


i





i RAN RET en


De


wre
. ’


———w en
ae, ATER E Caer) DE os
ay ‘ 2 A dean gal :


»


ibe ne


Cea TOE UT Peg ot ti
Oceed of oa cos
at Claremont _


1325 North College Avenue _
Claremont, CA 91711 _




















THE PREACHER'’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON


ST. MARK


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


NEW TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Eleven Volumes





FUNK &© WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


BS 49\\
pus A HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO


ST. MARK


BY THE
REV. JOHN HENRY BURN, B.D.
Rector of St. Drostan’s, Deer; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of


Ul veate en WadiOssaly





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON
Printed in the United States





PREFACE.


THROUGHOUT this volume the needs of the preacher have been constantly
kept in view, and the main thing aimed at has been not originality so
much as usefulness.

Besides a considerable quantity of homiletic material specially prepared
by the author for this work, there will be found here a great variety of
choice thoughts by different writers, carefully condensed, but for the most
part in their own words. These extracts have been culled from a very
wide field of literature, both ancient and modern. Many days were spent
in the Reading Room of the British Museum ransacking old and rare
tomes. Vast numbers of scarce periodicals also were searched and made
to deliver up their treasures.

The Illustrations and Anecdotes placed at the end of each chapter may
help sometimes to relieve the monotony of a close argument, or may
perchance brighten up a sermon to the young.

It is not pretended that the Critical and Exegetical Notes are com-
plete in themselves, or anything like it: the plan of the work precluded
the attempt. Being restricted to an average of a page per chapter for
this department, the writer was obliged to confine himself to the brief
elucidation of a few salient points, adding references here and there to
reliable sources of information. In cases of serious difficulty and con-
troversy, a preference for one interpretation has generally been indicated,
and reasons offered therefor. See, e.g., the notes on chaps. ii. 26, vil. 19,
xiii. 14, xiv. 72. But it must be distinctly understood that the reader
is supposed to be provided with other commentaries of a more critical
kind, which may supplement the slight treatment given here to the hard
texts in the Gospel according to St. Mark.


BENEDICTUS BENEDICAT.


ed





THE


PREACHER’S HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY.





pel ViCAt Relke


ea Ne,


INTRODUCTION.


The Author.—There seems no reason to doubt that the writer of the Second
Gospel is the person associated in the Acts (xii. 25, xii, 5, 13, xv. 37-39)
with Paul and Barnabas, and spoken of by Peter (1 Pet. v. 13) as his “son.”
To his Jewish name “John” (Johanan, “the gift of God”) was added, according
to the custom of the time, the Latin surname “ Mark” (Marcus, “a hammer”),
Of his father nothing is known; but his mother, Mary, was evidently a woman
of some note among the early disciples at Jerusalem (Acts xii. 12). He was
also cousin to Barnabas, and therefore a member of the tribe of Levi. When
or how he first came under Christian influences we have no means of determin-
ing, but his conversion was probably due in some way to St. Peter. If, as has
been conjectured, he recounts in chap. xiv. 51, 52, an incident that happened
to himself, we may think of him as a young man who had been impressed by
what he saw and heard of the Saviour’s teaching and bearing, but too timid
to make a determined stand for his convictions in the face of danger. In
a.p. 45 we find him (Acts xii. 25) accompanying Paul and Barnabas on their
return from Jerusalem to Antioch. Three years later he visited Cyprus with
them (Acts xiii. 5); and he might thenceforth have been their constant com-
panion, but that at Perga (Acts xiii. 13) he left them and returned to Jerusalem.
His reason for so doing cannot now be determined. Being a convert of
St. Peter, he may not have been prepared for a mission to the Gentiles, but felt
more fitted for work among the Jews nearer home; or he may have shrunk
from the unknown perils of the Asiatic mountains; or, perhaps, the novelty
of the expedition having worn off, he became homesick, and yearned for the
society of his mother. In any case it was not long before he was ready to
enter again upon the mission field with Paul and Barnabas, the latter of whom
B 1


mrropuction. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





took a more lenient view of his defection than the former, who indeed refused
his consent to the proposal (Acts xv. 36-40). Neither of them being willing
to give way, “they departed asunder, the one from the other; and so Barnabas
took Mark, and sailed into Cyprus,” and ‘Paul chose Silas, and departed.”
Thus this dissension between the two apostles resulted in God’s good providence
in the still wider diffusion of the gospel of peace. Moreover, the estrangement
proved but a temporary cloud, for we afterwards find Mark restored to the full
confidence of St. Paul, standing by his side during his first imprisonment at
Rome, and recognised by him as one of the few “fellow-workers unto the
kingdom of God” who had been “a comfort” to him at that trying period cf
his life (Col. iv. 10, 11; Philem. 24). Mark was at that time about to mmke
a journey to the very region he formerly refused to visit, and the Colossians
might have felt a little suspicious of him had not the apostle added, “If he
come unto you, receive him.” The next time we hear of Mark he is at Babylon,
in attendance on his spiritual father, St. Peter (1 Pet. v. 13). There is one
more notice of him in the New Testament, and that is contained in the last
Epistle we possess from the pen of St. Paul. The great apostle is in prison
once more at Rome, and the hour of his martyrdom is at hand. Mark is in
Asia Minor again, near or in Ephesus, where Timothy is stationed. St. Paul
longs for the society of them both. “ Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me,”
he writes to Timothy. ‘Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is profit-
able to me for the ministry” (2 Tim. iv. 10, 11). The weakness of his early
manhood had been nobly redeemed by a lifework of sterling fidelity to the truth.
In all likelihood he did, on receiving this message, return to Rome, and there
cheer the last days, not only of St. Paul, but also of St. Peter, for it is believed
that these two champions of the faith suffered martyrdom together. ccle-
siastical tradition asserts that Mark afterwards undertook a mission to Egypt,
where he founded the Church of Alexandria and the famous Catechetical
School which produced such a succession of learned teachers. He is said also
to have suffered martyrdom there. According to later legends, his body was
in A.D. 827 removed to Venice, a city where he was greatly honoured, and
which has ever since considered itself under his special protection.

The Gospel—In the foregoing notice of St. Mark’s life a great deal more
has necessarily been said of the Evangelist’s association with St. Paul than of
his relation to St. Peter. But when we proceed to speak of his Gospel, it is
St. Peter who comes into prominence. The early Christian Fathers are unanimous
in testifying that Mark wrote under Peter’s superintendence and by his
authority. Justin Martyr goes so far, indeed, as to call the Second Gospel
“Peter's memoirs.” Tertullian says that it “may be affirmed to be Peter's,
whose interpreter Mark was”; Origen, that Mark ‘‘ composed it as Peter guided
him”; and Eusebius, “that all the contents of Mark’s Gospel are regarded as
memoirs of Peter’s discourses.” Perhaps the most important patristic state-
ment is the following, which Papias makes on the authority of John, a
contemporary of the apostles, if not the Fourth Evangelist himself: ‘‘ And this
the Presbyter said: Mark having become the interpreter of Peter, wrote

a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.  rrropuction.








accurately whatever he recorded. He did not present, however, in regular
order the things that were either spoken or done by Christ, for he had not been
a personal auditor or follower of the Lord. But afterwards, as I said, he
attached himself to Peter, who gave instructions according to the necessities of
his hearers, but not in the way of making an orderly arrangement of the Lord’s
words. So that Mark committed no error in writing such details of things as
he recorded; for he made conscience of one thing, not to omit on the one hand,
and not to misrepresent on the other, any of the details which he heard.”
This testimony of the ancients is distinctly confirmed by the contents of the
Gospel itself. The whole tone and character of the book is in complete accord-
ance with what we know of St. Peter and his manner of preaching. Sco
Acts i. 22, x. 36-42. The latter of these passages has been called “the
Gospel of Mark in a nutshell.” Short as it is, this Gospel supplies several
details connected with St. Peter recorded by no other Evangelist (i. 36, xi. 21,
xiii. 3, xvi. 7), and lays special stress on things fitted to humble him (viii. 33,
xiv. 30, 68-72); while, on the other hand, it omits various circumstances
tending to his honour (comp. vii. 17 with Matt. xv. 15; vi. 50, 51, with
Matt. xiv. 28-31; ix. 33 with Matt. xvii. 24-27; viii. 29, 30, with Matt. xvi.
17-19; xiv. 13 with Luke xxii. 8). Bishop Chris. Wordsworth sees in the
fact that this Gospel bears the name of Mark, and not of Peter, another “silent
token of the humility of the apostle, not ambitious for the exhibition of his
own name in the eye of the world.” The human teacher is content to sink his
personality and veil his identity, while he sets forth with graphic pen the words
and deeds of the Christ, the Son of the living God.

Date and place of publication.—Here there is plenty of scope for speculation,
based on the statement of Irenxus, that, “after the departure of Peter and
Paul, Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, even he delivered to us
in writing the things which were preached by Peter.” The time of “the
departure” or decease of the two apostles being quite uncertain—every year
from A.D. 64 to A.D. 68 having been assigned by one critic or another—it would
be rash to attempt to draw the line closer than somewhere between these two
dates. It is hardly possible to believe, at any rate, that the Gospel left its
author’s hands later than a.p. 70, as it contains no mention of the signal fulfil-
ment of our Lord’s prediction of the destruction of Jerusalem, which occurred
in that year. As to the place of publication, one ancient father (Chrysostom)
mentions Alexandria; while of moderns one (Storr) fixes on Antioch, and
another (Birks) on Cexsarea; but they give no sufficient reasons for rejecting
the otherwise uniform testimony in favour of Rome. This tradition receives
confirmation from the contents of the Gospel, throughout which words unfamiliar
to Gentile readers are interpreted (iii. 17, v. 41, vii. 11, x. 46, xiv. 36,
xv. 34; see also xii. 42, ix. 43); Jewish customs are explained (vii. 3, 4, xii. 3,
xv. 42); matters chiefly interesting to Jews (such as genealogies, references
to the Mosaic Law, and Old Testament citations) are conspicuous by their
almost total absence; Latin words and idioms are more freely used than in
any of the other Gospels (vi. 27, vii. 4, 8, xii. 42, xv. 15, 39, 44, 45), Other

3


inrropuction. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


grains of confirmatory evidence may be drawn from the mention of Alexander
and Rufus (xv. 21), the latter being probably the person referred to by
St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans (xvi. 13); from our knowledge that Mark
certainly spent some part of his life at Rome, coupled with the fact of his
Roman surname “ Marcus” gradually superseding the Hebrew “John”; and
from the conciseness of his narrative, which made it so suitable for the vigorous
intelligence of Roman hearers.

Characteristics—The fourfold Gospel, according to a happy illustration of
the early Church, may be compared to the river which “went out of Eden to
water the garden”; for in like manner do these separate records of the life and
ministry of Jesus water the garden of the Catholic Church, and send their
refreshing streams to every nation and every age. Hach of the Evangelists
had his own distinct design and object, which must ever be kept in view.
St. Matthew points the Jews to their Messiah; St. Mark portrays for Gentile
readers the King of men; St. Luke depicts the Divine Physician and Saviour
of sinners; St. John declares the eternal pre-existence and Godhead of Him
who was manifested in the flesh. The first Evangelist may be said to adopt the
form of narrative, the second of memoirs, the third of history, and the fourth
of dramatic portraiture. The subject-matter of the first three Gospels is to a
certain extent very similar, though in each the peculiarities are striking enough
to preclude the theory of one being copied from another. The most natural
explanation is ‘that all three drew from a common source, that source being
the oral teaching of the apostles, which doubtless received a fixed form at a
very early date. St. Mark omits many of the discourses and parables which
occupy so prominent a place in the narratives of St. Matthew and St. Luke,
but enters into more minute details than either of them as regards persons
(i. 29, 36, iii. 6, 22, xi. 11, 21, xiii, 3, xiv. 65, xv. 21, xvi. 7), numbers
(v. 13, vi. 7, 40, xiv. 30), times (i. 35, ii. 1, iv. 35, vi. 2, xi. 11, 19, xv. 25,
xvi. 2), and places (ii. 13, iii. 7, iv. 1, v. 20, vii. 31, xii. 41, xiii. 3, xiv. 68,
xv. 39, xvi. 5). He also takes particular notice of the emotions, looks, gestures,
and actions of our Lord and others (iii. 5, 34, vii. 33, vill. 33, ix. 36, x. 32),
We have to thank him, too, for often preserving the identical Aramaic words
that fell from the Saviour’s lips (iii. 17, v. 41, vii. 11, 34, xiv. 36). His main
characteristic may be said to be vividness.  “‘ He sees history, as it were, by
flashes of lightning.” For him the past lives again in the present, and his life-
like narrative helps us to conjure up the scene as if it were now enacting and
we were ourselves among the bystanders. ‘Nor is this vividness merely the
product of an opulent fancy. It is the consistency in details of a picture whose
central figure is drawn in lines of fire. Those rapid and decided touches are
inspired by a conviction of the love, the glory, and the strength of Jesus, the
Son of God.” He is so full of his great subject, so wrapped up in the con-
templation of his Divine Hero, that he hurries from point to point with his
favourite kal evOéws, as if in breathless haste to reach the vantage-ground of
the resurrection morn, followed by the triumphant ascension into heaven and
the session at the right hand of God.

A


CHAPTER I.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Beginning.—For best commentary on this see Luke xvi. 16. Law and prophets
ended with John, who heralded new régime. Gospel.—Good tidings, from God to man, of
redemption and peace ; purposed from before foundation of world; proclaimed from Fall
onwards, as man could receive it; now fully unveiled and offered to all by Jesus Christ.
The Son of God.—Probably genuine, although omitted by 8 and some Fathers.

Ver. 2. In the prophets.—Read, In Isaiah the prophet. Remainder of verse, quoted from
Mal. iii. 1, must be regarded as a parenthesis. “‘The Evangelist’s mind went rapidly through
it, and fixed its attention on the contents of the earlier and more remarkable oracle lying
behind.” Only here, and in chap. xv. 28 (the genuineness of which is doubtful) does Mark
himself cite from Old Testament. In chaps. iv. 12, vii. 6, xi. 17, xiv. 27, he places on record
quotations made by Jesus.

Ver. 7. One mightier.—He who is mightier ; the Sovereign whose ambassador 1 am, the
Potentate whose orders I carry out.

Ver. 10. Straightway.—ev@éws. Mark’s constant use of this word of transition shows how
full his heart was of his subject. It would appeal to the prompt, energetic spirit of his
Roman readers. He (i.e. Jesus) saw.—The Baptism over, He was engaged in prayer
(Luke iii. 21), and then the vision was vouchsafed. The heavens opened.—ending. Same .
word used of rending of veil of temple and rocks at the Crucifixion (Matt. xxvii. 51).
The Spirit like a dove descending.—This was seen also by the Baptist (John i. 82, 33), and
was the sign by which he recognised in Jesus the Lamb of God. lt was His solemn
inauguration as the Messiah (Acts x. 38). A dove.—Fit emblem of His gentle rule.

Ver. 11. A voice from heaven.—Heard again at the Transfiguration (Mark ix. 7), and in
the temple court (John xii. 28). In whom I am well pleased.— Jn whom I decreed for good,
the “good” being man’s redemption purposed by God in Christ from all eternity. In
vers. 10, 11, we behold all Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity working together to accom-
plish man’s salvation.

Ver. 12. The Spirit driveth Him.—The human soul of Jesus, which shrank from the cup in
Gethsemane, would naturally shrink also from close contact with the prince of evil. But,
abhorrent as such an encounter was to His pure and holy nature, it could not be avoided.
Nay, it must needs be the first act of His official life. The Second Adam must triumph
where the first Adam fell.

Ver. 13. With the wild beasts. —Far from human habitation and companionship, Nothing
was wanting to complete the loneliness of our Divine Champion in His first combat with the
enemy of souls, The angels ministered.—Doubtless both to His bodily and spiritual wants.

«He who would not turn stones into bread was now fed; He who would not call upon
angels to uphold Him in rash confidence was now sustained by them; He who demanded
worship for God alone received homage from these servants of God.”

Ver. 14, John was put in prison.— Delivered wp. Same word used of our Lord’s betrayal
by Judas. “Such honour have all His saints.” Jesus came inte Galilee.—From Jerusalem,
where He had been teaching most of the time since His baptism (John ii. 13—iv. 3).

Ver, 15. Repent ye, and believe.—We have an echo of this Divine keynote in the first
sermon preached by Peter at Pentecost (Acts ii, 38).

Ver. 16. As He walked.—As He was passing along by the seashcre towards Capernaum,
He encountered four disciples of the Baptist whom He had previously met and impressed
(John i. 35-42: cf. Luke v. 1-11). Casting a net.—Casting about (a hand-net) im the sea.
Here is one of the many graphic touches in this Gospel which betray the source of Mark’s
inspiration. Who but one of the two men engaged in the business would have thought of


putting it in this way?


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Ver. 21. Capernaum was at that time a flourishing commercial town on north-western
shore of lake. A customs station, with military quarters. Its synagogue was the gift of a
centurion (Luke vii. 5). Here Jesus healed Simon’s wife’s mother, the centurion’s servant,
and a paralytic ; called Levi from the toll-house ; and discoursed on humility, and on the
bread of life.

Ver. 22. Not as the scribes,—They could only insist on the observance of petty rules
invented by men like themselves; whereas He dived deep down to eternal principles, which
bore the manifest impress of the Divine approval. Moreover, His teaching—unlike theirs—
was exemplified to the letter in His pure and holy life.

Ver. 23. With an unclean spirit.—Zn, i.e. in the power of—subject to—influenced or
possessed by. The demon had apparently obtained complete ascendency over the wretched
man, whose whole mind was now given up to uncleanness. But, as to this, see note by
Dr. Maitland on pp. 32, 33.

Ver. 24. Let us alone.—This exclamation was probably imported here from Luke iv. 34,
where it signifies the demon’s resentment at Clrist’s interference. What have we to do
with Thee !— What common ground is there between us? Truly, none whatever. They were
far as the poles asunder—the “ unclean spirit,” and the “ Holy One of God.”

Ver. 25. Jesus rebuked.—The Saviour endorses the demon’s admission of the infinite
distance which separated them morally the one from the other, and refuses to accept at his
mouth even so much as an acknowledgment of His own Divine claims. Throughout His
ministry; Christ never for a moment countenances anything that might be construed into
a truce with Satan or his emissaries—anything that could give colour to the sneer of the
Pharisees that by the prince of demons He cast out demons.

Ver. 27. What thing is this?—IWhat is this? New teaching with authority! He com-
mandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey Him !

Ver. 30. Lay sick of a fever.— Was prostrated with a burning fever. Intermittent fever
and dysentery, the latter often fatal, are common Arabian diseases.

Ver. 32. At even.—When the disappearance of the natural sun announced the close of
the Sabbath, the Sun of Righteousness arose with healing in His wings.

Ver. 33. All the city was gathered.—What a picture would linger in Peter’s memory of
this unwonted assemblage in front of his own house |

Ver. 35. A great while before day.—How Mark loves to emphasise the ceaseless activity
and devotion of our Blessed Lord |

Ver. 44. Say nothing to any man,—Our Lord desired to check, as far as possible, the
tendency on the part of the populace to rezard Him as a mere wonder-worker, because such
* a reputation would inevitably blind men to the primary object of His Divine mission, which
was not the healing of the body, but the salvation of the soul. For a testimony unto
them.—He would afford the Jewish authorities no pretext for asserting that He set Himself
above the law.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—8.
(PaRALLELs: Marr. iii. 1-12; Luxe iii. 1-20; Jonni. 19-28.)


The preparation for the gospel.—With trumpet-blast—short, sharp, triumphant
—St. Mark introduces his Divine Hero, “the Lion of the tribe of Judah.”
Wasting no time on preliminaries, he at once strikes the keynote of his theme
—‘“the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.” Well is he called ‘‘ Marcus,”
a hammer, who begins by aiming such a powerful blow at the inherent scepticism
of the human heart, and then follows it up with the workmanlike skill observ-
able throughout this book! Determined to leave no room for mistake con-
cerning the person of his Master, he at once accords to Him His full title,
“ Jesus Christ, Son of God.” Jesus—the Saviour; Christ—the Divinely appointed
Prophet, Priest, and King of men; Son of God, Revealer of the Father, Incarnate
Deity. Peter’s great confession was in almost the same words (Matt. xvi. 16),

I. The origin of the gospel in heaven.—l. Not man’s thought, but God’s,
To destroy the works of the devil, and devise means that His banished ones
should be restored to Him, was far beyond the conception of any but the
Creator. 2, The mode of carrying eut this grand scheme was equally Godlike.
The Creator became Himself a creature—God came to us in man—hiding His


6





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP.. IL.


EERE


glory under the tabernacle of human flesh, which He assumed, in order that we
might realise His nearness, believe in His goodwill towards us, and be incorpo-
‘rated into Him.

II. The preparation for the gospel on earth.—1. This began in the first
promise to Adam and Eve, in their sacrificial offerings, in the bleeding lambs
of Abel’s altar, and in the simple worship of the patriarchs. 2. It began afresh
in the Mosaic legislation, in the ceremonial law, etc. 3. It began once more in
the predictions of the prophets, who declared in words the gospel which the law
shadowed forth in acts. And the last of these prophets was John, the greatest
of them all, and the nearest to the kingdom.

III. The Forerunner of the gospel and his ministry.—1. The Baptist’s
mission had been foretold. The herald of Jesus had himself been heralded long
before; and the appearance of one uwnswering to the prophetic announcements
was to be the sign that a Greater than he was at hand. 2. The Baptist’s
preaching was suitable for the time- -positive, straightforward, unmistakable.
It could never be said of him, as was said of a certain modern minister, that
he spent six days in the week asking himself, “‘ What on earth shall I preach
about?” and sent the people home on Sunday asking themselves, “‘ What on
earth did he preach about?” John stood boldly forth as a preacher of
righteousness, in the midst of a perverse and crooked generation. (1) In his
stern, weird cry, ‘‘ Repent ye,” he made a personal appeal for personal action,
and a particular line of conduct—not simply general good behaviour. What-
ever sin has hitherto reigned in the heart, the opposite virtue must now take
its place; otherwise, the kingdom cannot be received. (2) By baptism he
pledged men to carry out in their life the discipline necessary to make them
ready for the kingdom. This rite served to prepare them to accept a system in
which sacramental means of grace were to hold a prominent place. (3) Besides
repentance and baptism, particular confession of sins was exacted by John.
And this was doubtless private confession; for it is highly improbable that
they publicly confessed sins, the knowledge of which would instruct others
in all sorts of evil, pollute their minds with all sorts of filthiness, and in
very many cases give the enemies of those so confessing the power of
accusing them before the law as long as they lived. 3. The Baptist’s
preaching proved a great success. Never before had the souls of the people
been so stirred. And although comparatively few took the further step of
enrolling themselves under Christ’s banner during His lifetime, yet amongst
those few were several of the apostles; and we know not how much of the
Church’s growth after Pentecost is to be attributed to the Baptist’s faithful
ministry. 4. The personal appearance of the Baptist was in perfect harmony
with the truths he proclaimed. Bede says he used a dress more austere than
was usual, because he did not encourage the life of sinners by flattery, but chid
them by the vigour of his rough rebuke; he had a girdle of a skin round his
loins, for he was one who crucified his flesh with the affections and lusts.
5. The self-abnegation of the Baptist is the greatest proof of his real nobility.
Such was his popularity, that he might easily have become the founder of a new
religious sect; for his disciples could not bear to think of his ministry as merely
the preface or introduction to that of Another. But John himself never
wavered in his testimony, never dreamt of arrogating to himself any honour ;
but maintained, with unswerving fidelity, that he—though he could claim high
rank among his countrymen, as the son of one of the heads of the courses of the
priests—was but the messenger of One for whom he did not think himself
worthy to perform the most menial service, One who would baptise not merely
in the waters of Jordan, but in the fire of the Life-giving Spirit.

Lessons.—1. Thank God for His mercy in the gospel. 2. Attend to God’s


7


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


message by the lips of men. 3. Make diligent and reverent use of the means
of grace. 4. Illustrate and exalt the gospel by your life. So you may be the
means of preparing others to welcome Christ.


Vers. 4-8. John’s baptism, and Christ’s.:—The question which perplexed the
chief priests and scribes and elders (Mark xi. 30-33) need cause us no difficulty,
because Christ Himself acknowledged and sanctioned His forerunner, and set
His seal on the legitimacy of John’s baptism, by submitting to it Himself.
We find, moreover, in the preaching of John a strong circumstance in his
favour. For who ever heard of an enthusiast, a self-inspired prophet, studiously
disparaging himself, and seeking to fix the attention of the world on some
greater Person who should come after him ?

I. John’s account of his own baptism.—l. He baptised “with water”—a
well-understood sign of moral purification (Isa. i. 16; Ezek. xxxvi. 25;
Ps. li. 2, 7). 2 He baptised with water “unto repentance” (ver. 4: cf.
Matt. iii. 11), ze. to the end that men should repent, amend their lives, and
“bring forth,” etc. (Matt. iii. 8), 3. Was there any inward and spiritual grace
in the baptism of John, of which the washing with water might be considered
as a sign? We are obliged to answer in the negative. The ceremony itself
was well calculated to make an impression upon those who submitted to it;
but the same may be said of many other rites, which have nothing spiritual
or supernatural about them. Such impressions may easily be accounted for,
and furnish no proof that there has been any extraordinary exertion of Divine
influence. 4. The baptism of John, though (like the law of Moses) it ‘made
nothing perfect,” yet prepared the way for “the bringing in of a better hope,”
and of a more efficacious baptism.

II. John’s prophecy concerning Christ’s baptism.—1. He states the manner
of Christ’s baptism—‘ with the Holy Ghost.” Not that “water” should not
also be employed in this greater baptism; without this there can be no baptism
at all. But here is the difference. John baptised with water only: Christ
should baptise with water and the Spirit (John iii. 5). The Holy Ghost is
unsubstantial and invisible; we can no more be baptised with the Spirit alone
than we can with “the wind, which bloweth where it listeth.” If this operation
is to be visibly performed on us, there must be some vehicle through which the
Holy Ghost is communicated to our souls; and water, the emblem of purity,
is the most convenient and natural sign of that spiritual grace which cleanses
and purifies the heart. 2. Consider now the effects of Christ’s baptism. (1) It
washes away all past sins and defilements in him who is baptised (Acts xxi. 16).
This is the first grace of baptism; and even if it were the only one, who would
not be astonished at the powerful operation of so simple a rite! Who would
not confess that He in whose name, and by faith in whose name, water is made
to wash away sins, must indeed be mightier than John or any other mere
human interpreter of the will of God! Above all, since the effect is as beneficial
as it is astonishing, who would not wish to partake of this inestimable gift of
God in Christ Jesus! (2) It not only washes away all former pollutions, but
it cleanses the heart itself, and purifies that turbid fountain out of which flow
all the issues of life. A physician turns his attention, in the first place, to the
immediate relief of his patient, and endeavours by suitable remedies to check
the progress of the disorder; but when that is done, then comes the glory of
his art, which is, to improve the general state of the patient’s health, and get
rid of those causes and tendencies which might bring on the complaint afresh.
Even so has Jesus Christ, the Great Physician of the soul, invented this remedy
of baptism, by which He not only cures the present disease, but renews, as it
were, the moral constitution of man. By the “washing of regeneration” we


“iS
8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. I.


I ese aE TT


are “born again, not of corruptible seed,” ete, (1 Pet. i, 23). (3) What baptism
necessarily confers on all who are the subjects of it—whether old or young
hackneyed in the ways of sin or as yet innocent of it—is not actual holiness,
but only the capacity of becoming holy. The man who is thus regenerated
may, if so disposed, return to his former courses and become as dead in sin as
before. But now it is no longer the fault of his nature. He can no longer
exclaim with the unregenerate, “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver
me,” etc. (Rom. vii. 24). He has been delivered. Before baptism he was
incapable of pleasing God; now he is not incapable. Before baptism there was
“‘a law in his members, warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him
into captivity to the law of sin, which was in his members.” Now there is no
such law, and no such captivity. In short, before baptism, whatever evil he
may have done, he had this excuse to plead: “It is no more I that do it, but
sin which dwelleth in me.” Now he has no such excuse. (4) If any one be
disposed to think that it is a small thing to be made capable of becoming holy
unless we be actually established in holiness, let him consider this: What must
it be to labour under a positive incapacity of working out our salvation; to
know that if we should exert ourselves ever so much we could never, by any
possibility, please God; that our best actions and intentions would be infected
with the taint of our nature, and, instead of being acceptable to God, must
necessarily be offensive to Him, as partaking of the nature of sin? 3, From
all this there arise two inducements to holiness and righteousness of life.
(1) The former things are forgiven thee; go, and sin no more. What does it
profit a man to have his debts cancelled, if he begin immediately to run up a
fresh score, and to involve himself in heavier liabilities than those from which
he has been delivered? Shall not the last state of that man be worse than
the first? See Ezek. xxiv. 13. (2) When thou art baptised, thou art “born
again” of the Spirit: see that the rest of thy life be answerable to this
beginning. The old man is put off: put off his deeds also. Thou hast purified
thy soul through the Spirit ; ask thyself, therefore, what qualities should spring
out of a cleansed and renewed heart. The works of the flesh are manifest ; the
fruit of the Spirit should be so also.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


ness” will never set.


Ver. 1. Beginnings.—I. Human life
is full of beginnings.—St. Mark is
constantly drawing attention to this,
See chap. i. 45, iv. 1, v. 17, vi. 7,
my 80D, xv. 018.


II. All beginnings are full of in-


_ terest.—They afford great scope for


speculation as to the progress and end.

III. The gospel is the greatest be-
ginning the world has ever seen.—It
is God’s crowning work and supreme
revelation.

IV. The gospel is a beginning with-
out an end.—The “Sun of Righteous-
But though
without end, the gospel is not with-
out completion. See Isa, liii. 11;


1 Cor. xv. 28.


A wonderful beginning—What a
wonderful beginning of things is here!
The gospel! Had he recorded the
beginning of the work of justice and
wrath to make an end of sinners, we
should not have been surprised, after
reading the story of sin and ingrati-
tude recorded in the Old Testament;
but instead we have the beginning of
the dispensation of love and mercy to
sinners—a beginning which was the
end of the old dispensation of law,
types, and shadows, and the bringing
in of the substance of all that God
had promised man in grace from the
foundation of the world. What a
humble beginning it was! One man,
one voice—and both man and voice


9


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


in the wilderness. Not a mighty
prince, but a prophet-man, clad in
camel’s hair, with a leathern girdle
about him. How differently from the
coming of an earthly prince did Jesus
appear to take up His ministry! Yet
as we proceed we shall see the reason
for this strange and simple “ beginning
of the gospel.” It was because it was
the beginning of the gospel, not of the
kingdom; the beginning of the grace
of God, not of the ceremonial pomp
of a formal worship; the beginning of
a dispensation which was to reign in
the hearts of men, not in external
paraphernalia of worship.—G. Te
Pentecost, D.D.

The strong Son of God.—The first
words of In Memoriam might be taken
to describe the theme of Mark’s Gospel.
It is the “strong Son of God” whom
he sets forth in his rapid, impetuous
narrative, which is full of fiery energy ;
he delights to paint the unresting
continuity of Christ’s filial service.—
A. Maclaren, D.D.

The title ‘Son of God,” besides here,
is given—l. By Gabriel (Luke i. 35).
2. By the devil (Matt. iv. 3, 6).
3. By demons (Matt. viii. 29). 4. By
apostles (Matt. xiv. 33). 5. By Peter
(Matt. xvi. 16). By John (John xx. 31;
1 John iii. 8; Rev. ii. 18). 6. By Paul
(Rom. i. 4; 2 Cor. i. 19; Gal. ii. 20;
Eph. iv. 13). 7. By author of Hebrews
(chap. iv. 14, and whole argument of
chap. i.). 8. By the Ethiopian eunuch
(Acts viii. 37). A fair deduction from
Philip’s teaching, even if the words are
spurious. 9. By Christ Himself (John
x. 36; Luke xxii. 70).


Vers. 2, 3. Preparation for Divine
visitation.—I. The two dispensatious
are in reality one.—John is the con-
necting link between them.

II. The Divinity of Messiah was
plainly foretold.See Isa. xl. 3;
Mal. ii. 1.

III. The function of a prophet is
here clearly stated.‘ A voice”—
God’s messenger and mouthpiece, going
only where God sends him, saying only
what God bids him. Dedicate your


10


lips to God, and He will fill them with
grace and truth.

IV. The willingness of God to visit
man is evident—He only waits for
the obstacles to be removed—hardness
of heart, and contempt of His word
and commandment (Rev. iii. 20). A
readiness to have Him come into our
lives and straighten them is the pre-
paration of heart needed to receive
Him


Ver. 3. John a voice, not an echo.—
Goethe has said in one of his pregnant
sentences, “‘There are many echoes in
the world, but few voices.” John
Baptist’s power lay in this—that he
was a voice, and not an echo. The
people of Israel had long been accus-
tomed to religious teachers who were
only echoes—echoes of the more distant
past when Moses and the prophets
spake the word of the Lord with living
voice, and yet more frequently echoes
of the teaching of some recent rabbi,
himself an echo and unreal. Their
temple courts in which they disputed
the law, their synagogue in which
Moses was expounded, were but as
whispering-galleries in which men,
surrounded with shadows, listen to
sounds that belong not to the living
world at all. But at length the ac-
cents of a living voice fell upon the
nation’s ear. A religious teacher ap-
peared who dealt with realities, and
not with semblances. He spoke as a
living man to living men in an actual
world.—Jas. Brown, D.D.

The need of our time is for voices,
—voices which are not echoes, living
voices speaking the living truth, out
of the depths of a living experience,
and in the living language of living
men; voices preaching mercy and not
sacrifice, righteousness and not burnt
offerings, faith and not outward cleans-
ing; voices bringing good tidings of
blessed possibilities for a sin-stricken
world, of the coming of a kingdom in
mercy and in judgment, which are not
two, but eternally and for ever one;
voices bearing witness for the Christ—
the Incarnation of divinest righteous:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.


—<—— ee


ness and divinest compassion, the
Redeemer of the fallen, the Helper of
the helpless, the Brother of us all;
voices whose accents are not hard and
dogmatic and pitiless, but as of men
who have wrestled, nay, who perchance
are wrestling still, with sorrow and
doubt and fear.—Jbid.

The voice of the Baptist was a voice
of severity.—His doctrine was as stern
as his raiment was rough. He pro-
claimed repentance—the axe to the
root, the fan to the corn, the chaff to
fire. He must, by plainness and bold-
ness of speech, level mountains and
exalt valleys, and so prepare a way
for the approach of the Messiah. The
corruption of human nature was a
wound of long standing, that must be
lanced before it could be healed. Sharp-
ness of speech, lke a ploughshare,
must cleave deep and break up the
stubborn ground of human pride, and
make the heart soft and tender to
receive the blessed seed of Divine
love,

Highways through the hearts of men.
—Crossing this mighty continent of
ours not long ago, by means of that
last marvel of our American engineer-
ing, whose daily track-laying, as I
have been told, was wont to beat tho
slow-moving waggon-trains of emi-
grants that marched beside it, I found
myself again and again exclaiming
“ What grander calling could there be
than thus to write one’s name in iron
across the unsullied page of those virgin
western prairies, as part-builder of the
highway that shall bind together Pekin
and Paris, London and San Francisco,
the commerce of Calcutta and the
manufactures of Manchester, in one
bright zone, whose central gem shall
be our own American metropolis!” And
yet there is a grander calling. May
it be yours and mine to braid it in
with whatsoever toil or study is ours;
to build those other highways through
_ the stony hearts and desert lives of
men, over which the Master Builder
shal] at last come back again, to claim
this world and all its treasures for His
own; to bear along the paths that


Christian labour has cast up the
saving message of God’s love, and so,
by steadfast conquest of all sin and
ignorance, to open wide the gates for
His enduring sunshine !— Bishop H. C.
Potter.

The Lord’s pathway.—lf I can only
place one little brick in the pavement
of the Lord’s pathway, I will place it
there, that coming generations may
walk thereon to the heavenly city.—
Bishop Phillips Brooks.


Ver. 4. Repentance.—To sum up the
business of repentance in a word, the
wise man (Prov. xxviii. 13) has reduced
it to two heads—to confess and forsake
our sins, St. Bernard almost as short
and not much unlike, Dolere preterita,
Cavere futura; to grieve and be dis-
pleased with ourselves for what is past,
and to take better heed for the time
to come. It must be a repentance
from sin as well as for sin; it must
be of thoughts as well as deeds, of
errors in judgment as well as mis-
carriages of life; finally, it must bring
forth fruits, and be accompanied with
works meet for repentance. To repent,
to cry peccavi, and go on still in the
same sin, to be always craving God’s
mercy, and never stand in fear of His
justice, is in short but to mock God
and our own souls to boot. Further,
our repentance must be proportionable
to our offences. Greater sins must be
taken to heart with greater regrets.
The more scandalous and notorious
any one’s faults have been, the more
signal must his conversion be, and the
more exemplary his conversation. The
longer we have continued in any ill
practice, the more lasting must our
exercise of repentance be. Chronical
and habitual distempers must be put
into a course of spiritual physic. To
shut up all: repentance, as ‘tis a
necessary duty, so ’tis a great privilege.
None so perfect but need it; none so
bad but may attain it: witness the
penitent thief, the publican, the pro-
digal.—A. Littleton, D.D.


Vers. 4, 5, A rite, message, and re-
11


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i


ception.—I. A great message.—l. The
duty urged: repentance. 2. The mo-
tive: the nearness of the kingdom,
with righteous laws and heavy penal-
ties. 3. The privilege proclaimed :
_setting free from sin.

II. A novel rite.—1. John’s baptism
—far superior to the ritual lustrations
of the Jews—foretold the purification
of heart and mind which would result
from the washing away of sin in the
blood of Christ (cp. 1 Pet. iii, 21).
2. It expressed a backward look at
guilt, and a forward look to mercy.

III. A striking reception.—There
was that about him which attracted
the attention not merely of the common
people, but also of the political and
religious leaders (Matt. iii. 7). 1. His
prophetic voice broke a silence of three
hundred years. 2. His announcement
of the kingdom kindled Messianic ex-
pectations. 3. His manifest sincerity
induced searchings of heart. If, like
John, we would “reach the masses,”
we must first have something worthy
to say, and then say it straight out.
4. We must recollect that this was
the great Sabbatical year of the Jews;
the people were less busy than usual;
the whole land was at rest; a religious
atmosphere was breathing around
them ; and so the awakened multitudes
swept forth from their homes on every
hand. Bethabara, the little fording-
place north of Jericho, was thronged
with excited listeners out of all classes
and social conditions, eagerly jostling
each other in defence of truth or
tradition.

The character of the Baptist’s minis-
try.—There can be no doubt concerning
the general character of the Baptist’s
ministry. It departed in every par-
ticular from the ordinary and orderly
ministries of the time. Judged by our
standards, or by those then prevailing,
it was distinctly sensational. It aimed
to arouse, alarm, denounce, scourge.
And its effects were in accordance
with its aims. If we should describe
them in the phraseology of our own
time, we should say that there was in
that part of Syria a great religious


13


awakening, and it would be to mis-
represent the whole situation if we
did not go on to say that the greatest
religious movement that the world
has seen turned, as its first hinge,
upon this same religious awakening.
There have been repetitions of it all
the way along. Whether it is Peter
the Hermit, or Francis of Assisi, or
Savonarola, or John Huss, or John
Wesley, the thing is too familiar to
be ignored or wholly disesteemed ; and
no effort to distinguish between great
national or ecclesiastical movements,
occurring at long intervals, and an
agency to be employed in connection
with the ordinary on-going of parish
life, though such a distinction is one
which we are bound to recognise, can
dismiss from our rightful consideration
such agencies as the latter. In one
sense the case of a parish and the
case of a Church or a nation are widely
different; but in another they are
identical. The same slumbrous torpor,
the same deadness to spiritual truths,
the same triumph of the spirit of
worldliness over the Spirit of Christ,
exist in the one as in the other. It
is, after all, only a question of extent
or degree; and the exigencies of para-
chial life in particular communities
often make that necessary, In some
single congregation, which, under other
circumstances, may widely, if not
universally, be necessary.—Bishop H.
C. Potter.


Ver. 5. Confession of sin.—There is
a twofold confession of sins necessary
in the practice of repentance.

I. To God.—1. It must come from
a feeling heart, touched with sense ot
sin and grieved for it; not verbal, or
from the teeth outward. 2. It must
come from a hatred and loathing of
the sins confessed, not from fear of
punishment merely: Saul, Pharaoh.
3. From hope of mercy, else we witness
against ourselves: Judas. 4. Free ana
voluntary, not forced from us; else it
is not pleasing to God. 5. It must not
be only in general terms, but there
must be a laying open of our particular


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.





known sins, so far as we can remember
them.

lI. To men,—Not always necessary,
but in some cases only. 1. When by
our sins we have offended and scandal-
ised men—either the Church in general,
or some particular persons. 2. When
any sin lies heavy on our conscience,
so that we cannot find ease or comfort.
Tn this case it is necessary to open our
hearts, and to acknowledge that sin
which troubles us, to some faithful
pastor, or other Christian brother, who
may minister spiritual advice and com-
fort to us._—G. Petter.

Confession of sin hindered by Satan.
—God knoweth all, saith Ambrose, but
yet He looketh for thy confession.
God is never more ready to cover than
when we lay open. The fox, say our
books, taketh his prey by the throat,
so to stop all noise; and the devil, that
fox, by all means hindereth holy con-
fession, and bringeth men to deal with
their souls as men use to deal with
old rusty armour, either never or once
in a year or two formally and super-
ficially to scour it over. But as a
thorn in your finger will grieve you
still till it be had out, so will sin in
your conscience still vex till it be ac-
knowledged and confessed. If we have
offended man, reconciliation to him is
necessary. But to thy God speak all,
saith Chrysostom, even whatsoever
thou art ashamed to speak unto man,
for He expecteth thy voice, although
He knew it before, and He will never
upbraid thee as man _ will.—Bishop
Babington.


Ver: 6. The habits of the Baptist.—
1. The Baptist’s habits were thoroughly
in harmony with his surroundings in
the wilderness, also with the absorption
of a man with such a mission, 2. His
unusual style of dress was probably
adopted with the deliberate intention
of sending men’s thoughts back to
Elijah (2 Kings i. 8: ep. Zech. xiii. 4).
3. His manner of living was a protest
against the prevalent worldliness and
luxury, especially of the religious leaders
(Mark xii. 38; Luke vii. 25). 4. One


inured to such a life could afford to
be perfectly fearless and independent,
having little to lose by opposition of
the great, or to gain from their favour.
5. John’s outward appearance fitly
symbolised the rigour and austerity of.
the old dispensation. Jesus, the Media-
tor of the new and better covenant, as
fitly ‘‘came eating and drinking,” etc.


Ver. 7. The humility of the Baptist.—
The highest buildings have the lowest
foundations. As the roots of a tree
descend, so the branches ascend. The
lower the ebb, the higher the tide.
Those upon the mountains see only
the fog beneath them, whilst those in
deep pits see the stars above them.
The most fruitful branches bow the
lowest.—John Trapp.

Christ is “mightier” than John.—
J. In essential being.—Son of God,
and God the Son, as well as Son of
Man.

II. In word.—John was but “a
voice”: Christ is the Eternal Word
(John i. 1).

III. In works.—John x. 41.

IV. In spiritual efficiency.—The
Baptist’s success was all due to Christ’s
power working with and in him
(John i. 16, iii. 27).

V. In ministerial rites.—The bap-
tism in water was but a faint fore-
shadowing of the cleansing fire of the
Holy Spirit.


Ver. 8. A symbol of moral puri-
fication.—The Baptist started from the
Messianic hope as the one thing remain-
ing to the nation promising a better
future; but he perceived what had to be
immediately done in connection with
it, according to the requirements of the
true religion, and he was the first man
consistent and daring enough actually
to do it. . . . Every individual had
to prepare himself for the true kingdom,
and as a regenerate man, receptive
simply for everything that is pure and
good—as a man who will not start
back from the Highest One should He
come—look for the mysterious but
certain coming of the Lord, . . . The


13


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


submersion in the depth of the flowing
water by the hand of the Baptist
became the most effective, visible, and
sensible symbol of the moral purifica-
tion of this generation. . . . And this
deep submersion, by the hand of a con-
fessor, with this strict confession of
sin, this vow and this absolution, of
which it was meant to be the symbol,
and this whole preparation for the
Messiah, was something which had
never before existed, and was the most
striking sign of that mighty change of
mind which was now about to be
wrought in Israel more fully than
before.—H. G. A. Ewald.

The Holy Spirits baptism.—The
nature of the Spirit's baptism.—l. As
the Spirit of truth, He enlightens the
soul (John xvi. 13; 1 Cor. ii. 10, 1h)
2. As the Spirit of holiness, He puri-
fies the soul (2 Thess. ii. 13; 1 Cor.
vi. 11; Tit. iii, 5). 3. As the Spirit
of life and power, He imparts spiritual
life, and animates thesoul with strength
to resist temptation.

II. How the Spirit's baptism is
communicated to us.—‘‘ Except one
be born of water and the Spirit,” says
Christ, “he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.” Thus He links
together the outward visible sign and
the inward spiritual grace. Holy
baptism, then, as practised in the
Christian Church, is not a mere rite
or ordinance,' a door, so to speak,





admitting into a state of grace, but
that, and something much more, even
a sacrament, a medium or vehicle of
conveying Divine grace itself. At
‘the font of regeneration” the person
baptised is made a member of Christ,
and by virtue of that membership a
child of God, and by virtue of that
adoption into Divine sonship an in-
heritor of the kingdom of heaven.

III. The results that should follow
the Spirit's baptism.—l. Careful in-
struction of the neophyte. ‘‘ Disciple
all the nations.” How? “ Baptising
them.” What next? “ Teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you” (Matt. xxviii.
19, 20). Human agency in the
Church must develop and translate
into life the Divine energy implanted
in baptism. 2. Perseverance in the
faith. This includes—(1) Diligent and
continuous effort to attain ‘“ the know-
ledge of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.” (2) Earnest endeavour to
correct and abandon all that is wrong
in action, word, and thought. (3)
Ready compliance with the will of
God in all things, with vigour and
resolution of mind to speak, work,
and suffer for the truth. (4) Com-
plete reliance on Christ alone—and
not on any external apparatus or
means of grace—for all that we need
to make us “ meet for the inheritance
of the saints in light.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—13.
(Parattets: Marv. iii, 13—iv. 11; Luxe iii, 21—iv. 13; Joun i. 29-42.)


Christ's preparation for ministry— ‘The beginning of the gospel” advances
here another stage. ‘The Coming One” has come. The Son of God takes His
place in history as Son of Man, and proceeds to “fulfil all righteousness,”
identifying Himself in every possible way with the race He has come to redeem
and save.

I. Christ is prepared for ministry by baptism.—l. He was about thirty
years of age at the time (Luke iii. 23)—the age at which the Levites entered
upon their work (Num. iv. 3). Hitherto—with the exception of an occasional
visit to the capital—His life had been passed in seclusion at Nazareth, the
Scriptures His daily study, the deep problems of human sin and misery His
constant thought. Now He prepares to stand forth as the Champion of humanity
by confessing their sins and expressing their repentance. 2. The place—on the


14


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. CHAP. 1.


A


eastern bank of the Jordan, near Jericho—to which Jesus came from Nazareth
to be baptised was full of historic memories, carrying the mind back to the
greatest of the judges, and one of the greatest of the prophets. ‘There the
Israelites crossed the Jordan dryshod, and entered with Joshua the promised
land (Josh. iii.); there Elijah, accompanied by Elisha, smote the stream with
his mantle and opened a passage through its rapid waters (2 Kings ii. 8).
3. But why should Jesus submit to the baptism of John? If we could answer
this question fully, we should be well on the way to solve the mystery of the
Incarnation. We can only dimly perceive some of the motives for this amazing
condescension. (1) Although the Sinless One, Christ was baptised with the
baptism of repentance, because He chose—for us men and for our salvation—to
be reckoned amongst sinners as if He were one Himself, and to receive the out-
ward sign of the cleansing away of that evil and defiling thing in which He had
no part. (2) Although John’s superior in nature, Christ received baptism from
him as if He had been inferior in office, for He was now dedicating Himself to
His great work as the Second Adam and New Head of the race. (3) Although
King, Messiah, and not merely a subject in the heavenly kingdom, it was yet fit
that He should be anointed for His own place in that kingdom; and who was
so fit to perform that office as he who had prepared the way before Him ?
(4) Moreover, by Himself receiving baptism, He “sanctified water to the mystical
washing away of sin.” This was the beginning of that sacramental system
which naturally flows from, and is the extension of, the Incarnation. Hitherto
baptism had been but a sign, a figure, an emblem’; henceforth it was to be a
means, a channel, for the conveyance of Divine grace: hitherto God had been
conceived of as far away in heaven; now He was to be regarded as having come
down to make His abode amongst men. 4. Here, for a brief moment, the veil
was drawn aside which shrouds the mystery of the Holy Trinity. The voice of
God the Father is heard from heaven, God the Holy Spirit is seen descending
through the opened heaven to earth, and God the Son is incarnate on earth in
the likeness of our humanity, as the link between it and heaven.

Il. Christ is prepared for ministry by temptation.--1. A special interest
belongs to this chapter of Christ’s life, because the narrative can only have been
derived from His own lips, no human eye having witnessed His contest with the
powers of evil. 2. From the waters of baptism He proceeds at once into the
fires of temptation. This was no accident in His life, but part of the Divine
plan for His equipment as our Representative and Head. Just when Satan’s fury
was at its height—the heavenly attestation of Christ’s Sonship ringing in his
ears—the Holy Spirit urges Jesus forward to the battle. Both the combatants
realise that it is a matter of life and death—that if Satan be worsted now, it is
the beginning of the end of his rule over men. He lays his. plans accordingly,
with the utmost skill and craft. 3. The scene of the encounter, if tradition
may be trusted, was the wilderness of Jericho, the Quarantania of later days ;
a region full of rocks and caverns, to which hermits have often resorted,
and whither pious pilgrims still wend their way, believing that a vivid realisa-
tion of their Saviour’s victory will be helpful to themselves. Some suppose,
however, that Christ was carried by the Spirit into the more distant desert of
Arabia, to the place where Moses and Elijah had fasted and held com-
munion with God (Exod. xxxiv. 28; 1 Kings xix. 8-18), and where afterwards
St. Paul passed a season of seclusion and prayer (Gal. i. 17). 4. How
far was it possible for Christ to be tempted? The following answer, con-
densed mainly from Dr. Liddon’s Divinity ef our Lord, may help to place this
matter in a true light. (1) We must here distinguish between (a) direct
temptation to moral evil, i.e. an appeal to a capacity of self-will which might
be quickened into active disobedience to the will of God; and (0) what may

15


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


OT





be termed indirect temptation, é.e. an appeal to instincts per se innocent, as
belonging to man in his unfallen state, which can make obedience wear the
form of a painful effort or sacrifice. (2) Jesus was—(a) Emmanuel (Matt.
i, 23), Himself God the Saviour; (6) Son of God (Luke i. 35), implying a
pre-existent superhuman personality in Him. (3) This union of the Divine
and human natures in Christ was not fatal to the perfection of either. But
it was inconsistent with the presence of anything in Christ’s manhood that
could contradict the essence of the perfect moral Being, é.e. the holiness of God.
If He could have sinned, the Incarnation would have been a phantom. The
sharpest arrows of the tempter struck Him, but, like darts lighting upon a hard
polished surface, they glanced aside. Moreover, as it would seem, the personal
union of the two natures in Christ involved, at least, the sight of the Beatific
Vision by His humanity ; and if we cannot conceive of the blessed as sinning
while they worship around the throne, much less can we conceive it in One in
whom “dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.” (4) But the union
of Christ’s manhood with His Godhead did not exempt it from simple
human instincts, such as, e¢g., a shrinking from bodily pain. See Hooker,
E. P., v. 48. Upon Christ’s human will in its inchoate or rudimentary stage .
of desire, uninformed by reason, an approaching trial might so far act as a
temptation, as, e.g., to produce a wish that obedience might be compatible with
escape from suffering. But it could not produce, even for one moment, any
wish to be free from the law of obedience itself. (5) Questions: (a) Is this
statement consistent with Heb. ii. 17, iv. 15, v. 7% Yes: see Heb. vii. 26;
1 John iii. 5. Scripture denies the existence, not merely of any sinful thinking
or acting, but of any ultimate roots and sources of sin, of ary propensities or
inclinations, however latent and rudimentary, towards sin, in Christ. When
therefore Scripture speaks of His perfect assimilation to us, it must be under-
stood of physical and mental pain in all their forms, not of any moral
assimilation. (6) Is this account consistent with the exigencies of Christ’s
redemptive work? Certainly. He is not less truly representative of our race,
because in Him it has recovered its perfection. His victory is none the less
real and precious, because, morally speaking, it was inevitable. Nay, He
could not have been the Sinless Victim, offered freely for a sinful world
(1 Pet. iii. 18), unless He had been thus superior to the moral infirmities of His
brethren. (c) Does not such an account impair the full form of Christ’s
example? We gain in the perfection of the moral Ideal thus placed before us,
to say nothing of the perfection of the Mediator between God and man, more
than we can lose in moral vigour, upon discovering that His obedience was
wrought out in a nature unlike our own in the one point of absolute purity.
(d) But does not such an account reflect upon Christ’s moral greatness, and
practically deny His moral liberty? No. The highest liberty does not imply
the moral capacity of doing wrong. God is the one perfectly free Being ; yet
God cannot sin. ‘The real temptation of a sinless Christ is not less precious to
us than the temptation of a Christ who could have sinned would be. It forms
a much truer and more perfect contrast to the failure of our first parent. It
occupies a chief place in that long series of acts of condescension which begins
with the Nativity and ends on the Cross. It is a lesson for all times as to the
true method of resisting the tempter. Finally, it is the source of that strength
whereby all later victories over Satan have been won: Christ, the Sinless One,
has conquered the enemy in His sin-stained members.

Lessons.—1. Seasons of special grace are often succeeded by seasons of
special difficulty and trial; therefore, “be not high-minded, but fear.” 2. Soli-
tude and separation from the world are no more free from spiritual danger than
a state of intercourse with one’s fellow-men. 3. While ever praying, “ Lead


16


*


<P es ee


oe 8


‘to exceed rather than fall short.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP I.





us not into temptation,” and being careful not to run into it of one’s own
accord, the Christian must remember that when he is tempted it is his duty to


fight, and by God’s grace overcome.


4, Christ fought the battle, and gained


the victory, with the very weapons that are in the hands of all Christians; and
He now waits to succour all them that are tempted.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 9. The Jordan, says Dr. Otts,
has so many peculiarities that it can-
not be compared with any other river
on the face of the globe. It is the one
sacred river of Scripture—the only one.
It has never been navigated, and it
empties itself into a sea that has
never had a port. It springs out of
the snows that rest upon the lofty tops
of the heaven-aspiring mountains, and
it rushes madly through its narrow
and ever-descending valley until it
empties itself in a sea that is far below
the level of all other seas. It is full
of life, but after running its short
career it suddenly dies away in the lap
of death. At its sources, and for a
long way down its course, its waters
are as clear as crystal; and flashing in
the sunbeams, they look like a flowing
stream of molten silver; but before
losing itself in the sea of death, its
waters become muddy, as if filled with
the filth of earth. Flowing into a sea
in which no life can live, and which
its unceasing flow never fills, it is a fit
symbol of human life, ever descend-
ing and becoming corrupt, and finally


plunging into the gulf of death which


swallows up all streams flowing into it,
and is never filled. In this stream was
Jesus baptised, symbolising the glorious
fact that He has entered the stream of
our human life to redeem our souls
from the sea of death into which all
human life flows.


Vers. 9, 10. The baptism of our
Lord.—1. By His own conduct and
example Christ here teaches us to
“fulfil all righteousness.” He would
have us ready and eager in our work
for God—doing not as little but as
much as we possibly can, determined


2. By


ON THE VERSES.


His own submission to baptism at
the commencement of His ministry,
He teaches us that this is the manner
in which we also must begin to be His
disciples. 3. As it was on His coming
up out of the water that the Holy
Spirit descended upon Him, so He
teaches us to believe that in the
sacrament of regeneration the babe
baptised with water is baptised also
with the Holy Spirit, who then cleanses
the soul and makes it partaker of a
new, even a Divine nature, by incor-
poration in the body of which Christ
is the Head.

Christ's baptism an epoch in His own
consciousness. —We must not imagine
that every day was the same to Christ,
or Christ the same on every day. He
had Hisgreat moments, as we have. We
call the supreme moment when the soul
awakens to God, and the man realises
manhood, conversion. What thisexperi-
ence signifies to us, the moment sym-
bolised by the baptism signified to Jesus,
only with a difference in degree which
His pre-eminence alone can measure.
It marked His awakening to all that
was involved in Messiahship; and such
an awakening could not come without
utmost tumult of spirit—tumult that
only the solitude and struggle of tht
wilderness could calm. The outward
expresses the inward change. Before
this moment no miracle; after it the
miracles begin and go on multiplying.
Before it no speech, no claim of extra-
ordinary mission, only Divine and
golden silence; after it the teaching
with authority, the founding of the
kingdom, the creating of the world’s
light. Before it the carpenter of Naza-
reth, the son of Joseph and Mary,
doing, in beautiful meekness, the com-
mon duties of the common day ; after


17


CHAP. I.





it the Christ of God, the Revealer of
the Father, the Life and the Light of
men. Now He who became so differ-
ent to others had first become as
different to Himself. What was soon
to be revealed to the world was then
made manifest to His own soul.—A. M.
Fairbairn, D.D.


Ver. 10. The Holy Ghost at the
baptism of our Lord.—In pictures
of Christ’s baptism one sees Jesus
standing in the shallow water of
the river, John from a shell or vessel

_ pouring water on His head, and the
Dove hovering over Him. The im-
pression conveyed is that the Holy
Ghost descended from heaven and
lighted upon Christ during the per-
formance of the rite, corresponding to,
and a visible token of, the regencrating
influence of the Spirit in Christian
baptism. Yet the language of the
Gospels gives no support to this idea.
They all agree that the descent of the
Spirit occurred after Jesus had been
baptised, and when He had come up
out of the river. St. Luke adds that
the Holy Ghost assumed a bodily form,
and that it was while Christ prayed
that the descent took place. We may
account for the general mistake in the
artistic representation of this trans-
action by the prevailing notion which
from primitive times has connected the
Holy Spirit with the grace of baptism,
and which saw in the details of the
baptism of Christ a plain proof of this
connexion. Of course there is a great
truth in this idea, but it is not neces-
sarily conveyed by the fact of Christ’s
baptism ; and if we hold this truth, we
derive our belief from other sources,
and not from this incident properly
regarded, The general opinion is given,
e.g., by Hilary : the Dove settles on the
head of Jesus, in order that we might
know that at our own baptism the
Holy Spirit descends on us, and that
we are bedewed with the unction of
celestial glory, and are made the sons
of God by adoption in Christ. But
Jesus did not come to John’s baptism
that He might receive the gift of the


18


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


_— =


Holy Spirit. John’s baptism did not
impart grace. It was merely a formal
ceremony, witnessing to the inward
desire and striving of the heart. The
water was a sign, and nothing more;
it carried no inward and spiritual grace.
Had the Holy Ghost descended as
is represented in popular pictures, it
would have indicated that what is true
of Christian baptism was also true of
John’s rite ; and this we know is not the
case. The baptism of John was from
heaven; it was a preparation for en-
trance into the new kingdom ; emptying
Himself of, or voluntarily ovscuring,
His Divinity, Jesus constrained John
to perform the initiatory rive, thus
fulfilling all righteousness, His private
life, so to speak, ended in Jordan; the
consecration to His mission was to
follow. So issuing from the river, He
stopped upon its bank, and prayed,
and the Holy Spirit descended from
heaven in a bodily shape, and rested
upon Him, and the heavenly voice pro-
claimed Him Son of God, in whom the
Father was well pleased. Thus was
He announced as Messiah ; thus did He
receive the fulness of the Spirit for His
Messianic work; thus by the unction
of the Spirit was He consecrated
Messiah-King. One naturally sees
here a lesson concerning the Christian
ministry. Not natural endowments,
not the ordinary grace that accom-
panies baptism, equip a man to exercise
the office of minister in the Church of
God, but the special gift of the Holy
Ghost bestowed and received for this
end. I would submit a further thought
concerning the spiritual life and well-
being of individual Christians. As
Christ was not prepared and commis-
sioned for His work without the addi-
tional effusion of the Holy Ghost, so
the Christian needs the added gifts of
the Spirit to fit him for his duty as the
servant of Christ. If we look to the
early records of the Church, we find
that apostolic teachers were not satisfied
with leaving to their converts only
the grace which they obtained by
baptism; they supplemented this by
conferring upon them further good


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.





things. A practical comment on our
passage in the Gospel is afforded by
a transaction mentioned in Acts xix, 2-6.
Surely they are not to be contemned
who see here a cogent argument for
the practice of confirmation. To fit
the neophyte for the battle of life, to
enable him to play his part as Christ’s
faithful soldier and servant, he needs a
fresh outpouring of the Spirit with His
sevenfold gifts.—W. J. Deane, M.A.

Christ comes in the strength of gentle-
ness.—Through the ages Christ’s
strength has been the strength of
gentleness, and His coming has been
like that of Noah’s dove with the olive
branch in its beak, and the tidings of
an abated flood and of a safe home on
its return. The ascetic preacher of
repentance was strong to shake and
purge men’s hearts by terror; but the
stronger Son comes to conquer by
meekness, and reign by the omnipo-
tence of love. The beginning of the
gospel was the anticipation and the
proclamation of strength like the
eagle’s, swift of flight, and powerful to
strike and destroy. The gospel, when
it became a fact, and not a hope, was
found in the meek Jesus, with the
Dove of God, the gentle Spirit, which is
mightier than all, nestling in His heart,
and uttering soft notes of invitation
through His lips.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

The Holy Spirit came as a dove,—a
gentle, joyous creature, with no bitter-
ness of gall, no fierceness of bite,
no violence of rending claws; loving
human houses, associating within one
home; nurturing their young together ;
when they fly abroad, hanging in their
flight: side by side ; leading their life in
mutual intercourse; giving in concord
the kiss of peace with the bill; in
every way fulfilling the law of unani-
mity. This is the singleness of heart
that ought to be in the Church ; this is
the habit of love that must be obtained.
—Cyprian,


Vers. 12, 13. Lessons.—1. We in
entering upon our Christian vocation
ought so to behave ourselves as Christ
did in entering upon His mediatorial


office. He retreated from the world,
and by that retreat He virtually de-
clared that He had nothing to do
with the world. Those therefore who
are called to the preaching of the
gospel, or to any other the like duty,
are by this example taught to wean
themselves from the things of this
world, and to renounce whatever may
hinder them from the performance of
that duty, to which they are called.
2. Christ willingly follows whither
the Spirit leads Him; and what His
Father commands Him that He under-
takes with all alacrity: we in the like
manner ought cheerfully in all things
to comply with God’s will and pleasure ;
nothing ought to deter us from a steady
performance of our duty; nor hunger,
nor thirst, nor deserts, nor devils ought
to be terrible to us, whilst we are safe
under the conduct of Christ and His
Spirit. 3. Christ soon after He was
baptised was led into the wilderness to
be tempted. After we have listed our-
selves amongst Christ’s soldiers, we
must not expect to be idle, but must
prepare ourselves for battle. Christ
armed Himself against the assaults of
the devil by fasting ; this armour He
Himself did not want, but He there-
fore put it on, that we might learn
how to arm ourselves against our
spritual enemies.—Bishop Smalridge.


Ver. 13. Jesus was tempted.—t.
That He might sympathise with us in
our trials, and assist us in our times
of need.—The mariner who has once
been cast on an inhospitable shore
hastens with greater ardour to the
relief of a shipwrecked crew than the
callous inhabitant of the land who
has never known the dangers of the
deep. The orphan knows best how
to mourn with his friend the loss of
a parent; the bereaved parent most
tenderly sympathises in the death of
a brother’s child. As we feel in our-
selves, so we judge of others; and it is
a consolation to us, not only that our
Saviour was of the same nature and
constitution as ourselves, but that
hardships, miseries, and temptations


19


CHAP. L


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of the same kind were suffered by Him,
and in a manner more severe than
human nature is generally called to
endure. We trust that He has learned
to sympathise with us, and that
His sympathy will teach Him to
relieve.

II. That we might learn from His
example how to resist temptation and
to conquer.—The only weapon that He
used was the sword of the Spirit, the
word of God, which is equally avail-
able for us to wield. It furnishes us
with the plainest directions for holiness
of life, and the most powerful motives
to obey them ; it shows us clearly the
pitfalls in our path, and how to avoid
them ; it animates us with visions of
heavenly things, and wondrous promises
to such as overcome,


III. That we might be convinced .


that this is God’s appointed path to
perfection—God has had one Son
without sin, but no son without tempta-
tion. Christ’s trial consisted in the
invitation to accept a lower ideal than
the highest, to be content with a
dazzling carnal glory instead of winning
His way through divinely appointed
sufferings to eternal renown. He was
shown how He might turn out of the
steep and stony path of sacrifice into
the smooth and easy road of earthly
pomp and grandeur—how with the
world’s weapons He might win the
victory. But He sternly and empha-
tically refused to entertain the tempter’s
suggestion ; and His refusal is a clarion
call to us to remain loyal to our better
selves, to trust implicitly the high con-
victions of our souls, to take up the
cross and in it find the crown. It is
not he that shirks the battle, but
“he that endureth to the end,” who
shall be “saved”: ze. completely
emancipated from all evil around and
within, and presented faultless—unim-
peached—before the throne.

Three prominent points in our Lord's
temptation.—l. The relation of the
supernatural to the natural in Himself ;


20


or, on the other side, His relation to
God as His ideal human Son. 2. The
relation of God to the supernatural in
His person, and the official in His
mission. 3. The nature of the kingdom
He had come to found, and the agencies
by which it was to live and extend.—
A. M. Fairbairn, DD.

Jesus the representative Man.—Jesus
is here the representative Man, the
Source and Head of the new humanity,
the Founder of the kingdom that is to
be. When He triumphs, it triumphs.
When He is victorious, all are victori-
ous that live in and by Him. And
His victory, as it was for humanity,
was by humanity. The supernatural
energies that were in Him He did not
use for Himself. In our nature, as in
our name, He stood, fought, conquered.
How perfectly, then, is He qualified to
be at once our Saviour and Example!
—Ibid.

Christ with wild beasts and angels.
—I. The companionship of the wild
beasts.—1. Not only a graphic indi-
cation that the place was wild and
desolate, but also a reminder of the
dominion over the lower creatures given
originally to man, and doubtless exer-
cised by our first parents unfearing
and unfeared. 2. Nor can we doubt
that the fiercest denizens of the wilds
would become tame and gentle in the
presence of ‘the Second Adam, the
Lord from heaven ”—the dumb animals
rebuking the madness of all who recog-
nise Him not !

II. The ministrations of the angels.
—1. The connexion between the three
worlds—Earth, Heaven, Hell—is closer
than we think. 2. Let the thought
of our invisible friends banish all fear
of our spiritual foes.

Christ manifested as Monarch of all.
—1. Of hell’s minions, whose assaults
He triumphantly repels. 2. Of earth’s
fiercest inhabitants, whose wild pas-
sions are subdued in His presence.
3. Of heaven’s angels, whose delight i
is to minister to Him,





a ae


— Se |
Fa


ee


Sa eet oS CY


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR. CHAP. i.
De eer Rear ee Ree NT ee ue ee


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1420.
(Panauters: Marr, iv. 17-22; Lunn iv. 14, 15, v, 1-11.)


Christ's early Galilean preaching and first disciples—What St. Mark here
records is not the beginning of Christ’s ministerial work, but His first preaching
in Galilee. St. John alone fills up the gap between our Lord’s temptation and
the imprisonment of the Baptist. From him we know of the Baptist’s testimony
to Jesus at Bethabara (Bethany, R.V.) beyond Jordan, and the impression it made
on some of his disciples; of the marriage feast at Cana of Galilee ; of Christ’s
first passover at Jerusalem, cleansing of temple, and discourse with N. icodemus ;
of His continued ministry in Judea, baptising by His disciples, and receiving
further testimony from the Baptist (chaps. i.-iii.). Then St. John mentions,
in common with the other Evangelists, Christ’s departure from Judea into
Galilee after the Baptist’s imprisonment ; but he supplements their narrative by
telling us of the incident on the way at Jacob's well near Sychar, the discourse
with the woman of Samaria, and the gaining of many believers among the
Samaritans ; stating also as an incidental reason for Christ’s going to Galilee,
that the Pharisees had heard that “Jesus made and baptised more disciples
than John” (iv. 1-42).

I. The Forerunner’s public ministry is closed—1. The last time we heard of
the Baptist, he occupied a position of peculiar honour. His popularity was
great, his influence permeating all classes of society. It looked as if the nation
had come to its senses, and was ready to welcome its King. But, alas! the
impression proved but transitory; the King, when they saw Him, proved very
different from what their carnal fancy had painted ; and so in bitter disappoint-
ment they turned from the Forerunner who (as they deemed it) had misled them,
and took no heed when Herod seized and shut him in prison. 2. But the
Baptist, although imprisoned, is not silenced. If he has been stopped working
for God, he can still suffer in His cause. Moreover, even in prison he is able
to direct his disciples to ‘“‘ Him who should come” for the solution of their
difficulties (Matt. xi. 2, 3). And in the conscience of Herod (and doubtless of
many others) his faithful testimony continued to ring long after his death
(Mark vi. 14, 16).

II. The One mightier than he takes the Forerunner’s place.—1. No man’s
service is essential to God. Though the workman be buried—whether in prison
or the grave—He can and will find means to carry on the work. What we
often regard as hindrances to the Lord’s cause are really its greatest helps. It
is not possible for a man to be “ cut off in the midst of his usefulness,” as we
term it. He cannot be cut off till his work is done, and it is time for him to
make way for his successor. God never makes a mistake in these matters, and
He is never off guard. 2. The world will never succeed in suppressing the
truth. The gospel has come here to stay ; and no power on earth—or in hell—
can dislodge or muffle it. Every religious persecution since the world began has
resulted in the overthrow of the assailants and the firmer establishment of those
assailed. The blood of the martyrs has in every case become the seed-plot of the
Church, for its further development and ultimate triumph. ;

III. The message of Jesus is a distinct advance upon that of the Baptist.—
1. While still enforcing repentance, He announces further that the time which
was formerly said to be at hand has now arrived, and the gospel which He
preaches must not only be believed, but believed in—relied upon as the panacea
for every human ill. Faith is the hand on earth which grasps and holds on to
the Divine hand reached down from heaven to strengthen and to aid. 2. He


al


\





CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee eee eee ee


takes steps for the establishment of the kingdom of God. Few things are more
striking, as a revelation of God’s method, than the measured tread with which
Christ went forward to this grand enterprise. The Jews in general were
eagerly desiring a liberator, who should gird his sword upon his thigh, and
through bloodshed restore to them something of their ancient prestige. But
Jesus is a Man of peace; His rallying cry bids them turn their weapons against
no extraneous foe, but against their own darling lusts and passions. He calls
upon them to repent ; to change their minds, hearts, hopes, ambitions ; to put
off the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and to put on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness ; to
accept the truth, which alone can make them free. For this purpose the
kingdom of God is at hand; and in Him who speaks (though He does not tell
them so) they behold its King. Such doctrine could only be received by a few
here and there in the nation, and to them alone does He make His revelation
in its fulness. 3. What is the kingdom of God? (1) This inquiry is most
important; for the kingdom—(a) 1s revealed to us by God; (6) is the
principal subject of Christ’s teaching throughout His entire ministry, most of
His parables being illustrative of it; (c) is specially emphasised after His
resurrection (Acts i. 3). (2) The origin of this kingdom may be clearly traced.
(a) The Mosaic economy was the kingdom of God in embryo. See Matt. viii.
12; Acts. iv. 11, vii. 38; Rom. ix. 4, xi.17; Heb. xii, 22-24. That which
existed Christ came to expand, extend, and perfect (Matt. v. 17). But this
work was like a new creation, a new birth of the kingdom (Luke xvi. 16).
(6) The kingdom of God is therefore spoken of as “to come ” by the Baptist
(Matt. iii. 2), by our Lord (Matt. iv. 17, xvi. 18), by the apostles during their
first mission (Matt. x. 7), and just before the Ascension (Acts i. 6). (c) Imme-
diately after Pentecost the kingdom is spoken of as now come (Acts ii. 16-47),
and henceforth it is generally called “the Church.” (3) The nature of this
kingdom may be ascertained from the figures under which it is represented in
Scripture. (a) A state (civitas) (Matt. v. 14). (6) A family, of which God
is the Father (Eph. iii. 14, 15). (c) The vineyard of God (Isa. v. 1, ete.;
Matt. xxi. 33, etc.). (d@) A vine (Ps. lxxx. 8, etc.: cp. John xv. 1, 2). (e) A
flock and a fold (Isa. xl. 11; Ezek. xxxiv. 11, ete.; John x.). (jf) A body, the
Head of which is Christ (Eph. i. 22; Col. i. 18), and which the Holy Spirit
inhabits (John xiv. 17: ep. 1 Cor. xii. 13). (g) The fulness of God (Eph. 1. 22).
From all this it clearly follows that the claims and rights of the Church are
the claims and rights of Christ through His body : what is done to the Church
is done to Christ. While she may suffer persecution (John xvi. 2), and men
may reject her to their own hurt (Isa. lx. 12), or may be deprived of her on
account of their sins (Matt. xxi. 43), yet she cannot be destroyed, for Christ is
always with her (Matt. xxviii. 20), and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against her (Matt. xvi. 18).

IV. The calling and training of disciples are marked features in the
ministry of Jesus.—1. The manner of their calling is deeply instructive. (1) He
honours diligence in lowly occupations. He thinks, not of the work, but of
the spirit in which it is done. (2) He chooses the weak things of the world
to confound the things which are mighty, . . . that no flesh should glory in His
presence. (3) He demands self-sacrifice from the very beginning. If any one
be inclined to urge that it was not much these men left, let him remember it
was their all. And there is no tempting bait dangled before their eyes to lure
them on. The promise of “twelve thrones” was not made till long afterwards.
All they are offered is, that if they follow Jesus He will make them fishers of
men, like Himself. 2. As to their training, let these facts be noted. (1) Christ
deliberately makes provision, from the first, for the perpetuity of His kingdom,


22


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.


—————————— eee


(2) He bestows personal attention on the spiritual education of those who are
hereafter to be His earthly representatives and vicegerents. (3) He puts them
in a position to testify as to His words and works.

Lessons.—1. Trust in God, who is all-sufficient for any and every emergency.


2. Use every possible means and occasion for furthering God’s work.


3. Despise


none of the ordinances of Christ’s Church. 4. The following of Christ is to be


preferred to the business of the world.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 14. The audience first addressed
by our Lord.—Did Jesus, it has been
asked, first address Himself to a small
circle of acquaintances, or did He
teach in public from the beginning of
His ministry? The latter is more
likely. It does not seem probable that
He began to work in secret amongst
a few individuals; for although He
would at any time gladly go out of
His way to restore a single wanderer
to the path of virtue, yet, after all,
His message was designed primarily
for the whole nation. Moreover,
publicity was as much in keeping with
the character of the age as with our
Lord’s intention; and He could not
fail to find abundant opportunities of
speaking to the populace.

The kingdom a gospel.—Jesus Christ
preached the kingdom of God as a
gospel: rightly understood it is not
a despotism, it is not a terror; it is
the supremacy of light, of truth, of
love.—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 15. The kingdom of God.—
J. The nature of true religion, here
termed “the kingdom of God.” St.
Paul defines it in Rom. xiv. 17. 1. It
is well known, that not only the un-
converted Jews, but many who had
received the faith of Christ, were, not-
withstanding, zealous of the ceremonial
law (Acts xxi. 20). 2. In opposition
to these, the apostle declares, that true
religion does not consist in any out-
ward thing whatever; that although
it naturally leads to every good word
and work, yet its real nature lies
deeper still, even in “the hidden man
of the heart.” (1) “Righteousness” :
seo Mark xii. 30, 31, (2) “The peace


of God,” which God only can give, and
the world cannot take away; the
peace which “passeth all under-
standing,” all barely rational concep-
tion ; being a supernatural sensation,
a divine taste, of “‘ the powers of the
world to come”; such as the natural
man knoweth not, how wise soever in
the things of this world; nor indeed
can he know it, in his present state,
“because it is spiritually discerned.”
It is a peace that banishes all doubt,
uncertainty, fear. (3) “Joy in the
Holy Ghost ”—joy wrought in the
heart by the ever-blessed Spirit. He
it is who works in us that calm,
humble rejoicing in God, through Christ
Jesus, ““by whom we have now re-
ceived the atonement,” and who en-
ables us boldly to confirm the truth of
the declaration (Ps. xxxii. 1). 3. This
holiness and happiness, joined in one,
are sometimes styled “the kingdom of
God,” ana sometimes “the kingdom
of heaven.” (1) It is termed “the
kingdom of God,” because it is the
immediate fruit of God’s reigning in
the soul. (2) It is called “the king-
dom of heaven,” because it is (in
a degree) heaven opened in the soul
(see 1 John v. 11, 12; John xvii. 3).
4, And this kingdom is “at hand.”
These words, as originally spoken, im-
plied that “the time” was then ful-
filled, God being “made manifest in
the flesh,” when He would set up His
kingdom among men, and reign in the
hearts of His people. And is not the
time now fulfilled? The kingdom is
not far from every one of you.

Il. The way to the kingdom.—
1. “ Repent”: that is, know thyself—
the inbred corruption of thy heart—


a9
ad


z


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ap IS ne SS SS eee


the bitter streams of vanity, ambition,
covetousness, and all kinds of lusts
flowing from it—the actual sins of
which thou art continually guilty—and
the just reward of thy inward and
outward wickedness. If to this lively
conviction of thy utter guiltiness and
helplessness there be added suitable
affections—sorrow of heart, for having
despised thy own mercies—remorse,
and self-condemnation, having thy
mouth stopped—shame to lift up thine
eyes to heaven—fear of the wrath of
God abiding on thee—earnest desire
to cease from evil, and learn to do
well,—then “thon art not far from
the kingdom of God.” One step more,
and thou shalt enter in. 2. “‘ Believe
the gospel.” (1) The gospel, in the
widest sense, means the whole revela-
tion made to men by Jesus Christ,
and sometimes the whole account of
what He did and suffered. The sub-
stance of all is (1 Tim. i. 15; John
iii. 16; Isa. liii, 5): (2) ‘“ Believe”
this, and the kingdom of God is thine.
By faith thou attainest the promise.
Only beware thou do not deceive thy
own soul, with regard to the nature
of this faith. It is not merely a bare
assent to the truth of the Bible and
Creeds, but, over and above this, a
sure trust in God’s mercy through
Christ.—John Wesley.

The requirements of the kingdom of
God.—1. An assertion: “The time is
fulfilled” —the time of patriarchs, pro-
phets, types and figures, etc. 2. A
prediction : “The kingdom of God is
at hand.” (1) Foretold by Daniel.
(2) Not in word, but in power ; sub-
duing passions of men, and enmity. of


demons. (3) Righteousness, peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghust. (4) Of
this kingdom there is no end. 3. A
twofold duty. (1) ‘ Repent.” This


includes—(a) sorrow for, confession of,
and fleeing from sin; (6) striving
after holiness. (2) ‘ Believe the gos-
pel.” God’s free gift, in spite of man’s
ill desert. Embodied in Christ. Look
to Him for—(a) pardon, (6) renewal,
(c) heavenward impulses, And give
God the glory.


24


The distinctive qualities, aspects, and
relations of the kingdom are thus stated
by Dr. A. M. Fairbairn :—l. It is
present, an already existing reality,
none the less real that it was unseen,
undiscovered by the very men who
professed to be looking for it (Luke
vi. 20, xvii. 20,21; Matt. xx.1). 2. It
is expansive, has an extensive and
intensive growth, can have its dominion
extended and its authority more per-
fectly recognised and obeyed (Matt.
vi. 10, xiii. 3-8, 19-23.) 3. It does
its work silently and unseen; grows
without noise, like the seed in the
ground, And its intensive is as silent
as its expansive action. It penetrates
and transforms the man who enters it
(Matt. xviii. 1-3; Luke xviii. 17;
John iii. 3-5). 4. It creates and re-
quires righteousness in all its subjects
(Matt. vi. 33, v. 19, 20). 5. It is
the possession and reward of those
who have certain spiritual qualities
(Matt. v. 3, 10, xvii. 4). 6. It is
without local or national character,
can have subjects anywhere, has none
for simply formal or hereditary reasons
(Matt. viii. 11, xxi. 31; Luke xiii. 29).
7. It is at once universal and indi-
vidual, meant to be preached every-
where and to every one, to compre-
hend the race by pervading all its
units (Matt. xxiv. 14). 8. It is to be
an everlasting kingdom, to endure
throughout all generations.

Faith and repentance.—Faith and
repentance keep up a Christian’s life,
as the natural heat and radical mois-
ture do the natural life. Faith is
like the innate heat; repentance like
the natural moisture. And as the
philosopher saith, if the innate heat
devour toomuch theradical moisture, or,
on the contrary, there breed preseutly
diseases, so, if believing make a man
repent less, or repenting make a man
believe less, this turneth to a dis-
temper. Lord, cast me down (said a
holy man upon his death-bed) as low
as hell in repentance, and lift me
up by faith into the highest heavens,
in confidence of Thy salvation,—John


Trapp.


ie





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP, I.


i


Ver. 16. The Sea of Galilee fills a
large place in the life of Jesus; on its
waters and around its shores most of
His mighty works were done. 1. It
was originally called the Sea of Chin-
nereth, either from its shape resembling
a harp, or from a town of that name
near by (Num. xxxiv. 11; Josh. xii. 3:
ep. Josh. xix. 35), 2. It was after-
wards called the Lake of Gennesaret
(Luke v. 1), which some consider a
corruption of the earlier name; but it
is more likely to have been so called
from the Plain»of Gennesar, so rich in
beauty and fertility, on its western
shore. 3. The name Sea of Galilee
was derived from the province which
bordered on its western side (Matt. iv.
18; Mark vii. 31). 4. Another name
was the Sea of Tiberias (John xxi. 1),
from Tiberias, which, although only
recently founded by Herod Antipas in
the time of our Lord, had become a
large and flourishing town by the time
St. John wrote. 5. The name given
it at the present day, by Jews and
Christians alike, is the Sea of the
Messiah. To Christians it is the Sea
of the Messiah who has come, to Jews
the Sea of the Messiah for whom they
still vainly look. 6. The industries
engaged in were “agriculture and
fruit-growing, dyeing and tanning,
with every department of a large
carrying trade; but chiefly fishing,
boat-building, and fish-curing. Of the
last, which spread the lake’s fame
over the Roman world, before its
fishermen and their habits became
familiar through the gospel, there is
no trace in the Evangelists. The
fisheries themselves were pursued by
thousands of families. They were no
monopoly; but the fishing-grounds,
best at the north end where the streams
entered, were free to ail. And the
trade was very profitable.” See article
by Prof. G. A. Smith, in Hapositor,
May 1893.

The chosen lake.—The Jewish Rabbis
had a tradition which they expressed
thus: “Seven lakes have I created,
saith the Lord; but out of them all
I have chosen none but the Lake of


Gennesaret.” How have these words
been fulfilled, in ways of which the
Rabbis never dreamed! It is the
chosen lake of Providence. Its dimen-
sions are not large. It measures only
thirteen miles by six. It does not lie
high up above the ordinary homes of
men. Nay, it is in astrange depression
on the -globe—more than six hundred
feet below the level of the sea. Yet
it is the fountain-head of a living
water that has flowed equally to
palaces and huts, and that has quenched
a thirst in souls of all conditions beyond
the power of this world’s wine.—
T. Starr King.

Christs activity in doing good.—
Walking was His constant exercise, to
find out objects of spiritual and cor-
poral mercy. This account St. Peter
gives of Him, that ‘‘ He went about,”
walked over all the country ere He
had done, beginning from Galilee ;
but He did not walk only for the walk’s
sake. ‘He went about,” says he,
“doing good, and healing all manner
of diseases.” He “‘ went about,” as the
sun goes his round, to dispense light
and warmth, to communicate life and
vigour to everything his active beams
light upon. All His steps, whither
ever He went, dropt fatness. Oh, may
every pious soul not miss to meet Him
in His walks! And sure enough it may,
it shall do so, if itself continue to keep
in His ways. So unwearied was His
love, that, even to His bodily weariness,
with indefatigable pains He walked up
and down, to scatter health to the sick
and salvation to sinners. He took a
survey of the whole country, measured
it with His own paces, and streamed
forth blessings wherever He came. It
fared with all places, with all persons,
that touched Him, or He them, that
came near Him, or that He came near,
as it did with the woman that had
the issue of blood, that they found
virtue come from Him. And so it was
here.—A. Littleton, D.D.


Vers. 16-20. The Master's call an-
swered.—l. The Master’s call.—l. It is
a call first to discipleship, and then to

25


ane?


CHAP. I.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


apostleship. Personal holiness must
precede Christian usefulness, Faith
must go before works. Let the heart
first be given to Christ, and the dedi-
cation of hands, feet, tongue, and
brain will naturally follow. To reverse
this order is to mistake root for fruit,
cause for effect. 2. It is a call to cast
in one’s lot with Christ, and receive
the impress of His life. How could
we talk of self-sacrifice in connexion
with Christ’s service, if we realised
that He only asks us to relinquish
what is ruinous to our souls, in order
that He may fill us with the riches of
His heavenly storehouse ?

II. The servants’ answer.—What
these men replied in words we know
not; but their action was full of the
best eloquence. 1. It was a prompt
decision. Ready obedience is at the
same time the easiest and the most
valuable. 2. It was a lasting decision.
These men had then little idea of all
that was involved in following Christ
and becoming fishers of men. Yet,
when the full import of their choice
became known to them, they never
flinched, or looked back with regret to
the things they had given up; for in
Christ they found every satisfaction of
life intensified a thousandfold—nay,
they learnt that without Christ earth’s
fairest scenes and chief delights are as
a howling wilderness or as a never-
resting, shoreless sea. Let us, like
them, hear when Christ speaks, obey
when Christ commands, believe when
Christ promises, and follow whither
Christ leads.

Christ and His servants.—1. Christ is
the preparer of His servants: “I will
make you ”—how much was involved in
that promise! (1) Authority; (2) Quali-
fication. 2. Small beginnings com-
patible with sublime results. 3. The
claims of God override all other claims
—the sons left their father. 4. The
discharge of common duties the best
preparation for higher calls—two were
casting the net into the sea, and two
were mending their nets. The transi-
tion from one duty to another need not
be abrupt. The humblest duty may be


3


very near the highest honour. 5. The
place of the servant is after the Master
—Come ye after Me” ; they are not
invited to equal terms—they must walk
in the King’s shadow.—J. Parker, D.D.

Jesus and John.—Jesus, in the silent
conflicts of the wilderness, prepares for
the open conflicts of life—takes the
place of John, delivered to death by
the carnal mind. 1. The history: a
testimony—(1) that He honoured the
Baptist ; (2) did not fear the enemy ;
(3) was faithful to His people and
vocation. 2. The doctrine: (1) The
witnesses of the kingdom cannot be
destroyed; (2) After every seeming
triumph of the kingdom of darkness
still stronger heroes of God come for-
ward, 3. Christ is always Himself
victorious at last in every scene.—J. P.
Lange, D.D.

The mighty calling of the Lord.—
1. Gentler than any human request.
2. Mightier than any human com-
mand. 38. Unique as the victorious
wooing of heavenly love.—Jbid.

The calling of Jesus.—1. To one
thing—into His discipleship and the
fellowship of His Spirit, or to the
Father. 2. To many things—to dis-
cipleship and mastership, to co-opera-
tion, to fellowship in suffering, and
community in triumph.—Zdid.

The spiritual and the worldly vocations
of Christians.—1. Opposition. 2. Kin-
dredness. 3. Union.—Jbzd.

The twofold earthly companionship of
thedisciples a foundation for the higher.—
1, Companions in fishing—companions
in fishing for men. 2. Brethren after
the flesh—spiritual brethren.—Jbid.

The Christian and ecclesiastical voca-
tions in harmony with the sacred
natural obligations of life.—Jbzd.

Christ's glance—One glance of the
Lord, and He knows the heart under its
rough garment.— Bauer.

The brotherhoods of life-—The world
is covered with a network of brother-
hoods. The first and simplest relation-
ships run on and out in every direction,
and multiply themselves till hardly
any man stands entirely alone. 1. The
cause of this interwoven network, this


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
2


reticulation of life with life, is the
whole system of nature by which each
human being takes its start from
another human being, and is kept, for
a time at least, in associations of com-
_ pany and dependence with the being
from whom it sprang and with the
other beings who have the same source
with it. 2. Such relationships are
full of mutual helpfulness and pleasure.
3. One final cause or purpose of this
interlacing of life with life, by natural
and indissoluble kinships, may be just
this—the providing, as it were, of open
communications, of a system of shafts
or channels piercing this human mass
in every direction, crossing and re-
crossing one another, through which
those higher influences, which ought
to reach every corner, and every indi-
vidual of the great structural humanity,
may be freely carried everywhere, and
no most remote or insignificant atom
of the mass be totally and necessarily
untouched.—Bishop Phillips Brooks.


Ver. 17. Four kinds of apostles.—
There are four sorts of apostles, accord-
ing to Jerome. 1. Some are sent only
from God, and not by men. (1) Im-
mediately from God the Father, as the
prophets under the law (2 Pet. i. 21),
Jesus Christ (John xx. 21), and the
Baptist (John i. 6) in the beginning
of the gospel. (2) Immediately from
God the Son, in His state mortal, as
the twelve (Matt. x. 5): in His state
glorious, as St. Paul (Acts ix. 15).
2. Others are sent by men, and not


CHAP. 1.


by God: as they who being unworthy
both in respect of their bad learning
and worse living, yet crowd into the
ministry, by alliance, favour, or simony.
3. Others are neither chosen of God,
nor called by men: as the false pro-
phets (Jer. xxiii, 21; John x. 1).
4, Others are both chosen by God and
called by men (Acts xx. 28, xiv. 23).

Jesus calls us.—1. O’er the tumult of
our life’s wild, restless sea. 2. From
the worship of the vain world’s golden
store. 3. From each idol. 4. In our
joys and sorrows, days of toil, and
hours of ease.

Fraternity.—Christ loves not singu-
larity ; He called not one alone. He
loves not schism either between them
whom He calls; and therefore He calls
persons likely to agree—“ two brethren.”
So He began to build the synagogues,
to establish that first government in
Moses and Aaron—*“ brethren” ; so He
begins to build the Church in Peter
and Andrew—“ brethren.” The prin-
cipal fraternity and brotherhood that
God respects is spiritual brethren in
the profession of the same true religion
(Exod. iv. 14; Eccles. iv. 9, 10).— John
Donne, DD.

Association in work.— Single endea-
vours seldom prosper: many hands
make the work. both quick and sure.
They can be no friends to the happy
estate of a family or Church that labour
to cause distractions. Division makes
certain way to ruin (Luke x. 1; Acts
xi. 30, xii. 2, xv. 2, 39, 40).—Bishop
Joseph Hall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—34.
(ParatLets: Luxe iv. 31-41; Marr. viii. 14-17.)


A Sabbath in Capernaum.—ti. Two places compete for the honour or shame
of being the site of Capernaum-—Tell Hum at the northern extremity, and
Khan Minyeh at the north-western corner. 1. At the former there have been
found the remains of a synagogue built of white marble, the style of which
belongs to the Herodian period; and the following circumstance respecting 1t
tay be worthy of consideration. It appears to have been usual to carve over
the doorway of these buildings an emblem, which, in every case known save one,
was *the seven-branched candlestick,” signifying that they were set apart

27


eek HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
Si syaiel Colca is cena I aneemani MeS


chiefly for illumination or instruction. The one exception is at Tell Hum,
where the carving represents “‘ the pot of manna” surrounded by a vine and
cluster of grapes. Now it was in the synagogue at Capernaum that Christ
delivered His discourse about the ‘“‘ manna » and the “living bread which came
down from heaven”; and it has been conjectured, with some show of reason, that
He who so frequently based His teaching on some object in sight at the time,
may have brought the conversation round to this point on purpose, because the
unusual emblem formed so happy an illustration of His subject. See John vi.
94-59, 2, Dr. Otts, a recent American traveller, writes as follows, in support
of the claim of Khan Minyeh :—Without entering into the controversy, or
presuming to dogmatise, we settle down on Khan Minyeh as the site of “ His
own city,” in which was the Jesus-house, contemptuously called, in His day,
by the unbelieving Jews, “the house of the heretic,” and ever since known as
such in tradition. In this city Jesus had a house. It is spoken of in the
Gospels as “the house,” and was doubtless known by His friends and foes as
“the Jesus-house.” It may have been a hired ‘house, like that in which Paul
lived and preached at Rome, engaged and maintained by His friends and
followers as the place where He met with His disciples, and received all who
sought the benedictions of His holy ministry. It seems that when He first
went to Capernaum to make His home there, He lodged with Peter while this
house was being procured and prepared for His use; and while staying in
Peter’s house, He healed his wife's mother of a fever, etc.

II. The synagogue was a term applied both to the congregation of Jews in
a provincial town, and to the place where it assembled—on the Sabbath for
worship, and during the week for instruction, discussion, and administration of
justice. The origin of this institution is lost in obscurity. As far back as the
time of Samuel there were meetings of bands of prophets for praise and pro-
phesyings (1 Sam. x. 5, xix. 20), which pious Israelites would doubtless attend.
In the days of the kings people resorted to the prophet of the time for instruction
at certain seasons (2 Kings iv. 23). The only Old Testament mention of re-
ligious meeting-places other than places of sacrifice—if, indeed, the reference be
not to religious feasts rather than religious houses—is in a Psalm (lxxiv. 8) of
Maccabean date. Jewish tradition ascribes the establishment of synagogues
to Ezra and Nehemiah. After the return from captivity they assumed a
prominent place in the J ewish ecclesiastical system. The order of service
was far less conventional than that of the Temple, distinguished strangers being
frequently invited to read and expound (Acts xiii. 15), Thus the synagogue
was a notable exception to the rigid formality which was sapping the life out of
Judaism, and formed a rallying-point for the propagation of the Christian faith.
Christ made constant use of the synagogue both for private devotion and for
teaching purposes (Luke iv. 16).

III. The teaching of Christ in the synagogue at Capernaum struck His
auditors with amazement, as it had done before at Nazareth (Luke iv. 14-30).
It is not unlikely that He repeated now the substance of what He said then :
declaring that His mission was to preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the
broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable
year of the Lord—the jubilee, in which God offers forgiveness of sins ané
deliverance to sinners; and that this blessing was for all, of whatever nation,
who would turn from their sins and trust in God. To all this He may have
added some of those imperishable sentences which were afterwards gathered up
in the grand charter of the heavenly commonwealth which we call the Sermon
on the Mount. Such teaching as this—at once so simple, so gracious, so com-
prehensive, so Divine—could not fail to create a sensation in the hearts of people


28


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP ay,








accustomed only to the pedantries and quibbles of the scribes, who only darkened
counsel by words without knowledge. How had the commandment of God been
emptied of all meaning by their puerile hair-splittings on every conceivable sub-
ject that bordered on religion without touching its inner essence! how had they
bewildered the minds of the simple by their endless arguments and speculations
and refinements, and by their wearisome appeals to this authority as against
that! With Jesus it is altogether different. He moves on a plane as far
above theirs as the heaven is higher than the earth. When He speaks, it is to
utter truths that find their unmistakable echo in every human soul; when He
teaches, it is to quote the opinion of no earthly authority, but to lay down the
eternal law of right and wrong as Himself the Word of God. And what He
preaches to others, He practises Himself; while He points, He also leads. Not
so the scribes: they said ‘ Go,” but went not themselves.

IV. A striking result of Christ’s preaching manifests itself immediately.
The hush of awe which testified to the strong impression made by Christ’s
discourse in the synagogue, is abruptly disturbed by shrieks of rage and fear
proceeding from one of the auditors who is manifestly under the dominion of
the powers of evil. Here we are brought face to face with the profound and
solemn problem of demoniacal possession. The phenomenon cannot be explained
away by saying that our Lord merely accommodated His language to the
mistaken ideas of the time, for we find that He deliberately made it part of His
disciples’ commission to “cast out demons” (Matt. x. 8), and afterwards gave
thanks to the Father for their success in this part of their work (Luke x. 17, 18),
while on another occasion He reproved them for having failed to expel an evil
spirit (Matt. xvii. 21). We must, then, decline to identify these demons with
mere physical and mental diseases—a theory which in any case would be
insufficient to account for the double personality so manifest in nearly every


- instance on record, and conspicuously in the text, where at one moment the


man, at another the demon, gains the ascendency. In one of his better
moments the poor wretch made his way to the synagogue, the very last place
that the demon would willingly have permitted him to enter ; but when there the
demon, goaded to fury by the presence of Christ, asserts his supremacy over his
victim, even while he fears that it will be to his own undoing. ‘“ Involuntarily,
in his confessed inability of disguise or resistance, he owns defeat, even before
the contest. ‘What have we to do with 'Thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Thou art
come to destroy us! I know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of God” And
yet there seems already an emergence of the consciousness of the demonised,
at least in so far that there is no longer confusion between him and his tormentor,
and the latter speaks in his own name. One stronger than the demon had
affected the higher part in the demonised. It was the Holy One of God, in
whose presence the powers of moral destruction cannot be silent, but must
speak, and own their subjection and doom. The Christ needs not to contend ;
that He is the Christ is itself victory. But this was not all. He had come
not only to destroy the works of the devil. His Incarnation meant this—and
more: to set the prisoners free. By a word of command He gagged the con-
fessions of the demon, unwillingly made, and even so with hostile intent. It
was not by such voices that He would have His Messiahship ever proclaimed.
Such testimony was wholly unfitting and incongruous ; it would have been
a strange discord on the witness of the Baptist and the Voice which had pro-
claimed Him from heaven. The same power which gagged the confession also
bade the demon relinquish his prey. One wild paroxysm—and the sufferer was
for ever free.” See Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus, book ii., chap. x1Vv., for
a thoroughly reverent aud learned discussion of this difficult subject.

V. The house of Simon and Andrew is the next scene of our Lord’s ceaseless


29


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


0 ee eee


activity. On this memorable Sabbath a sudden attack of violent burning fever,
such as is still common in that neighbourhood, had prostrated Simon’s mother-in-
law. That St. Peter was a married man, who continued to live with his wife
after his call to the apostolic office, has been made the occasion of many a bitter
gibe at the Roman See. But surely with great want of fairness, for the celibacy
of the clergy is nothing more than a matter of discipline, one of those minor
points which any branch of the Church has a right to exact from its ministers
if there be reason to think God’s work may thus be done more effectively. It is
evident from 1 Cor. vii. that St. Paul was strongly in favour of celibacy, when-
ever and wherever possible, in the then condition of society; and the Roman
See has simply applied to a particular class the general principle approved of
by the apostle. In thus doing the Roman See may be acting wisely or unwisely
—that is a question which must be decided entirely on its own merits; but the
fact that St. Peter happened to be a married man has nothing whatever to do
with it. St. Peter’s wife is said to have been named Perpetua or Concordia, to
have been a faithful convert, to have accompanied Peter in his apostolical
journeys, and to have died a martyr for the faith of Christ during the persecu-
tion of Nero, her husband supporting her in the last struggle, and comforting
her with the words, ““O my wife, remember thy Lord who died for thee, that
thou mightest gratefully shed thy blood for Him.” Now to return to Peter’s
wife's mother. Our Lord, as soon as He is told of her illness, restores her by
a touch. ‘He held the woman’s hand to give life,” says Petrus Chrysologus,
“because Adam from a woman’s hand had received death. He held her hand
in order that what the hand of the presumer had lost, the hand of the Author
might restore. He held her hand, that the hand might receive pardon which
had plucked the sentence of death.” And the cure is perfect. The woman
who an instant before lay in a consuming fever rises as if from refreshing and
invigorating sleep, and at once goes about her usual household duties, making
the best possible use of her recovered health by ministering to the wants of
Him who gave it.

VI. The day’s work is not yet over ; for the news of the Divine Benefactor’s
marvellous power has rapidly spread throughout the town, and there is a
universal desire to profit by His presence among them. True, the Blessed
Physician has a short respite, since it is the Sabbath, on which day journeys
must not be taken and burdens must not be carried. But no sooner does the
sinking sun proclaim the close of the Sabbath, than Christ’s privacy is invaded
by a surging mass of anxious people who have brought their sick and demonised
friends to seek His aid, and of course their number is soon swelled by crowds of
onlookers full of curiosity to witness the unwonted spectacle. ‘ And all the
city,” says St. Mark, “‘ was gathered together at the door”: can we doubt that
in this exclamation we have the very words of St. Peter, the master of the ©
house, who at the time must have been puzzled to think what was best to do or
how the multitude was to be got rid of? But it matters not to the Saviour
so utterly regardless of His own comfort and ease is He—how many there may
be ; for every emergency He is equally ready, to every cry for succour He makes
the same response. ‘ He cast out the spirits,” St. Matthew tells us, “ with His
word, and healed all that were sick ; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sick-
nesses.” What encouragement is here for all: for those “who are any ways
afflicted or distressed in mind, body, or estate,” to bring to Jesus all their woes ;
and for those who have friends or neighbours ignorant or heedless of the Saviour,
to proclaim to them the blessed tidings of His pity and His love! But, alas!
how little do we realise that Jesus can cure, and wishes to cure, every infirmity
of our fallen nature —from the great fever of our sin-sick souls, down to the

30





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. I.
Se ee eee


hasty tempers and uncharitable thoughts which mar the characters of so many
professing Christians, and yet cause them s0 little concern !


Vers. 23-26. The plea of evil, and its rejection.—I. The plea of evil (ver. 24).—
1, It is the plea of personal evil. The carnal mind asserts its right to be,
and insolently rages when confronted with the claims of truth and love and
righteousness—rages most of all when confronted with the beauty of Jesus
Christ. 2. It isthe plea of public evil. The moment reformers attempt to deal
with any social wrong, any pernicious institution, custom, trade, or law, they
are attacked after this fashion. (1) Idolatry; (2) Slavery; (3) Intemperance ;
(4) Impurity. 3. And when evil dare not claim absolute immunity, it pleads
for toleration and delay. “ What have we,” ete. The last thing to be expected
from evil is that it will tamely abdicate. Let us be sure that it never quits
its hold until after struggles which shake to their foundations personal, social,
and national life,

II. Some characteristics of this plea.—tl. It is specious. The demon has
closely identified himself with the human, and it is cleverly represented that the
devil is the man’s friend, Christ his enemy, and whatsoever is done against the
demon is done against the man. So blinded are the minds of them that. believe
not, that they regard an attack on the devil’s kingdom as an invasion of their
own rights, a confiscation of their own riches. Wickedness is never friendly to
anything that concerns the rights, safety, or enrichment of humanity, and when
the devil becomes an advocate it is the wolf pleading for the lamb. 2. It is
impudent. (1) This world is not the devil’s world, but God’s. The desert must
apologise for itself, not the garden of spices ; the black weed, not the lily or the
rose ; the cesspool, not the crystal river or the sea of glass. (2) In the develop-
ment of this world the devil plays no essential part. Evil has no rights.
3. It is cruel (ver. 26). Can we let evil alone in ourselves—that which dims
our eye, enervates our resolution, sears our conscience, destroys our affections,
- shatters our wing, blasts our hope? Can we for any consideration whatever
let sin alone in our children? Sensitive as we are to their welfare, we cannot
leave them a prey to the dark passions which destroy body and soul in hell.
Can we let the heathen nations alone? Idolatry, infanticide, sutteeism, hook-
swinging, slavery, cannibalism, are sufficiently terrible customs to let alone, and
yet they are but a few red bubbles on a vast sea of sorrow whose depths God
alone can sound. Are we to let alone the evils which afflict our own community ?
Intemperance, lust, war, tyranny, and other vices are filling our land with woes
too deep for tears.

III. Christ’s rejection of this plea.—1. ‘‘ Hold thy peace” (ver. 25). Here is
the voice of contempt. Christ speaks to principalities and powers as to a dog.
Where a spark of reality, sincerity, promise, existed, Christ was infinitely patient
and sympathetic; but there was no place for argument here, because in pure
wickedness there is no truth, no reason, no hope. 2. ‘‘Come out of him.”
Here is the voice of authority.

Lessons.—1. Evil is to be cast out of humanity. The whisper of Christ pre-
vails against all the wrath and rage and roar of hell. 2. Evil is to be wholly
cast out. Nothing is rational in dealing with evil but the severity that breaks
it off suddenly, that condemns it utterly, that pursues it to the death. 3, Evil
is cast out in Christ.—W. L. Watkinson.


32


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








——— = —--


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 21, 22. An authoritative
Teacher and His audience—I. An
authoritative Teacher.—1l. Dignified
in manner. 2. Original inmatter. 3.
Convincing in argument. 4. Consistent
in practice.

TI. An astonished audience.—They
might well be astonished at—1. The
range of His intellectual gifts. 2. The
wealth and force of His illustrations.
3, His acquaintance with the human
heart and conscience. 4. His deep
knowledge of the Divine law.

Christ stood distinguished in these
points among others from all the Rabbis
who had been, or then were, in Israel.
1, The relation between His person and
His word. The Teacher made the truth
Hetaught. His teaching was His arti-
culate person, His person His incor-
porated teaching. 2. The consciousness
He had of Himself and His truth ; its
authority and creative energy. He
was, at the first as at the last, at the
last as at the first, certain of the
reality of His words and claims, of
their endurance and triumph. 3. His
knowledge of His truth and mission
was throughout perfect and self-con-
sistent. His progress was not a series
of tentative efforts, of mended mistakes,
but an orderly movement to a con-
sciously conceived end.


Ver. 22. Christ's independence of
thought—It was as if an English
judge, instead of implicitly following
precedents in all his decisions, were to
discard any reference to even the most
weighty, and speak, it might he, in direct
opposition to them. No judicial lumi-
nary dares or dreams of such a thing,
his greatest audacity leading him no
further than to venture on some timid
advance in a new deduction from
earlier ‘ Cases.” —C. Geikie, D.D.

The failure of the scribes as teachers.
-—The scribes failed, first, in the
matter ; they delivered not the doctrine
of God : secondly, in the manner ; they
taught coldly and without zeal:
thirdly, in the end; they taught in

32


pride and ambition, seeking their own
and not God’s glory.—L. Leigh.

Teaching enforced by personal religious
character.—While the scribes leaned
upon the authority of others, and
quoted chapter and verse for all they
taught, Jesus spoke straight out from
Himself the truth that was embodied
in His own life, leaving it to find
an echo in the hearts of the truth-
loving and God-revering. His teaching
impressed itself upon the populace,
mainly because it was backed up by
a personal religious character; the
teaching of the scribes failed mainly
because it lacked this—because they
did not in their own lives act out what
they taught. The one thing essential
above all else is to be ourselves living
the truth that we desire others to
embrace. It has been reserved for
Christianity to present to the world
an ideal character, which, through all
the changes of eighteen centuries, has
filled the hearts of men with an im-
passioned love ; has shewn itself capable
of acting on all ages, nations, tempera-
ments, and conditions; has not only
been the highest pattern of virtue,
but the highest incentive to its practice ;
and thas exercised so deep an influence
that it may truly be said that the
simple record of three short years of
active life has done more to regenerate
mankind than all the disquisitions of
philosophers, and all the exhortations
of moralists.—W. H. H. Lecky.

Teaching with authority—l. Men
will teach well only as they teach
under Christ. 2. Authority is impos-
sible apart from association with the
Master. 3. Authority of tone must
come from intensity of conviction.
4, Hearers know the voice of authority.
5. The Christian teacher is to show
his supremacy over all other teachers.
—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 23. Unclean spirits—I do not
see anything in the history of those
spirits, or of the persons possessed by
them, which should lead to the use


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of the epithet “unclean” in any such
sense as we should think of assigning


‘to the word. If we could imagine the


evil spirits or demons thus represented
as wandering on earth to be the im-


. pure spirits who left their own habita-


tions, we might perhaps suppose that
they were characterised and described,
not by the acts of their vagrant
humiliation, but by the sin that had
led to it. This, however, does not
seem to be consistent with the idea
of their custody; and I am more in-
clined to believe that the uncleanness,
or impurity, relates to their mixed
nature; not purely human, or angelic.
—S. R. Maitland, DD.

“In an unclean spirit.”—There is
dreadful meaning in the preposition
here used—‘a man zm an unclean
spirit,” as if his human self was
immersed in that filthy flood. The
words embody three thoughts: the fierce
hatred which disowns all connexion
with Jesus; the wild terror which
asks or affirms Christ’s destructive
might over all foul spirits; and the
recognition of Christ’s holiness, which
lashes unholiness into a paroxysm of
mingled despair and hate.—A. Mac-
laren, D.D.

Demoniac possession is not an organic
or bodily disorder, a kind of hallucina-
tion or mental alienation, or one of
the nervous affections, as rationalist
critics have pretended in defiance of
the Scripture; it is a particular con-
dition of the mind, a psychological
disorder. The presence of a demon
in certain men neither absorbs nor
yet destroys their personality. The
individuality is indestructible and
inviolable. God Himself, who could
destroy everything, as He has created
everything, destroys nothing and does
not allow destruction. The most
violent Satanic action only affects
the organic and lower faculties, the
imagination and the senses of the un-
fortunate victims; their freewill may
be enchained for a moment, but only
when voluntarily surrendered. The
man possessed of a demon is under the
fominion of a spirit which tyrannises

D


=


CHAP. I.





over him, suspends or fetters his liberty,
deprives him of the normal control of
his body and limbs, speaks by his mouth
and deranges his feelings. The ab-
normal state of his faculties is not due
to an unhealthy condition of the brain
or to organic disturbances ; it is born of
the violent and disturbing action of a
superior will; it is a result and not a
cause. Hence the healing of one pos-
sessed is beyond the power of medicine ;
it can only be effected by the moral
influence of one spirit on another. It
is true that actual illness, as a rule,
accompanied demoniac possession. Cer-
tain senses were often paralysed; the
man possessed of a demon could not
see, could not speak; he was subject to
convulsions or epileptic fits; but we
have no authority to confound these
maladies with the possession itself.
All that we can say, after the closest
examination of the texts, is that the
mischief introduced into the organic
life of the victim may have been
originated by the violent action of the
spirit which tormented him: so in-
timate is the connexion between mind
and body, that organic disturbances
lead to mental troubles, just as mental
troubles engender organic disorders.—
Father Didon.


Ver. 24. The spiritually disturbed
consciousness a figure of the curse of
sin—l. In its destruction and con-
tradictions. 2. In its restraint. 3. In
its despair. 4. But also in its dim
feeling of its misery and of the coming
of its Saviour.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

The characteristics of the wicked.—
1. Knowledge without love. 2. Hatred
to Christ, and withal flattering acknow-
ledgment. 3. Pride even to madness,
and yet impotent fear and flight.—
Ibid.

The antithesis of heaven and hell.—
1. Peace of soul, and passion (the devil
assaults first). 2. Collectedness, and
distraction. 3. The spirit of mercy,
and the spirit of torment 4. Dignity,
and degradation. 5. Victory, and
prostration.—Ibid.

The name “ Jesus of Nazareth” given


33


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


cn


to Christ—1. By early disciples (John
i, 45). 2. By the demons. 3. By the
multitude (Mark x. 47). 4. By the
soldiers (John xviii. 5, 7). 5. By the
high-priest’s servant (Mark xiv. 67).
6. By Pilate (John xix. 19). 7. By
the angel at the sepulchre (Mark xvi. 6).
8. By the two disciples on the way
to Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 19). 9. By
Peter (Acts ii. 22, iii. 6, iv. 10, x. 38).
10. By Christ Himself after the Ascen-
sion (Acts xxii. 8).


Vers. 25, 26. The unclean spirit
rilenced.—1, An evidence of Christ’s
Divine commission. 2. A proof of
Christ’s goodwill tomen. 3. A declara-
tion of the great object of Christ’s
incarnation—to destroy the works of
the devil. 4. An indication of Christ’s
determination to refuse all quarter to
the minions of hell. One cannot be-
lieve that His rejection of their testi-
mony was prudential only, whatever
possibility there may have been of
that charge of complicity which was
afterwards formulated. The thought
of allowing Himself to be indebted to
them for help of any kind would be
most abhorrent to Him. And must
He not still regard as contamination
every truce with evil of whatever kind
—every gain accruing to His cause by
fraud, injustice, or suppression of the
truth 2


Ver. 27. Cured by a word.—What
caused such astonishment was not so
much the fact itself, as the way in
which it was performed. Such cures,
it seems, were not unknown to the
Jews, but they were due to the virtue
of the prayers, sacred formule, incan-
tations, and invocations of their exor-
cists, and, probably, more often to the
accommodation of the spirits them-
selves. Jesus did not appeal to any
extraneous force, He only had to speak
one word; He commanded, and the
unclean spirit passed out subdued,
ejected by a superior will.—Vather
Ihdon.


Vers. 30, 31. Christ wrought
34


miracle to relieve Himself from the
common burdens of humanity.—These
indeed pressed the heavier upon Him
because He uplifted their weight from -
other men; and it is in his narrative
of this very day’s events that St.
Matthew applies this principle to His
mastery over disease (viii. 17), All
the more, He relieved with especial
promptness the distresses of those who
were near to Him—of His hosts when
their wine failed, of His followers
threatened by hunger, of His disciples
alone upon the waters, of those whom
He loved in Bethany. Thus He was,
in temporal as in spiritual trouble, the
Saviour of all men, yet especially of |
them who believe. And therefore He
is prompt to respond to this appeal
for one whom He must have known,
and whom His disciples evidently
loved—an appeal at once so fervent and
so delicate, so free from dictation, that
it was equally well characterised as
“beseeching Him” and as “ telling
Him of her.”—Dean Chadwick.

Personal compassion. —The same
character is to be recognised in the
spiritual work of Jesus, even to this
day. It is still a personal compassion
which cools the worse and deadlier
fevers of the soul; still when invoked
He bends over us, and our healing is
due to no mechanical grace, but to His
own direct act of love; and still it is
ours, when healed, to minister to Him
and to His people.—Jbid.

Contact with the individual.—l. The
individual case as well as the case of
the multitude should be regarded as
worthy of attention. 2. Bodily dis-
eases as well as spiritual ailments are
within the sphere of our solicitude;
we are to be philanthropic as well as
spiritually-minded. 3. We are to put ©
ourselves in personal contact with those
who suffer.—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 34. Christ’s miracles of healtag
may be regarded—l. As proofs of
His Divine mission, Messiahship, and
Godhead. (1) They were such as no
man could have wrought without
direct aid from heaven. (2) They were


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.





such as the prophets had predicted
would be wrought by the Messiah
(Isa. lil. 4, xxxv. 5, 6, etc.). (3) They
were wrought with an air of authority
such as no mere man would dare
arrogate to himself. 2. As a means
of overcoming prejudice, and so securing
a favourable reception for His message.
His attention to their bodily interests,
and His success in dealing with physical
maladies, induced men to believe in
His solicitude for the welfare of the
soul, and to have confidence in the
spiritual treatment He _ prescribed.
3. As an encouragement to believing
prayer. Christ is as really in our
midst to-day, as He was that Sabbath
in Capernaum ; and He is every whit
as ready to sympathise and as able to
succour. But He cannot work for us


and with us and in us, unless we trust
Him implicitly and without reservation
of any kind. “Lord, increase our
faith!” 4, As examples for our imi-
tation. The whole apparatus now at
work for the relief of suffering and
for the care of sufferers—hospitals
and infirmaries, asylums and homes-—
is the direct fruit of Christianity.
Does it not become us, according to
our ability and opportunity, to give
such institutions our cordial support ?
Innumerable cases of suffering and
disease come constantly before us.
While we carry the sufferers in the
arms of faith and prayer to God, let
us do what we can to alleviate their
pains by self-denying effort, and so
prove that our prayers are the out-
pouring of tender, sympathising hearts.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. - Verses 35—39.
(Paratuets: Marr. viii. 16, 17, iv. 23-25; Luke iv. 40-44.)


The mutual relations of prayer and work.—Hitherto St. Mark has depicted in
glowing colours the untiring activity of Him who “went about doing good”
among-men, instructing their ignorance, removing their woes, and infusing new


hope into their burdened hearts.


Now he fills up the picture with a view of


Jesus in solitary communion with His Father, lifting up His eyes unto the
heavenly hills from whence came His daily inspiration and motive-power.

I. Christ’s prayers in general.—Highteen times our Lord’s own prayers are
spoken of in the Gospels, bringing out the following facts respecting them.
1. His habit of prayer (Matt. xiv. 23; Mark i 35, vi. 46; Luke iii. 21, v. 16,


Wiel?, ix: 28, xi. 1).
xi. 25; Luke x. 21; John xi. 41).


2. His blending of thanksgiving with prayer (Matt.
3. His use of intercession in prayer.


(1) For


friends (Luke xxii. 32). (2) For enemies (Luke xxiii. 34), (3) For Himself and


His disciples as one with Him (John xvii.).


(4) His complete submission to the


Father’s will (Matt. xxvi. 39; Mark xv. 34; Luke xxii. 42; John xii. 27).

II. Christ's prayer on this occasion.—1. The time selected“ the morning,
a great while before day.” No time could be more favourable for private
communion with God—the body refreshed by its recent repose, the mind in its
vigour, the passions at rest, the whole surroundings so calm and tranquil. The
saints in every age have loved to give their freshest thoughts to God, and to seek


His aid before the duties of the day begin.


2. The scene—“ a solitary place.”


Besides taking delight in the common prayers of the Church, and lifting up the
heart secretly even in the most public thoroughfares, the man of God has his
private oratory, into which he enters and shuts the door, and pours forth his
soul in the presence of his Heavenly Father, laying bare his most secret feelings,


confessing his inmost faults, making kn


Lord sets us here a notable example of


laborious a day as that just closed, an
trying, the Saviour must have sorely needed rest,


own his every trouble and desire. 3. Our
prayer in spite of hindrances.
d with the prospect of another equally


After so


But aching limbs and weary


35


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.

—_———<$ $< — —$— — ——————————— — —————————_ — 0 0——OO cer
mind are to Him as nothing in comparison with the longing of His pure and holy
spirit for the refreshing streams of heavenly grace. And so, giving but few
hours to sleep, He rises long before daybreak to pray.

III. Prayer and work,—With Christ these two things were always closely
associated. Prayer was to Him the sequel of one day’s work, and the prelude of
another. He will not on any account forego His daily devotions; but, on the
other hand, He will not let them interfere with His work for God. There are
some who think they may be excused from prayer because they are so busy ; and
others who think that God will be pleased with prayer in lieu of work, as the
sole business of their lives ; but the example of Christ rebukes all such trifling.
It is only in combination that either prayer or work will gain the Divine
approval, and draw down a blessing on ourselves and others. It is related of
Colonel Gardiner that he used constantly to rise at four in the morning, and
spend his time till six in private meditation and prayer, in which he acquired
such fervency of spirit as, says his biographer, “I believe few men living
ever attained. This certainly very much contributed to strengthen that firm
faith in God, and reverent, animating sense of His presence, for which he was
so eminently remarkable, and which carried him through the trials and services
of life with such readiness and with such activity; for he indeed endured and
acted as if always seeing Him who is invisible. If at any time he was obliged
to go out before six in the morning, he rose proportionally sooner ; so that, when
a journey or a march has required him to be on horseback by four, he would
be at his devotions by two.” There is a sentimentalism abroad which says,
“Work is prayer.” Soitis. And yet if we work without secret and constant
prayer our work will be powerless. Work is only prayer in so far as it is done
in a prayerful spirit. There must be distinct work and distinct prayer. We
must pray in order to work, and work because we pray.


Vers. 36-38. Jesus in request.—I. Though Jesus had withdrawn, the interest
and excitement created by His miracles continued in Capernaum (ver. 37).—
1, His miracles had taken the form of temporal benefits. They might look for
more of these. 2. His miracles might prompt them to take Him by force, and
make Him a king. 3. Erroneous notions of Christ still lead many to follow
Him. (1) Some, like the Jews, seek temporal advantages. (2) Some come for the
pardon of retained sins. (3) Some come to purchase salvation by the performance
of ceremonies, (4) Some come to accompany others.

II. Such interest seems to have gratified the apostles (ver. 36).—1. They
loved their Master, and rejoiced in His praise. 2. They shared in the reputation
of their Master. 3. They went to Christ, thinking to gratify Him. 4. They
went to Christ, perhaps supposing that He would take advantage of His
popularity to set up His kingdom. 5, They seem to have gone to induce Him
to return to Capernaum. 6, Gratification with the world’s favour indicates a
low standard in a believer or a Church.

III. Christ refused to return to Capernaum, on the ground that He had to
preach elsewhere (ver. 38).—1. In so far as the people of Capernaum were
concerned ; (1) He had preached to them the gospel. (2) He had confirmed His
doctrine by miracles. (3) He would not gratify a vain curiosity. (4) He would
not work miracles merely to confer a temporal good. (5) Let us examine our
motives for asking Christ’s presence. 2. He had to preach the gospel to others
(1) He was the King of the Jews, not the ruler of a city. (2) He was the
Shepherd and Bishop of souls, not the pastor of a congregation. (3) The a, ews
were to be dealt with nationally in judgment, and therefore nationally in
mercy. (4) Let Christ still preach everywhere. (5) Let us not limit Christ’s
presence,—Jas. Stewart,


36


,
) a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 35. Christ’s habit of prayer.—
Some have stumbled at the Saviour’s
habit of prayer, as though it derogated
from His Divine character that He
should make petitions to God: they
have explained it by saying that He
prayed not from want, but for example’s
sake. But away with such explana-
tions: let us embrace the mystery ; let us
not care to explain it; and let us say, as
we may say without passing the bounds
of truth and without detracting an
iota from our Saviour’s glory, that
being perfect man He did that which
perfect man ever ought to do—namely,
find His chief joy and His chief source
of support in communion with His
Father in heaven.— Bishop H. Goodwin.

Prayer before work.—Our Lord in
all His great works commenced with
prayer. The same religious habit was
common with the heathen. In all un-
dertakings of moment they began with
consulting or propitiating the gods : not
only if they were about to engage in any
expedition, or to encounter an enemy, or
to form a treaty; but scarcely is there
to be found a poem of any length in
which the aid or inspiration of some re-
puted divinity is not invoked. It was
reserved for the Christian—the disciple
of Jesus, the decrier and improver of
Gentile fashions—to. discard prayer
from his breast and home. It is the
Christian by name that enters on
matters of the first importance to his
country, his neighbour, or himself,
that ventures upon the thousand perils
and hazards which threaten his health,
fortune, and comfort by day, and the
secret evils which walk by night, and
all without prayer; often, without a
single aspiration to Him whose provi-
dence noteth even a sparrow’s fall, and
in whoce hands are the issues of our
weal and woe. What wonder if God
forsake those who never acknowledge
their dependence on Him, but on the
contrary habitually demean themselves
as if they were the sole or chief con-
trivers and builders of their fortunes !—
A. Williams, M.A.


Ver. 37. All men seek for Christ.—-
All ages and all lives have sought for
Christ. The prophecy that bespeaks
Him is no mere feature of the Jewish
Scriptures. It is part of the equip-
ment of the human heart. Messianic
prophecy is the deepest department of
psychology. The search for Christ is
the profoundest fact of human life.
Every life that has any moral value
seeks for something by the aid of
which it can rise above itself, of some-
thing which shall redeem it from its
littleness, heal its sicknesses, answer
its prophecies, and take its unrest away.
In every human heart there is beneath
all the carelessness and indifference
the Christ-want—a want which men
seek to satisfy in a thousand ways, or
to forget in the whirl of life and the
dissipation of trifles. Deep down in
our mystic life—no matter how care-
less, or shallow, or slight we be—there
is an unfulfilled prophecy for Jesus
Christ. No man is so shallow, super-
ficial, or bad as never to have felt in
his heart of hearts, in those solemn
hours that come to every man, the
impulse of this prophecy. What else
is the meaning of the hero-worship of
bygone days but the declaration that
man seeks a strength without, that
each life is not self-sufficient, that it
seeks for something perfectly holy,
yet perfectly human, to which it can
give itself up? The shrines of heroes
and martyrs at which men and women
have prayed—what are these but wit-
nesses to the fact that human nature
seeks its Christ, seeks by its worship
of goodness or power to yet back the
goodness or the power it lacks? The
whole travail of human life is its search
for Christ; the pathos of life is the
pursuit of the false Christs ; the equa-
tion of life is solved, the prophecies of
life fulfilled, when the soul finds its
Christ—when the soul of man returns
to its rest in God.

The true disciple always knows where
to find the Master.—The disciples knew
the habits of their Lord: they knew


37


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


DU a ee


that in some hidden place He could be
found in the early hours of the day;
at all events, they knew that Jesus
Christ would be found in the path of
usefulness or preparation for useful-
ness. Do men know where they can
find us? Are our Christian habits so
distinct and unchangeable that our
friends can with certainty explain our
position ?—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 38. Christ's eagerness to reach
as many souls as possible.—He will not
wait for people to come to Him, but
hastens to carry the gospel to them.
Thus He teaches us to make the most
of our lives and opportunities, to scatter
the seed of grace as widely as we can,
to press forward with the tidings of
God’s love with unflagging zeal.

The preaching of the kingdom of God
was Christ’s vocation.—l. Concerning
Himself, as He who was come to
save men. 2. Concerning the true
righteousness which avails before God.
3. Concerning the worship of God in


spirit and truth, Within these limits
it was His vocation to spread that
kingdom as far as He could.—f.
Schleiermacher.

“Therefore came I forth.” —Christ
does not mean that for this end He had
come into the world, but that for this
end He had come during the night from
His house to the spot where He had
been composed and tranquillised ; and
not that such was the intention with
which He had come hither, but that
such was the Divine purposein Hiscom-
ing—that He had been brought hither
to be composed and tranquillised, not
for Himself, not for His personal bene-
diction, but to be prepared and equipped
for further ministry; that He had
found comfort in the solitude, only to
enable Him to be a Comforter. This
is the true Christ-spirit, the feeling that
nothing is given to us for ourselves,
but for our helpful effluence thereof ;
that the raison détre for all we have
and are is service, sacrifice——S. A.
Tipple.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 40—45.
(Paratuets: Marv. viii. 2-4; Luxe v. 12-16.)


A parable in a miracle.—Christ’s miracles are called wonders—that is, deeds
which, by their exceptional character, arrest attention and excite surprise.
Further, they are called “ mighty works ”—that is, exhibitions of superhuman
power. They are still further called “signs”—that is, tokens of His Divine
mission. But they are signs in another sense, being, as it were, parables as well
as miracles, and representing on the lower plane of material things the effects of
His working on men’s spirits. This parabolic aspect of the miracles is obvious in
the case before us. Leprosy received exceptional treatment under the Mosaic
Law, and the peculiar restrictions to which the sufferer was subjected, as well as
the ritual of his cleansing, in the rare cases where the disease wore itself out,
are best explained by being considered as symbolical rather than as sanitary.
It was taken as an emblem of sin. Its hideous symptoms, its rotting sores, its
slow, stealthy, steady progress, its defiance of all known means of cure, made its
victim only too faithful a walking image of that worse disease.

I. The leper’s cry.—Mark connects the story with our Lord’s first journey
through Galilee, which was signalised by many miracles, and had excited much
stir and talk. The news of the Healer had reached the isolated huts where the
lepers herded, and had kindled a spark of hope in one poor wretch, which
emboldened him to break through all regulations and thrust his tainted and
unwelcome presence into the shrinking crowd. Mark's vivid narrative shows
him to us, flinging himself down before the Lord, and, without waiting for
question or pause, interrupting whatever was going on with his piteous cry.

38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. I.





Misery and wretchedness make short work of conventional politenesses. Note
the keen sense of misery that impels to the passionate desire for relief. A leper
with the flesh dropping off his bones could not suppose that there was nothing
the matter with him. The parallel fails us there. The emblem is all insufficient,
for here is the very misery of our deepest misery, that we are unconscious of it,
and sometimes even come to love it. The worse we are, the less we know that
there is anything the matter with us; and the deeper the leprosy has struck its
filthy fangs into us, the more ready we are to say that we are sound. Oh! if
the best of us could see himself for once, in the light of God, as the worst of us
will see himself one day, the ery would come from the purest lips, “‘O wretched
man that I am! who will deliver me from the body of this death?” this life
in death that I carry, rotting and smelling foul to heaven, about with me,
wheresoever I go. Note, further, this man’s confidence in Christ’s power.
“Thou canst make me clean.” He had heard all about the miracles that were
being wrought up and down over the country, and he came to the Worker, with
nothing of the nature of religious faith in him, but with entire confidence, based
upon the report of previous miracles, in Christ’s ability to heal. If we turn
from the emblem to the thing signified, from the leprosy of the body to that of
the spirit, we may be sure of Christ’s omnipotent ability to cleanse from the
extremest severity of the disease, however inveterate and chronic it may have
become. Sin dominates men by two opposite lies. I have been saying how hard
it is to get people’s consciences awakened to see the facts of their moral and
religious condition ; but then, when they are awoke up, it is almost as hard to
keep them from the other extreme. The devil, first of all, says to a man, “It is
only a little one. Do it; you will be none the worse. You can give it up when
you like, you know.” That is the language before the act. Afterwards, his
language is, first, ‘‘ You have done no harm; never mind what people say about
sin. Make yourself comfortable.” And then, when that le wears itself out,
the mask is dropped, and this is what is said: “I have got you now, and you
cannot get away. Done is done! What thou hast written thou hast written ;
and neither thou nor anybody else can blot it out.” Hence the despair into
which awakened consciences are apt to drop, and the feeling, which dogs the
sense of evil like a spectre, of the hopelessness of all attempts to make oneself
better. Brethren, they are both lies: the lie that we are pure is the first ; the
lie that we are too black to be purified is the second. Christ’s blood atones for
all past sin, and has power to bring forgiveness to every one. Christ’s vital
Spirit will enter into any heart, and, abiding there, has power to make the
foulest clean. Note, again, the leper’s hesitation: “If Thou wilt.” He had no
right to presume on Christ’s goodwill. He knew nothing about the principles
upon which His miracles were wrought and His mercy extended. But his
hesitation is quite as much entreaty as hesitation. He, as it were, throws the
responsibility for his health or disease upon Christ’s shoulders, and thereby
makes the strongest appeal to that loving heart. We stand on another level.
The leper’s hesitation is our certainty. We know that if any men are not healed
it is not because Christ will not, but because they will not.

Il. The Lord’s answer.—Mark puts the miracle in very small compass, and
dilates rather upon the attitude and mind of Christ preparatory to it. Note
three things—the compassion, the touch, the word. As to the first, is it not a
precious gift for us, in the midst of our many wearinesses and sorrows and
sicknesses, to have that picture of Jesus Christ bending over the leper, and
sending, as it were, a gush of pitying love from His heart to flood away all his
miseries? Show Him sorrow, and He answers it by a pity of such a sort that it
is restless till it helps and assuages. We may rise higher than even this, for
the pity of Jesus Christ is the summit of His revelation of the Father. The


39


-


ye. : ia


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


eee


Christian’s God is no impassive Being, indifferent to mankind, but One who in
all our afflictions is afflicted, and, in His love and in His pity, redeems and
bears and carries. Note, still further, the Lord’s touch. With swift obedience
to the impulse of His pity, Christ thrusts forth His hand and touches the leper.
There was much in that ; but whatever more we may see in it, we should not be
blind to the loving humanity of the act. All men that help their fellows must
be contented thus to identify themselves with them and to take them by the
hand, if they would deliver them from their evils. Remember, too, that
according to the Mosaic Law it was forbidden to any but the priest to touch a
leper. ‘Therefore in this act, beautiful as it is in its uncalculated humanity,
there may have been something intended of a deeper kind. Our Lord thereby
does one of two things—either He asserts His authority as overriding that of
Moses and all his regulations, or He asserts His sacerdotal character. Hither
way there is a great claim in the act. Still further, we may take that touch of
Christ’s as being a parable of His whole work. It symbolises His identifying
of Himself with mankind, the foulest and the most degraded; and in this
connexion there is a profound meaning in one of the ordinarily trivial legends
of the Rabbis, who, founding upon a word of Isa. lii., tell us that when
Messias comes He will be found sitting amongst the lepers at the gate of the
city. So He was numbered amongst the transgressors in His life, and “with
the wicked in His death.” He touches, and, touching, contracts no impurity,
cleansing as the sunlight or the fire does, by burning up the impurity, and not by
receiving it into Himself. Note the Lord’s word: “TI will; be thou clean.” It
is shaped, convolution for convolution, so to speak, to match the man’s prayer.
He ever moulds His response according to the feebleness and imperfection of
the petitioner’s faith. But, at the same time, what a ring of autocratic
authority and conscious sovereignty there is in the brief, calm, imperative
word, “I will; be thou clean”! He accepts the leper’s description of power ;
He claims to work the miracle by His own will, and therein He is either guilty
of what comes very near arrogant blasphemy, or He is rightly claiming for
Himself a Divine prerogative. If His word can tell as a force on material
things, what is the conclusion? He who “speaks and it is done” is Almighty
and Divine.

III. The immediate cure.—Mark tells, with his favourite word, ‘‘straightway, ’
how, as soon as Christ had spoken, the leprosy departed from him. And to
turn from the symbol to the fact, the same sudden and complete cleansing is
possible for us. On account of Christ’s sacrifice, whose efficacy is eternal and
lies at the foundation of all our blessedness and our purity until the heavens
shall be no more, we are forgiven our sins, and our guilt is taken away. By
the present indwelling of that cleansing Spirit of the ever-living Christ, which
will be given to us each if we seek it, we are cleansed day by day from our evil.
We must come to Christ, and there must be a real living contact between us
and Him through our faith, if we are to possess either the forgiveness or the
cleansing which is wrapped up inseparable in His gift. Further, the sudden-
ness of this cure and its completeness may be reproduced in us. Trust Him and
He will doit. Only remember, it was of no use to the leper that crowds had
Leen healed, that floods of blessing had been poured over the land. What he
wanted was that a rill should come into his own garden and flow past his own
door and refresh his own lips. And if you want to have Christ’s cleansing you
must make personal work of it, and come with this prayer, “Unto me be all
that cleansing shown!” Or rather you do not need to go to Him with an “ If”
nor a prayer, for His gift has not waited for our asking, and He has anticipated
us by coming with healing in His wings. The parts are reversed, and He prays
you to receive the gift, and stands before each of us with the gentle remon-

40


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. OAR. f.


Oe Ee PD


_ strance upon His lips, “ Why will ye die when I am here ready " cure you?”


Take Him at His word, for He offers to us all, whether we desire it or no, the
cleansing which we need.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Vers. 40-45. Christ's healing towch.—What purpose did the touch of Christ
serve? Perhaps we shall be helped in replying, if we think of how much tender-
ness and pathos the Gospel narratives would be deprived if this small feature
were taken from them. The touch of Christ seems still to bring Him into
contact with humanity; it falls into harmony with the whole story of His
condescending sympathy.

I. In touching the sick Christ fixes and confirms faith in Himself as the
Healer.—It is in condescension to a human weakness that He lays His hands on
diseased folk. We believe in little that we cannot see. Pain and sickness are
so sensible that we look for equally sensible tokens of the energy of the restorer.
Christ came into the world to heal sicknesses ; and faith in Him, as Healer, was
essential to the cure. By His touch He fixed men’s thoughts upon Himself ;
this was the pledge of healing by which He stimulated and confirmed their faith.
Christ’s touching the sick is then a symbol of that condescension to our weak-
ness in which He still appeals to us, fixing our thoughts upon Himself, revealing
His infinite power and ever-gracious purpose, arousing us by some special mode
to contemplate what virtue is in Him, but which, without these special revela-
tions, we should fail to see. Miracles themselves are such a condescension ; in
the miracle Christ “‘ touches” us, that we may see how entirely and blessedly the
universe is under His control. We may see this, too, as one among the reasons
of Christ’s incarnation—“ the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,” that
“touched” into attention we might behold “ the glory as of the Only Begotten of
the Father, full of grace andtruth.” Christ was in God, before God was incar-
nated in Jesus Christ. The love and sympathy, the reverence and righteousness,
the trustiness and truth—in one word, the grace that so moves and wins us in
Jesus, dwelt in the bosom of the Father from before all worlds. But how could
we have ascended up on high to bring Christ down from above? how could our
world-dulled eyes have beheld, or our carnal hearts have trusted, the grace that
is in our God? It needed to be not simply revealed to us as a heavenly
doctrine, but embodied in an earthly form. And so it “ drew from out the vast.
and struck its being into bounds.” Christian experience, again, will furnish us
with many illustrations of the mode in which Christ condescends to our weak-
ness in pursuing His purpose to save us. We none of us believe that there are
times and seasons with Him. He is as ready to save us the first hour we hear
of Him as He can be at any subsequent time ; He “ waiteth” to be gracious unta
us, with hand ever stretched out, and with voice ever pleading, “ Behold, now is
the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” And yet how full is
Christian biography of instances of Christ’s falling in with our expectation and
using special events, special times, as the mode in which to heal us. The cares
of life, the responsibilities of early manhood, the solemnity of parentage, the
softening influences of bereavement, the terrors of pestilence, the fear of death
—He makes all these the means of extending His grace to souls. He gives
us tho very sign we wish for, that we may believe that He is Himself making
us whole.

II. See in Christ’s touch of the sick His answer to our craving for sympathy.
—Those who have had much to do with the sick—who have seen how, in their
tossings to and fro, a hand laid on theirs can quiet them —who have heard them
say, ‘Sit there in the light, where I can see you”—who remember their restless
eraving for some token that they are being cared for, how they ask to be turned


frora side to side, that their pillow be smoothed. or the curtains drawn, or some
Al


—_


CHAP. i. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Sa a eg ne a vee en


little attention paid which makes their bed really no easier, but soothes them—
will see in the touch of Christ a virtue beyond what it has as the appropriate
sign of healing. They will understand that this token of sympathy had much
to do with the faith in Himself as Healer, which Christ sought to cherish ; for
thesick have very little confidence in the power to help them of those who are not
tender in their help. Some of us would do well to visit the sick, that we might
learn what possibilities of suffering are in man, and be made more thoughtful, more
tender-hearted. There was no need of Christ’s learning such a lesson, no need of
awakening His sympathy. But we did need to have that sympathy revealed to
us. And here, again, we are met by the wondrous doctrine of the Incarnation.
Christ is with us, not only helping us, but feeling with us ; knowing exactly how
to suecour, because He knows exactly how the burden presses on us. How the
gospel lights up and fills with meaning such passages as these: ‘Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him. For He
knoweth our frame; He remembereth that we aro but dust.” “ He that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of His eye.” Man’s craving for God’s sympathy is here
met, the very craving we are sometimes ready to stigmatise as a weakness.
“They brought unto Christ infants, that He should touch them ; but when His
disciples saw it, they rebuked them.” “ What good can a touch do them? Silly
mothers to long for, to find any satisfaction in a touch!” But Jesus rebuked
His disciples, and took the children in His arms and blessed them. There are
very many things that, like the touch of the children, do not seem to us of much
use, but still we are weak enough to long for them, And we have a Father in
heaven who is good enough to meet that weakness. Christ has made us under-
stand the Fatherhood of God. He would have us not stiffly, severely good, but
frank and natural with Him. The touch was not needed for healing, but it was
a comfort to be touched by Christ ; and “Jesus put forth His hand, and touched
him, and said, I will; be thou clean.”

III. See in Christ’s touch the symbol of Christ’s bearing our infirmities and
carrying our sins.—This is, after all, the sublimest meaning of our text. He
“touched” our nature in all its pollution; He shrank not from it, but took it
upon Himself, and bore its shame and suffering. A thousand will subscribe to
a hospital for one who will live with the idiot or deformed; a thousand will pay
the doctor and the nurse for one who will enter the cottage of the squalid sick
and spend one night there. It needs much schooling of self to suppress the
instinct of revolt at sickness hideously before us. Turn now and read of Christ,
that He “ touched” the sick and healed them. You will see that in His dealing
with bodily disease He did but symbolise how entirely He had taken human
sinfulness to Himself.—A. Mackennal, D.D.


Vers. 43-45. Be silent.—I. This is not at all the command we should have
expected; and we cannot but ask, therefore, for the reason of it. Can it be
that a very common conception of Christian duty is after all inaccurate and
misleading, and that it is not every convert’s first and great duty to bear verbal
witness to the Saviour who has redeemed him? It may be that this is an
inaccurate and a misleading conception of Christian duty; and for myself I think
it is. But, assuredly, there were other reasons for our Lord’s prohibition; and
it may be well to look at these first. 1. Doubtless one reason why Christ
enjoined silence on many of those whom He had healed was, that He did not
as yet wish to draw on Himself the public attention. He came not to strive,
and cry, and make His voice heard in the streets. He desired to go quietly
about His work, sowing seeds of truth and grace which might hereafter bring
forth fair fruit abundantly. 2. Another and more special reason in this case
was, that He wished the leper to discharge a special duty, viz. to bear @

42


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP, I.











“testimony to the priests.” As yet they were prejudiced against Jesus of
Nazareth. They thought of Him as a zealot, a fanatic, who had swept away
corruptions at which they had connived, by which they had profited. Probably
they feared that He might set Himself to destroy, rather than to fulfil, the
Mosaic Law, or that He might undermine their authority with the people.
Now if the leper had done as he was bid, if he had held his peace, if he had
gone straight to Jerusalem and told the priests that Jesus had sent him to them
in order that they might examine him by the Mosaic tests and say whether he
was clean, and if he had taken them the offerings which Moses had commanded
the cleansed leper to present before the Lord, he would have carried them
“a testimony” which could hardly have failed to produce a happy effect on their
minds, First, his very healing would have testified that Jesus wielded a Divine
power, and then the deference of Jesus to the law and to the priesthood would
have predisposed them in His favour. 3. But besides these, we cannot but feel
that there must be some reason in our common human nature for this constant
injunction to silence, that our Lord must have been thinking of the spiritual
welfare of men when He forbad them to bear public witness to His marvellous
works. One such reason is to be found, I think, in the very different estimate
put on miracles by Christ and by the Church. It is only of late years that
the more thoughtful students of the Word have come to suspect that miracles
are a burden which the gospel has to carry rather than wings of proof which
bear it up. But however we may regard them, our Lord and His apostles laid
very little stress upon them. To the leper, possibly, nothing was so grand,
nothing so desirable, as the power to work miracles; but Jesus knew “a more
excellent way,” and held not love alone, but almost any ethical and spiritual
virtue, to be worth far more than tongues, or prophecy, or the faith that can
only remove a mountain. For this reason, therefore, among many others, He
bade the leper “‘say nothing” of the miracle ‘‘to any man.” Consider, too, how
religious emotion evaporates in talk, how virtue goes out of us in the words we
utter. Is it not always better to obey than to talk about obedience, to show
love than to profess love? Obviously, though no doubt he thought to honour
Christ by “much publishing” what He had done, this man was not strong
enough for that form of service. To what good end did he honour Christ with
his tongue, while he dishonoured, by disobeying, Him in his life? See what
harm this leper did, though doubtless he had none but a good intention, what
an ill return he made for the grace of Christ. By touching the leper Christ
had become a leper, in the eye of the law. The kind hand laid upon him not
only healed him, but drew him from the desert into the city, and readmitted
him to the society of men. And the leper rewarded his Healer by driving Him
out of the city into the desert. Simply because his foolish tongue would wag,
“Jesus could no more openly enter into a city, but was” compelled to remain
‘without in desert places.” Could we have a more convincing illustration of
the danger of disobedience, however pure and generous its motive may seem ?
Yes, for it is a still more bitter proof when we find that by our own fluent
religious talk, and the easy but eager profession by which we honestly meant
to serve Christ, we have alienated from Him those who stand nearest to us and
know us best.

II. How came this leper to disobey the word of the Lord ?—This ought not
to be a puzzle to you, and could not be if you were thoughtful students of your
own hearts. Have you yet to learn that it is much easier to brace oneself for
great endeavours than to maintain a faithful discharge of simple and lesser
duties? easier to suffer death, for example, in some great cause than to set such
a watch over the lips as never to offend? easier to make a great sacrifice for
some worthy end than to keep one’s temper under the slight frets and provo-


43


CHAP. I.


WOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ie ee eee


cations which every day brings with it? A great faith is not always a patient
and submissive faith. We should also remember into what fatal languors great
spiritual excitement is apt to react. The leper who, face to face with Christ,
could live or die for Him, but no sooner quits His presence than he cannot even
hold his tongue for Him, is but a glass in which we may see ourselves and read
a warning against our own peril. —S. Cox, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 40. Various attitudes of men
towards Christ.—In ver. 27 we found
men putting questions regarding
Christ’s power; in ver. 40 we find a
poor sufferer seeking to avail himself
of Christ’s curative energy. This marks
the great difference between various
classes of society in relation to the
work of the Saviour. One class is
content with looking, wondering, and
perhaps admiring ; another class must
test His power in direct personal
experience.—J. Parker, D.D.

Christ inspires trust.—This incident
shows the érust which the ministry of
the Saviour had inspired in the minds
of sufferers, specially so in the case of
the leper; the leper lived under the
most terrible restrictions, yet his heart
rose to the point of trust and love when
he heard of the wonderful works of this
new Man.—ZJdid.

Personal faith in Christ.—This man
did not merely believe that Jesus Christ
could cleanse a leper, but that He could
cleanse him! It is very easy to believe
for other people. There is really no
faith in such impersonal, proxy con-
fidence. The true faith believes for
itself first, and then for others.

Sickness and the sowl.—Sicknesses
and diseases, says an old writer, are
often necessary to the soul’s health.
God knows this better than we ; where-
fore we ought to resign ourselves into
His hands, and not to ask for health
and relief absolutely, but conditionally,
as it shall please God, and as it shall
conduce to our spiritual good.


Vers. 40-42. Leprosy.—Leprosy was
regarded as the symbol of sin and of
judgment (Num, xii. 10; 2 Kings v. 26,
xv. 5; 2 Chron. xxvi. 20-23); also

44


of inscrutable visitations (Job ii. 7).
2. Recovery from leprosy was regarded
as a symbol of salvation, as in the
case of Naaman (2 Kings v. 2: ep.
Ps. li. 9, with Lev. vi. 7). 3. The
uncleanness, the gradual destruction
of the system, the disgusting appear-
ance, and the unexpected recovery by
a full outbreak of the eruption—and,
again, the slow but sure progress of
the disease, the isolation of those who
were affected by it from the society of
the clean, the infectious nature of the
trouble, its long duration and hope-
lessness—presented a variety of views
under which sin and guilt with its
consequences and effects, even upon
innocent individuals, might be sym-
bolised.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

A signal instance of faith in Christ.
—1l. In the cures wrought by Christ
faith was ever the connecting link
between cause and effect—the channel |
which conveyed the healing balm to
the festering sore—the medium which
brought the saving power of God to
bear upon the suffering weakness of
man. 2. Faith in the heart was ever
accompanied by confession with the
mouth and expression in the life. As
men believed, so they spoke and acted.
3. This leper came to Jesus, besought
Jesus, and confessed his faith in Jesus.
So far, he acted like the blind men
at Jericho (Matt. xx. 29-34), and the
father of the child with a dumb spirit
(Mark ix. 17-27). But this leper’s
confession, unlike theirs, was made
not in reply to any question put by
Christ, but of his own voluntary
motion. His soul was as full of faith
as his body of leprosy. He had no
doubt whatever as to Christ’s power
to heal; yet in his great humility


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. I.





he would not dictate to the Divine
Physician, but leave himself entirely
in His hands: “If Thou art willing,
Thou art able to cleanse me.” 4. To
such an appeal the Saviour had but
one answer—the echo of the suppliant’s
ery: “I will; be thou clean.” And
as He uttered these gracious words, to
show that He cowld do what He would,
and would do what He could, He “ put
forth His hand, and touched him,” and
“immediately the leprosy departed,”
etc. 5. Behold that leper—as he was,
and as he is! The disease, how hope-
less: the remedy, how sure: the appli-
cation of that remedy, how simple:
the cure, how speedy and complete!
That hopeless disease was leprosy:
that sure remedy, the power of Christ :
that simple application, faith in Jesus:
that swift and effectual cure, a new
creation !


Ver. 41. Christ's touch_The word
“be clean” was sufficient for His
healing: why then the towch? What
an illustration of Divinity! 1. That
He coukl touch pollution and be unde-
filed. The water of life is not fouled
by the corruption of those who come
todrink. 2. This was Divine sympathy.
We can almost hear this leper say,
“Lord, I am unclean, vile, sinful, and
separated ; no one can even touch me,
for fear of pollution; oh, heal me!”
We can almost feel the thrill as the
healing tide responded to the word of
Jesus, and the new love, like an electric
current, came at His touch. 3. In all
Christian work the loving hand should
accompany the loving word. John B.
Gough says of the man who was per-
mitted to reach him, “ After twenty
years, I can feel the power and love
of the hand that was laid upon my
shoulder that night.” And the world
has felt the touch, just as the multi-
tudes who came to be healed felt the
word and touch Jesus gave to the
leper.

Christ's helping hand.—Like a sun-
beam passing through foul water un-
tarnished and unstained, or like some
sweet spring such as travellers tell us


rises sometimes in the midst of the salt
sea and retains its freshness and pours
it over the surrounding bitterness, so
Christ takes upon Himself our nature,
and lays hold of our stained hands with
the hand that continues pure while it
grasps us, and will make us purer if
we grasp it.

The symbolic teaching of this miracle
is thus expressed by Bede: Typically,
the leper represents the whole race
of man languishing with sins, as this
sufferer, full of leprosy, for ‘all have
sinned and come short of the glory of
God.” By the hand of the Saviour
put forth—that is, by the Word of God
become incarnate and touching human
nature—they are cleansed from their
old transgression, and are enabled to
hear with the apostles the cheering
words, ‘‘ Now ye are clean, because of
the word which I have spoken unto
you”; and they who once, as abomin-
able, were excluded from the city of
God, are now brought within the
Temple, and are presented unto Him
who is a priest for ever, and offer for
their cleansing their bodies as a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God.

Christ touching the leprosies of
humanity.—How often, in His human
life, Christ repeated in the spirit what
He here did in the body! When He
ate with the publicans and sinners,
endured the kiss of the fallen, sent away
uncondemned the penitent adulteress,
opened paradise to the dying male-
factor, He was again and again touch-
ing the leprosies of humanity, touching
them that He might make them clean.
And when His Church went forth from
the upper chamber, in the strength of
His unseen presence and His Spirit’s
guidance, and stood before the dying
pagan world; when it confronted the
hideous profligacy of Corinthor Antioch,
and the frivolous scepticism of Athens, ,
and the dark devil-worship of Ephesus,
and the coarse brutality of Philippi, and
the wild fanaticism of Galatia, and the
pitiless cruelties of Rome,—then over
and over again Christ touched the leper
and made him clean ; and through the
tainted views of that polluted world


45


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: S81. MARK.


I Tota tr ten gen lee | od ee


there flowed out straight from Christ
the resistless current of a new and
purer life. The history of the first
Christian centuries is the fulfilment of
that of which this miracle was the
shadow and promise.—John Lllerton.

The leprosies of modern society.—
Think of the leprosies of modern
English society, which some are afraid
to touch, which too many have touched
to their sorrow and ruin. Look at that
great subject of popular amusements.
There is plenty of corruption and
disease there. But it is not copying
Christ to stand aloof from it all and
say, “Oh! these things are all so bad,
so dangerous—the vice of the drama,
the frivolity of fashionable pleasure,
the immorality of popular fiction—
these are so great, so corrupting, that
we must ignore them; they are too
bad for us to try to mend them.”
And it is pitiful when the reaction
from this moral cowardice comes, and
bright young lives are carried along by
pleasure; when with a sort of feeling
that they are defying and separating
themselves from the good and the
serious, they touch that which defiles,
and lose their purity of heart, their
faith in Christ, their longings to be
His for ever. We want men and
women to deal with this question of
amusement in a spirit of courageous
faith—-to say, “These things need not
be bad, and ought not to be bad; and
if we bring Christ’s touch upon them,
we can and will purify them—purify
our social life, our polities, our business,
our commerce, our amusements, aye,
and our Churches and our religious life
too, for they too need the outstretched
hand of Christ to make them clean,” —
Tbid.

Dogmatic teaching of verse.—This
verse was regarded by the early
Church as a mine of dogmatic teach-
ing, specially suitable for the confu-
tation of heresy. To Photinus, who
taught that Jesus was a mere man
and in no sense God, was objected the
word, “TI will,” as indicating His claim
to possess an almighty will, the power
to heal at His own will. To Arius,


46


who taught the inferiority of the Son
to the Father, were objected the words,
“TJ will; be thou clean,” as claiming
equality of power. To Manicheus,
who taught that Jesus did not possess
a body in reality, but only in appear-
ance, were objected the words, ‘ Jesus
put forth His hand, and touched him.”


Ver. 42. The healing of the leper a
sign of hope to the world.—1. The Lord
can restore, even where a case seems
desperate. 2. He is willing to do it.
3. He does it by entering into fellow-
ship with the sufferings of the world.
4. By His suffering He takes away
ours. 5. He separates between sin
and its counterpart, misery; thus
taking away the strength of sin.—
J. P. Lange, D.D.


Ver. 44. The use and abuse of testi-
mony.—There is no doubt real power
in personal testimony, but it is quite
possible we may lay too much stress
upon it; and that is the danger in
the present day. The young convert,
before he has had any experience, 1s
encouraged to tell forth his story, until
there is this danger—that when the
devil of unbelief is driven out, the devil
of pride shall enter in, and the man
begins to think that he has done some-
thing very great in trusting in Jesus.
There is very great danger of pressing


personal testimony too far. But there
is real use of testimony. Our Lord
seems to indicate it here: ‘Tell no


man; but go thy way, shew thyself to
the priest, and offer,” ete. It would be
far better for you to go to your house
in solitude, to think over in silence
what God has done for you, and there
in your solitary chamber to pour out
your thanksgiving to God. There is
more real true work done in the still-
ness of solitude than if you go and
publish abroad what Christ has done
for you. But there is a testimony you
must bring: “Go thy way, and shew
thyself to the priest, and offer the gift
that Moses commanded,” Not so much
go and speak, but go and live; go and
shew, not so much go and tell them


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


I am a cleansed man, but let them see
the anointed hand, the purified ear.
Let them see the life-blood coursing
through your veins, and that you have
become as a little child, humble and
faithful. Go and shew yourself to the
priests. And who are they? Those
most opposed to My claims, those who
hate Me, as the Messiah. Go and
shew thyself to My enemies; they will
not care for your speaking, but it will
be your life that will be a testimony
to them. Then go and offer as a gift
what Moses commanded. If Moses
has told you to sprinkle your hand,
your ear, your feet-—your ear, your
hand, and your foot, and every part
of your body must be sanctified not
now in obedience to some iron law, but
as expressive of your heart’s gratitude
for what Christ has done for you.—
E. A. Stuart.

Christ's command.—What our Pro-
phet commands is no costly offering,
no painful penance—a delightful ser-
vice, a surrender which is a relief.
That we offer and present our souls
and bodies to Him—that we trust
our way to Him and say, “I will
follow Thee ”—that we snatch ourselves
away from the old tyrants, from whose
hands He has rescued us, and watch
against any hint of a return to them—
that we be His who has bought us
with His blood.


Ver. 45. A fault to be guarded
against.—The healed leper was like
those who, out of thankfulness of heart
indeed, but yet inconsiderately, neglect
the inward commandment of the Holy


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. The beginning of the gospel.—tn
the old days of the South, a negro slave and
preacher had an infidel master. The master
said to the slave one day, “You are a
preacher, Sam?” ‘ Well, I tells about Jesus
some, massa.” “Well, if you are a preacher
you ought to understand the Bible. Now
tell me what does this mean?” And he
opened the Bible and read, “ And whom He
did foreknow, them He did predestinate ”—
words that have puzzled wiser heads than
the poor slave. “Well,” said the slave,


ST. MARK, CHAP. I.





Spirit, and make too much talk about
the grace of God, to their own and
others’ hurt.—Von Gerlach.

Imprudence better than apathy.—
The case of those who in our own
days are led to do things of which
Christian prudence cannot approve is
nearly parallel; they do what is not
right, but yet it may be easily believed
that their fault is in some cases more
easily pardoned than the coldness and
apathy of those who undertake to con-
demn them.— Bishop H. Goodwin.

Christ's withdrawal.— Some have
thought of this withdrawal as a kind
of Levitical quarantine, in acknow-
ledgment of the ceremonial uncleanness
acquired by touching the leper, which
became generally known from the
report of the latter. Certainly the
multitude had no scruples arising from
this consideration, and it is more
natural to suppose that Christ refrained
from openly entering any city in order
to avoid the applause of men, and the
commotion which, at this moment, His
presence would have excited. Those
who really desired to be with Him for
any high and sufficient reason would
follow Him even into the wilderness ;
but He would not thrust Himself
voluntarily into the idle throng, which,
for any or no cause, is collected with
little notice in a populous town,—
W. J. Deane.

Retirement from the world.—The
more a servant of God withdraws him-
self from the world, the more highly
does the world esteem him, and the
more likely is it to heed his admoni-
tions,


TO CHAPTER I.


“massa, where is it?” “It’s in Romans,”
said the master. ‘Oh, my dear massa! I
will explain dis ’ole business to you. It is
very simple. You begin with Matthew, and
do all the dear Lord tells you to do there ;
and then you go on to Mark, and Luke, and
John; and when you get to that place it is
easy enough, but you can’t begin there.”

The gospel seen, though never heard.—A
poor Chinaman came to a missionary to ask
for baptism. When asked where he had
heard the gospel, he answered he had never


4T


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


(CGE Slee ae serene IIE EPRI ENE AE tt +


heard the gospel, but he had seen it pie
then told of a poor man at Ning-po who had
once been a confirmed opium-smoker, and
a man of violent temper. This man had
learned about the Christian religion, and his
whole life was altered ; he gave up the opium,
and became loving and amiable. “Oh,”
said the candidate for baptism, “I have not
heard the gospel, but 1 have seen it.”


Ver. 2. Eastern roads.—The Western travel-
ler who first sees the wretched, difficult,
dangerous tracts which answer for Eastern
roads, will wonder, first, that they are pass-
able at all, and, second, that they can be as
frequently travelled as they are, and yet
show so little trace of the animal’s feet.
Long after he has ceased to think that he
must dismount at any passage seemingly
impassable on the back of his animal, long
after he has become accustomed to mounting
and descending places far more difficult and
dangerous than going up and down stairs
on horseback, he will wonder whether he
can be really on the road, since t ere are
so few signs of travel. Loose stones which
certainly ought to be thrust out of the way
persistently keep their impertinent place;
larger stones are wedged in for a few feet,
just as if a brook bad made its way along
and washed away the earth, so that a suc-
cession of slips and stumblings meet the
traveller for ages, where a half-hour’s work
vvould have left a good passage for over, It
is only when going over smooth rocks, where
the horses’ feet have worn an actual gutter,
scarcely twice the width of a hoof, and that
often by just sliding, that one realises that
he is on the beaten road. Beaten: the very
Oriental word for a road means just that
very thing—somcthing beaten ; and the word
has just about as exact a coincidence with
the English word as can be in all its other
uses. The horses know it.


Vers. 4-8. John Baptist the model prophet
and ambassador.—Of timidity he knew no
thing. He had the fear of God within him
and no other fear: the Divine honour and
glory, with a singular abnegation of all self-
honour and self-glory. Stranger and enemy
to all tortuous ways and sinister policy :
loyal to principle, without deflection or cofn-
promise. He said what he meant, and
meant what he said—undeterred by frowns
and sneers, false etiquette and conventional-
isms: his one thought and aim to unmask
hypocrisy, and vindicate the cause and claims
of righteousness. He felt it his special
mission to expose the degenerate and effete
forms of religious life. In doing so he
spared neither regal purple, nor hierarchal
robe, nor rabbinical phylactery, if under-
neath these lurked iniquity and vice. It
was like the réveille which wakes up at
sunrise the sleeping camp; or like the


4,2


trumpet-blast or beat of drum preparatory
to the battle-charge.—J. R Macduff, DD,

The Baptist in advance of his age—J ohn
was in the kingdom of grace, like those
gifted men in the world of thought, or in
the world of practical life, who are always
ahead of the mass of people around them ;
they have the inspiration not of supernatural
grace, but of natural genius, itself a gift of
God, but of a different order of value and of
power. They are like lofty mountains whose
summits the sun has already lit up, while
he has not yet risen to shine upon the plain
beneath. ‘ruth has come to them before
it has come to the mass of men around
them. It has come to. them as to its pre-
destined forerunners. The speculative truth
which everybody will recognise ten years
hence they see now; but then they are
alone on their watchtower, and if they say
what they think, it is only to be smiled
down as enthusiasts. The practical dis-
coveries of which everybody will proclaim
the high importance in another generation
these men advocate now amid the dis-
couraging criticisms of friends who advise
them not to risk capital upon a wild venture.
The social improvement or the public re-
form which nobody will think of challenging
when it has become at no distant date law
or custom they plead for now, when it is
denounced either as reaction or revolution,
when it is generally unpopular.— Canon
Liddon.

Artistie representations of the Baptist.
—Artists who have attempted to paint a
picture of the Baptist, getting their idea
of his appearauce from a profound study
of his character, have represented him as
a man having a supernatural look on his
face, with eyes that seem as if they saw
far away, and the countenance of one who
carries at the same time a great burden and
agreat joy. Perhaps more nearly than any
other who has ever lived he answers our
ideal of a messenger of God.

Socrates preparing the way for Christ.
—Marsilius Fiscinus bestowed on Socrates
the title of the John the Baptist of the Old
World. To go still further, as some have
done, and compare the Greek philosopher
to the great Ensample of perfect love and
perfect holiness, the Lamb of God, the Son
of Man, seems to us, to say the least, scarcely
reverential or Christian. But the mission of
Socrates, like the mission of the greatest


of prophets, was to prepare the way, to -


make straight the paths for Him who brought
life and immortality to light through the
gospel.

Trofold aspect of repentance.—Like Janus
Bifrons, the Roman god looking two ways,
a true repentance not only bemoans the
past but takes heed to the future. Re-
pentance, like the lights of a ship at her
bow and her stern, not only looks to the


;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


CHAP. I.


a ee


ee she has made, but to the path before
ere

A startling message.—The message ‘ re-
pert,” in the state in which he found men,
was like a peal of thunder at midnight.
The nation was like a suddenly awakened
city, in fixed terror gazing upon black
window-spaces fitfully and incessantly ablaze
with lightning-bursts, awaiting in quivering
dread each frightful following peal. It was
midnight. The light was coming; but John
was not that light. Hecame to waken men.
‘To awaken he was a voice.

Repentance implies change of mind and
life.— One of Luther’s happiest moments was
wien, reading in his Greek Testament, he
found that repentance meant a change of
mind rather than penance-doing. A captain
at sea discovers that by some mistake the
steersman is steering the ship directly for
the rocks. How is the danger to be avoided ?
By scrubbing the decks or setting the men
to the pumps? No! these things are good
enough in their own time ; but it the ship is
to be saved, one thing must be done—her
course must be changed. So the captain
utters a few quick words, and the ship turns
and speeds away from the danger. John’s
preaching was in like manner a call to men
to turn from the dangerous rocks of sin, and
to make for the only safe haven. Repent-
ance results in change of action. Just asthe
whole ship turns in obedience to the helm,
so the change of mind produces a change of
life. Here comes in the well-known story
of the storekeeper who could not recollect
the sermon; she only knew that after it she
went straight home and destroyed all her
light weights, A Hindu candidate for
Christian baptism was asked what evidence
he had to offer of his conversion. “ For-
merly,” he said, “I was proud and delighted
in evil, but since I heard the words of Jesus
I delight in these things no more.’

Repentance the way to heaven.—In the
neighbourhood of Hoddam Castle, Dum-
friesshire, Scotland, there was once a tower
called the “Tower of Repentance.” What
gave the tower its name we are not told,
but it is said that an English baronet,
walking near the castle, saw a shepherd lad
lying upon the ground, reading attentively.
“What are youreading, lad?” “The Bible,
sir.” “The Bible, indeed!” laughed the
gentleman; “then you must be wiser than
the parson. Can you tell me the way to
heaven?” ‘Yes, sir, I can,” replied the
boy, in no way embarrassed by the mocking
tone of the other; “you must go by way of
yonder tower.” The gentleman saw that the
boy had learned right well the lesson of his
book, and, being rebuked, he walked away
in silence.


Ver. 6. The girdle.—The girdle was use-
ful in many ways. The soldier carried his


- imitate him !


scimitar, his dagger, and in later days his
pistols—the merchant his money—the scribe
his writing implements, in his girdle. It
served to keep the garment together, and
enabled the wearer to tuck it up short when
engaged in any active operation; so we
read of Elijah that he girded up his loins
before he ran (1 Kings xviii. 46), and our
Lord impressed it upon His disciples that
they should be always girded, i.e. active,
ready, and prepared for any emergency
(Luke xii. 35: cp. Eph, vi. 14; 1 Pet. i. 18).
—W. F. Shan.

Power of self-denial —John came to de-
nounce luxury, and soft clothing, and sump-
tuous fare, and he was a living example
of the austerity which he called for, And
how many preachers have been prompted to
5S. Martin and Dominic,
Anselm aud Borromeo, and a host of others,
have themselves worn the same externals of
severity, as the surest way of recommending
the self-denial they sought to inculcate.
And though such asceticism is deprecated
in the nineteenth century, history bears
abundant witness to its power in the past.
It was from a hard life in the desert that
SS. Gregory Nazianzen and Basil came forth
to preach with such success; and Simon
Stylites was by no means a solitary instance
to show men of active lives and varied occu-
pations, how even kings, burdened with
imperial cares, were eager ‘o seek counsel .
and direction from a lonely and austere
ascetic.—Dean Luckock.


Ver. 7. John’s inferiority to Jesus—We
have seen on some beautiful morning the sun
rising in glory out of the east, and the moon
still fair and bright in the west. This is
what I think of when I think of Jesus and
tle Baptist. The rising sun, the setting
moon. One increaseth, tiie other decreaseth.
Not because they antagonise each other. but
because the inferior fades before the superior
splendour. One closes the dispensation to
which it belongs—the night. The other
opens the dispensation which belongs to it—
the day. One has the beauty of a recluse ;
the other comes to mingle with the activi-
ties and sorrows and joysof men. One gives
borrowed light; the other is light in its
essence. One gives light that is transient ;
the other stores light and heat in everything
that it touches. The one is negative—
preaching repentance; the other is con-
structive and productive—founding a king-
dom.


Ver. 8. The soul without the Spirit.—A
moderu writer compares the Church, or the
soul, without the gift of the Spirit, to—1. Iron
wire laid for a telegraph. Jt is powerful
only when attached to the battery. The
later invention of the electric light would
make the comparison still stronger. The


49


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


SS a ee ee ene ee Ee


points, or the fine wire of the lamp, are dark
and cold till the connected battery makes
them give forth a light which suggests the
sun itself. 2. He compares them also to
water, which, when cold, is solid, brittle ice:
“gently warmed, it flows; further heated,
it mounts to the sky”; and he might have
added that, with still greater heat, it becomes
steam—the greatest working force known.
3. So, “an organ filled with the ordinary
degree of air which exists everywhere 1s
dumb. Throw in, not another air, but an
unsteady current of the same air, and sweet,
but imperfect and uncertain, notes imme-
diately respond to the player’s touch; in-
crease the current to a full supply, and every
pipe swells with music.”

Need of the SpiritHere is a noble
ship... . The forests have masted her; in
many a broad yard of canvas a hundred
looms have given her wings. Her anchor
has been weighed to the rude sea-chant;
the needle trembles on her deck; with his
eye on that Friend, unlike worldly friends,
true in storm as in calm, the helmsman
stands impatient by the wheel. And when,
as men bound to a distant shore, the crew
have said farewell to wives and children,
why, then, lies she there over the self-same
ground, rising with the flowing and falling
with the ebbing tide? The cause is plain.
They want a wind to raise that drooping
pennon and fill these empty sails. ‘They
look to heaven; and so they may; out of
the skies their help must come. At length
their prayer is heard. . . . And now, likea
steed touched by the rider’s spur, she starts,
bounds forward, plunges through the waves,
and, heaven’s wind her moving power, is off
and away, amid blessings and prayers, to
the land she is chartered for. Even so,
though heaven-born, heaven-called, heaven-
bound, though endowed with a new heart
and new mind, we stand in the same need of
celestial influences.—7. Guthrie, D.D.


Vers. 9-11. Christ the rainbow of the new
covenant.—The baptism of our Saviour stands
us under the gospel, instead of the same
comfort, which the rainbow afforded unto
the old world. The rainbow is a reflexion
of the sunbeams in a watery cloud, and was
ordained as a sign of pacification (Gen. ix. 13)
that God’s anger should no more strive with
man. Such a rainbow was Jesus Christ
(Rev. iv. 3). Look upon Him, not standing
majestically in a cloud above, but wading,
like a humble servant, into the waters of
Jordan beneath; look upon Him, how He
sanctifies that element, which was once a
means to drown the world, and now is made
a means to save it; look upon Him in that
posture, as a rainbow in the water, and you
may read God’s sure covenant with His
whole Church, that His anger is pacified in
His well-beloved Son, and that He will be


50


gracious with His inheritance (John i. 29;
Eph. ii. 14; 1 Pet. iii. 21).—Bishop Hacket.

A further revelation of the Godhead.—
There are some of our ancient cathedrals,
such as York and Lincoln, crowned with
triple towers; yet when seen afar off in the
blue distance, only a single mass of building
can be discerned; but when advancing on
our journey nearer, we perceive that there
are towers, though perhaps we cannot clearly
trace their form or number—but when we
arrive yet closer, we can see and admire the
grand central tower, and the two western
campaniles in all their grace and majesty.
So the old world was taught first to recognise
the Unity of God; then as the ages passed
away the Second and the Third Persons of
the Trinity were revealed; and at last in
the fulness of time we behold the glory of the
Most Sacred Trinity made manifest to men!
When the Incarnate Redeemer went down
into Jordan, the heavenly light of the Divine
Spirit descended “as a dove,” whilst the
Father's voice proclaimed His almighty
sanction |


Ver. 9. The fellowship of penitence. —A
strange thing happened a few years ago in
an American court of justice. A young man
was asked if he had aught to say why the
extreme penalty should not be passed upon
him. At that moment a grey-baired man,
his face furrowed with sorrow, stepped into
the prisoner’s box unhindered, placed his
hand affectionately upon the cuiprit’s
shoulder, and said, ‘“ Your honour, we have


nothing to say. The verdict which has
been found against us is just. We have
only to ask for mercy.” ‘“ We” !—there was


nothing against the old father; yet in that
moment he lost himself, and identified his
very being with that of his wayward boy.
So in His baptism Christ pushes His way to
a place beside us, lays His hand upon the
sinner’s shoulder, and bears the shame and
sorrow with him.


Vers. 12, 13. Quarantania.—This wilder-
ness has been identified, by the voice of
tradition, in the Greek and Latin Churches,
as that wild and lonely region between
Jerusalem and the Dead Sea, called in
modern geograpliy Qnarantania. It is an
extensive plateau, elevated to a considerable
height above the plain of Jericho and the
west bank of the Jordan; and hence the
literal accuracy of the expression in St.
Matthew, that Jesus was “led up” into the
wilderness. Travellers have described it as
a barren, sterile waste of painful whiteness,
shut in on the west by a ridge of grey lime-
stone hills, moulded into every conceivable
shape ; while on the east the view is closed
by the gigantic wall of the Moab mountains,
appearing very near at hand, but in reality
a long way off, the deception being caused by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK,


CHAP. I,





the nature of the intervening ground, which
possesses no marked features, no difference
of colour on which to fix the eye for the
purpose of forming an estimate of distance.
Over this vast expanse of upland country
there are signs of vegetation only in two
or three places, where winter torrents have
scooped out a channel for themselves, and
stimulate year after year into brief existence
narrow strips of verdure along their banks.
The monotony of the landscape and the
uniformity of its colouring are varied only
when the glaring afternoon sun projects the
shadows of the ghostly rocks across the
plain, or, at rare intervals, when a snowy
cloud, that seems as if born of the hills
themselves, sails across the deep-blue sky
and casts down on the desolate scene the
cool, dark mantle of its shade. A more
dreary and lonely scene it is impossible to
imagine.—H. Macmillan, D.D.

Great temptations.—The story of the
Temptation is peculiar, but not wholly
unique. It is not without its parallel in
human experience, not without its analogue
in literature and history. The great heroes
whom the world reveres have passed through
similar experiences of test and trial. Thus,
in the legends of the East, there is brought
to us the story of the temptation of Buddha
on that night when all the powers of evil
gathered around about him to assail him by
violence or to entice him by wiles.


“Nor knoweth one,

Not even the wisest, how those fiends of hell

Battled that nig!.t to keep the truth from
Buddh:

Sometimes with terrors of the tempest,
blasts

Of demon-armies clouding all the wind

With thunder, and with blinding lightning
flung

In jagged javelins of purple wrath

From splitting skies; sometimes with wiles
and words

Fair-sounding, ’mid hushed leaves and
softened airs

From shapes of witching beauty; wanton


songs,

Whispers of love; sometimes with royal
allures

Of proffered rule ; sometimes with mocking
doubts,


Making truth vain.”


So, in the mythology of Greece, we have
the story of the temptation of Hercules.
Pleasure comes to him in wanton but be-
witching form, and bids him follow her, and
promises him the cup of pleasure and that
he shall drink of it. She will strew his path
with flowers all the way, and accompany
him with song and dancing. Wisdom comes
to him with sterner voice—with beauty,
indeed, but with solemn and almost for-
bidding beauty—and calls him to combat


and to battle that he may win manhood.
So in the later history of the Church is the
strange, mystical story of the temptation of
St. Anthony, with its wiles and its entice-
ments, with its demons inviting to sin by
smiles, and its demons tormenting with
red-hot pincers. In human history we find
the same or like record. We have like
temptations in the lives of John Wesley, of
Luther, of Xavier, of Loyola. Open the page
of history where you will, and you can hardly
find the story of any great, noble, prophetic
soul that has not had its hour of battle with
the powers of darkness. As in the story of
Napoleon the Great, concerning whom history
tells us that for two long months he struggled
over the question whether he should divorce
his faithful wife and take another that he
might build up a European dynasty, and
came out from his chamber after the last
night of battle with a face so pallid, so
wrought upon by the struggle, that it was as
no face he ever shewed after the hottest
battlefield of Europe. But love went down
before the hope of ambition in that battle ;
and the devil won.

Tempted like as we are.—It is recorded
of the great soldier, the gallant Montrose,
that finding his followers ill provided with
armour, he stripped off breastplate, and
steel cap, with his stout leathern coat,
and rode into battle in his bared shirt-
sleeves, at the head of his men, to show
them that he scorned to use defences of
which they could not avail themselves.
Even so our Great Captain laid aside the
panoply of heaven, and as a man entered
into the conflict.

Temptation following on privileges.—
Pirates, when they see a ship set sail for
a rich cargo to foreign parts, keep away,
and take no notice of her; they let her go
by in peace; but when she is coming back
from that foreign port, laden with rich
goods, the case is very different. Then the
pirate uses all his efforts to take that ship,
and leaves no means untried. So with us;
after Holy Communion the devil knows that
we are very dear to God, and have received
Christ.

Satan vanquished.There is in Tintern
churchyard, not far from the grand ruins of
the abbey, a defaced and broken tombstone,
grass-grown, and whereon only one sentence
can be read; it consists of these striking
words—I tread Satan under my feet,” not
a word more; it is the record of an unknown
fight, and a nameless victory over the wiles
of the devil. Such may, through Christ’s
help. be one day the triumphant exclamation
of us all.


Ver. 14. Hastern prisons.—In the Hast
imprisonment means a far harder fate, as a
rule, than we can realise. At Gaza I saw
a crowd of men caged up in a small barred


51


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


eS ee


space, with no room to move, and no means
of attending to they personal cleanliness ;
and at Rome, the Tullianum, below the
Capitol, still shews, in its subterranean
horrors, the dire misery inflicted in antiquity,
on persons accused, whether innocent or
guilty. John, however, must, at times, have
been allowed to sit—perhaps in another
Gaza cage—where he could see and be seen,
for his disciples could converse with him.—
C. Geikie, D.D.


Ver. 15. After John comes Christ.—The
human heart is a castle; repentance is the
gate that opens to admit the gospel. If that
gate is not opened, heaven’s artillery must
flame forth against it. Christ comes to the
loyal heart as a welcome guest, to the re-
bellious as a conquering king. What the
water cannot purify, the fire must burn.

The longer repentance is delayed, the
harder it becomes.—Blot a copy-book all
over, and you will find it a hard matter to
erase the marks. Twist the growing sapling,
and you will never be able to straighten it,
when it is grown. Here comes in the story
of the boy whose father drove a nail into
a post for every fault, and took one out
for every good action. Once it happened
that the post was entirely cleared. ‘Ah,
fatler,” said the boy in tears, “the marks
are left!”

Low in repentance, but high in faith.—
An old saint, on his death-bed, once used
this remarkable expression: “ Lord, sink me
low as hell in repentance; but”—and here
is the beauty of it—* lift me high as heaven
in faith.” The repentance that sinks a man
low as hell is of no use except there is the
faith that lifts him as high as heaven, and
the two are perfectly consistent with each
other. Ob, how blessed it is to know where
these two lines meet—the stripping of re-
pentance, and the clothing of faith !

Christ's watchnurd : Repent !—In. His re-
corded career the close student can find
every modern character met by Christ and
instructed. In these cures of sick souls
is there a common base-line of operations?
Tf you look in at a watchmaker’s window, you
find the repairer doing a different thing to
almost every watch. One wants a new
mainspring, but otherwise is in good order;
another has no fault with the mainspring,
but wants new jewels. Another has neither
of these faults, but a broken crystal. At
least we may say there is no one fault
which in every watch demands repairing.
The souls of men which Christ repaired, are
they like the watches, each righted in differ-
ent ways, and only casually presenting the
same defect? Is Zaccheus repaired as to
avarice, and otherwise not touched; Paul as
to intense bigotry, a very different fault you
see; the outcast as to chastity ; Nicodemus
as to his opinions, but otherwise not. and


52


not needing? Is Christ’s salvation patch-
work? Or is there in every soul which the
Restorer set right one and the same radical
fault, treated in reality in the same way,
though with different outward methods of
approach? To every man He said, “ Re-
pent.” It is the common base-line of cure.
It is as if the mainspring was broken in us
all.— LZ. J. Haynes.

“ Repent.”—Christ began His ministry
with that word, preaching it. Think what
it is to preach *‘ Repent” to a promiscuous
audience. Are there none who need not
the message? You are a physician, and
before you stand three men. You preach
a cure to them, feeling no man’s pulse,
nor taking other diagnosis. ‘“ Diet, gentle-
men. Be careful of your food, that’s the
cure.” “ But, doctor,” objects the first man,
“that applies to the next man, for he
has gout; I, however, have a broken leg,
and the third man a cataract on the eye.”
Multiply the three men by one hundred. It
is the city hospital. How absurd this curing
at arm’s-length, standing at one end of the
ward, with one word. Not a_ specific
hospital, not if all its sufferers had trouble
of the eye, could be so treated. Yet Christ
stood and preached to hundreds of sick
souls, and sent His ministers to do likewise,
with one word,‘ Repent.” Every man needs
then to repent; it is the beginning of the
cure, if the Physician is to be believed.—
Ibid.

Lhe salvation of man depends upon his
subjection to the rule of Gad.—TYo a ship's
company who have mutinied and deposed
their captain, who alone knows how to steer
the vessel, there can be no deliverance from
tempest or from rocks, except by their sub-
mission and renewed allegiance. To aworld
fallen into disbelief and disobedience, there
can be no hope except through the obedi-
ence of faith. To a revolted world groaning
and travailing under the usurper’s heel,
there can be no gospel but the glad tidings
of the reign of God.

The gospel call—There is a touching
poem by Felicia Hemans, in which she
describes a Crusader who has been taken
captive by the Saracens, and who, whilst
chained in the dungeons of some fortress in
Palestine, hears the sound of a Crusading
squadron passing throagh the valley beneath
the towers of the castle where he lies in
fetters. He listens to the tramp of the
hervsemen, the murmur of their words, and
the high, clear notes of the trumpets. as
they ring out with a challenge as they pass
along, and then those notes grow fainter
and weaker and pass away altogether. Not
so, however, with the trumpet voice of the
gospel’s call. Again and again it summons
the sinner to repent and believe—to escape
by God’s grace from the dungeon of evil
habits, and to obey the call of God.





a oa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





God demands belief—“«What does that
mean?” :aic a Christian disciple to an elder
brother, as he referred to a certain passage
of Scripture. “ What does it say?” was the
answer. He read the passage over. “It
says so and so.” “* Well, then. it means
what it says.” This first lesson in Scriptural
exposition is one of the most important that
can be learned. A preacher of the gospel
once addressed a note to another minister,
inquiring, “ How do you interpret such and
such passages?”’ The answer was about as
follows: “ Dear sir, I do not interpret God’s
Word ; I believe it, and I advise you to do
the same.”


Ver. 16. The Sea of Galilee —Dr. Tristram,
describing his approach to the Sea of Galilee
from Nazareth, says: “For nearly three
hours we had ridden on, with Hermon in
front, sparkling through its light clond-
mantle, but still no sight of the Sea of
Galilee. One-ridge after another had been
surmounted, when on a sudden the calm
blue basin, slumbering in placid sweetness
beneath its surrounding wall of Lills, burst
upon us, and we were looking down on the
halluwed scenes of our Lord’s ministry.
We were on the brow of a very steep hill.
Below us was a narrow plain, sloping to the
sea, the beach of which we could trace to
its northern extremity. At our feet lay the
city of Tiberius, the only remaining town on
its shores, enclosed by crumbling fortifica-
tions, with shattered but once massive
round bastions. Along that fringe, could
we have known where to find them, lay the
remains of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Caper-
naum. Opposite to us were the heights of
the country of the Gadarenes, and the scene
of the feeding of the five thousand. On
some one of the slopes beneath us the
Sermon on the Mount was delivered. The
first gaze on the Sea of Galilee, lighted up
with the bright sunshine of a spring after-
noon, was one of the moments of life not
soon or easily forgotten. It was different
from my expectations; our view was so
commanding. In some respect it recalled in
miniature the first view of the Lake of
Geneva, from the crest of the Jura, as it is
approached by the old Besangon road— Her-
mon taking the place of Mont Blanc, the
Plain of Gennesaret recalling the Pays de
Vaud, and the steep banks opposite the bold
coast of Savoy. All looked small for the
theatre of such great events, but all the
incidents seemed brought together as in a
diorama. There was a calm peacefulness in
the look of these shores on the west, with the
paths by the water’s edge, which made them
the fitting theatre for the delivery of the
message of peace and reconciliation.”

Fishermen make ready converts.—It is a
singular fact that the fisher caste have
been in every country in India the earliest


a tenet


CHAP. I.





converts to the Roman Catholic Church, so
much so as to render it worthy of inquiry,
whether it be only a coincidence, or the re-
sult of some permanent and predisposing
cause. Is it that there is an habitual ten-
dency to veneration of the Supreme Being
in “those who go down to the sea in ships,
and see His power in the great deep”? Or
is it that, being a low caste themselves, the
fishers of India and Ceylon acquire a. higher
status by espousing Christianity? Or have
they some sympathy with a religion whose
first apostles and teachers were the fishermen
of Galilee ?—Sir J. £, Tennant. -

The casting-net is a fine web of strong
material, generally beautiful in every work-
manlike respect. When open, it is either
circular or more or less conical. Its rim
carries leaden weights, to sink it to the
bottom when thrown. It is often used from
boats, and that even when a seine is used
at the same time; but still oftener from the
rocky shore. The fisherman runs along the
rocks with his net on his arm, drawn up into
a rope-like bundle, and wound about above
his wrist. His motions are very stealthy as
he nears the place to throw; his net is taken
into his hand, with the slack so disposed as
to work just as he wants it ; sometimes using
one hand, sometimes two hands, for the
throw. As he comes to the spot, instantly
the net flies off, expanding from a Jean, wet
swab to a circle, and thus goes down upon
and into the water, with little splash; per-
haps close by, perhaps thirty feet away.
Scarcely has the net touched the water before
the thrower is in after it; for if he was not
already naked his garment is off in a twink-
ling. He dives down, gathers up the net
by its edge, and then comes back, to take
out the fish and wrap them up in the bosom
of his garment.—Prof. I. H. Hail.


Ver. 17. Ministers are fishers—A busy
profession, a toilsome calling, no idle man’s
occupation, as the vulgar conceive it, nor
needless trade, taken up at last to pick a
living out of. Let God’s fishermen busy
themselves as they must, sometimes in pre-
paring, sometimes in mending, sometimes in
casting abroad, sometimes in drawing in the
net, that they may “separate the precious
from the vile,” etc. (Jer. xv. 19; Matt. xiii. 48) ;
and no man shall have just cause to twit
them with idleness, or to say they have an
easy life.—John Trapp.

The minister as a fisherman must fit him-
self for his employment.—If some fish will
bite only by day, he must fish by day; if
others will bite only by moonlight, he must
fish for them by moonlight.—Richard Cecil.

Fishers of men.—l have known a con-
gregation so full of kindly Christian workers
that in the low neighbourhood in which they
worked they got the nickname of “ Grippers.”
Some, hearing the name, thought it must


53


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


a ee ee


be a new sect, but it only marked the old
apostolic quality. All Christians ought to
pray for this power of catching souls. It is
not violence, loudness, or terror that gives
it; but love, goodness, the clear and strong
convictions that come from following Christ.
—R. Glover.

Christ's power to shape men.—In a rough
stone, a cunning lapidary will easily foresee
what his cutting, and bis polishing, and his
art will bring that stone to. A cunning
statuary discerns in a marble stone under
his feet, where there will arise an eye, and
an ear, and a hand, and other lineaments
to make it a perfect statue. Much more did
our Saviour Christ, who was Himself the
author of that disposition in them, foresee
in these fishermen an inclinableness to be-
come useful in that great service of His
Church. Therefore He took them from their
own ship, but He sent them from His Cross ;
He took them weatherbeaten with north
and south winds, and rough-cast with foam
and mud; but He sent them back soupled,
and smoothed, and levigated, quickened, and
inanimated with that spirit which He had
breathed into them; He took fishermen, and
He sent fishers of men.—J. Donne, D.D.


Ver. 18. Following Christ at cost to self—
In 1695 Madame Guyon was imprisoned in
the Castle of Vincennes, on her refusal to
abandon her religious convictions, and cease
to preach Christ to her friends. To her
brother, who besought her to throw off her
religion, she wrote, “If your house, my dear
brother, had been made of precious stones,
and if I could have been treated and honoured
in it as a queen, yet I should have for-
saken all to follow after God.” It is said of
Nebridius that he left his native country,
where he lived in great luxury, forsook
friends and kindred, to go into a foreign
city to live, in the most ardent search after
truth and wisdom. He forsook all to become
a disciple of wisdom. So must we make
everything else of a secondary nature, and
give Christ the firstfruits of our hands, hearts,
hopes.


Ver. 23. An wnelean spirit the essence of
potlution.—It is not every unclean thing that
offeuds the sight, while the slightest stain
upon some things will excite in us deep
dislike; the feeling depends entirely upon
the nature of the thing, and the purpose to
which it is applied. We pass by an unclean
stone unnoticed. ... But rising a step higher
in the scale of creation, to an unclean plant,
we become conscious of a slight emotion of
dislike, because we see that which might
have pleased the eye and have beautified a
spot in creation disfigured and useless. An
unclean animal creates our dislike still more,
for instead of proving useful in any way
it is merely a moving pollution. But an


54


unclean human being excites our loathing
more than all; it presents our nature in a
light so disgusting that it lessens our pity
for him if he be miserable, and excites in us
ideas of disease, contamination, and pain.
But an unclean spirit—it is loathsome above
all things. It is the soul and essence of
pollution; it is the spectacle which excites
the deep dislike of God Himself.—F, Ff.
Trench.


Vers. 25, 26. Restored harmony. — The
legend runs that there once stood in an old
baronial castle a musical instrument upon
which nobody could play. It was compli-
cated in its mechanism, and during years
of misuse the dust had gathered and clogged
it, while dampness and variations of tem-
perature had robbed the strings of their
tone. Various experts had tried to repair
it, but without success, and when the hand
of a player swept over the chords it woke
only harsh discords and unlovely sounds.
But there came one day to the castle a man
of another sort. He was the maker of the
instrument, and saw what was amiss, and
what was needed for its repair, and with
loving care and skill he freed the wires from
dust, and adjusted those which were awry,
and brought the jangling strings into tune,
and then the hall rang with bursts of ex-
quisite music. So with these souls of ours,
so disordered by sin, that everything is con-
fusion and at cross-purposes: it is not until
their Divine Maker comes and attempts the
task of repair and readjustment that they
can be set right and be made capable of the
harmonies for which they were originally
constructed.


Ver. 27. God is against disease—Remember
that the men who said this did not look
then, as we look now, on Jesus as Son of
God. What they saw was a son of man
with power over the subtlest form of disease ;
and from that day man began to realise
that God had “given this power unto men,”
and that the disease that walketh in dark-
ness or destroyeth at noonday should by
man be met and conquered. Nor was this
all the glad tidings of the new gospel of
the Great Physician. Men saw Him who
claimed to be one with the Father, going
about doing good, and healing all manner
of diseases among the people. Then, thought
they, God is against disease; it is a Godlike
thing to destroy it. And when the Christian
world awoke to a further consciousness of
the cause—viz. that these bodies of ours
are made in God’s fair image, and built to
be the temples of the Holy Ghost, are not
our own, but are bought with a price, and
belong unto the God who hath redeemed us
—then the Christian world arose in enthu-
siasm, and determined to seek and save not
only the dying souls, but the dying bodies


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. Is


Sa ae ee ——— ee ee ene


of men also. Hospitals for victory over
death arose, where before had only been
public buildings to victory in battle over
fellow-men.—H, D. Rawnsley.


Ver. 32-34. Christ’s care for humanity.—I£
we may reverently compare this scene with
its modern analogies, it bears less a re-
semblance to anything that occurs in the
life of a clergyman than to the occupation
of a physician to a hospital on the day of
his seeing his out-patients. There is, indeed,
all the difference in the world between the
best professional advice, and the summary
cure such as was our Lord’s. But we are,
for the moment, looking at the outward
aspects of the scene; and it shows very
vividly how largely Christ’s attention was
directed to the well-being of the bodily
frame of man. Now it would be a great
mistake to suppose that this feature of our
Saviour’s ministry was accidental or inevit-
able. Nothing in His work was accidental :
all was deliberate, all had an object. We
may infer with reverence and with certainty
that His first object was to shew Himself
as the Deliverer and Restorer of human
nature as a whole: not of the reason and
conscience merely without the imagination
and the affections—not of the spiritual side
of men’s nature, without the bodily ; and,
therefore, He was not merely Teacher, but
also Physician ; and therefore and thus He
has shed upon the medical profession to the
end of time a radiance and a consecration
which are ultimately due to the conditions
of that redemptive work, to achieve which
He came down from heaven teaching and
healing.— Canon Liddon.

Godlike works.—When one of the greatest;
of God’s heroes, one of the most illus-
trious saints of Christendom, made an ora-
tion—preached, as we should say, a funeral
sermon—concerning a brother, holy and
heroic, whose soul was in paradise—when
Gregory of Nazianzum would show unto
the people how, though Basil rested from
his labours, his works did follow, and he
being dead yet spoke—he pointed towards
the hospital which Basil had built, and
said, “Go forth a little out of the city,
and see the new city, his treasure of godli-
ness, the storehouse of alms which he
collected; see the place where disease is
relieved by charity and by skill, where the
poor leper finds at last a home! It was
Basil who persuaded men to care for others;
it was Basil who taught them thus to
honour Christ.”— Dean Hole.

Christ the centre of attraction.—Leaving
the Paris Exhibition as the sun went down,
I noted an electric light that, revolving
round and round, shot its ethereal pencilled
rays far across the sky, touching with a
momentary radiance the vegetation or the
buildings across which they passed ; and


looking up I noted innumerable sparks
wavering, vibrating in the illumination,
For a moment I could not think what this
meant, for there is scarcely any scintillation,
and certainly no sparks, thrown off from the
electriclight. Then in an instant it occurred
to me that these bright lights were myriads
of insects attracted from the dark ocean of
air round, and which, protected from the
burning luminary by the strong glass, were
safely rejoicing in the ecstasy of those beams.
So here, around the beams of spiritual light
and love that radiate from the Saviour, the
innumerable hosts of suffering, struggling
men and women of that day come within
the field of our vision.—J. A. Picton.


Ver. 35. The early morning.—If you would
see a likeness of heaven on earth, you must
look for it in the early morning. The day
then seems new-born ; there are all sorts of
beauteous sights and sounds; the air is
balmy, the dew glistening on the open
flowers like diamonds. Birds are singing
their matin praises; cattle lowing, etc.
Men, too, are scarce astir, and no evil
passions exciting your peaceful contempla-
tions. It is, indeed, a time for communing
with God. The spiritual analogy or corre-
spondence of the morning is also striking.
It denotes a new state in the regenerate life,
and this is a direct gift from the Lord, who
is called in God’s Word the “ Morning Star,”
and “a morning without clouds.” All great
workers have been early risers. Dr. Dod-
dridge ascribed the preparation of most
of his works to the circumstance of his
rising at five o’clock every morning, saying
that this course pursued for forty years
would add ten years to man’s life. Dr.
Homer observes that “there is a certain
loveliness and a salutary or even curative
influence in the morning atmosphere beyond
that of any other portion of the day.” Those
who habitually lie late in bed are generally
the drones and dawdlers of society. This
kind of self-indulgence is enervating to both
body and mind, and we ought to watch and
pray against it, as against a deadly sin.—
O. P. Hiller.

Morning praises—When St. Francis of
Assisi used to hear the birds sing in the
morning, he would say to his brethren, ‘‘ Our
little winged brothers are already praising
their Creator, and are singing Him a song
of gratitude for the new day that is shining
above them. Shall we allow ourselves to be
put to shame by the birds?”

Morning is the golden hour for prayer
and praise.—The mind is fresh; the mercies
of the night and the new resurrection
of the dawn both prompt a devout soul
to thankfulness. The buoyant heart takes
its earliest flight, like the lark, toward tle
gates of heaven. One of the finest touches
in Bunyan’s immortal allegory is his de-


55


CHAP. I.


ear sin


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Hy ats ok usee Sa Os Ie


scription of Christian in the chamber of
-eace, “who awoke and sang,” while his
window looked out to the sun rising. If
even the stony statue of heathen Memnon
made music when the first rays of the
dawn kindled on its flinty brow, surely no
Christian heart should be dumb when God
causes the outgoings of the morning to rejoice.

Prayer should be the hey of the day and
the lock of the night.—At night it is our
covering; in the morning it is our armour:
so at all times it defends us from the malice
of Satan, our own subordinations and betray-
ings, the unequal weather the world assaults
us with, and preserves us in the favour and
esteem of Heaven (Ps. cxxxii. 1-5, cxix. 148,
exliii. 8-12; 1 Sam. xiii, 12)— 0. Feltham.

Retirement with God is the only prepara-
tion for success, and the only medicine for
failure. The secret of all strong souls lies
jn those times of loneliness when they were
bound hand and foot as captives to the
Everlasting Will. We deride such nowa-
days; call them mystic, contemplationist,
fanatic, But ifit were anything but religion,
people would not laugh. Tell them of
Demosthenes living in a cellar, with head
half shaved to prevent his appearing -in
public, and there will be admiration : was it
any wonder that he became an orator? But
let a man be as bent on becoming a saint,
let him give up one hour’s frivolous talk in
order to commune with his Father in secret,
then we suspect that such an one is becoming
righteous overmuch, Mind, no one complains
of a man being anxious to be wise over-
much, rich overmuch, healthy overmuch ;
he may burn the midnight oil and study,
watch the markets and scheme, frequent
the gymnasium and develop his muscle, and
no one will find fault; but to spend time on
what is at least as important as wisdom,
wealth, and health, and in a sense involves
them all—this is fanatical, and not to be
encouraged or approved. We miss much
through our want of separation from the
world, and through our deficiency in insula-
tion, or, which is the same word, in isolation.
If we go into a science laboratory and
examine the great brass machines for holding
electrical charges, we find that they are all
mounted on glass feet. These are the insu-
lators; and if it were not for them, no
electricity would remain on the surface ; as
it is, electricity is hard enough to keep in
charge, even with the best insulators. And
we know sometimes what it is to have life
and power pass into us from above, but we
do not know how to retain it, because we have
never learnt true retirement of heart and
insulation of life. Some one spoke to John
Nelson, making unfavourable comparison of
John Wesley with a prominent religious
teacher of the day; and Nelson replied,
“He has not stayed in the upper room like
John Wesley.”—J. Rendel Harris.


56


Ver. 38. Opportunities.— Cromwell said
that it was his aim not only to strike while
the iron was hot, but to “‘make the iron hot
by striking!” Some men wait for oppor-
tunities, and others make opportunities and
circumstances wait upon them.


Vers. 40-45. Leprosy.—As to this disease
observe: Leat, dryness, and dust predispose
to diseases of the skin everywhere, and all
these causes are especially operative in
Syria. Insufficient food assists their action ;
and boils and sores are apt to fester and
poison the system. Leprosy is a disease
found over a large tract of the world’s
surface; it is found all round the shores of
the Mediterranean, from Syria to Spain, in
a virulent form, and in North and South
Africa. It was carried to various countries
in Europe by those wuo returned from the
Crusades, and became prevalent even in
England, in the times when our forefathers
had no butcher meat in winter but what was
salted, and little vegetable diet with it. In
a form less virulent than in Palestine it
exists in Norway, where the government
supports several hospitals for lepers, and
seeks to prevent the spread of the cisease by
requiring all afflicted with it to live—un-
married—in one or other of these. Probably
salt fish in Norway forms the too exclusive
food of the poor, as it also probably did
in Palestine in the time of Christ. Mrs.
Brassey found it in the islands of the Pacific.
Tt is so common in India that when Lord
Lawrence took formal possession of Oude,
he mace the people promise not to burn their
widows, nor slay their children (the girls),
nor bury alive their lepers.—R. Glover.

Leprosy.—You remember the story of the
leper which Swinburne has woven into one
of his most beautiful, most painfully realistic,
poems. He tells about a lady at the French
Court in the Middle Ages who was stricken
with leprosy. She had been courted, flattered,
idolised, and almost worshipped for her wit
and beauty by the king, princes, and all
the royal train, until she was smitten with
leprosy. Then her very lovers hunted her
forth as a banned and God-forsaken thing ;
every door in the great city of Paris was
slammed in her face; no one would give
her a drop of water or piece of bread; the
very children spat in her face, and fled from
her as a pestilential thing, until a poor clerk,
who had loved the great lady a long way off,
and had never spoken to her until then, took
her to his house for pity’s sake, and nursed
her until she died, and he was cast out and
cursed himself by all the religious world for
doing it.—J. G@. Greenhough.


Ver. 40. Growth of sin.—The Jews have
a tradition about the growth of leprosy, that
it began with the walls of a man’s house;
then, if he did not repent, it entered his


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. Ii





clothes, till at last it affected his body. So

it is with the growth of sin. It begins with

neglect of duty, it may be of prayer, or the

_ Warning voice of conscience is unheeded.

Habits of sin are formed, till at last the

ee that lets God alone is let alone by
od,

No “if” in Jesus.—A litile girl was
awakened to anxiety about her soul at a
meeting where the story of the leper was
told. Well, this dear little girl, who was
anxious, said, ‘I noticed that there was an
‘af’ in what the man said; but there was no
‘if’ in what Jesus said. So I went home
and took out the ‘if, by my granny’s fire-
side, and I kuelt down, and I said, ‘Lord
Jesus, Thou canst, Thou wilt make me clean.
I give myself to Thee.’”


Ver. 41. Hand-help.—You know what it
is to feel a man’s hand warm within your
own; tle cieer that comes from a good
hand-shake of an honest heart is what ?—
why, it is this: that you feel the friend


understands jou and gives you hope; the


spirit of your friend touches your spirit in
the hand-grasp, and that land-shaking is
instinct with life. He might write and say
good things, and true and helpful to you,
but they did not seem to be half as good
and true till he took your hand into his own.
Or, again, you have need of a physician, and
he writes you a prescription. The medicine
does not do half so much good as the visit
in which he took your weak hand in his own
strong one, and shewed you by the way
he held it that he meant to bring you
through, God helping him. Yes, hope in


the touch of a human hand of love, faith in
the touch of a human hand of pity, cheer
in the touch of a human band of power—
this is the doctor’s gift to his patient, and
this was God’s gift in Christ to a poor, sin-
weary, leprous world that felt there was
need of healthier, happier life, and knew not
where to turn for it.—H, D. Rawnsiey.

Christ's answer an exact echo of the request.
—The echo which the mountain gives back
to our cry is, as you must often have noticed,
calm and pure and musical, however harsh
or dissonant or strained our voice may be.
Your cry or shout may rise to a piercing
scream; but if you wait and listen, it comes
back to you with all the discord and ex-
citement strained out of it—comes back at
times with a mystical force and sweetness
and purity. And when the leper heard his
passionate cry come back from the lips of
Christ, must there not have been a heavenly
sweetness and power in that gracious echo?
Must he not have wondered how his poor
words should have suddenly grown in-
stinct with a celestial music and energy 7—
S. Cox, DD.


Ver. 45. Talkativeness a great evil.—He
that cannot refrain from much speaking is
like a city without walls; and less pains in
the world a man cannot take than to hold
his tongue. Therefore if thou observest
this rule in all assemblies, thou shalt seldom
err: restrain thy choler; hearken much,
and speak little; for the tongue is the in-
strument of the greatest good and greatest
evil that is done in the world (Job ii. 10;
James i. 19, 26).—Sir W. Raleigh.





CHAPTER II.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. It was noised.— Jt was heard, He is in the house, or at home,


Perhaps the house


already mentioned, viz. Simon’s (i. 29); but more probably His own homestead.
Ver. 4. Come nigh unto Him.— Bring (iim) to Him.


Ver. 5. Thy sins be.—Have been forgiven thee.


Doubtless the man himself was more


anxious about his state in the sight of God than about his bodily ailments.
Ver. 7. Blasphemies.— Why doth this man talk thus? He blasphemeth! They had yet


to learn the truth revealed in John v. 19.


Ver. 10. Power.— Authority, i.e. a moral right.


The use of the term “Son of Man”


implies a claim on the part of our Lord to forgive sins rather in His mediatorial than in
His Divine capacity. And as the Father sent Him vested with this authority, so does
He in due time hand it on to His earthly representatives and vicegerents (John xx. 21-23).

Ver, 14. Receipt of custom.— Zoll-house. ‘‘ Capernaum was the landing-place for the many
ships which traversed the lake or coasted from town to town; and this not only for those
who had business in Capernaum, but for those who would there strike the great road of
eastern commerce from Damascus to the harbours of the West.”

Ver, 15. Publicans.—VZaw-collectors, the local agents of the Roman “publicani” or
sevenue officers, who farmed the taxes from the government, Everywhere throughout


57


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MAREK,


Wie ee


the Empire they were hated for their rapacity and dishonesty ; but among the Jews
especially were they abhorred, as being the representatives of a heathen, hostile, and


victorious power. 7
Ver. 17. To repentance.—Omit these words, imported from Luke v. 32.


Ver. 18. Used to fast.— Were fasting, on that very day. ’ ; :
Ver. 20. Taken away.—There lurks in the original expression a hint of the violence and


pain with which the separation would be fraught. ‘
Ver. 21. A piece of new cloth.—A4 patch of undressed cloth. “The patch supposed is an
unfulled piece of cloth. It is the business of the fuller to make the cloth full and compact
by precipitating the process of contraction.” ; f

Ver, 23. Began, as they went, to pluck,—A very good rendering, though free. Cp. Latin
“iter facere,” French “ faire chemin.” From LXX. in Judg. xvii. 8, it is clear that the
classical distinction between 6d0v moe, “to make a road,” Oddy roeicPar, “ to make a
journey,” must not be pressed in Hellenistic Greek. Such a piece of wanton mischief as
“to make a road” through the corn by plucking the ears would never have been tolerated
on any day, let alone the Sabbath. Nor would the action attributed to the disciples have
sufficed “to make a road”: for that, they would have had not to break off the ears,
but to break down the stalks.

Ver. 26. In the days of Abiathar the high priest.—This seems, at first sight, to con-
tradict 1 Sam. xxi. 1-6, where Ahimelech, the father of Abiathar, is mentioned as the
high priest who gave the loaves to David. Many attempts have been made to reconcile
the two passages; the most successful is, perhaps, that of Bede: “ There is no discrepancy,
for both were there, when David came to ask for bread, and received it: that is to say,
Ahimelech, the high priest, and Abiathar, his son; but Ahimelech having been slain by
Saul (very shortly after), Abiathar fled to David, and became the companion of all his
exile afterwards. When he came to the throne, Abiathar himself also received the rank
of high priest, and the son became of much greater excellence than the father, and
therefore was worthy to be mentioned as the high priest, even during his father’s lifetime.”
An elaborate and ably expressed argument in favour of another explanation will be found
in McClellan’s Vem Testament, vol. i., pp. 671, 672.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—12,
(Paratiens: Marr. ix. 1-8; Luxe v. 17-26.)


The paralytic borne of fowr.—What, it has been asked, was the real purpose
of Christ, in those mighty works of healing which consumed so much of His
time and strength on earth? What was their relation to His great plan for
the world’s redemption? Evidently they were not intended to reduce, by direct
interference, the sum-total of the world’s suffering. Had that been their object,
we should have been forced to admit they have quite failed to attain it, for the
difference they have made in the amount of human woe is infinitesimal. More-
over, we can see for ourselves that that would not have been a worthy object.
Pain and misery are not here for nothing; they are sent here by God Himself,
to accomplish a definite work in the world—a good, merciful, and Divine work ;
and they cannot be spared until that work is completed. We must therefore
look elsewhere for the key to our Lord’s ministry of healing. And we find it
‘n the incident now before us. ‘That ye may know that the Son of Man hath
authority on earth to forgive sins ”—for this purpose it is that Jesus saith to
the paralytic, “‘ Arise and walk.” Possessing this key to the meaning of Christ’s
works of mercy, we can follow Him through the long succession of them, as
He goes about doing good and healing all that are oppressed of the devil and
can find in them all, not only the sign and proof of His power to save from sin.
but the example and illustration of His way of saving. Here we see the two
antagonists confronted. In Jesus Christ we see God manifest in the flesh ; and
in the maladies and visible infirmities of men we see sin manifest in the ‘flesh.
In the infinite diversity of these—palsies, blindness, leprosies, epileptic con-

58


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. Il.





vulsions, demoniac madness—we have set before us, in no dark parable, the

Protean phases of human sin. We hear the authoritative word of absolution,

cleansing, healing ; we witness the act of faith by which he who asks receives.

These mighty works are a continual parable, in which the whole life of Christ

sets before us the kingdom of heaven in its infinite mercy and all-victorious
wer.

I. The faith exhibited by the paralytic’s friends.—It was quite a common
occurrence for sick persons seeking help from Christ to be brought into His
presence by those who had the care of them (Matt. iv. 24, ix. 32, xiv. 35, 36,
xv. 30, xvii. 14-18); and after His ascension the same thing was experienced
by the apostles (Acts v. 16). In the present instance the sick man was so
utterly helpless that he could only be moved by four persons carrying him on
his pallet. But when they reached the house where Jesus was a new difficulty
arose, the crowd before the door being too great to admit of their entrance.
What was to be done? An ordinary degree of faith would have given up the
attempt, and the mournful procession would have returned home asit came. But
these men were not so easily daunted. They had the faith which can “ remove
mountains” ; and a mountain of difficulties and discouragements it did indeed
remove. ‘“ When they could not come nigh unto Him for the press,” they went
up on the housetop, carrying their burden with them; and being come just over
the place where Jesus was, they actually stripped off the roof, perhaps at the
risk of causing danger or inconvenience to those below, and let the paralytic
down with his pallet into the midst before Jesus. They adopted an expedient
which few would have thought of, and still fewer attempted, so earnest was
their desire for their friend’s recovery, and so strong their confidence in Christ’s
power and willingness to satisfy that desire. Unbelief would have raised
countless objections. ‘“ What is there peculiar in your case, that you should
take such an extraordinary method of making it known? Others, besides you,
have suffering friends. Wait, and take your turn with the rest. Have patience
till the crowd disperses, and Jesus is free to attend to you. Or go home now,
and return to-morrow. Such behaviour as this makes you look more like
housebreakers than humble petitioners. What will the owner of the house
say to such wanton destruction of his property ? What will the Lord Himself
say to this forcible intrusion into His presence?” To every objection urged
these men turned a deaf ear; and at length they received their reward for
thus taking the kingdom of heaven (as it were) by storm. Jesus recognised
in their action, not an outrage upon decency and propriety, but an exceptional
expedient to meet exceptional difficulties; not presumptuous forwardness
requiring to be checked, but energetic perseverance deserving every encourage-
ment. “Seeing their faith, He said”—what? nothing to them, they needed
no commendation, they were sufficiently rewarded by hearing His gracious
words addressed to their friend; and to him Jesus said, not, “ Son, thou art
healed of thine infirmity,” but, ‘Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.”

II. The power claimed by the Divine Physician.—To cleanse the soul as well
as to heal the body. It was in the latter capacity only—as the Healer of
physical maladies—that Jesus was usually resorted to. There is but one
instance on record of His being sought exclusively for the pardon of sins
(Luke vii. 37-50). So corrupt had the whole nation of the Jews become, so
self-satisfied and unspiritual, that it was the rarest thing possible for any of
them to realise that the true mission of Jesus was not to restore the body, but
the soul—to save His people from their sins. Now what could bring this truth
before them more emphatically than the course He pursued with respect to this
paralytic? To another impotent person, whom He had restored, He said, “ Sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee” (John v. 14)—implying that his

59


CHAP. IL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
RN eA Re a ay et ae i ra ee eee


affliction was the result of his sin. Here the same truth—that spiritual
disorders lie at the root of bodily ones—is not only declared, but proved ; for
instead of saying, “Son, thou art loosed from thine infirmity,” Jesus says,
“ Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.” As much as to say,—What you really want
is not so much bodily health as spiritual soundness, The faculties of your soul
are in direr need than the limbs of your body. It would be of little use for
Me to raise your physical frame from that pallet, unless I were at the same
time to free your higher nature from the bonds that hold it down. The true
physician is he who goes to the root of the disorder, who renovates the con-
stitution and makes the patient a new man. That is what I profess to do.
You come to me, craving health, and I offer you in addition salvation: “ Son,
thy sins are forgiven thee.” So spake the Saviour, and doubtless no sooner had
He spoken than the plague of the man’s heart was healed. ‘Still no visible effect
followed. There he lay, stretched on his pallet, while the scribes were reasoning
among themselves upon the astounding claim implied in the words Jesus had
just used. But the matter was not to end there. As far as the efficacy of
the word spoken was concerned, it was immaterial whether Christ adopted the
form, “Thy sins are forgiven thee,” or, “ Arise and walk.” If He intended ta
bestow health of body as well as forgiveness of. sins, then both would certainly
accrue in any case. But it was not immaterial whether the truth expressed in
the words, “ Thy sins are forgiven thee,” should be only taught, or proved as well
as taught. It was of the most supreme importance that all men should know
that “the Son of Man hath authority on earth to forgive sins,” and not merely
to remit the punishment of them. Turning, therefore, again to the paralytic,
but intending His words more for the objectors than for him, Jesus said,
“ Arise, and take up thy pallet, and go thy way into thy house.” In these
words the Saviour deliberately staked His claim to forgive sins, which the
scribes could not test, upon His ability to heal, which they could test. The
bodily disorder obeyed the mandate as promptly as the spiritual malady had
already done (ver. 12). Thus was manifested, in the most striking manner.
the close connection between sin and suffering; and thus was proved the
supreme authority of Jesus Christ, not only in the world of nature, but also
in the realm of grace.

III. The parabolic teaching of this miracle—While the restoration of fallen
humanity must be at the outset an inward and a spiritual thing, it is not com-
plete until the entire man has been renewed by the power of the Incarnate God
who shall transfigure even our body of humiliation unto conformity with His
body of glory (Phil. iii. 21).


The penunces of life.—Penance is the necessary consequence, the inseparable
accompaniment of sin; and though God’s mercy may pardon and absolve the
penitent from the guilt of sin, and so remit its eternal punishment, yet there is
a temporal punishment which remains, and must remain, as a witness to the
essential evil of sin. When we gaze upon the Cross we see there, in the Passion
of Jesus, the great penance of sin which He bore for us; but He has left us
a cross to bear, He has called us, as members of His body, to share in His
work: and in nothing is this more manifest than in the penance which follows
forgiven sin. :

I. We have to bear as a penance the consequences of the sins of the Church
(Col. i. 24).—1. In the sorrows which come to us from the lack of zeal, and
therefore lack of power in the Church. 2. In the difficulties with whieh he
Church has to contend in restoring primitive doctrine and practice. 3. In the
poverty of the sacramental and spiritual life of the Church in so maar of :
parishes. al


60


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY «1 ST. MARK. CHAP. II.


ere a Pee ee


II. We must expect penance to follow even on forgiven sins.—1. The
penitent drunkard or roué, who has injured his health by dissipation, has still
to bear the consequences of his sins in this. life, in physical weakness and
disability. 2. The gambler or spendthrift, who has squandered his patrimony
in pleasure and excess, has to endure poverty. 3. The criminal, who has lost
his character and reputation by legal exposure, though the guilt of his sin
be pardoned, has to satisfy the law’s demands, and even after that to put up
with many a humiliation as the fruit of his sin.

III. This law holds good in every class of sin—that which is known only
to God, as well as that which is manifest also before man. And part of our
repentance must consist in our willingness, lovingly, cheerfully, and patiently,
to bear the penance of forgiven sin. When our Lord absolved this man, He
imposed a penance: “Take up thy bed, and go unto thy house ”_possibly
bringing on him (as it did on another, John v.10) the criticism and con-
demnation of his neighbours for his apparent violation of the Sabbath. So with
us; when sin is absolved, its temporal results are often left as a penance.
1. In moral weakness, and therefore the necessary surrender of much that
is lawful, but for us net expedient, in the avoidance of occasions of temptation,
in the giving up of dangerous companions. 2. In the return of the old
temptations to worry and distress us, but by God’s grace to develop in us the


opposite virtue.


3. In having to bear the immediate consequences of our sin,


perhaps in poverty, pain, or humiliation.— A. G. Mortimer, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 1. When Christ is in the house
—1l1. Good men will be attracted to it ;
2. Bad men will be benefited in it;
3. Divine benediction will rest upon
it; 4. Beneficent ministries will flow
from it. Those who have Christ in
their home do not act like other people ;
their motives are purer, their charities
more disinterested; they carry with
them a radiance which tells of an
unworldly source of joy, and proclaims
the blessedness of dwelling under the
shadow of the Almighty.

Fragrant flowers cannot be concealed,
and there is a fragrance about Jesus
that always reveals His presence.
Light cannot be hidden, and there is
so much light in Him that it shines
out at every window and through every
chink and crevice of the house where

He abides. Love itself is invisible, but
‘wherever it dwells it produces such
effects that its presence soon becomes
known. It makes people gentle,
kindly, thoughtful, unselfish, and fills
them with new desires to do good,
and to serve and bless others.—/. A.
Miller, DD.


ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 3-12. Palsy is not so painful
as cancer, nor so loathsome as leprosy,
nor so fatal as cholera; but it is a
disease which renders the _ patient
eminently helpless. There are persons
affected with spiritual palsy who never
fall into glaring sins, and yet remain
inert and without the power of religious
decision. It is vain to expect such
people to “turn to Christ.” It is the
mission of the Church to bring to
Christ those who are too helpless in
spiritual indifference to seek Him of
their own accord (Luke xiv. 21-23).
—W. F. Adeney.

Mystical sense of the imcident.—In
one of the allegories attributed to
Hugo de 8. Victor the following view
is given of the whole history: “The
house in which Jesus was entertained
stands for the Holy Scripture. The
crowd who would not let the paralytic
be introduced sets forth the multitude
of empty thoughts which hide the sight
of God from the sinful soul. The roof
is uncovered when the sublime and
mystical sense of Scripture is laid open.
Here the paralytic is brought into the


61


CHAP. I.


presence of Jesus: there his sin is for-
given him, he is called son, and com-
manded to take up his bed and walk ;
for when a man truly comes to the
knowledge of God, God heals him by
His grace from all that he has done
amiss, and calls him a son by adoption,
and commands him to take up his bed
by subduing the flesh, and to walk by
means of good works.”

Lessons.—1. Those who would be
healed by Christ must come to Him.
It is not enough either (1) to hear
much of Christ, or (2) to seek help of
those who are near Christ. 2. There
are some who could never reach Christ
unless helped by others. 3. The selfish-
ness of some who are enjoying Christian
privileges is one of the greatest impedi-
ments to the spread of the blessings of
the gospel among those who are as yet
without them. (1) There are some so
eager to seek consolation and peace for
their own souls, that they leave no
room for such as are palsied and blind
and leprous with sin to receive needful
care and help. (2) The sinners and
the sick, not the whole and the right-
eous, have the first claim on Christ’s
care. The Church should be more
solicitous for the salvation of the world,
and less absorbed with the desire for
her own comfort. 4. Harnest perse-
verance in seeking Christ will overcome
the greatest difficulties. (1) We must
expect difficulties—(a) In bringing
others to Christ. (6) Possibly in coming
to Christ ourselves. (2) Difficulties are
sent—(a) To test our earnestness.
(6) To awaken our intelligence. (c) To
arouse our energy. (3) Christ is always
accessible, though not always with
ease.


Ver. 5. Soul-healing first—Here we
notice a remarkable advance on the
teaching accompanying the miracles
hitherto recorded by St. Mark. 1. The
Saviour, before giving relief to the body,
attends to the needs of the soul. We
cannot doubt that this paralytic was a
conscience-stricken man—that he knew
his sufferings were owing to his own
misconduct—his loss of vital energy


62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


having been brought about by a course
of enfeebling self-indulgence. The
Saviour read the mute confession of his
penitent heart, and hastened to assure
him of its acceptance in the sight of
Him who pardoneth and absolveth all
them that truly repent and unfeignedly
believe. Wearenot told what amount
of faith he possessed; but however
undefined it may have been, it would
at any rate include some real convic-
tion of Christ’s right to speak in the
name of God. 2. The faith of the four
bearers is specially emphasised. It is,
as Dean Luckock says, a fact full of
mystery, but full also of consolation,
that not a few of the gifts of healing
and restoration were obtained through
the faith and prayers, not so much of
the sick and afflicted themselves, as of
their relations and friends. See Matt.
viii. 13, xv. 28; Mark v. 36; John
iv. 50. Surely this dependence of man
upon his fellow-creatures was intended
to foreshadow the great mystery of
redemption through Another’s blood.
And what can be more encouraging
for us to know than this: that when-
ever we bring others to the feet of
Jesus to be healed of their soul-sickness
whenever we offer up “ the prayer of
faith” which we are assured “shall
save the sick,” we are associating our-
selves in deeds of mercy and acts of
intercession with the Great High Priest?
Dr. Edersheim well draws attention to
the fact, that by first speaking forgive-
ness Christ not only presented the
deeper moral aspect of His miracles,
as against their ascription to magic or
Satanic agency, but also established
that very claim, as regarded His person
and authority, which it was sought to
invalidate. In this forgiveness of sins
He presented His person and authority
as Divine, and He proved it such by
the miracle of healing which imme-
diately followed. Had the two been
inverted, there would have been
evidence, indeed, of His power, but
not of His Divine personality, nor of
His having authority to forgive sins;
and this, not the doing of miracles,
was the real object of His mission.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IL.


Re nee AE ue Le ee lat Os ee


The soul's need met by Christ.—¥For
most of us the wounds of life are
seldom wholly clean. Evermore the
self-reproach or the inevitable self-
accusation mingles with our trouble.
There is poison in most of the wounds
from which we suffer. We cannot
always tell others of the poison which
yet we know is lodged in the wound ;
and yet here we need, perhaps, the
greatest sympathy; and here we lie
outside our brother’s reach. But
here the Divine wisdom meets our
needs: “Thy sins be forgiven thee.”
It is like a healing touch, cleaning
the edges of the wound.—Bishop Boyd
Carpenter.


Ver. 7. Forgiveness of sin.—1. The
fact that God forgives sin. (1) Stated
(Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7; 2 Chron. vii. 14;
Ps. Ixxxvi. 5, cxxx. 4). (2) Illustrated
(Ps. xxxii. 5; Matt. ix. 2; Luke vii. 48).
2. The meritorious ground on which
God forgives. (1) Christ Jesus (Col.
1, 14; 1 John ix. 12; Acts x. 43;
Rom. iii. 24, 25). (2) What has Christ
done that God forgives for His sake ?
(Heb. ix. 22-26; 1 Pet. iii. 18; Isa.
liii. 5, 6). 3. The conditions in us
necessary to forgiveness. (1) Faith
(Acts xiii. 38). (2) Repentance (Acts
iii. 19). (3) Confession (1 John 1. 9).
(4) Forsaking sin (Prov. xxviii. 13).
4, The perfection of this forgiveness
of God. (1) Sins are blotted out
(Isa. xliii. 35). (2) Totally removed
from sight (Isa. i. 18). (3) Forgotten
for ever (Jer. xxxl. 34; Heb. x. 17).
5. The consequences of forgiveness.
We have—(1) Life (Ool. ii. 13). (2)
Blessedness in the soul (Ps. xxxii. 1, 2;
1 John v. 10). (3) Praise in the heart
(Isa. xii. 1). (4) The fear of God
(Ps. cxxx. 4; Jer. xxxiii.8, 9). (5) Re-
conciliation with God (Luke xv. 12,
32). (6) Peace with God and joy in
the hope of the glory of God (Rom.
v. 1, 2).—J. A. RB. Dickson.

The ungodly change the best medi-
«ines into poison, and pervert the holiest
truths.

The slanderer’s custom is, not to try
.to ascertain the speaker’s meaning, but


by some means to pervert and wrest
his words.


Ver. 8. The scribes had accepted the
dogma that access to other men’s
thoughts was a mark of the Messiah.
This sign the Saviour will supply by
disclosing to them their unfriendly
suspicions. In this way their unbelief
and malice were left without excuse.
An auspicious opportunity now opened,
by which they might enter the realm
of truth, but they missed it. At least
one sign of the Messiah Jesus had;
but they muzzled reason, that she
should not speak—they blindfolded
understanding, that she might not see.
A door of escape from perplexing doubt
was opened, but they would rather
dwell among the tangled thorns than
enter the Eden of light and rest.—
J. T. Davies.

Christ's delicate sensibility. — This
fine quality of mind, this delicacy, this
sensitiveness which unconsciously photo-
graphs character with a look, usually
belongs to the more subtile minds of
women. It is a Divine quality. Some
men have it to a high degree. The
Saviour had it to an unspeakable
degree. His delicate sensibility, His
perfectly sympathetic heart and mind,
are as impressive as the conscious quick-
silver to catch a faultless image of
our life, our troubles, our fears and
doubts. His being in heaven does
not impair His power to know us and
sympathise with us. Therefore He
is the true father confessor, the great
priest, to whom we can go with assur-
ance.—f. S. Barrett.


Ver. 10. Present pardon for sin taught
by Christ.—1. Christ here enforces a
doctrine that had been lost sight of
by the Jews—the doctrine of present
pardon for sin. They relegated for-
giveness to the next world and the day
of judgment: He insists that it may
be enjoyed now, even while the chas-
tisement is in progress; nay, the
chastisement itself may be the means
of preparing the heart to receive it.
2. This grace of pardon is dispensed


63


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


eR aR Le RMN eA eal fie OA) Sn Sa AE ek


by Jesus Christ as the Son of Man—
as the Head of the new creation of
redeemed humanity. It is the virtue
that necessarily flows from Him, to
all His members, cleansing the soul,
instilling peace, and establishing fellow-
ship with God. 3. The ordinary
channels for the conveyance of this
Divine gift are the ministry and the
sacraments of the Church “ which is
His body.” See John xx 22, 23;
1 Cor. v. 3-5; 2 Cor. ii. 10, 11.


Ver. 11. Christ's message to sick
souls.—To every sick soul, whose cure
He undertakes, He says, Surge, tolle,
ambula. Our beds are our natural
affections. These He does not bid us
cast away, nor burn, nor destroy.
Since Christ vouchsafed induere homi-
nem, we must not exuere hominem.
Since Christ invested the nature of
man and became man, we must not
pretend to divest it and become angels,
or flatter ourselves in the merit of
mortifications, not enjoined, or of a
retiredness, and departing out of the
world, in the world, by the withdraw-
ing of ourselves from the offices of
mutual society, or an extinguishing of
natural affections. But “ Surge,” says
our Saviour—Arise from this bed,
sleep not lazily in an over-indulgence
to these affections; but “ Ambula”—


Walk sincerely in thy calling, and
thou shalt hear thy Saviour say, “ Von
est infirmitas hec ad mortem ”; these
affections—nay, these concupiscences
—shall not destroy thee (Matt. xx. 8;
Tit. ii. 14).—John Donne, D.D.


Ver. 12. A new experience.—That
argument was perfectly logical ; it was
an induction, yet it led them to a
result curiously the reverse of theirs
who reject miracles for being contrary
to experience. ‘“‘ Yes,” they said, ‘we
appeal to experience, but the conclusion
is that good deeds which it cannot
parallel must come directly from the
Giver of all good.” Such good deeds
continue. The creed of Christ has
reformed Europe, is awakening Asia,
has transformed morality, and im-
posed new virtues on the conscience.
It is the one religion for the masses,
the lapsed, and indeed the sick in body
as truly as in soul; for while science
discourses with enthusiasm upon pro-
gress by the rejection of the less fit,
our faith cherishes these in hospitals,
asylums, and retreats, and prospers by
lavishing care upon the outcast and
rejected of the world. Now this tran-
scends experience: we never saw it
on this fashion ; it is supernatural.—
Dean Chadwick.


- MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—11.


(ParaLtets: Marr. ix. 9-13; Luke v. 27-32.)


The call and feast of Levi.—t. A seaside walk hallowed by sacred in-
struction.—Christ never wasted His time or opportunities in idle reverie or


sentimental contemplation of the beauties of nature.


‘yield food for mind and soul.
thing for Jesus on the sands ?


He made every scene


And, asks Mr. Spurgeon, can we not do some-
Tf so, let us not miss such a happiness.


What


situation and surroundings can do better for earnest, loving conversation with


our friends concerning the welfare of the soul?


A few words about the sea


of eternity and its great deeps, a sentence or two upon the broken shells and
our frailty, upon the Rock of Ages and the sands of time, may never be


forgotten.


II. A gracious call met by unquestioning obedience.—It is said that the
publicans had tenements or booths erected for them at the foot of bridges, at
the mouths of rivers, and by the seashore, where they plied their detested
craft—levying from thei countrvmen the dues of the conqueror, and adding


64


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK, CHAP. II.





insult to injury by the extortions they commonly practised. Doubtless ths
tax-office by the seashore of Capernaum was a very important one, and Levi
by this time a wealthy man adding daily to his gains, We need not suppose
this was his first encounter with Christ; he may already have been a disciple
in a general sense. But now the time has come for him to break away from
his old life altogether, to abandon his business and his riches, and to adopt
voluntary poverty for the rest of his life. It was a great sacrifice that was
demanded of him, and few who heard the call given would be prepared to
witness his ready obedience. From his case we may well learn to be very slow
in passing judgment on others: however unlikely their character and position
in life may appear to us, we know not what methods Christ may be employing
to lead them to Himself. From the example of Levi we learn also, that we
must be prepared to find our religion a costly thing. Had Levi replied, ‘“ Lord,
let me continue my profitable business for a while; be satisfied with the homage
of my heart,” surely Christ would have answered, ‘“‘ Whosoever there be of
you that forsaketh not all that he hath, and followeth after Me, he cannot
be My disciple.” Now what was required of Levi is required, in a certain
very real sense, of all. In every heart of man there is by nature the love of
riches, or of what riches will purchase: covetous desires; love of self-indulgence
in some shape or other; longings after something which is just beyond our
reach; allowing our minds to run upon schemes which we would carry out if
greater means were allowed, rather than reflecting what sort of use we make
of what we have already. These are the things we are required to renounce
(as Levi to give up his rich profession) for Christ’s sake.

III. A social meal marred by ignoble objections.—Levi’s first act is a
manifestation of gratitude. He is eager to extend to others a share of the
blessedness that has befallen himself. Accordingly he makes a great feast, and
invites his old associates and friends to meet the Master at his house, earnestly
desiring that they also may become followers of Christ. And the Master
understood and appreciated his motive. As the physician is found where
pain and sickness are, so Christ came to the dark, dull, ignorant, lost corners
of the earth. Anywhere would He sit down, in any company eat and drink,
especially in that of the most despised, because there He found those very souls,
the lost and the rejected of men, whom He came expressly to seek, and, if they
would, to save from themselves, and their own corrupt and miserable condition.
But certain “scribes of the Pharisees,” who, intent to pry into Christ’s private
life, had followed the guests into the dining-room (a common custom in the
East), were filled with indignation at His sitting down to meat with a whole
company of publicans, and that too (see ver. 18) on one of the fast days of the
week. ‘They must needs interpose with their crude criticisms. What cared
they that His very presence was medicinal—banishing foul words and thoughts
from all breasts save their own—bringing pure air and sunshine into the fetid
atmosphere—an outward and visible sign of Divine grace and love? All they
concerned themselves with was the maintenance of the barriers erected by their
narrow-minded, self-satisfied exclusiveness. They could not conceive of any one
sitting at meat with publicans and sinners from higher motives than the mere
enjoyment of social intercourse; it never occurred to them that what Christ
sought was not viands, but hearts—not to receive the meat that perisheth, but
to bestow the true bread from heaven which endureth unto eternal life. Crafty
cowards that they were, they uttered their cavil to the disciples rather than
to the Master Himself; but Christ at once accepted the challenge and set the
matter in the right light. Where else should the physician be found but in
the hospital? what else should he be doing but attending to the ailments of
his patients ?

F 65


CHAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
a a eevee


IV. Agreat claim advanced by the criticised Teacher.—‘“ In calling Him-
self the Physician of sick souls,” says Dean Chadwick, “Jesus made a startling
claim, which becomes more emphatic when we observe that He also quoted the
words of Hosea, ‘I will have mercy, and not sacrifice’ (Matt. ix. 13; Hos. vi. 6).
For this expression occurs in that chapter which tells how the Lord Himself
hath smitten and will bind us up. And the complaint is just before it, that
‘when Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim
to Assyria, and sent to King Jareb : but he is not able to heal you, neither shall
he cure you of your wound’ (Hos. v. 13—vi. 1). As the Lord Himself hath torn,
so He must heal. Now Jesus comes to that part of Israel which the Pharisees
despise for being wounded and diseased, and justifies Himself by words which
must, from their context, have reminded every Jew of the declaration that God
is the Physician, and it is vain to seek healing elsewhere. And immediately
afterwards He claims to be the Bridegroom, whom also Hosea spoke of as
Divine. Yet men profess that only in St. John does He advance such claims
that we should ask, ‘Whom makest Thou Thyself?’ Let them try the
experiment, then, of putting such words into the lips of any mortal.”

V. A pertinent question raised by puzzled friends.—It was a very different
spirit from that of the scribes which prompted John’s disciples (Matt. ix. 14)
to ask, ‘Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but Thy disciples fast not ?”
They were perplexed to find Jesus, whom their master had taught them to
regard with the deepest reverence, feasting on a fast day. They remembered,
perhaps, that in the Law the Day of Atonement was the only fast prescribed ;
and it may have begun to dawn upon them that there was more genuine
religion in the non-observance, on the part of Christ and His disciples, of the
elaborate system which had by this time degenerated into a pure formality,
than in their own strict adherence to it In reply Jesus takes the opportunity
to lay down the principle which should regulate all religious life and its
expression—the principle of naturalness, and not artificiality. “There is a time
to every purpose under heaven: a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time
to mourn, and a time to dance.” The Baptist himself had said, with reference
to Him, that “the friend of the Bridegroom, which standeth and heareth
Him, rejoiceth greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” To make that a
time of fasting-—when they were basking in the sunshine of the Bridegroom’s
presence-—would have been quite incongruous, if not hypocritical. And after all
no one need grudge them their day of gladness, for it would soon be succeeded by
the night of bereavement—“ and then shall they fast.” So, we know, it happened
in the Church’s earliest and purest time. When, e.g., Paul and Barnabas were
separated for the work to which the Holy Spirit had called them, the word
came to those who were “ ministering to the Lord and fasting” (Acts xiii. 2).
St. Paul ordained presbyters, after prayer with fasting (Acts xiv. 23); speaks
of himself as being “in fastings often” (2 Cor. xi. 27); and speaks of ministers
commending themselves to God “‘in labours, in watchings, and in fastings”
(2 Cor. vi. 5). And ever since fasting has been enjoined by the Church as the
natural expression of heartfelt contrition for sin, and a fit instrument for the
subjection of the lower to the higher nature; but not as a meritorious act
entitling him who practises it to the favour of God. This latter was the idea
with which fasting had become associated in the minds of the Jews; and in
order to stamp it with His disapproval.Christ adds the parables or similitudes
of the piece of new cloth, and of the new wine that must not be poured into old
bottles. Christians were indeed to fast, as Jews had fasted; but with them
the ordinance was to have a different and far higher significance. It was no
longer to be regarded as part of a law of works, part of a servile duty rendered
to a despot; it was now to be a spiritual sacrifice offered by spiritualmen to


66


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. II.





a spiritual Father, capable with His blessing to be the means of strengthening
and purifying the soul. Fitly, therefore, do we pray in the Collect for the First
Sunday in Lent, that God would give us grace to use such abstinence, that,
our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey His godly motions in
vighteousness and true holiness, to His honour and glory.


Ver. 17. Not the righteous, but sinners.—A motley crowd met at Levi's feast.
There were men of his own class—“ publicans”: the small district officers who
collected the tolls and customs for the great officials over them, who farmed the
taxes from the Roman Government; a greedy, extortionate set, whose main
object in life was to fill their own pockets by cheating those above and below
them alike. There were others present even less savoury than these to the
nostrils of the élite of Capernaum—“ sinners”: open transgressors who made
no pretence of virtue, but sinned as it were ‘“‘ with a cart-rope.” With such
companions, we are told, “Jesus sat at meat.” It was, then, we may be sure,
no riotous feast. Jesus was not lending His countenance to their sinful ways.
They had been induced to come to see and to hear this wonderful Teacher, and
in His presence (depend upon it) they were subdued, restrained, softened. No
one would take a liberty or say a vile word before Him. Christian charity would
have rejoiced to see these people so changed, even if but for the time. Yet
there were some near by who were terribly shocked at the sight. Instead of
feeling glad that so many sinners were on the road to amendment through
intercourse with Christ, they could only wonder that One so excellent would
adventure Himself into such evil company, and run the risk of legal pollution
in consequence. The great aim of most of these scribes and Pharisees, in
passing through the world, was to hold aloof from everything and everybody
that could contaminate them and render them ceremonially unclean. No
wonder they were scandalised at the scene in Levi’s house, and exclaimed,
“ How is it that He eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?” They
put their angry question to the disciples, but the Lord Himself took up the
challenge and gave them their answer. “They that are whole have no
need,” etc. They were silent. What could they reply? He whose conduct
they presumed to criticise had come as a Physician of souls: the idea was quite
new to them; they had never looked on publicans and sinners as people who
could be cured: of course it was just such depraved persons that were most in
need of a Physician. He had “come to call sinners to repentance ”: certainly
it was just people like those around Him that were most in need of such a call.
They, the scribes and Pharisees, were ‘the whole,” ‘the righteous”: the
Physician and the call were useless to them! _

I. Who are the “righteous” whom-Christ did not come to call?—l. The
expression has been taken to denote those who had truly reformed their lives,
and who carefully endeavoured to abstain from all known sin. But though
this may be a very correct definition of righteousness in general, it scarcely
applies here. Our Lord cannot have meant that there were persons living at
that time to whom the call to repentance—the very watchword of Christianity
—was altogether unnecessary ; for we know that “the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins” was ordained to be preached to all men without
exception. 2. There are two meanings which may be attached to the word
“righteous.” (1) It may have been used by Christ in a figurative sense,
without any reference to the actual state of the world, and without even the
supposition of there being any such persons as “the righteous” really in
existence. Thus His meaning may have been: “ You ask Me why I associate
with sinners. I answer, that My commission is to sinners. To them, and for
them,.I am sent. Righteousness is not the qualification required in those to


67


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.
LL SSS ee ne a nee


whom I am carrying relief. The righteous, therefore, if such there be, are not
included in My charge.” (2) It may have been intended to carry a reproachful
admonition to the hearts of the self-justifying Pharisees. ‘“ Yes, I do eat with
publicans and sinners. Amongst them, whose guilt is confessed, and who make
no pretence of sanctity, I may perhaps find the willing hearer, the patient
learner, and the penitent disciple. But upon you whose hear are blinded by
conceit—upon you whose minds are so fully occupied with admiration of your
own perfections that there is no room for anything else,—upon you My calls
to repentance would be lost; and therefore to you they need not be addressed.
Such an interpretation may seem inconsistent with the usual mildness of our
Lord’s discourse; but it corresponds with the style which He seems to have
invariably adopted in addressing the scribes and Pharisees, whose duplicity of
character and affectation of sanctity excited His constant displeasure and drew
down upon them His severest reprobation. :

II. What is the “repentance” to which Christ came to call sinners ?—
1. Repentance is sorrow for sin. The true servant of Christ must ever feel
a regret, a deep, abiding regret, that by his transgressions he has offended
a God to whom he is so greatly indebted. This feeling will accompany him
through life. He will never be found feeding his imagination with the fancied
virtues of his heart, or the supposed graces of his conduct. If he does well,
he thanks the God who enabled him to do it, and leaves it to that God to
accept his humble service—never forgetting that he has been, and is, a sinner.
2. Repentance is also amendment of life. He who regrets that he has sinned
will follow up that regret with endeavours to sin no more. Fixing his gaze
on the Divine standard of purity, he will strive unceasingly to attain to it. By
that standard he will repress his passions, model his desires, guide his judgment,
and correct his practice. 3. Repentance is, in short, a change of heart. The
whole tide of the penitent’s affections is reversed. He loves what he formerly
hated, and abhors that which was formerly his delight. Was he but lately
captivated with the charm of sinful pleasures? They are now his abomination.
Did he dislike and loathe the reasonable service of his Maker and Redeemer 2
He now finds in it his solace, his hope, and his ground of rejoicing. 4. But
is repentance the same in all minds? Far from it. To him who has long held
out against the kindly warnings of conscience, and resisted the gentle solicita-
tions of the Spirit of grace, which would have led him into the path of peace—
to him, in truth, repentance is a contest, a trial hard and sore, which may more
appropriately be called a “conversion.” His very principles of action, and the
whole temper of his mind, must undergo a complete transformation. But to
the avowed and sincere servant of Christ, who has never broken loose from the
hallowed circle in which he was placed at baptism, repentance is not a work
of so violent a nature; it rather proceeds with the quiet tenor of a gentle
stream, ruffled by an occasional unevenness. The mind of the faithful Christian
needs not the severe penance of the hackneyed sinner; yet has it reason to
be often looking back, confessing its errors, rectifying its conduct, and taking
refuge in the “ Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness.”

III. Consider the necessity and reasonableness of repentance as a condition
affixed to salvation—1. God could not, consistently with every part of His
Divine character, bestow eternal life on sinners without repentance. Wisdom,
Justice, compassion, holiness—all the attributes of Deity—are equally concerned
in this work. No measure, therefore, however gracious in its tendency, must
be adopted at the suggestion of one of these attributes which may by any
possibility interfere with the free exercise of another. A God of mercy may
forgive ; but a God of wisdom, justice, holiness, must (so to speak) deliberate
as to the manner and measure of His forgiveness. Scripture, therefore, in

68


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: “ST. MARK, CHAP. II.





declaring repentance to be indispensably necessary to salvation, declares that
which we can ourselves see to be alone worthy of the Great God, the Giver of
all law, and the Just Judge of all the earth. 2. Could we conceive the Son of
God, in His capacity of Mediator, interposing His merciful intercession between
offended Majesty and unrepentant sinners? A mediator is bound as much
to protect the honour of one party as to promote the mterests of the other.
How then could Jesus, with due regard for His Father’s dignity, plead for
creatures who still persisted in their rebellion against Him? How could He
present His own blood and His own righteousness in behalf of those who still
delighted in the enormities which brought Him to the Cross? What would this
be but to betray the honour of the Eternal Father, to prostitute the merits
of His own death, and to defeat the whole end and purpose of His atonement ?
3. The same truth is equally manifest with reference to the sinner himself.
For without that alteration and improvement in temper and habits, which by
the Holy Spirit is wrought in us through repentance, heaven itself would possess
no attraction for fallen man. There would be an absolute contradiction between
the nature of the happiness and the person to be admitted toit. The future
life of glory is no scene of carnal or corporeal delights—no place of enjoyment
for the senses. Its beauties are all of the moral kind; its pleasures such as
the spiritually-minded, and none others, can appreciate. The objects of those
pleasures are God, ourselves, and our fellow-creatures made perfect with us.
The state of the soul will then be such as results from a virtuous and well-
governed will, and a noble command of all the inclinations and affections—from
an exalted understanding, an enlarged knowledge of God, His attributes and
works, and a perfect perception of His wonderful dispensations of wisdom and
mercy towards His creatures—from the love of Him, and the ever-pleasing
sense of being beloved by Him. ‘This is to be happy, because this is to be good.
The contrary state—the state of unrepented sin—is misery, be one’s outward
circumstances what they may. Heaven itself could not remedy the evil. The
one and only source of relief is a change of disposition, of principles, of practices
—in one word, repentance.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 14. Levi — Matthew. — There
can be no question that the “ Levi”
of the Second and Third Gospels is the
“ Matthew ” whom the First Evangel-
ist mentions so modestly (Matt. ix. 9).
The previous occupation is the same;
the call is the same, in time, place,
manner, and result; the feast is the
same, the guests and spectators, the
questions and answers. That our
Lord should have bestowed upon Levi
the additional name Matthew—“ gift
of God ”—is in accordance with what
we are told of most of the other
apostles. Respecting his previous
history we know nothing; but it is
reasonable enough to suppose that,
like Peter, Andrew, James, John, and
Philip, he had been under the instruc-


tion and discipline of the Baptist, and
so was not by any means indifferent
to religion. For indications that there
had been some unusual religious move-
ment among the publicans as a class,
see Matt. xxi. 31; Luke ii. 12, 13,
vii. 29.

“‘ Sitting at the receipt of custom.” —
1. In business. (1) Exacting more than
is fair from employées. (2) Bestowing
too great assiduity on the amassing
of wealth, to the detriment of both
body and soul. 2. In general behaviour.
Pride and ambition—demanding obeis-
ance and deference, instead of practising
the virtues of humility and meekness.
3. In domestic concerns. Expecting
all household arrangements to fit in
exactly with one’s own convenience


69


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








or caprice. 4, In pleasure. Greedily
pursuing things that cannot bestow
lasting happiness.

Incidental services to men.—There
is here a lesson to us, that we are
to be always on the outlook for the
good of men whom we are passing by
in the various ways of life. Where-
ever we see a man we see an oppor-
tunity of speaking a word for Christ,
and of calling men to a higher life.
Courage and prudence are equally
required in the discharge of these
incidental services. There is a modesty
that is immodest, and there is a for-
wardness which is but the courage of
humility.— J. Parker, D.D.

The greatness of Divine grace, which
can make of a publican an apostle.
1. According to Jewish traditionalism,
the publican was an excommunicated
person ; but he is now called to assist
in founding the communion of Christ.
2. He was an apostate from the people
of God; but called to be one of the
pillars of the Church of God. 3. He
was an instrument of oppression; but
becomes an instrument of glorious
liberty. 4. He was a stumbling-block
and a byword; but becomes a burning
and a shining light.—/. P. Lange, D.D.

Christ’s diligence an incentive to us..—
Gracious Lord, how diligent art Thou
in doing good! how negligent are we
in receiving it !—who art fain to look
us out, and often makest that which
seems mere chance to be a blessed
occasion to us of spiritual improvement
and of eternal assurance, and turnest
accidents into special instances of love
and intimacy, if we do but as we
should do, regard Thy goings, observe
Thy looks, and obey Thy calls.—
A. Lnttleton, D.D.

The Divine call.—God has created
us by His power, and designed us by
His wisdom, and preserves us by His
mercy for greater and nobler ends than
to serve the wicked world and sinful
flesh ; nor is He wanting by His grace
to afford every one sufficient means for
his spiritual conduct. He passeth by
us often when we are not aware of
Him; He looks upon us and we see


70


Him not; and He calls us by checks
of our own conscience, by motions of
His Holy Spirit, and by the preaching
of His Word: but we stop our ears
against Him, and will not hear; and
when He cries to us, “‘ Follow Me,” we
sit still and mind Him not. Oh, let us
open our eyes to behold Him, our ears
to hear Him, and our hearts to receive
Him !—Jbid.


Ver. 15. Levi's feast.—1. The grati-
tude of the believing heart for the bless-
ings of salvation will manifest itself in
gifts to the Lord :—Zaccheus; Mary
of Bethany; the woman that was a
sinner; Lydia; the converts on the
day of Pentecost. 2. The earnest
believer will not be ashamed to confess
Christ before his former associates
and fellow-workmen. The Church has
great need of men like Hedley Vicars,
who laid down his Bible on the mess
room table in the presenceof his brother-
officers, as an unmistakable token of
the change that had come over him.
3. The converted man will be anxious
about the conversion of others. He
goes forth as Christ’s soldier to win
captives from the enemy. Naturally
he begins the campaign nearest home.
4. The Christian religion, in order to
accomplish its glorious mission, must
descend to the most degraded, and by
its own inherent power raise them up.


Ver. 17. Who are “ the righteous” ?—
A glance at a concordance will prove
that both Old and New Testaments
constantly speak of men as “righteous.”
God loves to give us credit for being
that which He foresees us capable of
becoming, even though we have got
only a few steps on the road as yet.
“The righteous” are simply those
whose intention is pure. Sinners we
all are, and must be; but wilful sinners
we need not be. We may have been
thoughtless many a time, and, in con-
sequence, surprised into folly and sin;
but if we at once own and lament our
frailty, He is not extreme to mark
what is done amiss; and whilst by His
grace we keep ourselves from pre-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,





sumptuous sin (Ps. xix. 13) our names
are enrolied among the righteous, and
He imputes not our iniquities to us.

The Divine Physician.—1. Sin is
sickness of the most dangerous kind.
2. Repentance is the first step towards
the healing of the soul. 3. Christ is
the soul’s Physician, for whose skill no
case is too hard. 4. The more grave
our state, the more anxious is Christ
to restore us to spiritual health.

How to do good.—From this answer
we may see—l. Duty of doing good
avowedly—not going about it in an
indirect manner, as if we were making
an experiment, but boldly and dis-
tinctly, approaching it with a set pur-
pose of spending our best energy upon
it. 2. We may see it to be our duty
to go to those who are least cared
jor. We are only working in the line
of the Saviour’s mission as we begin
at the very lowest point in the social
scale. We cannot do fundamental
-and permanent good by beginning at
the top or in the middle; we must get
down to springs and causes, we must


CHAP. II.


begin at the very deepest point of
human apostasy and work our way
steadily upward; there is a temptation
even in Christian work to stop short
of the lowest depth of human necessity.
3. Jesus Christ shows it to be our
duty to associate with those whom we
seek to save: He sat with them, He
talked to them, He asked them ques-
tions, He made Himself their personal
friend, and so attained over them
personal supremacy. This practice
levels a deadly blow at the theory of
doing good by proxy. It is compara-
tively easy to send other men on errands
of mercy, but we are only working in
Christ’s spirit in so far as we are
prepared to go ourselves and openly
identify our whole influence with the
cause of fallen men. Where there is
this intense personal consecration, there
will, of course, be a disposition to
engage as much co-operation as pos-
sible; our duty is to see that we do
not find in co-operation an excuse for
personal negligence.—J. Parker, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—22.


(Paratuets: Marr. ix. 14-17; Luxe v. 33-39.)


“The children of the bridechamber.”—Marriage, if any time, is a season of
festivity and joy. To promote these purposes is the object of inviting certain
friends of the bride and bridegroom to attend its celebration. To fast or assume
a stern aspect on such an occasion would be little short of an insult. Now
Christ here compares Himself to the bridegroom, and His disciples to these


companions or friends.


The Baptist had suggested the same comparison before


(John iii. 29). His disciples stood and heard Him all the time of His sojourning


upon earth, and rejoiced greatly because of His voice.


That was their holiday-


time. If it was not so to the world at large, to the Pharisees, etc., it was


because they were not of the Bridegroom’


Ss party.


I. The character of Christians, as “children of the bridechamber.’—This


implies—l. Dignity. This is an honour
to his wedding are not merely his friends,


to honour.


able office.
but such friends as he specially delights
‘And are not Christians highly honoured by being chosen out of


Those whom a man invites


the rest of mankind to receive “the light of the knowledge,” ete. (2 Cor. iv. 6)?


See also 1 Pet. ii. 9; John xv. 16.


“This honour have all His saints,” by the


mere circumstance of their election ; but this is greatly enhanced if we consider


what it is they are elected to (Rom. viii. 17).


The “children of the bride-


chamber,” though they performed many personal offices for the bridegroom,
were yet far from being considered in the light of menials, but rather of equals
and companions; and so says the Saviour to His disciples (John xv. 14, 15).


71


CHAP, II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


s—*





2. Subordination to and entire dependence upon Christ. The “children of the
bridechamber” have no existence but in relation to the bridegroom (John iii. 29).
Even so Christians are absolutely nothing without Christ (John xv. 5). What
a ridiculous character is a friend of the bridegroom thrusting himself forward
as a principal person, acting an independent part, pretending to be something
when he is nothing, instead of taking every opportunity of exalting and magni-
fying the bridegroom, even at his own expense! And such is the Christian who
glories in himself, or fails to refer everything to his Lord and Master. 3. Duties
and responsibilities. The “children of the bridechamber” must be always in
waiting. While the term of their service lasts they are a part of the family,
and the bridegroom’s house is their home. So Christians attend continually
upon the Saviour ;. “follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth” ; wait on Him
in the way of His judgments, ordinances, sacraments; ever “looking unto
Jesus,” and conforming their life and temper to the example set by Him.

II. The general temper of Christians, as rejoicing in the Lord always
(ver. 19).—1. The presence of the Divine Bridegroom, the converse of Him who
spake as never man spake, was to our Lord’s immediate followers as a continual
feast. 2. The same should now be true of Christians in general; for although,
in one sense, the Bridegroom is taken away from us, where is He? See 1 Pet.
iii. 22. This cannot be the “taking away” to which He refers, as an occasion
of mourning to His friends; since He Himself said, at another time (John
xiv. 28). Not only if we love Him, but if we love ourselves, we shall rejoice at
this temporary separation. Whatever accession of dignity or influence accrues
to the Bridegroom, His friends are sure to reap the benefit of it. Nor, because
He is in heaven, is He the less present with us on earth. This is a great
mystery, but an infallible and most comfortable truth. See John xiv. 18, 19;
Matt. xxviii. 20. ;

III. The occasional seasons when Christians mourn and fast.—l. This
cannot refer to any temporal afflictions; for we are expressly told that no
worldly tribulation or distress is able to separate us from the Saviour ; but that
it isin the nature of such things rather to endear Him to us the more, and to
make us the more worthy of His love. 2. We must therefore understand by
these words times of spiritual trouble and heaviness, such as will occasionally
happen, in this imperfect state, even to those who have the best reason to
“abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost.” The Bridegroom
Himself had such seasons. See Matt. iv. 1,2; Mark xiv. 33-36. It is evident,
then, that our spiritual garments will not be always white, and that tears may
be shed in a bridal chamber. Let us, at such seasons, have recourse to the
divinely appointed means of grace, in the assured confidence that, if rightly
improved, these occasional interruptions of our wonted cheerfulness will minister
to our more abundant consolation in the end. 3. Hitherto we have had in
view those dark and distressing times of the soul which come unsought, of which
we cannot give a satisfactory account, and which it is our duty as much as
possible to bear up against. Other times there arerwhen we should rather
invite than resist the entrance of sad thoughts into our hearts. The solemn
season of Lent is one of these, and especially the Holy Week with which it
ends, when we commemorate the Passion and Death of our Redeemer.


Fasting.—It is quite clear, to start with, that no practice of this kind can
be an end in itself; it must be a means: equally clear that it must be a
spiritual means to a spiritual end—a means by which the spirit may control.
the body, so as to fashion it into its noble destiny of being a spiritual body ;
that so the whole man may be moulded for the service, and, in some sense,
into the likeness, of God, who is a Spirit. ;


72





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. If.
ee a SNe ed Ds Ed Sea ee ee ae se a


_ I. It is a method of bodily discipline —It aims at making us like God, who
is a Spirit, and who, as such, is superior to and able to control material things.
It trains us in the power of detachment, in the power of saying “No,” not only
to the sins of the flesh, but to its indulgences; it recalls the command, “ Seek
ye jirst the kingdom of God,” and the example, “My meat is to do the will
of Him that sent Me”; it keeps the body braced for action, and prevents
luxuries from growing into necessities. It is in St. Leo’s favourite phrase
a “presidium,” a protection to the spirit against the encroachments of the
body—asking us, with importunate persistency, whether we have our body well
in hand, whether we should be ready for a call to do missionary work in some
part of the Master’s kingdom which is not yet civilised. We need this protection
for our own sakes, with its reminder of the need of fasting from all sin; and
we need it also for the sake of the poor and of the Church, that we may have
the means and the will to help their necessities. It is interesting to note that,
in the recently discovered Apology of Aristides, one of the characteristics
attributed to the early Christians is that, if they have not enough money to help
a poor brother, they fast two or three days, that they may supply the needy with
their necessary food; and St. Leo constantly insists on the duty of a liberal
benevolence being the accompaniment of fasting. Detachment, bodily discipline,
sympathy with the poor, liberality—these are virtues which spring from fasting ;
yet most assuredly fasting did not spring from the desire for them. We shall
miss its true value if we stop at these. We must go deeper still.

II. It is also the expression of sorrow—and, for the Christian, of sorrow for
sin: it becomes thus a great training in the true nature of penitence and the
right purposes of sorrow. Why was it that our Lord expected His apostles to
fast? It was because He was to be taken away from them. And why was He
taken away? Because of sin. The Incarnation, which might have been like
a perpetual joyous intercourse of Bridegroom and bride, was marred and checked
by sin. And in what sense can the Bridegroom be said to be taken away from
us now, so that we should mourn? He is gone wherever our sin has grieved
His Spirit and driven Him from our hearts. The Christian life should be one
of joyous service, of conscious spiritual communion with the Master; and who
can say how different it is for many of us, with selfishness and ill-will marring
its beauty, so that we get only now and then faint glimpses of what a loyal and
loving service of the Master might be? Now the reason of this is sin, our own
sin, our past sin, our present sin, whereby we have crucified the Son of God
afresh. Friday has to be a Good Friday in every week, giving us time and
quiet to learn “that individual and detailed knowledge of our own personal
sinfulness, whence the real love of our Redeemer can alone flow.” The most
fatal enemy of the spiritual life is self-complacency, and the recurring fast day
is our protection against this ; “the wound of our just remorse needeth touching ”
very often. We need to be reminded that nothing less than the Death of the
Son of God was sufficient to redeem us from our sins, that those sins were real
acts of our own will affecting our whole nature, so that we can never be as
though we had not sinned, but must always be penitent before God, always on
our guard against the temptations which have proved fatal to us, prepared
beforehand for any suffering which God may send us in consequence of our sins,
and willing to welcome it as His means of purifying our souls. It is not—God
forbid !—that the atonement on the Cross was insufficient; but it is that we
ought to feel and act as those whom He has redeemed, to share His hatred
for sin, to war against it actively in our own persons—to be like our God,
who is a consuming fire.

III. The reason for common Church fasts on fixed days—George Herbert
has tersely put it, “The Scriptures bid us fast, the Church says now ”; and the

73





CHAP. W.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Be


reason for this is not only that so brother helps brother to keep up his spiritual


life, and that the common action of th


e Church is more prevailing with God,


like its common prayer, but it is also a reminder that we have to be not self-
centred in our penitence, but to fast and sorrow for the sins and shortcomings


of the whole Church.


IV. Fasting does not end in itself; it is always in the Church’s system


a preparation.


century.
the Holy Communion.
Communion. After Lent comes Easter.


It was the preparatio


n for baptism as early as the second
An almost universal instinct has regarded it as the fit approach to
After Friday comes Sunday with


its worship and
This fact seems to say: grief, weak-


ness, sin—these are not the end. We sorrow that we may know the power of


the Resurrection; we feel the touch of


luman weakness that we may rest on


spiritual strength, and know that power is perfected in weakness ; we recall our


sinfulness that we may realise the love of the Atonement.


Fasting does for us


the work which that good man, the clergyman, did for the simple maiden in


Tennyson’s poem :
And it keeps joy Christian.
tian grief.
of righteousness.


If we have mourned


“ He showed me all the mercy, for he showed me all the sin.”
Christian joy has to stand in relation to Chris-
If we have learnt to grieve for sin, we shall rejoice for the triumph
for the failures of the Church, our joy


will rise above selfish family prosperity into delight in the progress of the


Church.
V. Two words of caution.





1. Remember Mr. Keble’s advice, “Keep a


medical conscience, either in your own bosom or in that of some friend who may
be trusted.” “Fasting sometimes causes a distressing reaction: if you have
reason to fear that, you had better use hard and unpleasant diet than actually


going without.”


2. It was especially in connexion with fasting that our Lord


insisted on the break with the old spirit of Judaism. Our fasting may not be


a mere form—a desire to win God’s favour-—a trust in ourselves.


It must be


done in love and gratitude, with desire to imitate our Lord, with prayer to Him
that it may be united with His fasting, and get all its virtue from Him.—


W. Lock.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 18. A common evil._—tt is a
Pharisaic and very common evil that
men are very much more troubled
about setting others right in their
living than about correcting their
own.—-Starke.

The busybody begins by talking about
others, and comes afterwards to him-
self, but makes the best of his own
case (1 Tim. iv. 8).—P. Quesnel.

All men not alike.—It is spiritual
pride when, in matters which God has
left to our freedom, people try to make
others regulate themselves’ by their
rules. What benefits one man’s soul
may harm another’s.


Ver. 20. The right use and end of
fasting—When godly and well-dis-
74


posed persons observe such days of
abstinence in a right manner, and to
a right end; when they look upon
fasting not as an essential part of
natural or revealed religion, but only
as an auxiliary or instrumental duty ;
when they do not rest init as abso-
lutely and in itself good, but make
use of it as a proper help for the
better performance of those duties,
which are strictly and properly acts
of religious worship; when they do
not acquiesce in the bare outward
performance of this duty, or think
they have discharged it as they ought,
till by the use of these means, and
God’s blessing upon them, they have
attained those graces, to which these
means ought to be subservient ; when


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IL





they strive thereby to mortify the
flesh, and to subdue the lusts thereof,
to spiritualise the soul, and to dispose
it for more exalted acts of devotion ;
when to these ends they choose to set
apart those days which they find have
been set apart to the same ends by the
generality of Christians in all ages;
when they are willing to keep up a
custom which they find hath been
kept up by all or by most of the
Churches of God; when they dutifully
comply with the usages of that Church
in which they live, and are afraid of
despising the lawful commands of their
superiors; when, how strict soever
they are towards themselves, they are
not rigorous in their censures of others
who do not think themselves bound to
the same observances; when they do
not hope by abstinence at some times
of the year to compound for criminal
excesses at other times, but are tem-
perate and sober through the whole
course of their lives, and at some
stated periods sequester themselves
more than usually from the business
and from the pleasures of this world,
that they may more freely and un-
interruptedly attend to the concerns
of the next; when they are in their
consciences fully persuaded that one
day or one meat of itself is not more
holy, more pure, or more clean than
another, but that all days and all
meats be of their own nature of one
equal purity, cleanness, and holiness,
and yet on some days abstain from
some meats not as in themselves un-
lawful, but as less subservient to the
keeping under the body and bringing
it into subjection; when they do not
rigorously tie themselves up to fixed
and unchangeable rules, from which
they may in no case swerve, to the
ensnaring and perplexing of their con-
sciences, but in things of themselves
indifferent use such a latitude as may
neither entrench too much on Christian
liberty, nor on the other side open a
gap to licentiousness,—when, I say,
sober, judicious, and devout Christians
observe the fasts of the Church with
these cautions, restrictions, and limita-


tions, such an observance cannot be
justly accused of superstition, cannot
indeed be condemned without super-
stition. Such an abstinence as this
our Church recommends; such, if we
shall practise with the same intentions,
with the same piety and moderation,
as she recommends it, we shall thereby
reap great benefit to our souls, and the
better prepare and dispose them for
the reception of God’s grace here, and
the communication of His glory in the
world to come.—Bishop Smalridge.


Ver. 21. Consequences of false con-
servatism in the Church.—1. These
attempts at tailoring in spiritual
matters are opposed even to common
sense and every-day practice. 2. The
old forms are destroyed by the new
life, and the new life by the old forms.
3. The work of destruction is continued
while they clamour against destruction,
until the new and the old are finally
separated.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

The threefold mark of the new life.—
1. It assumes a definite outward form.
2. It cannot continue in the false and
antiquated forms. 3. It must create
for itself corresponding forms.—ZJbid.


Ver. 22. Form and spirit—As the
wineskin retains the wine, so are feel-
ings and aspirations aided, and even
preserved, by suitable external forms.
Without these emotion would lose
itself for want of restraint, wasted,
like spilt wine, by diffuseness. And
if the forms are unsuitable and out-
worn, the same calamity happens—the
strong, new feelings break through
them, ‘‘and the wine perisheth, and
the skins.” In this respect how many
a sad experience of the Church attests
the wisdom of her Lord; what losses
have been suffered in the struggle
between forms that had stiffened into
archaic ceremonialism and new zeal de-
manding scope for its energy— between
the antiquated phrases of a bygone age
and the new experience, knowledge,
and requirements of the next—between
the frosty precisions of unsympathetic
age and the innocent warmth and


75


CHAP, IL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Ske aig ga ee SO ee ee


freshness of the young, too often, alas!
lost to their Master in passionate
revolt against restraints which He
neither imposed nor smiled upon.—
Dean Chadwick.

Christian development.—The old
stage-coaches could not have been
utilised for steam-engines; the new


thoughts respecting locomotion re-
quired new machinery. So did the
thoughts of Christ require new habits
and practices. These were not fully
initiated by Christ, but He laid down
the basis of all subsequent Christian
development.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 23—2o.


(Paratiets: Marr. xii. 1-8; Luke vi. 1-5.)


The Sabbath and its Lord.—The malignity of the Pharisees being now fully
aroused by Christ’s disregard of their scrupulosities and conventionalities, they
are henceforth to be found constantly dogging His steps, watching His every
action, catching up His every word, in order that His influence with the people
may be neutralised, or at least lessened, Especially on the Sabbath were they
careful to shadow Him wherever He went, for there was no clearer proof of
is divergence from current tradition than as regards the observance of the


rest-day.


“On no other subject,” says Dr. Edersheim, “1s Rabbinic teaching


more painfully minute and more manifestly incongruous to its professed object.
For if we rightly apprehend what underlay the complicated and intolerably
burdensome laws of Pharisaic Sabbath observance, it was to secure, negatively,
absolute rest from all labour, and, positively, to make the Sabbath a delight.
The Mishnah includes Sabbath desecration among those most heinous crimes
for which a man was to be stoned. This, then, was their first care: by a series
of complicated ordinances to make a breach of the Sabbath rest impossible.


The next object was, in a similarly external manner,
A special Sabbath dress, the best that could be procured; the


a delight.


to make the Sabbath


choicest food, even though a man had to work for it all the week, or public
charity were to supply it,—such were some of the means by which the day was
to be honoured, and men were to find pleasure therein. The strangest stories
are told how, by the purchase of the most expensive dishes, the pious poor had
gained unspeakable merit, and obtained, even on earth, Heaven’s manifest
reward. And yet, by the side of these and similar strange and sad misdirections
of piety, we come also upon that which is touching, beautiful, and even


spiritual.


On the Sabbath there mu


st be no mourning, for to the Sabbath


applies this saying : “The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and He addeth


no sorrow with it” (Prov. x. 22). The object which Rabbinism vainly strove
to attain by the multiplication of restrictions, Christ set Himself to accomplish
by a totally different method. Brushing aside all later accretions of tradi-


tionalism, He provoked the inquiry,
of the Sabbath ?


What was the original law and design


I. The accusation by the Pharisees.—Right gladly would they have accused
the disciples of theft, had there been the slightest vestige of excuse for doing so ;
but the law made express provision for the satisfying of hunger when passing


through corn-fields (Deut. xxiii. 25).
of this merciful provision on
it did. According to them,


But that any one should take advantage
the Sabbath horrified them—or they pretended
such an action involved at least two sins: the


plucking the ears was equivalent to reaping, the rubbing in the hands to sifting


or winnowing !


And yet, had the owner of the field wanted, in harvest-time,


to shift any of his sheaves, he had only to lay on each a spoon in common


ne
(3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IL.
ed et ee


use, when, in order to remove the spoon, he might also remove the sheaf on
which it lay! To men who spent their time in the invention and study of
puerilities of this kind, it mattered nothing that the disciples were really hungry,
and that abstinence would occasion far greater unrest of body and mind than
the infinitesimal exertion of plucking and rubbing a few earsof corn. “Sabbath
means rest—rest of spirit as well as of body—rest from all that is carnal
and selfish, and the surrender of the whole being to God in spiritual worship.
But these zealots were restless in their endeavours to overcome One whom they
hated, and their hearts were rankling with jealousy and envy, instead of
swelling with praise and prayer.” How pitiful it is when men seek to substitute
elaborate ceremonial for the sacrifice of the inner being !

II. The answer of our Lord.—Christ meets the objectors on their own
ground, and shows how, even if it were admitted that the disciples had broken
the letter of the law (which they had not done, but only the Rabbinic gloss),
they were amply justified in doing so. An eminent scholar, on being asked his
opinion of certain classical editors, once replied, “They know the rules; but
they do not know when the rules are right, and when they are wrong.” So
it was with these Pharisees. They had every minutest detail of the Mosaic Law
at their fingers’ ends, so far as the mere letter was concerned ; and even their
excessive zeal in interpreting and expanding its provisions need not have led
to any serious harm, had they only exercised the same care with respect to
its spiritual side. But this they had now lost sight of altogether. Christ,
therefore, in His reply, ignoring all minor issues, insistence upon which would
only have been certain to prejudice and embitter them still further, brings
them face to face with the great principle which they themselves admitted—that
when two laws clash, the higher one overrides the lower. “A single Rabbinic
prohibition is not to be heeded,” they said, “where a graver matter is in
question.” Bearing this in mind, we can see how impregnable was the position
that Christ took up on behalf of His disciples. David and his followers, when
at extremity, had eaten the shewbread, which it was not lawful for them to
rat, but only for the priests, and yet they were held blameless, Jewish tradition
vindicating their conduct on the plea that “danger of life superseded the law.”
From St. Matthew (xii. 5) we learn that our Lord followed this up with
another argument drawn from the Temple usages. ‘ What,” He asks, “were
the multiplied sacrifices, and incense-burnings, and washings, but so many
breaches of the letter of the law? Had they not given birth to the proverb,
‘There is no Sabbatical rest observed in the sanctuary’?—and yet no one
ever thought of blaming the priests.” Nor does any blame attach to the
disciples, who were but acting upon the same principle—that the greater
obligation overrules the lesser, that all ceremonial observance is subordinate
to human necessity, that God prefers mercy to sacrifice.

III. The true law of Sabbath observance.—1. “The Sabbath was made.”
The setting apart of one day in seven for rest from labour and special religious
effort is no haphazard arrangement of human invention, but God’s own
beneficent gift to His weary creatures. It is stamped with Divine sanctity
and authority. 2. ‘“‘The Sabbath was made for man ”—to subserve his highest
interests and promote his spiritual welfare. Now since man is a complex
creature, with a tripartite nature (1 Thess. v. 23), it is necessary to provide
for him as such, not ignoring either his physical or his social or his religious
needs, otherwise the end for which the Sabbath was made will be frustrated.
It is related in the life of a pious Presbyterian minister of this generation,
how his home looked upon a public park in the suburbs of a crowded city,
and how, when he saw some of his fellow-citizens taking a quiet walk for the
sake of fresh air and innocent relaxation on a Sunday afternoon, he wondered


17


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


that the earth did not open her mouth and swallow them up! The same
spirit was manifested by the inhabitants of St.Kilda a few years ago, when
they subjected some shipwrecked people to agonies of hunger rather than
permit a ship, with provisions on board, to land on what they called “the
Sabbath,” i.e. the Lord’s Day! Well might they have been asked, ‘‘ Have ye
never read what the Lord’s disciples did, when they had need and were hungry ;
how, going through the corn-fields on the Sabbath, they plucked the ears of
corn, and rubbed them in their hands, and ate; and how the Lord defended
them for so doing, and declared that the Sabbath is not man’s master, but
his servant 2” And as to the other instance mentioned of Sabbatic intolerance,
may we not say, with Dean Luckock, that it is not only permissible but a
manifest duty to furnish the masses with the means of bodily recreation, and
to draw them from their squalid homes into pure air which will invigorate
the frame; and no less a duty to elevate their tastes, to offer them, as far as
possible, variety of scene and relief from the monotony of their daily drudgery ?

IV. The supremacy of the Son of Man over the Sabbath.—“The Son of
Man is Lord even of the Sabbath”; and as its Lord He exercises the right
to eliminate from it all that is merely Judaic, and to re-establish it in its
original simplicity and benignity. During His earthly ministry He makes
it the day not of idle self-contemplation, but of gracious words and blessed
deeds. Then after death—His mission to the spirits in Hades having been
accomplished on the Sabbath (1 Pet. ii. 18-20, iv. 6)—He chooses the first
day of the week for His resurrection ; and that day has ever since been
observed by His followers as the Lord’s Day—His peculiar possession, and
their peculiar privilege—a day which is a thousand times more precious and
sacred to them than the Sabbath could ever be to a Jew. The Sabbath was
but the shadow of good things yet to come; on the Lord’s Day especially
(though far from exclusively) the believer realises that these good things have
now come, and that he is already a partaker of them in Christ. He therefore
regards the weekly rest-day as a boon of unspeakable value, for which he is
indebted to his Saviour. To him, indeed, all days are equally holy : he does
not imagine for a moment that God requires of him a better service or a purer
soul on one than on another; but while striving to serve God truly all the
days of his life, he thanks God particularly for every opportunity afforded
him of withdrawing for a season from the turmoil of worldly business, and
devoting himself without distraction to the things of the Lord.


Vers. 23-28. The Sabbath and the Lord’s Day.—t. The first principle embodied
in the Lord’s Day is the duty of consecrating a certain proportion of time, at
least one-seventh, to the especial service of God. This principle is common to the
Jewish Sabbath and to the Christian Lord’s Day. ‘‘ Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath Day” means for us Christians, ‘‘ Remember that thou keep
holy one day in seven.” Keep the day holy ; consecrate it. Such consecration
implies two things: a separation of the thing consecrated from all others, and
the communication to it of a quality of holiness or purity. To this idea of the
especial consecration of a section of time, it is objected that in a true Christian
life all time is consecrated. The answer is that the larger obligation of love is
not ignored because the smaller one of duty is insisted on. All a Christian’s
time is properly consecrated time; but practically, in many cases, none would
be consecrated unless an effort were made to mark a certain proportion of it
by a special consecration. The case is parallel to that of prayer. Our Lord
says that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. The apostle says, “ Pray
without ceasing.” And the life of a good Christian is, no doubt, a continuous
prayer: the spirit of prayer penetrates and hallows it; each duty is inter-


78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. II.





twined with acts of the soul which raise it above this earthly scene to the
throne and presence of Christ. But, for all that, in all Christian lives stated
times of prayer, private as well as public, are practically necessary, if the
practice of prayer is to be consistently maintained. And in like manner the
especial consecration of one day in seven does not involve an implied rejection
of the rights of Jesus Christ over alt Christian time. It is like those small
payments known to the law, which do not profess to give an equivalent for that
which they represent, but only technically to acknowledge a much larger claim ;
it implies that all our time belongs to God, although, considering our weakness,
He graciously accepts a prescribed instalment or section of it. And apart
from its importance in the life of the servants of God, the public setting apart
of a certain measure of time to God’s service is a witness to His claims borne
before the world, and calculated to strike the imaginations of men. From this
point of view, our English Sunday, whatever may be said about mistakes in the
detail of its observance, is a national blessing. It brings the existence and claims
of God before the minds even of those who do not make a good use of it. And
religious foreigners have not seldom told us that it fills them with envy and
admiration ; and that we shall do well to guard that which, once lost, is certain
to be well-nigh, if not altogether, irrecoverable.

II. A second principle represented in the Lord’s Day is the periodical sus,
pension of human toil. This is closely connected with that of the consecration
of time. In order to make the day, by this prohibition, unlike other days, in
order to make room for the acknowledgment of God on it, ordinary occupa-
tions are suspended. Here again we have a second principle common to the
Jewish Sabbath and to the Christian Lord’s Day. In the Old Testament a
variety of particular occupations are explicitly forbidden: on the Sabbath:
sowing and reaping, gathering wood and kindling a fire for cooking, holding
markets, every kind of trade, pressing grapes, carrying any sort of burden. In
a later age the Pharisees added largely to these prohibitions. They held it
unlawful to pluck an ear of corn in passing through a corn-field, or to assist
and relieve the sick ; although they ruled that an animal which had fallen into
a ditch might be helped out, that guests might be invited to an entertainment,
and that a child of eight days old might be circumcised. There were thirty-
nine Rabbinical prohibitions on the Sabbath, of which one limited a Sabbath-
day’s journey to two thousand cubits, and another forbade killing even the most
dangerous vermin, while a third proscribed the use of a wooden leg, or a crutch,
ora purse. These and other prohibitions illustrate the tendency of mere law
to become, sooner or later, through excessive technicality, the caricature and
the ruin of moral principle. And it was against these Pharisaic perversions of
the Sabbath that our Lord protested by act and word, reminding His country-
men that the Sabbath was made for the moral good of man, and not man for
the later legal theory of the Sabbath. But the broad principle of abstinence
from labour, however misrepresented in the later Jewish practice, was itself
sacred; and it passed into the Christian observance of the Lord’s Day. We see
this plainly in notices of the observance in the early times of the Christian
Church. Thus Tertullian, writing at the end of the second century, calls the
day both Sunday and the Lord’s Day; says that it is a day of joy, and that to
fast on it is wrong; yet adds that “business is put off on it, lest we give place
to the devil.” And thus when, under Constantine, the Imperial Government
had acknowledged the faith of Christ, and Christianity made itself felt in the
principles of legislation, provision was very soon made for the observance of the
Lord’s Day. Even four years before the Council of Nicza, Constantine issued
an edict ordering the judges, the town populations, the artists and tradesmen
of all kinds, to cease from labour on the Lord’s Day. He allows agricultural


a9


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,
er eee


labour to go on, if the safety of crops or the health of cattle depends on it.
And when we examine the Codes of the Emperors Theodosius and Justinian,
in which the experience and traditions of the great Roman lawyers are combined
with and modified by the softening influences of Christianity, we find that the
observance of the Lord’s Day is carefully provided for. Works of necessity,
whether civil or agricultural, are allowed; others are forbidden. Public
spectacles of all kinds and the games of the circus are suppressed. And the
great teachers of the Church in the fourth and fifth centuries did what they
could to second the imperial legislation by exhorting the faithful to abstain.
from works or sights which profaned the Holy Day of the Christian week.
This insistence on a day of freedom from earthly labour is not inconsistent with
a recognition of the dignity and the clsims of labour. On the contrary, it
protects labour, by arresting the excessive expenditure of human strength; and
#t paises and consecrates labour by leading the workman’s mind to acknowledge
the Source and Support of his exertions. It is sometimes asked why this
abstinence from labour should be dictated to us ; why each man cannot make a
Sunday for himself, when his strength or health demands it. The answer is,
Because, in a busy, highly worked community, unless all are to abstain from work,
none will abstain ; since, in point of fact, none can afford to abstain. This is
the principle of the Bank holidays: the State comes in to do for labour four
times a year, on a small scale, what the Church does on a large scale every
week; it essays to make a general rest from work possible by an external
sanction. If the sanction of the Sunday rest from toil were to be withdrawn,
it would, in a civilisation like ours, go hard, first with labour, and then, at no
distant interval, with capital. The dignity and obligation of labour are suffi-
ciently recognised in the precept, “ Six days shalt thou labour, and do all that
thou hast to do”; and the health and happiness and moral well-being of the
labourer are secured by a seventh day, in which the labourer is to ‘‘do no manner
of work.”

ITI. Thus the Sabbath and the Lord’s Day agree in affirming two principles :
the hallowing a seventh part of time, and the obligation of abstinence from servile
work on one day in seven. But are the days identical? May we rightly call
the Lord’s Day the Sabbath? These questions must be answered in the nega-
tive. Observe that the Jewish Sabbath and the Christian Lord’s Day, while
agreeing in affirming two principles, differ in two noteworthy respects. First,
they differ, as has already been implied, in being kept on distinct days. The
Sabbath was kept on the last day of the week : the Lord’s Day is kept on the
first. The change was made because there was an imperative reason for making
it. For the Lord’s Day and the Sabbath Day differ, secondly, in the reason or
motive for observing them. The Sabbath was the weekly commemoration of
the finished work of God. It brought before the mind of the Jew the ineffable
majesty of the Great Creator, between whom and the noblest work of His
hands there yawns an impassable abyss. Thus the Sabbath observance, apart
from its directly sanctifying effect upon individual life, was the great protection
to the Jews against the idolatry with which they came in contact in Egypt, in
Phenicia, in Babylon, and against the Greek modes of thought which tried
them so sorely at Alexandria and in Palestine under the Macedonian kings of
a later time. The Christian motive for observing the Lord’s Day is the
resurrection of Christ from the dead. That truth is to the Christian Creed
what the creation of the world out of nothing is to the Jewish. The Lord’s
Day marks the completed Redemption, as the Sabbath had marked the com-
pleted Creation. The Resurrection is also the fundamental truth on which
Christianity rests; and thus it is as much insisted on by the Christian apostles
as is God’s creation of all things by the Jewish prophets. Not, of course, that


80


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. It,

See eager eee eee ne ee ee
the creation of all things by God is less precious to the Christian than to the
Jew; but it is more taken for granted. In Christian eyes the creation of the
world of nature is eclipsed by the creation of the world of grace; and of this
last creation the Resurrection is the warrant. The Jewish Sabbath stands in
the same relation to the Lord’s Day as does Circumcision to Christian Baptism,
as does the Paschal Lamb to the Holy Communion, as does the Law to the
Gospel. It is a shadow of a good thing to come. It is only perpetuated by
being transfigured, or rather it is so transfigured as to have parted with its
identity. Christians stand no longer at the foot of Sinai, but by the empty tomb
in the garden outside Jerusalem.

IV. The cessation of ordinary work is not enjoined upon Christians only that
they may while away the time, or spend it in aimless self-pleasing, or in some-
thing worse. The Lord’s Day is the day upon which our Lord Jesus Christ has
a first claim. On this great day every instructed Christian thinks of Him as
completing the work of our redemption; as vindicating His character as a
Teacher of absolute truth ; as triumphing over His enemies; as conquering
death in that nature which had hitherto always been subject to its empire; as
designing, now that He has overcome the sharpness of death, to open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers. It is unlike any other in the week; and
the sense of this finds its natural expression in prayer and praise. A well-spent
Lord’s Day should always begin with that supreme act of Christian worship in
which we meet Jesus verily and indeed, the only public service known to the
early and Apostolic Church—the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our
Redeemer. What the practice of our fathers in the faith was within a few
years after the apostles had gone to their rest, we learn from the celebrated
letter of Pliny to Trajan. ‘The Christians,” he says, “‘ are accustomed to meet
together on a stated day, before it is light, and to sing hymns to Christ as God,
and to bind themselves by a Sacrament, not for any wicked purpose; but never
to commit fraud, theft, or adultery—never to break their word, nor to refuse,
when called upon, to deliver up any trust.” This was his impression as a
heathen, looking at the sacred service from without, and gathering its nature
from Christian language about it which he imperfectly understood. How
Sunday was kept by Christians about the year 140 is very fully described by
Justin Martyr. He says that on that day there was an assembly of all
Christians who lived either in town or country; that the writings of the
apostles and prophets were read; and that prayer was offered, and alms were
collected, and the Holy Sacrament of our Lord’s Body and Blood was celebrated.
As we descend the stream of time, illustrations become more numerous. But in
the early Church of Christ it was taken for granted that a Christian would
observe the Lord’s Day, first of all, by taking part in that solemn Sacrament
and Service which the Lord had Himself ordained. Those who begin their
Sundays with the Holy Communion know one of the deepest meanings of that
promise, ‘They that seek Me early shall find Me.” Not that it is wise or
reverent to suppose that all the religious duties of a Sunday can be properly
discharged before breakfast, and that the rest of the day may be spent as we
like. No Christian whose heart is in the right place will think this. Later
opportunities of public prayer and of instruction in the faith and duty of
a Christian will be made the most of, as may be possible for each. Especially
should an effort be made on every Sunday in the year to learn some portion of
the will of God more perfectly than before; some truth or aspect of Hass
revelation of Himself in the Gospel; some Christian duty, as taught by the
example or the words of Christ. Without a positive effort of this kind a
Sunday is a lost Sunday: we shall think of it thus in eternity. Where there
is the will to seek truth and wisdom there is no difficulty about the way: books,


.G, 81


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


ee BS Sg ON


CHAP, II.


friends, sermons, are at hand. We have but to be in earnest, and all will
follow. When the religious obligations of Sunday have been complied with,
there are duties of human brotherhood which may well find a place in it: kind
deeds and words to friends, visits to the sick, acts of consideration for the poor,
are in keeping with the spirit of the day. Above all, it should be made a bright
as well as a solemn day for children: first solemn, but then and always bright,
so that in their after-life they may look back on the Sundays of childhood
as its happiest days. And in itself there would be no harm if, for those who
live in towns, museums and picture-galleries could be open on Sundays, Just as
the fields and the gardens are open to those who live in the country; for Art,
like Nature, is to each one of us what we bring to it. The danger of such
proposals is that, to realise them, Sunday labour must be employed, in some
cases on a very considerable scale; and this would too easily lead the way to its
employment for other and general purposes, and so to the abandonment of an
essential characteristic of the Lord’s Day.—Canon Liddon.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 23. Lessons.—1. Christ never
bribes men to become His disciples.
Although when occasion arose, He
would work a miracle to feed a multi-
tude, He here leaves His followers to
stay their hunger as best they may.
g. It is not said that Christ Himself
partook of this frugal meal. Probably
He refrained from doing so, at the
cost of personal discomfort, rather
than give offence to His enemies. 3.
But while thus declining to use His
own right to the full, He will not
hinder others from the enjoyment of
theirs. On this principle St. Paul
afterwards acted (1 Cor. x.).

The disciples were poor ; but they
preferred to suffer hunger with Christ
rather than enjoy afiluence without
Him.—Heubner.


Ver. 24. Lessons.—He who has only
the knowledge without the spirit of
the law very often opposes when he
thinks he is defending it. 2. Phari-
saical pride makes men set themselves
up for judges of everything, and re-
quire an account of everything to be
given them. 3. When a man is once
full of himself, he decides confidently,
especially when it is to condemn others.
4. Those who love to domineer are not
content to exercise their authority
upon their own disciples, but would


82


fain bring those of others under their
dominion.—P. Quesnel.

Why did not these Pharisees give
them bread, and so prevent their doing
that to which they objected? We
might also fairly ask, How came they
to see the disciples? Did they not
break the Sabbath by setting a watch
over them ?


Ver. 25. Superficial reading preju-
dicial—An old preacher was once
heard to say, “‘The Word has mighty
free course among many nowadays, for
it goes in at one of their ears and out
at the other.” So it seems to be with
some readers—they read a very great
deal, and yet they do not read any-
thing. Their eye glances, but their
mind never rests. The soul does not
light upon the truth and stay there.
It flits over the landscape as a bird
might do, but builds no nest. Such
reading is worse than useless; it is
positively prejudicial to the mind.


Ver. 27. “The Sabbath was made
for man.”—1l, For man as man—
whether Jew or Gentile. It was set
apart by Divine sanction from the
beginning, not merely from the time
of Moses, when God only reminded
His people of that which had existed
long before, The law of six days’


———e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. II.





work and one day’s rest is wrought
into the very constitution of humanity,
and cannot be ignored with impunity.
2. For man as he is—not for man in
a fancied state of perfection. To
worship God every day in spirit and
truth, to raise each day to the level
of a Sabbath, is no doubt the goal to
be aimed at; but if such a command-
ment had been given to the Jews, and
no day specially separated from the
others, they would have ended by
reducing all to a dead level of worldli-
ness. ‘They needed the Sabbath as a
help to their devotion, and we in
this busy age need it too. From the
consecration of one day to God, we
learn by degrees to consecrate to Him
every day, every hour.

Reasons for Sabbath observance.—
The following are the reasons given
in the Old Testament for the observ-
ance of the Sabbath: 1. In memory
of the Creation, and of God’s rest from
His work (Exod. xx. 11). 2. To pro-
tect those whose time is at the dis-
posal of others (Deut. v. 14). 3. In
memory of the deliverance of God’s
people (Deut. v. 15). 4. As a sign
between God and His people of their
sanctification by Him (Ezek. xx. 12).
So now the weekly Lord’s Day, with
its Eucharistic celebration, is the
great testimony to the Church’s per-
petual union with her once crucified
but now reigning Head.

The consecration of one day im seven
to uses other and more sacred than
those of the rest, is ordained by a law
which lies a long way behind either
the religion of Christ or the re-
ligion of Moses. That law is embedded
in the very constitution, physical,
mental, and moral, of human nature ;
and as human nature has awakened
to its consciousness and its significance,
just in that proportion has it ennobled
and advanced itself. The first nations
in the family of nations to-day are
those who, whether early and quickly,
or slowly and late, have learned to
hallow one day and keep it sacred;
and the loftiest achievements in arms,
in literature, in science, in philanthropy,





in missionary enterprise, and in social
advancement, belong to that Anglo-
Saxon people whose observance of
Sunday is to-day the wonder and the
admiration of every intelligent traveller,
—Bishop H. C. Potter.

The Continental Sunday a failure.—
It is one of the most remarkable
facts of our time that those older
nations from which some of us propose
to borrow our habit of disregard for
the Lord’s Day are striving at this
very moment with most impressive
earnestness to restore the earlier
sacredness of that day. In Germany,
in Switzerland, and in France there
are already organisations of serious
and thoughtful men who are seeking
to banish the Continental Sunday.
They have seen, on the one hand, as
any one may see in France to-day,
that the removal of the sacred sanctions,
which with us hold the first day of
the week in a kind of chaste reserve,
have eventuated not merely in de-
grading it to the level of a vulgar
holiday, but also of degrading and
enslaving him for whom its privileges
were, most of all, designed—the
wearied, over-worked, and poorly-paid
labouring man. He is a person out
of whom the most is to be got, and
if he can work six days he may as
well work the seventh also, so long as
there is nothing to forbid it. Such a
condition of things may not directly
threaten those of us who are protected
by wealth from the necessities of daily
labour ; but if oursis this more favoured
condition, all the more do we owe it to
our brother-man who is less favoured
to see to it that he shall have every
sanction with which the law can furnish
him to guard his day of rest from
being perverted and_ revolutionised
into a day of toil. And if he him-
self does not see that the more we
assimilate Sunday to other days by
the amusements, the occupations, the
teaching and reading and thinking
with which we fill it, the greater is
the danger that ultimately we shall
lose it altogether, the more earnestly
are we bound to strive to disseminate


83


CHAP. Il.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK,


bo eS ee


those sounder ideas which shall set
this first day of the week and its
devout observance before our fellow-
men and women of the labouring
classes in its true light, and so help
and teach them how not to lose but
to keep it. We may declaim as we
please in behalf of a philosophy which
makes all days holy to the universal
worship of humanity by making no
day holy to the worship of a personal
God; but the decay of stated times
and seasons for the offering of that
worship presages a day when neither
God nor man, neither life nor property,
neither human weakness nor human
needs, have any rights nor any scantiest
respect. To learn that fact we need
go back no further than the history of
France in 1788.—Jozd.


Ver. 28. Son of Man.—1. Glorious
name that, which Jesus Himself loved
most—indeed, we may say to the
exclusion of all others—“ Son of Man” ;
thus identified with the whole race
in its joys and sorrows and manifold
experiences: a sympathetic bond of
union linking to Himself each member
of the wide human family. 2. Christ
—the Incarnate God—had not only
assumed the form and designation of
the “Son of Man,” but, as such, He
belonged to no exclusive or distinctive
nationality. He claimed and asserted
a, worldwide brotherhood. The sun
in the material heavens is the illu-
minator of no one specific region or
section, but of the entire earth :
every nation, and kindred, and people,
and tongue are served heirs to his
radiance—‘ nothing hid from the heat
thereof.” So was Christ “the true
Light which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world.” He took in
all climes, all blood, all ages, all
civilisations. —J. R. Macduff, D.D.

Christ's lordship over the Sabbath.—
Nothing can show the Divine nature
of our Lord more clearly than that
He is above such a law of God, so
that He should modify it, relax it,
change it at His pleasure. He exer-
cised but a small part of this authority


84


when He freed His disciples from the
yoke of its burdensome Pharisaic ob-
servance. He exercised His lordship
over the day far more royally when
He by His Spirit made the day of His
resurrection the weekly religious festi-
val of His Church. By this He gave
it altogether a new character. Hence-
forth it is a day not of mere rest, but
of renewed life—the life of His own
resurrection; and so its characteristic
ordinance is not the slaying of beasts,
but the life-giving celebration of the
Sacrament of His own Risen Body.—
M. F. Sadler.

The freedom of Christ's service.—
The service of God, and the service
of the Temple, by universal consent,
superseded the Sabbath law. But


Christ was greater than the Temple,


and His service more truly that of
God, and higher than that of the out-
ward Temple—and the Sabbath was
intended for man, to serve God: there-
fore Christ and His service were
superior to the Sabbath law. ‘Thus
much would be intelligible to these
Pharisees, although they would not
receive it, because they believed not
on Him as the Sent of God. But to
us the words mean more than this.
They preach not only that the service
of Christ is that of God, but that, even
more than in the Temple, all of work
or of liberty is lawful which this
service requires. We are free while
we are doing anything for Christ:
God loves mercy, and demands not
sacrifice; His sacrifice is the service of
Christ, in heart, and life, and work.
We are not free to do anything we
please ; but we are free to do anything
needful or helpful, while we are doing
any service to Christ. He is the Lord
of the Sabbath, whom we serve in and
through the Sabbath. And even this
is significant, that, when designating
Himself Lord of the Sabbath, it is as
“the Son of Man.” It shows that the
narrow Judaistic form regarding the
day and the manner of observance is
enlarged into the wider Law, which
applies to all humanity. Under the
New Testament the Sabbath has, as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. If.


I eS ee ee ee ee


the Church, become Catholic, and its
Lord is Chrisé as the Son of Man, to
whom the Body Catholic offers the
acceptable service of heart and life.—
A. Edersheim, D.D.

Christians are lords of the Sabbath.—
We also are, in our measure, “lords
of the Sabbath,” which was made
for man; we have a Christian liberty,
which, remember, implies a deep Chris-
tian responsibility, to regulate our
method of observing the Sabbath,
under God’s general laws, so as to
make it to ourselves not a burden,
but an exceeding spiritual blessing.
This liberty indeed is ours, only in
proportion as we are living as real
members of Christ, having His mind,
and in our deeds being like Him. So


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Christ’s presence cannot be kept
seeret.—We cannot give lodging and enter-
tainment to such a personage as He is
without it being seen of others. He is not
an ordinary visitor; and though no state
ceremonies accompany Him, there is that
about His whole customs which arrests
attention. We may have occasional visitors
whose amiable dispositions and influences
refine and improve us; but they cannot do
for us what a visit from Christ does. They
cannot, by their own strength and love, con-
fer on us spiritual blessings. His company
is the best; it not only makes time pass
pleasantly, but it makes us ready for eternity.
His songs not only make the heart merry,


but they make it new. Now this cannot be, |


and nothing of it be seen or known outside.
We soon tell upon ourselves; we soon let
out the secret ; and it is then “noised abroad”
that we have Him beneath our roof-tree.
Oh, happy is that house in which He lodges!
—John Macfarlane, LL.D.

Christ’s presence manifest.—“ Travelling on
the Lake Lugano,” says one, “we heard one
morning the swell of the nightingale’s song,
and the oars were stilled on the blue lake
as we listened to the silver sounds. We
could not see a single bird, nor dol know
that we wished to see—we were so content
with the sweetness of the music.” Even so
it is with our Lord; we may enter a house
where He is loved, and we may hear nothing
concerning Christ, and yet we may perceive
clearly enough that He is there; a holy in-
fluence streaming through their actions per-
yades the household, so that if Jesus be


far as we are sinful we forfeit our
privileges, even as a life of slavery
makes men unfit for freedom ; we may
require the constraints of a law, and
lose the full enjoyment, the perfect
blessing, of the Lord’s Day. But still
Christ’s words show us what we should
aim at and desire; they teach us how
to look on our Sundays, as blessings
for which we may thank God; and
stir us up to use them, not by any
formal rules, still less by any gloom or
compulsion, Lut freely and thankfully,
for our blessing and happiness both of
body and soul. They were made for
us; and we, by God’s grace, are lords
over them, only under Him who is
God and Lord of all.— Bishop Barry.


TO CHAPTER II.


unseen, it is clear that He is not unknown.
So anywhere that Jesus is, and though you
do not actually hear His name, yet the sweet
influence which flows from His love will be
plainly enough discernible.


Ver. 3. Moral paralysis—In one of our
city hospitals a young woman of beautiful
face and fcrm had lain motionless for many
months. Hxcept for the brightness of her
face and the action of the hands, her body
was apparently dead. Yet she spoke with
great confidence of her restoration to health
at some future time, and was enthusiastic in
planning good works then to be executed.
A physician remarked that it was the saddest
case he had ever witnessed. It was a
paralysis, not of the flesh, but of the mind:
it was a moral paralysis. The will itself had
lost its power of action. She could plan
for the future, but not wild anything at the
present moment. After a few months the
inactivity bred fatal disorder, and she passed
away. This a picture of the moral paralysis
of many.

Man’s helplessness.—How helpless man is
to save himself from the disease of sin may
be illustrated by schylus’ Prometheus
Bound; by Virgil’s Laocodn with his sons
in the coils of the great serpent; by the
young man in Paris, who was examining
a guillotine, and, from curiosity, lay down
on the plank under the knife, and found
himself fastened there, unable to escape
without aid from others.


Ver. 4. Eastern roofs.—“ When I lived at
85


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








ZXgina,” says Hartley, in his Travels, “1 used
to look up not infrequently at the roof above
my head, and contemplate how easily the
whole transaction of the paralytic might
take place. The roof was made in the fol-
lowing manner :—A layer of reeds, of a large
species, was placed upon the rafters; on
these a quantity of heather was strewed ;
on the heather earth was deposited, and
beaten down into a solid mass. Now what
difficulty would there be in removing first
the earth, next the heather, and then the
reeds? Nor would the difficulty be increased
if the earth had a pavement of tiling laid
upon it. No inconvenience could result to
the persons in the house from the removal
of the tiles and earth; for the heather and
reeds would stop anything that might other-
wise fall down, and would be removed last
of all.”

The power of faith.—Faith can make a
passage through the sea, level martial ram-
parts, make iron swim, trample on fire
vanhurt. It will find a key to open every
lock, a saw that can cut through every iron
bar. As water will, in some way, find its
proper level, so true faith will find its way
to its source—even to Christ.


Ver. 5. Progression in Christ's miracles.—
The day begins softly, beautifully, progress-
ively. In the early morn it peeps from
behind the hills, tinges the sky and the sea
with its rosy colours, and advances until

here is cloudless splendour, so that the day,

when at its meridian, may be said to be
perfect. Thus softly, beautifully, and pro-
gressively rose the Sun of Righteousness
on the dark world of humanity. His first
miracle was one of quiet and gentle benefi-
cence: He turned water into wine ; and thus
He brightened domestic joys before He went
forth to mitigate human sorrows. After
this He went about all Galilee, healing all
manner of bodily disease among the people.
Then He rose higher in miracle-working—
He re-throned prostrated reason, and set
demoniacs in their right mind. At last He
manifested forth His glory as God by par-
doning the soul. Indeed, just as every
human disease was a symbol of the moral
condition of the soul, so every miracle He
wrought on the body was a token of what
He would do for the soul, and what, in fact,
He did in the majority of instances: hence
His miracles were double—body and soul
were healed at the same time, as in this
case.

The good news of pardon.—When Bishop
Patteson was quite young, he used to say
that he wished to be ordained, because
he longed to say the Absolution, and thus
“make people so happy.” The son of one,
and the nephew of another, of England’s
most eminent judges, he knew well what a
verdict of “not guilty” implied to a prisoner


86


on his trial ; and this knowledge he had been
taught to apply to spiritual matters.


Vers. 10, 11.—Christ the Pardoner.—One
of our modern novelists has written the
story of a man who was haunted with re-
morse for a particular sin; and though
sometimes weeks would pass without the
thought of it, yet every now and then the

host of the old transgression would rise
before him to his infinite discomfort. It is
the story of almost every human life. Sin
is not something which a man commits and
has done with it. It becomes a part of his
being. His moral fibre is changed ; his moral
stamina is weakened. A traveller soon drives
through the malarious air of the Roman Cam-
pagna, and is out of the poisonous atmosphere ;
put during his brief transit disease has found
its way into his blood ; and even though he
sits under the cool shadow of the Alps,
or on the shore of the blue Mediterranean,
the inward fever rages and burns. A man
sins, and in sinning introduces disease into
his moral nature; and even though he
abandons his evil courses the old malady
works on. The forgiveness of sin which is
so thorough and central that it rids a man
of the power and guilt of sin—who is com-
petent to give us that? No specific of man’s
devising, no course of moral treatment, can
effect that. There is only One, Jesus Christ,
who has power on earth to forgive sin in
that complete and efficient fashion. And
that is His chief glory, and constitutes His
principal claim upon us.


Ver. 14. Attractive power of Christ.—lf
steel filings be mixed with dirt and a magnet
be applied, it will attract the steel to itself,
and draw it away from the grosser particles.
Thus does Christ draw men from that which
is earthly and polluting.

Christ our Guide—With my brother I
was once climbing the Cima di Jazi, one of
the mountains in the chain of Monta Rosa.
When nearly at the top, we entered a dense
fog. Presently our guides faced right about
and grounded their axes on the frozen
snowed slope. My brother, seeing the slope
still beyond, and not knowing it was merely
the cornice overhanging a precipice of
several thousand feet, rushed onward. I
shall never forget their cry of agonised
warning. He stood a moment on the very
summit, and then, the snow yielding, he
began to fall through. One of the guides,
at great risk, had rushed after him, and
seizing him by the coat, drew him down to
a place of safety. So Christ is our Guide
amid the mists and the difficult places of
life. It is not ours to go before Him.
Where He leads we may go. When He stops,
we should stop. It is at our peril if we goa
step beyond.—Nenwman Hall.

God often calls men im strange places.—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. II.


eee


Not in the house of prayer, not under
the preaching of the Word; but when
all these things have been absent, and all
surrounding circumstances have seemed
most adverse to the work of grace, that grace
has put forth its power. The tavern, the
theatre, the ball-room, the gaming-house,
the race-course, and other similar haunts of
worldliness and sin, have sometimes been
the scenes of God’s converting grace. Asan
old writer says: “Our calling is uncertain
in respect of place, for God calls some from
their ships, and some from their shops;
some from under the hedges, and others
from the market; so that if a man can but
make out unto his own soul that he is
certainly called, the time when and the
place where matter little.”

Christ's effectual call._We read in classic
story how the lyre of Orpheus enchanted
with its music not only the wild beasts, but
the very trees and rocks upon Olympus,
so that they moved from their places to
follow him ; so Christ, our heavenly Orpheus,
with the music of His gracious speech,
draws after Him those less susceptible to
benign influences than beasts and trees and
stones, even poor, hardened, senseless, sinful
souls. Let Him but strike His golden harp,
and whisper in thy heart, “Come, follow
Me,” and thou, like another Matthew, shalt
be won.

“ Follow Me.”—Aulus Gellius tells us a
story of one Protagoras, who, being poor,
was forced for a livelihood to carry burdens,
One day he had got some chumps on his
back, which he was bringing to town for
fuel. Democritus, a famed philosopher,
meets him; admiring his contrivance, how
he got that rude parcel of stuff together in
that order, for his further satisfaction bids
him lay down his bundle, untie it, and do it
up again. He does so, and that with such
method and artifice, that the philosopher
perceiving by this essay he had a logical
head and an ingeny fit for science, told him,
“ Come, young man, you must along with me;
you are fit for greater and better things than
this you are about.” He takes him along
with him, maintains him, breeds him up in
philosophy, wherein he proved subtle, and in
some degree eminent. It was the same case
with Matthew here, if I may make com-
parison. He was puzzling and pelting
himselfin a sorry employment. Our Saviour
comes by and finds him sitting at it; He
fetches him off with a gracious call, as if He
had said, ‘‘ Come, leave this sordid and scan-
dalous employ; I have greater and nobler
service for thee. Follow Me.”—A. Littie-
ton, D.D.


Ver. 15. Sinners drawn to Christ.—Travel-
ling along a country road on a hot summer’s
day, you may have noticed the people before
you turn aside at a certain point and gather


around something that was yet hidden from
you. You knew at once that it was a clear,
cold spring that drew them all together
there. Hach of them wanted something
which that spring could supply. Or you
have seen iron filings leap up and cling to
the poles of a magnet when it was brought
near to them. The attraction of the magnet
drew them to itself, So sinners were drawn
to Jesus; they felt that in Him was all
fulness, and that He could supply their
need,

The converted seeking to convert others.—
It is thought that Matthew wished to in-
troduce his friends and old companions to
Christ. Colonel Gardiner, after his conver-
sion, finding that his former friends con-
sidered him mad, invited them to meet him,
and pleaded the cause of religion with such
force and strength of reasoning, that one
cut short the argument with saying, “ We
thought this man mad, and he is in good
earnest proving us to be so.”


Ver. 16. Religious prejudice.—Happily,
in our age and country, though prejudice of
class is not yet done away with, there is not
much left to give an idea of the intensity of
the religious prejudices and sectarian divi-
sions of the ancient East. Giant Prejudice
now can do little more than sit grinning at
the pilgrims and biting his nails at them
because he cannot come at them; and it is
hard for modern occidental imagination to
conceive of him as he moved and acted in full
social and political power. But one example
will do. Read Leger’s Histoire de Pié-
mont, and learn the cruelty, brutality, and
obscenity practised on the poor Waldenses ;
and then imagine how the Pharisees felt
toward Jesus, who received sinners and ate
with them. The lower the grade of know-
ledge and culture (and most of the Pharisees
were probably illiterate), so much the more
savage were the feelings and actions of the
persecutors, though their cruelty was not
refined in proportion to their savageness.
In modern times this religious prejudice
exists, and strongly too. There are certain
sects still in Palestine and Syria who will
buy and sell with you, but not eat with you,
drink with you, nor pray with you. They
are often the dirtiest of the dirty, but they
hold your clean touch defilement. As when,
in certain parts of India, one ventures to
clear his throat in the street, all the shops
near by are immediately shut up; so, in
some places, an unlucky touch by a Christian
will defile a handful of figs, a bunch of
grapes, a melon; or perhaps even a whole
basket of fruit.


Ver. 17. God welcomes sinners.—As the
story goes, a certain generous but eccentric
nobleman sometimes asked not only the


87


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Uo ee


high-born and wealthy but the squalid and
poor to his feasts. Previous to one of these
occasions, a courtier had the misfortune to
tear or to stain his dress. How was he to
appear now at his benefactor’s table? After
some thought he came toa wise conclusion.
These were his words, “If I cannot go as
a nobleman I will go as a beggar.” Say the
same to Him who spreads the gospel feast.
Never mind though you cannot go as a saint ;
goasasinner. You will be welcome.

Christ saves sinners.—Luther says: “* Once
upon a time the devil said to me, ‘Martin
Luther, you are a great sinner, and you
will be damned!’ ‘Stop! stop!’ said I;
‘one thing ata time. I am a great sinner,
it is true, though you have no right to
tell me of it. I confess it. What next 2’
‘Therefore you will be damned.” ‘That is
not good reasoning. It is true I am a great
sinner, but it is written, “ Jesus Christ came
to save sinners” ; therefore Z shall be saved !
Now go your way.’ So I cut the devil off
with his own sword, and he went away
mourning because he could not cast me
down by calling me a sinner.”

All are sinners—I remember a gentle-
man taking exception to an address based
upon the words of God concerning Jew
and Gentile, that both are guilty before
God. I remarked, “ But the Word of God
distinctly says, ‘There is no difference : for
all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God’” (Rom. iit, 22, 23), My friend re-
plied, “Do you mean to say that there is
no difference between an honest man and a
dishonest one, between an intemperate man
and asober man?” “No,” I remarked ; “I
did not affirm that there was no room for
comparison between such cases; but my
position is, that if two men were standing
here together, one an intemperate man and
the other a sober man, I should say of the
one, ‘This man is an intemperate sinner,
the other is a sober sinner.” My friend did
not know how to meet the difficulty, but
answered, “ Well, I don’t like such teaching.”
Very quietly I replied, “ Then I will make
some concession, and meet your difficulty,
I will admit that many are ‘superior sinners,’
and that you are a superior sinner.” I shall
not soon forget my friend’s expression of
countenance when he had taken stock of
the argument.— Henry Varléy.


Ver. 21. External reform insufficient.—
We may try from without to make human
character lovely ; but there is sin in its very
fibre, and the blemishes will ever work out
and mar all. The only way is to have a
new heart, and then the beauty will be real
and will endure. A mother lost by death
a lovely and precious child—her only child.
To occupy her heart and hand in some way
about her vanished treasure, and thus fill
the empty hours, she took up a.photograph


88


of her child and began to touch it with her
skilful fingers, Soon, as she wrought, the
features became almost lifelike. The picture
was then laid away for a few days, and
when she sought it again the eyes were
dimmed, and the face was marred with ugly
blotches. Patiently she went over it a
second time, and the bewitching beauty
came again. A second time it was laid
away, and again the blotches appeared.
There was something wrong in the paper
on which the photograph had been taken.
There were chemicals lurking in it which
in some way marred the delicate colours,
and no amount of repainting could correct
the faults. So is it in human lives. No
outside reform is enough, for all the while
the heart is evil within, and it sends up its
pollution, staining the fairest beauty. The
change that is permanent must be wrought
in the heart.—J. R. Miller, D.D.


Ver. 27. Benefit of the rest-day.—Man !
man! this is the great creator of wealth.
The difference between the soil of Campania
and Spitzbergen is insignificant compared
with the difference presented by two coun-
tries—the one inhabited by men full of
moral and physical vigour, the other by
beings plunged in an intellectual decrepi-
tude. Hence it is that we are not im-
poverished, but on the contrary enriched by
this seventh day, which we have for so
many years devoted to rest. This day is
not lost, While the machinery is stopped,
while the car rests on the road, while the
treasury is silent, while the smoke ceases
to rise from the chimney of the factory, the
nation enriches itself none the less than
during the working days of the week.
Man, the machine of all machines, the one
by the side of which all the inventions of
the Watts and the Arkwrights are as nothing,
is recuperating and gaining strength so well,
that on Monday he returns to his work with
his mind clearer, with more courage for his
work, and with renewed vigour. I will
never believe that that which renders a
people stronger, wiser, and better can ever
turn to its impoverishment. In The Life
of Frank Buckland, the eminent naturalist,
who devoted himself so thoroughly to the
scientific and practical study of the river and
sea-fisheries of Great Britain, there is the
following testimony to the value of Sabbath
rest: “March 1866.—I am now working
from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., and then a bit in the
evening—fourteen hours a day ; but, thank
God, it does not hurt me. I should, how-
ever, collapse if it were not for Sunday.
The machinery has time to get cool, the
mill-wheel ceases to patter the water, the
mill-head is ponded up, and the superfluous
water let off by an easy, quiet current,
which leads to things above.”———In one of
the most densely populated parts of the city





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
go ee a ek ee nee





a gentleman lately visited the house of a
poor, hard-working, infidel cobbler. The
man was busy at his last, and had scarce
time to look up at his unwelcome visitor.
“That is hard work.” “It is, sir.” “For
how many hours a day have you to labour
here—twelve?” ‘Yes, and more, sir. I
am never off this seat under a fourteen or
fifteen hours’ spell of it.” “That is sore
tofl for a bit of bread.” “Indeed it is, sir;
and very thankful am I when the week’s
end comes. What would become of me, and
the likes of me, without that rest?” “And
who, friend, think you, gave you that. rest ?
Came it by accident, or arrangement, or
how?” There came no answer to that: the
cobbler hung his head; the man was honest;
the sceptic was ashamed.—-—An agricultural
labourer named Alégre, about sixty years
of age, was arrested during the French
Revolution, and put in prison for not having
worked on a Sunday. A week after his
release he presented himself, dressed in
his Sunday clothes, before the Committee.
On being asked what he wanted, he replied
that he was getting old, and that when he
had worked all the week he was tired out and
wanted rest, so that if he went to labour on
Sunday he should rob his employer, and
that therefore he preferred to come and be
put in prison. The Committee, who no
doubt thought the man had come to make


CHAP. Il.





a denunciation, were nonplussed at the
strange humour of this singular request,
shrugged their shoulders, and bade their
petitioner go about his business. William
Wilberforce said, “I can truly declare that
to me the Sabbath has been invaluable.”
When Sir Samuel Romilly, Solicitor-General
during Fox’s administration, committed
suicide, Mr. Wilberforce said, “If he had
suffered his mind to enjoy such occasional
remission, it is highly probable that the
strings of life would never have snapped
from over-tension,.” The celebrated Castle-
reagh, who was Foreign Secretary in 1812,
committed suicide in 1822. Wilberforce
said, “Poor fellow! he was certainly de-
ranged—the effect probably of continual wear
of the mind and the non-observance of the
Sabbath.”—— After all, the question is not
so much one of the safety and well-being of
life and property as of the higher well-being
of the personal soul. A great statesman
is reported to have said to one who sought
of him an interview concerning secular
matters on the Lord’s Day: “I must keep
one day in which to realise what I am and
where I am going !” A: world without a
Sabbath, says Mr. Beecher, would be like a
man without a smile, like a summer without
flowers, like a homestead without a garden.
It is the joyous day of the whole week.








CHAPTER III.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL


NOTES.


Ver. 5. With anger, being grieved.—His anger would be roused as He thought of the
evil resulting to others from the bigotry and tyranny of their spirit; His pity, as He thought
of the moral loss suffered by themselves in consequence thereof. Hardness.—Du/ness.
“Not the obduracy which cannot be impressed, but the obtuseness which cannot perceive.”
They were blind to their own blindness, deaf to their own deafness; and also blind and
deaf to the needs and woes of others. Compassion and kindness of heart were as much
dried up in them as this man’s hand was in him. :

Ver. 7. Mark several times notes the Saviour’s seasons of retirement from public notice,
either (as in this instance) to escape the pursuit of enemies, or for rest, or to pray, or for
conference with His disciples. See vi. 31, 46, vii. 24, ix. 2, xiv. 32-35.

Ver. 14. Ordained.— Made, or set apart. The twelve were now singled out for closer
attendance upon Him, and special instruction in His method of work. Their solemn
“ordination” came afterwards (John xx. 21, 22). Twelve.—“The number twelve sym-
bolises perfection and universality. Three indicates what is Divine; four, created things.
Three multiplied by four gives twelve, the number of those who were to go forth as apostles
into the four quarters of the world—called to the faith of the Holy Trinity.

Ver. 17. Boanerges.—It is uncertain whether each of them bore the name ‘‘ Son of
thunder,” or whether “Boanerges” was a dual name given to the pair, as the name
“ Dioscuri” was given to Castor and Pollux. It is also uncertain why the brothers were
thus named; but we may be sure it was not in any case intended as a term of reproach,
Perhaps it was suggested by some peculiarity in voice or manner of delivery which arrested
attention and lent conviction to their preaching.

89


CHAP IU. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Ver. 18. Simon the Canaanite.— Cananite, or Cananean, An Aramaic word, signifying
zealot. See Matt. x. 4; Luke vi. 15; Acts i. 18. Jerome says that his name preserves
a reference to the place of his birth (Cana) as well as to his zeal. “No name is more
striking in the list than that of Simon the Zealot, for to none of the twelve could the con-
trast be so vivid between their former and their new position. What revolution of thought
and heart could be greater than that which had thus changed into a follower of Jesus one
of the fierce war-party of the day, which looked on the presence of Rome in the Holy Land
as treason against the majesty of Jehovah, a party fanatical in their Jewish strictures and
exclusiveness ?” Ea

Ver. 19. Betrayed.— Delivered, or surrendered. Same word used in Rom. viii. 32 of the
Father's surrender of the Son, whom He “ delivered” into the power of men, in order that
He might “ deliver ” mankind from the power of Satan.

Ver. 21. His friends—His kinsfolk or near relatives. Beside Himself—In an ecstatic
state. They thought He was carried away by His zeal and devotion beyond all self-control.

Ver. 22. Beelzebub. —Beelzebul, meaning either “lord of the dwelling,” or “lord of filth”
_the title of a heathen deity, to whom the Jews ascribed lordship over evil spirits. ‘“ He
hath Beelzebul ” is equivalent to saying, “He is possessed not merely by a demon, but by
Satan himself.”

Ver. 27. Spoil his goods.— Snatch and carry off his vessels, or household treasures.

Ver. 29. Hath never forgiveness.— Hath not forgiveness unto the age or #20n of Messiah's
reign. In danger of eternal damnation.—In the grip of an age-long sin. None of the
agencies employed by God for the conversion of sinners up to the time of the Second
Advent are powerful enough to rescue such an one from the awful state to which he has
reduced himself by his own deliberate choice. Here the Saviour leaves the matter, without
revealing anything as to the man’s ultimate fate or the ministries of the future world.

Ver. 31. His brethren.—The word means nothing more than His “ nearest male rela-
tives.’ Probably either the sons of Joseph by a previous marriage, or of the Mary
mentioned in Mark xv. 40. It is inconceivable that our Lord should have assigned His
mother to the care of John, if she was the mother of four other sons.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.
(Pariuums: Marr. xii, 9-14; Luxe vi. 6-11)


A withered hand restored.—Again it is Sabbath—the day on which the Divine
Son of Man specially delighted to bring joy to the souls and healing to the
bodies of His suffering brethren. Again, too, the sleuth-hounds are on His
track, thirsting for His blood; and this time the trap is so skilfully baited
that they feel sure of securing their prey. Had the ingenuity of these religionists
only bebh directett aright--had they thought Half as inuch df the salvation of
sinners as they did of the safeguarding of their wire-drawn casuistries—what
a mighty work for God could have been accomplished! But, alas! religion
meant to them nothing but a round of outward observances ; they were “blind
as owls to the light of God and true goodness, keen-sighted as hawks for trivial
breaches of their cobweb regulations, and eryel as vultures. to tear with beak
and claw.”:’ Here they stand now in the synagogue, gloating over the spectacle of
affliction that’ meets their éyé, for they are bnvincdd’ that 2Jesus will set at
nought any number of Sabbath traditions, rather than fail to relieve misery.

I. A pitiable object.—The man’s right hand was not only paralysed in the
sinews, but withered up and hopeless. An old tradition recorded in the Gospel
of the Nazarenes and Ebionites adds, that he was a stonemason by trade, and that
he besought Jesus to heal him, and relieve him from having to beg for his bread.


;t i Let us hope; for the credit of huimn nature, that those, are tristaken who believe


fhe Pharigeps themsel vey had prigedythe may to éine there and place himself
~in the Saviour’s way. ~ 3 :
Il. A fearless challenge.—Jesus, fully aware of their hostile thoughts, as if


 {}fo anticipee,any action on their; part, and make the matter as public as pos-


sible, bids the man—* Stand forth.” All is now excitement and expectation
96


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. CHAP. III
a


The looks of the audience pass rapidly from Jesus to the man, and from the
man to the Pharisees, in the consciousness that a crisis is near. Then Jesus
propounds a question, which in the nature of things admits of but one answer
a question which completely cuts the ground from under His enemies’ feet:
“ Ts it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to
lnll?” According to them, only actual danger to life warranted a breach of
the Sabbath law. Jesus meets them, therefore, on their own terms, and shows
how their own principles lead logically to the kind of Sabbath work that they
condemn: “ All good-doing to men’s bodies lies on the line of life; all with-
holding of good-doing lies on the line of killing, or of death. If it would be
wrong, in the absence of higher claims, to withhold the good-doing that would
save life, it must also be wrong, when the higher claims are still absent, to
withhold the good-doing that may be needed to develop life into its fulness of
vigour and beauty.” Such reasoning was unanswerable, and could only be met
by silence on the part of those who were not prepared to endorse and commend
it. If there was still a soft spot in the heart of any one of them, surely Christ’s
words must have suggested the contrast between their murderous designs on
Him, and His zeal for the life and health of all men. But no such thought
seems to have entered their minds. They are speechless—not with conviction,
but with conscious defeat.

III. A Divine look.—St. Mark, who, more than any other Evangelist, records
the lights and shadows that swept over the Saviour’s countenance, tells us that
“ He looked round about upon them with anger, being grieved at the hardening
of their hearts.” They had set themselves to prove Him guilty at all hazards,
and the result was a gradual hardening of the heart, rendering them impervious
to all spiritual impressions and impulses. The anger of Christ is directed against
their sinful opposition to the truth, which was quite inexcusable ; but His loving
heart is full of commiseration for the men themselves, whose state of insensibility
to goodness and compassion was truly perilous and pitiable.

IV. A life-giving command.—“ Stretch forth thine hand.” There is no
manipulation of the stricken member, no touch, no word of healing even ; nothing
but a simple direction to the man to do what was forbidden to none, but what
had been up to that moment impossible to him; and in doing as he was bid,
in making the effort to obey, the vitality returned, “and his hand was restored
whole as the other.” Thus calmly and quietly does Jesus show His enemies
how easy it is for Him to evade their best-laid plots ; thus incontrovertibly does
He prove His superiority to all the powers of evil. Observe, too, “ that no
offence to hypocrites, no danger to Himself, prevented Jesus from removing
human suffering. Also that He expects from the man a certain co-operation
involving faith; he must stand forth in the midst; every one must see his
unhappiness ; he is to assume a position which will become ridiculous unless
a miracle is wrought. Then he must make an effort. In the act of stretching
forth his hand, the strength to stretch it forth is given ; but he would not have
tried the experiment unless he trusted before he discovered the power. Such is
the faith demanded of our sin-stricken and helpless souls—a faith which confesses
its wretchedness, believes in the goodwill of God and the promises of Christ, and
receives the experience of blessing through having acted on the belief that
already the blessing is a fact in the Divine volition.”

V. An unnatural alliance ——The-Pharisees—their pride humbled, their hopes
disappointed, their hearts full of futile rage—first commune one with another
as to what course they should now pursue, and then, calling together the
Herodians, ‘took counsel against Him, how they might destroy Him.” Mis-
fortune, according to an old saw, often brings men into strange company, and
certainly it was so in this case. ‘In theology the Herodians, so far as they


91





{ aae
Me


CHAP, IIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. ;


ob a re


held any theological opinions, fraternised with the Sadducees, the latitudinarians
of that day; in politics they were adherents of Herod Antipas, and so advocates
of the Roman domination. To both these the Pharisees were diametrically
opposed. Yet now they enter into an unholy alliance with those who were at
once their political opponents and religious antagonists.” Lifelong hatreds are
put aside for the nonce, in order that they may make common cause “ against
the Lord, and against His Anointed.”

Lessons,—1. As Christ’s actions and words were watched, so are ours. 2. As
this man found Christ in the sanctuary, so may we. 3. As this man took
Christ at His word, and did exactly what He bade him, so let us. 4. Let us
learn further—(1) For our warning—that not to do good is to do evil; and
(2) For our encouragement—that whatever good we attempt to do, Christ’s power
will work with us and in us.


Ver. 5. Hardness of heart.—It is a true rule and maxim in divinity that sins
against the gospel are most heinous and of greatest provocation. As the sweetest
and strongest wine makes the sourest and sharpest vinegar, so the choicest
favours, if they be despised, provoke in God the greatest displeasure. Now the
main sin against the gospel and grace of God is obstinate impenitency
and unbelief —when we repel and put off from us the offers of God’s grace.
And the root of that is the spirit of obduration and hardness of heart, when
our hearts stand it out with God, and will not give way to the work of His
grace. And this evil, more or less, in some degree or other, is in all men
naturally ; and this is that which our Saviour here discovers and reproves in
His present auditors.

I. The parties affected with this great evil_—l. Look upon them as men
in the state of nature, and then the observation is thus much—that naturally
every man’s heart is full of hardness and obstinacy. God created us in a far
different condition: our spirits were tender; our hearts, hearts of flesh ; the
whole frame and disposition of our souls pliant and yielding to every good
motion. But now, as sin hath depraved and corrupted us, our hearts are not
stirred or affected with any of these. Doth God appear to us, we take no
notice of Him: doth He send His Word to us, we give no credit to it, it
seems a fable to us: doth He command us, we will not obey Him: doth He
promise us, we will not be persuaded: doth He threaten us, we slight and
contemn it. A hard heart is like a brazen wall—shoot never so many arrows
against it, it beats them all back again, they cannot enter: such is a hard
heart; neither God’s Word nor His works, neither judgments nor mercies, can
enter into it to make any impression. See how the Scripture describes and
sets forth this hardness of heart (Ezek. xi. 19; Zech. vii. 12; Jer. vi. 28;
Isa. xlviii. 4). As they say of the disease of the stone, ’tis oftentimes hereditary ;
some children have drawn it from their parents, and been born with it: so
this stone in the heart, ’tis an original evil; we are born in hardness of heart ;
is our natural temper. Indeed, for natural and human affections we have
flesh and tenderness. Self-love, ’tis quick of feeling, and so parents have
their bowels to the fruit of their body; and, in point of humanity to others
in misery, all are not hard-hearted; some are tender and pitiful: but in
matters of God and spiritual duties, for the entertainments of grace, and the
work of conversion, no stone, no adamant, exceeds us in hardness. 2. Look
upon them as men living under the law. These men, whom the text speaks
of, were not wild men and savages, but civil and orderly : yea, more than so,
for their outward state, members of the visible Church, acquainted with the
doctrine and discipline of Moses, they had the circumcision of the flesh,
instructed in the law; and yet how doth Christ find them? Nothing changed


92


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. III.











or altered, not mollified or made tender; but dull, dead-hearted sinners for
all that. See the state of the Jews (Jer. ix. 26). Observe, ’tis not in the
power of the law to alter or change us, to soften and mollify our hard hearts ;
that work belongs to Christ and His gospel, to His grace and Spirit. We
see this work restrained to the new covenant; ’tis proper to the gospel
(Jer. xxxi. 31), The law teaches us, but the gospel enables us; that gives and
works in us what the law requires of us (John i. 17). The law hath power
of conviction, but ’tis the gospel only hath a power of conversion. The law,
that’s the hammer that knocks at the door of our hearts ; but the gospel, that’s
the key that opens it, puts back the bar of obduration, and lets in grace and
the Spirit into it. 3. These men were very forward in outward devotion,
frequenters of the synagogues, great Sabbatarians, and yet under all this
seeming sanctity Christ espies a dead, hard, wicked heart lurking. Observe,
seeming and outside sanctity may go together, and consist with inward and
spiritual hardness and obstinacy. Tis the true constitution of a hypocrite ;
he is all for the outside of religion—there he is excellent ; he will outgo and
exceed all others in show : but look upon his heart ; he wholly neglects it ; that’s
full of hardness and stubborn impiety. (1) "Tis the easiest work. Outward
observances in matter of religion, they cost but little pains; but to work
upon the heart, and to bring that in order, that’s painful and laborious. As
in the practice of physic or chirurgery, ’tis more easy to cure an outward
hurt of the body, that is ill-affected or wounded; but an inward distemper,
when a vein is broken, and it bleeds inward, the curing of this is a great deal more
difficult. (2) ’Tis natural for hypocrisy to leave the heart in hardness, because
it employs all its care in dressing and trimming and adorning the outside.
As those distempers that send all the heat of the body outward, and cause
great flushings in the face, they hinder the inward concoction, cool, and dead
the stomach and vital parts, that they cannot perform their functions: so
hypocrisy sends out all the heat of their piety to the outside, causes great
flushings of piety in the outward man, but chills and cools and deadens the
life of religion in the heart.

II. Their sinful disposition.—Hardness of heart. 1. The subject of this evil
quality is the heart. By heart we are not to understand that particular vital
member of the body as in common speech we use to take it, but in the
Scripture language : so it signifies the soul and spirit of a man. Thus Gen. vi. 5;
Jer. xix. 9; Matt. xv. 19. The whole soul, and all the faculties of it, are per-
verted and hardened, dead and dull to any goodness, froward and obstinate to
any good motion or holy action. As in a distempered clock, wherein both the
spring and the wheels are out of frame, it cannot strike one stroke right.
(1) The mind and understanding, that’s over-grown with hardness and blindness.
Eagle-eyed in worldly things, mole-eyed in spiritual. (2) Our memory in
matters. of religion, how is that dulled and benumbed! how fluid! No reten-
tive power in it for that which is spiritual. Let the seed of the Word be
sown in it; yet the devil comes ana takes it out, that it can have no abiding
inus. (3) The will, of all others, how is that hardened, brawned, steeled! We
may as easily remove mountains, pierce the rocks, melt the flint, as persuade
and prevail with a hard, obdurate will. (4) Our affections, which are quick
and stirring in other matters, how dead and dull are they to spiritual
duties! 2. The quality itself is called “hardness.” Now there is a threefold
hardness of heart. (1) There is, natural and inbred in us, a hardness of heart
which we all bring with us into this world, which makes us so unteachable and
untractable to any good. (2) There is an acquired and a contracted hardness
of heart, which increases that inbred and natural hardness—when custom in
sinning begets in us a firm resolution to continue and persist and go on in sinning’


93


cuap. i  HOMILETIC COMMENTALY: ST. WARK.


(Rom. ii. 5; Heb. iii. 13). (3) There is a hardness inflicted by God, a penal and
punishing hardness—when God punishes a wicked man with this spiritual judg-
ment of 2 hard heart. The inquiry then would be, Wherein doth this hardness
of heart consist? how shall we discern it? what are the properties and effects
of it? Take these four following: (i) Durum non cedit. Those things that
are hard, they are unyielding and impenetrable; whereas that which is soft
will easily admit of any impression. But a stone, touch it, nay offer more
force to it, and strike it, there is yet no yielding in it. And such is the
condition of a hard heart, stubborn and impenetrable. Till this hardness
be removed by the mighty hand of God, there is no working upon it; it will
not give place to any means of grace that God hath appointed, though never
so powerful. (ii) A second property and effect of a hard heart is, Durwm non
sentit; that which is hard and brawny is void of sense and apprehension.
The tenderest flesh, ’tis of quickest apprehension ; but a brawny heart is dull
and insensible. Will you see the stupor and lethargy of a hard heart ¢ Such
a heart, no suggestions of Satan, though never so dreadful, affrights them—they
startle not at them; no inspirations of God’s Spirit doth at all affect them—
they perceive them not; the checks of conscience never move them ; the guilt
of sin doth not dare them or perplex them. They are like Solomon’s drunkard
(Prov. xxiii. 24). (iii) Another property of a hard heart is, Durum non flectitur ;
that which is hard is inflexible. A stone may sooner be broken than bent:
and such is the temper of a hard heart, no art or endeavour can bow or bend
it. (iv) Durum repercutit. ‘There is not only a not yielding in that which is
hard, but there is a resistance, a contrary action repelling and driving back
any action upon it. Smite a stone, and it will not only not yield, but it
enforces the stroke back again. There is a redaction and repercussion in
resistance; it will drive back the strength upon him that smote it. And this
is the disposition of a hard heart; it will resist and oppose itself againss
any action of God, and strive against it. And this resistance will show itself
in three particulars. (a) In stiffness, and pertinacy, and wilfulness of opinion.
(6) In obstinate continuance in wicked courses. (c) In quarrelling and cavil-
ling at any evidence of truth, if it makes against us; it will not suffer us to
yield to the obedience of faith, or captivate ourselves to Divine truth, but will
exalt itself against the knowledge of God.

Conclusion.—1. Is every man’s heart by nature thus hard? It gives us the
reason why so few men are effectually wrought upon by the means of grace,
why so few are converted. "Tis more wonder to see any to yield and turn to
God. Tis easier to get oil out of a flint than a good thought out of a stony
heart. 2. Is the heart of man so overgrown with hardness? It shows the
reason why the work of conversion, even where ‘tis begun, goes So slowly
forward, why such small progress is made in the work of grace. Engravers
upon stone cannot rid much work: they that point and polish diamonds use
much grinding to wear away a little unevenness. The heart of man, ’tis like
metal, not melted but with much fire and heat; and take it off the fire, it will
soon harden of itself. Grace in the heart, ‘tis not like heat in the fire, but
like heat in the water: as long as there is fire under it, so long it retains heat ;
but take it off the fire, it will soon grow cold again. 3. Is every man’s heart
overgrown with this callous obduration? (1) Take heed of increasing it.
(i) Be careful to avoid and abstain even from small sins; they may make up
this evil of obduration. (ii) Especially be careful not to fall into more gross
and notorious sins; they have a special force to harden the heart. Such sins
waste the conscience, make havoc of grace, sear the conscience with a hot
iron. (iii) Wouldst thou not increase this hardness of heart? Above all take
heed of sinning against the light and evidence and dictates of conscience.


94


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. III.





(2) Use all good means to remove it, and to get tender and feeling and
softened hearts. (i) Complain to God, as to the Great Physician of thy soul,
who alone is able to cure this malady. (ii) Then lay thine heart under the
dint and stroke of the Word. That Word, enlivened by His Spirit, is a mighty
instrument to bruise and soften and mollify the heart (Jer. xxiii. 29).
(iii) The daily practice of repentance is of great force to soften our hearts. A
mournful heart will prove a mollified heart. There be two names given to
repentance, which show the virtue of it to work upon the heart. (a) Com-
punction, that enters indeed, and goes to the quick. (6) Contrition, that
bruises and breaks the hardness of heart, and makes capable of any good
impression. A daily dropping upon a hard stone will pierce into it and wear
it away: and so the daily distillations of penitential tears are of great force
to wear away this spiritual hardness of an obdurate heart.—Bishop Brownrigg.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Vers. 1-3. The hand was made for
work, but there arc many withered
hands in society. A celebrated German
economist divides industrial history
into three periods. In the first, nature
was chiefly productive ; in the second,
human toil; in the third, capital.
Inventions have changed the hand’s
labour ; there has been a withering of
the hand before the onward march of
inventive genius. The hand is still
required to guide the machine, but
there are many who consider toil a
disgrace. Fathers once humble in life,
but now rich, make the mistake of not
training their children in the same
industrial habits of life, and in a spirit
of self-reliance. Children of the rich
scorn toil by reason of their inherit-
ance; while the poor, through envy
of the rich, lose consciousness of the
inherent dignity of labour. Unto all
such Christ says, “Stretch forth thy
hand.” ‘Six days shalt thou labour,”
etce.—A. C. Ludlow.

Lessons.—1. Christ’s detection of
human incompleteness. He instantly
discovered that there was a man in
the synagogue with a withered hand.
The musician instantly detects a false
note; the painter instantly detects an
inartistic line; the complete Christ
instantly detects the incomplete man.
2. Jesus Christ's power over partial
disease. The man had only a
withered hand. In some cases Christ
had to heal thoroughly diseased men ;


ON THE VERSES.


in this case the disease was local; yet
in both instances His power was the
same.—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 1. Power of usefulness de-
stroyed.—This man’s disease was not
like the palsy, a type of universal
inaction; nor like some consuming
fever, a type of the way in which sin
and vice pervert all the faculties of
the soul; but there was a vivid picture
of that infirmity which destroys a
man’s power of doing anything well.
The hand of man is one of those noble
physical features which distinguish
him from the brute. ‘The hand” is
but another name for human skill,
power, and usefulness, and for the
studied adaptation of means to ends.
1. The bigotry of these Pharisees
rendered them useless in the great
kingdom of God, and destroyed their
power of serving Christ. 2. Prejudices
wither up some of the energies of men.
3. Past inconsistencies often wither
up the power of service. 4. Easily be-
setting sins will paralyse the usefulness
of any man who does not earnestly wage
war against them.—ZH. R. Reynolds.

Withered hearts and hands.—If there
were no withered hearts, there would
be no withered hands; make the
fountain clear, and the stream will be
pure. A miser, an unfruitful Christian,
a negligent ruler, a strong man who
will not help in any good work—these
are all mere withered hands.


95


CHAP. Il.


Ver. 2. Hollow profession.—W here
religion has become a body of maxims
and doctrines, without life or warmth
or motion—where it is traditional
observance handed down from father
to son, “‘devotion’s every grace, except
the heart”—where it is all intellect
and no affection, all logic without love
—its professors are always strict to
“mark iniquities,” and mere trivial
breaches of religious etiquette may
reap worse punishment than gross
sins. —G. Walker.


Ver. 5. Lessons.—1. It is the duty
of a Christian to sorrow not only for
his own sins, but also to be grieved for
the sins of others. 2. All anger is not
to be considered sinful. 3. He does
not bear the image of Christ, but
rather that of Satan, who can either
behold with indifference the wickedness
of others, or rejoice init. 4, Nothing
is more wretched than an obdurate
heart, since it caused Him who is the
source of all true joy to be filled with
grief in beholding it. 5. Our indig-
‘nation against wickedness must be
tempered by compassion for the persons
of the wicked.—7. H. Horne.

Christ's look.—In that look there
were two things—there were anger
and grief, indignation and inward
sorrow. His was not anger which
desired evil to its object; no touch
of malevolence was in it: it was
simply love on fire, love burning with
indignation against that which is un-
lovely. Mingled with this anger there
was grief. He was heart-broken be-
cause their hearts were so hard. As
Manton puts it, “He was softened
because of their hardness.” His was
not the pitiless flame of wrath which
burns in a dry eye; He had tears
as well as anger. His thunder-storm
brought a shower of pity with it.

The only legitimate anger is a holy
emotion directed against an unholy
thing. Sin, not our neighbour, must
be its object; zeal for righteousness,
not our pride, must be its distin-
guishing character.—Dr. Arnot.

Christ's feelings—Everything that


96


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


He touched burned that pure nature,
which was sensitive to evil like an
infant’s hand to hot iron. His sorrow
and His anger were the two sides of »
the medal. His feelings on looking
on sin were like a piece of woven
stuff with a pattern on cither side :
on one the fiery threads—the wrath ;
on the other the silvery tints of
sympathetic pity. A warp of wrath,
a woof of sorrow, and a dew of flame
married and knit together.—A. Mac-
laren, D.D.

What was hardening their hearts ? —
It was He! Why were their hearts
being hardened? Because they were
looking at Him, His graciousness, His
goodness, and His power, and were
steeling themselves against Him, oppos-
ing to His grace and tenderness their
obstinate determination. Some little
gleams of light were coming into their
houses, and they clapped the shutters
up. Some tones of His voice were
coming into their ears, and they stuffed
their fingers intothem. They half felt
that if they let themselves be influenced
by Him it was all over, and so they
set their teeth and steadied themselves
in their antagonism.—Jbid.

Health by obedience.—The way of
health lay in obedience. Had the
man said, ‘ No, I cannot ”—had he de-
bated, argued, ‘My arm is withered ”
—surely the power of Christ had been
restrained and the man had gone to
his grave a cripple. Christ speaks
tous. He tells us to do what seems
impossible—to repent, believe, love,
pray, trust. If we will be saved,
if we will have soul-health, it must
come to us in the way of obedience.—
G. Walker.

As we work God works.—If we
pass the clear light of day through
a prism, we get many coloured
rays. Our scientific men tell us that
these rays have different properties.
Some carry more heat than others;
some are full of chemical force, and
others have special electric properties.
Now if a man should say, “I will
glaze my conservatory with different
coloured glass ; one compartment shall


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. It


————


be red, another green, another blue,
and so on; and I will pass my plants
from one compartment to another, and
play experiments upon them; and
f will take the arrangement of light
and shade into my own hands,”—you
may imagine the result. He would
make good scientific experiments, but
he would have poor success as a. gar-
dener. He would not get flower or
fruit in perfection, The “Light of
Men” is full-orbed and many-rayed.
To the healthy soul His light appears
clear as the daylight. I fear we have
sometimes too much spectral analysis
in our heavenly things. We seek for
sharp lines of demarcation. So one
man will like the faith-producing ray,
another the work-power, another the
hope-power, another the will-producing
influence. We seem to think, if we
could but tinker up and amend the
weak parts of our nature we might
be saved. These works of mercy,
these acted parables, all bring home
to the heart one great truth, clear
and pure as daylight. They present
differences, but, amid all the difference,
the one truth. They are full of the
entire appeal of Jesus Christ to men.
No matter what be our complaint, or
special weakness, or sin; if all be
diseased, be it ours to take Him in
full reliance on His power and will-
ingness to heal.—Jbzd.

Instant action.—All that saved this
man was that he did not stop to
think. He proceeded as though there
were no difficulties, and forthwith for
him there were none. All Christ’s
commands to unconverted men are in
the present tense, which means that
the command is issued without any
allowance of time for comprehending
the mysteries of salvation or for ac-
quiring power to become a saved man.
It is simply levelled to the range of
the instant; not because thought is
not advantageous in some circum-


stances, but because it is not in point
here. Giving ourselves to Christ is
not a matter of understanding what we
are doing, but a matter of doing some-
thing, as when you tell your boy to
raise his hand; he does not know how
he raises his hand, and you know no
more about it than he as regards the
physiological intricacies of the act.
And if he were to decline raising it
until he understood the matter, you
would tell him to do it first and under-
stand at his leisure; your command
was aimed at his will, and his resort to
the intricacies of physiology only a side
issue raised to divert your attention
from his insubordination. God’s com-
mands stand out of allrelation to human
power to grasp the problems. moral or
theological, associated with obedience
to those commands. God’s commands
are .like the pole-star, which with
swift intuition finds out the magnetic
needle as easily by night-light as by
daylight, and beats upon it with relent-
less compulsion equally in the darkness
and the sunshine. They are not a
question of can, but of will; and with
the will once trembling obediently on
the verge of action, all needed resource
of power is at its instant service.—
C. H. Parkhurst, D.D.


Ver. 6. The working of three deter-
mined and most mischievous powers.—
1. The power of prejudice. 2. The
power of technicality. 3. The power
of ignorance. Prejudice as against
Christ: technicality as opposed to.
humanity: ignorance as forgetful of
the fact that in morals as well as in
physics the greater includes the less.
Sabbath-keeping is less than man-
healing.—J. Parker, D.D.

The madness of enmity.—1. It thinks
that it can destroy Jesus. 2. It does
not see how deeply it condemns itself.
—J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.


9T


OHAP. IIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


0 a eee


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—12.
(ParatteL: Marr. xii. 15-21.)


Christ and His disciples—While Pharisees and Herodians are hatching their
plots against Him in Capernaum or the neighbouring Sepphoris, Jesus with-
draws with His disciples to the purer atmosphere on the borders of the Galilean
Lake. “It is His first retreat before opposition; and careful readers of the
Gospels must observe that whenever the pressure of His enemies became
extreme, He turned for safety to the simple fishermen, among whom they had
no party, since they had preached no gospel to the poor, and that He was
frequently conveyed by water from point to point, easily reached by followers,
who sometimes indeed outran Him upon foot, but where treason had to begin
its wiles afresh.”

I. The popularity of Jesus——1. Though rejected by the leaders both in
Church and State, people flock to Him from all quarters: from North (“Tyre
and Sidon”), South (“Judea,” “J erusalem,” ‘Idumea”), East (“beyond
Jordan”), and West (“Galilee”). “ Even the Gentiles were beginning to rejoice
in Him. In this following multitude we see a prophecy of the great truth that
He should draw all men unto Him. There is that about Jesus which compels
attention, and causes men to seek after Him. He is the real magnet of men.”
9. The motives of those who followed Him were doubtless very mixed. Many
came out of sheer curiosity to witness His miracles; others were attracted
by self-interest, hoping that they or their friends would participate in the
blessings flowing from Him ; but some few, we may hope, were drawn by
higher considerations—because His teaching had found an echo in their hearts,
and they thirsted for deeper draughts of the water of life.

Il. The adaptability of Jesus.—He is equally at home everywhere, and
never ata loss for expedients to meet exceptional circumstances. It is all one
to Him whether He preaches from a ship or in the synagogue, so long as the
great work of His ministry is not retarded. It would have been better for the
Church in days not long gone by if she had shown more elasticity and adapt-
ability to the needs of the times, if she had striven rather for unity of faith than
for uniformity of practice.

TII. Demoniac testimony refused by Jesus——1. He would not have men
believe on Him on the testimony of evil spirits, but on that of God in Scripture,
by His own words and works, and by the Spirit revealing this knowledge from
the Father (Matt. xvi. 17; John xiv. 11). 2. The time had not yet come for
a full revelation of Himself, even to His most intimate friends. Nothing is
more noticeable in our Lord’s teaching than that Divine reserve by which the
truth is kept in abeyance until men are ready to receive it. ‘This action of
Hlis may teach His followers to be discreet. Falsehood indeed is always evil,
but at times reticence is a duty, because certain truths are a medicine too
powerful for some stages of spiritual disease. The strong sun which ripens the
grain in autumn would burn up the tender germs of spring.”

Lessons.—1. Christian effort, if rejected by some, will find acceptance from
others. 2. No service, however trivial, is disdained by Christ, if the heart be
pure. 3. How sad that, while unclean spirits acknowledge the supremacy of
Ohrist, men deny and blaspheme His name.


98


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. III.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 7. Jesus did not court martyr-
dom.—He had one great purpose in
view, and He faced His enemies or
withdrew from them, according as He
could best accomplish His work. He
was not afraid to go away, nor afraid
to remain if need be. In many cases
it is better quietly to withdraw from
a hostile crowd, and do one’s work
elsewhere.—/’. NV. Peloubet, D.D.


Ver. 8. Crowds are not proofs but
means of success.—The fame of the
teaching and the miracles of Jesus
brought great multitudes within reach
of His influence. He could not go to
them all, but they could come to Him.
There is a legitimate popularity from
earnest words and noble deeds.—J/bid.

How did Christ exercise His in-

fluence over great throngs?—l. He
never lowered the moral tone of His
teaching. 2. He was never unequal
to the increasing demands made upon
His power. 3. He never requested
the multitude to help Him in any
selfish endeavours.—/. Parker, D.D.
- Power of the gospel.—l. No subject
can draw such great multitudes as
the gospel. 2. No subject can so
deeply affect great multitudes as the
gospel. 3. No subject can so pro-
foundly and lastingly Oless great
multitudes as the gospel.—J/id.


Ver. 9. Christ nearer by removal.
This putting off from the shore and
separating Himself from the crowd
suggests to us a larger fact in the life
of Jesus. He has gone away from
the earth now to heaven, but He did
so that He might the better save us.
We know that in a vast throng only
a few could even see Him, much less
get at Him to touch Him. So we
cannot help thinking how disadvan-
tageous it would be for us had Jesus
remained on the earth. How many of
the poor, plague-stricken men of earth
could have gone to Him, or rather how
few could have gone to Him! But


ON THE VERSES.


now that He is removed from the
earth to heaven, He is where we may
all see Him by faith, even from the
ends of the earth, and ‘“ His word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in
thy heart,” and all who hear His words
and believe on Him are saved. In fact,
just as Jesus was practically nearer to
the multitude, both for sight and hear-
ing, in that little boat than on land,
so He is nearer to us now than if He
had remained on earth—as near to
the man in China, in India, or Africa
as to us; and “all who call upon
Him” are heard and saved.—G. F.
Pentecost, D.D.


Ver. 10. These méiracles—l. Illus-
trate and express in visible, tangible
forms the lovingkindness of God, His
goodwill toward men, His desire for
their happiness, and His care to make
them free from every evil. 2. The
blessed effects of Christ’s mission proved
it to be Divine. And to-day, as in
those days, the convincing proof of
Christianity is found in its beneficent
effects. It makes everybody better
who accepts it. The drunkard becomes
sober, the selfish becomes generous, the
vile becomes pure. Schools, colleges,
education, hospitals, missions, all forms
of benevolence, spring up wherever
Christ is believed. Wherever there is
the most Christianity, there is the most
of all the things that raise and bless
men. The map of the world is the
proof of the Christian religion. 3. They
manifest the power and presence of
God in nature, and in His daily provi-
dence. Wherever any one act shews
God’s presence, He is wholly present
with all His power and all His love.—
F. N. Peloubet, D.D.


Vers. 11, 12. The testimony of the
demons.—The publication of Jesus’
real character and office by demons’
lips was only an act of spite. Their
intention was to force on the antagonism
between truth and error, between


99


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


(a hie (0 ee ees


holiness and sin, and prematurely to
bring this Divine history to a tragic
close. Therefore Jesus declined this
testimony. By the force of His mighty
will He silenced these evil spirits;
and hereby He demonstrates that it


has discovered a more excellent way.
The will which Divine power has
created, Divine power can destroy.
Better that Christ should not be made
known than that He should be made
known by unclean spirits. To be a


true servant or preacher of Christ I


is possible to crush all hostility —
must be clean—J. D. Davies.


human or Satanic—by the exercise
of superior power. But His wisdom


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—19.
(Paratiers: Marr. x. 1-8; Luxe vi. 12-16.)


Choice and commission of the twelve.—lt is recorded of Israel's first king,
while still in the zenith of his royal estate, that when he saw any strong man
or any valiant man he took him unto himself, and thus recruited the ranks of
the Lord’s host (1 Sam. xiv. 52). So here does the true King of Israel and of
all men call to Himself twelve choice spirits—the best material to be found in
His band of followers—in order that they may be trained under His personal
supervision in the true principles of spiritual warfare, and form the nucleus of
the heavenly kingdom which He has come to set up on earth. ‘The appoint-
ment of the twelve apostles was in an especial sense an act which marked the
inauguration of that kingdom, an act by which our Lord represented the
assumption of the powers which belonged to Him as the true Sovereign of


the theocracy, for which all the institutions of Judaism were understood by .


the people of Israel themselves to have been but preparatory.” As at other
critical times in His ministry, so now, the Pattern Man consecrates Himself
to this great work by prayer (Luke v. 12). He also directs the whole body
of the disciples to pray the Lord of the Harvest that He would send forth
labourers into His harvest (Matt. ix. 38); and ever since, from the ordination
of Matthias to the present time, the Church has sought the special guidance of
aS oe Spirit, by prayer and fasting, before proceeding to the laying on
of hands.

I. The choice of the twelve.—The ministry in the apostles derived its origin
and commission, not from the Church or from the people, but from Christ.
It was in the power of Christ to have called all His people together, and bid
them choose their future rulers from amongst themselves; but He did not do
so-—they were chosen by Christ alone, who Himself designated them, and
afterwards breathed upon them when He ordained them with full apostolic
power. And when it pleased Christ to raise up two other apostles, it was by
the Holy Ghost saying, ‘Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them”; and the latter expressly disclaims any
commission from the people (Gal. i. 1).

TI. The men chosen.—l. The most noticeable thing is the disproportion
between their natural abilities and the work they were set to do. All other
great leaders of thought have striven first to secure the adherence of men
“ whose vigorous character or commanding position would give them a certain
influence over the men of their time.” It was not so with Christ. “The
channels through which His influence was to be conveyed were such as could
contribute nought to its fulness; the fibres along which the electric current
of His own impulsive energy was to run were to be simply passive in the
transmission.” Passing by the courtier and the soldier, the noble and the sage,


100


ee


oo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. Itt.


AA be
a


He selected His first ministers from classes not indeed oppressed by want, but
lowly and unsophisticated and of little account in the world’s eyes. 2. Yet
among the twelve, all drawn from the lower ranks of society, there was
evidently great diversity of character. Each was a man of marked individuality.
Notes on their personal characteristics will be found in the Outlines and
Comments on the Verses.

IIT. Their commission.—1. “That they should be with Him”—observing
His demeanour, and His manner of conveying instruction both by word and
act ; treasuring up in their minds the heavenly principles by which He was
ever actuated ; drinking in, little by little, some portion of the Divine Spirit
which was given to Him without measure. 2. “That He might send them
forth to preach ”—to proclaim to all, high and low, rich and poor, the glad
tidings of salvation through faith in Him. 3. “To have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out demons”—thus carrying on the war begun by Him
against the devil and all his works, a war in which “ there is no discharge” until
the kingdom of darkness is utterly destroyed, and the kingdom of God and of
His Christ is universally established in its place.


Ver. 14. Unrecorded workers and heroes.—Half of these twelve are never heard
of again as doing any work for Christ.

I. This peculiar and unexpected silence suggests the true worker in the
Church’s progress—not man, but Christ.—Men are nothing except as instru-
ments and organs of God. He is all. 1. How this should deliver us from all
over-estimate of men, to which our human affections and our feeble faith tempt
us so sorely! 2. What confidence it ought to give us as we think of the tasks
and fortunes of the Church! One man with Christ to back him is always in
the majority.

II. This silence of Scripture as to so many of the apostles may be taken
as suggesting what the real work of these delegated workers was.—The one
thing that must be found in an apostle was that he should have been in familiar
intercourse with Christ during His earthly life, both before and after His
resurrection, in order that he might be able to say, “I knew Him well; I know
that He died; I know that He rose again; I saw Him go up to heaven.” For
such a work there was no need for men of commanding power. Plain, simple,
honest men who had the requisite eyewitness were sufficient. The sharpest
weapon which any can wield for Christ is the simple adducing of his own
personal experience. Christ is the true worker, and all our work is but to
proclaim Him, and what He has done and is doing for ourselves and for all men.

III. We may gather the lesson of how often faithful work is unrecorded and
forgotten—1. For most of us, our service has to be unnoticed and unknown.
The earnestness and the accuracy with which we strike our blow are all im-
portant; but it matters nothing how far it echoes. 2. The magnitude of our
work in men’s eyes is as little important as the noise of it. Were the Peters and
the Johns more highly favoured than the others? Was their work greater in
His sight? Not so. To Him all service done from the same motive is the same,
and His measure of excellence is quantity of love and spiritual force in our
deeds, not the width of the area over which they spread. 3. All service done
for the same motive in the same force is of the same worth in His eyes. ‘Small
service is true service while it lasts.”

IV. Forgotten work is remembered, and unrecorded names are recorded
above.—1. The forgotten work and workers are remembered by Christ. 2. The
forgotten and unrecorded work lives, too, in the great whole. The fruit of our
labour may perhaps not be separable from that of others, any more than the
sowers can go into the reaped harvest-field and identify the gathered ears which


101


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








have sprung from the seed that they sowed, but it is there all the same; and


whosoever may be unable to pick out each


man’s share in the blessed total


outcome, the Lord of the Harvest knows, and His accurate proportionment of
individual reward to individual service will not mar the companionship in the


general gladness, when “he that sowet


together.”
doers.


h and he that reapeth shall rejoice
3. The forgotten work will live, too, in the blessed results to the
Habits are formed, emotions deepened, principles confirmed, capacities


enlarged, by every deed done for Christ, which make an over-measure of reward


here, and in their perfect form hereafter are heaven.
“Thou shalt find it after many days.” —A. Maclaren, D.D.


is ever wasted.


Nothing done for Him


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 13, 14. Ohrist’s call and man’s
response.—I. Christ’s call here is—
1. Addressed to those whom He has
already tested. 2. A call to higher
service and heavier responsibility.
Hitherto they have been learners ;
henceforth they are to be teachers and
healers as well.

II. Those called responded—l. Of
their own free will. The only con-
straint Christ ever uses is that of
love. 2. Promptly. They answer to
their names like soldiers at roll-call—
only waiting for orders—ready to do
ordie. 3. Openly. Secret discipleship,
besides being cowardly and mean,
thwarts the very object Christ has in
view—which is, the transformation of
mere followers into apostles, the con-
version of the world by the instrument-
ality of men.

Apostleship from discipleship.—Out
of the heart of the discipleship came the
apostleship. 1. Disciple means learner.
The idea rests entirely between two
persons, the teacher and the scholar.
It involves nothing but the receiving of
knowledge by some one docile mind.
But apostle means missionary. Itsidea
is utterance or sending forth. What
the disciple has drunk into his own satis-
fied soul, the apostle is to carry abroad,
wherever there are men to hear it.
When, then, Jesus turned His disciples
into apostles, you see what an event it
was. It was really the flowering of
that gospel which He had been pouring
into them through all their disciple-
ship. The plant fills itself with the
richness of the earth. No noise is


102


made. The whole transaction lies
between the plant and the rich earth
that feeds it through its open roots.
All is silent, private, restricted. But
some day the world looks, and, lo! the
process has burst open. Upon the
long-fed plant is burning a gorgeous
flower for the world to see. The earth
has sent its riéhness through the plant
to enlighten and to bless the world.
The disciple has turned to an apostle.
2. Notice, when Jesus took this great
step forward, He did not leave behind
His old life with His disciples. He
chose out of the number of His disciples
twelve, whom also He named apostles.
They were to be disciples still. They
did not cease to be learners when He
made them missionaries. The plant
does not cease to feed itself out of
the ground when it opens its glorious
flowers for the world to see. All the
more it needs supply, now that it has
fulfilled its life. And so this great
epoch in the Christian Church was
an addition, not a substitution. 3. It
is out of the very heart of the disciple-
ship that the apostleship proceeds. It
is the very best, the choicest, as we
say, of the disciples that are chosen
to be apostles. Always it is the best
of the inward life of anything, that
which lies the closest to its heart and
is the fullest of its spirit, which flowers
into the outward impulse which comes
to complete its life. It is the most
truly thorough learning which by-and-
by begins to be dissatisfied with its
own learned luxury, and to desire that
all men should have the chance of


rare“ ume 0 Mette EO wt pn i de me, ee! ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





CHAP. III.








knowledge. It is the most true refine-
ment that believes in the possible re-
finement even of the coarsest man.
The heart of any good thing is catholic
and expansive. It longs to give itself
away, and believes in the capacity of
all men to receive it.—Bishop Phillips
rooks.


Vers. 14, 15. Christian privilege and
power.—I. The Christian’s privilege—
1. To preach, filling Christ’s place,
doing Christ’s work, obeying Christ’s
word. 2. The subject of this preach-
ing. Proclaiming the advent of God’s
kingdom on earth.

II. The Christian’s power —1. In the
manifestation of Christian sympathy
for the afflicted. 2. In the uplifting of
earnest prayer and supplication for the
souls of men. 3. In the possession and
disposal of his substance to compass
both these objects, and exhibit by his
works his faith.

The best endowment.—We need not
zegret that we have not the power to
work miracles: we have something
better. We have the living, life-
giving Word of God. We have the
promise of the Spirit ; and by the Word
and the Spirit moral miracles are
being wrought every day. Preach and
pray; plant and water: God will give
the increase.

Sufficient equipment for every emer-
gency.—At first the apostles had a
smaller gospel (they had not got the
Cross to preach) and a larger power
of miracles; afterwards less miracles,
but more gospel; but always a sufii-
cient equipment. You have not to
make bricks without straw; Christ
gives you “ power” for every duty.—
f. Glover.


Ver. 15. Fromtemporal to spiritual.
How is it that the common-sense
view of Christian Missions, on the prin-
ciple of acting first on men’s secondary
motives by relieving their temporal
distresses, and as that principle is
sanctioned by the practice of Christ
and His apostles, has so much been
lost sight of in the foreign operations


of our Church? Of all human quali-
fications for a missionary’s Divine
work, I should say that the knowledge
of medicine was the most likely, under
God’s blessing, to prove useful “to the
furtherance of that gospel” which is
the healing of men’s souls (Col. iv. 14 ;
2 Cor. viii. 18).—J. Ford.


Vers. 16-19. The apostles.—1. Points
in which the apostles were alike.
(1) Social position: neither very poor
nor very rich. Wealth, rank, high
worldly position, are not necessary in
order to employment and usefulness
in the cause of God; and vice versd.
(2) Mental attainments: neither very
learned nor very ignorant. Scholar-
ship, the very highest, may be con-
secrated to the service of Christ; but
is not indispensable to Christian
usefulness. (3) Religious characters:
in the main, sincere, yet defective.
(4) Business aptitudes. So far as we
know, they were all called from real
business life. 2. Points in which they
were manifestly different. There was
no one distinct mental type, and no
one special mental characteristic is of
exclusive or predominant importance
for Christian service. All ministers
are not of the same order of mind.
Some are noted for the predominance
of the imaginative ; some of the logical ;
some of the metaphysical; some of the
emotional ; some, we might almost say,
of the intuitional propensity or power.
Souls are saved, instrumentally, by
men as men, and not by men just as
reasoners, scholars, poets, orators, ete.—
G. J. Adeney.

The apostles were plain men who had
not been perverted by the false philo-
sophies, traditions, and morals of the
day. They were mostly working men,
business men, practical men, but of
great variety of early training, and of
business life. Some were poor; some
were comparatively well off ; some be-
longed to country villages, some to the
city ; several were fishermen ; one was
a publican, one a zealot. They were
men of ability ; there were great pos-
sibilities in them. Christ transformed


103


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


SU Ais Mc iar oe sas aoe ee


common men into apostles, the founda-
tion stones of the New Jerusalem, the
leaders of the kingdom that was to
transform the world. The charcoal
was changed into diamonds. They were
far from faultless, but the faults were
flaws in a jewel, not the crudeness of
the charcoal.—F. WV. Peloubet, D.D.
Relationships among the apostles.—
The difficulties connected with tracing
the family descent or possible relation-
ship between the apostles are so great
that we must forego all hope of arriving
at any certain conclusion. But these
points seem clear. First, it appears
that only the calling of those to the
apostolate is related, which in some
sense is typical, viz. that of Peter and
Andrew, of James and John, of Philip
and Bartholomew (Nathanael), and of
Matthew the publican. Yet, secondly,
there is something which attaches to
each of the others. Thomas, called
Didymus (‘‘ twin”), is closely connected
with Matthew. James is expressly
named as the son of Alpheus or


Clopas. This we know to have been
also the name of Matthew-Levi’s
father. But, as the name was a


common one, no inference can be
drawn from it, and it does not seem
likely that the father of Matthew
was also that of James, Judas, and
Simon, for these three seem to have
been brothers. James is designated
by St. Matthew as Lebbus, from
Lebh, a heart, and is also named
Thaddeus, a term which we would
derive from Thodah, praise. In that
case both Lebbeus and Thaddeus
would point to the heartiness and the
thanksgiving of the apostle, and hence
to his character. St. Luke simply
designates him Judas of James, we.
the brother (less probably, son) of
James. Thus his real name would
have been Judas Lebbeus, and his
surname Thaddeus. Closely connected
with these two is Simon, surnamed
Zelotes or Cananean, both terms
indicating his original connection
with the Galilean Zealot party. His
position in the Apostolic Catalogue,
and the testimony of Hegesippus


104


(Euseb., H. £., iii, 11, iv. 22), seem to
point him out as the son of Clopas,
and brother of James, and of Judas
Lebbeus. These three were, in a
sense, cousins of Christ, since, accord-
ing to Hegesippus, Clopas was the
brother of Joseph, while the sons of
Zebedee were real cousins, their mother
Salome being a sister of the Virgin.
Lastly, we have Judas Iscariot, or
Ish Kerioth, “a man of Kerioth,” a
town in Judah (Josh. xv. 25). Thus
the betrayer alone would be of Judean
origin, the others all of Galilean ; and
this may throw light on not a little in
his after-history.—A. Hdersheim, D.D.

Three groups of apostles.—It can
hardly be without significance that in
all the apostolic lists they are divided
into the same three groups. 1. In
the first group we should naturally
expect to find the men of the largest
and strongest make-—those whose
capacity and force of character would
fit them to lead the rest. And this
expectation is justified. Peter and
Andrew, James and John, are the
natural leaders of the apostolic com-
pany. We might almost call them
the Boanergic group, so marked and
emphatic is the strain of passion
in their service. 2. In the second
group are the reflective men. Philip
is the leader, and he was a man who
would rather see than believe. They
are excellent and thoughtful men, but
they will not do much for the world
apart from men of a more forward
and adventurous spirit than their own.
3. The third we may call the He-
braistie or practical group. (1) They
held stoutly to the old Hebrew forms
of truth and righteousness, and were
at least as much Hebrew as Christian
to the end, (2) They were also men
of practical gifts. This is especially
seen in Judas—a man chosen to carry
the bag because he was careful,
prudent, busy, good at buying and
selling, conversant with the world.—
T. T. Lynch.


Ver. 16. Simon, son of Jonas
(Matt. xvi. 17; John xxi. 15, 16, 17),


- —?—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. III. ,


ee


was surnamed Peter=a rock, by our
Lord (Luke vi. 14; John i! 42;
Matt. xvi. 18 f.), was a fisherman by
occupation (Matt. iv. 18, 19; Luke
v. 3-12; Matt. xvii. 27; John xxi. 3);
originally of Bethsaida (John i, 44,
xi, 21), afterwards of Capernaum
(Mark i. 21, 29); a married man
(Mark i. 30; 1 Cor. ix, 5); eager and
impetuous, and with feelings easily
roused (Luke. v. 8; Matt. xiv. 28,
xvi. 16, xxvi. 33; Luke xxii. G1, 62;
John xiii. 6, 9, 37, xxi. 7); one of the
three with our Lord at the raising
of Jairus’ daughter (Mark vy. 37), at
the Transfiguration (Matt. xvii. it
2 Pet. i. 16-19), and in the Garden
of Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi. 37). He
denied our Lord with oaths and curses
(Matt. xxvi. 69-75), but was pardoned
and restored (Mark. xvi. 7; Luke
exe) OL, .32"s John xxi: 15-18) ;
preached on the day of Pentecost
(Acts ii. 14, 38); healed the lame man
(Acts i. 4, 6, 7); spoke before the
Sanhedrin (Acts iv. 8, 19, v. 29) ;
reproved Ananias and Sapphira (Acts
v. 3, 4, 8, 9); was followed by multi-
tudes (Acts v. 15, 16); confirmed in
Samaria (Acts viii. 14, 17); healed
a man long sick (Acts ix. 33, 34);
raised a dead woman to life (Acts
ix. 40, 41); had a vision, declaring
God’s will concerning the admission of
the Gentiles (Acts x. 9, 17); admitted
Cornelius and his company into the
Church (Acts x. 46-48); was reproved
by St. Paul (Gal. ii. 11-15). His
death was foretold by our Lord (John
xxi. 18, 19), and he is said to have
been crucified at Rome with his head
downwards. He is known in Christian
Art by the key or keys (Matt. xvi. 19).
—W. F. Shaw.

Stmon Peter.—In a Continental pic-
ture-gallery there are to be seen, side
by side, the first and the last works of
a great artist. ‘The first is very crude
and faulty ; the last is a masterpiece.
The contrast shows the result of long
culture and practice. So in this verse
we have two pictures. ‘ Simon”
shows us the rough fisherman of
Galilee—ignorant, rash, blundering.


“Peter” shows us the apostle in his
Pentecostal strength—the courageous
leader, powerful speaker, brave martyr.
It is not hard, remarks an American
writer, to take roses, lilies, fuchsias,
and all the rarest flowers, and with
them make forms of exquisite beauty ;
but to take weeds, dead grasses, dried
leaves, trampled and torn, and faded
flowers, and make lovely things out of
such materials, is the severest test
of skill. Yet that is what Christ is
always doing. He takes the poorest
stuff—despised and worthless, outcast
of men ofttimes; and when He has
finished His gracious work we behold
a saint whiter than snow.


Ver. 17. James and John, like Simon,
were fishermen (Matt. iv. 21, 22;
John xxi. 2, 3), in somewhat better
circumstances, possibly, than some of
the apostles (Mark i. 20); surnamed
Boanerges, or “sons of thunder”
(Mark iii. 17), on account of their
fiery zeal (Luke ix. 52-55); were with
our Blessed Lord at the house of
Jairus, on the Mount of Transfigura-
tion, in the Garden; were ambitious
(Matt. xx. 20-24), but did drink of
Christ’s cup of suffering, and were
baptised with His baptism of blood,
James being a martyr in deed, John
a martyr in will, James being the
first of the apostles who was put
to death for Christ’s sake and the
gospel’s (Acts xii. 2), John dying in
extreme old age, the last of all the
apostles, after having suffered per-
secution and exile to Patmos (Rev. i. 9),
after having been cast into a cauldron
of boiling oil and escaping unhurt, and
after having drunk of a poisoned cup
and felt no harm (cf. Mark xvi. 18).
John lived on at Ephesus unto extreme
old age, until men even began to say
that he should not die (John xxi. 23),
and until he was so feeble that he was
obliged to be carried through the streets
in a litter, when, as the Christians
crowded round him to receive his bless-
ing, his one constant word of exhorta-
tion to them was, “Little children,
love one another.” —W. F. Shaw.


105


CHAP. ITI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Wigs ade eyeokey Oe ee


Ver. 18. Andrew, one of the first
two to follow Christ (the other was
probably John), has been called ‘“ the
usher” of the Apostolic College. It
seems as if his strong point was a
certain tact for bringing peopletogether
(John i, 42, vi. 8, xii, 22). Probably
he was of an unobtrusive and a practi-
cal turn of mind, ready at all times to
perform those little offices of kindness
and love on which the happiness of
life so much depends. He is said to
have preached in Scythia and Sarmatia
(i.e. Poland and Southern Russia), and
to have suffered martyrdom by cruci-
fixion at Patre, in the north of the
Peloponnese of Greece.

Philip was a sincere but timid seeker
of the truth: one of those who can
hardly walk alone in the world, and
need the support and sympathy of a
friend, in good report and evil report.
The moment he has been found by
Jesus, he goes and confers with a
friend, and brings him to judge
whether or no He be the Christ
(John i. 45, 46). He can hardly dare
approach our Lord in behalf of some
strangers without getting one of his
brethren to go with him (John xii. 22).
It is said that he preached the gospel
in Asia Minor more particularly, and
suffered martyrdom at Hierapolis in
Phrygia.

Bartholomew is generally supposed
to have been the same person as
Nathanael, who was a friend of Philip
before they both became followers of
Christ (John i. 45, 46). St. John
always couples Nathanael, as the other
Evangelists do Bartholomew, with
Philip; and while they never mention
Nathanael, he never mentions Bartholo-
mew, but speaks of Nathanael instead.
He belonged to Cana of Galilee
(John xxi. 2); was highly commended
by Christ (John i. 47); and was one
of the seven who saw the Lord by the
Sea of Tiberias (John xxi. 1, 2). He
is said’ to have preached the gospel
in Armenia, converted the Lycaonians,
afterwards visited the extreme confines
of India, and finally to have been flayed
alive by order of Astyages, King of


106


Armenia; for this reason he is repre-
sented in Christian Art with a flaying-
knife, and often also as holding the
gospel in his hands.

Obscure Christians. — Bartholomew
was one of the obscure, unknown Chris-
tians, Yet these men make up the
army of God. It is the aggregate of
small things that makes life. Itis the
stream of pennies that fills the treasury
of God. The numberless leaves make
the forest; the innumerable sands
bound the sea. Not brilliant efforts,
but repeated efforts, carry on the
world’s progress. Thread by thread
the cloth is woven; rail by rail the
bands of steel encircle the earth ; brick
by brick the city is built. The one-
talented men, like Bartholomew, make
the world and the Church. The impor-
tant people are the privates rather
than the generals, the machinists rather
than the mechanics, the ploughmen
rather than the agriculturists, the
pioneers rather than the emigrant
agents, the loomsmen rather than the
overseers, the faithful men of medio-
crity rather than the brilliant men of
genius.

Matthew.—The choice of Matthew,
the man of business, is chiefly explained
by the nature of his Gospel, so explicit,
orderly, and methodical, and, until it
approaches the Crucifixion, so devoid
of fire.—Dean Chadwick.

Thomas is mentioned four times in
the Gospels, apart from the record in
the lists of apostles.
show us—l. His great love for Christ
(John xi. 16). 2. His inquiring spirit
(John xiv. 5). 3. That he, like the
rest, would not believe in the resurrec-
tion of Christ until he had actually
seen Him (John xx. 24, 25). 4. That
the sight of the Risen Lord not only
restored his faith, but brought absolute
conviction of Christ’s Godhead (John
xx,/26):

James the son of Alpheus or Clopas
(John xix. 25), and Mary the sister
of the blessed Virgin Mary, hence
called “the brother,” ¢.e. cousin of the
Lord (Matt. xiii, 55; Mark vi. 3;
Gal. i. 19), called also “the little”


These notices:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK ;


CHAP. III.


a es ee


(Mark. xv. 40). We know little of
him till after the Resurrection, when
our Lord vouchsafed to appear specially
to him (1 Cor. xv. 7), doubtless to in-
struct him in the things pertaining to
the kingdom of God, and to the office
of Bishop of Jerusalem, to which he was
about to be chosen. For we find him
occupying this position (ep. Acts ix. 27,
with Gal. i. 18, 19; Acts xii. 17,
xv. 13, 19; Gal. ii. 9,12; Acts xxi. 18),
and indeed held in such esteem by the
people of Jerusalem that he was called
“James the Just.” He is the author
of the Epistle which bears his name—
was martyred by being cast down from
the battlement of the Temple, stoned,
and finally despatched with a fuller’s
club, as he was praying for his mur-
derers.—W. F, Shaw.


Ver. 19. Judas.—In the life of
Judas there was a mysterious imper-
sonation of all the tendencies of godless
Judaism, and his dreadful personality
seems to express the whole movement
of the nation which rejected Christ.
We see this in the powerful attraction
felt toward Messiah before His aims


were understood, in the deadly estrange-
ment and hostility which were kindled
by the gentle and self-effacing ways of
Jesus, in the treachery of Judas in the
garden and the unscrupulous wiliness
of the priests accusing Christ before
the governor, in the fierce intensity of
rage which turned his hands against
himself and which destroyed the nation
under Titus. Nay, the very sordidness
which made a bargain for thirty pieces
of silver has ever since been a part of
the popular conception of the race.
We are apt to think of a gross love
of money as inconsistent with intense
passion ; but in Shylock, the compatriot
of Judas, Shakespeare combines the
two.—Dean Chadwick.

Judas among the twelve a sign of —
1. The all-endeavouring love of Christ.
2. The greatness of human depravity.
3. The dangers of the spiritual office
(or of a mere external connexion with
the Lord) without perfect fidelity in
the spiritual life (an internal union
with Him). 4. The aim and end of
the Church-—not a community of per-
fect saints, but of redeemed men,.—
J. P. Lange, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 20—30,
(Parattets: Marr. xii. 22-37; Luxe xi. 14-23.)


Christ misunderstood and misrepresented.The paragraph begins properly
with the last clause of ver. 19: “And they went into an house” [see R.V.
for variations in reading and rendering]. Robert Stephens, who first divided
the Bible into verses, began a verse with these words, as was right; but Beza
set the fashion of adding them to ver. 19, which was unfortunately followed
by the A.V. translators. They really begin the account of Christ’s fourth
sojourn in Capernaum, some weeks after His selection of the apostles.

I. Misunderstood by friends.—They judged Him, observes Dean Chadwick,
as men who profess to have learned the lesson of His life still judge, too often,
all whose devotion carries them beyond the boundaries of convention and
convenience. There is a curious betrayal of the popular estimate of this world
and the world to come, in the honour paid to those who cast away life in battle,
or sap it slowly in pursuit of wealth or honour, and the contempt expressed for
those who compromise it on behalf of souls, for which Christ died. Whenever
by exertion in any unselfish cause health is broken, or fortune impaired, or
influential friends estranged, the follower of Christ is called an enthusiast, a
fanatic, or a man of unsettled mind. He may take comfort from the thought
that his Master was said to be beside Himself—and that, too, by His own


107


CHAP. Ill. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


friends—when zeal for God and love for souls kept Him too busy to think of
bodily sustenance and rest. ‘

II. Misrepresented by foes.—The scribes are quick to turn to their own
advantage the admission of Christ’s friends that He is “beside Himself.
Unable to deny the reality, or the miraculous nature, of the cures He wrought
(see Matt. xii, 22), they insidiously suggest that while His own reason 1s
dislodged Satan himself is in possession of its throne. As much as to say:
“He is an incarnation of the Evil One, and by Satan’s own power He expels
the subordinate demons.” No doubt that was possible. If Satan, at that
particular period, was permitted to exercise, through his emissaries, a certain
power over men’s bodies and’ minds, it is reasonable to suppose that he might
still retain authority over those emissaries, and be able to recall them at any
time he chose. The only question is, Would he be likely to do so? Would
such a policy serve his purpose? To the elucidation of this problem Christ
addresses Himself.

III. The scribes triumphantly confuted.— Whether the powers of darkness,
presided over by Satan, be compared to a “kingdom,” from the wide extent
of their influence, and the completeness of their organisation ; or to a “ house,”
from the closeness of their intimacy, and the identity of their interests,—in
either case division is fatal to them—subversive of their design, and destructive
of their power. The kingdom is brought to desolation, the house falls to pieces,
by the mutual jealousies and aggressions of their component members. Such
would be the effect of Satan casting out Satan—of the chief of the devils
co-operating with one who went about dispossessing and healing his victims. The
conclusion was inevitable: that not Beelzebub, but God, was with Him who did
these things; that the kingdom of Satan was being brought to nought, not by
internal dissensions, but by external force—by the supervening of a stronger
influence and more powerful Monarch.

IV. The true state of the case explained.—Still speaking under the veil
of parable or allegory, Christ now draws a picture of a strong man living in
the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. The illustration reminds us of the
turbulent times of our own country a few centuries ago, when the knights
and barons with their retainers, each in his stronghold, maintained an armed
neutrality against all comers. But peace which is merely preserved by strength
is liable at any moment to be disturbed and overthrown by greater strength.
So here: the strong man is bound, his house invaded and plundered. In
attempting to expound the inner meaning of this, it may be well to include
the further details added in Luke xi. 21, 22. 1. The “strong man armed”
is Beelzebub or Satan: strong by natural endowments, a powerful spirit, who
had already even dared to defy the Most High; strong also in “his armour
wherein he trusted,” to enable him still to wage war, and after each defeat
to reappear, if possible, stronger than before. 2. By “his armour” we may
understand his agents, other wicked spirits, who, like himself, kept not their —
first estate ; but, not being so strong and ambitious as he, naturally fell inti
a sort of dependence on him. 3. With the aid of these his active instrumentr
Satan is enabled to “keep his palace,” z.e. to maintain his dominion over tha
souls and bodies of those unhappy men who have once been “taken captive
by him at his will.” Every sinner may truly be said to be “ possessed with
a demon,” and sometimes with more than one, as Mary Magdalene (Luke viii. 2)
and the Gadarene (Mark viii. 30). So some are possessed by many sins,

serving divers lusts and passions ”—divers, as directed towards different
objects, but all having a common source and parentage—all “of their father
the devil,” and ever ready to “do the lusts of their father,” as well as to
co-operate with and inflame each other. 4. And who is he who proves himself

108


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. I.
ce eS eS EE AES RS ae aL ae Ca eT EE ee


stronger than this strong man, able to bind him and spoil his house? Not one
of the same kind, another passion, a stronger devil; but an antagonist in nature
and principle, as well as in act. Such was He who spoke these words. His
great mission was to “destroy the works of the devil”; and His nature was
Divine (see Isa. xlix. 24, 25, lxiii. 5). Throughout His ministry Christ invari-
ably acted as a Victor in His dealings with the demons: commanding them
with authority ; rebuking them ; not suffering them to speak ; permitting them
as an indulgence, to enter into the lower animals, and wreak their impotent
spite on those who had no souls to be destroyed or saved. He also enabled
His servants to do the same (Mark iii.15; Lukex. 17), And ever since, though
Satan is still permitted to “go about seeking whom he may devour,” he has
been restrained from exercising his power in the way of bodily possession; and
with respect to the influence which he may still exert over the spiritual part
of us, he finds that he has to deal with One stronger than himself—even with
Him who, having grappled with and overcome him once for all upon the Cross,
is ever ready to renew on behalf of every individual soul the battle that He then
fought for the whole human race. By virtue of that victory we are now His
“ goods,” His lawful “spoil,” His purchased possession ; and so long as we fight
under His banner we are secure. Satan cannot lay a finger on the man who
is alive to the responsibilities of his Christian calling, who is diligent in the
use of the means of grace, who lives in the atmosphere of prayer, who “takes


-unto him the whole armour of God,” “and fights the good fight of faith.”


V. The scribes solemnly warned.—Christ has submitted His claim, in
an argument full of sweet reasonableness and touching forbearance, to the
better judgment of His foes; but now He declares, with solemn emphasis, as
being in possession of the secrets of the Almighty, the principles upon which
the world of spirits is administered. He asserts that sin has its scale, its
climax. There are sins of instinct, and of passion, and of ignorance. Where
there is little light to be guided by, there is little light to sin against. The next
step is where there is deliberation before the sin is committed. The last and
worse stage is where not only the deliberate judgment is gone against, but the
attempt is made to deny the principle of judgment in the soul itself. The hands
of the watch move backwards ; the lamp flags with the very abundance of oil ;
the man’s soul dies, Over against the words, “‘ Repent! Be ye forgiven!” stand
these—“ Irreclaimable! Unforgivable!” These scribes had now wrought
themselves up to such a pitch of hatred against Jesus, that they were standing,
as it were, on the very brink of the precipice ; and in the extremity of His love
the Saviour utters this tremendous warning, to keep them from taking the
fatal plunge. [In the Homilies that fellow, this difficult subject is discussed from


various points of view. |


The sin against the Holy Ghost.—I. The dignity of the person of the Holy
Ghost.—This is implied in the assertion, that whoso speaketh against the Son
of Man may be forgiven, while he that speaketh against the Holy Ghost
cannot. The power of Deity was inherent in the Incarnate Saviour; and He
told the Jews expressly that it was by the Spirit of God that He cast out
devils. Had He been a created Intelligence, would our Saviour have spoken
as He does in the text? Had the Holy Spirit been inferior, in essential dignity,
to the Father and the Son, would He have been joined with them in one name
in the sacred form of Christian baptism? And would the new creation, the
spiritual resurrection in the sinner’s soul, have been ascribed to His sacred
agency ? ;

II. The nature and design of the Spirit’s influence.—The Pharisees had
sufficient light to remove their errors ; and they had conviction enough to lead

109


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee a_i


to a change of heart ; but unhappily they resisted both light and conviction :
pride and sensuality combined to close their eyes, and led them to spurn the
offered grace of the Holy Ghost. Their dreadful sin lay in the act of not being
convinced, when a heavenly influence was offered them, and in the blasphemy
of attributing the works of Christ to diabolical agency.

III. The precise nature, and the accompanying evidences of the sin against
the Holy Ghost.—Some have imagined that the words of blasphemy to which
our Saviour refers constitute the essence of the unpardonable sin. But words,
considered abstractedly, possess no moral quality whatsoever: it is only as
symbols or indices of the mind that our expressions are criminal or otherwise.
Again—It has been supposed that the sin against the Holy Ghost was confined
to the period of our Saviour’s miracles; and that when the direct evidence
arising from these was withdrawn, this sin could no longer be committed. The
reverse, however, of this would rather appear to be the case: for our Lord does
not tell the Pharisees that they were already involved in the guilt and doom
attaching to the commission of the unpardonable sin: He rather cautions them
to beware of plunging themselves into so dreadful a situation, In order, then,
to guide us in endeavouring to ascertain in what cases the sin against the Holy
Ghost may have been committed, we may lay down the two following positions :
first, that the sin itself is a wilful resistance offered to the Spirit’s invitations
and influence; and, secondly, that its tendency is to shut up the soul in judicial
hardness and final impenitence. Both these positions are recognised in Heb,
.vi. 4-6, a memorable passage, bearing, I apprehend, upon the subject. 1. The
Spirit offers to draw men, but they will not follow Him: He repeats His friendly
solicitations again and again; but sensual passions or earthly affections absorb
the accents of His monitory voice, until at length it dies away and is heard no
more! It is not, I apprehend, because a man is too slothful, or too negligent,
or even, in a certain sense, too earthly-minded, that he is in danger of fatally
sinning against the Holy Ghost. It is because he hates the renovating power
of that Divine Agent. It is because he rebels against the reign of grace and
holiness in the heart. It is because he cannot endure the unrivalled supremacy
of a spiritual principle bearing down the carnal propensities of the soul, and
bringing into subjection every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. I now go
on to remark on that judicial hardness and final impenitence, the latter of which
invariably, and the former with few if any exceptions, follows the commission of
it. There is only one way in which a sinner can effectually close the avenues
of reconciliation against himself, and secure his place beforehand in the regions
of eternal woe: that way is by putting himself out of the reach of repentance—
by resisting the motions of the Spirit, till they are finally withdrawn—by
tampering with conscience, till her energies are paralysed, and he sinks, under
a load of unpardoned guilt, into a profound lethargy.

Conclusion.—1. Hvery sin is fatal in its tendency. If you are grasping the
wages of unrighteousness—if you are the slaves of lust or intemperance—if
the world, with its winning allurements, is enthroned in your hearts—or, in
short, if you are neglecting the great salvation of Christ,—you are in danger
of perishing everlastingly. Let your self-examination, then, be general, and
not confined to one point. 2. This subject is replete with salutary caution.
Many judicious persons have supposed that a degree of obscurity is permitted
to hang around it, in order to put Christians upon their guard, and to lead tltem
to beware of everything which might appear, in the slightest degree, to savour
of the unpardonable sin. 3. Lastly, I speak to you in the language of encourage-
ment. The darkest clouds are sometimes tinged with a bright and beautiful
radiance. The contemplation of a sin which is pronounced to be unpardonable
is certainly solemn, peculiarly solemn; but still, when taken in its proper


110


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. III.


connexions, it needs to alarm none but the wilful and determined transgressor-.
On the contrary, the subject forms an occasion of exhibiting, in the strongest
light, the rich and abounding mercy of God. It shews us an Almighty Sove-
reign holding out a sceptre of peace, till the revolting rebel will no longer deign
even to cast a look upon it. It discloses to us a Parent pleading with His
undutiful children, till His voice dies away in the distance of their determined
and fatal wanderings. What inexpressible consolation, then, the subject, rightly
understood, affords to every anxious inquirer after mercy !—Wm. Knight.


Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.—I. What the sin or blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost means, and wherein precisely it consists.—I said sin or
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, because some call it the sin against the
Holy Ghost, though Scripture itself never calls it anything else but blasphemy,
which is worth the observing. It lies in words, is committed by speaking, and
particularly by evil-speaking, by reviling and defaming the Holy Spirit of God.
There may be, and there have been, several offences committed against the
Holy Ghost which yet do not amount to the blasphemy against Him specified
in the text. There is such a thing as grieving the Holy Spirit, and quenching
the Spirit, when men refuse to hearken to His counsels, to follow His motions,
or to obey His calls. But this is not blaspheming Him. There is also what
St. Stephen calls resisting the Holy Ghost, which is opposing Him with a
high hand and rebelling against Him, ‘and is a very heinous sin; and yet
neither is that the same with blaspheming and slandering Him, which is what
those Pharisees were guilty of. Ananias and Sapphira grievously affronted
the Holy Ghost-in telling Him a lie, either presuming upon His ignorance as
not knowing it, or upon His patience as if He should have connived at it.
But yet that was not so bad as what the. Pharisees did in ascribing His
works to the devil. The malicious telling a lie of Him, to defame and slander
Him, was a more heinous offence than the telling a lie to Him under a weak
and foolish persuasion. There is also another way of affronting the Holy
Ghost, by vilifying His operations, which yet comes not up to the sin of the
text. Upon the day of Pentecost, when the disciples, full of the Holy Ghost,
began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, there
were some standing by who mocking said, “These men are full of new wine,”
vilifying the operations of the Spirit as the effects of drunkenness. But the
men who said it, said it perhaps wantonly or ignorantly, rather than spite-
fully or maliciously. But the Pharisees who are charged with being guilty of
blaspheming the Holy Ghost, they very well knew that what they had seen
done could not be accounted for in a natural way; and yet such was their
spleen and rage against the gospel, that they chose rather to impute the
miracles of our Lord to the devil than to acknowledge the Divine hand,
which was so visible in them that they themselves could not but see it, had
they been at all disposed to it. I may here also mention Simon Magus as a
person who very highly affronted the Holy Ghost, when he offered money for
the purchasing His miraculous gifts. But neither was that any such direct
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost as what the text mentions; for he had
some respect and veneration for the miracles he saw wrought and for the
author of them, and was very far from imputing them to the assistance of
the devil. The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost was something worse still
than anything I have yet mentioned: it was defaming the Holy Spirit of
God, and God Himself, under the execrable name of Beelzebub ; it was reviling,
and that knowingly and desperately, the Divine works as diabolical operations.

II. The heinousness of that sin—It was a most wicked and impudent lie
and slander upon the Holy Spirit, and was flying, as it were, in the face of

111


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
i eee


God. One would think, when God Himself interposes, giving the Divine signal
in plain uncontested miracles, that it might become all men to be mute, and
to lay aside their otherwise unconquerable rancour and prejudice. But the
Pharisees were so resolute and so outrageous in reviling everything that gave
any countenance to Christ and His gospel, that they would not spare even
God Himself, but called Him Beelzebub, spitefully defaming His most Divine
works as being nothing else but diabolical impostures. They saw the miracles
of our Blessed Lord, and were very sensible that they were real and true
miracles: they knew also that they were wrought in direct opposition to the
devil and his kingdom, having all the fair appearances possible of being Divine :
nor would they have scrupled to have received them as Divine, had they been
wrought by any one else excepting Christ or His disciples. But such was their
envenomed hatred and inveteracy against Him and His, that, at all adventures,
contrary to all candour or equity, and in contradiction to reason and common
sense, they resolved to say, however scarce to believe (for they hardly could
be so stupid), that He was in league with the devil, and that all His mighty
works which He wrought in the name of God were the works only of Beelzebub,
the prince of the devils. There could not be a more insolent slander, or a more
provoking outrage against the Divine Majesty, than this. It was sacrificing
the honour of Almighty God, and both the present and future happines of men,
to their own private humours and party passions ; being resolved to take up
with any wretched cavil, any improbable and self-contradictory lies and
slanders against God, rather than permit the honest and well-meaning people
to believe in Christ Jesus upon the brightest evidence of His miracles.

III. Whether any sins committed at this day are the same thing with
it, or which of them come the nearest to it—1. For the sake of the over-
tender and scrupulous consciences, I would observe, that roving, and which
some call blasphemous thoughts, which rise up accidentally, and as accidentally
go off again, are nothing akin to the sin which I have been speaking of, which
consisted in premeditated lies and slanders against God, formed with design
to obstruct or darken the evidences of the true religion, ani to prevent others
from looking into them or being convinced by them. 2. Even the atheists
or infidels of these times can scarce come up to the same degree of guilt with
the Pharisees of old, because they have not seen the miracles of Christ with
their own eyes. Rational and historical evidence may be as convincing as the
other, when duly considered ; but as it strikes not upon the senses, it does not
awaken the attention, and alarm every passion of the soul, in such a degree
as the other does. For which reason the unbelievers of our times, though
abandoned and profligate men, are not altogether so blamable in the opposition
they make to Christianity as the unbelievers of old time were, Nevertheless,
it must be said, that the obstinate rejecting the miracles of our Lord and of His
disciples (which have been so fully attested), and much more the ridiculing and
bantering them, and the endeavouring to run them down by lies and slander,
is a very high and heinous crime, as well as horrid blasphemy ; especially if
committed in a Christian country, and in a knowing age, and where men have
all desirable opportunities of learning the truth, as well as the strongest motives
offered for submitting to it.—Archdeacon Waterland.


Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.—I. The blasphemy of speaking against
the Holy Ghost appears to have been the sin which those scribes and Pharisees
committed ; for St. Mark expressly tells us that our Lord pronounced these
words, ‘ because they said, He hath an unclean spirit ”; and He Himself declared
(Matt. xii. 28) that He had ‘cast out the devil by the Spirit of God,” i.e. by
the Holy Ghost; so that if He exercised the power of the Holy Ghost in this


112


OO —————


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MARK. CHAP. III.





miracle which He wrought on the blind and dumb man, the scribes and the
Pharisees, who spake against this miracle, by ascribing it to an unclean spirit,
or to the prince of the devils, did most certainly blaspheme or speak against
the Holy Ghost. 1. It was a wilful and presumptuous sin; for though those
scribes and Pharisees had not seen the miracle wrought by our Blessed Lord,
yet they allowed and acknowledged it to have been wrought by Him, and not
withstanding this they perversely ascribed it to the power of Beelzebub, 2. It
- was committed against God Himself, whether we consider the Holy Ghost as
one person in the Divine Trinity, or even if we consider the Spirit of God as
that whereby God the Father acted in such wonderful operations (Matt. xii. 28).
3. It consisted in despising the word of God, and rejecting His gracious message
of peace and pardon to mankind: for this miracle was performed, and wrought
in evidence of our Blessed Lord’s Divine mission, in proof that the doctrine which
He taught was from God, and that He Himself was the Messias who was
to appear amongst the Jews, and was to make an atonement for the sins of
all such as believed in Him, and qualified themselves for pardon by faith and
repentance.

II. Why, and in what sense, this sin hath never forgiveness.—1. For the
explaining of this aright let it be considered that our Saviour spake this to
Jews, and therefore probably suited His expressions to their law, and to the
opinions then prevailing ainong them. And we find that the law of Moses
appointed sacrifices for legal defilements, and for sins of ignorance against
God, and appointed sacrifices in some cases and penalties in others for wilful
sins against men (Lev. iv., v., and vi.); but for the greater sins against God,
such as wilful and presumptuous ones, the sentence of death was pronounced
by God against all offenders of this sort, and there was no sacrifice or other
means by which the punishment incurred might be taken off or suspended
(Num. xv. 30, 31, 35; Lev. xx. 10). And this is the very thing which
St. Paul means when he says to the Jews, that by Christ all that believe

_are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the law
of Moses. Where he plainly asserts that under the Jewish law there were
crimes which could not be atoned for and forgiven; and if not under the Jewish
law, then not under natural religion, because the Jewish law had that and
all its advantages included in it. As to the first sort of sins taken notice of
by Moses in his body of laws, viz. those of ignorance committed against God,
and those of wilfulness against men, when the sacrifices appointed in such cases
are commanded to be offered by an offender, the usual phrase is, ‘The priest
shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.” So that such
sins might well be called pardonable ones, there being a method prescribed
for the atonement of them. But as to the other sort, that of wilful and
presumptuous sins against God, by which His word was despised, such sins were
properly unpardonable ones, because the Jewish laws had provided no sacrifice
by way of atonement for them. And that the unpardonableness of this heinous
sort of sins against God depends upon their having no sacrifice appointed for —
them appears from Heb. x. 28. Now, to bring these observations home to the
ease before us, the blaspheming or speaking against the Son of Man, or against
the Holy Jesus, in His personal capacity, and as man only, might be forgiven
to these scribes and Pharisees, because by the Jewish law a provision was made
for its expiation. But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit
of God, when it was a presumptuous sin, as this of the scribes and Pharisees
was, had no pardon under the Jewish law. God was reproached, and His word
was despised, and therefore the soul that thus offended was to be cut off from
among His people. Nor was there any pardon provided for it under the gospel
dispensation, because, when they thus blasphemed the Holy Spirit of God, by


Fi 113


CHAP. IIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


which Christ wrought His miracles, the only means which could redeem the
adversaries of the truth from the Divine vengeance was the merit of Christ’s
death applied to them by faith; and that benefit they wholly excluded them-
selves from in the very act of their sinning, which consisted in their rejecting
the evidence which the Spirit of God gave of Christ being the Messias and
Saviour of mankind. This was, as things then stood with them, an unpardon-
able sin, either in this age, the age of the Jewish law, or in the age to
come, that is, the age of the gospel. But were the gates of mercy for ever
shut against these blasphemers of the Holy Ghost? Was the sentence here
passed upon them unalterable and irreversible in all cases? No, surely: for,
as Athanasius observes, “Our Blessed Lord does not say that it shall not
be forgiven to him that blasphemeth and repenteth, but only to him that
blasphemeth ; and therefore He must have meant this of one that continued
in a state of impenitence; for with God no sin is unpardonable.” If such
blasphemers could repent of that their heinous sin, no doubt but they might
be forgiven it under the Christian covenant: and who can say of any man
that all means of repentance are cut off from him? Our Lord said in as strong
words as these are, “ Whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny
before My Father”; and yet but a little while afterwards, when Peter denied
Him before men three times, and in the most obstinate manner, Christ was so
far from rejecting him, that upon his weeping bitterly and repenting he was
continued even in his apostleship, and was ever after one of the leaders in that
blessed work of propagating the Christian faith. And it is highly probable that
some of the three thousand whom St. Peter at his first preaching converted to
the Christian faith had thus blasphemed the Holy Ghost in our Saviour’s days ;
for he describes them as those who “knew the miracles and signs ” which God
wrought by His Son, and notwithstanding this “with wicked hands had crucified
Him.” And yet he calls upon them to “repent and be baptised for the remission
of their sins,” and even encourages them to hope that upon so doing they
“ should receive that Holy Ghost” whom they had so often blasphemed in
our Saviour’s miracles. We are certain, likewise, that among those who reviled
Christ while He was hanging upon the Cross there were scribes who said, “ He
saved others, Himself He cannot save”; thereby acknowledging that He had
wrought miracles in healing diseases, this perhaps before us in particular, and
yet denying that He could “save Himself,” and consequently denying that what
He wrought was by a Divine power. And yet we find that our Saviour prayed
even for these scribes, saying, ‘‘ Father, forgive them.” And surely that sin
of theirs was not unpardonable upon their repentance, when Christ with His
dying breath prayed for their forgiveness.— Bishop Zachary Pearce.


The sin against the Holy Ghost.—I shall never forget the chill that struck
into my childish heart so often as I heard of this mysterious sin which carried
men, and for aught I knew might have carried even me, beyond all reach of
pardon ; or the wonder and perplexity with which I used to ask myself why,
if this sin were possible—if, as the words of our Lord seem to imply, it was
probable even and by no means infrequent—it was not clearly defined, so that
we might at least know, and know beyond all doubt, whether it had been
committed or had not.

I. The two phrases “this [present] age” and “the coming age,” which our
Lord here adopts, were perfectly familiar to the Jews, and had a clear and
definite meaning on their lips. ‘This present age,” or ‘the age that now is,”
was the age in which they lived, with all its apparatus of religious teaching
and worship, the age of the Law and the Temple; while “the coming age,” or
“the age to come,” was that happier time of which the advent of the long-


114


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. Iu.


promised Messiah was to be the sign and the commencement, although it could
not fully come until Jesus the Christ ascended into heaven and poured out His
Spirit from on high. So that what He really affirmed was, that there is a sin
which is just as unpardonable under the Christian dispensation as it was under
the Mosaic dispensation.

II. But what is this sin for which, at least in the present world, there is no
forgiveness, or no provision for forgiveness? It is that wilful and invincible
ignorance which refuses to be taught, that love of darkness which refuses to
admit the light even when the sun is shining in the sky. They saw the light,
and knew that it was light; and yet they loved darkness more than light,
because their deeds were evil. Like the servants in the parable, they said,
“This is the Heir,” only to add, “ Let us kill Him, that the inheritance may be
ours ”—ours, and not His. Jesus “knowing their thoughts,” knowing too the
desperate moral condition from which their thoughts sprang, simply warned
them that it was desperate. They were deliberately sinning against light,
against conscience, against all that was true and right and good; in a word,
they were “speaking against the Holy Ghost,” the Spirit of all truth and
goodness; and so long as they did that there was no hope for them.

III. So far, then, from giving us a dark mystical saying in which our thoughts
are lost, our Lord simply states a moral truism, as we might have inferred from
the casual and unemphatic manner of His speech. And the truism is that, since
salvation is necessarily of the will, if men will not be saved, they cannot be
saved ; if they will not yield to the Divine Spirit when it moves and stirs within
them, they cannot be redeemed and renewed by that gracious Spirit. Under
whatever dispensation they live, they are self-excluded from the kingdom of
heaven, by the one sin which is therefore called an “eternal” or “ zonial” sin.

IV. That this unpardonaDle sin might be pardoned, that it was the sin, and
not the men who committed it, which could never be forgiven, is clear: for
many of the Pharisees who had long resisted the Spirit of God in Christ—and
be it remembered that even Saul of Tarsus had long “kicked against the
goads” which urged him toward the kingdom—afterwards repented of their
sin, received His words, believed His works, and were welcomed into the fellowship
of the Church. And even of those who never knew an earthly repentance, and
of their doom in “the world to come,” this passage says absolutely nothing. It
leaves us to our own conjectures, our own hopes; and neither approves nor
condemns those who trust that in the world to come even those who leave this
world impenitent may be taught “even against their will, and by means of a
larger experience, the lessons they would not learn here; and so be brought to
confess their guilt and folly, and be taken at last—so as by fire—into the arms”
of the Divine Compassion and Love.

V. But where lies our danger of committing this sin against the Holy Ghost,
our need therefore of the warning that, so long as we persist in this sin, pardon
and salvation are impossible to us? We fall into this sin, must be my reply,
whenever we consciously and wilfully resist the Spirit of truth and goodness—
whenever, i.e., we see a truth and do not accept it, because it cuts our prejudices
against the grain—whenever we know what is good, and yet do it not, because
we love some evil way too well to leave it. To speak against any form of
truth or any form of goodness which we inwardly recognise as good and true,
or even suspect to be true and good, is “to speak against the Holy Ghost ” :
and, be it remembered, “ deeds speak louder than words.” In our religious life
we sin against the Holy Ghost if, as we read the gospel, we learn that in Christ
Jesus we have precisely such a Saviour from all sin and uncleanness as we need—
if, as we read, I say, conscience leaps up in approval of what we read and urges
us to accept the offered salvation, and we refuse to listen because we are too ©


115


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


; ;


engrossed with the outward affairs of life, or too attached to some of the forms
of sin from which Christ would save us to part with them yet, we commit the
sin which cannot be pardoned, and from which we cannot be saved so long as
we cleave to it. Or, again, if after we have accepted, or professed to accept,
His salvation, we catch glimpses of new and higher truths, and shut our eyes
against them because we do not want to be at the trouble of revising and
recasting our theological formulas—or if we are inwardly called to new and
difficult duties, and turn away from them because they would impose a strain
upon us or a sacrifice which we are not willing to bear,—in thus sinning against
conscience we sin against the Holy Ghost. Nor is there any one respect in
which we refuse to recognise truth as true or duty as binding upon us, whether in
the formation of our political views or the discharge of our political functions,
or in the principles on which we conduct our business, or even in the spirit in
which we conduct our literary or scientific investigations, in which we do not
or may not fall into this very sin. For the Holy Spirit is the Spirit from whom
all true thoughts and all forms of goodness do proceed. To close our eyes to
any truth, to neglect any duty, is not only to shut that truth out of our minds,
and not only to lower and impoverish the tone of our life; it is also to grieve
and resist that pure and gracious Spirit by whom we are made one with the
Father and the Son ; it is to impair the very organ by which truth comes to us,
and to cripple the very faculty by which we are enabled for all dutiful and noble
enterprise.

VI. There is still, however, one difficulty which must be met, and which I
meet the more cheerfully because it will give an opportunity of noticing what
is peculiar in St. Mark’s report of this great saying, viz. the phrase, “ Whosoever
shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but 1s guilty of
eternal sin.” The difficulty I am told is this: “When we read of a sin that
cannot be forgiven whether in the Mosaic age or the Christian, we naturally
assume our Lord to mean that it cannot bo forgiven even when it is repented of ;
for no sin can be forgiven men until they repent ; and our Lord is here drawing
a distinction between one sin and all others. What, then, can this distinction
be but this: that, though all other sins may be forgiven when men repent of
them, this sin cannot be forgiven, let them repent of it how they may ¢” But
we may ask those who urge this objection: How do you know that there are
no sins which God will not forgive men even before they repent, and even though
they should never repent, at least in this present life? We may suggest that
our Lord is here drawing a distinction between outward overt transgressions
which may be forgiven us on, or even perhaps apart from, repentance, and the
inward sinful principle which can never be forgiven, but must be renounced and
cast out. What is the sin which our Lord Himself compares, or contrasts, with
the unpardonable sin? t is the sin of speaking against Himself, the gracious
Son of Man. It is to deny that there was any manifestation of God in the God
manifest in the flesh ; in more modern phraseology, it is to deny that there is
anything Divine in the Christian dispensation and faith. That, alas! is a sin
only too common inour own days. There are intelligent and learned men only
too many, and men whom, judged by any other standard, we should al] pronounce
to be honest and good men, who deny that God has ever given any immediate
revelation of His will to mankind, who even doubt both whether any such
revelation be possible and whether there be any God to make it. They may
have been blinded by intellectual prepossessions or an inherited bent of mind:
but are we to blame blind men because they do not see, and to accuse them of a
wilful rejection of the light that shines from heaven? And if we do not, will
God? The fault may be owrs, rather than theirs. We may have turned the
very light into a darkness. We may so have misrepresented our Master to


116





.
|
.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. III.





them, that, instead of seeing Him as He is, they may have’ seen only that
imperfect and misleading image of Him which we have made in our own like-
ness. If a man has honestly doubted, if he has followed the inward light and
been true to the inward voice, and he should die before discovering that Christ
is other and better than he knew, that He is indeed the true light of every man
and the very: brightness of the Father’s glory—if, that is, he should never
repent in this world of his sin in speaking against and rejecting the Son of
Man,—will Azs sin never be forgiven him, or willit not, rather, never be counted
against him, however heavily he may reckon it against himself? On the other
hand, if a man has not been honest in his doubts and denials—if, besides sinning
against the God without him who sought to reveal Himself to him, he has also
sinned against the God within him ; if when reason or conscience said, That
is true and you ought to believe it, or, That is duty and you ought to do it, he
has refused to accept the truth, or do the duty which he felt to be clothed with
Divine sanctions ; if he has consciously shut out the light and refused to walk
in it; if, in the language of our passage, he has added the sin against the Holy
Ghost to the sin against the Son of Man, and if he should leave the world
without repenting of his sin,—how can we deny that he has put himself outside
the pale of forgiveness by making forgiveness impossible? What may become
of him in that other, future, world we cannot say, we are not told, though we
are still allowed to cherish the hope that new moral forces may be brought to
bear upon him and may take effect upon him ; all we can be sure of is that so
long as he deliberately shuts out the light, the light cannot reach him—that
so long as he refuses to part with his sin, he cannot be saved from his sin,—


S. Cox, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 20. The strain of constant
publicity—In the crowd there is no
moderation. They can go to a pitch
of enthusiasm in one direction, or of
animosity in another; but in the
presence of Christ they cannot act
with calmness. Nothing is so wearing
as the excitement of constant publicity.
Unless quiet alternate with the excite-
ment of great gatherings, the body
wastes, the nerve frets, the mind is
jaded, and the soul itself goes stale
and flat. Popularity has, accordingly,
often a cruel kindness, which claims
untimely and exhausting service from
him whom it flatters with its appro-
bation.—f. Glover.


Ver. 21. The taunts of unbelievers.—
It is very hard for the Christian to
bear the taunts of unbelievers. It is
difficult to work bravely on, without
the sympathy of one’s fellows; it
requires great grace not utterly to
lose heart, to bear being called a


rd


fanatic, to be sneered at and scorned. _
To human nature such _ treatment
gives keenest pain; yet God’s grace
is sufficient to triumph in us. When
we are sorely tried, let us not think of
the discouragements, but of Jesus, who
bore a shame and obloquy for us far
deeper*than we can ever bear for Him.

Opposition from friends is very
common in the career of reformers
and of those who depart from the
ordinary course. History is full of
instances. It is very frequent, too,
in the case of those who, in irreligious
families or societies, seek to become
Christians. (See Matt. x. 24, 35-37.)
Here is a severe test. But the only
way in which this world can be
improved and saved is by that faith,
and character, and truth which will
do right, no matter who opposes.
They who when “at Rome do as the
Romans do” in matters of conscience,
will never change Rome into the city


of God.
LET


CHAP. ITI.


Friendship’s shortcomings.—1. Un-
able to follow the highest moods of the
soul. 2. Unable to see the spiritual
meaning of outward circumstances.
3. Seeking to interfere «with spiritual
usefulness. 4. Seeking to reduce life
to commonplace order. The sincere
servant of Jesus Christ will take his
law from the Master and not from
public opinion.—J. Parker, D.D.

The zealous spirit.—A zealous spirit
is essential to eminent success in
anything. Perhaps there is the more
need to insist upon this because
enthusiasm is out of fashion. It is
bad form nowadays to admire any-
thing very warmly. To be strenuously
in earnest is almost vulgar. Especially
is this so in regard to religion. ‘“ Our
Joe is a very good young man,” said
an old nurse the other day; “but he
do go so mad on religion.” That was
the fly in the ointment—which spoilt
all. Did not Pope say long ago,
“The worst of madness is a saint run
mad”? And he only put in terse
and pithy speech what other people
say more clumsily. 1. And yet how
can one be a Christian without being
an enthusiast? Indifferent, half-
hearted Christians are not true Chris-
tians at all. The author of Hece Homo
cannot be said to exaggerate in his
declaration that “Christianity is an
enthusiasm, or it is nothing.” 2. And
what good work has ever been wrought
without enthusiasm? Said a great
preacher: “If you want to drive a
pointed piece of iron through a thick
board, the surest way is to heat your
skewer. It is always easier to burn
our way than to bore it.” Only “a
soul all flame” is likely to accomplish
much in the teeth of the difficulties
which beset every lofty enterprise.—
G. H. James.


Ver. 22. Zeal in opposing Christ.—
These scribes came all the way from
Jerusalem to oppose Christ. Had there
been as much earnestness in propagating
the truth as there has been in trying
to check it, the whole world might by
this time have been regenerated.


118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


rere


Satan versus Satan.-—-Would God
that we might hear of strife and
contentions in the ranks of the king-
dom of darkness! If the public-house
keepers might rise up against the
gamblers; if thieves and swindlers
might but take each other by the
throat ; if the managers of the horse-
races might but begin to make war
upon the organisers of the lottery
schemes; if drunkards and seducers
would but fall out; if only Satan
might fight against Satan, and his
kingdom fall into bitter, relentless,
and uncompromising internecine strife,
asking and giving no quarter,—then
would it be a good day for this poor
devil-ridden world. But no such good
thing as this is happening, or ever
will happen.—G@. F'. Pentecost, D.D.

Lessons.—1. Every argument of
truth and evidence of Divinity can
be explained away, if only you are
bad enough to do it. 2. Falsehood,


if indulged, may lead you to le in |


the most sacred matters, and utter
the most depraved blasphemy. 3. Man
has ultimately only the single alter-
native—to be devout or superstitious ;
you must be a believer in God, or in
a devil. 4. There is no knave who
is not a fool; for if he were not a fool,
he would not be a knave.—R. Glover.


Ver. 23. Christ's question.—Jesus
has questions to ask as well as His
opponents. Too much attention is
given to the answering of questions.
We listen to the “ How?” and the
“Why?” of the sceptic; but are we
alive to the advantage that we should
gain if we were to propose questions
for ourselves ?


Vers. 28, 29. Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost.—Blasphemy, that 1s,
speaking against. But thought is
speech to God. ‘“ Heard melodies are
sweet, but those unheard are sweeter,”
says Keats. Heard blasphemy is bitter :
is unheard blasphemy less bitter to the
ear of the Holy One? And speech is
deed. Therefore, ‘by thy words thou
shalt be justified, and by thy words





|
t


ee


—ys


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. III.





thou shalt be condemned.” The blas-
phemy against the Holy Spirit does
not demand audible speech. At the
very time Christ used this unparalleled
language, He was replying to the in-
audible speech of the Pharisees:
“Knowing their thoughts, He said
unto them.” So the essential thing
is not in the speech, but in the object
of it. ‘‘ No man can do these miracles
except God be with him ”—that was
the witness of the truth they knew.
“He casteth out devils by Beelzebub,
the prince of the devils”—that was
the lie to their own sense of right.
And it was because of that deliberate
lie against the light within them that
Jesus told them of the sin that hath
never forgiveness. Since the departure
of Jesus from the earth, the Holy
Spirit has been to men the inner
light. Magnificent gift! Momentous
responsibility ! He takes the place of
it within us. We no longer obey %,
resist i#, quench 7: we obey, resist,
quench .Him. He is the Advocate,
come to plead the cause of right
within us, the cause of righteousness
and judgment against us. He convicts
the world of sin and of righteousness
and of judgment.—Lapository Times.


Ver. 29. The soul incapacitated for
repentance.—Strength, Purity, Light,
Life, and Love,—are not these the
foundation pillars of the throne of
God? And these are the words under


which the nature and work of the
Holy Ghost are revealed to us. Now
suppose a man by an act of deliberate
and conscious choice renounces this
God of Holiness, this Spirit of Light,
and Life, and Love,—saying, “ These
are things that I hate. Death and
corruption are better than the life of
God. His love I trample on and
despise.” Imagine a man speaking
to himself after this fashion, and
proceeding to shape his life accordingly.
Would not that bea kind of blasphemy
which might well incapacitate the soul
for repentance, and so, as a necessary
consequence, for forgiveness ?’—W. AR.
Huntington, D.D.

The man who blasphemes against
the God within him—who calls that
right which he knows and feels to
be wrong, and who, knowing the good,
deliberately says to evil, ‘Be thou my
good,”—is not to be forgiven in this
age. No, verily: for this age has
brought him all that it has to bring,
and he has rejected it: the most
penetrating and intimate ministries
of Divine Grace have been vouchsafed
him, and he has resisted them: let
him feel the judgments of this age,
since he will not accept its choicest
gifts; let him pass out of this age
only to enter into the discipline of
the next: and as he suffers these
eonial judgments, let him consider
and reconsider himself, lest he also
lose the ages beyond.—s. Coa, D.D.


. MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 31—35.


(Parattets: Marr. xi. 46-50; Luxe viii. 19-21.)


Kinship to Christ.—Notwithstanding the organised opposition of the religious
leaders, crowds continue to surround Christ, eagerly listening to His gracious
words. But His friends and relatives, already convinced that “He is beside
Himself” (ver. 21), now induce His mother to accompany them into His presence.
The reason must have been, observes Calvin, ‘either that they were anxious
about Him, or that they were desirous of instruction ; for it is not without some
good reason that they endeavour to approach Him, and it is not probable that


those who accompanied the Holy Mother were unbelievers.


The warmth of


natural affection may have carried them beyond the bounds of propriety ; but


I have no doubt that they were led by pious zeal to seek His society.”


One
119


CHAP. Iil.


than the harsher judgment of Chrysos
make a public display of her materna


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
oe ee ee eee


would fain believe that this estimate of
tom, that the Blessed Virgin wanted to
1 authority. But, whatever the motive
may have been, whether wholly innocent or partly blameworthy, Christ seizes


their conduct is the true one, rather


the opportunity to set forth eternal truths of far-reaching import.

I. A sad fact.—‘ So far from blood relations being, as a matter of course,
helpers and promoters of spiritual duty or lofty sacrifice in the home of which
they are inmates, the history of all times goes to prove the very contrary ; in
the persecutions endured for the faith’s sake the daughter has risen against her


mother, and the father against his son,


itself; and the sword (not of the Spirit) has invaded it.


and the house has been divided against


We may have to


choose between Christ and some one who, after the flesh, is as dear to us as


our own soul.


Which shall we go with ?


(Matt. x. 37.) A call to the mission


field, or the preference of a quiet Christian life to a career of splendour and
fashion, or a profession which implies the reproach of Christ rather than the


riches of Egypt, has often disturbed families and parted kinsfolk”


Thorold).


(Bishop


II. A great principle.—Christ here declares most emphatically, that obedience,
not privilege, constitutes true kinship to Him—that the spiritual fellowship
which Ee came from heaven to establish, and which all may equally participate


in, is a far higher and more precious thing than any mere earthly tie.


So far,


however, from in any way depreciating the natural relationships of brother,
sister, mother, He adds to them fresh dignity and interest, by adopting them
as fit terms for the description of His closest union and communion with believers.
“Tt was not that He denied the claims of the flesh, but that He was sensitive
to other, subtler, profounder claims of the spirit and spiritual kinship. He


would not carelessly wound a mother’s or a brother’s heart, but the life Divine.


had also its fellowships and affinities, and still less could He throw these aside”


(Dean Chadwick). As Bengel puts it:


places the Father first.


He contemns not the mother, but He


Ill. An abiding law.—‘‘There is no tie so close, so holy, so blessed, so
exquisitely tender, as that which joins one regenerate soul to another in the


mystical body of Christ.


the faith once delivered to the saints,


The joy of the common salvation, the inheritance of
the fellowship in the gospel, the inex-


plicable experience of the love which passeth knowledge, the hope laid up in
heaven, the sympathy and zeal and ardour for the honour of the Saviour—these


constitute an unity closer, surer, fonder,


deeper, than the dearest earthly tie


which human souls can know” (Bishop Thorold). The tender bonds of family
affection can find stability nowhere but in Christ, the “ Elder Brother,” who
is the Only Begotten Son of the Eternal Father, from whom every family both


in heaven and earth is named.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 31. The family visit.—We
place this visit of the mother and
brethren of Jesus immediately after
His return to Capernaum, and we
attribute it to Pharisaic opposition,
which either filled those relatives of
Jesus with fear for His safety, or
made them sincerely concerned about
His proceedings. Only if it meant


120


some kind of interference with His
mission, whether prompted by fear or
affection, would Jesus have so disowned
their relationship.—A. Hdersheim, D.D.

Christ's outside kindred.—They were
without—that is, not in the inner
circle of the crowd standing by Him
and with Him, but on the outside of
the crowd, loving Him, but wanting





:


eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ST. MARK.


CHAP. I1t.





to get Him away from His present
surroundings. They no doubt thought
Him unwisely carried away with
enthusiasm, and that He was spoiling
or hurting His cause as well as imperil-
ling His life. Jesus has many outside
kindred—those who admire Him, and
appreciate to some extent His sublime
teaching on ethical points; but they
do not understand Him as the world’s
Saviour ; especially they do not under-
stand the significance of His death and
His relations to all men irrespective of
persons, and the nature of that new
kingdom of men and women “ born not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
... but of God.”—G. F. Pentecost, D.D.
Weigh the calls.—This was a call to
give up His work. We must be care-
ful to weigh the calls that come to us.
Even the calls of kindly consideration
may need to be resisted.


Vers. 33-35. Lessons.—1. The power
of interfering with others in such a
way as to do good is a very rare
possession. . 2. Sometimes it is our
duty to take a course that grieves dear
friends. In such cases aim at doing
as Jesus did—blending perfect gentle-
ness with perfect firmness. 3. Nearness
to Christ is a matter not of race, or
place, or time, but of heart. 4. Let
all seek this essential grace that was
the root grace of Christ’s character—
and live daily, hourly, doing the will
of our Father in heaven.—RA. Glover.

The false and the true family of
Jesus.—1. The one would watch over
Him and His cause; the other will
be watched over by Him. 2. The one
would lead Him; the other will be led
by Him. 3. The one would save
‘Him; the other will be saved by
Him, 4. The one would restrain and
bring Him into danger; the other
will be restrained and bound by His
Word and Spirit.— J. P. Lange, D.D.


Ver. 34. The Church's relationship
to Christ.—Christ here speaks of the
relationship which the Church on
earth can hold to Him. 1. It can be,
as it were, a “mother” to Him—can,


as that highly favoured and blessed
among women, bear Him, again and
again, to a perishing world which
needs Him,—can, I say, be as she
was, but is not, because lofty purity
and lowly submission to God’s will
are lacking. 2. Or the Church can
be as those “brothers” were—those
who tenderly cared for Him-—those
who misunderstood Him, and would
fain protect Him from Himself—those
who at length learned to believe in
Him, and to suffer with Him, and
to stand witness before kings for His
sake: thus can the Church be, when
it gets the brotherly heart, and thinks
more of Christ than of self. 3. Notice
that Christ did not say, when He
spoke of the relationship man can
hold to Him, “ Behold My Father.”
That is a position no man by himself,
nor all men put together, can hold
to Him. For the father’s position
(and half the world’s evils, domestic, ©
political, and religious, have arisen
from forgetfulness of this) is the
originating and governing position.
The true son only then lives when
he does the will of his father. And
the Christ, who saves, admits no
man’s right to stand in this governing,
regulative position to Him.—/. W.
Owen.


Ver. 35. Christ's spiritual kindred.
—Wonderful words! 1. Think of it,
busy toiler, far away, perhaps, from
the home of your youth; a young
man here in this city, it may be,
with few friends. Here is an assur-
ance of the Saviour’s brotherly kind-
ness. 2. Or you may be a daughter
trying to lift a mother’s burden or
a father’s care. No matter how poor
or needy, if you are doing God’s will,
Christ calls you His sister, 3. You may
be a wearied, perplexed mother, with
many little ones, and disheartened with
the work and burden of home, where
the bitter and sweet mingle. Jesus calls
you ‘ Mother,” and makes Himself
your “Son” !—#. P. Parker, D.D.

The gospel of the family of God.—
We have had the gospel of the

121


CHAP. Ii.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


SS eee


kingdom of God, and glad tidings it
has been indeed; but have we not
here something even better? It is
much to be permitted to hail the Son
of God as our King: is it not better
still to be encouraged to hail Him as
a Brother, to know that all that is
sweetest and tenderest in the dear
words “brother,” “sister,” ‘‘ mother,”
can be imported into our relation to
Him? How it endears the heavenly
relationship, and hallows the earthly !
—ZJ. M. Gibson, D.D.

The family of love and service.—All
those who have been impelled by a
nigher inspiration, and those who, sub-
jugated by God’s call, have dedicated
their whole life to His service, will
understand without difficulty these
words of Jesus. Every strong con-
viction ends by taking possession of
us; it overcomes and absorbs us, and


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. The world watches Christians.—
“ Now lads,” said the late Duncan Matheson,
the Scottish evangelist, to a lot of boys who
had been converted at his meetings, “ the
people here are not in the habit of reading
their Bible to learn what God says to them,
put Tl tell you what they'll read. They'll
read your lives and ways very carefully to
see if you are really what you profess to be.
And mind you this, if they find your lives
to be inconsistent with your profession, the
devil will give them this for an excuse in
rejecting Christ.” Very true indeed are
these words. Wouli that we could lay them
more constantly to eart! The life of the
professing Christia 4 is the only book of
evidences that maiy people ever read in
reference to Christianity. The Christian
professor’s life is this the world’s Bible.
When there are incons'stencies and flaws in
it, then the world make. these a plea against
religion. Let us remem er that the world’s
eyes are upon us. Let us keep our book of
evidences clear and pure.


Ver. 5. Anger checks wrongdoing.—l\t
might at first appear well for mankind if
the bee were without its sting; but upon
recollection it will be found that the little
animal would then have toe many rivals
in sharing its labours. A hyndred other
lazy animals, fond of honey and hating
labour, would intrude upon the sweets of
the hive, and the treasure would oe carried


122


tears us ruthlessly from everything
else; it becomes our sole object, and
outside it nothing seems to touch us:
those who do not understand it are
strangers to us; those who attack it
are our enemies ; those who love and
serve it with us are our true, our only
family.—ather Didon.

Ali to each.—He does not say that
one of us is to Him as a “brother,”
and another is to Him as a “sister,”
and another is to Him as a “ mother,”
according to the several features of
our different characters; but the man
who “does the will of God,” the same
occupies, at one and the same time,
all those endearing relationships. He
standsin the confidenceof the “brother,”
in the fondness of the “sister,” and in
all the holy and respectful attachment
even of a “ mother.”—Jas. Vaughan.


TO CHAPTER III.


off for want of armed guardians to protect
it. And it might at first appear well for
mankind if the principle of anger were not
a part of our constitution. But then we
should be overrun with rogues. The presence
of anger, always ready to start forth when
an injury is done or intended, has the effect
of suppressing much gross impudence and
intolerable oppression. The sting of noble
anger applied to a dastard who has bullied
the weak or injured the unoffending has a
most ‘salutary influence in restraining him
for the future, and in warning his fraternity
of the like punishment which is all ready for
them. But man should control his anger as
the bee does her sting. It is not to be per-
petually projected on every possible occasion,
put to be used only when impertinence,
laziness, injustice, or fraud requires.—
Scientific Illustrations.


Ver. 9. Waiting is a harder duty thar
doing.—In a certain battle a detachment of
cavalry was kept inactive. It was hard for
the men to do nothing but wait, while the
fight was going on before them. At last,
in the crisis of the battle, the command was
given them to charge, and that body of fresh
men, sweeping down like a torrent, turned
the tide of battle. So, in the battle of life,
waiting is often the surest means to victory.
And it is comforting to know that where we
see only the unsightly bud, God sees the per-
fect flower ; where we see the rough pebble


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MARK.


CHAP. III.





He sees the flashing diamond. Patient wait-
ing and patient doing have at last their
reward. The traveller who has patiently
toiled up the weary passes of the Alps looks
down at last with triumph on glorious Italy.
Those who have sat by the bedside of a
sick friend by night will know how gladly
they welcomed the morning. ‘The laurel
crown which the victor at Olympia received
was in itself of little value; it was prized as
a sign of the victory that had come through
hard strife. There is a great battle going on
in the world—the strife between good and
evil. In that strife we are engaged; and
the harder the battle is, the sweeter will be
the victory. During the battle of Waterloo,
Wellington, it is said, took out his watch,
and said, “I can hold out for so long.
Blucher will be here within an hour, so
victory is sure.” The Christian can in like
manner dismiss all fear as to the result of
the conflict in which he is engaged. Though
the conflict be sore, though the sword
pierce the soul, he knows that the Captain
of salvation will not fail him.


Ver. 14. Preaching.—The more lax, the
less laboured the style, the nearer it comes
to colloquial language, the better. I am
convinced that one of the things which
make my ordinary sermons tell from the
pulpit is this very circumstance—that I write
precisely as I would talk, and that my
sermons are as nearly as possible extempo-
raneous effusions, ... When the Archdeacon
and Mr. Watson say the sermon will (D.G.)
do good, though not add to my character as
an author, I hesitate not for one moment to
publish : for what does my character signify ?
and how gladly would I sacrifice all its re-
spectability as a writer, to do good to a single
soul !—From a letter of Dean Hook.

Solemnity of preaching.—Dr. John Brown,
speaking of a minister’s leaving his people
for another pastorate, says that he mentally
exclaims, “There they go! when next we
meet it will be at the Judgment!” ~*

Qualifications of a good preacher.—Ten
qualifications are given of a good preacher
by Luther. He should be able to preach
plainly and in order. He should have a
good head. Good power of speech; a good
voice; and a good memory. He should be
sure of what he means to say, and be ready
to stake body and life, goods and glory, on
its truth. He should know when to stop.
He should study diligently, and suffer him-
self to be vexed and criticised by every one.


Ver. 18. St. Matthen’s example led to one
of the holiest lives recorded in the annals of
the early Church. One of the most able and
useful men in the North African Church was
the Bishop Nulgertius. He had been a re-
ceiver of taxes, but one day it occurred to
him, “May not I, like Matthew, become


from a tax-gatherer a preacher of the gos-
pel?” Accordingly he renounced his worldly
employment, sought Holy Orders, and was
ultimately a most useful bishop.


Ver. 19. Judas an evidence to the worth of
Christianity.—That which is most valuable
and excellent in itself is most liable to be
counterfeited, And it is no disparagement
to a real diamond, a pure piece of gold, or a
genuine bank-note, that they are liable to be
imitated. We should act in the one case as
we do in the other—be upon our guard
against deception, learn to distinguish be-
tween the precious and the vile, and set a
greater value upon that which we find pure
and genuine.


Ver. 21. The world’s estimate of Christian
zeal.—The Rev. Rowland Hill, on one occa-
sion, strained his voice, raising it to the
highest pitch, in order to warn some persons
of impending danger, and so rescued them
from peril. For this he was warmly
applauded. But when he elevated his voice
to a similar pitch in warning sinners of the
error and evil of their ways, and in order to
save their souls from a still greater peril, the
same friends who before had praised him
now pronounced him fool and fanatic.

Zeal.—When some one expostulated with
Duncan Matheson, the evangelist, that he
was killing himself with his labours, and
ought to have rest, he replied, “I cannot
rest whilst souls are being lost: there is all
eternity in which to rest after life is done.”

Harnestness in work.—Soon after Dr. John
Morison’s ordination, a neighbouring minis-
ter called on him, and said, “ You are doing
too much; you must take care that you do
not overwork yourself.” ‘“ Depend upon it,”
replied Morison, “‘the lazy minister dies
first.” Six months later he was called to the
death-bed of this same minister. “Do you
remember what you once said to me?”
asked the dying man. Morison could only
reply falteringly, ‘Oh, don’t speak of that !”
“ Yes, but I must speak of it,” said his friend ;
“it was the truth. Work, work while it is
called day, for now the night is coming when
I cannot work.”


Vers. 23-26. Christ’s actions prove His
Divine mission—When the Netherlaiders
broke away from the bondage of Spain, they
still professed to be loyal subjects of King
Philip, and in the king’s name went out to
fight against the king’s armies. That was
a kind of loyalty which Philip refused to
recognise. The scribes professed to believe
that the devil was content with loyalty like
this—that, in fact, he hugely enjoyed the
destruction of his own works by Jesus, and
supplied Him with all the help He wanted
in that line. A sane man does not burn his
insurance policy, and then set fire to his


123


CHAP. IIt.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


house asa means of providing for his family.
A loyal soldier will not undermine his own
camp, and blow it into the air, as a means
of increasing the strength of that camp.
The captain who is anxious for the safety of
his ship will not step down into the hold and
bore a hole through the ship’s bottom. Nor
will Satan join in destroying his own king-
dom. That Christ came and destroyed the
works of the devil shows that He is Satan’s
enemy and Satan’s conqueror.


Ver. 29. Penal element in punishment.—
Punishment has sarely an element which is
purely penal—vindictive, if the word must
be used, but with a Divine vindictiveness.
And this seems to be the confession of the
human heart in the most differing states of
society. An Indian judge tells of the im-


pression produced by a thief who cut off a.


child’s wrists merely to get some tightly
fastened bracelets. As the maimed stumps
were held up in court, a hundred voices cried,
“Death is not enough.” In the south of
France a monster amused herself with her
paramour at the theatre, while her little boy
was found slowly starved to death, with his
cheek laid against a little dog which nestled
close to him. Many cried, “The priests are
right ; there must be a hell.”—Bishop Wm.
Alexander.

Unpardonable sin as to the body.—There
is an unpardonable sin that may be com-
mitted in connexion with the lungs, or with
the heart, or with the head. They are strung
with nerves as thick as beads on a string ;
and up to a certain point of excess or abuse
of the nervous system, if you rebound there
will be remission, and you will be put back,
or nearly back, where you were before you
transgressed nature’s laws ; but beyond that
point—it differs in different men, and in
different parts of the same man—if you go
on transgressing, and persist in transgres-
sion, you will never get over the effect of it
as long as you live-—H. W. Beecher.

No hope for those past feeling. A man may
misuse his eyes and yet see; but whosoever
puts them out can never see again. One
may misdirect his mariner’s compass, and
turn it aside from the north pole by a magnet
or piece of iron, and it may recover and point
right again; but whosoever destroys the
compass itself has lost his guide at sea. So
it is possible for us to sin and be forgiven:
recovery through God’s Spirit is not impos-
sible. But if we so harden our hearts that
they cannot feel the power of the Spirit, if
we are past feeling, then there is no hope.

A terrible text.—In my first charge, when
I was young and inexperienced, the very
first grave task set me was to carry what
comfort I could to my predecessor's widow,
a singularly devout and devoted woman,
who, in the depths of her grief, had come to
the conclusion that she had committed “the


124


unpardonable sin,” or “God would never
have been so hard with her.” No reason-
ings, no prayers, had the slightest effect
upon her. or seemed so much as to touch
the fixed idea she had taken to her heart,
With an almost incredible ingenuity, she
turned all grounds for hope into food for her
despair. And in a few weeks she passed
from my care into an asylum, only to be
carried from the asylum to the grave, For
years after I shrank from this text as if it
had been guilty of murder. Such experiences
bite deep.—S. Cow, D.D.

Shrinking from the commission of this sin.
—A striking testimony to the power which
these solemn words have had over the minds
of men is afforded by the absence of this
one sacred name, “the Holy Ghost,” from
all the vocabularies of profaneness. It
shows how men whom we are accustomed
to call bad men have often, after all, more
reverence for what is holy than we give
them credit for having—nay, more than
they credit themselves with having. They
may have committed crimes innumerable,
and may have boasted of them; still, not-
withstanding this, they shrink from the
commission of what is worse than any
crime—the unpardonable sin, The shrinking
is to their credit— W. R. Huntington, D.D.

This sin consists not in words only.—
I remember the case of a young man in
college, who, having fallen into a morbid
state of mind under the pressure of religious
excitement, went out upon a lonely bridge
at midnight, and shouted out into the dark-
ness words which he supposed to be the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. It is
not easy to believe that for doing this he
fell under the fearful condemnation of which
Christ speaks. On the other hand, it is not
difficult to believe that the sin against the
Holy Ghost may have been committed by
persons who have never in any spoken
utterance blasphemously used that awful
name.—Jbid.

Paralysis of the soul.—It is told of some
of the Hindoo ascetics, that they will at
times, in compliance with a vow, keep a
limb in a constrained position until the
natural use of it is wholly lost and gone.
May not the habitual putting of evil for
good and good for evil bring on a similar
paralysis of the soul? May not the devotees
of the god of this world so keep the vows
they make to him, as to rob themselves of
the power to take the postures of a holier
devotion ?—TLbdid.

Hternal sin.—

“ A sin that passes!” Lo, one sad and high,

Bearing a taper stately like a queen,

Talks in her sleep—‘ Will these hands

ne’er be clean?”

“ What’s done cannot be undone.” She
walks by

As she must walk through her eternity,


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.


a


eae within her that which she hath
been.
“The sin that I have sinn’d is but one
_ _ scene,
Life is a manifold drama,” so men cry.
Alas! the shadow follows thee too well.
The interlude outgrows its single part,
And every other voice is stricken
- dumb.
That which thou carriest to the silent dell
Is the eterna] sin thou hast become.
The everlasting tragedy thou art!
Bishop Wm. Alexander.


Ver. 35. The test of relationship is life.—
If you go out into the woods in summer,
you may see, high up on some tree, a branch
with dry twigs and withered leaves. It
seems to be a part of the tree. Yet, when
you look closer, you find it has been broken
away, and now it is only a piece of dead
wood encumbering a living tree. The test
of relationship with the tree is life—fruit-
bearing. That is also the test of relationship
with Christ. The power which binds the iron
to the magnet is unseen, but real; the


iron so bound becomes itself a magnet: the
power that binds believers to Christ, and
makes them members of Him, is as real,
though also unseen.

All love in Christ.—Light is one thing,
though comprising in itself -several hues.
All the fair hues of nature inhere in the
light—so that where there is no light, there
is no colour. Wherever the light travels, it
disparts its colours to natural objects—to
one after this manner, to another after that
—the emerald green to the leaves—to the
flowers violet, and yellow, and crimson.
And in the same manner all love is in Christ,
and is from Him, as its Fountain-head and
Centre, disparted among the various rela-
tions of human life. A ray from His light
struggles forth in the care of the father, in
the tenderness of the mother, in the active
support of the brother or friend, in the
sister’s refined sympathy—nay, in the affec-
tionate homage of the son. And this whole
love, in all its manifold elements, is brought
to converge, with unshorn beams, upon that
thrice happy man or boy who does the will
of God.— Dean Goulbourn.


CHAPTER IV.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. For a description of the surrounding scenery, which doubtless furnished many
of the illustrations used in the following parables, see Stanley’s Sinat and Palestine,
pp. 425-427; Thomson’s Land and the Book, p. 402; Tristram’s Land of Israel, p. 431.

Ver. 11. Unto you, who possess the hearing ear and inquiring heart, is given the mystery
or inner secret of the kingdom of God ; but unto them that are without, who listen only from
curiosity or some ever less worthy motive, all the things concerning that kingdom are done
in (i.e. take the form of) parables. i

Ver. 12. This veiling of spiritual truth is in mercy to those at present unable to receive
it. The time may come when, with softened hearts, they will recall the teaching unheeded
now; and then by the help of the parables embedded in their memory, they may rise to
an appreciation of the things of the kingdom. — f

Ver. 21. “ We lose much of the significance, if we think of the modern candle and candle-
stick carried about in the hand. On the contrary, it is the lamp of the house put upon the
lamp-stand, or candelabrum, which is so elevated that any lamp upon it can lighten up all

interior.”
a 22. Which shall not be manifested.—But that it should be manifested. To be read
in close connexion with vers. 11, 12, on which these words shed a flood of light. God's
purposes are always merciful; His hidings are revealings in disguise,

Ver. 24. Take heed what ye hear.—There is a discipline of ear, as well as of tongue,
hand, etc. Men are held responsible for the opportunities to hear good that they neglect,
and for the voluntary exposure of their minds to evil influences. With what measure ye
mete.—According to the attention bestowed in hearing the truth, and the diligence used
in obeying its behests, will be the profit derived from it. Or there may be a special
reference to the duty of handing on to others the spiritual knowledge we have acquired
ourselves, and the clearer insight that the instructor himself gains while so doing. The
last clause of the verse should probably read simply, And more shall be given to you: God
is ever a liberal paymaster. “If ye diligently endeavour to do all the good you can, and
teach it to others, the mercy of God wid come in to give you both in the present life
a sense to take in higher things and a will to do better things, and will add for the future
an everlasting reward.”


125


CHAP. 1V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oe


Ver, 25. The principle enunciated here is one that applies to every department of life.
Nothing succeeds like success, or fails like failure. One thing leads the way to another of
the same kind, whether it be triumph or defeat, gain or loss, etc. In the spiritual sphere,
in particular, he who possesses the hearing ear and the understanding heart, will find them
improve by use ; while he who does not cultivate them is in danger of losing them altogether.


Ver. 29. But as soon as the fruit is mature, straightway he putteth forth the sickle, etc.
Cp. Joel iii, 18 (LXX.). See also 1 Pet. i. 23-25; Rev. xiv. 14, 15.


Ver. 39. Arose.—Awoke. Peace, be still. Be silent! Be muzzled! Mark alone preserves


these words, which were doubtless addressed to “the prince of the power of the air,” by
whose agency the storm had arisen.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—20.


Popular teaching of Jesus Christ.—Good teaching is always seasonable. It
is the first step to the attainment of larger blessing. Real knowledge enlarges
the soul’s capacity, and awakens new desire.

I. The particular occasion.—The multitude was great: universal eagerness
was aroused to hear the wisdom of this strange Teacher. No private dwelling
sufficed to accommodate the crowd. By common instinct they withdrew to the
shore of the lake. 1. Outward circumstances are made tributary to the wise
designs of Jesus. If the artificial temples reared by men are too narrow for the
Divine purpose, material nature will provide a temple of the sublimest kind.
Nor is this all. There is no reason why we should not conclude that, at the
creation of Gennesaret’s blue lake, this event was foreseen. That shelving,
sandy beach had been, for long ages, intended as an auditorium for that human
assemblage; and never had its capacity been put to its noblest use till then.
Still, human art is not flung away in contempt. The Gracious King deigns to
employ human helpers, and *o work through human agencies, so far as He can.
9. Initial stages of Divine illumination. “He began to teach.” As a human
parent, dealing with children, begins with pictures and object-lessons, so deals
Jesus Christ with men. He began with parables. To speak of things in the
heavenly world as they really are would be to speak a language unintelligible
to human auditors. In nature God’s thoughts are projected before human
eyes in material objects, and these the Son of God makes His starting-point.
3 A renewed endeavour to do men good. “ Again He began.” Full well He
knew the dulness of men to apprehend spiritual truth. If He had depended
upon immediate and visible results for inspiration of energy to continue His
undertaking, hope would soon have expired. But His Divine patience is
inexhaustible. “Line upon line, precept upon precept,” is His sketch-plan.
No apparent miscarriage daunts Him.

II. The form of the Saviour’s teaching —‘In parables.” 1. This form of
teaching readily impresses the imagination. Interest is awakened. Attention
is excited. It becomes evident that spiritual truth has vital connexion with
visible things. This life is seen to be the groundwork of a nobler. 2. This
form of teaching serves as a test of men’s honesty. Some men will yield to the
momentary gratification of hearmg the parable, but will take no pains to solve
its meaning. Or, as soon as they get a glimpse that it implies an unpleasant
duty, they dismiss the matter unceremoniously. Herein is a test of their
honesty and earnestness. If they will not take the pains to thrash the straw,
grind the grain, they must starve. The sweet kernel of truth lies within, but
the hard shell must first be broken. 3. Infinite issues hang on receiving aright
parabolical teaching. Light comes to men in this form—a from the most
suitable: if they reject the light, their darkness becomes their chosen doom.
The Emancipator comes in a shape and dress they do not recognise : refusing
his offices, their bondage becomes confirmed. A moment of heavenly oppor-


126


~


ene ol


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.
pees et a i ot 8 ee RS eae ve en
tunity occurs, which, if improved, leads on to spiritual fortune > uninproved,
ends in curse.

III. The revelation provided for the many: exoteric doctrine.—The destiny
of the seed was various. 1. One portion fell on the beaten track, and was
at once doomed to fruitlessness. In Palestine pasture and corn-lands are
unenclosed. Camels and pedestrians soon make a beaten path from village to
village. The greatest expert could not prevent some seeds from falling on this
camel track, which lay right across his field. Wild birds soon learnt from
experience where to find unburied seed, and were always on the alert to find
aieal. In prospect of a harvest such seeds were lost. 2. A second portion
fell on stony ground, z.e. on shallow soil. Only the thinnest crust of earth
covered the rock. In the first stage of growth all seed finds its nutriment
within itself ; therefore the first aspect of the young crop is quite as promising
in a poor soil as in fattest loam. But the test of a scorching sun soon brings
to light good rootage, or slender. The moisture exuding through the pores of
the leaf found no continuous supply from the root-source. Hence the green
blades soon became languid, faint, shrivelled, sere. 3. A third portion fell
among the old roots of former wild growths. As soon as spring, with its
revivifying influence, appeared, the old stumps of thorns broke forth into new
life. Vigorous shoots and branches from these old roots monopolised space and
air and light,—the young blades of corn were attenuated and sickly. The power
to appropriate the nutritious elements of the soil was lacking; the young corn
could not even stand erect. The processes of life were checked. The force
needed for kernelling was spent. The hostility was too severe; life could not
survive. 4. The fortunes of the fourth portion of the seed were prosperous.
The seed fell into good ground. Nursed in the warm bosom of mother earth,
it soon gave signs of life. The hidden germ swelled, burst the swathing bands
of hard membrane, and sent its living rootlets in search of proper food. Day
by day it obtained a larger hold on life. Duly the green stalks pierced the
surface, and found nutrition from dew and air and sunlight. They grew,
acquired strength, flowered, kernelled into grain, and when the stalks at
length fell before the sickle, they yielded large increase. Yet the fruitfulness
was not uniform. In part, proportionate to the fatness of the soil; in part,
proportionate to the skill of the sower: thirty grains were found where one had
been sown—a hundred for one in some instances were gained.

IV. The higher revelation for the few: esoteric doctrine——Comparatively
few in every age care for spiritual enlightenment. The many are absorbed in
the care for bread, or in the care for riches. To them the visible is everything ;
the invisible, nothing. Yet a few everywhere—the true elect—examine, ponder,
and reverently ask. To such the deeper meanings of the parable appear.
1, There is failure in a man’s life through an unprepared condition of the soil.
Secular traffic hardens all the better feelings of the heart. A man’s soul, which
should be penetrable, plastic, accessible to the light and love from heaven,
becomes callous, repellent, indurated—until it has reached the final stage—
‘past feeling.” In the proper condition of the mind, it is exquisitely suited to
the reception of living seed; it is the seed’s home and rest. Inquiry after truth
is natural. But if the emotional nature become hardened by worldly pursuits,
the seed is lost; it remains on the surface, and our sleepless foe removes it at
once from the memory. The man wantonly allows himself to be despoiled of
his choicest treasure. In harvest time he reaps confusion andshame. 2. There
is failure also in man’s best life through shallow feeling. To have sin pardoned
is a joyous sensation—to be received as an adopted child is a rich privilege—
to be assured of heaven is rapture. But presently the sun’s face suffers eclipse
—clouds gather. Friends scowl and load us with opprobrium. The cold slee’’


127


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
Jee oe ee a eS ae
of the world’s hatred is showered upon us. Snares are laid for our feet. Our
occupation is gone. Poverty and shame have to be faced. We cannot tread
this rugged path. What? give up comfort, and riches, and prospects, and
friends, and health for the sake of a slender hope of future joy? It is too much
to ask. Men stumble at the terms; they go back to animal enjoyments.
Alas! the seed is unfruitful. 3. Failure, too, may come about through
attempted compromise of the earthly and the heavenly. The convictions of
truth have taken a deeper hold than in the foregoing case. The man cannot
afford to forego religion—that would be ruinous! But he will relegate it to
a corner. His feverish pursuit of riches need not destroy his faith. He will,
he must, be rich. But his riches shall not extinguish his piety. So he reasons ;
and all the while the green withes of evil habit are becoming tough as steel.
Still dreaming of freedom, he is suddenly cast out of the kingdom as the veriest
slave of mammon. Again the seed is fruitless. 4. Success comes only through
acting in concert with God. The honest mind says, “Let the truth come
in! Welcome light, come from what quarter it may 1” He can afford to wait
for blessed fruit till harvest time. Truth cannot injure a man: error or indolence
must. ‘He receives the Word.” He reflects on what he hears, until it has an
abiding-place in the understanding. From the understanding it passes into the
conscience, and becomes conviction of duty. Thence it goes down into the affec-
tions—roots itself there—and becomes new and holy experience.—J. D. Davies.


The parable of the sower.—Unilike all other teachers, this Divine Teacher, in

this His first parable, displays the same perfection of method, the same mastery
of this life in its highest relations to spiritual truth, as in His latest utterances.
Very notable, also, is the framework of this parable, in its adaptation to the
Master’s mission and that of all His followers. Seed-sowing was His work—
first for its own immediate usefulness, then for our imitation.
» I, The spiritual husbandman’s chief work is to sow the Word.—He is to
multiply what God hath revealed, not human speculations, not current news,
not scientific discoveries, however true or helpful in their sphere, not ingenious
theories about the Word. ‘That Word finds illustration in every phase of the
universe; but fatal the error that abandons the spirit and work of reverent
interpretation for that of substitution.

IL. He who sows the true seed may count upon a sure and large harvest —
A single sentence, often only a word, implanted within the soul, reconstructs
the whole life, and builds the world anew and for all the future.

III. Every one, of moderate intelligence even, is a sower of seed in the
world’s broad field of spiritual harvests.—Every life, however circumstanced,
repeats itself, or in some way enters into other lives, with a multiplying power
for good or evil, of which the world’s grain-harvests are a fit and vivid, though
inadequate, illustration.

IV. The emphasis of our Lord’s teaching refers to the seed’s fruitfulness
according to the condition of the hearts receiving it—Unlike the ground,
hearts are under self-control. Not passively inert, they can take condition
favourable to the Word, and become fruitful beyond any chance or doubt.
1. It is safe to say that our care in hearing the Word is not proportioned to its
importance. All religious life is antagonised by the adversary, but his best
energies are centred upon keeping the truth from finding lodgment. It easily
sets its roots if it have opportunity, but no seed will fruit if at once caught
away. Wayside hearers leave the Word, however faithfully presented, to such
speedy destruction. Jesus describes such as those who hearing the Word
understand it not. In epitome this includes every condition of mind and heart
barred against the truth. The vital truth is the helplessness of seed in hearts


128






HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.





so preoccupied as to be steeled against its lodgment. This truth is reinforced
by the revealed agency of Satan. He catches away the Word by coinciding with
the heart’s pre-existing hostility. To the sensualist he heightens the promise
of forbidden pleasures, lest a better life may get his attention and choice. The
worldling he points to heights of power or gain or fame not yet reached, and
with which nothing must be permitted to interfere. To the scoffing sceptic he
paints the conquests of controversy, the sweets of destructive onslaught upon
received and time-honoured doctrines. 2. The next part of the figure refers to
an underlying rock formation covered with a light layer of soil. This is a fitting
typeof natures quick to respond in feelings warm and sympathetic, but lacking
in the underlying virtues of reason, will, and conscience. With these a man
has “ root in himself” ; without them he is carried about by the enthusiasm of
the hour or moment. The quick sensibilities have their uses. Any soul devoid
of them is seriously lacking in equipment for life’s best enjoyment and work.
But with them there should be fixed convictions of one’s own, the combined
product of clear reason, a sensitive conscience, and persistent will. This is the
sub-soil into which the roots of principles thrust themselves, as do those of the
wind-beaten oak, under all the blasts of tribulation or persecution. 3. Here we
are to think not so much of a visible growth of thorns as of a root-infested soil,
the roots long and deeply planted and holding their places with stubborn
thoroughness. The soil is deep enough and of ample strength ; but its resources
are absorbed by these preoccupying thorns, whose roots hold the field and
promptly spring up, starving the good seed. Worldly anxieties, the deceitful
promises of wealth, mere self-indulgence, called pleasure, have a firm anchorage
in the natural heart. The renewed heart must enthrone service of the Lord
Jesus in the building of His universal kingdom. This may be only in germ, but
if genuine it will have a growing mastery and final supremacy, the thorn-roots
all eradicated. The best eradication, because easiest and quickest, is a trans-
formation of “ cares, riches, and pleasures” into reinforcements of the Lord’s
work. These pre-existing roots become fertilisers and feeders of good soil.
The Queen’s broad arrow marks and secures England’s possessions. The soul
converted to Christ may put the Cross upon all riches or proper pursuits and
pleasures, the Master’s kingdom supreme in its rounded life. 4. Two points of
profitable inquiry concerning the good-ground hearers: How can any unrenewed
heart be called “good ground,” and what determines the differing degrees of
fruitage? While no natural heart is holy, it may have moral qualities favour-
able to receiving good seed and for an easy incorporation of its life. A heart
tender and true, a knowledge of truth broad and deep, a conscience sensitive
and controlling, pursuits honourable and useful—these furnish conditions of ready
and vigorous growth when the seed finds lodgment. Great the encouragement
to persistent effort in the moral training of children and youth! When conver-
sion occurs a rich fruitage follows, because of the good ground thus carefully
and continuously prepared. The fruitage is measured by such antecedent
preparation. Towering corn and wheat cover the prairie once burdened with
flowers and waving grass. We must not omit, in closing, some thought of the
momentous responsibility of hearing the Word. How vital its relation to present
life and future destiny! And yet what is done with less deliberation or
thoroughness ?—S. L. B. Speare.


The Sower and the seed.-—This parable may be regarded as introductory to all
the rest, and preparatory to that method of teaching which Christ in His Divine
wisdom saw fit to adopt. Unless the drift of this, the first and plainest of the
parables, be understood, it is useless to proceed to more difficult ones, which
presuppose an acquaintance with the ordinary rules of parabolic instruction.

B 129


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





In the parables afterwards delivered that was actually done which is here only
described : the Sower sowed the Word, with the different results that He Himself
foretells in this parable. Or we may say that this very parable is a portion of
that Divine seed which then began to be sown. This doctrine of the preparation
of the heart to receive the gospel may itself be as variously received as any
other portion of evangelical truth.

I. The free grace of God, which is the corner-stone of the whole fabric of
revealed truth, is the foundation on which this parable is constructed.—
1. Moved by His own infinite goodness—the same goodness which originally
prompted Him to call man into existence—God “went forth,” as it were, came
out of His place, to sow the seed of Divine truth in the hearts of His creatures.
Whatever revelations of Himself He has been pleased to make, from the time
when He talked with our first parents until the present day, the Sower has never
ceased to scatter over the wide field of the human family the seeds of that
knowledge which “maketh wise unto salvation.” 2. This grand operation of
sowing the Word, as it proceeded from unbounded goodness, so has it always been
conducted with unerring wisdom—with that wisdom which looks to the end,
which contemplates great results, comprehensive benefits (Luke ii. 14). 3. As
we survey the world’s history, we see the Great Sower marking out, and as it
were enclosing, certain portions of the common field to be cultivated with
particular care, while the rest was to all appearance left in a state of nature.
So it was, avowedly, under the Jewish dispensation ; so it is now, actually at
least, under the Christian. Actually, but not designedly. The design of the
dispensation of grace is, to make known the glad tidings of salvation to all
nations for the obedience of faith (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15; Luke
xxiy. 47). 4. The Sower still goes forth, by His agents and ministers, to sow
the Word of Life (Eph. iv. 11-13). The commission is unlimited, the supply of
grace and strength unbounded ; the deficiency is in the human instruments alone.

II. The various receptions which are accorded by men to the free grace
of God.—1. Here are three descriptions of persons whom “the Word preached _
does not profit,” etc. (Heb. iv. 2). Their characters are exactly discriminated in
vers. 15-19. Any hearer who desires to know the cause of his own unprofitable-
ness may sit down before this faithful mirror, and in one or other of the three
reflexions presented by it he will be sure to find his own. 2. Note the points
of agreement between the three classes of unprofitable hearers. (1) They all
hear the Word. This is partly the gracious provision of the Sower, who sows _
plentifully (James i. 5). But, besides, there is a natural disposition in men to
“hear the Word,” independent of the reception they may eventually give it.

(2) They all, in a certain sense, receive the Word. So it is with hearers in
general. They “receive the Word with joy.” They like to hear. They go
away with the intention of coming again. They do tome again. They become
regular hearers. Hearing the Word becomes a habit with them. They feel
a certain gratification in the mere act of hearing, and so they fancy they have
derived benefit from it. Vain delusion! (3) They all “ bring no fruit to per-
fection.” The first sort never believe the Word at all; the second have faith,
but such faith as will not abide the test of tribulation or persecution because of
the Word; the third might endure afflictions, but yield to temptations of a
different kind (ver. 19). Thus the end of allis the same. Some may advance
further towards maturity than others; some may exhibit the blade, others the
ear, but none “the full corn in the ear.” At the best they are ‘ double-minded
men,” “ halting between two opinions,” “ unstable in all their ways.” 3. There
is yet another class of hearers, standing entirely by itself. It consists of those
who “hear the Word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit.” The seed that is
sown here, finding a soil congenial to it—‘“an honest and good heart” —and


130





:


7S: es ee eee.


ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.
a ed eee ds


watered by the dews of heaven, “takes root downward, and bears fruit
upward.” Such an one, “nourished up in the words of faith and of good
doctrine,” “ grows in grace,” etc. (2 Pet. iii. 18). The “fruit of the Spirit ”
manifests itself in his words and deeds. By the grace of God, he “ keepeth
himself ; and that wicked one,” who is always at hand to catch away the Word
sown in the heart, “toucheth him not.” Afflictions and temptations, however
they may unsettle him for a time, “nevertheless afterward yield the peaceable
fruits of righteousness.” Even “the cares of this world, and the lusts of other
things,” from which no one is altogether exempt, although they may check the
growth of the good seed in the heart, do not choke it; they may make it less
abe but not “barren or unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
ist.”


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. Christ teaching in the ship
a parable itself of the kingdom of
heaven. 1. A figure of its form.
(1) The evangelical ministry. (2) The
Church. (3) Missions. 2. A figure of
its condition. (1) Small beginnings.
(2) Poverty. (3) Mobility. (4) Free-
dom.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

An imperfect Church, an unworthy
pulpit, and poor hearers may never-
theless form a true Church, accepted
of God.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 2. Why Christ spoke in parables.
—1l. That the Scripture might be ful-
filled (Ps. lxxviii. 2). 2. That we might
know that Christ spake with the same
spirit with which all God’s prophets
in the old time spake, whose writings
are full of parables. 3. That He might
descend to the capacity of the most
simple, who best understand and re-
member homely illustrations. 4. That
His auditors might take occasion to ask
questions (ver. 10). 5. That the mys-
teries of God’s heavenly kingdom might
be hidden from the scornful (vers.
11, 12). 6. That every man, in his
occupation and ordinary vocation,
might be taught those things which
concern his soul’s health: as_ this
parable may be termed: the plough-
man’s gospel ; he that meditates on it,
when he ploughs his ground, may have
a sermon always before him, every
furrow being a line, every grain of
corn a lesson bringing forth some
fruit.


Rules for the interpretation of para-
bles—1. Careful attention to the
occasion of them. 2. Close adherence
to the one truth or duty meant to be
enforced. It is much the same here as
in considering a fine painting ; a com-
prehensive view of the whole will have
a happy and striking effect, but that
effect will not be felt if the eye is held
to detached parts of the picture with-
out regarding the relation they bear to
the rest. 3. Great care in reasoning
from the parables to the peculiar
doctrines of Christianity. (1) An in-
temperate use of figures tends to
sensualise the mind and deprave the
taste. (2) By the misapplication of
figures false ideas are given to the
hearer of the things they stand for.
(3) The reasoning injudiciously from
types and figures begets a kind of
faith that is precarious and ineffectual.
An enthusiast, struck with appear-
ances, hastily yields his assent to a
proposition, without considering the
evidence carefully. But as soon as his
passions cool, and the false glare upon
his imagination subsides, his faith dies
away, and the fruit expected from it
proves utterly abortive. ‘‘ Parables
are more ancient than arguments,”
says Lord Bacon: and it is not
difficult to see why. A parable is
winnirg and attractive, because it is
a narrative or story: it is easy to
be understood, since it deals with
familiar events and actions, with say-
ings and doings of common life, which


131


CHAP. IV.





are well known to all its hearers:
lastly, it is acceptable and effective,
because it does not arouse antagonism
and opposition in the mind of the
hearer, as argument frequently does.

Christ's thought for the multitude.—
Tt is easy to have tender regard and
helpful disposition towards the few
kindred spirits, but Jesus thought of
the needs of any and all of His fellow-
men to which He could minister. But
this spirit of beneficence was always
guided by unerring wisdom as to
methods. We may blindly yield to
benevolent impulses in ways self-
defeating and often harmful. He
thoroughly measured the situation of
His opening ministry, and taught by
parable which should both reveal and
conceal. Idle curiosity, much less per-
sonal prejudice or selfish scheming, is
never the condition of helpful hearing.
Concealment by parable was a favour
to all who would have wrested the
truth to their own hurt.—S. LZ. B.
Speare.


Ver. 3. The sower is now any and
every one who rehearses and enforces
the same doctrines as our Lord. It
matters little who or what he is, so
long as he has full store of the good
seed and is faithful in scattering it.
The harvest tells nothing as to the
husbandman—whether a master or
slave—save his wise and _ trustful
labour. Results are the same in either
case, and these are the objects in all
sowing.

Analogies.—1. Between the sowing
of seed and the teaching of truth.
2. Between the earth’s reception of the
seed and man’s reception of the truth.
3. Between the earth’s response to the
seed sown and man’s response to the
truth taught. So too it is the same
God—1. Who gives man seed to sow
and truth to learn. 2. Who prepares
the earth for the reception of the seed
and the heart of man for the reception
of the truth. 3. Who causes the seed
to grow and bring forth fruit, and who
guides and helps man to carry into
practice the truth which he learns,


132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Vers. 5, 6. No depth of earth.— At
first, when the wheat sprouts, the blade
which it sends up to the surface is
green and beautiful. But after a
while the field of emerald loveliness
looks suddenly sere and yellow; the
blades seem to droop and languish as
if a worm were at the root. This
remarkable change is caused by what
the farmers call the “ spearin’ brash”
(Scotch for “weaning brash”). The
corn is weaned from its mother’s milk,
as it were; for the supply of food
which was stored up for it in the seed
is now exhausted, and it has to seek
food for itself in the soil and air. It
has not yet strength to do so, and
therefore fades and becomes sickly.
It falls off, just as a human child falls
off when weaned. If, in such circum-
stances, there is soil enough, it soon
recovers ; if, however, there is no room
beneath and fierce sun above, then
because it has no root it withers.—
H. Macmillan, DD.


Ver. 9. Hloquent hearing is indis-
pensable to effective preaching: it is
as necessary that listeners should be
taught how to hear, as it is that
preachers should be taught what or
how to speak.—W. M. Taylor, D.D.

Qualities to be cultivated by gospel
hearers. —-1. Attention. The good
hearer stirs himself up to listen, He
trains himseif to follow the speaker.
His hearing is an opportunity, and he
takes care to make the most of it.
2. Meditation. What he “hears” he
“keeps” by reflecting upon it, and
assimilating it for his own edification
and growth in grace. Says Willmott:
“ Proportion an hour’s reflexion to an
hour’s reading, and so dispirit the book
into the student.” So I would say:
Let every time of hearing be followed
by a time of meditation, that the seed
which has fallen on the soil may, as
it were, be “ harrowed” into it by the
process. 3. Obedience. To hear with-
out obeying is to harden the heart ;
for, as Bishop Butler says, “ passive
impressions grow weaker by being
repeated.” But the acting on what





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.





we hear prepares us for being better
hearers next time, and quickens the
receptivity of the soul. Even among
good hearers, however, there will be
differences ; some will make more of
their opportunities than others.—Jbid.

Divine truth needs attention—Per-
haps our Saviour used so frequently
to conclude His Divine discourses with,
“ He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear,” to teach us that there is no
employment of our faculties, that more
deserves their utmost attention, than
the scrutiny of Divine truths (Isa. iv. 3;
Rom. x. 17).—. Boyle.


Vers. 10-12. Parables necessary for
outsiders.—Parables are, so to speak,
forced upon the Lord. They are His
only method of dealing with this loose
mob that is following Him. He cannot
venture to confide to them His full
mind, for it would but confuse and
repel them. So long as it was His
disciples He could address them openly,
as in the Sermon on the Mount, with
plain, strong directions. So it had
been, apparently, at the first ; but now
that His fame had spread—now that
a mixed multitude is swarming around
Him—He is driven to protect His
doctrine from degradation, misunder-
standing, confusion. It is not enough
that He hasin His hands pearls to give;
He must see to it, also, that He distri-
butes them aright to those that will
profit by them. So the parables ex-
press the guarded caution with which
the great revelation of the Father must
be made. It is not enough that God
should reveal His love for fallen man ;
but more than that, He must do it
in a way of condescension to all the
gradations of darkness into which men
have fallen. Here is the irony of the
terrible passage quoted by our Lord
from Isaiah in answer to the wondering
question of the disciples why He should
speak in parables. Why in parables ?
Because so many, though they willingly
listen, are in such a state that, hearing
they hear not, and seeing they see not ;
it is because “this people’s heart is
waxed gross, and their ears are dull


of hearing, and their eyes are closed,
lest at any time, seeing with their eyes,
and hearing with their ears, they should
understand with their hearts, and
should be converted, and I should heal
them.” ‘Lest they should be con-
verted, and I should healthem.” That
is the dreadful thing that would happen;
that is the dreadful thing that they
are bent on postponing. That is the
irony of love picturing the postpone-
ment of the good it brings; and since
the facts are so, since men have deter-
mined that the process of their salvation
shall be slow, and difficult and gradual,
therefore Christ has conformed to their
ways; He has qualified the blinding
light, He has shadowed it down to
the dusk in which men abide, He has
divided His teaching into stages, so as
to protect these obstinate hearts against
their own prejudices, He has fallen
back on these parables. Even those
who most vehemently repudiate the
more emphatic message, even those


~ who might in indignation take up


stones to kill Him if they heard the
full claim, will stand and listen to
these parables; and if they listen and
are pleased to walk away without
further question no irremediable harm
will be done, only they will be much
as they were before, only they will
postpone the day of possibility, they
will not have been brought up near
enough to the fire to be scorched by
it, they will have been saved the
uppermost disaster. But, on the other
hand, if there are any there who have
ears to hear and eyes to see, then the
parable will work its perfect work
upon them, they will never be satisfied
by its mere beauty, they will feel the
prickings of a Diviner secret, the
parables will quicken and animate
them into more eager expectation ;
something in them will provoke them,
they will be restless until they have
gone further, they will press in with
the other disciples into the house with
the Master, they will insist on being
told what it all means. And it is
these persistent, clamouring questioners
to whom it is given to know the


133


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





mysteries of heaven. These will ask
and knock, and asking will receive,
and knocking it will be opened unto
them.-—Canon Scott Holland.

Double aspect of parables.—Inasmuch
as a parable is the presentation of
some spiritual truth under the guise
of an incident belonging to the material
sphere, it follows, from its very nature,
that it may either reveal or hide the
truth, and that it will do the former
to susceptible and the latter to un-
susceptible souls. The eye may either
dwell upon the coloured glass or on
the light that streams through it; and,
as is the case with all revelations of
spiritual realities through sensuous
mediums, gross and earthly hearts will
not rise above the medium, which to
them, by their own fault, becomes a
medium of obscuration, not of revela-
tion. This double aspect belongs to
all revelation, which is both a savour
of life unto life and of death unto
death.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

The veil of allegory.—The ideas of
the Christ of God are thinly veiled in
parables, so as to conceal them from
idle and corrupt minds, who hate the
Cross, and do not think truth worth
their steady attention. But this slight
veil of allegory enhances their beauty
for those who are worthy of initiation
into the ‘mysteries of the kingdom,”
just as the sun and moon appear more
beautiful for the thin luminous mists
through which they rise above the
horizon, as they turn the vapours into
gold.—H#. White.


Ver. 10. Haplanation of difficulties
to be sought.—As in the schools of
human knowledge, so soon as the lecture
is read, it is the scholars’ duty to ques-
tion among themselves how to parse
and construe it, and when they doubt
to have recourse to their grammar
rules, by which all construction is
examined; and when they do not
understand a hard rule to come for
a resolution unto their master, who
is as it were a living grammar and
a walking book,—so likewise in God’s
academy, in the divinity school, when


134


either the lecture of the law is read,
or sermon on the gospel ended, it is
your part to reason among yourselves,
as you walk abroad in the fields or
talk at home in your house, how this
and that may be construed; and when
you cannot resolve one another, with
the men of Berea, to search the
Scripture daily, whether those things
are so, to try the spirits of men by
the Spirit of God, for the Bible is our
divinity grammar, according to which
all our lessons ought to be parsed and
construed. And if ye meet with a
difficult place, repair to God’s usher,
the priest, whose lips should preserve
knowledge; demand of your pastor, as
the disciplesof Christ here.—Dean Boys.


Ver. 11. “The mystery of the king-
dom of God.” —Religious knowledge, and
especially that Christian and saving
knowledge which the gospel brought
to light, is what our Lord means by
“‘the mystery of the kingdom of God.”
A “mystery” is something dark and
incomprehensible; which may happen
in two ways—either through the want
of a clear revelation, or through the
natural and incurable imperfection of
our faculties. ‘“ The kingdom” con-
tains mysteries of both kinds: some
sublime secrets which are altogether
too high for us, which no revelation
could impart to us, and which are
therefore properly said to “belong
unto the Lord our God”; others, again,
which in former ages were not made
known unto the sons of men, as they
are now revealed unto the holy apostles
and prophets, and through them to
mankind in general, by the Spirit.
In the latter there is no mystery as
soon as the revelation is made, no
difficulty which may not be removed
by the instructions and explanations
of a discreet, patient, and condescend-
ing teacher. Such a teacher was our
Blessed Lord. He had to teach things,
not unintelligible in their nature, but
yet strange and hard sayings to His
poor, ignorant, carnal-minded hearers ;
such as required to be helped out by
comparisons and illustrations from


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee


oe


—_—s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


se


CHAP. IV.





things which they did understand.
He did not attempt to show to such
persons what the kingdom of God
was, but only what it was like; that
by the help of these patterns and
representations of things in the heavens
He might at last lead up their minds
to the heavenly things themselves.


Ver. 14, The emblem of seed for God’s
Word needs no explanation. The tiny,
living nucleus of force, which is thrown
broadcast, and must sink underground
in order to grow, which does grow, and
comes to light again in a form which
fils the whole field where it is sown,
and nourishes life as well as supplies
material for another sowing, is the
truest symbol of the truth in its work-
ing on the spirit.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

Sowing broadcast is the only right
husbandry in Christ’s field with Christ’s
seed. ‘Thou canst not tell which shall
prosper, whether this or that.” The
character of the soil is not irrevocably
fixed; but the trodden path may be
broken up to softness, and the stony
heart changed, and the soul filled with
cares and lusts be cleared, and any soil
may become good ground.—/bid.

The seed must be genuine: wheat,
not bastard wheat; the wheat that
makes bread and sustains life—the seed
of the Word of God. Not all seed sown
in Sunday schools, just as not all seed
scattered from Christian pulpits, is un-
adulterated truth of God. While there
must always be the human element in
the teaching of the inspired Word, it
must not be all the human element,
which it is too oftenfound to be, whereby
much of the teaching given is, for all
higher and Divine purposes, not bread,
but sawdust.— Bishop Thorold.

Twofold sowing.—According to Jew-
ish authorities there was twofold sow-
ing, as the seed was either cast by the
hand or by means of cattle. In the
latter case a sack with holes was filled
with corn, and laid on the back of the
animal, so that, as it moved onwards,
the seed was thickly scattered. Thus
it might well be that it would fall
indiscriminately on beaten roadway, or


on stony places but thinly covered with
soil, or where the thorns had not been
cleared away, or undergrowth from
this thorn hedge crept into the field,
as well as on good ground.—A. Eder-
sheim, D.D.

The sowing of the seed of goodness,
even among the rank growths of evil,
will do in the spiritual world what the
growth of the wild flowers of England
is doing at this moment among the
rank vegetation of New Zealand, and
what the fire and hoe of the settler
have failed to do. We are told that
the common clover of our fields, tender
as it looks, is actually rooting out
the formidable New Zealand flax, with
its fibrous leaves and strong woody
roots. By the law of natural selection,
as it were, in the spiritual world, the
stronger growth of heaven will extir-
pate the feebler growth of earth.—
H, Macmillan, D.D.


Ver. 15. By the wayside.—These are
they who, when the Baptist came with
austere severity, said he was mad; and
when Christ conversed and taught with
mild condescension, said He was a
drunkard, a glutton, and a keeper of
bad company. They hated the doctrines,
and so found fault with the teachers.
Such are those who have entered be-
times, and continued long, in the service
of the devil; who are slaves to vices
and bad habits ; who have extinguished
all reason, reflexion, and natural con-
science, and whom no ordinary methods
can reclaim. The Word is preached to
them, and they trample it underfoot,
and ridicule those who offer them good
advice. They lie out of the reach of
persuasion and instruction, and nothing
short of some grievous calamity can
rouse them. But from their deplor-
able condition others may take due
warning, lest, by departing from their
duty and neglecting a timely reforma-
tion, they should, through the deceit-
fulness of sin, arrive at such a hardened
state. And this seems to be the only
use these incorrigible offenders serve in
this world: they stand forth, not as
marks and friendly lights to guide


135


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





nn nnn nn cn ee nEnIn SS SnDIIDIUIEISIS SSSI


and direct the passenger, but as signals
of danger and death to be avoided.—
J. Jortin, DD.

The devil’s activity.— ‘‘ Wherever
there is a preacher in the pulpit, there
is a devil in the pew,” to carry off the
good seed if it be neglected. \

Satan hinders men in sundry ways
from profiting by the Word. 1. By
keeping them from hearing it, stirring
up occasions of worldly business or some
other impediments on the Lord’s Day
to keep them away from church. 2. By
keeping them from attending to it
when they do hear it. 3. By blinding
their minds, that they may not under-
stand it. 4. By labouring to hold them
in infidelity, that they may not believe
and apply the Word to themselves.
5. By using means to thrust the Word
heard out of their minds, that they
may not remember it. 6. By keeping
them from yielding obedience to the
Word.—G. Petter.


Vers. 16, 17. No root.—These are
persons who have conscience, reason,
and reflexion; who can discern the
amiable and profitable nature of re-
ligion, and the folly and danger of vice ;
who can sometimes give attention to the
Word of God, approve it as right and
fit, speak and think honourably of it,
and of those who practise it, and even
entertain purposes of acting suitably
to it: but they have no steadiness,
resolution, and perseverance; and so
are not proof against trials and tempta-
tions. They are such as are described
in Ezek. xxxiii. 31, 32. Moral precepts
and religious arguments appear fair
and lovely in idea, but are found
grievous in practice and execution ;
and the paths of righteousness, which
make a ‘fine landscape in description,
are rough, steep, and tedious to ascend.
Such is the effect of religion upon
those who have some taste and natural
discernment, but no steady love of
goodness.—J. Jortin, D.D.

Many mistake feeling for faith,
admiration of Christ for attachment
to Him, the appreciation of the beauty
of holiness for the use and practice of


136


it, the power of emotion for depth of
piety. Such are as quickly offended
as they are impressed.

Quick maturity means brief life and
speedy decay. ‘ Gladness,” although
certainly a result of true conversion,
is not the immediate result, but sorrow
for sin and repentance in dust and
ashes.

A forgotten truth—Much more of
true religion consists in deep humility,
brokenness of heart, and an abasing
sense of barrenness, and want of grace,
and holiness, than most who are called
Christians imagine; especially those
who have been esteemed the converts
of the late day, many of whom seem
to know of no other religion but
elevated joys and affections, arising
only from some flights of imagination,
or some suggestion made to their mind
of Christ’s being theirs, God’s loving
them, and the like (John v. 35;
Mark vi. 20; Luke iv. 23, 29).—
D. Brainerd.

Revival converts——The short and
pathetic history of some who are called
revival converts. They are charmed,
but not changed; much excited, but
not truly converted. Their root is in
the crowd, the fine music, the lively
stir, the hearty companionships of the
gospel meeting. The Moravians every
Sabbath offer up this prayer: “ From
light-minded swarming deliver us,


good God.”


Vers. 18, 19, The Word choked.—To
this class of people religion is presented
and propounded; and they assent to
it and receive it, and call themselves
Christians; but many things arise
between them and their duty, many
avocations and impediments which
prevent the Word from having a due
effect upon their hearts. 1. “The
cares of this world,” when admitted
and nourished and encouraged, seize
upon the whole man, and so fill the
head and occupy the hours that the
attention is entirely fixed on worldly
affairs, and no leisure is allowed for
spiritual concerns. And as no person
can bear the toil and fatigue of being


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.


ee ee ee Ne


always contriving, projecting, labour-
ing, plodding, and some amusement
must intervene, the times for recreation
are, for such persons, the times when
other Christians are attending the
public worship of God, or meditating
on things sacred and serious at home.
Thus religious considerations are totally
banished; and the man may be said
to be dead to God and Christ, and alive
only to the world. 2. ‘“ The deceitful-
ness of riches” has the same,bad effect.
When the love of wealth is predominant
and engrosses the affections, it produces
an eagerness to acquire it; a proud
trust and confidence in it; a settled
resolution to preserve and increase it
by any methods, and in defiance of
honesty and humanity ; andan esteem
or contempt of other persons, according
as tuey are rich or poor: and then
mammon alone is worshipped, and the
love of God is expelled from the heart.
3. “The lusts of other things ”—viz.
desires of magnificence and splendour,
of flattery and popular applause, of
power and pre-eminence, and, in a
word, immoderate affections for any-
thing that is temporal and transitory.
—J, Joriin, DD.

Disheartening influences.—The ridi-
cule of companions, the polite surprise
or cold sneer of former friends at their
earnestness, the tyranny of fashion,
the seductions of pleasure, the force
of habit and inclination, unexpected
sorrows and difficulties, which would
drive an earnest spirit nearer to God,
dishearten those whose religion is
founded on emotion rather than on
principle.


Ver. 20. Ground which disap-
pointeth not the sower, and bringeth
forth fruit in its season, is naturally
good, and is improved by culture.
The heart of every well-disposed person
is such. God has given to all of us
abilities, and power to exert them;


He has also given to us Christians
superadded His revealed will in the
gospel ; and what aid is necessary He
is ever ready to bestow: but a man
must put forth his own strength, and
seek out and work out his own salva-
tion. The persons, therefore, here
described act like rational creatures;
they have a'love of knowledge and
goodness, and a desire to make im-
provements in both. Thence they are
disposed to inquire into themselves
and their duty; and opportunities for
this are never wanting: morality and
revealed religion lie within their reach,
and they may read or hear what God
requires from them. ‘They hear the
Word, and receive it”; they lay it to
heart, and call it to mind; they
meditate upon the benefits arising from
it, the danger of neglecting it, the
reasonable and lovable nature of
it, the dangers, inconveniences, and
temptations which may arise and
assault them, the proper methods of
shunning or resisting them, and the
wisdom of preferring eternal life to all
other considerations.—J. Jortin, D.D.

Varying yields—Every one has ob-
served the difference between those
who may be called good Christians, in
the matter of their good works—how
some seem to produce twice or thrice
the fruit that others do. Some are,
compared with others, three times
more careful in all the trifling matters
which make up so much of life; three
times more self-denying, three times
more liberal, three times more humble,
subdued, and thankful. Does not the
Lord recognise this difference in the
parable of the pounds, when the noble-
man, in leaving, gives a pound to each
of his servants; and one servant makes
it ten pounds, and another five; and
he commends both, but gives to the
more industrious worker twice the
reward ?—W. F. Sadler.


137


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Nee ee ee eee ee


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—25.
(Paratien: Luxe viii. 16-18.)


Ver. 22. The manifestation of hidden things—This is a proverbial saying,
applied in various senses, according to the occasion. Before treating it in a
general way, we may glance at it in connexion with the particular occasions
on which we find it employed in Scripture. 1. Matt. x. 26. Our Lord is there
warning His apostles of the enmity and persecution which they must expect to
encounter in the discharge of their duty. ‘My doctrine,” He seems to say,
“must by all means, and in spite of all attempts to suppress it, be proclaimed
abroad. There is nothing now hid which shall not be revealed; nor has there
anything passed in secret between us which shall not be generally made known.
Fear not, therefore, but proceed to execute the task assigned you, not by the
method of private communication, which is suited only to the instruction of a
few confidential disciples, but in whatever way may best serve to spread the
gospel abroad.” 2. Luke xii. 2. A warning against dissimulation. There will
come a day when all hypocrisy will be laid bare, and every man will appear
in his true character. 3. The text. As a candle is meant to be elevated on a
candlestick, so Christians should not lead a life of seclusion and retirement, but
rather let their light shine before men.

I. Perhaps the first case which occurs to one, on hearing this saying, is that
of great and atrocious crimes, of which the perpetrators are unknown ; acts
of violence or wanton mischief, committed under cover of night or remote from
observation. A short time usually brings to light the deed; but the author
and the circumstances remain a mystery. Such is the case of “an uncertain
murder,” for which the Mosaic Law made a remarkable provision (Deut. xxi. 1-9).
Even in this world it is wonderful how things come to light, often with the
result of bringing the guilt home to the right door. But for the complete
fulfilment of the text we must wait till the Day of Judgment, when no darkness
will hide the evil-doer, and there will be no need of pursuers to track him to
his hiding-place; “his own iniquities,” ete. (Prov. v. 22). Then it will be
useless for one of the party to come forward and betray his accomplices; for
whatsoever the conspirators of mischief “have spoken in darkness,” ete.
(Luke xii. 3). A necessary consequence of the exposure of guilt will be the
manifestation of innocence. Now, in our ignorance of the real offender,
suspicions fall upon many innocent persons, who, if they cannot perfectly clear
themselves, continue under a cloud all their lives. This is a sore trial; but the
Day of Judgment will set it right. See Isa. lvii. 8 ; Ps, xxxvii. 6.

II. Another great heap of hidden things, one day to be revealed, are the
thoughts of men’s hearts, and the secret springs of their actions. At present
everything connected with the inner working of the mind is a mystery. Of all
covered things none is so close and impenetrable as the heart of man (Jer. xvii. 9).
But, happily, “all things are naked,” etc. (Heb. iv. 13). God is able to unlock
the doors of this cabinet, and expose all the secret drawers, recesses, and hiding-
places contained in it. And when we see the multifarious furniture of a single
heart—thoughts, desires, motives, passions, and affections—ransacked and sifted
before the eyes of the universe, we shall perceive an additional propriety in the
text. What a disclosure! Who could have imagined that those who preserved
so amiable and sanctified an exterior should in their hearts be proud, covetous,
sensual, devilish? But where gross hypocrisy is not chargeable, yet what a
miserable figure will the very best and purest exertions of human virtue make,
when manifested, with all their blemishes, in the searching light of God’s


138


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK CHAP. IV.


ee a ea rs Be ee a eee


countenance | Which of us will then appear to have “walked before Him and
been perfect”? to have loved Him “with all our heart,” etc.? to have set up
no idols, no rebellious wills, no carnal affections?


4 ae vs nee to hear sermons.—“* Take heed what ye hear” really means
eed how ye hear,” in what spirit ye hear, with what attention, with
what profit, as appears from the words which follow.

I. Ways in which men bring upon themselves spiritual hurt and loss by
their manner of hearing God’s Word.—1. If they hear without attention or
feeling or desire, then they become so used to the words by hearing them
often, they so harden their hearts by their careless, godless practice, that they
become like the hard-beaten road from which the devil catches away the seed
directly it has fallen. They have this of not attending, that they cannot
attend ; of closing their ears, that they lose the power of hearing even when
they would listen ; and often they go down to the grave deaf to God’s warnings,
deaf to the sound of preacher or angel cr the voice of Christ, to be awakened
from that deafness by the voice of the archangel, and by the trump of God
calling to judgment. 2. Men hear and pay attention; they are moved by
what is said or by what they read: but they rise up and forget; or they begin
to act and leave off with failing zeal and sinking interest; or their sins or the
world choke the seed, and it becometh unfruitful. 3. God withdraws His Spirit
from those who neglect His grace; and without that Spirit no man can draw
near to Him.

II. The great danger of not heeding how we hear in respect to sermons.—-
1. It will avail a man nothing to listen in a judging, criticising spirit. On the
contrary, it will make the service an exercise of pride to him instead of humility :
he will learn nothing, because he has not the spirit of a learner, but the feeling
of a teacher, a judge, andasuperior. 2. It will serve a man nothing if he listens
to a sermon without applying it to himself. 3. If any person delights in
the manner or words of a sermon, or in the preacher of it, rather than in the
matter, the thing preached will profit him nothing. Such an one loses the’
kernel in admiring the shell. 4. A man who talks much about a sermon after
it is over is not one most likely to profit by it. It has been well said that the
best sermon is that which sends a congregation away not talking, but thinking.
Those who feel most speak least. St. Augustine went to preach to some
barbarous people in order to persuade them to abandon a cruel custom to which
they were used. ‘TI preached mightily,” he says, “to the best of my power to
pluck out so cruel and unchristian a custom from their hearts and minds, and to
banish it by my exhorting. I did not think, however, that I had accomplished
anything when I heard them applauding, but when I saw them weeping. For
they shewed by their applause that they were instructed and pleased, but by
their tears that they were turned.” 5. Many people think that they require a
sermon. several times a week to keep them in the right way, and to fill them
with heavenly thoughts. They are mistaken ; they require no more preaching
than they can hear upon the Lord’s Day, except at particular seasons and for
particular instruction. But what they do require is thought. It is want of
thought that makes sermons useless, and afflictions useless, and warnings
useless.:—W. H. Heygate,.


Ver. 25. How progress is possible.—The law laid down is this: that when we
use powers and faculties, we gain more power and more faculty ; that when we
neglect to use them, they decrease, and at last perish. Such is the case with
bodily organs, but such is still more the case with mental organs. Practice
makes perfect, it is said. But notice this: it is not undirected practice, or the

139


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





random use of any power, but it is the carefully arranged practice which
improves it. In other words, it is practice directed towards an end. Robert
Houdon, the celebrated French juggler, tells us how he acquired one element of
his power, an extreme quickness and accuracy of observation. His father took
him through one of the boulevards of Paris, crowded with people, and led him
slowly past a shop window, in which were exhibited a great multitude of different
articles, and then made him tell how many he had been able to notice and
recollect. This practice so strengthened and quickened the perceptive powers,
that at last he became able to recollect every article in a large shop window
by only walking past it a single time. The more he exercised the faculty, the
easier it became. The more he had of this quickness of observation, the more
was given to him. In the same way acrobats and gymnasts, by careful and
systematic training, develop herculean strength of limb and power of equipoise.
As one improves any power by careful training, he gets more. He has much,
and more is given him. But if we neglect to exercise our powers, they
degenerate, and at last disappear. ‘The fishes in the Mammoth Cave have lost
their eyes by not using them in that Egyptian darkness. So if men do not
employ any power, they at last become incapable of using it. The gland which
does not secrete diminishes in bulk; the nerve that does not transmit impres-
sions wastes away ; the muscle which does not contract withers. The intellectual
and moral organs, like the physical, are liable to atrophy, from disease. Ifa
person does not take pains to observe, and to remember what he observes, the
power of seeing and remembering gradually decays. He who does not think
seriously on anything will become frivolous, and not be able to apply his mind
at all. To him who hath knowledge more shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. Knowledge in the mind is such a vital and vitalising power, that
it makes the intellect active to see, to learn, to remember. Whoever travels
with an empty, untaught mind comes back nearly as ignorant as he went; but
the geologist, the artist, the man who has read geography and history, or who
knows well any industry or manufacture or art, is able to see something new
wherever he goes. Just as the merchant must send out some freight in his
vessel in order to bring back a cargo, the traveller must take some knowledge
with him abroad if he wishes to bring any with him home. We have heard of
persons who have stayed in their house and avoided society until it became
impossible for them to leave their home or the room. We owe something to
society ; we all can be of use to others by some kindly, cheerful companion:
ship ; but these people have buried their talent in the earth, until at last it is
taken from them. Solitary confinement, when inflicted as a punishment, is
considered a very severe one; but these persons inflict it on themselves—living
for years alone, and at last unable to go out, even if they wish to do so. So
people who do not give lose at last the power of giving. Let us never forget
the epitaph on a tombstone, which teaches the true law on this subject : ‘“ What
I spent, I had; what I kept, I lost; what I gave, I have still.” So likewise
those who do not care to see the truth lose at last the power of seeing it. I
have known lawyers to whom justice and truth were supreme—honourable,
high-minded men, who never condescended to any low cunning, but only used
those arguments to convince others which were convincing to themselves. Such
men, as they grow older, grow wiser, stronger, greater. They love truth, and
truth is given to them, and they have abundance. But we have known others,
members of this same grand profession, whose only object was to win their
cause, and that in any way. They said, not what they believed true, but what
they thought they might make seem true to others. Their object was, not to
convince ; but to deceive, to confuse, to bewilder, to mislead, to win their cause by
appeals to prejudice, to ignorance, to passion. And so at last they confuse their


140


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. QHAP. Iv.


ee





own sense, and lose the power of distinguishing between truth and falsehood, right
and wrong. They have buried their talent in the earth, and it is taken from
them. We may state the law thus: “ Any habitual course of conduct changes
voluntary actions into automatic or involuntary actions.” ‘This can be illustrated
by the physical constitution of man. Some of our bodily acts are voluntary,
some involuntary; some, partly one and partly the other. The heart beats
seventy or eighty times a minute all our life long, without any will of ours.
The lungs, in the same way, perpetually inhale and exhale breath, whether we
intend it or not; and if the lungs should suspend their action, we should die.
But we can exercise a Little volition over the action of the lungs ; we can breathe
voluntarily, taking long breaths. Thus the action of the lungs is partly
automatic and partly voluntary, while the mechanical action of the heart is
wholly automatic, and the chemical action of the digestive organs is the same.
But some acts, voluntary at first, become, by habit, automatic. A child begin-
ning to walk takes every single step by a separate act of will; beginning to
read, he looks at every single letter. After a while he walks and reads by a
habit, which has become involuntary. So also it is with man’s moral and
spiritual nature. By practice he forms habits, and habitual action is automatic
action, requiring no exercise of will except at the beginning of the series of acts
The law of association does the rest. So to him who hath shall be given. As
voluntary acts are transformed into automatic, the will is set free to devote
itself to higher efforts and larger attainments. Tf it were not for some such
law of accumulation as this, the work of life would have to be begun for ever
anew. Formation of character would be impossible. We should be incapable
of progress, our whole strength being always employed in battling with our first
enemies, learning evermore anew our earliest lessons. But, by our present
constitution, he who has taken one step can. take another, and life may become
a perpetual advance from good to better. This is the one and sufficient reward
of all virtue, the one sufficient punishment of all wrongdoing, that right actions
and wrong actions gradually harden into character. The reward of the good
man is, that having chosen truth and pursued it, it becomes at last a part of his
own nature, a happy companion of all his life. The condemnation of the bad
man is, that when light has come into the world he has chosen darkness, and so
the light within him becomes darkness. Do not envy the bad man’s triumphs
and worldly successes. Every one of them is a rivet fastening him to evil,
making it more difficult for him to return to good, making it impossible but for
the redeeming power of God, which has become incarnate in Christ, in order to
seek and save the lost. The highest graces of all—faith, hope, and love—obey
the same law. By trusting in God when we hardly see Him at all, we come at
last to realise, as by another sense, His Divine presence in all things. Faith
in God, at first an effort, at last becomes automatic and instinctive. Thus,
too, faith in immortality solidifies into an instinct. As we live from and for
infinite, Divine, eternal realities, these become a part of our knowledge. Socrates
did not convince himself of bis immortality much by his arguments. But by
spending a long life in intimate converse with the highest truths and noblest
ends, he at last reached the point where he could not help believing in immor-
tality. The moral of all this isevident. Every man, every woman, every child,
has-some talent, some power, some opportunity, of getting good and doing good.
Each day offers us some occasion of using this talent. As we use it, it gradually
increases, improves. becomes native to the character. As we neglect it, it
dwindes, withers, and disappears. This is the stern but benign law by which
we live. This makes character real and enduring ; this makes progress possible ;
this turns men into angels and virtue into goodness.—J. F’. Clarke.


141


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 21, 22. Christian life—I. As
a revelation.—l. It is to be luminous.
2. It is to be properly placed in the
midst of society. The gospel is a great
vevealing power. In all truth there is
power of exposure and judgment ; how
much more in the highest truth of all!

It. As a responsibility.—l. Stew-
ardship in doctrine. 2. Stewardship
in action.

Tif. Asalaw.—l. Usefulness is pro-
ductiveness. 2. Indolence is ruin.
The kingdom of Christ is thus shewn
to be founded on law. Man never
becomes more than a subject: Christ
never less than a king.—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 21. Usefulness.—The duty which
no one can disclaim, the test which no
one may evade, and the praise which
no one will despise are all included in
the homely word “ usefulness.”

I. The inevitableness of usefulness
for every one who is in spirit, as well
as profession, a true disciple of Christ.
The use of light, as well as its function,
is toshine. Soa Christian is a Chris-
tian, not merely for the personal object
of his individual salvation, but that he
may glorify God in saving others.
True, he must divest himself of self-
consciousness. Also, he must be con-
stantly on his guard against religious
priggishness. But he is to shine asa
light in the world, if he would not be
missing one of the chief ends of his
salvation.

II. The scope of a Christian’s use-
fulness is very wide. ‘‘ Before men,”
Christ said, His disciples were to make
their light shine. But there are
several spheres of usefulness, in their
order of importance and necessity, more
or less open to us all. 1. Wherever
else we may or may not be useful, let
us, above all things, endeavour to be
useful at home. Our first duties are
with those who are nearest and dearest
to us. 2. In society we can he very
useful, if we are only earnestly bent


142


on it, and cultivate tact, modesty, and
self-effacement.

III. The method of usefulness.—1.
All our usefulness, whatever it may be,
must depend on our character. Christ
in the heart must precede Christ on the
lips. 2. The discharge of our daily
duty will immensely affect our influ-
ence with others. 3. Friendship gives
another scope for usefulness. 4. For
each one, if he cares to trust it and to
use it, Christ offers some special service,
according to capacity, age, and gift.—
Bishop Thorold.

Christ's methods in revelation.—He
is the person that lights the candle or
the lamp; and in explanation of His
teaching by parables He says in
effect : ‘ Do not think that I would be
so foolish as to defeat and counterwork
My own purpose, by bringing any
arbitrary or needless obscurities into
My teaching. I do notlight My lamp
of revelation, and then put it away
under a bushel of dark sayings, which
might have been made light and clear.”
But the parable, which is a veiling of
the light—which is, if not a putting
it under a bushel, at least putting a’
bit of coloured glass between you and
it—the parable is given for the dis-
tinct purpose, not that the light that
streams through it may be hidden, but
that the light may be manifested. If
there is any darkness, be sure that it
is darkness which is intended to help
the spread of the light. And if there
be obscurities, they are meant, by
stimulating thought to search, by ar-
resting attention, and by a hundred
other effects on us to whom the
revelation comes, to make us more
vigorous in our pursuit after the
truth ; and on God’s side are adopted,
not in order that He may ensnare us
and give Himself excuses for punish-
ing, but that He may temper the
light to the weak eye, and so make it
capable of becoming strong enough to
bear more light.—A., Maclaren, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.


Oe ee arn aE EEEEREREREERERE


The guiding light.—What does a
man light a candle for? That it
may give light. What has God given
me my conscience and my power of
spiritual perception for, but in order
that it may be the guiding light of my
whole nature, not that it may be put
under a bushel or under a bed? The
light which is in us falls under the
same laws as the light without us in
the revelation of Jesus Christ. Nay,
more, the light which is in the Chris-
tian soul is Christ. For it is the
conscience illuminated by His indwell-


ing, and the spirit made capable of


perceiving the truth because it pos-
sesses Christ within, of which He is
here speaking. And what He says
is this: “‘I kindled the light in your
heart and mind and conscience, not that
it might be quenched and darkened,
but that it might be your guiding star
and perpetual inspiration.” And you
falsify and contradict the very purpose
for which Christ has come to you,
unless you let the light of His will
burning in your will, and the light of
His truth flaming in your understand-
ing, and the light of his righteousness
illuminating your conscience, be your
supreme and sovereign guides.—/ bed.

Hidden lights —Some Christian men
darken and obscure the light of Christ
within them by their carefulness about
earthly necessities, possessions, and
treasures, which are represented by
the bushel of commerce ; and some of
them do the same thing by sheer
slothfulness and indifference in the
religious life, which are represented by
the bed on which men stretch them-
selves at ease for sleep.—bid.


Ver. 22. The day of manifestation.—
Though now it is often hard or im-
possible to distinguish between those
in whom the good seed is springing
up freely and healthfully, and those
in whom its growth is checked and
stunted, or trodden out ; yet remember
a time is coming when all shall be
made plain and manifest, when man’s
responsibility shall be fully acknow-
ledged, and his shortcomings shall be


fearfully avenged. Then shall the
reckoning be. Then shall it be clearly
seen and brought to light how the
good seed has been plenteously and
continually sown in many a_ heart,
and scarcely sown before lost for ever,
how opportunities and calls have been
neglected, graces and mercies slighted,
warnings and examples lightly put
aside; in a word, the man’s struggle
against grace through a whole life-
time shall be laid bare, step by step,
and feature by feature, then, when
the time of grace shall be no more.—
Dean Butler.


Ver. 24. “ Take heed what ye hear.”
—Never was this warning more needed
than now. Men think themselves free
to follow any teacher, especially if he
be eloquent, to read any book, if only
it be in demand, and to discuss any
theory, provided it be fashionable,
while perfectly well aware that they
are neither earnest inquirers after
truth, nor qualified champions against
its assailants. For what, then, do
they read and hear? For the pleasure
of a rounded phrase, or to augment
the prattle of conceited ignorance in
a drawing-room. Do we wonder when
these players with edged tools injure
themselves, and become perverts or
agnostics? A rash and uninstructed
exposure of our intellects to evil in-
fluences is meting to God with an
unjust measure, as really as a wilful
plunge into any other temptation,
since we are bidden to cleanse ourselves
from all defilement of the spirit as well
as of the flesh.— Dean Chadwick.

Unprofitable hearers.—Some can be
content to hear all pleasant things, as
the promises and mercies of God; but
judgments and reproofs, threats and
checks, these they cannot brook ; like
unto those who, in medicine, care only
for a pleasant smell or appearance
in the remedy, as pills rolled in gold,
but have no regard for the efficacy of
the physic. Some can willingly hear
that which concerns other men and
their sins, their lives and manners, but
nothing touching themselves or their


143


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a pn re


own sins; as men can willingly abide
to hear of other men’s deaths, but
cannot abide to think of their own.—
R. Stock.

“ With what measure ye mete.” —His
hearers would at once understand the
allusion. When grain is brought in
quantities, it is brought in bags which
are always measured again by a person
whose trade it is to do this. Squatting
cross-legged on the ground, he fills the
grain with his hands into a “ tinneh,”
which he shakes when it is full, to
make the contents solid. He then
refills it, twists it round scientifically,
and makes a second settling of the
grain, afterwards refilling it. He then
presses down the whole with his hands,
and at last, when he cannot make it
hold more, raises as high a cone as
possible on the top; only this being
thought “good measure.”—C. Geikie,
DD.

The law of compensation.—At present
you have, as men say, the law in your
own hands. ‘You can do nearly as you
will. There is no compulsion laid upon
you. You can measure out to God
what measure you will. If you choose
to profit, to let His words sink into
your hearts, to bring forth fruit to
His glory, it is, through His grace,
in your power to do so, Under the
influence of that life-giving Word the
rocky soil may become deep, rich,
staple; the roadside shall no more be
trodden; the thorns shall be rooted
out, Not even deep sin can hinder it.
“The desert shall rejoice and blossom
asthe rose: it shall blossom abundantly,
and rejoice with joy and singing.”
Such is its marvellous efficacy within
the heart that gives itself to its control,
that the publican becomes an apostle,
the shameless sinner a deeply-loving
penitent. Therefore you are now the
meters. You may, as you will, refuse
or accept, i.e. develop or utterly stifle
the results of the heavenly sowing.
Only remember, that as you deal now
with God, in this measure will you be
dealt with hereafter.—Dean Butler.

The nature of Christ's teaching is such
as that, if a man, with sharpened ear


144


and attentive spirit, listens and takes
into his heart what he does understand,
and lives thereby, the amount of what
he understands is sure to grow, and
endless progress in the apprehension
of the light that lives in the thickest
apparent darkness will be his. Just
as when we step out of a gaudily lighted
room, and look up into the depths of
the heavens above us, all seems ob-
scured. But, as we gaze, the focus
of the eye changes, and we see sparkling
points which we shall one day know
to be magnificent suns in the far-off


-vault, which at first seemed unrelieved


darkness. So, because the lamp is not
hid under the bushel, take heed what
you hear, and recognise in the very
form of the revelation of God’s love
and will in Jesus Christ a provision
for the certain progress in knowledge
and perception of every faithful, listen-
ing soul, and a provision for the as
certain darkening into unrelieved
blackness and midnight obscurity of
the glimmering light neglected.—4A.
Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 25. Christian attainment. —
According to the interest, the atten-
tion, the practical purpose, the sym-
pathy with truth which you bring
to the hearing will be the gifts which
your ‘Teacher will bestow, and the
accessions which you will carry away ;
and every such accession will be itself a
foundation for higher attainment, for
“he that hath to him shall be given,
and he shall have more abundance.”
What importance is thus added to
every measure of Christian attain-
ment! It is no longer to be estimated
by itself, but in relation to ulterior
progress, as a qualification for the
further steps by which we may “ grow
up into Him in all things who is our
Head, even Christ.” Valuable and
blessed as every such attainment is in
itself, that value and blessedness will
be largely increased by what we may
call the tendencies and potentialities
which belong to it, and which show
themselves as new opportunities arise.
A man has a certain interest in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


things of God: it is well; but we are
chiefly thankful for it because it will
dispose him to hear, to inquire, to
consider, and so to profit by the teach-
ing which the providence of God may
present to him. He has certain con-
victions : we rejoice, but most because
these convictions decide him to break
with things that were hurtful, and to
throw himself among things that are
profitable to his salvation, taking his
place among those who would learn of
the heavenly wisdom, “‘ watching daily
at her gates, waiting at the posts of
her doors.” He has a certain know-
ledge of Divine truth, and what he
knows will interpret to him what
he knows not, enabling him, when he
hears a higher teaching, to apprehend
and appreciate instructions which, to
those less advanced, are ‘‘ done in
parables.” He has a certain experi-
ence in the spiritual life, and that
experience qualifies him to pass with
increasing profit through subsequent
dispensations which might else have
perplexed or offended or crushed him.
Till the time shall come which will
enlighten the obscure histories of
human life, none can say to what a
degree this system of sequence is
maintained and administered in the
kingdom of God. Enough of it is
declared, and enough is visible, to


CHAP. TY.


solemnise our view of passing things,
and to make us feel how neglect or
refusal of what is offered us at one
period may propagate its fatal in-
fluence through successive stages of
spiritual loss, or how a firm hold laid
upon some gift of grace may prove to
have put us in possession of ever-accu-
mulating treasures.—J. D. Burns.

The earnest find that they grow;
the triflers find that their powers rust
and fade.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

God’s benefits come not alone, but
one is the pledge of another. The
grant of a miteis the assignment of a
talent. A drop of dew from heaven
is a prognostic of a gracious shower,
of a flood, which nothing can draw
dry, but ingratitude (James i. 5,
iv. 6).—A. Farindon, D.D.

God’s dealings—This verse repre-
sents God’s dealings in a very encour-
aging light. Many who wish to be true
Christians despair of ever reaching
such a lofty attainment ; the distance
seems too great, the path too difficult.
Let them remember, for their comfort,
that, no matter how far, it is only one
step at a time, and, no matter how
difficult, “to him that hath” the will
‘shall be given” the power ; he shall
go from strength to strength, and from
grace to grace, till before the God of
gods he appears in Zion.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 26—29.


The parable of the growing corn.—It is remarkable that St. Mark alone should
report this parable, and it is more than remarkable because it is the only parable
which he alone has reported. It is very brief, has no interpretation attached to


it, and looks at first sight not unlike some of the other parables.


Yet it appears


to me to supply an essential link in the chain of parabolic teaching. The side
or aspect of the kingdom of God to which it refers is one which could not


be passed over.


counterpart to the parable of the tares (Matt. xii, 24-30).
stress upon a different part of the common process of husbandry.
the end operations of sowing and reaping,


Tf I understand it aright, it forms a needful companion or


Each of them lays
In the one
into which enters the personal action


of the Son of Man, are made conspicuous and insisted on at length, while the
intervening months of growth are referred to only to add that then the crop


must be ‘let alone.”


In the other the contrary occurs.


The initial and


terminal operations of the husbandman constitute no more than a frame to the


picture.


They are named merely to shew us the better how the farmer did


nothing for the remainder of the time; while the process described at length is


145


CHAP. Iv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








the slow, gradual growth and ripening of the plants under the spontaneous
action of the fruit-bearing earth. Thus the two parables are seen to complete
each other. The one in Matthew brings out how voluntary extra-natural agents
act upon the kingdom of Christ from above or from beneath, but chiefly at the
beginning and the end of its career. This one in Mark brings out the natural
agencies whose unhindered action determines the advance of the kingdom from
its beginning to its end. Let us now examine our parable in detail. Its central
words form a key to the whole: “The earth bringeth forth fruit of herself.” In
other words, what is here taught is not the vitality of the seed, nor the activity
of the two sowers, but the productiveness of the soil. Only commit a seed to
the earth, and “the earth will bring forth fruit of herself.” The growth of
a wheat-field is a long and tedious process. Grain has its own laws, according to
which it must germinate and shoot: you cannot make it grow otherwise than
God appoints. It has its successive stages through which it is bound to pass :
you cannot have an ear before its stalk is tall. It lies exposed to atmospheric
influences, both bad and good: you cannot, with all your husbandry, hinder the
wind from causing it to strike deeper root, or the frost from nipping its too
tender shoots. In fact, the farmer can do very little in the matter. Only the
great earth, stored by God with the chemical conditions of fruitfulness, and
lying ever open by day and night to God’s atmospheric influences—to rain and
dew, to sun and wind, to frost and electricity—only this wonderful earth carries
on the process. In spite of so much that appears to war against the plant,
damping the farmer’s hope, somehow the earth never fails after all to “ bring
forth fruit of herself.” In all this may be discerned, I think, three leading
features of resemblance to the progress of Christ’s kingdom in the world.

I. The kingdom of Christ has had to pass through thoso stages of imperfect
growth which are common to other systems existing in human society.—It
need hardly be said that the Church did not burst upon the world a finished
organisation—perfect when it was first set up. Our Lord did no more than sow
a few men into Palestine society with a few religious truths in their hearts.
These truths, being alive with a Divine force, made the men live. Life proved
contagious, and spread. It sought expression through common forms, and the
multitude became a community—a Church. It has been really growing on ever
since. There has been progress. Christendom has not passed through so many
changes in vain. Was it no progress when the seed Christ scattered in the
early sowing-day struck its roots through the old dying Greco-Roman world,
and out of it drew whatever it could find of nutriment in its philosophy, its law,
or its literature? That fat soil of classic civilisation was the prepared ground
in which, beneath the hot sun of ten persecutions, Christianity was designed to
grow deep-rooted and full-bladed. Was it no further progress when out of this
rich growth a new world shot up, and through the Middle Ages modern Europe
was formed like a tall flowering stalk held aloft upon the base of the older
world? Has there been no progress since then? ‘The religion of the Anglo-
Saxon race is the most promising ear on the Church Catholic, and it has been
rapidly filling for the last three centuries. It has drunk in contributions from
every quarter: from the growth of municipal and national freedom ; from the
resuscitation of letters ; from the discovery of America and India; from modern
widening of knowledge and stimulation of the inventive arts. Perhaps we are
standing already on the border of the world’s ripening age—if not actually
within it. Already we see enough to surmise that by-and-by the kingdom will
have run its course and the harvest of the earth be ripe. These two will
synchronise. This world cannot last a day longer uor end a day sooner than
the close of the Church’s development. ‘ When the fruit is brought forth,
immediately He putteth in the sickle,”


146





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.


ee EERE EEE


II. Throughout all its stages the Christian community is affected by every
secular influence at work beside it, just as anything else would be—What is
this but to say that “the field is the world”? Human society as it exists in the
world forms the soil into which Christianity has been cast. The current modes
of thought form the atmosphere it has to breathe. The forces which in each
land or age have told on ordinary history have told upon the Church. At one
time it has been crushed by violence, and at another fanned to slumber in the
lap of luxury. False philosophies have tainted its doctrine, and lax manners
affected its discipline. The passion or the pride that inflames rival parties has
often rent its unity; often, too, have political alliances essayed to cement the
fragments. It has borrowed much from other forces in social history, as well as
lent much to others. Rude in rude ages; learned among the learned ; it has
become all things to all men. Yet in this common soil and atmosphere of earth
the kingdom of Christ has, on the whole, thriven. Propagated by human
hands, it has drunk of the rain of heaven. Wealth has served its ends, and
literature fought its battles, and adventure run its errands. Civilisation has
organised its strength, and commerce pioneered its way. Whatever good gifts
God gave to earth have in some measure aided the advance of His kingdom ;
and the history of the nations has been at the same time in great part the
history of Christianity. Thus on the whole the kingdom grows. It may be
hard to see how at any given moment. Stand beside a field of springing corn
on a blustery March morning ; you fail to see how such tender sprouts are to be
brought nearer harvest by the blasts that beat them. So at few moments of
the Church’s progress could the saints of the day trace the tendency of all the
forces at work upon the cause of Christ. Yet let the short-sighted and faint-
hearted Christian take courage. It is a fruitful earth after all. As surely as
the weeks of spring and summer do on the whole ripen our fields, so surely will
all the ages ecntribute to fill the garners of heaven.

III. The parable implies not merely that natural forces act on the kingdom
of Christ, but that they are aliowed to act themselves out freely without
personal or supernatural interference on the part of the Great Husbandman.
When it is said, “The kingdom is as if a man... should sleep and rise, night
and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how,” it is
just the ordinary life of the farmer as he goes about his other tasks which is
described. The point is that that ordinary life of the farmer between sowing
and reaping is, speaking roughly, one of entire cessation from all direct action
upon the field. Sowing and reaping are human interferences with the processes
of nature. As compared with the self-sown wilderness, where each seed is
allowed to shell itself out upon the untilled ground, a field is an artificial thing.
Now these two artificial interferences of man symbolise the supernatural acts of
God which mark the opening and the close of the Christian history. He did
interfere with the sterility of the world to clear a space and sow a new crop of
spiritual men and women. The advent of Christ with all that He accomplished
personally or through His messengers to found His Church constituted one
stupendous miracle. Supernatural interposition of God to work in the human
field is the true description of the life of Christ. What wonder if accessory
miracles hung about His steps and lingered round the feet of His immediate
ministers? By such signs and portents was he who had long ruled in open day
with his possessions and sorceries and oracles driven to sow mimic seed secretly
by night. But when that first great operation of the Sower from heaven was
ended miracle ceased. The higher and the lower agents alike retired for a long
while behind the screen of natural instrumentality. The field ot Christian
history was left to the sun and the wind and the rain. Henceforth—till we
near the end, when again Divine hands interpose—everything in the development

147


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





of the faith progresses in obedience to those orderly laws which regulate the
progress of truth from mind to mind or from age to age. It may be said, ‘“‘ How
can we speak of the Lord Jesus as quitting charge or activity within His field ?
Nay, as even asleep and ignorant how it grows? Is it not He who is always
at work within every Christian heart, sustaining by His Spirit the life of His
saints, and guiding to His own issues the destinies of His Church?” Unquestion-
ably. Only He does so very much as He causes corn to grow in the field. He
is as full of care and as rich in effort for His own cause as ever. Yet He never
reaches a hand out of the cloud to dispel the tempest of persecution or kill the
worm of heresy. He works, it is true; but it is along the lines of nature, and
through the complex mechanism by which the world is guided. On the one
hand, the informing Spirit of the Church operates through ordinary channels of
intelligence and moral influence; on the other hand, the common providence
of God overrules, but nowhere overrides, contingencies. And to these two factors
He has left His Church. So far, therefore, as any direct or personal inter-
position to modify the action of natural forces is concerned, He is like the
farmer who, from seedtime to harvest, lets his field alone. “ Till harvest,” I
say. For there is a second advent before us, when the order of the world is
again to be broken through—this time with a view to be broken up. When
the ripe fruit of the kingdom shall offer itself to the sickle, then will the Sower
reappear.—J. QO. Dykes, D.D.


Spiritual growth.—This parable is a brilliant example of the perfect natural-
ness of our Lord’s teachings and the way in which He shews the underlying
connexion between the two worlds, natural and spiritual. At first sight it
might seem as if there were but few points of comparison between these two—
between the work going on, for example, in the corn-field and the work going
on in the human soul ; for while trees and shooting corns have power of growth,
they have no power of will; whereas man has botn. And it is this power
of will which is the determining factor in character and destiny. And yet,
though these worlds are so dissimilar, there is an underlying unity; and it is
this unity our Lord brings out in this parable. The central thought seems to
be that God’s Divine power is at work in God’s own kingdom. “The earth
bringeth forth fruit of herself ”— not of herself apart from God, but of herself
apart from the man who sows the seed. He does his work, he sows the seed,
and he goes on his way; and after he has done his part he sleeps by night and
rises by day, and the seed springs up and grows, he knows not how.

I. The kingdom of God.—It is not that rule over the creatures which God
as the Creator exercises, but that which is based on the mediatorial kingdom
of Christ. It is the kingdom into which the poor in spirit enter, which is
reserved for them who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake ; it is the kingdom
which is for those who are pure in heart, who are born again of the Spirit
of God; it is the kingdom which comes not by observation; it is a kingdom
into which all men pass by repentance and faith; it is mysterious in its
beginnings, silent in its growth, like the seed springing up from very small
beginnings and growing to great things; and it is potent in its action, like the
leaven in the meal. We are to pray for its coming, and yet it is always coming.
Wherever there is a just thing taking the place of an unjust, wherever righteous-
ness prevails over unrighteousness, wherever men are growing more kindly and
true, wherever legislation is becoming more Christian, where commerce is
baptised with the Spirit of Christ, where literature is guided by a Holy Spirit
of God, when family life becomes ennobled and purified, when men come into
holier and truer relations with one another and with their God in heaven, this
kingdom is coming. We may well pray for its coming, for when it comes the


148


ee ee ee


——-- =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ST. MARK. CHAP, IV.





old trouble and sorrow and conflict of the centuries will vanish like an idle
dream. Then, what hope have we that this kingdom will come? What is our
consolation in regard to it amidst all discouragements of the time? Our Lord
sys, The same hope and the same encouragement that the man has who casts
his seed into the ground. Everywhere men are dependent upon a great power
which is working behind them; every day God brings the succession of day and
night, so that men may carry on the work of their life. Every year comes the
stately march of the seasons, or else there would be no harvest for men. Why,
there is a standing miracle which would overwhelm us if we were not used
to it every year—of that shooting of life in field and forest which the spring-time
brings! So even in regions nearer to ourselves. Your very children spring up
and grow you know not how. So we are to take this thought into the activities
of the Christian Church. In this day of material progress and triumph we are
apt to look rather at the organisations than at the Spirit which breathes through
them; at what men do rather than at what God does behind; and our Lord
here puts to us this great central fact. John Wesley’s dying words are words
of comfort for the Church in all the centuries: “The best of all is, God is with
us. If He were not, our hope would be scant indeed.” But He is. He is,
in history, bringing new and strange and wondrous movements, developing a
nation’s life. He is in the Church of God convincing men of sin, carrying on
the great work of building up men in the image of Jesus Christ.

II. The need of patience.—In carrying on this great work of bettering the
world, elevating it higher, there is the element of time which must be taken
into account. “The husbandman waiteth long and is patient.” The earth says
to him, “Give me seed, give me time, and I will give you fruit.” And so it is
in regard to the great things of the spiritual life. Everywhere we find that
what is done is the result of long and complex forces. The more important a
thing is, the longer time does it take. A man may be converted in a moment
of time; but after he has turned right round the development of that life must
needs take many long years of discipline before it reaches the height for which
God intended it. Salvation means not merely delivering a man from sin, from
every evil thing, but building him up to all nobleness ; not merely the putting
aside of what is weak and sinful, but the attainment of all that is noble and
true ; and is always the work of time. You can make a man a present of some
material things in a moment, but you cannot give him patience, you cannot
give him purity, you cannot give him humility, in a moment of time. Faith
gets grip and strength through stress of suffering; wisdom is the child of


experience. ‘
III. Spiritual continuity.—Our Lord says there is a natural law of continuity
in the spiritual life as there is in other things. “ First the blade.” We can


never do without any of the intervening stages—never expedite the processes
of God either in nature or in grace. Men are coming to see that everywhere
this law prevails; history is coming to be regarded not as a mere set of isolated
facts chronicled together in the manner of annals, but that the thought and the
life of the past generations are living in the present, and shaping its thought
and purposes, that the growth of opinion and the influence of thought are felt
over and over again in succeeding generations. So it is in regard to the
spiritual life; perfectly natural, perfectly simple and beautiful in its action
is the life of God inthe soul. 1. There is the green blade trembling in the breeze,
the type of spiritual life in the young disciple. There seems at first very little
in the way of positive Christian life. It is but a green blade touched by the
wandering breeze; it seems very little ; but if God’s Spirit is in it, it will grow
to greater things. 2. There is another stage, and it seems sometimes as if very
little value could be attached to it except for what comes afterwards. Some-


149


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
i


times a man thinks he is losing ground, going back, when in point of fact God
is training him for higher services and leading him to the heights of the
Christian life. It is through the depths that we go to the heights. 3. There
is another time yet. The time of the full ripe corn in the ear—the time which
Bunyan sets before us in the picture of the land of Beulah, where the birds are
for ever singing, the angels come and go, and you can see the city far away,
its heights gleaming in the sunshine. There is a time when we think not so
much of doctrines, though they have their importance, as we think of that
which is behind the teaching—the living God; when we have not so much
many motives as one motive—love to Christ; when we feel more and more that
He has been with us leading and guiding us; when we come out of the struggle
not merely talking of the trouble but of the merey which has been shown to us
while we passed through it; when some things have fallen off from us that
we thought important for us, and we get more and more to the central verities
of eternal truth; when Christ becomes to the trusting soul all in all !—John
Brown, D.D.


Harvest lessons——Our Lord was very fond of drawing His parallels and
illustrations from the garden and the field. This will be found a great help to
those whose occupations lead them to be much abroad, and to take notice of
the various appearances of nature as she works out the processes of vegetation.

I. The harvest suggests grateful thoughts of the good providence of God.—
1. We almost see Him “opening His hand and filling all things living with
plenteousness.” What a family has He to provide for! Not only mankind,
but “all sheep and oxen,” etc. (Ps. viii. 7, 8). ‘‘These wait all upon Him,”
ete. (Ps. civ. 27). Nor wait in vain (Ps. exlv. 15, 16). Well, therefore, does
the psalmist call upon “beasts and all cattle,” ete, to “ praise the name
of the Lord” (Ps. exlviii. 10, 13), 2. But the lower animals have neither
understanding to know God, nor yet voice to praise Him. Man has both. Man
is placed in this magnificent world, to be the interpreter of the whole creation.
He is the priest of the temple, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto
God. 3. Man is not only most capable of praising God, but he has also most
cause to do so. Of all living things, he is maintained at the greatest cost.

II. The harvest reminds us of the faithfulness of God.—Once He brought
a flood upon the earth; and for that year no sower went forth to sow, and no
reaper put in his sickle. But after that He declared that it should never be so
again (Gen. ix. 9-17). 2. Such is God’s promise; and those who have little
respect for anything else He has said place entire reliance on this. They
plough and they sow in perfect confidence that God will send heat and cold,
sun and rain, everything that is necessary to produce a harvest. 3. Some years
may be less favourable than others; some countries may be visited with a
partial or even entire failure of the fruits of the earth; but the promise never
fails. After a year of scarcity comes a year of extraordinary abundance, or
the deficiency of one country is supplied by the excess of another. 4. There is
only just enough uncertainty in these things to make serious people sensible
of their absolute dependence upon Him who giveth all (Jer. v. 24; Deut. xi. 17).

III. The harvest reminds us of the instability of man.—1l. “One generation
passeth away,” ete. (Eccles. i. 4). We know, indeed, that the earth itself has its
appointed time, and that the end of one harvest will be, to be burned up by that
fire which shall consume the earth and all that is therein (2 Pet. iii. 10).
Still, as compared with the rapid succession of its inhabitants, the earth may be
said to “abide for ever,” yielding its fruit to the different generations of men,
which quickly come and as quickly disappear. What a mortifying reflexion—
that the very ground we tread on, even the dust we shake off our feet, is in this


150





.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK, CHAP. IV.





respect better than ourselves! 2. Harvests measure our lives. Thousands will
not live to see another harvest; nay, thousands are going out of the world, at
this very season, while the provision of another year is being gathered in. They
sowed, and others are reaping; or they reaped, and others have entered into the
fruits of their labours.

IV. The harvest makes us think about death.—_1. Death is the great reaper.
When he “ putteth in his sickle,” all heads bow down. His harvest is confined
to no particular season. His are the only crops that never fail. 2. To the
Christian death is no longer the “king of terrors.” He is cut down because
he is ripe. He has passed through all the stages of spiritual growth and
godliness—“ first the blade,” etc. Then, when God judges that the fruit is
perfectly formed in him—* the fruit of the Spirit, which is in all goodness,
righteousness, and truth ”—immediately He Himself “ putteth in the sickle,
because the harvest is come.” 3. When the corn is fit to cut, it is a pity to let
it stand any longer; and when a soul is ripe, it is equally desirable that it
should be “taken away from the evil to come,” and lodged in a place of safety
beyond the changes and chances of this mortal life.

V. The harvest speaks to us of the resurrection and judgment.—l. The
resurrection parallel is developed by St. Paul in 1 Cor. xv. 35-49. 2. The
judgment may be considered in two lights. (1) Itis God’s harvest (Matt. xiii. 30 ;
Rev. xiv. 14-19). (2) It is man’s harvest also (Gal. vi. 7; 2 Cor. v.10). This life
is the seed-time of our whole existence. ‘The harvest is the end of the world” ;
and then shall every man “eat of the fruit of his way,” etc. (Prov. i. 31).


“He that soweth to his flesh,” ete. (Gal. vi. 8).
uncharitable hear this (Matt. vii. 2).
Let the covetous hear this (James v. 2, 3).


hear this (James ii. 13).


despisers of the gospel hear this (Prov. i. 24-28).
but to the spirit, all that they have need of is that


sowing, not to the flesh,


which every sower must possess—patience ;


Let the censorious and
Let the unmerciful and unrelenting
Let the
But as to those who are


that, “‘after they have done the


will of God, they may receive the promises.”


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 26-29. Rise and progress of
religion in the heart.—1. Religious
impressions sometimes take their rise
in the heart from small and apparently
accidental circumstances. An observa-
tion casually made in conversation,
the perusal of a book, one of those
occurrences which we call accidents,
or some serious misfortune, may be
the means of either giving a man the
first instruction in practical piety, or
of causing him seriously to feel the
importance of religion. 2. By what-
ever means the good seed is first sown
in the heart, if it there meets with a
congenial soil, a very short time will
elapse before its existence and power
begin to be perceived. As the tend-
ency of natural vegetation is upwards,
so the first aspirations of the regene-


rate soul are directed towards heaven.
Its hopes and wishes rise gradually
above the earth: under the fostering
warmth of Divine grace holy disposi-
tions spring and grow up in the man’s
heart, he knoweth not how: his leaf
withereth not: it is protected against
the storms and blight which might
infest it in its tender condition, so that
the sun shall not burn it by day,
neither the moon by night. 3. There
remains one final labour of the hus-
bandman before he can enjoy the full
reward of all his anxieties and toils.
“When the fruit is brought forth,”
and fully ripened, the stem which
unites it to the earth must be severed
before it can be laid up in his barns.
“ Immediately,” therefore, ‘he putteth
in the sickle, because the harvest is


151


-


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a ee ee a ee


come.” Maturity in spiritual growth
is not always measured by length of
years. Whenever the truly religious
man is cut off, apparently in the
flower of his age, we must regard the
event as one of the mysteries which
we understand not, as a dispensation,
afflicting indeed to those who are left
to mourn his loss, but not so to him, to
whom “to die is gain.” Conclusion :
1. This parable gives no excuse for
slothfulness or negligence to the
spiritual husbandman, but rather a
season for constant exertion. 2. This
parable instructs us all to be ready to
receive religious instruction, as well as
to impart it.—Prof. T. Chevallier.

The development of good and ewtl.—
This parable is frequently explained
of the silent and secret growth of
grace in the individual character of
God’s servants, and of the final storing
up of the wheat of earth in the garner
of heaven. But surely the parable
embraces a far wider horizon of
thought, and concerns the method
of God’s procedure in the kingdom of
Christ to the end of time—namely,
the principle of allowing the full de-
velopment of both evil and good until
the hour strikes for judgment. In
illustration of this our Lord sets forth
the general laws of vegetable life on
earth, which are analogous to the laws
of spiritual development: (1) the law
of growth or full development from
germs ; (2) the law of silent, gradual,
unperceived increase ; and (3) the law
of crisis or ripeness, followed by the
sickle and the harvest, the cutting
down, either for storage or burning.
The practical use, then, of this parable
is to meet men’s incredulity or doubt
as to the reality of God’s government
on earth ; which may arise, and often
does arise, in the minds of Christ’s
followers from taking too short views,
from looking at the world as already
a finished thing, and therefore as an
unintelligible chaos, a field where good
and bad grow hopelessly together ; to
meet this incredulity and doubt by the
assurance that the fixed method of the
Divine government is not hasty and


152


sudden harvesting and uprooting, but
to allow all germs of both good and
evil to develop and mature; and then,
when the time of full ripeness arrives,
to put in the sickle—to postpone the
crisis till “iniquity is full,” and heroic
righteousness in resistance is also at
the full—and then to bring in sudden
judgment and retribution.—Z. White.

Lessons.—1. Though the sower sleep,
after his labour, yet the process of
germination goes on night and day.
2. Simple beginnings and practical
results may be connected by mysterious
processes: ‘he knoweth not how.”
There is a point in Christian work
where knowledge must yield to mystery.
3. As the work of the sower is assisted
by natural processes (“the earth
bringeth forth of itself,” etc.), so the
seed of truth is aided by the natural
conscience and aspiration which God
has given to all men. 4. The mys-
teriousness of processes ought not to
deter from reaping the harvest. The
spiritual labourer may learn from the
husbandman.—J. Parker, D.D.

The Word of life in the figure of a
grain of wheat.—1. Its internal energy
of life. 2. Its growth according to
laws. 3. Its gradualness. 4. Its
progressive stages. 5. The certainty of
its development.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

Divine surprises.—The little green
growth, as it forces its way through
the soil, is not prepared for the great
surprises of its own development ; it is
not prepared for the beautiful verdure
of the green field caused by its own
shooting up, nor even then for a still
further development; for now comes
the ear with its promises of even
farther development—with its promises
of great usefulness, of some time fur-
nishing food for the eater. And even
then greater surprises are still in store ;
for the ear can scarcely guess—this
little ear of wheat not yet developed,
just heavy enough to bend the stem
on which it is growing—it is scarcely
prepared for the still further surprises
of the full wheat, or corn, in the ear ;
and men and women, following this
same thought, begin to realise that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.





there is within them something of
Divine, God-like possibility.—S. AR.
Fuller.

Growth—_If you, as an individual
soul, are not bigger, fuller of Divine
power and inspiration, than you were
five or ten years ago, it is because this
process of growth has been hindered or
thwarted by your own rebellious inter-
ference—as if the farmer who has
sown the seed should untimely scratch
away the earth and hinder the germ’s
expansion, or later on, heedless of law,
should walk rough-shod over this early
verdure and thwart its development.—
Ibid.

Gradual progress towards perfection.
—Like those wondrous insects of the
branching coral, who, beneath the
waters of the vast Southern Ocean,
lay their slight foundation, ever add-
ing a little, and still a little more,
while, as years pass on, the work goes
on increasing, till the little unper-
ceived atom stands forth a fair island,
bursting with tropical luxuriance of
fruit and foliage—so should it be with
us. The seed is sown within our
hearts. The Heavenly Husbandman
—the Builder also—is at work within.
Leave Him who sowed to do His holy
will And it shall work mightily
within you — moulding, leavening,
forming, building, spreading, spring-
ing up and growing, as none “ knoweth
how,” till there loom forth within the
chaos of the natural heart the glorious
form and lineaments of “the Perfect
Man, the measure of the stature of
the fulness of Christ” Himself.—Dean
Butler.


Ver. 26. “The kingdom of God” is
a phrase more easy to understand than
to explain. It is God’s government
over the world ; the Church chosen out
of the world; the authority exercised
over each soul; the spiritual progress
of the community, of the truth, of any
special member. It is God’s dealings
with men as seen from above. In it
all outward things are included. But
it is still an inward thing. Its hidden
nature is illustrated here by comparisons


taken from the growth of seeds. The
grain is lost to our sight, and the
growth is too gradual to be seen. But
we need only fresh senses to which the
earth shall be transparent, and the
smallest increase visible, in order to
see them. And so the effects of God’s
Word and Providence are only invisible
because of our infirmity. We know
very little about the soil ; one is good,
another bad; one will grow such things,
another such; and wise men know a
little about its parts, and how they
act. And just such a knowledge it is
that we have of men. We distinguish
them roughly, and know practically
what to expect from them, and our
philosophers have analysed characters
and mental processes. It is upon such
soil that the facts of the gospel are
cast as seed out of which is to grow
the plant of holiness. But God does
not leave the soul alone. Just as
Providence works in the natural soil,
bringing it into a fit composition, pro-
viding vegetable and animal growths,
and checking each when it has done
its work, so that the soil when left
alone grows more and more fertile, so
is Providence working with the souls
of men, and by the myriad accidents
of life moulding and forming them.
We cannot tell, when we speak, how
our words may be taken. We cannot
tell, from the way they are taken,
what their ultimate effect may be.
Now this may operate to discourage
and chill. We all like to see how our
work is getting on; we all strive to
help on our own purposes. But this
parable is meant to encourage us all.
We must leave much to other powers,
and cannot order all things as we
would: other men will not obey us;
we cannot make them listen ; we cannot
order our own circumstances or theirs ;
and yet they are ordered. We must
leave them to Him that ordereth, 2.¢.
God.— Bishop Steere.


Ver. 28. Blade, ear, and full corn.—
1. “The blade” begins in a small shoot.
That shoot is but the elongation or
enlargement of the germ which is


153


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


a


found at the rough end of a grain of
wheat. This is elongated by the addi-
tion of fresh cells, which continues
until the blade is fully formed. Now
the idea of Jesus, sown in a suitable
mind, develops in the same way by
growing first into enlarged knowledge,
idea after idea being added until a new
form of thinking is unfolded. New
ideas of God, of ourselves, of our fellow-
men, arise. We think differently of
life’s duties, experiences, and purposes.
2. “The ear” is the case in which the
corn is formed; it is preparatory to
the fruit, and determines it. The ear
is thus the purposes of good in the will.
The new thought and knowledge, under
. the warm love of the soul, begins to
form purposes, to propose ends, which
are but Christian thinking passing into
Christian aims. At first these plans
will give little promise of being realised ;
they will be rather suggestions of what
might possibly be. But the sun of love
in the soul shines upon them with
glowing warmth, and the ear puts forth
its modest blossom. That blossom is
the joy that comes of such purposes ;
there is a pleasure in contemplating
the possibility of bringing a practical
result out of our new thoughts and
plans. When the blossom, or joy, has
fully developed, then is the time for
the fruit to begin to form. The vital
principle of good which is in the joy,
as the pollen is in the blossom, finds
its way into the will, and there it
grows into action—the plans for mend-
. ing our life and the world take practical
shape—at first, however, only imper-
fectly. 3. “The full corn” is the
reproduction of that which came to
us as seed—that is, our lives yield a
result which is the reproduction of the
character of Jesus. This third stage
is only partially reproduced in the best
of men in this life; but it will be
perfectly attained. There is no Christ-
given thought which shall not also
become Christ-like endeavour; and
there is no Christ-like endeavour which
shall fail to becomo an _ attained
practical result.—R. Vaughan.
Encouragement for Christian workers.


154


—1. We should never be discouraged
in Christian work, of whatever kind,
by what seems a slow growth. 2. We
should never be discouraged in our
efforts for Christ’s kingdom by ad-
verse circumstances; nor by any
unexpected combination of them, and
their prolonged operation. 3. Good
influences are linked to good issues in
this world, as the seed to its fruitage.
4, God is within and behind all forces
that tend to enlarge and perfect His
kingdom, as He is beneath the physical
forces which bring harvest in its season,
and set on the springing seed its
coronal. 5. Finally, let us remember
what the glory of the harvest shall
be, when it is reached, in this develop-
ing kingdom of God; and in view of
that let us constantly labour, with more
than fidelity, with an eager enthusiasm
that surpasses all obstacles, makes duty
a privilege, and transmutes toil into joy.
—R. S. Storrs, DD.

Growth in the spiritual world, as
in the natural, is spontaneous, in the
sense that it is subject to definite laws
of the spirit over which man’s will has
small control. The fact is one to be
recognised with humility and thank-
fulness. With humility, for it teaches
dependence on God—a habit of mind
which. brings along with it prayer-
fulness, and which, as honouring to
God, is more likely to ensure ultimate
success than a self-reliant zeal. With
thankfulness, for it relieves the heart
of the too heavy burden of an un-
defined, unlimited responsibility, and
makes it possible for the minister of
the Word to do his: work cheerfully,
in the morning sowing the ‘seed, in the
evening withholding not his hand;
then retiring to rest to enjoy the
sound sleep of the labouring man,
while the seed sown springs and grows
apace, he knoweth not how. Growth
in the spiritual world, as in the
natural, is, further, a process, which
demands time and gives ample occasion
for the exercise of patience. Time
must elapse even between the sowing
and the brairding—a fact to be laid
to heart by parents and teachers, lest


—— tt


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


they commit the folly of insisting on
seeing the blade at once, to the pro-
bable spiritual hurt of the young
intrusted to their care. Much longer
time must elapse between the braird-
ing and the ripening. That a speedy
sanctification 1s impossible we do not
affirm; but it is, we believe, so ex-
ceptional that it may be left altogether
out of account in discussing the theory
of Christian experience. Once more,
growth in the spiritual world, as in
the natural, is graduated; in that
region as in this there is a blade, a
green ear, and a ripe ear.—d. JB.
Bruce, D.D.

Order of growth.—Not only does the
corn always go on growing, but it
always observes the same order and
succession in its growth—“ first the
blade, then the ear, after that the full
corn in the ear.” This is an order
which is never reversed or altered ; it
is always the full corn in the ear which
is the last to shew itself. And so it is
with the heart. First, it is always
repentance and sorrow for sin; then,
faith in Jesus Christ; then, without
losing these, any more than the grain
loses the protection of the blade and the
ear, it goes on to holiness of life, and
a sure hope in God’s promises ; and last
of all to love—love the ripened corn,
the fulfilling of the ear.—H. Harris.

The beauty of early piety.—How re-
freshing to the eye is the garb of green
with which the field is clothed, when
the tender blade has first sprung up!
But a short time back all lay in a
state of ruggedness and an unseemly
mass of clods. And not less grateful
to the eye of those interested in the
spiritual welfare of others are the
first dawnings and buddings of faith
and love in the Christian’s heart, when
the “good seed” puts forth its first
increase in those around us. How
pleasing to witness the young and
tender plant of righteousness putting
forth the buds and leaves of Christian
advancement! How pleasing to ob-
serve the gradual increase of piety, of
Christian feeling, of prayer, of love,
and of joy, bursting forth and ripening


CHAP, IV.





into full experience for the coming
harvest.—J. L. F. Russell.


Ver. 29. God’s sickle.—The physical
world contains evidence of such periods
of catastrophe and new creation. ‘The
ages of universal fire and molten
elements were ended by the creation
of life on the globe, at some time in
the past eternity, as Prof. Bonney
demonstrates in his Hulsean Lecture.
And many times since, locally if not
universally, there have been epochs of
change, of ‘‘new heavens and new
earth,” of new forms of life, vegetable
and animal, of vast destruction and
wholly new formation of land and sea,
with their inhabitants. The history
of the world of mankind during the
historic period furnishes many ex-
amples of this law of the kingdom of
God. When the harvest is come, He
putteth in the sickle. The old world
grew up from a single pair, and de-
veloped its good and evil. At length
evil prevailed, “and the flood came
and took them all away.” Again the
world started with a single family,
and again evil and apostasy prevailed.
Then God added a fresh element to
human history in the family of Abra-
ham. When evil increased judgment
descended on them, as also on Egypt,
Assyria, Edom, Babylon, Tyre, Persia,
Greece, Rome. Jerusalem itself was
destroyed, and the Jews were scattered.
The Jewish vintage of evil was ripe
for the wine-press. The same law has
ruled in the Gentile modern world.
The bloody vintage came for the
Roman Empire in the fifth century, for
Eastern Christendom in the seventh,
by the hand of the Mohammedans,
and later by the Turkish Power. It
came later on for European wickedness
in the French Revolution. And it is
coming again in the great battles and
tribulations of the last days, when
the clusters of the Vine of the Earth
shall “be cast into the wine-press of
the wrath.and fury of Almighty God.”
Right-doing and Wrong-doing are
ripening on every side. Every nation
on earth, every soul on earth, is ripen-


155


CHAP, 1V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





ing as wheat for the harvest in the
garner of God, or as a cluster of the
vine of the earth for the wine-press of
His wrath. This ‘‘sharp sickle ” hovers
in the sky suspended by an Almighty
Hand. But it is there, and it is visible


characters of men.


lifetime to demonstrate fully the real
The evolution re-
quires space for derelopment in relation
to individual character. St. Paul sums
up all these facts in 1 Tim. v. 24, 25.
—E. White.


to the spiritual eye; often it takes a


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 30—34.
(PaRALLets : Marv, xiii, 31, 32; Luxe xiii. 18, 19.)


The rise and progress of Christianity—I. Christianity is insignificant in its
beginning.—1. Its Founder assumed a humble form. 2. Its first advocates
were obscure. 3. Its sphere of action was confined. 4. Its first converts were
few. 5. Its mode of operation was unassuming. 6. Its reception was unpopular.

II. Christianity is gradual in its progress——1. The difficulties with which
it has to contend are tremendous. 2. The means which it adopts are moral.
3. The change which it attempts is radical. 4. The field in which it works is
extensive. 5. The time at its disposal is long. 6. The results which it contem-
plates are eternal.

III. Christianity will be great in its consummation.—l. It will be the
mightiest display of God’s energy. 2. It will be the holiest manifestation of
God’s character. 3. It will be the truest exhibition of God’s faithfulness. 4. It
will be the wisest revelation of God’s intelligence. 5. It will be the most
benevolent expression of God’s love. 6. It will be the sublimest source of God’s
glory. (1) It will be the acknowledged instrument of His complete overthrow
of sin. (2) It will be time’s sole surviving wonder for the admiration of the
spiritual universe. (3) It will be the redeemed’s theme of sweetest song of
gratitude to God. (4) It will be the climax of Christ. Then God will be
all in all.

Lessons.—-1. Despise not the day of small things.
3. Be active.


2. Exercise patience.
4, Draw upon the glorious future.—B. D. Johns.


I. The comparative insignificance of Christianity at the first—1. Contrast
the gorgeous ritual of the Temple with the unostentatious worship inculcated
by Christ. 2. Contrast the elaborate systems of philosophers with the simple
teaching of our Lord. 3. Contrast the social position of the priests with that
of the apostles. 4, Contrast the multitudes who followed priests and philosophers
with the few who were the disciples of Jesus.

II. The careful implantation of Christianity.—1. Not a handful, but a solitary
seed (Acts iv. 12). 2. Not accidentally but designedly sown. Christ personally
performed the work. 3. In a chosen and appropriate spot.

III. The rapid growth of Christianity.—1. In three or four centuries it had
spread so far and wide that Christians were found in Rome, Asia Minor, Greece,
Syria, Russia, Germany, Gaul, Persia, Armenia, Egypt, Arabia, Abyssinia, and
indeed in almost every known land. 2. It became so great a tree, that persecu-
tion could not uproot or even injure it; so great, that the eyes of three continents
looked on in amazement; so great, that the trees of idolatry and superstition
had no room for growth. 3. Every obstacle malice could throw in its way
had been employed. All classes laid their axe toits root. Philosophers brought
their satire, priests their anathemas, kings their laws. All in vain. The tree
not only resisted every blow, but shattered to atoms every axe which assailed it.


156


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


CHAP. IV.





Its devotees were nailed to crosses, and, dying, cried, ‘ It must grow.”


Thousands


at the stake exulted as they said, “‘ We burn, but it cannot wither.”


IV. The natural phenomenon resulting.—Ver. 32 ult.


Observe, the very


same class of men who sought to destroy Christianity at its introduction after-
ward gladly espoused it for their own personal ends. The tree was planted by
God to give shelter to the weary and sad; it was not designed for such birds
of prey ; and sooner or later all the mercenary ones shall be driven away by
the power of Him who planted it.—A. A. Griffin.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 30-32. Christianity a living
organism. — Hitherto the Christian
kingdom has been represented by a
crowd of distinct though similar corn-
plants—contiguous yet individual.
Now the deeper truth is hinted at
that all Christian men and women
make up in some sense a single living
organism, with its root deep hid in the
earth, of whose fatness we all partake.
Tt enters into the very idea of a tree
that its various parts are the outcome
of the same life-force, which originally
was shut up in a tiny unpromising
seed, which yet before it has spent
itself creates that umbrageous fruitful
whole, from gnarled root to topmost,
outmost twig. The glories of mid-
summer leafage, on which the breezes
play low airs, while the sunbeams
dance a dance of green and gold; riches
of autumn berry dropping to the
gatherer’s hand; subtle harmony of
curve as the boughs lean to balance
one another; mystic new birth as often
as the spring sends a reviving tide of
sap through every branch ; unwearied
effort to put forth fresh lines of growth
from each budding point; while the
records of a hundred seasons of storm
and contest and victorious life are
graven on its furrowed sides and
stubborn limbs,—how wonderful, how
endless in delight and mystery, is the
world of life to be found within a single
tree; and yet its age-long growth
and all its splendours come from the
forces hid in one smooth brown rind
over which a boy’s fingers could be
clasped in sport! This beautiful figure
for an organised community of men


bound by a common life, sprung from
small beginnings, and lasting through
many generations—the figure of a tree
—was not a new one in the hands of
Jesus. He found it in the literature
of His people. As far back as the age
of the Captivity it had become usual
with the great prophets to compare
the kingdom of Judah to a vine, and
the mighty empire which threatened
it to a cedar tree. But the figure had
disappeared from Hebrew literature till
our Lord revived it in the words before
us. With characteristic homeliness,
He selects from the vegetable creation
a plant whose lowly appearance con-
trasts strangely with the vine of Isaiah,
the cedar of Ezekiel, or the olive of
St. Paul. It was not for its homeliness,
however, that He chose it, although
conspicuously His emblems are all
taken from the most familiar objects
of common life. It was because, for
another reason, it suited His purpose
best. We measure roughly with the
eye the power of growth which resides
in ‘a plant, by the disproportion we
discover betwixt the smallness of the
seed and the largeness of the perfect
plant. When a comparatively minute
seed develops into a comparatively
big tree, you are much struck by the
force of life there was in it. Now of
this the mustard formed an excellent
familiar instance. It was, in fact, the
least of the seeds usually sown by
people in Palestine, and therefore
passed in the proverbial speech of the
country-folk for the least thing in the
world. Yet, strange to add, the full-
grown mustard plant was “the largest


137


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of garden herbs”: nay, “ greater than
all herbs,” since sometimes it shot out
branches so as to pass fairly beyond
the rank of a “herb” and become
quite a “tree,” under whose shadow
the field birds could perch. Precisely
so is it found growing wild to this day
by the Lake of Galilee—a tall shrub,
or dwarf tree, some ten feet in height.
On this point of comparison rests the
stress of the parable. Christianity is
not only a creation of the Saviour’s
own life; it is the work and monument
of the most extraordinary spiritual
- force we know. The kingdoms of the
world were round Him where He sat—
relics of ancient empires, which, in their
day, Ezekiel had likened to the grand
mountain cedar, with a ‘shadowing
shroud” and a lofty stature. Yet now
these all lay “fallen” and “ broken”
and “left,” as Ezekiel had foretold ;
while over them towered one world-
empire huger than any of its fore-
runners, whose very fragments con-
stitute our modern empires. Rome
filled the wide earth with its shade as
He spoke. Tiny beside the mighty
bulk of overshadowing Rome, as a
very mustard seed, was this carpenter’s
Son and the handful of followers He
left behind Him. Yet who does not
know how unexpectedly the little
spiritual kingdom of Jesus grew up
out of His own grave to develop the
mightiest force which history has to
tell of ; how speedily it thrust out its
branches into every land, and sent its
roots along every water-course ; how
it reckons at this hour a larger census
of citizens than the most populous of
secular sovereignties? By its own
inward force of Divine life did it grow
so large. And still it grows, and sees
the old poison plants of heathendom,
beneath whose deadly boughs the
people sat, droop and die around its
feet, and welcomes to its grateful
shade the wandering souls of men who
crave for rest and for refreshing. It


158


yields its fruit every month, and its
leaves are for the healing of the
nations.—J. 0. Dykes, D.D.

‘A parable of promise.—This is a
parable of promise, speaking to the
heart and to the community. It says,
“ Hope for much, but expect it only
little by little” When Livingstone
had measured his work and his powers,
he said this as his last word: “It is
but little we can do, but we lodge a
protest in the heart against a vile
system, and time may ripen it.” And
whenever we do our best, and trust
and pray our best, though that best
be but little, still we also may hope
that God will favour it, and that time
will ripen it. For the little of our day
is often the seed of much in a day to
come; and no one who works in his
place can tell what his work will grow
to, or how much God may make of
it.—T. F. Crosse, D.C.L.


Vers, 33, 34. The duties of the Chris-
tian teacher.—l. He must adapt him-
self to his hearers. Are they young?
are they educated? are they courage-
ous? are they surrounded by any
peculiar circumstances? 2. He must
consider his hearers rather than him-
self. This was Jesus Christ’s method.
The question should be, not what pleases
the preacher’s taste, but what is most
required by the spiritual condition of
the people. 3. He must increase his
communication of truth and light
according to the progress of his scholars.
Reticence is power. In teaching chil-
dren the teacher should not dazzle them
by the splendour of his attainments ;
he adapts the light to the strength of
their mental vision. The preacher
should always know more of Divine
truth than the hearer. Christ’s method
of imparting knowledge is, so far as
we can infer, unchanged. He has yet
more light to shed upon His Word.
—J. Parker, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IY.





——


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 35—Al.
(PARALLELS: Marv. viii. 18, 23-27 ; Luxe viii. 22-25.)


The storm on the lake.-—How pleasant it is to stand upon the beach, when
there is a glorious sunset, to look upon the vast expanse, to gaze upon the
splendid colours of the clouds! Only a gentle ripple disturbs the surface of
the water. All nature is preparing for its evening rest. But observe ; a vessel
is approaching, and others are following. A great Personage is about to embark :
the Prophet of Galilee. He has brought consolation to many hearts during
the day ; for He has been teaching in the neighbouring towns and healing the
sick. And now, having dismissed the multitude, He desires to pass over to the
other side of the sea or lake. But as we stand watching the departing ships
a breeze springs up. And mark yonder clouds. Observe, Christ’s attendants are
taking the necessary precautions, for they know how rapidly a storm gathers
on the lake. It is the same to-day. Sir Charles Wilson, when in Galilee some
time ago, encountered a violent storm. He says: ‘The morning was delightful.
A gentle easterly breeze, and not a cloud in the sky to give warning of what
was coming. Suddenly, about midday, there was a sound of distant thunder,
and a small cloud, ‘no bigger than a man’s hand,’ was seen rising over the
heights, The cloud appeared to spread, and heavy black masses came rolling
down the hills. At the moment the breeze died away, there were a few minutes
of perfect calm. But soon the thunder-gust, advancing across the lake, lifted
the placid water into a bright sheet of foam. For more than an hour . . . peals
of thunder and torrents of rain.” It was just such a storm as this that over-
whelmed Christ’s ship, and yet we read that the Redeemer was asleep in the
hinder part of the ship—asleep, tired, fatigued. I like to think of Christ
sleeping. It shews that He had our nature. We have a Saviour who has
ascended into the highest heaven, and yet who sympathises with our infirmities
because He is man. “ Without one sign of confusion, without one feeling of
alarm, Jesus raised Himself from the dripping stern of the labouring and half-
sinking vessel, and without further movement stilled the tempest of their souls
by the quiet words, “‘ Why so cowardly, O ye of little faith ?’” And then rising
up, standing in all the calm of a natural majesty, He gazed forth into the
darkness, and His voice was heard amid the roaring of the troubled elements,
saying, ‘“ Peace, be still!” and instantly the wind dropped, and there was a great
calm.

I. To succeed and be safe in our passage through life we must have Christ
with us.—There are men who commenced life, so to speak, in a very small ship,
and they felt how helpless they would be if any storm should arise. Night after
night, and day by day, they implored Christ to be with them, to give them
health, prosperity, and success. Those men reached their harbour, sold their
goods, built a large ship, Christ again with them. No storm ever overwhelmed
them. To-day they give Him allthe honour. But there are men who believe
they can dispense with the Divine Presence. Have they not wealth? Have they
not. excellent investments? Why, they could get through any storm. And
then they are put to the test. Slowly the clouds gather, the wind rises, and
then secretly they begin to feel matters are getting serious. But still they hope
to weather the storm. Something will happen; they must be more careful in
future. I knew just such a man. He rose from a humble position to one of
great wealth; but he refused to give God the honour. He boasted openly
of his own good management, whereby Le had succeeded so well; and first one
loss came, and then another, until at last he was overwhelmed. No Christ in


159


UHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


<= § a ea ES ————E—e—————— ee ee se :


the ship. Oh, my brethren, if you desire lasting success, if you would have help
in trouble, if you hope to reach the other side in safety, ask Christ to accompany
you in the ship ! ;

IL. It was a difficult matter to follow Christ’s ship because of the boisterous
waves.—The vessels that followed Christ’s ship must have encountered the same
storm. No one ever yet found it an easy matter to follow Christ because of the
forces against us. There is the flesh to contend with, the World and the Evil
One to encounter. In your own strength you will not be able to follow Christ,
to obey His commandments ; so frail is human nature, what are you to do?
Christ has promised to give you such help that you can always be victorious.
This help is called grace. But if you co not ask Him for what He has promised
to give, and as a result are unable to resist the storm of the flesh or the powers
of darkness—if you lose paradise, it will be your own fault; you can blame
no one but yourself.

III. Divine aid interposing when all human power has failed.—God permits
“ human affairs to proceed to a given point, and at the vital moment outstretches
His arm.” Have you never seen Him do that? Have you never observed some
illness suddenly take a favourable turn, or a perplexity vanish, or the prodigal


repent, at the request of some praying one? Some time ago a vessel was sailing


through Lake Erie. It was early in the season, and great blocks of ice were
floating about. All at once the captain saw that the ice was closing the ship
in on all sides. He summoned the passengers, and informed them of the position.
He said nothing but the direct interference of Almighty God could save the
ship. Immediately all knelt down and asked for help, and after a few minutes
the man at the wheel shouted that it was all right now; the wind was changing,
and blowing the ice out of the way. Divine aid comes when human power fail».
Ah! there is a moment coming for us all when no earthly friend will be able to
assist us, when the words are heard, “ Pass over to the other side.” Then if we
have not Divine aid, what shall we do? But if we have Christ with us, we
shall possess His peace, we shall be safe for eternity.—Z. R. Still.


The Church in peril.—t. The Church is like a ship.—Noah’s Ark was a type
. of Christ’s Church, in that as he and his family were saved in the ark from
perishing by water, so we, by being admitted into the Church, are by baptismal
water saved from perishing. So the Church tells us in her office of baptism,
where she drives on the allegory throughout, praying that God would sanctify
the child with the Holy Ghost, that he, being delivered from wrath, may be
received into the ark of Christ’s Church, and, being steadfast in faith, may so pass
the waves of this troublesome world, that finally he may come to the land of
everlasting life. Nor is the ark alone so appropriate a resemblance of the Church,
as that any ordinary ship may not, in some kind or other, represent it, whether
it be for passage, for merchandise, or for war. Look weon the make and build of
it ; tis fitly compacted and framed together, both for strength and beauty. If we
consider it in its furniture and tackle, it has its compass to sail by, the Word of
God ; its sails of devout affections, to be filled with the breathings of His Spirit ;
and its anchor of hope to stay itself upon, the merits of His Son. If we regard
the design of a ship to go from port to port, ours is bound heavenward; for
we seek a country, even the land of everlasting life, as ye heard before. The
Church entertains passengers to waft them into the regions of bliss; it has her
cargo of Divine truths; and as a man-of-war, too, she is all along throughout her
whole voyage militant. As to her manage and conduct, she has Christ for
her Pilot, and under Him the Chief Magistrate to steer the vessel and to govern
the ship’s crew. But in no one thing is the Church more like to a ship than in
those frequent dangers and jeopardies she is to undergo,—dangers from without;


160






f
I
"1
4
.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.








all the elements as it were conspiring her ruin; rocks and shelves to split her ;
flats and quicksands to founder her ; tempests and storms of persecutions,to over-
whelm her ; corsairs and pirates, all her ghostly foes, to attack her,—dangers
from within, by leaks of schism and division, and many other casualties through
negligence or ill government.

II. Distress is a very fit season for devotion.—The sense of present danger
awakens the worst of men to the practice of this duty of prayer, and our earnest
prayer awakens God to our relief. The psalmist tells us that at God's word or
command the stormy wind arises which lifteth up the waves. And probably
for this very reason God sometimes causes, or at least most times permits, storms
and troubles to arise upon His Church, that His people, who, when they are sate
and see all things quiet about them, are too apt to forget God, and refuse to
hearken to the still voice of His Word and to obey His commandments, may
from such terrible dismal instances of danger learn to fear Him, to adore His
majesty, to acknowledge His power, te implore His goodness, and in their great
distress to ery unto Him for help: “Save, Lord, or else we perish.”

III. Our extremity is God’s opportunity.—I have read a dismal description
of a shipwreck in a Greek romance—when all the passengers, and seamen too,
with hands and eyes and hearts lifted up to heaven, fetched the last shriek,
expecting with their tattered vessel immediately to go down quick to the bottom
of the sea. And when men are in such a posture of danger, how is God’s mercy
signalised at such a time in their preservation? This, I say, is business in
ordinary providence ; but when the ship, which Himself with His almighty care
and skill has undertaken to steer and bring to her desired port, when the safety
and interest of His Church and people, is reduced to extremity, how much more
reason have we to expect the extraordinary effects of His power and goodness,
who both can and will provide for His, when they are destitute of all other help ¢
When a Church or nation is, to the eye of man, in all human probability, given
up for lost, when all other helps and means fail, then is God’s time to come in
at a dead lift, who is already help in the needful time of trouble. There is
nothing so secret which He cannot bring to light, nothing so strong which can
resist His power, nothing so cunningly contrived which He cannot disappoint.

IV. Christ, as He is the Founder of our religion, so He is the sole Author of

-our deliverances.—To Thee, O holy Jesu, who wast the Founder of our faith and
holy profession, we fly in all our distresses, as to our only Deliverer. In Thy
merits and satisfaction, in Thy mediation and intercessions, alone we fix the
anchor of our hope. In Thy saving health we repose all our trust and ground
our assurance. To Thee alone it is that we address our requests. Thy patronage
alone is all-sufficient for our direction in life, for our protection in danger. Thou

art the way and the truth and the life—the way in Thy holy example, the
truth in Thy heavenly doctrine, and the life in the application of Thy merit.—

Adam Littleton, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 35. “ Unto the other side.”— to us, though with varying meaning in
1. A watchword of faith, breaking His words. He is ever calling us to
through all narrow boundaries. 2, A pass over some line into new fields,
watchword of love, overcoming all with their new experiences, privileges,
selfishness. 3. A watchword of cour- duties, conflicts, joys. 1. He says it to
age, overcoming all dangers.—J. P. the impenitent, when He graciously
Lange, D.D. invites them to become His disciples.

Christ is continually saying thesame He wants them to cut loose from this


M 16]


CHAP. IV


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST MARK.





world, from sin and all their old dead
past, and rise up and go with Him to
the better life which lies beyond.
2. He gives the same call and invita-
tion to His people, when they reach
the end of earthly life, and He comes
to take them home. Before them rolls
the sea of death, dark and full of
terrors to the natural sense. But on
“the other side” glory waits.—J. R.
Miller, D.D.


Ver. 36. Christ on board.—Christ
will come on board your boat. Life
has often been described as a voyage,
and it is an appropriate description.
He will come, I say, on board the
barque in which your destiny is being
carried forward. He will start with
you if you want Him. He will identify
Himself with the poorest if only you
are a disciple, if you are willing to sit
at His feet and learn of Him. Will
you take Him then as He is? will you
make common cause with Him? KEvi-
dently this manner of man will sail
the seas of time with anybody who
will simply be friends with Him, who
will lie down and be at peace with
Him. Are you of that disposition
towards Him %’—J. McNeill.

Where the Lord is there should His
servants and apostles be,—in danger
as well as in peace; as feeding the
multitude, so sharing in His troubled
and evening voyage : not only treading
in His footsteps, but partaking in
the holy confidence of their Master's
faith, who committed Himself with all
confidence to the winds and waves.—
W. Scott.

These ‘other little ships” doubtless
enjoyed a share in the blessing of calm
obtained by the ship that bare Jesus.
I have sometimes thought that they
picture vividly the fortunes of these
societies, that, in these later ages, have
moved in the wake of the ancient
Apostolic Church, that with it are
forced to endure the storms of a world
impartially hostile to every form of
religious effort, and that are not with-
out participating in the blessings of
the Holy Presence, abiding in that


162


Church as long as in sincerity of heart
they endeavour to keep up with the
Master in His course (Mark ix. 38;
Exod, xii. 38; 1 Cor. i. 2; Eph. vi. 24).
—W. A. Butler.


Vers. 37-40. Christ's victory over
JSeeble-minded wnbelief.—l|. He leads
little faith into danger. 2. He lets
it wrestle with the peril to the utmost
point. 3. He convicts, humbles, and
heals it.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

Here Christ exhibits Himself as—
1. The true and holy Man. 2. The
wise and gracious Master. 3. The
alinighty and adorable Son of God.—
Ibid.

An image of the Christian life.—
l. The threatening danger. 2. The
growing anxiety. 3. The delivering
might. 4. The rising thanks.—Jbid.

Trial and deliverance work together.—
1. To reveal the Lord. 2. To train
His people. 3. To advance the coming
of His kingdom.—ZJbid.

The Sea of Galilee is an inland lake
surrounded by hills, save at each of
its extremities, where are narrow pass-
ages, affording an entrance and outlet
to the Jordan. The river, flowing
through the lake, creates a current,
which is felt even to the very shores.
Like all other inland seas surrounded


by mountains, the lake, though usually -


placid, is subject to sudden gusts from
the hollows of the mountains, and to
violent eddies and storms, short in
duration, but violent in their effects.
Especially when the storm-gusts sweep
down upon the lake from the south
(the direction in which the boat was
to proceed), the wind meeting and
opposing the current of the Jordan,
soon lashes the surface into fury.
Christ's presence causes storms.—
Until Christ was in the ship, there
was no storm. While men have pillows
sewn under their elbows, all is peace;
but so soon as Christ rebukes the world
of sin, the wicked are like the raging
sea, that cannot rest, whose waters
cast up dirt and mire.—Dean Boys.
Suddenness of lifes storms.—Thus
many of life’s storms come, Tempta-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


tions come when we are not looking
for them. So disasters come. We
are at peace in a happy home. At
an hour when we think not, without
warning, the darling child we love so
much lies dead in our arms. The
friend we trusted, and who we thought
could never fail us, proves false. The
hopes cherished for years wither in our
hands in a night, like flowers when the
frost comes. The storms of life are
nearly all sudden surprises. They
do not hang out danger-signals days
before to warn us. The only way to
be ready for them is to be always
ready.—J. R. Miller, D.D.


Ver. 38. Christ asleep—He who
“never slumbereth nor sleepeth” is
asleep! Not that He seemed to sleep,
as has been said, but ‘‘ He was asleep.”
Now, as God, of course our Lord could
not, did not, sleep, it was only in His
humanity that “‘ His eyes were heavy
to sleep.” But more than this may
be said. He slept, it may be, for
a purpose, i.e. to shew the apostles
that where He was there was no real
danger, and to teach Christian souls
calmly and faithfully to repose on
Him, while all outward things seem
most distressing.—W. Scott.

Asleep amid storms.—What are the
world’s angry storms—the miserable
uncertainties and chances of this
mortal life—the malice of evil angels
—the tossing about of mingled hopes
and fears: nay, what is the nearness
of death itself, what is danger, what is
fear, to the faithful Christian? Like
his Lord, he may sleep calmly through
all the wild commotions of the world,
in prayer it must have been, and
converse with His and our Heavenly
Father.—J/bid.

Salvation spiritual.—The spirit of
Christ, not the body of Christ, must
save the Church in all peril. The
sleeping body was in the vessel, but
it exercised no influence upon the
storm. It is possible to have an em-
balmed Christ, and yet to have no
Christianity. It is also possible to
have the letter of Christ’s Word with-


CHAP. IV.


out the spirit and power of His truth,
—J. Parker, D.D.

UnbeliefI. Some of the circum-
stances in which this question of
unbelief arises in the mind.—In rela-
tion to—l. Temporal things: poverty,
adversity, distress, sickness, bereave-
ment, danger. 2. Spiritual things:
darkness, loneliness, temptation. 3.
Others: sunk in ignorance and sin.

II. How Christ rebukes our un-
belief; and the proofs which God has
given that He cares for us.—1. The
instincts which God has implanted in
the human heart. 2. The ample
provision He has made for all our
necessities. 3. The fact that others
care for us. 4. Even the storms
through which we pass are often the
result of God’s care for us: “Whom
I love I rebuke and chasten.”

Conclusion.—If God so cares for us,
we ought to—l. Care for ourselves.
2. Care for those around us. 3. Cast
all our cares upon Him.—A. Clark.

Signs of a weak faith.—l. Fear in
danger. 2. Doubt of the Lord’s power
in danger. 3. Anxious solicitude about
earthly things. 4. Impatience under
trouble (Isa. xxviii. 16).

Fear and faith. — Though fear
caused self-abandonment, faith pro-
vided guidance to the right person.
Fear commanded, “Drop your oar.”


Faith directed, ‘““Go to Jesus.” Fear
said, ‘Your case is hopeless.” Faith
said, ‘Seek safety in Christ.” Fear


made them ready to go. Faith led in
the right way. Fear cried, ‘“‘ We
perish ! we perish!” Faith prayed,
“Master, carest Thou not? Lord,
save! save!”

A model prayer.—It was short, appro-
priate, fervent. The disciples knew
what they wanted, and they asked for
it. Our prayers often fail to gain us
a blessing because they lack definite
ness. In a long prayer we have
sometimes been prayed into a good
frame of mind and out of it. Dr.
Talmage suggests that, in the case of
most of our prayers, they would be
better and more helpful if we were to
cut off a bit frem each end and set


163


CHAP. IV.


fire to the middle. The prayer of the
disciples did what the storm had failed
to do. There is an instinctive tend-
ency in the human heart to pray when
-econfronted suddenly by imminent peril,
eg. Jonah i. 13, 14; Ps. evii. 5, 6,
11-13, 17-19, 28. ‘Some will never
pray until they are half starved.”


Ver. 39. Trials not always calami-
ties.—Had the apostles been inquired
of before the storm ceased, they would
have replied that the tempest was a
great misfortune, that they were much
to be pitied, that they were in the very
greatest peril. But was it so? Was
the storm such a calamity? It was
a trial, and for the time a bitter one;
but it wrought good, unalloyed good,
in the end. And is not this a parable
of life? 1. The ancients were wont
constantly to use the figure of a ship
as a similitude of the Church of Christ ;
and our Baptismal Office preserves this
ancient usage, when we pray that the
newly baptised may be received into
the Ark of Christ’s Church, and may
so pass the waves of this troublesome
world as finally to attain the land
of life. The Church, then, is as a
ship, often tossed by tempest, some-
times seeming to the eye of man as if
it were now full of water, ready to
sink, but yet never sinking, because
Christ is in her. She has been in
great danger, so that her crew have
been compelled to cast out with their
own hands the lading of the ship, her
possessions and her dignities; but yet,
at the hour of greatest need, has she
been rescued by Him who never left
her—who seemed to sleep, but yet
who suffered the storm to arise—even
by Him who never slumbers nor sleeps
in His providential government. As
the infant Church, represented by the
apostles, was tossed upon the Sea of
Galilee, so is the Christian Church by
the waves of the world, the machina-
tions of evil spirits, the pride and the
passion of men; and as the apostles
rose up after their trial stronger in
the faith, so even now does tribulation
better than prosperity develop that


164


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ST. MARK.
es


which is good. And herein all faith-
ful members of the Church may thank
God and take courage, even in troublous
times. Her ministers may not fear,
though it may seem as if Jesus was
asleep, as if He hid His face and would
not behold; they may take courage
when they see the wicked in great
prosperity, and Satan ruling over the
hearts of many, and holding them in
ignorance and sin. Yet still the storm
has its lessons specially for them. It
teaches them to be up and doing, to
ply the oars, to trim the sails, to take
good heed to the rudder, to ery aloud
to the Captain of their salvation, and
thus to do their part to make the
vessel weather the storm. But when
they have done all that they can, it
teaches them to leave the result in the
hands of God; it teaches them to ex-
pect a favourable issue—an issue which
will make the glory of God apparent.
2. We, the members of the Church of
Christ, are also sailing over the stormy
main. We have our peculiar difficul-
ties and trials, each one his own:
sometimes secular trials, sometimes
spiritual trials. In either case we
find that the ocean of our life is not
always calm: there are storms and
tempests in it, there are fierce and
sudden gusts, and sometimes we may
almost have despaired and thought
that our vessel was ready to sink.
Have we in such a case been tempted
to ery, “‘ Lord, carest Thou not that we
perish ?” The earnest Christian will
have ever found, sooner or later, an
answer of peace.—W. S. Simpson, M.A.

Safety in Ohrist—Whether sinner
or saint, unbeliever or believer, we are
alike voyaging upon the sea of life.
Perils abound in shoal and reef.
Dangers gather and threaten in tem-
pest and billow. The storm is stronger,
the sea is mightier, than we. Our
open boat—-a frail craft—will be
crushed and sunken in the dark night
and black waters, unless the Master
speaks the word of peace and brings
the calm. In Him is safety. In Him
only is life. He cares for us with
infinite mercy. We will go to Him





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





CHAP. IV.





reposing on His might and trusting in
His love.

Christ yields to the cry of an im-
perfect faith, and so strengthens it.
If He did not, what would become of
any of us? He does not quench the
dimly burning wick, but tends it and
feeds it with oil—by His inward gifts
and by His answers to prayer—till it
burns up clear and smokeless, a faith
without fear. Even smoke needs but a
higher temperature to flame; and fear
which is mingled with faith needs but
a little more heat to be converted into
radiance of trust.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

Self-possession. — Well were it for
men if, in life’s trials, larger measures
of the mastery of self-possession were
enjoyed. It can be cultivated. The
conscious resting of the soul on God
inspires and strengthens it. That helps
it to possess and guide instead of being
possessed and driven. It converts
tyrants into useful servants. Self-
possessed utterance and action nerve.
The disjointed ones of despair spread
paralysis. The former would thus
greatly help people either to act more
efficiently or endure more heroically.—
W. M. Campbell.

The duty of resistance.—Some pious
people resign themselves much too pas-
sively to the mischiefs of the material
universe, supposing that troubles which
are not of their own making must
needs be a Divine infliction, calling
only for submission. But God sends
oppositions to be conquered as well as
burdens to be borne; and even before
the Fall the world had to be subdued.
And our final mastery over the sur-
rounding universe was expressed when
Jesus our Head rebuked the winds
and stilled the waves.—Dean Chadwick.

Christ in the storm.—St. Augustine,
who knew as well as most men what
the storms of temptation are, and
better than most men what the deliver-
ance is, and by whom the victory
comes, often in his writings refers to
this passage of the Evangelist, and
those Psalms like the 46th and 93rd
and 107th, where we almost seem to
hear the roaring of the waters and the


voice of God above them. In one of
these he sums up the practical appli-
cation of the miracle in language that
cannot be bettered: ‘We are sailing
in this life as through a sea, and the
wind rises and storms of temptations
are not wanting. Whence is this, save
because Jesus is sleeping in thee? If
He were not sleeping in thee thou
wouldst have calm within. But what
means this, that Jesus is sleeping in
thee, save that thy faith, which is
from Jesus, is slumbering in thine
heart? What shalt thou do to be
delivered? Arouse Him and say,
Master, we perish. He will awaken—
that is, thy faith will return to thee
and. abide with thee always. When
Christ is awakened, though the tempest
beat into yet it will not fill thy ship ; thy
faith will now command the winds and
the waves, and the danger will be over.”


Ver. 40. Responsible for faith.—
Christ treats the disciples as respon-
sible for the defectiveness of their
faith. Christians may live on so low
a level as to be affected by influences
which depress their energies, and
render them liable to many faults
and shortcomings, which, although not


‘fastening guilt upon the conscience,


are in the aggregate a serious evil.
The kindness of Christ does not degene-
rate into indulgence, by shielding His
delinquent disciples from the reproof
they merited. The reproach which
they alleged against Him of not caring
for them was groundless and irreverent.
He reproaches them in return, but in
a different spirit, not by way of retalia-
tion, but because the necessities of the
case required it. He chides them, not
for disturbing His rest, but for har-
bouring fears that disturbed their own
souls.—J. H. Morgan.

The faithless reproved.—Consider this
reproof as addressed to—l. Men com-
manded to receive Christ, which is the
case of all who hear the gospel. If
He had not told you to go over to the
other side, away from this world, as
your home and portion, then there
might be ground of fear that attempt-


165


GHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





ing to do so you might fail and perish
in the storm of this world’s opposition ;
but He has said, “ Go over to the other
side,” yea, ‘Come over,” for He will
be with you, and hence to tremble and
hesitate and doubt is wicked distrust
of Him. 2. Those who shrink from
Christian duty. (1) They who with-
hold themselves from open profession.
(2) They who lag behind in the path
of spiritual progress, and who, instead
of stirring themselves up, groan and
despond. (3) They who take a dark
view of the prospects of the Ark of God
and of Christian work. 3. Such as
are disposed to faint in time of trial.
—D. Merson.


Ver. 41. “What manner of man is
this ?”—This is the question for every
individual, for every age, to consider.
Christ is the great problem of history,
of theology, of life. What is He? He
is man; but what manner of man ?
He is more than mature, more than
the sum-total of its powers. We do
not exhaust Him when we say He is
@ wan, nor when we say He is the
man, standing at the head of the race
by virtue of pre-eminent gifts. He is
the God-man, who stunds equal with
God on the high level of Deity, and equal
with man on the low level of humanity.
—J. Hughes.


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. Christ's parables differ from all
others in this, that in their application they
seem inexhaustible. Just as one may, from
Geneva, watch the sun setting on Mont
Blanc, and while the sunny peak in its
gigantic outlines remains ever the same, yet
the rays of the sun, as they fall upon it at
different angles, so change its marvellous
tints that at one moment it sparkles like
burnished gold, at another it is bathed in
roseate hues, and then again, as the sun
sinks beneath the western hills, it stands out
in cold, grey tones, in grand relief against
the glories of the azure sky,—so with our
Lord’s parables, while the outline of the
familiar story remains always the same, yet
every time we come to its contemplation in
the light of the Holy Spirit, not only do we see
new beauties, but new lessons, I had almost
said new truths !—A, G. Mortimer, D.D.


166


The Ruler of the storm.—Dr. Liddon,
speaking of political opposition to
Christianity, says: “During the first
three centuries, and finally under
Julian, the heathen state made re-
peated and desperate attempts to sup-
press it by force. Statesmen and —
philosophers undertook the task of
eradicating it. ... More than once
they drove it from the army, from the
professions, from the public thorough-
fares, into secrecy; they pursued it
into the vaults beneath the palaces of
Rome, into the catacombs, into the
deserts. . . . The hordes which shat-
tered the work of the Cesars learnt to
repeat the Catholic creed, and a new
order of things had formed itself when
the tempest of Mohammedanism broke
upon Christendom. Politically speak-
ing, this was perhaps the most threaten-
ing storm through which the Christian
Church passed. . . . The last trial of
the Church was the first French Revo-
lution . . . which for a while seemed
to threaten its total suppression. Yet
the men of the Terror have passed, as
the Caesars had passed before them ;
and, like the Cesars, they have only
proved to the world that the Church
carries within her One who rules the
fierce tempests in which human insti-
tutions are wont to perish.”


TO CHAPTER TY.


The parables of Jesus are simple in structure
and for the most part easily understood.
And yet they are deep as His Divine Spirit.
Their inimitable perfections appear as often
as any one tries to parallel them. Meeting
with Dr. Robert Breckinridge, “Tom ”
Marshall, the Kentucky orator, asked, ‘“ Why
do you not imitate your Model, and preach in
parables?” “ Because I cannot make them.”
“ Why,” said the polivician, “they are per.
fectly simple; JI could write parables.”
“Then,” answered Dr. Breckinridge, “ bring
one of your own at our next meeting.”
When next they met, and Mr. Marshall was
reminded of the parable, he said, “I am
beaten, No man can make a parable any
more than he can make a speech like
Jesus.”

The spirit in which to study nature.—By
studying nature in the spirit of meek devo-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. IV





tion and solemn love, a good man may
indeed “ walk up and down the world as in
a garden of spices, and draw a Divine sweet-
ness out of every flower.”—J. Keble.

What we can see in nuturée.—There is in
nature just as much, or as little, as the soul
of each beholder can see in her.—J. G.
Shairp, LL.D.

Nature leads to God.—Nature represents
the Soul from which all souls come, and by
its beautifulness helps us to delight ourselves
in God. He leads us to no dead museum or
stony cathedral, but under the dome of the
sky. He says, ‘‘The whole is alive, full of
God’s life.’—John Pulsford.

Nature @ mirror.—Yo a man under the
influence of emotion, nature is ever a great
mirror full of emotions. To the satiated
and quiescent alone, she is a cold, dead
window for the outward world.—J. P.
Richter.

Nature a print of God.—The heavens are
a print from the pen of God’s perfection ; the
world is a bud from the flower of His beauty ;
the sun is a spark from the light of His
wisdom, and the ocean is a bubble on the
sea of His power.—7om the Persian.

A story helps the truth.— The story,” as
Dr. Guthrie says, “like a float, keeps the
truth from sinking; like a nail, fastens it
in the mind; like the feathers of an arrow,
makes it strike ; and, like the barb, makes it
stick.”

Parable a mode of conveying truth.—aA
parable is Christ’s mode of conveying His
mind into ours—the waggon in which He
puts deep thoughts, not apparent or neces-
sary at the time, but useful for the Christian
Church when out of its infancy.





Ver. 9. Hars to hear—All men for the
most part have both their ears, but not to
hear. The man sick of the gout hath both
his feet, but not to walk. He that is pur-
blind hath both his eyes, but not to see
clearly. He that is manacled by the magis-
trate for some fault hath both his hands ;
but so long as they are bound they cannot
do their office. So most men have ears; but
few men have ears to hear—namely, to hear
that which is good, and to hear that which
is good well.— Dean Boys.

Best to have no left ear.—in listening to
God it is as well that we have no left ear.
True, we are commanded to use both ears—
“ He that hath ears to hear, let him hear” ;
but this takes it for granted that both ears
are right ones. Now, morally speaking, there
is a right ear and there is a left ear; and he
has both who, in listening to the gospel,
takes it in by the one ear and lets it out
again by the other. It is right to admit the
sound, but it is left, or wrong, to allow it to
escape so soon. In this sense it is best to
have no left ear. The most profitable way
is to put the right ear to the gospel trumpet,


and, as the joyful sound enters, to let it drop
at once down into the heart, from whence it
will not arise to depart. This right ear is
just faith in the Word; and he who believes
what God says, not only hears rightly, but
never loses what is heard. In such an one
the Word of the Lord abideth for ever.

The gospel to be heard.—In the reign of
James II. that king commanded an Act
of Parliament, called the “Liberty of Con-
science Act,” to be read in all the churches.
The clergy were very unwilling to read it,
and some of their congregations did not wish
to hear it. One Sunday a clergyman, when
the time came for reading the document,
said to his congregation: “Though I am
compelled to read this, you are not com-
pelled to hear it,” upon which the people
rose up and left the church, and the clergy-
man read the Act of Parhament to the pews,
hassocks, and walls. But we may not thus
treat the gospel. This is God’s message to
our souls; and while true ministers are indeed
compelled by the Spirit of God to speak the
Word to us, we too should feel that we are
compelled to listen to it with reverence and
attention because it is a message from God.

Worthless hearing.—One day a very clever
countryman, named Jedediah Buxton, who
could multiply nine figures by nine figures
without a slate or paper, went to see Garrick,
a famous actor, perform upon the stage of a
theatre. When he went home from London
to his native village, and was asked what he
thought of the acting of Garrick, he replied,
“ Oh, I don't know ; I only saw a little man
strut about the stage and repeat seven thou-
sand nine hundred and fifty-six words.”
Instead of listening to what was said, he had
been counting the speaker's words. More
foolish is it for us to come to hear the Word
of God and then amuse ourselves by noticing
something that is beside the mark.

Hearing.—Give but interest in the theme,
and the listener’s ear fulfils its natural
function, that of hearing. “Mine ears hast
Thou opened.” Intensify the interest, and
the listener is all ears, all ear. Webster's
ill-starred Duchess of Malfi assures her
brother, “ I will plant my soul in my ears to
hear you.” ‘ Alarmed nature starts up in my
heart, and opens a thousand ears to listen,”
cries Colonel Talbot in an old play. Per-
plexed in the extreme, and cut to the heart,
by a revelation of household treachery and
wrong, an incredulous husband is described
in a modern romance, with his hands clasped
together, and with his head bent to catch
every syllable of the harrowing news—
listening “as if his whole being were resolved
into that one sense of hearing.” It is with
hearing as with seeing. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing. Mendelssohn, in one of his letters
from abroad, rapturous with gazing on his
favourite Titian, declares that “one might


167


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


2 SS SS SSS en


well wish for a dozen more eyes to look one’s
fill at such a picture.” ‘Had I three ears
I'd hear thee,” exclaims Macbeth, when sum-
moned to attend by the apparition of an
Armed Head, in the witches’ cave. D’Artag-
nan, in the ante-chamber of M. de Treville,
is described as looking with all his eyes and
listening with all his ears, stretching his five
senses so as to lose nothing. The same
author tells how Mazarin listened, dying as
he was, to Anne of Austria, as ten living men
could not have listened. ‘ Will you listen?”
asks a prince in the same story; and is
answered, “Can you ask me? You speak of
a matter of life or death to me, and then
ask if I will listen !” ;


Vers, 11,12. The door kept open.—In Mrs.
Whitney’s story Odd or Hven? she gives
the following ingenious interpretation of a
declaration which has puzzled many people
(Matt. xiii. 13-16), It is given in a conversa-
tion between Mr. Kingsworth, her ideal
minister, and Philip Merriweather, a young
man of sceptical tendencies. “ Therefore
speak I to them in parables: because they
seeing see not; and hearing they hear not,
neither do they understand. ... Lest at
any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and should under-
stand with their heart, and should be con-
verted, and I should heal them,” quoted Mr.
Kingsworth again. “That is the heart of
the Healer, waiting for them that shall fall
down from their mountain.” But Flip was
still only climbing his mountain, He was
pleased at every clutch and foothold he got,
that seemed to lift him higher. ‘“ And yet
the fog is put there on purpose! it says so.”
The boy did not dare to say “ He,”—* ‘lest’
they should see, and understand—and the
rest of it! hat’s just the way. Why
couldn’t it be plain, if it meant to be?”
‘Suppose you fasten the door, at night,
‘lest’ any unauthorised person should come
in?” “Well, I do exactly that,” said Flip,
wondering what it justified in respect of a
door that he was contending should be freely
open. “And suppose you leave it unlocked,
‘lest’ your brother should come home at
midnight?” Whether he was puzzled, or
whether he began to see, Flip made no
answer. “Don’t you see there are two ‘lests’
—a providing against, anda providing for?”
asked the minister. “Take those words with
the second ‘lest.’ ‘I speak these things to
them in parables ; I put them away, in their
memory, as in My creation; so that they
may see, even without perceiving, and hear,
even if they cannot understand : im case that
at any time they should see with their
spiritual eyes, and hear with their spiritual
ears, and understand with the very heart of
them, and be converted, and I should heal
them.’ Isn’t the waiting there, in those
words?” “You have altered a good many


168


of them.” “I have chosen between those
two ‘lests,’” said Mr. Kingsworth. “That
interpreted all the sentence, which I tried
to translate, not change. Because, other-
wise, how do they agree with those different
words: ‘I am come unto you, that you
might have life’; and, ‘I came to call the
sinners’ ?”

No spiritual impression.—In a room glazed
with yellow glass the photographer would
get heat and light from the sunshine, bus
he could not produce a photograph, because
yellow glass, while it lets in the light and
heat of the sun, keeps out the chemical or
actinic ray necessary to produce a portrait.
And so it is true of many that, while they
live in the free light and warmth of the
gospel day, while the true Light which
lighteth every man that cometh into the
world shines upon and al] around them,
they are not savingly changed, they are not
transformed by the light into the image of
God. And the reason of this is that they
have a yellow spot in their spiritual eye,
and live, as it were, in a house of yellow
glass. They get the light and the heat of
the gospel, but not its renewing power.
Their eye is not single, and therefore their
whole body is not full of light. The medium
in which they live and move and have their
being is unfavourable to spiritual impres-
sions, and therefore they are not spiritually
impressed.


Ver. 12. Does God harden hearts ?—
Suppose two merchant vessels out on the
same sea, sailing before the same wind,
which comes prosperously on their quarter.
Suddenly upon one of them a mutiny is
organised; the captain is murdered, and
the crew put in irons; then the captors turn
on their course exactly, face in the opposite
direction, and start for some desolate pirates’
isle, where they may beach their stolen
cargo in safety. The same wind which
drives the honest ship along now drives the
wicked one too, and so it helps in the crime,
But all it really does to help it is—to keep
blowing on. God never does anything to
harden a heart which would not soften it if
properly received.


Ver. 14. Sowing the Word—Doubt not,
but earnestly believe, that if “long sleeps
the summer in the seed,” the summer is in
the seed, if the seed sown by you is indeed
the Word of God; and even now it may be
shining and ripening in many a changed
heart passed far out of your reach and ken.
The sailor keeping watch on the midnight
sea, praying as he watches; the miner
toiling for gold in some Queensland gully,
and thinking of the better treasure in the
heavenly country towards which, by words
of yours, his feet are moving ; the shepherd
among the wooded valleys of New Zealand,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IV.


—————— a


' saying over to himself the Shepherd's Psalm


taught him by you; the settler’s wife in
some rude cabin on the Pacific slope, train-
ing her children as you trained her, may,
without your knowing it, have found the
Pearl of great price, which, but for you,
they would never have found ; through you,
also, may be helping others to find it,—
Bishop Thorold.

Vitality of the Word.—The Word has all
the hidden vitality of a seed. Take up a
grain of wheat and examine it ; ask yourself
where its life lies. Certainly not on the
surface ; nor yet in its inner compartments,
so far as our senses can detect. Chemistry
will inform you as to every material element
it contains, and leave youas far as ever from
knowing or seeing the very thing that makes
it a seed—that mysterious something we
call its life. Within that little mass of
matter there lies a force which sun, rain,


- and soil shall call forth with voices it will


hear and obey. God hath given it a body,
and to every seed a body of its own. The
hidden life and unwearied force of the wheat-
grain furnish analogies to the Word of God.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the
Word of the Lord endureth for ever. It
is an eternal seed, to which God has given
eternal form; but its vitality is not lodged
where we can see and analyse it.


Vers. 15-19. Three kinds of unprofitable
hearers.—There are three different kinds of
hearers of the Word,—those like a sponge,
that suck up good and bad together, and let
both run out immediately; those like a sand-
glass, that let what enters in at one ear pass
out at the other, hearing without thinking ;
those like a strainer, letting go the good
and retaining the bad.

Thought dissipated.-Have you ever seen
erain scattered on the road? The sparrow
from the housetop and the chickens from
the barn rush in, and within a minute after
it has been scattered not the shadow of a
grain is left. This is the picture, not of
thought crushed by degrees, but of thought
dissipated, and no man can tell how or when
it went. Swiftly do these winged thoughts
come when we pray, or read, or listen; in
our inattentive, sauntering, wayside hours;
and, before we can be upon guard, the very
trace of holier purposes has disappeared. In
our purest moods, when we kneel to pray, or
gather round the altar, down into the very
Holy of Holies sweep these foul birds of the
air, villain fancies, demon thoughts. The
germ of life, the small seed of impression, is
gone—where, you know not. But it is gone.
Tnattentiveness of spirit, produced by want
of spiritual interest, is the first cause of
disappointment.— W. Rebertson.

The trodden heart.—There was an old
legend of a goblin horseman that galloped
over men’s fields at night ; and wherever his


foot struck, the soil was so blasted that
nothing would ever grow on it again. §o is
it with the heart over which the beastly feet
of lust, sensuality, greed, selfishness, passion,
are allowed to tread. The heart is never the
same again.

Hardened by evangelical teaching.—Speak-
ing of a certain place in which he conducted
a mission, the Rev. W. Haslam says: “ It
was certainly a very difficult place, for the
congregation had been hardened with over-
much evangelical teaching of a general kind.
Seed had been abundantly sown without
any due preparation of the ground. It was
amazing to witness the hardness of the
people, and their unwillingness to yield.”

No refuge from the storm.—Some years
ago two undergraduates went up one of the
highest mountains in Switzerland. They
would not have a guide. They said they had
been there before, and they feared nothing.
Their friends watched them with their tele-
scopes, and saw them reach the top, and
then came a storm of snow which lasted a
week. Nobody could reach them, and they
never came down alive. When found, they
were close to a track by which, if they had
had a guide, they could have come down in
safety when the snow first fell. So it is
that many a proud philosopher of our time,
resting on reason and his own conceit, climbs
the highest steeps of learning ; then comes
the storm, the icy hand of Death is on his
shoulder, and he knows not where to turn,
because he has forsaken the Guide of his
youth, the Light and Life of men!

Unpromising, but not hopeless.—Many years
ago my friend Colonel Boyd, of Wytheville,
Virginia, gave to a Frenchman, by the name
of Hartmann, a rocky hillside. Everywhere
the hard, blue limestone protruded. A more
unpromising garden could not be imagined.
In the spring the warmth and moisture made
the hillside green for a little while, but the
first drought scorched it dry and brown.
But Hartmann worked away, patiently, per-
severingly, systematically. He dug out tle
rocks, he deepened the soil, he irrigated
from the neighbouring brook. Years passed,
and the “Frenchman’s Garden,” as every-
body called it, was the most beautiful, the
most picturesque, the most fruitful, the most
profitable garden inall that part of Virginia.
So, after all, that peculiar kind of human
hearts which the Lord described as “ stony
places” are not absolutely hopeless. These
shallow hearts may be deepened. This senti-
mental religion may be enriched. The Word
of God may be cultivated until it grows to
be a fruitful plant in even these unpromising
lives. From being a mere enthusiasm, or
a dead orthodoxy, religion may become a
life, a deep-rooted life, a life hid with Christ
in God.—&. S. Barrett.

Fugitive impressions.—When Daguerre was
working at his sun-pictures his great diffi-


169


CHAP. IV.





culty was to fix them, The light came and
imprinted the image; but when the tablet
was drawn from the camera, the image had
vanished. Our lamentation is like this; our
want the same—a fixing solution which shall
arrest and detain the fugitive impressions.
He discovered the chemical power which
turned the evanescent into the durable.
There is a Divine agency at hand that can
fix the truth upon the heart of man—God’s
Holy Spirit.


Ver. 17. Want of root.—Men have no root
inthemselves. That is the best account that
I can give of the vast failure of our systems
of general education. Iam not thinking of
elementary schools merely, but of all schools.
They are able to produce a certain measure
of success. In the fairly good schools boys
and girls learn something, and sometimes a
good deal. Highty, ninety, and ninety-five
per cent. of the scholars in our common
schools, under energetic and able teachers,
read fairly, write fairly, become fairly suc-
cessful in arithmetic. In schools of a higher
class they will learn something of Greek
and Latin grammar, and they can make a
fair show in arithmetic. But though the
teaching may not be mechanical, there is
something mechanical in the result, and in
a few years after they have left school it is
quite clear that the mind of an immense
proportion of those who have been taught
is dead; it does not grow. We discover
that large numbers of those who have passed.
through the schools have never grasped for
themselves, as the roots of a tree grasp the
soil, any subject that sustains intellectual
activity. The mischief is not merely that
they have forgotten much that they learned ;
that cannot be helped. I am not sure that
we ought to cherish any wish that it should
be helped. J remember meeting an eminent
man not long ago who was a high Wrangler
at Cambridge, and he said he was thankful
that he had forgotten mostof the mathe-
matics he knew when he took his degree. I do
not complain that what was learned has been
forgotten, but that there is nothing, no
science, no history, no province of speculation
or of art in which large numbers of those
who have received an early education have
areal, personal, enduring interest. One of
the first objects of every wise teacher should
be to get the mind of his pupils to strike
root into something, it does not much matter
what, but something that will stimulate and
maintain intellectual activity. When once
that miracle is wrought, and the mind has
a root of its own, the great work of the edu-
cationist isdone. Take another illustration.
How many men succeed in maintaining a
fairly excellent character, because they are
sheltered from moral peril by the circum-
stances that environ them, and supported in
well-doing by the general opinion of those


170


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


with whom they are most intimately asso-
ciated! Let the circumstances change, place
them among men with a lower sense of
honour, with less ideas of honesty and of
truthfulness, place them in circumstances in
which it will look safe to violate some of the
laws which they now honour, and what will
become of themthen? If the moral opinion
of society is to be sound, there must be men
who give an ethical law to others, and do not
merely receive it from others— men with an
ethical idea of their own, to which they are
loyal at all costs, men who have discovered
eternal laws which they must obey whatever
comes of their obedience. Such men have a
root in themselves; they are not to be bribed
into wrong-doing by the promise of wealth
or of honour; they are not to be terrified into
virtue by the penalties of law or by the fear
of loss of property or of social position. They
are faithful because the law that has been
revealed to them is too august to be broken.
—R. W. Dale, D.D.


Vers. 18,19. Zhe Word choked.—What an
illustration of this the speech which a dying,
despairing man addressed to one under whose
ministry he had sat for twenty years! “I
have never,” he cried, “ heard a single ser-
mon!” The minister, to whom his face was
quite familiar, who had known him for years
as a regular attendant at church, looked
astonished, fancied he was raving under the
delirium of his approaching end. No, not at
all! The man was in his sad and sober
senses. “I attended church,” he exclaimed,
“but my habit was, so soon as you began the
sermon, to begin a review of last week’s
trade, and to anticipate and arrange the
business of the next.” Now, in like manner,
to a greater or less extent, Satan deals with
thousands who occupy pews in the church.

Good impressions destroyed.—Robert Burns
—who had times of serious reflexion, in one
of which, as recorded by his own pen, he
beautifully compares himself, in the review
of his past life, to a lonely man walking amid
the ruins of a noble temple, where pillars
stand dismantled of their capitals, and
elaborate works of purest marble lie on the
ground, overgrown by tall, foul, rank weeds—
was once brought, as I have heard, under
deep convictions. He was in great alarm.
The seed of the Word had begun to grow.
He sought counsel from one called a minister
of the gospel. Alas that in that crisis of
his history he should have trusted the helm
to the hands of such a pilot! This so-called
minister laughed at the poet’s fears—bade
him dance them away at balls, drown them
in bowls of wine, fly from these phantoms
to the arms of pleasure. Fatal, too pleasant
advice! He followed it: and ‘‘the lusts of
other things ” entering in, choked the Word.

Strangled.—In the gardens of Hampton
Court you will see many trees entirely van-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


quished and well-nigh strangled by huge
coils of ivy, which are wound about them
like the snakes around the unhappy Laocoon ;
there is no untwisting the folds, they are too
giant-like, and fast fixed, and every hour the
rootlets of the climber are sucking the life
out of the unhappy tree. Yet there was a
day when the ivy was a tiny aspirant, only
asking a little aid in climbing; had it been
denied then the tree had never become its
victim ; but by degrees the humble weakling
grew in strength and arrogance, and at last
it assumed the mastery, and the tall tree
became the prey of the creeping, insinvating
destroyer. ‘he moral is too obvious. Sor-
rowfully do we remember many noble
characters which have been ruined little by
little by insinuating habits. Covetousness,
drink, the love of pleasure, and pride, have
often been the ivy that has wrought the
ruin.

Blinded by self-interest.—Many a man of
influence and position is blinded by the
interests that absorb his thought. From the
summit of East Rock in New Haven there
is a magnificent view. The city has wisely
taken the place as a public park, and now
its paths are daily thronged with pilgrims to
that shrine of beauty. But on that rock has
been found a counterfeiter’s cave. The time
was when those were on the hill who cared
nothing for the wondrous view, but whose
only desire was to hide themselves in the
cave to pursue a nefarious business. So
long as they were there the glories of the
out-stretching valley and the distant sea
were unseen by them. It is just such a
difficulty that hinders men from seeing the
loveliness of Christ. They are busy in caves
of worldliness. They see nothing because
they keep themselves where they cannot see.


Ver. 20. Receptiveness.—“ Receive” is the
one word that describes the healthful con-
duct of human life. We receive being at
birth; we do nothing but receive for the
months that follow—receive mother-milk,
clothing, warmth, care. The lad receives
protection, advice, and wisdom, if indeed he
does receive ; for, rejecting these, he rejects
his destiny, to find out his own way, which
is death. We receive pickaxe and pen, and
our place in the world. Old men smile, as
they hear proud youth talk of “hewing a
way” or “winning a way” through life to
fortune, as if there could be any path dis-
covered or cut out that was not hard-beaten
like a Broadway by the thousands who have
trodden it before us. In all honourable
vocations the road is Patience, Industry,
Frugality, Knowledge. And, if one go
higher, Repentance, the New Heart through
Christ, and the common gate to heaven.
The youth makes his experiment. At times
he seems to be hewing, winning, and invent-
ing; but afterwards reviewing, he perceives





CHAP. IV.





he was but lifting up a hewing hand to cut
away the obstacles to his receiving. As
when one bursts a prison wall, or emerges
toilfully from a wood, he has but to receive
the down-pouring sun. Old age testifies,
“ All my battles have in fact been against
Self, that I might not reject, against Others
that I might not be defrauded of, the good
which God meant me to receive.”—H, J.
Haynes.


Vers. 21, 22. The Christian’s light.—This
statement of Christ’s is well illustrated by
the story of the Calais lighthouse keeper,
who, when boasting of the brilliancy of his
lamp, was asked what would happen if it
were allowed’ to go out, or if the reflectors
became dim. “Impossible,” he replied, “ fo:
yonder, where nothing can be seen by us,
there are ships sailing to every harbour or
the sea; if to-night I failed in my duty,
some one might be shipwrecked. No; | like
to think that the eyes of the whole world
are fixed on my light.” This man could
appreciate what Christ taught His disciples
when He said that they were to be like
Safed, the city set upon a hill which could
not be hid, and to remember that, inasmuch
as they were the light of the world, they
must shine before men.

Influence.—A man once said, “I have no
more influence than a farthing rushlight.”
“ Well,” was the reply, “a farthing rushlight
can do a good deal: it can set a haystack
on fire; it can burn down a house—yea,
more, it will enable a poor creature to read
a chapter out of God’s Book. Go your way,
friend; let your farthing rushlight so shine
before men, that others, seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in
heaven.”

A good life——Julius Drusus, a Roman
tribune, had a house so situated that several
of its apartments lay exposed to the view of
the neighbourhood. A person came to him,
and offered for five talents so to alter it as
that it should not be liable to that incon-
venience. “I will give thee ten talents,”
said Drusus, “if thou canst make my house
conspicuous in every room of it, so that all
the city may behold in what manner I lead
my life.”


Ver. 22. Hidden, to be revealed— Many
things are concealed, both in nature and by
art, though the concealment is by no means
designed to be permanent. Look, e¢.g., at the
almost measureless beds of coal, hidden for
ages in the bowels of the earth, but designed
by Providence to be revealed when necessity
should arise. The precise time for the un-
veiling it is not always easy to decide, because
man’s knowledge is finite, but we rest assured
that it will coincide with the need for its
use. It is a principle worth bearing in mind
when humun efforts fail; for it is encourag-


171


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





ing to know that such a result may be due
simply to the fact that we have tried un-
consciously to anticipate the fore-appointed
time.-—_Dean Luckock.


Ver. 24. No loss by giving away,—During
the summer a clergyman called on a lady
who had a very fine collection of roses. She
took him out to see them and began pluck-
ing right and left. Some bushes with but a
single flower she despoiled. The clergyman
remonstrated. “You are robbing yourself,
dear madam.” ‘“ Ah,” she said, “do you not
know that the way to make the rosebush
bear is to pluck its flowers freely? I lose
nothing by what I give away.” This is a
universal law. We never lose anything by
what we give away.

Influences of evil.Sir Peter Lely made it
a rule never to look at a bad picture, having
found by experience that, whenever he did
so, bis pencil took a taint from it. ‘“ Apply
this,” adds Bishop Horne, “to bad books
and bad company.” Lord Collingwood,
writing to a young friend, said, “ Hold it as
a maxim that you had better be alone than
in mean company, for the worth of a man
will always be ruled by that of his com-
pany.” The converse of course is only true,
for nothing is of greater value than the in-
fluence of good surroundings and noble
friends. The Persian poet Saadi has a lyric
in which a clod of clay is asked how it has
come to smell so sweet. The clay replies,
“The sweetness is not in myself, but I have
been lying in contact with a rose.”


Ver. 25. The law of compensation.—We
see in some office two or three young men.
They seem to be of equal abilities, but one
has a small fortune bequeathed him. On
this account, when a partnership is vacant,
the opening is offered to him. By-and-by
some public appointment is vacant; because
this man is possessed of some wealth he is
thought to be a responsible man, and so is
chosen. “To him that hath shall be given.”
This is the ordinary way in which things
work in the world around us. But observe
that the same rule exhibits its sway in the
spiritual world, Here is a man with a very
little knowledge of religion, who has been,
perhaps, much neglected in his youth, but
he has some idea of God’s greatness and
power, and that it is his duty to go to
church. In the house of God he comes
under good influences, and his conscience is
enlightened. He becomes a regular attend-
ant, and then a communicant. “To him
that hath shall be given.” Or let the other
part of the saying be taken up. There isa
child who gets some slight knowledge of
the facts of Christianity in a Sunday-school
class, but that knowledge is very slight, for
the child is restless and careless, and dis-
inclined to listen to anything which requires


172


attention. Soon the lad goes to work for
his bread, and thinks himself too much of
a man to go any longer to Sunday school.
The little learning he received soon fades
away, and from want of practice even the
half-learnt art of reading is lost. He goes
now and then to church, but is ashamed to
be unable to read as others do around. And
so at length, though living in a Christian
land, he becomes as ignorant and indifferent
asa heathen. “From him that hath not,”
etc. A young man begins to feel, as he
grows up, the Divine life stirring within
him. He wants to do something to help in
efforts for good around him, to take his
share in bearing burdens. But he goes into
business or enters a profession or devotes
himself to society, and by degrees all the
pulses of Divine life beat more slowly; he
loses an aspiration here—he loses a scruple
there—he makes an excuse about that; and
his life begins to dwindle, and, after a bit,
he becomes like a bicycle going downhill—
the law of accelerated motion asserts itself,
and in the day of trial or of opportunity he
is found wanting and useless. “From him
that hath not,” etc. If only he had taken
up some little bit of self-denying work, if
only he had given himself to one thing in
which he could help others, if only he had
had the self-forgetting element within him,
then in him too the law “to him that hath
shall be given ” would have asserted itself—
he would have been saved in the truest
sense.—R. Hyton.

Service no loss—An eminent merchant of
St. Petersburg supported, at his own expense,
a number of missionaries in India. Some one
asked him how he could afford to do so, to
which he replied, “ Before my conversion,
when I served the world and self, I did it
on a grand scale and at the most lavish
expense; and when Christ called me out
of darkness, I resolved that He should have
more than I had ever given the world. At
my conversion I promised I would give
a certain per cent. of what my business
brought me. Since that time it yields
double as much.” §o it is in our service for
Christ. God never allows any capital to lay
idle, and, if we do not use the talent given
us, He takes it, and gives it to him who will
use it. How often do we see poor, lean
Christians fretting and fuming and praying
for more faith and more strength, when


they sit still and will not use what they-


have !

The treasure only for the pwre.—There is
an old church in Germany with which a
singular legend is connected. In this
church, at certain times, a mighty treasure
is said to become visible to mortal eyes.
Gold and silver vessels, of great magnificence
and in great abundance, are disclosed; but
only he who is free from sin can hope to
secure the prec’ ~~ vessels. This legend


3 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





CHAP. IV.





shadows a great truth. In the temple of
God, in the Word of God, are riches beyond
gem or gold; but only the sincere, the pure
in purpose, can hope to realise the Divine
treasure. There must be in the truth-seeker a
moral susceptibility anc passion for the light.

Moral inerease—There is an Eastern alle-
gory which teaches the same lesson as this
parable. A merchant, going abroad for a
time, gave respectively to two of his friends
two sacks of wheat each, to take care of
against his return. Years passed ; he came
back, and applied for them again. The first
took him into his storehouse, and shewed
them to him; but they were mildewed and
worthless. The other led him out into the
open country, and pointed out field after
field of waving corn, the produce of the two
sacks given him. Said the merchant, “ You
have been a faithful friend; give me two
sacks of that wheat; the rest shall be
thine.”


Vers. 26, 27. Fruit in after-days.——An old
man was once at work in the field, his mind
occupied only with things of this world.
Suddenly his thoughts wandered back to his
early days, and he remembered how on one
ovcasion the minister, before pronouncing
the parting blessing, had paused, and re-
minded the ungodly that upon them no
blessing would rest, but the wrath of God
instead. The remembrance of that solemn
warning—uttered seventy years before— filled
the old man’s heart with terror, and led him
to seek the Lord with all his heart. Thus
the words disregarded at fifteen saved at
eighty-five, long after the speaker had passed
away from the ministry of earth.

Christian growth imperceptible.—It is the
work of a long life to become a Christian.
Many, oh! many a time are we tempted to
say, “I make no progress at all. “Tis only
failure after failure ; nothing grows.” Now
look at the sea when the flood is coming in.
Go and stand by the sea-beach, and you
will think that the ceaseless flux and reflux
is but retrogression equal to the advance.
But look again in an hour’s time, and the
whole ocean has advanced. Every advance
has been beyond the last, and every re-
trograde movement has been an impercep-
tible trifle less than the last. This is
progress, to be estimated at the end of hours,
not minutes. And this is Christian progress.
Many a fluctuation, many a backward motion,
with a rush at times so vehement that all
seems lost. But if the eternal work be real,
every failure has been a real gain, and the
next does not carry us so far back as we
were before. Every advance is a real gain,
and part of it is never lost. Both when we
advance and when we fail, we gain. We
are nearer to God than we were.


Ver. 28. Slumbering seeds—A gentleman


tore down an outbuilding that had stood for
many years in his yard. He smoothed over
the ground, and left it. The warm spring
rains fell upon it, and the sunshine flooded
it; and soon there sprang up multitudes of
little flowers, unlike any growing in the
neighbourhood. Where the building had
stood was once a garden, and the seeds had
lain in the soil without moisture, light, or
warmth all the years, So soon as the
sunshine and the rain touched them, they
sprang up into life and beauty. So ofttimes
the seeds of truth lie long in a human heart,
growing not, because the light and warmth
of the Holy Spirit are shut away from
them by sin and unbelief; but after long
years the heart is opened in some way to
the heavenly influences, and the seeds, living
still, shoot up into beauty. The instructions
of a pious mother may lie in a heart, fruit-
less, from childhood to old age, and yet at
last be the means of saving the soul.

The law of gradual advance.—No nation
comes to eminence in character, and to a
corresponding supremacy in position, with
out many and painful preparatory processes.
There is “ first the blade, then the ear; after
that, the full corn in the ear.” First, natur-
ally, come the means of subsistence ; then,
conveniences ; then, elegancies; and only
after long and still-advancing struggle the
great achievement of a perfected civilisa-
tion. The cavern, or the cabin; then, the
house; then, the village; and afterward
the city, with palaces and piers, and con-
secrating temples. The spoken word, and
the spontaneous song; then, literature in its
permanence ; and not till long afterward
that literature in its various and copious
departments, of eloquence, science, philo-
sophy, poetry, and the history which in-
cludes and perpetuates all these. First,
industry ; then, art. First, hollow logs, and
timorous barks; and afterward great ships,
that spread their wings on every wind, or
made the seas to pause and throb as the
pulsating energy thunders above them. First,
a tribe ; and then—when years and genera-
tions have passed, when soldiers have
fought, and statesmen have planned, when
religions have diffused their spirit through
society, and reciprocating industries have
knit together, when homes have been estab-
lished, and families have been organised,
and parents have transmitted their qualities
to their children—then a great, enlightened,
and peaceful commonwealth, rich in all
manhood, replete with resources, and in-
wardly compacted in vital union: this is
the method of all civilisation ; this is the
history of nations.


Vers. 31, 32. Great things from small,—
Many great histories of blessing may be
traced back to a very small seed. A woman
whose name is forgotten dropped a tract or


173


-CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





little book in the way of a man named
Richard Baxter. He picked it up and read
it, and it led him to Christ. He became a
man of saintly life, and wrote a book entitled
aA Call to the Unconverted, which brought
many persons to the Saviour, and among
others Philip Doddridge. Philip Doddridge
in his turn wrote Vhe Rise and Progress
of Religion, which led many into the king-
dom of God, among them the great Wilber-
force. Wilberforce wrote A Practical View
of Christianity, which was the means of
saving a multitude, including Legh Rich-
mond. In his turn Richmond wrote The
Dairyman’s Daughter, which has been in-
strumental in the conversion of thousands.
The dropping of that one little tract seemed
a very small thing to do; but see what a
wonderful, many-branched tree has sprung
from it!

Euith in the power of truth.—When Charles
Darwin wrote his Origin of Species, did
he believe it would be received by the
scientific world? Most certainly he did.
But the scientific world, with rare exceptions,
received it with a storm of derision and
opposition. To others it was the height of
unreason. But to him it was not unreason-
able. Where was the difference? He knew
it best, saw its truth, and therefore had
faith in its acceptance, and in some thirty
years the scientific world has, in the main,
come round to his belief. They who know
Christianity best have most faith in its
power to upheave the world. It still re-
quires a great deal of faith to believe that
the world will actually become a Christian
world. This is partly because the world has
always been a stiff soil for any kind of noble
husbandry. It is slow to yield its produce,
aud there are some terribly tough roots to be
stubbed up. It is partly because of imper-
fection in the means employed. But God
works by imperfect means, or how would He
use men at all? He wins His victories with
maimed soldiers. The workmen have all
manner of crotchets of their own, and all
manner of ridiculous notions of the shape
of the building, and a nice piece of archi-
tecture it would be if all their structures
were to stand; but the Divine Architect has
His plan matured in heavenly wisdom, and
He will look to it with sleepless eye that the
New Jerusalem keeps its symmetry. What
one inan with a crotchet has built awry or
with perishable material, He sends another
man with an opposite crotchet to pull down,
and, as there is a little bit of right work in
every worker, He takes that out of him too,
and the fair structure rises in impregnable
righteousness.— G. 7. Candlin.

Seed served by the tempests.—Polycarp,
Bishop of Smyrna, when obliged to quit
the city-in consequence of increasing per-
secutions, went with one of his disciples
to a region in the vicinity. In the cool of


174


the evening the bishop was walking under
the shade of the magnificent trees which
stood in front of his rural abode ; here he
found his disciple sitting under an oak tree,
leaning his head upon his hand, and weep-
ing. Then the old man said, “ My son, why
weepest thou?” The disciple replied, “Shall
IT not mourn and weep when I think of the
kingdom of truth upon earth? Tempests
are gathering round it, and will destroy it.
Many of its adherents have become apostates,
and have denied and abused the truth,
proving that unworthy men may confess it
with their lips, though their hearts are far
from it. This fills my heart with sorrow and
my eyes with tears.” Then Polycarp smiled
and answered, ‘My son, the kingdom of
Divine truth is like unto a tree which a
man reared in his garden. He set the seed
secretly and quietly in the ground and left
it ; the seed put forth leaves, and the young
tree grew up among weeds and thorns.
Soon the tree reared itself above them, and
the weeds died, because the shadow of the
branches overcame them. The tree grew,
and the wind blew on it and shook it, but
its roots clung firmer and firmer to the
ground, taking hold of the rocks downward,
and its branches reached unto heaven. Thus
the tempest served to increase the firmness
and strength of the tree. When it grew
higher, and its shadow spread farther, then
the thorns and weeds grew again round the
tree, but it heeded them not in its loftiness.
There it stood, in calm, peaceful grandeur—
a tree of God!”

Triwnph of the gospel.—Far out in the
western main is a little island round which
for nearly half the year the Atlantic clangs
his angry billows, keeping the handful of
inhabitants close prisoners. Most of it is
bleak and barren; but there is one little bay
rimmed round with silvery sand, and reflect-
ing in its waters a slope of verdure. Towards
this bay one autumn evening, thirteen hundred
years ago, a rude vessel steered its course.
It was a flimsy bark, no better than a huge
basket of osiers covered over with the skins
of beasts; but the tide was tranquil, and as
the boatmen plied their oars they raised the
voice of psalms. Skimming across the bay,
they beached their coracle and stepped on
shore—about thirteen in number. On the
green slope they built a few hasty huts and
a tiny Christian temple. The freight of that
little ship was the gospel, and the errand of
the saintly strangers was to tell benighted
heathen about Jesus and His love. From
the favoured soil of Ireland they had brought
a grain of mustard seed, and now they
sowed it in Iona. In the conservatory of
their little church it throve, till it was fit
to be planted out on the neighbouring main-
land. ‘To the Picts with their tattooed
faces, to the Druids peeping and muttering
in their dismal groves, the missionaries


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. MARK. CHAP. IV.





preached the gospel. That gospel triumphed.
The groves were felled, and where once
they stood rose the house of prayer. Planted
out on the bleak moorland, the little seed
became a mighty tree, so that the hills of
Caledonia were covered with the shade; nor
must Scotland ever forget the seedling of
Yona, and the labours of Columba with his
meek Culdees.

The Church’s expansion.—There is a fairy
tale which speaks of a magic tent, no bigger
than a walnut shell, whose powers were very
wonderful. Placed in the king’s audience
chamber, it expanded into a gorgeous canopy
over his throne. Placed in the courtyard, it
became a spacious tent, which provided
accommodation for the royal household.
Placed without the gates, it widened its
borders until the plain was covered by
a glistening encampment, beneath whose
shelter a great army might find ample room.
And so it was capable of infinite expansion
according to the requirements of its owner.
Well, that magic tent may serve as an
emblem of the Church of Christ. At first
it was only a little one, but with every year
it has expanded, and widened its borders,
and become more ample ana uiajestic. Mul-
titudes whom no man can number, from
every nation under heaven, have sought its
shelter. And it shall continue to grow until
all the kingdoms of this world have become
the kingdoms of God and of His Christ.


Ver. 38. Christ sometimes seems to sleep
in our hearts, as He did in the ship, when
temptation assails. It is but to try our
faith, for if He be there we are safe. It is
recorded of St. Catherine of Siena that, on
one occasion, after being subjected to most
horrible temptation in thought for several
days, during which God seemed to have
hidden His face from her, when the tempta-
tion, to which she had never consented, had
passed away, and she felt again her Lord’s
presence within her, she said to Him, “O
Lord, where wast Thou when I was so
tempted?” “In thy heart, My child,” was
the reply; “if I had not been there, thou
wouldst have yielded.”

Safety where Christ is.—The greatest hero
of antiquity, once exposed to the dangers of
shipwreck, roused the sinking spirits of his
crew by crying aloud amidst the din of the
winds and waves, and exclaiming to the
helmsman of the vessel, almost ready to
desert his charge, “ The vessel which carries
Cesar and his fortunes can never sink |”
Might not the apostles of the Lord have
learnt a lesson even from the heathen con-
queror, and applied his words in their truest
and highest form ?—“ The vessel that carries
Jesus can never perish !”

The world in God’s hands.—In the Fiji
Islands a man-of-war was overtaken by a
storm. The commander, instead of trusting


—}


to the anchor, got up steam and plunged
right into the hell of waters that seethed
around him. The vessel, after moments of
suspense, began to make headway, and soon
rose and fell on the waves of the open sea.
We, too, are going ahead. We have a tre-
mendous propelling power, not the gates of
hell will prevail against it. When a man
gets into a moody state about the outlook in
the world, he should go and take a night's
sleep, and let God look after His own world.
What did these fishermen take our Lord
for? They forgot; they should have remem-
bered their sailing orders, which were bound
to be carried out.

The winds in God’s hands.—A coasting
vessel was caught in a trap on the east
coast of Scotland. That is a bay, crescent-
shaped, in which vessels, in the stress of
a storm, take refuge, and are sometimes
caught in it. Tuis vessel was beating to
get out of the trap. The chances were all
against her. As the captain kicked off his
sea-boots preparatory to doing battle with
the waves, when the boat would founder on
the rocks, he thought of his wife, in a
neighbouring town, and his little girl. Be-
fore the vessel struck he thought of Him
who stilled the waves on the Lake of Galilee.
He went to his cabin, and he was heard to
say, “O God, give us but two points, just
two points!” He came on deck, and the
wind had shifted just two points. They
weathered that strip of land and escaped
from the trap into the open sea. Do you
believe that? Do you believe that it is
God’s world, that He holds the winds in His
fists, and the waters in the hollow of His
hands ?


Ver. 41. “ What manner of man?”—Be
it legend or history, the story of royal Cnut
on the seashore, forbidding, at his flatterers’
instigation, or by his own desire to rebuke
their folly, forbidding the farther approach
of the incoming tide, is pregnant with in-
struction. The royal Dane might be a man
of men, but the surging waves were not
obedient unto his voice. King though he
was, the tide was responseless as the deaf
adder to any charming of his, charmed he
never so wisely, enjoined he never so
sternly. What manner of man, then, but
the Son of Man? What manner of king but
the King of kings? An older king than
Cnut, and not a wiser, not only lashed the
winds that blew contrary to his will, but
bound the sea with fetters, after a sort:
“Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Enno-
sigeum.” Much good it did him: witness his
return from his great expedition, in a poor
skiff, wind-tossed across waves red with the
blood of his slaughtered host. The stars in
their courses once fought against Sisera,
and the fettered waves were little more
propitious to speed the fortunes of Xerxes.


175


OHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





He might have spared his chains. At any
rate he lost his army. Archdeacon Hare
practically applied the extravagance of the
Great King, as they of Persia were styled, in
designating the present (or, rather, what
was then the present) as an age when men
will scoff at the madness of Xerxes, yet
themselves try to fling their chains over the
ever-rolling, irrepressible ocean of thought;
nay, they will scoop out a mimic sea in
their pleasure ground, he goes on to say,
and make it ripple and bubble, and spout
up prettily into the air, and then fancy they
are taming the Atlantic, which, however,
‘ keeps advancing upon them, until it sweeps
them away with their toys.—/ Jacow.

Mr. Carlyle made a picturesque applica-
tion of the royal Dane’s injunction to the
waves, in his survey of the advancing tide
of the French Revolution—grim host march-
ing on, the black-browed Marseillese in the
van, with hum and murmur, far heard; like
‘the ocean tide, “drawn up, as if by Luna
and Influences, from the great deep of


waters, they roll gleaming on; no king;

Cnut or Louis, can bid them roll back.”

To quite another effect is Judge Haliburton’s

application of the incident, in his panegyric

on. the capabilities of the Southampton

docks. It was here, he says, that Cuut sat

in his armchair, to show his courtiers (after

he gave up drinking and murder) that,

though he was a mighty prince, he could

not control the sea. “Well, what Cnut

could not do, your dock company has ac-

complished. It has actually said to the sea,

‘Thus far shalt thou go, and no faither’;

and the waves have obeyed the mandate,”—

Tbid.

Some dream, says Cowper, that

... “tbey can silence when they will

The storm of passion, and say, ‘ Peace, be
still’:

But ‘Thus far and no farther,’ when ad-
dressed

To the wild wave, or wilder human breast,

Implies authority that never can,

That never ought to be the lot of man.”








CHAPTER V.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Gadarenes.— Gerasenes is undoubtedly the true reading here, and in Origen’s time it
was the prevalent one; “ but the copyists, thinking this referred to the well-known Gerasa in
Gilead, and knowing that the miracle could not have occurred there, at a distance of twenty
miles from the Sea of Galilee, altered it to ‘Gadarenes,’ since at Gadara there were the
‘tombs,’ and other particulars of the miracle, and it might easily be supposed that the
whole district took its name from this chief city. Gadara is a little over six miles from
the lake. As for the reading ‘Gergesenes,’ we owe it either to Origen’s own conjecture,
or else Gergesa was a dialectic variety of the name Gerasa.” To Dr. Thomson we owe the
discovery of the real site. ‘It is,” he says, ‘ within a few rods of the shore, and an immense
mountain rises directly above it, in which are ancient tombs... . The lake isso near the base
of the mountain, that the swine rushing madly down it could not stop, but would be hurried
on into the water. . . . The name, pronounced by Bedouin Arabs, is so similar to Gergesa,
that, to all my inquiries for the place, they invariably said it was at Chersa; and they
insisted that they were identical.” See The Land and the Book, pp. 375-378.

Ver. 2. A man,— Matthew (viii. 28) mentions two men. Mark and Luke speak only of
the better known or fiercer of the two, who probably acted as spokesman for both.

Ver. 5. Cutting.—Or, beating.

Ver. 7.—See note on chap i. 24.

Ver. 9. Legion.—Cp. Matt. xii. 45; Luke viii. 2.

Ver. 15. Clothed.—He had been wont to wear no upper garment (Luke viii. 27), and
doubtless such clothes as he had were very ragged.

Ver. 20. Decapolis.— The district of the ten cities, lying for the most part east of the
Jordan, and east and south-east of the Sea of Tiberias. Its ten cities were Scythopolis (the
only one on the west of Jordan), Hippos, Gadara, Pella, Philadelphia, Geresa, Dion, Canatha,
Raphana, Damascus.

Ver. 22. Rulers of the synagogue.—The synagogues had no clergy, but were managed by
laymen, who conducted or superintended the services, and administered discipline. The
rulers of Capernaum -had already (Luke vii. 3) approached vur Lord on behalf of the
centurion who built their synagogue. Now one of them comes to prefer a petition on his
own account.


176


HiGHILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. V.





Ver, 25. An issue of blood.— Hemorrhage. See Lev. xy. 19-30.

Ver. 36. As soon as Jesus heard,—For another reading see R.V. It is not easy to deter-
mine the exact shade of meaning which wapaxodoas bears here. Dr. F. Field renders

Jesus, making as though He heareth not the word spoken,” ete. ;


Ver. 41. Talitha cumi.—St. Peter, who was present, would t in hi
a p ', reasure in his memory the very


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—20.
(PaRaLiets: Marr. viii. 28-34; Luxe viii. 26-39.)


Christ and the Gadarenes—I. The Gadarene demoniac.—l. What was the
nature of the so-called ‘“‘demonism” of the New Testament? It is nowhere
said there concerning any one that he was possessed of the devil. In one
passage only (Acts x. 38) mention is made of the healing of “all that were
oppressed of the devil.” But in all other like passages there is no mention made
of “the devil,’ but of “unclean spirits” or ‘‘ demons.” 2. A second point of
difficulty that troubles some people is that this describing of a malady as if it
were the infestation of some living thing that had entered into the person seems
so like the relic of a barbarous and superstitious pathology, which ascribes all
sicknesses to such a cause. To which we may make either of two answers :
(1) That if this description of certain maladies as wrought by evil spirits is a
survival of the superstitious notion that all maladies were so caused, it may be
a survival of just so much in that notion as was true and ought to survive.
Or, (2) That if barbarism and superstition used to allege that all human
diseases are produced by the agency of living beings invisible to the ordinary
sight entering into the patient, then barbarism and superstition are in pretty
good company, considering that the very latest word of the most advanced
pathological science comes out at precisely the same point. 3. Why are there
no cases of demonism in our own times? (1) It is not certain that there are
no such cases now. There are many who insist, with a very formidable array of
evidence in favour of their claim, that cases of possession by spirits, clean or
unclean, are peculiarly frequent in these days. (2) If no cases just like what
are described in the Gospels are recognised in modern pathology, this is no more
than might be expected from analogy. It is one of the commonest maxims of
medical science that the type of diseases changes from age to age. For my
part, I find it nothing unlikely that in an age like that of the coming of our
Lord, when a decisive conflict was impending between the kingdom of evil and
the kingdom of heaven, those maladies that involve the mind and soul, and
indicate the presence of some mischievous spiritual agency, should be found to
take on a character of pecular malignity. 4. Taking the Gospels as an honest
and not unintelligent record of the phenomena, we make out two points very
clearly concerning this demonism: (1) It was not mere lunacy or epilepsy, for
these diseases are recognised and clearly distinguished from the work of the evil
spirits. (2) As this demonism was not mere disease, so, on the other hand, it
was not mere wickedness—the wilful giving up one’s self to the instigation of
the devil. It is always spoken of and dealt with as an involuntary af! iction,
looked upon by the Lord with pity rather than censure. Neither is it treated
as if it were, in any special sense, a visitation for sin. 5. The truth seems to
be this: that sin, unbelief, ungodliness, opened the way for this awful curse,
and that, when the alien spirit had taken hold of body and mind and will,
it had the power of plaguing with various disorders-—with wild, moping,
melancholic madness, or with epileptic convulsions, or blindness, or dumbness.
6, The startling and unearthly fact, in the words and actions of the demoniac,


N 177


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,





is the presence in him of a double consciousness and will. He is torn with
discordant desires, and tossed to and fro between conflicting passions. Physicians
who have studied the horrible symptoms of deliriwm tremens describe the sort
of double consciousness that sometimes characterises its wretched victims, in
terms which remind us of this demonism described by the Evangelists. 7. As
to the spirits themselves, we get some hints of their ways here and elsewhere
in the New Testament. They are represented as wandering uneasy and restless
until they can find lodgment in some human body and soul, if may be; if not
there, then anywhere, even in a swine’s carcass—some living organism of which
they can take possession, and there work their malignant will. The unclean
spirit beds itself luxuriously in the consciousness and thoughts and members
of its victims, and loathes to be dispossessed. Like certain noxious tropical
insects, it sinks its feelers and tentacles into the flesh, so that to tear it away
is like tearing the flesh away from itself. To leave it there is torture, and to
remove it is worse torture; so that the patient rushes to the surgeon, and, when
the surgeon puts forth his hand to heal him, it is as if victim and tormentor
shrank away together, crying: “Let me alone! I beseech thee, torment me
not!” Now is it any dark parable to you, that I should need explain how like
this is to the possession which sin takes of the mind ?—how evil thoughts and
passions and purposes, for which the soul was not made, but which are alien
to its Divine constitution in God’s image, do root themselves like a morbid
growth into its very substance, till the soul, bewildered at the unnatural conflict
within itself, cries out against the power of sin, craving to be delivered, and
then, when the Deliverer comes near, cries out again, with a loud voice:
“What have I to do with Thee, Jesus, Son of God most high? I beseech Thee,
torment me not!” 8. What help is there for the soul that is in such a pliight—
the will, the motives, the desires, the active faculties, all that should co-operate
in the effort of self-healing, themselves implicated in the disease, so that even
when deliverance is brought nigh it will none of it, but warns the Saviour
away? It will, and yet it will not. The consciousness of need and danger
are of no avail; even faith and prayer bring no help, for there is no prayer
but with a reservation—let not the double-minded man think that he shall
receive anything from the Lord. So Augustine prayed, ‘‘Save me, O Lord,
save me,—but not now.” O helpless man, the hope for you is that God will be
to you better than your prayers, will do for you exceeding abundantly above
that you ask,—that when you pray, ‘Save me, but not now,” He will answer,
“‘ Now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation: look unto Me now and
be saved.” Be not afraid to come near your Lord and Saviour, even though
the sin that is in you, the evil thoughts, the Gemoniac passions, cry out against
your prayers and say, “ Let us alone! torment us not! depart from us! what
have we do with Thee, Jesus, Son of the most high God?” Doubt not that
the compassionate Lord will be more ready to hear this craving of your better
nature than the clamour of a legion of evil spirits, and that, if you will but suffer
Him, He will deliver you from your worse self ; He will command the inward
discord of your mind to cease, and make the storm a calm; and you, even
though it be not without sore rendings from the retreating fiend, shall at last
sit peaceful at the feet of your Redeemer, clothed and in your right mind.

II. The gospel among the Gadarenes.—1. You may be at a loss, perhaps, to
see any good reason why the healing of the wretched man possessed of demons
should have been an occasion of terror to the people of the neighbourhood. It
might seem more reasonable that they should have found it rather an immense
relief to their fears, when the frightful creature that had been the terror of
that part of the country, whose horrible frenzies had made the road that led
by his cave impassable, so that they took long circuits to avoid him, was found


178


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. CHAP. V-





by them sitting as quiet as a good child, at the feet of Jesus, trying to learn
something of God and truth and duty, and of who this wonderful Saviour was—
this destroyer of the works of the devil. What good reason could they find
in all that they had heard, for sending Jesus out from their borders 2 What
good reason? Ah! but this is asking too much—to look for a good reason for
a wrong action. It is the very nature of sin to be unreasonable. Its reasons
are no reasons. We may look for the motives of it, and for the excuses for it.
But in giving reasons for wrong conduct, we cannot go much further than to
shew that it is like the conduct of human nature in general under like circum-
stances. And we do not pretend to justify human nature. Why should Adam
and Eve be afraid when they heard the voice of the Lord God in the garden?
Why should Moses be afraid and hide his face when the Lord spoke to him out
of the burning bush, and said, ‘“‘I am the God of thy father”? Why should
Isaiah, when he saw the Lord sitting on a throne high and lifted up, cry out,
“Woe is me, for I am undone, for my eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
hosts” @ It is in human nature, somehow, account for it as you may, that men
do not like to come quite so near to God. It is not only that they shrink from
the manifestation of the Divine anger—that would be intelligible enough ; but
men do not like such close dealings with God anyway. In fact, anything that
brings them close, face to face with the powers of the unseen world is a
thing that men in general shrink from. It is the one labour of the ministry
of the gospel to persuade men to come near enough to God to know Him—
to look Christ in the face long enough to know Him. Dr. H. A. Boardman
wrote a little book entitled The Great Question; and when you looked within
to see what “the great question” was, you found it nothing but this—
“Will you consider the subject of personal religion?” And why should not
any man—every man—say yes to this Great Question? But they will not.
The complaint of the old prophet is the complaint of the modern preacher—
‘“‘My people will not consider.” Our lips frame words of welcome and praise ;
but our hearts are all the time silently pleading with Him to “ let us alone,”
and depart out of our coasts, even though we would shrink from putting such
a thought into words. ! We feel easier with a legion of malignant demons near
us, than with one faithful and merciful and holy Saviour. 2. The second topic
of consultation among the Gadarenes was this: “concerning the swine.” I
do believe (to do these people justice) that if we could have been there, and
could have charged them to the face with having deliberately rejected Christ,
wilfully driven away the Great Healer, simply on account of their interest in
pork-raising, they would indignantly and sincerely have repelled the imputation,
and have suggested a number of other reasons by which they supposed they
were actuated, instead of the one which really affected and decided their minds.
I do not believe they said explicitly to each other, “This is a great and Divine
work of mercy. God Himself is manifest here destroying the works of the devil,
and delivering our fellow-man from bondage to unclean spirits. Surely the
kingdom of God is come nigh unto us! But then, on the other hand, see what
it costs; two thousand head of pork is a great deal to lose, and we will not
have God’s kingdom.” I do not believe they said this; I do not believe they
distinctly thought it; but they did it. And you, beware how you put yourself
under the same condemnation. For you need not expect that the gospel of
salvation will ever come to you without bringing along with it some conditions
of loss and self-denial. It will interfere with your plans, break up your
arrangements, frustrate your schemes, in business, in politics, in society, in the
conduct of life. That petty fraud—that adulteration or misrepresentation,
so common that no one thinks of it—that smart, lying advertisement that
you have got in your desk ready for the press—those keen little tricks or


179


*% ret :
CHAP. V. IOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a ee ee et


disingenuous compliances in politics that are to carry the caucus or the election

and put you into officeand keep you there—those shams and deceits, that neglect

of homely duties and of wearying charities, by which you are studying to gain

social position and pleasure,—how these herds of unclean things, the soilure

and blemish of your lives, will have to rush off into the sea, if the Holy Christ

is to come to you and live with you! Are you ready to let them go, or will
ou rather come and pray the Lord to depart out of your neighbourhood @

III. The apostle to the Gadarenes.—There, away up the hillside, the angry
crowd are lingering yet. They have carried their point, and the Saviour whom
they have rejected has turned to leave them ;—it is so easy to be rid of Jesus if
you will. Downward He goes in sorrow to the beach where the little shallop
lies rocking in the sands, and timidly in the rear comes this new disciple with
only one humble petition—“ that he might be with Him.” “Go home to thy
friends!” “But, Lord, I have no friend but Thee. I have been an outcast
now these many years, a dweller in unclean sepulchres, abhorred of men.
What have men done for me but bind me in chains and fetters of iron? But
‘Thy hand hath loosed my bonds of pain, and bound me with Thy love!’ Let
me be with Thee where Thou art!” But still from that Most Gracious One
comes the inexorable, “Go back—back to thy friends and thy father’s house


—go tell them what the Lord hath done for thee 1 «What? Lord te


I, so disused to rational speech? whose lips and tongue were but now the
organs of demoniac blasphemy? I, just rallying from the rending of the
exorcised fiends? I, surrounded by a hostile people, that have just warned
away my Lord and Saviour from their coasts? And can I hope that they will
hear my words, who turn a deaf and rebellious ear to Thee? Nay, Lord, I
entreat Thee let me be with Thee, there sitting at Thy feet clothed and in my
right mind, that men may look and point at me and glorify my Lord, my
Saviour! Let them go, whose zeal to tell of Thee even Thy interdict cannot
repress,—there be many such—send them! But let me be near Thee, be with
Thee, and gaze, and love, and be silent, and adore!” Was ever a stronger
argument of prayer? And yet Christ departs, and the grateful believer is
left alone to do the work for which he seems so insufficient and unfit! To
translate the story into the terms of our daily life, it shews us: 1. That the
path of duty which Christ has marked out for us may be the opposite of that
which we naturally think and ardently desire. You say to yourself that a
man must be willing to leave father and mother and children and business for
the gospel’s sake: but God finds some way of admonishing you that a man
must also be willing to stay by them for the gospel’s sake, when he is called
thereto, and answers the fine texts with which you try to excuse yourself from
humble and irksome duty with other texts,—how he that provideth not for his
own household is worse than an infidel,—and how he makes void the law of God
who says to his father or mother Corban—I have consecrated to religious uses
the time and labour that might have gone to your support ;—and so God shuts
up your favourite path of service, and makes plain before your feet a very
humble and obscure little by-way for you to walk in. 2. That when religious
privilege and religious duty seem to conflict, the duty is to be preferred above
the privilege. It would seem as if the case of this lunatic had been set before
us here as ana fortiori case for all generations to the end of time. What one
of us can ever be called to surrender that supreme religious privilege—the
personal, visible companionship, the personal, audible teaching of Jesus the
Lord? And if Ae might not choose, but must needs. go away, untaught,
untrained, to be alone from his Saviour, and be himself a teacher of others, can
there ever be imagined a case between duty and privilege when you or I should
be at liberty to hesitate? 3, That duty, preferred and followed instead of


180


a _
— i a is EEE a





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. V.





privilege, becomes itself the supreme privilege. See to what honour came this
nameless man at last. Having given up the infinite delight of the personal
companionship of Jesus, behold him now promoted to this dignity, that he
should be the first in the kingdom of heaven. ‘The trained disciples, that had
left all to follow the Lord, are passed over, and this highest honour, that he
should be the first commissioned preacher of the gospel, is given to him who
left the Lord Himself, at His command, to do the Lord’s work. And no man
knoweth his name unto this day. But in the resurrection those unknown
syllables shall be spoken again with ‘Well done, good and faithful servant,”
and shall shine above those of prophets and apostles, like the sun, and like
the brightness of the firmament, for ever and ever.—L. W. Bacon.


Ver. 17. Christ rejected by the Gadarenes.—We are not surprised to learn, that
those “‘in the city and in the country,” when such strange tidings reached them,
“went out to see what it was that was done.” We should have so acted our-
selves in similar circumstances. Perhaps we think that here the likeness ends ;
and that, instead of beseeching One who had given such proofs of power and
goodness to “depart out of our coasts,” we should rather have imitated the
conduct of the people of Sychar (John iv. 40). In both cases Jesus granted
the request made. What the Gadarenes lost by their rejection of Him we
may never know; but that their loss may be our gain, let us try to discover
the feelings which influenced these persons, and which may still actuate any
possessed of the same depraved and disordered moral constitution.

I. Vexation at pecuniary loss sustained.—_We may partly excuse this feeling
on the ground of its naturalness, but we may not allow it to be a just and right
one. We may not admit that ever so large an amount of this world’s goods is
to be weighed in the balance against one immortal soul, “turned from darkness
to light,” etc. Moreover, the Gadarenes had ample evidence that He who
permitted this destruction of property was no ordinary man, for “ with authority
He commanded the unclean spirits, and they obeyed Him.” He belonged,
evidently, to another world. He had passed the boundary which separates
things visible from invisible. He must have much to tell, therefore, which is
most important for all to know, who are conscious that they possess a spiritual
nature. Compared with the benefits which all might expect to reap from His
“wisdom and mighty works,” what was the injury which a few had sustained
from the loss of a portion of their worldly wealth ?

II. The dread of preternatural agency.—‘ They were afraid” (ver. 15).
Why, and when? Not when they beheld the traces of the destructive energy
which had been at work; but when they saw ‘“‘him that was possessed... .
sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind.” Not because they thought he
would do them an injury-—he was now as harmless as he had heretofore been
Jangerous ; but because they saw in him one who had just been the subject of
a preternatural agency, and because the Agent Himself was close at hand. So
Peter (Luke y. 8). So all the disciples (Luke viii. 25). These Gadarenes had
hitherto been living according to the course of this world. Perhaps they
professed some form of religion; but it exercised no regenerating influence over
their hearts: of the “ power of godliness” they knew nothing at all. Probably
they had heard a rumour of the “Great Prophet who had risen up” amongst
their neighbours ; but it had made no particular impression upon them ; not one
of them thought more of making provision for another life, or less of getting
and enjoying the good things of this. Suddenly their carnal ease is broken
in upon ty the report of the arrival of the new Teacher in their own country,
and of the awful display of supernatural power which ensued. The effect was
instantaneous. It was like the first warnings of an earthquake—the slight

181,


an eet


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


RR ESTES


trembling which precedes the more powerful shock which is to bury the city in
its own ruins. Not more hastily do the inhabitants, on the first premonitory
vibration, rush out of their houses and take refuge in the open country, than did
the Gadarenes, with one accord, “ pray Jesus to depart out of their coasts.”
They desired to have nothing to do with Him. He had already seriously
disturbed them ; and if He were allowed to go on, who could tell whereunto
these things would grow ?

III. Cousciousness of guilt, and fear of punishment.—Yes, “ guilt” is the
word, as implying not only wrong, but wrong which must be answered for,
wrong which subjects to the penalty of the law. This is what all mankind
are alike implicated in. God had not left these Gadarenes without a witness
to Him in their own breasts, for He had given them a conscience, and thoughts
which accused or excused according to the bidding of that inward monitor.
But they, being ignorant of God’s ways, and knowing only that they were “ the
enemies of God by wicked works,” supposed that He must be their enemy also,
and could think of no other way of fleeing from His wrath but by fleeing from
Him and from every one who came in His name. What could be more
natural? All that they had as yet heard or seen of Jesus only confirmed them
in the impression that He was come to torment them before their time, and to
bring upon them or their families such swift destruction as had already befallen
their swine. We cannot doubt that abject personal fear had the largest share
in prompting them to “ pray Him to depart out of their coasts.”

Lessons.—1. Was it the loss of worldly substance which induced the Gadarenes
to wish to be rid of Christ’s presence? In this, even knowing no more of Him
than they did, they acted foolishly and wickedly. But what must be said of
those who know Him to be the Saviour of the world—‘“ the Way, and the
Truth, and the Life”—and yet allow worldly considerations to prevent them
from reaping the full benefit of His Mission? 2. Did the carnal-minded
Gadarenes see in Jesus a messenger from the invisible world, who was come
to turn their thoughts from things temporal to things eternal ? and did they
therefore desire to have nothing to do with Him? This also was inexcusable
even in them; but how much more so in us! We cannot plead that it was
well with us before this Man of God came among us, and that we desire to
“Jet well alone.” There never was a time when He was nof among us—
never a time when the name of Jesus, His work and His doctrine, were
not familiar to us as household words. ‘In the light are we, that in us the
light may be.” Let us, then, go out to meet “ Him that cometh in the name
of the Lord,” and pray Him not to depart from us, not to let us alone, but
to come unto us, and make His abode with us, for time and for eternity.
3. Did the Gadarenes reject Christ because they saw in Him a swift Minister
of that Divine vengeance which was due to them for their sins? We cannot
blame them for this. But what if they had been better instructed in the nature
of His Person and Mission? What if they had known that (1 Tim. ii. 5)?
What if they had heard those charming words (John iii. 16, 17; 1 John iv. 9)?
Why, then the whole population would surely have gone out to meet Him, and
to escort Him in triumph into their city. While they accepted Him as their
Priest to make atonement for them, they would have sat at His feet as their
Prophet, and sworn allegiance to Him as their King. What they did not know
we do; therefore the reception which, had they known, they would have given
Him let us give, and the homage which they would have rendered to Him
let us render, saying, “ Worthy is the Lamb,” ete.


Vers. 17-19. The two prayers.—No contrast could be more striking than that
presented by these verses. Under what circumstances was it, and with what


182


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. Vv.





motives, that these two prayers, most opposite in their purport, were offered tc
Christ? The answer to this question will shew us that these two contrary
prayers are in fact offered up to Him now and daily,—one or other of them by
every one of us; both, at different times, by many.

I. The prayer of the Gadarenes.—They might have known that One who
gave signs so infallible of a Divine Mission must have a message for them from
God. That that message was on the whole a gracious message they might have
inferred from the sight of one out of whom demons were departed sitting
at His feet clothed and in his right mind. But no: their fears and their
displeasure prevailed, and they prayed Him only to depart out of their coasts.
These Gadarenes were a type of thousands now. To us also Christ has come.
We hear His Word. We see those miracles of His grace by which the
thoughtless, selfish, sinful, are changed into a new image by the transforming
power of faith in Christ. These things we see ;—and, if our own heart condemns
us as being still ourselves dead in sin, we may well tremble as we behold. But
what further effect have these things had upon us? Have we drawn near to
Him whose works are thus mighty, whose words are thus gracious?’ Have we
sought to know more of Him than we could by the mere hearing of the ear?
Being assured, by His own promise, that He hears prayers, have we prayed, are
we daily praying, to Him? Do we bring to Him our daily wants and sins and
weaknesses, our daily duties, snares, aud temptations, and ask in each for the ever-
present help of His Holy Spirit? Or do we neglect all these things, and live
much as we should if Christ had never died for us, and try to keep as far from Him
as possible, lest we should be obliged to part with those things which we love
better? Then, it is with us just as if we every day uttered the prayer of these
Gadarenes, and besought Christ to depart from us! And this is a prayer which
is soon answered. In that heart which refuses to believe Christ does no mighty
works, because of its unbelief. Le who desires to forget Christ may easily
succeed in doing so. The Lord’s Spirit will not alway strive with man. So
long as by our carelessness or our sins we are praying Christ to depart from us,
and not to torment us before the time, so long we may too reasonably fear that
that prayer will be heard—that He who has come out of His place with offers
of mercy, He who is calling to us from heaven, and bidding us hear and live,
will go and return unto His place, till we acknowledge our offence and seek His face.

II. The prayer of the man delivered from demons.—Knowing his own
weakness, and the subtlety of his great enemy ; knowing that till he heard the
voice of Christ he had been in bondage, and that only by His strength is he
free; fearing lest the departure of his Deliverer should be the signal for the
return of the unclean spirit to his now deserted habitation,—he prays that he
may remain with Christ, contented to be the companion of Him who has not
where to lay His head, if he may but still hear the sound of that gracious voice,
and be still within the reach of that compassionate arm. But as the prayer of
unbelief and of carelessness, which beseeches Christ to depart, is but too surely
fulfilled in His withdrawal, so this, though it be the prayer of faith and love,
is yet no less surely refused. The time for uninterrupted converse with the
Lord is hereafter, not now. A life of rapturous meditation, of ecstatic com-
munion with a world unseen, is not that which will best glorify Christ, or shine
most brightly before men. He who has been first healed by Christ must go
back into the world to shew forth His praise. By pureness, by meekness, by
kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, he must be Christ’s witness ;
men must take knowledge of him, by these signs, that he has been with Jesus.
This is his work :—the other his refreshment, his recreation, his invigoration for
future service. Seasons indeed are allowed him—and happy is he who cares tor
them—of visiting Christ, of communing with Him, of receiving from Him new


183


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








supplies of mercy and grace. Such opportunities are prayer, the study of
Scripture, and above all the Holy Communion ; opportunities of being with Christ,
of seeking from Him the restoration and revival of our souls—the casting out
of those evil spirits of pride and sensuality and worldliness, which are ever
regaining, in some new form, the possession of our hearts, and which no power
but Christ’s can enable us to overcome. But every such approach to Him
implies and looks forward to a subsequent return to the duties of daily life. We
come to renew our strength, that again we may run and not be weary. We
come to eat of that living bread, that so in the strength of that meat we
may enter upon another stage of our pilgrimage towards the heavenly city.—
Dean Vaughan.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-15. The greatness and the
weakness of man.—-l. His greatness
—seen in the fact that many demons
can enter into him. Shew how men
may be great in evil as well as in
good—tyrants, warriors, conspirators,
hypocrites, etc. 2. His weakness—


seen in his yielding where he ought to’


have resisted, in his helplessness when
he had once admitted the power of evil
into his heart—seen also in his fear of
the only power that could redeem him
from its bondage-—J. Parker, D.D.

A revelation of the Saviour’s glory.—
1. As the Son of the living God. 2. As
the King of the world of spirits. 3. As
the Deliverer of the wretched. 4. As the
Holy One, who does not suffer Limself
to be entreated in vain to depart.—
J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.


Ver. 3. An inveterate habit of un-
cleanness frequently extinguishes all
the principles of the Christian life ;
and an unchaste soul dwells in its
body as in a loathsome sepulchre,
where there is nothing but the remains
of worms and corruption. This is but
too often literally true. An unchaste
person is a madman, whom everything
provokes, whom nothing stops, and
who will not bear the least restraint.
—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 4. Spiritual strength.—That
poor man, possessed by that unclean
spirit, was able to burst the fetters
and chains which bound his limbs, and
to break through all opposition of the


184


arms of men; how much more power-
ful is he who is possessed by the Spirit
of God, his will wholly given to obey
His call, powerful to break away
through any bonds with which the
world would bind him, and to follow
on the heavenly path, defying all
opposition of an ungodly world!


Ver. 5. The desolate places of the
earth.—The gloomy waste, the sterile
desert, are the contrast of Eden, and
shewed themselves contemporaneously
with man’s trangression; death and
the grave are the result of sin—what
fitter habitation than these could Satan
and his myrmidons find? The de-
moniac, in the midst of his mental
confusion, retains his old notions of
the habits of demons, and _ yields
readily to the impulse that sends him
to solitude and graves, wherein he
supposed they specially delight. How
far he is a free agent, how far under
the control of an alien force, we cannot
accurately define. This is one of those
mysterious matters of which we are
greatly ignorant; but we have glimpses
of an identification of man and devil
which is inexpressibly awful. Mean-
time, whatever opinion we may form
concerning the notion of evil spirits
being especially attached to certain
localities (and if we localise holiness
we may equally localise wickedness),
we may at any rate learn this lesson,
that it is in souls dry of grace that
Satan takes up his abode, in hearts
not filled with love and faith that he


=


finds entrance.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. V.


eee


Solitude does not bar
him out. People have fied to the
desert, living a life of want and pain
far away from the busy haunts of
men, that there, alone with God, as
they thought, they might wrestle out
their soul’s salvation ; but the tempter
has found them there. Wherever a
soul is to be lost or won, as surely as
this present life is our trial-time, as
surely as this present world is our
battle-field, so surely in this time and
place are we exposed to the assaults
of evil; and nothing can keep us safe
but watchfulness and prayer.—W. J.
Deane.

The madness of sin.—Having gone
through some fearful scenes with
madmen, I have a vivid idea of what
this savage was. How strong, how
rampant, how brutal! I haveseen one
leap from a third-storey window at a
bound, and another crimson with his
own blood from broken glass, and yet
another defying five police-officers to
touch a hair of his head. And what
lessons have I then and there learned
about the dreadfulness of being given
up to Satan, and having such frenzied
beings for everlasting associates—
lessons, too, of thankfulness to God
for sparing our reason, and warding
off those accidents which might have
robbed us of it. A fall on the ice, a
fright, a blow from a stick, and you
and I might now be even such out-
casts.—Jas. Bolton.


Vers. 6,-7. A double nature.—That
the man worshipped Jesus, and yet a
moment after the evil spirit within
him cried with a loud voice, as one
who was not in the kingdom of Jesus
—this is like our daily case. There
is within us a double nature—a good
spirit and an evil spirit ; one minute
one prevails, another minute the other
governs. Even the best man is not
free from sin. Good people have said
they are surprised at the wickedness
within them. On the other hand,
even the worst man is hardly a devil
yet. But most of us are between the
two. We change, not perhaps quite


so quickly as he whom the Gospel
describes, and yet very quickly In
the morning we worship Jesus with
our prayer and make good resolutions.
But perhaps the same day, not long
after, we lose our temper, and say
spiteful things that have nothing in
common with Jesus, the Son of God.
Or perhaps he who said a prayer the
same day is drunken, or does some
dishonest action, or tells a lie. Thus
we pass from Jesus to Satan.—Jas,
Lonsdale.


Ver. 7. The struggle to get rid of sin
—A man can never leave sin without
violence; he can never root up an
evil habit but nature must suffer
deeply. She fights against grace; she
causes the flesh to strive against the
Spirit, and will against will. Who-
ever loves impurity dreads to be de-
livered from it, and omits nothing to
continue himself under that miserable
possession.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 9. Legion.—It may be that the
fiends within him dictated his reply,
or that he himself, conscious of their
tyranny, cried out in agony, We are
many—a regiment like those of con-
quering Rome, drilled and armed to
trample and destroy, a legion. This
answer distinctly contravened what
Christ had just implied, that he was
one, an individual, and precious in his
Maker’s eyes. But there are men and
women in every Christian land whom
it might startle to look within, and
see how far their individuality is
oppressed and overlaid by a legion of
impulses, appetites, and conventionali-
ties, which leave them nothing personal,
nothing essential and characteristic,
notbing that deserves a name.—Dean
Chadwick.

Troops of temptations.—Our enemies
come upon us like a torrent. How
much does it concern us to band our
hearts together in a communion of
saints! ‘The number of our enemies
adds to the praise of our victory. To
overcome single temptations is com-
mendable; but to subdue troops of

185


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


A a


temptations is glorious (Matt. xi. 45 ;
Isa. lix. 19; Phil. i. 27).—Bishop Hall.

The Legion of sin.—Truly the name
of sin is Legion. It is anger, malice,
intemperance, murder, impurity, un-
faithfulness, dishonesty, equivocation,
dissimulation, falsehood, hypocrisy, in-
gratitude, disobedience, impatience,
discontentment, envy, covetousness ; it
is profanity, formality, superstition,
idolatry, blasphemy, and atheism. It
is a repudiation of the authority, a
defiance of the power, a slight to the
wisdom, a contempt of the holiness, and
unthankfulness for the goodness of
God. It is the cause of all the error,
conflict, cruelty, suffering, weeping, and
woe that exist in this world. Like a
foul demon, it has poisoned and pol-
luted, blighted and cursed, everything
it has touched. It has caused man, the
noblest work of God, to become the
destroyer of his own soul, the murderer
of his brother, the enemy of his God.—
A. Thompson.


Ver. 12. The prayer of the demons.—
1. The language of conscious degrada-
tion. The demons knew there was
an inexorable necessity carrying them
downwards; the lake of unutterable
woe would receive them at length ; but
they felt as if it would be a breaking
of their fall, a something less than their
ultimate misery, to take up their abode
even in the vilest and most loathsome
of the brute creation. Think not that
you can indulge your vicious propensi-
ties without debasing your moral
nature, or that you can tempt others
to moral depravity without yourself
becoming more depraved. 2. The lan-
guage of conscious terror and alarm.
That woful and degrading punishment
they would acquiesce in, nay, acknow-
ledge as a mark of condescension and
favour, hoping thereby to effect at least
a temporary delay of their ultimate
sentence to the lake of endless perdi-
tion. They gain their wish; their
prayer is answered; and with it in-
creasing debasement, and the consum-
mation of woe. Verily, itis a dangerous
thing to tamper with our moral nature,


186


and to take even a single step that
leads down the terrible declivity.—
J. Cochrane.


Ver. 13. Jesus gave them leave.—
Thus His power over the world of
spirits was shown to be absolute; they
could not operate even on the lower
animals without His permission, much
less could they dominate men, the sheep
of His pasture. Andat the same time
this hidden world was demonstrated to
be very real and very formidable,
encompassing our path, restlessly seek-
ing to mar, and to deface, and to
destroy. Hereby too the sufferer was
assured of his cure, and realised from
what a tremendous evil he had been
delivered; he was afforded a visible
proof of that supernatural region ; he
was allowed a glimpse behind that veil
which mortal eye cannot penetrate.—
W. J. Deane.

Why such destruction ?—Some think
that the herd belonged to Jews, who
were thus justly punished for dealing
with animals forbidden by the law.
But if the owners were Gentiles, another
reason may be given. The heathen
may have needed to be taught the
reality of demoniacal possession, and
that it was the providence of God alone
that preserved them from evils worse
than those which they saw exemplified
in the demoniacs and the swine; or
they might thus learn that salvation is
of the Jews, and that it was the same
God who gave to them their laws who
shewed His authority over evil spirits
by the demolition of the herd.—Jbzd.

The drowning of the herd does not
appear to have entered into the calcu-
lations of the unclean spirits. They
desired houses to live in after their
expulsion, and for them to plunge the
swine into the lake would have defeated
their purpose. The stampede was an
unexpected effect of the commingling |
of the demoniac with the animal
nature, and outwitted the demons.
“The devil is an ass.” There is a
lower depth than the animal nature ;
and even swine feel uncomfortable
when the demon is in them, and in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. V-


a Se


their panic rush anywhere to get rid
of the incubus, and, before they know,
find themselve struggling in the lake.
“Which things are an allegory.”—
A. Maclaren, D.D.


Vers. 14, 15. Miracles not necessarily
convincing.—No miracle could be more
decisive, or more directed to the hearts
of men, than that which Christ worked
on this occasion, and yet it produced no
good effect whatever on the Gadarenes.
The fact is, that much previous educa-
tion and preparation are necessary in
order to make a miracle effectual; in
certain cases it may be wholesome or
even necessary, but it is of the nature
of a very violent medicine, which if
administered indiscriminately may do
much more harm than good. Might
not one of the purposes of our Lord
in working this miracle, which in some
respects is of so exceptional a kind,
have been to shew how impracticable
it would have been for Him to establish
His kingdom in the world by mere
force of miracles ?—Bishop H. Goodwin.


Ver.15.A reformed character.—W hen
the formerly careless and mad wanderer
after this world’s vain bubbles is
under the salutary influence of Divine
grace, where is he to be found, and
what is he doing? He is to be found
“sitting at. the feet of Jesus,” receiv-
ing the instruction which the gospel
of Jesus imparts, watching daily at
wisdom’s gates, and waiting at the
posts of wisdom’s doors. He is to be
found in the court of the Lord’s house,
waiting to hear what God the Lord
will say unto him by the Divine Word.
He becomes a companion of all those
that fear God and keep His command-
ments. He now delights in the society
of those as the excellent of the earth,
whom he formerly hated and reviled
as needlessly precise or superstitiously
religious.—Z, Hdwards.

Lessons.—i. How one spirit may
disturb a whole household — make
every means of happiness vain—render
all the resources for enjoyment of no
worth! All these resources only say,


How happy we might be! There is
a relief when our sorrow comes from
sickness, accident, the visitation of God ;
but when it comes from moral insanity,
the arrow is barbed indeed, and strikes
and rankles deep. How much there
is of this—from intemperance, dis-
honesty, passion, selfishness, sensuality,
and meanness! 2. Jesus can trans-
form this wild spirit and send hin
home a blessing. The moral maniac
has been tamed! The ferocious tiger
has departed, and the serenity of a
true, manly soul has appeared—like
the passing of the thunderous clouds
that made night awful, and the coming
forth of the morn, pouring her baptism
of light on hill and tower and on the
rolling river and the home. 3. Do
not let us shake all this off with the
passing hour, because we are not
maniacs and cannot go home as such.
But let this be our question: Where
do we stand between this extreme, and
what we should be? Here is the
terrible maniac, and there is Jesus—
where are we? With which have we
the most features of character in com-
mon ¢—Henry Bacon.


Ver. 17. Sins of communities.—1. It
is possible for communities as com-
munities to sin, to transgress the law
of righteousness, to incur guilt. 2.
When a town as a town, or a parish
as a parish, by its own vote and deter-
mination, does what is wrong, the
bad consequences of the evil act are
very likely to involve those who dis-
approved of the unrighteousness along
with those who favoured it. 3. The
duty which attaches to all right-minded
people of trying to prevent this thing.
By the words we speak, the opinions
we express, the preferences we hint,
the disapprovals we venture, the judg-
ments we utter, the votes we cast, we
do all of us and every one help to give
character to the aggregate of public
opinion. How are we to exercise this
power of influence as we ought? By
always seeking, as God gives us grace
to do so, to take the worthiest and
highest view of every question that


187


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MAREK.


pO err


comes before us.—W. R. Huntington,
D.D.

Entreating Christ to depart.—tIt is
an entreating of Christ to depart out
of our coasts, whenever we allow our-
selves in ever so little a matter to put
profit before principle, to prefer gain
to godliness. The permanence and
stability of all we value most in social
life, the maintenance of mutual con-
fidence, the preservation of the purity
of home—these and many other such
precious possessions depend on being
able to keep Christ within our borders.
—Ilbid

A Christless world—That will be
indeed a fatal day for society if ever
the voices of those who would have
Christ depart should so far prevail as
to secure the accomplishment of the
wish. Picture the Christless world
rolling on its dismal course through
space, no homes of prayer anywhere
upon its surface, no gathered con-
gregations lifting the voice of worship,
no kneeling suppliants interceding for
the sick and sorrowing, no bread of
life, no cup of blessing, no tender
ministries of loving care and sym-
pathy, no children taught to say
“Our Father,” no holy benediction for
man and wife, no word of trustful
hope for the dying, no utterance of
faith in a joyful resurrection over the
dead—nothing of all this, but, instead,
only one long, ‘hard, selfish struggle to
see who shall be richest and who shall
be strongest in a life of which the
grave is the acknowledged end.—ZJbid.

The difficulty of saving work.—Those
who are acquainted with missionary
exertions, either of ancient or modern
times, to plant the gospel in heathen
countries, know with what extreme
difficulty any saving effect is wrought.
In most instances, perhaps, the Word
of life has been rejected, and Christ
desired to depart out of their coasts,
as an unwelcome guest, who was come
to torment them before the time.
But need we go far from home to see
this? When any attempt is made to
revive practical religion in our days,
and to call the attention of nominal

188


Christians to those grand truths which

they profess in words, how is the
attempt received? When Christ is
faithfully preached, and the doctrines
of His religion explained and pressed
upon men’s consciences, how do they
behave? When any among them are
persuaded to receive Christ into their
hearts by faith, to come out from the
world which lieth in wickedness, and
to devote themselves to His service,
how are they treated by their unbe-
lieving friends? Is there not still
something in the presence of Christ,
and the close application of His doc-
trines to the mind and conscience, that
is tormenting? Is not a life formed
upon the principles of the gospel
offensive to those who will not receive
nor act upon those principles ?—
W. Richardson.


Vers. 18, 19. Lessons.—1. This
shews how dear the presence of Christ
is to those who have seen and felt His
grace. 2. Let us submit readily to
our Lord’s will in all His denials of
our requests. 3. Let us reflect on the
experience we have had of the power
and compassion of Christ. 4. What
noble subjects religion furnishes for
domestic converse! 5. How graciously
Christ adapts our sphere of labour to
the state of the body and mind! 6. Be
content to labour in the humblest and


most private sphere.—H. Belfrage, D.D.


Ver. 19. Home.—A man may be said


- to have two lives in one—his public


and his home life. Those who work
with him through the week can tell
you his outward character, his habits,
his appearance; but there may be a
great deal, whether of good or bad,
that they do not know because they
do not know his home. If they did,
they might respect him more than
they do already, or despise him more
than they do already, but probably
their opinion of him would not remain
the same. 1. Home is the refuge of
affections. Among strangers we might
be misunderstood or condemned; at
home we are believed in; they who


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. V.


SS st Se a a a al oe oe ey ee


know us best, know that, with all our
faults, there is something to care about.
2. Home is a place of memories. In
your own household pleasures need
never be far to seek while you recall
together things which happened years
ago. 3. The best homes are also
centres of personal religion. ‘Go
home to thy friends, and tell them”
all that God teaches you, all that God
has given you to know of His dealings :
tell those at home in the best of all
speech, that of your daily example.—
W. R. Hutton.

The Lord’s doings.—1. Christ is ready
to do all for His people that He con-
sistently can do. 2. Christians are
bound to tell all that Christ has done
for them. 3. Why does Christ not
do more for many of His disciples ?
Chiefly because they do not make an
honest surrender of themselves and all
they possess to Him. 4. Christians
should seek to know more, experi-
mentally, that they may have more
to tell. 5. If Christians had more to
tell of the Saviour’s wonderful works
in them, and were more faithful in
telling it, our country would soon be
brought to Christ.—J. B. Shaw, D.D.

How the gospel is to be propagated.—
1. It is to be declared at home. 2. It
is to be founded on personal experi-
ences. 3. It is to acknowledge the
power and goodness of God alone.—
J. Parker, D.D.

What has Christ done for us ?—W hat
is our present state as compared with
our former condition? What is our
moral tone? What is our attitude in
relation to the future? If we can
answer these questions satisfactorily,
we have a suilicient reply to all con-
troversial difficulties and to all specu-
lative scepticism.—lbid.

Be fruitful.—the first act God re-
quires of a convert is, ‘“‘ Be fruitful.”
The good man’s goodness lies not hidden
in himself alone ; he is still strengthen-
ing his weaker brother. How soon
would the world and Christianity fail,


if there were not propagation both of
it and man! Good works and good
instructions are the generative acts of
the soul, out of which spring new
prosperity to the Church and gospel
(Luke xxii. 32; John i. 40, 41, 45,
xv. 16; Rom.i. 11; James v. 19, 20).
—0. Feltham.


Ver. 20. A thankful heart can
not easily confine itself within the
narrow bounds of gratitude prescribed
to it. There are some graces which
are proper to be published; and there
are others which ought to be concealed.
It is just to publish those which, being
preceded by heinous sins, cannot be
ascribed to anything but the pure
mercy of God, and which are visibly
counterbalanced by our demerits. It
is the safer way to conceal such as
may be looked on as the reward of
great fidelity in making a good use of
those which a man has received before.
The glory of God and the advantage
of our neighbour are the rules to be
observed on this occasion. He who
does not publish them of his own
accord, when they are extraordinary
in their kind, and the example may
be dangerous to the weak, shelters his
neighbour’s weakness under the veil of
silence, and his own under that of
obedience.—P. Quesnel.

Marvelling.—The demoniac’s narra-
tive would shew these people that it
was not Jesus whom they had to fear,
but evil spiritual powers to- whose in-
vasions their lives and habits exposed
them, and would thus prepare them to
receive with favour the preaching of
the apostles after Christ’s ascension
anil the Pentecostal effusion of the
Holy Ghost. The immediate effect of
the missionary’s story is related alone
by Mark: “and all men did marvel.”
Such marvelling is the beginning of
faith ; it leads to consideration of the
claims of the Wonder-worker, and
acknowledgment of His Divine power.
—wW. J. Deane.


189


OHAY. Vv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
SS ee


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—43.
(Paratiets: Marr. ix. 1, 18-26; Luxe vii. 40-56.)


Vers, 21-24, 35-43. Jairus’ daughter—I. The faith of a father.—1. It was
Christward. ‘Behold, there cometh,” etc. He came to Christ when all human
power was useless. He had confidence in the superhuman power of Christ.
He had seen Christ cast out the fiend in the synagogue. He knew of the
recovery of the centurion’s servant. These mighty deeds planted the seed of
faith in his heart. Personal trial was needed to make it grow and bring forth
fruit. Afflictions are blessings if they bring us to Christ. 2. It was humble.
“Fell at His feet.” Jairus saw beyond the outward poverty of Christ. He, a
man of rank and position, prostrate before Christ, conscious of his own inferiority.
No place on earth higher than the feet of Jesus. To fall is to rise. Those
who lie at His feet shall hereafter sit on His right hand. 3. It was earnest.
“Besought Him greatly.” He knew, felt, begged, one thing. The blessing
sought was precious. Only Christ could give it. Jesus delights to hear passionate
prayer. Each tear is a jewel, each cry an oration. Cesar said, ‘‘ The voices
of the distressed crying for my help make sweetest music in my ears.” <A father
delays granting the request of his darling child, not that he is heedless of its
appeals, but he likes to hear its little voice. Jesus often delayed to answer,
not that He disliked giving, but because He liked the asking. 4. It was
imperfect. “Come, and lay Thy hands,” ete. His faith was inferior to that
of the centurion. ‘Say the word only,” etc. Healing while being absent a
mystery to Jairus. Instrumentality not essential to Christ. The secret of
success was in Himself. Distance no disadvantage. Now that He has exchanged
worlds He is still the same.

Il. The death of a daughter.—She was twelve years old, and dying. A very
trying age in which to lose her. There was mutual entwining of affections.
They had arranged for her future. They had promised to themselves much
comfort from her. How insecure are the most promising earthly objects !
Jairus’ daughter, like a beautiful flower, fades in its budding. Her day closed
early—night before noon. Her death full of pathos. 1. The death of a
young daughter. 2. The death of an only daughter. 3. The death of a loved
daughter. 4. The death of a good daughter. The fact that she was so beloved
implies that she was all that could be desired.

Ifl. The sympathy of the Saviour.—l. It was prompt in its action. Jesus
was ever ready to sacrifice personal enjoyment for the good of others. 2. It
was new in its sphere (ver. 35). It is implied that death is incurable. Jesus,
the Infallible Physician, can cure the disease of death. His power reiches to
both sides of mortality—this and other side. 3. It was contemptuously treated.
“ Laughed Him to scorn.” What others called death Jesus called sleep ; and
as we with ease awake the sleeper, so Christ can awake the dead. Hitherto
this power of Christ was unrevealed, hence the mockery. Their laughter was
serviceable to Christ, for it proved the reality of her death. So Christ was no
impostor. They unconsciously reared a platform on which He displayed His
Divine power. 4. It was blessed in its results. (1) Resurrection of the dead.
(2) Joy to the household. (3) Impetus to the truth. (4) Glory to Christ.—
B. D. Johns.


Vers, 25-34. The timid woman’s touch.—I. Salvation is through Christ, not in
human endeavours.—Here was a woman who had been an invalid for twelve
years. In that time she had faithfully sought the best medical advice to be


190


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. V.








had, had done her utmost to obtain a cure, had spent all that she had in her
endeavour to find relief. But it had done no good. It is not strange, indeed,
when we consider the empiricism of medicine in that day, that this was so.
To cure the disease of this woman there was a great variety of remedies.
Among other things, she was to ke set in a place where two ways met, with a
glass of wine in her hand, and some one was to come up behind her and frighten
her. Or seven ditches were to be dug, in which the shoots of grape-vines were
to be burned, and then with a cup of wine in her hand she was to sit down in
each. No wonder the poor woman “was nothing bettered, but rather grew
worse.” This is the great lesson here: Men try to heal themselves of their sins
by their own devices. They go to human advisers in their sense of need. One
tells the sin-sick man, as Burns was told, to drive away his melancholy by
gay company ; another, as Theodore Parker did in Boston years ago, sneers at
the idea of sin; another, as did Comte, tells men to worship humanity. Others
hope by a pretty good sort of a life, as the phrase goes, to come out right,
though without any very definite idea of how it is to be. Now, in opposition to
all this, nothing is more plainly taught in Scripture than that salvation must be
through Christ.

II. Salvation is through personal effort, and does not come by waiting.—
There is danger of swinging from the error just considered to the opposite
extreme, and doing nothing. Men sometimes make a wrong use of the doctrine
of election, and persist in waiting for religious influences instead of coming to
Christ without delay. They are practically fatalists. It was not so with this
woman. She kept saying, “If I touch but His garments, I shall be made
whole.” She evinced determination and perseverance. No one will fail to-day
who comes to Christ in a similar spirit. ‘Him that cometh unto Me, I will in
no wise cast out.” God appoints us something to do in receiving salvation.
We must at least reach out our hand for it and accept it. We must shew
such a desire for it as to seek it. God does not want heaven filled with puppets,
to move only as He pulls the string. He wants Godlike men, men to be holy
as He is holy, and this can be only as each man in the sovereignty of his own
free-will decides for himself whether or not he will accept the salvation of
Christ. But further than this, as man is made, God could not force salvation
on us against our will. Salvation would be impossible without an acceptance on
our part. It would not be salvation, but punishment, to be forced into heaven
if we did not wish it or enjoy it.

TII. Salvation is through faith in Christ, and not by mere contact with Him.
—Many are at church from Sunday to Sunday listening to the truths taught
by the Saviour, without any personal interest in them or purpose to apply them.
They are there from curiosity or habit, or because others are, and have ne
thought or wish to accept Christ for themselves. ‘They cannot receive salvation
in such a frame of mind. They must put forth the hand and touch Him.
Contact is not enough. There was a spring in California where many came and
drank. All admired its clear water and sought it in turn to slake their thirst.
But one who knelt there with the rest saw what the others did not, recognised
a vein of glittering gold lying beneath the water, put forth his hand, and made
his fortune, ‘The difference between the throngs in Christian lands, who do not
accept Christ and those who do is a similar difference. The one fail to take
Christ to themselves, though perhaps gathering around Him in admiration.
The others see His infinite worth and eagerly take the treasure offered them.

IV. Salvation is by simple faith, and not by elaborate works.—We trust
Jesus—that is all. The mode of expressing our trust is an insignificant
matter. There was a certain young people’s society which had a warm dis-
cussion as to whether in their meetings the voting should be done by word of

19]


ww


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


fy a a SS Se


mouth or by a shew of hands. It was a question of absolute insignificance.
The things of importance were that they should have a definite mind on the
subjects considered, should make up their minds aright, and then should express
their wills clearly. ‘The method by which their will was expressed was immaterial,
so long as it was expressed. So is it in regard to faith in Christ. It is of the
utmost importance that we commit ourselves to Christ, but how that committal
shall express itself is a matter of comparative indifference. We are like a party
under guidance through a country infested by hostile Indians. Such a party is
bound to follow its guide implicitly. It is its only hope. We must trust
ourselves implicitly to the guidance of Christ. He alone knows what is best
for us to do.. He alone can guide us through the dangers of life, so that we
shall come out safely at the last.

V. Salvation is through Divine love, and not by any mystical virtue.—The
woman touched the border of Christ’s garment, that white fringe attached to
the blue ribbon which bound His robe. She went to Christ very much as many,
two centuries ago, went to King Charles of England to be healed of the king’s
evil by his touch. But Christ called the woman out of the crowd and forced
her to acknowledge her dependence upon Him, partly to teach her and us that
He was personally concerned in her healing. It was not something with which
His will had nothing to do. It was a result brought about by His knowledge
of her need and her faith. She must see that Christ’s aid was His free gift,
and not to be surreptitiously taken from Him; that He knew her desire and
freely and lovingly gave her help.

VI. Salvation comes through confession, and not in secret.—It was a sore
trial for the poor woman to be called to make an acknowledgment of Christ
before that unsympathetic company. Why, then, was this sacrifice required of
her? 1. It was for the good of others. It is important that the world know
that we are saved by Christ. Sometimes Christ did not allow His healings to be
heralded, because it was not safe for Him to excite too much publicity ; but
generally He did. There is no reason now why we should not confess Him, and
every reason why we should. I have somewhere read a narrative of the escape
of a large company from Malay pirates in the South Seas. A boat was dis-
covered by two or three of the captives. They could easily step on board by
themselves, silently drop down the river, and so escape. But they could not
bear to leave behind the large company of their friends held in torture and
danger of death. So they went back, told their friends their discovery and the
possibility of escape it opened, and urged all to undertake it. At night the
whole company, including babes in arms, slipped out, passing sleeping guards,
tiptoed their way to the river, and so escaped. We honour the few who risked
all their hopes rather than leave the rest behind. There are striking points of
similarity in our duty to-day. To be sure, we risk nothing in helping others to
escape from their sins; but, on the other hand, to find the way of escape our-
selves, and to be unwilling to tell others of the way when we have found it, is
such ungenerous conduct that we can scarcely conceive it possible in a Christian.
2. But this confession of Christ is required, not only for the good of others, but
for our own good quite as much. How much this woman would have lost had
not Christ obliged her to confess Him! She needed just this to be confirmed in
her assurance of permanent healing. She needed spiritual blessing as well as
physical aid. She needed to take a stand on Christ’s side for the sake of
developing her character. She was thus brought nearer to her Lord. Many
a despondent one, questioning his salvation, has instantly found peace when he
came forward and confessed Christ by joining the Church.—A. P. Foster.


192


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP V.


a ee ee ee ee


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 22-24, 35-43. Various phases
of faith.—1. Supplicating faith heard
by Jesus. 2. Hager faith tried by
Jesus. 3. Sinking faith strengthened
by Jesus. 4, Thankful faith perfected
by Jesus. —J. J. Van Oosterzee, DD.

Christ in His offices—View Christ
here as—l. The Consoler (ver. 36).
2. The Revealer (ver. 39). 3. The
Conqueror of death (ver. 42). 4. The
True Man (ver. 43). 5. The Divine
Physician, ready to apply to each
applicant the remedy required.


Ver. 23. “The point of death,”—
I. The point of death is a point of
mark. ‘The sound mind contemplates
it, not as at a distance, but as at hand.
The believer keeps it in his eye. He
knows it is not the goal, but only the
starting-point into eternity.

II. The point of death is a point of
moment—a momentous point indeed.
It is such when a man-child is born
into the world, and still more so when
he is born a second time. Surely it is
not less so when the moment strikes
that fixes his eternal destiny !

III. The point of death is a point
of interest. Life is the seed-time;
when death comes, it is harvest—the
time of reaping, and of reaping that
very kind of grain which we have
sown.

IV. The point of death is a point of
reference. It refers man to the future
—to the hell from which he is to flee,
to the heaven for which he is to pre-
pare, and within the one or other of
which his eternity is to be passed.
When, therefore, you are reading the
folio pages of truth and duty, study
also the marginal references, and be
ready to meet thy God. /

V. The point of death is a point of
fact. The disease which is to carry us
off may now be in our veins, the place
where we are to die is mapped off, the
machinery of the providence is all set
up, and known unto God is the moment
in which the wheels are to go round;


ce)


so that man is as good as dead. It
is ae a question of a little time—so
very little, that we may almost sup-
pose it traversed.

VI. The point of death is the final
point, the closing period in the last
paragraph of the last chapter of life.
1t is the “finis” indeed. Does it not
therefore become us to ascertain what
kind of death we are all dying ?

VII. In a word, the point of death
ought to be the point of preference.
There is no sin in Paul’s estimate, that
departing to be with Christ is “far
better.” Only we would need to see
that our hope is on the right founda-
tion; if not, departing must be far
worse than to live, vexing and soul-
harrowing as life often is. Your pre-
ference will not be unsafe, and unsound
it cannot be, if you have by faith seen
Jesus at the point of death, yea, dead
for you. In that moment you have
reached the point of life—John Mac-
Sarlane, LL.D.

“The point of death.”—This is one
point to which every one must come.
The paths of earth run in very diverse
ways, but they all pass at last “the
point of death.” It is a point that lies
hidden from view; no one knows the
day or the hour when he will come to
it, and yet somewhere along the sunny
years it waits for every one. Some-
times this point is struck in early
youth. Even the children should think
about dying, not as a sad and terrible
thing, but as a point to which they,
must come, and for which they should
prepare.—J, R. Miller, D.D.

The beginning of eternity.—O most
dreadful point, which art the end of
time and beginning of eternity! O
last moment of life! O first of eter-
nity! How terrible is the thought of
thee, since not only life is to be lost
in thee, but to be accounted for! . .
Admirable is the high wisdom of God,
which hath placed a point, in the
midst, betwixt time and eternity, unto
which all the time of this life is to


193


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a eee


relate, and upon which the whole eter-
nity of the other is to depend! O
moment, which art neither time nor
eternity, but art the horizon of both,
and dividest things temporal from
eternal! ... O moment, in which
the just shall forget all his labours,
and shall rest assured of all his virtues!
O moment, which art certain to be;
uncertain, when to be; and most cer-
tain, never to be again! I will there-
fore now fix thee in my memory, that
I may not hereafter meet thee in my
eternal ruin and _ perdition !—Bishop
J. Taylor.


Vers. 25-34. The faith of this woman
was—l. Secretly nourished. 2. Cour-
ageously shown. 3. Immediately dis-
covered. 4  Humbly acknowledged.
5. Nobly crowned.—J/. J. Van Ooster-
zee, D.D.

By-errands in God’s service.—In His
blessed path as the Healer He is ever
willing to be arrested by the sons of
men, counting this no detention, no
trouble, no hindrance, but the true
fulfilment of His heavenly mission.
Opportunities such as these were
welcome to Him; nor was He at any
time too busy, too much in haste, to
take up the case of the needy, how-
ever suddenly brought before Him. To
Him no interruption was unwelcome
which appealed to His love or power.
I know not whether we prize our own
by-errands sufficiently, our “ acci-
dental” opportunities of working or
speaking for God. We like to plan,
and carry out our plans to the end;
and we do not quite like interruptions
or detentions. Yet these may be,
after all, our real work. Little can
we guess, when forming our plans for
the day, on what errands God may
send us; and as little can we foresee,
when setting out even on the shortest
journey, what opportunity may cross
our path of serving the Master and
blessing our fellow-men. Whitefield,
on his way to Glasgow, is drawn aside
unexpectedly to tarry a night in the
house of strangers. To that family
he brings salvation. A minister of


194


Christ misses the train which was te
convey him to his destination. He
frets a little, but sets out to walk the
ten miles as best he may. He is picked
up by a kind stranger in a carriage,
a man of the world, who has not been
in the house of God for years. He
speaks a word, gives a book, thanks
the stranger in the Master’s name for
his kindness, and joys to learn some
years after that he missed the train
in order to be the messenger of eternal
life to a heedless sinner.—H. Bonar,
D.D.


Ver. 25. Long affliction.—It pleases
God to lay long and tedious afflictions
on some of His servants in this life.
1. To manifest His great power,
strengthening them to bear such long
afflictions. 2. To magnify His mercy
in delivering them at length out of
them. 3. That He may make thorough
proof and trial of their faith, patience,
and other graces of His Spirit in them.
4, To wean them from this world, and
to stir up in them a longing for heaven.
5. To make them more earnest in
prayer to Him for deliverance. It is
therefore no evidence of God’s wrath,
nor any sufficient reason to prove such
an one to be out of His favour, whom
He so holds for a long time under the
cross. Be well content, then, to bear
afflictions, though of long continuance,
submitting in this matter to the will
of God, who knows it to be good and
profitable for some to be kept long
under discipline. —G. Petter.


Ver. 26. God often the last resource
of sorrow.—It is a great piece of in-
fidelity for men not to think of God in
afflictions until they have experienced
the insufficiency of human remedies.
What a mercy is it to be forced to
have recourse to God, by misfortunes,
diseases, or the ill-usage of men! See
here a representation of those phy-
sicians of souls who, not acting in the
name and in the spirit of Christ, do
nothing else but feed and increase their
maladies. Men are very far from
doing as much for the health of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VY.


re ee ee eee


soul as for that of the body, and from
giving all for eternal salvation, as they
willingly spend all they have for
temporal life. They are apt to seek
out such physicians from whom they
may suffer little or nothing, such as
are likely to be most easy and gentle;
and scarce will they hear speak of
bestowing some slight alms. What
wonder then, if such persons are
nothing bettered, but rather grow
worse !—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 27-29. The means of grace.—
It was not the hem of His garment
that stanched her sickness. No; but
it was the Divine power and the
Divine love which lay beneath the
garment. So with the means of grace;
they are blessed to our souls because
they are the channels through which
the presence of the Lord Jesus comes
to us to cleanse and to heal. The out-
ward words of prayer cannot profit a
man unless the heart rises with them.
To say prayers without thought of God
is to trust to an outward sign, not to
the love and power of the Saviour.
So also of the sacraments. The out-
ward elements in the Eucharist are as
the hem of His garment; we receive
them in the hand and in the mouth:
even as the woman touched His skirts.
They are blessed to the soul, not because
they are outward elements, but because
through them there flowsto us the virtue
and the strength of that body and blood
of which the elements are the Divinely
appointed pledges and tokens and
vehicles. And to this blessing two
things are needful: the assured pre-
sence of Christ on His part; faith in
His presence and in His love upon our
part.

Soul-sickness.—By how much the
soul is of more value than the body,
by how much eternity outweighs time,
by how much deliverance from ever-
lasting misery and a title to eternal life
transcend the comforts and pleasures
of this world, by how much the favour
and lovingkindness of the Lord are
to be esteemed more than all that this
earth can supply, just by so much is it


more the part of a rational and im-
mortal being to be in earnest about
the prosperity of his soul than about
the health of his body.

The distress of sin.—Our sins and
troubles are not so grievous to us as
was this woman’s infirmity to her;
and yet they are greater evils. Our
untempered, coarse, rude nature, our
hard pride, our foolish running after
men’s smiles and praises, our vanity in
all things, our misconception of our-
selves, our mistakes and foibles, our
foolish faults and sins—do they dis-
tress us much ?—H. W. Beecher.


Ver. 29. The grace of Christ is the
only remedy for all the most inveterate
diseases of the soul. This will dry up
the very fountain itself of sin, which is
concupiscence, when the time of the
perfect reign of charity shall come.
It at present stops the course, the
reign, and the dominion of concu-
piscence. The healing operation of
grace alone can do all in a moment:
the delays of it do not proceed from
inability and necessity, but from dis-
pensation and wisdom. When will it
be, O my Saviour, that it shall drain
in me the source of all sin, that it
shall dry up that fountain of corrup-
tion and iniquity which I carry in my
flesh and in my heart ?—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 30-34. Love in detection.—It
was love, not harshness, which made
the Lord detect this woman, who had,
as it were, stolen from Him a blessing.
Her faith was weak, and He would
strengthen it. He would not suffer
her to go away to her home without
confessing Him as her Healer, and
rendering Him thanks. He wished to
give her His best blessing; she had
only received a foretaste. Her humility
might seem cowardice, and He would
make her brave. Her silence might
be want of gratitude, and He would
teach her thankfulness. Not yet had
she heard His voice or fully known all
His love. But now that He has seen
her and called her to Him, she is no
longer timid, for she has “ told before


195


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





all the multitude for what cause she
had touched Him, and how she was
healed immediately”; and then the
words are spoken which bring her His
fullest blessing : ‘ daughter,” ete.—
Bishop Blunt.

Sought out.—Not because He did
not know her did He seek her out,
but because those who were with Him
did not know her, and because He
would not have her lose the honour,
nor them the benefit, which the mani-
festation of her faith and its success
might yield. This detection and mani-
festation were not designed to make
her a gazing-stock, but to set her
forth as an example and pattern, which
might encourage others to come to
the same almighty and exhaustless
Fountain of strength and love for
higher benefits and more spiritual


gifts.


Ver. 31. Two kinds of touch.—It is
not because we surround and follow
after Christ, in frequenting the services
and even the sacraments of the Church,
thronging to its teaching, interesting
ourselves and taking our part in its
works of piety and charity, sharing
loudly and warmly in its controversies,
watching closely its movements, re-
joicing in its progress, and lamenting
over its checks and hindrances—it is
not because we do all this, and even
more, that we are justified in taking
ourselves out of the class of mere
spectators of the redemptive work.
As it must be a particular kind of
wire to draw down the electric current
from the thunder-cloud, so it is only
a special kind of touch—the touch
of faith—which draws forth healing
virtue from Christ.


Ver. 34. Not superstition, but faith.
-—What some of us would have sneered
at as swperstition Christ here dignifies
by the name of faith. We pity the
poor deluded devotees who crowd to
Lourdes, or eagerly touch a relic or
bow before a sacred image—we pity
them and laugh at them ; but perhaps
God sees more that is worthy of love


196


and Divine approbation in that faulty,
superstitious worship than in our cold
intellectual belief and our well-balanced
creeds.

Faith is essentially a personal alle-
giance to Jesus Christ. Whoever is
drawn to Him from any motive, who-
ever reverences and trusts Him in any
way, touches the heart of Christian
faith.

Imperfect faith.—W here this woman’s
faith was imperfect ours may be com-
plete. She came secretly, distrusting
His willingness, believing only in His
power to help. It is our privilege to
come boldly to the throne of His grace,
knowing that He is far more anxious
than we to heal every sickness of our
soul, and that He has provided in the
Holy Communion a blessed means of
spiritual contact with Himself.


Vers. 35, 36. Two views taken of the
same case-—1. There is the human
view—the child is dead, trouble not
the Master. Men see the outside;
they deal with facts rather than with
principles ; they see the circumference,
not the centre. 2. There is Christ’s
view—only believe; man is called
beyond facts, he is called into the
sanctuary of God’s secret. We often
put the period where God Himself
puts only a comma: we say “dead,”
when God Himself says ‘sleepeth.”
—J. Parker, D.D.


Vers. 36-43. Christ's simplicity in
miracle-working.—Our Lord in this
miracle did His utmost to lower in the
minds of the parents any sense of their
obligation to Him for the kindness
which He designed to shew them. He
prepared it by a kind of Divine équi-
voque: “The maid is not dead, but
sleepeth.” He would have it appear
that He was doing nothing more than
banishing sleep from the eyes of the
slumbering damsel ; that by this means
He might, I think, put to shame those
persons who arrogate to themselves so
much praise for their insignificant
services; whereas He lessened the
immensity of His benefits by His


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. V.





modest way of conferring them.—
Segnert.


Ver. 37. Secret work.—Let us thus
learn from Christ not to impart, ex-
cept only to a few chosen persons, those
works of God which we propose to
undertake, for fear lest they should
be obstructed. The Spirit of God would
have us labour in secret as much as
possible; whereas the spirit of the
world continually affects noise and
applause.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 39. Sleep the image of death.—
Both are—l. Preceded by weariness.
2. Accompanied by a rest. 3. Fol-
lowed by a wakening.—/. J. Van
Oosterzee, D.D.

Why did He thus speak ?—Because
so soon would He recall her spirit
from the other world that it would be
like an awakening from sleep—a sleep
shorter than that of an ordinary night’s
repose. Yes; but the Lord meant
more than that by these words. He
meant that the death of the body was
not death, but only sleep. The word
“death” He reserved for something more
terrible—the death of the higher, truer
life, the death of the spirit. That alone
was death in the eyes of the Lord of
life. He would have men think little
of the decay of bodily powers, or of the
corruption which followed on the disso-
lution of the outward frame, in com-
parison with the decay and death and
corruption of the spiritual life. Death
spiritual alone, in His sight, was worthy
of the name of death, because life
spiritual alone was worthy of the name
ef life—Bishop Blunt.





Ver. 40. Jesus with the dead.—
1. Notice, first, the solitude of Jesus
in the midst of those men and women.
He was the only man who had that
great faith so that He could declare it.
And how hard it is to be hopeful alone!
A gloomy atmosphere depresses a man ;
the surroundings of mourning break
the most courageous spirits. It was
what Christ was which made Him able
to stand alone; it was what He was


that made Him the Leader of thehuman
race. In the world disciples were faith -
less, in the garden disciples slept, on
the Cross His friends deserted Him. Let
us not be too indignant as we read of
those facts. It was the condition of
His success that it should be so. It
was by that that He shewed Himself
the Saviour of men, the Incarnate Son
of God. It was that which put Him
in advance of every position which any
son of man had ever taken. Separat-
ing Him from all others, it placed Him
where all others could come up to Him.
2. Notice, next, that though Christ felt
His power, and asserted it only more
boldly in the presence of those hopeless
men and women, that power could not
or did not work until they had all been
put forth from the room. It shews us
the distinction between two things that
we often confuse. Unfavourable cir-
cumstances may hinder, but they cannot
kill, true power. We cannot do in one
moment what Jesus did—turn out all
adverse influences—and so we let them
tell us that they are all-powerful. The
actions of Christ among those men were
tokens of all His action everywhere.
When He prepared the way for that
miracle, quickly as it may have been
done, it told the story that His power
is never more truly present than when
it is preparing the way for its own
perfect working. It is not what we
accomplish, but what we persist in for
our God, which saves us. However
unfavourable your circumstances, hin-
dering great accomplishments, however
hard the battle full of stubborn enemies
and hard reverses, however small the
gleanings of our poor sterile fields, the
faith that fought on the one and
worked on the other shall work salva-
tion, and restore to the life of God its
Father the soul that was dead in sin.
That is a gospel to carry to the dis-
couraged millions of the earth, and by
it to nerve them to new effort. 3. After
turning out all the other mourners and
the minstrels, Jesus took the parents
of the child, and entered into the room,
and brought the child to life. Those
parents by their presence seemed to


197


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


=


form the connexion between the faith-
ful Christ and the unbelieving world,
for they had a relation to both. Doubt-
less to them the words of Jesus, “ She
is not dead, but sleepeth,” must have
seemed very strange; they could not
have meant all to them that they did
to Him. And yet their parental love
must have fastened on them with a
hope which did not allow them to join
in the scornful laughter with which
others greeted them. They found a
response in the deepest feelings of their
hearts, which no others there appre-
ciated ; and so their presence was no
hindrance to that miracle-working
power of Christ. And, doubtless, in
those wailings a hope kept alive by a
parent’s love had yearned for something
more, and was ready for it when it
came.—A. Brooks.

Christ's attitude towards earthly rela-
tionships.—Such a deed as He proposed
to do must be done in silence, and
yet not in loneliness. The parents
were there ; He regarded their claim to
be present. Parents are the natural
guardians of youth and infancy. ‘This
act is not at variance with what He
elsewhere says about leaving father
and mother for His sake, nor does it
contradict what He says about the
division and conflict which He intro-
duces into family life. Divisions can
only exist, or at least be permanent,
where the presence and authority of
Christ are disregarded by the parents
on the one hand, or the child on the
other. Where His presence is desired,
though at first sight He may seem to
disparage or lightly esteem blood rela-
tionship, yet in the end we shall find
He has cemented earthly relationship,
and bound father to child or child
to father by closer ties, not of earth
only, but of heaven too.—G@. Walker.


Ver. 41. “ Talitha cumi” was a
common term of endearment, used by
loving mothers to wake their children.
The old familiar words were what Jesus
used. They seem to tell that in the
glad waking, after the sleep of death,
there will be nothing startling. It


198


will all be just as natural as waking
now. The old familiar love which has
blessed us here will greet us there.

In the hand of God.—lf God vouch-
safe not to take our heart in His hand,
it will never recover fromits sin. The
sacred humanity is as it were the hand
and instrument of the Divinity, to
which it is united in the person of the
Word. Itis from this humanity that
our life proceeds, because it was in this
that Christ died and rose again, and
completed His sacrifice. He is man,
since He takes this dead person by the
hand; He is God, since He commands
her to live and to arise, and is imme-
diately obeyed.—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 42, 43. The order of conversion.
—1. To rise, by forsaking sin, its habits
and occasions. 2. To walk a long time
in good works. 3. To retire from the
world, and to keep silence for some
time. 4. To eat the living bread of
the Eucharist. One ought to take great
care not to give this bread to a dead
person. That which ought to precede
this Divine food, according to the order
here intimated by Christ, is, that a
man should rise, leave the bed wherein
he was dead, and walk in the practice
of virtue, with such edification as even
to cause admiration in those whom he
had before offended and scandalised by
his sins.—bid.

Silence enjoined.—-1. It was better for
the parents and better for the child
to think, and not to talk, about this
great blessing. It is seldom good, even
for rulers and their families, to be the
objects of interest, curiosity, and gossip.
2. The Lord did not want men to re-
gard Him merely as One who wrought
signs and wonders, healed the sick and
raised the dead, but wished the report
of His Divine teaching to precede or
accompany the fame of His wonderful
works. 38. The Lord would not need-
lessly multiply His marvellous works.
Though the child’s life had been mira-
culously restored, it was not to be
miraculously sustained.—Bishop Blunt.

The wyunction as to food.—It is
often said that this is a proof of Christ’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VY,


a


moderation and reason in the use of
His miraculous powers. He who raised
from the dead gave no miraculous
supply of food. The lesson goes still
further, as it shews how the miraculous
power goes on, after its first exhibition,
to affect all other methods of work.
They who before mourned her as dead
were now to give her food as living.
Jesus had conquered those who laughed
Him to scorn; and now those who, by
their faithlessness, seemed to shut the
poor girl away from life, were, because
His power had intervened, to do all in


their power to help her life. She was
to walk through the world, meeting
friends who once had mourned her,
demanding and obtaining the tribute
of their friendship in a better and
richer way. So Jesus changes the
world from a hopeless to a hopeful
place.—A. Brooks.

ternal life.—¥Faith itself and the
new birth conduct us to eternal life,
not merely, as once received, but as
preserved (Luke xxii. 32 ; Acts xiii. 43 ;
Heb. iii. 14).—J. Milner.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER PF.


Vers. 2-5. A man in ruins.—Can anything
be more sad than the wreck of aman? We
mourn over the destruction of many noble
things that have existed in the world. Men,
when they hear of the old Phidian Jupiter—
that sat forty feet high, carved of ivory and
gold, and that was so magnificent, so tran-
scendent, that all the ancient world counted
him unhappy that died without having
seen this most memorable statue that ever
existed in the world—often mourn to think
that its exceeding value led to its destruc-
tion, and that it perished. It was a great
loss to art that such a thing should perish.
Can any man look upon the Acropolis—
shattered with balls, crumbled by the various
influences of the elements, and utterly
destroyed—and not mourn to think that
such a stately temple, a temple so un-
paralleled in its exquisite symmetry and
beauty, should be desolate and scattered ?
Can there be anything more melancholy
than the destruction, not only of such
temples as the Acropolis and the Parthenon,
but of a whole city of temples and statues?
More melancholy than the destruction of a
statue, or a temple, or a,city, or a nation, in
its physical aspects, is the destruction of a
man, the wreck of the understanding, the
ruin of the moral feelings, the scattering all
abroad of those elements of power that,
united together, make man fitly the noblest
creature that walks on theearth. Thousands
and thousands of men make foreign pil-
grimages to visit and mourn over fallen and
destroyed cities of former grandeur and
beauty ; and yet, all round about every one
of us, in every street, and in almost every
neighbourhood, there are ruins more stupen-
dous, more pitiful, and more heart-touching
than that of any city. And how strange
would be the wonder if, as men wandered
in the Orient, there should come some one
that should call from the mounds all the


scattered ruins of Babylon, or build again
Tadmor of the desert! How strange it
would be to see a city, that at night was
a waste heap, so restored .that in the morn-
ing the light of the sun should flash from
pinnacle, and tower, and wall, and roof!
How marvellous would be that creative
miracle! But more marvellous, ten thousand
times, is that Divine touch by which a man,
broken down and shattered, is raised up in
his right mind, and made to sit, clothed, at
the feet of Jesus.—H. W. Beecher.


Ver. 3. The tombs.—In the East the recep-
tacles of the dead are always situated at some
distance from the abodes of the living; and
if belonging to kings or men of rank, are
spacious vaults and magnificent structures,
containing, besides the crypt that holds
the ashes of their solitary tenants, several
chambers or recesses which are open and
accessible at the sides. In these the be-
nighted traveller often finds a welcome
asylum ; in these the dervishes and santons,
wandering mendicants that infest the towns
of Persia and other Eastern countries, gener-
ally establish themselves, and they are often,
too, made the haunts of robbers and lawless
people, who hide themselves there to avoid
the consequences of their crimes. Nor are
they occupied only by such casual and
dangerous tenants. When passing through
a desolate village near the Lake of Tiberias,
Giovanni Finati saw the few inhabitants
living in the tombs as their usual place of
residence ; and at Thebes the same traveller,
when he was introduced to Mr. Beechy, the
British Consul, found that gentleman had
established himself, while prosecuting his
researches among the ruins of that celebrated
place, in the vestibule of one of the tombs
of the ancient kings. Captain Light, who
travelled over the scene of our Lord’s inter-
view with the demoniac, describes the tombs


199


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee ee


as still existing in the form of caverns cut
in the live rock, like those at Petra—as wild
and sequestered solitudes, divided into a
number of bare and open niches, well suited
to be places of refuge to those unhappy
lunatics for whom the benevolence of anti-
quity had not provided a better asylum.


Vers. 11-15. Lhe demoniac's restoration.—
A victim of intemperance was dashing him-
self hither and thither at risk of life, in vain
attempts to elude the monstrous phantom
serpent he saw assailing him. Nurses and
physicians were baffled. Opiates had no
effect. The man must sleep, or he must die.
A new physician was summoned. He entered
the room with a huge bare knife, attacked
the phantom serpent, fought it, drove it
under the bed, while the cowering wretch
watched every motion in an agony of alter-
nating hopes and fears; stabbed it again
and again, slew it, dragged it across the
floor, threw it from the door, locked the
door again; and the sufferer, with a great
sigh of relief, sank into a slumber which
saved his reason and his life. May not such
an experience throw light upon the fact that
Jesus allowed the demons to enter into the
swine and drive them down a steep place
into the sea, where they were choked? Cer-
tainly not until he had seen that did the
demoniac sit at Jesus’ feet, “‘ clothed, and in
his right mind.”


Ver. 13. The destructive character of sin.—
Satan’s work is a work of destruction. Nearly
seven hundred years ago Jenghis Khan
swept over Central Asia, and it is said that,
for centuries after, his course could be
traced by the pyramids of human bones—the
bones of slaughtered captives—which his
armies left behind them. If the bones of
satan’s slain captives could be piled up in
our sight, what a pyramid that would be!
Self-mutilation has always been common
among the worshippers of false gods ; to this
day the fakirs of India cut and gnash them-
selves with knives. The devil sets his
servants at the same unprofitable task. Alo-
ed-Din, the chief of the Assassins, succeeded
in persuading his men that whoever would
fall in his service was sure of paradise ; and
so, at a nod of their chief, the poor dupes
would stab themselves to the heart, or fling
themselves over precipices, Satan’s one aim
is to blind his captives, and lead them to
self-destruction.


Vers. 15, 16. Transforming. influence of
Christianity A young man, an apprentice
in an extensive tin factory in Massachusetts,
who had formerly been very profligate,
having applied for admission into a Church,
the minister called on his master to inquire
whether any change had been wrought in
his conduct, and whether he had any objec-


200


tion to his reception. When the minister
had made the customary inquiries, his
master, with evident emotion, though he
was not a professor of religion, replied in
substance as follows: Pointing to an iron
chain hanging up in the room, “ Do you see
that chain?” said he. “That chain was
forged for W——. I was obliged to chain
him to the bench by the week together, to
keep him at work. He was the worst boy I
had in the whole establishment. No punish-
ment seemed to have any salutary influence
upon him. I could not trust him out of
my sight. But now, sir, he is completely
changed—he has really become like a lamb.
He is one of my best apprentices. I would
trust bim with untold gold. I have no
objection to his being received into com-
munion. I wish all my boys were prepared
to go with him.”——In a manuscript by an old
Scotch minister, in the early part of the
eighteenth century, there is a remarkable
account of the conversion of Lord Jeddart,
who had been famous for his recklessness in
sin, and of the astonishment it caused among
Christian people. A little after his conver-
sion, and before the thing was known, he
came to the Lord’s table. He sat next a
lady who had her hands over her face, and
did not see him till he delivered the cup out
of his hand. When she saw that it was
Lord Jeddart, who had been so renowned
for sin, she fell a-trembling terribly for very
amazement that such a man should be there.
He noticed it, and said, ‘“ Madam, be not
troubled: the grace of God is free!” This
calmed the lady; but when we consider
what sort of man Lord Jeddart had been,
we can account for her surprise. Guthrie,
of Fenwick, a Scotch minister, once visited
a dying woman. He found her anxious
about her state, but very ignorant. His
explanation of the gospel was joyfully re-
ceived by her, and soon after she died. On
his return home, Guthrie said, “I have seen
a strange thing to-day—a woman whom 1
found in a state of nature I saw in a state
of grace, and left in a state of glory.”’
“When I get to heaven,” said John Newton,
“T shall see three wonders there: the first
wonder will be to see many people there
whom I did not expect to see; the second
wonder will be to miss many people whom
I did expect to see; and the third and
greatest wonder of all will be to find
myself there,”








Ver. 17. Rejection of Christ.—Even so
do men now deal with their Saviour. He
draws nigh to us in His Word and Sacra-
ments. He is close to us in blessings and
in the discipline of life; but we will not
have Him to teach us. We fear it may
interfere with our plans and wavs of life
if we should become really religious! In
many ways we “beseech Him to depart ”—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK


CHAP. V.


eee


some by wilful sins, which cannot be enjoyed
in the presence of Christ. The busy, active
man, who lives for this world only, has no
time “to waste” on religion, so he bids
the Redeemer “depart.” The thoughtless,
careless lover of pleasure, looking upon
spiritual claims as an interruption to his
amusements, feels no need for a Saviour
and hears with unconcern His retreating
footsteps. Alas! how many will, when too
late, regret their neglect of, or contempt
for, religion! A few years ago, the Prime
Minister of England stepped across Downing
Street with a friend, who wanted some
information from one of the Government
officials. They entered the particular office,
and on inquiring for the Head of the Depart-
ment were curtly told to “wait” by an
insolent young clerk, who did not even look
up from his newspaper, and presently added
an order to “wait outside.” When the
principal official returned, he was thunder-
struck to find the Head of the Government
sitting with his friend on the steps of the
stone staircase. Equally surprised was the
clerk when, to his dismay, he learned by
his dismissal the result of his careless inso-
lence. In earthly things men bitterly regret
“chances” lost or thrown away, and yet we
treat with indifference our opportunities in
the spiritual life !—Dr. Hardman.

Folly of communities.—Bishop Butler had
a very poor opinion of the wisdom of com-
munities. His chaplain, Dean Tucker, tells
that he one day asked him “why whole
communities of public bodies might not
be seized with fits of insanity, as well as
individuals,” and on the chaplain declaring
that he had not considered the subject, the
bishop added: “ Nothing but this principle,
that they are liable to insanity equally at
least with private persons, can account for
the major part of those transactions of
which we read in history.”


Ver. 19. “ Zell what the Lord hath done
for thee.” —A young lady sat in her room one
day reading her Bible, and came to this
verse. The words rang in her ears, and
refused to leave her, until she resolved she
would speak to the first person she met on
her way down town. Closing her book, she
donned her wraps, and stepped into the
street just as a young man, who was one of
her particular friends, was passing. As they
walked along together she tried hard to find
courage to speak to him; but each time
Satan would say, Wait. When they came
to the place of separation, they lingered
a moment, and she said, “ George, I want
to tell you about my Friend, one that has
been so kind and good to me, and one whom
you would enjoy to know, and whose influ-
ence you so much need.” Her companion
listened with unusual earnestness. ‘‘ George,
I want to see you under the care and influence


of my Saviour, Won't you, now, just give
up all, and take hold on Him?” ‘Lhe young
man was deeply impressed, and promised
to seriously meditate on such a step, at the
same time informing his friend that he
would leave town next day to be gone some
time in the interest of his employer. The
young lady passed on down the street to
attend some business, thinking little more
about the young man, until, a few days
after, when a small note was handed her,
bearing these words: “ Mamie, I accepted
your Great Friend as my Friend too: am
saved, Oh, how glad that you told me of
Him! Your friend, George.” The words
were written as he lay dying in a railroad
wreck,


Ver. 20. Zeal im spreading the gospel._—
A remarkable case occurred in the Batticaloa
District. It was that of a heathen who was
employed in one of the mission schools,
not to teach Christianity, but to assist
the Christian teacher in teaching secular
subjects. Being thus brought under the
influence of the gospel, his mind gradually
opened to receive the truth; and as soon
as he had made a profession of Christ, he
had a desire to make known to others the
glad news of salvation. Week after week,
and month after month, he walked six or
eight miles to a distant village, without pay,
to preach Christ to the people. The love of
Christ constrained him to the work, and the
result was that nearly all the people of that
village received the truth, and a short time
after the missionary there baptised on one
occasion thirty-two persons.


Vers. 25-34. A testimony ta Jesus—At
Czsarea Paneas there might been seen, as late
as the middle of the fourth century, a house,
in the courtyard or garden of which was a
group in bronze, consisting of a standing
figure and a woman prostrate at its feet.
Julian, the Apostate Emperor of Rome, com-
manded this memorial to be cverthrown by
his soldiers and destroyed. It was a monu-
ment that bore testimony to the faith he
had renounced, The house was believed
to be that in which this woman, cured of
the bloody issue, ended her days, and the
group represented the Divine Healer and
His fearing and trembling patient.


Ver. 27. No going back.—When sinners
sweep away every other delusion, and view
Jesus as the only Saviour, they will persevere
till they find. When Cortez went to conquer
Mexico, he found that the soldiers were few
and dispirited. The Mexicans were many,
and the enterprise hazardous, The soldiers
would have gone back to Spain, but Cortez
took two or three chosen heroes with him.
and went down to the seaside and broke up
all the ships; and “now.” he said, “ we must


201


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ge


conquer or die. We cannot go back.” When
it is death or life, heaven or hell, pardon or
condemnation, the sinner will be as deter-
mined and courageous as these poor Spaniards
or as this poor woman,


Ver. 28. The ordinances of the Church
may be compared to telephone wires, through
which messages are all the while passing.
You may climb up and put your ear to the
wire, or hold it in your hand, but you will
not hear a word of all the important messages
that are flashing through it. But let an
operator come with his instrument, and
attach it, and he hears every word. So in
the ordinances we touch the invisible wires
that bind heaven and earth together. Along
these wires messages are flying,—up from
earth to heaven, prayers, praises, heart-cries,
faith-filled desires; down from heaven to
earth, answers of comfort, cheer, joy, and
help, blessings of pardon, healing, life, peace.


Ver. 34. Fuith and omnipotence.—Here is
an exhaustless reservoir of power, the power
of omnipotence, and the means by which it
may all be made available to feed our lives,
The mill-owner stores up in a reservoir on
the heights the water that shall run his mill.
Then he needs only a channel or sluice-way
that shall bring the water to his wheels. If
it were an exhaustless reservoir, like the
Atlantic Ocean for extent, he would have no
fear that his mill would run dry. These
miracles and this text teach the Christian
that omnipotence and omniscience alone
bound the reservoir of his spiritual graces,
and that he has under his own control the
width and depth of the channel called “faith,”
which brings them into his life. When
Franklin grasped the principle of electricity,
he could not only draw the lightning from a
single cloud—all the electricity in the earth
and in all the clouds was at his command,
and he could send it upon his errands. When
James Watt mastered the principle of the
expansive power of steam, not only the little
cloud of vapour that issued from his mother’s
tea-kettle was under his control, but all the
steam that could be generated by the stored-
up combustibles of the world was really his.
When the Christian can grasp this truth of
the power of faith, the infinite spiritual
resources of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Ghost are his. “All power is given
unto Me in heaven and in earth.” There is
the reservoir, ‘All things, whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.”
There is the chanrel that conveys the power
into our lives and makes it available.


Ver. 36. God sceking to save.—God be-
seeches men to be reconciled. He stands
knocking—not we. Dr. Munhall in an
address said there is not even a command to
any sinner to pray before believing. A chal-


202


lenge came froma clergyman in the audience,
who quoted Rom. x. 13: “ Whosoever shall
call on the name of the Lord shall be
saved.” “Yes,” says Dr. Munhall, “but
read the next verse: ‘How then shall they
call on Him on whom they have not
believed ?’”

The seeking Saviour.—Mr. Moody was one
night preaching in Philadelphia; near the
pulpit sat a young lady, who listened with
eager attention, drinking in every word,
After he had done talking, he went to her.
“ Are you a Christian?” “No,” she replied,
“TJ wish I were; I’ve been seeking Jesus for
three years.” Mr. Moody replied, “There
must be some mistake.” ‘‘ Don’t you believe
me?” said the distressed girl. ‘Well, no
doubt you think you have been seeking Jesus;
but, believe me, it don’t take three years for
a seeking soul to meet a seeking Saviour.”
“What am I todo,then?” “ Youhave been
trying to do long enough; you must just
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” “Oh!”
said the young lady, “I am so tired of that
word, ‘ Believe,’ ‘believe,’ ‘believe!’ I
don’t know what it means.” “Then we'll
change the word, and say, ‘trust’” “If I
say, ‘I'll trust Him, will He save me?” “I
don’t say that, for you may say ten thousand
things ; but if you do trust Him, He certainly
will.” “ Well,” said she, “I do trust Him ;
but I don’t feel any better!” ‘ Ah!” said
Mr. Moody, ‘‘I see; you’ve been looking for
feelings for three years, instead of looking
to Jesus.” If the translators of the Bible
had everywhere inserted “ feelings” instead
of “ faith,” what a run there would be upon
the Book! But God does not say a word
about feelings from Genesis to Revelation.
With men “seeing is believing,” but with
the believer “believing is seeing.” An
orphan child was once asked by her little
friend, ‘What do you do without a mother
to tell your troubles to?” ‘‘ Mother told me
to go to Jesus; He was mother’s Friend, and
He’s my Friend too,” was the simple reply.
« But He is a long way off ; He won’t stop to
mind you.” Her face brightened, as she
said, “I don’t know about that, but I know
He says He will, and that’s enough for
me.” And should not that be enough for
us all?


Ver. 39. Only sleeping.—Is it no comfort
to be told that the friend you thought to be
dead only sleeps? There was a time when
Christians took great consolation from this
very truth—when it made them ready to die,
and resigned to see those near to them die
at the callof God. Go look at the catacombs
of Rome, and see, in the records which those
faithful caverns have preserved of the creed
and life of our Christian forefathers, how
the early Christians thought of death. The
inscriptions are full of faith. Here a mother
“sleeps in Jesus”; there a child “ sleeps in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.


oe a ry ee


Jesus” ; husband, wife, and friend—they all
“ sleep,’—there is no sign of death in the
catacombs. And I would rather visit now
their grim and unadorned recesses, with the
feelings suggested by the simple stones
which tell how faithful Christians died as
well as lived in the comfort of their faith,
than go into our gay modern cemeteries, with
their costly classic, not Christian, ornaments,
telling of the unrest of broken-hearted
survivors, rather than of the peaceful sleep
of the dead in Christ. Our martyred fore-
fathers of the early Church may teach us
how to live, to die, to bury, and to mourn for
our dead. “She is not dead, but sleepeth.”
The sleep is long—it is too deep for us to
break—our loved one may not be awakened
by the call of affection or the cry of anguish;
but still she only sleeps—she is not dead.
Sleep—and death.—There is in the German
a beautiful fable which represents the angel
of slumber wandering over the earth in
company with the angel of death. As the
evening draws near they approach a village
and encamp upon one of its hills, listening
to the curfew as it “tolls the knell of parting
day.” At last the sounds cease, profound
silence reigns round about, and the dark
mantle of night covers the earth. Now the
angel of sleep rises from her bed of moss,
and, stepping forward to the brink of the
height, silently scatters the unseen seeds
of slumber. The evening wind noiselessly
wafts them out over the habitations of weary
men. Sweet sleep settles down upon all
the inhabitants of the village, and over-
comes them all, from the old man who nods
in his chair to the infant resting in its
cradle. The sick forget their pain; the
afflicted, their anguish; even poverty is ob-
livious of its wants. All eyes are closed.
After her task has been performed, the angel
of slumber turns to her sister and says:
“ When the morning sun appears, all these
people will praise me as their benefactor and
friend. How delightful it is to go about
doing good so silently and all unseen!


What a beautiful calling we have!’’ Thus
spoke the angel of sleep; but the angel of
death gazed upon her in silent sorrow, and
a tear, such as the undying shed, stood
in her earnest eye. “Alas!” said she, “I
cannot rejoice, like you, in the gratitude
of men. ‘The earth calls me its enemy, and
the destroyer of its peace.” “O my sister!”
replied the angel of slumber, “at the great
awaking of the resurrection morning the
souls of the blessed will recognise you as
their friend and benefactor. Are we not
sisters, and the messengers of our common
Father?” They ceased to speak, but the
eyes of the death-angel glistened with tears
as they both fled out into the darkness of
the night.


Ver. 41. Make for the higher.—Nineteen
centuries have passed since the Saviour spoke
these words, but they are as full of meaning
now as they were then to every girl who
hath ears to hear. ‘“ Talitha cumi,’—My
child, arise; get up from any slothful habit,
from any frivolous, idle, selfish habit you
have formed. My little lamb, mount up, be
better this year than you were last year.
Let His voice reach your innermost heart
and awake you from the sleep of indiffer-
ence. Not long ago an interesting memoir
was written of one who heard words very
similar to those which the Saviour spoke to
the daughter of Jairus, and who acted upon
them. An early friend of Catherine Spooner,
who became Mrs. Tait, wife of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, remembers that
in the flush of her bright girlhood, when
every innocent delight was poured into her
cup, she once told her how she had heard in
her inmost heart, amidst all these joys and
pleasures, a hidden voice saying, ‘‘ Make for
the higher.” This aspiration and consecra-
tion of her life was never lowered. In the
sphere of activity and social intercourse,
where the providence of God placed her,
“ Make for the higher ” hallowed and sweet-
ened all lower things for her.








CHAPTER VI.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. His own country.—Wative place, or town: Nazareth, the home of His youth.
Rejected at an earlier stage in His ministry (Luke iv. 14-30), He now returns in the
character of a Rabbi followed by disciples, and makes one more attempt to gain an
attentive and intelligent hearing. ; -

Ver, 3. They were offended.—Scandalised, a graphic word. Christ was to them like a
scandal, i.e. a “ trap-spring,” or “ baited stick in a trap.” Their familiarity with His earthly
antecedents blinded them to His Divine character, and hindered them from rejoicing in the
liberty of the children of God, which He came to proclaim and to bestow on all who would


receive Him.
203


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Fn


Ver. 5. He could there do no mighty work.—The door was barred by their unbelief and
noral insensibility, for God never forces an entrance, but always respects man’s free-will.

Ver. 6. He marvelled.—For besides being “ Perfect God,” He is also “ Perfect Man, of a
teasonable soul and human flesh subsisting ” (Athanasian Symbol).

Ver. 7. By two and two.—A detail peculiar to Mark, who in his list of names does not
group the apostles in pairs as the other Synoptists do—an undesigned coincidence worthy
of notice.

Ver. 11. Verily .. . that city.—Omit this sentence, probably imported from Matt. x. 15.

Ver. 13. Anointed with oil.—This unction was clearly sacramental—“ an outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given.” 1t was both the symbol and the
vehicle of blessings for body and soul. See James v. 14.

Ver, 19. Had a quarrel.—ostered a grudge. Wer inward enmity only waited for an
opportunity to break forth in open hostilities,

Ver. 20. Observed.—Or preserved, i.e. guarded him. Did many things.—w, B, L, and
Coptic read, he was much perplewed, which, however, hardly seems to harmonise with the
next words, and heard Him gladly.

Ver. 21.—Mark alone mentions the three classes of guests: (1) Herod’s political magnates ;
(2) the military dignitaries—“ chiliarchs,” %.e. commanders of a thousand men; (3) the
grandees of Galilee—persons of substance and distinction.

Ver. 22.—The reading best supported by MS. authority (8, B, D, L, A) is that of R.V.
margin—* his daughter Herodias, thus making mother and daughter bear the same name.
It would not be a conclusive argument against this that this child of shame is not otherwise
mentioned in history. The circumstances of her birth would condemn her to obscurity,
and she may have died young. Against the common reading it may be urged that in
A.D. 29 Salome, who was left a widow in A.D. 34, might perhaps barely (but not more than
barely) be described as xopdcvov ; while the other reading would throw back the beginning
of Herod’s connexion with Herodias to the year 20 or 21. This would then have to be
reconciled with the history of his relations to the daughter of Aretas. Josephus says that
at the time when Herodias joined him (which may, indeed, have been some little time after
his first connexion with her) he had then been married to the daughter of Aretas for a
considerable time (Antig. Jud., XVIII. v. 1, 4), He also speaks of the repudiation of Aretas’
daughter as the beginning (be it observed) of the quarrel which led to the war between
Antipas and the Arabian King in A.D. 36.”

Ver. 25. By-and-by.—Instantly. Same word, égavr7js, in Matt. xiii. 21; Luke xviii. 7,
xxi. 9.

Ver. 26. Reject.— Disappoint, or break faith with.

Ver. 27. Executioner.—The speculator was originally one whose duty it was to act as a
spy or scout; then it came to be applied generally to any member of the armed body-guard
of the Roman Emperor. Herod, who loved to imitate the customs of the Imperial Court,
kept about him a company of speculatores to carry out his orders.

Ver, 49. A spirit.—A phantasm or apparition.

Ver. 52. Hardened.— Become dull—insusceptible and irresponsible to spiritual impressions.
See chaps. iii. 5, vili. 17.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—13.
(Paratuets: Mart. xiii. 54-58, ix. 35-38, x. 5-42; Luke ix. 1-6.)


The Master rejected: the servants sent forth—An easy day’s journey would
carry Jesus and His followers from Capernaum to Nazareth. What took our
Lord back there? Mark seems to wish us to observe the connexion between
this visit and the great group of miracles just recorded ; and possibly the link
may be Christ’s hope that the report of these might have preceded Him and
prepared His way. In His patient longsuffering He will give His fellow-villagers
another chance. His heart yearns for “‘ His own country,” and “ His own kin,”
and “ His own house.”

I. We have here unbelief born of familiarity, and its effects on Christ.—
1. They own Christ’s wisdom in His teaching, and the reality of His miracles ;
but the fact that He was one of themselves made them angry that He should
have such gifts, and suspicious of where He had got them. (1) We note in
their questions, first, the glimpse of Christ’s early life. They bring before us the


204


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SZ. MARK. CHAP VI.


quiet, undistinguished home and the long years of monotonous labour. (2) These
questions bring out strongly what we too often forget in estimating Christ’s
contemporaries, viz. that His presence among them, in the simplicity of His
human life, was a positive hindrance to their seeing His true character. (3) The
facts on which the Nazarenes grounded their unbelief are really irrefragable
proofs of Christ’s Divinity. His character and work, compared with the
circumstances of His origin and environment, are an insoluble riddle, except
on the supposition that He was the Word and Power of God. 2. The effects of
this unbelief on Christ. (1) It limited His power. The atmosphere of chill
unbelief froze the stream. He “ would have gathered,” but ‘ye would not,”
and therefore He “could not.” (2) He marvelled. All sin is a wonder to eyes
that see into the realities of things and read the end; for it is all utterly
unreasonable (though it is, alas! not unaccountable) and suicidal. To one who
lives ever in the Father's bosom, what can seem so strange as that men should
prefer homeless exposedness and dreary loneliness ?

II. The new instrument which Christ fashions to cope with unbelief— What
does Jesus do when thus wounded in the house of His friends? Give way to
despondency ? No; but meekly betakes Himself to yet obscurer fields of service,
and sends out the twelve to prepare His way. 1. The gift of power. Christ
gives before He commands, and sends no man into the field without filling
his basket with seed-corn. 2. Their equipment. The minimum of outward
provision is likeliest to call out the maximum of faith. 3. The disposition of the
messengers. It is not to be self-indulgent. If ever a herald of Christ falls
under suspicion of caring more about life’s comforts than about his work, good-
bye to his usefulness. 4. The messengers’ demeanour to rejecters. Shaking
the dust off the sandal is an emblem of solemn renunciation of participation, and
perhaps of disclaimer of responsibility..—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 3, a. Does labour block the way to manhood ?—I. “Ts not this mighty worker
and wise teacher a carpenter?” Well! and what then? Skill in handling the
plane and driving the saw does not expel wisdom from the speech, love from the
heart, and beauty from the life. The artisan may be the conqueror of himself
and of his circumstances, a man of clear vision, high and enduring motive, and
chivalrous philanthropy, as the sun may warm and fertilise the earth with one
set of rays, and paint the “ human face Divine” with another. It is undeniable
that the Nazareth artisan is the true King of the ages and the rightful Lord
of the souls of men.

II. But apart from the obvious and proved compatibility of even menial and
monotonous toil with kindly feeling, generous impulse, strict integrity, and large
usefulness, these disaffected Nazarenes might have dispelled their passion-fed
prejudice by simply recalling the leading names of their typical history. “In
the beginning” God had set the stamp of His approval on human labour, and all
along had chosen as the chief toilers for the higher and spiritual welfare of
Israel and the world those who were devoted to useful handicrafts or pastoral
pursuits. ;

III. But it would be unfair to treat this jaundiced jeer, the outburst of the
lowest and rudest thought of Galilee, as though it expressed the prevalent Jewish
idea of labour. Far from it. Handicrafts were specially honoured amongst the
Jews, and the occupants of the highest posts of learning and tuition were most
familiar with the lower forms of human toil. The teacher of that Rabbi Hillel
who died only a few years before the birth of Christ was in the habit of saying,
“Tove labour.” Another Rabbi said, “Great is labour, for she honours the
Master.” A third, “ When a man teaches his son no trade, it is as if he taught
him highway robbery.” And we owe to the family of the far-famed Gamaliel the


205


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ae


penetrating saying, ‘Beautiful is the union of the study of the law with some
honest calling, for by the diligent pursuit of both a man is weaned from sin, but
all study unaccompanied by work ends in vanity and draws sin in its train,”

IV. Now the strange and inexplicable thing is that this insane prejudice
against handicrafts requiring hard muscular work as blocking the way to the
higher grades of goodness exists and operates amongst us in this year with
a force it never had in Palestine, and produces mischiefs that are positively
incalculable. Only lately it was seriously contended that men in the East End
of London with a scant cupboard and a life of forced daily toil could not be
expected to be Christians, and echoes follow echoes which report nothing but the
deeply rooted falsehood that so long as men have to toil to live they cannot live
to and for and in God. I do not deny the heart-ache of many a labouring life,
the fierce struggle to exist continued in many a home, the unbroken dulness,
the leaden monotony, killing aspiration and deadening faith, the brutalising
conditions often associated with toil. I know the wo.kshop is infested with
corruption, the atmosphere charged with falseness and impurity, and that often
the work itself is hard and rough and ill-paid. I admit the worse, but I cannot
close my eyes to the evidence of facts, and I dare not be false to God’s revelation
of the sublime conquests possible to every man in and through Christ over the
dullest circumstance or the most violently antagonistic lot. I am sure that
labour is in the main wholesome and helpful, a defence from myriad temptations,
a goad to usefulness, a contribution to the progress of the world, and perfectly
compatible with the manliest life.

V. We might learn this from the Iong and thrilling history of toil at the
back of us, for we have had apostles of labour like the brave Hollanders, who
built their own country out of the sands of the sea, and created themselves into
the manliest of men, and the most compact and independent of states by the
act; martyrs to trade like Palissy the Potter ; confessors and reformers like
Richard Cobden, the manufacturer of calicoes ; model men of business like the
bookseller, Daniel Macmillan, and the “ commercial” George Moore; and
myriads more amongst the labouring poor, some of whom, I rejoice to say,
I have intimately known and warmly loved, who, though they never gained any
“social standing,” “ wrought righteousness, subdued the kingdoms” of self and
of home, “stopped the mouths of the lions” of vice and impurity, “ quenched the
power of the fires” of intemperance, “from weakness were made strong, waxed
mighty in power” against domestic and social evils, and helped in turning to
flight armies of aliens. Besides, does not everybody think Goethe is right when
he says “an idle life is an anticipated death”? And must we not in our best
moments admit that in spite of many drawbacks we owe lasting thanks to God
for putting us where work is a necessity and a vocation the condition not only
of a prolonged existence, but of a prolonged happiness? Labour is a benediction
from God. Delitzsch, writing on Jewish Artisan Life, says: “All work worthy
of the name is Godlike, for the world is one great whole in which everything acts
and reacts. Each separate thing is but a stepping-stone to some higher end,
and all things work out together the grand purpose of the whole.”

VI. But it isin the fullest life ever lived—a life unequalled in its sweet dignity
and attractive familiarity, tender strength and daring meekness—a life from.
which moral grandeur never departs—it is from it we get the strongest witness
that “labour” does not block the way to manhood. That life is set deep in the
forests of human toil. The pattern character is in the pattern condition, to use
it, to redeem it, to glorify it, to adjust it to Himself, to exhibit the spirit in
which a man may convert his surroundings into a set of “‘angels on the way of
life,” ministers inspiring and educating him, forces enabling him to partake
more largely of the Divine nature.


206


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.


—————————$———— C—O vO OO





VII. So far as we know Christ left the bench of the carpenter for the post
of teacher and reformer, His work was His college. ‘“ He learnt obedience
by the things He did and suffered,” and acquired fitness for His ministry of
brief but measureless energy, tender pathos, broad sympathies, and heroic self-
sacrifice. The lowliest tasks well done are the best preparations for helpful
ministries to the world. “Labour” is not only not a block to manhood, but
it is the best drill for some of its finest services. 1. Read, I beseech you, the
handwriting of God on your daily toil. “In all your ways acknowledge God,
and He will direct you in your goings” for a subsistence. 2. Breathe into your
work the spirit of beneficence. Do not stop your vision at its details, but range
in thought over its large issues; and as Daniel Macmillan, when a bookseller’s
clerk, found solace from the conviction that he was aiding in the fight against
ignorance and falsehood, and thus promoting the welfare of the world, so take
care you never lose sight of the really helpful results of even the smallest honest
and true work. 3. Be thorough in to-day’s work. Do the thing well that is
near you. Carlyle, after he met Arnold at Rugby, said of this model teacher,
“He is a hero—a man who knows his work and does it.” 4, Give a definite
place to, and find special time and spheres for, the cultivation of your spiritual
nature. Receive into your nature the power of Christ, and He will make the
work of the bench a discipline for the consolation of the weary, the guidance of
the perplexed, the assistance of the needy, and the helping of the world.

VIII. And is it from this religion founded by an artisan, torn in poverty,
whose apostles were fishermen and tax-gatherers, whom the “(common people
heard gladly ”—is it from it and Him the toiling millions are turning away in
indifference or despair? Do you blame the architect for the blunders of the
builder? Will you censure the directors for the unknown intemperance of
the “guard” that wrecks a train? Nor ought we to blame Christ Jesus for
the faults of the Churches. It is not from Him you hear the cry that the
weakest must be driven to the wall, the “fittest only must survive.” It is not
from Christ you hear approval of the tyranny of capital over labour or of the
selfishness of masters in their dealings with men. He bids masters and servants
alike be fair and just, and commands a mutual recognition of brotherhood in
the kingdoms of toil, and breathes into men the spirit that ameliorates the
lot of the wretched, and prepares the way for the widest and most enduring
prosperity.

IX. Above all, beware of the strong illusion which resides in the common-
place. Familiarity with Jesus as the Son of Mary and brother of Joses, as
playmate and fellow-workmen, closed the eyes of the Nazarenes to the spiritual
meaning of His life, and barred their hearts to the entrance of His saving power.
A similar danger is before us. Goaded by Strauss and others, men like Robertson
of Brighton have compelled us to sit with fixed and profitable gaze on the MAN
Christ Jesus. The pulpits and the literature of the Church are full of the
blessed reality of Christ’s humanness. Never was He more fully the Brother
of men since He left the slopes of Olivet. But let us take “large views.” Gop
was IN Cnrist, transfiguring menial toil by faithfulness, obedience, and worship ;
educing from smallest seeds large harvests, and from lowliest deeds grandest
issues ; reconciling all things in our world to Himself, and to ws, by reconciling
us to Himself; adjusting all human relations, revealing the brotherhood of all
men, penetrating our social life with the spirit of thoroughness and unselfishness,
and so making possible a world in which every man does a full man’s work with
a, clear spiritual aim, and so helps to establish a kingdom of righteousness and


truth upon the earth.—J. Clifford, D.D.


Ver. 3, b. Offended in Him.—I. The astonishment of prejudice aroused.—
j 207


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST MARK.
oe a ee Se


1. The prejudice of calling. 2. The prejudice of birth. 3. The prejudice of
relationship. 4. The prejudice of familiarity.

II. The astonishment culminating in bitter jealousy and dislike.—Why
should one occupying such a humble position and surroundings claim any pre-
eminence over them ¢ They could not deny the majesty of the life, the greatness
of the deed, and the sublimity of the utterance ; yet the ever-recurring question
was, “Is not this the carpenter ¢”

III. The protest which their astonishment and unbelief called forth (ver. 4).
This was an old proverb with a new application.

IV. The evil wrought by this blind prejudice in limiting the possibilities
of Christ’s ministry among them.—Human receptivity is one of the essential
conditions of Divine working among men.

V. The painful surprise awakened in Christ by their astonishment and
unbelief.

VI. The good accomplished in spite of prejudice and unbelief—1. Healing
a few sick folk. Poor sufferers were not shut out of His great sympathy, nor
placed beyond the reach of His tender healing, by the unbelief of their neighbours.
9. Teaching in the villages. All that prejudice could do was to exclude its
owners from the sphere of Divine operations.—D. Davies.


Ver. 11. Punishments proportionable to sins.—In these words Christ doth not
wholly excuse those wicked Gentiles; but neither doth He charge them with so
great a degree of guilt as He doth the unbelieving Jews. The Gentiles’ gross
ignorance of their duty might in some measure have been avoided by them,
and was therefore justly to be imputed to them; but they had not the same
opportunities and advantages of improving their knowledge, they had not the
same means of conviction, they had not the same motives to reformation and
amendment of life, as those men unto whom the gospel had been preached ; and
therefore, upon this account, our Lord is graciously pleased to make them
as it were some sort of allowance and abatement. They are here represented
not indeed as entirely blameless, but still as less blamable than others: they
are not exempted from those sufferings that were due unto their sins; but these
sufferings, we are told, shall be less severe than those which will be inflicted
upon greater sinners.

I. In the next world some sinners will be more severely punished than
others.—1. Though this doctrine had not been expressly revealed to us in the
Word of God, yet our own reason alone would have inclined us to have believed
it; for the same arguments that are brought to prove that any punishments
shall hereafter be inflicted upon any sinners, may also be urged to shew that
some sinners shall have a greater share in those punishments than others: the
same vindictive justice of God which inclines Him to punish the sins of the
impenitent disposes Him likewise to observe some proportion in His punishments,
and to allot the greatest degrees of misery to the greatest degrees of guilt. And
even if the justice of God were not so clearly interested in this matter, yet these
future punishments do themselves suggest to us this doctrine; and from the
nature of them we may very reasonably infer their inequality. One great part
of the punishment of hell consists in the remorse of conscience arising from
the sense of guilt; and therefore, where the greatest guilt is, there must be
the greatest remorse, that is the greatest punishment, from the sense of it.
Another argument to prove the inequality of future torments may be this—
namely, that envy, malice, and other vices are not only by the order of God
attended with punishments, but in the nature of the thing necessarily create
torment ; and therefore, where these are in the most eminent degree, they must
necessarily create the greatest torment. 2. This truth will appear still more


208


_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.





evident if we consider the declarations God has been pleased to make concerning
it in His Word. In the Levitical law God commands the magistrate to give the
offender a certain number of stripes, according to his fault; and our Saviour
hath taught us that He will observe the same method in the distribution and
execution of His future punishments (Luke v. 47, 48).

II. What those sins are which will expose men to the greatest suffering.—
1. These are, first, such sins as are in their kind most heinous—such as
blasphemy, hypocrisy, murder, bloody persecution of God’s saints, unnatural
lusts, and the like. These sins are, in the kind of them, so open and so
provoking an affront to the great God of heaven and earth, and are besides
so shocking to human nature and to the first conceptions we are used to form
of the distinction between good and evil, that a man must have perfectly rooted
out of his mind all awe of God, all sense of religion, all regard to goodness,
before he can harbour or encourage the least thoughts of them. 2. Those sins
also will be most severely punished which are committed against the greatest
light. The sins of Christians, of reformed Christians, of those of the best
reformed Church, the sins of such who attend continually upon the ordinances
of God, and come constantly to be partakers of the Supper of the Lord—such
men as these have no pretence for their iniquity, no colour or excuse for their
sins. 3. Those men also have just reason to dread the severest judgments of
God who allow themselves in such sins as shew th> greatest depravity of will—
habitual, deliberate, presumptuous sins—sins which they take pleasure in, and
love to see practised by others.—Bishop Smalridge.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. Meaning of the word “dis- (Job xxii. 22; Ps. xxv. 9; Jer, xxxili, 3;
ciple.”—I. The school.—l. They are John xxi. 22).—#. Hopkins,
in the kingdom of God (John iii. 5).
2. At the feet of Jesus (Luke x. 39; Ver. 2. Christian doctrine.—1. Chris-
Deut. xxxiii. 3). 3. The law brings us tian doctrine applicable to all classes
to Christ (Gal. iii, 24). 4. To be in of men. 2. Christian doctrine caleu-
school is to be “in Christ” (Eph. iv. 21). lated to excite the profoundest swr-
5. It isin the school that the instruc- prise. 3. Christian doctrine always
tion, training, and discipline take place. conveying the impression of wnique
6. “Come unto Me” precedes “ Learn power. 4. Christian doctrine shewing
of Me” (Matt. xi. 28, 29). the insignificance of the personality

II. The lesson.—l. The truth to be of its teachers. Even Christ Himself,
understood (John xvi. 13-15). 2. The according to the flesh, seemed poor and
Person to be appropriated (Eph. iv. 20; inadequate when viewed in the light
Heb. iii. 14; 2 Pet. i. 4). 3. The of the wondrous revelations which He
example to be followed (1 Pet. ii. 21; made to the world.—J. Parker, D.D.
Phil. ii. 5; Matt. xi. 29; John xii. Individuality of spirit, claim, man-
12-17 ; Luke xiv. 27). ner, always provokes criticism. The

III. The Teacher.—The Lord Him- glory of the highest revelation of Chris-
self (John vi. 45). 1. His wisdom  tianity is, that personality is superseded
(Col. ii, 3). 2. His power (1 Cor. i. 24). by spirituality. The speaker is to be
3, His skill (Ps. Ixxviii. 72, xxxii. 8). forgotten in the speech. When both
4, He can teach the heart (Heb. personality and doctrine are to be con-
viii. 10, x. 16). 5. He teaches us to sidered, the danger is that the former
profit (Isa. xlviii. 17). 6. What He may be made to assume undue promi-
requires of those whom He teaches nence. Instead of inquiring What is


P 209


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





said? the inquiry will be Who said
it? Personality is a mere question of
detail in comparison with the truths
which nourish and save the soul.—J/drd.

Lessons.—1. Men may acknowledge
and wonder at the spiritual gifts and
graces which they see to be in others,
and yet themselves have never the
more grace, but be utterly void of all
sanctifying and saving gifts of the
spirit. 2. It is the property of carnal
men to tie the gifts and graces of God’s
Spirit unto outward helps and means,
as if the Lord could not bestow such
gifts, or work such graces by His Spirit,
without such outward helps. 3. So
long as any remain hardened in their
natural blindness and infidelity, no
means will prevail to work faith or
repentance in them, and to bring them
to God, though the means used be
in themselves never so powerful and
excellent.—G. Petter.

Unbelief—In our modern cant
phraseology theirs might have been
designated agnosticism and philosophic
doubt. But philosophic it certainly
was not, any more than much that
now passes, because it bears that
name; at least, if according to modern
negative criticism, the inexplicable is
also the unthinkable. Nor was it
really doubt or agnosticism, any more
than much that now covers itself with
that garb. It was what Christ desig-
nated it—unbelief, since the questions
would have been easily. answered—
indeed, never have arisen—had they
believed that He was the Christ. And
the same alternative still holds true.
If “this One” is what negative criti-
cism declares Him, which is all that
it can know of Him by the outside—
the Son of Mary, the Carpenter and
Son of the carpenter of Nazareth,
whose family occupied the humblest
position among Galileans—then whence
this wisdom which, say of it what you
will, underlies all modern thinking, and
these mighty works, which have mould-
ed all modern history ?—A. Hdersheim,
DD;


Ver. 3. “Js not this the carpenter ne
210


—Certainly ; yet that refutes nothing.
It only helps to prove the claims of
Jesus to be the Son of God. If He
had been a learned rabbi or philosopher,
it might have been said He had received
His wisdom from men; but as He
was only a poor village carpenter, He
must have been taught of-Ged. 1. This
tells us how wisely Jesus spent His
youth and early manhood—not in
idleness, but in useful toil, 2. It
teaches us that there is no disgrace
in working at a trade. Marks of toil


are brighter insignia of honour than


jewelled rings and delicate whiteness.
3. It shows also the condescension of
Christ. Though rich, He became poor,
and even toiled for His daily bread.
It assures us, therefore, of His sympathy
now with those who toil. It is a plea-
sant thought that the hands that now
hold the sceptre once wielded the ham-
mer and the saw.—/. R. Miller, D.D.
The history of Nazareth has been re-
peated on a large scale in the history of
Israel.—Israel, as a whole, also made
the nearness of Jesus, His “not being
afar off,” an occasion of unbelief and
fall. This temptation, resulting from
the constant beholding of the Holy
One with common eyes, was pointed to
in Deut. xxx. 14 (cp. Rom. x. 8). It
is the temptation which besets the
intimates and fellow-citizens of chosen
spirits and great geniuses; which
besets theologians in the daily study
and service of the truths of revelation,
ministers in their commerce with the
ordinances of grace, and all the lesser
officers of the house of God in their
habitual contact with the externals of
Divine things. It is the temptation
also of ancient towns and Churches,
which have enjoyed exalted privileges,
and indeed of the whole Church itself
(Luke xvii. 8).—J. P. Lange, D.D.
The offence of the Nazarenes on
account of Christ’s humble origin a
picture of all other offences in Him.
1. An offence—(1) In His terrestrial
state and existence. (2) In His human
lowliness. (3) In His brothers and
sisters with their human weakness.
2. Yet an offence which will leave us


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


self-condemned, since it implies an
admission of His wisdom and of His
deeds. 3. A most fatal offence, since
unbelief deprives us of the blessings
of Christ’s wondrous works.—Jbid.

Lessons.—1. This should teach us to
be well content to be abased in this
world for Christ’s sake, seeing He, for
our sakes, and to do us good, refused not
to take upon Him so mean and lowa
condition. 2. It should move us to
shew all humility towards our brethren
in and for Christ’s sake. 3. It should
restrain in us all ambitions and covet-
ous desires of worldly greatness, honour,
wealth, etc.—G. Petter.

The message more than the messenger.
—If a message be sent to us from
some great person, we look not so much
at the person that brings it as at
the message itself. So when ministers
preach the Word of God to us, we
must not so much have an eye to the
outward quality of the persons that
preach as to the doctrine itself which
they deliver, the excellency and Divine
authority whereof must move us to
embraceand yield obedience to it.—/bid.


Vers. 4-6. How Christ victoriously
contends with the unbelief of prejudice
among His own countrymen.—l. Pre-
judice everywhere opposes Him. (1) In
an impure and a gross apprehension
of His dignity, as of a magical secret
doctrine and art. (2) In the reckon-
ing up of all His earthly relationships,
in order to urge them to the dis-
paragement of His heavenly dignity.
(3) In a slavish community of envious
and low judgment upon His life. 2.
How the Lord lays hold of and over-
comes this prejudice. (1) He refers it
all to a universal fact, which they
might afterwards reflect upon. (2) He
does not forget, but heals, the few
who needed and were susceptible of
help among His scorners. (3) He
gathers up His influences, and with-
draws. (4) He causes the light of His
presence to shine brightly throughout
the whole district.—J. P. Lange, D.D.
Good and


Ver. 4. Lessons,— 1.


CHAP. VI.


faithful ministers of God are usually
most subject to contempt and dis-
honour in the places where they are
most familiarly known. (1) Envy and
emulation cause men often to repine
at the honour and preferment of such
as are and have been familiarly known
to them, and perhaps also have been
heretofore their inferiors or equals.
(2) Where ministers daily live and
converse, they cannot but through
human frailty discover some infirmities ;
and so their infirmities being most
known in such places, hence it is that
they are the more apt there to be
despised. (3) The daily presence and
commonness of a benefit are apt to
breathe a contempt and loathing of it.
2. Honour and good respect are due
unto God's faithful ministers wherever
they live. (1) They are spiritual
fathers (1 Cor. iv. 15); therefore to
be honoured. (2) They are God’s
messengers and ambassadors (2 Cor.
v. 20); therefore to be respected for the
Lord’s sake who sends them. (3) This
wins reverence and authority to their
ministry, causing it to be the more
regarded, and become more profitable
and effectual.—G. Petter.


Ver. 5. The right atmosphere is want-
ing. -—Fire cannot burn in a vacuum.
His hands, indeed, were laid upon a
few sick folk, and He healed them ; but
the mightier work of healing diseased
minds and troubled hearts could not
there be accomplished—that required
stronger faith.


Ver. 6. Jesus wonders at that at
which He would have us wonder ; and
He takes notice of our faults, to the
end that we may reflect upon our-
selves. How much more strange and
surprising are our own infidelity or
unsuitable returns, after the instruc-
tion and miracles of so many ages !—
P. Quesnel.

Nature, causes, and effects of wn-
belief.—I. The nature of unbelief.—
1. Practical disregard of God’s Word
and Commandments is really infidelity.
9. Afraid to receive the promises of


211


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


TD


God. 3. Fearing to take comfort from
the Word of God.

TI. The causes of unbelief—
1. Voluntary ignorance (Rom. i. 19-21).
2. Wilful resistance of conscience
(2 Thess. ii, 10-12). 3. A deliberate
preference for sins (John iii. 19).

III. The effects of unbeliefi—
1. It rejects Christ, the Lord of Glory,
and therefore deserves eternal punish-
ment. 2. It leads the sinner further
and further away from God.—H. M.
Villiers.

The unbelief which comes between us
and Christ is that state of heart and
feeling which dislikes the strain and
trouble of thinking of things out of
this present world ; which looks away
from what is out of sight and to come,
and is moved and impressed only by
what is just before it —immediate
interests, immediate pleasures, common
customs. It is the unbelief of care-
lessness, deadness of soul, lazy, selfish
indifference; which cannot understand
how any one can be in earnest, so as
to take pains and suffer trouble for
the sake of things unseen; which
cannot bring itself to think that God
is in earnest and the work of serving
and pleasing Him a real thing. It is
the unbelief which comes of wishing to
save ourselves trouble, of not thinking
it worth while to force ourselves to
attend, to think, to remember, to lay
to heart. This is the unbelief which
comes between us and the power of
Christ to improve us, to strengthen us,
to comfort us. What we will not
have done for us that He cannot do,.—
Dean Church.


Vers. 7-11. The sending forth of the
twelve apostles, formally commissioned
to preach the gospel of the kingdom
of heaven, reminds us of that noble
and wonderful stream which Ezekiel
saw in vision proceeding from under
the threshold of the Temple, at first
but a small rivulet not more than
ankle-deep, but which, as it went on
its way, increased to a stream knee-
deep, then up to the thighs, and after-
ward to a great river for a man to


212


swim in, and carrying healing in its
blessed waters whithersoever it flowed.
Jesus is the True Temple of God, and
in Him this stream of life rises, and
through His apostles and disciples it
flowed forth, at first a very small
stream, but it has gone on widening
and deepening until its waters have
filled the whole earth, and whitherso-
ever it has flowed it has carried life
and healing (Ezek. xlvii. 1-9; Rev.
xxii. 1-7; John vii. 37-39). To-day
it is the mightiest moral force in the
world, and there are none to sneer at
it except fools and knaves (though
many still oppose its onward flow),
while millions all over the world and
among all peoples live to bless God for
His love and for His unspeakable gift
in Christ Jesus.—G. F'. Pentecost, D.D.

A beginning only.—Mark signifi-
cantly says, “Then Jesus began to
send them forth”: for ever since that
day He has been giving similar work,
and qualifying similar representatives.
1. To go forth from the presence of
Jesus. 2. To be willing to work to-
gether. 3. To be content with the use
of moral influence. Men are to be
urged, not forced. 4. To exercise self-
denial and cheerful trust in God.—
A. Rowland.


Ver. 7. Two and two is a wise rule
for all Christian workers. It checks
individual peculiarities and _ self-will,
helps to keep off faults, wholesomely
stimulates, strengthens faith by giving
another to hear it and to speak it,
brings companionship, and admits of
division of labour. One and one are
morethantwiceone.-—A. Maclaren, D.L.

Jesus sends out His disciples by twos.
—TIn the line of this need, and for
its supply, woman, with her blessed
ministries, is granted as a help-meet
to man. He is made stronger and
enters a larger and better life by her
pure companionship. And this, too,
outside of the sacred relation of husband
and wife. ‘They need each other's
mutual help, and are uplifted in the
relation simply of man and woman.
They complement and help each other


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.


SS


to attain and enjoy higher good. In
all this man’s need of going out of
himself and the healthfulness of the
mutual impact of true natures are
recognised.—W. WM. Campbell.

Christian friendship.—I. The power
of Christian friendship.—1. Sympathy:
its immense help in enabling one to
meet the difficulties, bear the trials,
and do the work of Christian life.
2. Counsel: the advice of a wise friend,
how valuable when in perplexity!
3. Love: its stimulating power.

II. The beauty of Christian friend-
ship.—1. Its unselfishness, eachstriving
to help and make sacrifices for the other.
2. The common pursuit of noble aims,
the common interest of Christian life.
3. The exchange of helpful thoughts
on great subjects, the intercourse of
minds enlightened by the knowledge
of Christ.

III. The responsibility of Christian
friendship.—Like all blessings, it has
its dangers. It can be misused—1l. By
weakly yielding to please a friend,
instead of using the privilege of friend-
ship to try to put him right. 2. By
flattering a friend’s weakness, instead
of pointing out and helping him to
eradicate his faults. 3. By that ab-
sorption in one another which becomes
a hindrance to the real work of life.—
A. G. Mortimer, DD.


Ver. 8. God’s messengers.—l. Such
as are called of God to performance
of great and weighty duties must
free themselves from such impediments
as will hinder them in those duties.
2. The best Christians may sometimes
be called to a mean and poor estate, in
which they may be destitute of neces-
saries for maintenance of this life.
(1) That God’s special providence and
fatherly care may more appear 1n
providing for them when outward
means failthem. (2) To try and exer-
cise their faith in depending on His
fatherly providence in their wants.
(3) To wean their hearts from love of
earthly things, and to stir up in them
the greater love and desire of spiritual
and heavenly riches.—G’. Petter.


Maintenance for ministers.—1. It is
not fit for ministers of the Word to be
cumbered and troubled with the affairs
of this life. 2. It is the ordinance of
God that ministers should receive a
sufficient maintenance from the people
whom they are called to teach.—Jbid.


Ver. 11. Lessons—When we see
God dishonoured by great and heinous
sins, we ought to testify our utter dis-
like and detestation of them, some way
or other. (1) By an outward gesture
and carriage (Acts xiii. 51, xviii. 6;
Neh. v.13; 2 Kings xix. 1). (2) By
our words, plainly and sharply reprov-
ing such sins, and denouncing God’s
judgments against them (Eph. v. 11).
2. The contempt of God’s ministers,
especially of their ministry and doctrine,
is an execrable and odious sin in the
sight of God. 3. The sins of wicked
men pollute the very ground on which
they tread.—Jbid.

Severity or patience?—The whole
conditions of work now are different.
Sometimes, perhaps, a Christian is
warranted in solemnly declaring to
those who receive not his message that
he will have no more to say to them.
That may do more than all his other
words. But such cases are rare; and
the rule that is safest to follow is rather
that of love, which despairs of none,
and, though often repelled, returns
with pleading, and, if it have told often
in vain, now tells with tears, the story
of the love that never abandons the
most obstinate.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 12. True repentance—1. Its
nature. (1) It is represented in Scrip-
ture both as the gift of God and as the
duty of the sinner. (2) It is insepar-
ably connected with faith in Christ.
It includes—(a) A genuine sorrow for
sin. (6) An unreserved and ingenious
confession of sin. (c) A firm purpose,
through Divine grace, to walk in new-
ness of life—a purpose that is proved
to be sincere by the fruits it produces.
2. Its indispensable necessity. This
is proved by—(1) The universality of
sin, (2) The express command of God,

213


CHAP. VI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


eo SE a ee ee


and the awful threatenings He has
denounced against the finally impeni-
tent. 3. Motives and encouragements
to the performance of this duty.
(1) The very call and command to
repent may afford encouragement to
returning sinners. (2) The Word of
God is full of the most encouraging
and express promises to penitent sin-
ners. (3) The examples recorded in
Scripture of sinners who obtained
mercy, notwithstanding the peculiar
greatness of their guilt. (4) The un-
speakable happiness which awaits the
true penitent in a future and eternal
world.—D. Black,


Ver. 13. Miracles.—It was not magic
that conquered disease and death. We
must not assume that, because powers
are beyond our own knowledge and
control, they are therefore lawless
and irregular. Order is heaven’s first
law. Jesus violates no principle in
restoring the dead to life, but works
according to some higher, unknown,
and more heavenly principle. It is
the kingdom of heaven overcoming the
kingdom of darkness. The apostles,
after Christ’s ascension, preached One
who had all power in heaven and on
earth, who had come to deliver men
from the plagues and adversaries tor-
menting them.

Power in common things.—There is
a potency in the commonest things.
God has ordered it so. He certainly
will not ignore His own arrangement.
Every cure wrought without the aid
of magical art or imposition and


quackery, wrought with the aid of
remedies provided in the earth and air,
wrought wisely, honestly, scientifically,
is a new proof that One who in other
times healed the bodies and souls of
men is still at work, that He still
gives knowledge and insight to those
who seek it, enables them to look into
the condition of their fellow-men, and
to be the ministers to them of His own
blessed, healing, life-giving power.

The healing art the gift of God.—We
may claim all true powers of the heal-
ing art and all honest studies in
physical science as the gifts of God,
ever intended to be the instruments
of extending and proclaiming the Re-
deemer’s kingdom over the earth.

Credentials of authority.—Through-
out all the centuries Christians have
been following in the footsteps of Christ
in their ministry to the sick, the
diseased, the devil-ridden, and the
dying : thousands of hospitals for every
manner of disease and affliction ; nurses
everywhere to care for the suffering ;
the white cross on the battle-fields;
remorseless warfare against every form
of evil, and successful warfare too.
A Christlike life, sympathy, active and
tender, with the suffering poor under
all conditions, are the credentials of
authority which Christ gives to us all
now.—G. F'. Pentecost, D.D.

The duties of a pastor.—Here is an
emblem of the several duties of a
pastor—namely, courageously to prose-
cute incorrigible sinners, to treat the
weak with mildness, and to apply him-
self to all with zeal. P. Quesnel.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—29.


(PaRaLLets: Marr. xiv. 1, 2, 6-12; Luxe ix. 7-9.)


Death and burial of the Baptist.—John the Forerunner, like the Master whose


way he came to prepare, died by violence.
John had precedence of Jesus both in the time and


were slain by cruel hands.


Both died in the prime of life ; both


the manner of his death; for while Jesus died as a malefacter on the Cross of


shame, John died the death of a Roman citizen by decapitation.


Moreover,


while mocking crowds insulted Jesus as He hung in the agonies of torture,
John’s death was instantaneous and in the privacy of a dungeon.

I. Faithful goodness on the part of the Baptist.—1. John was pre-eminently
a good man, The light of personal holiness shone in all he said and did (John


214


a ®


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI,

Sa eer eee a ee
v. 35). When Christ challenged the Jews concerning him, no man durst speak
disparagingly of him. The verdict of the whole land was in his favour (Mark
xi. 30-32). 2. John’s goodness was essentially faithful goodness. He had the
courage of his convictions. He dared to press goodness upon a corrupt land,
and to enforce holiness among a degenerate people. Wherever he saw sin he
denounced it unsparingly, without respect of persons or consideration of self-
interest (Luke ii. 7-14; Matt. iii, 7-10). Even the palace did not escape
his faithful testimony to the truth; and as the truth was unpalatable, his
adherence to it brought him at length to prison and to death. Ease, honour, and
pleasure might all have been his, if he would but abstain from interfering with
the guilty Herod ; but these he regarded as but dross in comparison with a good
conscience and a holy life—nay, life itself he gladly relinquished rather than
swerve a hair’s-breadth from his loyalty to God.

II. Cruel sin on the part of his enemies.—1. In Herod sin gained power day by
day. Though all history brands him as vile and despicable in his iniquity to an
unusual degree, yet sin was not always so strong in him as it became at last.
By self-indulgence it gradually mastered him, in spite of checks and warnings,
and even of convictions. 2. Bad as Herod was, Herodias was infinitely worse.
Terrible as it is to be a great sinner, what is that to being a great tempter ?
We may, from the force of temptation, be led wrong ourselves; but calmly,
persistently, and in cold blood to say and do and plan things destructive to the
welfare of others is diabolical. 3. Sin is always a cruel thing. See here how
it so steeled the heart of what was once a woman that she counselled murder
in the gay moments of a birthday feast. There had been days of innocence
now long gone by, when Herodias was a girl, a child, an infant. As she played
by her mother’s knee, who could have foretold that those prattling, laughing lips
would one day frame such a demand as this (ver. 24)? The various stages
which led her step by step to such an abyss of inhuman cruelty it is not now
possible to trace; nor is that necessary, for the course of sin never varies in its
main features, but is ever the same,—as it flows on, it gradually carries all
before it; it ever deepens, increases, hardens, and pollutes, until all high
principle vanishes, every tender feeling is eradicated, all self-rule is destroyed,
and the wretched victim is henceforth the slave of Satan, bound and tied by the
chain of sin with which he once thought he was only amusing himself. 4. The
hideous nature of sin is still more evident in the case of Herodias. or not only
had she herself arrived at a fearful stage of cruelty, but she had brought herself
to teach her own daughter the same. Can there be conceived a lower depth of
depravity than that ?

IIT. Swift retribution on the part of conscience.—The tragedy was soon
ended; but its consequences were not so easily got rid of. “No matter that
Herod was by profession a Sadducee, with no faith in the resurrection ; his creed
was forgotten in the superstitious dread which the memory of his crime fostered.
The shade of the murdered prophet haunted him wherever he went ; it followed
him even beyond the seas; and the fear it engendered became a by-word and
a proverb in Roman society, and furnished material for the biting satire of
Persius,—

‘But when the feast of Herod’s birthday comes,


Thou mov'st thy lips, yet speak’st not in fear,
Thou keep’st the Sabbath of the circumcised,
And then there rise dark spectres of the dead.’


IV. Last offices of love on the part of John’s disciples—‘‘ Whether or not
there be any truth in the tradition that Herod threw the head over the walls of
the black fortress of Macherus, where the bloody deed was done, we may be

215


ae | ae


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


nS


certain that his cruel paramour, when she had once got into her possession her
strange plaything, on its golden charger, would never think of gratifying his
disciples by giving it to them for decent burial. So that we may, with perfect
certainty, conclude, in thinking of that funeral somewhere among the lonely
wilds, on the eastern side of the Dead Sea, that it was a mutilated corpse that
these men took up, and that, wrapping it in the garment of camel's hair, with
which they were so familiar, they tenderly and sadly placed in some cave of the
desert, But we can well believe that, though in one sense not before them, that
noble head was ever present to their mind’s eye, with the flowing locks that had
never been cut, with its tongue that had never faltered in its holy message, and
its eyes that had never flinched before tyrant mob or tyrant king. The very
fact that they were close at hand when those services were required of them, in
this distant place, shews the depth of their attachment to him. If they could
not share his prison, they could at least keep near it, and shew their devotion
and their love by ministering to him even when he was in the clutches of the
cruel Herod ; and now, when the end had come, they were there, ready to do their
part, tenderly and courageously. They took his body—his poor, headless body—
and buried it. It may be that before they left, when they had carefully closed
the cave in which their dead was placed, they rudely scratched upon the rock
some epitaph in his honour. What was it? Methinks it might well be the
words in which His Master bore testimony to him: ‘ Among them that are born of
women, there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist.’”


Herod and John.—General history is at once an entertaining and an edifying
study. It brings before us human agents with their passions and pursuits, and
arrests our attention, and promotes our advantage by the virtues and vices which
it exhibits, with their opposite consequences. Biography, or the history of
particular persons, is in a high degree interesting and improving. It is like
turning the attention from a general group in painting, and directing it to
a single portrait, where we not only mark how the colours swell from the
canvas, but study the turn and expression of every feature, and arrive at a
knowledge of the character and disposition.

I. The weakness and degeneracy of human nature, by which we can be
led to commit deeds which we regard as in the last degree heinous.—In
speculation, and when left to the unbiassed dictates of our own hearts, guilt
is always the object of our abhorrence. In a particular manner inhumanity
and cruelty strike us as crimes of a most odious description, and we shrink from
them as disgraceful to our nature. But the cool convictions of the moral
principle weighing the merit of actions in abstract theory, and the inflamed
suggestions of passion rushing to its object in real life, are widely different from
each other ; and though perfectly friendly to virtue in speculation, we may be
led in practice to the perpetration of deeds fearful for atrocity. Watch and
pray that ye enter not into temptation. Be not high minded, but fear. Strive,
according to His working who worketh. within you mightily. Draw nigh to
God, and He will draw nigh to you.

II. The danger of bad counsel and bad company.—Herodias was the evident
means of Herod’s great guilt. Of himself, it would appear that he was far
from being an utterly depraved character. Though reproved by the Baptist, he
had no wish to cast him into prison, nor would his anger ever have proceeded
so far against him as to have taken away his life. But the artifices of her with
whom he had connected himself in unlawful intercourse triumphed over his more
amiable feelings, and in the end rendered him deaf to the remonstrances of
conscience. Such is the usual effect of bad associates. If you have companions
of this description, they will, how innocent soever or well disposed you may at


216





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.








present be, accomplish your destruction by availing themselves of all your weak
and unguarded moments. They will not desist from their importunities till
they have estranged you from God, and made you instruments of their
unhallowed desires and passions. What have they to give that can be equivalent
for such a sacrifice? The pleasures of guilt which awaken a foreboding that
is never laid, though the pleasures themselves perish in the using. s

IIT. The rapid progress of the sinner from guilt to guilt—Herod not only
continued in unlawful connexion with Herodias, but seized John for remon-
strating with them, and cast him into prison. With this despotical stretch of
his authority he was not long contented. The servant of God and the reprover
of sin must not only be deprived of his liberty, he must be bereaved of his life,
Do not suppose that the complicated guilt of this monster of iniquity can never
become yours. Look into life, both low and high, and tremble for yourselves.
In the humblest ranks of society you have repeated proofs of the progress of
iniquity. There you see the artificer and the day-labourer, in their aversion to
toil, ceasing to work with their accustomed regularity. Idleness involves them
in want, and impels them to fraud and rapine, and every unlawful means of
getting money. At length they lay hold of their neighbour’s person on the
highway, and rob and plunder him, and murder him to escape detection.
Ascend the scale, and you see similar results from similar beginnings. The
libertine of fashion becomes at last fearless of God, and regardless of the rights
and callous to the sufferings of his acquaintance. He contracts debts which he
neyer intends to pay, ruins characters whom he promised to protect, seduces
the unsuspecting from kindred and parents and home; and after being satiated
with the pleasures of guilt, he abandons them without a scruple to poverty and
misery. Extend your observations to the course of all the wicked, and you will
see that when once men enter into the path of sin they seldom or never stop.
But the vices not only spring out of each other, they increase perpetually in
enormity. Herod began with an act of wrongful imprisonment ; next he was
guilty of a bloody murder ; and, at an after-period, he surpassed even this com-
plication of iniquity by insulting the last moments of Christ, and delivering Him
into the hands of His enemies to be crucified as a traitor and blasphemer.
Guard your heart ; guard and fence your conduct ; and beware of the repetition
of any heinous act as certain to lead you to another still more heinous, till it
end you in the extremity of guilt.

IV. The unspeakable terrors of an awakened conscience.—Impelled by
passion and appetite, you may despise the monitor within, and rush on fearless
of consequences. But all this obstinacy and intrepidity neither alters the
nature of guilt nor ends the supremacy of conscience. The power of this moral
ruler is suspended, not destroyed ; and the recovery of its ascendency will prove
to you most terrible. Then it will bring up your crimes, and marshal them in
battle-array against you ; and as the supposed return of the beheaded Baptist
into life disturbed the heart of the king who murdered him, so shall they rack
your soul with unspeakable horrors, and distract and drive you mad, with the
prospect of final damnation.—W. Thorburn.





Imperfect reformation insufficient.—Herod’s proficiency in matter of religion.
—1. Herod’s preservation of John Baptist’s life, and sheltering and protecting
him against Herodias’ malice. Wicked and unregenerate men may take such a
liking to the Word of God, and be so affected with it, as to become maintainers
and protectors and defenders of the servants of God that minister it to them.
2. The Word of God may so far prevail upon an unregenerate man as to work
in him a fear and an awful regard, and to captivate him to the authority of
religion in the servants of God. (1) Did Herod stand in fear of John? "Tis


217


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





then no evidence of piety and goodness not to do evil for fear of others. (2) Did
Herod fear John, and keep within some compass and bounds of moderation
because of John? In what case are they that are of his temper in the gospel,
that could boast and profess that he neither feared God nor reverenced man ?
Licentious, audacious, profane wretches, such as those graceless Jews were,
that, when they saw Stephen’s face shine like an angel, yet durst oppose him
and offer violence to him. 3. A third effect that was wrought in Herod towards
John Baptist is a worthy esteem and acknowledgment of John’s piety and
sanctity, and those graces that were in him; he accounted him a just man
and holy. Carnal and unconverted and sensual men yet can come thus far,
as to have the virtues and graces that shine in others in a fair esteem and
in some admiration. 4. There is a fourth effect wrought in Herod towards
John Baptist—that is a reverent behaviour towards him. He observed him,
had a care to please him in his demeanour ; he would be loath to offend him as
little as he could. A carnal, unconverted man may be so affected towards
religion as to be willing to accommodate his carriage to the best content of the
servants of God. 5. A fifth effect of John’s ministry in Herod is a willing
attention to his preaching. “ He heard him gladly.” Even an unregenerate man,
living in a state of sensuality, may be a diligent, and constant, and willing, and
ready frequenter of the preaching of the Word. 6. There is yet a further step
of proficiency in Herod that was a very specious conformity to St. John’s
doctrine. ‘He did many things”—yielded obedience to many instructions. An
unregenerate man may come thus far, as to be won and persuaded by the Word
to the performance of many good duties. Herod, it seems, yielded obedience
to John’s preaching in many particulars. (1) In his private conversation ’tis
like he abstained from some vicious courses. (2) In his public administration
and government he listened to John in reforming of abuses, made many good
laws for the well-ordering of his kingdom and repressing of vices. (3) Was
not wanting in ecclesiastical affairs. He countenanced John’s preaching, and
assisted him against gainsayers and opposers. He did not only hear him gladly,
but was persuaded by him to do, yea to do many things in conformity to his
doctrine. ’Tis much to come thus far, not only to afford him audience, but
to perform obedience: not to rest in the notional part, but to make some
progress in the practical part of religion. Yet so did Herod and many others
that never attained to true conversion, and so fell short of life and salvation,

Il. The insufficiency of this his progress, and wherein it failed and came
short.__l. For his esteem and regard of John’s person and piety. “Tis very
questionable, as unsound, upon the suspicion of those false grounds, from which
it did arise; and we may see three suspicious grounds of it. (1) The first
suspicious ground of this high esteem of John we may justly conceive was
popularity. When religion is in request and grown into fashion, and becomes
a matter of reputation, ’tis no great matter then to become an admirer and
honourer of it. (2) A second suspicious ground of Herod’s respect to John that
makes it insufficient is policy. Herod was a fox, as our Saviour terms him,
He thought it safe to hold in with John, to get him to the court, and to put
countenance upon him ; it would satisfy the people well. (3) To make the best
of it, a third ground of Herod’s good respect to John, that makes his pro-
ficiency to be insufficient, might be a natural ingenuity, a remainder of right
reason and common honesty, which might be in Herod, and might move him to
think well of John Baptist, and esteem worthily of him. Besides those things
that are truly and properly spiritual, there are some excellences that do
accompany piety and religion, that may be apprehended and well esteemed by
mere natural men; and accordingly their natural ingenuity will affect and
approve them, though they have no true relish of that which is indeed spiritual


218


Ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.








in piety and religion: thus deceiving their own hearts as if they loved
religion for the sanctity of it. St. Gregory speaks excellently to this purpose :
“Many a man deceives himself, and thinks he loves that in religion which
indeed he loves not, but some other thing for. it.” (a) Natural ingenuity
will see and discern a great deal of innocence in religion. True piety and
Christianity will make Christians unblamable, inoffensive, and of a harmless
conversation, so that they gain a good report of them that are without. (b) Inge-
nuity observes a great deal of utility and profitableness in religion. Good
Christians are not only harmless and inoffensive, but they are useful and
helpful, and beneficial to the times and places wherein they live. (c) Ingenuity
can observe a great deal of beauty and comeliness in religion. Piety, when
it appears in the life of a Christian, is exceedingly lovely ; as Solomon speaks, it
makes the face to shine. It was not John’s piety that relished with Herod,
but these condimenta pietatis which were as sauces and sweetenings unto it.
2. His diligent attention to John’s preaching and ministry: he heard him
gladly. But even this forwardness falls short and will appear insufficient upon
two suspicions. (1) We have just cause to suspect his disposition out of which
he did it. (a) All this his forwardness in hearing, it was but a passion, a
pleasure, and a delight that he took, and that brought him on to give John the
hearing. (6) His delight and joy was too forward. Some other motion and
affection should have been stirred up in him. No question, John’s preaching,
had it been suffered to work kindly, wouid have stirred up fear, and care,
and sorrow, and repentance, and humiliation: we hear of none of these; but
only Herod’s fancy was taken, and begat delight in him. The matter of salva-
tion, ‘tis not a jocund and a sporting work; it must be wrought out with fear
and trembling. (c) He delighted in John’s preaching with the same affection
that he shewed in other things. John preaches, and he pleases him; Herodias
dances, and she pleases him,—no difference. A religious man, even in outward
delights, rejoices spiritually ; a carnal man, even in spiritual things, rejoices
carnally. (d) It was a passion of joy in hearing the Word; but it was yet
controllable, and easily overcome by another delight. His birthday joy, and his
delight he takes in the damsel’s dancing, hath exceeded and overcome all the
delight he took in John. Was Herod ever so much taken with John’s preaching
as to yield to him so great a suit as he granted to his minstrel? (2) The motives
that made him thus attentive are very suspicious. (a) Was it not the novelty
of John’s teaching that did thus delight him? Let John hold on for some time,
all this forwardness will cool again. "Tis but the crackling of thorns in the
fire; a sudden blaze for a time, and soon out again. (6) Was it not some
generality of truth that might give Herod content? No doubt John had many
deep discourses in matters of divinity about the nature of God and the con-
troversies of the times. And Herod can hear these discourses gladly. There is
in many men a kind of spiritual lust in their understanding, that is much
pleased with such high strains and contemplative discourses. (c) "Tis like
John’s preaching cleared a great doubt and scruple in Herod’s mind concerning
the Messiah that had much troubled him. That Christ’s kingdom was not of
this world, that Christianity teaches obedience to worldly powers and poten-
tates, doth not disturb them, much less destroy them—this doctrine was
welcome to Herod; he heard it gladly. (d) John had his thunderings against
the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the priests, and scribes, and doctors of the
law ; he was a sharp reprover of vice and disorders; he taught the soldiers to
be content with their wages, and not to mutiny. And Herod could hear other
men’s faults taxed and reproved; it was music to him. (¢) Were there not some
personal excellences in John’s preaching that Herod delighted in—his wit, or
elocution, or some graceful delivery? 3. The third thing considerable is


us


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
Se i Ne ee ee


Herod’s conformity to John’s preaching; he yielded to his doctrine in many
things, and submitted to it. He was not a bare auditor, gave John the hearing
only, but made some progress in practice too. John’s preaching prevailed
with him, and made him do many things. Now, surely, a very specious
conformity, had it not some suspicions and failings in it. (1) This conformity
is suspicious, because—(a) These many things which Herod did, they were
some light, easy performances. He put himself to no great pain in this doing
or forbearing. Canst thou mortify thy dearest sins, cross thy lusts, and strive
against them? work thyself to the practice of those good duties that are
painful and laborious? Such a conformity argues truth of grace in thee.
(0) These many things which Herod did, tis like they were some plausible
performances that the world will take notice of and speak well of ; such make
for Herod’s reputation in the world, and you may win him unto them. But try
Herod with the more inward and private and secret parts of piety, that men
cannot discern or take notice of ; thy secret devotion and prayer to God, thy
daily bewailing thy sins ’twixt God and thine own conscience, and the strivings
of thy soul against sinful inclinations, thine alms in secret, as Christ directs,—
oh! these make no noise, they are not matter of ostentation ; and so Herod
forbears them. (c) These many things that Herod did might be some civil
and public and outward administrations, the redress of public abuses, some
good orders published and enjoyed. No doubt many an honest cause sped the
better for John, the course of justice went on more speedily. These good duties
put Herod to no great trouble or pain. “Tis more hard to mortify one bosom
sin that thy soul delights in, than to bring thyself to the outward performance
of the whole law of God. (2) As the obedience of Herod was suspicious, so we
find it to be failing and defective. He did many things, but yet. fell short ; he
failed in other things; he dispensed with himself for some sins which he would
not part with. This he would do, but that he would not do. "Iwas like
Naaman’s conversion; he promises some duties in religion, but sues for a
dispensation in others. “ Herein God be merciful to me: this sin I cannot part
with.” Whereas entire and universal obedience is only acceptable and of
account with God (Ps. cxix. 6), Satan knows this so well that he can be
content to have us yield to God in many things, only be true to Satan in some
one thing. He knows one dram of poison may spoil all the wholesome
ingredients, and make them deadly. One dead fly may taint the most precious
ointment, saith Solomon. One sin unrepented of and retained in practice, the
cherishing of one lust, will corrupt all other laudable and commendable duties.
“ Asa bird,” saith Chrysostom, “if the snare catch but one of her feet, though
her wings be free and ready for flight, yet she is taken, and becomes a prey to
the fowler.” Or as Augustine compares it, ‘Though all the parts of our body
be sound, save only one, that one diseased and ulcerous part may be deadly to
thee. All the sound members cannot preserve life; but even one diseased
member shall hasten thy death.” (a) See John’s fidelity. For all Herod's
forwardness, he will not abate him the commission of one gross sin. (6) See
John’s simplicity. A politic man would have winked at this one fault of Herod,
thought it wisdom to preserve his interest with Herod. “I may prevail much
with him, if I hold good terms with him; many good causes may speed the
better, if I hold fair with Herod; but to deal roughly with him, and affront
him in his sin, may set him farther off—no good shall be done with him.” No;
John’s piety abhors this policy. God allows no such compliances upon any such
pretences. (¢c) See John’s importunity in admonishing of Herod. He tells him
plainly of his sin. John must do his duty, though it cost him the loss of
Herod’s favour—ay, and his life too. And so it did; and that will give you to
see Herod’s deficiency, to what he falls, even to open persecution.


220


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. VI.


Lessons.—1l. Bare formality in matters of religion is not lasting. It will
wear off—like some waterish colours that are lightly laid on, will fade and
vanish, are of no continuance. 2. One unmortified sin wilfully retained will
eat out all appearances of virtue and piety. 3. An unmortified sin, rather than
be crossed, will fall to persecution. Reigning sins will at last prove raging sins,
and grow impatient of any reproof. Cast pearls and precious truths before
fierce dogs, they will not only trample them under their feet, but will rend and
worry you (Matt. vii. 6). This is the dreadful downfall of unsoundness in
religion. A false friend to religion will at last prove an open enemy to it.—
Bishop Brownrigg.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 14. Lessons.—1. The innotence
and uprightness of God’s faithful ser-
vants are of great power to strike terror
into their wicked enemies, and that
not only while living, but even after
their death. (1) The best way for
God’s servants to dismay their enemies
is to walk in holiness and innocence of
life. (2) Beware of offering wrong to
any innocent and holy servant of God,
lest thy conscience terrify thee for it.
2. This is one effect and property of a
guilty conscience: to disquiet and vex
the heart with great terrors and fears—
yea, often with vain fears for which
there is no cause (Job xv. 21; Isa.
lvii. 20; Deut. xxviii. 65; Lev. xxvi. 36 ;
Prov. xxviii. 1). 3. Sin once committed
lies heavy on the conscience, accusing
and troubling it long afterwards
(Gen. xlii. 21; Ps. xxv. 7). 4. Murder,
or shedding of innocent blood, is such
a sin as will lie heavy on the con-
science of those guilty of it, breeding
great terror to them (Gen. iv. 13;
Ps. li. 14).—@. Petter.


Ver. 15. The speculators of society.—
Conscience is hardly concerned in their
case. They give themselves to the con-
sideration of mere problems or puzzles.
They represent, too, the persons who can
talk about religious subjects without
having any religious feeling. Religion
is to them only a topic of the day. It
is something to be remarked upon, and
then dropped in favour of something
else. There are men around ourselves
who suppose that to admire a preacher
is to admire Christ, and that to be


critical about sermons. is to be con-
cerned about truth.—J/. Parker, D.D.

The judgment of the world is very
uncertain in all things, but extremely
blind in those which relate to God.
There are no conjectures so extra-
vagant but men will have recourse to
them rather than believe the Word of
God: so corrupt is the heart of man,
so true is it, that blindness is the just
punishment of incredulity. These Jews,
in their several judgments, afford us a
lively representation of those pretended
masters of reason who affect always
singularity in their opinions, and who
believe everything except truth.—
P. Quesnel.


Ver. 16. Conscience.—1. Conscience
will not be silenced by wealth or earthly
surroundings. 2. A guilty conscience
is troubled with not only real but
imaginary troubles. 3. A guilty con-
science will torment a man in spite of
his avowed religious belief.—7Z’. Kelly.

Conscience bribed.—We all of us do
evil things that it is not hard for us
to seem to forget, and with regard to
which it is not hard for us to bribe
or to silence our memories and our
consciences. The hurry and bustle of
daily life, the very weakness of our
characters, the rush of sensuous delights,
may make us blind and deaf to the
voice of conscience ; and we think that
all chance of the evil deed rising again
to harm us is past. But some trifle
touches the hidden spring by mere
accident. As in the old story of the
man groping along a wall, till his finger


+4
aad


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


happened to fall upon one inch of it,
and immediately the hidden door flies
open and there is the skeleton, so
with any of us some merely fortuitous
association may freshen faded memories
and wake a dormant conscience. An
apparently trivial circumstance, like
some hooked pole pushed at random
into the sea, may bring up by the locks
some pale and drowned memory long
plunged in an ocean of oblivicn.—
A. Maclaren, D.D.

Unbelief and superstition.—There is
a very close connexion, as all history
proves, between theoretical disbelief in
a future life and spiritual existence
and superstition. So strong is the
bond that unites men with the unseen
world, that if they do not link them-
selves with that world in the legitimate
and true fashion, it is almost certain
to avenge itself upon them by leading
them to all manner of low and ab-
ject superstitions. Spiritualism is the
disease of a generation that disbelieves
in another life. The French Revolu-
tion with its infidelities was also the
very seed-field for all manner of quacks
and impostors such as Cagliostro and
the like. The time when Christ lived
presented precisely the same pheno-
mena. If Herod was a Sadducee,
Heros Sa:iduceeism, like the frost upon
the window-panes, was such a thin


layer shutting out the invisible world’


that the least warmth of conscience
melted it, and the clear daylight glared
in upon him. And I am afraid that
there are a great many of us who may
be half inclined to regret supernatural
religion and the thought of another
life who would find precisely the same
thing happening to them.—JZbid.


Ver. 17. Persecution of the good.—
1. Think it no new or strange thing if
in our times we see good and faithful
ministers unjustly troubled and perse-
cuted by those in authority, and that
even for the faithful discharge of their
ministry. Pray for them, and use all
good means to help them. 2. Let all
faithful ministers prepare and arm
themselves for troubles and persecutions


222


in the world (Matt. x. 24). 3. It should
comfort and encourage faithful ministers
to bear such troubles patiently, and not
be dismayed at them, seeing they suffer
no other but what the most excellent
prophets and ministers of God have
gone through before them. 4. See the
wretched blindness and corruption of
our nature, causing us to hate and
persecute such as are called and sent
of God to do us good—yea, the greatest
good.—G. Petter.

The propensity of the heart to self-
delusion.—It is not improbable that
Herod, conscious as he was that he
most unjustly detained John the Bap-
tist in prison, applauded himself with
complacency, and assumed in his own
estimation great credit for virtue, be-
cause he had withstood the solicitations
of Herodias for his death. Have you
not also, while aware that you have
lived under the habitual influence of
some unchristian temper, in the habitual
indulgence of some unchristian practice,
proudly congratulated yourself on your
goodness, because you have abstained
from other crimes to which you were
tempted? Have you not satisfied your-
self for yielding to the one temptation
by reminding your conscience that you
did not yield to the other? Have not
you hankered after a compromise with
Divine justice, and meditated with
complacent self-righteousness the pro-
duction of a balance of imaginary merit
to countervail the penalty of guilt 2?’ See
Hag. 1. 5; Isa. xliv. 20; Rev. i. 17;
Gal. iii. 10. If example can affect
you, look to that of Herod. Behold
in him an illustration of the conse-
quences entailed on perseverance in a
single sin. In him behold a picture
of that abandoned depravity of which
perseverance in a single sin is naturally
the forerunner. Is there an Herodias
whom you will not put away? Let
suitable temptations arise, and guilt
equal to that of Herod may become
yours.—7', Gisborne, D.D.


Ver. 18. The duty of reproving sin.—
1. Ministers ought not to wink at sin
in those of their charge, not to be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


silent at the committing of it; but
to admonish and reprove the same as
occasion offers, in public and private
(2 Tim, iv. 2; Tit. ii, 15). 2. Minis-
ters must deal impartially in admonish-
ing and reproving sin, not only in
mean persons, but in the great ones.
3. Such as have a call to reprove sin
in others should do it plainly and
directly, shewing them their sin, and
the danger of it by the Word of God,
in such sort as they may be in con-
science convinced of it.—G. Petter.


Ver. 19. Hatred against reprovers.
—It is very shocking, but is there
nothing in our own hearts that can
interpret to us this woman’s hate? Has
the reproof of some cherished sin never
stirred within us a feeling of bitter
enmity towards the reprover? Doubt-
less we should shrink back in horror
from the mere thought of murder ;
but, remember, the spirit of hatred, of
revenge, whether it lead to murder or
stop short at some lesser vengeance, 1s
essentially the same (Matt. v. 21, 22).
—W. T. Wilson.


Ver. 20. Vice respects virtwe.—Feared
John there in prison ?—feared the help-
less captive, bound and confined far
from the sight of a fmend? A trait
how deeply true to the human soul!
Yes, vice must respect virtue all the
time : ever putting it to shame, counter-
mining and insulting it, banishing it,
loading it with chains, it must fearfully
respect it. Is it not so? Whenever
you have been the aggressor in any
difference or quarrel with a fellow-man,
though you may have added defence
to defence, and piled vindication on
vindication, have you been ale, after
all, to uproot a deep-seated regard even
for him you differed with? When the
passion and turbid commotion of the
hour have passed by, has not that
solemn regard subsided to the very
bottom of your mind, and, in the light
of transparent reflexion, made you
ashamed of yourself, if not caused you
to stand aghast at the wrong you see
scored against you, as with the point


SL MARK CHAP. VI.





of a diamond, on the page of your own
heart °—C. A. Bartol.

Religion too costly for Herod.—Think
of all the weary steps which Herod
must retrace before he could be even
on a moral level to start on St. John’s
principles of religion. Perhaps in in-
tense moments, when martyrdom was
the consequence, it would have been
in some ways easier to make a pro-
fession—to stand forth from the parody
of baptism on the stage, and to own
oneself converted and be torn to death-—
to. jump down into the amphitheatre
where men were fighting, and say,
“You shall not do it,” and be cut to
pieces—to be carried away by the im-
pulse of a great movement, and die in
the heat of enthusiasm. But in the
quiet of a great lull, among people who
are not intensely committed one way
or another, to alter the mode of life,
to cut away with their own hands the
hindrances and barriers, to be known
to have plucked out a right eye or to
have cut off a right foot, to be earnestly
preaching renunciation instead of a
faint disapproval of things which we
do not think are quite right, to be
practising faith instead of an eclectic
appreciation, an earnest practice of
true religion instead of being “an
honorary member of all forms of
belief ”—it costs a good deal, it means
a good deal. Herod shrinks from it ;
giving up that bad connexion was
not so much in itself, but 1t meant a
good deal, and there was more than
one person to be considered.—Canon
Newbolt.

“Did many things.”—What those
“many things” were which Herod
amended at the bidding of John we
vainly surmise. A few of the grosser
corruptions of his foul court were per-
chance removed, or it may be John
could hold back the stubborn king in
some one occasional act of cruelty, or
persuade him to pay some attention
to the outward worship of God; but
he could not, did not, win him to a
thorough reformation of his own life.
Tt was all surface work. The deep,
ingrained depravity was not shaken


223


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


=,





off. There was pleasure in hearing
truth—a partial obedience to truth—
but not a thorough casting away of
impurity and cruelty and_ fraud.
And we know the result. The evil
spirit, driven out in a measure, re-
turned again. One day of excess, one
hour of ungoverned passion, swept
away the edifice of sand, and a crime
which stamps him for ever in the ranks
of the Pilates and Judases, the unjust
judges and false friends, plunged his
soul again into unutterable darkness.
The only voice which had ever stirred
the better spirit within him was
quenched in blood, and the last state
became worse than the first.—Bishop
Woodford.

Herod and John.—Were are two
men, each swayed by his past, each
working out a future; living in the
same age, within touch, as it were, of
the same wonderful crisis of history—
with the same God, the same nature,
the same heaven to win, the same hell
to avoid. And now under the same
roof, and yet how separated in every
possible way! With a value to the
world which varied with terrible irony
in inverse ratio to their outward cir-
cumstances! The one pledged up to
the hilt to the service of God, the main-
tenance of principle, and the integrity
of his life; the other a mere plaything
of the world, tossed up and down like
a cork upon its turbulent waters, the
victim of every whim, the slave of
every pleasure, hounded along by his
lusts, his very principle of morality
given in pawn to an adulteress; and
yet with a lingering appreciation still
left of a noble character when he saw
one; the power of still snatching at
an ornament which he had sense enough
left to know was precious, as it was
swept by on the waves. It was politic
to shut up the open-mouthed prophet.
Yes; but that was not all—he had
liked to keep him by him. His stern
words roused a delightful thrill of self-
distrust; gave him, if we follow one
reading of the passage, deep perplexity ;
perhaps even led him to do certain
things, to take certain steps in the


224


direction of right; and, at all events,
it was a real pleasure to him to hear
him speak on great and deep subjects.
It might be just a link with a better
past to have a prophet on the premises,
albeit in the dungeon.—Canon Newbolt.
The downward path—In our own.
days, amidst our own homes, there are
souls taking the downward path, be-
cause they, like Herod, will not give
up their besetting sin. Perhaps it is
the seductive wine-cup, perhaps the
perilous friendship of some sceptic.
Perhaps it is the strange delusion
which makes the happiness of some men
—adding bid to bit of shining metal,
of which they make no use; or that
sin in disguise, the idolatry of self,
making everything and everybody bow
down to one’s own ease and comfort !
One is reminded of the account given
of the way in which old Westminster
Bridge came to ruin. The stone-work
piers on which the arches rested were
built on piles of wood firmly driven
into the river’s bed; but the scour of
the ebbing tides, and the force of the
currents, swept away the earth and
gravel from around the piles, till they
were no longer secure. So with the
soul. We make firm resolutions, as we
think, and for a time they last; but
the powerful stream of temptation
gradually loosens them, and the whole
superstructure of the Christian life is
ready to fallin pieces. Many a gallant
ship has been wrecked by a simple
leak; so one sin worked the ruin of
Herod Antipas.—Dr. Hardman.


Ver. 21. A convenient day.—A crime
is more than half committed when it
is once resolved on; a convenient day
cannot be long wanting to a passion
so violent and vigilant as revenge
animated by an infamous love. The
feasts of the world are days very con-
venient for sin, as the feasts of the
Church are for piety. It is a great
misfortune to be engaged to be at
the former ; a great imprudence not to
provide against the infectious air which
is there breathed ; a great piece of
unfaithfulness not to excuse ourselves


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.





from going when we can; and a very
great folly to appear there without any
manner of obligation.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 22. Lessons.—1. How danger-
ous it is to make rash and unadvised
promises! 2. How much wicked men
are addicted to their sinful lusts, and
what great account they make of them
in that they are content, for the
satisfying of them, to be at great cost
and charge! 3. The cursed fruit and
effect of sin and sinful lusts in such
as are given over to them; that they
even besot them and make them foolish,
depriving them of sound reason and
judgment (Hos. iv. 11; Rom. i. 21, 28;
Prov. vii. 22, xxiil. 35).—G. Petter.


Ver. 25. Resist solicitation to sin.—
Allow not yourself to be entrapped
into sin by the solicitations and impor-
tunities of others, not even of your
friends and your nearest relations,
should you be unhappy enough to per-
ceive tempters among them. You will
not be urged, it may be presumed, to
procure the imprisonment or the murder
of another. But were tempters ever
at a loss for grounds of temptation ¢
If you are in poverty, may they not
impel you to meliorate your condition
by depredations on the property of a
neighbour, or to excite charity by
exaggerated representations of your
distress? Are you moving in a higher
sphere? May they not ensnare you
into captivity to ambition, or seduce
you into the habit of squandering in
dissipation that sacred talent, time,
entrusted to your charge? And
whether you occupy a lower or a higher
station, may they not encourage you
to over-reach an ignorant or a careless
man in a contract ; to revenge yourself
on some person who has offended you,
or whom you envy, by spreading a
slanderous tale to his disadvantage ;
to withhold reparation from those
whom you have wronged ; to surrender
your heart to things temporal; to live
not unto God and Christ, but unto
the world and yourself? Stand pre-
pared upon the ‘watch-tower. Obey


the Lord Omnipotent, not man. Resist
the assaults of the devil, whatever be
the instruments which he employs.
Away with fear, with irresolution, with
false shame, Be strong in the grace
of Christ.—7. Gisborne, D.D.

Callousness im youth.—This is a
picture of human sin more loathsome,
it seems to me, than the other. For
this damsel could have had no re-
vengeful hate, no vindictive passion,
rankling in her heart. The prophet
had not rebuked her. Hers was a cool,
deliberate, passionless cruelty—cruelty
at which one shudders when associated
with her age and sex; for if not with
youth and girlhood, where should pity
and compassion dwell? Doubtless
Salome had a motive. Perhaps she
feared the loss of her position and
her pleasures, and fear can be quite
as powerful an incentive to crime as
revenge or hate. ‘The prophet had
unwittingly laid his hand upon this
young girl’s world, and she turned
again and stung him. Ah! believe
me; youth, apparently so bright and
fresh and winning, if you venture to
touch its pleasures, can show a callous-
ness, a steely hardness of the heart,
which you would have deemed in-
credible.—W. 7. Wilson.

Lessons.—1. How apt children are
by nature to follow wicked counsel and
advice given them by their parents!
2. The wicked make but a light matter
of sin—yea, of great and grievous sins,
such as murder.—G@. Petter.


Ver. 26. Herod's dilemma.—The
dilemma of Herod was the dilemma
of a man whose conduct was governed
not by the principles of an immutable
morality, the eternal distinctions of
right and wrong, but by a vague
superstition and a miserable conven-
tionalism. The petty rules and obliga-
tions which he recognised were below
the requirements and emergencies of
life, and therefore only served to be-
tray him into sin. 1. Is it not strange
to hear this man, face to face with
crime, pleading the sanctity of an
oath to justify his commission of it %


225


CHAP. VI.





What a moral bewilderment was that !
Had Herod been a man of pure life
and clear conscience, how long would
such a monstrous sophism have en-
tangled him? The guilt of such oaths
consists in making and keeping them,
not in breaking them. If they are
registered at all, it is not in heaven,
but in hell. 2. Reference to the
opinion of the world, and deference to
it, and conference with it, and pre-
ference of it above every principle and
rule and law, human or Divine—is not
this a tendency that grows upon us
very, very fast? 3. Is idle sorrow ever
availing ¢ It did not save John. Will
it save Herod at the day of judg-
ment ?—W. 7. Wilson.

Conscience darkened by sin.—The
pleasures which chiefly affect or rather
bewitch the body, and by so doing be-
come the pest and poison of the nobler
and intellectual part of man, are those
false and fallacious pleasures of lust
and intemperance. . . . Nothing does
or can darken the mind or conscience
of man more. . . . Could Herod have
ever thought himself obliged by the
religion of an oath to murder the Bap-
tist, had not his lust and his Herodias
imprisoned and murdered his conscience
first? . . . It seems his besotted con-
science, having broken through the
seventh commandment, the sixth
stood too near it to be safe long.—
R. South, DD.

Herod's duty plain.—The case cannot
be supposed wherein a man should be
so straitened as he could not come
off fairly without sinning. Say a
man through heat of blood made a
wicked vow to kill his brother: here
he hath, by his own rashness, brought
himself into a seeming strait, that
either he must commit a murder or
break a vow—either of which seemeth
to be a great sin, the one against the
sixth, the other against the third com-
mandment. But here is in very deed
no strait nor perplexity at all. Here
is a fair, open course to him without
sin. He may break his vow, and
there is an end. Neither is this the
choice of the lesser sin; but only the


226


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





loosening of the lesser bond—the bond
of charity being greater than the bond
of a promise, and there being good
reason that (in terms of inconsistency,
when both cannot stand) the lesser
bond should yield to the greater. But
is it not a sin for a man to break a
vow 2 Yes, where it may be kept saluis
charitate et justitid; then the breach
is a sin; but in the case proposed it
is no sin (Exod. i. 16, etc.; Judg.
xi. 30, 31; Acts xxiii. 12).—Bishop
Sanderson.


Ver. 27. Guilty compliance.—Thus
it has often been: what is noblest and
best sacrificed, not to policy or neces-
sity, or in the hot, fierce conflict of
opposing issues, but in a mood of
dalliance, and in compliance with what
appeals to the baser part of our nature.
There is cruelty in the brutal fury of
a mob; there is cruelty in the vin-
dictive apprehension of an imperilled
order ; but there is no cruelty equal to
the cruelty of thorough worldliness—
the light, careless gaiety which sends
a prophet to the block because the
wine flows, and the jest goes round,
and the thrilling mazes of a voluptuous
dance have fired the heart of King
Herod.—-W. 7. Wilson.


Ver. 29. Lessons.—1. Such as have
reaped spiritual good and profit by
others do owe special thankfulness to
them ; and this thankfulness they ought
to shew toward them by the fruits of
it, in doing duties of love to them;
and that not only in their lifetime, but
even after they are dead. 2. It is a
duty of love and mercy which we owe
to our Christian friends departed this
life, to be careful to bury them in good
and decent manner, and with such
honour and respect as is fitting to their
persons. 3. God takes special care of
the good name and credit of His faith-
ful servants, even after they are dead
and gone (Ps. exii. 6; Prov. x. 7).—
G. Petter.

John’s mission fulfilled.—So ended
to human eyes the life and ministry
of St. John the Baptist. But if we


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.


————————————


regard this as the real end of all, we
manifestly make an infinite mistake :
St. John had made preparation for the
coming of Christ, and now Christ was
come, and so St. John was called to
his rest, and his works followed him.
And we may draw from his history
this conclusion, applicable to our own
times—namely, that when missionaries


of Christ’s gospel lose their lives in the
work, have their heads cut off, it may
be, by savages, and when their bodies
are buried in the tomb, the end is not
yet; they have prepared the way for
the coming of Christ, and their work
will not be useless in the eye of Him
whom appearances can never deceive.
—Bishop H. Goodwin.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 30—32.
(Parattets: Marr. xiv. 13; Luxe ix. 10.)


Rest after work,—The disciples had just returned from the missionary journey
through Galilee and Judea, Their Master had sent them out, by two and two
together, six parties of them in all, to preach repentance and remission of sins.
1. You can fancy how they must have gone forth, all of them novices, and some
of them young men. Inmagine it, you who have not yet survived the memory
of your own younger days: the new-born sense of our own importance, which
accompanies our first attempt at responsible action; the childlike hopefulness
to which no miracle of success seems impossible ; all the bright illusions, all the
golden dreams of youth—that time of life when every subject possesses so fresh
an interest, when every effort seems so certain to succeed, when the sensation
of failure is yet a thing unknown. And such a doctrine as they had to preach,
and such a Master as they had to proclaim as the coming King! What could
there be before them but rapid and complete victory? 2. They came back, we
may imagine, with an immense deal to tell. No child that returns to its mother
from a visit more overflowing with talk than they. ‘They told Him all things,
both what they had done and what they had taught.” Here they had met an
open and truthful mind; and what a pleasure it had been to instruct and
encourage him! Here they had found a repentant yet desponding sinner ;
and how they had delighted to bind up his broken heart and to send him on his
way rejoicing! And here they had encountered a captious gainsayer; and with
what a clever repartee they had answered and silenced his objections! And
what a ready hearing and how much success their words and efforts had
obtained! They can hardly have failed to have told their Master another thing,
which the seventy, who were sent out afterwards, reported, when they too
returned—what mighty works they had done in His name. Nor would they
fail to receive some such reply, half encouragement and half caution, as that
which the seventy received (Luke x. 18, 20). You can imagine much being
said like this by that Master, still young Himself, and therefore naturally, as
well as supernaturally, sympathising with the hopefulness of youth, cautious not
to depress zeal, even while correcting its extravagance. “ Yes,” He said, “the
Spirit of good is stronger than the spirit of evil. Yes, Satan is falling from his
high place of power, and he will fall. But do not boast of spiritual power; do
not be exalted by spiritual success; rejoice, rather, that there is a place for all
faithful labourers, the unsuccessful as well as the successful, in the dwelling of
their Lord. When bright hopes are all faded, when success has turned to
failure, when high gifts have deserted their former possessors, there will still
remain for you a refuge and a home.” At the same time there came those
words of kindly invitation, ‘‘Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and
rest a while,” They were, in fact, to go with their Master and enjoy a well-


227


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
\





earned holiday. 3, And so they embarked on the calm bosom of the Sea of
Galilee, and raised their sail; and the light airs began to draw them off the land,
slowly and dreamily, towards the lonelier country of the eastern side. There,
let us think, are the thirteen upon the lake—the crew of twelve, each one of
whom is an apostle, and the Captain, whom almost all now admit to have been
the Ideal Man, whom we believe to have been God manifest in the flesh. Fresh
airs are breathing on the weary brows; bright waters are rippling under the
vessel’s floor; an open sky is bending over them, boundless as that love of God
which they have been proclaiming; no shadow of approaching horrors has yet
fallen on them, and all hearts are free and joyous, for not even Judas is
a traitor yet. 4, It was from diligent labours for the good of souls that those
disciples were invited to seek a temporary refuge. How much more needful
must it be to seek such occasional retirements from the present hurrying world!
God made the world—the world of society as well as the world of nature. Even
this rapid world of the end of the nineteenth century has come into existence
through His providence. The Great Steersman has not abandoned the helm, but
is guiding it, through all the cross-currents and changing winds, to noble objects
of His own. The evil in it is not original, and (happier still) itis not inseparable.
It is of His ordering that we live our lives, in close and frequent communion
with those fellow-creatures of ours who form our world for their good and for
our own. Jn the world, though not of the world, our Lord bade His disciples be.
Nevertheless in the world certain evils happen to us for which occasional
retirement is the cure. Let us look at one or two of these, for which we seek
a remedy.

I. The world confuses our self-knowledge.—The source of self-knowledge is
reflexion; and little reflexion is possible amid the bustle of the world. It
happens to us, as to the disciples in the gospel—there are many coming and
going—employers, customers, clients, patients, parishioners, as the case may be.
The trade, or business, or profession occupies nearly all our time. Family affairs
often cause anxiety. Public business, politics, religion, charity, all solicit
attention, which must be given from time to time. A hundred persons have
to be spoken to, a hundred subjects considered. As soon as one business is
despatched another comes to be transacted. Well for us if we can keep them
distinct and separate, and not mix and muddle them all. All these are outside
of our real selves, so that the mind engaged in them acquires an outward leaning,
and seldom collects itself inwardly at all. So reflexion perishes, and with it self-
knowledge. The cure of this is retirement.

II. During our intercourse with the world our wishes and objects grow
more and more worldly—that is, they become confined and bounded by this
present world. We cease to feel our own immortality, we cease to have inter-
course with God, and then all our aims insensibly decline. Conscience and duty
become Jess and less our rule. We are more and more guided by self-interest
or personal inclination; and by even worse things, covetousness, ambition,
revenge, our motives sinking gradually, so that we cannot tell when or how they
change. It is in retirement that we must resist and repair declines like these.

III. The last evil I will name, whose proper remedy is retirement, is irrita-
tion.—Many things occur to ruffle and disturb. We kecome vexed and displeased,
perhaps with actual enemies, perhaps with indifferent people, perhaps with our
best friends. This is sure to be so. For all are sinful; and our respective faults
and failings jar against each. Besides, all are short-sighted and imperfectly
informed, and therefore we often mistake and misunderstand. For all these
inward disturbances the remedy is retirement and reflexion. Enter into your
closet and shut to the door, and pray to your Father which is in secret. Lay
yourselves in the arms of Jesus; throw yourselves open to the eye of the All-seeing


228


ce


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.








God. There breathe forth the wish, “That which I see not teach Thou me; if
I have done iniquity, I would do so no more.” Your Father will teach you; He
will guide your feet into the way of peace.—Archdeacon Rawstorne.


Lenten retirement.—We are most of us living, as many almost necessarily
must live, in all the busy, anxious cares of a busy, anxious age, our duties or
our business laying claim to every moment of our time, till the throng and
crush of earthly things prevent us from coming near to touch the Saviour’s robe.
Then it is that our solemn Lenten fast bids us come into our chambers and shut
our doors, offers to the jaded, wearied soul a little rest, a short breathing-space
in which we may gather strength to wrestle on, a moment’s retirement from
that unceasing “coming and going” which makes up the greatness and the
littleness of our life in the world.

I. Lent is a time of retirement—a special opportunity for being alone with
God. As a nation we are becoming increasingly alive to the economic dangers,
physical and moral, of a life without leisure. The deadening of spiritual energy,
the choking of spiritual life and aspirations—these are the parallel dangers to
the religious life which knows not the blessing of retirement. You will see,
then, that by the rest of religious retirement we mean something different
from that rest which belongs at all times to those who are living with God.
For that is an abiding thing; this is occasional. Religious retirement means
a withdrawing ourselves for a special purpose and at a special time, just as he
whose life is the life of one who is praying always has yet his special time of
prayer, or as He whose life was lived in the full consciousness of God yet loved
to withdraw Himself to the lonely mountain-top and spend whole nights in
prayer to God.

II. The time that is to be dedicated to Lenten retirement must be ‘‘ redeemed”
time—time won, not from duties, but from pleasures. Just as fasting may
not trench on that which is necessary to health, but may simply limit us in
what we might do without, so in redeeming some special time for prayer and
self-examination we must make up our mind to give up some luxuries Those
few minutes we give, perhaps, to our social chat; the comfortable half-hour that
we spend over our daily paper; the time we spend in unnecessary letter-writing,
or the odd times we pass we hardly know how in mere do-nothingness—all
these might be spared, or limited, and dedicated to God.

III. How will this help us in running our daily race?—1. It will teach us
self-knowledge. As we stand alone in the presence of God, every act stripped
of the colouring which human praise and blame can give, without any of those
secondary helps which the love of approbation and the desire to please so often
jend us in the world, putting on one side those false standards by which we
judge, the waxen wings which have borne us aloft hitherto melted in the rays
of the sun—then we begin to know ourselves. And as we review our past
spiritual life we see the shadows of selfish and interested motives darkening what
once seemed clear and fair; our fancied love of God in that new light was but
an esthetic or poetical devotion to an ideal, our humility a skilfully concealed
but now discovered pride; the very bright ones which seemed to guard our way
are but as evil spirits in the form of an angel of light. 2. It is the great means
of knowing God. For knowledge is born of intercourse and communion with its
object. He who made man his study sought to learn his subject in the crowded
market-place. And if we are to know God it must be by losing no opportunity
of being with Him: with Him in those places where He has set His Name,—
in His Church, and His Sacrament, and His Word ; above all, in prayer.

IV. This knowledge of God and of ourselves which comes from retirement
with God brings with it a new power for doing our duties in the world. The


229


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ae a


presence by which you seemed in your retirement to be flooded is the presence
which shall go with you into the world. It is the ark of God which shall carry
victory over the enemies, the real presence which transforms your very bodies
into the temples of the Living God, the light which will brighten and make clear
your earthly path, the continual source of strength and nourishment, preparing
you a table in the very midst of your enemies, a fountain of living water


springing up within you to quench the battle-thirst.


Tn retirement and private


prayer you have learnt what it is to be alone with God, and now in the roar
and din of conflict you realise what it is to have God with you.—A. L. Moore.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 30. Duties of ministers.—l.
Ministers ought so to carry themselves
in discharge of their calling, that they
may approve their diligence and faith-
fulness unto Christ, who hath called
them to that office. 2. Ministers ought
so faithfully and conscionably to do the
duties of their calling, that they may
be able to give a good and comfortable
account thereof unto Christ, who hath
enjoined them those duties.—G. Petter.


Ver. 31. The use of leisure.—
1. “Come.” This is the first principle
in every time of leisure, such as it
is fit for a Christian to take, that
we should spend it in the presence
and under the eye of the Master.
2. “ Apart into a desert place.” Leisure
for the overworked had betiter be sought
among the works of God in nature than
among the works of man. 3. “A
while.” Such seasons of rest are only
temporary, and are meant to nerve
and brace us for work—our work, God’s
work, Christ’s work. If it does not fit
us for this, if it leaves us only discon-
tented, selfish, and indolent, we have
made a curse to ourselves out of a
blessing.—John Eillerton.

Seclusion with Christ—How much
better would our work be done, how
much more thoroughly our duty, how
much healthier and more satisfactory
would our worldly business be, if we
could realise that that which is earthly
can only bear beautiful blossom or rich
fruit, when watered by the rains that
fall from heaven; that the life must
grow hard and barren which is cut off
from its spiritual root; that Christ is


229


ever calling us, amidst all our cares
and engrossments to keep ourselves
from being carried away on the flood
of these, by preserving our personal
fellowship with Him, and to come apart
from the bustle of the world, into the
silence and seclusion, where we may
meet Him, and in the consciousness
of His presence “rest a while.”—A. H.
Story, D.D.

“ Rest” for “a while” only.—This
lesson is gladly learned, and too much
practised. Reguiescite pleaseth every
man. The truth is, that the body and
mind of man must after labour be
refreshed with rest. But he which
laboureth not is altogether as unworthy
to rest as to eat. Again, such as will
take rest and ease after labours must
learn of Christ as well to measure their
ease as their pains. He permitteth
His disciples to take their rest ; but He
limiteth and restraineth His permission,
saying, “ Rest a while.” For by too
much rest men are not made the more
fit but the less willing to take pain.—
Archbishop Sandys.

Leisure for communion with God.—)
know how hard it seems to many to
get room in their lives for a quiet hour.
They are so compassed about with
imperious demands and fretting details,
“Would we could have it,” they say,
“but it is impossible.” Well, it is
often a great mercy when God takes
such an one and lays him aside by sick.
ness, where he must wait and be still,
and is no longer oppressed with the
feeling that he ought to be doing
something. In that strange watch-
tower of trouble his life rolls itself out


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.





before him, and he sees how brief it is,
with the mystery behind it and the
mystery before it, and God alone above
all from everlasting to everlasting.
Why should we compel the great
Father thus to visit us with affliction


7


ere we will find leisure to talk with
Him and mourn for our shortcomings ?
—D. W. Forrest.

Solitude, says one, is the mother-
country of the strong; silence ‘is their
prayer.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 33—A44.
(PaRaLLEts: Marr. xiv. 13-21; Luxe ix. 10-17; Joun vi. 1-13.)


The multitude fed.imWhen Jesus came forth from a brief rest, He was con-
fronted in the desert place by the familiar sight of sinful, weary, sick humanity.
That they should come there was almost a miracle of His attractive power. At
once, we are told, the streams of His mercy began to flow.

I. The compassion of Jesus.—A great multitude is always a moving spectacle.
The pathos of life comes out before our imaginations, as we behold in it so
many broken, disordered, disappointing, wrecked lives ; so much that begins with
gladness and ends in grief; so much sin, and the countless victories of death.
Even the withered heart cof Xerxes was touched, when he sat on a throne at
Salamis and looked down on his army of a million slaves, all of whom, he said,
would soon pass away. Then we must remember that the company gathered
around Jesus was at that time peculiarly a sad one. They were there because
they were in need and they felt the need. Weary with a long journey, pressing
their claims on His attention, stretching out ‘lame hands” of questioning and
doubt, lifting imploring eyes to meet His—what could quicker touch the fountain
of His compassion? He was deeply moved. His face changed with mingled
sorrow and love. Now, who were they? He had compassion on them because
they were as sheep that had been over-driven and were fainting on the road.
And He stood before them as the Good Shepherd, who was soon to lay down His
life for the sheep. This brings us to dwell upon the attitude of the Holy One
towards sin and towards sinners separately andin masses. That whole company,
men, women, and children, were sinners. Because they were such, He had come
into the world to save them; and we might presume that the supreme fact
about them in His mind was their sinfulness and guilt. But this compassion at
the sight of the crowd speaks to us of that other relation in which He could look
at them, even as objects of pity, while they were objects of condemnation.
They were offenders against the holy law, but at the same time they were lost
sheep to be called home. But this pity, we observe next, took shape in forms
of real helpfulness. It was not wasted in the heart, like the emotions that come
and go as we read a novel or see a play at the theatre, and think our feelings
are tender because they are moved by imaginary griefs. The compassion of our
Lord took on a twofold form: one, that of setting in motion far-reaching works
in the preaching of the gospel among the nations and the seed-sowing of distant
harvests ; the other, a nearer, simpler attention to immediate wants.

Il. The power of Jesus.—‘‘ He bowed the heavens and came down” to the
measure of commonest human need. The fact about this power that touches us
most is that it is power to bless the world, and to bring salvation to the lost.
Each miracle of our Lord’s was a sign of something farther, something more
lasting and blessed. How soon all that desert multitude passed away from
earth! How quickly the bread created by miracle perished ! And yet it stood
for that which is imperishable, and on which, if we feed as we all may, we shall
never hunger again. Christ Himself is the Bread of God that cometh down


231


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


en er


CHAP. VI.





from heaven and giveth life to the world. We may feed on it each moment and
never exhaust the supply. He is not a luxury, but bread to be eaten freely and
without satiety. The whole lesson is that of the Divine helpfulness for all our
needs, and of the Divine fulness of supply.

III. The command of Jesus to His disciples in all ages.—Hach step in the
supply of the crowd with food is interesting to all who preach or teach the
everlasting Word, because it reveals the natural unbelief and distrust with which
we have to contend when many are to be fed by us and we are sure that our
stock is not sufficient. Many a time, if you preach, when you look upon
a company of men seated in God’s house to hear your voice, you will feel like
Philip, and wonder whence provision is coming for so many. But if you bring
your scanty loaves and fishes—if you bid the men sit down to receive, not your
fancies nor wisdom, your eloquence nor knowledge, but heaven’s bread, and that
only—you will find the old miracle repeated. You will take what Christ hands
over to you and pass it on to others. You will be fed by what feeds them. You
will say with them, when the feast is over, “ Lord, evermore give us this bread.”
For, after all, this and this only is our work—to give what is given unto us.
We are not to despise hard labour in winning our supplies. They will not come
to the lazy nor to the ignorant. We are called to seek a chastened spirit that
discerns the true intent of the heavenly messages. We are to meditate on the
Word and grow into its spirit and life. We surely must obey it, and so prove
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. But for the real
conveyance of food from God to a soul we must rely on God Himself.—H#dward
NV. Packard.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


a


Ver. 33. Christ's followers drawn by
various motives.—1. Some were drawn
with the strangeness of those things
which He wrought and taught amongst
them. To whom in these our days
we may compare them which haunt
sermons for no other end but either
vainly to hearken for news, or curiously
to note what order and eloquence they
may find in the preacher, or maliciously
to take hold of things spoken, when
they may by froward construction be
drawn to an offensive meaning. These
labour to their own loss: they are un-
profitable followers. 2. Others followed
Christ for bread. Such followers our
times have brought out too many.
So long as the gospel can feed, cherish,
and maintain them, they are willing
and glad to be professors of it; but
when persecution cometh they shrink.
3. Sundry there were which followed
for a desire which they had of bodily
health. For Christ ‘‘ went about heal-
ing every malady and every infirmity
in the people.” We see by daily ex-


232


perience that the body is more cared
for than the soul, the flesh than
the spirit, the carcase than the mind.
4, The last and best sort of followers
were such as followed Christ to hear
His Word. This is that travail that
chiefly is required of a Christian :
“ Seek first the kingdom of God.” This
declareth us to be His children, to be
His flock. “ He that is of God heareth
God’s Word.”—Archbishop Sandys.

The importunity of the crowd.—The
fact thus revealed is worthy of obser-
vation, as a commentary upon the
weary life of our Lord. He wished
His disciples to retire to the desert to
take some rest, but the people would
let them have none. If the reasons
which prompted them to follow Christ
were really the love of His doctrine,
then we may gain a lesson from their
importunity, and we may be sure that,
however much it might increase His
labours, Christ would be pleased by
such importunity. What displeases
Christ is the quiet, easy indifference of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. Vy,


ea ee eg


those who care not for His presence,
and will not put themselves out of
the way to hear His words.—Bishop
A, Goodwin.


Ver. 34. The Church and social ques-
tions.—The virtue of compassion is
the great discovery of Christ. The
world’s pain and weakness were to the
heathen a definite loss to society. It
was only somuch human waste, Christ
believed in the usefulness of things,
and utilised the rejected refuse of
society. It was in this refuse that
Jesus reared the tender plant of
compassion. Fed upon sorrow and
sickness, and watered with tears, com-
passion has redeemed the waste places,
and made them blossom as the rose.
Yet Christian compassion has been
slow to overtake the whole field that
claimed its energy and its labour.
Compassion towards individuals was
early developed as one of the first and
finest of the Christian graces. Com-
passion towards the multitudes was,
till lately, left uncultivated. This, no
doubt, is partly to be accounted for by
the fact that in Greece and in the
Roman Empire the claims and interests
of the State were paramount. The
individual was sacrificed to society—so
much so, that in Sparta sickness was
regarded more as a crime than a mis-
fortune. Weak children were quietly
put out of the way, lest they should
become a burden. In Rome the in-
dividual gave himself up in the arena
of the Colosseum that the emperor and
the people might enjoy the luxury of a
fierce laugh or cry. Asa rebound from
this contempt for the sacredness of the
individual, Christianity long confined
itself to the salvation of the units of
society. The masses, the multitudes,
have to a great extent been neglected.
But everywhere around us there are
signs that the social conscience is being
deeply moved. The trend of present-
day activity is distinctly in the direc-
tion of redressing the wrongs and
securing the rights of society. Now
the question requires to be raised,
What is to be the attitude of the Church


towards the great problems relating to
the social weal with which we are
brought face to face? The answer is
sometimes returned that the Church
should confine itself to the duty of
saving the souls of men; that she
should only deal with men as indi-
viduals, and not with human society.
Now this reply, which limits the
sphere of Christian activity, requires
to be looked at in order to see the poor
conception of humanity and the paltry
faith in Christ’s power which are at
the root of it. 1. When we are told
to confine ourselves to the care and
salvation of the sowls of men, we
wonder how this can fit in with Christ’s
idea of man. <A great deal of His time
was occupied in ministering to men’s
bodies. To tell me that I am to save
the soul of a man who is starving,
or living in a filthy hovel, or almost
worked to death, raises in my mind
the query, “‘ How is it to be done{”
The physical and mental conditions
under which a man exists have such
an influence upon his spiritual con-
dition that we must treat them all
concurrently. Hence the justification
for social work alongside of our evan-
gelistic agencies. 2. Again, we are
warned that the Church should confine
itself to operating upon the individual,
and leave social questions alone. What
would you think of a man who advised
a gardener to confine his attention to
cultivating his plants, but not to heed
the soil in which the plants had to
grow? Society is to the individual
what soil is to the plant. In order to
save a man we must preach the gospel
of Jesus Christ to him as an individual,
but we must see that his Christian life
is not next to impossible in the social
surroundings in which he is compelled
to live. The salvation of the individual
and the salvation of society must go
hand in hand. Now, if this be the
ease, the relation of the gospel to
human life becomes more extensive and
more complex than is generally sup-
posed. Everything that affects the
well-being of man is a proper subject
of Christian inquiry. 3. But it is
233


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


ee eS


sometimes objected that the Church
should have nothing to do with subjects
that are under dispute, and upon which
men, from interest or conviction, are
divided. It is sufficient to reply that
if the Church of Christ is only to deal
with those things upon which men are
agreed, her mission is useless, and her
influence effete. The religious, social,
and political life of the people is
complex. The one shades into the
other. Many of our social reforms
cannot be secured without the aid of
laws enacted by Parliament. Is the
Church to be dumb because temperance,
religious equality, sanitation, etc., have
a political bearing? These social
reforms affect the religious welfare of
the country ; and to stand still would
be to betray the spiritual rights of the
people. 4. Yet, when all this is said,
we cannot but revert to the great
truth that the chief aim of the gospel
is to secure an inner change of heart.
External changes are only enjoyed and
secured after the great internal change,
which is the crowning work of Christ’s
mission.—Wm. Dickie.

A shepherd needed in all human
societies —Men must be organised,
taught, disciplined. There are men
Divinely qualified to interpret truth ;
they have insight, sympathy, and
faculty of delicate and forcible expres-
sion. There are other men who can
only receive what is given to them by
God’s ministry. They are as sheep;
they need a shepherd.—J/. Parker, D.D.


Vers. 39, 40. Order in God’s work.
—If we regard the feeding of the
multitude as a parable concerning the
work which the apostles were to do
in the world afterwards, a parable of
the spiritual feeding of mankind with
the bread from heaven which Christ
should supply them withal, then these
orderly arrangements made by the
command of our Lord are very full
of instruction: the tendency of men,
when they once realise the fact that
they are surrounded by a hungry
multitude, is to throw a piece of bread
here and a piece there, to make


234


irregular efforts to supply the wants ©
which they perceive to exist; but this
is not Christ’s way, and therefore it is
not the wise way; order must in this,
as in every other work of God, be the
root of all success.— Bishop H. Goodwin.


Vers. 41-43. This miracle illustrates
—1. The dealings of God in providence.
(1) Think of the number to be fed,
and then look upon the corn-seed, cast
into the ground, to supply bread for
any one year, and you might well ask,
“ What are they among so many?”
But God manipulates the seed in the
soil, and then sends it forth as from His
own hand, bread enough and to spare.
The annual miracle is as great a wonder
as the miracle wrought in an hour,
(2) God seldom works miracles when
ordinary means will suffice ; but when
you have tried all, and men have
given you up as a hopeless case, it
is still right to go to God, the Great
Physician. God sometimes sends food
to the poor and needy in most unusual
ways. It seems to them almost a
miracle, but it would be a great mis-
take, if any were to infer from that,
that if they only have faith they may
neglect to plough, and to sow, and to
work for their daily bread. 2. The
way in which the world is to be fed
with the Bread of Life. (1) In the
heart and soul of each man who re-
ceives this Bread it grows, so that
there is not only enough for yourself,
but also enough to distribute among
your neighbours, and the more you dis-
tribute it the more it grows. (2) This
bread also resembles the Bread of
Life in its overflowing abundance.
There is room for all in the love of
God. Lessons: 1. Christ commands
nothing that He does not give us the
power to perform. 2. Our resources
will increase, if we make a diligent
use of what we have. 3. The more
you distribute, the more you yourself
will possess. Every soul you bring to
the gospel feast will enhance your
own joy. 4. Jesus does not approve
of waste.—A. Clark.

Christ the Restorer—In ne miracle


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST, MARK. CHAP. VI.





of the gospel did Jesus actually create.
He makes no new members of the body,
but restores old useless ones. “ And so,
without a substratum to work upon,
He creates neither bread nor wine.”
To do this would not have been a whit
more difficult, but it would have
expressed less aptly His mission, which
was not to create a new system of
things, but to renew the old, to recover
the lost sheep, and to heal the sick at
heart.—Dean Chadwick.


Vers. 41, 42. Works out of the ordi-
nary course.—The miracles which our
Lord Jesus Christ wrought are in truth
Divine works, and, from the things
that are seen, awaken the human
mind to contemplate and understand
the invisible God. For He is such a
Being as cannot be seen by human
sight, and because the miracles by
which He governeth the whole world
and ruleth every creature are, by their
frequency, little regarded, so that
scarce any one thinks it worth his
while to attend to and remark the
wonderful and astonishing works of
God, manifested in every seed and grain
upon the earth. But of His mercy He
reserved some things which He would
do otherwise than in the usual course
of nature, that they by whom His daily
wonders were unobserved might have
an occasion to admire, not when they
saw greater, but more unusual works.
For it is a greater miracle to govern
and provide for the whole world than
to feed five thousand men with but
five loaves; yet while men pay little
regard to the former, they are as-
tonished at the latter, not because it
is greater, but more unusual; for who
is it that now feeds the whole world
but He from whom a few seeds sown
produce the plentiful sheaves ; and the
same power which gives that mar-
vellous increase multiplied the loaves
in the hand of Christ, who was Himself
endued with all power. ‘Those five
loaves were a kind of seed, not indeed
delivered to the earth for increase, but
increased by Him who made the earth.
The same Divine power which wrought


the miracle with loaves and fishes
instantaneously, works the greater
miracles of nature gradually and with
regularly appointed means.—A ugustine.


Ver. 41. “ Blessed.”—There can be
little doubt that the words which Jesus
spake were those so well known:
“ Blessed art Thou, Jehovah our God,
King of the world, who causes to come
forth bread from the earth.” Assuredly
it was this threefold thought: the
upward thought (swrswm corda), the
recognition of the creative act as re-
gards every piece of bread we eat, and
the thanksgiving, which was realised
anew in all its fulness when, as He
distributed to the disciples, the pro-
vision miraculously multiplied in His
hands.—A. Edersheim, D.D.


Ver. 43. The fragments that remained
were greater in amount than the
original loaves. This is true in relation
even to temporal things, that the man
who is reasonably liberal has more
than the man who keeps all to himself.
He may not have more wealth than
the miser, though often he has that,
but he enjoys more that which he has
when he has given a portion to others :
that which is left becomes more to
him, and affords him more enjoyment
than the whole would have done if he
had retained it. But this is especially
true in spiritual things.—A. Clark,

Gather up the fragments—1, Of
truth. Many a time, when a man has
been really hungering after righteous-
ness, he has found in some one truth
which has fallen from his Master's
table exactly that portion which was
required to satisfy his longings. As
was once said by a dying man, great
in human learning: “Give me now a
single promise of Scripture, that I may
hold it as an ear of corn, and rub it
out in the hand of faith, and it is
worth to me all my other knowledge.”
2. Of time. Who has not to weep for
time which has not been used for its
true purposes—for mercies little noted,
for gifts abused, for vows forgotten,
for sorrow that has not chastened and


235


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





joy that has not sanctified, for number-
less visitations of God that have passed
over us and left no blessing behind ?
(1) We have need to treasure up its
very minutes, for they are fragments


prayer. (3) Holy Eucharist. 4. Of
duty. We are often apt to despise
common things because they are so
common, forgetting that we might lift
them to a much higher dignity if we


of a gift which God bestows. (2) In
course of time we become the result of
the time we live. 3. Of the means of
grace. (1) Lord’s Day. (2) Private


but infused into them a nobler prin-
ciple, doing them as in God’s sight,
by God’s help, and to God’s glory.—
Canon Nisbet.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. —Verses 45—-56.
(PaRaLLets: Marv. xiv. 22-36; JouN vi. 15-21.)


Christ walking on the sea.—This incident stands alone, among the recorded
acts of Jesus, as a peculiar manifestation of His character and dealings. In
general Christ’s miracles were founded on the principle of relieving human
want and misery, while also displaying Divine power. But here the object was
different, as will appear from a careful consideration of the circumstances.

I. It had been a day of self-revelation on the part of Jesus.—The privacy
which He had sought for the apostles and Himself having been invaded by the
multitude, He had devoted Himself to teaching them “concerning the kingdom
of God, and healing them that had need of cure” (Luke ix. 11). He had also
relieved, by a miraculous increase of food, the hunger of five thousand men,—
thus demonstrating to the people at large that He was at least a Messenger
come from God; and as such they acknowledged Him. To His more immediate
disciples, however, it was necessary that He should now manifest Himself in a
character of more unquestionable greatness; it was important that they should
regard Him, not merely as One come from God, but as a Being closely connected
with the Deity, in a union incomprehensible indeed, but undeniable. In this
character, therefore, He determined to exhibit Himself to them. Accordingly
‘He constrained His disciples to get into the ship,” etc. The unenlightened
multitude whom He had instructed and miraculously fed sought forsooth to
make Him a King, in acknowledgment of the benefits He had conferred upon
them (John vi. 15); but He who afterwards freely offered Himself to those who
came to compass His death shrank from the proffered glories of the world, and
sent away those who would have forced them on Him.

II. When evening came, Jesus was alone—Mark how He employs the
solitude thus sought and obtained. ‘‘ He departed into a mountain to pray.”
His life on earth was a mixture of contemplation and action, of austerity and
freedom: we find Him often where the greatest concourse was to be found—in
muarket-places, synagogues, etc. ; and we find Him also retiring from the crowd
into a desert or a. garden, and there employing Himself in all kinds of religious
exercise and intercourse with His Father, in fasting, meditation, and prayer.
Following His example we may doubtless lead public lives innocently and
usefully, conversing with men and doing them good, mutually sowing and
reaping the various comforts and advantages of human society. But since the
pleasures of conversation when too freely tasted are intoxicating and dangerous,
since the temptations which we thereby meet with are many and great (and
even where the spirit is willing to resist, yet the fiesh is often weak), we ought
therefore to regulate and restrain ourselves in the indulgence of such enjoy-
ments by periodical intermissions of them, to strengthen ourselves for such
public encounters by our religious privacies, to retire from the world and

236


¢


~~ wae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VI.





converse with God and our own conscience, examining the state and fortifying
the power of our soul in secrecy and silence.

III. Next morning Jesus joined His disciples.—Some three hours after
midnight “ He cometh unto them, walking upon the sea.” The fact surprises
us: yet why should it? All elements are surely alike to Him who made them!
“The progress of Divinity, within His own dominions, cannot be confined to
humanly constructed roads or solid ground.” What wonder, then, that He who
had so amply demonstrated His power upon the land should display it upon the
waters also? Our surprise is but a result and an evidence of the weakness of
our faith. The disciples during Christ’s absence had been “ toiling in rowing,
for the wind was contrary.” Doubtless that conflict of the elements had been
stirred by Christ Himself, for the clearer display of His power, and the deeper
conviction of His disciples. From the mountain where He prayed He had
witnessed their distress ; but for the benefit of their souls He delayed their
rescue. So with ourselves. Often does the providence of God surround us with
so dark a tempest of calamity that the prospect of relief would seem almost
hopeless. Yet even in the darkest hour the eye of faith will pierce through the
gloom to the regions of joy and peace beyond. Nay, are we not, through the
whole of our present existence, in the situation of those wave-tossed disciples,
sailing upon a sea of anxiety at the best, and of peril for the most part, in the
hope of the appearance of our Lord? Is not that hope the only source of our
light, the only anchor of our soul?

IV. The appearance of Jesus first terrifies and then consoles.—1. The
confession of weakness so faithfully recorded in ver. 49 is a sample of the
candour which distinguishes Holy Writ. Had Jesus approached the ship in
any ordinary manner, it would have been unaccountable that His disciples
should not instantly have recognised Him; but the way in which He came of
itself explains their misapprehension. They had never seen Him hold in abey-
ance the laws of nature with respect to His own body. The idea of His walking
over the sea had never entered their minds; and consequently, in the absence of
any rational explanation, they readily fell a prey to the weak suggestions of
superstitious credulity. And if through that mere delusion of the imagination
they were thrilled with horror and cried out in an agony of fear, though free
from crime, what must the guilty conscience suffer in self-inflicted tortures
even here, and what must be its torment of remorse hereafter! 2. The con-
soling voice of Jesus calms the storm—both stilling the waves of the sea
and dispelling the tumult in the hearts of the disciples (vers. 50, 51). And
in similar accents does He address Himself to all who turn to Him believing
(Matt. xi. 28; John iii, 16). 3. As to the degree in which we may, indeed must,
repose our confidence in Him, the example of St. Peter on this occasion amply
instructs us (Matt. xiv. 28-32). We are invited, nay bidden, to come to Jesus ;
and no sooner do we make the attempt than we are endowed with strength to
enable us to come; and under the support of that celestial aid, without which
we could do nothing, we advance nearer and nearer to the Eternal Source ci
light and life. ;

V. How far was Christ’s object accomplished by this miracle?—St. Mark
tells us that they were struck with amazement at the moment, and then, “ after
that sudden ‘ecstasy’ was past, they continued more collectedly and thoughtfully
in a wondering mood.” St. Matthew adds (xiv. 33) that they “came and
worshipped Him, saying, Of a truth Thou art the Son of God.” This was.
the impression which Jesus had wished to produce upon their minds, and the
acknowledgment which He had sought to draw from their lips. In forming
and in expressing such an opinion they were supported by the authority of
Scripture (Job ix. 8).

237


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








Ver. 56. Touching the Lord.—Wonderful scenes must these have been,—the
rumour of His coming ; the preparations for it; the eagerness to be first; the
gestures and cries to excite notice and pity; the gracious touch; the joyful
exclamations; the thankful returning home. And we sing, “Thy touch has
still its ancient power.” Let us ask some simple questions as to the meaning
of that.

I. What is the virtue now?—1. Not bodily healing—that is to say, not as
it was given then. May I not then ask the Lord to heal me of my sickness,
or my brother of his? I cannot do better. Let me seek the Lord through
the physicians. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up. But the healing shall neither be instant nor quite certainly
given. 2. The virtue now is soul-healing. The miracles of the Lord Jesus
seem to have had two ends. (1) They were demonstrative; by them Jesus
of Nazareth was approved of God. (2) They were also illustrative. When
prophets foretold that the lame should walk and the dumb sing, they foretold
what was literally done; but their language was also a figurative description
of what Jesus would do for men’s souls.

II. What is the border of the garment ?—In Rev. i. St. John records his vision
of the Son of Man. It is a vision of our High Priest clothed with a garment
down to the foot. He is our Aaron—our Melchizedek rather. The unction
of the Spirit flows down to the skirts of His garment. Is there not a threefold
hem? 1. Prayer: ‘ Lord, be merciful to me, heal my soul, for I have sinned
against Thee.” He who touches thus shall be made whole. 2. The Word of
God: “ Almighty God, who calledst Luke the physician to be an evangelist
and physician of the soul, may it please Thee that by the wholesome medicines
of the doctrine delivered by him all the diseases of our souls may be healed.”
3. The Holy Sacraments: We pray to the Lord, who laid His hands upon little
children and blessed them, to wash and sanctify our children with the Holy
Ghost. And just as it is most important for recovery and health that whole-
some food in plenty be given to the sick, so He has provided that in the
Eucharist we eat His Flesh and live by Him: “The strengthening and
refreshing of our souls by the Body and Blood of Christ.”

III. What is the touch now?—1. Not the mere use of means. It is the
touch of faith and prayer which is blest. No means of grace should be used
without prayer. The Lord, at His baptism, was praying (Luke ii. 21).
Apostles did not confirm or ordain without prayer (Acts viii. 15, xiv. 23).
Not a superstitious but a believing use of the means of grace brings healing.
The difficulty of faith when Jesus was among men lay in believing that He
who seemed to be man only was God. Its difficulty now is that the Lord is
withdrawn by the cloud of His ascension. But faith triumphs now as it did
then. 2. The touch is a personal application. ‘I will yet for this be inquired
of to do it for them.” Heaven for the asking; but we must ask; and, God
knows why, how many, alas, stop short of the asking! (1) Jesus has entered
here ; we were born in a Christian country. How shall we answer for it? We
have owned Bibles all our lives; the house of God has stood open for us; the
Lord’s Day has proclaimed to us that Jesus passeth by. What if after all we
are not healed? (2) The touch of these sick needed not to be repeated; the
soul’s touch does. Where first we knew health, there it is our delight to resort
continually. (3) May we see the force of example here? Did the woman
(Mark v. 27) set this happy fashion, and these follow her? Do not let us
leave others without the help of our example, openly making application to the
Lord that healeth us. (4) See the power of intercession. It was friends here
who laid the sick in the Lord’s way and besought Him. LEffectual fervent
prayer availeth much.—H. Thompson.


238


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR,


CHAP. VI.


—_——  - Ooo—————————————————————————


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 45. Changes in life.—How un-
expected and disheartening a change!
A calm sunset; a sober livery of even-
ing clothing the quiet vales; the rose
and purple transfiguration of the
mountain-tops; the peaceful rocking
of the slumberous waves; the joy of
feeding the five thousand with loaves
and fishes multiplying in their hands;
and now, behold, disappointed hearts
and a stern struggle in gathering
darkness against threatening winds
and waves! What a picture of life
it is! Improbable and unexpected
changes come, bringing unrest, tempt-
ing us to be unsubmissive or even
disobedient. The loom of life has
been arranged to produce a pattern to
our liking; the swift shuttle of time,
flying through the warp of our human
affairs, weaves awhile a fabric pleas-
ing to us and others, and then, an
unseen hand silently shifting all the
machinery of life, strange threads and
sombre colours begin to weave upon a
pattern not yet disclosed.


Ver. 46. Christ's prayer.—The
prayer here referred to was not so
much a series of requests or petitions,
as a state of rapt contemplation of
God’s presence and a profound com-
munion with Him. He spent those
quiet hours in a Divine meditation,
drinking afresh at the Eternal Springs,
listening to the inspirations of the
Father’s voice. The claims of honour
and ambition which men made for
Him were put aside and clean for-
gotten, as He entered into the secret
place of the Most High and dwelt
under the shadow of the Almighty.
He saw then with clear vision His
work stretch out before Him as the
Redeemer of men, and knew that He
must be made perfect through suffer-
ing ere God or man could crown Him.
~—D. W. Forrest.

Christ lived by faith.—As the Son of
Man, made like unto His brethren,
He too lived by faith. He was ever


going up into His mountain of devo-
tion and bringing down power and
encouragement. It mattered not how
clamant appeared the demands for out-
ward service, He allowed nothing to rob
Him of that frequent solitary fellow-
ship. He was never so busy that He
had no time for retirement. Without
it His Mission had never been accom-
plished. And without it our life in Him
will never be strong or deep.—Jbid.

Foundations out of sight.—Some-
times, perhaps, you have been im-
pressed by the courage with which a
man stood forth for truth and justice
against a gainsaying multitude, or by
the patience and submission shewn
by one whose earthly hopes were
blasted. You marvelled; but these
men had in many an hour taken
counsel of themselves, they had seen
visions of God, and were sure how He
would have them go, and that He
would go with them. They knew
whom they had believed. The founda-
tions of Divine faith and life are, like
all foundations, out of sight; but the
character that you see and admire is
based on them, and draws its strength
from them. Therefore to rest even
from good works may be a duty.
There are some sweet souls whose
devotion is such that they never can
think it right to pause in their service,
who are always finding some new
claim on their sympathy, until they
exhaust themselves. This ceaseless
energy is not good either for their
sake or for the work’s sake. Christ
rested, simply sent the crowds away,
many of them unhelped, and went up
into His mountain; but when He
reappeared it was with a double
blessing. —J6zd.


Ver. 48. Unable to come to Christ.—
We are sometimes in a like position
with the disciples. In spite of all our
efforts we cannot succeed in fighting
our way to Him. In the midst of
temptation, when our spirit seems


239


CHAP. VI.


held down and cannot soar to the joy
of faith, or in severe bodily suffering,
which envelops the soul with the
black veil of spiritual darkness, there
is still indeed deep down in the heart
a believing desire for the Lord’s help,
but dark thoughts of temptations rise
like black and heavy waves between
Him and ourselves. The soul cannot
come to Christ: this sometimes lasts
a long while, and even till the hour of
death. Relatives may then be stand-
ing in deep grief round the death-bed,
and anxiously asking: ‘Is it possible
that this soul is to die in the darkness
of doubt? Is this disciple to be for-
saken by the Lord in his last hour ?”
Oh no; beloved, learn here that when
disciples, in spite of all their efforts,
cannot come to their Lord, He comes
to them. —Z. Lehmann.

Hindrances turned into helps.—The
stormy sea has been used far too often
as a symbol of a troubled life for us
to hesitate a moment about making
application of that scene to those
times in our lives when events seem
lawless, uncontrollable by ourselves,
like that shifting, fluid, restless sea.
Those waves seemed to present an
insuperable barrier to Christ’s advance,
but by the power of the life that is
in Him He transformed them into a
means of progress. Every billow was
made by Him a stepping-stone towards
His disciples. It is not a fanciful
dream, but a sober fact, that many of
His people, by the power of that self-
same life, have triumphed over their
troubles, and have found them helps
heavenward. The spirit is mightier
than the body, the living stronger than
the dead. The Christly spirit is the
conqueror of materialism in thought
and in fact here and hereafter, and
your Lord can make your very hind-
rances, as you call them, your stepping-
stones heavenward.—A. Rowland.


Ver. 49. Christ not recognised.—
They did not recognise Him, because
He came to them in another manner
from that to which they were accus-
tomed, They took Him for a spirit


240


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





——__+,








announcing to them, according to the
popular superstition, death and de-
struction, and they cried out for fear.
So greatly may Christ be misunder-
stood by His people. We always
think of Him after one fashion, and
picture His coming according to owr
thoughts. If He comes otherwise,
and approaches us, not in the way of
prosperity, but upon the storm-tossed
sea, we do not recognise Him and are
afraid. When He draws nigh with
hands full of blessings, He is welcome ;
but when He comes upon the waves of
tribulation, we think it cannot be the
Saviour. And yet it is He. What
seems to us unmixed misfortune is
often our greatest blessing. When
we are afraid of perishing, He is
just upon His way to preserve us.—
EH. Lehmann.


Ver. 50. Christ's words of cheer.—
These words of Christ’s, once uttered on
the earth, are blent henceforth with
heaven’s eternal echoes. When the
storms of affliction are raging ; when
the blasts of adversity blow ; when the
bolts of bereavement are falling, in
dark and dreary days; when strength
and pride are prostrate, and the lamp
of life burns low; when dear delights
and darling dreams are vanishing away;
when the light of hope is dim, and the
heart is sick with sorrow,—then for a
time it seems as though our sky were
for ever overcast, and the waters of
grief were closing for aye above our
heads. But there is One who rules
the tempest ; there is guidance in the
waste of woe; there is deliverance
deeper than disaster; there is a yoice
commanding, “‘ Peace! be still.” Anon
the clouds shall clear, the day shall
dawn, the countenance of God shall
beam; for sadness, loss, and dire
dismay are sent to man for discipline,
not for destruction. Yet a little while,
and the anguish that has pierced the
breast shall purify the soul ; the help-
lessness of self-despair shall change to
the rest of reliance; all the solitude
shall smile, all the shadows be bright,
and all the sounds of frantic fear and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.





desolating doubt be whelmed in the
sweet whisper of the Voice Divine,
“Tt is I; be not afraid.”—Z. YU.
Geldart.


Ver. 51. Lessons.—1. It is commend-
able that they were affected with
admiration and reverent fear of these
great and miraculous works of Christ.
2. It is discommendable that they
exceeded due measure in this astonish-
ment and admiration of the miracles
themselves, without due consideration
of Christ’s Divine power by which
they were wrought.—G. Petter.


Ver. 52. Want of consideration.—
They failed in this consideration to
the very end, and it was not until after
the Holy Ghost was given them that
their faith became equal to the demands
upon it. And so it seems to be with
disciples always. Our trouble is the
dull heart, the slow apprehension, the
little faith, We do not consider
the providence which has its witness
in our past experience. We fail to
apprehend our Lord’s meaning in the
questions which our circumstances, our
work in the world, our obligations and
duties, are continually putting to us.
We miss the Divine purpose in the
emergencies, the exigencies, which from
time to time confront us. Least of all
do we suspect that they are oppor-
tunities of faith—occasions for the
exercise of spiritual power. Missions,
charities, social reformations, and all
the various forms of Christian enter-
prise—these things languish or fail
chiefly because we, the disciples, cannot
seem to get rid of the idea that man
lives and must live by bread alone.—
W. T. Wilson.

Christ's training.—It is one purpose
of the training of the school of Christ
to beget confidence in His power and
grace ; and often this is done by bring-
ing to light our lurking unbelief. And
that is an hour of blessing for us when
fateful events put before our eyes, in
unmistakable ways, our lack of con-
fidence in the Lord, and shame us into


higher faith,


Rk


Hardness of heart.—1. Hardness of
heart is a main cause hindering the
fruit and profit which we should reap
by the means of grace. 2. There may
be and is even in good Christians (yea,
in the best) some degree of hardness of
heart.—G. Petter.

Lessons.—1. The regenerate do in
some measure see and feel their own
hardness of heart, whereas the un-
regenerate have little or no feeling of
it for the most part (Eph. iv. 19;
Tim. iv. 2). 2. The godly not only
feel but are unfeignedly grieved and
humbled for their own hardness of
heart ; so are not the wicked. 3. The
godly hate and constantly strive against
it, using all good means to be rid of
it, and to have their hearts softened
more and more; not so the wicked, who
bear with themselves, and willingly go
on in hardness of heart (Rom. ii. 5).
4. Hardness of heart in the godly is
a sin of infirmity ; but in the wicked
it is a reigning sin, bearing away, and
prevailing in them.—Jbid.


Ver. 53. Gennesaret —the modern
el-Ghuweir—is that fine rich level tract
of country which was the principal
scene of our Lord’searthly career. ‘Its
nature is wonderful,” says Josephus,
“as well as its beauty. Its soil is so
fruitful that all sorts of trees can grow
upon it; and the inhabitants accord-
ingly plant on it all kinds. The
temperature of the air is so well mixed
that it agrees with the different kinds.
Walnuts, which require cold air,
flourish there in the greatest abund-
ance; palm trees also, which grow best
in heat; fig trees likewise, and olives,
which require an air that is more
temperate. One may call this place
the Ambition of nature, where it con-
strains those plants which are naturally
enemies to one another to agree to-
gether. It is a happy strife of the
seasons, as if every one of them laid
claim to this country, for it not only
nourishes different sorts of autumnal
fruit beyond men’s expectation, it
preserves them a great while. It sup-.
plies men with the principal fruits,

241


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SY, MARK,





with grapes and figs, continually
during ten months of the year, and the
rest of the fruits, as they become ripe
together, throughout the whole year.”


Ver. 55. Helping others.—1. In that
this people shew their love by bringing
the sick to Christ to be healed, we learn
that it is a duty of love and mercy
which we owe to such as are in misery
and affliction, to afford them our best
help and succour. (1) We profess to
be fellow-members of the same mystical
body of Christ, the Church. (2) We
ourselves are subject to like afflictions.
2. How are we to help such as are
in misery and afiliction? (1) By our
prayers to God to give them strength,
patience, deliverance, to sanctify to
them all their troubles, etc. (2) By


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 3, 4. Ignorant prejudices.—The same
blindness and folly appears on a smaller
scale in our own day. Some years ago
Professor Wilson wrote that “as the northern
Highlanders do not admire Waverley, so, I
presume, the south Highlanders despise Guy
Mannering. The Westmoreland peasants
think Wordsworth a fool. In Borrowdale
Southey is not known to exist. I met ten
men in Hawick who do not think Hogg a
poet, and the whole city of Glasgow think
me @ madman.”


Ver. 7. The Divine call.—The apostles are
the Lord’s “sent ones,” models of Christ’s
servants who do His bidding in all the ages.
Still, the supreme need of all who engage
in Christian work is a sense of the Divine
call, We may, therefore, ask how such calls
are likely to come to us in these our times.
They often come in providential circum-
stances, which bring altogether unsought
work into a man’s hands. In one of his
letters Dr. Norman McLeod wrote in this
way: “I have tried, at least for the last
twenty-five years, to accept of whatever
work is offered to me in God's providence.
I have, rightly or wrongly, always believed
that a man’s work is given to him, that it is
not so much sought as accepted, that it
is floated to one’s feet like the infant Moses
to Pharaoh’s daughter.” No man will want
work who waits on Divine providence with a
full purpose of heart to do what is shewn
to be God’s will for him. They come in
the consciousness of possessing gifts, and such
consciousness often comes suddenly to men.


242


comforting and strengthening them in
all their troubles, that they may be
better able to bear them with patience.
(3) By our best advice, counsel, and
instruction. (4) By providing for them
the best outward means of comfort and
help in our power. 3. True Christian
love is diligent and painful in doing
duties and services of love to others as
occasion offers. 4. We ought wisely
to observe and take the best oppor-
tunities of helping and doing good to
such as are in misery and distress.—
G. Petter.


Ver. 56. Touching Chiist.—The
touch was—l. Needy. 2. Wise. 3.
Prompt. 4. Believing. 5. Personal.
6. Unrestricted. 7. Efficacious.—John
Smith.


TO CHAPTER VI.


A good man, called to reside in a fresh
city, visited a Sunday school, and was
asked to take charge of the infant class
in the absence of the usual teacher. As
he had the little folk before him, the
thought came to him and possessed him,
“Here is your life-work, This is what
you have to do.” It was an inward impulse
by the Spirit. In that work he has won
good success. We limit our realisation of
Divine calls by limiting our ideas of Chris-
tian work. When an army is going forth to
war, what a multitude of great and small
preparations are necessary! and how much
the success of the expedition will depend on
careful attention to the minute details! The
credit of the triumph won does not belong
to the soldier only; it is in part his who
made the soldiers’ weapons and the soldiers’
clothes. In the Arctic Expeditions every-
thing depended on the thorough faithfulness
of each member in the things that were
least. The cabin-boy had his part in tha
work as truly as the leader. David acted
on this view of the claims of all who take
any place in an enterprise, however lowly
the place may be, when he insisted on
having the spoil divided among those who
“ tarried by the stuff,” as well as among those
who “ went forth to battle.” We all need to
recognise more fully than we have ever done,
that the Divine call to work, and the Divine
inspiration and grace for workers, come to
givers, and collectors, and sympathisers,
and those who pray, quite as truly as to
those who preach and teach.

Support by companionship.—A father was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE.


CHAP. VI.


a a EEEEIEEEEEEEEEEEEEENG


walking one day in the fields with his two
children. The wind was blowing over a fine
field of ripe corn, and making the beautiful
golden ears wave like the waves of the sea.
“Js it not surprising,” said one of the
children, “that the wind does not break the
slender stalks of the corn?” “My child,”
said the father, ‘see how flexible the stalks
are! They bend before the wind, and rise
again when the wind has passed over them.
See, too, how they help to support each other.
A single stalk would be soon bent to the
ground, but so many growing close together
help to keep each other up. If we keep
together when the troubles of life come upon
us like a stormy wind, we shall keep each
other up, when one trying to stand alone
would fall.”


Ver. 8. Impediments.—Armies most amply
furnished with stores and comforts are most
inefficient. The Zulu hordes, with but spear
and shield, held long at bay the well-pro-
visioned and disciplined troops of England.
Baggage is well termed “ impedimenta.” It
checks by just so much the quickness, and
fosters by hardness. The soul heavily
freighted with the luxuries and appliances
of this life is at a disadvantage for the
sudden movements and missions on which
the Great Captain would send it.


Ver, 16. Herod’s thoughts—What were
Herod’s thoughts? Not long before a re-
markable poem had been written in which
the hero is represented as having entered
by the Sybil’s agency the dark regions of
Tartarus, the abode of the spirits of the
departed dead. There, crowding around him,
are multitudes of shadowy forms, wearing
the semblance of what they bore whilst
on earth. Flitting in restless disquietude
are the unburied dead; there, too, are
parricides, dishonest trustees who have
wronged widows and orphans, betrayers of
the honour of wife and country, all showing
in phantom face and visage that they are
enduring the righteous retribution of the
gods. And there, likewise, in more blissful
regions are the ghosts who, when alive on
earth, did good and honourable deeds.
Amidst the throng he recognises his honoured
father, whom, indeed, he had come to see,
and he receives from him sundry admonitions
as to the future of his race and country, and
the duties thereby required. He inquires if
the shades of the dead wish or are allowed
to revisit the upper world, and the answer
he receives seems to leave the question some-
what open, and is followed by a philosophical
disquisition on the nature and origin of the
creation, That poem was dedicated to
Augustus, the immediate predecessor of
Tiberius, the then wearer of the imperial
purple, and had been rehearsed before him
ia the presence of his court. The poem, like


all great poems, reflected not only the
thoughts of the age, but the thoughts of
human nature itself. Had Herod heard it
or read it? Most likely he had. Was he
acquainted with the history of the Sybil,
and the Sybilline Oracles? If so, there
would be no antecedent improbability in the
reappearance of John the Baptist. Nay,
similar apparitions were reported to have
been actually seen. Thus the ghost of the
mighty Caesar was said to have appeared to
his murderer, and to have summoned him to
a meeting after the fateful field at Philippi.
Jewish traditions told, too, of the apparition
of the prophet Samuel to Saul with the
awful message, “To-day shalt thou and thy
sons be with me.” If, then, the Baptist
were risen from the dead, no wonder that
mighty works should shew forth themselves
in him. But to whom should his first visit
be more likely paid than to his murderer?
and what would be the terrible nature of his
message? In vain the licentious dances
of voluptuous women, the flattery of his
courtiers, the luxuries of his table! They
could not stifle the whispers of the inward
monitor; adultery and murder were ugly
facts, and so Herod might have said with
Juvenal,—


“Tf the anger of the gods be great, yet
certainly it is slow;
If, therefore, they take care to punish all
the guilty,
When will they come to me?”
Sat, xiii., 7. 100.


Stings of conscience.—Henry of Essex,
struck down in a duel, attributed his defeat
to the imagined appearance of a knight
whom he had murdered standing by the
side of his adversary. Speaking of the
man who planned the massacre of Glencoe,
Macaulay tells us that Breadalbane felt the
stings of conscience. He went to the most
fashionable coffee-house in Edinburgh, and
talked loudly about what he had done among
the mountains; but some of his soldiers
observed that all this was put on. He was
not the same man that he had been before.
In all places, at all hours, working or sleeping,
Glencoe was for ever before him.

Rustled by a breeze.—There is a species of
poplar whose leaves are often rustled by a
breeze too faint to stir the foliage of other
trees. Noticing the fact one day when there
was scarce a breath of air, Gotthold thought
within himself, “ This tree is the emblem of
9, man with a wounded and uneasy conscience,
which takes alarm at the most trifling cause,
and agitates him so that he knows not
whither to fly.”

A guilty conscience.—King Theodoric could
not endure the senator Symmachus, a good
and virtuous'man, so he caused him to be
put to death. But after this proceeding he
lost his accustomed high spirits, and took to


243


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


ST


looking gloomy and soliloquising apart. One
day while at dinner, on a fish being served,
he thought he saw the head of Symmachus
attached to the body, and this optical
illusion caused his death. Bessus, while
surrounded by his courtiers, suddenly drew
his sword, and rushing at a nest of swallows,
hacked the whole family to death. Having
been allowed time to recover himself after
this unwonted exertion, he was asked the
reason for his sudden outbreak, when, in a
virtuously indignant tone, he replied, “ Did
you not hear them reproach me with the
murder of my father?” It afterwards
transpired that he was really guilty of this
crime.





Ver. 18. Testimony before kings.—On one
occasion St, Hugh is reported to have said to
King John, “I trust you mean what you say ;
you know I dislike lies.” He warned him
also against trusting to a stone amulet which
he wore round his neck, saving, “ Trust not
in that senseless stone, but in the Living
Stone, the Lord Jesus Christ.” And at
Fontevrault he pointed out to John a
sculpture of the Day of Judgment, with a
group of crowned kings being led away by
demons to the smoking pit.


Ver. 20. Reverence for the good.-We may
be reminded perhaps of our own monarch
Charles II., who certainly reverenced Bishop
Ken and several others like him, and
reverenced them because they were just
men, but who could not shake himself free
from his lusts and submit himself to their
teaching.

Royal wmability—Palissy, the famous
French potter, was imprisoned in the
Bastille, when nearly eighty years old, on
account of his religious opinions. The King
of France visited him, and strove to make
him recant. “ My good man,” said the King,
“ you have been forty-five years in the service
of my mother, or in mine, and we have
suffered you to live in your own religion,
amidst all the executions and the massacres,
Now, however, I am so pressed that I have
been compelled in spite of myself to imprison
you; you will be burnt, if you will not be
converted.” ‘‘ Sire,” answered Palissy, “you
have said several times that you feel pity for
me; but it is I who pity you, who have said,
Iam compelled. That is not speaking like a
king. I will teach you to talk royally. All
your people and yourself cannot compel a
potter to bow down to images of clay.”


Ver. 25. Unwomanly women.—There is a
similar instance in Roman history of a woman
requiring the head of an enemy to be brought
to her. Agrippina, the mother of Nero, who
was afterwards emperor, sent an officer to
put to death Lollia Paulina, who had been
her rival for the imperial dignity. When


244


Lollia’s head was brought to her, not know-
ing it at first, she examined it with her
own hands, till she perceived some particular
feature by which that lady was distinguished.


Ver. 29. Relics of the Baptist—At Sebaste
(Samaria) a dungeon is pointed out as the
place where the Baptist was beheaded,
though Josephus says it took place in the
castle of Macherus. At any rate he seems
to have been buried at Samaria, “ between


two prophets,” Mandeville declares, “ Elisha:


and Abdias.” In the time of Julian some
pagans broke into the tomb, burnt the bones,
and scattered the ashes to the winds. Some
small portions were collected by the Chris-
tians, and sent to St. Athanasius at Alex-
andria, where the Emperor Theodosius, in
396 A.D., built a magnificent church for
their reception.


Ver. 31. Labour and patience.—Activity
and the growth which comes by passive
sufiering ought always to make one single
total life. Some of you will remember how
in the old church at Innsbruck, among the
magnificent bronze people who stand about
the tomb of the Emperor Maximilian, is the
great Godfrey of Boulogne, the illustrious
Crusader. Upon his head he wears his
helmet, and on the helmet rests a crown of
thorns. The strange conjunction may mean
many things. No doubt the crown of thorns
is meant to represent the sacred cause, the
rescue of the place of the Lord’s crucifixion
and burial, for which the soldier fought,
But is not such a union of symbols a
perpetual picture? The helmet and the
crown of thorns—activity ‘and suffering,
fighting and growing, the putting forth of
energy and the drinking in of strength—
these two were represented, not as coming
in by turns, not as chasing one another into
and out of the life, but as abiding together,
making one temper, filling one character.
It is the helmet and the crown of thorns
worn together on the consecrated head that
makes the noble, useful, growing life.—
Bishop Phillips Brooks.

No leisure.—If a stranger enters a busy
factory, he cannot help being struck with
the bustle and activity that pervade the
whole establishment. Here a _ powerful
engine throbs and works; there are glowing
furnaces and red caverns of fire. Here are
wheels and spindles and revolving bands;
there, hurrying to and fro with rapid steps
and skilful hands, the workpeople, all
hastening to accomplish their respective
tasks. And there is much similarity in the
condition of our ever-active modern life—
when every day, and every hour, seems filled
with business, and the seasons of relaxation
are equally crowded with pleasures and ex-
citements, so that we seem to exist under
a system of “high pressure.” _ Ruskin’s blunt





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VI.


nan


language calls it, “a machine-ridden and
devil-driven age.” The rough sarcasm of
the man who said to his fellow-labourer,
who was longing for rest, “ You’ll have time
to rest when you are dead!” seems to give
some idea of the business and activity of
life in our great cities in this age. But
there are many disadvantages that follow,
for “he who lacks time to think lacks time
to mend.”—Dr. Hardman.

Periods of repose.—For all organic life
God has provided periods of repose, during
which repair goes on in order to counteract
the waste caused by activity. In the spring-
time we see movement and stir in gardens,
fields, and hedgerows, which continues till
the fruits are gathered in and the leaves
fall; but then winter’s quiet again settles
down over all, and nature is at rest. Even
the flowers have their time for closing their
petals, and their sleeping hours come so
regularly, and yet are so varied in distribu-
tion among them, that botanists can con-
struct a floral clock out of our English
wild flowers, and tell the hour of night or
day by their opening or closing. The same
God who created the flowers and appointed
the seasons ordained the laws of Israel,
and by these definite seasons of rest were
set apart for the people—the Sabbath, the
jubilee year, and the annual festivals. In-
deed, in every age and in every land, the
coming of night and the victory of sleep
are hints of what God has ordained for
man.—A. Ronland.

Human claims paramount.—An old hea-
then philosopher bade his pupils beware of
saying there was no time if a human claim
was made upon their services. Never say
“there is no time,” if there is a ministry of
mercy to be rendered to your race. If you
want to see how active men may become
under the urgency of necessity, stand on
Ludgate Hill, and see how human life is
being exhausted, how the energies of many
are being worn out. Amid the activities of
a London commercial life, and with ail the
incentive that the promise of wealth and
greatness and aught else may give, you will
find no man who can give such a record of
a day’s work as we find in the Gospels
concerning our Saviour.—D. Davies.


Ver. 34. Sympathy with the multitude —
In the troublous times of the French Revo-
lution a speaker in the Corps Legislatif
asked, “Why do not our great men, our
priests and philosophers, move and save
the people?” A solemn voice replied, ‘ Be-
cause they are cast in bronze.” We who
profess the service of Christ can never win
the multitude until our hearts are clearly
responsive to all their appeals for better-
ment of body and soul.


Ver. 41. God the Provider—A boy was


once saying a grace before meat, which his
Sunday-school teacher had taught him,
when his mother, who was not accustomed
to such things, said to him, “ Why do you
thank God for it? does not your father work
for it?” But if the father had worked a
thousand years he could not have made a
grain of wheat, and it would have been an
easy thing for God to deprive the father of
the health and strength which enabled him
to work, or to close the door through which
he obtained employment and wages to
purchase food; so that the boy was right,
and we are all right when we pray to God
and thank Him for our daily bread.


Ver. 43. Wise economy.—Two men set out
for a ten days’ journey across the desert.
They each took ten loaves, a luaf for each
day. The first day the younger man ate all
he could, and then tossed the rest on the
sand; but the elder man, having eaten spar-
ingly, brought out two bags, into one of
which he put all the crusts, and into the
other all the crumbs. Day after day he did
the same, and the younger man marvelled
and smiled. But on the tenth day they
discovered that they were still two days
short of their journey’s end. And now the
younger man had nothing whatever to eat}!
But the elder now brought out his two well-
filled bags, and both of them were very
thankful to eat the crusts that day, and the
crumbs the next.


Vers. 45-51. The direction of the wind when
Jesus malked on the sea.—During a recent
visit to the Sea of Galilee, I naturally spent
some time over the Gospel narratives con-
nected with this historic piece of water,
studying them with the panorama of moun-
tain, shore, ravine, and lake spread before
me. It scemed to me that in one connexion
at least—that of Christ’s walking on the
water—most of the commentaries I had read
were at fault. Almost without exception
they assume that the “ contrary wind ” which
beset the disciples was a westerly wind,
preventing them from reaching Capernaum
on the west side. Now I believe that a
study of the thvee narratives (Matthew,
Mark, and John) bears out that the wind was
actually from the east, and that the disciples
were really pulling away from Capernaum,
trying to get back to Bethsaida. In the first
place, where was the Bethsaida spoken of
in Mark? Most take it as the Bethsaida
on the western shore, and translate mpos
Bybcatddy as “ towards Bethsaida” ; but mpds
may mean, as in the margin, “ over against,”
in which case the town must be sought for
on the eastern side. Mr. Haskett Smith, in
his latest edition of Porter’s admirable Hand-
book, p. 253, says that the true site of this
Bethsaida is a village named Ms’aidieh—a
name virtually identical in meaning-—situ-


245


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ES


ated on the fertile plain of el-Batiheh, exactly
opposite to Tell Him, which he identifies
with Capernaum, The hills immediately
behind this ruin are generally admitted to
have been the most likely scene of the
miraculous feeding of the five thousand. lf
this be the true site, as there is every reason
to believe, then the narrative becomes quite
clear. At the conclusion of the feeding
of the five thousand, then, Christ sent His
disciples on board the ship with the intention
of crossing with them to the other side. It
is said, He “constrained them” to go on
board. Why did He need to do so? Many
say they too were carried away by the
enthusiasm of the crowd, and would have
liked to make Him a king (John vi. 15), and
thesupposition is probable; but it may further
be that, experienced fishermen as they were,
they knew the signs of an approaching
storm, and marvelled that their Master
should compel them to go on board at such
atime. Before a tempest on the lake there
is usually a great sultriness in the air, the
sky is murky and filled with misty, indefi-
nitely shaped clouds, while the sun loses its
brilliancy and appears of a pale sickly yellow.
But Christ gave no reasons beyond the
directions to pick Him up farther along the
shore. Their ship (rd mAofov) was anchored
a little off the shore, and communication was
kept up by means of a single “ punt ” or
“ skiff,” mdoudprov (John vi. 22). Having got
on board, the disciples sent back the skiff,
and waited for their Master. But the storm
burst upon them, and blew them far out
across the lake towards the west. It was
my good fortune while in Galilee to witness
one of the most violent tempests seen for
many years. Iam aware that the majority
of squalls come down the Wady Hammam
and are westerly in character; but the storm
T witnessed came from the south, and after
blowing for half an hour in that direction
changed to the north-east. I was assured
by the boatmen on the lake who had been
in this tempest that the only resource for
a boat caught in such a squall is to let her
drift, till the first violence is spent, when
rowing may be attempted. Such was, no
doubt, the case with the disciples. They
simply had to “scud” before the seas and
furious wind, till the initial fury had some-
what spent itself, when they took to the oars
and began the weary work of rowing back
to Bethsaida. This they continued till the
fourth watch of the night, toiling against the
heavy breakers and, perhaps, dashing rain,
But their toil was in vain; they drifted
more than they rowed. Christ saw them
Bacarigoudvous ev T@ EAatver, and came walk-
ing on the water to meet them. Why did
they not see Jesus till He was “ passing them
by”? (Mark vi. 48). Simply because, if our
supposition is correct, their backs were
turned towards Him as He was coming with


246


the wind, while they were toiling at the oars
against the wind. Immediately on receiving
Jesus into the boat, John tells us, “the ship
was at the land whither they went” (vi. 21).
The Evangelist gives no indication that the
incident is to be regarded as a miracle, nor
need we necessarily suppose it to have been
one. John says they had rowed twenty-five
or thirty furlongs when they were met by
Jesus. But as they were drifting more than
they rowed, they were close on the other
side when Christ appeared. From Ms’aidieh
to Capernaum is just about twenty-eight
furlongs, so that when they took Jesus into
the boat, and the storm was hushed, it was
straightway that their ship was émi rijs Yijs,
i.e. touching the shelving, gravelly beach.
The shore had been obscured before, partly
by the gloom of night and partly by the
spray and spindrift, which is such a feature
of these Galilean storms. In conclusion, I
may say that the homiletic value of this
exegesis appears to me greater than on the
common view. The disciples in this case
were not rowing away from Christ, but,
filled with a strong love for their Master,
and in apprehension at leaving Him alone on
the desolate shore, were doing all they could
to pull back to Jesus, even though at the
expense of enormous labour to themselves.
It is a splendid instance of devotion, and
shews that the fishermen had risen much in
moral courage since the time of their former
craven fear when Jesus was on board, and
when He stilled the tempest G. A. Frank
Knight.


Vers. 47-51. Two aspects of life—In a
gallery in Italy there are two pictures side
by side by different artists. One represents
asea tossed by storms. Dark clouds hang
over it, and the lightning-bolts pierce the
sky, and the wrathful waves roll in fury. In
the seething waters a dead human face is
seen, The other represents a sea similarly
storm-tossed ; but in the midst of the angry
waters is a rock, and in the rock a cleft with
green herbage and flowers, and amid these
a dove quietly sitting on her nest. These
two pictures tell the whole story of human
life in this world. The first is a story of
life without Christ, unblessed by His presence
and peace. There is storm everywhere, with
no quiet shelter. The other shews the peac¢
which Christ gives. There is no less storm
The waves rollas high. But there is peace,
The rock represents Christ ; it is in the clefs
of the rock that the peace is found.

Man's impotence.—The howling wind, the
raging waves, and the tossing, tremulous
ship taught them what they needed to feel
—their impotence. Ah! man in his season
of prosperity and peace is prone to pride,
disposed to cherish an overweening estimate
of his character and position. It is a blessing
when, even by a terrible tempest of adversity,


>


_———-


——


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


CHAP. VI.





this insuperable bar to improvement is re-


moved, and the man knows himself. On
one occasion the great Napoleon arranged
to review his fleet off Boulogne. Seeing that
a severe storm was impending, the admiral
in command sent word to the Emperor, ad-
vising that the position of the ships should
be altered. Napoleon demanded obedience
to his first directions, and the vice-admiral
obeyed. The storm burst in terrific violence.
Several gun-sloops were wrecked, and over
two hundred soldiers and sailors were
obliged to battle with the angry sea for life,
and few escaped. The Emperor at once
ordered the boats out to rescue the drowning
men, but he was told that no boat could live
in such a sea. Then, in the strength of his
determination, he ordered a company of
grenadiers to man his boat, and springing
into it, he exclaimed: “Follow me, my
brave fellows! Push on! Push on!” In
vain the poor soldiers struggled at the oars.
“Push on!” cried Napoleon. “Do you not
hear their cries? Oh, this sea! this sea!
It rebels against our power, but it may
be conquered!” Scarcely had the words
escaped his lips when a mighty billow struck
the boat, and sent it and its occupants with
terrible force high up the shore, leaving them
like a stranded waif. Thus was the proud
monarch taught his impotence. Thus also
is self-confident, self-important, self-con-
ceited man often driven back by life’s storms
—driven back upon the very first principles of
a truly religious life—conscious weakness and
necessary dependence.—J. H. Hitchens, D.D.

Divine help.— lifeboat, with its precious
cargo, was pitching and rolling in a fearful
storm, when the old captain cried aloud to
all, “Hold on! hold on!” ‘The response
came, “ Ay, ay!” But there was one little
voice which, in the sadness of despair, ex-
claimed, “I can’t hold on!” Instantly the
strong arm of the captain was thrown around
that trembling child, and he was safe. So
when Jesus sees and hears that, notwith-
standing our utmost efforts, we feel we need
Him, and crave His Divine help, He hastens
to our relief.—Zdid.

Thought for sailors.—As Christ went to the
relief of His distressed disciples, so we who
profess to value the religion of Jesus should
be willing to do all we can for our sons of
the sea. They are a noble race, our sailors.
They are ever ready to do a kindness to a
distressed fellow-voyager; they have extra-
ordinary opportunities for spreading the
truth; and they are called to exercise an
untold amount of self-denial. A ship was
once in distress. Though the angry sea
dashed and foamed with terrible fury, yet
some noble sailors put off to rescue the ship’s
crew. After prolonged effort and peculiar
danger, they succeeded in bringing the whole
company safely to shore. A man of wealth,
standing by the water’s side, as snectator of


the men’s heroism, was moved by the way
they risked their lives. Pulling out his
purse, he offered all the gold it contained
to the coxswain and his men. The gift,
however, was respectfully declined, the boat-
swain saying, “No, sir; we would save a
man for nothing any day.” Brethren, shall
we be backward when the souls of such brave
men are to be saved ?—Jbid.

Difficulty melting before endeavour.—How
often hast thou found thyself, at the entrance
into a duty, becalmed as a ship, which, at
first setting sail, hath hardly wind to swell
its sails, while under the shore and shadow
of the trees, but meets a fresh gale of wind
when got into the open sea? Yea, didst
thou never launch out to duty, as the apostles
did to sea, with the wind in thy face, as if
the Spirit of God, instead of helping thee
on, meant to drive thee back, and yet hast
found Christ walking to thee before the
duty was done, and a prosperous voyage
made of it at last?—W. Gurnall.


Ver. 48. Zoil.—Half the ingenuity of man-
kind is expended in the attempt to avoid
toil. The Lord’s constraint, then, which
sometimes snatches us away from pleasant
ease and compels us to endure some hardness
of toil, is a thing to be thankful for. No
doubt Robert and Mary Moffat, among the
idolatrous and warlike Bechuanas of South
Africa, needed the stern discipline of toiling
and fruitless years as a preparation for the
larger successes of later times. The ten
long years of darkness, without a glimmer
of the dawn, tried and proved a faith which
was imperishable. Before one convert re-
warded their labours, a friend wrote to Mary
Moffat to ask what thing of use she could send
to her, and was answered, ‘Send us a com-
munion service; we shall want it some day.”

Toilers.—\t is an interesting thing to look
out from a suburban railway train, which
enters London or any other large town on
a high level, and as one rapidly passes along
to catch a flying glimpse at the busy life
beneath. Here one gazes down into a
crowded street with its bustling throng—
there one sees a factory with the spindles
and machinery revolving behind the win-
dows; or it may be we catch sight of the
roaring fires of a foundry, or the humble
toil of a washerwoman. But one general
characteristic strikes the mind. It is a sense
of the busy activity of men’s lives—that they
are “toiling.” Now there is no reason why
the idea of work should be an unhappy
one. God in mercy has given mankind work
to do, to make us useful and happy, and keep
us out of harm; but the word “toil” implies
the idea of over-work, of too much pressure,
of too little time for rest and leisure; and
many an excellent and hard-working man
is in these days pressed beyond his powers,
which is a great evil— Dr. Hardman.


247


cuap. vu.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ol eee


CHAPTER VII.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 3. Oft.—Literally, with the fist, hence vigorously. The idea is, that the Pharisees
had inaugurated an elaborate and painstaking ceremonial, which was now adopted by the
whole body of the Jews. The Evangelist may possible mean, that it was actually a part
of the prescribed ritual to keep the one hand closed while the other was being rubbed
with it.

Ver. 4. Wash.—Hither Barrlowvtas, take a bath, or pavricwvra, sprinkle water over them-
selves. Have received to hold.— Accepted as suitable or worthy to retain (or hold fast).

Vers. 11-13. For true reading and rendering see R.V. When an unnatural son wished,
either in a temporary fit of passion, or under the goad of an abiding selfishness, to get
quit of the importunity of a destitute father or mother, he had just to say, in reference
to whatever was craved, Corban ! and then not only was he released from obligation to
assist his needy parent, but was actually bound, as by the highest authority, to withhold
the desired relief. Nor was it necessary that he should actually make the offering to the
service of God; he might keep it himself, or do anything he chose with it, save only that
he must not give it to his parent! Could human ingenuity go further in the direction of
annulling the Word of God?

Ver, 18. Are ye so, ete.—Or, What! are ye also void of understanding ?

Ver. 19. It is difficult to determine whether the words purging (or cleansing) all meats
are a part of our Lord’s discourse, or an eaplanatory addition by the Evangelist. The
R.V., following Origen, Chrysostom, and Gregory Thaumaturgus, adopts the latter inter-
pretation, reading xabapitwy for the xadaplfor of the Textus Receptus; and certainly the
Zreye 5€ which immediately follows looks like an indication that the quotation of Christ’s
words, after being broken off for a moment, is now resumed. “He saith... (and in
so saying He cleanseth all meats). And He said further . . .—Dr. Jas. Morison,
however, while defending ca@apifwv as the true reading, thinks that it “must apparently
refer to the draught, which, by receiving the refuse, draws off as it were the impurities
of the food, or those elements that remain after the nutritive ingredients have been
eliminated and assimilated.”—Mr. J. B. McCleilan, on the other hand, decides against
kadapifwv, on the ground that although it has far the greatest external support, yet “as
Wordsworth has noted, the itacism of w and ois so common in MSS. that this fact ‘is of
little weight against the ordinary rules of grammatical construction,’ and, he might have
added, against the certain requirements of the sense. It was not by the appeal and
explanation to the disciples in our present verse, but by the original declaration to the
multitude in ver. 15, that our Lord made all meats clean. Hence in the verse before us the
masc. cadapitwv is out of place in regard to our Lord, In every other reference it is gram-
matically untenable. With all confidence therefore we retain the neut. xa@aplfov, and
construct it in apposition with the sentence.”

Ver. 22. Covetousness.—The word is in the plural—meovetia : “for this greedy lust of
lawless having runs out on more lines than one: it is a moral monster of several tentacles:
like the cuttle-fish, it puts forth many feelers armed with suckers. Avarice is a branch
only of the root covetousness. Sometimes this pleonexy, or “amor sceleratus habendi,”
is associated with adultery: but, in that case it less denotes the lust of impurity than
connotes a lawless desire to overreach one’s neighbour ; for the adulterer defrauds the
husband in seizing what is the husband’s property. In short, love of pleasure, and love of
money, and love of power are but so many forms of this “ unbridled and unhallowed
possessiveness.” Wickedness.—Also in plural: viliainies—active wrongdoing of all sorts.
Jeremy Taylor explains it as “an aptness to do shrewd turns, to delight in mischief and
tragedies; a love to trouble our neighbour and to do him ill offices ; crossness, perverseness,
and peevishness of action in our intercourse.” An evil eye.—Niggardliness as to one’s own
possessions, and envy as to those of others. See Deut. xv. 9, xxviii. 54; Sirach xiv. 8-10;
Tobit iv. 7-9; Matt. vi. 23, xx. 15. Blasphemy.—Reviling either of God or man. Pride.—
‘An overbearing attitude. Folly.—Senselessness or inyatuation. Such is the true nature of
all sin.

Ver, 24. Tyre and Sidon.—Great commercial cities in Phoenicia. Tyre is mentioned in
29 Sam. v. 11; 1 Kings ix. 11-14, x. 22, xvi. 31: Sidon in Gen. x. 19; Josh. xi. 8;
Judg. i. 31, Apparently Christ did not actually go into Phcenicia, but into the adjacent
district, belonging to the tribe of Asher. See R.V.

Ver. 26. Syrophenician.—So called by way of distinction from the Libyophcenicians of
Africa, the Carthaginians.


248





i
;


—_ soe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VII.
en ee ee ee eee ee
Ver. 27. Dogs.—A diminutive, indicating the household pets.
Ver, 28. Crumbs.—Another diminutive. Wondrous humility |
Ver. 31. For true reading see R.V. Through Sidon—not necessarily the city. The


object of this long détour was to obtain much-needed retirement and rest.
_ Ver. 32. This man’s deafness had rendered him hard-of-speech, scarcely able to articulate
intelligibly.

Ver. 34. Ephphatha.—The actual Aramaic word used. “ Be thow opened—it is the man


who is addressed ; it was he who needed to be corporeally opened to the ingress of ds
and to the ready egress of words.” ise ene Saas > ger


Ver. 85. String.—The bond holding his tongue and impeding his speech.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—?3.
(Paratiet : Marr. xv. 1-20.)


The tradition of men.—tI. Traditionalists conspiring against Christ.—
1, Their evil design. See John vii. 1. 2. Their cunning method. They sought
to bring in our Lord guilty of impiety by teaching His disciples to transgress
the tradition of the elders.

II. Traditionalists confounded by Christ.—1. By shewing that they taught
for doctrines the commandments of men which were in opposition to the
commandments of God. 2. By shewing the folly of these human traditions.

Lessons.—1. A sad tendency of human nature—to honour God with the lips
while the heart is far from Him. 2. The manifestation of this tendency
(vers. 8, 9). 3. The real source of evil—the human heart. 4. The manifesta-
tions of the controlling power of the sinful heart (vers. 21, 22). 5. Real
defilement before God—that of the inner source of evil.—D. C. Hughes. .


Christian controversy.—Christ, when on earth, maintained two descriptions of
intercourse with the people: the one was of a friendly and social nature, such
as a friend maintains with his friend, when a congeniality of mind, combined
with a similarity of habit, is found to subsist between them; the other was
controversial, when proclaiming the true character, mind, and will of His
Heavenly Father in opposition to the false opinions entertained respecting Him
by the scribes and Pharisees, who, while altogether uninfluenced by the spiritu-
ality of what they taught, nevertheless maintained such strictness in the form
and selfish regard for the moral requirements of religion, that, being irre-
proachable in the sight of men, they vainly conceived they must be equally so in
the sight of God, forgetting or being wilfully ignorant that, whilst men judged
from the appearance only, His all-seeing eye penetrated within the veil,
discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart. Respecting the first of these
two, namely, our Lord’s social and friendly intercourse with men, we may well
conceive the meek, the gentle, yet dignified Jesus a guest within the house of
one of His disciples, unfolding the nature of God to those ia company with Him,
announcing Him a Spirit who cannot be deceived, and who claims from His
creatures a “worship in spirit and in truth,” which, when rendered, He
willingly accepts, and mercifully pardons their transgressions. But though
there were some who gladly received Him, and listened with the purest joy to
His holy conversation, they were comparatively but few, and for the most part
humble in their circumstances; whilst the great majority—the wealthy, the
noble, and the learnedl—stood opposed to Him, ever on the watch to entangle
Him in His talk, and find something whereof they might accuse Him to their
rulers, and so be rid of One whose arguments they could not meet, and whose
positions they could not controvert ; yet with the most uncompromising integrity
did the Saviour stand His ground, exposing the falsehood, the fraud, the errors,


249





CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Se ee


or the hypocrisy of those who from their superior education ought to have been
the first to recognise Him as Messiah and submit to His authority, combating
wrong notions, rectifying mistaken principles, whenever or by whomsoever
advanced. This controversial intercourse in no small degree characterised our
Lord’s ministry ; nor could it be maintained without incurring all that hatred
and opposition which the exposure of falsehood and error is sure to draw down
on the person whose sense of moral responsibility would prevail to incite to it ;
still, disagreeable as is the office of setting those right who have been all their
lives wrong, it becomes a solemn obligation, because involving the exercise of
that charity or love which will not suffer us to see an immortal being persisting
in a course obviously opposed to the will of God without warning him of his
danger. With the psalmist the true and faithful servant of Christ can say,
All false ways I utterly abhor.” Receiving his instructions from that Divine
Master, he learns “to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the
saints,” and “as a good soldier,” serving a good Master, to “ endure hardness ”
in the contention, when others “ oppose themselves” and “would pervert the
right ways of the Lord,” knowing as he does that ‘“ there is no other name
under heaven given among men [but Jesus Christ], whereby we must be saved a
(Acts iv. 12); nor can any man lay any other foundation on which to build his
hopes for admission into heaven hereafter “than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ” (1 Cor. iii. 11). Thus does the Bible furnish one great saving truth,
and one only, which men are called upon to receive, and which, if they reject,
they reject at their peril. To proclaim God’s eternal and unalterable truth,
whether men will hear or whether they will forbear, is charity—love unfeigned.
Would it be charity to suffer some dear friend or relative to languish from day
to day upon the bed of sickness and not administer the medicine which the
physician’s skill had prescribed for a cure, lest it might prove nauseous and
unpalatable? Would it be charity if, passing through a town at dead of night,
and seeing a house on fire, we should refrain from rousing its inhabitants,
through fear of disturbing their slumbers? Or would it be charity if, observing
a blind man fearlessly to approach a precipice, we should be silent, suffer him to
advance on his destruction, and not tell him of his danger? We protest against
such charity as this. We prefer the discharge of our duty, as faithful ambas-
sadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, commissioned to preach “repentance towards
God, and faith in Him who has sent us”; we are ready, in maintaining the
Lord’s controversy with His people, to endure the world’s misrepresentation.
Nevertheless we do maintain that “our labour is labour of love,” “the work of
faith,” the fruit whereof “is charity out of a pure heart.” Our Lord did not
shrink from the work which the Father had given Him to do because of the
misconstruction put upon His conduct by the enemies of righteousness, nor was
He restrained by the rude rebuffs of an insolent world; no, He loved even His
cruel persecutors too well to suffer them to run upon their ruin without telling
them the consequences which would inevitably result, should they pass from
time to eternity without effecting their reconciliation with God, through Him,
the only Mediator. In what moral darkness would the world now be plunged
had error and falsehood been progressing for the last eighteen hundred years in
a ratio similar to what it had been up to the period of the Saviour’s manifesta-
tion in the flesh, to detect and dissipate the fearful gloom by the shining of the
glorious gospel of truth into the hearts of His people! An accumulation of
falsehood such as dissolved the tie of filial affection and filial duty, on the child’s
telling his aged and perhaps destitute parent that it was “Corban, that is to
say a gift, by whatsoever ” that parent might be prefited by him, suffering the
son “no more to do ought for his father or his mother”—thus permitting a
corrupt and unnatural tradition, derived from sinful and selfish men, virtually


250


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIL


to repeal the fifth commandment, given by God Himself, and the unwritten
expedient of human policy to supersede the unalterable will of Jehovah, pro-
claimed with a trumpet’s tongue amidst thunderings and lightnings and smoke,
which, the people seeing, removed and stood afar off. Had falsehood thus
audaciously advanced, what bonds would have proved strong enough for uniting
the relative positions of society, what barriers have restrained the overfiowings
of ungodliness, or checked the violation of natural affection, when thus sanc-
tioned by uninspired and lawless traditions, usurping the sacred authority of
God’s Holy Word? ‘The scribes and Pharisees ranked the foremost in opposing
our Lord in all His teaching ; their principal error consisted in a superstitious
regard for “the traditions of the elders”; and to such a length did they carry
their veneration for this description of authority that there was scarcely a
passage of any moment in the sacred records that was not frittered away, and
its plain and obvious meaning lost in the false glosses put upon it by these
unauthorised means, “making the Word of God of none effect” through their
traditions: their scrupulous exactness regarding external cleanliness made
them unconcerned respecting that which was of higher importance, though hidden
and unseen—the heart—and for the cleansing of which one (who, had they
remembered him as an elder, it would have been well) evinced such anxiety that he
prayed, “Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.”
Their spring of action, however, arising from a desire to be seen of men rendered
them totally indifferent about any and everything not having human applause
for its object, so that the heart, the inward part, where God requires truth
to dwell, was overlooked and unattended to by them. Such were the practices
and such the doctrine which our Lord on the present occasion set Himself
to refute, shewing how injurious in its effect was every deviation from the
written Word; for however useful the tradition of the elders might be for
the well-regulating of society or establishing habits of personal cleanliness, yet
it would be infinitely better to forego it altogether, than by adopting it cast
a slight upon a much higher authority. To teach for doctrines the command-
ments of men was a most grievous error, and fraught with the most dangerous
consequences, for which reason our Lord fearlessly condemns it, and nobly
reproves those who, whilst professing an honour for God's Word, wowld sanction
a system which directly insulted it. ‘‘ Well hath Esaias prophesied of you, hypo-
crites,” etc. Then instancing the case of the fifth commandment, Jesus proceeds
to shew that it was not external cleanliness, or the neglect of it—-washing the
hands on certain occasions, or omitting it-—not one sort of meat or another;
in fact, “nothing from without a man, entering into him can defile him : but
the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.” What
is in the heart the heart will, like a fountain, be sending up, until changed
by Divine grace; for by nature it is a corrupt fountain, and consequently
“from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,” etc. Let us
take any of these evil things which abide in the heart of the unconverted and
natural man, and observe its process of defilement. 1. Look at covetousness,
eg. the love of money, justly called “the root of all evil.” What can debase
the soul more than this all-absorbing lust ?—hours, days, weeks, months, and
years, nay, a man’s entire life, passed in contrivances whereby to increase
his store of gold, involving too often falsehood and deceit in order to attain
his object; and when attained, with what complacency does he regard his
success! Nor does moderate success satisfy him, verifying the proverb, “ Much
must have more,”—religion discarded, its ordinances contemned, the Lord’s
Day itself polluted, that nothing may impede his unhallowed pursuit of gain.
Whence come the murders, the thefts, of which our Lord speaks ? Come they
not from covetousness? While other evils are partial in their operation, this


351





CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK
SS ' 4
takes no rest, knows no intermission, will have no repose. If the laws of
the land protect the property of the owner from the aggression of the violent,
and the penalty attached to the violation of the law restrains the covetous
man from unlawfully attacking that which is another’s, yet how near will
he approach the forbidden limit! If he is honest, he is hardly so; if he does
bear restraint, ’tis with a bad grace: the evil lust of covetousness withers every
generous sentiment; the sons and daughters of adversity may pine and die
ere the sordid mind of covetousness would be moved to commiserate or relieve ;
nought is known but self; gold is the idol to whose service not only the bodily
energies but the affections of the heart and all the faculties of the mind are
devoted. 2. Consider, also, the countless impurities contained under the head
“evil thoughts.” You are quite conscious of the vain ideas which run to
and fro in the mind throughout the four-and-twenty hours of the day, so vain
and evil that we should feel ashamed to speak of them to our nearest or dearest
friend, and would be glad were they blotted from our memory the moment they _
recur to us; yet God searches and knows us, etc. (Ps. exxxix. 1-4). 3. Look,
again, at the insidious working of pride, often at the very moment when we
think ourselves most humble,—at one time piquing ourselves upon the elegance
or beauty of our persons; at another regarding ourselves with the utmost
satisfaction on a comparison with some one whom we look down upon as an
inferior, either in birth, or fortune, or education, or mental capacity. Examine
one or all, or which you will, of ‘these evil things,” and, oh! what an abyss
of defilement forms itself, fed by that corrupt stream which ever flows from that —
polluted source, an unconverted heart, “ deceitful” as it is “above all things,
and desperately wicked.” Well might Abraham call himself “sinful dust
and ashes,” or Job exclaim, ‘“‘ Behold, I am vile,” or Isaiah, “I am a man of
unclean lips”: for who can know the depths of its depravity? Jesus knew
them, and in our text declares them. And yet there is nothing over which we
can exercise less control than our thoughts: a thought, a foolish or a corrupt
thought, rises in the heart, and, like the blood in the natural system, is in
an instant propelled through every inlet of the mind, and has fastened itself
on us ere we are aware; and such is the strength and subtlety of that fiend
who suggests the evil thought, that it not infrequently happens that what
we desire to think least about is that which, through his agency, we think most
of. I see from this review of my natural corrupt heart, says the newly awakened
sinner, that it requires cleansing, must have renewing, must be fully converted,
before I should either like heaven or be received in thither. But what can
Ido? It is not in my power to change my heart, and so produce a new current

of thought, which would make me relish the pure and holy enjoyments of
the redeemed,—the work is superhuman. Beloved, you are quite right; the
work is superhuman. But though powerless in ourselves, though the work
of converting the sinner’s heart is superhuman, yet it is not impossible that
Christ, by whom God the Father ~ works, having put all things in subjection
to Him, having given Him all power in heaven and in earth, power even to
bend the stubborn and rebellious heart of His sinful creatures, He can cleanse
and purify the fountain, so that the stream of thought shall run pure and holy.
What says St. Paul, after confessing himself a wretched being, unable to deliver
himself from the body of death, a naturally wicked heart? “I can do all
things through Christ strengthening me.” Christ has changed and renewed
the hearts of millions. The way in which He accomplishes this important change

is worthy of attention. First He sends His Holy Spirit into the heart, whereby
the sinner is enabled to take a view of that corrupt stream which flows from
it, and upon an examination of the “evil things ” spoken of in our text to
feel its sinfulness, then acknowledge in prostrate humility those particulars


252


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIL





which offend us most to the Lord Jesus Christ, not in the least palliating them,
but laying them open to Him in all their fearful aggravations, till we abhor
ourselves, and cry, Unclean! unclean! His next influence upon the heart
is to make the sinner renounce himself as bankrupt in righteousness, and
desire above all things the imputation of Christ’s righteousness as his only
hope. From thence he is led to recognise Christ as greater in his behalf than
he who seeks his destruction. These feelings grow with his growth and


_ strengthen with his strength, until sin is hated and shunned; and though


the remains of indwelling sin may tease and harass the Christian, yet it has
altogether lost its supremacy in his heart. Thus is the poor sinner changed
by the Holy Spirit from the power of Satan to the power of God, and from
rejoicing in the perishing things of time and sense to rejoice in God his Saviour,
who has done such great things for him: from that time, also his conversation
is in heaven, from whence he also looks for the Saviour.—/. J. Taylor.


Insincerity in worship.—The great sin of hypocrisy, laid by our Saviour to
the charge of the Jews in His time, had been charged, long before, upon the
same people by Isaiah. A sin thus chargeable upon the same people at
various periods of their history may justly be considered as a national sin.
But then it must be borne in mind, that it was a sin on account of which it
was not competent to the Gentile world, that is, to the great bulk of mankind,
to reproach the Jewish nation, or, on account of their own exemption from
it, to flatter or felicitate themselves. If the Jew satisfied himself with the
outward confession of God and the lip-honour he paid Him, the Gentile world
did not pay even that, but offered a debasing worship to idols. So far from
being in a condition to look down upon the Jew, the Gentile had a great step
to take to be even upon a level with him. The Jew was so far right that he
believed in ‘‘ one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.” The
Jews’ worship was, in form and externals, such as God Himself had appointed,
and their notions of Himself such as He had taught them. How then is it
spoken of with disapprobation instead of praise, both by Isaiah in his time
and our Saviour in His? There was the outward shew, not the inward feeling ;
great professions, but little practice; long prayers, and cold hearts. A question
then arises whether we of these times and this nation are concerned in our
Lord’s remark. Now I hope there is neither flattery nor self-deceit in saying
that it is not true of us in the same sense and degree as it was of the Jews.
I find what I think to be error, wrongheadedness, an uncharitable and angry
spirit, in the language and writings of men, on religious subjects, but little
that I can presume to call insincerity. Then, again, the endeavour to make
up by high professions and scrupulosity in little things for laxity in great
things is a vain endeavour now. Men are disgusted by such attempts. They
look with a more indulgent eye upon the open and avowed violator of God’s
laws, than upon him who, by a shew of piety, would cover or make up for a
selfish and licentious life. But although the sin of hypocrisy should not be
chargeable, as a national sin, upon us at this time, in the same degree that
it was upon the Jews in our Saviour’s time and in the time of Isaiah, it still
remains for each man to ask himself whether it be chargeable upon him as an
individual in any degree or sense. I fear we shall find that there is a sense
in which it is chargeable upon us all. 1. I lay the case of the blasphemer
out of consideration, as one that can consist only with an estranged state of
the heart from God, and as one not falling within the range of our Lord’s
observation, and I would ask whether we are not oftentimes forgetful of God,
when engaged, not in things which He has forbidden, but even in things which
He has commanded. When we pray, for example, are we then all of us, are


253


cHap. vi.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oe ee ee eS


we any of us, so attentive as we ought to be to the work we are about? It
is the mind, the serious and attentive mind, that gives life to forms and effect
to prayer. It is, no doubt, a difficult thing to keep the attention fixed upon
the proper object of worship, and to prevent the intrusion of idle thoughts.
(1) One reason of this may be, that that object is invisible, and “no man hath
seen God at any time.” It was, I presume, as an expedient to help attention,
and as a resource against the difficulty we speak of, that image-worship came
to be so much practised. (2) Another reason is, that when we are engaged
in our ordinary work-day business, we are wont, without ceasing from that
business or neglecting it at all, to give the mind leave to range and wander
through a variety of subjects. Practice has made us so perfect in those
operations whereby we have long earned our bread, that we can perform them
correctly with a degree of attention so slight that we are hardly conscious of
exerting it. Now this is not only pleasant, but innocent, if the thoughts be
employed upon things innocent. But this will not do in worship. If the mind
is not in this work it cannot prosper. We can say our prayers, no doubt, as
we can do other familiar things, with little exertion of attention, and give the
thoughts leave to settle on other subjects ; but when we do so we pray in vain,
or, more properly speaking, do not pray at all. That is wanting which is
essential to prayer—an attentive mind and an awakened heart. It has been
recommended to those who lament their proneness to this wandering inattention
in prayer not to clothe their private addresses to God with any words—not
to say, but as it were to think their prayers to God. This advice proceeds
upon the supposition that the method of using thought alone, unclothed in
words, may prevent self-deceit, and make us at once perceive that if we are
not praying internally, with the understanding and the feelings, we are doing
nothing. 2. Again, we may be said to worship God in vain, and to draw nigh
to Him with our lips while our hearts are far from Him, if we continue in sin,
or intend so to do. The principal subject of a good man’s prayers is grace—
the grace of God, and the help of the Holy Spirit to his naturally infirm
endeavours to resist temptation. But such prayer is poisoned at its source, if
it be not faithful, if it be not accompanied with a faithful and unreserved
intention and willingness on the part of him who prays to part with his sins
and with whatever causes him to sin. 3. These things make worship vain, and
they spring from a defect in the heart, that is, in the disposition with respect
to God, which it concerns us before all things to remove. It is to be removed
by more positive and earnest endeavours than have yet been used to keep the
mind intent upon its work, and by cries for the help of that Holy Spirit which
is said to “‘ help our infirmities,” especially in that work.—A. Gibson.


Zeal and diligence in false worship no ground of comfort.—I. It is a vain and
unprofitable sign to support and comfort ourselves by, that we are diligent in
the worship of God, if not commanded by Him.—l1. It lieth as a necessary duty
upon all to worship and serve God. Now this worship and service may be either
internal, or external, or mixed, compounded of both: internal consists in our love
of God above all things, faith and hope in Him, obedience to His commands,
which Scripture preferreth before all external worship; external is that
of adoration and inclination of the body, kissing the hand, bowing the knee,
dedicating temples, altars, and offering of sacrifices ; mixed is compounded of
both these, such as calling upon God’s name by petition and thanksgiving.
2. This worship and service of God is not given to God because He needs it or
is made more happy thereby. God is no more better by our worship than the
fountain is because a man drinks of it, or the sun because a man seeth by the
light of it. Such do not advantage the fountain or the sun, but their own selves.


2Qh¢


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIf





So God hath appointed this worship, not that He might receive good from us,
but communicate good to us. 3. Such is the infinite excellency and majesty of
God, that we are to tremble and greatly to be ashamed of any worship or service
we tender to Him. The angels, that are not conscious to the least sin in
themselves, but are pure above the sun, that cannot call themselves dust and
ashes, yet cover their faces before God. 4. God only may appoint that worship
which He will accept of. The deformity of an ape lieth in being so like a man,
and yet not a man; so doth the loathsomeness of all false worship lie in this,
that it imitateth the worship of God, but indeed it is not so. 5. Our Lord
briefly lays down what is acceptable worship unto Him (John iv. 22). To
worship God in the spirit is to have a spiritual and holy inward frame of heart
in all our addresses to Him. This is worshipping of God in a way the most of
men are not acquainted with. Oh, it is a hard matter to have a spiritual man
in prayer, hearing, and other worship! And indeed this is the soul and life of
the service of God. The other way of worship is in truth, which by some is
explained against hypocrisy and guile of spirit; for this God complaineth of,
that they drew nigh with their mouths, but their hearts were far from God.
Lastly, as a Father, they must worship, though humbly, yet not slavishly and
servilely. Seneca speaketh of the superstitious, intimidated person, that while
he worships God he provoketh Him. 6. Howsoever worship of God be com-
manded by Him, yet such is the nature of all moral duties that the obedience to
them is required before any instituted worship. ‘I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice” ; go and learn what that meaneth, saith our Saviour: insomuch that
comparatively to obedience God is said not to command these at all. 7. The
heart of man is exceeding subtle and ingenious to palliate over all false worship :
insomuch that there never were superstitious abuses of God’s worship, but that
there have been learned men and wise men to plead for them.

II. Why men addicted to false worship, though they much admire themselves,
yet are indeed vain men, and lean upon vain props.—l. Because always such
persons have the bitterest enmity against true godliness. 2. Here is no ground
of confidence in these, because they are consistent with the ordinary practice of
gross and sinful courses. 3. If a man may not rely or trust on the instituted
worship of God, yea, nor on the graces wrought by God’s Spirit in us, then much
less in a worship of his own. If thy own graces are not helmet strong enough
to repel God’s wrath, then thy own voluntary worship is but as so many cobwebs,
when a furious tempest bloweth upon them. 4. These are not to be relied upon,
which are vain and unprofitable, and so frustrate of that end we expect. Now
the text saith, “In vain do they worship Me”; other duties commanded by God,
though they are not pillars to be leaned on, yet they are not vain. God saith
not to Jacob, to seek His face in vain, but all this service is lost labour : “ Who
hath required all these things at your hands?” Now of all things to labour in
vain in religious matters is the saddest expense of all. After all that zeal thou
art never a whit the nearer heaven, thou art no more endeared to God. Thy
state is noways spiritually advantaged : yea, though it be a fruitless labour one
way, yet it is not another way ; for there is a fruit of these labours, but it is
bitterness and wormwood—God is more provoked by thee. 5. That which is
a sad curse and fruit of former sins, that can be little comfort to any man that
rightly considereth of things. Thus we say it is an absurd thing to be proud of
clothes, for in that thou needest clothing it is an argument thou art fallen from
integrity and innocency. But in this matter the curse of God is more wonderful
upon thee, for all that admiration and applause of false worship is inflicted upon
thee as a punishment, because thou hast not received the truth in the love of it.
6. These of all men are in a most unsafe estate (notwithstanding their security),
because they are in a most absolute contrariety and indisposition for receiving of

255


ww


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Christ, in whom only our souls have rest.


Publicans and harlots went to


heaven before the Pharisees. Why so? Because the former were sooner convinced


of their sin, their undone estate,
A. Burgess.


and so more willingly flying unto Christ.—


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1, 2. Fault-finding.—Those
see most faults in others who have
most themselves. None are such critics
of small faults as those guilty of grave
ones. Beware of fault-finding. He
that censures others cures not himself.
—R. Glover.

We must not always follow great
men.—Those who for their place and
calling should be greatest friends and
favourers of Christ and His followers
are often greatest enemies and readiest
to oppose them. 1. See how unfit it
is to tie ourselves to the example of
great men in the Church in matters
of religion—not safe always to follow
them, for so we may with them become
the worst enemies of Christ and His
Church. 2. Admonition to great men
in high place in the Church to use
their dignity, place, and office to the
honour of Christ and good of His
Church.—G. Petter.


Vers. 3, 4. Lessons.—1. It is the
manner of hypocrites to tie others to
their own practice and example in
matters of religion, and to censure all
uncharitably who do not conform to
them even in trifles. 2. Hypocrites
put religion and holiness in outward
rites, ceremonies, and superstitious
observances, and think that by per-
formance of these they become holy
and acceptable before God. 3. Super-
stition makes wise men become foolish,
absurd, and childish, in busying and
troubling themselves about trifles and
toys.—Ibid.

Rabbinical washings. —The legal
washing of the hands before eating
was especially sacred to the Rabbinist ;
not to do so was a crime as great
as to eat the flesh of swine. ‘ He
who neglects hand-washing,” says
the book Sohar, ‘deserves to be


256


punished here and hereafter.” “ He is
to be destroyed out of the world, for in
hand-washing is contained the secret
of the Ten Commandments.” “ He is
guilty of death.” It was laid down
that the hands were first to be washed
clean. The tips of the ten fingers
were then joined and lifted up, so that
the water ran down to the elbows, then
turned down so that it might run off
to the ground. Fresh water was
poured on them as they were lifted up,
and twice again as they hung down.
The washing itself was to be done by
rubbing the fist of one hand in the
hollow of the other. When the hands
were washed before eating, they must
be held upwards ; when after it, down-
wards, but so that the water should
not run beyond the knuckles. The
vessel used must be held first in the
right, then in the left hand; the water
was to be poured first on the right, then
on the left hand; and at every third
time the words repeated, ‘Blessed art
Thou who hast given us the command
to wash the hands.”—C. Getkie, D.D.
The “tradition of the elders” was
an after-growth of the Captivity,
originating not improbably with the
Great Synagogue, out of which the


_ Sanhedrin was developed. . The rever-


ence and care for Holy Scripture,
revived by Ezra, and fostered by
later scribes, were handed down from
generation to generation, and treated
with so much honour that the highest
authority was sought for their origin.
Some Rabbi, bolder than his pre-
decessors, put forward the theory that
God had given to Moses not only the
Ten Commandments, but also at the
same time a full explanation, even in
the minutest detail, of all their ap-
plications. This Oral Law, he said,
had been revealed by Moses to Aarov


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VII.


ee ee


and his sons, and the memory of it
was cherished and handed on without
any loss or diminution in the progress
of transmission. As soon as such a
view of its origin had gained acceptance
with the people, its authority became
equally binding upon the conscience
with that of the Written Law, and
the estimation in which it was held
even higher. In lapse of time it re-
ceived its interpretation at the hands
of the Rabbis, and the disquisitions,
illustrations, and additions grew into
a great body of doctrine; and after
the Jewish motto “Commit nothing
to writing ” had been forgotten, these
were all combined in a vast collection,
under the title of Gemara, or Talmud.
The publication in writing of the
Mishnah itself, as the Oral Law was
called, had preceded it by two hundred
years. It was issued authoritatively
by Rabbi Judah, the Holy, at the
close of the second century of the
Christian era.—Dean Luckock,

There were two familiar sayings
among the later Jews which enable
us to understand how widely tradi-
tionalism must have conflicted with the
teaching of Christ. ‘The words of the
elders,” they said, ‘“‘ are of more weight
than the words of the prophets”;
and, even more startling than this,
“The Mosaic Law is as water, the
Mishnah as wine, and the Gemara as
hippocras” (a richly spiced drink, most
highly esteemed).—Jbzd.

The traditions of the elders were all,
without exception, the product of the
later ages of the Jewish dispensation
in the time of its decay and fall, when
it was at its worst; whereas the
opinions and practices which are
invidiously called “ traditions” in these
days, z.e. the opinions and practices of
the earliest Fathers of the Christian
Church, are the products of the earliest
ages of the Christian religion, when it
was at its best, and was least con-
_ taminated with the influence of the
world from without, and kept most
pure by godly discipline from within.
The opinions of the Fathers on the
interpretation of Scripture, when they


8


can be ascertained, are far more likely
to be in accord with its real meaning
than any opinions or practices of later


ages.— IM. F. Sadler.


Vers. 6-9. The external preferred.—
It may seem almost incredible that
men should leave the simple principles
of righteousness for a region so barren
and burdensome as that of external
observances. But the secret is not
difficult to find. 1. External acts can
be seen and felt by oneself, and so
can give complacency. 2. They can
be seen by others, and thus can gain
credit. 3. They are easier than walk-
ing with God. Toapproach Him needs
the courage of purity and penitence ;
and to take His guidance requires
perpetually the self-denial and con-
secration of faith.—R. Glover.

The abuse of ceremonies.—It cannot
be too carefully noticed that no con-
demnation is passed upon these rites of
purification in themselves. Had the
Pharisees recognised their symbolism
and deep moral significance, had Jesus
been certain that when they washed
their hands they thought of or prayed
for purity of heart and life, He would
have been the last person to rebuke
them, however much they multiplied
external forms and ceremonies. These
are useful as stepping-stones to higher
things; but the moment they begin
to satisfy in themselves they become
snares and lead to superstition.—Dean
Luckock.


Vers. 6,7. The whole Old Testament
history was prophetic of Christ and
of those around Him in this respect,
that everywhere in the continually
recurring contest between light and
darkness, between truth and error,
there were displayed the types of that
which, in its highest energy, developed
itself in and around Christ.— H. Ols-
hausen, D.D.


Ver. 9. Irony sometimes lawful.—in
that Christ here, by this sharp irony or
taunting speech, derides the gross super-
stition of the scribes and Pharisees,


257


CHAP. VII.


——


we may gather that it is lawful to
deride and scoff at the sins and unlaw-
ful practices of others, especially at the
gross and notorious sins of the wicked
and ungodly. See 1 Kings xviii. ahs
Tsa. xliv. Yet some cautions are to
be observed for the lawful use of such
ironical reproofs of sin. 1. They must
proceed from a holy and upright
affection in such as use them, viz.
from zeal for God’s glory, and hatred
of sin, and not from private malice or
revenge. 2. They must tend to the
right end, viz. God’s glory, and the
good of the party reproved, that by
such a sharp and taunting reproof he
may, if possible, be brought to be
ashamed of his sin, and to be touched
with remorse for it, as also to grow
in dislike and hatred of it: not the
disgrace of the person is to be sought,
but the disgrace of the sin reproved,
and the reformation of the person.
3. Such taunts and ironies are to be
used against sin in due manner, 2.
after a grave and serious manner, not
with shew of lightness or vanity.—
G. Petter.


Ver. 15. The heart the seat of defile-
ment.—1. Material processes cannot
produce spiritual effects. 2. The true
source of spiritual pollution is the heart.
The internal translates itself into the
external. 3. But the principle itself
implies that the body may be defiled.
See 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17. The sins
enumerated by our Lord (vers. 21-23)
shew themselves in words and deeds,
and defile the tongue, the eye, the
hand, etc. They who commit them
yield their members as servants of
iniquity unto iniquity (Rom. vi. 19).
4, Our Lord did not sanction indif-
ference to the use and abuse of food
and drink, to habits of personal cleanli-
mess and filthiness. The principle He
lays down witnesses to the contrary.
‘hese matters are under our control,
and indicate our tastes and tendencies,
our desires, choice, will—in one word,
our character. 5. No man, however,
can put his heart right, or keep it right.
¥or the first is needed the converting,


258


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


eee


for the second the sustaining and re-
straining grace of God. True morality
needs a supernatural foundation and
continuously bestowed Divine energy.
The very idea of inward purity points
us to the Holy Spirit and the new
birth.—J. RB. Gregory.


Ver. 16. An important rule—Thic
rule must needs be of very great
importance to Christians. For our
Great Master—l. Calls the people unto
Him on purpose to tell them only this.
2. He requires of them a particular
attention. 3. He requires it of every
one of them without exception. 4. He
exhorts them to endeavour thoroughly
to understand it. 5. He lets them
know that in order to do it they have
need of a singular grace and a particular
gift of understanding. It was for
want of understanding this rule that
the Jews still remained Jews, adhering
to a mere external way of worship.
It is for the very same reason that
numbers of Christians, even to this
day, serve God more like Jews than
Christians.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 17. Dulness in spiritual matters.
—1. See here how great dulness and
slowness of capacity there is, even in
the best Christians, to conceive spiri-
tual and heavenly matters when they
are taught them. 2. The best should
not be ashamed to acknowledge their
own ignorance in spiritual matters to
such as are able to teach them, that
so they may be better informed and
instructed. 3. It is commendable in
Christians to move profitable questions
unto their teachers or others.—G. Petter.


Ver. 18. The Saviour refers to the
material things that enter into a man
through his mouth. His principle,
however, is applicable, on a higher
plane of reference, to spiritual things
too which come in from without. These,
however noxious, cannot of themselves
defile a man. ‘The man within the
breast” must act in reference to them
before guilt can be contracted.—
J. Morison, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VII.


a


Ver. 19. Lessons.—-1. The wisdom
of God shewn in the frame of man’s
body, ordaining every part for neces-
sary ends and uses. See how it should
be in the body of the Church: there
should be no unprofitable member, but
even the meanest should so live as to
further the good of the whole (1 Cor.
xii. 25). 2. Howsoever the belly serves
for necessary use in man’s body, yet it
is for such use as is base and vile in
comparison of most of the other parts
of the body. See then the sin of those
who serve and worship their belly, as
if they were born for no other end but
to eat and drink.—G. Petter.


Vers. 20-23. Heart-defilement.—This
is a hard saying, but our conscience
acknowledges the truth of it. We are
not the toy of circumstances, but such
as we have made ourselves; and our
lives would have been pure if the
stream had flowed from a pure foun-
tain. However modern sentiment may
rejoice in highly coloured pictures of
the noble profligate and his pure-
minded and elegant victim; of the
brigand or the border ruffian full of
kindness, with a heart as gentle as his
hands are red; and however true we
may feel it to be that the worst heart
may never have betrayed itself by the
worst actions, but many that are first
shall be last,—it still continues to be
the fact, and undeniable when we do
not sophisticate our judgment, that
“all these evil things proceed from
within.” It is also true that they
further ‘defile the man.” The corrup-
tion which already existed in the
heart is made worse by passing into
action ; shame and fear are weakened ;
the will is confirmed in evil; a gap is
opened and widened between the man
who commits a new sin and the virtue
on which he has turned his back.—
Dean Chadwick.


Ver. 20. Inward corruption.—That
which St. James saith of the tongue
(iii. 6) is much more true of man’s
corrupt heart, without the sanctifying
grace of God renewing and changing


it, and purging it from this natural
filthiness and corruption of sin. 1.
Labour to see and bewail this great
corruption of our own heart. To
this end examine and view our own
heart often in the glass of God’s law.
And we must deal thoroughly in
searching out the corruptions of the
heart, remembering how deceitful it is,
and how hard to know it. 2. See
what need for us to get our heart
purged and cleansed from this sink
and puddle of sin which is in it.
(1) By the power and efficacy of God’s
sanctifying Spirit. (2) By the minis-
try of the Word. (3) Get true faith,
apprehending God’s saving love and
mercy in Christ. 3. See by this how
great a work is the work of regenera-
tion and sanctification, whereby the
heart must be purged from such a
world of wickedness and sea of filthi-
ness. Such a work is not easily done,
or soon. The whole time of our life
is too little for doing it thoroughly.—
G. Petter.

The thoughts.—Nothing seems of less
consequence than a thought—+so silent,
swift, subtle, is it, and yet in that
lightning-flash of the brain, in that
throb of the heart, in that fiat of the
will, in that airy nothing, all the vast
things of man’s history, its grandeur
and its grief, have their birth. The .
heart of man is the gateway of strange
worlds, and through it are ever gliding
thoughts fraught with infinite con-
sequence to the individual and to the
race. Let not the Church of God
abandon that appeal to reason, to
conscience, to the hearts of men, which
is the true preaching of the gospel of
Christ.—W. L. Watkinson.

Imagination.—Says Jacob Boehme in
a deep passage, “ All now depends on
what I set my imagination upon.”
Setting his imagination upon the king-
dom of God, upon the highest objects,
patterns, and callings of the spiritual
universe, the believer conquers succes-
sively all selfishness and sensuality,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
All depends upon what we set our
imagination—upon the ideals we choose,


259


CHAP. VII.


X\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Se


upon the vivid realisation of those
ideals, upon the daily striving toward
those ideals, upon the faithful, confiding
surrender of the soul to those ideals.——
Ibid.

Inward renewal needed.—We need
all the faculties and powers of our
inward being renewing. We need our
conscience to bear us witness in the
Holy Ghost; our imagination to eye
supremest ideals of light and beauty,
and urge its flight thitherto as the
eagle seeks the sun ; our will by virtue


of a Divine strengthening to become


imperative and invincible; our affec-
tions to be filled, dominated, by the
sovereign love of God. Nothing but
this new heart and right spirit will
meet the case. Let us begin here, and
all will be well. Out of the heart
shall proceed good thoughts, and out
of them all fair and noble charac-
teristics and actions.—Jbid.


Vers. 21-23. The things that defile.—
At the head of the list Christ places
the “evil disputings” so fresh in His
memory from His encounter with the
Pharisees; then adulteries and fornica-
tions, the outcome of a corrupt imagina-
tion; murders, which proceed from
anger; thefts and covetousness, from
secret promptings to overreach others
and gain more than one has a right
to; knaveries and fraud; lascivious-
ness or reckless insolence, which out-
rages the decencies of life; the malicious
glance and slanderous tongue; the
proud and haughty bearing which be-
speaks the self-centred man ; and last
in the list, the comprehensive sin of
foolishness, which embraces every sense-
less, wicked act.—Dean Luckock.


Ver. 21. Lvil thoughts. —Evilthoughts
in the heart are like internal diseases
of the body, very dangerous and very
difficult of cure. Stealthy in effecting
a lodgment, but most tenacious in
maintaining their hold; singly appear-
ing of little consequencs, mere specks
of human infirmity upon the soul, but
soon spreading and leavening the whole
being with their corruption, constitut-


260


ing our character and deciding our
eternal state,—we cannot afford to
make light of these enemies of our
peace. A constant watchfulness against
their approach, promptitude in repress-
ing their incursion ; the diligent study,
the conscientious practice of every
method that may help against their
power,—this is the bounden duty of
every Christian who sincerely desires
to keep himself unspotted from the
world, or to recover himself from the
dominion of past sin. St. Paul speaks
of God as “a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart,” and declares
that “all things are naked and open
to the eyes of Him with whom we have
to do.” In the prophet we have God
asserting this prerogative (Ezek. xi. 5).
And so the psalmist appeals to His
omniscience (Ps, cxxxix. 1). And thus
we are told on the eve of the Deluge,
Gen. vi. 5, 6. The indulgence of
an evil thought is as much an offence
against God as an injurious speech or
a blow is an offence against our neigh-
bour. Even under the Old Testament
we have the wise man declaring, Prov.
xxiv. 9. And in the New Testament,
in the Sermon on the Mount, our
Saviour still more expressly declares
that the gospel law reaches to the
thoughts and intents of the heart
(Matt. v. 22, 28). And by this law
shall we give account in the end. And
it is just that it should be so. The
prevailing character of our thoughts
is the best index of our spiritual state.
For it is not always what we actually
do, but what we would do, if we could,
what we wish for, and think about,
and take delight in—this it is which
constitutes our moral character for
good or evil, and decides our state
before God. Evil thoughts are the
beginning and source of all iniquities.
We think we are safe. We mean to
draw back in time. But some sudden
impulse takes us ; our resolution gives
way, and we fall headlong. And
though, by mercy above our deserts,
we do stop short of any flagrant act
of sin, yet the mere indulgence of evil
thoughts imprints a character and


' jc vee ae
: 4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VII.


i


stamp upon the heart which years of
sorrow and conscientious striving will
often fail to obliterate. The soul be-
comes engrained with evil, and evil
becomes connatural to the soul. It
acquires a sad facility for uncharitable
suppositions. It becomes wonderfully
apt at finding fuel for its vanity in the
most indifferent circumstances. It will
contract fresh stains from objects upon
which a purer mind would rest with-
out experiencing any affection of evil;
while grosser suggestions will fall upon
such a diseased soul like sparks upon
tinder, and inflame it into evil passions
at once. And this will last on, when
those sins have been utterly renounced,
when the soul has checked itself in its
wilfulness, and has turned sincerely to
God, and is striving to walk daily in
His fear, and to cleanse itself from
iniquity ; still will the shadows of his
past life darken the repentant sinner’s


' path, and embarrass his efforts in reli-


gion ; and in his holiest moments, even


upon his knees, before the altar, will .


some train of evil thought start up
suddenly, and take possession of that
soul which has been used formerly to
delight in them. 1. The most general,
perhaps, are vain thoughts. Young
people are most open to them, but
they are congenial enough to all.
We are all too apt to dwell with
complacency upon the thing we excel
in; we long for an opportunity of
displaying our abilities; we please
ourselves by imagining how much better
we could have acquitted ourselves than
a neighbour has done; we plan all
sorts of schemes for the future, abandon
ourselves to the most extravagant re-
veries, picture imaginary scenes and
positions, and fancy how we should act
in them. The habit of indulging such
thoughts is weak and foolish indeed,
but it is more, it is sinful. It is an
artifice for gaining food for our vanity
out of an imaginary future, when the
ordinary tenor of our daily life yields
too humble materials to please us. It
dissipates our energies, it injures our
religion, and estranges us from God.
3. In close connexion with vain


thoughts we must place discontented
thoughts. By overrating his ability,
and by dreaming of the future, a man
gets dissatisfied with his present lowly
position, and thinks himself equal to
something much more trying and
important. 3. Next I may name un-
charitable thoughts. We are all too
apt to take dislikes, to impute motives,
to rehearse over to ourselves the affronts
we have received, to take pains to make
out that we have been ill used, and be
glad when we have fixed upon some
reasonable ground for being angry.
4, But I have yet to name the most
evil of all those evil thoughts which
proceed out of the heart and defile a
man; 1 mean impure thoughts—the
most dangerous and the most difficult
to conquer of all our inward corrup-
tions ; and yet one, it is to be feared,
in which too many indulge without
much compunction, thinking it enough
so long as they abstain from grosser
acts of shame. It is to this sort of
evil thoughts that Bishop Beveridge’s
words seem particularly to belong,
when he recalls the experience he had
had of the devil’s temptations, and the
working of his own corruptions; by
which he says: “I find that there is
no sin I am betrayed into but what
takes it rise from my froward thoughts.
These are the tempters that first present
some pleasing objects to my view, and
then bias my understanding and pervert
my will to comply with the suggestions.
So that though the Spirit of God is
pleased to dart a beam into my heart
at the same time, and shew me the
odious and dangerous effect of such
thoughts, yet, I know not how or
why, I find a prevailing suggestion
within that tells me itis bué a thought,
and that so long as it goes no further
it cannot do me much hurt. Under
this specious colour and pretence I
secretly persuade myself to dwell a
little longer upon it; and finding my
heart pleased and delighted with its
natural issue, I give it a little further
indulgence, till at last my desire breaks
out into a flame, and will be satisfied
with nothing less than the enjoyment


261


CHAP. VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


of the object it is exercised upon.”
5. There are other evil thoughts less
under our control. We are liable to be
afflicted by blasphemous thoughts, by
unbelieving thoughts, and by despond-
ing thoughts, which may indeed owe
their origin to past sins, but which
may be injected by Satan, or induced
by bodily weakness, or arise from
ignorance or misapprehension of re-
vealed truth. When our minds are
thus disordered, we are not fit judges
of our own estate, and our remedy is
to have recourse to some di-creet and
learned minister of God’s Word, and to
open our grief. 6. Against the other
evil thoughts I mentioned our remedy
lies more within our reach, and various
rules may be given for resisting them.
The first and most obvious is prayer—
painstaking, earnest prayer. Avoid all
occasions of sinning. Avoid the great
snare of having time on your hands.
Avoid vicious books. Forbear to read
the details of crime in the public prints :
they can do you no good; they may
corrupt your mind with suggestions of
evil. And when evil thoughts assail
you, flee them at once. I do not
advise any one to argue against them.
Your plan is to turn your attention
at once to something else; to go and
do something, to think of something,
different. And accordingly we must
store our minds with subjects of
meditation ; we must get hymns and
psalms by heart, or favourite pieces of
Seripture ; and directly an evil thought
assails us, we must begin and say to
ourselves one or other of these, and we


shall so succeed in foiling the enemy of
souls. And when we fave sinned in
thought, we should take notice of it in
our nightly examination, and humble
ourselves for it before God. We must
strive, we must hope, and we shall
overcome. We have the Spirit of God
pledged to us to transform our affections
and desires, to make us new hearts
and new spirits, and bring every
thought into captivity to the obedience
of Christ.—C. I’. Secretan.


Ver. 22. An evil eye.—Oh, how can
we hope with Job to “see our
Redeemer,” with these eyes so vain, so
proud, so wanton, so polluted, so pro-
stitute! They had need be well
washed with the eye-water of penitent
tears, and then with the blood of
Christ (Matt. v. 8; Ps. cxix. 37;
1 John iii. 3; Job xxxi. 1).—Bishop
Gauden.

The eye the window of the soul.—The
mind looks through the eye; so does
the heart. lLactantius beautifully
compares the eyes to glazed windows,
through which the mind _beholds.
“ And therefore,” adds he, “‘the mind
and will are often discerned from the
eyes.” Salvianus uses the same com-
parison of windows, but adds that
hence “all wicked desires enter into
the heart through the eyes, as through
their natural avenues.” But the
Saviour unfolds here a far profounder
philosophy, when He says that the
evil desires arise in the heart, and come
looking out wistfully at the eyes.—
J. Morison, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 24—30.
(ParaLteL: Marr. xv. 21-28.)


The Syrophenician woman.—What a powerful principle faith is, and how
great its success, we have a striking example here. It shews itself to be of
Divine original, and that there is no discouragement which it will not overcome.

TI. The excellence of this woman’s faith_—1. The disadvantages under which
she laboured. She was a Syrophenician, an alien to the commonwealth of
Israel, and had been born and educated amongst idolaters. It discovered great
liberality of mind in her to acknowledge Jesus of Nazareth and to apply to
[lim for a cure. She had got over tho prejudices of her education and country,


262


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VII.
a


and entertained the grandest apprehensions of His ability ; nay, she acknow-
ledged Him as the true Messiah, the Son of David, and presented her petition
to Him in that character. This shews how sovereign and free the grace of
God is, and that it is not confined to any one nation under heaven! This
Divine seed is sometimes sowed in a seemingly neglected soil, and carefully
cultivated by the Heavenly Husbandman, to teach us that He can plant it
anywhere and bring it to great perfection. It is not where He taketh the
greatest pains that He receiveth the largest returns, but where the children
of men are diligent in improving the advantages they enjoy. 2. The severe
trial to which it was put. Our Lord knew well what virtue was in her, for He
was the author of it; and He proved it, for His own honour and her consolation,
He concealed His regard under the appearance of displeasure. One would have
thought that, when she first applied to Him, He would have taken some notice
of her, and have given her a hearty welcome; she was a stranger, and who
would not be kind to strangers? Yet we are told He answered her not a word.
This was so unlike His common manner, which was all condescension and
sympathy, that the disciples were surprised at it, and interceded in her behalf.
This application ef the disciples probably encouraged the poor woman, and
her heart would bless them for it. But it drew from Christ a reply more
forbidding than His silence, and which plainly indicated that she had no reason
to expect any favour from Him. “Tam not sent save to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.” What a disheartening reply was this! Was it not enough to
drive her to despair? Methinks we may suppose her reasoning thus with
herself: ‘“‘What an unhappy creature am I, to be born a Greek, and con-
sequently to be excluded from the mercy of Jesus of Nazareth! Can it be
that His heart is so contracted as to be confined to the house of Jacob, and
must all the rest of mankind perish? I will not, I cannot entertain so mean
an opinion of Him; I will go and prostrate myself at His feet, and implore
His compassion ; if He will not hear me, I can be no worse; but perhaps His
bowels may be moved, and He will vouchsafe me His blessing.” Could any-
thing be more melting than an address of this nature? Yet our Lord resisted,
and would not be importuned; He told her the great impropriety, nay, the
injustice, of complying with her petition: ‘‘ For that He would not starve the
children to feed the dogs.” One would think that an epithet of this nature
would have roused her pride and inflamed her anger. But she had a, better
spirit, and had learned humility. “Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the
children’s crumbs.” I confess I am no better than a dog; but may I not
have the portion of a dog? The argument was irresistible. The compassionate
Jesus felt the force of it, and yielded immediately. 3. The greatness of the
reward conferred upon it. There is no grace which our Lord hath distinguished
with such marks of approbation as faith, because there is none which confers
such honour upon Himself. +, ; :

II. Why our Lord delays granting those petitions which are pleasing to
Him, and which He is determined to grant.—1l. To make us prize the blessings
He hath already bestowed. Mankind, in general, put a much greater value
upon something which they want than upon all that they possess. Nay,
such is the perversion of our natures, that we will not allow ourselves to enjoy
the blessings which Providence hath conferred upon us, but torture ourselves
in seeking after what it hath denied. Ought not so perverse and unreasonable
a disposition to receive a severe check? May not God justly contract His hand,
and restrain His bounty, when we prove insensible to His former beneficence ?
2. To teach us patience and submission. In the pride of our hearts we are
apt to think ourselves neglected, if we do not receive a speedy answer to our
prayers ; hence sullenness and discontent are ready to spring up in our minds,

263


CHAP. VIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Dw OS ES a


and we are apt to accuse Him of coldness and disaffection. But are these
becoming dispositions in dependent, guilty, necessitous creatures? Is it not
our duty to wait with patience the event of the Divine counsel, and to acquiesce
cheerfully in its proceedings? Is it not more for the honour of God, and for
our own interest, that His will be obeyed, and the purposes of His providence
accomplished, than that we should immediately obtain what we ask? I
acknowledge that chastisement is unpleasant and cross to corrupt nature; but
is not corrupt nature what we wish to have subdued? Must not our Father
in heaven use the most effectual means for extinguishing it? 3. To make us
more fervent and importunate. Do not our prayers too often resemble rain
in the time of frost, which freezes before ‘it reaches the ground? A cold
petitioner in some measure begs a denial. We provoke the Almighty to detain
us at His throne, or to send us empty away, to arouse us from our lethargy, and
to excite in us greater fervour. 4. That we may be examples to others of
faith and patience. Who would grudge to be held a little longer in doubt, if
to be the means of exciting in some humble fellow-Christian a holy boldness and
patient perseverance? Is it not enough to satisfy us that “in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not”? Therefore let us go with boldness to a throne of
grace, that we may find mercy and grace to help us in every time of need.

Lessons.—1. The great advantage of affliction. It was the distress of this
poor woman’s family which brought her to Jesus, and she had reason to be
thankful for it all her life. When adversity hath this happy effect, we should
make it welcome, and kiss the hand which dispenseth it. 2. Though this
poor woman’s faith was very urgent, it was not presumptuous. Oh that all of
us may be actuated with a similar spirit! It is to be regretted that there are
some so full of themselves, and have so high an opinion of their own importance,
that in their addresses to God they resemble creditors who have a demand to
make upon Him, rather than debtors who owe Him every obligation. 3. Genuine
Christians need not be discouraged, though an immediate return is not given to
their prayers. God may treasure up their petitions, as He does their tears, in
a bottle, reserving the answer to some future occasion. Let me add, that we
sometimes blame our Father in heaven unjustly, and may actually receive a
blessing without knowing it. It is one thing to obtain a favour, and another
to have a lively sense of it. God frequently dispenseth His richest gifts whilst
He conceals the hand which bestoweth them. May He graciously condescend
to hear our prayers and send us an answer of peace !—D. Johnston, D.D.


The Oanaanitish mother.—In all the parts of this narrative we may read that
which concerns ourselves most closely. For what else are our lives, with all
their varying accidents and issues, than, as it were, the shadows cast forward
into all time by these dealings of the Son of God with man whilst He stood
amongst us in the flesh ? Have we not each one our own burden? Whether
it be some outward or some inward trial; some family sorrow or some heart-
ache; the secret wasting of some spirit-wound, some pang of conscience, or some
besetting temptation ; or whether it be the world’s hollowness and the thirst
of the soul for truth,—have we not each our need of Him amid evils of which
Ye can be the only Healer? And further: do not characters now divide off
and part asunder even as they did then? Are there not those who, like the
Jews, know not the office of this Healer ; who hear all His words, and see all
His signs, and languidly let Him pass, or angrily murmur at Him or blasphem-
ously drive Him from them; from whom He passes, even to the coasts of Tyre
and Sidon, to pour on others the blessing they refuse? But then there are also
those who do seek Him with their whole heart,—opening to Him their hidden
affliction; bearing seeming refusals in the strength of faith and the patience of


264.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIL.
i


an unfeigned humility ; and still looking for crumbs, if they may not eat the
children’s bread; daring to hope against hope; ready to take up with any
portion He shall give them; and waiting still on Him, because they cannot
turn to any other.

I. There is the lesson taught us by the Jews, that He does pass away from
those who will not stay Him with them; that He goes on and heals others;
and that they die unhealed, because they knew not ‘the time of their visitation.”
And the root of this evil is here pointed out to us: it is a want of faith, and,
from this, a lack of the power of spiritual discernment.

II. But there is also here the lesson of the woman of Canaan ; and this has
many aspects, of which the first, perhaps, is this, that by every mark and
token which the stricken soul can read He to whom she sought is the only
Healer of humanity, the true portion and rest of every heart,—that He would
teach us this by all the discipline of outward things ; that the ties of family
life are meant thus to train up our weak affections till they are fitted to lay
hold on Him ; that the eddies and sorrows of life are meant to sweep us from
its flowery banks, that in its deep strong currents we may cry to Him.

III. And, once more, there is this further lesson, that He will most surely
be found by those who do seek after Him. And this is taught us here, not by
a mere general assurance that we shall be heard, but in a way which enters far
more practically into those difficulties with which every one who has striven to
pray earnestly finds earnest prayer beset. For here we see why it often happens
that really earnest and sincere men seem, for a time at least, to pray in vain—
why their “Lord, help me!” is not answered by a word. He has a double
purpose herein: He would bless by it both us and all His Church. 1. How
could His Church have been taught always to pray, and not to faint, better than
by such a narrative as this? 2. For ourselves, too, there is a special mercy in
these long-delayed blessings. For it is only by degrees that the work within us
can be perfected ; it is only by steps, small and almost imperceptible as we are
taking them, yet one by one leading us to unknown heights, that we can mount
up to the golden gate before us. Much are we taught by these delayed answers
to our prayers. By them the treasure of our hearts is cleared from dross, as
in the furnace-heat; our earthly will is purified and bowed; the passionate
fervency of unchastened prayer is deepened into the strong breath of humble
supplication ; patience has her perfect work ; we are kept looking up to Christ ;
and by His grace, even as we hang upon Him, we grow like unto Him; we
dwell in Him, and He in us.—Bishop S. Wilberforce.


Christ's mercy.—The unusual conduct of our Lord, as seen in this story, has
been often attributed to an intention of calling into full consciousness the faith
which He knew to exist in the woman’s heart, and thus at once to deepen it in
Himself, and to elicit an example which should serve, as it has served, for the
instruction and support of all Christian souls. But, without excluding this
consideration, there are some circumstances in the case which seem to give a
more obvious explanation of the first motive of our Lord’s conduct, and may
give the story a still closer application to ourselves.

I. The people had just been raised to the highest point of enthusiasm for
Christ, and, as a double consequence, His disciples were ready to make Him
a king by force, and the Pharisaic party were moving into active hostility. On
account of this twofold excitement, then, He withdrew into the coasts of Tyre
and Sidon, He was therefore specially concerned to abstain from using His
miraculous powers; and had He at once healed the woman’s daughter, the
purpose of His retirement might have been at once frustrated.


II. But there is a further consideration which shews that His repellent
265


CHAP. VIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MARK.


answers were more than formal excuses.—‘“ I am not sent but unto the lost


sheep of the house of Israel.”


That was a definite principle of His ministry.


Consequently when this woman appealed to Him, she was asking Him to


depart from an important principle of His ordinary conduct.


His ministry was


governed by certain laws which had been determined for purposes of the highest
import, and it was no easy matter for Him to depart from them.

III. This aspect of the narrative adds a great attraction and force to the
bearing of the story upon ourselves.—We too are living under certain definite
laws of God; and if we transgress them, then under all ordinary circumstances
we must expect the consequences, and we make a grievous mistake in appeal-
ing lightly to the mercy of God. Doubtless His mercy is infinite; but so are
His truth and justice, and His determination to uphold the laws He has laid
down. Our Lord longed to help the woman, but it was hard for Him to infringe
the rule which He had laid down for His own guidance.

TV. Thus our Lord’s conduct is first a warning.—It illustrates what must
often be the feeling of God towards us when we have violated our covenant with


Him; and expect Him to have pity on us simply because of the misery we have


brought upon ourselves.


V. But the example of this woman is also given for infinite encourage-
ment.—By the side of these rules of His ordinary government there is ever
present a higher principle or a higher law—that of the response of perfect love


to genuine and entire faith._H. Wace,


DED:


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 24. Christ's departure from
Galilee.—Take warning from Christ’s
departure from the active ministry in
Galilee. His own rejected Him. They
were deeply moved; conscience told them
to yield their hearts to Him in meek
obedience, and they would not. So
He left them. Christ is near each one
of us, far nearer to us than He was
to those scribes and Pharisees; He
demands, therefore, more of us than
He did of them; and if we will not
give Him our hearts, He will leave us
to our worst enemy—our own miserable
selves.

Jesus in Phenicia.—To the Jeru-
salem Jews this north-land was
a sink of idolatry. Even the Gali-
leans spoke of their frontagers as
“dogs,” “heathen,” “ unclean,” ‘ out-
casts.” Uncircumcised aliens, left
unextirpated by Joshua and his con-
quering soldiers, were these Gentiles.
Out of this ill-omened quarter had
come Ethbaal and Jezebel, and the
priests of Astarte, border-ruffians in
the age of the judges, and the raiders
who in the days of the kings had


266


desolated Israel. Apparently only
twice was Syrian contact wholesome
to the Holy Land and people. These
were when Hiram the king and Hiram
the architect, with Phceenician timber
and Phenician art, contributed to the
glory of Solomon’s Temple, and again
when Elisha won trophies of grace in
Naaman and his company. Except
one or two bright lines of association,
the whole spectrum of memory was
that of darkness. Added to all else
was the thought of Phenicia, the
slave-land to which Judah’s children
had been sold in the days of Joel.

Christ not hidden from the seeking
soul.—It is easy to hide Christ from
those who do not want Him. But the
heart which feels its need of Christ,
and cannot do without Him, will find
Him wherever He is hidden.


Vers. 25-30. Persistent effort is not in
itself true faith, but it always accom-
panies true faith. Thunder never
split the heart of the oak tree, but
it always accompanies the lightning’s
flash, and tells to all about of the light-


La


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIi.


CS es ee


ning’s presence. The farmer does not
shew his faith by lying in his bed and
waiting for God to plough and harrow
his field and sow his seed. He ploughs
and harrows and sows, and shews his
faith in then waiting for God to give
the increase. God’s winds are always
blowing ; the man of faith spreads his
sail before God can fill it. Does not
this story shew—1l. That the Lord is
humane enough, tender enough, to
satisfy all mankind. 2. That even if
He seems silent at first, and does not
grant our prayers, yet still He may be
keeping us waiting only that He may
be gracious to us at last. 3. That He
can feel for mothers and with mothers ;
that He actually allowed Himself to
be won over—if such a word may be
used reverently—by the wit and grace
of a mother pleading for a child.—
C. Kingsley.

Lessons—1. Any trouble, however
grievous, is a blessing, if it brings us
to seek Christand His help. 2. There
are none who may not come to Christ
for help. 3. No true blessing is too
' great for Christ to grant. 4. Men
ought always to pray, and not to
faint.—J. R. Bailey.

Christ's dealings with His people.—1.
Remember how various are the dealings
of the Lord with His people who pray
to Him, answering at once with some,
answering after long delay with others,
and not answering at all with a third
class. 2. Examine into the causes of
delay so far as we can, or of failure in
prayer. Is it that we ask for what is
contrary to His will and providence,
and not that His will be fulfilled? Is
it that we seek temporal things first,
and not spiritual—not “first the
kingdom of God”? Is it that we
are| indulging some known sin, and so
our prayers are not acceptable? Or is
it that we have not the dispositions
which the heathen mother had—of
faith and fervour, of lowliness and
perseverance? 3. Let us imitate her,
and wait upon God until He is gracious
tous. Take especially her perseverance
in prayer, and copy it. “Ask, and ye
shall receive ; seek, and ye shall find ;


knock, and it shall be opened unto
you.” Let delay enlarge the desire
of the soul. Ward off impatience
and despair. ‘The kingdom of God
suffereth violence ; and the violent take
it by force.” Let us struggle on till
we gain the grace we are seeking, and
say, with the patriarch of old, “I will
not let Thee go, except Thou bless me.”
—W. H. Hutchings.

Bringing others to Christ.—This case
is one out of a multitude in which the
immediate sufferer is brought to Christ
not by his own prayer, but by the
prayer of others. Have you ever seen
anything like this in the symptoms of
this raging pestilence of sin? Have
you ever known the patient fascinated
by its illusions, or crazed with its mad
delirium, or hardened into apathetic
indifference, or inactive in the helpless
torpor of despair, so that if anything
is to be done in his behalf, it must
needs be done by others? And do you
find no encouragement, in such stories
as this, to believe that those who seem
to be past the power of praying for
themselves may be taken up in the
arms of natural affection and brought
to where the Lord may lay His hands
upon them and heal them? Each
bond of social influence, each tie of
natural affection, may be a means ©
that God shall use to bring them
within the circle of the attractions of
the Cross, “drawing them with the
cords of love, with the bands of a
man.” Oh, doubly blessed such an
affliction which brings to Christ not
one alone but two—preparing the
sufferer to receive the grace, and
teaching the sympathiser how to pray
for it!—Z. W. Bacon.

Prayer for others.—It is said truly,
that necessity makes a man pray for
himself, but charity for another; and
in charity the rule is good, the nearer
the dearer: and therefore, seeing our
children next unto ourselves, and our
wives our other selves, are nearest
unto us, it is good reason we should
wish them all good, especially that
they may be dispossessed of the devil.
—Dean Boys.


267


cual. VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oe ee eee


Ver. 27. Christ's reluctance to depart
from His plan of work.—Jesus’ work
was proceeding in a certain method.
He could depart from that method,
but He must depart for a reason.
When a departure was suggested, the
first thing that came up to Him was
the great law and purpose of His life.
It was only when the reason became
very strong that He was willing to
depart. It would seem that there
was a necessity for adhering to the
ordinary course of His work, yet not
an absolute but a relative necessity,
which could be surpassed, but had first
to be moved aside by reason.—Dishop
Phillips Brooks.

Words with tender tone.—Hard words.
Yes: but all depends on how they were
spoken—on Christ’s look, and the tone
of His voice. Did He speak with a
frown, or with something like a smile?
There must have been some tenderness,
meaningness, pity, in His voice which
the quick woman’s wit caught instantly,
and the quick mother’s heart inter-
preted as a sign of hope.—C. Kingsley.


Ver. 28. This verse contains three
important principles for our guidance
in the spiritual life. 1. Agree with
the Lord, no matter what He says.
“Yes, Lord.” 2. Think of another
truth, and urge it with Him as a plea.
“Yet.” 3. Whatever happens, have
faith in the Lord, and possess thy soul
in patience. His dealings may be
inscrutable, but the foundation of them
all is love.


Encouragement from a severe word. -


—Instead of “Yes, Lord: yet,” the
R.V. gives “Yea, Lord: even”; and
the more exact rendering brings to
light a valuable truth. The old trans-
lation, it has been truly said, expresses
the way in which our mind too
generally looks at things. We fancy
that we set one truth over against
another, whereas all truths are agreed,
and cannot be in conflict. Out of the
very truth which looks darkest we
may gain consolation. This woman
did not draw comfort from another
truth which seemed to neutralise the


268


first; but as the bee sucks honey
from the nettle, so did she gather
encouragement from the severe word
of the Lord: “It is not meet to take
the children’s bread, and to cast it to
dogs.” She said, ‘That is true, Lord,
for even the dogs eat of the children’s
crumbs.” She had not to turn what
Christ said upside-down; she took it
as it stood, and spied out comfort in it.

Are we pleading the better covenant ?
—This woman had God’s old covenant
against her; we have His new and
better covenant on our side. Are we
pleading it with anything like the
earnestness she shewed? Do we pray
for others with such pertinacity and
importunity ?

Reading between the lines.—Like a
skilful musician, she caught the strain
and finished the strophe. To the
Jewish ear the Master had begun to
tell the parable of elect and reprobate,
covenant and aliens, of the home and
the outcasts, of the children and the
curs. She, with faith’s power and in
the light of that eye, read between the
lines the tiny parable of the children
and their pets, even the parable of
humanity and its Saviour. Her gen-
tleness made her great ; her trust made
her mighty. No longer Canaanitish
or Syrophenician, she is for ever in
sacred story as the woman great of
faith, on whose will was laid answer
to prayer from the Holy One of God.

In the love of God there is ample
room, if only men will enter in at the
right door, and pursue it in the lawful
way. What Esau imputed to an
earthly father, when he said, “ Bless
me, even me also, O my father,” the
same fulness of bounty do the hearts
of “‘ such as shall be saved” impute to
their Heavenly Father, and to His
express image, Jesus Christ.” And so
did this woman’s heart impute it to
Him, when she replied, “Truth, Lord,”
etc. It is clear she caught glimpses,
at least, of the true and living God,
who “giveth to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not.” It is clear she had
a lively notion what kind of “ Master”
God was. She had also a notion of


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VII.


=a ti a he a ae ee a ee ee oe


the necessities and dependence of man
upon God. What she calls ‘the
master’s table” is, in the enlarged
application of the parable, the com-
mon order of Providence. She herein
silently acknowledges, at the same
time, the justice of God in giving
different gifts to men,—to some abun-
dance, whether of wealth or health ; to
others poverty and sickness. She does
not dispute the order of Providence,
but acquiesces in it.


Ver. 29. Perseverance rewarded.—
There is no withheld mercy that the
soul requires which is not waiting
simply for the opportunity to abandon
itself in the utter bestowal of its grace
upon the needy soul. Persevere, even
if you have pleaded for years and
seemed to get no entrance into the ear
of God. The man, wrestling with the
burden of this life and finding it too
heavy, who by-and-by kills himself
because he thinks there is no salvation
at the hands of God, how cowardly
his conduct is, and how poor it is,
beside the impetuous faith with which
this poor woman wrestles with the
stone athwart the torrent of the mercy
of her God, until by-and-by it is
turned away and the torrent pours
itself into the help of her need !—Bishop
Phillips Brooks.

The limitations of mercy.— All
through the record of mercies and the
miracles of Jesus there runs a certain
subtle tone which puzzles us. I seem
to hear, as I read, the sound of a
great sea of might and mercy shut in
behind necessities which it cannot dis-
obey; J seem to hear it clamouring
to escape and give itself away along
long stretches of the wall which shuts
it in; and then I seem to see it
bursting forth rejoicingly where some
great gate is flung wide open, and it
may go forth unhindered to its work
of blessing. So seems to me the story
of the power and love of Jesus held
fast under the conditions of the faith
of men.—Jbid.

The outside and inside healing.—The
child was healed; but no more than


the mother. The demon was cast out
of the child ; but no more than it was
out of the mother. The child was
brought back to the mother. Yes,
and the mother was brought back to
God. It was a double miracle that
was performed. There was an inside
one and an outside one; and the
inside one was the more resplendent
and glorious. God’s mercies are to be
counted not on the outside, but on the
inside. If they make you selfish, and
hard-hearted, and unsympathetic, and
you grow close, and you separate your-
self from your fellow-men, and you
are ungoddke in the proportion in
which you are prospered, woe be unto
you! If God’s external mercies make
you better, they are tolerable. If
God’s chastisements make you better,
thank God for them. Those unfeeling
words, that cold look, and that in-
different way of Christ—what a gush
of feeling they brought out from this
woman’s soul! That pushing away—
how it brought the pleading hands
out, as it were! how it caused every
tendril and fibre of her heart to clasp
and cling to the Saviour, and made
her refuse to let Him go! It was out
of the apparent winter of His face
that her summer came. It was out
of this repulsion that her blessing came.
Any dealing that makes you better
inside is beneficent. And do not feel,
when God is dealing with you severely,
that He has forgotten you. It takes
a great while to answer some prayers.
You cannot be transformed in an
instant. You cannot be changed be-
tween twilight and sunrise. When,
therefore, you pray that God _ will
regenerate your nature, will you not
give Him time to do such a work?
When you pray for the reconstruction
of your character, will you not wait till
God can perform such an act of mercy ?
If, looking at the interior, He ‘sees
that the work can be expedited, He
will expedite it; but you must be
patient.—H. W. Beecher.

Bring your wants to Christ.—Bring
all your wants to Christ, and always
bring them with a consciousness that


269


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ow Sa ee





for the answering of your prayer the It may be that you stand between
best of all persuasions and arguments your desires and God’s mercies. Seek
isa heart that will be made better by to keep the way clear between your
having its petitions answered of God. soul and His.—Jbid.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 31— 37.


The deaf-mute healed.—tI. The journey of Christ, and the place where the
miracle was performed (ver. 31).—From His short and necessary excursion unto
a foreign territory Christ speedily returned to the land of Judea, the proper
scene of the ministry of Him who was sent unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. With a view, probably, both of allowing time for the resentment of His
enemies to be moderated, and of instructing numbers whom He had not, visited
in the regular course of His journeys, He makes a circuit through the rich and
fertile district of Decapolis, or “ the Ten Cities,” the most populous part of the
well-inhabited province of Galilee. His stay seems to have been short, for none
of the Evangelists mention any remarkable event to have taken place there. He
hastens to the shores of the Sea of Galilee, the birthplace and residence of many
of His disciples—the country of a numerous people who listened to Him with
more attention and respect than the proud and bigoted inhabitants of the capital
and its neighbourhood.

II. The nature of the disease to be cured (ver. 32).—This man had not power
in those organs which are necessary for the reciprocal communication of ideas
and sentiments. We are little accustomed to consider the vast importance of
the gift of speech—a gift, I believe, in the strictest sense of the term, from our
Supreme Benefactor ; for articulate language, an art so complicated and yet so
necessary in the earliest infancy of society, can searcely be considered as a matter
of human invention. No theory has proved satisfactory, or thrown light on the
subject, but that one which ascribes it to “the Father of lights, from whom
cometh every good and perfect gift.” It is indeed a good gift, on which all the
other improvements of society depend. Without it man must be still almost a
solitary individual, In the midst of society he were alone—guided in his diffi-
culties by no kind instruction, soothed in his calamities by no soft voice of
sympathy, gladdened in the day of strength by no cheering note of joy, comforted
in the hour of darkness and sorrow by no kindred spirit to tell him of another
and a better life, of the high destiny of man, and of the grace of a merciful God.

III. The request of the people (ver. 32).—There is a modesty in the request
which gives a favourable idea of the character of the petitioners. They were
evidently humane; for they bring their distressed neighbour for a cure. They
were humble ; they present the opportunity of working a miracle to Him whom
they believed to be possessed of the power; but they did not demand nor even
solicit the exertion of His Divine energy. They believed in the compassion of
Christ ; and they present to Him an object of pity, and pray that He will bless
him. To lay the hand on one is the natural and significant action of goodwill,
of a benevolent wish and friendly inclination. The people expected that by this
action Christ would communicate the particular blessing which the case required.
They did not suppose that He was to use any vain arts, like the false pretenders
to miraculous power; but that by His own inherent energy He would effect the
cure of which the laying on of His hand marked, according to the usual significant
form, the wish and theaccomplishment. The people knew that Christ was raised
far above all vainglory, and that by a simple indication of His will He could
produce a miraculous cure.


270


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VII.
ee ee

Lv The manner In which our Lord proceeded in performing this miracle
(vers. 33, 34).—He would not expose the man, while He is communicating with
him by the necessary signs, to the idle gaze of the indifferent, or the impertinent
observations of those wicked companions who followed Him everywhere, and
might now be mixed among the friendly observers, and who might alarm the
patient, who could not hear nor understand their words, but might comprehend
their gestures so far as to produce in him uneasiness and fear. Retiring a little
from the crowd, “He put His fingers into his ears, and He spit, and touched
his tongue.” You are aware that from the situation of this man, precluded from
all conversation with his neighbours, from all the means of knowledge which
depend on spoken language, he must therefore have had a very imperfect notion
of our Lord’s character and power. There was no way by which Christ could
excite his attention or communicate His own views or purpose but by appropriate
signs, to the use of which he was probably accustomed. As the ears of the deaf
seem to be closed, He puts His fingers on them; and as the tongue is supposed
to be fastened, He touched it with a wet finger, to intimate, perhaps, to the
wondering patient and his friends the nature of the relief He was about to
convey. Then observe our Lord’s sympathy—‘“ He sighed.” He felt for the
degraded situation of the man before Him, excluded from society, whose converse
cheers us amid the calamities of life—from that moral instruction which elevates
us above them, from the knowledge of God and that religious truth which
prepares us for the enjoyment of Him ; and by a sigh, the frequent attendant
of inward and silent prayer, especially when the mind is oppressed by grief, He
shewed how much His heart was affected, and how ardent His wish to grant
relief. It might be that there were some circumstances unknown to us which
made this man a peculiar object of pity. But whether general or particular, it
was evidently His sympathy with human wretchedness which agitated His
bosom, that tender feeling for all our sorrows which renders Him so fit a High
Priest for men compassed about with infirmity. Observe our Lord’s piety in
this action : ‘‘ Looking up to heaven.” Through all His life, from His earliest
years till it was finished on the Cross, His reverence for His Heavenly Father is
conspicuous. His will was the guide of His actions, His honour the end and
aim of them. From Him He asked for power, and to Him ascribed the glory.
In this case He raised His eyes to the heavens and to Him who made them, as
a mark of His own trust in the Divine blessing on this work of kindness, as an
intimation to the person to be cured, who could see, though he could not speak
nor hear, that from thence was to come his aid, and as a warning to all the
witnesses of the transaction that they should glorify the God of their fathers for
His wondrous works. In this action observe the power and authority of Christ ;
He saith, “‘ Ephphatha, that is, Be thou opened.” He speaks in the Syriac, the
common language of the ceuntry, that the audience might all know what was
passing. Assured of His power, He commands, and it is done. The authority
of Heaven accompanying His words, sanctions the high claims of the Carpenter
of Nazareth to the office and character of the Messiah.

V. The account of the miracle (ver. 35),—The miracle was accomplished
“ straightway,” instantly, on the command—not gradually, as if it were the
effect of external application. Although Christ, as the Messiah, ‘was not to
ery nor lift up nor cause His voice to be heard in the streets” as a vain boaster
or a deceiver of the people, yet He possessed within Him a mighty energy which
gave its proper effect to every word which He spake, which made the deaf to
hear His voice, and gave to the tongue of the dumb a power unknown and
unconceived before. He spake with the voice of power; but as it broke on the
delighted ear of the patient, it sounded soft as the voice of mercy speaking in
its sweetest tones; gentle and kind, it diffused joy over his frame, mixed with


271


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
set Se ee a, ee


that astonishment which he could not help feeling when all the knowledge of
manhood was at once bestowed on such a weak and imperfect being.

VI. The charge of concealment (ver. 36).—Without waiting to receive the
expressions of astonishment, joy, and gratitude which were ready to break forth
from every tongue, and which would have been so pleasant to an ordinary mind,
He enjoins silence and secrecy with regard to this humane action. He laid the
foundation for a complete proof of His Divinity, but He was not anxious to
receive the direct testimony or honour of men, He formed the strongest claims
to the gratitude of mankind, but He declined, with the genuine modesty of a
superior mind, the applause which they were ready to bestow. It has been
often observed, that true greatness is always adorned with this lovely quality,
and that the highest attainments have ever been accompanied with humility.
Possessing qualities far above those of humanity, the humility of Christ reflects
a peculiar beauty on His character, and renders His virtues and His works most
engaging and attractive. We are astonished at the Divine power in this miracle.
We admire the Divine goodness and condescension. We adore and love the lowly
spirit which shrank from the noisy praises of the wondering multitude, and
avoided the ostentation of a public testimony to His merits.

VIL. The effect on the beholders (vers. 36, 37).—In His journey through life
Christ was much oftener harassed by envy and malice than consoled by the
soft voice of sympathy or cheered by the sweet notes of praise. The people
among whom He now was felt and spake of His good deeds as it became them.
There is often a zeal without knowledge which appears in the writings of pious
men. Hence these Galileans have been blamed because they published this
miracle “so much the more” that the Worker of it charged them to conceal it.
Christ, they say, was a Lawgiver entitled to the obedience of all whom He had
addressed, and had peculiar reasons, involving His comfort and His safety, for
wishing that this command should be carefully observed. All this is certainly
true. But it was not yet known to these men of Galilee: they viewed Him
merely as an illustrious prophet, whose modesty would keep secret what tended
to His great honour, and, moved by wonder and gratitude, they feel themselves
bound to proclaim the virtue which they admired, and the good deeds which
they experienced. Far from entertaining any enmity to Christ, or a malicious
disregard of His request, they are anxious to promote His credit among men,
and use only the language of commendation.—L. Adamson.





Ver. 34. Ephphatha.—A serious and philosophical mind, contemplating the
innumerable evils, physical and moral, to which men are exposed during their short
continuance in this world, would very naturally conclude that the present state
could not be that for which the Almighty originally intended them. Divine
revelation alone can carry us back to the origin of things, and give us the true
information with respect to their present appearances. By this we learn, that
the beautiful order and harmony of creation were marred by the creature’s trans-
gression, who, turning his will from the source of infinite goodness, lost that first
state in which his Maker had placed him, and wherein all was light and joy,
and found himself in subjection to an evil nature within and a world of darkness
and distress without. By this too we are informed, that nothing less than
a return to his original source could reinstate him in his original bliss; that
this return could be rendered possible in no other way than by a ray, a spark,
a seed, an earnest, a taste, or a touch of his first life, imparted or inspoken into
his fallen nature by the God of love, to be gradually opened and unfolded by
such a redeeming process as, with the co-operation of his own will, would
effectually restore him to his primeval felicity ; and that this was undertaken,
and only could be undertaken and accomplished, by that Eternal Son of the


272


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VII.
a a a ei


Father in and by whom man was originally created, and in and by whom alone
he could be redeemed.

_ I. The looking up to heaven was beautifully expressive of the real situation
in which this Great Restorer of human nature stood before His Heavenly Father.
It was intended, no doubt, to communicate to every attentive observer this
great lesson of instruction: that all the powers and virtues of which He was
possessed came down from above; that they were communicated to Him
“without measure”; and that He could have no authority over the evils of
human life, so as either to mitigate or remove them, but by standing continually
in the heavenly world, inspiring its air, receiving its beams of light and love,
and sending them forth into every human heart that was truly desirous of
receiving them ; and that it was by such a communication alone that He should
be enabled to restore hearing and speech to the unhappy patient they had
brought before Him.

II. This look was accompanied with a sigh—A sigh seems to indicate
distress. An anxious, oppressed, and afflicted heart is sometimes so full as to
deprive the tongue of the power of utterance ; it vents itself, therefore, in a sigh.
But what could oppress or afflict the heart of the meek and innocent Jesus ?
As the Second Adam, the Father and Regenerator of our whole lapsed race, He
voluntarily assumed our nature, and became as intimately united to it as the
head to the members of the body. His sympathetic heart is sensible of every
want and distress of every son and daughter of Adam. He is persecuted with
the Church that Saul persecuteth ; and “‘ whoso toucheth His children, toucheth
the apple of His eye.” Yea, He feels for those who feel not for themselves,
and sighs over the sad estate of those who are blind to their true happiness—
“ who call evil good, and good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for
darkness.”

III. “And He saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.”—-Whatever
salutary efficacy there may be in medicine, it must proceed from that heavenly
virtue which rises from the reunion of divided properties. This reunion is the
source of health, and the restoration of aught that may be impaired in any of
our outward organs or inward faculties. To Him who had all nature under
His control, who knew how to bring together and unite in an instant those
properties which have been ‘separated, a single word, the mere motion of His
will, was sufficient to produce the desired effect.

IV. The same supernatural powers which Jesus displayed upon this
occasion He still continues to exercise in the hearts of His redeemed offspring.
—Deaf and dumb with respect to our inward and spiritual senses we all are by
nature. We can hear and speak, indeed, of worldly things with a quickness
and facility which manifests in innumerable instances the strong attraction
by which they bold our attention and affections: the calls of business and of
pleasure we are ever ready to answer. Our earthly senses are continually open;
but our heavenly faculties are closed by a thousand obstructions which we suffer
the devil, the world, and the flesh to form in our hearts. The Great Shepherd
of Israel, who is perpetually employed in “seeking and saving that which was
lost,” makes use of a variety of means and methods to bring the soul to a
conviction of itsloss, The efficacy of these depends, indeed, upon the concurrence
of the human will, because nothing can come into the soul but what itself wills
or desires. The different dispensations of Providence are wisely and affectionately
adapted to the different circumstances of individuals: the end and design of
them all is one and the same, viz. to bring the wandering creature to a sense
of his deviations, and “to guide his feet into the way of peace.” By whatever
means this conviction is wrought, the soul soon becomes sensible of its mistaken
choice, and soon determines to withhold its attention from the calls of earthly


s, 273


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ee a Be ee Oe Te ee ed


objects. In vain does the siren sing her delusive song—it ceases now to charm;
for the finger of God stops the outward ear, that the inward ear may be opened
to a sweeter note. The sigh of a contrite sinner brings down heaven into his
heart. Jesus often sighed. He loves a sigh—it invites Him into His own
temple; and “ Ephphatha, Be opened,” is the blessed voice that precedes His
salutary entrance. Be opened! Opened to what? To the harmony of heaven,
to the symphonies of angels, to “ the voice of the Bridegroom.” “The marriage
of the Lamb” is come; the bride is prepared ; the silver cord is tied; the blessed
union is completed! The soul is now all eye, all ear, all heart, all tongue ; and
eye, and ear, and heart, and tongue are all employed in receiving the gifts and
graces and celebrating the beauties and perfections of Him who is “fairest
among ten thousand, who is altogether lovely.” —J. Duché, UA.


Ver. 37. “ He hath done all things well.”--I. The people’s testimony or verdict
concerning our Saviour.—‘ He hath done all things well.” 1. No doubt but
the scribes and Pharisees had been witnesses of Christ’s miracles as well as the
people ; but vainglory, envy, and other by-respects had jostled out the belief
of them, so that by means of them they were rather hardened than converted.
We owe the growth of Christian religion to plain, honest men, who received the
gospel with free and unprejudiced affections, and closed with it when they saw
it consonant to right reason. Oh, how blessed would this nation be if it had
people of the like temper, who, without prejudice and prepossession, without
siding and faction, would embrace sound doctrine, and bear testimony to it by
their peaceable and holy lives! 2. From the persons testifying I proceed to the
Person of whom they testify—He, a mere man, for so they express Him, and
not as believers in after-times did, who never mentioned Him as mere man, but
either as God or as the Eternal Son of God. However, this denomination of
the people was at present accepted and registered as a proof of their ingenuity,
that they gave Christ the glory of His actions, though their appellation of Him
was not sufficiently honourable. God opens the eyes of men’s understanding
and cures the infirmities of their souls by degrees. “Iwas enough, at our Lord’s
first entrance upon His prophetic office and preaching to the world, that the
people received His doctrine and conceived rightly of His miracles, though:not
of His Divine nature ; that they acknowledged Him to be a good man, though
not the Son of God Incarnate, which at that time was not understood by the
apostles themselves. This their ignorance God then winked at; but how
injurious, how derogatory to Etis honour would it now be so far to debase Him
as to strip Him of His Divine nature and to degrade Him to mere humanity !
"Tis necessary to believe not only all that is delivered by Him, but also all that
is delivered of Him, and to acknowledge Him to be our God as well as our
Saviour. To say in these days, with the Jewish multitude, He, or this man,
were no less than sacrilege, when our style ought to be, the Eternal Son, God
blessed for evermore. 3. I pass to the third particular—the people’s verdict or
approbation of Him, “ He hath done well.” This testimony was rightly grounded :
they concluded, with good reason, that He who had made “ both the deaf to hear
and the dumb to speak” was no deceiver, but a man approved of God; that He
whose works were so mighty must Himself be holy and His words true.
Miracles, says St. Austin, have a tongue, and speak ; they are not only works,
but arguments. To give speech to a man that was from his birth without it is
even of itself a kind of speech, the speech no less than of the Almighty; for God
not appearing personally to converse with men, such as these are the expressions
of Himself to the world. Neither did the voices which broke from the clouds at
the baptism and transfiguration of our Lord, saying, “ This is My Beloved Son,”
more plainly and intelligibly declare te hearers who Christ was, than the voice


274





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VII.


a


of God in every miracle that Christ wrought pronounced the same thing : on
all His works were these Divine words engraved, in bright and shining
characters, ‘This is My Beloved Son; hear Him.” 4. I told you before that
when the people gave Him this approbation, they did not understand Him to be
that great prophet that was to come into the world, the Messias, and Son
of God ; though a true prophet they apprehended Him to be, for this He had
made apparent to the most scrupulous. But how then could they give Him so
large a testimony as they did, when even true prophets sent by God did not
do all things well, but had all of them their infirmities, and were not without
sin? I confess, indeed, that, acknowledging Him no more than a man, their
approbation of Him was not without exception; for though they pronounced
a right sentence, twas not with a right knowledge; they overshot themselves
in their testimony (though true) when they said, “ He hath done all things
well.” This is no trifling or insignificant observation ; for we may build on it
this important truth, that we may not from a few instances of goodness conclude
a universal probity, nor from a few specious or astonishing actions allow a
Divine approbation : for thus a Theudas or a Judas Gaulonites may pass for the
Messiah, and Simon Magus might pretend to the Godhead that was given him
at Rome for his skill in magic; and the heathen demons, who were all deified
for some uncommon and extraordinary performances, might challenge their deities.

II. The application of this testimony to the present miracle.—‘‘ He maketh
both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.” 1. He touched him with His
fingers—(1) That the standers-by might see and testify that the cure came from
Him, not from any confederacy with spirits, nor from any other external power; and
this could not but oblige them to have a greater veneration both for His person
and doctrine ; it could not but persuade them that what proceeded from His
mouth must needs be true, when they saw that the operations of His hands were
supernatural and Divine. (2) That the miracle might make a deeper impression,
and be longer remembered both by the beholders and by the person recovered.
For the like reason our Saviour instituted the two great sacraments. He
could have conveyed to us the pardon of our sins and the grace of His Holy
Spirit without the ceremonies of washing and breaking of bread; but He thought
fit to add these outward actions not only to make spiritual things more plain
and conceivable, but to make transient things more permanent, that His benefits
might be more remarkable and better fixed in our minds. 2. By casting up
His eyes to heaven and sighing, He made intercession with God, from whom
cometh salvation, in such strains as cannot be uttered or distinctly expressed ;
not that the Father did not hear Him readily and at all times, but that the
people might see that the miracle which He wrought was the return of His
prayer—that as His finger touched the tongue and ear of the man, so His request
touched the throne of God. 3. The last circumstance which Christ used was the
word “ Ephphatha, Be opened ”—a word like that which God spoke at creation
(Gen. i. 3). The poets tell us of a famous enchantress whose spells were so
prevalent that the celestial orbs yielded obedience to her. This was either
a fiction or a juggle. But it is certain that all creatures, without any demur,
speedily obeyed the commands of our Lord, without expecting a second fiat.—


E. Lake, DD.


275


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


wo ee SS a ee


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 31. Why did Christ now leave
Tyre and Sidon and go again to Galilee ?
—1. Because He was called and ap-
pointed by God to be the minister of
the circumcision. 2. That by His de-
parture, depriving them of all further
benefit of His presence and ministry,
He might punish the unthankfulness
of the people of those coasts, who
apparently did not esteem and make
use of His presence and ministry while
He was with them.—G. Petter.


Ver. 34. Christ’s look, sigh, and word.
—1l. The upward look. Not so much
an appeal as a testimony (John x1. 41,
42), indicating—(1) Devout faith in
Heaven. (2) Conscious harmony with
Heaven. (3) Undoubting confidence in
Heaven. 2. Thesigh. (1) Holy grief.
(2) Brotherly sympathy. (3) Anxious
solicitude. Says Henry: ‘He had
better be tongue-tied still, unless he
have grace to keep his mouth as with
a bridle.” 3. The word. (1) Love.
(2) Power. (3) Prophetic meaning.
Learn: 1. Adoring gratitude (Exod.
iv. 1). 2. Humble patience. What use
are we making of speech ? (Jer. viii. 6 ;


Isa, vi. 5). 3. Practical brotherly-
kindness. Some sigh, but nothing
more. Idle sentiment. Others sigh,


but do not look up. No faith in God.
If they ipity and strive to help, it is
only of themselves. They give not
God the glory. Let us seek the Spirit
of Christ.—W. Forsyth.

A compassionate Saviowr—l. See
how great hardness of heart possesses
us by nature in that we are not
touched with feelings of our own sins
and miseries, which caused Christ to
grieve and sigh, etc. 2. Comfort to
God’s children in all miseries and
afflictions. Christ is a merciful and
compassionate Saviour. 3. Learn by
Christ’s example to be affected with
grief and . compassion for others’
miseries.—G. Petter.

The heavenward look.—Let us be
like our Lord, lifting up our eyes and
‘looking up to heaven”; sighing, too,


276


as He did, because of the many sad-
nesses of this world—its blindness,
deafness, dumbness ; but looking up to
that heaven where none will be blind,
but all shall see God—none deaf, but
all shall hear His voice, and, hearing,
understand—none dumb, but all shall


praise God in the home of “halle-


lujah” for ever.—Jas. Lonsdale.


Ver. 35. Ears opened before the
tongue wntied.—It has been well ob-
served that Christ first opened the
man’s ears, and then untied his tongue,
because we must hear well before we
can speak well.


Ver. 36. Ostentation to be avoided by
ministers.—1. In doing good duties of
our callings, we must be far from the
very shew of ambition and vainglory.
2. Ministers must be very wise and
careful to prevent all occasions and
impediments that may any way hinder
or interrupt them in their ministerial
duties. 3. In that Christ forbade this
miracle to be made known, because
the time was not yet come in which
the glory of His Godhead proved by
His miracles should be clearly and
fully manifested, hereby He teaches us
to be far from desiring or seeking any
honour or glory to ourselves which
does not belong to us, or which does
not as yet belong to us, or is not meet
and fit for us at this or that time.—
G. Petter.


Ver. 37. God has done all things well.
—This is one of the most momentous
principles of all wisdom and religion,
one of the main pillars of human
virtue and happiness—a _ principle
essentially inherent in Christianity,
and which should be always present to
our thoughts, the soul and guide of all
our judgments, dispositions, actions,
hopes, and views. 1. “God has done
all things well” is applicable to the
arrangements and institutions which
God has established in nature, to the
laws which He has prescribed to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTA RY: ST: MARK.


CHAP. VII.


eee


innumerable host of His inanimate and
animate creatures. All is one im-
mense, close-compacted whole, the
several parts whereof in various ways
insinuate together, confine each other,
advance, retard, impel, uphold, pro-
duce, enliven one another: a whole,
where no power extrudes another, no
part militates with another, no aim
defeats another, no cause is dispropor-
tionate to its effect, no effect without
cause; where is neither want nor
superfluity, nor chasm ; where nothing
is indeterminate, nothing casual, no-
thing detached and separate from the
rest; where absolute, exquisite con-
nexion and order and harmony exist.
2. “God has done all things well”
holds in regard to the arrangements
and provisions which He has made
in the moral world and for promoting
moral ends. Is it expedient that thou,
O man, from a sensual, animal creature,
shouldst be formed and educated into
a rational, wise, good, happy intelli-
gent agent; is it expedient that thy
faculties should be exerted, drawn
forth, exercised, strengthened, per-
fected; is it expedient that thou
shouldst act not from blind instinct,
but by just perceptions and freely; is
it expedient for thee to shun the
deceitful paths of folly and vice, and
pursue the career of virtue with
courage and resolution ; is it expedient
for thee to know, to seek, to enjoy
substantial, lasting happiness, and
learn to look rather at the unseen
than at the visible, at the future than
at the present; is it expedient that
thou shouldst prepare and fit thyself
for a superior life—then all these
institutions and arrangements could
be no other than they are; they are
the properest means for promoting
thy perfection and forwarding thee to
thy appointment. 3. “God has done
all things well” holds in regard to the
particular laws which He has _ pre-
scribed to us as moral creatures. They
are all just and expedient, so many
means and methods to perfection and
happiness, how numerous soever the
restraints they put upon us, however


hostile they are to our lusts and
passions, whatever attention, care,
self-denial, exertion of our faculties it
may cost us, whenever they deprive
us of some present advantage, some
transient pleasure. Never without
danger can we exceed the bounds
which He has set us, never without
detriment neglect the duties which He
has enjoined us, never without injury
omit the exercises which He has pre-
scribed us. 4. ‘‘ God has done and does
all things well” is applicable to the
providence and government which He
extends over all. Let the ways of His
providence seem ever so dark and
intricate to us, before Him all is
unclouded light, all perfect order.
The association of means and ends
may appear to us ever so incompre-
hensible, ever so incongruous; the
coherence and combination of the
whole and its parts ever so em-
barrassed: His ends will be infallibly
attained, the means He employs are
always the surest and best, and all
evolve and disentangle themselves
agreeably to the laws of sovereign
perfection. 5. “God has done and does
all things well” applies to all the
dispensations which He is pleased to
vouchsafe to each of us in particular.
Riches and poverty, health and sick-
ness, majesty and meanness, prosperity
and adversity, thraldom and liberty,
life and death, are equally in His
hand, and are severally by Him distri-
buted, ascertained, decreed, balanced,
and combined together in such manner
as may best consist with the greatest
possible welfare of all living beings
in general, and of each in particular.
No one is postponed or preferred to
another from partial or self-interested
views ; no one needs suffer on account
of another, without being indemnified
for it; no one will for ever forego or
bear what at present by means of the
combination of things he is obliged to
forego or to bear; no one will fail of
his appointment to happiness ; but one
sooner, another later, one in this, the
other in another method will arrive
at it. 6. “God has done and does all


277


CHAP. VII-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


—  —————


things well” is applied by the wor-
shipper of God to all the vicissitudes,
accidents, events, little or great, that
betide him, and thereby keeps his
mind in continual serenity, even
though in every other respect he is
surrounded by darkness. He considers
everything in its dependence on the
will of the Sovereign Ruler of the
world, and finds all that is agreeable
to His will to be just and expedient.
This idea gives a totally different


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Vers. 6, 7. Haxternalism in religion How
many striking examples might be cited
where men have united the form of godli-
ness with the mystery of iniquity, under
the manifest impression that their great
zeal for religious observances atoned for
their moral delinquencies, or that the latter
were entirely overlooked on account of the
approbation they earned by the former!
We are told that Ivan the Terrible retired
sometimes to a monastery which he Se
built, for his religious improvement. e
rang the bell for matins himself at three
o’clock in the morning. “During the
services, which lasted many hours, he read,
chanted, and prayed with such fervour that
the marks of his prostrations remained on
his forehead. But at intervals he went to
the dungeons to see with his own eyes his
prisoners tortured, and always returned, it
was observed, with a face beaming with
delight.” What a mingling it was of
diabolical cruelty with religious service!
Christianity, in its corrupt branches, abounds
in such absurdities. That is the way they
became corrupt—by setting up a false
standard of righteousness, by accepting zeal
and fidelity in the observance of the forms
of worship as a substitute for genuine piety.

Lip-service.—Panchcowrie, a Hindoo con-
vert, thus spoke one day in the market:
“Some think they will avert God’s dis-
pleasure by frequently taking His name on
their lips, and saying, ‘O Excellent God!’
*O Ocean of Wisdom!’ ‘O Sea of Love!’
and soon. To be sure, God is all this; but
whoever heard of adebt being paid in words
instead of rupees! God says to such people,
‘Ye hypocrites, why do you honour Me with
your lips when your heart isfar from Me ?’”

Routine service.—Go out with me into the
woods, where the white oak is, and where
the beech is. Their leaves died last
November, but they all hang on the trees
yet. The trees have not strength enough
to slough them. They always make me
think of a great many people. Sap does


278


aspect to all that we see and hear and
learn, sheds light and joy on all,
preserves us from a thousand fallacies


of sophistry and artifices of imposture


along the dubious journey of life,
enucleates and unravels to us many
things both in the natural and the
moral world, pacifies us concerning
all that we cannot comprehend and
explain, and is inexhaustible in power
and consolation.—G@. J. Zollikofer.


CHAPTER VIL.


not run in them any more, but their duties
hang on them like dead leaves all over.
They would not like to drop their duties—
they are not quite in that state yet; but
those duties are dry, sapless, and enforced.


Ver. 9. God’s commandments and human
rvules—The experience is a universal one,
that God’s commandments suffer from the
competition of human rules. The great
precepts of God have only an unseen God
behind them, but behind the human rules
there is generally a class whose pride is
gratified by their observance and incensed
by their neglect. Accordingly, whenever
small rules of outward conduct begin to
flourish, the great principles of religion—
faith, love, honour—fall into the background.
It isso to-day. The Thug in India who con-
fessed to having killed three hundred and
twenty people had no pangs of conscience
for killing them, but was somewhat dis-
tressed on account of having killed a few
of them after a hare had crossed his path
or a bird whistled in a certain direction.
Murder was no crime in his opinion, but the
neglect of an omen from Bowany was a
grave one, In Hindooism, which is ceremonial
throughout, a man may be a most religious
man, and yet very wicked. Many in our
own country would unscrupulously commit
great crimes, and yet be very careful to
avoid eating flesh on Good Friday. It seems
as if we only had a certain amount of power
of attention in us, and, if it goes to little
rules, there is none left for great principles.

A hypocritical regard for ceremonial.—
A traveller in Russia tells the following of
a lady who, leaving a party of companions
in St. Petersburg, called a hack and directed
the driver to take her home. Instead of
following her directions, he drove her to a
deserted part of the city, murdered her, and,
taking her jewels, threw her body into the
canal. As he returned to the city he was
arrested. The murdered lady had with her
a basket of pie ; when asked why he did not,


es


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VII.


SS ee ee ee ee eee


eat that, the murderer replied, “It was Lent.
How could I think of eating that—it may
contain meat ; and I am, thank God, a good
Christian.” We sometimes express an abhor-
rence of insignificant things when our hearts
are set on the vilest of sins.


Ver. 10. Honouring parents.—We call the
Chinese heathen, and yet they have some
customs that would do credit to a Christian
people. On every New Year morning each
man and boy, from the emperor to the
lowest peasant, pays a visit to his mother,
He carries her a present, varying in value
according to his station, thanks her for all
she has done for him, and asks a continuance
of her favour another year. They are taught
to believe that mothers have an influence for
good over their sons all through life.


Ver. 15. A self-evident truth.—Christ does
not stop to prove that these things come out
of the heart. He asserts it, and asserts it
because it is self-evident. When you see
a thing coming forth, you are clear it was
there first. One summer I noticed hornets
continually flying from a number of decayed
logs in my garden. I saw them constantly
flying in and out, and I did not think myself
at all unreasonable in concluding that there
was a hornets’ nest there. And so, if we see
the hornets of sin flying out of a man, we
suppose at once there is sin within him,


Ver. 20. Concupiscence.—A gentleman was
once extolling loudly the virtue of honesty,
saying what a dignity it imparted to our
nature, and how it recommended us to the
favour of God. “Sir,” replied his friend,
“however excellent the virtue of honesty
may be, I fear there are very few men in
the world who really possess it.” “You
surprise me,” said a stranger. “Ignorant
as I am of your character,” was the reply,
“T fancy it would be no difficult matter to
prove even you to be a dishonest man.” “I
defy you.” “Will you give me leave, then,
to ask you a question or two, and promise
not to be offended?” ‘Certainly.’ “ Have
you never met with an opportunity of getting
gains by unfair means? I don’t say, Have
you taken advantage of it? but, Have you
ever met with such an opportunity? I, for
my part, have; and I believe everybody else
has.” “Very probably I may.” “How did
you feel your mind affected on such an
occasion? Had you no secret desire, not
the least inclination, to seize the advantage
which offered? Tellme without any evasion,
and consistently with the character you
admire.” ‘TJ must acknowledge I have not
always been absolutely free from every
irregular inclination; but——” “Hold!
sir, none of your salvos; you have confessed
enough, If you had the desire, though you
never proceeded to the act, you were dis-


honest in heart. This is what the Scriptures
call concupiscence. It defiles the soul ; it
is a breach of that law which requireth
truth in the inward parts, and, unless you
are pardoned through the bluod of Christ,
it will be a just ground for your condemna-
tion, when God shall judge the secrets of
men,’


Ver. 21. Origin of sin.—When a young
man consulted John Newton touching the
origin of evil, the divine replied that he
was more anxious to get sin out of the world
than to know how it came into the world.
But really this saying is not so wise as it
seems, for to know where sin takes its rise
is of first consequence in attempting its
extirpation. In the soul Christ declared that
it took its origin, and in the soul Christ
sought to deal with it, supplying a spiritual
antidote for a spiritual plague.

Sin has its sowrce in the heart.—At present
there are two theories in the field to ex-
plain the origin of contagious diseases—the
parasitic theory, and the theory of the innate
character of diseases. The parasitic theory
assumes that diseases are originated by
microbes first diffused in the atmosphere,
and then taken into the system by the air
we breathe, the water we drink, the things
we touch. The advocates of the innate
character of diseases hold, on the contrary,
that the disease is spontaneously developed
in the patient ; the first cause is in morbid
changes which are purely chemical, changes
produced in the actual substance of the
tissues and secretions without any external
intervention of microbes—the microbes,
where they really exist, being only a
secondary phenomenon, a complication, and
not the scientific cause which actually de-
termines the disease. Now, whatever may
be the exact truth in this biological con-
troversy, it is evident that the first cause of
such disease must be sought in a defect of
life, a feebleness, a certain untoward dis-
position and receptivity in the organism
itself. The phylloxera devastates the French
vineyards because the vines have been ex-
hausted by excessive cultivation; tuberculosis
fastens upon man because of obscure con-
ditions of bodily weakness and susceptibility ;
vigorous plants and robust constitutions
defying the foreign destructive bodies which
may fill the air—extrinsic influence and
excitement counting for little where the
intrinsic tendency does not exist. Revelation
assumes that the man morally occupies much
the same position. Environment brings the
opportunity for evil, the solicitation or
provocation to evil, so far do evil communi-
cations corrupt good manners; but the first
cause of all must be found in the heart
itself, in its lack of right direction, sympathy,
and force; in a word, the scientific cause of
sin is the spiritual cause.


279


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a ee ee


Evil thoughts—A quaint preacher says,
“Beware how ye tarry in the painting-
chamber of the devil,” by which he warns
the young Christian to be on his watch
against the way in which Satan seduces the
imagination. When evil thoughts and un-
holy desires intrude into the soul, it is like
a fiery dart finding its way into a powder
magazine. The only safety isto stamp it out
at once. If we let the spark of fire smoulder
on, soon all will be wrapped in flames.

The commencements of evil to be rejected.—
It is true that no man can determine who
shall knock at his door, but every man can
determine who shall come in through his
door. It is true that no man can say,
“T will not have wrong thoughts”; such
thoughts will come into a man’s mind with-
out his permission; but it is within the
power of every man to say whether or
not he will entertain them. If, however, a
man entertains evil thoughts, he cannot tell
whether the conflagration will or will not
spread. A man sits down upon a prairie
upon an autumnal day, when everything is
dry and parched, and sets fire to the leaves
and grass, saying, “I will stamp it out; I
merely want a little blaze here for my own
use”; but when he attempts to stamp it out,
the fire is quicker-footed than he. Though
he rushes from side to side and does the best
he can to extinguish it, it is not stamped
out, but gains on him right and left, and
by-and-by it opens its wings and flies all
over the prairie, destroying insects, and
beasts, and human beings, and property of
every kind, travelling like a whirlwind.

Bias of the heart.—The bowl runs as the
bias inclines it ; the ship moves as the rudder
steers it; and the mind thinks according to
the predominancy of vice or virtue in it. The
heart of man is like the spring of the clock,
which causes the wheels to move right or
wrong, well or ill. If the heart once set
forward for God, all the members will follow
after ; all the parts, like dutiful handmaids,
in their places, will wait on their mistress.
The heart is the great workhouse where all
sin is wrought before it is exposed to open
view. It is the mint where evil thoughts
are coined, before they are current in our
words or actions. It is the forge where all
our evil works as well as words are hammered
out. There is no sin but is dressed in the
withdrawing-room of the heart, before it
appears on the stage of life. It is vain to
go about a holy life till the heart be made
holy, The pulse of the hand beats well or
ill, according to the state of the heart. If
the chinks of the ship are unstopped, it will
be to no purpose to labour at the pump.
When the water is foul at the bottom, no
wonder that scum and filth appear at the
top. There is no way to stop the issue of
sin but by drying up the matter that feeds
it.— G. Swinnock.


280


A bad heart—A certain little boy in
Kansas, only eleven years old, strove hard
to be a Christian. Once he stood watching
his sister paring the potatoes for dinner.
Soon she pared an extra large one, which
was very white and very nice on the outside,
but when cut into pieces it shewed itself to
be hollow and black inside with dry-rot.
Instantly Willie exclaimed, “ Why, Maggie,
that potato isn’t a Christian!” “ What do
you mean?” asked Maggie. “Don’t you .
see it has a bad heart?” was the child’s
reply. This little Kansas boy had learned
enough of the religion of Jesus to know
that, however fair the outside may be, the
natural heart is corrupt.


Ver. 22. Beware of covetousness, for, under
the guise of beinga mere harmless indulg-
ence of natural feeling, it is really the
imbibing a dangerous gas, which will
eventually choke our spiritual life. Whilst
we revel in the chambers of our covetous
imagery, and paint the fond desires of our
evil hearts in every detail, we accustom our-
selves to the growth of sinful longings,
we construct an easy gradient, down which
we may pass from unholy wishes to wicked
deeds. The serpent’s egg may become the
venomous reptile-—Dr. Hardman.

Covetous men are condemned to dig in
the mines for they know not whom. The
spirit of covetousness, which leads to an
overvalue and overlove of money, is inde-
pendent of amount. A poor man may make
an idol of his little, just as much as the
rich man makes an idol of bis much. The
Duke of Marlborough, when he was in the
last stage of life and very infirm, would
walk from the public room, in Bath, to his
lodgings on a cold, dark night to save a
sixpence in chair hire. At his death he
left more than a million and a half sterling,
which was inherited by one of his greatest
enemies.

Avarice.—It was a true instinct which led
Dante to picture avarice as an invincible
foe. In his pilgrimage he passed safely by
the leopard of pleasure ; he feared, yet was
not vanquished by, the lion of ambition ;
but the lean wolf of avarice drove him step
by step back to the darkness. Such is the
power of covetousness. It is a vice which
renews its strength and is tenacious and
remorseless.

Evil eye—There are evidences of the
prevalence in Ceylon of that most ancient
of all superstitions, the belief in the “ evil
eye,” which exists in all countries in the
universe from China to Peru. Is there any
mysterious connexion between the probibi-
tion to “ covet” contained in the Decalogue
and the horror of the “evil eye” so often
alluded to in the Bible?—Sir J. H. Tennant.


Ver. 24. Tyre and Sidon.—Toward the


a a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAL. VII.


vi Sane Ye) a et LR ae:


north, where the ,cliffs of Lebanon rise
bolder and loftier, and crowd closer down
upon the sea, is the narrow strip of sea-
coast memorable in history as the earliest
home of maritime commerce, and of the
splendid wealth that resulted from it, as
well as of the luxury and corruption, the
disasters and overthrows, that followed in
their turn—the land of Tyre and Sidon,
otherwise called Phenicia. Fifteen hundred
years before Christ, Tyre was a great and
famous town—mentioned in the book of
Joshua—and Sidon, a day’s walk to the
north of it, was older yet. Six hundred
years before Christ, following hard after
the prophecies of Ezekiel to fulfil them,
Nebuchadnezzar the Great came marching
down the coast with his Chaldeans, and
destroyed it after a siege of thirteen years’
duration. It would not stay destroyed.
That little rocky island lying off the cliffs
of the inhospitable coast has been one of
the points of earth predestinated for the
abode of man. Three hundred years before
Christ, Alexander the Great, marching his
Macedonian phalanxes down this narrow
coast-line, found Tyre lying across his path
to India. On its island of rock it seemed
to defy him, until, after seven months of
vain siege, he gathered up the ruins of the
former city that cumbered the shore and
tumbled them into the sea, and over that
isthmus marched over and took the town
and destroyed it again. Since that, to this
day, Tyre is a peninsula, and no more an
island. But now, in the days of Christ, the
city was growing up a third time. And the
relics of its splendour at the period in
question are visible to the traveller to-day.
You see the traces of that magnificent enter-
prise that marked the palmy days of the
Roman Empire. They sent to Egypt for the
numberless granite columns that decorated
the quays and breakwaters—you can see
them now lying in piles under the blue,
tideless Mediterranean waters. They sent to
the Grecian islands for sculptured marbles.
They decorated the neighbouring hillsides
with the villas of Greek and Roman mer-
chants, with statues and fountains and tesse-
lated pavements. And not least, “on every
high hill and under every green tree” they
set up again the shrines and temples of that
utterly corrupt and licentious idolatry that
bad polluted not only this Canaanitish race
itself from the beginning, but all the races
that came into relation with it. The glory
of Tyre is departed now. The hovels of
poor fishermen occupy the sites of palaces
and temples, and the munitions of her
rocks are a place for the drying of nets.—
LL, W. Bacon.


Ver. 26. A rich heritage—There is no
heritage so rich as the heritage of a mother’s
pious example and godly counsels—no


patrimony so valuable and profitable as a
mother’s prayers. Uponatombstone erected
by a family of children was the inscription,
“Our mother. She always made home
happy.” Cecil, though once full of sceptical
notions, said afterwards, “There was one
argument I mever could get over—the
influence and life of a godly mother.” Oh,
mothers, take your daughters to Jesus, and
be determined to plead and persevere until
He shall speak the healing word and cause
them to sit at His feet, “clothed and in their
right mind”!


Vers. 27, 28. “ Feed me as a dog.”—The
Talmud contains a story so singularly
parallel to this that it is worth reproducing.
“There was a famine in the land, and
stores of corn were placed under the care
of Rabbi Jehudah the Holy, to be dis-
tributed to those only who were skilled in
the knowledge of the law. And, behold,
aman came, Jonathan, the son of Amram,
and clamorously asked for his portion. The
Rabbi asked him whether he knew the con-
dition and had fulfilled it, and then the
suppliant changed his tone and said, ‘Nay,
but feed me as a dog is fed, who eats of
the crumbs of the feast’; and the Rabbi
hearkened to his words, and gave him of
the corn.”

The gospel for the outcast.—Duff, the mis-
sionary, was about to begin service in a
Boer farmer’s house, when he noticed that
none of the Kaffir servants were present.
To his request that they should be brought
in, the Boer replied roughly, “ What have
Kafiirs to do with the gospel? Kaffits, sir,
are dogs.” Duff made no reply, but opened
his Bible and read, “Yes, Lord; yet the
dogs under the table eat of the children’s
crumbs,” “Stop,” cried the farmer, “‘ you’ve
broken my head. Let the Kaffirs come in.”


Ver. 32. Incapacity removed in heaven.—
At a deaf-and-dumb institution for children
a boy was once dying, and, when his teacher
signified to him that there was no hope of
recovery, his face lighted up, and in his own
language he said, ‘Oh, sir, I shall soon be
singing God’s praises, and won’t you be
surprised and delighted to hear me when
you come?” The boy had so grieved over
his incapacity for thus honouring God on
earth, that the prospect of death was one
of unqualified joy, as setting him free to use
the best member that he had in the glorifi-’
cation of God.


Ver. 33. “Aside from the multitude.”—
There is too much noise around us, and we
cannot hear the voice of God as long as all
is well with us and we have the enjoyment
of life. Every affliction is a wilderness in
which a man is in solitucle and stillness, so
that he understands better the Word of God.


281


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee eS ee


When human voices are silent, the voice of
God begins to speak.—Dr. Tholuck.


Ver. 34. Christ saddened by the sight of
human misery.—How it must have saddened.
the heart of Jesus to walk through this
world and see so much human misery!
There is a story of a sculptor who wept as
he saw at his feet the shattered fragments
of his breathing marble, on which he had
spent years of patient, loving toil. Jesus
walked through this world amid the ruin of
the noblest work of His own hands. Hvery-
where He saw the destruction wrought by
sin. So His grief was twofold—tender
sympathy with human suffering, and sorrow
over the ruinous work of sin.

Ephphatha.—The Ephphatha of Christ is
heardalsoin history. Hesighed “ Ephphatha,”
and the conflict of His Church was revealed
to His Evangelist. He sighed ‘‘ Ephphatha,”
and the tongue of Galileo and Kepler told
of the wondrous order of the heavens. He
sighed “ Ephphatha,” and buried monuments
gave up their records of the past, and threw
sidelights on higher truths. He spoke
“ Ephphatha,” and Caxton gave new powers
to the world; knowledge stepped forth
from her dust-covered shrine, and carried
her rich bounties into every city and house ;
history unlocked her long-hidden lore;
science painted in noble colours the half-
veiled face of nature; the tongue of Kurope
was loosed. But well might a sigh have
been heaved as the Hphphatha was spoken.
It is not truth alone, or holiness alone,
which has been unlocked. Itis not Chaucer’s
“ well of English undefiled,” the pure song
of Spenser, the heart-rousing vision of Dante,
the chivalrous epic of Tasso, the stately and
magnanimous verse of Milton, alone which
have been given to the world. A fouler
current mingles with the pure, bright stream,
and darkens the flood of knowledge—the


unredeemed filth of Boccaccio, the unbridled
licentiousness of Scarron, the stupid sensu-
ality of Dancourt, the open indecency of
Wycherley, the more fatal suggestiveness
of Sterne. The press became indeed the
voice of nations; but when it was loosed a
sigh drawn from the pure heart of Christ,
wounded by the misuse of a glorious oppor-
tunity, might have been heard by the Church
of God. Yet Christ did not withhold the
boon. Freely, ungrudgingly, were His
miracles of love performed. To deny powers
or privileges, or the free exercise of rights
and faculties, on the ground that they
may be abused, is to act according to the
dictates of expediency, not of right. But
there is a remedy for the evils which ac-
company this freedom. It is by conferring
an additional and guiding gift. There is
another “Ephphatha.” He speaks, “ Be
opened,” and the tongue is loosed; but the
ear is unstopped also. While He bestows
the faculty of speech, He bestows also the
opportunity of hearing those glad and soul-
elevating principles of righteousness and
forgiveness and love which will fill the
loosened tongue with joy and put a new
song of praise in that long-silent mouth.—
Bishop Boyd Carpenter.


Ver. 35. Tongue loosed.—Dr. Carey found
a man in Calcutta who had not spoken a
loud word for four years, under a vow of
perpetual silence. Nothing could open his
mouth, till happening to meet with a religious
tract, he read it, and his tongue was loosed.
He soon threw away his paras and other
badges of superstition, and became a par-
taker of the grace of God. Many a profess-
ing Christian, who is as dumb in religious
subjects as if under a vow of silence, would
find a tongue to speak if religion were really
to touch and warm his heart.








CHAPTER VIII.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. The multitude being very great.—The MS. authority is pretty evenly divided
between mayzd\dov as above, and maw mddov, there being again a great multitude. The
latter seems preferable on the whole, taumé)dou being found nowhere else in the New


Testament, nor yet in LXX.


Ver. 3. For divers, ete.—And some of them are (or, are come) from afar.


words: not an addition by the Evangelist.


Ver. 8. Broken meat.—Hragments, as in ¢


Our Lord’s


hap. vi. 43. Baskets.—Not the little wicker-


baskets of chap. vi. 43, but panniers of sufficient size and strength to hold a man


(Acts ix. 25).


Ver. 9. We may note the following points of difference between this feeding and the


former (chap. vi. 35-44).
282


1. On this occasion the people had been with our Lord upwards


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII
a


of three days, a circumstance not mentioned before. 2. Seven loaves are now distributed
and a few fishes; then, five loaves and two fishes. 3. Five thousand were fed then; four
thousand now. 4, Seven large rope-baskets are employed here to hold the fragments;
twelve small wicker-baskets there. 5. The more excitable inhabitants of the coast-villages
of the north would have taken and made Him a king (John vi. 15); whereas the men of
Decapolis and the eastern shores permit Him to depart without any demonstration.

Ver. 10. Dalmanutha.—“ Has been identified with the modern Ain-el-Barideh, the ‘cold
fountain,’ a glen which opens upon the lake about a mile from Magdala.” Cp. Matt. xv. 39,

Ver, 17. Hardened.—Dulled. See on chaps. iii. 5, vi. 52.

Ver, 22-26. Peculiar to Mark. Bethsaida (= Fish-town).—There were two places of this
name : (1) the landing-port for Capernaum, on the western side of the lake ; (2) a village
to the north-east, on which Herod Philip conferred the status of a city, naming it Julias, after
the emperor’s daughter. That this latter was the Bethsaida to which our Lord now with-
drew may be inferred from the indications of locality in vers. 10, 13, 27.

Ver. 24. See R.V. “I see something confusedly and obscurely ; for I see what I think
. must be men, and yet so dimly that they look to me like trees, only that I know that men
move from their places, whereas trees do not.”

Vers. 25, 26. See R.V. for readings and renderings.

Ver. 27. Cesarea Philippi—tThis picturesquely situated town, originally called Paneas,
after a cavern dedicated to Pan in its neighbourhood, was enlarged and fortified by Herod
Philip, who also renamed it in honour of the emperor. Then, to distinguish it from the
Ceesarea on the Mediterranean coast—the seat of the Roman government, where Cornelius
lived and, Paul suffered imprisonment—it was styled “Czesarea Philippi.” The name was
again changed to Neronias by Agrippa II., as a compliment to his imperial patron ; but the
original appellation still survives in the modern Banias,

Ver. 31. After three days.—Only another form for “on the third day ”—one complete
day, with a portion of another day (no matter how small a portion) on either side. Cf. Gen.
xlii. 17, 18, LXX.; also Matt. xxvii. 63, 64.

Ver. 32. Openly.—LZwplicitly, and not by dark hints as heretofore (John ii. 19, iii, 14;
Mark ii. 20; John vi. 51).

Ver. 34. Whosoever wili come.—// any one wishes to come.

Ver. 35. Will save.— May wish to save.

Vers. 36, 37. Soul.—Life: same word as in ver. 35,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—9,
(ParauueL: Marr, xv. 32-39.)


The feeding of the four thousand.—It could hardly have been without some
special reason that the miracle should have been also worked on another occasion
by our Lord with scarcely any variation of detail, or that in each case the
miracle should have been recorded with so very great attention to detail.

I, The compassion of Jesus Christ is the origin and source of help.—tI. He
had compassion on mankind as, looking down from heaven, He saw the whole
human race, a vast multitude of souls, helpless, in the wilderness of sin, starving,
away from all supplies of spiritual food, with death before them; and having
compassion on them, He came from heaven to earth to bring them the bread
of life. 2. He sees the multitude to-day, and has compassion on us; and s¢
He sends to us His Church, by and through the ministry of which He gives us
all the means of grace. 3. And remember this, that Jesus our Lord, looking
upon the multitude now as of old, looks at us not in the mass, but one by one.
He sees me; He knows my needs; He has compassion on me. :

II. Our Lord draws out from the disciples a declaration of their own
inability to meet the difficulty and to supply the needs of the multitude.—And
it was then, when they had realised the difficulty, when they had come to see
their own insufficiency, that our Lord worked the miracle. And i. it not just
sc with us and the difficulties of life? “Whence can a man satisfy these men
with bread here in the wilderness?” The question is a natural one It is also
an admission of entire helplessness, and it is often the first step to obtain 1g help,


283


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


sn A


TIL. He makes them see that, after all, they have something through which
help is to be obtained, and that they must do what they can.—That “ God
helps those who help themselves” is a saying which is true in material as in
spiritual matters; and we very often forget that God helps us through those
very things which we already possess, and which we overlook as insufficient for
our needs. The world around seems hard and cold; there seems no chance of
help. It is well at such times to put to ourselves the question, ““ How many
loaves have ye?” Then, if we think, we find that, after all, we have something
—life, health, strength, intelligence, opportunities of one kind or another; and
these gifts of God already given to us, if used diligently according to His laws,
will, under His blessing, prove more than sufficient for our need. So, also,
in spiritual matters. There are times when the temptations and the trials of
life, when old habits of evil, the downward tendencies so often yielded to, seem
altogether too great for us to overcome—and they are too great for us to over-
come in our own strength; and though we would thankfully overcome if we
could, yet it all seems so hopeless; we so fully realise our own weakness that
we are tempted to give it all up as hopeless. Ah! then listen to the Saviour’s
searching question, “‘ How many loaves have ye?” ‘“ Have you nothing already
given you that may help? No strength? No grace? Look well and see.”
1. The gift of baptismal grace—and therein the germ of all graces. 2. The
sevenfold gifts of the Holy Spirit, given you in confirmation—the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, counsel and strength, knowledge and true godliness
and holy fear. 3. The Holy Communion. 4. All the means of grace. ‘The
Word of God. Opportunities of public worship. 5. The power of repentance.
6. The gift of prayer. 7. The ministry of the Church. If we will but use
these gifts faithfully, then by God’s blessing they will more than suffice for all
the wants of our souls, and we shall be ‘‘ more than conquerors” in that battle
that seemed so hopeless.

IV. His was the power that was to make this small amount of food more
than enough to satisfy the needs of this vast multitude; but before He exercised
that power He commanded them to sit down. There is here a lesson of the
utmost value to us all in this busy, energetic age. We need more repose of
mind and character, more quiet, steady, humble work of all kinds. Jesus
commands us, as He did the multitude of old, to “sit down on the ground,”
if we would receive His gifts aright and benefit by them. They are to be
received in an orderly, quiet, composed, and humble spirit. The life most free
from feverish excitement is the life that profits most by His gifts. In the
spiritual life, above all, there must be not only energetic activity, but also the
quiet sitting down and waiting humbly for God’s blessing. ‘Sit down” before
you say your prayers, if you would really have them answered. Recall your
thoughts, be patient and quiet and humble, try to remember to whom you are
about to speak, and what it is you are going to ask, what you really need.
“Sit down” before your acts of public worship. Let there be more restfulness
about your worship, more repose of thought, more concentration of thought
on what you are about to do. “Sit down,” above all, before each Communion.
‘Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup.” 1. Let me calmly, honestly, and thoughtfully look into my past
life, especially since my last Communion. 2. Let me see where I am and what
Iam. 3. Let me try my best to see my sins as they really are, and as they
are recorded in God’s Book. 4. Let me “sit down” and truly repent of past
sins, and yuake my humble confession to Almighty God, honestly purposing
amendme’:t of life.

V. Gou's gifts, whether temporal or spiritual, are never to be wasted.—He
gives, j.deed, with a splendid liberality, but He gives that His gifts may be


284


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII.
———— eee
used and not wasted. “Waste not, want not,” applies to the matters of the
soul quite as truly as it does to those of the body. Gather up, then, the
fragments of time that may yet remain to you, and make the most of them,
living daily nearer God. Gather up the fragments of the opportunities of
showing sympathy and kindness and winning the hearts of others. Gather up
the fragments that yet remain to you of all the opportunities of helping others
by precept or example or moral support. Gather up all the fragments of the


grace given you. Store it up for use; by use it grows and increases; by use
grace is turned into virtue—Dean W. C. Ingram.


Christ’s presence in ordinances.—If we are following Christ, we may not
doubt His protection; we may not think (however dark our prospect) that
His support and comfort will be withdrawn; but, on the contrary, we shall
find that means are at hand (though overlooked for a time) which, with His
blessing, will suffice for our wants. If we are following in the flock of Christ,
and do not, by our sin or our distrust, forfeit our privilege, we shall find indeed
that “the Lord is our Shepherd, and therefore we can lack nothing”; and we
have His assurance that He will be with us, to support, protect, and save, even
unto the end of the world.

I. There is much in the Church at the present day which resembles the
position of those who upon this occasion followed our Lord into the wilderness.—
1, First, inwardly, in the thoughts and feelings of their minds, there is the same
strong tendency in the present generation of Christians to walk by sight, not by
faith. They see themselves surrounded by sin on every side, and they fail to
discern the presence of Christ among them. They are following Christ, it is
true; they are hearing His Word in public and at home; they are hungering
for the bread of life; yet when they think of the position of Christ’s Church
on earth they are ready to ask, ‘Whence can a man,” etc. The answer to this
is ready. The bread is within our reach, if we will take our eyes off from man
and fix them upon God; if we regard the Church as the institution not of man
but of God, if we avail ourselves of her sacraments and other ordinances in
faith, “all,” “men, women, and children,” “ will be filled,” and there will be more
than enough. 2. Yet menin general do not.receive the blessing; they are
starving for the bread of life, and cannot find it. Why? Because they have no
faith in the ordinance which is to convey it. If they fail to discern-the presence
of Christ in any ordinance of the Church, no blessing can reasonably be
expected. Thus in respect to public prayer our Lord has promised, “ Where
two or three are gathered together,” etc. Is it reasonable to suppose that a
person who, after such plain declarations, fails to discern Christ’s presence in
the worship of the Church should receive a blessing from it? Again, with
regard to the Holy Communion, the necessity is admitted of “feeding upon
Christ” and eating ‘ the bread of life.” But do men seek this food when it is to
be had in the Blessed Sacrament? And do they believe that it is Christ on
whom they feed? So again, if after our Lord’s plain words, “Suffer little
children to come to Me, and forbid them not,” we neglect to bring them to that
sacrament by which they are made members of Christ’s Church, can we wonder
if they are not blessed ? or if, notwithstanding His plain declaration, “ He that
believeth, and is baptised, shall be saved,” we yet consider that the child is not
“‘by baptism regenerate,” and thus in state of salvation,—if we prefer thus to
“walk by sight, and not by faith,” can we wonder if we suffer? Again, if after
the express assertion of St. Peter, “ Baptism doth now save us—not the putting
away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience towards God,” no
care is taken to train up those who have been baptised in the paths of
righteousness ; if we fail to discharge the obligation which it entailed upon


285


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


NN ————


us, to bring up those children as no longer our own, but Christ’s, bought
with His own blood and resigned to Him, only that they are lent us back for
a time; if we fail to discern the presence of Christ as it were leading
His youthful converts by the hand, and on the contrary distract their atten-
tion or suffer them to wander away from Him,—can we be surprised that
they should run into grievous sin, and that the Word of God should seem
to fail?

II. What is the course which all Christians whose eyes are open to their
position ought to pursue ?—1. How was it of old? See Ps. cvii. 4-6. Now, as
then, if we pray “in the faith, we shall receive”; if we trustfully “stand still
and see the salvation of the Lord,” if we believe that “He is able to save to —
the uttermost them that come unto God by Him,” our faith will be confirmed,
our grace increased, and a new light will break in upon us. We shall see that,
however dark the prospect, however seemingly impossible that good should come
from it, yet to doubt is sinful; Christ will ever be true to His own ordinance.
2. The Christian who has been tried will admit that the cares and sorrows
of life (the very rocks and thorns of his wilderness) are productive of good:
losses and poverty will keep his soul humble, dead to the world, sober; so will
mean or low station; reproach will exercise his patience; pain and bodily
affliction, though for the present not joyous, but grievous, nevertheless after-
wards “yield the peacéable fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised
thereby.” 3. Every Christian will admit that he has at times received support
and consolation from the prayers and the advice of his brethren in the Lord.
The conversation of the pious, their consolation in time of trouble, their advice
and support in cases of difficulty, and their piety and earnestness at other times,
are admitted to afford a degree of peace and happiness ; they are admitted to be
channels through which God is sending us support, and we feel the good they
have done us, and are thankful for it.

III. The consequence of our failing to recognise Christ’s presence in His
ordinances is very apparent.—l. We perceive it in the want of reverence too
often manifested in the house of God, or in unfrequent attendance there—in
the listless prayer, the faint praise, the wandering thought, the neglected
Communion, or the carelessness with which the altar is approached. 2. We
perceive it in the neglected training of Christian children, who are seldom
regarded as regenerate—as the lambs of Christ’s flock, led by Him and blessed
by Him, unless through our indifference Satan is permitted to obtain the
advantage over them. 3. We perceive it in the evil life of youths who, though
children of godly parents, through the error of those parents in not regarding
the Church’s ordinances as the means of grace, have become mere hypocrites in
religion, and oftentimes are bringing down their parents’ grey hairs with sorrow
to the grave. 4. We perceive it in the neglect of confirmation, or the careless
receiving of that holy rite. 5. We perceive it in unhappy marriages, or the
breach of the marriage vow. 6. We perceive it in the relapse into sin of those
who, when they had thought themselves dying, made to the priest the most
zarnest professions of repentance.—C. C. Spencer.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 2. Waiting on Christ.—1. If we 3, Christ watches just as lovingly over
have real spiritual hunger, we shall our physical needs as over the welfare
not soon weary of waiting on Christ. of the soul.

2. Christ will take good care of those Christ's compassion. — How con-
who are earnestly following Him. fidently, then, may the believer reckon


286


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIII.





upon the compassion of his Lord! How
should the knowledge of it lead him to
cast all his care upon Him. In every
circumstance of his life Jesus feels for
him, and is watching over him, and is
ordering all things for his good. Ozly
let faith be in active exercise, and
vealise this truth. Distrust will only
cause us to err.—H. Caddell.


Ver. 3. Christ's knowledge of human
nature—Why did these people not
faint now? Simply because there was
something to absorb their thoughts
now, and thus make them forgetful
of their hunger. We have travelled
before now with a companion, and
have been charmed by his personality
and utterances. We became almost
unconscious of time or space. Then
the hour came when we had to say
“ Good-bye,” and to walk home with-
out the inspiration of his presence.
Oh, how weak and wearied we then
felt! Everything told us that we had
exhausted our body under the continu-
ous strain. But we did not realise all
that while our friend was near. Now
Christ, who knows our nature, knew
all this. Oh, we rejoice to know that
Jesus enters into these little details
of human experience, that His pity
covers all possibilities of failure arising
from the weakness of our flesh or
aught else!—D. Davies.


Ver. 4. Forgetfulness of former
mercies.—Do we act more consistently
even now, with all our increase of light
and of spiritual experience? Is it not
too often true of us, even now, that,
though we have heard with our ears
and have ourselves witnessed the noble
and merciful works which God has
done, we still cry with only a faltering
faith, “Oh, Lord, arise, help us and
deliver us”? It is so with regard to
His providential dealings ; it is so with
regard to His gifts of grace. Hach
new difficulty appears too great for us ;
at each recurring necessity we feel as
if we should be overpowered by Satan
and by the many perplexities which
surround us. We all have need to


pray for that ripeness of faith and that
clearness of spiritual discernment
which would enable us under sudden
dangers to rely undoubtingly upon
Him who has so often saved us, and in
the midst of temptations to rest with
confidence upon that Divine grace the
power of which has so often been dis-
played to ourselves and others, and
which never faileth those who trust
to it.


Vers. 6, 7. The law of increase.—It is
written, “ Man shall not live by bread
alone” (Deut. viii. 3). The true bread is
Christ, who was given to us at baptism,
that He might live in us and bring
forth fruit. On this grace we depend
for all good. Would we have Him to
increase, we must note and imitate His
action in this miracle. 1. He had faith
in His own Divine power. So have we
in grace. Did we look at difficulties,
our hearts would fail. We must look
only to Him; believe that He has
called us; believe that He gives us
power to obey. 2. He used ordinary
means : SO we; no special calls needed ;
in the midst of daily life we may become
perfect. For example, there are duty,
temptations, sacrifices, trials. 3. He
gave thanks: so let us even for small
mercies; we must not let blessings
ravel out. 4. Liberality toward others.
Grace is meant to be used. If its fire
has really kindled in our hearts, we
must diffuse the warmth. But the
very act of imparting blessing brings an
increase to ourselves (Prov. xi. 25 ;
Job xlii. 10).—A. G. Jackson.

No waste in God's work.—W hen God
interrupts the ordinary course of His
providence, it is not for the purpose of
surprising and astounding men’s minds,
but in order to bring about His own
designs. Hence it is that we never
see any waste either of energy or
material in His works. And thus does
He proceed in supplying the wants of
His people. He does it so as to make
it plainly appear that the supply ts
God’s work, and yet not so as to be
altogether out of the course of natural
things.—H. Caddell.


287


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee a ee


Our wants Christ's care. — Jesus
created a supply out of what the
disciples had, and not out of nothing.
In like manner, if His people daily
follow Him in faith, if this is the first
and prominent object of their lives,
and if, in subordination to this, they
are diligent and laborious in_ their
callings in life, and seek His blessing
on all their earnings, He will take
care that they never want. His hand,
though unseen, except by the eye of
faith, shall break and bless their daily
meal. They shall ever have enough.
And the secret of it will be that “ Christ
dwelling in their hearts by faith”
presides also over all their temporal
concerns, makes their wants His care,
becomes a daily guest at their table,
and draws out to the extent of their
wants the slender meal which, by His
blessing, their faithful diligence has
already provided.——lbid.

Christ will not fail us in the hour of
need.—If we follow the Lord into the


wilderness, if for His sake we are
content to give up much which the
world holds valuable, to forego some
of its lawful pleasures, if in His service
we forget to make provision for the
flesh, He will not fail us in our hour
of necessity, but will supply all our
needs according to His riches in glory,
feed our souls with the hidden manna
of His sweetness, and give us such
temporal blessings as may best minister
to our eternal good.—S. W. Skeffington.


Ver. 8. Religious frugality.—There
is a wide difference between a penurious
spirit and a spirit of religious frugality.
The former grudges what is used in
order that it may hoard up the more
for itself. The latter unites a large
hospitality with a due sense of responsi-
bility to God in the use of His bountiful
gifts. ‘The former is mere covetousness ;
the latter is wise and godly prudence.
—H. Caddell.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 10—12.
(ParaturL: Marr. xvi. 1-4.)


The * sign” refused.—It was, we may be sure, no mere intellectual deficiency
in His hearers which drew this sigh from the Gracious Saviour. In the request
that He would give them a sign there was some secret spiritual wrongness
over which Christ grieved.

I. What did they mean by asking a sign?—Had they not His wonderful
works? And why did He say that no sign should be given when in fact He
was giving signs innumerable and conclusive? It is quite plain that Christ’s
works did not convince them. It is therefore also plain that we greatly over-
rate the force of miracles as an evidence of Christianity. In those times few,
if any, followed Christ because of the miracles. They followed Him because of
that all-prevailing power which accompanied the simple words “ Follow Me,”
because never man spake as He spake, because the message of Divine love
carried with it its own overwhelming evidence. And then we know that
vast multitudes witnessed the miracles and yet persistently refused to believe.
Some other sign they wanted, something besides curing the blind and cleansing
the leper and raising the dead. They asked for some imposing display in the
heavens, some disclosure of the Messiah magnificently seated on a material
throne, which would confound, amaze, and convince all beholders. Now that
the Saviour would not give. He refused, first, because they had no right to
dictate how much evidence must needs be forthcoming. Part of our trial here
consists, in fact, in God’s so adjusting the evidence to our moral condition that,
while there is amply enough to determine the acceptance of the honest and
good heart, there is no lavishing of proof.


288


ee


5


:


i


Sas


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII.
Cos a Se a ER ete cet ee A SL Ee


II. Suppose the “sign from heaven” given.—Suppose that in the sky above
Jerusalem had been disclosed the form of the Son of Man as the sun in his
strength, ten thousand times ten thousand of the heavenly hosts on the right
hand and the left, the first effect would doubtless have been unspeakable and
overwhelming awe. But remember, belief in the Christ meant trust in the
Christ, the homage of heart and soul. Do you think that the most magnificent
display in the heavens would secure that? —

III. No outward proof alone can determine belief in truths moral and
spiritual._Every kind of truth has its proper evidence. Mathematical truth
has its evidence; but to crave mathematical proof outside its own proper region
is unphilosophical, and may lead us to suspect that the absorbing study of
mathematics disqualifies for, rather than aids, the search after truth of other
kinds. Historical truth again is reached through its own proper evidence ; but
it is here that we touch upon the very point before us. Christianity rests on an
historical basis, and because it does so sceptics are apt to assume that its truth
or falsehood is merely matter of historical evidence. Doubtless the historical
evidence must be sound; but is every one qualified to judge of its soundness ?
And so we have to point out that Christianity has a moral and spiritual basis
also. Suppose there has appeared on the page of history One whom our own
hearts and the universal consent of the civilised world pronounce to be perfect
goodness, unrivalled purity, Divine dignity, love unequalled. Will not good
men yield their love and devotion to Him who is perfect goodness? Will not
bad men shrink from Christ and from His perfect purity, and be predisposed
to question the historical evidence, because they hope thereby to free them-
selves from His claim upon their allegiance? For such men there are no
signs from heaven. They are not given, simply because they would be useless
(Luke xvi. 31).

IV. Obedience is the condition of faith.—Obedience to what we know leads
to faith in what is yet to be revealed. The good ground in the parable of the
sower, the only ground that brought forth fruit, is explained to be “the honest
and good heart,”—honest, and therefore receptive of everything true ; good, and
therefore in closest sympathy with the noble, the loving, and the pure. But
this is alone of Him from whom comes every good and perfect gift.—Canon Jacob.


. OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 11, 12. Neglect not the signs
given already.—When we long for
miracles, neglecting those standing
miracles of our faith, the gospel and
the Church ; when our reason is satis-
fied of a doctrine or a duty, and yet
we remain irresolute, sighing for the
impulse of some rare spiritual en-
lightenment or excitement, for a re-
vival or a mission or an oration to lift
us above oarselves,—we are virtually
asking to be shewn what we already
confess, to behold a sign, while we
possess the evidence.—Dean Chadwick.

You cannot convince some men.—Did
you ever try to satisfy an impracticable
man, or to remove all ground of offence


from one who is determined to find
fault? The old Greek fable-writer
was very wise. The stories of ‘“ The
Wolf and the Lamb,” and of “The
Old Man and his Ass,” bear a moral
for all time. Jesus Christ told men
that they were not to give that which
was ‘holy to the dogs,” or to cast
their ‘pearls before swine.” Life is
too short, time and strength are too
precious, to be wasted in vain en-
deavour.—D. J. Hamer.

Sight more needed than signs.—Per-
sons ‘who, after looking at what
Christianity has wrought in the world,
and the kind of influence it has on the
souls of men, still ask for evidences of


289


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Christianity, are of the same sort as
these. They forget that demonstration
is only possible of the visible or the
tangible, and that there cannot be any
scientific demonstration of such a thing
as the Godhead of Christ. What all
such persons want is sight, not signs—
the power of seeing and appreciating
the Saviour’s moral glory, not evidences
of Christianity.—A. Glover.


Ver. 12. The Lord’s deep sigh in its
great significance—l. A silent and
yet decisive sign of His conflict and
of His victory. 2. An unuttered word,
containing a world of Divine words.
3. A fulfilment of the primitive
prophecy concerning the breach be-
tween the external and the spiritual
Israel. 4. A prophecy which stretches
forward to the Cross and the Judgment.
—J. P. Lange, D.D.

The infinite meaning of this sigh of
Christ-—1. As a breathing forth of
the Divine patience over the visible
world. 2. A collective expression of
all the sufferings and all the patience
of Christ. 3. A declaration of all the
incarnate sorrow and endurance of the
Lord in His Church.—Jbid.

An unreasonable demand.—In many
cases of unbelief the individual is not
so much to blame as the spirit of the
age of which he is the representative.
See 2 Oor. iv. 4. Such persons not
only cannot recognise the signs of the
kingdom of heaven, but are in a state
of heart and mind to which no sign
can possibly be given. We are in-
debted to the fine candour of the late


Mr. Darwin for a striking illustration
of this. In his life there is an in-
teresting correspondence with Professor
Asa Gray, the great botanist, who,
wondering how Darwin could remain
unconvinced by the innumerable evi-
dences of design in nature, asked him
if he could think of any possible proof
which he would consider sufficient.
Mr. Darwin replied: “‘ Your question
is a poser. If I saw an angel come
down to teach us so, and I was con-
vinced, from others seeing him, that
I was not mad, I should believe.” If
he had left it there, it might have
been pertinent to ask him whether
Christ is not just such an angel come
down from heaven to teach us, and
whether a sufficient number of per-
sons did not see Him in the flesh, to
say nothing of the multitudes who
know Him in the spirit, to convince
us that we are not mad in believing
it. But he went on to say: ‘If man
were made of brass and iron, and in
no way connected with any other
organism which had ever lived, I
should perhaps be convinced.” Nothing
could be more candid, or more in
keeping with the transparent honesty
of the man. But what an acknow-
ledgment! Man must cease to be
man, and become a metal machine,
and the universe must cease to be a
harmonious whole, before there can
be evidence enough for so simple and
elementary a principle as design in the
universe; and then only a “ perhaps”!
Is Christ’s answer to the seekers after
a sign out of date ?—J. M. Gibson, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—21.


(PaRaLLEL: Mart. xvi. 5-12.)


A warning against formality and indifference.—I. What the caution refers to.


—1, A formal, hypocritical religion.


4. An indifference about all religion.


The rich, the gay, the men of learning and philosophy, are too generally of this


description.


II. Some reasons for this caution—l. Because of our proneness to these


evils.
they vitiate the whole man





2. Because of their fatal tendency. Do they not work incessantly till
blinding the understanding, perverting the will,


sensualising the affections, and causing every part of one’s conduct to savour


290


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIII.





of ungodliness ?


3. Because of their ultimate effect.


Eternal happiness and


eternal misery are too important to be trifled with.
ITI. The means whereby it may be rendered effectual for our preservation.—


1, Get your soul deeply impressed with the principles of the gospel.
careful whom you choose as your associates,


thought of the Judgment.—C.. Simeon.


2. Be
3. Endeavour to realise the


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 15. Of leaven in the Gospel
I find three sorts interpreted to our
hands, that we cannot mistake. 1. The
Pharisees—of the leaven of super-
stition, consisting in  phylacteries,
phrases, and observances, and little
else. 2. The Sadducees—of a leaven
that smelt strong of profaneness, in
their liberty of prophesying, calling in
question angels and spirits and the
resurrection itself. 3. The leaven of
Herod-—beware that too; many times
it is the bane of true religion, when
God’s truth and worship must be
moulded up with Jeroboam’s and with
Herod’s ends, squared to them, just as
it is fittest to do their turns. Let all
be abandoned—Pharisees’, Sadducees’,
Herod’s—and the truth take their place
(1 Thess, ii. 3-6; 2 Cor. xi. 3; Rev.
xxii. 15).—Bishop Andrewes.

Erroneous doctrine is like leaven—
1. In regard of the commonness. 2. In
regard of the quantity—little (1 Cor.
v. 6). 3. In regard of the quality
(Matt. xiii. 29). 4. In regard of its
spreading property (Acts xx. 30). 5. In
regard of its effects—leaven soureth,
heateth, swelleth (Matt. vi. 16; Col.
ii. 21; Acts vii. 54, 57; Col. ii. 18).—
E. Leigh.


Ver. 16. The disciples’ misconcep-
tion.—In wondering at the disciples’
curious misconception we ought to
remember at least, as serving in a
measure to account for it, how accus-
tomed they were to hear our Lord
speak in riddles, to have Him address
them on many subjects in a mysterious
and enigmatical way. Yet need we
after all look further for an explana-
tion of what seems to us a remarkable


mistake than to the character of their
mental preoccupation, when we reflect
on the wonderful facility with which
the mind discolours and distorts things
in the atmosphere of its own broodings,
and the illusions it creates in so doing.
Only think, for instance, of the irre-
sistible tendency of the self-conscious,
self-regarding young gentleman in
society to suspect that people are
either laughing at or admiring him
when there is not the slightest ground
for the suspicion, when perhaps not
an eye in the room notices him; or
of our haste to read in the words and
gestures of another a covert allusion
to that secret wrongdoing of ours with
the memory of which we are burdened,
when no such allusion is intended or
could be.—WV. R. Wood.


Ver. 21. Why it is that we “do
not understand”—whether it be the
principles of the Divine government,
or the direction of the Divine purpose,
or the meaning of the Divine oracles.
1, We do not always care enough to
understand, and so will not be at the
pains to discover. 2. We are too apt
to discover and adopt only what is
in sufficient harmony with our own
preconceived opinions. 3. We do not
use the right helps to enable us to
understand; or, having the right
helps, we do not use them in the right
way. Reflexion, conversation, min-
gling with those who differ from us,
etc. 4. We so seldom go to Scripture
as the final tribunal of revealed truth,
or place ourselves in the keeping of
the Holy Spirit to be our Counsellor
and Guide.—Bishop Thorold.


291


7”


cHap. vule HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
eee


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 22—26.


The blind man at Bethsaida.—This incident, recorded only by St. Mark, may
be considered both in a natural and a spiritual view, under which twofold
aspect there can be no doubt that all our Lord’s miracles of healing were
intended to be viewed. He adopted this method to make Himself known as
the Great Physician of the soul, who “forgiveth all our sins and healeth
all our infirmities”; who, by the virtue which resides in Him, and which is
called forth by the application of faith, removes the blindness of our under-
standing, the raging fever of our passions, the palsy of our spiritual affections,
the lameness of our halting obedience; commands Satan and his unclean
spirits to come out of us, and raises us from the death of sin unto the life of
righteousness. ;

I. A blind man is brought to Jesus to be cured—1. The restoring of sight
to the blind was one of the signs to be looked for in the promised Messiah
(Isa. xxxv. 5); and to this evidence Christ appealed, in the first place, in His
answer to the Baptist’s messengers (Matt. xi. 5). 2. Many remarkable instances
of this kind of miracle might be referred to (see especially John ix.). The
present example contains some peculiarities not found elsewhere. 3. There
is a moral as well as a natural blindness, to which not merely a few unfortunate
persons but all mankind by nature are subject (Isa. xliii. 8). (1) Such were
the Gentiles (Eph. iv. 18). (2) Such were the Jews also, who, though they had
not the same excuse of ignorance or want of light, yet were blinded by obstinate
and invincible prejudice (Mark iv. 12). (3) Such are all of us by nature: born
blind, and continuing so by our own fault; having no light in ourselves, and
hating it when it is brought to us. Perhaps, like the Pharisees, we say we see ;
but this is our blindness. We see nothing as we ought to see, nothing as it
really is. We see no deformity in sin, no beauty in holiness; no terrors in the
law, no charms or attractions in the gospel; no weakness in ourselves, no all-
sufficiency in Christ (Rev. iii. 17, 18). 4. It was to free all mankind from these
spiritual infirmities, and not to relieve a few miserable objects from their bodily
pains, that the Saviour appeared (Luke iv. 18).

II. Our Lord, before beginning the cure, takes His patient to a private
place, apart from the multitude—1. No reason is given why He did this,
or why, after the cure was complete, He told him not to go back into the
town, ete. (ver. 26). Perhaps the people of Bethsaida, like those of Nazareth
(Matt. xiii. 57, 58), had resisted the evidence of former miracles performed
amongst them, and therefore did not deserve another. At any rate, when we
read this, and when we observe His disinclination on other occasions to have
His fame blazed abroad, we are reminded of the character given Him by the
prophet (Isa. xlii. 2). 2. “We also are oftentimes spiritually blind while we
are iv the town, ze. this world; afterwards, being led out of the town, 2.e. out
of the world and its concerns, by Jesus Christ, we are healed.” He does this
in a variety of ways: by afflictions, by disappointments, by the loss of friends,
by a change in our situation, ete. Anything, in short, which disentangles us
from the world, detaches us from our former associates and pursuits, affords
an opening for serious reflexion, and a closer acquaintance with our own hearts
—anything which has this effect may be considered as a merciful dispensation
of Christ to our souls, a taking us by the hand and leading us out of the town,
preparatory to a perfect restoration.

IIT. On a first exertion of His healing virtue our Lord cures the blind man
only in part.—He saw objects, but not distinctly. Men and trees waved
to and fro before his eyes, so that he could not distinguish one object from


292





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. cuap. vut.





-


another. 1. This is always the case when a blind man is restored to sight
by natural means; and it is necessary to obviate it by not allowing him the
free use of his eyes at first, and by the gradual admission of light into the room.
2. Such was not our Lord’s usual manner. He did all things well. Those who
witnessed His cures were beyond measure astonished when they saw His
patients restored to the immediate and full use of their senses, without the
necessity of any precautions. 3. Here, however, He departs from His usual
course, and as it were puts a restraint upon the virtue which resided in Him,
so as to make its effect incomplete. Perhaps, according to the faith of this poor
man, so was it done to him, which, being weak at first, required nursing and
rearing by a partial exhibition of the Saviour’s power. 4. At any rate the
application to the spiritual recovery of sinners is much more exact than if the
cure had been completed at once. When the eyes of our understanding are
enlightened by the revelation of Christ, the first effect is not unlike what is
here described. Our views of Divine things are very imperfect and confused.
We are not all at once turned from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. We experience at first a kind of twilight illumination, which
“shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” Nor is this gradual conversion
in any way derogatory to the great power of God. Was the cure of this blind
man less perfect or less astonishing because it was not effected all at once? The
material circumstance which constituted the miracle was this; he came, seeing
no man; he went away, ‘“‘seeing every man clearly.” And so with respect to
our souls; the great point to be considered is, what we were, and what we are
(Eph. v. 8). It is not necessary that we should be able to refer to the time
or place when light first flashed in upon our mind; it is enough if we can say,
“ One thing I know,” etc. (John ix. 25).

IV. The same process being repeated, the patient is perfectly restored.—
1. The former trial, however unsuccessful apparently in part, had had the
intended effect of raising the man’s expectations and confidence in his Physician
to a proper pitch. And Jesus, seeing that he had now faith to be healed, delays
no longer to complete the cure. 2. It is the same with those whom He calls
out of spiritual darkness into His marvellous light. The imperfect illumination
vouchsafed them at first is designed only to exercise their faith, to make them
love the light and desire more of it. Having once tasted of the heavenly gift,
they feel an insatiable desire to increase in the knowledge of God, and to be
filled with all wisdom and spiritual understanding. To them shall more be
given as they are able to receive it, until they are “stablished, strengthened,
settled,” and ‘“‘ made perfect in every good work to do His will.”

V. The remarkable injunction with which the man is dismissed.—1. There
was the same reason (whatever that might be) for desiring him not to go into
the town after his cure as for taking him out in order to cure him. 2, The
eyes of our understanding being enlightened to see our lost condition as sinners
and the great power of God our Saviour, we are commanded not to go back
into the town, nor to tell it to any one in the town, but to go to our house.
(1) Since it was the god of this world that first blinded our minds, the folly and
danger of going back into the world after conversion is evident to common
sense. If we do, we run the most serious risk of being again entangled therein
and overcome. Nor is it enough that we should merely abstain from returning
to the world; we must not even wish to do so, or indulge longing desires after
what we have renounced. They are objects altogether at variance with our
newly acquired sense (1 John ii. Is AMay 2 Luke ax 5 62). (2) Still further to
preserve us from worldly contamination, Christ forbids us even to tell or talk
of what has happened to us, to the unspiritual. By such communications we
are likely to do harm to ourselves, and no good to them. We may begin by


293


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
SS ee


inviting them out of the town, we may end by going back into the town with
them. (3) But although we are dissuaded from talking of these matters to the
world in general, it by no means follows that we are to keep them to ourselves.
On the contrary, having received such great mercies, we are to give glory to
God, and at the same time be doing an inestimable service to those most dear to
us, by endeavouring to open their eyes and to bring them to the knowledge and
obedience of the faith. In the bosom of our own family, where we may count
upon at least some measure of sympathy and attention, we are to do the work
of a true friend for them and of an evangelist for Christ.


The clearing of the sight.—As in other cases, Jesus led this sufferer apart ;
as in other cases, He made use of certain means as well as of His word,
teaching us the method and the secret of sacramental working; but, not as
in other miracles, the cure is gradually wrought.

I. It was intended to teach us how God deals differently with different
souls.—It is a rebuke to those who demand proofs of instantaneous conversion ;
it should be read with that passage which describes the growth of grace as
gradual, like the growth of the grain of corn, “first the blade, then the ear,
then the full corn in the ear,” which, while the man rises and sleeps night and
day, grows he knoweth not how.

II. As to the particular words in which the man describes his growth.—
“T see men walking, but they look like trees.” Large, indistinct, crowded, and
hazy, like the mingled mass of the distant woods waving and bending in the
breeze, or as when passing rapidly along we see the trees flit quickly by us
in copse and hedgerow. The man had either never seen, or had long been
unaccustomed to, the form of either man or tree; his was therefore an utterance
doubly obscured, his eyes only partially transmitting objects which his mind
only partially recognised. The man having thus truly described his half-
restored condition, Jesus speaks to him a word of command: He bids him look
up, and then he sees all men clearly.

III. Looking at the spiritual meaning of this description, it has been urged
that it is often the case when the work of grace is beginning that people
mistake the nature and proportion of things around them. Spiritual things
and living truths still have much of the earthly clinging to them: and if life and
movement be recognised at all, it is the dull vegetative life of mere existence,
still rooted in the soil of this world, or spreading itself out in a hazy form
of general indefinite goodness, not the active, personal, organic life of the
regenerate man, which is part of the very life of God.

TV. We notice a lesson of honesty and humility in the man’s description.
He does not claim an insight which he has not attained to. He speaks a lesson,
gentle but severe, to those who, after hearing a sermon, or reading a treatise, or
attending a service, or feeling an awakening of conscience, suddenly consider
that they are converted, that they “can read their title clear,” that they have
clear views, and so forth. The precocious child, who lectures its parents or
strangers on religion; the converted prize-fighter, who suddenly turns from
indulging in all kinds of brutal passions and lectures his neighbours who have
been walking for years in the light on which he has persistently turned his
back; the uneducated convert, who has picked up one text of Scripture, and
on the strength of that ignores all that others have learned of the whole counsel
of God,—all these may lay to heart the humility and truthfulness of this man.

V. And in this gradual development of the spiritual powers there is also
a strong and abiding word of comfort for many a struggling Christian. Often-
times we find those who, though they are interested and anxious, cannot obtain
the steadfast gaze that they desire. Clouds drive across their spiritual firma-


294


So
ee


TOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII.
a Se ee ete a ome ek? Md oe Stet: ie


ment ; now all is clear and bright for a moment ; now the fierce storm or the


_ blinding mist sweeps over them, and their light is turned to darkness, They


are not, as they were once, either blind or careless; the truth has shone in
upon their souls, but they cannot retain it ; their conscience is tender, but their
understanding is dim. Let such take courage; they are just in the condition
indicated by the text—they see men walking as it were trees. You who have
been not only baptised and confirmed, but have earnestly worshipped and
reverently communicated, you are different, widely different, from what you
were once; but widely different also from what hereafter you shall be. Christ
has led you to self-examination: the result is at once to excite your thankful-
ness for His marvellous work, and your humiliation for your own shortcoming.
But He still is standing by you,—still in His house apart from the city’s noise
He is bending over you as you kneel; still to your soul His voice is speaking ;
still on His altar He waits for you, that again He may lay His hands upon
you, again He may bid you lift up your hearts. And in His house, and
through His Word, by the voice of His Church and the power of His sacraments,
He will free you from the bondage and the blinding power of sin, and quicken
all those faculties which have so long been paralysed or misused.—G@. C. Harris.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 23. Christ's freedom in the use
of means.—This case and that of the
deaf and stammering man in Decapolis
have many points of resemblance. In
both those who brought the diseased
to Jesus prescribed to Him the mode
of cure. Was it for the purpose of
reproving and counteracting the pre-
judice which connected the cure with
a certain kind of manipulation on the
part of the curer that Jesus in both
instances went so far out of His usual
course, varying the manner of His
action so singularly that, out of all His
miracles of healing, these two stand
distinguished by the unique mode of
their performance? It is certain that,
had Jesus observed one uniform method
of healing, the spirit of formalism and
superstition, which lies so deep in our
nature, would have seized upon it, and
linked it inseparably with the Divine
virtue that went out of Him, confound-
ing the channel with the blessing it
conveyed.—Dr. Hanna.

Christ, not means, the source of healing.
—If Christ’s touch and Christ’s saliva
healed, it was not because of anything
in them, but because He willed it so;
and He Himself is the source of all the
healing energy. Therefore let us keep
these externals in their proper place


ON THE VERSES.


of subordination, and remember that
in Him, not in them, lies the healing
power.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

Led into solitude—As Israel was
led into the wilderness that God might
“speak to her heart,” so often Christ
draws us aside, if not by outward
providences such as these, yet by
awaking in us that solemn sense of
personal responsibility and making us
feel our solitude, that He may lead us
to feel His all-sufficient companionship.
—Tbid.


Vers. 24, 25. The man’s answer is in
accord with later scientific discovery.
What we call the act of vision is really
a twofold process; there is in it the
report of the nerves to the brain, and
also an inference, drawn by the mind,
which previous experience has educated
to understand what that report implies.
In want of such experience an infant
thinks the moon as near him as the
lamp, and reaches out for it. And
when Christian science does its Master’s
work by opening the eyes of men who
have been born blind, they do not know
at first what appearances belong to
globes and what to flat and square
objects. Itis certain that every image
conveyed to the brain reaches it upside-


295


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


J SS ae


down, and is corrected there. When
Jesus then restored a blind man to the
perfect enjoyment of effective, intelli-
gent vision, He wrought a double
miracle, one which instructed the
intelligence of the blind man as well
as opened his eyes. This was utterly
unknown to that age.—Dean Chadwick.


Ver. 24. Different conditions of the
spiritual life—l. It is a happy state,
if it is the first stage towards clearly
seeing in perfect knowledge. 2. It
is a gloomy and uncertain state, if
the Christian should remain in it.
3. Worst of all, if through his own guilt
he should return to this stage, falling
into the new blindness of despair.—
J. P. Lange, D.D.

Man and tree.—A large part of the
battle of life has been fought and
gained when one has learned the
difference between a man and a tree.
For that is the difference between the
great and the small, between mind and
matter, between the eternal and the
‘ransitory, between earth and heaven.
—G. Hodges.

Christian progress.—How dim and
partial a glimmer of light comes to
many a soul at the outset of the
Christian life! How little a new
convert knows about God and self and
the starry truths of His great reve-
lation! Christian progress does not
consist in seeing new things, but in
seeing the old things more clearly—the
same Christ, the same Cross, only more
distinctly and deeply apprehended, and
more closely incorporated into my very
being. We do not grow away from
Him, but we grow into knowledge of
Him.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 25. The restoration of sight.—
In this verse the Evangelist just touches
that which is the salient point in the
blessing of the restoration of sight.
For what is the great deprivation in
blindness? It is a loss, doubtless, as
the blind poet Milton sang, that not
to them return, “Day, or the sweet
approach of even or morn, or sight
of vernal bloom, or summer’s rose, or


2G


flocks and herds” —but still more, what
he adds last, that they cannot see the
“human face Divine.” Were it possible
for a blind person to be restored to
the faculty of seeing persons, though he
remained blind to everything else, much
more than half his deprivation would
be removed. Now a great deal of
that moral blindness of which the
blindness of this man was the type
consists in just this—that we do not
see our fellow-men. We only see our-
selves ; we are sharp-sighted enough to
our own interests, but blind to the wants
and wishes of others. ‘The love of self
brings a gradual film over the moral
vision, so that, reversing the process
of the miracle, though at first we see
every man clearly, by-and-by they are
no more to us than vague shadows,
as trees walking, and presently we
cease to see them at all.—Jbishop
A. Blomfield.


Ver. 26. A view of the miraculous.—
This fact, of a miracle done in intended
secrecy and shrouded in deep darkness,
suggests to us the true point of view
from which to look at the whole subject
of miracles. 1. People say they were
meant to be attestations of His Divine
mission. Yes, no doubt that is true
partially ; but that was never the sole
or even the main purpose for which
they were wrought ; and when anybody
asked Jesus Christ to work a miracle
for that purpose only, He rebuked the
desire and refused to gratify it. He
wrought the miracle not coldly, in
order to witness to His mission, but
every one of them was the token be-
cause it was the outcome of His own
sympathetic heart brought into con-
tact with human need. And instead
of the miracles of Jesus Christ being
cold, logical proofs of His mission, they
were all glowing with the earnestness
of a loving sympathy, and came from
Him as naturally as rays from the sun-
shine at sight of sorrow. 2. The same
fact carries with it, too, a lesson about
His character. Is not He here doing
what He tells us to do ?—* Let not thy


left hand know what thy right hand


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VILL.


doeth.” All goodness “ does good by
stealth,” even if it does not “ blush to
find it fame”—and that universal mark
of true benevolence marked His. He


Siete


the narrow path between ostentation
of powers and selfish concealment of
faculty ; and He solved it thus : “ Leav-
ing us an example that we should


had to solve in His human life what we


follow in His steps.” —A. Maclaren, D.D.
bave to solve—the problem of keeping


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 27—38,
and Chap. ix. 1.


(ParaLLets: Marr. xvi. 13-28; Luxe ix. 18-27.)


Christ's catechism.—I. Christ is such as to cause the world to think of Him.—
1. Because He professes to be the Saviour whom the world had long expected.
2. Because His appearance did not correspond with the world’s expectations,
3. Because the advent of a Saviour was the world’s great need.

II. Christ is interested in what the world thinks of Him—1. He recognised
the world’s ability to form an idea of Him. 2. He had laboured to impart to
the world a correct idea of Him. 3. He was conscious that the world had formed
an idea of Him. 4. He seeks information of the result of His own teaching and
the world’s learning from the most reliable source.

III. Christ is differently thought of by the world..—1. He had imparted ti,
the world an impression of superiority. “A great prophet.” 2. The world had
failed to perceive the unique character of His greatness. Only a great man.
3. This failure had its source in the union of Godhead with manhood.

IV. Christ is wishful that right ideas of Himself should exist in the world.—-
1, He had been qualifying His followers to teach them. 2. He opportunely
tests their mastery of them. 3. He ascertains the successful implantation of
them.—B. D. Johns.


Ver. 34. The necessity of self-denial.—We ought to attach more than ordinary
importance to this saying of our Lord, because it is evident that He Himself
laid great stress on it. He had been conversing apart with His disciples, and
particularly with Peter; and something that Peter said gave Him occasion
to insist on this truth: He would not, however, address it privately to him
or to the small band of His immediate followers, but He summoned the
multitude to attend to Him, marking by this circumstance as strongly as
possible the importance of what He was about to say: “‘ Whosoever will come
after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.” He,
enforced the same truth again and again (Matt. x. 38; Luke xiv. 27). And
is not the declaration in itself calculated to arouse our attention? If we know
that there is anything without which we cannot be true followers of Christ,
it surely ought to be well considered by us, because the very life and salvation
of our souls must depend on it. Let us then take earnest heed to what Christ
here says to us: let us consider well what that is which He declares to be
necessary in order to prove our claim to be His disciples; nor let us rest till
we have this evidence that we belong to Him—till this seal, as it were, is
visibly set upon us to mark us out as His disciples indeed. The text requires
but few words by way of explanation. To “deny oneself” is to refuse
indulgence to our desires, not to do what we would naturally wish to do—to
put a restraint upon ourselves, to withhold from any of our appetites that
which would gratify them, and to act differently in any case to what nature
would incline us.


297


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
re


I. Self-denial is necessary in order that we may prove our love and fidelity to
Christ.—1. A service which costs us nothing affords no very certain evidence
of our attachment to any one. Now Christ would have us give proof of our
loyalty and attachment to Him. He requires it of us as a positive duty to
give up something, to make some sacrifice for Him, to oppose our inclinations
in some way or other, in order that we may ascertain whether indeed love
to His name is a strong and ruling principle within us. 2. There are many
who are well enough disposed to the religion of Christ till it prescribes this
duty. They appear willingly to hear the Scripture, to join in prayer, and to
observe holy ordinances; and they will do many things which would seem to
indicate an earnestness and zeal in the cause of Christ; but they draw back
when called to the difficult exercise of self-denial. But what is the value of
a service which cautiously avoids all toil and difficulty? Where is the proof
of our being sincere in the love of an object if we will encounter no hardship
to attain it? We see men ready to practise much self-denial and to think
little of it in any matter in which their hearts are engaged. Look, for example,
at the man whose ambition it is to prosper in business. What a life of self-
denial is his! He labours even to weariness, rises early, late takes rest, eats
the bread of carefulness, denies his nature the rest that it needs, and refuses
many enjoyments which he would be glad to partake but that they would
hinder him in the object that he has in view. Even the man of pleasure must
in the pursuit of his object often use self-denial : he must put a restraint on
himself at times, and refuse a less pleasure for the present, however strongly
his wishes may incline to it, in order to obtain a greater one in prospect. Nay,
even the customary civilities of society impose on us frequent self-denial. A
man will often deny himself, will often refrain from doing what he would
otherwise wish to do, in order to observe the rules of good breeding and courtesy.
Tf then we are content in the pursuit of business or of pleasure to deny
ourselves, if we are willing and able to practise it in order that we may
observe the decent courtesies of life and be esteemed well mannered in society,
what must be said of us if we refuse to practise it for Christ’s sake, if we
can use self-denial on other occasions and for other purposes readily, and only
feel it too irksome when called on to use it for the purpose of pleasing Him ?
What must be said of us but that the love of God is not in us ?

II. Self-denial is necessary to the due discharge of our duties——For many
of these we cannot perform except at the expense of denying ourselves. 1. How
can the rich relieve the poor as they ought, or how can the poor as they ought
befriend each other, except they deny themselves for each other's sake? We
must in part sacrifice our own ease, we must give up our own way, we must
abridge our own enjoyments, if we would do good to others according to the
will of Christ. ‘Bear ye one another’s burdens.” This is His law; and it is
evident that we cannot pretend to fulfil it except we deny ourselves. “ Look
not,” saith the apostle, “every man on his own things, but every man also
on the things of others”; and then he adds, “let this mind be in you which
was also in Christ Jesus,” inasmuch as His Divine conduct furnishes the best
example of self-denying charity. Not a single day passes which will not
furnish many occasions for this: nay, not an hour’s intercourse with our fellow-
men but will afford us opportunities of denying ourselves,—by giving up, for
instance, our own wishes, and yielding to the wishes of another; by “taking
the lowest room,” or choosing the least desirable lot ; by securing the comfort
or ease or honour of those about us at some sacrifice on our own part; by
putting a restraint upon our feelings; by imposing silence on our tongue,
refusing it the licence which it loves, not allowing it to utter words “that may
do hurt,” not answering again, nor resenting wrong, nor resisting evil. In


298


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII.
suing irae metae e — —ceeeeee  n


a thousand ways which only a watchful conscience can discover, and which
no one may be privy to but God Himself, we may do what our Lord hers
commands us. Our daily course, under the most ordinary circumstances, may
become a course of virtuous self-renunciation—a course of habitual obedience
to the injunction in the text, “ Whosoever will come after Me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.” 2. There are at the present
day great efforts made by the Church for the extension of the Lord’s kingdom
among men, for propagating both at home and abroad the gospel of the grace
of God. These efforts cannot be sustained except by the free-will offerings of
Christians—they must be given up unless the members of the Church liberally
give of their substance for their support. These multiplying demands on
Christians cannot possibly be answered unless they contrive in some way to
lessen their personal expenses, to spend less on self-indulgence, to save somewhat
more by self-denial. Then, and not till then, will the resources of the Church
be adequately replenished, and means be supplied her sufficient for carrying
on her great designs of training her own children in the service and worship of
God, and of ‘“ preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ.”
IIT. Self-denial is necessary for the purification of our minds.—1. As we
were born in sin, and our nature is consequently corrupt, it must be watched
over, restrained, and subdued. Our innate propensities are all on the side
of evil, and if any of them gain the mastery over us we are thereby brought
into bondage to sin. Now the only way to prevent this is to mortify these
propensities, to deny them indulgence, to oppose them at their first rising,
however earnest and importunate they may be, and by an act of self-denial
to put a restraint upon them. The will grows unruly if it be not crossed;
the soul is weakened by self-indulgence ; faith languishes when the senses are
unceasingly gratified ; the affections will not rise to things above if we grant
them unrestricted enjoyment of things on earth. Therefore it is that a
Christian should be watchful for opportunities of exercising self-control, and
not wait till his desires point to something absolutely unlawful. He should,
for instance, make his ordinary meals occasions for doing so, learning to keep
in check the lower appetites of his nature in the common matter of meat and
drink. He should observe the same in reference to dress, refusing indulgence
to himself in things which might awaken vanity and stimulate strongly the
lust of the eye. In many ways, from which he will not receive the least taint
of asceticism, nor do any rude violence to nature, or obscure to himself the
blessed truth that God “ giveth us all things richly to enjoy,” he may deny
himself and bring his desires under control. 2. Whenever-the exercise of self-
denial is spoken of, there naturally arises in the mind a repugnance to it, on
account of the difficulty of it and the pain which attends it. But let us not
give way to this repugnance, seeing the necessity of self-denial is so absolute.
(1) The exercise is difficult doubtless—very difficult ; but think not that we are
left to encounter the difficulty alone, to meet it in the feebleness of our own
nature. No, God will give us His Holy Spirit if we ask Him, and with His
Divine co-operation we shall be able to do what otherwise would not only be
difficult but impossible. (2) With regard to the pain of it, it is granted that
it must be painful, more or less so, always. The very word implies it. But
is not pain suffered for Christ and in His service better than ease secured
by deserting Him? Is not pain met with in the performance of duty more to
be prized than the ease which is sought in the neglect of it? Is not pain
endured in seeking the purification of our nature better a thousandfold than
the indulgence which must complete its debasement? Besides, the pain is but
momentary, the advantage that flows from it lasting. See Rom. viii. 13.
The faithful soldier and servant of Christ who manfully engages in this


299


cuar. vit.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


po ee SS ee





warfare shall hereafter share his Lord’s triumph and enter into His rest
(Rev. iii. 21).—G. Bellet.


Vers. 27-30. Christ’s Cross, and ours.—This section has the announcement of
the Cross as its centre, prepared for on the one hand by a question, and followed
on the other by a warning that His followers must travel the same road.

I. The preparation for the announcement of the Cross (vers. 27-30).—1l. Why
did Christ begin by asking about the popular judgment of His personality ?
Apparently in order to bring clearly home to the disciples that, as far as the
masses were concerned, His work and theirs had failed, and had for net result
total misconception. Who that had the faintest glimmer of what He was could
suppose that the stern, fiery spirits of Elijah or John had come to life again in
Him? 2. The second question, “ But whom say ye that I am?” with its sharp
transition, is meant to force home the conviction of the gulf between His disciples
and the whole nation. Mark, too, that this is the all-important question for
every man. Our own individual “ thought” of Him determines our whole worth
and fate. 3. How did these questions and their answers serve as introduction
to the announcement of the Cross? (1) They brought clearly before the disciples
the hard fact of Christ’s rejection by the popular voice, and defined their position
as sharply antagonistic. A rejected Messiah could not fail to be, sooner or later,
a slain Messiah. (2) Then clear, firm faith in His Messiahship was needed to
enable them to stand the ordeal to which the announcement, and still more its
fulfilment, would subject them. (3) Again, the significance and worth of the
Cross could only be understood when seen in the light of that great confession.
4, The charge of silence contrasts singularly with the former employment of
the apostles as heralds of Jesus. The silence was partly punitive and partly
prudential. (1) It was punitive, inasmuch as the people had already had
abundantly the proclamation of His gospel, and had cast it away. (2) It was
prudential, in order to avoid hastening on the inevitable collision; not because
Christ desired escape, but because He would first fulfil His day.

II. The announcement of the Cross (vers. 31-33)—There had been many
hints before this ; for Christ saw the end from the beginning. His death was
before Him, all through His days, as the great purpose for which He had come.
How much more gracious and wonderful His quick sympathy, His patient self-
forgetfulness, His unwearied toil, shew against that dark background! 1. Mark
here the solemn necessity. Why “must” He suffer? The cords which bind this
sacrifice to the horns of the altar were not spun by men’s hands. The great
“ must” which ruled His life was a cable of two strands—obedience to the Father,
and love to men. He would save; therefore He “must ” die. The same
“ must” stretches beyond death. “Christ that died” is no gospel until you go
on to say, “ Yea, rather, that is risen again.” 2. Peter’s rash “rebuke,” like
most of his appearances in the Gospel, is strangely compounded of warm-hearted,
impulsive love and presumptuous self-confidence. He found fault with Christ.
For what? Probably for not trusting to His followers’ arms, or for letting Hin-
self become a victim to the “must” which Peter thought of as depending only
on the power of the ecclesiastics in Jerusalem. He blames Christ for not hoisting
the flag of a revolt. This blind love was the nearest approach to sympathy
which Christ received ; and it was repugnant to Him, so as to draw the sharpest
words from Him that He ever spoke to a loving heart. Not thus was He wont
to repel ignorant love, nor to tell out faults in public ; but the act witnessed to
the recoil of His fixed spirit from the temptation which addressed His natural
human shrinking from death, as well as to His desire that, once for all, every
dream of resistance by force should be shattered. Note that it may be the work
of “Satan” to appeal to the things ‘that be of men,” however innocent, if by


300


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. VIII.








so doing obedience to God’s will is hindered. Note, too, that Simon may be
“ Peter” at one moment and “ Satan” at the next.

IIt. The announcement of the Cross as the law for the disciples too (vers.
34-38).—Christ’s followers must follow, but men can choose whether they will
be His followers or not. So the “‘ must ” is‘changed into “ let him,” and the “ if
any man will” is put in the forefront. The conditions are fixed, but the choice
of accepting the position is free. 1. The law for every disciple is self-denial and
taking up his cross. This does not merely mean accepting meekly God-sent or
men-inflicted sorrows, but persistently carrying on the special form of self-denial
which my special type of character requires. It will include these other meanings,
but it goes deeper than they. 2. The first of the reasons for the law in ver. 35
is a paradox, and a truth with two sides. To wish to save is to lose life; to lose
it for Christ’s sake is to save it. Flagrant vice is not needed to kill the real life.
Clean, respectable selfishness does the work effectually. The deadly gas is
invisible and has no smell. But while all selfishness is fatal, it is self-surrender
and sacrifice, “for My sake and the gospel’s,” which is life-giving. 3. The
“for” of ver. 36 seems to refer back to the law in ver. 34, and the verse enforces
the command by an appeal to self-interest, which in the highest sense of the
word dictates self-sacrifice. The men who live for self are dead, as Christ has
been saying. A man gets rich, and in the process has dropped generous
impulses, affections, interest in noble things, perhaps principle and religion.
He has shrivelled and hardened into a mere fragment of himself; and so, when
success comes, he cannot much enjoy it, and was happier, poor and sympathetic,
and enthusiastic and generous, than he is now, rich and dwindled. He who
loses himself in gaining the world does not win it, but is mastered by it. 4. A
wholesome contempt for the world’s cackle is needed for following Christ. The
geese on the common hiss at the passer-by who goes steadily through the flock.
How grave and awful is that irony, if we may call it so, which casts the
retribution in the mould of the sin! The Judge shall be “ashamed” of such
unworthy disciples—shall blush to own such as His. May we venture to put
stress on the fact that He does not say that He will reject them? 5. How
marvellous the transition from the prediction of the Cross to this of the Throne!
We do not know Jesus unless we know Him as the crucified Sacrifice for the
world’s sins, and as the exalted Judge of the world’s deeds. 6. He adds a weighty
word of enigmatical meaning, lest any should think that He was speaking only
of some far-off judgment. The destruction of Jerusalem seems to be the event
intended. It was a kind of rehearsal, or picture in little, of that coming and
ultimate great day of the Lord, and was meant to be a “sign” that it should
surely come.-—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Vers. 36-37. The loss of the soul.—I. The character of some of those who may
be said to pursue the present world at the expense of their souls.—1. Consider,
first, the case of those intensely occupied with the pursuit of the pleasures and
indulgences of the world. It is no crime to be happy in this state of being
(Phil. iv. 4), The crime is either in seeking happiness from wrong sources, or in
so eagerly drinking at the streams of earthly joy which the bounty of God has
opened to us, as to forget or neglect the Fountain where alone the soul can be
satisfied. 2. Consider, next, the case of those who are pursuing, with the like
intenseness, the interests of this life. Here also a reasonable regard to our own
worldly interest, and that of others connected with us, is not condemned in Scrip-
ture (Prov. xxii. 29; 1 Cor. iv. 12; 1 Tim. v.8). But if these worldly interests
ave pursued with feverish anxiety, from wrong motives or by wrong means ;
if they are the main objects for which we labour ; if their pursuit is connected
with disobedience to the will of God,—then the supposition of the text is


301


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


pe ee ee Se


realised : the world is gained, but the soul is lost. 3. In like manner Scripture
does not demand the austere rejection of worldly honours. Rank and natural
influence, if it be the pleasure of the Most High to bestow them, are to be
received with gratitude, and consecrated to the glory of the Giver, and to the
benefit, temporal and spiritual, of His creatures. If, however, mistaking the
means for the end, we sit down satisfied with the possession of reputation or
influence, without considering the objects to which they are to be dedicated ; if
worldly honours are the main objects of desire; if the pursuit of them be
connected with envy, fretfulness, or ambition, with the commission of sin, or the
neglect of duty; if, in struggling for the corruptible crown, the love of God,
of the Redeemer, of heavenly things, and of one another is suffered to ‘decline,
and in wearing it the lowliness of the gospel spirit is sacrificed,—this, again,
is to incur the condemnation of the text.

Il. What is included in the loss of the soul._—l. The nature and value of
the soul of man. (1) Its intrinsic excellence and dignity. (2) The price paid,
and that by Divine appointment, for the redemption of the soul. (3) The
description given of the soul in Scripture, as the grand object of contention
between the powers of heaven and hell. (4) The mighty apparatus of means
and instruments which it has pleased God to put into action for the recovery of
the soul. (5) And finally its capacity for the pursuits and enjoyments of another
state of existence. With what faculties must that creature be endowed who,
day and night and without ceasing, sings the praises of the Lord, who sees God
as He is and knows Him as he himself is known! 2. What is more distinctly
implied in the term “Jost.” (1) To “lose ” the soul is not, as some, without the
smallest warrant either from reason or Scripture, have ventured to affirm, to be
annihilated. (2) The loss of the soul is represented in Scripture as a penalty
inflicted by the hand of God Himself. (3) The loss of the soul is represented in
Scripture as involving a species of suffering altogether without alleviation. We
have perhaps witnessed the misery which the unrestrained dominion even of a
single passion is able to inflict upon the sinner: conceive, then, all the faculties
employed, and all the bad passions let loose, for the torment of the sufferer.
Imagine, for instance, the discernment of truth employed only to assure the
lost creature of the awful fact of his own eternal ruin. Conceive the powers of
calculation, perhaps infinitely enlarged, and altogether engaged in familiarising
the mind with ages of interminable woe. Conceive memory converted into a
mere storehouse for the materials of anguish, recalling every neglected opportunity,
every wasted warning, every lesson of truth forgotten, and every invitation of
love refused. Imagine the conscience, which perhaps has slumbered through the
whole period of our human existence, awaking from its temporary slumber, and
scaring the mind with images of deeper woe and more insufferable torment.

III. The folly of thus sacrificing the soul to gain the world.—On this subject
it is not necessary to enlarge, because every line in the preceding argument
leads decisively to this conclusion. One observation, however, I may make.
It has, for the sake of argument, been taken for granted that it is possible
to gain the world by the sacrifice of the soul. But how infinitely far is
such a supposition from the fact! How few attain even a small part of
the worldly objects at which they aim! How rarely are the hopes of the
ambitious, or the covetous, or the sensual in the smallest degree realised !
How difficult is it to obtain the prizes of life! how impossible to keep them !
But to return to the point more immediately insisted upon in the text:
suppose every object accomplished, every interest secured, and honour won, and
pleasure enjoyed, what can they “ profit” the man rolling on the gulf we have
been contemplating, and shut out for ever from hope, from heaven, and from
God 2—J. W. Cunningham.


302


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. yIII.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 28. Zhe world’s estimate of
Christ.—-1. Even an unbelieving world
never gives a small name to Christ ;
for the names here suggested are those
of the greatest of men. 2. The pecu-
liarity of unbelief, that it can believe
in old prophets brought back more
easily than in new prophets raised up.
Be a believer in a living God, who not
only has given in the past, but in the
present is giving heroes, sages, saints,
and prophets. Happy those who see
God at work around them! 3. A
certain grudging spirit marks their
estimates, reluctant to ascribe more
dignity to Jesus than they can help.
Beware of that spirit.—R. Glover.


Ver. 29. Christ's questions.—Christ
asks, “Whom say ye that I am?”
in no doubtful and apologetic tone.
He demands and expects an answer.
It is His right. It is obedience to the
plainest duty. Neglect on our part
is an insult to our Lord, whose we
are and whom we are bound to serve.
It is treason to a lost world, which
needs to be helped to an acceptance
of its Redeemer, and which is hindered
by any reluctance to confess Him on
the part of His disciples. If Christians
hide the faith which is in them, or if
they veil it by silence or the neglect
of appropriate action, they are doing a
grievous wrong as well as immeasurable
mischief,

Loyalty to Christ.—The power and
reach of genuine loyalty to Christ
cannot be over-estimated. It is so
spontaneous that it is unquestioned.
When the sun is riding in unclouded
splendour in mid-heaven, there is no
occasion for asking from what fountain
of light the glory of the noontide is
pouring. And when Jesus Christ is
so heartily owned and accepted and
loved by a man that all which he is
or does is in a measure transfigured
by his affection for his adorable Lord,
there is no dispute as to who and what
Christ is to that man. Nothing so


blesses the world, nothing so helps on
the advance of the kingdom of God,
as the testimony which consecrated
lives bear to the truth and worth of
the faith of the gospel.

Peter's reply.—l. The reply of Peter
is more marvellous in the lips of a
Jew, whose great creed was the Unity
of God, than in the lips of any other.
2. In all ages, in some form or other,
men have expressed their faith in the
Divinity of Christ. 3. The more re-
fined the soul, the more adoring is its
estimate of Christ. 4, They who truly
honour God will very readily believe
that He has love enough to become
incarnate and save men.


Ver 30. “ Tell no man of Him.”—
This is partly a temporary precept,
postponing the disciples’ testimony
until after Calvary, on the ground
that already the curiosity of the nation
was over-roused, and interfered with
the Saviour’s teaching; and is partly
a precept of perpetual guidance. Tell
people what Christ has done, and
only assist them to find out for them-
selves who He is. A ready-made
definition of the Saviour, saving people
the trouble of thinking, is not a real
service to any soul.—f. Glover.


Vers. 32, 33. Spiritual exaltation.—
Moments of spiritual exaltation are
often followed by moments of spiritual
exhaustion, and a good man is never
more perilously open to temptation
than after a long and high strain of
devotion. So Peter falls from the
height of his good confession to the
depth of Christ’s displeasure, and from
being inspired by the Spirit of all
truth and goodness to being the mouth-
piece of the spirit of all evil and
error.—S. Cox, D.D.

Learn—1. In the best of men there
is weakness and liability to err. 2,
Through mistaken kindness we may
become the tempters of our brethren,
3. We must never lower our standard


303


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of duty because friends seek to spare
us.


Vers. 34-38. The fundamentals of
the Christian fellowship.—|. Its laws.
(1) The true denier of himself is the
true confessor. (2) The true cross-
bearer is the true knight of the Cross.
(3) The true follower after Christ in
obedience is the true conqueror. 2. Its
grounds. (1) He who will save his
life in self-seeking shall lose it; he
who loses it in devotion to Christ shall
gain it. (2) He who lays down his
soul to win the world loses with his
soul the world also; he who has gained
his soul has with his soul gained the
world also. (3) To seek honour in the
world while ashamed of Christ leads
to infamy before the throne of Christ ;
but shame in the world leads to honour
with Him. (4) Readiness to die with
Christ leads through death to eternal
glory.—J. P. Lange, D.D.


Ver. 34. Words addressed to disciples.
—We must come to Christ in order to
come after Him. To wish to go to
heaven when we die is not the same
thing as to wish to follow Christ while
we live. Following Christ means walk-
ing in the path that He trod.

I. To follow Christ we must take
up the cross.—1. What is the cross?
Trial, suffering, difficulty, etc. Divinely
appointed—not self-imposed. The re-
proach of Christ (John xv. 20; Phil.
1 2920) Pet. iv. 16).- 2. Whatris tt
to “take it up”? Voluntary accept-
ance (John iv. 34, xviii, 11; Matt.
xi. 29). Not to be dragged by us—
nor forced upon us.

II. To take up the cross we must
deny self.—l. What is “self”? It
is the personality taking the throne,
claiming, possessing, and managing the
whole being. This is a condition of
“‘selfness.” There is wnrighteous self
and self-righteous self (John v. 30,
viii. 28; Phil. ii. 7). 2. What is it
to “deny” self? Notice the difference
between denying fo yourself certain
things and denying se/f (Luke xxii. 57).

III. To deny self we must enthrone


304


Christ—1. Christ and self cannot
reign together (Gal. ii. 20; Rom. vi.
11). 2. Only Christ can dethrone self
(1 Pet. iii, 15; 2 Cor. vi. 16, xiii. 5).
—E. H. Hopkins.

Self-denial.—l1. Abnegation is not
itself the good, but the most universal
condition for the human attainment
of the good. 2. Christ promises not
happiness but life: yet sometimes life
through death: the right hand may
have to be cut off or the right eye
plucked out. 3. We are slow to
believe that the cross of anguish can
be a tree of life.—Prof. F. J. A. Hort.

The life of religion.—1. The exercise
of self-denial infers the possession and
display of all the milder virtues. Where
this exists, there must be humility,
diffidence, self-command, respect for
authority, meekness, gentleness, good-
ness, temperance, charity. 2. The
exercise of mortification infers the
presence and exercise of all the stronger
virtues. Where this is, there must be
truth, integrity, justice, fortitude, con-
tempt of pain, fearlessness of death.
3. The imitation of Christ requires the
exercise of all those amiable graces
which constitute the life and spirit of
religion in the soul. Where that is,
there must be faith, hope, love, piety,
purity, peace, heavenly-mindedness,
devotion. In short, these duties com-
prehend all the duties of morality and
religion ; and the exercise of them is
only the discharge of some religious or
moral duty—of something that is wise,
dignified, good, and which could not
be exhibited in the same spirit with-
out their presence and power.—Z. S.
Jones, D.D.

Self-sacrifice. —That which especially
distinguishes a high order of man
from a low order of man, that which
constitutes human goodness, human
greatness, human nobleness, is surely
not the degree of enlightenment with
which men pursue their own advan-
tage; but it is self-forgetfulness, self-
sacrifice, the disregard of personal
pleasure, personal indulgence, personal
advantage remote or present, because
some other line of conduct is more right.


%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


OHAP. VIII.


a


Note the order of the three things.—
Deny self—take up cross—follow Me.
Perplexity and spiritual difficulties
often arise from a wrong order of right
things. Thus we may read the words
as if our Lord had said, “Let him
take up his cross and deny himself,”
etc. Taking up the cross may be
understood as meaning much the same
thing as denying self, which is not
correct, or we may be putting follow-
ing Christ first. But this is to miss
the chief point in this lesson. “ Let
him deny himself”—that is the main
and first direction that must be under-
stood and obeyed. We shall never
take up the cross—consent to it, and
do it willingly—until we have reached
the point of denying self. The mind,
of which self is the centre, will never
take up the cross; it may sullenly
endure to have it laid upon it, it may
put up with it as that which is in-
evitable, but it will never take it up
as an act of willing submission. But
the mind of Christ is the mind that
cheerfully yields to all that the Father
appoints.—Z. H. Hopkins.

A cross is an instrument on which
something is to be put to death.
Taking it up is not wearing an
ornament, nor even just carrying a
burden, but putting something to death.
What? Sin. Not some incarnate sin
that we can catch and bind as they
took Jesus, not some other personality,
but the sin that is in us—the love of
self, the love of the world, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life. Sin is
a desperate enemy. And to be rid of it
means thorough work, not coaxing it,
not hiding it, not forgetting it, but
putting it to death.—C. M. Southgate.

Consider your cross.—You may try,
if you like, to go through life and not
see a “cross”; or, if you like, you may
consider it; you may avoid it, or you
may meet it; you may resist, or you
may acquiesce in it; you may murmur
under it, or you may be still; you may
drag it, or you may carry it; you
may be in a hurry to lay it down, or
you may wish to wait God’s time :—
but blessed is that man who considers


‘o


his cross, and does not fly from it;
who bears it silently, cheerfully, joy-
fully, and hastens not to be rid of it,
but patiently tarries the Lord’s leisure,
To that man that “cross” is his soul’s
cure; it is the Spirit’s school; it is
the badge of his discipleship, the token
of his Heavenly Father’s love, the
road to glory, the opportunity for
all the promises, the earnest of an
eternal crown.—J. Vaughan.
The cross the way to life.—
Wouldst thou inherit life with Christ
on high ?
Then count the cost, and know
That here on earth below
Thou needs must suffer with thy Lord,
and die.
We reach that gain, to which all else
is loss,
But through the Cross !
Not e’en the sharpest sorrows we can
feel,
Nor keenest pangs, we dare
With that great bliss compare,
When God His glory shall in us reveal,
That shall endure when our brief woes
are O’er,
For evermore.—Dach.
“Follow Me.”—This implies not
merely to believe His doctrine, obey
His commandments, and trust in Him
for salvation, but also to imitate Him
in His spirit and conduct—in the holi-
ness, activity, and usefulness of His
life—in that love to God and man,
that zeal for the Divine glory, that
humility, patience, meekness, perse-
verance, and resignation with which
He did and suffered His Heavenly
Father’s will,—in consequence of
which He was exposed to hunger,
thirst, poverty, and privations, to the
contradiction of sinners, scorn of men,
stripes, imprisonment, to all the
horrors of Gethsemane and torments
of Golgotha.—7Z. S. Jones, D.D.


Ver. 35. The selfish, sinful life and
the true, spiritual life hang at opposite
ends of the scale-beam.—The dip of the
one means the ascent of the other.
Self-denial is but choosing the better ;
denying the lower is accepting the


305


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





higher. The soul cannot live in both
at once; indeed, can truly live in the
higher alone. We need only to keep
this compensation in mind to see the
excelling charm of self-denial. It is
not the bare going without something
pleasant, but giving up one attraction
for a greater.—C. M. Southgate.


Ver. 36. The worth of the soul.
—We cannot overrate our nature,
as we cannot underrate our merit ;
we cannot think too highly of
ourselves as immortals, or too humbly
of ourselves as transgressors. There
is quite as much danger in our under-
valuing our immortality, as there is
in our exaggerating our merit. In
very deed we are more prone to the
one than we are to the other; for if
self-righteousness slays its thousands,
self-neglect slays its tens of thousands.
1. The soul! that thinking, conscious,
deathless essence, which thrills and
throbs in every tenement of clay
before me and around me,—that soul!
invisible, yet perceptible; wrapped up
in the mortal, yet itself immortal ;
passing away, yet never to end :—
that soul! we argue that its worth is
immense, because its origin was most
exalted. 2. We argue the worth of
the soul from the vast capacities and
powers with which it is endowed.
What a wonderful thing is the mind
of man! How wondrous is his power
of love! how deep the bitterness of his
hate! how dark his desperation of
revenge! how insatiable and yearning
his desires! how high the inspirations
of his soul! how all the drops he
gathers from the cisterns of created
good can never slake or satisfy the
yearnings of his immortal mind! how
he still craves and longs after some-
thing higher and more pure than
earth can furnish! And, then, what
a capability it has of enjoyment!
what a capability of endurance! 3. I
argue the value of the soul still
more emphatically from its dread
immortality. There is the mysterious
attribute, compared with which all
things temporal are but shadows and


306


day-dreams, 4. I argue the worth of
the soul still more emphatically from
the fact that it was redeemed at an
untold price: it was ransomed with
the blood of God. 5. But if the worth
of the soul be so immense, the loss
of the soul must be tremendous. We
therefore argue the fearfulness of that
loss, because it involves the sacrifice
and the shipwreck of all for which
man was first created, and which
Christ has redeemed to Him by His
atoning blood—all that God can
bestow or man receive. Neither is
this all: there is not only privation of
all that is good and glorious—there is
also the endurance of God’s everlasting
anger, whose frown is death and whose
smile is life; there is the perpetual
gnawing despair of one that has made
shipwreck of his all; there is the
smouldering remorse, the worm that
never dieth.—H. Stowell.

World and soul.—l. It is impossible .
to gain the whole world, even at the
sacrifice of our soul. None but Christ
was ever tempted with such a huge
bait. 2. The soul may be lost for the
sake of securing a very infinitesimal
portion of the world: Esau, Ahab,
Judas. 3. In the ordinary course of
things such a part of the world as
is sufficient for our happiness may
be easily gained without exposing the
soul to loss (Prov. viii. 21, iii. 16,
x. 4, xxii. 29); but even were this
not so, nothing could compensate for
the loss of the soul. 4. By endeavour-
ing to gain the whole world or any
part of it at the expense of the soul,
we do not only disclaim the greatest
good or happiness, but incur and invite
the greatest evil and misery, which
is not the losing the soul absolutely,
however grievous and shocking to
nature, but the keeping it, together
with the gains and wages of sin, so as
to wish it were lost. 5. Whereas by
endeavouring to gain the whole world,
though with the loss of our souls, it is
impossible for us to gain the whole, and
we are not so certain to gain any com-
petent part of it; on the other hand,
by endeavouring to save our souls,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


though with the loss of the world, we
may not only be sure to save them,
but to save them with advantage, or
to purchase for ourselves a greater
salvation.—B. Kennet, D.D.

The world as a law of life—You
may be as ignorant and as rude in
your life as a Hottentot, and as poor
as Lazarus, and yet have gained the
world and lost your life. For this is
not merely a question of the things
which you acquire by your exchange,
it is a question of the law under which
you put yourself, of the moral quality
of the end which you seek._W. R.
Vincent, D.D.

The soul that may be lost.—A
German commentator who is usually
very diffuse tersely and truly observes
with respect to this passage, “‘ He who
will understand it does understand it.”
There is no real room for doubt as
to the meaning of our Lord’s words.
The soul which may be lost is the
very inmost seat of being ; that which
thinks in each one of us, but is not
thought; that which feels, but is not
feeling; that which remembers and is
conscious, but is neither consciousness
nor memory; that depth, that abyss
of life which we so rarely explore, yet
which is within each one of us, which
we carry everywhere with us,—the
one mystery of which perhaps we know
less than any other, and yet our very
inmost self.—Canon Liddon.

“ Tf”—What a world of meaning
there is in that little word “if”! It
suggests the fact that few, perhaps
not one in ten thousand, do gain
that portion of the world on which they
have set their heart. Many runin the
race, but only one gains the prize;
and not seldom he who bids fair to win
fails through something which we call
chance or accident.—/. W. King.


Ver. 37. A business question.—The
apostles had been men of business ;
here was a business question indeed.
They were decidedly practical, and
they were met on their own ground.
Their answer is not recorded. They
doubtless thought long and often on it.


CHAP. VIII.





Their final decision we know. They
concluded their soul was valuable
enough to justify them in giving up
their affairs to save it; in giving up
their time, ease, and indulgence to save
it ; in surrendering their repute, home,
and country to save it ; and, finally, in
laying down their life to save it.—
T. F. Crosse, D.C.L.


Ver. 38. Confessing or denying
Christ—1. Confessing or denying
Christ is certainly no mere affair of
words. Yet words, though weak, are
not worthless. Whatever worthy wit-
ness words can bear, they will not fail
to utter in any loving and thorough-
going confession of our loving Lord.
2. Confessing Christ and being con-
fessed by Christ are not to be sepa-
rated in our thought, like work-day
and pay-day, as if the confessing were
all here and the being confessed all
there. What comes out there is simply
the flash of an awakened consciousness
of a judgment of Christ which has
been going on here every day under
the eyes of the invisible witnesses of
many a negligent life. 3. Confessing
or denying Christ here is not a ques-
tion solely as to the totality or average
of character, but quite as much a
question as to the particulars of
character. Point by point the world
compares the professed copy with its
model, and recognises agreements or
contradictions in detail. No otherwise
can it be in presence of the angels of
God.— J. M. Whiton.

Conduct and character.—How does
a son of a wise and virtuous father
confess or deny him most expressively ?
Certainly not by the word which
declares the eternal relationship, not
by saying “ Father,” though he ought
to say it. Rather by conduct and
character; either by the wise and
virtuous following of parental example,
which bespeaks him as his father’s
own son, heir of his spirit as of his
name, or else by the course of folly
and vice, which denies all moral
affinity with him. So on the father’s
part; let father and son be in the


307


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


53 Pe RO a ee


same society, how does the wise and
virtuous father most effectively own
or disown the son before intelligent
observers? Certainly not by saying,
or omitting to say, “ My son”; rather
by being in the same circle with him
as an object of comparison before
observant witnesses, by the light
which the father’s character reflects
upon the son, to the son’s honour or
dishonour as the imitator or neglecter
of a noble model.—ZJbid.

On being ashamed of Jesws.—Those
who would willingly follow Jesus
where the road is smooth and easy,
but leave Him where it is rugged and
hard; who inwardly approve of His
doctrine, but from the ridicule of the
profane are ashamed to avow it; who
punctually attend the routine of wor-
ship, but dispense with the observance
of duties to which they are not com-
pelled by human laws ; who can occa-
sionally associate with the drunkard
and hear the name of God profaned
without concern ; who have no objection
to do wrong when the multitude give
their sanction; who, when unnoticed
or secure of escaping censure, can lift
the rod of oppression or receive the
wages of iniquity; who can cherish
pride, vanity, avarice, and ambition,
and yet by nice dissimulation affect
the opposite virtues; who can be


tender and partial to themselves, but
austere and cruel to others; who
perform no duty on which human
applause is not bestowed, and are
deterred from no vice which fashion
or common practice countenances ;—
men of this character, and all who
resemble them—all false Christians,
in short, who in public and private
life have not the fear and love of
God before their eyes, whatever may
be their reception from the world—
of them shall Jesus Christ be ashamed
when in transcendent glory He shall
come to judge the world. It is obvious,
then, from this climax of vice and folly,
that nothing under a sincere, uniform,
and universal obedience to the moral
law which Jesus came to fulfil will
be accepted from His followers; and
that no pretences, excuses, and pallia-
tions will avail, if this essential and
absolutely necessary condition be not
complied with.—A. Stirling, LL.D.

Adulterous generation—not because
the particular sin of adultery was so
frequent in that age, but because by
every kind of sin a man under the
contract of religion runs into that
character wherewith Solomon describes
the adulteress, who ‘forsaketh the
guide of her youth, and forgetteth the
covenant of her God” (Jas. iv. 4).—
Dean Young.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VIII.


Ver. 2. Compassion for the needy.—King
Oswald of Northumbria accompanied the
monk Aidan in his long missionary journeys
as interpreter. One day, as he feasted with
the monk by his side, the thane, or noble of
his war-band, whom he had set to give alms
to the poor at his gate, told him of a
multitude that still waited fasting without.
The king at once bade the untasted meat
before him be carried to the poor, and his
silver dish be divided piecemeal among
.them. Aidan seized the royal hand and
blessed it. “May this hand,” he cried,
“never grow old!”


Ver. 4, “ From whence ?”—That .question
may be asked of us. Who cando this? Not
the cleverest or most powerful man living.
The man of science can do much. He can
open the fields of sky to our -gaze with a


308


telescope, and shew us other worlds than
ours. He can make steam his slave, and
compel it to bear the ship from one side of
the world to the other. He can seize upon
electricity and make it carry a message at his
bidding. But the greatest man of science
cannot make an ear of corn grow, nor an
apple blossom swell into fruit. Kings can
make laws to take away life, but they cannot
give life, nor cause it to rain upon the earth,
nor make the fields bring forth their in-
crease. “From whence can a man satisfy
these men with bread?” From whence?
From heaven. And the one Man who can
do this is the Man Christ Jesus, the God
Christ Jesus.—H. J. Wilmot Buxton.


Ver. 11. Asking a sign.—Two striking
instances from Rabbinic literature will shew
that-this demand .of the Pharisees was in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIII.


er


accordance with their notions and practice.
We read that, when a certain Rabbi was
asked by his disciples about the time of
Messiah’s coming, he replied, “I am afraid
that you will also ask me for a sign.” When
they promised they would not do so, he told
them that the gate of Rome would fall and
be rebuilt, and fall again, when there would
not be time to restore it ere the Son of
David came. On this they pressed him,
despite his remonstrance, for “a sign,”
when this was given them—that the waters
which issued from the cave of Paneias were
turned into blood. Again, as regards “a
sign from heaven,” it is said that Rabbi
Eliezer, when his teaching was challenged,
successively appealed to certain “signs.”
First, a locust tree moved at his bidding
one hundred, or, according to some, four
hundred, cubits. Next, the channels of
water were made to flow backwards; then
the walls of the Academy leaned forward,
and were only arrested at the bidding of
another Rabbi. Lastly, Eliezer exclaimed,
“Tf the law is as I teach, let it be proved
from heaven!” when a voice fell from the
sky, “What have ye to do with Rabbi
Eliezer ? for the Halakhah is as he teaches.”


Ver. 12. Difficult to explain truth to un-
spiritual people.—If a man paints a picture
on canvas, gorgeous in colour as Titian
could make it, and then gathers together
a multitude of spectators, it is useless for
him to undertake to explain to them that
the colours are exquisite, and the reasons
why they are so. If, as they stand and look
at it, one, in behalf of the others, should
ask, “ Will you be kind enough to prove to
us that those are exquisite colours?” he
would say, probably with expletives, “If
you cannot yourselves see what they are,
I cannot explain it to you.” If you play
a magnificent overture to an audience, some
of them say, “I would rather hear a ballad
than that thing.” Others have an apprecia-
tion of it. Men only hear what they are
capable of hearing. Some men’s ears enable
them to appreciate only the lowest elements
of music; and when the better parts are
developed, these are nothing to them. If
they do not like a beautiful symphony, they
do not, and that is all you can say about it.
It is not in them to like it. The eye
cannot see anything which it is not organised
to see. Tyndall shewed us that light,
besides containing all those qualities which
we supposed it contained, also had in it
chemical qualities which no sense of ours
could trace or comprehend. It was the
first intimation I had that the universe is
full of things which we are not organised to
appreciate. Precisely this was implied by
Christ when He said, substantially, to His
adversaries, the educated people of His day
who denied that He was Divine: “If you


were spiritually enlightened, you would recog.
nise My high claim; you would perceive in
My life and disposition the qualities of
Divinity ; and if you do not perceive them,
it is because you have not the requisite
perceiving power. The proof must always
lie in the person who is reasoned with; and
you have not the moral faculty which is
necessary to enable you to discern it.”—
H. W. Beecher.


Vers. 22-25. Sight obscured by the trivial.
—A silk thread stretched across the glass
of the telescope will entirely cover a star,
although as large as our sun. {So there are
some whose sight of the heavenly world is
entirely obscured by what is infinitely little
compared with the life of the world to
come. Richardson, the blind man, used to
say of his conversion, “I could never see
till I was blind.” The great Earl of Chatham
once went with a friend to hear Mr. Cecil
preach. The sermon was on the Spirit’s
agency in the hearts of believers. As they
were coming from church, the great states-
man confessed that he could not understand
it at all, and asked his friend if he supposed
that any one present did. ‘ Why, yes,” said
he, “there were many plain, unlettered
women, and some children there, who un-
derstood every word of it, and heard it
with joy.”


Ver. 27. A striking coincidence.—If we.
are right in identifying the little bay—-
Dalmanutha—with the neighbourhood of
Taricheea, yet another link of strange co-
incidence connects the prophetic warning
spoken there with its fulfilment. From
Dalmanutha our Lord passed across the
lake to Ceesarea Philippi. From Czsarea
Philippi did Vespasian pass through Tiberias
to Tarichea, when the town and people were
destroyed, and the blood of the fugitives
reddened the lake, and their bodies choked
its waters. Even amidst the horrors of the
last Jewish war few spectacles could have
been so sickening as that of the wild stand
at Tarichea, ending with the butchery of
6,500 on land and sea, and lastly the vile
treachery by which they to whom mercy
had been promised were lured into the
circus at Tiberias, when the weak and old, to
the number of about 1,200, were slaughtered,
and the rest—upwards of 30,400—sold into
slavery. Well might He who foresaw and
foretold that terrible end, standing on that
spot, deeply sigh in spirit as He spake to
them who asked “a sign,” and yet saw not
what even ordinary discernment might have
perceived of the red and lowering sky over-
head.—A. Hdersheim, D.D.





Ver. 29. Comprehensive news of Christ.—
Many have at one-time or other felt the
charm of a Christ who is purely human, but


309


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE.


¥
\
—- —


a a Se ee


not Divine. Our literature abounds at present
with such pictures, and some of them are
very fascinating. The Peasant of Nazareth,
growing up beneath His mother’s roof and
in the carpenter’s workshop ; the enthusiastic
Lover of the poor and oppressed, who went
about continually doing good; the pure and
fearless Reformer, who blasted with the
lightning of His eloquence the Pharisee and
the priest; the Martyr, who died for the
truth, and lies buried beneath the Syrian
blue,—this picture is being sketched by
clever littérateurs; it is impossible not to
enjoy it; and you ask, Why does this win
me more than the Christ I hear of in
church? The latter perplexes me with
mystery, but this is simple, human, lovable.
It is not, I think, difficult to explain this.
If you know music, and have ever endea-
voured to follow and grasp a long and
classical composition of a great master, say,
an oratorio of Handel or Haydn, I am sure
you can remember in it a few airs and
choruses which, if separated from the whole
and executed by themselves, would produce
far more immediate pleasure than the whole
elaborate composition. Indeed, there are
audiences which could not tolerate the
oratorio as a whole, but would be delighted
with its selected beauties. Yet, though these
lovely morsels are enchanting, they are not
Handel. Or, do you know literature? If
you know your Browning, you must be aware
how charming it is, after struggling through
his more difficult pages, to light on a lyric
here and there which is perfectly easy read-
ing. Selections of these find their way even
into school books, and many readers can
enjoy selections from this great author who
recoil from his longer and more difficult
works. But though these elegant extracts
are delightful, they are not Browning. In
the same way these pictures of a merely
human Christ are true as far as they go;
they are the simpler traits selected from
that great character and life; they are easy
to comprehend, and they touch the feelings ;
but they are not Christ. At first sight that
way of thinking of Christ as a great and
good man appears to make everything
simple; but it really involves you in con-
fusion and contradiction, For what is it
you hold Him to be? He is, you say, the
jdeal man—the model of modesty, wisdom,
and truth. If He was merely a link in the
chain of humanity, then, as a weak and
fallible man, He ought to have confessed
His own sins, and He was a blasphemer
when He spoke of giving His life a ransom
for many. When He said, “All power is
given unto Me in heaven and on earth,”
and promised to be with His people always,
even to the end of the world, He was not
a wise man, but the victim of a madman’s
delusions. When He, a finite creature, spoke
of Himself as seated on God’s throne and


310


judging the assembled world, He was no
model of goodness and modesty, but a man
rendered insane with pride, who was pre-
suming to pluck the sceptre from the hands
of the Eternal. If He who said, “Come
unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest, had not
the peace and joy of salvation to give to
those who come to hide their guilty heads
in His bosom, then He was cruelly deceiving
us all.—Jas. Stalker, D.D.

A large Christ eaperienced.—Payson, when
he lay on his bed dying, said: “ All my life
Christ has seemed to me asa star afar off;
but little by little He has been advancing
and growing larger and larger, till now His
beams seem to fill the whole hemisphere,
and I am floating in the glory of God,
wondering with unutterable wonder how
such a mote as I should be glorified in His
light.” But he came to that after a long
life.


Ver. 33. We all have our Satans—each
one of us a different Satan. Satan comes to
one man in the form of idleness, and makes
him waste day after day, year after year,
until he has wasted his whole life doing
nothing. Satan comes to another man as
work, and makes him destroy himself in the
opposite way by wearing out prematurely
his brain and his body. He comes to
another as Christian zeal, and the man be-
comes a bigot, full of fire for the Lord; but
the Lord whom he serves is a God of wrath,
a God who cares for trifles, a God who pre-
fers sacrifice tomercy. He comes to another
as charity, but it is a charity which tolerates
evil, and lets it alone, which has no edge to
it, no courage—an indolent charity which
is not love at all, but only easy good-nature.
So he disguises himself as an angel of light,
calling himself Patriotism when he wishes
to make nations hate each other; calling
himself Christianity when he wishes to make
men persecute each other; calling himself
Honesty when he wishes to encourage a man
in his rude and overbearing ways; and so
on, changing himself into every virtue and
every grace.—dJ. F, Clarke.


Ver. 34. To take up one’s cross was a pro-
verbial expression, both with the Jews and
Romans, for any extraordinary sufferings,
and it is probable they had it from the
Persians, who made use of that form of
punishment.—7Z. J. Montefiore.

The symbol of the cross.—It is strange, yet
well authenticated, and has given rise to
many speculations, that the symbol of the
cross was already known to the Indians before
the arrival of Cortez. Among the Egyptians
a cross was the emblem of a future life. In
O’Brien’s Round Towers of Ireland there are
some curious remarks on the cross. The use
of it in some way by the Druids is noticed.


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIII.


SE


To take, not make, our cross.—We are bid
to take, not to make, our cross. God in His
providence will provide one for us. And we
are bid to take it wp; we hear nothing of
laying it down. Our troubles and our lives
live and die together— W. Gurnail,

The spirit of the Christian soldier,—When
Garibaldi entered on one of his campaigns,
he told his troops what he wanted of them.
They replied, “ Well, General, and what are
you going to give us for all this?” He
replied, ‘I don’t know what also you will
get, but you will get hunger, cold, wounds,
and perhaps death.” They stood awhile
considering, and then, throwing up their
arms, exclaimed, ‘We are the men!” This
is the spirit Christ looks for in His soldiers.

The spell of example.—There is, we know,
a wonderful spell in the cry, “Come after
Me,” “Follow Me.” All history, profane
as well as sacred, has shewn this. The great
Roman general realised its force when he
called to his soldiers, who shrank from the
hardships of the Libyan desert, and pro-
mised to go before them, and to command
them nothing which he would not first do
himself. Even so Christ designed to help
His followers by the assurance that He
should first suffer that which they would be
called to bear.

Predominance of the cross.—Describing
the artistic glories of the Church of St.
Mark at Venice, Mr. Ruskin savs: “ Here
are all the successions of crowded imagery,
shewing the passions and the pleasures of
human life symbolised together, and the
mystery of its redemption: for the maze of
interwoven lines and changeful pictures
lead always at last to the cross, lifted and
carved in every place and upon every stone ;
sometimes with the serpent of eternity
wrapped round it, sometimes with doves
beneath its arms, and sweet herbage growing
forth from its feet; but conspicuous most
of all on the great rood that crosses the
church before the altar, raised in bright
blazonry against the shadow of the apse. It
is the cross that is first seen and always
burning in the centre of the temple; and
every dome and hollow of its roof has the
figure of Christ in the utmost height of it,
raised in power, or returning in judgment.”

Christ’s cross is the sweetest burden that
ever I bore; it is such a burden as wings
are to a bird, or sails to a ship, to carry me
forward to my harbour.—S. Rutherford.

The figure of the cross.—My will is repre-
sented well by a straight line thus,
running from birth to death in unbroken
current through the flesh and the world in
all manner of self-indulgence unto the hidden
abyss. God’s will is represented by a per-
pendicular | thus, falling from heaven like
a bolt of thunder. The two wills meet, and
form the figure of the + thus. It cuts me,
severs me, hinders me, clogs me, compels





me; but Thy will, O God, saves me. That
cross means the life and death of the Son
of God. “For me,” therefore, “to live is
Christ, and to die is gain.”

Christ the Leader.—When Hedley Vicars
fell at the head of his regiment during a
night attack of the Russians, his voice was
heard ringing out on the night air over the
din of the conflict with the cry, “ This way,
Ninety-seventh.” A hundred “goes” would
be weak in comparison with the “come”
involved in that battle-cry. In all the cross-
bearing of life the voice of the Captain of
our salvation is still heard in the van, saying,
“This way, Mv disciple.”

Following Christ im self-denial.—A little
girl was instructed by her parents in what
Christ had taught, and how He lived, and
that through Him we must enter into eternal
life. When she heard these things, she
became dissatisfied with her native land,
and pressed her parents to be taken to that
land where men lived as Christ had taught
them, and as He lived. Her parents replied
that she was then in a Christian land, and
that those around her were Christians,
and were living so. She shook her head
and said, “ That I cannot believe, for those
I see around me neither live as Christ
taught nor as Christ lived; for Christ was
voluntarily poor, we love gold and silver;
He was humble and lowly, but we affect
dominion and greatness; He was always in
affliction, we hunt for carnal pleasures.”
What cutting truths from infant lips!


Ver. 35. Gain by loss —The most impor-
tant use of aseed is that which results in the
reproduction of its species ; but in order that
it may serve this high purpose, it must lose
itself as a seed, must suffer the disintegration
of its structure, and give up its elements
for the production of new forms of life.
The seed must, as it were, lose all thought of
itself, must give up its own life, its own separ-
ate existence, and allow itself to be converted
into new and productive forms of vegetation.
A grain of corn stored away in the granary
is of small account. To be of any use in
the world it must be either ground to powder
and made into bread for the eater, or be
planted in the ground and transmuted by
the joint action of the wonderful forces
locked up within itself and those lodged
in the soil around it, into a green and grow-
ing stalk which shall in due time bear fruit
to nourish human life and bless the world.
It is only one illustration of a great law
prevalent in all the universe of God. Help-
fulness to others is attained through sacrifice
of self.

The reward of self-sacrifice—A group of
firemen sat in their engine house to hold
their anniversary. They have invited in the
“veterans.” They eat—they remember.
Which is the keenest delight, the memory


31t


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee


of the terrible eight-and-forty hours in
which you played the hero, carrying the
nozzle through the doorway from which a
hundred citizens had shrunk dismayed, or
the present banquet? The pleasure of heroic
deeds, or--a piece of pie? Yet here is all the
difference between noble and ignoble men.
When wr come to think of it, self-sacrifice
has its cwn high reward. But observe how
slow we are to win it with the denial of an
appetite. The cross of Christ is no esoteric
secret. It inheres in the constitution of
things, even the commonest things.—Z. J.
Haynes.

Lost.—I remember being one winter’s
night in a little town on the coast of Wales.
We were sitting by the fire, cheerful, when
we heard a sudden noise. We looked out
into the night. The wind was very high,
and suddenly we heard the scream of voices,
then the boom of guns over the water ; then
the clatter of feet along the street, the life-
boat, and the lifebuoy. Human life in
danger. We thought we descried a dark
mass heaving over the black billows, but
the breakers carried her away. That night
she struck on the rocks. I walked down in
the morning to look at her lying on the
beach. I could not help saying, ‘ How
human this is! how lifelike!” There she
lay, the pride and hope of her owners—
stripped; masts, sails, shrouds, broken,
ragged, torn—gone. And yet much had
depended on her. She had been launched
with many hopes and expectations. All
gone, a melancholy wreck. The winds
howled through as they lifted her ragged
shrouds. She could not, as once she might
have done, repel them, and make them her
ministers. She was a lost ship. Melancholy
type of a lost soul.— #. Paxton Hood.


Ver. 36. Gained, but not possessed.—A
people may gain the whole world, and lose
all those qualities of the head and heart
which entitle them to possess it. May we
not say of ancient Rome that she gained
the whole world and lost her soul? Just
as the tale of her conquests was almost
complete, yet ere the Roman. eagles were
firmly planted on the Euphrates and on the
Danube the soul of the old republic had
departed. The temperance, courage, justice,
patriotism, of the earlier Romans had died
out; and while, in the intoxication of her
victories, Rome grasped with one hand the
sceptre of the world, she surrendered the
liberties and lives of her citizens to the
lusts and tyranny of the Cwsars with
the other. A people may have been civil-
ised, in the material sense of the word, for
centuries, while it remains at heart and for
ever barbarian, In ages when our ancestors
were mere savages Chinese society was as
highly organised, Chinese life as highly
embellished, as at the present day. Yet


312


no primitive race was ever capable of the
extraordinary cruelties which are now of
daily occurrence in China ; and the dignity
and the rights of man are nowhere treated
with such lofty scorn as in those tribunals
which are presided over by the passionless
scepticism of a Chinese mandarin. Without
a ray of moral life, without a soul, that
vast and ancient empire exists as if that it
may exhibit to Christendom the worthless-
ness and feebleness of mere material pro-
gress. Yet Pagan empires are no measure
of the degradation of which Christian
peoples are capable when they sacrifice
truth and goodness in an attempt to gain
the world. When during the first French
Revolution divine honours were paid to one
of the daughters of shame, throned on the
high altar of the cathedral church of Paris,
while the streets of that brilliant capital
were deluged with the best blood of its
citizens, men read God’s doom upon a noble
people, bent fiercely for the moment upon
spiritual suicide and upon material aggran-
disement. And when we hear daily of the
gigantic miseries inflicted and endured by
a nation which but yesterday was a British
colony, we may reflect that there are dangers
against which no institutions or races can
be guaranteed, and that we ourselves have
our weaknesses and our temptations. My
countrymen, I do not dispute your pre-
eminence; you are unquestionably the
princes of commerce, you reign without a
rival over the realm of matter: but have
you lost, or are you losing, that which is
more precious than any acquisitions of your
industry or of your genius—are you be-
coming the slaves of matter instead of its
masters? Beneath the surface of many
an advanced civilisation the human brute
crouches, he scarcely slumbers, with the old
untamed ferocity of his savage nature; and
not merely the accumulations of your capital,
but the creations of your science, your new
projectiles, your rifled cannon, and your iron-
clad steam vessels, may but enable the
nation which has gained the world to prove
one day how much she has really lost in
gaining it— Canon Liddon.

The world unsatisfying.—Alexander the
Great overran the whole earth, and subdued
every nation; and at the conclusion of
universal victory he sat down and wept like
a child because he had not another world to
conquer. We read also of a Roman emperor
who had run the round of all the pleasures
in the world offering a rich reward to any
one who should discover a new pleasure.
Cyrus the conqueror thought that for a
little time he was making a fine thing out
of this world; yet before he came to his
grave he wrote out this pitiful epitaph for
his monument : “Iam Cyrus. I occupied the
Persian Empire. I was King over Asia, Be-
grudge me not thismonument.” But theworld


HOMILETIC COMMEN TARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. VIIt.


Saas ce ee SS RY


in after-years ploughed up bis sepulchre.
Pope Adrian VI. had this inscription on his
monument: “ Here lies Adrian VI., who was
never so unhappy in any period of his life
as at that in which he was a prince.” « AI
sinful wretch, by the grace of God, King of
England and of France, and Lord of Treland,
bequeath to Almighty God my sinful soul
and the life I have misspent, whereof I put
myself wholly at His grace and mercy ”—so
wrote Henry IV. in his last will, when the
frightful reality of leprosy bad disenchanted
the rapturous dream of usurpation. Queen
Elizabeth, dying, cried: * Millions of money
for an inch of time!” Was the gay queen
happy? The history of kings and queens
proves that though their crowns may be
“set with diamonds or Indian stones,” the
kings and queens themselves but seldom
enjoy the crown of content which is worn
upon the heart. The world clapped its
hands and stamped its feet in honour of
Charles Lamb. Was he happy? He says:
“T walk up and down, tiinking I am happy,
but feeling I am not.” Samuel Johnson,
happy? “No. I am afraid I shall some
day get crazy.” Buchanan, the world-re-
nowned writer, exiled from his own country,


appealing to Henry VIII. for protection, -


happy? “No. Over mountains covered with
snow, and through valleys flooded with rain,
I come a fugitive.” ‘Indeed, my lord,”
wrote famous Edmund Burke, “I doubt
whether, in these hard times, I would give
a peck of refuse wheat for all that is called
fame in the world.” “Sweet,” says the
poet, “sweet were the days when I was all
unknown ;

But when my name was lifted up, the

storm

Broke on the mountain, and I cared not

for it.”

Man’s soul thirsts and longs for some-
thing nobler, brighter, greater, and better
than the world itself. As Macduff says:
“ As well try to fill the yawning chasm with
a few grains of sand as satisfy the gulf of
the soul’s desires with the pleasures of an
empty world.” Nothing can satisfy the soul
but God.

A revealing light—A traveller who crosses
the Alps by night sees only a foot or two
before him; and he is as little alive to the
extraordinary scene through which he is
passing, to the beauties which encompass
and to the risks which beset his path, as if
he were walking quietly along the turnpike
road from London to Cambridge. But as
the early dawn breaks upon him, be becomes
aware of those mountain pinnacles which
tower above him till they hide their snow-
capped summits in the very clouds of heaven;
he sees the precipice which yawns at his
very feet; he becomes conscious of dangers
of which he had previously no idea; and he
4s grateful to the morning light which cer-


tainly has discovered to him a vision of
unsuspected beauty, and which probably has
saved him from an untimely death. And
what is the question of our Blessed Lord in
the text, but the very light of heaven itself,
bringing out into sharp relief the real con-
ditions of our personal existence !

The north of a sowl.—We know the force
and majesty of the thoughts of Pascal. The
realms of space and the worlds in them are
full of grandeur in his philosophy; but there
is one thing compared with which all this
vast material universe is nothing. “All the
bodies, the stars, the firmament, the earth
and all its kingdoms, are not worth one
soul; for that soul knows both itself and
them, and they know nothing.”

The soul the chief concern—When the
steamer London was lost some years ago
on the English coast, among the many sad
tales told in connexion with the shipwreck,
I recollect reading of one in some respects
the saddest of all. When the condition of
the ship was hopeless, one of the passengers
had gone down to his cabin, which was
already under water, and had with some
difficulty found his trunk, which he had
carried up to the deck. The captain, who
was standing by, waiting in silence for the
inevitable catastrophe, shook his head as he
saw what the poor man had done. He had
saved his trunk; his life would be gone in
a moment.

What then?—An aged Christian once
asked a young man who was just entering
business and laying out his plans for life,
“What are you going todo? Youare about


to settle in business, I understand.” “Yes.”
“And what do you intend then?” ‘“T shall
marry.” “And what then?” “I hope to


make a fortune.” “And what then?” “TI
shall enter public life.” “And what then?”
“T hope that I may make a family reputa-
tion.” “And what then?” “Well, 1 sup,
pose I shall grow old and die.” “And what
then?” The young man was silent. He
had never looked so far ahead.

The legend of Ninws.—There is a legend
of Ninus, the monarch of Assyria, that he
had an ocean of gold.and riches more than
the sand of the Caspian Sea, but that he
never offered sacrifice, nor worshipped God,
nor administered justice—in a word, he spent
a life of selfishness and indulgence with
no sense of accountability to God or man.
“This man is dead,” says the old chronicler.
“Behold his sepulchre ; and now hear where
Ninus is” (he is supposed to be speaking
from his tomb). “Sometime I was Ninus
and drew the breath of a living man, but
now I am nothing but clay; I have nothing
but what I served to myself in lust—that
was and is all my portion. The wealth with
which I was blessed mine enemies shall
bear away. I am gone to Tartarus, and
when I went thither I neither carried gold


AI3


CHAP. VIII.








nor horse nor chariot. I that wore a crown
am now a little heap of dust.”

Not much left.—lt is said of Saladin, also
called the Great, that just before he gave
his last sigh he called the herald who had
carried his banner before him in all his
battles, and commanded him to fasten to
the top of a lance the shroud in which he
was so soon to be buried. ‘ Go,” said he,
“unfurl the banner, and whilst you lift up
this standard proclaim, ‘Saladin tle miguty
monarch is gone, and has taken no more
with him than what you see.’”

As in life, so in death.—There is a story
of one that, being often reproved for his
ungodly and vicious life, and exhorted to re-
pentance, would still answer that it was but
saying three words at his death, and he was
sure to be saved. Perhaps the three words
he meant were, Miserere mei Deus (“ God,
have mercy on me”). But one day riding
over a bridge, his horse stumbled, and both
were falling into the river, when in the
moment of that precipitation he only cried,
Capiat omnia diabolus (“Horse and man
and all to the devil”). Three words he had,
but not such as he should have had. He
had been so familiar with the devil all his
life that he thinks of none else at his death,
Thus it usually is, that a wicked life hath
a wicked end. He that travels the way of
hell all his lifetime, it is impossible in the
end of the journey he should arrive at heaven.
A worldly man dies rather thinking of his
gold than his God Some die jeering, some
raging; some in one distemper, some in
another way. They lived so, and so they die.

Crushed by gold—When Rome was be-
sieged, it is said of the daughter of its ruler
that she saw the golden bracelets on the
arms of the enemy, and sent word to them
tha: she would betray her city and deliver
t into their hands if they would give her
sheir bracelets. They readily accepted her
proposition, and before sunset the daughter
had secretly opened one of the gates to the
city, and as the enemy entered they threw
upon her their golden bracelets, and also
their shields, until the great weight crushed
her to death. How many poor souls to-day
are striving to gain that which will in the end
prove the means of their soul’s destruction |

Much lost for little—When Lysimachus
was engaged in a war with the Gete, he
was so tormented by thirst that he offered
his kingdom to his enemies for permission
to quench it. His exclamation, when he
kad drunk the water with which they fur-
nished him, is striking. “Ah, wretched me,
who for such a momentary gratification
have lost so great a kingdom!” How ap-
plicable is this to the case of those who for
the momentary pleasures of sin part with
the kingdom of heaven!

The folly of sacrificing eternity to time.—
When Sir Thomas More was in prison, his


314





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee aaa


wife and children entreated him to yield to
the king. “For so many years,” said his
wife, “we might yet live together: why then
can you, in the flower of your age, bring
yourself and our family to the worst mis-
fortunes?” ‘How many years,” said he,
“do you suppose I can yet live?” “At least
twenty,” said she. “What a foolish ex-
change,” exclaimed the Chancellor, “for
twenty years of life here below, and very
likely not so much, that I should give up
life eternal and condemn myself to endless
torments! Better lose all than my soul: ‘for
what does it profit a man to gain the whole
world and lose his soul ?’”


Ver, 37. The value of a soul.—It was doubt-
less when standing in full view of the niched
rock cut by Greeks for the idol Pan, face
to face with the lustrous marble temple to
“divine Augustus ” of the Romans at Caesarea
Philippi, that Christ said, “ What shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?” To
Him belonged this costly adoration, squan-
dered at the feet of idols; and He is a
jealous God. There before His very eyes
were the tokens of a false love. Jealousy
in the purest woman’s heart, at sight of love-
tokens bestowed upon another which were
rightfully her own, is a severe, a biting
thing, killing the one, or the two, or the
three. Observe how poor and inadequate a
thing is our English word “jealousy” with
which to portray the Divine emotion. Our
Blessed Lord laments over the value of a
soul whose devotion is snatched from Him-
self ; loves it all the more; condemns it with
the unspeakable condemnation of wounded
love ; asks, “Once lost, what shall man give
in exchange, to get it back again?”’ His
“jealousy ” drives Him to the Cross, that
He may win His own again—the love of a
priceless human soul, Let human jealousy
learn a lesson. Lift yourself up on a cross,
that you may draw unto yourself the heart
you think you have lost.—Z. J. Haynes.


Ver. 38. Confession of Christ—tIn his
Confessions St. Augustine relates a story
of Victorinus, an eminent man at Rome,
who had won the respect of a large number
of his countrymen, among whom were many
heathen. When the Spirit of God dawned
upon his heart, and the light of Christ therein
shone, he went direct to one of his friends,
and told him that he was a Christian. The
friend replied, “I will never believe it until
Isee you openly profess your new faith in
the church.” This text came to him with
such force that he went back with his friend,
and boldly and openly confessed Christ as
his Saviour.

Confession of Christ—A Roman emperor
said to a Greek architect, “Build me a
colosseum, a grand colosseum, and if it suits
me I will crown you in the presnnce of all


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX.





the people, and I will make a great day of
festival on your account.” The architect
did his work—did it magnificentiy, planned
the building, and looked after its construc-
tion, The building was finished, the opening
day arrived, the emperor and the architect
were in the colosseum. Amid loud cheers the
emperor arose and announced that the day
was set apart in honour of the Greek architect,
and everything must be done to his honour.
“Let us make merry and enjoy ourselves;
bring out those Christians, and let us see
the lions destroy them.” A group of im-
prisoned Christians were led forth, and a
number of half-starved lions turned loose
among them. They were soon devoured,
and the architect slowly arose, and in a
firm though gentle voice said, “I too ama
Christian.”” The howling mob seized him
and flung him to the fierce beasts, who soon
tore his limbs from his body. This is con-
fession, true and undefiled. It is easy enough
to confess Christ before our own Church and
friends, but do we confess Him among those
that revile Him? Do we go among men
‘that despise His precepts, and by our very
life tell of Him? If we do not, we do not
do our duty as His followers.

Confession of Christ unknown to nominal
Christians.—A Hindoo of rank was troubled
in his conscience on the subject of a future
state. He had heard of Christians, and
longed to converse with them about their
religion, and to know who Christ was. So
he visited England, the Christians’ land,
supplied with introductions to some leading
people. Being asked to a great dinner, he
turned to his neighbour in the course of
conversation, and said, “Can you tell me
something about Christ, the founder of your
religion?” “Hush,” replied his new ao-


quaintance, “ we do not speak of such things
at dinner-parties.” Subsequently he was
invited to a large ball. Dancing with a
young and fashionable lady, he took an
opportunity of asking her who the founder
of her religion, Jesus Christ, was. And again
he was warned that a ball was no place to
introduce such subjects, Strange, thought
the Hindoo, are these Christians in England.
They will not speak of their religion, nor
inform me about Christ, its founder.

Wo silent partners.—“ 1 come, sir,” said a
business man to a minister of the gospel,
“to ask if Jesus Christ will take me into
the firm as a silent partner.” The reply
was, “ Jesus Christ takes no silent partners ;
the firm must be ‘Jesus Christ & Co.,’ and
the names of the ‘Co.,’ though they may
occupy a subordinate place, must all be
written out on the signboard.”

Power of confession.—In relating his ex-
perience during the Peninsular War, Captain
Watson says: ‘I was nominated to sit on a
garrison court-martial. A number of officers
of different ranks and regiments were present
on the occasion, and before the proceedings
commenced some of them indulged in loose
and sceptical observations. ‘Alas,’ thought
I, ‘here are many not ashamed to speak
openly for their master, and shall I hold my
peace and refrain when the honour and
cause of Him who has had mercy on me are
called in question?’ I looked for wisdom
and assistance from on high, and I was
enabled to speak for a quarter of an hour
in a way that astonished my hearers and
myself, The Lord was pleased to give what
I said a favourable reception, and not an-
other improper word was uttered by them
during my stay in that room,”





CHAPTER IX,


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 2. Transfigured—aA strong word, implying that the change was not due to any


external influence, but proceeded from Christ’s own inner being.
Lord remained the same, the fashion of that form underwent a change.


“ While the form of our
His whole sacred


Person seemed to be living with light—light flashing outward from within, and rendering
luminous and bright in unspeakable glory His face and form and dress.” (

Ver. 3. Omit as snow. The Evangelists seem to vie with one another in their efforts to
depict the splendour and brilliancy of this “golden link in the iron chain that bound our


Lord’s career.”
2 Pet. i. 16.


Cp. Matt. xvii. 2; Luke ix. 29: see also John i. 14; 1 John i. 1;


Ver. 12. See R.V. for punctuation. Set at nought.—Treated as a nonentity. ‘

Ver. 31. Is delivered.—TZs being delivered. The last stage of His ministry, which was
to culminate in His threefold “ delivery ”—the Father’s surrender of the Son, the Son’s
surrender of Himself, and His betrayal by Judas—had now set in.


315


cuap. 1x.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.
a Se


Ver. 35. If any man desire,—Jf any one wishes, as chap. viii. 34.

Vers. 42-47. Offend.— Lay a trap for. See on chap. vi. 3.

Ver. 42. It is better for him.—.A happy thing it is for him rather, Cp. 1 Cor. ix. 15.

Vers. 44, 46. Probably spurious.

Ver. 47. Hell fire.—The Gehenna. “The Ravine of Hinnom,” also called “ Topheth ”
(2 Kings xxiii. 10; Isa. xxx. 33), is described in Josh. xviii, 16 as on the south of Mount
Zion. Total length a mile anda half. A deep retired glen, shut in by rugged cliffs, bleak
mountain-sides rising over all. Scene of barbarous rites of Molech and Chemosh in times
of Ahaz and Manasseh (2 Kings xvi. 3 ; 2 Chron, xxviii. 3; Jer. vii, 31); in consequence of
which it was polluted by Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 10, 13, 14); from which time it seems to
have become the common cesspool of the city. These inhuman rites and subsequent cere-
monial defilements caused the later Jews to regard it with horror and detestation, and they
applied the name given to the valley to the place of torment.— G. F. Maclear, D.D.


Ver. 48. Quoted from Isa. lxvi. 24. The words are not to be taken to mean more here


than they do there.

Ver, 49. Salted with fire—Explanatory of the words immediately preceding. Hither
here on earth, or else hereafter in the Gehenna, all the impurities and imperfections of our
fallen nature must be burnt out by the cleansing fires of discipline and chastisement, in
order that we may become an acceptable sacrifice unto God, Salted with salt.—It is Divine
grace alone—and not in any sense our own merits—that makes us “a reasonable, holy,
and lively sacrifice.” This second clause of ver. 49 is probably an early marginal gloss.

Ver. 50. Here there seems to be a transition of thought from the Divine Source to the
human receptacles of grace. Our Lord is speaking to “ the twelve” (ver. 35), whom He
has already styled, as His disciples, “the salt of the earth” (Matt. v.13), He now warns
them against the tendency to factiousness and self-seeking, which, if indulged, will thwart
all their efforts to purify the world, And then He winds up, “ Entertain among yourselves
the spiritual salt of self-repression and self-discipline, and be at peace with one another.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 2—13,
(PARALLELS: Marr. xvii. 1-13; Luxe ix. 28-36.)


The Transfiguration—Unlike other prominent events in Christ’s life, the
Transfiguration finds no place in the ordinary cycle of art representations in the
early Church. It is represented emblematically in mosaics of the sixth and
eight centuries, but it was reserved for Raphael’s genius to portray it ina
worthy manner. His noble picture in the Vatican was the apotheosis of his
art; but death snatched the brush from his hand before it was finished, as if
Providence would teach us that no human art or genius, tongue or pen, can
sufficiently and completely portray that sublime spectacle.

I. The scene.—It was when the Master was in the neighbourhood of Cesarea
Philippi, far away in the north of Palestine, that the event occurred. To any
one visiting the spot, and seeing the stupendous form of snowy Hermon rising
before him, till its summit has left the valley eleven thousand feet below, it
appears almost certain, it is said, that this was the high mountain to which the
Saviour led His chosen disciples. Through a scene of surpassing loveliness
they wend their way. At every step the prospect expands, till at length a
glorious panorama opens before them, “‘ embracing a great part of Syria, from
the sea to Damascus, from the Lebanon and the gorge of the Litany to the
mountains of Moab; or down the Jordan valley to the Dead Sea; or over
Galilee and Samaria, and on to Jerusalem,” all bathed in the splendours of the
setting sun. But these sunset glories presently fade. Night falls, The stars
one by one shine forth. The moon rises in silvery radiance, reflected back in
dazzling beauty from the broad patches of snow on the mountain-side. And
now we see Jesus bowed in prayer in the moonlight, His disciples praying with
Him a short distance apart, till, overcome by fatigue, they sink in slumber,
But what sudden light is that which bursts forth upon the scene, hiding by its
dazzling brilliancy all the glories of the moonlit night? The disciples are


316


MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SY. MARK. CHAP. Ix,


eo SSsS—seeesese


wakened by the splendour, and their astonished eyes behold a marvellous sight.
Jesus is transfigured before them. His face shines with the brightness of the
noonday sun; His raiment is white and glistering ; and as they gaze in a
transport of awe, behold! two shining forms appear with Him in glory, whom
they, by the intuition which is given to the spirit in moments of ecstasy,
recognise to be none other than Moses and Elias. The apostles gaze in wonder
and adoration, till presently there comes a bright cloud, which enwraps in its
folds of light the three figures. It is the Shechinah, and the apostles fear as
they see the face of Christ and the faces of Moses and Elias disappearing within
it. And now from out that cloud of awful glory comes a voice, saying, ‘“ This
is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased : hear ye Him.”

II. Its purpose.—1. It was intended to strengthen and brace the spirit of
Jesus Christ for the solemn and awful work which lay before Him, culminating
in Gethsemane and Calvary. 2. As regards the purpose of the Transfiguration
with reference to Moses and Elias, it is difficult to speak with any degree of
positiveness. Remembering, however, what St. Peter tells us, that the angels
bend over the mystery of redemption as the cherubim bent over the mercy-seat
on the ark, desiring “to look into” its secret meaning, we may infer that
glorified saints, such as Moses and Elias, must have felt the most earnest and
absorbing desire to understand the mystery of the atonement which Christ was
about to make for their sins and for the sins of the whole world. For ‘them
the Transfiguration must have been a new revelation of the wisdom and glory
of God, in the consummation of His eternal purpose to redeem a ruined world.
3. So far as the three apostolic witnesses of the Transfiuration were concerned,
its intent is perfectly clear. They could not grasp the conception of a suffering
Messiah. It was an offence to them. So they are taken up into the Holy
Mount, and shewn the great lawgiver and the great prophet of Israel engaged
in ecstatic converse with their glorified Master concerning the decease which He
was to accomplish at Jerusalem. The lesson was plain; they had misread the
prophecies : the Messiah of Moses and the prophets must be a suffering, dying
Messiah. And this Jesus, whom they are almost ready to forsake, because He
tells them He is to die the shameful death of the Cross, God the Father, on the
Mount of Transfiguration, crowns with honour and glory.

III. Its significance.—1. It marks the topmost step in the progressive
glorification of the manhood of Jesus Christ. He rose to that height of glory
because of the inner power of His holy life, because of the transfiguring virtue
of His consecrated soul. The doors of eternal glory open before the Son of
Man: He has only to enter in, to step up from the summit of Hermon into the
presence of God Himself, and to sit down in glory for ever! But He puts aside
this possible glorification ; He leaves all that glory which He might have had
with the angels of God and the glorified saints, and descends into the valley of
humiliation, into this desert of sin and sorrow and suffering, into the dark and
gloomy depths of Gethsemane and Calvary, in order to redeem a world! 2. It
may be looked upon as the inauguration of the New Covenant. As on rugged
Sinai was inaugurated the law which proved a ministration of death, so on
snowy Hermon, amid a scene of exquisite natural beauty, was inaugurated the
gospel by that voice from the excellent glory. God proclaims Him the Head
and Lord of all. ‘ Hear ve Him.” You have heard and obeyed Moses, you
have heard and obeyed the prophets: now hear and obey Christ the Son of God.
3. It represents to us the investiture of Jesus Christ as High Priest. From
this point on to the end Christ’s prophetical office appears to recede more and
more, while His priestly office comes into prominence. From Hermon Ho
descended into the valley of humiliation, and moved right on to the altar of
sacrifice, even His Cross on Calvary. 4, It is above all designed to exhibit to us


317


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i


the transcendent value of the sufferings and death of Christ. In the Basilica at
Ravenna there is a mosaic of the sixth century representing in emblematical
form the Transfiguration of Christ,—a jewelled cross set in a circle of blue
studded with golden stars, in the midst of which appears the face of Christ, the
Saviour of the world; while from the cloud close by is thrust forth a Divine
hand that points to the Cross. Those early artists were right in their reading
of this sublime event. The Transfiguration sets the Cross of Christ in the centre,
surrounds it with a radiant firmament of God’s promises and of the prophecies
of the Old Testament, and shews us the hand of God Himself emerging from
the cloud of glory and pointing to the Cross, as though God the Father would
say to man what John the Baptist said: “ Behold the Lamb of God, which
taketh away the sin of the world.” 5. Its prophetic significance. Standing on
Hermon with these three apostles, a long vista stretches out before us into the
distant future, including in its scope that great day when the Son of God shall
take to Himself His power, His mighty power, in order to reign. His kingdom
has come at last ; and what is the manner of it? It is a kingdom of redeemed
men—of men who stand like Moses and Elias with Christ in glory, not only
redeemed, not only delivered from sin and suffering and sorrow and trial and
pain, but transformed and transfigured with that same glory by which the
person of Jesus is enwrapped. 6. it symbolises the transformation and trans-
figuration of our spirits, our whole reasonable, moral, and spiritual nature, into
the image of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Lessons.—1. If we desire to behold the glory of the transfigured Redeemer,
we must climb with Him the mount of prayer. 2. The metamorphic, trans-
figuring power of a life of prayer. I have seen the face of a dying servant of
Christ lit up, whether by a light from the unseen world, or by a radiance
shining out from within, I could not tell; but in either case it was a kind of
transfiguration which only those attain who have been often with Jesus on the
mountain-top of prayer. 3. Consecration to the path of suffering is the
preparation for transfiguration. 4. The true relation of the contemplative to
the active life. We cannot spend our lives on the mountain-top of vision,
or of ecstasy, or of contemplation. The voice of God calls us down to grapple
with the problems and the duties which wait on every side. Sin is here;
sorrow is here; darkness is here; unbelief is here. If God has revealed to
us the glory of His Son, it is not that we should give our lives up to its
contemplation, but that we should gain thereby inspiration and strength to
tread the path of duty or of suffering—that we should consecrate ourselves
to the work of lightening the darkness, and lessening the suffering, and
cleansing the defilement of the world in which we live.—k. H. McKim, D.D.


Ver. 5. “Jt is good for us to be here.” —We need not inquire too closely what
thoughts were uppermost in the apostle’s mind when he said this. If asked, he
could not perhaps have told himself. He was not himself. Suddenly waking
out of sleep (Luke ix. 32), he and his fellow-disciples found themselves the
amazed spectators of a vision of glory for the contemplation of which neither
their minds nor their bodily organs were framed. All that we can certainly
infer from this involuntary exclamation of Peter’s is that his mind was cast
into a pleasurable frame, so blissful that he longed for its continuance.

TI. The state of mind which gave rise to this exclamation.—l. It was the
acknowledgment of a present good. Peter felt himself happy, and at once
avowed it. He looked neither backwards nor forwards; he saw no more than
what was before his eyes. The narrow plot of ground on which he and his
companions lay, and so much more as would suffice to erect three tabernacles
upon, was then all the world to him. Such moments and such feelings were


318


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IX.
ee eee
rarely granted to those who shared the human condition of the Son of God.
At other times they said not, “It is good,” but ‘“‘When will it be good?”
(Matt. xix. 27). When the past supplies nothing but painful recollections, and
the present nothing but painful experiences, it is our duty to look forward
and to inquire, When will our happiness begin? But when we are happy, it

is equally our duty to be sensible of it—to feel it, enjoy it, dwell upon it.
Let us cherish such moments as the oases of this life. This applies especially
to things spiritual. As “the elect of God, holy and beloved,” possessing “the
firstiruits of the Spirit,” we ought to “abound in hope,” “with all joy and
peace in believing.” 2. Happiness depends upon the state of the feelings.
“It is good for us to be here,” says Peter, What! good to have nowhere to
lay one’s. head? good to be out all night in a bleak desert place, without shelter
or food ? good to be far from home, lost to the world and to the endearing
relations of family life? This is all true, would Peter have replied, but it is all
beside the mark. Happiness or wretchedness is in the mind (Prov. xiv. 10).
Outward circumstances can only influence our happiness by acting upon our
feelings. Let us look well, then, to our inward frames, and watch over the
thoughts which arise in our minds (Prov. iv. 23), 3. Peter here mistook a
mere transitory frame for a permanent state of mind. He said, “It is good
for us to be here,” and so far he was right; but his thoughts went further than
this ; he said in his heart, It would be good for us to be always here—to gaze
for ever on “the King in His beauty.” The same feeling made the apostles
dread our Lord’s departure ; but He shews them that there is a higher “good”
dependent on it (John xvi. 6, 7). So we too have our short-lived and occasional
frames as well as our general and permanent states of mind; and we are in
danger of mistaking one for the other. (1) In regard to temporal gratifications.
When we find ourselves in some unusually agreeable and enjoyable situation,
does not our vain heart unconsciously suggest to us, Would that I were always
so! Oh that to-morrow might be as this day, and still more abundant !—
forgetting that it is the nature of such delicious moments to be but moments ;
that these pleasures would lose half their sweetness if they did not come and
go—just shew themselves and disappear. (2) In respect to spiritual delights.
If you possess any religious sensibility, if you ever commune with your own
heart, if you have any experience of prayer, if you ever long to see the Divine
power and glory as you have seen them in the sanctuary,—if in any of these
ways you have “tasted that the Lord is gracious,” you will understand. At
such moments has not the thought of your heart been—Vain world, adieu!
It is good for us to be always so! Such is the language of nature; but let us
beware how we listen to it. Cherish such moments; acknowledge them; be
grateful for them ; enjoy them while they last; but do not think of “ building
tabernacles for them.” They were never meant to dwell with the tumult of
the world or the sober realities of life. Even as spiritual refreshments they
are not so good for us as many other fruits which hang from the less elevated
branches of the tree of life. The true “peace of God which passeth all under-
standing” is not that which goes out of the heart, but that which stays in it,
and “keeps as with a garrison the heart and mind of its possessor, through
Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv. 7).

II. Some common occasions in life to which the words of the text apply.—
1. “It is good for us to be here”—in the house of God. Here we may by
faith “behold His glory.” Moses and Elias, the law and the prophets, those
lesser lights and glories of which the meridian is past, still appear, as tributary
to His brightness, like stars lingering after. the sun is risen. And although
“no man hath seen God at any time,” yet in His Word and Sacraments we
behold, if not the Divinity itself, at least the bright overshadowing cloud which


319


——


i


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee eee


at once veils and indicates the Divine Presence. 2. “It is good for us to be”


in the house of affliction (Eccles. vii. 2, 3).
take the wings of a dove and fly from t


heaviness whose fruit is holiness? 3.


Who that. believes this would not


hat mirth whose end is heaviness to that
“It is good for us to be” in this mixed


and chequered world. There is nothing to hinder us from conceiving a world


without pain, or a world without sorrow,
wishing that our own lot were cast there.


or a world without sin; nor from
But however such imaginary systems


might be suited to their respective inhabitants, let us be assured of this, that


it is good for us to be where we are.
men, mortal men—each undergoing


Only consider what we are: men, sinful
his separate trial—all moving on to


eternity. To place such beings, with such a design, in a perfect and unmixed
state of existence would be absurd. The longer we live in the world, the firmer


shall we hold by this principle, that “


whatever is, is best.”


What a blessing


it is, e.g., that we are not all rich, or all poor, or all midway between the two.
Such a dead level would extinguish some of the noblest and holiest feelings of
the human heart, besides annihilating half the duties and all the charities of


life. Or would you banish pain and sorrow from the world ?
be the reverse of a boon, since
The same line of argument applies to differences in age,


it possible, would
, adversity,” etc.
temperament, knowledge, ete.


But that, were
“sweet are the uses of


QUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 2. “ After six days.” —Why did
Christ defer the performance of His
promise for six days? He deferred it
to increase their desires before it came,
their joys when it came. To inflame
their desires ; for things easily come by
are little set by. To increase their
joys; for that which hath been long
detained is at last more sweetly ob-
tained. Moreover, if Christ after the
promise of this vision had immediately
singled out some to the participation
of it, this would have bred envy and
grudging in the rest.—Thos. Adams.

Christ always better than His word.
__It was after six days. He stayed no
longer. Why? He might have deferred
longer. It was in these terms that He
promised—before they die. Time enough
therefore hereafter. Indeed for us, if
we promise anything to God before we
die, we must do it presently, because
we know not the time of our death.
As the Rabbins say, if a man vowed
to pe a Nazarite one day before his
death, he was to be so presently,
because this day may be the last day.
But God knows these times and seasons,
and the number of our days. What
then? Yet after six days He performs


320


it. In all His promises He is better
and fuller and speedier than His word.
—Bishop Brownrigg.

The first week of suffering on the part
of the disciples, previous to the suffer-
ings of the Lord Himself. 1. Its
beginning: the confession of Peter
and the announcement of the Lord’s
sufferings. 2. Its employment : familiar-
ising their minds with thoughts of the
Cross. 3. Its close : a glorious Sabbath
onthe Holy Mount.—J/. P. Lange, D.D.

The three chosen apostles.—1. Peter
was the forward, zealous disciple, who
led the way to the rest in that noble
confession of Christ; therefore he is
singled out to be partaker of this
vision. Again, Peter is now overtaken
with an error, is sorry to hear of Christ’s
death, dissuades Him from it; by this
vision therefore he is comforted, re-
formed, instructed in the mystery of
Christ’s death and passion. 2. James
was appointed to be the first apostle
that should die for Christ: Herod
sucked his blood first. As they who
must be in the front of the battle have
the choicest armour because they are
to undertake desperate services, so
because James was to be the first


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX.


in the army royal therefore he was
admitted to view the glory of this
Transfiguration. 3. John was fore-
appointed to be the publisher and pen-
man of Christ’s Divinity ; and so above
all he soared highest into heaven.
Therefore was this manifestation of
Christ’s glory and Divinity made to
him. He urges it (John i. 14),—
Bishop Brownrigg.

Why these three?—We cannot for
a moment imagine that there was
favouritism in the selection of certain
apostles to share in what the others
might not witness. It was not because
these were better loved, but because
they were better prepared—more fully
receptive, more readily acquiescing,
more entirely self-surrendering—4A.
Edersheim, D.D.

What mountain ?—1. According to
an old tradition Christ had left
Cesarea Philippi, and the scene of
the Transfiguration was Mount Tabor.
But (1) there is no notice of His
departure, such as is generally made
by Mark; (2) on the contrary, it is
mentioned by him as after the Trans-
figuration (ix. 30); (3) Tabor was at
that time crowned by a fortified city,
which would render it unsuitable for
such a scene. 2. Modern opinion fixes
upon one of the southern peaks of
_ Hermon—the only “high mountain”
in Palestine—as the place.

Mountains.—The devil took Christ
into a mountain when he shewed Him
the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them. So our Saviour took
His apostles up into a mountain
when He shewed them the kingdom
of heaven and glory of the world to
come. Moses went up to a mountain
to speak with the Lord; now the
Lord goes up to a mountain to speak
with Moses.—Thos. Adams.

Hermon.—tlt was meet that Hermon
should be chosen for this high honour,
whose hoary head rose among the
other hills, wreathed with the white
shroud of eternal snow. Just as in
human life snow-white locks are ever
a mark of honour and command
respect and reverence, so in the world


Y°


of nature the hoary mountain, grey
with years and white with the snows
of many ages, ever commands respect
among its fellows, rising high overhead
—a Saul among the people—its wreath
of perpetual snow being at once a proof
of its great age and great height among
the neighbouring hills—W. F. Low.

Consecration to the Lord changes
man.—1. Internally ; he is elevated into
the spiritual world and surrounded by
blessed spirits. 2. Externally; he is
renewed, adorned, transfigured.—J. P.
Lange, D.D.

Transfiguration.—If our previous
investigations have rightly led us up
to this result, that Jesus was the Very
Christ of God, then this event can
scarcely be described as miraculous—
at least in such a history. If we
would not expect it, it is certainly
that which might have been expected.
1. It was, and at that particular
period, a necessary stage in the Lord’s
history, viewed in the light in which
the Gospels present Him. 2. It was
needful for His own strengthening,
even as the ministry of the angels
after the Temptation. 3. It was
“good” for these three disciples to
be there—not only for future witness,
but for present help, and also with
special reference to Peter’s remon-
strance against Christ’s death-message.
4, The Voice from heaven, coming after
the announcement of His Death and
Passion, sealed that testimony, and
in view of it proclaimed Him as the
Prophet to whom Moses had bidden
Israel hearken, while it repeated the
heavenly utterance concerning Him
made at His Baptism. 5. For us all
the interest of this history lies not
only in ‘the past; it is in the present
also, and in the future. To all ages
it is like the vision of the bush burn-
ing, in which was the Presence of God.
And it points us forward to that trans-
formation, of which that of Christ was
the pledge, when “this corruptible
shall put on incorruption.” As of old
the beacon fires, lighted from hill to
hill, announced to them far away from
Jerusalem the advent of solemn feast,


321


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ae a


so does the glory kindled on the Mount
of Transfiguration shine through the
darkness of the world and tell of the
Resurrection Day.—A. Hdersheim, D.D.

Prayer accompanied by glory.—Luke
gives a pregnant hint in connecting
it with Christ’s praying, as if the calm
ecstasy of communion with the Father
brought to the surface the hidden glory
of the Son. Can it be that such glory
always accompanied His prayers, and
that its presence may have been one
reason for the sedulous privacy of these,
except on this one occasion, when He
desired that His faithful three should
be “eye-witnesses of His majesty” ¢
—A, Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 3. Christ in glory.—lLook upon
all the beauties that are in the world,
the most glorious and resplendent
creatures, and unite all their excel-
lences, and raise up thy thoughts by
them, and from them to the contempla-
tion of that glory which is in heaven.
View the curious rarities of art and
nature. Is the snow, a vanishing
meteor, so white? the material
heavens so pure? the lily so beauti-
ful? Oh! our Solomon in His glory is
clothed more richly than any of these.
Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard,
the heart cannot conceive the great-
ness of His glory.— Bishop Brownriyg.


Ver. 4. Why did Moses and Elias
appear, rather than David and
Abraham, from whose loins Jesus
came, and who were so famous among
the people? 1. To manifest a differ-
ence between the Lord and _ the
servants. Moses and Elias were of
high esteem with the Jews, Christ not
regarded, a man of no repute among
them; therefore He would now shew
that He was the Lord and they but
His servants. 2. If it be granted that
Moses was dead and that Elias died
not, this declares that Christ is the
Saviour of both quick and dead. 3.
Moses was called the law-giver, and
Elias was (after a sort) the law-
restorer; now the Jews  traduced
Christ for a law-breaker. Moses


322


and Elias were witness that He was:
obedient to the law. 4. They meet:
that brought the law with Christ:
who brought the gospel, to shew that:
law and gospel must be joined to-:
gether. We must still serve God
according to His law, or He will not
save us according to His gospel. 5. To
shew that this was the true Messiah,
to whom both law and prophets bare
witness. 6. Christ proposed two such
famous men as Moses and Elias to His
apostles for patterns, that their spirits
might bewell tempered in them. Moses,
a man most meek on the earth ; Elias, a
man exceeding zealous. These two are
brought hither, that the apostles may
learn to mix Moses’ meekness with
Elias’ ferventness.— Thos. Adams.

Christ the centre—All true teachers
of duty and all inspired witnesses for
God are found at last commending and
adoring Christ. And all that is good
fits into the gospel and helps to pre-
pare its way. 1. Man, like the Son
of Man, has latent glory which the
presence of God brings out. 2. Obey
God, and the glorified befriend you.
3. The Cross of Christ is not the weak
point in the gospel, but its grandest
feature—that into which the glorified
desire to look.—--R. Glover.

The consecration of Jesus to His
suffering and dying by a visit from
the dwellers of heaven. 1. Necessary,
on account of His true humanity.
2. Fitting, on account of the high
momentousness of the event. 3. Of
great value for the disciples, as
well then as afterwards. 4. Con-
tinually important for the Christian
world of following centuries—J. J.
Van Oosterzee, D.D.

the meeting of the Lord with Moses
and Elijah shews—1. The bearing of
the future upon the present world. (1)
The dead are waiting the appearance
of Christ. (2) The most exalted of
the departed spirits here do homage to
Him. 2. The bearing of the visible
upon the invisible world. This may
be regarded as the earnest and com-
mencement of Christ’s preaching to the
spirits in prison (1 Pet, iii. 19, iv. 6),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP IX.


a ee eee


3. How this world and the next meet
and coalesce in the resurrection of Jesus.
—J. P. Lange, D.D.

The Sun makes the stars more
glorious.—The Jews thought if Christ
were advanced Moses must down.
Whosoever preached Christ spake
against Moses. No, Moses was never
so glorious as in this attendance. It
is otherwise with the Sun of Righteous-
ness and the saints. Then with the
body of the sun and the stars: these
do, occidere heliace, not appear when
they come nearer to the sun. But our
Sun of Glory makes these stars, the
nearer they be, to be the more glorious,
As in Joseph’s dream, the sun, moon,
and stars were all shining together.—
Bishop Brownrigg.

Communion with Christ now and
hereafter.—Moses and Elias were men
of much communion with God upon
earth; many heavenly intercourses
passed between them; and now they
are admitted into a near and sweet
and familiar communication. Men of
communion with God here shall be
received with more free access and
familiar conversation with Christ in
heaven. They who never maintain
speech with God here, how can they
look to have access in heaven? They
who love to come into His presence,
delight in hearing Him speak to them,
and they to Him by prayer and
meditation—they shall have nearest
and freest and sweetest communion
hereafter.—Jbid.

Christ seen with His foreannouncers.
—What could so befit the Creator’s
Christ as to manifest Him in the
company of His own foreannouncers ?
to let Him be seen with those to whom
He had appeared in revelations? to
let Him be speaking to those who had
spoken of Him? to share His glory
with those by whom He used to be
called the Lord of Glory, even with
those chief servants of His, one of
whom was once the moulder of His
people, the other afterwards the
reformer thereof ?—Tertullian.


Ver. 5. The good intention and the


error of Peter.—l. He was anxious
to display the agreement between the
Old and New Covenants; but by an
outward amalgamation, not by their
internal connexion. 2. He was ready


_ to renounce the world; but by an


outward institution (such as monas-
ticism and anchoretism), not by an
inward act. 38. He wished to per-
petuate this season of spiritual fellow-
ship ; but by giving it an outward and
fixed form, not by converting it into a
spring of hidden life.—J/. P. Lange, D.D.

Heaven on earth.—l. Where it may
be found. (1) In secret fellowship
with God. (2) In a life of spiritual
love and friendship. (3) In the courts
and at the altar of the Lord. 2. How
it should be sought. (1) By preserving
purity of heart (or by perseverance in
the faith). (2) By constant increase
of spirituality in our wishes and in-
clinations (or sanctification). (3) By
ever keeping before our minds and
hearts our eternal calling (or watching
and prayer).—Rambach.

Good to be with Jesus.—If we find
it as impossible as Peter did to live
retired from all conflict and intercourse
with all kinds of men; if, like Peter,
we have to descend into a valley
ringing with demoniac’s cries; if we
are called upon to deal with the world
as it aetually is—deformed, dehu-
manised by sin: is it nothing that we
can assure ourselves of the society and
friendship of One who means to remove
all suffering and all sin, and who does
so not by a violent act of authority,
but by sympathy and patient love, so
that we can be His brighter instru-
ments, and in healing and _ helping
others help and heal ourselves !—
M. Dods, D.D.

Calvary or not Calvary ?—That was
the issue. It was the alternative
that comes to each one of us at some
time or other in life. Ease and safety,
or duty and sacrifice? Retire from
the conflict and live in glorious peace ?
or fight on and fall ?@—/J/. Halsey.

Danger of saint-worship.—The same
feeling which induced Peter to utter
these words has probably been the


323


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





foundation of the errors of the Church
of Rome with respect to the worship
of saints. If his desire had been
permitted, and three tabernacles had
been erected, these would have become
three temples of worship, and that
homage which was due to Christ alone
would have been divided with His
saints. Such practically has been the
ease in the Church of Rome. Men
have been attracted by the glory of the
saints, and, forgetting that it was all
derived from Christ, have treated them
as if they were each alone and by
themselves worthy of their homage.
The tabernacle of the saints has been
preferred too often to that of the
King of saints, on the supposition that,
because they have themselves suffered
all the trials which we suffer, they are
better able to sympathise with human
weakness, and therefore will become
intercessors for men with Christ. But
need we any intercessor with Him ?
There are mountains in the kingdom
of God.—The soul can withdraw from
the multiplied cares and distractions
of the work-a-day world life to find
restful influence and inspiring com-
panionship on their quiet heights.
On the hill-tops of gracious ordinances,
in special seasons of fellowship with
the Eternal Father, through the re-
vealing Son, by the blessed whisperings
of the Spirit, the soul will feel and
manifest the reality and blessedness of
_upper-world revelations and voices in
a way not otherwise attainable. En-
joying these things in heavenly places,
with Peter it will say, “It is good to
be here.” In that clear upper air the
eye will behold, as never before, the
beauties of holiness and the deformities
of sin, The soul shall put on a
radiancy born of an atmosphere puri-
fied from the influences of malarial
levels. But it is not the will of God
that the soul should seek selfishly to
abide there. It is not to be drawn
away from and raised uninfluentially
above the crying needs of fallen men.
The healing power of its contact with
Divine things is needed in the plain
below. The attractions of a contem-


324


plative life must not therefore lead to
forgetfulness or neglect of the demands
for practical toil and _ self-denial.
Neither, on the other hand, must
those quiet seasons of withdrawal from


_ earthly distractions be forgotten or


neglected. The soul then puts on new
strength by nearer fellowship with
God. All this must not be defeated
by the despotic tendencies and im-
perious claims of practical work. If
so, the soul will suffer loss, power be
paralysed, and blessings withheld from
men. It is the union of both that
will make the well-balanced, healthy,
Christlike soul. — Wm. M. Campbell.


Ver. 7. The overshadowing cloud.—
The outer skirts of the central glory
began to advance—to enlarge their
borders and to encompass the chosen
three. Peter and James and John
stand fora while in the golden suburbs
of the heavenly Jerusalem. ‘“ A bright
cloud overshadowed them.” He who
‘tempers the wind to the shorn lamb ”
softened the dazzling brightness with
a luminous curtain. Nevertheless,
even in the haze of the cloud that
relieved the blaze, they were affrighted.
The majesty was veiled to them, yet
they were afraid. The glory was
tempered to them, yet they trembled.
But if the subdued flashing of the
clouded splendour alarmed them, the
thunder of the voice that came out of
the cloud appalled them. It was the
voice of God !—Prof. T. S. Evans.

That overshadowing cloud warns us
as it warned St. Peter, that this worla
is a battle-field, not a vision of peace ,
a working time, not the rest that
remaineth ; the Mount of Crucifixion,
not the Mount of Glory. To our
Blessed Lord Himself that overshadow-
ing cloud was a type of what His
earthly life was to be. Says Jeremy
Taylor: “ His transfiguration was a
bright ray of glory; but then, also,
He entered into a cloud, and was told
a sad story of what He was to suffer
at Jerusalem. For this Jesus was like
the rainbow, which God set in the
clouds as a sacrament, to confirm a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





promise and establish a grace. He
was half made of the glories of the
light, and half of the moisture of a
cloud,”

Divine secrets.—There is no manner
of absurdity in supposing a veil on
purpose drawn over some scenes of
Infinite power, wisdom, and goodness,
the sight of which might some way or
other strike us too strongly; or that
better ends are designed and served by
their being concealed than could be
by their being exposed to our know-
ledge. The Almighty may cast clouds
and darkness round about Him for
reasons and purposes of which we
have not the least glimpse or concep-
tion (Rom. xi. 33 ; Ecclus. xvi. 21, 22;
John xx. 29).—Bishop Butler.

God’s glory veiled in mercy.— When
the eye gazes on the sun, it is more
tormented with the brightness than
pleased with the beauty of it; but
when the beams are transmitted
through a coloured medium, they are
more temperate and sweetened to the
sight. The Eternal Word shining in
His full glory, the more bright the
less visible is He to mortal eyes ; but
the Incarnate Word is eclipsed and
allayed by a veil of flesh (Heb. x. 20),
and so made accessible to us. God,
out of a tender respect to our frailty
and fears, promised to raise up a
Prophet clothed in our nature (Exod.
xx. 18, 19; Deut. xviii. 15-19), that
we might comfortably and quietly
receive His instructions (Job xxxiii.
6, 7; John i. 18; Luke iv. 20-22).—
Dr. Bates.

The vision withdrawn.—A Chris-
tian’s highest enjoyments are some-
times put an end to by God Himself.
He may think that he has sinned
away his previous privilege, or trifled


it away, or by some means driven it -


away; and this is perhaps very gene-
rally the truth. But it is not always
so. The intercepting cloud, like that
which we are now considering, is
sometimes of God’s sending. The
vision has done its work-—its appointed,
strengthening, comforting work; and
that done, the vision is withdrawn.


2


CHAP. It.





The gospel cloud.—The law, that is
a cloud, dark and obscure; but the
gospel, that is a clear cloud. Still,
indeed, the gospel is a cloud, it gives
no full evident view; but yet it is a
clear cloud, it hath many rays and
beams of light in it. The law had a
dark cloud, we could not see through
it; their shadows were remote and
obscure. Their circumcision was a
dark cloud, immediately signifying
God’s covenant with Abraham. Our
baptism is a cloud, a bodily, material
type, an outward element; but itis a
clear cloud, representing distinctly the
washing away the filth of the flesh by
the blood of Christ. Their Passover
was a dark cloud, representing their
delivery out of Egypt immediately,
but darkly the Messias. Our Lord’s
Supper is a cloud, a veil of bread and
wine is over it; but yet it is a clear
cloud, immediately shewing Christ
and all His benefits. Their covenant
was a cloud, covered with temporary
promises, with the promise of Canaan.
Ours is a cloud indeed, we cannot see
those things that it promises ; but yet
a clear cloud, immediately presenting -
to us immediate promises of heaven.
The light of the law was like the
light of a candle ; ours, as the day-star.
—Bishop Brownrigg.

“Hear Him.”—1. He has truth
which can never deceive you, a wis-
dom which knows what you need, a
goodness which will command nothing
but what will bless. 2. If you hear
Him, He has promised to hear you
(John xvi. 7). 3. He speaks to you
on the subject of greatest importance,
and speaks with a clearness, emphasis,
authority, decision, which scatter all
doubts and solve all perplexities.
4. God has declared what will be the
consequence of refusing to hear Him
(Deut. xviii. 19). 5. If you hear Him
not, and keep not His words, you are
building your hopes upon the sand;
and when the tempest comes, as come
it will, your fabric of happiness must
fall, and great will be the fall of it—
J. Sanderson, D.D.

“ Hear Him”—1. Reverently. 2.


325


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


With docility. 3. With personal,
special, and practical application. 4.
With a deep, solemn sense of your
responsibility.—J/bzd.


Ver. 8. “Jesus only.”—1. Moses
and Elias, the law and the prophets,
have but a temporary station and
abode in the Church. Christ being
brought into the world, they are with-
drawn. 2. Christ’s office and glory
and government in His Church, ’tis
lasting and perpetual. 3. The eye
and observation and faith of the
Church is fixed upon Christ only.—
Bishop Brownrigy.

The eye of the Church fixed on Christ.
—The eye of the Church looks only
upon Christ, fixes upon Him, and
expects no other. This is the main
difference betwixt the Jewish Church
and ours. They were all in expecta-
tion, and were waiters for better times.
But our faith hath Him exhibited
and presented, and rests upon Him.
Hence Christ forewarns them not to
listen to or look after any other
The sun arising, darkens all the
_ stars; so all the former saints are
obscured to the eye of the Church, and
He alone must shine in His full glory.
As when the king enters into any city
all authority is resigned up to him,
all viceroys and lieutenants must
resign up to him, so Moses and the
prophets all yield up their place in
the Church to Christ.—Jbid.

Christ the Sum of revelation.—It is
the summing up of revelation; all
others vanish, He abides. It is the
summing up of the world’s history.
Thickening folds of oblivion wrap
the past, and all its mighty names be-
come forgotten ; but His figure stands
out, solitary against the background
of the past, as some great mountain,
which is seen long after the lower
summits are sunk below the horizon.
Let us make this the summing up of
our lives. We can venture to take
Him for our sole Helper, Pattern,
Love, and Aim, because He, in His
singleness, is enough for our hearts.—


A, Maclaren, D.D.
326


Ver. 9. Reasons for concealment.—
This vision of Christ’s Divinity and
glory must be concealed till after His
resurrection, 1, Till then Christ is
in stutu humiliationis, and so He will
have His majesty and glory to be
covered. Now He terms Himself the
Son of Man. He was declared to be
the Son of God by the resurrection
from the dead (Rom. i.). Thus He
was pleased to veil His glory, and
to become vile, and of no reputation.
2. It is documentum modestie. His
glory, He is not ambitious to publish
it—as St. Paul fourteen years con-
cealed his revelations. He glories in
his infirmities and weaknesses; but
till he was constrained he kept his
rapture concealed. 3, Till His resur-
rection these apostles were <nepti,
weak and carnal, not sufficiently
grounded in this doctrine of Christ’s
Divinity. After His resurrection,
then they were endued with strength
from above, and then those mysteries
that they could not bear the Comforter
revealed to them. 4. Quita incredibile.
The infidelity of the world was not
yet to be removed ; it would not believe
there had been such a vision. In-
fidelity deprives us of many truths
that God would otherwise reveal to
us. 5. Ne impediret passionem. It
troubled Pilate to hear it mentioned
that Christ was the Son of God. And
St. Paul saith, had they known it,
they would not have crucified the
Lord of Life and Glory. He purposely
concealed His Deity to give way to
His passion, And hence it is that
He spake of His Divinity very
reservedly. He charged they should
tell no men who He was (Mark viii.
20), but (ver. 32) He spake plainly
of His passion.—Bishop Brownrigg.

Reasons for silence.—l1. Because the
Jews were to have no sign, but the
sign of the prophet Jonas: they had
seen enough to leave their unbelief
without excuse. 2. Because among
the rude, after the publication of
such a glory, the following Cross would
have bred scandal. If He were
invested with such glory, why could


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ee a





He not keep Himself in it? 3.
Because till His resurrection had
made way for it, the world would
never have given credit to this wonder.
4. According to that (Ecelus. xi. 28),
judge no man blessed before his death.
Then they witnessed it, preached it,
wrote it: we hear it, let us all believe
it, that we may one day enjoy it in the
everlasting kingdom of Jesus Christ.—
Thos. Adams.

The silence enjoined was the first
step into the Valley of Humiliation.
It was also a test whether they had
understood the spiritual teaching of
the vision. And their strict obedience,
not questioning even the grounds of
the injunction, proved that they had
learned it.—A. Edersheim, D.D.

Transfigurations not to be talked about.
—l. Transfigurations are not themes
for common gossip. Those bitter con-
flicts that turn to raptures are things
we had vather not speak of. The
common, prosaic, worldly mind would
not understand them—would, indeed,
only find food for ridicule in them.
2. Besides, our transfigurations do
not need to be talked about. They
proclaim themselves. If we have
experienced a great spiritual uplifting,
the thrill of an inward illumination,
the world will know it without our
saying anything about it.—J/. Halsey.

Even to His fellow-disciples the

believer cannot relate all that the


CHAP. IX.


Saviour has often let him taste.—
J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.

How some Christians are perpetually
tormented with a notion that they
must testify to whatever manifesta-
tion of God is granted to themselves,
at the risk of bringing shallowness
and weakness upon their own ex-
perience !—C. C. Starbuck.


Ver. 10. Submissive  silence-—So
entire was their submission that they
dared nor even ask the Master about
a new and seemingly greater mystery


_ than they had yet heard—the meaning


of the Son of Man rising from the
dead. Did it refer to the general
resurrection? was the Messiah to be the
first to rise from the dead, and to waken
the other sleepers—or was it only a
figurative expression for His triumph
and vindication?—A. Hdersheim, D.D.
Learn—l. Even the best Chris-
tians are by nature and of themselves
slow to conceive and understand the
mysteries of faith and doctrines of
Christ taught in the gospel. 2. True
faith and sanctifying grace in this
life may stand with ignorance in some
points of Christian faith, at least for
atime. 3. It isa good and profitable
cause for Christians to confer and
reason together by mutual questioning
one with another about those points
of Christian religion whereof they are
yet ignorant or doubtful.—G. Petter.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—29,
(PaRALLeLs: Marr. xvii. 14-21 ; Luxe ix. 37-43.)


The afflicted child.—Moses, when he descended from the mount, found that
the people in his absence had lapsed into idolatry ; and our Lord, in descending
from the Mount of Transfiguration, found that His followers had been surprised
into spiritual impotence and failure. The swift transition from the glories of
the Mount to the trials and toils that awaited Him below may be regarded
as typical of the life of all Christians,—the mount (ver. 9) and the multitude
(ver. 14); the supreme festival and the fiery trial ; to-day, ecstasies and glories
that tell of heaven; to-morrow, conflicts with demoniacal degradation and fury
that disclose the depths of hell. The appearance of our Lord on the scene
wrought an immediate transformation ; it was like the arrival of a general on
the field of battle in time to retrieve the fortunes of his army when wellnigh


327


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ce


defeated. He always comes to succour His own at the right time and with the
right blessing : He is “a very present help in trouble.”

I. A distressed child.—The ground of the disorder was natural; the child
suffered from a physical complaint, perhaps the most severe form of epileptic
lunacy that was brought to Christ for healing. But on this ground a worse
spiritual disorder was superinduced. The disorder of the child is a picture of
sin as a spiritual evil. The child was deaf; so a sinner refuses to hear the
voices of God and conscience. The child was dumb; so the sinner’s tongue is
not used for God in testimony and song. The child was mad; so the sinner,
under the influence of that “ spirit that now worketh [it. energiseth] in the
children of disobedience,” is a maniac,

TI. An anxious father.—The colloquy our Lord had with him is a type of the
method by which a seeker is led into stronger faith. “ The man had said to
Him, ‘If Thou canst do’; Jesus retorts upon him, ‘If thou canst believe.’
The man had said, ‘If Thou canst do anything’; Jesus replies, ‘ All things are
possible’ to faith : ‘My doing all depends on thy believing.’ To impress this
still more He redoubles upon the believing: ‘If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth.’ . . . Two things are very remarkable here:
(1) The felt and owned presence of unbelief, which only the strength of the
man’s faith could have so revealed to his own consciousness. (2) His appeal
to Christ for help against his past unbelief—a feature in the case quite
unparalleled, and shewing more than all protestations could have done the insight
he had attained of a power in Christ more glorious than any he had besought
for his poor child.”

III. The baffled apostles.—In their worshipping exercises on the Mount
some of the disciples had to contend with infirmity and sleep; whilst in the
activities of public life in the valley others had to contend with impotence and
the shame of failure. Possibly the disciples, deprived of the presence of the
Master, and the chief apostles, in whom dwelt most of His spirit, had neglected
fasting and prayer ; the sad prophecy of His death may have damped the spirits
of the weakest of them, or they yielded to fear in view of the special virulence
of the disorder. The kind of demon that tortured the child required more than
ordinary spiritual vigour to expel him—a faith braced up by intense devotion,
_ and such rigorous self-denial as would weaken the hold of the lower nature upon
the higher, and aid in spiritual meditation and fellowship.

TV. An effectual Healer.—In the exercises of devotion on the Mount He was
declared to be the Master; and in the exercises of active zeal below He asserts
His absolute power and dominion—not only over the minds of men, as illustrated
in the scribes, the multitude, the father, and the disciples, but also over the
rage and malice of demons. Impotence, in some form or other, prevailed in all
the actors in the scene except Himself ; but “ power belonged unto Him”
power that fell in anger on a malicious demon and in blessing on a helpless
child.— J. H. Morgan.





The power and the difficulties of faith.—This story is strikingly illustrative
both of the difficulties and the power of faith,—the power of faith, which caused
the ultimate healing; the difficulties of faith, which caused the previous failure
of that power.

I. The difficulty of believing is very great and very strong.—1. The disciples
of Jesus frequently and very keenly felt this difficulty. Their faith was con-
stantly breaking down; at almost e-ory great crisis it completely failed them :
the falsehood and treachery in Pilate’s hall, the desertion at the Cross. Their
impotency to heal this epileptic child is an illustration of this. From the context
of the narrative it would appear that it was the three most conspicuous of our


328


a.


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IX.


Se OE


Lord’s disciples to whom the sorrowing father brought his epileptic child, and
that at a time when we should naturally suppose their faith would have been
in a condition of the greatest and most triumphant vigour. For they had just
descended from the Mount of Transfiguration, they had just been enveloped
in the glory of the Lord, and had heard celestial voices testifying to the Divinity
of their Master. 2. When we turn away from the disciples to the distressed
and sorrowing father, we find an illustration of the difficulties of believing
under changed and opposite circumstances. The disciples were in a state of
joy and gladness after the Transfiguration ; the father of the epileptic child was
in a state of grief and sore affliction. They were in the light on the mountain-
top ; he was amid the darkness down in the valley. Yet he found the difficulties
of believing not less hard than they. “If Thou canst do anything.” “Lord!
I believe; help Thou mine unbelief.” 3. Faith is one of the most difficult of
Christian exercises. A little faith is more or less common; but much faith
is very rare. We all, I suppose, believe in a greater or less degree—a degree
at least large enough to justify our repetition of the Church’s creeds, But the
faith which statedly recites the creeds is not commonly great faith; it is the
ordinary faith of the ordinary Christian—the minimum, without which we could
not decently profess to be Christians at all. 4. The difficulty of miracles,
according to Christ’s declaration, is not the difficulty of God’s doing, but the
difficulty of man’s believing. Not material laws, but spiritual unfaith—this
is the insuperable hindrance to miracles. 5. The experience of all the ages
fully attests the truth of the explanation of Christ. Extraordinary faith is
pre-essential to extraordinary action; the miracle of believing precedes the
miracle of doing. It is as impossible to think living thoughts with a dead
brain, or to raise heavy weights with a palsied arm, as to do wonders with
a doubting soul or a dead faith. Failure, even in miracle, is practically
synonymous with faithlessness.

IT. In every age power has been given to men in proportion to their faith —
1. Seldom, indeed, has the power of faith extended to the control of the materia}
universe, though in the instance of Christ frequently, and of others occasionally,
even matter has been visibly subjugated to the influences of faith; and modern
psychical researches are ever tending more and more clearly to demonstrate the
possibility of the interpenetration of matter by will, and therefore a Sortiori
by faith, which as a spiritual energy is often more powerful than will. But
outside the material universe and in the realm of purpose and religion we see
the power of faith perpetually exemplified. According to the measure of our
faith it is daily done unto us. According to the measure of our faith it is
also daily done by us. Great deeds are great faith made visible; great
faith is great deeds made possible. 2. Seeing, then, that the experience of the
ages attests the truth of Christ’s explanation concerning the rarity of miracles,
and also His declaration of the potency of faith, the possibility of believing is
for each of us a very momentous possibility. “Canst thou,” is it possible for
thee, to “believe”? That is the great question, upon the answer to which
everything of real importance in life depends. If thou canst believe, there
is possible to thee—everything ; but if thou canst not believe, there is possible
to thee—nothing! 3. The difficulties of belief in our age are without denial
peculiarly great. It is not merely that doubt is in the air ; that the intellectual
and academic atmosphere is charged with currents of dubitation; that physical
science, which depends for its existence upon experiment and demonstration, and
has achieved such striking successes in the department of matter by the diligent
use of its own methods, should have been emboldened to try those methods upon
religion,—it is not these things which make the difficulties of belief so peculiarly
great in the present age. (1) The moral and spiritual characteristics of our


329








CHAP. IX


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


7 =


age are not favourable to faith. Our age is an age of great wealth; and an
age of great wealth is never an age of great faith, the tendency of wealth being
always towards luxury and great comfortableness, and neither luxury nor great


comfortableness being a good soil for religious growth.


Moreover the effect


of spiritual drowsiness among the rich is to produce a similar drowsiness among


the poor.


The poor perceive that the profession of Christianity by the rich


seldom produces anything great or striking in the way of sympathy or self-


sacrifice, and they therefore grow
among themselves.


largely indifferent to the profession of it
(2) But far greater than all other difficulties are the


difficulties inherent in our own moral and spiritual constitution. The visible


over-masters US;


the invisible is less than half real.


Our occupations and


employments, the urgency of earning our daily bread, the need for concentrating


our thoughts upon worldly things


in order to gain subsistence and make


progress in our trade or profession—all unite in giving prominence to temporal


realities, and in hiding from view the realities which are eternal.


Above all,


the natural deceitfulness of the human heart revolts against the constraining
power of faith. 4. Yet great as these difficulties are, they are by no means


insuperable. Far from it.


All things are possible to God; and to that man


whose mind is ever dwelling upon the Eternal, the Infinite, the Invisible—whose
spirit is thoroughly interpenetrated with the Spirit of God—to that man also
most things are possible likewise.—Canon Diggle.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 14. The scribes questioning.—
The scribes probably argued that failure
in one case proved deception in all.
How true to nature is this picture! If
they had encouraged the disciples to try
again with prayer, and had knelt with
the father of the boy asking God to
give the disciples power, they could
have prevented the failure which they
denounce! It is like the world—to
withhold help, and then give blame for
what it might have prevented. Pity
the woes of men, so often intensified
and perpetuated by men disputing as
to who is to blame for them, instead of
uniting in the effort to cure.—R. Glover

He came—as always, and to us also
—anexpectedly, most opportunely, and
for the real decision of the question in
hand. There was immediate calm,
preceding victory.—A. Hdersheim, DoD,

The world wants us.—However good
it may be to be in nature's silent
retreats for a season, the world wants
us; for it is full of evils to be remedied,
full of work to be done, full of demons
to be cast out. There are calls down
as well as wp. And we must be as
alert to the one call as to the other.—
J. Halsey.


330


Vers. 16-18. Zessons.—l1. When
Jesus Christ absents Himself from us
we are nothing. 2. A minister must
not expect to have always success in
the conversion of sinners. 3. Some-
times the greatest care, application,
and talents signify nothing, because
God designs to effect the thing by Him-
self, and to make His ministers more
fit for His work by making them more
humble. 4. Children diseased and pos-
sessed are an evident proof of original
sin, because under a just God none
are miserable unless they deserve it.
5. Bodily possession is a consequence
and emblem of that of the soul, and
of the dominion which the devil exer-
cises over the heart by means of the
passions.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 17. “A dumb spirit.”—The
poor lad was a demoniac, and the
demon had deprived him of the use
of the affiliated organs of speech and
hearing (see ver. 25). There is nothing
incredible in such power, if evil spirits
there be at all. Even some men have
power to deprive, for the time being,
some of their fellow-men of speech,
hearing, feeling, seeing. What marvel,


5 ee


»


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX.





then, that unincarnated spirits should
have a corresponding power? There
are assuredly in existence, as W. G.
Palgrave says, “malignant cosmical
influences, be they what they may.”
“The spirit world,” says Delitzsch,
“good as well as bad, has been in
all times the background of the
events that transpire on earth,”—
J. Morison, D.D.


Ver. 19. Christ's forbearance to be
umitated.—Let us imitate on occasion
the obedience and charity of Christ,
which detained Him in the world,
though the incredulity and contradic-
tion thereof were a continual trouble
to Him. How intolerable soever some
ministers and pastors, by reason of
their want of faith and their other
defects, may possible be, yet Christ
ceases not mildly to bear with them,
to continue with them, according to
His promise, to work by their ministry,
and even to produce by them extra-
ordinary effects. Whoever finds his
endeavours ineffectual on souls enslaved
to sin and the devil ought to conduct
them to Christ, by addressing himself
to Him in more fervent prayers, or by
procuring them the assistance of some
others of His servants.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 23. Faith is in its essence the
power by which we grasp the future,
the unseen, the infinite, the eternal ;
and in its application it is a principle


of knowledge, a principle of power, a


principle of action. It is then on man’s
side the condition and the measure of
Divine blessing. By faith we lift up
the sightless eye, and it is opened: by
faith we stretch out the withered arm,
and it is made whole: by faith, bound
hand and foot with gravecloths, we
come forth from the tomb of custom
which lies upon us
“ With a weight
Heavy as frost and deep almost as life.”

In the Oreed I do not simply
acknowledge the existence of these
Divine Persons of the One Godhead,
but I throw myself wholly upon their
power and love. I have found and I


trust without reserve Him who made,
redeemed, sanctifies me. I have gained
not a certain conclusion, but an un-
failing, an all-powerful Friend. “I
believe in Him! He can help me;
and He will help me.”— Bishop Westcott.

There is in faith a power to make
God’s resources our own tributaries and
auxiliaries.—The great reason why we
make such slow gains in our own
religious life in the warfare with in-
ward sin, selfishness, and pride, is that
we make no calculation for any strength
but our own, and do not muster in
our reserves. We are in this respect
where manufacturing was in mechani-
cal life a hundred years ago, when
everything was done by hand; where
travelling was fifty years ago, when
everything was done by stage; where
communication was twenty-five years
ago, when all messages were sent by
post. We do not calculate on a
margin. We are doing all by a dead
lift.—C. H. Parkhurst, D.D.


Ver. 24. Prayer for faith—He who
implores faith with tears has it already
in his heart.—Canstein.

Doubt and faith.—1. Doubt and faith
can coexist in the heart, and actually
do. As creatures of God we must
believe; as fallen, disordered, and dis-
organised creatures we must doubt.
2. The will can choose between doubt-
ing and believing. It can control and
shape the thoughts; it can throw its
weight on one side or the other when
the battle rages in the soul. And
because it can do this we are respon-
sible for the strength or weakness of
our faith. 3. If we choose to believe,
God will help.—M. Dia, D.D.

Faith’s progress—We have here—
1. The birth of faith. (1) Eager
desire. (2) A sense of utter helpless-
ness. (3) The acceptance of Christ’s
calm assurances, 2. The infancy of
faith. The sense of possessing some
feeble degree of any virtue or excel-
lence, and the effort to put it forth, is
the surest way of discovering how little
of it we have. On the other side
sorrow for the lack of some form of


331


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


pg SS eee


goodness is itself a proof of the partial
possession, in some rudimentary and
incipient form, of that goodness.
3. The cry of infant faith. “ Help
Thou mine unbelief” may have either
of two meanings. The man’s desire
was either that his faith should be
increased and his unbelief “helped”
by being removed by Christ’s operation
upon his spirit, or that Christ would
“help” him and his boy by healing
the child, though the faith which asked
the blessing was so feeble that it might
be called unbelief. ‘ Heal my child,
though it is unbelief as much as faith
that asks Thee to do it.” 4. The
education of faith. Christ paid no
heed in words to the man’s confession
of unbelief, but proceeded to do the
work which answered his prayer in
both its possible meanings. He re-
sponded to imperfect confidence by
His perfect work of cure ; and by that
perfect work of cure He strengthened
the imperfect confidence which it had
confessed. Thus He educates us by
His answers—His over-answers—to
our poor desires; and the abundance
of His gifts rebukes the poverty of our
petitions more emphatically than any
words of remonstrance beforehand
could have done. He does not lecture
us into faith, but He blesses us into
it.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

Unbelief helped.—Beautiful to the eye
of the father was the lad brought to
Jesus, when the spasm was not on him.
So is a true faith in Christ. It is the
child of the heart. It is the image of
all that is parental and Divine in the
human soul. The affections so naturally
fasten upon it as upon the child given
to the arms and the bosom—to the
kiss and fondnesses of maternal and
paternal love. We so speak of a
favourite idea of an author, an artist,
a schemer—we say, It is the child of
his heart. It stands out, as it were,
to his eye as a child born to him, in
whom he has garnered up great hopes,
and with whom is linked all the happi-
ness of life. More justly may this be
regarded the Christian’s faith in im-
mortality, with the light it sheds on


332


present duty, joy, and sorrow. So did
Socrates regard his fainter and less
beautiful hope of life beyond death.
When Socrates held his last conversa-
tion with his scholars, it seemed at one
time that all the arguments for the
immortality of the soul had been over-
thrown; and as it was a custom for the
Greeks to cut off their hair and throw
it into the tomb at the time of the
burial of a friend, Socrates took hold
of the long drooping locks of one of his
disciples, and asked if that pretty hair
would not be cut off on the morrow
—the time he should bedead. He was
answered “ Yes”; and then he added,
“Tf you take my advice, you will not
stay so long !” and explained his mean-
ing that it was more fit that the death
of a great hope be mourned than the
death of a friend. But the beautiful
faith of many a heart does not so
much die as it may be said to be
affected with spasms. It is tortured.
Its harmonies are untuned, and it is a
mournful thing. It is as uncontrol-
lable as the poor lad to whom the
apostles could bring no help, so that
the sorrow of that father is but a
picture of the troubles of him whose
faith is not healthy, strong, and happy.
There is just enough of life in their
faith for them to say, “I believe!”
but there is weakness enough to make
them add, with tears, the confession,
‘“‘ Help my unbelief!” To Christ must
the heart come; and the result of patient
waiting upon Him shall be, the languid
pulse of faith shall be quickened—the
‘veins shall feel the rosy tide,” and as
Christ lifted up the lad and he arose to
tremble and to fall no more, so shall
belief be released of all the spasms of
unbelief and the fire and the flood be
feared no more. Take to Christ thy
faith. Its weakness will not be de-
spised. Thy tears will be pearls in the
treasury of Christ. Bring to Him thy
soul by adopting the simple rule, to try
by the spirit of His life all doctrines
and theories, all creeds and articles.—
Henry Bacon.


Ver. 25. Lessons.—1. Those who love


.HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX,


Se a ere


not either to speak or to hear of God
are possessed with a dumb and deaf
split, from which Christ alone can
leliver them. Happy are they into
whom he never enters any more!
2. What would not God grant to a
faith which is perfect, since even to an
imperfect one He grants much more
than it asks? 3. Jesus Christ never
speaks to the devil but with threats,
as toa slave. There are no measures
to be kept where there is no longer
the least hope of reconciliation or
charity.—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 26, 27. Man’s extremity, God’s
opportunity. —It is generally when
things have come to the worst that
God interposes and delivers—and not
until then. 1. Because then the need
of help is the greatest. 2. Because
then there is the clearest evidence of the
failure of all human help. 3. Because
then deliverance is seen to be of God
only. 4 Because then the omnipo-
tence of God is displayed in accomplish-
ing what none other can effect.


Ver. 27. “ Took him by the hand.” —
J. Look at the hand, as the helping or-
gan and instrument of a man.—‘ Jesus
took him by the hand.” “ Very well,”
some of you say, “ how common, how
natural! Men take each other by the
hand every day.” And therefore, my
friends, be sure, since it is so common
and so natural, that it is most beauti-
ful and most significant, when we con-
sider it closely. Our most common
and familiar actions are the richest in
beauty and in meaning. The most
precious thoughts lie hid in the most
homely things.

II. This action of the Lord appears
to be most characteristic of His whole
ministry to man.—In Christ the hand
of God touched the sick and tormented
world and lifted it up; for in Christ
God brought Himself into living, lov-
ing, and helpful contact with the mass
of sin, misery, and corruption where-
with the devil had filled His world.

III. The true form of Christian
activity is indicated to us in this


hand-helping of our Lord.—The touch
of a Christian’s hand, the tones of a
Christian’s voice, the strong sympathies
of a Christian’s heart, have a magic
potency. This is God’s own appointed
instrument for healing and blessing
the world. You are not following His
footsteps if you are not entering your-
self into some chambers of sickness,
some homes of sorrow, some dens of
vice and crime; if sinners are not
feeling that you are not afraid of them;
that like your Master you have come
to seek them, and would rather have
it said that you kept company with
publicans and sinners than hear your
name rung from the trumpet of fame.
—J. B. Brown.

Christ's hwmanity.—Christ proves
His Divinity by His humanity. I
know He is Divine because He was
so humane.

The helping hand.—What a happi-
ness is it when, amidst the pangs and
struggles of conversion, a sinner meets
with an enlightened guide, a charitable
hand to lift him up in his dejection, to
comfort him under his pains, and to
lead him into the ways of God! But
what docility, what respect, what grati-
tude, does not the invincible hand of
Christ, which is concealed under this
visible one, deserve ?—P. Quesne?.


Ver. 28. Dissatisfaction with failure
a hopeful sign.—There was hopefulness
in the fact that they were dissatisfied
with their own failing. As long as the
Christian Church is keenly alive to the
humiliation which it brings upon itself
and the dishonour upon its Master by
its failures there is hope of it. It is
when the Church is utterly indifferent
to its failures in casting out demons
that it subsides into a hopeless con-
dition. But whenever the Church of
Christ after failing to do its work feels
keenly the disgrace of failure and will
not tolerate it until at least the secret
is explained, but goes to the Master
and asks Him in the agony of a keen
disappointment, “Why could not we
cast him out?” then the very failure
will lead up to nobler attainments.


333


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


The Master will give the secret of suc-
cessful work, and sooner or later the
Church will arouse itself again and
rise into the dignity of its calling and
its position.—D. Davies.


Ver. 29. Prayer and fasting.—It is
not meant that faith might be omitted
(Matt. xvii. 20); nor that faith must
be merged in prayer and fasting : but
that faith must be in maximum degree,
and that consequently those spiritual
exercises which condition its highest
attainable exaltation must be realised.
There must be prayer, the uplifting of
desire till it settle in the will of God.
There must be fasting, the denying of
all in the periphery of self that would
hinder the uprising of the desire to
God, or its absolute repose in His will.—
J. Morison, D.D.

Prayer and fasting, in the life of


Christ, were the human expression of .


two deeper and Diviner things. His
prayers, whether on mountain-slopes or
at open grave-sides—whether for the
renewal of His own strength or for
the benefit of others—were the outcome
and expression of a personal inter-
communion with God, of which His life
was the highest exemplification which
the world has ever seen. His fastings
were the expression—the manifestation
to man—of a self-denial which can
only be adequately expressed as abso-
lute and unselfish self-forgetfulness.
In this utter and complete self-renun-


ciation and its counterpart of close and
unbroken intercommunion with the
Father—in His absolute oneness with
the Father—Jesus went up to His
struggles with evil in its many forms;
and before this consecrated and en-
godded life the evil invariably fell.
Demoniacal posgessions—no matter
what their form or how great their
intensity—could not live in the white
light that flashed from perfect self-
oblation and unbroken intercourse with
Heaven. Then why did the disciples
fail? Because they fell immeasurably
short of the Master’s character. They
were not nearly as close to God as He
was. There was a great gulf between
their puny and imbecile faith and His
grand hold of God.—#. H. Starr, DD.

The power of prayer—tIt is not
enough to have seen the vision on the
mountain. We must foster the memory
of it by our prayers; for prayer is
the secret of holiness. It is the wit-
ness of our spirituality. It is the pro-
mise of the victory which shall be ours.
We can do nothing of ourselves—that
is the law of the spiritual life. But
we can do all things by leaning on
a higher Power. When the faith of
men and of Churches has proved impo-
tent to cope with the evil which has
vitiated the heart of society, then a
Divine voice is heard above the tumult,
saying only, “Bring him hither to
Me.” It is Thy voice, O Lord Jesus,
and we will obey it.—J. #. C. Welldon.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 30—82.


(ParaLtets: Marr. xvii. 22, 23; Luxe ix. 43-45.)


More explicit prediction of sufferings—After His transfiguration, and the
performance of the above miracle, Christ proceeded through Galilee towards


Jerusalem.


He travels unknown, in order that He might instruct His disciples.


An example of how we may spend time by the way.
I. He explained to them His present state: “ 7’he Son of Man is delivered.” —
1. He had already been delivered by the Father—in purpose, promise, and


deed—to stand in our room.
to be a curse for us.


2. He had delivered Himself to law and justice,
3. He was about to be delivered by a traitorous disciple.


Among the twelve He seems to have for a while a retreat; but He is betrayed.
4. The Father and Himself, in thus acting, shewed love—Judas, avarice.
II. He told them the parties into whose power He had been given: “ Jnio


334


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. 1X.

a pee ee re ee en oe ds els ah ee,
the hands of men.”—1. To be delivered into the hands of men is to be put into
their power—to do to Him and with Him as they chose. 2. They could have
this power only by special permission—from the Father and Himself. 3, It is
marvellous that He should have been delivered into the hands of men. God in
humanity. (1) It tested their character, and brought out their desperate
wickedness. (2) It proved the voluntariness of His obedience. (3) It shewed
how blind sin is in its supposed triumphs—how God brings glory out of
rebellion.

Ill. He told them what must befall Him at the hands of men: “ They shall
kill Him.”—1. That Christ was to die was not now foretold for the first time.
(1) Im sacrifice He had been slain since the beginning of the world. (2) His
sufferings had been predicted. (3) He had been hated in His law. (4) Killed
in His people. (5) His life had been sought already. (6) The death of Christ
was no singular event in the display of human character involved. 2. Conscience
tells man that death is penal, and he uses it as such, and as the height of
punishment. Man proclaimed Christ guilty. 3. Intensity of revenge leads him
sometimes to add torture to death. Man proclaimed his own hatred to Christ,
4. This death of Christ was necessary. 5. Did take place—religion—law—
power—people.

IV. He revealed to them the future by telling them of His resurrection.—
1. Man’s power and agency ended with His death. 2. Christ’s resurrection
was the result of an agency neither human nor satanic, but Divine.
(1) Scripture prophecy called for it. (2) His office and undertaking called for
it. (3) Divine justice called for it. (4) The exalted connexion of His humanity
called for it. (5) The defeat of him who had the power of death led to it.
3. Christ followed man to death. Man follows Christ to life.

V. We see that Christ had His sufferings ever in view.—1. He knew Judas’


part, and the priests’ and the people’s.


2. He anticipates the Father’s.


He knew His ire.


He saw in their bosoms the fire, etc.
3. The feelings with which


He approached these are mentioned, Luke xii. 50; John xii. 27.
VI. He also kept in view that which was to follow.—1l. He contemplated


the whole truth, and the one part balanced with the other,


2. “For the joy


that was set before Him,” etc.—Jas. Stewart.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERS@S.


Ver. 31. Sufferings and glory in-
timately connected.imJesus knew  be-
forehand the whole amount of His
sufferings, in all their connexions and
bearings; and therefore never foretold
them without likewise foretelling His
resurrection; neither did He foretell
this without foretelling His sufferings.
Thus doth true faith apprehend the
latter and the former as one entire
matter, and makes very much of
everything pertaining to either. Here
is something for exercising the heart—
something which must never be lost
sight of, in the darkest night of afflic-
tion, or in the clearest blaze of the
terrestrial noon; for it is to “guide


our feet into the way of peace.” As
we hold a candle to the flame until
it is fully lighted, so we must hold
ourselves to this subject with affecting
meditation (Luke xxiv. 26; 1 Pet. v. 1;
2 Cor. xii. 4).—J. A. Bengel.


Ver. 32. Lessons.—1. The spirit
cannot understand what the flesh is
unwilling to suffer. 2. This seed which
Christ seems unprofitably to cast into
a barren soil will bring forth fruit in
due time. 3. We must not give over
instructing, how dull soever the under-
standings of men are as to heavenly
truths: the Spirit of God can open
them, as He opened those of the


335


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





apostles. 4, We ought to be ashamed
of that unreasonable bashfulness which
makes us choose rather to continue
ignorant than to discover our ignorance.
Nothing but humility can secure us
from it.—P. Quesnel.

Understanding must precede speech.
—It is not to no purpose to speak
things that are not presently under-
stood. Seed, though it lies in the
ground awhile unseen, is not lost or


thrown away, but will bring forth
fruit. If you confine your teacher,
you hinder your learning ; if you limit
his discourses to your present appre-
hensions, how shall he raise your under-
standings? If he accommodate all
things to your present weakness, you
will never be the wiser than you are
now; you will be always in swaddling
clothes (John ii, 22, xiv. 26).—Dr.
Whichcote.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 33—41.
(PaRatLets: Marr. xviii. 1-5; Luxe ix. 46-50.)


Receiving and forbidding.—Surely the disciples might have found something
better to talk about on the road from Cesarea, where they had heard from Jesus
of His sufferings, than this miserable wrangle about rank! Probably they
understood little of His meaning, but hazily thought that the crisis was at hand
when He should establish the kingdom ; and so their ambition, rather than their
affection, was stirred. Perhaps, too, the dignity bestowed on Peter after his
confession, and the favour shewn to the three witnesses of the Transfiguration,
may have created jealousy. Matthew makes the quarrel to have been about
future precedence; Mark, about present. The one was striven for with a view
to the other.

I. Note the law of service as the true greatness (vers. 33-35)‘ When He
was in the house, He asked them.” The tongues that had been so loud on the
road were dumb in the house—silenced by conscience. His servants still do and
say many things on the road which they would not do if they saw Him close
beside them, and sometimes fancy that these escape Him. But when they are
“tin the house” with Him, they will find that He knew all that was going on;
and when He asks the account of it, they too will be speechless. ‘If any man
would be first,” he is to be the least and servant, and thereby he will reach his
aim. Of course that involves the conception of the nature of true greatness as
service, but still the distinction is to be kept in view. Farther, “last of all” is
not the same as “servant of all.” The one expresses humility; the other,
ministry. There are two paradoxes here. The lowest is the highest—the servant
is the chief ; and they may be turned round with equal truth—the highest is the
lowest, and the chief is the servant. The former tells us how things really are,
and what they look like, when seen from the centre by His eye. The latter
prescribes the duties and responsibilities of high position. In fact and truth, to
sink is the way to rise, and to serve is the way to rule—only the rise and ‘the
rule are of another sort than content worldly ambition, and the Christian must
rectify his notions of what loftiness and greatness are. On the other hand,
distinguishing gifts of mind, heart, leisure, position, possessions, or anything
else, are given us for others, and bind us to serve. Both things follow from the
nature of Christ’s kingdom, which is a kingdom of love; for in love the vulgar
distinctions of higher and lower are abolished, and service is delight.

II. Note the exhibition of the law in a life.—Children are quick at finding
out who loves them, and there would always be some hovering near for a smile
from Christ. With what eyes of innocent wonder the child would look up at
Him, as He gently set him there, in the open space in front of Himself! Mark


B26 ms


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IX,


ae Spats a


does not record any accompanying words, and none were needed. The uncon-
sciousness of rank, the spontaneous acceptance of inferiority, the absence of
claims to consideration and respect, which naturally belong to childhood, as it
ought to be, and give it winningness and grace, are the marks of a true disciple,
and are the more winning in such because they are not of nature, but regained
by self-abnegation. What the child is, we have to become. This child was the
example of one half of the law, being “least of all,” and perfectly contented to
be so; but the other half was not shewn in him, for his little hands could do
but small service. Was there, then, no example in this scene of that other
requirement? Surely there was; for the child was not left standing, shy in the
middle, but, before embarrassment became weeping, was caught up in Christ’s
arms and folded to His heart. He had been taken as the instance of humility,


_and he then became the subject of tender ministry. Christ and he divided the


illustration of the whole law between them, and the very inmost nature of true
service was shewn in our Lord’s loving clasp and soothing pressure to His heart.
Christ goes on to speak of the child not as the example of service, but of being
served. ‘The deep words carry us into blessed mysteries which recompense the
lowly servants and lift them high in the kingdom. ‘One of such little children ”
means those who are thus lowly, unambitious, and unexacting. “In My name”
defines the motive as not being simple humanity or benevolence, but the distinct
recognition of Christ’s command and loving obedience to His revealed character.
Unselfish deeds in His name open the heart for more of Christ and God,
and bring on the doer the blessing of fuller insight, closer communion, more
complete assimilation to his Lord. Therefore such service is the road to the
true superiority in His kingdom, which depends altogether on the measure
of His own nature which has flowed into our emptiness.

III. The apostles’ conscience-stricken confession of their breach of the law
(vers. 38-40).—Peter is not spokesman this time, but John, whose conscience
was more quickly pricked. He begins to think that perhaps the man whom
they had silenced was “ one such little child,” and had deserved more sympathetic
treatment. Pity that so many listen to the law, and do not, like John,
feel it prick them! Christ forbids such “forbidding.” They are only to
forbid those who do speak evil of Christ; to all others, even if they have
not reached the full perception of truth, they are to extend patient forbearance
and guidance. ‘“ The mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped”; but the
mouth that begins to stammer His name is to be taught and cherished.

IV. We have the reward of receiving Christ’s little ones set over against the
retribution that seizes those who cause them to stumble (vers. 41, 42).—These
verses seem to resume the broken thread of ver. 37, whilst they also link on to
the great principle laid down in ver. 40. He that is not against is for, even if
he only givesa cup of water because they are Christ’s. ‘That shews that there
is some regard for Jesus in him, It is a germ which may grow. Such a one
shall certainly have his reward. That does not mean that he will receive it in a
future life, but that here his deed shall bring after it blessed consequences to
himself. Of these none can be more blessed than the growing regard for the Name,
which already is in some degree precious to him. The faintest perception of Christ’s
beauty, honestly lived out, will be increased. Note, too, the person spoken of
belongs to the same class as the silenced exorcist, thus reading the disciples a
farther lesson. Jesus will look with love on the acts which even a John wished
to forbid. Note, also, that the disciples here are the recipients of the kindness.
They are no longer being taught to receive the little ones, but are taught
that they themselves belong to that class, and need kindly succour from these
outsiders, whom they had proudly thought to silence.—A. Maclaren, D.D


z a3%


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a RL


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 33, 34. Ambition a universal
fault.—How subtile is the poison of
ambition! how difficult for a man to
preserve himself from it! Few people
are heartily willing to be below others ;
they find as much difficulty almost
to bear an equality; and much the
greatest number think of nothing but
gaining a superiority. Who would
imagine that ambition could take hold
of persons who had forsaken all, and
that the apostolical college should not
be exempt from it? In short, every-
body is subject to it, and nobody is
willing to own it.—P. Quesnel.

Our Lord’s question brings His
hearers back to their higher selves,
and they can again see that to be
permitted to work at all in bringing
God’s kingdom to pass is a great
blessing, in comparison with which
all petty distinctions between this
kind of work and that disappear out
of view. We see in this instance
how the mere question operates. Could
any rebuke have met the purpose
better? Do we not find that an
accusation commonly provokes a de-
fence, and that the temper which is
bent on finding excuse is not that
which leads a man to amend? Our
Lord causes men’s hearts to condemn
them; and when so condemned they
turn in their trouble to Him, and find
that He is “‘ greater than their hearts
and will forgive them”: whereupon a
great light comes into their minds. This
is what happened here.—H. Latham.


Ver. 35. Service the road to prefer-
ment and rule.—To lord it over men
is not the way to win the first place
in their hearts. The men whom we
all know, admire, praise, whom we
cheerfully acknowledge as our superiors,
are those who live for others rather
than for themselves. Men will resist
mere power, but they bow to love.—
S. Cox, DD.

True greatness consists in renouncing
greatness itself, A man becomes a


338


slave to it when once he desires it ;
he is above it whenever he despises
it. The primacy or first place in
humility is the only one to which we
are permitted to aspire. To dispute
with secular persons, which should be
the greatest, is a thing very opposite
to an ecclesiastical spirit. The only
thing of which a minister of Christ
ought to be ambitious is to be the last
of all. Humility must not be an idle
virtue, but a virtue useful to our
neighbour. It places its chief joy
not only in being below all, but even
in serving all. For true charity is
humble, and true humility is charitable.
—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 36. Look at the children.—Look
at the children set by God in our
midst. Christ’s parable to His disciples
can never grow stale, for always there
are fresh young children in our midst
to repeat it. They are there, and
when we are sick with self-reflexion
and self-preoccupation turn and look
at the children. How simply they
take their days! how gaily they face
them! how fresh and natural the
development of their life! how un-
trammelled by questionings about
whether they are properly appreciated
or no! They go, in tears perhaps as
well as laughter, but always in all
circumstances trusting to be just what
they are, trusting to their own native
reality, to the natural self as it acts
in its spontaneous freedom. Love is
trust—trust in God, the trust of a
child that he was made to be what
he is. We take our being on trust.
No growth in self-direction diminishes
in the least degree the absolute necessity
of continuing to act in the child’s trust.
God’s creative impulse abides from
hour to hour within us, feeding,
moulding, upholding, making us what
we are; and the child in us alone
enables us to respond to His impulse,
to live in His breath, to move in His
will. . Oh, what sweet and tender


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX,


a a a SET SE =


peace would spring up within our
secret souls if deep within, belov,
and beyond all the self-questionings
we could just quietly lie back in God
like a child in the arms of Jesus!
There is a great picture by Watts,
charged with his mystic passion, in
which an old man, worn and feeble,
lies back in his chair, dying, and
round him, dropped from his nerveless
hands, lie all the gifts of his culture,
the tools and signs of all that has
been his in philosophy, in science and
art. Wearily he fades away, amid
the wreck of his highest human ex-
periences; and then up above a great
angel, benignant and strong, bears off
his soul, new-born through death in
the shape of a baby child, soft, white,
and warm. A child-soul—that is what
a man should have within him at the
last, still living within him to surrender
at death to his God. It is as a little
child that he shall enter that new
kingdom of love, as a little child that
he should be taken up into the arms
of Jesus and set there in the midst.—
Canon Scott-Holland.

Childhood our model.—Was it the
boy Ignatius or the little son of Peter ?
We know not. It was childhood, and
not the particular child, which Jesus
commended as the model of the Chris-
tian life. In the condensed report of
the talk of Jesus at this time, Matthew
tells us about “turning” from the
natural or selfish mind to that of
the child’s, or about being “ con-
verted.” Luke emphasises the fact
that Jesus read the hearts of His
disciples and spoke directly to these.
Mark selects the blessedness of lowly
service as the theme most urged upon
His followers by Him who emptied
Himself of His glory. In all three
the main purpose of Jesus was to shew
that the Christian life is but a glorified
childhood.


Vers. 37. The Church the guardian of
the children.—The care taken. of these
little ones may be regarded as among
the tests of the sound state of any
branch of the Church to which they


have been so lovingly commended by
her Lord; they, in outward shew,
poor, helpless, weak, ignorant, having
everything to learn—to the eye of
taith, cleansed in their Redeemer’s
blood, waited upon and guarded by
the highest angels, clad in the white
robes of their baptismal purity, rich in
invisible treasures, insensible to our
poor outward world, and wrapped in
a world unseen, and set forth as our
example that we should become such
as they. Of a truth, whether we con-
template them in ¢heir purity, or our
Saviour’s “woe on such as cause them
to offend,” one would alike shrink from
the duty of forming what is of so great
price and yet so frail, but that a duty
is laid upon us, yea, “ woe is on us, if
we do it not”; and it is not we alone
who do it, but He who saith, “ Whoso
receiveth one such little child in My
name receiveth Me”; He whose face
their angels in heaven do always
behold.—#. B. Pusey, DD.

““ Such children.” —The term includes
all who are in any way like such
children : as, for instance, all who are
helpless, as children are; all who are
simple-minded, or even weak in mind ;
or, particularly, all who are young in
the faith, who, like children, require
the “milk” of the Word, and not its
“strong meat.”—~M. J’. Sadler.

“In My name.”-—That is, for My
sake ; not only because they are bap-
tised or belong to Christian parents,
though these are good reasons indeed,
but because they partake of the nature
which Christ took upon Him, because
they belong to the race which Christ
redeemed—because like Him they are
poor, and have no settled homes, or
because He may be honoured in their
after-life. Such children are received
in Christ’s name not only in orphanages
or in Sunday-schools, but by many of
the Christ-loving poor who have chil-
dren of their own, and yet take into
their homes some poor waif or stray,
and cherish it as their own flesh and
blood for no reward except the Lord’s
approval,—T/bid.

“ Receiveth Me.’—The grace of this


339


Chaz. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


er


promise seems almost incredible. What
an honour would any Christian have
esteemed it if he had been permitted
to receive Christ under his roof for
a single hour, and yet that receiv-
ing might have been external and
transitory; but the Lord here un-
doubtedly promises that to receive a
little one in His name is to receive
Him effectually.—Jbid.


Vers. 38-40. Christian usefulness.—
1. The great principle of Christian
usefulness. He whose first concern
it is to be faithful to Christ, as the
Almighty Saviour of the human race
and the Lord of the dead and of the
living, will be equally faithful and
pure in his conduct to the world around
him: earnest in selecting the means
and opportunities of usefulness; active
and conscientious in applying them ;
firm in his purpose, in opposition both
to foreseen.and to unexpected difficulties,
where he sees the good which may be
done. 2. The obstructions to con-
scientious usefulness which in every
age of the world arise from false
conceptions or from a deliberate per-
version of the genuine spirit of the
gospel. 3. The indulgence which is
due from sincere believers to the pure
intentions of useful and upright men.
Though the means employed should
not embrace every instrument of use-
fulness which our peculiar views or
habits might suggest to ourselves,
when the general effect is visible and
the means selected are in themselves
beyond all exception, we are bound to
regard the labours of the men who are
employed together in conducting them
as genuine service to our Blessed
Master, and to respect them as
fellow-workers together with Him,—
H, M. Wellwood.


Ver. 38. Indiscreet zeal.—The most
holy persons have sometimes occasion
to secure themselves from _ secret
emulations. We very easily mingle
our own interests with those of God ;
and our vanity uses the glory of His
name only as a veil. A preacher some-


340


times imagines that his only desire is
that men should follow Christ and
adhere to His Word; and it is himself
whom he desires they should follow,
and to whom he is very glad to find
them adhere. John has fewer imita-
tors of that perfect freedom from self-
interest which he had after the descent
of the Holy Ghost, than he has of this
defect in his state of imperfection. A
man willingly approves the good which
is done by others, when he loves good
for its own sake and God for His.—
P. Quesnel.

The confidence between Master and
disciple evidenced by this free avowal
is to be marked: if the disciples had
been set right whenever they were
wrong, or had frequently met with
reproach, such confidence might not
have grown up. It was much helped
on by their being sure that their
Master would understand them : what
often keeps young people from opening
their hearts to their elders is that they
are afraid of not being understood.
But though our Lord is very gentle in
His treatment of the particular case,
yet He speaks strongly of the distemper
of which a symptom had appeared—of
the evil humour which vents itself in
rebuffs.—H. Latham.


Ver. 39. The Church's duty as to
irregular preachers.—There are great
numbers of persons amongst us who
are preaching Christ after their fashion
who have had not only no commission
from the Church, but no training even
in the Scriptures from any professedly
religious body whatsoever. Are we
of the Church to forbid them, ze. to
denounce them as necessarily schis-
matic and anti-Christian? JI think
that this place, together with such
words as those in Phil. i. 18, settles
the matter that we are not. But then
we are bound to do that which will
entail upon ourselves far more trouble
and odium. We are bound to witness
to such preachers and their followers
that Christ desires the absolute Unity
of His Church, and exhibited His desire
by very earnestly praying for it


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





(John xvii. 20, 21); so that if they
preach such things as conversion and
present acceptance of Christ without
regard to the truth that there is not
only “one Spirit” but “one Body,” they
may destroy with one hand what they
think they build up with the other.
We are bound also to tell them that
in all probability they hold an imper-
fect, indeed a very mutilated Chris-
tianity ; for all such persons are, by
the necessity of their position as ex-


ternal to the Catholic Church, unable:


to comprehend the truths which relate
to the Mystical Body, and in con-
sequence they ignore the leading truths
of the apostolic writings (Rom. vi,
xii. 1-4; 1 Cor. vi. 18-20, x. 16-18,
xii. 12-30; Eph. i. 22, 23, iii. 6, iv.
4-6); they in consequence disparage
altogether the grace of Sacraments,
have most imperfect views of the holi-
ness of the Christian’s body, and of set
purpose absolve their followers from
all need of preparation for the judg-
ment of Christ. The loss of these
truths we should bring before them
very prayerfully and very humbly,
knowing that the Church herself has
in time past through her ministers
imperfectly taught them ; but still we
should set them before them very
decidedly, for they are not our truths,
but the Lord’s, and in so doing we
shall not be without success.—/, F.
Sadler.

“Forbid him not.”—We can con-
ceive what such an utterance as this
of Jesus was to the disciples as they
listened to Him. Was it a disappoint-
ment that came to them? I think
not. I think they were too great and
noble men for that. I can almost see
the face of John glowing with satisfac-
tion and delight, and a certain release
and freedom coming to his soul. I can
almost hear him say: ‘Then I need
not have rebuked that man. Then
my Master will let me rejoice in every
work that is being done in His name,
no matter how imperfectly and ir-
regularly it may be done.” Oh, let
that release come to your souls out of
the words of Jesus! Do not think


~Sre


CHAP. IX.


yourselves ever bound to be narrow
and exclusive in jealousy for your
Lord. Believe He wants you to go
through the world as He went through
the world, seeking out what men are
doing of good and rejoicing in that
good.— Bishop Phillips Brooks.

Christ suffers many things in His
Church which are done without His
mission; but He makes them con-
tribute to the establishment of His
kingdom. Whatever reason we may
have to fear that some persons will
not persevere in goodness, we must
notwithstanding suffer them to con-
tinue their endeavours, when they
appear to be anyways useful. God
Himself authorises such persons, since
it is He who performs the good in them.
It is to make the world promote and
carry on God’s work, for a man to
engage worldly people to do good, or
to favour the Church. And this is
sometimes even a beginning of their
salvation.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 40. On Chrisi’s side-—Not in
the truth we believe, although it is
good to believe all truth, lies the real
sanction and warrant of our belonging
to our Master, Christ. It is not in
the regularity of our association with
the Church, although it is good to.
be associated with that Church which
He founded, and which has come
down through the ages from Him.
Ultimately there is only this test. We
are on His side if we are not against
Him. If our work in the world is
helping men to be wicked instead of
good, then, whatever may be our saying
or our creed or our part in the as-
semblies of the Church, we are none


of Jesus Christ’s.—Bishop Phillips
Brooks.
Ver. 41. Sympathy with Christ's


ministers.—I. The need of sympathy


‘with ministers of the gospel is im-


plied.—1. Destitution may arise from
thoroughness of devotion to their work,
Care for the spiritual may trespass
upon the temporal. History of Jesus;
Paul. 2. Destitution may arise from


341


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


oa


the opposition of the world to their
work. Spoiling of goods. 3. Desti-
tution may arise from Divine pro-
vidence, in order to test their sincerity
in the work.

II. The nature of sympathy with
ministers of the gospel is described.—
2. It may be small in quantity. 2. It
may be exhibited by any one. 3. It
must be from regard to Christ.


III. The reward of sympathy with


gospel ministers is pledged—_1. It
will be substantial acknowledgment.
2. It will be personally enjoyed. 3. It
is Divinely assured.—B. D. Johns.

“ Ye belong to Christ.—1. Proprietor-


ship. We are all Christ’s—(1) By
creation. (2) By redemption. (3) By
baptism. 2. Privilege. (1) Special
care. (2) Identity of interests.
(3) High dignity. 3. Responsibility.
(1) To live for Christ. (2) To live
like Christ. (3) To confess Christ.—
R. Roberts.

The reward for Christian service.—
The action is worthy and rewardable,
and shall therefore obtain reward.
Not that there is anything in it that
should or could be erected on a high
pedestal of merit. But, -eing right
and good, God will smile on it.—
J. Morison, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 42—50.
(PaRatLeL: Marr. xviii. 6-9.)


Vers. 42-48. Offences.—“ The law was given by Moses; grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ.” It seems as though the contrast was suggested. I think it was.
But men make a tremendous mistake if they imagine that gentleness means weak-
ness, or that only in obtrusive terribleness comes a revelation of strength. The
speech of Jesus is the mightiest utterance the world has ever heard. The law
of life and love, the call to righteousness which He delivered, is the most awfully
soul-searching, all-encompassing, fiery word which has ever reached the listening
ears and beating hearts of men. The only salvation worth the having is a
salvation unto God. A purpose which alone satisfies Him as being worthy of
the Infinite Father is to renew His own image in His children, and make us
like unto Himself.

I. Christian life is a thorough consecration Anything less than this turns
religion into a dismal burden, But this makes its face to shine with the
very glory of God, and its power comes to us as an uplifting joy, a thrilling
inspiration; thy whole self, body, mind, heart, soul, hallowed, consecrated,
dedicated. What do you think of it? This is to be, this 7s the fulness of the
blessing of the gospel of Christ. High, great, difficult, beyond our capacity.
Yes, and therefore comes the salvation from the everlasting, Almighty One.
He is able and He is patient. What He begins He can complete. Our world
of weak, erring, human life has known one Being who maintained a complete,
supreme, unswerving consecration. He is the Saviour of men. He inbreathes
His life; His mind, His spirit, may be in us. Men have felt His spell and
realised His power. His promise has been so far known to be a great reality
that it brought faith enough to a disciple to say, ‘We shall be like Him.”

II. Now it will be evident, if we pause to think, that, as the sphere of our
being rises, dangers and hindrances will come, which lower down may not be
so obtrusive. There can be no question as to desires, passions, activities, words,
deeds, thoughts, which are wrong in themselves. The Christian has no business
with them. The right eye, the right hand, are not wrong things. They are
good faculties, good energies, which are a splendid gift for consecrated use. The
advice of the fanatic or the coward is, “ Destroy the sense, blind it, muffle it,


342


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IX.
ce a


for in it lies a danger”; and out of that have come all the austerities of the
ascetic, all the inhumanity of the Stoic, but with no real redemption. The
advice of the presumptuous fatalist is, “ Withhold not thy heart from any joy;
you are not responsible for your weakness or your passion”; and out of that
have come the degradation of men, the fierce and terrible lines which sensual
sin brands upon the sinner’s face. In the one extreme a man tries to have
nothing to pray for; in the other he dares to pray for the working of a miracle
in aid of wrong. We must avoid both presumption and distrust. Broadly
speaking, I suppose the eye may stand for that which is beautiful, pleasurable,
and the hand for that which is active and energetic ; in a word, occupation and
recreation, labour and luxury. These are wholesome, natural, essential, to our
due being. Without them a man is manifestly maimed. But, says Jesus, it
is better to be maimed than slain. The limb or the body, the organ or the
whole self: can there be any question as to which? I have known men on
what was said to be the way to fortune, who seemed to me to be stumbling
on a footway like that outside Jerusalem, where the precipice overhung Gehenna.
I have known men, said to be ruined, from whom God had mercifully cut away
the peril of their soul.

III. But Jesus here, as always, lays His appeal upon conscience —This alone
would have made Him solitary among all leaders and teachers. He clears
conscience from its shadow, and says, “ Look to its light ”—your own conscience,
not another man’s. You have no business with the hands and eyes of others;
= have great business with your own. Looking unto Jesus, you will not be
ed astray. Maintaining communion with Him, conscience will be lustrous
and clear. Cling to Him, your Saviour. Obey His voice, your Lord.
D. J. Hamer.


Ver. 50. The salt of Christian profession —* Salt is good.” The wise son of
Sirach says, “The principal things for the whole of a man’s life are water, fire,
iron, and salt”; after which follow in their turn “flour of wheat, honey, milk
and the blood of the grape, and oil, and clothing.” Amongst the good things of
this present life—the natural productions which the Giver of all good has caused
to exist for the use and benefit of His creatures—we may surely reckon a
condiment so indispensable to health and enjoyment. Yes, “salt is good”;
and it cannot lose its goodness or usefulness so long as it is salt.

I. In the symbolical language of Scripture, salt is applied. in several ways,
according to its various uses and properties—1. The first and most obvious
of all is derived from its seasoning property. Salt makes savoury and palatable®
that which has no taste of its own (Job vi. 6). Divine grace communicates a
similar relish to everything in which it may be said to form an ingredient—
to every part of the life and conversation of him who is under its influence, but
especially to his familiar discourse. Hence the apostolic admonition (Col. iv. 6).
And to this same seasoning virtue our Lord Himself alludes when He says to
His disciples, ‘‘ Ye are the salt of the earth”—as if all that is in the world
were utterly tasteless and unpalatable in the judgment of truth until seasoned
and as it were leavened with the holy doctrines and pure principles of Chris-
tianity. ‘“ But if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye season 7?”
What other more powerful or more salutary religion remains behind to renovate
the enfeebled energies of a corrupt and degenerate Christianity? 2. This article
entering so largely into the arrangements of the table, especially in the more
simple forms of society, we need not be surprised to find it sometimes put for
food in general. ‘To “eat a person’s salt” carries with it among Eastern nations
the same idea as with us ‘“‘to eat a person’s bread,” ¢.e. to be in his domestic
service or otherwise employed by him at a salary (a term which derived its


343


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR.


cn


origin from the Latin word for salt). See Ezra iv. 14, text and margin. Hence
also salt became a symbol of hospitality and friendship; and an Arab of the
present day regards every one who has eaten salt with him as his sworn friend
and brother, whom he is bound on all occasions to protect. Connected with this
idea is the custom of eating a few grains of salt at the ratification of covenants.
See Num. xviii. 19; Lev. ii. 13. 3. But that which is ever so good in modera-
tion and in its proper place may without those conditions be turned into the
sorest of evils. “Salt is good”; but when it covers the whole face of the
country, and the husbandman sees nothing around him but “brimstone and salt
and burning” (Deut. xxix. 23), this most useful commodity becomes another
word for barrenness and desolation. See Jer. xvii. 6; Ps. cvii. 34, margin. To
this head may probably be referred the custom of sowing salt (Judg. ix. 45) in
a place which was intended to be devoted to perpetual desolation.

TI. Whereas this substance is used to season others, we know of no other
which can be made use of to impart a savour to salt.—Insipid salt may
therefore be regarded as another name for whatever is useless and valueless,
not in its own nature, but as being devoid of those very properties in which
its excellence consists. 1. Salt that has lost its saltness may fitly represent a
religious profession which does not influence the conduct. The profession of
religion is good. It is good to see a man framing his life, arranging his habits,
ordering his family, on the supposition that “ God is, and that He is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek Him.” It is good to see him entering into his
closet, and shutting the door and praying to his Father which seeth in secret.
It is good to see him coming forth from his private devotions, and summoning
his family to join with him in domestic worship. It is good to see him and
them in the Lord’s house on the Lord’s Day, and especially at the altar to
receive the Sacrament of the Lord’s Body and Blood. All these things are good,
for the same reason that salt is good—because of their aptitude to impregnate
and season other things, all things, in fact, with which they are mixed up.
This is the proper virtue and natural operation of a man’s religious profession ;
the whole life ought to taste of it. But, alas, how seldom is this so! How few
are there amongst the multitude of professing Christians who in the common
concerns of life think and speak and act differently from those who are openly
living without God in the world! 2. Salt that has lost its saltness may also
fitly represent a Christian who does no good to others. Just as the use of salt
is to season not itself but other things which either have no savour of their own
or an unpleasant one, so the use of Christianity is to season an ungodly and
unbelieving world with the truths and principles of pure and undefiled religion.
This can only be accomplished by the exertions of individual Christians, each
seeking the good and promoting the eternal salvation of all who come within
the circle of his influence. “This,” says Chrysostom, ‘is the definition of
Christianity—to care for the salvation of others. Nothing is so frivolous and
insipid as a Christian who does not save others.” And yet there are many who
seem to understand that text, “ Work out your own salvation,” in the same
way as if they had been told to mind their own business and not to trouble
themselves about the religious state of others. They do work out their own
salvation, at least according to their views of the method of working it. They
are zealous towards God, diligent in the performance of religious duties, strict
moralists, and blameless in all the common duties and relations of life. Thus
they may be said to “have salt in themselves.” But how do they realise that
other and higher requirement, to be “the salt of the earth”? Where are their
seasoning qualities? Wherein does such a man “please his neighbour for his
good to edification”? Does he “command his children and his household after
him to keep the way of the Lord”? Does he seek the good of the city where


544


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. IX.
ee
he dwells, doing all in his power to discountenance wickedness and vice, and to
season that locality with which he is more immediately connected, with the
salt of true religion and virtue? Do his efforts reach forth beyond the narrow
limits and petty concerns of a single locality? and does he cast in his mite of
salt to the general stock which is employed in seasoning, converting, and evan-
gelising the world? 3. What has been said of the duty of all Christians to
seek the spiritual good of others applies in the highest degree to the priesthood
of the Church. Insipid salt is but a feeble illustration of the character of a
careless and unfaithful “minister of Christ and steward of the mysteries of
God”—as to be “cast out and trodden underfoot of men” but faintly shadows
forth his inevitable doom.

III. Improvement under religious advantages depends in a great measure
upon ourselves.—“‘ The Word preached,” be it ever so highly seasoned, will not
profit unless it be “mixed with faith in them that hear it.” “Salt is good” ;
but there are some substances so utterly corrupt and stinking as to bid defiance
to its correcting and preserving power. We Christian preachers are, according
to St. Paul, “a sweet savour of Christ,” etc. (2 Cor. ii. 15, 16). The salt is the
same ; its natural properties are the same ; but, being applied to one, it preserves
him from corruption and seasons him for the kingdom of heaven; while, being
sprinkled on another, it salts him as a sacrifice to be offered up to the Divine
vengeance, and makes him indestructible only for the worm that dieth not, and
the fire that cannot be quenched, until the man’s heart is humbled to the dust
and he cries aloud for mercy to the God whose grace he has heretofore spurned
If therefore ye would escape the agonies of hell, “take heed what ye hear”
and “how ye hear.” ‘ Receive with meekness the engrafted Word,” ete. ‘Give
no place to the devil,” who is ever watching his opportunity to “take away the
Word out of your hearts,” etc. “Keep yourselves unspotted from the world,”
which is always at hand with its contaminating influence, “the cares and riches
and pleasures of this life,” to choke the Word and make it unfruitful. And
finally, pray constantly to God to give you more and more of that “honest and
good heart,” which “‘ having heard the Word keeps it and brings forth fruit with
patience.”


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 42-48. Self-control and self-
denial.—The whole passage is steeped
in metaphor. No one is expected to
take the scandal or trap of vers. 42,
43, 45 literally, or the ass-millstone or
the flinging into the sea, or the Gehenna.
Why, then, should we insist on taking
literally either the hand or the foot of
these verses, or even the inextinguish-
able fire? The principle which under-
lies them is, that a man had far better
part with, lose, sacrifice, anything and
everything else, however good it may
be in itself or however dear, than suffer
himself to be hindered in that service
of truth and goodness in which he finds
his true life, or that fidelity to Christ
in which eternal life consists. It is


not by mutilating the body, but only
by a wise and resolute self-control, a
wise and resolute rule of our own spirit,
that we can maintain our loyalty to
Him, and walk with even and steadfast
foot in His ways. And if we find that
in ourselves which hinders or makes
us stumble in these ways, He would
have us know that, unless we freely
renounce it, there is that both in the
righteousness and in the love of God
which will kindle on it like a fire, and
burn it out of us; yes, and burn us
until we let it go.—S. Cox, D.D.
Destruction of evil.The point to
which our Lord really directs our
thoughts is, that all that is evil in us,
however closely it sits to the heart,


345


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


must be destroyed ; that not only in a
future world of woe—which we might
just as truly depict as all millstone
and sea, as all worm and fire—but
here and now, as well as then and
there, the righteousness and love of
God will burn against all unrighteous-
ness of men, burn more keenly and
inwardly and consumingly than any
fire; that all in us which exalts itself
against Him or stands in the way of
our own perfection, or militates against
the welfare of the world, will infallibly
expose us to a discipline more dread-
ful and agonising than metaphor can
convey or imagination conceive. The
severity is part of the goodness of God.
—Ihid.

Something betier than acrimony.—
Instead of acrimony against those who
follow not with us, let us bend all our
anger and resentment, all our bitter-
ness and hostility, against our own
lusts and sinful propensities, not sparing
one of them, though they be as dear
to us as the members of our bodies, as
our hands, our feet, or our eyes, and
however painful the amputation or
mortification of them may be to us.
—C. Seymour.


Ver. 42. Skandala.—W hen we learn
that it was John’s repulse of the man
who had cast out demons which set
our Lord on this theme, a light is
thrown on the particular meaning of
the word “skandala,” which I think
was in our Lord’s mind—that, viz.,
‘ of the checking others on their way
to good, the throwing back on itself
of the enthusiasm or warm affection
which was beginning to flow, and the
choking up of the heartsprings thereby.
The man who had been casting out
demons and was turned back because
he did not follow with the apostles
might have asked, ‘‘ Would the scribes
and Pharisees have treated me worse ?”
The revulsion might deaden his spiritual
life.—H. Latham.

Stumbling-blocks.—To go where we
should not go, to do what we should
not do, to touch what we should not
touch with hand or eye, tongue or foot,


346


is to set one of these traps in motion.
To lie in wait on any honest path, to
forbid or condemn any good action,
movement, teaching, to hinder men,
to trip them up, to hold them back,
when they are bent on the service of
truth or going on any errand of mercy,
is to be such a trap: it is to scandalise.
or set them stumbling. Better to die,
better even to be hanged, than to
become a trap, a drag, in the ser. ‘se
of truth and goodness: a defender of
the faith, for example, who, honestly
intending its defence, nevertheless
opposes its growth, retards, or even
blights, its springing and germinant
powers. The most capable and eminent
servants of the truth in all ages have
had to waste half their strength in
breaking through these traps and
snares. Don’t you be one of these
traps, or even the tongue of a trap.—
S. Cou, D.D.

We offend Christ's little ones every
time we give them, in place of gospel
bread, the stones of human philosophy ;
or, in place of the nourishment of
simple faith in Christ, the sting of
some abstraction about which sectaries
quarrel.

Where in our Lord’s teachings do you
jind stronger words than these /—He
never denounced murder or unchastity
or malice of any kind in stronger terms,
and the reason is not far to seek. He
who deliberately puts the occasion of
falling in the way of Christ’s little ones
is really committing a heinous sin; it
is murder and suicide combined, for
while he injures the soul of him who is
weak and helpless, he is really destroy-
ing all that is pure and Christlike in
his own nature.


Vers. 43-48. The awfulness of hell.
—In this and other passages Christ
speaks of hell in terms far more solemn
and terrible than any other prophet
or messenger of God has done. Why
isthis? 1. Because Heis emphatically |
the teacher of God’s truth in its fullest
form, without reservation or conceal-
ment, 2. Because He alone has per-
fect knowledge on the subject of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


9


eternal world. 3. Because of His
infinite love. He paints hell in all
its awfulness, to induce men to flee
from the wrath to come and to seek
refuge ia Him.

Precautions against evil.—W hat pre-
cautions do we not take to avoid an
infectious air, and to prevent a con-
tagious distemper from spreading ?
How much greater reason have we to
shun those persons who are to us an
occasion of sin, were they, on the
account of their advice, protection, and
assistanee, as dear to us as our hands,
our feet, and our eyes? How much
more still ought we to cut off all
criminal, unprofitable, and dangerous
use of our senses, our mind, and our
body 2—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 44. The worm of remorse.—
Who can conceive the torment of this
gnawing worm, namely, of the eternal
reproach of conscience, when a man
shall reflect upon the graces and mercies
of God which he has despised, and on
the preference he has made of the
shadow of a momentary happiness,
before a substantial and eternal good,
which is God Himself ?—Jbid.


Ver. 45. The cutting off of the foot
is the breaking off all commerce with
the world by a holy retirement, when-
ever it becomes necessary to salvation.
To quit the occasions of falling is not
a counsel of perfection, but a neces-
sary duty, since salvation depends
upon it.—lbid.


Ver. 49. The true sacrificial fire of
self-denial and _ self-mortification in
relation to the fiery flame of hell.
1. The relation: all must be salted
with fire. 2. The contrast: to be
prepared for the fire by salt, or to be
salted with fire.—J. P. Lange, D.D.

The two fies.—We cannot escape
the fire; but we have the choice be-
tween the fire of life and the fire of
death.—Jbid.

Learn—1. Christians ought to be
as spiritual sacrifices or oblations
offered up to God in this life. 2. The


CHAP, Ix.





ministry of the Word ought to be as
salt to season men for God, and fit for
His use and service. 3. As salt, being
of a hot and dry nature, is apt to bite
and fret the raw skin or flesh, so the
Word of God, preached and applied to
men’s consciences, is apt to cause pain
and grief.—G@. Petter.


Ver. 50. Saltless salt.—Three times,
in different connexions, this proverb is
recorded in Christ’s teaching, in each
case in reference to the failure of that
which was excellent and hopeful. In
St. Matthew it is applied generally
to the influence of His new people on
the world; in St. Mark to the danger
to ourselves of the careless or selfish
use of our personal influence; in St.
Luke to the conditions of sincere dis-
cipleship. But in all cases it contem-
plates the possible failure of religion
to do its perfect work.—Dean Church.

Deterioration.—There is such a thing
as moral and spiritual decay—in stan-
dard, motive, devotion, sacrifice, good-
ness. Whatarethesignsofit? 1. A
lowered and attenuated ideal. Christ
has little by little become almost
a personal stranger. We have not
consciously renounced Him, but have
lagged so far behind in the journey
that He is quite out of our sight and
reach. 2. A growing indifference to
all great enterprise for Christ. 3. A
deepening indifference to truth for its
own sake, though not infrequently
accompanied with an augmenting
fierceness of controversy and a spirit
of partisanship in contending with
those on the other side. Few forms
of self-deceit are more treacherous or
more hardening than that which thinks
to contend for the truth without love.
4. Inconsistency in the use and enjoy-
ment of what we understand by earthly
and worldly things. To aim at both
worlds is usually to end in enjoying
neither.— Bishop Thorold.

True savour.—lf we merely have
the salt of good doctrine, without
having the true savour and seasoning
of personal godliness, we may become
utterly worthless—like the waters of


347


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Ce a a te a


the “Dead Sea,” so called, whose
waters receive a large quantity of salt,
but which, by remaining stagnant,
become so dense that nothing can live
or grow in them.—S. Jenner.
Christians the salt of the earth.-—It is
for the best welfare of every nation
and city on the face of the earth that
the children of God should be in it, not
merely for its spiritual welfare, but
even that the blessing of God may
descend upon it in earthly matters, the
hand of God guiding and directing it.
Tt is for the best interests both of this
life and of the life to come that the
children of God should pervade the
earth from one end to another, and
that the blessing of God should rest
upon all men for their sakes. No
doubt in the process of thus spreading
through the earth the children of God
may be persecuted and harassed and
vexed; death may be their portion;
their earthly goods may be spoiled at
the hands of ungodly men; they may
sufier for their faithfulness to Christ


and to His cause. Are they not the
liker to the salt which perishes in the
very using, and is crushed into extinc-
tion simply by doing its work in the
world? Let them be scattered abroad,
therefore, come of them what may;
and then, when the gospel shall have
been preached in all the nations of the
world, when there is something of this
salt of the earth scattered everywhere,
then we are told the end shall come,
the world shall be ready for its bless-
ing, ready for the presence of its God,
ready to become the new heavens and
the new earth wherein dwelleth right-
eousness.—A. Melvill, D.D.

Peace without, from purity within.—
The meaning of the last clause in this
verse is, that the strongest personal
character is quite consistent with the
gentlest Christian temper and_be-
haviour. Christ intends to say, that
His disciples not only may be calm
and decided too; but that, if they are
true ones, that is just what they will
be.—S. Rickards.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IX.


Ver. 2. Dowologies to God for the moun-
tains—In their mineral treasures, in the
liberal toll taken from the clouds and dis-
bursed in channels of blessing, in their
worldwide sanatory influence, felt where
unseen, what a boon are they to men!
Often have they given friendly shelter to
the hunted spirit of liberty. They have
made a higher civilisation possible. They
have quickened desire for the same by
furnishing so largely the needed instru-
ments of agriculture, manufacture, com-
merce, and the arts. How vivifying and
ennobling the influence which their beauty,
variety, sublimity, repose, and strength
exercise upon the minds and hearts of
men! Rich and varied is the inheritance
of the high and holy in intellectual, moral,
and spiritual things which but for the
mountains would be unenjoyed by men.
In a thousand ways how the “everlasting
hills” help men upward nearer heaven and
God! They are the cathedral spires of the
world for ever pointing the nations to the
things above. Streams of physical, in-
tellectual, political, moral, and spiritual good
have enriched human life through its
relations with the everlasting hills—W. .
Campbell.


348


Christ’s transfiguration.—I have stood by
the side of the tall mast in Madison Square,
New York, at early evening, wondering at
the unique and surprising structure, re-
cognising it as something extraordinary,
and yet not knowing exactly what it meant
or what was its effect, when suddenly the
rushing of an unseen force was heard, there
was a flash, and a circle of fire surrounded
the top of the mast and cast its weird
light far out into the surrounding dark-
ness. So to the disciples on the mount came
the transfiguration of Christ. He stood
before them in the impressiveness of a rare
and wonderful Manhood, when suddenly
that Manhood glowed with an internal fire.
God was within the Man, and the mouns
tain summit became on the -instant resplen-
dent with the Divine glory flasking forth.—
A. P. Foster.


Ver. 3. The beauty of the snow.—The
white wonder of the snow is spread so often
before our eyes every winter that many of
us forget how wonderful and how beautiful
it is. With impatience and fretful com-
plainings we look up at the threatening
sky, where the grey clouds drive before
the wind thick with the coming snow.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. IX.


Se ee


Presently the delicate crystals, star-shaped,
feather-soft, white and sparkling, begin to
fall as silently as the slippered fuot of
Time; at first coming down slowly and
timidly, then gathering courage, and whirl-
ing down as if in delight at their own
beauty. No fewer than ninety-six separate
exquisite forms have been discerned among
the flakes of the snow, every form as perfect
as geometry can imagine or the sculptor’s
art devise.—Dr. Talmage.


Vers. 5, 6. Religious enthusiasm cannot
be detained._I have seen in the little
English city of Salisbury the great cathedral.
It was built when a flood-tide of religious
enthusiasm was sweeping over the world.
Thousands might worship, thousands have
worshipped, within that splendid fane, and
its walls were not able to contain the great
flood of devotion. But the tide has ebbed;
the ecstatic vision has faded. The mighty
cathedral stands; but a handful of wor-
shippers can scarcely keep a sleepy rivulet
of praise flowing in a corner of the building.
No tabernacie can detain a moment of
religious enthusiasm; and if Peter and his
friends had built the grandest cathedral in
the world on the ridge of Mount Hermon,
it might have been empty and bare to-day.
—H. Van Dyke, D.D.


Ver. 8. Jesus only.—When Bishop Beve-
ridge was on his death-bed, his memory so
failed that he did not know even his nearest
relative. His chaplain said, ‘Do you know
me?” “Who are you?” was the answer.
His own wife asked him, “Do you know
me?” “Who are you?” was the only
answer. On being told that it was his wife
he said that he did not know her. Then
one standing by said, “ Do you know Jesus
Christ ?” “Jesus Christ?” he replied, re-
viving as if the name acted on him like a
cordial; “yes, I have known Him these
forty years; He is my only hope.”


Ver. 19. Lack of faith.—Admiral Dupont
was once explaining to Farragut the reason
why he failed to enter Charlestown harbour
with his fleet of ironclads. He gave this
reason, and that reason, and the other
reason; and Farragut remained silent until
he had got through, and then said, ‘“ Ah,
Dupont, there was one more reason.”
‘What is that?” “You didn’t believe you
could do it!”


Vers. 23, 24. The use of weak faith —
When the suspension bridge across Niagara
was erected, a kite took a string over to the
other side; to this string a cord was at-
tached and was drawn over, then a rope
which drew a larger rope, and then a cable
strong enough to sustain the iron cable
which supported the bridge, over which


heavily laden trains now pass in safety.
This could never have been done but for the
small kite, which may represent a faith
which, though weak, yet reaches to Christ
and heaven.

Little faith in a great God.—There was
once a woman who was well known for her
simple faith and great calmness in the
midst of many trials, Another woman hear-
ing of her, went to learn the secret of her
holy, happy life. She accosted her by say-
ing, “Are you the woman with the great
faith?” “No,” she replied, “I am not the
woman with the great faith; but I am the
woman with a little faith in the great God.”


Ver, 24. Obedience has a firm basis.—The
same state of mind, looked at from its two
opposite ends, as it were, may be designated
faith or unbelief; just as a piece of shot
silk, according to the angle at which you
hold it, may shew you only the bright
colours of its warp or the dark ones of its
weft. When you are travelling in a railway
train with the sun streaming in at the
windows, if you look out on the one hand
you will see the illumined face of every tree
and blade of grass and house, and if you
look out on the other you will see the dark
side. And so the same landscape may seem
to be all lit up by the sunshine of belief, or
to be darkened by the gloom of distrust. If
we consider how great and how perfect
ought to be our obedience, to bear any due
proportion to the firmness of that upon
which it is built, we shall not be slow to
believe that through life there will always
be the presence, more or less, of these two
elements. There will be all degrees of pro-
gress between the two extremes of infantile
and mature faith. A. Maclaren, D.D.

Fluctuations of faith—Travelling on the
plain, which, notwithstanding, has its risings
and fallings, I discovered Salisbury steeple
many miles off; coming to a declivity, I lost
the sight thereof, but, climbing up the next
hill, the steeple grew out of the ground
again, Yea, i often found it and lost it, till
at last I came safely to it, and took my
lodgings near it. It fareth thus with us
while we are wayfaring to heaven. Mounted
on the Pisgah top of some good meditation,
we get a glimpse of our celestial Canaan ;
but when either on the flat of an ordinary
temper, or in the fall of an extraordinary
temptation, we lose the view thereof. Thus,
in the sight of our soul, heaven is discovered,
covered, and recovered; till, though late, at
last, though slowly, surely, we arrive at
the haven of our happiness.— Thomas Fuller.


Ver. 29. Prayer—I once went to see
Channing at Newport, and he told me that
a minister had been to see him that day,
and had told how he had once been called
in to exorcise a madman. The man was in


349


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


aD


a paroxysm; but his friends had an idea
that it could be relieved by prayer. The
minister, himself a man of simple faith,
could not refuse the request, and went into
the room where the maniac was, took him
by the hand, and said, “Let us kneel down
and pray.” He said that he never prayed
so sincerely in all his life. When he began,
the man’s muscles were like iron; as he
went on, they gradually relaxed, and when
he finished the maniac was quiet and peace-
ful. Channing thought, and I think, that
the strong faith of the minister acted on
the patient’s body, through his mind.—J. F.
Clarke.

Fasting —Some years ago, an excellent,
well-meaning clergyman preached during
Lent on the duty of fasting, which he
clearly proved from Scripture. But having
done this, he proceeded to discount all he
had said by making a series of exceptions.
The working-man, for instance, could not
be expected to fast, for he had his work to
do; the weak and sickly were excepted
because of their health, the children on
account of their tender years, the old on ac-
count of their age, the brain-worker because
of the severity of intellectual labour, etc.
Doubtless there is some truth in all this, but
the answer lies in the word “ abstinence.”
Many who are unable to fast literally can
do so spiritually by taking plain food and
avoiding luxuries and self-indulgence. And
we should ever look beyond ourselves, and
make our self-denial of benefit to others. A
good old lady used to have her plateful of
meat, cut off from the joint at dinner-time,
set aside whilst she ate her dry bread, and
then putting it in her basket she would
hurry off with it to some poor, sick person
in the neighbourhood.


Ver. 31. Christ’s knowledge of His future.
—Christ deals with His future as men deal
with their past. This is entirely different
from these mere presentiments of death which
are sometimes, no doubt, as extraordinary as
they are pathetic. A brave officer is ordered
abroad for a campaign. On his voyage out
his heart turns to his family, to his wife
and children. After he lands, before going
into action, he writes tender words in the
light of an eternal world. They reach us
when the hand is cold that traced the lines,
when the eyes are closed that were half
blinded with the salt mist of love. We read
the presentiment into a prophecy, the felt
probability into a certainty. Yet, in truth,
such anticipations are generally vague
enough. Hundreds have written such let-
ters for whom they have not been fulfilled.
It was not so with Christ. In the army of
the greatest of all human captains there was
a regiment, at the head of whose list was
the name of one brave soldier, called first
whenever the roll was called, with the ad-


350


dition of “killed upon the field of battle.”
So stood the name of the Son of God in His
own hearing every day of His life.— Bishop
Wm. Alexander.


Ver. 35. Humility.—St. Augustine being
asked, “ What is the first thing in religion?”
replied, “ Humility.” “And what is the
second?” “ Humility.” “And what the
third?” “ Humility.” Benjamin Franklin,
when young, received this advice, when, on
going out of a house by a shorter way, he
hit his head against a beam: “ You are
young, and have the world before you;
stoop as you go through it, and you will
miss many hard thumps.”


Ver. 36. Our blessed religion looks upon
children as immortal creatures, full of
beauty. It is by no means a matter of course
that children are respected. Look at the
social contempt in which Mahometan chil-
dren are held. Look at the random influ-
ence of the infidel’s child. The atheist may
indeed treat his child after the Christian
custom of the land he lives in; but at the
bottom of his creed the child is a mere
perishing brute. Listen to the shrill shriek
that comes from the fiery altar of Moloch,
and the splash on the banks of the Ganges.
Look at China’s infanticide, and the blood
on the Juggernaut’s wheel. Then look at
Christendom’s child enthroned—enthroned
in the church, in the home, in the school, in
Christian art, and in the Christmas festival.


Ver. 37. Chirist in His little ones—The
legend of St. Christopher is told in vari-
ous ways, but one version is that, being
a humble ferryman on the banks of a
turbulent river, he heard one dark and
stormy night a child’s voice outside his but,
asking to be carried across the river. Simply
doing his duty, he took the wailing little
one in his arms and breasted the swollen
torrent; but before he had gone far his
burden was surrounded with a halo of light,
and he found that it was no ordinary child
but the Christ-child, and that in performing
his humble duty he had the unspeakable
honour of carrying the Lord of Glory, and
on this account his name was changed to
Christopher, “the Christ-bearer.” This is
no mere legend. It embodies an experience
possible to every Christian. Whoever lov-
ingly and patiently cares for one of Christ’s
little ones will find his burden growing
blessedly light, and he will realise the joy
not only of rescuing the perishing, but of
bearing the Christ perpetually in his heart.

Revervnce to childhood. —Join Locke
drank into the spirit of our Lord’s teaching
when he wrote this maxim: ‘“ Maxima de-
betur pueris reverentia” (“The greatest
reverence is owed to children”). At Hisen-
ach a famous master, John Trebonius, was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
yt 3)


rector of the convent of the Barefooted
Carmelites ; and when he taught his classes
of boys there, he always did so with his
head uncovered, to honour, as he said, the
consuls, chanvellors, doctors, and masters
who would one day proceed from his school.
There was reverence to youth! And not in
vain was it shewn, for among his scholars
was that highly honoured servant of God
Martin Luther, who was greater than all the
consuls, chancellors, and doctors of his time.
When Edward Irving was at the height of
his power as an orator in London, some
ladies, who had established an infant school
in the district of Billingsgate, and were un-
successful in persuading the people to send
their children to it, applied to him to help
them, He immediately consented, and went
with them through the district. In the first
house he allowed tie ladies to explain their
errai.d, and they did it very offensively to
the poor, so full of condescension and
patronage was their manner. In the second
house Irving took the place of spokesman
upon himself. When the door was opened,
he spoke in the kindest tone to the woman
who opened it, and asked permission to go
in. He then explained the intentions of
the ladies, asked how many children she
had, and whether she would send them. A
ready consent was the result; and the
mother’s heart was completely won when
the visitor took one of her little ones on his
knee, and blessed her. The ladies who
were engaged in this work were horrified.
“Why, Mr. Irving,” exclaimed one of the
ladies, when they got to the street, “you
spoke to that woman as if she were doing
you a tavour, and not you conferring one on
her! How could you speak so? and how
could you take up that child on your knee?”
“ The woman,” he replied, ‘does not as yet
know the advantages which her children
will derive from your school; by-and-by she
will know them, and own her obligations to
you; and in so speaking and in blessing her
child I do but follow the example of our
Lord, who blessed the little ones, the lambs
of His flock.’”” Edward Irving’s conception
of a child is given in these words: “a
glorious bud of being.” He had a high ap-
preciation of a child. He saw grand possi-
bilities hidden away in its undeveloped
capacities. He saw the promise of a new
world in its being devoted to God, and
blessed by Christ. But we must not forget
this: Irving, like Trebonius, -was a seer.
And might not all be seers if tliey would
only do as he did, accept Christ’s estimate
of children ?

Begin with the children.—Dr. Duff, the
missionary to India, began his work there
on a principle altogether new in missionary
enterprise. He began with the children.
With the eye and heart of a philosopher, as
he was—a Christian philosopher—he saw


CHAP. IX.





that, if he could gain the children, the
coming generations would be gained. In
the words of Sir Charles Trevelyan : “ Up to
that time preaching had been considered
the orthodox ‘regular mode of missionary
action ; but Dr. Duff held that the receptive,
plastic minds of children might be moulded
from the first according to the Christian
system, to the exclusion of all heathen
teaching, and that the best preaching to the
rising generation, which soon becomes the
entire people, is the ‘line upon line, precept
upon precept’ of the schoolroom.” This
action of Dr. Duff's recalls the action of
the Spartans, who, when Antipater demanded
fifty children as hostages, offered him in
their stead a hundred men of distinction.
One would have thought this by far the
noblest offer, but there was a far-seeing
wisdom in it. In the children there was
hope ct retrieving their loss, and wiping out
their dishonour. Their fathers had lost the
day, the children might regain it. In them
Sparta would flourish anew.


Ver. 40. Friends mistaken for enemies.—
A sailor once told me that the most terrible
engagement he had ever been in was one
between the ship to which he belonged and
another English vessel, when, on meeting in
the night, they mistook each other for
enemies. Several persons were wounded,
and both vessels were much damaged by
the firing. When the day broke, great and
painful was the surprise to find the English
flag hoisted from both ships. They saluted
each other, and wept bitterly together over
their mistake. Christians, sometimes, com-
mit the same error. One denomination
mistakes another for an enemy; it is night,
and they do not recognise one another.
What will be their surprise when they see
each other in heaven’s light! How will
they salute each other when better known
and understood !—W. Williams.


Ver. 41. Common life sublime.—In the
universe filled with Christ, the falling
sparrow is to the thoughtful Christian as
impressive as the stars fighting in their
courses. Grandly does that profound Chris-
tian thinker and poet, Sidney Lanier, in his
development of the English novel, show
how Christ has made even common life
sublime. Maggie Tulliver, amid the details
of bumble routine, now wins our sympathies
as much as does (idipus. We have learned
the gospel of details. What need have we
of all the complex machinery of Greek
tragedy when we know that God sees,
knows, pities, and Christ has blessed even
the cup of cold water? Like the Divine
flood in Ezekiel’s vision of the ankle-deep
rill swelling into the lordly river, so this
beatitude of refreshment to the needy has
made increase of the cup to a flood that


351


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COM. MENTA RY: ST. MARK.


eS SS ee


has quenched the thirst of millions through
eighteen centuries. The well and the foun-
tain built in Christ’s name, the medicine to
assuage fever, the kindly ministrations of
the nurse and the hospital, the reforms of
the Christian ages, are but the magnified
results of the truth taught by our Lord
and made vital in the lives of His people.

Cup of cold water—When Sir Philip
Sidney, after being wounded at the battle
of Zutphen, was retiring to the camp, he
was almost overcome by the oppressive heat.
Calling for a drink of water, a soldier with
great difficulty procured him one. Just as
he was raising it to his lips, a wounded
soldier was borne by, who turned his eyes
wistfully towards the cooling draught.
Instantly passing the bottle down to him
he said, “Thy necessity is greater than
mine.”


Ver. 42. Wrong done to a child.—One of
the most pathetic stories of the wrong done
to children is, to my mind, that which a
good man tells of his own childhood more
than a hundred and fifty years ago. It was
a Scotch Communion Sunday, and amidst
the crowd who thronged to that solemn
ordinance there came a boy of eight who
managed to pass unnoticed into the church,
He heard a part of the minister’s address,
and tells us that he commended Christ in
so sweet and delightful a manner that his
heart was captivated. But just then a stern
official caught sight of the young intruder,
and indignantly bade him go out of the
sanctuary, as though he had been some
leprous Uzziah, instead of one of the lambs
of Christ’s flock. The Church has not
thought it worth while to preserve in grate-
ful memory the name of that austere up-
holder of ecclesiastical discipline, but the
boy he excommunicated lived to ennoble
one of the commonest of common names,
for he is known to us and to many as the
saintly John Brown, of Haddington.


Ver. 44. Future punishment.—Men in
these times seem unwilling to hear of future
punishment. They talk as if “a certain
class of preachers” invented hell and kept
it burning to enforce their’precepts. I was
in Naples in 1884, the year that cholera
was epidemic. The Neapolitans accused
the physicians of bringing the cholera.
The physicians predicted it; they told the
people that unless they cleaned up their
city the scourge would come. They laid
down rules and gave warning. So when
the cholera came, the people thought the
physicians brought it to intimidate them
into washing themselves and keeping their
back yards clean, so they threw stones at
the physicians and drove them out of the
city. These physicians had come to risk
their lives for the ungrateful people who


302


rejected them. Thus when preachers begin
to talk of the scourge which will follow
sin, the people—that is, some of them—
begin to think the preachers are in some
way responsible for this scourge. The
preachers are assailed as cruel, fanatical,
behind the times, and all that. Our Lord
is a physician. He came and found the
disease of sin and its fatal consequences
here already. He did not bring them, He
left His home to improve the sanitary con-
dition of this world, to cleanse its filth.
And in order to induce men to submit to His
treatment, He warns them to flee from the
wrath to come.—f&. S. Barrett.

“ Worm that dieth not.” —It has been dis-
covered that there are worms which eat and
live upon stone. Many such have been
found in a freestone wall in Normandy. So
there is a worm in hell—conscience—which
lives upon the stony heart of the condemned
sinners.

Heil in the present life—A man may be
in hell here as well as hereafter. No more
striking illustration can be supplied than
that of Lady Macbeth. After the murder
of Banquo she cannot rest. She rises from
her bed and walks about. She rubs and
rubs, as if washing her hands, and continues
it for a quarter of an hour. She fancies
she sees a spot of blood on them. She can-
not take it out ; her hands will not be clean,
and she cries, “Here’s the smell of the
blood still; all the perfumes of Arabia will
not sweeten this little hand. Ob! oh! oh!”


Ver. 47. Danger prevented.—A blind man
was once asked whether he had no desire
that his sight should be restored to him;
he answered boldly, ‘No; because Jesus
says, ‘If thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out. God probably saw that mine eyes
would offend me, so as to endanger my
soul, and so He has prevented this great
evil by plucking them out Himself; and I
thank Him for it.”


Ver. 50. Salt losing its savour.—A merchant
of Sidon, having farmed of the government
the revenue from the importation of salt,
brought over an immense quantity from the
marshes of Cyprus—enough, in fact, to
supply the whole province for at least
twenty years. This he transferred to the
mountains, to cheat the government out of
some small percentage. Sixty-five houses
were rented and filled with salt. These
houses had merely earthrn floors, and the
salt next the ground in a few years entirely
spoiled. I saw large quantities of it literally
thrown into the street, to be trodden under-
foot of men and beasts, It was “ good for
nothing.”"— Wm. Thomson, D.D.

Salt and wpeace.—Every one who has
sojourned in the Hast has some story to
tell of the sacredness attached by Arabs


oe ae eae


.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP, X.


a ED


to a compact which has been ratified by
salt ; how the man who one day would have
plundered you of all will the next day
sacrifice everything he values, if need be,
if in the meantime you have tasted his salt,
Some think that in this verse our Lord
refers to this well-known fact. An unseemly
quarrel had taken place amongst His dis-
ciples: “What was it that ye disputed
among yourselves by the way? But they


held their peace ; for by the way they had
disputed among themselves who should be
greatest.” The very children of the desert
teach the disciples a lesson. They had
been brought “into the bond of the
covenant”; they had eaten of the “ king’s
salt”; had been “salted with the salt of
the palace” (Ezra iv. 14). How can they
dispute who are bound by the most solemn
obligations to perpetual amity and love ?








CHAPTER X.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. He arose from thence.—Between the events just recorded and those of which the
Evangelist now proceeds to treat many others had occurred, which he passes over. The
most important of these were: 1. The visit of Christ to Jerusalem at the Feast of Taber-
nacles (John vii. 8-10), which was marked by—(1) The rebuke to. the “Sons of Thunder” at
the churlish conduct of the inhabitants of a Samaritan village on their way to the Holy City
(Luke ix. 51-56); (2) Solemn discourses during the feast, and an attempt of the Sanhedrin
to apprehend Him (John vii. 11-52, viii. 12-59); (3) The opening of the eyes of one born
blind (John ix. 1-41), the revelation of Himself as the Good Shepherd (John x. 1-18).
2. Ministrations in Judea and mission of the seventy (Luke x.-xiii. 17). 3. Visit to
Jerusalem at the Feast of Dedication (John x. 22-39). 4. Tour in Perea (Luke xiii. 22-
xvii. 10). 5, The raising of Lazarus (John xi. 1-46). 6. Resolve of the Sanhedrin to put
Him to death, and His retirement to Ephraim (John xi. 47-54). The coasts of Judea,—The
place whither He now retired has been identified with Ophrah, and was situated in the
wide desert country north-east of Jerusalem, not far from Bethel, and on the confines of
Samaria. Caspari would identify it with a place now called El-Faria, or El-Farrah, about
two hours north-east of Nablous.—G. F. Maclear, D.D.

Ver. 5. For the hardness.— 7o meet—in the way of concession or compromise.

Ver. 18. Wo one is good except God.

Ver. 21. Loved.—Possibly caressed. It is said to have been customary with Jewish
Rabbis to kiss the head of such pupils as answered well. Take up the cross.—Omitted
by », B, C, D, A, and Vulg. d

Ver. 22. Was sad.— Turning gloomy—his bright countenance becoming overshadowed as
by a thunder-cloud—he went away sorronful: for he was in possession of many acquisitions,
which he could not bear to think of giving up.

Ver. 24. See R.V. text and margin.

Ver. 25. It is easier for a camel.—This is (as Dr. J. Morison aptly remarks) a fine, bold,
hieroglyphic, hyperbolical way of speaking, that need impose on no one with a spark of
poetry in his soul. The key to its import is hung at the girdle of common sense. Southey
caught its spirit :—

“T would ride the camel,
Yea, leap him flying, through the needle’s eye,
As easily as such a pampered soul
Could pass the narrow gate.”


“The text,” he says, “is gospel-wisdom.” The Saviour intended to represent vividly and
memorably the extraordinary difficulty of discharging the responsibilities and overcoming
the temptations of riches. sre

Ver. 30, The world to come.—The age which is coming—the Messianic or Christian era,
which was inaugurated by the descent of the Holy Spirit—the Life-giver—on the Day of
Pentecost. Hternal life begins now, in this present world of sense and time.

Ver. 40, See R.V. for last clause, which, however, may also be rendered save to them for
whom it is prepared (made ready). “The throne is the prize of toils, not a grace granted
to ambition.”

Ver. 45, “The human blood of the Eternal Son was the ransom paid to God for our eternal


AA. 353


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Pe ana


redemption from the curse of the law and from the wrath of God, and from the claims of
Satan and from the power of sin.” This “ one offering, single and complete,” when put in
the balance over against the transgressions of many, proved sufficient to atone for all.

Vers. 46-52. See R.V. for several graphic touches obscured by A.V.

Ver. 51. Rabboni.The highest title he could give, the gradations being Rab, Rabbi,
Rabban, Rabboni. See John xx. 16.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—12.
(PARALLEL: Marr. xix. 1-12.)


Lessons for preachers.—This passage, which will hardly ever be required
for public use, suggests some points which ought not to be neglected by the
preacher.

I. Jesus Christ taught.—Ignorance was never approved by the Saviour. He
saved through light, never through darkness. He conducted specific intellectual
processes as well as processes distinctively moral. It was His delight to
simplify truth.

Il. Jesus Christ taught the people.—Not a particular class, but the people
asa whole, His teaching was as impartial as the sunshine. This is the glory
of Christian truth. It challenges all hearts in all ages and in all lands. It
is a heavenly rain, not a local fountain.

III. Jesus Christ honoured the holy teachers who had gone before Him
(ver. 3).—Truth is one. We find new phases, new applications, and the like,
but truth is one, because God is one. This is our security amid all changes of
ministers and teachers. In so far as the men have been true to God each can
say, ‘‘ What did my predecessor tell you ?”

TV. Jesus Christ honoured the tenderest relations of the present life
(vers. 7-9).—He did not ignore the present because of the future. He treated
no vow with levity. He taught the whole law—the law of home, the law of
society, the law of the Church: ‘“‘ There is one Lawgiver.”—J. Parker, D.D.





Marriage —1. That society is necessary to the happiness of human nature,
that the gloom of solitude and the stillness of retirement, however they may
flatter at a distance with pleasing views of independence and serenity, neither
extinguish the passions nor enlighten the understanding, that discontent will
intrude upon privacy and temptations follow us to the desert, every one may
be easily convinced, either by his own experience or that of others. 2. Itisa
proof of the regard of God for the happiness of mankind that the means by
which it must be attained are obvious and evident; that we are not left to
discover them by difficult speculations, intricate disquisitions, or long experience,
but are led to them equally by our passions and our reason, in prosperity and
distress. 3. As a general relation to the rest of the species is not sufficient to
procure gratifications for the private desires of particular persons, as closer ties
of union are necessary to promote the separate interests of individuals, the great
society of the world is divided into different communities, which are again
subdivided into smaller bodies and more contracted associations, which pursue,
or ought to pursue, a particular interest, in subordination to the public good, and
consistently with the general happiness of mankind, 4. The lowest subdivision
of society is that by which it is broken into private families; nor do any duties
demand more to be explained and enforced than those which this relation
produces, because none is more universally obligatory, and perhaps very few
are more frequently neglected. 5, That marriage itself, an institution designed
only for the promotion of happiness, and for the relief of the disappointments,


354


a i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP, X.





anxieties, and distresses, to which we are subject in our present state, does
not always produce the effects for which it was appointed, that it sometimes
condenses the gloom which it was intended to dispel, and increases the weight
which was expected to be made lighter by it, must, however unwillingly, be yet
acknowledged. 6. It is to be considered to what causes effects so unexpected
and unpleasing, so contrary to the end of the institution, and so unlikely to
arise from it, are to be attributed; it is necessary to inquire whether those
that are thus unhappy are to impute their misery to any other cause than their
own folly, and to the neglect of those duties which prudence and religion equally
require.

I. The nature and end of marriage.—The vow of marriage, which the wisdom
of most civilised nations has enjoined, and which the rules of the Christian
Church enjoin, may be properly considered as a vow of perpetual and indissoluble
friendship—friendship which no change of fortune nor any alteration of external
circumstances can be allowed to interrupt or weaken. After the commencement
of this state there remain no longer any separate interests ; the two individuals
become united, and are therefore to enjoy the same felicity and suffer the same
misfortunes—to have the same friends and the same enemies, the same success
and the same disappointments. 1. It is remarked that “friendship amongst
equals is the most lasting,” and perhaps there are few causes to which more
unhappy marriages are to be ascribed than a disproportion between the original
condition of the two persons. Difference of condition makes difference of
education, and difference of education produces differences of habits, sentiments,
and inclinations. 2. Strict friendship is ‘‘ to have the same desires and the same
aversions.” Whoever is to choose a friend is to consider first the resemblance
or the dissimilitude of tempers. How necessary this caution is to be urged as
preparatory to marriage the misery of those who neglect it sufficiently evinces.
To enumerate all the varieties of disposition to which it may on this occasion
be convenient to attend would be a tedious task; but it is at least proper to
enforce one precept on this head—a precept which was never yet broken without
fatal consequences : “ Let the religion of the man and woman be the same.”
3. “ Friends,” says the proverbial observation, ‘‘ have everything incommon.’ This
is likewise implied in the marriage covenant. Matrimony admits of no separate
possessions, no incommunicable interests. 4. There is yet another precept equally
relating to friendship and to marriage—a precept which in either case can never
be too strongly inculcated or too scrupulously observed : ‘‘ Contract friendship
only with the good.” Virtue is the first quality to be considered in the choice
of a friend, and yet more in a fixed and irrevocable choice. This maxim surely
requires no comment nor any vindication; it is equally clear and certain,
obvious to the superficial, and incontestable by the most accurate examiner.
To dwell upon it is therefore superfluous; for though often neglected, it never
was denied.

II. By what means the end of marriage is to be attained.—As it appears by
examining the natural system of the universe that the greatest and smallest
bodies are invested with the same properties and moved by the same laws, so
a survey of the moral world will inform us that greater or less societies are to
be made happy by the same means, and that, however relations may be varied
or circumstances changed, virtue, and virtue alone, is the parent of felicity.
If passion be suffered to prevail over right, and the duties of our state be broken
through or neglected for the sake of gratifying our anger, our pride, or our
revenge, the union of hearts will quickly be dissolved, and kindness will give
way to resentment and aversion. 1. The duties by the practice of which a
married life is to be made happy are the same with those of friendship, but
exalted to higher perfection. Love must be more ardent, and confidence without


359


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee


CHAP. X.


limits. It is therefore necessary on each part to deserve that confidence by the
most unshaken fidelity, and to preserve their love unextinguished by continual
acts of tenderness, not only to detest all real but seeming offences, and to
avoid suspicion and guilt with almost equal solicitude. 2. But since the frailty
of our nature is such that we cannot hope from each other an unvaried rectitude
of conduct or an uninterrupted course of wisdom or virtue, as folly will some-
times intrude upon an unguarded hour, and temptations by frequent attacks


will sometimes prevail, one of the chief acts of love is readily to forgive errors


and overlook defects. Neglect is to be reclaimed by kindness, and perverseness
.softened by complaisance. 3. Marriage, however in general it resembles friend-
ship, differs from it inthis: that all its duties are not reciprocal. Friends are
equal in every respect, but the relation of marriage produces authority on one
side and exacts obedience on the other. But though obedience may be justly
required, servility is not to be exacted ; and though it may be lawful to exert
authority, it must be remembered that to govern and to tyrannise are very
different, and that oppression will naturally provoke rebellion, 4. The great
rule both of authority and obedience is the law of God—a law which is not to
be broken for the promotion of any ends or in compliance with any commands,
and which indeed never can be violated without destroying that confidence
which is the great source of mutual happiness: for how can that person be
trusted whom no principle obliges to fidelity ?—S. Johnson, LL.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. A true pastor is never weary
of instructing his people.—He is always
ready to communicate himself, because
the treasure of his heart is always
full of the truths of salvation. His
known charity causes people to seek
and apply themselves to him, and this
search and concourse invite and solicit
his charity. Kindle, O Lord, this
double zeal, both in the pastors and
in the sheep !—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 4. A loose caswist generally wants
either knowledge or sincerity.—This con-
duct of the Pharisees is but too fre-
quently imitated, who, being called
upon to produce the primitive law
published by Moses, ‘‘ He shall cleave
to his wife,” suppress it, to insist upon
a doctrine which was only tolerated,
and to fix upon a dispensation of this
law which had been extorted, as it
were, by force. Men often substitute,
in the room of the holy law of the
gospel, a toleration of some things
which corruption of manners has in-
troduced contrary to the gospel itself.
—Ibid.


356


Vers. 5-9. The doctrine of Christ
concerning marriage—Il. Its binding
character as instituted by God. 2. Its
decay in the progress of history. 3. Its
prepared restoration under the law.
4, Its transformation by the gospel.—
—J. P. Lange, D.D.


Ver. 5. God does by no means author-
ise everything which He tolerates ; and
He frequently permits a less evil that
a greater may be avoided. It is abso-
lutely necessary to distinguish in the
Scripture that which God commands,
that which He counsels, that which
He expressly permits, and that which,
out of His infinite patience, He only
tolerates or suffers.—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 7,8. Marriage may be regarded
in three lights. 1. It is a natural
contract, designed for “the propaga-
tion and perpetuation” of the human
race. 2. It is a civil contract, entered
into according to the laws of the state,
for the preservation of peace and pros-
perity in the kingdom. 3. It is a
sacred contract, raised by the new law


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.





of Christ into something higher than
the natural sphere—a rite through
which grace is conferred upon two
human beings for the fulfilment of the
duties of the married state, an image
of the union between Christ and his
Church.


Ver. 7. Husband and wife com-
plete and strengthen each other. A
husband’s love will not deaden but
develop what is strong and individual
in a wife’s character; and a wife's
love will give edge to her husband’s
individuality and heighten the worth
of: his work. This is not bondage,
unless it be bondage for a child to be
moulded by a mother’s love, or for a
friend to be influenced by the nobler
character of his friend. That is the
true freedom when what is best in me
is free to grow because it is surrounded
by the conditions of growth. And
that is the freedom of marriage where
two souls are joined in a life-union by
love and reverence, and help each other
to be their true selves, enhance each
other’s moral influence, and heighten
each other’s joys.—D. MU. Ross.


Ver. 9. Marriage in the time of
Christ.—If we bear in mind that great
laxity existed with regard to marriage
even amongst the Jews in the time
of our Lord, we shall see that His
purpose was to bring marriage back
to its original foundation, and so “ give





perpetual security to His followers for
the sanctity of home.” There were
two schools amongst the Jews, those of
Hillel andShammiai; the former allowed
divorce for slight reasons, the latter
only for grave offences. Both, though
in very different degrees, fell short of
the doctrine of the permanency which,
according to Divine appointment, be-
longed to the marriage bond. When
the Pharisees twitted Christ with the
Mosaic “command to give a writing
of divorcement,” He reminded them
that it was not a ‘a command,”. but
a matter of sufferance, because the
standard of their fathers was so low;
and that it was not so from the begin-
ning, but that He came to restore the
institution of marriage to its original
condition, and to add to it new grace.

The marriage bond.—Not only our
religious but our social and national
well-being demands the permanency
of the marriage bond. Without it,
marriage degenerates into a form of
selfish and sensual gratification; with
it, it is a state of complete and un-
reserved mutual self-surrender. With-
out it, home rests upon the sands;
with it, it is founded on a rock. If
marriages and homes are to be ruled
by mere selfishness, and not by pure
love, we know from history that
national greatness is too closely bound
up with home life to continue when
domestic happiness is gone.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—16.
(Parauuets : Marr. xix. 13-15; Luxe xviii. 15-17.)


Children welcomed to Christ.—Infant baptism was assuredly in the mind, in
the will, and in the intention of Christ at that moment. In fact, was it not
baptism, only without the water? Where He stood visibly in all His grace and
power, the emblem and the instrument were not needed. We now want the help
and assurance of the external symbol. But if some say, “Is not the base too
small for the superstructure? The record isso very simple here, and we only read
of it but once,” I answer, Every incident in Christ’s life was intended to be a
germ of great thought, of deep principle, and of extensive duty. And if it were
only once that Jesus blessed the little children, as often as the children were
brought to Him so often He blessed them.


357


GHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
———————————————————————————————————— — ——. _ a a a a>
I. The danger and sin of standing in the way of children coming to Christ.—


1. I do not speak now of those who, upon a principle in their own minds, do not
bring infants to holy baptism: they are acting conscientiously ; and doubtless


their sin of ignorance is pardoned, and their children may not be suffered by a


loving Father to miss the grace which He had willed to give them. 2. There
are persons who, believing the baptism of infants to be according to the mind
of God, nevertheless, from idolence or thoughtlessness, neglect that holy rite.
3. Perhaps few persons are aware of the extent to which children, even very young
children’s minds, are capable of being affected, prejudiced, distorted, injured, by
the conversation which they hear. You talk before a child lightly and falsely
upon religious and moral subjects. You mean no harm, You do not remember
a little child is present ; and you do not recollect how that little child is listening
to and drinking in all you say. But that child cannot balance or direct or
dismiss a subject as you do. It has fallen with a fearful impression. It has
left a stamp and an irreverence perhaps, a doubt perhaps, a wicked imagination
perhaps, which will never, never be obliterated! 4. Some cast obstacles less
offensively, but perhaps more dangerously. Whoever considers the subject must
become aware how exceedingly uninviting, nay, how repulsive, religion is
generally made to children. Where is that cheerfulness and that gladsomeness
which a child loves, and in which real religion always consists ?

II. The duty of bringing children to Christ.—If you wish a child to be really
religious, you must begin with the distinctive features of Christianity, and imbue
it with the gospel. I will illustrate my meaning by three examples. You desire
to lay in your child’s mind the foundation of right conduct, and of a good,
upright life. Tell him at once about Jesus. Tell him, “Jesus died for you, and
therefore, though you are a very sinful child, God has forgiven you, and God
loves you. For Jesus Christ’s sake, you are His own dear child.” Or take
another instance. Your child has told a lie. What shall you do tohim? Tell
him, “Jesus is truth. Try to be true, that you may be like Jesus. Heaven is
all truth, because heaven is all like Jesus. Go, and never be unlike Jesus
again.” Or your child has fallen into any sin. Do not be afraid to say to
that child at once Jesus died to wash away that sin. Go and ask Him to
doit. And He will do it. He will do it instantly. He will do it perfectly,
if you ask Him.

III. We ourselves must be like little children.—If it were only that we
might influence children, we should cuitivate a childlike spirit; for none can
do good, especially to the young, but those who are very simple in their thoughts
and very lowly in their ways. But in what are we to become like a little child ?
1. When those little children lay in Jesus’ arms, His act came before any of their
acts. It was anticipatory of what was to follow. They received what He gave
them as a free gift of His, They could have no sense whatever that they
deserved it. But freely as He bestowed the grace, so freely the little children
took it. This is just the way to get to the kingdom. 2. A very little child
never doubts where it has learned to love. It believes everything, and questions
nothing. The credulity of the child is the faith of the Christian. My Saviour,
my Lord, has said it. I will believe it, and ask no questions. 3. A very little
child is necessarily led. It knows it cannot go alone. And we must be content
all of us to be borne and carried every step. Those who get to heaven do not
march in, they do not walk there: they are carried there.—J. Vaughan, UA.


358


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





CHAP. X.








OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 13-16. The Son of Man among
the children of men.—1. As the heavenly
new and fresh related to the earthly
new andfresh. 2. Asthe humble One
to the artless. 3. As the Prince of
faith to the confiding. 4. As the great
Warrior to the strivers. 5. As the
great Hope to the hoping. 6. As
the Blessed with the happy.—J. P.
Lange, D.D.

Children are specially susceptible of
spiritual influences.—In their case there
is still—l. Confidence instead of
scepticism. 2. Self-surrender instead
of distrust. 3. Truth instead of
hypocrisy. 4. Modesty and humility
instead of pride.—Lisco.


Vers. 13, 14. Infant baptism.—We
have been accustomed to allege these
words in behalf of the Catholic practice
of infant baptism; and rightly, for
they have been always so understood
by the Church,—and the voice of the
Church Universal is that of the Lord.
“ Baptise also your infants,” says an
ancient writing, speaking the sense of
the Greek Church, “and bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of
God. For He saith, ‘Suffer the little
children to come unto Me, and forbid
them not.’” And in the Latin Church
of old times (as in our own), in the
Baptismal Service for Infants, they
read this history out of one of the three
Gospels, as their Lord’s sanction of
their act of charity.—/. B. Pusey, DD.


Ver. 14. The kingdom of heaven,
or sovereignty of the Messiah, is
constituted of such as the children
_ presented to Christ. He does not say,
observe, that this kingdom consists of
children, but of such as children. It
is therefore some similarity to that
class of persons which indicates member-
ship of the community of the faithful.
In what, then, does that similarity lie ?
It cannot refer to age, for it is not
true that infants alone are members
of the Church ; nor can it refer specially


to the physical or external charac-
teristics of childhood; but it refers
to the following peculiarities. 1. The
only prominent circumstance about an
infant’s history is its birth. Nothing
else has happened to it. No other
event relating to it deserves notice.
The grand, the sole feature to be noted
is, that it was born. Of suchlike
persons is the kingdom of God. What
designates and marks out the subjects
of this kingdom is a new birth, a
regeneration. A new heart, a new
spirit, a new nature, a new man—
such are the expressions employed to
represent their character. 2. Infants
are helpless; and of suchlike persons
is the kingdom of heaven, because all
who enter therein must feel their
inability to do anything of themselves.
Their sufficiency must be of God. They
must, “as new-born babes, desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that they
may grow thereby.” 3. Infants are
humble, unconscious of all pride and
self-righteousness; and of suchlike
persons is the kingdom of heaven,
because the followers of Jesus must,
like their Master, be humble and lowly
of heart. 4. Infants are teachable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated ; and
of suchlike persons is the kingdom of
heaven, because all its subjects are
brought to submit every high thought
and lofty imagination to the obedience
of Christ. 5. Infants are without
moral obligation, and therefore un-
tainted by the guilt of actual sin,
unworldly and uncarnal ; and of such
is the kingdom of heaven, inasmuch
as those who enter therein have been
crucified to all sinful lusts—have put
off the old man, which is corrupt—been
renewed in the spirit of their minds—
and put on the new man, which, after
God, is created in righteousness and
true holiness. 6. Infants are void of
offence towards man ; and of suchlike
is the kingdom of heaven, because
those who enter therein are ‘‘in malice
children,” and have “laid aside guile,


359


Wier:


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





and hypocrisies, and envies, and all
evil-speakings,” striving to be harmless
av little children.—A. Nisbet.


Ver. 15. To receive the kingdom as a
little child implies that we receive it—
1. Humbly, as the provision of Sove-
reignty. 2. Trustfully, as the device
of Fatherly Wisdom. 3. Gratefully, as
the gift of Saving Love.—J. L. Henry.

Christian childhood consists in having
no more pride, impurity, resentment,
craft, ambition, covetousness, and know-
ledge of evil than children. It is this
which renders us conformable, gives
us admission, and unites us to Jesus
Christ in His kingdom. What is here
said is not by way of counsel, but it
shews the absolute necessity of being
such, at least in some degree, in order
to be saved.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 16. Christ blessing infants.—
What parent of us would not wish, if
he might, that our Saviour should lay
His hand upon his child and bless it ?
And if His visible touch was such a
source of comfort and of hope, how
not and much more when He, the
risen, the ascended Saviour, who from
the right hand of God sheds forth His


gifts abundantly upon His Church,
not lays only His hands upon them,
but makes them members of Himself,
“members of His body, of His flesh, of
His bones,” members of “‘ His Church,
which is His body, the fulness of Him
which filleth all in all.” We know still
less of the ineffable greatness of that we
seek for than did these poor parents
who sought for His bodily touch and
His prayers; and the wish of those
who seek for baptism for the bodily
health of their children is not so far
below their belief whose belief is most


enlightened, as is theirs below the


inexpressible reality; and so, for the
comfort of us all, our Saviour herein
shewed that He regarded not our
merits, but His mercies—not our
ignorance, but His own omniscience—-
not our faint wish for a blessing we
know not what, but our trust in Him,
our wish to have a blessing from Him,
the inexhaustible Fountain of all
blessedness ; and grants not according
to the poverty of our desires, but
according to the overflowing riches of
His goodness, takes our infants even
now invisibly up in His everlasting
arms, and returns them to us—blessed.
—K. B. Pusey, DD.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 17—22.
(Parattets: Marr. xix. 16-22; Luxe xviii. 18-23.)


The rich young ruler.—I. The hopeful inquiry.—l. Who is he? Vaguely
introduced as ‘“‘one”—Luke says “a certain ruler,” Matthew calls him “ the
young man ”—all agree in saying that he was rich: combining these points,
we get his usual title—‘t the rich young ruler.” 2. How does he act? Mark
pictures the scene. His eagerness—expressed by his running; fearless dis-
regard of opinion of others, by his public appeal to Christ (no Nicodemus); his
respect for One without rank or office, by his kneeling. 3. What does he say ?
“Good Master, what,” etc. How to obtain eternal life, that he would know.
No quibble here, no playing on the surface of things. Life’s solemn responsi-
bility has sobered him. Much here to make us hopeful.

II. The startling reply.—Few things more remarkable than the way Jesus
dealt with men. Each was to Him an open book. He replies to the thought
more than to the word. 1. ‘Why callest thou Me good?” This was intended
to make him see how shallow was his conception of goodness. The light, careless,
possibly patronising use of this word, a word dropped thoughtlessly, betrayed
him. Our very approach to Christ tests us, and either convicts us of lack of
spiritual insight and desire, or it will call out all that is deepest and truest.


360


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.
TE gE ie TE ES A Es ae SER Ne ee eae


2. Christ meets him on his own ground, refers him to the six commandments
which regulate. man’s conduct towards his fellows. Thou knowest them—keep
them. ‘All these have I observed.” Could you have stood up before the
pitiful but piercing gaze of Jesus and said so much? Truly he knew not the
deep spiritual reach of the commandments ; yet ‘“‘Jesus, looking upon him, loved
him.” O heart of infinite love! 3. There was a fatal flaw, and Christ applied
a stern test to lay it bare: “Go, sell”—then, “Come, follow Me.” Allis tested
by devotion to Christ’s own person. Here is the very essence of Christianity.
Not correct belief, not blameless living, not human goodness—-though all this is
helpful and lovable; but the self given up, fully surrendered. All else parted
with, and then following Jesus.

III. The disappointing refusal.—l. “He went away.” To throw away.
position, prospects, wealth, it seemed a harsh demand. For there was a flaw
within. Something, perhaps a great deal, he was willing to do to obtain
eternal life, but to fling this life away was too great a price. So you see his
original question meant, “ What shall I do, and still retain my position?” 2. Yet
he went away “ sorrowful,” for that we will be glad: not scornful, or indignant,
or with a light flippancy. He carried the arrow within. Did he ever return ?
Who shall say? But he missed his golden opportunity ; he could not rise to
the rank of hero.—7’. Puddicombe.


The great refusal.—The young man in this narrative was worth looking at.
To begin with, he was young; and youth is always interesting. Then he was
rich, “very rich,” and “a ruler” besides. Better still, he was of upright cha-
racter, claiming a due respect for the Divine law. He was amiable also, for when
the Lord looked upon him He loved him. But the best of all was his earnest-
ness. A young man in earnest, and in earnest with respect to spiritual things !
When Cesar saw Brutus for the first time and heard him pleading in the Forum,
he said, “ Yon youth is destined to make his mark, because he intends strongly.”
The youth who here prostrated himself before Jesus intended strongly. But,
alas! there were grave difficulties in the way. ‘The heavenward path is ever steep
and rugged. Three serious mistakes he made, any one of which would have
nullified his pursuit of spiritual things.

I. With respect to Christ.—At tuis point he was an Arian. He addressed
Jesus as “Good Rabbi,” and would probably have been willing to pronounce Him
the most excellent of men. But Jesus would have none of it. “ Why callest
thou Me good?” said He; “there is none good but One, that is, God.” The
alternative, put in syllogistic form, was like this :—

God alone is good:

Thou dost not believe Me to be God;

Ergo, Call Me not good.
Or—

God alone is good:

Thou callest Me good;

Hirgo, Go farther and pronounce Me God.
In any case, as merely a “ Good Rabbi,” He could not receive it. The compli-
ments of those who esteem Him anything else or lower than He claimed to be
are, in the nature of the case, an affront to Lim. All through His ministry He
insisted that He was the long-looked-for Christ, and as such the very Son of
God. He arrogated to Himself all the Divine attributes and distinctly made
Himself equal with God. For this He suffered death. He was either what He
claimed to be or He was an impostor. ‘Good Rabbi” He certainly was not.
There is no middle ground. Was Voltaire right when he cried, “ Ecrasez
Vinfame !” or Peter when he said, ‘‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living
God” ?

361


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Ee





Il. With reference to himselfi—At this point he was a Pelagian. He had
no comprehension of his own moral character. In one of Hogarth’s cartoons a
demented prisoner sits in the straw, chained like a beast to his dungeon wall ;
but he smiles and sings as if he were the happiest of mortals. The straw is his
throne, his jailors are his courtiers; he deems himself the envy of crowned
kings. Not greater is his self-deception than that of the self-righteous man
who deems himself worthy to appear in judgment before God.

III. With respect to salvation—At this point he was a Legalist. ‘ What
shall I do,” said he, “that I may inherit eternal life ?” There was indeed
nothing for him to do. Had he but known it, life is a gracious gift. If we are
ever saved, it will not be on account of our doing, but by God’s giving. He is
not a merchant that He should sell his precious wares; He is a king and gives
right royally. But while salvation is free it is conditioned. God who gives it
has been pleased—as was His obvious right—to affix a condition upon its
bestowal, to wit, He that believeth shall live. ‘To believe is to accept. Faith is
the hand stretched out to grasp God’s grace. Salvation is free—tfree as air, as
water, as the manna which lay like hoar-frost on the ground. But if the
Israelites had not gathered up the manna they would have died of hunger.
And though a man stood on the bank of the Amazon, were he to refuse to drink
he would perish of thirst. There is an atmosphere fifty miles deep around this
earth of ours, but a man who will not breathe must strangle. So I say
salvation is free; but it saves only the man who reaches forth and takes it.
The word of the Master comes to you as to this young man, “Go, sell all that
thou hast: put away everything—gold, pleasure, unholy ambition, everything
that separates between thee and holiness—and come and follow Me.”—
D. J. Burrell, DD.


Ver. 18. The goodness of God.—I. God is a good Being.—1. Creation is
evidently an effect of goodness, and thoroughout displays the goodness of God.
(1) Life is felt by all sentient creatures to be a blessing ; they seek to
preserve it. (2) No creature is made without a capacity for enjoyment and a
susceptibility of pleasure of some kind. (3) The arrangement and order of the
universe and its various parts, the curious organisation of creatures, the
manner in which one thing is adapted to another, and the principle of utility
which pervades the whole, exhibit abundant proof of the goodness of the Maker
cf all things. 2. Divine providence furnishes further proof that God is good.
(1) God hath made ample provision for the wants of all His creatures, and
furnished them with abundant means of enjoyment. (2) Provision is not only
made for the preservation and comfort of individuals, of all who at present
exist, but also for perpetuating the various orders of creatures by successive
generations; and the means necessary to these ends are sources of pleasure.
(3) The kindness of Divine providence is everywhere manifested. He openeth
His hand and supplieth the wants of all living. He crowneth the year with
His goodness. 3. The moral system which God hath established exhibits clear
proofs that He is a good Being. (1) Such a system is established in the moral
world, that man must be the artificer of his own happiness, he must erect the
superstructure of his own intellectual and moral attainments. (2) Such a
connexion is established between causes and effects in the moral system, that
no man can be vicious with impunity, nor virtuous without receiving a reward.
Every evil passion is in some degree a tormenter. Virtue is productive of peace
of mind and intellectual pleasure, and is conducive to health, cheerfulness,
reputation, and even worldly comfort and advantage. The Being who hath
thus arranged causes and effects must be good. (3) The moral system is so
constituted that true self-love will lead us to do good to our fellow-creatures.


362


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.
eC


The more good a man does, the more happiness he gains. This order of things
could arise from nothing but goodness. (4) The laws established in the moral
system have a constant tendency to intellectual and moral improvement. To
Judge properly of this, we should compare the present state of knowledge and
improvement, both as to its degree and extent, with what it was in former
times. A system which ever tends to greater perfection must have originated
with a Being who is perfectly good. 4. Divine revelation is a testimony of the
goodness of God. (1) In the Scriptures the goodness of God is proclaimed. It
is declared that He is good, good unto all, and that His goodness abideth
continually. (2) Divine revelation not only declares that God is good, it
exhibits the most astonishing proofs of His goodness. It makes known the
greatness of His love, and opens the riches of His grace to the children of men.
It contains a provision for all our moral and spiritual wants. 5. The goodness
of God is so evident from His works, and so plainly declared in His Word, as
to compel universal assent among all who profess faith in Him. It may be
objected that there is much evil in the world, and asked how its existence
is to be reconciled with the belief that all things were made and are governed
by a Being who is perfectly good. (1) Evil is relative, and may be made
subservient to good; there is no such thing as absolute evil : consequently its
existence is not incompatible with the absolute goodness of God. (2) Evil is
partial and temporary; good or enjoyment everywhere preponderates, and
will be eternal ; evil is merely an infraction of the established order of things,
throughout which goodness appears. (3) We see evil in many instances made
subservient to and productive of good: hence it is reasonable to conclude all
evil will be made to issue in good. (4) Constituted as the present world is,
and formed as man is, to be instructed by experience, it does not appear that
all evil could be excluded in the present state. (5) It cannot be shewn that
more evil is permitted than is necessary to produce the greatest ultimate good ;
and unless this could be shewn, its existence cannot be proved inconsistent with
Divine goodness.

II. Under what views God only is good—l. The goodness of God is
underived, uncaused, unoriginated. Goodness is His essential and eternal nature.
This cannot be said of any other being. The goodness of all others is originated
and derived. 2. God alone is the primary Source of all that is good in the
universe, It is either the work of His hand or a communication from His fulness.
3. The goodness of God is pure and absolute. There is nothing in God but
what is good, nor that can operate but for good. His goodness is without the
least alloy. It is not diminished by ignorance, nor by weakness, nor by the
slightest possible limitation of powers; nor is it capable of being bounded in
its operations by any power in the universe: for it is the pure goodness of an
infinitely wise and almighty Being, who is the supreme, universal, and eternal
Sovereign. 4. The goodness of God is most perfect. It is all that goodness
can be. It comprehends all His attributes and perfections: they are all
modifications of goodness, which is His general excellence; and only differently
characterised according to its various manifestations. 5. God being only and
perfectly good, His goodness must be infinite. It can have no bound nor limit.
It must extend to all creatures, and fill the universe; for it is the supreme
excellence, infinite nature, and fulness of Him who filleth heaven and earth,
whom heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain.

Lessons.—1. If God be infinitely good, how comprehensive must be His
designs and plans of goodness respecting His creatures! 2. If God be infinitely
good, He must necessarily have made all men for happiness; it is impossible
He should give existence to a single individual without intending his happi-
wess; or that He should cause him to exist, if He knew his existence, on the


363


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ce


whole, would not be to him a blessing. 3. If God be good, He cannot require
impossibilities of His creatures ; He cannot call them to perform what is above
their strength ; He cannot require they should be more perfect than He hath
formed them capable of being; He will not severely mark their frailties and
imperfections ; He will not reject the well-meant endeavours of His feeble and
erring offspring to please Him, though mixed with ignorance and imperfection ;
because to do these things would be contrary to goodness. 4. If God be purely
good, He must be naturally merciful, ready to forgive, and to dispense salvation
and eternal life of His free favour. 5. If God be absolutely good, He must
always allot to His creatures what He sees to be wisest and best for them;


nor can He suffer anything painful to befall them, but what is necessary for ~


their benefit. 6. If God be infinitely good, He cannot be partial: He cannot
have limited His love, and His gracious and merciful provision of salvation and
eternal life, to a part of the great family He hath created; for such partiality
would be inconsistent with unbounded goodness. 7. If God be perfectly good,
He cannot be the subject of revenge, for revenge is inconsistent with perfect
goodness. 8. The goodness of God should lead sinners to repentance. 9. The
infinite goodness of God establishes the firmest ground of confidence in Him.
10. The infinite goodness of God is a sufficient reason why we should love Him
with all our heart, and soul, and mind, and strength. 11. As God alone is
absolutely good, He alone is the proper object of Divine worship and of the
highest adoration. 12. As goodness is the supreme excellence, it is most worthy
of imitation; and it is our highest interest, so far as we are capable, to imitate
the goodness of God. 13. Our hopes, founded upon the infinite goodness of
God, cannot be raised too high respecting our final portion and the final
portion of our fellow-creatures. What may we not expect from such a God ?—
J. Smith.


Ver. 22. Worldly-mindedness.—This young man was not the slave or lover of
vice, but he was not ready to become the ardent and devoted lover of virtue. It
is so with many of us. We are not ready to yield ourselves the slaves of sin,
but neither are we ready to give ourselves to the pursuit of great excellence.
And we compound the matter by observing the forms of religion, but giving
the heart and every warm and devoted feeling to the world. In a word, very
many who would revolt at the idea of vice are willing to be worldly-minded.
A determination of this kind is full of treason against the nature which God
has given us and against His will. He wills our moral exaltation and per-
fection, our transformation into His image. The worldly-minded choose to retain
their likeness to that which is of the earth, and thus as effectually as the
vicious, though in another way, cross and defeat the purposes of God. The
love of the world is exclusive and engrossing. If it takes possession of the
heart, the saying of the apostle is infallibly verified: the love of the Father
cannot exist or thrive there; it is extruded or overlaid. The worldly-minded
are bent upon some project or pursuit or pleasure which absorbs and fills the
mind and for the time satisfies the desires. The soul does not crave any-
thing more or better; and if it be occasionally sad and discontented, the
recurrence of its customary resources and objects of satisfaction restores its
tranquillity. It is not necessary in order to constitute a worldly mind that
it derives all its happiness from the sources of this world; it is sufficient that
it relies on them principally and most firmly. He is a bad man whose bad
deeds outnumber his good ones; he is a covetous man whose mean and narrow
actions are more than his generous and just ones; he is an ill-tempered man
whose prevalent humour is pettish or surly; he is a sensual man who thinks
more of the indulgence of appetite than of the culture of the mind and heart;


364


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.





and he too is a worldly man who loves the world better and more than those
things that are better than and above the world, whose thoughts dwell more
upon it, whose affections fasten more upon it, than upon those things which in
his heart he still knows to be infinitely more worth loving.

I. In what way then, if it is so dangerous, does it obtain its bad supre-
macy ?—The encroachments of a worldly mind are gradual ; its growth is slow,
but sure and regular; its dominion is established through plausible appearances
and pretences. 1. A devotion to business, the pursuit of one profession by
which a livelihood is to be secured or a reputation to be gained, is a broad
avenue for the entrance of worldly-mindedness. It is strictly true, though it
may sound paradoxical, that the most faithful discharge of the duties of our
callings is attended with peculiar danger as it respects the religious affections
and a right state of the soul. For it is apt to beget in time a total neglect
of and indifference to any considerations but such as relate to worldly pros-
perity and promotion. Let me not be misunderstood. We are doubtless to
love the world, its duties and callings; but it is equally plain that we are not
to love them too much or too long. It is our particular business to ascertain
where the virtue of loving rightly ends and the vice of loving too well begins.
It can form no apology for worldliness that we were occupied industriously
with the regular business of our station. For the soul, though made for earth,
was made for heaven too; and those duties are equally demanded of it which
fit it for the one as for the other. He does but half his work who lives but
for this world, though he lives well and honourably for it. 2. Again, worldly-
mindedness comes upon us through the avenue of social feelings and enjoyments,
In this case too, as in the one already mentioned, we are led to it by the
virtues. It is a virtue of high order to love those by whom we are surrounded,
and with whom we are obliged to come in contact. It is a virtue to do them
favours, and to receive in a good spirit favour from them. But how easily
do these virtues run into an excess that is rightly denominated a vice! How ©
short and direct the transition from a social to a worldly temper. The duty
of mingling to a reasonable and proper degree with our fellow-men become:
in many instances so agreeable as to lead to the neglect of other and more
important duties, The love of society grows into a passion. The mind that
once gave itself to it timidly and reservedly, through fear of forgetting higher
concerns, comes at last to be wholly dependent on it for its most valued and
exciting pleasures. The sources of moral and intellectual pleasure have at
length been so long forsaken that they cease to yield anything that the mind
relishes. It listens perhaps with a faint and weary attention to the truths
which once in seven days it thinks it right and decent to respect and believe,
but all its ardour and enthusiasm and strong interest are for other scenes and
other thoughts. The limit up to which all these things are either virtuous
or at least innocent is soon and unconsciously passed. The world has intruded
upon the soul and the love of God has departed almost before it has been
perceived that any important change was going on. In this way has the mind
of many a one grown to be so wedded to the enjoyments of society as
absolutely to reject and despise any other source of occupation and pleasure,
and at length indeed to be incapable of relishing any other. 3. Worldliness
comes again through education. Education, which should be sacred to those
interests of the human soul which are ultimately of the highest value, is
but too often the direct and mischievous agent in debasing the desires and
corrupting the mind. It is often occupied about those things which are wholly
secondary or frivolous, or at least the highest and best and most useful
topics of instruction are not touched upon or enforced. Moral and religious
education on the part of parents is far too little attended to,—I mean the


365


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





education which lies in the moral habits, pure principles, timely counsels,
affectionate warnings, good examples, religious lives, of father and mother.
Of this close domestic education there is too little; but of it there cannot be
too much. But not only is this too much neglected, an opposite education
in too many instances takes its place—one of the chief objects of which would
seem not to be the culture of a moral and intellectual being, but how best to
prepare for a striking entrance upon the world, how best to secure its favours
and rewards. The standard of action proposed is not what is right, what
is moral, what becoming our nature and conformable to the demands of
religion; but what will the world think, what will it say, how will it regard
you, what will best enable you to make your way in it? And the young are
made to learn, to study, to think, to act, with reference not primarily to be
useful and good, but to the sovereign opinion of the world. What wonder
then if the world, for which youth has been thus made the season of training
and preparation, should in the end engage that respect and reverence which
are due to a higher authority ?

II. If in these and similar ways a worldly mind is created and takes posses-
sion of us, we learn whence to expect its approach and where to place our
guard.—If we consider it rightly, we shall feel that it is a mind most hostile
to religion and most dangerous to ourselves, and calling for our strong and
untiring efforts to change and to conquer. In order to do this we have
simply to remember the quarters whence it comes, and to feel th> importance
of guarding against its approach. This is the only just and meritorious way
of resisting it. We have no right to take ourselves out of that world in
which we have been placed and our station has been appointed. God alone
may take off the burden of our trial and separate us from this scene of duty
and temptation. In the meantime we must live on as we are, and resist
as we may, and overcome if we can. We must mingle in the world’s crowd,
we must expose ourselves to its temptations, we must venture within the
magic circle of its attractions; but we must shew by our conduct that we
are above it, superior to its enchantments. We must coolly compare its
rewards and pleasures with those which religion offers, and prefer the latter
from real conviction of their higher value.

Iil. If we glance at the unhappy effect which the love of the world has
upon those who are its slaves, we shall deeply feel the wisdom and prudence,
as well as the duty, of resisting its power. When a worldly disposition has
taken entire possession of the soul, so that the world and its scenes of pleasure
or occupation are all for which life is valued, I need not say that it is wholly
incompatible with the existence of religion in the soul that the love of
the Father cannot dwell there. But where the love of the world has not
proceeded to this extreme, its effects are still deplorable and sad. It disorders
the mind—unsettles it—incapacitates it for reflexion—alienates it from quiet
and sober pleasures—creates a restless and uneasy longing for excitements
which ordinary life, and still more religion, fails to afford. In the same way
that the intemperate man has created by indulgence an appetite which
continued indulgence can alone allay and satisfy, the lover of pleasure has
nourished desires and cultivated tastes whose wants a life of idleness and
pleasure can alone meet. With others, again, the love of the world is a mixed
emotion. God and the world rule by turns. The empire of the mind is a
contested region. The heart is divided. It would fain love God and lift its
affections to Him, and yet it cannot bring itself to renounce so much of the
world as to enable it to do so. Worldliness is in this way the successful and
potent enemy of religion. It does not succeed in banishing it wholly from
the soul; but it does succeed in diminishing and alloying its comforts. It


366


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP! X&








does not take the mind wholly from God and the contemplation of its great
destiny ; but it takes it away so much and so often that it returns to them
unwillingly and derives from them little satisfaction. It is in Christians
of this frame that worldly-mindedness produces the most mental sorrow and
disquiet. It poisons all their sources of religious pleasure, and substitutes
none in their place. In the world they are without peace, for their consciences
upbraid them. In religion they are restless, for their thoughts still wander
to the world. If it were only for these sad effects upon our minds and hearts,
which would otherwise find their joy in the best and holiest things, we see
reason enough to detest the disposition of which we speak, as one mischievously
productive of the acutest pains and most desponding sensations of which the
human heart is susceptible.

IV. I have urged the importance of resisting the influence of the world, its
occupations and pleasures; but I do not say that it is an easy duty. It is
a hard one. To those who live and move in the better walks of life, into
whose lap fortune has poured her full horn, who enjoy the honours and
praise of the world, there is a brilliant lustre spread over the face of society,
a joy and excitement in its dazzling intercourse, a deep interest in its scenes
of pleasure, that occupy and absorb the whole heart, that tie it down to earth
by a bond strong as death, but invisible and unfelt. It is not easy to break
this bond, to conquer the strong love which has been thus created. It is not
easy thus to take the heart away from such scenes and pleasures, to teach it
to find its happiness in scenes and pleasures the very opposite. It is not easy
for one all whose thoughts have been of the earth to fix them on the things
that are above. This change involves as entire a revolution of character and
feeling as when the slave of notorious sin is converted and finds in virtue the
peace and joy he once found only in vice. It demands, therefore, great effort
on the part of those who are interested in the work of their own conversion
in order thoroughly to accomplish it. They who linger in the haunts of
pleasure, in the resolve that by-and-by, at whatever time they shall desire,
they will break from the world and shut it wholly out of their hearts, but
in the meantime they will love it as they have ever done, are precisely those
who will always love it, and the more passionately and exclusively as the
mind becomes weakened by age.—W. Ware.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 17. “Good Master.”—There is
more in this epithet “good,” as here
applied, than at first sight appears.
It betrays his self-righteous spirit. He
is doing more than paying a compli-
ment to the Saviour here. He is
indirectly paying a compliment to him-
self—to his own goodness, or at any
rate to human goodness, that idol
which he worshipped with his whole
soul. He looks up to Him as possessed
of this goodness, in a far higher measure
than himself indeed, but still of the
same kind of goodness. He regards
and reveres Him, much in the same


fashion as some in our day, as a good
man, as the good man, the perfect man,
the ideal man, the personification of
virtue, the incarnation of moral excel-
lence, the pattern and perfection of all
goodness, who had attained to this
goodness in the way he himself had
attained to his. He was thus conceiv-
ing of the Saviour as one very much
like himself; he was transferring his
own views and feelings to Him. ‘ Good
Master, what good thing shall I do?”
—A. L. R. Foote.

An excellent question.—How advan-
tageous is it frequently to ask at the


367


CHAP. UX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


—— ee


feet of Christ what we must do in order
to our salvation! It is an excellent
practice, provided we perform it as we
ought. He alone is capable of shewing
us the way to heaven, being Himself
the way; He alone is incapable of
deceiving us, since He is the truth;
and He alone is worthy to conduct us
to eternal life, being Himself that very
life.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 18. A sound foundation for
veligious belief.—This question appears
to spring out of a general mothod of
dealing with men in quest of salvation.
Christ was in no haste to get men to
make correct religious affirmations, but
rather took pains to lay sound moral
foundations of religious belief. To
persons seeking eternal life He did not
say, “Call Me good, call Me Christ,
call Me God, call Me Saviour ”—all
things which may be truly affirmed,
and which it is most desiral!s all should
affirm eventually—but, Reflect what
goodness is, what it is to be a Christ,
what God is, commands, and loves,
what salvation implies, what true life
consists in. The atiainment of true
conceptions on these subjects is the
business of discipleship. — A. JB.
Bruce, D.D.

The goodness of God.—The epithet
dyads, “good,” applied by the young
man to Jesus, signifies genorous, large-
hearted. In speaking of God as the
only good, then, our Lord meant to
represent the Divine Being as generous
more than just—as benignant, gracious.
And if we would Enow how benigant,
we must look to His own lifo on earth —
see Him associating with publicans and
sinners, see Him dying on the Cross.—
Ibid.


Ver. 19. Christ's use of the Decalogue.
—l. Our Lord enumerates the com-
mandments not in the order in which
they occur in the Old Testament, but
as they occur to His memory. 2. If
Mark’s report be accurate, He quotes
them freely, using His own words
instead of those of Moses, and caring
for the sense rather than the letter,


368


so freely that it is still matter of
dispute which of the commandments
He referred to in defraud not. The
better opinion seems to be that it was
the tenth commandment, beginning
with “Thou shalt not covet” ; for to
covet anything which is our neighbour’s
is, so far as we are able, to defraud or
deprive him of it. If we assume this to
be the reference, every commandment,
from five to ten, of the second table
is quoted in this verse.—S. Cox, D.D.
The commandments sufficient.—The
commandments of God afford us suffi-
cient instruction: it is often nothing
but curiosity which desires other lights.
The law of God makes known His
will; and it is by conforming our-
selves thereto that we partake of His
goodness and holiness. Let Thy law,
O my God, be continually the rule of
my behaviour and actions !—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 20. Self-deception as to one’s
character—To us His answer seems
proud and presumptuous, and yet how
frequently are like words used by us!
And are not similar thoughts to be
found in our hearts? How we boast
of our irreproachable character! Be-
cause we do not indulge in gross sins,
at which even the world takes offence,
we think ourselves righteous ; but how
far are wo from being so when we view
tho matter aright! There is nothing
about ~hich we so rreatly deceive our-
selves as our own condition. Thesame
eye which can plainly see the smallest
mote in a brother’s eye cannot perceive
tho beam in its own.—L. Lehmann.


Ver. 21. Christ's look of love.—The
Son of God, upon the assumption of
human nature, had His soul touched
with all our passions, yet so as to be
sinless and innocent emotions of His
Diviner mind; and, as we cannot but
do, unless we be very well versed in the
art of dissimulation, He also made dis-
coveries of them in His very looks and
eyes. These are the windows of the
heart, through which it sees and is
itself seen, and shews all its pleasures
and discontents to others : hence mutual


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


t


CHAP. X.


ey er a ee ey


sight proves such entertainment to
friends and breeds no less regret to
foes. Our Blessed Lord, who was all
made of compassion and love, being
freed from all those rugged, boisterous
distempers which we, whilst we seek
to trouble others with, labour under
ourselves, feeling the worst effects of
our heats and animosities within our
own breasts—He, I say, had all the
lines of goodness drawn in His heavenly
face, and above all His eyes sparkling
with seraphic love, and darting forth
rays of it to warm and fire the hearts
of all that either beheld Him or He
beheld. Fortunate man whom He
who is now for ever to be thy Lord
hath cast and fixed His gracioug eye
upon, to mark thee for His friendship
and the choicest dignations of His
love !—A. Littleton, D.D.

Christ loves the virtuous.—There are
those whose lives have been pure, who
have been generous and cherished no
ill-will to others, who have been truth-
ful, and who have been pitiful and
considerate to the weak and the aged,
those whose youthful brows are bound
with a crown of the natural virtues.
Now this passage says to all of that
sort that Jesus Christ when He looks
upon you loves you; He loves you
with a special love, and desires you for
His kingdom, for you are nearer to
Him, liker to Him, than others are.
Though possessing only what we may
call the natural virtues and moral
excellences, you are loved in His sight
before you go further, and are not
strictly what are called His disciples.
When you live a pure life and are
dutiful, when you shun uncleanness and
vice, when you are truthful andupright,
then the Lord Jesus, looking upon you,
loves you.—A. B. Davidson, D.D.

A hard requirement.—More of us
than we are willing to believe are kept
from entire surrender to Jesus Christ
by money and worldly possessions ; and
many professing Christians are kept
shrivelled and weak and joyless because
they love their wealth more than their
Lord, and would think it madness to do
as this man was bidden todo. When


BB


ballast is thrown out, the balloon shoots
up. A general unlading of the “ thick
clay ” which weighs down the Christian
life of England and of America would
let thousands soar to heights which
they will never reach as long as they
love money and what it buys as much
as they do.—A. Maclaren, D.D.

“ Follow Me.”—The life of Jesus
Christ always illustrated the truth
which He taught and the principles of
His kingdom. He did not lay on the
young man a burden which He Him-
self did not bear. It was His own life
that He recommended him to follow.
Christ’s poverty and the fact that He
possessed nothing were not probably
in order to shew sympathy with the
poor, at least not specially, but in order
to shew the nature of His kingdom,
which is just men and God together—
men with nothing, men destitute of all
but themselves, possessing nothing—
casting themselves just as men upon
God.—A. B. Davidson, D.D.


Ver. 22. “Sad.”—Observe that the
word is “sad,” not “angry.” The
young man went away grieved, not
shocked nor indignant. These distinc-
tions are of some value, as shewing
that the young man had no complaint
against the reasonableness or fitness of
Christ’s demand. ‘He approved and
admired more than he felt able to adopt
and to obey. And because he was an
honest man he did not fling epithets at
the Teacher or the truth which had
so unexpectedly disturbed him. He paid
respect to both, and practically Judged
himself in fault in the grief and sad-
ness with which he went away.—C. A.
Berry.

Sorrow apart from Christ.—-There
are thousands who do not follow Christ
who are sorrowful because of it. They
would give much that they were His
followers. They can conceive how
joyful it would be to be His, Their
aimless, broken life would be reunited
and made one if dedicated to Him.
They have powers and influence—they
feel them. They would be glad if they
could devote the powers and influence


369


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee eee SS


they have to Him. It would, they
are sure, fill and satisfy their empty,
unsatisfied hearts to be His followers.


selves the true comfort. But why not 2
Why not? Why go away? Why
add another sorrow to the sorrows that


already accumulate upon them ’—A. B.
Davidson, D.D.


They are of all men the most miserable.
To the natural sorrows of life they add
this sorrow, that they cannot give them-


MAIN HOMI“LETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 23—27.
(Parauuets: Marr. xix. 23-26; Luxe xviii. 24-27.)


Mundane trust a barrier—Men are ever astonished when taken out of their
own little grooves. Enlarge a man’s world and wonderment is the result.
Jesus never wondered at His own sayings: it is impossible that He should
have so done; and when, as here, He uses the word “impossible,” He simply
accommodates Himself to the finite capacity of His auditory. There is no such
word as “impossible” in heaven’s vocabulary. The interpretation often given
to this passage is too limited in its application? because—

I. Sometimes it is regarded as a reflexion by Jesus Christ upon worldly
wealth.—The rich, the poor, the high, the low, the old, the young, were all alike
to Him. He looked not to condition, but to character. Jesus is not here
talking against wealth, but against trust in riches, a thing altogether different.

II. Jesus is often regarded as referring here only to very rich men.—This
is one reason why all men pass the text on to their more wealthy neighbours, as
being more applicable to them than to themselves. ‘They forget that wealth is
relative—forget that it is as possible to be purse-proud of five pounds as
of fifty, and of fifty as of fifty thousand. Trustfulness in riches is a question of
disposition and not of length of purse.

III. Jesus Christ is sometimes thought to be referring here only to the
realm of the objective.—No doubt the text was suggested to the mind of our
Lord by His conversation with the rich young man, the weak point in whose
character was love of money. But we should be careful not to mistake parts
for wholes—careful lest we conclude that the sayings of Jesus contain no more
than what lies upon their surface. So that between the lines we may thus
read : ‘‘ Verily, verily, I say unto you, How hardly shall they that have learning,
or physical strength, or intellectual power, or are socially high, or outwardly
circumspect, enter into the kingdom of God! It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle than for those who place their chief trust in these
things to enter into the kingdom of God.”—J. S. Swan.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 23-25. Money.—The subject
of “money” is largely dealt with in
the Bible—as much so in the New
Testament as in the Old; and no
unprejudiced mind will easily escape
from the following conclusions about
it: 1. That all moneys belong to God,
as their Oreator and Pzoprietor (Hag.
ii, 8; Pant T0391 Cor. x. 26.20).
2. That He has consequently the


370


right to every penny we may think
our own, and considers Himself robbed
if we do not honour Him with our
substance (Mal. iii. 8). 3. That we are
in danger of putting money in God’s
place, and thereby becoming idolatrous
(Exod. xxxii. 31). We are all prone to
the same sin. 4. That, as a counter-
active, God commands us to give it
away to Him ; or, what is equivalent,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.


er ee


to good and charitable objects. Thus
the Jews were from the very beginning
habituated to pay tithes; and Chris-
tians are under similar orders to give
liberally of their means for the support
and extension of the gospel (2 Cor.
viii. 7, ix. 7). 5. That covetousness
is a great evil, and leads to many
others (1 Tim. vi. 10; Prov. xi. 28).
6. That to be rich is to be in great
spiritual difficulties. The young man
became sad when Christ bade him sell
off and give to the poor. 7. That, in
this view of it, it is surely better to
be poor. 8. That under the Chris-
tian dispensation the amount to be
given is left to conscience. It is a
duty, however, that those to whom
God has given most should give Him
most. 9. That to give liberally to
God entails no loss—-not even loss
in kind. Given from proper motives,
many a subscription of one pound
sterling has filled a man’s barns or
brought him a hundred per cent. It
does not follow that you have really
saved your money though you have
withheld it (2 Cor. ix. 6; Prov. xi. 24).
10. That the miser may live and die
in poverty. Judas hanged himself.
Many a rich but illiberal man has
died a pauper; and many a poor but
liberal man has lived to be opulent
and a blessing. I admired the reply
that I once got from a liberal lady to
a remark that she was too generous
with her means. ‘No, no,” she said;
“JT am generous only to myself. I
wish to keep my money; therefore I
clip its wings, lest it fly away ; for you
know it is written, ‘ Riches certainly
make themselves wings; they fly away
as aneagle toward heaven.’” 11. That
to be rich in grace is far better than
to be rich in gold. Devils shall knock
in vain at heaven’s gate, but Lazarus
enters. 12. That the Lord Jesus Christ
is the only one to whom money can
be safely entrusted. ‘“ Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive riches.”
—John Macfarlane, LL.D.


Ver. 23. Riches a hindrance.—Christ
plainly says—because the world needed


to be plainly told—that they who
have riches (literally, “things they can
make use of”) with difficulty enter into
the kingdom of God. He says not a
syllable about ‘excess ” of riches. He
says nothing about “ the life to come.”
There is nothing said about its being
impossible for the man with riches to
enter, but there is the definite state-
ment that those who have affairs,
businesses, and the results which come
from such, shall find it hard to enter.
This applies quite as much to the poor
as to the well-to-do, and it is concerned
with the life that now is. ‘The
kingdom of God” means those over
whom God reigns with undivided rule,
where His laws are His subjects’ law,
His will their will, His ways their
ways. With all of us—whatever our
riches may be, whether the weekly
wage which just provides the things
honest, or the wealth of some merchant
prince—it is “‘ with difficulty ” that we
keep ourselves from being “of the
world”; it is “hardly” that we enter
into the kingdom of God; it is with
difficulty that we subserve its advance.
—J. W. Owen.


Ver. 24. Disentangled from posses-
sions.—The poor are sooner astonished
at these words than the rich are so
much as moved by them: the reason
is, because men see the danger of others
better than their own. It is much
easier for a man to be contented with-
out those things which he has not
than to disengage himself from those
which he possesses and not to trust in
them. The poor may find a sufficient
ground of trust and confidence in their
poverty, since the kingdom of God is
theirs; but the rich have reason te
tremble in the midst of their riches.
Whoever finds in them his rest, his
joy, and his happiness, never thinks
of seeking for these things in Ged.
And there lies the greatest misery.—
P. Quesnel.


Ver. 25. Camel and needle’s eye.—
The illustration is drawn from one of
the common, popular stories in the


371


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





East, which would be recognised by
all, There were far-spread tales and
legends of some enchanted city, with
a gate of entrance which was a needle’s
eye. Among the applicants for admis-
sion was a rich merchant, riding on a
camel, with its long neck and humped
back, packed with precious wares.
The rich man, who trusts in riches,
fares like the merchant of the story.
He cannot pass through the magic gate
into the radiant city without the Divine
spell which makes him free of the land
of the spirit.—Bishop Wm. Alexander.


Ver. 27. Salvation in the hands of
God.—It is the comfort of the humble
that their salvation is in the hands of
God; and it is the blindness of the
proud that they would have theirs in
their own. A true Christian is not at
all alarmed to find here that without
grace his salvation is impossible, be-
cause he knows that God can do every-
thing for him, and that he himself can
do all things in God through Jesus
Christ.—P. Quesnel.


“With God all things are possible.”
—Thus God saved Zaccheus, and in
this our day some rich and noble men
seem to abound in every Christian
grace; but though it be possible
with God, we may be sure that the
Lord did not intend by these words
to cancel the warnings He had just
uttered. Does the Lord here mean
that all things are equally easy to
God? By no means. All things may
be equally easy to Him as looked at
from the side of mere power—mere
physical force; but God does not deal
with intelligent creatures in the way
of overwhelming power. So far as
their will is concerned He deals with
them, then, after such sort that they
should co-operate with Him and yield
willingly to Him ; and the Lord, if He
teaches us anything by the whole
matter, teaches us this, that it requires
more spiritual effort on God’s part to
deliver a man from the love of the
world when the man’s wealth enables
him to enjoy all that the world has to
offer.—M. FP, Sadler.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 28—31.
(Parattets: Marr. xix. 27-30; Luxe xviii. 28, 29.)


The all-forsaking spirit and its reward.—The apostles, on witnessing the
incident of vers. 17-27, could not fail to make a personal application of it to
themselves. They remembered the time—not long before—when each of them
had been placed in a similar predicament: their own deceitful hearts soliciting
them to remain as they were; and the imperious voice of One greater than their
hearts saying, “‘ Forsake all, and follow Me.” And so they did. Will any say
that these were poor men possessed of nothing worth mentioning, and that
it required no great sacrifice to renounce a world which smiles not on such as
they? Not so. A man can but give up his all. It costs a poor man as much
to give up his daily labour, his mean abode, his little substance, as it does a rich
man to part with his great possessions. The world is as dear and the ties of
home are as strong to one as to the other.

I. The sense in which this declaration was first made.—The circumstances
of the calling of these disciples were not, then, so different after all from those
of the young man. But the result was exactly opposite. The one went away
sorrowful; the others followed, and patiently continued with Him who called
them. They not only acquiesced in their forlorn and destitute condition, but
actually gloried in it, when they had respect unto the recompense of the reward.
It was no dissatisfaction with their present mode of life, no hankering after
the ease and comfort of former days, that prompted the exclamation, ‘“‘ Lo, we


372


a>


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.


have left all, and have followed Thee!” We learn from Matt. xix. 27 that
Peter added the question, “What shall we have therefore?” We cannot
suppose that he was ignorant of the nature and magnitude of that compensation,
in consideration of which he and all of them had made so great a sacrifice. But
in an affair of such importance, where so much present benefit is surrendered,
the mind naturally seeks all the satisfaction it can procure in regard to the
security of the investment. As the miser is not content to know that he
possesses so much gold, but opens his bags and gloats over the glittering hoard
day after day, so those who have staked their all for a future and distant good
may be excused a little anxiety on the score of the anticipated return.

II, The sense in which we may make the same renunciation.—To “ follow
Christ ” is a common expression to denote almost any relation to or reception
of Him. But we cannot properly lay claim to a part of Peter’s profession
without accepting the whole. We may forsake all and follow Christ, or we
may refuse to forsake all and decline to follow Christ; but to assent to the one
and reject the other is impossible and absurd. Strange that men should ever
dream of such a contradiction! The mistake arises, doubtless, from confounding
the mere act of forsaking all for Christ with the mind and spirit which alone
gives any value to the act, and which may exist equally without the act. The
act may or may not be required; but no condition of life or change of circum-
stances can dispense with the all-forsaking spirit. The letter of this principle—
“We have left all,” etc.—if universally acted upon, would make the world a
desert, and involve laws, morals, and religion itself in one universal chaos: the
spirit of it is a spirit of peace, order, harmony, supports laws, perfects morals,
and is the life and soul of religion.

III. Wherein the all-forsaking spirit consists, and how it acts.—1. We may
discern it in a Christian’s use of this world’s good. Instead of literally forsaking
all for Christ, it may be his duty to hold all for Christ, “‘ready to distribute,
willing to communicate,” “ giving not grudgingly or of necessity, but cheerfully.”
This spirit is entirely opposed to that cool and calculating charity which is
always saying, ‘“ Let the children first be fed; let us wait till the end of the year,
and see what remains after all expenses are met, and all claims provided for.”
That is charity also: that has its praise; but not the praise of those who “seek
first the kingdom,” ete. That would have listened complacently to the command-
ment, ‘Give alms of thy goods”; but would have gone away sorrowful on being
told, “‘ If thou wilt be perfect, give all that thou hast.” That may be called the
giving-up-something spirit, not the giving-up-all. The Pharisee who gave tithes
of all he possessed is an example of the one; the poor widow who cast into the
treasury all that she had is the best illustration of the other. 2. Not in
pecuniary sacrifices only, or even chiefly, is the all-forsaking spirit shewn.
Ancient history tells of a king who enjoyed such uniform prosperity that he
began to fear his good fortune might excite the envy of the gods, and end in
some dreadful disaster. To prevent this he was advised to part voluntarily wit!
the most valued possession he had, and that one the loss of which he would fee!
most. So he bethought himself which among all his treasures answered best to
this description; and having found it (a gold ring or some such trifle), with
his own hand he cast it into the sea. So the Christian manifests his readiness
to give up all for Christ by giving up that which is most precious to him,
whatever it be. To some persons their time is the most valuable of all their
possessions ; and a portion of every day, redeemed from the engrossing cares of
business, and devoted to the glory of God and the improvement and benefit of
the world, is the best proof of their willingness (if need be) to forsake all and
follow Christ. Others, who are not selfish persons, nor wanting in sympathy
with the concerns of their neighbours, are yet fond of ease and quiet, and averse


373


oo


CHAP. x. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


—— ee


to everything likely to involve them in the strife and tumult of the world.
These shew a disposition to forsake all for Christ when, from love for Him and
His brethren, they give up their cherished retirement, and “ go about” doing
that good which the mere “liberal giver” can never accomplish. 3. So far we
have thought of things which must be voluntarily renounced and east behind
us. Other things there are which, while we have them, we are permitted to
enjoy, but which we may at any time be called on to resign. Indeed this is
the tenure on which we hold all our precious things: riches make themselves
wings, and fly away; the faces of beloved friends fade as we gaze on them ; life
itself is but a transitory vapour. Now with respect to such things as these the
all-forsaking spirit has a twofold operation: when deprived of them, it meekly
resigns; while enjoying them, it prepares to resign. Both are hard, especially
the latter. It is hard to give up—harder still to procure and preserve that
state of mind which is always ready to give up, always prepared to “hear the
rod and who hath appointed it.” This is the disposition for all to cultivate
who profess and call themselves Christians. It is not the short, sharp conflict
of a day, or even the protracted battle of many days, but the continual warfare
of life, which ends only with all human affections and all earthly objects. For
the Pauline conception of this disposition, see 1 Cor. vii. 29-31; and for the
Johannine, 1 John ii. 15-17. 4. We should perhaps never think of reckoning
among our treasures the lusts and appetites, human passions and natural
affections, which belong to us as men, Yet are there no possessions which we
can. so strictly call our own, or which we are so unwilling to part with, as these.
Do they not reside in and proceed out of the heart? And if a man’s heart
is not his own, what else, whether within or without the body, can be so
called? As, on the other hand, if a man is able at the word of Christ to tear
out his own heart and cast it from him, will he not much more forsake all
that he hath besides? This is our Lord’s meaning in Matt. v. 29, 30. In the
extirpation of every thought, desire, and affection contrary to the will of God the
all-forsaking spirit has ample scope for all its energies.

IV. The reward of the all-forsaking spirit.—1. Even the temporal condition
of one whose heart and affections have been trained in the self-denying school
of Christ is far better than that of those who use this world to the full, whe
say to their soul, Luke xii. 19. What is the great secret of human happiness ?
Is it not to be “without carefulness ”—to enjoy our present comforts and to
have no disquieting apprehensions of ills to come—to lie down at night with
peace in our heart? Now this state of mind is the assured possession of him
who has forsaken all for Christ. He, and none but he, can say, “I shall never
be moved.” The changes and chances—even the persecutions—of the world
are nothing to him. He is “ satisfied from himself.” He brings forth his
happiness from “the good treasure of his heart,” and therefore it never fails.
He receives a hundredfold more—in the testimony of his conscience, in the
love of God, and in the patient waiting for Christ—than if he had grasped these
things which crumble at a touch, or clung to these ‘ bruised reeds, on which,”
etc. (2 Kings xviii, 21), 2. “And in the world to come—eternal life.”
There the Christian will meet again all those good things which he has, in
heart and will at least, if not in deed, forsaken here. There he will find the
worldly wealth which he scattered in Christ’s name; the much-loved ease
which, to promote Christ’s interests, he was content to be without; the dear
earthly delights which it was lawful for him to enjoy, yet more for Christ’s
glory that he should give up. There he “rests from his labours,” etc. (Rev.
xiv. 13), There, finally, whatever he enjoys, it is with the delightful con-
sciousness, never felt on earth, that “his joy no man taketh from him,” that
his treasure is in heaven, and can neither fade nor fail.


374


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X
cocoa a eS a al EE ee he eye


The trials and reward of the missionary.—God, in order to determine His
people to a cordial and zealous fulfilment of His will in all things, even in those
things which are most trying to faith and repulsive to flesh and blood, employs
every kind of influence which is suited to His character and adapted to their
nature. He employs the influence of His authority to command them, of His
displeasure to warn them, of His love to constrain them, of His ability and
willingness to recompense, in order to induce and to win them. And there are
in all genuine disciples principles powerfully susceptible of all these influences—
meek obedience to His will, awe of His displeasure, constraint by His love, and
a holy ambition to acquire the rewards of grace. |

I. The call of the missionary to make the sacrifices which our Lord here
specifies.—1. His call originates in the gracious purposes of God to have all the
nations of the earth turned unto Himself by the power of the gospel. . 2. This
call flows from the commandment which the Redeemer has laid upon His Church
to proceed in carrying this purpose into effect without delay (Mark xvi. 15;
Acts i. 8). The faithful missionary hears the commandment, and hastens to
the fulfilment of it, both in his labours and his prayers. 3. The missionary
hears himself specially called by God to the service of His gospel in distant
lands. He sees the purpose of God, and longs to have it fulfilled ; he hears the
command of God, and is moved to obey it; he perceives the promises of God to
this work, and desires to seek the benefit of them ; he feels the love of souls, and
cannot be at rest while they are perishing ; he sees the sacrifices and the dangers,
but is not dismayed by them ; he understands the nature of the work required,
and believes that he may by grace be made instrumental in fulfilling it. And
what is all this but the witness in himself that he is called of God to go far
hence to the Gentiles, as if he heard a voice from heaven saying to him, “I
have made thee 'a minister,” etc. (Acts xxvi. 16-18). 4. He feels called by the
imploring ery of a perishing world, “Come over, and help us.” He is not
insensible to their sorrows because they are thousands of miles distant from him,
and seas roll between, and his eye has never looked upon their wretchedness.

II. The sacrifices which are required of the Christian missionary.—1. As
the Church must enlighten the world by the instituted means of grace, some
must go forth from it to carry these means and apply them to the heathen
nations. 2. The missionary presents himself to the Church as ready to undertake
all the labours, privations, and sacrifices in the work, and encounter all its
difficulties and perils, if they at home will only support him with their habitual
prayers, aiding and encouraging him under his trials, and ministering to his
wants as far as his circumstances in providence may require. 3. Missionaries,
in going forth to the heathen, must leave behind them not only their country,
but relatives, and houses, and lands, and whatever nature esteems dear; and
they have the feelings of nature in common with others. 4. They have
unnumbered and unknown perils, privations, and sufferings to expect. They
are exposed to the perils of the traveller both by sea and by land. The hazards
to which they are exposed from climate are none of the least appalling to those
who have the same love of life with other men. They are exposed to perils
from those among whom they labour—from the barbarity of savage tribes, and
the more monstrous enmity and persecution of civilised and nominally Christian
colonists. Though they should escape all these evils, they have still difficulties
and vexations to encounter in their work itself which are none of the least
trying to the spirits of men—difficulties from language, from the inveterate
ignorance of those whom they seek to enlighten, their incurable superstitions,
or their confirmed habits of vice and ungodliness ; while open resistance will
usually be raised up by Satan from quarters whence it was least expected and
where it proves the most effectual.

375


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ee Se


IIT. The motives which determine and encourage the missionary to embrace
these sacrifices.—1. Love to the Redeemer, and desire that He may be glorified.
9, Admiration of the gospel as the “ power of God, and the wisdom of God,”
‘unto the salvation of men.” 3. Compassion and love to mankind for Christ’s
sake. He is impelled by some portion of the Spirit of Him who, moved by love
for our race, left His Father’s bosom, and tabernacled for a season in our sinful
and wretched world, partaking of its sorrows—whose ‘ compassion was moved ”
to intensity “when He beheld the multitudes, because they fainted,” and were

scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd. This compassion may be felt

strongly by the missionary even at home, but far more powerfully when he is
set down in the midst of the objects of his sympathy and his eye has looked
upon their miseries.

IV. Their reward.—l. They are “ chosen vessels” to the most arduous and
honourable part of the work of Christ on earth. To be occupied in this work
is the highest glory of man, the chief happiness of the renewed mind. It
assimilates to Christ, who came not to do His own will, but the will of Him that
sent Him. It assimilates them to angels, who are occupied in “doing His
commandments, hearkening unto the voice of His word.” 2. The honour of
eminent suffering for Christ. Paul rejoiced in his sufferings for the Church


(Col. i. 24), and spake of suffering


for Christ as an honour peculiarly “ given ”


to such of the saints as were called to it (Phil. i. 29). And truly these
sufferings cannot appear a small honour to any who behold in them “a
manifest token” that they “shall reign with Him” (2 Tim. ii. 12), and know
that they are “ working” for them “a far more exceeding and eternal weight of


glory.”—Joseph Hay, M.A.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 29. Sacrifice of all.—Let no
man say that this sacrifice of theirs
was a trifling one. True it is they
were poor men and had nothing to
part with but their boats and their
nets; but let us remember that the
little that a poor man hath is as much
to him as are riches to the wealthy.
If a man be thirsty, it is as hard to
persuade him to pour on the ground
a single cup of water as to prevail
upon another to cast away a whole
barrel. It is a triumph of grace, then,
when the poor forsakes his little, as
well as when the rich counts his
abundance as dross for Christ’s sake.—
H. Verschoyle.

“ For My sake.” —These three words
make secular things sacred. You may
go to your farm, or to your merchan-
dise, you may sing songs, or paint
pictures, or build houses, or make
shoes, or heal bodies, and all these
things become sacred if they are done


376





for the love of Christ: “For My
sake.” —F, Harper.

Ver. 30. “An hundredfold now.’—
What shall we say to this bountiful
promise? Shall we say it is merely
a flourish of words from the lips of
Eternal Truth? God forbid! These
are the words of truth and soberness.
Looking back on the first disciples, we
see this promise fulfilled: but how?
1. Though the disciples had but little
left, or afterwards received but little
in the stead of what they had lost, yet
had they a good title to that little, and
you can without difficulty conceive a
man having greater enjoyment in the
possession of one acre of land on a
good title than ten acres on a disputed
one, The child of God holds what he
possesses as a gift conferred upon him
in virtue of Christ’s propitiatory sacri-
fice; the ungodly holds his possessions
as things already forfeited by his sin ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.


hence it is written, Ps. xxxvii, 16.
2. They had, besides, the capacity given
them of enjoying their little, which is
often denied to the most affluent. Con-
tentment is the handmaid of real godli-
ness; when it is joined to godliness
there is great gain, because it gives a
sweet relish to the most slender pro-
vision, it transforms straitness into
abundance.—H. Verschoyle.

The Christian's gain in this world.—
The Christian gains back again already
in this world, in the higher form of
real spiritual essence, whatever in the


physical and symbolical form. of his.


life he has forfeited: houses enough,
in the entertainment afforded him by
his spiritual associates who receive him ;
brothers and sisters, in the highest sense
of the term; mothers, who bless and
tend the life of his soul; children, of
his spirit ; lands, of his activity, of his
higher enjoyment of nature, of his
delights ; and all this ever purer, ever
richer, as an unfolding of that eternal
inheritance of which it is said, “ All
things are yours,” in spite of what-
ever persecutions of the world which


dim the glory of these things.—J. P.
Lange, D.D.


Ver. 31. First and last.—On occa-
sions that call for a great prompt
sacrifice in the interests of a worthy
cause, or upon the altar of truth and
principle, have you not seen, now and
again, some very religious and virtuous
people wonderfully outdone by some
who had had but little credit for
conscientiousness or moral seriousness,
men to whom you would never have
looked for anything like the magnani-
mous spirit and conduct that distinguish
them? The very greatest are often
behind others for a while, like your
dull, slow schoolboy, who turns out
afterwards a brilliant man, while his
more brilliant schoolmate, who got all
the praise and prizes, dims and fades
beside him, the tortoise in the end
beating the hare. The best are often
the tortoise in development, just be-
cause they are the best, and have so
much more in them to develop.—
S. A, Tipple.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 32—34.
(Parattets: Marr. xx. 17-19; Luxe xviii. 31-34; Joun xi. 53-57.)


On the way to Jerusalem.—Every act of Christ relates not only to those
disciples who were the immediate witnesses of it, and to events which then and
there transpired, but also to His whole Church through all future ages, and to
events bearing upon the interests of that Church, till her probation on earth is
finished, her numbers are made up, and she stands complete in Him before the
throne above. ‘The circumstances recorded in the text therefore bear a striking
analogy to the spiritual circumstances of all believers in Christ.

I. The course they pursued.—The ‘‘ way” here meant was the highway to
Jerusalem, a type of the way which leads to heaven, along which all must pass
who wish at last to reach that glorious world. 1. As there was a public,
appointed, and common way to Jerusalem, so there is an appointed and common
way to heaven. (1) The way of regeneration. (2) The way of repentance.
(8) The way of holiness, (4) The way of faith in Christ. (5) The way of holy
obedience. (6) The way of atonement. 2. They were in the way. It is not
sufficient for us to know that there is a way, but we must see to it that we are
in it. 3. They made advances in the way. Itis not sufficient that we know the
way to heaven, and be in the way to heaven; but we must make progress in it,
and be like the disciples, ever going up. The new life within must grow and be
constantly giving forth new fruits and beauties.


II. The place of their destination.—“ Jerusalem.” It was called the Holy


377


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR.


ee SS eee


City, because there stood the temple, there dwelt the sublime symbol of the
Divine Presence, there Divine worship was carried on, and there all God’s people
met to pay their Divine honours to His name. Its peace, its glory, its religious
services, its enjoyment of the Divine Presence, and the security of its inhabitants
caused it to be selected as a type of heaven, and hence John calls it the New
Jerusalem and the City of God. There the weary pilgrim is at rest; the
weather-beaten mariner has anchored for ever in the fair haven of peace; the
worn-out warrior doffs his helmet and puts on his crown; the heavenly runner
has reached the goal and enwreaths his brow with the garland of immortal
honour ; and all ascribe their glory to free and sovereign grace.

III. The Leader they followed.—‘ Jesus went before them.” This act of Christ
was typical of glorious truths—truths which apply not only to those who imme-
diately followed Him, but also to all His followers down to the end of time.
1. He went before them as their Mediator, to break down the impregnable
barriers which sin had reared in their way to happiness, to God, and to heaven,
and to give them free access to glory by His precious blood. 2. He went before
them as their Glorious General, to subdue all their enemies, to lead them in the
good fight of faith, to instruct and arm them for the holy war, to conduct them
from conquest to conquest, and to bring them to final victory and immortal
triumph. 3. He went before them as their Great Pattern of submission to the
Divine will, of patience under suffering, of self-denial in the Divine service, of
love to God and man, of a pure benevolence, of intense desire for the glory of
God. 4. He went before them as their Infallible Guide in doctrinal truth, in
practical holiness, and in the way to glory, honour, and immortality. 5. He
went before them through death and the grave, to take away their terrors,
and bring life and immortality to light. 6, He went before them in the first
resurrection, to demonstrate to them His own almighty power and the acceptance
of His great atonement on their behalf by the Father, and to teach them to rest
in hope of that glorious day when He will change their vile bodies and fashion
them like unto His glorious body, according to the power whereby He is able to
subdue all things unto Himself. 7. He went before them to heaven, to take
possession of it in their name, to prepare it for them and them for it, and to
supply them with all needed grace, till they abide in His presence and see Him
as He is.

IV. The feelings they experienced.—1. They were amazed. This appears to
have been an impression made up of the mental elements of reverence, awe,
admiration, and wonder, thrown over the disciples’ minds by the sublime spirit
and conduct of Jesus on this occasion. As you follow the Lamb to eternal glory,
have you not often felt amazed? Have you not often felt amazed at the
benevolence which led Him to become poor that you might be eternally rich @—
amazed that He should have loved sinners so as to become for them a Man of
Sorrows, that they might become participants of eternal joys ?—amazed that He
should have chosen, predestinated, called, renewed, sanctified, and preserved you,
when, had you been left to yourself, you had now been in the road to eternal
ruin ?—amazed that you do not love Him more and serve Him better, who has
done, is doing, and will do so much for you ?—and amazed that the glories which
He has revealed as the eternal portion of His faithful people do not produce
upon you a more heavenly influence in this world of sin and woe? 2. “As
they followed, they were afraid.” Such were their weakness, their timidity, their
imperfect knowledge, their erroneous views of His glorious mission and the true
nature of His spiritual kingdom, that all the glorious majesty which He here
displayed was not sufficient to preserve them from fear—fear for themselves, fear
for Him, and fear for His cause. Believers fear for Christ—fear for His cause,


fear for themselves—fear persecutions, dangers, afflictions, and death—because
378


— —————————


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.





their knowledge of Christ is defective, or because they do not look sufficiently to
Him.—W. Gregory.


The intensity of Jesus—What a wonderful picture is here! There are only
a few words, only a few touches of the painter’s brush, but they are the words
of a loving heart, the touches of a skilful hand; and as we look at the picture
we seem to realise what it means. Jesus is going up to Jerusalem with His
disciples ; it is the last time they will tread that road together; and on the way,
instead of keeping close to Him, and hanging on His every word, they linger
behind, wrapped up in their own petty trifling interests, disputing with one
another as to which of them shall have the pre-eminence when the rewards of
the kingdom are distributed. And Jesus goes before them, and they know it
not ; talking of the kingdom they have forgotten the King, and on a sudden they
look up and see Him alone, sad, silent, grave, awful in the majesty of that sad
face and eager on-looking eyes, and are amazed. Amazed, why? Because they
see and read in all this what you and I can see and read there yet more clearly
than they, a wondrous intensity. “Intense.” This is one of the words adopted
by a modern sect of fashion—a fashion which delights in making men look
effeminate and women masculine, which puts mere mawkish sentiment in the
place of noble deeds, mistakes a rhapsody of words for great realities, and has
learned the art of taking the meaning out of grandest words. But while the
word has been taken and spoilt by some, remember what a depth of meaning
there is in this word “intensity.” Would you know what it means? Then
look at Jesus and you will learn.

TI. You will see, first of all, in Him an intensity of purpose. Those fixed
eyes, that set mouth, those firm steps, that grave face, they tell us of a Man who
has set before Himself a great aim, who means by the help of God to accomplish
it. It is the will of God, it is His I'ather’s business, which He had set before
Him from the first. And because His aim is so high, His purpose so simple and
grand, therefore the life of Jesus is not like ours, a zigzag, crooked path, but a
straight, onward, undeviating path.

Il. But in His intensity we see also the intensity of humility. The conscious-
ness of a great aim in life, the recognition of a great purpose, sometimes, because
of our innate weakness, makes us conceited; it gives a man self-consciousness,
and so spoils his aim. But as we look into the face of Jesus Christ, so sorrowful
and sad, as we look onward to the object on which His eyes are fixed, as we listen
to the words wherein He explains what all this means, we learn what intensity
of purpose needs to control and guide it aright. The intensity of Jesus is one
that stooped, that bowed itself—ay, it is an intensity which was “ obedient even
to the death upon the Cross.”

III. But there is more than this; look again into His eyes and you will see
what it is. Something more is wanted, something that shall join together the
intensity of purpose with the intensity of humility. What is it that will make
a man’s life straight as the flight of an arrow, and yet at the same time lowliness
itself 2 Nothing, I think, but the intensity of love. This intensity of Jesus,
remember, is for us. 1. For us, because all this intensity was expended on our
behalf. He goes up to Jerusalem before us as our Sacrifice. “ Christ also hath
once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God.”
2, For us, because this intensity may be ours. He goes up to Jerusalem before
us as our Example (1 Pet. ii. 21). And hence you and I may go forward on the
path God hath marked out for us, in some of this intensity of purpose, of
humility, of love, which marked the life of Jesus. This intensity may be ours,
for He was Perfect Man as well as Perfect God. His intensity was human
intensity, made up of human purpose, human humility, human love. This


379


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Se ee std a


intensity may be ours, for we see something of this intensity in the lives of
others. Other men have attracted us or shamed us as we have looked upon
their intensity and compared it with our lack of it.—C. J. Ridgeway.


Following Jesus fearingly.—Notice the singular combination, the compatibility
and the union of two apparently contradictory things: though they “ feared ”
they “ followed,” and though they “ followed” they “feared.” The fear was not
enough to stop the following, nor the following sufficient to arrest the fear.
There was a love in the fear which kept them following ; and yet a nature in
the following which still left them fearing. And I should not be wrong if
I carried the connexion of these two thoughts a little further. They feared
because they followed, and they followed because they were afraid. Fear is the
strongest fascination. There is always a tendency to go to what we greatly fear.
So the following led up to the fear, and the fear led up to the following. That
walk up to Jerusalem appears to me strangely illustrative of the path by which
many of you are going to heaven. This strange and, but for experience, this
incredible condition of a man’s heart—the fear that follows, and the following
that fears—whence is it ?

I. Certainly, if you were not a follower, you would not be a fearer.—I never
knew any one in my life begin to fear till God had begun to love him and he
had begun to love God. The fear is an index that you are on the road. Because
you are His the Spirit works those tender, awe-stricken feelings in your mind ;
because you are His men hate you; because you are His the devil harasses


you; because you are His you know that “ through much tribulation you must


enter into the kingdom of God.”

II. But is this, then, right ?—Have you ever known whatit is, in any sense, to
have undertaken—-absolutely to have undertaken for anybody ? And then have
you felt the mortification of finding that person, for whom you had undertaken
in everything, afraid, mistrusting? It is good to follow fearingly ; but it is
much better to follow trustingly.

III. How is it that a real follower may be a real fearer ?—I will find the
answer on that road up to Jerusalem. Why did the disciples fear? 1. They
had not adequate ideas of Him whom they followed. So it is with you. If you
knew the character of Christ, if you knew the work of Christ, you would be
rid of that fear. 2. Though they loved Christ, they did not love Him as He
deserved. If they had, the love would have absorbed the fear ; they would have
rejoiced to endure with Him, even to the death; the dignity, the happiness of
partnership with Him would have swallowed up every other consideration.
3. They had not what their Master had—one, great, fixed, sustaining aim.
There is nothing so ennobling, there is nothing which makes a hero, a martyr,
a saint, like an object, distinct, lofty, worthy. Usefulness is such an object ;
the extension of Christ’s kingdom is such an object ; the glory of God is such an
object. 4. They had their fears undefined. It was the indefinite which terrified
them. I should hardly say too much if I said that fear is indefiniteness. The
terror is the mist which enwraps it.

IV. Take, then, four rules.—1. Fortify yourself in the thought of what Christ
is—His person, His work, His covenant ; and what He is to you. 2. Love
Him very much, and realise your union with Him—the preciousness, the


grandeur of that union, especially in sorrow, persecution, and death. 3. Set .


a high mark, and carry your life in your hand, so you may reach that mark,
and do something for God. 4. Often stop and say deliberately to yourself,
“Why art thou cast down, O my soul?” and do not go on till you have got an
answer.

V. But are vou still afraid ?—Let me offer you this counsel. Do not care


380






a


—


=


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.





about it ; do not care for your fears ; do not fear because you fear. Only follow


on, follow on.
did follow fearingly.—J. Vaughan.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 32. The way of the Cross.—All
nature trembles in a man, when God
obliges him to take the way of the
Cross. Christ goes forward therein,
with a firm and even pace, and with
a true courage. He who hazards his
life in hopes of a better fortune exposes
it only because he hopes not to lose it,
and is but the more fond of it on this
account ; as a covetous person is really
the forider of riches the more he exposes
to the hazard of gaming, on the pro-
spect of greater gain. True courage
consists in the contempt of this present
life through the hopes of that which
is eternal; and this contempt is so
much the greater the more sure a man
is of losing it, as Jesus Christ and the
martyrs were.— P. Quesnel.


Vers. 33, 34. Going up to Jerusalem.
—1, They were very near the end of
one experience, and on the threshold


The disciples came in all right to Jerusalem at last, though they


ON THE VERSES.


of the next. Every sudden transition
awakens strange feelings. The change
from one experience to another, when
it appears to come with any measure of
suddenness, comes to us with pathetic
interest. This must have affected
the disciples with exceptional power.
2. The feeling that an important
experience has come to an end without
our having made the best use of it,
adds to our sense of loss and our feel-
ing of regret at the thought of parting
company with such an _ experience.
Christ knew nothing of that sadness.
In His experience everything had led
up to the Cross; and although there
was a natural recoil on His part as
the Son of Man from the agony of the
Cross, and the dread experience of
deadly contact with the world’s sin,


‘yet He had nothing on his own part


to dread as He entered the conflict.—
D. Davies.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 34—45.
(PaRALLeL: Marr. xx. 20-28.)


The petition of Zebedee’s sons.—Ilt was our Lord’s custom, when any indefinite
request was preferred to Him, to draw forth from the petitioner a more exact
statement of his wants and desires. Of this we have one instance here
(vers. 35, 36), and another in ver. 51. Can we have a stronger argument than
this for the exercise of special prayer? And can we have a plainer testimony
to the need of self-examination before we venture to approach the throne
of grace ? a

I. The request of the two brothers.“ Grant unto us,” etc. 1. This petition
displayed their ignorance of Christ’s plans. They looked for a kingdom of this
world and a temporal Messiah. They were waiting with impatience for the
moment when Christ should throw aside the mean disguise under which He now
walked, and proclaim Himself in His true character, as the lawful inheritor of
the throne of David. All enemies being subdued, and the whole world reduced
to a state of peaceful subjection under His sceptre, then (they imagined) would
begin such an earthly kingdom as would swallow up the splendour and the
remembrance of all former ones. And they, the chosen comprnions and faithful
followers of His low estate—what should they not have, what honours and


o81


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
oe Se ee


dignities might they not aspire to in His exaltation? 2. This petition was


marked by forwardness and presumption. To ask that they might “sit, the one _


on His right hand, and the other on His left, in His kingdom,” was to seek for
themselves a pre-eminence in that kingdom above their fellows ; for these were
the tro most honourable seats in an Eastern court, and always reserved for those
whose rank was only inferior to him who sat upon the throne. It is dangerous
to say, ‘What wilt thou?” to persons whose requests are not likely to be guided
by modesty or discretion. 3. Observe, also, the worldliness of this petition.
Tt looks no farther, apparently, than the present life. (1) How many still
follow Christ, knowing and caring nothing about the riches of His redeeming
grace, but desiring to eat of the loaves and be filled! How many make a pro-
fession of religion for the sake of certain worldly advantages which they expect
to gain by it! Not so gross, but equally dangerous, is the delusion of those
who look for any part of the reward of godliness in this world. If we entered
thoroughly into the mind of Christ, and saw eye to eye with Him the end He
has in view, we should never think of asking of Him such mere temporal
advantages as a good name, a quiet mind, a comfortable enjoyment of life, or
even a peaceful and happy death. These are consolation certainly, but not the
consolation of Christ; these are blessings, but not the blessing of Him who
“came to bless us by turning,” ete. (Acts iL 26). (2) How many religious
parents, like “the mother of Zebedee’s children” (Matt. xx. 20), display a much
greater anxiety about the worldly prospects of their offspring than about the
welfare of their souls! Judging by their conduct, they think more of seeing
them now “riding upon the high places of the earth,” than of meeting them
hereafter at the right hand of power in heaven.

II. The Saviour’s reply.—‘ Ye know not,” etc. 1. It may be said to all who
pray for any temporal advantages, “ Ye know not whether the issue of your
prayer, if granted, will be for good or evil.” We do not, however, bid you not
ask at all for the things of this life; but when you do, ask discreetly, modestly,
without importunity, with an entire submission to the will and wisdom of God,
confident that He will not only give good things, but also refuse evil and hurtful
things, to them that ask Him. 2. But Christ’s answer to these petitioners
seems to insist chiefly on their ignorance of the manner in which the great prizes
(so to speak) in the distribution of heavenly honours were to be sought and
won. Would they have preferred their request in this form had they realised
that “through much tribulation,” ete.? “ My own exaltation,” says the Saviour,
“will be the reward of My previous sufferings and humiliation. If you desire
to share in My Crown, you must expect to bear your part in My Cross. Are
you able to do this?” ‘Those who are contented to be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven may perhaps escape with just the ordinary afflictions that
fall to every man’s lot. But those who aspire (as who would not?) to a place
near the throne must expect to be called upon to resist unto blood, striving
against sin, to go through fire and water, and to be baptised in the furnace of
affliction, “that the trial of their faith,” ete. (1 Pet. i. 7).

III. The decision of the two brothers.—“ We can.” 1. Here we have a
striking instance of the levity and rashness with which men undertake they
know not what. Amongst Christ’s followers, as indeed in the outset of any
enterprise whatever, there was no lack of zealous promisers and hasty undertakers
(Mark xiv. 29-31). But “ pride goeth before destruction.” When the hour of
trial came, “all the disciples forsook Him and fled.” 2. If you are wise, you
will before beginning to build “sit down first and count the cost,” etc.
(Luke xiv. 28-30), duly sensible of your own weakness, relying only upon the
ability and sufficiency which cometh from God. Then you may adopt as your
own the golden maxim of the apostle (Phil. iv. 13).


382


—— —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.





IV. The Saviour’s concluding observation—1. “Ye shall indeed drink,” ete,
This is generally supposed to be an intimation of what should happen to these
two brothers in the prosecution of their apostolic ministry. (1) James was the
foremost in time of all the apostles to follow his Master to death (Acts xii. 2).
(2) John was preserved alive the longest of all the apostles, and for that very
reason doubtless endured and suffered the most. 2. “But to sit on My right
hand,” ete. The power of Christ, whether to reward or punish, is a judicial
power, not to be exercised in a partial or capricious manner (if we could suppose
Him capable of such weakness), but by certain fixed rules and principles. It
is of the very essence of a judge to judge according to law. Surely we do not
need to be told that in the distribution of heavenly honours there is no room
either for partiality on the part of the dispensers or solicitation on the part of
the candidates. Nor does it diminish aught from the dignity of the Son that
He should assign the high places of His kingdom to those who are the blessed
and approved of His Father. And who are they? ‘Not every one that saith,”
etc. (Matt. vii. 21). “Holy and humble men of heart”; “Israelites indeed ” ;
“the true circumcision ” ; they that “‘ worship God in the spirit,” etc. (Phil. ili. 3).
They who “strive to enter in at the strait gate”; and, being entered, strive
to advance farther and farther, always “pressing toward the mark,” etc.
(Phil. iii. 14). Above all, they who in this life have “ received their evil things,”
and counted them as good ; who have been great and patient sufferers, whether
“in mind, body, or estate”; who have “come out of great tribulation,” etc.
(Rev. vii. 14). 3. If we would know these assessors of the Saviour, these right-
hand and left-hand men, while they are upon earth, or if we would determine
whether we ourselves are of the number, we must attend to the signs which He
has given us (vers. 42-45).


The request of James and John.—I. The request.—This request is a remark-
able instance of that slowness and dulness of heart with which our Lord had
to deal, even among those who understood Him most. For you observe that it
was made immediately after a very clear prediction of His Cross and Passion.
You may judge how great was the solitude of heart, the isolation in which the
Incarnate Son abode on earth, when even His intimates and closest followers
could so little sympathise with His purposes or enter into His thoughts.

II. Our Lord’s answer.— He does not deny that there are high places in His
kingdom, but He unveils the terms on which only they may be won. Nearest
to Him they might be, but then it must be a nearness in self-abasement, self-
sacrifice, and suffering. The very terms Christ uses spoke of suffering : the
poison-cup was not seldom used of old as a mode of execution—you remember
the hemlock of Socrates; and water was sometimes the instrument of death—
we read of being drowned in the depth of the sea. They were terms, moreover,
which the Old Testament connected with suffering; “the cup of trembling,”
“the cup of the Lord’s fury,” express some discipline very terrible to flesh and
blood : “I will take the cup of salvation” is by some interpreted, “(I am ready
to undergo even the pains of martyrdom”; and the mention of the baptism also
would recall such expressions as these, “ All Thy waves and storms are gone
over me.” And the sharp searching trial implied in these words would only be
intensified when, at a later period, they heard their Master speak of that terrible
agony which they were called to witness as His cup—‘“ Let this cup pass from
Me”; when they stood before His Cross, and saw His life-blood streaming from
Ilis head, and hands, and feet, and side, a very baptism of blood. Were they able
to face such things as these? to go through those trials, that anguish, coming
in varions shapes, which were necessary to prepare in them those graces, only
as jossessing which they could stand high in the kingdom of the Man of Sorrows,

383


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i ea





of the Lamb slain? In short, in these words our Lord intimates the use of
suffering as a preparation for glory, for the presence of God. Not that sufferimg
necessarily does this. It can act on us only according to the state we ourselves
are in, and a corrupt heart it is likely only to embitter and harden. Suffering
can bless but those who receive it meekly and in the love of God.

III, What a bearing has all this upon ourselves.—1. Have we not often
asked our Blessed Lord to place us uear Him, to shew us His truth, to
open our eyes to enable us to cast in our lot with Him, to give us a throne
among His saints, to set us on His right hand at least, if not upon His left ¢
What dosuch prayers imply? (1) To cast in your lot with Christ, what is that ?
To share the portion of One whom the world rejected, whose goodness those
about Him could not appreciate. Aré you ready to do that? to be called an
enthusiast 2 to lose the support of the many who stand by that which is popular
and moderate and safe? to become in their estimation “a fool for Christ’s
sake”? (2) To know Christ’s very truth ; do you understand that to wish this
is to draw down on yourself the agony of seeing truths which the world will not
accept, while you see also that she is suffering for not accepting—the agony
which prophets of old knew, of having a message, a revelation, which men will
not hear from you, which is the only panacea for the ills of society, of
nations, of homes, and yet to which they will not listen? (3) To be like our
Lord, you have asked that. But have you considered through what you must
pass, that you may have opportunities of exercising longsuffering, forgiveness,
calmness, like His? Have you thought what a discipline it requires, what self-
denials you must exercise to prepare in you a mind like that of Jesus? 2. And
yet do we withdraw you from these high aspirations because there is a price
to pay for their fulfilment? Ah, no: those are indeed your most blessed
moments, your most blessed thoughts, when you long the most to be like your
Incarnate Lord, feel most the attracting influence of His purity. Cleave to
them, part not with them, cost you what they will. Whatever the price you
must pay for the fulfilment of those wishes, however bitter the cup or the
baptism, there are some thoughts which will strengthen you to bear them.
(1) You may think of them as His baptism and His cup; as sufferings and trials
which He has sanctified for you by first bearing them Himself, taking His own
deep draught before the cup is handed on to us. (2) You may think of the
sympathy of Christ; for there is that close oneness of life between Christ and
His people that their afflictions become His. (3) There is the strength supplied
to you in sacramental grace. The very terms our Lord uses to denote His
sufferings, and His people’s, are borrowed from those two great means of grace,
whereby our union with Him is begun and perfected. We have our baptism
into Him, as the guarantee that our souls have been brought into a relation of
grace to Him, into a capacity of receiving life from Him, which nothing but
our own sinfulness can render nugatory. We have that other Sacrament of
His Body and Blood, the cup of blessing and the bread of life, wherein we can
again and again draw nigh to Him, and unite ourselves with Him, and rein-
vigorate, as it were, the wasting frame of spiritual strength. This baptism and
this cup, since they bring the faithful soul into such direct connexion with
Him through whom we may do all things, are able to equip us for all the
demands of patience, of sweetness, of strength, which that other baptism, that
other cup, may make upon us.—Canon Turnock.


384


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. A.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS


Ver. 37. Is ambition wrong ?— What
is ambition 2 Ambition is an instinct
of nature, a desire to rise; and, like
all other instincts, capable of good and
evil. Satan took hold of it, and said,
“Ye shall be as gods.” Jesus en-
shrined it, ‘‘ Ye shall sit on thrones” ;
“ Be ye perfect, even as your Father,
who is in heaven, is perfect.” When


“a man wishes to go out of his own line


into another, to which evidently God
has not called him, his ambition is
wrong. When a man tries to get to
the very top of his own line, his ambi-
tion is right. When a man seeks great
things for himself, only for himself, it
is a worldly ambition. When a man
pursues great things for usefulness, for
the Church, for Christ, it is the same
principle, but it is consecrated, pious,
and good.—J. Vaughan.


Ver. 38. “ Ye know not what ye ask.”
—Often we offer large petitions with
small meanings or motives, and would
be overwhelmed if they were granted.
When they ask for thrones, they ask
the path leading thither—the discipline
fitting for them, the service which
wins such influence.—F. Glover.

Cup and baptism.—The word “ cup”
is often used by sacred and other
writers to signify the portion of good
and evil which is assigned to men in
this life. It probably arose from the
custom in ancient times of the master
of the household distributing to his
children and servants a certain sepa-
rate allowance of meat and drink each
by himself, differing in quality and
quantity according to their desert.
The same custom was also observed in
entertaining guests (see Gen. xliii. 34).
In allusion to which custom the word
“cup” is used for the dispensation
of Providence—the Almighty, as our
common Master and Father, appoint-
ing to each one his respective share of
suffering and enjoyment. “ Baptism,”
which signifies immersion, is also fami-
liarly used in Seripture to denote a
person being overwhelmed with calami-


Kel


ON THE VERSES.


ties, as it were with a flood of waters.
The “cup,” then, which Jesus was to
drink of was one of affliction; the
“baptism ” with which He was to be
baptised was that of a cruel and
ignominious death. And they who
should follow Him in His career were
to drink deep of that cup of suffering
and be immersed in the darkest horrors
of human barbarity.


Ver. 39. The ambitious person finds
nothing difficult, provided he can but
raise himself—He easily presumes
upon that which he cannot perform,
to obtain that which he cannot deserve.
It was but a moment ago, and these
men were seized with fear and amaze-
ment at the bare sight of the way to
Jerusalem; but one passion weakens
another, and, like a burning fever,
supplies a man with fresh strength
and courage.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 40. Vo true honours are hghtly
won in either earth or heaven.—None
are arbitrarily given; for to give
honours for which we are unfit would
be no kindness. Besides, the true
crown is a flowering of our nature, not
a garland lifted and put on. Accord-
ingly the right-hand and left-hand
thrones go to those fullest of the
Saviour’s spirit, and who, of all men,
have been most like Him in their work
and sacrifice.—2R. Glover.

Lessons.—On the whole incident note
—1. How noble these men are in their
very faults ; they seek not money, fame,
or ease, but the honour that comes from
God. . 2. How graciously Christ deals
with what is faulty in us. 3. How,
in answering our prayers, He has to
answer not the great words, but the
small meaning, lest we should be over-
whelmed. 4. In the other world
there will be no unequal distribution
of rewards, but each will receive what
fits him.—Jbid.


Ver. 41. Ambition of the clergy.—
The ambition of clergymen is a great
scandal in the Church, and is frequently


385


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


es eS ee a


an occasion of emulations, enmities,
divisions, schisms, and wars—of all
which the displeasure and indignation
of the apostles give us an imperfect
shadow and resemblance. If apostles,
trained up with so much care in the
school of charity and humility, not-
withstanding are not free from this
vice, what effects will not ambition
produce in souls, wholly immersed in
flesh and blood, which have no motion
but from their passions, no law but
that of their own desires !—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 42. The principle of scramble.
—There is a strange ambition ruling
in the hearts of multitudes—to be
ministered to instead of ministering.
Men wish to get rather than to give.
Hence the universal scramble in com-
merce. Hence the worldwide diffusion
of the spirit of selfishness—a spirit
whose tendency is to turn every man
into an Ishmaelite, with his hands and
heart against all other men, and all
other men’s against him. One might
have expected men would see that the
plan of seeking to receive ministry
rather than to give it is short-sighted
and suicidal. Suppose you were one of
an association of a hundred persons, all
jealous of one another, each seeking
to take advantage of all the rest, and
trying to get them all to minister to
him. What is likely to be the result ?
Each will shut himself up as in his
own castle to defend himself against
all the rest. All the energy that each
possesses will be expended on promoting
his own particular advantage ; and not
one will get from any of his neighbours
a really helping hand, if the circum-
stances will admit of the help being
withheld. This is the principle of
scramble—every one for himself and
for himself alone. It has been tried
in every country and in every coterie
under heaven, and everywhere with
lamentable results. All tyrannies have
sprung from it. All wars have been
begotten by it. All poverty is its
child. All household feuds and family
alienations are to be traced to its
baleful influence.—J. Morison, D.D,


386


Vers. 43, 44. Mutual service is
something very practical. Do not put
it aside as one of the counsels of perfec-
tion, or as a theory that will not work
on weekdays. Mutual service may
be the abiding principle of every-day
life in any station of domestic or public
or mercantile life. Think, first, how
much is done for us—-what service we
receive and absorb. Let our imagina-
tion travel for a moment over the
scenes where toil is even now going on
for us, to the far countries whence
come our food-supplies—all the world
laid under tribute ; think of our sailors
in their hard and dangerous work ;
visit in fancy our miners, our labourers,
our factory-workers, our clerks, the
myriad-handed, myriad-headed service
of a great city. Think what has been
the labour of creating the civilisa-
tion, the conquest over nature, even
the delicate organisation of faculties
that we unconsciously inherit. Which
of us can repay to the existing genera-
tion, still more to the world, the vast
debt we owe? Are we not indeed
under a sort of spell that forces us to
sit, and be clothed, and carried about,
and amused by the labours of others ?
No, it is not so. You may break the
spell. It is open to all of us to render
service to others over and above our
business in lifee We may render
bodily service; and we know how high
a value our Lord puts on the service
of our bodily needs. We may diminish
the scale of our own comfort, that we
may raise the standard of the comfort
of those who work for us; we may
thus serve our own generaticn even
in its physical needs, and this is an
absolute duty. But there is other
service than this. When material
nature is conquered, its wastes tilled,
its wild beasts slain, there remains the
harder problem of conquering human
nature, reclaiming its waste places,
casting out its evil spirits. There is
the noblest service of all, the spiritual
service of lifting the ignorant and
degraded, of supplying “the  spirit-
ually indis pensable—the bread of life.”
Here are our worlds to conquer, our





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.





nnknown seas to traverse. Men have
toiled for us in body, and are toiling,
that we in our turn may toil for them
and give them light, and life, and hope,
and heaven. This is the true mutual
service, and this we may all render.—


J. M. Wilson, D.D.


Ver. 45. Christ’s ministry and self-
sacrifice.—I. The negative side—“ the
Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto.” This clears the ground. The
Son of Man is not a self-seeker. That
is the meaning of the manger in little
Bethlehem, the want of a place to lay
His head, the departure into a moun-
tain alone when they would make Him
a king.

II. The positive and general side
—‘‘but to minister.” This is the
character of His life—the Son of Man
ministers to the sons of men. He
restores health, brings back the dead,
speaks and there is a great calm.
Then after a hard day’s ministering
He rises a great while before day to
pray—to pray for strength to minister
more. And it was all of His own free
choice. He came to minister, and He
ministers still.

III. The positive and precise side
—“and to give His life a ransom for
many.” The first two clauses point to
His life; this points to His death.
And it rises to a climax—this is His
greatest deed. He gave His life for
many. So He places a great value on
His life. His single life is an equiva-
lent for many lives. Iam in the circle
of the many. Like Paul I say, “He
loved me, and gave Himself for me.”
—A. Scott.

Service and sacrifice.—1. The great-
ness of God is, in one point of view,
service. Every power in nature is a
power of God, so that in steam, electri-
city, and the like we are in different
ways taking advantage of God’s good-
ness as a servant. 2. In all nature
God is a servant, and finds joy in the
service. But in redemption it is other-
wise. This is the highest service
God has rendered man, and it has the
element of sacrifice init, 3. Thus the





death of Christ is an example of service
and sacrifice—of the highest form of
service, service which demands what
it is hard to give. But there is more
in it than that. There is substitution.
His death was the climax and consum-
mation of a life of ministering ; but
it was a death in the sinner’s room,
without which the sinner could not
have been saved.—W. M. Taylor, D.D.

“Even the Son of Man.’—The
Saviour was perfectly conscious of His
own intrinsic elevation and dignity.
It was not because He could do no
better that He came into the world
amid poverty and lived among the
poor. Of His own free-will, and
although He was infinitely rich, He
stooped into the valley of humiliation.
But He never forgot the height from
which He had descended, and back
to which He was by-and-by to re-
ascend, leading captivity captive.—
J. Morison, D.D.

Gifts to the ministering Christ.—
He came not to get, but to give.
Such was His aim. But He got,
nevertheless, and still gets, and will
continue to get, through all time and
through eternity. He cannot help
getting. He gets gratitude. Oh, how
much of it! and yet not one atom
more than He deserves. He gets
devotion of hearts, such as no other
being ever gets or got. All the noblest
souls that are either in the higher
places of society or in the lower places
and the hidden nooks and corners
count it their joy to do service to
Jesus. They do minister to Him, even
as also, though on a lower plane, they
minister to their fellow-men.—Jdid.

Christ's life the ransom for our life.—
The suggestions of this statement are
very grave. 1. Our life is forfeit.
2, Sin is so great an evil that even
God cannot, without sacrifice, free us
from it. 3. To let us off without
penalty or atonement would make us
indifferent todoing wrong. 4. In love
to man God punishes sin. 5. And to
save thoroughly Christ shares with us
that punishment. Are we thankful
for the great redemption ? humbled by


387


CHAP. X


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee Se


the Cross? saved by it? Be grave with
the Saviour’s gravity in your thoughts
of sin and of salvation.—R. Gilover.
The needed ransom.—The surrender
of the life of Christ unto death was
the needed ransom. No wonder! A
ransom is something valuable. It may
be all but invaluable. Certainly the
life of Christ was inestimably valuable,
more valuable by far than myriads of
other lives—the lives of nobles, or
princes, or kings, or queens. Yet He
came into the world, and into our
nature, that He might give His life a
ransom for many. Oh, the incalculable
value of a life such as Christ’s—a life
so rich in possibilities of enjoyment,
and so rich in goodness, unselfishness,
and every kind of moral beauty and
excellency! Thus valuable and invalu-
able was the life of Jesus; and yet it
was that very value that made the


with the great moral government of
the Father, something incalculably
better, and more glorious and more
glorifying to the law, than a mere
equivalent for all the penalties that
could have been inflicted on the guilty.
—J. Morison, D.D.

The ransom paid for all.—The word
“many” is not used to suggest that
the ransom was paid for fewer than
all. It is another idea altogether that
is intended. Ad/are not always many.
All the queens of Europe are not many.
All the great poets of the world are
not many. All the inhabitants of a
hamlet are not many. But the persons
for the salvation of whose souls the
Son of Man gave His life as a ran-
som were and are many—incalculably
numerous. Yet not one was left out
of His regard and interest and sym-
pathy. —Jbid.





surrender of His life, in connexion


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 46—52.
(Paratiens: Marr. xx. 29-34; LUKE Xvili. 35-43, xix. 1-28.)


Bartimeus.—There are three powers which, interacting upon one another,
work out the drama of life. There is the power within us, the power of self.
There is the power without us, the power of the world. In proportion as we
can make the power within operative on the power without we are successful.
But above these two powers there is a third—the power of God over all. If the
power of self, working in conjunction with the power of the world, brings about
success or failure, the realisation of the power of God is the way to that best
success—the success over ourselves and the world, the victory of character. The
story of Bartimeus shews us a man in difficulties, and exhibits his conduct when
face to face with these three powers of life.

I. The world is the first power we shall think of in this case.—l. The
world has its power. There is something which the world can do, and that
something is what the world on the whole very readily does. Bartimeus found
that this was the case. The world gave pity, also practical evidence of its pity.
The world gave its alms. 2. But the world has its limitations. The one thing
which the man most needed was the one thing which the world could not give.
The world could not supply his real need, for his real need was sight. The world
seldom can reach the real needs of men. She can bestow honour, she can
alleviate suffering, but she cannot heal or satisfy the soul. The gifts which
the world gave to Bartimeus, kind and well intentioned as they were, were just
those gifts which reminded him most keenly of his misfortune. In receiving
the alms of men he felt his dependence. Men in all ages have found out the
world and its limitations. Like Severus, who had reached the supreme height
of power, they have tried everything and found that everything was naught.
Like Augustine, they have found that the heart which is made for greater things


388


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAT ws


cannot rest in the lesser. Like Lacordaire, they have exclaimed with indignation
and loathing, ‘1 cannot leave my heart in this heap of mud.” The world, great,
kindly, and generous as it is, cannot satisfy the desire of the soul. 3. The world,
too, has its moods. The society in which we live is kindly and well disposed.
It is not hard-hearted, but it likes to help in its own way, and it is relentless
in its opposition to those who strike out their own line. Society has its moods
as well as its limitations. The story of Bartimeus illustrates this, for it not
only shews us what the world could do and what it could not do, but it also
shews us what it did do. The action of the world in this respect may be described
in one word—hindrance. It hindered the man in his attempt to realise his most
cherished dreams. He desired to be no longer a profitless and dependent creature,
but to be restored to the possession of sight, and with it to that capacity for
self-direction which is requisite for true life. The moment came when it was
within his grasp. The Healer, the Prophet of Nazareth, endowed with the
powers of restoration, was near. Bartimeus lifted up his voice in earnest appeal.
Society chided Bartimeus for his cry. ‘They rebuked him that he should hold
his peace.” The picture is true to life. The world is intolerant of the best
aspirations of men; it resents the attitude of those who take a line of their own.
The world has a way of stifling the utterance of the great and unexpected voices
which are lifted up in earnest desire or noble appeal. Genius has found it so.
The world has hindered, frowned upon, and too often clamoured down the man
whose intellectual range was beyond the grasp of average dulness. Philanthropy
has found the same. Even a Howard and a Wilberforce cannot escape detrac-
tion; and society has shouted against those who have cried aloud in the cause
of humanity, and has bidden them to hold their peace. The reformer has fared
no better. There are always Eliabs to be found who chide the aspirations
of young faith. And even apostles proclaiming a nobler life and spiritual
emancipation to society will be clamoured against as those “ who turn the
world upside-down.”

Il. What the man Bartimeus did for himself —There are two principles which
are essential to independent success. One is the principle of self-dependence,
the other is that of single-mindedness. Bartimeus illustrates both these
principles in his action. 1. He was self-reliant. He took his own course. He
did not abandon his purpose because of the clamour of the crowd. This is a
lesson which life soon teaches us. Men begin life by hoping much from their
patrons. They know men who have influence ; they look forward to an easy
grasp upon the object of their desires. But they soon unlearn this delusion.
Like Dr. Johnson, they discover that too often the office of patron is to leave
the struggling man unassisted, and to encumber him with help when he no
longer stands in need of it. Men soon discover that their own best patron is
their self-reliance. It is this quality which Bartimeus displays. He is heedless
of the crowd; but it is not the heedlessness of a coarse and indifferent nature.
Tt is the heedlessness of a man who knows what he wants, and who has the
courage to dare all to secure it. It is the quality of soul which Wellington
displayed when he planted himself on the heights of Torres Vedras, and held
to his choice in spite of the clamour, abuse, and accusations of home ignorance.
He knew what he was doing, and he was in earnest. He was not to be turned
aside from his purpose because of the empty chatter of impatient and inexperi-
enced criticism. 2. The companion virtue of self-reliance ought to be single-
mindedness. Single-mindedness seeks, by concentration of all the attention
and all the powers upon one thing, to secure the end in view. It is the spirit
which will not be turned aside or seduced. It knows that some sacrifice is
needed, and it is ready to pay the price. It compels the attention of the whole
mind to the thing in hand. It will cast overboard the most precious freightage


389


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Si Oe ESE ee ee ee Ee 2 =


in order to reach its harbour successfully. This spirit also Bartimeus displays.
It is necessary for him to reach Christ. He must run no risk of failure. The
long robe about him was useful enough as he sat by the gate of the city the
whole day through. But it might prove a hindrance to his advancing footsteps.
There is no hesitation in his action. If there is any chance of its being in
his way, it must be sacrificed. He flings aside his robe, and so, unimpeded,
advances towards the Lord. Greatness possesses the courage which can sacrifice
what may be useful, when it may also prove a temptation or an encumbrance
to its advancing march. Cesar knows when to burn his boats. Industry knows
that many a social pleasure and many an hour of relaxation must ruthlessly
be sacrificed if ultimate victory is to be achieved. Like Lord Eldon, it knows
that the way to success is to live like a hermit and work like a horse! The
message of successful lives is the lesson of a single-minded devotion to the object
in view. That which is the counsel of successful lives is the command of religion.
For the sake of the higher life the encumbrances of the lower must be laid
aside. The garments of the old life must be left behind. When the soul is
filled with one strong passion, such single-mindedness becomes easy. To
Bartimeus it was as nothing to cast aside his robe. He thirsted for sight.
What was raiment compared with such a dowry? To those who thirst for
the vision of God no sacrifice seems too great. Indeed, it is only those who
are possessed of a spirit ready to sacrifice all who can behold that light.

III. What Christ did for him.—When we have spoken of self-reliance and
single-mindedness, we have not said the last word about success. As far as
temporal life is a conflict with the world these two are indispensable factors
of success. But there are ranges of life which lie outside the compelling forces
of energy and self-denial. Life is not merely energy, industry, achievement.
There is place for repose and worship as well as for zealous activity. Man is
not merely a busy, achieving sort of creature; he is a receptive being also.
Self-assertion works well against the world; but in the presence of Him who
is greater than the world, the spirit of self-assertion drops away. As Bartimeus
stands before Christ his whole demeanour is changed. He is no longer the
strong and stout pleader of his own cause and his own need. Jesus commanded
him to be brought; and when he stands before Christ he is silent till Christ
speaks. He stands as one who waits. It is right that it should be so, There
are gifts, which come only to waiting souls. There are utterances which are
open to all the world, which only they hear who wait to hear—

“Celestial harmonies then only heard
When the heart listens.”
This calm and trustful attitude of mind has a kind of natural devoutness in it.
It recognises a source of inspiration greater than itself. Great men of different
faiths and different ages have realised this. Avicenna found his subtlest
syllogisms given him after meditation and worship. Haydn prayed before
he composed. Many a man of genius can truly say of some of his best works,
‘They were given to me.” Inspirations are for men who can and will wait
upon God. In the Albert Memorial Chapel at Windsor one of the most sug-
gestive pictures on the walls exhibits this aspect of the soul waiting for God’s
gift. David and the harpists of Israel are represented with their instruments
in their hands. Their fingers hang listless upon the strings. Their heads
are bowed. All the appliances of their art are in their grasp, but the Divine
gift is not yet. They are waiting for the inspiration from on high. So Barti-
meus, the man of energy and self-assertion, waits before Christ for the gift
which his force and his determination cannot seize, which must be given as
love’s free gift. He waits till Christ asks, “What wilt thou that I should
do unto thee?” ‘To say that our Lord shewed love to the blind man is to


390


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. X.





say what is true enough and obvious enough; but it does not help us to the
full appreciation of Christ’s personal dealing with Bartimeus. His action
shewed much more than a vague and limp benevolence. His love was ever
exerted with an everlasting moral influence upon those whom He helped.
1. There was sensibility. Here, amid the clamour of the crowd, He detects
the voice of want, just as at another time He knew at once when the wearv
and suffering woman laid a trembling finger on His robe. His love was of that
delicate and responsive order which makes kindness twice welcome in being so
obviously the outcome of a sympathetic and ready heart. 2. There was decision.
No clamour or noise of discountenancing crowds could stay the march of His
love. Jesus, in the midst of the outcry against Bartimeus, stood and commanded
him to be brought. In one moment the clamouring crowd changes its demeanour.
“Be of good cheer. Rise: He calleth thee.” Nothing succeeds like success.
A little firmness, and the strong man brings the whole multitude over to his
side. The man who knows what he means, and has the requisite firmness
to pursue it regardless of noise, is like a solid mass floating on the surface of
the water which draws the purposeless jetsam to its side. 3. There was
judgment. He does not heal the blind man all at once. There is a pause ;
there is a question. “ What wilt thou that I should do unto thee?” The
need was obvious, but it was well the man should express it. The interchange
of speech created a feeling of confidence; the bond between him and Christ
became one through which moral sympathy might flow. It was no cold exercise
of power; it was no heartless magic which restored the sight. It was power
exercised by wise and loving sympathy. Here we touch a principle which may
shed light upon the mystery of prayer. Why go through the form of asking
God to help us, when God, if He be all-knowing, knows all about our needs ?
If all-powerful, He can help us. If all-good, He will. What need is there,
then, of prayer? But is prayer only so to be measured? Is the establishment
of sympathetic confidence between the soul of man and the love of God to
count as nothing? 4. There was capability. With Christ, love and power
were one. ‘Receive thy sight.” The words are spoken, and Bartimeus looks
up. The restoration of sight is restoration to his true and complete manhood.
He can see things as they are. It is this which Christ can bestow on all.
It is the power to see in their true relationship the great forces of life—the
world, self, God—the force without us, the force within us, and the power
above us. It is the power to see God as He is—in His purity and lovingness
as well as in His might. It is the power to see ourselves as we are in our
weakness and dependence, in our sinfulness and foolishness. It is the power
to see the world and life as they are, and therefore to see life not as the
opportunity of accumulating the things which perish, but as the opportunity
of being what we ought to be, and of doing what we ought to do.— Bishop
Boyd Carpenter.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 46. The uncomfortable situation I. The uncomfortable situation of


of the blind.—In what uncomfortable
circumstances are some of the children
of men placed! One is deprived of his
eyes, another of his ears, a third of his
legs, and a fourth of his judgment. Of
all these there are none more pitiable
and helpless than the blind.


the blind.—1. They are deprived of the
benefit of light, which is so cheerful
and animating. 2. They are deprived
of the advantages of reading, either for
instruction or entertainment. 3, They
are incapable of following the common
occupations of life, by which to earn


891


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








their bread. 4. They are in a great
measure dependent upon others.

II. Some means by which to alle-
viate the miseries of the blind.—1. To
furnish them with some employment,
which may prevent them from being a
burden to the public. 2. That the occu-
pation be of such a nature as gently to
engage the mind without fatiguing it,
and by diverting their attention to
make them less a burden to themselves.
3. That they be taught the principles
of the religion of Jesus, which are
so nobly suited to afford consolation
under the hardest lot, and to render
them contented and happy.—D. John-
ston, D.D.


Ver. 47. In the Nazarene Barti-
meus saw the Messiah. Why did he
so? Why more than the rest of the
crowd that followed? Can we doubt
the reason? Can we be in a difficulty
about it? He was blind now. But
there had been a time, perhaps, when
he was able to see. If so, he had used
his eyesight for a heavenly purpose.
He had read and marked and inwardly
digested the truth as it is in Jesus.
Happy Bartimeus! He can _ see
clearer than the most keen-eyed. The
penetration of philosophy is nothing
to his; he understands all mysteries ;
he pierces the thick palpable darkness ;
be sees through the veil of the out-
ward sense the glory and the majesty
of Him who is the Light of the world.
What an example for us to follow!
We may not be dark-visioned, like
Bartimeus, but we shall have our
hours of the heart’s darkness, or of
moral twilight. Howshall we prepare
for them? Most surely in the way
that he prepared—by reading God’s
Holy Word, by diving into its hidden
depths, by praying for enlightenment,
by committing to our memories, and
by treasuring up in them the holy
texts of promise or of prophecy which
lie like jewels within that great sea of
wonder.


Ver. 48. Want and faith not to be
silenced.—Could their hands stop the


392


mouth of him who spoke and felt as
Bartimeus did? Nay; for he had a
double tongue. His faith and his
misery alike were speaking. You may
stifle almost anything else; but there
is a life and an energy in want and in
faith which nothing can overpower.
Did the winds and the waves ever
prevent the seaman that has been
washed overboard from crying for the
cable to be thrown him? Is not his
ery the mightier for their tempestuous
riot? It is the cry of nature, the
ery of that voice which God has im-
planted in all. But the cry of the
new nature is in this case added to
that of the old; it is the cry of grace
and of nature too. It is nature that
feels the want; it is grace that believes
the remedy.


Ver. 49. “Commanded him to be
called.” —By this circumstance Christ
administered reproof and instruction :
reproof, by ordering those to help the
poor man who had endeavoured to
check him; instruction, by teaching
us that, though He does not stand in
need of our help, He will not dispense
with our services, that we are to aid
each other, that though we cannot
recover our fellow-creatures we may
frequently bring them to the place and
means of cure.—W. Jay.


Ver. 50. Renwnciation.—The action
of the blind man in casting aside his
garment in order to come to Jesus
means to us much more than a mere
revelation of personal character—a
disclosure of the faith and zeal of the
blind beggar. It may be taken as
a type of the removal of the hin-
drances of whatever kind that prevent
a soul from coming to Jesus as its
Saviour. 1. The necessity of casting
away our garment of self-righteousness
in order to come to Jesus. Every man
thinks that he has whereof to boast—
his acts of worship or kindness, his
upright character and goodness of
heart. We are slow to believe that
God does not ask some valuable con-
sideration at our hands, and that if





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. X.


a a eR eve


we would seek His blessing it is not
necessary for us to be furnished with
some price or equivalent to give. We
have our formularies, our ordinances,
our offerings, which we think will open
our way; and we exact from ourselves
certain spiritual qualifications as a
preparation. But if we are to be
cured of our blindness and poverty, we
must fling this garment aside. If we
would get near enough to Jesus to get
personal benefit from Him, we must
have the conviction inwrought in us
of our utter destitution of true religion.
We must be brought to believe that
we do not believe. We must hide our
poverty no longer from ourselves. We
must honestly and humbly take the
beggar’s place and raise the beggar’s
cry, “ God be merciful to me a sinner.”
2. The necessity of casting away the
garment of effete forms and methods
in order to grow in knowledge and
grace. Religion itself is often made
a hindrance in the way of coming
nearer to Christ. What would happen
if, when the warm, quickening sun of
spring is calling every living thing to
new growth and development, the
buds of the trees persisted in retaining
the scales in which they were wrapped
up, merely because they had been
indispensable in preserving the vitality
of their buds during the winter’s frosts
and storms? There would be no
foliage, no blossom or fruit, no forma-
tion of new wood for man’s use, no
shade for the earth and its creatures.
The whole economy of nature would
suffer grievous loss and be deranged.
Nay, more, the arrested buds them-
selves would either die into hard knotty
excrescences, or would be transformed
into formidable thorns. And so, if
we persist in retaining the old effete
wrappings of religion merely because
they were formerly, at an earlier stage
of growth, indispensable, when the
summer sun of a higher faith is
quickening us and calling us toa fuller
Christian life, we shall become mere
dry sticks in the vineyard of the
Lord, providing no shade or fruit or
beauty for ourselves or others; we


shall derange the whole economy of the
Church by our deadness and conserva-
tion, and our arrested growth will be
transformed into a wounding thorn.
3. The necessity of casting away in
the end the garment of the body by
death in order to be present with the
Lord, and to be effectually cured of
all our poverty and blindness. All
nature is deciduous. The bud casts off
its scales in order to produce its
foliage; the flower casts off its petals
in order to produce the fruit; the
fruit decays in order to liberate the
seed; the seed dies in order that
the germ may grow. The worm leaves
behind its silken tomb in order to
emerge a butterfly. And at every
stage of advancing life some old gar-
ment that suited an old purpose is
cast away. So we cast away our body
every seventh year in order to grow
and mature our physical nature. And
in the end we must cast away our
body itself in order to finish our
development and emerge into ampler
life. As the growth of the young
foliage of spring from the cast-off
husks of autumn is a process of life
and not of death, so in the expansion
of the soul through the casting off of
the body death loses all the elements
which make it death. It is a process
of life and development—in the har-
mony, and not out of the harmony, of
the Divine order. A higher miracle
than that wrought upon Bartimeus
will be performed upon us; and what
this world under the bright sunshine
was to him when his eyes were couched
of their films, and he saw the glory
of nature for the first time, this in
a far grander form will be the heavenly
world that shall burst upon our purified
vision, and we shall see the glorious
form of Jesus in the light in which He
dwells. We shall see Him as He is,
and we shall be changed into the same
image. Surely it is worth casting
away the garment of the body; surely
what things are gain to us in this
world we may well count loss, to have
such a revelation and experience as
that !—H. Macmillan, D.D.


393


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


SS eee


Ver. 52. “Thy faith hath made thee
whole.” —Ask for this faith, if you have
it not. Exercise it if you have it. It
is the appropriator of every blessing ;
it is the hand which lays hold of every
blessing, yea, which puts on Christ Him-
self. Grace stands, so to speak, above
us, holding out the mantle of blessed-
ness; faith raises its hand, takes the
mantle, and puts it on. Poor, blind,
naked, ignorant, wretched, as we may
be, yet come we in faith, come we in
tears, in penitence, in deep contrition,
and yet in faith to the Friend of peni-
tents; and there is not a stain we
lament which shall not be wiped out,
nor a heart-wound which shall not be
healed.

Following Jesus.—So with us, when
our eyes are opened we follow Jesus in
the way. Before that we walk in our
own way, in the way of the world ;
we follow the multitude to do evil, we
follow our own sinful lusts and passions ;


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. “As He was wont.” —Wondrously
expressive words, Like a tiny straw, they
shew the steady movement of a mighty
current. Constancy is there, never-failing
and inseparably allied to the good. Christ’s
whole being was but one great undivided
habit of holiness. We have to “grow up
unto Him in all things.” In this upward
growth we are forming habits which make
for righteousness and holiness with in-
creasing certainty. They have a mutual
influence. Habits make acts surer. Acts
confirm habit. Our Christlikeness is not
to be measured by the goodness of a par-
ticular act; neither by that of a series
fitfully performed. It is rather to be gauged
by such a steady trend of spirit and deed
toward all goodness as will lead men
abidingly to expect and confidently to affirm
that we are acting thus and so wherever we
are. A young man was leaving for a distant
part of the country. A friend in bidding
him good-bye remarked, “We need not
tell you to work for God wherever your lot
may be. We know you will.” A mother
was being told of a certain notable example
of resistance to temptation on the part of
a young officer in the army. While ex-
pressing her admiration thereat, she was
informed that he who thus nobly lived was
her boy. Amid grateful tears she ex-


894


we choose our own way instead of God’s


“way ; we prefer the path which is most


pleasant, most easy, most profitable ;
but when our eyes are opened all is
changed, we learn to say, “T loved to
choose and see my path; but now—
lead Thou me on.” ‘Thus we come to
follow Jesus in the way; and that way
is the way of holiness, the narrow way
which leads to life. It is not always
a smooth way; it climbs up the Hill
Difficulty, and anon winds down into
the Valley of Humiliation ; it passes
through a garden of Gethsemane, a
place of agonised prayer ; it leads to
a cross, a lifelong cross sometimes ; it
carries us to a grave, but, thank God,
a grave from which the stone is rolled
away, and which is bright with the
light of a glorious resurrection. And
withal it is a way of pleasantness, and
a path of peace, of peace such as the
world cannot give, and it ends in
heaven.


TO CHAPTER X.


claimed, “Is that my boy? Is that my
Will? It’s just like him. I knew he would
do so—as he was wont.”


Ver. 8. “ They twain shall be one flesh,” —
The parting of man and wife in the sight
of God is like the rending of limb from
limb, Imagine some dungeon: the smoking
torch gives a fitful flame; the air is foul;
the prisoner is brought. Tie his feet and
hands; stretch him on the rack. Turn your
wheels, ye unfeeling executioners, until the
great beads stand on his forehead, until the
eyeballs seem ready to start from their
sockets; turn them; what matter though
he yell and scream; turn them; turn them
till the cracking bones and quivering sinews
can hold no longer! Turn them till iimb
from limb the poor, quivering, feeling mass
settles still in death. Horrible! Yet it is
only rending “one flesh.” That ghastly,
terrible, soul-revolting tragedy is a parable.
It, in the physical world, is like divorce
in the spiritwal. Some sickening accident,
when groans and shrieks and cries tell of
anguish, shadows forth for us what divorce
is like in God’s sight. God’s Word thus
likens divorce and murder—murder cruel
and barbarous.


Ver. 14. Brought to Christ in childhood.—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:





Many of the ablest and noblest of Christian
teachers were brought to the Saviour in
cuildhood. The martyr Polycarp was only
nine years old when he gave himself to
Christ. Matthew Henry and Isaac Watts
were no older, Archbishop Fénélon was a
mere child when his heart awoke to the
love of God ; William Channing could not
remember the time when he first turned to
Christ; Robert Hall was a sincere Christian
when eleven years old,and became a student
for the ministry when but fourteen, Baxter
was only a child when he sought the
Saviour; Jonathan Edwards sat at the feet
of Jesus, Coleridge Patteson was devout
and prayerful, Fletcher of Madeley “ began
to feel the love of God shed abroad in
his heart”—each at seven years of age.
Frederick W. Robertson became a decided
and courageous soldier of Christ in boyhood ;
Thomas J. Comber, the heroic pioneer of
the Congo, gave his heart to Jesus and
devoted himself to mission work ere he was
thirteen; and John Foster was not four-
teen when he found peace with God in
Christ Jesus our Lord. It would be easy to
enlarge the list ; but surely enough has been
said to encourage us to lead the children to
immediate decision for Christ. Let us seek
to enrol them now, Let us encourage them
to come, with their toys in their hands,
to be blessed by Christ. The kingdom of
heaven, which is open to publicans and
sinners, is not closed to the little ones He
loves.


Ver. 15. Total renunciation.—A  high-
caste Brahmin came to receive holy baptism.
He approached the font wearing the sacred
thread which, among his Hindoo co-
religionists, was the badge of his belonging
to the “twice born,” and entitled him to
little short of religious worship from those
of a lower caste. But at the moment when
he answered, “1 renounce them all,” he
stripped off the sign of idolatrous pre-
eminence and trampled it under his feet.


Ver. 16. Blessed by the good.—Says Dr.
Samuel Cox: “ When I was a boy, I was
taken into my father’s library to be
‘blessed’ by those two great missionaries
John Williams and William Knibb; and to
this moment I remember how proud and
happy it made me to have their hands laid
on my head, and to hear the kind words
they said. It made me feel very ‘good,’
at least for a little while; and I think that
somehow, though I don’t at all know how
that should be, I am the better for it to this
day.”


“ He loved little children."—An earnest
aad successful minister of the gospel who
died a few years ago was possessed of a


ST. MARK, CHAP. X.


beautiful ambition. Expressed in words at
fitting times, it had also constant expression
in his life. This is what he often said; “I
should like my epitaph to be, ‘He loved
little children, and tried to do them good.”
This single sentence sheds a flood of light
on the character of the man who uttered it.
Our loves determine what we are. Little
children belong to the heavenly kingdom,
and are therefore in the Lord’s love. A
real love for little children, then, denotes
a love for heavenly things. A real love is
not simply a fondness for bright, pretty
ways and winning graces, but a love that
takes in childhood as a whole, that can
bear patiently with perversity and naughti-
ness, that forgets self in love for the child
and in desire to bring it to the best and
highest place possible. A real love for
children leads to just such an ambition as
possessed this servant of the Lord, “who
tried to do them good.”

Care for children.—A lady missionary in
the East tells that one day a woman came
to her with a baby, whom she had found in
a ditch. The poor child had been cast out
by its own father—as thousands of others
in heathen countries have been—-because it
was “only a girl.” In begging the lady to
take charge of the very unattractive object
that was presented to her (it was naked and
covered with mud), the woman said, “ Please
do take this little thing; your God is the
only God that teaches to be good to little
children,”


Ver. 19. A classical parallel.—The resem-
blance which a passage of Menander, in
Hirelius, bears to the Scriptural command-
ments, is remarkable, and is certainly not to
be ascribed to imitation, but to the breadth,
compass, and universality of the thought, as
well as the home appeal they make to the
moral sense and our general nature, “If
any one, O Pamphilius, think that by merely
offering a sacrifice he. can arrive at the
favour of God, he has an unworthy opinion
of Him, and will find himself mistaken. He
must become a man of virtue, beneficial to
society ; must not pollute virgins, nor com-
mit adultery, nor steal, nor murder; and the
wife, house, horse, youths, and maids of
another he must not covet. Sacrifice there-
fore to God with justice and. benevolence ;
let your purity be in your hearts rather than
in your garments,”


Ver. 21. Altogether wrong. — The rich
young ruler came to hear what little deco-
rations might now be added to the super-
structure that he has laboriously built,
and he is made to feel that he is wrong
to the foundation. He is in the position
of aman who comes to his medical adviser
complaining of a slight uneasiness which


395


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a ee


he supposes a tonic or a change of air may
remove, and is told that he has heart
disease or cancer. Or he is in the position
of a sanguine inventor, who has spent the
best years of his life on a machine, and at
last puts it into the hands of a practical
man merely to get the fittings adjusted and
steam applied, and is told that the whole
thing is wrong in conception and can never
by any possibility be made to work.—
M. Dods, D.D.

One error fatal.—The boy goes through a
long sum with great accuracy and despatch,
but one mistake in the first line makes his
whole calculation useless. It only takes
one disease to kill a man. His brain may
be sound, his lungs untouched, all his organs
but one may be in a healthy condition ; but
if one vital organ be attacked all the other
healthy organs will not save lim, So it is
incharacter. One vice is sufficient to destroy
the whole man.—Tbid.

“ One thing” may keep a soul from eternal
life —But is it right to make such destinies
turn upon a single point? That depends on
the point. In other relations one thing may
bring ruin, Ata crisis in worldly interests,
one wrong step may lead to remediless
disaster. One error in trade may make you
bankrupt; one medicine in sickness may
give the turn to your life; for the lack of
one anchor a vessel is lost. In religion, how
may “one thing” keep a soul from heaven 2
Tf there is a determined, persistent unwill-
ingness to be saved, that would seem suffi-
cient, would it not? Well, that is the “one
thing ” referred to by Christ. And, further-
more, it is some “one thing” which makes
the unwillingness, The rulerloved his great
possessions more than he loved his soul.
But the “ one thing ” may take many forms.
It may be one appetite, one ambition, one
companionship, one pleasure. Every one is
called to choose between one set of influences
that helps religion and some other set which
hinders. He cannot bend in both directions.

One thing needful.—One jewel only was
needed to complete the circles; one link
only to perfect the chain; one step only to
touch the goal; one movement only, and the
beautiful gate opens into the temple of God.
But the one thing lacking may be of all
others the most essential—the one thing
needful. He who is dying of thirst lacks
only a cup of cold water; he who is perish-
ing of hunger lacks only a morsel of bread.
A corpse lacks only life.

The broken bridge.—Hossein said to his
aged grandfather Abbas, “Oh, grandfather,
why are you reading the gospel?” Abbas
made answer, “I read it, oh, my son, to
find the way toheaven!” Hossein, who had
received some instruction in an English
school, smiling, said, “The way is plain
enough; worship but the one true God,
and keep the commandments.” The man,


396


whose hair was silver with age, replied,
“Hossein, the commandments of God are
as a bridge of ten arches, by means of
which the soul might once have passed to
heaven, But, alas! the bridge has been
broken, There is not one among us who
has not broken the commands again and
again.” “My conscience is clear,” cried
Hossein proudly ; “I have kept all the com-
mandments—at least, almost all,” he added,
for he felt that he had said too much.
“ And if one arch of the bridge give way
under the traveller, doth he not surely
perish in the flood, though the nine other
arches be firm and strong?”

False and true power.—l once asked a
rich man, says an American writer, by what
motive he had been prompted in accu-
mulating his wealth. ‘“ Power,” said he,
“power”; and then, clenching his hands
and teeth, and contracting all his muscles
to their highest tension, he added, “1
wanted power, and I have got it.” “Yes,”
said I; “you have power over any quantity
of water or steam, and over any number
of wheels. You have power too over the
bodies of certain classes of men; but do
good with your wealth, and you will become
a ruler over all men’s hearts ; nor will your


reign cease when you die, but will last as


long as youare remembered ; and the love of
men will not suffer your memory to perish.”

Amiability among the worldly.—Father
Taylor being once asked if a certain re-
lative of his had been converted, replied,
“No! he is not a saint, but he is a very
sweet sinner!”


Ver. 22. Amway from Jesus.——He went
away; he went away sorrowing—sorrow-
ing to go, and yet he went. It is like
what you may see sometimes when you
wander in the night-time by the side of
some sleeping sea. You may see the path
of the moonbeam bright and silvery upon
the darkened water. You may see some
ship pass out of the darkness into that path-
way of the moonlight; and as the light
falls upon it, every sail, every spar, almost
every rope, gleams in the moonshine, and
you may then see it pass out of that path
into the night which hides it evermore from
our view. Is not this the history of this
soul, passing for a moment under this light
from the face of Jesus, but passing sorrow-
ing from it into the darkness of an endless
night—the very sorrow shewing that he
knew what a sacrifice he was making,
sorrowing because he knew that he was
leaving Jesus, sorrowing because he did not
wish to leave Him, sorrowing because if
he could only have had the world with Him
he would have had Him, but sorrowing
because he could not give up the world
that he might have Him, sorrowing the
sorrow of the world which worketh death ?





a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





CHAP, X.





Looking back after insight—One hour of
supreme insight, one hour of clear, sur-
passing vision, and life is never the same
again, and cannot be the same again, A
man who has dwelt from his childhood
without passing beyond the mountainous
bounds of the valley in which he was born,
who sees only so much of God’s work as
lies within the mountain-range, who has
judged man and judged God by the little
life of that little plain, can be happy, and
in a sense can be large. But once let him
climb one of those mountain-crests, let him
see the undulating plains of Life stretching
away to the distant horizon, let him feel
the larger argument of God’s Spirit, and
understand that God is not conditioned and
determined by a few families in a little
plain, and he cannot go back and be as
happy and as strong as he was. This
youth was in such a plight. The old life
of piety and benevolence had been sufli-
cient in its time; it gave him as large an
environment as his soul desired or could
conceive of, and in the perfect harmony of
himself and his enyironment he was happy
and strong. But Christ had just lifted him
to a new height, had shewn him a nobler
heritage, had touched his soul and brought
it for a moment up to the high pitch of
real Christlike heroism. And the young
man saw, but felt he had not courage to
cut his old moorings and take the new
inheritance, and so, as he looked back, the
vision he had seen belittled and shadowed
his past inheritance. There was the cause
of his sadness; he was not ready to go on,
and there was nothing to go back to excepta
squeezed and exhausted past.—C. A. Berry.

The Hamlet of the New Testament.—What
was it that drove Hamlet mad? It seems to me
his madness arose out of the breach between
his perceptions and his aptitudes, between his
enlarged and haunting sense of duty and
his faltering ability to face and fulfil it.
Hamlet could have been happy under any
one of three conditions,—had he never been
forced out of the quiet retreat of a simple
and placid life; or, being so forced, had he
possessed a rougher nature, not sensitive to
moral appeal, seared and hardened by coarse
contact with the world ; or, having a healthy
conscience and recognising sacred obliga-
tions, had he boldly obeyed the vision which
called to duty. It was because he saw and
felt more than he had nerve to execute that
a discord arose which destroyed the sym-
metry and sanity or hismind. Andso it was
with this youth.—Zdid.


Vers. 23-27. The peril of property.—No
wonder that Anthony, the father of monas-
ticism in Egypt, went out from the church
in Thebes where this passage had been read,
to give away his ancestral estates, to put his
sister into the fellowship and care of pious


virgins, and to go himself poor and alone
into the solitude of the cliffs! No wonder
that in the early centuries the vow of poverty
became the threshold article of every Chris-
tian life, and, with its twin principle of
celibacy, became the foundation of the great
monastic orders in the Church! But surely
a rich man can be a Christian, and a poor
man may be a sinner! For a ragged coat
and a diamond ring have no moral quality
or spiritual character in themselves. Ah,
no! It is not money, but the love of it,
that keeps men out of the Father’s house.
And so, as we strike the bell or fire the gun
to arouse the sleeping village, or dash cold
water in the face of the fainting, the Son of
God would bestir men to the possibilities
of peril which lurk in the possession of
property.

Covetous to the last.—We read not long
ago the experience of an English clergy-
man called to the death-bed of a wealthy
parishioner. As he kneeled at his bedside,
his pastor twice requested him to take his
hand as he prayed for his upholding in that
solemn hour; but the dying man declined
to give it. After the end had come, and
they had turned down the coverlet, his rigid
hands were found holding the safe-key in
their death-grip. No hand of fellowship for
his minister, because he could not loose bis
hold upon the key to the safe-vault! The
power of hands which hold in their palms
such possibilities of help and service is
beyond our arithmetic to compute. The
peril, here and hereafter, which waits upon
the misuse of such a power is infinite.

Impedimenta.—Lord Bacon, who was a
prince of modern worldly philosophers, and
who never spoke merely from a spiritual
plane in his treatment of practical themes
of thought, says emphatically : “I cannot
call riches better than the baggage of virtue.
The Roman word is better, impedimenta ; for
as the baggage is to an army, so is riches to
virtue : it cannot be spared, nor left behind,
but it hindereth the march; yea, and the
care of it sometimes loseth or disturbeth
the victory.” Then, in commenting on the
suggestion that riches will enable men to
purchase themselves successes, Bacon adds
that “certainly great riches have sold more
men than they have bought out.”

The weight of riches.— An opulent merchant
having received a sum of money, was putting
the ducats one by one into a pair of scales,
in order to ascertain that they were not too
light. “For my part,” said Gotthold, who
was present, “I should be more afraid of
their being too heavy.” “How so?” inquired
the merchant. ‘*Do you not think,” re-
joined Gotthold, “that money is too heavy
when bedewed with the blood of the poor, the
sweat of the laborious, and the tears of the
widow and the orphan, or when loaded with
the curses of those who, by fraud or violence,


397


CHAP. X.-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ne Se ee


have been robbed of it. I will hope, how-
ever, that there are no pieces of this descrip-
tion in that heap of yours, or rather I will
not fear that there are any. Suffer me,
however, without offence, to express the wish
that you will always make your conscience
your scales, and weigh in it your dollars and
ducats to ascertain that they are of proper
weight, and have been honestly acquired.
Many a man never learns, until he is strug-
gling with death, how difficult, or rather
impossible, it is to force a soul burdened
with unrighteous gain through the strait gate
which leadeth unto life. ‘Take heed, then,
that no such gain ever burdens yours. The
more he carries, the more the pilgrim sweats
and pants as he climbs the steep ; and the
more the conscience is oppressed with dis-
honesty and fraud, the harder will the
struggle of a death-bed be.”


Ver. 23. The giver of wealth forgotten.—
Among the legends of Hindostan is one that
illustrates these words of our Saviour. One
Rawana, a Brahmin, was offered by his god
anything that he might name. Rawana
prayed his god to bestow upon him the
government of the world. His god immedi-
ately granted his wish. Then he prayed for
ten heads, with which to see and rule the
world. After Rawana had well fortified
himself, and was surrounded by riches,
honours, and praise, he forgot his god
Txora, and bade all the people worship him,
an act which greatly angered the god Ixora,
and he destroyed Rawana. How true to
human nature was the course of Rawana !
And how many we find to-day that have
forgotten the God that gave them all they
possess !


Ver. 24. Peril of riches—When Alex-
ander the Great sent a rich present to
Phocian the Athenian, the latter asked why
he had been the object of so splendid a
gift. On hearing that it was because the
king considered him the most virtuous man
in Athens, he replied, “If he wishes me
to preserve my virtue, let bim keep his
riches,” and forthwith sent back the pre-
sent to Alexander.

Hard to leave-—When Garrick shewed
Dr. Johnson his fine house, gardens, statues,
pictures, etc., at Hampton Court, what
ideas did they awaken in the mind of that
great man? Instead of a flattering com-
pliment, which was expected, “Ah! David,
David,” said the doctor, “these are the
things which make a death-bed terrible |”


Ver. 25. Rich men like camels.—It were
no bad comparison to liken mere rich men
to camels and mules; for they often pursue
their devious way over hills and mountains,
laden with Indian purple, with gems,
aromas, and generous wines upon their


398


backs, attended, too, by a long line of
servants as a safeguard on their way. Soon,
however, they come to their evening halting-
place, and forthwith their precious burdens
are taken from their backs; and they, now
wearied and stripped of their lading and
their retinue of slaves, shew nothing but
livid marks of stripes. So, also, those who
glitter in gold and purple raiment, when
the evening of life comes rushing on them,
have naught to shew but marks and wounds
of sin impressed upon them by their evil
use of riches.—St. Augustine.


Ver. 27. All things possible to God.—l
was pacing to and fro, awaiting a train
within a railway station. There were others
in the great room, and it was singular none
of them had observed it before—a sparrow
imprisoned within the sliding window
sashes, He had thought he saw a way, but
it was a glass wall. He had beaten his
wings to tatters, and his fair plumage into
rags. The glass was opaque with the stains
of his denuded cuticle, and streaked with
blood. He may have been in this crystal
dungeon for hours, and fighting till he sank
into quiet from exhaustion, from which
reviving again to fight as when I first heard
him. Could I be denied it, as I sprang to
that heavy frame and sent it with a bang
to the ceiling, letting the oppressed go free?
Does not Christ, the Sent to open prison
doors, feel a grander propulsion to liberate
unhappy men, who thought they saw a way,
but found themselves in dreadful bonds of
poverty, or pain, or dishonour, or conscious
sin? Suppose the sparrow had piped out
to me, in shrill treble, that he wanted no
mercy, but justice; that he could conduct
his own life; that he scorned to be beholden
unto any one, It is an analogue of many
human souls, who are whipping their wings
to shreds against the impossible, while to
God all things are possible, even their
setting free.—H. J. Haynes.


Ver. 28. Choosing Christ.—The poet
George Herbert was so highly connected,
and in such favour at court, that at one
time a secretaryship of state seemed to him
not unattainable. But he gave up all such
prospects for the work of a humble clergy-
man, and in looking back upon the time
when he made his choice, he could say:
“T think myself more happy than if I had
attained what then I so ambitiously thirsted
for, And Ican now behold the court with
an impartial eye, and see plainly that it is
made up of frauds and bitters and flattery,
and many other such empty, imaginary,
and painted pleasures—pleasures which are
so empty as not to satisfy when they are
enjoyed. But in God and His service is a
fulness of all joy and pleasure, and no
satiety.” :


=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP, X





Ver. 29. “ For My sake.”—George Miiller,
the founder of the Ashley Down Orphan-
age, once said that more than £800,000
had been given him towards the support of
more than eight thousand orphans—a work of
which a sceptic once remarked that it came
nearer proving the truth of Christianity
than anything he had ever seen before.
But the history of it all may be written in
three words—“ For My sake.” And how
many hospitals too have been built because
Christ healed the sick! You may grave
“ For My sake” on a good many of the
foundation stones. Again, Christian people
are found to live and work in the East End
of London—Christian people who have the
means to live in comfort and luxury else-
where, but who choose to live where they
do in order that they may “rescue the
perishing and care for the dying.” Why?
“Hor My sake.” How is it that loving
hands all over England are willing to sew
and make garments in order that the gospel
may reach the zenanas of India? Here
again (and the list might be multiplied
indefinitely) it is done “For My sake.”
Young men of wealth or talent forsake
home and friends and all in order to
preach Jesus Christ in India, China, Japan,
or Africa. Henry Martyn leaves his books,
David Livingstone his loom, Mackay the
engineering shed, Charles Studd the bar,
and Stanley Smith fresh from the University
crew—all these and myriads more of whom
the world is not worthy have gone forth
for life or death, and here again the only
explanation is, “ For My sake.”


Vers. 32-34. Will-power.—There is nothing
to be done in life without an inflexible will.
“To be weak is to be miserable, doing or
suffering.” And our Master has set us the
example of this, that unless there run
through a man’s life, like the iron frame-
work on the top of the spire of Antwerp
Cathedral, on which graceful fancies are
strung in stone, unless there run through a
man’s life the rigid bar of an iron purpose
that nothing can bend, the life will be
naught and the man will be a failure.
Christ is the pattern of heroic endurance,
and reads to us the lesson, resist and per-
sist, whatever stands between us and our
goal.—_A. Maclaren, D.D.

Invincible cowrage.—It was as if, in the
old days, some excommunicated man with
the decree of the Inquisition pronounced
against him had gone into Romeand planted
himself in the front of the piazza before the
buildings of the Holy Office, and lifted up
his testimony there.—Zdid.

The way of the Cross.—An old ecclesi-
astical legend tells how an emperor won
the true Cross in battle from a pagan king,
and brought it back, with great pomp, to
Jerusalem, but found the gate walled up,


and an angel standing before it, who said,
“Thou bringest back the Cross with pomp
and splendour; He that died upon it had
shame for His companion; and carried it on
His back, barefooted, to Calvary.” Then,
says the chronicler, the emperor «is-
mounted from his steed, cast off his robes,
lifted the sacred Rood on his shoulders, and
with bare feet advanced to the gate, which
opened of itself, and he entered in. We
have to go up the steep rocky road that
leads from the plain where the Dead Sea is
to Jerusalem. Let us follow the Master,
as He strides before us, the Forerunner and
the Captain of our salvation.—TZdid.

Stern resolution in face of danger.—With
unshaken resolution Jesus pressed forward
to receive the crown of thorns, and to pass
through the terrible crisis that awaited Him.
We may remember, by way of illustration,
the words of Julius Czsar, when he em-
barked in a raging storm to obtain the sooner
aid for the famine-stricken people of Rome :
“Tt is necessary that I should go, but it is
not necessary that I should live!” Thusa
brave man is inspired by the circumstances,
and supported by the enthusiasm of those
around; but in our Lord’s case, in the
solitariness of His mysterious life, He “ treads
the winepress alone.”

The loneliness of the great.— Great men, as
a rule, are not club men. The thinkers of
the world have not been society fractions.
In their isolation they remind us of the oak,
which is never seen in a crowd, forming
what may be properly termed a wood. An
oak forest is nothing more than a poetical
figure ; for the oak stands alone, or mingled
with other trees of different foliage, which
it dominates with venerable feudal sove-
reignty. We have one Dr. Johnson and a
number of Boswells round about him.


Ver. 38. Ambition.—A boy at play hit a
ball so that it fell on the roof of a high barn.
He climbed up the rugged door, and, cling-
ing by a hole in the brickwork, reached the
top of the barn, rubbing off the skin from
his fingers, tearing his clothes, and run-
ning great risk of breaking his neck. He
gained the ball; but was it worth climbing
for ?


Ver. 39. Use of suffering.—In the manu-
facture of paper the filthy rags are torn to
pieces, reduced to pulp, bleached and washed
till it is white as snow, then shaken to and
fro till fibre crosses fibre and gives firmness
to the sheet, and ironed by hot cylinders till
made smooth and even. Such is the effect
of tribulation.


Ver, 44. Life as service—Confucius being
asked if he could in one word express the
whole duty of life, said, “ Will not the word
serve do?”


399


CHAP. X.


Ver. 45. The law of service.—
Not to be served, O Lord, but to serve man
All that I can,
And as I minister unto his need,
Serve Thee indeed ;
So runs the law of love that hath been given
To make earth heaven.


What if the task appointed me be mean!
Wert Thou not seen

To gird Thee with the towel, as was meet,
To wash the feet

Of Thy disciples, whom Thou wouldst be-

friend

Until the end?

For meanest work becomes the noblest part,
When a great heart,

Pitiful, stoops to comfort our distress,
Or to impress

A sealing kiss on penitence fresh clad
In raiment sad.


And if the wanderer’s feet be soiled and sore,
So much the more
He needs a tender hand to cleanse and heal,
And make him feel
There is no task that love will shrink to do
Life to renew.
Walter C. Smith, D.D.
A throne for the ministering Christ.—The
otler day I sat in St. Paul’s, and by my left
was Nelson’s monument. Why was that
monument erected? Nelson told his men
that England expected every man to do his
duty, and he did what he felt was his duty.
And because he served his country, his
country honours his memory. I have in my
heart a throne, and on that throne—Cbhrist.
Why? Because He came to minister, and
has ministered to me.—A. Scott.


Ver. 46. The blind beggar and the multi-
titude.—Origen gives a very pretty alle-
gorical turn to this narrative. He makes
the blind man, who calls on Jesus, an Ebion-
ite ; and the multitudes around, who com-
manded him to hold his peace, believers from
among the heathen converts, who generally
held the more exalted views in regard to the
Passion of the Messiah; and then he con-
tinues thus: But although the multitudes
commanded him to be silent, yet he said the
more because he believed in Jesus; although
his faith was of a human kind; and he
cried out aloud, and said to Him, “Son of
David, have mercy on me!” How different
would many things have been if men, in this
spirit of love and freedom, had always
allowed the grace of the Redeemer to fall on
all who call upon Him! if they had always
taken into account the various stages in the
Christian progress up to the ripeness of
manhood in the faith, and had not wished
to force different spirits all at once into the
same measure and degrees !

Treatment of the poor.—The Jews had a
law that there should be no beggar in


400


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a  —— —  ——


Israel. England has statutes also to cor-
rect impudent poor and to provide for
impotent poor; but, as it is observed, our
Jaws have a better prologue than epilogue ;
they be well penned, but ill kept; and so
this good order is neglected among us, as it
was about Jericho, to the great scandal of
Christian religion and dishonour of our Eng-
lish nation. it is written of the Athenians
that they punished idle persons as heinous
offenders. And the Egyptians had a law
that every man should bring bis name to the
chief ruler of the province and show what
trade he followed. The Romans enacted
severe statutes against such as negligently
left their ground untilled. Among the
Chinese every man is set about some-
what, according to his strength and years;
one labours with his hand, another with
his foot, etc.; and (which is most admir-
able) they keep in Canton four thousand
blind men, unfit for other service, to grind
corn and rice for the people. If either the
law were believed as gospel, or the gospel kept
as law, such as would not labour should not
eat. Loiterers and sturdy rogues should be
sent to prison, or some place where they
might work well; and as for such as cannot
labour, it is fit, we that are strong, should
help to bear the burdens of the weak, being
eyes to the blind and feet to the lame.—
Dean Boys.


Ver. 47. Soul sight.—One day a cry went
down the street, every one fled, as a runaway
horse came tearing along the road. A little
blind girl, left all alone, stood in the road,
not knowing which way to turn to escape
from death. She could not see, and no
human hand was there to guide. She did
not try to run, but sinking down on her
knees just where she was, with upturned
face to the heaven the bodily eye could not
see, she commended herself to the Father of
all. The horse dashed on—it was upon her!
Tt swerved and thundered past, leaving the
lonely kneeling child unhurt. That little
one’s bodily eye could not see, but the soul
eye, looking out beyond all, saw the Makei
and Creator of all. So sometimes blind
folk see more than those who think they see.


Ver. 50. “ And he, casting away his gar.
ment, rose, and came to Jesus.’—I remember
once reading these words on a memorial
tablet in a country church. Inscriptions on
tombstones are often unsatisfactory, and
Scriptural quotations upon them most inap-
propriate ; but this one was as suitable as it
was singular. The squire of the village had
late in life come under the influence of
Christian friends, who brought him to a
knowledge of the gospel; and to him the
words of the Evangelist wereapplied. They
were very suggestive. They told of pride,
and worldly pursuits, and self-righteousness,





N = ,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI.


of all to which the man had clung for a
lifetime, cast away that he might come to
the Saviour. For a sinner saved in life’s
last hours a better epitaph could hardly
have been chosen. I admired the piety that
compared the rich man lying there to the
poor blind beggar of the gospel story, the
once highly esteemed garment of personal
righteousness to the beggar’s worthless robe,
and that expressed the one hope and refuge
of the soul in Christ by the words “he
came to Jesus.” It reminded me of the
lines on William Carey’s tomb:


“A guilty, weak, and helpless worm,


Be Thou my strength and righteousness,
My Jesus, and my all.”


What is your want ?—We complain of
wandering thoughts; we kneel at our devo-
tions, and our thoughts go fluttering away
from us like the sparrows that flit and
twitter in the trees. The remedy for this
is to have a want. Let us pause at the
threshold of prayer as Jeanie Deans did at
the door of the audience-room, laying her
hand upon her heart. Let us, if we would
present a petition at the throne of heavenly
grace, feel the parchment to make sure it is
there.


On Thy kind arms I fall;


CHAPTER XI.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


It may be well to trace out, approximately, the order of events here. Leaving Jericho on
the Friday morning, after a fatiguing journey of six or seven hours, they reach Bethany,
where they spend the Sabbath. On Saturday evening Christ sups in the house of Simon
the leper, His disciples and Lazarus and his sisters being present; and at this feast He is
anointed by Mary. During that night the chief priests—irritated on hearing that many of
the Jews have been to see Jesus and Lazarus—hold a meeting to consult as to the advis-
ability of putting them both to death. Next morning—Palm Sunday—the triumphal entry
into Jerusalem takes place.

Ver. 1. Bethphage and Bethany.—Bethphage (‘‘ House-of-unripe-figs”) being mentioned
first both here and in Luke xix. 29, would seem to indicate that it lay on the road from
Jericho to the east of Bethany (“ House-of-dates ”); but the traditional site is to the west.
Porter surmises that the two names may have been applied to different quarters of the one
straggling village, the one part called Bethphage from the fig orchards adjoining it, and the
other Bethany from its palm trees. See his Syria and Palestine, p. 180. At the mount of
Olives.— Looking towards—rpés.

Ver. 3. And straightway he will send him hither.—The insertion of ré\w before Gée in &,
B, C, D, L, A, has led many to regard this clause as a part of the answer which the disciples
were to give if any difficulty arose as to the borrowing of the colt. But Dr. F. Field urges
in defence of the generally received interpretation : (1) that ed@éws is far more properly said
of the promptness of the owners in giving up the colt than of the expedition of the borrower
in returning, which could only take place after a certain interval of time ; and (2) that the
effect of the authoritative requisition, “The Lord hath need of him,” upon the mind of tie ~
owners would be weakened rather than strengthened by the addition, “and will be sure to
return him.”

Ver. 4. A very circumstantial account, such as none but an eyewitness would have thought
of giving—a strong indication that Peter was one of the two disciples. They found the colt
tied beside the door, outside (the yard or court), on the rowndabout road (t.e. the road that
went round the house).

Ver. 8. Branches... the way.—Scee R.V.

Vers. 9, 10. See R.V. .

Ver. 13. If haply.—Z/, after all—although not the proper time for fruit.

Ver. 17. The marginal rendering is preferable.

Ver. 19. See R.V.

Vers. 23, 24. See R.V.

Ver. 26. MS. authority for retention or omission is about equally divided.

Ver, 27. The elders.—‘‘ The ancient senators or representatives of the people. With the
chief priests and scribes they constituted on this occasion a formal deputation from the


DD 401


CHAP. XI HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


pe ee


Sanhedrin, We find the earliest notice of the elders acting in concert as a political body
in the time of the Exodus (Exod. xix. 7; Deut. xxxi.9). Their authority, which extended to
all matters of the common weal, they exercised under (a) the Judges (Judg. ii. 173
1 Sam. iv. 3); under (0) the Kings (1 Sam. xxx. 26; 1 Chron. xxi. 16; 2 Sam. xvii, 4);
during (c) the Captivity (Jer. xxix. 1; Ezek. viii. 1); after (d) the Return (Hzra v. 5,
vi. 7, 14, x. 8, 14); under (e) the Maccabees (1 Macc. xii. 6; 2 Macc. i. 10); in (/) the time
of our Lord, when they denoted a distinct body in the Sanhedrin, amongst whom they
obtained their seat by election, or nomination from the executive authority.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—11.
(PaRALLELs : Marr. xxi. 1-11, 14-17; Lune xix. 29-44; Jonn xii. 12-19.)


The final entry into Jerusalem.—l. Here was a token which Jesus gave to
these two disciples, and to the twelve by them.—It was an example of His
superhuman knowledge. A similar case occurred in the preparation for the
Paschal Supper (Luke xxii. 10). These manifestations of supernatural knowledge,
though less illustrious than His publicly wrought miracles, were of the same
general order. And they were of great interest as tokens given by our Lord
to individual disciples. In the present instance we are not told who these two
disciples were. Our Lord appointed at His pleasure when He was on earth, and
He does so now that He is in heaven, those of His servants who shall do special
work and receive special manifestations from Himself in the discharge of it.
Multitudes saw the greater, or at least the more conspicuous, miracles; but
these two disciples had this at first all to themselves. And thus it often is still
in the Christian life. In addition to all the more patent evidences of the Divine
reality of the Gospel, there will be manifestations, arising out of personal
transactions with God and the Redeemer, which are gloriously confirming to
faith and hope; bright beamings cf truth from the Word on the mind; a
realised nearness of access into the Divine presence; marked answers to prayer
of Providence ; spiritual results following upon efforts for others and endeavours
for the Divine glory; and suchlike experimental evidences, things full of
emphasis to the soul which meets with them—still quiet voices, which those
who are near the Master sometimes hear!

II. An interesting case of the fulfilment of prophecy is presented to us
here—Nearly five hundred years before it had been written by Zechariah the
prophet (ix. 9). The disciples of our Lord themselves, we are informed by
St. John (xii. 16), did not at the time think of this prediction, or view what was
occurring as the fulfilling of it ; but “‘when Jesus was glorified, then remembered
they that these things were written of Him, and that they had done such things
unto Him.” And thus it is that events best explain the prophetic Word. We
have, like the disciples, to “‘company with” Christ, and stand by the interests
of His kingdom, whatever measure of development they may have attained,
working, watching, and praying, and that measure will assuredly go on to
increase till the world shall be bright with Messiah’s glory. The fulfilment of
prophecy in the case before us strikingly confirms our believing expectations of
the future. For this prediction, as it stands in Zechariah, is directly connected
with references to the ultimate triumphs of the Saviour. And certainly as the
former part of the prediction was accomplished, so certainly “ His dominion shall
be from sea to sea, and from the river even unto the ends of the earth.”

III. An illustration is here furnished of the control of Christ over minds
and events, and of the manner in which, when the time for the execution
of the Divine purposes is come, the means and agencies at once appear.—
Jesus was to make a public entry into Jerusalem, It must needs be so, that


402


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI. |


Scripture might be fulfilled. And see how all things conspire for this end. Our
Lord sends into the village over against Him and near the city, knowing
precisely where the animal He was to ride on would be found; and there it was
at the very hour at which it was needed, as though waiting for the honour now
to be put upon it, after having been spoken of in prophecy five hundred years
before! But will it be given up for the purpose? Yes. The owners have only
to be told that the Great Teacher had need of it, and it was at once placed at His
disposal. Have we not here a specimen of what may be looked for in the future
unfolding of the purposes of Heaven? As the periods come for the successive
fulfilment of God’s designs in connexion with the kingdom of His Son, the
fitting means and instrumentalities will not be wanting. Who can foresee,
moreoyer, what events in Providence may arise to impress men’s minds, as the
raising of Lazarus did at this time, both to facilitate the diffusion of the gospel,
and to awaken, by the accompanying power of the Spirit of God, a sense of the
need of the blessings it offers? One may well be awed in viewing the progress
of events, even in our own day,—in the consolidation, to a great extent, of
religious liberty in our own land, and in many of those of the Continent; in the
opening of India and China to the preaching of Christ; in the triumphs of the
gospel in Madagascar, long the scene of bloody persecution; in the advance of
evangelisation in Burmah, Polynesia, Africa, and other parts of the field of
missions ; in the unbarring of Italy, in which the Reformation was once crushed
by persecution, and to which till lately there was no access through its length
and breadth to free Christian exertion. Everywhere a multitude of obstacles
have yet to be overcome; but all things are pointing onward to great and
grand issues in the not very distant future.

IV. The joyous acclamations of the disciples as they attended their Master
into Jerusalem may well remind us of what should be the attitude and feeling
of the Church of Christ with reference to the triumphs of its Lord.—No doubt
there were many voices raised that day under the influence of mere passing
excitement. But it was not so with the real disciples with whom the demon-
stration probably originated. Even they had then no enlarged acquaintance
with the truth of Christ; but they had that which is the rudiment of all
preparation for Christian service, sacrifice, and suffering—a loving devotedness
to their Lord. And He: approved and encouraged their ardour, Amid all the
occupations of earth, and all the distractions of time, what a psalm of praise
to the exalted Saviour should the Christian life of a redeemed sinner be !—
E. T. Prust.


An Advent Sunday discourse —The history of Christ’s triumphal entry into
Jerusalem is selected as the Holy Gospel for Advent Sunday, because it is
typical of the manner in which He makes His Advent throughout the centuries
to the Church at large.

TI. It is the same Person who comes, and in the same character—Jesus of
Nazareth, the Christ of God.—His very name should ensure Him a welcome
in every heart. He is “ Jesus”—our Saviour; and “ Christ ”—the Anointed of
God: anointed as Prophet, to teach the way of God in truth; anointed as Priest,
to make atonement for our sins, and by one offering to perfect for ever them
that are sanctified; anointed as King, to set up His throne in our hearts, and
reduce every thought and affection to the obedience of faith. Thus has He ever
presented Himself to the reception of every individual who is acquainted with
what is written in the Law and the Prophets and the Psalms concerning Him,
whether Jews then or Christians since. Any difference there may be is
clearly in owr favour. Those who hailed Him as the Son of David, and rent
the air with hosannas to Him that came in the name of the Lord, had after


403


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oo eS SS


all very low, imperfect, and even false ideas of His character and mission.
Their thoughts all ran upon carnal enemies and temporal deliverances. We


know better than that; we have learnt that the most cruel tyrants are Satan .


and Sin, and that a man’s worst foes are of his own household, even within
his own breast. Knowing our danger and weakness, we are the better able to
appreciate the greatness of our deliverance, and to hail with joy and gratitude
Him who comes to “ heal the broken-hearted,” etc.

II. As it is the same Great Person who comes, so He comes in a spiritual
sense to the same. Of His First Advent in general it is said, “ He came unto
His own.” But especially when, as now, He visited Jerusalem, the city of
David who was His father according to the flesh, and the Temple of God which
was His Heavenly Father’s house, might He be said in a more particular manner
to be coming unto His own. And is not this the case with the Saviour of
mankind, whensoever and to whomsoever He comes ? Are we not doubly His
——His by creation and His by redemption? But we know by experience that the
most unquestionable title does not ensure peaceful possession. Thus in the days
of His flesh (John i. 10, 11). And stall, when He asserts His claim to universal
empire, or knocks at the door of the heart of individual sinners, the greater
number, like the inhabitants of Jerusalem, are moved only with wonder and
surprise at the demand made upon them (Matt. xxi, 10). They ask, “ Who
is this ?”-—some, indeed, with an honest desire for information and enlightenment
(John ix. 36); but too many in the bad, bold spirit of the Jewish rulers
(Matt. xxi. 23).

III. We may see another point of resemblance in the manner of our Lord’s
Advent. How did He approach Jerusalem? As a mighty conqueror, at the
head of an army, to destroy His enemies and burn up their city? Far different.
See Matt. xxi. 5. His attendants a few simple men and feeble women, who had
followed Him from His native place. What could be more typical of the Saviour’s
Mission to this earth? See John iii. 17; Matt. xii. 20. What an irresistible
appeal is that of St. Paul! (2 Cor. x. 1). Force is met by force. He who assails
with violence is by violence repelled. Against the crash of thunder we stop
our ears. But to gentleness we yield. To him who entreats we show ourselves
easy to be entreated. The still, small voice is the most certain to gain our
attention. Be it so now. Receive with meekness Him who comes in the spirit
of meekness. Wait not till He comes in another fashion (Matt. xxiv. 30;
Rev. i. 7).

IV. Another point of comparison that we may draw relates to the reception
of Christ. The inhabitants of Jerusalem, not content to await His arrival, went
out to meet Him on the road (John xii, 13). Even so the Church, in Advent,
goes forth to meet her Lord. His Incarnation, or actual coming in the flesh,
she celebrates at Christmas; but long before that time we may imagine her
to be standing on the watch-tower, eagerly looking for the signs of His approach,
At last, as on this day, she espies Him afar off, and gives notice to all her
children—“ Behold, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet Him.” But
in another sense the coming of the Son of Man is “ not with observation,” and
not at any particular season. To the heart of the sinner Christ often comes ‘ on
a day that he looks not for Him, and in an hour that he ‘is not aware”; and so,
finding nobody come out to meet Him, He turns round and departs as silently
as He came. We must meet Him on the road. We must be in attendance
where He is likely to be found. We must wait for Him in the way of His
judgments, providences, ordinances. Prayer especially is like a place where
roads from all directions meet. Whenever and however He comes, He must
pass that way; and if we are there, waiting for Him, it is impossible for us to
miss Him.

404





f
f


i i


————


ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP, XI.


i a ee eae A a ee


V. Those who went to meet Him


: : on His approach to Jerusalem receive
Him with the most significant tokens i reece


let us welcome “ Him that cometh in the name of the Lord.”


of honour and respect (ver. 8).—So
Let us put off


the old man with his deeds of darkness, lay aside every weight and the sin
that doth so easily beset us, and so make a way for the Redeemer to enter


and take possession of our souls,


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-11. The significance of Christ's
royal entry into Jerusalem.—tt is surely
a strange mistake, as Dr. Edersheim
remarks, to regard this entry as imply-
ing that, fired by enthusiasm, Christ
for the moment expected the people
would receive Him as the Messiah.
Nor is it much better to describe it as
a concession to the fevered expectations
of His disciples and the multitude. It
was, on the contrary, an integral part
of Christ’s Mission, which would not be
complete without it. “It behoved Him
so to enter Jerusalem, because He was
a King; and as King to enter it in
such manner, because He was such a
King : and both the one and the other
were in accordance with the prophecy
of old.”


Vers. 2-6. Humble service.—l. We
should always attempt that for which
we have Christ’s warrant. 2. We
should not attempt that for which we
have not Christ’s warrant. 3. In look-
ing for that for which we have Christ’s
warrant, we must expect opposition.
From—(1) The weakness of the flesh.
(2) The unbelieving amongst men.
(3) The spiritual hosts of wickedness.
(4) If we attempt that for which we
have Christ’s warrant, in the manner
He directs, we shall accomplish it.—
J, S. Swan.

Particularity in giving directions.—
The closer the personal oversight given
to one’s business the better. But after
all is said and done a great part of the
work of life depends on delegated labour.
Men cannot do everything at first-hand.
Neither does God. He has His angels
or messengers. ‘They do His bidding.
The Holy Spirit is sent to “ convince


the world of sin, of righteousness and
of judgment.” But now the fulfilment
of the work entrusted to an agent, in
harmony with the desire of the sender,
will not only depend, under God, on
the intelligence and faithfulness of the
one sent, but also on the nature of the
instructions given by the sender. The
less we take for granted in this respect
the better. And this the more so in
proportion to the deficiencies of the sent.
In giving orders Jesus left no room for
mistake, His directions were very
specific: they were no doubt given
clearly; they could be heard dis-
tinctly. Because He Himself was
perfectly familiar with the requisites
of any work, He did not therefore
think, or act as if He thought, that a
few hurried hints would be sufficient
for others. It was said of Christ that
He “shall not fail.” He was pre-
eminently successful in all He under-
took. One of the characteristics that
prevented failure was His thoroughness.
He did not despise details. Confusion,
vexation, failure, were thus avoided.
Note His care in telling His disciples
where to find the colt, what kind of
a colt, in what condition it would be,
whether tied or loose, how to answer
objections to their bringing him, etc.
Then again in regard to the prepara-
tion for the Passover the same particu-
larity is observed. The result was that
all moved on smoothly. All was in
harmony with the injunction, “ Let
everything be done decently and in
order.” —Wm. M. Campbell.


Ver. 3. “The Lord hath need of
him.” —This is the only time in the
Bible where the Lord is said to have


405


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


aprenden 8


need of any creature; and here it is
said of a despised creature—of an ass,
as if to rebuke the pride of creature
superiority, and at the same time to
exalt the dignity of creature instrumen-
tality. These words are spoken of an
ass, to prevent the possibility of any
one saying, “I am too mean to be of
any service to so glorious a Master ;
my abilities are too small, my position
is too obscure.” Perhaps at the moment
of such a temptation there may be
some blessed service for such a one,
which, instrumentally speaking, could
only be performed by that one. Yes,
it may be to bear Jesus in His mem-
bers to His triumph or His Cross.—
J.T, Baylee, DD.


Vers. 5, 6. 2 power of Christ’s
Word.—Nothing resists the Word of the
God-man, nor the faith and obedience
of a faithful disciple. Let us learn to
avoid all arguing and disputing when-
ever God commands us something above
our strength, and to put our whole
confidence in the power of His will,
which can do all things. He accustoms
His apostles to see that the wills of
men are less in their own power than
in that of God, and that His Word is
almighty even in the mouth of His
ministers, to the end that men may
believe them. —P. Quesnel.


Vers. 8-10. How Christ must be enter-
tained.—l. We must believe Him to
be that Great Prophet who is the
Messiah and Saviour of the world.
2. We must profess and confess this
faith, having “ Hosanna” in our
mouths, and crying, “ Blessed,” ete.
3. We must spread our garments in
the way, etc., i.e. forsake all and follow
Christ, proffering and offering ourselves
wholly to His service.—Dean Boys.

The nature of Christ's kingdom.—A
King, not of this world, though over
it; ruling, not in external pomp and
state, but by secret providence and
power; not so much over the bodies
and temporal estates, as in the hearts
and consciences of men; not chiefly
by outward compulsion and violence,


406


but by inward allurement and persu-
sion (Rev. v. 13, xix. 16).—Dr. Isaue
Barrow.


Ver. 11. The evening can become the
sweetest and most sacred portion of
the day. It is profound, it is serene;
tender as solemn, tranquil as pensive;
full of permission fraught with privi-
lege ; free and fresh and fragrant with
repose. Evening completes the day, as
its coronation and benediction. The
morrow is at hand; evening awaits the
morrow, as its herald and its pledge.
The west horizon claims its kindred
with the east, looking so like it that
you know them to be twins. The sun-
down on the west glows like the sunrise
on the east. Both alike tip the hill-
tops with gold. Pause now and lay
down the tool, the spade; there is
something else than toil—there is
reverie, rest. Glad evenings guarantee
and glorify the days, replenish wear
and tear, stanch wounds. But when
shadows wrap you, when curtains close,
birds to their nests, cattle to their
stalls, man to his home—soul, whither
thou? Whither else but to thy God ?
Oh, house thee in His peace! Life's
eventide evinces much in the soft de-
clensions of late lingering years. The
old man’s heart sees shadows lengthen
and dusk deepen, until familiar spots
wear a weird beauty, as the places that
knew him begin to know him no more
for ever, and the fellowships that used
to greet and cheer him seem in their
dimness to forget that he was ever
young like them or still has his share
on the earth. The eventide of life is
death, and the evening and the morning
make the first day. Nigher now the
morning, and death is only eventide at
last. Life begins like the light—it
comes out of the dark of an oblivion
that seems to itself a nonentity, full of
pangs to the mother and as full of pain
to the infant, if the infant were alike
sensitive and sentient. But playful
infancy, sportive childhood, take slight
notice of the struggle, the transition,
and the change. When at length it
has reached its close, it settles back to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





the same fostering conditions. Death
hides it in the oblivion and the shadow
once again. And what conclusion can
there be but that, as its morning had
an evening, its evening is to have a
morning too, a fresher, fuller, freer
morning next, because as tenderly the


CHAP. XI.





it for night hours and cradling it for
infantile and ineffable repose. These
are inklings of the undeistanding, but
they become the intuitions of the soul.
The promise becomes the prospect ; the
prospect becomes the possession.—
H. S. Carpenter.


Infinite disrobes the life slumber, lulling


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—26.
(PARALLELS : Marv. xxi. 12-22; Luxe xix. 45-48.)


Vers. 12-14. The useless tree.—Dangers were closing round the Saviour, and
He prudently spent His nights, except the last fatal one, not at Jerusalem,
but the neighbouring village of Bethany. This miracle was wrought on Monday,
the second day of Holy Week. Perhaps the reason of His being hungry so
early in the day was that He had spent a portion of the night or early
morning in prayer. His early departure probably arose from a holy haste to
enter upon the work of the day. He inherited the physical weaknesses of our
nature, and so qualified Himself to sympathise with His people in all physical
trials (Heb. ii. 14, iv. 15).

I. The miracles of our Lord generally contained a symbolic element; but this
miracle is a symbol in itself—In this He was following the examples of the
prophets, who often acted out their parables. It was a mode of teaching
that excited livelier attention than an oral statement, and produced a deeper
impression upon the mind. Indeed the Jewish Temple, with its outer court,
high priests, offerings and ordinances, was a stupendous parable uttered in
the form of sign and symbol. It is objected that our Lord, knowing, as from
His omniscience He must have done, that there was no fruit upon the fig tree,
went to it as though expecting to find fruit. In His action there was no
insincerity. The language used is a mode of speech often used, especially in
figurative teaching.

IJ. But is not this miracle at variance with the ordinary cperations of Him
who came “not to destroy, but to fulfil” ?—Other miracles were exercises of
love, acts of giving and creation; this is an act of destruction. Here He
appears as a punishing God. Solitary as it is, it shews that, while our Lord
“‘delighteth in mercy,” He does not shrink from executing judgment when
required. Its solitariness as an act of judgment exhibits in impressive lights
the exceeding greatness and bountifulness of His love. But why should He put
forth His anger upon a tree, which, not being a moral agent, could not be
conscious of guilt? A tree has no sentient existence, much less intelligent and
moral consciousness, and therefore could not be a fit subject for praise or blame.
That the fig tree was an inanimate existence is a sufficient reply to the objection.
It was not capable of suffering, and could therefore be lawfully used as a means
for ends lying beyond itself. Our Lord did not attribute any moral responsi-
bilities to the fig tree; He simply used it to represent moral qualities. Other
considerations may be advanced which bear upon the justice of this act. The
situation of the tree was very favourable for fruit-bearing. Being planted on
the roadside, it was not private property. It was not a sound tree that our
Lord caused to wither. Its life had begun to decay, and our Saviour’s sentence
only hastened a process that would have advanced in the course of nature.

407


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ge ee ee


TIl. But why should Christ vent His indignation upon the fig tree if the
usual season for fruit-bearing had not arrived ?—Was this consistent with the
justice and reasonableness which ruled Him in all His dealings? It was: for
the fruit usually appeared before the leaves; and if the fig tree could produce
leaves, what excuse had it for being fruitless? ‘“ Where is the propriety,” says
Dr. Thomas, “‘ of allowing it to occupy 4 position, and to appropriate nourish-
ment, which, if granted to another tree, would result in abundant fruitfulness ?
Let it die. Why should its roots steal the nutriment of the soil, its leafy
branches obstruct the genial rays of heaven, and prevent their falling on better
plants? Usefulness is the grand end of all created existence, and the function
of justice is to remove out of the way whatever answers not its original design.
Justice clears the universe of the worthless. The fruitless tree it burns; the
salt that has lost its savour it casts forth as rubbish ; the spirit that perverts its
powers it divests of its freedom and its influence, its privileges and enjoyments,
Justice weeds the garden of the universe.”

Lessons.—1. It teaches that to our existence God has set a specific purpose.
The fruit we are expected to bear is goodness—in other words, holy and useful
living (Rom. vi. 22; Jas. iii. 18; Gal. iti, 22; Eph. v. 5; Ps. exxvi. 5, 6;
Jas. v.20). 2. Like the fruitless fig tree, we are surrounded by conditions and
means favourable to fruit-bearing. If no fruit appears, no fault can be found
with the soil, air, clouds, sun, or with the culturing methods and appliances of


the vine-dresser; the evil is in the tree (Jas. i. 13-15). 3. The appearance of _


goodness without the reality only aggravates our guilt. Standing beside the
fruitless tree, the Master did not say, “ This tree is an ornament to the
surrounding landscape, a grateful shelter to the weary traveller ; choirs of birds
now and then make the branches quiver with delightful music.” Its leaves and
blossoms could not be accepted as substitutes for fruit. 4. The evil of our
spiritual barrenness is not confined to ourselves. We occupy space in the
community that might be occupied with greater advantage by others. 5. When
the sentence goes forth, ruin follows—complete, final, and irretrievable.—
J. H. Morgan.


Vers. 15-17. Reverence for God's house.—On two very different occasions our
Lord shewed His zeal for the honour of the Temple of God. At the commence-
ment of His public ministry, when He went up to the Feast of the Passover,
He found the sale of oxen and sheep and doves going on within the court of
the Temple. And He drove them out and said, “Take these things hence ;
make not My Father’s house a house of merchandise.” And now again, at the
close of His ministry, He went up to the Passover, and He found the same
abomination going on. And once more He drove out the profaners, and claimed
for Giod’s house the reverence and respect which is due to the house of prayer.

I. There can be no doubt that the decay of religious feeling among the
people, the loss of reverence for holy things and places, the weakening of
their belief in God’s actual and immediate presence with them, was very
closely connected and bound up with the coming destruction of the Jewish
nation. 1. This faith in the presence of God in the Temple, and among the
people whom He had chosen for Himself, was impressed on them by the law
perhaps more distinctly and solemnly than any other truth. 2. And while
their trust in God’s presence was firm and unshaken, so long it was well with
them. God did protect them from their enemies, and raised them to prosperity,
and gave them abundance and peace and power. But when their faith failed,
and they forgot God, and they lost their reverence and fell into sin, then He
caused suffering to come upon them. Their sin found them out. 3. Is there
not a lesson for us in this age? Are not the two besetting sins of the time, on


408





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI.


~Syo eran ace epee oe ae as a ae


the one hand, a craving after money, a spirit of merchandise, which takes up
our thoughts and occupies our time, and sorely interferes with our higher
interests ; and, on the other hand, a want of reverence, a slowness to see and
confess the presence of God, that all we do and say is in His sight: that He is
about our path and about our bed, and spieth out all our ways. Our longing
for money, what is it but a want of faith? We cannot trust God, that He will
provide for us. We will make provision for ourselves and for our children’s
wants. We are slow to believe that it is really required that we should make
sacrifice for Christ’s sake. And therefore the love of the world is in danger of
eating more and more into our hearts and driving out our religion, our trust,
and our love, and our faith in a heavenly reward and coming glory. And if so,
if this is a real evil, and if it be not timely checked, then assuredly the glory
will be departing from us.

II. Besides this larger and more general lesson, there is also a thought which
may come closer and more personally to ourselves. Our Lord teaches us very
plainly, by cleansing the Temple at Jerusalem, that a reverence is due to holy
places ; that where the presence of God ought to be recognised and felt the
common affairs of life ought not to find entrance. 1. When we come to
approach God in prayer, and when we enter into the house which has been
dedicated to the Lord, the charge given to Moses may still have its meaning for
us: “ Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
holy ground.” 2. And does not this condemn very strongly the lightness and
irreverence with which so many will come to church? When we kneel upon
our knees, it is not to go through an unmeaning form, but to pray for pardon
and for grace. When we listen, we must try to apply to our hearts the lessons
which God’s Word would teach. Our carelessness, our littleness, our vanity,
our worldly thoughts, all these must be put away. We are drawing near to
our God, and we desire to be drawn yet closer towards Him in faith and love.
And He will draw nigh to us. He is present with us when we seek His
pardon—present with us when we sing His praise—present with us when
we hear His message—present with us when we kneel to receive the Blessed
Sacrament of His Body and Blood.—Canon Nevill.


Ver. 17. God’s house “an house of prayer for all nations.’—The Temple at
Jerusalem, while it stood, might well be classed amongst “the wonders of the
world”: not merely on account of the magnificence of its conception, the
splendour of its ornaments, or the costliness of its worship; but, even more, for
the anomalous character of the principle on which it was founded, and of the
religious system to which it belonged. In the Jewish creed it was regarded as
the habitation of Him who, according to another article of the same belief,
“dwelleth not in temples made with hands.” Dedicated to the service of the
God of the whole earth, who “ made of one blood all nations of men,” it was yet
strictly exclusive. It was surrounded by spacious courts. Of these the first or
outer court, which encompassed all the rest, was called ‘the Court of the
Gentiles,” because Gentiles were allowed to enter into but not beyond it. This
court was separated from the next—that of the Israelites—by a low stone wall,
on which stood pillars at equal distances, with inscriptions signifying to all not
of the seed of Abraham that that was their place and they must proceed no
farther. Now, it is the removal of this particular disability, which is predicted
in the words quoted by our Lord from Isaiah. There was at all times a
prescribed method by which ‘“‘the son of the stranger” might join himself to
the Lord’s people, and become a member of “ the commonwealth of Israel,” and
entitled to all the privileges of a born Jew. But this method was so little
adopted in practice that it entirely fails to meet the language here used, even


493


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


if the words did not plainly refer to something to take place ata future time,
and not to a provision already existing. And we know in fact that the Temple
at Jerusalem never was, and could at no time be called, “‘an house of prayer
for all nations.” We must therefore understand the prophecy in a wider
sense, as foretelling “ the opening of the kingdom of heaven ”__much more,
therefore, the doors of the sanctuary— to all believers.” See Mal. i. 11;
John iv. 21-24.

I. The perfect freedom and openness of Divine ordinances in the Church of
Christ.—The Gentiles having long since been admitted into the Church—or
rather, the Church as it now exists being composed for the most part of Gentiles
we may pass over that distinction as obsolete, and proceed to others. 1. There
+s no distinction of rich and poor in our Churches. In early times, indeed, some
abuse of this kind appears to have crept in. See Jas. il. 1-4, But we may
fearlessly say that our asyemblies are not liable to this charge. None is excluded
or insulted because he is poor or meanly clad. Many, it is true, exclude them-
selves, on the ground that they have no clothes fit to come in, and they are
ashamed to exhibit their “ vile raiment ” among the “ gay clothing ” of their
neighbours. This is, “n most cases, only a miserable subterfuge. 2. We
acknowledge no distinction between learned and unlearned in Church. Neither
class is shut out by any custom or practice calculated to repel. Everything said
or done in the sanctuary has for its object the general edification, “that all may
learn, and all may be comforted.” (1) The Anglican Liturgy is a “ Book of
Common Prayer ”—suited “ for all people.” Its greatest admirers are, no doubt,
its most refined and intelligent ones, as an exquisite picture or statue or other
work of art is best appreciated by those who have studied the principles of art.
But “the common people” also are great admirers of the Prayer Book, and find
therein—besides such plainness and simplicity as enables the most unlearned to
say ‘ Amen” to every sentence—a savour and spirit of devotion which is not
perceptible, or in far less degree, in other compositions. (2) And with respect
to the public instructions of the Church, here also the profit of all alike is kept
in view. A minister, in preparing his sermon, remembers that there will be
among his hearers persons of very different degrees of intelligence and cultivation.
That he may not leave the unlearned entirely behind him, he has to use great
plainness of speech, a good deal of repetition, and a certain homeliness and
familiarity of illustration. On the other hand, the minds of the better educated
demand correctness of style, closeness of reasoning, and general propriety of
manner. He endeavours, therefore, not simply to descend to the level of the
former class, but so to descend as to carry the others with him, so to adapt his
instructions to both that the adaptation shall not be offensively perceptible to
either. 3. Our churches are open to all characters of people—to good and bad,
righteous and sinner, him that feareth God and him that feareth Him not.
How could it be otherwise? Should we exclude the righteous? But these are
the very persons whom God would have to worship Him, and whose godly
supplications and ‘‘ pure offerings” give a savour and seasoning to the whole
sacrifice. Or should we refuse admission to the sinner? How, then, could we
be the ministers of Him who “ came to call,” ete. 2 How could we, with any
consistency, come into the house of God ourselves, seeing we are all ‘‘ miserable
sinners”? Only one class of persons there is whom we do not invite, and would
rather not see, within the walls of the sanctuary, viz. those who are living in
the open, shameless, and defiant practice of iniquity. These we would exclude,
not permanently, but for a time, until they shew so much regard to decency
and public morality as constitutes the lowest qualification for one who seeks
admission into a religious assembly. We would, by this temporary exclusion,
shame them and bring them to a better mind; or, if not, lighten their damnation


410





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI.





by just so much guilt as they would have incurred by offering to the Lord an
abomination instead of a sacrifice.

II. The true nature of the Christian sanctuary—it is a house of prayer.—In
thus setting aside not only @ part, but the emphatic part, of the sentence
as originally uttered—“ for all nations ”—we are justified by our Lord Himself,
who here refers the quotation to a question, not of the admissibility or
inadmissibility of others than Jews to the privileges of the Temple, but of the
use and abuse of the Temple itself. Whether open to all people, or reserved
for a privileged tribe; whether appropriated to the imposing ceremonies of
the Jewish ritual, or to the less sensuous solemnities of Christian worships,—-
the Lord’s house still maintains its character of “an house of prayer.” From
this expression we may learn—1l. What is the proper business of this place—
prayer ; i.e. prayer in its widest sense, including every act of devotion in which
a Christian congregation may appropriately unite. Besides prayer, properly
so called, by which we make our joint requests known unto God, “the voice of
joy and praise” enters largely into those common supplications which we make
with one accord in the Lord’s house. But let us ever remember that, being thus
explained, prayer, and prayer alone, is our proper business there. It is
necessary to lay great stress upon this, for it is a matter which is greatly
misapprehended by many. ‘They will tell one they go to Church to hear.
They listen to the prayers, and that is all. It is only when these are concluded
that they rouse themselves, and begin to give their best attention to the
discourse which is expected to follow, in the hope of hearing, if not something
new, at least something not quite so stale and antiquated as that “form of
sound words” in which the Church has for centuries poured forth her devotions
before God. Such persons are fond of talking of the more or less “ good” that
they get from their attendance at public worship; and they estimate the
amount of “ good” by the manner and degree in which their feelings are excited
by the sermon. There is a better test than that. Shew me the man who has
prayed the best, and I will shew you the man who has got the most “ good” ;
for he has got—whatever he asked. But if any man who has not truly
joined in the prayers imagines that he has received any real benefit from the
sermon, he deceives himself. The thing is impossible. It is opposed to the
clearest rule of the dispensation of grace. See Luke viii. 18. 2. What
is the proper behaviour of this place. Whatever deportment, in look, gesture,
or manner, is suited to the act of prayer, the same is becoming demeanour in
“the house of prayer”; and whatever is foreign to the business of the place
is also inappropriate to the place itself. Now what is prayer, and what are the
manner and behaviour of a person engaged in prayer? Prayer is the most
serious —I had almost said awful—transaction in which a human being can be
employed. A man who is truly praying, whether in public or private—
praying effectually, fervently, and with all his soul—is a sight which cannot be
mistaken for anything but what it really is. And when a number of persons
are so engaged, praying with one accord in one place, striving together in their
fervent addresses to the “Father of mercies and God of all comfort,” we should
expect to see still more legibly stamped on every feature and gesture the
characteristic marks of their employment, the outward and visible signs of
heartfelt devotion. Is it so in our churches? Would a stranger entermg
while service is going on perceive at once that it was a place in which
prayer was wont to be made, and that the congregation was so engaged at
that moment? Would he be carried away by the contagion of so many bended
knees and blended voices, so many eyes cast down to the ground and hands
lifted up to heaven; and so, falling down on his face, would he worship God,
and report that God was in us of a truth ?

411


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


web BS eel





Ver. 17. The advantage of a liturgy in public worship.—One of the most inter-
esting objects to the eye of the contemplative man must ever be an assembly of
Christians engaged in public worship. The literary mind may revert on such
an occasion, to those sad spectacles of superstition and cruelty which disgraced
even the most enlightened periods of heathen history ; and the observer of human
character will call to mind and compare the infinite variety of follies and delusions
which to this day mar the religious observances of all uncivilised nations. The
purity of Christian worship will be well illustrated by the contrast. There are
differences, however, among the professors of Christianity with regard to the
public worship of God. These may be considered to resolve. themselves, in some
degree, into one great question—that of the use of a liturgy or set form of

rayer.

p 1 The great criterion, by which we may judge of the advantage of a liturgy
in public worship, is its effect on the minds of the worshippers, and its suitable-
ness to the object for which they are assembled.—God’s house is “the house of
prayer.” How, then, is a congregation assembled there to address itself to the
throne of grace? How is it to speak, with only one voice, the language of all,
so that each individual may thoroughly enter into the spirit of the supplication
without perplexity a distraction? This result can only be secured, we apprehend,
by the use of a regular “form of sound words” (2 Tim. i. 13), known, understood,
and approved by all, which shall be a guarantee to them that they are not
going to utter collectively what they dissent from as individuals, and that they
are not going to insult the Majesty of Heaven with what is unintelligible, offen-
sive, or unscriptural; so that the understanding not being now employed in
comprehending or the judgment in approving it, the heart may be at full liberty
to feel its effect, and every prayer uttered by the minister may ascend at once
to heaven as the united offering of the congregation. Thus the object of the
assembly is fully answered. Though but one for the most part spoke, they all
prayed; and having thus poured forth their. collective petitions, they retire to
their homes, where, at their accustomed seasons, and according to their individual
methods, each may address his particular prayer to the Father which seeth in
secret.

II. Another advantage of a liturgy is its efficacy as a source of union—a
rallying-point around which, as a centre, a whole nation may assemble with that
harmony of religious intercourse which should distinguish all who profess and
call themselves Christians. A liturgy protects a Church against needless
innovations—against the effects of misguided zeal or internal faction, which would
disturb or rend it asunder—against the caprice, the errors, and the passions of
the human mind. It is also most useful as a standard of purity in doctrine,
through which, as an untainted channel, the great truths of Christianity having
been crystallised, may be transmitted, unaltered and uncorrupted, to future
generations. If these truths were left to be explained only through the uncertain
and variable medium of preaching, they would soon be wrested and tortured by
the injudicious or the enthusiastic minister, and the people would be lost in a
labyrinth of unintelligible or contradictory doctrine ; but when they are embodied
and illustrated in a well-modelled form of public worship, the perversion of them
becomes more difficult, and the minds of the people are less likely to be led astray.

III. A liturgy is a constant reminder that the great object of our meeting
in church is prayer.—The importance of this point being kept prominently in view
will be evident if we glance for a moment at the appearance which the religious
world at this day exhibits. It is notorious that amongst the adherents of the
numerous Christian societies which have sprung up during the last three
centuries a spirit of preaching has superseded the spirit of prayer. They assemble
together for the avowed purpose of listening to the discourse of a minister, which


41¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI.
ee eee a ee es ee


is the main feature of their meeting. Some of them, indeed, sensible that this is
not as it should be, have introduced the Anglican Liturgy, or selections from it,
into their religious services. Others have attempted to defend their disuse of a
Prayer Book by the authority of the Primitive Church, asserting that in so
doing they are only laying aside the unnecessary accretions which time has
attached to public worship, and returning to the purity and simplicity of original
usage. But there is little force in this argument. The worship of the early
Christians, who were scattered abroad in small numbers, and who had moreover
been just converted to Christianity, was necessarily imperfect in various respects.
They had not yet had time to arrange for themselves a regular form of service
to take the place of the old Jewish ritual, although there are traces in the New
Testament that they had already begun to do so. They existed alsoin a state of
constant alarm, from persecution either impending or actually raging, which
forced them to be content to assemble when they could and how they could.
No comparison can be instituted between their case and that of Christians in this
present age, who enjoy leisure, liberty, and all means of organisation in abun-
dance. The Church is never likely to consent to such a retrograde step as the
abandonment of what has been found so practically beneficial. To do this would
be to exchange system and order for confusion and chaos.


Vers. 22, 23. The power of faith—Our Lord’s grand earthly work was the
work of atonement. But there were other designs of great importance which He
accomplished whilst He sojourned among men. Not the least of these was to fit
and prepare His disciples for carrying on the work of the kingdom after His
departure. And, in reference to this matter, His anxiety manifestly deepens,
and His efforts become more urgent, as the time of His offering-up draws
near. At this period how earnest and how oft repeated were His warnings to the
disciples regarding the dangers and sufferings and disappointments of their
carnal expectations which awaited them! how earnest and oft repeated His
efforts to lead them to their true source of strength and victory in God! ‘ Have
faith in God” is the burden of many a discourse, the peculiar lesson of
many a parable and many a wondrous work. This was the lesson which the
miracle of the cursing and withering of the fig tree was designed to illustrate.
He would thus prepare the mind of His disciples to meet many and great
difficulties in the prosecution of their work, and would teach them also that
they must not be downcast and discouraged, since their faith in God endowed
them with an irresistible strength, before which every difficulty must vanish.

I. Who are those to whom these cheering words are addressed ?—Primarily,
they were addressed by our Lord to His personal friends and followers whom
He had chosen as apostles. The promise was given to them in their character
of labourers in the Lord’s vineyard, servants of the kingdom of God. And it
is equally valid for all who labour and strive for the advancement of Christ’s
kingdom. The work of the world’s salvation from sin and Satan was begun
by the Lord in person, and by His death on the Cross and His resurrection
from the dead He ensured its successful issue. But it was ordained by Divine
Wisdom that the prosecution of the work in detail should be accomplished by
the instrumentality of human agents. Every Christian is entitled to appropriate
the gracious language of our text as addressed to him; for he is one whom
the Lord hath found in the market-place, and hired, and sent to work in His
vineyard. Every preacher of the gospel can claim the promises as specially
made to him; for is he not sent expressly on the Lord’s business? Every
congregation of the Lord’s people is entitled to rest upon it; for have they
not banded themselves together in the Lord’s name, for the very purpose of
advancing His work and His kingdom in the world ?

413


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE.


ee


II. What is the promise made to those who are doing the Lord’s work and
seeking the advancement of His kingdom ? (ver. 23 : see also Matt. xvii. 20),—
There is no enemy so mighty, no difficulty so great, that may not be conquered
in the might of that Divine strength with which the Christian is endowed.
1. Look at the individual Christian, even if he be one of the lowliest and feeblest
of the children of the kingdom—one of those hidden ones whom the world
notices not. Mark well his history, and you will find that his whole life has
been, at every step, the march of a mighty, resistless power, going forth conquer-
ing and to conquer. He has waged a warfare with no mere power of flesh
and blood, but with principalities and powers, with the rulers of the darkness
of this world, with spiritual wickedness in high places; and he has triumphed.
Sin and Satan still abide with him indeed, ever striving to foment rebellion
among the members of his mortal body ; but they no longer reign—their hour
of power is gone. And in the exercise of that same power by which he has
subjected them, he shall at length shake himself fully and for ever clear of
their polluting touch. Nor is this all the victory that every humblest Christian
has gained. He has triumphed over a condemning law. The mountain of
guilt and the sentence of death are powerless to arrest his progress, as he presses
forward toward the mark for the prize of the high calling in Christ. 2. Look
also at the Church in general, in its progress from age to age. The work given
her to do is nothing less than the salvation of the world from the dominion
of Satan, and the subjection of it, in all its nations, to the holy and righteous
rule of the Prince of Peace. In the barren fig tree, with its large promise
and total lack of fruit, the disciples were called on to recognise a symbol of
the enemies of the gospel—a striking symbol especially of the Church’s mightiest
and most malignant foe, Antichrist—the service of the devil, under the name
and profession of the truth. Always is the Lord’s vineyard preoccupied by the
deceitful plants of the devil’s sowing. Before the seed of life can grow these
must be hewn down and rooted out. But who shall venture to touch them,
guarded as they are by a banded world and by the hosts of hell? What
weapon do the feeble followers of the Crucified wield, with which to strike down
the deep-rooted, wide-spreading evil power? Their Lord reveals to them the
secret of their strength in that mighty word of faith before which the barren
fig tree withered and died in a day. But that tree which sucked the strength
of the garden of the Lord, and covered it with its deadly shade, withered at a
word. And so is it with all the Church’s enemies. The Church is as yet in
the agony of the contest. She sees with trembling heart the tide of victory
sway continually backwards and forwards. Her battle is not fought, her
warfare is not accomplished, until the knowledge of the Lord covers the earth
as the waters cover the sea. The Church is a tree which must still grow on,
until she fills the earth with her branches. But, all imperfect as she is, what
marvellous growth has she made since her beginning, when she was small as
a mustard seed!

Til. What is the secret of the Church’s marvellous strength ?—It is revealed
in the words, ‘ Have faith in God.” Have faith in God, and then shall follow
the wonderful triumphs indicated. 1. God’s people work their work and fight
their foes in the strength of the Almighty. Have faith, not in yourself, but
in God : expect success, not in your own strength, but in God’s. Not only
is He with us amid the mountains, the grand towering difficulties of the
Christian life; even in the performance of duties apparently the most simple
and easy man could do nothing in the strength of the flesh. And, blessed be
God, the Christian does not need to try. Though we are not sufficient of
ourselves, we are sufficient, ay, even to work wonders, if the Christian work
should require them, and our Lord should command. In all things, external


414


7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XI.
ee et ee ee ee


or internal, great or small, it is ever God that worketh in us to will and to do
of His good pleasure. 2. God interposes on behalf of His people to work with
them and fight for them on occasion of their faith. Their faith is the measure
and condition of their victory. So that in a sense their strength lies in their
faith, There is indeed no true efficacy in faith itself; but only on occasion of
faith does the Almighty work for His people. To remove the mountains of
our difficulties, then, we must apply ourselves to our work in faith,—not in
the spirit of presumptuous self-confidence, but in faith; not in the spirit of
doubt and fear, but in faith —_Jas. Hamilton.


Ver. 23. The weakness and difficulties of doubt.—I wish to speak of doubt
rather than of doubtfulness. Doubtfulness is a chronic, sensitive condition of
soul; doubt, an acute, sensitive condition of mind. Doubt, in the end, may
degenerate into spiritual doubtfulness—spiritual doubtfulness amounting, in
extreme instances, to spiritual death; but, in the beginning, doubt, at least in
its higher forms, is less often spiritual than intellectual. Without contradictior.
there are many low and base forms of doubt—doubt supervening on spiritual
neglect, and moral transgressions, and sensual indulgences. But without con-
tradiction also there are high and noble forms of doubt—unwilling doubt, which
is most painfully miserable at its incapacity to believe.

I. Nor is this species of doubt altogether an evil—For there is a strong
tendency in human nature to acquiesce in authority, most of all in spiritual
authority. Spiritual truths are often so ditficult to discern, there is such a
chaos of religious opinion weltering in Christendom, that for peace and certainty’s
sake men are inclined to bow beneath any dominion which professes to hold the
keys of truth and light. And the more subjugate men are, the more autocratic
and unreesoning this dominion becomes, until at length, in order completely
to enslave human reason, the dominion utterly violates it, ever encroaching
upon and narrowing the limits of free, religious intelligence. And if it were
not for the resistances and reformations of doubt, this tyrannous dominion
of authority would assuredly usurp the throne of all religious life. Even in
Christian Churches which boast of their liberties, and profess to abhor all manner
of ecclesiastical despotism, the prevalence of doubt is rapidly expanding those
liberties, and imparting greater health and vigour to the general religious tone.
It is making the Bible a more real, more intelligible, more living book. It is
stripping prayer of its spurious attributes, and clothing it with vast and most
heavenly power. It is insisting, with St. James, that faith is more than con-
fessions and creeds—it is life and work. It is making manifest that the essence
of Christianity is sacrifice, and that without sacrifice no one can be a Christian.
By taking away the false, doubt is making conspicuous the true elements in religion.

II. Yet there are obvious dangers attending the practice of doubt.—Doubt
is apt to run into excess, and the excess of anything is evil. If the excess of
faith be superstition, the excess of doubt is feebleness. The tendency of doubt is
always to cripple men, to make them hesitate and do nothing. In every
department of life it is impossible to succeed without believing; if we do not
believe in what we are doing, we cannot do it well. We are like trees whose
roots are all on the surface; the first winds of obstacle uproot and blow us down.
Our strength is as the strengthlessness of a fractured arm, dangling down in
impotence and pain; no one can lean upon us for support, and we ourselves are
maimed and powerless. Most of all is this true of religion. In religion the
stern necessity for occasional doubt may be wholesome ; but the easy indulgence
in continuous doubt is deadly. Doubt starves the soul; it makes lean and
feeble the inner man. The pre-essential of all success in religion is mighty,
living faith. Without faith even Christianity itself is feebleness.

415


UHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SI. MARK,


ee a eee


III. There are doubters and doubters.—There are those who scarcely care
whether they believe or not; to them doubting is at least painless, if not


absolutely welcome.


But there are ot


hers who earnestly desire to believe, to


whom doubting is misery, and yet who seem unable to preserve themselves from
doubt. These yearning souls long for that eye which sees the Invisible, that
hand which touches the Eternal, that spirit which can commune with the
Infinite and be inspired with the All-Holy; yet, amid all the wonders and
loveliness of nature, all the solaces and promises of the gospel, all the experiences


and mercies of. daily life, they are una
their faith is like the dimness of the twi


meridian sun.


ble to believe; or, if they believe at all,
light, and not like the splendour of the
To such persons, I say, doubt is misery—the misery of the caged


bird, the misery of the shorn and blinded Samson, the misery of the discrowned


king. What are they to do?


Is there no relief or way of escape ¢


Will the


darkness never turn to light, and the weakness of doubt be exchanged for the


power of faith ?


IV. There is one method of strengthening faith which we all may wisely
practise.—It is the method of fairly confronting doubt with its own difficulties.
It is when we throw ourselves out of ourselves, and project our thoughts upon
the universe, that the difficulties of doubt present themselves with huge force


and emphasis.


For what is the nature of the universe in which we live 2


It is


boundless in extent, yet perfect in harmony. Whence then, T ask, comes this
perfection, this punctuality, this absolute order and precision of the universe—
an order compared with which the highest human regulations are chaos, a
precision than which the keenest human intelligence cannot conceive anything


more precise ¢
reply. Whence came the law?
inconceivable idea.


So also is an effect higher than its cause.


You answer it is all the result of law. But what is law? I
An effect without a cause is, to my mind, an


If the effect be


reasonable and intelligible, the cause must be Intelligence and Reason ; for you
cannot deduce reasonableness from non-reason, or intelligibleness from non-


intelligence.


T am thus compelled by t
universe to assign their origin to an intelligent Creator.


he sublimities and the harmonies of the


And when we ascend


the scale of being until we reach the kingdom of man (man, with all his little-
ness and sin, but with all his greatness too—his powers to think, to love, to
remember, to aspire), we ask again, Whence spring all this intelligence, these
emotions, these longings of our human nature ? Water will not rise higher


than its source; and man cannot soar beyond his original.
therefore must be higher and greater than man himself.


The original of man
And when to all this


you add the teachings of history, the character of the world’s moral government,
the voice of conscience, the imaginations and inspirations of the human soul,
and ask from what beginning did they come, the simplest and the most satisfying
of all answers is, “Their builder and maker is God.”—Canon Diggle.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 13, 14. Pretension and per-
formance.—1. There is apt to be most
pretension where there is least per-
formance (Rev. iii. 17). 2. There are
many ways of making profession.
Observance of the forms of Christian
life is profession; Church membership
is profession ; statement of our habit
and waysis a profession, and generally


4l¢


a loud one, for no one can easily speak
about himself without self-laudation,
openly or covertly, coming in; criti-
cism, assumptions of being all right,
and fault-finding are professions, loud
professions, for to censure others’ faults
is tantamount to declaring our freedom
from them; and self-defence is some-
times a form of profession, 3. The


YJ


Sr


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI


a


only ground on which men or things
are spared by the judgment of God
is that they yield good fruit.’ Where
love is, and the likeness to Christ is,
there is endurance and reward. Where
only profession is there is judgment.
4. The stroke of judgment is swift.
Fearfulness surprises the hypocrites.
It is striking by what slow pro-
cesses reputations are built up, and
by what swift judgments they are
brought down. 5. The angerless judg-
ment, of Christ is very solemn.—2.
Glover.

The mission of ithe Church—to feed
hungry souls—As Jesus turned to
that fig tree, drawn thereto by the
tree’s profession of fruitfulness, so
hungry souls turn to the Church and
to God’s professed people to find spiri-
tual food. What that tree with leaves
and no fruit was to Jesus, the Jewish
Church was to people in their soul-
hunger. With their burden of sin,
with their deep heart-questionings,
with their sorrows, with their un-
satisfied longings, with their yearnings
for help and sympathy, they turned
to the priests, the professed spiritual
guides, if haply they might get from
them what they wanted. So the
mission of the Church is to feed hungry
souls. In the hour of penitence,
when the soul is conscious of guilt;
in the day of trouble, when the world
has no more to give; in the shadow
of death; in all the great crises of
life,—even the most worldly turn to
the Church for what they need.—J/. R.
Miller, D.D.

The cursing of the fig tree.—This is
Christ’s first and only miracle of
judgment. It is wrought as an acted
dramatised parable, not for any phy-
sical advantage, but wholly for the
instruction which it conveys, 1. It
is complained that by this act Jesus
deprived some one of his property.
But the same retributive justice of
which this was an expression was
preparing to blight presently all the
possessions of all the nation. Was
this unjust? And of the numberless
trees that are blasted year by year,


EE


why should the loss of this one only
be resented? Every physical injury
must be intended to further some
spiritual end; but it is not often that
the purpose is so clear, and the lesson
so distinctly learned. 2. Others blame
our Lord’s word of sentence, because
a tree, not being a moral agent, ought
not to be punished. It is an obvious
rejoinder that neither could it suffer
pain; that the whole action is sym-
bolic; and that we ourselves justify
the Saviour’s method of expression as
often as we call one tree “good” and
another “bad,” and say that a third
“ought” to bear fruit, while not much
could be “expected of” a fourth.
3. In this word of sentence Jesus
revealed His tenderness, It would
have been a false and cruel kindness
never to work any miracle except of
compassion, and thus to suggest the
inference that He could never strike,
whereas indeed, before that genera-
tion passed away, He would break
His enemies in pieces like a potter’s
vessel.—Dean Chadwick.


Ver. 14, That which does no service
to Christ is found unworthy to render
service to man (Luke iii. 9). A.
Bengel.

Usefulness the sole test.—This fig tree
was in some respects a good one. Its
timber probably was sound; and as
for its leaves, they were abundant.
But a fruit tree is valued neither for
its timber nor its foliage, but for its
fruit. As with trees, so with every-
thing else: the important question
is, “What is their obvious purpose
or final cause?” A building may be
a very good thing in its way; it may
be at once durable and ornamental.
But if it is not subserving the purpose
for which it was erected nor any pur-
pose, what then? Simply this—Let
it be “improved from off the face
of the earth.” This is, I think, the
dictum of common sense, as it cer-
tainly is the principle to which Jesus
Christ gives a practical and concrete
Amen! ‘No man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever”; for thou art not


417


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


eS


meeting “the wants of the time.”—
J. S. Swan,


Vers. 15-17. Cleansing of the Temple.
—From this narrative we learn—-
1. The blinding force of self-interest,
for doubtless they were no more
sensible of their iniquity than many
a modern slave-dealer. And we must
never rest content because our own
conscience acquits us, unless we have
by thought and prayer supplied it
with light and guiding. 2. Reverence
for sacred places, since the one
exercise of His royal authority which
Jesus publicly displayed was to cleanse
the Temple, even though upon the
morrow He would relinquish it for
ever, to be “your house”—and deso-
late. 3. How much apparent sanctity,
what dignity of worship, splendour of
offerings, and pomp of architecture,
may go along with corruption and
unreality! 4. The might of holy
indignation, and the awakening power
of a bold appeal to conscience.— Dean
Chadwick.

Reverence due to Churches.—Man has
two employments in the present scene :
the one earthly, the other of heaven ;
the one pertaining to the body, the
other to the soul. And as the world
generally is the place where He treats
with man, and makes provision for
the well-being of the body, so is this
the chief appointed place for the
business of heaven, and for securing
those advantages which are great, but
unspeakable. 1. Here, to take the
first point in our spiritual history, we
are baptised. Born into the world in
a state of sin, born mere worldly
beings, only fitted for and having no
heritage but the earth: hither we
are brought by our believing parents
and pious sponsors, and are made the
children of grace. Ought we not, then,
to feel an awful and deep interest in
the place where we have been set
free from Adam’s stain, and admitted
to the light; where we have been
delivered from the original curse, and
obtained a blessing; where we have
been saved from the bondage of the


418


devil, and been made the free sons of
God ; where, in short, the utterly lost
and ruined were reinstated in their
heritage, and again placed in their
native home? 2. Here, when our
reason and understanding are in some
degree developed, we approach the
sacred fount of inspiration, and drink
in knowledge from the oracles of God.
Ought we not to listen with reverence,
when although we behold nothing with
our outward senses, but men like
ourselves, and the ambassador is weak
and unworthy to do his office, yet the
King of kings is here by his side, and
by so worthless an instrument speaks
His commandment? 3. Here we pro-
fess to do Him homage, and to fall
low on our knees before His footstool.
We are to feel our dependence, we are
to lean on His arm, we are to confide
in His love, we are to be pierced with
the conviction of our helplessness and
His power, and our distress and long-
ings are to find uttcrance in prayer.
And then to such prayers and such
convictions, to such sincerity and such
earnestness, He represents Himself
as listening eagerly. How should you
be careful and reverent when here,
and “keep thy foot when thou goest


to the house of God”! ‘ My house
is a house of prayer.” “There am
I in the midst of them.” 4. Here is


offered up that feast and _ sacrifice
peculiar to Christians, which com-
memorate the sacrifice made on the
Cross. We have temples erected, we
have altars set up, we have priests
ordained, in succession, from age to
age, that this great rite, the crown
and sum of our solemnities, may be
duly administered, and never cease
whilst the world stands. Here, then,
is another reason for exceeding rever-
ence, that here “we spiritually eat
the flesh of Christ and drink His
blood, we dwell in Christ and Christ in
us, we are one with Christ and Christ
with us.” Here is the Divine Victim,
here the health and life of man, here
the precious blood, here the strength-
ening and refreshing of souls. Oh, how
reverently should we deal with and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


CHAP. XI.


pee os is SR LAD ES aed aes a


approach that house where the Son
of Godcomes! 5. And shall I not add
one other reason for affectionate yet
solemn feeling towards the Churches
of God ?—that here the dead are lying,
and that here are treasured up unto
the dawn of the resurrection all the
earthly remains of those you loved.

II. The methods by which we can
shew that we have a becoming sense
of God’s presence and majesty.—1. If
we have that respectful feeling which
I have desired to inculcate, and which
is pleasant to God, our hearts will be
in a state of adoration and worship.
We shall not permit, at least willingly,
and if they intrude we shall strive
against them, vain and idle thoughts
or dreams from the world. 2. If the
spirit of devotion fill the soul, it will
make itself manifest in the outward
gesture; for the body is the soul’s
instrument, and complies with the
biddings of that which dwells within,
eyen the immortal part of us, whether
it be for evil or for good. 3, When
a man considers that this is God’s
house; when he considers who God
is; when he reflects on the purposes
for which it is set apart, to be the
audience chamber of the Almighty
when He treats with man; that here
he was reconciled to the Father, made
a member of Christ, and sanctified by
the Spirit; that here God speaks to
him, as from His heavenly throne;
that he may lay before Him he’e his
supplications; that here our Saviour
Jesus Christ comes by a mysterious
presence ; and that here are deposited
the ashes of the dead,—-he will desire
the house of God to be in some degree
worthy of its Divine Possessor. If
an earthly prince choose to honour a
subject, what expense isspared? What
a cost of silver and gold, of gems and
of raiment, of furniture and attend-
ants. Ought the Almighty to be less
honoured when He comes? Should His
royal palace be less glorious ?—/J. MW.
Chanter.


Vers. 15, 16. The force of a Holy
Personality.—The instrument which


Christ wielded was the power inherent
in sinlessness. That made cravens of
these worldlings. The voice of His
holy zeal, entering with the paramount
influence of purity and truth, awoke
long-slumbering echoes in souls case-
hardened with unholy commerce, and
drove them from the scene of profane
gain.—S. D. F. Salmond.


Ver. 15. Christ resorting to the
Temple.—Being come to the city, He
straightway entered into the Temple,
either, as Gregory noteth, to declare
“that the fault of the priests is the
ruin of the people,” and therefore His
principal care was to correct and
reform them; or else to give all men
an example of diligence in repairing
to the house of God.—Archbishop
Sandys.


Ver. 16. A great principle vindi-
cated.—It seems to have become a
common practice for the Jews to take
the implements of their daily toil with
them into the Temple at the hours of
devotion, and make the sacred in-
closure a thoroughfare from one part
of the city to another. There was no
express ordinance interdicting such a
practice, and in ordinary circumstances
it might have seemed innocent enough
to avail oneself of the short cut there
provided. But it was at variance with
the spirit in which the place was to be
used, and Jesus could give it no licence.
So uncompromising was the Son’s
jealousy for the Father’s honour even
in trivial circumstances and seemingly
indifferent incidents! The principle
here again illustrated is of the highest
consequence. It means that in order to
keep ourselves unspotted from the world
it is necessary to cast off along with.
the evil itself everything auxiliary to it
or connected with it. Innocence from
the great transgression implies practised.
self-restraint, not merely against the
profanity which is seen, but against its
appliances, occasions, accompaniments
—against all that looks like it, conduces
to it, is in sympathy with it.—S. D. F.
Salmond.

419


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


2 eee ee SS SSS a


Ver. 18. The Indestructible Jesus.—
“Destroy Jesus.” How incredibly
astounding these words sound in the
ears of men who are accustomed to
survey the world after it has been
subjected for upwards of eighteen
centuries to the uninterrupted presence
of Jesus and the accumulating in-
fluences of Christianity! Yet they are
words of a definite import: they are
exact and significant enough; they
announced a determination on the part
of certain men, to which they were
ready to give effect, and for the failure
of which neither their wills nor their
zeal may be held responsible.

I. To what extent could the pur-
pose of the foes of Jesus succeed ?—
1. They might succeed in disparaging
His character and station before men.
Their object is to prove that He is
a blasphemer, a godless man, a rebel,
an impostor. 2. Maliciously assaulting
the person of Jesus was another step
in the attainment of their merciless end.
3. Restraining His personal freedom
was another step towards accomplishing
their purpose. 4. A farther element
in this series is the silencing of His
tongue. They will hear its accusa-
tions no more; its severe utterances
will grate on their feelings no more;
no more will it publish before God
and man their gross and wanton in-
fidelity. 5, Another advance towards
their full achievement is the torture
they applied to His feelings. The
arraigning, the accusation, the fearful
perjury, the corrupt and vacillating
judge, how must all these have wounded
the spirit of the falsely accused! The
barbarity, however, has not yet reached
its height. Jesus heard them shout
away His life, and shout out their
preference of Barabbas to Himself.
6. Our next step takes us to the
climax of this wicked purpose. They
who had secured His condemnation felt
that but one act was now wanting to
perfect their design, and that they
hasten to effect. As soon as the
semblance and perversion of law per-
mitted, they led Him away to crucify
Him. ‘They did crucify Him amid the


420


cheering of hardened spectators, and
to the ineffable delight of those who
had contrived the plot which ended
here. (1) In that it was possible for
Jesus to die lies the very basis of our
redemption. (2) In the death of Jesus
promises of the deepest import to our
race were accomplished. (3) In the
stooping of Jesus to death He knew
our degradation in its farthest depth.
(4) In the death of Jesus lay His most
sublime victory for men,

Il. Some of the grand points in
which the purpose of Jesus’ assailants
was an entire and egregious failure.—


-1. The very body of Jesus recovers its


vitality. 2. The Deity that was within
the destructible Temple they could not
touch. 3. The violence of men against
the person of Jesus could not frustrate
or retard His designs. 4. The violent
death of Jesus did not secure the
permanence of the old Jewish establish-
ment, Jesus was destroyed after the
flesh, but lives again and lives for
evermore; Judaism, in the very death
of Jesus, expired, and has never since
revived ; it has vanished away, whilst
Jesus abideth ever. 5. The success of
the ungodly did not lead to the destruc-
tion of the new kingdom, or to the
dethronement of Jesus.

In conclusion, to render the topic
practically useful, we shall briefly indi-
cate who they are that now sympathise
with the unholy purpose we have been
discussing, and also who they are who
are ina living and sanctifying sympathy
with the Indestructible Jesus. 1. To
the first. class belong—(1) All such as
are unbelievers in Jesus. (2) Those
who, however upright their outward
life may be, yet, in spite of God’s
commending His Son to them, remain
utter worldlings. (3) Where too must
they rank who but partially receive
the record that God gave of His Son ?
2. But there are some that belong to
the latter class whom we have no
difficulty in identifying. (1) Such as
labour and pray daily to purify them-
selves as Christ is pure. (2) The peni-
tent, who in his grief and humiliation
comes to Jesus Christ for pardon and


5 oe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


peace. (3) The Christian who leaves
all and follows Jesus, who is content
with deprivations, bereavements, and


shame, that he may follow and serve ©


Jesus, gives a most convincing proof of
where his sympathies lie.

Truth divides men.—Truth always
makes a division among men. Some
think of nothing but to persecute and
suppress it, while others admire, love,
embrace, and practise it. It is a
dreadful thing to see here who they
are who take the resolution to destroy
it, without doubt not imagining they
were doing it, but really believing
themselves on its side. There are some
particular seasons in which it is almost
necessary for a man to lie concealed in
the crowd of people, to prevent his
having any hand in the persecution of
truth. That which a man is hindered
from doing against it by nothing but
fear alone is already done in the
heart.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 19. The conservation of human
energy.—In these days of high pressure,
when the capital as well as the interest
of life has often to be drawn upon,
when we have to make such unnatural
and excessive drains upon our energies,
and when as a consequence our ail-
ments are not specific diseases, nor
organic maladies, but simply nervous
exhaustion, loss of tone throughout the
fibre of our constitution, the example
of our Lord even in a purely physical
way inculcates a most salutary lesson,
urges upon us the solemn obligation to
maintain the fabric of our energies in
good repair. To preserve the con-
ditions and to obey the commands of
the laws of health, to exercise our
force so as best to conserve it, to
regard life as an inviolable unity,
where hurt or loss to one member
entails lack of energy or good condition
on the rest, where such is the quick
and constant sympathy of the various
parts that disregard of the meanest
involves the derangement and dese-
eration of the. whole—these simple
intimations of common sense, little as
at times we may wot, are yet the


CHAP. XI.





prime, the paramount obligations of
Christianity.—D. Dickie.


Ver. 20. The withered fig tree.—The
real fig tree is the chosen people,
planted by God in a chosen land. At
the appointed time Jesus, the Mes-
senger of the Father, has come to urge
upon them penitence and faith. These
are the fruits for which He hungered,
and which He longed to gather. God
strikes with death whatsoever of His
favoured creatures has received His
bounty and His care, His waiting and
His love, in vain. All history is
strewn with the remains of those works
of man which the living Spirit of God
has not builded, lying shattered under
the blows of time. All history is
cumbered with the dead bodies of those
sterile beings who, though born of the
breath of God, have not responded to
His call, but have falsified His hopes
for them. The very type of their
decay is found in Judaism, withered
to the roots. Incapable of producing
any fruits of religion, it yet remains.
standing, shewing even in its barren-
ness the terrible malediction with
which Jesus has weighed it down.—
Father Didon.


Vers. 22-24. The source of super-
natural power.—All supernatural power
has its source in absolute faith in God.
He who is endued with perfect faith
enters into communion with the Divine
Being, and God makes him the instru-
ment of His goodness and His power.
If omnipotence has been granted to
Jesus, it is because His humanity is
permeated with the fulness of the
Divine Spirit ; in subordination to its
sovereign control He executes unfail-
ingly its wishes, its motions, and its
works. What He Himself was, Jesus
required of His disciples to become.
“Then,” He said, “nothing will with-
stand you.” We should strangely mis-
interpret His words if we were to
believe that the Spirit of God is at the
beck and call of the caprice and vain
desires of men. We must ask of God
only His holy will; and in order to


421


CHAP. ict.


HUMILELIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a Ls


thoroughly enter into it we must pray
__that is, we must make ourselves one
with it in absolute self-denial. Then
and then only will the Spirit of God
inspire us with a good desire, the
desire which is always listened to by
God, for it comes from Him.—Jbhid.


Ver. 22. Faith in God is a living,
dominant conviction concerning God,
His being, His character and govern-
ment. It is that act and habit of the
soul by which the truth concerning
God is drawn in from the distant
regions of speculation and enthroned
over the character and the life. It is
an act of the whole mind: of the intel-
lect, which sees; but also of the con-
science, which responds; of the will,
which chooses; of the heart, which
fears and reveres, which loves and
trusts. It is that act and habit of the
soul by which the notion concerning
God becomes a reality, the chief of
realities, ever present, all controlling,
the perfect object of fear, of service,
and of love.—H. G. Andrews.

Faith in God means faith in the
supremacy of good.—By this faith
Christianity accomplished its successes
at first ; by this faith all great reforms
have been carried on. It is faith, not
only in God, but in man, as the child
of God. It is the faith that man is
capable of seeing truth and obeying it—
capable of seeing the right and doing
it. Thus, and thus alone, is evil over-
come by good. We can only overcome
the evil in ourselves in the same way—
by faith that Jesus is really the Christ ;
therefore that goodness will at last
rule in our souls, mould our con-
sciences, lift us above temptation and
evil.—J. F’. Clarke.





Ver. 23. Faith removing mountains.
—The only mountains faith desires to
remove are such as are substantial ob-
stacles in the path of mercy. It is
marvellous how many such have been
removed,—enormous evils, lke the
slave-trade of seventy years ago, like
slavery in America; degradation and
superstition, like those holding the


a3


natives of New Guinea; pride an
secularity, like that which seemed to
make the conversion of the Roman
Empire impossible. There is no im-
possibility to those who can lay hold
on God.-—R. Glover.

The spirit of doubt is the spirit of
weakness.—It cripples the will, so that
no life of high resolve is possible to it ;
it produces unrest and discontent; it
looks always at the dark side of the
picture; and its provalence in this age
largely accounts for that pessimism
which, like a chadow, follows it into
all its dreary and desolate places.
Trace the social discontent, the de-
structive tendency of much of our
literature, especially in the sphere of
philosophy—the socialism, anarchism,
and all the grumbling and rebelling
against constitutional order and the
law of the land,—trace these tendencies
of our modern life to their source, and
you will find there religious doubt, as
one of the essential preconditions
accounting to a large extent for what
we see amongst a vast class of our
population. For I maintain that when
a nation or any large community
forming part of its organic life loses
faith in the verities of religion, when
it is given over to the service of selfish-
ness or halts between faith and unbelief,
and when this tendency continues
for any lengthened period, then there
has begun the downward movement
of national dismemberment and decay.
But, on the other hand, the spirit of
faith is the spirit of strength, so that
all things are possible to him who
believeth._MU. McLellan.


Ver. 24. The conditions of effectual
prayer.—l. We must pray in truth—
that is, we must ask for what we
really wish. We must pray in spirit—
that is, we must ask for the right
thing. 3. We must pray in faith,
believing that our prayers will be
heard and answered.—J. F’. Clarke.

Prayer and its answer.—* All things
whatsoever ye pray and ask for,
believe”—not that ye receive them,
but “that ye have received them,” or,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI,


ee ee ee ee


still more closely, “that ye received
them,” “‘and ye shall have them.”
The answer to the prayer is thus de-
clared to be coincident with the prayer
itself. The petition is granted at the
very moment when it is framed; the
blessing for which we look does not
follow at some distant time through
any outward events, but is given at
once, when, with absolute, childlike
trust, we lay the thoughts of our hearts
open before our Father. Prayer, in
a word, is the conscious and glad
acceptance of God’s will for us when
we have first endeavoured to estimate
our own wants.—Bishop Westcott.

Confidence im prayer.—lt is only
when the heart is very childlike that
its desires are pure and wise enough
to be left with God, and faith strong
enough to leave them. If there seem
but few prayers answered, it only
proves that there are few prayers
offered. For it is only good prayers
that can be really prayed. Many that
we “say” do not lift our desires to
God and lodge them in His heart.
Let this word shew us how great a
thing is prayer, and how great are its
issues. The time for the answer is
not pledged, and the manner of it may
differ from what we expected; but if
we really pray we shall be heard.—
LR. Glover.

Faith the substance of things hoped
for.—He doth not say, ‘believe that
ye shall receive them,” but that you
do receive them, which plainly shews
what kind of faith it is that He
requires of us, even such a faith as
is the very “substance of the things
we hope for” (Heb. xi. 1), and gives
a present being and substance to them.
Faith is also “the evidence of things
not seen.” As by it we enjoy what
God hath promised, so by it we behold
what He hath revealed to us, though
never so much above our reason or
beyond our sight.—Bishop Beveridge.

The power of believing prayer.—
Prayer obtains grace, wisdom, strength,
self-mastery, peace, all which the soul
dares wish for, for time or eternity ;
but it obtains more—it gains God.


O glorious prerogative of the faith of
the simple peasant, ignorant of this
world’s knowledge, but having access
to Divine! O glorious compendium
of Divine illumining, whereby, not as
in a mirror nor by laborious process,
the soul shall have all knowledge, and
shall see the secret cause of all created
things, in the light of God, in God!
Even gifts of God could not satisfy
that vast soul of man—no wisdom, no
intelligence, nothing which has any
bound or end. Prayer fills this void,
which all creation, out of God, could
not fill. Prayer is “the ascent of the
soul to God”; it is the beginning of
that blessed converse which shall be
the exhaustless fulness of eternal bliss ;
it is the continuance or renewal of
union with God.—Z#. B. Pusey, D.D.





Vers. 25, 26. Prayer and forgive-
ness.—To His promise Jesus adds a
precept, the admirable suitability of
which is not at first apparent. Most
sins are made evident to the conscience
in the act of prayer. Drawing nigh
to God, we feel our unfitness to be
there; we are made conscious of what
He frowns upon; and if we have such
faith as Jesus spoke of, we at once
resign what would grieve the Spirit
of adoption. No saint is ignorant of
the convicting power of prayer. But
it is not of necessity so with resentment
for real grievances. We may think
we do well to be angry. We may
confound our selfish fire with the pure
flame of holy zeal, and begin, with
confidence enough, yet not with the
mind of Christ, to remove mountains,
not because they impede a holy cause,
but because they throw a shadow upon
our own field. And therefore Jesus
reminds us that not only wonder-
working faith but even the forgive-
ness of our sins requires from us
the forgiveness of our biother.—Dean
Chadwick.

God forgives us as we forgive others.—
We know that when rain falls not
upon hard rock but upon broken
ground, in due time a mist ascends
from the ground and clothes itself in


”


423


CHAP. XI.


H OMILE TIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ee ee ee ee ee


the shape of clouds and returns in the
form of showers, so that there is an
action and reaction between the rich
rain of heaven and the thin mists of
earth. And in like manner there is
a mutual interaction between God’s
mercy to man and man’s mercy to his
fellow: the first kindles the second,
and the second rekindles the first;
they produce and reproduce each other.
This is an immutable moral law;
therefore we pray, “Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us,” i.e. in the like
spirit of forgiving love. But if the
sense of Divine forgiveness produces
in the contrite heart a readiness to
forgive, remember that it is this
readiness to forgive in you, this tender-
ness of heart in you, this spirit of love
in you, which keeps ever flowing full
and free the current of God’s forgive-
ness. That current may languish,
dwindle, cease to flow; nay, from the
sweet running water of love it may
turn into a sullen pool of hate: it is,
indeed, sure to stagnate in the stag-
nation of your faith and love. If you
grow indifferent to your neighbour's
welfare, envious, malicious, vindictive,


your soul, as it recedes from the desire
to shew mercy, will precisely in the
same degree recede from the power to
receive mercy. See Matt. xvii. 21-35.


Ver. 26. Anger a bar to forgiveness.
—What an inconsistency, to seek re-
conciliation with God while we ourselves
are unreconciled to our neighbours!
to seek to have our own sins remitted
while we retain the sins of others!
How can he who is “ angry with his
brother” hope to please God, since
from the very beginning all such anger
is prohibited? (Gen.iv. 6; Isa. i. 10-15).
—Tertullian.

Anger drives away the Spirit.—Anger
is a passion which, if it be long
cherished, drives away the Spirit. For
how canst thou think that the dove-
like Spirit of God will reside where
the heart remains full of gall? or
that the celestial flame of Divine love
should burn bright and clear where
there are so many thick fumes and
vapours rising up to damp and choke
it? Canst thou in faith pray for
forgiveness who dost not thyself
forgive? (Eph.iv. 26; 1 Tim. ii. 8).—
Bishop Hopkins.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH:—Verses 27—33.
(Parattets: Mart. xxi, 23-32; Luxe xx. 1-8.)


Christ’s authority challenged—I. The challenge by the chief priests and
scribes and elders.—1. The occasion. Christ’s teaching in the Temple.
Observe—(1) His constant and unwearied pains and diligence in the duties of
His public ministry. (2) Though the chief priests and scribes sought His life
(ver. 18), yet He doth not refrain or forbear coming to Jerusalem, and into the
Temple, and teaching the people there, and that daily. Hence learn that we
ought not to forsake our calling, or give over the duties of it which God calls
us to perform, for fear of outward dangers which may happen to us. God is
able to protect us from all our enemies. 2. The persons that questioned with
Christ about His calling and authority. (1) Such as for their high place and


calling in the Church should be the greatest friends and favourers of Christ


and the gospel, are often the greatest enemies to both. (2) Seeing there is
such unity and consent amongst the wicked enemies of Christ, as here we see,
this should teach us much more to labour for true unity and consent, whereby
to join together for Christ, as these did against Him. 3. ‘leir questioning.
1) There is something good and commendable here. (a) That they suppose,
and take it for granted, that no man ought to take upon him any public office
or function in the Church without a lawful calling and authority committed


424


— is eas —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: S T. MARK, CHAP. XT.





—


to him. (6) That they themselves, being public officers and governors in the
Church, do think it their duty to take care that none intrude or usurp any
public office in the Church without a calling. (2) But there is also that which
is evil and wicked. (a) Their malicious purpose against Christ. (6) Their
gross hypocrisy and dissimulation. (c) Their wilful ignorance and blindness, in
that being formerly convinced of His lawful calling and authority by so many
evident signs and testimonies of it as they had seen and heard—viz. by the
testimony of the Baptist, the excellence of His doctrine, and Divine power of
His miracles—yet for all this they cannot, or rather will not, see what authority
He had, but do now question Him about the same,

II. The vindication of Himself by our Lord.—1. The preface or preparation
to the answer, wherein Christ tells them that He would also ask of them one
question, which, if they could and would answer, then He would answer them.
(1) In that our Saviour, knowing them to come with malicious purpose, doth
not directly answer their question, we may learn that it is not always necessary
or fit to give a direct answer to those demands or questions put to us by others,
especially by malicious enemies of the truth, who come to cavil and entrap us
with captious questions, and not with a mind to learn or receive satisfaction
from us. (2) Though He does not directly answer their malicious question, yet
He makes a kind of answer indirectly, by putting another question to them,
and such a one as was sufficient (if they would have understood it) to resolve
the matter, and to convince them: hence gather, that although it be not
always necessary or fit to give a direct answer, nor yet any answer at all some-
times, to the questions of malicious cavillers, yet it is also fit sometimes to make
some kind of answer to such captious questions, viz. so far forth as is neces-
sary for the clearing of the truth and for the convincing of such cavillers
(Prov. xxvi. 5; 1 Pet. iii. 15). 2. The answer itself. (1) In that Christ alleges
the authority of John’s ministry, to justify His own calling and authority,
hence gather, that one main end of the calling and ministry of the Baptist
was to declare and manifest the calling and authority of Christ Himself, by
giving testimony to Him that He was the true Messiah promised and sent from
God to be the Saviour of the world. (2) In that Christ here implies that
John’s ministry and doctrine concerning Him was from God, and therefore to
be believed and embraced, which otherwise it should not have been: hence
gather, that no doctrine or ministry is to be received and embraced in the
Church but that which is from God, that is, of Divine authority, and not from
men only. (3) In that Christ’s asking here whether John’s baptism or
ministry was from heaven or of men doth thereby imply that it was indeed
from heaven, and not from men: hence gather, the dignity and excellence of
the doctrine and ministry of John, that it was the doctrine of God, and was
preached and taught by authority from God Himself. (4) The dignity and
excellence of the sacrament of baptism.

III. The effects or consequents which followed.—l. Their reasoning together
about the matter, and consulting about the answer they should make. (1) Though
they came very cunningly and politicly to examine and question with our
Lord about His authority, to entrap Him and bring Him into trouble and
danger, yet here we see they could not prevail against Him by their policy.
See Prov. xxi. 30; Isa. viii. 10; Ps. ii. 1-4; Job v. 13; Ps. vii. 15. (2) See
here one point of carnal wisdom in these enemies of our Lord, in that they, being
now in a perplexity, do not rashly or suddenly proceed to make answer, but first
reason and consult together. See Luke xvi. 8; Jer. iv. 22. 2. Now followeth
the matter of their private reasoning or consultation together. (1) They cast
what inconveniences or dangers to themselves are like to follow, if they answer
thus or thus: but regard not the offence of God, and dishonour like to come to

425


CHAY. XL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


eran ee
Him, by their denying or concealing the truth, and that against their own


knowledge.


(2) They presuppose that if they should acknowledge John’s ministry


to be from heaven, then they were bound to believe his doctrine, and that Christ


might justly reprove them for not doing so.


(3) They feared the people’s


displeasure, and lest they should stone them for speaking against John and his
ministry ; but they were not moved with any fear of God to confess the truth,
neither are they afraid of offending God by denying or concealing the truth.
(4) The common and meaner sort of people are often more forward to embrace
the gospel, and to esteem the ministers of it, than men of great place and dignity


in the Church.


3. Their answer: ‘‘ We cannot tell.”


This must needs be false ;


yea, it is a lying answer, containing an untruth uttered against their own


knowledge.


of the truth in their own policy (1 ©


(1) God. often takes and confounds the crafty and subtle enemies
or. ili. 19).


(2) It is the property and


practice of wicked and profane men to lie and dissemble for their own benefit
and advantage, as for their profit and gain, or to save their credit with men,
or to help themselves out of trouble, or to prevent some inconvenience or danger


like to come upon them.
to wilful blindness and infidelity !


(3) How fearful a thing it is for any to be given up
4. Christ’s reply. Because they denied and


opposed the truth against their own knowledge, He refuses to give them any


further answer.


Take heed of this wilful contempt and opposition of the known


truth, lest for it God do justly leave us in ignorance; yea, give us up to further


blindness, to be hardened in it, as He may justly do.


On the contrary, labour


not only to know the truth and doctrine of God out of His Word, but especially
to entertain the love of it in our hearts, that we may embrace it and yield


obedience to it.—G. Petter.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 27-33. Christ and the Temple
authorities. —1. Where the action is
unquestionably right some will censure
the agent. 2. They who require
reasons should be ready to give reasons.
3. Truth should be the first question
with men, not consequences. 4, In-
competency may be exposed and
assumption resisted for the sake of
truth.—J. H. Godwin.

The mutual bearing of Christ and His
enemies.—With evil intent they open
fire. A brief “yes or no” style of
reply may do great injustice to righte-
ousness. They would be greatly pleased
therewith. But they were dealing with
One who had the wisdom of the serpent
as well as the harmlessness of the dove.
And so without needlessly rousing
wrath, impeding work, or compromis-
ing truth, God’s glory and the welfare
of men in all ages are subserved by
the replies which came promptly and
steadily back to their astonished ears.


426


He did not deem it a duty to always
answer questions directly and without
reserve. ‘he gates were not to be
thrown wide open at the beck of every
foe. Source, motive, and result were
considered, and the nature of His replies
gauged accordingly. In this instance
He defeated their purpose in seeking
whereof they might accuse Him. But
He at the same time let them know
that both the fact and source of what
they sought were good and true. His
refusal to respond to their liking arose
not from fear of frank statement or of
maintaining it. Let them answer a
plain question and He would. Fair
play. They would thus shew them-
selves worthy of an explicit reply by
their own readiness to do the same.
But whether answered or not, they
found themselves handicapped by their
insincerity as well as moral and physi-
cal cowardice. Had they been true
men they would not have gotten there.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI.


[> Se ee eee


Their capacity to decide on His creden-
tials, their honesty, their courage, were
all at stake. It was the presentation
of a dilemma, the grasping of either
horn of which would defeat them.
Among the evils they made a lame
effort to select the least. By avoiding
a blunt refusal He prevented the need-
lessly premature loss of temper and
its consequences. Without this self-
command and wisdom, by undue exas-
peration, a crisis might be hastened.
“ His hour was not yet come.” But
how could they help realising that, by
such a question, He knew what was in
them? How could they help knowing
that the knowledge implied by His
questions had Divinity back of it? How
could they help concluding that Divinity
carried with it that authority which
they were insincerely seeking to find
out? It is His turn now. He ques-
tions. They soon stand self-condemned
in the light of their own admissions,—
Wm. M. Campbell.

Wilful blindness and iis retributive
judgment.—Had they been true to their
office or to themselves, they needed not
to have asked this question. They had
possessed long since abundant means
of knowing the Divine authority both


of the Lord’s ministry and of John’s”


baptism. But their carnal passions
prevented them from acknowledging
the first ; while their cowardly fears,
the offspring of a bad conscience,
brought them into a dilemma respect-
ing the last. Do we see nothing like
this among ourselves ? Received
truths are disputed; things certain
are treated as uncertainties ; old objec-
tions, often refuted, are revived ; ques-
tions are raised where the clearest
light and evidence have long supplied
an answer adequate to the conviction
of every honest mind: but men refuse
to be convinced; they harden them-
selves in error; because of their lusts
they “love to have it so”; while some
even venture to hope that their sup-
posed inability to believe, which is
their condemnation, will serve as an
extenuation of their general guilt at


the Last Day. How awful in these’


respects are the warnings of the Lord!
See John xii, 35; Matt. xiii, 12;
Luke xi. 35.—J. Ford.

The rejection of authority.—Those
who find themselves vanquished by
truth generally endeavour to reject
authority. There are no_ persons
more forward to demand of others a
reason for their actions than those who
think they may do everything them-
selves without control. Blind priests!
who see not the finger of God nor His
Divine authority in the visible and
innumerable miracles of Christ, which
plainly authorise His mission and His
conduct, and evidently prove His
Divinity. Ignorant scribes! who talk
of nothing but the Scriptures and the
law, and yet do not perceive in Christ
the author and the perfection, the end
and accomplishment, the spirit and
the truth of the law, as all the Scrip-
tures declare Him to be.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 28. The calling of ministers in
the Church—l. Reasons why none
ought to take upon him this public
office or function in the Church without
a lawful calling. (1) Because without
such a calling he cannot be assured
that God will assist him and
strengthen him to do the duties of
his calling. (2) He cannot expect or
look for the blessing of God upon that
which he doth in execution of his
office, and so he cannot with comfort
go on in it. (3) Neither can he be
assured of God’s protection in his
calling, that God will maintain and
keep him against all enemies and
dangers. 2. There is a twofold calling
of every one who takes upon him this
public office in the Church. (1) An
inward calling from God and in his
own conscience, whereby he must
know and be assured in himself that
God has endued him in some measure
with such gifts and graces as are
requisite to make him able and fit
to execute that office and function,
together with a willing and ready mind
and conscience to use those gifts to the
glory of God and good of the Church.


(2) An outward calling from men


427


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


also, being approved and allowed of
by such as are in authority in the
Church, to execute the office he takes
upon him.—G. Petter.


Vers. 29, 30. Christ’s appeal to the
testimony of the Baptist.—As His
words are generally understood, they
would have amounted only to silenc-
ing His questioners, and that in a
manner which would, under ordinary
circumstances, be scarcely regarded as
either fair or ingenuous.. It would
have been simply to turn the question
against themselves, and so in turn
to raise popular prejudice. But the
Lord’s words meant quite other. He
did answer their question, though He
also exposed the cunning and cowar-
dice which prompted it. To the
challenge for His authority, and the
dark hint about Satanic agency, He
replied by an appeal to the Baptist.
He had borne full witness to the
mission of Christ from the Father,
and “all men counted John, that he
was a prophet indeed.” Were they
satisfied 2 What was their view of
the Baptism in preparation for the
Coming of Christ? They would not,
or could not, answer! If they said
the Baptist was a prophet, this implied
not only the authorisation of the
mission of Jesus, but the call to
believe on Him. On the other hand,
they were afraid publicly to disown
John! And so their cunning and
cowardice stood out self-condemned,
when they pleaded ignorance—a plea
so grossly and manifestly dishonest,
that Christ, having given what all
must have felt to be a complete
answer, could refuse further discus-
sion with them on this point.—
A. Edersheim, D.D.


Ver. 32. A prophet is one who,
standing in the foreground of God,
announces on Divine impulse and with
Divine power truths unveiled to his
spiritual perception. These truths,
often significant of salvation, it is his
office to report for the welfare of the
community. He receives them in his


428


own higher spirit, unto which, as to,
an observatory of heavenly visions,
his life for a season withdraws itself,
and where, shrinking from all contact
with externals, it becomes “‘a seeing
eye, a hearing ear, a perceiving sense ”
for the things of eternity or of the
future. What the prophet thus re-
ceives in the sanctuary of his spirit
or meeting-place of the two worlds
that he announces through the medium
of the subordinate mind and tis
outflowing speech : for in the prophetic
ecstasy the three constituents of the
spirit-nature, vods and Adyos and
mvedpa, continue in unbroken com-
munication with each other. If he
be a seer, he contemplates that which
is seen, not as it is in itself, but as it
comes to view ina symbol: this symbol
is Divinely formed for the purpose,
and often accommodated to the man’s
natural bent or educational mode of
thought, being chiefly framed out of
materials found in his subjectivity.
The prophet is not, indeed, like the
subject of the mystic ecstasy, rapt or
caught up to the confines of the third
heaven or blissfully translated into
the paradise of God; but from the
reciprocal immanence of the human
spirit and of the Divine there arise
manifestations to his mind in a
clothing or colouring borrowed from
his individual nature. The super-
sensuous, which he is permitted to
behold, passes immediately through
his own voids into ddyos, and thus
in the form of speech travelling
through his mouth out of himself
enters the ears and the vods of the
listening congregation, and so becomes
intelligible and therefore profitable to the
assembled Church.—Prof. 7. S. Hvans.


Ver. 33. Christ discovers not Himself
to hypocrites.—That man is altogether
unworthy of the truth who seeks it
only to oppose it. It is to no manner
of purpose to dispute and reason with
those who study only how to ensnare
in their discourse, and to take ad-
vantage of everything against truth.
Such persons shew plainly what con-








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI.





cern they have for truth when they
make use of lies and forgeries to
oppress it. Humility does not oblige
any one to give an account of his
conduct to all sorts of persons, nor at


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 3. God’s need of all—tin a strange
place, where few travellers ever go, thereis a
wonderful bridge, underneath which the trains
stop for the collection of passenger-tickets.
There may be nothing remarkable in this;
but as the traveller looks up he sees that
which strikes him as indeed a peculiarity, if
nothing more; it is that the granite stones
of which this long and massive bridge is
built have each one of them been numbered.
The large blocks that lay at the bottom
supporting the whole structure have their
number. The medium-sized ones that hold
the great work together have tleirs, and
the very smallest have theirs—all to fill
their parts in the great structure which so
truly completes the perfect work. There
was need for all of them. So we are taught
by this earthly monument of man’s genius
the spiritual lessons of life. God, the Great
Architect of the universe, the Master Builder
of all things, and the Creatvr of all life, has
need of every creature here below, that it
may have its use for God’s glory. All crea-
tures bow before God as He comes to them to
draw them to their use for His purposes in
the world, and, in their willingness to be so
dealt with, teach us the very first lesson
of life—submission to His holy will in all
things.


Ver. 8. A triumphal procession—At the
conclusion of the Franco-German War, in the
course of which Napoleon III. became a cap-
tive and was dethroned, the victorious German
troops made their triumphal) entry into Berlin
on June 16th, 1871, which is thus described
in a newspaper of the time: “On each side
of the way were placed gilt pedestals, and
between each pedestal hung a festoon of
laurel and fir. After the flags come the
Guards. They are covered with laurel and
fir. The altars and cannons are covered
with leaves and with branches of fir trees.”


Vers. 9, 10. A deliverer hailed.—Perhaps
there is no episode recorded in history more
interesting than that of Charles V. when he
landed at Tunis. Ten thousand men and
women who were slaves within the city,
when they heard the approach of their
deliverer, rose and broke their chains, and
rushed towards the gate as the emperor was
entering the town; and this mighty proces-
sion knelt down, hailed him as their cleliverer,
and prayed God to bless him.


TO CHAPTER


all times, nor in all circumstances,
but only to be ready to do it whenever
the glory of God and the benefit of his
neighbour require it.—P. Quesnel.


AL,


Slight value of popular demonstrations.—
When Napoleon was returning from his
successful wars in Austria and Italy, amid
the huzzas of the people, Bourrienne re-
marked to him that “it must be delightful
to be greeted with such demonstrations of
enthusiastic admiration.” “Bah!” replied
Napoleon, “this same unthinking crowd,
under a slight change of circumstances,
would follow me just as eagerly to the
scaffold.”


Vers. 13, 14. Christ’s search for fruit —
When He comes He will turn up our leaves;
and look that, like the tree of life (Rev. xxii.
21), we bear fruit every month, or that we
be like the lemon tree, which ever and anon
sendeth forth new lemons as soon as the
former are fallen down with ripeness; or
the Egyptian fig tree, which, saith Solinus,
beareth fruit seven times a year—puli off
a fig and another breaks forth in the place
shortly after.—J. Trapp.


Vers. 15-17. Traffic in holy places.—Descrip-
tions left us of what used to take place in
the great cathedrals of Hurope—the com-
mercial bustle, the exchange and _ barter,
the hiring of servants, the transit of heavy
market-produce, which went on familiarly in
our own St. Paul’s less than three centuries
ago--may help us to realise the state of
matters suggested by these pregnant words.

Rebuke of irreverence.—W hen Walter Hook
(Dean) was vicar of Coventry, he was once
presiding at a vestry meeting which was so
largely attended as to necessitate an adjourn-
ment to the church. Several persons kept
their hats on. The vicar requested them to
take them off, but they refused. “ Very
well, gentlemen,” he replied ; “‘ but remember
that in this house the insult is not done to
me, but to your God.” And the hats were
immediately taken off.


Ver. 22. “ Have faith in God.”—There is
something very interesting in looking at one
of those triumphs of human ingenuity like
the clock in Strasburg Cathedral, which tells
not only the hours of the day, but shews all
the motions of the moon and planets, fore-
tells the eclipses, takes account of “leap
year,” and performs a multitude of other
curious manifestations of thought and con-
trivance. Could any one be so foolish as to
doubt the power of its maker to alter some


429


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


:


particular portion of its works? And yet
why will men doubt the power of God, or
refuse to permit Him to act as He sees fit ?
The laws of nature are His servants, and
God is not the slave of His own rules.

Filial confidence.—The celebrated preacher
Cecil once bade his little daughter cast a
favourite necklace into the fire at his simple
request. With tears in her eyes the child
obeyed, and the next day her father brought
her a jewel of far more value, and explained
to her how God rewards the faith of those
who trust in His wisdom and love.


Ver. 23. “This mountain.”—We find in
the prophetic writings the expressions, “ The
Mountain of the House of the Lord,” “ The
Mountain of the Lord’s House,” “ The Holy
Mountain”; and thus we may apply the
epithet to the Temple of Jerusalem, with its
noble buildings and golden roof, standing
on the rocky heights of Mount Moriah.
Perhaps our Lord, by some glance or gesture,
made this meaning plain. The Mountain of
the Lord’s House, the grand Sanctuary of
ancient Israel, was the very sign and figure
of the Old Dispensation, which was in its
character concentrated, local, and central-
ised—one God, one nation, one Temple, one
law. But Jesus Christ came to alter and
change, to widen and enlarge the Covenant
of Grace, to unlock the gates of mercy, to
welcome in the wanderers, to stretch out
the cords of the Heavenly Tabernacle, so
that all nations might enter in, to break
down the wall of partition, and to make His
organisation, the Catholic Church, embrace
all nations and kindre’s and people. This
great change He declares in prophetic
words. This Mountain was to be removed,
this Jewish religion was to be transferred
from its local home on the rocky height of
Jerusalem, and it was to be cast “into the
sea.” “The sea,” in the language of pro-
phetic symbols, means the nations, the
Gentiles, the various races of men. Our
Lord’s words were fulfilled when, under
Divine inspiration, St. Peter baptised the
Roman Cornelius and his family; when St.
Paul said, “ Lo, we turn to the Gentiles ” ;
when St. James gave sentence, “Trouble not
the Gentiles which believe, with the Mosaic
restrictions.”"—Dr. Hardman.

Stages of faith.—We are told that a piece
of iron probably becomes a magnet by a sort
of polarised arrangement of its molecules,
but that this polarised or magnetised con-
dition cannot be maintained at very high
temperatures. Now it is observed that if a
magnet is put into the fire it heats to red-
ness like any other piece of iron, but that
when it has reached a certain temperature,
though still in the fire, it grows almost
suddenly less red and less hot, after which
it gradually regains its heat and redness,
and goes forward to whiteness, and melting


430


like any other piece of iron; but it is mo
longer a magnet. An internal and invisible
alteration in its own structure has taken
place, and the expenditure of energy upon
the change in its own molecular constitu-
tion, in the process of being demagnetised,
has been such as not merely to arrest its
progressive heating, but more or less to chill
it in the midst of the fire. Yet it is true
that the magnet could not have become
white hot without passing through this
constitutional change, and what appeared
like retrogression was really a necessary
stage of progress. Is not this in very
striking analogy with what happens in the
history of many a soul? and if so, is not
doubt in those souls a stage in the growth
of faith ?

Prayer and the laws of nature.—Our faith
is, that God hears His creatures’ prayers, as
to everything which concerns their well-
being, and specifically as to those changes,
upon which even life so often depends, as
it is good for us. Now neither science nor
theology has any right to set these two
beliefs in contradiction to each other. They
can be harmonised. Professor Tyndall’s
argument, that the fixity of laws precludes
God’s hearing our prayers in this respect,
would, if pressed (as he doubtless would not
press it) equally militate against any belief
in God’s providence. For those who believe
in God’s providence must believe that those
fixed laws (if they exist) were adapted in
their marvellous variations, or at least in some
of their more striking coincidences, to the
moral condition of moral agents, All Hurope
was electrified by the shock of that terrific
Russian winter which destroyed the great
army of Napoleon I. If the laws upon
which that extreme cold depended were
laws fixed (as Professor Tyndall must hold)
in all eternity, then, if we believe in God's
providence, we must believe that God, in all
eternity, adapted them to that end in His
moral government which they subserved,
whatever that end was. And if those fixed
laws (supposing them to exist) could be
adapted to that act of Napoleon I. which
they served to chasten, although Napoleon
was free to invade Russia or not to invade
it, then equally the same fixed laws (if they
exist) may be so adapted in all eternity to
our foreseen moral condition, that any other
scourges which (like the cholera, plague,
locusts) are brought upon man for his moral
discipline, without violation of those laws,
may equally, without violation of those
laws, be, on man’s repentant prayer, removed
The adaptation of the supposed fixed laws,
to our praying or not praying, our repenting
or not repenting, has no other difficulty





than their adaptation to any other part of .


our moral character which is equally free.
—H. B. Pusey, D.D.
God’s control of nature —There is a re~





—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XI.


a ep


markable note in Darwin’s Botanic Garden
(Canto iv., 7. 320), in which the author
conjectures that changes of wind may de-
pend on some minute chemical cause, which,
if it were discovered, might probably,
like other chemical causes, be governed by
human agency. Whatever may be thought
of the probability of this anticipation being
realised, it is at least sufficient to suggest
one reflexion. If atmospheric changes may
conceivably, without any violation of natural
law, be brought under the control of man,
may they not now, equally without violation
of natural law, be under the control of God ?
And are we so fully informed of the manner
of God’s working with regard to these con-
tingent phenomena of nature, as to know for
certain that He can never exercise such a
control for purposes connected with His
moral government ?/— Dean Mansel,


Vers. 25, 26. Necessity of forgiving spirit.
—In the Middle Ages, when the lords and
knights were always at war with each other,
one of them resolved to revenge himself on
a neighbour who had offended him. It
chanced that, on the very evening when he
had made this resolution, he heard that his
enemy was to pass near his castle, with only
a very few men with him. It was a good
opportunity to take his revenge, and he
determined not to let it pass. He spoke of
his plan in the presence of his chaplain, who
tried in vain to persuade him to give it up.
The good man said a great deal to the duke
about the sin of what he was going to do,
but in vain. At length, seeing that all his
words had no effect, he said, “ My lord,
since I cannot persuade you to give up this
plan of yours, you will at least come with
me to the chapel, that we may pray together
before you go.” The duke consented, and
the chaplain and he kneeled together in
prayer. Then the mercy-loving Christian
said to the revengeful warrior, ‘“ Will you
repeat after me, sentence by sentence, the
prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
taught to His disciples?” “I will do it,”
replied the duke. He did it accordingly.
The chaplain said a sentence, and the duke
repeated it, till he came to the petition,
“Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us.” There the
duke was silent. ‘“ My lord duke, you are
silent,” said the chaplain. ‘ Will you be so
good as to continue to repeat the words
after me, if you dare to do so: ‘Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that tres-
pass against us’?” “I cannot,” replied the
duke. ‘“ Well, God cannot forgive you, for
sie has said so. He Himself has given us


this prayer. Therefore you must either give
up your revenge or give up saying this
prayer; for to ask God to pardon you as
you pardon others is to ask Him to take
vengeance on you for all your sins. Go
now, my lord, and meet your victim, Goi
will meet you at the great day of judgment.”
The iron will of the duke was broken, “No,”
said he, “I will finish my prayer. My
God, my Father, pardon me; forgive me as
I desire to forgive him who has offended
me; ‘lead me not into temptation, but de-
liver me from evil.” ‘ Amen,” said the
chaplain. “Amen,” repeated the duke, who
now understood the Lord’s Prayer better
than he had ever done before, since he had
learned to apply it to himself.

Christian treatment of enemies.—A poor
widow, who was a washerwoman, partly de-
pended for support upon the produce of her
garden. In it was a peach tree, the fruit of
which was coveted by some boys of the
village. Accordingly one night they entered
the garden to rob the tree. The widow had,
however, made a timely gathering of her
fruit that day. In revenge for their dis-
appointment the wicked lads turned some
swine into the garden, who by morning had
wrought havoc among the poor woman’s
vegetables, and made her suffer in conse-
quence through the winter. In looking at
the desolation she picked up a knife with
a name engraved on the handle. It was
the name of a village boy whom she knew,
and whom she thus recognised as the cavse
of her loss. However, nothing was said
about the matter. During the ensuing
months a revival took place in the village
in question, and among those who became
convicted of sin was the owner of the knife.
Becoming converted, he obeyed his con-
science by going to the widow and confessing
the wrong lhe had done her. Thereupon she
told him she had long known it, and shewed
him bis knife. “But why did you not inform
upon me, and make me pay the damage?”
he asked. “There was a more excellent
way,” she said; “I took that.” “ What was
it?” asked the lad. “To pray for you, in
accordance with the Master’s directions.”
So the widow had her revenge.

Christian feeling towards enemies.—At
Tamatave, on the eve of the bombardment
(by the French), all the natives, from the
governor downwards, were at a prayer-
meeting, and “there were no prayers for the
lives of their enemies, and no cries for ven-
geance upon them. Prayers for a righteous
vindication, for guidance, for faith to trust
where they could not see, and for eventual
peace and goodwill, were the only petitions.”


431


~


CHAP. XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a ee a a ee a ne ee ee ey





CHAPTER XII.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. A place for the winefat,—Simply a winepress; or (more exactly) winevat, t.e, the
receptacle under the winepress proper. Probably dmodyjmiov is here used to denote the
whole apparatus, which was often hollowed out of a sloping rock. A tower.—A stone build-
ing some twenty feet high, with a flat roof, where a sentinel was posted to protect the
vineyard from depredators. It would also serve as a residence during the vintage season.
Into a far country.—Too strong: dmedqunce is just went from home.

Ver. 4. See R.V.

Ver. 6. Most pathetically put in the original: There was yet one he possessed, a son
beloved : he sent him last to visit them, saying, They will feel ashamed of themselves in presence
of my son.
fk 13. To catch Him in His words.—The chief priests and scribes and elders having
signally failed in their last attempt (chap. xi. 27-33), now send a band of Pharisees and
Herodians, in the hope that they may be able to entangle and ensnare Him in an argwment.

Ver. 19. “The statute must be regarded as relative to some exceedingly offensive
matrimonial condition which had prevailed, probably polyandry. When such a custom has
unhappily got ingrained in the habits of a degraded people, it is not possible to induce
them to leap, at a bound, to a lofty pinnacle of marital purity. The ascent must be gradual ;
the utmost that can be achieved by progressive legislators is to take one step at a time.”
See Dr. J. Morison’s note in doco, from which the above is quoted. :

Ver. 24. Do ye not therefore err.—Is it not on this account that ye wander in a maze,
because... Instead of accusing them point-blank of error, and so alienating them still
farther, our Lord deals with them as if they had come in good faith to have a difficulty
solved; and He at once points them to the true source of their pretended perplexity—
ignorance of the Scriptures.

Ver. 26. See R.V.

Ver. 28. The scribe’s question was—Of what nature is the first commandment of all? Has
it to do, that is, with Sabbath observance, or with circumcision, or with sacrificial rites—
or what ?

Ver. 30. Note the prep. é, before “ heart,” “soul,” “mind,” “strength.” The whole
of man’s complex being is to go out in love to God. “The measure of our love to God is to
love Him without measure.”

Ver. 32. Finely (answered)! Teacher, Thou hast spoken from (the standpoint of) truth,
for Heis one, etc. This seems to suit both text and context better than R.V. rendering.

Ver. 34. Discreetly.— With vois or discernment—“ having his wits about him,” as we say.

Ver. 35. Jesus answered.—For the earlier part of the conversation see Matt. xxii. 41, 42.

Ver. 39. Uppermost rooms at feasts.— Chief places in the suppers—the most important meal
of the day, and the most fashionable entertainment.

Ver. 40. Greater damnation.— A heavier sentence or doom than that awaiting other sinners.
Christ always denounces the hypocrite as a villain of double dye.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—12.
(PaRALLeLs : Marv, xxi. 33-41; Luxe xx. 9-18.)


The husbandmen and the vineyard.—In this parable our Lord seeks to con-
vince the Jews of the sinful state of the nation, and to warn them of the terrible
judgments they were bringing on themselves. These features will be dwelt
on more fully in the next Outline; the following more general lessons may
be enforced here.

I. This parable condemns injustice between man and man.—It assumes that
a man has a right in that which belongs to him, and exposes the wickedness
of those who attempt to take the law. into their own hands. It goes dead
against such teaching as has led to bloodshed and misery in Ireland, and can
only result in ruin wherever it is put in practice.

II. This parable enforces solemn spiritual lessons.—1. We are not our own


432


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.’  cuap. xt.





(1 Cor. vi. 10, 20). The soul is a vineyard, and we have no right to neglect
or misuse it. Every talent entrusted to us must be employed for the glory
of God, and in obedience to His commands. 2. The Lord of the vineyard has
afforded us every opportunity for right cultivation, and He expects us to render
a due return. ‘No man is elected to any advantage over his fellows for
his own sake or enjoyment. He is rather in the position of one to whom finer
and more powerful instruments are given, that by their possession he may
be the servant of all the rest.” 3, Obedience must be the voluntary submission
of our free choice ; and God will not be satisfied without this.


The Stone which the builders rejected.—Those whom our Lord addressed had
not only “read this scripture,” but had been accustomed to apply it to the
proper person—not David himself, but David’s Son and Lord, the Messiah.
So that here, as elsewhere, Christ covertly takes to Himself that office and
dignity which, out of consideration for their prejudices, He forbore openly
to assume. After His ascension, when there was no longer any reason for
reserve, His apostles affirmed the same truth in the plainest terms (Acts iv. 10, 11;
1 Pet. ii. 7).

I. The cs ea ef Jesus Christ by the Jewish nation—They were “the
builders,” a people specially set apart to preserve the knowledge of God in the
world. This they had done—carried up the structure to a certain height above
the ground, as far as their materials would go. But now, on there being
presented to them-a Stone, a chief Corner-stone, just what they required to
complete the edifice, they cast it aside with derision and contempt. And in
so doing they unwittingly fulfilled prophecy (Acts xiii. 27).

IJ. The exaltation of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding their rejection. We
cannot, like Stephen, see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing
at the right hand of God. But we may behold the visible kingdom and Church
of Christ, as it was instituted at Jerusalem immediately after His ascension,
and continues to this day. We may trace the marvellous progress of this
institution in the pages of the inspired narrative, so far as that narrative
extends. Proceeding onwards, we may view “the kingdoms of this world,”
one after another, ‘‘ becoming the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ,”
and the religion of the Crucified firmly established and consolidated in the
world.

III. The Divine agency to which this is to be ascribed.—From whom, if not
from God, could a work so truly Divine, so far surpassing all human powers and
conceptions, proceed? 1. Consider it as a gift (Jas. i. 17; Rom. vi. 23;
John i. 16). 2. Consider it as a signal defeat and disconcerting of the
counsels of men (Ps. xxxiii. 10; Job v. 13; Ps. lxxvi. 10). 3. Consider it as
stili proceeding, and recognise ‘the Lord’s doing” both in the rejection and
the reception of Jesus Christ, and of the doctrine which He brought down from
heaven, and sealed with His blood.—F. Field, LL.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. God’s care for Israel. infectious that even the chosen nation
Canaan was a vineyard enclosed (Exod. could not be trusted to mingle with
xv. 17; Ps. xliv. 2; Neh. ix. 23-25; them on free terms. They were for-
Ps. Ixxx. 8-11). Lines of demarcation bidden to intermarry with other
were laid down between the people of people. Moreover they were isolated
Israel and the surrounding nations, by their geographical position: the
partly because the idolatries practised desert of Paran bounded their southern
by those nations were so defiling and states; the Mediterranean Sea, the


FE 433


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i a i a


west; the rugged mountains of
Lebanon, the north; and _ their
eastern frontier was a water boundary.
A vineyard required unceasing care
and attention; so every facility was
furnished the children of Israel to
become a nation of saints—J. JZ.
Morgan.

The soul, God's vineyard.—The soul,
according to one figurative sense of this
parable, is the vineyard of God. When
He created it, He planted it; He set
a hedge about it, which is that of
His commandments.. The winepress
is the representative sacrifice which
causes the blood of Christ to flow into
it. The tower is the Church, the
house of prayer, in which the soul,
being raised from the earth, is secure
from its enemies, and finds in the
Word of God arms strong enough to
overcome them. Our soul is not our
own: God, who is the creator, is like-
wise the proprietor of it. We hold it
of Him, as it were, by lease, only that
we may cultivate it, and render to
Uim the fruits which it is capable of
producing by His grace. Let us take
great care that we be not found, either
not haying any at all, or claiming
the property of them to ourselves.—
P. Quesnel.


Vers. 3-9. The wicked husbandmen.
—1. Injustice to men results from
unfaithfulness to God. 2. The wicked
expect to profit by the removal of the
righteous. 3. What is good passes
from those who will not use it to those
who will. 4. Those most honoured
by God have not been most honoured
by men.-—J. H. Godwin.

The form of this parable—At most
this parable is but an old theme
worked up with new variations. Every
one who heard it knew what the vine-
yard with its hedge, winepress, and
tower signified, and who the vine-
dressers were, and who the servants
sent for the fruits. These phrases
belonged to the established religious
dialect of Israel as much as the words
pastor, flock, lambs of the flock, Zion,
etc., do to ours, used by us all without


434


consciousness that we are speaking
in figures. In adopting this form of
presentation, therefore, Jesus was not
so much speaking in parables as using
the recognised authority of written
prophecy against His opponents, a
most appropriate procedure when the
question at issue respected His personal
authority..—A. B. Bruce, D.D.

The design of this parable.—The
design is to signalise the contrast
between the spirit of the owner and
that of the men to whom the vineyard
was entrusted. The owner has an
eye to fruit; the details depicting the
construction of the vineyard all point
towards fruit as the chief end, and
they are enumerated for no other
reason There is a hedge, that the
vines may not be spoiled by wild
beasts; a press and vat, that the
grapes may be squeezed and the juice
preserved ; a tower, that the ripe fruit
may not be stolen. The didactic signi-
ficance of these particulars is not, as
in the original form of the allegory
in Isaiah, that all has been done that
could be done for the vineyard, so as
to make the owner free from blame,
but that all has been done with one
object in view, viz. the production of
fruit. In keeping with this empha-
sising of fruitfulness as the reason of
the existence of the vineyard fully
equipped for the purpose, is the re-
iterated persistent demand: for the
fruit when the season came round,
as also the intimation of the owner’s
purpose, on conclusively ascertaining


that no fruit was to be forthcoming, .


to entrust his vineyard to others.
On the other hand, what was the
temper of the vinedressers? Was it
that of men who wished to keep the
fruit to themselves instead of giving it
to the owner? No; but rather that
of men who never thought of fruit,
but only of the honour and privilege
of being entrusted with the keeping
of the vineyard. They were triflers,
men utterly devoid of earnestness, and
the practical purpose of the property
committed to their charge they habitu-
ally forgot. The hedge and the press


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XII.





and the tower might as well not have
been there. When the servants came
for the fruit they were simply surprised.
“ Fruit, did you say? we have occupied
the position of vinedressers, and duly
drawn our wages: what more do you
want?” Such was the actual fact in
regard to the spiritual heads of Israel.
They had been entrusted with a
valuable institution—an elect nation
furnished with good laws, and meant
to be a holy nation, a people to God’s
praise. And speaking generally, they
had lost sight of the end of Israel’s
calling, and had made no use of the
means provided for its attainment.
They had occupied their position for
their own glory; taken pay and done
no work. They had committed the
sin to which privileged classes have
ever been prone—that of thinking only
of privilege, and forgetting duty.—
Lbid.

Application of this parable to Chris-
tians.—A rich vineyard, planted and
fenced, is let out to us by the Divine
Owner. The Bible, the Church, and
the ministry have been provided and
preserved for us. These blessings are
not ours by right; we are tenants at
will. We cannot truly enjoy the
produce of the vineyard unless we
reserve a portion for the owner.
Those fruits enrich us most when
returned to the Giver. They cannot
be presented directly to Him, but they
are made payable to the poor and His
ministers. His Son has come to claim
them, and is now waiting for our
supreme reverence, trust, and love.
“See that ye refuse not Him that
speaketh.” —J. H. Morgan.


Ver. 6. The treatment due to Christ
from sinners.—It might have been
presumed that sinners would treat
Christ kindly, from—l. The Divinity
and glory of His nature. 2. The
perfect excellence of His character.
3. The reasonableness of His claims.
4, The goodness of His intentions.
5. His known ability to save. 6. His
power to destroy. 7%. Their own
necessities. One might sooner expect


a beggar to spurn a palace, or a dying
man to refuse the touch that would
bring him life and health.

The Mission of the Son.—As He
reached this point of the parable we
may well believe that a thrill of
blended joy and horror shot through
the heart of Him who spake as never
man spake, and loved as never man
loved. For now He has to speak of
Himself, and of His Father’s grace as
shewn in and through Him. There
was yet one, a well-beloved Son; and
He last of all was sent by the all-
enduring Lord of all. Must not His
whole being have thrilled with deep
and sacred joy at the thought that
His Father loved Him, loved Him
well and much, loved Him most of all
for the love which prompted Him to
lay down His life for the sinful race
which hated and rejected Him? Amid
all the sorrow and darkness which
confronted Him, must He not have
been consoled and upheld by the con-
viction that the God who had spoken
to men in sundry fragments and divers
ways by the prophets in times gone
by, was now speaking to them by the
Son whom He had “appointed heir
of all things,” and was about to reveal
to them the very fulness of His grace,
His kindness and philanthropy—that
even the death of the Cross was
ordained by His Father, and was part
of the plan by which He would yet
draw all men unto Himself? And
yet, as He turned from God to men,
as the thought of His rejection, of all
He had suffered and was still to suffer
at the hands of these lawless upholders
of law, must He not have been pro-
foundly appalled by the sense of that
guilt which He came to take away?
He had long and often spoken of His
death to His disciples, striving to pre-
pare them for it; but now, for the
first time, He predicts His rejection
and death to the people at large, and
in especial charges the rulers and
priests, who had already in secret
council conspired to put Him to death,
with the guilt, with ‘the deep damna-
tion of His taking-off.” If they could


435


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


He could not, face that guilt un-
moved; and as He put into the mouths
of those wicked husbandmen the
words, ‘This is the heir; come, and
let us kill him, that the inheritance
may be ours”—if the priestly rulers
(who, to keep their “ place,” had deter-
mined to murder Him)—if they started
as at the voice of an accusing and
impersonated. conscience, to which all
their guilty secrets were known, how
must He, who loved even them, have
been grieved and appalled at a wicked-
ness so stiff-necked and stupendous as
theirs !—S. Cox, D.D.


Ver. 7. The Son known and rejected.
1. Jesus claims to be the Heir of
God. In acting for God He acts for
Himself. It is nature and relation-
ship, not mere official dignity, that
underlies this title and that is implied
in the parable. 2. Jesus implies that
this was known by these Jewish
leaders. Their condemnation was,
that, knowing Him to be the Son of
God, they slew Him. They had a con-
viction that Jesus was the Christ, but
they would not let their mind dwell
upon it. There are thousands who
have a haunting suspicion that Jesus
deserves a very different kind of re-
cognition from that which they give
Him.—M. Dods, D.D.

Denial in spite of conviction.—
Beneath many an obstinate denial of
Him lies a secret confession or mis-
giving, which is more truly the man
than the loud negation. And such
strange contradictions are men, that
the secret conviction is often the very
thing which gives bitterness and eager-
ness to the hostility. —A. Maclaren, D.D.

“The inheritance shall be ours.”—
Fatal mistake! The inheritance was
theirs, and in slaying the Heir they cast
themselves out of it.—Prof. F. J. A.
Hort.


Vers. 10, 11. The rejected Stone—
The psalmist, in these two verses, is
held to have referred to an incident
in the building or in the rebuilding
of the Temple. A stone which after


436


examination the builders had rejected
and cast aside as unworthy of a place
in the foundation, had proved, when
re-examined, to be of such noble quality
that it was used as a corner-stone in
the cornice, at an angle where two
walls met, and was thus exalted to a
conspicuous place of honour. Such a
reversal of skilled human judgment
was held to be the Lord’s doing, a
marvel which called for admiration
and praise. As it was with the rejected
stone, Jesus implies, so will it be with
the rejected Son. ‘ You priests and
rulers have rejected Me ; you are about,
as you think, to cover Me with shame
and dishonour ; but God is laughing at
you, and at the shallow cunning you
mistake for policy and wisdom: He will
have you in derision; He will lift His
despised and rejected Son into a place
so lofty and honourable as that all the
world may see Him, and praise the God
who has exalted Him.”—S. Cox, D.D.

_ God's truth overcoming human oppo-
sition.—It is very remarkable how
often this has been repeated in the
history of the Church—how great
religious movements have been frowned
down, if not actively opposed, by those
in high places, which have afterwards
subdued all opposition. In our own
times, in this very century, this has
occurred twice. First, the great evan-
gelical movement in the Church of
England was set at naught by the
builders, though it was the assertion
of the primary truth of personal religion
—that each soul must have a personal
apprehension of Christ, and look te
Him with the eye of a living faith ;
and then the great Church movement
was almost unanimously rejected by
the bishops between 1840 and 1850,
though it was the assertion of the
truths patent through all the New
Testament, that the Church, though a
visible organisation, is the mystical
body of Christ—that it is a super-
natural system of grace, and that its
sacraments are the signs of grace
actually given in and with the outward
sign. In neither of these cases did
“the builders” discern the strength of








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. XIf





the principles asserted, and foresee that
they must win their way, though the
formularies of the Church, of which
these builders were the exponents and
guardians, assert very unmistakably
both these truths in conjunction, viz.
spiritual apprehension of Christ, and
sacramental union in His body.—
M. F. Sadler.

Christ is to His Church a stone,
which is solid by His immortality,
white by His purity,—a principal one,
as being her Head; a foundation-stone,
as Author and Finisher of the faith;
and a corner-stone, as being the band
and union of all His members. They
whose business it is to build the
spiritual edifice are sometimes so un-
happy as to reject the most lively and
excellent stones. But God will cer-
, tainly take care to reserve them their
proper place, and to put them into the


Ver. 12. Reproof should be welcomed.
—Men almost instinctively resent re-
proof; they do not like plain truths
about themselves. Light hurts weak
eyes; honey burns sore throats. Lais,
the Corinthian beauty, broke her mirror
because it shewed her wrinkles. This
is foolish. I ought to be grateful to
any who help me to know myself.
When I remember how I shrink from
reproving another, I ought to feel
deeply indebted to the man who has
brought himself to the point of reprov-
ing me. Some one has said that no
man can be perfect without either a
watchful enemy or a faithful friend.
Let us value the faithful friend. He
may not tickle our vanity, as does
the honey-tongued flatterer, who, like
Vitellius, worshipped Jehovah at Jeru-
salem and Caligula at Rome; but he
will make us stronger and purer.


building.—-P. Quesnel.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—17.
(Parattets: Marr xxii. 15-22; Luxe xx. 19-26.)


Question as to tribute money.—One part of the business of a teacher of
Divine truth is to be ready to resolve doubtful cases submitted to him relating
to duty and conscience. Especially a teacher professing to come with a message
straight from God to men would be regarded as a kind of living oracle, at
whose mouth any one who had a question to propose might seek a solution of it.
There are, however, two conditions which such a teacher might reasonably
demand from those who came to, consult him: first, that he should not be
appealed to in mere private matters and personal differences, which might be
settled by the proper tribunals (Luke xii. 13, 14); and, secondly, that there
should be, on the part of the questioner, a sincere desire to know what is right
that he may choose it, and to learn the will of God that he may do it. It was
in this latter qualification that the inquirers we are at present concerned with
were deficient.

I. A foul plot.—The chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders”
(Mark xi. 27), being afraid, after their signal defeat, to enter the lists with
Jesus any more, now “send unto Him certain of the Pharisees and H erodians,
to catch Him in His words.” 1. They doubtless thought this a very clever
move, and congratulated one another upon the secrecy with which their
arrangements had been made. But somebody had gained admittance into their
counsel who was not of it. Let the plotters of mischief and those who take
counsel together against the innocent know this assuredly : that there is
nothing hidden from the Lord; that when every precaution has been taken,
and every possibility of human treachery guarded against, “a bird of the air
shall carry the voice,” ete. (Eccles. x. 20). 2. Christ’s enemies were constantly
holding secret meetings to devise His ruin. It required many a midnight
conclave, many a sitting with closed doors, to hatch the foul plot which ended

‘ 437


enone


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


eee eee ee EE
ese


in His death. But now all those things which were spoken in the ear in
closets are proclaimed upon the housetops. 3. The object of the present plot
was “to catch Him in His words.” They could not have employed a more
likely device. Nothing is easier than to entrap a person of a frank, unsuspicious,
straightforward character into saying something which may artfully be turned
to his prejudice. God’s saints in all ages have been persecuted in this way
(Ps. lvi. 5, 6; Isa. xxix. 21).

“TI. An insidious compliment—1. “A man that flattereth his neighbour,” etc.
(Prov. xxix. 5). So these hypocrites, designing to entrap Christ, try to put Him
off His guard by a compliment to His character. 2. With many persons this
ruse would have succeeded. There is a class of men who pride themselves on
speaking the truth, regardless of consequences ; whence it often happens that
to the fear of being thought capable of fear they sacrifice that very truth
which they profess to prize so highly. 3. To attempt to entangle Christ by so
poor an artifice only shewed how far they were from knowing Him. He was
certainly all that they said: He did “teach the way of God in truth”; He
did “care for no man”; He did “regard not the person of men.” But no more
did He regard the opinions of men, or care for establishing such a character
of Himself amongst men. And as for those who offered Him this incense, He
knew that they “did but flatter Him with their lips, and dissemble in their
double heart.”

III. A captious question—1. To understand the entangling nature of this
question, we must remember the ambiguous condition of the Jews, as a nation,
at this time. It was not independence, because they were under the military
authority of a Roman governor; nor was it a state of absolute bondage, since
they were allowed to retain their own laws and customs, and to exercise a
certain judicial power through their high priest and Sanhedrin. It was, in
fact, a condition of real subjection, with just such concessions as might soothe
the wounded vanity of a fierce and high-spirited race. Observe how sensitive
they were to any allusion to their lost liberties (John viii. 33). Now the most
galling thing of all, and that which reminded them most painfully of their real
condition, was the tribute. Cesar could afford to leave them a shew of liberty,
but not to forego his taxes. The Jews, on their part, looked upon the payment
of custom or tribute to a foreign power as an act of treason against Jehovah.
They did pay it, but under protest—because they could not help themselves.
2. The question now proposed to Christ by His enemies was one which, they
judged, must receive from Him either an affirmative or a negative answer. If
He should decide in the affirmative, He would be placing Himself in opposition
to the almost universal feeling of the Jewish nation. It would be considered
not only an unpatriotic but even a blasphemous decision, and as such would
be fatal to His influence with the people. If, on the contrary, He should
pronounce against the lawfulness of paying tribute, He could be handed over
to the magistrate on a charge of sedition.

IV. An ignominious defeat.—1. “He, knowing their hypocrisy ”__pretending
to entertain conscientious scruples which they did not feel, and, while professing
to seek advice, having no other object but to turn Christ’s answer against Him-
self, whatever it might be—instead of giving a direct reply, desires to see the
tribute money. And they bring him a denarius—a silver coin bearing on its
face the head of Tiberius Cesar, the reigning emperor, with his name and title.
2. This proceeding of Christ’s was well calculated to excite curiosity, and to
keep His hearers in suspense. We can fancy we see the little circle of spectators
drawing closer together, looking now upon the questioners, now upon the piece
of money, now upon the lips of Him who was expected to break the silence.
And He does so in the memorable words, “ Render to Cesar,” etc. 3, Christ


438





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XE.





does not give a direct answer to the question asked. The question was, “Is it
lawful?” not, Is it necessary? or, Is it expedient? but, “Is it lawful to give
tribute to Cesar, or not?” This question could only be answered by shewing
that there is nothing in such a payment inconsistent with the law of God, or
with that allegiance which, as the people of God, they owed to a greater King
than Cesar. Christ neither shews this nor even asserts it. And why? Because
that would have been to do the very thing they wanted, and to fall into the
trap they had laid for Him. To a captious question He returns an evasive
answer. They sought a handle against Him, and He gives them something
they cannot lay hold of. His reply is so framed as neither to injure Him with
the people nor to compromise Him with the magistrate. 4. Still the question
remains—‘“ Is it lawful,” ete. To which a sufficient, though not a direct, answer
may be gathered from Christ’s action and words. For it is a general maxim
that the money current in any country determines the power to which allegiance
is due. When the Jews deluded themselves with the idea that they still
preserved their independence as a nation, this Roman coin bore witness against
them. When they boasted of being the people of God, “a kingdom of priests
and a holy nation,” they ought to have remembered that by God, the same God
whom they acknowledged for their King, did other kings reign, and princes
decree justice. ‘“‘ He changeth the times,” etc. (Dan. ii. 21). At one time: He
had brought foreign princes against this very people to oppress them in their
own land ; at another He had caused them to be carried away captive to a land
that was not theirs. And He had forewarned them of a time when “the
sceptre” should finally “depart from Judah,” etc. (Gen. xlix. 10). That time
was now come. This very image and superscription, to those who read it
aright, plainly declared so. While they were arguing and disputing whether
it was lawful to pay or not, Cesar’s collectors were gathering in his taxes. This
was a state of things which could not be mistaken. None but the wilfully blind
could fail to see that to resist the power was, in this case, to resist the ordinance
of God. 5. But, lest this rule of “rendering to Cesar the things that are
Cexsar’s,” should appear to countenance the smallest violation of the sacred
rights of conscience, we must remember that it is not the whole of Christ’s
answer. He goes on to give a second rule which guards and limits the first ;
or rather, the two together must be considered as a single rule, and so applied
to every case of conduct. God has His rights, as well as Cesar. There need
not be any opposition or interference between the two; and there was none
here. Should it be otherwise, should the things of Cesar in any case be contrary
to the things of God, no man can doubt which of these must give way. 6. Note,
in conclusion, the comparative urgency with which these respective claims are
enforced upon us. Cesar is pressing’ and peremptory: God is gentle and
persuasive. Czxsar listens to no appeal: God is pitiful and easy to be entreated.
Tt is Cesar’s policy to put down resistance and disobedience at once, by the
immediate punishment of the offender : it is God’s principle to forbear and suffer
long, “not willing that any should perish,” etc. Such being the respective
dispositions of these two powers, it needs little knowledge of human nature to
tell which of them is more likely to obtain his due. As we look around, we
observe that human laws, strictly enforced, are generally obeyed; while the
most flagrant violations of the law of God, the most wanton denials of His
claims, go unpunished, if not unregarded. Such being the case, it is surely
incumbent on all who would see the things of Cxsar rendered to Cesar, and
unto God the things that are God's, to throw all their weight into the lighter
scale. Cesar needs no advocate; he will take care to get his own: but God
depends, for the enforcement of His claims, upon the zeal and earnestness of
those who advocate them.


439


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 14. Testimony of adversaries to
Christ—That a man may speak freely
the truth, he must have knowledge,
zeal, boldness— all which Christ’s
adversaries ascribe to Him here.
1. Knowledge of the truth, in that
He was a “master and taught the
way of God.” 2. Zeal and love to the
truth, in that He was “ true, teaching
truly.” 3. Boldness, in that He
“respected not the person of any.’—
Dean Boys.

The commendable parts of a good
pastor.—1. He must be for his learning
a “master”—able to teach, apt to
teach, a guide to the blind, a light to
them that are in darkness. 2. He
must be “true”; which some apply
to pureness of life, but others think
the words “and teachest truly the
way of life” expound the clause “ Thou
art true.” 3. He must not utter his
own dream, or the vision of his own
heart, but “teach the way of God”
(1 Pet. iv. 11). 4. He must have
certainty of doctrine, teaching the
truth aright (Jer. xxiii. 28 ; Rom. xii. 6).
5. He must be stout in delivering God’s
ambassage (Ezek. ii. 6)—Jbzd.

Suspicious blandishments.—The old
word is, “Full of courtesy, full of
craft.” When ye see too glittering
pretences in unapproved persons, sus-
pect the inside (Ps. xxvii. 3; Amos
vii. 12, 13; 2 Cor. i. 12).—Bishop Hall.


Ver. 15. Hypocrisy eaposed.—Christ, ©


as God, seeing their hypocritical
humour, and understanding — their
treacherous intent, accommodates His
answer to the foul malice of their
mind, not to the fair words of their
mouth, objecting against them four
faults especially. 1. Folly. ‘“‘ Why?”
For if I am (as you say) “ true,” then
T am God, because every man is a liar,
and only God true, yea truth itself ;
and if I be the Son of God, I can
easily make your wisdom foolishness.
2. Treachery. “Why tempt ye?”
3. Ingratitude. “Why tempt ye Me,


440


who teach unto you the way of God
truly, desiring often to gather your
children together ?” etc. 4. Dissimula-
tion. ‘“ Ye hypocrites.” Having thus
in a trice confounded them, He pro-
ceeds in the next clause to confute
them, even by their own words and
deeds, as the soldiers of Timotheus
were wounded with the points of their
own swords (2 Mac. xii. 22)-—Dean
Boys.


Vers. 16, 17. Coinage a token of
authority.—It has been ingeniously and
not irrationally suggested that our
Lord’s sanction of the payment of tri-
bute money to Cesar may afford a hint
to Christians of the point at which they
may conscientiously yield obedience to
a» fresh civil authority. If that
authority is so recognised that its
coin is admitted as the medium of
exchange, its tenure may fairly be
considered as a fait accompli.

The King’s image on the heart.—The
heart of the believer should be a golden
coin, so graven with loyalty and love
to the Heavenly King that there
ought to be no hesitation in answering
the question, “Whose image and
superscription is it?”

Church and State-—Consider the
respective rights of Church and State
in property, and the duty of men who
may at the same time be members of


the Church and subjects of the State_


to regard the rights and vested in-
terests of both. In discriminating
between those mutual well-defined
rights and vested interests in property,
the question of our Lord comes in,
helping us in the knowledge and per-
formance of our twofold duty, in our
twofold capacity as members of the
Church and subjects of the State,
1. Whose is this image and super-
scription, we ask on the one hand,
of all temporal things which belong
unto Cesar? The answer is Cesar’s
image and superscription. Then our
duty is to render such things unto








Cesar. 2. Whose is this image and
superscription, we inquire on the other
hand, borne upon the Church’s posses-
sions? The answer is God’s. His
sacred superscription is upon them.
To God they were consecrated. Their
use was given to His Church and her
ministers and members, not for general
purposes, but for God’s honour, glory,
worship, and for the spiritual and
ecclesiastical uses of all subjects of the
kingdom, who will use them on the
lines laid down in her terms of com-
munion exclusively for and consist-
ently with these purposes.

Religion no enemy to government.—
Among all the stratagems of the devil,
tending to the undermining of religion
and the subversion of the souls of men,
though there cannot be any more
unreasonable, yet there was never any
more unhappily successful, than the
creating and fomenting an opinion in
the world that religion is an enemy
to government, and the bringing sin-
cerity and zeal in religion into
jealousy and disgrace with the civil
powers (Luke xxiii. 2; Acts xvii. 6,
xxiii. 4, 5).— Bishop Seth Ward.

Loyalty of early Christians to the
emperor.—We pray for the safety of
the emperors to the eternal God, the
true, the living God, whom emperors
themselves would desire to be propi-
tious to them, ‘above all others, who
are called gods.” We, looking up to
heaven with outstretched hands, be-
cause they are harmless, with naked
heads, because we are not ashamed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MARK.


CHAP. XII.





(1 Cor. vi. 7), without a prompter,
because we pray from the heart, con-
stantly pray for all emperors, that
they may have a long life, a secure
empire, a safe palace, strong armies,
a faithful senate, a well-moralised
people, a quiet state of the world—
whatever Cesar would wish for him-
self in his public and private capacity
Jer, xxix. 7; Dan. vi. 21; 1 Tim. ii. 2 ;
1 Pet. i. 13-17).—Tertullian.


Ver. 17. “ They marvelled.”—His re-
mark concerning the superscription
and image on the coin, as connecting
the tribute with civil authority, and
the opposition which He makes between
such demands and the things belonging
to God, intimate a new characier in
the Messiah’s theocracy, in which the
ecclesiastical should no more interfere
with the civil rule, or the obedience
of the. subject to the human magis-
trate be inconsistent with the obedience
of the believer to God. Cesar’s do-
minion was to be one, Christ’s another.
Jesus was a king, but not of this
world.—S. Hinds.

Innocence the best protection against
craft.—Oraft is ever one of the arts
of the wayward ; they who believe in
it find it needful to employ it. At
first sight it seems as if the children
of truth and simplicity must be at
the mercy of the unscrupulous. What
happens here should reassure us. If
we are true-hearted and transparent,
no craft will avail against us.—QA.
Glover.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—27.
(Parattets: Marr. xxii. 23-33; Luxe xx. 27-38.)


Christ's argument against the Sadducees.—The Sadducees were a libertine sect
of the Jews who, for the sake of indulging their lusts, and to remove the dread
of an after-reckoning, thought proper to reject the belief of a resurrection and
a life 40 come. But yet, to save appearances, and to keep up an outward shew
of religion among their countrymen, they professed a great regard to the same
common Scriptures as the oracles of God, and sought out colours from those
very Scriptures whereby to countenance or seemingly to authorise their wanton

‘and wicked opinions. They came to our Lord, and propounded a captious
question to Him, grounded upon Moses’ law, artfully insinuating as if Moses
himself must have been in their sentiments. Our Lord in reply corrected their


44]


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ic AME eda ae ie aie te
fond mistake in judging of a life to come by the life that now is, when circum-
stances would be widely different. In this world, where mankind go off and die
daily, there is a necessity of a constant and regular succession to supply the
decays of mortality. But in a world to come, where none die any more, the
reason then ceases, inasmuch as there will be no occasion for any further
supplies. Our Lord, by thus distinguishing upon the case, defeated the objection ;
but to shew further how ill the Sadducees had contrived in appealing to Moses
as a favourer of their sentiments, He reminds them of a famous passage in
Moses’ law which was directly contrary to their principles, being indeed a full
and clear proof of a resurrection and future state.

I. What the distinguishing principles of the ancient Sadducees really
were.—They denied a future state; they did not allow that the soul survived
the body. ‘They looked upon the doctrines of a resurrection and future state to
be so nearly allied, or so closely connected with each other, that they might
reasonably be conceived to stand or fall together. Wherefore they denied both,
as on the other hand the Pharisees admitted both. There is one difficulty in
St. Luke's account of the Sadducees (Acts xxiii. 8), relating to their denial of
the existence of angels. Other accounts of Jewish writers are silent on that
head; and it might seem very needless for the Sadducees to clog their cause
with it, since it was sufficient for their purpose to reject only the separate
subsistence of human souls; and it is odd that they should run so flatly counter
to the history of the Old Testament (which is full of what concerns angels)
when they had really no great necessity for it, nor temptation to it, so far as
appears. But perhaps they thought it the shortest and surest way to reject
the whole doctrine of spirits, or at least of created spirits, and so to settle in
materialism, after the example of some pagan philosophers ; and therefore they
at once discarded both angels and separate souls. And as to the Old Testament
standing directly against them with respect to angels, there are so many various
ways of playing upon words, especially in dead writings, that men resolute to
maintain a point (whatever it be) can never be at a loss for evasions. Possibly,
however, St. Luke, knowing that the word “angel ” had been used to mean no
more than a human soul, might mean only to say that the Sadducees rejected the
doctrine of the resurrection and the other doctrine of separate souls, whether
called angels, as by some, or spirits only, as by others. This account will appear
the better when it is considered that St. Luke says the Pharisees admitted
both. Both what? There had been three things mentioned, if angel makes a
distinct article. But if angel there means no more than a human soul, then the
articles are reduced to two only; and so it was very proper to say both, namely,
both the resurrection and the separate state of the soul.

II. Inquire why our Blessed Lord chose to confront the Sadducees with a
text out of Moses’ writings, rather than out of any other part of the Old Testa-
ment.—Some have given it for a reason of our Lord’s choice, that Moses’
books were the only ones which the Sadducees received as Canonical Scripture.
But the fact is disputable at least, if not certainly false. Others say that our
Lord chose to confute them out of the Book of the Law, es being of prime value
and of greatest authority. And that indeed is a consideration not without
weight. But I conceive that we have no occasion to look far for reasons, when
the text itself, with what goes along with it, sufficiently accounts for the whole
thing. The Sadducees had formed their objection upon the books of Moses,
claiming Moses as a voucher on their side. In such a case it was extremely
proper and pertinent (if it could be done) to confute them from Moses himself.
Tt was vindicating Moses’ writings at the same time that it was doing justice to
an important truth. Our Lord therefore applied Himself entirely to the clearing
up Moses’ sentiments in that article ; and He effected it two ways: first, by


442





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI.


observing that what the Sadducees had cited from him did not prove what
they wished for; and, secondly, by shewing that what he had taught elsewhere
fully and clearly disproved it.

III. Consider the force of our Lord’s argument, which was then so clearly
apprehended at first hearing by friends and adversaries, and admired by all.—
The words which the argument is grounded upon occur in Exod. ii. 6: “IT am
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” “I am,”
not, “I was.” God was then God of those three patriarchs, the latest of whom
had been dead above a hundred and seventy years. Still He continued to be
their God. What could that mean? Is He a God of lifeless clay, of mouldered
carcases, of dust and rottenness? No, sure. Besides, with what propriety of
speech could the ashes of the ground be yet called Abraham or Isaac or Jacob ?
Those names are the names of persons, not of senseless earth; and person always
goes where the intelligence goes. Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were
still living and intelligent, somewhere or other, when God declared He was still
their God—that is to say, they were alive as to their better part, their souls.
He is not a God of the dead, but of the living; therefore the soul survives the
body. Therefore the Sadducees, who denied the separate subsistence of souls or
spirits, were confuted at once, and that by a very clear and plain text, produced
even from the books of Moses. But it will be asked, ‘‘ How does this prove the
resurrection of the body, which was the point in question?” I answer that
was not the only point, nor the main point, though it follows this other, as I
shall shew presently. But even if the argument really reached no further than
what I have mentioned, yet it was a very considerable point gained, and the
vest was not worth disputing. What they were afraid of was a future account.
Now whether men shall give an account in the body or without the body, it
would come much to the same; for still there would be an account to be given,
and there would remain the like dreadful apprehension of a judgment to come.
Here lay the main stress of the dispute; and therefore when our Lord had
undeniably proved a future state, He had gone to the very root of the Sadducean
principles, and if they once yielded thus far they might readily grant the rest.
For if it be considered that death was the punishment of sin, and that every
person remaining under that sentence and under the dominion of death still
carries about him the badges of the first transgression and the marks of Divine
displeasure, it cannot reasonably be supposed that the souls of good men whom
God has owned for His shall for ever remain in that inglorious state, but will
some time or other be restored to their first honours, or to what they were first
ordained to in paradise before sin entered. Wherefore since God is pleased to
acknowledge Himself still God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it is highly
reasonable to presume that He will in due time restore them to their original
privileges, removing from them the chains of death by reuniting soul and body
together in a happy and glorious resurrection. Thus the same thread of argu-
ment which our Lord began with, and which directly proves the immortality
of the soul, does also in conclusion lead us on by just and clear consequences
to the resurrection of the body.—Archdeacon Waterland.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 24-27. Christ's reply to the testimony of Christ. 4. They who are
Sadducees.—1. God is able to preserve now dead to men still live with God.
old forms of life and to produce new. —J. H. Godwin.

2. Marriage, birth, and death belong

only to the earthly life. 3. The Ver. 26. The fulness of Scripture.—.

mission of Moses was confirmed by the How much more there is in Scripture
443


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oe ee


than at first sight appears! God spoke
to Moses in the burning bush, and called
Himself the God of Abraham; and
Christ tells us that in this simple
announcement was contained the pro-
mise that Abraham should rise again
from the dead. In truth, if we may
say it with reverence, the All-wise, All-
knowing God cannot speak without
meaning many things at once. He
“sees the end from the beginning” ;
He understands the numberless con-
nexions and relations of all things, one
with another. Every word of His is
full of instruction, looking many ways ;
and though it is not often given to us
to know these various senses, and we
are not at liberty to attempt lightly to
imagine them, yet, as far as they are
told us, and as far as we may reason-
ably infer them, we must thankfully
accept them (Ps. cxix. 96)—J. H.
Newman, D.D.


Ver. 27. The Divine estimate of
death.—In the Infinite view there is
not a cemetery in the universe, not a
grave on any globe that gleams in the
sky. For there is no cessation or
interruption of life caused by that
which seems to us death. The body,
as He looks upon it, is the spirit’s
garment only; and however we are
called to meet death—whether by slow
disease or by water or by fire or by
tempest, at the end of years or in
youth or in the full powers of man-
hood, on the sick-bed or the battle-
field—to His vision it is but the
stripping off of a robe and the libera-
tion of the clothed essence into higher
forms of being.—Z. Starr King.

Effect on character of belief as to
future life——The belief in a fuller life
beyond the grave must influence cha-
racter indefinitely. Even in days before
Christianity, among heathens, it did so.
Herodotus tells us of a tribe among
the Thracians who believed themselves
immortal. “The men of this tribe,”
he says, “were the bravest and the
most honourable.” It cannot but make
a difference whether our hopes end
with the grave or not.—W. &. Hutton.


AAA
de


The communion of saints.—Long
before light and immortality were
brought to light by the gospel, the,
greatest moral philosopher of the
ancient world discussed this question
of the relation of the dead to the living
in memorable words, and he came to
the conclusion that to suppose the
departed unmindful of the friends who
survive them is too heartless a notion to
be entertained. Truly and spiritually,
in all the essentials of unity, the
departed are with us and we with
them: we are still members of the
same family of God ; one and the same
roof is still over us; they have but
passed into a brighter and _ better
compartment of the same great home
and house of Christ; and whatever
they are doing, beholding or enjoying,
we cannot believe that they cease to
think of us or to pray for us; nay,
we cannot but suppose that they think
of us now with a purer interest and a
deeper love than was ever possible
here. Few things are more remark-
able than the contrast between the
faith of the Church and our practice.
Many of us are far behind the heathen
in fidelity to our dead. We profess
to accept the glorious consolation which
is ours through the Risen Christ ; we
profess to believe that they are all
living in God, and that we are one
with them, that the whole Church this
side the veil and beyond it is one and
the same household; and yet we sink
into chill indifference, we suffer new
interests, new excitement, new faces,
to usurp their place and to turn into
solemn mockery the hopes and regrets
we once inscribed upon their grave. I
suppose there can be little doubt that
the chief cause of that habit of mind
which has made the communion of
saints so unreal is the modern disuse
of prayers for the departed. They are
all but banished from our devotions.
For thousands of years, let it be
remembered, prayers for the dead were
a part of the instituted service of God’s
people; they were in use among the
Israelites hundreds of years before
Christ; they were in use in the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


1


CHAP. XII.


ee ee ce ee ee


synagogue and Temple worship in which
He was wont to join, and they are
used by the Jews to this day. They
are to be found in every ancient liturgy
of the Christian Church which has
come down to us. But, whatever be
the decision to which we see our way
on this particular point, let us realise
the duty and the blessedness of
strengthening by all legitimate means
our faith in the indestructible bond
which knits in holy communion and
fellowship the whole redeemed family of
God. We talk and act as though we
on this side of the veil constituted the
whole Catholic Church ; we forget that


but a fraction of it : we forget the great
cloud of witnesses gathered during the
ages growing day by day, the unseen
multitude which no man can number :
we think but seldom of that paradise
of God, that land of the living, where
loyal hearts and true stand ever in the
light. Ah, brethren, it is we who are
in the shadows and the darkness, not
they. Let us be true to their memories:
let the thought of what they are and
where they are be a continual inspira-
tion ; let it lift us above the earthliness
and littleness of the present, and shed
more and more over mind and heart
the solemnising powers of the world to


the majority is elsewhere, that we are come.—Canon Duckworth.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 28—34.
(ParauteL: Marr. xxii. 34-40.)


Christ's interview with a scribe.—The character of the scribes and Pharisees,
as a body, is held up by our Lord to the abhorrence of all who would serve God
in spirit and in truth. See Matt. xvi. 6-12, xxiii, 1-36. But experience
teaches that no general description of a class of men, however just, is applicable
to every individual in it. We are not, therefore, surprised to find here a
notable exception to the rule—a scribe who entertains such worthy notions
of religion as to win the commendation of Christ.

I. The occasion.—The Pharisees and the Sadducees had, one after another,
put questions to our Lord, for the purpose of catching or ensnaring Him in His
talk. He, seeing through their hypocrisy, gave them such answers as neither
satisfied them nor afforded them a handle to use against Him. Then one of
the scribes, struck with the appositeness of His replies, determined to put a
question of his own, to try whether He who had so properly silenced the crafty
and malicious would be as ready with a suitable answer to an honest and
serious inquirer.

II. The scribe’s question“ Which is the first commandment of all?” 1. If
his object was to test the merits and attainments of this new Teacher, and to
see whether He had a correct notion of that law which He professed to expound,
he could not have put a more appropriate question. It would be a parallei
case if, in the present day, a professing Christian were to be called upon to
state which is the greatest and most distinguishing doctrine of Christianity,
or its most excellent privilege. Those persons who are ‘ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,” would either be unable to
answer at all, or would answer in such a way as to prove that they were
destitute of any clear and comprehensive views of Divine truth. 2. This
question was one very frequently discussed in the schools of the Rabbis; and
from many of them it received answers very wide of the mark. Some said the
commandment relating to the Sabbath was the greatest of all; others set the
highest value on the laws relating to sacrifices, or to purifications. This scribe
appears to have come to a sounder conclusion, and to have been anxious to
discover whether this new Teacher would confirm him in it.





445


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee


III. Our Lord’s reply.—This question being honestly put, Christ meets it in
a very different manner from that in which He had silenced His enemies.
Without hesitation, and without ambiguity, the Oracle of Divine truth delivers
His infallible sentence. 1. Whereas the question referred to one command-
ment only, our Lord in His reply brings forward two. ‘Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God,” He says, is the first commandment. But the mention of a first
naturally suggests a second, without which the first might appear incomplete.
Tt is true that the love of God, if perfect and sincere, will constrain us, by a
moral necessity, to love our brother also. Still, in a matter of so much practical
importance, it is desirable that there should be no room for cavil or mistake.
Therefore He proceeds: “And the second is like,” etc. 2. “There is none
other commandment greater than these.” (1) In comprehensiveness. What-
ever commandments may be added to these, can they require of us anything
greater than is already required by these? (2) In fundamental importance
(Matt. xxii. 40). These are the two great principles upon which all statutes,
ordinances, and judgments, which can be given or conceived, are based. Take
away the obligation of these two, and it will be impossible to maintain the
authority of any others.

IV. The scribe’s remark upon Christ's answer.—l. His language is that
of a man who, having long considered the subject, and come to a conclusion not
generally accredited among those of his own set, at last meets with one whose
opinion agrees with his own. 2. In declaring his conviction that the observance
of these two commandments “is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices,” he does not mean to imply that burnt offerings and sacrifices are
nothing. To him, as a Jew, they were much. They were that wherewith
man should “come before the Lord, and bow himself before the high God”;
they were the suitable recognitions of the Divine bounty ; and, what is still
more to the purpose, they were the means appointed by God Himself for the
acknowledgment and atonement of sin. What, therefore, though God had
declared that “ to obey is better than sacrifice,” since He had also declared that
sacrifice was necessary to supply the deficiencies of obedience, and thus it
became, in fact, a part of obedience! Tt was not for a Jew to ask how the
blood of bulls and of goats could take away sin, or how that Great Being who
owned “every beast of the forest and the cattle upon a thousand hills” should
condescend to accept a bullock out of his house or a he-goat out of his folds.
It was enough for him to know that God in His wisdom had provided for the
continuance of these things till He came into the world who should provide a
real sacrifice for sin, and by one offering perfect for ever them that are sanctified.

V. Christ’s commendation of the scribe.—Here is—l. An approbation of
the scribe’s remark. It wasa “discreet” answer, 7.¢. moderate and judicious.
If, in his admiration of inward and spiritual religion, he had spoken con-
temptuously of forms and ceremonies, we should have said his meaning was
good, but his language indiscreet. As it was, however, he hit the happy mean
of exalting the one without degrading the other. He shewed no disposition to
disparage the most literal compliance with every jot and tittle of the ceremonial
law; he was only anxious that the body and the spirit, the form and the
substance of religion, should be estimated in their proper order—first purity
of heart, and then scrupulousness of obedience. This was exactly in accordance
with Christ’s own teaching (Matt. xxiii, 23). 2. A commendation of the
individual himself. “Thou art not far from the kingdom of God,” we. thou
art in a favourable state of mind for embracing the gospel. (1) The honesty
of intention which distinguished this scribe was a very important qualification
for his reception of the truth. (2) His spiritual conception of religion was
an even more valuable preparation. A Jew thus enlightened had, to a certain


446


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE. CHAP. XII.


extent, forestalled the gospel ; he would find most congenial to his mind those
very sayings of Christ which to others were the hardest of all (Matt. ix. 13,
xu. 7; Mark i. 27, vil. 15-23; John iv. 21, 23).


_ Love to God and one’s neighbour.—I. The nature and properties of love.—1. It
is a passion of the soul, that inclines it to unite to the thing beloved. 2. Its
properties are chiefly these two: (1) A desire to please, and (2) A desire to
enjoy.

II, The double object of love—t1. The first and great object of our love is
God. (1) He is “the Lord”; and so His power and sovereignty may command
our affections. (2) He is “our God,” in covenant and relation to us; and so
His kindness and nearness to us may engage us to love Him. 2. The other
object of our love is our neighbour. He is to be loved by us—(1) Chiefly for
God’s sake, whose creature, child, and servant he is (1 John iv. 20, 21). (2) For
our own sake, because he has the same nature as ourselves (Prov. xxii. 2).

III. In what measure these two are to be loved.—l. The loving of God with
allthe heart, etc., denotes both the sincerity and integrity of our love to Him.
(1) The sincerity is signified by its being from the heart ; what springs from
thence is commonly sound andsincere. (2) “ With aid thy heart,” etc., denotes the
integrity. God will admit of no rival with Him in our affections. Though He
loves a broken He hates a divided heart. 2. “Thy neighbour as thyself ”—that
is, with a like though not always with an equal affection; for every one being
nearest to himself may be allowed, first, to consult his own welfare. Charity
begins at home, though it must not end there, but must extend to all that are
round about us, making our own desires the measure and standard of our
dealing with others, doing all that good to others which we would have done
to us, and avoiding all that evil to any which we ourselves would be unwilling
to bear.—W. Hole, D.D.


Christ's first and second commandments.—I. How is the love of God said to
be the first commandment ?—1. It is so in order of time, the love of God
being the first thing to be taught and learnt of all that come to Him; for all
true religion begins with it and is founded upon it: it is the first step we
are to make towards our Maker, and that will lead us on to all the other parts
of our duty and obedience to Him. 2. It is the first in order of nature, as
being the root and spring of all other virtues. He that truly loves God will
fear Him above all things, will trust Him in all conditions, will honour Him
in all his actions, will worship Him at all times, and in a word will serve and
depend upon Him in the whole course of his life.

IL. How is the loving our neighbour the second and like unto the first
commandment ?—1. In respect of the authority that commands it, and our
obligation to observe it, which is the same in both. 2. In respect of the ground
and motive of our obedience, which are some Divine perfections residing in
God and communicated to His creatures. Our love to man is grounded upon
the love of God; and we depart not from the love of our Maker by loving
our neighbour, but rather heighten and increase it; for it is for God’s sake,
and on His account, that we pay this affection to His creature. 3. In respect
of the extent and comprehensiveness of it; for as the love of God includes
the whole of that duty and homage we owe unto Him, so the love of our
neighbour comprises all the good offices we are to pay unto him. 4. In
respect of the reward and punishment that attend the keeping and breaking
of it, which is the same in both. See Matt. xxv. 31-46.—Jbid.


Completeness of character in serving God.—Jesus took this questioner back
447


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. '


ee ee ee a


to the familiar beginning of things—to a well-worn platitude of the Jewish
system—and, leading this man to old -and familiar ground, made him work
the old machinery with a new leverage, as the life of Christ fulfilled the
old command, and lighted up the letter of the Mosaic economy with the spirit
of the new-found Christian faith.

I. By loving God with all our heart we mean the placing of our affections
upon Him. By the heart we mean love, emotion, the vitality of the tender,
responsive, emotional side of our being. But you say, “ How can I love God,
for I have never seen Him?” A mother who had lost an only child in her
brooding grief adopted an unknown child in a foreign mission school. The
Arab boy was at first an unknown quantity to her. She assumed that the
child was and the child became in time real to her. Not her reason but
her affections were set upon the child who took the place of her own lost one.
She loved him with all her poor broken heart, and by-and-by they met, each
having saved the other. In the same way, dear friends, you must assume
that God is, until He becomes real to you. You must love Him who is
unknown, in the light of all His righteousness, until He becomes known to
you. Your affections must grow towards God; they must lead the way to
Him, for the rest of our nature always follows the leading of the heart.

II. By loving God with all the sovul we mean giving to God and His
service that which is the very essence of a being, the internal, animating
principle of our lives. What we mean by soul is that essence or spirit within
us which is regardless of matter. The power of the soul is a very different
quality from the power of the heart. We may defend a cause or a person,
or throw our lives into a certain current, because the soul compels us to
that course of action, regardless of the heart. The power of the heart is in
idealising another. The power of the soul is in idealising some hidden strength
within ourselves. You love your darling child with all your heart. You
love the cause you have at heart with all your soul. This is what is meant
by soul—it is the rising above all the hindrances and limitations of our
physical and material nature. Brethren, that is the kind of strength in us
which God wants. It is that which we ought to give to Him, and which
is always a great and commanding power when we find it ruling a strong
character in the religious life.

III. By loving God with all the mind we mean putting into exercise our
reasoning faculties with regard to Him. God can never be real to you unless
you have real and definite thoughts with reference to Him. Begin with
the fact of Jesus Christ, study out the meaning of the Christian Church, take
in the grasp of the religious instincts and the moral faculties, study out
God in history, believe in a definite Holy Ghost, and you will find that
the mind will grow by what it feeds on, and that God will bea reality to
your mind, when your mind has a real grasp upon God.

IV. By loving God with all our strength is meant the co-ordination of our
powers and faculties in such a way as to shew the force of our character,
the energy of our entire nature, the putting of our energies into exercise,
and the command of our own personality over our mere circumstances and
surroundings. We mean by the exercise of all our powers, through the
unit of the individual will, what Frederick the Great meant when speaking
of William Pitt. He said, ‘England has been a long time in labour, but she has
at last brought forth a man.” In the same way heart and soul and mind, when
they become united with a definite will and purpose, produce that strength
which shews itself in action—that belief which becomes a living force when
it is translated into a life! How is it, then, that this wholeness of service
ensures us against restlessness and unbelief and sin? The answer is very plain.


448


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XI,





Do you not see that if you have this much of the bulk of your nature on the
side of the service of God, if God is real enough to you to claim a real and
honest portion of your nature in every department-—in heart, in soul, in mind, .
and in strength—there will be no trouble either in your belief in Him or
in your service for Him? You will have exalted the spiritual side of your
nature over the tyrannous rule of the body with its material demands, and
you will be living upward to-God instead of downward towards self; and the
Being who had claimed and has received your affection, your soul, your mind,
and your concentrated force of living will give you as a reward those returns
of a spiritual life which grow to great results in our life in exact proportion to
our daily practice.—W. W. Newton.


Ver. 34. Obedience to God the way to faith in Christ.—In these words we are
taught, first, that the Christian’s faith and obedience are not the same religion
as that of natural conscience, as being some way beyond it; secondly, that this
way is “not far”—not far in the case of those who try to act up to their
conscience ; in other words, that obedience to conscience leads to obedience to
the gospel, which, instead of being something different altogether, is but the
completion and perfection of that religion which natural conscience teaches.
Indeed, it would have been strange if the God of nature had said one thing and
the God of grace another, if the truths which our conscience taught us without
the information of Scripture were contradicted by that information when
obtained. But it is not so; there are not two ways of pleasing God; what
conscience suggests Christ has sanctioned and explained ; to love God and our
neighbour are the great duties of the gospel as well as of the law; he who
endeavours to fulfil them by the light of nature is in the way towards, is, as our
Lord said, “ not far from Christ’s kingdom”; for to him that hath more shall
be given. .

IL. Consider how plainly we are taught in Scripture that perfect obedience
is the standard of gospel holiness—Rom. xii. 2; 1 Cor. vii. 19; Phil. iv. 8;
Jas. ii. 10; 2 Pet. i. 5-7; John xiv. 21; Matt. v. 19. These texts, and a
multitude of others, shew that the gospel leaves us just where it found us, as
regards the necessity of our obedience to God ; that Christ has not obeyed instead
of us, but that obedience is quite as imperative as if Christ had never come ;
nay, is pressed upon us with additional sanctions; the difference being, not that
He relaxes the strict rule of keeping His commandments, but that He gives us
spiritual aids, which we have not except through Him, to enable us to keep
them. Accordingly Christ’s service is represented in Scripture, not as different
from that religious obedience which conscienice teaches us naturally, but as the
perfection of it. We are told again and again that obedience to God leads on
to faith in Christ, that it is the only recognised way to Christ, and that therefore
to believe in Him ordinarily implies that we are living in obedience to God
(John vi. 45, iii. 21, vii. 17, xv. 23, viii. 19; 1 John ii. 23; 2 John 9;
2 Cor. iv. 4).

II. If we look to the history of the first propagation of the gospel, we find
this view confirmed.—The early Christian Church was principally composed of
those who had long been in the habit of obeying their consciences carefully, and so
preparing themselves for Christ’s religion, that kingdom of God from which the
text says they were not far (Luke 1. 6; Matt. i. 19; Luke ii. 25; Johni. 47;
Luke xxiii. 50; Acts x. 2, xiii, xvii.). Put it may be asked, “ Did Christ
hold out no hope for those who had lived in sin?” Doubtless He did, if
they determined to forsake their sin. When sinners truly repent, then indeed
they are altogether brothers in Christ’s kingdom with those who have not in the
same sense “need of repentance”; but that they should repent at all is, alas !


449


Sg.


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


so far from being likely, that when the unexpected event takes place it causes
such joy in heaven (from the marvellousness of it) as is not even excited by the
ninety-and-nine just persons who need no such change of mind, Of such changes
some instances are given usin the Gospels, for the encouragement of all penitents,
such as that of the woman, mentioned by St. Luke, who “loved much.” And,
moreover, of these penitents of whom I speak, and whom, when they become
penitents, we cannot love too dearly (after our Saviour’s pattern), nay, or
reverence too highly, and whom the apostles, after Christ’s departure, brought
into the Church in such vast multitudes, none, as far as we now, had any sudden
change of mind from bad to good wrought in them, nor do we hear of any of
them honoured with any important station inthe Church. I have confined myself
to the time of Christ’s coming ; but not only then, but at all times and under
all circumstances, as all parts of the Bible inform us, obedience to the light
we possess is the way to gain more light (Prov. viii. 17-20; Luke xvi. 10;
Mark iv. 25).

III. Some of the consequences which follow from this great Scripture truth.—
1. First, we see the hopelessness of waiting for any sudden change of heart, if
we are at present living in sin. To all those who live a self-indulgent life,
however they veil their self-indulgence from themselves by a notion of their
superior religious knowledge, and by their faculty of speaking fluently in Scripture
language, to all such the Word of life says, “Be not deceived ; God is not
mocked”; He tries the heart, and disdains the mere worship of the lips. He
acknowledges no man as a believer in His Son who does not anxiously struggle
to obey His commandments to the utmost; to none of those who seek without
striving, and who consider themselves safe, to none of these does He give “ power
to become sons of God.” 2. But, after all, there are very many more than I
have as yet mentioned who wait for a time of repentance to come, while at
present they live in sin. For instance, the young, who think it will be time
enough to think of God when they grow old, that religion will then come as a
matter of course, and that they will then like it naturally, just as they now like
their follies and sins. Or those who are much engaged in worldly business, who
confess they do not give that attention to religion which they ought to give,
who neglect the ordinances of the Church, who allow themselves in various
small transgressions of their conscience, and resolutely harden themselves against
the remorse which such transgressions are calculated to cause them ; and all this
they do under the idea that at length a convenient season will come when they
may give themselves to religious duties. All such persons do not, in their hearts,
believe our Lord’s doctrine contained in the text, that to obey God is to be near
Christ, and that to disobey is to be far from Him. How will this truth be plain
to us in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed! Now we do
not believe that strict obedience is as necessary as it is. We put something
before it, in our doctrinal system, as more necessary than it; one man puts
faith, another outward devotion, a third attention to his temporal calling,
another zeal for the Church—that is, we put a part for the whole of our duty,
and so run the risk of losing our souls. These are the burnt offerings and
sacrifices which even the scribe put aside before the weightier matters of the
law. Or, again, we fancy that the means of gaining heaven are something
stranger and rarer than the mere obvious duty of obedience to God : we are loath
to seek Christ in the waters of Jordan rather than in Pharpar and Abana, rivers
of Damascus ; we prefer to seek Him in the height above, or to descend into the
deep, rather than to believe that the Word is nigh us, even in our mouth and in
our heart. Hence in false religions some men have even tortured themselves
and been cruel to their flesh, thereby to become as gods, and to mount aloft ;
and in our own, with a not less melancholy, though less self-denying, error, men


450


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XIT.


cS


fancy that certain strange effects on their minds, strong emotion, restlessness,
and an unmanly excitement and extravagance of thought and feeling, are the
tokens of that inscrutable Spirit who is given us, not to make us something
other than men, but to make us, what without His gracious aid we never shall
be, upright, self-mastering men, humble and obedient children of our Lord and
Saviour. In that day of trial all these deceits will be laid aside; we shall stand
in our own real form, whether it be of heaven or of earth, the wedding garment or
the old raiment of sin; and then how many, do we think, will be revealed as
the heirs of light, who have followed Christ in His narrow way, and humbled
themselves after His manner (though not in His perfection, and with nothing
of His merit) to the daily duties of soberness, mercy, gentleness, self-denial, and
the fear of God ?—J. H. Newman, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 28-31. The scribe’s question, or
catch, was a common one among the
learned of that day ; and this answer of
Jesus was the recognised solution of it.
Long before now another lawyer, when
asked by Jesus, ‘‘ What is written in the
law? How dost thou read it?” had
replied in similar terms (Luke x. 25-27).
So that our Lord’s answer was not
original, was not His private solution
of the problem ; it was the common and
accepted solution among the students
and masters of the law, as indeed this
master himself confesses in the next
verse. The only wonder to those who
heard it from the lips of Jesus was
how He came to know it, He who had
“ never learned,” never sat at the feet
of any of their rabbis or passed through
any of their schools. An ordinary
layman would have been posed by it.
For neither “the first and great com-
mandment,” nor “ the second, which is
like unto it,” was contained in the
Decalogue, though obedience to them
was far “more than all whole burnt
offerings and sacrifices.” The first,
that which enjoins love to God, is only
given incidentally, in a summary of
human duty contained in Deut. vi. 5;
and, again, x. 12. The second, that
which enjoins love for our neigh-
bour, is hidden away among a crowd
of Leviticzl enactments of the most
minute and burdensome kind (Lev. xix.
18). It took some knowledge of the
law, therefore, to find these two com-
mandments at all; and much know-
ledge, much spiritual insight and a


deep sympathy with the animating
spirit of the Hebrew law, to discover
that they were the first and best com-
mandments of all. And it shews, I
think, what a real genius for religion
the Jews had, that even the hide-bound
rabbis and scribes had discerned for
themselves that love—love to God and
man—is the end of the command-
ment and the fulfilling of the law.
But, though they would have used
the very words which Jesus used,
would they have used them in the
same sense? They would have selected
—they had selected—the same two
commandments as the great command-
ments; but did they see in them the
meaning that He saw? We know
they did not. To them this answer
was only the right answer to a legal
catch; to Him it was the supreme
fact of human life. For what else had
He come into the world but just this?
to induce men, by revealing God’s
hearty love for them, to love Him
with all their hearts, and their neigh-
bours as themselves.—S. Cox, D.D.
Christ's two commandments and the
Decalogue.—Have the two command-
ments of Christ superseded the ten
commandments of Moses? Yes and
No: they abolish only by fulfilling
them. So long as we are compassed
about with infirmity, and come short
therefore of the full height of the
charity of love, it is very meet, right,
and our boanden duty to bear in mind
the commandments of the law, and to
enforce ourselves to obey them. And


45]





CHAP. XII.


yet, if we could but keep the two com-
mandments, what need should we have
of the ten, or of any other command-
ment? How can any man who loves
God with all his heart have any other
God besides Him? How can any man
who loves God with the whole of his
mind, with full and clear intelligence,
make unto him any graven images,
any idol, and bow down before it?
Hiow can any man who loves God with
all his soul take the name of the Lord
his God in vain? How can any man
who loves God with all his strength
forget to hallow every day to His
service, and not only the seventh? Or
how ean any man who loves his neigh-
bour as himself fail to honour all men,
and not only his father and mother, or
do any murder, or commit adultery, or
steal, or bear false witness, or covet
anything that is his neighbour's ?
Within the compass of these two com-
mandments the whole law does hang
and move: love is the fulfillmg of the
law ; and he that walketh in love both
walks at large (i.e. in liberty) and
keeps all the commandments of God.—
Lbid.

True religion.—l. True religion can
be no disjointed, fragmentary affair.
As the forest tree is one tree, though
it have a myriad branches and twigs
and leaves, because it has one root, so
the true religious life must be one
because it can have but one root—
supreme love to God. 2. True religion
engages the whole man, mind and soul
and affections, while the strength and
power to carry out its behests are not
wanting. The intellect and the emo-
tions, the spiritual nature, and the will
and force to make the Spirit effective
are all drawn upon. 3, Philanthropy
is not religion; but there can be no
true religion without philanthropy.
We love God whom we have not seen
because we have learned to love our
fellow-men whom we have seen, and
our love to our fellow-men is intense
and pure and active in proportion to
the strength of our devotion to the
Lord our God. 4. True religion is an
active influence, leading us to do as


482


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


well as think, to act as well as feel.
5. While true religion demands our all,
it demands no more than any one can
give. No experience that is beyond
us is demanded. No angel’s love, no
seraph’s might, not the devotion of the
ripened saint unless his years and
experience have been attained, but
“with all thy heart and soul and
mind and strength, and thy neighbour
as thyself.”--/. #. Clark.

Guidance in the religious life.—These
words of Christ form a noble guide for
the religious life. You are concerned
with religion in many of its varied
aspects. You are interested in thoughts
about God and His relation to the
world and man; you give expression
to your spiritual aspirations in one and
another form of worship; you bear
your share of the Christian activity of
the congregation ; and you can never
escape from the demands made upon
you for Christian conduct. Forget
not what religion according to Christ
means. Take heed lest you be so
engrossed with its mere accidents that
you lose sight of its substance. Strive
that you may grow in love to God and
man. Despise not creeds and theo-
logies, but so use creed, theology, and
Bible that you may gain that deeper
insight into God and God’s ways with
men which will waken a deeper love.
In recoil from a ritualism which sets
more store by the means than by the
end which is subserved by the means,
do not rashly sit too loosely to forms
of worship, but so use these forms that
they may serve to bring you nearer
God and nearer man. In the sphere
of Christian duty beware of the letter
which killeth, rise above mere obedi-
ence to external law, and ever seek in
your relations with others to have a
fresh baptism of that love by which
alone the law of Christ can be fulfilled.
And in the work you undertake in
Christ’s Church on behalf of others be
not content with their acceptance of a
creed, with their participation in reli-
gious worship, or with the observance
of the respectabilities of social life ;
strive to lead them into the love of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XII,





God and man; and that you may be
successful in that work grow yourself
in that love, for love is begotten by
love.—D. M. Ross.


Ver. 29. The unity of God.—What
a massive and reassuring thought!
Amid the debasements of idolatry,
with its deification of every impulse
and every force, amid the distractions
of chance and change, seemingly so
capricious and even discordant, amid
the complexities of the universe and
its phenomena, there is wonderful
strength and wisdom in the reflexion
that God is one. All changes obey
His hand whick holds the rein; by
Him the worlds were made. The
exiled patriarch was overwhelmed by
the majesty of the revelation that his
fathers’ God was God in Bethel even
as in Beersheba: it charmed away
the bitter sense of isolation, it unsealed
in him the fountains of worship and
trust, and sent him forward with a
new hope of protection and prosperity.
The unity of God, really apprehended,
is a basis for the human will to repose
upon, and to become self-consistent
and at peace. It was the parent of
the fruitful doctrine of the unity
of nature which underlies all the
scientific victories of the modern world.
In religion St. Paul felt that it implies
the equal treatment of all the human
zace (Rom. iii. 29).—Dean Chadwick.


Ver. 30. Loving God with heart,
soul, mind, and strength._—-We know
what love is in the relation of husband
and wife, of father and children, of
friend with friend; and from time to
time any thoughtful Christian asks
himself somewhat sadly, ‘‘Do I, with
the same reality of love, love God?”
If we would endeavour to get some
answer to this question in regard to
ourselves, let us examine carefully this
passage. 1. To love God with all my
heart means that I do deliberately
direct my life consciously to God as
its first end, and that not generally
only, but in detail also. I seek first
the kingdom of God and His righteous-





ness in the small ordinary transactions
of life as well as in the great move-
ments of my life. 2. The soul or life
means the sum of the faculties. There
is the life of a plant, which means the
sum of its faculties—the power of
absorbing moisture, developing the
leaves, the flower, and the fruit.
There is the life or soul of the animal ;
that is, in addition to its powers of
assimilation, digestion, and reproduc-
tion—powers also of movement and
expression of sound—there is the sum
of faculties, which is the life of the
animal. And there is the sum of
the faculties which belong to man in
addition to those which the animal
shares—those rational powers which
constitute the true life of humanity.
In part those powers belong to all
men; in part they are the peculiar
endowment of special individuals, as
each of us has from Almighty God
his special gifts and powers. To love
God, then, “ with all our soul,” is to
take stock of the faculties which God
has given us, and deliberately as we
realise what they are with increasing
assurance as life goes on to direct
them one by one and altogether to the
service of God. 3. “To love the Lord
our God with all our mind” is to
direct our faculties of intellect to
knowing what we can of God. Let us
run through the various traits of the
being of God which He has revealed
to us. There is, first, His revelation
in nature. It is a scene which, by
captivating the spiritual imagination
and faculties of man, discloses some-
thing of the mind and spiritual being
of that God who is at work in it:
power, wisdom, beauty; and not so
only, for this scene is also a storehouse
of truth. Everywhere God is appeal-
ing there to the mind of man, inform-
ing it, enlightening it. God is there
disclosed in His power, in His beauty,
in His truth. And yet we have but
begun to estimate what we can know
of God. There is that other great
natural witness—the witness of con-
science. So it is when man within
himself becomes conscious of the


453


Cilap. XI.


LFOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a


altogether new work of self-revelation.
God is disclosed in righteousness. And
then, once more, there is the moral
character remaining, which is the
argument of the psalmist: “ He that
made the eye, shall He not see? He
that planted the ear, shall He not
hear?” And our great poet Robert
Browning has taught men to argue—
_ He that made love and righteousness
the character of man, must not He
in Himself be greater than this moral
work? So it is with men. They look
to human nature, and see in what is
best in man once more the order of
the uncreated God. And yet what
a wild scene this human nature is!
How are we to discriminate between
what belongs to human nature, be-
tween love and cruelty, between
justice and tyranny? How shall we
know what here is proper to human
nature, and what is but the corruption
of it? At this point there comes in
the rectifying disclosure which God
has given of Himself in the humanity
of our Lord. Jesus Christ, our Master,
gives us the true standard of human
nature. There we see what belongs to
man, and what is only the corruption
of the gift of God. And yet in Jesus
Christ is not only the disclosure of
perfect manhood—it is the disclosure,
under the conditions of our humanity,
of perfect Godhood. He in man is
very God. We look at His life, His
forbearance, His patience, His gentle-
ness, His self-sacrifice, and we see
nothing else than forbearance and
patience and gentleness—very God.
so it is with point after point.
Gradually we sum up what we can
know of God, His power, His beauty,
His truth, His righteousness, His love,
His self-sacrifice—that being of God
which is summed up in St. John’s
words : “God is love.” And yet one
step more. In thus disclosing to us
His character God has revealed to us
something at least of His own being.
We could not conceive of God at all in
blank, monotonous solitude. Wecould
not conceive of a personal God living
in the enjoyment of spiritual life in


454


monotonous solitude. There can be
no life, no knowledge, no will, if there
be no relationship, if there be no
fellowship. But as God has come
nearer to us in the person of His Son,
He has disclosed to us something of
those inner relationships which ob-
tained eternally in His being—the
relation of Father and Son and Holy
Ghost. 4. With all our strength!
What does that add to the other?
This surely: that everything in
human nature degenerates very rapidly
into routine is an experience with
which we are all only too unhappily
familiar. Therefore to love the Lord
our God with all our strength is again
and again to make fresh beginnings
in the love of God—again and again
be as one who has not yet begun at
all to learn the lesson of religion, so
that new force of vitality may in each
successive epoch of our life, in each
successive morning of our life, be put
into the service which we offer to God.
—Canon Gore.

Love to God.—1. The sentiments and
actions wherein love to God is chiefly
exhibited. It implies in general to
regard Him from intimate conviction
as our sovereign good, as the source
of all our happiness; to delight more
in Him than in all things else; to
prize and covet His favour and fellow-
ship above all things; and diligently
to make it our business to be well
pleasing to Him. (1) Frequent meci-
tation on God is the first particular
by which the religious man evinces
his love to the Supreme Being, and
shews it to be operative in him.
(2) The delight with which the re-
ligious man attends on public as well
as private worship is the second par-
ticular whereby his love to God appears
and shews itself active. (3) An en-
lightened and active zeal for the honour
and glory of God is the third particular
whereby the love towards God is mani-
fested and effectively displayed. (4) A
constant and earnest endeavour to
please God by a willing and unlimited
obedience to His commands is the
fourth particular whereby the love


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIl.





towards God is displayed and shewn
to be effective. This, in fact, forms
the most essential part of it. (5) The
love of God must manifest itself by a
sincere and effective love of our neigh-
bour. God is infinitely superior to all
necessities. We cannot augment His
perfection, or give Him anything
which He has not first given us. But
He has rational creatures who bear
His likeness, He has children, He has
friends and subjects here on earth,
whom we may effectually serve, to
whom we may be useful in various
ways, whose temporal and eternal pros-
perity we may promote. These He
recommends to our love, to our care,
to our relief. (6) Lastly, the love of
God displays itself in sincere aspira-
tions after heaven, where we shall be
more intimately united with Him, and
partake of His good pleasure in a
superior degree. 2. How our love to
God should be constituted, or what
qualities it should possess, for being
genuine. “With all thy heart, soul,
mind, strength.” These accumulated
expressions, which apparently denote
the selfsame thing, serve generally to
shew the sincerity no less than the
force and degree of the love which we
owe to God. They give us to under-
stand an undissembled, an ardent, an
effective, and a constant love, capti-
vating as it were the entire soul, setting
all its capacities and energies in motion,
and becoming a ruling affection. (1) It
must be sincere. (2) We must love
God above or more than all things
else. (3) We must love all else that
merits our esteem and affection, princi-
pally in regard and in reference to
God as the author of it. (4) Our love
to God must be firm and immutable.
3. The reasons which oblige us to such
a love towards God. Love is founded
on the excellency of its object, or on
the close relations wherein we stand
towards it, or on the benefits which
we receive from it, or on the good we
have to hope for from it. In regard
to our love for God all these reasons
unite together ; and who does not per-
ceive how strong and indissoluble they


render our obligation to it? (1) Where
is the being that is more excellent,
more venerable, more amiable than
God? Does He not comprise in Him-
self whatever is beautiful, good, per-
fect? (2) Consider the close relation
wherein you stand towards God, and
the multitude, the greatness, the high
value of the benefits you have received
from Him. He is our Creator; we
are the work of His hands. He is our
Sovereign, and we are His subjects.
He is our Father, and we His children.
(3) Add the intrinsic excellency and
the manifold utility of this virtue.
(a) What can more delightfully employ
the soul of a reasonable and virtuous
being ; what is more adapted to elevate
and enlarge his capacities and powers ;
what can procure him a more pure,
a more noble, a more sensible pleasure,
than the love of a God who possesses
all the prerogatives and attributes
which only merit love in the supreme
degree, without limitation and change ;
who is the ever-flowing and inex-
haustible fountain of light, of life, of
joy, of happiness; whose goodness and
grace continue for ever and ever; and
who will never cease to bless His friends
and worshippers, and to make them
happy? (0) What is more adapted to
facilitate to us the practice of all the
virtues, the discharge of all our duties,
than the love of God? (c) What is
more adapted to comfort us in all
adversities, to render us firm and un-
daunted in every danger, and to give
us the most certain hope of the com-
pletest happiness, than love towards
God ?’—G@. J. Zollikofer.

The meaning of this commandment
for us is nothing less than this: that
we are to cherish and maintain within
ourselves an enthusiastic devotion to
the highest vision that is vouchsafed
us of the Eternal Reality, the Eternal
Love, the Eternal Beauty. J.
Fletcher.


Ver. 31. Duty to neighbouwr.—Christ
sums up all God’s law, all man’s duty,
in the word “love.” The love of God
and its manifestation in the love of


455


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


man. 1, The strictness of the com-
mandment and the frequency of its
iteration. (1) Here it is put forth as
the compendium of the law, and again
Rom. xiii, 8. (2) The breach of
charity is a bar to the acceptance by
God of ourselves and of our work
(Matt. v. 23,24; 1 Johniii. 14). (3) It
is the new commandment given by
Christ on the most solemn occasion
(John xiii. 34, 35). (4) It has attached
to it the promise that its fulfilment
shall cover a multitude of sins (1 Pet.
iv. 8). 2. Its twofold channel of
operation. (1) Alms-deeds and the
corporal works of mercy: to feed the
hungry, give drink to the thirsty,
clothe the naked, harbour the stranger
and needy, visit the sick, minister to
prisoners and captives, visit the father-
less and widows, bury the dea‘. (2)
Intercession and the spiritual works
of mercy: to instruct the ignorant,
correct offenders, counsel the doubtful,
comfort the afflicted, suffer injuries
with patience, forgive offences and
wrongs, pray for others. 3. Its scope
and limit. (1) It is to be universal
in its scope, reaching even to our
enemies (Matt. v. 43-48; Luke x. 29-
38). (2) Its limit: we are to love our
neighbour as ourself; not more—a
warning to those who neglect the
cultivation of their own spiritual life
for the active ministrations of Church
work; but not less—a warning to
those who think only of the needs of
their own soul.—A. G. Mortimer, D.D.

Motives to universal charity.—l.
Wouldst thou love all mankind as thy
brethren, rejoice in them and think of
them with complacency, say sometimes
to thyself, “God loves them ; He designs
their good; He showers His benefits
upon them; He rejoices in them as the
work of His hands, as His creatures,
His children; He beholds them with
complacency.” 2. Wouldst thou love
all mankind as thy brethren, rejoice in
them all, and think on them with
complacency and esteem : in the judg-
ment that thou passest on them be
not biassed either by the homeliness of
their figure, or the meanness of their


A5G


apparel, or the humble situation in
which they are placed, or by single
actions, foolish or wicked, which they
commit. Nothing of this detracts
from the inherent worth of the man,
his native grandeur and dignity, his
essential excellences. 3. Wouldst thou
awaken and confirm in thy soul the
principle of love, inward, cordial love
towards all mankind, as towards thy
neighbours, frequently resolve in thy
mind the various and generally useful
connexions in which they all stand
with thee and with human society at
large. Not one is entirely useless, or
absolutely and in all respects injurious
to society, and no one can or will be
so at all times and in every situation.
4, Wouldst thou excite and cherish in
thy heart this universal charity, Judge,
esteem thy brethren, mankind, not
merely by what at present, in this
their infant state, they are and afford,
but by what in all future times on
every higher step of their existence
they may and will be and afford.—
G. J. Zollikofer.


Vers. 32-34. The excellence of the
moral law.—I. The great practical
duties of the law are supremely excel-
lent.—1. They are good for their own
sake; whereas the institutions of the
ceremonial law were good only as
means to an end. 2. They can be
performed only by a renewed heart ;
whereas the institutions of the cere-
monial law may be performed by the
most abandoned of mankind.

II. They are such as must commend
themselves to the conscience of every
candid inquirer.—1l. Are they reason-
able? What can be more reasonable
than that we should love Him who is
infinitely lovely, and who has so loved
us as even to give His only dear Son
to die for us? 2. Are they conducive
to our happiness? Wherein does the
happiness of heaven consist but in the
exercise of love? 3. Are they per-
fective of our nature? The want of
love is that which debases us even
lower than the beasts that perish. No
words can describe the full malignity





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST MARK.


CHAP. XII.


Na


of such a state. But let a principle
of love possess our souls, and it instantly
refines all our feelings, regulates all
our dispositions, and transforms us into
the very image of our God. 4. Are
they instrumental to the honouring
of God? We know of no other way in
which God can be honoured, because
these two commandments comprehend
the whole of our duty. But by
abounding in a regard to these we
may and do honour Him.

III. An approbation of them argues
a state of mind favourable to the
reception of the gospel. When there
is a readiness to approve the boundless
extent of these commandments, there
must of necessity be—1. An openness
to be convinced of our lost estate.
2. A willingness to embrace the offers
of salvation. 3. A readiness to receive
and improve the aids of God’s Spirit.
—C. Simeon.


Ver. 34. Not far from the kingdom.—
I. What is it to be near the kingdom ?
—There are habits of life, traits of cha-
racter which bring us nigh—1. A moral
life. 2. Interest in religion. The Holy
Spirit guides all sincere seekers of
truth. 3. Knowledge of Scriptures.
This is a long step nearer Christ. The
seed lies ready for the sun and rain.

II. What is it to be in the kingdom ?
—1l. Answer supplied in narrative. To
know that to love God and man is
more than all mere rites is to be near
the kingdom. To have that love in
the heart is to be in the kingdom.
2. To enter the kingdom love must be
shed abroad in the heart. This love
enters when we believe God’s love to
us. The last step into the kingdom
is then faith—belief in God’s love to
me. God’s love enters the soul like
a cascade, as we believe it. Then rises
up our love to God, like the spray, the
vapour-cloud of the fall, that fills our
life with beauty, as the mossy banks
of the cascade are full of flowers and
ferns. Our love to God is the return
of God’s love to its source. This love
shews itself to our neighbour ; if not,
it does not exist,


III. Why do men not go all the
way ?—1. They love some secret evil.
A hidden anchor holds the vessel when
the tide is flowing. 2. They are not in
earnest. It is necessary to “strive.”
3. They procrastinate; they lack the
final act of decision; they miss the
flood-tide which would have led to
salvation.

IV. The responsibility of stopping
short.—1. It is full of danger. To
feel “‘near the kingdom” breeds the
presumption, “I can enter any time.”
Where despair of salvation slays one
soul, presumption slays a thousand.
2. The position cannot be maintained ;
the habits of life, the traits of character,
which bring us near, will fade, unless
we ask Christ to guard them. We
shall drift farther every year from
heaven. 3. Itisfatal. ‘To be almost
saved is to be altogether lost.”—J. H.
Hodson.

Nearness not possession.—It is with
the kingdom of God as with other
kingdoms—kingdoms both objective
and subjective—to be almost in pos-
session is not sufficient. A man may
be almost in possession of a fortune,
but that adds not to his credit at the
bank. A man may be almost honest
or almost sober, but that will be no
recommendation to a position of trust
and responsibility. And as with these,
so with the kingdoms of mental force,
health, and social influence; nearness
is not sufficient.

I. Aman is not necessarily in the
kingdom of God because an intelligent
inquirer.—Christ does not shrink from
being questioned; but let us discrimi-
nate between questioning with a view
to information and questioning with
a view to disputation. Moreover it
is worthy of notice that when Christ
pronounces upon a man’s condition that
man does not farther presume upon
his mere knowledge. ‘Thou art not
far from the kingdom of God.” What
then? ‘No man after that durst ask
Him any question.”

II. A man is not necessarily in the
kingdom of God because he knows
truth when he hears it.—Twice over


ADF


CHAP. XII.





in the narrative we find this scribe
tacitly saying Amen to the utterances
of Christ. But a man may do that
and yet have no affection for Christ as
Saviour. This man was thoroughly
orthodox. But it is quite possible to
make a false god of orthodoxy. At all
events theoretical orthodoxy is not
enough. A man may be ready “to


stand up for the truth,” nay, ready.


to die for it, and yet be only “not
far from the kingdom of God” (1 Cor.
xiii. 3).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Se


kingdom of God because he can answer
questions bearing upon Christianity.—
We fear that not a little confidence
is reposed in questions having only a
very remote bearing upon religion. A
man may know the creed without
knowing the Christ, and the catechism
while yet he knows nothing of charity.
Farther, a man may answer according
to the letter of Scripture and yet be
only “not far from the kingdom of
God.” We must repent, confess, be-
lieve, and serve.—J. S. Swan.


III. A man is not necessarily in the


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 35—31.
(Paratiets: Marr. xxii. 41-46; Luxe xx. 41-44.)


Our Lord’s question concerning the Messiah.—I. The place where He pro-
pounded His question.—Why did He choose such a public place as the Temple
to oppose the scribes’ opinion and doctrine ? That by putting them to silence
in such open manner He might bring the greater shame and disgrace upon
them and their doctrine, they being malicious enemies of the truth; and withal
that He might gain the more credit and authority with the people to His own
person and doctrine. 1. In that Christ used so much to frequent the Temple,
being a public place, whither all sorts of people much resorted, to the end He
might there have occasion of doing the more good, both by His doctrine and
miracles, as also by reforming abuses there, and by opposing and refuting
errors: hence observe that we also ought to take the best opportunities of time,
place, and persons, where and amongst whom we may do most good, and bring
most glory to God, in our place and calling. 2. In that Christ was now
teaching in the Temple, and so used to be much and often at other times to
teach the people there publicly : hence learn whither to resort if we would hear
Christ and be partakers of His doctrine, viz. to the public place of God’s
worship. 3. In that Christ did not only teach and deliver sound doctrine in
the Temple at this time, but did also oppose erroneous doctrine: hence gather
that ministers of the Word are not only in their public ministry to teach true
and sound doctrine, but also to oppose and confute contrary errors, as occasion
is offered (Tit. i. 9, 11).

II. The manner of Christ’s opposing and confuting the opinion of the
scribes.—1. He propounds their opinion and questions the truth of it.
(1) That He might by this means take occasion to confute and overthrow that
common and gross error held not only by the scribes and Pharisees, but also
by the greatest part of the other Jews, touching the person of the Messiah.
(2) That by this means He might have occasion to confirm the faith of His
disciples in the truth and doctrine of His Godhead. (3) Having lately
commended one of the scribes for answering discreetly, therefore now He
takes occasion to propound this question, thereby to stir up both that scribe
and others also to a diligent search after the true knowledge of the Messiah.
9. He object: against them a place of Scripture. (1) All errors, and erroneous
opinions and doctrines of men, in matters of faith and religion, are to be opposed
and confuted by Scripture, and by grounds and reasons taken from thence.
(2) The prophets of the Old Testament spoke of Christ the true Messiah, ana


458





i a Nia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XII.








of Lis kingdom and glory, and the manifestation of it, long before it was
fulfilled. (3) The writers of Holy Scripture were extraordinarily directed and
assisted by the Holy Ghost. 3. He applies those words of David to His purpose.
(1) The Person who is said here to have called and advanced Christ to this high
degree of glory and authority, viz. God the Father. (2) The Person called
and advanced to this glory—Christ the true Messiah. (qa) There is a distinction
of Persons in the Godhead, though but one God in nature and essence. (6) The
truth of Christ’s Godhead, in that David calls Him his Lord. (c) The nature
of true faith—to make particular application of Christ to the believer. “My
Lord.” (d) How we ought to receive and embrace Christ—not only as Redeemer
and Saviour, but also as Lord and Master. (3) The ground or cause of Christ’s
advancement to this glory, viz. the eternal purpose and decree of God the
Father, ordaining and appointing Him unto it. (4) The advancement itself.
(a) To the highest degree of glory, honour, and dignity, next unto God the
Father. (0) To the full possession and administration of His kingdom and
government over the world, and especially over His true Church.—G@. Petter.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 35, 36. Faith can reconcile
apparent opposites.—Faith alone, which
knows what Christ is by His Divine
nature, and what He is become by
His mercy, knows how to reconcile
the seeming contradictions which are
in this Divine compound, God-man :
Son of David, by His birth according
to the flesh; and Lord of David, by
His eternal birth in God His Father,
as also by the rights of His third
birth, namely, His resurrection, which
placed Him at the right hand of His
Father.—P. Quesnel.

A counter-question.—Thusthe Saviour
intimates it is not robbery to claim
equality with God, and intimates that
no merely human Saviour would meet
the deep wants of man.

I. In all ages men have longed for
a Divine and human Saviour,—one
who, as man, would be near and
sympathetic; as God, omnipotent and
enduring. David’s psalm is a clear
expression of what all religious men
have dreamed of. An incarnation of
a helpful God is the hope of the
Hindoo peoples.

II. None less than God can be a
spiritual and eternal Saviour.—We
want a son of David, but one whose
name is “ Lord,” and whose natural seat
is “ at God’s right hand.”—R. Glover.


Ver. 37. Christ's popularity with the


masses.—All through the Gospels there
are indications of Christ’s popularity
with the masses as distinguished from
the classes. Why? Where lay the
charm? In the aspect, the matter,
the spirit of the Man? Perhaps in
all together. It is difficult to give a
full account of popularity, to explain
why one man can do what he wills
with an audience, while another is
utterly helpless. There may be subtle
physical causes at work, as well a
intellectual and moral ones. But the
thing is not altogether a mystery ; the
teacher’s power can be explained in
part. Looks count for something—
the kindling eye, the play of thought
and emotion in the face. A genial
manner goes a long way to conciliate
favour, revealing itself in a kindly
smile and a warm, hearty tone of
utterance. But the secret of power
lies mainly in what a man says—in
his thoughts as a revelation of himself,
his convictions embodied in speech.
Eloquence is not an affair of manner
or of style or of gesture; it is the
whole man—all that is within—speak-
ing out: the mind, heart, soul, spirit,
finding utterance for itself in words.
It is this on which the Evangelists
remark in reference to Christ’s power
over His audience (see Luke iv. 22;
Matt. vii. 28, 29).—A. B. Bruce, D.D.


‘ie of


459


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


——— eee


CHAP. XII.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 38—40.
(Parattens: Marr. xxiii, 13-39; Luge xx. 45-47.)


Charucter and conduct of scribes denownced.—I. Their loud professions of
sanctity and their ostentatious devotions are censured.—Long prayers may
sometimes be the outcome of deep feeling and many needs; they may, as in
the case of the scribes, be a cloak for sin. Long robes, like long prayers, may
be a profession with which nothing spiritual corresponds.

II. Their love of pre-eminence is blamed.—Both in “Church and State”
they loved to be supreme, and in all social relations they sought the honour
which cometh from man.

III. Their cruel rapacity is held up to obloquy.
less were their victims.

IV. Christ predicts the condemnation of such sinners, and at the same time
puts the people on their guard against them.—Against the wrongs and cruelties,
the assumptions and errors of such pretenders, the Good Shepherd would fain
protect His feeble and defenceless sheep.—J. &. Thomson.


The bereaved and defence-





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 38-40. Needful cautions.—I.
In that our Lord warns the common


wickedly. 2. Christians must take
heed of being corrupted by the evil


people, and His own disciples too, to
beware of following the evil and
corrupt life and example of the scribes,
we may gather that there is much
danger of infection to the people of
God by the evil and corrupt lives
of such as are called to be public
pastors and teachers of the Church,
when they do not live answerably to
this calling, but loosely, profanely,


example and practice of such as are
outwardly called to the ministerial
office, and yet are men of corrupt and
vicious life. Though they may and
ought to hear the doctrine preached
by such, and to embrace and follow
it, so far as they preach the truth
(Matt. xxiii. 3), yet they must beware
of following the evil example and
practice of such pastors.—G. Peter.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 41—44,


(PARALLEL: LUKE xxi. 1-4.)


A celebrated contribution.—The “collection” is generally considered to be


commonplace.
ised the famous farthing.


Jesus, in this passage, clothed it with sublimity.


He immortal-


The two mites are transformed into two angels,


and they seem to watch over the contribution chest of the Church as the


cherubim did over the Ark of the Covenant.
the many in the one, the much in the little, the sublime in the simple.
smallest act may embody the greatest principle.


Jesus was memorable for seeing
The
The mites of the poor widow


rise to the transcendent height of latent martyrdom—‘“ even all her living.”


She gave all that her life depended upon.


have been life.


One step more and the gift would


I. True religion is sometimes under disadvantageous circumstances to


develop itself—l. True religion is to be developed.


sisting of principle and action.


Piety is composite, con-


As rays to the sun, branches to the tree, the


stream to the fountain, so conduct is to the heart, its natural and necessary


outcome,


460


2, The possessor of true religion is sometimes unfortunately situated.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XII.





The condition of woman, and especially of a widow, in the Hast was deplorable.
Her portion was oppression. 3. Contrast between principles and position makes
the development of religion difficult. The widow had the will, but not the
means, to give. She was a princess in heart, but a pauper in hand.

II. True religion will develop itself in spite of adverse circumstances.—
This “ poor widow” displayed—1. Consciousness of ability to give. God created
all beings with the power to realise the design of their existence. This is
pre-eminently true of man. He has soul, will, affections, emotions, conscience,
body, privileges, motives, and example. 2. Conviction of duty to give. Every
one under the law was commanded to give. None was exempted. The
principle still remains under the new dispensation. Individual effort is ever-
lasting. No proxy in religion. ‘Follow thou Me.” 3. Practical promptitude
to give. She contributed gloriously, and the tinkling of her tiny tokens has
reverberated throughout the universe. The making power of the two mites has
been felt in all the collections of Christendom ever since.

III. The display of true religion in spite of adverse circumstances wins _
the hearty commendation of Christ.—Christ reports a farthing. He is alone
in this. The sum was small, but it was an indication of profound feeling and
great sacrifice. It was full of self-denial. The others of their much gave a
little, but she of her little gave all. There was no suffering in their offerings.
Religion was secondary to riches. Gold superseded God. If there is no sacrifice
in our deeds, they are valueless in a moral sense. The widow went her way
after depositing her gift, and probably never knew that she was observed.
Perhaps it will be so with thee. Do thy best and thou shalt reap. Do thy
best in the family, the business, the school, the Church, the world. Time is


short. Work is urgent. Recompense is sure.—B. D. Johns.
OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.
Ver. 41. The Church treasury.— gift cannot be determined by its


I. The Church treasury.—l. Its su-
preme importance. The Church can
no more succeed without its treasury
than can a mill, factory, workshop,
farm, or store. (1) Church edifices
can neither be built nor maintained
without money. (2) The ministry is
sustained by the treasury. (3) All
the benevolent work of the Church
waitsonthetreasury. 2. The treasury
measures the love of Christ’s people
for Him. Self-sacrifice. Money is
the principal representative of value.

II. The people who cast money
into it.—1l. “The multitude.” “None
empty.” ‘Every one lay by,” ete.
2. Jesus saw how much, ete. 3. How
rather than what. ‘Cheerful giver.”
“ Willing mind.” Many gave from
purse only; she from heart. Custom
—love.


Vers. 42-44. The greatness of the
widow's gift—I. The greatness of a


absolute amount; it can be truly
ascertained only by a moral standard.
—l. The first index on this moral
standard points to the ability to bestow.
The widow had given more than the
wealthy in proportion to her ability.
Their contributions were as much .
less than their living as the widow’s
mites, which were “all her living,”
were less than their gifts of gold.
And, even while they stood at the
Temple, their servants were busy in
their rich dwellings, preparing savoury
viands against their masters’ return.
But the widow’s habitation was deso-
late in her absence; the fire had gone
out upon her hearth; and she must
return not to a luxurious feast, but
to an empty board. In such circum-
stances abundant indeed was her con-
tribution. 2. A second mark upon
this standard indicates the disposition
that prompts the gift. There may be
no generosity in the most magnificent


461


CHAP. XII.





bequest, while a soul overfiowing with
love may accompany the humblest
present. Here inceed is a sense in
which her offering was greater than
those of the worldlings. It was
greater in her own soul. Small in-
deed was their gift in the estimation
of their own secret thought. Inferior
was its weight in the scales of con-
science, but great and glorious the
integrity and joyfulness of the widow’s
spirit. 38. There is still another index
on this moral standard which deter-
mines the greatness of a gift. This
index points to the good effect result-
ing from the gift. How many hearts
has this lofty spirit of the poor widow,
thus celebrated by Christ, inspired
with the same self-forgetful love and
impelled to the same noble conduct!
Viewed in its ultimate influence, then,
her gift was greater than theirs; and,
thus regarded, we may even say it
was absolutely greater. For if we
consider all the effects of her example
in cherishing a true benevolence and
leading others to be bountiful even
the sum of the rich men’s benefactions
would dwindle and fade into nothing
before the greatness and splendour of
offerings devoted to the cause of
religion which have grown, as an
iramense harvest from invisible seed, out
of the widow's mites. She gave not
only to the Temple at Jerusalem, but
to every Christian temple under the
heaven whose foundations have since
been laid. By asingle act of self-denial
she has been charitable to the whole
world; and for what she did, in
humility and sorrow that she could do
no more, the whole world will confess
itself under obligations and be grateful.

II. This subject naturally suggests
an absolute truth, apart from the
particular case presented in the text.
—1, We may say, generally, it is not
great but small things, not imposing
but humble deeds, that make up the
great sum of good influence. Look at
all the great associations for the sup-
port of government, education, philan-
thropy, religion. It is not the talents,
but the mites, by which they are


462


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


nourished. 2. In regard to our own
characters we may say the mites are
more than the talents. Itis not what
we think and feel and do on extra-
ordinary occasions that makes the
bulk of character, but the silent and
steady accumulation of our every-day
desires and motives and habits of life.
Religion consists not in spasmodic
efforts, but persevering industry—not
in doing much at one time, but all we
can at all times. Think not thy little,
if it be all thou canst, will be despised :
think not thy much, if it be less than
thy ability, will be accepted.—C. 4.
Bartol.

Unconscious fame.—She knew not
that any had seen it: for the know-
ledge of eyes turned on her, even His,
would have flushed with shame. the
pure cheek of her love; and any word,
conscious notice, or promise would have
marred and turned aside the rising
incense of her sacrifice. But to all
time has it remained in the Church,
like the perfume of Mary’s alabaster
that filled the house, this. deed of self-
denying sacrifice. More, far more, than
the great gifts of their “ superfiuity,”
which the rich cast in, was, and is to
all time, the gift of absolute self-
surrender and sacrifice, tremblingly
offered by the solitary mourner. And
though He spake not to her, yet the
sunshine of His words must have fallen
into the dark desolateness of her heart ;
and though perhaps she knew not
why, it must have been a happy day
of rich feast in the heart when she
gave up “her whole living” unto God.
And so perhaps is every sacrifice
for God all the more blessed when we
know not of its blessedness.—A. Hders-
heim, D.D.

Uncoined charity—The humblest
and feeblest among us may cast in
their mite wherever there is a sick
bedside to be prayed by, ignorance to
be enlightened, or misery to be relieved.
There are many widows still among
us in heart like her who left her all
in the treasury. May their useful
and estimable class extend and per-
severe! True to their principles of





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIi.


oe ee ee ae


doing all unto the Lord, and of giving
in secret, may no apprehension of the
scorn of the world, nor any misgiving
of their doing good because the good
they do seems small in amount, check
their hands or chill their hearts: many
a midnight prayer ascends for them
from sleepless but grateful sufferers,
many a blessing poured forth for them
by helpless lips is registered on high ;
and still, when the Lord looks up to
view how men are filling His treasury,
He sees certain poor widows casting in
thither their mites ; and passing by un-
heeded the rich men’s gifts, He fixes on
them the praise of real charity.—A. L.
Browne.

A rule of giving for the rich.—Dit-
ferent circumstances require different
management, and there is a way of
coming up to the poor widow’s attain-
ments without doing exactly as she
did. Ifa rich man were to give away
his whole estate, and reduce himself
to poverty or to hard labour, this
would not only be doing as much, but
a great deal more than the poor widow
did; for she did not make any such
great change in her circumstances,
nor did she sink her state or condition
at all lower than before. Her example
therefore, or our Lord’s applauding it,
is of no force as to obliging any one to
throw himself out of that rank, station,
or condition of life wherein God has
placed him. Nor does the instance of
the text oblige a man, when in a
thriving way, to dispose of all the
overplus, all the clear gains, at the
year’s end: for how then could he go
on to support that rank and station
he is in, and to provide for his family ?





The poor widow might, by what she
did, straiten herself for a day or
two, and after that be in as good a
condition as she was before. But were
any trading or thriving men to give
away all their increase, they would
soon find their affairs run backwards,
and would not be able to recover them.
Well, then, how must we state the case
with a rich man to make it answer
to this in the text? The rule of pro-
portion, I conceive, is this: that the
richer sort, in order to give the more
away in charity, should be content
to practise some degree of self-denial,
in like manner as the poor widow did.
Let them retrench unnecessary ex-
penses at least, abridge their pleasures,
shorten their diversions, cut off as
much as possible from the pomp and
pride of life, to spend upon the poor.
Besides this, let them not be over-
solicitous as to futurities, providing
handsomely for their children, or
raising their families. The poor widow
trusted God for her own necessary
subsistence rather than make no
offering at all to the treasury. And
thus much at least may be expected
of every man: that he contribute
according to his perfect circumstances ;
and that no anxiety, either for himself
or his children after him, ever hinder
him from doing in proportion to what
he at present enjoys. Be content
with a moderate provision rather than
grow covetous and defraud the poor ;
for, after all, God’s providence is
the best security and His friendship
the richest treasure we can have.—
Archdeacon Waterland.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII.


Ver. 2. “ At the season.”—That was when
the clusters were ripe, or perhaps it means
the usually arranged period when the tenants,
having gathered their grapes, and pressed
their clusters, and sold their casks of wine,
were able to pay the agreed amount of
the profits. The plan seems to resemble the
system called métayer in France, where the
landowner supplies the land and seed, etc.,
according to an agreement, and the labourer
supplies the culture, and at harvest-time


receives for himself two-thirds of the crop,
and pays over the other third to the land-
owner,


Vers. 3-9. Insecurity of life in unsettled
times.—The insecurity of life is reflected by
the fierce lawlessness of the peasants who
had possession of the vineyard; for that
must have been a wild time of which it
could be said that they beat, stabbed, or
stoned both bands of slaves, ending by kill-


463


CHAP. XII.





ing even the householder’s son. Nor is ita
less vivid indication of general social de-
moralisation to find the injured owner repre-
sented as coming and destroying the criminals,
without any reference of the matter to a
court of law. The parable must be true to
possibilities, else it would have failed to im-
press, and hence may be accepted as imply-
ing a very unsettled state of society in
Palestine in those days, at least in districts
away from Roman posts. The hideous misery
entailed on the whole land by the long civil
wars of local pretenders, and, still more, by
the awful struggles of the rival claimants
to the throne of the world, had brought over
wide regions, not in Palestine alone, but in
every province of the all-embracing Roman
Empire, a dissolution of society, and the
destruction of once flourishing communities,
which made it the great task of the peaceful
age of Augustus to rebuild ruined cities, to
bring back to cultivation provinces once
filled with a thriving population and rich
in all rural industries, to repress and ex-
tirpate the lawlessness following in the train
of such prolonged social convulsions, and to
restore order and the sanctities of a secure
public and private life. Over Palestine and
Western Asia, including Asia Minor, there
was, in fact, a state of things to redress
which in a measure anticipated that of the
civilised world at large in the fifth century,
when the safest retreat of robbers, or the
most lonely haunt of the solitary monk
fleeing from the evils of the world, was in
the ruins of what had not long before been
a rich and populous city. Or, if we seek a
parallel in modern history, there was such
a state of things as remained over Central
Europe after the close of the Thirty Years’
War, the scars and ruin of which are not
even yet effaced, after nearly two hundred
and fifty years. 7. Geikie, D.D.
Ingratitude.—At the battle of the Alma,
in September 1854, a wounded Russian was
calling piteously for water. Captain Edding-
ton, whose heart was kind and charitable,
ran to him, and, stooping, gave him a drink.
The wounded man revived. The captain
ran forward to rejoin his regiment, when
the wretch fired and shot him who had
befriended him in time of need.


Vers. 6, 7. God's longsuffering—The axe
carried before the Roman consuls was always
bound up ina bundle of rods. An old author
tells us that “‘the rods were tied up with
knotted cords, and that when an offender
was condemned to be punished the exe-
cutioner would untie the knots one by one,
and meanwhile the magistrate would look
the culprit in the face, to observe any signs
of repentance and watch his words, to see
if he could find a motive for mercy; and
thus justice went to its work deliberately
and without passion.” The axe was enclosed


464


MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





in rods to shew that the extreme penalty
was never inflicted till milder means had
failed; first the rod, and the axe only as a
terrible necessity.

Divine forbearance.—The Macedonian king,
Alexander the Great, who, as in one triumphal
march, conquered the world, observed a very .
singular custom in his method of carrying
on war. Whenever he encamped with his
army before a fortified city and laid siege to
it, he caused to be set up a great lantern,
which was kept lighted by day and night.
This was a signal to the besieged, and what
it meant was that as long as the lamp burned
they had time to, save themselves by sur-
render, but that when once the light should
be extinguished, the city, and all that were
in it, would be irrevocably given over to
destruction. And the conqueror kept his
word with terrible consistency. When the
light was put out, and the city was not
given up, all hope of mercy was over. The
Macedonians stormed the place, and if it
was taken all were cut to pieces who were
capable of bearing arms, and there was no
quarter or forgiveness possible. Now it is
the good pleasure of our God to have com-
passion and to shew mercy. But acity ora
people can arrive at such a pitch of moral
corruption that the moral order of the world
can only be saved by its destruction. It
was so with the whole race of men at the
time of the Flood, with Sodom and Gomorrah
at a later period, and with the Jewish people
in our Saviour’s time. But before the im-
pending stroke of judgment fell God always,
so to speak, set up the lamp of grace, which
was not only a signal of mercy, but also a
light to shew men that they were in the way
of death, and a power to turn them from it.

God's final effort.—I remember one of the
poets hath an ingenious fancy to express the
Passion, wherewith he found himself over-
come after a long resistance—that “the God
of love had shot all His golden arrows at
him, but could never pierce his heart, till
at length he put Himself into the bow, and
darted Himself straight into his breast.”
Methinks this doth some way adumbrate
God’s method of dealing with men. He had
long contended with a stubborn world, and
thrown down many a blessing upon them;
and when all His other gifts could not
prevail, He at last made a gift of Himself,
to testify His affections and to engage theirs
(Isa. v. 4; Rom. viii. 32; Heb.i,3; Tit. ii. 14),
—H., Scougal.

Christ's reception from men.—Surely a ser-
vant of the government may risk himself in
the very heart of a convict prison alone, if
he is the bearer of a royal pardon for all the
inmates. In such a case it would not be
necessary to look out for a man of rare
courage who might dare to carry the pro-
clamation to the convicts. Give him but
the message of free pardon, and he may go





oe


q


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XII





jn unarmed with all safety, like Daniel in
the den of lions. When Christ Himself came
to the world—the great convict prison of
the universe—came the Ambassador from
God, bringing peace—they said: ‘‘ This is the
heir; come, let us kill Him!” He came unto
His own, and His own received Him not,
and the servant is not greater than his Lord,


Ver. 9. Responsibility—Daniel Webster
was once called upon at a dinner-party in
his own house to specify what one thing he
had met with in life which had done most
for him or had contributed most to his
success. After a moment he replied, “The
most fruitful and elevating influence I have
ever seemed to meet with has been my im-
pression of responsibility to God.”


Ver. 10. “ The headstone of the corner” is
a keystone. A keystone is the wedge-shaped
stone which keys or binds together the sides
of an arch at its top. There is an ancient
story that the Temple-builders, in absence
of the architect, threw away a keystone
because of its peculiar shape. It would not
fit anywhere in the walls, Finally its proper
place was found, and it was raised to the top
of the arch. “The stone which the builders
rejected became the head of the corner,” the
keystone of the arch. A beautiful illustra-
tion, frequently used, of the rejection and
exaltation of Christ. The rejection adds
lustre to the glory. Every rejection of
Christ turns out the same way: whether
rejected by Caiaphas, or Nero, or Voltaire
or Paris Commune, He is ever found, ever
raised, ever placed higher in the fabric, the
headstone of the arch. He has no other
place. He fits nowhere else. He is not
one fine stone along with the rest, Confucius,
Buddha, and Mahomet. He is the keystone,
different in kind from the rest. This or
nothing. His place is at the top. The
whole fabric of history holds Him up to
view. He binds together the arch. With-
out Him the arch must fall in. Without
Him the arch is an unsolved problem. He
is the keystone; He solves the problem and
locks the arch. He is the keystone of history.
Previous history comes up to Him on one
side, and subsequent history on the other
side, and He unites them. He is the centre
of history. He is the keystone of religion.
Religion is the arch which bridges the chasm
between heaven and earth. The God-man
touches each side: His Divinity touches the
heaven side, His humanity touches the earth
side, and the arch is completed, the bridge
is effected.


Ver. 16. God’s image stamped on man.—
We can often tell what a thing is for by
noticing its make. The instructed eye of
an anatomist will, from a bone, divine the
sphere in which the creature to whom it
belonged was intended to live. Just as


plainly as gills or lungs, fins or wings, or
legs and arms declare the element in which
the creature that possesses them is intended
to move, so plainly stamped upon all our
natures is this, that God is our Lord, since
we are made in a true sense in His image,
and that only in Him can we find rest. If
you take a coin, and compare it with the
die from which it has been struck, you will
find that wherever in the die there is a
relief, in the coin there is a sunken place,
and conversely. So there are not only resem-
blances in man to the Divine nature which
bear upon them the manifest marks of his
destiny, but there are correspondences,
wants, on our side, being met by gifts upon
His; hollow emptiness in us being filled,
when we are brought into contact with
Him, by the abundance of His outstanding
supplies and gifts —A. Maclaren, D.D.

The defacement of God's image in man.—
You sometimes get into your hands money
on which there has been stamped, by mis-
chief, or for some selfish purpose, the name
of some one else than the king’s or queen's
which surrounds the head upon it. And in
like manner our nature has gone through
the stamping-press again, and another like-
ness has been deeply imprinted upon it.
The image of God, which every man has,
is in some senses and aspects ineffaceable
by any course of conduct of theirs. But in
another aspect it is not like the permanent
similitude stamped upon the solid metal of
the penny, but like the reflexion, rather,
that falls upon some polished plate, or that
is cast upon the white sheet from a lantern.
If the polished plate be rusty and stained,
the image is faint and indistinct; if it be
turned away from the light, the image passes.
Aud that is what some of you are doing.
By living to yourselves, by living day in and
day out without ever remembering God, by
yielding to passions, lusts, ambitions, low
desires, and the like, you are doing your
very best to scratch out the likeness which
still lingers in your nature.—Jbid.


Ver. 17. Religion and business.—Have you,
a Christian, two sources of happiness—God
and the world? Then you are wrong, for to
you God ought to be in all the world that
you appropriate, and all the world God’s.
Do you use the adjectives “spiritual” and
“secular” in describing your enjoyments?
Is prayer spiritual, that is the Great Spirit's
gift, while an evening in a picture-gallery
is secular, that is man’s gift? Why, God
gives the latter as truly as the former. Tf
you are living on the high plane of your
privilege, you see God in all things that you
are permitted to build into your life. Have
you spiritual needs, as for instance help in
resisting temptation, and secular needs, such
as help in sickness? There is only One
Helper everywhere, -You watch against


HH 465


CHAP. XII.


temptation—and pray; you call the phy-
sician in sickness—and ought also to pray.
Are you able to manage the mortgage alone,
but unable, as you think, to save your soul?
In fact you, without God, are as powerless
in the one case as the other; you cannot
cross your office threshold without Him, nor
sign a draft. There are not two worlds here
below to the Christian, one God’s realm and
the other man’s. He is all in all. Collo-
quially it is harmless, but in the secret heart it
is wicked to distinguish to oneself between
spiritual and temporal possessions. Your
faith and love are God’s, and so your house,
your gold. Men say business is business and
religion isreligion. No. Business is religion
and religion is business.—#. J. Haynes.


Vers. 18-27. Universal belief in immor-
tality.— Almost every religion which has
gathered adherents from among the different
tribes of men has not only affirmed the doc-
trine of a future life, but has inculcated it—
if not as a basis of morality, as a promise of
reward for virtue and right living. “In all
the leading nations of the earth the doctrine
is a tradition handed down from immemorial
antiquity, embalmed in sacred books which
are regarded as infallible revelations.” You
will find it in some form as well in the
ancient religions as in those of later times.
Brahminism teaches it; so does Moham-
medanism. It forms part of the Confucian
theology, and is one of the chief features of
the revelation of Christianity. Amid the
apparent Nihilism and Atheism of the teach-
ing of Buddha there are gleams of light on
the great problem of an immortal future.
The Zendavesta unfolds a state beyond death
in which man’s destiny is the consequent
result of character; and when the Persians
decorated the splendid walls of Persepolis,
they embodied in sculpture the dominant
dogma of their faith—the doctrine of ever-
lastingness. In the theology and religious
symbolism of ancient Egypt the doctrine of
immortality held a most conspicuous place.
It was not a dream of the Egyptian priest-
hood, but a fixed and firm persuasion of the
people. And the natives embalmed their
dead not merely to preserve them from
putrefaction, but as significant of eternal
continuance. When we come to Greece and
Rome, we find the idea so mixed up with all
that is best in the literature of these great
nations that we cannot help seeing how
largely it affected the faith and hope of the
leaders of learning, philosophy, and religion.
The best of the Greek poets caught sight in
imagination of their favourite heroes trans-
ported beyond the waves of death’s dark
river—immortal in a land of life. They
sang of the Elysian plains, where the e/Swra
kauovrwy—the shadowy images of the dead
—moved in a world of shadows, and of
“the Islands of the Blest where Achilles


466


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


and Tydides unlaced the helmets from their
flowing hair.” It has been thought that the
organisation of the Greek mysteries was the
outcome of the nation’s best aspirations for
immortal life. The conception of an immortal
future so possessed the best of Rome’s philo-
sophers and orators that they declared the
troubles of life unworthy to be borne “ unless
man had within himself the assurance of an
after-destiny.” Cicero represents Cato as
thus addressing his young friends Scipio
and Lelius; “No one shall persuade me,
Scipio, that your worthy father, or your
grandfathers, Paulus and Africanus, or many
other excellent men whom I need not name,
performed so many actions to be remem-
bered by posterity without being sensible
that futurity was their right. And if I may
be allowed an old man’s privilege to speak
for myself, can you imagine that I should
have submitted to so much painful toil by
night and by day, in the forum, in the
Senate, and in the field, had I apprehended
that: my existence and reputation were to
terminate with this life? But... I feel my-
self transported with delight at the thought
of again seeing and joining your father, whom
on earth I highly respected and dearly loved.
. . . Ob! glorious day when I shall be ad-
mitted into the assembly of the wise and the
good, ... when amidst the happy throng
of the immortals I shall find thee also, my
son, my Cato, best, most amiable of men.”
Seneca—one of Rome’s greatest philoso-
phers—writing to Marcia to console her on
the loss of her son, says: “The sacred
assembly of the Scipios and Catos, who have
themselves despised life, and obtained free-
dom by death, shall welcome the youth to
the region of happy souls.” Centuries before
that Cyrus, addressing his sons, as he lay on
the bed of death, had given utterance to the
same assurance: “ Do not imagine, oh, my
dear children! that when I leave you I shall
cease to exist. For even when I was yet
with you my spirit you could not discern;
but that it animated this body you were
fully assured by the actions I performed.
Be assured that it will continue the same,
though you see it not. I can never suffer
myself to be persuaded that man lives only
while he is in the body, and dies when it is
dissolved, or that the soul loses all intel-
ligence on being separated from an unin-
telligent lump of clay; but rather that on
being liberated from all mixture with the
body, pure and entire, it enters upon its true
intellectual existence.” In the Phedo Plato
describes Socrates as calmly discussing
with his friends, in his last moments, the
conditions of the immortal state into which
he was about to enter. “Those,” he says,
“who have passed through life with peculiar
sanctity of manners are received on high
into a pure region, where they live without
their bodies to all eternity, in a series of








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XII.





joys and delights which cannot be described.”
When some reference was made to the
interment that was to follow the fatal
draught, he replied: “ You may bury me if
you can catch me.” And then, with a smile,
and with an intonation of unfathomable ten-
derness, he added: “Do not call this poor
body Socrates. When I have drunk the
poison IT shall leave you, and go to the joys
of the blessed. I would not have you sorrow
at my hard lot, or say at the interment,
‘Thus we lay out Socrates’; or, ‘Thus we
follow him to the grave, or bury him.’ Be
of good cheer ; say that you are burying my
body only.”


Ver. 27. Heaven the land of the living —
A dying lady once said to her brother who
was about to take his leave of her without
any hope of seeing her again in this world:
“Brother, I trust we shall meet in the
land of the living. We are now in the land
of the dying.”


Ver. 30. Love, the most imporiant thing. —
“ Father,” asked the son of Bishop Berkeley,
“ what is the meaning of the words ‘ cheru-
bim’ and ‘seraphim,’ which we meet with in
the Bible?” “ Cherubim,” replied his father,
“is a Hebrew word, signifying knowledge ;
seraphim is another word of the same
language, signifying flame. Whence it is
supposed that the cherubim are angels who
excel in knowledge, and that the seraphim
are angels likewise who excel in loving God.”
“TJ hope, then,” said the little boy, “ when I
die I shall be a seraph, for I would rather
love God than know all things.”


Ver. 31. Loving neighbour as self—A good
old clergyman, living on the borders of
Salisbury Plain, was admired by his bishop
for having performed “the greatest act of
charity of which he had ever heard.” It
will amuse you to hear what that act was.
When the Rev. Samuel Settle—for that was
his name—required a new suit of clothes,
he used to send for the parish tailor to
measure him; and when the number of
inches had been correctly noted down, he
would add, “Make the things a size larger
than the measure, Grant.” Did he like his
clothes very loose, do you think? Not a bit
of it; but his reverence was a particularly
small man, and the poor old parishioner to
whom he usually gave his cast-off garments
was a size larger. Now do you see the
reason for the order to the tailor, and do you
wonder at the bishop’s praise? Which of
us would choose our coats or dresses to suit
mother person? Verily good old Mr. Settle
—now gone to his rest—did love his neigh-
bour as himself.


Ver. 34. “Not far from the kingdom.”—
When, after safely circumnavigating the
globe, the Royal Charter went to pieces in


Moelfra Bay, on the coast of Wales, it was my
melancholy duty (says one) to visit and seek
to comfort the wife of the first officer, made by
that calamity a widow. The ship had been
telegraphed from Queenstown, and the lady
was sitting in her parlour expecting her
husband, with the table spread for his even-
ing meal, when the messenger came to tell
her he was drowned, Never canI forget the
grief, so stricken and tearless, with which
she rung my hand, as she said, “So near
home, and yet lost!”

Half a point off the course.—Almost is not
sufficient. A gentleman crossing the English
Channel stood near the helmsman. It was
a calm and pleasant evening, and no one
dreamed of a possible danger to their good
ship. But a sudden flapping of a sail, as if
the wind had shifted, caught the ear of the
officer on watch, and he sprang at once to
the wheel, examining closely the compass.
“You are half a point off the course,” he
said sharply to the man at the wheel. The
deviation was corrected, and the officer re-
turned to his post. “You must steer very
accurately,” said the looker-on, “ when only
half a point is so much thought of.” “ Ab,
half a point in many places might bring us
directly on the rocks,” he said. What avails
being almost right, if destruction is the end?


Vers. 38, 39. The Synagogue of Ambition.
—There is the Synagogue of Ambition,
whose bond of union is the lust of place
and of power. Let Diotrephes be its repre-
sentative, who “loved to have the pre-emi-
nence,” and whom St. John censured for this
ambitious temper, which tempted him,
though nominally a member—perhaps a
minister—of the early Church, violently to
reject the best Christians. What are not
men ready to do to gratify an inordinate and
insatiate ambition! You know how the
old Romans built their military roads. They
projected them in a mathematical line,
straight to the point of termination, and
everything had to give way, there could be
no deviation. And so on went the road,
bridging rivers, filling up ravines, hewing
down hills, levelling forests, cutting its way
through every obstacle! Just so men set
their lust upon self-emolument, some height
of ambition, the attainment of place, rank,
power, and hew their way toward it, not
minding what gives way. No obstacle is
insurmountable; health, happiness, home-
comfort, honesty, integrity, conscience, the
law of God, everything is sacrificed to the
god of ambition.


Ver. 40. A devourer of widows’ houses.—
In the town of L—— resided a prosperous
and pious sadler. He had a wife, but no
family ; and at her entreaty he took into his
home a boy, a relative of his own. The
wife tended him, mothered him, taught him,


467


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





a ee


He learned the business, and grew up to his
manhood. Before that time the wife became
a confirmed invalid from rheumatism, and
soon lay helpless in one room, when her
husband was stricken with acute disease
and lay dying in another. Under solemn
promise to the dying man, and with great
shew of piety, the young man secured that all
the property should be left to him, solemnly
pledging himself to care lovingly for that
invalid wife to her last day. No sooner was
the husband laid in his grave than that
young man turned the poor invalid out of
house and home, and even compelled her to
find money among her friends with which
to purchase the very furniture she brought
to the home at her marriage. And, broken-
hearted, the poor woman soon died in a
stranger’s shelter. They say that man
- is prosperous to-day. Who of us would
change lots with that “devourer of widows’
houses ”?

Prayers judged by weight, not length.—
God takes not men’s prayers by tale, but by
weight. He respecteth not the arithmetic
of our prayers, how many there are; nor the
rhetoric of our prayers, how eloquent they
are; nor the geometry of our prayers, how
long they are; nor the music of our prayers,
the sweetness of our voice; nor the logic of
our prayers, nor the method of them; but
the divinity of our prayers is that which He
so much esteemeth. He looketh not for any
James with horny knees through assuidity
in prayer; nor for any Bartholomew with a
century of prayers for the morning, and as
many for the evening; but St. Paul, his
frequency of praying with fervency of spirit,
without all tedious prolixities and vain
babblings, this it is that God makes most
account of. It is not a servant’s going to
and fro, but the despatch of his business,
that pleases his master. It is not the loud-
ness of a preacher’s voice, but the holiness of
the matter and the spirit of the preacher,
that moves a wise and intelligent hearer.
So here, not gifts, but graces in prayer, move
the Lord. But these long prayers of the
Pharisees were so much the worse because
thereby they sought to entitle God to their
sin, yea, they merely mocked Him, fleering in
His face.—J. Trapp.


Vers, 41,42. The widon’s mites.—In my pas-
torate at Wyoming, Pa., a brother Pettibone,
since deceased, a man rich in faith, charity,
and good works, cast five dollars into the
church treasury every Lord’s Day; a poor
widow cast into the same treasury five cents
each Sunday. She was very poor, and, to
provide for her six fatherless children, took
in washing every week. Brother Pattibone
came to me one day, and asked me to say
to this widow that the church officers felt
she ought not to pay anything for the sup-
port of the church; and, he added, “tell


468


her that I will pay the five cents extra each
week for her.” I called, and performed my
errand as delicately as I could; but never
before or since did I learn a lesson that
taught me, as I was then taught, what it
meant to give. As she heard my story the
tears came to her eyes, and she answered :
“Do they want to take from me the comfort
I experience in giving to the Lord? Think
how much I owe to Him. My health is
good, my children keep well, and I receive
so many blessings I feel that I could not
live if Idid not make my little offering to
Jesus each week.” I left her humble dwell-
ing, feeling that Providence had ordered the
incident, to teach me a never-to-be-forgotten
lesson, that giving is absolutely essential to
true Christian discipleship and worship, and
that our giving and all other acts of worship
will be judged not by the amounts we give,
nor the professions we make, but by the
spirit, the motive of our giving and doing.
—R. W. Van Schaick. ;

The gifts of the poor.—Jewish tradition,
though it ever and painfully thrusts for-
ward the reward, has some beautiful legends,
allegories, and sayings about the gifts of
the poor. One is to the effect that if one
who is poor doeth charity, God says of
him: “This one is preventing Me. He has
kept My commandments before they have
come to him, I must recompense him.”
In Vayyikra, R. 3, we read of a woman
whose offering of a handful of flour the
priest despised, when God admonished him
in a dream to value the gift as highly as if
she had offered herself. The tractate Mena-
choth closes with these words: Alike as
regards burnt offerings of beasts and those
of fowls [those of the poor] and the meat
offering, we find the expression “ for a sweet
savour,” to teach us that to offer much or
to offer little is the same, provided only that
a person direct mind and heart toward God.
—A. Edersheim, D.D.


Vers. 43, 44. Liberality must correspond
with means.—Sir Thomas Sutton, the founder
of the Charter House, wasone of the wealthiest
merchants of his day. Fuller tells how he
was overheard one day praying in his garden:
“ Lord, Thou hast given me a large and
liberal estate ; give me also a heart to make
use of it.”

Oracles are said to have more than once
proclaimed that the hecatombs of noble
oxen with gilded horns, that were offered
up ostentatiously by the rich, were less
pleasing to the gods than the wreaths of
flowers and the modest, reverential worship
of the poor. In general, however, the service
of the Temple had little or no connexion with
morals, and the change which Christianity
effected in this respect was one of its most
important benefits to mankind.—W. #. 4,
Lecky.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. WARK. CHAP. XII.
oe EN I a de


CHAPTER XIII.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 8. Beginnings of sorrows.--Beginning of travail-pangs—the throes that are to issue
in the regeneration of the world.

Ver. 9. Render: But look ye to yourselves ; for they shall deliver you unto sanhedrins
and unto synagogues ; ye shall be beaten; and at-the-bar-of governors and kings ye shall
stand on account of Me, for a testimony to them. Meaning of last clause: an opportunity
will be given you of proclaiming the truth in the hearing of the highest in the land—those
ee a the ordinary course of things, would be unlikely to come in contact with peasants
of Galilee.

Ver. 11. Take no thought beforehand.—“ntertain no solicitude as to what, etc. Neither do
ye premeditate.—Omitted in many first-rate MSS. and versions. Probably a marginal
explanation of preceding clause, which eventually crept into the text.

Ver. 13. He that shall endure unto the end.—“ Here is the cardinal virtue of fortitude, the
cheerful hardihood and loyal sense of duty, evinced by Christ’s faithful soldier and servant
in meeting all shocks of temptation and all assaults of our enemies; for droudvew often
means to bide the brunt of encounter in battle.”

Ver, 14. The abomination of desolation.— Hebraism for the abomination that makes desolate.
See Dan. ix. 27, xi. 31, xii. 11. A comparison of this verse with the parallel passage in
Matt. xxiv. 15, 16, makes it evident that the scene of this was to be the Temple. Once
already had it been desecrated (1 Macc. i. 54), when Antiochus Epiphanes set up the statue
of Jupiter on the altar of burnt sacrifice. But a worse profanation was yet to follow.
Josephus (Wars of the Jews, 1V. vi. 3) mentions an ancient saying current among the Jews,
that “ Jerusalem would be taken, and the Temple be destroyed, when it had been defiled by
the hands of Jews themselves "—a prophecy that was literally fulfilled when, during the
first siege of Jerusalem under Cestius (A.D. 68), the Temple was taken possession of by a
band of Zealots, who committed fearful outrages of lust and murder within its sacred
precincts. Such, in the opinion of the writer, was the portent to which Christ pointed as
the signal to His followers to lose no time in seeking a place of safety beyond Judea.
Flee to the mountains.— History records that when the time came the Christians fled from
Jerusalem and Judea to Pella, identified with the ruins of Fahil, among the hills of Gilead.

Ver. 17. Woe to them.— Alas! for them ... Cp. Luke xxiii. 28, 29; and see Josephus,
Wars, VI. iii. 4.

Ver. 18. In God’s mercy the prayer which the Christians doubtless offered in accordance
with this injunction was heard, and the awful calamity of a winter flight averted. The
Roman army first encompassed Jerusalem in October, when the weather is still mild; and
the final siege took place in April or May.

Ver. 19. Josephus unconsciously echoes these words : “ All calamities, from the beginning
of time, seem to me to shrink to nothing in comparison with those of the Jews.” He gives
an awful description of these calamities in Wars, VI.ili. 3. See also Tacitus, History, v. 13 ;
Milman, History of the Jews, ii. 16; Merivale, History of the Romans, vi. 59.

Ver. 20, The city which had stood the siege of Nebuchadnezzar for sixteen months
(2 Kings xxv. 1-6; Jer, xxxix.1, 2) was taken by the Romans in less than five. Among
the providential circumstances which combined to bring this about may be mentioned—
(1) the order of Claudius forbidding Herod Agrippa from completing the fortifications ;
(2) the wars of factions in Jerusalem itself; (3) the destruction by fire of large stores of
provisions ; (4) the Jews’ abandonment of the towers on the approach of Titus; (5) the
swift and energetic measures of the Roman armies.

Ver. 22. False Christs.—Not necessarily assuming the name of Christ, but pretending to
a fuller revelation than Christ’s. Theudas; Simon Magus. False prophets.—See Josephus,
Antiquities, XX. viii. 6; Tacitus, History, v.13. Cp. also 2 Thess. ii. 1-10, To seduce.—
With a view to leading astray. Whether or not successful in this, Christ leaves an open
question for the future to decide,

Vers. 28, 29. See R.V. rendering.

Ver, 30. This generationAlways used by Christ of persons then living on earth
(Matt. xi, 16, xii. 41, 42, 45, xxiii. 36; Mark viii. 12, 38; Luke vii. 31, xi. 30, 31, 32, 50, 51,
xvii. 25). Evidently, then, the terminus ad quem of “all these things” is the destruction
of Jerusalem.

Ver. 32. Neither the Son.— He who as Son of God possesses with the Father and the Holy
Spirit the Divine attribute of omniscience, condescended as Son of Man to acquire during
His earthly life only such instalments of knowledge (Luke ii. 52) as were consistent with
a creaturely form of existence (Phil. ii. 6,7). The knowledge of the time of the Last Advent


469


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIG COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
pe a a ea


being wholly unnecessary to the Church, was not communicated to Him, its Head. The
main thing to remember as to this limitation is that it was voluntary on our Lord’s part
—a, Self-emptying for the purposes of His Mission to our fallen race.

Ver. 35. Watch ye.—Be ye wakeful.—A military image. Don’t be caught napping at your
post. Same word in ver. 37. At even, etc.—The Roman divisions of the night. The four
watches, of three hours each, began at sunset and ended at sunrise.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—13.
(Paratets: Marr. xxiv. 1-14; Luxe xxi. 5-19.)


The destruction of the Temple.—I. The function of a prophet.—Of the three
characters, Prophet, Priest, and King, which are united in the person of Christ,
the first is that in which He was commonly regarded while He lived among
men. The original authority of a prophet is grounded, not on the truth of
his declarations concerning future events, which can never be ascertained till
the accomplishment of those events, but on the proofs of his Divine mission
which he offers to his immediate hearers—the signs and wonders which, in
connexion with the purity of his doctrine and the holiness of his life, plainly
prove him to be a teacher come from God, a prophet at least, if not more
than a prophet. When, however, the miracles have done their work, and
convinced the men of that generation of the prophetic character of him who
performs them, there still remains the test of prophecy, strictly so called—the
predictions, if the prophet have uttered any such, relating to future events, to
be accomplished in due season. Many such predictions might be gathered out
of our Lord’s discourses, and compared with the course of subsequent events,
from the time of their delivery unto this day. None, however, will be found
more interesting or more convincing than those which He delivered relating
to the destruction of that very city and Temple in or near which they were
uttered.

Il. The prediction of Christ concerning the Temple.—Jerusalem might be
called, at that time, a prosperous and flourishing city, not indeed independent,
but rather strengthened than weakened by that protection which was extended
over it by the Roman power. It was surrounded with lofty walls, along which
numerous strong towers were erected at certain distances, accor’ing to the best
methods of fortification then practised. High above all rose the Temple, at
once temple and fortress, to the buildings of which belonged those immense
stones which were pointed out to Christ by His disciples on this occasion,
Could a finer opportunity have been offered of delivering that prediction which
He had always intended to leave behind Him of the approaching destruction
of both city and Temple? Or could that destruction have been announced in
terms better adapted to sink down into the ears of His disciples? When a
building, especially one of the size and massive construction of the Temple, is
suffered to fall into decay, its destruction is slow and gradual; and long after
the more perishable portions have disappeared the walls remain standing, to
shew the form and dimensions of the structure when entire. Even when these
have fallen down the foundations continue unimpaired; and no degree of
dilapidation, nothing but extreme violence and a deliberate intention to destroy,
can ever reduce such an edifice to the state here described. It is manifest,
therefore, and must have been manifest to Christ’s hearers, that He spoke of
no ravages of time, no process of decay, but of brute force and hostile assaults,
when He used this image.

III. The fulfilment of this prediction Pass over a period of forty years,
and view Jerusalem, as had been foretold of it, compassed with armies, the
armies of the Romans under Titus. After several delays, occasioned by the


470


Dy OS ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIII.





unsettled state of the Roman Government, Vespasian was at last confirmed


in the imperial throne, and his son Titus was sent to command the armies in


Judea. The days of Jerusalem were now numbered. Failing to take the
city by assault, Titus proceeded to surround the entire compass of it with a
wall, thereby fulfilling a part of our Lord’s description (Luke xix, 43). The
inhabitants being thus without the possibility of escape, and all supplies being
cut off, the accomplishment of the rest of the prophecy could not be far off.
It was hastened by the conduct of the people themselves. Instead of uniting,
as one man, in the defence of the city, they weakened themselves by mutual
factions and divisions, insomuch that within the short space of five months
the city was taken, and the work of destructior begun. It is recorded that
Titus himself was very desirous of preserving tac Temple as a monument of
Roman power and prowess, but was unable to restrain his own soldiers, who,
in the heat and excitement of victory, set fire to it, and resisted all attempts
to extinguish the conflagration. The preservation of these great buildings being
thus rendered impossible, we read that the Roman general, foiled in his first
design, now gave orders to complete the demolition both of the city and Temple
by actually digging up and levelling the foundations of them; thus, almost


literally, leaving “not one stone upon another.”


Lessons.—1. How differently would things strike us if we could only look
forward a few years! What a world of changes do we live in! Desire and
seek after “durable riches,” a “building of God,” a “good foundation laid up
in store against the time to come.” 2. In connexion with the punishment
inflicted on Jerusalem, reflect on our own responsibility as having succeeded to
those privileges of which the Jews were dispossessed. Beware of defiling ‘the
temple of the living God.” 3. Where is this temple to be seen in its perfection ?
Not, will each of us be ready to reply, not in me, nor in my sin-stained, blood-
guilty soul. When I look into myself I see a temple indeed, but a temple in
ruins; a shrine from which the Divinity-has departed; a perverse will, unruly
passions, wayward and unsanctified affections; in a word, of that noble fabric
which was dedicated to God in baptism, and has been since adorned with so
many “gifts of the Holy Ghost,” not one stone is left upon another. I see, and
mourn; but I do not despair. The tears of the Christian over the breaches
and decays of his spiritual temple are the appointed means by which, under
God, those breaches are to be healed, and the whole building restored to its
original use, and, if possible, to more than its original beauty.—F. Mield, LL.D.


Warning, promise, and encowragement.—There is uothing in these words to
encourage speculation, much to induce and strengthen that practical temper
and habit, the habit of duty and loyal obedience, in which there lives far more real
religion than in all the pious and laborious conjectures good men have framed,
and which they sometimes attempt to palm off as infallible certainties on an
astonished Church, or world. ; ;

Il. The warning I take to be that we are to wait with patience for the
orderly providential unfolding of the Divine counsel, instead of impatiently
jumping at hasty and misleading conclusions. The conceited temper which
speaks as though it had been admitted to the secret council-chamber of heaven ;
the curious temper which is for ever prying into futurity, and busies itself with
~peculation instead of with the rules of holy living and the problems of obedience;
the hasty temper which is impatient for results, and wants to see trees bearing
fruit as soon as they are planted; and the faithless temper which is always
seeking proofs and signs, and confounds seeing with believing, are all rebuked by
this grave and kindly warning. ‘s ;

Il. The promise I take to be that to all faithful and obedient souls, thus

471


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
MPacbieer es ot! Se. = Eee





waiting with patience on God amid many tribulations aad disappointments, too |
occupied with duty and service to let their hearts grow sick with hope deferred,
a Divine guidance and help will be vouchsafed, answering to every need.
Loyalty to Christ under hard conditions, and when we fall on evil times, will
expose us to many tribulations—to loss, contumely, and the alienation of friends. —
But these very tribulations are part of the discipline by which God is making
us constant and making us perfect, by which He is preparing us for salvation
and life. And meantime, even in our darkest hours and most dejected moods,
He is with us to guide and sustain us, to teach us what to say and what to do.
III. The encouragement I take to be that the tribulations of this present —
time are designed to usher in, to prepare for us and to prepare us for, a better
time, a golden age, which shall have no end. This regeneration is our great
hope, our great encouragement, under the toils, often unrequited, of time, under —
all its changes and catastrophes, under the oppressive sense of its manifold |


evils, sorrows, wrongs.


We look for a time, we believe it to be the purpose


of God that a time shall come, in which evil will be overcome of good, and
death be swallowed up of life, in which not’ we alone shall be blessed, but


all men will be drawn into the service, love, and peace of God. And if we |


really believe this to be the end to which the love and providence of God are
pressing forward through all the vicissitudes and tribulations of time, for the
joy set before us, we may well rejoice in our tribulations and toils, even though
we do not know when the end will be reached, or what will be the signs of its


approach.—S. Cox, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1, 2. The spiritual temple.—
1. The world admires a stately and
magnificent temple; but the temple
which attracts the eyes and the heart
of Christ, as worthy of God and
framed by His Spirit, is a heart which
resembles that of this poor widow, a
heart consecrated by charity, wherein
God makes His abode, and in which
this virtue worships Him, sacrifices
itself to Him, mourns continually in
His presence, and there feeds upon His
Divine Word. 2. Christ bears with
the simplicity of His disciples, who
would have Him admire a temple of
which He was Himself the model, and
which was only a figure of His body;
but He makes use of this simplicity to
instruct them, to take off their minds
from this visible temple, and to give
them a foresight of that justice which
He was to exercise upon this building,
on account of the Jews. Nothing
of that which is to be destroyed is
worthy to be the true temple of God.
It isin a poor and humble heart that
He delights to dwell.—P. Quesnel.


472


Vers. 5-13. This prophecy a proof
of Christs Divinity—This prophecy
is one of the clearest and surest in
the Bible, and has ever been regarded
by Christians as a decisive proof of
the Divine mission of their Lord. In
a time of peace He predicted war.
When there were only visible signs of
prosperity, He foretold speedy destruc-
tion. When the disciples were few,
He declared that the gospel would
soon be proclaimed to distant nations,
When the apostles were about to for-
sake Him, seeking safety by flight,
He said that ere long many would be
willing to die for His name. When
there were no outward indications of
success, He spoke with perfect con-
fidence of the establishment of His
kingdom. He taught the disciples
that its nature was different from their
hopes, being more excellent; and the
means of its promotion different from
their expectations, being more effective.
Knowing that after two days He
should be crucified, and declaring this
to the disciples, He expressed to them





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIIf.








_ the full assurance of the triumph of
4 His kingdom, by means of which the
_ history of the world afforded no ex-
_ ample; and of their salvation, through
_ sufferings which they feared to anti-
_ cipate. He gave them that knowledge,
and only that, which was useful to
them; and referred to their coming
trials with the firmest faith and the
most tender sympathy. He announced
the retribution which would come on
His adversaries, without any personal
resentment, stating it to be the right-
eous Judgment of God, but manifesting
- compassion even for those whose sins
_ brought upon themselves destruction.
_ Such were the words of Jesus; and
_ His words were fulfilled. Looking
_ only to this one prophecy, we say with
_ those who witnessed the Crucifixion,

“Truly this is the Son of God.”—J. H.
— Godwin.


Vers. 5, 6. The danger of being led
 astray.—It is quite as important not
to be led astray by false religious
teachers as by any other class of
deceivers or deceived; and there is
quite as much danger in this line as
in any other. Sincerity on our part
is no guard against deception or
wandering; nor is sincerity a safe-
guard to a religious teacher. Those
who are themselves both honest and
sincere would lead us astray if we
followed them in their wrong path.
There is danger of our being led astray
by the sermons we hear, the papers
or the books we read, the counsel or
example of those whom we have sup-
posed to be godly, or by the impulses
or convictions of our own minds and
hearts. There is such a thing as
_ conscientious error-teaching and devil-
serving. The warning of Jesus is,
- that ye take heed that no man lead
you astray in doctrine or morals,
through holding up a false standard
of conduct, or a false interpretation


of God’s Word.


Ver. 6. “I am Christ.”—Imposture
will always take its clue from antece-
dent reality; its work is that of


distortion, not of invention (Acts xix.
15502 dime it 18320 Pet ai. 16)
J. Miller.


Ver. 11. Divine source of apostolic
sufficiency.—Christ chose poor fisher-
men to shew that however insufficient
soever He received them, yet He
received them into such a school,
such an university, as would deliver
them back into His Church, made fit
by Him for the service thereof. Christ
needed not man’s sufficiency ; He took
insufficient men. Christ excuses no
man’s insufficiency; He made them
sufficient (Mark xvi. 20; Acts iv. 13;
Exod. iv. 10-12; 2 Cor. iv. 7).—John
Donne, DD.


Ver. 12. Christianity the cause of
division.—As Christianity gives birth
to and cherishes the most perfect love,
so it calls forth the most bitter hatred.
It calls forth a love which is above
nature, because it makes men love
their enemies. Contrariwise it calls
forth a hatred which is unnatural;
for it made, and yet makes, men hate
and betray, and, if they can, destroy
their own flesh and blood. Thus we
read that the Emperor Domitian, in
his hatred of the Christian name, slew
Flavius Clemens and his niece, or near
relation Flavia Domitilla ; the Emperor
Maximin martyred Artemia, his own
sister; and Diocletian slew his own
wife and other relatives. St. Barbara
also was killed by her own father ; and
if we had a full martyrology of obscure
Christians, we should find multitudes
of others similarly betrayed by their
own flesh and blood. We are told
by Indian missionaries that as soon
as converts are baptised they become
objects of hatred to their nearest
relatives ; even their wives often desert
them. Now if this be so in a country
where Christianity is the religion of
the rulers, what would it be if
heathenism were unchecked in its
power of persecution ?—M/. F. Sadler.


Ver. 13. Incentives to perseverance.—
1. Of all afflictions and troubles, those


473


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


"


ee re ene


are the most comfortable to suffer and
endure which are suffered for Christ.
2. By these kinds of sufferings we
glorify God, and bring honour to the
name of Christ, and credit to the
gospel, more than by any other suffer-
ings. 3. It is a most honourable
thing unto us, yea, the greatest glory
that may be in this world, to suffer
anything for Christ. 4. Consider how
much Christ has suffered for us, and
for our salvation ; how great reproach
and shame; what bitter pain and
torment of soul and body; and let
this move us patiently and willingly
to suffer any persecution and trouble
for His sake. 5. Consider how much
wicked men suffer in the practice of
sin, and to satisfy their wicked lusts,
and let this move us to suffer any
persecution for Christ. 6. Consider
the great and excellent reward pro-
mised to those who endure for Christ’s
sake.—G. Petter.

Persecution a trial to perseverance.—
There are persecutions and persecutions
—great and bloody persecutions such
as a Nero or a Decius could inaugurate
on an imposing scale; and, as we
know, petty persecutions, which are
all that is permitted to the native
ferocity of the persecuting temper by


the milder manners of a more civilised
age. But persecution, whatever its
scale, is a trial to perseverance. Per-
secution is in any case friction; and,
as we all know, friction, if only it be
continued long enough, brings move-
ment to a standstill, unless there be
a new supply of the impelling force.
Men who have done much for Christ
have given up at the last under the
stress of relentless persecution. And
perhaps petty persecutions are more
trying to perseverance, in seme ways,
than great ones. Men who have not
flinched from the axe or from the
stake will yield to the incessant worry
of domestic or local tyranny—to the per-
secutions which make home wretched, or
the office, or the shop, or the dormitory
wellnigh intolerable. Why do we
pray in the Church service that “the
evils which the craft and subtlety of
the devil or man worketh against us
be brought to naught, and, by the
providence of God’s goodness, may be
dispersed?” Itisthat we, His servants,
“being hurt by no persecutions, may
evermore give thanks unto Him in
His holy Church.” In other words, it
is because persecution involves a serious
risk to perseverance.—Canon Liddon.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—32.
(Paratuets: Marr. xxiv. 15-36; Lox xxi. 20-33.)


Christ’s manifestation in glory.—The manifestations of Christ are not exhausted
yet. The Infant, the Child, the Man, the Worker of miracles, the Teacher by
parables—He has been revealed to us as all these; but there is still another
revelation of Him to come in the unknown future. He came once to visit us in
great humility; He shall come again to judge us in glorious majesty.

I. There will be a manifestation of Christ in truth and unmistakable reality.
—Till the moment of His coming it will be possible to deceive. False prophets
were the bane of the old dispensation; false Christs are the bane of the new.
We scarcely wonder that false Messiahs could command followers at a time like
the siege of Jerusalem. It was just the crisis from which they would expect a
Messiah to deliver them. But we do wonder, and we ought to wonder, that
false Christs have arisen since, and that they arise still, That men who do not
Lelieve that Christ has come yet should be prepared to accept a self-styled
Christ, if only his credentials satisfy them, is at least consistent, if not almost
excusable; but for men who believe that Christ has already come, and then
discredit His perfect life and Divine teaching by seeking elsewhere for light and


474


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. , XIIt.








 guidance—for these we have no excuse, no explanation. Whatever may. be said
of the resulés of Christian effort in these days, there can be no question as to its
tendencies. Give it full power and fair play, and it would reform tlie world.
This is as much as to say that, so far forth as Christianity succeeds in exhibiting
Christ, so far she is a trusted leader of society. Where she has failed to help
the world, she has failed to represent Christ. Our contention is, and must be,
this: that Christianity leads to Christ, and Christ to God; that the knowledge
of God is the highest of all knowledge; that all which leads away from Him
must end in nothingness, and can but be a loss to those who gain it. There
is an inherent “ deceivableness of unrighteousness”—an essential capacity for
“ strong delusion ”—as to the highest of all truths which we are led by the Holy
Spirit always to expect, and increasingly till the end of time, possibly that the
contrast at the end might be the more marked. While they are all at their very
busiest, and the “very elect” themselves almost dizzy with the whirl in the
religious air, He will stand before them, true and unmistakable. ‘ Every eye
shall see Him” then; the mists from men’s minds and the cobwebs of men’s
weaving will be swept away, and at that moment they shall know, even as they,
are known. “I am the Truth” will be condemnation enough for millions in

- that day, if no other sentence were to proceed out of His mouth.

II. Christ will be manifested in universality. At present it is here and there,
as men carry the message. Dark corners have to wait till they can be attended
to. “Go ye into all the world and preach” is the world’s only chance: for
“how shall they hear without a preacher?” Nor is this all. It was not
enough to light the lamp of the Tabernacle with heavenly flame; it required
daily tending and replenishing with oil. We overcome the darkness of night
with artificial light ; and we keep up the gospel light in men’s hearts by human
means. If Christ is our Sun of Righteousness, it is only to be expected that He
should seem sometimes to set. The Church is His own devised system for
arresting His beams and deriving His rays to ourselves. But the coming of the
Son of Man shall be no longer, as it is now, like the coming and the going of
the sun in the heavens—a sun, too, whose light can be admitted or excluded at
will. It shall be rather like the lightning-flash, of which you say, “Tt is
lightening in the east,” and yet, at the selfsame moment, it is in the west too—
the lightning which seems to follow no law, but penetrates everywhere—awfully
beautiful, irresistibly destructive, fearfully silent, and which has done its worls,
its irreparable work, before the roar of the thunder is heard. The highest
attract it first, and yet it may pass the highest and strike the lowest. All that
we can say for certain is, that whatsoever withstands it in its course will utterly
be destroyed. Lightning always appals, though it leaves us unscathed. Its
downward dart suggests a doomed mark, and its rapid zigzag forbids us to
guess its aim ; all are in peril where any one may be struck. It may well be
that the suspense at the coming of the Son of Man will be the first instalment of
the torments of the lost. :

III. The awful majesty in which He will appear.—This is set forth in the
appalling changes that will come over the material heavens. The sun darkened,
so that the moon can no longer shine with his reflected light—an image, surely,
of the helplessness of the blinded followers of blind leaders. The stars falling
from heaven, as not presuming to govern this night of no mere physical
darkness, and in a dismay corresponding to the Joy with which they sang
together when the corner-stone of the earth was laid. The powers of heaven
shaking, as in anticipation of their “passing away with a great noise.” And
then the appearance of the sign of the Son of Man. What that sign shall be—
whether, as Christian history leads us to suppose, the sign of the Fiery Cross,
or whether rather a new sign, corresponding to the new heavens and the new


475


cHar. xu.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


earth—we cannot tell. Christian poetry may weave thoughts into scarcely
understood words, so that for a time we think that we picture it; meditation
may help us to forget ourselves, till we say, “I feel it, but I cannot put it into
words” ; we can approach it in similes and illustrations; but when all is done,
we shall but have listened, felt, thought as men; and as men we still must
confess at last, ‘“‘ We cannot bear it now.”

IV. Christ will be manifested then as in search of His own.—It were idle to
ask, “‘ Who would not be of the elect then?” It is more to the purpose to
inquire, ‘‘ What do men mean by being ashamed of Christ now?” It is to shew
no faith, no love, no trust; it is to put man before God, to put worldly men
before the saints ; it is to give the lie to all our religious phrases, and falsify all
our Christian hopes; it is to tempt God to take us at our word and say,
“« According to your faith, so be it done unto you.”—Z. 7. Marshall.


Ver. 32. The limitations of our Lord’s manhood.—lt has generally been con-
sidered very difficult to reconcile the passage before us with the doctrine of the
Deity of Christ. The common explanation, which refers our Saviour’s ignorance
of the date of the approaching judgment to His human nature only, is indig-
nantly denounced as a miserable subterfuge by those who deny His Divinity.
And even some of the ablest among the orthodox have abandoned this interpre-
tation as unsatisfactory, if not evasive. To us, however, it seems perfectly just
and Scriptural; while its supposed difficulties admit, we think, of solutions
which are not only sound in logic, but are commonly applied in the interpretation
of many other passages. We shall endeavour to support this opinion in the
following argument.

I. Jesus Christ, while truly God, was also truly man, and therefore
possessed a human soul.—Innumerable acts and feelings are attributed to Christ
in the Scriptures, which, on the one hand, are incompatible with the nature of
God, and, on the other, could not be asserted of any mere physical organisation.
“He was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.” “ He groaned in spirit
and was troubled” at the grave of Lazarus. ‘ He was in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin.” ‘In all things it behoved Him to be made like
unto His brethren.” He prayed unto the Father “ with strong crying and
tears, and was heard in that He feared.” “ He increased in wisdom, and in
favour with God and man.”

II. The union of the Divine and human natures in the person of our Lord
did not extinguish or confound the essential attributes of either—We can
easily understand that two different natures, distinguished by the most opposite ~
qualities, may yet be so connected as to constitute one person. We experience
the truth of this in our own mysterious conformation. But this implies no.
confusion of their separate peculiarities. Because the body and the soul, in
their present inexplicable conjunction, make up the individual man, does it
follow that matter thinks, or that mind is extended in three dimensions? And
if not, why should we imagine that the finite and the Infinite lost their respective
differences and were merged into a common medium in the person of Immanuel,
God with us? The widest possible diversity subsists between these two classes
of attributes. And if we are justified in pronouncing the properties of the circle
and the square to be intrinsically incompatible, we may surely maintain that
the union of Deity and manhood in the person of the Lord left the essence of
each undestroyed, unabsorbed, entire, and perfect in all its qualities.

III. Omniscience is one of the incommunicable attributes of God, in which,
therefore, the reasonable soul of Christ had no participation.—Of God, and of
God alone, can it be said that ‘‘ His understanding is infinite.” When, there-
fore, omniscience is ascribed to the Redeemer, it must be understood of His


476


Ef OMILETI C COMMENTARY: ST. MARE. CHAP. XIII.





Divine, not of His human nature. We may, indeed, with good reason believe
that the rational soul of Christ received successive and great additions of
knowledge from its connexion with the Eternal Word; but these, whatever
their amount, did not exalt the creature into an equality with God. We have
already quoted the scripture which declares that Christ “ increased in wisdom.”
Now that which is susceptible of increase is clearly at an infinite distance from
infinity. If, then, the knowledge of the man Christ Jesus, however extended,
was still the knowledge of a creature, and therefore finite, what inconsistency
is there in believing that there were secrets in the counsels of God concealed
even from Him?

nel. Though the union of the Divine and human natures in the Saviour
involved no permutation or absorption of their respective peculiarities, it
constituted Him one person, of whom, therefore, the attributes of God and man
might be predicated indifferently—The inspired writers affirm many things of
Christ which are true only of His Divine nature—many which, in strictness of
speech, apply only to His humanity. Yet they seldom mark the distinction.
They did not think it necessary-to say that “by Him,” in His Divine nature,
“ were all things created” —“ by Him and for Him,” that is, as He was God;
“and He is before all things, and in Him all things consist,” considering Him as
Divine. They did not say that, as God, “ He is Lord of all” —that, as one with
the Hather, Lie is “the First and the Last—that “Thou, Lord, in the begin-
ning,” by Thine eternal power and Godhead, “hast laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the works of Thine hands.” Nor did they usually
adopt any such guarded phraseology in speaking of Jesus as man. We do
not read that, in His human nature, “ He was an hungered ”—that, as man,
“being wearied with His journey, He sat thus on the well”—that, as partaker
of flesh and blood, “ He was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a pillow io
that, in His character as a creature, He “increased in wisdom and stature, and in
favour with God and man.” Sometimes, it is true, we meet with qualifying
expressions in reference to His humanity—such as, “according to the flesh,”
“the offering of the body of Jesus,” ete. But these instances are comparatively
few, and easily accounted for by the context ; while, in the current phraseology
of the Scriptures, both Divine and human attributes are given to Christ without
any express limitation of either to the one nature or to the other. Is it any
harder to believe that the human soul of Jesus was left in ignorance of future
¢imes and seasons, than te believe that it sorrowed, complained, and prayed ?

V. It may be asked, “ But is not such a method of interpretation somewhat
unnatural? Is it not assumed without proof?”—We think that in answering
these questions we can produce a form of expression exactly parallel to that
against which the objection is raised, yet employed in general conversation
without ever incurring the charge of impropriety or any danger of misconstruc-
tion. . No one will deny that, in the opinion of an immense majority, the body
and the soul of man are two different natures, distinguished by opposite and
incompatible qualities. It is equally clear, as we have already observed, that
this conjunction involves no loss and no confusion of their characteristic
peculiarities. There is a mutu:l influence of the two natures, we readily admit.
The feelings and volitions of the mind act on the nerves of the body; and
certain affections of the nerves produce sensations in the mind. But matter is
still matter, mind is mind; and this reciprocal activity of both occasions no
interchange or assimilation of their several powers. And yet we familiarly
employ, with reference to man in general, language which is strictly true only
of one part of his nature. We do this continually in common discourse, and
in written style, without formally announcing the distinction; and we do it
without any risk of misinterpretation. We say of any individual with whom

417


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





we are acquainted that he is tall or short, light or heavy, brown or fair. Yet
we never think of adding a prudent parenthesis to inform the company that we
are speaking only of the body of the individual in question. On the other hand,
we describe the same individual, it may be, as imaginative, choleric, or timid—
as fond of reasoning, or deficient in memory, or conscientious even to scrupu-
losity. Yet we do not deem it necessary to restrict the application of these
phrases to the spiritual nature of the man. The two classes of attributes are
too distinct to be confounded. And were not the Divine and human natures of
our Lord as perfectly distinct in all their powers? Are the qualities of the
creature and the perfections of God so much alike as to be distinguished with
difficulty, and perpetually liable to be confounded? Assuredly if error of this
kind be rendered anywhere impossible, from the nature of the case, it is so in
the incarnation of “the Mighty God.” It has been observed by an eminent
writer that ‘the pet texts of a Socinian are quite enough for his confutation
with acute thinkers. If Christ had been a mere man, it would have been
ridiculous in Him to call Himself the Son of Man; but being God and man, it
then became, in His own assumption of it, a peculiar and mysterious title.”
The same remark may be applied, we think, to the passage now under con-
sideration. Let the name of any of the prophets or apostles be substituted for
the designation of Christ, and a sentence is produced at which even a Socinian
might stagger. “ But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the
angels which are in heaven, neither Moses, but the Father.” It matters little
what particular name is selected for the experiment. Isaiah, Daniel, Paul, or
John, in such a collocation, would be alike incongruous with the whole phraseo-
logy and spirit of the Bible. Why, then, would such an announcement have
revolted us, while the name of the Son, in this identical connexion, awakens no
surprise? Manifestly because the human soul of Christ, from its conjunction
with ‘“‘the brightness of the Father’s glory, and the express image of His
person,” was admitted to a knowledge of the counsel of God which is never
ascribed to any other creature; manifestly because “in Him dwelt all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily.” The audacity of those who deny the possibility
of such a union has been too often rivalled by the presumption of others who
have pretended to explain it. On such a subject our only wisdom is to receive,
with the faith of “little children,” the words “which the Holy Ghost teacheth,”
not “adding to them, lest we be reproved.”—J. M. Mackenzie.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS
Vers. 14-18. A fruitful warning.—


ON THE VERSES.
Ver. 18. Winter flight.—How late


As they were not to linger in the
guilty city, so we are to let no earthly
interests arrest our flight—not to turn
back, but promptly and resolutely to
flee unto the everlasting hills. As
they should pray that their flight
through the mountains should not be
in the winter, so should we beware of
needing to seek salvation in the winter
of the soul, when the storms of passion
and appetite are wildest, when evil
habits have made the road slippery
underfoot, and sophistry and self-will
have hidden the gulfs in a treacherous
wreath of snow.—Dean Chadwick.


478


is it to begin our flight from the
world and sin in the winter of old age
and death! In the winter the days
are short, the ways bad, the season
rainy, the night comes on before we
are aware, and we meet with a thou-
sand impediments and hindrances of
flight and travelling: these are a lively
representation of those hindrances of
salvation which men find at the end of
their lives. The grace to prevent them
by a speedy conversion is obtained only
by prayer.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 22. False Christs—There have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


SL. MARK. CHAP. XII.





been many of them. David George,
for instance, who ultimately settled
at Basle, where he died in 1556.
He claimed, according to the account
of Dr. Henry More, to be the true
Christ, the dear Son of God, born not
of the flesh, but of the Spirit. He was
to restore the house of Israel, and
re-erect the tabernacle of God, not
by afflictions and death, as the other
Messiah, but by that sweetness, love,
and grace that were given him of the
Father. He had the power of the
remission of sins, and had come to
administer the last judgment. He
averred that “the Holy Scriptures,
the sayings and testimonies of the
prophets, of Christ, and of His apostles,
do all point, if rightly understood, in
their true mystery, to the glorious
coming of David George, who is greater
than the former Christ, as being born
of the Spirit, and not of the flesh”
(Enthusiasmus Triwmphatus, § 34).
This David George, says Dr. More,
was a man “of notable natural parts,
of comely person, and a graceful
presence.” And he had many ad-
herents, who believed in him. In our
own day there are persons—out of
asylums—who put forth corresponding
claims. There is lying before the
writer a Tract on the Second Advent
fulfilled, in which it is said that “ the
enrolling of the saints commenced on
the anniversary of the last day of the
Feast of Tabernacles of the year 1868,
that is, on the 9th of October, 1868.
The following,” it is added, “is the
declaration to be made and signed:
‘T believe Jesus of Nazareth to be the
Messiah at His first coming and the
antitypical Paschal Lamb who died for
sin in allegory, and I believe John
Cochran of Glasgow to be that Messiah
at His second coming and the anti-
typical High Priest who has taken
away sin in reality’” Of all such
persons it has, in consequence of their
obscurity, to be said, “‘ Lo, here! Lo,
there!” ‘Believe not,” says our
Saviour.—J. Morison, D.D.

False prophets.—They have been
legion in number. Lodowick Muggle-


ton, for instance, who, on the title-
page of his True Interpretation of the
whole Book of the Revelai.on of St. John
(1746), describes himself as “one of
the two last commissionated witnesses
and prophets of the only high, immortal,
glorious God, Christ Jesus.” Madame
Antoinette Bourignon, before him, was
a far nobler being, yet she declared to
Christian de Cort: “I am sent from
God to bring light to the world, and
to bear witness to the truth. He has
sent me to tell that the last times are
come; that the world is judged, and
the sentence is irrevocable; that the
plagues are begun, and will not cease
till all evil be rooted out; and that
Jesus Christ will come shortly to the
earth to finish this, and then He will
continue to reign with ‘men of good-
will,’ who shall enjoy eternal peace.
IT am sent with a commission to declare
all these thirgs to men, to the end
that peradve:.ture some of them may
be converted and repent, that they
may reign with Jesus Christ in His
glory.” —Lbid.

False Christs and false prophets.—
In those days it was an adventurer
who traded on the religious enthusiasm
of his compatriots—led them out to
some desert or to some mountain-side
to enjoy for a moment the delirium
of an impossible delusion, and then,
perhaps, to suffer the panishment of
a supposed political offence. In our
days it is a sceptical friend, it is an
article in a review, it is the general
atmospuere of the social circle in which
we live. Our faith is undermined by
people who talk and write in the very
best English, and who have so much
about them that is winning and agree-
able that we cannot believe what is
really going on. Swill, after a time,
we find that we have less hold on the
Unseen than we had, that prayer is
more difficult, that conscience is more
sluggish, that religious exertion of all
kinds is more unwelcome; and this, I
say, means that the soul’s heid of the
central realities is, to say the very least,
weakened, if that is, indeed, anything
like a full and true account of what


479


CHAP. XIII.


has taken place. We cannot go on
breathing a bad air, and be as we
were when we lived high up upon the
mountain, unless we take very great
precautions. Not to take them under
such circumstances as these is to be
in the fair way to forfeit perseverance.
—Canon Liddon.


Vers. 25-27. The Second Advent.—
The second coming of Christ will be
even as the first coming at His in-
carnation—an_ historical fact taking
place on the world in which we live;
not anything like a figure of speech,
but breaking violently into the uniform
and hitherto unbroken continuity of
time and nature, and thus freeing the
soul and spirit of man from those
physical relations on which man is
now dependent, and giving the soul
fresh opportunities and hopes in a
world where all will be glorious. Such
will be the second coming of Christ
—the perfecting of the first. Not
partial, however, and gradual as His
first coming, when Christ was revealed
here to one and there to one; but
seen and recognised by all the tribes
of the earth. Not gradual, for it has
taken long to spread the Church, and
the work is very far from being done
even now; but sudden and instan-
taneous—revealed as a flash of light-
ning. By one act and one appearance
will He unite the greatest terror with
the greatest glory ; He will transform
the world and nature and time; He will
judge the living and the dead, and carry
the children of God to the inheritance
of eternal life—— Jas. Lonsdale.


Ver. 30. Zwo horizons—tIn that
landscape of the future, of which our
Lord permitted His disciples to catch
a glimpse in this great discourse of
“the last things,” there were two
horizons—one near at hand, the other
afar off. “The boundary line of
either horizon marked the winding
up of an son; each was a great
ending; of each it was true that the
then existing generation, first in its
literal sense, then in its wider sense


480


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i
:
:





of ‘race,’ should not pass away until
all had been fulfilled.” One event was
the end of the Jewish nationality, the
other the end of the world. The
former was in many respects the type
of the latter. The signs, both in the
natural and moral world, which pre-
ceded and accompanied the overthrow
of Jerusalem are measurably the same
as those which will characterise the
last ages of the world. And hence it
is not easy to determine with precision
what signs are applicable solely to one
event, and what are applicable solely
to the other. In true prophetic style
they are much intermingled. But we
must not forget that they are the
words of ‘One whose whole being
moved in the sphere of eternity and
not of time”; that moral warning
rather than chronological indication is
the real object of prophecy; and that
“to the voice of prophecy, as to the
eye of God, all time is but one eternal
present.”


Ver. 31. The perishable and the im-
perishable.—I. The things which shall
pass away-—the perishable things, the
destructible things, the things which
in this visible economy seem never to
continue in one stay, and at last shall
perish for ever. 1. Thus see what
traces of instability and decay are
written on the things men chiefly love
and live for. Riches, honours, com-
forts, friends—youth, beauty, genius,
strength—the prospering enterprise,
the unfolding hope, the fellowship of
kindred minds, and the hallowed
domestic ties,—how slight is our hold
on the fairest and best of these things !
2. See the same truth inscribed on
what we might have thought would
have a more enduring life; namely,
the triumphs of man’s intellectual
nature—the inventions of art, the
applications of science, the treasures
of literature, the profound researches
of the learned, and the ingenious dis-
coveries of the wise: all these are found
to be of the earth, earthy. 3. Again,
how strikingly are we reminded of this
law of mutability and decay, as applied





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIII.


ep ee ee ee


to all earthly things, when we contem-
plate the history of nations. 4. But
not to indications, in the history and
moral circumstances of mankind only,
are we to limit the application of our
Lord’s words. As the foregoing verses
shew, the final consummation will be
preceded by a mighty disturbance
among the elemental powers of nature.
Who shall say how soon all visible
and material things, consumed and
scattered, as it were by the springing
of some invisible mine, may be called
upon to shed the light of their dis-
solving glory on the day of Christ,
and testify to the imperishableness
of His words?

II. Christ's words shall not pass
away.—1. Because they are founded
on eternal truth, and on the fixed
purposes of the unchangeable Jehovah.
2. Because of the eternal power and
Godhead of Him who spake them.
3. Because of their connexion with
His own glory as the Divinely consti-
tuted Mediator.—D. Moore.

The permanence of Christs words.—
I. The words which Jesus spake while
on earth are permanently associated
with our whole life.

TT, All our literature is enriched
by these words.

Ill. That which is spiritual must
always be more permanent than the
material,

IV. Yet the material prepares the


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE


way for the spiritual application.—
1. A lesson of warning, since we are
in danger of attaching too much im-
portance to the form, and too little
to the truth, which the form embodies.
2. A lesson of encouragement ; opinions
may change and interpretations differ,
but the truth remains always the same.
—F, Wagstaff.


Ver. 32. Christ's voluntary limitation
of knowledge.—What forbids us to
believe that His knowledge, like His
power, was limited by a lowliness not
enforced, but for our sakes chosen ;
and that as He could have asked for
twelve legions of angels, yet chose to
be bound and buffeted, so He could
have known that day and hour, yet
submitted to ignorance, that He might
be made like in all points to His
brethren? Souls there are for whom
this wonderful saying, ‘The Son
knoweth not,” is even more affecting
than the words, “The Son of Man
hath not where to lay His head.”—
Dean Chadwick.

To me this means that He who was
to judge the world, who knew what
was in man, and more, who alone
knew the Father, was at that time
content to have that hour hidden from
Him—did not choose to be above the
angels in knowing it—as He was
afterwards content to be forsaken of
the Father.—Dean Church.


PARAGRAPH.—Verses 33—37.


The command to watch.—In this brief parable the Church is compared to a


great mansion, with many offices,


duties, servants—a vast, complex, interior


ministry, every function of which must be diligently discharged if the house is


to be kept in order and the household are
I. The authority which the departing


to live in comfort and peace.
Master confers on all His servants.—


We know that in a household where the father and master is served from love


and not from fear, when he goes away f
they are faithful, bestir themselves to sb


or a time, the children and servants, if


ew that they are not unworthy of the


trust he reposes in them. A pulse of quickened affection and activity spreads


from heart to heart.


them to a more steadfast and earnest discharge of duty.


A new and invigorating sense of responsibility stimulates


Tf our ruling motive


and inspiration be love to Christ, we shall not dream of saying of any work


which needs to be done,


“This is no business of mine,” or “ T am not bound to


do that”; we shall be eager to do whatever we can for the general good, No
task will be too mean for us, no detail too petty or trivial.


48]


CHAP, XIII. ‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


II. Besides this general authority, common to all, we have each of us a
special task to do for Him and for the family named after Him. ‘To each one
his own work,” i.e. the work he is specially fitted or called to do. And, indeed,
the forms of service are so many, and the call for service so imperative, that no
one need lack suitable employment if only he is bent on finding it. None is so
weak or so poor in endowment but that he may do a little good, if only he be of
a willing mind. In the Household of Faith, as in the world, there are many
forms of service, many ways of gaining spiritual food and strength and skill;
and there are many servants in it who do not feel that their gifts fit them for
one kind of labour more than for another; some doubt whether they have any
gifts, any calling, worthy of the name. But if necessity is laid upon them,
what will they do? Naturally they will try this kind of work and that, till
they find a work which they can do, and perhaps a work they can like as well
as do; or they will take up the work that comes first to hand, and gradually
make themselves fit for it by doing it. What we chiefly want, if at least we are
doing little or nothing for Him, is more love, and of that kind of love which
will make us feel that we must do something for Him who has done so much for
us. As we get more love we shall do more work, and settle down into our
proper vocation.

Ill. To work we must add watchfulness.—The porter is to look for his lord’s
return ; but so are all the servants: 7.e. they are to expect it, to be ready for
it, to desire it. We are not to be as drudges who have no pleasure in their
work, nor as hirelings who care only for their wages. Our labour is to be
bright with hope, with the hope of a great happiness to come, and that may
come at any moment. The Lord is always coming to those who lcok for His
appearing. We see His advent on a large scale in every crisis of the great
human story. In revolution, in reformations, when the thoughts of men’s
hearts are revealed, when they are summoned to accept new forms of truth or
to enter on new spheres of duty, we know that Christ has come once more to
try their works, to see whether they have been faithful to Him and are ready
to greet Him with love and joy. And in like manner, though not so obviously,
He comes to us in the crises of our individual history, when one page of our life
is closed and a new page is opened. For each one of us there is an advent of
Christ as often as new and larger views of truth are presented to us, or we are
called to leave a familiar round of duty and to take up new duties and more
laborious. If we are so absorbed in the mere routine of our previous service,
or so attached to old forms of truth and labour, that we have no eye for new
aspects of truth, and no ear for the call to new labours, we miss another happy
chance; we are like servants who, stolidly plodding through a familiar drudgery,
do not hear when the Master stands at the door and knocks, and are even
flurried and vexed should He bid them do what they have never done before.
But if, while going resolutely and happily about our accustomed tasks, we look
alertly and hopefully for the joy of Christ’s return ; if, because we know so
little, we expect Him to teach us new truths; if, because our service is so
imperfect, we expect to be called to new and better modes of serving Him, we
are like servants who, living daily in hope of the Master’s return, catch the first
signal of His approach,\ hurry out to welcome Him, and are rewarded for their
watchful diligence by having greater authority committed to them, and
ministries which bring them nearer to His person. And all these advents of
Christ, in new truths and new duties, are but preludes of that great personal
advent for which we look none the less earnestly because we know neither its
day nor its hour. We know that He who once came and dwelt among us in
great humility will come again, in the glory of the Father, to complete the
work He then began—to finish our redemption, to reward every act of kindness


482


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. XIII.





as though it had been done to Him. And therefore we are watchful, and
strengthen the things which are ready to die, not suffering any grace to perish
out of our hearts in this world’s unkindly weather, but guarding and cherishing
it for the summer of eternity; nor permitting any good enterprise to fail for
lack of help, tut breathing into it the life of our help till happier times arrive.—


is, Cox, DD.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 33-36. The duty of watchful-
ness enforced.—l. The duty inculeated.
—Watchfulness and prayer are often
united in the Holy Scriptures as duties
of the first importance. In themselves
they are different ; but in their exercise
they are inseparable: neither would
be of any avail without the other:
prayer without watchfulness would be
hypocritical ; and watchfulness without
prayer presumptuous. 1. What we
should watch and pray against. Here
we must include everything which has
a tendency to lull us asleep. We see
how intent men are on all the things
of time and sense: the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life so occupy them that they find no
time nor inclination for spiritual con-
cerns. 2. What we should watch and
pray for. To be found ready, at what-
ever moment our Lord shall call for
us, should be the one object of our
ambition.

II. The considerations with which
it is enforced.—l. The uncertainty of
the time when our Lord shall call us.
There is not a moment of our lives
when we may sit down secure. 2. The
awfulness of being found in a sleeping
state. It will be to no purpose to
plead that we were not engaged in
any wicked projects. We were “ sloth-
ful servants,” and therefore are justly
regarded as ‘“ wicked.”

Til. Our Lord’s concluding admoni-
tion, ‘What I say unto you I say
unto all, Watch,” will lead us to ad-
dress some different descriptions of
persons. 1. The old. Is so much of
your time gone, and will you not im-
prove the remainder? 2. The young.
What security have you against death,
that you should delay so necessary @
work? 3. The afflicted, God sends


your afflictions on purpose to awaken
you from your slumbers, and to stir
you up to heavenly pursuits. What
an aggravation will it be of your guilt
if these dispensations pass away un-
improved! 4, The backslidden. What
an awful thing is it that, instead of
having advanced in the Divine life,
you have lost in a good measure the
life which you once had! Attend to
God’s admonition to the Church of
Sardis, lest He execute upon you the
judgment that He threatened to inflict
on them (Rev. iii. 2, 3). 5. The more
steadfast Christian. Hxperience proves
that the exhortation to ‘“‘ watch” is not
less necessary for you than for others.
How many who are on the whole
pious grieve, by their unwatchfulness,
their Divine Master.—C. Simeon.


Ver. 33. Watch and pray.—Two
duties. 1. The activity of the eye
earthward. 2. The emotion of the
heart Godward. Watchfulness is like
the hands of the clock that point ;
prayer is the weight that keeps the
machinery in motion.—Z. J. Judkin.


Ver. 34. Fidelity and watchfulness.
—The whole which our Blessed Master,
when He ascended into heaven, recom-
mended to the care of His servants,
consisted in fidelity and watchfulness :
fidelity, in doing everything well which
is to be done in His house, in the heart,
in the Church, according to the full
extent of their duty; watchfulness, im
suffering no stranger nor enemy to
enter by the senses, which are the gates
of the soul, in permitting nothing which
belongs to the Master to go out without
His orders, and in carefully observing
all commerce and correspondence which
the heart may have abroad in the


483


CHAP, XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





world, to the prejudice of the Master’s
service.—P. Quesnel.

Every man the porter of his own
heart.—It is the business of each
one of us to stop, by God’s help, evil
thoughts from coming in and good
aspirations from going out. We must
watch and pray that we enter not into
temptation.


Ver. 36. Remissness and negligence,
as well as the greater sins, are often
the occasion of our being surprised by
death. A porter asleep exposes the
house to be robbed, and well deserves
to be punished. A Christian whose
faith is not watchful exposes his own
heart to the enemy of his salvation,
and to those who are continually
watching, in order to steal away all
the valuable things which God has
laid up there, as in His own house.—
Ibid.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Vers. 7, 8. The sorrows of war—The con-
queror of Bonaparte at Waterloo wrote, on
the day after June 19th, to the Duke of
Beaufort : “‘The losses we have sustained
have quite broken me down, and I have no
feeling for the advantages we have acquired.”
On the same day, too, he wrote to Lord
Aberdeen: “I cannot express to you the
regret and sorrow with which I look round
me and contemplate the loss which I have
sustained, particularly in your brother.
The glory resulting from such actions, so
dearly bought, is no consolation to me, and
I cannot suggest it as any to you and his
friends ; but I hope that it may be expected
that this last one has been so decisive as
that no doubt remains that our exertions
and our individual losses will be rewarded
by the early attainment of our just object.
It is then that the glory of the actions in
which our friends and relations have fallen
will be some consolation for their loss.”
He who could write thus had already
attained a greater victory than that of
Waterloo; and the less naturally follows
the greater.


Ver. 13. Hndurance.—There was a period
during the battle of K6énigeriitz when the
attack of the Prussians seemed hopeless,
Across the stream and up the long slope the
battalions poured, only to be again and
again repulsed by the Austrian army, and
yet again and again they returned to the


484


Ver. 37. Reasons for watchfulness.—
1, Because you are liable to drowsiness
and slumber. 2. Because means are
constantly being used to seduce you
from the ways of saving peace. 3. Be-
cause you have given yourselves up
as soldiers of the Cross. 4. Because
you have many duties to perform.
5. Because you know not when the
Master will .come to demand an
account.

Watch.—l. To prevent evil.
further good.


2. To


=


Watching for Christ—He watches |


for Christ who has a sensitive, eager,
apprehensive mind; who is awake,
alive, quick-sighted, zealous in seeking
and honouring Him; who looks out
for Him in all that happens; and who
would not be surprised, who would not
be overagitated or overwhelmed, if he
found that He was coming at once.—
J. H. Newman, DD.


CHAPTER XIII.


attack. And what was the secret that en-
couraged their persistence? An observer
of the battle from a tall tower, at this crisis,
looked eastward along the range of elevated
ground which was the stronghold of the
Austrians, and in the distance, from the
edge of a wood, his eye caught the gleaming
of bayonets. A strong body of Prussians
had outflanked the Austrians, and was
advancing rapidly on the rear of their
position, and it was the knowledge of this
flank movement of the other division of
their army that gave courage and endurance
to those Prussians who attacked in front.
Just thus the Christian, though often disap-
pointed with his failures in the spiritual life,
yet persists in his efforts, for he knows that
the irresistible force of God’s power will
come to the help of His tried and tempted
servants,

Constamey.—Some dyes cannot bear the
weather, but alter colour presently; but
there are others that, having something that
gives a deeper tincture, will hold, The graces
of a true Christian hold out in all sorts of
weather, in winter and summer, prosperity
and adversity, when superficial counterfeit
holiness will give out.—R. Sibdbes.

Perseverance—“T know the way to
heaven,” said little Minnie to little Johnny.
who stood by her side, looking at a picture-
book. ‘‘ Youdo?” said little John. *“ Well,
won’t you tell me how to get there?” “Oh
yes} Tl tell you. Just commence going





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


up, and keep on going all the time, and
you'll get there. But, Johnny, you must not
turn back.”


Vers. 15, 16. The danger of delay.—
1. Opportunity is like a string of stepping-
stones acrossa ford. The traveller, coming
up to them, may find the river so swollen
with the rains that the stones are all but
covered. If he delay, though his home be
on the opposite bank, and full in sight, it
may be too late to cross, and he may have a
journey of several miles to reach his home.
2. Opportunity is like a narrow passage in
the Arctic Seas. Sometimes, in these north-
ern regions, ships get enclosed in a narrow
space between ice-islands. The floating
rocks glide nearer the ship on every side,
and the dismayed seamen behold their only
chance of escape from the fatal crash lies in
a narrow channel, that every moment grows
still narrower. How hurriedly they press
their vessel through that strip to reach the
safety of the open ocean! Even so must
we press along the narrow way that leads to
eternal life; for who knows how soon that
narrow way may be closed against him.


Ver. 18. The horrors of a winter flight.—
In the autumn of 1812 Napoleon entered
Moscow with 120,000 soldiers, intending to
pass the winter there in comfort. On
October 13th (three weeks earlier than it
had ever been known before) snow began to
fall. The proud emperor looked out of his
window in dismay, and decided to hasten
back at once, and establish his winter
quarters in the friendly cities of Poland. It
was a march through a dreary and desolate
region, of more than a thousand miles; but
he put on a bold front, and the troops began
to retire in good order. A week later, and
the grand army was in fuli retreat. Bleak,
chilly winds howled through the leafless
trees; the weary soldiers were blinded by
the flakes of snow and sleet ; their embittered
enemies attacked them in every unguarded
point; order and discipline were forgotten ;
the ranks were broken, and each man
struggled on as best he could; the dead and
the dying were trodden down ; hundreds of
horses were slain for feod; all ideas of con-
quest were banished ; Napoleon himself left
the army to its fate; and each day’s weary
march was marked by heaps of broken
waggons, and abandoned cannon, and white
hillocks of snow, beneath which the frozen
bodies of man and beast were buried. With
such a dreadful picture of misery before you,
it will be easy to understand the tender
compassion which prompted the Saviour to
say, “ Pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter.” Especially ought we to remember
those who are suffering the sad privations
of poverty, and be glad to relieve their wants
when we are able.


CHAP. XIII.


Ver. 22. Danger of deception by false
Christs.—In the frescoes of Signorelli we
have “The Teaching of Anticirist ”—no
repulsive figure, but a grand personage in
flowing robes, and with a noble countenance,
which at a distance might easily be taken
for the Saviour, To him the crowd are
eagerly gathering and listening, and it is
only when you draw close that you can dis-
cover in his harder and cynical expression,
and from the evil spirit whispering in his
ear, that it is not Christ.


Ver. 28. A sign of summer's approach.—
When Dr. Rees preached last in North Wales,
a friend said to him, “ You are whitening
fast, Dr. Rees.” The old gentleman did not
say anything then; but when he got to the
pulpit he referred to it, and said, “There is
a wee white flower that comes up through
the earth at this season of the year—some-
times it comes up through the snow and
frost; but we are all glad to see the snow-
drop, because it proclaims that the winter is
over and that the summer is at hand. A
friend reminded me last night that I was
whitening fast. But heed not that, brother ;
it is to me a proof that my winter will soon
be over, that I shall have done presently
with the cold east winds and the frosts of
earth, and that my summer—my eternal
summer—is at hand.”


Ver. 32. Christ’s second coming is to be
of awful suddenness, overtaking a careless
world with surprise, and not wholly expected
even by the faithful watchman. Of such a
sudden and awful change perhaps a faint
illustration may be found in the catastrophe
which took place about a century ago, when
in an ‘Alpine valley the whole side of a
mountain suddenly felland overwhelmed the
village below, crushing chalets and houses,
burying the church, and covering with earth
and stones a merry wedding-party that had
just entered the doomed valley. To be
without warning or preparation is the cha-
racter of the Second Advent, as compared
with the long-planned arrangements and the
deep foundations laid for the First Coming.
—Dr, Hardman.


Ver. 33. “ Watch and pray.”—The sentinel
picketed to watch the enemy does his duty
by giving the alarm if the enemy approaches,
not by advancing single-handed to the con-
flict. So the duty of a Christian, watchfully
discerning the approach of temptation, is to
convey the case to God. It is foolhardiness
to adventure into the combat unsent and
unprovided for.

Watchfulness and prayer.—“1 often re-
call,” says an old sailor, “ my first night at
sea, A storm had come up, and we had put
back under a point of land which broke the
wind a little, but still the sea had a rake on
us, and we were in danger of drifting. I


485


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





was on the anchor watch, and it was my
duty to give warning in case the ship should
drag her anchor. It was a long night to
me. I was very anxious whether I should
know if the ship really did drift. How could
I tell? JI found that, going forward and
placing my hand on the chain, I could tell
by the feeling of it whether the anchor was
dragging or not; and how often that night
I went forward and placed my hand on that
chain! And very often since then I have
wondered whether I am drifting away from
God, and then I go away and pray. Some-
times during that long stormy night I would
be startled by a rumbling sound, and I
would put my hand on the chain, and find
it was not the anchor dragging, but only the
chain grating against the rocks on the bottom.
The anchor was still firm. And sometimes
now, in temptation and trial, I become
afraid, and upon praying I find that away
down deep in my heart I do love God, and
my hope is in His salvation. And I want
just to say a word to my fellow-Christians:
Keep an anchor watch, lest before you are
aware you may be upon the rocks.”


Ver. 34. Work for all.Let us be thankful
that there is a growing and more universal
recognition of the Bible teaching, that each
individual believer has some apportioned
work in the Church of God, some appro-
priate niche assigned him to fill in God’s
sanctuary. Just as it was of old in the
Jewish Temple, extending from its outer
gates and outer courts, to the rites of the
Most Holy Place. Some were engaged in
hewing fir and cedar logs for altar fuel:
others disposing of the ashes of the sacri-
fices in the great conduits leading to the
Kedron; some ministering as _ sacrificial
priests; others occupied in ceremonial lus-
trations: some, more honoured, in bringing
the golden bowl from Siloam at the Feast of
Tabernacles. Hereare the silver trumpeters
who wake up the city at early morn to the
duties of a new day, or at similar stated in-
tervals proclaim the appearance of the new
moon. Here are the sons of Korah mingling
their voices with “ kinnor” and cymbal-tones,
chanting psalm and Hallel. Here the sym-
pathetic and beneficent among the worship-
ping throng are seen as they retire, aiding
with alms and deeds the cripples laid at “ the
Gate Beautiful.” Here are the aged Annas
and Simeons coming in to wait for the salva-
tion of Israel ; or to present once more their
lowly tribute-offering, and sing their nune
dimittis. Here are the children of the
Temple twisting wreaths of olive, myrtle,
and palm, to greet their Lord with glad
hosannas. This daily acted parable of the
old Temple dispensation needs no further
interpretation. The Great Master gives it in
His own laconic words: “To every man his
work.”"—J. R. Macduff, D.D,


486


The joy of working for Christ.—A beautiful
incident in reference to Mr. Townsend is
mentioned in the Life of John Campbell.
“Finding him on Tuesday morning, shortly
before his last illness, leaning on the balus-
trade of the staircase that led to the com-
mittee-room of the Tract Society, and scarcely
able to breathe, I remarked, ‘ Mr. Townsend,
is this you? Why should you come in this
state of body to our meetings? You have
now attended them for a long time, and you
should leave the work to younger men.’ The
reply of Mr, Townsend was worthy of his
character. Looking at his friend with a
countenance brightened and elevated by the
thoughts that were struggling for utterance,
his words were, ‘Oh! Johnny, Johnny, man,
it is hard to give up working in the service
of such a Master !’”

This life the time for work.— Are you
not wearying for the heavenly rest?” said
Whitefield to an old minister. ‘No, cer-
tainly not!” he replied. ‘Why not?” was
the surprised rejoinder. “Why, my good
brother,” said the aged saint, “if you were
to send your servant into the fields to doa
certain portion of work for you, and promised
to give him rest and refreshment in the even-
ing, what would you say if you found him
languid and discontented in the middle of
the day, and murmuring, ‘ Would to God it
were evening’? Would you not bid him be
up and doing, and finish his work, and then
go home and enjoy the promised rest? Just
so does God require of you and me that,
instead of looking for Saturday night, we do
our day’s work in the day.”

The importance of vigilance—The duty
entrusted to the porter is of great import-
ance. His negligence lays the house open
to every intruder. If the sentinel falls asleep
at his post, the whole army may be surprised
and cut off. If the man stationed at the
gate is unfaithful, the fortress may be taken
without assault, and the whole garrison put
to the sword. A man ignorant of the
management of a ship, when he sees all
hands busily at work, some climbing the
mast, others hoisting the sails, and others
plying at the pump, will be apt to look on the
pilot as a lazy supernumerary who spends
his time in gazing idly at the stars, and
amusing himself with turning a piece of
timber from side to side, not aware that
this man’s services are of all others the most
essential to the progress of the vessel on her
way, and to the safety of all who are on
board. In like manner, though there are
Christian graces and duties which are of
greater dignity, vigilance is of the greatest
utility.

Each at his post.—An Arctic explorer found,
floating helplessly about among the icebergs
of that cold, lonely country, a ship. Going
on board, he found that the captain was
frozen, and sat dead at his log-book, while





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIII.





the helmsman stood at his post, and the men
on watch still on duty, but cold in death.
What happiness will it be when our Lord
comes to know we have done our duty, and
can welcome our Saviour as He bids us
“come up higher”!


Vers. 35-37. On the watch—How many
striking pictures this word brings before us !
We may think of the old times when the
first colonists settled in North America, when
they had planted their log-wood cabin in
the little clearing, but knew that the dark
woods beyond might at any moment hide the
fierce Red Indian. Dreading the treachery
of the savage, how often the anxious settler
would listen at night for any sound of danger,
how carefully would he scan the shadowy
edge of the forest! The loaded rifle is kept
at hand, the faithful dog unchained. He is
perpetually on the alert, watchful against
the unseen but stealthy foe. Or the word
suggests the watchfulness of a mother over
a sick infant: how unweariedly she hangs
over the cradle, how quickly she rises at the
slightest sound! Or we may illustrate the
word by the mariner who paces to and fro
looking forth over the sea, lest his vessel
should run upon some half-hidden and
jagged rock; or the fisherman’s wife plac-
ing her little taper in the window as she
counts the number of the returning boats.

In daily life how important is watchfulness!
A sailing yacht was cruising about the en-
trance of the English Channel. It was night,
but a night clear from mist and fog, when
the crew saw a huge steamship approaching.
She came on straight in their direction ; but
as their yacht had lights hung out they felt
no alarm, though the yacht could not get out
of the way. But still closer and closer came
the great steamer. In terror those on the
yacht raised their voices and shouted with
all their power. There was evidently no
watch kept on the bow of the large vessel.
Secure in her own strength, she swept
onwards, and the crew of the little pleasure-
boat foresaw that instant death was immi-
nent; the monster ship would crush them
down and pass over them and leave no trace
behind. But at the very last moment, by
God’s mercy, she changed her course slightly,
and passed close alongside instead of over


them, and they could note by the many lights
in the cabins how merriment and occupa-
tions had caused a want of watchfulness
which nearly destroyed a number of their
fellow-men !—Dr. Hardman.

Watchfulness constantly needed.—No num-
ber of false alarms cancels the duty of
watchfulness. In the town of Amycle, in
Italy, false reports of the approach of the
enemy had been so often spread that a
law was passed forbidding any one to pay
attention to them. In consequence of this,
when the attack was really imminent, no
one felt at liberty to heed the warning that
was given, and the city was taken. From
this circumstance the epithet of “ Tacitz”
(silent) was given to Amyclee.

Watchfulness — how important to the
soldier! Inthe Middle Ages a town, strongly
fortified, had often resisted siege or capture,
but one day the gate was thrown open to
receive a train of waggons loaded with hay
and corn. One of them, accidentally as it
seemed, for some trifling cause, stopped under
the arch of the gateway. The soldiers on
guard observed nothing suspicious in the
occurrence, nor marked that the waggon
had so stopped that neither could the gate
be closed nor the portcullis lowered. A
moment afterwards the loads of hay were
cast aside, and bands of armed men leapt
out from their concealment beneath! And
thus the city was captured for lack of
watchfulness.

A Christian asleep.—The devil held a
great anniversary, at which his angels and
ministers were called together to report the
result of their several missions. ‘‘I let loose
the wild beasts of the desert,” said one, “on
a caravan of Christians, and their bones are
now bleaching on the sands.” ‘What of
that?” said the arch-fiend ; “their souls are
all saved.” “I drove the east wind,” said
another, “against a ship freighted with
Christians, and they were drowned every
one.” “What of that ?” replied he again;
“ their souls were all saved.” ‘Then stood up
a third, and he said, “ For ten years I tried
to get a single Christian asleep, and at last
I succeeded, and left him so.” Then the
devil shouted, and the night stars of hell
sang for joy.


487


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





CHAPTER XIV.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Render: After two days was the Passover and the Azuma (or Leavenless Feast).
The Passover was the lamb slain on the 14th Nisan (Exod. xii. 6-11); the Azuma was the
festival which began on 15th Nisan, and lasted seven days (Exod. xii. 15-20).

Vers. 3-9. This incident, which happened on the evening before Palm Sunday (chap. xi.),
is inserted here in order to explain the circumstances that led to Christ’s betrayal. It is

_ recorded in a similar connexion by both Matthew (xxvi. 6-13) and John (xii. 1-8). Another
anointing is mentioned in Luke vii. 36-50.

Ver. 3. A woman.—See John xi. 2. An alabaster box.—Omit “box.” Vases or phials for
holding unguents were made at Alabastron in Egypt out of a stone found in the neighbouring
mountains, and so the word came to be used of any vessel employed for a purpose of that
kind, Spikenard.—Pure nard. Pliny says (Wat. Hist., xii. 26) that the nard leaf, especially
the best, was often adulterated with a very common herb.

Vers. 4, 5. This indignant murmuring began with Judas (John xii. 4), Three hundred
pence.—Equal in purchasing power to £30 of our money—a “denarius” being the day’s
wage of a labourer.


Ver. 8. Come aforehand.—She took the initiative as to anointing, etc. The word occurs ~


elsewhere only in 1 Cor. xi. 21, and (passive) Gal. vi. 1.

Ver. 10. To betray.—That he might deliver Him to them. Perhaps his thought was: “The
Master Himself declares His death and burial are at hand. He has said over and over
again that He must be delivered unto the chief priests. Why, then, should not I win their
favour, and at the same time earn some money, by helping them to apprehend Him
quietly?”

Ver. 12. The first day, ete.—14th Nisan—Thursday in Holy Week. The previous day had
been spent in seclusion at Bethany, which “was reckoned as regards religious purposes
part of Jerusalem by the Rabbis, and the lamb might be eaten there, though it must be
killed at the Temple” (Lightfoot, Ho7. Heb.).

Ver. 13. Two of His disciples.—Peter and John (Luke xxii. 8). A man bearing, ete.—It
being essential to Christ’s plan that He should not be arrested before His celebration of the
Passover, He did not divulge to His apostles until the last moment the place where it was
to be held. Probably He had made some private arrangement with a trusty disciple living
in Jerusalem to send a man-servant (instead of a woman, as was usual) for water at a
particular time of day. Possibly the man-servant was also a disciple and in the secret.

Ver. 14. The guest-chamber.— My lodging-place : kardédvyua, rendered “inn” in Luke ii. 7.

Ver. 15. Furnished.—The couches for reclining on set in order and spread with carpets,
Prepared.— Ready for the due celebration of the Passover, so far as the room was concerned
—every particle of leaven having been cleared out. There make ready.—By procuring the
lamb, the unleavened cakes, the cups of wine and water, the bitter herbs, and the sauce.
Some of these would perhaps be provided by the master of the house, but there is great
uncertainty as to what exactly took place.

Ver. 16. The Passover,—An account of the ritual may conveniently be inserted here.
(1) Two or three flat cakes of unleavened bread, and four cups of red wine mixed with water,
were placed before the master of the house, or the most eminent person present, who was
called the Celebrant or President. (2) All present having reclined, he took one of the cups,
known as the “Cup of Consecration,” gave thanks, tasted the cup, and passed it round,
(3) Water was brought in, and the President washed his hands ceremonially. (4) There
were placed on the table the bitter herbs (lettuce, endive, beet, succory, horehound), the
sauce called “ Charoseth” (made of dates, raisins, figs, vinegar, etc., pounded and mixed
together), and the Passover lamb. (5) After again thanking God for the fruits of the earth,
the President took a portion of the bitter herbs ‘the size of an olive,” dipped it in the
Charoseth and ate it, and his example was followed by the rest. (6) The second cup of wine
was filled, after which began the “ Haggadah ” or ‘‘Shewing forth” (1 Cor. xi. 26). A child
or proselyte inquired, “ What mean ye by this service?” (Ixod. xii. 26), and the President
answered according to a prescribed formula, ‘The first part of the “ Hallel” (Ps. cxiii., cxiv.)
was then sung, and the second cup solemnly drunk, (7) The President again washed his
hands (the rest doing so also), and taking two of the unleavened cakes, broke them, gave
thanks, and distributed to the company. Tach, on receiving his portion, wrapped bitter
herbs round it, dipped it in the “Charoseth,” and ate it. (8) The flesh of the lamb was
then eaten. (9) After thanksgiving, the third cup (“Cup of Blessing ”) was handed round.
(10) Thanks were given for the food received and for redemption from Egypt, the fourth


488





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


aa a a a


cup (“ Cup of Joy”) was drunk, the second part of the “ Hallel” (Ps, cxv.-cxviii.) was sung
and the company dispersed. :

Ver. 17. Tu the evening.—After sunset on Thursday—the beginning of 15th Nisan—the
proper paschal night.

i a 18. eevee — yee Aa original standing posture (Exod. xii. 11) had
ong been abandoned. Render last part of verse: One out

you) will deliver Me—he that is siting nith Me. cage eee Wheeden eo
. Ver. 21, The order of the words in the last clause, and the intrinsic meaning of xaddp,
incline one to render thus: An excellent thing were it for Him (the Son of Man) if there had
not been born that man (the man who, while an apostle, becomes a traitor); and the
meaning may perhaps be, that the burden pressing on Christ’s soul would have been infinitely
easier to bear had His apprehension not come about by the agency of His own familiar
friend. Tarlier in the verse He exclaims, Alas for that man! thinking, apparently, of the
self-reproach that would overwhelm Judas, almost the moment the deed was done.

Ver. 22. Took bread.—One of the unleavened cakes lying on the table. Blessed.— Spoke
the word for good: the-word (Adyos), for good (ed). So in the Latin, benedicimus = we utter
the word bene, i.e. bene fiat. ‘Cum Deus bene dicit, tum bene est: cum homo, tum ut bene
fiat.” See the profound note by Prof. T. 8. Evans on 1 Cor. x. 16 in the Speaker's Commentary.
Eat.—Imported from Matt. xxvi. 26, where genuine. A very natural addition, as of course
it is implied. This is My body.—The copula means neither “represents” nor “ symbolises,”
but simply és. The Lord is pleased to establish the most intimate relation possible between
the consecrated elements and His sacred humanity. The faithful communicant, when: he
receives the Eucharistic bread and wine, eats the flesh and drinks the blood of the Son of
Man (John vi. 53-56). It ought not to be necessary to add that “this is a great mystery,”
and that the eating and drinking are purely spiritual acts—and, because spiritual, therefore
most real and true.

Ver. 23. Given thanks.—J.e. for ed or God’s good gifts of bread and wine: the idea of
thanks is exhausted in the ydpis. So Prof. Evans on 1 Cor, xi. 24.

Ver. 24. Of the new testament.—Omit “new,” and render: of the covenant—i.e. of the
arrangement (61a07xn) which God has graciously made for restoring to man his lost inherit-
ance. From first to last God has entertained but one grand scheme of mercy to our fallen
tace; but this scheme, when our Lord spoke, had been manifested in its initial stage only
(see Exod. xxiv. 4-8), which was a shadow cast before of the great reality to be revealed
in due time. Since, however, the Jews had mistaken the shadow for the reality, and were
for the most part content to offer and rest in material sacrifices which could never take away
sins, it became necessary to differentiate the true plan of salvation through the blood of
Christ from the preparatory sacrificial system of Israel which merely typified it. This was
done by terming the one the “ old covenant,” and the other the “new.” See Jer. xxxi. 31-34;
Luke xxii. 20; 1 Cor. xi. 25; Heb. ix. 15, 18-22, xii. 24. But both here and in Matt. xxvi. 28
the word “new” is not found. Shed.—Being shed: Christ was there and then offering His
precious blood for the sins of the whole world. For many.—In behalf of many: trip =
super, over, the essential idea being that of a person bending over another—in New Testa-
ment never in a physical, always in a moral sense. The Redeemer bent His mind over
many—even the whole race of men—when He laid down His life to effect their salvation
(1 John ii, 2). ,

Ver. 25. See Rey. xix. 9. Kingdom of God.— With the announcement of the kingdom’s
immanence Christ’s ministry began (Mark i. 15); with the prophecy of that kingdom’s
perfect consummation and bliss it fitly ends.

Ver. 27. An hymn.—Second part of Hallel (Ps. cxv.-cxviii.); for no doubt the first part
(cxiii., cxiv.) had been sung in its usual place earlier in the evening.

Vers. 27-31. See R.V. for reading and rendering.

Ver. 32. Gethsemane.—J.e. Oil-press. The traditional site is a garden at the foot of the
Mount of Olives on the north-west, where still are to be seen eight olive trees, believed to
be over two thousand years old.

Ver. 33. Sore amazed.— Filled with consternation at the thought of all He must pass
through ere He reached the goal. Very hervy.—Uncertain whether ddnyovety is derived
from &5nyos, “ away from home,” or déyv, ‘\measily”: in either case it expresses the yearning
of heart-sickness, The two words are wost aptly chosen to depict the feelings of one
“surrounded with sorrow,” as Christ Himself describes His position in next verse.

Ver. 36. Abba.—The very word used by Christ. Peculiar to Mark. Take away this cup
from Me.—His soul “exceeding sorrowful unto death,” Christ feared apparently that the
agony He was enduring might snap asunder the thin thread of His life there and then. He
therefore prays for strength to reach the Cross, there to complete the offering of Himself as
a ransom for the sins of the world. This may be the meaning of Heb. v. 7. Nevertheless
not what I will, but what Thou wilt.—The sublime self-sacrifice of the preceding clause
is intensified by this, He had said long before, “I, if I be lifted up, shall draw all men


. 489


cHap. xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a een rr


unto Me.” But it seemed, in the garden, as if He were not to be lifted up on the Cross after
all—as if His life-work might be frustrated at the very last, by His physical strength not
holding out long enough. Even to this He resigns Himself, if it be the Father’s will. See
Expository Times, vol. vi., No. 10, pp. 483, 484.

Ver. 41. The meaning of dméxe. being uncertain, and the punctuation being equally
undetermined, Christ’s words here are susceptible of very different interpretations : (1) Sleep
and rest for the time that remains ; he (the traitor) is far away. Then, after an interval:
The hour has come, etc. (2) Sleep and rest for the time that remains. Then, after an
interval: Enough! the hour has come, etc. (3) Are you sleeping and resting for the time
that remains? Enough! The hour has come, etc.

Ver. 48. Thief —Robdber, or bandit.

Ver, 51. A linen cloth.—A sindon—either a garment or bed-covering made of linen or
muslin manufactured in Sind.

Ver. 53. With him were assembled.— 7here come with him, or There come together wnto him.

Ver. 54. The palace.—The court of the palace. At the fire.—Beside the light of the fire.

Ver. 58. Within three days.—A/fter three days: 6d. For similar construction see
Mark ii. 1 ; Acts xxiv. 17; Gal. ii. 1.

Ver. 72. When he thought thereon,—A good rendering, if émiSaddév means having cast his
mind over the matter. But, as this verb is used not many verses back (ver. 46) of a
physical action, it may be best to adopt Theophylact’s explanation—having cast his mantle
over his head. So (of recent English scholars) Dean Blakesley, Prof. Evans, and
Dr. F, Field—a remarkable consensus of independent judgment on a knotty point.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—11.
(Parautets: Marr. xxvi. 1-16; Luxe xxii. 1-6; Jonn xii. 1-8.)


The anointing of Christ's body to the burying—I. The feast and the
anointing.—‘“‘ Jesus, six days before the Passover”—the last Passover He
was to celebrate with His disciples before He suffered—‘came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was,” whom He had, a short time before, “raised from
the dead.” ‘There”—‘“in the house of Simon the leper”—‘they made
Him a supper,” at which were present, in different capacities, all three
members of that family which is distinguished above all others as “the family
which Jesus loved.” ‘Martha served,” i.e. attended to the preparation and
management of the feast--an employment suited to her character and abilities,
and deserving of praise rather than blame if confined within the bounds of
a decent hospitality, and a proper attention to the comforts of the guests.
Lazarus, the dead-alive, was “‘one of those who sat at table with” Jesus.
Mary, the other sister, on this as on a former occasion (Luke x. 39), is found
still “‘choosing the better part”: for which she draws upon herself, as before,
the censure of those who could not appreciate her conduct, and the approbation
of her Divine Lord. This time Mary, “having an alabaster box of ointment
of spikenard very precious, brake the box, and poured it on His head,” anointed
also His feet, wiping them with her hair—an action which, according to the
habits of those days, expressed the highest possible respect and veneration for
the Person so honoured. And not that Person only, but the whole company,
came in for a share of the gratification which such a costly preparation of
the apothecary’s art was adapted to convey to the senses; nay, so diffusive
was the benefit, that ‘“‘ the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.”

II. The objection made by Judas and others.—All were benefited ; but not
all were pleased. There was one in particular whom neither the honour paid
to his Master nor the enjoyment afforded to himself could restrain from
giving vent to the ill-humour which this proceeding had excited in his breast
(John xii. 4, 5); and his specious complaint is quickly taken up by others
(Matt. xxvi. 8, 9). The objection, were it ever so valid in itself, was not so in
the mouth of Judas, not being made in good faith (John xii. 6). Our Lord


490





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. xrv.





and His disciples, on the principle that “the labourer is worthy of his hire,”
subsisted on the contributions of the charitably-disposed. These were deposited
in a box like that described in 2 Kings xii. 9. Our Lord’s was a poor-box, both
as receiving the money contributed for the support of such poor men as
Himself and His immediate followers, and also because distribution was made
out of it to those whose wants were more pressing than their own (John xiii, 29).
This box was placed in the custody of Judas, our Lord’s design probably being
to soothe and partially gratify his mercenary instincts, and thus save him from
falling into those grosser offences of dishonesty and treachery which he afterwards
committed. But so deep-rooted was his ruling passion, that the very expedient
which was intended to keep him out of temptation only served to lead him
into it: not content with having the keeping of the box, he also purloined its
contents; and, so far from caring for the poor, actually embezzled the funds
set apart for them.

III. The vindication of Mary by our Lord.—Judas, when he made this
objection, spoke in bad faith, and therefore deserved no answer. But as there
were others present, who may have sincerely thought that here was an
extravagant outlay, and that the money might have been better spent, our
Lord vouchsafes a reply, both for their satisfaction, and for the instruction
of all to whom this gospel should come (vers. 6-9). 1. The judgment which
had been’ passed on the proceeding was equally rash and uncharitable. Hasty
censure is always to be avoided, especially in the presence of those more
competent to express an opinion. If Mary’s conduct had been really blamable,
there was One present who might have rebuked her with authority. But He
did not. After that, to trouble or find fault with her was to cast reflexions
on Him. If she was wrong in committing the act, He was wrong in permitting
it. But He does not vindicate Himself—that was unnecessary. He interferes
solely onthe woman’s account. ‘ Let her alone; why trouble ye her?” Muni-
ficence like hers, even if it were misdirected, should rather be encouraged than
checked. Such examples are not likely to be generally followed. But was this
woman’s liberality misdirected? Jesus emphatically declares it was not. ‘She
hath wrought a good work on Me.” The cost of this ointment would have
procured her many luxuries, which she has chosen to go without, in order that
nothing may be wanting to the honour and gratification of her Lord. She has set
an example of self-denial and consecration of her talents to the service of religion,
much needed in a world where “all seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ’s.” 2. “The poor” having been mentioned, Jesus would not have
it supposed for a moment that their interests were with Him a matter of
secondary importance. Therefore, before going on to reveal the true significance
and appropriateness of Mary’s action, He pauses a moment to shew that His
approval and acceptance of her offering is by no means to be considered a
disparagement of the proposed alternative. “ There is a time,” He says, “for
everything; and the present is a very peculiar time, and has a duty which
can be performed at no other time. That duty is, to pay the last honours to
the person of your dying Master and Lord. I go; but I leave the poor behind
Me. Do them good, when you can do Meno more good.” Or rather, ‘‘ Do them
good, and you will still be doing Me good” (Matt. xxv. 40). 3. We are not
to understand, by the words “She is come aforehand to anoint My body to
the burying,” that Mary was aware of her Lord’s imminent death, or that she
entertained any expectation of it. No reason can be assigned why she alone,
of all His disciples, should have been able to penetrate the mystery in which
everything connected with His death and passion was, up to that time,
enveloped. Indeed, had she foreseen the events of the next few days, she
would surely have kept this ointment a little longer, and poured it upon the


491


cuap. xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





lifeless clay, instead of the warm flesh and blood, of her beloved Lord. Jesus,
therefore, in these words kindly puts a construction upon her action of which
she herself had no idea, taking occasion, at the same time, to give a clearer
intimation of coming events than He had yet done.

IV. The purposes for which this incident was recorded.—l. First, and
specially, as a just tribute of honour to the woman herself (ver. 9). 2. Secondly,
in common with all Scripture, “for our learning.” (1) Learn hence a lesson
of generous self-sacrifice in the promotion of God’s honour and our Master's
cause. In such a cause there is room not only for liberality, but also for
that unstinted profuseness which may, now and then, go beyond the mark,
and require to be restrained, rather than stimulated, by those whose duty it
is to direct it. See Exod. xxxvi. 5, 6; Acts iv. 34-37; 2 Cor. viii. 1-4.
(2) Remember that the poor are Christ’s peculiar legacy to His Church. Who
would not feel honoured to be entrusted with such a charge? Who would not
be anxious to acquit himself, to the utmost of his power, of the obligations of
it? (3) Since we have not our Lord Himself always with us, and can no
longer do honour to His person, let us take every opportunity of shewing our
dutiful respect for His memory. Mary “did what she could.” It was not
in her power to avert the Great Sacrifice which was foreordained from before
the foundation of the world, or even to retard it for a single day; but what
she did was not the less ‘a good work,” nor she who did it the less blessed
in her deed. Let us follow her example as best we may. If we cannot anoint
our Lord’s body for the burying, let us at least embalm the memory of His
precious death and passion in our heart of hearts, and let us thankfully
receive those holy mysteries in which He is pleased to convey to us the spiritual
benefits pertaining thereto.


Vers. 6-9. Christ honouring loving service.—Of all who were present, no one
seems to have taken the woman’s part except Jesus. But that exception made
up for the lack of all else. He defended her from their attack; He vindicated
the wisdom and rightness of her deed. But He did more. He uttered words
revealing His appreciation, and securing its undying honour.

I. Jesus speaks of “this gospel.”—Gospel is a familiar term, but, like many
other familiar words, it is often used without any idea as to what it means.
To many the term expresses the summation of theology with all its abstractions
and metaphysics—a subject that, as regarded by them, has little to attract,
and as little to profit, To others the gospel means religion, and religion, as
they regard it, with its impossible requirements and irksome ordinances. The
gospel is simply God’s spell, i.e. God’s story. And just because it is God’s
spell it is a good spell, the spell or story of Him who is pre-eminently the good.
There are many gospels—endless varieties of good tidings, and of good tidings
of great joy. Any news that brings gladness to the heart, any intelligence
from near or far that relieves from fear and fills the mouth with laughter or
with song is a gospel—that is, it is good news. But we do not call such news a
gospel. We reserve that term for God’s news. It is not theology or religion,
and it is nothing that is undesirable or hurtful ; but it is the blissful announce-
ment that Jesus lived and died and rose again on our behalf. It is the good
news of a Divine and All-sufficient Helper for us who were without strength.
It is the good news of Christ having done, in the grace of God, on our behalf,
not only what we could not do for ourselves, but all that was needful to be done
in order to our salvation. This is the gospel we preach. There are other good
things, but this is the best.

II. Christ intimates that this gospel is to be preached in the whole world. —
There are little gospels of men, human inventions sought sometimes to be put


492





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





into the place of God’s gospel. They create a stir for a little while and within
a little sphere, but it is only for a little while and within a little sphere. Our
candles burn out, but the sun shines on. The gospel, however, is not only not
to die out, but it is to be spread abroad. That is the work assigned to the
redeemed Church, the duty to which it is specially called. Here a Church may
be negligent ; there one professing himself to be wise may urge what he deems
to be a better way; yonder another may venture to go farther and condemn
even the little that is being done to win the world to Christ ; but all these things
do not alter by a thousandth part the reality of obligation, do not recall by a
shadow the “marching orders” given by the Leader of the redeemed hosts of
God. Of course there are still those who tell us that charity begins at home;
but it is getting to be discovered that they very truthfully describe their own
charity—it begins at home, and it stays there, for it is a kind of weak invalid,
not strong enough by any means to venture outside. They tell us that zeal for
the foreign field leads to neglect of the home field, although, from all Christendom,
they cannot quote one exception to the rule that as the missionary spirit grows
in any Church it increases its home power and labour. The early Church
did not first do all that could be done at home before thought was taken for
those outside. It did not first spend all that it needed on itself, and then give
the remainder, if remainder there happened to be, to the conquest of the world.
It acted in a different spirit ; for it acted in the spirit of Him who desired that
this great gospel of love, this great story of salvation, should be spread throughout
the whole world.

III. Love of Christ is the proof and test of discipleship.—The religion of
Christ is distinguished by many features from all other professed religions, but
by no feature more than this, that it demands love for its Author. It is true
that not love but faith is the condition of salvation. But then faith is thus set
as the condition only that love may be reached. There cannot be love till there
is faith. Christ must be recognised, seen somewhat as He is, and believed in
as worthy of trust, before love can be felt. Hence faith must precede love—
faith, not love, must be the condition of salvation. But if faith be the
condition of salvation, love is largely salvation itself. “Now abideth faith,
hope, charity, these three ; but the greatest of these is charity.”

TV. The reward accorded by Christ to personal devotion.—It was a bold
thing for any one to promise. It shews the marvellous self-consciousness of
Christ that He pledged remembrance and fame. Such language on the lips of
any mere man would be insufferable. The egotism would disgust; the bombast
would anger. But Christ was no mere man. In the consciousness that He
was more than man—that in Him as the Divine One was all that men could
need—He bade men come to Him, proclaimed Himself their life and light, and
declared that without Him they could do nothing. And so here He plelges
immortality of renown. No one else could have done that. Only He who is
Lord of all and the Father of the ages.—-G. Gladstone.


Vers. 10, 11. Judas Iscariot.—There are three motives which lead men
to attach themselves to a new movement. Men may be moved either by
conviction, or by contagious enthusiasm, or by self-interest. To this last class
belonged Judas.

T. Ina double sense he came from without.—He came from a distance ; his
nature was never stirred by the passing sincerity of contagious enthusiasm.
He threw in his lot with the followers of Christ with deliberation, and with
faith, only so far as calculation is faith. He did believe that our Lord would
achieve a great success; he may have believed, as others did, though with more
self-interested speculativeness than others, that the new Prophet was the


493


ae


CHAP. XIV. H OMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Messiah, the destined King. At any rate the venture is worth some risk.
He joins the society. His gifts win for him a place among the foremost.
Whenever good fortune smiles, he cannot fail to share in it. And good fortune
seemed to smile. The great works of Christ and His mighty and enthralling
words drew the people; they heard Him gladly. The impression of His
greatness deepened and spread. Impression grew into expectation. Expectation
became impatient. The Prophet Teacher must submit to the people’s will.
They determined to take Him by force and make Him a king. All this Judas
must have perceived; and the gladness of imminent success must have been
his. But the attitude of our Lord at this moment must have surprised many.
Instead of courting this popular movement, He retired from it. He withdrew
Himself; and His withdrawal chilled the growing enthusiasm. Changes in
the popular mood are readily gauged by those who touch the world on its
financial side, and Judas’ position gave him opportunity of noticing the first
symptoms of waning popularity. He felt the pulse of public opinion, and he
knew when it began to beat with calmness; he could calculate that calmness
might lapse into indifference. A little, a very little change in the popular
temper, and the whole situation would be reversed ; and Judas would find that
he had cast in his lot with a losing and not with a winning cause. Now what
would be the natural conduct of a person without any moral convictions under
such circumstances? He must, to use a slang expression, hedge; so that,
whatever happened, he would be safe to win. And this is precisely what Judas
does. Without breaking with the party of Christ, he opens up negotiations
with the other side. It is the precaution of worldly wisdom. Judas is the
type of the man who has no principle. He is for God or for God’s enemies
with equal readiness, so long as he himself is safe.

IT. Judas did not fall at once and unwarned.—Characters grow : the features
which attract or repel us are products of will and circumstances; for character
is not a gift, but a formation. Judas had the same chances of better things
which his brother-apostles had. ‘There were mixed motives, no doubt, in the
hearts of all. The comrades of Judas had weaknesses and worldly desires,
even as he had; but they yielded themselves to the good influence which was
so near them. But in Judas the self-interest was allowed to grow; he fostered
it in thought ; he nourished it by habitual embezzlements of the funds entrusted
to him. Character grows from habits; and he adopted bad ones. This was
not all. He thrust away from himself the helping hand which Christ’s love
extended to him. From the earliest time to the latest moment Christ sought
to save the traitor from himself.. Let us recall Christ’s method. He did not
receive recruits without caution. He sought to arm with weapons against
self-deception those who volunteered to follow Him. Above all things, He
made it clear that riches and worldly wealth were not to be looked for by those
who would come after Him. Not unwarned then (we may well conclude) did
Judas attach himself to Christ’s company. There were after-warnings also.
Generally the tone of our Lord’s teaching respecting worldliness was one constant
warning. But besides this there were utterances of our Lord's which, in the
light of Judas’ character, sound like direct and special efforts to awake him
from his dream of self. We may, for example, read in the light of Judas’
designs the parable of the unjust steward. The faithless steward may secure
for himself a refuge among those partners of his guilt whom he has placed
under an obligation—yes, in the world, in earthly habitations, it may be so;
but such methods will secure no welcome, when men fail, in eternal habitations.
Or, again, the parable of the wedding garment had its message for the traitor.
It was one thing to refuse to come to the wedding; it was another to come,
and to come in the beggarly array of one’s worldliness. Still more emphatic


«ot





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XIV.





is the warning given at the time when our Lord had by His action refused the
kingdom, and when consequently doubts began to grow strong in the mind of
Judas. ‘ Did not I choose you the twelve, and one of you is a devil?” Must
not the soul of Judas have whispered to itself, “It is I. To this image must
I come if I allow this thing to gain the mastery over me”? Christ’s efforts
to save His disciple sinking into such an abyss of baseness did not end here.
As the crisis draws near, He puts forth fresh and final attempts to save him.
“Ye are not all clean,” He said, at the time when it was not yet too late for
the traitor to cleanse his fault. But the words of Christ wake no softening
thoughts in the traitor’s mind. One more effort Christ will make. At the
supper table He quotes the words, ‘‘ He that eateth My bread hath lifted up his
heel against Me” (John xiii. 18). Later still more explicitly, ‘““One of you
shall betray Me” (John xiii. 21). Even then it was not too late. The last
step had not been taken by Judas. But, as with a man sliding down a steep
place, the impetus of temptation was too strong. He takes the food from the
hand of Christ. There is a treachery in the doing so; the Nemesis of base acts
is further baseness. ‘ After the sop Satan entered into him” (John xiii. 27).
The crisis is passed at that moment. He will not turn back now. “That thou
doest, do quickly” (John xiii. 27). “He went out straightway; and it was
night.” An hour later his treason was an accomplished fact. The inward
story of Judas’ life is a story of help refused and warning disregarded. The
tender efforts of his Lord and Master to save him are put away.

Ill. How far did Judas understand these efforts of Christ on his behalf?—
They were warnings to his spirit ; the warnings were directed primarily, and
at first exclusively, to the moral sense of the man. Christ did not wish Judas
to be moved merely by motives of personal alarm, and under their influence
alone to abandon his scheme. He sought to awaken the man’s moral sense against
himself. But later He brings to bear upon Judas the force of the less worthy
motive. He gives the hints of coming betrayal. But Judas, though warned,
has dulled his soul by sin. The full significance of all that our Lord spoke does
not reach him. Only at the very last, it appears, does he realise that he may
be suspected, and even to the moment of the treacherous kiss he hopes that it
is other treachery than his own which is known to Christ. Worldly wisdom
outwits itself, as vaulting ambition overleaps itself and falls on the other side.
The schemer imagines that he has covered the whole ground with his eye before
he lays his plans, but there is always a blind spot in his field of vision. Indulging
in a secret sin, and judging everything by the standard of his own interests,
the sight of anything which conflicts with his interests exasperates Judas.
This is the explanation of his astonishing and rash outburst of temper at
Bethany. Although he veiled his real meaning by some words about the poor,
yet the irritation which he displayed might have provoked suspicion. His speech
was imprudent. It may be that he has aroused suspicion. This being so, it
is high time that he should secure himself, and take those steps which will
open to him retreat and good fortune should the Prophet of Galilee fail. He
takes the step; he makes the bargain with the priests ; he makes one fatal
blunder—his greedy spirit compels him to accept the paltry and inadequate sum
of money which was offered. But it is not part of his policy to forsake the
discipleship of Christ. It is still possible that Christ may declare Himself with
invincible might, and seize in some unexpected way the crown which He seems
to have refused. He takes his place with the rest of the disciples. He will
keep up the appearance of friendliness and loyalty to the last. Yes, even
though it involves the crowning baseness of the hypocrite kiss. “Judas,
betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?” (Luke xxii. 48). Judas cannot
doubt now that his treason is known. And yet, these other words, “ Friend,


495


7


car. xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. | ’





do that for which thou art come” (Matt. xxvi. 50); what might they mean ¢
What might they not? His Master calls him friend, and seemingly acquiesces
in what has been done. Can it be that his Master accepts the situation, and
sees in it an opportunity for some splendid manifestation of power? Will victory
dawn out of the hour of disaster? And if so, may not he, Judas, who devised
this thing, yet be reckoned as an instrument of the triumph ?

TV. All illusions are soon at an end.— His Master is condemned. All worldly
hopes in that direction have disappeared. He has, however, the other side to
depend on. He will be honoured as the means of what the priestly party will
consider a national triumph. He visits the priests, and, with an affectation of
misgiving, expresses doubts concerning his own action. Does he think that
they will pamper and coax him, laugh at his misgivings, and belaud him as a
patriot who has deserved well of the powers that be? He is quickly undeceived.
In the eyes of the priests he is a paid spy, and nothing more. The scales fall
from his eyes now. He has sacrificed place, credit, character, friends—and for
what? Thirty pieces of silver—of what possible use are these to him? He
flings down the price of blood. He goes out alone. He is alone indeed. He
has no way to turn. He thought his skill had kept one door open to himself ;
but both doors are closed upon him. “What shall I do? I cannot dig: to
. beg I am ashamed.” Did the words come back to him now that his clever
device had ended so disastrously 2? Did he now sée that the habitations of
worldly men were cruel? Did he see that worldly policy, however much it
may be commended, is scorned in heaven? Was that which now, by his own
action, seemed unattainable perceived at last to be most desirable? Does it
dawn upon his mind now that there is a nobler victory in patience and weakness,
even when it suffers, than in hard and unscrupulous triumph? Does that
spiritual kingdom seem to his alienated spirit to be a land very far off when
now at length he begins to guess at the beauty of its King? Struck down
by the heavy blow of disappointment, failure, disaster, he realised now the
measureless spiritual distance which he had placed between himself and his
Lord. He was as a man placed upon a thin strip of coast, hemmed in behind
by hard, unscaleable rocks, and fronting the inexorable waves of the incoming
tide. He had no power to take up life again by repentance, and to seek to
undo the past by earnest and humble work for others. There seemed nothing
for it but to lay down that life which he had not the moral earnestness to value
nor the moral courage to face.

V. Is the picture of Judas an unusual one ?—Is it only once in a century
or a millennium that such a character presents itself? A man possessed of
sagacity and shrewdness learns to balance probabilities of success and to ignore
the consideration of principle. Enthusiasm for right is inconvenient. Fidelity
to conviction, to truth, to honour, interferes sadly with his worldly prospects.
Conscience is a troublesome fellow-voyager. It is better that it should be put
overboard. The only purpose of life is success. Is the picture far to seek 2
Yet, wherever such men are to be found, they are the incipient Iscariots of
the world. Nay, such are already traitors at heart—traitors to themselves,
to mankind, and to God. Absorbing devotion to self disintegrates the character,
In the flood time of temptation it goes to pieces. Absorbing devotion to the’
other One than self, to Him who alone is the true centre of life, consolidates,
strengthens, invigorates the character. Day by day those so devoted grow to
firmer mould and nobler stature. They are in Christ’s hands, and none can
pluck them thence. They fall not; they are founded on a rock.— Bishop
Boyd Carpenter.


496





Ee aren


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP, XIV.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1, 2. The conspiracy of the
priests.—As the priests, with whatever
misgivings, had resolved not to recog-
nise Jesus as the Christ, it was in-
evitable that they should conspire
against Him. Not only had He worsted
them in every controversy in which
they had engaged Him, and put them
to shame before the people whom they
despised but courted—not only had
He proved them to be ignorant of the
very Scriptures of which they professed
to hold the key: He had also de-
nounced them as disloyal to their
Master in heaven, and had invoked
on them “woes” so searching and
scathing as to pierce even their hard
hearts, and to bring a blush even to
their brows of brass. And the people
had rallied to Him; He was “ walking
about” in the Temple as if it belonged
to Him rather than to them, and en-
chanting the ears of those on whom
they had always securely counted to
listen with unbounded deference and
admiration. There was not, in fine,
room for them and for Him; as He
increased they must decrease; and
hence they met with a common deter-
mination to make an end of Him.
Their private animosities were for-
gotten in the presence of a common
danger; and Pharisees and Sadducees,
Herodians and Hebrews, elders and
scribes, priests and laymen, united for
a time against Him who was shaking
the very foundations of their authority
and power. They met at the house
of Caiaphas, hard by the Temple, on the
evening of the very day (Tuesday) on
which they had been worsted and put
to shame. Of the course of their dis-
cussion we are told nothing; but the
two decisions at which they arrived
are recorded. They were (1) that He
must be put to death with the least
possible delay; and (2) that it would
not be safe to proceed against Him
until the immense multitude of pilgrims
had left Jerusalem: ‘They said [they


kept saying], Not during the feast,


lest haply there should be a tumult of
the people.” But at the very time at
which they were saying, “‘ Not till after
the feast,” Jesus was forewarning His
disciples that “after two days,” on the
day on which the feast began, He
would be delivered up and crucified!
What, then, was it which led them to
abandon their resolution, and con-
strained them to carry out not their
own counsel, but ‘the determinate
foreknowledge” of God? Before their
meeting was over, as we learn from
Luke, an event, wholly unexpected by
them, had happened, which held out
to them the hope of carrying out their
cruel and wicked purpose sooner than
they had anticipated, and without ex-
citing the tumult which they dreaded.
Judas Iscariot had at last made up
his mind to betray the Master who
had disappointed all his hopes of wealth
and distinction ; and, on gaining access
to them, had covenanted to deliver
Him to the priests secretly, ‘‘ without
tumult.” Providence itself would seem,
to some of them, to have come to their
help, although in the questionable
shape of a thief and a traitor. Hence
they rescinded their former resolution,
and entered on a course in which they
exactly fulfilled the prediction of Jesus.
After two days He was delivered up to
them, and crucified.—S. Cox, D.D.


Vers. 3-9. The anointing at Bethany.
—1. In Christ’s company it is possible
to have the extremes of character and
disposition. The self-denying, loving
woman, and the selfish and avaricious
professing disciple. 2. Hypocrisy will
always uncloak itself to sneer at deeds
of loving sacrifice. 3. In Christ’s com-
pany the heart lovingly devoted to
Him must be prepared for bitter trials.
There are Judases and murmurers.
4, Right doing, based on simple, loving
faith in Jesus, will be cherished and
remembered by the Master, though
despised by men.—J. H. Hargreaves.

A woman's devotion to Christ—


KK 497


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





I. Displayed.— 1. Upon a public occa-
sion, A great supper. 2. In time of
danger. Near crucifixion. 3. After
a great blessing. Resurrectic>. of
Lazarus. 4. Beautiful in its trai.
(1) Costly. (2) Modest. (3) Loving.
(4) Suitable. (5) Pleasant.

IT. Condemned.—1l. By one closely
allied to Christ. Profession is not
piety. 2. In a secular spirit. 3. In
the name of philanthropy. 4. For his
own benefit.

III. Defended.—1. Christ prohibits
interference with it. 2. He announces
it as exactly seasonable. 3. He accepts
it as sublimely useful. She did more
than she thought. Goodness immortal
in its results.—B. D. Johns.


Ver. 3. Love the best motive for work.
—It is not good to set about the per-
formance even of right things from
second-rate motives, for the action thug
inspired must of necessity be second-
rate also. We dwarf our best actions,
and get into stereotyped modes of
service, which tend to formalism, simply
because we do not work from personal
love to the living, personal Christ.
See how Mary’s love operated. It
would not let her be content with simply
doing duty and acting after the pre-
cedent of others. Duty is very good
when you can get nothing better, but
after all it is a cold and somewhat
stern mistress. He who works from
a sense of duty generally seeks to get
off with doing as little as he can, and
will not undertake anything that is
not prescribed. But he who works
from the impulse of love is constantly
trying how much he can do for Jesus.
Had Mary waited for a precedent, she
had never done this action which so
gladdened the Redeemer’s heart. How
much of the Christian effort of these
days is mere imitation! Mary had
her own reasons for loving the Lord,
and she took her own way of shewing
her love. So it ought to be with us.
No human thing, no earthly model, no
precedent, should shut out from our
view the Lord, and to Him everything
ought to be rendered. This will give


498


inventiveness and originality to our
piety, so that the offering brought by
each shall have as much individuality
and distinctiveness about it as there
is about the fragrance of the lily
or the perfume of the violet.—
W. M. Taylor, D.D.


Vers. 4, 5. Christian liberality.—
The nearest parallel in our own day
is where lavish expenditure is made
upon objects which, however intimately
connected with the honour of religion,
are yet not strictly necessary—such as
the erection of new churches of noble
design and costly construction, or the
handsomeand lavish adorning of the old.
In such cases there is always some
narrow-minded person ready to cry
out, “ Why this waste of what might
have been given to the poor?” And
though we do not desire to impute to
any man other motives than those he
avows, yet this we may safely say:
that such objectors are not generally
observed to care or to do more for
the poor than those whom they con-
demn. Such an outlay as Mary’s
was, may, it is true, arise from mere
ostentation; and then it is liable to
the charge not only of extravagance,
but of hypocrisy. But when it is
prompted by love unfeigned, and by
a sincere desire to spare no expense
in doing honour to the Greatest of
Benefactors and the Best of Friends,
it is not only commendable in itself,
but it will always be found united
with an equally unstinted expenditure
on those objects which are strictly
charitable. So true it is that “the
liberal man deviseth liberal things” ;
whereas a covetous person is never
without an excuse for saving his money,
whether the Saviour’s person is to be
honoured or His poor to be fed.

Profusion is not necessarily waste.—
No one will doubt that there is a law
of utility, a law of economy, which
man must observe; but we must also
learn that there are spheres of motive
and duty where the rigid laws of utility
will not apply and where economy is
niggard. God teaches this in creation,


oo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





where “Beauty and Utility walked
hand in hand.” He teaches it in His
Holy Word, where truth is unfolded
to us clad in infinite loveliness.—
H. M. Jackson.

All is not waste that looks like waste.
—Had Mary been hindered from dis-
charging herself of the emotion that
swelled within her and panted for some
escape, then there would have been
waste. She would have been defrauded
of increase in love. The permitted
expression of it according to its own
impulse nourished and fed it, and left


her so much more qualified and pro-


vided to be a blessing to the poor. To
let me have my way sometimes in
expending freely upon a sentiment, a
fine or tender sentiment, without


reference to utility or thought of other .


and more serviceable channels in which
my energy might flow—this is not
waste, inasmuch as it helps to enlarge
and elevate me, and thus conduces to
render me more capable and prepared
to do good.—V. R. Wood.


Vers. 6-9. The law of Christian
devotion.—Our Lord’s answer goes very
deep into the whole subject of Christian
consecration, both of self and of posses-
sions. 1. He jays down first the great
motive of 1 all—she hath wrought
a good work on Me.” The absolute
singleness of its reference to Him made
it “good.” The question is not, eo
what purpose?” but “For whose
sake?” Everything done from the
impulse of simple love to Jesus Christ
is “good.” All other devotion of
powers or possessions is “ waste.” 2,
Christ next strips the cavil of its
disguise, and shews its insincerity.
The solicitude for the poor which had
seized the objectors so suddenly would
have ample opportunities to express
itself. That “whensoever ye will” is
a sharp prick to conscience, and is
meant to disclose the insincerity of the
eare which is so occasional, though the
misery which it affects to pity is so
continual, True benevolence is not an
invermittent fountain, but a perennial
stream, 3. Farther, our Lord here





lays down the principle that cireum-
stances may arise when our supreme
love to Him not only warrants, but
demands, the temporary neglect of
perpetual and ordinary objects of
liberality, in order to consecrate all
our resources on some great act, which
shall worthily express our love, and
can only be doneonce. 4. “She hath
done what she could.” There our Lord
lays down the measure of acceptable
consecration. It is an apology or
vindication of the form of the offering;
but it is a stringent demand as to its
amount. If Mary had had half a
dozen more alabaster vases, which she
kept unbroken, would she have been
so praised? Capacity regulates obliga-
tion, both as to the manner and the
measure. ‘Power to its last particle
is duty.” 5. We have next set forth
the significance which our Lord puts
into the service which He accepts.
“She is come aforehand to anoint My
body to the burying.” Love is wiser
than it knows, and the purposes which
Christ can make its offerings serve are
higher and sacreder than the offerer’s
intent. ‘Lord, when saw we Thee—
and visited Thee?” We—did we do
that? If we take care of the motive,
which is our end of the deed, He will
take care of the result, which is His
end. 6. Finally, we have Christ’s
promise of perpetuity for the service
which He accepts. If we lay our best
in any kind at Christ’s feet, He will
take our poor offerings and melt them
down to form part of His eternal
crown.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 6. God enriched by man’s devo-
tion.—Can we, in reality, add any-
thing toGod? Oan we ever experience
the sweetness of doing something for
Him who has done all things for us ?
Yes; Jehovah is not satisfied with
governing men: He cannot rest until


“He possesses their heart. And that


heart must not be captured: it can
only be won over, and s0 bestowed.
Thus the Creator becomes a suitor to
His creatures; beseeches them to
understand Him; is enriched by their


499


CHAP. XIV.


intelligence, impoverished by their
dulness; is joyful in their affection,
saddened at their refusal. And where
is this better witnessed than at the
supper table of Bethany?—J. 4H.
Alford.


Ver. 7. The problem of poverty, and
how to deal with it.—l. The essential
claim which this class of mankind has
upon the common brotherhood is not
one of “charity,” but is founded in
religion ; it is not a humane sentiment
to be gratified, but a law of Christianity
to be obeyed. 2. The poor may be
considered in the light of Christ’s
legacy to His Church in all ages. If
there were no poor claiming our
sympathy and kindly ministry, what
a lack there had been in the training
of the Christian graces! 3. We are
to perform this high and sacred duty
in testimony of our love to Christ, and
in gratitude for His love and services
in our behalf.—Homiletic Review.

The poor always with us.—If we are
wise, we shall be thankful for our own
sakes that this is so. The mere sight
of them may remind us that this
world is not only or chiefly for the rich
and prosperous, that “the poor will
never cease out of the land,” or even
cease from forming the numerical
majority of those who are to be
sustained by it. The sufferings and
distresses of the poor, and even their
very follies and vices, may teach us a
wholesome lesson, if we remember that
they are men of like passions with
ourselves, and that we possess our
rational and moral nature in common
with the most miserable and degraded
of our species. But we shall derive
little benefit from having the poor
always with us unless we learn to
consider them as partakers of the same
spiritual privileges with ourselves, as
fellow-members of the body of Christ
—that body in which there is neither
rich nor poor, bond nor free, but all
are one in Christ Jesus. If we thus
view our poorer brethren, we shall feel
an interest in their welfare, both


500 ¢


" HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


temporal and eternal, which no other
consideration can excite in us.
shall not be content with bestowing a


.


q


We


pittance of relief upon a few cases of |


distress, or contributing our quota to a
few charitable institutions. “ Putting
on, as the elect of God, bowels of
mercies, kindness, meekness, long-
suffering,” we


shall go forth, as


ministering angels, into a world of sin —
and misery, carrying a healing balm ©


wherever we go. We shall never turn
away our face from any scene of


distress, or our feet from the path ©


which leads to it.


We shall never |


refuse to “rejoice with them that do —
rejoice,” or to “weep with them that —


weep.” Thus soothing and relieving
the sorrows of others, we shall forget
our own; whispering comfort and
hope to the wounded spirit of our
brother, we shall lay up a rich store
of peace and consolation within our
own breast. We shall experience the
truth of our Lord’s saying, “It is
more blessed to give than to receive” ;
and we shall “know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we
love the brethren.”


Vers. 10, 11. Greed in its demoniac
greatness.—1. A child of perfected
unbelief as to Christ, God, and man-
kind. 2. A father of treachery, which
has often injured the saints. 3. A
companion of avarice, envy, anguish,
audacity, despair.—J. P. Lange, D.D.


Ver. 11. The joy of the wicked is to
have success in their crimes. But
what joy is this? It is the joy only
of a moment, which will be changed
into everlasting sorrow. It was easy
for our Blessed Saviour to have broken
this sacrilegious and, as it may be
called, simoniacal bargain by diverting
this opportunity, which depended on
Himself ; but it was necessary that sin
should be instrumental in the destruc-
tion of sin, and that the Author of life
should die to destroy death and his
empire.—P. Quesnel.


Bey
4 ‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. X1V.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—31.
(PaRALLets: Marv. xxvi. 17-35; Luxe xxii. 7-38 ; Joun xiii.-xvii.)


The Christian Passover.—It is a noteworthy fact that of the sacred times and
seasons of the old economy we have nothing left but the Feast of the Passover.
The perpetuation of that feast was provided for and announced in its original
institution (Exod. xii. 14). On the night when Jesus was betrayed He ate the
Passover with His disciples, and at the same time established the Holy Communion
as its successor. He thus rescued the Passover feast from among the vanishing
shadows of the ceremonial economy, and gave it in a simpler form but with
unbroken continuity a perpetual place among the ordinances of the new
dispensation.

I. The original Passover feast was observed at night.—It was the night
of the 14th Nisan. King and people were asleep, unmindful of approaching
danger. But the Hebrews were awake; lights glimmered in their homes. They
had been forewarned that in their behalf the Lord was about to make bare His
arm. The years of their oppression were at an end. Staff in hand they crossed
the threshold, passed along the streets and out through the gates into the
wilderness, then on through toil and danger and weariness to the land of which
the Lord had said, “ Behold, I will give it you.” It wasa darker night than
that when our Lord hung dying on His Cross. At high noon the shadows
closed around Him. Earth never saw so deep a darkness, nor was night
ever pierced with a cry so dismal, “ Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?” His cry of
abandonment was the signal of our deliverance. When His anguish had reached
its utmost, we, healed by His stripes, passed forth into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. 5 aK

TI. The Passover feast was kept within-doors.—This was true of no other of
the great festivals. On other days the ties of kinship might be ignored, but on
that day blood was always thicker than water. It was a time for praising the
Lord because He hath set the solitary in families. The father presided; the
children hearkened to his counsels and joined him in gratitude for the blessings
of the roof-tree. The Holy Communion is our family feast. Here the Elder
Brother takes our harids and places them in the strong grasp of the Infinite
One, bidding us say after Him, “ Abba, Father.” We here commune with one
another in the household of faith and with Him who is the God and Father of
us all.

III. The lamb was at the centre of the paschal feast.—It must be a lamb of
the first year and without blemish. The four days previous to the Passover
were set apart for careful inspection. The lamb was placed in the hands of
judicious persons, who were instructed to see that there should be no spot nor
blemish in it. By a providential coincidence the four days previous to our Lord’s
crucifixion were days of peculiar trial. The eyes of many were upon Him to
discover any possible spot or blemish. And when the preparation was over He
was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb,
so He opened not His mouth.

IV. The blood of the paschal sacrifice was sprinkled on the door-posts and
the lintel.—It was not enough that the lamb should have been slain. The head
of the household must arrange for the sprinkling of the blood where the destroying
angel might see it. For so it had been promised, ‘“ When I see the blood, I will
pass over you.” The Rabbis tell, in one of their sacred books, of a sick girl who
on that memorable night was troubled with apprehension lest due precautions
had net been taken. She called her father to her couch, saying, ‘“ Father, >


501


cuar. xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





greatly fear lest the blood hath not been sprinkled on the lintels of the door. I
pray thee, see to it.” He laughed at her fears, but at her persistent entreaty
he went and looked, and lo, his servant had neglected his task. The basin
and the branch of hyssop were speedily brought, the blood was sprinkled, and
the household saved. In like manner the merits of the Saviour’s blood are
effective only for such as appropriate it. Faith is the condition of life. Faith
is the hyssop branch that sprinkles the lintels of the door. The night is dark,
the black-winged angel is above us; but we are quite secure if we have entrusted
our welfare to the only begotten Son of God.

V. The lamb was eaten with bitter herbs and unleavened bread.—The bitter
herbs were a reminder of the toil and weariness of Egypt. The unleavened
bread was a symbol of the sinless life. The two together set forth the nature
and necessity of repentance. For repentance is on the one side sorrow for sin,
and on the other an abandonment of it. At the Holy Communion we remember
with sorrow our Lord’s passion for us and with joy His breaking of our bonds.
In memory of His sacrifice we renew in this sacramentwm our vows of devotion
and signify our abhorrence of and departure from sin. Wherefore Paul enjoins
upon us to purge out the old leaven (1 Cor. v. 7, 8).

VI. The children of Israel ate their Passover with sandals on and staff in
hand.—They were ready for the signal of departure. ‘As thy days, so shall
thy strength be.”—D. J. Burrell, D.D.


The Holy Hucharist.—It is part of the manifold wisdom of God that His gifts,

in nature and in grace, minister to distinct and, as it often seems, unconnected
‘ends, manifesting thereby the more His own unity as the secret cause and
power of all things, putting itself forward in varied forms and divers manners,
yet itself the one cause of all that is. The element which is the image of our
baptism cleanses alike and refreshes, gives health and nourishment and growth.
And if in nature, much more in the gifts of grace. For therein God, not by
will or by power only, but by Himself and the effluence of His Spirit, is the life
of all which lives through Him. Itis, then, according to the analogy of His other
gifts that His two great sacraments have in themselves manifold gifts. Baptism
containeth not only remission of sin, actual or original, but maketh members of
Christ, children of God, heirs of heaven, hath the seal and earnest of the Spirit,
the germ of spiritual life; the Holy Eucharist imparteth not life only, spiritual
strength, and oneness with Christ, and His indwelling, and participation of Him,
but, in its degree, remission of sins also. As the manna is said to have “ con-
tented every man’s delight and agreed to every taste,” so He, the Heavenly
Manna, becometh to every man what he needeth, and what he can receive; to
the penitent perhaps chiefly remission of sins and continued life, to those who
have “loved Him and kept His word” His own transporting, irradiating presence,
full of His own grace and life and love; yet to each full contentment, because
to each His own overflowing, undeserved goodness.

I. The penitent’s joy, then, in the Holy Eucharist is not the less deep because
the pardon of sins is not, as in baptism, its direct provision—The chief
object of the Holy Eucharist, as conveyed by type or prophecy, by the very
elements chosen, or by the words of our Lord, is the support and enlargement of
life, and that in Him. In type the tree of life was within the paradise of God,
given as a nourishment of immortality, withheld from Adam when he sinned:
the bread and wine wherewith Melchizedek met Abraham were to refresh the
father of the faithful, the weary warrior of God: the paschal lamb was a
commemorative sacrifice; the saving blood had been shed; it was to be eaten
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, and with bitter herbs, the type
of mortification, and by those only who were undefiled. The manna was given


502





»


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





to them after they had passed the Red Sea, the image of cleansing baptism, and,
as He Himself interprets it, represented Him as coming down from heaven to
give life unto the world, the food of angels and the holy hosts of heaven; the
shewbread was eaten only by those hallowed to the priesthood (as the whole
Christian people has in this sense been made kings and priests), and, when once
given to David and those that were with him, still on the ground that the
“vessels of the young men were holy” (1 Sam. xxi. 5). In verbal prophecy
it is foretold under the images of the very elements, and so of strengthening and
overflowing joy. See Prov. ix. 5; Ps. xxii. 26, xxiii. 5, iv. 7, civ. 15; Isa. —
ly. 1; Cant. v. 1. In all these varied symbols—strength, renewed life, growth,
refreshment, gladness, likeness to the angels, immortality—are the gifts set forth ;
they are gifts as to the redeemed of the Lord placed anew in the paradise of
His Church, admitted to His sanctuary, joying in His presence, growing before
Him, filled with the river of His joy, feasting with Him, yea Himself feasting
in them, as in them He hungereth. Hitherto there is no allusion to sin; it is
what the Church should be, walking in the brightness of His light, and itself
reflecting that brightness. And when our Lord most largely and directly is
setting forth the fruits of eating His flesh and drinking His blood, He speaks
throughout of one gift—life; freedom from death, life through Him, through His
indwelling, and therefore resurrection from the dead and life eternal. See John
vi. 50, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58. No one can observe how this whole discourse
circleth round this gift of life, and how our Lord, with unwearied patience,
bringeth this one truth before us in so many different forms, without feeling
that He means to inculcate, that life in Him is His chief gift in His Sacrament,
and to make a reverent longing for it an incentive to our faith. Yet although
life in Him is the substance of His whole teaching, the teaching itself is manifold.
Our Lord inculcates not one truth only in varied forms, but in its different
bearings. He answers not the strivings of the Jews, ‘ How can this man give
us His flesh to eat?” Such an “How can these things be?” He never
answereth ; and we, if we are wise, shall never ask how they can be elements
of this world and yet His very body and blood. But how they give life to us
He does answer; and amid this apparent uniformity of His teaching each
separate sentence gives us a portion of that answer. And the teaching of the
whole, as far as such as we may grasp it, is this: That He is the living bread
because He came down from heaven, and as being one God with the Father
hath life in Himself, even as the Father hath life in Himself ; the life then
which He is He imparted to that flesh which He took into Himself, yea, which
He.-took so wholly that Holy Scripture says He became it, “the Word became
flesh,” and since it is thus a part of Himself, “ Whoso eateth My flesh, and
drinketh My blood” (He Himself says the amazing words), “eateth Me,” and
so receiveth into Himself, in an ineffable manner, his Lord Himself, ‘‘ dwelleth ”
(our Lord says) ‘in Me, and I in Him,” and having Christ within him, not only
shall he have, but he “hath” already “ eternal life,” because he hath Him who:
is “the only true God and eternal life”; and so Christ “will raise him up at
the last day,” because he hath His life in him. Receiving Him into this very
body, they who are His receive life, which shall pass over to our very decaying
flesh ; they have within them Him who is life and immortality and incorruption,
to cast out or absorb into itself our natural mortality and death and corruption,
and “shall live for ever,” because made one with Him who alone “liveth for
evermore.” But where, one may feel, is there here any place for the sinner ?
Here all breathes of holy life, life in God, the life of God imparted to man, the
indwelling of the All-holy and Incarnate Word, the presence of God in the soul
and body, incorruption and eternal life, through His holy presence and union
with Him who, being God, is life. Yet although most which is spoken belongs
503


cHAP. XIV.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





to Christians, as belonging already to the household of saints and the family of
heaven and the communion of angels and unity with God, still, here as elsewhere
in the New Testament, there is a subordinate and subdued notion of sin; and
what wraps the saint already in the third heaven may yet uphold us sinners,
that the pit shut not her mouth upon us. The same reality of the Divine gift
makes it angels’ food to the saint, the ransom to the sinner. And both because
it is the body and blood of Christ. To him its special joy is that it is his
Redeemer’s very broken body, it is His blood, which was shed for the remission
of his sins. In the words of the ancient Church, he “drinks his ransom,” he
eateth that, “‘the very body and blood of the Lord, the only sacrifice for sin,”
God “‘poureth out” for him yet ‘the most precious blood of His Only-
Begotten”; they “are fed from the Cross of the Lord, because they eat His
body and blood”; and as of the Jews of old, even those who had been the
betrayers and murderers of their Lord, it was said, “The blood, which in their
frenzy they shed, believing they drank,” so of the true penitent it may be said,
whatever may have been his sins, so he could repent, awful as it is to say, the
blood he indeed despised, and profaned, and trampled underfoot, may he, when
himself humbled in the dust, drink, and therein drink his salvation.

II. In each place in Holy Scripture where the doctrine of the Eucharist is
taught, there is at least some indication of the remission of sins Our Lord,
while chiefly speaking of Himself, as the bread of life, the true meat, the true
drink, His indwelling, resurrection from the dead, and life everlasting, still says
also, “ The bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.” As amid the apparent identity of this teaching each separate oracle
enounces some fresh portion of the whole truth, so also does this; that His flesh’
and blood in the Sacrament shall give life, not only because they are the flesh
and blood of the Incarnate Word, who is life, but also because they are the
very flesh and blood which were given and shed for the life of the world, and are
given to those for whom they had been given. This is said yet more distinctly
in the awful words whereby He consecrated for ever elements of this world to
be His body and blood. “ 'This is My body, which és given for you”; “ This is
My body, which is broken for you”; ‘This is My blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many for the remission of sins”; “This cup is the new
testament in My blood, which is shed for you.” He saith not, “which shall
be given,” “shall be broken,” “shall be shed,” but “is being given,” ‘ being
broken,” “ being shed” (Suddpevoy, KAdpevov, éxyvvdpevov), and this in remarkable
contrast with His own words, when speaking of that same gift, as yet future,
“The bread which I will give is My flesh, which I will give [8v eyo déo| for
the life of the world.” And of one of the words used St. Chrysostom remarks
how it could not be said of the Cross, but is true of the Holy Eucharist. “ For
‘a bone of Him,’ it saith, ‘shall not be broken.’ But that which He suffered
not on the Cross, this He suffers in the oblation for thy sake, and submits to be
‘broken that He may fill all men.” Hereby He seems as well to teach us that
the great act of His passion then began; then, as a Priest, did He through the
Eternal Spirit offer Himself without spot to God; then did He “ consecrate ”
Himself, before He was by wicked hands crucified and slain; and all which
followed, until He commended His Blessed Spirit to the hands of His Heavenly
Father, was one protracted, willing suffering. Then did He begin His lonely
journey, where there was none to help or uphold, but He “travelled in the
greatness of His strength”; then did He begin to “tread the winepress alone,”
and to “stain all His raiment”; then to “ wash the garments” of His humanity
“with” the “wine” of His blood; and therefore does the blood bedew us too;
it cleanses us, because it is the blood shed for the remission of our sins. There
is, accordingly, an entire agreement in the Eucharistic liturgies of the universal


504





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK CHAP. XIV.





Church, in prayer, in benediction, in declaration, confessing that in the Holy
_ Eucharist there is forgiveness of sins also, Those of St James and St. Mark
_ so paraphrase the words of consecration as to develop the sense that they relate
not only to the past act of His precious bloodshedding on the Cross, but to the
- communication of that blood to us now. |“ This is My body, which for you is
broken and given for the remission of sins.” “This is My blood of the New
Testament, which for you and for many is poured out and given for the remission
of sins.” Again, the liturgies join together, manifoldly, remission of sins and
- life eternal, as the two great fruits of this Sacrament. Thus in the prayer for
the descent of the Holy Ghost on the sacred elements, “ that they may be to all
_ who partake of them to the remission of sins, and to life eternal”; or in inter-
cession, “that we may become meet to be partakers of Thy holy mysteries to
the remission of sins and life eternal”; or in the words of communicating, ‘I give
thee the precious and holy and undefiled body of our Lord and God and Saviour
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins and life eternal.”

III. Since, then, this Divine Sacrament has, as its immediate and proper end,
union with Him who hath taken our manhood into God, and the infusion into
us of His Spirit and life and immortality, making us one with His glorified
humanity, as He is one in the Godhead with the Father, and, besides this, it is
ulteriorly the cleansing of our sins, the refining our corruptions, the repairing
of our decays, what must be the loss of the Church of the latter days, in which
Communions are so infrequent! How can we wonder that love should have
waxed cold, corruptions so abound, grievous falls have been among our youth
almost the rule, to stand upright the exception, heathen strictness reproach
Christian laxity, the Divine life become so rare, all higher instances of it so few
and faint, when “the stay and the staff,” the strength of that life is willingly
forfeited! How should there be the fulness of the Divine life, amid all but a
month-long fast from our “daily bread” ! It implies a life so different from this
our commonplace ordinary tenor, a life so above this world as knit with Him
who hath overcome the world, so angelic as living on Him who is angels’ food ;
an union with God so close, that we cannot mostly, I suppose, imagine ‘to
ourselves how we could daily thus be in heaven, and in our daily business here
below—-how sanctify our daily duties, thoughts, refreshment, so that they should
be tinged with the hues reflected by our daily heaven, not that heavenly gift be
dimmed with our earthliness—how our souls should through the day shine with
the glory of that ineffable Presence to which we had approached, not we approach
to jt with earth-dimmed souls. It must ever be so; we cannot know the gift
of God if we forfeit it; we must cease mostly even to long for what we forego.
We lose the very sense to understand it.

TV. But, however we may see that our present decay and negligence should
not continue, restoration must not be rashly compassed.—Sound restoration
must be the gift of God, to be sought of Him in humiliation, in prayer, in
mutual forbearance and charity, with increased strictness of life and more
diligent use of what we have. He who alone can make more frequent Com-
munion a blessing, and who gave such strength to that one heavenly meal,
whereby through forty days and forty nights of pilgrimage He carried Elijah to
His presence at the Mount of God, can, if we be faithful and keep His gift
which we receive, give such abundant strength to our rarer Communions, that
they shall carry us through our forty years of trial unto His own Holy Hill, and
the vision of Himself in bliss. Let us each suspect, ourselves, not others; the
backward their own backwardness, the forward their own eagerness; each
habitually interpret well the other’s actions and motives; so, while we each
think all good of the other, may we all together, strengthened by the same
bread, washed by the same plood, be led, in the unity of the Spirit and the bond


505


CHAP. XIV HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





-
———


of peace and holiness of life, to that ineffable feast, where not, as now, in
mysteries, but, face to face, we shall ever see God, and be ever filled with His
goodness and His love.—#. B. Pusey, D.D.


The feelings suited to our last Sacrament.—The last words of a man of God, at
the close of a religious solemnity, are regarded with peculiar attention. The
parting warnings, counsels, and encouragements of such a man have counteracted
the influence of temptations to folly, kept the mind steadfast in seasons of
difficulty, excited to the most arduous duties, and reconciled the heart to the
most painful separations. Our text presents to us the last words of the Lord
Jesus at the observance of the Holy Communion—words rich in admonition
and in comfort—words which have melted many a heart in pious affection,
and inspired many a fearful soul with the most blessed hopes.

I. Consider these words as an intimation of our Lord’s speedy departure, and
of the termination of all the present intercourse of His disciples with Him.—
1. Our Blessed Saviour made frequent references to His death during the course
of His life. To reconcile His disciples to an event so necessary, He expatiates
on its blessed results, and generally connects with it consequences of the most
happy description both to Himself and to them. 2. The intercourse of our
Lord with His disciples had been of the most affectionate kind. But that
intercourse was now to close; from the circle of love and peace in which He
now sat He was about to be removed into the assembly of the wicked, and to
suffer all the ignominy and pain which their unrestrained malice could inflict.
3. Mark with what mild resignation our Lord contemplates this event. What
was dear to Him in life He willingly sacrificed ; what was painful in death He
cheerfully bore. 4. Our Lord’s language intimates the necessity of His dying
to His mediatorial glory and to the future happiness of His people. 5. Our
Lord, in contemplating this as His last participation of the Holy Sacrament
with them, may be viewed as anticipating the close of all that worship which
was suited to His state of humiliation and suffering.

II. Consider the intimation our Lord gives of a reunion.—There are two
considerations which stamp a peculiar beauty on this assurance. The termina-
tion of His intercourse with them was to be closed in a manner no way
creditable to their attachment or their courage. His generous heart could
forgive their weakness and cowardice, and friends and foes were the objects of
a charity which was stronger than death. I may add that this promise of
reunion, following so immediately the notice of His separation, shews, in a
most affecting manner, how unwilling He is that His people should mourn in
hopeless grief, and how ready He is to solace and to encourage. It has been
much disputed to what place or scene our Lord refers as that of reunion with
His disciples. Some have supposed that it refers to His renewed intercourse
with them after His resurrection ; and in this view it intimated to them that
the death of their Master, to which they looked forward with so much terror,
would only be a temporary subjection to the last enemy, and that He would
rise in heart unchanged, with the same delight in their society and the same
solicitude for their welfare as ever. But as it appears to me that our Lord
meant to suggest the fullest consolation, it seems better not to limit the passage
to an intercourse with them on earth, which was to lie in a few meetings
during the space of forty days, but to consider it as pointing to the communion
of the world of glory. 1. Considering it as referring to the heavenly state,
this promise suggests that the reunion of the disciples with their Lord is
certain. Men have often spoken of meeting their friends in heaven when
parting with them in death; but they speak of a place whose gates they
have no power to open, whose bliss they have no power to allot. It is in


506


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





many cases the language of ignorance and presumption, which reason will not
sanction, which conscience condemns ; but the Speaker in the text is the way,
the truth, and the life. Every heart is in His hands, every lot is in His sentence,
every region is in His power, and all futurity is in His eye. 2. It intimates
that this reunion should be in the most glorious place, even in the kingdom of
His Father. It will take place in a scene where naught can occur either to
embitter or to terminate it. In that kingdom the highest honours were destined
for Himself; but to them, poor and despised as they now were, He would
grant to share in His dignity, and to rejoice in His joy. His love deemed no
abasement too low for Himself, and no exaltation too high for them. 3. It
suggests that, when thus reunited, their intercourse should be most intimate
and affectionate. In His intercourse with them here Judas mingled, though
he had probably gone out before the institution of the Holy Communion; but:
in heaven there should not be one whose heart was not sincere in friendship,
nor one whose presence should in the least check the freest disclosure of the
Redeemer’s feelings. Here too the idea of the termination of this intercourse
afflicted the disciples; but in heaven they should reign in life, never see their
Saviour’s countenance less complacent, nor behold the last enemy but in his
final destruction. 4. I¢ intimates that in this reunion they should enjoy
together the purest and most blissful delights. (1) They shall enjoy these
delights with the Saviour. His presence shall heighten the beauty of paradise,
and render more delicious all that proceeds from its living fountains. In all
the tokens of their Father’s complacency Ho shall share, and in all their
attainments in excellence He shall be the pattern. (2) The enjoyments of the
heavenly state shall be tho same in kind with those of the sanctuary on earth,
however they may differ in degree. They are excited by the same objects
and directed by the same spirit. (3) These enjoyments in heaven shall, like
the Holy Communion on earth, bear a direct reference to the Cross. Every
feeling of rapture will attest its efficacy, every song of the redeemed celebrate ©
its glory. (4) Their reunion with one anothor is intimated in this assurance.
TII. Consider thesc words 2s a memento intended for every observance of
the Holy Communion.—At one Sacrament or another these words will be
addressed to every pious communicant, and sooner probably to the most
vigorous and healthy than he is aware; for “we are strangers before God,
and sojourners, as were all our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow,
and there is none abiding.” It would be proper that all of us should consider
our situation in this light; for none can promise himself another solemnity of
this nature, and none will improve this ordinance properly who does not observe
it as his last Sacrament. 1. It should be received with resignation. (1) It is
made by Him who hath the power of life and death, and whose will it is both
impious and vain to resist. (2) The kindness of the manner in which He
intimates this is another reason for resignation. It is with the voice of
invitation and persuasion that He addresses you, rather than with that of
authority. (3) You cannot, in this scene, mark the resignation of your Lord
+o His Father’s will, nor hear Him saying, ‘‘The cup which My Father giveth
Me. shall I not drink it?” and be disposed to rebel against the determination
of His providence. 2. It should be received with gratitude. It shews His
goodness to you that He apprises you of this event, that you may use all the
appointed means of preparation for it. He wishes to save you from the
anxiety and horror of those who shall be awakened from the sleep of security
by the notice of His approach. 3. It should be received with love. Here we
sce Christ submitting to death to redeem us from destruction, laying open to
us the kindness of His heart, revealing the everlasting felicity for which He
hath destined us, and solacing Himself in the prospect of being happy with us


507


ee oe hee


omar. xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





for ever. That heart must be lost to all proper feeling which is not kindled
into affection by this statement of the Saviour. It ought to be heard with
increasing affection to our Christian brethren. Aged persons have been some-
times charged with implacability of temper, with brooding over the injuries
of former times, and instilling their prejudices and animosities into their
descendants; but let your conduct shew that you have fully imbibed the for-
giving spirit of the Cross, and that every malignant feeling is extinguished
within you. 4. It should be received with a determination to shew increasing
diligence in preparing for our departure. Nobler objects solicit ‘your affections ;
let them now engage your whole heart. 5. It should be received with hope
of the felicity here promised. This is the promise of Him who is the faithful
witness, and, while such love breathes in it, you cannot question His intention
to fulfil it—H. Belfrage, D.D.


Ver. 26. The Hallel, and Jesus singing.—The best scholarship warrants us t
assume that as Psalms cxiii.-cxviii. formed the Hallel or hallelujah songs
of praise associated with the Passover, so the closing hymn sung by Jesus and
His disciples was Psalm exviii., as being that which rounded off the partaking
of the fourth festal cup (“ the cup of salvation ”). :

I. Psalm exviii. opens with a burst of hallelujahs over the mercy of God.—
The sum of these hallelujahs is, “O praise God for His mercies of old and
now.” It is easy to understand how at that moment thoughts of the mercy
of God would gird the Redeemer as with new strength to go forward to His
appointed work. That work was to lay open the channel along which the
mercy of God should flow “in righteousness” toward our fallen race. So that
we cannot help feeling that it was Divinely ordered that this jubilant refrain
should come in as part of the Lord’s last singing on earth. You remember how
similarly this was the keynote of the dedication of the first Temple: “ He is
‘ good; His mercy endureth for ever.” And so throughout. The great heart
of the world—as of a sick, weary giant—ached for the ultimate manifestation
of this mercy; and it could not but bring to the Lord a strange and awful
joy that now at long, long last the manifestation was about to be made. I
covet for myself and you all deeper insight into the wonder and grace, benedic-
tion and righteousness, of God’s ever-enduring and unchanging mercy in Christ
Jesus. Grasping it, how may we dare to go to the guiltiest, even vilest, and
whisper, “God loves you.” Behold the proof in the Cross, in the Crucified !

II. The suitableness to the Lord’s circumstances and to the continuous
dangers of His Church (vers. 5-13).—It was the hour and power of darkness.
Personally the shadow of Gethsemane was already blackening over His path.
There lay before Him the betrayal—the arrest—the forsaking—the denial—
the arraigning—the judgment—the suborned witnesses—the insults~—the
mockery —the loathsome spitting—the blows—the scourging—the condemnation
—and, beyond, the spectre and spectacle of the ghastly cross. Is it not, then,
affecting and yet again sustaining to find here written beforehand, in this last
psalm of the Hallel, great words of strength and cheer (vers. 5, 6): “Out of
my distress”——plumbless, measureless distress—-‘‘I called upon the Lord: the
Lord answered me, and set me in a large place. The Lord is on my side;
I will not fear what man can do unto me.” We can again conceive the
Lord flinging Himself on the vast breadth of these exultant words. Amid all
dangers and tribulation the Church, like her Divine Head, may well find in
this portion of the final Hallel psalm inexhaustible consolation. Martin Luther
in the throes of the Reformation and of his own peril, and when even Catherine
de Bora seemed to counsel retreat and compliance, turned to this psalm and
“waxed valiant” as he sang (ver. 17), “I shall not die, but live, and declare


508


PP
“9


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





the works of the Lord.” Let us not fear. The waves of the tempest-trampled
sea may toss to and fro and make a mighty noise, but the blue heavens beyond
the clouds are calm. God lives. God reigns. The once pale hand grasps the
sceptre of the universe, and sways ebb and flow of event and circumstance to
His “ everlasting purpose.”

III. The joy set before the Redeemer and before us through Him (vers. 14-21).
—Joy is the sublimation of sorrow. Sorrow opens the door for joy to come in.
Sorrow and joy are strangely akin, or, as we say in Scotland and old English,
“sib.” Sorrow turns into joy—not merely is followed by joy, but turns into
it. So was it with the disciples. ‘Your sorrow shall be turned into joy ”—
the very event that seemed so black and calamitous becoming the centre and
source of everlasting light. Some of you, doubtless, have seen Doré’s great picture
of ‘Pilate’s Wife’s Dream.” Those of you who have seen it will remember
that whilst the horrid cross in the foreground looms up large and hideous, yet
away in the radiant distance that same cross is shewn transformed and glorified,
and glorifying all that it shines upon. So if sorrow is deep, I think it leads
to and issues in something deeper still, and that is joy. Hence in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, by one of those deep glances into the heart of the mystery
of things that make this letter so great, we have all this summed up (xii. 2).
Be it yours and mine, like our Lord, to rest on this Hallel psalm and see all
around us demonstration, that the Lord’s mighty prayer was no idle breath
like “idle tears”: “These things I spake in the world, that they may have
My joy fulfilled in themselves” (John xvii. 13).

IV. The great Messianic symbol (vers. 22, 23)—As we turn and return
on the favourite texts of Jesus, it moves and melts us to discover how they
nearly all revolve around His redemptive work. The present is no exception.
For we all carry in our heart of hearts the “exceeding great and precious
promises” and teaching that set forth the Lord Christ as a “stone.” Even
the glazing eye of dying Jacob beheld it (Gen. xlix. 24). And so Isaiah sang
(xxviii. 16). It is therefore just what might have been expected, that earlier
the Lord turned to those very words now before us, and uttered from them some
of His most barbed and searching words to rejecting Israel. And as we to-day
think of the supernatural structure—part on earth and part in heaven—that
along the nineteen centuries has been raised on this one Stone, do we not thrill
to the song of Christ’s last singing, and exclaim, “This is from the Lord: it
is marvellous in our eyes.”

V. Finally, in vers. 25-29, we have thanksgiving. I can but accentuate
ver. 27: “Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.”
Once more to the vision of faith this sacrifice has been set forth—once more
it has been our privilege by the memorial symbols appointed to remember the
Lord’s death “until He come.” And so as thus again we behold “the Lamb
of God that taketh away the sin of the world,” thanksgiving may fitly close
our service as thanksgiving closed His, as perchance falteringly He sang for
the last time the Hallel of His own sacrificial death: ‘“ He filleth our mouths
with songs.” In our outlook I see no call for despondency, I discern no omens
of failure—tI catch a light of glory on the mountain-tops that is descending
to the plains, and is making the Cross still more refulgent, and rallying more
and more myriads of tired feet and wearier hearts to the great broken heart.
Yea, I see our blood-ransomed world girdled by mightier rings than Saturn’s,
swung back into its primal orbit of unsullied light; and by-and-by we shall
hear reverberating from sea to sea and from shore to shore (Rev. xi. 15).—


A. B. Grosart, D.D.


Vers, 27-31. Man’s need of Divine support.—We are taught by our holy
209


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee nn


religion that man’s ability to perform the appointed duties of his Christian
calling is derived from the co-operation and assistance of the Holy Spirit,
which must be sought by humble and fervent prayer. Some, however, have
entertained doubts on the subject, in consequence of their inability. to diseri-
minate between the natural movements of their minds and the influences of
Divine agency, forgetting that we are required not to give account of the
nature or extent of the assistance vouchsafed from above, but only to receive
it thankfully and to use it diligently. Others have questioned the existence
of such spiritual aid, because not conscious of their own need of it. To them
this discourse is addressed.

I. The circum’tances connected with the fall of St. Peter—1. If ever an
unassisted mortal might have been expected to stand by his own strength,
it was Peter—the Rock-man. ‘The instructions he had received, the miracles
he had witnessed, the variety of motives with which his intercourse with Christ
must have supplied him, might have been considered almost as an equivalent
for inspiration. Yet he fell. Betrayed by ignorance of his own heart and
presumptuous confidence in his own resolution, he caused himself to be recorded
for an everlasting memorial of human weakness and frailty. 2. The Master,
as the time of His betrayal approached, with a view doubtless of consoling
His disciples under their coming disgrace, gave them a previous intimation of
it in the kindest and most soothing terms (vers. 27, 28). The effect of this
announcement upon the others is not recorded. Perhaps conscious of their own
weakness, they remained silent ; or perhaps, while inwardly trusting that they
would be found ready for any emergency, they did not presume to express that
confidence. Peter alone ventured to proclaim his imaginary fortitude (ver. 29).
Christ thereupon revealed a lower depth even than desertion to which Peter
would descend (ver. 30). Such seeming distrust of the sincerity of his attach-
ment drew from the warm-hearted disciple a vehement protest (ver. 31). But
in the hour of trial, how did he behave? Whence that equivocating answer,
conveying falsehood under its most subtle guise (ver. 68)¢ Whence that second
denial (ver. 70)? Whence that cursing and swearing with which the third
accusation induced him to accompany the repetition of his assertion (ver. 71)?
Alas! human nature must bear the shame of these reiterated falsehoods and
blasphemies. Though selected for the apostleship, Peter yet remained
dependent only on mortal resources, and in the hour of trial they proved utterly
inadequate.

II. The admonition to be derived from St. Peter’s sad fall__l. Is there to
be found a man who, in face of such an example, dares to refuse the proffered
aid of the Holy Spirit, and to encounter life’s conflict in his own unaided
strength? Let him attend to an exposition of the delusion under which he
labours. (1) Such a man may have persuaded himself that his reliance on
his own strength is not the effect of presumption, but only of a fervent wish
and sincere resolution to tread the path of holiness. But such we know was
equally the disposition of Peter’s mind. On his first introduction to our notice
we are even struck with his exceeding humility and self-abasement (Luke v. 8);
and the same meek and modest distrust of himself is again evinced only a few
hours before his fall (John xiii. 6-9), (2) The self-confident man may imagine
that there was a perverseness in the character of Peter from which he is
himself free. But the Gospel history lends no countenance to such a theory.
On more than one oceasion the extreme openness and warmth of his disposition
led Peter to so unreserved a discovery of the opinions and prejudices of his
heart as exposed him to sharp reproof (Matt. xvi. 23; John xviii. 11), Yet
we find that he was ever submissive to the correction and ever obedient to the
direction of his Master. (3) A man may flatter himself that he possesses a


510


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





firmness, an energy, and a zeal which were wanting in Peter. But what reason
has he for thinking so? He surely must have had no inconsiderable degree
of firmness who merited and received from Christ the name ‘“ Cephas”; and
he certainly could not be accused of want of energy and zeal who, when his
Lord was arrested, instantly drew sword in His defence, and wielded it so
effectually as to incur the displeasure of Him for whom he fought! 2. How,
then, came Peter’s resolution to miscarry in the scene of his Master’s dire
extremity 2? The reason seems to be this: he had grounded the execution of
that resolution upon a sudden feeling of immoderate self-confidence,—nothing
doubting but his will was in his own power, whether God’s grace assisted him
or not; fully satisfied that what he had courage to resolve so honestly he had
likewise ability to perform. He had not sufficiently considered that He who
forewarned him of the failure of his resolution was the Searcher of hearts, and
needed not that any should testify of man, for He knew what was in man—
and what was not. Had he only reflected on the Master’s own declaration,
“Without Me ye can do nothing,” the empty boast would have died away upon
his lips, and given place to a humble petition for Divine assistance.

III. The need of prayer to ensure preservation from a like fall.—In
contemplating the failure of a man who seems to have possessed all the elements
of moral strength, and all the qualities requisite for a life of consistent integrity
and undeviating holiness, are we not irresistibly led to the conclusion that our
natural powers are insufficient for the work which we have to do, and that
consequently an appeal must be made to heaven for grace to help in time of
need? If we reach this conclusion by a comparison of ourselves with St. Peter
in those faculties which we may be supposed to possess in common with him,
must not the conviction of our insufficiency be increased tenfold, when we reflect
that he must have had many opportunities and incentives to perseverance
which we naturally cannot have? Yet he fell! His familiar association with
Christ—hearing His words, witnessing His actions, and consequently receiving
continual accessions of information and continual confirmations of his faith—
must necessarily have enlarged his understanding and _ strengthened his
judgment. Yet he fell! Who, then, at the distance at which we are placed
by nature from intercourse with Christ, can possibly hope to stand alone?
Who that sees an apostle vanquished will dare to go forth to the battle of
life unaided by that Divine Spirit “without whom nothing is strong, nothing
is holy”?


Vers. 29-31. How best to promote the accomplishment of owr good resolutions.—
Perhaps it is not taking for granted too much to suppose that few Christians
have come to a due conviction of their own sinful weakness and infirmity of
purpose without having themselves so fallen under some trying occasion or
temptation as afterwards to bewail from the heart their own irresolution, and,
like Peter, to go out and weep bitterly. For however strong the mind, however
sound the faith, and however fixed and confirmed by habit the religious principles,
there are occasions when the Christian’s armour seems to stand him in little
stead. He appears taken by surprise,—either his situation is new to him, or the
allurement unusually great, or the opportunity too auspicious, or the alterna-
tive attended by great dangers, or the advantage of compliance sure and
important, or the favourable concurrence of circumstances not likely to occur
again. One or other or even all of these considerations perhaps prompts him
to decide quickly; and, alas! to determine wrongly. He falls, therefore,
because he never contemplated such a trial of his strength; or having con-
templated it, thought himself quite safe. But how, it may be asked, is such
success to our best purposes and resolves to be secured, that we may be, as


511


cuar. xIv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


a a a ee a


much as possible, prepared for every temptation—that we may, as far as
human infirmity will permit, prevent “ sin from getting dominion over us”—
that we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, “to
stand ” ?

I. To give stability to our good resolutions we must be convinced of our
own weakness as well as wickedness.—No man can be ignorant of his
besetting sin—his peculiar bias towards some one vice, temper, or failing; and
whatever it may be, to that he should principally direct his attention in forming
his resolves. For without having made this part of his moral nature his
especial study, without understanding clearly what little reliance he can place
upon himself, in the case of allurement and temptation addressed to this his
prevailing sin, his most deliberate purpose will avail him nothing. He will
seek occasions and places and persons from which he never yet escaped
without guilt, and thus perhaps continue to impute to circumstances the
fault which belongs only to his own heart.

II. We must have minutely considered our former lapses and relapses
before we presume to make a resolve.—The causes of our fall should be
accurately ascertained, and the leading incitement to each relapse be singled
out and set up as a kind of beacon to warn us effectually where our danger
lies. The repeated practice of sin has made this admonition by no means
difficult for the sinner to obey. For he has only to select any one transgression,
and he will for the most part trace in it the usual course of his progress in the
commission of sin. Above all, he will perceive that with each relapse his
resolves have become less efficacious, the path to his favourite vice has become
smoother, his compunctions less bitter, his heart more hardened. .

III. The sense of your weakness and of your frequent relapses should
induce such a distrust of your own strength as to deter you from exposing
yourselves to trials which may be avoided.—It is easy to attribute to your-
selves powers of resistance or forbearance and self-denial which are far beyond
your present attainments in Christian discipline. Your resolves should there-
Fore be made in all humility. Nothing too high and hard for your present
strength should be attempted. We are all to expect trials; but it is a criminal
degree of rashness to go out needlessly to meet them, and much more so when
a little reflexion might teach us that we have not arms sufficiently strong for
the encounter.

IV. There must be after every lapse an act of sincere and sorrowful
repentance before we presume to make a fresh resolve.— Where there have
been shame and confusion, and remorse and fear, there may be some promise
of our “taking heed to our ways,” of our hating sin, of our “recovering
ourselves out of the snare of the devil.” But when the sinner, in order to
pacify at the moment the fearful misgivings that ever attend guilt, satisfies
himself with the bare resolution to offend no more, what grounds can he have
for accepting so insignificant a pledge of his own actual improvement ?

V. Even after repentance we must not consider our resolves as any warrant
of our safety without two other safeguards.—1. The first of these is vigilance.
Our minds must be thoroughly imbued with that important truth that ours is
a life of warfare—that we are, as it were, in an enemy’s country. Our own
corruption within and constant temptations without should keep us ever in the
state of sentinels. For the greatest security for the sinner, after all, is to avoid
every occasion of sin—to be beforehand in shunning the dangerous opportunity,
the depraved associate, the convenient hour, the favourable situation. 2. The
other principal safeguard to our resolves is prayer. We have only to be earnest
and sincere in our applications to the throne of grace for spiritual aid, through
the intercession of that Redeemer who is “able to save them to the uttermost


512


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


that come unto God through Him,” and we shall not fail to receive the blessing
that we ask.

VI. Among the religious offices which come in aid of the means above
recommended, none is more efficacious than the “spiritual food and suste-
nance” properly received in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper.—On no
occasion does the heart of man come into closer intercourse with his God and
Saviour ; on no occasion does he draw more freely from the fountain of Divine
grace. For he not only receives remission of his sins, and peace and comfort
past all understanding, but he is endued with new vigour for his conflict with
the world, the flesh, and the devil; and all his holy purposes and resolutions
receive the sanction and support of his approving Maker. Thus renewed in the
inner man, he cometh forth from that holy ordinance as “a bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoiceth as a giant to run his course.” —A. B. Evans, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 12-16. Christ's preparation for those innocent, because unconscious
the Passover.—Not even Peter and and unintentional, transgressions of
John are to know beforehand theman’s His goodwill for us which must in-
name and address, lest, if Judas should evitably inflict their natural punish-
suspect them of knowing, he should ment upon us, however guiltless we
worm, or try to worm, the secret out may be—just as He saved Peter and
of them. Perhaps he did suspect— John from innocently betraying a
perhaps he did try to get at their secret to Judas of which he would have
secret ; but even Peter could not tell made an evil use. 4. Even when we
him what he did not know. In His are traitors to Him in our hearts,
love and pity, His love for them, His when we are meditating some sin
pity for Judas—to save them from a which will cast us from His grace, He
mistake they would have found it hard _ will do all He can, short of forcing our
to forgive, and to hold him back from will, to save us from our sin; He will
a sin which man has not forgiven yet, place hindrances and impediments in
though we have no right to assume our way as He did in the way of
that Christ has not forgiven it long Iscariot, and will not abandon us to
ago—He rendered it impossible for our evil hearts, until, against all the
them to betray Him to Judas, and for’ remonstrances and warnings of His
Judas to betray Him to the priests. love, we overleap all hindrances and
The incident, thus viewed, has many plunge into what we know to be a path
lessons for us. 1. Even when He _ of death.—JS. Cox, D.D.
seems most unlike Himself our Lord
is most truly Himself, and is leading Ver. 14. Preparation for Christ as
us where we would be, though by ways owr guest.—At all seasons of the year,
we know not, and which do not seem and on festivals and ordinary days
likely to lead us there. 2. His pre- alike, the question, which is at once a
icience extends to the minutest details warning and an invitation, is addressed
as well as to the main lines and critical to each one of us, “ Where is My guest-
occasions of life: nothing which really chamber?” And we, far more than
concerns us is overlooked or forgotten the owner of that honoured house in
by Him; no, not even the pitcher, or Jerusalem, have had opportunities of
the cup of cold water we need to slake knowing all that that question means.
our thirst, or are carrying toa neigh- It is no guest-chamber built with
bour who needs it even more than we hands that He needs, but the temple
do. 3. If we love Him, and are bent built without hands, which temple we
on serving Him, He will save us from are. If that hospitable disciple would


LL. 513


cuap xiv.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ee ___$<$


do so much for His entertainment
during a few hours, surely we may do
ag much when we aim at having Him
for our guest for ever—throughout
life and in eternity. 1. It must be
an upper room, in the highest part of
our being, the best that we have to
offer to any one. It must be in our
heart of hearts, where we can love
Him, not in word and tongue, but in
deed and truth, with all our soul and
all our strength. There are those who
think that they have done much if
they have given Him a welcome in some
transitory emotion of religious excite-
ment. But these heated feelings are
not the upper room, which is ever calm
and quiet ; they are more akin to the
common hall, where noise and excite-
ment are frequent. 2. It must be a
furnished room and ready: furnished
with those things which He loves, and
which will enable Him to rest and
abide—prayers and hymns, thanks-
givings and intercessions, holy thoughts,
kind words, and good deeds. ‘ Alms
all around and hymns within ”—that
is the atmosphere in which Christ can
abide ; and the heart that is furnished
with these can offer Him a home in
which He may bestow His goods. For
Christ is noman’sdebtor. If He comes
as a guest He comes open-handed, and
bestows blessings without measure or
stint. 3. And therefore we must pre-
parealargeroom, As weareniggardly
in what we offer to Him, so also we are
half hearted and little-minded in what
weask from Him. We do not desire
His graces enough, and we do not
desire enough of them. We must open
our hearts freely to receive the good
measure, pressed down and shaken
together, which He yearns to bestow.
It is His own command, His own
promise, which says, ‘Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fi i.”—
A. Plummer, D.D.


Vers. 17-19. A traitor among the
twelve—1. In the holiest society on
earth the unholy may have a place.
2. The highest goodness may fail to
win to the obedience of faith. 3, There


514


may be moral wrong without present
consciousness. 4. The knowledge and
appointment of God do not hinder the
freedom and responsibility of man.—
J. H. Godwin.

The traitor—|. At first it seems
strange to find a traitor amongst the
select disciples of Christ. Yet there is
nothing in this selection of a bad man
to be an agent in carrying on a good
design which is not in harmony with
the general scheme of the Divine
government. It is a condition of the
visible Church that “the evil should
be ever mingled with the good,” and
that sometimes the evil should have
authority and pre-eminence over the
good. Thus the small circle of Christ’s
select disciples presented a sort of
epitome of the world into which they
were to be sent and the Church over
which they were to preside. 2. The
next thing which challenges observa-
tion here is the unfruitfulness of this
unhappy man under the extraordinary
religious advantages which he enjoyed.
We plainly see, in this instance, that
mere means of grace, unaccompanied
by an actual operation of Divine power
upon the heart, are nothing. Even
the Holy Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, then for the first and
last time administered by Christ Him-
self, and of which Judas was permitted
to partake, as the type of all who


‘should thereafter profane those holy


mysteries, had no effect upon him, except
to make him worse than before (John
xiii. 27). 3. The commonness of the
sinful lust by which Judas was enticed.
What is there singular in a man’s
rejoicing because his wealth is great,
or desiring that it may be still greater ?
This is, in fact, the ruling passion of
mankind. The desire of acquiring is
one of the most powerful springs of
human conduct. Rightly directed and
strictly regulated, it is not only innocent,
but laudable. Unregulated and mis-
directed, see what it leads to!—
Ff. Field, LL.D.


Ver. 18. A question of propriety as
to quality and time of news,—Christ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





then breaks news at table that operates
distressfully. Heknewit would. That
was a violation of hygienic law. At
such times, to secure the best results,
cheerfulness should reign. He who
made the Sabbath for man would
surely not thoughtlessly or wantonly
establish a precedent the observance
of which would be against man. It
cannot be. The gospel tends to glad-
ness. Its trend makes for the good of
man as man, body and soul, in all the
phases of his being. But there is a
disturbing element in him. The other-
wise beautiful equipoise, adjustment,
and beneficent operation of the laws
of human life have been rudely shat-
tered by sin. Anarchical times demand
different treatment from the “ piping
times of peace.” Just when and where
the province of one law should be
invaded in deference to another and
higher werequestions which the Saviour,
we may besure, in His own case settled
righteously. That He had good reason
therefore we may rest assured. But
what that was we may not be so sure.
Possibly the “needs be” was this:
His hour was at hand. The goal was
being reached without the unnecessary
introduction of the miraculous either
in forcing or retarding. God does not
work by miracles when ordinary means
will suffice. Were Christ to utter these
words sooner, Judas might, humanly
speaking, have perfected arrangements
and precipitated matters. Jesus would
then have been betrayed before “ His
time,” unless a miracle of prevention
were wrought. Had He spoken them
later, Judas might not have the requisite
time to compass his plans and be on
the ground at the right moment for
his hour,” unless a miracle of hasten-
ing were wrought. And then, again,
these words may have been uttered at
that moment to secure the absence of
this disturbing element from the feast
of love that was to follow.—Wm. M.
Campbell.


Ver. 19. The moving of conscience.
—This question indicates a deep stirring
of conscience, quickened by God. Tt


CHAP. XIV.


is a question of which every human
soul at some time or other is more or
less cognisant, whatever may be the
answer given to it. It is a question
which is vital to any adequate con-
ception either of the sinfulness of sin,
or of the standard of personal duty,
or of the ideal walk of the regenerate
spirit with God.

I. Consider it in some of the various
motives and intentions with which a
human soul may conceivably put the
question to God. 1. Clearly it may
be put (God protect us from it!) ina
spirit of insolent hardness. Thus Judas
put it. A man to whom sin is not
sinful, to whom self-gratification is the
law of his being, who neither fears
God nor regards man, may say, “ Lord,
is it 12” But he will not care for
an answer, nor wait to hear it given.
2. It may be put also in a spirit of
shallow and ignorant levity. We little
know what possibilities of good and
also of evil are hidden in our wonderful
and complex nature—to what heights
of goodness we may rise, into what
abysses of infamy we may fall. 3. It
is also the question of a holy self-
distrust. There are so many pitfalls
at our feet, such woful surprises, such
mortifying recollections of hopes dis-
appointed, opportunities neglected,
duties omitted, blessings lost, that
“Lord, is it 1%” is often the aching,
frightened question of a bewildered
though honest spirit, fearful of losing
itself in the mazes and obscurities of
its unknown tendencies, and quite
distinct from the morbid self-question-
ings of spiritual egotism.

TI. There are circumstances which
from time to time suggest if they do
not compel it; and so sinuous and in-
tricate are the windings of the human
heart, so apt are even true natures
to be deceived by refined sophistries,
or encouraged to mistake transient
emotion for the continuous action of
dominant principles, that it is almost
necessary for us, if we would adequately
know ourselves, and habitually rule
ourselves, to be forced to find ourselves
out as we stand in the light of God.


515


CHAP XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
REN.





1. The sight of a brother’s sin may be
wholesome though humbling in making
us recognise that only by the grace of
God we are what we are. Had we
been tempted as he was tempted, migl.t
not we have fallen perhaps lower ?
Or we may ourselves have been ex-
posed to the fiery trial of temptation
and been saved, yet so as “by fire.”
We never knew till now how strong
was the strength of God, how weak
the weakness of man. 2. There are
also occasions in life which, like moun-
tain-peaks rising out of a level plain
to break its monotony and form its
landmarks, bring us face to face with
hidden corners in our personal life,
and make us feel with a thrill of glad-
ness the good hand of our God upon
us. Sometimes it is a special mercy,
which makes us wonder how God can
be so good to us.-—Bishop Thorold.

“Ts tt [?”—It was a good sign that
the first thought of each of them was
about the possibility of his own sin.
When a man foresees a great tempta-
tion that is coming, it is always better
that, instead of turning to his neigh-
bours and saying, as he searches their
faces, ‘‘I wonder who will do this
wicked thing ?” he should turn to him-
self and say, “Is it possible that I am
the man who will do it?” When the
wind is rising, it is good for each ship
at sea to look to its own ropes and
sails, and not stand gazing to see how
ready the other ships are to meet it.
We all feel that we would rather hear
a man asking about himself anxiously
than to see him so sure of himself that
the question never occurred to him.
We should be surer of his standing
firm if we saw that he knew he was
in danger of a fall.

. I. There are times in the lives of
all of us, I think, when that comes
to us which came here to Christ’s
disciples. — Beneath us, as beneath


them, the worst possibilities of our


nature sometimes reveal themselves.
Such times are not our worst times
certainly. Often they are times which,
by their very sense of danger, are the
safest and strongest of our lives. But


516


they are often moments that dismay
us. They come in upon our self-
complacency and shock it with their
ominous presence. 1. One of them is
the time when we see deep and flagrant
sin in some other man. When some
great crime is done, when through the
community there runs the story of
some frightful cruelty or dreadful fraud,
I think that almost all of us are con-
scious of a strange mixture of two
emotions, one of horror and the other
of a terrible familiarity. The act is
repugnant to all our conscientiousness ;
but the powers that did the act, and
the motives that persuaded the doing
of it, are powers which we possess and
motives which we have felt. When
you read the story of yesterday’s de-
faulter fleeing to-day, an exile and an
outcast, or sitting gloomily behind his
prison bars, it is not with an angel’s
innocent wonder what a sin like this
can mean ; it is with the understanding
of a man who has felt the same tempta-
tion to which this poor wretch has
yielded, that you deplore his fate.
With simple wonder an angel might
walk through our State prison-halls ;
but a man must walk there full of
humbleness and charity; for as the
best man that ever lived finds some-
thing of common humanity in us which
makes his goodness seem not impossible
to us, so the worst of men stirs by the
sight of his human sin some sense of
what human power of sinfulness we
too possess. 2. Another of the occa-
sions which let us see our own possi-
bility of sin, which open to us a glimpse
of how wicked we might be, is when
we do some small sin and recognise the
deep power of sinfulness by which we
do it. A pure, honest boy cheats with
his first little timid fraud, and on the
other side, the bad side of him, the
door flies open, and he sees the possibility
that he too should be the swindler
whose enormous frauds make the whole
city tremble. The slightest crumbling
of the earth under your feet makes
you aware of the precipice. The least
impurity makes you ready to cry out,
as some image of hideous lust rises


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





before you, “Oh, is it I? Can I come
to that?” 3. And yet another occa-
sion when we become aware of our
own bad possibility is the expression
of any suspicion about us by another
person. I think that for you or me
to find our names linked to-morrow
in this community with some great
crime of which we knew that we were
totally innocent must stir the mystery
of our inner life, and make us see
what capacity of sin is lying there.
I think our disavowal of the sin that
we were charged with would be not
boisterously angry, but quiet and
solemn and humble, with a sense of
danger and a gratitude for preservation.
I think that ought to be the influence.
And even the boisterousness with which
some men deny a charge against their
characters is still a sign in a worse
way of how their conscience has been
touched. Would you want the clerk
in your store to be charged with dis-
honesty, and not go back to his work,
when the charge had been disproved,
with a deepened perception of tempta-
tion and a quickened watchfulness and
care? 4, Bya strange but very natural
process the same result often comes
from just the opposite cause. Not
merely when men suspect us and charge
us with wrong-doing, but when men
praise us and say that we are good,
this same recognition of how bad we
have the power to be often arises. A
man comes up to our life, and, looking
round upon the crowd of our fellow-
men, he says, “See, I will strike the
life of this brother of ours, and you
shall hear how true it rings.” He
does strike it, and it does seem to them
to ring true, and they shout their
applause; but we whose life is struck
feel running all through us at the
stroke the sense of hollowness. 5. Is
it not also true that every temptation
which comes to us, however bravely
and successfully it may be resisted,
opens to us the sight of some of our
human capacity of sin? The man who
dares to laugh at a temptation which
he has felt and resisted is not yet wholly
safe out of its power,


CHAP. XTV.





II. What is this but saying that
in every serious moment of life the
possibility of sin stands up before us?
—None but the man who has no serious
moments, none but he who makes all
life a play, escapes the sight. To every
other man—nay, may we not say to
every man, since no man is literally
always a trifler 2—to every man at some
time the clouds roll back, the spell is
broken, and he sees what a power of
being wicked as of being good belongs
to him just as man. 1. Is it good for
him to see this? Will it help him or
harm him? That will depend upon
the way it works in him. It may
become in him either paralysis or in-
spiration. One man sees his danger,
and stands powerless. Another man
sees his danger, and every faculty is
strung to its intensest strength. It
the feet are set more resolutely toward
goodness, and the hands lay hold more
firmly upon help, it is good for us to
know how wicked we may be, how
great our danger is. 2. What is it
that makes that difference? How is
the consciousness of our danger pre-
vented from becoming a depressing
emotion and turned into an inspiring
motive? It must be by opening the
life upon the other side. It must be
by realising the possibilities of our
human life for good as well as for evil,
by seeing and never forgetting how
good we have a chance to be, as well
as how bad we may become. This is
the power of hope; and hope is the
true master of fear. A merchant
hopes to be rich, and the fear of being
poor, instead of being a vexing anxiety,
becomes the humble servant of his
expectation, and helps him on toward
wealth. The fear of death is terrible
to a sick man until the hope of life
and strength and activity opens before
him; and then in his convalescence
the fear of death has ceased to depress
him as a feeling, and only remains
with him as a motive to caution and
watchfulness. Thus fear is always
good when it has hope to rule it.
3. Now if you saw a young man over-
whelmed with the sight on which our


517


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





eyes have been fixed to-day; if you
saw him so full of the consciousness
of the power of sin in his life, the
possibility of the badness that he might
do and be, that he was wretched and
paralysed,—what would you dofor him?
Would you try to make him forget
what he had seen? Would you try
to shut out the mystery of his life
from him, and make him live again
the life of narrow satisfaction in the
present which he lived before he looked
down into the deep gulf? You could
not doit. But if you could, would it
be well? Surefy not. What you need
to do for him is to make him lift up
his eyes and see the heights above him.
You want to make him like the climber
on a ladder, who looks up and not
down, who climbs not to escape the
gulf below him, but to reach the top
above him, and who feels the gulf
below him only as a power that makes
the hold of foot and hand on every
round of the ladder which they strike
more firm. Now it is the glory of the
Christian gospel that in the treatment
of man’s spiritual nature it preserves
this true relation between hope and
fear perfectly. 4. I suggested just
now the analogy between our physical
and moral consciousness, between our
consciousness of the power to be sick
and the consciousness of the power to
sin. It is an analogy which illustrates
what I have just been saying. There
is a nervousness about health which is
all morbid. It is full of imaginations.
There are people who can never hear
a disease described without thinking
that they have it. They never hear
a sick man talk without feeling all his
symptoms repeated in themselves. You
think of such a person and realise his
wretchedness. Then you look away
from him to a perfectly healthy man
who seldom thinks about being sick at
all. But yet he is something different
from what he would be if there were
no power of sickness in him. Un-
conscious for the most part, but now
and then coming forth into conscious-
ness, there is always present with him
a sense of his humanity, with all the


518


liabilities which that involves. He
does not do what a man would do who
had literally a frame of iron. And
that is just the condition of the man
with the healthy soul. He does not
nervously believe, when he hears of
any flagrant crime, that he is just
upon the brink of that crime himself.
He lives in doing righteousness, but
all the time he keeps the consciousness
that sin, even out to its worst possi-
bilities, sin even to the cruelty of Cain,
the lust of David, the treachery of
Judas, is open to him.—Bishop Phillips
Brooks.


Ver. 21. A wail in the woe.—There
is a wail in the word for ‘“ woe,” a tone
of lament, if also a tone of reprobation.
Indeed, we shall get nearer the meaning
of the whole verse if we think of it
as an elegy, rather than as a formal
sentence on the traitor. Jesus could
aot lose even “the son of loss” without
sorrow. That any man should be base
enough to betray “the best Man that
e’er wore flesh about Him” might well
make even an angel weep. There must
have been something good in Judas, or
he would not have been “called to be
an apostle”; but there must also have
been something horribly mean in a
man who, while affecting great love
for the poor, could habitually steal
from the purse which commonly held
so little, but always a little for the
destitute and helpless. And how could
He who loved all men but mourn over
one in whom much that was good and
of fair promise had been blighted by
a sordid selfishness and covetousness,
one who had given place to the devil,
and to the meanest of all devils, the
most sordid of the spirits that fell ?
“Good for that man,” etc., was a pro-
verbial expression of blended pity and
blame, and must not be taken too
literally, since nothing could be good
or bad for an unborn man. It means
simply that not to have been at all
would have been better than to have
become such a man as Iscariot was.
And there are many of whom this
might be said. Judas is not the only


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIV.





man who has been unfaithful to his
ideal, nor the only man who has played
the hypocrite and proved a traitor to
Christ from selfishness and greed.—
8. Goes DD.

The grace of God received in vain. —
Judas was treated even as the rest of
the apostles up to the moment of his
defection. That he was meanwhile so
ill disciplined in heart as to be robbing
the common purse of his little fra-
ternity almost certainly denotes that
he had received this favour before he
had become “like a little child ””—that


he was an exception, in short, to the


general rule of the Messiah’s ministry
while on earth, and of the Comforter’s
dispensation ever since. It was an
exception which, considered in all its
bearings, was sure to be always re-
membered and recorded, and might
therefore have been made and exhibited
in a strong light for the purpose of
shewing that the rule from which it
was a departure was really no limita-
tion to the free mercy of God in Christ.
In the same manner as Adam’s fall
proved that the whole human race
were incapable of standing without
Divine assistance added to their natural
powers, even so Judas’ case was per-
haps designed to shew that if in the
recovery of fallen man the grace of
God were more lavishly dispensed, if
His Son while on earth or His Spirit
now required of us no preparatory
frame of heart and mind, we should
not be the better for the removal of
the apparent restriction in the offer
of mercy. Toman in that unprepared
state of heart the grace of God would
be the pearl thrown to swine.—S. Hinds.

Warning from the fall of Judas.—
The Lord, when He pleases, can
employ bad men in His service, and
bestow splendid abilities and extra-
ordinary spiritual gifts upon them,
which He perhaps denies to His
dutiful and beloved children. If it
be asked why He does this, and why
He permits hypocrites, covetous and
deceitful workers, to appear among
men as angels of light, it may be
answered that He has a right to do


what He will with His own, that He
giveth no account of His matters, cnd
that from what He has revealed of
His character we ought to believe,
whether we can always see it or not,
that He is righteous in all His ways,
holy in all His works, and wise in all
His proceedings. But since the fact is
so, that Satan can transform himself
into an angel of light, and his ministers
appear as ministers of righteousness,
that Balaam can prophesy, Judas work
miracles, and wicked men preach and
pray with great eloquence, we ought
to be aware of it, lest we be dazzled
or misled, and therefore excited to
covet splendid gifts instead of those
graces of the Spirit which essentially
accompany salvation, and mark us out
as real members of Christ, children of
God, and inheritors of the kingdom of
heaven.—W. Richardson.


\

Vers. 22-24. The Holy sommuniot
—When the earnest Christian kneels
at the altar to take the Holy Com-
munion, he performs a sixfold act.
1. It is an act of obedience. Not a
suggestion merely, not a time-honoured
custom only, but a command, explicit,


emphatic. 2. It is an act of remem-
brance. Not that Christ needed a
memorial, but that we needed a


memory. 3. It is an act of thanks-
giving—a eucharist. This is worthy.
Nations honour themselves in honour-
ing their heroes. Thus Garibaldi is
honoured in Italy, Luther in Germany,
Napoleon in France. Thus Italy, and
France, and Germany, and all Chris-
tian people honour the world’s Hero,
the world’s Saviour, in this sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, in this
eucharistic feast. 4. It is an act of
fellowship—a communion, We join
with angels and archangels and all
the company of heaven and of earth
to magnify the glorious name of God.
5. It is an act of testimony. Every
celebration of this Sacrament is one
new link in the continuous chain of
testimony that comes down through
the ages from the upper chamber of
Jerusalem. Every hand that takes


519


GHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,





this bread and cup joins hands with
the unbroken chain of priestly hands
that reach back to the pierced hands
of Jesus. 6. It is an act of expectancy.
We shew forth the Lord’s death till
He come. We look back, and we look
forward “till He come.” It is going
up to the altar on the mountain-top
and looking to the eastern sky to see
if there be any sign of the coming


RG Lees S. Barrett.

L} / Hf 3 The Holy Communion the most solemn
7'?! Ohristian service.—l. If any one were
to ask what is the most sacred,
solemn, and consoling part of our
religious service, that where God has
gathered together most abundantly
the greatest of His truths and the
richest of His graces, where it is that
in our life on earth we are brought
nearest to heaven, and are most lifted
up in heart and spirit, calmly and
awfully to feel the presence of the
God whom we serve, no well-instructed
Christian would doubt how to answer.
He would say at once, “In the Holy
Communion.” 2. What is it that
makes it so different from all other
acts of prayer and praise? What
gives it its matchless solemnity, its
matchless savour of heaven, its deep
comfort? (1) It is the communication
to us of the death and passion of
Christ, and in it we are carried back
for the time to that One Sacrifice, in
which our own pardon was involved,
and from which flowed God’s mercy to
the world. (2) It is the lmk and
bond, while Christians are living in
the flesh, between earth and heaven,
the meeting-place between the re-
deemed and their Redeemer, out of
sight, but not far off, the communion
in which we are again and again
joined to the risen and glorified Lord,
who is the heavenly strength and life
by which our spirits live. (3) Here
we have communion also with the
whole Church of Christ. Here we
who are so separated are one. Here
we who most deeply sympathise with
one another, and we who never could
be brought on earth to understand each
other, are practically joined in one;

520


for both break the bread and pour the
wine, and receive it as the token that
the Lord had died for them, that the
Lord hath pardoned us, that the
Loxd is nigh.—Dean Church.
he presence of Ohrist in the
Eucharist.—1. I say and confess with
the Evangelists and with St. Paul
that the bread on the which thanks
are given is the body of Christ in the
remembrance of Him and His death,
to be set forth perpetually of the faith-
ful until His coming. 2. I say and
confess the bread which we break to
be the communion and partaking of
Christ’s body with the ancient and
the faithful Fathers. 3. I say and
believe that there is not only a signi-
fication of Christ’s body set forth by
the Sacrament, but also that therewith
is given to the godly and faithful the
grace of Christ’s body—that is, the
food of life and immortality; and this
I hold with Cyprian. 4. I say also,
with St. Augustine, that we eat life
and we drink life; with Emissene,
that we feel the Lord to be present
in grace; with Athanasius, that we
receive celestial food which cometh
from above; the property of natural
communion, with Hilary ; the nature
of flesh and benediction which giveth
life, in bread and wine, with Cyril ;
and, with the same Cyril, the virtue of
the very flesh of Christ, life and grace
of His body, the property of the Only-
Begotten, that is to say life, as He
Himself in plain words expoundeth
it. 5. I confess also, with Basil, that
we receive the mystical advent and
coming of Christ, grace, and the virtue
of His very nature; the Sacrament of
His very flesh, with Ambrose; the
body by grace, with Epiphanius ;
. Spiritual flesh, but not that which was
crucified, with Jerome; grace flowing
into a sacrifice, and the grace of the
Spirit, with Chrysostom; grace and
invisible verity, grace and society of
the members of Christ’s body, with
Augustine. 6. Finally, with Bertram,
I confess that Christ’s body is in the
Sacrament in this: respect—namely, as
he writeth, because there is in it the


~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR.


CHAP. XIV.


a  ,


Spirit of Christ, that is, the power


of the Word of God, which not only »


feedeth the soul, but also cleanseth it.
Out of these I suppose it may clearly
appear unto all men how far we are
from that opinion whereof some go
about falsely to slander us to the
world, saying we teach that the godly
and faithful should receive nothing
else at the Lord’s table but a figure
of the body of Christ.—Bishop Ridley.

Christ's presence in the Hucharist to
unworthy receivers.—May we say, then,
that Christ is really present in the
Sacrament as well to the unworthy as
to the faithful receivers? Yes, this
we must grant, yet must we add withal
that He is really present with them
in a quite contrary manner; really
present He is, because virtually
present to both—because the operation
or efficacy of His body and blood is
not metaphorical but real in both.
Thus the bodily sun, though locally
distant for its substance, is_ really
present by its heat and light as well
to sore eyes as to clear sights, but
really present to both by a contrary
real operation; and by the like con-
trary operation it is really present to
clay and to wax, it really hardeneth
the one and really softeneth the
other. So doth Christ’s body and
blood, by its invisible but real
influence, mollify the hearts of such
as come to the Sacrament with due
preparation, but harden such as
unworthily receive the consecrated ele-
ments. If he that will hear the Word
must take heed how he hears, much
more must he which means to receive
the Sacrament of Christ’s body and
blood be careful how he receives.—
T. Jackson.

The mystery of the Eucharist.—The
words, ‘Take, and eat: it is My body.
Take, and drink: it is the cup of My
blood,” understood in their true mean-
ing, literally and without metaphor,
are to human reason a mystery un-
heard of andimpenetrable. The bread
that Jesus offers to His apostles is no
longer merely bread, but His body
which is about to be sacrificed; the


cup which He gives them to drink is
no longer merely wine, but His own
blood which is about to be shed. The
apostles understood it so. They did
not esk, “How can this be done?”
In the simplicity and fulness of their
faith, knowing that the power of the
Master was boundless, and that the
truth was in Him, they believed on
His words, and partook of His body
and His blood under the forms of
bread and wine. What Jesus had
said a year before to the people of
Galilee at Capernaum (John vi. 35,
etc.), He realised on this day a few
hours before His death. He taught
them that He was the “Bread of
Life,” that in eating of Him they
should live; that if they ate not the
flesh of the Son of Man and drank not
His blood, they should not have life;
that His flesh was the true meat, and
His blood the true drink; that he
who ate of His flesh and drank of
His blood should dwell in Him. The
people, shocked and scandalised, had
turned away, asking ironically how
He would give any man Jiis flesh
toeat. ‘“ How” was now explained.—
Father Didon.

The significance of the Eucharist.—
This scene contains the whole religion
of Jesus. In this single moment of
His life He realises it at one stroke
in its perfection. He appears at once
as Priest and Victim, as creating the
eternal priesthood and the eternal
sacrifice. He reveals without meta-
phor or parable the reason of His
death. John had rightly called Him
“the Lamb of God which taketh away
the sins of the world.” How are men
to profit by the personal atonement
which the Son of God comes to
accomplish? They must be incor-
porated in the Victim who delivers
Himself up and dies for their sakes.
And Jesus requires not only that
there should be a spiritual unicn with
His spirit and His person—His
design is a grander one. His aim is a
spiritual and material union together ;
His design is that man, being both
spirit and matter, body and soul,


521


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


Se


should be united in spirit and reality
to His whole being—to the Son of
God and the Son of Man—to His
Divinity and His humanity, to His
soul and His body. His design is
that he should believe on His Word,
and become through faith one and
the same spirit with Him—that he
should eat of His body and drink of
His blood, and be incorporated in the
flesh of the Son of Man.—Jtid.

The Eucharist an extension of the
Incarnation.—Gregory Nazianzen de-
fines the Eucharist, “a communion of
the incarnation of God.” For in that
He affirms the bread to be His body,
and the wine to be His blood; by
receiving this body and blood of
Christ, and so changing it into the
substance of our body and blood by
way of nourishment, the body of
Christ becomes our body and His blood
is made our blood, and we become in
a mystical manner flesh of His flesh
and bone of His bone. And as in
His conception of the Holy Virgin
He took upon Him the nature of man
that He might save man, so in His
Holy Sacrament He takes upon Him
the nature of every man in singular
that He might save every man who
becomes one with Him in the Divine
Sacrament of His body and _ blood.
His real incarnation was only in one,
but His mystical incarnation in many ;
and hence comes this Sacrament to
be an instrument whereby Christ is
conveyed unto us, His benefits applied,
and so our faith confirmed.—J. Mede.

The Eucharist is on the one side the
perfection of the sustenance of life in
personal communion, on the other a
use of the products of the earth as
instruments of communion, implying
the necessity of taking the whole
nature into communion if it is to be
real, the symbols of creation and of
the Lord’s body in one. The life of
the disciples with Christ was exchanged
for a life in Christ: they abode as
branches in the Vine of which His
Father is the Husbandman, The
bread took for them the place of the
body through which they had first


522


learnt to converse with a living Lord.
The wine took for them the place of
the blood in which His life had dwelt.
In that feast of blessing and thanks-
giving, that joyful participation of
accepted sacrifice, no life was found
too earthly to be offered on the altar
of the Cross, or to become a means of
human fellowship and Divine com-
munion.—Prof. Ff. J. A. Hort.

Communion.—1. Communion is per-
manent, yet needs times of revival.
2. All Christian life is sacramental.
Not alone in our highest act of
communion are we _ partaking of
heavenly powers through earthly signs
and vehicles. 3. This neglected faith
may be revived through increased
sympathy with the earth derived from
fuller knowledge, through the fearless
love of all things.—Jid.


Ver. 22. Analogies between Christ's
body and bread.—1. As bread is the
strength and state of our natural life,
so Christ is for our spiritual, being all
in all. 2. As bread is loathed of the
full stomach, but most acceptable to
the hungry soul, so Christ is most
welcome to such as “hunger and
thirst after righteousness.” 3. As
bread is usual and daily, so Christ
should be to the Christian, feeding on
that bread which came down from
heaven, the soul’s ordinary refection.
4, As bread is made one loaf of many
grains, so we that are many are one
bread and one body, because we are all
partakers of one bread. 5. As corn
is cut down with the scythe, threshed
in the barn with many stripes, torn
in the mill with much violence, then
bolted and sifted, last of all baked
with extreme heat in the oven, and
all this that it may be fit meat for
our body, so Christ in His ripe age
was cut down by cruel death, His
body was whipped, His flesh rent
asunder, His soul was as it were
melted in the fiery furnace of God’s
anger; and all this that He might
become food for our soul, that we
might eat of this bread and drink of
this cup.—Dean Boys.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Vers. 23, 24. The blood of Jesus
Christ becomes, through His goodness,
milk for His children, a band of union
to His members, the seal of His
covenant, and the ransom of His
slaves; and, on the contrary, through
the wickedness of the imitators of
Judas, it becomes to them a mortal
poison, a sword of separation, the seal
of their reprobation, and the cause of
an eternal captivity.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 25. The new Passover.—Jesus
never partook afterwards of the Pass-
over—never, that we know of, cele-
brated the Eucharist with His disciples.
It is said, indeed, that after His resur-
rection ‘‘ He was known of them in
breaking of bread”; but this can hardly
be so applied. Rather say that the
Holy Spirit of Christ is in His Church,
which is His new body, even as His
fleshy frame was when this declara-
tion was made. When, therefore, after
the descent of the Holy Ghost—when,
at this day, a Christian congregation
partakes of the new Passover, Christ
isin the midst of them, they are His
body and members in particular. He
is then as truly present, and as truly
a partaker in the ceremony of “ drink-
ing the fruit of the vine,” as when
His Divine nature was united only
with the Man Christ Jesus. In this
sense He fulfilled His declaration to
the apostles, and in this sense continues,
in every age of the Church, to drink
the fruit of the vine in His own
kingdom, the kingdom of God on
earth. He said that He would drink
it new, because it was thenceforth to
assume a new character and efficacy.
He came not to destroy, but to fulfil,
God’s former appointments—to make
all things new.—S. Hinds.

Communion in heaven.—Let us take
care to raise our hearts from the
sacramental communion here on earth
to the eternal communion in heaven,
to be celebrated there not under veils
or sensible symbols, but openly and
without veils. The sight of truth,
unveiled and perfectly disclosed to our
eyes, is a torrent of delight and joy,


CHAP. XIV.


which as it were inebriates the soul,
makes it forget all the afflictions and
miseries of the earth, and transports
it out of itself, in order to its living
only in the truth, upon the truth, and
for the truth.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 26. Jesus singing that song
is like an aureola encircling that little
company in the gathering gloom.
There is no concord between light
and darkness, no real affinity between
woe and song. One is from above,
the other from beneath. One is a
daughter of the skies, the other a
child of perdition. Musical harmonies
are not heard in the outer darkness,
breaking sweetly on the ear amid the
awful discords of despair. But heaven
isa land of song. Joyous strains are
heard constantly echoing in sweetest
refrain over the “bright plains” of
paradise. 1. Christ singing! And
at such a time! The hour and power
of darkness approaching. The agony
of Gethsemane and the darkness of
the Cross near. He knows it all, yet
calmly sings. What a vision is here
of holy confidence and anticipated
triumph! Apparently Christ on the
eve of defeat; the powers of darkness
on that of victory. But He sings.
Glad omen for the cause of redemption.
Such singing does not indicate a dis-
couraged leader or a defeated cause.
2. The disciples sang. This would
have a tendency to neutralise the
effect of the ‘“ exceeding sorrow” that
oppressed them. It would prevent a
panic until the “hour” had come.
3. In time of danger and in the face
of the coming storm, how much de-
pends, under God, on the leader!
Napoleon in the hearts of his soldiers
fights and wins an Austerlitz or a
Jena. ‘The spirit of Wellington per-
vades Waterloo and saves Europe.
Jesus can sing on the eve of the
Waterloo of the world’s redemption.
Such a leader, such a spirit, such a
song, animates His people to meet
foes, “fight the good fight of faith,”
and conquer. Blessed paradox! The
darkest hours may still be bright with


523


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





the light of the heavenly sun. The
Eternal Father and Friend is “at the
helm.”—Wm. M. Campbell.

The spirit in which to meet the trials
of life—Praise is an exercise in the
spirit of which we should meet the
trials of life, I use the term “ spirit ”
as distinguished from the outward
act, from the mere utterance of words
or melody of sounds, and to guard
against the idea that apart from
those feelings of which it ought to
be the expression and accompaniment
any form of worship is entitled to
the commendation given in Scripture
to the exercise of praising God. The
exercise is founded on a knowledge
and belief of the Divine perfections ;
it is not so much a mechanical as a
spiritual act—it is not the exercise
of musical taste, but of devotional
feeling—it is the admiring contem-
plation of the Divine perfections,
expressed in the appropriate forms
of inspired devotion. Be it yours to
rise from the contemplation of second
causes to the contemplation of the
First Cause, in adoring admiration of
Him who appoints and arranges all
according to His unerring will. Be
it yours to remember that the hand
which removed the gourd you delighted
in likewise bestowed it,-—that the worm
which withers has been sent by Him,
not in wrath, but in love; not to
leave your heads defenceless against
the scorching sun or the pelting storm,
but to lead you to abide in a safer
and sweeter peace under the shadow
of the Almighty. Trials thus met
would be deprived of their sting. And
did either your own interests or those
of Christianity require that sufferings
as great as those which martyrs have
endured should be appointed you,
encountering them in the same spirit,
you would come out of them with the
same triumph.—RA&. Brodie.


Ver. 27. Christ the Shepherd—l. As
descending from ancient patriarchs
who were shepherds. They were
types of Him. 2. He knows His
sheep, and marks them for His own


524


(John x. 3, 14). God sets His seal
on them (2 Tim. ii. 19). 3. He feeds
their souls and bodies in green pastures
(Ps. xxiii.), and drives them to the
sweet streams and waters of comfort
by the paths of grace and righteous-
ness. 4. He defends them from the
wolf and enemies ; they being timorous,
simple, weak, shiftless creatures, unable
to fly, resist, or save themselves. 5. He
nourishes the young and tender lambs.
6. He seeks them when they go astray,
and rejoices to findthem. 7. He brings
them to thefold. (1) The fold of grace.
(2) The fold of glory.—7. Taylor, D.D.

Christ smitten, an example to us.—
1, He suffered for no necessity or
desert, but by voluntary humility,
whereas we deserve fiery trials. 2. He
suffered not for His own cause, but
ours ; and shall not we for His? 3. He
despised the shame; and why should
not we? 4, The end of His Cross was
the exaltation at God’s right hand;
and we expect the same.—J/bid.

The sheep scattered.Why were the
disciples thus scattered? 1, Their
own weakness and carnal fear made
them fly to save themselves. They
had not counted the cost of their
profession. Nor had they yet received
the Holy Spirit, which afterwards
kept them strong and _ steadfast.
2. God in His wisdom would have
Christ deserted, because He was to
be known to tread “the winepress of
God’s wrath alone.” 3. Thus it behoved
the Scripture to be fulfilled, in regard
of Christ Himself, who, voluntarily
undertaking the grievous burden of
our sin, must be forsaken by all for
the time. 4. To teach us that all
our safety depends on our relation to
the Chief Shepherd. Without Christ
we lie dispersed, ungathered, and
forlorn.—IJbid.


Ver. 28. The promised meeting in
Galilee.—Why in Galilee? 1. That
our Lord and His disciples may more
surely enjoy one another without fear
of the Jews, and that He may instruct
them in the things concerning the
kingdom of heaven. 2. Because Christ


s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :





had more disciples and favourites in
Galilee to whom He would familiarly
offer Himself and manifest His resur-
rection than in Judea. 3. His disciples
belonged to Galilee, and He would
bring them to the place where He
found them. 4. They must follow
their calling till Christ came, and for
the time before they can get into
Galilee He will be there before them,
waiting for them.—Jbid.

Christ going before—It is a very
great consolation to the diseased and
infirm members to be assured that
their Head will not abandon them
when they fall, but that He will even
go before them. If Jesus did not
vouchsafe to come to meet us in the
power of His new-raised life—that is,
by powerful graces—how should we be
able ever to rise and go to Him ?—
P. Quesnel.

Christ the Leader.—He is always
going before His followers as an In-
fallible Teacher, as a Faithful Friend,


ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


and as a Mighty Leader; He went
before Joseph to Egypt; He went
before Moses to the land of Midian,
and through the wilderness to the
Promised Land; He went before
Daniel to the lions’ den; He went
before the three brave-hearted Baby-
lonian nonconformists to the fiery
furnace; He went before Paul to
Rome and John to Patmos. And He
will faithfully go before us in our
paths of duty, in all our trials and
temptations, and in sickness and death
we shall find Him going before us.


Ver. 29. The rashness of the heart.—
When we love, we think ourselves
capable of anything. Suffering or
death seems nothing to us. Of all
kinds of rashness, the most incurable
and the most unreflecting, and at the
same time the most excusable, because
it is the most sincere, is not the rash-
ness of the mind or the will, but the
rashness of the heart.—Vather Didon.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 32—42.


(Paratiets: Marr. xxvi. 36-46; Luxe xxii. 39-46.)


The agony in the garden.—In our Litany we plead with our Lord by His


agony and bloody sweat.


say, to our Lord’s remembrance.
part in working out our salvation.
Him grant our requests.


From among the events of His life we thus select the
agony in the garden as one of the most important.


We bring it, if we may so


We are convinced that it bore a prominent
The remembrance of it will operate to make
No passage of His life is more mysterious; we should


approach the topic with awe and reverence, taking as it were the shoes off our
feet, because it is holy ground that we purpose to visit.


I. His sufferings on the Cross had not yet begun.
1. Chiefly, mainly, I believe, it was the grief of His whole life.


exceeding distress ?


What was the cause of this


He was in the place of sinners; He was the representative ofsinners; He was suffer-
ing for sinners, bearing their punishment, and their punishment is that God hides
His face from them; and the holier, the more loving, the more capable, the soul
of the Christ was, the more bitter to Him was this punishment, which others


deserved and He endured.


9. There were special reasons why the suffering


thus produced should at this time press with extreme violence on His soul. He
had completed other work ; He had trained His apostles, finished the work given


Him to do, had reissued the law, had


fulfilled all types and prophecies, had


revealed the Divine character, had exhibited the type of perfect manhood ; and


so the work of suffering and expiation alone remained.
The mind could no longer be diverted by
ay before Him in the way of suffering.


no more teaching—only endurance.


other employment from that which |


No more controversy,


525


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





3. All this suffering was foreseen, anticipated; it was not like our sufferings,
which are mercifully hidden from us. 4. There are also other explanations of
the horror of great darkness through which He now passed. He said a little
farther on that it was the hour of His enemies and the power of darkness. We
believe that Satan now put forth all his power to crush Him. Then we may
also believe that the fear of death, the fear of all that was to come to body,
mind, and spirit, all the agonising sufferings of the Cross, depressed the human
soul of the Redeemer. 5. Again, He was denied those consolations which have
made martyrs, under excruciating sufferings, triumphant. What is it makes
a martyr meekly, gladly, patiently endure, though every nerve be racked? It
is the infusion of God’s grace, a drop of the joy of heaven, a cordial sent by God
on high to support the soul of His faithful witness. But this is just what was
denied the Christ while bearing, as our representative, the burden of our sins.
6. We see, too, in the narrative the mark of another trial, viz. disappointment,
owing to the failure of human support and sympathy.

II. What is to be learnt from this passage.—1. This passage should impress
on us that our salvation was no easy work. Creation, with all its wonders, |
might be effected by a word. He had only to speak, and it was done; but to
recover mankind, to cancel sin, to extricate the race from Satan’s usurped
dominion—this was a task which cost much. This required the infinite descent,
the inconceivable mystery of the Son of God emptying Himself, laying aside His
garments of light, taking the form of a servant, humbling Himself to one descent
after another, divesting Himself, as far as possible, of the exercise of the
attributes of Godhead, acting through a created nature, submitting to humilia-
tions, and laying Himself open to the keenest inroads of pain, spiritual, mental,
and physical. Every time we plead with Him by His agony and bloody sweat,
we should remember that our salvation cost Him pain, and that we must not
expect ourselves without tribulation to enter into the kingdom of God. 2. We
see the completeness of our Lord’s manhood. He took not only our body, but
our mind, our most essential and distinctive quality, our will. He cries, ‘‘ Not
My will, but Thine.” He had therefore a will, as Man; and His perfection was
that He bowed His human will, sacrificed it, adjusted it, subjected it to the Divine
will. 3. Wesee that it isnot wrong tomake known our wishes to God in prayer.
We may shrink from pain, we may ask to be spared suffering, so long as we do
so in entire submission to the Divine will. We may ask that the cup of suffer-
ing may pass from us, if only we are willing to drain it cheerfully, when God
signifies His will that we should drink it. And because we may have to give
up our wills in a great matter, it is well to practise ourselves to get power over
our will in smaller matters. 4. Observe our Great Master and Pattern called
God His Father in the very crisis of bowing His human will to the greatest
sacrifice that will of man ever made, to entire accordance, perfect submission to,
and acquiescence in the Divine appointment, though it involved inconceivable
sufferings : “ Abba, Father.” May God produce in allof us a faith in the Father-
hood of God! Then we too shall be able to bear pain, to go into a crisis in faith,
and to come out of it, as our Master did, unscathed. 5. Lastly, notice in this
crisis that our Lord was not so engrossed with His own surpassing agony as not
to attend to His disciples, and strive to rouse, stimulate, and shame them to
better endeavours. He graciously makes allowance for them, acknowledges that
the spirit is ready though the flesh is weak. He honours them by requesting
their support and sympathy ; He returns to them more than once ; He rouses them
at last that they may not be discredited by their negligence when the enemy is
close at hand. Of those given Him, He will not lose one. May God give us
grace to be, after His example, thoughtful for others, if God should be pleased
to visit us with exhausting and engrossing sufferings !—Canon Burrows.


526


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


eeeprr  eee ieeoe ee re A e


Gethsemane.—We may here learn our true attitude in suffering. The clouds
which darken the sky of this transitory life have gathered over us all, and
maybe their shadows fall upon some of you now. Adversity isan inheritance we
cannot decline, forced upon us all, and forced because we have not sufficient
grace to choose and bear it for virtue’s Sake. Suffering—and by that I mean
all the pains and trials, physical, intellectual, spiritual, which attack mankind—
is inevitable. It may vary in degree and kind, but in some measure we all
are its victims; and every doubt, every sick-bed, every grave, seals this true.
There is no exemption, and the noblest hearts seem to hold the most; and
looking ahead, we ask the question, not for the first time—

“Ts it so, O Christ in heaven, that the highest suffer most,

That the strongest wander farthest and most hopelessly are lost,

That the mark of rank in nature is capacity for pain,

That the anguish of the singer makes the sweetness of the strain?”
It may appear strange that one cup should contain so much more of bitterness
than another. The best and perhaps only way of coming to know the “ Why ¢”
of these things is to bear a right attitude towards them, and towards Him
whose care never fails, whose wisdom never errs, whose love never changes.
Affliction is not calamity to the one who knows how to bear it, but a mine
of inexhaustible wealth; and though the sun may go down, yet to the one who
can read the heavens even the night will bring its joyful truths. Remember
there is another side to the cloud under which you dwell, and there is light
and deliverance and an everlasting Father.

I. Christ’s suffering did not shake His confidence in God.—“ All things are
possible unto Thee ; remove this cup from Me.” There was the recognition of
God’s power. The night was dark, but He did not cry, “There is no light !”
The cup was bitter, but there was no complaint or cruel charge. The burden
was heavy, but weakness never suggested, “There is no deliverer !” Brethren,
do we not feel condemned when we recall our weakness and unbelief, when
overtaken by adversity? At times God lets His shadow fall upon us, and we
think it cold and harsh and meaningless. But instead of concluding that the
sun has been extinguished when he sets, instead of idle, weak complaints, making
the time bitter unto us, let us labour to discover the treasure of His love in
the severest stroke He deals us. As in nature, so in grace, there must be a
change of seasons. When grim winter appears and closes the eye and damps
the smile of mother-earth, clothing her in a snow-white shroud, and freezing
her body hard and cold, think we that her life has gone and we must starve,
for nature’s cupboard is empty and cannot be replenished? Nay; we remember
it lay as helpless but a year ago; but creeping beneath the sun’s directer rays
it day by day revived, and the spring and summer came, followed by ripe old
autumn with his lap full of golden fruit. Oh, how often shall the Master save
us ere we cease to be afraid? When shall we learn to trustfully repose, through
hope and despair, through joy and sorrow, in that eternal principle of truth,
“We know that to them that love God all things work together for good”? .
« All things are possible unto Thee ; remove this cup from Me.” The prayer
is, however, by no means complete here. There must be something more than
the acknowledgment of God’s power. We may come to God and say, ‘‘Thou
art able,” and He answering may declare, “ I am willing.” But should He
declare, “I am not willing,” what then? If there be nothing more than the
acknowledgment of God’s ability, the result will be disappointment and unbelief ;
and according to the estimate we had of God’s ability there will follow this
bitterness. “‘ Howbeit, not what I will, but what Thou wilt.”

II. The complete submission of Christ's will to the Father’s.—Christ has
expressed the desire of His heart, He has prayed for deliverance; but He


527


CHAP. XIV. TTOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








cioses His petition, He interrupts His very agonies, He turns right round to
the Father and bows in adoring submission to His will; and how He suffered
it we know. This, brethren, is the true spirit of prayer. To pray is not to
claim unconditionally, to ask what we want and selfishly require it. It is the
soul’s request submitted to the will of God. We must remember our ignorance,
the restive desires of our hearts, the circumscribed present only visible to us ;
and realising all this, and more, we must pray, but leave our prayer in His
hands, not dictating what we would have God do, but beseeching Him to grant
our requests as they accord with His will, which is our eternal welfare. And
if the answer come as we call, if the blessing descend whilst we still linger at
the throne of grace, let us be thankful. But, on the other hand, if no voice
replies, if the long-sought blessing be delayed, yea, and if it be delayed for ever
and never greets us, still let us be thankful, rejoicing to forsake our own
desires when the wisdom of God beckons us away. Our disappointment is our
gain; the frustration of our hopes is our everlasting benefit. The supreme
purpose of our life should be to know the will of God, and our zealous care
to gain this patient, gentle grace, submission, which quickly turns its face
whichever way the current of God’s Spirit flows, and with swift obedience
answers each movement of His will. The knowledge of His will interprets
our duty, which is the fulfilment of that will. There are truths we do not
know, we cannot know; and many are the things which are veiled from our
sight, for the revelation of which we must wait. They lie beyond the haze
which surrounds and circumscribes our vision here, in a clearer, purer
atmosphere. A time will come, and come speedily, when this concealing cloud
shall be the pathway for our feet, and when we shall begin to know these
hidden truths; but believe me, brethren, that time will also tell us of eternal
secrets yet unveiled, and we shall find a path for our abiding faith. Our pride
and unbelief must be quenched, and the Father’s will must reign supreme, the
song of our heart ever rising in clear notes to the attentive sky, “Not my
will but Thine be done.” It was this complete submission which led the
Saviour to His death.

III. The victory of the Cross was gained in Gethsemane.—The Crucifixion
was public, but the Saviour bore it first.in secret. The hardship and grief
of the soldier is not as he stands in the midst of the fight, but as he takes one
farewell glance at the window yonder, where his child waves its tiny hand-
kerchief and his bereaved wife sobs her pain away. The trial of Archbishop
Cranmer was not greatest when he stood in the curling smoke and thrust his
hand in the devouring flame, but in the agony it cost him to go there. And
it was even so with our agonising Lord. He saw the cruel Cross as He knelt
in Gethsemane, He felt the wounds of the nails, and wept as He heard the
cries of the mocking crowd He died to save. He saw and felt it all as He
wrestled there. If we would discover the secret of our Lord’s strength, we
shall find it in those nights of earnest prayer spent upon the green slopes of
the mountain. Our prayers may cast us, as Daniel of old, in the lions’ den,
but they shall close the lions’ mouths. And now what consolation is ours and
what remaineth unto us? We are not left comfortless, brethren; the Saviour
has provided for His absence. The Spirit comes as a heavenly messenger to
remind us that we have interests beyond, a Father who loves, a Saviour who
intercedes, a throne vacant, till we gain the shore. —S. W. Kay.


Ver. 37. The hour of watching.—There is an unknown element in human nature
which makes the sympathy of others a necessary factor in our life. A writer has
told us that joy unshared loses half its glow, and that the weight of sorrow is
threefold heavier if there be none to watch with the sufferer. Specially in our


528 :





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


dark moments of spiritual need we cry aloud for just one soul, one only, to watch
with us, that we be not left alone. We pity the man who has to take a solitary
path through the world; and if we have known the deep privilege of walking
through the sunlight and shadow of earth with some sympathetic human soul,
we recognise in how terrible a blank moves the uncompanioned life.

I. This half-sorrowful and half-indignant cry is just one of those cries for
sympathy, for friendship.—The Bible never hesitates to emphasise the true
humanity of Christ—His anger, His sorrow, His pity, His hunger and thirst
and weariness, His need of love and fellowship. He could face, with all the
self-reliance of His loving purpose, the frown of, His critics and enemies,
the scribes and Pharisees, the lawyers and the Roman soldiers; but here in the
solitude of the garden He could not face without remonstrance the loneliness of
the human heart. He pleaded for one hour of watching with Him. He knew,
no doubt, that His disciples could not help Him much. Their simple and child-
like natures were too far from His for that; and it was not until He was taken
from them that they even began to understand what He was. Certainly they
never guessed what He was suffering. And we, had we been there, with all
our larger knowledge and deeper insight—we should have been, if sleepless, at
least as dumb as they. For this is one of the tragic colours in the picture, that,
whereas we can trace clearly enough all those outward forms, we do not know
the depth of all they represent. We cannot tell what He suffered for the sins
of men. Into the depths of that story the world has never entered. That
patience, that humility, that love, have never been felt, fathomed, or rightly
understood even by the most sacred spirits of earth. A very immortality of
pain is centred in that one short hour.

II. Does not the cry ring down to us across the ages like a peal of thunder ?
—1. It is primarily in our own personal life that we are thus called upon to
watch with Christ. To all of us there comes, sometimes in little things, some:
times in great things, a temptation, an impulse to do what we know to be
wrong—a time when our spiritual principles, our Christian temper, is put to the
proof, and the hour of trial comes to the Christ within us. It is then that we
are alone like He was, in the sense that we have to face and conquer that
temptation without help from others; it is then that He appeals to us most
earnestly to watch with Him one hour, to watch until the temptation has
passed, and we come out victorious. There is a moral truth of a very supreme
value in the words “one hour.” For the temptation that is thus met in the
spirit of Christ is a brief one. It loses its power over us, and every successful
resistance of it makes it less formidable on its next return. That is the true
watchfulness that watches not, like the old ascetics, that it may shun temptation,
but, like Christ, that it may meet and subdue it. We see, in a word, that trial
and temptation are rather less things to be shunned than blessings in disguise,
angels with hidden wings. The first step, as Socrates has warned us, in spiritual
progress is learning to know ourselves, our own powers and potentialities, just
as the soldier learns the work of shield and spear and the measure of his own
courage only in the heat of the fight. Above all, we learn our own weakness,
and so open the way for fresh watchfulness. Temptation, thus used, becomes
the great helper in human development. We grow larger under God’s disciplfne,
and emerge from it with new faculties and a finer character. We have seen
something of the deep things of God, and can never more shake off the vision
of them. If we have thus watched with Christ, we are in a manner sharing
His sufferings and receiving His sanctification; and though, if we are wise,
we shall love good because it is good and hate evil because it is evil, quite apart
from any results they bring, that may fairly be our hope and prospect in the
hours when we are tempted. While, on the other hand, if we have slept


MM 529


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





in the time of trial, there is the miserable thought that we have disappointed
our Master’s hope. 2. The appeal comes to us not only as individuals, but as
members of the organic body we call “the Church.” Whatever may be thought
of the very singular age in which we live, we are all agreed on one point, that
it is an age of transition, a time whose thoughts and feelings and ideals are not
fixed, permanent, complete. It is the one short hour in which we as Christians
are called upon to watch with Him. And we can do it best not by engaging
in theological disputes, still less by ignorantly rejecting the genuine results of
historical or scientific research, or by trying vainly to smother the flame of free
inquiry, but by more maintaining our Christian principles unshaken, by offer-
ing to men the sweet apology of a holy and self-devoted life, by making them
feel that with us at least religion shall be a reality and not aform. Christianity
is not a system of beliefs, but a life, a new life, in the world. “I am come that
they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.” The
thoughtfulness, therefore, and patience and self-devotion of our daily work
may become the best apology for the Christian faith; for the new life that is
thus lived in the spirit of Christ is an argument which men can neither answer
nor ignore.—S. A. Alexander.


Ver, 38. The nature and kinds of sins of infirmity.—One can scarce acquit
the disciples of some degree of negligence and want of respect. But our Lord
was pleased to put the mildest and most candid construction possible upon it.
The night was far spent; sleep stole upon them unawares; and they were
naturally slow and heavy, not apprehending how much depended upon that
critical juncture. They intended no affront or disrespect to their Lord: they
had a true and real, only not so lively and vigorous a concern for Him as
they ought to have had; their spirit truly was willing, and they meant well;
but yet, for want of quicker sentiments, they failed in the performance. It
was natural infirmity which prevailed over their resolutions, which overpowered
their very hearty and honest but languid endeavours.

I. What sins are properly sins of infirmity.—Their general nature is briefly
described thus: that they are rather weak than wilful, having much more of
frailty than of wilfulness in them. Something of wilfulness they must have,
otherwise they could not be imputed as sins. But as the degree of wilfulness is
small in comparison, and the frailty so much the greater, they have therefore
their denomination from their most prevailing ingredient, and so are called
sins of infirmity. They are a kind of slips, failings, or deviations, issuing from
an honest and good heart, and carrying no malice prepense, no premeditated
guile, no ill meaning in them—harmless almost as to the matter of them, and
without any bad design. They are owing either to inadvertency, forgetfulness,
surprise, strength of passion, or to the suddenness and violence of an unlooked-
for temptation. 1. I begin with such as have respect to the inward thought.
And here we are liable to offend two ways—either in not thinking as we ought
to think, or in thinking as we ought not. Human frailty is too often and too
sadly felt in what concerns the government of the thoughts. Who is there
that does not often find distraction and wanderings and deadness at his
prayers, private or public—but public more especially, as we there meet with
more objects to divert the eyes and to turn off the attention? This kind of
non-attention or absence of thought in religious exercises, so far as it is a sin
(for it is not so always), is, generally speaking, a sin of infirmity, and no more.
And it is then only to be reckoned among wilful sins, when a man makes a
habit of it, and slothfully submits to it, without striving against it; or when
it carries some contempt of the service with it, arising from some vicious
principle of the mind. Besides the sin of infirmity new mentioned, I may

530


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





name some others reducible to the same head,—such as the not thinking often
enough or highly enough of God and His good providence; not having Him
constantly in our thoughts, nor setting Him before our eyes; not attending to
His calls, not regarding His judgments, nor being duly thankful for His
mercies, etc. To these we may add, the not thinking how to lay hold of and
to improve any opportunities we meet with of doing good in the world; and
this through dulness, through inadvertency, or forgetfulness: for if we wilfully
and designedly let slip the golden opportunity offered us, and despise the
invitation, the sin is then wilful, and the offence presumptuous. Among sins
of infirmity belonging to this head may be reckoned some kinds of unbelief,
as both belief and unbelief respect the inward thoughts of the heart. Want
of faith or trust in God’s words or His promises in some timorous minds
may justly pass for a sin of infirmity. They despond and sink down in the
day of adversity more than becomes them to do, as if they had forgot that
the very hairs of their heads are all numbered, or as if they had never read
that not so much as a sparrow falleth to the ground but by the order or with
the permission of an All-knowing God. Hitherto I have been considering
such sins of infirmity as respect the inward thoughts, in such cases wherein
we do not think as we ought to think. There is another branch of the same
head, which is the thinking as we ought not. The former is a sin of omission
only, this of commission, both resting in the mind. When we are thinking of
this world only, suppose in prayer-time or sermon-time, instead of thinking
of a better, as most of us are apt to do—this, we hope, may pass for a sin of
infirmity, if not chosen by us, nor designedly indulged. Sometimes profane,
blasphemous thoughts will rise up in men’s minds; but if they be checked as
soon as observed, and are not consented to, they are at most no more than
sins of infirmity, owing generally to bodily indispositions. The same I say
even of unchaste or malicious thoughts, if they are only short and transient,
which abide not, which do not gain our consent, but are condemned by us as
soon as perceived ; they are then either sins of infirmity only, or not sins at all.
For what the will or choice has no hand in is not imputable to us as a fault;
it may be our misfortune. Too much warmth and eagerness, in some instances,
is a sin of infirmity. Such, I suppose, was Peter’s eagerness, when he drew
his sword, without staying for his Lord’s commission, and smote off a servant’s
ear. To this head I may refer credulity or over-hasty belief, as being often
a sin of infirmity and pertaining only to the mind. To the same head may
be referred over-great carefulness or anxiety in respect of worldly things.
Martha, a very good woman in the main, was yet careful and cumbered about
many things more than she should have been; and she received a gentle
rebuke for it from our Blessed Lord. 2. Many are our sins of infirmity in
speech. Our greatest comfort is that several of them may pass for frailties
only; and happy will it be for us if we go no farther. I am persuaded that
even Peter’s denial of his Lord was rather weak than wilful; he was surprised
into it, had forgot himself, and had not yet time to recollect. I should be
willing to hope that hasty, heedless swearing, or taking God’s name in vain, in
those who have unhappily got a habit of it from their childhood, may be but a
sin of infirmity for some time ; but to such as perceive it, and continue it, and
use not all proper means and care to get the better of it, and to break the
evil habit, to them it is wilful and deadly sin. Telling of lies I do not reckon
among the sins of infirmity. It is, generally at least, a voluntary chosen thing.
But varying a little from strict truth, or adding to it, as is sometimes done,
undesignedly, hastily, forgetfully, in the making a report, if it be in things
of slight consequence, that may be numbered among human frailties. Angry
and passionate speeches may mostly fall under the head of infirmities; but


031


CHAP. XIv. “HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
a


bitter invectives, and irritating, injurious reflexions, made in cold blood, made
deliberately, are without excuse. It would be endless to enumerate all the
offences of the tongue which men are liable to. It is a difficult matter to
talk much and well. Great talkers offend often, and they who say the least
are generally the most innocent. Yet there may be a fault sometimes in being
too reserved, shy, and silent—-as when a man neglects to exhort or reprove his
neighbour as occasions offer, or when he can patiently sit by and hear the
name of God dishonoured or an innocent absent man abused without opening
his mouth in defence of either. Such reservedness, in some cases, may rise no
higher than a sin of infirmity; but for the most part we may more justly call
it a wilful neglect, betraying meanness of spirit at least, or something worse.
3. I come now to the most material article of all, which concerns our outward
actions. And here also we may offend two ways—either as neglecting to do
what we ought, or doing what we ought not. Sins of infirmity are mostly seen
in our manifold omissions and neglects, either forgetting what duties are
incumbent upon us or performing them but in part. Hard would be our
circumstances were we to give a strict account of all our omissions, or if much
the greater part of them were not kindly overlooked by an All-merciful God, as
pitiable frailties. Yet let not any man set light by omissions. Wilful omissions
of known duties are wilful and presumptuous sins; and there are some kinds
of omissions which will be always charged as wilful, and will be enough to
exclude us from the kingdom of heaven, particularly if we omit or neglect
to worship God or do good to man as our opportunities and abilities permit.
T come next to speak of sins of commission, the doing what we ought not to
do. Sins of this kind are mostly wilful; but some there are which may be
justly looked upon as sins of infirmity. Drunkenness in righteous Noah, once
only, might be a sin of infirmity. He was not aware of the effects of wine ;
he had not till then had experience of it; he was overtaken unawares, and
surprised into it. I know not whether the like favourable excuse may not be
admitted for others who may once unhappily fall into the like excess unawares.
But, generally speaking, as the world now stands, a man can scarce be surprised
into such excess or overtaken without his fault. Some have been weak enough
to plead human frailty even for crying and scandalous sins, such as fornication
or adultery or other sinful lusts. But all such pretences are vain. Sins of
that kind never are, never can be, committed without great degrees of wilfulness.
There are some other kinds of sins for which human infirmity is sometimes
pleaded, and with very little reason—acts of hostility, assaults, beating,
striking, wounding, and the like. Good men run sometimes into excessive
warmth and zeal in the discharge of a duty or execution of an office. They
may be guilty of indiscreet rigours, and push things too far—may be so afraid
of not doing enough that they will even overdo, and be too officious or too
severe, exceeding the bounds of Christian prudence, and doing hurt when they
intended good. These and other the like indiscretions of good men are
properly sins of infirmity, owing to inadvertency or surprise or to some natural
weakness adhering to their particular temper, complexion, and constitution.

Il. How far our spiritual state or condition is affected by the sins of this
kind.—They do not exclude a man from the kingdom of heaven; they do not
put him out of a state of grace, or out of favour with Almighty God. ‘his
may be proved several ways, both from Scripture texts and from the reason of
the thing itself. 1. There are two or three special texts of Scripture which
number up and recite such particular sins as will most certainly, if not repented
of, exclude the offenders from the kingdom of heaven (see 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10;
Gal. v. 19-21; Matt. xxv. 41-43). Sins of mere, infirmity are not the sins
which either St. Paul or our Blessed Lord refer to as excluding men from


532


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





the kingdom of heaven. They are quite of another kind from those now
mentioned ; and therefore they do not exclude the person from a state of grace,
but are consistent with the love of God and the love of one’s neighbour, and so
are not mortal or damning sins. They are the spots of God’s children, such as
the best of men are not entirely free from, though they are not imputed to
them. 2. There is the greatest reason and equity imaginable here shewn in
making such distinctions between sins of infirmity and deliberate sins; because
this is estimating of men according to their sincerity, and according to the turn
of their hearts, of which God alone is the unerring Judge, and which He has
chiefly respect to; because indeed the heart is the principal thing—the mind
is the man.

III. What kind of conduct or management on our part is prudent or
proper in regard to them.—1. It concerns us to repent of them, that is, to express
our sorrow and contrition for them, and to humble ourselves before God on
the account of them. That they are sins is supposed, though not wilful or
deliberate sins; and as they are sins, they will stand in need of pardon; and
if they need pardon, they will also require repentance, which is the condition
on which pardon is promised, and by means of which it will be given. But
then the question is, ‘‘ What kind of repentance?” First, a general repentance
may suffice. We need not, we cannot be particular in all our sins of infirmity.
Who can tell how oft he offendeth in this kind? We are not aware perhaps
of one half or a tenth part of our failures, and therefore cannot particularly
repent of them. And even those which we have been aware of, while fresh
and new, yet easily slip out of our memories; and the very number of them,
as they happen daily or hourly, is much too great to be distinctly considered
or retained. But there is a farther difference between the repentance proper
to wilful sins and the repentance required for human frailties. A man must
not be content merely to confess and to declare his sorrow for wilful sins, but
he must renounce and forsake them, and never rest satisfied till he has divested
himself of them. But as to sins of infirmity the case is different. They are
such as a good man may be content to live with and die with, and that
because he never can entirely remove them from him. They are inseparable
from flesh and blood, are interwoven into our very frame, and are as natural
and necessary, in some degree at least, as it is to be weak or frail, unthinking
or unobserving ; or as it is to be liable to forgetfulness, fatigue, weariness, and
the like. 2. We should farther add our devout prayers to God, to make us
every day less and less liable to them, and not to impute them. The greater
perfection we attain to, the more secure are we against falling back; and not
only so, but we thereby become qualified for a higher and nobler reward.
3. We must use our best endeavours along with our prayers, to guard as much
as possibly we can even against those smaller sins, lest they should lead to
greater.—Archdeacon Waterland.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 32. Retirement for prayer—An prayer. He prays retired, not out


afflicted heart ought to shut itself up
from men by retirement, and to open
itself to God by prayer. Christ, as
the Good Shepherd, does that first
Himself which He enjoins His sheep
to do, preventing temptations by


of any necessity, but both out of
obedience to His Father, who had
prescribed this to Him as well as all
the rest, and out of love towards us,
whom He would instruct, edify, and
redeem by this means.—P. Quesnel.


533





CHAP. XIV.
Vers. 33-36. Christ's agony im
Gethsemane was consistent with—


1, The affection of God towards Him.
He suffered as the Substitute of guilty
man (2 Cor. v. 21)—according to the
Divine plan (John v. 22)—with satis-
faction to God (John x. 17). 2. Volun-
tary consecration. (1) Christ was
equal with God, and therefore could
not be coerced. (2) Christ was loved
by God, and therefore would not be
coerced. (3) Christ was devoted to
God, and therefore needed not to be
coerced. It was not the nails but
His love that bound Him to the Cross.
He died when He could have lived.
3. Purity of character. He did not
suffer because He sinned. (1) Men
testified to His purity. Judas, Pilate,
Peter. (2) Fiends testified to His
purity. “ Holy One of God.” (3) God
testified to His purity. “ Well pleased.”
4, Consciousness of power to overcome
opposition. ‘The prince of this world
shall be cast out.” “ And I, if I be
lifted up,” ete. “It is finished.” (1) He
was fully conscious of the arduousness
of His work. (2) He experienced the
terrible penalties of His work. (3) He
never shrank from the consequences
of His work. (4) He finally accom-
plished the design of His work.—
B. D. Johns.

Christ's agony of sowl on account of
sin.—He was, so to speak, mentally
robing Himself for the great sacrifice ;
He was robing, He was folding round
His sinless manhood, He was laying
upon a sinless soul the sins of a guilty
world. To us, indeed, the burden of
sin is as natural almost as the clothes
we wear; it sits on us as lightly, and
for long tracks of life, it may be, we
think nothing at all about it; but
to Him the touch which we take so
easily was an agony even in its lightest
form. And when we consider the
weight and magnitude, the subtle
penetrating poison, the dreadful impor-
tunity of the burden which He willed
to bear, when we think of that festering
accumulation of ages, the sins of the
men before the Flood, the sins of Egypt
and of Babylon, the sins of Sodom,


534


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


of Moab, of Philistia, of Tyre, the
sins of Imperial Rome, of barbarous
heathendom, and then, worse than
these, the sins of Israel—-sins of dis-
obedience and stubbornness, sins of
scorn and ingratitude, sins of cruelty
and hypocrisy—when we think of all
that was suggested to the mind of the
Son of David as He looked up from
the mount there in Gethsemane, and
beheld in the moonlight the eastern
wall of the city which was rejecting
Him, on the hill over against the very
spot where He knelt—when we recall
that which touches us more nearly,
the sins of redeemed Christendom,
and Christian Churches, of Christian
nations, of individual Christians— your
sins and mine, our sins against light
and knowledge, our sins against grace,
our sins against merciful warnings
and wholesome fears, all of them
most intimately present to Him,—can
we wonder that His bodily nature
gave way, that His passion seemed
to have been upon Him before its
time, and that His sweat was, as it
were, great drops of blood falling to
the ground ?—Canon Liddon.

Christ in Gethsemane an example to
us.—It is not at all times that even
good Christians can enter into the
meaning of this solemn scene; but
there are mental trials which interpret
it to us, and which, in turn, are by us,
if we will, transfigured into heavenly
blessings. 1. There is the inward
conflict which often precedes our under-
taking hard or unwelcome duty or
sacrifice; there is no doubt of the
obligation, and the spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak. The eye
measures the effort which is required,
the length and degree of endurance
which must be attempted ere the work
is really done ; and as the eye traverses
the field before it, all the quick sensi-
bilities of feeling start up and rehearse
their past by anticipation, and cling
to and clog and embarrass the will—
the will already, perhaps, sufficiently
sluggish or reluctant—that they may
hold it back from the road of duty.
Ah! struggles such as this between


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. XIV.


Ue a eR a EE ee


inclination and duty may be at times
sorrow for the soul even unto death.
When they come on you, brace your-
selves by watching, by praying with
Jesus in Gethsemane, that you may
learn to say after Him, “Not my
will but Thine be done.” 2. Then
there are forms of doubt respecting
God’s goodness and providence which
are a great trouble at times to excellent
Christians. There are, of course,
obvious sources of relief for this
calamity— wise books, thoughtful
friends; but the best remedy is to
kneel in spirit side by side with Jesus
in Gethsemane. It is a prayer such
as was His prayer, which struggles
on under a darkened heaven into the
light beyond. 3. And then, quite dis-
tinct from doubt, there is a desolateness
of the soul, which, for long intervals
of time, sometimes makes God’s service
distasteful even to the best Christians.
They who experience it can but kneel
in their Gethsemane with that oft-
repeated prayer, “Oh, my Father, let
this cup pass from me; nevertheless,
aot what I will, but what Thou wilt.”
4. Lastly, there is the approach of
death, which may come upon us sud-
denly as a thief in the night, but may
be also ushered in, as it generally is,
by a preface of weakening health and
lingering sickness. “I was sitting
at luncheon,” said one of the best of
Christ’s servants in this generation,
“and I suddenly felt as I never did
before. I felt that something had
given way. I knew what it meant,
what it must mean. I went up into
my room; I prayed God that He
would enable me to bear what I
knew was before me, and would at
the last receive me, for His dear Son’s
sake.” It was the close of a life as
bright as it was beautiful, only there
was much to leave behind, warm and
affectionate friends, and an abundance
of those highest satisfactions which
come with constant and unselfish
occupation ; but it was the summons
to another world, and, as such, it was
obeyed. Death is awful, and that
first gaze at the break up of all that


we have hitherto called life must ever
have about it a touch of agony; and
yet if Jesus in Gethsemane is our
Shepherd, surely we should lack
nothing. “Yea, though we walk
through the valley of the shadow of
death, we shall fear no eyil,” for
He is with us who has gone before,
His rod and His staff comfort us.—
Ibid.

Comfort to us from Christ's agony.
—In our reverential contemplation of
Christ’s human perfections we are apt
to overlook the important fact that
they were not the result even of His
original human nature left to itself,
but as it was influenced and perfected
by the same holy comfort which He
has imparted to all His disciples.
“‘ He was made in all things like unto
us, sin only excepted.” The tears
which fell on the grave of Lazarus
flowed from the same source out of
which in unregenerate man springs
weak repining or sullen discontent ;
his unwearied industry in “doing
good” was but that which the miser
or the ambitious man employs to other
ends; and the calm fortitude with
which He endured insult, pain, and
death was formed out of the very same
qualities which, ungoverned and mis-
directed, brought the guilty robber toa
cross by His side. The materials were
all human and our own, the workman-
ship alone Divine. Andis the Lord’s
arm shortened ? Will not the same God
that worketh in us also enable us like
Him perfectly to will and to do of His
good pleasure, if only the same mind
be in us that was in Christ Jesus? It
is true, indeed, that to us the Holy
Spirit is given by measure; still that
measure is a measure of grace sufficient
for us.—S. Hinds.

Christ's craving for sympathy.—
Tender touch of nature to make Him
with the whole world kin. In any great
trial this craving of companionship, if
no more ; if no hand can help nor voice
can soothe, yet a motionless, silent
companionship; who is a stranger to
the desire? It begins in childhood,
when two infants will walk hand in


535


CHAP. XIV.


iia


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





hand “in the dark” where neither
would go alone. Do these two inno-
cents calculate that the twain are
more defensible against “the giant”
than one? By no means. It is the
embryo of that wordless hunger of the
soul, developing as life broadens, and
finding its most exalted manifestation
in Gethsemane. Invalids, who. have
counted the strokes of midnight wake-
ful hours, conjured by the wall-flashes
and flickers of dim lamps, and need
no other service, cry out, ‘“ Father !
Mother! Someone!” It is nothing,
only to hear you answer that you
are there. Then we sit by them, long
and patiently, perhaps dozing disciple-
like as we hold their hands, saying and
doing nothing, but being—near them.
Jesus knew, as the crisis approached,
that the acme of sorrow must ever be
met in solitude; but up to the outer
vestibule of that solitude He brought
the eight disciples, and to the last
inner door He brought the three.
Even when He must be alone, in
conflict and victory, He yet emerges
twice to feel the helpfulness of His
beloved near Him. He wants our
sympathy still in His warfare with
sin on the earth. He who so wanted
the society of men will have His own
with Him where He is, at last and
for ever.—L. J. Haynes.


Ver. 35. Secret prayer.—The prayer
of Jesus Christ was secret. He had
withdrawn Himself from His disciples.
They were not able to bear the sight of
such a conflict. Even at this distant
period we read of it with painful emo-
tions. The transactions of the soul
with God demand secrecy. A deeper
humiliation may become us before God
than it would be proper for any about
us to witness. We do well, therefore,
to seek opportunities of retirement, and
should reserve large portions of our
time for the purpose of drawing nigh
to God.—0. A. Jeary.

“ Hell on the grownd.’—With His
face to the earth—a posture betoken-
ing far more abasement and earnest-
ness than even kneeling. That the


36


Son of God should have prayed in
such a posture teaches us the fear-
ful darkness of that shadow of death
which He had resolved to pass through
on our account; that the Son of God
should have prayed in such a posture
teaches us that we must worship God
with the worship of the body. What
a reproof to those who would fain
make a shew of prayer, sitting at ease,
to see the Holy One of God prostrated

on the ground!—M/, FP’. Sadler. |


Ver. 36. Submission to the will of
God.—There is no Christian grace —
which we have oftener occasion to
exercise than that of an humble and
patient submission to the will of God.
1. There are few moments of our lives —
in which we are not either under the ©
pressure of some evil which lies heavy.
upon our minds, or under the appre-
hension of some grievous calamity
which hangs over our heads and is
ready to fall down upon us. In both
these cases an entire resignation to the
good pleasure of God is necessary, that
we should without repining bear
whatever He hath been pleased to
inflict, and that we should have our
minds well prepared to endure what-
ever He in His infinite wisdom shall
think expedient farther to lay upon us.
2. Those who have taken the greatest
care to arm themselves against the
time of conflict find it sometimes
difficult enough to stand their ground
and to come off conquerors in the day
of battle ; but those who have in their
prosperous state made no provision
against adversity, those who fall into
the midst of troubles defenceless and
unarmed, those who are then to learn
the hard duty of submission when
they are’ called to practise it, will be
much more at a loss how to bear up
against evils unforeseen and unpro- —
vided against, and how to demean
themselves in the needful time of
trouble. 3. The difficulties with which
we are to encounter during our
pilgrimage in this world are very


many and very great, so many that


we may not hope by any foresight to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





escape them all, and some of them so
great that without due preparation
we cannot expect to be patient under
them. Liable we are to be attacked
with troubles of mind and with pains
of body, with losses of our nearest and
dearest friends, with the ruin of our
estates, and with the blastings of our
reputations : these we are obnoxious to
in our own persons, and in the persons
of those who are so closely tied to us
by blood or by friendship, by affection
or by interest, that what happens to
them touches us as nearly and afflicts
us as sensibly as what happens to our-
selves. 4. Upon all these occasions
which do so frequently occur, which
are now, it is to be feared, present to
many of us, and which to those who
may think them at a very great
distance may probably be much nearer
than they imagine, submission to the
will of God is a duty which we are
called to exercise, and which therefore
it concerns us to be well acquainted
with and to be well prepared for.—
Bishop Smalridge.

‘* Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from Me,” was the first thought
that human frailty suggested even
to our Blessed Saviour Himself; and
therefore it cannot be blameworthy in
us if upon the first hasty view of any
great calamity ready to overtake us
we do in the like manner desire and
beg that we may escape it; but when
we have time to consider and deliberate,
we must bring our natural desires
under a strict discipline, and curb them
with the same restraint as Christ did :
‘Nevertheless, not what I will, but
what Thou wilt.”—Jbid.

Christ's two wishes.—Christ is not
two Christs, but one; yet has He two
wishes—a general wish, and a particu-
lar wish. His particular wish is to
escape this suffering, His general
wish that God’s will be done. The
one is the wish for His own sake,
the other the wish for God’s sake.
The one is a temporary wish, the
other an enduring wish.’ If Christ
knew not before He prayed what was
possible and what impossible, how


CHAP. XIV.


much less likely is it that we should
know ?—Jas. Lonsdale.

Obedience learnt by suffering.—No
one has ever learned obedience to the
will of God, and joy in that obedience,
except through suffering. He who
endures because he must suffers only
as a servant. He who endures only
because he hopes to gain something by
it is not a Christian at all. Christ’s
submission is a lesson of utter un-
selfishness. “God has good ends in
view for you,” we say, to console the
sufferer. But God had ends in view
in Christ’s sufferings, not for His Son,
but for His Son’s enemies. He only
has learned to suffer as a son who has
found that the will of God is sweet
even when it involves what is in itself
bitter. To suffer gladly because it is
our Father’s will is to have learned
obedience. When that is learned, the
Christian need not wait for great
afflictions, but finds in every little
trial, every disappointment, each daily
cross and care, a discipline to bring
him into richer revelations of sonship
with God.


Ver. 37. “ Couldest not thou watch
one hour ?”—Probably many of us
would be discomposed by an arith-
metical estimate of our communion
with God. It might reveal to us the
secret of much of our apathy in prayer,
because it might disclose how little we
desire to be alone with God. We
might learn from such a computation
that Augustine’s idea of prayer as
“the measure of love” is not very
flattering to us. We do not grudge
time given to a privilege which we
love. Why should we expect to enjoy
a duty which we have no time to
enjoy? Do we enjoy anything which
we do in a hurry? Enjoyment pre-
supposes something of mental leisure.
How often do we say of a pleasure,
“‘T wanted more time to enjoy it to
my heart’s content.” But of all em-
ployments none can be more dependent
on “time for it” than stated prayer.
Fugitive acts of devotion, to be of
high value, must be sustained by other


537


CHAP, XIV.


’ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ana naomi aceon me eer


approaches to God, deliberate, pre-
meditated, regular, which shall be to
those acts like the abutments of a
suspension bridge to the arch that
spans the stream. It will never do to
be in desperate haste in laying such
foundations. This thoughtful duty,
this spiritual privilege, this foretaste
of incorporeal life, this communion
with an unseen Friend—can you expect
to enjoy it as you would a repartee or
a dance 2—“ The Still Howr.”


Ver. 38. Watching and prayer.—lf
we must watch and pray, to prevent
and withstand temptation, let us not
be surprised that so many enter into
it and fall thereby: it is for no other
reason but because there are very few
who watch and pray in that manner
and with that constancy which they
ought. Prayer is necessary in order
to watch, and watchfulness in order to
pray; and both the one and the other
are so to secure us from temptation.
Peter was deficient in vigilance be-
cause he was so in prayer ; and through
the neglect of both he fell, being
overcome by the fear of death and the
love of life.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 39. The simplicity and plain-
ness of Christ in His prayers is an
important lesson, and of great use and
advantage. A Christian who prays
to God is not an orator who would
persuade by his eloquence, but a
beggar who would move to compassion
by his poverty and humility. These


speak plainly and without ornament. —
And Jesus speaks thus to God because
He has clothed Himself with our
humility and poverty.—JIbid.
Trouble—great, searching, over-
whelming trouble—has no varied dic-
tion. Sorrow has but few words.
These are syllabled by lips that are
pale and quivering. There isa terrible
concentration in grief. The soul that
groans under its pressure is swathed
in darkness, even amid the splendour
of high noon, The light is gone.
The stars glitter no more. The voices
of the loving are unheard. Oh the
frightful abstraction of woe !—Dean


Lefroy.


Vers. 41, 42. The past and the
futwre-—He had warned. the disciples
in vain to watch and pray, and now it
was too late for that—all was over ;
the opportinity had slipped away
from them and was buried in the past,
so that, as far as this duty went, they
might sleep on, for it must remain for
ever undone. But then He turned
away at once from this contemplation
of the unchangeable, and pointing
onward to present duty He said,
“Rise, let us be going.” The one
thing was beyond their control, and
though they might mourn they could
not alter it; there would be no
answer to their endeavours but ‘ Too
late,” so that it behoved them now
to turn at once to the courses which
were still open.—J. Percival, LL.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 43—52.
(PARALLELS: Marr. xxvi. 47-56; Luke xxii. 47-53; Joun xviii. 1-11.)


The captive Christ and the circle round Him.—A comparison of the first three
Gospels in this section shews a degree of similarity, often verbal, which is best
accounted for by supposing that a common (oral) “ gospel,” which had become
traditionally fixed by frequent and long repetition, underlies them all. Mark's
account is briefest, and grasps with sure instinct the essential points; but, even
in his brevity, he pauses to tell of the young man who so nearly shared the
Lord’s apprehension. The canvas is narrow and crowded; but we may see
unity in the picture, if we regard as the central fact the sacrilegious seizure of
Jesus, and the other incidents and persons as grouped round it and Him, and
reflecting various moods of men’s feelings towards Him.


538


en


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





I. The avowed and hypocritical enemies of Incarnate Love.— Again we have
Mark’s favourite “ straightway,” so frequent in the beginning of the Gospel, and
occurring twice here, vividly painting both the sudden inburst of the crowd
which interrupted Christ’s words and broke the holy silence of the garden, and
J udas’ swift kiss. The passionless narrative tells the criminal and his crime
with unsparing, unmoved tones, which have caught some echo beforehand of the
Judge’s voice. To name the sinner, and to state without cloak or periphrasis
what his deed really was, is condemnation enough. Which of us could stand
it? Judas was foremost of the crowd. That the black depths of his spirit
were agitated is plain from two things—the quick kiss, and the nauseous
repetition of it. ‘“Straightway ... he kissed Him much.” Probably the
swiftness and vehemence, so graphically expressed by these two touches, were .
due not only to fear lest Christ should escape, and to hypocrisy over-acting its
part, but reveal a struggle with conscience and ancient affection, and a fierce
determination to do the thing and have it over. The very extravagances of evil
betray the divided and stormy spirit of the doer. That traitor’s kiss has
become a symbol for all treachery cloaked in the garb of affection. Its lessons
and warnings are obvious ; but this other may be added—that such audacity and
nauseousness of hypocrisy is not reached at a leap, but presupposes long under-
ground tunnels of insincere discipleship, through which a man has burrowed,
unseen by others, and perhaps unsuspected by himself. Much hypocrisy of the
unconscious sort precedes the deliberate and conscious. How much less criminal
and disgusting was the rude crowd at Judas’ heels! Most of them were mere
passive tools. Half-ignorant hatred, which had had ample opportunities of
becoming knowledge and love, offended formalism, blind obedience to ecclesias-
tical superiors, the dislike of goodness—these impelled the rabble who burst into
the Garden of Gethsemane.

II. Incarnate Love bound and patient.—“ They laid hands on Him.” That was
the first stage in outrage—the quick stretching of many hands to secure the
unresisting Prisoner. They “‘ took Him,” or, as perhaps we might better render,
“They held Him fast,” as would have been done with any prisoner. Surely
the quietest way of telling that stupendous fact is the best! It is easy to
exclaim, and, after the fashion of some popular writers of Lives of Christ, to
paint fancy pictures. It is better to be sparing of words, like Mark, and
silently to meditate on the patient long-suffering of the love which submitted to
these indignities, and on the blindness which had no welcome but this for God
manifest in the flesh. Both are in full operation to-day, and the germs of the
latter are in us all. Mark confines himself to that one of Christ’s sayings which
sets in the clearest light His innocence and meek submissiveness. With all its
calmness and patience, it is majestic and authoritative, and sounds as if spoken
from a height far above the hubbub. Its question is not only an assertion of
His innocence, and therefore of His capto.s’ guilt, but also declares the impotence
of force as against Him: “ Swords and staves to take Me!” All that parade
of arms was out of place, for He was no evil-doer; needless, for He did not
resist ; and powerless, unless He chose to let them prevail. The second clause
of Christ’s remonstrance appeals to their knowledge of Him and His words, and
to their attitude towards Him. He would have them ask, “ Why this change
in us, since He is the same?” Did He deserve to be hailed as King a few short
hours ago? How, then, before the palm branches are withered, can He deserve
rude hands? The third clause rises beyond all notice of the human agents, and
soars to the Divine purpose which wrought itself out through them. That
Divine purpose does not make them guiltless, but it makes Jesus submissive.
We, too, should train ourselves to see the hand that moves the pieces and to
make God’s will our will, as becomes sons. Then Christ’s calm will be ours,


539





CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
ae ET Pee Ticks Weer Oe Ota WAN ite BG ONE eS


and, ceasing from self and conscious of God everywhere and yielding our wills,
which are the self of ourselves, to Him, we shall enter into rest.

III. Rash love defending its Lord with wrong weapons.—Peter may have
felt that he must do something to vindicate his recent boasting, and, with his
usual headlong haste, stops neither to ask what good his sword is likely to do,
nor to pick his man and take deliberte aim at him. If swords were to be used,
they should do something more effectual than hacking off a poor servant's ear.
Christ and His cause are to be defended by other weapons. Christian heroism
endures, and does not smite. Not only swords, but bitter words, which wound
worse than they, are forbidden to Christ’s soldier. We are ever being tempted
to fight Christ’s battles with the world’s weapons; and many a “ defender of
_ the faith” in later days, perhaps even in this very enlightened day, has repeated
Peter’s fault with less excuse than he, and with very little of either his courage
or his love.

IV. Cowardly love forsaking its Lord. They all forsook Him, and fled.”
And who will venture to say that he would not have done so too? ‘The tree
that can stand such a blast must have deep roots. Their flight may teach us to
place little reliance on our emotions, however genuine and deep, and to look for
the security of our continual adherence to Christ—not to our fluctuating feelings,
but to His steadfast love.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Vers. 51, 52. The young man in the linen cloth—As Jesus was being led a
prisoner through the streets of Jerusalem to the palace of Caiaphas, a certain
youth, awakened probably by the uproar they made, sprang from his bed, seized
the first wrapper that came to hand, and, hastily folding himself in it, ran out
into the moonlight, to learn the cause of the disturbance. As he ran after and
caught up the retiring group of officers, he saw they had a prisoner in their
midst, and in tke prisoner he recognised Jesus of Nazareth, the rabbi to whom
no doubt he had listened with delight as He taught in the Temple and in the
streets ; for, we are told, he was following Him, not simply following the crowd.
In Him his interest is so great, so obvious, that it compels him to remonstrate
with the officers who had arrested Him, or to address words of comfort and hope
to their Prisoner. For the officers, irritated by his too obvious sympathy with
Jesus, lay hold upon him, and are about to arrest him asa follower of the Galilean
Rabbi. But for this the young man is not prepared. He slips out of the linen
robe, which they have grasped, and runs back, naked, to the house from which
but a few moments before he had run out.

I. In all probability the young man was St. Mark himself, the writer of this
Gospel.—l. At least one other of the Evangelists, 8t. John, whenihe has to speak
of himself, does not name himself, but speaks of himself in the indefinite way in
which “a certain young man” is here introduced to us. So that, if the young
man were Mark, it might well be that ne would not name himself, but give some
such indefinite allusion to himself as is here employed. 2. What is there in this
incident to warrant, or even to account for, its insertion into the narrative,
unless it be a personal interest 2 It is mentioned in no one of the other Gospels.
It has no direct bearing on the story of Christ’s arrest and trial. If Mark
himself was the young man that sprang up in the dead of night, and saw Jesus
led by the officers to be tried by the high priest, we can understand with what
profound interest he would afterward recall every detail of that incident, and
how gladly, when he wrote his Gospel, he would connect himself, though in the
most modest and unobtrusive way, with that supreme crisis in the history of his
Lord and ours. Whereas, on any other hypothesis, supposing the young man
to have been any one but himself, we can see no sufficient reason why he should
pause to narrate so trifling an event. 3. The minute details crowded into this

540





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.


brief sentence look as if they could only be drawn from personal recollection.
As we read it, if at least we read with an alert imagination, we can see the
young man lying on his pallet ; we can hear the brawl in the street that awakes
him 3 we see him start up and snatch at the first covering that comes to hand,
cast it hastily about him, run out into the moonlit street, recognise Jesus, and
interfere impulsively with the officers in the execution of their duty ; we see
him roused to a sense of his danger as they lay rough hands upon him, and run
away, leaving the costly linen robe in their hands. I have sometimes wondered
whether there was any prophetic symbolism in the seeming accident that the
young man should wrap himself in a sindon. The Lord Jesus was on His way
to the Cross and the grave, though as yet no official sentence had been pronounced
against Him. Was this fine linen web, this costly Indian fabric, which came so
strangely and unexpectedly into the hands of His guard, an omen of what that
sentence would be? Any Jew would have set the web aside to be a winding-
sheet. Is the winding-sheet brought into the sacred narrative to indicate that
Jesus was now about to die? 4. The mother of Mark, as we learn from Acts
xii. 12, had a house in Jerusalem; and it has been generally held that St. Mark
was a native of this city, and dwelt in it until he became a missionary of the
Cross: so that, unlike most of the disciples\and friends of Jesus, he would be
living in Jerusalem, and perhaps in that very street through which Jesus was
led on the night of His betrayal. From the fact, moreover, that Mark’s mother
had a house of her own in the metropolis, and that this house was spacious
enough to be the habitual resort of the primitive Church, we infer that she was
a woman of some wealth and consideration—a woman, therefore, in whose house
a costly Indian fabric, such as the young man cast about him, might well lie
ready to his hand. 5. The impulsive character of this young man—soon hot,
soon cold, ready to dare all risks at one moment that he may follow Jesus, and
ready at the next moment to abandon his sole and costly garment that he may
escape the hands of the officers—accords entirely with what we know of the
character of Mark as depicted by St. Luke.

II. Why was this incident recorded? What is there in it for us?—l. It
teaches us at least this lesson: that Christ has room in His service, and a
discipline, for warm and impulsive natures ; that even for these He can find
some duty to discharge, some function to fulfil. St. Mark was a man of this
kind—a man who was apt to begin to build without counting the cost. He
was of an eager, sensitive, and impressible temperament, as the graphic touches
which abound in his Gospel indicate; but, like most persons of this sensitive,
impulsive temperament, he was fickle and unsteadfast. Probably his imagina-
tion was very keen and active, as in such cases it often is, and painted the
beauty and heroism of a certain line of conduct very brightly, but painted just
as darkly the terrors of the conflict which to pursue such a line of conduct
would involve. And thus he would be easily moved to undertake enterprises
which he was not strong enough to carry through. Even when he had grown
older and was an avowed servant of Christ, Mark betrayed the same infirmity,
the same unsteadfast poise of spirit between conflicting impulses, the same
sensitive apprehension of the lions that lurk in the path of devotion to any
great cause. He started with Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary
journey, just as he rose from his bed to follow Christ to the hall of judgment
through the streets of Jerusalem; but just as he forsook Christ when the
officers laid their rude grasp on Him, so also he abandoned Paul and Barnabas
before their work was well begun (Acts xiii. 13). His motive for abandoning ©
them was the very motive which led him to abandon Christ—the fear of harm
and loss. Paul and Barnabas were about to plunge into the wild mountains of
Asia Minor, to encounter “perils of rivers and perils of robbers” among the

o41


cHaP. x1v. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


>


lawless and marauding highland clans. Mark did not like the prospect. And
so, just as they were about to face their gravest perils, and to win their greatest
successes, he forsook them—deserted them, as St. Paul indignantly maintained—
and returned to his mother’s comfortable house in Jerusalem. Yet even for
this impulsive and inconstant man there was not only room but an appropriate
discipline in the service of Christ. In his later epistles St. Paul speaks of Mark
as “a fellow-worker in the kingdom of God,” and as “a comfort to himself” ;
and in his very last letter he describes him as being “ profitable to him in the
ministry.” We may be sure, therefore, that this man, once so impulsive, so
unreliable, so driven by contrary winds and tossed, became, by the teaching and
grace of Christ, a brave and single-hearted servant of the Lord whose service
he had more than once abandoned. 2. As we recall the past, we cannot but
‘ see that our lives have not flowed on in a single steady current to an eternal
goal; that they have been broken into many, and even into adverse, currents,
some flowing in one direction, some in another, most of them losing themselves
in mere marshes and bogs, instead of carrying health and fertility along their
appointed course. We are conscious that unity has been wanting to our lives,
so that they will not have left one, and that a strong and good, impression on
the world, but many broken and even contradictory impressions. Our influence,
as we readily acknowledge, has not been wholly good; it has not always helped
to foster all the good growths springing up around us; it has told almost as
often and as much for evil as for good. We feel that, like St. Mark, we have
again and again abandoned the Master we profess and wish to serve. And
at times we lose all hope of ever reaching that constant mind, that settled and
steadfast loyalty to Him, that entire devotion to His service, which yet we long
to reach, without which, should we fail to reach it, we are sure that we cannot
know any true happiness or peace. At such times as these it will give us new
heart to remember that even for Mark there was reserved a place in the
service of Christ, and a discipline which enabled him to fill that place. For the
Master will deal with us as He dealt with him. If we have any true love for
Him, any sincere desire to live to Him, He will teach us by our very errors,
and train us by our very failures, and make our dissatisfaction with ourselves a
spur to a more constant and cheerful obedience.—S. Cox, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 43. Who are like Judas to-day ?
—Those who know their duty, feel the
power of the truth, see the worth of
Christ, recognise the privilege of the


nothing but violence, rebellion, and
treason.—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 44, 45. The kiss of treachery.


Christian life, and yet turn their back
on all this and give themselves up as
the slaves of their passions. Knowing
perfectly the wrong they do, they do
not hesitate to injure Christ for what
they consider their advantage.

A picture of apostates—We ses here
but too lively a picture of apostates,
who have no sooner deserted from the
Church but they persecute it, put
themselves at the head of conspiracies
against the higher powers. and breathe


542


—The kiss was a customary expression
of mingled affection and reverence on
the part of the disciples when they
met their Master. To suppose that
Judas deliberately selected an action
which was as remote as possible from
his then true feelings is an unnecessary
supposition. It is more true to human
nature to suppose that he endeavoured
to appease whatever there may have
been in the way of lingering protest
in his conscience by an act of formal


ae
wri


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIV,





reverence that was dictated to him by
long habit, and that served to veil
from himself the full enormity of his
crime at the moment of his doing it.
In like manner the brigands in the
south of Europe have been known to
accompany deeds of thefts and deeds
of blood with previous ejaculations
whether of piety or superstition, and
cases have been heard farther north
of pickpockets when the thief and his
victim have been kneeling side by side
in a church or sitting side by side in
a meeting-house. In these instances
religion may be employed not simply
as a blind to an immoral act, but as a
sort of salve to a protesting conscience.
The passing thrill of emotion seems to
do something towards reducing the
magnitude of the crime which accom-
panies it. The case of Judas has
become a proverb for all those pro-
ceedings whereby, under the semblance
of outward reverence for religion or of
devotion to its interests, its substance
or its reality is betrayed. —- Canon
Liddon.

The hardihood of evil—wNote: 1.
The malignant influence of an evil
leader. 2. The awful change in
Judas. He might have been the
leader of the twelve, of the holy com-
pany of disciples, and sinks to be
the leader of this vile crew. 3. The
hardihood of evil in kissing Christ :
such resolute effrontery, such presump-
tuous invasion of that face before
which earth and heaven shall flee
away! 4, The infinite meekness of
Christ. He requires us to endure the
blow of an enemy. He endures the
loathsome kiss. 5. As their number
betrayed their sense of Christ’s great-
ness, so this kiss proclaims Him
worthy of allegiance and of love.
6. The worst opponents of Christ are
still those who betray with a kiss—
such as those who oppose His claims
while affecting to revere His character,
and deny His Saviourship while ac-
knowledging the excellence of His
doctrine. 7. The depravity of human
nature. For these men are our
brothers. There is no sermon on the


need of repentance can be so convict-
ing as this narrative of what human
nature has actually done.—R. Glover.


Ver. 47. Worldly weapons.—In rela-
tion to the advancement of the Church
of Christ, worldly views, a worldly
temper, worldly methods, efforts to
secularise in order to popularise, how-
ever well meaning, are but the swing-
ing of swords, which, if unchecked,
would nullify Scripture and bar the
way of life to men. There is a law
in our members warring against the
law of our minds. As opportunity
offers it eagerly puts a sword in our
hands and commands the use of it. We
obey too often, to our own and others’
spiritual injury and the hindrance of
the sacred cause we represent and would
help.—Wm. M. Campbell.


Ver. 50. A bad deed by good men.—
The apprehension of Christ in the
garden was to the disciples a mystery.
It confounded them. In their ignor-
ance they were terrified, and deserted
Christ. It was not want of love, but
lack of courage. It was an eclipse, not
an extinction, of their faith.

I. The disciples deserted Christ
after promising not todoso?—1l. They
had promised after being warned.
‘“‘ Ye shall be offended because of Me,”
etc. Christ candidly spoke of suffering.
“To be forewarned is to be forearmed.”
2. They had promised independently
of each other. “If all men,” etc.
‘So said all His disciples.” 3. They
had promised whatever would be the
result. ‘Go with Thee to prison,” ete.

II. The disciples deserted Christ
when He was in difficulties.—1. The
instability of the best human friend-
ship. 2. The terribleness of Christ’s
sufferings. 3. The necessity of Chris-
tians counting the cost.

III. The disciples deserted Christ,
though He suffered in their cause.—
This made them guilty of—1. Ingrati-
tude. 2. Discouragement. 3. Cowardice,

IV. The disciples deserted Christ,
but He remained steadfast.—l. The
faithfulness of Christ. 2. The inde-


943


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


aS
oq
= b
d





pendence of Christ. 3. The courage
of Christ. 4. The forbearance of
Christ.—B. D. Johns.

Christ forsaken by His disciples.—
I. How weak is the resolution of fallen
man!—Man, as originally formed by
God, was capable of carrying into
execution whatever his judgment ap-
proved or his will decreed; but it is
far otherwise with us in our present
state. How earnest are many, when
lying on a bed of sickness, to redeem
their time; and how determined, if
ever they should recover, to devote the
remainder of their lives toGod! Yet
they are no sooner restored to health
than they go back to their former
habits and companions, and leave to
a distant period the performance of
their vows. It is thus also with many
after an awakening discourse: they
see how vain it is to render unto God
a mere formal or hypocritical service,
and they resolve that henceforth they
will offer Him an undivided heart.
But their hearts are not steadfast in
the covenant which they make, and
their lives are, little else than a series
of reformations and declensions with-
out any solid improvement in the
Divine life.

II. What great evils are even good
men capable of committing !—What
ingratitude were these disciples guilty
of in forsaking their Lord, when their
presence might perhaps be of most
essential service to Him? The unbelief
also which they manifested on this occa-
sion was highly criminal, They had
been repeatedly told by Jesus that, after
His death and resurrection, He would
meet them in Galilee. This was equal
to a promise on His part that they
should be preserved. Moreover, at
the very time when He was appre-
hended, He said in their hearing, “If
ye seek Me, let these go their way.”
This ought to have been regarded by
them as a certain pledge of their
security. But so completely were they
overcome by fear that they could not
think of safety but in flight.

III. How desirable is it to have
just views of Jesus Christ !—Our Lord


544


forewarned His disciples that their
desertion of Him would originate in
their misconception of His character
and office: “ All ye shall be offended
in Me this night.” They had seen
their Divine Master controlling the
very elements themselves, from whence
they had concluded Him to be the true
Messiah. But now they behold Him
bound and led away by an armed band,
they begin to think that all their
former notions were false, and that the
expectations which they had founded
on His numerous miracles were delu-
sive. Jesus seemed to them now to
be like Samson after his locks were
cut: He was become weak as other
men. Hence they could no longer
repose any confidence in Him, but fled
like sheep without a shepherd. And
is it not thus with the ungodly ?
Wherefore do they despise Jesus, but
because they know neither His power
nor His grace ?—C. Simeon.


Vers. 51, 52. Impulse.—I. The ex-
citement of impulse.—l. In the best


cause. (1) Associated with the best
being. (2) Manifested in the best
way. “Followed.” Christ alone to
lead. (38) Fired by the best spirit.


Courage when all others fled. 2. By
an anonymous person. (1) The youth-
ful are the likeliest to be impulsive.
Passions are strong; curiosity eager ;
ambition powerful. (2) Mere im-
pulse is a very commonplace passion.
3. Abruptly displayed. (1) Thought-
less in regard toappearance. (2) Aim-
less in regard to design. (3) Useless
in regard to service.

II. The opposition to impulse.—
1. Association with Christ may entail
danger. Needful to count the cost.
2. Impulsive natures need extraordi-
nary prudence. 3. Those near to Christ
most hated by the enemy.

III. The collapse of impulse.—
1. Fear. (1) No true love to Christ.
(2) Depended on His own strength.
(3) No fear of God. (4) Love of life
strong. 2. Desertion. Soon ripe—
soon rotten. 3. Oblivion. Never
heard of again.—B. D. Johns.


it


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIV.





Christ's care for His disciples.—This
accident, which seems to be of no
consequence, serves to discover the
power of Christ, and His great care
and concern for His apostles. 1. He
thereby admonishes Peter that he
ought to fly from the occasion and
not expose himself to temptation,
these people having a design to seize


by this discovers the same danger to
the rest, and advises them likewise
to flee. 3. He shews them that it
was by His power that they escaped
the danger. 4. That even that person
who by their means is exposed thereto
escapes from it by the appointment
of Providence, and because He Himself
would suffer alone.—P. Quesnel.


all the disciples of our Lord. 2. He


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 53—72.
(Paratiets: Marr. xxvi. 57-75; Luxe xxii. 54-71; Joun xviii. 12-27.)


Jesus before the Sanhedrin.—The Reformer, who had detected and exposed the
prevailing abuses of Jehovah’s law; the Prophet, who had sternly rebuked the
inconsistencies, hypocrisies, and vices of the degenerate men who sat in Moses’
seat; the Son of David, who appeared as a mean carpenter’s son of despised
Nazareth ; the King of the Jews, who came only as a Prince of Peace, whose
servants would not fight against Roman dominion ; the Messiah, who had not
been anointed with oil of their choosing,—this Jesus was now in their power.

I. The pretended trial.-1. As the supreme court of judicature in Israel, the
Sanhedrin sat in judgment upon Jesus. But the men who were here assembled
as His judges had already conspired against Him as His foes, and had resolved to
arraign Him before the Roman governor as His prosecutors. This was enough
to stamp their proceedings with injustice. But in order to the complete justifica-
tion of truth, and for the warning of future ages, their guilt must become more
heinous and more evident. 2. They could not justify to their own people the
arraignment of a Jew before a Roman tribunal, unless that Jew should first
have been condemned and excommunicated by themselves as a breaker of the
Mosaic law. Hence the necessity for this pretended trial, 3. It was hurried
on with indecent haste, conducted in the dead of night, with the omission of
many legal forms: false evidence had been prepared by the judges themselves.
But as truth is always consistent, falsehood seldom or never, it pleased God to
confute these perjured witnesses by their own words. At length the high
priest, disconcerted by the palpable failure of his plot, and impatient to arrive
at his foregone conclusion, resorts to the unusual and unjust expedient of
convicting the Accused out of His own mouth (vers. 61-64).

Il. The evil principle which moved the Sanhedrin: party-spirit.—1l. The
Sanhedrin had lost the power of life and death; its ancient privileges, curtailed
under the Asmonean and Edomite dynasties, had been further diminished by the
Roman emperors; and with power and privilege the dignity and influence of
its members was all but gone. For the recovery of this influence, that is to say,
for their own selfish aggrandisement, and not for the honour of God and the
good of their country, these counsellors caballed, combined, conspired—formed #
party, and acted together as a party. 2. At one time they had looked with hope
to Jesus. They would have been glad to use Him as an instrument against the
hated Romans, and when He had served their turn to fling away the lowly
Nazarene as a broken tool. But Jesus would not join them. Nay, more, He
unveiled their abuses, unmasked their hypocrisies, confuted their pretexts,
bafiled their devices, rebuked their sins. ‘Therefore they regarded Him as ar
enemy, and agreed together to destroy Him. 3. Then was waged the warfare


NN 545





CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of an unscrupulous and infuriated party against one obnoxious individual. Spies
were employed to entangle Him in His talk; snares were set ; calumnies were
circulated. But from His armour of proofall their shafts -Il harmless. At
length the traitor Judas presents himself; the bribe is offered and accepted ;
hasty preparations are made; witnesses suborned ; the arrest effected ; the trial-
scene performed under cover of night, with the cruel issue which had been
predetermined and concerted. ;

III. Distinguish between two kinds of party-spirit—1. There is an unright-
eous party-spirit, which, as Christians, we are bound to eschew. (1) All party-
spirit is by the nature of the case unrigh - which espouses the cause of evil
and falsehood: all which is enlisted against tho honour of God—against His
eternal attributes, truth, justice, holiness—against the gospel or the Church.
(2) Party-spirit in a doubtful or even in a good cause is unrighteous when it
proceeds from wrong motives, is exhibited a wrong spirit, or served by wrong
means. 2. If wo would be most effcctuai 7 <scured by the grace of God against
the influence of unchristiay, peis*-spirit, it must be by the possession of that
party-spirit which is according to righi-ousness and true holiness. We are born
into a world of ‘varfare, 1nd ha->~ > choice but to take a part. He that is not
with Christ is against Him: he that gathereth not with Him scattereth. Let His
name be our war-cry, His Cross inscribed upon our banner. Let His holy ark
be erected in our heart, and the Dagon of worldly party-spirit will bow down
before it and be broken.—Prof. B. H. Kennedy.


Peter's fall and recovery.—tIn the whole history of our Saviour’s last sufferings,
perhaps there is not a more affecting incident than the denial of Christ by
Peter. The natural simplicity with which the story is told, and the striking
circumstances with which it abounds, make the deepest impression upon the
heart, and raise a tide of the most mixed emotions. 1. The sincere professions
of fidelity which Peter made to Jesus, the zeal which he discovered in His defence,
and the attachment which he manifested in following Him to the palace of the
high priest, are circumstances which present this apostle in an amiable light,
and recommend him to our love. 2. The cowardice with which he deserted his
Master in the garden when the natural means of defence were taken away,
the baseness with which he afterwards denied Him, and the obstinacy with
which he persisted in that denial, shew the man in a very different point of view,
and fill our minds with the strongest indignation. 3. The conduct of our Saviour
in forewarning him of his danger, in restoring him to a sense of his guilt, and in
admitting him freely to mercy, gives us the most exalted conceptions of our
Saviour’s goodness, and fills our souls with just admiration. 4, The speediness
of Peter’s repentance, the deepness of his contrition, and the tears of sorrow
which he sheds melt our souls into compassion, and lead us to forgive this
unfortunate man.

I. The fall of St. Peter.—l. It affords a melancholy instance of human
infirmity. Never did man enjoy greater advantages or make fairer appear-
ances than this disciple. Was it not most natural to think that his faith and
zeal, his courage and resolution, would have supported his mind, and carried him
through the most fiery trial? But, alas! in the hour of temptation all his
principles and resolutions forsook him ; this great apostle fell; and in his fall
has left an awful lesson to mankind, even to the most eminent Christians, that
# is notin man who walketh to direct his steps—that we are not sufficient of
ourselves, but that our sufficiency is of God. 2. Confidence and presumption,
even in the most confirmed Christians, are very unpromising signs of stead-
fastness in religion. This was the rock upon which Peter first split, when he
made shipwreck of faith and of a good conscience. Trust in God is one thing,


D4e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





and trust in ourselves is another, and there will always be as much difference
in the success which attends them as in the powers on which they are founded.
If we proceed on a sense of our own weakness, and a reliance on the Divine
aid, we shall continue unto the end. But if, like Peter, we set out in our own
strength, like him we shall soon be offended, and turn back. 3. Natural
rourage and precipitate zeal will not supply the place of Christian fortitude, and
earry a man through the trials of religion. When St. Peter was surrounded
with swords and staves, he was nothing dismayed ; his heart and his hand went
together in the cause of God. But he who could fight for his Saviour had not
fortitude to suffer with him when matters came to extremity. It is vain to
promise yourselves a superiority under any temptations, unless you lay the right
foundation, by imploring the aid of God’s Holy Spirit, whose province only it is
to confirm the faithful unto the end. 4. The danger of exposing ourselves to
temptations, when we are not called by the providence of God. It was no doubt
a concern for his Master which induced Peter to follow Jesus to His trial, and
to venture into that dangerous place. But from whatever motive he acted, it
could not be matter of duty in the apostle to thrust himself into the company
of wretches where his presence could be of no use to his Master, and where
his virtue could scarcely come off unhurt. Nay, the prediction of our Blessed
Saviour, that He should be denied by Peter that very night, ought to have been
sufficient warning to him to have kept at the greatest distance from. a place
where he was in the most imminent danger of being drawn into that very sin
which he had been warned against. 5. How naturally sin hardens the heart,
stupefies the conscience, and involves men still deeper in guilt! First, by con-
fidence and presumption, Peter indecently and expressly contradicted his Master,
when Jesus foretold the flight of His disciples, and the denial of Him by Peter
himself; next, when his Master was about to be apprehended, driven by an
intemperate zeal, he was guilty of a most rash and imprudent action in cutting
off the ear of the high-priest’s servant, which might have caused not only
himself but all the rest of the disciples to have been put to death on the spot.
Immediately after, when he saw Jesus seized and bound, like the rest of the
timid disciples, by an act of cowardice and ingratitude, he forsook his Master
and fled. As soon as he had recovered himself, he inconsiderately thrust himself
into evil company, in which he was exposed to that very temptation which Christ
had warned him against. This was the unhappy occasion of all his subsequent
sin and sorrow. Here, disarmed by his fatal security, he was quite unprepared
to meet any trial, and of course yielded to the first attack. Scarcely had Peter
ended this act of baseness when, going out into the porch, he accidentally heard
the cock crow, the very signal of his fall. Might he not now have recollected
himself, and gathered resolution to retract his falsehood, and to give an honest °
testimony to the truth? But, alas! when a man has made one false step, it is
not so easy a matter to recover himself. One sin naturally, nay, almost unavoid-
ably, leads to another; one lie frequently requires another to support the
falsehood. And in this case the principle of shame, which was before the guardian
of innocence, now bars the way to repentance ; for men blush to retract the
falsehood they have asserted, or to own the baseness they have committed. A
second time Peter is charged with being a follower of Jesus; a second time he
denies his Master. But he does not even, as before, rest with simple assertions
of falsehood. In order to remove every ground of suspicion, he confirms his
denial with an oath, calling upon the God of truth to witness his falsehood.
To complete the disgrace of this unfortunate man, a third and a more pointed
attack is made upon him, Two strong presumptions are adduced against him
_that his speech proved him to be a Galilean, and that he had been seen in
the garden with Christ, Peter was now tempted to the last degree; and in


547


cHAP. xIv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. ey





order to testify his innocence by resentment of their suspicion, he not only by
assertions and oaths, but by dreadful imprecations on himself, abjured his Blessed
Lord. He began to curse and to swear, saying, “I know not the man.” To
aggravate his guilt still more, these denials of Christ were all made in the
presence of the other disciples, who had also followed the Master to the palace
of the high priest, and who could not be strangers to Peter’s falsehood and base-
ness. Nay, the last and most shameful denial was made in the presence of
Christ Himself, who must have been more painfully wounded by this per-
fidiousness of Peter than by all the indignities and insults of His enemies.
Lord, what is man, that Thou art mindful of him; or the son of man, that Thou
visitest him! What is our boasted strength but weakness! And when left
to ourselves, how do our firmest principles and our best resolutions melt like
snow before the sun ! |

II. The recovery of St. Peter.—l. The necessity of Divine grace, in order to
the restoration of fallen saints, as well.as to the conversion of habitual sinners.
2. Though good men may accidentally fall, yet, upon a speedy and effectual
repentance, they will be restored to the favour of God. 3. Although the restora-
tion of Peter furnishes matter of consolation to good men who have been seduced
into a fault, it affords no ground of hope to presumptuous offenders who live in —
the deliberate practice of sin. If Peter’s crime was great in its nature, it was
neither premeditated nor of long continuance. It was not so much the act of
the man as the effect of sudden and violent temptation which unhinged his
mind and threw him into utter confusion. The moment his Saviour gave him
the signal he was obedient to the heavenly call. As soon as he recovered the
powers of reflexion, he bathed his soul in the tears of repentance, and from
that time became the same faithful and affectionate apostle he had been before.
But what is all this to deliberate transgressors who make bold with sin and
presume upon the mercy of God? 4. Though good men may accidentally fall,
they are more easily reclaimed than habitual sinners. Their minds, not being
hardened by sin, are awakened by the gentlest calls of the Spirit ; and the sense
of virtue revives upon the first motions and suggestions of conscience. 5. The
sins of the best men, into which they fall accidentally, are expiated with the
strongest sense of sorrow and afiliction. When men are truly concerned, they
do not consider what they are to get by their tears, or what profit their sorrow
will yield. The soul must vent its grief; and godly sorrow is as truly the natural
expression of inward pain as worldly sorrow is, however much they differ in
their causes and effects. When therefore we find ourselves truly affected with.
a sense of our sins, and in earnest lament our ingratitude and disobedience to
God, we have the best indication that the spirit of religion is still alive within us,
and that we are not given up to a reprobate mind.—A. Donnan.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 54. “ Afar off.’—Thisis amost Rock-man. Every appeal to love and


unwelcome revelation of the apostle.
We see him separated from the Saviour.
He is following, but not so closely as
to indicate his association with Jesus.
The adherent is being lost in the
apostate. The disciple is being degraded
to the level of a deserter. Love is
being chilled to lethargy. The ice of
the coward is freezing the soul of the


548


to fidelity which was made in silence
by the utter desolation of the Christ,
every incentive to steadfastness which
arose from the memory of his ardent
and unreserved pledges, and from the
transcendent importance of consistency,
was consigned to oblivion. His leaden
feet moved slowly towards the palace


of the high priest.— Dean Lefroy,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Vers. 57, 58. False witness through
misapplication of words—The words
laid to His charge might have been,
and probably were, literally such as
He had used. But the falseness of the
evidence lay in the misapplication of
them. Jesus had spoken of the temple
of His body ; the witnesses gave in the
evidence as if He meant the Jewish
Temple of stone. Hence it-was no
doubt that their evidence could not
be made to agree, because each false
witness would probably enough add
something more which might go to
prove the criminal meaning of those
words—that they were so spoken,
namely, as to apply to the holy build-
ing atJerusalem. Evenso we Christians
—-and it is a serious and fearful con-
sideration—may be quoting the words
of Divine truth, the very language of
our Lord, and yet be guilty oi false
evidence. When, like the Jewish
witnesses, we first frame a position,
and then seek for texts of Scripture to
support it, and apply these only in
reference to the view predetermined
on, are we not doing even the same ¢
—S. Hinds.


Ver. 60. The patience of Christ.—
Jesus astonishes and confounds His
judge by His silence and patience. But
there is a very great difference betwixt
confounding and converting. It is no
small humiliation and mortification to
see ourselves deserted by those who are
most obliged to defend us. How much
greater is it then to see them at the
head of our enemies! This is what
Jesus Christ teaches us to bear with-
out bitterness, animosity, or the least
desire of revenge.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 62. Christ’s testimony to Him-
self—Why did the Lord, when thus
 adjured, break His silence? Some
have thought it was out of respect to
the office of the high priest, as the
representative of God and the spiritual
ruler of the people; and if we can
separate the office from the character
of him who held it, no more fitting
opportunity could have presented itself.


CHAP. XIV.





For here was the head of the nation,
considered as a theocracy, demanding
of One whose credentials shewed that
He came direct from God who He
was. This was the first time that
Jesus was face to face with the chief
minister of His Father’s religion. It
ought not to have been so, His claims
ought long ago to have been investi-
gated, as to whether He really fulfilled
the prophecies of the Messiah. But
long ere this they had prejudged His
case, and condemned Him. And now
they sought not for the truth, but for
that which might enable them to carry
out their evil will against Him. He
might, consequently, I think, if He
had only looked to the motive of
Caiaphas in putting such a question,
have declined to answer. But the crisis
had come. He must assert who He
was, though He knew it would lead to
His crucifixion —U/. F. Sadler.


Vers. 63, 64. The culpability of the
Sanhedrin.—Some have been troubled
with the thought that the judges
of Jesus were conscientious. Was it
not their duty, when any one came
forward with Messianic pretensions, to
judge whether or not his claim was
just ? And did theynot honestly believe
that Jesus was not what He professed
to be? No doubt they did honestly
believe so. We must ascend to a much
earlier period to be able to judge their
conduct accurately. It was when the
claims of Jesus were first submitted to
them that they went astray. He,
being such as He was, could only have
been welcomed and appreciated by
expectant, receptive, holy minds. They
were anything but that. They were
totally incapable of understanding Him,
and saw no beauty that they should
desire Him. As He often told them
Himself, being such as they were, they
could not believe. The fault lay not
so much in what they did as in what
they were. Being in the wrong path,
they went forward to the end. It
may be said that they walked according
to their light; but the light that was
in'them was darkness.—J. Stalker, D.D.


549


CHAP. XIV,


Ver. 65. Christ dishonoured and
suffering in His senses.—The image of
the invisible God refuses not, for our
sakes, to be dishonoured by the most
unworthy treatment. All His senses
suffer. 1. His sight, by their covering
His face. 2. His hearing, by their
blasphemies. 3, His smelling, by the
nastiness of their spittle. 4. His feel-
ing, by their buffeting Him, and the
blows given by these servants. 5. His
taste, by the blood which proceeded
from these blows, etc. This is a dread-
ful motive of humiliation for the sinner,
who seeks only to gratify his senses ;
and it is more so for the proud and
revengeful person, who cannot bear
the least injury, and is a mere idolater
of his false honour.—P. Quesnel.


Vers. 66, 67. Peter discovered.—The
place which the apostle occupied illus-
trates the reign of Providence in and
over what we regard as trifle. He
sat in such a position that either the
glow of the fire or its light shone full
upon his features. How often have
we known of every arrangement being
made to perfect some plan or scheme
or purpose with the most studied care
and the most anxious regard to design
and to completeness, and yet all is
undone by some simple trifle being
omitted or disregarded as of no con-
sequence whatever, and as being most
unlikely to affect the issue the success
of which commanded such attention,
thought, and care! So here the golden
glow of the fire or the flicker of the
lightsome flame fell precisely upon the
face of the one man in that group
upon whom it was of the gravest con-
sequence that it should not fall! And
with his face thus illuminated and his
very feature revealed, his affectation
of indifference appeared to the maid
to be the meanest dissimulation.—
Dean Lefroy.


Vers. 68-72. Constant falls—At
times perhaps, after reading the life
of some holy man, we have ventured
to think of stricter devotion and a
closer walk with God; and then some


950


“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ordinary temptation, some common
fault, has brought us down from our
dreams and shewn us what worms we
are. We have gone forth in the morn-
ing relying on our steadfastness, and
we have come home humbled and
ashamed. We have felt sure that
nothing could move us, and the merest
opportunity was enough. We have
risen perhaps from sinning, and ab-
horred ourselves, and been filled with
disgust at our foolishness, and we have
returned and sinned again. We have
prayed against temptation, and we
have run into it. At every Communion
we vow ourselves Christ’s servants; at
every Communion we have to repent
of broken vows. We have knelt down
and wept, and next week we have
had to weep again. Our infirmity is
miserable. We fall and fall again.—
C. F. Secretan.

The temptation to deny Christ before
men.—chis is a common temptation.
It is the first and earliest temptation
of the young stepping out into the
world. It is a boy’s temptation, when
he first finds himself under a strange
roof, and has to kneel down at night
beneath the eye of a strange companion,
and he feels uneasy, and half inclined
to forego his accustomed prayers. It
is the young man’s temptation, when
he takes his place among his fellows,
and too often finds himself, like Peter,
surrounded by the enemies of his
Lord—when he sees Jesus insulted,
the holy name blasphemed, saintliness
a byword, and the faith of his affection
treated with mockery and contempt—
when inquiring eyes are bent upon him
to know how it is he does not echo
their irreligious mirth. “Thou also
art one of them. Thy speech be-
trayeth thee.” Then comes the trial of
his constancy ; then is it shewn what
root he has in himself; then the eye
of Jesus rests upon His young disciple,
and good spirits watch what answer
he will make to his blasphemers ; then
is the grace of God waiting too to help
his infirmity, and enable that young
Christian soldier to stand his ground
with manfulness, and quietly but de-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





cisively declare himself for God and
His truth against sin. “Yes, I am
one of Jesus’ followers. I freely con-
fess it. I care not who knows my
mind. I believe in Christ. I make
it my study to serve Him. I doscruple
at an oath. I find no pleasure in the
language of uncleanness. I am not
used to talk so. I do not like such
ways. I think them wrong. I hope
T shall always think so.” And if you
hardly find strength to speak out so
boldly, and your heart fails you in
your hour of trial, just when you
should stand firm ; if you feel inclined
rather to laugh off the imputation of
singularity, to disown the character
of a disciple, and talk and jest with
the rest,—oh! remember, “if we deny
Christ, He will also deny us.”—Jozd.


Ver. 71. Peter cursing and swearing.
—This was no doubt the resurrection
of an old fisherman’s habit, long since
dead and buried. Peter was just the
man likely to be a profane swearer
in his youth—the headlong man of
temper, who likes to say a thing with
as much emphasis and exaggeration
as possible. Old habits of sin are hard
to kill. Till his dying day the man
who has been a drunkard or a forni-
cator, a liar or a swearer, will have to
keep watch and ward over the grave-
yard in which he has buried the past.
2. Yet there was a kind of method
in the madness of Peter’s profanity.
When he wanted to prove that he was
none of Christ’s, he could not do better
than take to cursing. It is one of
the strongest testimonies to Jesus still
that even those who do not believe in
Him expect cleanness of speech and
conduct from His followers, and are
astonished if those who bear His name
do things which when done by others
are matters of course.—J. Stalker, D.D.


Ver. 72. Thought leading to penitence.
_-I. Peter alone.—Solitude is a test.
Tt often shews the bent of a man’s mind.
Tt is a critical time, and may issue in
good or for evil. Satan watches for
such occasions to war against the soul.


CHAP. XIV.


It. Peter thinking.—There is much
thinking that is mere dissipation.
Peter’s thought was earnest and prac-
tical. Such is necessary. Without it
there can be no real life, progress, and
achievement.

III. Peter thinking about his sin.—
Such a subject is repulsive and painful.
Sin in the abstract is so much more
the sins of mex, and especially of
friends and kindred; but most of all
our own sin. And yet thinking of
our sins is right and necessary. We
shall have to do it sooner or later; and
it is infinitely better to do it in time
than when too late.

IV. Peter thinking of his sin with
penitential sorrow.— He wept.” Tears
not always true. There may be re-
pentance without tears, and tears with-
out repentance. But Peter was utterly
sincere. His tears were the real ex-
pression of the grief and shame that
wrung his heart. Shall we love what
Peter so hated? Shall we indulge
in ourselves what Peter found so bitter
in its fruits ?

V. Peter thinking of his sin with
hope in Christ.—He “called to mind
the word,” ete. But he would not
stop here. Other words would be re-
called, and especially that gracious word
of promise and of hope (Luke xxii. 32).
Besides, he could not but be conscious
that the look of his Master indicated
mercy more than judgment. That
look pierced him through and through.
Tt manifested not only knowledge and
reproof and grief, but also love.—
William Forsyth.

Peter's case no exceptional one.—Can-
not you remember in your own life
brave resolutions and miserable fulfil-
ments—promises which seemed easy to
make, but which turned out so hard to
keep? Cannot you remember what a
picture you have sometimes drawn in
your own mind of your intended resist-
ance to temptation—how nobly and
faithfully you imagined yourself, in
your thoughts beforehand, sorely tried
and proudly triumphing over the temp-
tation? And cannot you remember,
too, after the storm of temptation had


551


CHAP. XIV.





passed over you, what a miserable shew
you had actually made, how lightly you
had been overcome, with what wretched
weakness and stupidity and folly you
had been provoked or terrified or
enticed from your strong purposes of
good? In the apostles we but see the
reflexion of our own doings towards
our Master.—Dean Church.

Recollection more needed than informa-
tion.—Peter’s recollection of what he
had formerly heard was the occasion
of his repentance. We do not suffi-
ciently consider how much more we
need recollection than information. We
know a thousand things, but it is
necessary that they should be kept alive
in our hearts by a constant and vivid
recollection. It is therefore extremely
absurd and childish for people to say,
“You tell me nothing but what I
know.” I answer, “ You forget many
things, and therefore it is necessary
that line should be upon line and
precept upon precept.” Peter himself
afterwards said in his epistles, “I will
not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though
ye know them.” We are prone to
forget what we do know; whereas
we should consider that whatever good
thing we know is only so far good to
us as it is remembered to purpose.—
fichard Cecil.

Tears of contrition.—Who need be
ashamed of tears wrung from him on
his knees? Let sinners take shame
rather for having no tears to flow, for
repentance so moderate, for devotion so
poor and low, for feelings so blunted by
the habitude of sin, and hearts so dry


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 3-9. Common things idealised.—Sup-
pose that a cultured foreigner should walk
over the ruins and examine the sculpture and
paintings of a Huropean city. Near the close
of the day his soul is filled with a strange,
undefinable joy. He has a feeling of awe
mixed with gratitude to the God of such
beauty and grandeur. Itisafeeling to which
he cannot give a name, and which he cannot
shake off. Oppressed by it, he enters one of
the ancient churches, At that moment the


952


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





:
and dead that they never want to
relieve themselves by tears. We feel
a little sorry, and think and look serious,
and resolve to mend. We are not
moved to weep. And yet a touching

narrative will bring water into our

eyes; our interest in a mere fictitious
character will often moisten them.

Shall our emotions of religion be so

faint and feeble, our sense or sin so
dull, as never to draw forth one tear ?

I am not for any affectation of religious
feeling. I would make every allow-
ance for a difference of temperament;

but those of us, at least, who have
wept for sorrow, how is it, I would ask,

that we have never wept for sin ?—

C.F. Secretan. )

Peter's lifelong repentance.—Some

say that, after his sad fall, he was

ever and anon weeping, and that his

face was even furrowed with continual

tears. He had no sooner taken this

poison but he vomited it up again, ere

it got to the vitals; he had no sooner

handled this serpent but he turned it

into a rod, to scourge his soul with

remorse for sinning against such clear
light and strong love and sweet dis-

coveries of the heart of Christ to him.

Clement notes that Peter so repented.
that, all his life after, every night when

he heard the cock crow, he would fall

upon his knees, and, weeping bitterly,

would beg pardon for his sins? Ah!

souls, you can easily sin as the saints ;

but can you repent with the saints ?

Many can sin with David and Peter

who cannot repent with David and

Peter, and so must perish for ever.

—T. Brooks.


TO CHAPTER XIV.


organ awakes in the gallery, and fills the
twilight with its music. Now it sinks into
the faintest whisper or rises into a tempest
of melody, and he is entranced. The organ,
to him, is not made of wood or metal, nor is
its music simply the escaping of the air.
It is the voice in which his strange and
oppressive joy finds expression. It lifts into
distinctness and invests with meaning the
emotions which burdened his soul. And
these emotions go out in its music as a well-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. MARK. CHAP. XIV.





defined and precious sacrifice to the God of
the beautiful and the grand. Now as the
organ became the voice through which the
artist’s undefined joy became definite and
went out in service to God, so Christ endowed
the offering of Mary with voice and beauty
and most heroic purpose, and then accepted
it.—lW. R. Hamer.

Shew love to the living.—Truly as well as

beautifully has one said: “ Do not keep all
the alabaster boxes of your love and tender-
ness sealed up until your friends are dead.
I would rather have a bare coffin without a
flower and a funeral without an eulogy than
a life without the sweetness of love and
sympathy. Let us anoint our friends before-
and for their burial. Post-mortem kind-
ness does not cheer the burdened spirit.
Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance back-
ward over the weary days,”

Self-sa vijice fruitful.—A Scotch woman,
who had been in the habit of giving a penny
a day for the missions, was given by a visitor
3 sixpence to buy some meat—a luxury
which she had not lately enjoyed. But she
thought to herself, ““I have long done very
well on porridge, so I will give the sixpence

also to God.” This fact came to the know-
ledge of a missionary secretary, who narrated
it at a missionary breakfast. The host and
his guests were profoundly impressed by it,
the host himself saying that he had never
denied himself a chop for the cause of God.
He thereupon subscribed £500 additional,
and others of the party followed his example,
till a large sum had been raised. It is pro-
bable that this poor woman’s sixpenve was
larger in God's sight than the thousands
contributed by these rich people, for she
gave of her poverty, and they out of their
abundance. There is nothing so fruitful as
self-sacrifice.


Ver. 4. False estimates of waste.—A Chris-
tian gentleman, when blamed by his partner
for doing so much for the cause of God, re-
plied, “ Your foxhounds cost more in one year
than my religion ever cost in two.” People
sometimes complain of what they call
‘“‘waste of life” in establishing Christian
missions among savage people or unhealthy
climates, e.g. in establishing or maintaining
the Nyanza Mission the lives of Bishops
Hannington and Parker, of O'Neill, Shergold
Smith, Mackay, and several others have been
sacrificed. But were those lives “ wasted”?
There, as elsewhere, it has proved that the
“blood of the martyrs is the seed of the
Church.”


Ver, 6. Approval of Christ—When Anti-
machus, an Ionian poet and musician,
repeated one of his compositions before a
large audience, his language was so obscure
that all his hearers retired with the excep-
tion of Plato. Seeing this, he remarked,


“TJ shall read none the less, for Plato is to
me one instead of all.” How much more
should the disciple of Christ be content with
His approval !


Ver. 7. Christian care for the poor.—When
the deacon St. Lawrence was asked, in the
Decian persecution, to shew the prefect the
most precious treasures of the Church at
Rome, he shewed him the sick, the lame, the
blind. “It is incredible,” said Lucian, the
pagan jeerer and sceptic, “ to see the ardour
with which those Christians help each other
in their wants. They spare nothing. Their
first legislator has put it into their heads
that they are all brothers.” “These Gali-
leans,” said Julian the apostate, “ nourish
not only their own poor, but ours as well.”
In the year 252 a plague raged in Carthage.
The heathen threw out their dead and sick
upon the streets, and ran away from them for
fear of contagion, and cursed the Christians.
St. Cyprian, on the contrary, assembled his
congregation, told them to love those who
cursed them; and the rich working with
their money, the poor with their hands,
never rested till the dead were buried, the
sick cared for, and the city saved from
destruction.


Ver. 8. Much result from small begin-
pings. —There was once a child in an
Knglish parsonage who shyly gave a six-
pence of his very own to “the missionary
deputation” as he sat at breakfast. The
missionary spent the sixpence on a Prayer
Book and took it out to Australia. One
Sunday as he was waiting in his church, he
saw a young girl peep into the building.
He welcomed her with kind words, and
finding she was a workhouse girl, sent out
from England, who had got a situation at
a farm twenty miles inland, he gave her the
Prayer Book. Several weeks passed away,
and one day a rough-looking man asked to
speak to him. “Ain't you the parson that
gave our servant girl a Prayer Book?” His
wife, it appeared, was very ill, and interested
at hearing from the emigrant girl about the
gift of the Prayer Book, sent to beg from
the clergyman a pastoral visit. With some
difficulty he managed this. The sick woman
was comforted, and departed in the faith of
Christ. ‘The husband’s mind was impressed.
He stirred up his neighbours to build a
church at that outlying spot, in which to
this day services and sacraments are cele-
brated. How much can be done even by a
little effort!

“ She hath done what she could.” —Not long
ago, in an American city, there lived a
woman who had once been proficient in her
trade of dress and cloak-making, but a severe
illness shattered her mind and quite unfitted
her for pursuing it again. She could not
endure to be idle and useless, and so would


B53





CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








go about from house to house among the
poor, to cut and fit their simple garments,
always refusing to take any pay for her
labours. “It is a great pleasure to me to
do it,” she would say in her childlike way.
“God has taken away a great deal of my
health and a portion of my mind; I can’t go
about among grand folks as I used to; 1
should get all confused with their rich trim-
mings, and make mistakes with their new
patterns. I can’t be trusted with so much
responsibility—it bewilders me. But I love
to go from family to family among the
poor, especially God’s poor. When I see the
mothers worn out with overwork, I like to
step in and say, ‘ I’ve come in to sew for you
a few days.’ When I know they stop going
to church because their old Sunday gown
isn’t fit to be seen, I like just to take it, and
sponge it, and turn it, and set them going
again. When I see the children staying away
from Sunday school because the weather has
got so cold, and their shawls are thin or
their cloaks worn out, it makes me happy to
wad up the old cloak again, and to do up
warm jackets to wear under the thin shawls.
It’s true,” she would add, “God doesn’t ex-
pect much of me, because He knows that my
health is weakly and my mind unsettled,
but when the end comes I would like to
have Him say, ‘She hath done what she
could.’”


Ver. 11. A picture of Judas.—There is a
picture in one of the Brussels galleries which
possesses awful eloquence. Thescene is laid
near the Holy City. Night has flung its mantle
over home and field and Temple. ‘Three
Jewish artisans are resting after toil beside
the embers, glowing and lightsome, of a fire.
In the foreground their work lies wellnigh
done. That work is across. A man in full
stature fills in the scene. His face is pallid,
though strong. His lips seem as though
sealed for ever. His eyes, dark and furtive,
seem wild. His stride is long, his step firm.
In his right hand he grasps a bag of money.
As he makes his way to the Temple to fling
the fiery pieces upon the pavement, he
stumbles upon the workmen who are mak-
ing that cross which is to be occupied by
his innocent Master, and the knowledge of
which is degradation and death to Judas.—
Dean Lefroy.


Vers. 18, 19. Betraying Christ—Upon the
mouldering walls of the refectory at Santa
Maria delle Grazie, in Milan, are the faded
outlines of the most famous fresco in the
world. It is the Last Supper of Leonardo
da Vinci. The artist bas taken the moment
when the Master has said to His disciples
that one of them would betray Him, and the
disciples have started up and fallen into
excited groups, and they are depicted in
every variety of surprise and consternation,


554


sorrow and self-searching. Is the artist

right in so representing it? There was only

one traitor amongst them, surely! Judas

knew he meant to betray the Master; but

the others were loyal men—nothing farther

from their thoughts than handing over the

beloved Lord to His persecutors and judges.

I think, if you will reflect, you will see that

the artist is right, for this reason—these

men realised the possibilities which lay in >
their nature. They did not mean to betray,

and yet they might be on the moment of

betrayal. And all of us have understood

how a sudden question applied to us, a

sudden charge made against us, however

unjustly, or a charge made against another
justly, will sometimes reveal ourselves, as it

were, and shew what we little suspected, —
that we were capable of enormities which,
in our better moments, we condemned, and
that we were even at that moment standing
upon the very brink of a precipice, which is
revealed to us by a lightning-flash. The
artist, then, was probably right in shewing
all the disciples equally anxious, though only
one was conscious of treachery,

“ Ts it I?”—A preacher in a certain village
church once gave an easy lesson in Christian
ethics from the letters of the alphabet. It
was to this effect : ‘“ You say, A lies, B steals,
C swears, D drinks, F brags, G goes into a
passion, H gets into debt. The letter I is
the only one of which you have nothing to
say.”


Vers. 22-25. The Holy Communion.—All our
churches contain the apparatus for a certain
sacred ceremony. And this is no novel in-
troduction ; for when we examine the most
ancient sanctuaries, or excavate the ruins of
the oldest structures, we find this arrange-
ment existing—nay, even when we descend
into the catacombs of Rome, where, under-
ground, the infant Church of Jesus wor-
shipped in the days of persecution, we find
due provision made for celebrating the Holy
Communion. Up then almost to the very
era of the Saviour’s mission do we trace this
ancient institution, and every time we behold
the Lord’s table standing in its appointed
place we see an evidence of the truth of
Christianity ; for there is no way of account-
ing for its existence, or for the appearance
of a new rite amongst the religious cere-
monies of mankind, at a particular period,
except by assenting to the truth of the
gospel narrative that, on a certain eventful
night, Jesus of Nazareth established the
Blessed Sacrament of His Body and Blood,
and commanded it to be observed for an
everlasting memorial.—_ Dr. Hardman.

Spiritual nowrishment—When General
Grant took the Federal army at Chatta-
nooga, it was feeble and dispirited because
it was almost destitute. The food of the
army was hauled with difficulty over moun-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


CHAP. XIV.


pee ee reed eee 2 Ee ee


tain roads and the supply was totally in-
sufficient, His first movement, on assuming
command—and it was that which eventually
led to victory—was to repair the railroads
and open up communication, so that the
army soon had everything it needed, There
is a like necessity in the spiritual life of
Christ’s army. We are worth very little in
the service of Christ except as we are spirit-
ually nourished. The soul is easily starved by
lack of appropriate food. And our spiritual
nourishment must come from Christ.

Sacramental grace—Were a king to offer
grants of land to any who would serve ina
war for the defence of the country, it would
be a foolish question, “ Can we not obtain a
grant without serving in the war ?” The king
might give a grant to some who served him
ina different way, but in ordinary cases he
would not. God may save a man without
the sacraments; but those who reject the
sacraments are, to say the least, in great
peril. There was a labouring man some
time since in one of our northern towns who,
owing to some mistake, had been misin-
formed as to the hour of service. He came
when the celebration of the Holy Communion
was just over, and when they came out of
church they found him waiting sadly out-
side. The clergyman explained how the mis-
take had arisen, and expressed his sorrow
for it. “Never mind, master,” said the man ;
but the poor fellow could not help adding,
“only I did so build upon it.” He knew his
own weakness, and his need of Divine grace
and supernatural assistance ; and so he was
coming, not as if there was any virtue in the
bare act of coming, not as if the Sacrament
itself could save him, but because he had
grasped the great truth that it is through
the Sacrament that God imparts grace and
strength and life to us His children, un-
worthy as we are of the least of His benefits.

The Eucharist a feast of consecration.—
Here we renounce the idols of the world and
put on more and more devotion to our God.
Not long ago a foreign potentate was re-
ceived with much pomp and circumstance
by the Lord Mayor of London. He came
along the Strand with courtiers and attend-
ants to Temple Bar, at the borders of the
old city, where the Lord Mayor met him
and delivered to him the keys of London, so
signifying that he was welcome not merely
to the freedom of the city, but also to the
custody of it. As we at this sacramental
gateway of promise pass out into the larger
and better life, let us turn over the keys to
our Prince. Come in, Thou Blessed One!
Come in and possess Thine own.

The Eucharist prized.—In times of perse-
cution men would risk their lives to get
their Communions. A hundred years ago,
during the French Revolution, when religion
was abolished by the French Parliament,
when Sunday was done away with, the


clergy were hunted into the thickets like
beasts of prey, and none might conduct or
attend a service on pain of death, did people
go without this means of grace? No!
From time to time a messenger hurried
with a mysterious watchword from house to
house. “The black swamp,” he would mutter,
and pass on without greeting or farewell.
But the persons addressed understood him.
Shortly after midnight, men and women,
dressed in dark clothes, would meet silently
by the black swamp below the village, and
there, by the light of a carefully guarded
lantern, one of the homeless priests would
give the Body and Blood of the Lord to the
faithful of the neighbourhood. They all
knew that at any moment, before the alarm
could be given, the soldiers might be upon
them, and a volley of grape-shot might
stretch them bleeding and dying on the
ground. What matter? Man might kill their
body, but Jesus had said that He would raise
them up at the last day.

Benefit of the Sacrament.—A poor woman
was once asked by a neighbour what good
she got by receiving the Blessed Sacrament,
“Can you understand it?” asked her neigh-
pour. “No,” said the woman, “I cannot
understand it, I cannot explain it; but this
I know, that I go to the altar empty and I
come down full.”

The Holy Grail.—Such was the name given,
long ago to the actual cup out of which our
Saviour dispensed the first Lord’s Supper.
This cup, it was believed, had been taken
up to heaven, but was revealed miraculously
to every one whose heart was pure, And it
was thought that the sight of this cup
imparted pardon and peace to all who were
favoured with a vision of it. This was the
tradition believed by our forefathers, and
there is a beautiful truth in it which all who
consider may understand. For beneath the
outward symbols of the Holy Eucharist there
is a Divine reality which is seen only by
those whose hearts have been purified.
Everybody sees the bread and wine, but few
see the Divine Flesh and Blood behind them
that purchased salvation for us on the bitter
cross. Long ago people used to set out on
painful pilgrimages in the hope of seeing
the Holy Grail. They prayed, they fasted,
they wrought good works, they longed for
a sight of the wonderful vessel that would
give them blessing and joy. But these
painful pilgrimages were needless. The
Holy Grail was nearer than they thought.
For the wonderful vision is to be seen at
every Communion, and all we need to see it
is a pure heart.


Ver. 24. Bloodshedding as an expression
of love.—A certain Asiatic queen, departing
this life, left behind her three accomplished
sons, all arrived to years of maturity. The
young princes were at strife as to who


555


CHAP, XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK,





should pay the highest respect to their royal
mother’s memory. To give scope for their
generous contentions they agreed to meet at
the place of interment, and there present
the most honourable gift they knew how to
devise or were able to procure. The eldest
came, and exhibited a sumptuous monument,
consisting of the richest materials, and
ornamented with the most exquisite work-
manship. The second ransacked all the
beauties of the blooming creation, and
offered a garland of such admirable colours
and delightful odours as had never been
seen before. The youngest appeared with-
out any pompous preparations, having only
a crystal basin in one hand and a silver
bodkin in the other. As soon as he ap-
proached he threw open his breast, pierced
a vein which lay opposite to his heart,
received the blood in the transparent vase,
and, with an air of affectionate reverence,
placed it on the tomb. The spectators,
struck with the sight, gave a shout of general
applause, and immediately gave preference
to this oblation. If it was reckoned such
a singular expression of love to expend a
few of those precious drops for the honour
of a parent, oh, how matchless, how ineff-
able, was the love of Jesus in pouring out all
His vital blood for the salvation of His
enemies !


Ver. 26. Afflictivn producing song. —In his
Hunting for the Nightingale in England,
John Burroughs tells of listening one black
night to the song of the sedge-warbler in
the hedge. It was a singular medley of
notes, hurried chirps, trills, calls, warbles.
When it stopped singing, a stone flung into
the bush set it going again, its song now
being so persistently animated as to fill
the gloom and darkness with joy. Samuel
Rutherford’s most gladsome letters are those
from his prison. The saints have sung their
sweetest when the thorn has pierced their
heart.

The power of a hymn.—A little boy came
to one of our city missionaries, and holding
out a dirty and well-worn bit of printed
paper, said, “ Please, sir, father sent me to
get a clean paper like this.” Taking it from
his hand, the missionary unfolded it, and
found it was a paper containing the beauti-
ful hymn beginning, “Just as I am.” The
missionary looked down with interest into
the face earnestly upturned to him, and
asked the little boy where he got it, and
why he wanted a clean one. “We found it,
sir,” said he, “in sister’s pocket after she
died; she used to sing it all the time when she
was sick, and loved it so much that father
wanted to get a clean one to put in a frame
to hang it up. Won’t you give us a clean
one, sir?”


Vers. 29-31. Mistaken self-complacency.—
556


It was well said once by a remarkable
man, and the words are worth remembering,
“Bear in mind that you are just then
beginning to go wrong when you are a little
pleased with yourself because you are going
right.” Let us watch against this as a
snare of Satan, and endeavour ever to main-
tain the apostolic attitude: “In lowliness
of mind let each esteem other better than
himself.” And let me caution you not to
make the mistake of supposing that this
self-complacency can be effectually guarded
against by a mere use of the recognised
theological expressions duly ascribing all
the merit and all the praise to God. These
are too often merely the garments of spiritual
pride, and by no means must they be mis-
taken for true humility.

Presumption.— Henry Winstanley, who
built the first Hddystone Lighthouse in
1696, had such confidence in the structure
that he expressed a wish that he might be
in the lighthouse during the fiercest possible
hurricane. In November 1703 he had his
wish gratified; and the morning after the
tempest not a vestige of the lighthouse
remained.

Danger of presumption.—A scientific
gentleman, deputed by the Government, was,
not many years ago, examining the scene of a
fatalexplosion. He was accompanied by the
underviewer of the colliery, and as they were
inspecting the edges of a goaf (a region of foul
air), it was observed that the “ Davy ” lamps
which they carried were afire. ‘I suppose,”
said the inspector, “ that there is a good deal
of fire-damp hereabouts.”” ‘Thousands and
thousands of cubic feet all through the
goaf,” coolly replied his companion. “ Why,”
exclaimed the official, “ do you mean to say
that there is nothing but that shred of wire-
gauze between us and eternity?” ‘“ Nothing
at all,” replied the underviewer, very com-
posedly. ‘There’s nothing here where we
stand but that gauze wire to keep the whole
mine from being blown into the air.” The
precipitate retreat of the Government official
was instantaneous. And thus it should be
with the sinner; his retreat from the ways
of sin—those “ goafs” of poisonous air—
should be instantaneous. Sir Humphry
Davy’s lamp was never designed as a substi-
tute for caution if accidentally or unknow-
ingly carried into fonl air, whereas many do
so knowingly and habitually.


Ver. 32. The Garden of Gethsemane. —
There is a garden in the Alps surrounded
by dizzy peaks, mighty glaciers, yawning
crevasses, There one hears the gurgling
waters far beneath one’s feet, like the moan
of imprisoned spirits. The approach to that
lonely island in a frozen sea is through a
broken way of ice and snow and frost.
The route lies in uncertainty and even peril.
No leaf, flower, or shrub appears along the


———


Ss
—_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. XIV.





icy sea. But when the garden is reached,
the gentian and the forget-me-not, the saxi-
frage and the rose, are found decking the
solitude with beauty and the scene with life.
So here this Gethsemane garden has its
environment of height and depth—of shadow,
dark, dreary, and deathlike—of light, faint
and full; but as we, by faith and in love,
approach reverently near to Him who gives
it all its meaning, we gather those fruits and
flowers which ripen best in an atmosphere
which was sanctified by the presence of the
Man of Sorrows, and which for that reason
are likely to be refreshing to those who,
living His life, breathe His Spirit.—Dean
Lefroy.

In communion with God.—There was each
morning, during General Gordon’s first so-
journ in the Soudan, one half-hour during
whick there lay outside his tent a handker-
chief, and the whole camp knew the full
significance of that small token, and most
religiously was it respected by all there,
whatever was their colour, creed, or business.
No foot dared to enter the tent so guarded.
No message, however pressing, was carried in.
Whatever it was, of life or death, it bad to
wait until the guardian signal was removed.
Every one knew that Gordon, in there alone,
was in communion with God.


Ver. 33. Mutual sympathy.—Christ asked
His disciples to watch with Him in Geth-
semane. Tender touch of nature to make
Him with the whole world kin. Two infants
will walk hand in hand “in the dark” where
neither would go alone. Invalids, who have
counted the strokes of midnight wakeful
hours, conjured by the wall-flashes and
flickers of dim lamps, and need no other
service, cry out, “Fatber! Mother! Some
one!” We sit by them, long and patiently,
perhaps dozing disciple-like as we hold
their hands, saying and doing nothing, but
being near them. Through the streets of
Paris, between prison and block, the most
desperate were often observed sitting upon
the cart’s edge handinhand. Triumph wants
friends also. Jesus wants our sympathy
still in His warfare with sin on the earth.
He who so wanted the society of men will
have His own with Him where He is, at last
and for ever.— Haynes.


Ver. 36. Resignation to the Divine wiil.
—Epictetus, a heathen philosopher, thus
prayed, “Great God, use me henceforward
according to Thy pleasure. I am altogether
of Thy mind. It is indifferent to me how
Thou dealest with me; I refuse nothing if
Thou seest it good for me; lead me where
Thou thinkest it convenient; clothe me in
what garment Thou pleasest, whether it be
whole or torn, either shall be welcome ;
whether Thou wilt have me to bear the
office of magistrate, or lead a private life ;


whether Thou wilt have me to stay in my
own country, or let me be driven into exile;
whether Thou wilt have me rich or poor ; in
all this, by my equanimity, I will justify
Thee before men.” This from the lips of a
heathen is wonderful, and the more so
because real Christians seldom reach such
an elevation of soul. The King of Arra-
gon (Alfonso) was once asked whom he
considered the most perfect man; and he
replied, “Him who receives all things,
whether sad or pleasant, as coming from
a kind and wise Father’s hand, with an even
mind.” And so it is now; he is the most
perfect Christian who is not lifted up by
prosperity, nor cast down by adversity ;
who, whatever happens to him, still looks
beyond second causes to God, the great first
cause of all; who makes it his daily business
to desire notbing but that which God
appoints; and whose constant prayer is,
that God’s will may be fully carried out, and
accomplished in him, and in all his concerns,
Edward Payson, who was a great sufferer,
being asked if he saw any particular reason
for a dispensation, replied: “ No, but I am
as well satisfied as if I could see ten thousand.
God's willis the very perfection of all reason.”
Mr. Simeon, on his death-bed, telling an
inquiring friend of his dependence upon
God, said: “‘ He cannot do anything against
my will.”

“ Thy will be done.” —It is related that when
St. Gertrude used to say the Lord’s Prayer
she would repeat the words ‘Thy will be
done” several times over. One day, when
she was praying in this manner, the Saviour
appeared to her holding health in His right
hand and sickness in His left. ‘ Choose, My
daughter, which you please,” said the Lord;
to which she replied, “Thy will be done, not
mine, O Lord.” Many an impressive homily
on acquiescence to the Divine will has been
written by sufferers. Richard Baxter was
throughout life familiarised, as few are, with
hours of sickness and prostration. Perhaps
it was this habitual discipline of pain,
causing him for long years to hover on the
very border-land of death, which imparted
so much pathos and fervency to his Saint’s
Rest, and its realistic vision of “the better
country.” Quaint and beautiful is his prayer
—a formula of devout submission—to Him
whose loving hand and wisdom he recognised
in it all. “ What Thou wilt; where Thou
wilt ; when Thou wilt!”,


Ver. 38. “ Watch and pray.’—There is a
custom among the Breton sailors, when
launching their boats, to offer this prayer,
“ Keep me, my God; my boat is so small, and
Thy ocean is so wide.” Thelife of a Christian
may be likened unto a frail bark cast upon the
mighty ocean, which unless rightly steered
may run into some contrary current that will
toss it about and turn its course. In this


5OT


_


cuap. xiv, HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





great ocean of ungodliness it is necessary to
pray that the current of sin may not turn us
from our course. “Pray that ye enter not
into temptation”; and if ye do, “ call upon
Me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
Thee,” saith the Lord. Prayer is not enough.
Like the Scots when they conquered the
English at Bannockburn, or the English
when they conquered the French at Crecy,
we are to rise from our knees; to stand up
and fight; to quit us like men; “having
done all,” to stand. We are to put on the
whole armour of God; and since we know
neither when nor where the adversary may
assault us, we are never to put it off. Live
and die in harness,—using such precautions
as some say Cromwell did against the
assassin’s dagger—his dress concealed a
shirt of mail. In the council-chamber, at
the banquet, in court as in camp, he wore
it always. Let the good man go to his work-
shop, counting-room, market, the place of
business, and scenes of enjoyment, as the
peasant of the East to his plough, where fiery
Bedouins scour the land, and bullets whist-
ling from the bush may suddenly call him
to drop the ox-goad and fly to arms. The
sun glances on other iron than the plough-
share, a sword hangs at his thigh, and a gun
is slung at his back.— 7. Guthrie, D.D.


Ver. 39. “Spake the same words.”—The
late Rev. W. H. Krause, of Dublin, was
visiting a lady in a depressed state—“ weak,
oh, so weak!” She told him that she had
been very much troubled in mind that day,
because in meditation and prayer she had
found it impossible to govern her thoughts,
and kept merely going over the same things
again and again. ‘“ Well, my dear friend,”
was his prompt reply, “there is provision
in the gospel for that too. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, when His soul was exceeding sorrow-
ful, even unto death, three times prayed,
and spoke the same words.” This seasonable
application of Scripture was a source of
great comfort to her.


Ver. 40. The power of sleep.—The most
violent passion and excitement cannot keep
even powerful minds from sleep; Alexander
the Great slept on the field of Arbela, and
Napoleon upon that of Austerlitz. Even
stripes and torture cannot keep off sleep, as
criminals have been known to give way to it
on the rack. Noises which at first serve to
drive it away soon become indispensable
to its existence; thus, while a stage-coach,
stopping to change horses, wakens all the
passengers, the proprietor of an iron forge,
whoslept close to the din of hammers, forges,
and blast furnaces, would wake up if there
was any interruption to them during the
night; and a sick miller who had his mill
stopped on that account passed sleepless
nights until the mill resumed its usual noise.


yas


Homer, in his Jliad, elegantly represents
sleep as overcoming all men, and even the
gods, except Jupiter alone.


Ver. 41. The hour of crisis.—Often has the
fate of kingdoms and empires been left to
the decision of an hour, and that hour of
inconceivable importance to millions. Often
have the rights and the liberties, the freedom
or the slavery, of a nation depended upon
the result of a contest where valour and
patriotism and magnanimity struggled hard
amidst the clash of arms and the din of war;
and their bosoms have beat with trembling
anxiety, as from lip to lip the important
announcement passed, “The hour is come.”
But although we could put together all the
interesting anticipations, all the distressing
and conflicting hopes and fears, all the im-
portant deeds and destinies that were ever
suspended upon any hour in the world’s
history, they would instantly sink into insig-
nificance compared with the vast and eternal
interests of innumerable myriads which were
suspended upon the results of that hour
which our Saviour declares in the text to be
at hand. The fate of kingdoms and empires
is nothing compared with the fate of the
universe, upon whose destiny it was to bear
its decision for eternity.


Ver. 47. Mistaken zeal—The Saviour’s
method is to conquer force by submission,
violence by meekness, sin by the Cross. Yet
many make this mistake, and defend a
spiritual cause by carnal weapons. On a
large scale the Crusades were an example of
a continent ready to fight the devil in others
with swords, without being ready to fight
the devil in themselves with self-denial. All
violence used in religion by inquisitors or by
men impatient to enthrone the right is an
example of Peter’s mistake. All hatred of
those doing wrong, all vituperation of them,
is a Peter’s sword. What Christ wants is
some that can bear a cross with Him, not
such as will draw a sword for Him.—
R. Glover.


Ver. 61. Silence often more effective than
speech.—*I have often repented having
spoken, but I never have been sorry for
having kept silent.” So said a friend in our
hearing, and his words often are recalled to
mind. There are occasions when duty bids
a man speak, if he be a true man, a Christian
man—when, unless he fling all fear of con-
sequences to the winds, and utter words in
behalf of truth, he will shew himself a
coward. There are times, too, when it is his
privilege to soothe anxiety and to comfort
those in sorrow. Nevertheless, in spite of
these and some other cases, silence fre-
quently is wiser and no less effective than
speech. Christ calmly and silently standing
before the fuming high priest has been





mle ale i Se ee ee ee ee ee,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XIV.





confessed through all the ages the nobler of
the two. It falls to almost every one at times
to encounter abuse. Bitter accusations are
hurled at him, caused perhaps by misunder-
standings. To listen in silence often is
better evidence than anything else of the
actual subjugation of one’s temper, and is
the most effectual way of disarming an
angry adversary.

Help from considering Christ's endurance.
—When Pollok the poet was a boy, he was
of a passionate temper. Sometimes when
oftended, he allowed himself to fall into a
rage, which was so violent that it was very
painful to witness. About the age of fifteen
a very striking change took place in his
temper. This was observed for some time
by his friends; and when at length he was
questioned on the subject, his answer was,
“While perusing the Gospels for myself, I
was struck with the meekness and calm
dignity of the Saviour under persecution,
and I resolved henceforward to command
my temper; and since that time, though I
may feel anger, nothing ever puts me in a
passion.”


Ver. 62. Christ's advent glorg.— Sometimes
perhaps you have passed in the daytime
through some public place where at night
there was to be a magnificent exhibition of
pyrotechnic art, and you have seen the
figures that are to be lighted up as they
stand ready for the exhibition. They are
very plain and common-looking. You can
see in the rude outlines the forms of men,
the crown upon the kingly brow, and the
jewels that flash from it; but there is no
beauty and glory whatever about them. But
wait till the eventide, till the sun goes down,
and the master of ceremonies appears on the
scene, and suddenly at the signal, perhaps of
a trumpet-blast or a chorus of melody, the
lights are turned on and a blaze of glory
lights up the scene. Every figure stands out
in radiant light, and the whole scene is
iiuminated, transfigured, and seems almost
supernatural. So it will be when our Master
appears, and these bodies of humiliation
shall be lighted up with His brightness, and
all the members shall shine with the beauty
and majesty of their living Head, and He
shall reveal all His glory in His heavenly
bride.


Vers. 66-71. Unguarded places most liable
to attack—A one-eyed doe used to graze
near the sea, and always kept her blind eye
next the water, as she thought her danger
would only be from the land. Buta poacher,
when he discovered this, took a boat and
shot her, and as she died the doe exclaimed,
“ Qhard fate! that I should receive my death
wound from that side whence I expected no


ill, and be safe in that part where I looked
for the most danger,” —Asop.


Ver. 72. God's voice in common things.—In
many ways and by many voices God pleads
with us. There was a certain ungodly man
who complained bitterly of the church-bell.
He could neglect God’s service, he could in
the insolence of wealth refuse to listen to
God’s minister, but that bell as it rang forth
day by day was echoed by his conscience and
would not let him rest. God can make even
a little bird preach a sermon for Him.
Oncea careless shepherd came down from the
plains to waste in revelry and sin his hard-
earned wages, and entered one of the cities
of Australia. As he passed along the streets
a wicker cage caught his eye, from which a
captive lark, an English lark, brought across
the ocean by some emigrant, was pouring
forth its cheerful song; and at once by the
magic power of association there came to his
memory the old home far away, the village
green, the grey church tower, the tender voice
of his mother, the good advice of the kind
old vicar, and by God’s help as he listened
he paused, and then turned back determined
to lead a better life-——George Macdonald,
in his story of Robert Falconer, relates a
well-authenticated incident of a notorious
convict in one of our colonies having been
led to reform his ways through going one
day into a little church where the matting
along the aisle happened to be of the same
pattern as that in the church where he had
worshipped with his mother when a boy.
That old familiar matting recalled the
memories of childhood, “the mysteries of
the kingdom of innocence” which had long
been hidden and overborne by the sins and
sufferings of later years. It came to him like
the crowing of the cock to Peter. It was the
turning-point in his life——God has blessed
the tick of the clock and the falling of a
leaf to rouse in man’s breast a sense of
responsibility. A thousand voices in nature
call us to reflexion, but sometimes a simple
incident in daily life has done so more effect-
ually. The hard-hearted father who had
listened to remonstrance and warning for
many a year, was at last touched. He had
heard most of the temperance orators of
the day, but he continued the drink. One
Sunday afternoon he took his little girl to
the Sunday school, intending himself to go
after more drink. At the door of the school-
house he put the child down from his arms,
but observed that tears started into her eyes.
“Why do you cry?” he asked. The little
one sobbed out her answer, “ Because you go
to public-house, and frighten us when you
come home.” It was enough. He never
entered a public-house again. God can bless
simple means to reach great ends.





559


¥ a |
car. xv.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
Fe RT ia te ete et Re SEN


CHAPTER XV.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. And the whole council.—Zven the whole Sanhedrin, which consisted of the three
classes just named—chief priests, elders, and scribes (1 Macc. xiv. 28).

Ver. 2. Thou sayest it.—=d Aéyes. This is generally taken as a direct affirmation—an
idiomatic or courteous “ Yes”; but Prof. Thayer seems to have shewn that it is rather an
appeal to the questioner’s own conscience. “Art Thou the King of the Jews?” asked
Pilate, half in scorn and half in amusement. “ Dost thow say this 2?” is Christ’s reply; or,
as in John xviii. 34, “Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it thee concerning


Me?” See Hapository Times, vol. vi. No. 10, pp. 437-439.

Ver. 3. But He answered nothing.—Omit this clause, imported from Matt. xxvii. 12.

Ver. 6. Render : Now at feast-time he was wont to release wnto them one prisoner, whomso-
ever they desired. For évrep yrotvro, &, A, B read 6v rapyrobvro, mhom they begged off.


Ver. 16. See R.V. ,
Ver. 17. Render: And they invest Him with “a purple”—the official robe of gs and


rulers, no matter what its colour.
Ver. 21. Compel.—Press into service: original word is of Persian origin, and denotes the


impressment into service which officials were authorised to make to expedite the mails.
Ver. 26. The fact that the inscription was written in three languages is quite enough to
acount for the slight variations in wording.


Ver. 27. Thieves.— Robbers, or bandits.
Ver. 28. Wanting in many of the best MSS., but found in all the most ancient versions;


therefore probably genuine.
Ver. 43, Went in boidly.— Took cowrage and went in.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—15.


(Parattets: Marr. xxvii. 1, 2, 11-26; Luke xxii. 1-7, 13-24;
JoHN xviii. 28—xix. 16.)


Christ and Pilate: the True King and His cownterfeit.—The so-called trial of
Jesus by the rulers turned entirely on His claim to be Messias; His examination
by Pilate turns entirely on His claim to be King. The two claims are indeed
one; but the political aspect is distinguishable from the higher one, and it was
the Jewish rulers’ trick to push it exclusively into prominence before Pilate, in
the hope that he might see in the claim an incipient insurrection, and might
mercilessly stamp it out.

I. The True King at the bar of the apparent ruler (vers. 1-6).—Pilate
holding Christ’s life in his hand is the crowning paradox of history and the
mystery of self-abasing love. One exercise of the Prisoner’s will and His chains
would have snapped and the governor lain dead on the marble “ pavement.”
The two hearings are parallel, and yet contrasted. In each there are two stages
—the self-attestation of Jesus, and the accusations of others; but the order is
different. The rulers begin with the witnesses, and, foiled there, fall back on
Christ’s own answer. Pilate, with Roman directness and a touch of contempt
for the accusers, goes straight to the point, and first questions Jesus. His question
was simply as to our Lord’s regal pretensions. ‘‘ Thou a king ?”—poor, helpless
peasant! A strange specimen of royalty this! How constantly the same
blindness is repeated, and the strong things of this world despise the weak, and
material power smiles pityingly at the helpless impotence of the principles of
Christ’s gospel, which yet will one day shatter it to fragments, like a potter’s
vessel! There are plenty of Pilates to-day who judge and misjudge the King
of Israel. The silence of Jesus in regard to the eager accusations corresponds


560


Di


~—-


Sore


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XV.





to His silence before the false witnesses. Christ can afford to let many of His
foes alone. Contradictions and confutations keep slanders and heresies above
water, which the law of gravitation would dispose of, if they were left alone.
Pilate’s wonder might and should have led him further. It was the little
glimmer of light at the far-off end of his cavern, which, travelled towards, might
have brought him into free air and broad day. One great part of his crime was
neglecting the faint monitions of which he was conscious.

Il. The people’s favourite (vers. 7-15).—‘‘Barabbas” means “son of the
father.” His very name is a kind of caricature of the “Son of the Blessed,”
and his character and actions present in gross form the sort of Messias whom
the nation really wanted. The popular hero is like a mirror which reflects the
popular mind. He echoes the popular voice, a little improved or exaggerated.
Jesus had taught what the people did not care to hear, and given blessings
waich even the recipients soon forgot, and lived a life whose beauty of holiness
oppressed and rebuked the common life of men. What chance had truth anl
goodness and purity against the sort of bravery that slashes with a sword, and
is not elevated by inconvenient reach of thought or beauty of character above
the mob? Even now, after nineteen centuries of Christ’s influence have
modified the popular ideals, what chance have they? Are the popular “ heroes ”
of Christian nations saints, teachers, lovers of men, in whom their Christ-
likeness is the thing venerated? That fatal choice revealed the character of
the choosers, both in their hostility and admiration ; for excellence hated shews
what we ought to be and are not, and grossness or vice admired shews what we
would fain be if we dared.—A. Maclaren, D.D.


A coward, and what became of him.—Fix your eyes on Pilate. An o'er close
contact with an evil world had ploughed furrows across his face; sensuality had
left its impress there. He had come up from Cesarea a little while ago to keep
peace during the great annual festival, for the Jews were a turbulent race. He
made his headquarters at the castle of Antonia, and doubtless kept well
indoors; for he was the best-hated man in all Jerusalem, and deserved it. On
the morning of this April day he was awakened early by a beating at his gates.
He doubtless arose from his couch with reluctance and muttering maledictions
on these troublesome Jews. They had brought a prisoner for trial. Last night,
at the conclave of the Sanhedrin, He was accused of blasphemy, of making Him-
self equal with God. But no Roman magistrate would take cognisance of a
theological indictment. So they must needs trump up charges against Him.
First, He had perverted the nation. Second, He had forbidden payment of
tribute to the emperor. Third, He had proclaimed Himself asa king. Pilate
must determine upon this case: there was no escape. And you, friend, must
also decide what you will do with Jesus who is called the Christ.

I. Now mark the circumstances which aggravated his cowardice.—1!. He
had heard about Jesus and knew Him. His wonderful work and words and
name were in the air. He had had, moreover, an interview with Jesus. He
had asked Him, “ Art thou a king?” And Jesus answered, “‘ Thou sayest it ;
but My kingdom is not of this world—I am come to reign in the province of
truth.” So he knew about Him. What will he do with Him? 2. He had
been warned concerning Him. Not only had his conscience rung the alarm—
as conscience warns us all—but a special admonition had been given him, His
wife Procula had dreamed in the waking hours of the morning—the hour when
Israel thought all dreams came true—and tradition tells us the dream. She
saw a conflagration that consumed homes and temples and palaces, licked up
forests, and burned the heavens like a parched scroll, so that nothing could
extinguish it. There were cries of the homeless and fear-stricken and dying.


00. 561


CHAP. XV. “HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





Then a lamb appeared, and as it lifted its eyes all sounds were hushed. It
mounted the flaming pyre; its side was pierced, blood gushed forth, and the
fires were quenched. Then the lamb assumed human form, and the appearance
was, as the dreamer said,
“Of a Man Divine and passing fair,
And like your august Prisoner there.”

Therefore she said, ‘Do no harm to that just Man.” 3. Pilate’s cowardice was
aggravated by his attempts at evasion and compromise. He entreated the
people, “Why, what evil hath He done?” He might as well have sung a
lullaby to a cyclone. ‘“ Crucify Him!” was the answer. ‘“Crucify Him!”
And then he sent Him to Herod—a happy thought. But Herod would not be
responsible for the decision of this perplexing case ; so he sent the Prisoner back.
Pilate must judge Him; so must you andI. Here is this Jesus; and what will
he do with Him? A great problem confronts him. He said, ‘I will chastise
Him and let Him go.” Oh, shame upon him for a Roman magistrate! The
Man is either guilty or innocent. If guilty, He should die the death; if
innocent, let Him go. Compromise never pays. ‘“ Nothing is settled until it is
settled right.” No man nor Church, no pastor nor teacher, can afford to split
the difference in spiritual things.

II. But what was the occasion of this man’s cowardice ?-—1. To begin with,
he was a trifler. He lived in an age of cynicism; the foundations of religion
were broken up. He had mingled with the soldiers at the camp-fire, cracking
jokes about the gods and making sport of sacred things. And now, facing this
Divine Truth-giver, the irony of his retort—‘‘ What is truth ?”—was but the
outcome of his pernicious habit. Some of you, perhaps, have been wont to trifle
in like manner. But we cannot make light of any serious matter without
ultimately paying for it. 2. He had no opinions of his own. He went to the
people, to his wife, to the priests, for advice. Oh, man, think for thyself! It
behoves us to have convictions of our own. Let us live by them, stand for them,
and be willing in their defence, if need be, to die. If ever we are in doubt, we
have a sure Counsellor (Jas. i. 5). 3. Another reason for Pilate’s cowardice
was his sycophancy. At all hazards he must be Cesar’s friend. What was the
result? A little while after Tiberius was off the throne and Caligula wason. And
Caligula said, “Go bring me Pilate ; he must answer to certain charges concern-
ing an aqueduct, a Roman standard, and a murder at the altar.” And a little
later Pilate was an exile and a wanderer.

III. Let us not be too hard upon Pilate, for there may be some moral cowards
among us. Let me give you a parting word, the motto of the Guthrie family,
“Sto pro veritate.” Let us stand for the truth, the truth against the world.
There is nothing better than that We are all-in Pilate’s place. The Lord
Jesus stands in judgment before us. What are you going to do with Him?
Will you meet Him with mock heroics, admiration of His manhood and rejection
of His Divine claim? Out upon all mere sentimentalism! Let us be logical
and sensible. Christ was what He claimed to be, or else an impostor who
deserved to die—D. J. Burrell, D.D.


Personal conviction and popular clamowr.—This Jewish scene, so important in
the world’s life, introduces us to a very serious subject, involving moral and
religious questions—the rule or prevalence of the majority. The theory that
every man has a voice and vote in the arrangement of things, and that that
arrangement shall be according to the opinion which combines the greatest
number of those votes or voices, is almost universal. It seems to embody the
only principle upon which a decision has any justice, or is binding at all. It
encourages activity, free thought, and discussion, and the individual personal


562


eS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. CHAP. XV.


interests of us all. And yet we are sorely perplexed about it at times. We
feel that the voices of the majority often mean nothing at all, and should have
no weight—that is, they are mere empty noise, behind which there is no truth,
but only ignorance, or only a half-truth, destructive in its mutilated state.
When, then, ought the many voices to prevail ?

I. When the responsibility of decision and action is to belong to the many
whose voices are heard.—If a company of travellers are to choose between
certain plans or paths of journeying, and no one person has or is to have the
responsibility, and the success or disappointment will not be visited upon any
one member, but all are interested and will bear the blame or praise of the
future action, then a vote of the entire companionship is taken. Their decision
may be wrong in itself, but it is right that it should have been so made. Now
in the case of our text it was not so, The multitude had nothing to do
with the judging or deciding. It was an individual matter between Pilate and
Christ. And so it is with each of us. Every quiet moment of conviction, when
we stand face to face with Christ and His pure cross-marked religion, and
debate anxiously the question, ‘Shall I decide for or against Him?” is a
reproduction of the interviews of Pilate and Jesus at the inner judgment-seat.
We should decide in a moment for Jesus, if it were not that other voices enter
in. They control the sentence, and we bear the responsibility and results of it.
Oh, think of it! That empty-tongued crowd of fashion or society, which cries
down your single heart’s voice—that hard-voiced throng of money-seekers, which
shames and silences your warm conviction for the Lord—that false, smooth-toned
multitude of unbelievers, which surround you and ply you with their infidel
voices and sneers and arguments, and chill your spiritual aspirations,—you can
never fasten the blame upon them. They will only mock at you when the
results come. They will say, ‘(It is none of our matter.” And it will be true.

II. In a matter of fact, in the testimony of experience.—The more witnesses
toa fact of experience that can be brought, the better for the truth, whoever
has to decide it. But now turn to this story of Pilate again. What sort of
voices did he listen to and allow to prevail? Did they bring the overwhelming
weight of experience against him? Was that what controlled and turned his
decision? No, he knew that those chief priests cried for crucifixion out of
envy. He knew that his own experience of Christ, that his comprehension and
appreciation of Him, was something of which this crowd had nothing. They
should never have prevailed. If you have felt the truth of Christ’s love to you
only for a moment—if you have felt His purity by the side of your sin in one
quick instant of repentant experience—if you have once felt His gentle yet
complete kingliness by the side of false earthly power,—there is a voice of
experience within you over which all voices of men who have seen and learnt
no such facts should never prevail. Oh, if a man’s moral self and God’s Spirit
insist upon being heard together, and above all else, it is not obstinacy, but
firmness of purpose; it is the strongest condition of man ; it is the richest of
life’s harmonies—man’s voice and God’s voice at one.—F’. Brooks.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. Activity in evil—While to do mischievously. “The devil’s
honest men lay them down in peace martyrs,” saith Bernard, “are more
and take their rest, suspecting noharm swift in running to hell than we to
because they mean none, thieves and heaven.” How slack are we to do
robbers are up and abroad, spreading God any service ! how backward to
their nets for the prey and watching suffer anything for Him! And how


563


cuar. xv. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE.


ee ee eee


they, on the other side, can bestir them
to serve the devil, and be content to
suffer a kind of martyrdom in his
service! The way, sure, is broad
enough and easy enough that leadeth
to destruction; yet so much pains is
there taken to find it, that I verily
believe half the pains many a man
taketh to go to hell, if it had been well
bestowed, would have brought him to
heaven.—Bishop Sanderson.

Jesus delivered to Pilate-—What a
spectacle was that! The heads of the
Jewish nationleading their own Messiah
in chains to deliver Him up to a Gentile
governor, with the petition that He
should be put to death! Shades of the
heroes and the prophets, who loved the
nation and boasted of it and foretold
its glorious fate, the hour of destiny
has come, and this is the result! It
was an act of national suicide. But
was it not more? Was it not the frus-
tration of the purpose and the promise
of God? So it certainly appeared to
be. Yet He is not mocked. Even
through human sin His purpose holds
on its way. The Jews brought the
Son of God to Pilate’s judgment-seat,
that both Jew and Gentile might unite
in condemning Him; for it was part
of the work of the Redeemer to expose
human sin, and here was to be exhibited
the ne plus ultra of wickedness, as the
hand of humanity was lifted up against
its Maker. And yet that death was
to be the life of humanity; and Jesus,
standing between Jew and Gentile, was
to unite them in the fellowship of a
common salvation.—J. Stalker, D.D.

Why was Jesus taken to Pilate ?—The
common opinion, that the Romans had
deprived the Jews of the power to
inflict capital punishment, would seem
to be erroneous ; for we learn from the
Acts that theSanhedrin put St. Stephen
and others to death. The truth prob-
ably is, that the Pharisees, who were
the chief instigators of our Lord’s
death, were averse to the shedding of
Jewish blood by the Sanhedrin, and
preferred to throw the odium of His
execution upon the Romans, The
Sadducees, who took the lead in the


564


persecution of the early Christians, had
no such scruples.


Ver. 2. Avowul and description of
kingship.—Never answering the dis-
honest attack, the Saviour always
answered the honest inquiry. Here He
explicitly avows that He is “a king”
—the King, according to the fuller
reply recorded by John, of more than
Jews; and, according to that ac-
count, He intimates His kingship
(John xviii. 36) to be other than
worldly royalties, not employing force
and fighting men, but that His king-
ship is the royalty which invests all
who can testify the truth, and invests
Him as the Truth, as the Great
Revealer of God, of duty, of mercy, of
hope. There is no sort of kingliness
like this.—R. Glover.


Vers. 3-5. The silence of Jesus pro-
ceeds from His owning all our crimes
before His Father, His only lawful
judge. Concern, passion, fear of death,
love of reputation, and desire to be
justified, make an accused person speak
who has nothing at liberty but his
tongue; but even the tongue itself of
Christ is not at liberty, being under a
kind of confinement from His meekness,
His patience, His wisdom, His humility,
His obedience, and His quality of victim,
which make Him even in love with
shame and with the Cross.—P. Quesnel.

The silence of Jesus.—Much is said,
and well said, on the teaching of
Jesus—His manner and method as
a speaker; how independent He was
of times and circumstances ; and how,
in His peasant’s garb, and by the hill-
side or the river-shore, He forced the
confession from His hearers, ‘“ Never
man spake like this man!” He was
troubled by no interruption. He was
always ready to bear questionings, and
no teacher was ever so patient to
repeat himself so long as repetition
promised anything. But there was
the limit. When speech was useless,
He was silent. The prudence of Jesus
is seen in His keeping silence, and
never more so than where He answered


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


no more questions or thrusts. And
the governor marvelled greatly. Pilate
marvelled because he knew Jesus cowld
speak. He knew the power with
which He could plead the cause of
truth. He knew the influence He
had exerted by His eloquence. He
knew these accusations came because
of the power which the wonderful
Teacher had exerted by His speech.
He did not keep dumb because He had
no words, nor because He' was unused
to discussion, nor because He could not
bear the presence of these ecclesiastical
dignitaries. Discussion and they were
familiar to Him; but He had to practise
the instructions He had given to His
disciples. He had forbidden them to
throw pearls where they would find
no gold setting; and where there was
only talk and no heart, He bade them
leave the place and go elsewhere. He
had not only taught this, but He had
practised it. Many instances you will
find which illustrate that so soon as
He discovered that the disposition of
the people was wrong He retired, and
in silence found confidence and strength.
And there in Pilate’s hall, accused and
scorned, He who could wake the dead
and still the sea, who could blast the
unproductive fig tree whose life was
expressed only in leaves, and who could
open the deaf ear and bid the dumb
to speak—He in the hour of mortal
peril was silent. There He stood —still
as the stars dropping their crystal
light—still as the grass springs and
the blossoms unfold—still as the
subtlest forces of nature speed on their
way—still as the footsteps of God,
when He visits specially the human
soul—still as the spirit goes to the
resurrection. The example of Jesus
in reference to the time to keep silent
must not be lost upon us. We some-
times forget that the world is not
wholly ruled by talk, that it is not
possible at all times to find an unper-
verting hearing, and we need the
discipline of silence. To Jesus let us
go for an example in reference to
the times and seasons of silence; and
then in the difficult passes of life we


CHAP. XV.


shall say our word calmly, solemnly,
truthfully, and leave the issues with
God, not doubting the fidelity of His
providence.—Henry Bacon.

Silence under misconception.—There
still are few, even under the tuition
of the example of Christ, who can
preserve this supreme silence. It is
not altogether easy, even for the wisest
and the best, to be serenely contented
to be misunderstood—to let their
thought quietly grow, their good in-
tention gradually become known of all
men, their larger plan, their higher
purpose, their prophetic anticipation
of the world-age next to come, wait
its hour, while they themselves may
be regarded as unbelievers, or looked
upon as visionaries, or hardly tolerated
as dangerous Christian teachers; and
they themselves may not expect to
live to see the larger good in which
some day their thought and toil may
find beneficent fruitions. Andif silence
under misconception is no easy virtue
always even for the wisest and the
best, it is a spiritual gift not even
coveted by the great mass of men and
women whom the slightest misunder-
standing may irritate into bitter speech
and the least provocation cause to
bristle up in offensive self-assertion.
The millennium can hardly be expected
to come even to the best society until
men and women shall have mastered
more humbly and unselfishly the secret
of this personal silence of the Christ.
His conduct inthis particular seems
the more remarkable when we consider
what powers of commanding speech
He possessed, had He been pleased
to exercise them in His own behalf.
What a vindication, had He pleased,
He might have given of His life as the
Son of Man, when the Jews falsely
accused Him before Pilate of making
Himself a king in COesar’s place!
What glorious argument of His
doctrine He might have spoken when
Herod asked Him many questions!
What sublime apology for His life as
the Divine Servant of men He might
have left for disciples to publish to the
coming ages after He should have


565


—


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


on a ee ee ee


suffered a martyr’s death! Yet He
chose a kinglier silence for His record,
and Heaven’s approval for His crown.
He could wait, He alone of the great
powers of our human history, until
the glory of the Father which He had
from the beginning should be mani-
fested, and in His name all be
reconciled.—V. Smyth, D.D.


Ver. 10. The envy of the chief priests.
—Christ’s earthly life was in many
respects so unenviable that the thought
of envy at first occasions surprise. He
had no advantage of wealth or station.
His limited successes in preaching the
gospel of His kingdom were chiefly
among poor and despised classes. How
came it, then, that rich and haughty
Sadducees envied Him? The truth is,
that envy is a passion of blacker face
than the mere feeling of disquiet at
sight of the worldly successes of others.
The heart that is apart from God and
unreconciled to Him, lacking a worthy
object for its affection, is a prey to
unrest. Sometimes it must needs be
discontented. And then the sight of
spiritual peace and happiness in others
awakens that sense of lack and that
pain of contrast which we call envy.
It may be hardly more than a tinge
of feeling, or it may grow to be a
dominant and malignant passion. Lord
Bacon said: “A man that hath no
virtue in himself ever envieth virtue in
others, for men’s minds will either feed
upon their own good or upon others’
evil; and who wanteth the one will
prey upon the other; and whoso is out
of hope to attain another's virtue will
seek to come at even hand by depress-
ing another's fortune.”

The choice of alternatives.—Tinworth
has graphically reproduced this scene
in clay, and called it “The World's
Choice.” He thus treats it not only as
an historic but also as a typical fact.
It expresses the spirit of the world.
Note a few of the many elements in it.
1. Hatred of Rome and a desire to
perplex Pilate. 2. Sympathy with the
man who had lifted up his hand against
the hateful rule of Rome and her


560


representatives. 3, Bitter resentment
against Christ for His scathing words
in cleansing the Temple, and His daring
deeds in scourging unholy traffickers.
4, The infectious influence of raging
passion, or the feverish and mad frenzy
of a crowd. 5. The felt inconvenience
of being in the minority.—D. Davies.

The tragedy of Pilates life—There
was nothing to signalise him; he was
no bad example of an average Roman
governor. Ina few months he might
have retired from his post, to end his
days in the merciful obscurity which
has closed over the remains of thousands
such as he. But the pathetic tragedy
of his life lies in this: that suddenly,
by accident (as we speak), without any
wish or choice or consent of his own,
unasked, unwarned, surprised, he is
found to be placed at the very hour
and centre of the sharpest and fiercest
crisis that the world has ever seen.
The heat of the great battle surges with
abrupt vehemence, with furious em-
phasis, round the spot where he happens
to stand. It is the hour of all hours,
and he is in the very thick of its awful
pressure before he is aware of it, before
he can take its measure. Unexpected,
uncaleulated, the eternal war has
swung his way-—the war between good
and evil, God and devil—the death-
struggle for the world’s redemption.
Round him the forces of the spiritual
strife surge and swell. In a moment
he is caught up into them, as into a
whirlpool—round and round they eddy,
they storm, they howl; they clamour
for a decision from him—a decision
swift, momentous, vital. ‘ Yes or no,”
—Canon Scott-Holland.


Ver. 12. The parting of the ways.—
It is very easy aid respectable to place
Pilate in our thoughts upon a pedestal
of infamy; butare we sufficiently alive
to the fact that our responsibility is as
great? We have to pursue a certain
course in regard to Christ. There are
two main divergent roads, and only
two. We must side with the mob, we
must belie our own conscience, as Pilate
did; or we must yield iiim our allegj-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP, XY.


ne ee Og ee es


ance, and crown Him with our love.
Yet, of course, there are degrees in
partisanship. The relations of men to
Christ may be more elaborately de-
scribed. 1. For example, you may put
Christ off. Thousands do that without
the slightest thought of dying infidels,
and finally and deliberately rejecting
the Christian gospel. But, oh, remem-
ber postponement is distinct action !
For the time being it is final. 2. Or
you may patronise Him. You may
clothe Him in the fine robe of genteel
respect ; you may support the institu-
tions of religion that bear His name;
you may never speak against Him—
you may even speak up for His Church.
How high a value, think you, does
Christ place upon this kind of support ?
3. Or, again, you may sell Christ.
You love money. But, it may be, you
cannot make money as you have been
making it and place Him on the throne
of your heart. You are in sight of a
big success; you have only to square
your conscience and the thing will be
done. Oh! face the situation boldly,
know distinctly what you are going to
do with Jesus which is called Christ!
4, Or, once more, you may boycott Him.
In your heart of hearts you acknow-
ledge His claim; yet you never seem
to know Christ in society. You never
speak of Him, you never honour Him,
you never stand up for Him, you treat
Him like a poor relation of whom you
are ashamed. Now, is not each of
these expedients the selection of a way ?
Is it not the adoption of a party? Is
it not enlistment on one side of the
great struggle? The most obvious and
important lesson from this incident
in Pilate’s history is the impossibility
of shirking spiritual responsibilities.—
R. B. Brindley.

A crisis in Pilate’s life-—Quite apart
from that which is at stake, it is a
terrible picture of a man, by no means


all bad, driven by bold, bad men to do
a dreadful deed, a deed from which his
heart and his conscience and his honour
each in turn recoil, a deed which has
made the name of Pontius Pilate stand
out in lurid letters as no other name
ever named among men stands out, as
no other name ever can stand out. It
was not, you must notice, the first or
the second time that Pilate had been
defeated in the attempt to carry out his
will by the determination of the Jews.
He knew well what they were. His
was the famous order which sent into
the Holy City the standards of the
Roman soldiers with the desecrating
image of the emperor; and after one
device and another had failed, after he
had tried persuasion, and had tried the
threat and the shew of violence, they
made him withdraw the order. He it
was who hung up in the palace of the
Roman governor shields inscribed with
the names of the Roman deities; but
here, great as was the outrage to the
Jews, he remained firm, and had to bear
the indignity of a special order from
Tiberius to remove them. In both of
those cases he was wrong from the first
and throughout, and he had to give
way,—-in the one case to submit; in
the other, in the case which fills our
thoughts to-day, he strove to do what
was right, and he had to give way, as
before. It is a terrible warning to a
weak man in a place of responsibility.
—Canon G. F. Browne.

Pilate’s weakness.—‘‘ Poor mockery
of a ruler,” one has said, “set by the
Kternal to do right upon the earth and
afraid to do it! Told so by his own
bosom ; strong enough in his legions,
and in the truth itself, to have saved
the Innocent One and kept his own
soul,—he could only think of the
apparently expedient. Type of the
politician of all ages who forgets that
only the right is the strong or wise.”


567





CHAL. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


SS eS eee


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 16—20.
(ParatieL: Marr. xxvii. 27-31.)


The Son of God mocked and wownded.—Solar eclipses are not miraculous
appearances. Men acquainted with the situations and revolutions of the
celestial orbs foretell these appearances. The humiliation of the Son of God
is the eclipse of the Sun of Righteousness. Infamy and reproach covered Him
in the days of His flesh, and toward the end of these days intercepted His
rays, hiding, like a dark body, the brightness of His glory from the eyes of
the world. Foreseeing this, a prophet says, “ His visage was so marred more
than any man,” etc.; and relating this, an apostle says, “‘ Who being in the
form of God,” ete. The obscuration of the Sun of Righteousness in His
humiliation was not, however, a total eclipse. A prophet foretells one day
that shall be “not day nor night,” the light being not clear nor dark, but a
mixture of both qualities. So is the light of the Sun of Righteousness in
His humiliation; and in looking down to Him at this period, we behold an
unparalleled mixture of light and shade, of glory and infamy, of honour. and
dishonour, and of beauty, meanness, and shame.

I. Concerning the Sufferer.—1. The Sufferer is the Son of the Highest.
“The Highest” is one of the lofty vitles which distinguish and exalt the
living and true God; and “the Son of the Highest ” is a glorious title, with
which, according to the prediction of Gabriel, the Saviour of the world is
honoured. The real import of it is given by the apostle when he affirms Him
to be “the brightness of glory, and the express image of the Father.” Every
perfection essential to the Father dwells bodily and essentially in the Son;
and the singular titles, “Own Son,” ‘Dear Son,” “Beloved Son,” “ Only
Begotten Son,” exalt Him above creatures, and equal Him to the Highest.
2. The Sufferer is the Kinsman of the human race. To a part of our race
the Lord Jesus bears a special relation, but He dwells in the nature common
to the whole. Partaking of flesh and blood, of which all, as well as the
children, are partakers, every man under heaven, upon the revelation of Him,
is warranted to call Him kinsman. 3. The Sufferer is the Undertaker for the
elect. All that the precept of the law of works required to be done by them
He undertook to perform, and what its penalty denounced He engaged Himself
to bear. Nor hath He failed in either. The satisfaction which by suffering
and dying He made is the shield that protects them from its vengeance.
4. The Sufferer is the Horn of Salvation which God raised up in the house of
David. The horn of an animal is its weapon, both for defence and vengeance,
With this it defends itself, and with this it pushes down the enemy. In some
prophecies horn is an emblem of the power of a king and the strength of his
kingdom, and with the highest propriety is transferred to the Lamb of God,
in whose office the powers of salvation and destruction are vested, and in
whose administration these powers are exerted. The horns of the bulls of
Bashan were not able to break the horn of the Lamb. 5. The Sufferer is the
Author and Finisher of faith. In His own exercise He is the Prince and
Leader who goes before believers, and who, in trusting and hoping Himself,
leaves them a finished and perfect pattern of trust and hope. 6. The Sufferer
is the Sun of Righteousness, or Light of the World. In His birth He was
deeply obscured. From His agony and seizure in the garden to His death and
resurrection this glorious Sun was thought to be totally eclipsed. His visage
was marred, His face discoloured with spittle, His head crowned with thorns,
His back furrowed with cords, and His hands and feet pierced with nails. But


oGP


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP, XV.
3 ets SIN 5


under this darkness the title Sun of Righteousness existed, and through it light
beams upon the world.

II. Concerning the indignities which our Lord suffered.—These are related
in the text without colouring and without reflexions. The holy writer neither
praises the fortitude and glory of the Sufferer, nor reprobates the baseness and
inhumanity of the wicked by whom He was abused. Facts are truly stated
in the relation, and simplicity is rigidly observed. 1. When made under the
law, our Lord subjected Himself to the suffering of these indignities. 2. In
suffering the insolences of the ungodly our Lord was not ashamed and con-
founded. Behold the Sufferer, not a desponding and cowardly but a bold and
mighty Sufferer, whose back, furrowed by the lash, and covered with the
scarlet robe, upheld the universe—whose countenance, marred with shame and
spitting, was harder than flint and bolder than Lebanon—and whose faith,
assailed and affronted by every indignity, stood firmer than the pillars of
heaven and earth! Trusting in God, and beholding the joy set before Him,
He despised the shame, endured the pain, and triumphed over the diversion
and wantonness of wickedness and inhumanity. 3. The Lord Jesus suffered
these indignities for and instead of the elect. Indignation at the rudeness and
brutality of the soldiers is not the only passion which the record of these abuses
should kindle in our breasts, Rather it should kindle indignation against
ourselves, for whose iniquities He submitted to abuse. 4. The suffering of
‘hese indignities was a part of the ransom which our Kinsman gave for the
redemption of the elect. Redemption is an expensive undertaking; none but
Himself was equal to it, and it cost Him dear. 5. In suffering these indignities
our Lord Jesus left us an example that we should follow His steps.

III. Concerning the glory of Christ in suffering these indignities.—The
sacred writer relates His sufferings without revealing His glory. But by the
light of other parts of Scripture we behold it ; and without a display of it
the knowledge of the fellowship of His sufferings could not be attained. 1. In
suffering these indignities the glory of His faith and trust appears bright and
resplendent. Unmoved, undismayed, unashamed, He stood firm, and without
fainting held fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end. 2. In the common hall, where the Lord Jesus suffered the indignities,
the glory of His love appears in splendour and dignity. Observe the scarlet
robe, the reed, and the crown of thorns; behold the vilest ruffians bowing the
knee, striking, reviling, and spitting upon the Blessed and Only Potentate, and
say, ‘‘ Behold how He loved us!” 3. In suffering the reproaches and indignities
of the ungodly glory appears in the zeal of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. In
suffering the indignities and insolences of the wicked the humility of the Lord
Jesus is glorious. Found in fashion as a man, they treated Him not as a man,
but trampled on Him as a worm. Astonishing humiliation! Astonishing,
indeed, when we consider that He humbled Himself so low to declare the
righteousness of God, in “raising up the poor out of the dust, and lifting up
the beggar” and the criminal “from the dunghill, to set them among princes,
and to make them inherit the throne of glory.” 5. In suffering the insolences
of brutish men the meekness of Jesus Christ is glorious. The testimony of the
false witnesses He heard in silence. The rudeness of the wicked, who spit in
His face, and buffeted Him, and smote Him with the palms of their hands,
He endured with composure. The derision and pain in the common hall He
suffered with boldness and mildness. Nothing defective appeared in His temper,
His language, nor in His behaviour. 6. In suffering the insolences and abuses
of men the patience of Jesus Christ is glorious. ‘‘ He suffered, but threatened
not ”—suffered not with stoical apathy and sullen and philosophical pride, but
with bold tranquillity and reverential and humble and holy composure. 7. In


569


CHAP, XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


ae ‘





suffering the


resignation of the Lord Jesus is glorious. ©


As the hour of


suffering approached a conflict was felt—a conflict not between sin and grace,
but between the weakness of His human nature and the strength and glory


of His grace; while at the same time


resignation triumphed (John xii. 27).


Another conflict was in His agony, when resignation also triumphed (Mark


xiv. 36).


The palm, the scourge, the reed, the thorn, the purple, the spittle,


the cross, and the nails were bitter and painful infusions; yet these, all these
dregs, He submitted to wring out and drink.

Lessons.—1. The harmony between the predictions of prophets and the
relations of evangelists concerning the sufferings of Christ is obvious and
striking. 2. In His person and office the Lord Jesus is inconceivably glorious.


“ Brightness of Glory ’


is one of His distinguishing titles.


3. The grand design


of revelation is to manifest the glory of Christ in His person—God-man. 4, The


various representations which have bee
glory of Christ are suitable means of
His death at His table.


heart for shewing
exhibited of the person, sufferings,


n made of the person, sufferings, and
working in believers a lively frame of


5. The various representations


and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ lead


to the satisfactory answer of a question of the highest importance to the
unbelieving, the ungodly, and the unholy. “ What must we do to be saved?”
Behold, O perishing and helpless creatures ! behold the Doer and the Sufferer !
To the Doer and Sufferer thou must be united, betrothed, and joined, and
married. Obey His voice, and receive His grace; believe in His name, and


rejoice in His salvation.—A. Shanks.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 17-19. Lessons from the nock-
ery of the soldiers.—l. Nice it the
conduct of the tormontors e* Jesus
the abuse of one of the gifts of God.
Laughter is a kind of spice which the
Creator has given to be taken along
with the somewhat unpalatable food
of ordinary life. But when directed
against sacred things and holy per-
sons, when used to belittle and de-
grade what is great and reverend,
when employed as a weapon with
which to torture weakness and cover
innocence with ridicule, then, instead
of being the foam on the cup of the
banquet of life, it becomes a deadly
poison. Laughter guided these soldiers
in their inhuman acts; it concealed
from them the true nature of what
they were doing; and it wounded
Christ more deeply than even the
scourge of Pilate. 2. It was against
the kingly office of the Redeemer
that the opposition of men was directed
on this occasion. The soldiers con-
sidered it an absurdity and a joke
that one apparently so mean, friend-


570


less, and powerless should make any
such pretensions. Many a time since
then has the same derision been
awakened by this claim of Christ.
He is the King of nations. But
earthly kings and statesmen have ridi-
culed the idea that His will and His
law should control them in their
schemes and ambitions. Even where
His authority is nominally acknow-
ledged, both aristocracies and demo-
cracies are slow to recognise that their
legislation and customs should be
regulated by His words. Most vital
of all is the acknowledgment of Christ’s
kingship in the realm of the individual
life; but it is here that His will is
most resisted. 3. In what Jesus bore
on this occasion. He was suffering
for us. Thorns were the sign of the
curse. And does not the thorn, staring
from the naked bough of winter in
threatening ugliness, lurking beneath
the leaves or flowers of summer to
wound the approaching hand, tearing
the clothes or the flesh of the traveller
who tries to make his way through


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XV;





the thicket, burning in the flesh where
it has sunk, fitly stand for that side
of life which we associate with sin—
the side of care, fret, pain, disappoint-
ment, disease, and death? In a word,
it symbolises the curse. But it was
the mission of Christ to bear the curse ;
and as He lifted it on His own head,
He took it off the world. 4. Christ’s
sufferings are a rebuke to our softness
and self-pleasing. It is not, indeed,
wrong to enjoy the comforts and the
pleasures of life. God sends these,
and if we receive them with gratitude
they may lift us nearer to Himself.
But we are too terrified to be parted
from them, and too afraid of pain
and poverty. Many would like to be
Christians, but are kept back from
decision by dread of the laughter of
profane companions or by the prospect
of some worldly loss. But we cannot
look at the suffering Saviour without
being ashamed of such cowardly fears.
—J. Stalker, D.D.

Christ was intended for the whole
world.—Let us see the Divine inten-
tion in the Crucifixion. In that are
mingling lines of glory and of humilia-
tion. The King of humanity appears
with a scarlet camp-mantle flung
contemptuously over His shoulders ;
but to the eye of faith it is the purple
of empire. He is crowned with the
acanthus wreath; but the wreath of
mockery is the royalty of our race.
He is crucified between two thieves ;
but His Cross is a judgment-throne,
and at His right hand and His left are
the two separated worlds of belief
and unbelief. All the Evangelists tell
us that a superscription, a title of
accusation, was written over His Cross ;
two of them add that it was written
over Him “‘in letters of Greek, and
Latin, and Hebrew” (or in Hebrew,
Greek, Latin). In Hebrew,—the sacred
tongue of patriarchs and seers, of the
nation all whose members were in idea
and destination those of whom God
said, “‘ My prophets.” In Greek,—the
“musical and golden tongue which
gave a soul to the objects of sense and
a body te the abstractions of philo-





sophy”; the language of a people
whose mission it was to give a prin-
ciple of fermentation to all races of
mankind, susceptible of those subtle
and largely indefinable influences
which are called collectively Progress.
In Latin,—the dialect of a people
originally the strongest of all the sons
of men, The three languages repre-
sent the three races and their ideas,—
revelation, art, literature; progress,
war, and jurisprudence. Wherever
these three tendencies of the human
race exist, wherever annunciation can
be made in human language, wherever
there is a heart to sin, a tongue to
speak, and eye to read, the Cross has
a message.—Bishop Wm. Alexander.


Ver. 17. The crown of thorns.—The
imposition of the mock crown was only
one among many indignities. It was
not only a mock crown, but a circlet
of torture.

I. To wear this crown Christ had
laid aside that of Divine majesty.—
We can pity the fallen and weep for
the great who are degraded, or who
are made to feel the hardship of re-
versed fortune—we cah measure the
depth of the descent because they are
human; but we have no power to
gauge the height from which He came
when He “humbled Himself and
became obedient unto death.”

Il. By wearing this crown of
mockery Christ added a glory to that
He wears eternally.—He conquered
suffering, sorrow, death, for us, and
now every branch and spike of the
mock crown is a jewel inwrought with
that of His Divine majesty. Thus the
very scorn of man Christ transforms
into the sign of Divine regal power.

III. By wearing the mock crown
Christ gained the further right to
bestow a crown of life on all the
faithful.

IV. Consider the power Christ
gained over human souls by wearing
that mock crown.—1l. Men are led
to mourn the guilt that brought Him
such pain. 2. He gains such intense
affection as He could have obtained


ATI


CHAP. XV.


in no other way. We should not have
loved mere majesty or power, however
great; but Jesus we can love as God
manifest in the flesh. “The love of
Christ constraineth.”—Anon.

The crown of thorns.—In the
thorns composing the Redeemer’s
crown we see refiected—l. The true
character of sin as the deadly curse
in the life and history of man. 2. The
triumphant conquest and carrying
away of sin, 3. The glorious trans-
formation of the consequences of sin.
4, A symbol of Christ’s work. Crowned
with thorns! Oh the deep disgrace to
those who did it! Yet what so pathe-
tically appropriate, what so beauti-
fully significant, that at the close and
climax of such a life as His, full of
travail of soul and agony of spirit,
bitterness and reproach of men and
devils and sin’s burden, there should
be placed on His head a crown such
as should be the expression and picture
of it all! Jesus Christ, the ideal King
of humanity, who shall yet be historic
King, found His kingdom “lying in
the beast” of prejudice and passion,
and ever since with kingly courage
He has been engaged in lifting it
into the “beauty of the Lord”—
bitter, heart-breaking, thorny work.—
W. B. Melville.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





The crown of thorns.—I. Jesus Christ
claimed the highest dignity : “ King.”


—-Proved by—l. His own words and





deeds, 2. The service of angels. 3. The —


dread of demons. 4. The phenomena
of nature.
departed.
God.


6. The acknowledgment of


5. The appearance of the —


TI. The claim of Christ to the


highest dignity was treated with con-
tempt.—“ Crown of thorns.” 1. Its
reason. (1) Its ordinary human ap-
pearance. (2) The spirituality of His
kingdom. (3) The preconceived notions
of men. 2. Its form. Mockery and


re


pain. This arose from—(1) A cruel —


occupation : “soldiers.” (2) Servile
obedience. (3) Heathenish cruelty.
(4) Example of superiors. (5) Sinful
excitement.

III. Contempt for the claim of
Christ to the highest dignity was


a


overruled to the advantage of Christ.— —
1. Suffering revealed His greatness. —


Love, patience, forgiveness.
ness gave value to His sufferings.


Sufferings of the God-man, dignity of


Godhead, and sufferings of manhood— ~


atonement. The “ curse” represented


by the “thorns” becomes a blessing —


represented by the “crown of thorns.”
—B. D. Johns.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—A4l.


(Parattets: Marr. xxvii. 32-56; Luxe xxiii. 26-49; JoHn xx. 17-37.)


Lessons from Calvary.—l. Let us be willing to bear the cross for Him who


bore the cross for us (ver. 21).—They compel Simon to bear His cross.
reproach, and none would do it but by


It was a


compulsion, “We must not think it


strange if crosses come upon us suddenly, and we be surprised by them.” The


cross represents the sufferings which we are called upon to bear as Christians. —


“ Gross-bearing and self-forgetfulness fitly go together (as in Matt. xvi. 24); for
he that will not deny himself the pleasures of sin and the advantages of the


world for Christ, when it comes to the
his cross.” In running the race set


push will never have the heart to take up
before us there is often a cross in the
way—something which is not only not joyous, but even grievous.


This is no


mournful aspect of discipleship ; for if we are willing to bear the cross for Christ,
we shall be thereby brought into closer fellowship with Christ.
II. The place of death to Him is the beginning of life to us (ver. 22).—


“Once a Golgotha, Calvary has ceased


to be a place of skulls. Where men


went once to die they go now to live.” There was opened the fountain for sin


572


2. Great- —





HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XV.








and uncleanness—for your sins and mine, for the sins of the whole world.
Have you been to the place called Calvary ?

III. The manner of death He endured for us shews with what manner of |
love He loved us (ver. 24).—Crucifixion was regarded as the appropriate
punishment for the most infamous characters. ‘The cross being placed in
position, the victim was within reach of every hand that might choose to strike
a blow, and near enough also to note every gesture of insult, and to hear every
mocking word levelled at him.” Yet for us, for our salvation, Christ was
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. The rocks rent asunder when
Jesus died ; and surely our hearts must be harder than granite if the story of
the Cross fail to touch them. Christ died for the ungodly, and He will not see
of the travail of His soul and be satisfied until every heart is renewed, as
it has been redeemed.

IV. The cruel challenge (vers. 29-32).—Could our Lord’s enemies but have
grasped the truth comprehended in their sarcastic taunt, tears of gratitude
would have dimmed their eyes as they learned that Christ had voluntarily laid
by the power He possessed to save Himself, that by His death the way might
be opened for fallen man to return to God. In wilful and therefore criminal
ignorance the terrible act of crucifixion was sanctioned and carried out. It is
possible for men to be fulfilling Scripture prophecies even when they are
breaking Scripture precepts.

V. The two signs—light at birth, and darkness at death (ver. 33). At the
Saviour’s birth heaven’s host rejoiced and the dazzling lustre of the glory of
the Lord was manifest. At the Saviour’s death the prophecy was fulfilled,
“J will-cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the
clear day.” So awestruck were the people that one heathen writer said
concerning it, “There was a general belief that either the God of nature was
suffering, or the machine of the world was tumbling to ruin.”

VI. The ery of a Saviour’s agony (ver. 34).—It is as though He had said,
“JT could have borne all else—the being despised and rejected of men; I could
have endured the outward pain, the bodily anguish; but oh! My Father, Thy
smile has been My light, Thy presence and fellowship My joy. Why hast Thou
forsaken Me?” We have here the summit of human bliss—‘ My God! My
God!” We have here the lowest depth of human woe—the being God-forsaken.

VII. Triumph in death (ver. 37).—He commended His soul to God and
expired. He triumphed in death at Calvary. So may we.

VIII. The signification of the rent veil (ver. 38).—The kingdom of heaven
is open to all believers. We may now draw near in full assurance of faith; for
we may boldly “enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way which He hath consecrated for us through the veil—that is to say, His
flesh.” —S. Oliver.


Ver. 25. The Son of God nailed to the Cross.—Upon the crucifixion of a good
man Xenophon or Livy would have lavished all the stores of descriptive
language, loaded the memory of the murderers with every indignant epithet,
and honoured the virtue and heroism of the sufferer with the highest applause.
Mark despatches his history of the crucifixion of the Son of God in one word,
saying, with apparent coolness and bold simplicity, ‘ And they crucified Him.”
Taught to record the deed and suppress the reflexion, he hath, however, given
the world all that faith desires for a foundation, a fact under the hand and seal
of the Spirit of truth.

I. The crucifiers—1. Israelites and Gentiles, the two great divisions of men
at that time, took part in it; the agency of both was criminal, though not
equally criminal. ‘He that delivered Me to thee,” said our Lord to the


o73


‘aap. xv.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oo SS SS a





Roman governor, “ hath the greater sin.” The agency of Judas and Caiaphas
was more criminal than the agency of Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the
Gentiles were less blamable than the people of Israel. By the hands of wicked
men Christ was crucified and slain, but their wicked hands did that which the
righteous counsel of God determined before to be done. The determination of
His counsel was just and holy; the deed of the ungodly assembly who executed
it was wicked and unjust. 2. The crucifiers knew not what they did.
Ignorance, though neither the justification nor the excuse of wickedness, is an
alleviation pleadable in applications to the throne for pardon.

Il. The Crucified.—l. The Man Christ Jesus is Son and Servant and Elect
of God (Ps. ii. 7; Isa. xlii, 1),—Son, the Brightness of glory, the express
Image, and in every perfection the Equal of the Father, by whom He is
begotten; Servant, righteous Servant, who, doing the work which pleased the
Father, glorified Him on earth, finishing it by bowing His head and giving up
the Ghost; Elect of God, and precious Chosen of Him from eternity, and
foreordained to obedience and suffering before the corner-stones of creation were
fastened. 2. The Man Christ Jesus is the Seed of the woman, and the Seed of
Abraham, the Root and Offspring of David, and the Son of Mary (Gen. in. 15,
xxii. 18; Rev. xxii. 16; Luke i. 32; Acts iL 30). These titles, which break
forth along the line of His ancestry according to the flesh, are proofs that He is
the Saviour promised to the world and invitations to believe and praise the love
of God, who in “the fulness of time sent forth His Son,” ete. 3. The Man
Christ Jesus is the Mediator, the Surety, and the Messenger of the covenant. In
the covenant, of which Christ Jesus is mediator, there is an old and a new testament.
The efficacy of His mediation, running along the Old Testament, breaks forth
with greater lustre and vigour under the New; and “ by means of His death
for the redemption of the transgressions under the first testament, they who
are called” under both, whether Israelites or Gentiles, “receive the promise
of eternal inheritance.” The Mediator of the covenant is the Surety of it. The
vigour of His suretyship, together with its precious effects, extends itself to both
testaments of the covenant; but under the new its beauty is more conspicuous
and its effects more extensive. The Mediator and Surety is the Messenger
of the covenant. The glad tidings of a new and everlasting covenant He
published to the world in paradise, proclaimed by His holy prophets, sealed
and ratified with His own blood upon the Cross, and by the mouth of His apostles,
with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, made them known to all nations
for the obedience of faith. 4. The Man Christ Jesus is the Priest, the Prophet,
and the King whom God hath raised up and anointed. Salvation, effected by
His death as a priest and revealed in Ilis Word as a prophet, is completed under
His administration asa king. While on earth He executed the offices in His
humiliation ; and after rising and ascending into heaven, He executes them in
His exaltation. Their glory is not an occasional and transient blaze, but
a sunshine, which shall continue for ever, and fill the heaven of heavens with
brightness of glory through eternity.

Til. The crucifying.—Christ Jesus is the Man by Himself. Among the
sons of the mighty none is equal to Him, none is like Him, and there is none
besides Him. The crucifying is a deed of which, in all its circumstances, there
is no example in the history of punishment. 1. The crucifying of the Man
Christ Jesus is exhibited to the world as a deed which executed the counsel of
God (Acts ii, 23). 2. The crucifying of the Man Christ Jesus is exhibited to
the world as a deed that fulfilled many prophecies of Scripture (Gen. ii. 15 ;
Ps, xxii. 16; Isa. liii.; Zech. xii, 10; Dan. ix. 26). 3. The crucifying of the
Man Christ Jesus is exhibited to the world as the infliction of a penalty.
The crucifiers beheld it as the punishment which their laws inflicted upon


574


—


FIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XV.





=


blasphemers of God and the king; but “He had done violence to none,
neither was any deceit in His mouth. It pleased the Lord to bruise Him,
to put Him to the grief” of dying on the Cross, and to “make His soul an
offering for sin.” In the judgment of God, which is according to truth, the
crucifying of the Lord of Glory, in our nature and stead, is the punishment
that transgressors of the law under which He was made deserved. 4. The
crucifying of the Man Christ Jesus is exhibited to the world as the operation
of a curse. ‘The curse is the sentence which the Lawgiver denounced upon
the transgressor of His law. 5. The crucifying of the Man Christ Jesus is
exhibited to the world as the expedient of reconciliation for iniquity. In this
expedient the wisdom and love of God break forth to the world, and meeting
together with His holiness, mercy, truth, and righteousness, glorify themselves
in the highest.

IV. Wonders in the Crucifixion—Here God and man, sin and holiness, love
and hatred, weakness and strength, honour and dishonour, death and victory,
the blessing and the curse, meet together, and exert themselves wondrously,
forming coalitions of conflicting causes, and producing effects apparently
discordant, yet perfectly harmonious.—A. Shanks.


The call of the Cross.—The Cross is the symbol of the eternal love of God, and
it is the symbol of the perfect life of man. The call of the Cross is like the call
of other facts of nature and of the universe. It is like the call of the sunshine and
the rain, and no more mysterious. The sunshine and the rain call the farmer
to sow the seed to co-operate with nature, to link his little life with the great
life of God. The one is no more mysterious than the other. The farmer labours
in a narrow sphere; the Christian labours in ali the spheres. The Cross shews
to us the true life of man—the Christ-life.

I. The Cross calls all men to personal holiness.—The end of salvation is that
men may have the very life of God. There are two elements in this idea of
holiness. The sacrifices when they were brought to be offered, if they were
acceptable sacrifices, must be of animals in perfect health, perfect physical health
and purity. And so the primary idea of holiness is that of healthfulness or of
purity. We speak of the sacrifice of Christ, the stainloss purity of Christ: to be
fit to be offered to God as He was—to that all men are called. But then there is
another idea in connexion with these sacrifices. Thc first idea was the idea of
health and purity; the second idea is of something which is set apart to the
service of God. Now we are to understand that goodness does not imply weak-
ness. Goodness implies the finest strength and the finest beauty and the most
finished culture, all set apart to God. There has been an idea in other ages that
what we call the heroic virtues—bravery, courage—that these were the things
which require strength. But love requires more strength than all the heroic
virtues combined. It was a braver thing for Ignatius Loyola, when that rabble
of Chinese turned upon him and a rude ruffian rushed up and spat in his face,
quietly to look down and smile upon him and commend him to the love of God,
than for Marshal Ney at Waterloo to lead the Old Guard. The one had all the
enthusiasm and passion of a great occasion; the other saw ten thousand men
against him and only God above. A man once said: “If I were an artist, I
should like to paint my ideal of God; I should paint Him, not as some have
painted Him, as a feeble old man with snowy hair; I should paint Him, not as
others have painted Him, seated upon a lofty throne, with thousands bowing
before Him ; I should paint my ideal of God as a great cloud, and out of the cloud
an outstretched hand, and in our weakness and guilt, in our consciousness of our
utter impotence to be that to which we are called, I would see that hand reaching


from beyond the stars.”





579





CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.
Ea ROO

II. The Cross calls all to fill their lives with service and sacrifice for —
humanity.—Christ’s ideal is to become our life. Not only are we to become like
Him, not only are we to think His thoughts, but we are to do as He did. I some-
times wonder how it is that people have so mistaken emphasis, and have spent
so much time in seeking to adjust the death of Christ to a philosophical system,
when all the while there is the example of One who went about doing good, who ©
bound up the broken-hearted, who was seeking opportunities to be helpful to those
who are in suffering. Itis only one thing that can make a cross, and that is love;
and love must go into that shape, because love means sacrifice. Love always
hangs on the cross. The more we love, the more we must suffer. The more our
hearts are tied to our dear ones, the more awfully will they be broken if those
dear ones do not realise the life to which they are called.

III. We are called by that Cross of Christ to believe in the triumph of the
truth and righteousness.—That shews us, as nothing else does, what has been —
spent—that poverty, that sorrow, that sin, can be destroyed. And in our hours
of darkness, when we feel as if everything were going awry, when it seems to us
as if there were no God at the heart of things, when we look up into the great
wide sky inquiring wherefore we were born, for earnest or for jest—in those ©
moments, when it seems as if nothing but a heartless and cruel fate were at the
heart of things, the voice from the cross, serene as the music of the angel-choirs, —
rings out its inquiry, “Can you believe that a work which was baptised with
the blood of the Son of God, and which Jesus died to start, can ever be
defeated ?”—A. H. Bradford, D.D.


Ver. 26. The title on the Cross.—That white board has long since perished—
it has crumbled to dust ; and yet there is a glorious sense in which the inscription
can never be obliterated. Fire cannot burn it out ; waters cannot wash it away ;
spears cannot erase the wondrous words; and to-day, in living letters of glorious
light, it stands out for us and for every living creature to read that Jesus—this
Jesus of Nazareth—is King—King of the Jews and King of the world.

J. What this inscription meant to Pilate——It was Pilate’s revenge on the

riests ; it was a studied insult to them. It was one of those sarcastic sallies in
which the Romans delighted. Pilate must have fallen very low to make scoff
and sport at such a time. There is no knowing where a man may be led when
he once gives way to revenge. Nothing is sacred then; he will trample under-
foot the most solemn thing; he will disregard the most solemn moment. For
ever the character of Pilate stands out as the character of a man who knew the
right, but did it not—who was convinced of the true path, but deliberately turned
round and walked in the false.

II. What the priests could have seen in that inscription—To them it was
one of the most startling and searching sentences upon which their eyes had.
ever looked, and we can see from the wondrous story how vexed, how bitter, they
were when they found out the trick that Pilate had played upon them. Why,
there was the very thing they least loved—that proclamation of the Kingship of
this Man dying on the Cross. They could not reconcile His lowly origin and His
ignominious death with His Divine claims and glorious title. And that is the
difficulty with many even now. The real distinctive character of Christianity
is that it is independent of all outward and material conditions of greatness,

III. What could have been the special relation to Jesus, as He hung upon
the Cross, of that inscription above His head ?—It was written in jest—but
there was a tremendous meaning in those words! There, above the Cross, is
inscribed His sweetest name. Jesus! Mystic, blessed, soul-healing name!
Jehovah! Emmanuel! Shepherd ! Unspeakable Gift ! Saviour! Name of sweet-
ness! Name of power! Name fer the guilty! Nameforthe lost! Name for all


576





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARR. CHAP. XV.





nations! Note also that on the Cross is a mark of the wondrous condescension
of Jesus, for there is “ Nazareth,” “ Jesus of Nazareth,” despised Nazareth. Ay,
and there I see also His rightful dignity, “ King.” But where is His throne,
and where His sceptre and His crown? Ah! don’t you see them? That
wooden Cross is His throne ; the nails in His hands are His sceptre ; those twisted
thorns form His crown. ‘He conquered when He fell”; He reigned when He
died ; and never king was more kingly than Jesus on the Cross. But I see also
a hint of His future glory. “King of the Jews.” He is coming again; and
‘‘when He cometh to make up His jewels,” as the children sing, among the
brightest of His crown shall be some of the children of Abraham, “ bone of His
bone, and flesh of His flesh”; and though now they are cast out and scattered,
though they are a nation and yet no nation, though indeed they have no human
king and no human governor, when He comes, He who scattered Israel shall
gather them, and reign over the people who once pierced Him.

IV. What is it to us?—What is it to me? Some one has said that that
inscription on the Cross was the first printed sermon. It was printed in three
languages—in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Hebrew was the language of religion,
Greek the language of culture, Latin the language of power. Was it not
prophetic? Has it nut its messages for to-day? Yes. What is the message of
the Cross for men of culture? It is this: that Jesus must be their King, Jesus
must be owned as Master of the mind and Lord of every gift and talent. Oh
that to-day intellect, genius, science, art, literature, and all culture might own
the kingship of Christ! And what shall we say of the Latin—the emblem of
power and empire? Christ must be King—King over men of influence, men of
power, statesmen, rulers, magistrates, judges. King in the senate-house, King
on the bench, King in our courts of law, King in all our local assemblies.
Dare we forget it? Woe be to our dear land if we do! And what of religion Q
Oh, if He is not King here, religion will be the deadest, dullest, dreariest,” most
abominable thing of all! Oh that we who profess to be men and women religious
in heart and life may truly own the kingship of Christ! Now I want us all to
recognise in these three languages emblems of the three parts of our own lives;
and I want us to say to Jesus Christ, ‘Oh, Christ of the Cross, Saviour of men !
come and rule in my life, not in one part of it, but in all parts of it—come and
make me all Thine own.”—W. J. Mayers.


Jesus our King.— Behold your king!” exclaimed Pilate to the Jews, as they
erowded round his tribunal to witness the condemnation of Jesus. The words
may have been spoken in sarcasm ; but we would hope they were rather intended
as a last appeal to the compassion of the populace. Some have even thought
that they embodied the secret impression of Pilate’s own mind. Certain it is
that he was alarmed by the peculiarity of Christ’s appearance and manner ; and
possibly enough he entertained a fear lest He should have a real claim to the
title thus assigned Him. But, with whatever motive he uttered the wcrds—
whether in derision or in seriousness, in contempt or in faith—his tongue was
the instrument of Providence in declaring a great and stupendous truth; and
that truth he afterwards recorded, in “ the three great languages of the ancient
world—the languages of culture, of empire, and of religion ”—upon the Cross
of Christ.

I. The kingly relation in which Jesus stands to us is far more definite and
intelligible than it was to the Jews.—1. Though He was indeed their king
by the strongest claims—announced to them as such by prophecy, expected by
them in that character for ages, and manifested to them by demonstrations of
miraculous power—yet it must be confessed that there was much difficulty and
much obscurity hovering about His pretensions, when He stood before the


PP 577


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST..MARK.


Ce eee ee ee ee ee SSS


tribunal of Pilate or hung upon the tree of Calvary. It must have been a
hard matter even for the eye of faith to discover in that apparently helpless and
destitute Object any appearance of regal dignity. He seemed abandoned alike by
heaven and earth-—One whose condition was that of utter hopelessness, whose
“in was inevitable, and who was only rescued from absolute contempt by the
placid dignity of His manner. Accordingly we find that even those who had
seen His arm uplifted in the majesty of omnipotence, and heard His voice when
it hushed the tumult of the waves or called the dead back to earth, made ship-
wreck of their faith in this hour of trial. Although therefore a keen observer
of mankind might, as Pilate did, perceive in the conduct of Jesus symptoms of
an extraordinary and wondrous character, how were the multitude to discriminate
or to recognise a King in One condemned;to crucifixion as a criminal ? But we
are under no such difficulty. To us Jesus appears not as a culprit, but as the
Conqueror of death and the Lord of life. Why, then, should we hesitate to
acknowledge Him as our King? 2. The Jews were differently situated from us
with respect to Christ, as they had received no positive, public, and official
assurance from Him of His being their king. It did not enter into His design
to announce Himself formally to them in that capacity. He was, in fact, their
spiritual, not temporal sovereign ; but as long as He was present amongst them
in person He could never have made them comprehend the distinction. He
therefore left it to His apostles to explain fully the nature of His kingdom,
its extent, and the qualifications requisite for membership in it. Now the
explanation which the apostles gave in consequence of that commission we are
in full possession of. We find in the New Testament an account of a spiritual
kingdom, whose Invisible Head is Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords.
3. The Jews had received no such benefits as they expected from Christ as their
King. He had, it is true, proved a great and signal benefactor to them in
many respects; but the blessings of His kingdom were not dispensed so long as
He remained on earth in the flesh. The Holy Spirit, who was to be the agent
in dispensing the blessings and extending the bounds of that kingdom, did not
openly commence His work till Christ’s bodily presence was withdrawn. We,
on the other hand, have from infancy shared all the present privileges and
advantages of Christ’s kingdom, and have been cheered with the hope of those
which are hereafter to be revealed. We therefore are utterly without excuse
if we do not acknowledge and reverence Him as our King. In His hands the
Father has been pleased to place the absolute control of all our destinies. He
is our Ruler, our Protector, our Example, and our Judge.

II. The feelings with which we should regard Jesus as our King.—1. With
reverence. The very thought of Him should stifle every lofty imagination and
hush every unguarded word. We bend ourselves, with a feeling of awe, before
an earthly monarch: should we not, then, present ourselves in a constant
attitude of humility before the Supreme Sovereign of creation? Let this
thought operate upon the minds of those who are in the habit of speaking lightly
of the gospel, and using the name of Christ more familiarly than they would
that of a common acquaintance. This practice, though originating often in
thoughtlessness, is an offence of a very serious cast, which blunts the delicate
edge of spiritual susceptibility. 2. With love. An earthly sovereign, by a few
acts of munificence, or even by a few generous expressions, finds an easy passage
to the hearts of his people. But has Christ conferred no more than one or two
benefits upon us? Has He uttered only a few expressions of kindness? Surely,
if ever sovereign deserved the love of His subjects, it must be He who, after
having said and done everything that could encourage and console, laid down
His life for them! What an inversion is it, not merely of right reasoning, but
of proper and honourable feeling, when we loudly extol those whose ambition has


578


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. CHAP. XV.


ee a a a a aa aE a


led thousands to death, as sheep to the slaughter, but dare to depreciate that
Divine Mercy which could offer up itself a sacrifice for the ungodly!

III. Where especially shall we offer our homage to Christ as King ?—He
is not to be seen, as formerly, walking amongst men, in the humble state of a
companion, or the still more lowly form of a servant. Nor is He at present to
be seen by us in the magnificence of celestial splendour. The time indeed will
come when the eye that now looks to Him in faith shall actually behold Him
in all the brightness of His glory. But the mists of earth cannot yet be
penetrated, and we must be satistied with a distant and mental contemplation
of our King. Yet is He not far from any one of us; and occasions there are
when we may know that He is specially among us, to receive our worship and
our praise. 1. He marks the looks, the gestures, nay, the inmost thoughts, of
those who present themselves in the courts of His house. And there also those
who are thus seen by Him may with the eye spiritual behold Him in return—
may see Him smiling benignly, may hear Him whispering peace, and may feel
Him in their souls blessing their efforts and strengthemng their resolutions.
2. We may behold and worship Him in the retirement of private devotion.
When, bowed down under the sense of sin, or in affliction or sickness, we raise
our hearts to heaven, we may see Him bending from His throne of love to hear
our prayer and recommend it by His advocacy to His Father. 3. But surely
our homage is more particularly due to Him when we kneel before Him at
that altar which He Himself consecrated as the peculiar scene of His intercourse
with His people. ‘Lhere He meets us by special appointment. There He pours
forth in fullest measure the riches of His grace. There, then, let us not fail to
present ourselves continually before Him, and offer Him our most heartfelt
praise and thanksgiving, and plead before the Eternal Father the Great
Sacrifice of Calvary.


Ver. 34. Our Lord’s desertion by the Father—This complaint is borrowed
from the twenty-second Psalm, which begins with these words. And if it be
asked why our Saviour chose to express Himself on this occasion in the language
of David, two probable reasons may be given for this. 1. That the Jews might
call to mind the great resemblance between His case and that of this illustrious
king and prophet. In both cases innocence and virtue were borne down by
violence and eclipsed under a cloud of sufferings, while the wicked triumphed
and the vilest of men were exalted. 2. The other reason of Christ’s taking the
words of this psalm might be that this psalm was allowed to belong to the
Messiah, and to have its ultimate completion in Him. To signify that He was
the person foretold in this psalm our dying Lord makes the complaint His own,
and this after His crucifiers had as it were challenged Him to make good His
titles to this character. ;

I. Consider the style which our dying Lord uses in addressing Himself to
God.—“ My God, My God.” 1. These words can signify no less than a con-
sciousness of His integrity at the time of our Saviour’s using them. At that
very time His heart was so far from reproaching Him as to applaud every
action of His life and fill Him with great peace and assurance. 2. Christ
might well say, “ My God, My God,” because He had chosen and avouched Him
for such, and loved and deligsted in Him with a flame of devotion which angels
themselves cannot equal. 3. These words imply the filial confidence and trust
which Christ reposed in His Father at the very time that He complained so
tenderly of His having forsaken Him. ;

II. In what sense was Christ forsaken by God in His passion ?—1. Are we
to believe that God was angry with His well-beloved Son? Was His heart
turned against Him, and His love towarls Him for some time interrupted?


579


CHAP. XV. ‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. j





Did the wrath of God fall upon this sacrifice like fire from heaven, and as it
were consume it, as He saith of His own zeal? These things I call impossible.
For how in the nature of things could they possibly be? How could the same
Person at the same time be both innocent and guilty, the object of the love
of God and of His wrath ? Or how could the righteous Judge of the world, who
is infinite in knowledge, reckon things and persons to be what they. really were
not? 2. But if God was not angry with His Son, might not the Son apprehend
that He was, or at least doubt of the continuance of His Father’s love to Him,
the fear of which filled Him with this amazing anguish? No. The Scripture
saith it is impossible for God to lie. But what had such a delusion as this been
better ?’—to make His Son believe things for which there was no manner of
foundation? And as for His being in such an error if left to Himself, it is
also impossible. His conscience could not accuse Him of what He never com-
mitted; and He had too worthy and honourable thoughts of the Deity to
apprehend His displeasure, while His own heart did not condemn Him, 3. The
true meaning of thiscomplaint. (1) “(Why hast Thou forsaken Me?” i.e. “Why
dost Thou leave Me destitute of Thy heavenly aid in this dreadful conflict? In
My agony when I prayed so fervently that the cup might pass from Me there
appeared an angel from heaven strengthening Me; but now Thou neither
helpest Me immediately nor by Thy holy angels: I am left to wrestle single
against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world.” And was He not a match for them in His own strength ?—able alone
to stand against their whole force, and to support the load of sufferings which
was laid upon Him, without the assistance of ministering angels? Doubtless He
was, and for that reason was left to Himself upon the Cross. (2) “ Why hast
Thou forsaken Me?” ze. “Why hast Thou taken from Me the joys and con-
solations of Thy presence. If I had these, as I have formerly enjoyed them,
no sorrows and pains that I could feel would make any great impression upon
Me. But, oh! the scene is changed, and that darkness which now covers the
earth is but an emblem of that thicker night which has involved My soul!”
(3) ““Why hast Thou forsaken Me?” 4c. “Why am I left so long in this
suffering condition, exposed to the insults of wicked men and the rage of
infernal spirits, a spectacle of shame and horror to the world? Why dost Thou
delay so long to take My soul? Oh, come, My Father, and at length release
My wearied spirit!” (4) How is the condition of our Redeemer changed since
the time He made this bitter complaint ! As the sun, after its eclipse, broke
out with double lustre upon the world, so did the light of His Father’s counte-
nance upon His soul; shame and sorrow and suffering were succeeded by
glory, rest, and felicity—and victory with triumph.

III. Inquire into the reasons of God’s thus forsaking His beloved Son.—As
the Scripture does not give us any particular reasons of this, distinct from those
of His sufferings in general, we have no other rule to go by but the end or
design of His sufferings, which relates either to His example, or His sacrifice,
or His priesthood, or His victory over the enemies of His Church. 1. If the —
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ was pleased to forsake His well-beloved
Son in His dying passion, it was in order to add the greater perfection to His
example (1 Pet. ii, 2; Heb. v. 7-9). To carry His example to the: greatest
height, He not only suffered from men, but from God—pain and shame and
death from men, desertion from God: in all teaching us how to behave with
humble, filial resignation to the One, and charity and meekness to the other.
2. Another design of the Father in this temporary desertion of His dying Son
might be to increase the perfection of His atonement (1 Pet. ii. 24; Heb. ix. 26,
x. 14; Eph. i. 7), He not only sheds His blood, in which the life of the body
consists, but He sheds it with all the circumstances necessary to complete the.


580


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XV.





expiation: His soul had its share of suffering; and though, being pure and
innocent, He could know nothing of the gnawings of a guilty conscience, that
worm which never dies, nor suffer under the wrath and displeasure of a Holy
God, who, loving righteousness, could not for a moment hate that Person who
of all beings represented Him most exactly in this respect, yet He bore all
that an innocent being could well be liable to, and for so long a time as the
Divine Wisdom judged meet. 3. This circumstance of our Saviour’s sufferings,
His being forsaken of God, contributes to the perfection of His priesthood. He
suffered by inward sorrow and desertion, as by outward and bodily pain, and
is therefore able to succour them that are in the same condition, so as to be
also willing and inclined to do it. 4. This completes His victory over the grand
adversary of God and man, and renders His triumph the more glorious. Satan
shall see that he has another kind of person to deal with than he had in the
first Adam—One who, left to Himself, is not only able to cope with him, but easily
to baffle all his temptations and stratagems, and with an invincible courage to
repel all his assaults.

Concluding reflexions.—1. How should this endear the Redeemer of the
world to us, who was willing to suffer such things for our sakes—shame and
pain and death; to be persecuted by men, assaulted by Satan, and forsaken
of God! 2. This part of the history of our Saviour’s last passion carries in it
a great deal of instruction and consolation to His faithful disciples when they
are in like circumstances with Him.— H. Grove.


Ver. 38 The rent veil—_This seems a trifling incident to record in such a
solemn place. That an ancient curtain, worn out in the lapse of years, should
be torn—what is there in that to excite surprise or be thought worthy of
notice, especially at such a time?

I. The whole worship and ritual of the Jews was like a volume of pictures,
by which they were taught spiritual truths.—1. The veil told them that there
was a barrier between them and God—sin. They felt as they gazed upon it
somewhat of the same awe that falls upon us as we stand outside the chamber
of death, and know that a few feet away there is a visitor stronger than any
human power, unseen, but terribly real. 2. There is nothing to hinder us from
coming face to face with God in worship—no outward symbol that sets a
barrier to us, past which we dare not go. But though the veil has been taken
away, that still remains of which the veil was but the picture. Our sin hangs
as a thick curtain between us and the purity of God. 3. Have we ever felt
that this veil is there, over our hearts—no delusion, but an awful fact? It is
indeed the most fundamental of all truths—that which we must start with.
Here a beginning is made with us by God. He speaks to sinners, and to
sinners alone. We cannot feel the full joy of salvation if we have not first
felt the sorrow, the desolation, of the separation that sin has made between us
and God. 4. The depths and the heights of Christian experience lie close
together. There is no better place to seek God, no surer place to find Him,
than in some valley of humiliation. The veil of the temple—let us take our
stand before it, along with the great company of those who in all ages have
mourned over their sin.

II. The death of Christ can take the barrier of sin away.—1. It is broken;
the veil is rent ; there is a way for us to God, a living way, for whomsoever will
tread it. This is the gospel of Christ. It is a gospel that wounds before it
heals, humbles before it exalts, strikes us down with a conviction of sin before
it lifts us up with the assurance of forgiveness. 2. It is glad tidings to know
that Christ has opened this way. But what good will it do to know it if we do
not tread it? It will not do for us just to say, ‘“ Yes, Christ is the Saviour


Hye |


CHAP. XV. “HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


enn enn er inn


. wees


of sinners.” We must each one by one take a journey to the Cross alone, and
meet Christ there. In the darkness we stretch out the feeble hands of faith,
and pray that the veil may be withdrawn, the shadow lifted from off our souls.
And lo! even as we pray our scarlet sins become white as snow, the veil
is rent, and we are at peace with God.

III. The rent veil signifies also that death is conquered.—_To the Jews
death was at the best a sore discouragement, an unsolved problem. God was
on the other side of the veil—they knew that; but whether He dwelt there
alone or in company with the living saints of bygone days they could not be
quite sure. So the whole of life was to them but a walking in the valley of the
shadow of death, at the farther end of which sat that giant form—dim, dark,
repulsive—filling up the whole space, and projecting his gloomy shadow along
the whole path they travelled. But Christ has changed all this. He has rent
for us the veil that is over our eyes, has brought to light the life and
immortality that is beyond death, and has shewn to us on the other side not an
empty heaven where God sits alone, but a heaven peopled with all who have
loved and served Him here.—A&. 7. Cunningham.


Ver. 39. The confession of the centurion.—Many of us no doubt have witnessed a
death—the death, probably, of some one near and dear to us. It was one of
those events, necessarily rare in life, that in a few moments impress a stamp
upon us which a lifetime cannot efface. We are not dead metal, but living
souls. Such moments are full of awe,—not merely because of this more
immediate contact with things unseen, but because of the increased responsi-
bility ; for we have one more great crisis to answer for, one more opportunity
of making a fresh start on the flood-tide of feeling, which a crisis of this kind
almost necessarily involves. And yet, after all, how small the event was which
effected all this! The death of just one out of the myriads of the human race.
flow few there were that even for a short time missed him! How very narrow
was the circle of affairs that was in any degree affected by his loss! But in
spite of the evident want of change in the world around us, we cannot for
a moment doubt the reality of the change which has come over ourselves.

I. Once, and once only, in the history of the world all surrounding circum-
stances did change, in order to be more in harmony with a scene of death.—
Once, and once only, nature has swerved from its iron course for the sake of
a dying man, and shewn clear signs of distress and suffering, in order to be
in sympathy with a soul in agony. And well might it do so; for the agonised
soul was the soul of its Maker and its Master. When the human soul of Christ
took its willing flight to the hands of its Heavenly Father, the sun hid its face,
“the earth did quake, and the rocks rent ”—the very graves set free their dead.
Tt was sights and sounds such as these which told upon the centurion and his
companions, and wrung from them that marvellous confession, ‘‘ Truly this was
the Son of God.”

II. In all that multitude they were the very group from whom one might
least have expected it.—Such an exclamation would have come naturally from
the lips of the disciples. It would not have surprised us had it been uttered by
the crowd—a mob which had been raised to such enthusiasm for Him on Palm
Sunday by the report of the raising of Lazarus, and to such frenzy against Him
by the machinations of the priests, might easily have been won back (we think)
py portents like these. Nay, it would not wholly have astounded us if it had
proceeded from the priests themselves. The darkness, and the earthquake,
and the rending of the veil might have forced home the truth even on them.
But no; the priests are already preparing to take further measures against
“that deceiver.” The most that any of the people do is to smite their breasts


582


=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XY.








and return. And as for the disciples, the very things that should have turned
their hopes into certainties robbed them of hope altogether. On Easter morning
the news of His resurrection seemed to them as ‘‘idle tales.” No; the only
persons able to interpret these awful signs aright are despised Gentiles; and
among these not people of thought and culture, but Roman soldiers. Nor
was it the execution which touched them. The cruel punishments of Rome
had made them familiar enough with scourging and crucifixion. But they
had had other experiences to-day. They may have been part of the band
who found themselves prostrate on the ground at the mere word of their
Prisoner. They may have heard, one of them may have carried, the message
from Pilate’s wife. They had heard the cry of the Jews, which made Pilate
“the more afraid,” and of which their own exclamation seems to be an echo:
“ By our law He ought to die, because He made Himself Son of God.” And
no doubt they had been on duty during the three hours of darkness, at the
close of which came the earthquake. They had heard also the last great cry
with which that Life which redeemed the world was yielded up. And St. Mark
tells us that it was this cry, even more than the surrounding wonders, that
called forth the confession of the centurion.

Iii. And why ?—Possibly because such proof of unsubdued power, after the
long hours of agony and exhaustion, seemed nothing short of miraculous. But
still more perhaps because His dying immediately after such proof of power
shewed that, after all that the malice of His enemies had inflicted on Him,
His death was voluntary. He surrendered His life. There is yet one more
fact which may well have contributed to produce this startling conviction in
the mind of the centurion and his companions: the dying words of Christ.
“Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit.” They had heard that He
claimed to be ‘Son of God”—a title quite unknown to them among their own
divinities and heroes. What did it mean? “Son of Jupiter,” ‘‘ Son of Venus,”
“Offspring of the gods,” they could have understood. But “Son of God”?
Death stared Him in the face; and to speak falsely in the hour of death is
scarcely human ; and yet with His dying words He had commended His spirit
into the hands of that Almighty Father whose Son from His childhood
upwards He had claimed to be. It was this then that drove the truth home
to the Roman soldiers. “Certainly,” they said, “‘this was a righteous man.”
Certainly this man was no deceiver. “Truly this was the Son of God.”

IV. The assent of more than eighteen centuries has ratified their verdict.—
And it will hold good till He Himself makes good the promise made to Caiaphas :
‘‘ Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of heaven.”

Lessons.—1. Christ’s willing surrender of His life may teach us that in the
spiritual world there is only one road to suecess—the surrender of self. He
who “hallowed birth by being born,” and “ conquered death by dying,” conquered
the stubborn wills of men by surrendering His own. And there is no other way
for us. This is not a lesson to be buried in a napkin until some great affliction
calls it into use. It is a lesson for every day and every hour. There is no
annoyance too trifling for the exercise of it. Ifin the petty vexations of which
we have a dozen a day we learn to submit with cheerfulness for the sake
of Christ’s Cross, we shall be ready even to give thanks to Him for His chastise-
ment, when He sees fit to bruise us more severely. Thus all our lives long
we may share the mind of our dying Master. To us to live will be Christ,
and to die gain. 2. And this easily leads us to the second point—our Lord's
commendation of His spirit into the hands of His Father. If we have in any
way learnt to surrender our wills to God, we shall not find it hard to commend
our whole being to Him. The right to do so has been won for us by Christ.


983





CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








That which would be an abomination to Him, “who charges even the angels —
with folly,” becomes a sweet-smelling sacrifice when united with the Sinless
Victim of the Cross. Christ’s offering was a double one—His own Divinity
and our humanity. Ours must be double also—ourselves with Christ, Christ —
with ourselves, And this also is a work not for a few great and rare occasions, —
but for our whole life. In all that we do we must ever be commending ourselves,
in union with Christ, to God. Yet there are times when it may be done with
more than usual solemnity and devotion; and among these surely is our Easter
Communion. Let Easter morning, or at least some day in Easter week, find ©
us on our knees before God’s altar, saying with all the humble confidence a —
sinful soul can cherish, and all the loving self-sacrifice a grovelling heart

can feel, “ Father, into Thy hands I commend my life. Do with me as seemeth —
best unto Thee in time and in eternity.” And as we retire with the seal of —
Christ’s body and blood within us, assuring us that the fire of the Lord has
fallen upon our offering, we shall know, not by the darkness and the earthquake,
but by the light and peace of His presence, that “truly this is the Son of ©
God.”—A. Plummer, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 21. Simon the Cyrenian— that moulds it all to His own perfect —
Simon was a Jew by descent, probably purposes. Let us bring the highest


born, certainly resident, for purposes
of commerce, in Oyrene, on the North
African coast of the Mediterranean.
No doubt he had come up to Jerusalem
for the Passover; and, like mavy
strangers, met some difficulty in finding
accommodation in the city, and so was
obliged to lodge in one of the outlying
villages. From this lodging he is com-
ing in, in the morning, knowing nothing
about Christ or His trial, and happens
to see the procession as it is passing out
of the gate. He is compelled by the
centurion, for what reason we do not
know, to carry the heavy Cross of the
Saviour,—reluctantly no doubt, but
gradually touched into some kind of
sympathy ; drawn closer and closer, as
we suppose, as he looked upon this
dying meekness; and at last yielding
to the soul-conquering power of Christ.

I, The greatness of trifles.—Our lives
are like the Cornish rocking-stones,
pivoted on little points. The most
apparently insignificant things have
got such a strange knack of suddenly
developing unexpected consequences,
and turning out to be not small things
at all, but great and decisive and fruit-
ful. And so let us look with ever
fresh wonder on this marvellous con-
texture of human life, and on Him


584


and largest principles to bear on the
smallest events and circumstances, for
you never can tell which of these is
going to turn out a revolutionary and
formative influence in your life. And
then let us learn this lesson, too, of
quiet confidence in Him in whose hands
the whole puzzling, overwhelming mys-
tery lies.

II. The blessedness and honour of
helping Christ.—Christ’s Cross has to
be carried to-day; and if we have not
found out that it has, let us ask our-
selves if we are Christians at all. There
will be hostility, alienation, a compara-
tive coolness, and absence of a full
sense of sympathy in many people with
you, if you area true Christian. There
will be a share of contempt from the
wise and the cultivated of this genera-
tion, as in all generations. The mud
that is thrown after the Master will
spatter your faces too, to some extent ;
and if we are walking with Him, we
shall share to the extent of our
communion with Him in the feelings
with which many men regard Him.
Stand to your colours! Do not be
ashamed of the Master in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation.
And there is another way in which
this honour of helping the Lord is given


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP: XV.





to us. As in His weakness He needed
some one to aid Him to bear His Cross,
soin His glory He needs our help to
carry out the purposes for which the
Cross was borne. The paradox of a
man carrying the Cross of Him who
varried the world’s burden is repeated
in another form too. He needs nothing,
and yet He needs us.

Iif. The perpetual recompense and
record of humblest Christian work.—
‘“* How little Simon knew that where-


ever in the whole world this gospel was


preached, there also this that he had
done should be told for a memorial of
him!” Why, men have fretted their
whole lives away to get what this man
got, and knew nothing of one line in
that chronicle of fame. And so we
may say it shall be always, “TI will
never forget any of their works.” We
may not leave them on any records that
men can read. What of that, if they
are written in letters of light in that
“ Lamb’s Book of Life,” to be read out
by Him before His Father and the
holy angels in that last great day. We
may not leave any separable traces of
our service, any more than the little
brook that comes down some gully on


- the hillside flows separate from its


sisters, with whom it has coalesced in
the bed of the great river or in the
rolling, boundless ccean. What of that
so long as the work, in its consequences,
shall last !—A. Maclaren, DD.

The firstfruits of the heathen world.—
The Synoptists in the accounts which
they give of the Crucifixion bring into
prominent notice Simon of Cyrene as
the man who was compelled to bear
the Cross of Christ, and with this brief
notice he disappears apparently from
the pages of Scripture. I think, how-
ever, if we look a little more closely,
we shall find that he reappears in
Acts xiii. 1 as a member of the early
Church under the name of Simeon,
who was called Niger. My view of the
matter was suggested by the following
considerations: 1. Simon and Simeon
are interchangeable names, as where
in Acts xv. 14 Simon Peter is called
Simeon. 2. Simon of Cyrene might


appropriately have been called Niger,
in allusion to the colour of his skin,
coming as he did from Africa.
3. Simeon, who was called Niger, is
mentioned in Acts xiii. 1, in close
juxtaposition with Lucius of Cyrene.
I might further add, not as an argu-
ment, but as a fitting corollary to the
circumstances, that we can scarcely
think that Simon would not have been
greatly impressed by the scenes which
he witnessed, if indeed he did not
receive some personal blessing from our
Lord—he who in so real a sense had
borne the Cross up the hill to Calvary,
who had come into such close contact
with Christ at such a critical moment,
and who in all probability had been an
eye-witness of the Crucifixion. So that
we might almost expect to find him a
member of the early Church, or at least
would meet him there without surprise.
If this identity be a real one, we see in
Simon of Cyrene the very firstfruits of
the heathen world.—@. F’. Assinder.
Providential leadings.—W hat moved
Simon to take that turning inthe streets
which brought him to Christ and His
Cross, and just at the very moment
he was needed? Wecannotsay. How
curiously we are led! We take one
turning in life rather than another,
hardly knowing why, and the whole
of our after-history is changed. It is
not chance—it is God and ourselves.
We often say that our lives are very
dull and commonplace—there is no-
thing romantic or interesting about
them—their story is not worth the
telling. If we could only see them for
a moment as God sees them, how
different they would look! If we
could only see the meaning and im-
portance of the events which are taking
place, of the things we do so thought-
lessly, the words we speak so care-
lessly, and understand the eternal
interests involved in every hour that
we live, we need not seek for romance
outside the narrow circle in which we
live.—R. T. Cunningham.
Oross-bearing is never pleasant, take
it at its best; there is always a sting
and a hardship in it which makes us
585


CHAP. XV.


" HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





smart at the time: take it as for the
most part we know it, and we shall
find that we generally murmur and
resist and complain, and try to shake
it from our shoulders. But it must
be done. It is through tribulation
that our characters are perfected and
heaven is won. So God does not ask
our permission, or whether we are
willing. He lays His Cross upon us,
and compels us to carry it. Thank
God He does!—R. 7. Cunningham.

Carrying Christ's Cross. — Christ’s
Cross-bearing is not over yet; after
nineteen hundred years He is still
carrying it; andsomehow I cannot but
think of Him as continually tired and
needing help. We can do something
’ to relieve the sin and wretchedness
beside which we live ; and in relieving
it we are making Christ’s Cross easier
for Him to bear.—Jbid.

The Oross of Christ is the pivot of
history—On this the doors of ancient
life shut and modern history open.
Heathen nations, however new or
young, are ancient; Christian nations,
however old, are modern. Western
civilisation began on Calvary. Signi-
ficant is the fact that the root of the
word stawros (cross), descending from
the Sanskrit, and meaning what
“stands ’ or is “fixed,” and thence
reappearing in all the Indo-Germanic
languages of Europe, is a figure of
history’s humblest yet mightiest land-
mark. On the head of that Cross were
joined in one those three languages
which represented religion, culture,
and law, typifying the three world
civilisations that were to become con-
fluent and be vitalised by a Divine
Person and character, and His ever-
abiding Spirit. Asia furnished alike
the Victim and him who delivered Him
up; Europe the judge, tribunal, and
executioners; but Africa bore the
Cross. In this the century of hope
for the Dark Continent, let it be
remembered that one of her sons, in
vicarious labour, carried that Cross on
which the Redeemer of the African,
as well as of the Asian and European,
bore the sins of humanity.


586


Ver. 22. Golgotha.—The most ap-
proved explanation of this name is
that it denotes a place slightly elevated
and skull-shaped. The Latin designa-
tion, Calvary, which comes from the
Vulgate, may or may not be meant to
express the same meaning. That it
was a place where the skulls of male-
factors executed there were found is
fanciful and improbable, because the
Jews would not have suffered it, who
were so careful to avoid everything
Levitically unclean, Though Christ
was suffering so much at this moment,
and was about to suffer so much more
intensely, He forgot Himself, and
thought only of the distress of those
who followed Him weeping and wailing,
who soon, in the judgments that were
hastening to fall on the guilty city,
would themselves suffer such hitherto
unknown calamities (Luke xxiii. 27-31).
—H. B. Hackett, DD.


Vers. 23-26. The mystery of eternity.
Death by crucifixion was of all deaths
the most shameful and most horrible
—a pagan penalty that Judaism had
never adopted, and one only inflicted
by pagans on those of whom it was
meant to make a horrible example.
Wounding no vital part, and not
robbing the victim of any blood, it
was a death horribly lingering ; while
infinite varieties of anguish—from the
crushed nerves, from the weight of the
body, from the exposure to the scorch-
ing sun, from the fever set up by the
wounds, and, in Christ’s case, from the
back ridged and furrowed, where each
stroke of the lash had cut through the
flesh —all conspired to make it a death
of herror. Yet this is inflicted on
Jesus, the Son of God, whose crime
was mercy, whose mission here was
one of redeeming love.

I. All the mysteries of human
nature are here.—l. That of sin:
depravity, as we have already noted,
shewing itself clearly here, and demon-
strating the corruption of mankind.
2. That of free-will is here. God
restrains our sin by truth, mercy, grace,
appeal, and warning, but not by force.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,








Man’s freedom to wreck his immortal
nature is shewn conspicuously here.
3. That ef judgment is here suggested
strongly. After these things must
there not be some reckoning? (Luke
xxiii. 31).

II. The mysteries of Divine revela-
tion are here.—Not till a man has
seen God in Christ on the Cross has he
seen God. Here all marvels of God
are displayed. 1. The mystery of God’s
love is here. Nature reveals God’s
wisdom; providence, His mercy and
His judgment; but Calvary reveals
His heart. It displays God’s passion
of mercy, His yearning to bless, His
appreciation of man, His power of
sacrifice. 2. The mystery of God’s meek-
ness is here. Daily He turns the left
cheek to those who smote the right,
and men mistake His patience for
indifference to their faults. Here the
meekness and lowliness of the Lord
God Almighty are displayed. 3. The
mystery of God’s method of curing sin
is here. By enduring its strokes He
shames and vanquishes transgression.

III. The mysteries of salvation are
here.—1. For here is atonement. The
sin of man had never been adequately
owned, prayed for, counterbalanced.
But by accepting death—its penalty—
Christ owns the death-worthiness of our
sin. In His prayer, “Father, forgive
them; they know not what they do,”
He makes intercession for the whole
guilty race. And there is enough love,
faith, obedience, goodness, in Christ’s
dying to more than balance all the
dishonour a world’s transgression has
done its God. This owning, praying
for, repairing the wrong of a world’s
transgression isatonement. 2. Recon-
ciliation is here (John x. 17; 1 John
iv. 19). Our love meets God’s love
there, and we are reconciled. 3. The
mystery of a great inspiration is here.
Ever since, the Cross has been the
pattern on the mount which holy lives
have copied, and it has inspired love
and sacrifice into countless hearts.

IV. All mysteries of consolation are
here.--Had Christ evaded death, who
would have dared to face it? But


CHAP. XV.


when He has been with us in passing
through the waters, He has changed
Jordan’s streams into still waters and
its banks to green pastures. Death
fixed its sting in Ohrist and left and
lost it there. ‘He hath abolished
death ” (2 Tim. i. 10) by dying, and the
consolations of peace and of immortal
hope come from it. Thus Christ’s
Cross is our Alpha and Omega, glowing
with law and gospel, comfort and con-
straint, power and peace; it is the new
tree of life in the midst of life’s wilder-
ness. Let us refuse to glory save in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.—
fk. Glover.


Ver. 23. “Wine mingled with
myrrh.” —Literally, “‘myrrhed wine,”
that is, drugged wine, to produce
heartening it might be (see Bartholi-
nus, de vino myrrhato, in his De Cruce,
p. 136), or to induce comparative
anexsthesis or insensibility. Myrrh is
a strong stimulant. The administra-
tion of drugged wine to criminals
about to suffer was a merciful custom,
which relieved to a small degree; the
excessive ferocity so characteristic of
the executions of those olden times (see
Buxtorf’s Lexicon Talmudic, p. 2131,
and Wetstein in loc.). “But He re-
ceived it not.” Or, as the reading is in
the Sinaitic and Vatican manuscripts,
and “the queen of the cursives” (33),
who, however, received it not (ds instead
of 6). Our Lord did not wish to use
any artificial means to mitigate or
otherwise modify His sense of the
sufferings connected with the culmina-
tion of His work. The value of these
sufferings centred in the free activity
that, first of all, chose their endurance,
in consideration of the sublime moral
ends to be subserved, and then self-
sacrificingly held out, under their
undiminished superincumbence, till all


was finished.—J. Morison, D.D.


Vers, 24-25. “When they had crucified
Him,” i.e. when they had affixed Him
to the Cross. A world of pain is hidden
behind these simple words. Stripping
the Sufferer of cloak and coat, the outer


587


CHAP. XV.


a


 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





and inner tunic, the soldiers would
place Him on the Cross as it lay on the
ground, and, stretching His arms across
the cross-beam, drive the point of a
large iron nail through one open palm
after the other with blows from a mallet.
They would then draw the legs down
the upright, and drive another such
nail through either foot, or perhaps
through both together. Then, lifting
the Cross into its socket, fresh pangs
would thrill along all the fine and
sensitive nerves thus lacerated, and
the whole body would be racked with
excruciating pains. All this He en-
dured for us men and our salvation.
And it seems probable that it was at
this point that, instead of breaking
into a scream of agony, He uttered the
prayer for His murderers which Luke
xxii. 34) records, “Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they
do.”—S. Cox, D.D.


Ver. 26. “The King of the Jews.”
—Jesus is a King, and the King of the
Jews; and neither the insult of Pilate,
nor the anxious denial of the multitude,
can affect the reality of that fact in
the smallest degree. Though humbled,
insulted, and crucified, Jesus was and is
at once the King of Israel and the Head
and Sovereign of every immortal man.
To Him the Almighty has assigned
the throne of His father David; and
that throne, therefore, He needs must
occupy. Nay, He has been exalted
to kingly supremacy over the whole
universe; and that kingly supremacy
all must acknowledge, or perish.—
J. Cochrane.


Vers. 27, 28. Christ's companions in
shame.—Pilate may have to surrender
Barabbas, the leader of the band, to
the clamour of powerful hypocrites; he
all the more readily will crucify two of
his comrades. If he is to crucify Christ,
he will label Him “ King of the Jews,”
and give Him two thieves to keep Him
company, in token of the sort of nation
He would have to rule. The fact that
such association dishonours Christ does
not prevent him ordering it when it


588


may give him the sweets of a little

revenge in shewing his contempt for

everything Jewish. Yet even so there

is something very instructive as the

association of transgressors with Him

in Hisdeath. 1. It is suggestive of the

philosophy of the Atonement. The

prophecy alluded to in ver. 28 was

quoted by Jesus Himself (Luke xxii. 37),

and gives the simplest theory of the
Atonement which we can frame.

Numbered with two conspicuous trans- —
gressors, the fact suggested that God
had “numbered” Him with the whole
race of transgressors, and permitted the
common penalty of the world’s sin to
fallon Him. He is associated with us
in our curse, that we may be associated
with Him in heavenly bliss. 2. Where ©
most need and misery are, there Christ
always is. On His Cross He is near
those dying on across. He is always
nearest the neediest. 3. Be not over-
solicitous of reputation. Christ is
classed with thieves, Paul with deceivers.
One of the most universal of afflictions
for Christ’s sake is being misunderstood.
Marvel not if your name be ‘cast out
as evil.” —R. Glover.


Ver. 28. Fulfilment of Scripture at
the Crucifixion.—Above every other
aspect, the crucifixion of Christ was
fulfilment. Let any one familiar
with the language of prophet and
psalmist pencil-mark every one of
their words, verses, and versicles found
in the Evangelists’ story of Calvary.
The result will be a well-underscored
page, and the effect very striking to
the eye. Inthe Greek text, like that
of Westcott and Hort, where Old
Testament language is printed in un-
cial or capital letter type, the effect
is startling. From many angles of
vision the seers of truth in the past
ages caught glimpses of history’s most
august figure. Many are the photo-
graphic outlines set in the Old Testa-
ment pages of the Sinless Victim; but
they are in profile or silhouette. Not
one is perfect, none full-face or express
image. Even they who wrote down
their visions could not fully compre


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


CHAP. XV.





hend and interpret what they saw.
Nevertheless, while inquiring and
searching diligently of the salvation
to come, they searched what or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify, when
it testified beforehand of the sufferings
of the Messiah and the glory that
should follow.


Vers. 29-32. Mockers at the Cross.
—One does not know whether the
blindness or the cruelty of these words
is the more wonderful. There is
nothing so cruel or so blind as religious
hatred.

J. Christ’s Cross apparently shatters
to fragments Christ’s claims.— Hither
Jesus Christ died and rose again from
the dead, and then He is the Son of
God, and God hath exalted Him to be
a Prince and a Saviour, as He claimed
to be; or He died like other men, and
there is an end of it. And then it is
no use to talk about Him as a wise
Teacher and a lovely perfect character,
He is a fanatical Enthusiast, all the
beauty of whose religious teaching is
marred and spoiled by the extravagant
personal claims which He attached
to it. We must dismiss the fair dream
of a perfect Man, unless we are pre-
pared to go further and say, an
Incarnate God.

Ul. The Cross of Christ is a neces-
sity, to which He voluntarily sub-
mitted in order to save a world.—
These men only needed to alter one
letter to be grandly and_ gloriously
right. If, instead of “could not,”
they had said ‘would not,” they
would have grasped the very heart of
the power and the very central bright-
ness of the glory of Christianity. It
was His own will, and no outward
necessity, that fastened Him there ;
and that will was kept steadfast and
immovable by nothing else but His
love—He Himself fixed the iron chain
which bound Him. He made the
“cannot.” It was His love that made
it impossible that He should relinquish
the task; therefore His steely will,
like a strong spring constantly work-


ing, kept Him close up against the
sharp edge of the knife that cut into
His very heart’s life.

III. The Cross is the throne of
Christ.—His dominion is a dominion
based upon suffering, and wielded in
gentleness and meekness; and the
crown of thorns lies beneath the many
diadems that He wears in heaven.
The sceptre of reed, light, fragile,
emblem of a meek and merciful do-
minion that lays a light and loving
hand upon the inner springs of the
will, and commands by serving, is a
stronger rod of dominion than all
golden jewel-tipped sceptres that
monarchs bear.

IV. The death of Christ is the
great proof that God had delight in
Him.—Mystery of mysteries, where
blend all opposites in harmonious
reconcilement: Divine justice and
Divine righteousness; the extremities
of humiliation and the superlative of
exaltation: life and death, the Divine
forsaking and the Divine complacency.
—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 31. Truth in mockery.—Many
true things have been said in jest.
This is one. Never did a more impor-
tant truth fall from the lips of a scoffer.

I. A great tribute involuntarily
accorded to Jesus.—“‘ He saved others.”
They practically condemn their own
unbelief and their treatment of Him
by making this admission. Even His
bitterest enemies could find nothing
worse to say about Him than this—
that He had spent His life in acts
of self-sacrificing love. And yet they
have no compunction in hounding to
death the One True Benefactor of man-
kind!

II. A declaration true in one sense,
false in another.—“ Himself He cannot
save.” 1. Not true in the sense they
meant. (1) That God had disowned
Him as an impostor. (2) That He
was unable from want of power.
2. But most blessedly true in a sense
far beyond their comprehension.
(1) Christ’s sufferings and death were
part of a Divine plan. (2) They ful-

589


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








filled a pledge given (Gen. iii. 15),
(3) The object to be attained by them.
(a) God’s honour. (0) Man’s rescue.


Ver. 32. Sight not conducive to faith.
—Anearnest desire to see is but a very
ill disposition in order to believe. Had
Christ descended from the cross and
not died, all faith had been quite
destroyed, and He could not have been
either the Author or Finisher of it. See
here another delusion of human pride,
to imagine that miracles are of them-
selves sufficient to engage men to
believe—as if faith were not a gift of
God. These men will believe, they say,
if Christ save Himself from death—
when they themselves had seen Him
raise one who had been dead four days,
without any other effect than increas-
ing in envy, incredulity, and hardness
of heart. So greatly does the sinner
deceive himself.—P. Quesnel.


Ver. 33. The veiled Cross.—The
darkening of the sun was the testimony
of nature to her dying Lord. It is a
hint of the truth that creation is
dependent on Him, that nature is
supported by unseen and spiritual
powers, that the fate of the earth
ultimately rests on that of the “kingdom
of God.”

I. The suggestions of this darkness.
—l. It indicated the going out of
the world’s Light. 2. It represented
the ignorance of the Gentiles and the
malignity of the Jews. 3. It reminds
us of the mystery of the Atonement.
Christ went into the darkness to save
us from darkness; and when the gloom
passed away, and the sun shone upon
the Cross, the restored light was like
the bow of promise after the Flood, a
sign of peace between man and God.

II. The effects of the darkness upon
those who surrounded the Cross.—
1. It increased the solemnity of the
event. 2. It veiled His agony from
those around. 3. It whispered warn-
ing to the impenitent.—A. Rowland.

The supernatural darkness.—It was
not occasioned by an eclipse, for the
full moon cannot intervene between the


59





earth and the sun. It was no doubt —
supernaturally contrived or overruled, ©
as a fringe of the entire supernatural
drapery of the great supernatural event
which was transpiring within the
Sufferer on the Cross. Not that any
universal laws were contravened o1
suspended. But a new force came in,
which limited the scope and modified —
the direction of the other forces that
were ordinarily at work. Or when we —
go to the ultimates of thought, and to _
the corresponding ultimates of objective
reality, we may represent the case thus
—a peculiar volition took place in the-
Divine mind, which modified the action,
in that particular scene, of the omni-—
potent Divinehand. It was meet that
there should be around our Lord a
penumbra of darkness. It at once
reflected the mediatorial eclipse that
was going on within, and cast a fitting
shade over the guilty population in the
immediate vicinity of the scene.—
J. Morison, D.D.


Ver. 34. The causes of Christ's deso-
lation.—Though we cannot understand
this sorrow of our dear Lord, because
to us, perhaps, to be forsaken of God
would mean so little—though we feel
that we are in the presence of a
mystery we cannot fathom, whose
depths we cannot enter, at whose brink
we can but stand and wonder and adore,
—yet we may in reverence consider
three causes which seem to have pro-
duced this element of the Sacred Passion.
1. The first cause of this awful desola-
tion was the fact of the accumulated
sin of the whole world, from the dis-
obedience of Eden down to the last
intention of sin that shall be disturbed
by the archangel’s trumpet, resting
upon one Human Soul, to whom the
faintest shadow of sin was intolerable.
2. The second cause was the gathering
of the hosts of darkness, vanquished in
the wilderness, and in the garden, and
in many of the souls they had possessed,
but now, rallied and marshalled’ and
massed for one last supreme effort,
hurling themselves with the fury of
despair and hate upon their Vanquisher.





oe a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XV.





3. The third cause was the hiding of
the Father’s face. He who is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity could not
look even upon His beloved Son, when
deluged thus in our sin.
“He hides His face from sinners,
He hideth it from Thee.”

And what is all this but hell itself!
To be deluged in sin, literally sin-ful,
to be surrounded and attacked and
tormented on all sides by devils, to be
hidden from the light of God’s counte-
nance—what is all this but the foretaste
of that misery of outer darkness, of
weeping and gnashing of teeth, of ever-
lasting destruction from the presence
of God—the final awfulness of unre-
pented sin.—H. S. Miles.

The forsaking of Christ by His Father.
—All His other sufferings seem small
by the side of this; they bore rather
upon His body, this upon His soul;
they came from the hands of men, but
this from His Father. 1. This was a
penal forsaking, inflicted on Christ for
the satisfaction of our sins. 2. It was
a real forsaking, not a fictitious one.
The Father kept back at this time all
the joys, comforts, and love from Christ
theMan. 3. This forsaking took place
in the very time of Christ’s need. Yet
His soul still cleaves to God for all
this.—Jas. Lonsdale.

Why God forsakes—¥or our sins,
worldliness, carelessness, coldness, God
justly forsakes us. Let us look dili-
gently for the cause. Let us ask, “Is
it in this thing or in that, that we have
grieved Thy Holy Spirit? What duty
have we neglected? What evil temper
shewn? Do our thoughts wander in
prayer? Are we formalists ? Are we
unthankful for Thy love?” So let us
search our spirits that nothing escape
us.—Lbid.

The ory of desertion Speaking of
the words uttered by Christ in this
terrible moment of loneliness, one says :
«¢ When I read what men have written
to explain the meaning of Jesus in that
ery, I always feel anew how much
deeper than our comprehension went
His identification with humanity when
He plunged into the darkness of its sin.





‘He was made flesh.’ Into what
mysterious contact with the sinfulness
to which the flesh of man had given
itself that ‘being made flesh’ brought
Him I know no man has ever fathomed.
If I try to fathom it at all, I can only
picture to myself the most Christlike
act, the most Messianic entrance into
the strange and dreadful fate of other
men which my imagination can con-
ceive.” The perfectly Holy One did
bear sin, and out of the horrible abyss
into which He had plunged came the
agonising cry.

The last temptation and triumph.—
These words are a quotation from the
twenty-second Psalm. Are they not
more an appropriation of the whole
psalm? The words directed the disciples
to it as pointing out the current of His
thoughts and expressing His condition.
Thus they direct us, and in the psalm
and its character we must look for the
meaning and significance of His ery.
Pitying them amid His agony, He
cannot tell them all; but calling to
mind the old familiar hymn, let them
find His heart and its experience and
triumph there. Read that psalm as
such, and however darkly it opens, that
only makes more glorious the psalmist’s
testimony. It is the history of a
passionate soul passing through fierce
discipline and suffering to confident
security and triumph, feeling its way
through weakness to strength, proving
each step how faithful, how wonderful,
is the abiding presence and keeping of
God. The passionate cry of its opening
verse is but the vivid sense of need, and
emphasises the needlessness of all fear,
the sureness of God’s enclosing and
faithful deliverance—the impossibility
of being forsaken, for ‘God delivers
even from the horns of the unicorn.”
Christ’s utterance told truly His suffer-
ing and need, but pointed directly to
the sureness of His triumph and glory.
By the very words He chooses He
would seem to be feeling after and
touching His disciples’ inner thought
and weakness, forestalling as it were
their despairful fears and conclusion
when the tragedy shall be complete ;


591


CHAP. XV.





and by pointing in such words their
uncomprehending thought, andcarrying
their minds to this psalm, He would
comfort them in its assurances and
give them its hope and security. Looked
at in the light of the whole psalm,
Christ is standing face to face with
His sacrifice and work, facing its temp-
tation and measuring Himself with it.
The shadow which has crept nearer and
nearer, vague but threatening, and
deepening into awfulness, through His
whole ministry, at length is known and
felt, has become palpable and distinct,
and holds Him; and He must know
its meaning and measure. Isolating
Him from human sympathy, it insinu-
ates Him isolated from God also, The
fear of the psalmist grows distinct and
forceful before His broken and suffer-
ing spirit, challenging His faith ; He
takes it up, and through it moves into
the confidence of the psalmist. ‘God
doth not abhor the affliction of the
afflicted.” He hurls the insinuation,
baflled and destroyed, from Him by
His clear consciousness and confidence
in the Father. He has measured His
strength and resources, and can drink
the cup He has accepted, and, drinking
it, His work is finished.—S. D. Thomas.


Ver. 37. The death of Christ reveals
—l. His perfect humanity. 2. A
completed work of self-sacrifice. 3.
The completeness of His rejection
by the world. 4. The completion
of the old dispensation. 5. A com-
pleted salvation. We instinctively
expect consistency in a great and
good man’s death. We feel he ought
to leave the trail of his greatness
behind him. His dying influence
should adorn what he leaves as
witness to his worth. So Christ dies,
sinking to rest as the setting sun
in a stormful sky, making His life’s
close His triumph. You have seen
the broken banks of storm-clouds
massed in the heavy west of a winter’s
sky, with broken dun cloudlets float-
ing through monotonous grey, changed
into splendour by the sinking sun,
flushed into rose and floating islets

592


} | a on


’ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


of light and _ gold,


"


and then the —


many tints deepening into the deep


purple of evening’s quiet. So Christ
passed and sank to rest, so set the
Sun of Righteousness, changing the
storm, the tragedy, and Cross by
heroism, wondrous words and prayers,
into light and glory, deepening into
serenity and rest. There was such
a nobleness and greatness in the
whole we cannot think of it as death;
it was but a setting, His life’s work
crowned.—Jbid.


Ver. 38. The veil rent.—This veil —


formed the first mark of distinction
which was observed in the use of


the Temple with respect to the several —


gradations of those who worshipped
therein. In these gradations con-
sisted a feature of the Jewish Church
which was not to be preserved in that
which was to succeed it.
new temple there was to be no family
like Aaron’s, no tribe like Levi’s, no
nation like the Israelites. The par-
tition walls between outward and
inner court, between the temple and
its holy of holies, were all broken
down; and the idolater who came
in at the eleventh hour was as free
of the new temple as the converted
son of Abraham, whose fathers had


In the —


served there from the first dawn and —


early morning of the Church. See


Heb. ix. 1-8, x. 16-22.—S. Hinds.


Ver. 39. Recognising nobleness.—
Next to being noble is the ability to
recognise nobleness in others. In fact,
this ability indicates a measure of noble-
ness in oneself; the recognition is a
proof of kinship. Itis in this asit is in
every other line of observation and of
outreaching: one’s perceptions and
attractions and repulsions are the
truest test of one’s personal character.
The next thing to being manly is
to recognise and honour manliness
in another. The next thing to being
unselfish is to recognise and honour
unselfishness in another. The next
thing to being pure is to recognise
and honour purity in another. And





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. MARK. CHAP. SV.





the next thing to being Christlike
is to perceive the likeness of Christ ;
indeed, to perceive Christ’s likeness
is in itself to be Christlike—Z. C.
Trumbull.


Vers. 40, 41. Women at the Cruci-
fixion.—How true to the purpose of
woman’s creation as the helpmeet
of man was the association of
these faithful, clinging souls with
their Lord in His passion! And He,
in the perfection of His manhood,
did not refuse the comfort of their
presence. As He looked down upon
that little group of loving faces in
the midst of the pitiless crowd that
‘was now surging round His Cross,
we may reverently believe that the
Son of Man found a little comfort
in their true-hearted devotion, seeing
in them the firstfruits of the faithful
of all time, in whom He should see
of the travail of His soul—H. S.
Miles.

Woman's ministry to Christ.—If
such a thing is possible, the Saviour
had done much more for woman than
for man. Some who have rejected
the gospel (Comte, for instance) have
been the readiest to admit that it has
raised the status of women immeasur-
ably. Of the many elements in the
gospel which have contributed to this,
nothing has been more operative than
the services which the Saviour has
received from woman’s hand. The
gospel gave them a noble cause, to
be advanced by methods of holiest
peace; it engaged the love which
made such service a delight, and gave


the grace which crowned it with
supreme success. The ministry of
women to the Rabbis was a recognised
thing; and Jesus, in His homeless
greatness and in His Divine poverty,
could receive the gentle tendance of
Galilean matrons without reproach.
(1) It is a great cause which enlists
the best feelings of the best women
on its side. °(2) Some might have
objected to their going there, asking,
“What good could possibly be done ?”
In dealing with such questions it is
always safer to trust to the instincts
of affection than to our reason. Their
heart bade them stand beside Him,
and, doing so, they gave a testi-
mony greatly needed and of richest
worth, and found themselves ready to
help Joseph in his gracious task.
(3) Mary Magdalene, “out of whom
went seven demons” (Luke viii. 2),
ought to be regarded as having been
a great sufferer whom Christ relieved,
not as a great sinner whom Christ
forgave. We have in her action the
full beauty of gratitude displayed.
(4) Mary, wife of Cleophas (or
Alpheus, for these are two forms
of one name), is another instance of a
good mother having good sons. When
we see her heroic love, and that
of Salome, who stands beside her,
we do not marvel that each of them
is the mother of two apostles.
(5) What honour these women find,
without having a single thought of
working for it! So honour ever flies
those who seek, but seeks those who
merit it. See to thy work, and God
will see to your reward.—R. Glover.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 42—4T7.


(Paratuets: Marr. xxvii. 57-61; Luxe xxiii. 50-56.)


Seasons of trial, times of preparation.—The unrenewed mind is not subject


to the law of God, neither indeed can be.


Things seen and temporal have a


tendency to carnalise the affections, and we are apt to forget whence we come,


what we are doing, and whither we are going.


He therefore who is preparing


for a happy immortality gladly embraces seasons peculiarly devoted to the
concerns of the soul. A pious divine has justly remarked that one part of the
week is properly adapted for reflexion, and the other for preparation. A time
of preparation, generally, is a season of trial, and is painful to flesh and blood.


8a


598


- |
CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. y





Training is not enjoyment, but the means by which it is acquired. The way
to heaven is through a wilderness and by a vale of tears. Times of refreshing —
revivals are ushered in by a night of preparation, often dark and portentous.
What may be said of the state of the Church is also true of every individual ;
it is a time of preparation, because every individual is either preparing for
happiness or misery.

I. Times of preparation in the Church are seasons of trial_—Every individual
who is acquainted with the history of the Church knows that it has undergone
various changes. It is subject to incessant fluctuations, and either is progressing —
or retrograding. Such'a state of things may be expected under the spiritual
warfare in which the Church is engaged. If we fix our attention on that even
of preparation referred to in the text and connect with it past events and those
which immediately succeeded, we shall bé fully convinced that a time of preparation —
is a season of trial. After the Babylonish captivity the Jews were little given
to idolatry. The means of instruction were more widely diffused, and with this
change of circumstances the carnality of their heart operated in new channels.
Satan adapted his temptations to their moral state, and while externally they
worshipped God the internal homage of the heart was withheld. Their religion
was a form of godliness without its power. At this period the heathen nations
lay prostrate at the feet of Satan; and the Jews, with few exceptions, yielded
to his will. During this even of preparation Simeon had a few sons, and Anna
some daughters, who observed the aspect of the times, and waited for the
Consolation of Israel. The sceptre had departed from Judah, and every event
seemed to hasten the grand consummation foretold by the prophets. An
astonishing Personage appeared, in whom their hopes centred. With wisdom
unequalled, benevolence unwearied, and power uncontrollable, He seemed to be
the Desire of all nations. Hosannas ascend to His praise, and He is welcomed
as the anticipated Deliverer of Israel. He announces that His kingdom is not
of this world, and the crowd cease their acclamations—He reproves vice, and
sinners overawed retire, determined on His destruction. The hour and the
power of darkness was come, and the Saviour of mankind was apprehended,
insulted, and nailed to the accursed tree between two malefactors. The Saviour
bowed His head and gave up the ghost. This was, if not the hour of despair
to spiritual Israelites, at least it was the even of preparation—the season of
trial. Even those who had imbibed the spirit of prophecy had much to agitate
and perplex their minds. The promises of God they could not doubt, but how
they were to receive fulfilment was beyond their comprehension. The faithful
disciples were scattered as sheep without a shepherd. The mangled body of
the Saviour was entombed; and hope, though still lingering in the breast,
scarcely durst embody a wish. The Jewish Sabbath passed, and a slumbering
Saviour burst the bands of death asunder, triumphed over death, and him who
had the power of death. The preparation over, the trial in the Divine economy
had accomplished its purpose, and a different scene is now presented to
our contemplation. A triumphant Saviour, enraptured disciples, a stupefied
Sanhedrin, an amazed multitude, a Conqueror ascending on high, bearing gifts
for men, the Spirit bestowed at Pentecost, the heralds of the Cross endowed with
miraculous gifts, numbers added to the Church, and Christianity proclaimed
throughout the vast extent of the Roman Empire. The night of diffidence,
doubt, and perplexity was the immediate harbinger of confidence, assurance,
and clear manifestations of Heaven’s approbation. In proportion as the even
of preparation was awfully portentous and severely trying, so were the triumphs
| which followed and the pleasures which the faithful enjoyed.

II. Life is a time of preparation for every individual, and either works
for his good or evil according as he is exercised. From a consideration of


594


_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XV.





the character of the Creator, we conclude that benevolence is an essential
attribute of His nature, and that His tender mercies will appear throughout
all His works. This world, as wheeled into space, was crowned with beauty.
It was worthy of the creating hand of a benevolent Being, and a suitable abode
for innocence and happy creatures. Every creature is finite, and, coming perfect
from the hand of God, may become imperfect from personal acts. By the Fall
man was not only liable to punishment, but had become morally depraved.
Christ by dying bore the penalty of a violated law, and thus delivered believers
from punishment, and He procured the agency of the Spirit to create the
heart anew, and thus restored the Divine image which was lost by sin. The
deliverance from punishment which Christ effected for believers is an act, and
is called “justification”; the renewing of the heart is a work, and is called
“sanctification.” The latter being progressive, though an act of grace, is
accomplished by means. Life to Christians frequently is a chequered scene,
and at every remarkable stage of their pilgrimage to eternity fresh proofs of
an unseen directing Power are furnished. They are often led by a way which
they know not, and conducted to an issue which they did not anticipate.
Ordinary occurrences are much under our own control, and by certain modes
of action we can in not a few cases predict the result. Circumstances, how-
ever, which we did not foresee, and which from our ignorance of the cause we
term accidents, give new directions to our plans, and change in a greater or
less degree the aspect of our personal history. Prosperity engenders pride, and
adversity balances in some minds the actuating powers. A sickly existence
may preserve the soul in health. Bereavements loosen the heart from created
objects. All works for the good of the Christian, and the fluctuations to which
he is exposed, prepare his mind for the spiritual employments of heaven.
Every individual in future will be rewarded according to his works. As we
sow so shall we reap. He that sows sparingly shall reap also sparingly.
Among the angelic host ‘there are various degrees, and though all are happy
in heaven the capacity for enjoyment is infinitely varied. As vessels all are
full to overflowing, but all cannot partake of the same extent of enjoyment.
In the joy of our Lord as we have employed our talents so will be-the measure
of our reward.—A. Robertson.


The dead Christ—Here we behold the dead Christ. We follow not the
departed spirit in its sojourn till the third day, or speculate on its disembodied
occupation. We do not attempt to dwell on the incarnate mystery of the Son
of God still united to the body of death. We contemplate the sacred body,
the movements of affection and faith called forth by it, and the providential
circumstances attending the sepulture.

I. The reality of the dead Christ.—1. The body of Jesus. How affecting
the sight of a dead body! Motionless, inert, cold, and pale: the blood no longer
circulates, the heart has ceased to beat or the bosom to heave, the eye emits no
flash —all is fixed, dull, marbled, and silent. Deaf, dumb, blind, palsied, beauty
itself vanishes, corruption hastens, the last feature is obliterated, and all that
remains is the lifeless clay. And this was the powerful frame, the fair
countenance, the fine organisation ; this was the active, indefatigable machine
of life; this was the outward man, and tabernacle of the friendship and love of
home and of business life, that have passed into memory. How immeasurably
affecting to gaze on the dead body of a friend, and that the nearest and dearest
of the earth, and the most revered, on whom we have trusted, depended, and
with whom we have taken sweet counsel—a guardian and a friend, a more than
half of our soul! How keenly all this was felt by the stunned disciples and
the mourning women as they gazed on the lifeless form still suspended on the


595





cHAP. xv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





cross, and withdrew, leaving it in the rough custody of the soldiers, possibly to
behold it no more! 2. The dead body of Jesus. More than the common mystery
of death is here. This was He “who should have redeemed Israel.” This was
He who seemed death-proof, who had power over death, who gave back to the
widow of Nain her son from the bier, and Lazarus to his sisters from his four
days’ grave. This was He who did so many “ mighty works” that all marvelled.
Yet here death has laid its cold grasp even upon Him. ‘Son of Man,” ‘Son
of Abraham,” “Son of David,” “Son of God,” so named, so proved, so believed, —
and held, and loved; yet is this His dead, His pulseless form. How comes it
that death hath this ‘“ dominion over Him”? They are not yet able rightly —
to answer. ‘Great is the mystery of godliness.” “Crucified through weakness.”
Lo! the dead Christ. 3. Where is redemption now? What chapter, what
verse, is this? Where stands the world, the Church, redeemed or unredeemed ?
Was redemption yet complete ? It was impossible, doubtless, for Christ to fail—
impossible for the Son of God. Yet we see how slight-seeming are the links of —
events, how frail-looking is the agency, how hopeless to all sense as we gaze
on the dead Christ! The wisdom of God is foolishness with men. 4. It is upon
this dead body we must continue to fix our eye. We must understand by faith
that the dead Christ fulfils a great part in the history and economy of our
salvation. We are allowed to gaze until the reality of His death is pressed
home on our soul. There in that dead body we see the power of the law.
Who can stand against that stroke and live? Christ Himself is smitten by it
to the dust of death. His connexion with us, His adoption of our liabilities, —
His taking of our sins, though Himself spotless and righteous, lays Him low.
See in the dead Redeemer the deadliness of our sins. ‘‘ He was wounded for
our transgressions . . . the chastisement of our peace was upon Him.” 5, To
us it is now easy and possible to see the end from the beginning. In the dead
Christ is the token of the finished work of Calvary—the foundation of redemption.
He has laid down His life. He has yet “to take it again.” A dead Jesus, a
disembodied Christ, fulfils not all the offices of Redeemer. The gospel is not
the story of one who died and ‘“‘saw corruption,” like other hopes of the world,
but of One who died for our sins, and was buried and rose again, and saw no
corruption, whom yet we shall behold as He is now reigning in glory.

II. The preciousness of the dead Christ.—How precious is that dead body!
It is to be the transformed and glorified organ of the living Redeemer through
all ages. It must needs ascend incorruptible and unmutilated to the heavens.
But how shall this be, exposed to the indignity and careless scorn of the world,
with no shield, no guardianship, but the military watch, all the disciples terrified
and fled? And is this Providence, we ask, that cares for the sparrow’s fall and
numbers the hairs of our head? How loose all seems, how casual, how easily
natural, as if there were no more care in heaven for this sacred body than for
the malefactor’s corpse or the torn prey of the fields! Yes, this is Providence,
which finds its instrument in every fluctuation of human feeling, in every
incident and circumstance of the hour, all united by invisible connexions to the
past and to the future, a line of purpose and of agency stretching from the
throne of God through all history, and joining the eternities. Do not fear,
mournful soul, for the dead Christ! Wait and watch but long enough—and
it shall not be unduly long: you shall see stirrings of life beneath the shroud,
the colour of resurrection on the pallid cheek ; you shall behold the old glistening
of the eye of love, you shall see the erect, resuscitated form, hear the footstep
of the Conqueror of death, and the tones of “the voice that was still.” This
shall be for Mary and John, and Peter and Thomas, in after-time, not distant ;
but now this dead body, so precious and imperilled, is taken into unexpected care
.nd is protected by unlikely means, ‘There is no wisdom nor understanding


596


a


| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.  omav. xv.
ce ee eee Nh we ee
nor counsel against the Lord.” The body of Jesus is brought safely through


the dark passage of history—some one and something ever provided for its


protection and honour. God had ready not His angels only, but His centurion
and His Pilate, His Joseph and His Nicodemus—He had ready the willing and
the unwilling to do service to the dead Christ. It was in full assurance of this
that Jesus fell asleep. ‘Thou wilt not leave My soul to Sheol, neither wilt
Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption.” The garden was there and the
tomb, and the heart of its owner ready to yield to the touch of His grace. The
hour of the last word of Calvary was timed by no wisdom of men, and it
anticipated and baffled their reckless desires; and all that looked so purposeless
and of accident was part of the sublime but unobserved concatenations of
Heaven (Acts iv. 27, 5

Ill. The influence of the dead Christ.—How powerful and mysterious the
influence of death! How it softens and awes, puts men on honour and conscience,
and brings home a sense of the invisible world! See it gathering long-sundered
friends from far and near, renewing ties of nature and grace, imposing order
as with authority, silencing the busy tongue! See the dead Christ drawing, as
by some magnet, the secret admirer, the unavowed friend, the unsuspected lover,
the cold neighbour, the remorseful wrong-doer, the abashed ingrate, the very
distant relative, the negligent and unfriendly one of former days, as though
summoned to-day before some unseen tribunal, to say why it was they thought
and spoke and acted so! But what is the influence of the dead Christ? There
are shattered hopes, but no doubts of the heart. Mystery shrouds all, but the
Lord and Master lost was never more precious. Where there was love before,
now it gushes from the hearts of those womanly believers; where it was
unavowed, it is now expressed ; where it was secret, it now reveals itself ; where
it was remorseful and penitent, it is now of inexpressible contrition ; where it
was intimate and thrice endeared, it now presses home the sense of irreparable
loss ; where it cannot bear disappointment, it bursts into language which refuses
comfort ; where it was halting and fearing, it shoots into sudden strength ;
where it has been false, it works despair ; Judas cannot bear the face of the
dead Christ, and rushes to his place; Peter cannot sleep till he sees it again ;
John must reach the heart of the mystery of the bosom on which he leaned; the
Marys and the loving women “ prevent the dawning,” that they may anoint
the body of the blessed dead. Seeing we know the mystery of the dead Christ,
let us thank God for His adorable providence in grace and redemption, by which
“all things work together for good to them that love God.” And let us “thus
judge that, if one died for all, then all were dead... that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even we also should walk in
newness of life.”—G. C. Hutton, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 43-46. Joseph of Arimathea.—
See in this ‘“‘good and just” man of
Arimathea the long embrace and
tender constancy of Jesus’ love to us.
First, He puts into our heart the good
desire to serve Him; then He brings
our purpose to good effect; and after-
wards, instead of claiming the work
as His, He allows it to be our own.
His memory will not forget it, His
affection will not leave it; but long


after we are gone He still comes to
it, looks on it, and keeps it up like
a parent treasuring the little things
of a departed child, and keeping the
little garden it used to work in and
call its own.—TZ. F’. Crosse, D.C.L.


Ver. 46. The Saviour’s grave.—Jeru-
salem was surrounded by graves cut
out of the limestone rock. Yet it
seems strange that in the spot recently


594


CHAP, XV.


SPS ae
nal!)
“1 -


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


i


identified by Conder and Sir William
Dawson as Calvary you may still find
a garden, and in the garden a sepulchre,
and the sepulchre closed with a huge
circular stone, like a colossal grindstone,
which, rolling in a groove cut for it,
would cover or expose the opening into
the tomb as you might move it. Per-
haps it was to spite Joseph that they
had the Saviour crucified in this spot
near his garden. If so, the spite served
Joseph well. None other had lain
in this grave. It was sacred to Him.
Christ died what one may call a
borrowed death; He is laid in a
borrowed tomb. Only the death was
the most shameful of all deaths ; while
the grave is rich and noble. There
is much about this grave-dwelling of
the Saviour worthy of earnest thought.
1. A grave seems an item in the
experience of all things good. Nothing
great or good seems to go straight to
its throne, but always through a grave.
Good causes seem always lost before
they are won, the dark hour of weak-
ness being used of God to draw forth
the allegiance that gives them victory.
The testimony of prophets seemed
generally to find only a-grave, and
“who hath believed our report?” has
been its constant epitaph. Religion,


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 3-5. Silence and self-control.—
Moltke, the great strategist, was a man of
lowly habits and few words. He has been
described as a man “ who can hold his tongue
in seven languages!”


Ver. 10. Hnvy.—Dionysius the tyrant, out
of envy, punished Philoxenus the musician
because he could sing, and Plato the philo-
sopher because he could dispute, better than
himself.


Vers, 11-14. A change of national senti-
ment.—Englishmen can very well under-
stand what a change of national sentiment
means—what it is for a ruler to have the
confidence of the nation at one time and
lose it at another. When that happens, and
is proved to have happened by a general
election, there need not be any voters—there
seldom are more than a few scores or
hundreds—who actually change sides, who
vote one way one time and the opposite way


598


truth, and goodness go not through
the ‘world in bright apparel, but perse-
cuted, dying, and finding graves. Judge
not success by seeming, power by
popularity. The great Christ found
a grave. 2. It was meet Christ
should enter our graves, for all the
world is but a grave—a vast cemetery
where we transact a little business
and indulge a little pleasure before
lying down beside the dead. There
is no household without its grave.
Life is only a procession to our own
funeral. So Christ would not have
thoroughly come to the world if He
had not come to our grave. 3. The
Saviour hallows the grave by occupy-
ing it. He removes its reproach, dis-
pels its terrors. When He enters it,
He shews it is one of ‘the places of
God’s dominion,” a region where life
is not extinct and God’s mercy not
vanished away. Since that new tomb
was occupied all graves have become
new, and thoughts of rest, sleep, re-
freshment, waking, are now associated
with them. When death fixed its sting
in Christ, it lost it for all who follow
Christ. 4. We now can feel ‘those
who sleep in Jesus” are safe. Where
God permitted His Son to lie we may
safely place our dear dead.—R. Gilover.


LO) CHAPTER AN


another. But the party that was dominant
at one time, that knew what it wanted and
meant to get it, is at another time half-
hearted and doubtful; if they will not vote
against their old party they perhaps do not
care to vote at all, or at any rate they do
not care to try to convince others, to gain
over those who are doubtful, or to urge to
activity those who are indifferent, or still
more half-hearted than themselves.— W. H.
Simeow.

Fickleness of popularity —On July 25th,
1553, Northumberland and Lord Ambrose
Dudley were brought in from Cambridge,
escorted by Grey and Arundel, with four
hundred of the Guards. Detachments of
troops were posted all along the streets
from Bishopsgate, where the duke would
enter, to the Tower, to prevent the mob
from tearing him to pieces. It was but
twelve days since he had ridden out from
that gate in the splendour of his power:
he was now assailed from all sides with


e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


yells and execrations ; bareheaded with cap
in hand, he bowed to the crowd as he rode
on, as if to win some compassion from
them; but so recent a humility could find
no favour. His scarlet cloak was plucked
from his back; the only sounds which greeted
his ears were, “Traitor! traitor! Death to
the traitor!” And he hid his face, sick at
heart with shame, and Lord Ambrose at the
gate of the Tower was seen to burst into
tears.—J. A. Froude.

Inherent weakness of human nature.—The
poet has said, “ Nature never did betray the
heart that loved her.” Can you say that of
human nature ?


Ver. 13. The world’s reception of Christ.—
It is said of Dr. Robertson, the celebrated
historian, that, preaching once in the fore-
noon, he affirmed, in the words of the ancient
heathen, that “if perfect virtue were to de-
scend to the earth clothed in a human form,
all the world would fail prostrate and wor-
ship her.” In the afternoon Dr. Erskine, his
colleague, remarked, on the contrary, that
“perfect virtue, in the human nature of the
Saviour of mankind, had indeed appeared
on the earth; but, instead of being univers-
ally worshipped, the general cry of His
countrymen was, “Crucifty Him! crucify
Him!”


Ver. 15. Scourging.—We cannot tell what
that Roman punishment was; we read about
it in the olden books, but men do not
understand what they read so much as what
they feel. The victim was tied by the hands
to a post or standard; he was compelled to
assume a stooping position ; the knotted
thong was in the hands of a Roman execu-
tioner, and be administered the punishment
largely according to his own will or passion.
We have heard of the knout in Russia; in
our own land we have the “ cat,” so feared
by felons; in the Roman law there was
this arrangement for scourging, that men
might be humbled as well as punished, that
the truth might be extorted from them as
well as a penalty inflicted, that they might
be brought into lowliness of mind and sub-
missiveness of temper, so that the judge
could do with them what he pleased. The
hands of Christ were tied to the stake, the
flagellum was used upon His naked back ;
He was scourged by Roman hands.—
J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 20. Christ mocked.—A strange illus-
tration of the scene is afforded by what
happened only a few years afterwards at
Alexandria, when the people, in derision
of King Agrippa L., arrayed a well-known
maniac in a common door-mat, put a papyrus
crown on his head, and a reed in his
hand, and saluted him as “ maris” (lord).—
A. Edersheim, D.D.


CHAP. XV:





Ver. 21. The shape of the Cross.—The
shape of the Cross on which our Lord
suffered has been much debated. Some
ancient Fathers, fancying they found a
typical reference in the crossing of the hands
over the head of the scape-goat, and in the
peculiar mode in which Jacob blessed his
grandsons, often assumed that it was in the
form of what is commonly called a St.
Andrew’s cross ; otLers again, seeing in the
mystical mark or Tau set upon the fereheads
of the righteous in Ezekiel’s vision a fore-
shadowing of the Cross, concluded that it
was like that which bears the name of
St. Anthony, in form like a capital T. It
is far more probable that it was what is
known familiarly as the Latin cross. It
was prefigured by the transverse spits which
the priest placed in the paschal lamb. Its
four arms, pointing to the four quarters of
the globe, symbolised “the breadth, and
length, and depth, and heiglt ” of Christ’s
universal Church. It is a strong argument
in favour of this form that “‘ the inscription ”
was set above the head of the Crucified,
which would be impossible in either of the
ot..er forms.—Dean Luckock.


Ver. 24. Stripped of His raiment.— Dr.
Norman Macleod relates the following inci-
dent: “Tom Baird, the carter, the beadle
of my working-man’s church, was as noble a
fellow as ever lived—God-fearing, true, un-
selfish. I shall never forget what he said
when [asked him to stand at the door of the
working-man’s congregation, and when I
thought he was unwilling to do so in his
working clothes, ‘If,’ said I, ‘ you don’t like
to do it, Tom; if you are ashamed ’
‘Ashamed!’ he exclaimed, as he turned
round upon me, ‘I’m mair ashamed o’ yersel’
sir. Div ye think that I believe, as ye ken
1 do, that Jesus Christ, who died for me,
was stripped o’ His raiment on the Cross,
aud that I—— Na, na, I’m prood to stand
atthe door.’ Dear, good fellow! There he
stood for seven winters, without a sixpence
of pay, all from love, though at my request
the working congregation gave him a silver
watch. Wuten he was dying from small-pox,
the same unselfish nature appeared. When
asked if they would let me know, he replied:
‘Tkere’s nae man leevin’ I like as I do him.
I know he would come. But he shouldna’
come on account of his wife and bairns, and
so ye maunna’ tell him!’ I never saw him
in his illness, never hearing of his danger till
it was too late.”

A hardened gamester.—There was a profli-
gate gamester whose conversion was at-
tempted by some honest monks, and they,
in order to break his heart for sin, put into
his hands a fine picture of the crucifixion of
Christ; but when they inquired what he was
studying so intently in the picture, hoping
his conversion was going forward, he replied,


599





CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


oe Ee ee ae


“T was examining whether the dice with
which the soldiers are casting lots for the
garment be like ours.” This man too well
resembles bad men in the ceremonies of
religion, for their hearts guide their eyes to
what may nourish their vices, not to what
would destroy them.


Ver. 25. The Cross explains the world’s
mystery.—In the Palace of Justice at Rome
they take you sometimes into a chamber
with strangely painted frescoes on the ceiling,
and around the walls, and upon the floor, in
all kinds of grotesque forms. You cannot
reduce them to harmony; you cannot make
out the perspective; it is all a bewildering
maze of confusion. But there is one spot
upon the floor of that room, and one only,
standing upon which every line falls into
harmony; the perspective is perfect, the
picture flashes out upon you, instinct with
meaning in every line and panel. You can
see at that point, and that only, the design
of the artist that painted it. I believe that
this world is just as bewildering a maze
looked at at every point except one. I look
back upon the records of history; I look
upon the speculations of science; I endea-
vour to gaze into the future of this world’s
career; wherever I turn I am opposed by
-the mysteries that hem me in and crush
me down, until I take my stand at the foot
of the Cross. Then darkness and discord
become light and harmony; the mystery is
solved ; the night that shuts me in becomes
radiant with the Divine light and glory. At
the foot of the Cross art, science, literature,
history, become at once to me a Divine, a
glorious, and a blessed thing. And so I
claim for my Lord His rightful dominion
over all the works of His hands. We will
gather all the beauties of art, all the trea-
sures of music, all that is brightest and best
in this world, and we will lay them down at
His feet; for “ worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive might, and majesty, and
riches, and power, and honour, and glory.”
His is the sceptre, His is the right, His this
universal world.—Dr. Manning.

The Cross the sufferer’s support.—A poor
woman in a ward of one of the great London
hospitals had to undergo a fearful operation,
and as a special favour besought that it
might be performed on Good Friday, which
was close at hand, that the reflexion on her
Redeemer’s agony might the better enable her
to endure her own sufferings.——A preacher
has found an illustration of the saving
efficacy of the Redeemer’s work in the great
breakwater or pier which stretches in front
of Plymouth Harbour, on which all the force
of the storms expend their violence, and
behind whose solid strength the ships of
many a distant land find shelter and security.
So does the atonement of Christ offer us
rest for our souls, if only we seek it as our


600





refuge ; and so too, when the things of this —


world are full of bitterness, we shall find


life sweetened and purified by means of the ©


Cross.


Ver. 31. Salvation of others by self-sacrifice. —
—1. Aconverted Japanese was explaining the ©


Atonement,
tion: A woman was crossing the great plain.


He used this touching illustra- —


She carried a child on her back. When in ~
the midst of the plain, she looked suddenly ~


behind her and saw that it was afire. She
had but a moment to think. She laid down
the child, desperately scooped with her hands
a hole in the earth, with trembling haste
laid the child in it, and covered it with her
own body. There they found the two. The
poor mother was dead, but the child was
saved. “So Jesus died for me,” said the
simple-hearted convert, “That I might
live, He put His body between me and ever-
lasting fire.’ 2. When Dr, Bushnell, after
telling one of his children that if he touched
the plants in the conservatory his own gera-


ts


nium, as a penalty, should be put in the —


cellar, and, seeing the child disobey, put his
own geranium, the largest and most beauti-
ful of all, into the cellar instead, the boy
understood the sacrifice of feelings thus
made—that if he was to be spared, and his
father’s word respected, his father must
suffer. 3. A wealthy young man, living in
London, undertook to improve the condition
of the poor of that vast city. For this pur-
pose he visited them and gave away large
sums, But within a short time he discovered
that, if he was to do any permanent good,
he must live among them. He did not hesi-
tate. He took a lodging in the heart of the
Seven Dials, the worst district of the city.
There he toiled until he died. He was cut
off in the beginning of his work, but he
succeeded. He had found the secret of his
calling—that if he would save, he must
suffer.

Self-sacrificing devotion —EHdwin, King of
Northumbria, in 617 gave audience to an
envoy from the King of Wessex. In the
midst of the conference the envoy started to
his feet, drew a dagger from his robe, and
rushed madly on the king. Lilla, one of the
royal band, threw himself between Edwin
and the assassin; but so furious was the
stroke that even through Lilla’s body the
dagger still reached its aim. The king,
however, soon recovered, though his devoted
servant died.

Sacrifice to save.—In the early days of the
American settlement Captain John Smith
was among the most intrepid of the ex-
plorers, and earned for himself the title of
“ Father of the Colony.” He was once seized
by the Indians and held in captivity, being
afterwards sentenced to death. A tender-
hearted Indian maiden, touched with pity,
interceded for him, but in vain, and then





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


‘


CHAP. XV.


ee


flung herself beneath the executioner’s axe,
and clasped the victim in her arms, risking
her own life, but saving the captain and the
colony of Virginia,


Ver. 33. Christ eclipsed.—A pious astrono-
mer, in describing an eclipse which he wit-
nessed in Norway, says: “I watched the
instantaneous extinction of light, and saw
the glorious scene on which 1 had been
gazing turned into darkness. All the horizon
seemed to speak of terror, death, and judg-
ment; and overhead sat, not the clear flood of
light which a starry night sends down, but
there hung over me dark and leaden black-
ness, which seemed as if it would crush me
into the earth. And asI beheld it I thought,
“ How miserable is the soul to whom Christ
is eclipsed!” The thought was answered
by a voice; for a fierce and powerful sea-
bird which had been swooping around us,
apparently infuriated at our intrusion on its
domain, poured out a scream of despairing
agony when it was surprised in the dark-
ness.” What, then, will be the fearful sur-
prise when the lost soul finds itself in that
world “where hope withering flees, and
mercy sighs, Farewell ! ”

Nature's sympathy with her Lord.—We
feel a deep appropriateness in the sympathy
of nature with the crucifixion of our Lord,
in the profound darkness that overspread the
earth as the outer token of the spiritual
darkness that overwhelmed His soul, and in
the rending of the rocks that accompanied
the rending of His mortal flesh and the
separation between soul and body. Super-


' stition has sought for farther proofs than


those which Scripture gives of such sym-
pathy, and imagined that it has found them
in the continual trembling to this day of the
leaves of the aspen when all around is still,
as if in shuddering recollection of the use
made of its wood for the construction of the
cross ; and also in the dark stains that appear
ineffaceably on the leaves and the crimson
spots that mingle with the white blossoms
on one of the commonest weeds of our corn-
fields, said by tradition to have grown beneath
the Cross. And the scarlet anemones, which
blaze in spring-like embodied flames on the
hills of Palestine, are called by the Christian
residents “ blood-drops of Christ,” under the
idea that these beautiful flowers were dyed
with the blood that issued from our Saviour’s
pierced side. Unfounded as these super-
stitions are, it must be confessed, notwith-
standing, that there is something in them
that appeals to our natural sense of fitness.
It is difficult to realise that nature should
bold on serenely in her accustomed way
while her Lord was dying. We should have
expected that the supernatural darkness
would have continued all the time—that the
fields would languish and the flowers fade
in token of their deep sympathy with the


death of Him who gave them all their
beauty, and whose smile of blessing rested
always upon them while He trod the earth,
—Hugh Macmillan, D.D.


Ver. 37. The death of Death—A Green-
land missionary relates the following: “Last
winter, Jacob, a native assistant of mine,
was summoned to his rest. On the day
before his death, having been asked how he
felt, he replied, ‘I shall not rise from this
bed again; I am called hence to the Lord’
He then raised his arm, stretched it out and
said, ‘Look! my arm is nothing but bones
and skin. It is the same with my earthly
body: the flesh is dead within me; my
desire is fixed on my heavenly country—that
country where I shall behold Him who loves
me and whom I love. Yes, I shall see Him
shortly.’ When asked whether he feared
death, ‘Oh no,’ he answered; ‘how can I
love Christ and fear death? The death of
Christ was the death of Death.’ ”


Ver. 39. Power of the Cross—The well-
known story of Colonel Gardiner’s conversion
illustrates the power of the Cross. He lived
a gay life, and after having spent the Sunday
evening in carousing retired to his room,
when he took up a book entitled The
Christian Soldier, intending to make fun of
it. He fell asleep with the book in his hand,
and dreamed: a blaze of light shone on the
book, and overhead he saw suspended in the
air a vivid representation of the Saviour on
the Cross. Distinctly he heard a voice saying,
“This I did for thee: what hast thou done
for Me?” He awoke, and filled with con-
trition he sought and found pardon and
peace.—One afternoon a man stood in Ant-
werp Cathedral gazing at Rubens’ “ Descent
from the Cross.” He was so absorbed in
what he saw, that when the verger came and
told him it was time to close the cathedral
he exclaimed, “No, no, not yet; wait until
they get Him down.”

Involuntary testimony to the Divinity of
Christ—A well-known learned man of
Saxony, aftier having all his life long attacked
Jesus and His gospel with all the weapors
of sophistry he could command, was in his
old age partially deprived of his reason,
chiefly through the fear of death, and fre-
quently fell into religious paroxysms of a
peculiar nature. He was almost daily ob-
served conversing with himself, while pacing
to and fro in his chamber, on one of the walls
of which, between other pictures, hung one
of the Saviour. Repeatedly he halted before
the latter, and said in a horrifying tone of
voice, “ After all, Thou wast only a man.”
Then after a short pause he would continue,
“What wast Thou more than a man?
Ought I to worship Thee? No, I will not
worship Thee, for Thou art only Rabbi Jesus,
Joseph’s son, of Nazareth,” Uttering these


601


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ST. MARK.


at a eee


words, he would return with a deeply affected
countenance, and exclaim, “ What dost Thou
say? That Thou camest from above! How
terribly Thou eyest me! Oh, Thou art dread-
ful! But Thou art only a man, after all!”
Then he would again rush away, but soon
return with faltering step, crying out, “What!
Art Thou in reality the Son of God?” The
same scenes were daily renewed, till the
unhappy man, struck by paralysis, dropped
down dead; and then really stood before his
Judge, who, even in His picture had so
strikingly and overpoweringly judged him.

Rousseaws testimony to the death of Christ.
-—Rousseau once wrote in one of his better
moments that “if the death of Socrates was
that of a sage, the death of Jesus was that
of a God.” It may be too, probably, that he
wrote not as one who adores, but as one who
admires. Bitter epigrams on Rousseau’s
sentence were not wanting. “It may be a
pretty turn,” some one said, “ but then,
unluckily, it is absurd.” But He who in one
undivided Person is God and Man, who died
His death, is so different from all others that
the paradox of Rousseau is literally true.—
Bishop Wm. Alexander.


Ver. 43. Great occasions disclose great
qualities. Some natures need powerful in-
centives to draw out their better traits and
nobler qualities. Close to Bracelet Bay,
Mumbles, is a bell-buoy marking a concealed
rock. ‘This bell rings only in the storm. It
is only when the wind is high and the
billows roll and beat against it that it gives
forth the music that is in it.

Glastonbury.—In the middle of the county





of Somerset there is a green and open vale,
through which several small rivers flow
quietly along towards the western channel.
These waters, as they wind through the
meadows, form a sort of island, upon which
may still be seen the grey ruins of an ancient
abbey. These ruins are of an extent and
richness which tell of an institution once
important. Among them one can trace the
outline of a solitary chapel, standing west-
ward and apart. This chapel was dedicated
to Joseph of Arimathea, and it was ever the
fixed and firm belief of all the inmates of
the abbey, and the long tradition of preceding
generations, that in this remote and sheltered
place Joseph of Arimathea had planted a
mission, and had himself passed the latter
years of his life. Here he had built a fragile
church, which persevering piety renewed
with increasing beauty from age to age.
Here he who had buried Jesus had himself
found agrave, and here his Heavenly Saviour
had paid him backa hundredfold his garden-
grave at Calvary, and had written an epitaph
of blessing on his work of love, until it
grew into a stately pile, and became a great
light of learning and lamp of truth in the
Western world. Such was the beginning of
Avalon, the famed Abbey of Glastonbury,
where men said King Arthur lies asleep, and
where King Alfred found his shelter from
the Danes; but chiefly where Joseph of Ari-
mathea, the councillor of the Hast, found
both his first and last refuge from the world,
and was in his turn “laid in a sepulchre
that was hewn in stone, wherein never man
before was laid.”—7. F. Crosse, D.C.L.





CHAPTER XVI.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Had bought sweet spices.—Simply, bought spices. No time specified, merely the
fact stated. From Luke xxiii. 56 we gather (unless, indeed, there were two companies
of women) that the purchase was made before the Sabbath began. St. Mark’s point is, that
the women bought spices some time or other—no matter when—in order that when the
Sabbath was over they might come and anoint the body of the Lord. They seem to have
wished to complete the imperfect embalming which Joseph and Nicodemus had hastily
begun. See John xix. 39, 40, and ep. 2 Chron. xvi. 14.

Ver. 2. They came, ete.—7hey come (so as to be) at the sepulehre when the sun had risen.
That is, they start from home very early, with the object of reaching their destination soon
after daylight.

Ver. 3. The door of the sepulchre,—“ There was generally an approach to the tomb open to
the sky; then a low entrance on the side of the rock, leading into a square chamber, on one
side of which was a recess for the body. about three feet deep, with a lowarch over it. The
stone here referred to would be the stone which covered the actual entrance into the vault.
Té would probably be not less than six feet in breadth and three in height.” Had the women
known of the arrangement recorded in Matt, xxvii. 62-66, they might have hesitated about
visiting the tomb that day at all.


602


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XVI.


Ver. 4. Looked.— Looked uwp—* the only, but sufficient, proof that Calvary was a hill.”
Ver. 5. While Mary Magdalene, after a hasty glance, sped away to inform Peter and John
_ that the sepulchre had been, as she supposed, rifled (John xx. 1, 2), the other women made
bold to enter and inspect for themselves. Affrighted.—The word, used only by St. Mark,
signifies amazement blended with fear. It is found also in chaps. ix. 15, xiv. 34, xvi. 6.
Such experiences as these women were now passing through filled them with awestruck
surprise.

Ver. 7. And Peter.—With what solemnity the apostle would utter these words as he
recounted the matter to St, Mark!

Ver. 8. Quickly.— Omit. Fled.—Not as Mary Magdalene had done, in terror and hope-
lessness, but full of bewildered excitement, for agitation and ecstasy had them in its grip.
And to no one said they anything, for they were afraid to pause until they had delivered
their message to the disciples and Peter.

Vers, 9-20. See Appendix, p. 641.

Ver. 15. Go ye into all the world.—That is to say, ‘“‘Go wherever ye will, wherever ye can,
that the gospel may be diffused: no limits of place are henceforth prescribed to you.”
Every creature.—Every human creature. Cp. “all nations ” (Matt. xx. 19), as contrasted with
the one Jewish nation to which their labours hitherto had been restricted. See Matt. x. 5.

Ver. 16. He that believeth not.—Against heretics denying, from the omission in this latter
clause, the necessity of baptism, it is sufficient to reply that baptism, if not a necessary
means of grace, would not have been introduced as such, and without qualification, in the
previous clause—to say nothing of the assertion of its necessity elsewhere (¢.g. John ili. 3).
Nor, indeed, is the insistence on baptism really absent from this clause after all; although
not verbally expressed, it is evidently implied; the previous conjunction of the two—faith
and baptisrmm—is such that to accept or deny one is to accept or deny both. Moreover,
saving faith is practical, and includes the observance of all things enjoined, of which
baptism is among the first.

Ver. 17. These signs shall follow them that believe.—Not to be understood of every
believer, nor of all times alike. Miracles were more needed while the Church was in its
infancy than after it had obtained a secure footing in the world. Yet it must not be
concluded that the power of miracles in the body of the faithful is absolutely extinct. We
dare not attempt to draw the line, and say that miracles were possible up to such a date, but
not beyond, since God has not drawn any such line for us Himself. To be critical in
investigating evidence is wise and right; to be sceptical, in the teeth of evidence, is foolish
and wrong.

Yers. 19, 20. Mark the antithesis. The Lord, for His part, was received up into heaven,
‘and sat on the right hand of God—the seat of power; and they, for their part, went forth
into the world to do as He had bidden them, and, doing it, they were sustained and
reinforced by His almighty aid.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.-—Verses 1—8.
(Paratiets: Marr. xxviii. 1-8; Luxe xxiv. 1-12; Jonn xx. 1-10.)


The pious women visiting the sepulchre.—The present hopes of the followers
of Jesus had been destroyed and their future expectations frustrated by the
ignominious death of their Ixrd. When they beheld the accomplishment of all
which the malice of His ene: ies could inflict, they seem to have given way to
their feelings of despondency and dismay. But while the most favoured of the
apostles had retired from the place where He was put to death, and from
the garden in which they had seen His body laid and a large stone rolled to the
mouth of the sepulchre, there were others whose faith and love had survived
all these trials (Mark xv. 40, 41). During our Saviour’s life these pious
women had ministered to Him of their substance. They had followed Him out
of the distant part of the country in which they resided ; and they were still
found, in that hour of suffering, hoping against hope, or desirous to testify
to the end the love which they bore to Him who had loved them. When, at
a later hour of the same mournful day, the body of Jesus was taken down
from the Cross and laid in the new sepulchre, “ wherein never man before was
laid,” the same affectionate attendants still followed their Lord (Luke xxiii. 35).
“ As yet they knew not the Scripture, that He must rise again from the dead.”


603


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.








But perceiving that they who had in a hurried manner buried the body of —
Jesus had not embalmed it, as the manner of the Jews was to bury, but had
merely wrapped the body in linen with dry spices, they determined to perform —
that last oftice of affectionate care, and “returned, and prepared” the “spices —
and ointments” necessary for the purpose, and “rested the Sabbath day, —
according to the commandment.” ‘And very early in the morning, the first —
day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.” They —
knew not that the heavy stone which they had seen placed over the mouth ©
of the sepulchre had been farther secured by having been sealed with a seal ‘
and guarded by soldiers set as a watch. But they were aware that, even ©
without such a precaution, there was an impediment to the accomplishment —
of their pious intention insurmountable by their own strength. Still they
persevered in their exertions, though not without some secret misgivings that their —
labour would be in vain (ver. 3). But as soon as they reached the sepulchre —
all their apprehensions were proved to have been groundless. They came but —
to embalm the body of Jesus; they expected to have found a lifeless corpse; —
and lo! a vision of angels, which told them that He was risen from the dead. —
I. The constancy of these pious women, contrasted with the comparative ©
weakness of the faith even of the apostles, may remind us that the “faith
which worketh by love,” the religion of the heart, is by no means in pro- —
portion to the outward advantages which different individuals may possess. —
There may be often found among the comparatively unlearned, in the meanest —
stations and in circumstances of the greatest apparent distress, a practical
acquaintance with vital religion, a firm trust in God, an abiding faith in the —
merits of the Saviour, and a sense of the real consolations arising from a
spiritual frame of mind, which may well serve as an encouragement and as
a lesson to others who have been blessed with far greater opportunities of
religious improvement. Such examples teach us, in language which cannot —
be misunderstood, what a treasure true religion is; for it is found supplying,
and more than supplying, the want of all which this world can afford.
IJ. Another reflexion arising from this history is, that we are often
ignorant of obstacles which really beset our path of duty, while we exaggerate
to ourselves the magnitude of those with which we are acquainted. How
many, when inquiry is made respecting their religious condition, are found
to have fixed their apprehensions upon some circumstances which they con-
ceived to be the principal, if not the only, bar to their advancement in piety!
Some will complain of the cares of life. Before the eyes of others there may be —
set some trial of temper, some weakness of which they are especially conscious,
some trouble which at present occupies their thoughts, or some easily besetting
sin which they know not how to conquer or rem ve. And each of these may
conceive that there is but this one barrier interpc .ed between him and his duty.
But when we are led thus unduly to estimate the magnitude of some one —
ebstacle to a religious life, we overlook others of greater importance and still |
Jess surmountable by any powers of our own. If the sepulchre of Jesus was
sealed with a seal to prevent all access from without, who knows not that the
heart of man is by nature closed against Divine grace and remains dark and
impervious to its holy light! If the sepulchre of Jesus was guarded with a
band of soldiers, whose express duty it was to prevent the seal from being
broken and the stone from being rolled away, who knows not what a band
of evil passions and unholy desires and worldly thoughts besets the heart of
man, and how the prince of the power of the air disposes his active and sleep-
less forces, to keep the thoughts and affections still cold and dark, “lest the
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine


8


unto them ”!
604


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.





III. But while we thus learn justly to appreciate the real obstacles against
which we have to contend, the example of the pious women may encourage us
to persevere in the plain course of duty, in the firm persuasion that, although
we cannot, by our own strength, roll away the stone from the sepulchre, yet
that, however great it may be, there is a power which will remove it for us.
There are periods when the heart even of the faithful Christian is weighed
down with much sorrow. He is exposed to some great danger, or apprehends
some severe trial. At such a time his faith is ready to fail him. He goes on
his way, weary and sad at heart, although he knows that he is treading the
direct path of Christian duty. But who shall set bounds to the mercy or power
of God? When the Christian has accomplished his journey, he looks and sees
that the stone is rolled away. Either his apprehensions are removed, or, if
the trial which he feared has come upon him, strength has been given him to
enable him to bear it. And if this be true in the trials which are of a temporary
kind, so is it especially found in those which regard our spiritual state.

IV. If we persevere in faithful obedience, our exertions will often be blessed
beyond our utmost hopes.—The pious women who visited the sepulchre of their
Lord looked only for the sad satisfaction of preparing His body for the tomb.
And the apprehension which chiefly weighed upon their minds was instantly
removed, as soon as they looked and saw that the stone, which had appeared so
great, was rolled away. And after they had been relieved from this fear,
a new source of holy joy was unexpectedly opened to them. Their Lord was
risen from the dead, no more to see corruption. ,And so assuredly will God
deal with His servants at all times. With the temptation He will make a fway
to escape, that they may be able to bear it; with the trial He will give
strength ; with the tribulation He will send patience; and with patience,
experience ; and with experience, hope.—Prof. Temple Chevallier.


Vers. 3, 4. All difficulties surmounted by the fuithful.—tf we look at the diffi-
culties, trials, and sorrows which attend man from the cradle to the grave, and
’ consider at the same time only man’s strength, which is perfect weakness, we must
say with the apostle, ‘‘ Who is sufficient for these things?” ‘‘ Who then can be
saved?” Happy isit for him who is brought to confess, “W ith man it is impossible,
but with God all things are possible”; for when men are brought to look out of
themselves and to say, “Who shall roll us away the stone ?” they have taken
the first step towards its removal. 1. Sometimes the Christian is in great fear
of danger, in common with other men who fear not God. He sees no means
of escape—there may be no chance of it, as the world would say ; a fatal sickness
is around him, or he is in the power of an enemy. But is he without comfort
or resource 2 Nay, he remembers Joseph in Egypt, Lot in Sodom, Daniel in the
lions’ den, the three children in the furnace, Israel at the Red Sea, Paul and
Silas and Peter in prison ; and when ready to faint, and ery, “ Who shall roll away
the stone?” he hears again those cheering words, “ He shall give His angels
charge over thee,” etc. “ Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the
Lord.” 2. Sometimes the Christian is poor and in misery, and knows not to-day
how he shall live to-morrow ; distress presses him hard; he is in great straits,
and there seems no help for it ; he cannot see the least prospect of his condition
being bettered : or he may have a dread that poverty must soon come upon him ;
his faith is tried to the uttermost ; bad success, misfortunes of various kinds, daily
threaten him. And is he without comfort or hope? Does he forget Hagar in
the desert, the Israelites in the wilderness, Elijah at the brook Cherith, the
widow and her cruse of oil? 3. The Christian is sometimes much oppressed
and made to suffer under false accusations, his character mistaken, words
misrepresented, motives misunderstood and falsely stated. Who shall roll away


605


i |
CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. - :


—=3 @





the stone? But he is not without great comfort under all this, for he calls to
mind our Saviour’s words (Matt. v. 11, 12). He does not forget that Christ
“¢ame unto His own, and His own received Him not”; “He was despised and
rejected of men”; “ He was reviled.” If he be inclined to think that God
hath forsaken him, he hears God reasoning with him thus: Isa. xl. 27;
Ps. xxxvii. 5-7. 4. The Christian is sometimes sorely perplexed in some of
his plans and undertakings: nothing he takes in hand seems to prosper; so
many difficulties arise that he is tempted to yield to despair. But even here he
can patiently abide; “in quietness and confidence is his strength”; he leans
more unreservedly upon God; he waits His time; he knows that man’s time is
always ready—God’s time may not be yet. He remembers that God often
permits one to sow and another to reap, one man to begin and another to finish— —
as David, who prepared the materials, and Solomon, who built Him a house; —
and so looking steadfastly to Him, he sees the stone rolled away. 5. The
Christian is sometimes in‘great doubt as to how he should act—whether this
or that is his duty ; in a strait betwixt two, or else in perplexity as to how he
should perform that which he knows to be best. He is often haunted with the
fear of consequences and of a doubtful mind, tossed to and fro like a wave of
the sea. How comforting then are such words to him! (John vii. 17; Isa. 1. 10;
Ps. xevii. 11; Isa. xxvi. 3). 6. But if ever the Christian is ready to say, “‘ Who
shall roll away the stone,” it is when, having borne the Christian name, he is
convicted of having lived as a stranger to Christ the hope of glory—of exhibiting
in himself that sad contradiction, a worldly and unholy Christian. Who can
tell the blessing to a soul, weary and heavy laden with the burden of its sins,
of hearing such words as these, ‘‘ Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and He shall
sustain thee”? Who can tell the comfort of such consoling counsel as this ¢
Claim the privileges of the covenant, the first of which is pardon and forgive-
ness through Christ, into whom ye were baptised. Treat God as your Father :
you are not strangers and foreigners, though you have been bad and rebellious
subjects ; but ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, You have “liberty to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus”; “and having a High Priest over the
house of God, draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith” : for though
you have no power of yourselves to help yourselves, you can do all things through
Christ which strengtheneth you.—Z#. J. Boyce, M.A.


oF Am


_


ae


Vers. 5, 6. The first preaching of the Resurrection.—Mark has scarcely anything
to say about our Lord’s appearance after the Resurrection. His object seems
mainly to be to describe rather the manner in which the report of the Resurrection
affected the disciples. And so he makes prominent the bewildered astonishment
of the women. If the latter part of this chapter be his, he passes by the appear-
ance of our Lord to Mary Magdalene and to the two travellers to Emmaus with
just a word for each—contrasting singularly with the lovely narrative of the
former in John’s Gospel and with the detailed account of the latter in Luke’s, he
emphasises the incredulity of the twelve after receiving the reports. And in
like manner he lays stress upon the unbelief and hardness of heart which the
Lord rebuked.

I. The first witness to the Resurrection.—There are singular diversities in the
four Gospels in the account of the angelic appearances, the number, occupation,
and attitude of these superhuman persons; and contradictions may be spun,
if one is so disposed, out of these varieties. But it is wiser to take another view
of them, and to see in the varying reports—sometimes of one angel, sometimes
two, sometimes of one sitting outside the sepulchre, sometimes one within,
sometimes none—either different moments of time or differences produced by
the different spiritual condition of the beholders. We know too little about the


606


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.


laws of angelic appearances, we know too little about the relation in that high
region between the seeing eye and the objects beheld, to venture to say that
there is a contradiction where the narratives present variety. Enough for us
to draw the lessons suggested by that quiet figure sitting there in the inner
vestibule of the grave, gazing on the tomb where the Lord of men and angels
had lain. He was a youth. “The oldest angels are the youngest,” says the
great mystic. He was “clothed in a long white garment,” the sign at once of
purity and of repose; and he was sitting in rapt contemplation and quiet
adoration there, where the body of Jesus had lain. Wherefore was he there ?
Because that Cross strikes its power upwards as well as downwards—because He
that had lain there is the Head of all creation, and the Lord of angels as well
as of men—because that Resurrection following upon that Cross, “unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places,” opened a new and wonderful door
into the unsounded and unfathomed abyss of Divine love—because into these
things “angels desire to look,” and, looking, are smitten with adoring wonder
and flushed with the illumination of a new knowledge of what God is and of
what man is to God. Farther, we see in that angel-presence not only the
indication that Christ is his King as well as ours, but also the mark of his and
all his fellows’ sympathetic participation in whatsoever is of so deep interest to
humanity. All the servants of our King in heaven and earth are one, and He
sends forth His brightest and loftiest to be brethren and ministers to them
who shall be “ heirs of salvation.”

Il. The triumphant light cast upon the cradle and the Cross.—“ Jesus, the
Nazarene, who was crucified.” Do you not catch a tone of wonder and a tone
of triumph in this threefold particularising of the humanity, the lowly residence,
and the ignominious death? All that lowliness, suffering, and shame are
brought into comparison with the rising from the dead. The cradle is illuminated
by the grave, the Cross by the empty sepulchre. As at the beginning there is
a supernatural entrance into life, so at the end there is a supernatural resump-
tion of it. The Birth corresponds with the Resurrection, and both witness to the
‘Divinity. Brethren, let us lay this to heart—that unless we believe in the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the saying “ He was crucified” is the saddest word
that can be spoken about any of the great ones of the past. ‘If He be not
risen, our preaching is vain, and your faith is also vain.” “If Christ be not
risen, ye are yet in your sins.” But if what Easter Day commemorates be true,
then upon all His earthly life is thrown a new light, and we first understand
the Cross when we look upon the empty grave.

III. The majestic announcement of the great fact, and its confirmation.—
“He is risen; He is not here.” The first preacher of the Resurrection was an
angel, a true ev-angel-ist. His message is conveyed in these brief sentences,
unconnected with each other, in token, not of abruptness and haste, but of |
solemnity. ‘‘ He is risen” is one word in the original—a sentence of one word,
which announces the mightiest miracle that ever was wrought upon earth, a
miracle which opens the door wide enough for all supernatural events recorded
of Jesus Christ to find an entrance to the whole understanding and the reason.
“ He is risen.” The Resurrection of Jesus Christ is declared by angel lips to be
His own act. The Divine power of the Father’s will did not work upon Him
as from without to raise Him from the dead; but He, the embodiment of
Divinity, raised Himself, even though it is also true that He was raised from
the dead by the glory of the Father. These two things are not contradictory,
but the former of them can only be predicated of Him ; and it sets Him on a
pedestal immeasurably above and infinitely apart from all those to whom life
is communicated by a Divine act. He Himself is the Life, and it was not
possible that Life should be holden of Death. Now, then, note the confirmation


607


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





of this stupendous fact. “He is risen; He is not here.” We take it as a
plain historical fact, which the extremest scepticism has never ventured to
deny, that the grave of Christ was empty. The trumped-up story of the guards
sufficiently shews that. When the belief of a resurrection began to be spread
abroad, what would have been easier for Pharisees and rulers than to have gone
to the sepulchre and rolled back the stone, and said, “ Look there! there is your
risen Man, lying mouldering, like all the rest of us”! They did not do it.





woe


forma


Why? Because the grave was empty. Where was the body? They had it A
not, else they would have been glad to produce it. Now note the way in which ~


the announcement of this tremendous fact was received. With blank bewilder- —


ment and terror on the part of these women, followed by incredulity on the part
of the apostles and of the other disciples. These things are on the surface of
the narrative ; and very important they are. They plainly tell us that the first
hearers did not believe the testimony which they call upon us to believe. And
that being the state of mind of the early disciples on the Resurrection day, what


A i at


becomes of the modern theory, which seeks to explain the fact of the early —
belief in the Resurrection by saying, “Oh, they had worked themselves into —


such a fever of expectation that Jesus Christ would rise from the dead that the —


wish was father to the thought, and they said He did because they expected He
would ” ?


IV. The summons to grateful contemplation.“ Behold the place where they —
laid Him.” To these women the call was simply one to come and see what —
would confirm the witness. But we may, perhaps, permissibly turn it to a —


wider purpose, and say that it summons us all to thankful, lowly, believing,


glad contemplation of that empty grave as the basis of all our hopes. Look ~
upon it and upon the Resurrection which it confirms to us as an historical fact.


It sets the seal of the Divine approval on Christ’s work, and declares the
Divinity of His person and the all-sufficiency of His mighty sacrifice. ‘‘ Behold
the place where they laid Him,” and, looking upon it, let us think of that
Resurrection as a prophecy in its bearing upon us and upon all the dear ones
that have trod the common road into the great darkness, Chrift has died,
therefore they live; Christ lives, therefore we shall never die. ‘‘ Behold the
place where they laid Him,” and in the empty grave read the mystery of the
Resurrection as the pattern and the symbol of our higher life—that, “like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life.” Oh to partake more and more of that power
of His resurrection !—A. Maclaren, D.D.


Ver. 7. The message of the Resurrection.—The text, ’tis the first joyful tidings
that came to the Church of God of our Saviour’s Resurrection, the first blessed
news of Christ’s triumphant victory over death and the grave, and thereby of
His restoring of us to life and immortality. This day Satan and the powers
of hell, all the enemies of our salvation, were vanquished and subdued by Christ’s
Resurrection ; the hold and fortress of death, the grave, was spoiled and ransacked,
the gates and bars of hell broken in pieces. Our Samson hath taken the gates of
the Philistines on His shoulders, and carried them away. Surely this is a day of
joyful tidings. Let it be told to the King’s household, published in the Church
of God. Say unto Zion, “ Behold, thy God reigneth”: He hath triumphed
gloriously ; He hath led captivity captive; the horse and the rider, that pale
horse, and Death riding on him, hath He slain in the battle (Rev. vi. 8).

I. The despatch of this message, and that seems very hasty and somewhat
abrupt : it begins here with a word of diversion—“ But.” Whyso? Were they
in the wrong way? or in an unwarrantable employment? Just now, in the
former verse, he bids them come and see the place, behold the sepulchre where


608


=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.





the Lord was laid, and from whence He was risen. Why doth he now presently
remove them from it, not let them stay and take their fill of that joyful vision ?
"Tis said of Hilarion he went once to Jerusalem to see those monuments of
Christ’s death and passion; but he went no more, he made no practice of it,
placed no piety in it. So here the angel allows them a sight of the sepulchre to
confirm their faith ; but withal he dismisses them presently, suffers them not to
fix their devotion upon it. Besides this reason, the angel is thus quick and
speedy in his diversion, to teach us that even the spiritual delights of contem-
plation must give way to religious and pious actions. Their piety in meditating
on His Resurrection must give way to their charity in imparting it to others.
He is the best servant, not that delights to stand in his master’s presence, but
that carefully minds and diligently goes about his master’s business. For the
despatch of this message here are two things considerable. 1. From whom it
comes. The first news of Christ’s Resurrection is sent by anangel. (1) It becomes
the excellency of this great work of Christ’s Resurrection to be attended and
published by the ministry of angels. (2) Fit it was an angel should first publish
it, a heavenly messenger, as being a matter supernatural and heavenly, and of
special revelation. All proclamations are first published at the court-gate,
then sent abroad into the kingdom. This new revelation, ’tis first proclaimed
at heaven’s gates by an angel, and then sent abroad unto the sons of men.
(3) Angels are made messengers and publishers of these tidings, and they gladly
undertake it. See now there is a sweet communion and intercourse ’twixt them
and us. It shews us the virtue and power of that great atonement of Christ’s
death and bloodshed; it hath made up the breach and alienation ’twixt us and
the angels. They were all partakersin God’s quarrel ; and therefore the Scripture
presents them in martial and military and warlike appearances, tells us of
armies and hosts of angels. When soldiers and martial men proclaim peace and
good-will, there is peace indeed. This office of love the angel performs, ’tis the
fruit of Christ’s mediation, the merit of His death, the purchase of His passion.
2. By whom the angel conveys this message ; they are the women that repaired


to the sepulchre. Reason would conceit that some other messengers should have


been employed than these poor, weak women. But God’s thoughts are not as
man’s thoughts are. (1) God purposely makes choice of such instruments in
this great and weighty service. In the whole carriage and economy of the
gospel God observes a mixture of much spiritual power and glory, with much
outward baseness and meanness. (2) The tidings of His Resurrection are con-
veyed into the world by weak women. ‘‘ Kings and princes,” saith Chrysostom,
“make known their minds to inferior people by their great officers and ministers
of state: God, He employs poor, feeble, contemptible men to declare His will
to the potentates of the world.” (3) But yet there is some congruity that God
observes in the choice of these messengers. These good women, they stood to it
and clave to Christ when the apostles all of them fled and forsook Him; they
assisted His Cross when the others hid themselves (Mark xv. 40); they watched
His burial, repaired early and weeping to the sepulchre ; they were forwardest
in attending His passion; and so they are first made acquainted with His
Resurrection.

II. The persons to whom these tidings are directed.—“ Tell His disciples and
Peter.” 1. Hereisa general direction to His disciples. (1) Why is not the message
directed to Pilate and Herod, to Annas, and Caiaphas, and the priests, that con-
demned Him and compassed His death? It might have been a mighty conviction
to them. No; ’tis purposely hid from them to punish their infidelity and former
obstinacy. They had heard Him preach in His lifetime ; now, should He appear
from the dead, they would not believe Him. (2) Why not to the common people,
that sinned out of ignorance? No; this manifestation of lis Resurrection was not


RR 609





cHap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


1
a
#4
4





made promiscuously to all,’purposely to prepare a way to faith and believing. The
great honour that Christianity doth to God is to embrace His truth upon belief. —
3) This message and tidings of Christ’s Resurrection is directed to His disciples.
(3 They were the only visible body of Christians—to teach us, to whom the
benefit of Christ’s Resurrection belongeth ; ’tis to the Church, ’tis limited and
confined only to believers. (6) The faith of the disciples was now in a great ;
weakness ; they had almost given over all belief that Jesus was the Messias
(Luke xxiv. 21), Our faith, not only when ’tis in robore, in its full strength and
vivacity, but when ’tis in vulnere, wounded and weakened and overwhelmed |
with temptations, is accepted of Him. (c) These disciples were at this time full —
of sadness and sorrow for the loss of their Master. Such mourners are blessed
mourners ; they shall be comforted. They that can lament for His passion, they
shall be partakers of the joy and comfort of His Resurrection. 2. To acquaint
Peter with these good tidings an express message is directed to him. (1) Peter
had fallen most foully—denied, forsworn, his Master with curses and execrations.
Oh, ’twas a great sin of the first magnitude! And yet tosuch and so vilea sinner
are these tidings directed. It shews the virtue of the gospel of Christ’s death
and Resurrection ; the greatest sinners, the most heinous offenders, may get good
by it. (2) Peter’s faith and graces have received a very great bruise and maim
by his fall: his conscience is deeply wounded. He is like one fallen from a high
place, exceedingly bruised, and lies for dead. Such a one must be catched up
in our arms, more carefully tended. (3) Peter is now overwhelmed with sorrow
for his heinous sin: he wept bitterly, no doubt abhorred himself in dust and
ashes. And to extraordinary mourners God graciously directs extraordinary
and special and more personal comforts. (4) Peter by his -great fall in denying
of Christ hath incurred a great and an infamous scandal, given a great offence
to the whole Church of God. This personal message to him shall not only
comfort his conscience, but cure his credit too. It plainly signifies he must not
be cast off, but be dealt mercifully withal, and accounted as a brother. Nay, it
restores him not only to his discipleship, but to his office of an apostle. The
tidings are sent to him under the name of Peter, his apostolical name. (5) From
this personal message to Peter we may briefly collect these three corollaries :
a) As loving parents are most tender of their weakest children, so is Christ to.
the feeble Christians, sorrowful, heavy-hearted Christians ; His bowels of com-
passion yearn most towards them. (6) The angel pities Peter, and hath care
and compassion on him. Peter’s tears were the wine of angels; they were a
banquet in heaven. (c) In conformity to Christ, in imitation of His angel, it
must be our duty to practise the charge given to these messengers ; have a care
of Peter, of a sorrowful, contrite, broken-hearted Christian.

III. The sum of the message, the news to be imparted.—“ He goes before you
into Galilee: there shall ye see Him.” 1. Here is an intimation of Christ’s
Resurrection. The angel is careful to confirm that truth to them. Indeed, ’tis
the main capital truth of Christian religion—the sum and pith and kernel of
the gospel. It strengthens our faith in other saving truths. (1) It confirms
us in the truth of His Divinity (Rom. i. 4; Ps. xvi. 10). (2) It confirms
to us the benefit of His death and passion. Had He died only, death had
overcome Him; now He is risen, He hath overcome death. (3) This intimation
is the strongest means to revive and comfort them. Faith, ‘tis like the flower
called heliotropium : when the sun sets, it fades and closes; when the sun rises
and returns, it blows out and flourishes. 2. Here is a prediction that must
evidence the truth of His Resurrection. ‘“ He goes before you into Galilee.”
(1) Here is an act of local motion. Christ’s body now, after His Resurrection,
tis a glorified body, and yet within the compass and condition of a true natural
body, to be transferred by motion from one place to another (a) After His


610


—"


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.








Resurrection twas a finite body: ‘ He is risen; Heis not here.” When it was in one
place, it was not in another. (0) It was a sensible body (Luke xxiv. 39). (ce) It
was organical : we read of His hands, feet, side. It had all the parts and members
of a human body, in a just proportion and situation, the fit proportions of a human
body. (2) Here isan act of prevention : “‘ He goes before you.” Early and speedily
He hastens to Galilee, to visit and comfort them. ’Tis the gracious course of
God’s preventing goodness ; He is forward to relieve and comfort HisCburch. All
delays are tedious to Him. Nay, see the impatience of His love to His poor
disciples : He appoints them Galilee ; but He cannot withhold Himself so long from
them—tHe appears to them sooner. (a) To Mary in the garden. (6) To the
women in the way as they are going to Jerusalem. (c) To the two disciples
as they are going to Emmaus. (d) To the apostles ere they stirred one foot
out of the city. This is the speediness of His mercy (Isa. lxv. 24). He is still
better than His promise. (3) Here is the designation of the place: ‘ Galilee.”
Why to so remote a place? (a) As ’tis said of Peter's sinking, ’twas not pedes,
but fides ; not his feet, but his faith failed him,—so Christ here requires them not
to exercise their feet, but their faith. He would have them begin with faith,
and then they shall end in sight. (6) He sends them so far the more to quicken


_ and inflame their desires and longings to see Him. If He comes sooner to them,


tis to comfort them ; if He stays longer, ’tis to quicken and enliven their desires
towards Him. (4) In particular Galilee is the place appointed. (a) "Iwas locus
tutus: He graciously provides for His disciples’ safety ; He calls them out of
Jerusalem, the place of persecution—makes them withdraw themselves from
that bloody generation, where they were beset with dangers—leads them into a
place of safety, where with greater freedom they might converse with Him.
(6) "T'was locus familiaris, a place where He had usually conversed with them ;
"twas the place of His abode—He was called a Galilean. Purpesely Christ
chooses all the circumstances that might help forward their faith. In Galilee
they had often enjoyed His presence; His appearing there would more fully
affect them. (c) "I'was locus discipulorum plenus ; it was a place wherein Christ
had most of His disciples. His preaching had nothing the success at Jerusalem
that it had in Galilee. In Galilee He was seen of five hundred brethren at
once. Here is the place that Christ delights to visit and frequent, where He
hath the fullest churches, the greatest communion of saints and believers.
(d) "Tis locus typicus. Christ calls them from Jewry to Galilee; it casts the
shadow of a type and prefiguration ; it represents to us the passage and remove
of Christ and His gospel from the Jews to the Gentiles. Before in His lifetime He
confined His own presence and preaching to the nation of the Jews, and forbade
His apostles to preach unto the Gentiles ; but His Resurrection brake down the
wall of separation; now their commission is enlarged, “Go, teach all nations.” :
Bishop Brownrigg.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1, 2. The quest of faith. --
1. Faith seeks after life in the very
sepulchre of Christ, and it will find
even more than it seeks, because it
seeks it as it ought, and out of a
principle of obedience. 2. A solid and
substantial devotion is always regular,
does everything in its proper time,
and is very far from neglecting what


is commanded for that which is not.
3. The Spirit of God, which guides
these holy women, permits them not
to dispense with the observance even
of a dying law, that so they may
perform a service to Christ which
could be deferred but a very little
while.—P. Quesnel.

The earnestness of the women.——It is


6)1


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.








no wonder if we find the women here
more earnest than the apostles in
their grief and in regard to the death,
the burial, and the embalming of the
Lord’s body. The woman is the first
in the expression of her grief, for she
was the first in hastening to the Fall;
she goes before to the tomb who was
the precursor to corruption ; she brings
the tidings of the Resurrection who
had been the herald of death; she
who had conveyed to the man the
message of so dreadful a destruction
herself conveys to men the sounds of
a great salvation ; that the loss which
she occasioned by her suggestion to
unbelief she might now compensate for
by the tidings of faith (Gen. ii. 6, 12 ;
1 Tim. ii. 14, 15).—Pet. Chrysologus.

Apparent discrepancies in the narra-
tives.—To harmonise the accounts a
certain effort is necessary, because they
tell of interviews with men and women
who had to pass through all the vicissi-
tudes of despair, suspense, rapturous
incredulity, and faith. Hach of them
contributes a portion of the tale.
From St. John we learn that Mary
Magdalene came early to the sepulchre,
from St. Matthew that others were
with her, from St. Mark that these
women, dissatisfied with the unskilful
ministrations of men whose rank knew
nothing of such functions, had brought
sweet spices to anoint Him who was
about to claim their adoration; St.
John tells how Mary, seeing the empty
sepulchre, ran to tell Peter and John
of its desecration ; the others, that in
her absence an angel told ‘the glad
tidings to the women; St. Mark, that
Mary was the first to whom Jesus
Himself appeared. And thenceforth
the narrative more easily falls into
its place. This confusion, however
perplexing to thoughtless readers, is
inevitable in the independent histories
of such events, derived from the various
parties who delighted to remember
each what had befallen himself,—
Dean Chadwick.


Ver. 2. The first day of the new
cicution.—Surely we Christians may
612 oN





see the reason of our keeping this day
far more than any other day, inas-
much as it is the first of all days, the
first day of the old creation, and the.
first day of the new in Christ, as on
this day Christ rose from the grave.
On this day, the first day in the begin-
ning, the light was created. On this
day, the first of days, Christ, the True ©
Light, the Sun of Righteousness, rose
from the grave. On this day the
Holy Spirit came down, the true illu-
mination, to fill the new creation with
the light of God. This day, therefore,
is beyond all days the day of our
Maker, the day of our Redeemer, the
day of our Sanctifier (Ps. exviii. 21-25.)

The journey of the women.—A jour-
ney of—l, Love. 2. Provident care.
3. Hope. 4. Joy. 5. Life.


Ver. 3. ‘¢ Who shall roll us away the
stone ?”——This question is applicable
to—l. Those who are seeking Divine
guidance and direction. To be involved
in circumstances of doubt and_per-
plexity respecting some path is no
evidence of the want of the Divine
favour. God sometimes keeps His
children in the dark to secure their
safety (Isa. 1.10). 2. To the subjects
of anxious care through poverty and
affliction. ‘‘Stand still, and see the
salvation of God.” 3. To the per-
secuted and tempted believer. God
will strengthen thee in thy weakness,
and nerve thee for thy duty. 4. The
hour of death. The eye of sense sees
only the western horizon, and says,
“ The sun is going down.” The eye of
faith turns to the glowing east, and
sees the Sun of Righteousness rising
with healing in His wings.

Obstacles in the Christian’s path.—
Many of the obstacles in the life of
the Christian, when they are first
sighted ahead and when they are seen
from a distance, appear to be invincible,
insurmountable—barriers never to be
overstepped or moved out of the way.
The fact is, they are looked at only
as to themselves and their own great
size, and for the time there are not
taken into account the weapons which


* CY se oe


ne siciolap sce PO on


ek Se MN, Noe CR lia a atl Nga: Me


So nel


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVI.





may be brought to bear against them
and for their removal. In themselves,
and as they stand before us, they are
certainly formidable and fear-inspiring.
Any mountain in the Alpine range is
certainly of itself rather a startling
and somewhat real obstacle; but it
only requires, that one should pass
over it into the fertile fields beyond, a
stout heart, and a good physical frame,
and abundance of “stay” and resolu-
tion, and plenty of time. A flood of
water or an army of men is, either
of them, fear-inspiring under certain
circumstances; but the one, be it re-
membered, is made up of single drops,
and the other of single units; and
either the one or the other may be
very easily restrained or destroyed.—
W. M. Arthur.


Ver. 4. The stone rolled away.—
I. To let Christ out of the grave.—
1. To express the Divine acceptance
of the work of Christ. 2. To do
homage to the person of Christ. 3. To
acknowledge the grandeur of the occa-
sion. 4. To shew the futility of the
mightiest human opposition. 5. To


_ reveal the sympathy of the holy


universe with the plan of salvation.
II. To let Christians into the grave.
—1. To convince them of the reality
of the Resurrection. 2. To comfort
them with the fact of the Resurrection.
3. To impress them with the power of
the Resurrection. 4. To qualify them
for the announcement of the Resurrec-
tion. 5. To assure them of their own
resurrection.—B. D. Johns.


Ver. 5. The tomb of a wealthy Jew,
even when hewn from the solid rock,
was a large and ample structure. It
commonly consisted of at least two
parts : (1) an antechamber, which often
took the form of a long vestibule or
corridor ; and (2) the mortuary chamber
itself, in which the body or bodies were
laid. Joseph’s tomb seems to have
been of this type. When the women
looked up as they drew near, they saw
at once that the rocky slab which
closed the corridor on the outer side


had been removed from its place.
Filled with amazement, they seem
to have paused for a while; and then,
while Mary of Magdala ran off to
summon Peter and John (John xx. 2),
the other women gathered courage to
climb up to the vestibule and enter it.
And here a still more amazing spectacle
met their view. They saw—in the
mortuary chamber, I suppose, or at
the entrance into it—a youth sitting
on the right hand, clothed in a long
white stole, z.e. a talar, ‘which indi-
cated a heavenly being, none other
wearing such a vestment.” They would
know him for an angel by his garb
and by his youth, angels being assumed
never to lose the bloom and beauty of
youth. “ And they were affrighted,” or
rather amazed, the word denoting the
extreme mental perturbation which a
supernatural presence naturally in-
spires in those who are compassed with
“this muddy vesture of decay.” And
what wonder that amazement, a solemn
awe, should seize them, when, in the
chamber of death, they saw the very
type of immortal life! An angel in
a tomb should teach us at least, if
it did not teach them, that death is
not the end, but a new beginning.—
S. Coa, DD. -


Ver. 6. The empty grave.—l. A sure
and undeniable proof of Christ’s Deity.
2. A full security that He is alive, to
die no more. 3. An awful view of
the evil nature of sin. 4. The in-
sufficiency and uselessness of all our
own righteousness in the matter of
our justification before God. 5. In
the grave of Christ we may see the
curse of the broken law buried, and
the wrath of God finally and effectually
appeased in relation to every one
who enjoys an interest in a risen and
glorified Redeemer. 6. Here we may
see death itself lie buried, so that none
of the followers of Christ have any
reason to be afraid of that last enemy.
—ZJ. Young.

“He is not here.”—1. Not in the
grave, for He is risen from the dead.
2. Not in the garden, for He goes


613


CHAP. XVI-





forth into all the world. 3. Not here
on earth, for He is entered into His
Divine glory.

Where Christ is not.—There is but
one place, only one, in which Christ
is not to be found—His grave. He is
not there; He arose and left it, and
has never returned thither. If, then,
that be the only place where He is
not, He must be found by you, if you
seek Him everywhere else, and every-
where only to bless you and do you
good. ‘Lo, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.” And
yet, though emptied of Christ, that
grave is full of consolation. His not
being there tells us that He is
Emmanuel, ‘God with us ”—that His
sacrifice is accepted, and that we are
saved.

“ The place where they laid Him.” —
With most tombs the interest consists
in the fact that all that is mortal of
the saint or the hero or the near
relative rests beneath the stone or the
sod on which we gaze. Of our Lord’s
sepulchre the real interest is that He
no longer tenants it. It is not as the
place in which He lies; it is not even
chiefly as the place wherein He lay ;
it is as the place from which He rose
that the tomb of Jesus speaks to faith.
--Canon Inddon.

The empty tomb of Jesus recalls an
event which is as well attested as any
in history ; it is so attested as to put
the idea of what is called illusion out
of the question, The main purpose,
the first duty, of the apostolic ministry
was to witness to the fact that Christ
had risen.
the Resurrection as a revealed truth, as
they taught, for example, the doctrine
of justification; they taught the Resur-
rection as a fact of experience, a fact
of which they themselves had had
experience. And this is why the
different Evangelists did not report the
same appearances of our Risen Lord.
Each one reports that which he him-
self witnessed, or that which was
witnessed by an eye-witness on whose
authority he writes. Put the various
attestations together, and the evidence


614


The apostles did not teach


TIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


is irresistible. That which these wit
nesses attest must be true, unless they
have conspired to deceive us, or are
themselves deceived. The idea that
they are deceiving us cannot be enter-
tained by any man who understands
human character ; the idea that they
were themselves deceived is inconsistent
with the character of the witness which
they give.—Jbid.

The empty tomb an ‘ineitement to
Christian endeavour.—And why? Be-
cause of all effective endeavour hope
must be a main ingredient, and hope
nowhere so learns successfully to resist
the pressure and shock of disappoint-
ment, and to reach forward with
confidence into an unexplored future,
as at the empty tomb of Jesus. Had
He been crucified without rising from
the dead, hope in the eventual triumph
of truth and goodness must perforce
have died away from the hearts of
men; but as it is the Resurrection is
a warrant that if the heaviness of
spiritual discouragement should endure
for a night, the joy of spiritual success,
patiently awaited, cometh in the morn-
ing. So it is that those who while
endeavouring to live the new life of
Christ are fighting a hard battle
against untoward circumstances, against
strong insurgent passions, against
deeply rooted and perhaps very evil
habits, against some fatal weakness or
warp of the will. Fail they must, if
they essay to fight that battle in their
own natural strength; but they can
do all things through Christ that
strengtheneth them, and the Christ
that strengtheneth them is not only
the teacher Christ, the example Christ,
the perfect sacrifice for sin, He is
also the Risen Christ, risen for their
justification, and to this end making
them a free present of His Resurrection
strength. Assuch a soul in moments of
deep discouragement comes in thought
to see the place where the Lord lay
once, but where He lies no more, it
learns to understand its share in His
great victory, and to expect with
confidence that He will take it out of
the horrible pit, out of the miry clay,





7


,


4


‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVI.





and will set its feet upon a rock, and
will order its goings. And so, too,
with enterprises undertaken for the
good of others—enterprises which seem
to be stricken with the note of failure,
which fail over and over again, which
we are tempted to give up as a bad
business. Do not give up that enter-
prise, be it what it may, if you can
dare to offer it, if you have offered it,
to God as intended to promote His
glory and the good of your fellow-men—
do not give it up. There was darkness
over the whole world on the day of
Calvary—darkness which lately por-
tended, though it necessarily preceded,
the brightness of the Resurrection
morning. Your enterprise will have
its Easter, if you will only have the
patience and the grace to wait.—
Canon Inddon.


Ver. 7. The message to Peter.—
Whence happened it that to Peter,
guilty, fallen Peter, is vouchsafed not
only a common interest with his
brethren in the angelic tidings, but
a separate and individual communica-


tion 2


I. Because he had greatly offended
against his Lord and Master.—The
Good Shepherd went, as it were, into
the wilderness to recover him to the
way of life and salvation. And what
message so likely to effect the pur-
poses of infinite love, or to animate
the apostle’s hopes, as the assurance
that Christ had gotten Himself the
victory over death, had triumphed
gloriously over the wide dominion of
the grave, and proved Himself to be
the Son of God with power by the
Resurrection from the dead? He was
thus taught that the sincerity and
bitterness of repentance which he had
felt were not in vain; but that the
same compassion which had awakened
in his mind a salutary sense of his
guilt still waited to pardon, to em-
brace, to restore him.

Il. Because he was a _ penitent
transgressor.—‘‘ The remembrance of
his sin was grievous unto him, the
burden of it was intolerable.” Shame


and remorse had wrung his heart with
anguish, which could bear no other
witness than the eye of Heaven: ‘“‘ He
went out and wept bitterly.” Happy
the tears which Peter shed in the
seed-time of his sorrow! and great
the measure of his joy when the
reaping of the harvest came!

III. In order that he might be
invigorated for future duty.—“ When
thou are converted,” said our Lord,
“strengthen thy brethren.” The
infant Church was in some degree
committed to his especial care; and
therefore an express revelation of his
Master’s triumph over death was
vouchsafed, that he might bless the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, according to His abundant
mercy, had begotten him again to a
lively hope by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead. His faith
was to be confirmed by the tidings of
that wondrous event. His holy bold-
ness in the great gospel cause was
to be aroused by this pledge of his
Saviour’s power and truth. And thus
it actually happened. He continued
sound in the faith, unshaken in
danger, unmoved in tribulation, and
at length laid down his life for his
Master, with whom he now reigns
in glory everlasting, bearing on his
brow the bright diadem of Christian
martyrdom. 1. The preachers of the
gospel may learn from the angel’s
message what should be the pattern
of their own ministrations. We should
guide the undutiful son to the tender
Father whom he has left ; and when
he comes to. himself, when he arises
to seek salvation, we should shew how
his peace has been made, and how
he may partake the mercies of that
amnesty which the trumpet of the
gospel jubilee proclaims to all. 2. The
spiritual application of this subject
will also teach us the duty of pre-
paring to meet our Risen Saviour in
the world of glory. He hath first
departed to prepare the way for us.—
R. P. Buddicom.

A forgotten promise—In common
with the apostles they had forgotten


615


CHAP. XVI.








His gracious promise, as in our hours
of darkness we too commonly forget
the words which should inspire trust
and hope: “ But after I am risen, I
will go before you into Galilee”
(Mark xiv. 28: see also, for the
pastoral figure, the previous verse),—
go before you as a shepherd who
collects and leads his scattered sheep.
It may be doubted whether we have
any of us laid such stress on this
promise as it deserves, or as the Gospels
lay on it, and on the means taken to
secure its fulfilment—whether we have
not been almost as forgetful of it, and
with less excuse, as the apostles them-
selves. What it really meant was,
that before they returned from the
feast to their Galilean homes Jesus
would be there, going before them and
shewing the way. Had they remem-
bered the promise and acted on it,
how much suffering they might have
been spared! If, instead of mourn-
ing and weeping in Jerusalem, they
had set out for Galilee, assured that
He would there manifest Himself to
them and renew His broken inter-
course with them, the days lost in
grief might have been bright with
hope and action.—S. Cox, D.D.

Galilee, the place of meeting.—Galilee
was the place where He had spent
most of His time on earth, where His
first miracle had been wrought, and
where His apostles had been called
to follow Him. It was the locality
where He Himself had been brought
up, and also the native place of the
dearest of His disciples—Peter, James,
and John. These had followed Him
from Galilee to Jerusalem, and there
had witnessed many sad and solemn-
ising scenes—scenes fitted to trouble,
to agitate, and to overwhelm. Re-
membering all this, we cannot help
seeing that there was great tenderness
and love on the part of the Redeemer
in asking them to meet Him after
His Resurrection,—not at Jerusalem,
where He had been faithlessly betrayed
by one of the twelve; not at Geth-
semane, the scene of His indescrib-
able agony; not at Calvary, where


616


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


He had poured out His soul even unto
death; but in Galilee—remote and
secluded Galilee—inseparably asso-
ciated with the memory of their
earliest days, and with their first im-
pressions of the riches of the Saviour’s
grace.

A testing lesson in faith.—We believe
on evidence, but in difficult things we
want the greatest possible amount of
evidence. Faith is awakened in us,
but faith needs to be trained and
confirmed by some hard act of faith.
The disciples heard of the Resurrection,
but heard it as an idle tale. Then
He appeared to them, and they were
affrighted, supposing they had seen a
spirit. They behold His hands and
feet ; they handle Him, and find that
He has flesh and bones, and is not
a ghostly apparition. But there may
yet be room for doubt; it may be an
illusion or contagion of credulity that
has crept into their wearied and ex-
cited minds. And so they are led
away from the scene of the event to
Galilee, a three days’ journey. Thus
a twofold end is gained: fresh con-
firmation, and a stern, testing lesson
in faith. “Is it, after all,” we can
imagine them saying, “ worth the while
to make the journey to Galilee? Can
He who died on the Cross, whose
feet were pierced with nails, journey
thither? That He should appear here
is possible ; we have heard the like be-
fore: but will He appear in Galilee?”
So their minds may have acted; and
as they made the journey every step
and every hour must have tended to
throw them out of their belief and
hope. For there is nothing that so
tests our faith in an event difficult of
belief as to get out of the atmosphere
of it. The wonder lessens as we go
away from it. When remote from it,
the mind settles back into the old
habit of belief, and into its every-day
habit. And nothing so aids this
tendency as a journey. Its weariness
takes away the edge of interest; the
wider view of the world draws us back
to the steady order of the world and
the great facts of nature. In a journey





’ aia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVI.





we believe in what we see; we are
engrossed in the changing scene.


- Travel helps the mind, but it is not


favourable to the finer exercises of the
spirit. This journey to Galilee was
made by the disciples in resistance
of all these influences. Doubtless the
energy of their faith sank with weari-
ness, and their practical minds fell
under the spell of the old, every-day
world. Doubtless they often said to
one another, “‘ Has not our life these
three years been a mistake? Have
we not left a real and rational life
in the world for the vagaries of an
enthusiast ?” This is a temptation that
we all undergo,—the temptation to let
go the ideals of life that have been
revealed to us—purity, honour, un-
selfishness, self-denial, truth, spiritu-
ality—and sink back into the selfish,
striving world that is all about us,
clamouring at every door of our nature
for entrance. But if this experience
of the disciples was a trial of their
faith, it also strengthened it. For
faith is not hurt by doubt until it
yields to it. The very weakness and
faltering of faith may be turned into


- strength by pressing on in its path,


fighting doubt, and resisting the ap-


peals of the world. This journey of
simple trust and stout adherence to
hope was a fine preparation for harder
experiences soon to follow. There
would come times when not merely
the faltering of their own hearts was
against them, but all the powers of
the world—times when their only refuge |
would be their faith in the Risen and
Ascended Lord. Then the memory of
this experience, crowned by actual sight
of their Master, would come to their
rescue.—T7’, 7. Munger, D.D.


Ver. 8. “ They were afraid.” —W hy ?
Certainly not, as Petter supposes, ‘from
the apprehension of some hurt or danger
which might befall them by or upon
the apparition of the angel to them.”
Neither is it natural to think of any
far-seeing solicitude lest the news
should get wind and reach the ears
of the members of the Sanhedrin, so
as to arouse to persecution. Dr, Edward
Wells comes nearer nature. ‘ For,”
says he, “they were afraid to stay,
and not to hasten all they could to the
apostles.” They were in a tumult of
commotion, and could not pause by the
way to speak to any.—J. Morison, D.D.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—18.
(Parauiets: Marr. xxviii. 9-20; Luxe xxiv. 13-43; Joun xx. 11-29.)


Christ's first appearance after His Resurrection—1. Why did He appear first to
a woman ?—1l. To shew that God is no respecter of persons (Rom. i. 11)—that
is, that in the bestowing of spiritual graces or privileges God does not regard
the outward quality or condition of the persons upon whom He bestows them,
but He doth freely and indifferently bestow such graces and privileges upon
persons of all sorts and conditions—upon women as well as men, poor as well
as rich, etc. 2. To shew that the fruit and benefit of His resurrection, and
consequently of His death and passion, belong to women as well as to men.

II. Why did He appear first to this woman in particular 2—1. Because she
shewed most love to Christ, and was most forward and diligent in seeking after
Him. (1) She is first named ; yea, she alone (John xx. 1), (2) She continued
longest seeking. (3) She sought Him with tears. 2. To comfort her against


- her former miserable and afflicted condition.


Lessons.—1. Christ is most ready and forward to reveal and manifest Himself
and His comfortable presence to such as truly and earnestly love Him, and are
most forward to shew and express their love towards Him. 2. Christ hath a
great care of such of His saints and servants as have been in great misery and
distress, that they may not want comfort and encouragement afterward.

617


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


SS re


3, Such as have received great mercies and favours from God, if they be thank-
ful to Him and make good use of those favours, shall have more added unto
them. 4. The more any have tasted of the mercy of God, the more they will
love God and Christ, and the more forward they will be to shew their love by
its fruits.—G@. Petter.


Christ's appearance to two disciples—Had St. Luke's Gospel never been
written, or contained no reference to this incident, we might have indulged in
a variety of conjectures and speculations regarding it. “ Who were these two
disciples ?” we might have asked ; “and where were they going? On what day, and
what time of day? What are we to understand by the expression ‘ in another
form’? Did Christ merely shew Himself to them? or did He converse with
them ? and if so, on what subjects? If He appeared to them under a different
form from that under which they had hitherto known Him, how did they
recognise Him? What feelings and impressions did the incident leave upon
their minds?” These and many other questions might have been suggested by
St. Mark’s brief account ; but little or nothing satisfactory could have resulted
from the inquiry. In this state of uncertainty, how gladly should we have
welcomed the discovery of another and hitherto unknown portion of Scripture,
containing the very information we were seeking—a narrative taken down from
the lips of one of the two disciples, giving a full and particular account of the
whole transaction—just such a narrative, in short, as we find in Luke xxiv.
13-35! Let us suppose that this narrative were now before us for the first
time, and see what information may be obtained from it as to the particulars
upon which we were in doubt.

I. The meeting of the two disciples with their Risen Lord.—St. Mark only
states that after Jesus had first appeared to Mary Magdalene, who “ went and
told them that had been with Him” (i.e. the general body of disciples in
Jerusalem), but failed to convince them—“ after that He appeared in another
form unto two” of those who had heard Mary’s story and believed it not.
We might almost infer from this that the appearances both took place on
Easter Day itself; and St. Luke confirms this (xxiv. 13). We also gather
from his account that it was in the afternoon (ver. 29). The name of one of
them—‘“ Cleopas”—is mentioned incidentally (ver. 18) ; but no hint is given as to
who the other was. All we know for certain is, that he was not one of the
eleven apostles (ver. 33). To these two disciples, then, Jesus appeared, “as they
walked and went into the country.” Had we only St. Mark’s statement, we
might have supposed it was a walk of recreation, not of business (as Gen. xxiv. 63).
What could be more natural than for persons in such a state of agitation and
suspense to seek an opportunity of calm reflexion and discussion in a quiet
country walk! We learn, however, from St. Luke that they were on their
way to a certain place, several miles distant from Jerusalem (ver. 13), where
they intended to lodge that night (ver. 29), though whether at an inn, or at the
house of one of them, or at a friend’s house we cannot determine. As they
walked they talked; and their conversation could not but turn upon those
recent and still passing events in which they were so deeply interested (ver. 14),
Their hearts were full, and ‘out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh.” Their discourse was earnest and solemn, for it related to matters on
the ultimate event of which the whole course and character of their future lives
might turn. As they thus talked a Stranger came up and joined them. It
was Jesus; yet they knew Him not (vers. 15, 16). They were not struck with
blindness ; they saw other objects, and saw them as they really were; they saw
the person and features of Jesus Himself, but by some providential arrange-
ment of which we can form no conception they were prevented from recognising


618


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.





Him. Even His voice, with whose accents they must have been as familiar as
a child with its parent’s, failed to convey its wonted impressions to their ears.
The same mysterious influence which had been exercised for a brief period over
the senses of Mary Magdalene (John xx. 14-16) now took possession of them,
and maintained its ascendency throughout the lengthened conversation which
ensued. First the two disciples related to the Stranger “‘the things which were
come to pass there in those days” (vers, 18-24). When they had finished their
statement, the Stranger Himself took up the discourse ; and their share in the
conversation consisted chiefly (we may suppose) in such inquiries and remarks
as scholars are in the habit of addressing to their master, to elicit further
explanation, and so forth. There was but one subject which at that time could
be of the slightest interest to any of the party, viz. the accordance of all that
had happened to Jesus with the prophetic announcements respecting the Messiah
(vers. 25-27). On this subject He held His hearers in mute and rapt attention
until towards evening they drew near their destination. All this time they had
no idea who their Companion really was; but thinking Him a man like them-
selves, they begged Him to take up His quarters with them for the night. All
three therefore turned in, and sat down to meat; and it was during this meal
that the mist or veil was removed from their eyes, and they saw Him in His
own proper form in which He had always appeared to them. ven the precise
moment of the discovery is recorded by St. Luke (vers. 30, 31, 35); it was when
He was in the act of breaking bread, and blessing it, and giving it to them,
that they recognised Him who had so often before performed the same pious
act in their presence. The recognition being complete, the purpose of this whole
transaction was answered, and Jesus “ vanished out of their sight.”

II. The feelings of the two disciples in the presence of their Risen Lord.—
« Did not our heart burn within us!” they exclaimed (ver. 32). The expression
is a striking one, and seems to be as pregnant with meaning as their hearts
were with feeling. It indicates the presence not of one but of many strong and
stirring emotions within the breast, all too big for the confined space in which


‘they were pent up. It reminds us of the psalmist’s language (Bs. xxxix. 3);


or of Jeremiah’s (Jer. xx. 9). 1. The first feeling excited in their breasts was
perhaps that of hope. They had had hope in Christ before (Luke xxiv. 21);
but His condemnation and death had filled their minds with despondency. To
look for the salvation of their nation to One who had not been able to save
Himself would indeed have been to hope against hope. But the discourse of
their Fellow-traveller rekindled the dying embers, and fanned them into a flame.
Did not the Scriptures of the prophets expressly point to a suffering as well as
a triumphant Messiah, and suffering in order to triumph ? See Isa. liii, And
as to His being alive again, as announced to the women by a vision of angels,
why should they discredit it or be astonished at it? See Ps. xvi. 10. If we
at this day are able to build up for ourselves “a good hope through grace”
on the foundation of these and similar texts, we may imagine what it must
have been to hear Jesus Himself “ expounding in all the Scriptures the things
concerning” His own sufferings and exaltation; we may well believe that
while they listened the hearts of these two disciples beat high with hope—the
hope of seeing their Lord again, triumphant over death and the grave, and
of themselves sharing His triumph. We often hear it said, “What is life
without hope ?” but those who say it are thinking of some temporal advantage,
some improvement in worldly condition, the hope of which cheers them under
present difficulties and animates them to fresh exertion in the struggle of life.
But what is life, when all its hopes are realised and all its objects attained,
without the Christian hope? 2. Did not the hearts of the two disciples burn
within them with love and gratitude while the unknown Object of that love


619


CHAP. XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARE.








talked with them by the way and opened to them the Scriptures? And what
should be more effectual to inflame love where it exists, or to kindle it in
hearts as yet unconscious of it, than the contemplation of those events which


were recalled to the minds of these men by the discourse of Jesus? The ©


thought of Christ being ‘wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our
iniquities ” is one with which we have been familiar from childhood, which may
have weakened somewhat the effect it ought to have upon our minds. But
whenever it is placed strongly and clearly before us, cold and dead must be
that heart which does not respond to the appeal! Fools indeed must they
be, and “slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken” and all
that the Evangelists have recorded, who are not melted by the bare recital
of all that the Son of God suffered in the flesh for us men and for our salvation !
3. Doubtless the predominant emotion was joy. The two disciples had set out
on their journey in sorrow and heaviness. But as the Stranger proceeded
to shew them from Scripture not only the probability but the certainty and
necessity of their Lord’s resurrection, their hearts were cheered and warmed
with the prospect of beholding Him again, in accordance with His own most
gracious promise (John xvi. 20-22). And if they had cause to rejoice, how
much more have we! See Ps. exviil. 24-29; 1 Cor. v. 7, 8.


Vers. 14-18. The departing Saviowr—I. Our departing Saviour's chidings
(ver. 14).—It sounds somewhat harsh to hear that the gentle Jesus mingled
rebukes with His parting words. But it was love itself that gave birth to
these upbraidings. It was not that Jesus took pleasure in reproaching
His disciples, or that He did not wish them every comfort and peace of mind ;
but it was just because their highest welfare was the chief desire of His heart
that He thus admonished them. Faith is the great saving grace; and where
that is wanting there is misery, darkness, and death. It was just because He
loved them, and wished to have them take in and possess the true joys of faith,
that He upbraided them with their unbelief. Every interest of their own,
and of those who were afterward to believe through their word, was put
into terrible jeopardy by the indulgence of such stubborn scepticism. And
as the Saviour loved them, and loved the souls of men in general, He
referred to it in His last interview, expressed again His dissatisfaction, and
gave to them, and through them to all men, a last solemn warning against “ an
evil heart of unbelief.” Nor can we plead that no such evil temper and hard-
ness have in any way characterised us hitherto. Have we so believed the Resur-
rection of Christ as to take all its momentous implications home to our souls,
and to have them living in our lives?. Have we so believed it, “that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead,” etc.? (Rom. vi. 4-6). Admitting that Christ is
risen, have we then so risen with Him as to seek those things which are above,
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God ? (Col. iii. 1, 2). Conceding it as
true that there is a blessed resurrection life for the virtuous and the good, have
we really set ourselves to attain to that resurrection of the just? Yielding that
Jesus is declared the Son of God with power, have we embraced Him with all
our heart, and clung to Him as the only Saviour of our souls, and given ourselves
to obey Him in all things as the Captain of our salvation ?

II. Our departing Saviour’s commands (vers. 15, 16).—Here is another grand
testimony and manifestation of our Great Redeemer’s love. It is assumed that
there is a heaven and that there is a hell; but the desire of Jesus is that all
men should escape the horrors of the one and secure the blessedness of the other.
He is “not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance ”
(2 Pet. iii. 9). But there is only one way in which men can be saved (John iii. 36).
The Saviour Himself here reannounces the same, and has made it firm and


620


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVL








unalterable for ever. But it is impossible for men to believe on the Son, or to
turn themselves heartily to Him as their hope, without first having had Him
preached unto them. This is now the grand commission of all Christ’s disciples.
The gospel calls men not only to be saved themselves, but to be agents and
messengers in carrying the same salvation to others. No Christian is exempt
from its binding obligation, and no Christian is excluded from the high privilege
and honour of taking part in it, according to his sphere and measure. There is
indeed a line of discrimination to be observed between Christians in general and
those who are the chosen and appointed ministers of the Church ; but the election
of some to officiate more directly for the rest assumes that there is a common
office of this sort inhering in the whole body and in all its members in common.
That office it is the business of every individual to exercise, if not in his own
person, yet in and through others, by his vote, concurrence, and aid. But the
mere preaching and hearing of the truth is not all. Something more is neces-
sary in order to full profit in Divine grace. As Christ commands the preaching
of the gorpel to every one, so He also at the same time appoints and ordains
the holy sacrament of baptism to be received by every one, as a test of his
obedience to the truth, and as a further means of imparting His Holy Spirit.
Faith without obedience is nothing, and salvation is promised only to him “that
believeth and is baptised.” We must remember, also, that saving faith is not
a product of our reason and will. “It is the gift of God” (Eph. ii. 8). It is
a thing wrought in us by the Holy Ghost. And the instrument of the Holy
Ghost is the Word and sacraments. God has appointed baptism as well as
preaching ; and the promise of salvation rests on one as upon the other. Hence
it is written : “ Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God” (John iii. 5). And again: “ Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost ” (Tit. iti. 5). And,
again, that “the ark wherein eight souls were saved by water” was a “ like
figure whereunto baptism doth also now save us,” which is “not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God”
(1 Pet. iii. 20, 21). Hence the farewell charge of the loving Jesus is, that we
carry this sacrament wheresoever we carry the gospel itself ; and that, equally
with our preaching of His truth to every creature, it is our duty to offer baptism
to every creature, and to demand of all men obedience to the one as we require
faith in the other, as the Divine conditions on which alone we are authorised to
promise salvation to them that hear us.

III. Our departing Saviour’s promises (vers. 17, 18).—These are grand and
startling announcements. Scepticism has often pointed to them, and challenged
Christians to attest their faith accordingly. Whether such miracles occur now
or not, if they ever were actually wrought by Christians, then the promise has
been fulfilled, and the taunt of infidelity falls to the ground. Turning back,
then, to those trying times when Christianity went forth in a few humble
fishermen and tent-makers, to grapple with the hoary systems which then held
empire over the world, we are also abundantly certified that in no instance did
these assurances fail (Heb. ii. 4). Were they to be able to cast out demons ?
(Acts xvi. 16, 24, xix. 11, 12). And many demons of pride, covetousness,
uncleanness, drunkenness, gluttony, ambition, and demons of lust, hatred,
moroseness, and spirits of wickedness of innumerable sorts, did these same
apostles expel by their preaching, turning men from their idols and corruptions
to serve the Living and True God—thus both literally and spiritually fulfilling
the blessed promise of the Master, that in His name they should ‘cast out
devils.” Were they to be able to speak in languages which they had never
learned ? (Acts ii. 5-11, x. 46). Were they to be able to take up poisonous

621


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





reptiles unharmed? (Acts xxviii. 1-6). Were they to be able to drink deadly —
draughts with impunity? Church history tells of a fatal potion prepared for





the destruction of the Apostle John, which he drank, but was unhurt by the —


poisoned cup, which it was confidently counted would be his death. Were they
to be able to heal the sick and the suffering? (Acts iii. 1-9, ix. 33-35, xiy.
8-11). And time would fail to tell the works of healing wonder which the
disciples wrought in the name of Jesus, by prayer and the laying on of hands,
in which the Master fulfilled His promise: ‘They shall lay hands on the sick,
and they shall recover.” ‘They went forth, and preached the Word everywhere,
the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs following.”
Nor was the promise or the fulfilment of it confined to them alone. It was not
made to apostles simply, but ‘‘ them that believe,” and hence to Christians in
general. Accordingly we find this‘miraculous power working in and by the
Church for a hundred years after the Saviour’s ascension. It is still outstanding,
firm, and good; and always must hold good, as long as the gospel is preached,


and men are found to believe it. The lack is not to be sought in the absence —


of necessity, but in the weakness and the infirmity of our faith. There were
places, when Christ was on earth, at which He did not many mighty works,
because of the unbelief of the people. Want of faith will always restrain and
grieve away the gracious power of God. And instead of reasoning these precious
promises into a state of superannuation, let us rather conclude that the Church’s
living confidence in her Lord has declined. Let us look for more, pray with
more confidence, realise more thoroughly what our high calling is, and what an
Almighty Saviour we have, and as God is true His promise will be verified
now as well as in other ages.—J. A. Seiss, D.D.


Ver. 15. What is Christian preaching ?—Our Lord believed in the work of
the preacher, not only as one of the chief methods of disseminating the gospel,
but as the chief method. By Him it was never undervalued as something


secondary. He “went about all Galilee teaching in their synagogues and _


”


preaching.” When He sent forth the apostles He said, “As ye go, preach.”
After His Resurrection “they that were scattered abroad went everywhere
preaching the Word.” And Paul rejoices that he “‘ was ordained a preacher.”
I. Realising the importance of this office, as we turn to study the great
Model we find ourselves at first discouraged, because that which impresses us
most strongly is the dissimilarity between the discourses of Him who “spake


a


ie phe men


Oty nw et


Nee


a


A ae


as never man spake” and any which we may ever hope to produce. 1. We ©


must study and frame our sentences beforehand, and many times sit down
afterward and wonder that so great a truth could be so poorly told. The most
striking element in Christ’s discourses is their marvellous spontaneity. His
words were real lightning: they flashed. With us, and our perhaps necessary
elaborate methods, they become too often only lightning on canvas—a streak
of yellow paint. But even here, in this at first most discouraging attribute of
our Lord’s preaching, we may find for ourselves an idea and an ideal. The
ideal Christian discourse will be that which in manner and spirit as nearly
as possible resembles Christ’s. With Him preaching was speaking. “He


opened His mouth and spake.” We cannot do this as He did it; and if the ©
perpetuation of the Christian religion had depended upon this kind of Christian —


preaching, it would have died with the death of the apostles and their immediate


successors. If the inspiration which they received was not indeed different —


in kind from that which falls on us to-day, it was so infinitely different in
degree that the result is the same in either case. 2. And yet there is one
method by which in its effect we may approximate the manner of Christ’s
preaching. And because of the difference between us and the apostles that


622


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.


wt Nis Se Se aaah ae


method is exactly the opposite of that which He suggested to them. What
they, fresh from immediate personal contact with the Christ, were to do by
“taking no thought,” we can accomplish only by recognising in a very special
sense the need of taking much thought. Thomas Guthrie began in Edinburgh
a pastorate which lasted thirty years; and he determined from the beginning
to preach extemporaneously, as Christ preached. But he realised that he had

_ limitations which Christ and His apostles had not—that if he would accomplish
this, it must be, not with less study than would be required for a written
sermon, but more. He rose regularly at five in summer and six in winter,
and for five days in the week devoted the first three hours of every morning
to the preparation of his sermon. Thus for fifteen hours it was the single
object of his thought. He wrote it and rewrote it, eliminating here and
emphasising there, until when Sunday came he did not need to learn it ; as our
school-children say, “It had learned itself.” Unconsciously he had absorbed
it, and by reading it over once or twice on the morning of its delivery he went
into the pulpit surcharged. The ideas leaped to his lips without conscious
effort, in almost or quite the very language in which he had thought and
written them out, with all the polish of a scholar and all the spontaneity of
a speaker. He preached like Christ; and that which happened eighteen
hundred years ago happened again, as it always will under similar cireum-
stances: “The common people heard him gladly.”

II. What was the substance of Jesus’ preaching ?—1. Our Lord’s sermons were
doctrinal, if we remember that docere means to teach. When He speaks, He
speaks as though something were settled; and that is dogma, truth crystallised.
The very name of His followers was that of disciples, learners. He had some-
thing to teach. His discourses were not “guesses at truth.” There was
nothing in them which would remind one of the debating society, where “ every-
thing is an open question.” ‘Do you know,” said the late Oliver Wendell
Holmes, “I don’t like to listen to these everlasting negations that some
ministers deal out from the pulpit.” 2. Christ’s preaching was pictorial : He
knew how to teach it. That was probably an overstatement when some one
said of Him that “our Lord never preached a sermon in which He did not tell
a story, because it is written that ‘without a parable spake He not unto
them.” But there is no doubt that His style of address was essentially Oriental.
Neither is there any doubt that this was one of the chief reasons why the
throngs hung so breathlessly upon His words. His eye swept all heaven and
earth for metaphors and parables and similes. We may mark the perils to be
met with here by noting how deftly He avoided them. He never fondled an
illustration, as one does a pretty babe, to call attention to itself. His illustra-
tions illustrated. They were suggestive, not exhaustive. With Him a metaphor
was only “a window into an argument.” He never deliberately constructed
ornamentation; but we must believe, with His sermons before us, that He did
ornament construction. But even here we need a qualifying word. Though
His teaching was illustrative, it was always teaching. His figures were not
wax flowers, put on for adornment, simply adherent. ‘They were inherent, they
were the truth in blossom. 3. His preaching was persuasive: He knew why
He taught it. There is no true Christian sermon ever preached which does
not contain, directly or indirectly, this element of persuasion to a Christian
life. It is this which differentiates it from other forms of literature, and
makes it a Christian sermon. A drama is always pictorial, and sometimes
instructive : a lyceum lecture is supposed to be both. But the distinctive mark
of a Christian sermon is that it is a discourse aimed at the will, for the purpose
of inducing or strengthening the Christian life. What Christ said of Himself
was eminently true of His preaching: it was “a way” not stopping with itself,

623


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





but leading farther on. 4. In His teaching He was spiritual: He addressed
the inner life. He not only had something to teach, and knew how to teach
it, and why He taught it; He knew likewise to whom He taught it. His —
appeal was ever to the spiritual yearning which in greater or less degree is to
be found in every soul. ‘I don’t care whether it’s Briggsism or anti-Briggsism,” —
said a man at the close of a celebrated service in a New York church, as he
ran up into the pulpit and grasped the hand of the clergyman ; “ but for God’s
sake help me; for I am a ruined soul.” In every word He ever uttered Christ —
always had in mind that ruined soul, longing to be borne upward into an
atmosphere of health. ‘Iam come,” He said, “ that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly.” ——G. 7. Dowling, D.D.


Vers. 17, 18. The signs of faith.—When we remember such words as those
which tell us that “he who believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he
that believeth not on the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth
on him,” how should it at once arrest our attention to hear, from the lips of
Him who cannot deceive, an account of those very signs which shall mark out
the possession of this invaluable gift !

I. We seem to be reading—we are evidently reading—of gifts and of powers
which have long passed away from Christ’s Church: gifts and powers which
never infallibly pointed out the true members of His spiritual body—for some
had these who had little, if any, experience of the inward graces of Christ’s
Spirit—and which now, at all events, do not survive, to make any distinction,
real or apparent, amongst the multitude of His professed disciples. It was one
great object of Christ’s revelation to draw up the veil which separated between
the material and the spiritual, and to disclose to the eyes of men those great but
unseen realities in the very midst of which they were blindly and unconsciously
dwelling. This unseen world was of a twofold character. There was the world
of God, and the world of the devil—the world of Divine agency, and the world of
antagonist evil. With both of these every man upon earth was deeply concerned ;
and yet the nature, the very existence, of either could only be made known to
him for certain by disclosures from God. Thus, on the one hand, the devil was
permitted in that generation to manifest his operation upon men’s souls by
visible tokens of his presence in their bodies. On the other hand, that generation
was blessed also with equally palpable proofs of the operation of God’s Spirit. He
enabled the tongue to utter languages which the understanding in many cases could
not interpret ; He made the word of a man powerful to heal diseases which had
defied all the skill of physicians—to cast out from the convulsed and distorted body
those evil spirits which had usurped it for their abode. But these visible and
sensible proofs of the presence of God’s Spirit were never designed, we may
venture to say, to remain with the Church of Christ. The signs which were to
follow them that believed—if in the first instance they were of a mixed character,
partly gifts and partly graces, partly outward powers and partly spiritual virtues
—were designed to become ere long wholly of the latter kind: the only powers
with which Christ’s people were ultimately to be endued in this life were such as
are inseparable from the graces of love and knowledge and holiness—from the
insensible but resistless influence of one who is proved by his life and spirit to
have God with him and in him of a truth.

II. Every one of these signs has a corresponding token in times when miracles
are no more.—Let us view by the light of other words of God each of the four
particulars here enumerated in its application to our own days: 1. If Christ
stood now in the midst of us and said, “‘ These signs shall follow those amongst
you that believe: in My name shall they cast out devils,” should we not at once
understand Him to declare, that, whatever be the peculiar sins to which we are


624


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.





most often and powerfully tempted, whatever the snares by which the great enemy
most easily prevails over us, in His name we must overcome them ?—that,
knowing as we all do our weaknesses, our faults, our past sinful acts, our present
foolish and hurtful desires ; knowing whether it be in the form of passion, or of
selfishness, or of sensuality, or of sloth, that sin has most power over us ; knowing
by experience that in some one or in all of these forms it has great power over
us, and recognising, as Christ teaches us to do, in all these things indications of
his presence and his agency who like a roaring lion is ever going about seeking
whom he may devour, we must cast him out in His name and strength ?—that,
if we really believe, we shall do so; that if we do it not, it is because we have
no faith and therefore no life in us? 2. “They shall speak with new tongues.”
The miraculous power which fulfilled this prediction has long passedaway. But
what was the miraculous gift of tongues—glorious as it was, and most convincing
as an argument of the Divine origin of the gospel—when viewed in comparison
with that grace which was so aptly signified by its exercise, and for so many ages
has survived its withdrawal? If he who has hitherto found no response within,
when he would fain have summoned his heart to awake and utter praise—who
has knelt on his knees to pray, and found his very prayers dried up at their
inmost source by the withering power of long indifference or unbelief—is now
able te realise God’s being, to trust in Christ’s mediation, to enter in through
that door into the heavenly courts of the Lord, to present there with a full heart
his’ daily offering of confession and prayer and thanksgiving, to believe that he is
heard, and to receive according to his need the supply of life and strength and
comfort,—what is this but the gift of a new tongue, a sign which follows them
that believe, and betokens an heir of salvation? 3. “ They shall take up serpents ;
and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them.” In other words,
this is one of the signs which attend Christ’s servants, that what is perilous to
others is safe to them, that that is health to them which to others is but an
occasion of falling. They live in an ensnaring world. Their own hearts are


’ weak and treacherous. Their occupations in life are often perilous to the well-


being of their souls. They hear evil maxims often avowed, corrupting principles
more often insinuated. Their own duty sometimes requires them to read or to
hear that of which they had been happy to have remainedignorant. Some friend,
whom nature or choice had endeared to them most closely, seeks by argument
or persuasion or ridicule to shake their steadfastness, and by his own example
encourages them to sin. But what then? Greater is He that is in them than
he that is in the world. To the pure all things are pure. The tempest which
overthrows others but roots them more firmly. 4. ‘They shall lay hands on the
sick, and they shall recover.” We have dwelt upon other signs of true faith:
how it shews itself in fighting against our own sins—in bridling the tongue, and yet
loosing it—in giving safety amidst danger, and stability amidst general defection.
And now we are taught to remember how the same principle tends to make us
useful in the world—useful in our own world, whatever that be, whether the
world of youth or the world of men ; how it enables us to help the weak, to warn
the sinful, to comfort the weak-hearted, to establish the wavering, to bring back
the wandering ; how the consistent maintenance, in word and conduct, of that
spirit of faith in Christ of which we are speaking, will, by God’s blessing, often
without a word of direct exhortation, act upon others with a powerful influence,
silently reproving, teaching, guiding, supporting our brethren, even when we are
least conscious of any eye being upon us.—Dean Vaughan.


83 625


CHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,


'T (i





OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 9. Christ's appearance to Mary
of Magdala.—St. Mark reminds us
that Mary had once been possessed
by seven devils; and whatever else
and more be included in demoniacal
possession, we know that it must have
perilously weakened brain and nerve.
Is it not obvious, then, that, as we
might have expected of Him, Jesus
appeared first to Mary because she
was in the most desperate need of
Him? Wandering about the garden
like one distraught, blinded with her
tears, possessed with one idea—so
possessed that even the angelic vision
seems to have had no awe for her,
and she fails to recognise the Lord
she loved, till in familiar tones He
cries, ‘‘ Mary”—who does not see the
extreme danger her susceptible and
excitable nature was in? Insanity
was not far off when she flung herself
upon Him with the cry, ‘‘ My Master,”
and would have clasped His feet.
How wholesome for her too and
calming to have a commission con-
fided to her, to be made useful, to be
sent to the disciples with the message,
“T ascend unto My Father and your
Father, to My God and your God!”
—S. Cox, D.D.

“First to Mary Magdalene.”—To
reconcile this representation with
Matthew’s (xxviii. 9), we must sup-
pose—what is perfectly natural—
that there was a variety of runnings
to and fro. We may conceive the
_ case in some such way as the following
—without, however, imagining that
it embodies the absolute historic
truth: When the group of women
saw the open tomb and the angels,
Mary may instantly, in a kind of
ecstatic bewilderment, have turned on
her heels to run and carry word of
the fact to the apostles. By-and-by
the other women would follow. Ere
long Peter and John would come
running, and then return. Mary
for a little season was alone, near
the sepulchre, and Jesus revealed


126


Himself to her. By-and-by the other


women rejoined her, and Jesus ap-’


peared to them all, as they were
on their way to the apostles.
would be in all their bosoms not only
interest, strung to the highest pitch.
but ecstasy, and trepidation, and an
impossibility of resting anywhere
longer than a few moments at a
time. See Greswell’s Forty-third Dis-
sertation.—J. Morison, D.D.


Ver. 12. Another form.—By “ an-
other form” St. Mark seems to mean a
different form to that in which Christ
appeared to Mary, but may, and
probably does, mean nothing more
than a form other than that with
which they had been familiar in the
days of His humiliation—‘‘a spirit-
ual body,”
body.” This conjecture is confirmed
by the word rendered manifested, a
different word to that rendered
“appeared” in ver. 9. It implies
that in His new form He was not
necessarily visible, though He could
render Himself visible where and to
whom He would.—S. Cox, D.D.


Ver. 13. The unbelief of the apostles.
—‘ Neither believed ‘they them.”
The original is stronger: but not even
them did they believe. And yet it is
said in Luke xxiv. 33, 34, that when





and no longer ‘‘a natural ©


,
>
4
,


There —


they got into the midst of ‘the ©


eleven and them that were with them,”
they were met with the exclamation,
“The Lord is risen indeed, and hath
appeared to Simon.” This apparent
contrariety demolishes at a stroke
the theory of Hitzig, who supposes
that Luke is the author of Mark
xvi. 9-20. It also completely over-
turns the theory of those who imagine
that the section, though not composed
by Luke, was, by the hand of some
other one, culled out of Luke, But
there is no real contradiction neverthe-
less. The disciples of our Lord were
in the midst of the inconsistencies of


I
4





a tumultuating and transition state of
mind. All their hopes had been sud-
denly dashed. They had been utterly
disappointed. And yet they could
not bring themselves to believe that
their late Beloved Lord had been an
impostor. Had Henot been uniformly
and perfectly pure? Had He not
been almost infinitely unselfish and
noble? It could not be that He was
a deceiver. And yet the unchallenge-
able fact stared them in the face,
that, instead of throwing off His
disguise and assuming His royal pre-
rogatives, as they had anticipated, He
had been seized, tried, condemned,
and crucified like a slave! What
could they make of the case? Mary
Magdalene and other women had told
them that the sepulchre was found
by them open and illumined by the
presence of angels. Peter and John
had run to it, and found the report
of the women true, inits main element
at least. Then Mary had told them
that the Lord actually appeared to
her. They could not for a moment
doubt her sincerity. But surely

her imagination must have imposed
on her! By-and-by, however, the
Lord appeared to Peter also, and he
reported the fact to his brethren.
His testimony had weight; and
they received it with raptures
(Luke xxiv. 34). And yet after a
little, and because of the very pre-
ciousness of their new-born hope,
they begin to be inquisitive and
critical in reference in its foundation.
What if Peter himself had been over-
mastered by his imagination? What
if, under the influence of his sanguine
nature, and with that haste which
has been all along his besetting
failing, he had mistaken a mere
subjective vision for an objective fact ¢
Then perhaps the assembled brethren
would question Peter, and cross-
question him, going into the varied
details of the appearance, until,
it may be, Peter’s own faith began
to waver. When once in the full
flow of this doubting mood, they
would-be ready enough to set aside


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVL


the testimony of the two comparatively
humble brethren who had returned
from the country. They would say,
“No doubt the brethren are honest.
But surely it cannot be true that
He who actually on the Cross gave
up the ghost, and was then buried,
is now literally alive again! How
could such a thing be? Must not
the brethren and Peter himself, as
well as Mary, be the dupes of their
fond imaginations?” Such would
naturally be the state of the disciples’
minds for a considerable length of
time—the tide of thought and feeling
surging and resurging in contrary
directions. And hence the facile
conciliation of Mark’s statement with
Luke’s.— J. Morison, D.D.


Ver. 15. Christ's commission.—
I. What is implied in preaching the
gospel ?—1. It means to spread the
good news. 2. To make known that
revelation which God has given of
Himself. 3. To exhibit the privilege
the gospel offers. 4. To declare the
precepts the gospel enjoins.

II. To whom the office is committed.
—1. It was not confined to the apostles.
2. The preacher must have a deep and
a living sense of the importance of
Divine truth. 3. The preacher must
have good sense and a power of argu-
ment. 4. Aspiritual and experimental
knowledge of the gospel. 5. A par-
ticular call by the grace of God. 6. A
fervent love to the Lord Jesus, and an
earnest desire to advance His honour
and interest. 7. An intense desire for
the salvation of souls. 8. A willing-
ness to endure hardship and persecution
in the work on which he is engaged.

III. Where and to whom is the
message to be preached ?—Hvery
rational being of the race of Adam is
to receive this important message, for
all have sinned and come short of
the kingdom of God. 1. None are
excluded by the decree of God. He is
loving toall men. 2. None are excluded
by natural or moral incapacity. They
are not too weak, ignorant, or depraved
to obey the precepts of the gospel.


627


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.





IV. The condition required from
those who hear.—Faith is required in
order to have salvation, for the gospel
is—l. A revelation of truths, and
implies a persuasion of their certainty
and importance. 2. An offer of privi-
leges, and implies that we accept that
offer in the way God has appointed.
3. A promulgation of laws, and implies
that we acknowledge the authority of
the Lawgiver.—Preacher’s Analyst.

Gospel responsibility.—It was the
saying of a great missionary preacher,
““We shall soon have done with the
gospel, but the gospel will not soon
have done with us.”


Ver. 16. Belief and baptism.—By
joining “ believing” and “ being bap-
tised,” as both necessary to salvation,
did the Lord mean to put on an equality
the highest action of the soul in
embracing the truth of God and of
Christ and the reception of an outward
rite? Certainly not. For He did not
consider that the baptism which He
ordained was an outward rite. It is,
according to His own words, a new
birth of water and the Spirit into His
kingdom. According to the teaching
of St. Paul, it is a death and burial with
Him to sin, and a rising again with
Him to newness of life (Rom. vi. 1-4),
so that the baptised man must, no
matter what the difficulty, count him-
self to be in a new state, born anew
into the Second Adam, grafted into
the True Vine, endued with a new life
from Christ, and gifted, if he will
faithfully strive to use them, with new
powers against sin and on the side of
holiness of life. It was the Lord’s
intention, by His death and resur-
rection, not only to deliver men from
sin as individuals, but to incorporate
them into His mystical body, 2.e. His
Holy Catholic Church, so that in the
unity of that Church, in the unity of
its faith, its hope, its charity, they
might grow up, not singly, but together,
in the fellowship of the One Body,
And so the reception of His baptism
being the outward sign of this, and the
means for bringing it to each one, was


628


worthy to be put side by side with
believing.—_I/. Ff. Sadler.

Words applicable to nations. —W hat-
ever unbelievers think about individual
souls, it is plain that these words have
proved true for communities and
nations. He that believeth and is
baptised has been saved; he that
believeth not has been condemned,
The nation and kingdom that has
not served Christ has perished.—Dean
Chadwick.

Nominal Christianity insufficient. —
Let a man (I speak of the generality
of men) be asked upon what he builds
his hopes of salvation. He will reply:
“T ama Christian. I was born in a
Christian land, of Christian parents,
and baptised in the name of Christ,
and therefore I am a Christian.” It
is well for him that he has been
blessed with such advantages. But has
he improved them as they might have
been improved? The words of Christ
are not, “‘He that is baptised shall
be saved”; but, ‘‘He that believeth
and is baptised shall be saved.” The
name of a Christian will, of itself, do
nothing for us; it will only be an
aggravation of our guilt, if we be found
without a Christian heart, without a
Christian faith, without a Christian
practice. But perhaps he will say: “TI
am something more than a nominal
professor of the gospel. Jam constant
in my attendance at the house of God,
and regular in the observance of the
Holy Communion.” But let him be
asked again: Is the heart in all this?
Is it done solely and wholly to please
God? Is it done with seriousness,
earnestness, and sincerity? Or is this
outward shew of religion the result of
habit, put on in conformity with the
custom of the world, or to deceive and
gain the favour of mankind? Does
he enter the holy sanctuary with the
full determination that, when he has
been taught his duty, he will perform
the same? Does he, as he kneels at
the holy table, “acknowledge and
bewail his manifold sins and wicked-
ness,” and, “intending to lead a new
life,” pray for strength and grace to


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVI.





that God with whom alone dwelleth
the power to bring him unto happiness ?
Does he “commune with his own
heart” in public and in private, at all
times and seasons, to discover whether
he be wandering from the right way,
from his duty, his religion, and his
God, and with the purpose to correct
what he finds to be wrong, and to
improve what is deficient? The man
who can answer these questions to the
satisfaction of his conscience and his
God will “be accepted with Him”;
but too many, it is to be feared, are
very far removed from such an ad-
vanced state of spiritual excellence. —
H, Marriott.

“ Shall be damned.”—‘God is too
good to damn anybody.” Quite right.
God does not damn anybody ; but many
damn themselves. Damnation is sin
and suffering producing and perpetuat-
ing each other. Look at the low dens
with their diseased, poisoned, putres-
cent inmates, their depravity, their
profligacy, their brutality, their bodily
torture, their mental anguish. Is not
that damnation ?—sin ‘and suffering
acting and reacting. Hell is that
same thing projected into the soul’s
future. God does not damn men. He
moves heaven and earth to prevent it.
The Crvcifixion was God’s supreme
effort to keep men from hell. How
unreasonable to charge God with your
death! Suppose I went, sick and
suffering, through the stormy night to
hold a light for you at some dizzy
chasm; suppose you struck down the
light which I had brought with so
much pains; suppose you lost your
foothold and fell into the abyss below :
could I be charged with your death ?
Well, then, did not God bring you
light ? Did He not with scarred hand
hold that light over your pathway ?
If you reject it and fall, can you charge
Him with your death? No; oh no!
“This is the condemnation, that light
came into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light.”—A&. S.
Barrett.


Vers. 17, 18. “ These signs.”—The


Holy Church doth spiritually every
day what she then did through the
apostles corporally. For when the
priests, by the grace of exorcism, lay
hands on believers, and forbid evil
spirits to inhabit their minds, what do
they but cast out devils? And any
believers whatever, who henceforth
abandon the secular words of the old
life, and utter holy mysteries, and
rehearse as best they can the praise
and power of their Maker, what do
they but speak with new tongues?
Moreover, while by their good exhorta-
tions they remove evil from the hearts
of others, they are taking up serpents :
which miracles are greater, because
they are the more spiritual; the
greater, because they are the means
of raising not bodies, but souls. These
signs then, dearest brethren, ye do, if
ye will (Ps. xci. 13; John xiv. 12;
1 Cor. xili.).— Gregory.


Ver. 17. The promise of power.—
This promise, observe, is contingent
upon faith; and it is a promise of
power over spiritual foes and over
natural disqualifications. 1, Over
spiritual foes, so that even demons
shall be subject unto us. O Christian
worker, therefore abandon not the
hardest case. 2. Over natural dis-
qualifications. The timid, shrinking
Peter shall speak with boldness before
three thousand men; and John, the
hasty Boanerges, shall become the
apostle of gentleness and love.—Z#, A.
Stuart.


Ver. 18. Safety amid danger.—The
Master promises to His disciples, on
the condition of their faith in Him,
perfect safety amidst the dangers of
the work, so that what is harmful to
others shall not hurt them. And this
safety will consist not in the avoid-
ance of evil, for the Master knew they
would still be in the world, and that
temptations would be round about
them on every side. Therefore He
does not promise immunity from
danger, but immunity from harm.
Yet this also, of course, only in the


629


CHAP. XVI.





aes


pathway of obedience, We may not
throw ourselves from the pinnacle of
the Temple, and expect His angels to
bear us up in their preserving hands,
for we may not tempt the Lord our
God; but right sure we are that no
harm can happen unto us if we be
followers of that which is good—that
He doth give His angels charge over
us to keep us in all His ways—that
upon the highway of the Lord no lion
shall be there. And is it not so?
Take, for instance, sceptical books ;
and can you take up a more deadly
serpent, or drink a more poisonous
cup? If you take it up simply from
curiosity, or because the book is
popular, and you covet the reputation
of being liberal-minded or up with
the times, even if you retain your faith,
the poison of that book will oftentimes
sting you in years to come. But if
you read that book because it is your
duty, because you wish to expose its
fallacy to some young heart who is
being led astray thereby, then you
may take up the serpent or drink the
deadly thing, and it shall not hurt you.
And so it is all through. This man
enters into politics strong in faith
and in his desire to serve both God
and man, and therefore walks erect
amidst the pitfalls of public life, into
which that poor miserable wretch, so


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.





because he is a man of God, when
yonder huckster’s conscience is seared
day by day by the tricks of trade,
until he grows so callous that evil
ceases to cause pain.—Z. A. Stuart.
The promise of usefulness.—‘ They
shall lay hands on the sick, and they
shall recover.” Yes, the blessing shall
not end with yourself; others shall
live by your side. You will only be


helpful when you yourself are safe,


and you will only be safe when you
are helpful. Bring yourself into con-
tact with those who are sick and
sorrowing, and you will know the
exquisite delight of doing good. But
we must “lay hands” upon them,
comeclose tothem, bring our personality
into touch withthem. You can never
do good if you stand at a distance from
your fellow-men. The Risen Jesus has
left you in this world as His represen-
tative, to heal the sorrows of the world,
and works through you in conferring
blessings upon the outcast and the
sad.—TIbid.

Christian treatment of the sick.—In
nothing has the spirit of Christianity
been more apparent than in the treat-
ment of the sick. The latest discoveries
of medical science are, in our great
hospitals and infirmaries, immediately
on their discovery, applied to the benefit
of the poorest and meanest who have


selfishly ambitious, most miserably
falls. This tradesman preserves his
character unspotted and unsullied


been taken to these places. Ff.
Sadler.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19, 20.
(Parattets: Luxe xxiv. 50, 51; Acts i. 9.)


Christ's ascension and co-operation.—The words “after the Lord had spoken
unto them” may refer primarily to the commission which He had just given
to His disciples to “go into all the world and to preach the gospel to every
creature,” and to the various instructions and promises with which that
commission was accompanied. But the words probably refer also to all that
Christ had spoken to His disciples after His resurrection from the dead ; for
we are told in His history that after His crucifixion “He shewed Himself
alive by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking
of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.” Highteen hundred years have
passed away since these events occurred, and we never saw either the Saviour
or the apostles to whom, they refer. But we believe the record that relates
them to us, we make them the subject of devout and delightful contemplation,


630





:
;
:
4
:
;
,
i
4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK, CHAP. XVI.


and we feel that we have an interest in them which will never cease to
influence our hearts through time or through eternity.

I. Let us contemplate these apostles witnessing the ascension of their Lord.
1. The place from which He ascended was the Mount of Olives—that part
of it which was situated in the district of Bethany (Luke xxiv. 50). It was
the place to which He had been accustomed to resort after the labours and
fatigues of the day, and where He had often spent whole nights in meditation
and in prayer; and now He Himself ascends from the same place whence His
nightly supplications had so often ascended to His Father and to our Father,
to His God and to our God. It was the place over which He passed as He
made His last entry into Jerusalem, where He was crowned with thorns; and
from which He now passes to the heavenly Jerusalem, to be crowned with
glory and honour. It was the place to which He repaired with His disciples,
after they had partaken of the Last Supper; for when they had sung a hymn
they went into the Mount of Olives. There His disciples forsook Him and
fled, and there He was afterwards parted from them, and a cloud received Him
out of their sight. 2. The manner in which He ascended is minutely recorded
(Luke xxiv. 51). His ascension was visible, and His disciples were eye- witnesses
of His majesty, as He rose higher and higher from the mountain, till the cloud
covered Him and concealed Him from their sight. But the most interesting
fact connected with His ascension is that it took place whilst He was in the
act of blessing His disciples. When the high priest among the Jews began to
bless the congregation, he lifted up his hands and exclaimed, “The Lord bless
thee and keep thee; the Lord cause His face to shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift upon thee the light of His countenance,
and give thee peace.” And in like manner our Great High Priest lifted up His
hands—those hands which had so often given bread to the hungry, health to
the sick, life to the dead, salvation to the lost—those hands which had so
lately bled upon the Cross, and in which the print of the nails was yet visible





- __those bountiful and wounded hands He lifted up, and then He began to


bless His disciples. ‘“ And it came to pass, while He blessed them” (after His
blessing was begun, but before it was concluded)—‘it came to pass, while He
blessed them” (for how often does it happen that a blessing precedes a bereave-
ment !)—“ He was parted from them”; and He rose from the mountain, with
His hands still lifted up, and with the blessing still dropping from His lips,
and brightening as He took His flight. 3. Having thus left the earth, our
text declares that “He was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand
of God.” As He had descended to earth in the likeness of men, and in order,
through sufferings and death, to become the Mediator, He now, having procured
eternal redemption for us, ascends in His mediatorial capacity, and rises “ far
above all principality,” etc. And what, think you, must have been the
rapturous joy that thrilled through heaven, when the expectant and listening
silence of its inhabitants was broken by the shout, “ Lift up your heads, O ye
gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall
come in”! And having thus entered, He was received by the Everlasting
Father, who declared, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
“Tet all the angels of God worship Him!” 4. Such an ascension into heaven,
and such a reception there, is in beautiful harmony with the dignity of the
Saviour’s person, and with the glory which He had acquired as the Author of
man’s redemption ; and it was also a pledge and a preparation for the triumphant
spread of His gospel in the world. é i

II: Contemplate the apostles going forth to preach His gospel.—The ministry
of the gospel is represented by the apostle as one of the first gifts which the
Ascended Saviour acquired and bestowed upon the world (Eph. iv. 11, 12). We

631


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK;





therefore find that immediately after the ascension of their Lord these disciples
“went forth, and preached everywhere.” 1. The subject of their preaching was
the gospel of Jesus Christ, or “the Word,” as it is emphatically called in our text.
And after what they had seen and heard and experienced themselves, on what
other subject could they preach and what other name could they declare? It
was not merely as an important fact that they contemplated His death, but as
having essentially connected with it a moral meaning and design, as the only
and the all-sufficient means of redemption to a ruined world. He was wounded ;
but it was for our transgressions. He was bruised; but it was for our iniquities.
He suffered; but He suffered, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us
to God. He bled; but in His blood there is redemption, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of His grace. He died; but through death He destroyed
him that had the power of death, that is the devil, and delivered them who
through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. In preaching
this doctrine the apostles warned sinners, as we warn you, to beware of rejecting
Christ by trusting for salvation to your own works; and they exhorted sinners,
as we exhort you, to go at once to Christ, and to go to Him laden with the full
weight of all your guilt and condemnation, because “ He came into the world
to seek and to save that which was lost.” 2. They communicated this gospel
to mankind by preaching. Nothing can equal the impressiveness of a living
address from man to man, where numbers are assembled, where the place which
they occupy is sacred, where the gospel is the theme, where the whole soul of
the preacher feels and speaks, and where all are reminded that they are in the
presence of God. Attention is awakened; emotions are excited ; conscience is
aroused; and the stream of sympathy flows from soul to soul, mingled with all
those hallowed influences which render the gospel the power of God to our
salvation, 3. The extent to which they preached this gospel was universal.
They preached Christ first in the very place where He had lived, and died, and
risen, and ascended. They preached His miracles to the very men who had
witnessed them and experienced them. They preached His sufferings in the
garden of Gethsemane and on the hill of Calvary where they had been endured.
They preached His resurrection at the mouth of His deserted sepulchre. They
preached His ascension on the very mount where He had been parted from
them. But while Jerusalem was the centre of their operations the world was
their circumference ; and they went forth and preached everywhere, till they
could say to the Colossians, ‘“‘The gospel is come unto you, as it is in all the
world.”

Il. Contemplate the apostles experiencing their Lord’s co-operation with
them in their labours.—Wherever His disciples worked as instruments He
worked also as the efficient agent; for His power is omnipotent. And by
this presence and this power He graciously fulfilled His own declaration
(vers. 17, 18). 1. These Divine influences qualified the preachers of the gospel.
The change which took place in the sentiments and conduct of the apostles,
after the reception of Christ into heaven, was most manifest and remarkable.
To that same Divine Redeemer let every minister of the gospel look for the
knowledge, and the holiness, and the energy, and the pathos, and the patieat
perseverance, and for every qualification which is necessary to render him a
workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth,
and instant in season and out of season, watching for souls as one who must
give an account. 2. These Divine influences confirmed the truth of the gospel.
As He sat at the right hand of God, He baptised them with His miraculous
influences and power to such an extent that they could heal the sick and raise
the dead whenever they invoked the name of Jesus. These miraculous influences
are now indeed withdrawn. But as we can prove that these miraculous powers


632


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.


eee


then existed, we can appeal to them as a standing evidence in our day that
the gospel of our salvation is the Word of God. But though the miraculous
influences are withdrawn, the spiritual and sanctifying influences are still con-
tinued. 3. These Divine influences ensured the success of the gospel. Though
its original ministers were only the twelve fishermen of Galilee—men without
learning, without worldly wealth, and without worldly power—yet they became
so mighty through God that heathen philosophers were confounded, heathen
oracles were struck dumb, heathen temples were deserted, and so mightily grew
the Word of God and prevailed that in about thirty years after the ascension
of Christ the whole Roman world was conquered by the Cross. And it was
a glorious conquest ; for it was a triumph over mind and heart. And, thanks
be unto God, the same Divine influences ensure the success of the gospel in every
age; and many of you, my brethren, are living witnesses of its effectual working
in the hearts of them that believe; “for our gospel has come to you not in
word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost .and in much assurance.”
And believing as we do that the Ascended Redeemer possesses all power both
in heaven and earth, we are sure that His moral government of the world
will be productive of the purity and joy and universality of the Church, and
that the time foretold by prophecy shall come, when to Him every knee shall
bow and every tongue confess.—J. A. Alexander, D.D.


OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 19. The significance of Christ's
Ascension.—1. It was the end of the
work of redemption. 2. It was the
final triumph of goodness. 3. It was
the exaltation of humanity. 4. It
told of the continuity of life. 5. It
inaugurated the reign of blessing.
‘Let us realise that all gifts, both
spiritual and temporal, come from
Him, and so live that His benediction
may be able to rest on all that we
do.—A. G. Mortimer, D.D.

“ Received up into heaven.”—There
is something remarkable in these
words, We habitually speak of Christ
as ascending, but Scripture more
frequently declares that He was the
subject of the action of Another, and
was taken up. See Luke xxiv. 51;
Acts i. 2,9. Physical interference is
not implied; no angels bore Him
aloft; and the narratives make it
clear that His glorious body, obedient
to its new mysterious nature, arose
unaided, But the decision to depart
and the choice of a time came not
from Him: He did not go, but was
taken.—Dean Chadwick.

Why such slight mention of Christ's
Ascension ?—It may seem remarkable
that so great an occurrence should be


so little noticed by the sacred writers ;
for it is mentioned by two only, St.
Mark and St. Luke, and these two
who were not witnesses of it. And
yet we need not wonder at this, nor
that it should have held a less pro-
minent place in the minds of the
apostles than the Resurrection; for,
indeed, that He who had risen from
the grave, who had laid aside His
earthly body and put on the heavenly,
that He should go up to heaven,
that He who had so clearly shewn
that He came down from God should
return to God—this was but natural,
and could not but appear natural to
the enlightened minds of the apostles.
What else could happen to Him who
had risen from the grave, and clothed
Himself with His “house that was
from heaven” ?—A. Grant, D.C.L.

Ascension joy.—Trulyif we could ever
live in this day all were joy; for the
Ascension is the crown of all joys, the
rapture of all creation, the wonder of
the blessed angels, the union of all
being, the finishing of the earthly course
of the Son of God, His entrance into
glory !—#. B. Pusey, D.D.

We ascend with Christ——The Ascen-
sion of Christ is the great pledge

€33.


CHAP. XVI HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


oe SS ee


and proof of our eternal state;
our nature is for ever identified with
His, so that as long as He is ‘man
we must be happy as one with Him.
The great value of this transcendent
fact is not merely that itisan example
of our future ascension, but that it.
is our ascension begun—we in Him
having risen to heaven—we in Him
being at this time present before God
—we in Him being united with the
eternal plans and procedures of heaven,
so that we are for ever blended with
Christ—His property—His purchased
possession—the very members of His
body.—Prof. W. A. Butler.
Thou hast raised our human nature
in the clouds to God’s right hand,
There we sit in heavenly places, there
with Thee in glory stand ;
Jesus reigns, adored by angels; man
with God is on the throne ;
Mighty Lord, in Thine Ascension we
by faith behold our own!
Bishop Chris. Wordsworth.
Christ on the right hand of God as
our Intercessor.—The Epistle to the
Hebrews over and over again reiterates
that thought that we have a Priest
that has passed into the heavens,
there to appear in the presence of God
for us. And the apostle Paul, in
that great linked climax in the eighth
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,
has it, ‘‘ Christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at
the right hand of God, who also
maketh intercession for us.” There
are deep mysteries connected with
that thought of the intercession of
Christ. It does not mean that the
Divine heart needs to be won to love
and pity. It does not mean that in
any mere outward and formal fashion
He pleads with God, and softens and
placates the infinite and eternal love
of the Father in the heavens. It at
least plainly means this, that He, our
Saviour and Sacrifice, is for ever in the
presence of God, presenting His own
blood as an element in the Divine
dealing with us, modifying the inci-


dence of the Divine law, and securing -


through His own merits and inter-
634


cession the outflow of blessings upon
our heads and hearts. It is not a
complete statement of Christ’s work
for us that He died for us. He died
that He might have somewhat to offer.
He lives that He may be our Advocate
as well as our propitiation with the
Father. And just as the high priest
once a year passed within the curtain,
and there in the solemn silence and
solitude of the holy place sprinkled the
blood that he bore thither, not without
trembling, and but for a moment per-
mitted to stay in the awful Presence,
thus, but in reality and for ever, with
the joyful gladness of a Son in His
“ own calm home, His habitation from
eternity,” Christ abides in the holy
place, and at the right hand of
the Majesty of the heavens lifts up


that prayer, so strangely compact of :


authority and submission: “ Father,
I will that these whom Thou hast
given Me be with Me where I am.”
The Son of Man at the right hand of
God is our Intercessor with the Father.
“Seeing, then, that we have a Great
High Priest that is passed through the
heavens, let us come boldly to the
throne of grace.”—A. Maclaren, DD.


Ver. 20. The spread of Christ's
influence.—As the ages pass the in-
fluence of the love of Christ is conquer-
ing the selfishness of mankind. Even
the statute-books of civilisation attest
His growing power. The regeneration
of a world is a slow process, but the
healing rays from His glorified presence





|


lw


solidi


ne ee ee


ee ee


at the right hand of the Father— —
calling forth the verdure and fruitage —


of an ever wider imitation of His life
—have in them the pledge of a future
in which their influence will extend
over all lands.—C. Geikie, D.D.

Christ with His Church throughout


the ages—He has been with His ©


Church, keeping her from fainting,
from decay, declension, so that she has
gone on conquering and to conquer;
so that the hundred and twenty
became three thousand at Pentecost ;
and before the end of the century the
three thousand had become probably


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


(Lange) half a million; by the eighth
century the half-million had become
thirty millions; by the Reformation
one hundred millions. And to-day
four hundred and forty millions of men
give Jesus the Name which is above
every name; multitudes that none can
number doing so, not with lips only,
but from the heart. He is with us
still, A hundred years ago Carey
reckoned up the population of the
world with great accuracy, and found
Christendom was only one-fifth of the
whole; now it is nearly one-third.
What another century of missions may


CHAP. XVI,


make it will probably exceed the hope
and prayers of the most daring
believer. We must remember He is
most richly with us when we are
‘going into the world to preach the
‘rospel,” 7.e. when we are on the move
of mercy. Let us, for our personal
consolation, remember He will be with
us to the end of life and work and
need. Let us remember that, in all
work done for Him, He still is with us,
and is ever making the foolishness of
preaching and teaching omnipotent to
bring men into His fold.—R. Glover.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVI.


Ver. 1. The devotion of the holy women.—
The nightingale is celebrated for its singing
in the night. We have, however, seen it
maintained that it is all a mistake to sup-
pose that she sings only in the night. She


“sings in the day as well, only, as other


song'sters are then in full chorus, her sweeter
strains are not particularly distinguishable
from the rest. But at night, when all others
are hushed, her song is heard, and is more
sweet by reason of the contrast with the
surrounding stillness. Similarly was it with
these women. They served in the day of
bright sunshine, but their service was then
overshadowed, so to speak, by the demon-
strative crowd that thronged around Him.
Awidst all the marks of attention paid Him,
theirs did not appear particularly distin-
guishable. But when the voice of the noisy,
effusive crowd was hushed during the dark
night of trial and suffering which followed
the brief day of popularity, they continued
to give forth the music of love and sympathy
through the dark loneliness of the night.


Vers. 3, 4. Imaginary difficulties.—Once
upon a time—so the homely tale runs—a
man and his wife started one pleasant
morning to pay a long-promised visit to a
friend some four or five miles away. The
good woman carried her only little one with
her; and they had not got far from home
when she suddenly remembered a bridge
they had to cross which was very old and
very unsafe. Then she began to worry
about it. ‘What shall we do about that
bridge?” she said to her husband. “TI shall
never dare to go over it, and we can’t get
across the river by any other way.” “Oh,”
said the man, “I forgot that bridge! It is
a bad place, What if it were to break, and
we fall into the water and be drowned?”
“Or even,” said the wife, “suppose you


should step on a rotten plank, and break
your leg, what would become of me and the
child?” ‘I don’t know,” said the man,
“what would become of any of us, for I
couldn’t work, and we should starve to
death.” So they went on worrying and
fretting and framing evil till they got to the
bridge, when, behold! since they had been
there last, a fine, new, substantial stone
bridge had been built! They crossed by -

in safety, and found that they might have
saved themselves all this anxiety.

Difficulties overcome.—Men who undertake
great works, like the Mont Cenis tunnel,
the Atlantic cable, a railway across a
continent, know that theie are palpable,
vast, and costly difficulties. There are
costs which are certainly known, which civil
engineers can readily calculate; and there are
probable costs, which hinge upon conjectured
contingencies ; and there are possible costs
whicli may be brought to light by the pro-
gress of the work. The men who furnish
the capital necessarily look at these. They
do not want to be in company with the man
whose tower was not finished, of whom the
Master told us. But, nevertheless, they go
forward. Immense difficulties had to be
overcome to establish tie Central and Erie
and Pacific Railways, the continental and
sub-ocean telegraphs, and other great works ;
but they have been brought into existence,
and stand to-day, because men who are not
visionary had the nerve to dare to take up
great burdens, and the shoulders broad and
strong enough to bear them.

Love never retreats—A little English
drummer-boy was brought prisoner before
Napoleon. The emperor told him to sound
the retreat. “I never learnt it,” was the
prompt reply. Love never retreats. Love
is ever accompanied by faith and hope, and
in their company it always dares to pursue


639


CHAP, XVI.


its course, however the odds may appear
against it.


Ver. 6. The secret of Christ's influence.—
During the years which followed the out-
break of the French Revolution, and the
revolt against Christianity which accom-
panied it, there was an extraordinary activity
in some sections of French society, directed
to projecting religions that might, it was
hoped, take the place of Christianity. New
philanthropic enthusiasms, new speculative
enthusiasms, were quite the order of the
day. On one occasion a projector of one of
these schemes came to Talleyrand, who, you
will remember, was a bishop who had turned
sceptic, and so had devoted himself to
politics; but whatever is to be said of him,
he was possessed, in a very remarkable
degree, of a keen perception of the propor-
tions of things, and of what is and is not
possible in this human world. The visitor
observed, by way of complaint to Talleyrand,
how hard it was to start a new religion,
even though its tenets and its efforts were
obviously directed to promote the social
and personal improvement of mankind.
“Surely,” said Talleyrand, with a fine smile
—“Surely it cannot be so difficult as you
think.” “Howso?” said his friend. “Why,”
said Talleyrand, “the matter is simple; you
have only to get yourself crucified, or,
anyhow, put to death, and then, at your
own time, to rise from the dead, and you will
have no difficulty.” Canon Liddon.

Nature’s testimony to the Resurrection.—In
the life of Michael Faraday there is a very
touching and instructive reference to the
Resurrection. He tells us that during his
travels on the Continent he was particularly
struck with the beauty and simplicity of the
little posts of remembrance set up on the
graves in a quiet little graveyard in Switzer-
land. He speaks of one grave which more
than any of the others arrested his attention.
Some one was too poor to put up an engraved
brass plate, cr even a painted board, but had
written on a piece of paper the dates of the
birth and death of the one whose remains
were resting below. The piece of paper
was fastened to a board, and mounted on
the top of a stick at the head of the grave.
The paper was protected from the rain by
asmall roof, the ledge of which protruded
sufficiently to carry the water away from
the board. It wasa very simple contrivance
to memorialise a friend. But on examining
the contrivance Faraday saw that Nature
had contributed her part towards that
humble memorial. Because under that little
shelter formed: by the protruding ledge, and
by the side of the inscription on the paper,
a caterpillar had attached itself, and there
had passed through its death-like state of
a chrysalis, and ultimately assumed its
finished state of a butterfly, and had winged


636


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK.


SS eee


its flight from the spot, leaving its corpse-
like relics behind. And the young scientist
turned away from that humble grave, his
heart strengthened in the belief of the
Resurrection, and his thoughts kindled into
a glow by the contemplation of the wonderful
works of God.


Ver 14. Unbelief wnreasonable.—To one
who affected to question the received account
of the death of Julius Czsar we should
not say “You want faith,” but “You want
sense.”—Jsaac Taylor.


Ver. 15. How to preach.—A wise clergy-
man, now deceased, once said he had
learned to preach not only so that people
could understand him if they had a mind to,
but also that they could not misunderstand
him if they wanted to. A hint here to all
called upon to make statements with pen o1
lips.

The preservation of the gospel.The monks
of Lindisfarne set sail for Ireland with the
book of the Gospels; a storm arose; the
book fell overboard and was lost: they were
driven back to the English coast. Discon-
solate, they went in quest of the precious
volume: for a long time they searched in
vain, but at length (so says the story) a
miraculous revelation was vouchsafed to
them, and, following its directions, they
found the book on the sand, far above high-
water mark, uninjured by the waves, nay,
even more beautiful for the disaster. Does
not this story well symbolise the power of
the gospel working on the Church? Through
the carelessness of man it may disappear
amidst the confusion of the storm, the waves
may close over it and hide it from human
sight, but lost—lost for ever—it cannot be.
— Bishop Lightfoot. ‘

Preaching Christ everywhere.—Dr. Boaz,
of Calcutta, tells in his journal of the follow-
ing incident, which happened to him and
a fellow-missionary at the great fair on
Saugor Island, whither they had come to
preach to the assembled multitudes. While
they were speaking, “ a respectable-looking
man, in evident astonishment,” came upon
the scene, and exclaimed: “ What, are you
here also? When I am in the north of
Calcutta, there I am sure to meet you, and
hear you speaking about Jesus Christ.
When business takes me to the south of the
city, there you are again, telling the people
about the same Jesus Christ; and if I go to
a distant village, I am sure to hear the same
story; and here, in the midst of the very
jungles, I hear the name of Christ. What
is all this? You seem to be everywhere,
and always talking about the same thing.
Who would have thought to hear anything
about Jesus Christ in such a dreary spot as
this?”

The true preacher a Divine creation,.—





ee


SO ag ee IE AN


0 a Iam Ds


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. CHAP. XVI.


Speaking of art-training, Mr. Ruskin says:
“Until a man has passed through a course
of academy studentship, and can draw in
an improved manner with French chalk, and
knows fore-shortening, and perspective, and
something of anatomy, we do not think he
can possibly be an artist. What is worse,
we are very apt to think that we can make
him an artist by teaching him anatomy, and
how to draw with French chalk, whereas
the real gift in him is utterly independent of
all such accomplishments.” So the highest
powers of the teacher or preacher, the power
of interpreting the Scriptures with spiritual
insight, of moving the hearers to earnest
worship and decision, may exist with or
without the culture of the schools. Learned
Pharisees are impotent failures compared
with a rough fisherman Peter anointed with
the Holy Ghost. Inspiration is more than
education.

Missionary zeal.— Raymond Lully, or
Lullius, to whom the Arabic professorship
at Oxford owes its origin, was the first Chris-
tian missionary to the Moslems. When
shipwrecked near Pisa, after many years of
missionary labour, though upwards of seventy,
his ardour was unabated. ‘“ Once,” he wrote,
“JT was fairly rich; once I had a wife and
children ; once I tasted freely of the plea-
sures of this life. But all these things I
gladly resigned that I might spread abroad
a knowledge of the truth. I studied Arabic,
and several times went forth to preach the
gospel to the Saracens. I have been in
prisons; I have been scourged; for years


‘I have striven to persuade the princes of


Christendom to befriend the common cause
of converting the Mohammedans. Now,
though old and poor, I do not despair; J am
ready, if it be God’s wiil, to persevere unto
death.” And he died so, being stoned to
death at Bugia, in Africa, in 1314, after
gathering a little flock of converts.
Missionary enthusiasm.—In the first cen-
turies every Christian looked on it as a part
of his life to be God’s missionary, and for
centuries the Church produced men like
Boniface and Columban. Then for a thou-
sand years the darkness was only broken here
and there by a man like St. Louis of France
or St. Francis of Assisi. It is to Count
Zinzendorf and the Moravians that we owe
the revival of missionary zeal. In the last
century missionaries were regarded as foolish
and rash, and I know not what. When
Carey proposed to go as a missionary to
India, he was told that if God wished to
convert the heathen He would doubtless do
so in His own way. Think of John Eliot,
the lion-hearted “apostle of the Indians,”
and his motto that prayer and painstaking
can accomplisb everything. Think of young
and sickly David Brainerd going alone into
the wild forests of America and among their
wilder denizens, with the words, “ Not from


necessity but from choice, for it seems to me
that God’s dealings towards me have fitted
me for a life of solitariness and hardship.”
Think of Adoniram Judson and the tortures
he bore so cheerfully in his Burmese prison.
And we, too, in these days have seen Charles
Mackenzie leave the comforts of Cambridge
to die amid the pestilent swamps of the
Zambesi, and Coleridge Patteson, floating,
with his palm branch of victory in his hand,
over the blue sea among the Coral Isles.
Nor do I know any signs more hopeful for
the nation than these, that our public schools
are now founding missions in the neglected
wastes of London, and our young athletes
are going out as poor men to labour in
China and Hindostan.—Dean Farrar.

Christ wants to get the gospel into every
home in the world ; and the way He wants
to do this is through the hearts and hands
of those whom He has already saved. If we
do not carry the good news, the lost will not
receive it at all. It is told of a boy who
was converted that at once he started to
walk—for he was poor and could not afford
to go by train—away to a place more than
a thousand miles from his home, to tell his
brother about Christ. History relates that
the early Christians, many of them, were so
eager to carry the gospel everywhere, that
they even hired themselves out as servants
or sold themselves as slaves, that they might
be admitted into the homes of the rich and
great among the heathen, to live there, and
thus have opportunity to proclaim the love
of Jesus and His salvation,

A non-missionary Churchis like Coleridge’s
ice-ship, manned by dead men from prow to
stern.

A clergyman was once asked by the Duke
of Wellington, ‘How are you getting on
with the propagation of the gospel abroad ?
Is there any chance of the Hindoos becoming
Christians?” To which the clergyman re-
plied, “Oh no! I do not see anything doing
there; I see no reason to suspect any work
of the kind being successful.” ‘‘ Well,” said
the duke, “what have you to do with that ?
What are your marching orders? Are they
not, ‘Go ye into all the world, and preach
the gospel to every creature’? Do your
duty, sir, and never mind results.”

An English preacher asked some British
soldiers, “If Queen Victoria were to issue
a proclamation, and, placing it in the hands
of her army and navy, were to say, ‘Go ye
into all the world and proclaim it to every
creature,’ how long do you think it would
take to doit?’’ One of these brave fellows,
accustomed to obey orders without hesitation
or delay, and at peril of life, promptly
answered, “ Well, I think we could manage
it in about eighteen months.”


Ver. 16. Baptism in the apostolic age.—lt
coincided with the greatest religious change


637


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


Po II eee Ne fe J ren ree ee


which the world had yet witnessed. Mul-
titudes of men and women were seized with
one common impulse, and abandoned by
the irresistible conviction of a day, an hour,
a moment, their former habits, friends,
associates, to be enrolled in a new society,
under the banner of a new faith. That new
society was intended to be a society of
“brothers,” bound by ties closer than any
earthly brotherhood—filled with life and
energy such as fall to the lot of none but
the most ardent enthusiasts, yet tempered
by a moderation, a wisdom, and a holiness
such as enthusiasts have rarely possessed.
Yt was, moreover, a society swayed by the
presence of men whose words even now
cause the heart to burn, and by the recent
recollections of One whom, “ not seeing, they
loved with love unspeakable.” Into this
society they passed by an act as natural as
it was expressive. The plunge into the bath
of purification, long known among the Jewish
nation as the symbol of a change of life,
was still retained as the pledge of entrance
into this new and universal communion—
retained under the sanction of Him into
whose name they were by that rite “bap-
tised.” In that early age the scene of the
transaction was either some deep wayside
spring or well, as for the Ethiopian, or some
rushing river, as the Jordan, or some vast
reservoir, as at Jericho or Jerusalem, whither,
as in the baths of Caracalla at Rome, the
whole population resorted for swimming or
washing. The water in those Hastern
regions, so doubly significant of all that was
pure and refreshing, closed over the heads
of the converts, and they rose into the light
of heaven new and altered beings. It was
natural that on such an act were lavished
all the figures whicu language could furnish
to express the mighty change—‘ Regenera-
tion,” “ Illumination,” “ Burial,” “ Resurrec-
tion,” “A new creation,” “ Forgiveness of
sins,” “Salvation.” Well might the apostle
say, “ Baptism doth even now save us,” even
had he left his statement in its unrestricted
strength to express what in that age no one
could misunderstand. But no less well was
he led to add, as if with a prescience of
coming evils, “Not the putting away the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God” (1 Pet, iii. 21).—
Dean Stanley.

New birth in baptism.—An old man of
eighty was baptised in America by a
missionary, and thenceforth led a life
devoted to God. Two years later he was
lying on his death-bed, and when asked his
age he replied, “I am only two years old,
for my life began when I was born for God
in baptism; the previous eighty years were
a life of death.”

Suved.—At the wreck of the steamer
Atlantic on the coast of Halifax hundreds
of lives were lost. Amongst the passengers


63F-


who escaped was a Christian merchant from
Boston, who, as soon as he could reach a
telegraph office, sent a message to his
family. It contained only a single word,
but it was worth more to them than all the
world. Itwas the word Saved. Afterwards
the merchant had the telegram framed and
hung up in his office to remind him of God’s
mercy to him.


Ver. 19.—It was an ancient myth that
the Milky Way was the bright track made
by the flashing wheels of the car of Phaethon,
driving through the skies; but the Man
of Calvary, ascending from the Mount of
Olives to His celestial throne, has left across
the heavens a brighter and more glorious
pathway than the pale light of far-off stars.
He has brought life and immortality to
light, and millions who believe in His name
have in all ages seen and rejoiced in His
light, and by it been guided to the realm of
everlasting day.


Ver. 20. “« The Lord working with them.”—
That is a sweet legend hanging about an old
church in England, and it tells the great
truth well,—how centuries ago, when the
monks were rearing it, a new temple for
the worship of their God, there came among
the workers a strange monk, unasked, who
always took on himself the heaviest tasks ;
and how at last, when a particularly gigantic
beam was needed for a position as important
as that of the keystone of an arch, and
when, with sweating strain and united
effort, it was lifted to its place, it was
strangely found to be some feet too short.
No device of the builders could remedy it;
they had tried their best with it, they had
used the most careful measurement they
knew, but how sadly they had failed!
There it was, too short, and their utmost
skill could not find remedy. The night
closed in upon the tired workers, and they
went to their rest with sore hearts, leaving
only this unknown monk, who would go
working on. But when the morning came,
and the workers came forth again, they saw
the sunlight falling on the beam exactly in
its place, lengthened to the precise dimen-
sions needed, and resting accurately on its
supports. But the unknown monk had
disappeared. Yet the workers knew Him
now, and were certain they could carry the
temple onward to its topmost turret. For
He who bad been working with them and
supplying their lack of perfect work, they
came now to know, was none other than the
Lord Himself. They were not unhelped
toilers. Nor are we.

God working with man.—When Robert
Morrison went out to China, he stopped for
a little while in New York, and one of the
American millionaires turned to him, and
in a supercilious way said, “‘ Mr. Morrison,


Org et


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


CHAP. XVI.





do you expect to make any impression on
Chinat” Robert Morrison, in the kingli-
ness of a consecrated manhood, replied, “I
do not, but I do expect that the Lord
Almighty will.”

Power of the Word.—Cesar Malan found
himself on the diligence at Angouléme in
the company of a sprightly young gentle-
man from Paris. He proved to be a mate-
rialist, who, when his companion drew
out the New Testament, treated it as “a
book of fables, good enough for children.”
Though tempted to expose to him by argu-
ment the folly of infidelity, M. Malan
thought it better to let the Word of God, as
he said, speak for itself. So he read several
passages. The young man shewed vexation,
and his fellow-traveller, judging by this
that his conscience was troubled, read still
more. The infidel became very angry, then
biting his lips he took refuge in silence.
After travelling in this way for about half
an hour, he suddenly exciaimed : “I should
like to have a book like that, for I begin to
believe that what it contains is true, and
that I have been deceiving myself.” M.
Malan gave the young man his Testament ;
and meeting him afterwards at Bordeaux,
he found that he was attentively studying
it, and that in every way he shewed it had
made a profound impression upon him.
“ When I saw this fruit of the Word of God,”
said M. Malan, ‘‘I rejoiced that I had not
spoken of myself and of my own reasons.”

Divine energy of Christianity.—Voltaire
well said to Lady Chesterfield that the

- English Parliament patronised Christianity
because no better system of religion had
yet been found. Read the chronicles of
Buddhism, Brahminism, Parseeism, and
other heathen philosophies. Their logical
work has been to quench the happiness of
their devotees. Hours might be spent in
portraying the transfigurations wrought by
Christianity. She has recently lighted her
vestal fires in Australia, Madagascar, and
Liberia, and to-day each is a pharos of civili-
sation, shedding its radiance far out on the
surges of domestic, civil, and moral gloom.
Few benedictions of civilisation can be
named that she has not pioneered. Over no
acre has she waved her wand where the
wilderness has not blossomed as the rose.
Prejudiced sceptics speak of modern nations
as being little improved over classic Greece
and Rome. Look back to that period when
the law of might was the law of right,
when childhood and womanhood were
in degradation, and when iron-hearted
cruelty was enthroned in the metropolis of
paganism. Read of the extensive butcheries
of men in the sports of the Colosseum under
numerous imperial monsters. Read of the
successive massacres of the early Christians,
from the coronation of Nero to the death of
Diocletian, whose slaughter of God’s saints


was so general that on his commemora-
tive medal was impressed, “The Christian
religion is destroyed.” Even such infidel
essayists as Bolingbroke and Gibbon are
pre-eminently brilliant in their eulogies of
Christianity in the Roman Empire. Rousseau
and Bonaparte penned as eloquent tributes
to the achievements of Christianity as did
De Tocqueville, Pascal, or Bacon. Macaulay
describes a gorgeous window made from
rejected fragments of glass. So Christianity
has taken depraved communities and con-
verted them into moral populations. It
is because Divine energy is essential to the
mental, social, and spiritual uplifting of all
lands, because at their gates Jesus knocks
to-day more earnestly than Henry IV.
knocked at the gates of Hildebrand, and
because history attests the regenerative in-
fluence of Christianity, that the ascending
Redeemer commissioned His disciples to see
to it that His kingdom shall finally achieve
universal ascendency.

Progress of Christianity.—Arnobius, a
heathen philosopher, who became a Christian,
speaking of the power which the Christian
faith had over the minds of men, says:
“Who would not believe it, when he sees in
how short a time it has conquered so great
knowledge? Orators, grammarians, rheto-
ricians, lawyers, physicians, and philosophers
have thrown up those opinions which but a
little before they held, and have embraced
the doctrines of the gospel!” “Though but
of yesterday,” said Tertullian, “ yet have we
filled your cities, islands, castles, corpora-
tions, councils, your armies themselves, your
tribes, companies, the palace, the senate,
and courts of justice; only your temples
have we left you free.”

Final triumph of Christianity.— Travellers
tell us that in Arctic regions, when the six
months of night are ending, and the long
day of sunshine is about to begin, the in-
habitants ascend the peaks and await the
magnificent sunrise. When his ball of light
has chased from the ice-fields the shadows,
and he rests like a globe of flame on the rim
of earth, ere he begins to climb the rounds
of a ladder of glory more luminous than
Jacob saw at Bethel, the people shed tears
of joy, and, embracing each other, they cry,
“ The sun has come to us, and the long night
is over.” So in fancy I see standing on the
crests of all lands of heathenism the be-
nighted races, looking for the appearance of
the Sun of Righteousness to banish their
long night of barbarism, idolatry, and
cruelty, and usher in the unending day of
Christ’s universal reign. I seem to stand
to-day in this vast and solemn presence. In
vision I see the countless millions, Cau-
casians, Mongolians, Africans, Malays, and
Indians. They crowd the summits of all the
mountains of pagan provinces in fearful
vastness of multitude. From the standpoint


639


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK,





of this commission, and with the telescope
of this farewell pledge of the Ascended
Redeemer, we can even now by faith see
that splendid period in history when, from
the tall tops of all mission provinces, the
grand concerted acclaim shall ascend, “The
Sun has come to us, and the long night is
over.”—S. V. Leach, D.D.

Amen.— My heart wishes it to be exactly
so,” is the Chinese rendering of “Amen.” The


640


value of this definition is that it is not a
mere lip repetition of this blessed old Hebrew
word, but a whole-souled, whole-hearted
desire for the triumph of that which is good.
Is there not danger that our “ Amens” may
become a mere head and lip endorsement of
the truth, while the heart is not init? Let


us be sure that in everything excellent that —


is presented to us we can say of a verity,


“ Amen, my heart wishes it to be exactly so.” —





a ae er ee


APPENDIX,


[For this interesting review of the evidence for and against the Last Twelve Verses of
aa Se : am indebted to my friend the Rev. F. W. Christie, M.A., Rector of St Mary’s.
eraeen.


NOTE ON ST. MARK XVI. 9—20.


THE great majority of modern scholars are agreed that with the eighth verse
of this chapter the genuine work of St. Mark comes abruptly to an end, and
that the twelve verses which follow are an addition by another hand in the
earliest sub-apostolic age. Westcott and Hort insert these verses within
double brackets, as an interpolation, “probably Western in origin, containing
important matter apparently derived from extraneous sources ”;l and Lightfoot
ascribes them, together with the account of the woman taken in adultery
(John vii. 53—viii. 11), “to that knot of early disciples who gathered about
St. John in Asia Minor, and must have preserved more than one true tradition


-of the Lord’s life and of the earliest days of the Church, of which some at


least had themselves been eye-witnesses.”2 And so most scholars. On the other
hand, such eminent critics as Dr. Scrivener, Dean Burgon, Prof. Salmon,
Bishop John Wordsworth, and others, maintain, on grounds of external and
internal evidence, that these verses are the genuine work of St. Mark. Dean
Burgon’s elaborate monograph (The Last Twelve Verses of the Gospel according
to St. Mark vindicated : Oxford, 1871) won the admiration of Lagarde,’ and is
acknowledged to have proved “that the external evidence against the passage
has been greatly overstated . . . and that the patristic evidence resolves itself
into that (perhaps ultimately of Origen, but immediately) of Eusebius.” * With-
out presuming to settle so difficult a controversy, it will be useful to review
the evidence on which the decision depends.

External evidence.—The verses are wanting in the two oldest MSS., the
great uncial Bibles of the fourth century, Codex Vaticanus (B) and Sinaiticus
(8). Tischendorf has, however, pointed out that these MSS. are here not
independent witnesses, as in x the last leaf of St. Mark has been written by
the scribe of B.> In B there is a blank column—the only one in the whole
MS.—after ver. 8; and in x the letters of the last page of St. Mark, which might
easily have been written in one column, are spread out so as to carry over
a few lines to the second column, as if to avoid leaving it quite blank.
Dr. Salmon infers from these facts that both MSS. had, as first copied, contained


SE ee iL ED AT I a RE ce


1 New Test., smaller edition, p. 583. 8 Expositor, September 1894, p. 226.
2 On Revision of N. T. 4 W. H. Simcox, Writers of NV. 7., p. 11
5 Salmon, Introd. to NV. T., p. 161.


TT. 641


APPENDIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK,








the disputed verses, and that the leaves were then cancelled and rewritten by
the original scribe of B. The scribe was evidently aware of the twelve verses,
and rejected them. Eusebius (Bishop of Caesarea 315 a.p., died 340 a.p.) says
of these verses :! “He that rejects Mark’s section as spurious will say that it
is not current in all the copies. The accurate copies at least end with ‘afraid.’
For this is the end in nearly all the copies.” Eusebius himself, the great
critic of that century, seems to have rejected this section, for the so-called
Eusebian Canons were not carried beyond ver. 8. The words of Eusebius just
quoted are almost verbally repeated by Jerome (circ. 400 A.D.),? Hesychius of
Jerusalem (circ. 400 a.p.), and Severus of Antioch (circ. 500 a.p.). Doubts
about the genuineness of this section were therefore familiar to them. The
evidence of the important Armenian Version made in the fifth century is
specially interesting. All MSS. prior to 1100 a.p, omit the verses. Later
MSS. containing them have “ Here ends Mark’s Gospel” after “afraid,” and
then after a pause continue with vers. 9-20. There is, however, one old MS.
in the Patriarchal Library at Etchmiadzin which not only gives the verses, but
seems to throw light upon their origin. This MS. was examined by Mr. F. O.
Conybeare in 1891, and in the Hapositor for October 1893 he describes it and
gives his conclusions. The MS. is an Evangeliarium written about 986 A.D.,
and purporting to have been copied from a true and accurate Armenian
exemplar. St. Mark is written out to xvi. 8. Then there is a space of two
lines, after which in the same uncial hand, only in red—a distinction otherwise
reserved for the titles of the four Gospels themselves—is written “Ariston
Eritzou,” which means “Of the Presbyter Ariston.” This title occupies one
whole line (the book is written in double columns), and then follow the last
twelve verses, still in the same hand. This discovery of Mr. Conybeare’s is an
important one. The heading no doubt embodies a very ancient tradition, and
may meet with verification elsewhere. Mr. Conybeare identifies this Ariston the
Presbyter with the Ariston mentioned by Papias (Euseb., Hist. Eeel., ili. 39)
as one of the elders who were disciples of the Lord. Dr. Resch * thinks he was
Ariston of Pella, a Jewish Christian who wrote about 140 a.p., and who—
Dr. Resch thinks after this discovery—also arranged the Canon of the Gospels.
There are also MSS. which exhibit a duplicate ending. The uncial Codex L,
eighth century, in the National Library at Paris, noted for its frequent
agreement with x and B, breaks off after ver. 8, and then continues :* “The
following also is current: ‘And they briefly brought word of all the things
that were commanded them to Peter and his company: but after these things
Jesus Himself also sent forth by them from the east even unto the west the
holy and incorruptible preaching of the eternal salvation.’ But then is also
current the following after ‘for they were afraid, ‘But when He was risen
again,’ etc.” The same duplicate ending is also found in a fifth-century MS.
of the old Latin, the Codex Bobiensis. The alternative ending is added in the
margin of the Harklean Syriac (616 a.p.), and is found in various MSS. of the
Memphitic and Aithiopic versions. In the recently discovered Sinai Palimpsest
of the Old Syriac, allied to the Curetonian, the text of St. Mark ends with
ver. 8, as in x, B (see Guardian, October 31st, 1894). On the other hand,
the twelve verses are found in the other two great uncial MSS., the Codex
Bezze (D) and the Codex Ephremi (C), both of the fifth century; in all the
other uncial MSS.; in MSS. of the old Latin (including the important Codex
Colbertinus); in the Vulgate; in three Syriac versions (Curetonian, Peschito,
Jerusalem); in the Gothic and various Memphitic and Atthiopic MSS.





1 Quest. ad Marinum, iv. 957, ed. Migne. 3 See Thinker, October 1894, pp. 291, 292.
2 Kp. 120, ad Hedibiam. * McClellan, New Zest., p. 681


642


————


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, MARK. APPENDIX.


——<—$—


Treneeus (cire. 185 a.p.) quotes ver. 19 as St. Mark’s (Adv. Her., III. x. 6).
Justin Martyr) seems to cite these verses; but “decision seems impossible.” ?
They are found in Tatian’s Diatessaron (160-170 a.p.). Victor of Antioch
400-450 a.D.) wrote a commentary on St. Mark which had a wide repute
see list of MSS. in Burgon). The last words of his commentary are these:
“ Notwithstanding that in very many copies of the present Gospel the passage
beginning, ‘Now when [Jesus] was risen early the first day of the week,’ be
not found (certain individuals having supposed it to be spurious), yet we at
all events, inasmuch as in very many we have discovered it to exist, have out
of accurate copies subjoined also the account of the Lord’s ascension (following
the words ‘for they were afraid’) in conformity with the Palestinian exemplar
of Mark which exhibits the Gospel verity: that is to say, from the words
‘Now when [Jesus] was risen early the first day of the week,’ etc., down to
‘with signs following. Amen.’”

Internal evidence.—Against the genuineness it is urged: 1. There is a want
of connexion between this section and the foregoing. St. Mark would never
have written consecutively éboBotvro ydp. “Avacras 8& pul, xr dA. Also Mary
Magdalene is introduced in ver. 9 as if she had not been mentioned before in
ver.1. 2. The usual relation between St. Mark and St. Matthew fails in this
section. Mark xvi. 1-8 is parallel with Matt. xxviii. 1-8, but there the
connexion ceases. From Mark viii. 7 we might have expected a mention in
the sequel of this appearance in Galilee, such as we find in St. Matthew. The
twelve verses contain no mention of it, and must therefore be from another
hand. 3. The diction is unlike St. Mark’s. pry caBBdrov is unique; in
ver. 2 Mark had written the usual md rév caBBdrwv (cp. Gen. i 5, R.V.).
éxeivos is never used elsewhere in St. Mark without a substantive ; here it occurs
four times without a substantive. G@avdo.pos, popdy, Gedo Gar, PrAdwrew, mopever Gat,
dmotelv, tapaxodovbeiv, éraxodovfeiy, do not occur before in this Gospel. On
the other hand, arguments for the genuineness of these verses based on internal
- evidence are not wanting. Dr. Salmon traces in the first fifteen verses of this
Gospel a resemblance in style to the last twelve. These opening and closing
sections are, he thinks, the framework in which St. Mark set the Petrine
tradition. He also finds the characteristic ideas of the Gospel in these verses.
Thrice does St. Mark alone of the Synoptics record the unbelief of men
(iii. 5, vi. 6, 52), and thrice in this last section (xvi. 11, 13, 14) does this thought
appear. Westcott also notices this correspondence (Introduction to Study of
Gospels, p. 334). But nowhere has it been stated so fully as in a university
sermon of the present Bishop of Salisbury.? St. Mark, he thinks, depicts Christ
as the strong Son of God, Lord of spirits and men and nature, contending with
and overcoming evil and unbelief. Hence miracles occupy so large a space in
this Gospel. Especially does St. Mark dwell on the moral resistance offered
to Christ by the hardness of the human heart. These being the general lessons of
this Gospel, the last chapter fits on to the rest with a perfect and exact harmony.
“What do we read, in fact, in the last chapter ? It describes with greater
fulness than any of the other Gospels, how hopeless and weak in faith the
community of disciples was left by the Crucifixion,—how slow of perception
and hard of heart they still remained, notwithstanding all that had been done
for them,—how the women, going to anoint the body, found the tomb empty,
and fled in trembling and astonishment and fear at the angel’s message,—


ee ee ee eee


1 See Dr. Taylor’s article, Zxpositor, July 1893.


2 Westcott and Hort. ,
$ Sermon II. in University Sermons on Gospel Subjects : Parker, 1878. See also Addendum


by same author to commentary on St, Mark, in Bishop Chr. Wordsworth’s Greek Testament.


643


APPENDIX, | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK.


how the disciples disbelieved Mary Magdalene, to whom the Risen Jesus first
appeared,—how the two who met Him in another form, as they were going
into the country, failed to convince the rest,—how, at last, He appeared to all
Himself, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart; and
then, finally, and after a long and gradual process, gained a conquest over
their wills. Then it was that He addressed them, bidding them to go and
preach the gospel to the whole creation, offering salvation to those that believe
and are baptised, foretelling the condemnation of those who reject the message,
and promising fourfold miraculous powers, like His own, to His faithful
followers and messengers. Then, and not till then, when He reveals His full
majesty by the transfer of these gifts, does He receive the title of ‘ Lord’
from the Evangelist’s own lips. The word, though found not unfrequently in
the reports of speeches in this Gospel, is used twice only in it as an historical
title, and that in these last two verses. The Lord, it is said, after He had
spoken with them, was received up to heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
And they, thus conquered by Him, are no longer faithless, but believing.
Having gained them, He has gained the instrument which He came down to
earth to fashion, the only instrument which in His wisdom He thinks fit to use
in the conversion of the world—the instrument of personal faith begetting faith.
And thus endowed they go forth and preach everywhere, not in their own
strength, but His; for the Lord works ever with them. And as in His own
ministry He has supported and illustrated His teaching with appropriate
miracles and mighty works, so now He confirms their word with signs
following.”

Whatever we may infer from the internal evidence as to the genwineness of
these verses, one conclusion is forced upon us. These verses are certainly
authentic. They have the ring of truth. “This section,” says Dr. Resch,! “is
free from all affectation, and from all legendary colouring—such as, for example,
we meet with in the pseudo-Petrine Gospel. It is rather characterised by a
compendious abruptness, such as shews that the author of it says less than
he knows.” Compare the vague generalities of the alternative ending with
the fulness of independent knowledge shewn in these verses. Although the
statements that the first appearance was to Mary Magdalene and that
she bore the message to the apostles might conceivably be derived from
St. John’s Gospel, and vers. 9 and 12 seem to reflect expressions in St. Luke
(viii. 2, xxiv. 13), yet the section taken as a whole is plainly not the work of
a compiler. It adds to our knowledge by explicit statement and vivid detail.
Here only in the Gospels is it stated that our Lord rose again on the first day
of the week (ver. 9); that the disciples mourned and wept (ver. 10); that they
disbelieved the tidings of Mary Magdalene (ver. 11); that He appeared to the
two in another form (ver. 12); that the disciples again disbelieved the testimony
of the two (ver. 13); that the eleven were at meat when He appeared (observe
the undesigned coincidence with Luke xxiv. 41-43); and that He upbraided
them (ver. 14). The apostolic commission in vers. 15, 16, though resembling
that in Matt. xxviii, 19 in the two points universal mission and the
injunction of baptism, is evidently independent. The promise of signs to
follow believers as such is a new one (cp. Matt. x. 8). And the majestic
closing verses (19 and 20) stand alone in the Gospels in their assertion of the
Lord’s sitting at the right hand of God and His continued working with the
apostles.

Concluding summary.—After this review of the evidence, external and
internal, it may be said by way of summary, that if these verses be from





1 Haepositor, September 1894, p, 228.
644







.
|
.


a me


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. MARK. APPENDIX.


St. Mark’s pen and formed part of his Gospel from the first, it seems very
difficult to account for the multiplication of copies without these verses in
widely separate lands, for the obstinate doubts which clung to them (which
Eusebius states and Jerome repeats), for the existence of an alternative
ending, and lastly for the tradition which ascribes the twelve verses to the
presbyter Ariston. To account for all that by an imagined accident which
may have torn away from some MS. its last leaf, on which just these twelve
verses were written, and so gave rise to a mutilated family of MSS., is to assign
a very inadequate cause. But on the assumption, to which so much of the
evidence points, that these verses are an appendage by another though still
authoritative hand, in the earliest times, all the phenomena may be explained.
St. Mark for some reason left his Gospel unfinished.1_ It may have been, as
Godet thinks,? the breaking out of persecution and the death of St. Peter which
caused the interruption. It was no wonder then that some early disciple should,
it may be by request, complete the unfinished narrative with an account of
the Ascension; so that this Gospel, as it began ‘“‘from the baptism of John,”
should extend to the “day that He was taken up,” and thus correspond to the
requirement of the chief of the apostles (Acts i. 22).


i ee eee ee ee


1 égoBodvro ydp might very well be the end of a sentence or paragraph. Cp. Plato
Protagoras, p. 328, D, where a chapter ends with véou ydp. But Plato did not end a Dialogue
with a particle, nor would St. Mark end his Gospel with one. The reference to Plato is
due to Prof. Marcus Dods in Hzpository Times, March 1894,

2 Studies on NV. T., p. 38.


645





INDEX.


(Notre: H. = Homily; C. = Comment; I. = Illustration.)


ABUSE and use of testimony, C. 46
of ceremonies, C. 257
Acrimony, something better than, C. 346
Action, instant, C. 97
Activity, Christ’s, in doing good, OC. 25
devil's, C. 136
in evil, C. 563
Adulterous generation, C. 308
Advance, gradual, law of, I. 173
Advantage of liturgy in public worship,
H, 412


Advent glory, Christ’s, I. 559
second, C. 480
Sunday discourse, H. 403
Adversaries to Christ, testimony of, C. 440
Afar off, C. 548
Afflicted child, H. 327
Affliction, long, H. 194
producing song, I. 556
Afraid, they were, C. 617
After John comes Christ, I. 52
After-days, fruit in, I. 173
Age, Baptist in advance of his, I. 48
Ages, Christ with His Church throughout,
C. 634
Agony, Christ’s, comfort to us from, ©. 535
in garden, H. 525, 534
of soul, Christ’s, on account of sin,
C. 534
All are sinners, I. 88
love in Christ, I. 125
men not alike, C. 74
seek for Christ, C. 37
nations, house of prayer for, God’s house,
H. 409


to each, C. 122
things possible to God, I. 398
Allegory, veil of, C. 134
All-forsaking spirit and its reward, H. 372
Alternatives, choice of, C. 566
Altogether wrong, I. 395
Ambition, I. 399
a universal fault, C. 338
of clergy, C. 385
synagogue of, I. 467
wrong, is? C. 385
Ambitious person finds nothing difficult, pro-
vided he can but raise himself, C. 385


Amen, I. 640
Amiability among the worldly, I, 396
Analogies between Christ’s body and bread,
H. 522
Andrew, C. 106
Angels and wild beasts, Christ with, H. 20
Anger a bar to forgiveness, C. 424
checks wrong-doing, I. 122
drives away Spirit, C, 424
legitimate, C. 96
Anointing at Bethany, H. 497
of Christ’s body to burying, H. 490
Answer, blind man’s, C. 295
prayer and its, C. 422
Antithesis of heaven and hell, H. 33
Apathy, imprudence better than, C. 47
Apostates, picture of, C. 542
Apostles, H. 103
four kinds of, C. 27
relationships among, C. 104
three chosen, C. 320
three groups of, C. 104
twelve, sending forth of, C. 212
unbelief of, C. 626
Apostleship from discipleship, H. 102
Apostolic age, baptism in, I. 637
sufficiency, Divine source of, C. 473
Apparent discrepancies in narratives, C. 612
Appearance, Christ’s first, after His Resurrec-
tion, H. 617
Approval of Christ, I. 553
Argument, Christ’s, against Sadducees,
H. 441


Arimathza, Joseph of, C. 597
Artistic representations of Baptist, I. 48
As He was wont, I. 394
Ascend, we, with Christ, C. 633
Ascension and co-operation, Christ’s, H. 630
Christ’s, significance of, H. 633
why such slight mention of? C, 633
joy, C. 633
Ashamed of Jesus, on being, C. 308
Aside from multitude, I. 281
Asking a sign, I. 308
Asleep amid storms, O. 163
Christian, I. 487
Aspects, qualities, and relations of kingdom,
distinctive, C. 24


647


INDEX.





Association in work, C. 27

Astray, led, danger of being, C. 473

Atmosphere, right, is wanting, C. 211

Attack, unguarded places most liable to,
1. 559

Attainment, Christian, C. 144

Attention, Divine truth needs, C. 132

Attitudes of men towards Christ, various,
C, 44

Attraction, Christ centre of, I. 55, 86

Audience, authoritative Teacher and His,
H. 32


first addressed by our Lord, C. 23
Authoritative Teacher and His audience,
H. 32
Authority, Christ’s, challenged, H, 424
coinage token of, C. 440
credentials of, C. 214
rejection of, C. 427
teaching with, H. 32
Authorise, God does by no means, every-
thing which He tolerates, C. 356
Avarice, I. 280
Away from Jesus, I. 396
Awfulness of hell, C. 340


BACK, no going, I, 201
Bad deed by good men, H. 543
heart, I. 280
Baptism and cup, C. 385
belief and, C. 628
Christ’s, epoch in His own consciousness,
C.1


bles

Holy Spirit’s, H. 14

in apostolic age, I. 637

infant, C. 359

new birth in, I. 638

of our Lord, H. 17

Holy Ghost at, C. 18

Baptist, artistic representations of I, 48

death and burial of, H. 214

habits of, C. 13

humility of, C. 13

in advance of his age, I. 48

relics of, I. 244

voice of, a voice of severity, C. 11
Baptist’s ministry, character of, C. 12
Bar to forgiveness, anger, C. 424
Barrier, mundane trust, H. 370
Bartholomew, C. 106
Bartimzeus, H. 388
Beauty of early piety, C, 155

of snow, I. 348
Beggar, blind, and multitude, I. 400
Begin with the children, I, 351
Beginning of eternity, C. 193

of gospel, I. 47

only, C. 212

wonderful, C. 9
Beginnings, H. 9

small, much result from, I. 553
Belief and baptism, C, 628

as to future life, effect on character of,

C. 444
God demands, I. 53
in immortality, universal, I. 466


648


Believing prayer, power of, C. 423
Benefit of rest-day, I. 88

of sacrament, I. 555
Best endowment, C. 103
Bethany, anointing at, H. 497
Bethsaida, blind man at, H. 292
Betraying Christ, I. 554
Bias of heart, I. 280
Birth, new, in baptism, I. 638
Blade, ear, and full corn, C. 153
Blandishments, suspicious, C. 440
eer oe Holy Ghost, H. 111, 112;


Blessed, @. "386
by good, I. 395
Blind beggar and multitude, I. 400
man at Bethsaida, H. 292
man’s answer, C. 295
uncomfortable situation of, H. 391
Blinded by self-interest, I. 171
Blindness, wilful, and its retributive judg-
ment, C, 427
Blood of Jesus Christ, C. 523
Bloodshedding as expression of love, I. 555
Board, Christ on, C. 162
Body, Christ’s, anointing of, to burying,
H. 490
unpardonable sin as to, I. 124
Bread and Christ’s body, analogies between,
H. 522
Breeze, rustled by, I. 242
Bride-chamber, children of, H. 71
Bridge, broken, I. 396
Bringing others to Christ, C. 267
Broadcast, sowing, C. 135
Broken bridge, I. 396
Brotherhoods of life, C. 26
Builders rejected, stone which, H. 433;
C. 436
Burdens of humanity, common, Christ
wrought no miracle to relieve Himself
from, C. 34
Burying, anointing of Christ’s body to,
H. 490


Business and religion, I. 465
Busybody, C. 74
By-errands in God’s service, C. 194


CALAMITIES, trials not always, OC. 164
Call and feast of Levi, H. 64; ©. 69, 70
answered, Master’s, H. 25
Christ’s, and man’s response, H. 102
Divine, C. 70; I. 240
gospel, I. 52
of cross, H. 575
Calls, weigh, C. 121
Calling of J: esus, C. 26, 27
of ministers in eee H. 427
Callousness in youth, © 225
Calvary, lessons from, H. 572
or not Calvary ? C. 323
Camel and needle’s eye, C. 371
Camels, rich men like, I. 398
Canaanitish mother, H. 264
Capernaum, sabbath in, H. 27
Captive Christ and circle round Him, H. 538





wd oct Nt i aa meet las apt


ee


— A se!


INDEX.





Care, Christ’s, for His disciples, H. 545
for children, I. 395
for Israel, God’s, C. 433
Carpenter, is not this the? C. 210
Carrying Christ’s cross, C. 586
Case, two views taken of same, ©. 196
Casting-net, I. 53
Casuist, loose, generally wants either know-
ledge or sincerity, C. 356
Catechism, Christ’s, H. 297
Caution, needful, H. 460
Celebrated contribution, H. 460
Centre, Christ the, C, 322
of attraction, Christ, I. 55, 86
Centurion, confession of, H. 582
Ceremonial, hypocritical regard for, I. 278
Ceremonies, abuse of, C. 257
Change of mind and life, repentance im-
plies, I. 49
of national sentiment, I. 598
Changes in life, C. 239
Character and conduct, C. 307
completeness of, in serving God, H. 447
effect on, of belief as to future life, C, 444
of Baptist’s ministry, C. 12
oxe’s, self-deception as to, C. 368
Charity, uncoined, C. 462
universal, motives to, C. 456
Cheer, Christ’s words of, C. 240
Chief concern, soul, 1. 313
Child afflicted, H. 327
little, to receive kingdom as, H. 360
wrong done to, I. 352
Children are specially susceptible of spiritual
influences, H. 359
begin with the, I. 351
care for, I, 395
Church guardian of, C. 339
little, He loved, I. 395
look at, C. 338
of bride-chamber, H. 71
of men, Son of man among, H. 359
welcomed to Christ, H. 357
Childhood, brought to Christ in, I. 394
Christian, C. 360
our model, C. 339
reverence to, I. 350
Choice and commission of twelve, H. 100
of alternatives, C. 566
Choked, Word, C. 136; I. 170
Chosen lake, C. 25
Christ, after John comes, I. 52
all love in, I. 125
all men seek for, C. 37
always better than His word, C. 320
and Gadarenes, H. 177
and His disciples, H. 98
and His enemies, mutual bearing of,
C. 426
and His servants, C. 26
and Pilate, H. 560
and temple authorities, H. 426
approval of, I. 553
as Leader, C. 525; I. 311
as our Guest, prepare for, C, 513
as Pardoner, 1. 86


Christ, as Restorer, C, 234

as Shepherd, H. 524

as Sum of revelation, C. 326

asleep, C. 163

betraying, I. 554

blessing infants, C. 360

bring your wants to, C. 269

bringing others to, C. 267

captive, and circle round Him, H. 53

Centre of attraction, I. 55, 86

children welcomed to, H. 357

choosing, I. 398

Church’s relationship to, H. 121

comes in strength of gentleness, C. 19

communion with, now and _ hereafter,
C. 323

comprehensive views of, I. 309

confessing or denying, C. 307

confession of, I. 314

dead, H. 595

death of, H. 592

discovers not Himself to hypocrites,
C. 428

dishonoured and suffering in His senses,
H. 550

Divinity of, involuntary testimony to,
I. 601


doctrine of, concerning marriage, H. 356

eclipsed, I. 601

entreating, to depart, C. 188

eye of Church fixed on, C. 326

faith in, obedience to God way to, H. 449

following, at cost to self, I. 54

forsaken by His disciples, H. 544

forsaking of, by His Father, C. 591

going before, C. 525

grace of, C. 195

honouring loving service, H. 492

how, contends with unbelief of prejudice,
C. 211

how did, exercise His influence over great
throngs? C. 99

how, must be entertained, C. 406

I an, C. 473

in glory, C. 322

in His little ones, I. 350

in His offices, H. 193

in His prayers, simplicity and plainness
of, C. 538

in storm, C. 165

inspires trust, C. 44

is in house, when, H. 61

is to His Church a Stone, C. 437

joy of working for, I. 486

kinship to, H. 119, 121

large, experienced, I. 310

lived by faith, C. 239

loves virtuous, C. 369

loyalty to, C, 303

manifested as Monarch of all, C. 20

marriage in time of, C. 357

mightier than John Baptist, H. 13

ministering, gifts to, C. 387

misunderstood and misrepresented, H. 107

nearer by removal, C. 99

not hidden from seeking soul, C. 266


649


INDEX. q


Christ, not means, source of healing, C. 295 Christ’s agony in Gethsemane, H, 534


not recognised, C. 240
on board, C, 162
on right hand of God as our Intercessor,
C. 634
our Guide, I. 86
patience of, C, 549
personal faith in, OC, 44
presence of, in Eucharist, H. 520, 521
present pardon for sin taught by, C. 63
rainbow of new covenant, I. 50
rejection of, I. 200
resorting to temple, C, 419
saddened by sight of human misery,
T, 282
safety in, C. 164
where, is, I. 175
seclusion with, C. 230
seen with His fore-announcers, ©. 323
sigh of, infinite meaning of, H. 290
sinners drawn to, I. 87
smitten, example to us, H. 524
Socrates preparing way for, I. 48
sometimes seems to sleep in our hearts,
Th, gf}
sorrow apart from, C. 369
soul’s need met by, C. 63
suffers many things in His Church which
are done without His mission, O, 341
teaching in ship, H. 131
testimony of adversaries to, C. 440
the Centre, C. 322
touching, H. 242
leprosies of humanity, C. 45
treatment due to, from sinners, C. 435
unable to come to, C. 239
unbelief which comes between us and,
C. 212
various attitudes of men towards, C. 44
waiting on, H. 286
walking on sea, H. 236
was intended for whole world, C. 571
watching for, H, 484
we ascend with, C. 633
what has, done for us? C. 189
where, is not, C. 614
why did, leave Tyre and Sidon and go
again to Galilee? H. 276
why, spoke in parables, H. 131
will not fail us in hour of need, C. 288
with His Church throughout ages, C. 634
with wild beasts and angels, H. 20
woman’s devotion to, H. 497
ministry to, C. 593
world’s estimate of, H. 303
reception of, I. 599
wrought no miracle to relieve Himself
from common burdens of human-
ity, C. 34
ye belong to, H. 342
yields, C. 165
zeal in opposing, C. 118
Christ’s actions prove His Divine mission,
I. 123
activity in doing good, C, 25
advent glory, I. 559


650


answer exact echo of request, I. 57
appeal to testimony of Baptist, C. 428
appearance to Mary of Magdala, C. 626
to two disciples, H. 618
argument against Sadducees, H. 441, 443
ascension and co-operation, H. 630
significance of, H. 633
eee towards earthly relationships,
. 198
authority challenged, H. 424
baptism an epoch in His own conscious-
ness, C. 17
body and _ bread,
H. 522
anointing of, to burying, H. 490
call and man’s response, H. 102
care for His disciples, H. 545
for humanity, I. 55
our wants, C. 288
catechism, H. 297
command, C. 47
commission, H. 627
companions in shame, C. 588
compassion, CO. 286
craving for sympathy, C. 535
cross, and ours, H. 300
carrying, C. 586
dealing with His people, C. 267
delicate sensibility, C. 63
departure from Galilee, C. 266
desolation, causes of, C. 590
diligence incentive to us, C. 70
Divinity, prophecy proof of, C. 472
eagerness to reach souls, C, 38
early Galilean preaching, and first dis-
ciples, H. 21
endurance, help from considering, I. 559
feelings, C. 96
first and second commandments, H. 447;


analogies between,


C. 451
appearance after His Resurrection,

H.617
followers drawn by various motives,


C, 232
forbearance to be imitated, OC. 331
freedom in use of means, C. 295
glance, C. 26
habit of prayer, C. 37
healing touch, H. 41; C. 45


helping hand, C. 45 .


humanity, C. 333
independence of thought, C. 32
influence, secret of, I. 636
spread of, C. 634
interview with scribe, H. 445
kingdom, nature of, C. 406
knowledge of His future, I. 350
of human nature, C. 287
life ransom for our life, H. 387
little ones, offending, C. 346
look, C. 96
of love, C. 368
sigh, and word, H. 276
lordship over sabbath, C. 84
manifestation in glory, H. 474


Pi


ee ee


~~


t


7


INDEX.





Christ’s mercy, H, 265
message to sick souls, C. 64
methods in revelation, C. 142
Ministers, sympathy with, H, 341
ministry and self-sacrifice, H. 387
miracles of healing, C. 34
progression in, I. 86
parables, I. 166
popularity with masses, C. 459
power to shape men, I. 54
prayer, C. 239
preparation for ministry, H. 14
for Passover, C. 513
presence cannot be kept secret, I. 85
causes storms, C. 162
in ordinances, H. 285
question, C. 118
questions, C. 303, 338
reception from men, I. 464
reluctance to depart from His plan of
work, C. 268
royal entry into Jerusalem, significance
of, C. 405
search for fruit, I, 429
second coming, I. 485
service, freedom of, C. 84
side, on, C. 341
simplicity in miracle-working, C. 196
teaching, nature of, C, 144
testimony to Himself, C. 549
thought for multitude, C. 132
training, C. 241
Transfiguration, H. 316, 321; I. 348
two wishes, C. 537
use of Decalogue, C. 368 :
victory over feeble-minded
H. 162
vocation, preaching kingdom was, C. 38
voluntary limitation of knowledge,
C. 481
watchword, Repent, I. 52
withdrawal, C. 47
word, power of, C. 406
words of cheer, C. 240
permanence of, H. 481
Christs, false, C. 478, 479
Christian and ecclesiastical vocations, C. 26
asleep, I. 487
attainment, C. 144
care for poor, I. 553
childhood, C. 360
controversy, H. 249
development, C. 76
devotion, law of, C. 499
doctrine, H. 209
endeavour, empty tomb incitement to,
C. 614
fellowship, fundamentals of, H. 304
friendship, H. 213
growth imperceptible, I. 173
liberality, C. 498
life, H, 142
image of, H. 162
Passover, H. 501
preaching, what is? H. 622
privilege and power, H. 103


unbelief,


Christian profession, salt of, H. 343
progress, C. 296
service, Holy Communion most solemn,
H. 520
reward for, C. 342
soldier, spirit of, I. 311
teacher, duties of, H. 158
treatment of enemies, I. 431
of sick, C. 630
usefulness, H. 340
zeal, world’s estimate of, I. 123
Christian’s gain in this world, C. 377
light, I. 171
path, obstacles in, C. 612
Christians are lords of sabbath, C. 85
obscure, C. 106
salt of earth, C. 348
spiritual and worldly vocations of, C. 26
world watches, I. 122
Christianity a living organism, C. 157
cause of division, C. 473
Divine energy of, I. 639
final triumph of, I. 639
nominal, insufficient, C. 628
progress of, I. 639
rise and progress of, C. 156
transforming influence of, I. 200
worth of, Judas evidence to, I. 123
Christless world, C. 188
Church and social questions, C. 233
and State, C. 440
calling of ministers in, H. 427
Christ is to His, a Stone, C. 437
suffers many things in His, which are
done without His mission, C. 341
with His, throughout ages, C. 634
consequences of false conservatism in
the, C. 75
eye of, fixed on Christ, C. 326
guardian of children, C, 339
imperfect, C. 131
in peril, H. 160
mission of—to feed hungry souls, C. 417
ordinances of, I. 202
treasury, H, 461
Church’s duty as to irregular preachers,
C. 340
expansion, I. 175
relationship to Christ, H, 121
Churches, reverence due to, H. 418
Circle round captive Christ, H. 538
Clamour, popular, personal conviction and,
H. 562


Classical parallel, I. 395
Cleansing of temple, H. 418
Clearing of sight, H. 294
Clergy, ambition of, C. 385
Cloth, linen, young man in, H. 540
Cloud, gospel, C. 325
overshadowing, C. 324
Coinage token of authority, OC. 440
Coincidence, striking, I. 309
Cold water, cup of, I. 352
Comfort to us from Christ’s agony, C. 536
zeal and diligence in false worsbip no
ground of, H, 254


651


INDEX,
nn


Command, Christ’s, C. 47
to watch, H. 481
Commanded him to be called, C. 392
Commandments, Christ first and second,
H. 447; C. 451
sufficient, C. 368
Commencements of evil to be rejected,
I, 280
Commendable parts of good pastor, C. 440
Commission, choice and, of twelve, H. 100
Christ’s, H. 627
Common evil, C. 74
life sublime, I. 351
things, God’s voice in, I. 559
idealised, I. 552
power in, C. 214
Communion, Holy, H. 519, 520, 522; 1. 554
in heaven, C. 523
of saints, C. 444
with Christ now and hereafter, C. 323
with God, in, I. 557
leisure for, C. 230
Communities, folly of, I. 201
sins of, C. 187
Companions in shame, Christ’s, C. 588
Companionship, support by, I. 242
twofold earthly, of disciples a foundation
for higher, C. 26
Compassion, Christ’s, C. 286
for needy, I. 308
personal, C. 34
Compassionate Saviour, C. 276
Compensation, law of, C. 144; I. 172
Completeness of character in serving God,
H. 447
Compliance, guilty, C. 226
Comprehensive views of Christ, I. 309
Concealment, reasons for, H. 326
Concupiscence, I. 279
Conditions of effectual prayer, C. 422
of spiritual life, difficult, H. 296
Conduct and character, C. 307
Confessing or denying Christ, C. 307
Confession of centurion, H. 582
of Christ, I. 314
of sin, H. 12
power of, I. 315
Confidence between Master and disciple,
C. 340
filial, I. 430
in prayer, C. 423
Conscience, H. 221
bribed, OC, 221
darkened by sin, C. 226
guilty, I. 243
moving of, H. 515
stings of, I. 243
Consciousness, Christ’s baptism epoch in His
own, C. 17
spiritually disturbed, H. 33
Consecration, Eucharist feast of, I. 555
of Jesus to His suffering and dying, C. 322
of one day in seven, C. 83
to Lord changes man, C, 321
Conservatism, false, consequences of, in the
Church, C. 75


652





Consider your cross, C. 305
Consideration, want of, C. 241
Conspiracy of priests, C. 497
Constancy, I. 484
Constant falls, C. 550
Contact with individual, C. 34
Continental Sunday a failure, C. 83
Contribution, celebrated, H. 460
Contrition, tears of, C. 552
Controversy, Christian, H. 249
Convenient day, C. 224
Conversion, order of, C. 198
Converted seeking to convert others, I. 87
Converts, fishermen make ready, I. 53
revival, C. 136
Conviction, denial in spite of, C. 436
personal, and popular clamour, H. 562
Convince some men, you cannot, C. 289
Co-operation, Christ’s ascension and, H. 630
Corn, growing, parable of, H. 145
Corner, headstone of, I. 465
Corruption, inward, O. 259
Couldest not thou watch one hour? C. 537
Counterfeit, true King and His, H. 560
Counter-question, H. 459
Courage, invincible, I. 399
Course, half a point off, I. 467
Covenant, better, are we pleading ? C. 268
Covetous to last, I. 397
Covetousness, beware of, I. 280
Coward, a, and what became of him, H. 561
Craft, innocence best protection against,
C. 441
Craving, Christ’s, for sympathy, C. 535
Creation, new, first day of, C. 612
Credentials of authority, C. 214
Crisis, hour of, I. 558
in Pilate’s life, C. 567
Cross, call of, H. 575
Christ’s, carrying, C. 586
and ours, H. 300
consider your, C. 305
explains world’s mystery, I. 600
figure of, I. 311
mockers at, H. 589
of Christ the pivot of history, C. 586
one’s, to take up, I. 310
power of, I. 601
predominance of, I. 311
shape of, I. 599 |
Son of God nailed to, H. 573 4
sufforcr’s support, I. 600 :
symbol of, I. 310
title on, H. 576
veiled, 11. 590
way of, C. 381; I. 399
to life, C. 305
Cross-bearing, C. 585
Crowd, importunity of, C. 232
Crowds are not proofs, but means of success,
C. 99
Crown of thorns, H. 571, 572
Crucified Him, when they had, C. 587
Crucifixion, fulfilment of Scripture at, C. 588
women at, C. 593
Crushed by gold, I, 314


ee ee ee ee ee eae Se eee reesss ess


eee





INDEX.





Cry of desertion, C. 591
Culpability of Sanhedrin, C, 549
Cup and baptism, C. 385
of cold water, I. 352
Cured by word, C. 34
Cursing and swearing, Peter, C. 551
of fig tree, C. 417
Custom, sitting at receipt of, H. 69
Cutting off of foot, C. 347
Cyrenian, Simon, H. 584


DAMNED, shall be, C. 629
Danger of being led astray, C. 473
of deception by false Christs, I. 485
of delay, I. 485
of presumption, I. 556
of saint-worship, C. 323
prevented, I. 352
safety amid, C. 629
stern resolution in face of, I. 399
Daughter, Jairus’, H. 190
Day, convenient, C. 224
first, of new creation, C. 612
of manifestation, C. 143
Dead Christ, H. 595
Jesus with, C. 197
Deaf-mute healed, H. 270
Dealings, Christ’s, with His people, C. 267
God’s, C. 145
Death and burial of Baptist, H. 214
as in life, so in, I. 314
Divine estimate of, C. 444
of Christ, H. 592
Rousseau’s testimony to, 1. 602
of Death, I. 601
point of, H. 193
sleep and, I. 203
image of, H. 197 .
Decalogue, Christ’s two commandments and,
C. 451
use of, C. 368
Deception by false Christs, danger of, I. 485
Deed, bad, by good men, H. 543
Defacement of God’s image in man, I. 465
Defile, things that, C. 260
Defilement, heart seat of, C, 258
Delay, danger of, I. 485
Delicate sensibility, Christ’s, C. 63
Deliverance, trial and, work together, H. 162
Deliverer hailed, I. 429
Demand, unreasonable, C. 290
Demoniac greatness, greed in its, H. 500
possession, C. 33
Demoniac’s restoration, I. 200.
Demons, prayer of, C. 186
testimony of, C. 99
Demonstrations, popular, slight value of,
I, 429
Denial in spite of conviction, C. 436
Deny Christ, temptation to, before men,
C. 550
Denying or confessing Christ, C. 307
Depart, entreating Christ to, C. 188
Departing Saviour, H. 620
Departure from Galilee, Christ’s, C. 266
Depth of earth, no, C, 132


Desertion by Father, our Lord’s, H. 579
ery of, C. 591
Desolate places of earth, C, 184
Desolation, Christ’s, causes of, C. 590
Destruction of evil, C. 345
of temple, H. 470
why such? C. 186
Destructive character of sin, I. 200
Detection, love in, C. 195
Deterioration, C. 347
Development, Christian, C. 76
of good and evil, C. 152
Devil’s activity, C. 136
Devotion, Christian, law of, C. 499
of holy women, I. 635
self-sacrificing, I. 600
to Christ, woman’s, H. 497
Devourer of widows’ houses, I. 467
Did many things, C. 223
Different conditions of spiritual life, H. 296
Difficult to explain truth to unspiritual people,
I. 309
Difficulty melting before endeavour, I. 247
of saving work, C. 188
Difficulties, all, surmounted by faithful,
H. 605
and power of faith, H. 328
and weakness of doubt, H. 415
explanation of, to be sought, C. 134
imaginary, I. 635
overcome, I. 635
Dilemma, Herod’s, C. 225
Diligence, Christ’s, incentive to us, C. 70
Directions, particularity in giving, C. 405
Disciple and Master, confidence between,
C. 340
meaning of word, H. 209
true, always knows where to find Master,
C. 37
Disciples by twos, Jesus sends out His,
C. 212
Christ and His, H. 98
forsaken by His, H. 544
Christ’s care for His, H. 545
first, Christ’s early Galilean preaching
and, H. 21
two, Christ’s appearance to, H. 618
twofold earthly companionship of, foun-
dation for higher, C. 26
were poor, 0. 82
words addressed to, H. 304
Disciples’ misconception, C. 291
part, first week of suffering on, C. 320
Discipleship, apostleship from, H. 102
Discrepancies, apparent, in narratives, C. 612
Disease, God is against, I. 54
Disentangled from possessions, C. 371
Disheartening influences, OC, 137
Dissatisfaction with failure a hopeful sign,
C. 333
Distress of sin, C. 195
Divine call, C. 70; I. 242
creation, true preacher, I. 636
energy of Christianity, I. 639
estimate of death, C. 444
forbearance, I. 464


653


INDEX.


a $A


Divine grace, greatness of, C. 70
help, I. 247
mission, Christ’s actions prove His, I. 123
Physician, C. 71
secrets, C. 325
source of apostolic sufficiency, C. 473
support, man’s need of, H. 509
surprises, C. 152
truth needs attention, C. 133
visitation, preparation for, H. 10
Divinity, Christ’s, prophecy proof of, C. 472
of Christ, involuntary testimony to, I. 601
Division, Christianity cause of, C. 473
Doctrine, Vhristian, H. 209
erroneous, like leaven, H. 291
of Christ concerning marriage, H. 356
Dog, feed meas a, I. 281
Dogmatic teaching, C. 46
Doing, waiting is harder duty than, I. 122
Door kept open, I. 168
Double aspect of parables, C. 134
nature, C. 185
Doubt and faith, C. 331
spirit of, is spirit of weakness, C. 422
weakness and difficulties of, H. 415
Dove, Holy Spirit came as, C. 19
Downward path, C. 224
Doxologies to God for mountains, I. 348
Drowning of herd, C, 186
Dulness in spiritual matters, C. 258
Dumb spirit, C. 330
Duty, Herod's, plain, C. 226
of reproving sin, C. 222
of resistance, C. 165
of watchfulness enforced, H. 483
to neighbour, C. 455
Duties of Christian teacher, H. 158
of ministers, C. 230
of pastor, C, 214


EAcn, all to, C. 122
Eagerness to reach souls, Christ’s, C. 38
Kar, and full corn, blade, C. 153
Ears opened before tongue untied, C. 276
to hear, I. 167
Early Christians, loyalty of, to emperor,
C, 441
morning, I. 55
piety, beauty of, C. 155
Earnestness in work, I. 123
of women, C. 611
Earth, desolate places of, C. 184
heaven on, H. 323
no depth of, C, 132
salt of, Christians, C. 348
Earthly companionship of disciples, twofold,
foundation for higher, C, 26
relationships, Christ’s attitude towards,
C. 198
Eastern prisons, I. 51
roads, I, 48
roofs, I. 85
Ecclesiastical,
C. 26
Echo, John Baptist voice, not, C. 10
of request, Christ’s answer exact, I. 57


654


Christian and, vocations,


Economy, wise, I. 245

Effect on character of belief as to future
life, C. 444

Effectual call, Christ’s, I. 87

prayer, conditions of, C. 422

Effurt, persistent, C. 266

Elders, tradition of, C. 256, 257

Eloquent hearing, C. 132

Elias and Moses, why did, appear? H. {22

Elijah and Moses, meeting of Lord with,
H, 322

Emblem of seed for God’s Word, C. 135

Emergency, every, sufficient equipment for,
C. 103

Emperor, loyalty of early Christians to,
C, 441


Empty grave, H. 613, 614
Encouragement for Christian workers,
H. 154
from severe word, C. 268
warning, and promise, H. 471
Endeavour, Christian, empty tomb incite-
ment to, C. 614
difficulty melting before, I. 247
Endowment, best, C. 103
Endurance, I. 484
Enemies, Christ and His, mutual bearing of,
C. 426 :
Christian treatment of, I. 431
friends mistaken for, I. 351
Energy, Divine, of Christianity, I. 639
Enmity, madness of, C. 97
Entertained, how Christ must be, C. 406
Enthusiasm, missionary, I. 637
religious, cannot be detained, I. 349
Entry into Jerusalem, final, H. 402; C. 406
Envy, I. 598
of chief priests, C. 566
Ephphatha, H. 272; I. 282
xl aa sufficient, for every emergency,
. 103
Erroneous doctrine like leaven, H. 291
Error, one, fatal, I. 396
Estimate of death, Divine, C. 444
world’s, of Christ, H. 303
of Christian zeal, I. 123
Eternal life, C. 199
one thing may keep soul from, I. 396
sin, I, 124
Eternity, beginning of, C. 193
mystery of, H. 586
to time, folly of sacrificing, I. 314
Eucharist extension of Incarnation, 0. 522
feast of consecration, I. 555
Holy, H. 502; C. 522
mystery of, C. 521
presence of Christ in, H. 520, 521
prized, I, 555
significance of, C. 521
Evangelical teaching, hardened by, I. 169
Evening, C. 406
Evil, activity in, C. 563
and good, development of, C. 152
commencements of, to be rejected, I. 280
common, C. 74
destruction of, C. 345


pm eae 8


INDEX.





Evil eye, C. 262; I. 280
hardihood of, H. 543
influence of, I. 172
plea of, and its rejection, H. 31
precautions against, C. 347
thoughts, C. 260; I. 280
Exaltation, spiritual, C. 303
Example, spell of, I. 311
Excellence of moral law, H. 446
Excellent question, C. 367
Expansion, Church’s, I. 175
Experience, new, C. 64
Explanation of difficulties to be sought,
C. 134
External preferred, C. 257
reform insufficient, I. 88
Externalism in religion, 1. 278
Hye, evil, C. 262; I. 280
of Church fixed on Christ, C. 326
window of soul, C. 262


FAILURE, dissatisfaction with, a hopeful
sign, C. 333
of scribes as teachers, C. 32
Faith, C. 331
and doubt, C. 331
and fear, C. 163
and omuipotence, I, 202
and repentance, ©. 24
and want not to be silenced, C. 392
can reconcile apparent opposites, C. 459
Christ lived by, C. 239
fluctuations of, I. 349
high in, low in repentance, but, I. 52
imperfect, C. 196
in Christ, obedience to God way to, H. 449
personal, C. 44
in God, C. 422
have, I. 429
in power of truth, I, 174
in supremacy of good, faith in God means,
C. 422
is substance of things hoped for, C. 423
lack of, 1. 349
many mistake feeling for, C. 136
not superstition, but, C. 196
power and difficulties of, H. 328
of, H. 413; I. 86
prayer for, C. 331
qaest of, C. 611
removing mountains, C. 422
responsible for, C. 165
sight not conducive to, C. 590
signs of, H. 624
stages of, I. 430
testing lesson in, C. 616
thy, hath made thee whole, C. 394
various phases of, H. 193
weak, use of, I. 349
Faith’s progress, H. 331
Faithful, all difficulties surmounted by, H. 605
Faithless reproved, H. 165
Fall and recovery of Peter, H. 546
Falls, constant, C. 550
False and true family of Jesus, H. 121
power, I. 396


False Christs, C. 478, 479
danger of deception by, I. 485
conservatism, consequences of, in the
Church, C. 75
estimates of waste, I. 553
prophets, C. 479
witness through misapplicaticn of words,
C. 549
worship, zeal and diligence in, no ground
of comfort, H. 254
Fame, unconscious, C. 462
Family of God, gospel of, C, 121
of Jesus, false and true, H. 121
of love and service, C. 122
visit, C. 120
Fasting, H. 72; I. 350
and prayer, C. 334
right use and end of, C. 74
Fatal, one error, I. 396
Father, forsaking of Christ by His, C. 591
our Lord’s desertion by, H. 579
Fault to be guarded against, C. 47
Fault-finding, C. 256
Fear and faith, C. 163
Feast of consecration, Eucharist, I. 555
Feeble-minded unbelief, Christ’s victory over,
H. 162
Feed me as a dog, I. 281
Feeding of four thousand, H. 283
Feeling, many mistake, for faith, C. 136
no hope for those past, I. 124
towards enemies, Christian, I. 431
Feelings, Christ’s, C. 96
suited to our last sacrament, H. 506
Fell on ground, C. 536
Fellowship, Christian,
H. 304
of penitence, I. 50
Fickleness of popularity, I. 598
Fidelity and watchfulness, C. 483
Fig tree, cursing of, C. 417
withered, C. 421
Figure of cross, I. 311
Filial confidence, I. 480
Final effort, God’s, I. 464
entry into Jerusalem, H. 402
triumph of Christianity, I. 639
Fire, true sacrificial, C. 347
Fires, two, C. 347
Firm basis, obedience has, I, 349
First and last, C. 377
appearance, Christ’s, after His Resurrec-
tion, H. 617
day of new creation, C, 612
disciples, Christ’s early Galilean preach-
ing and, H. 21
preaching of Resurrection, H. 606
week of suffering on disciples’ part,
C. 320
Firstfruits of heathen world, C. 585
Fishermen make ready converts, I. 53
Fishers, ministers are, I. 53
Flowers, fragrant, cannot be concealed,
C. 61
Fluctuations of faith, I. 349
Follow Me, C. 305, 369; I. 87


fundamentals of,


655


INDEX,


a ee ana SRREEEREERDE RING AGRE ERATE EE


Followers, Christ’s, drawn by various motives,
O. 232
Following Christ at cost to self, I 54
in self-denial, I. 311
Jesus fearingly, H. 380
Folly of communities, I. 201
of sacrificing eternity to time, I. 31
Food, injunction as to, C. 198
Foot, cutting off of, C. 347
For My sake, C. 376; I. 399
Forbearance, Christ’s, to be imitated, C. 331
Divine, I. 464
Forbid him not, C. 341
Forbidding, receiving and, H. 336
Force of holy personality, C. 419
Foreannouncers, Christ seen with His, C. 323
Forgetfulness of former mercies, C, 287
Forgive others, God forgives us as we, C. 423
Forgiveness, anger a bar to, C. 424
of sin, C. 63
prayer and, C. 423
Forgiving spirit, necessity of, I. 431
Forgotten promise, C. 615
truth, C. 136
Form and spirit, C. 75
another, C. 626
Formality and indifference, warning against,
> He 290
Former mercies, forgetfulness of, C. 287
Forsaking of Christ by His Father, C. 591
Foundation, sound, for religious belief,
C. 368
Foundations out of sight, C. 239
Four kinds of apostles, C. 27
paralytic borne of, H. 58
thousand, feeding of, H. 283
Fragments, gather up, C. 235
Fragrant flowers cannot be concealed, C. 61
Fraternity, C. 27
Freedom, Christ’s, in use of means, C. 295
of Christ’s service, C. 84
Friends mistaken for enemies, I. 351
opposition from, C. 117
Friendship, Christian, H. 213
Friendship’s shortcomings, H. 118
Frugality, religious, C. 288
Fruit, Christ’s search for, I. 429
in after-days, I. 173
Fruitful, be, C. 189
self-sacrifice, I. 553
warning, C. 478
Fugitive impressions, I. 169
Fulfilment of Scripture
C. 588
Full corn, blade, ear, and, C. 153
Fulness of Scripture, C. 443
Fundamentals of. Christian
H. 304
Future, Christ’s knowledge of His, I. 350
life, effect on character of belief as to,
C. 444
past and, C. 538
punishment, I. 352


at Crucifixion,


fellowship,


GADARENES, Christ rejected by, H. 177, 181
Gain by loss, I, 311


656


Gain, Christian’s, in this world, C. 377
Gained, but not possessed, I. 312
Galilean preaching, Christ’s early, and first
disciples, H. 21
Galilee, Christ’s departure from, C, 266
place of meeting, C. 616
promised meeting in, H. 524
sea of, C. 25, 162; I. 53
why did Christ leave Tyre and Sidon and
go again to? H. 276
Gamester, hardened, I. 599
Garden, agony in, H, 525, 534
of Gethsemane, I. 556
Gather up fragments, C. 235
Generation, adulterous, C. 308
Gennesaret, C. 241
Gentleness, Christ comes in strength of,
Cag
Genuine, seed must be, C. 135
Gethsemane, Christ’s agony in, H. 534
garden of, I. 556
Gift of God, healing art, C. 214
Gifts of poor, I. 468
to ministering Christ, C. 387
Girdle, I. 49
Giver of wealth forgotten, I. 398
Giving away, no loss by, I. 172
rule of, for rich, C. 463
Glance, Christ’s, C. 26
Glastonbury, I. 602
Glory and sufferings intimately connected,
C. 335
Christ in, C. 322
Christ’s manifestation in, H. 474
God’s, veiled in mercy, C. 325
prayer accompanied by, C. 322
Saviour’s, revelation of, C. 184
God, all things possible to, I. 398
Christ on right hand of, as our Interces-
sor, C. 634
communion with, leisure for, C. 230
completeness of character in serving,
H. 447
demands belief, I. 53
does by no means authorise everything
which He tolerates, C. 356
does, harden hearts? I. 168
enriched by man’s devotion, C, 499
faith in, C. 422
forgives us as we forgive others, C, 423
goodness of, H. 362; C. 368
gospel of family of, C. 121
grace of, received in vain, C. 519
hath done all things well, H. 274; OC. 276
have faith in, I. 429 :
healing art gift of, C. 214
in communion with, I. 557
in hand of, C. 198
is against disease, I. 54
kingdom of, H. 23; C. 24, 134, 153, 324
love to, and one’s neighbour, H, 447
loving, with heart, soul, mind, strength,
C, 453, 454
nature leads to, I. 167
obedience to, way to faith in Christ,
H. 449





|
|
|
|


mene se


Phd << =


INDEX.





God often calls men in strange places, I. 86
often last resource of sorrow, C, 194
retirement with, I. 56
seeking to save, I, 202
the Provider, I. 245
unity of, C. 453
welcomes sinners, I. 87
working with man, I. 638
works, as we work, C. 96

God’s care for Israel, C. 433
commandments and human rules, I. 278
dealings, C. 145
final eff rt, I. 464
hands, winds in, I. 175

world in, I. 175
house a house of prayer for all nations,
H. 409
reverence for, H. 408
image stamped on man, I. 465
long-suffering, I. 464
messengers, H. 213
need of all, I. 429
opportunity, man’s extremity, H. 333
sickle, C. 155
truth overcoming human opposition,
C. 436
vineyard, soul, C. 434
voice in common things, I. 559
Word, emblem of seed for, C, 135
work, no waste in, C. 287
order in, C. 234

Godhead, further revelation of, I. 50

Godlike works, I. 55

Going back, no, I. 201

Gold, crushed by, I. 314

Golden hour for prayer and praise, morning

; is, I. 55
Golgotha, C. 586
Good and evil, development of, C. 152
blessed by, I. 395
doing, Christ’s activity in, C. 25
faith in supremacy of, faith in God means,
C. 422

for us to be here, it is, H. 318

how to do, C. 71

life, I. 171

Master, C. 367

men, bad deed by, H. 543

news of pardon, I. 86

pastor, commendable parts of, C. 440

persecution of, H. 222

resolutions, how best to promote accom-
plishment of our, H. 511

reverence for, I. 244

to be with Jesus, C. 323

Goodness of God, H. 362 ; C. 368
sowing seed of, C. 135

Gospel, beginning of, I. 47
call, I. 52
cloud, C. 325
for outcast, I. 281
hearers, qualities to be cultivated by,

C. 132
how, to be propagated, H. 189
kingdom a, O. 23
of family of God, C. 121


UU


Gospel, power of, H. 99
preparation for, H. 6
preservation of, I. 636
responsibility, C, 628
seen, though never heard, I. 47
to be heard, I. 167
triumph of, I. 174
zeal in spreading, I. 201
Government, religion no enemy to, C. 441
Grace, Divine, greatness of, C. 70
means of, C. 195
of Christ, C. 195
of God received in vain, C. 519
sacramental, I. 555
Gradual advance, law of, I. 173
progress towards perfection, C. 153
Grail, Holy, 1. 555
Grain of wheat, Word of life in figure of,
H. 152
Grave, empty, H. 613, 614
Saviour’s, C. 597
Great evil, talkativeness, I. 57
God, little faith in, I. 349
loneliness of, I. 399
men, we must not always follow, C. 256
occasions disclose great qualities, I. 602
refusal, H. 361
temptations, I. 51
things from small, I. 173
Greatness and weakness of man, C. 18
of Divine grace, C. 70
of widow’s gift, H. 461
true, C. 338
Greed in its demoniac greatness, H. 500
Ground, fell on, C. 536
which disappointeth not sower, C. 137
Groups of apostles, three, C. 104
Growing corn, parable of, H. 145
Growth, C. 153
Christian imperceptible, I. 173
in spiritual world, C. 154
of sin, I. 56 i
order of, C, 155
spiritual, H. 148
Guardian of children, Church, C. 339
Guest, Christ as our, preparation for, C. 513
Guidance in religious life, C, 452
Guide, Christ our, 1. 86
Guiding light, C. 143
Guilty compliance, C. 226
conscience, I. 243


Hasit of prayer, Christ’s, C. 37

of uncleanness, inveterate, C, 184
Habits of Baptist, C. 13
Half a point off course, !. 467
Hallel, and Jesus singing, H. 508
Hamlet of New Testament, I. 397
Hand, C. 95

Christ’s helping, C. 45

helping, C. 333

of God, in, C. 198

took him by, H. 383

withered, restored, H. 90
Hands-of God, salvation in, C. 372
Hand-help, I. 57

657


INDEX,





Hard requirement, C. 369
to leave, I. 398
Hardened by evangelical teaching, I. 169
Hardening their hearts, what was? C. 96
Hardihood of evil, H. 548
Hardness of heart, H. 92; C. 241
Harmony restored, I. 54
Harvest lessons, H. 150
Hatred against reprovers, C. 223
He hath done all things well, H. 274; C. 276
He is not here, H. 613
Headstone of corner, L. 465
Healing art, gift of God, C. 214
Christ’s miracles of, C. 34
of leper sign of hope to world, H. 46
outside and inside, C, 269
source of, Christ, not means, C. 295
touch, Christ’s, H. 41; C. 45
Health by obedience, C. 96
Hear Him, H. 325
sermons, how to, H. 139
take heed what ye, C. 143
Heard, gospel seen, though never, I. 47
Hearers, gospel, qualities to be cultivated by,
C. 132


unprofitable, C. 143
three kinds of, I. 169
Hearing, I. 167
eloquent, C. 132
worthless, I. 167
Heart, bad, I. 280
bias of, I. 280
every man porter of his own, CO. 484
hardness of, H. 92; C. 241
King’s image on, C. 440
loving God with, C. 453
propensity of, to self-delusion, C. 222.
rashness of, C. 525
religion in, rise and progress of, C. 151
seat of defilement, C. 258
sin has its source in, I. 279
thankful, C. 189
trodden, I. 169
Hearts and hands, withered, C. 95
Christ sometimes seems to sleep in our,
I. 175
does God harden? I. 168
of men, highways through, C. 11
what was hardening their? C, 96
Heart-defilement, C. 259
Heathen world, firstfruits of, C. 585
Heaven and hell, antithesis of, H. 33
communion in, C. 523
incapacity removed in, I. 281
kingdom of, C. 359
land of living, I. 467
on earth, H. 323
received up into, C. 633
repentance way to, I. 49
Heavenward look, C. 276
Hell and heaven, antithesis of, H. 33
awiulness of, C. 346
in present life, I. 352
Help, Divine, I. 247
from considering Christ’s endurance,
I. 559


658


Helps, hindrances turned into, C. 240
Helping hand, C. 333
Christ’s, C. 45
others, H. 242
Helplessness, man’s, I. 85
Herd, drowning of, C. 186
Heritage, rich, I. 281
Hermon, C. 321
Herod and John Baptist, H. 216; C. 224
religion too costly for, C. 223
Herod’s dilemma, C. 225
duty plain, C. 226
thoughts, I. 243
Heroes and workers, unrecorded, H. 101
Hidden lights, C. 143
things, manifestation of, H. 138.
to be revealed, I. 171
High in faith, low in repentance, but, I. 52
Higher, make for, I. 203
twofold earthly companionship of dis-
ciples, foundation for, C. 26
Highways through hearts of men, C. 11
Hindrance, riches, C. 371
Hindrances turned into helps, C. 240
History of Nazareth, C. 210
pivot of, cross of Christ, C. 586
Hollow profession, C. 96
Holy Communion, most solemn Christian
service, H. 520
Eucharist, H. 502; C. 522
Ghost at baptism of our Lord, C. 18
sin against, H. 109, 111, 112, 114;
C. 118
Grail, I. 555
personality, force of, C. 419
places, traffic in, I. 429
Spirit came as dove, C. 19
Spirit’s baptism, H. 14
women, devotion of, I. 635
Home, C. 188
Honouring parents, I. 279
Honours, no true, are lightly won in either
earth or heaven, C. 385
Hope, no, for those past feeling, I. 124
to world, healing of leper sign of, H. 46
Hopeful sin, dissatisfaction with failure,
C. 333
Hopeless, unpromising, but not, I. 169
Horizons, two, C. 480
Horrors of winter flight, L 485
Hour of crisis, I. 558
of need, Christ will not fail us in, C. 288
of watching, H. 528
House, God’s, reverence for, H. 408


of prayer for all nations, God’s house,’


H. 409
when Christ is in, H. 61
Houses, widows’, devourer of, I. 467
Human claims paramount, I. 245
misery, Christ saddened by sight of,
I, 282
nature, Christ’s knowledge of, C. 287
inherent weakness of, I. 599
opposition, God’s truth overcoming,
C. 436
rules and God’s commandments, I. 278


ee Ae


nape ate


ot


ete ES


an ag


—


a et catia BE


INDEX.





Human societies, shepherd needed in all,
C. 234

Humanity, Christ touching leprosies of,
C. 4


- 45
Christ’s, C. 333
care for, I. 55
common burdens of, Christ wrought no
miracle to relieve Himself from,


C. 34
Humble service, H. 405
Humility, 1. 350
of Baptist, C. 13
Hundredfold now, C. 376
Hungry souls, to feed—mission of Church,
C. 417


Husband and wife, C. 357
Husbandmen and vineyard, H. 432
wicked, C. 434 4
Hymn, power of, I. 556
Hypocrisy, exposed, C. 440
Hypocrites, Christ discovers not Himself to,
©. 428
Hypocritical regard for ceremonial, I. 278


Ir, C. 307

no, in Jesus, I. 57
Ignorant prejudices, I. 242
Image, God’s, stamped on man, I. 465

King’s, on heart, C. 440

of Christian life, H. 162
Imaginary difficulties, I. 635
Imagination, C. 259
Immortality, universal belief in, I. 466
Impedimenta, I. 397
Impediments, I. 243
Imperfect Church, C. 131

aith, C. 196

reformation insufficient, H. 217
Imperishable and perishable, H. 480
Importance of vigilance, L 486
Important rule, H. 258

thing, most, love, I. 467
Importunity of crowd, C. 232
Impotence, man’s, I. 246
Impression, no spiritual, I. 168
Impressions, fugitive, I. 169

good, destroyed, I. 170
Imprudence better than apathy, C. 47
Impulse, H. 544
Inability, royal, I. 244
Incapacity removed in heaven, I. 281
Incarnation, Eucharist extension of, C, 522
Incentives to perseverance, C. 473
Incidental services to men, C. 70
- Increase, law of, H. 287

moral, I. 173
Independence of thought, Christ’s, C. 32
Indestructible Jesus, H. 420
Indifference and formality, warning against,

H. 290

Indiscreet zeal, C. 340
Individual, contact with, C. 34
Individuality, C. 209
Infant baptism, C. 359
Infants, Christ blessing, C. 360
Inferiority to Jesus, John’s, I. 49


Infinite meaning of sigh of Christ, H. 290
Infirmity, sins of, nature and kinds of,
H. 530
Influence, I. 171
Christ’s, spread of, C. 634
of evil, I. 172
secret of Christ’s, I. 636
Influences, disheartening, C. 137
sear ag recollection more needed than,
. 552
Ingratitude, I. 464
Inherent weakness of human nature, I. 599
Inheritance shall be ours, C. 436
Injunction as to food, C. 198
rey best protection against craft,
441


Insecurity of life in unsettled times, I. 463

Inside and outside healing, C. 269

Insight, looking back after, I. 397

Insincerity in worship, H. 253

Instant action, C. 97

Intensity of Jesus, H. 379

Intercessor, Christ on right hand of God as
our, C. 634

Interview, Christ’s, with scribe, H. 445

Invincible courage, I. 399

Involuntary testimony to Divinity of Christ,
I. 601

Inward corruption, C. 259

renewal needed, C. 260

Irony sometimes lawful, C. 257

Irregular preachers, Church’s duty as to,
C. 340


Irreverence, rebuke of, I. 429
Isit1? H. 516; I. 554
Israel, God’s care for, C. 433


JArIRvS’ daughter, H. 190
James and John, C. 105
request of, H. 383
son of Alpheus, C. 106
Jerusalem, final entry into, H. 402; C. 405
on way to, H. 377; C. 381
Jesus and John Baptist, H. 26
ashamed of, on being, C. 308
away from, I. 396
before Sanhedrin, H. 545
Christ, blood of, C. 523
popular teachings of, H. 126
calling of, C. 26, 27
consecration of, to His suffering and
: dying, C. 322
delivered to Pilate, C. 564
did not court martyrdom, C. 99
empty tomb of, C. 614
false and true family of, H. 121
following, C. 394
fearingly, H. 380
gives demons leave, C. 186
good to be with, C. 323
he came to, I. 400
in Phoenicia, C. 266
in request, H. 36
indestructible, H. 420
intensity of, H. 379
John’s inferiority to, I. 49


659


INDEX.


aN


Jesus, no “if” in, I. 57
of Nazareth—the name, ©, 33
only, H. 326; I. 349
our King, H. 577
parables of, I. 166
representative man, C. 20
silence of, C. 564
singing, Hallel and, H. 508; C. 523
testimony to, I. 201


walked on the sea, direction of wind


when, J. 245
was tempted, H. 19
with dead, C. 197
wonders, C. 211
Jew, wealthy, tomb of, C. 613
Jews, King of, C. 588
John Baptist and Herod, H. 216; C. 224
Christ mightier than, H. 13
Jesus and, H. 26
model prophet and ambassador, I. 48
voice, not echo, C. 10
John, after, comes Christ, I. 52
John’s inferiority to Jesus, I. 49
mission fulfilled, C. 226
John and James, ©. 105
request of, H. 383
Jordan, C. 17
Joseph of Arimathza, C. 597
Journey of women, H. 612
Joy, ascension, C. 633
of wicked, C. 500
of working for Christ, I. 486
Judas Iscariot, H. 493 |
among twelve, C. 107
evidence to worth of Christianity, I, 123
picture of, I. 554
who are like, to-day? C. 542
Judgment of world, C. 221
retributive, wilful blindness and _ its,
C. 427


Kay of day and lock of night, prayer should
be, I. 56
Kindred, Christ’s outside, C. 120, 121
Kinds and nature of sins of infirmity,
H. 530
King, Jesus our, H. 577
of Jews, C. 588
true, and His counterfeit, H. 560
Kingdom a gospel, C. 23
Christ’s, nature of, C. 406
distinctive qualities, aspects, and relations
of, C. 24
of God, H. 23; C. 153
mystery of, C. 134
requirements of, C. 24
there are mountains in, OC. 324
of heaven, C, 359
not far from, H. 457
preaching of, was
C. 38
to receive, as little child, H. 360
King’s image on heart, C. 440
Kings, testimony before, I. 244
Kingship, avowal and description of, C, 564
Kinship to Christ, H. 119


660


Christ’s vocation,


Kiss of treachery, C. 542


Knowledge, Christ’s voluntary limitation of,


C. 481
or sincerity, loose casuist generally wants
either, C. 356


| LABOUR and patience, I, 244


does, block way to manhood? H. 205
Lack of faith, I. 349
Lake, chosen, OC. 25
storm on, H. 159
Land of living, heaven, I. 467
Last, first and, C. 377
Large Christ experienced, I. 310
Law of Christian devotion, C. 499
of compensation, C. 144; I. 172
of gradual advance, I. 173
of increase, H. 287
of life, world as, C. 307
of service, I. 400
Laws of nature, prayer and, I. 430
Leader, Christ as, C. 525; I. 311
Leadings, providential, C. 585
Leaven, H. 291
erroneous doctrine like, H. 293
Left ear, best to have no, I. 167
not much, I. 314
Legend of Ninus, I. 313
Legion, C. 185, 186
Legitimate anger, C. 96
Leisure for communion with God, C. 230
no, I. 244
use of, H. 230
Length, prayers judged by weight, not, I. 468
Lenten retirement, H. 229
Leper, ae of, sign of hope to world,
H. 4


Leprosy, C. "a: I. 56
Leprosies of humanity, Christ touching, C. 45
of modern society, C. 46
Lessons, harvest, H. 150
Levi—Matthew, C. 69
call and feast of, H. 64; C. 69, 70
Liberality, Christian, C. 498
must correspond with means, I. 468
Life and mind, change of, repentance implies,
I. 49
as in, so in death, I. 314
as service, I. 399
brotherhoods of, C. 26
changes in, ©. 239
Christian, H. 142
cross way to, ©. 305
eternal, C. 199
good, I. 171
insecurity of, in unsettled times, I. 463
new, threefold mark of, H. 75
of religion, CO. 304
our, Christ’s life ransom for, H. 387
penances of, H. 60
test of relationship is, I. 126
this, time for work, I. 486
two aspects of, I. 246
Life’s storms, suddenness of, C. 162
Lifelong repentance, Peter’s, 0. 652
Light, Christian’s, I. 171


INDEX,








Light, guiding, C. 143
revealing, I, 313
Lights, hidden, C. 143
fea knowledge, Christ’s voluntary,
. 481
Limitations of mercy, C. 269
of our Lord’s manhood, H. 476
Linen cloth, young man in, H. 540
Lines, reading between, C, 268
Lip-service, I. 278
Little faith in great God, IL. 349
much lost for, I. 314
ones, Christ in His, I. 350
Christ’s, offending, C. 346
mia in public worship, advantage of,
. 412


Living, land of, heaven, I. 467
organism, Christianity, C. 157
show love to, I. 553
Lock of night and key of day, prayer should
be, 1. 56
Loneliness of the great, I. 399
Long affliction, H. 194
Long-suffering, God’s, I. 464
Look at children, C, 338
Christ’s, C. 96
heavenward, C. 276
of love, Christ’s, C. 368
sigh, and word, Christ’s, H. 276
Looking back after insight, I. 397
Loose casuist generally wants either know-
ledge or sincerity, C. 356
Lord, audience first addressed by our, C. 23
baptism of our, H. 17
consecration to, changes man, C. 321
hath need of him, C. 405
Holy Ghost at baptism of our, C. 18
nature’s sympathy with her, I. 601
sabbath and its, H. 76
tell what, hath done for thee, I. 201
touching the, H. 238
working with them, I. 638
Lord’s day and sabbath, H. 78
deep sigh, H. 290
desertion by Father, our, H, 579
doings, C. 189
pathway, C. 11
question concerning Messiah, H. 458
temptation, three prominent points in
our, C. 20
Lords of sabbath, Christians are, C. 85
Lordship over sabbath, Christ’s, C. 84
Loss, gain by, I. 311
no, by giving away, I. 172
of soul, H. 301
service no, I. 172
Lost, I. 312
Love and service, family of, C. 122
best motive for work, C. 498
bloodshedding as expression of, I. 555
Christ’s look of, C. 368
in detection, C. 195
most important thing, I. 467
never retreats, I. 635
of God, in, ample room, C. 268
show, to living, I. 553


Love to God, and one’s neighbour, H. 447


Loving God with heart, soul, mind, strength,
CO. 453, 454
neighbour as self, I. 467
service, Christ honouring, H. 492
Low in repentance, but high in faith, L 52
maine a early Christians to emperor,


to Christ, C. 303


MADNESS of enmity, C. 97
of sin, C. 185
Magdala, Mary of, Christ’s appearance to,
C. 626


Magdalene, Mary, first to, C. 626
Maintenance for ministers, C. 213
Man and tree, H. 296
consecration to Lord changes, C. 321
God working with, I. 638
God’s image stamped on, I. 465
greatness and weakness of, C. 184
in ruins, I. 199
Jesus, representative, C. 20
sabbath was made for, C. 82
salvation of, depends upon his subjection
to rule of God, I. 52
Son of, C. 84
what manner of, is this? C. 166; I. 175
Man’s devotion, God enriched by, C. 499
extremity, God’s opportunity, H. 333
helplessness, I. 85
impotence, I. 246
need of Divine support, H. 509
response, Christ’s call and, H. 102
Manhood, does labour block way to? H. 205
our Lord’s, limitations of, H. 476
Manifest, Christ’s presence, I. 85
Manifestation, Christ’s, in glory, H. 474
day of, C. 143
of hidden things, H. 138
Mark’s Gospel, author, 1
characteristics, 4
date and place of publication, 3
Appendix (ch. xvi. 9—20), 641
Marriage, H. 354; C. 356
doctrine of Christ concerning, H. 356
in time of Christ, C. 357
Marriage-bond, C. 357
Martyrdom, Jesus did not court, C. 99
Marvelling, C. 189
Mary of Magdala, Christ’s appearance to,
C. 626
Masses, Christ’s popularity with, C. 459
Master and disciple, confidence between,
C. 340
good, C. 367
rejected ; servants sent forth, H. 204
true disciple always knows where to
find, C. 37
Mastevr’s call answered, H. 25
Matthew, C. 106
Levi, C. 69
Matthew’s example, I. 123
Maturity, quick, O. 136
Meaning, infinite, of sigh of Christ, H. 290
Means, Christ’s freedom in use of, C. 295


661


INDEX.


Means, liberality must correspond with,
I. 468


Measure, with what, ye mete, C. 144
Meeting, Galilee place of, C. 616
in Galilee, promised, H. 524
Men, Christ’s power to shape, I. 54
Christ’s reception from, I. 464
fishers of, I. 53
good, bad deed by, H. 543
hearts of, highways through, C. 11
incidental services to, C. 70
Satan hinders, C. 136
temptation to deny Christ before, C. 550
tradition of, H. 249
truth divides, C. 421
various attitudes of, towards Christ, C. 44
Mention, why such slight, of Christ’s ascen-
sion? C, 633
Mercy, Christ’s, H. 265
God’s glory veiled in, C. 325
limitations of, C. 269
Mercies, forgetfulness of former, C. 287
Message and reception, rite, H. 11
Christ’s, to sick souls, C. 64
more than messenger, C. 211
of Resurrection, H. 608
startling, I. 49
to Peter, H. 615
Messengers, God’s, H. 213
Messiah, our Lord’s question concerning,
H, 458
Mighty calling of Lord, C. 26
Mind and life, change of, repentance implies,
TI. 49
loving God with, C. 453
Ministering Christ, gifts to, C. 387
throne for, I. 400
Ministers are fishers, I, 53
Christ’s, sympathy with, H. 341
duties of, C. 230
in Church, calling of, H. 427
maintenance for, C. 213
ostentation to be avoided by, H. 276
Ministry and self-sacrifice, Christ’s, H. 387
Baptist’s, character of, C. 12
Christ’s preparation for, H. 14
woman’s, to Christ, C. 593
Miracle, Christ wrought no, to relieve Him-
self from common burdens of hu-
manity, C. 34
parable in, H. 38
symbolic teaching of, C. 45
Miracles, C, 214
Christ’s, progression in, I. 86
not necessarily convincing, C. 187
of healing, Christ’s, C. 34
three, H. 99
Miracle-working, Christ’s simplicity in, C. 196
Miraculous, view of, C. 296
Mirror, nature a, I, 167
Misapplication of words,
through, C. 549
Misconception, disciples’, C. 291
silence under, C. 565
Misery, human, Christ saddened by sight of,
I, 282


false witness


662


Misrepresented and misunderstood, Christ, —


H. 107 :
Mission, Divine, Christ’s actions prove His,
I. 123


of Church—to feed hungry souls, C. 417
of Son, C. 435
Missionary enthusiasm, I. 637
trials and reward of, H. 375
zeal, I. 637
Mistaken self-complacency, I. 556
zeal, I. 558
Misunderstood and misrepresented, Christ,
_ H. 107
Mites, widow’s, I. 468
Mockers at cross, H. 589
Mockery of soldiers, lessons from, H. 570;
I. 599
truth in, H. 589
Model, childhood our, C. 339
prayer, C. 163 ;
prophet and ambassador, John Baptist,
I. 48
Modern society, leprosies of, C, 46
Monarch of all, Christ manifested as, C. 20
Money, C. 370
Moral increase, I. 173
law, excellence of, H. 446
paralysis, I. 85
purification, symbol of, C. 13
Morning, early, I. 55
is golden hour for prayer and praise, I. 55
praises, I. 55
Moses and Elias, why did, appear? H. 322
and Elijah, meeting of Lord with, H. 322
Mother, Canaanitish, H. 264 ’
Motive for work, love best, C. 498
Motives, Christ’s followers drawn by various,
C. 232
to universal charity, C. 456
Mountain, this, I. 430
Mountains, C. 321
doxologies to God for, I. 348
faith removing, C. 422
in kingdom of God, there are, C. 324
Moving of conscience, H. 515
Much result from small beginnings, I. 553
lost for little, I. 314
Multitude, aside from, I. 281
blind beggar and, I. 400
Christ’s thought for, C. 132
fed, H. 231
sympathy with, I. 245
Mundane trust a barrier, H. 370
Mutual bearing of Christ and His enemies,
C. 426
relations of prayer and work, H 35
service, C. 386
sympathy, I. 557
Myrrh, wine mingled with, C. 587
Mystery of eternity, H. 586
of Eucharist, O. 521
of kingdom of God, C. 134
world’s, cross explains, I. 600
Mystical sense of healing of paralytic, C. 61


NAMB, in My, C. 339





INDEX.





Narratives, apparent discrepancies in, C. 612
National sentiment, change of, I 598
Nations, words applicable to, C. 628
Nature a mirror, IL. 167
a print of God, I. 167
and kinds of sins of infirmity, H. 530
double, C, 185
God’s control of, I. 430
human, Christ’s knowledge of, C. 287
laws of, prayer and, I. 430
leads to God, I. 167
of Christ’s kingdom, C. 406
spirit in which to study, I. 166
what we can see in, I. 167
Nature’s sympathy with her Lord, I. 601
testimony to Resurrection, I. 636
Nazarenes, offence of, C. 210
Nazareth, history of, C. 210
Jesus oi—the name, C. 33
Nearer by removal, Christ, C. 99
Nearness not possession, H. 457
Necessity of forgiving spirit, I. 431
of self-denial, H. 297
Need, hour of, Christ will not fail us in,
C. 288
of all, God’s, I. 429
of our time is for voices, C. 10
of Spirit, I. 50
Needed ransom, C. 388
Needful caution, H. 460
Needle’s eye, camel and, C. 371
Needy, compassion for, I. 308
Neglect not signs already given, C. 289
Negligence and remissness, C. 484
Neighbour, duty to, C. 455
love to God and one’s, H. 447
loving, as self, I. 467
New birth in baptism, I. 638
covenant, Christ rainbow of, I. 50
creation, first day of, C. 612
experience, C. 64
life, threefold mark of, H. 75
Passover, C. 523
Testament, Hamlet of, I. 397
News, question of propriety as to quality
and time of, C. 514
Ninus, legend of, I. 313
Nobleness, recognising, C. 592
Nominal Christians, confession of Christ
unknown to, J. 315
Christianity insufficient, C. 628
Nourishment, spiritual, 1 554


OBEDIENCE has firm basis, I. 349
health by, C. 96
learnt by suffering, C. 537
to God way to faith in Christ, H. 449
Obscure Christians, C. 106
Obstacles in Christian’s path, C. 612
Occasions, great, disclose great qualities,
I. 602
Offence of Nazarenes, C. 210
Offences, H. 342
Offended in Him, H. 207
Omnipotence, faith and, I. 202
One day in seven, consecration of, C. 83


One error fatal, I. 396
flesh, they twain shall be, I. 394
thing soe keep soul from eternal life,
I. 396


needful, I. 396

Open, door kept, I. 168

Opportunities, I. 56

ee, Aye faith can reconcile,
“C. 458


Opposition from friends, C. 117
Ordinances, Christ’s presence in, H. 285
of Church, I. 202
Order in God’s work, C. 234
of conversion, C. 198
of growth, C. 155


| Ordinary course, works out of, C. 235


Organism, living, Christianity, C. 157

Origin of sin, I. 279

Ostentation to be avoided by ministers,
H. 276

Other side, unto the, H. 161

Outcast, gospel for, I. 281

Outside and inside healing, C. 269

Outsiders, parables necessary for, C. 133

Overshadowing cloud, C. 324


Pasy,,C. 61
Parable in miracle, H. 38
mode of conveying truth, I. 167
of growing corn, H. 145
of promise, C. 158
of sower, H. 128; C. 132
Parables, Christ’s, I. 166
double aspect of, C. 134
necessary for outsiders, C. 133
rules for interpretation of, H. 131
why Christ spoke in, H. 131
Paralysis, moral, I. 85
of soul, I. 124
Paralytic borne of four, H. 58
mystical sense of healing of, C. 61
Pardon for sin, present, taught by Christ,
C. 63
good news of, I. 86
Pardoner, Christ, I. 86
Parents, honouring, I. 279
Particularity in giving directions, 0. 405
Parting of the ways, H. 566
Partners, no silent, I. 315
Passover, Christian, H. 501
Christ’s preparation for, C. 513
new, C. 523
Past and future, C. 538
Pastor, duties of, C. 214
good, commendable parts of, C. 440
true, is never weary of instructing his
people, C. 356
Path, Christian’s, obstacles in, C. 612
downward, O. 224
Pathway, Lord’s, C. 11
Patience and labour, I. 244
of Christ, C. 549
or severity? C. 213
Peace, salt and, I. 352
without from purity within, C. 348
Penal element in punishment, I. 124


663


INDEX.


ce


Penances of life, H. 60
Penitence, fellowship of, 1. 50
thought leading to, H. 551
People, Christ’s dealings with His, C. 267
Perfection, gradual progress towards, C. 153
Performance, pretension and, H. 416
Peril, Church in, H. 160
of property, I. 397
of riches, 1. 398
Periods of repose, I. 245
Perishable and imperishable, H. 480
Permanence of Christ’s words, H. 481
Persecution of good, H. 222
trial to perseverance, OC. 474
Perseverance, I. 484
incentives to, C. 473
rewarded, C. 269
Persistent effort, C. 266
Personal compassion, C, 34
conviction and popular clamour, H. 562
faith in Christ, C. 44
religious character, teaching enforced by,
C. 32
Personality, holy, force of, C. 419
Peter cursing and swearing, C. 551
discovered, C. 550
good intention and error of, C. 323
message to, H, 615
Peter’s case no exceptional one, CO. 551
fall and recovery, H. 546
lifelong repentance, C. 552
reply, H. 303
Petition of Zebedee’s sons, H. 381
Phases of faith, various, H. 193
Philip, C. 106
Pheenicia, Jesus in, C. 266
Physician, Divine, C. 71
Picture of apostates, C. 542
Piety, early, beauty of, C. 155
Pilate and Christ, H. 560
why was Jesus taken to? C. 564
Pilate’s life, crisis in, C. 567
tragedy of, C. 566
weakness, C. 567
Pious women visiting sepulchre, H, 603
Pivot of history, cross of Christ, C. 586
Place where they laid Him, C. 614
Plainness and simplicity of Christ in His
prayers, C. 538
Plan of work, Christ’s reluctance to depart
from His, C. 268
Plea of evil, and its rejection, H. 31
Pleading better covenant, are we? C. 268
Point of death, H. 193
Pollution, unclean spirit essence of, I. 54
Poor always with us, C. 500
Christian care for, I. 553
disciples were, C. 82
gifts of, 1. 468
treatment of, I. 400
Popular clamour, personal conviction and,
62


demonstration, slight value of, I, 429
teaching of Jesus Christ, H. 126

Popularity, Christ’s, with masses, C. 459
fickleness of, I. 598


664


Porter, every man, of his own heart, C,
484


Possessed, gained, but not, I. 312
Possession, demoniac, C. 33
nearness not, H. 457
Possessions, disentangled from, C. 371
Post, each at his, I. 486
Poverty, problem of, and how to deal with
it, H. 500
Power and difficulties of faith, H. 328
and privilege, Christian, H. 103
in common things, C. 214
of believing prayer, C. 423
of Christ to shape men, I. 54
of Christ’s word, C. 406
of confession, I. 315
of cross, I. 601
of faith, H. 413; I. 86
of gospel, H. 99
of hymn, I. 556
of prayer, C. 334
of self-denial, I. 49
of sleep, I. 558
of truth, faith in, I. 174
of usefulness destroyed, C. 95
of Word, I. 638
promise of, H. 629
supernatural, source of, C. 421
true and false, I. 396
Powers, three determined and most mis-
chievous, working of, C. 97
Praises, morning, I. 55
Pray, watch and, H. 483; I. 485
Prayer, I. 349
accompanied by glory, C. 322
and fasting, C. 334
and forgiveness, C. 423
and its answer, C. 422
and laws of nature, I. 430
and work, mutual relations of, H. 35
before work, C. 37
Christ’s, C. 239
habit of, C. 37
confidence in, C. 423
for faith, C. 331
for others, C. 267
house of, for all nations, God’s house,
H. 409
model, C. 163
of demons, C. 186
power of, C. 334
retirement for, C. 533
secret, C. 536
ea as Kl of day and lock of night,
watching and, C. 538; I. 557
Prayers, Christ in His, simplicity and plain-
ness of, C. 588
judged by weight, not length, I. 468
two, H. 182
Preach, how to, I. 636
Preacher, good, qualifications of, I. 123
true, Divine creation, L 636
Preachers, lessons for, H. 354
Preaching, I. 123
Christ everywhere, I. 636


a ee ee


—


INDEX.


Sanne ncn nnn EET


Preaching, Christ’s early Galilean, and first
disciples, H. 21
Christian, what is? H. 622
first, of Resurrection, H. 606
of kingdom was Christ’s vocation, C. 38
Precautions against evil, C. 347
Prediction of sufferings, more explicit,
H. 334
Predominance of cross, I. 311
Preferment and rule, service road to, C. 338
Prejudice, how Christ contends with un-
belief of, C. 211
religious, I. 87
Prejudices, ignorant, I. 242
Preparation for Christ as our Guest, C. 513
for Divine visitation, H. 10
for gospel, H. 6
for ministry, Christ’s, H. 14
times of, seasons of trial, H. 593
Presence, Christ’s, causes storms, C. 162
in ordinances, H. 285
manifest, I, 85
of Christ in Eucharist, H. 520, 521
Present life, hell in, I. 352
pardon for sin taught by Christ, C. 63
Preservation of gospel, I. 636
Presumption, danger of, I. 556
Pretension and performance, H. 416
Priests, chief, envy of, C. 566
conspiracy of, C. 497
Principle, great, vindicated, C. 419
of scramble, C. 386
Print of God, nature a, I. 167
Prisons, Hastern, 1. 51
Privilege and power, Christian, H. 103
Privileges, temptation following on, I. 51
Problem of poverty, and how to deal with it,
H. 500
Procession, triumphal, I. 429
Profession, Christian, salt of, H. 343
hollow, C. 96
Profusion is not necessarily waste, C. 498
Progress, Christian, C. 296
faith’s, H. 331
gradual, towards perfection, C. 153
how, is possible, H. 139
of Christianity, I. 639
rise and, of Christianity, H. 156
Progression in Christ’s miracles, I. 86
Promise, forgotten, C. 615
of power, H. 629
of uscfulness, C. 630
parable of, C. 158
warning, and encouragement, H. 471
Promised meeting in Galilee, H. 524
Proof of Christ’s Divinity, prophecy, C. 472
Propagated, bow gospel to be, H. 189
Propensity of heart to self-delusion, 0. 222
Property, peril of, I. 397
Prophecy proof of Christ’s Divinity, C. 472
Prophet, C. 428
Prophets, false, ©, 479
Propriety, question of, as to quality and
time of news, C. 514
Providential leadings, C. 585
Provider, God the, I. 245


Public worship, advantage of liturgy in,
H. 412
Publicity, strain of constant, C. 117
Punishment, future, J. 352
penal element in, I. 124
Punishments proportionable to sins, H. 208
Pure, treasure only for, I. 172
Purification, moral, symbol of, C. 13
Purity within, peace without from, C, 348


QUALIFICATIONS of good preacher, I. 123
Qualities, aspects, and relations of kingdom,
distinctive, C. 24
great occasions disclose great, I. 602
to be cultivated by gospel hearers, C. 132
Quarantania, I. 50
Quest of faith, C. 611
Question as to tribute money, H. 437
Christ's, C. 118
excellent, C. 367
our Lord’s, concerning Messiah, H. 458
scribe’s, C. 451
Questions, Christ’s, C. 303, 338
Quick maturity, C. 136


RABBINICAL washings, ©. 256
Raiment, stripped of His, I. 599
Rainbow of new covenant, Christ, I. 50
Ransom for our life, Christ’s life, H. 387
needed, C. 388
paid for all, C. 388
Rashness of heart, C. 525
Reading between lines, C. 268 .
superficial, prejudicial, C. 82 °
Reasons for concealment, H. 326
for sabbath observance, C. 83
for silence, I. 326
for watchfulness, H. 484
Rebuke of irreverence, I. 429
Receiveth Me, C. 809
Receiving and forbidding, H. 336
Reception, Christ’s, from men, I. 464
of Christ, world’s, I. 599
Receptiveness, I. 171
Recollection more needed than information,
C. 552,
Recovery, fail and, of Peter, H. 546
Reform, external, insufficient, I. 88
Reformation, imperfect, insufficient, H. 217
Reformed character, C. 187
Refuge from storm, no, He TS)
Refusal, great, H. 361
Regard for ceremonial, hypocritical, I. 278
Rejection of authority, C. 427
of Christ, I. 200
of plea of evil, H. 31
Relations of prayer and work, mutual, H. 35
qualities, and aspects of kingdom, dis-
tinctive, C. 24
Relationship, test of, is life, I. 125
to Christ, Church’s, H. 121
Relationships among apostles, C. 104
earthly, Christ’s attitude towards, C. 198
Relics of Baptist, 1. 244
Religion and business, I. 465
externalism in, I. 278


665


INDEX,





Religion in heart, rise and progress of, C, 151
life of, C. 304
no enemy to government, C. 441
too costly for Herod, C, 223
true, C. 452
Religious belief, sound foundation for, C. 368
character, personal, teaching enforced by,
C. 32
enthusiasm cannot be detained, I. 349
frugality, C. 288
life, guidance in, C. 452
prejudice, I. 87
Remissness and negligence, C. 484
Remorse, worm of, C. 347
Removal, Christ nearer by, C. 99
Renewal, inward, needed, C. 260
Rent veil, H. 581; C. 592
Renunciation, C. 392
total, I. 395
Repent, Christ’s watchword, I. 52
Repentance, C. 11
and faith, C. 24
implies change of mind and life, I. 49
low in, but high in faith, I. 52
Peter’s lifelong, C. 552
soul incapacitated for, C. 119
the longer delayed, the harder it becomes,
I. 52
true, H. 213
twofold aspect of, I. 48
way to heaven, I. 49
Reply, Christ’s, to Sadducees, H. 443
Peter’s, H. 303
Repose, periods of, I. 245
Representative man, Jesus, C. 20
Reproof should be welcomed, C. 437
_ Reprovers, hatred against, C. 223
' Reproving sin, duty of, C. 222
Request, Christ’s answer exact echo of, I. 57
Jesus in, H. 36
of James and John, H. 383
Requirement, hard, C. 369
Requirements of kingdom of God, C. 24
Resignation to will of God, I. 557
Resistance, duty of, C. 165
Resolution, stern, in face of danger, I. 399
Resolutions, our good, how best to promote
accomplishment of, H. 511
Response, man’s, Christ’s call and, H. 102
Responsibility, I. 465
gospel, C. 628
Responsible for faith, C. 165
Rest after work, H, 227
for a while only, C. 230
Rest-day, benefit of, I, 88
Restoration, demoniac’s, I. 200
of sight, C. 296
Restored harmony, I. 54
Restorer, Christ as, C, 234
Resurrection, Christ’s first appearance after
His, H. 617
first preaching of, H. 606
message of, H. 608
nature’s testimony to, I. 636
Retirement for prayer, C. 533
from world, 0.47


666


Retirement, Lenten, H. 229
with God, I. 56
Retreats, love never, I. 635
Retributive judgment, wilful blindness and
its, C. 427
Revealed, hidden to be, I, 171
Revealing light, I. 313
Revelation, Christ Sum of, C, 326
Christ’s methods in, C. 142
of Godhead, further, I. 50
Reverence due to churches, H. 418
for God’s house, H. 408
for good, I. 244
to childhood, I. 350
Revival converts, C. 136
Reward, ail- -forsaking spirit and its, H. 372
for Christian service, C. 342
of self-sacrifice, I. 311
trials and, of missionary, H. 375
Rich heritage, I. 281
men like camels, I. 398
rule of siving for, C. 463
young ruler, H. 360
Riches a hindrance, C. 371
peril of, I. 398
weight of, I. 397
Right band of God, Christ on, as our Inter-
cessor, C. 634
use and end of fasting, C. 74
Righteous, not, but sinners, H. 67
who are the? C. 70
Rise and progress of Christianity, H. 156
of religion in heart, C. 151
Rite, message, yand reception, H. il
Roads, Eastern, I. 48
Roofs, Eastern, I. 85
Room, ample, in love of God, C. 268
Root, no, C. 136
want of, I. 170
Rousseau’s testimony to death of Christ,
I. 602
Routine service, I. 278
Royal entry into Jerusalem, Christ’s, signi-
ficance of, C. 405
inability, I. 244
Ruins, man in, I. 199
Rule and preferment, service road to, C. 338
important, H. 258
Ruler of storm, C. 166
rich young, H. 360





SABBATH and its Lord, H. 76

and Lord’s day, H. 78

Christ’s lordship over, C. 84

Christians are lords of, C. 85

in Capernaum, H. 27

observance, reasons for, O. 83

was made for man, CO. 82
Sacrament, benefit of, I. 555

our last, feelings suited to, H. 506
Sacramental grace, I, 555
Sacrifice and service, C, 387 :

of all, C. 376 ‘

to save, I. 600 4
Sacrificial fire, true, C. 347 ¥
Sad, C. 369 ?


INDEX


we ——


Sadducees, Christ’s
H, 441, 443
Safety amid danger, C. 629
in Christ, C. 164
where Christ is, I. 175
Sailors, thought for, I. 247
Saints, communion of, C. 444
Saint-worship, danger of, C. 323
Salt and peace, I. 352
losing its savour, I. 352
of Christian profession, H. 343
of earth, Christians, C. 348
Saltless salt, C. 347
Salvation in hands of God, C, 372
of man depends upon his subjection to
rule of God, I. 52
of others by self-sacrifice, I. 600
spiritual, C. 163
Sanhedrin, culpability of, ©. 549
Jesus before, H. 545
Satan, confession of sin hindered by, C. 13
hinders men, C. 136
vanquished, I. 51
versus Satan, C. 118
Satans, we all have our, I. 310
Saved, L 638
Saving work, difficulty of, C. 188
Saviour, compassionate, C. 276
departing, H. 620
seeking, I. 202
Saviour’s glory, revelation of, C, 184
grave, C. 597
Savour, salt losing its, I. 352
true, C. 347
Scale-beam, selfish life and spiritual life
hang at opposite ends of, C, 305
Scourging, I. 599
Scramble, principle of, C. 386
Scribe, Christ’s interview with, H. 445
Scribe’s question, C. 451
Scribes, C. 63
character and conduct of, denounced,
H. 460
failure of, as teachers, C. 32
questioning, C. 330
Scripture, fulfilment of, at Crucifixion, C. 588
fulness of, C. 443
Sea, Christ walking on, H. 236
Jesus walked on the, direction of wind
when, I. 245
of Galilee, C. 25, 162; I. 53
‘Search for fruit, Christ’s, I. 429
Season, at the, I. 463
Seasons of trial, times of preparation, H. 593
Seclusion with Christ, C. 230
Second Advent, C. 480
coming, Christ’s, I. 485
Secret, Christ’s presence cannot be kept,
I. 85


argument against,


of Christ’s influence, I. 636
prayer, C. 536
work, C. 197
Secrets, Divine, C. 325
Seed, emblem of, for God’s Word, C. 135
must be genuine, C. 135
of goodness, sowing, C. 135


Seed saved by tempests, I. 174
sower and, H. 129
Seeds slumbering, I. 173
Seeking Saviour, I. 202
seeking soul, Christ not hidden from,
C, 266
Seen, gospel, though never heard, I. 47
Self, loving neighbour as, |. 467
Self-complacency, mistaken, I. 556
Self-control and self-denial, C. 345
and silence, I. 598
Self-deception as to one’s character, C. 368
Self-delusion, propensity of heart to, C, 222
Self-denial, H. 304 : ,
and self-control, C. 345
following Christ in, I. 311
necessity of, H. 297
power of, I. 49
Self-evident truth, I. 279
Self-interest, blinded by, I. 171
Self-possession, C. 165
Self-sacrifice, C. 304
and ministry, Christ’s, H. 387
fruitful, I. 553
reward of, I. 311
. salvation of others by, I. 600
Self-sacrificing devotion, I. 600
Selfish life and spiritual life hang at opposite
ends of scale-beam, C. 305
Senses, Christ dishonoured and suffering in
His, H. 550
Sensibility, Christ’s delicate, C. 63
Sentiment, natural, change of, I. 598
Sepulchre pious women visiting, H. 603
Sermons, how to hear, H. 139
Servants, Christ and His, C. 26
sent forth; Master rejected, H. 204
Service and love, family of, C. 122
and sacrifice, C. 387
by-errands in God’s, C. 194
. Christian, Holy Communion most solemn,
H. 520
Christ’s, freedom of, C. 84
humble, H. 405
law of, I. 400
life as, I. 399
loving, Christ honouring, H. 492
mutual, C. 386
no loss, I. 172
road to preferment and rule, C. 338
routine, I. 278
Services, incidental, to men, C. 70
Seven, consecration of one day in, C. 83
Severe word, encouragement from, C. 268
Severity or patience? C. 213
voice of Baptist a voice of, C. 11
Shame, Christ’s companions in, C. 588
Shape of cross, I. 599
She hath done what she could, I. 553
Sheep scattered, C. 524
Shepherd, Christ as, H. 524
needed in all human societies, C, 234
Ship, Christ teaching in, H. 131
Shortcomings, friendship’s, H. 118
Shrinking from commission of the sin, I. 124
Sick, Christian treatment of, C. 630


667


INDEX.


Sick souls, Christ’s message to, C. 64
Sickle, God’s, C. 155
Sickness and the soul, C. 44
Sidon, Tyre and, J. 280
Sigh, Christ’s look, and word, H. 276
Lord’s deep, H. 290
Sight, clearing of, H. 294
foundations out of, C. 239
more needed than signs, C. 289
not conducive to faith, C. 590
obscured by trivial, I. 309
restoration of, C. 296
Sign, asking a, I. 308
of summer's approach, I. 485
refused, H. 288
Signs already given, neglect not, C. 289
of faith, H. 624
of weak faith, H. 163
sight more needed than, C. 289
these, C. 629
Signal instance of faith in Christ, C. 44
Significance of Christ’s ascension, H. 633
royal entry into Jerusalem, C. 405
of Eucharist, C. 521
Silence and self-control, I. 598
enjoined, H. 198
of Jesus, C. 564
often more effective than speech, I. 558
reasons for, H. 326
submissive, C. 327
under misconception, CO. 565
Silent, be, H. 42
partners, no, I. 315
Simon Cyrenian, H. 584
Peter, C. 104, 105
Simplicity and plainness of Christ in His
prayers, C. 538
Christ’s, in miracle-working, C. 196
Sin against Holy Ghost, H. 109, 114
confession of, H. 12 ,
conscience darkened by, C. 226
destructive character of, I. 200
distress of, C. 195
duty of reproving, C. 222
eternal, I. 124
forgiveness of, C. 63
growth of, I. 56
has its source in heart, I. 279
legion of, C. 186
madness of, C. 185
origin of, I. 279
present pardon for, taught by Christ,
C. 63
resist solicitation:to, C. 225
struggle to get rid of, C. 185
the, shrinking from commission of, I, 124
Sins of communities, C. 187
of infirmity, nature and kinds of, H. 530
punishments proportionable to, H. 208
Sincerity or knowledge, loose casuist
generally wants either, C. 356
Sinners, all are, I. 88
drawn to Christ, I. 87
God welcomes, I. 87
not righteous, but, H. 67
Sees due to Christ from, C. 435


\ 668





Sitting at receipt of custom, H, 69


| Six days, after, C. 320
| Skandala, C. 346


Sleep and death, I. 203
image of death, H. 197
power of, I. 558
Sleeping, only, I. 202
Slight mention, why such, of Christ’s
ascension ? C. 633
value of popular demonstrations, I. 429
Slumbering seeds, I. 173
Small beginnings, much result from, I. 553
great things from, I. 173
Snow, beauty of, I. 348
Social questions, Church and, C, 233
Society, modern, leprosies of, C. 46
speculators of, C. 221
Socrates preparing way for Christ, I. 48
Soldier, Christian, spirit of, I. 311
Soldiers, mockery of, lessons from, H. 570
Solemnity of preaching, I. 123
Solicitation to sin, resist, C. 225
Solitude, C. 231
led into, C. 295
Son known and rejected, OC. 436
mission of, C. 435


of God mocked and wounded, H. 568;.


I, 599
nailed to cross, H. 578
strong, C. 10
title, C. 10
of man, C. 84
among children of men, H. 359
even, C. 387
Song, affliction producing, I. 556
Sorrow apart from Christ, C. 369
God often last resource of, C. 194
Sorrows of war, I]. 484
Sought out, C. 196
Soul chief concern, I. 313
Christ’s agony of, on account of sin, C. 534
God’s vineyard, C. 434
incapacitated for repentance, OC. 119
loss of, H. 301
loving God with, C, 453
one thing may keep, from eternal life,
I. 396
paralysis of, I. 124
sickness and the, C. 44
that may be lost, C. 307
window of, eye, C. 262
without Spirit, I. 49
world and, H. 306
worth of, H, 306; I. 313, 314
Soul’s need met by Christ, C. 63
Souls, Christ’s eagerness to reach, C, 38
to feed hungry—mission of Church, ©, 417
Soul-healing first, C. 62
Soul-sickness, C. 195
Soul-sight, I. 400
Sound foundation for religious belief, C. 368
Source of healing, Christ, not means, C. 295
of supernatural power, OC. 421
sin has its, in heart, I. 279
Sower and seed, 9. 129
ground which disappointeth not, C. 137


o4 @<hee ee, ee or es


INDEX.


NN 2?


Sower, parable of, H. 128; C. 132
Sowing broadcast, C. 135
twofold, C. 135
Word, f. 168
Spake same words, I. 558
Speculators of society, C. 221
Speech, silence often more effective than,
I. 558


understanding must precede, C. 336
Spell of example, I. 311
Spirit, anger drives away, C. 424
dumb, C. 330
form and, C. 75
in which to meet trials of life, C. 524
in which to study nature, I. 166
need of, I. 50
of Christian soldier, I. 311
of doubt is spirit of weakness, C. 422
soul without, I. 49
unclean, essence of pollution, I. 54
zealous, C. 118
Spirits, unclean, C. 32, 34
Spiritual and worldly vocations of Chris-
tians, C. 26
exaltation, C. 303
from temporal to, C. 103
growth, H. 148
impression, no, I. 168
influences, children are specially sus-
ceptible of, H. 359
kindred, Christ’s, C. 121
life and selfish life hang at opposite ends
of scale-beam, C. 305
difficult conditions of, H. 296
matters, dulness in, C. 258
nourishment, I. 554
salvation, C. 163
strength, OC. 184
temple, C. 472
world, growth in, C, 154
Spiritually disturbed consciousness, H, 33
Spread of Christ’s influence, C. 634
Stages of faith, I. 430
Stars, sun makes, more glorious, C. 323
Startling message, I. 49
State, Church and, C. 440
Stern resolution in face of danger, I. 399
Stings of conscience, I. 243
Stone, Christ is to His Church a, C. 437
rolled away, H. 613
which builders rejected, H. 433; C. 436
who shall roll us away? H. 612
Storm, Christ in, C. 165
no refuge from, I. 169
on lake, H. 159
Ruler of, C. 166
Storms, asleep amid, C. 163
Christ’s presence causes, C. 162
life’s, suddenness of, C. 162
Story helps truth, I. 167
Strain of constant publicity, C. 117
Strange places, God often calls men in, I. 86
Strangled, I. 170
Strength, loving God with, C. 453
of gentleness, Christ comes in, C. 19
spiritual, C. 184


Striking coincidence, I. 309

Strong Son of God, C. 10

Struggle to get rid of sin, C. 185

Stumbling-blocks, C. 346

Sublime, common life, I. 351

Submission to will of God, C. 536 ; I. 557

Submissive silence, C. 327

Bubelenoe of things hoped for, faith is,
. 423


Success, crowds are not proofs, but means
of, C. 99
Suddenness of life’s storms, C. 162
Sufferer’s support, cross, I. 600
pees first week of, on disciples’ part,
. 820


obedience learnt by, C. 537
use of, I, 399


-Sufferings and glory intimately connected,
C. 335


more explicit prediction of, H. 334
Sufficiency, apostolic, Divine source of,
C. 473


Sum of revelation, Christ, C. 326
Summer’s approach, sign of, I. 485


| Sun makes stars more glorious, C. 323


Sunday, Continental, a failure, C. 83
Superficial reading prejudicial, C. 82
Supernatural power, source of, C. 421
Superstition and unbelief, C, 222
not, but faith, C. 196
Support by companionship, I. 242
Divine, man’s need of, H. 509
Supremacy of good, faith in, faith in God
means, C. 422
Surprises, Divine, C. 152
Suspicious blandishments, C. 440
Symbol of cross, I. 310
of moral purification, C. 13
Symbolic teaching of miracle, C, 45
Sympathy, Christ’s craving for, C. 535
mutual, I. 557
nature’s, with her Lord, I, 601
with Christ’s ministers, H. 341
with multitude, I. 245
Synagogue of ambition, I. 467
Syro-phcenician woman, H. 262


TALITHA cumi, C. 198

Talkativeness great evil, I. 57

Taunts of unbelievers, C. 117

Teacher, authoritative, and his audience,
H. 32


Christian, duties of, H, 158
Teachers, failure of scribes as, C. 32
Teaching, Christ’s, nature of, ©. 144
dogmatic, C. 46
enforced by personal religious character,
C. 32


popular, of Jesus Christ, H. 126
symbolic, of miracle, C. 45
with authority, H. 32
Tears of contrition, C. 552
Tell no man of Him, C. 303
what Lord hath done for thee, I. 201
Tempests, seed saved by, I. 174
Temple authorities, Christ and, H. 426


669


INDES.





Temple, Christ resorting to, C. 419
cleansing of, H. 418
destruction of, H. 470
spiritual, C. 472
Temporal to spiritual, from, C, 103
Temptation and triumph, last, C. 591
following on privileges, I. 51
our Lord’s, three prominent points in,
C. 20
to deny Christ before men, ©. 550
Temptations, great, I. 51
troops of, C. 185
Tempted, Jesus was, H. 19
like as we are, I. 51
Tender tone, words with, C. 268
Terrible text, I. 124
Test of relationship is life, I. 125
, usefulness, sole, C. 417
Testimony before kings, I. 244
Christ’s, to Himself, C. 549
involuntary, to Divinity of Christ, I. 601
nature’s, to Resurrection, I. 636
of adversaries to Christ, C. 440
of Baptist, Christ’s appeal to, C. 428
of demons, C. 99
to Jesus, I. 201
|) use and abuse of, C. 46
Testing lesson in faith, C. 616
Text, terrible, I. 124
Thankful heart, C. 189
Thomas, C. 106
Thorns, crown of, H. 571, 572
Thought, Christ’s independence of, C. 32
dissipated, I. 169
for sailors, I. 247
leading to penitence, H. 551
Thoughts, C. 259
evil, C. 260; I. 280
Three chosen apostles, C. 320


determined and most mischievous powers,


''" working of, C, 97
groups of apostles, C. 104
kinds of unprofitable hearers, I. 169
miracles, H. 99
prominent points in our Lord’s tempta-
tion, C. 20
Threefold mark of new life, H. 75
Throne for ministering Christ, I. 400
Throngs, great, how did Christ exercise His
influence over? C. 99
Time, | oe of sacrificing eternity to, I. 314
need of our, is for voices, C. 10
Times os preparation, seasons of trial,


Timid ea s touch, H. 190
Title on cross, H. 576
“Son of God, C. 10
Toil, I. 247
Toilers, 16247"
Tolerates, Godt ius by no means authorise
everytliing which He, C. 356
Tomb of Jesus, emipty, C. 614
of wealthy Jew, C. 613
Tombs, I. 199
Tongue loosed, I. 282
untied, ears open before, C. 276


670


Total renunciation, J, 395
Touch, Christ’s healing, H. 41 ; ©, 45
timid woman’s, H. 190
two kinds of, C. 196
Touching Christ, H. 242
the Lord, H. 238
Tradition of elders, C. 256, 257
of men, H. 249
Traffic in holy places, I. 429
Tragedy of Pilate’s life, C. 566
Training, Christ’s, C. 241
Traitor among twelve, H. 514
Transfiguration, H. 316, 321; I. 348
Transfigurations not to be talked about,
C. 327
Transforming
I. 200
Treachery, kiss of, C. 542
Treasure only for pure, I. 172
Treasury, Church, H. 461
Treatment, Christian, of sick, C, 630
due to Christ from sinners, C. 435
of enemies, Christian, I. 431
of poor, I. 400
Tree, man and, C. 296
useless, H. 407
Trial and deliverance work together, H. 162
seasons of, times of preparation, H. 593
to perseverance, persecution, C. 474
Trials and reward of missionary, H. 375
not always calamities, C. 164
of life, spirit in which to meet, C. 524
Tribute money, question as to, H. "437
Triumph, final, of Christianity, I. 639
last temptation and, C. 591
of gospel, I. 174
Triumphal procession, I. 429
Trivial, sight obscured by, I. 309
Trodden heart, I. 169
Troops of temptations, C. 185
Trouble, C. 538
True and false power, I. 396
disciple always knows where to find
Master, C. 37
family of Jesus, H. 121
greatness, C. 338
honours, no, are lightly won in either
earth or heaven, ©. 385
King and His counterfeit, H. 560
pastor is never weary of instructing his
people, C. 356
preacher Divine creation, I. 636
religion, C. 452
repentance, H. 213
savour, C. 347
Trust, Christ inspires, C. 44
mundane, a barrier, H. 370
Truth, difficult to explain, to unspiritual
people, I. 309
divides men, C. 421
Divine, needs attention, C, 133
faith in power of, I. 174
forgotten, C, 136
‘in mockery, H. 589
parable mode of conveying, I. 167
self-evident, I. 279


influence of Christianity,





INDEX.


Truth, story helps, I. 167
Twain, they, shall be one flesh, I. 394
Twelve apostles, sending forth of, C. 212
choice and commission of, H. 100
Judas among, C. 107
traitor among, H. 514
Two and two, ©. 212
aspects of life, I. 246
disciples, Christ's appearance to, H. 618
fires, C. 347
horizons, C. 480
kinds of touch, O. 196
prayers, H. 182
views taken of same case, C, 196
wishes, Christ’s, C. 537
Twos, gee sends out His disciples by,
21


Twofold aspect of repentance, I. 48 -
earthly companionship of disciples,
foundation for higher, C. 26
sowing, C. 135
Tyre and Sidon, I. 280
why did Christ leave, and go again
to Galilee? H. 276


UNABLE to come to Christ, C. 239
Unbelief, H. 163; C. 210
and superstition, C. 222
Christ’s victory over
H. 162
helped, CO. 332
nature, causes, and effects of, H. 211
of apostles, C. 626
unreasonable, I. 636
which comes between us and Christ,
C. 212
Unbelievers, taunts of, C. 117
Unclean spirit essence of pollution, I. 54
spirits, C. 32, 34
Uncleanness, inveterate habit of, C. 184
Uncoined charity, C. 462
Uncomfortable situation of blind, H. 391
Unconscious fame, C. 462
Understand, why it is we do not, C. 291
Understanding must precede speech, C. 336
-Unguarded places most liable to attack,
I, 559


feeble-minded,


Unity of God, C. 453
Universal belief in immortality, I. 466
charity, motives to, C. 456
fault, ambition a, C. 338
Unpardonable sin as to body, I. 124
Unprofitable hearers, C, 143
three kinds of, I. 169
Unpromising, but not hopeless, I. 169
Unreasonable demand, CO. 290
unbelief, I. 636
Unrecorded workers and heroes, H. 101
Unsatisfying, world, I. 312
Unsettled times, insecurity of life in, I. 463
Unspiritual people, difficult to explain truth
to, I. 309
Unwomanly women, I. 244
Unworthy receivers, Christ’s presence in
Eucharist to, C. 521
_ Use and abuse of testimony, C. 46


Use of leisure, H. 230
Usefulness, H. 142
Christian, H. 340
power of, destroyed, C. 95
promise of, C. 630
sole test, C. 417
Useless tree, H. 407


VAIN, grace of God received in, C. 519
Value of popular demonstrations, slight,


of soul, I. 314
Varying yields, C. 137
Veil of allegory, C. 134
rent, H. 581; C. 592
Veiled cross, H. 590
Vice respects virtue, C. 223
Victory, Christ’s, over feeble-minded unbelief,
H. 162


Views of Christ, comprehensive, I. 309
Vigilance, importance of, I. 486
Vineyard, God’s, soul, OC, 434
husbandmen and, H. 432
Virtue, vice respects, C. 223
Virtuous, Christ loves, C. 369
Vision withdrawn, C. 325
Visit, family, C. 120
Visitation, Divine, preparation for, H. 10
Vitality of Word, I. 169
Vocations, Christian and ecclesiastical, C. 26
of Christians, spiritual and worldly, C. 26
Voice, God's, in common things, I. 559
not echo, John Baptist, C. 10
of Baptist a voice of severity, C. 11
Voices, need of our time is for, C. 10
Voluntary limitation of knowledge, Christ’s,
C. 481


WAIL in woe, ©. 518

Waiting is harder duty than doing, I. 122
on Christ, H. 286

Want and faith not to be silenced, C. 392
of consideration, C. 241
of root, I. 170
what is your? I. 401

Wants, our, Christ’s care, C. 288
to Christ, bring your, C. 269

War, sorrows of, I. 484

Warning against formality and indifference,

H. 290


fruitful, C. 478
promise, and encouragement, H. 471
Washings, rabbinical, C. 256 :
Waste, all is not waste that looks like.
C. 499


false estimates of, I. 553

no, in God’s work, C. 287
* profusion is not necessarily, OC, 498
Watch and pray, H. 483; I. 485

command ‘to, H. 481

on, I. 487

one hour, couldest not thou? C. 537
Watchfulness constantly needed, I. 487

duty of, enforced, H. 483

fidelity and, OC. 483

reasons for, H. 484


671


INDEX.


Watching and prayer, C. 538; I, 557
hour of, H. 528
Watchword, Christ’s, Repent, I. 52
Water, cup of cold, I. 352
Way of cross, C. 381; I. 399
to heaven, repentance, I. 49
to Jerusalem, on, H. 377; C. 381
to life, cross, C. 305
Ways, parting of the, H. 566
Wayside, by, C. 185
Weak faith, signs of, H. 163
use of, I. 349
Weakness and difficulties of doubt, H, 415
greatness and, of man, C. 184
of human nature, inherent, I. 599
Pilate’s, C. 567
spirit of, spirit of doubt is, C. 422
Wealth, giver of, forgotten, I. 398
Wealthy Jew, tomb of, C. 613
Weapons, worldly, C. 543
Weigh calls, C. 121
Weight, not lenge prayers judged by, I. 468
of riches, I. 3
Well, He hath i668 all things, H. 274; C, 276
What manner of man is this? C. 166; E176
What then ? I. 313
Wheat, grain of, Word of life in figure of,
i. 15
Whence, from? I. 308
Wicked, characteristics of, C. 33
husbandmen, C. 484
joy of, C. 500
Widow’s gift, greatness of, H. 461
mites, 1. 468
Widows’ houses, devourer of, I. 467
Wife and husband, C. 357
Wild beasts and angels, Christ with, H. 20
Wilful blindness and its retributive judgment,
C. 427
Will be done, Thy, I. 557
of God, submission to, C. 536 ; I. 557
Will-power, I. 399
Wind, direction of, when Jesus walked on
the sea, I. 245
Winds in God’s hands, I. 175
Window of soul, eye, C. 262 j
Wine mingled with myrrh, ©. 587
Winter flight, horrors of, I. 485
Wise economy, I. 245
Wishes, Christ’s two, C, 537
Withdrawal, Christ’s, C. 47
Withered fig tree, C. 421
hand restored, H. 90
hearts and hands, C. 95
Witness, false, through misapprehension of
words, C. 549
Woe, wail in, C. 518
Woman, Syro-pheenician, H. 262
Woman’s devotion to Christ, H. 497
faith, H. 194
ministry to Christ, C, 593
touch, timid, H. 190
Women at Crucifixion, CG. 598
earnestness of, C. 611
journey of, H. 612
pious, visiting sepulchre, H. 603


W2


Women, unwomanly, I. 244
Wonderful beginning, C. 9
Word choked, C. 186; I. 170
Christ’s look, sigh, and, H. 276
cured by, C. 34
God’s, emblem of seed for, C. 135
of life in figure of grain of wheat, H. 152
power of, I. 638
sowing, I. 168
vitality of, I. 169
Words applicable to nations, C, 628
Christ’s, permanence of, H. 481
misapplication of, false witness through,
C. 549


spake same, I, 558
with tender tone, C. 268
Work and prayer, mutual relations of, H. 35
as we, God works, C. 96
association in, C. 27
earnestness in, I. 123
for all, I. 486
love best motive for, C. 498
prayer before, C. 27
rest after, H. 227
secret, C. 197
this life time for, I. 486
Works, Godlike, J. 55
out of ordinary course, C. 235
Workers and heroes, unrecorded, H. 101
Christian, encouragement for, H. 154
Working for Christ, joy of, I. 486
of three determined and most mis-
chievous powers, C. 97
World and soul, H. 306
as law of life, C. 307
Christ was intended for whole, C. 571
Christless, C. 188
hope to, healing of leper sign of, H. 46
in God’s hands, I. 175
judgment of, C. 221
retirement from, C. 47
this, Christian’s gain in, C. 377
unsatisfying, I. 312
wants us, C. 330
watches Christians, I. 122
World’s estimate of Christ, H. 303
of Christian zeal, I. 123 _
mystery, cross explains, I. 600
reception of Christ, I. 599
Worldly, amiability among, I. 396


and spiritual vocations of Christians, C. 26


weapons, C. 543
Worldly-mindedness, H. 364
Worm of remorse, GC. 347
that dieth not, I. 352
Worship, false, zeal and diligence in, no
ground of comfort, H. 254
insincerity in, H. 253
public, advantage of liturgy in, H. 412
Worth of Christianity, evidence to, I. 123
of soul, H. 306; I. 313, 314
Worthless. hearing, I. 167
Wrong done to child, I. 352
Wrong-doing, anger checks, I, 122


YE know not what ye ask, C. 385


INDEX.





Yields, varying, C. 137
Young man in linen cloth, H. 540 indiscreet, C. 340
Youth, callousness in, C. 225 missionary, I. 637

mistaken, I. 558
ZHAL, I. 123


\ Zealous spirit, C. 118
in opposing Christ, C. 118 Zebedee’s sons, petition of, H, 381


Zeal in spreading gospel, I. 201





HOMILIES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS.


Church Seasons: Advent, ch, xi. 1-11; xiii. 33-37. Lent, ch. 1. 13; ii, 18-22; vi. 30-32.
Palm Sunday, ch. xi. 1-11. Good Friday, ch. x. 45; xiv. 32-42; 53-72; xv. 1-15; 16-20;
21-41; 31; 33. Haster, ch. xvi. 4; 5, 6; 7; 9-18. St. Mark’s Day, ch. xiv. 51, 52.
Ascension Day, ch, xvi. 14-18; 19, 20. John Baptist’s Day, ch, i. 1-8; vi. 14-29. St.
Matthew’s Day, ch. ii. 13-17. Sabbath, ch. ii. 23-28.

Baptism: ch. i. 8; x. 13-16.

Holy Communion: ch. xiv. 12-31.

Foreign Missions : ch, iv. 30-34; x. 28-31; xvi. 15.

Hwangelistie Services: ch. ii. 17; v. 25-34; vii. 24-30; viii. 36, 37.

Special : Workers, ch. iii. 13-19; 14; iv. 1-20; 21; xiv. 6-9; xv. 21. Worship, ch. vii. 1-23;
ix. 5; xi. 17. Quiet Days, ch. vi. 30-32. Hospital Sunday, ch, i. 21-34; 40-45; x. 46.
Harvest Festival, ch. iv. 26-29. Marriage, ch. ii. 18-22; x. 1-12. Children, ch, ix. 37 ;
x. 13-16. Labour Congress, ch, vi. 3a. Almsgiving, ch. xii. 41-44.


OLOGY LIBRARY
LAREMO? iT, CALIF.


©)


xX 873


,. Tie iv Fives
afk ie WBointbe» id atts


us


ion
1



















BS491 .P65 / vol 24 4%
The Preacher s complete homiletical com 3
—_ a" ea ec ti






Miah











iy
ue
Vo 23


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
Z SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
- AT CLAREMONT
: CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


444735 fa


DEMCO





tae ee aed
BL GTA tS
ee Peed


Neue nye
ere

a fat det ve

Si vi Aad


pew rey ew
Ni ayy wee
ove vy. uvvwene es
‘eee yw, wey
Vere sty
voy 4
ve ou ey
ee
a rere
ea ene ad
vee.


ver 2
Vly one yy
vw ;
, vor,
ears
NN ee TIC
NEE FEMS
ene f
Pui ae eS
FOO OAT LES,
eye ee et


EN Satin poe oY
Jere ee


asa
Pe be tae
PAS
Se ee ae
soe, Nat hr he S LO
wee ee Ny hy Uw wY, very EM TI MF
MSR tae ea A MY SN
Loree are te ES


eye
ives OTe ey,
peyewn inn a
Site eee
Prk
Se ee
Vi eee
OP A SEY
Next 2
EVEN TRY , Rae :
Weureyeu ieee
veers eee : ,
’
f pees Pe AA
j rity


7,
CoP get LE
par oe MEL AE
ne Nh EF AY
eee re
Ce ent at
Cs


weve
a tyvey tae
VEE e :
Mansa eit eae
ei god of of
Peon Mat eae TS
De ert rear, .
See we ONE goa tT
Mee we ea EMO OMS saudi
EN PMN aE vk tO TS ase
ahd rae


=


AEE PEELE L

CPLA EAA ed
iio 5 EIEIO E,
eh ee Cree


<<
oa8.


fee
C5


Cheha fe
A}


seed
Vener in Se
RN eaRerite bia
BM Sees uN eM
vevyeey ;
eee
ees
GG


penis
eevee naa wee eS
Vowel eS eee ee EM,
Srey CREO
SARS esha
nk .


a Asis
Pererbes
.
ste


a


iSvyiy


Se)
te
Sesese
> S28582
Roa S,
ace m4
ae
= ee
aes


ee
“25.
4


St
14!
¢

¢

mS)
2
$<


Ate a
BELLE SE
CeAss


Se
<
6
%.
¢
z
<a
aks


age
<
<
"%,
x
2.
<<
5
<


Vevey

wy eee”
wer ney
pe


4
ie
5
¢
+
446.
4
es
4,
<<,
3
<
3
<


2

*.

i)
ae
¢

ie

e

4
3
bs

S38.

<a

S38.
*.

< 34)


<a


35%
4
ie
<
re
es
<.
>


B26.

<3
227

Sts


<
bs
¥
=e;
.


os
3
<t
335


ese"
orbs
<
S<
z1
<.
<
Sa
SES2%)
235;
43
Pi


Ses2


)


+
:
‘7
4
3


%,
KeS<
$<.
34
ps
Ste


§


tet
Se
¢
ai
bos
a8
ied
=43
eka
Po
S36
s, =o
ppt
“
3,
A
SRS


<2

of)
f3
4
<
¢3

Se

y


<2
&

2.
‘,
ry


ce
S.
a
*
€
<
<
<
PS
Be
4


=
<.


5

<

€

4,
2$e
2


25
e54
Se
a8
Te
32828
<
core
Rae
35


$5


ee)
Cee
Pe


i
ear
=
Se5e
=
3
re,
ace.
a


SeS<
=
3
Sse
she
S
re35p42


438,
fe
<8,


pares Oe)

ASrictem aoa

SOA Seats ately
vee


es8etee,
Oe:
ses ey
egceent
aes
othe
coe
ee
SPerers)


2
<
23.
ry


e
on
eae


<sece,
5


eee
see,
Sete:
eaase
ase
SSS
nehes
2
ane
es
beet


Rady
veeeye

cette a kk a

SENT Fett

rs


3.
4
ce
ev
3335
2
s


br}
Cy
528s
as
sit


.
cham


=
ace
seas,


"2


Sac os
Map ah ae st or oF
Papas ye are
Piet ad op of Mat SE

eer oP


relate
eet


: Ay

jes Tene
phir hata? Rater

TH Ph mh 4 2 fg

on

af siae ath ghot
