' 


i 


THE 


GOSPEL    OF    ST.    JOHN 


ALEXANDER     MACLAREN,     D.D. 


HODDER    AND    STOUGHTON 

27   PATERNOSTER  ROW 


MDCCCXCIII 


Printed  by  Hazelt,  Watson,  &  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


PREFACE 

^  I  ^HESE  chapters  were  written  as  a  commentary 
on  the  International  Sunday  School  Lessons 
for  the  American  Sunday  School  Times,  from  which 
they  are  reprinted  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
proprietors. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


I.    THE   WORD    IN    ETERNITY,    TIME,    AND    FLESH      .         I 
St.  John  i.   I-18. 

II.  TWO  days:  John's  last,  and  Christ's  first     ii 

St.  John  i.  29-42. 

III.  THE    first    ray    OF    THE    GLORY         .  .  .20 

St.  John  ii.   i-i  I. 

IV.  "  HOW   CAN    THESE   THINGS    BE  ?  "      .  .  -29 

St.  John  iii.   1-17. 

V.    THE   THIRSTY    GIVER    OF    LIVING    WATER    .  .       39 

St.  John  iv.  S-26. 

VI.    THE    LIFE-GIVER    AND    JUDGE     .  .  .  -49 

St.  John  V.   17-30. 

VII.    BREAD    ENOUGH,    AND    TO    SPARE        .  .  •       58 

St.  John  vi.   I -14. 

VIII.    TRUE    WORK    FOR    TRUE   BREAD  .  .  .66 

St.  John  vi.  26-40. 

IX.    "  THAT    ROCK   WAS    CHRIST  "     .  .  .  ■       1^ 

St.  John  vii.  31-44. 

X.    FREEDOM   AND    SONSHIP  .  .  .  -85 

St.  John  viii.  31-47. 

XI.    JESUS      SEEING     THE     BLIND,     AND     THE     BLIND 

SEEING   JESUS 95 

St.  John  ix.   I-Il,   35-38. 

XII.    THE    SHEPHERD    OF    MEN  ....     I03 

St.  John  X.   I -16. 


viii  Contents 

LESS.  PAGE 

XIII.  THE   CROWNING    MIRACLE         .  .  .  .112 

St,  John  xi.  21-44. 

XIV.  WHAT   JESUS    THOUGHT    ABOUT    THE    CROSS       .     121 

St.  John  xii.  20-36. 

XV.    THE   MASTER-SERVANT 130 

St.  John  xiii.  I- 17 

XVI.    THE   PRESENT-ABSENT  CHRIST    AND    THE   ABID- 
ING   COMFORTER     .  .  .  .  -139 
St.  John  xiv.   1-3,   15-27. 

XVII.    THE    VINE   AND    THE    BRANCHES        .  .  .    I49 

St.  John  XV,   1-16, 

XVIII,    THE     SPIRIT     CONVINCING      THE     WORLD     AND 

GUIDING    THE    CHURCH.  .  .  .     158 

St.  John  xvi.   I-15. 

XIX.    THE    INTERCESSOR 1 69 

St.  John  xvii.   1-19, 

XX.    THE   WILLING    PRISONER  .  .  .  .    180 

St.  John  xviii.   I- 13. 

XXI.    THE    RELUCTANT    JUDGE,    THE    RESOLVED   AC- 
CUSERS,   AND    THE    PATIENT    CHRIST  .    189 
St.  John  xix.   I -16. 

XXII.  "it  IS  finished"         .         .         .         .         .198 

St,  John  xix,  17-30, 

XXIII.  THE    DAWNINGS    OF    FAITH    IN    THE    RISEN 

LORD      .  .  .  .  .  .  .207 

St.  John  XX.  1-18. 

XXIV.  THE    SEA   AND    THE    SHORE      .  .  .  .    2l6 

St,  John  xxi.  I-14. 

XXV.    REVIEW   LESSON    THOUGHTS     .  .  .  -2  23 


LESSON    I 


The  Word  in  Eternity,  Time,  and  Flesh 

St,  John  i.  i-i8 


1.  "In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God. 

2.  The  same  was  in  the 
beginning  with  God. 

3.  All  things  were  made  by 
Him  ;  and  without  Him  was  not 
any  thing  made  that  was  made. 

4.  In  Him  was  life ;  and  the 
life  was  the  light  of  men. 

5.  And  the  light  shineth  in 
darkness ;  and  the  darkness 
comprehended  it  not. 

6.  There  was  a  man  sent 
from  God,  whose  name  was 
John. 

7.  The  same  came  for  a  wit- 
ness, to  bear  witness  of  the 
Light,  that  all  men  through 
Him  might  believe. 

8.  He  was  not  that  Light,  but 
was  sent  to  bear  witness  of 
that  Light. 

9.  That  was  the  true  Light, 
which  lighteth  every  man  that 
Cometh  into  the  world. 

10.  He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by 
Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him 
not. 

11.  He  came  unto  His  own, 
and  His  own  received  Him  not. 


12.  But  as  many  as  received 
Him,  to  them  gave  He  power 
to  become  the  sons  of  God, 
even  to  them  that  believe  on 
His  name  : 

13.  Which  were  born,  not  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man, 
but  of  God. 

14.  And  the  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us, 
(and  we  beheld  His  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  only  begotten 
of  the  Father,)  full  of  grace  and 
truth. 

15.  John  bare  witness  of 
Him,  and  cried,  saying.  This 
was  He  of  whom  I  spake.  He 
that  Cometh  after  me  is  pre- 
ferred before  me  :  for  He  was 
before  me. 

16.  And  of  His  fulness  have 
all  we  received,  and  grace  for 
grace. 

17.  For  the  law  was  given 
by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth 
came  by  Jesus  Christ. 

18.  No  man  hath  seen  God' 
at  any  time  ;  the  only  begotten 
Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of 
the   Father,   He  hath  declared 
Him." 


THE    simplest  words  carry  the    deepest   meanings. 
These  brief  sentences  of  this  wonderful  prologue 
are  as  inexhaustible  in  thought  as  they  are  inartificial  in 


2  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  i.  1-18 

language.  They  unveil  the  eternal  depths  of  Deity,  and 
gather  all  the  history  of  man  in  time  into  one  long  pro- 
cess of  the  effluent  light  warring  with  darkness,  which 
culminates  in  the  incarnate  Word,  "the  Light,"  whose 
name  at  last  is  disclosed  as  Jesus  Christ,  the  fountain  of 
all  grace  and  truth,  the  only  declarer  of  God.  Volumes 
could  not  worthily  set  forth  the  truths  condensed  in  these 
verses.  Eighteen  centuries  have  but  spelled  out  a  little 
of  the  meaning  of  these  eighteen  verses.  Heaven  will 
not  exhaust  them. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  try  to  force  the  style  of  John  into 
logical  grooves.  The  great  stones  with  which  he  builds 
are  laid  on  each  other  without  mortar.  The  links  of 
connection  are  so  numerous  that  each  new  student  finds 
some  fresh  one.  And  they  are  all  there,  and  more 
besides  ;  for  the  mighty  facts  which  he  tells  in  such 
childlike,  deep  speech  are  all  laced  together  by  innu- 
merable ties.  We  may,  however,  note  that  the  two 
references  to  the  Baptist's  testimony,  w^hich  break  in 
upon  the  flow  of  the  evangelist's  thought,  seem  to  part  it 
into  distinct  portions,  and  to  be  themselves  distinct.  If 
we  read  straight  on,  omitting  John's  two  sayings,  the 
stream  is  continuous.  We  follow,  then,  this  clue  to  a 
division  of  the  subject-matter,  not,  however,  laying  stress 
on  it. 

I.  Verses  1-5,  then,  begin  by  carrying  us  out  of  time  and 
creation,  to  unveil  to  our  awestruck  vision  something  of 
the  eternal  depths  of  God,  when  none  but  God  was,  and 
thence  descend  to  reveal  how  things  came  to  be,  how  a 
universe  has  life,  how  what  is  but  life  in  other  creatures 
rises  in  man  to  be  light,  and  how,  through  all  the  ages, 
the  uncreated  light  has  striven  with  the  intrusive  and 


Less.  I.]    The  "Word  in  Eternity,  Time,  and  Flesh  3 

obstinate  darkness.  God  in  Hiaiself,  creation,  preserva- 
tion, and  the  whole  history  of  man  as  moral,  intellectual, 
and  spiritual,  are  here.  "  In  the  beginning  God  created^^ 
but  "  in  the  beginning  the  Word  was,^^  When  creatures 
began  to  be,  He  was  there  already.  That  necessarily 
implies  eternal  existence.  John  does  not  speak  as  if  "^ 
his  terms  needed  definition.  Either  they  were  already 
familiar  to  his  readers,  or  he  felt  that  his  statements 
sufficiently  explained  them.  This  at  least  is  clear,  that 
the  three  clauses  of  the  first  verse  set  forth  the  Word  as 
eternal,  as  a  Person  holding  communion  with  God,  and 
as  Himself  Divine  in  nature. 

At  the  close  of  the  prologue  he  will  identify  this 
eternal,  Divine,  personal  Word  with  his  dear  Lord  and 
Master,  but  now  he  simply  affirms,  in  that  strangely 
assured  and  yet  quiet  way  of  his,  as  if  no  proof  were 
needed.  If  we  accept  these  words,  we  shall  be  wiser 
than  all  philosophers,  and  have  got  nearer  the  heart  of 
things  than  they.  The  second  verse  forms  the  transition 
to  the  activity  of  the  Word  in  history.  It  gathers  the 
three  clauses  preceding  into  one,  and  thus  presents  that 
Word  as  fitted  for  the  work  to  be  next  ascribed  to  Him. 

That  work  is,  first,  creation.  Mark  the  contrast  of  the  / 
ante-temporal  "  was  "  of  the  first  verse  and  the  "  came  to 
be"  ("were  made")  of  the  third  verse.  Observe,  too, 
the  universality  of  the  Word's  creative  energy,  as  twice 
signalised  in  the  two  clauses.  Note  the  specific  form  of 
His  action.  "  Through  Him  "  (not  "  by  ")  teaches,  as  in 
Colossians  i.  16  and  other  passages,  that  the  Word  is 
the  agent  of  creation,  while  the  Father  is  the  source. 
Observe  also  the  distinction  between  "  through "  and 
"  not  apart  from,"  or  "  without."     The  one  presents  Him 


y 


4  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  i.  1-18 

as  the  agent ;  the  other  insists  on  His  presence  with  His 
creation  as  necessary  to  its  existence,  and  forbids  us  to 
think  of  it  as  being  hke  a  man's  work,  capable  of  subsist- 
ing away  from  its  maker.  It  is  the  same  teaching  as 
Paul's  in  Colossians  i.  17  :  "In  Him  all  things  consist." 
Observe,  too,  the  difference  of  tense,  "  was  made  "  and 
^^  hath  been  made,"  the  former  expressing  the  original 
creative  act,  the  latter  the  continuous  existence  of  the 
things  created. 

If  we  keep  to  the  division  of  verses  in  both  the 
Authorised  and  the  Revised  Versions,  verse  four  rises  in 
the  scale  of  being,  and  shows  how  not  only  inanimate 
things  came  to  be,  but  living  things  to  live.  The  change 
of  preposition  is  significant.  "  Through  Him  "  and  "  not 
apart  from  Him  "  express  a  less  close  and  wonderful 
relation  than  "  in  Him."  Life  is  a  gift  implying  a  closer 
resemblance  to  its  source  than  inanimate  matter  attains. 
"  With  Thee  is  the  fountain  of  life."  Science  is  baffled 
to  tell  what  life  is,  and  still  more  to  produce  it.  John's 
words  go  nearer  the  centre  than  any  biology  has  reached. 

"  In  Him  was  life  " — not,  of  course,  meaning  that  He 
lives,  but  that  He  gives  life.  Then  we  rise  still  higher, 
to  the  one  creature  who  has  self-conscious  life,  and  can 
turn  himself  partly  round  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the 
source.  "  Light "  is  one  of  John's  great,  simple  words, 
which  open  out  into  unfathomable  depths.  Physical 
light  divides  into  three  chief  sets  of  beams.  "  The  light 
of  men  "  does  the  same ;  for  we  need  not  ask  whether 
it  means  purity,  knowledge,  or  joy,  since  it  means  all, 
and  these  three  are  really  one.  All  that  makes  us  men, 
rising  above  the  less  conscious  forms  of  life,  which  are 
too  low  for  morality  or  knowledge,  and  may  be  happy 


Less.  I.]    The  Word  in  Eternity,  Time,  and  Flesh  5 

but  not  blessed,  and  above  inanimate  being,  flows  from 
the  same  hand  which  created  and  sustains. 

May  there  not  be  in  that  singular  "  was  "  of  the  fourth 
verse  some  faint  gleam  of  the  vanished  Eden,  where 
God's  idea  of  manhood  was  for  a  moment  realised,  and,  in 
unbroken  communion,  life  was  light  ?  The  abrupt  intro- 
duction, in  the  next  verse,  of  "  darkness,"  hints  at  some 
catastrophe  unnamed,  to  account  for  its  appearance. 
And  so  the  sad  history  of  humanity  is  summed"  up  in 
verse  five  as  a  continual  meek  shining  of  the  light,  side  / 
by  side  with  its  opposite,  and,  if  we  adopt  the  rendering 
in  the  text  of  the  Revised  Version,  a  continual  resistance 
by  the  darkness ;  or,  if  we  take  the  margin,  a  continual 
shining  of  the  light  in  spite  of  resistance.  There  is  a 
paradox.  Light  dispels  darkness.  The  two  cannot  co- 
exist, but  this  light  and  darkness  can  and  do.  In  these 
few  broad  outlines  the  whole  history  of  man  is  condensed,  /V. 
up  to  John  Baptist.  — 

II.  John's  mission  is  regarded  in  verses  6-8  in  its  relation 
to  that  light  which  is  not  yet  presented  as  historically 
manifested  in  Jesus.  He,  like  all  the  prophets  whose 
missions  may  be  summed  up  in  his,  was  but  "a  man," 
who,  like  "  all  things,"  began  to  be.  (Note  that  the  "  was  " 
of  verse  six  is  the  same  as  "  were  made  "  of  verse  three, 
and  not  the  same  as  "  was  "  of  verse  one.)  His  office 
was  to  witness  of  it,  being  himself  not  light,  but  lighted ; 
the  scope  of  his  mission  was  universal,  and  its  purpose 
the  production  of  "  belief."  A  pregnant  contrast  is 
implied  throughout.  The  description  of  John  fits  Jesus, 
unless  Jesus  is  what  this  Gospel  proclaims  Him,  the 
incarnate  Light.  Otherwise  He  too  was  but  sent  to  point 
away  from  Himself. 


6  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap,  i  1-18 

III.  The  section  between  the  two  utterances  of  the 
Baptist  deals  with  the  incarnation  under  the  two  aspects 
of  the  coming  of  the  Light  and  the  becoming  flesh  of  the 
Word,  thus  knitting  together  the  two  thoughts  of  the  first 
section.  The  former  representation  includes  verses  nine 
to  thirteen ;  the  latter,  verse  fourteen.  In  the  former 
part,  verses  nine  and  ten  still  retain  some  reference  to 
the  action  of  the  light  before  the  incarnation.  Verse 
nine  is  ambiguous,  but  "coming  into  the  world"  is  a 
standing  expression  for  the  incarnation,  and  is  therefore 
most  naturally  referred  to  "  the  true  light."  The  exist- 
ence of  the  "  true  light,"  as  distinguished  from  imperfect 
realisations  or  reflections  of  it,  such  as  John,  the  universal 
action  of  the  light  on  humanity,  and  the  culmination 
thereof  in  a  historical  "  coming,"  are  the  great  truths  in 
the  ninth  verse.  But,  before  elaborating  the  last  further, 
the  writer  pauses  for  a  moment  on  the  same  sad  thought 
as  in  verse  five.  "  I  speak  of  a  *  coming,'  but  it  is  of 
One  who  was  here  before  He  '  came,'  had  been  here 
ever  since  He  made  this  world,  and  had  been  moving 
unrecognised  among  men,  like  a  king  incognito."  That 
was  not  because  He  hid  Himself,  but  because  the  dark- 
ness would  have  none  of  the  light.  The  need  for  a 
further  coming  is  laid  in  the  failure  of  the  former,  "  being 
in  the  world,"  to  bring  recognition. 

All  the  preceding  has  been  a  majestic  flight  of  stairs 
from  heaven  to  earth,  and  now  we  reach  the  foot.  The 
Light  who  was,  "  came,"  as  John  too  "  came,"  in  so  far 
as  both  had  a  historical  beginning  and  appeared  among 
men  ;  but  the  Light  came,  as  this  whole  Gospel  teaches, 
in  an  altogether  unique  sense,  as  by  His  own  will,  and 
from  a  previous  state  of  being.     "  His  own  land  "  was 


Less.  I.]    The  Word  in  Eternity,  Time,  and  Flesh  7 

the  scene  of  His  action,  and  "  His  own  people  "  repeated 
the  tragedy  of  the  past,  and  again  darkness  rejected  Hght. 
But  the  mighty  expenditure  of  power  and  love  was  not 
all  vain ;  for  this  is  the  vindication  of  the  new  step,  His 
"  coming,"  that  some  "  received  Him,"  and,  in  Him,  new 
gifts.  The  broken  construction  "  as  many  ...  to  them  " 
puts  emphasis  on  the  condition  of  the  gift,  which  is 
further  underscored,  as  it  were,  by  its  repetition  in 
another  form  at  the  end  of  the  verse.  To  "  believe  on 
His  name "  involves  the  recognition  of  His  revealed 
character,  as  the  object  not  merely  of  intellectual  know- 
ledge, but  of  trust,  since  "  believing  on  "  is  more  than 
simply  believing.  Such  trustful  acceptance  of  the 
revealed  name  is  "  receiving."  That  faith  is  the  condi- 
tion of  being  entitled  to  "become  sons  of  God."  The 
relationship  thus  expressed  is  not  that  incident  to  all 
men,  as  deriving  natural  life  from  God  and  being  objects 
of  His  love  and  care,  but  is  broadly  distinguished  from 
anything  belonging  to  men  in  virtue  of  their  natural 
birth,  and  is  the  result  of  another  supernatural  birth, 
according  to  God's  will,  and  dependent  on  "believing 
on  the  name." 

The  arrangement  of  this  section  and  of  the  first  is  a 
case  of  "  inverted  parallelism."  In  the  former  we  have 
first  the  Word,  then  the  Light ;  in  the  latter,  first  the 
Light,  then  the  Word.  So  verse  fourteen  presents  the 
coming  of  the  Light  as  also  the  becoming  flesh  of  the 
Word.  Mark  how  the  eternal  "  was  "  changes  into  the 
temporal  "  became " ;  how  the  mystery  of  mysteries  is 
declared  in  three  simple  words.  The  eternal,  personal 
being  of  the  Word,  the  oneness  of  that  Person  before 
and  after  incarnation,  the  reality,  completeness,  and  per- 


8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  i.  1-18 

manence  cf  the  manhood,  are  affirmed  for  adoring  wonder 
and  faith.  "In  the  beginning  was  the  Word"  unveils 
the  depths  of  Deity.  "The  Word  became  flesh" 
declares  the  union  of  God  with  man,  and  lays  in  the 
depths  the  sure  foundation  for  thought,  love,  and  faith. 
Nothing  profounder,  nothing  bearing  more  directly  and 
closely  on  daily  needs  or  immortal  hopes,  can  be  spoken 
in  the  speech  of  earth.  That  becoming  flesh  was  no 
transient  appearance.  "  He  tabernacled  among  us,"  the 
eye-witnesses,  thus  fulfilling  the  promises  of  God's  dwell- 
ing among  men,  and  being  in  that  flesh  as  in  the  true 
temple,  which  tabernacle  and  temple  but  faintly  shadowed. 
"  The  temple  of  His  body  "  is  the  meeting-place  of  God 
and  man,  the  place  of  sacrifice  and  of  revelation.  John 
stays  his  hand  for  a  moment  as  the  remembrances  of 
that  blessed  time  fill  his  heart,  and  recalls  the  "  glory," 
the  reality  of  which  the  Light  that  shone  between  the 
cherubim  was  but  the  emblem,  the  lustre  of  the  self- 
manifestation  of  Divinity,  by  which  the  incarnate  Word 
was  manifested  as,  in  a  unique  sense,  the  Son,  pre- 
eminent among  the  "  children."  Then  he  pursues  his 
thought,  and  describes  Him  who  dwelt  among  the  group 
of  disciples  as  possessed,  in  perfect  measure  and  manner, 
of  all  love  and  all  truth. 

Again  the  Baptist's  witness  interposes  in  the  stream, 
and  this  time  is  more  definitely  directed  to  the  historical 
Person,  identifying  One  standing  in  his  presence  with 
the  theme  of  his  former  proclamations.  The  whole  dis- 
course is  gradually  converging  on  one  head.  John 
recognised,  with  beautiful  self-abnegation,  his  own  in- 
feriority, and  traced  it  to  its  cause,  in  the  essential  dignity 
of  the  Word.     Later  in  time,  He  is  first  in  place,  out- 


Less.  I.]    The  Word  in  Eternity,  Time,  and  Flesh  9 

stripping  His  forerunner,  because  He  was  before  he 
came. 

Finally,  verses  16-18  gather  up  the  blessed  issues  of 
incarnation,  contrast  these  with  previous  revelation,  and, 
at  last,  declare  how  all  the  glorious  names  of  Word,  Light, 
and  Son  meet  in  the  man  Jesus  Christ.  The  close  con- 
nection of  the  first  words  with  those  of  verse  fourteen 
shows  that  the  stream  of  thought  goes  on,  overleaping 
the  reference  to  the  Baptist.  Christ's  "  fulness  "  is  the 
perfect  completeness  of  Divine  powers  with  which  He 
is,  so  to  speak,  charged,  and  that  fulness  is  a  communi- 
cative fulness.  The  personal  experience  of  the  Apostle 
and  his  brethren  comes  in  to  attest  that.  Those  who 
can  say,  "We  have  received  of  it,"  need  no  arguments 
beside  to  prove  Him  Divine.  Those  who  "  receive 
Him"  (ver.  12)  do  therein  "receive"  all  spiritual  gifts. 
The  grace  of  this  moment,  if  used  aright,  is  ever 
exchanged  for  new  grace,  and  that  in  increasing  richness. 

The  law  was  given,  in  one  definite  act,  as  an  external 
and  authoritative  statute,  fixed  and  rigid ;  but  what  Jesus 
brings  "comes  to  be  through  Him,"  for  ever  flowing  out 
in  a  vital  process  and  taking  shape  in  men's  hearts.  The 
contents  of  the  law  are  statutes,  those  of  Christ's  gift  are 
love  bestowed  and  bestowing,  and  truth,  even  the  light 
from  the  Light,  and  speech  from  the  Word. 

So  Jesus  Christ  is  disclosed  as  both  Word  and  Light, 
is  set  far  above  all  messengers  of  God,  is  the  Divine 
communicator  to  men  of  all  the  Divine  fulness,  and  the 
source  of  all  grace  and  truth.  In  one  last  sentence  this 
fisherman-apostle  transcends  all  philosophy,  and  lays  the 
foundation  stone  of  all  true  theology  and  of  all  the  satis- 
faction of  the  needs  of  humble  souls.     The  limitations 


lo  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  i.  1-18 

of  our  powers  make  the  direct  knowledge  of  God  impos- 
sible for  man.  The  manhood  of  Him  who  in  and  from 
eternity  was  the  Word,  and  from  the  beginning  has  been 
the  light  of  men,  makes  it  certain  that  the  invisible  God 
is  fully  declared  in  Him,  who  in  timeless  union  is  "  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  and  who  yet  tabernacled 
among  us,  that  the  eyes  which  could  not  see  God  might 
calmly  and  lovingly  "  behold  His  glory,"  and  in  gazing 
might  not  only  behold,  but  possess,  the  grace  and  truth 
of  which  He  is  full,  and  of  which  the  world  without  Him 
is  empty. 


LESSON    II 


Two  Days :  John's  Last  and  Christ's  First 

St.  John  i.  29-42 


29.  "  The  next  day  John  seeth 
Jesus  coming  unto  him,  and 
saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world. 

30.  This  is  He  of  whom  I 
said,  After  me  cometh  a  man 
which  is  preferred  before  me  : 
for  He  was  before  me. 

31.  And  I  knew  Him  not: 
but  that  He  should  be  made 
manifest  to  Israel,  therefore  am 
I  come  baptizing  with  water. 

32.  And  John  bare  record, 
saying,  I  saw  the  Spirit  descend- 
ing from  heaven  like  a  dove, 
and  it  abode  upon  Him. 

33.  And  I  knew  Him  not  : 
but  He  that  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  the  same  said  unto 
me,  Upon  whom  thou  shalt  see 
the  Spirit  descending,  and  re- 
maining on  Him,  the  same  is 
He  which  baptizeth  with  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

34.  And  I  saw,  and  bare 
record  that  this  is  the  Son  of 
God. 

35.  Again  the  next  day  after 
John  stood,  and  two  of  his 
disciples ; 

36.  And  looking  upon  Jesus 


as  He  walked,  he  saith,  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God  ! 

37.  And  the  two  disciples 
heard  him  speak,  and  they 
followed  Jesus. 

38.  Then  Jesus  turned,  and 
saw  them  following,  and  saith 
unto  them,  "What  seek  ye  ? 
They  said  unto  Him,  Rabbi, 
(which  is  to  say,  being  inter- 
preted. Master,)  where  dwellest 
Thou  ? 

39.  He  saith  unto  them,  Come 
and  see.  They  came  and  saw 
where  He  dwelt,  and  abode 
with  Him  that  day :  for  it  was 
about  the  tenth  hour. 

40.  One  of  the  two  which 
heard  John  speak,  and  followed 
Him,  was  Andrew,  Simon 
Peter's   brother. 

41.  He  first  findeth  his  own 
brother,  Simon,  and  saith  unto 
him,  We  have  found  the  Messias, 
which  is,  being  interpreted,  the 
Christ. 

42.  And  he  brought  him  to 
Jesus.  And  when  Jesus  beheld 
him,  He  said,  Thou  art  Simon 
the  son  of  Jona  :  thou  shalt  be 
called  Cephas,  which  is  by  in- 
terpretation, A  stone." 


THE   careful   notes   of  time  in   this  and  the  next 
chapter  show  that  Jesus  had  returned  from  the 
temptation  to  the  place  where  John  was  baptizing  before 


II 


12  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  i.  29-42 

the  testimony  of  the  latter  here  recorded.  John  i.  26 
seems  to  show  that  Jesus  was  in  the  crowd  when  the 
deputation  from  Jerusalem  came ;  but,  at  all  events, 
the  first  part  of  the  lesson  deals  with  John's  new  witness 
to  Him  (vers.  29-34),  while  the  second  part  gives  the 
effect  of  that  testimony  in  the  transference  of  the  first 
disciples  from  John  to  Jesus.  These  two  days  witnessed 
the  beginning  of  the  greatest  institution  in  the  world, — 
the  Christian  Church, — and  the  end  of  prophecy,  which 
reached  its  goal  when  its  last  representative  stood  in  the 
presence  of  Jesus,  and,  with  pointing  finger,  designated 
Him  as  the  Lamb  of  God.  To  outward  seeming  they 
were  but  a  little  knot  of  poor  Jews.  How  kings  and 
Caesars  would  have  scoffed,  if  told  that  they  were  the 
nucleus  of  a  movement  which  would  shatter  their  thrones 
and  reshape  the  world  !  "  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh 
not  with  observation." 

The  testimony  of  the  Baptist,  as  recorded  in  this 
section,  is  singularly  unlike  his  preaching  as  reported  in 
the  Synoptic  Gospels.  Here  it  points  specifically  to  the 
person  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  and  speaks  a  new 
insight  into  His  character  and  work.  He  is  not  here 
the  Judge  with  fan  in  hand,  but  the  Lamb  taking  away 
sin.  This  difference  has  been  used  as  an  argument 
against  the  truth  of  this  Gospel ;  but  there  is  nothing 
suspicious  or  doubtful  about  it,  if  we  only  remember 
that  the  other  Gospels  give  John's  preaching  as  it  rang 
in  men's  ears  before  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  while  this 
Gospel  gives  it  as  it  was  after  that  baptism  had  opened 
his  eyes  to  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  descent 
of  the  dove  had  taught  him  the  inmost  nature  of 
Messiah's  rule  and  power. 


Less.  II.]  Two  Days :   John's  Last  and  Christ's  First     13 

The  Baptist  himself  tells  the  process  of  his  new 
vision,  in  this  section,  and  certainly  the  cause  assigned 
by  him  is  adequate  to  the  effect.  No  wonder  that, 
when  he  beheld  "  the  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove  and 
abiding  "  on  the  unknown  man's  head,  his  heart  leaped 
up  to  recognise  his  Lord,  and  his  stern  spirit  was  bowed 
in  lowly  adoration.  The  interval  during  which  Jesus 
was  tempted  in  the  wilderness  gave  John's  new  know- 
ledge time  to  clear  itself.  Hence  the  eager  swiftness  of 
his  testimony  when  he  saw  Jesus  coming  to  him,  as 
if  calling  on  him  for  homage  and  witness.  It  is  not 
addressed  to  any  particular  hearer,  but  is  a  public 
proclamation. 

The  point  of  the  comparison  with  "  the  Lamb  "  is  not 
in  character,  but  in  office.  The  explanation  which  takes 
it  to  mean  innocence,  patience,  meekness,  is  miserably 
shallow,  and  is  negatived  by  the  following  clause,  which 
puts  all  the  stress  of  comparison  on  taking  away  the 
world's  sin.  Where  did  John  get  this  comparison  ? 
There  are  three  distinct  sources  in  the  Old  Testament, 
all  tributary  to  this  saying.  There  is  the  lamb  of 
history,  when  Abraham  steadied  his  voice  to  answer, 
"  My  son,  God  will  provide  Himself  a  lamb."  The 
Lamb  of  God  is  God-provided.  There  is  the  lamb  of 
ritual,  both  that  offered  daily  and  that  of  the  passover, 
which  feast  was  near  when  John  spoke.  There  is  the 
lamb  of  prophecy,  set  forth  in  Isaiah's  great  prophecy, 
which  is  clearly  in  John's  mind.  There  the  ideas  of 
unresisting  meekness  and  of  vicarious  sacrifice  are  clearly 
expressed,  and  in  the  light  of  these  we  cannot  but  see 
that  the  "taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world"  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself  is  the  very  purpose  for  which  God 


14  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  i.  29-42 

has  provided  the  Lamb.  Note  the  universahty  of  the 
power  of  that  sacrifice, — "the  world."  Note  the  com- 
pleteness of  its  efficacy  as  dealing  with  "  sin,"  the  whole 
mass  as  a  whole,  and  not  only  with  "  sins  "  separately. 
Note  the  hint  of  the  manner  of  its  operation  in  "  taketh 
away,"  which  implies  removal  by  Himself  bearing  the 
burden.  Note  that  not  only  the  punishment,  but  the 
reality  of  sin,  is  removed.  How  clear  the  insight  of 
John,  then.  And  yet  this  is  he  who  could  send  to  ask, 
"  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come  ?  "  Let  us  beware 
lest  mists  born  of  our  own  hearts  wrap  the  brightest 
stars  of  truth  in  a  doleful  film  ! 

Verses  thirty  and  thirty-one  glow  with  thankful  triumph 
and  lowly  recognition  of  inferiority.  Few  prophets  have 
the  joy  of  saying,  "  This  is  He  of  whom  I  spoke."  At 
such  an  hour  of  fulfilment  the  true  prophet  recalls  with 
thankfulness  his  words,  spoken  when  no  sign  of  their 
accomplishment  was  visible,  and  he  knew  as  little  as 
any  by  whom  they  were  to  be  brought  to  pass.  Well 
for  those  who  can  thus  recall  unashamed  their  faith 
and  testimony  w^hen  they  stand  before  Christ.  Very 
beautifully  does  John  recall  his  witness  borne  when  the 
person  of  the  Messiah  was  unknown  to  him,  his  con- 
fidence even  while  thus  ignorant  that  Jesus  would  be 
manifested,  and  the  subordinate  office  which  he  himself 
discharged  in  his  baptism  by  water. 

Verses  32-34  may  be  a  continuation  of  the  preceding 
testimony,  but,  as  they  are  separated  by  the  first  words 
of  verse  thirty-two,  they  are  perhaps  rather  to  be  taken  as 
another  cognate  witness.  They  differ  from  the  preceding 
by  giving  the  ground  of  John's  new  teaching  and  confi- 
dence, in  the  visible  descent  of  the  Spirit  like  a  dove 


Less.  II.]  Two  Days :  John's  Last  and  Christ's  First      15 

on  Jesus  at  His  baptism,  and  its  abiding  on  Him.  A 
Divine  message,  how  or  when  received  we  know  not, 
had  set  John  to  look  for  this  sign.  The  abiding  is  as 
much  a  part  of  it  as  the  descent,  for  both  facts  express 
in  visible  symbol  the  Divine  operation  which  fitted  the 
manhood  of  Jesus  for  His  Messianic  work.  The  Spirit 
came  down,  peaceful,  tender,  upon  Him,  and  abode  in 
Him — not  being  given  by  measure,  nor  at  moments  of 
special  illumination  or  power,  but  in  indissoluble  union 
with  that  pure  and  perfect  manhood,  which  alone  of  all 
men  was  capable  of  such  perfect  reception  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  And  the  reception  of  the  Spirit  by  Jesus,  in 
such  fashion  and  measure,  is  the  reason  why  He  is  able 
to  "baptize  in  the  Holy  Spirit."  John  gathers  all  into 
one  great  saying,  which  sums  up  and  concludes  his  own 
ministry,  and  ushers,  as  it  were,  the  Greater  than  he  on 
to  the  scene.  For  himself,  he  has  seen  and  borne 
witness.  His  work  is  done.  For  that  other.  He  is,  in 
the  highest  sense  of  that  great  title,  "  the  Son  of  God." 
How  much  had  to  be  suffered  and  learned  before  Christ's 
disciples  could  fathom  John's  words  !  That  clear  vision 
was  clouded  to  him,  and  still  more  to  them,  and  did  not 
shine  to  be  no  more  dimmed  till  the  empty  grave  and 
the  parting  on  Olivet  had  "  declared  Him  to  be  the  Son 
of  God,  with  power  over  the  Spirit  of  holiness." 

Verses  35-42  tell  the  events  of  that  fateful  "  morrow," 
the  first  day  of  Christ's  ministry.  They  fall  into  two 
parts, — how  Jesus  drew  two  souls  to  Himself,  and 
how  these  immediately  drew  others  to  Him.  John's 
repeated  proclamation  was  a  direct  invitation  to  his 
disciples  to  transfer  their  allegiance  to  the  new  Teacher, 
and   the   obedience   of   the   two    was    their   deliberate 


t6  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  i.  29-42 

acceptance  of  Him.  The  unnamed  one  was,  no  doubt, 
the  evangelist  himself  Would  any  other  writer  have 
had  a  motive  for  omitting  one  of  the  two  names  ? 
Deeply  interesting  is  the  frequent  use  of  the  name  of 
"  the  Lamb  "  in  the  Apocalypse,  if  we  remember  that  it 
was  the  name  which,  long  before  Patmos,  on  that  never- 
to-be-forgotten  day  by  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  had  first 
directed  the  young  fisherman  to  Jesus.  Well  for  us  if 
our  latest  faith  is  but  the  deepening  of  our  earliest 
thoughts  of  that  Lord  ! 

The  two  were  following  Jesus,  as  it  were,  by  stealth, 
when  He  "  turned,"  as  He  ever  does,  to  convert  secret 
into  open  discipleship,  and  to  assure  us  that  He  knows 
unspoken  desires.     The  first  words  which  He  speaks  are 
His  question  to  us  all,  "  What  seek  ye  ?  "     He  would 
have  us  make  clear  to  ourselves  what  is  our  aim  and 
true  quest  in  Hfe.     He  would  have  us  search  our  hearts 
to   ascertain  what  we  desire  from  Him,  and  what  we 
think  that  He  can  do  for  us.     The  knowledge  of  our 
own  motives  and  conceptions  of   Him  and    His  work 
underlies  all  profitable  resort  to  Him  ;  and  His  question 
is  a  veiled  promise  that  the  measure  of  our  desires  will 
be  the  measure  of  His  gifts.     Note  that  His  question  is 
"  What  ?  "  not  "  Whom  ?  "  and  that  the  two  are  not  to 
be  put  oif  with  a  thing,  but  seek  a  person.     "Where 
dwellest  Thou  ? "  means   "  We   seek   Thee,  and   to  be 
permanently  with  Thee."     If  we  can  answer  Jesus  so, 
we  shall  be  led  by  Him  to  secret,  sweet  converse,  and 
know,  as  John  learned  to  do,  the  depth  of  the  word 
used  slightly  at  first ;  for  we  shall   "  abide "  with  and 
in  Him. 

Jesus'  second  word  is  as  universal  and  deep  as  His 


Less.  II.]  Two  Days :  John's  Last  and  Christ's  First     1 7 

first.  "  Come  and  see  "  is  His  invitation  to  us  all,  and 
it  means  that  faith  must  precede  experience,  and  also  it 
promises  that  experience  shall  certainly  and  blessedly 
follow  faith.  Note  the  verbal  repetition  of  the  words 
of  invitation  in  the  narrative  of  what  the  two  did. 
Obedience  was  precise,  immediate,  and  it  was  rewarded 
according  to  promise.  If  our  deeds  accurately  repeat 
Christ's  commands,  and  we  fully  respond  to  His  invita- 
tions. He  will  fully  accomplish  all  hopes  held  out  by 
Him,  and  will  give  us  more  than  we  dreamed;  for  the 
disciples  but  asked  "  where "  He  dwelt,  and  they  not 
only  saw  that,  but  abode  there  themselves. 

No  word  tells  what  passed  in  that  sacred  interview, 
begun,  as  it  would  seem,  in  the  morning  hours,  and 
lasting  long.  The  personal  revelation  of  Jesus,  His 
words  and  self,  bound  them  to  Him  for  ever.  They 
called  Him  Teacher  before  He  had  spoken  to  them,  but 
before  He  ceased  to  speak  they  were  ready  to  confess 
Him  to  be  the  Messiah ;  and  from  that  confession  John, 
at  least,  never  flinched.  The  attractive  force  in  Christi- 
anity is  Christ  Himself.  If  we  gain  a  glimpse  of  Him 
as  He  really  is,  and  know  what  we  really  seek,  we  shall 
be  drawn  to  His  service.  Personal  experience  is  the  best 
evidence  of  His  divinity. 

The  Christian  Church  was  founded  that  day.  It 
began  with  two  members.  Their  first  impulse  was  to 
impart  their  treasure.  Observe  how  the  next  step  is 
told.  Andrew's  action  is  mentioned  in  such  terms  as  to 
suggest  an  unmentioned  similar  action  by  the  other ;  for 
if  there  were  a  "  first  "  finding  "  his  own  "  brother,  there 
was  probably  a  second  finding  of  somebody  else's  brother. 
It  is  extremely  improbable  that  when  Andrew  brought 


1 8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  i.  29-42 

Simon  to  Jesus,  John  came  back  unaccompanied  by 
James.  But,  however  that  may  be,  the  natural  impulse 
of  every  true  disciple  of  Christ  is  here  beautifully  illus- 
trated. To  bring  others  to  Jesus  will  spontaneously 
suggest  itself  to  us,  if  we  have  found  Him  for  ourselves. 
The  natural  craving  to  utter  conviction,  the  sense  of 
loyalty  to  Christ  and  of  obligation  from  brotherhood,  will 
operate  to  that  end.  The  word  "  shut  up  in  our  hearts  " 
will  burn  there  like  a  fire,  till  we  become  weary  of  for- 
bearing. If  we  know  nothing  of  such  necessity  laid  on 
us  from  possessing  the  Gospel,  we  had  better  ask  our- 
selves whether  we  have  any  firm  grasp  of  it. 

The  true  weapon  for  us  is  here  shown  us.  Andrew 
did  not  begin  to  argue  with  Simon,  or  to  submit  to  him 
a  few  considerations  tending  to  show  the  reasonableness 
of  Christianity,  or  the  correspondence  of  the  character 
of  Jesus  with  prophetic  or  rabbinic  teaching.  He  did 
not  scold  or  threaten,  and  he  was  not  in  the  least 
eloquent,  or  poetic,  or  profound  ;  but  he  brought  his 
own  experience  in  lieu  of  any  other  persuasive,  "  We  have 
found  the  Messiah."  That  is  the  best  thing  any  of  us 
can  say,  if  we  would  draw  men  to  Jesus.  Nothing  can 
refute  "  Whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see,"  and  not  much 
can  resist  it.  The  limits  of  our  work  are  also  here. 
"  He  brought  him  to  Jesus."  That  is  all  we  can  do.  If 
we  can  get  a  man  to  come  into  direct  relations  with  the 
Lord,  that  Lord  will  do  the  rest. 

Christ's  treatment  of  Peter  is  significant.  Christ  reads 
his  old  character  and  self;  for  whether  His  naming  him 
is  supernatural  knowledge  or  not,  it  implies,  and  is  meant 
to  claim,  complete  knowledge.  He  sets  in  sharp  con- 
trast the  present  and  the  future  of  the  man, — "Thou 


Less.  II.]  Two  Days :  John's  Last  and  Christ's  First      19 

art,"  "  Thou  shalt  be."  If  the  new  name  be  meant 
to  prophesy  character,  it  is  a  promise  that  the  natural 
impulsiveness  and  fitfulness  shall  be  changed  into  solid 
steadfastness.  If  it  be  intended  to  set  forth  office,  it  is  a 
prophecy  that  he  shall  be  used  for  a  foundation-stone  of 
the  new  building  of  the  Church.  In  either  meaning,  it 
at  once  reveals  Christ's  knowledge  of  present  and  future, 
and  establishes  His  authority.  The  imposition  of  a  name 
was  an  act  of  superiority,  a  designation  to  office,  and  a 
gift  of  capacity.  If  we  come  to  Jesus,  He  will  receive 
us,  knowing  us  altogether  in  all  the  weakness  of  our  old 
selves,  and  will  write  upon  us  a  new  name,  changing  by 
degrees  our  weakness  into  calm  strength,  and  haply 
using  us  for  high  service,  but,  at  all  events,  appointing 
us  such  tasks  as  we  can  do  for  and  by  Him. 

Simon  took  many  years  and  trials  to  grow  up  to  be 
Peter,  but  his  destination  was  disclosed  at  first.  We 
know  that  Christ's  servants  are  meant  to  be  clothed  with 
His  likeness.  Let  us  "put  off  the  old  man  and  be  re- 
newed in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  "  first,  and  then,  by 
daily  efforts,  "  put  on  the  new  man,"  which  is  our  destined 
attire. 


LESSON    III 


The  First  Ray  of  the  Glory 

St.  John  ii.  i-ii 


I.   "And  the  third  day  there 
was    a    marriage    in    Cana    of 


mother    of 


Jesus      was 
disciples,    to 


Gahlee ;    and    the 
Jesus  was  there  : 

2.  And  both 
called,  and  His 
the  marriage. 

3.  And  when  they  wanted 
wine,  the  mother  of  Jesus 
saith  unto  Him,  They  have  no 
wine. 

4.  Jesus  saith  unto  her, 
Woman,  what  have  I  to  do 
with  thee  ?  Mine  hour  is  not 
yet  come. 

5.  His  mother  saith  unto  the 
servants,  Whatsoever  He  saith 
unto  you,  do  it. 

6.  And  there  were  set  there 
six  waterpots  of  stone,  after  the 
manner  of  the  purifying  of  the 
Jews,  containing  two  or  three 
firkins  apiece. 

7.  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
Fill  the  waterpots  with  water. 


And  they  filled  them  up  to  the 
brim. 

8.  And  He  saith  unto  them, 
Draw  out  now,  and  bear  unto 
the  governor  of  the  feast.  And 
they  bare  it. 

9.  When  the  ruler  of  the 
feast  had  tasted  the  water 
that  was  made  wine,  and  knew 
not  whence  it  was :  (but  the 
servants  which  drew  the  water 
knew;)  the  governor  of  the 
feast  called  the  bridegroom, 

10.  And  saith  unto  him, 
Every  man  at  the  beginning 
doth  set  forth  good  wine  ;  and 
when  men  have  well  drunk, 
then  that  which  is  worse  :  but 
thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine 
until  now. 

11.  This  beginning  of  mira- 
cles did  Jesus  in  Cana  of  Gali- 
lee, and  manifested  forth  His 
glory ;  and  His  disciples  be- 
lieved on  Him." 


T 


HIS  Gospel  records  just  seven  miracles  before 
the  resurrection,  and  it  calls  them  all  "  signs,"  or 
symbolic  acts  revealing  spiritual  truth  through  material 
things*     The  eleventh  verse  gives  the  point  of  view  from 

20 


Less.  III.]        The  First  Ray  of  the  Glory  21 

which  John  regards  them,  as  being  manifestations  of  the 
"glory  as  of  the  only-begotten"  Son.  They  are  the 
sevenfold  beams  into  which  that  white  light  is  separated. 
This  first  of  them  is,  by  its  place  in  the  series,  especially 
significant.  The  narrative  is  vivid,  and  charged  with 
minute  details  which  speak  of  an  eye-witness,  and  of 
communications  from  Mary,  made  perhaps  in  the  days 
when  John  "  took  her  unto  his  own  home."  It  tells  the 
preliminaries  of  the  sign,  the  sign  itself,  and  the  effects 
of  the  sign. 

I.  Cana  was  the  home  of  Nathanael,  whose  connec- 
tion with  it  may  possibly  have  been  the  reason  why 
Jesus  and  His  six  disciples  went  there.  Mary  appears 
to  have  preceded  them,  and  the  invitation  to  them  to 
have  followed  their  arrival.  "  The  third  day  "  is  counted 
from  that  when  Philip  and  Nathanael  were  called,  as 
the  distance  from  John's  place  of  baptizing  requires. 
The  addition  of  so  many  guests  might  naturally  make 
supplies  run  short,  and  lead  Mary  to  appeal  to  Jesus, 
as  the  cause  of  the  deficiency,  to  suggest  some  way  of 
making  it  good.  Her  intimation  is  more  than  an  intima- 
tion.    It  is  a  request. 

The  whole  incident  is  best  understood  by  supposing 
that  Mary  recognised  in  Him,  not  only  her  Son,  but  her 
Lord,  however  incomplete  her  faith.  That  explains  her 
unspoken  hope,  His  answer,  and  the  else  unaccountable 
effect  of  it  on  her  as  shown  in  her  instructions  to  the 
servants.  She  tells  the  need  and  leaves  Him  to  deal 
with  it.  True  prayer  makes  known  wants,  in  humble 
confidence  that  to  tell  them  is  sufficient,  and  submis- 
sively refrains  from  prescribing  a  course  to  Him.  To 
speak  the  need,  be  it  great  or  small,  and  to  be  silent 


22  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ii.  i-ti 

about  the  way  of  filling  it,  becomes  those  who  trust  His 
wise  and  mighty  love. 

It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  no  trace  of  sternness 
or  rebuke  is  in  Christ's  reply ;  but  while  "  woman  "  is 
respectful  and  affectionate,  the  substance  of  His  words 
gives  emphasis  to  His  independence,  and  declares  that, 
now  that  He  has  begun  His  public  work,  the  old  days 
of  "  subjection  "  are  ended.  Their  ways  diverge,  and 
henceforward  He  must  be  guided  by  His  own  conscious- 
ness of  fitting  seasons  for  His  working.  Such  a  declara- 
tion implies  Mary's  knowledge  of  His  mission,  and  that 
knowledge  is  still  more  inevitably  implied  in  her  words 
to  the  servants.  She  still  trusts  to  Him,  and  so  implicitly 
that  she  leaves  everything  to  His  disposal,  and  bespeaks 
obedience  for  whatever  He  directs.  Christ's  delays 
should  but  strengthen  faith  and  submission. 

No  note  of  time  gives  the  space  between  Christ's 
answer  and  the  miracle.  It  cannot  have  been  long,  but 
He  discerned  some  change  in  conditions,  either  material 
or  moral,  which  in  a  brief  space  made  much  change. 
Possibly  He  waited  for  the  deficiency  to  be  apparent  to 
the  disciples.  Possibly  He  waited  for  the  voice  of 
His  heavenly  Father,  as  well  as  of  His  earthly  mother. 
But,  at  all  events,  He  knew  that  the  right  time  had  come. 
His  clock  is  not  set  by  ours,  and  the  beats  that  bring 
the  striking  of  His  hour  are  not  moments,  but  spiritual 
conditions. 

II.  The  miracle  is  next  told,  and  that  in  very  remark- 
able fashion.  There  is  not  a  word  about  the  method, 
nor  even  a  statement  that  the  miracle  was  wrought. 
We  are  told  what  preceded  and  followed,  but  itself  is 
shrouded  in  silence.      The  servants  fill  the  waterpots. 


Less.  III.]        The  First  Ray  of  the  Glory  23 

then  "  Draw  out  now,"  and  they  draw,  and  carry  to  the 
superintendent  of  the  revels.  We  cannot  even  tell 
where  the  miracle  came  in,  or  how  far  it  extended. 
Was  all  the  water  in  these  six  great  vessels,  probably 
some  fifty  gallons,  changed  into  wine,  or  was  the  change 
effected  as  the  portion  required  was  drawn,  and  on  that 
portion  only  ?  It  is  impossible  to  say.  The  conspicuous 
feature  of  the  miracle  is  the  entire  absence  of  material 
means.  Sometimes  our  Lord  employed  material  vehicles » 
as  clay,  or  spittle,  or  the  touch  of  His  hand ;  sometimes 
He  wrought  by  a  word.  But  here  there  is  not  even  a 
word.  His  will  silently  works  with  sovereign  power  on 
matter  which  is  plastic,  as  if  touched.  It  is  not  even 
"  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,"  but,  more  wonderful  than 
even  that,  He  silently  willed,  and  the  "conscious  water 
knew  its  Lord,  and  blushed."  In  this  beginning  of 
miracles,  then,  Jesus  manifested  forth  His  glory  as 
Creator  and  Sustainer  of  all  things,  without  whom  was 
not  anything  made,  and  by  whom  all  things  consist  and 
change. 

III.  The  results  of  the  miracle  are  twofold.  The 
ruler  of  the  feast,  ignorant  of  the  miracle,  unconsciously 
attests  its  reality  and  completeness ;  the  glory  manifested 
in  it  deepens  the  faith  of  the  disciples. 

The  ruler's  half-jesting  speech  compliments  the  bride- 
groom's cellar  at  the  expense  of  his  prudence,  and,  in 
its  intention,  is  simply  a  suggestion  that  he  is  wasting 
his  best  wine  in  producing  it  when  palates  are  less 
sensitive  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  entertainment. 
But  it  suggests  a  higher  thought.  Christ  keeps  His  best 
till  last,  whereas  the  world  gives  its  best  first ;  and,  when 
palates  are  dulled  and  appetite  diminished,   "  then  that 


24  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  H.  i-n 

which  is  worse."  How  tragically  true  that  is  !  In  many 
lives  the  early  days  of  hope  and  vigour,  when  all  was 
fresh  and  wondrous,  contrast  miserably  with  the  dreary 
close,  when  habit  and  failing  strength  have  taken  the 
edge  off  all  delights  of  sense ;  and  memory,  like  a 
lengthening  chain,  is  dragged  along,  and,  with  memory, 
regrets  and  remorse.  In  the  weariness  and  monotony 
of  toilsome  middle  life,  and  in  the  deepening  shadows 
of  advancing  and  solitary  old  age,  worldly  men  have 
to  drink  the  dregs  of  the  once  foaming  cup,  which  "  at 
the  last  biteth  like  a  serpent."  But  Jesus  keeps  the  best 
for  the  end.  No  time  can  cloy  His  gifts,  but  advancing 
years  make  them  more  precious  and  necessary.  In  His 
service,  "  better  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  beginning 
thereof."  And  when  life  is  over  here,  and  we  pass  into 
the  heavens,  this  word  of  the  ruler  at  the  humble  feast 
will  serve  to  express  our  thankful  surprise  at  finding  all 
so  much  better  than  our  highest  hopes  and  sweetest 
experiences.  "Thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until 
now." 

"  The  best  is  yet  to  be, 
The  last  of  life,  for  which  the  first  was  planned." 

The  wider  significance  of  the  sign  is  given  in  the 
eleventh  verse.  It  was  a  manifestation  of  Christ's  glory, 
and  thereby  it  was  the  occasion  of  new  faith  to  the 
disciples.  The  light  was  His,  and  yet  the  Father's.  The 
mystery  of  His  being  is  that  His  self-revelation  was  at 
once  ^'the  effulgence  of"  the  Father's  "glory,"  and  of 
His  own,  as  the  eternal  Light  and  only-begotten  Son. 
That  manifestation  (one  of  John's  favourite  words)  led 
susceptible  hearts  to  new,  deeper  faith.  It  was  a  sign  for 
those  who  were  already  disciples,  and  had  no  recorded 


Less.  Ill,]        The  First  Ray  of  the  Glory  25 

effect  on  others.  Not  only  the  miraculous  fact,  but  the 
whole  revelation  of  Christ  in  the  incident,  is  meant. 
We  have  already  seen  that  it  "  manifested  forth  His 
glory "  as  being  a  creative  act ;  but  there  are  other 
gleams  from  it,  which  reveal  other  and  gracious  aspects 
of  our  Lord's  character  and  work. 

It  is  not  without  meaning  that  Jesus  began  His  work 
by  sanctioning  and  hallowing  common,  and  especially 
family,  life.  What  a  contrast  there  is  between  the 
simple  gladness  of  the  rustic  wedding  and  the  tempta- 
tion in  the  wilderness,  from  which  Jesus  had  just  come  ! 
AVhat  a  contrast  between  the  sublime  heights  of  the 
prologue  and  this  opening  scene  of  the  ministry  !  What 
a  contrast  between  the  rigid,  ascetic  forerunner  and  this 
Son  of  Man  !  How  unlike  the  anticipations  of  the 
disciples,  who  would  be  all  tingling  with  expectation 
of  the  first  exhibition  of  His  Messiahship !  Surely  the 
fact  that  His  first  act  was  to  hallow  marriage  and  family 
life  has  opened  a  fountain  of  sacred  blessing.  So  He 
breaks  down  that  wicked  division  of  life  into  sacred  and 
secular  which  has  damaged  both  parts  so  much.  So  He 
teaches  that  the  sphere  of  religion  is  this  world,  not 
only  another.  So  He  claims  as  the  subjects  of  His 
sanctifying  power  every  relation  of  manhood.  So  He 
says  at  the  beginning  of  His  career,  "  I  am  a  man,  and 
nothing  that  belongs  to  manhood  do  I  reckon  foreign  to 
Myself."     Where  He  has  trod  is  hallowed  ground. 

The  participation  of  the  prince  in  the  festivities  of 
his  people  dignifies  these.  Our  King  has  sat  at  a 
wedding  feast,  and  the  memory  of  His  presence  there 
adds  a  new  sacredness  to  the  sacredest,  and  a  new 
sweetness  to  the  sweetest,  of  human  ties.     The  consecra- 


26  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ii.  i-n 

tion  of  His  presence,  like  some  pungent  and  perennial 
perfume,  lingers  yet  in  the  else  scentless  air  of  daily  life. 
"  Sanctity  "  is  not  "  singularity."  We  need  not  withdraw 
from  any  region  of  activity  or  interest  for  affection  or 
intellect,  in  order  to  develop  the  whitest  saintliness. 
Christ's  saints  are  to  be  "  in  the  world,  not  of  it,"  like 
their  Master,  who  went  from  the  wilderness  and  its 
fearful  conflicts  to  begin  His  work  amid  the  homely 
rejoicings  of  a  village  wedding. 

Further,  He  manifested  His  glory  as  the  ennobler 
and  heightener  of  earthly  joys.  That  may  be  taken, 
with  a  possibly  permissible  play  of  fancy,  as  a  lesson 
suggested,  if  not  as  a  meaning  intended,  by  the  change 
of  water  into  wine.  The  latter  is,  in  the  Old  Testament 
especially,  a  symbol  of  gladness.  The  Man  of  Sorrows 
brings  the  gift  of  joy.  To  make  men  glad  is  an  object 
not  unworthy  of  Him.  If  we  may  so  say,  it  was  worth 
His  while  to  come  from  heaven  and  agonise  and  die, 
that  He  might  pour  everlasting  and  pure  joy  into  weary 
and  sad  hearts. 

We  are  so  much  accustomed  to  draw  joys  from  ignoble 
sources,  that  in  most  of  them  there  is  a  trace  of  something 
not  altogether  creditable  or  lofty,  and  hence  we  often  fail 
to  estimate  rightly  the  importance  of  joy  as  an  element 
in  Christian  life.  But  Christ  came  to  give  the  oil  of  joy 
for  mourning,  and  He  does  so  in  part  by  transforming 
the  less  potent  and  invigorating  draughts  from  earthen 
waterpots  into  the  new  wine  of  the  kingdom.  The 
commonest  joys,  if  only  they  are  not  foul  and  sinful, 
are  capable  of  this  transformation.  If  we  bring  them  to 
Jesus,  and  are  "  glad  in  the  Lord,"  He  will  ennoble 
them,    and   they   will   tend    to   ennoble   us.      A   taper 


Less.  III.]        The  First  Ray  of  the  Glory  27 

plunged  into  a  jar  of  oxygen  blazes  more  brightly. 
Without  Christ's  presence,  earth's  joys  at  their  best  and 
brightest  are  like  some  fair  landscape  in  shadow.  When 
He  comes  to  hallow  them — as  He  always  does  when 
He  is  invited — they  are  like  the  same  scene  when  the 
sun  blazes  out  on  it,  flashes  from  every  bend  of  the 
rippling  river,  brings  beauty  into  shady  corners,  opens 
the  flowers,  and  sets  all  the  birds  singing,  in  the  sky. 
Joys  on  which  He  can  let  the  sunshine  of  His  smile  fall 
will  be  bettered  and  prolonged  thereby  ;  joys  on  which 
He  cannot,  are  not  for  His  servants  to  meddle  with. 
If  we  cannot  make  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  our  mirth, 
and  ask  Him  to  bless  it,  we  had  better  be  sorrowful  than 
glad.  If  we  keep  Him  out  of  our  mirth,  "  the  end  of 
that  mirth  is  heaviness,"  however  jubilant  may  be  its 
beginning. 

But  Christ  can  not  only  change  the  water  of  human 
joy  into  the  wine  of  heavenly  gladness,  but  He  can  drop 
an  elixir  into  the  cups  of  sorrow,  and  change  them  into 
cups  of  blessing  and  salvation.  One  drop  of  that  potent 
influence  can  sweeten  the  bitterest  draught,  even  though 
many  a  tear  has  fallen  into  it.  He  can  make  Marah 
into  Elim,  and  can  calm  sorrow  into  a  wilHng  acquies- 
cence not  wholly  unlike  happiness.  Christian  sorrow 
has  a  sister's  likeness  to  Christian  joy,  though  com- 
plexion and  dress  be  different.  Jesus  will  repeat  "  this 
beginning  of  miracles  "  in  every  sad  heart  that  trusts 
to  Him. 

Where  He  is  invited  as  a  guest.  He  brings  richer 
provision  than  was  there  before.  No  man  is  the  poorer 
by  asking  Him  to  accept  what  He  can  give.  They  who 
bid  Him  to  sup  with   them  shall  sup  with  Him.     He 


28  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  ii.  i-n 

supplies  the  deficiencies  of  earthly  stores.  The  gifts  He 
gives  do  not  perish  with  the  using.  The  more  we  take, 
the  more  we  have.  The  largest  waterpots  will  run  dry 
at  last ;  but  Christ  will  give  us  a  fountain  within 
springing  unto  life  eternal,  and  when  the  world's  cups 
are  empty  He  will  satisfy  the  blessed  thirst  of  every 
spirit  which  longs  for  Him  and  His  gifts. 


LESSON    IV 


How  Can  these  Things  be  ? " 

St.  John  iii.  1-17 


1.  "  There  was  a  man  of  the 
Pharisees,  named  Nicodemus,  a 
ruler  of  the  Jews : 

2.  The  same  came  to  Jesus 
bj'^  night,  and  said  unto  Him, 
Rabbi,  we  know  that  Thou  art 
a  teacher  come  from  God  :  for 
no  man  can  do  these  miracles 
that  Thou  doest,  except  God  be 
with  him. 

3.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  thee.  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

4.  Nicodemus  saith  unto  Him, 
How  can  a  man  be  born  when 
he  is  old  ?  can  he  enter  the 
second  time  into  his  mother's 
womb,  and  be  born  ? 

5.  Jesus  answered.  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except 
a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

6.  That  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh  ;  and  that  which 
is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit. 

7.  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto 
thee.  Ye  must  be  born  again. 

8.  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the 
sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell 
whence  it  cometh,  and  whither 
it  goeth  :  so  is  every  one  that 
is  born  of  the  Spirit. 

9.  Nicodemus  answered  and 


said  unto  Him,  How  can  these 
things  be  ? 

10.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Art  thou  a  master  of 
Israel,  and  knowest  not  these 
things  ? 

11.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
thee.  We  speak  that  we  do 
know,  and  testify  that  we  have 
seen ;  and  ye  receive  not  our 
witness. 

12.  If  I  have  told  you  earthly 
things,  and  ye  believe  not,  how 
shall  3^e  believe,  if  I  tell  you  of 
heavenly  things  ? 

13.  And  no  man  hath  as- 
cended up  to  heaven,  but  He 
that  came  down  from  heaven, 
even  the  Son  of  man  which  is 
in  heaven. 

14.  And  as  Moses  lifted  up 
the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  must  the  Son  of  man 
be  lifted  up  : 

1 5 .  That  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  eternal  life. 

16.  For  God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  He  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life. 

17.  For  God  sent  not  His 
Son  into  the  world  to  condemn 
the  world  ;  but  that  the  world 
through  Him  might  be  saved." 


29 


30  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  iii.  1-17 

THE  designation  of  Nicodemus  as  "  a  man  of  the 
Pharisees  "  connects  the  narrative  with  the  preced- 
ing words,  and  presents  it  as  an  instance  of  our  Lord's 
discernment  of  character  and  motives,  even  when  these 
were  unexpressed  and  dimly  seen  by  the  man  himself. 
He  knew  Nicodemus  better  than  Nicodemus  did,  and 
spoke  to  his  unspoken  thoughts.  He  "committed 
Himself "  to  this  "  man  "  as  seeing  what  was  in  him. 
This  wonderful  disclosure  of  the  very  heart  of  the  gospel, 
made  thus  early  and  to  a  ruler,  can  only  be  touched  here 
in  the  slightest  fashion.  Volumes  would  not  exhaust  it, 
but  it  must  suffice  to  try  to  grasp  its  main  sequence  of 
thought.  In  general,  we  may  regard  it  as  Christ's  way 
of  educating  a  man  who  was  ready  to  recognise  Him  as 
a  teacher  to  a  fuller  perception  of  what  was  needed  for 
discipleship,  and  to  a  loftier  conception  of  His  nature 
and  work.  The  utterances  of  Nicodemus  divide  the 
whole  into  three  parts. 

I.  We  have  the  imperfect  confession  and  its  reception 
(vers.  1-3).  The  nocturnal  visit  looks  like  timidity,  or, 
at  least,  a  wish  for  secrecy  and  non-committal.  The 
acknowledgment  by  Nicodemus  is  made  in  the  name  of 
others.  Possibly  he  was  sent  by  some  of  his  colleagues 
who  shared  his  conviction,  and  wished  further  information 
as  to  the  programme  of  this  new  claimant  of  INIessiahship, 
or  he  may  have  been  speaking  the  general  conclusion  of 
the  Sanhedrim.  If  so,  they  stifled  their  first  clear  convic- 
tions, and  afterwards  gave  the  lie  to  this  confession. 
Those  who  said  "  We  know  that  Thou  art  a  teacher  come 
from  God  "  were  not  subsequently  ashamed  to  say,  with 
equal  confidence  and  arrogance,  "  We  know  that  this 
Man  is  a  sinner,"  and  "  we  know  not  from  whence  He 


Less.  IV.]       "How  Can  these  Things  be?"  31 

is."     Light  resisted  is  quenched.     Wilful  ignorance  call- 
ing itself  knowledge  binds  sin  on  men. 

There  is  an  unpleasant  tone  of  superiority,  and  almost 
of  patronage,  in  Nicodemus'  testimonial.  He  conde- 
scends to  recognise  in  Jesus  a  "  teacher,"  and  calls  Him 
"Rabbi,"  though  He  had  not  graduated  in  the  schools. 
"  From  God  "  is  put  emphatically  first,  as  if  to  signalise 
the  irregular  inspiration  of  Jesus ;  and  the  prominence 
given  to  "  we  know  "  implies  the  speaker's  consciousness 
of  the  value  of  such  a  certificate  to  this  undistinguished 
teacher.  But  Nicodemus'  error  was  mainly  in  his  ■ 
inadequate  conception  of  Christ's  nature  and  work.  If 
we  think  of  Jesus  but  as  a  teacher,  even  if  we  admit  His 
miracles  as  attesting  God's  presence  with  Him,  His  true 
nature  and  kingdom  are  hid  from  our  eyes.  All  merely 
humanitarian  conceptions  of  Him  are  here  set  aside  by 
His  own  hand,  as  unworthy  of  Him  and  impotent  for  us. 

Whom  did  Nicodemus  mean  to  convince  by  his  argu- 
ment about  miracles  ?  It  was  singularly  unnecessary  as 
addressed  to  Jesus,  but  its  introduction  suggests  that  the 
speaker  is  reassuring  his  own  somewhat  shaky  faith,  which 
found  difficulty  in  admitting  that  a  Galilean  peasant  was 
a  God-made  rabbi.  He  has  not  said  a  word  about  what 
he  came  for,  and  we  can  only  infer  it  from  Christ's 
answer,  which,  as  so  often,  replies  to  thoughts  rather 
than  words.  He  wishes  to  know  more  of  whether  Jesus  "^ 
claims  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  means  to  carry  out  the 
Jewish  idea  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  which  John  had 
shadowed. 

Our  Lord's  answer  glances  at  his  "  except,"  and  then 
grapples  directly  with  his  unspoken  thought,  and  tells 
him  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  brought  into  being 


32  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  m.  1-17 

through  teachers,  but  requires,  as  the  condition  of  even 
beholding  it,  an  entirely  new  beginning  of  life.  There 
must  be  new  eyes  for  new  seeing,  and  new  seeing  for 
this  new  order  of  things,  the  kingdom  of  God.  That 
principle,  which  will  be  further  developed  in  the  sequel, 
sweeps  away  the  idea  that  the  bringer  of  the  kingdom  is 
merely  to  be  either  a  school-trained  rabbi  or  a  God-sent 
teacher.  Something  infinitely  more  and  altogether 
different  from  that  is  wanted.  Human  nature  does  not 
require  culture,  but  a  new  life.  If  Jesus  is  but  a  teacher. 
He  is  but  one  of  the  long  series  whose  teachings  have 
failed  to  arrest  evil  or  bring  the  golden  age.  This 
generation,  with  its  confidence  in  the  ennobling  and 
purifying  effect  of  education,  needs  this  truth  as  much 
as  Nicodemus  did. 

n.  Nicodemus'  question  is  not  so  foolish  as  it  is 
often  supposed  to  be.  Its  second  part  shows  that  he 
recognised  the  impossibility  of  the  expression  "  born 
again  "  being  literally  understood ;  and  its  first  member 
asks  what,  in  view  of  that  plain  impossibility,  is  the  pro- 
cess intended.  One  does  not  see  what  better  question 
he  could  have  asked.  The  cautions  founded  upon  its 
supposed  inappropriateness,  to  the  effect  that  we  should 
beware  of  putting  away  truths  because  we  do  not  under- 
stand the  manner  of  their  being,  seem  beside  the  mark. 
Was  not  this  question  the  very  one  which  Jesus  desired 
to  evoke  ?  His  answer  does  not  deal  with  it  as  either 
absurd  or  improper,  but  as  the  very  thing  for  which  He 
had  been  waiting.  That  answer  (vers.  5-8)  is  an  explana- 
tion of  the  manner  and  an  enforcement  of  the  necessity  of 
this  new  birth.  In  the  fifth  verse  both  of  these  thoughts 
are  stated,  and  rested  on  the  sole  authority  of  Jesus. 


Less.  IV.]       "How  Can  these  Things  be?"  ^^ 

The  duplicated  "  verily,"  which  is  peculiar  to  this 
Gospel,  at  once  claims  absolute  authority  for  the  teacher, 
attests  the  importance  of  the  lesson,  and  calls  for  our 
best  attention.  We  are  bound  to  take  His  statements 
on  His  bare  word.  What  is  arrogant  presumption  in 
a  human  teacher  is  consistent  with  meekness  in  Him. 
The  truth  thus  heralded  is  all-important.  Nicodemus' 
"  how  can  "  is  fully  answered. 

This  new  life  is  communicated  "  by  water  and  Spirit." 
Whatever  be  the  meaning  of  the  former  factor,  "  water," 
its  omission  in  the  eighth  verse  shows  that  it  is  not  on  the 
same  level  as  the  latter,  "  Spirit."  It  is  generally  referred 
to  baptism,  and,  if  so,  the  relation  of  the  two  terms  is  that 
of  symbol  and  thing  symbolised  ;  or,  it  may  be,  of  cleans- 
ing for  the  past  old  life,  and  impartation  of  the  new. 
But  the  explanation,  which  follows  the  analogy  of  John 
the  Baptist's  phrase  "with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire," 
taking  water  to  mean  simply  the  purifying  energy  of  the 
Spirit,  is  more  in  accordance  with  our  Lord's  absolute 
silence,  till  the  last  of  His  words,  in  reference  to  the  rite, 
and  with  the  omission  in  verse  eight. 

The  necessity  of  the  new  birth  is  still  more  strongly 
affirmed  as  the  condition,  not  only  of  perceiving,  but  of 
entering  into,  the  kingdom  of  God.  Therein  is  contained 
the  declaration  of  the  spiritual  character  of  that  kingdom, 
which,  however  it  may  be  manifested  on  earth  in  institu- 
tions, is  essentially  that  order  of  things  in  which  the  will 
of  God  reigns  supreme.  The  Sanhedrim's  dreams,  which 
Nicodemus  shared,  are  shattered  by  the  words.  The 
necessity  of  this  new  birth  is  enforced  in  the  sixth  verse 
by  the  consideration  that,  as  a  stream  cannot  rise  above 
its  source,  the  child  but  repeats  the  elements  belonging 

3 


34  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  iii.  1-17 

to  the  parent.  "  Flesh,"  by  which  is  meant  the  whole  of 
human  nature  apart  from  the  life-giving  Spirit,  can  but 
produce  flesh.  Man  cannot  find  within  the  limits  of  his 
own  powers  the  conditions  necessary  for  entrance  into 
the  kingdom.  The  same  law  of  kinship  holds  in  the 
higher  region.  Spiritual  birth  results  in  a  life  like  its 
source.  That  life,  by  its  spiritual  nature,  is  fit  to  enter 
a  kingdom  which  is  spiritual.  Therefore,  these  things 
being  so,  the  stringent  demand  for  a  new  birth  as  pre- 
liminary to  becoming  a  subject  of  Messiah's  (which  is 
God's)  kingdom  should  cause  no  wonder. 

Mark  our  Lord's  emphatic  "ye,"  corresponding  to 
Nicodemus'  "  we,"  but  also  significantly  excepting  Him- 
self from  the  universal  need. 

A  symbol  lies  ready  at  hand  which  may  lighten  the 
wonder.  The  word  necessarily  translated  "  wind  "  in 
verse  eight  is  that  used  in  the  rest  of  the  conversation, 
as  always,  for  "  spirit " ;  and  the  operation  and  effects  of 
the  one  agent  are  illustrations  of  those  of  the  other. 
The  former  seems  to  blow  where  it  listeth,  so  little  do 
we  know  even  yet  of  the  laws  determining  its  course. 
It  is  audible  in  its  effect,  though  unseen  in  itself,  and  its 
source  and  its  goal  are  beyond  us.  Thus  free  in  its 
working,  invisible  but  manifest  in  result,  coming  from 
hidden  depths  in  God,  and  passing  on  to  unknown  issues, 
the  breath  of  God  is  breathed  into  "  flesh,"  and  makes  it, 
too,  "spirit."  Mark  the  significance  of  the  apparently 
irregular  comparison  attributing  all  these  characteristics, 
not,  as  we  expect,  to  the  Spirit,  but  to  every  one  born 
thereby.  The  offspring  is  as  the  parent.  The  Christian 
in  his  new  life  has  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  within,  and 
is  free  thereby.     The  depths  of  his  hidden  life  cannot  be 


Less.  IV.]       "How  Can  these  Things  be?"  35 

tracked  by  fleshly  eyes,  but  its  results  are  manifest.  It 
has  its  origin  in  the  secrets  of  Divine  love,  and  its  goal  is 
among  things  which  eye  hath  not  seen. 

So  Jesus  answers  the  question,  "  How  can  a  man  be 
born  when  he  is  old  ?  "  A  new  life,  which  the  Spirit 
of  God  will  give,  is  the  only  possible  qualification  for 
entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  either  here  or  in  its 
ultimate  perfection.  What  use  would  a  "  teacher  "  be, 
if  that  be  so? 

III.  Nicodemus'  third  utterance  repeats  more  curtly, 
and,  as  it  were,  wearily,  his  former  question.  Christ's 
answer  has  a  tone  of  rebuke  at  first,  implying  the  presence 
of  something  wrong,  but  soon  passes  to  answer  with 
infinite  patience  what  was  good  in  the  question,  by  un- 
folding the  great  work  which  made  it  possible  that  "  these 
things  "  should  "  be."  The  conditions  of  entrance  into 
the  kingdom  having  been  laid  down,  the  means  of  com- 
pliance with  them  are  next  set  forth.  The  tenth  verse 
has  an  accent  of  rebuke,  and  implies  that  "these  things  " 
— that  is,  the  necessity  and  reality  of  a  spiritual  influence 
recreating  men — were  so  far  taught  in  the  Old  Testament 
that  the  men  whose  business  was  to  expound  it,  and 
whose  boast  was  that  they  "knew,"  should  have  been 
familiar  with  them.  Many  a  psalm  (Jer.  xxxi.  ;^;^ ; 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  26)  taught  these  truths.  Ecclesiastics  blind 
to  the  vital  centre  of  the  revelation  which  they  assume 
to  expound  are  found  in  all  Churches. 

The  eleventh  verse  rebukes  Nicodemus  on  another 
ground, — that  he  was  putting  away  strong  testimony  to  the 
truths  in  hand.  But  who  are  the  "  we  "  here  associated 
with  Jesus  ?  The  best  answer  is,  the  little  group  of 
disciples,  who,  however  imperfectly,  had  in  some  measure 


36  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  iii.  1-17 

accepted  Christ's  teaching,  and  begun  to  know  the  mys- 
teries of  the  kingdom.  On  the  one  side  are  the  Pharisees, 
represented  by  Nicodemus,  with  his  "  we  know  "  ;  on  the 
other,  the  handful  of  Christ's  followers  who  could  say, 
"  We  have  seen,  and  we  know,"  with  better  right. 

The  essential  distinction  of  true  Christian  witnessing 
is  here  set  forth,  in  some  measure  anticipatively,  as 
being  the  result  of  personal  and  immediate  knowledge  ; 
and  John's  first  words  in  his  Epistle  are  an  echo.  The 
clearness  of  the  witness  and  the  rehableness  of  its 
source  make  the  guilt  of  rejecting  the  more  deep, 
and  the  wonder  of  it  the  more  wonderful  and  sad. 
This  tenderly  condescending  "  we  "  makes  the  presence 
of  some,  at  least,  of  the  disciples  probable;  and  that 
would  explain  the  minute  •  fulness  of  narrative,  since,  if 
any  were  there,  John  would  be. 

The  twelfth  verse  warns  Nicodemus  and  us  all  that  the 
rejection  of  light  given  bars  the  reception  of  higher  light, 
and  saddens  the  Speaker  of  it.  It  may  seem  strange  that 
the  truths  just  spoken  should  be  called  "  earthly  " ;  but 
the  strangeness  disappears  if  we  remember  that  that 
epithet  means  having  their  place  of  manifestation  on  earth. 
The  new  birth  is  not  earthly  in  the  sense  of  belonging 
by  nature  to  earth,  but  it  is  in  that  other  of  being  brought 
about  and  operating  on  earth.  So  it  is  capable  of  verifi- 
cation through  its  effects,  and  therefore  should  be  easier 
to  receive  than  the  next  declaration  to  be  made.  A 
solemn  lesson  as  to  the  connection  between  our  attitude 
to  the  first  and  second  stages  of  Christ's  teaching  is 
wrapped  up  in  these  words.  If  we  will  not  learn  a^  we 
stand  small  chance  of  learning  b. 

The  thirteenth  verse  naturally  follows  the  claim  that 


Less.  IV.]       "How  Can  these  Things  be?"  37 

Jesus  was  the  trustworthy  Revealer  of  heavenly  things. 
There  was  a  witness  to  the  earthly  in  which  others  were 
united  with  Him,  but  in  telling  the  heavenly  He  stood 
alone.  His  sole  office  therein,  and  the  reliableness  of 
these  revelations  resting  on  His  word  only,  depend  on 
that  great  fact  that  He  came  down  from  heaven,  and  that, 
as  Son  of  Man,  He  is  in  heaven  even  while  on  earth. 
His  pre-existence,  incarnation,  continual  communion  with 
the  Father,  uniqueness,  and,  as  consequence  of  all.  His 
right  to  tell  heavenly  things,  and  our  obligation  to 
receive  them,  simply  because  He  has  said  them,  are  all 
included  in  these  few  words. 

And  what  are  the  heavenly  things  thus  solemnly 
brought  to  us  for  our  faith  ?  The  fact  of  the  mission  of 
the  Son  of  God  from  the  heart  of  the  Father.  Of  course, 
the  incarnation  and  the  crucifixion  are  earthly  things,  in 
so  far  as  they  have  their  fulfilment  on  earth ;  but  they 
are  heavenly,  inasmuch  as  all  which  gives  them  their 
value,  and  distinguishes  them  from  any  other  birth  or 
death,  lies  in  the  heavenly  truths  unfolded  in  verses  14- 
18.  The  brazen  serpent  was  in  the  likeness  of  the  cause 
of  the  disease.  Jesus  came  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh.  Its  elevation  was  the  symbol  of  the  defeat  of  the 
evil,  and  the  means  of  making  it  conspicuous.  Christ 
was  lifted  on  the  cross  in  order  to  slay  the  sin  in  the 
likeness  of  which  He,  sinless,  died.  A  look  brought 
healing.  Faith  beholds,  and  is  whole.  The  shameful 
elevation  of  the  cross  was  one  stage  in  the  elevation  to 
the  throne,  and  Nicodemus  and  we  are  to  learn  that  the 
victory  of  the  King  is  in  His  apparent  defeat,  and  the 
degradation  of  the  lofty  cross  the  direct  path  to  the 
height  of  the  throne. 


38  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  iii.  1-17 

The   sacrificial  death   of  Christ   on  the   cross,   as  in 
obedience   to   a   necessity   ("  must ")   arising   from  the 
very  nature  of  God,  the  great  gift  of  eternal  life  flowing 
from  Him  to  us,  and  the  condition  on  which  that  gift  is 
ours, — namely,  faith  in  Him, — are  the  heavenly  things 
which  Jesus  unfolded  to  Nicodemus  as  the  full  answer 
to  his  question  of  how  that  new  birth  could  be  brought 
about.     Clearly,  the   knowledge  which  each  man   may 
have  of  his  own  character,  and  the  experience  which  he 
has  of  men,  confirm  the  earlier  declaration  that  a  radical 
change,  comparable  to   a  new  birth,   is  needful  before 
such  a  mortal  creature  can  enter  into  the  state  of  perfect 
obedience   to   God's  perfect   will.     As   clearly,  such   a 
change  can  only  be  effected  by  superhuman — that  is,  by 
Divine — power.     Then  comes   the  great  question,  Can 
and  will  such  a  power  be  put  forth  ;  and,  if  so,  where  is 
it,  and  how  may  I  have  it  working  on  me  ?     The  second 
part  of  this  conversation  answers  these  questions.     Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  Man,  has  come  from 
the  Father,  sent  by  the  Father's  love.     He  has  died  on 
the  cross  for  sin-stricken  men.     The  look  of  faith  brings 
His  gifts  into  our  hearts.     Eternal  life  is  the  fife  con- 
ferred in  the  new  birth.     They  who  believe  in  His  name 
are  born,  not  of  flesh,  but  of  God ;  and  to  them  He  gives 
the  Spirit,  which  quickens  and  changes  their  sinful  selves 
into  its  own  likeness,  and  gives  them  authority  to  become 
sons  of  God. 


LESSON   V 
The  Thirsty  Giver  of  Living  Water 

St.  John  iv.  5-26 


5.  "Then  cometh  He  to  a 
city  of  Samaria,  which  is  called 
Sychar,  near  to  the  parcel  of 
ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  his 
son  Joseph. 

6.  Now  Jacob's  well  was 
there.  Jesus  therefore,  being 
wearied  with  His  journey,  sat 
thus  on  the  well :  and  it  was 
about  the  sixth  hour. 

7.  There  cometh  a  woman  of 
Samaria  to  draw  water  :  Jesus 
saith  unto  her,  Give  Me  to 
drink. 

8.  (For  His  disciples  were 
gone  away  unto  the  city  to  buy 
meat.) 

9.  Then  saith  the  woman  of 
Samaria  unto  Him,  How  is  it 
that  Thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest 
drink  of  me,  which  am  a  woman 
of  Samaria  ?  for  the  Jews  have 
no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans. 

10.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  her,  If  thou  knewest  the 
gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that 
saith  to  thee.  Give  Me  to  drink ; 
thou  wouldest  have  asked  of 
Him,  and  He  would  have  given 
thee  living  water. 

11.  The  woman  saith  unto 
Him,  Sir,  Thou  hast  nothing  to 


draw  with,  and  the  well  is 
deep  :  from  whence  then  hast 
Thou  that  living  water  ? 

12.  Art  Thou  greater  than 
our  father  Jacob,  which  gave 
us  the  well,  and  drank  thereof 
himself,  and  his  children,  and 
his  cattle  ? 

13.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  her,  Whosoever  drinketh 
of  this  water  shall  thirst  again  : 

14.  But  whosoever  drinketh 
of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the 
water  that  I  shall  give  him 
shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life. 

15.  The  woman  saith  unto 
Him,  Sir,  give  me  this  water, 
that  I  thirst  not,  neither  come 
hither  to  draw. 

16.  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Go, 
call  thy  husband,  and  come 
hither. 

17.  The  woman  answered 
and  said,  I  have  no  husband. 
Jesus  said  unto  her.  Thou  hast 
well  said,  I  have  no  husband  : 

18.  For  thou  hast  had  five 
husbands  ;  and  he  whom  thou 
now  hast  is  not  thy  husband  : 
in  that  saidst  thou  truly. 


40 


The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  iv.  5-26 


19.  The  woman  saith  unto 
Him,  Sir,  I  perceive  that  Thou 
art  a  prophet. 

20.  Our  fathers  worshipped 
in  this  mountain ;  and  ye  say, 
that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place 
where  men  ought  to  worship. 

21.  Jesus  saith  unto  her, 
Woman,  believe  Me,  the  hour 
Cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither 
in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at 
Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father. 

22.  Ye  worship  ye  know  not 
what :  we  know  what  we  wor- 
ship :  for  salvation  is  of  the 
Jews. 


23.  But  the  hour  cometh? 
and  now  is,  when  the  true 
worshippers  shall  worship  the 
Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth : 
for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to 
worship  Him. 

24.  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they 
that  worship  Him  must  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

25.  The  woman  saith  unto 
Him,  I  know  that  Messias 
Cometh,  which  is  called  Christ : 
when  He  is  come,  He  will  tell 
us  all  things. 

26.  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  I 
that  speak  unto  thee  am  He." 


THERE  are  seven  sayings  of  our  Lord  in  this  con- 
versation, which  may  be  regarded  as  the  seven 
rounds  of  a  ladder  whose  foot  is  on  earth  and  its  top  in 
heaven.  The  first  is  the  request  "  Give  Me  to  drink," 
which  reveals  a  true  manhood  participant  of  physical 
need  and  dependent  on  help.  The  last  is  the  full 
revelation  of  His  dignity  in  "  I  that  speak  unto  thee 
am  He."  How  wide  the  distance  between  these  two ! 
The  path  from  the  valley  to  the  height,  and  the  reasons 
for  making  a  Samaritan  woman  the  recipient  of  so  clear 
a  revelation  of  the  truth  veiled  from  His  own  people, 
will  appear  in  studying  the  narrative.  Observe  that  in 
the  earlier  part  of  the  conversation  Jesus  takes  the 
initiative  and  the  woman  answers,  while  in  the  latter, 
after  her  conscience  has  been  roused,  the  parts  are 
reversed.  The  passive  recipient  becomes  the  active 
inquirer. 

We  must  leave  all  topography  and  picturesque  treat- 
ment to  others,  and  simply  note  the  first  step  in  the 
ladder.     Try  to  see  with  the  woman's  eyes  a  travel-worn 


Less.  V.J    The  Thirsty  Giver  of  Living  Water  4 1 

Jew  sitting  alone  by  the  well,  and  to  hear  with  her  ears 
the  request  for  a  draught  of  water,  which  He  evidently 
sorely  needed.  Her  question  (probably  put  while  she 
was  giving  the  boon  asked  for)  is  the  simple  expression 
of  wonder,  with  a  little  dash  of  rustic  raillery  in  it,  as 
who  should  say,  "Oh,  then,  a  thirsty  Jew  is  not  quite 
so  proud  as  he  would  be  if  He  did  not  want  anything  ! 
You  can  speak  to  a  Samaritan,  and  that  a  woman,  when 
she  can  help  you."  Her  wonder  would  have  been 
greater  if  she  had  known  the  deepest  answer  to  her 
question,  His  elevation  above  all  national  distinctions 
and  equal  kinship  to  every  human  soul. 

But,  if  we  look  at  this  scene  with  eyes  enlightened 
by  fuller  knowledge,  how  wonderful  and  precious  it  is, 
as  one  pathetic  evidence  of  the  true  humanity  and 
humiliation  of  our  Lord  !  He  whose  goings  forth  were 
of  old  sat,  a  weary  traveller,  too  tired  to  go  with  the 
disciples  to  buy  food,  which  He  needed.  The  blazing 
sun,  His  creature,  made  Him  thirst  who  stills  the 
cravings  of  souls.  Our  question  should  be,  "  How  is  it 
that  Thou,  being  the  Son  of  God,  needest  and  askest 
drink  of  one  of  us  ?  "  The  answer  carries  us  deep  into 
the  mysteries  of  God  and  the  heart  of  the  gospel. 

The  second  step  (vers.  10-12)  is  like  a  partial  opening 
of  a  giving  hand  to  show  a  corner  of  the  gift  lying  in 
it,  which  is  met  by  a  half-bewildered  answer,  through 
which  appears  a  dawning  sense  of  some  deeper  meaning 
than  the  speaker  has  grasped.  Our  Lord  does  not  yet 
afford  any  clear  indication  of  the  nature  of  the  gift,  but 
simply  seeks  to  awaken  a  sense  of  great  possibilities  to 
be  had  for  the  asking.  He  links  His  words  on  to  the 
woman's  expressed  wonder  that  He,  being  what  she  sees 


42  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  iv.  5-26 

Him,  should  cross  the  barrier  to  her.  If  she  knew  who 
He,  the  "  Jew,"  was,  a  deeper  wonder  would  open  to 
her,  and  it  would  be  she  who  would -sue  to  Him.  "  The 
gift  of  God  "  is  not  defined,  but  the  very  generality  of 
the  phrase  stirs  desires.  It  is  perhaps  best  left  in  that 
generality,  as  here  meaning  all  that  God  gives  through 
Christ. 

Two  things  then  are  pointed  out,  in  which  He  would 
have  her  feel  her  ignorance, — the  gift  of  God,  and  the 
true  nature  of  Him,  the  Giver.  If  men  rightly  under- 
stood what  God  wishes  to  give  them,  the  knowledge 
could  not  but  kindle  desire.  If  they  understood  it  was 
a  gift,  they  would  know  that  asking  was  the  way  to  get 
it.  If  they  knew  that  Christ  gave  God's  gift,  they  would 
know  to  ask  Him.  That  "  if  thou  knewest "  is,  on 
Christ's  lips,  a  lament  as  well  as  a  palliation.  This 
woman's  ignorance  was  innocent.  Ours  is  not.  But 
the  knowledge  here  meant  is  more  than  intellectual 
apprehension  ;  for,  alas  !  it  is  possible  to  know  in  that 
way  both  of  these  subjects,  and  to  have  no  motions  of 
desire  towards  them.  Not  only  will  real  knowledge 
produce  desire,  but  every  desire  addressed  to  Jesus  will 
be  answered.  The  sequence  is  certain.  *,^now,"  "ask,'^, 
"have,"  are  links  soldered  fast  together. 

What  is  the  "  living  water  "  ?  Of  course,  the  form  of 
the  symbol  has  reference  to  the  occasion  of  the  whole 
conversation.  But  the  occurrence  of  the  same  metaphor 
in  the  words  to  Nicodemus  as  to  "  water  and  the  Spirit," 
and  again  in  the  great  scene  in  the  temple  court  (John 
vii.  37),  suggests  that  the  emblem  is  here  used  for  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  so,  the  subsequent  teaching 
of  the  nature  of  true  worship  is  based  on  the  promise 


Less,  v.]    The  Thirsty  Giver  of  Living  Water  43 

in  this  earlier  part  of  the  conversation,  and  a  new  hnk 
between  the  parts  is  brought  to  Hght.  But  whatever 
the  meaning  may  be,  there  is  no  explanation  of  it  at 
this  stage.  Enough  if  now  some  longing  for  the  un- 
known precious  gift  and  some  dawnings  of  trust  in  its 
Giver  begin  to  move  in  the  woman. 

Her  reply  indicates  growing  seriousness  and  incipient 
awe.  She  addresses  Jesus  with  a  title  of  respect,  and 
her  question,  pointing  out  the  physical  impossibility,  is 
like  Nicodemus'  parallel  one,  the  first  trace  of  per- 
ception that  more  is  meant  than  water.  Her  second 
question  lays  hold  of  Christ's  hint  of  concealed  greatness; 
and  while  it  puts  emphasis  on  ''Thou," — a  wearied,  thirsty, 
solitary  wayfarer, — and  magnifies,  with  a  touch  of  national 
jealousy,  "  our  father  Jacob,"  whom  she  calls,  with  dis- 
tinct reference  to  Christ's  promise  to  give,  the  "  giver  "  of 
"  the  well,"  there  is  a  tone  of  reverence  in  it  which  seems 
to  invite  fuller  disclosure.  Thus  far  Christ's  dealing  has 
told  as  He  desired. 

The  next  step  (vers.  13-15)  is  a  fuller  explanation  of 
the  gift,  answered  by  asking  which,  however  imperfect, 
is  not  in  vain.  Water  gives  temporary  relief  to  thirst, 
and  so  all  creatural  delights  and  goods  allay  desires  for 
a  space  only.  They  fail  in  permanence  because  they  are 
external.  If  men  are  ever  to  cease  to  thirst,  they  must 
have  an  inward  fountain.  Nothing  outside  of  me  can 
permanently  still  my  nature.  Jesus  does  not  define  His 
gift,  but  tells  its  blessed  effects.  He  has  something  to 
give  which  will  pass  into  the  spirit,  and,  there  abiding, 
will  not  only  quench  a  moment's  thirst,  but  will  be  a 
self-reproducing  fountain, — not  merely  like  water  in  a 
cup  or  even  in  Jacob's  well,  but  "  leaping  up  "  towards 


44  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  iv.  5-26 

and  reaching  to  the  eternal  Hfe  from  which  it  came.  A 
satisfying  gift,  an  inward  gift,  a  satisfying  inward  gift, 
which  is  itself  an  active  principle  and  the  quickener  of 
action  where  it  dwells,  and  which  ever  tends  towards  the 
perfect  consummation  of  eternal  life, — what  can  this  gift 
be  but  that  Spirit  which  He  gives,  and  which  is  in  us  the 
ground  of  all  enduring  blessedness,  the  spring  of  all  glad 
energy,  the  inspirer  of  all  Teachings  of  heart  and  mind 
towards  the  perfect  life,  of  which  it  is  the  earnest  ?  The 
great  words  in  the  seventh  chapter,  already  referred  to, 
are  the  best  commentary  on  this  saying. 

The  woman's  wonder  has  deepened  into  awe,  and  her 
glimmering  suspicions  of  something  great  in  this  "Jew  " 
pass  into  longings  to  possess  this  gift ;  and  her  petition, 
though  it  be  spoken  as  in  twilight,  bears  witness  that  new 
desires  are  beginning.  She  does  not  understand,  but 
she  feels  that  somehow  this  Stranger  can  give  her  the 
cure  of  two  evils, ^unsatisfied  thirst  and  weary  toil,  the 
latter  being  pathetically  expressed  in  the  Revised  Version's 
"  come  all  the  way  hither."  Even  the  dimmest  per- 
ception of  His  gift,  which  is  strong  enough  to  wing  a 
prayer  to  Him,  is  strong  enough  to  bring  an  answer. 
Even  the  desire  to  have  earthly  necessities  supplied  and 
earthly  toil  alleviated  is  acceptable  to  Him. 

The  next  step  (vers.  16,  17)  is  the  unexpected  home- 
thrust  at  her  sin  and  the  roused  conscience.  No  ex- 
planation of  the  startling  suddenness  of  this  address 
is  sufficient,  if  it  supposes  that  Jesus  did  not  know  her 
circumstances,  or  did  not  mean  it  as  an  assault  on  her  con- 
science. What  other  reason  could  there  be  for  breaking 
in  on  the  flow  of  the  conversation  ?  The  lesson  taught 
by  this  sudden  demand  is  that  the  consciousness  of  sin 


Less,  v.]    The  Thirsty  Giver  of  living  Water  45 

must  be  evoked,  and  penitence  precede  the  reception  of 
Christ's  gift.  The  direct  way  to  answer  the  woman's 
prayer  is  to  rouse  her  conscience. 

The  woman's  answer  proves  that  she  is  under  the 
spell  of  Christ's  influence.  There  is  shame  in  its  brevity, 
but  also  the  need  to  tell  Him  the  shameful  truth.  Per- 
haps there  may  be  also  a  shade  of  doubt  whether  He 
could  have  the  mysterious  power  she  was  beginning  to 
think  He  had,  since  He  seemed  to  err.  Did  she  half 
think  that  she  had  found  Him  tripping  ?  If  so,  the  next 
step  sets  her  right. 

It  is  (vers.  17,  18)  the  full  disclosure  of  her  sin  and 
the  full  recognition  of  His  prophetic  authority.  "  He 
knew  all  men  "  (John  ii.  24),  and  His  minute  knowledge 
of  the  foul  details  drove  home  the  conviction  that  He 
was  "  a  prophet."  She  has  got  nearer  the  true  con- 
ception than  Nicodemus,  with  his  cold  statement  of  a 
reasoned  conviction.  A  quickened  conscience  is  a  good 
teacher.  She  does  not  resent  the  Stranger's  intrusion 
into  her  past,  nor  make  excuses,  but,  as  it  were,  falls  in 
a  heap  at  His  feet,  utterly  abject  before  Him.  They  are 
not  beyond  hope  who  are  within  reach  of  conviction  of 
sin.  From  this  point  onward  the  woman  takes  the 
mitiative,  and  Christ  answers.  That  is  a  sign  of  growing 
interest  and  earnestness. 

So  the  next  step  (vers.  20-24)  is  her  reference  of  the 
fundamental  question  between  her  people  and  His  to  His 
prophetic  authority.  The  supposition  that  her  question 
was  only  a  diversion,  to  get  away  from  further  allusions 
to  her  life,  is  inconsistent  both  with  her  previous  attitude 
of  reverence  and  awe  and  with  the  tone  of  Christ's 
answer.     The  question  raised  by  her  divided  the  two 


46  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  iv.  5-26 

peoples,  was  important,  and  had  evidently  been  seriously 
thought  of  by  her.  She  must  have  been  profoundly 
impressed  by  Jesus,  to  think  of  asking  Him,  "  being  a 
Jew,"  to  decide  it  for  her.  She  all  but  offers,  in  asking 
His  judgment,  to  become  a  proselyte.  But  her  notions 
are  those  of  formal  worshippers,  to  whom  the  place  made 
worship  acceptable,  and  who  were  more  concerned  about 
the  where  than  the  how -ox  the  whom.  She  leaves  out 
the  name  of  the  object  of  worship,  as  if  that  w^ere  less 
important  than  the  locality. 

Our  Lord's  great  answer  lifts  her  high  above  half- 
pagan  notions.  It  deals  with  a  prospect  for  the  future 
and  a  privilege  for  the  present.  At  some  hour,  which  is 
yet  to  come  and  will  come,  the  religion  of  sacred  places 
will  melt  away,  with  all  its  antagonisms,  in  a  worship 
which  will  be  universal  because  it  is  filial.  When  that 
hour  strikes,  Gerizim  and  Jerusalem  will  equally  be 
forsaken  shrines.  The  fatherhood  of  God  is  the  great 
truth  which  Jesus  proclaims  as  determining  the  externals 
of  worship. 

But  He  also  answers  the  question  as  to  the  relative 
worth  of  Samaritan  and  Jewish  worship.  The  difference 
does  not  lie  in  the  place  of  worship,  but  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  worshippers.  The  Samaritans  had  cut  themselves 
off  from  God's  progressive  revelation  of  Himself  in  Israel, 
and  therefore  their  worship  was  of  an  unknown  some- 
what. The  God  to  whom  men  attain  by  any  other  path 
than  ^hat  of  accepting  His  historical  revelation  of  Him- 
self, is  a  dim  and  colourless  abstraction,  a  peradventure, 
an  object  of  fear  or  hope,  as  may  be,  but  not  of  know- 
ledge. Only  they  who  accept  and  profit  by  that  historical 
revelation  can  be  said  to  "  know  what  they  worship." 


Less,  v.]     The  Thirsty  Giver  of  Living  Water  47 

The  reason  for  this  knowledge  of  the  object  of  worship 
is  that,  by  God's  appointment,  "  the  [promised]  salva- 
tion "  was  to  proceed  from  the  Jews,  which  implies  a 
process  of  revelation  among  them.  The  woman's  ques- 
tion is  thus  answered,  the  true  prerogative  of  Israel  set 
forth,  even  while  the  universal  destination  of  that  salvation 
is  asserted,  and  the  fading  away  of  all  national  pre- 
eminence and  local  sanctity  in  the  universal  worship  of 
the  Father  foretold. 

But  the  present  has  its  privilege  and  its  duty,  as  well 
as  the  future  its  glorious,  wide  prospect.  "  The  hour 
now  is."  Because  Jesus  has  come,  it  has  come.  His 
coming  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father,  and  is  the  Father's 
seeking  for  true  worshippers.  Such  words,  though  parti- 
ally understood,  would  lead  the  woman  to  feel  more  and 
more  the  mysterious  greatness  of  the  Speaker,  and  would 
sound  as  inviting  her  to  become  such  a  worshipper.  The 
true  sanctuary  is  the  worshipper's  "  spirit,"  that  higher 
part  or  aspect  of  human  nature  which  is  capable  of 
communion  with  God.  Worship  in  spirit  is  possible 
only  on  the  basis  of  Christ's  work.  It  leaves  all  ques- 
tions of  externals  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  But  that 
communion  in  spirit  with  the  Divine  Spirit  is  to  be  also 
"  in  truth."  A  true,  though  not  full,  knowledge  is 
possible  on  the  basis  of  Christ's  revelation,  which  gives 
the  substance  of  Jewish  ritual  shadows  and  the  reality 
which  heathenism  had  overlaid  with  errors.  True  ideas 
and  right  feelings  are  both  drawn  from  Him. 

The  last  step  (vers.  25,  26)  is  the  woman's  Messianic 
hope  and  Christ's  full  disclosure  of  Himself.  The  alien, 
heretical  Samaritan  has  a  loftier  ideal  of  Messiah  than 
the  orthodox  Jew.     She  thinks  of  a  perfect  Enlightener ; 


48  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  iv.  5-26 

he  thought  of  a  temporal  prince.  The  heretic  may 
have  in  some  respects  a  higher  ideal  than  the  orthodox 
whose  orthodoxy  is  stiffened  into  form.  This  soul, 
though  stained  with  fleshly  lusts,  and  groping  in  much 
darkness,  was  ready  to  hail  Messiah  ;  and  that  for  the 
sake  of  His  revealing  power,  and  not  for  lower  gifts. 

Therefore  Jesus  at  last  throws  back  the  cloak,  of 
which  He  had  let  a  fold  or  two  be  blown  aside,  and 
stands  confessed  in  His  full  sovereign  authority.  Docile 
reception  of  partial  knowledge,  and  desire  for  its  increase, 
are  ever  rewarded.  "  Whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be 
given."  An  alien  woman  receives  the  full-orbed  truth 
which  was  hidden  from  rabbis  and  Pharisees.  That 
Christ  who  comes  to  give  the  Spirit  which  is  the  water 
of  life,  and  to  reveal  the  Father,  and  to  make  worship  in 
spirit  and  truth  possible  for  the  humblest,  will  hold 
familiar  converse  with  outcasts  and  sinners.  The  initial 
wonder  of  His  speaking  to  an  alien  pales  before  the 
stupendous  wonder  that  the  eternal  Word  becomes  flesh 
and  talks,  with  human  lips  and  Divine  condescension, 
with  us. 


LESSON    VI 


The  Life-Giver  and  Judge 

St.  John  v.  17-30 


17.  "But  Jesus  answered 
them,  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work. 

18.  Therefore  the  Jews 
sought  the  more  to  kill  Him, 
because  He  not  only  had  broken 
the  Sabbath,  but  said  also  that 
God  was  His  Father,  making 
Himself  equal  with  God. 

19.  Then  answered  Jesus 
and  said  unto  them.  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  The  Son 
can  do  nothing  of  Himself,  but 
what  He  seeth  the  Father  do : 
for  what  things  soever  He 
doeth,  these  also  doeth  the  Son 
likewise. 

20.  For  the  Father  loveth  the 
Son,  and  showeth  Him  all 
things  that  Himself  doeth  :  and 
He  will  show  Him  greater 
works  than  these,  that  ye  may 
marvel. 

21.  For  as  the  Father  raiseth 
up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth 
them ;  even  so  the  Son  quick- 
eneth whom  He  will. 

22.  For  the  Father  judgeth 
no  man,  but  hath  committed  all 
judgment  unto  the  Son. 

23.  That  all  men  should 
honour  the  Son,  even  as  they 
honour  the  Father.  He  that 
honoureth  not  the  Son  honour- 
eth  not  the  Father  which  hath 
sent  Him. 


24.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  He  that  heareth  My  word, 
and  believeth  on  Him  that  sent 
Me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and 
shall  not  come  into  condemna- 
tion ;  but  is  passed  from  death 
unto  life. 

25.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  The  hour  is  coming,  and 
now  is,  when  the  dead  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God  :  and  they  that  hear  shall 
live. 

26.  For  as  the  Father  hath 
life  in  Himself;  so  hath  He 
given  to  the  Son  to  have  life 
in  Himself; 

27.  And  hath  given  Him 
authority  to  execute  judgment 
also,  because  He  is  the  Son  of 
man. 

28.  Marvel  not  at  this :  for 
the  hour  is  coming,  in  the 
which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  His  voice, 

29.  And  shall  come  forth ; 
they  that  have  done  good,  unto 
the  resurrection  of  life ;  and 
they  that  have  done  evil,  unto 
the  resurrection  of  damnation. 

30.  I  can  of  Mine  own  self 
do  nothing:  as  I  hear,  I  judge: 
and  My  judgment  is  just ;  be- 
cause I  seek  not  Mine  own  will, 
but  the  will  of  the  Father  which 
hath  sent  Me." 


49 


50  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  v.  17-30 

IT  was  a  strange  state  of  mind  to  admit  that  Jesus 
"  did  these  things," — namely,  miracles, — and  yet  to 
take  offence  that  it  was  "  on  the  Sabbath  day."  Our 
Lord's  wonderful  answer  to  these  pedantic  formalists 
made  one  offence  into  two.  Hatred  sometimes  divines 
meanings  hidden  from  love.  The  Jews  were  right  when 
they  interpreted  Him  as  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
in  a  special  sense  ("  His  own  Father  "),  and  as  therein 
asserting  equality  with  God.  That  great  saying  in  the 
seventeenth  verse  is  the  germ  of  all  this  lesson's  remark- 
able teaching.  The  Divine  rest,  which  the  Sabbath 
symbolises,  is  not  cessation  of  action.  Both  in  that  pre- 
servation which  is  a  continual  creation,  and  in  redeeming 
activity,  God  unceasingly  works.  And  the  Son's  work  is 
of  the  same  order  and  conforms  to  the  same  law.  The 
rest  of  the  lesson  is  Christ's  defence  of  that  claim,  the 
greatness  of  which  had  thrown  His  original  offence  of 
Sabbath-breaking  into  the  shade.  Perhaps  we  may  take 
the  triple  "  Verily,  verily,"  as  marking  its  stages. 

I.  Verses  19-23  assert  that  the  work  of  the  Son  is 
absolutely  coincident  and  coextensive  with  that  of  the 
Father,  predict  still  more  signal  instances  of  that  working 
of  Divine  work  by  the  Son,  and,  as  practical  consequence 
of  that  identity  of  working,  claim  identity  of  reverence 
for  the  Son  and  the  Father.  Throughout  the  whole  the 
personality  of  Jesus  is  kept  subordinate  to  the  exposition 
of  the  relation  of  fatherhood  and  sonship  in  its  most 
perfect  form.  A  true  son  will  do  as  his  father  does ;  a 
true  father  will  lovingly  confide  his  motives  and  methods 
to  the  son.  Such  ideal  perfectness  of  paternal  confidence 
and  filial  following,  Jesus  declares,  though  without  as  yet 
distinctly  presenting  His  own  person,  to  subsist  between 


Less.  vi.J  The  Life-Giver  and  Judge  5 1 

Him  and  God.  The  tremendous  claim  is  made  first 
negatively,  and  then  positively, — He  does  nothing  of 
Himself,  but  everything  which  God  does,  He  does. 
So,  entire  suppression  of  the  human  self,  clear  vision 
of  the  working  of  God,  power  to  do  whatever  Divine 
power  can  do,  and  to  do  all  these  "  in  like  manner," 
are  the  claims  made  here  by  Jesus.  How  can  His 
pretensions  to  be  a  meek  and  lowly  pattern  and  religious 
teacher  be  sustained  in  the  face  of  such  tremendous 
assertions,  except  we  beUeve  Him  to  be  Divine  ?  Surely 
there  is  no  escaping  the  conclusion  that,  if  He  ever 
said  such  things,  He  is  either  arrogant  to  the  verge  of 
madness,  and  undeserving  of  credit  as  a  teacher  and  of 
imitation  as  a  pattern,  or  else  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  able 
to  do  Divine  works,  and  worthy  of  Divine  honour. 

The  ground  of  this  absolute  correspondence  is  laid 
(ver.  20)  in  the  Father's  love,  which  implies  perfect 
communication  of  purposes  and  deeds.  The  words  give 
a  glimpse  into  the  eternal  depths  of  Deity,  and  show 
there  the  energy  of  love  and  the  possibility  of  communion 
before  creatures  were.  They  claim  for  the  incarnate 
Son  the  same  unbroken  share  in  the  love  of  the  Father 
and  undimmed  vision  of  His  work.  They  marvellously 
unite  lowly  subordination  and  sameness  of  nature,  and 
however  little  we  can  read  all  their  depths,  they  unmis- 
takably proclaim  that  He  of  whom  they  are  true  is  Divine. 

But  the  communication  is  further  set  forth  as  being 
gradual  and  progressive,  and  "  greater  works  "  are  yet 
to  be  shown  and  done.  The  miracles,  of  which  one  had 
occasioned  this  whole  discourse,  are  here  put  below  the 
future  work,  whether  of  redemption  by  the  cross,  or  of 
rule  from  the  throne,  or  of  resurrection  and  judgment. 


52  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  v.  17-30 

The  whole  of  these  are  unitedly  "the  work  of  Christ," 
of  which  the  single  works  are  parts.  Wonder  is  not  the 
final  aim  of  any  of  His  works,  but  the  beginning  of  the 
path  which  ends  in  faith.  AVonder  may  breed  attention, 
and  attention  may  recognise  the  truth  which  makes  the 
wonderful  natural  ("  Marvel  not^^^  ver.  28).  It  rouses 
the  soul,  but  its  worth  depends  on  what  the  roused 
soul  does  next.  If  it  beholds  and  despises,  it  w^onders 
and  perishes ;  if  it  w^onderingly  beholds  and  cries  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God  !  "  it  lives  and  grows  familiar  w4th 
what  was  once  so  strange. 

Verses  21  and  22  instance  two  of  these  greater  works, 
and  give  definiteness  to  the  claim  of  the  correspondence 
of  the  Son's  work  with  the  Father's.  He  has  the  Divine 
power  of  giving  and  restoring  life,  and  the  awful  preroga- 
tive of  judgment.  These  two  are  here  stated  in  their 
most  general  form,  and  in  a  more  developed  fashion 
(as  is  usual  in  St.  John's  Gospel  and  Epistle)  in  the  sub- 
sequent context.  It  is  God  who  kills  and  makes  alive, 
and  only  a  Divine  person  could  exercise  that  power  on 
"  whom  He  will."  Others  might  and  could  wield  it, 
as  mere  channels  of  Divine  will ;  but  Jesus  was  not  a 
mere  instrument,  but  the  source  of  power,  when  He 
stopped  the  bier  with  "  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise."  That 
is  no  contradiction  of  His  preceding  disavowal  of  doing 
anything  of  Himself,  but  is  the  assurance  that  His  wuU 
ever  coincided  with  the  Father's,  as  w^ell  as  the  claim  to 
be  Himself  the  true  raiser  from  the  dead,  whether  the 
bodily  or  spiritually  dead.  Are  we  listening  to  a  mere 
man  like  ourselves  ?  If  so,  shall  we  call  Him  saint,  sage, 
or  blasphemer  ? 

The  prerogative  of  judgment  is  adduced  as  the  ground, 


Less.  VI.]  The  Life-Giver  and  Judge  ■    53 

or  perhaps  rather  as  the  proof,  of  the  other  of  Ufe- 
giving ;  and  here  for  a  moment  the  identity  of  the  action 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  seems  broken,  for  the 
"  Father  judges  no  man."  But  it  is  still  retained  in 
essence ;  for  it  is  the  Father  who  has  given  the  authority 
to  judge.  Again  we  have  to  mark  the  many-sidedness 
of  the  ineffable  relation  of  Father  and  Son,  which,  when 
it  is  presented  in  human  speech,  can  only  be  shadowed 
by  apparent  opposites,  such  as  occur  throughout  this 
context.  They  are  not  contradictions,  but  indications 
that  the  full  comprehension  of  the  truth  which  they 
complimentarily  set  forth  is  beyond  us.  Note,  too,  the 
view  here  given  of  the  Son's  work,  present  as  well  as 
future :  He  is,  not  merely  will  be,  the  Judge.  In  one 
aspect  He  said,  "God  sent  not  His  Son  .  .  .  to  judge 
the  world."  In  another  He  said,  "  For  judgment  I  am 
come  into  this  world." 

The  purpose  of  all  this  communication  of  Divine 
powers  and  prerogatives  is  next  stated,  in  words  which 
one  cannot  read  without  a  shudder,  unless  one  accepts 
them  as  the  utterance  of  a  truly  Divine  consciousness. 
Jesus  declares  that  He  is  meant  to  receive  a  universal 
homage,  precisely  identical  with  that  rendered  to  God ; 
and  He  further  dares  to  assert  that  to  withhold  such 
from  Him  is  to  withhold  it  from  God.  Yet  the  claim 
is  the  claim  of  a  Son ;  and,  even  in  making  it,  though  it 
surely  is  the  most  awful  that  ever  came  from  sane  lips, 
He  does  not  forget  His  filial  subordination. 

Can  any  theory  of  His  nature  do  justice  to  both  sides 
of  these  solemn  sayings,  except  that  which  sees  in  Him 
the  Word  made  flesh,  who  in  the  beginning  was  with 
God  and  was  God  ? 


54  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  v.  17-30 

II.  The  second  "  verily,  verily  "  (ver.  24)  further  un- 
folds the  bearing  of  the  two  great  ideas  of  life-giving  and 
judgment.  The  personality  of  Jesus  is  more  prominent 
("  My  word  ").  The  conditions  on  which  men  receive 
life  and  escape  judgment  are  set  forth  with  majestic 
absoluteness,  and  all  is  commended  as  sufficiently  estab- 
lished by  nothing  more  than  His  bare  word.  A  teacher 
of  a  new  sort  this,  who  makes  the  most  astounding  and 
awful  assertions,  and  never  stops  to  prove  them,  but 
simply  says,  "  I  tell  you  so,  and  that  is  enough."  What 
must  He  have  thought  of  His  word,  who  could  thus 
calmly  declare  that  to  accept  it,  and  to  trust  in  Him 
whom  it  revealed,  secures  present  possession  of  eternal 
life  and  exemption  from  judgment  ?  That  life  is  a 
resurrection ;  for  every  one  possessing  it  passes  from 
death  into  it.  The  world  is  a  graveyard.  It  was  spoken 
of  to  Nicodemus  as  a  birth,  here  it  is  a  resurrection. 
The  Son  "quickens  whom  He  will";  but  that  w^ill  is 
neither  arbitrary  as  regards  men,  nor  self-asserting  as 
regards  the  Father.  The  law  of  its  harmonies  with  the 
latter  we  do  not  know,  but  its  conditions  as  to  ourselves 
we  do.  He  wills  to  quicken  all  who  receive  His  word. 
The  reception  of  that  word  removes  its  receivers  from 
the  incidence  of  the  judgment  w^hich  follows  future 
resurrection ;  for  the  possession  of  eternal  Hfe  negatives 
the  need  and  possibility  of  judgment ;  and  if  Christ's 
words  are  daily  judging  and  cleansing  us  here,  and  by 
their  light  "we  judge  ourselves,  we  shall  not  be  judged." 
These  great  gifts  are  present  gifts.  The  eternal  life  is 
ours  to-day,  and  the  abolition  of  judgment  in  all  its 
terrible  aspects,  while  it  is  active  in  all  its  beneficent  ones, 
is  the  privilege  of  every  believing  soul  here  and  now. 


Less.  VI.]         The  Life-Giver  and  Judge  55 

III.  The  third  "  verily,  verily "  introduces  the  full 
development  of  these  two  great  ideas,  filling  up  their 
contents  and  discriminating  their  aspects  (vers.  25-27). 
The  first  broadly  marked  feature  is  the  clear  separation 
of  two  stages  or  epochs  of  resurrection  and  judgment, — 
one  present  ("  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is  "),  one  future 
("  cometh  ").  Clearly  the  former  refers  to  the  spiritual 
quickening  which  has  been  spoken  of  in  verse  twenty- 
four,  as  is  established  by  that  remarkable  limitation, 
"  They  that  hear  shall  live,"  which  is  only  explicable  by 
supposing  that  "  the  dead  "  are  those  sunk  in  the  death 
of  sin  and  self,  and  that,  among  these,  there  are  the 
two  classes  of  "  some  who  believed  "  and  "  some  who 
believed  not."  They  can  exercise  choice  though  they 
be  dead,  and,  if  they  will,  can  be  deaf  as  well  as  dead. 
Our  Lord's  personality  is  again  veiled ;  and  while  He 
spoke  of  His  voice  in  the  former  verse,  here. He  speaks 
of  "  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God."  The  quickening 
power  of  that  voice  is  traced  (ver.  26)  to  the  Son's 
possession  of  "  life  in  Himself," — a  Divine  prerogative, 
which  yet,  by  a  bold  paradox,  is  declared  to  be  "  given." 
The  two  expressions  "given"  and  "in  Himself"  seem 
mutually  exclusive,  and  can  only  be  reconciled  by  the 
recognition  of  the  mysterious  relation  of  Fatherhood  and 
Sonship  in  the  depths  of  Deity.  That  Son,  being  in 
Himself  possessor  of  life,  can  impart  it,  and  does  do  so 
to  all  who  hear  His  voice.  The  prerogative  of  judgment 
necessarily  resides  where  the  power  of  life-giving  resides, 
but  is  here  connected  with  our  Lord's  manhood,  rather 
than  with  His  Divine  Sonship,  as  it  was  in  verse  22. 
It  is  a  Divine  office,  needing  omniscience  and  other 
purely  Divine  attributes,  and  these  are  presupposed  as 


56  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  v.  17-30 

included  in  verse  22  ;  but  it  is  a  blessed  addition  to  the 
thought  that  the  Judge  of  men  must  be  a  man,  who 
knows  our  frame,  not  only  with  the  knowledge  of  a  God, 
but  by  the  experience  of  a  man,  and,  as  Judge  no  less 
than  as  priestly  Intercessor,  "  can  have  compassion  on 
the  ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way." 

Verses  28  and  29  obviously  refer  to  a  future  event, 
the  hour  of  which  "  comes,"  but  is  not  "  now  " ;  and 
that  event  is  unmistakably  the  universal  resurrection  of 
the  corporeally  dead,  as  is  clear  from  the  unambiguous 
description  of  its  objects,  as  "  all  that  are  in  the  graves," 
and  from  the  addition,  as  compared  with  verse  24,  of 
"  shall  come  forth  " ;  and,  yet  more  solemnly,  from  the 
twofold  nature  of  this  resurrection,  contrasted  with  the 
one  blessed  result  of  that  former.  Life-giving  is  once 
more  connected  with  judgment ;  but  now  the  life  given 
is  of  such  a  kind  that  only  a  portion  of  its  recipients 
partake  of  "the  resurrection  of  life,"  while  others,  who 
also  live  again,  have  their  resurrection  unto  "judgment." 
The  true  life  is  the  antithesis  of  the  final  judgment ; 
and  they  who  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  here  and  now 
shall  not  come  into  that  final  judgment,  while  they  who 
hear  it  not  shall  at  last  hear  it,  and  rise  to  a  life  which 
is  not  life,  but  judgment. 

Verse  30  carries  us  back  to  the  beginning  of  this 
wonderful  outpouring  of  Christ's  consciousness.  His 
own  personality  is  now  put  in  the  foreground,  as  if 
insisting  on  the  application  of  all  these  great  sayings 
concerning  "  the  Son  "  to  Himself.  But  while  He  thus 
makes  the  most  awful  claims,  lowly  self-abnegation  blends 
in  the  most  unheard-of  manner  with  these.  He  declares 
Himself  to  be  the  fountain  of  fife,  the  Judge   of  the 


Less.  VI.]  The  Life-Giver  and  Judge  57 

world,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  capable  of  doing  all 
Divine  acts ;  and  yet  He  abjures  all  independent  self- 
willed  activity,  and  proclaims,  in  words  of  which  their 
lowliness  and  their  consciousness  of  complete  and  con- 
tinual conformity  with  the  Father's  will  are  equally 
unique,  that  His  judgments  are  always  just,  because 
they  are  always  the  utterance  of  the  Father's,  which  He 
ever  hears,  because,  without  the  smallest  deflection,  His 
human  will  is  conformed  and  submitted  to  the  Father's. 
This  closing  utterance  of  Christ's  self-consciousness  is 
lowly  humility  in  Him.  What  but  the  very  insanity  of 
self-righteousness  and  fancied  infallibility  would  it  be  in 
any  other  man  that  ever  lived  ? 


LESSON   VII 


Bread  Enough,  and  to  Spare 

St.  John  vi,   1-14 


1.  "  After  these  things  Jesus 
went  over  the  sea  of  GaHlee, 
which  is  the  sea  of  Tiberias. 

2.  And  a  great  multitude 
followed  Him,  because  they 
saw  His  miracles  which  He 
did  on  them  that  were  diseased. 

3.  And  Jesus  went  up  into  a 
mountain,  and  there  He  sat 
with  His  disciples. 

4.  And  the  passover,  a  feast 
of  the  Jews,  was  nigh. 

5.  When  Jesus  then  lifted 
up  His  eyes,  and  saw  a  great 
company  come  unto  Him,  He 
saith  unto  Philip,  Whence 
shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these 
may  eat  ? 

6.  And  this  He  said  to  prove 
Him  :  for  He  Himself  knew 
what  He  would  do. 

7.  Philip  answered  Him, 
Two  hundred  pennyworth  of 
bread  is  not  sufficient  for  them, 
that  every  one  of  them  may 
take  a  little. 

8.  One  of  His  disciples, 
Andrew,  Simon  Peter's  brother, 
saith  unto  Him, 

9.  There  is  a  lad  here,  which 


hath  five  barley  loaves,  and 
two  small  fishes  :  but  what  are 
they  among  so  many  ? 

10.  And  Jesus  said.  Make 
the  men  sit  down.  Now  there 
was  much  grass  in  the  place. 
So  the  men  sat  down,  in  num- 
ber about  five  thousand. 

11.  And  Jesus  took  the 
loaves ;  and  when  He  had 
given  thanks,  He  distributed  to 
the  disciples,  and  the  disciples 
to  them  that  were  set  down ; 
and  likewise  of  the  fishes  as 
much  as  they  would. 

12.  When  they  were  filled, 
He  said  unto  His  disciples, 
Gather  up  the  fragm.ents  that 
remain,  that  nothing  be  lost. 

13.  Therefore  they  gathered 
them  together,  and  filled  twelve 
baskets  with  the  fragments  of 
the  five  barley  loaves,  which 
remained  over  and  above  unto 
them  that  had  eaten. 

14.  Then  those  men,  when 
they  had  seen  the  miracle  that 
Jesus  did,  said,  This  is  of  a 
truth  that  prophet  that  should 
come  into  the  world." 


A 


FTER   these    things."      What    things?      Those 
recorded  in  the  fifth  chapter  as  having  occurred 
in  Jerusalem.     There  must,  therefore,  be  inserted  before 

58 


Less.  VII.]       Bread  Enough,  and  to  Spare  59 

this  narrative  a  journey  from  Jerusalem  to  Galilee ;  and, 
if  the  preceding  incidents  took  place,  as  is  probable,  at 
the  Feast  of  Purim,  several  weeks  had  passed  in  Galilee. 
Our  narrative  omits  also  our  Lord's  reasons  for  this 
retirement  to  the  eastern  shores  of  the  lake.  John's 
attention  is  fixed  on  the  significance  of  the  miracle,  as 
developed  in  the  subsequent  discourse  on  the  bread  of 
life,  to  which  it  gave  occasion,  and  on  its  importance  as 
a  turning-point  in  the  people's  estimate  of  Jesus,  to 
whom  they  at  first  clung  with  enthusiastic  hope,  and 
from  whom  they  departed  when  the  miracle  was  followed 
by  His  "  hard  sayings  "  founded  on  it. 

The  double  name  for  the  lake  is  an  indication  that 
this  Gospel  was  not  addressed  to  Jews  familiar  with  the 
scene.  Its  readers  were  more  likely  to  have  known  the 
name  of  Tiberias  than  the  other.  Verse  2  describes 
vividly  not  merely  the  circumstances  of  that  one  time, 
but  the  habitual  environment  at  that  period, — a  throng 
of  eager  gazers,  drawn  by  curiosity  more  than  by  any 
deeper  feelings,  who  pressed  on  Jesus,  regardless  of 
delicacy  or  of  His  need  for  repose  and  privacy.  Part 
of  the  reason  for  crossing  the  lake  was  to  avoid  these 
intrusive  sight-seers,  but  they  came  hurrying  after,  mak- 
ing their  way  on  foot  round  the  head  of  the  sea,  and 
destroying  the  seclusion  needed  both  by  Him  and  by 
the  disciples,  who  had  just  come  back  from  their  trial 
mission.  They  had  found  some  quiet  spot  on  the  hill- 
side, and  there  "He  sat  with  His  disciples,"  glad  of  this 
breathing-time.  The  note  of  time,  in  verse  4,  explains 
the  crowd,  and  may  also  hint  at  the  spiritual  significance 
of  the  feast,  which  was  a  truer  passover  than  that  in 
Jerusalem. 


6o  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  vi.  1-14 

The  first  point  to  observe  is  Christ's  cheerful  giving 
up  of  repose  and  quick  sympathetic  foresight  of  men's 
needs.  No  impatience  disturbs  His  cahii  as  the  vulgar 
crowd  come  flocking  towards  Him.  He  surrenders  the 
prospect  of  quiet  without  a  sigh,  being  ever  ready  to 
"  please  not  Himself,"  and  finding  His  meat  in  doing 
the  Father's  will.  Before  the  mob  is  at  His  side.  He 
thinks  for  them  of  a  want  which  they  had  not  thought 
of.  They  were  not  hungry  yet,  and  had  not  troubled 
themselves  about  food.  But  He  cared  for  the  careless. 
His  heart  foresaw  their  need,  and  already  knew  what 
He  would  do  to  supply  it.  So  is  it  ever.  Before  we 
call,  He  answers,  and  prepares  to  supply  necessities  as 
yet  unfelt. 

The  next  point  is  the  question  asked  by  conscious 
power  and  answered  by  practical  common  sense.  In 
the  Synoptics,  the  question  of  how  to  get  provision  is 
discussed  first  among  the  apostles  privately  at  the  close 
of  the  day.  John  not  only  makes  it  originate  with  Jesus, 
but  times  it  before  the  people  had  arrived.  It  does  not 
seem  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  difference  in  the 
times  is  the  key  that  harmonises  the  accounts.  The 
question  suggested  by  Jesus  to  Philip  alone,  and 
answered  by  him  only,  worked  in  the  latter's  mind  all 
day ;  and,  when  the  evening  came  on,  his  answer  is 
again  quoted  by  the  disciples.  John  will  then  have 
fused  into  one  the  two  conversations  at  the  beginning 
and  end  of  the  day.  The  question  was  "  to  prove  " 
Philip  ;  that  is,  to  see  whether  he  had  so  grasped  Christ's 
power  as  to  answer,  "  We  need  not  buy,  for  Thou  canst 
supply."  Does  not  Christ  do  with  us  thus  still  ?  He 
takes  us,  as  it  were,  into  His  confidence,  with  interroga- 


Less.  VII.]       Bread  Enough,  and  to  Spare  6i 

tions  that  try  us,  whether  we  can  rise  above  the  level  of 
visible  resources,  and  beheve  in  His  unseen  power. 

Philip  is  always  strong  in  his  appreciation  of  what  he 
can  see.  When  Nathanael  said  to  him,  "  Can  any  good 
thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  "  all  he  had  to  say  was, 
"  Come  and  see," — the  best  answer  he  could  have  made, 
but  not  the  less  characteristic.  He  broke  in  upon  the 
sacred  words  in  the  upper  room  with,  "  Show  us  the 
Father."  So  here  he  sticks  to  the  visible,  and,  running 
his  eye  over  the  crowd,  makes  a  rough-and-ready  calcu- 
lation, the  data  of  which  we  do  not  know,  that  some 
seven  pounds  might  get  a  mouthful  apiece  for  them. 
He  was  a  man  of  figures,  and  believed  in  statistics,  and, 
like  some  other  folk  of  that  sort,  he  left  out  one  small 
factor  in  his  calculation, — namely,  Jesus  Christ.  When 
we  have  to  deal  with  Christ's  working — and  when  have 
we  not  ? — the  audacity  of  a  faith  that  expects  great  things, 
though  there  is  nothing  visible  on  which  to  build,  is 
wiser  and  more  "practical "  than  the  common  sense  that 
creeps  along  the  low  levels  of  "fact,"  and  does  not  see 
the  one  all-important  fact  that  we  have  a  Divine  Helper 
at  our  sides. 

Then  comes  the  exhibition  of  the  poor  resources  of 
the  disciples.  Philip  and  Andrew  were  fellow-townsmen, 
and  appear  together  (John  i.  44  ;  xii.  22).  Note  how  the 
greater  personality  of  Peter  overshadows  his  brother,  who 
is  known  to  the  readers  rather  by  his  relationship  than 
for  himself.  Barley-loaves  were  the  poor  man's  food,  and 
one  loaf  per  thousand  was  little.  Two  small  fishes  were 
still  more  ludicrously  disproportionate  to  the  case.  The 
disciples'  own  stores  seem  to  have  been  empty,  and  they 
would  probably  have  been  hungry  though  no  crowd  had 


62  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  vi.  1-14 

come.  Would  Jesus  have  wrought  a  miracle  to  feed 
Himself?  Christ's  preparation  for  making  our  poor 
resources  adequate  is  to  drive  home  the  consciousness  of 
their  insufficiency.  When  we  have  gone  down  into  the 
depths  of  our  own  impotence,  and  seen  that  the  work  we 
have  to  do  is  far  too  great  for  our  own  strength,  which  is 
weakness,  we  are  fit  to  receive  His  with  rejoicing  and 
overcoming  might.  We  must  be  emptied  of  self  if  we 
are  to  be  filled  with  God. 

The  next  point  is  the  seating  of  the  hungry  multitude. 
"  Make  the  men  sit  down  "  was  a  test  for  both  disciples 
and  crowd.  It  would  kindle  wonder  and  expectation, 
and  neither  would  have  obeyed,  unless  some  faint  germ 
of  faith,  at  least  in  His  power  to  spread  a  table  even 
there,  had  been  quickened  in  them.  At  most,  they 
anticipated  food,  and  the  measure  of  their  expectation 
was  the  measure  of  His  gift.  A  rudimentary  trust 
brought  corporeal  blessings.  It  impelled  to  obedience, 
and  obedience  was  rewarded  according  to  its  impulse 
and  their  need.  John  remembers  still,  after  all  these 
years,  the  flush  of  the  spring  grass  on  which  the  ranks 
of  wondering,  waiting  people  sat  by  the  quiet  lake. 
"Jesus  therefore  took  the  loaves."  That  is  one  of  John's 
significant  "  therefores."  If  we  sit  down  as  He  bids  us, 
our  mouths  will  not  long  be  empty.  If  we  do  what  He 
tells  us  to  do,  we  shall  get  the  food  which  we  need. 
Our  business  is  to  obey  and  wait  patiently  in  confidence ; 
and  His  is  to  open  His  hand,  when  we  are  seated,  and 
let  the  mercy  drop  on  us.  "  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do 
good  ;  .  .  .  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed." 

Next  comes  the  miracle  itself.  Two  points  only  are 
noticed, — the  thanksgiving  and  the  distribution.    Accord- 


Less.  VII.]       Bread  Enough,  and  to  Spare  63 

ing  to  the  reading  of  the  Revised  Version,  no  mention  is 
made  of  the  disciples'  agency  as  the  almoners  of  Christ's 
gift,  but  His  solitary  figure  fills  the  canvas.  His  tone  or 
expression  must  have  made  that  thanksgiving  memorable, 
for,  in  verse  23,  the  place  is  referred  to  as  "where  they 
did  eat  bread  after  that  the  Lord  had  given  thanks." 
The  manner  of  the  miracle  and  the  point  at  which  the 
multiplication  occurred  are  left  obscure.  But  that  allu- 
sion in  verse  23  seems  to  imply  that  it  took  effect  at  the 
moment  of  the  prayer,  which  John  calls  "  thanks  "  and 
the  Synoptics  "  blessing." 

What  are  the  lessons  of  the  "  sign "  ?  It  teaches 
Christ's  care  for  all  forms  of  human  want.  It  reveals 
His  continuous  working  as  Sustainer  of  physical  Hfe.  In 
the  miracle,  some  of  the  links  ordinarily  present  in  the 
chain  which  binds  physical  results  to  the  Divine  will  were 
absent,  but  their  absence  or  presence  does  not  affect  the 
reality  of  the  connection  between  the  staple  from  which 
it  hangs  and  the  last  visible  effect.  The  cause  of  all 
physical  phenomena  is  the  will  of  God,  and  that  will 
works  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  is  life,  and 
without  whom  nothing  created  subsists.  He  is  Sustainer 
as  well  as  Creator.  He  holds  the  stars  in  His  hand,  and 
He  opens  His  hand,  with  the  print  of  the  nail  in  it,  and 
satisfies  the  desires  of  every  living  thing. 

But  the  great  lesson  of  the  miracle  is  that  which  our 
Lord  Himself  drew  from  it,  in  the  following  discourse  on 
the  bread  of  life,  which  we  have  to  study  in  our  next 
lesson,  and  may  therefore  leave  for  the  present. 

The  result  of  the  miracle  is  next  presented  in  two 
ways, — the  abundance  left  over,  and  the  people's  excite- 
ment.    As  to  the  former,  note  that  the  "  broken  pieces  " 


64  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  vi.  1-14 

are  not  the  crumbs  that  Uttered  the  grass  after  the 
feast  was  over,  but  the  pieces  broken  for  distribution. 
John  alone  records  that  Christ  commanded  the  gathering. 
He  thereby  taught  economy  in  the  use  and  storing  of  His 
gifts,  and  bade  the  disciples  recognise  that  dependence 
on  His  miraculous  power  does  not  absolve  from  the 
exercise  of  ordinary  prudence. 

But  if  we  regard  the  whole  incident  in  that  symbolic 
aspect  in  which  He  Himself  presents  it  in  the  subsequent 
discourse,  this  abundant  overplus  and  the  care  taken  of 
it  are  fruitful  of  instruction.  Men,  women,  and  children, 
all  found  enough  in  the  bread  from  His  hands.  The 
world  scoffs  at  the  barley-bread  which  Jesus  gives,  which 
seems  coarse  to  palates  spoiled  by  the  world's  confec- 
tionery ;  but  it  gives  life  to  the  eaters.  If  any  man  wants 
dainties  that  will  tickle  his  diseased  or  fastidious  appetite, 
he  will  have  to  go  elsewhere  for  them ;  but  if  he  wants 
bread,  to  stay  his  hunger,  let  him  go  to  Jesus,  who  is 
"human  nature's  daily  food." 

But  not  only  was  there  enough  for  each,  but  the 
twelve  baskets  were  filled — one  carried  by  each  apostle, 
probably — with  the  food  that  had  been  prepared,  and 
was  not  needed.  "  The  gift  doth  stretch  itself  as  'tis 
received."  Other  goods  and  possessions  perish  with 
using,  but  this  increases  with  use.  The  more  one  eats, 
the  more  there  is  for  him  to  eat.  All  the  world  may  live 
on  it  for  ever,  and  there  will  be  more  at  the  end  than  at 
the  beginning.  In  Christ's  gift  of  the  bread  of  life  there 
is  always  a  certain  unappropriated  overplus,  a  quality  of 
infinity  of  resource,  which  surpasses  our  present  power 
of  reception,  and  encourages  us  to  hope  for  larger 
possession  when  our  faith  is  enlarged.     That  unrealised 


Less.  VII.]      Bread  Enough,  and  to  Spare  65 

possible  attainment  is  not  to  be  left  unheeded,  but  to  be 
gathered  up  in  the  baskets  of  our  growing  faith,  our  more 
ardent  desire  and  more  lowly  obedience,  that  it  may  be 
food  for  to-morrow,  when  we  are  able  to  make  it  our  own. 
The  unwon  treasures  of  His  grace  should  stimulate  end- 
less hope,  aspiration,  and  effort.  To-morrow  shall  be  as 
this  day,  and  much  more  abundant.  That  hope  is  folly, 
and  worse,  if  cherished  in  regard  to  any  life  but  a 
Christian  life.  Not  to  cherish  it  in  regard  to  the  Chris- 
tian life  is  to  fall  beneath  our  privileges  and  to  lose  the 
unused  abundance  prepared  for  us  by  the  Master  of  the 
feast. 

The  effect  of  the  miracle  on  the  crowd  was  simply  to 
work  them  into  an  unwholesome  fever  of  carnal  Messianic 
hopes.  How  true  to  human  nature  their  exclamation 
is  !  "A  prophet  that  can  give  bread, — that  is  the  sort 
of  prophet  for  us.  We  can  understand  that  kind  of 
Messiah.  The  Samaritan  heretic  hoped  for  a  Messiah 
who  would  teach  all  things.  We  do  not  care  for  teach- 
ing ;  give  us  loaves."  Alas  !  the  crowd  has  not  got 
much  further  than  this  even  now.  They  had  much 
rather  have  some  one  who  would  find  them  bread  with- 
out working  for  it,  than  one  who  would  bring  God's  love 
and  grace  to  them.  Show  them  how  to  make  money,  or 
put  them  in  the  way  of  increased  material  comfort  or 
prosperity,  and  they  will  hail  you  as  a  man  of  men,  and 
build  a  monument  to  you  when  you  die.  But  how  many 
of  us  have  no  reverence  for  Jesus  because  we  do  not 
care  for  the  gifts  He  has  to  bring  ! 


LESSON  VIII 
True  Work  for  True  Bread 

St.  John  vi.  26-40 


26.  "Jesus  answered  them 
and  said,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  Ye  seek  Me,  not  be- 
cause ye  saw  the  miracles,  but 
because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves, 
and  were  filled. 

27.  Labour  not  for  the  meat 
which  perisheth,  but  for  that 
meat  which  endureth  unto 
everlasting  life,  which  the  Son 
of  man  shall  give  unto  you  :  for 
Him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed. 

28.  Then  said  the}'  unto  Him, 
What  shall  we  do,  that  we 
might  work  the  works  of  God  ? 

29.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  This  is  the  work  of 
God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him 
whom  He  hath  sent. 

30.  They  said  therefore  unto 
Him,  What  sign  showest  Thou 
then,  that  we  may  see,  and  be- 
lieve Thee?  what  dost  Thou 
work  ? 

31.  Our  fathers  did  eat  manna 
in  the  desert ;  as  it  is  written. 
He  gave  them  bread  from 
heaven  to  eat. 

32.  Then  Jesus  said  unto 
them,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  Moses  gave  you  not  that 
bread  from  heaven ;  but  My 
Father  giveth  you  the  true  bread 
from  heaven. 


33.  For  the  bread  of  God 
is  He  which  Cometh  down  from 
heaven,  and  giveth  life  unto  the 
world. 

34.  Then  said  they  unto 
Him,  Lord,  evermore  give  us 
this  bread. 

35.  And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
I  am  the  bread  of  life :  he  that 
Cometh  to  Me  shall  never  hun- 
ger ;  and  he  that  believeth  on 
Me  shall  never  thirst. 

36.  But  I  said  unto  you.  That 
ye  also  have  seen  Me,  and  be- 
lieve not. 

37.  All  that  the  Father  giveth 
Me  shall  come  to  Me  ;  and  him 
that  Cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out. 

38.  For  I  came  down  from 
heaven,  not  to  do  Mine  own 
will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Me. 

39.  And  this  is  the  Father's 
will  which  hath  sent  Me,  that 
of  all  which  He  hath  given  Me 
I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should 
raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day. 

40.  And  this  is  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  Me,  that  every 
one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and 
believeth  on  Him,  maj'  have 
everlasting  life,  and  I  will  raise 
him  up  at  the  last  day." 


IF  we  take  into  account  the  Jews'  question  to  which 
the  beginning  of  this  lesson  is  an  answer,  we  have 
in  it  four  pairs  of  sayings  by  them,  and  repHes  by  Jesus. 

66 


Less.  VIII.]       True  Work  for  True  Bread  67 

Theirs  are  three  questions, — "When  earnest  Thou  hither?" 
"What  must  we  do  ?  "  "  What  dost  Thou  work  ?  "—and 
a  petition,  "  Give  us  this  bread."  His  words  follow  the 
channel  marked  by  theirs,  but  yet  have  a  progress  of  their 
own,  and  reach  their  climax  in  His  full  disclosure  of 
Himself  as  the  bread  of  life  (ver.  35).  There  is  then  a 
slight  pause  in  the  discourse,  and  verses  37-40  have 
neither  the  metaphor  of  the  bread  nor  any  personal 
address,  but  are  our  Lord's  declaration  of  the  great  pur- 
poses and  certain  issues  of  His  work  of  lowly  obedience 
to  the  Father's  will,  which  issues  should  be  reached, 
whether  these  men  came  to  Him  or  no. 

I.  We  have  in  verses  26  and  27  Christ's  discernment 
of  their  low  motives  and  disclosure  of  the  only  worthy 
aim  of  human  effort.  The  Jews  had  spoken  in  their 
question  as  if  they  were  surprised  and  had  the  right  to 
be  aggrieved  that  He  had  left  them  almost  by  stealth, 
and  so  given  them  the  trouble  of  coming  all  the  way  back, 
across  to  Capernaum,  to  find  Him.  They  mean  to  say, 
"Surely  our  eagerness  to  make  Thee  a  king  deserved 
at  least  more  recognition  than  this."  That  surprised 
"  when  "  really  meant  an  offended  "  why." 

Jesus,  as  ever,  answers  thoughts,  not  words.  The 
surface  of  the  question  needed  no  answer  ;  for  the  miracle 
had  been  wrought  as  evening  came  on,  and  now  it  was 
morning,  and  the  passage  of  the  lake  must  have  been  in 
the  night.  The  question  was  inane  and  superfluous,  and 
is  treated  as  such  ;  but  the  spirit  which  prompted  it  needs 
correction.  So  our  Lord  first  cuts  deep  into  the  ques- 
tioners' hearts,  and  lays  bare  the  gross,  sensuous  nature 
of  their  admiration  for  and  seeking  after  Him.  They 
had  seen  the  "  sign,"  but  it  was  no  sign  to  them.     All 


68  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  vi.  26-40 

they  saw  or  cared  for  was  the  loaves.  This  dissection 
of  motives  lays  bare  a  truth  concerning  a  wider  circle 
than  that  which  first  heard  it.  The  fatal  predominance 
of  earthly  tastes  and  appetites,  which  dulls  perception  of 
and  desire  after  higher  good,  besets  us  all.  Religion 
itself  is  often  recommended  for  the  sake  of  its  material 
advantages,  and  still  more  often  neglected  because  we 
much  prefer  loaves  to  signs.     ' 

While  verse  26  thus  sets  in  clear  light  the  often  un- 
conscious earthward  gravitation  of  tastes  and  desires, 
verse  27  points  to  the  one  worthy  aim  of  human  effort, 
and  in  paradoxical  form  shows  the  means  of  attaining  it. 
"  The  meat  which  perisheth  "  is,  by  its  transiency,  proved 
insufficient ;  and  the  life  which  is  full  of  toil  to  win  it,  in 
any  of  its  forms,  sumptuous  or  coarse,  dainties  or  bare 
necessaries,  is  shown  to  be  too  low-pitched.  They 
labour  for  naught  who  labour  for  anything  short  of  that 
which  is  permanent  in  its  effects  and  nourishes  eternal 
life.  The  description  of  this  only  sufficing  possession  as 
the  "  meat  which  abideth  unto  eternal  life  "  is  entirely 
parallel  with  that  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  of  the  water 
springing  up  unto  life  eternal ;  and  the  whole  course  of 
the  two  dialogues  is  similar. 

How  diffc«:ent  men's  lives  would  be  if  they  had  clearly 
before  them  the  only  worthy  aim  !  That  being  plain, 
how  is  it  to  be  secured?  Jesus  answers  by  a  double 
word,  which  sounds  contradictory, — "  work,"  "  the  Son 
of  Man  shall  give."  The  solution  of  the  paradox  follows 
presently.  Here  it  is  enough  to  notice  that,  since  it  is 
a  gift,  the  "  work  "  does  not  earn  it,  and  since  there  is  to 
be  work,  it  is  not  an  arbitrary  gift.  The  Giver  of  living 
water  is  the  Giver  of  this  bread.     That  claim,  however 


Less.  VIII.]      True  Work  for  True  Bread  69 

lofty,  is  advanced  in  lowliness,  and  made  to  depend 
wholly  on  the  Father's  destination  and  designation  of 
Him. 

II.  Verses  28  and  29  give  the  second  turn  in  the 
conversation.  The  questioners  do  not  resent  rebuke, 
nor  refuse  obedience.  It  says  something  for  them  that 
their  question  goes  straight  to  the  important  point  of 
what  they  were  to  do.  They  are  ready  to  do  it,  though 
they  understand  little  about  the  bread  spoken  of  by  Him. 
But  they  take  the  "work,"  which  He  has  been  en- 
joining, in  an  entirely  external  sense,  as  is  shown  by  that 
significant  plural  which  they  use.  They  had  caught  half 
of  Christ's  sentence,  and  the  other  had  passed  by  them 
like  idle  wind.  A  heap  of  separate  acts,  such  as  God 
required,  seemed  to  them  what  He  meant ;  and  now  they 
want  direction  as  to  what  these  are.  When  some  dim 
glimpses  of  what  it  is  worth  while  to  live  for  are  caught, 
men  immediately  want  to  set  about  doing  things  to  secure 
the  aim.  Such  a  state  of  mind  is  better  than  gross  earth- 
liness,  but  it  is  only  twilight. 

Christ's  answer  is  divinely  deep  and  simple.  He  sets 
one  "  work  "  against  the  mass  of  "  works  "  which  they 
thought  would  be  needful.  He  declares  that  the  single 
work  which  God  requires  as  the  condition  of  the  gift  is 
faith  in  the  Son  of  Man,  its  Giver.  To  "  believe  on  "  is 
more  than  simply  "  to  believe,"  with  which  lower  act  of 
the  mind  the  Jews  presently  confound  it.  Here,  then, 
is  set  forth  in  germ  the  whole  truth  as  to  the  conditions 
of  eternal  life,  and  as  to  the  relations  of  faith  and  works. 
Not  a  multitude  of  meritorious  deeds,  but  the  one  act  of 
trust ;  not  the  mere  credence  of  His  words,  but  the  moral 
act  of  reliance  on  Him,  is  the  way  to  receive  ^His  gift. 


70  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  vi.  26-40 

That,  faith  is  the  seed  of  all  the  manifold  "  works  of 
God  "  which  a  man  can  do  ;  and  they  who  have  that 
faith  will  necessarily  abound  in  these,  and  labour  in  all 
that  they  do  to  be  well-pleasing  to  Him,  and,  even  when 
toiling  for  perishable  goods,  will  have  an  aim  beyond 
these,  and  will  labour  for  Him,  and,  whether  they  eat  or 
drink,  will  do  it  in  remembrance  of  the  Giver  of  their 
eternal  life. 

in.  Verses  30-33  give  the  next  stage.  The  invita- 
tion to  faith  meets  more  opposition  than  the  exhortation 
to  work.  So  it  always  does.  Twenty-four  hours  had 
not  passed  since  they  had  seen  the  miracle  which  had 
wrought  them  to  the  pitch  of  wishing  to  make  a  king  of 
Him,  and  now  they  are  asking  for  a  sign.  Were  their 
memories  short  ?  or  was  it  not  rather  that  they  felt  that 
something  more  was  contained  in  His  call  for  faith  than 
they  had  thought  of  as  in  Him,  and  that  they  felt  that  the 
loftier  claims  demanded  fuller  attestation  ?  The  refer- 
ence to  Moses  and  the  manna  is  relevant  only  if  some 
vague  idea  was  in  their  minds  that  Jesus  was  claiming 
to  be  at  least  another  Moses,  if  not  something  more. 
But  note  how  they  degrade  the  idea  of  faith  to  that  of 
simple  credence,  and  how  they  make  outward  signs  the 
only  ground  of  the  poor,  starved  thing  they  call  "  belief." 
Is  there  not,  too,  in  their  reiteration  of  Christ's  own 
word  in  their  question  "  What  dost  Thou  work?  "  almost 
a  scoff,  as  if  they  had  said  :  "  Work  indeed !  Time 
enough  to  tell  us  to  work  and  to  believe  Thee,  when  Thou 
hast  done  something  to  warrant  belief  and  to  vindicate 
Thy  right  to  command  "  ?  Evidently  they  are  beginning 
to  resist,  and  admiration  and  docility  are  passing  into 
critical  withdrawal. 


Less.  VIII.]      True  Work  for  True  Bread  71 

Our  Lord's  answer  is  marked  as  solemn  and  important 
by  the  twofold  '*'  verily."  He,  first,  with  infinite  majesty 
and  calm,  sets  aside  the  suggested  parallel  with  Moses, 
which  doubly  fails  in  that  the  latter  was  not  the  giver, 
and  in  that  manna  was  not  truly  bread  from  heaven. 
Note  the  contrast  between  the  past  gift  of  the  manna 
and  the  present  (and  continuous)  gift  of  the  bread. 
Note  the  claim  of  unique  relationship  between  Him  who 
has  just  called  Himself  the  Giver,  and  the  Father  who  in 
and  through  Him  gives.  Note  the  emphatic  collocation 
of  words  in  the  original,  "  the  bread  out  of  heaven,  the 
true."  That  bread  is  the  reality  of  which  all  earthly 
food,  even  miraculous  manna,  is  but  the  symbol.  It, 
and  only  it,  truly  feeds  men.  The  wondrous  charac- 
teristics of  that  bread  are  then  set  forth  in  verse  ;^^.  It 
is  the  direct  gift  of  God,  it  is  "  that  which  cometh  down 
out  of  heaven  "  in  continuous  descent  to  hungry  souls, 
it  not  only  sustains  but  gives  life,  and  it  is  meant  for  the 
whole  world. 

IV.  No  wonder  that  such  words  should  stir  desire  for 
such  a  gift.  The  Samaritan  woman's  petition  for  the 
gift  of  the  water  to  save  her  from  thirst  and  toil  is  on  the 
same  level  as  this  cry,  "  Evermore  give  us  this  bread." 
Deeply  tainted  with  gross  material  misconceptions  of 
some  mysterious  outward  good,  the  people  are  yet 
touched  with  longings,  and  recognise  His  power  to  give 
what  they  need.  That  cry  never  goes  to  Him  in  vain, 
however  dense  the  clouds  of  ignorance  and  error  through 
which  it  rises  to  Him.  Therefore  the  point  is  reached 
at  which  He  can  draw  back  the  last  veil,  and  show  the 
truth  in  its  brightness.  Some  eyes  will  be  dazzled  and 
turn  away,  but  some  may  look  and  live. 


72  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  vi.  26-40 

At  all  events,  the  disclosure  is  the  next  step  in 
answering  the  cry.  Jesus  gives  the  bread  by  declaring 
Himself  to  be  the  bread,  and  inviting  us  to  Him  that  we 
may  take  it  by  faith.  The  full  disclosure  of  Himself, 
is  again  a  parallel  to  that  to  the  Samaritan  woman.  If 
we  keep  the  immediately  preceding  description  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  bread  of  God  in  view,  how  wonder- 
ful these  words  become !  In  them  Jesus  asserts  His 
descent  from  the  Father,  His  power  to  give  life  and  to 
feed,  with  the  only  true  nourishment,  all  the  wants  of 
every  soul.  Think  of  a  man  saying  this  to  men,  and, 
what  is  more  wonderful  still,  getting  men  to  believe  him, 
and  millions  of  them  to  answer,  "  Yes,  we  have  tasted 
this  bread,  and  know  all  that  he  said  is  true."  He  gave 
Himself  to  these  Jews  when  He  declared  who  He  was,  and 
invited  them  to  come  that  they  might  hunger  no  more. 
He  gives  Himself  to  us,  whom  He  invites  to  "  believe  on 
Him  " ;  and  He  teaches  us  that  coming  is  believing,  and 
access  to  Him  as  possible  for  us  as  for  those  who  stood 
by  Him.  If  we  exercise  that  faith  which  is  coming  to 
Him,  we  shall  neither  know  the  weakness  of  hunger  nor 
the  pangs  of  thirst ;  but  will  be  strong  with  the  nourish- 
ment of  our  powers,  and  glad  with  the  satisfaction  of  our 
desires,  as  they  only  can  be  who  eat  the  bread  of  life  and 
drink  the  living  water. 

Verse  35  fully  discloses  the  nature  of  the  bread,  the 
blessed  results  of  possessing  it,  and  the  condition  of 
receiving.  But  the  sad  fact  that  the  listeners  had  not 
exercised  that  condition,  as  was  obvious  from  their  very 
petition,  which  proved  them  bhnd  to  the  higher  meanings 
of  His  sayings  and  to  His  true  character,  presses  on 
His  spirit,  and  draws  out  the  lament  and  indictment 


Less.  VIII.]       True  Work  for  True  Bread  73 

which  close  His  direct  address.  Verse  36  refers  to  a 
previous  saying,  probably  that  in  verse  26,  the  inner 
meaning  of  which  is  truly  preserved  in  the  different 
form  of  this  verse.  The  Jews  had  just  asked  for  a  sign, 
that  they  might  see  and  believe.  He  tells  them  that 
they  had  seen  Him,  the  greatest  of  signs,  and  that  the 
sight  had  not  led  to  belief.  Sadness,  wonder,  and  blame 
blend  in  that  saying.  That  we  should  see  Jesus,  and 
not  believe  on  Him,  is  the  mystery  and  tragedy  of  the 
world,  and  is,  alas  !  repeated  to-day. 

V.  Verses  37-40  are  separated  from  the  preceding  in 
tone,  by  the  absence  of  reference  to  the  bread,  and  by 
the  cessation  of  personal  address.  Probably  a  pause  in 
Christ's  utterance  went  before  them.  He  seems  to  be 
staying  Himself,  in  face  of  the  people's  unbelief,  by 
gazing  on  the  certain  success  of  His  work,  quite  as  much 
as  to  be  holding  forth  yet  more  attractively  the  blessed 
results  of  coming  to  Him,  in  still  another  attempt  to  win 
their  faith.  Both  strains  are  blended  in  these  wonderful 
words.  Verses  37  and  38  sound  principally  the  former, 
and  verses  39  and  40  mainly  the  latter,  but  in  neither 
case  exclusively.  "  What  if  some  did  not  believe  ?  " 
Their  unbelief  shall  not  make  the  "purpose  of  God 
without  effect."  For  "all  that  the  Father  giveth  Me 
shall  come  to  Me,"  where  the  neuter  form  is  to  be  noted, 
as  presenting  the  body  of  believers  in  all  ages  and  lands 
as  a  definite  whole,  and  the  stress  of  the  assurance  is  to 
be  observed,  as  being  shall  "  reach  Me," — not  merely 
come  towards,  but  attain  to. 

Then,  in  the  next  clause,  the  individual  members  of 
that  whole  are  made  prominent,  and  stress  is  laid  on 
His  welcome  of  each.     Men  come  to  Him,   not  in  a 


74  The  Gospel  of  St.  Jolin     [Chap.  vi.  26-40 

mass,  but  one  by  one.  Faith  is  intensely  personal,  and 
the  wicket-gate  lets  in  only  one  at  a  time.  The  blessed 
assurance  of  welcome  is  familiar  to  us  all,  but  its  remark- 
able connection  is  often  passed  by  unnoticed.  Here  it 
is  represented  as  the  result  of  the  perfect  docility  and 
submission  of  the  Son  to  the  will  of  the  Father.  The 
fact  of  a  man's  coming  to  Him  by  faith  is  the  sign  to 
Him  that  this  man  is  the  Father's  gift  to  Him,  and 
therefore  He  takes  him  to  His  heart.  In  all  His  earthly 
and  heavenly  work  of  redemption,  whether  it  be  His 
incarnation,  life,  death,  reign  in  heaven,  or  reception 
and  perfecting  of  believers.  He  is  obedient  to  the  Father, 
and  does  nothing  of  Himself.  Therefore  He  was  patient 
and  undismayed,  when  men  believed  not.  Therefore, 
too,  we  may  go  to  Him,  assured  of  a  welcolhe. 

Verses  39  and  40  present  the  glorious  issues  of  faith 
in  a  double  form,  of  which  the  similarities  and  the  differ- 
ences are  equally  noteworthy.  "  The  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Me "  in  the  true  reading  in  verse  39  becomes  in 
verse  40  "the  will  of  My  Father,"  so  that  the  filial 
relationship  is  made  emphatic  and  declared  to  be  unique 
("  My  Father  ").  In  verse  39  the  neuter  form  appears, 
and  the  objects  of  Christ's  care  are  described  as  "  that 
which  He  hath  given  Me  " ;  the  totality  being  the  main 
thought,  and  the  security  of  its  present  protection  and 
certainty  of  its  future  life  being  considered  as  resting  on 
the  Father's  gift  and  the  Son's  obedience ;  while  in  verse 
40  the  same  persons  are  individualised,  and  described 
according  to  their  own  act  of  faith,  which  ensures  His 
response  of  eternal  life. 

In  verse  39  the  present  blessedness   of  believers   is 
regarded  as  being  safe  keeping ;  in  verse  40,  as  being 


Less.  VIII,]      True  Work  for  True  Bread  75 

everlasting  life.  But  the  two  types  merge  in  the  final 
issue,  though  even  there  the  one  reads  "  it "  and  the 
other  "  him."  The  resurrection  of  the  body  is  the  neces- 
sary crown  of  that  safe  keeping  and  communicated  life, 
which  are  the  believer's  privilege  here.  That  glorious 
issue,  without  which  the  present  experiences  of  the 
believer  would  be  futile  and  the  whole  of  his  earthly 
life  a  confounding  riddle,  is  wrought  by  Jesus  Himself, 
as  is  emphatically  claimed  by  the  majestic  "  I "  which 
the  original  underscores,  so  to  speak,  by  its  position,  in 
the  fortieth  verse.  He  who  feeds  on  the  bread  of  life 
here  cannot  die.  The  resurrection  to  life  must  come  as 
the  copestone  of  redemption.  Without  it  the  building 
stands,  would  stand,  a  ruin,  and  the  taunt  would  be 
justified.  This  Jesus  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to 
finish. 


LESSON    IX 
"That  Rock  was  Christ 


St.  John  vii.  31-44 


31.  "And  many  of  the  people 
believed  on  Him,  and  said, 
When  Christ  cometh,  will  He 
do  more  miracles  than  these 
which  this  man  hath  done? 

32.  The  Pharisees  heard  that 
the  people  murmured  such 
things  concerning  Him  ;  and 
the  Pharisees  and  the  chief 
priests  sent  officers  to  take 
Him. 

33.  Then  said  Jesus  unto 
them,  Yet  a  little  while  am  I 
with  you,  and  then  I  go  unto 
Him  that  sent  Me. 

34.  Ye  shall  seek  Me,  and 
shall  not  find  Me  :  and  where  I 
am,  thither  ye  cannot  come. 

35.  Then  said  the  Jews 
among  themselves.  Whither 
will  He  go,  that  we  shall  not 
find  Him  ?  will  He  go  unto 
the  dispersed  among  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  teach  the  Gentiles  ? 

36.  What  manner  of  saying 
is  this  that  He  said,  Ye  shall 
seek  Me,  and  shall  not  find 
Me  :  and  where  I  am,  thither  ye 
cannot  come  ? 

37.  In  the  last  day,  that 
great   day  of  the   feast,   Jesus 


stood  and  cried,  saying.  If  any 
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto 
Me,  and  drink, 

38.  He  that  believeth  on  Me, 
as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out 
of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of 
living  water. 

39.  (But  this  spake  He  of 
the  Spirit,  which  they  that 
believe  on  Him  should  receive : 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
given ;  because  that  Jesus  was 
not  yet  glorified.) 

40.  Many  of  the  people  there- 
fore, when  they  heard  this 
saying,  said.  Of  a  truth  this  is 
the  Prophet. 

41.  Others  said.  This  is  the 
Christ.  But  some  said,  Shall 
Christ  come  out  of  Galilee  ? 

42.  Hath  not  the  Scripture 
said,  That  Christ  cometh  of  the 
seed  of  David,  and  out  of  the 
town  of  Bethlehem,  where 
David   was  ? 

43.  So  there  was  a  division 
among  the  people  because  of 
Him. 

44.  And  some  of  them  would 
have  taken  Him  ;  but  no  man 
laid  hands  on  Him." 


THIS   seventh   chapter   carries   us    into    the   midst 
of  the   glad   stir   in   Jerusalem   at   the   Feast   of 
Tabernacles,   and    vividly   reproduces    the    contending 

76 


Less.  IX.]  "That  Rock  was  Christ"  77 

opinions  and  feelings  about  Jesus.  There  were  three 
parties, — the  "  multitude,"  or  the  crowds  of  pilgrims, 
who  were  favourably  disposed  to  Him,  but  wavering 
and  easily  swayed  backwards  and  forwards  as  crowds 
are ;  the  "  Jews,"  the  section  who  clung  to  carnal 
Messianic  hopes,  and  could  not  but  be  against  such  a 
Messiah  as  Jesus ;  and  the  official  class,  divided  into 
Pharisees  and  chief  priests,  the  latter  being  mostly 
Sadducees,  and  violently  antagonistic  to  the  former,  but 
one  with  them  in  hatred  of  Jesus.  The  chapter  rings 
with  the  Babel  of  these  discordant  voices.  Our  lesson 
begins  in  the  midst  of  the  clamour,  and  may  be  con- 
sidered with  reference  to  the  two  sayings  of  our  Lord 
which  it  contains. 

I.  We  note  then,  first,  His  prophecy  of  departure, 
with  its  occasion  and  result  (vers.  31-36).  The  calm 
boldness  of  our  Lord's  teaching  in  the  temple,  and  the 
silence  of  the  rulers,  had  impressed  both  the  floating 
population  of  pilgrims  and  some  of  the  residents  in 
Jerusalem  ;  but  the  latter  had  been  alienated  by  His 
further  declarations,  while  many  of  the  former  had  been 
drawn  to  Him  with  a  fuller  faith  thereby.  Mark  the 
"believed  on  Him"  in  verse  31,  which  expresses  reli- 
ance, and  not  mere  credence.  This  faith  was  real, 
though  imperfect,  as  being  founded  on  "  signs."  It  was 
not  bold  enough  nor  perhaps  certain  enough  to  affirm, 
but  only  to  whisper  a  question. 

But  those  who  have  reached  the  point  of  asking  what 
more  the  Christ  could  do  than  this  man  does,  are  not 
far  from  answering  their  own  question  with  a  full  con- 
fession. The  action  of  the  rulers  was  precipitated  by 
reports  of  these  "  murmurings " ;  for  any  spark   might 


78  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  vii.  31-44 

set  the  excited  crowds  in  a  blaze.  It  was  humiliating 
for  Jewish  officials  to  have  to  stifle  the  national  hope 
in  which  the  Pharisees,  at  all  events,  shared ;  but  that 
was  the  price  they  had  to  pay  for  place  and  power  under 
Rome.  The  decision  to  arrest  Jesus  marked  a  new 
stage  in  the  conflict  of  Divine  love  with  unbelief,  and 
John  is  careful  to  note  its  occasion  in  the  people's 
ominous  question,  and  its  result  in  our  Lord's  saying. 

That  saying  was  apparently  spoken  in  public,  in  the 
hearing  of  His  would-be  captors.  If  we  try  to  realise 
the  circumstances,  the  few  calm  words  become  majestic 
and  pathetic.  We  note  their  recognition  that  this  was 
the  beginning  of  the  end,  a  further  stage  in  the  struggle. 
The  "  little  while  "  was  but  about  six  months,  and  this 
abortive  attempt  was  like  a  signal-gun  which  opens  a 
battle.  But  Christ's  consciousness  that  the  term  of  His 
continuance  depends  on  Another  than  them  is  equally 
audible  in  the  words.  He  knows  that  whatever  the 
rulers  may  attempt.  He  will  be  with  them  still,  and  that 
when  He  leaves  them,  it  will  be  His  own  act.  His 
"  hour "  will  tick  out  all  its  minutes  before  it  strikes. 
He  will  not  leave  off"  nor  be  dragged  from  His  work 
till  it  is  done.  The  completion  of  His  message  is 
guaranteed  to  Himself  and  assured  to  men  by  the 
thought  of  "  Him  that  sent "  Him. 

How  eloquent  of  a  unique  relation  to  life  and  death 
and  the  future  life  is  that  calm  word,  "  I  go  " — not  I 
am  driven ;  for  men  and  death  are  impotent  against 
Him,  unless  He  wills  to  die — "  to  Him  that  sent  Me  " 
as  a  faithful  messenger  with  an  accomplished  errand, 
returning  to,  not  entering  for  the  first  time,  the  land 
beyond !      It  is  no  human  consciousness   merely  that 


Less.  IX.]  « That  Rock  was  Christ "  79 

fronted  the  excited  crowd  and  intending  captors  with 
such  words.  They  open  a  ghmpse  into  the  Divine 
depths  of  His  spirit. 

But  even  in  that  hour  of  peril  He  thinks  less  of 
Himself  than  of  men,  and  turns  to  these  listeners  with 
almost  a  wail  of  sad  forecast,  through  which  the  tone  of 
beseeching  is  heard.  The  incarnate  Wisdom  laments 
even  while  He  foretells,  as  did  the  personified  Wisdom 
in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  "  They  shall  seek  Me  diligently, 
but  they  shall  not  find  Me."  The  sad  prophecy  does 
not  refer  to  penitence,  but  to  the  vain  longings  and 
futile  seekings  which  have  been  that  strange  nation's 
bitter  food  ever  since.  The  whole  tragedy  of  its  history 
is  condensed  into  a  sentence.  Like  all  prophetic 
threatenings,  it  was  said  that  it  might  not  have  to  be 
experienced,  and  mercy  shaped  His  lips  to  stern  speech. 

Why  would  their  seeking  be  vain  ?  Because  they  had 
not  the  conditions  needful  for  that  place  and  state  of 
communion  with  the  Father,  whither  He  was  going, 
and  to  which  He  only  can  lead  any  of  us.  Earthly- 
mindedness  shuts  us  out  from  heaven  and  from  finding 
Christ  here.  If  we  are  to  be  with  Him  there,  we  must 
have  sought  Him  here,  with  that  true  desire  and  seeking 
which  ever  finds.  Mark  that  He  "is,"  even  when  on 
earth,  where  He  goes  when  He  leaves  earth.  Mark, 
too,  the  tone  of  invitation  to  make  the  best  use  of  the 
"  little  while."  Conscious  security  till  His  work  is  done, 
prophetic  warning  and  loving  call  to  present  faith,  are  all 
contained  in  these  words. 

The  gross  misunderstanding  of  them  comes  from  the 
deafness  of  prejudice  and  hate,  which  left  unnoticed  the 
plain  declaration  "to  Him  that  sent  Me,"  in  order  to 


8o  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Ch^.  vii.  31-44 

point  a  gibe  at  a  Messiah  who,  when  found  out  as  an 
impostor  at  home,  would  carry  His  fooHsh  "  teaching  " 
to  the  Gentiles.  John  is  fond  of  recording  sayings  of 
enemies  which  the  irony  of  Providence  fulfilled.  Like 
Caiaphas,  these  scoffers  were  wiser  than  they  knew,  and 
their  taunt  shadowed  the  actual  course  of  the  gospel. 
"  Seeing  ye  condemn  yourselves  as  unworthy  of  eternal 
life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles." 

II.  We  have,  secondly,  the  great  call  on  the  great  day 
of  the  feast.  The  promise  to  the  Samaritan  woman  is 
repeated  and  expanded  in  the  temple-court.  The  well- 
known  ceremonial  of  the  water-drawing  on  the  seven 
days  of  the  feast  naturally  suggested  it ;  and  if,  as  seems 
probable,  that  rite  was  omitted  on  the  last  day,  its  very 
omission  made  Christ's  words  the  more  emphatic.  They 
point,  however,  to  the  historical  fact  commemorated  by 
the  rite,  and  not  only  to  the  rite  itself ;  namely,  to  the 
miracle  in  the  desert,  when  the  thirsty  crowds  saw  the 
precious  stream  pouring  from  the  rock.  So  here,  again 
Jesus  lays  His  hand  on  the  great  facts  and  thoughts  of 
the  old  order,  and  claims  to  be  that  which  they  shadowed. 
This  Gospel  of  John,  which  we  are  sometimes  told  is 
anti- Jewish,  is  really  saturated  with  reminiscences  of  the 
earlier  revelation ;  and  in  it  Jesus  claims  to  be  the  true 
temple,  the  reality  of  what  the  serpent  typified,  the  real 
manna,  the  water-yielding  rock,  the  pillar  of  cloud  and 
fire,  and  the  true  Paschal  Lamb. 

The  general  idea  contained  in  the  emblem  here  needs 
no  elucidation.  Whatever  thirst  or  longing  desire  is  felt 
by  man,  Jesus  will  satisfy  it.  We  stand  awed  as  well  as 
attracted  by  the  majestic  and  unconditional  universality 
of  the  promise.     Who  is  this  who  fronts  the  whole  race 


Less.  IX.]  "That  Rock  was  Christ"  8i 

of  men  with  open  arms  of  invitation  and  calm  confi- 
dence in  His  sufficiency  for  all  the  wants  of  every 
man?  What  majestic  assurance  in  that  "Me"!  What 
wide-stretching,  deep-reaching,  individualising  mercy  of 
invitation  in  that  "  any  man  "  !  What  universal  invita- 
tion and  Divine  simplicity  of  conditions  in  that  "  let 
him  come  "  !  What  wealth  of  promise  that  no  coming 
can  be  vain,  in  that  collocation  "  let  him  come  .  .  .  and 
drink  "  !  Coming  is  believing  ;  believing  is  sure  to  bring 
partaking ;  partaking  is  sure  to  still  all  painful  desire. 
And  all  this  blessedness  is  offered  to  every  man  down 
the  ages  and  through  the  world  ;  for  every  man  thirsts, 
and  may  therefore  come. 

Nor  does  the  gift  stop  with  the  satisfaction  of  the 
comer's  own  needs.  He  becomes  a  fountain  for  the 
slaking  of  others'  thirst.  Note  Christ's  own  explanation 
of  "  coming,"  as  synonymous  with  "  believing  on  "  Him. 
What  "  Scripture  "  is  here  quoted  by  our  Lord  ?  No 
Old  Testament  passage  says  in  so  many  words,  "  Out  of 
his  belly  shall  flow,"  etc. ;  but  there  may  be  allusions  to 
several,  such  as  Isaiah  Iviii.  ii.  The  difficulty  of  finding 
words  analogous  to  those  apparently  quoted  may  be 
lightened  if  we  refer  to  the  original  incident  of  the 
flowing  stream  from  the  rock  in  the  wilderness ;  for 
there  we  read,  "  There  shall  come  water  out  of  it " 
(Exod.  xvii.   6). 

If  this  be  recognised  as  the  source  of  the  quotation, 
we  have  the  great  thought  that  they  who  come  to  that 
Rock,  and  slake  their  own  thirst  there,  become,  in  their 
measure  of  union  with  Him,  as  rocks  yielding  water  for 
other  thirsty  souls.  The  result  of  real  communion  with 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  terminated  in  the  rest,  as  of  satisfied 

6 


82  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap,  vU.  31-44 

desires,  which  it  brings,  but  passes  on  further  to  make 
us  the  medium  of  bringing  hke  blessings  to  others.  The 
end  of  personal  religion  is  not  personal  reception,  but 
communication,  for  which  reception  is  the  indispensable 
prior  requisite.  If  a  professing  Christian  has  no  impulse 
to  impart,  he  had  better  examine  himself  whether  he 
has  drunk  of  the  water  of  life.  The  paradox  is  true 
that  we  slake  our  own  thirst  by  giving  to  others  to  drink. 
In  England  we  have  in  some  places  what  we  call 
"  swallow-holes,"  where  a  river  plunges  into  the  ground 
and  is  lost.  Too  many"  professing  Christians  are  like 
those.  But  we  are  meant  to  be  water-carriers,  not 
water-drinkers  only. 

We  have  already  seen,  in  the  conversation  with  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  that  the  water  represents  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit ;  and  that  is  the  explanation  which  John  gives 
in  a  parenthesis.  He  lays  stress  on  the  "  shall "  in 
verse  38,  and  regards  it  as  pointing  to  a  future  gift. 
That  thought  is  even  more  strongly  expressed  in  the 
original,  which  might  be  read  "were  going  to  receive." 
Some  modern  critics,  who  know  Christ's  meaning  better 
than  John,  think  that  he  has  made  a  mistake  here,  and 
that  the  "shall"  in  verse  37  is  only  the  future  of 
promise ;  but  both  the  history  of  the  Primitive  Church 
and  parallel  sayings  in  this  Gospel  show  that  the  evan- 
geHst's  comment  is  right.  The  promise  of  satisfaction 
to  individual  thirst  by  coming  to  Jesus  was  for  the  then 
present  as  well  as  for  every  future ;  but  that  of  the 
transformation  of  believers  into  fountains  of  spiritual 
influence  was  for  the  future  only. 

The  change  effected  on  the  apostles  at  Pentecost  is 
the  best  commentary  on  the  words  here.     The  same  rela- 


Less.  IX.]  "  That  Rock  was  Christ "  83 

tion  between  the  full  gift  of  the  Spirit  and  the  glorifying 
of  Jesus  (mark  the  emphasis  laid  by  the  name  on  the 
humanity  of  our  Lord)  which  is  here  indicated,  is  fully 
developed  in  our  Lord's  words  in  the  upper  room. 
The  atoning  work  of  Jesus  had  to  be  complete  before 
the  Spirit  could  dwell  in  men's  hearts ;  and,  since  it  is 
His  office  to  apply  to  the  soul  that  finished  work,  it 
evidently  must  be  finished  ere  the  Spirit  could  possess 
the  material  for  His  work.  The  "  glorifying  "  of  Jesus 
embraces  not  only  His  ascension,  but  His  death.  John 
takes  the  complementary  view  to  Paul.  To  the  latter, 
Christ's  death  is  the  lowest  stage  in  His  humiliation, 
while  to  the  former  it  is  the  first  step  in  His  exaltation. 
Both  thoughts  are  true.  The  zenith  is  the  nadir.  The 
cross  is  the  throne.  There  the  glory  of  endless  pity,  of 
Divine  love,  of  Almighty  power  to  redeem,  shines  forth. 
The  solemn  calm  of  Christ's  voice  is  followed  by 
the  recurrent  jangle  of  conflicting  tongues.  The  brief 
utterances  in  their  direct  form  give  a  vivid  impression  of 
the  eager  controversies  which  surged  round  Jesus,  like 
noisy  waves  on  some  steadfast  rock.  Two  opinions  were 
formed  by  those  impressed  by  Christ's  words,  according 
to  one  of  which  He  was  "the  Prophet  "  (Deut.  xviii.  15), 
while  others,  who  had  got  beyond  the  "  murmurings  " 
of  verse  31,  boldly  acknowledged  Him  as  the  Christ. 
John  details  the  objection  to  this  view  which  came  from 
some  learned  authorities,  who  knew  their  Old  Testament 
in  its  letter,  and  demanded  that  Messiah  should  be  born 
in  Bethlehem.  It  did  not  matter  what  Divine  wisdom, 
tenderness,  purity,  and  power  were  in  this  Jesus.  All 
these  could  not  show  Him  to  be  Messiah.  Where  does 
He  come  from,  not  what  He  is,  is  the  important  point. 


$4  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap  vii.  31-44 

Better  the  ignorance  that  discerned  His  sweetness  and 
bowed  to  His  authority,  than  the  learned  bhndness  that 
pottered  over  the  letter  and  let  the  spirit  slip.  Are 
there  not  a  few  Biblical  scholars  of  that  breed  left  yet  ? 
But  John  is  struck  again,  much  as  when  quoting  the 
sarcasm  in  verse  35,  with  the  thought  that  these  wise 
people  knew  so  little,  and  that  the  condition,  the  sup- 
posed non-fulfilment  of  which  made  their  belief  in  this 
Christ  impossible,  whatever  grace  and  truth  He  might 
disclose,  had  really  been  fulfilled,  if  they  had  only 
known  it. 

The  same  thing  is  continually  recurring.  Grave 
objections  are  made  by  partial  knowledge,  especially  of 
the  self-conceited  and  unspiritual  sort,  which  fuller  know- 
ledge converts  into  arguments  for  the  faith  which  they 
were  supposed  to  destroy.  Spiritual  instincts  are  better 
guides  to  Jesus  than  microscopic  literalism ;  and,  if  a 
man  feels  that  he  is  thirsty,  and  is  touched  by  Christ's 
gracious  and  majestic  promise  of  living  water,  he  need 
not  pay  much  attention  to  objectors  who  would  rob 
him  of  his  faith  because  this  or  that  bit  of  geography 
or  history  seems  wrong.  Probably  it  is  right  after  all. 
Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  though  these  cavillers 
thought  that  He  was  not,  and  knew  that  the  Christ  must 
be. 


LESSON    X 


Freedom  and  Sonship 

St.  John  viii.  31-47 


31.  "  Then  said  Jesus  to  those 
Jews  which  believed  on  Him, 
If  ye  continue  in  My  word, 
then  are  ye  My  disciples  in- 
deed ; 

32.  And  ye  shall  know  the 
truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make 
you  free. 

^^.  They  answered  Him,  We 
be  Abraham's  seed,  and  were 
never  in  bondage  to  any  man  : 
how  sayest  Thou,  Ye  shall  be 
made  free  ? 

34.  Jesus  answered  them, 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you. 
Whosoever  committeth  sin  is 
the  servant  of  sin. 

35.  And  the  servant  abideth 
not  in  the  house  for  ever  :  but 
the  Son  abideth  ever. 

36.  If  the  Son  therefore  shall 
make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free 
indeed. 

37.  I  know  that  ye  are 
Abraham's  seed ;  but  ye  seek 
to  kill  Me,  because  My  word 
hath  no  place  in  you. 

38.  I  speak  that  which  I 
have  seen  with  My  Father : 
and  ye  do  that  which  ye  have 
seen  with  your  father. 

39.  They  answered  and  said 
unto  Him,  Abraham  is  our 
father.  Jesus  saith  unto  them. 
If  ye  were  Abraham's  children, 
ye  would  do  the  works  of 
Abraham. 


40.  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill 
Me,  a  Man  that  hath  told  you 
the  truth,  which  I  have  heard 
of  God  :  this  did  not  Abraham. 

41.  Ye  do  the  deeds  of  your 
father.  Then  said  they  to  Him, 
We  be  not  born  of  fornication  ; 
we  have  one  Father,  even  God. 

42.  Jesus  said  unto  them,  If 
God  were  your  Father,  ye 
would  love  Me  :  for  I  proceeded 
forth  and  came  from  God ; 
neither  came  I  of  Myself,  but 
He  sent  Me. 

43.  Why  do  ye  not  under- 
stand My  speech  ?  even  because 
j"e  cannot  hear  My  word. 

44.  Ye  are  of  your  father  the 
devil,  and  the  lusts  of  your 
father  ye  will  do.  He  was  a 
murderer  from  the  beginning, 
and  abode  not  in  the  truth, 
because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie, 
he  speaketh  of  his  own :  for 
he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of 
it. 

45.  And  because  I  tell  you 
the  truth,  ye  believe  Me  not. 

46.  Which  of  you  convinceth 
Me  of  sin  ?  And  if  I  say  the 
truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe 
Me? 

47.  He  that  is  of  God  hear- 
eth  God's  words  :  ye  therefore 
hear  them  not,  because  ye  are 
not  of  God." 


85 


86  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  viii.  31-47 

THE  remarkable  description  of  the  persons  addressed 
in  this  conversation  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  blend 
incongruous  characteristics,  since  John  generally  uses 
"  Jews  "  to  mean  the  section  of  the  people  who  held 
fast  by  the  hope  of  an  earthly  conqueror  as  Messiah, 
and  were  therefore  opposed  to  Jesus.  How  could  such 
persons  "believe  Him  "  ?  And  how  could  believers  be 
called  "  children  of  the  devil,"  and  charged  with  seeking 
to  kill  Jesus  ?  The  observation  of  the  distinction 
between  "  believed  on  "  (ver.  30)  and  "  believed  "  gives 
the  key.  The  former  means  reliance ;  the  latter,  mere 
credence.  Such  incomplete  faith  was  quite  consistent 
with  retaining  their  carnal  expectations,  and  must  neces- 
sarily issue  in  falling  away,  when  they  understood 
Christ's  true  character.  They  had  got  to  the  point  of 
beheving  Him  the  Messiah,  but  it  must  be  their  sort  of 
Messiah.  The  words  of  our  Lord,  in  verse  31,  imply 
that  these  people  were  not  yet  "  disciples  indeed." 

Our  Lord's  words  in  verses  31  and  32  are,  then,  His 
welcome  and  warning  to  very  imperfect  faith.  He  is 
willing  to  accept  the  least  adequate  recognition,  and  to 
deepen  it.  He  lays  down  a  condition,  and  gives  a 
promise.  The  condition  is  "  abiding  in  His  word," 
where  the  singular  is  to  be  observed  as  marking  His 
revelation  as  a  whole,  and  the  expression  "  abide  in  " 
as  suggesting  that  "  word  "  as  the  atmosphere  in  which 
the  believer  lives  and  moves.  The  converse  representa- 
tion of  the  word  as  abiding  in  us  is  also  common  in  this 
Gospel.  That  word  is  the  element  in  which  we  should 
live  and  the  inward  root  of  our  lives.  Faithful  adherence 
to  it  develops  rudimentary  and  half-seeing  faith  into 
completeness,  as  the  triple  promise  holds  forth. 


Less.  X.]  Freedom  and  Sonship  87 

True  discipleship,  in  contrast  to  the  crude  adhesion 
given  by  these  Jews ;  knowledge  of  the  truth,  which 
surpasses  their  present  position  both  in  respect  to  the 
sweep  and  elevation  of  that  which  is  known  and  in 
regard  to  the  manner  of  knowledge,  which  will  be  not 
mere  head-work,  but  the  fruit  of  experience  and  posses- 
sion ;  and  freedom  brought  about  by  that  truth, — are 
the  gifts  waiting  the  disciple  who  abides  in  the  Word. 
Intellectual  freedom  consists  in  the  subjugation  of  the 
understanding  to  the  truth  which  delivers  from  errors, 
prejudices,  and  the  babble  of  human  opinion.  Moral 
freedom  consists  in  the  submission  of  the  will  to  duty, 
which  is  the  practical  outcome  of  truth.  To  do  as  we 
ought  is  liberty ;  to  do  as  we  like  is  slavery.  Spiritual 
freedom  consists  in  the  bowing  down  of  the  whole  man 
to  God,  who  is  revealed  by  the  truth,  and  to  serve  whom 
is  to  be  master  of  self  and  things. 

Skin-deep  discipleship  took  offence  at  a  promise  in 
which  it  detected  a  view  of  its  present  condition  which  it 
resented.  So  it  does  to-day.  Tell  men  that  Jesus  will 
redeem  them  from  their  sins,  and  they  fire  up  at  the 
implication  that  they  are  sinners. 

How  could  these  Jews  assert  that  they  had  never  been 
in  bondage,  with  Egypt  and  Babylon  in  their  history,  and 
Roman  eagles,  visible  from  the  temple,  flaunting  in  "  the 
castle  "  ?  They  used  the  same  strange  power  of  ignoring 
disagreeable  facts  which  blinds  so  many  of  us  to  our 
slavery.  Sin's  fetters  are  riveted  when  the  bondsman 
lifts  his  manacled  hands  and  protests  his  freedom.  Pride 
of  and  trust  in  their  descent,  as  if  it  gave  them  inahen- 
able  rights,  and  a  vain  assertion  of  liberty,  were  all  that 
Christ's  great  promise  evoked.     The  veneer  of  faith  was 


88  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  viH.  31-47 

very  thin,  and  was  already  worn  through  and  the  baser 
core  presented. 

Our  Lord  takes  up  these  two  pleas  in  reverse  order  in 
His  answer  (vers.  34-38).  First  He  sets  forth  the  prin- 
ciples of  true  freedom ;  and,  next,  of  true  sonship.  The 
solemn  words  in  verse  34,  introduced  by  that  double 
"  verily "  which  always  indicates  important  and  often 
unwelcome  truth,  and  calls  for  special  docility,  tear  away 
the  flimsy  veil,  and  disclose  the  fact  which  it  is  so  easy 
and  fatal  to  miss.  True  freedom  or  slavery  is  not  an 
affair  of  political  or  social  arrangements,  but  a  condition 
of  the  spirit.  The  real  bondage  is  that  which  enslaves 
the  will  and  prevents  doing  right.  The  perverted  state 
of  the  sinner,  the  terrible  power  of  repeating  itself  which 
sin  possesses,  the  impotence  of  the  better  nature  to  cast 
off  the  chains  woven  by  acts,  are  all  revealed  as  by  a 
lightning  flash  in  that  awful  saying,  which  shatters  so 
much  of  our  boasted  independence,  and  is  verified  daily 
in  the  experience  of  those  who  cast  off  the  restraints  of 
virtue  only  to  be  tied  and  bound  by  the  heavier  fetters 
of  vice.  The  stern  brevity  of  the  words  adds  to  their 
force. 

With  like  condensation,  the  fate  of  the  slave  is  set 
forth  in  verse  35,  and  contrasted  with  that  of  the  son. 
The  boast  of  the  Jews  had  been  that,  as  sons  of  Abraham, 
they  possessed  inalienable  freedom  and  secure  tenure  of 
their  land.  The  answer  lies  in  the  difference  between 
the  permanency  of  slave  and  son,  as  the  old  story  of 
Hagar  and  Ishmael  showed  it.  The  "  slave "  of  verse 
35  is  necessarily  the  ideal  of  the  class,  and  the  reference 
to  sin  as  the  master  is  dropped.  Slaves,  whoever  their 
lords,  are  not  permanent  dwellers  ;  sons,  whoever  their 


Less.  X.]  Freedom  and  Sonship  89 

fathers,  are.  This  is  true  in  relation  to  men  and  God. 
He  who  is  sin's  slave  cannot  claim  the  right  of  per- 
manent enjoyment  of  God's  blessings  which  he  possesses 
for  a  time.  Such  secure  continuance  is  the  prerogative 
of  a  son.  And  the  connecting  thought  implied  is  that 
slaves  of  sin  cannot  be  sons  of  God. 

The  saying  rang  the  knell  of  the  national  privileges  of 
the  Jews,  and  it  discloses  weighty  and  sad  truths  applic- 
able to  us ;  namely,  the  essentially  transitory  character 
of  sinful  men's  possession  of  any  outward  blessings,  and 
the  dread  sentence  of  exclusion,  which  must  ultimately 
sever  them  from  the  family  of  God.  There  is  something 
very  terrible  in  these  swift  strokes  as  of  a  glittering  sword, 
with  which  Jesus  here  so  authoritatively  shears  through 
the  outward  shows,  and  lays  bare  realities  and  conse- 
quences. 

As  He  passed  from  the  specific  idea  of  slave  of  sin  to 
the  general  one  of  slave,  so,  with  reverse  motion.  He 
next  passes  from  the  general  idea  of  the  sonship  to  the 
specific  idea  of  "  the  Son  " — of  God,  that  is.  Because 
the  Son  is  ever  in  the  Father's  house.  He  can  give 
true  freedom.  He  does  not  yet  say,  "  I  am  that  Son," 
but  He  scarcely  conceals  that  He  is.  What  "the 
truth  "  does  in  verse  32  the  Son  does  here,  and,  since 
that  truth  is  equivalent  to  "  My  word,"  no  doubt  as  to 
who  this  Son  was  could  exist.  He  abides  for  ever  in  the 
Father's  house,  as  He  has  told  us  all  through  the  earlier 
lessons  from  this  Gospel,  being  there  even  while  incar- 
nate. That  abiding  implies  His  full  carrying  out  of  the 
Father's  will  and  wielding  of  the  Father's  power.  There- 
fore He  has  power  to  break  every  yoke  of  bondage,  and 
they  who  let  Him  show  them  their  slavery  and  loose 


90  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  viii.  31-47 

their  chains  are  set  free,  and  share  in  the  prerogative  of 
sons,  and  dwell  for  ever  in  the  Father's  house. 

The  second  part  of  our  Lord's  answer  deals,  in  the 
light  of  these  truths,  with  the  first  part  of  the  Jews'  boast, 
and  the  remainder  of  the  lesson  turns  on  the  true  idea  of 
fatherhood  and  sonship.  The  great  truth  is  brought  out, 
that  true  sons  do  the  will  and  possess  the  likeness  of 
their  Father,  and  that  thought  is  directed  to  shatter  the 
two  boasts  of  "  the  Jews  "  to  be  the  children  of  Abraham 
and  of  God,  and  to  force  home  to  them  their  true  descent. 

In  verses  37  and  38  Jesus  admits  their  natural  descent, 
and  sets  against  it  their  attitude  to  Himself.  Already 
they  had  passed  from  crude  faith  to  hate,  which  will 
appear  incredible  only  to  those  who  do  not  know  that 
no  enemies  are  so  embittered  as  disenchanted  and  rene- 
gade admirers.  No  doubt,  Christ's  charge  drew  into 
consciousness  lurking  feelings.  Mark  the  reason  He 
assigns  for  their  hate,  "  My  word  hath  not  free  course 
in  you."  Their  beginning  of  belief  did  not  grow.  His 
truth,  as  more  clearly  unveiled,  did  not  advance  in  them. 
Standing  still  is  going  back.  If  rudimentary  faith  does 
not  mature,  it  rots.  Our  only  safety  is  in  the  victorious 
progress  of  Christ's  whole  word  in  mind,  heart,  and  life. 

Verse  38  gives  the  reason  for  their  non-acceptance  of 
His  word.  He  speaks  what  He  has  seen  with  His 
Father ;  they  do  what  they  have  heard  of  theirs.  Note 
the  contrasts  of  "  seen  "  and  "  heard,"  and  of  "  with  "  and 
"from."  Jesus  claims  superhuman  vision  of  God  and 
absolute  correspondence  of  His  revealing  word  with  the 
Divine  things  beheld  and  revealed.  Again,  He  "  speaks  "  ; 
they  "  do."  For  all  His  deeds  are  words  in,  and  parts 
of,  His  word. 


Less.  X.]  Freedom  and  Sonship  91 

Thus  far,  our  Lord  keeps  to  the  general  thought  of 
sonship  as  involving  likeness,  and  does  not  plainly  speak 
the  names  of  the  two  fathers.  We  may  by  our  actions 
make  ourselves  completely  deaf  to  Christ's  words ;  and 
nothing  stops  the  ears  of  the  spirit  so  surely  as  the  wax 
of  evil  deeds  consolidated  into  habits.  Conduct  betrays 
parentage. 

Verses  39-41  reiterate  the  truth  more  sternly,  in  answer 
to  the  repeated  boast  of  descent  from  Abraham.  They 
differ  from  the  preceding  in  saying  plainly  that  there  was 
absolute  contradiction  between  the  deeds  of  the  patriarch 
and  these,  his  descendants,  in  the  designation  of  Jesus, 
in  which  His  true  manhood.  His  ministry  of  truth,  and 
its  source  in  God,  are  plainly  declared,  this  being  an 
advance  on  the  previous  clause,  in  which  the  Father  was 
unnamed,  and  so  preparing  for  the  naming  of  the  other 
"  father." 

In  verse  41  the  Jews  show  that  they  partly  understood 
what  Father  Jesus  claimed,  and  they  follow  Him  on  to 
His  own  ground,  asserting  that  they  too,  because  legiti- 
mately descended  in  the  flesh  from  Abraham,  are  God's 
sons.  The  boast  is  shivered  by  the  application  of  the 
same  principle  which  shattered  the  former.  But  the 
principle  is  applied  with  a  noticeable  difference.  Love 
to  Jesus  is  "  the  spot  of  God's  children."  Think  of  one 
of  us  making  men's  love  to  himself  the  sign  of  being 
kindred  with  God  ! 

How  deep  this  saying  cuts  into  the  reasons  for  turning 
away  from  Jesus  !  Why  will  God's  children  necessarily 
love  Jesus  ?  Because  He  "  came  forth  "  in  the  past  act 
of  incarnation,  which  was  His  act,  and  "  is  come,"  stand- 
ing there  while  He  speaks,  and  "  has  not  come,"  a  phrase 


92  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  viii.  31-47 

including  past  and  present  in  one  continuous  whole,  and 
the  assertion  regarding  each  being  that  He  is  "  sent." 
So  he  that  "  loveth  Him  that  begat  loveth  Him  also  that 
is  begotten  of  Him." 

Next,  Jesus  lays  bare  the  ground  of  the  Jews'  failure 
in  understanding  as  well  as  in  love.  "  My  speech  "  is 
less  general  and  comprehensive  than  "My  word." 
"  Understand "  is  a  subsequent  process  to  "  hear.' 
"  Cannot "  is  a  self-caused  inability,  the  ground  of  which 
is  immediately  disclosed.  Men  can  make  themselves 
incapable  of  even  hearing  the  word  of  Christ ;  and  that 
general  incapacity  which  comes  from  contrariety  of  moral 
disposition  will  prevent  their  grasping  the  meaning  of 
His  single  utterances.  A  right  judgment  on  His  sayings 
requires  spiritual  susceptibility  for  His  mission  as  a 
whole. 

And  now  the  awful  revelation  of  the  true  paternity  of 
these  degenerate  sons  of  Abraham  is  flashed  forth.  The 
inmost  ground  of  want  of  love  to  Christ,  and  of  incapacity 
to  accept  His  word,  is  kindred  with  the  great  antagonist 
of  God ;  and  that  kinship,  it  is  to  be  observed,  is  dis- 
tinctly declared  as  voluntary  in  the  emphatic  expression, 
"Ye  will  to  do."  Men  are  members  of  that  family  be- 
cause they  choose  to  be  so,  and  do  things  contrary  to 
God's  will  and  accordant  with  Satan's  "  lusts."  What 
are  these  lusts?  Two  are  specified,  both  germane  to 
the  Jews'  feelings  to  Jesus, — murderous  hate  and  aver- 
sion to  the  truth. 

The  distinct  reference  to  the  Fall,  by  which  death  came 
on  men,  is  to  be  noted ;  and  there  seems  also  a  dim 
glimpse  of  a  previous  fall  of  the  Tempter  from  "  the 
truth."     A  spiritual  being — man  or  angel — who  has  not 


Less.  X.]  Freedom  and  Sonship  93 

"  truth  "  within, — that  is,  no  sincerity,  uprightness  of 
will,  or  affinity  with  the  revelation  of  God,  which  is  "  the 
truth," — cannot  continue  in  it  as  his  life's  atmosphere. 
He  has  no  lungs  fitted  to  breathe  it,  and  will  suifocate 
there,  like  a  man  in  water  or  a  fish  on  land. 

If  we  adopt  the  rendering  of  the  difficult  closing 
sentence  of  verse  44  in  the  Revised  Version  and  in  the 
Authorised  Version,  it  carries  on  the  allusion  to  the  Fall 
and  the  Satanic  lie  then.  "  Of  his  own  "  points  to  the 
true  diabolic  nature,  in  contrast  to  that  of  the  Son,  who 
did  and  spoke  nothing  of  Himself.  Wherever  such 
self-origination  and  casting  off  of  filial  obedience  are, 
there  are  the  "  devil's  marks,"  deep  stamped.  All  his 
words  are  lies,  his  promises  and  his  denials  of  God's 
threats.  Himself  a  liar,  he  breeds  lies  in  others.  It  is 
hard  to  beheve  that  these  solemn  words  of  Christ's  were 
only  accommodated  to  Jewish  superstition.  They  open 
a  dread  glimpse  into  the  anarchic  kingdom  of  antagonism 
to  God,  and  press  home  the  alternative, — either  children 
of  God  or  of  the  Devil. 

The  close  of  the  lesson  gathers  all  up  to  a  point.  So 
blinded  were  the  Jews  by  the  glamour  cast  by  Satan's 
lies,  that  they  rejected  Jesus  just  because  He  spoke  the 
truth.  The  highest  truth  has  this  for  one  of  its  credentials 
— that  sinful  men  do  not  accept  it.  Tongues  accus- 
tomed to  the  coarse  pungency  of  leeks  and  garlic  do  not 
like  manna.  The  devil's  children  naturally  take  to  lies, 
and  turn  away  from  truth.  Verse  46  in  its  first  part  gives 
as  proof  that  He  spoke  the  truth  the  unanswerable 
challenge  to  convict  Him  of  sin.  That  glove  lies  in  the 
lists  still,  and  eighteen  hundred  years  have  produced  no 
champion  bold  enough  to  lift  it  and  say,  "  I  will."     Jesus 


94  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  viii.  31-47 

asserts  His  sinlessness,  and  the  world  admits  the  claim. 
But  does  it  accept  the  consequence,  that  sinlessness  in 
action  implies  truth  in  speech  ?  So  He  takes  for  granted 
here — and  surely,  if  it  be  true  that  His  manhood  was 
utterly  free  from  sin,  the  only  explanation  is  to  be  found 
in  the  recognition  of  His  sonship,  and  involved  therein— 
the  vahdity  of  His  claim  to  be  the  perfect  Revealer  of 
the  truth.  On  the  basis  of  His  flawless  purity  is  solidly 
planted  the  searching  question,  "  Why  do  ye  not  believe 
Me?"  and  no  less  solidly  the  final  crushing  unveiling 
of  the  ultimate  reason  for  all  unbelief,  "  Ye  therefore 
hear  them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  God." 


LESSON    XI 


Jesus  Seeing  the  Blind,  and  the  Blind  Seeing  Jesus 

St.  John  ix.  i-ii,  35-38 


1.  "And  as  Jesus  passed  by, 
He  saw  a  man  which  was  blind 
from  his  birth. 

2.  And  His  disciples  asked 
Him,  saying.  Master,  who  did 
sin,  this  man,  or  his  parents, 
that  he  was  born  blind  ? 

3.  Jesus  answered,  Neither 
hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his 
parents :  but  that  the  works  of 
God  should  be  made  manifest 
in  him. 

4.  I  must  work  the  works  of 
Him  that  sent  Me,  while  it  is 
day  :  the  night  cometh,  when 
no  man  can  work. 

5.  As  long  as  I  am  in  the 
world,  I  am  the  light  of  the 
world. 

6.  When  He  had  thus  spoken, 
He  spat  on  the  ground,  and 
made  clay  of  the  spittle,  and  He 
anointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
man  with  the  clay. 

7.  And  said  unto  him.  Go, 
wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloam, 
(which  is  by  interpretation, 
Sent.)  He  went  his  way  there- 
fore, and  washed,  and  came 
seeing. 

8.  The  neighbours  therefore, 


and  they  which  before  had 
seen  him  that  he  was  blind, 
said,  Is  not  this  he  that  sat  and 
begged  ? 

9.  Some  said,  This  is  he : 
others  said.  He  is  like  him  :  but 
he  said,  I  am  he. 

10.  Therefore  said  they  unto 
him.  How  were  thine  eyes 
opened  ? 

11.  He  answered  and  said, 
A  man  that  is  called  Jesus 
made  clay,  and  anointed  mine 
eyes,  and  said  unto  me,  Go  to 
the  pool  of  Siloam,  and  wash  : 
and  I  went  and  washed,  and  I 
received  sight.  .  .  . 

35.  Jesus  heard  that  they 
had  cast  him  out;  and  when 
He  had  found  him,  He  said  unto 
him.  Dost  thou  believe  on  the 
Son  of  God  ? 

36.  He  answered  and  said, 
Who  is  He,  Lord,  that  I  might 
believe  on  Him  ? 

37.  And  Jesus  said  unto  him, 
Thou  hast  both  seen  Him,  and 
it  is  He  that  talketh  with  thee. 

38.  And  he  said,  Lord,  I 
believe.  And  he  worshipped 
Him." 


IT  is  remarkable  that,  while  the  other  evangelists  tell 
of  miracles  done  at  the  request  of  others,  all  but 
one  of  those  which  John  records  were  spontaneous  on 

95 


96  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ix.  1-38 

Christ's  part.  That  characteristic  is  strikingly  brought 
out  in  this  narrative.  "  He  saw  "  the  man.  No  one 
interceded  for  him.  The  disciples  regarded  him  only  as 
a  theological  problem.  He  himself  sat  silent,  waiting 
for  alms,  all  unconscious  of  the  kind  eyes  fixed  on  him. 
But  Jesus  saw  and  pitied,  recognised  the  will  of  the 
Father,  and  was  about  to  intervene  with  heahng  when 
He  was  delayed  by  the  question  of  the  disciples. 

Two  ways  of  looking  at  suffering  are  suggested  by 
the  disciples'  inquiry  and  Christ's  answer.  The  former 
glanced  at  the  blind  man  without  pity.  His  was  a 
common  calamity,  and  interested  them  only  as  raising  a 
doubt  as  to  the  persons  to  be  blamed  for  it.  Perhaps 
they  remembered  the  saying  to  another  sufferer,  "  Thou 
art  made  whole :  sin  no  more."  A  commonplace  of 
their  religion  was  the  connection  between  sin  and  suffer- 
ing ;  and  as,  in  this  case,  the  affliction  had  been  from 
birth,  it  strikes  them  as  a  curious  question  whether  there 
had  been  sin  in  some  previous  state  of  existence,  or 
whether  it  was  a  case  of  the  children's  expiating  the 
parents'  fault. 

Christ's  answer  falls  into  three  parts  (vers.  3-5).  First, 
He  teaches  the  disciples  and  us  how  to  look  at  suffering. 
So  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the  chief  consideration  is 
that  it  gives  opportunity  for  manifesting  "the  works  of 
God"  by  helping  to  remedy  it.  No  doubt  there  is  a 
connection  between  sin  and  sorrow,  and  Jesus  recognised 
it  when  He  pronounced  forgiveness  to  the  palsied  man 
before  He  healed  his  body.  But  to  study  misery  as 
material  for  theological  speculations  or  for  censorious 
adjudging  blame,  is  to  miss  its  true  purpose  for  us.  Not 
what  brought  it,  but  what  we  can  do  to  remove  it,  is  the 


Less.  XI.]  Jesus  Seeing  the  Blind  97 

question  for  us.  Speculations  about  "the  origin  of  evil" 
may  ossify  the  heart  so  that  it  throbs  with  no  pity.  That 
question  is  deeply  interesting  and  important  in  its  own 
place,  but  that  place  is  not  when  we  are  standing  beside 
the  sufferer.  Discuss  the  cause  of  the  fire  as  much  as 
you  like,  but  try  to  put  it  out  first  and  philosophise 
afterwards.  The  purpose  of  the  evil  around  us,  in 
reference  to  us,  is  to  touch  us  with  pity  and  summon  us 
to  help.  "  The  works  of  God  "  are  works  of  alleviation 
of  affliction  done  by  men  who,  in  thus  working,  are 
carrying  out  the  Divine  purpose  and  imitating  the  Divine 
acts.  We  are  likest  God  when  we  strive  to  reduce  the 
sum  of  human  misery. 

Verse  4  unfolds  the  secret  of  Christ's  unwearied 
diligence  in  His  appointed  task.  The  reading  adopted 
in  the  Revised  Version,  "we  must  work,"  associates 
us  with  Him,  and  sets  forth  the  great  "  must "  which 
dominated  His  life  as  meant  to  dominate  ours.  But 
if  that  be  the  true  reading,  the  difference  oetween  the 
Master  and  the  servants  remains  ;  for  our  obligation  is 
consequent  on  His  mission,  and  His  relation  to  the 
Father  is  that  of  being  "  sent "  in  a  special  manner. 
Jesus  here  shows  us  His  inmost  heart.  That  solemn 
"  must "  ruled  all  His  life,  and,  in  this  Gospel,  is  often 
on  His  lips.  But  it  was  no  unwelcome  necessity  re- 
luctantly obeyed,  but  was  inwoven  with  His  deepest  will 
and  the  occasion  of  His  continual  delight.  Because 
His  spirit  said,  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,"  He  was 
thereby  "anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His 
fellows." 

Jesus,  too,  as  well  as  we,  was  stimulated  to  fill  the 
moments  with  toil  by  the  consciousness  that  the  time 

7 


98  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ix.  1-38 

was  short.  He,  too,  must  make  the  most  of  the  oppor- 
tunities of  earthly  Hfe  ;  for,  after  it,  the  season  for  these 
gentle  works  of  Omnipotence  clothed  in  flesh  would  be 
ended.  True,  the  "  night "  was  really  day,  and  the  rest 
which  followed  earthly  toil  was  to  be  filled  with  loftier 
work  than  giving  this  man  sight ;  but  still,  the  form  of 
work  which  He  then  was  doing  could  not  be  done  in  a 
near  future.  Therefore  His  course  on  earth,  besides 
its  .grander  and  more  recondite  features,  is  marked  by 
the  homely  virtue  of  hard  work,  and  utilising  every 
moment. 

These  two  characteristics  are  to  be  reproduced  by  us, 
whether  this  verse  is  to  be  read  "  we "  or  "  I."  The 
quick  response  of  a  shoot  of  pity  and  love  when  we  see 
sorrow;  the  consciousness  of  a  great  necessity,  which 
we  rejoice  to  obey,  bidding  us  help  the  sufferers,  and 
so  do  God's  works  ;  the  unhasting,  unresting  diligence 
which  marks  the  evening  shadows  lengthening,  while  so 
much  of  the  harvest  is  unreaped,  and  therefore  is  a 
miser  of  time  and  prodigal  of  strength, — these  are  the 
signs  of  a  true  disciple.  Let  us  leave  the  question  of 
the  cause  of  the  misery  to  censorious  and  curious  people, 
except  so  far  as  the  knowledge  of  the  cause  may  direct 
wise  effort  to  cure  ;  and  let  us  feel  that  every  sorrow 
which  we  see  has  a  message  and  purpose  for  us,  and  is 
God's  call  to  us  to  soothe  and,  if  possible,  remove  it. 

Verse  5  is  the  majestic  utterance  of  His  conscious 
power,  which  power  here  is  present  to  His  mind,  as,  if 
we  may  so  say,  the  measure  of  His  responsibility.  He 
knows  that  He  is  "  the  Light  of  the  world,"  and  can  give 
the  lower  light  for  the  eyes,  and  the  higher  for  the  spirit, 
to  this  man,  as  to   every  man.     Therefore  He  pauses 


Less.  XI.]  Jesus  Seeing  the  Blind  99 

before  him,  full  of  pity,  of  filial  obedience,  and  of 
consciousness  of  power.  The  words  are  to  be  taken 
in  their  widest  and  deepest  meaning,  as  declaring  what 
John  said  in  the  prologue  to  the  Gospel,  that  He  is  the 
Light  of  men,  in  all  senses  of  that  word,  and  to  all.  He 
did  not  cease  to  be  "  in  the  world  "  when  He  ascended, 
any  more  than  He  began  to  be  in  it  when  He  was  born  ; 
but  the  period  of  His  earthly  life  had  special  modes  of 
manifesting  Him  as  the  Light,  and  one  of  these  was  such 
a  miracle  as  this.  While,  then,  in  one  aspect,  the  saying 
is  parallel  to  the  preceding,  in  another  it  stretches  far 
beyond  it,  and  declares  a  presence  and  an  influence 
coeval  with  creation  and  coextensive  with  humanity. 
Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  world  in  a  sense  in  which  none 
others  are ;  but  the  same  condescension  which  underlies 
the  possible  "  we "  preceding,  associates  us  with  Him 
in  the  name,  and,  derived  though  our  radiance  be.  He 
calls  His  servants  "  the  lights  of  the  world."  The  name 
should  be  to  us  what  here  it  was  to  Him,  a  call  to  let 
the  light  shine  on  darkened  eyes. 

The  miracle  proper  is  the  smallest  part  of  this  narra- 
tive, and  is  distinguished  by  the  special  feature  of  our 
Lord's  use  of  means,  which  was  rare  with  Him,  and  in 
each  case  probably  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  spiritual 
needs  of  the  subjects.  It  might  be  a  help  to  feeble 
faith,  to  a  man  who  has  not  seen  His  gentle  face  nor 
marked  the  pity  in  His  eye.  The  touch  of  His  hand 
on  the  poor  sightless  eyes,  and  the  clay  laid  there  by  it, 
would  aid  apprehension,  and  be  a  crutch  for  faith. 

Another  peculiarity  is  the  healing  at  a  distance,  of 
which  we  have  another  example  in  the  fourth  chapter. 
The  significance  of  the  name  "  Siloam  "  was  the  reason 


loo  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ix.  1-38 

for  its  place  in  the  cure.  The  name  refers  either  to  the 
gushing  out  of  the  waters  discharged  from  an  underground 
channel,  or,  less  probably,  to  their  being  a  gift  sent 
from  God.  Already  in  John  vii.  37  the  water  from  that 
spring  was  taken  by  our  Lord  as  a  type  of  Himself;  and 
here  the  emphasis  is  to  be  laid,  not  on  the  fact  that  the 
blind  man  was  "  sent "  to  the  fountain,  but  that  He 
who  was  "  sent  from  God  "  was  the  true  agent  in  his 
cure. 

Again,  the  method  of  cure  suspends  healing  on  obedi- 
ence, as  in  the  other  case  where  the  command  "  Stretch 
forth  thy  hand "  was  addressed  to  a  man  who  could 
not  stretch  it  out,  but  who,  trying,  became  able.  Com- 
pliance with  Christ's  conditions  brings  healing.  For  us 
the  condition  is  faith.  We  have  to  wash  in  the  true 
Fountain,  "  sent  of  God  "  for  sin  and  uncleanness  ;  and, 
if  we  do,  we  shall  come  seeing,  and  clean. 

The  buzz  of  talk  among  the  neighbours  is  vividly 
given,  and  attests  the  conspicuous  notoriety  of  the 
miracle.  The  blind  man's  character  is  strongly  marked 
throughout.  He  sturdily  adheres  to  facts,  will  not  be 
tempted  one  inch  beyond  them,  declines  to  speculate 
or  to  profess  to  know  anything  more  than  he  does  know ; 
has  a  touch  of  dry  sarcasm  and  quick-wittedness,  and, 
withal,  docility  very  touching  when  combined  with  such 
independence.  Therefore  he  gets  the  better  sight,  as 
told  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  lesson. 

His  conceptions  of  Jesus  had  been  steadily  rising, 
from  "  the  man  Jesus "  to  "  a  prophet,"  and  "  from 
God."  Opposition  and  the  floundering  of  the  Pharisees 
in  trying  to  explain  away  his  cure  had  led  him  to  pro- 
gressive  preparedness   for   the   fuller  revelation.      The 


Less.  XI.]  Jesus  Seeing  the  Blind  loi 

excommunication  left  him  sad,  but  unshaken.  Jesus 
went  to  look  for  the  outcast,  as  He  ever  does.  The 
question  "Dost  thou  believe  ?  "  is  really  an  invitation  to 
believe  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  our  Lord  here 
asks  for  faith  in  its  deepest  sense — ^namely,  that  believ- 
ing on  Him  which  we  have  had  frequent  occasion  to 
distinguish  from  simply  believing  Him.  It  is  reliance 
absolute  and  firm  which  He  seeks.  And  the  object  of 
that  faith  is  "  the  Son  of  God,"  in  the  full  meaning  of 
that  great  name,  the  whole  significance  of  which  yet 
waited  to  be  revealed.  How  the  strong,  sturdy  man 
who  had  held  his  own  with  the  Sanhedrim,  and  given 
back  sarcasm  for  threat,  melts  and  bows  in  docility 
before  Him  whom  he  had  such  good  cause  to  trust, 
and  whose  greatness  had  been  slowly  shining  in  on  his 
newly  seeing  soul ! 

It  is  not  bhnd  submission  which  professes  its  readi- 
ness to  accept  further  teaching  from  a  teacher  who  has 
done  so  much  for  him.  If  Jesus  were  the  prophet 
which  His  acts  convinced  the  man  that  He  was,  then 
His  words  were  to  be  taken  as  truth,  whatever  they 
declared  or  demanded.  The  recognition  of  Him  as 
"  from  God,"  honestly  followed  out,  will  lead  to  some- 
thing more  wonderful  still.  Where  there  has  been  true 
adherence  to  present  measures  of  light,  and  willingness 
to  follow  that  light  wherever  it  leads,  Jesus  will  come 
and  disclose  Himself  Many  a  man  has  found  that  to 
be  cast  out  by  men  is  to  be  found  by  Christ,  and  that, 
when  hunted  from  the  fellowship  of  formalists,  his  soli- 
tude has  been  illumined  by  the  sunshine  of  that  face. 

The  answer  of  our  Lord  to  the  man's  eager  question 
is  very  beautiful.     He  does  not  say  "  I  am   He,"  but 


102  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  ix.  1-38 

describes  Himself  by  two  characteristics,  the  first  of 
which  ("  thou  hast  seen  Him  ")  touches  deHcately  the 
obHgation  under  which  the  man  lay  to  Him,  and  the 
proof  in  the  miracle  of  His  love  and  power.  "  That 
thou  canst  see  at  all  is  My  gift,  and  My  better  gift  is 
that  thou  dost  see  Me."  The  second  emphasises  the 
wonderful  fact  that  the  Son  of  God  stands  in  human 
form  before  him,  and  talks  in  familiar  friendship.  It  is 
like  the  word  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  "  I  that  speak 
unto  thee  am  He " ;  and  both  lay  on  our  hearts  the 
gracious  and  astounding  mystery  of  incarnate  love,  by 
which  the  Son  of  God  dwells  among  us,  and  men  can 
speak  face  to  face  with  Him  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his 
friend. 

Thus  flooded  with  light,  the  soul  of  this  poor  bhnd 
man  bows  in  lowly  adoration,  compact  of  gratitude,  awe, 
and  loving  trust,  and  worships  the  Bringer  of  sight  to  his 
eyeballs  and  of  the  better  vision  to  his  spirit.  If  we  will 
listen  to  Jesus,  He  will  talk  with  us ;  and  if  we  will  obey 
His  conditions  and  go  to  the  fountain  "  Sent,"  which  is 
Himself,  and  wash  there,  we  too  shall  see,  and  have  for 
ours  the  irrefragable  argument  of  experience  with  which 
this  bhnd  beggar  pulverised  the  cavils  of  the  Sanhedrim  : 
"  Whether  He  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not :  one  thing 
I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see." 


LESSON    XII 


The  Shepherd  of  Men 

St.  John  x,   i-i6 


1.  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  He  that  entereth  not  by 
the  door  into  the  sheepfold,  but 
climbeth  up  some  other  way, 
the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber. 

2.  But  he  that  entereth  in  by 
the  door  is  the  shepherd  of  the 
sheep. 

3.  To  him  the  porter  open- 
eth ;  and  the  sheep  hear  his 
voice :  and  he  calleth  his  own 
sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth 
them  out. 

4.  And  when  he  putteth  forth 
his  own  sheep,  he  goeth  before 
them,  and  the  sheep  follow  him  : 
for  they  know  his  voice, 

5.  And  a  stranger  will  they 
not  follow,  but  will  flee  from 
him :  for  they  know  not  the 
voice  of  strangers. 

6.  This  parable  spake  Jesus 
unto  them :  but  Ihey  under- 
stood not  what  things  they 
were  which  He  spake  unto 
them. 

7.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them 
again.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
j-ou,  I  am  the  Door  of  the 
sheep. 

8.  All  that  ever  came  before 
Me  are  thieves  and  robbers : 
but  the  sheep  did  not  hear 
them. 

9.  I  am  the  Door  :  b}'  Me  if 


any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be 
saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out, 
and  find  pasture. 

10.  The  thief  cometh  not,  but 
for  to  steal,  and  to  kill,  and 
to  destroy :  I  am  come  that 
they  might  have  life,  and  that 
they  might  have  it  more  abund- 
antly. 

11.  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd  : 
the  good  shepherd  giveth  his 
life  for  the  sheep. 

12.  But  he  that  is  an  hireling, 
and  not  the  shepherd,  whose 
own  the  sheep  are  not,  seeth 
the  wolf  coming,  and  leaveth 
the  sheep,  and  fleeth :  and  the 
wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scatter- 
eth  the  sheep. 

13.  The  hireling  fleeth.  be- 
cause he  is  an  hireling,  and 
careth  not  for  the  sheep. 

14.  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd, 
and  know  M3'  sheep,  and  am 
known  of  Mine. 

15.  As  the  Father  knoweth 
Me,  even  so  know  I  the  Father  : 
and  I  lay  down  My  life  for  the 
sheep. 

16.  And  other  sheep  I  have, 
which  are  not  of  this  fold : 
them  also  I  must  bring,  and 
they  shall  hear  My  voice  ;  and 
there  shall  be  one  fold,  and 
one  Shepherd." 


lO' 


I04  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  x.  1-16 

THE  Pharisees'  treatment  of  the  bhnd  man  showed 
what  tender  shepherds  they  were,  and  their 
indignant  "  Are  we  blind  ? "  betrayed  their  irritable 
self-conceit.  Therefore  Christ  assails  their  consciences 
in  this  lesson,  which  must  be  taken  in  close  connection 
with  what  goes  before.  We  have,  first,  a  picture  of  a 
true  shepherd,  and  then  the  expansion  and  application 
of  its  two  principal  ideas. 

I.  The  "  parable  "  (vers.  1-5)  sets  forth  the  ideal  of  a 
true  shepherd ;  but,  since  that  ideal  is  fulfilled  in  Jesus, 
it  is  also  His  own  portrait  of  Himself,  though  the 
personal  reference  is  quite  in  the  background.  The 
picture  is  meant  to  rouse  the  consciences  of  the  un- 
worthy shepherds  by  showing  them  what  they  should  be ; 
but  that  application  is  also  in  the  background.  It  is 
not  always  wise  to  say,  "  Thou  art  the  man."  It  is 
often  better  to  hold  up  the  portrait  of  what  a  man 
should  be,  and  leave  him  to  say  whether  it  is  a  likeness 
of  him. 

A  true  shepherd  enters  the  fold  by  the  door.  A  fold 
is  an  external  organisation  :  in  its  original  meaning  here> 
the  Jewish  theocracy ;  for  us,  the  Christian  Church. 
This  Gospel  has  all  along  been  insisting  on  the  activity 
of  the  eternal  Word  before  incarnation  ;  and  therefore 
we  must  take  it  that  from  the  beginning  all  true  shep" 
herds  and  guides — lawgivers,  prophets,  kings — entered 
on  their  office  through  Him.  Honest  men  go  in  by 
the  door.  If  we  see  one  getting  over  the  fence,  we 
conclude  that  he  is  on  no  good  errand.  The  unworthy 
teachers  of  that  day  had  selfish  ends  to  further,  and, 
whether  by  stealth  like  "a  thief"  or  by  violence  like  a 
"  robber,"  sought  their  own  gain.     They  are  dead  and 


Less.  XII.]  The  Shepherd  of  Men  105 

gone,  but  the  warning  is  much  needed  by  Christian 
teachers  of  all  degrees.  He  is  no  true  shepherd  who 
does  not  derive  his  office  from  Jesus,  and  use  it  for 
Him.  "Not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord; 
and  ourselves  your  servants,"  should  be  our  motto. 
Reliance  on  one's  own  powers,  entrance  on  such  sacred 
tasks  from  one's  own  self-will,  discharge  of  them  for 
one's  own  advantage,  either  as  regards  money  or  glory, 
making  anything  but  Jesus  one's  theme,  are  signs  of 
being  thieves,  not  shepherds.  These  are  the  dangers 
besetting  all  religious  teaching.  Conceit  climbs  high ; 
the  door  is  low-pitched,  and  a  man  must  stoop  to  go  in. 

"To  him  the  porter  openeth."  The  meaning  of  this 
second  trait  is  obscure.  To  treat  it  as  mere  embellish- 
ment seems  scarcely  reverent ;  to  explain  it  as  referring 
to  recognition  by  ecclesiastical  authorities  is  incongruous 
— for  these  are  "shepherds."  The  explanation  which 
sees  in  it  the  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit  furthering  Christ- 
derived  and  Christ-devoted  work  seems  worthiest.  He 
who  enters  on  his  service  through  the  door  will  find  a 
mighty  power  clearing  away  obstacles  and  prospering  his 
goings. 

Next  we  see  the  shepherd  in  the  fold  (ver.  3).  His 
only  weapon  is  his  voice,  and  "  the  sheep "  hear  it. 
The  presence  in  the  fold  of  unworthy  members  is  pro- 
bably lightly  indicated ;  but  the  main  point  is  that 
prepared  hearts  recognise  the  truth,  and  in  like  manner 
the  selective  work  of  the  shepherd  may  be  glanced  at,  as 
well  as  the  tenderness  of  the  bond  between  him  and  the 
flock  in  that  sweet  phrase,  "his  own  sheep."  Each  true 
Christian  teacher  will  find  some  who  will  specially 
respond    to   his    manner    of    setting    forth    the   truth. 


io6  The  Gospel  of  St.  John        [Chap.  x.  1-16 

Diversities  of  gifts  correspond  to  diversities  of  needs. 
Individualising  care  and  tender  knowledge  of  each  are 
marks  of  the  true  shepherd.  To  call  by  name  implies 
this  and  more.  To  a  stranger  all  sheep  are  alike ;  the 
shepherd  knows  them  apart.  It  is  a  beautiful  picture  of 
loving  intimacy,  lowliness,  care,  and  confidence,  and  one 
which  every  teacher  should  ponder.  Contrast  with  it 
the  Pharisees'  treatment  of  the  blind  man. 

Having  gathered  his  own  sheep,  the  shepherd  "  leadeth 
them  out."  So  we  have  next  the  shepherd  and  flock 
outside  the  fold.  They  are  taken  out  to  pasture  and 
exercise,  which,  in  the  most  wide  application,  suggests 
that  the  activities  of  Hfe  are  to  be  regulated  by  the  truth 
that  religious  teaching  finds  its  goal  in  obedient  conduct ; 
that  to  do,  and  not  to  meditate  or  rest,  is  the  end  of  man. 
But  there  is,  probably,  also  a  hint  that  the  time  for  the 
separation  between  sheep  and  goats  in  Israel  was  at  hand, 
and  that  Jesus  was  soon  to  call  His  own  from  the  mass, 
and  guide  them  to  new  pastures.  The  hint  of  the 
establishment  of  the  Church  apart  from  the  synagogue  is 
here. 

But  the  main  point  in  the  sweet  picture  is  the  relation 
of  confidence  and  close  companionship  between  shepherd 
and  sheep, — he  going  before  ;  they,  drawn  by  his  voice, 
following,  safe  in  his  presence  and  secure  from  wandering, 
when  behind  him.  Lessons  for  all  Christian  teachers  lie 
on  the  surface ;  that  is  the  ideal  for  them.  They  miser- 
ably fail  if  they  are  not  leaders  in  holy  living,  just  as 
disciples  fail  if  they  merely  admire  their  voices,  and  do 
not  follow  their  footsteps.  Of  course,  through  this  ideal 
picture  of  what  every  true  shepherd  should  be  shines  the 
actual  realisation   of  it  in  Christ,   who  is  Himself  the 


Less.  XII.]  The  Shepherd  of  Men  107 

Shepherd  whom  He  drew ;  but  that  is  in  the  back- 
ground. 

II.  The  expansion  and  apphcation  to  Christ  of  the 
figure  of  the  door.  Note  that  new  phase  of  the  idea, 
conveyed  in  caUing  it  "  the  door  of  the  sheep,"  not 
merely,  as  before,  for  the  shepherds  to  go  in  by. 
Observe,  too,  the  pause  before  developing  the  meaning 
of  the  emblem,  to  denounce  again  the  "  thieves  and 
robbers."  Here  these  must  be  false  mediums  of  access 
to  whatever  the  door  leads  to ;  that  is  to  say,  pretenders 
to  open  the  way  to  God,  to  safety,  and  pasture.  The 
omission  of  "  ever "  in  the  Revised  Version  and  the 
present  tense  "  are  "  show  that  the  pretenders  spoken  of 
are  cotemporaries  of  Jesus,  though  "  before  Him  "  as 
already  exercising  their  false  authority.  In  fact,  He 
means  the  existing  rulers,  whose  pretensions  to  give 
access  to  God  are  as  baseless  and  inspired  by  the  same 
self-seeking  as  their  claims  to  be  the  true  shepherds. 

But  that  is  but  a  momentary  flash  of  lightning.  He 
returns  to  set  forth  the  wonders  to  which  He  admits,  in 
words  which  only  familiarity  robs  of  their  sublime  self- 
consciousness.  The  picture  has  somewhat  shifted.  The 
flock  are  now  outside,  and  the  fold  is  not  so  definitely 
an  organisation.  It  is  rather  the  true  home  of  wander- 
ing souls,  the  fold  of  God.  Jesus  here  stands  before  the 
whole  world,  and,  with  universal  invitation,  witnessing  to 
His  claim  of  Divine  universality  of  power,  presents  Him- 
self as  the  medium  by  which  every  man  may  have  all  that 
he  needs. 

Three  things  are  requisite  for  vigorous  life, — security, 
a  field  for  exercise  of  activity,  and  food.  Jesus  says  that 
He  will  supply   them   all.     The   condition   is    entrance 


io8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  x.  1-16. 

through  Him,  which  is  plainly  tantamount  to  faith  in 
Him  as  our  sole  means  of  access  to  God.  Then  comes 
security;  for  the  figure  of  the  flock  is  kept  up,  and 
"  saved  "  has  probably  not  so  much  the  full  Christian 
meaning  as  the  general  one  of  safety, — from  outward 
disasters,  which  will  not  hurt  us  if  we  are  in  Him ;  from 
inward  evil,  which  will  not  tempt  if  we  dwell  in  the  fold  ; 
and  thus,  finally,  from  everything  outward  or  inward 
which  could  sadden,  hurt,  or  stain  our  souls.  The 
many  temporary  and  partial  deliverances  are  crowned 
by  the  final  complete  salvation.  If  we  keep  behind  the 
breakwater,  and  cast  anchor  with  Jesus  between  us  and 
the  wind,  we  shall  ride  out  the  storms.  We  shall,  further, 
have  the  free  exercise  of  powers.  "  Go  in  and  out " 
means  free,  unrestricted  activity.  Both  the  contempla- 
tive and  active  sides  of  life  are  included.  Within  the 
fold  is  repose ;  without  is  healthful  exercise.  We  must 
go  deep  into  God  if  we  would  be  blessed,  and  Jesus 
leads  us  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  where 
we  can  renew  strength  and  regain  calmness.  We  must 
go  out  into  the  world ;  and  Jesus  gives  us  a  pattern  for 
action,  motives  for  service,  and  new  powers,  as  none 
else  can.  Christians  should  be  complete  men.  But  we 
must  "  go  in  "  first,  if  we  are  to  "go  out"  charged  with 
blessing  for  others. 

Further,  Jesus  gives  provision  for  all  true  wants,  food 
for  all  powers,  desires,  and  aspirations,  and  He  makes 
the  desert  yield  supplies.  Without  Him,  the  world  is 
like  the  burnt-up  pastures  after  drought,  where  starving 
sheep  mumble  some  dry  stalks  that  crumble  to  dust  in 
their  mouths  ;  but,  with  Him,  it  is  like  the  same  pastures 
after  rain, — green  with  juicy  grass. 


Less.  XII,]  The  Shepherd  of  Men  109 

The  transition  to  the  image  of  the  shepherd  is  pre- 
pared for  in  verse  10,  in  which  the  persons  ("  thief," 
"  I  ")  are  contrasted,  the  general  truth  appHcable  to  a 
class  ("  Cometh ")  set  by  the  side  of  the  single  past 
coming  which  has  abiding  presence  as  result  ("  am 
come  "),  and  the  effects  of  the  selfish  teacher's  lessons — 
which  are  robbing  the  true  Owner  of  His  sheep  by  making 
them  partisans  of  a  man,  spiritual  death  and  the  des- 
truction of  what  would  nourish  life — are  presented  in 
contrast  with  the  hfe  in  its  deepest  and  widest  sense 
which  He  gives,  and  the  abundance  of  all  that  will 
nourish  and  increase  it. 

in.  We  have  the  image  of  the  shepherd  applied 
to  Jesus  (vers.  11-16).  "Good"  means  "beautiful"  as 
well  as  "  excellent,"  and  suggests  the  gracious  and  lovely 
attractiveness  of  our  Lord's  character  as  Shepherd. 
Note  the  strangeness  of  a  man's  saying  anything  like 
this  about  himself  Is  not  Jesus  harder  to  understand 
if  we  reject  His  Divinity  than  if  we  accept  it? 

But  what  is  the  one  token  that  He  is  the  Good  Shep- 
herd ?  His  laying  down  His  life.  Here  is  a  prophecy 
of  His  death,  a  claim  that  He  lays  down  His  life  volun- 
tarily as  one  might  put  aside  a  garment,  a  declaration 
that  His  death  is  "  for  the  sheep,"  and  the  plain  impli- 
cation that  it  is  the  very  centre  and  heart  of  His  work, 
establishing  His  claim  to  be  our  Shepherd.  True,  the 
whole  meaning  and  power  of  it  are  not  revealed,  but  it 
is  set  forth  as  the  climax  of  self-sacrificing  care,  and  as 
the  way  of  saving  the  flock  from  the  wolf  We  shall 
not  understand  Jesus,  nor  see  the  fairest  beauty  in  Him, 
till  we  learn  that  His  voluntary  death  for  us  is  the 
keystone  of  His  work. 


no  The  Gospel  of  St.  John       [Chap.  x.  1-16 

The  contrast  now  is  with  hirelings,  not  thieves.  The 
wolf  does  what  the  thieves  did, — kills  and  destroys. 
Whoever  fills  any  office  involving  the  care  and  guidance 
of  men,  and  is  swayed  by  mercenary  considerations,  will 
have  a  quick  eye  to  see  danger  far  off,  and  will  look 
after  himself,  deserting  duty  to  keep  life.  There  are 
whole  packs  of  wolves  snuffing  round  every  fold,  and 
hirelings  always  have  been,  and  will  be,  cowards. 
"  Faithful  unto  death  "  he  only  will  be  who  has  caught 
his  inspiration  from  Jesus,  and  does  his  work  ''  all  for 
love,  and  nothing  for  reward." 

Another  mark  of  the  Good  Shepherd  is  the  per- 
fect knowledge  and  sympathy  between  Him  and  the 
flock.  "  I  know  Mine  own,  and  Mine  own  know  Me." 
That  throws  a  bridge  across  the  gulf  between  us,  and 
likens  the  humble  upward  movement  of  the  dependent 
love,  which  is  knowledge  and  possession,  to  the  down- 
ward flow  of  that  love  which  is  Divine.  His  knowledge 
of  us  guarantees  our  safety  and  peace.  "  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  His  "  is  the  seal  stamped  on  the 
foundation,  by  which  it  "  standeth  sure."  Ours  of  Him 
clings  and  trusts  and  grows,  and  is  enriched  by  experience. 
But  yet,  with  all  differences,  the  lower  is  like  the  higher 
and  the  same  sympathy  and  love  look  out  of  the  eyes 
of  the  Shepherd  and  of  the  flock.  Deep  words,  which 
we  can  only  bow  before  in  adoration,  declare  that  the 
union  of  knowledge  and  love  between  Christ  and  us  has 
its  original  in  that  ineffable  union  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  The  unknown  is  made  to  explain  the 
known ;  and  it  does  so  if  it  helps  us  to  feel  how  sacred, 
deep,  and,  in  its  possibilities,  inexhaustible,  is  the 
bond  which   knits  the  humblest  soul  that  follows  the 


Less.  XII.]  The  Shepherd  of  Men.  1 1 1 

Shepherd  to  Him  whom  he  feebly  loves  and  dimly 
knows. 

These  mysteries  of  intimacy  will  not  seem  impossible 
if  we  turn  again  to  gaze  on  the  blessed  fact  which 
founds  them,  even  the  death  of  Christ  for  the  sheep. 
That-  sacrifice  is  the  indispensable  prerequisite  if  we  are 
ever  to  come  to  this  satisfying  and  wonderful  communion 
of  heart  and  mind  with  Him.  Here  Jesus  declares  that 
He  will  do  what  He  has  just  said  that  a  good  shepherd 
must  be  ready  to  do. 

And,  as  He  sees  the  cross  rising  before  His  prophetic 
eye,  the  narrow  bounds  of  the  "  fold  "  which  then  was 
melt  away,  and  He  sees  the  "  other  sheep  "  flocking  to 
His  call.  The  thought  of  the  universality  of  His  redemp- 
tion is  very  frequently  associated  with  His  prevision  of 
the  cross,  as  if,  before  He  suffered,  He  saw  of  the  travail 
of  His  soul,  and  was  satisfied.  These  triumphant  words 
teach  us  the  spirit  in  which  we  should  look  on  the 
outlying  regions  as  belonging  to  Christ,  as  containing 
some  who  are  His,  and  as  sure  to  be  won  for  Him. 
They  teach  us  the  Divine  necessity  which  lay  on  His 
Spirit,  and  should  press  on  ours.  They  assure  us  that 
He  is  now  fulfilling  that  "  must,"  and  will  help  His 
servants  to  fulfil  it.  They  bid  us  lift  our  eyes  beyond 
the  narrow  bounds  of  existing  organised  Christianity,  and 
rouse  our  faith  and  expectations  to  embrace  what  He 
saw  then.  They  set  the  final  state  of  His  Church 
before  us.  He  shows  us  a  "  flock,"  not  a  "  fold  " ;  one, 
not  because  of  a  surrounding  wall,  but  because  of  a 
central  Lord  and  Leader.  If  the  shepherd  be  in  the 
midst,  the  sheep  will  couch  round  him,  and  be  one 
because  all  are  knit  to  the  one  Shepherd. 


LESSON    XIII 


The  Crowning  Miracle 

St.  John  xi.  21-44 


21.  "Then  said  Martha  unto 
Jesus,  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst  been 
here,  my  brother  had  not  died. 

22.  But  I  know,  that  even 
now,  whatsoever  Thou  wilt  ask 
of  God,  God  will  give  it  Thee. 

23.  Jesus  saith  unto  her.  Thy 
brother  shall  rise  again. 

24.  Martha  said  unto  Him,  I 
know  that  he  shall  rise  again  in 
the  resurrection  at  the  last  day. 

25.  Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am 
the  resurrection,  and  the  life  : 
he  that  believeth  in  Me,  though 
he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live  : 

26.  And  whosoever  liveth  and 
believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die. 
Believest  thou  this  ? 

27.  She  saith  unto  Him,  Yea, 
Lord  :  I  believe  that  Thou  art 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
which  should  come  into  the 
world. 

28.  And  when  she  had  so 
said,  she  went  her  way,  and 
called  Mary  her  sister  secretly, 
saying.  The  Master  is  come,  and 
calleth  for  thee. 

29.  As  soon  as  she  heard 
that,  she  arose  quickly,  and 
came  unto  Him. 

30.  Now  Jesus  was  not  yet 


come  into  the  town,  but  was  in 
that  place  where  Martha  met 
Him. 

31.  The  Jews  then  which 
were  with  her  in  the  house, 
and  comforted  her,  when  they 
saw  Mary,  that  she  rose  up 
hastily  and  went  out,  followed 
her,  saying,  She  goeth  unto  the 
grave  to  weep  there. 

32.  Then  when  Mar}?^  was 
come  where  Jesus  was,  and 
saw  Him,  she  fell  down  at  His 
feet,  saying  unto  Him,  Lord,  if 
Thou  hadst  been  here,  my 
brother  had  not  died. 

33.  When  Jesus  therefore 
saw  her  weeping,  and  the  Jews 
also  weeping  which  came  with 
her,  He  groaned  in  the  spirit, 
and  was  troubled, 

34.  And  said.  Where  have 
ye  laid  him  ?  They  said  unto 
Him,  Lord,  come  and  see. 

35.  Jesus  wept. 

36.  Then  said  the  Jews,  Be- 
hold how  He  loved  him  ! 

37.  And  some  of  them  said, 
Could  not  this  man,  which 
opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind, 
have  caused  that  even  this  man 
should  not  have  died  ? 


112 


Less.  XIII.]  The  Crowning  Miracle  113 

38.  Jesus  therefore  again  up  His  eyes,  and  said,  Father, 
groaning  in  Himself  cometh  to  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast 
the  grave.     It  was  a  cave,  and       heard  Me. 

a  stone  lay  upon  it.  42.  And    I    knew  that   Thou 

39.  Jesus  said,  Take  ye  away  hearest  Me  always :  but  be- 
the  stone.  Martha,  the  sister  cause  of  the  people  which  stand 
of  him  that  was  dead,  saith  by  I  said  it,  that  they  may 
unto  Him,  Lord,  by  this  time  believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me. 
he  stinketh  :  for  he  hath  been  43.  And  when  He  thus  had 
dead  four  days.  spoken,  He  cried  with   a  loud 

40.  Jesus     saith     unto     her,  voice,  Lazarus,  come  forth. 
Said    I  not  unto    thee,    that  if  44.  And    he    that   was   dead 
thou     wouldest    believe,    thou  came    forth,    bound    hand    and 
shouldest  see  the  glory  of  God  ?  |   foot  with  graveclothes  :  and  his 

41.  Then  they  took  away  the  i  face  was  bound  about  with  a 
stone  from  the  place  where  the  1  napkin.  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
dead  was  laid.    And  Jesus  lifted  !  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go." 

JOHN  records  seven  miracles  before  the  crucifixion, 
all  deeply  significant.  The  raising  of  Lazarus  is  the 
last,  and,  if  we  can  compare  miracles,  the  greatest. 
It  crowns  the  whole,  not  only  by  its  revelation  of  the  Life- 
giver,  but  by  its  disclosing  of  Christ's  human  sympathy 
and  individualising  love,  the  majesty  of  the  manner  of 
His  work,  the  pathos  and  rich  store  of  consolation  for 
bleeding  hearts  hived  in  the  inimitable  narrative.  The 
direct  effect  of  the  miracle  in  precipitating  Christ's  death 
is  also  part  of  the  reason  for  the  minute  account  of  it. 
The  story  is  as  inexhaustible  as  inimitable,  and  we  can 
only  skim  its  surface.  The  material  naturally  gathers 
into  four  portions. 

L  Jesus  and  Martha;  the  drawing  forth  of  faith. — 
It  was  like  Martha  to  be  in  the  way  to  get  the  news 
of  Christ's  arrival,  and  to  rush  to  Him  without  telling 
Mary.  Grief  that  can  work  is  easier  to  bear  than  grief 
that  sits  still  and  broods.  ^'  If  Thou  hadst  been  here  " 
is  not  meant  for  reproach,  but  regret,  mingled  with  trust 
that   somehow   Jesus   could    have    hindered   the   blow. 

8 


IT4  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xi.  21-44 

Sorrowful  hearts  are  but  too  apt,  like  the  man  with  the 
legion,  to  cut  themselves  with  this  sharp  knife.  We  all 
know  the   bitter   thought,    "  How    different   everything 

would  have  been,  if  only "     Regret  passed  quickly 

into  a  wild  hope,  which  did  not  venture  to  name  itself. 
She  means  "  resurrection  "  when  she  only  dares  to  say 
"whatever."  Perhaps  she  knew  of  the  raisings  of  Jairus' 
daughter  and  the  widow's  son.  But  the  wistful  belief 
that  Jesus  could  was  shaded  by  a  doubt  if  He  would, 
and  her  words  are  a  petition.  The  imperfection  of  her 
conception  is  obvious  as  regards  Christ's  relation  to  God 
and  to  His  own  gifts ;  but  the  strength  of  the  faith,  born 
of  sorrow  and  sore  need,  is  beautiful.  Despair  grasps 
Jesus,  and  is  transformed  into  faith  that  dares  to  expect 
even  impossibilities.  Thick  smoke-wreaths  flare  up, 
when  they  are  once  set  on  fire. 

The  purpose  of  Christ's  treatment  of  Martha  was  to 
evoke  and  enlighten  her  faith,  which,  though  not  needful 
for  the  miracle,  was  needful  for  her  getting  the  full  good 
of  it.  So  His  first  reply  is  intentionally  indefinite.  If 
the  hope  she  expressed  were  deep  and  solid,  she  would 
apply  the  promise  to  the  moment ;  if  not,  it  would 
sound  remote.  Jesus  grants  requests,  but  often  in  such 
a  form  that  faith  is  needed  to  perceive  the  grant. 
"  The  gift  doth  stretch  itself  as  'tis  received."  Will 
Martha  take  what  is  given,  or  spill  the  most  of  it  by 
tremulous  faith  ?  Her  answer  is  almost  impatient,  as  it 
puts  away  the  far-off  prospect  as  all  insufficient  for 
present  comfort.  Heart's  agony  makes  short  work  of 
religious  commonplaces.  It  is  a  dreary,  long  road  to 
"  the  last  day,"  and  she  wants  Lazarus  now.  How  true 
to  nature  that  putting  away  of  the  very  hope  that  she 


Less.  XIII.]  The  Crowning'  Miracle  115 

had  been  cherishing  !  So  swiftly  does  the  mood  change, 
and  what  seemed  soHd  melt  into  cloud. 

But  this  at  least  has  been  gained,  that  the  thought 
of  resurrection  has  been  twice  spoken,  and  the  way 
prepared  for  the  full  glorious  declaration  which  Jesus 
offers  to  her  faith  :  "  I  am  the  resurrection."  That  sets 
right  her  notion  of  His  relation  to  His  gift,  and,  in  its 
assumption  of  the  power  of  His  personality,  contrasts 
with  "  God  will  give  it  thee."  It  also  meets  the  sad 
postponement  to  a  far-off  future,  and  teaches  that  in 
Him  standing  by  her  side  was  power  to  effect  a  resur- 
rection now  as  well  as  then.  Whenever  and  however  it 
takes  place,  it  is  His  work. 

The  order  of  words  is  profoundly  significant ;  for 
"  resurrection  "  comes  first,  not  simply  as  the  subject  in 
hand,  but  as  being  the  issue  of  what  is  named  second, 
"  life."  Jesus  is  the  former  because  He  is  the  latter, 
and  partaking  in  resurrection  is  the  certain  issue  of  par- 
taking in  life.  Therefore  two  paradoxes  for  sense  are 
true  on  condition  of  union  with  Jesus  by  faith.  If  He 
is  the  resurrection,  they  who  believe  live,  though  they 
die.  If  He  is  the  hfe,  they  who,  in  this  mortal  being, 
are  united  to  Him  by  faith,  never  really  die;  for  the 
name  of  death  is  not  to  be  given  to  the  physical  fact, 
which  does  not  touch  the  life  eternal.  United  to  Jesus, 
we  are  vital  with  a  life  over  which  the  shadow  called 
Death  has  no  dominion  ;  and  having  passed  through  the 
dark  sea,  as  some  bright  stream  may  through  a  sullen 
lake,  without  losing  its  current  or  a  drop  of  its  waters, 
shall  flow  on  beyond  to  meet  the  sunny  ocean.  The 
resurrection  of  all  believers  is  the  consequence  of  their 
possession  of  Christ's  life, 


ii6  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xi.  21-44 

These  were  stupendous  truths  to  flash  upon  tear- 
dimmed  eyes,  and  to  be  followed  by  the  searching 
question,  "Believest  thou  this?"  But  great  truths  are 
quickly  assimilated  by  deeply  moved  souls,  and  lasting 
faith  sometimes  grows,  or  becomes  conscious  of  its  growth, 
as  fast  as  Jonah's  gourd.  Martha's  answer  fully  accepts 
the  wonderful  words,  and  is  not  rash  credulity ;  for  she 
builds  her  swift  belief  on  rock  when  she  says,  "  I  have 
believed  that  Thou  art  the  Christ."  That  faith  had 
been  slow  to  grow,  but  it  prepared  for  the  unhesitating 
acceptance  of  all  that  He  showed  her. 

II.  Jesus  and  Mary  ;  sympathy  with  grief. — The  work 
on  Martha  was  done  when  her  faith  thus  triumphantly 
closed  with  the  great  promise,  and  now  she  sought  her 
sister.  Apparently  Jesus  bade  her  go ;  for  her  words 
to  Mary  are  scarcely  her  own  inference.  Her  calling 
"  secretly "  indicates  the  natural  wish  to  get  rid  of 
heartless  "  comforters,"  but  the  effort  was  vain.  Mary's 
characteristic  swift  setting  out  did  not  shake  off  the 
conventional  sympathisers,  who  understood  sorrow  so 
little  that  they  would  not  let  it  have  a  moment  of  solitude 
to  break  down  in,  and  be  relieved. 

Note  the  delicate  difference  between  the  sisters,  in 
that  while  both  say  the  same  thing,  and  thereby  show 
how  monotonously  they  had  said  it  to  one  another  in 
the  four  dreary  days,  Mary  falls  at  Christ's  feet,  and  has 
no  word  of  hope  for  "  even  now."  The  difference  of 
character  makes  their  treatment  different.  Martha  got 
teaching ;  Mary,  sympathy.  Christ's  tears  would  do 
more  for  her  than  words. 

That  picture  of  the  emotion  of  Jesus  is  too  sacred  for 
cool  comment.     But  we  may  reverently  mark  the  token 


Less.  XIII.]  The  Crowning  Miracle  117 

of  Christ's  true  manhood,  in  that  the  sight  of  tears 
brings  His,  as  well  as  in  that  He  has  tears  to  be  brought. 
Surely,  of  all  the  signs  of  His  manhood  none  is  more 
precious  than  this.  It  sanctions  sorrow,  and  sets  its 
limits.  It  reveals  the  reality  of  His  sympathy,  the  depth 
of  His  personal  affection.  It  lets  us  see  dimly  that  He 
could  not  take  away  grief  without  feeling  its  pressure, 
and  that  His  work  was  not  done  without  painful  cost. 

But  tears  were  not  all  that  the  sight  of  sorrow  evoked. 
That  other  phase  of  emotion,  described  in  the  margin 
of  the  Revised  Version  as  "  moved  with  indignation  in 
the  spirit,"  opens  a  glimpse  into  a  deep  region.  What 
was  the  cause  of  this  strange  storm  of  anger  which  swept 
across  that  calm  spirit  ?  Surely  the  most  worthy  answer 
is  that  He  saw  in  this  one  death  and  these  two  weeping 
sisters,  as  it  were,  one  drop  in  the  ocean  of  woes  which 
covered  the  earth.  He  summons  all  the  miseries  of 
man  before  Him,  and  sees  them  all  in  connection  with 
their  cause,  sin,  and  possibly  the  personal  tempter,  whose 
handiwork  of  murdering  was  so  near.  But  that  brief 
agitation  did  not  delay  His  work ;  and  the  very  fact  that 
He  felt  it,  even  when  the  end  of  the  sorrow  was  so  near, 
shows  how  keen  His  sympathy  was,  and  is,  with  transitory 
ills.  If  Jesus  did  not  feel  with  us  the  pains  which  He 
knows  are  brief,  what  pains  would  He  feel  ? 

Another  apparent  taking  of  human  conditions  is  His 
question — the  only  one  of  the  kind  in  the  Gospels — as 
to  the  situation  of  the  tomb.  But  perhaps  it  was  rather 
meant  as  an  invitation  to  the  "  Jews  "  to  do  what  they 
ask  Him  to  do, — "come  and  see."  An  evident  desire 
for  publicity  marks  Him  at  this  stage,  and,  knowing 
what  would  come  of  it.  He  courts  the  presence  of  wit- 


ii8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap. xi.  21-44 

nesses.  How  natural  the  fresh  burst  of  tears  as  they 
drew  near  the  tomb  !  And  how  cool  the  criticisms  of  the 
curious  group,  some  struck  by  the  tokens  of  His  affection, 
but  not  sharing  it,  and  others  half  scoffing,  and  suggest- 
ing that  His  letting  so  dear  a  friend  die  discredited  His 
power  to  cure  a  blind  stranger  !  Malice  is  ingenious  and 
shallow.  Think  of  men  having  actually  seen  Jesus  weep- 
ing, and  having  nothing  else  to  say  about  it  than  this  ! 

HI.  Jesus  at  the  tomb. — Majestic  calm  of  conscious, 
unbroken  communion !  The  emotion  is  past,  and  the 
habitual  calm  majesty  reassumed.  The  command  to 
take  away  the  stone  is  in  accord  with  Christ's  continual 
economy  in  the  use  of  miraculous  power.  Whatever  man 
can  do  is  to  be  done  by  man  ;  and,  besides,  the  men 
whose  hands  rolled  away  the  stone  were  made  witnesses 
of  the  resurrection. 

John  has  a  delicate  touch  in  reminding  us  of  Martha's 
relationship  to  "  him  that  was  dead,"  as  explaining  the 
natural  shrinking  of  her  love  from  the  exposure  of  the 
dear  form  in  its  dishonour.  But  she  was  faltering  in 
her  faith,  or  she  would  not  have  so  spoken.  Therefore 
Jesus  puts  out  a  hand  to  hold  her  up,  as  He  did  to  Peter 
sinking,  and  His  reminder  of  the  previous  conversation 
puts  its  true  purport  into  other  words.  He  had,  in 
effect,  told  her  that,  if  she  believed,  she  would  see  the 
glory  of  God,  when  He  had  sought  to  draw  out  her 
faith,  and  spread  before  her  astonished  eyes  the  resur- 
rection and  the  life  which  come  by  faith.  Her  faith  was 
not  the  condition  of  the  miracle,  but  it  was  of  her  enjoy- 
ing (seeing)  all  that  the  miracle  meant  and  prophesied. 
The  outward  fact  might  be  seen  by  eyes  all  blind  to  the 
glory  that  shone  in  it. 


Less.  XIII]  The  Crowning  Miracle  T19 

With  like  majesty  sounds  the  solemn  thanksgiving 
before  the  mighty  act.  It  was  not  a  prayer,  such  as 
Martha  had  meant.  He  does  not  ask  for  a  gift,  but  He 
gives  thanks.  He  traces,  indeed,  as  always,  the  miracle 
to  the  Father ;  for  He  does  nothing  of  Himself,  and  gives 
life  to  whom  He  will  in  conformity  with  the  Father's 
gift.  But  that  relation  is  by  no  means  parallel  with  the 
relation  of  other  men  who  wrought  miracles  by  Divine 
power,  and  must  be  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  teach- 
ing of  chapter  v. ;  for  He  has  the  consciousness  of 
unbroken  communion  with  the  Father,  and  of  continual 
fulfilment  of  His  will. 

The  prayer  of  thanksgiving,  then,  was  spoken  in  order 
that  the  bystanders  might,  by  hearing  it,  and  seeing  the 
miracle  that  followed,  be  led  to  recognise  the  true  import 
of  the  miracle  as  a  sign  that  He  was  sent  from  God. 
The  prayer  was  a  solemn  appeal  to  God,  a  confident 
assumption  of  what  was  to  follow.  If  it  did  follow,  the 
appeal  was  effectual  and  the  conclusion  plain. 

IV.  Jesus  and  the  living  dead ;  the  life-giving  word. 
— The  actual  miracle  is  briefly  told,  but  with  unsurpass- 
able vividness  and  solemnity.  The  brief  emotion  showed 
the  Son  of  Man,  but,  as  is  always  the  case,  the  tokens  of 
His  humiliation  lie  side  by  side  with  those  of  His  glory. 
The  same  voice  that  had  sobbed  in  human  grief  now 
spoke  in  Divine  power.  Curt  and  authoritative  is  its 
utterance.  He  named  the  man,  who  still  lived.  The 
man  heard,  wherever  he  was,  and  dull  as  his  ear  was  to 
sisters'  weeping  and  all  earthly  noises.  Wherever  he 
was,  he  was  not  out  of  reach  of  Christ's  will,  and  that 
voice  could  pierce  the  depths  of  the  unseen  world  ; 
Christ's  commands  run  through  the  universe.     The  mere 


I20  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xi.  21-44 

words  were  breath,  but  the  will  was  mighty.  Who  is  He 
whose  bare  will  has  power  over  material  existences,  and 
can  shoot  out  its  behests  wherever  there  are  creatures  ? 

Who  could  paint  that  picture  of  the  swathed  form 
stumbhng  from  the  tomb,  bound  hand  and  foot,  and 
the  unaccustomed  eyes  shrinking  from  the  sunlight, 
which  had  grown  strange  to  them  ?  What  awe  would 
await  the  taking  away  of  the  napkin  from  the  face,  and 
how  the  gazers  would  look  to  see  what  traces  of  the 
unseen  world  were  there  !  But  the  reticence  of  the  story 
is  one  of  its  charms.  No  eye  is  allowed  to  see  the  joy 
of  the  sisters  or  to  peer  into  the  home  that  night. 
"  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go."  Christ's  p_art_is  done. 
Other  hands  may  undo  the  graveclothes  ;  His  will  has 
loosed  the  grip  of  death. 


LESSON    XIV 


What  Jesus  Thought  about  the  Cross 

St.  John  xii.  20-36 


20.  "  And  there  were  certain 
Greeks  among  them  that  came 
up  to  worship  at  the  feast  : 

21.  The  same  came  therefore 
to  Philip,  which  was  of  Beth- 
saida  of  Gahlee,  and  desired 
him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus. 

22.  Philip  Cometh  and  telleth 
Andrew :  and  again  Andrew 
and  Philip   tell  Jesus. 

23.  And  Jesus  answered  them, 
saying,  The  hour  is  come,  that 
the  Son  of  man  should  be 
glorified. 

24.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  Except  a  corn  of  wheat 
fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it 
abideth  alone  :  but  if  it  die,  it 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit. 

25.  He  that  loveth  his  life 
shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  hateth 
his  life  in  this  world  shall  keep 
it  unto  life  eternal. 

26.  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let 
him  follow  Me ;  and  where  I 
am,  there  shall  also  My  servant 
be :  if  any  man  serve  Me,  him 
will  My  Father  honour. 

27.  Now  is  My  soul  troubled  ; 
and  what  shall  I  say  ?  Father, 
save  Me  from  this  hour  :  but  for 
this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour. 

28.  Father,  glorify  Thy  name. 
Then  came  there  a  voice  from 
heaven,    saying,     I    have    both 


glorified  it,   and  will  glorify  it 
again. 

29.  The  people  therefore,  that 
stood  by,  and  heard  it,  said 
that  it  thundered  :  others  said. 
An  angel  spake  to  Him. 

30.  Jesus  answered  and  said. 
This  voice  came  not  because  of 
Me,  but  for  your  sakes. 

31.  Now  is  the  judgment  of 
this  world  :  now  shall  the  prince 
of  this  world  be  cast  out. 

32.  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  Me. 

33.  This  He  said,  signifying 
what  death  He  should  die. 

34.  The  people  answered 
Him,  We  have  heard  out  of 
the  law  that  Christ  abideth  for 
ever :  and  how  sayest  Thou, 
The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted 
up  ?  who  is  this  Son  of  man  ? 

35.  Then  Jesus  said  unto 
them,  Yet  a  little  while  is  the 
light  with  you.  Walk  while 
ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkness 
come  upon  you  :  for  he  that 
walketh  in  darkness  knoweth 
not  whither  he  goeth. 

36.  While  ye  have  light,  be- 
lieve in  the  light,  that  ye  may 
be  the  children  of  light.  These 
things  spake  Jesus,  and  de- 
parted, and  did  hide  Himself 
from   them." 


121 


122  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xii. 20-36 

THE  remarkable  request  of  some  Greek  proselytes 
to  see  Jesus,  interesting  as  it  is,  is  but  the  starting- 
point  of  the  great  thoughts  in  this  lesson.  These  carry 
the  Evangelist  so  completely  away  that  he  does  not  tell 
us  what  came  of  the  request.  Jesus  saw  in  it  the  first 
drops  of  the  shower,  the  beginning  of  the  Gentiles  com- 
ing to  His  feet ;  and  that  prospect  brought  with  it  the 
vision  of  the  death  that  must"  first  be  endured.  The 
theme,  then,  of  the  lesson  is  what  Jesus  thought  and  felt 
about  the  Cross.  "  The  place  whereon  thou  standest  is 
holy  ground."  We  may  note  a  difference  in  the  tone  of 
His  words  before  and  after  the  heavenly  voice,  and  so 
take  the  whole  as  gathered  into  four  parts. 

I.  The  prevision  of  the  near  Cross,  and  the  troubled 
soul  of  Jesus.  The  first  emotion  stirred  by  the  request 
was  triumph.  "  The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  Man 
should  be  glorified."  Now,  the  subsequent  context  shows 
that  the  "  glory  "  in  view  is  chiefly  that  of  His  bringing 
men  to  Himself  by  His  death,  and  that  of  the  return  to 
the  pre-incarnate  glory  with  the  Father.  But  it  is  not 
to  be  forgotten  that  in  this  Gospel  the  Cross  is  always 
presented  as  the  summit  of  Christ's  glory,  rather  than  as 
His  lowest  humiliation.  It  was  His  throne,  because  in  it 
were  most  wondrously  manifested  the  redeeming  power 
and  love  which  are  the  very  flashing  central  light  of  all 
His  brightness.  In  all  His  life  we  "  behold  His  glory, 
.  .  .  full  of  grace  and  truth  "  ;  but  the  rays  are  focussed 
there,  where  He  hangs  dying  in  the  dark.  There  all 
paradoxes  met.  Shame  is  glory  ;  weakness  is  strength  ; 
death  is  life. 

Verses  24-26  point  to  'the  wide  range  of  the  same 
paradox  of  which  the  Cross  is  the  crowning  example.     It 


Less.  XIV.]    What  Jesus  Thoug^ht  about  the  Cross     123 

is  seen  in  nature,  where  fruit  is  only  possible  by  the 
destruction  of  the  seed.  No  converts  without  martyrs, 
whether  literally  by  actual  death  or  by  the  daily  dying 
of  self-sacrifice.  Life  exemplifies  the  law.  Eager 
clutching  at  the  delights  of  natural  life,  and  making 
it  one's  chief  aim,  is  the  sure  way  to  lose  all  its  sweet- 
ness and  to  miss  the  higher  life,  while  the  subordination, 
and,  if  needful,  the  sacrifice  of  "life  in  this  world,"  leads 
straight  to  the  possession  of  "  life  eternal."  That  was 
the  truth  for  lack  of  which  Greek  literature,  art,  and 
glory  rotted  and  perished.  Discipleship  demands  the 
same  conditions.  Christ's  servant  must  be  Christ's 
follower  on  that  road.  The  Cross  must  be  his  pattern 
as  well  as  his  trust.  In  a  later  part  of  this  lesson  (vers. 
31,  32)  the  virtue  of  Christ's  death,  which  has  no  parallel 
in  the  servant's  "  following,"  is  stated ;  but  here  the 
possibility  and  necessity  that  discipleship  shall  be  imita- 
tion even  of  that  inimitable  death  are  solemnly  declared, 
with  the  appended  blessed  assurance  that  faithful  follow- 
ing means  final  union  and  lowly  service,  a  share  in  His 
honour  and  glory. 

But  swiftly  a  wave  of  agitation  breaks  upon  the  rock 
of  His  steadfast  will.  It  is  a  true  wave,  but  it  breaks, 
and  the  rock  is  unshaken.  Jesus  had  the  natural,  in- 
stinctive human  recoil  froni  death,  and  that  clashed 
against  the  will  to  suffer.  But  it  was  His  "  soul,"  not 
His  "spirit,"  which  was  "  troubled."  The  hesitation  so 
pathetically  expressed  here  did  not  extend  to  His  will, 
and  was  sinless.  Whether  we  read  the  prayer  "  Save  Me 
from  this  hour  "  as  a  question  or  as  a  definite  petition,  it 
seems  to  represent  the  one  alternative  of  "  what "  He 
"should  say,"  and   is   immediately   superseded  by   the 


124  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xii.  20-39 

prayer  in  which  the  perturbed  soul  as  well  as  the  un- 
moved spirit  unite.  It  is  put  aside,  because  Jesus  sees 
the  Cross  as  the  great  purpose  of  His  coming,  and  so  the 
very  sight  of  the  dreaded  thing  as  the  goal  of  His  work 
gives  strength  to  embrace  it. 

An  old  monkish  painter  makes  the  strengthening 
angel  in  Gethsemane  hold  forth  a  cross,  and  there  is 
deep  truth  in  the  picture.  The  prayer,  in  which  the 
whole  man  Jesus  utters  Himself,  grasps  the  name 
"  Father,"  and,  in  filial  submission  and  trust,  asks  only 
that  His  name  may  be  glorified.  That  is  really  a  prayer 
that  Jesus  may  die  ;  but  the  pain  is  all  lost  in  the  con- 
templation of  the  issue,  and  so  the  universal  pattern  for 
true  sons  is  set,  and  the  victory  in  this  prelude  of  Geth- 
semane is  won.  We  can  see  but  a  little  way  into  the 
depths  of  Christ's  nature,  and  shall  better  use  this  tender 
and  mysterious  shrinking  of  human  weakness  overcome 
by  fiHal  submission  and  resolved  sacrifice,  if  we  adore  the 
love  that  kept  His  will  so  firm,  than  if  we  curiously 
speculate  beyond  our  depth . 

H.  We  have  the  heavenly  voice  and  how  it  sounded 
to  dull  ears  (vers.  28,  29).  The  Revised  Version  gives 
"therefore"  instead  of  "then"  in  verse  28  and  thus 
brings  out  the  significant  connection  of  the  voice  with 
that  prayer.  Such  prayer  is  sure  of  answer,  and  such 
filial  surrender  is  sure  of  tokens  of  the  Father's  approval. 
If  our  prayers  were  more  often  like  His,  we  should  more 
often  hear  the  voice  following  close  upon  them,  and 
repeating  in  accents  loud  as  thunder  and  sweet  as  an 
angel's  speech  our  own  low  breathings  turned  into 
promises.  As  in  the  conspicuous  humility  of  the 
baptism,  and  in  the  hour  on   the  mountain  when  the 


Less.  XIV.]    What  Jesus  Thought  about  the  Cross     125 

mighty  dead  spake  with  Him  of  His  decease,  the  Father's 
voice  witnessed  to  Him.  The  past  acts  of  glorifying  are 
those  of  Christ's  earthly  ministry  ;  the  future  are  the 
declaring  more  gloriously  of  that  name  to  the  whole 
world  by  the  Cross  and  subsequent  triumph. 

Every  man  hears  in  God's  voice  what  he  is  fit  to  hear. 
Obviously  there  was  an  objective  something,  an  audible 
sound.  To  the  deafest  there  was  a  vague  impression  of 
some  majestic  noise  from  heaven,  which  said  nothing, 
but  was  grand  and  meaningless  as  a  thunder-clap. 
Others,  a  little  more  susceptible,  caught  something  like 
articulate  words,  but  discerned  no  significance,  though 
they  felt  their  sweetness  and  dignity,  and  so  thought 
them  an  angel's  voice.  "  Ye  therefore  hear  them  not, 
because  ye  are  not  of  God."  We  can  dull  our  ears  till 
they  will  not  even  recognise  God's  voice  as  thunder,  and, 
if  it  sounds  meaningless  to  us,  it  is  our  own  fault. 

HI.  We  have  Christ's  triumphant  vision  of  the  issues  of 
the  cross  (vers.  30-33).  Did  Jesus  not  need  the  voice  ? 
His  filial  submission  was  perfect,  and  His  assurance  that 
His  death  was  to  glorify  the  Father's  name  was  entire 
before  it  came.  His  words  do  not  necessarily  imply 
that  He  drew  no  strength  from  it,  but  only  that  His 
strengthening  was  not  its  main  purpose.  An  absolute 
negative  often  in  Scripture  means  a  comparative  one. 
But  how  could  a  voice  be  sent  for  people  who  did  not 
understand  it  ?  Some  of  them  would  ;  and  the  deafness 
of  men  does  not  compel  the  dumbness  of  God.  The 
revelation  is  given,  and  they  who  are  capable  receive  it. 
Let  us  see  that  we  do  not  make  ourselves  unfit  to  profit 
by  what  is  sent  for  our  sakes. 

What   did   the   voice   teach   its   hearers?     The   true 


126  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xii.  20-36 

meaning  of  Christ's  past  life,  and  of  the  great  crisis  now 
impending. 

Jesus  translates  its  lessons  in  the  next  words,  which 
show  Him,  Victor  over  all  the  shrinking  of  flesh, 
triumphing  in  the  world-wide  and  world-saving  results 
of  the  Cross.  He  anticipates  the  rapidly  approaching 
hour,  and  in  the  eagerness,  if  we  may  so  say,  of  loving 
self-sacrifice,  stretches  out  to  meet  the  coming  doom, 
in  that  prophetic  and  repeated  "now."  His  death  is 
the  judgment  of  this  world.  Does  not  the  fact  of  His 
death  considered  as  the  act  of  men  reveal,  as  nothing 
else  does,  the  depth  of  human  alienation  from  God  and 
goodness  ?  If  He  thought  of  Himself  only  as  a  martyr, 
one  among  many,  it  was  gross  exaggeration  to  say  that 
His  death  headed  the  black  roll  of  the  world's  sins. 
On  that  hypothesis  of  His  person,  there  have  been 
many  other  deaths  quite  as  criminal.  Only  the  full- 
toned  view  of  who  and  what  the  victim  was  warrants 
such  a  construction  of  the  guilt  of  His  slaying  as  is  here. 

Still  more  extravagant,  on  the  supposition  that  Jesus 
is  simply  the  best  of  men  and  teachers,  is  that  other 
triumphant  cry  of  victory  over  the  defeated  and  cast-out 
"  prince  of  this  world."  Only  the  full-toned'  view  of 
the  death  of  Christ  as  the  sacrifice  for  the  world's  sins 
can  warrant  such  a  construction  of  its  power  to  redeem 
the  world  from  the  tyranny  of  that  usurper,  and  to 
dislodge  him  from  his  fortress.  He  and  all  his  hosts 
hold  their  own,  undisturbed  by  teachers  and  martyrs, 
but  they  flee  before  the  power  of  the  Cross  of  the  Son 
of  God,  "who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  He 
"  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them 
in  it." 


Less.  XIV.]    What  Jesus  Thought  about  the  Cross     127 

The  judgment  and  defeat  are  immediate  results  of 
the  Cross,  but  the  last  issue,  which  Jesus  stays  Himself 
by  beholding,  is  one  that  begins,  indeed,  contempor- 
aneously with  these,  but  stretches  on  through  all  time, 
and  blesses  each  coming  generation.  Of  course,  the 
"lifting  up"  here  is  primarily  a  designation  of  the 
crucifixion  (John  iii.  14) ;  but  that  is  contemplated  in 
connection  with  the  other  lifting  up  from  the  earth,  in 
His  ascension  and  session  at  the  right  hand  of  God- 
To  draw  men  to  Himself  is  the  work  of  Christ  till 
the  end  of  the  world.  His  magnet  is  the  Cross.  That 
drawing  does  not  imply  universal  yielding  to  itself,  for 
there  may  be  resistance  to  it ;  but  for  evermore  there 
stream  out  from  that  Cross  powers  which  lay  hold  on 
hearts,  and  sweetly  and  mightily  grapple  them  to  Jesus. 
He  Himself,  and  nothing  less,  is  the  centre ;  and  what 
conquers  men  to  be  His,  is  His  death. 

Every  form  of  so-called  Christianity  which  weakens 
or  obscures  the  sacrificial  death  of  Jesus  weakens  the 
power  of  Christianity.  A  Christ  without  a  cross  is  no 
match  for  the  drawings  of  the  world  and  its  prince. 
This  is  the  grand  vision  on  His  own  death,  in  which 
Jesus  found  strength,  and  in  which  we  shall  find  peace, 
pardon,  and  purity. 

IV.  We  have  the  objection  of  the  crowd,  and  Christ's 
last  warnings  to  the  nation.  There  must  have  been 
more  spoken  than  is  reported,  or  the  people  would  not 
have  puzzled  about  "  the  Son  of  man  "  being  lifted  up, 
since  that  title  is  not  employed  in  the  saying,  though  it 
occurs  in  verse  23.  They  knew  that  Jesus  claimed  to 
be  the  Messiah,  and,  building  on  passages  which  spoke 
of  His  kingdom  as  everlasting,  they  anticipated  Messiah's 


128  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xii.  20-36 

permanent,  miraculous  life  on  earth.  They  have  heard 
Jesus  saying  that  "the  Son  of  Man"  is  to  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  and  they  supposed  that  He  was  speaking 
of  Himself  by  that  name  ;  but,  if  so,  what  about  His 
Messianic  claims  ?  They  are  in  a  fog,  and  are  pottering 
about  interpretations  of  the  law,  instead  of  letting  the 
light,  which  was  shining  before  them,  shine  into  them. 

Texts  out  of  the  Prophets  were  all  very  well,  but,  if 
they  would  open  their  eyes  and  their  hearts  to  Him 
standing  there  before  them,  they  would  find  all  their 
pedantic  difficulties  melt  away.  The  best  way  to  deal 
with  similar  trivial  objections  sometimes  is  to  press  the 
positive  revelation  of  Christ,  and  let  that  speak.  So 
here  Jesus  does  not  "  answer  "  the  question,  but  speaks 
a  solemn  warning — His  last  words  before  the  cross — to 
the  nation.  The  time  was  short.  In  a  few  minutes 
He  would  go  over  Olivet  to  Bethany,  only  to  return 
for  the  upper  room  and  the  cross.  But  still  there  was 
time. 

Two  exhortations  are  given,  the  former  enforced  by 
the  misery  of  darkness,  the  latter  by  the  blessings  of 
transformation  into  light.  The  former  counsels  "  walk 
while  ye  have  the  light."  Progress  in  the  knowledge 
of  Him  could  yet  be  won.  Action  correspondent  to 
the  light  was  yet  possible.  So  is  it  ever.  And  the 
solemn  alternative  is  certain  if  we  do  not  "  walk." 
Darkness  is,  as  it  were,  hurrying  up  behind,  and  only 
by  diligent  carrying  out  of  Christ's  precepts,  and  pressing 
towards  fuller  knowledge,  can  we  escape  it.  If  it  fall  on 
us,  we  shall  wander  without  guide  or  clear  aim,  and  be 
lost  in  the  desert.  The  history  of  Israel  ever  since  is  a 
commentary  on  the  words,  as  it  strays  through  the  world 


Less.  XIV.]    What  Jesus  Thought  about  the  Cross     129 

with  no  aim  or  hope  beyond  earth.     They  are  a  parable 
and  warning  for  us. 

But  Jesus  will  not  let  His  last  word  be  a  threat. 
Therefore,  in  still  clearer  tones,  He  speaks  a  merciful 
invitation  and  a  glorious  promise.  Believe  on  the  light, 
is  His  invitation  to  us  all.  And  the  gracious  hope  is 
offered  to  each,  of  becoming,  by  faith,  changed  into 
the  substance  of  that  to  which  we  trust,  and  having  all 
our  darkness  of  sorrow,  ignorance,  and  sin  turned  into 
light  in  the  Lord.  So  some  poor  wreath  of  cold,  wet 
mist,  lying  near  the  rising  sun,  is  suffused  with  light 
in  all  its  dank  depths,  and  glows  with  radiant  hues 
caught  from  the  great  Hght  near  which  it  hangs. 


LESSON    XV 
The  Master-Servant 

St.  John  xiii.   1-17* 


1.  "Now  before  the  feast  of 
the  passover,  when  Jesus  knew 
that  His  hour  was  come  that 
He  should  depart  out  of  this 
world  unto  the  Father,  having 
loved  His  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  He  loved  them  unto 
the  end. 

2.  And  supper  being  ended, 
the  devil  having  now  put  into 
the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot, 
Simon's  son,  to  betray  Him  ; 

3.  Jesus  knowing  that  the 
Father  had  given  all  things  into 
His  hands,  and  that  He  was 
come  from  God,  and  went  to 
God  ; 

4.  He  riseth  from  supper,  and 
laid  aside  His  garments ;  and 
took  a  towel,  and  girded  Him- 
self. 

5.  After  that  He  poureth 
water  into  a  bason,  and  began 
to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and 
to  wipe  them  with  the  towel 
wherewith  He  was  girded. 

6.  Then  cometh  He  to  Simon 
Peter :  and  Peter  saith  unto 
Him,  Lord,  dost  Thou  wash  my 
feet? 

7.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  "\4^»hat  I  do  thou  know- 
est  not  now ;  but  thou  shalt 
know  hereafter. 

8.  Peter  saith  unto  Him, 
Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet. 


Jesus  answered  him.  If  I  wash 
thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part 
with   Me. 

9.  Simon  Peter  saith  unto 
Him,  Lord,  not  my  feet  only, 
but  also  my  hands  and  my  head. 

10.  Jesus  saith  to  him.  He 
that  is  washed  needeth  not  save 
to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  clean 
every  whit  :  and  ye  are  clean, 
but  not  all. 

11.  For  He  knew  who  should 
betray  Him ;  therefore  said  He, 
Ye  are  not  all  clean. 

12.  So  after  He  had  washed 
their  feet,  and  had  taken  His 
garments,  and  was  set  down 
again.  He  said  unto  them.  Know 
ye  what  I  have  done  to  you  ? 

13.  Ye  call  me  Master  and 
Lord  :  and  ye  say  well ;  for  so 
I  am. 

14.  If  I  then,  your  Lord  and 
Master,  have  washed  your  feet ; 
ye  also  ought  to  wash  one 
another's  feet. 

15.  For  I  have  given  you  an 
example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I 
have  done  to  you. 

16.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  The  servant  is  not  greater 
than  his  lord  ;  neither  he  that 
is  sent  greater  than  he  that  sent 
him. 

17.  If  ye  know  these  things, 
happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them. " 


no 


Less.  XV.]  The  Master-Servant  131 

IN  this  lesson  we  have  four  stages, — the  gUmpse  into 
the  heart  of  Jesus,  and  the  impelHng  motives  to  the 
great  act  of  tender  humility  ;  that  act  itself  described  in 
all  the  details  of  its  lowHness  ;  the  episode  of  the  mis- 
placed and  spurious  humility  which  was  really  arrogance  ; 
and  the  application,  by  the  Master  and  Lord,  of  the 
lesson  which  He  taught  in  the  form  of  a  servant. 

I.  Verse  i  should  be  regarded  as  an  introduction,  not 
only  to  the  one  act  of  foot-washing,  but  to  the  whole 
following  section,  including  all  the  sacred  teachings  of 
the  upper  room.  It  is  best  to  adopt  the  marginal  render- 
ing of  "to  the  uttermost  "  ;  for  John  is  more  concerned 
to  tell  us  how,  at  that  supreme  moment,  Christ's  love 
shone  forth  as  absolutely  perfect,  than  simply  to  assure 
us  of  its  continuance.  So  understanding  the  last  clause 
of  the  verse,  its  Iformer  part  becomes  an  explanation  of 
the  influences  which  gave  rise  to  the  special  manifesta- 
tions of  that  love  in  the  succeeding  acts,  discourses,  and 
prayer.     When,  then,  are  these  influences  ? 

First,  the  consciousness  that  separation  was  at  hand. 
We  have  heard  much  about  "  His  hour  "  in  this  Gospel. 
His  unbroken  communion  with  the  Father  taught  Him 
the  duty  proper  to  each  moment,  and  He  never  acted 
without  the  illuminating  assurance  that  it  was  the  time 
to  act.  But  now  the  supreme  hour  was  close  at  hand. 
For  what  ?  The  language  is  remarkable, — "  that  He 
should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father." 

Then  His  death  was  voluntary  and  His  own  act,  as  it 
is  ever  represented  in  this  Gospel.  He  is  not  cast  out 
of  the  world  by  others,  but  departs.  He  goes,  not  to 
the  grave,  but  "  to  the  Father."  So  may  death  be  to  us, 
if  we  are  His. 


132  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.xiii.  1-17 

This  consciousness  increased  the  manifestations  of 
His  love.  We,  too,  know  that  parting  brings  deeper 
tenderness,  as  an  earthquake  may  lay  bare  hidden  veins 
of  gold.  The  heart  crowds  all  its  love  into  a  look  or  a 
word  or  an  embrace  which  two  may  find  it  life  to  re- 
member. Blessed  is  it  to  know  that  Jesus  felt  the  same, 
arid  sought  to  make  the  last  moments  tender  moments, 
for  His  sake  as  well  as  for  ours.  But  it  was  more  than 
human  love  w^hich  so  forgot  His  own  sufferings  in  the 
desire  to  pour  itself  into  the  hearts  that  were  soon  to  be 
stricken  and  solitary. 

That  love,  too,  was  one  which  owned  the  obligation 
created  by  its  own  past.  "  Having  loved,  .  .  .  He  loved." 
Alas,  how  much  human  love  has  the  opposite  for  its 
epitaph,  "  Having  loved,  ...  he  tired  of  loving  "  !  But 
Christ's  past  is  the  pledge  of  His  future,  and  every  "  has  " 
of  His  holds  a  "  will "  in  its  hand.  Even  earthly  love 
may  sometimes  have  in  its  depth  the  guarantee  that  it 
is  not  "  born  for  death  "  ;  but  how  much  more  Christ's, 
which  is,  as  He  is,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and 
for  ever  !  That  love  clasps  "  its  own  "  with  special 
tenderness,  and  it  is  moved  to  pour  itself  out  over 
those  who  trust  Him,  with  such  specialty  because  He 
knows  their  dangers,  left  to  fight  and  be  tempted  "in 
the  world." 

Verses  2  and  3,  in  similar  fashion,  give  the  precise 
date  and  the  impelling  motives  of  the  foot-washing.  The 
time  was  "  during  supper  "  (Rev.  Ver.),  at  what  point  in 
the  meal  we  are  not  told,  and  need  not  try  to  guess. 
Possibly,  as  has  been  thought,  the  usual  washing  of  the 
guests'  feet  had  been  omitted  at  the  beginning  of  the 
meal,  and  the  dispute  as  to  who  was  greatest  may  have 


Less.  XV.]  The  Master-Servant  133 

been  connected  with  that  omission.  But  that  is  un- 
certain. Why  is  the  treachery  of  Judas  brought  into 
prominence  at  this  point  ?  Probably  to  enhance  the 
lowly  forbearance  which  washed  even  his  feet,  as  well 
as  to  explain  the  allusions  to  him  in  what  follows,  and  to 
suggest  that  Jesus  read  his  heart,  and  saw,  in  its  black 
resolve,  the  token  that  His  hour  was  come. 

At  that  hour  of  clearly  discerned  nearness  to  the  cross, 
Jesus  was  unhesitatingly  conscious  of  universal  authority, 
of  His  pre-incarnate  glory  and  mission,  and  of  His  return 
to  the  Father.  That  consciousness  must  be  taken  along 
with  the  motives  in  verse  i,  and  then  we  learn  that  the 
lowliness  of  Jesus,  when  He  stooped  to  be  a  servant,  was 
based  on  His  knowing  himself  Divine  and  on  His  infinite 
love.  Not  although^  but  because^  He  was  conscious  of 
Divine  authority,  origin,  and  destination,  did  He  humble 
Himself  thus.  What  a  strange  "  therefore  "  it  is  in  the 
world's  eyes  ! 

n.  Verses  4  and  5  give  with  awe-struck  particularity 
the  marvellous  details  of  the  fact,  which  had  left  an  in- 
effaceable impression  on  the  disciple  who  reclined  next 
the  Lord  at  the  table,  and  which  now  come  all  back  to 
him,  step  by  step,  with  yet  deeper  sense  of  their  wonder 
and  meaning.  We  can  see  the  little  company  startled  by 
His  rising,  and  watching  in  silence  each  successive  detail. 
The  task  was  that  of  a  slave,  or,  at  least,  of  the  lowest 
in  rank  of  those  present.  The  disciples  had  had  a  hot 
journey  from  Bethany,  and,  no  doubt,  needed  the  service. 
No  part  of  the  servile  task  did  He  omit,  not  even  the 
indignity  of  divesting  Himself  of  His  upper  robe,  and 
wrapping  round  Him  the  slave's  towel ;  Himself  filled 
the  bason   that  stood  ready,    and  thought  nothing  un- 


134  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xUi.  1-17 

worthy,  even  to  wiping  the  wet  feet  with  the  towel  which 
touched  His  own  body. 

Well  may  the  Evangelist  linger  over  such  a  deed,  and 
well  may  we  try  to  print  deep  on  our  hearts  its  gracious- 
ness  and  stringent  exhortation  to  us.  But  while  the  deed 
was  in  itself  the  most  touching  manifestation  of  the  tender 
emotions  that  then  filled  Christ's  heart,  and  loses  its 
supreme  beauty  unless  we  think  of  it  as  the  spontaneous 
outgush  of  His  love,  we  can  scarcely  fail  to  note  how  it 
symbolises  His  whole  work,  or,  rather,  how  it  shows  the 
same  principles  at  work  on  a  lower  plane,  which  find  their 
highest  manifestation  in  His  incarnation  and  life  of  ser- 
vice. He  rose  from  His  place  in  the  uncreated  glory. 
He  divested  Himself  of  the  robes  of  His  Divine  majesty. 
He  assumed  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  girded  Himself 
with  the  slave's  badge.  He  filled  the  bason,  providing 
the  means  of  cleansing.  He  applied  the  cleansing  water. 
Alone  He  originated,  prepared  for,  effected,  carried  out, 
and  completed  the  work.  "  Himself  doing  all  things  with 
all  alacrity." 

IH.  Verses  6-1 1  give  the  ill-timed  humility  of  Peter, 
which  was  really  presumption  with  a  mask  on.  The 
language  of  verse  6  implies  that  others  had  been  washed 
before  Peter ;  but  his  impetuous  love,  his  strong  self- 
will,  and  his  hking  for  being  unlike  the  others,  burst 
out  in  the  remonstrance.  He  had  thought  that  he  knew 
better  than  Christ  before  now,  and  he  was  always  ready 
with  his  advice.  No  doubt  his  question  came  from 
the  sense  of  his  own  inferiority,  as  is  marked  by  the 
emphatic  pronouns  "  Thou  "  and  "  I."  But  an  adequate 
sense  of  it  would  have  taught  him  that  Christ  could  n^t 
degrade  Himself,  however  low  He  stooped,  and  that  he, 


Less.  XV.]  The  Master-Servant  135 

Peter,  could  not  be  unworthy  to  receive  anything  which 
Jesus  chose  to  give. 

The  gentle  answer,  which  repressed  rashness  by 
impressing  present  ignorance  and  promising  future  know- 
ledge, may  teach  us  all  how  perilous  it  is  to  make  our- 
selves the  judges  of  what  is  becoming  to  a  Divine  love 
dealing  with  sinful  men.  The  partial  explanation 
immediately  following  can  scarcely  be  what  Jesus  meant 
by  the  promise  of  knowledge  hereafter ;  for  "  after  these 
things "  seems  to  stretch  to  all  the  incidents  of  the 
passion  on  which  He  was  now  entering,  and  the  time 
of  illumination,  when  all  the  significance  should  be 
plain,  was  years  ahead. 

But  rash  self-will  is  not  to  be  repressed  by  considera- 
tions of  its  ignorance,  and  forbearance  may  only  make 
it  bolder.  The  comparatively  modest  question  changed 
into  obstinate,  rude  refusal.  "  Never "  is  opposed  to 
"  hereafter,"  as  if  he  said,  "  I  do  not  care  what  the  future 
may  teach  me,  which  I  do  not  know  now ;  but  I  know 
this,  that  no  future  can  teach  me  to  let  Thee  do  such 
a  thing  to  me."  It  was  a  flat  contradiction  of  Christ, 
and  assumed  superior  knowledge  to  His.  It  strained  the 
tie  of  discipleship  to  almost  breaking-point.  So  closely 
does  "voluntary  humility "  neighbour  arrogant  self- 
assertion  and  pride ;  so  dangerous  is  it  to  suppose  our- 
selves too  lowly  for  Jesus  to  stoop  to  serve  and  cleanse 
us. 

Christ's  answer  has  a  tone  of  sternness  in  its  plain 
statement  of  what  was  involved.  Peter  had  said  "  never," 
and  Jesus  accepts  the  word,  and  probes  the  speaker's 
heart,  to  see  if  he  will  stand  by  his  refusal  when  he 
knows   that   it   means  losing   all  share   in  Him.     It    is 


136  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xiii.  1-17 

usually  said  by  commentators  now  that  the  context 
forbids  any  direct  reference  to  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  limits  the  meaning  of  the  solemn  words  to  a 
declaration  that  separation  must  follow  the  want  of  sub- 
mission. But  the  reference  to  forgiveness  and  cleansing 
from  sin  is  undeniable  in  verse  10,  and  it  seems  most 
natural  to  see  it  here  also.  If  Jesus  is  not  our  Saviour 
from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  we  have  no  vital  union 
with  Him.  He  must  be  that  or  nothing ;  and  the 
converse  is  also  true,  that,  if  He  is  anything  to  us,  He 
will  cleanse  us. 

The  prospect  of  separation  from  the  Lord  whom  he 
loved  so  deeply  brings  the  wayward,  true-hearted  disciple 
back  to  lowliness  and  a  passion  of  clinging  affection. 
These  quick  revulsions,  all  so  genuine  and  so  whole- 
souled,  give  a  charm  to  Peter  which  the  others  lack. 
"  If  washing  means  union  with  Thee,  and  what  is  un- 
washed is  parted  from  Thee,  let  my  whole  self  be  blessed 
with  it."  It  is  the  vehement  cry  of  the  soul  longing  for 
union  with  Jesus.  Does  it  wake  an  echo  in  ours  ?  If 
we  have  any  real  love  for  that  Lord,  it  will.  It  will, 
if  we  have  any  deep  sense  of  our  own  sin,  and  con- 
sciousness that  it  makes  separation.  One  film  of  sin  is 
a  thicker  barrier  than  would  be  made  if  the  space  from 
this  spot  to  His  throne  were  covered  with  solid  wall. 

Jesus  answers  the  request,  which  went  as  much  too 
far  on  the  one  side  as  the  refusal  did  on  the  other, 
by  great  words,  capable  of  such  wide  application,  and 
throwing  light  on  the  whole  teaching  of  Scripture  as 
to  sanctification.  There  is  an  initial  cleansing  of  the 
whole  man,  comparable  to  the  entire  bathing  of  the 
body.     That  corresponds  to  the  entire  forgiveness   and 


Less.  XV.]  The  Master-Servant  137 

ideally  complete  cleansing  by  the  impartation  of  the 
new  nature,  which  is  given  in  the  initial  act  of  faith. 
But  the  ways  of  the  world  are  foul,  and  bare  or  sandalled 
feet  on  dusty  or  muddy  roads  are  stained  by  travel.  So 
the  cleansed  spirit  has  yet  to  avail  itself  of  continual 
fresh  resort  to  the  blood  of  cleansing,  and  daily  to  pray 
for  pardon  as  for  daily  bread.  So  the  lessons  of  the 
whole  episode  are  :  No  Christ  for  us  unless  He  cleanse  ; 
no  cleansing  for  us  unless  from  Christ ;  no  cleansing 
without  faith,  and  daily  cleansing  for  stains  contracted 
even  by  cleansed   men. 

IV.  Verses  12-17  .?ive  the  application  of  the  pattern 
to  ourselves.  We  note  the  remarkable  juxtaposition  of 
humility  and  loftiness.  Seated  again  at  table,  Jesus 
declares  His  supreme  authority  as  Teacher  of  truth  and 
Ruler  of  life  in  uncompromising  tones.  No  man  ever 
rendered  Him  higher  honour  or  titles  than  He  accepted 
as  His  right.  The  mystery  of  the  Master-Servant,  un- 
approachable as  it  is,  has  yet  an  imitable  side ;  and  in 
that  most  pathetic  and  wonderful  incident  Jesus  sets 
forth  the  law  for  all  His  followers.  That  law  is  that 
dignity  binds  to  service.  If  we  are  Christ's,  we  must 
stoop  to  serve,  and  serve  to  cleanse.  The  noblest  form 
of  help  is  to  help  men  to  get  rid  of  their  sin.  The 
highest  glory  of  powers  and  gifts  is  to  humble  one- 
self for  the  lowest,  and  to  be  ready  to  be  a  slave,  if  we 
may  wash  any  stained  soul  or  bind  any  bleeding  feet. 

The  example  of  Christ  includes  what  He  has  done 
for  us.  Some  of  us  are  willing  to  look  to  the  Cross  as 
the  foundation  of  our  hope,  who  are  not  willing  to  take 
it  as  the  law  of  our  lives.  But  the  benefits  of  the  gospel 
are  meant  to  impel  us   to  corresponding  action.     How 


138  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.xiii.  1-17 

little  any  of  us  have  caught  the  whole  sweep  of  the 
meaning  of  that  imperative  "  example,  that  ye  should  do 
as  I  have  done  to  you."  What  have  we  received  from 
Him  ?  What  have  we  given  to  men  ?  Are  we  not  too 
much  like  some  sullen,  land-locked  lake,  which  receives 
many  streams  and  gives  forth  none  ?  If  our  acts  to 
others  are  not  widened  to  correspond  to  Christ's  to  and 
for  us,  the  reverse  process  will  set  in,  and  Christ's  acts 
and  gifts  to  us  will  shrink  to  the  narrowness  of  ours  to 
-others. 

We  all  know  that  He  is  our  example,  and  that  even 
in  the  supreme  and  unapproachable  gift  of  His  death  we 
ought  to  find  the  model  for  our  lives.  But  the  gulf 
between  knowledge  and  practice  is  all  too  wide,  and  so 
our  Lord  adds  one  more  to  the  Beatitudes,  pronouncing 
those  blessed  who  add  doing  to  knowing.  Only  they 
really  know  who  translate  all  their  knowledge  into 
performance.  Only  they  are  truly  blessed  who  have 
no  principles  which  do  not  regulate  conduct,  and  no 
conduct  which  is  not  regulated  by  principle.  The  one 
principle  which  can  shape  all  life  into  blessedness  is, 
Do  as  Jesus  has  done  for  you.  Stoop  that  you  may 
serve,  and  let  your  service  be  cleansing. 


LESSON   XVI 


The  Present-Absent  Christ  and  the  Abiding 
Comforter 

St.  John  xiv.   1-3,   15-27 


1.  "Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled  :  ye  believe  in  God, 
believe  also  in  Me. 

2.  In  My  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions  :  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  would  have  told  you,  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you, 

3.  And  if  1  go  and  prepare  a 
place  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 
and  receive  you  unto  Myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may 
be  also.  .  .  . 

15.  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My 
commandments. 

16.  And  I  will  pray  the 
Father,  and  He  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  He  may 
abide  with  you  for  ever ; 

17.  Even  the  Spirit  of  truth  ; 
whom  the  world  cannot  receive, 
because  itseeth  Him  not,  neither 
knoweth  Him :  but  ye  know 
Him ;  for  He  dwelleth  with 
you,  and  shall  be  in  you. 

18.  I  will  not  leave  you  com- 
fortless :  I  will  come  to  you. 

19.  Yet  a  little  while,  and 
the  world  seeth  Me  no  more  ; 
but  ye  see  Me :  because  I  live, 
ye  shall  live  also. 

20.  At  that  day  ye  shall  know 
that  I  am  in  My  Father,  and  ye 
in  Me,  and  I  in  you. 

21.  He  that  hath  My  com- 
mandments, and  keepeth  them, 
He  it  is  that  loveth  Me  :   and 


he  that  loveth  Me  shall  be  loved 
of  My  Father,  and  I  will  love 
Him,  and  will  manifest  Myself 
to  Him. 

22.  Judas  saith  unto  Him, 
not  Iscariot,  Lord,  how  is  it 
that  Thou  wilt  manifest  Thy- 
self unto  us,  and  not  unto  the 
world  ? 

23.  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  If  a  man  love  Me,  he 
will  keep  My  words  :  and  My 
Father  will  love  him,  and  we 
will  come  unto  him,  and  make 
our  abode  with  him 

24.  He  that  loveth  Me  not 
keepeth  not  My  sayings :  and 
the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not 
Mine,  but  the  Father's  which 
sent  Me. 

25,  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you,  being  yet 
present  with  you. 

26,  But  the  Comforter,  which 
is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the 
Father  will  send  in  My  name, 
He  shall  teach  you  all  things, 
and  bring  all  things  to  your 
remembrance,  whatsoever  I 
have  said  unto  you. 

27,  Peace  I  leave  with  you. 
My  peace  I  give  unto  you  :  not 
as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto 
you.  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled,  neither  let  it  be 
afraid." 


139 


I40  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xiv.  1-3, 15-27 

THE  depth,  sweetness,  and  calm  of  these  wonderful 
words  in  the  upper  room  lift  them  high  above 
comment.  Who  can  reproduce  their  tender  music,  or  ex- 
haust their  deep  meaning  ?    We  can  but  skim  the  surface. 

I.  The  first  three  verses  apply  the  simplest  and  most 
sufficient  soothing  to  the  sorrow  for  His  departure.  In 
verse  i  the  exhortation  to  twofold  and  yet  single  trust 
presents  faith  in  God,  which  is  also  faith  in  Jesus,  as  the 
one  antidote  to  trouble  of  heart.  What  is  the  use  of 
telling  men  not  to  be  troubled,  unless  you  can  show 
them  how  ?  How  else  can  coiling  sorrow  be  cast  out 
than  by  faith  ?  Jesus  asks  the  same  trust  which  we  give 
to  God,  and  these  two  are  one.  He  does  not  bid  us 
ruin  our  faith  by  dividing  it  between  two  objects. 
Strange  words  from  a  Man  who  was  within  twenty-four 
hours  of  death  ! 

Verse  2  clothes  great  truths  in  simple  words,  and 
changes  the  aspect  of  departure  by  the  revelation  of  the 
place  whither  He  goes,  and  of  the  share  they  had  in 
His  going,  and  appeals  to  His  frankness  in  telling  them 
the  sad  tidings,  as  assuring  them  that  He  would  not 
have  hidden  it  from  them  if  His  departure  had  been 
parting.  It  is  really  the  preparation  for  their  eternal 
reunion.  "  My  Father's  house.  .  .  .  Wist  ye  not  that 
there  is  My  place  ?  "  Heaven  is  the  true  temple,  and 
in  it  is  room  for  these  eleven  poor  men,  and  for  millions 
more.  The  places  there  are  "mansions,"  perpetual 
abodes.  Unchangeableness  and  repose  breathe  from 
the  word.  Jesus  tells  us  all  that  we  need,  though  less 
than  we  sometimes  wish.  If  there  were  any  dismal 
separation,  any  dark  shadow  brooding  over  that  future. 
He  would  not  leave  us  to  find  it  out  too  late.     We  may 


Less.  XVI.]  The  Abiding  Comforter  141 

utterly  trust  His  absolute  frankness,  and  be  content  to 
know  that  the  gaps  in  our  knowledge  hide  nothing 
terrible,  or  affecting  permanent  repose  in  and  with  Him 
in  the  Father's  house. 

Verse  3  opens  the  blessed  prospect  of  return  and 
reunion.  How  He  prepares  the  place  we  know  not, 
nor  need  to  know.  Perhaps,  if  He  had  not  gone  thither 
in  human  form,  there  had  been  no  place.  Certainly,  if 
He  stood  not  before  the  throne,  we  could  never  stand 
there.  Only  because  the  Lamb  is  "  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne,"  can  the  elders,  the  representatives  of  redeemed 
manhood,  "  adore  around." 

n.  Verses  15-17  are  mainly  occupied  with  the  promise 
of  the  Comforter.  They  present  to  our  thoughts  the 
loving  obedience  which  secures  the  Saviour's  interces- 
sion, the  praying  Christ,  the  giving  Father,  and  the 
abiding  Spirit.  Hitherto  "believe"  has  been  the  key- 
word. Now  it  is  "  love."  Jesus  has  just  promised  to 
do  whatsoever  we  ask  in  His  name.  Now  He  bids  us 
do  whatsoever  He  commands.  On  both  sides  is  love 
set  in  motion  by  a  message  from  the  other.  His  love 
commands,  and  delights  to  be  asked.  Ours  should  ask, 
and  delight  to  be  commanded.  Verse  15  contains  the 
all-sufficient  guide  for  life.  His  "  commandments  "  are 
Himself.  That  pattern  is  enough  for  conduct,  for 
character,  and  for  all  perplexities.  Here  is  the  all- 
powerful  motive.  "  Ye  will  keep,"  says  the  Revised 
Version.  Love  will  have  power  to  sway  life.  It  is  the 
foundation  of  obedience,  and  obedience  is  its  sure  out- 
come. All  the  emotional,  mystic,  and  select  experiences 
of  Christians  must  submit  to  this  plain  test :  Do  they 
help  to  obedience  ? 


142  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xiv.  1-3, 15-27 

The  root  of  such  active  love  is  "  beHeve,"  and  its 
issues  are  next  unfolded.  "  I  will  pray,  .  .  .  and  He 
will  give."  His  intercession  is  our  hope.  It  is  His 
present  work.  His  presence  within  the  veil,  His  con- 
tinual presenting  of  His  finished  work  as  the  reason  for 
blessing  being  given  to  us,  are  truths  of  which  we  can 
but  grasp  part ;  but  without  them  the  Cross  would  lack 
its  meaning  and  be  shorn  of  its  power.  Jesus  is  sure  of 
answer  to  His  prayer. 

The  one  all-inclusive  gift  secured  by  Christ's  interces- 
sion is  "  the  Comforter."  We  probably  know  that  that 
name  has  shrunk  in  significance  in  our  modern  English, 
and  that  it  means,  and  was  understood  at  the  date  of 
the  earlier  translations  to  mean,  more  than  it  now  does. 
It  is  wider  than  "  consoler,"  meaning  literally  "  one  called 
to  aid  another,"  and  so  covering  the  meanings  of 
"  advocate,"  "  helper,"  "  strengthener,"  "  guide,"  and 
"instructor."  By  whatever  processes  a  man  can  be 
made  strong,  these  are  the  Spirit's  work.  This  Advocate 
is  to  replace  Christ,  and  carry  on  His  work.  He  is 
"  another  Comforter,"  and  is  to  be  an  abiding  presence, 
not  going  away,  as  Jesus  was  about  to  do.  But  mark 
how  He  will  do  His  work.  He  is  "  the  Spirit  of  truth." 
Not  that  He  brings  new  truth, — that  is  Christ's  work, — 
but  the  Spirit  has  for  His  weapon  and  source  of  strength 
the  revelation  summed  and  finished  in  Christ's  person 
and  work. 

The  world — that  is,  the  aggregate  of  men  considered 
as  separated  from  God  and  immersed  in  the  material — 
cannot  have  this  Strengthener,  any  more  than  low,  sen- 
suous natures  are  capable  of  perceiving  the  highest  forms 
of  natural  beauty  or  of  art.     Of  course,  the  "  conviction  " 


Less.  XVI.]  The  Abiding  Comforter  143 

which  the  Spirit  works  on  "  the  world "  is  not  the 
matter  in  hand  here.  But  men  put  out  their  eyes  by 
sin  and  worldly  lusts,  and  cannot  see  what  purer  vision 
suns  itself  in  beholding.  Some  men  need  oculists,  not 
light.  The  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  does  not 
know.  The  disciples  know,  because  they  receive. 
Possession  and  knowledge  are  mutual  cause  and  effect ; 
or  perhaps,  rather,  they  are  one  and  the  same  thing. 
Even  at  that  hour  the  Spirit  abode  with  the  disciples, 
for  He  was  in  Christ ;  but  the  future  was  to  bring  a 
clearer,  closer  knowledge  and  possession,  when,  after 
Pentecost,  He  should  not  only  be  with,  but  in,  them. 
These  great  promises  are  for  all  Christian  souls*  to  the 
end.  The  way  to  the  personal  experience  of  their  sweet 
truth  is,  as  this  discourse  shows,  first,  "  believe  "  ;  then, 
"  love  "  ;  then,  "  do  His  commandments." 

HI.  Verses  18-21  carry  the  comfort  of  the  sorrowing 
disciples  still  further,  by  assuring  them  that  Christ  Him- 
self will  come  to  them,  and  give  them  greater  gifts  than 
they  could  ever  possess  otherwise.  Reunion,  influence 
from  afar,  the  preparation  of  a  place,  were  not  all  that 
they  craved  for.  So  there  are,  in  verses  18  and  19, 
three  paradoxes :  the  absent  Christ  is  present ;  the 
unseen  Christ  is  visible ;  the  dying  Christ  is  life-giving. 
The  word  rendered  "comfortless"  (ver.  18)  is  "orphans." 
The  forlorn  disciples  would  be  like  fatherless  and 
motherless  children  without  Him,  and  nothing  would 
keep  them  from  being  so  but  His  presence.  Unless 
Christ  be  with  us,  we  are  desolate. 

He  does  not  say  "  I  will  come,"  but  "  I  come," — an 
immediately  impending  coming.  If  His  future  coming 
were  meant,  then  till  then  all  His  people  are  to  be  as 


144  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xiv.  1-3, 15-27 

orphans  ;  and  that  cannot  be.  There  is  a  coming,  then, 
contemporaneous  with  His  bodily  absence.  "  Bodily  " 
is  not  a  synonym  for  "  real."  He  came  in  the  very  act 
of  going.  Being  absent,  He  is  present  with  us,  if  we 
will.  How  the  vivid  belief  in  Christ's  real  presence 
would  calm,  glorify,  and  hallow  life  !  Again,  the  unseen 
Christ  is  a  seen  Christ.  "  Yet  a  little  while  "  is  best 
interpreted  as  covering  all  the  time  till  the  ascension, 
and  the  brief  appearances  during  the  forty  days  are  too 
little  to  be  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise,  which  neces- 
sarily has  the  same  extension  in  time  as  the  coming — 
that  is,  is  continuous  and  permanent. 

"  See,"  when  denied  as  to  the  world,  means  bodily 
sight ;  when  promise  to  disciples,  spiritual  perception. 
Every  Christian  life  may  be  blessed  with  the  vision  of 
the  present  Christ.  "  See  "  is  a  strong  word,  implying 
very  vivid,  direct,  and  certain  knowledge  and  conscious- 
ness. Is  Jesus  so  near  us,  and  are  we  so  aware  and 
sure  of  Him,  that  the  sight  of  sense  is  less  than  that  of 
spirit?  Again,  the  dying  Christ  lives  and  gives  life. 
"  I  live "  is  a  timeless  present  tense,  all  but  identical 
with  "Jehovah."  We  Hve  because,  and  therefore,  as 
long  as,  and,  in  a  true  correspondence,  in  the  same 
manner  as  He  lives.  We  can  never  die  as  long  as  the 
eternally  "  living  who  became  dead  "  is  alive,  and  that 
is  "for  evermore." 

Verse  20  discloses  the  blessed  consequence  of  His 
coming.  Because  the  disciple  has  Christ's  presence, 
sees  Him  and  draws  kindred  life  from  Him,  he  will 
know  by  experience  Christ's  indwelling  at  once  in  the 
Father  and  in  His  servant,  and  His  servant's  indwelling 
in   Him.      "  That   day "  is   the   whole   period  between 


Less.  XVI.]  The  Abiding  Comforter  145 

ascension  and  return  in  bodily  form.  In  that  period 
the  experiences  just  promised  will  be  the  best  teachers 
of  fundamental  Christian  truth.  But  how  can  the  rela- 
tion between  Father  and  Son  ever  have  any  verification 
in  ourselves  ?  If  these  preceding  promises  be  fulfilled 
to  me,  my  experiences  will  be  such  as  to  be  inexplicable, 
except  on  the  supposition  of  their  having  a  Divine 
source.  They  bear  the  signature  of  a  Divine  hand. 
I  know  that  it  is  Jesus  who  gives  them,  and  that  He 
could  not  give  them  unless  He  was  in  the  Father. 
Similarly,  the  consciousness  of  Christ  present,  seen, 
life-giving,  carries  the  knowledge  that  Jesus  is  in  us ; 
for  we  feel  His  touch,  and  we  are  in  Him  ;  for  we  are 
aware  of  the  power  that  encompasses  us  and  the  atmo- 
sphere in  which  we  have  our  being. 

Verse  21  closes  the  first  section  of  the  discourse.  Its 
first  words  are  substantially  equivalent  to  verse  15,  but 
the  slight  difference  is  significant.  The  former  saying 
begins  with  the  root,  and  works  outward  to  the  fruit ; 
while  this  verse  takes  the  reverse  order,  beginning  with 
the  fruit  and  going  inwards  to  the  root.  Note  that 
"  hath  My  commandments."  The  only  real  possession 
of  them  is  in  the  heart.  Practical  obedience  is  the  test 
of  love.  The  emphatic  "  he "  and  the  order  of  the 
sentence,  putting  the  fruits  first,  give  it  a  sharp  edge 
as  against  false  pretensions.  Christ  stamps  with  His 
hall-mark  as  gold  no  mere  emotion,  however  genuine 
and  passionate,  but  only  that  which  issues  in  Christian 
conduct  and  character. 

Such  love  is  rewarded  by  further  and  sweeter  gifts 
of  Divine  love  and  manifestation.  What  boldness  in 
saying  that,  if  a  man  loves  Christ,  God  will  love  him  ! 

10 


146  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xiv.  1-3, 15-27 

Of  course,  that  saying  does  not  begin  at  the  very 
beginning.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us  " 
digs  a  story  deeper  down  in  the  building.  What  is  in 
hand  is,  not  how  a  man  comes  to  receive  the  love  of 
God  at  first,  but  how  a  Christian  grows  in  possession 
of  it.  God  loves  all  men,  but  the  heart  that  believes 
and  therefore  loves,  and  loves  and  therefore  obeys,  will 
receive  deeper  and  sweeter  tokens  of  God's  love.  Further, 
Christ  will  meet  us  on  the  path  of  obedience,  with  more 
and  more  of  His  love  unveiled  to  our  eyes. 

IV.  In  verses  22-24,  Judas'  question  gives  occasion 
for  a  statement  of  the  conditions  of  Christ's  self-mani- 
festation, both  positively  and  negatively.  The  question 
is  that  of  a  listener  dimly  understanding  Jesus,  perceiving 
that  the  public  display  which  had  seemed  coming,  when 
Christ  rode  into  Jerusalem,  was  somehow  not  to  be. 
"What  is  come  to  pass  that?"  etc.  He  understands 
that  somehow  "  unto  us,  and  not  unto  the  world,"  is  the 
revelation  to  be  made.  Christ  answers  both  parts  of 
the  question,  and  tells  us  what  brings  Christ  and  what  • 
Christ  brings,  and  then  what  keeps  away  Him  and  His 
gifts.  Note  the  width  of  the  words  "  if  a  man,"  instead 
of  "if  ye"  (ver.  15),  thus  telling  Judas  that  his  com- 
placent assumption,  "  unto  us,"  was  a  narrow  reading  of 
the  sw^eep  of  the  promise. 

We  have  already  seen  what  brings  Christ,  and  need 
only  here  note  that  the  test  of  love  is  said  to  be 
keeping  Christ's  "  word,"  which  suggests  that  not  only 
His  commandments,  but  all  His  words,  are  to  be 
treasured,  and,  further,  that  His  many  words  are  one 
whole,  and,  further,  that  every  word  of  His  holds  some 
law  for  practical  life  in  its  depths.     Obedience  brings 


Less.  XVI.]  The  Abiding  Comforter  147 

the  sense  of  the  Father's  love,  and  the  reality  of  His 
abiding  presence,  which  is  also  Christ's  presence.  How 
close  must  be  that  union  of  Father  and  Son  whereby 
Jesus  could  dare  to  say,  "  We  will  come " !  How 
blessed  the  dwelling  of  the  Divine  guest,  which  is 
permanent,  as  long  as  the  obedience  which  is  its  con- 
dition endures !  The  negative  side  shows  what  keeps 
away  Jesus.  Unloving  disobedience  closes  the  heart. 
Two  principles  are  laid  down.  First,  no  love,  no 
obedience.  Second,  disobedience  to  Christ  is  dis- 
obedience to  God.  Jesus  is  sure  that  all  He  speaks  is 
God's  word.  What  should  we  think  of  a  religious 
teacher  who  began  by  saying,  "  Remember  that  every- 
thing which  I  say  God  says  "  ?  The  conclusion  is  not 
stated,  but  easily  drawn.  Unloving  obedience,  then, 
will  keep  away  Christ,  and  in  Him  God.  It  is  possible, 
then,  not  to  see  Christ,  though  He  stands  beside  us. 
The  simple  absence  of  love  is  fatal. 

V.  A  slight  pause  in  the  flow  of  speech  seems  to 
come  in,  and  then  in  verses  25  and  26  Jesus  looks  back 
on  what  He  has  said,  and  contrasts  His  teaching  with 
that  future  teaching  by  the  Comforter,  whom  He  has 
already,  in  a  different  connection,  promised.  Mark  the 
name  here  given  to  the  Teacher-Spirit.  His  office  of 
Strengthener  is  brought  into  immediate  connection  with 
His  teaching ;  for  what  can  more  fully  equip  us  with 
power  from  on  high  than  the  firm  grasp  of  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus  ?  That  Teacher  is,  further,  "  the  Holy 
Ghost."  That  name  in  this  connection  suggests  that 
there  is  no  holiness  without  such  knowledge,  and  no 
learning  of  the  truth  without  holiness.  This  Teacher- 
Spirit  is  "  sent  in  Christ's  name."     In  some  deep  sense 


14S  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xiv.  1-3, 15-27 

God  acts  as  representing  Christ,  and  it  is  on  the 
historic  manifestation  of  Christ  as  basis  that  the  Spirit 
is  sent.  Revelation  must  be  complete  before  He  who 
came  to  unfold  and  impress  it  had  material  to  work 
with.  Mark,  too,  the  unmistakable  declaration  of  the 
personality  of  the  Spirit :  "  He  shall  teach."  That 
cannot  be  said  of  an  influence. 

The  lesson-book  of  the  Teacher-Spirit  is  clearly  set 
forth  as  Christ,  "  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  said." 
Jesus  Himself  contrasts  here  the  partial  understanding 
of  His  words  while  on  earth  with  the  fuller  grasp  of 
their  inexhaustible  meaning  to  be  attained  hereafter. 
His  words  can  never  be  fathomed,  much  less  exhausted. 
The  Spirit  is  ever  with  His  Church,  teaching  each  age 
to  understand  some  little  bit  more  of  their  depth.  True 
progress  consists,  not  in  getting  beyond  Jesus,  but  in 
getting  more  deeply  into  His  ever-fresh  truth.  The 
problems  of  this  generation  will  find  their  solution 
where  those  of  past  generations  have  found  theirs,  and 
the  old  commandment  of  the  old  Christ  will  be  the  new 
commandment  of  the  new  Christ.  As  long  as  we  have 
an  abiding  Spirit  to  teach  the  endless  fulness  of  His 
words  to  loving  obedience,  we  need  not  fear,  though 
the  things  which  can  be  shaken  are  removed.  The 
world  will  not  outgrow  Jesus  Christ.  All  change  will 
but  make  more  plain  His  inexhaustibleness,  and  reveal 
new  treasures  in  His  familiar  and  enduring  words. 


LESSON   XVII 
The  Vine  and  the  Branches 

St.  John  xv.  i-i6 


1.  "I  am  the  true  vine,  and 
My  Father  is  the  husbandman. 

2.  Every  branch  in  Me  that 
beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh 
aw^ay :  and  every  branch  that 
beareth  fruit,  He  purgeth  it, 
that  it  may  bring  forth  more 
fruit. 

3.  Now^  ye  are  clean  through 
the  word  which  I  have  spoken 
unto  you. 

4.  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in 
you.  As  the  branch  cannot 
bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it 
abide  in  the  vine ;  no  more  can 
ye,  except  ye  abide  in  Me. 

5.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the 
branches  :  He  that  abideth  in 
Me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit :  for 
without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing. 

6.  If  a  man  abide  not  in  Me, 
he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch, 
and  is  withered  ;  and  men 
gather  them,  and  cast  them 
into  the  fire,  and  they  are 
burned. 

7.  If  ye  abide  in  Me,  and 
My  words  abide  in  you,  ye 
shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you. 

8.  Herein  is  My  Father 
glorified,  that  ye  bear  much 
fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be  My  dis- 
ciples. 


9.  As  the  Father  hath  loved 
Me,  so  have  I  loved  you  :  con- 
tinue ye  in  My  love. 

10.  If  ye  keep  My  command- 
ments, ye  shall  abide  in  My 
love ;  even  as  I  have  kept  My 
Father's  commandments,  and 
abide  in  His  love. 

11.  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy 
might  remain  in  you,  and  that 
your  joy  might  be  full. 

12.  This  is  My  command- 
ment. That  ye  love  one  another, 
as  I  have  loved  you. 

13.  Greater  Jove  hath  no  man 
than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down 
his  life  for  his  friends. 

14.  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye 
do  whatsoever  I  command  you. 

15.  Henceforth  I  call  you 
not  servants;  for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  Lord 
doeth  :  but  I  have  called  you 
friends ;  for  all  things  that  I 
have  heard  of  My  Father  I 
have  made  known  unto  you. 

16.  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me, 
but  I  have  chosen  you,  and 
ordained  you,  that  ye  should 
go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and 
that  your  fruit  should  remain  ; 
that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
of  the  Father  in  My  name.  He 
may  give  it  you." 


149 


150  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xv.  1-16 

THE  last  words  of  the  fourteenth  chapter  show  that 
there  is  a  sHght  break  in  the  discourse,  and  possibly 
a  change  of  place.  Many  guesses  have  been  made  as  to 
the  occasion  suggesting  the  parable  of  our  lesson  ;  but 
these  are  unimportant.  A  vine  by  the  wayside,  or  the 
golden  vine  on  the  temple  doors,  or  the  "  fruit  of  the 
vine"  which  had  just  been  used  for  the  Lord's  Supper, 
may  have  shaped  the  allusion. 

I.  The  lovely  and  significant  parable  occupies  verses 
1-8.  It  falls  into  two  halves,  of  which  the  first  (vers. 
1-4)  gives  the  image  in  its  most  general  aspect,  and  the 
second  (vers.  5-8)  dwells  on  the  branches  abiding  in  the 
vine,  and  the  solemn  issues  involved.  Jesus  is  the  "  true 
Vine,"  the  reality  of  which  the  material  one  to  which  He 
perhaps  pointed  is  but  a  shadow,  and  of  which  Israel 
had  failed  to  be  the  spiritual  emblem  which  it  was 
meant  to  be.  One  life  fills  the  plant  from  root  through 
stem,  and  reddens  and  mellows  each  cluster.  So  His 
life  pervades  all  His  true  followers ;  and  that  one  life 
results  in  oneness  of  relation  to  God,  of  character,  and 
of  destiny.  We  are  sons  of  God  in  Him,  lights  of  the 
world  by  Him,  clothed  with  His  righteousness,  sanctified 
by  His  Spirit,  and  at  last  with  Him  and  glorified  with 
His  glory. 

The  husbandman  and  his  dressing  of  the  vine  comes 
next.  Christ  is  usually  presented  as  the  Cultivator,  but 
the  form  of  the  parable  requires  that  here  the  Father, 
who,  however,  works  through  the  Son,  should  do  that 
office.  The  vinedresser's  chief  tool  is  a  knife.  Pruning 
looks  merciless  and  wasteful,  but  it  is  done  scientifically, 
without  random  strokes.  Nothing  is  cut  away  except 
that  which  it  is  gain  to  lose.     Dead  wood  has  to  be  cut 


Less.  XVII.]      The  Vine  and  the  Branches  151 

out,  and  living  wood  has  to  be  cut  back.  The  whole 
strain  of  the  parable  implies  that  life,  however  imperfect, 
will  produce  some  fruit,  and  therefore  leads  to  tlie 
conclusion  that  the  utterly  fruitless  branches  are  people 
with  a  merely  nominal  connection  with  Christ,  whose 
"taking  away"  is  simply  making  visible  the  fact  that 
they  are  not  His  at  all. 

But  pruning  is  needed  by  true  branches,  for  we  all 
have  two  natures  if  we  are  in  Christ,  and  the  one 
flourishes  at  the  other's  expense  ;  therefore  the  Husband- 
man has  to  cut  the  rank  shoots  from  self,  that  all  our 
force  may  be  thrown  into  growing  fruit.  Then  we  have 
the  condition  of  fruitfulness  laid  down  as  abiding  in 
Christ.  There  may  be  much  work  and  no  fruit.  What 
we  bring  forth  "  of  ourselves "  is  no  more  fruit  than 
cankers  are  roses.  The  reception  of  the  life  which 
secures  fruit  depends  on  our  own  effort.  We  have  to 
take  pains  that  we  may  abide  in  Christ,  and  so  secure 
His  abiding  in  us.  If  a  canal  lock  be  empty,  the  water 
will  press  on  it,  and  open  the  gates,  and  fill  it.  If  we 
empty  the  heart,  Christ  will  come  in.  If  we  abide  in 
Him,  by  thought,  love,  desire,  by  submission  and  re- 
ference of  all  work  to  Him,  He  will  dwell  in  us,  and  we 
shall  be  fruitful  branches. 

Verses  5-8  repeat,  but  with  additions,  these  truths. 
Christ  was  not  afraid  of  repetition.  He  broke  the  bread 
of  life  small,  and  fed  the  disciples  little  and  often.  In 
these  four  verses  are  four  aspects  of  the  great  truth  of 
union  with  Him.  First,  the  fruitfulness  of  union.  Note 
the  pointed  application  of  the  truth,  "  Ye  are  the 
branches."  Toothless  generalities  are  useless ;  there 
must  be  a  driving  home  of  truth  to  the  individual.     The 


152  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xv.  1-16 

great  condition  of  fruit-bearing  is  quiet  abiding  in 
Christ, — a  temper  far  remote  from  noise  and  bustle. 
We  must  be  much  within  the  veil,  and  have  still  hearts ; 
and  the  harder  our  work,  the  more  must  we  "  labour  to 
enter  into  that  rest." 

Mark  the  promise  of  "much  fruit."  Why  do  we  bear 
a  shrivelled  cluster  or  two,  more  like  marbles  than  grapes  ? 
Because  we  do  not  abide  in  Him.  Christ  puts  but  two 
alternatives, — no  fruit  or  much.  The  average  crop  now- 
adays is  "  little."  "  Apart  from  Me,  nothing,"  is  the 
emphatic  statement  here.  Life  without  Jesus  is  a  long 
sum,  which,  added  up,  has  for  its  total  a  cipher. 

Second,  the  converse  truth  is  stated,  that  separation 
means  withering  and  destruction.  How  the  leaves  shrivel 
on  a  plucked  branch  !  So,  separate  from  Christ,  men 
wither  and  Churches  droop.  Withering  brings  destruction. 
The  language  describes  what  befalls  actual  branches  in 
literal  vines,  but  is  symbolic  of  the  fate  of  men  apart  from 
Jesus.  Note  the  mysterious  language  :  "  They  gather." 
Who  do  ?  and  who  cast  into  the  fire  ?  All  is  left  in  un- 
explained awfulness.  Enough  to  know  that  to  be  in  the 
Vine  or  thrown  into  the  fire  are  the  alternatives.  Once 
more,  union  with  Christ  brings  satisfaction  of  desires. 
If  He,  by  His  words,  abide  in  us,  and  we  in  Him,  our 
"  will  "  harmonises  with  His,  and  we  get  our  wishes  when 
they  are  moulded  by  His  indwelling  word. 

Once  more,  union  with  Him  leads  to  God's  glorifying 
and  our  increasing  discipleship.  Do  we  so  live  that  the 
sight  of  us  kindles  sweeter  and  worthier  thoughts  of  God 
in  men?  Thus  abiding,  we  shall  "become"  (as  the 
accurate  rendering  is)  His  disciples.  We  never,  on 
earth,  reach  full  discipleship,  but  should  be  ever  in  pro- 


Less.  XVII.]     The  Vine  and  the  Branches  153 

cess  of  becoming  His  true  servants.     The  fruit   borne 
by  union  with  Him  will  help  us  nearer  to  Him. 

II.  Verses  9-1 1  are  a  kind  of  conclusion  of  the  parable, 
presenting  a  somewhat  different  aspect  of  its  main  drift, 
and  telhng  us  His  purpose  in  it.  Three  things  are  spoken 
of  in  these  verses  as  abiding, — love,  obedience,  joy.  The 
abiding  is,  first,  abiding  in  love.  Christ  claims  to  be  in 
an  altogether  unique  manner  the  object  of  the  Father's 
love,  and — no  less  wonderful — to  be  able  to  love  like 
the  Father, — as  deeply,  purely,  fully,  eternally,  and  with 
all  the  unnamable  perfectness  of  Divine  love.  In  that 
mysterious,  tender,  perfect  love  He  bids  us  abide, — 
meaning  thereby,  not  the  continuance  of  our  emotion 
of  love  to  Him,  but  our  keeping  ourselves  in  the  sacred 
precincts  of  His  love  to  us.  That  abiding  is  in  our  own 
power.  The  dwellers  in  the  clefts  of  that  riven  Rock  need 
no  other  defence. 

The  second  abiding  thing  is  obedience,  by  which  we 
abide  in  the  love  of  Christ.  Fruit  is  grown  without  effort, 
but  the  human  side  of  the  truth  is  more  prominent  here, 
where  the  converse  of  the  previous  thought  is  set  forth  ; 
namely,  that  obedience  is  the  condition  of  abiding. 
Jesus  does  not  say  "  Obey  God  as  I  have  done,  and  He 
will  love  you,"  but  "  Obey  Me  as  I  obey  Him,  and  I  will 
love  you."  Who  is  He  that  thus  comes  between  us  and 
God  ?  And  does  He  come  between,  or  rather  lead  us  to 
the  Father  ?  He  does  love  us  the  better  the  more  we  do 
His  will.  That  love  which  sought  the  wandering  sheep 
will  pour  itself  more  tenderly  on  it  when  it  follows  close 
at  the  heels  of  the  Shepherd. 

The  third  abiding  thing  is  joy,  if  the  reading  of  the 
Authorised   Version  be  retained.     This    was   a   strange 


154  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xv.  1-16 

time  for  Jesus  to  speak  of  His  joy,  with  Gethsemane  and 
Calvary  so  near.  Was  the  Man  of  Sorrows  a  joyful  man  ? 
He  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His 
fellows,  because  He  absolutely  surrendered  Himself  to  the 
Father's  will ;  and  that  joy  He  will  give  us  if  we  too  give 
up  ourselves  at  the  bidding  of  love.  Such  joy  will  be 
progressive,  ever  full,  and  ever  advancing  towards  fulleo: 
possession  of  His  joys. 

HI.  Verses  twelve  and  thirteen  pass  from  the  relation 
of  branches  to  vine  to  that  of  branches  to  each  other,  of 
which  the  natural  expression  is  mutual  love.  The  com- 
mandments are  all  summed  in  one — love.  Then  love  is 
obligatory.  But  can  it  be  produced  to  order  ?  Com- 
mandment and  love  do  not  go  well  together,  but  yet 
much  may  be  done  to  cultivate  it.  Christians  should 
feel  nearer  to  each  other,  however  unlike  in  temperament, 
culture,  and  position,  than  they  are  to  non-Christians  to 
whom  in  these  respects  they  may  be  most  hke.  If  this 
be  the  sum  of  His  commandments,  it  must  be  the  essence 
of  our  duty,  and  hold  every  other  right  feeling  and  deed 
in  germ  in  itself.  When  Jesus  was  about  to  leave  His 
little  flock.  He  did  not  talk  to  them  about  institutions. 
Church  order,  and  the  like,  but  gave  this  one  all-sufficient 
injunction.     If  that  be  right,  everything  will  come  right. 

Further,  He  here  gives  the  pattern  and  measure  of 
mutual  love.  He  had  just  declared  that  His  love  was 
like  God's,  and  now  He  bids  us  make  ours  like  His. 
Think  of  a  man  calmly  saying,  "I  am  the  embodiment 
of  perfect  love,  the  pattern  for  all  hearts."  But  still 
more  remarkable  is  it  that  He  sets  before  us  His  death 
as  our  pattern,  not,  indeed,  in  its  propitiatory  character, 
but  as  being  a  voluntary,  love-impelled  surrender  for  our 


Less.  XVII.]     The  Vine  and  the  Branches  155 

good.  That  is  the  model  for  us, — a  solemn  thought 
which  may  well  bring  a  blush  to  our  cheeks  and  peni- 
tence to  our  consciences.  "  For  His  friends."  But  He 
died  for  enemies,  that  He  might  make  them  friends. 
The  word  here  does  not  mean  those  who  loved  Him, 
but  those  whom  He  loved,  and  so  refers  to  the  same 
persons  as  Paul  had  in  view  in  his  variation  of  this 
saying,  and  called  "  enemies." 

IV.  The  closing  verses  of  the  lesson  describe  Christ's 
friends.  They  tell  us  what  His  friends  do  for  Him,  what 
He  does  for  them,  how  they  come  to  be  so.  "  Friends  " 
here  means  mainly  those  who  love  Him,  and  Jesus  here 
stoops  to  accept  and  rejoice  in  the  imperfect  love  of  these 
poor  men  and  of  us.  But  the  singular  blending  of  friend- 
ship and  authority  is  noticeable.  He  commands,  though 
He  is  Friend ;  He  is  Friend,  though  He  commands.  So 
we  should  cherish  at  once  absolute  submission  and  closest 
friendship.  Obedience  will  knit  the  tie  between  Him 
and  us  more  closely ;  and  the  closer  tie  will  give  clearer 
insight  into  His  will,  and  fuller  joy  in  doing  it. 

Verse  fifteen  tells  us  what  Christ  does  for  His  friends. 
The  slave  may  see  what  his  lord  does,  but  does  not 
know  his  purpose  or  motive,  and  so  cannot  estimate 
his  acts.  A  servant  in  his  master's  confidence  is  some- 
thing more  than  a  servant.  But  Jesus  calls  His  disciples 
"  friends,"  and  had  called  them  so  in  act  before  He  here 
named  them  so.  Jesus  recognises  the  obligation  of  per- 
fect frankness,  and  He  will  tell  His  friends  everything 
that  He  can.  Of  course,  that  frankness  has  its  limits  in 
the  power  of  reception  in  the  hearers  ;  for  He  does  not 
pour  His  treasures  into  vessels  that  will  spill  them,  and 
there  were  many  things  yet  to  be  spoken  which  remained 


156  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xv.  1-16 

unspoken  "  because  ye  cannot  carry  them  now."  That 
frankness  continues,  and  to-day  we,  if  we  listen  to  Him, 
may  know  all  which  it  concerns  us  to  know,  and  may 
peacefully  acquiesce  in  ignorance  about  much  which  we 
sometimes  feel  we  wish  to  know.  Let  us  be  certain  that 
we  have  caught  all  the  words  which  He  has  spoken.  That 
still  small  voice  is  not  heard  amid  the  babble  of  earth  and 
the  cries  of  our  own  hearts  ;  but  if  we  keep  silent  before 
the  Lord,  it  will  fill  the  silence  with  music. 

Then  we  have,  in  verse  sixteen,  how  and  why  Christ's 
friends  come  to  be  so.  The  reference  is  primarily  to  the 
apostles,  chosen  and  ordained  to  their  office,  and  in  their 
apostolic  labours  bringing  forth  abiding  fruit.  But  the 
saying  has  a  far  wider  application.  The  beginning  of  all 
friendship  between  Christ  and  men  lies  with  Him.  I 
suppose  that  every  man  who  has  felt  Christ's  love  will 
say,  whatever  his  theological  standpoint,  "  I  was  appre- 
hended of  Christ."  It  is  because  He  lays  His  seeking 
hand  upon  us  that  we  come  to  Him,  and  His  choice  of 
us  precedes  ours  of  Him. 

This  is  how  men  come  to  be  His  friends,  because, 
when  they  were  enemies,  He  gave  Himself  for  them,  and 
has  ever  since  been  sending  the  rays  of  His  love  to  draw 
us  to  Himself.  The  purpose  is  twofold.  First,  it  re- 
spects service  or  fruit.  "  That  ye  may  go."  That  word 
hints  at  parting,  gives  them  a  quasi-independent  position, 
and  yet  shows  the  real  union  in  separation.  Wherever 
we  go  in  obedience  to  His  will,  we  carry  His  friendship. 
"  That  ye  may  bring  forth  fruit."  This  recalls  the  parable. 
Both  ideas  of  keeping  commandments  and  bringing  forth 
fruit  are  needed  to  set  forth  the  whole  truth  of  Christian 
service.     It  is  more  than  effortless  growth  or  than  painful 


Less.  xviL]     The  Vine  and  the  Branches  157 

effort.  There  must  be  first  unity  of  life  with  Jesus,  and 
then  toil.  Both  are  essential.  "  That  your  fruit  should 
remain."  Nothing  corrupts  faster  than  fruit.  One  sort 
only  is  incorruptible.  The  only  activity  that  outlasts 
time  and  the  world  is  that  of  those  whose  deeds  are  begun, 
continued,  and  ended  in  Him. 

The  other  half  of  the  issues  of  friendship  with  Jesus  is 
the  satisfaction  of  our  desires,  stated  in  substantially  the 
same  terms  as  we  have  already  considered.  To  "  ask  in 
Christ's  name  "  is  more  than  merely  to  put  that  name  as 
a  kind  of  charm  at  the  end  of  our  prayers.  It  is  to  ask 
as — in  some  sense — His  representatives,  filled  with  His 
spirit,  as  well  as  in  reliance  on  His  sacrifice  and  inter- 
cession. Such  prayers  will  not  be  self-willed,  but  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  Christ,  and  therefore  of  God ; 
and  therefore  they  will  be  answered.  If  we  make  Christ's 
desires  ours,  and  our  desires  Christ's,  they  will  be  satis- 
fied. 


LESSON    XVIII 


The  Spirit  Convicting  the  World  and   Guiding  the 

Church 

St.  John  xvi.   1-15 


1.  "These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should 
not  be  offended, 

2.  They  shall  put  you  out  of 
the  synagogues:  yea,  the  time 
Cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth 
you  will  think  that  he  doeth 
God  service. 

3.  And  these  things  will  they 
do  unto  3''0u,  because  they  have 
not  known  the  Father,  nor 
Me. 

4*.  But  these  things  have  I 
told  you,  that  when  the  time 
shall  come,  ye  may  remember 
that  I  told  you  of  them.  And 
these  things  I  said  not  unto 
you  at  the  beginning,  because 
I  was  with  you. 

5.  But  now  I  go  My  way  to 
Him  that  sent  Me;  and  none 
of  you  asketh  Me,  Whither 
goest  Thou  ? 

6.  But  because  I  have  said 
these  things  unto  you,  sorrow 
hath   filled  your  heart. 

7.  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the 
truth  ;  It  is  expedient  for  you 
that  I  go  away :  for  if  I  go  not 
away,  the   Comforter  will  not 


come  unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart, 
I  will  send  Him  unto  you. 

8.  And  when  He  is  come,  He 
will  reprove  the  world  of  sin, 
and  of  righteousness,  and  of 
judgment : 

9.  Ofsin,  because  they  believe 
not  on  Me ; 

10.  Of  righteousness,  because 
I  go  to  My  Father,  and  ye  see 
Me  no  more. 

11.  Of  judgment,  because  the 
prince  of  this  world  is  judged. 

12.  I  have  yet  many  things 
to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot 
bear  them  now. 

13.  Howbeit  when  He,  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  is  come.  He 
will  guide  you  into  all  truth  :  for 
He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself; 
but  whatsoever  He  shall  hear, 
that  shall  He  speak  :  and  He 
will  show  you  things  to  come. 

14.  He  shall  glorify  Me :  for 
He  shall  receive  of  Mine,  and 
shall  show  it  unto  you. 

15.  All  things  that  the  Father 
hath  are  Mine  :  therefore  said 
I,  that  He  shall  take  of  Mine, 
and  shall  show  it  unto  you." 

THE   unbroken   flow  of  thought  and  many  subtle 
links  of  connection  in  this   wonderful    discourse 
baffle  attempts  to  group  its  deep  teachings  in  any  rigid 

158 


Less.  XVIII.]  The  Spirit  159 

sequence.  But  we  can  trace  in  this  lesson  three  main 
ideas,  which  may  assist  us  in  grasping  its  significance  if 
we  keep  in  view. 

I.  Verses  1-6  are  a  kind  of  landing-place  or  pause  in 
the  discourse,  mainly  looking  back  on  the  previous 
utterances,  and  contemplating  the  reasons  for  speech 
now  and  silence  before.  First,  in  verses  1-4  the  reasons 
for  speech  now  are  given  in  a  double  form, — "  that  ye 
should  not  be  made  to  stumble"  (ver.  i),  and  "that 
when  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may  remember  that  I  told 
you  of  them  "  (ver.  4).  These  two  views  of  the  reasons 
for  speech  are  separated  by  a  reiteration,  in  more  emphatic 
form,  of  the  dark  prospect  of  persecution. 

In  the  previous  chapter  the  disciples  were  taught  to 
expect  the  hatred  of  "  the  world,"  but  here  that  world 
is  formally  identified  with  the  apostate  Jewish  Church. 
"The  synagogue"  is  "the  world."  The  organised  body 
calling  itself  God's  Church  may  become  the  most  ram- 
pant enemy  of  Christ's  people  and  the  fullest  embodiment 
of  all  that  makes  "  the  world."  Such  a  body  will  do  the 
cruellest  things  religiously,  and  offer  up  Christ's  servants 
as  sacrifices  to  God.  That  is  partly  aggravation  and 
partly  alleviation  of  the  sin.  A  Church  which  has 
become  "  world "  will  persecute  as  a  duty ;  and  the 
reason  is  that,  although  it  may  be  rigidly  orthodox  and 
versed  in  theology,  it  "  does  not  know  "  either  God  or 
Christ.  It  does  not  know  the  former  because  it  will  not 
know  the  latter. 

The  first  reason  which  Jesus  gives  for  present  speech 
is  that  the  disciples  might  be  kept  from  stumbling  when 
the  forewarned  evils  burst  on  them.  The  stumbling- 
block  for  them  in  finding  themselves  at  odds  with  the 


i6o  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xvi.  1-15 

synagogue  as  to  the  claims  of  Jesus  is  of  such  magnitude 
as  we  can  scarcely  realise.  But  forewarned  is  forearmed, 
and  that  is  as  true  about  our  difficulties  as  about  theirs. 
If  we  try  to  follow  Christ,  we  shall  often  have  to  stand 
in  such  a  very  small  minority,  and  have  against  us  such 
a  mass  who  take  such  a  different  view  of  duty,  that 
we  shall  be  tempted  to  distrust  our  own  consciences  and 
to  yield.  We  shall  be  heartened  to  stand  firm  if  we 
remember  Christ's  warnings.  So  is  it  also  in  regard  to 
other  sorrows  and  trials.  We  have  fair  and  full  warning 
of  them.  Jesus  does  not  enlist  recruits  by  rose-tinted 
pictures  of  delights  and  concealment  of  trials  in  His 
service,  but  lets  us  understand  from  the  beginning  that 
we  must  make  up  our  minds  to  antagonisms  that  we 
might  otherwise  escape,  and  "enter  the  kingdom  through 
much  tribulation."  Sorrow  anticipated  is  half  overcome. 
Sorrow  foretold  gives  confidence  in  our  Guide.  He  has 
told  us  this,  and  He  is  right.  If  there  were  anything 
worse,  He  would  have  told  us,  and  He  will  be  right,  too, 
in  His  predictions  of  good.  He  foretold  Marah  and  its 
bitter  waters ;  shall  we  not  trust  Him  when  He  foretells 
Elim  and  its  wells  and  palms  ? 

"When  their  hour  is  come,"  says  Jesus.  "Their 
hour  "  is  their  appointed  time.  Who  appointed  it  ?  He 
did,  and  therefore  their  punctual  arrival  up  to  time 
shows  that  they  come  in  obedience  to  Him.  Further, 
we  have  His  reasons  for  past  silence, — "  Not  unto  you 
from  the  beginning,  for  I  was  with  you."  There  had 
been  passing  hints  before,  but  no  such  detailed  exhibi- 
tion, and  that  because  He  was  still  with  them.  That 
expresses  superb  confidence  in  His  power  to  shield 
them.     No  harm  can  come  as  long  as  He  is  with  them. 


Less.  XVIII.]  The  Spirit  i6i 

For  US;  too,  sorrows  though  foretold  in  general  terms,  are 
largely  hidden  till  near.  There  needs  an  adaptation  of 
ear  to  word,  which  only  experience  gives.  Great  tracts 
of  Scripture  He  dark  to  us  till  life  explains  them,  and 
then  they  come  on  us  with  the  force  of  a  new  revelation, 
like  the  messages  which  of  old  were  sent  by  a  roll  of 
parchment  coiled  upon  a  baton  and  then  written  upon, 
and  were  unintelligible  unless  the  receiver  had  a  corre- 
sponding roller  to  wrap  them  round.  Thank  God  for 
the  loving  reticence  as  well  as  for  the  loving  frankness  of 
His  forewarnings  of  sorrow  ! 

One  more  thought  lies  here  ;  namely,  that  the  imperfect 
apprehension  of  Christ's  words  leads  to  sorrow  instead 
of  joy  (vers.  5,  6).  He  had  been  telling  them  that  He 
was  "going,"  and  all  that  they  thought  was  "Going! 
then  what  is  to  become  of  us  ?  "  If  there  had  been 
more  love  to  Him,  and  they  had  said  "  Going  !  then 
what  is  to  become  of  Him  ? "  sorrow  would  not  have 
filled  their  hearts,  but  joy  would  have  flooded  out  sorrow, 
because  He  went  to  Him  that  sent  Him,  and  therefore 
went  with  His  work  done.  The  steadfast  contemplation 
of  the  ascended  Christ  is  a  sovereign  antidote  against 
solitude,  the  victory  over  a  hostile  world,  the  cure  for 
every  sorrow. 

H.  Verses  7-1 1  set  forth  one  aspect  of  that  gift  of  the 
Spirit,  which  has  already  been  promised  in  these  parting 
words;  namely,  its  operation  on  "the  world"  through 
the  disciples.  Think  of  these  eleven  poor  men  and  their 
peasant  Leader  at  that  moment.  They  were  neither  very 
wise  nor  strong,  and  outside  that  upper  room  there  was 
scarcely  a  creature  who  had  the  least  belief  in  either 
Him  or  them.     They  had  everything  against  them,  and, 

II 


i62  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xvi.  1-15 

most  of  all,  their  own  hearts,  while  they  had  nothing 
for  them  but  their  Master's  promises.  They  were 
desolate  at  the  thought  of  His  going.  And  now  He 
bids  them  think  of  that  going  away  as  pure  gain  for 
them,  and  explains  that  staggering  statement  by  the 
assurance  of  the  coming  of  the  Spirit. 

Paul  said,  "  To  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful 
for  you."  Jesus  said,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away."  Why  this  difference  ?  Because  of  the  essential 
difference  of  the  relation  of  the  two  to  those  whom 
they  left.  Paul's  work  ended  when  he  went ;  Jesus' 
continued  after  He  went.  He  is  nearer  us  w^hen  He  has 
left  us,  and  works  more  mightily  for  us  after  departure. 
Death  drops  an  iron  gate  between  the  dead  and  the 
living,  through  which  no  helping  hand  can  be  stretched, 
but  Christ's  influence  flows  unchecked  through  the 
grated  door.  Who  is  He  of  whom  this  is  true,  and  what 
sort  of  work  is  that  which  is  continued  and  perfected 
after  death  ? 

Here  again  we  meet  the  declaration  that  the  Spirit's 
coming  is  inseparably  connected  with  Christ's  departure. 
The  complete  work  of  Christ  was  the  necessary  pre- 
liminary, and,  in  some  sense,  the  procuring  cause  of  that 
gift ;  and  since  the  Word  is  the  Spirit's  instrument,  the 
revelation  must  be  complete  before  the  application  of  it 
can  begin  in  its  full  energy.  Christ  must  be  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  before  He  can  bestow  that  Spirit,  ascending 
on  high  that  He  may  receive  for,  and  give  the  gift  to, 
spirits  fitted  to  receive  it  by  faith  in  His  completed 
work. 

It  is  by  being  "  sent  unto  you  "  that  the  Spirit  is  to 
"convict  the  world";  that  is  to  say,  the  subject  in  hand 


Less.  XVIII.]  The  Spirit  163 

here  is  the  conviction  wrought  by  the  Spirit  using  Chris- 
tian men  as  its  organs.  Note  the  process  of  "  convic- 
tion," which  is  no  mere  demonstration  of  truth.  Certain 
facts  are  borne  in  upon  understanding  and  conscience, 
and  along  with  these,  the  conviction  of  error  and  fault 
in  relation  to  them.  "  He  shall  convict  the  world  in 
respect  of  sin."  That  is  the  first  step  towards  the  world's 
ceasing  to  be  "world."  Apart  from  the  conviction  of 
sin  which  is  characteristic  of  the  gospel,  men  have 
wholly  inadequate  notions  of  what  it  is,  its  inwardness, 
universality,  and  gravity  as  affecting  man's  whole  being 
and  relation  to  God.  Every  blunder  and  heresy  that 
leads  men  away  from  the  true  conception  of  Christ  and 
His  work  may  be  traced  to  defective  notions  or  realisa- 
tion of  the  fact  of  sin. 

After  the  conviction  of  sin  comes  the  dawning  of  the 
sunrise  of  righteousness.  Obviously,  "  the  world  "  is  the 
subject  throughout  these  verses.  It  is  to  be  convinced, 
and  it  must  be  its  sin  and  its  righteousness  and  its 
judgment  which  are  in  view.  There  is  but  one  way  by 
which  a  conviction  of  righteousness  as  mine  can  follow 
one  of  sin  as  mine  ;  namely,  by  the  sight  of  a  righteous- 
ness given  from  above,  to  sweep  away  my  sin,  and  make 
me  righteous  as  Christ  is.  That  conviction  will  not  be 
ours  unless  the  other  has  gone  before.  The  one  convic- 
tion without  the  other  is  misery ;  the  second  without 
the  first  is  irrelevant,  as  medicine  to  a  man  that  thinks 
himself  well. 

Finally  comes  the  conviction  of  "  judgment."  If  there 
are  in  the  world  sin  and  righteousness,  and  the  two 
collide,  what  then  ?  Which  will  go  down  ?  Righteous- 
ness will  triumph,  and  there  will  be  "  judgment,"  which 


164  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xvi.  1-15 

will  destroy  the  sin.  There  is  a  continual  judgment 
going  on  now,  and  there  is  a  future  one  beyond  the 
grave.  That  is  a  terrible,  but  also  a  blessed,  thought ; 
terrible  if  I  do  not  make  that  righteousness  mine, 
blessed  if  I  do,  since  it  assures  me  that  in  the  one  case 
I  must  perish  with  the  sin  to  which  I  cling,  and  in  the 
other  that  I  shall  be  separated  from  all  my  evil,  and 
filled  with  perfect  righteousness. 

This  threefold  conviction  which  the  Spirit  in  believers 
will  work  in  the  world  rests  on  three  facts  :  one  of  ex- 
perience, one  of  history,  and  one  of  revelation, — all 
three  having  reference  to  Jesus  and  His  relation  to  men. 
These  are,  the  world's  unbelief,  Christ's  ascension,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  Prince  of  the  world.  Unbelief  in 
Jesus  is  the  climax  and  strongest  proof  of  sin.  Strange 
words  !  Here  is  a  Man  who  dares  to  say  that,  full  as  the 
world  is  of  hideous  crimes,  a  mere  negative  and  inward 
thing,  namely,  men's  rejection  of  Him,  is  worst  of  all. 
What  does  the  rejection  of  Christ  betray  the  rejecter  to 
be  ?  He  turns  away  from  the  loftiest,  tenderest  revela- 
tion of  God's  love,  seeing  nothing  there  to  desire. 
Surely  that  augurs  criminal  blindness.  He  rejects  the 
blessings  of  forgiveness,  cleansing,  and  purity,  and  of  a 
heaven  which  is  the  perfection  of  these.  Surely  that 
augurs  earthly-mindedness  gross  and  ignoble.  The 
essence  of  sin  is  living  to  self  Belief  in  Christ  is  the 
surrender  of  self  So  unbelief  is  a  "  typical  "  sin  in  its 
"  purest  "  form.  The  mother-tincture  is  there  concen- 
trated which,  variously  coloured  and  perfumed,  makes 
the  evil  of  all  sins. 

There  is  a  fact  of  history  as  the  ground  of  the  convic- 
tion of  righteousness.     He  "  goes  to  the  Father  and  we 


Less.  XVIII.]  The  Spirit  165 

see  Him  no  more."  He  speaks  as  if  the  process  had 
begun.  His  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension  are  its 
stages.  The  apostles'  great  argument  to  convince  the 
world  of  righteousness  was  to  be  the  ascended  Christ. 
With  the  supernatural  fact  of  His  ascension  and  abode 
with  the  Father  stands  or  falls  His  power  of  giving  us 
His  own  righteousness.  If  He  cannot  give  me  that, 
what  does  His  having  had  it  matter  to  me  ?  Nothing. 
But  if  He  is  above  to  bestow  upon  us  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  Life  in  Him,  which  will  make  us  free  from  the 
law  of  sin,  then  we  may  cherish  hope  that  we  too  shall 
be  made  like  Him.  If  He  has  gone  to  the  Father,  His 
righteousness  may  be  the  world's ;  if  He  has  not,  it  is 
useless  to  any  but  Himself. 

A  fact  made  known  only  by  revelation,  the  judgment 
of  the  Prince  of  the  world,  is  the  ground  of  the  final 
conviction.  The  world  has  a  Prince.  However  ludicrous 
vulgar  superstitions  may  have  made  the  notion,  there 
is  nothing  ridiculous,  nor  anything  which  we  have  the 
right  to  call  incredible,  in  Christ's  solemn  declaration 
that  the  kingdom  of  darkness  has  a  King.  The  Cross 
was  the  judgment  of  that  Prince,  as  is  frequently  taught 
in  Scripture.  Then  the  power  of  evil  was  broken  in  its 
centre.  The  serpent's  head  has  been  bruised,  though 
still  it  writhes  and  swings  "  the  scaly  horror  of  its  folded 
tail."  But  the  strong  man  is  bound,  and  his  house  is 
being  spoiled.  The  judgment  of  the  Prince  prophesies 
the  judgment  of  the  world.  That  thought  ought  to  be 
a  hope,  but  it  often  is  a  fear.  Whether  hope  or  fear, 
it  is  a  fact  as  certain  as  the  Cross  in  the  past  or  the 
throne  in  the  present.  If  we  know  our  own  sin,  and 
Christ's  righteousness   as    ours,   we    can  rejoice  in  the 


i66  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xvi.  1-15 

hope  of  the  final  judgment,  and  have  boldness  before 
Him  when  it  comes. 

III.  I  can  but  glance  at  the  final  portion  of  the  lesson, 
in  which  the  aspect  of  the  Spirit's  work  as  the  Guide 
into  all  truth  for  believing  souls  is  presented  (vers.  T2-15). 
Note  the  avowed  incompleteness  of  Christ's  own  teaching 
(ver.  12).  How  does  this  representation  agree  with  the 
other  that  He  had  made  known  "  all  things  whatsoever 
He  had  heard  of  the  Father  "  ?  There  is  a  difference 
between  bud  and  flower,  principles  and  their  develop- 
ment. He  did  give  the  fundamental,  seminal  principles, 
but  not  their  unfolding,  their  consequences,  or  their 
mutual  relations.  As  to  these,  there  was  much  to  be 
said  which  the  disciples  were  not  able  to  "  carry." 

People  tell  us,  "Your  modern  theology  isn't  in  the 
Gospels ;  we  stick  by  Jesus,  not  by  Paul."  I  do  not 
admit  that  the  silence  of  Jesus  about  His  sacrificial 
death  and  the  atoning  power  of  it  is  so  absolute ;  but 
I  do  admit  that  He  says  little  about  it.  What  then  ? 
That  reticence  is  exactly  what  He  told  us  we  should  find 
in  His  words.  The  Cross  had  to  be  endured  before  it 
could  be  explained.  Jesus  came  to  be  the  sacrifice,  not 
to  speak  about  it.  Those  who  say  that  they  take  His 
words  as  the  only  source  of  their  Christianity  are  flying 
in  the  face  of  His  words  in  saying  so ;  for  He  proclaimed 
their  incompleteness,  and  referred  us  for  fuller  knowledge 
to  a  subsequent  teacher. 

Next  we  have  declared  the  completeness  of  the  truth 
into  which  the  Spirit  leads.  Mark  the  personality  of 
the  Spirit, — "  He,"  not  "  it."  Note  His  designation  as 
"  the  Spirit  of  truth,"  which  is  His  characteristic  and 
weapon.      Note  His   office — "  shall   guide,"   as  with  a 


Less.  XVIII.]  The  Spirit  167 

loving  hand  put  out  to  lead,  so  suggesting  the  gracious- 
ness,  gentleness,  and  gradualness  of  the  teaching.  Note 
the  width  of  the  promise,  "  all  truth."  That  is  not  a 
promise  of  omniscience,  but  the  assurance  of  gradual 
and  growing  acquaintance  with  the  spiritual  truth  revealed 
in  Jesus.  Not  to-day,  nor  to-morrow,  will  it  all  be  known, 
but  step  by  step  we  shall  be  led. 

"He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself;  but  whatsoever  He 
shall  hear,  that  shall  He  speak."  The  Spirit  stands  to 
Jesus  as  Jesus  stands  to  the  Father.  Where  does  the 
Spirit  "  hear  "  ?  In  the  depths  of  Deity.  And  especially 
"  things  to  come  "  would  be  made  known — the  evolving 
glory  of  the  kingdom,  and  "  all  the  wonder  that  should 
be  " — in  the  new  order  which  Christ  should  establish. 
It  might  appear  as  if  two  independent  sources  of 
illumination  were  set  forth.  Therefore  in  the  last  verses 
of  the  lesson  we  see  the  union  of  the  two  beams.  "  He 
shall  glorify  Me."  Think  of  a  man  saying  that !  So 
fair  is  Christ  that  to  make  Him  known  is  to  make  Him 
glorious.  "  He  shall  take  of  Mine."  All  the  Spirit  brings 
is  Christ's  ;  His  office  is  not  to  give  new  revelation,  but 
to  interpret  that  given.  He  guides  into  "  the  truth," 
which  Jesus  declared  Himself  to  be. 

"  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine :  therefore 
said  I,  that  He  shall  take  of  Mine,  and  shall  show  it 
unto  you."  What  awful  words  !  A  Divine  teaching 
Spirit  can  only  teach  concerning  God,  and  Christ  here 
explains  the  preceding  words,  in  which,  if  He  were  but 
human,  He  had  given  that  Spirit  an  unworthy  office,  by 
the  solemn,  articulate  claim  that  whatever  is  God's  is 
His,  and  whatever  is  His  is  God's.  He  puts  out  an 
unpresumptuous  hand  and   lays  hold   on   all  the  con- 


i68  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.xvi.  1-15 

stellated  glories  of  the  Divine  nature,  saying,  "  They 
are  Mine";  and  the  Father  admits  the  claim,  and 
answers,  "  Son,  Thou  art  ever  with  Me,  and  all  that  I 
have  is  Thine."  Let  us  add  our  "  Amen,"  and  trust  our 
all  to  Him  who  makes  us  possessors  of  all  that  is  His, 
that  so  we  may  be  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God." 


LESSON    XIX 
The  Intercessor 

St.  John  xvii.  1-19 


1.  "These  words  spake  Jesus, 
and  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven, 
and  said,  Father,  the  hour  is 
come ;  glorify  Thy  Son,  that 
Thy  Son  also  may  glorify  Thee  : 

2.  As  Thou  hast  given  Him 
power  over  all  flesh,  that  He 
should  give  eternal  life  to  as 
many  as  Thou  hast  given  Him. 

3.  And  this  is  life  eternal, 
that  they  might  know  Thee  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  Thou  hast  sent. 

4.  I  have  glorified  Thee  on 
the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the 
work  which  Thou  gavest  Me  to 
do. 

5.  And  now,  O  Father,  glorify 
Thou  Me  with  Thine  own  self 
with  the  glory  which  I  had 
with  Thee  before  the  world 
was. 

6.  I  have  manifested  Thy 
name  unto  the  men  which  Thou 
gavest  Me  out  of  the  world  : 
Thine  they  were,  and  Thou 
gavest  them  Me ;  and  they  have 
kept  Thy  word. 

7.  Nowthey  have  known  that 
all  things  whatsoever  Thou  hast 
given  Me  are  of  Thee. 

8.  For  I  have  given  unto 
them   the    words  which   Thou 


gavest  Me ;  and  they  have 
received  them,  and  have  known 
surely  that  I  came  out  from 
Thee,  and  they  have  believed 
that  Thou  didst  send  Me. 

9.  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray 
not  for  the  world,  but  for  them 
which  Thou  hast  given  Me ;  for 
they  are  Thine. 

10.  And  all  Mine  are  Thine, 
and  Thine  are  Mine ;  and  I  am 
glorified  in  them. 

11.  And  now  I  am  no  more 
in  the  world,  but  these  are  in 
the  world,  and  I  come  to  Thee. 
Holy  Father,  keep  through 
Thine  own  name  those  whom 
Thou  hast  given  Me,  that  they 
may  be  one,  as  we  are. 

12.  While  I  was  with  them 
in  the  world,  I  kept  them  in 
Thy  name :  those  that  Thou 
gavest  Me  I  have  kept,  and 
none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the 
son  of  perdition  ;  that  the 
Scripture  might  be  fulfilled. 

13.  And  now  come  I  to  Thee  ; 
and  these  things  I  speak  in  the 
world,  that  they  might  have 
My  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves. 

14.  I  have  given  them  Thy 
word ;  and  the  world  hath 
hated  them,   because  they  are 


169 


T70 


The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.xvii.  1-19 


not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am 
not  of  the  world. 

15.  I  pray  not  that  Thou 
shouldest  take  them  out  of  the 
world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest 
keep  them  from  the  evil. 

1 6.  They  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 


17.  Sanctify  them  through 
Thy  truth  :  Thy  word  is  truth. 

18.  As  Thou  hast  sent  Me 
into  the  world,  even  so  have  I 
also  sent  them  into  the  world. 

19.  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanc- 
tify Myself,  that  they  also  might 
be  sanctified  through  the  truth." 


WE  may  well  despair  of  doing  justice,  in  a  lesson, 
to  the  deep  thoughts  of  this  prayer,  which 
volumes  would  not  exhaust.  Who  is  worthy  to  speak 
or  to  write  about  such  sacred  words  ?  Perhaps  we  may 
best  gain  some  glimpses  of  their  great  and  holy  sublimity 
by  trying  to  gather  their  teaching  round  the  centres  of 
the  three  petitions, — "glorify"  (vers,  i,  5),  "keep"  (ver. 
11),  and  "sanctify"  (ver.  17). 

I.  In  verses  1-5  Jesus  prays  for  Himself,  that  He 
may  be  restored  to  His  pre-incarnate  glory  ;  but  yet  the 
prayer  desires  not  so  much  that  glory  as  affecting  Him- 
self, as  His  being  fitted  thereby  for  completing  His  work 
of  manifesting  the  Father.  There  are  three  main  points 
in  these  verses, — the  petition,  its  purpose,  and  its  grounds. 

As  to  the  first,  the  repetition  of  the  request  in  verses 
I  and  5  is  significant,  especially  if  we  note  that  in  the 
former  the  language  is  impersonal,  "  Thy  Son,"  and 
continues  so  till  verse  4,  where  "  I  "  and  "  Me  "  appear. 
In  verses  1-3,  then,  the  prayer  rests  upon  the  ideal 
relations  of  Father  and  Son,  realised  in  Jesus,  while  in 
verses  4  and  5  the  personal  element  is  emphatically 
presented.  The  two  petitions  are  in  their  scope  identical. 
The  "  glorifying  "  in  the  former  is  more  fully  explained 
in  the  latter  as  being  that  which  He  possessed  in  that 
ineffable  fellowship  with  the  Father,  not  merely  before 
incarnation,  but  before  creation.     In  His  manhood  He 


Less.  XIX.]  The  Intercessor  171 

possessed  and  manifested  the  "glory  as  of  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father,  full  'of  grace  and  truth";  but 
that  glory,  lustrous  though  it  was,  was  pale,  and  humilia- 
tion compared  with  the  light  inaccessible,  which  shone 
around  the  eternal  Word  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father. 
Yet  He  who  prayed  was  the  same  Person  who  had 
walked  in  that  light  before  time  was,  and  now  in  human 
flesh  asked  for  what  no  mere  manhood  could  bear. 
The  first  form  of  the  petition  implies  that  such  a  par- 
taking in  the  uncreated  glory  of  the  Father  is  the  natural 
prerogative  of  One  who  is  "  the  Son,"  while  the  second 
implies  that  it  is  the  appropriate  recompense  of  the 
earthly  life  and  character  of  the  man  Jesus. 

The  petition  not  only  reveals  the  conscious  Divinity 
of  the  Son,  but  also  His  willing  acceptance  of  the  cross  ; 
for  the  glorifying  sought  is  that  reached  through  death, 
resurrection,  and  ascension,  and  that  introductory  clause 
"  the  hour  is  come  "  points  to  the  impending  sufferings 
as  the  first  step  in  the  answer  to  the  petition.  The 
crucifixion  is  always  thus  treated  in  this  Gospel,  as  being 
both  the  lowest  humiliation  and  the  "  lifting  up  "  of  the 
Son  ;  and  here  He  is  reaching  out  His  hand,  as  it  were, 
to  draw  His  sufferings  nearer.  So  willingly  and  desir- 
ingly  did  this  Isaac  climb  the  mount  of  sacrifice.  Both 
elements  of  the  great  saying  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  are  here  :  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before 
Him  [He]  endured  the  cross." 

The  purpose  of  the  petition  is  to  be  noted;  namely, 
the  Son's  glorifying  of  the  Father.  No  taint  of  selfish- 
ness corrupted  His  prayer.  Not  for  Himself,  but  for  men, 
did  He  desire  His  glory.  He  sought  return  to  that  serene 
and  lofty  seat,  and  the  elevation  of  His  weak  manhood 


172  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xvii.  1-19 

to  the  throne,  not  because  He  was  wearied  of  earth  or 
impatient  of  weakness,  sorrows,  or  Hmitations,  but  that 
He  might  more  fully  manifest,  from  that  glory,  the  Father's 
name.     To  make  the  Father  known  is  to  make  the  Father 
glorious ;  for  He  is  all  fair  and  lovely.     That  revelation 
of  Divine  perfection,  majesty,  and  sweetness  was  the  end 
of  Christ's  earthly  life,  and  is  the  end  of  His  heavenly 
Divine  activity.     He  needs  to  reassume  the  prerogatives 
of  which  He  needed  to  divest  Himself,  and  both  neces- 
sities are  one.     He  had  to  lay  aside  His  garments  and 
assume  the  form  of  a  servant  that  He  might  make  God 
known ;  but,  that  revelation  being  complete.  He  must 
take  His  garments  and  sit  down  again,  before  He  can  go 
on  to  tell  all  the  meaning  of  what  He  has  "  done  unto  us." 
The  ground  of  the  petition  is  twofold.     Verses  2  and 
3  represent  the  glory  sought  for,  as  the  completion  of 
the   Son's   mission   and   task.     Already    He   had   been 
endowed  with  authority  over  all  flesh,  for  the  purpose 
of  bestowing  eternal  life ;  and  that  eternal  Hfe  stands  in 
the  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  the  same  as  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ.     The  present  gift  to  the  Son  and  its 
purpose  are  thus  precisely  parallel  with  the  further  gift 
desired,  and  that  is  the  necessary  carrying  out  of  this. 
The  authority  and  office  of  the  incarnate  Christ  demand 
the  glory  of  and   consequent  further  manifestation   by 
the  glorified  Christ.     The  life  which  He  comes  to  give 
is  a  life  which  flows  from  the  revelation  He  makes  of  the 
Father,  received,  not  as  mere  intellectual  knowledge,  but 
as  loving  acquaintance. 

The  second  ground  for  the  petition  is  in  verse  4,  the 
actual  perfect  fulfilment  by  the  Son  of  that  mission. 
What  untroubled  consciousness  of  sinless  obedience  and 


Less.  XIX.]  The  Intercessor  173 

transparent  shining  through  His  life  of  the  Father's  like- 
ness and  will  He  must  have  had  who  could  thus  assert 
His  complete  realisation  of  that  Father's  revealing  pur- 
pose, as  the  ground  of  His  deserving  and  desiring 
participation  in  the  Divine  glory  !  Surely  such  words 
are  either  the  acme  of  self-righteousness  or  the  self- 
revealing  speech  of  the  Son  of  God. 

n.  With  verse  6  we  pass  to  the  more  immediate  refer- 
ence to  the  disciples,  and  the  context  from  thence  to 
verse  15  may  be  regarded  as  all  clustered  round  the 
second  petition,  "keep  "  (ver.  11).  That  central  request 
is  preceded  and  followed  by  consideration  of  the  dis- 
ciples' relation  to  Christ  and  to  the  world,  which  may  be 
regarded  as  its  grounds.  The  whole  context  preceding 
the  petition  may  be  summed  up  in  two  grounds  for  the 
prayer, — the  former  set  forth  at  length,  and  the  latter 
summarily ;  the  one  being  the  genuine,  though  incom- 
plete, discipleship  of  the  men  for  whom  Christ  prays 
(vers.  6-10),  and  the  latter  their  desolate  condition 
without  Jesus  (ver.   11). 

It  is  beautiful  to  see  how  our  Lord  here  credits  the 
disciples  with  genuine  grasp,  both  in  heart  and  head,  of 
His  teaching.  He  had  shortly,  before  had  to  say,  "  Have 
I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not 
known  Me  ?  "  and  soon  *'  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled." 
But  beneath  misconception  and  inadequate  apprehension 
there  lived  faith  and  love ;  and  He  saw  the  full  corn  in 
the  ear,  when  only  the  green  blade  was  visible,  pushing 
itself  above  the  surface.  We  may  take  comfort  from  this 
generous  estimate  of  imperfect  disciples.  If  He  did  not 
tend,  instead  of  quenching,  dimly  burning  wicks,  where 
would  He  have  "  lights  in  the  world  "? 


174  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xvii.  1-19 

Verse  6  lays  down  the  beginning  of  discipleship  as 
threefold :  Christ's  act  in  revealing ;  the  Father's,  in 
giving  men  to  Jesus  ;  and  men's,  in  keeping  the  Father's 
word.  "  Thy  word  "  is  the  whole  revelation  by  Christ, 
which  is,  as  this  Gospel  so  often  re'peats,  not  His  own, 
but  the  Father's.  These  three  facts  underlying  disciple- 
ship are  pleas  for  the  petition  to  follow ;  for  unless  the 
feeble  disciples  are  "  kept "  in  the  name,  as  in  a  fortress, 
Christ's  work  of  revelation  is  neutralised,  the  Father's 
gift  to  Him  made  of  none  effect,  and  the  incipient  dis- 
ciples will  not  "  keep  "  His  word.  The  plea  is,  in  effect, 
"  Forsake  not  the  works  of  Thine  own  hands  " ;  and,  like 
all  Christ's  prayers,  it  has  a  promise  in  its  depths,  since 
God  does  not  begin  what  He  will  not  finish ;  and  it  has 
a  warning,  too,  that  we  cannot  keep  ourselves  unless  a 
stronger  hand  keeps  us. 

Verses  7  and  8  carry  on  the  portraiture  of  discipleship, 
and  thence  draw  fresh  pleas.  The  blessed  result  of 
accepting  Christ's  revelation  is  a  knowledge,  built  on 
happy  experience,  and,  like  the  acquaintance  of  heart 
with  heart,  issuing  in  the  firm  conviction  that  Christ's 
words  and  deeds  are  from  God.  Why  does  He  say,  "  All 
things  whatsoever  Thou  hast  given,"  instead  of  simply 
"  that  I  have  "  or  "  declare  "  ?  Probably  it  is  the  natural 
expression  of  His  consciousness,  the  lowly  utterance  of 
His  obedience,  claiming  nothing  as  His  own,  and  yet 
claiming  all,  while  the  subsequent  clause  "  are  of  Thee  " 
expresses  the  disciples'  conviction.  In  like  fashion  our 
Lord,  in  verse  8,  declares  that  His  words,  in  their  mani- 
foldness  (contrast  ver.  6,  "Thy  word"),  were  all  received 
by  Him  from  the  Father,  and  accepted  by  the  disciples, 
with  the  result  that  they  came,  as  before,  to  "  know  " 


Less.  XIX.]  The  Intercesso  175 

by  inward  acquaintance  with  Him  as  a  person,  and  so 
to  have  the  Divinity  of  His  person  certified  by  experi- 
ence, and  further  came  to  "  beHeve  "  that  God  had  sent 
Him,  which  was  a  conviction  arrived  at  by  faith.  So 
knowledge,  which  is  personal  experience  and  acquaint- 
ance, and  faith,  which  rises  to  the  heights  of  the  Father's 
purpose,  come  from  the  humble  acceptance  of  the  Christ 
declaring  the  Father's  name.  First  faith,  then  knowledge, 
and  then  a  fuller  faith  built  on  it,  and  that  faith  in  its 
turn  passing  into  knowledge  (ver.  25), — these  are  the 
blessings  belonging  to  the  growth  of  true  discipleship, 
and  are  discerned  by  the  loving  eye  of  Jesus  in  very 
imperfect  followers. 

In  verse  9  Jesus  assumes  the  great  office  of  Intercessor. 
"  I  pray  for  them  "  is  not  so  much  prayer  as  His  solemn 
presentation  of  Himself  before  the  Father  as  the  High 
Priest  of  His  people.  It  marks  an  epoch  in  His  work. 
The  task  of  bringing  God  to  man  is  substantially  com- 
plete. That  of  bringing  men  by  supplication  to  God  is 
now  to  begin.  It  is  the  revelation  of  the  permanent 
office  of  the  departed  Lord.  Moses  on  the  Mount  holds 
up  the  rod,  and  Israel  prevails  (Exod.  xvii.  9).  The 
limitation  of  this  prayer  to  the  disciples  applies  only  to 
the  special  occasion,  and  has  no  bearing  on  the  sweep 
of  His  redeeming  purpose  or  the  desires  of  His  all-pitying 
heart.  The  reasons  for  His  intercession  follow  in  verses 
9-1 1  a.  The  disciples  are  the  Father's,  and  continue 
so  even  when  "  given  "  to  Christ,  in  accordance  with 
the  community  of  possession  which  oneness  of  nature 
and  perfectness  of  love  establish  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  God  cannot  but  care  for  those  who  are  His. 
The  Son  cannot  but  pray  for  those  who  are  His.     Their 


176  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xvii.  1-19 

having  recognised  Him  for  what  He  was  binds  Him  to 
pray  for  them.  He  is  glorified  in  disciples,  and  if  we 
show  forth  His  character  He  will  be  our  Advocate. 
The  last  reason  for  His  prayer  is  the  loneliness  of  the 
disciples  and  their  exposure  in  the  world  without  Him. 
His  departure  impelled  Him  to  intercede,  both  as  being 
a  leaving  them  defenceless  and  as  being  an  entrance 
into  the  heavenly  state  of  communion  with  the  Father. 

In  the  petition  itself  (ver.  11),  observe  the  invocation 
"  Holy  Father,"  with  special  reference  to  the  prayer  for 
preservation  from  the  corruption  of  the  world.  God's 
holiness  is  the  pledge  that  He  will  make  us  holy,  since 
He  is  Father  as  well.  Observe  the  substance  of  the 
request,  that  the  disciples  should  be  kept,  as  in  a  fortress, 
within  the  enclosing  circle  of  the  name  which  God  has 
given  to  Jesus.  The  name  is  the  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  nature.  It  was  given  to  Jesus,  inasmuch  as  He, 
the  Word,  had  from  the  beginning  the  office  of  revealing 
God ;  and  that  which  was  spoken  of  the  angel  of  the 
covenant  is  true  in  highest  reality  of  Jesus  :  "  My  name 
is  in  Him."  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower  : 
the  righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe." 

Observe  the  issue  of  this  keeping ;  namely,  the  unity 
of  believers.  The  depths  of  that  saying  are  beyond  us, 
but  we  can  at  least  see  thus  far, — that  the  true  bond  of 
unity  is  the  name  in  which  all  who  are  one  are  kept ;  that 
the  pattern  of  the  true  unity  of  believers  is  the  ineffable 
union  of  Father  and  Son,  which  is  oneness  of  will  and 
nature,  along  with  distinctness  of  persons ;  and  that 
therefore  this  purpose  goes  far  deeper  than  outward  unity 
of  organisation. 

Then  follow  other  pleas,  which  are  principally  drawn 


Less.  XIX.]  The  Intercessor  177 

from  Christ's  relation  to  the  disciples,  now  ending; 
whereas  the  former  ones  were  chiefly  deduced  from  the 
disciples'  relation  to  Him.  He  can  no  more  do  what 
He  has  done,  and  commits  it  to  the  Father.  Happy 
we  if  we  can  leave  our  unfinished  tasks  to  be  taken  up 
by  God,  and  trust  those  whom  we  leave  undefended  to 
be  shielded  by  Him  !  "  I  kept  "  is,  in  the  Greek,  expres 
sive  of  continuous,  repeated  action,  while  "  I  guarded" 
gives  the  single  issue  of  the  many  acts  of  keeping.  Jesus 
keeps  His  disciples  now  as  He  did  then,  by  sedulous, 
patient,  reiterated  acts,  so  that  they  are  safe  from  evil. 
But  note  where  He  kept, — "  in  Thy  name."  That  is 
our  place  of  safety,  a  sure  defence  and  inexpugnable 
fortress.  One,  indeed,  was  lost ;  but  that  was  not  any 
slur  on  Christ's  keeping,  but  resulted  from  his  own  evil 
nature,  as  being  "  a  son  of  loss  "  (if  we  may  so  preserve 
the  affinity  of  words  in  the  Greek),  and  from  the  Divine 
decree  from  of  old.  Sharply  defined  and  closely  united 
are  the  two  apparent  contradictories  of  man's  free  choice 
of  destruction  and  God's  foreknowledge.  Christ  saw 
them  in  harmony,  and  we   shall  do  so  one  day. 

Then  the  flow  of  the  prayer  recurs  to  former  thoughts. 
Going  away  so  soon  He  yearned  to  leave  them  sharers 
of  His  own  emotions  in  the  prospect  of  His  departure  to 
the  Father,  and  therefore  He  had  admitted  them  (and 
us)  to  hear  this  sacred  outpouring  of  His  desires.  If  we 
laid  to  heart  the  blessed  revelations  of  this  disclosure  01 
Christ's  heart,  and  followed  Him  with  faithful  gaze  as 
He  ascends  to  the  Father,  and  realised  our  share  in  that 
triumph,  our  empty  vessels  would  be  filled  by  some  of 
that  same  joy  which  was  His.  Earthly  joy  can  never  be 
full  ;  Christian  joy  should  never  be  anything  less  than  full. 

12 


lyS  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap. xvii.  1-19 

Then  follows  a  final  glance  at  the  disciples'  relation  to 
the  world,  to  which  they  are  alien  because  they  are  of 
kindred  to' Him.  This  is  the  ground  for  the  repetition  of 
the  prayer  "  keep,"  with  the  difference  that  formerly  it 
was  "  keep  in  Thy  name,"  and  now  it  is  ^^from  the  evil." 
It  is  good  to  gaze  first  on  our  defence,  the  munitions  of 
rocks  where  we  lie  safely,  and  then  we  can  venture  to 
face  the  thought  of  "  the  evil  "  from  which  that  keeps  us, 
whether  it  be  personal  or  abstract. 

III.  Verses  16-19  give  the  final  petition  for  the  im- 
mediate circle  of  disciples,  with  its  grounds.  The  posi- 
tion of  alienation  from  the  world,  in  which  the  disciples 
stand  by  reason  of  their  assimilation  to  Jesus,  is  repeated 
here.  It  was  the  reason  for  the  former  prayer,  "  keep  "  ; 
it  is  the  reason  for  the  new  petition,  "  sanctify."  Keep- 
ing comes  first,  and  then  sanctifying,  or  consecration. 
Security  from  evil  is  given  that  we  may  be  wholly  devoted 
to  the  service  of  God.  The  evil  in  the  world  is  the 
great  hindrance  to  that.  The  likeness  to  Jesus  is  the 
great  ground  of  hope  that  we  shall  be  truly  consecrated. 
We  are  kept  "  in  the  name  " ;  we  are  consecrated  "  in 
the  truth,"  which  is  the  revelation  made  by  Jesus,  and 
in  a  very  deep  sense  is  Himself  That  truth  is,  as  it 
were,  the  element  in  which  the  believer  lives,  and  by 
abiding  in  which  His  real  consecration  is  possible. 

Christ's  prayer  for  us  should  be  our  aim  and  deepest 
desire  for  ourselves,  and  His  declaration  of  the  condition 
of  its  fulfilment  should  prescribe  our  firm  adhesion  to, 
and  constant  abiding  in,  the  truth  as  revealed  and 
embodied  in  Him,  as  the  only  means  by  which  we  can 
attain  the  consecration  which  is  at  once,  as  the  closing 
verses  of  the  lesson  tell  us,  the  means  by  which  we  may 


Less.  XIX.]  The  Intercessor  179 

fulfil  the  purpose  for  which  we  are  sent  into  the  world, 
and  the  path  on  which  we  reach  complete  assimilation 
to    His   perfect  self-surrender.     All  Christians  are  sent 
into  the  world  by  Jesus,  as  Jesus  was  sent  by  the  Father. 
We   have   the    charge    to  glorify   Him.     We    have   the 
presence   of  the    Sender   with   us,    the   sent.     We   are 
inspired   with   His   Spirit.      We    cannot   do    His   work 
without  that  entire  consecration  which  shall  copy   His 
devotion  to  the  Father  and  eager  swiftness   to  do  His 
will.     How  can  such  ennobling  and  exalted  consecration 
be  ours  ?     There  is  but  one  way.     He  has  "  consecrated 
Himself,"  and  by  union  with   Him,   through   faith,  our 
selfishness  may  be  subdued,  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  may 
dwell  in  our  hearts,  to  make  us  "  living  sacrifices,  con- 
secrated and  acceptable  to  God."     Then  shall  we   be 
"  truly  consecrated,"  and  then  alone,  when  we  can  say, 
"  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  hveth  in  me."     That  is 
the  end  of  Christ's  consecration  of  Himself, — the  prayer 
which  He  prayed  for  His  disciples,— and  should  be  the 
aim  which  every  disciple  earnestly  pursues. 


LESSON    XX 


The  Willing  Prisoner 

St.  John  xviii.  I-13 


1.  "When  Jesus  had  spoken 
these  words,  He  went  forth  with 
His  disciples  over  the  brook 
Cedron,  where  was  a  garden, 
into  the  which  He  entered,  and 
His  disciples. 

2.  And  Judas  also,  which  be- 
trayed Him,  knew  the  place  : 
for  Jesus  ofttimes  resorted 
thither  with  His  disciples. 

3.  Judas  then,  having  re- 
ceived a  band  of  men  and 
officers  from  the  chief  priests 
and  Pharisees,  cometh  thither 
with  lanterns  and  torches  and 
weapons. 

4.  Jesus  therefore,  knowing 
all  things  that  should  come  upon 
Him,  went  forth,  and  said  unto 
them,  Whom  seek  ye  ? 

5.  They  answered  Him,  Jesus 
of  Nazareth.  Jesus  saith  unto 
them,  I  am  He.  And  Judas 
also,  which  betrayed  Him,  stood 
with  them. 

6.  As  soon  then  as  He  had 
said  unto  them,  I  am  He,  they 
went  backward,  and  fell  to  the 
ground. 


7.  Then  asked  He  them  again, 
Whom  seek  ye  ?  And  they 
said,  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

8.  Jesus  answered,  I  have 
told  you  that  I  am  He  :  if  there- 
fore ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go 
their  way  : 

9.  That  the  saying  might  be 
fulfilled,  which  He  spake,  Of 
them  which  Thou  gavest  Me 
have  I  lost  none. 

10.  Then  Simon  Peter  having 
a  sword  drew  it,  and  smote  the 
high  priest's  servant,  and  cut 
off  his  right  ear.  The  servant's 
name  was  Malchus. 

11.  Then  said  Jesus  unto 
Peter,  Put  up  thy  sword  into 
the  sheath  :  the  cup  which  My 
Father  hath  given  Me,  shall  I 
not  drink  it  ? 

12.  Then  the  band  and  the 
captain  and  officers  of  the  Jews 
took  Jesus,  and  bound  Him, 

13.  And  led  Him  away  to 
Annas  first ;  for  he  was  father 
in  law  to  Caiaphas,  which  was 
the  high  priest  that  same 
year." 


JOHN'S  omissions  and  additions  in  this  section  are 
equally  significant.     He  has  no  mention  of  the  agony 
in  Gethsemane,  and  he  alone  records  the  remarkable 
incident  of  the  panic  which  shook  the  soldiers.     His 

180 


Less.  XX.]  The  Willing  Prisoner  i8i 

narrative  is  most  naturally  taken  here,  as  everywhere,  as 
a  supplement  to  the  Synoptics,  for  the  special  purpose 
of  bringing  out  the  facts  which  showed  Jesus  to  be  "  the 
Son  of  God."  This  is  his  own  account  of  his  design, 
and  is  well  illustrated  in  this  lesson. 

I.  We  have  the  two  so  diiferent  companies  converging 
on  the  one  spot.  It  is  only  John  who  mentions  the 
passage  of  the  Kidron,  the  generally  dry  torrent-bed 
between  the  temple  mount  and  Olivet,  which  had  seen 
the  crossing  of  another  king  of  Israel,  a  fugitive  from  a 
traitor  son  (2  Sam.  xv.  23).  John  alone  tells  us  that 
the  place  was  "  a  garden."  Gethsemane  witnessed 
victory;  Eden  saw  defeat.  The  place  seems  to  have 
been  chosen  not  only  for  quiet  and  seclusion,  but  because 
it  was  His  habitual  resort,  and  may  even  have  been  His 
usual  open-air  sleeping-place  (John  viii.  i).  The  refer- 
ence to  Judas'  knowledge  of  the  place  implies  that  that 
knowledge  was  one  reason  for  its  selection.  The  motive 
for  secrecy  was  past  since  His  "  desire  to  eat  this  passover 
with  you  "  was  fulfilled,  and  now  Jesus  seems  to  smooth 
the  path  for  His  captors. 

On  the  one  hand,  then,  we  see  the  little  band  coming 
from  the  city  in  deep  silence,  and  passing  into  the  olive- 
garden,  where  the  tremulous  shadows  of  the  leaves 
somewhat  obscured  the  paschal  moon ;  and,  on  the  other, 
we  see  the  armed  soldiers  of  the  Roman  garrison  and 
the  temple  police,  headed  by  Judas,  and  carrying  useless 
swords  which  had  no  power  against  Jesus,  and  super- 
fluous "lanterns  and  torches,"  which  were  absurd  in  that 
clear  moonlight.  The  contrast  of  the  two  groups  is 
striking  as  they  pass  through  the  silent  midnight  to  meet 
beneath  the  olives.     One  starts  from  heaven,  the  other 


I«2 


The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap,  xviii.  1-13 


from  hell,  and  they  touch  there.  Infinite  love  and  the 
mystery  of  Divine  endurance  for  man  stream  from  the 
one,  like  the  encircling  moonbeams  ;  diabolic  hate  and 
treachery  flame  in  the  other,  like  the  smoky  torches  with 
which  they  affronted  the  moon.  How  many  opposing 
paths  met  in  that  meeting  !  John  has  no  record  of  the 
solemn  scene  in  the  depths  of  the  garden.  He  takes 
the  readers'  knowledge  of  it  for  granted;  but  he  fixes 
our  attention  on  these  two  groups,  and  wishes  us  to  feel 
the  impressiveness  of  the  contrast,  as  well  as  the  voluntary 
surrender  of  Jesus  to  His  captors,  implied  in  His  choice 
of  the  place. 

II.  John's  special  contributions  to  the  narrative  of  our 
Lord's  capture  are  the  momentary  flash  of  glory  which 
struck  awe  into  the  band,  and  the  care  of  Jesus  for  His 
disciples'  safety  even  in  that  supreme  moment.  What 
calm  majesty  there  is  in  His  coming  forth  from  the  garden 
to  meet  the  approaching  crowd,  and  how  His  willing 
surrender,  not  so  much  to  the  violence  of  men  as  to  the 
purpose  of  the  Father,  is  expressed  in  that  explanation 
of  the  consciousness  which  impelled  Him,  as  a  similar 
consciousness  had  led  Him  to  gird  Himself  with  the 
towel !  Probably  Judas'  kiss  was  given  at  this  first 
meeting  with  the  band;  but,  as  would  be  likely  in  the 
uncertain  light  (made  more  uncertain  by  the  torches) 
and  confusion,  it  was  unnoticed  by  most,  and  the  traitor 
slunk  back  among  the  others,  as  he  appears  in  verse  five. 

The  quiet  question  "  Whom  seek  ye  ? "  fell  on  the 
ears  of  the  foremost  ranks  of  the  captors.  Did  it  remind 
John  of  the  other,  so  like  and  yet  so  unlike  it,  "  What 
seek  ye  ?  "  which  had  drawn  him  to  Jesus  at  first  ?  Its 
purpose   was   apparently   to  protect   the   disciples,  and 


Less.  XX.]  The  Willing  Prisoner  183 

perhaps  to  appeal  to  the  conscience  of  some  among  the 
tools  of  the  priests.  If  men  would  put  their  sinful 
purposes  into  plain  words,  they  would  sometimes  shrink 
from  executing  them.  But  here  the  answer  came  from 
many  lips,  and  was  not  without  a  shade  of  contempt  for 
their  prey,  "Jesus  the  Nazarene."  They  did  not  suppose 
that  their  questioner  was  their  prisoner  ;  and  when  the 
tranquil  voice  said  "  I  am  He,"  they  recoiled,  and  some 
of  them  "fell  to  the  ground,"  perhaps  thrown  down  by 
the  falling  back  of  the  front  ranks. 

We  need  not  ask  if  this  was  a  miracle.  However 
produced,  a  strange  awe  and  terror  smote  the  rude 
soldiers.  His  calm  dignity  impressed  them,  as  that  of 
virgin  martyrs  and  grey-headed  confessors  has  often  done. 
But  that  will  not  explain  the  fact,  which  seems  most 
worthily  attributed  to  a  momentary  shining  forth  of 
Christ's  indwelling  divinity,  somewhat  like  that  which 
shone  through  His  corporeal  frame  at  the  transfiguration. 
It  may  not  have  been  the  work  of  His  will  at  all,  but 
the  elevation  of  spirit  attendant  on  the  solemn  scene  in 
Gethsemane  may  have  transfigured  for  a  moment  His 
lowly  manhood,  and  let  some  beams  of  His  glory  through. 
But  however  that  may  be,  we  can  scarcely  fail  to  see 
here  a  revelation  of  His  majesty,  which  is  all  the  more 
eloquent  as  coming  at  the  hour  of  deepest  humiliation. 

We  have  frequently  had  occasion  to  note  how  John 
delights  to  bring  into  juxtaposition  instances  of  both,  as 
indeed  do  all  the  evangelists.  The  interweaving  of 
lowliness  and  glory  makes  the  very  differentia  of  the 
character  portrayed  by  them  all.  He  is  a  weak  infant, 
but  angels  hover  round  the  manger,  and  a  star  leads 
worshippers  to  it.     He  bows  His  head  to  John's  baptisai, 


184  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap,  xviii.  1-13 

but  heaven  opens  and  the  dove  descends.  He  falls 
asleep  in  the  boat,  but  wakes  to  still  the  storm  with  a 
word.  He  weeps  by  a  grave,  but  He  raises  its  tenant. 
He  all  but  faints  in  His  agony  in  the  garden,  but  angels 
strengthen  Him.  The  same  union  of  opposites  is  in 
this  incident.  He  is  to  be  led,  bound  by  rude  hands, 
before  an  unjust  judge.  But  as  He  passes  into  their 
power,  one  flash  of  brightness  "  above  that  of  the  noon- 
day sun  "  tells  of  the  hidden  glory.  "  What  will  He  do 
when  He  shall  come  as  judge,  if  He  did  this  when 
giving  Himself  up  as  a  prisoner  ? "    (Augustine.) 

The  moment  was  propitious  for  escape,  if  He  had 
chosen,  as  the  soldiers  lay  huddled  together  in  terror. 
Why  did  He  not  pass  through  the  midst  of  them,  and 
go  His  way  ?  It  would  have  been  perfectly  easy.  But, 
instead.  He  stands  still  and  repeats  the  question.  Verse 
seven  literally  reads  "  Inhere/ore  He  asked  them  again," 
which  suggests  that  the  second  putting  of  the  question 
was  meant  to  stimulate  the  soldiers  to  their  ofhce.  Thus 
here  again,  even  if  that  interpretation  of  the  "  Therefore  " 
be  not  sustained,  we  have  a  distinct  instance,  in  the  facts 
themselves,  of  Christ's  voluntary  surrender  to  the  fate 
which  He  could  easily  have  avoided.  Not  only  in  the 
great  resolve  to  enter  into  our  human  limitations,  but 
step  by  step,  through  all  His  earthly  life.  His  steadfast 
will  travelled  towards  the  Cross ;  and  the  voluntariness  of 
His  death  is  most  strongly  marked  in  the  events  of  that 
last  journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  especially  of  the  final  days 
there.  The  studied  publicity — and  we  had  almost  said 
offensiveness  to  the  rulers — of  His  last  entrance  and 
utterances;  the  withdrawal  till  the  passover;  the  pre- 
cautions against  interruption  at  the  Last  Supper ;   the 


Less.  XX.]  The  Wniing  Prisoner  185 

resort  to  the  usual  place,  Gethsemane ;  and  this  refusal 
to  avail  Himself  of  the  means  of  safety  open  to  Him  at 
this  last  moment, — are  all  of  one  piece,  and  present  Him, 
not  as  the  passive  Victim  of  men's  hate,  but  as  the  volun- 
tary Sacrifice,  who  chooses  time  and  place  for  the  con- 
summate act  of  His  love  and  of  our  redemption.  "  No 
man  taketh  it  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself." 
His  death  was  His  act.  He  died  because  He  chose, 
and  He  chose  because  He  would  obey  the  Father  and 
loved  the  world.  This  Sacrifice  was  not  bound  to  the 
altar,  but  laid  Himself  willingly  there  ;  or,  if  bound  at  all, 
it  was  with  "cords  of  love." 

The  last  word  to  the  captors  explains  the  motive  for 
the  previous  repeated  question  as  being  the  shielding  of 
the  disciples,  by  the  clear  definition  of  the  limitation  of 
the  arrest  to  Himself.  The  disciples  were  innocent,  and 
they  were  unfit  for  such  a  trial.  One  day  many  of  them 
would  have  to  die  for  Him,  but  not  yet.  So,  even  at  that 
hour  of  peril  for  Himself,  all  His  care  is  for  His  humble 
friends,  and  He  was  ready  to  yield  Himself  to  bonds  and 
death  to  secure  their  liberty.  "  Let  these  go  their  way  " 
gives  the  sheep  permission  to  scatter,  now  that  the 
Shepherd  is  taken.  John  sees  in  this  a  fulfilment,  on  a 
small  scale,  of  the  great  words  which  he  quotes  from  the 
intercessory  prayer  ;  not  that  he  thought  that  such  a 
trivial  and  transient  matter  exhausted  their  meaning,  but 
he  sees  in  it,  as  in  a  tiny  mirror,  the  reflection  of  the 
much  mightier,  eternal  safe-keeping  of  all  Christ's  ser- 
vants. A  dewdrop  is  rounded  by  the  same  law  which 
shapes  planets  into  spheres.  The  greatest  may  be  shown 
in  the  smallest. 

This  incident  is  as  a  parable.     It  shows  Christ's  self- 


i86  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap,  xviii.  1-13 

forgetting  care.  In  it  He  gives  Himself  up  as  a  prisoner, 
that  His  servants  may  go  free.  To  all  our  foes  He  says, 
Take  Me,  and  let  these  go.  Guilt,  sorrow,  pains  and  ills, 
death  and  hell,  are  thus  addressed,  or  rather  commanded, 
by  Him.  His  speech  to  them  is,  like  that  to  His  captors, 
authoritative,  and  liker  the  orders  of  a  prince  than  the 
entreaty  of  a  prisoner.  Jesus  has  met  our  enemies  like 
a  mother  who  gives  herself  to  the  wolves  that  her 
children  may  escape.  The  transcendent  sacrifice  of  His 
death  is  mirrored,  in  its  principle  and  effects,  in  these 
wondrous  words,  "  If  ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go  their 
way." 

III.  The  rash  and  futile  attempt  at  resistance  follows, 
in  strong  contrast  to  the  unused  power  of  overcoming  by 
Divine  might,  which  Jesus  willed  to  keep  latent.  He 
would  not  use  the  effectual  defence  which  He  possessed ; 
but  Peter,  who  with  the  others  had  by  this  time  joined 
the  company  outside  the  enclosure,  produces  some  sword 
which  he  had  got  hold  of,  and  strikes  at  random.  Half 
asleep,  and  dazzled  by  the  uncertain  light,  and  agitated, 
and  probably  more  used  to  haul  nets  than  handle  swords, 
he  happily  missed  the  head,  and  took  only  an  ear.  An 
eyewitness  is  manifest  in  the  specification  of  "  the  right 
ear." 

It  is  right  and  easy  to  blame  the  rashness  of  Peter, 
but  let  him  have  the  credit  of  brave  devotion.  It  is 
easy  to  see  that  one  sword  flourished  would  only  provoke 
twenty  to  leap  from  their  scabbards,  and  bring  on  a 
hopeless  struggle.  But  how  many  of  us  would  have 
been  courageous  enough  to  have  done  what  he  did  ? 
Prudence  is  a  very  valuable  virtue,  but  courage  set  on 
fire  by  love  is  better,  and  its  condemnation,  if  it   be 


Less.  XX.]  The  Willing  Prisoner  187 

sometimes  rash,  should  be  very  lenient.  John  knew, 
and,  now  that  so  many  years  had  passed,  could  venture 
to  tell,  the  names  of  both  actors  in  what  had  so  nearly 
been  a  tragedy,  which  names  the  other  evangelists  either 
did  not  know,  or  thought  it  better  to  suppress. 

Our  Lord's  command  to  sheathe  his  useless  weapon 
is  given  in  a  form  which  implies  the  prayer  in  Gethsemane, 
which  John  does  not  record.  He  had  asked  that  the 
cup  should  pass  from  Him,  and  the  answer  was  the  full 
acquiescence  of  His  will  in  the  Father's  will  that  He 
should  drink  it.  The  cup  was  felt  to  be  given,  and  that 
was  better  than  that  it  should  have  been  taken  away. 
The  best  answer  to  our  prayers  is  the  submission  of  our 
wills  and  the  recognition  of  the  Father's  hand  as  com- 
mending the  chalice  to  our  lips.  The  cup  may  remain, 
but  its  bitterness  is  taken  away  when  we  know  it  to  be 
the  "  cup  which  our  Father  hath  given  us." 

IV.  The  actual  capture  is  briefly  described.  The 
soldiers  of  the  Roman  garrison  and  their  officer  are 
significantly  named  before  the  Jewish  officials.  Evidently 
the  arrest  was  beyond  the  power  of  the  priests  without 
the  help  of  Pilate,  and  also  the  co-operation  of  Gentile 
and  Jew,  which  runs  through  the  whole  story  of  the 
passion,  and  points  so  deep  truths,  is  meant  to  be  noted 
from  the  beginning. 

John  alone  records  the  appearance  before  Annas,  and 
his  remark  that  Jesus  was  led  to  his  house  "  first "  seems 
to  imply  that  he  wishes  to  supplement  the  other  accounts, 
which  tell  only  of  Christ's  appearance  before  Caiaphas. 
The  name  of  the  judge  was  sufficient  to  stamp  the 
character  of  shameless  injustice  on  the  whole  procedure. 
Annas  had  himself  been  high  priest,  and  several  of  his 


i88  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap,  xviii.  1-13 

sons,  as  well  as  his  son-in-law  Caiaphas,  held  the  office 
in  succession  during  his  lifetime,  in  flagrant  violation 
of  the  law  for  the  high-priesthood.  Such  worldly 
intriguers,  who  prostituted  their  office  for  personal  ends, 
were  the  judges  before  whom  Jesus,  the  reahty  of  which 
their  desecrated  office  was  the  shadow,  stood  as  a 
criminal.  The  irony  of  providence  could  no  further  go 
than  that  such  a  man  as  Annas  or  as  Caiaphas  should 
hold  that  position  at  such  a  time.  And  this  it  is  which 
John  would  point  out  by  his  remark  that  Caiaphas,  of 
all  men  in  the  world,  should  have  been  "  high  priest 
that  year,"  the  unworthy  holder  of  the  office  which  gave 
such  a  man  power  of  life  and  death  over  Jesus.  Caiaphas 
on  the  bench,  and  Jesus  at  the  bar !  What  could  the 
end  of  that  be  ? 


LESSON   XXI 

The  Reluctant  Judge,  the  Resolved  Accusers,  and  the 
Patient  Christ 


St.  John  xix.  1-16 


1.  "Then  Pilate  therefore 
took  Jesus,  and  scourged  Him. 

2.  And  the  soldiers  platted  a 
crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  on 
His  head,  and  they  put  on  Him 
a  purple  robe, 

3.  And  said,  Hail,  King  of 
the  Jews  !  and  they  smote  Him 
with  their  hands. 

4.  Pilate  therefore  went  forth 
again,  and  saith  unto  them. 
Behold,  I  bring  Him  forth  to 
you,  that  ye  may  know  that  I 
find  no  fault  in  Him. 

5.  Then  came  Jesus  forth, 
wearing  the  crown  of  thorns, 
and  the  purple  robe.  And 
Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Behold 
the  Man  ! 

6.  When  the  chief  priests 
therefore  and  officers  saw  Him, 
they  cried  out,  saying,  Crucify 
Hnn,  crucify  Him.  Pilate  saith 
unto  them.  Take  ye  Him,  and 
crucify  Him :  for  I  find  no  fault 
in  Him. 

7.  The  Jews  answered  him, 
We  have  a  law,  and  by  our 
law  He  ought  to  die,  because 
He  made  Himself  the  Son  of 
God. 

8.  When      Pilate     therefore 


189 


heard  that  saying,  he  was  the 
more  afraid ; 

9.  And  went  again  into  the 
judgment  hall,  and  saith  unto 
Jesus,  Whence  art  Thou  ?  But 
Jesus  gave  him  no  answer. 

10.  Then  saith  Pilate  unto 
Him,  Speakest  Thou  not  unto 
me  ?  knowest  Thou  not  that  I 
have  power  to  crucify  Thee, 
and  have  power  to  release  Thee  ? 

11.  Jesus  answered.  Thou 
couldest  have  no  power  at  all 
against  Me,  except  it  were 
given  thee  from  above  :  there- 
fore he  that  delivered  Me  unto 
thee  hath  the  greater  sin. 

12.  And  from  thenceforth 
Pilate  sought  to  release  Him  : 
but  the  Jews  cried  out,  saying. 
If  thou  let  this  Man  go,  thou 
art  not  Caesar's  friend  :  whoso- 
ever maketh  himself  a  king 
speaketh  against  Caesar. 

13.  When  Pilate  therefore 
heard  that  saying,  he  brought 
Jesus  forth,  and  sat  down  in 
the  judgment  seat  in  a  place 
that  is  called  the  Pavement, 
but  in  the  Hebrew,  Gabbatha. 

14.  And  it  was  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  passover,  and  about 


190  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xix.  1-16 

the  sixth  hour :  and    he    saith       King  ?        The      chief      priests 


unto   the   Jews,     Behold    your 
King! 

15.  But  they  cried  out,  Away 
with  Him,  away  with  Him, 
crucify  Him.  Pilate  saith  unto 
them,     Shall    I     crucify    your 


answered.    We   have    no    king 
but  Caesar. 

16.  Then  delivered  he  Him 
therefore  unto  them  to  be 
crucified.  And  they  took  Jesus, 
and  led  Him  away." 


THE  Struggle  between  the  vacillation  of  Pilate  and 
the  fixed  malignity  of  the  rulers  is  the  principal 
theme  of  this  fragment  of  Christ's  judicial  trial.  He 
Himself  is  passive  and  all  but  silent,  speaking  only  one 
sentence  of  calm  rebuke.  The  frequent  changes  of 
scene  from  within  to  without  the  prsetorium  indicate 
the  steps  in  the  struggle,  and  vividly  reflect  the  irresolu- 
tion of  Pilate.  These  changes  may  help  to  mark  the 
stages  in  the  lesson. 

I.  The  cruelties  and  indignities  in  verses  1-3  were 
inflicted  within  the  "  palace,"  to  which  Pilate,  with  his 
Prisoner,  had  returned  after  the  rulers'  vote  for  Barabbas. 
John  makes  that  choice  of  the  robber  the  reason  for  the 
scourging  of  Jesus.  His  thought  seems  to  be  that  Pilate, 
having  failed  in  his  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  whole 
difficulty  by  releasing  Jesus,  according  to  the  "  custom," 
ordered  the  scourging,  in  hope  that  the  lighter  punish- 
ment might  satisfy  the  turbulent  crowd,  whom  he  wished 
to  humour,  while,  if  possible,  saving  their  Victim.  It 
was  the  expedient  of  a  weak  and  cynical  nature,  and, 
like  all  weak  attempts  at  compromise  between  right  and 
wrong,  only  emboldened  the  hatred  which  it  was  meant 
to  appease.  If  by  clamour  the  rulers  had  succeeded 
in  getting  Pilate  to  scourge  a  Man  whom  he  thought 
innocent,  they  might  well  hope  to  get  him  to  crucify, 
if  they  clamoured  loudly  and  long  enough. 

One  attitude  only  befitted  Pilate,  since  he  did  not  in 


Less.  XXI.]  The  Reluctant  Judge  191 

the  least  believe  that  Jesus  threatened  the  Roman 
supremacy ;  namely,  to  set  Him  at  liberty,  and  let  the 
disappointed  rulers  growl  like  wild  beasts  robbed  of  their 
prey.  But  he  did  not  care  enough  about  a  single  half- 
crazy  Jewish  peasant  to  risk  his  standing  well  with  his 
awkward  subjects,  for  the  sake  of  righteousness.  The 
one  good  which  Rome  could  give  to  its  vassal  nations 
was  inflexible  justice  and  a  sovereign  law ;  but  in  Pilate's 
action  there  was  not  even  the  pretence  of  legality. 
Tricks  and  expedients  run  through  it  all,  and  never 
once  does  he  say.  This  is  the  law,  this  is  justice,  and  by 
it  I  stand  or  fall. 

The  cruel  scourging  which,  in  Roman  hands,  was  a 
much  more  severe  punishment  than  the  Jewish  "  beating 
with  rods,"  and  often  ended  in  death,  was  inflicted  on  the 
silent,  unresisting  Christ,  not  because  His  judge  thought 
that  it  was  deserved,  but  to  please  accusers  whose  charge 
he  knew  to  be  absurd.  The  underlings  naturally  followed 
their  betters'  example,  and,  after  they  had  executed 
Pilate's  orders  to  scourge,  covered  the  bleeding  wounds 
with  some  robe,  perhaps  ragged,  but  of  the  royal  colour, 
and  crushed  the  twisted  wreath  of  thorn-branch  down 
on  the  brows,  to  make  fresh  wounds  there.  The  jest 
of  crowning  such  a  poor,  helpless  creature  as  Jesus 
seemed  to  them,  was  exactly  on  the  level  of  such  rude 
natures,  and  would  be  the  more  exquisite  to  them 
because  it  was  double-barrelled,  and  insulted  the  nation 
as  well  as  the  "king."  They  came  in  a  string,  as  the 
tense  of  the  original  word  suggests,  and  offered  their 
mock  reverence.  But  that  became  tame  after  a  Httle, 
and  mockery  passed  into  violence,  as  it  always  does  in 
such  natures.     These  rough  legionaries  were  cruel  and 


192  The  Gospel  of  St.  Jolin     [Chap.  xix.  1-16 

brutal,  and  they  were  unconscious  witnesses  to  His 
kingship  as  founded  on  suffering ;  but  they  were  innocent 
as  compared  with  the  polished  gentleman  who  pro- 
stituted justice  on  the  judgment-seat,  and  the  learned 
Pharisees  who  were  howling  for  blood  outside. 

II.  In  verses  4-8  the  scene  changes  again  to  without 
the  palace,  and  shows  us  Pilate  trying  another  expedient, 
equally  in  vain.  The  hesitating  governor  has  no  chance 
with  the  resolute,  rooted  hate  of  the  rulers.  Jesus  silently 
and  unresistingly  follows  Pilate  from  the  hall,  still  wear- 
ing the  mockery  of  royal  pomp.  Pilate  had  calculated 
that  the  sight  of  Him  in  such  guise,  and  bleeding  from 
the  lash,  might  turn  hate  into  contempt,  and  perhaps 
give  a  touch  of  pity.  "  Behold  the  Man  !  "  as  he  meant 
it,  was  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Is  this  poor,  bruised,  spiritless 
Sufferer  worth  hate  or  fear  ?  Does  He  look  like  a  king 
or  a  dangerous  enemy  ?  "  Pilate  for  once  drops  the  scoff 
of  calling  Him  their  king,  and  seeks  to  conciliate  and 
move  to  pity.  The  profound  meanings  which  later  ages 
have  delighted  to  find  in  his  words,  however  warrantable, 
are  no  part  of  their  design  as  spoken,  and  we  gain  a  better 
lesson  from  the  scene  by  keeping  close  to  the  thoughts 
of  the  actors.  What  a  contrast  between  the  vacillation 
of  the  governor,  on  the  one  hand,  afraid  to  do  right  and 
reluctant  to  do  wrong,  and  the  dogged  malignity  of  the 
rulers  and  their  tools  on  the  other,  and  the  calm,  meek 
endurance  of  the  silent  Christ,  knowing  all  their  thoughts, 
pitying  all,  and  fixed  in  loving  resolve,  even  firmer  than 
the  rulers'  hate,  to  bear  the  utmost,  that  He  might  save  a 
world  ! 

Some  pity  may  have  stirred  in  the  crowd,  but  the 
priests  and  their  immediate  dependants  silenced  it  by  the 


Less.  XXL]  The  Reluctant  Judge  193 

yell  of  fresh  hate  at  the  sight  of  the  Prisoner.  Note  how 
John  gives  the  very  impression  of  the  tierce,  brief  roar, 
like  that  of  wild  beasts  for  their  prey,  by  his  "Crucify, 
crucify,"  without  addition  of  the  person.  Pilate  lost 
patience  at  last,  and  angrily  and  half  seriously  gives  per- 
mission to  them  to  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands. 
He  really  means,  "  I  will  not  be  your  tool,  and,  if  my 
conviction  of  '  the  Man's '  innocence  is  to  be  of  no 
account,  you  must  punish  Him;  for  I  will  not."  How 
far  he  meant  to  abdicate  authority,  and  how  far  he  was 
launching  sarcasms,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Throughout  he 
is  sarcastic,  and  thereby  indicates  his  weakness,  indem- 
nifying himself  for  being  thwarted  by  sneers,  which  sit 
ill  on  authority. 

But  the  offer,  or  sarcasm,  whichever  it  was,  missed 
fire,  as  the  appeal  to  pity  had  done,  and  only  led  to  the 
production  of  a  new  weapon.  In  their  frantic  determina- 
tion to  compass  Jesus'  death,  the  rulers  hesitate  at  no 
degradation ;  and  now  they  adduced  the  charge  of 
blasphemy,  and  were  ready  to  make  a  heathen  the  judge. 
To  ask  a  'Roman  governor  to  execute  their  law  on  a 
religious  offender,  was  to  drag  their  national  prerogative 
in  the  mud.  But  formal  religionists,  inflamed  by 
religious  animosity,  are  often  the  degraders  of  religion 
for  the  gratification  of  their  hatred.  They  are  poor 
preservers  of  the  Church  who  call  on  the  secular  arm  to 
execute  their  "  laws."  Rome  went  a  long  way  in  letting 
subject  peoples  keep  their  institutions ;  but  it  was  too 
much  to  expect  Pilate  to  be  the  hangman  for  these 
furious  priests,  on  a  charge  scarcely  intelligible  to  him. 

What  was  Jesus  doing  while  all  this  hell  of  wickedness 
and  fury  boiled  round  Him  ?      Standing  there,  passive 

13 


194  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xix.  1-16 

and  dumb,  "as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers."  Himself 
is  the  least  conspicuous  figure  in  the  history  of  His  own 
trial.  In  silent  communion  with  the  Father,  in  silent 
submission  to  His  murderers,  in  silent  pity  for  us,  in 
silent  contemplation  of  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him, 
He  waits  on  their  will. 

IH.  Once  more  the  scene  changes  to  the  interior  of 
the  praetorium  (vers.  9-1 1).  The  rulers'  words  stir  a 
deepened  awe  in  Pilate.  He  "  was  the  more  afraid." 
Then  he  had  been  already  afraid.  His  wife's  dream, 
the  impression  already  produced  by  the  person  of  Jesus, 
had  touched  him  more  deeply  than  probably  he  himself 
was  aware  of;  and  now  this  charge  that  Jesus  had 
"  made  Himself  the  Son  of  God  "  shook  him.  What  if 
this  strange  Man  were  in  some  sense  a  messenger  of  the 
gods  ?  Had  he  been  scourging  one  sent  from  them  ? 
Sceptical  he  probably  was,  and  therefore  superstitious ; 
and  half-forgotten  and  disbelieved  stories  of  gods  who 
had  come  dow^n  in  the  likeness  of  men  would  swim  up 
in  his  memory.  If  this  Man  were  such,  His  strange 
demeanour  would  be  explained.  Therefore  he  carried 
Jesus  in  again,  and,  not  now  as  judge,  sought  to  hear 
from  His  own  lips  His  version  of  the  alleged  claim. 

"Why  did  not  Jesus  answer  such  a  question  ?  His 
silence  was  answer ;  but,  besides  that,  Pilate  had  not 
received  what  Jesus  had  already  declared  to  him  as  to 
His  kingdom  and  His  relation  to  "  the  truth  "  as  he  ought, 
and  careless  turning  away  from  Christ's  earlier  words  is 
righteously  and  necessarily  punished  by  subsequent 
silence,  if  the  same  disposition  remains.  That  it  did 
remain  Christ's  silence  is  proof.  Had  there  been  any 
use  in  answering,  Pilate  would  not  have  asked  in  vain, 


Less.  XXI.]  The  Reluctant  Judge  195 

If  Jesus  was  silent,  we  may  be  sure  that  He  who  sees  all 
hearts  and  responds  to  all  true  desires  was  so  because 
He  knew  that  it  was  best  to  say  nothing.  The  question 
of  His  origin  had  nothing  to  do  with  Pilate's  duty  then, 
which  turned,  not  on  whence  Jesus  had  come,  but  on 
what  Pilate  believed  Him  to  have  done,  or  not  to  have 
done.  He  who  will  not  do  the  plain  duty  of  the  moment 
has  little  chance  of  an  answer  to  his  questions  about 
such  high  matters. 

The  shallow  character  of  the  governor's  awe  and  interest 
is  clearly  seen  from  the  immediate  change  of  tone  to 
arrogant  reminder  of  his  absolute  authority.  "To  me 
dost  Thou  not  speak  ?  "  The  pride  of  offended  dignity 
peeps  out  there.  He  has  forgotten  that  a  moment  since 
he  half  suspected  that  the  Prisoner,  whom  he  now  seeks  to 
terrify  with  the  cross  and  to  allure  with  deliverance,  was 
perhaps  come  from  some  misty  heaven.  Was  that  a 
temper  which  would  have  received  Christ's  answer  to  his 
question  ? 

But  one  thing  he  might  be  made  to  perceive,  and 
therefore  Jesus  broke  silence  for  the  only  time  in  this 
lesson,  and  almost  the  only  time  before  Pilate.  He  reads 
the  arrogant  Roman  the  lesson  which  he  and  all  his 
tribe  in  all  lands  and  ages  need, — that  their  power  is 
derived  from  God,  therefore  in  its  foundation  legitimate 
and  in  its  exercise  to  be=  guided  by  His  will  and  used  for 
His  purposes.  It  was  God  who  had  brought  the  Roman 
eagles,  with  their  ravening  beaks  and  strong  claws,  to  the 
Holy  City.  Pilate  was  right  in  exercising  jurisdiction 
over  Jesus.  Let  him  see  that  he  exercised  justice.  And 
let  him  remember  that  the  power  which  he  boasted  that 
he  "  had  "  was  "  given."     The  truth  as  to  the  source  of 


196  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xix.  1-16 

power  made  the  guilt  of  Caiaphas  or  of  the  rulers  the 
greater,  inasmuch  as  they  had  neglected  the  duties  to 
which  they  had  been  appointed,  and  by  handing  over 
Jesus  on  a  charge  which  they  themselves  should  have 
searched  out,  had  been  guilty  of  "  theocratic  felony." 
This  sudden  flash  of  bold  rebuke,  reminding  Pilate  of  his 
dependence,  and  charging  him  with  "  the  lesser  "  but  yet 
real  "  sin,"  went  deeper  than  any  answer  to  his  question 
would  have  done,  and  spurred  him  to  more  earnest  efl'ort, 
as  John  points  out.  He  "  sought  to  release  Him,"  as  if 
formerly  he  had  been  rather  simply  unwilling  to  condemn 
than  anxious  to  deliver. 

IV.  So  the  scene  changes  again  to  outside.  He  first 
went  out  alone,  leaving  Jesus  within,  and  was  met  before 
he  had  time,  as  would  appear,  to  speak,  by  the  final 
irresistible  weapon  which  the  rulers  had  kept  in  reserve. 
An  accusation  of  treason  was  only  too  certain  to  be 
listened  to  by  the  suspicious  tyrant  who  was  then 
emperor,  especially  if  brought  by  the  authorities  of  a 
subject  nation.  Many  a  provincial  governor  had  had  but 
a  short  shrift  in  such  a  case,  and  Pilate  knew  that  he  was 
a  ruined  man  if  these  implacable  zealots  howling  before 
him  went  to  Tiberius  with  such  a  charge.  So  the  die 
was  cast.  With  rage  in  his  heart,  no  doubt,  and  knowing 
that  he  was  sacrificing  innocent  blood  to  save  himself, 
he  turned  away  from  the  victorious  mob,  apparently  in 
silence,  and  brought  Jesus  out  once  more.  He  had  no 
more  words  to  say  to  his  Prisoner.  Nothing  remained 
but  the  formal  act  of  sentence,  for  which  he  seated  him- 
self, with  a  poor  assumption  of  dignity,  yet  feeling  all  the 
while,  no  doubt,  what  a  contemptible  surrender  he  was 
making. 


Less.  XXI.]  The  Reluctant  Judge  197 

Judgment-seats  and  mosaic  pavements  do  not  go  far  to 
secure  reverence  for  a  judge  who  is  no  better  than  an 
assassin,  killing  an  innocent  man  to  secure  his  own  ends. 
Pilate's  sentence  fell  most  heavily  on  himself.  If  "  the 
judge  is  condemned  when  the  guilty  is  acquitted,"  he  is 
tenfold  condemned  when  the  innocent  is  sentenced. 

Pilate  returned  to  his  sarcastic  mood  when  he  returned 
to  his  injustice,  and  found  some  satisfaction  in  his  old 
jeer  "  your  King."  But  the  passion  of  hatred  was  too 
much  in  earnest  to  be  turned  or  even  affected  by  such 
poor  scoffs,  and  the  only  answer  was  the  renewed  roar 
of  the  mob,  which  had  murder  in  its  tone.  The  repeti- 
tion of  the  governor's  taunt  "  Shall  I  crucify  your  King  ?  " 
brought  out  the  answer  in  which  the  rulers  of  the  nation 
in  their  fury  blindly  flung  away  their  prerogative.  It  is 
no  accident  that  it  was  "  the  chief  priests  "  who  answered, 
"  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar."  Driven  by  hate,  they 
deliberately  disown  their  Messianic  hope,  and  repudiate 
their  national  glory.  They  who  will  not  have  Christ 
have  to  bow  to  a  tyrant.  Rebellion  against  Him  brings 
slavery. 


LESSON   XXII 
"It  is  Finislied" 

St.  John  xix.    17-30 


17.  "And  He  bearing  His 
cross  went  forth  into  a  place 
called  the  place  of  a  skull,  which 
is  called  in  the  Hebrew  Gol- 
gotha: 

18.  Where  they  crucified 
Him,  and  two  other  with  Him, 
on  either  side  one,  and  Jesus  in 
the  midst. 

19.  And  Pilate  wrote  a  title, 
and  put  it  on  the  cross.  And 
the  writing  was,  JESUS  OF 
NAZARETH  THE  KING  OF 
THE  JEWS. 

20.  This  title  then  read  many 
of  the  Jews :  for  the  place 
where  Jesus  was  crucified  was 
nigh  to  the  city :  and  it  was 
written  in  Hebrew,  and  Greek, 
and  Latin. 

21.  Then  said  the  chief  priests 
of  the  Jews  to  Pilate,  Write  not, 
The  King  of  the  Jews;  but  that 
He  said,  I  am  King  of  the  Jews. 

22.  Pilate  answered.  What  I 
have  written  I  have  written. 

23.  Then  the  soldiers,  when 
they  had  crucified  Jesus,  took 
His  garments,  and  made  four 
parts,  to  every  soldier  a  part ; 
and  also  His  coat :  now  the 
coat  was  without  seam,  woven 
from  the  top  throughout. 

24.  They  said  therefore  among 
themselves,  Let  us  not  rend  it. 


but  cast  lots  for  it,  whose  it  shall 
be :  that  the  Scripture  might 
be  fulfilled,  which  saith.  They 
parted  My  raiment  among  them, 
and  for  My  vesture  they  did  cast 
lots.  These  things  therefore 
the  soldiers  did. 

25.  Now  there  stood  by  the 
cross  of  Jesus  His  mother,  and 
His  mother's  sister,  Mary  the 
wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary 
Magdalene. 

26.  When  Jesus  therefore 
saw  His  mother,  and  the  disciple 
standing  by,  whom  He  loved, 
He  saith  unto  His  mother. 
Woman,  behold   thy  son ! 

26.  Then  saith  He  to  the 
disciple,  Behold  thy  mother ! 
And  from  that  hour  that  disciple 
took  her  unto  his  own  home. 

28.  After  this,  Jesus  knowing 
that  all  things  were  now  ac- 
complished, that  the  Scripture 
might  be  fulfilled,  saith,  I  thirst. 

29.  Now  there  was  set  a 
vessel  full  of  vinegar :  and  they 
filled  a  spunge  with  vinegar, 
and  put  it  upon  hyssop,  and 
put  it  to  His  mouth. 

30.  When  Jesus  therefore 
had  received  the  vinegar,  He 
said,  It  is  finished :  and  He 
bowed  His  head,  and  gave  up 
the  ghost," 

198 


Less.  XXII.]  "  It  is  Finished "  199 

THE  supplementary  character  of  John's  account  of 
the  crucifixion  is  shown  by  both  its  omissions  and 
additions,  as  compared  with  the  other  Gospels.  These 
deserve  careful  examination.  So  far  as  any  purpose 
beyond  that  of  contributing  incidents  to  complete  the 
narratives  can  be  discerned,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  the 
impression  from  the  whole  account  is  that  of  the  calm 
majesty  of  voluntary  suffering,  in  filial  obedience  ful- 
filling the  will  of  the  Father  and  the  word  of  prophecy. 
Such  an  impression  corresponds  entirely  to  the  point  of 
view  of  John's  Gospel,  which  is  none  the  less  trustworthy 
as  a  record  of  facts  because  the  facts  are  chosen  with  a 
purpose. 

I.  The  account  of  the  act  of  crucifixion  is  singularly 
brief,  but  even  in  it  we  find  a  noteworthy  addition,  in 
the  statement  that  Jesus  "  went  out,  bearing  the  cross 
for  Himself."  The  practice  was  that  the  condemned 
man  should  carry  his  cross,  and  that  cruel  indignity  too 
was  endured  by  Jesus  at  the  beginning  of  the  short 
passage  to  Golgotha,  as  is  shown  by  John's  accurate 
words,  "  ive7tt  out,  bearing."  These  perfectly  harmonise 
with,  and  may  almost  be  said  to  presuppose,  what  the 
other  evangelists  tell  us ;  that  is,  that  when  the  sad  pro- 
cession was  outside  the  gate,  it  was  needful  to  find  some 
one  else  to  carry  the  burden,  which  His  physical  strength 
sank  under.  Simon  of  Cyrene  was  "  coming  out  of  the 
country,"  when  he  was  pressed  into  that  service,  which 
suggests  that  he  was  met  outside  the  city.  The  other 
evangelists  give  the  sequel,  which  teaches  the  weakness 
of  Christ's  flesh.  John  gives  the  first  arrangement,  which 
teaches  the  meek  willingness  of  His  spirit. 

His  bearing  His  cross,  like  Isaac's  carrying  the  wood 


200  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xix.  17-50 

for  his  own  burning,  speaks  of  patient  submission  to  a 
Father's  will,  and  gives  pathetic  meaning  to  the  exhorta- 
tion to  "go  forth  unto  Him  without  the  camp,  bearing 
His  reproach."  We,  too,  have  sometimes  to  carry  the 
cross  on  which  we  are  to  be  crucified. 

John  leaves  the  agents  of  the  crucifixion  somewhat 
indefinite  by  that  vague  "  they,"  which,  however,  is  prob- 
ably to  be  taken  as  meaning  the  persons  last  named; 
that  is,  "  the  chief  priests."  Whose  hands  actually  nailed 
Him  to  the  cross  mattered  little.  Probably  the  soldiers 
did  it,  as  executioners,  skilled  in  the  art;  but  the  real 
agents  were  the  priests.  The  ignorant  legionaries  were 
no  more  guilty  than  their  own  hammers.  The  hands 
that  used  them  as  tools  w^ere  those  really  stained  with 
innocent  blood.  AVhile  the  plea  of  Christ's  dying  prayer 
for  His  murderers  applied  to  all  concerned,  its  ample 
folds  covered  entirely  the  ignorant  instruments  of  crimin- 
ally and  partially  ignorant  rulers. 

John  touches  most  slightly  on  the  companions  in 
suffering,  omitting  their  crimes  and  the  taunt  implied  in 
the  association  of  such  men  with  Jesus ;  and  omitting, 
too,  the  jeers  of  the  one  and  the  penitence  of  the  other, 
and  seeing  an  unintended  but  eloquent  symbol  of  Christ's 
dignity,  even  in  humiliation,  in  His  place  in  the  midst. 
It  had  been  meant  to  imply  that  He  was  chief  in  crime  ; 
it  is  a  watness  to  His  being  the  centre  of  all  things,  and 
chief  wherever  He  is — "  Him  first,  Him  last.  Him  midst 
and  without  end." 

H.  The  next  section  tells  of  the  royal  proclamation  in 
many  tongues,  and  adds  much  to  the  accounts  of  the 
other  Gospels.  John  uses  the  technical  Latin  word  for 
the  inscription,  "  title  " ;  and  he  alone  tells  us   that  it 


Less. XXII.]  "It  is  Finished"  201 

was  fixed  on  the  cross  by  Pilate's  orders,  and  possibly 
was  written  by  his  own  hand.  It  was  the  last  fling  of 
his  malice,  directed  not  against  Jesus,  but  the  priests. 
Like  many  another  scoffer,  Pilate  did  not  see  that  the 
sharpest  edge  of  his  gibe  cut  himself;  for,  if  he  thought 
the  pretensions  to  royalty  of  such  a  poor  creature  so 
ludicrous,  the  more  disgrace  to  the  unjust  judge  who  let 
Him  be  hung  up  there  to  die.  Caiaphas,  the  unworthy 
high  priest,  had  unconsciously  uttered  one  prophecy. 
Pilate,  the  unworthy  governor,  unconsciously  spoke 
another.  "  This  " — this  fainting,  bleeding,  dying  Man — 
is  King,  not  of  Jews  only,  but  of  all  men,  just  because  He 
hangs  there  helpless.  The  cross  is  His  throne.  The  crown 
of  thorns  will  be  wreathed  round  with  the  many  crowns 
of  universal  dominion.  A  rule,  compared  with  which 
Rome's  was  limited,  vulgar,  superficial,  and  transient,  was 
established  then.  The  Redeemer  of  men  is  their  King. 
The  fact  of  the  inscription  being  in  three  languages  is 
peculiar  to  John,  for  the  similar  clause  in  Luke  is  not 
genuine.  The  motive  for  the  triple  "  title  "  was,  probably, 
the  presence  at  the  passover  of  foreign-born  Jews,  to  all 
of  whom  it  was  desired  to  make  it  legible.  But  we  may 
permissibly  see  in  this  accident  another  unconscious 
prophecy.  Hebrew  was  the  language  of  revelation ; 
Latin,  the  tongue  of  civil  authority  and  law  ;  Greek,  that 
of  philosophy  and  art.  These  all  find  their  fulfilment 
in  the  Christ,  and  their  highest  glory  is  to  proclaim  Him. 
Not  only  these  cultivated  languages  but  the  rude  speech 
of  tribes  who  were  barbarians  then  was  to  be  capable  of 
receiving  and  re-echoing  the  message  of  His  reign,  as  has 
been  the  case  with  our  own  English,  the  ancestor  of 
which  was  the  speech  of  unlettered  tribes  when  Pilate 


202  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xix.  17-30 

wrote,  and  as  has  been  true  in  the  many  tongues  which 
Christ's  missionaries  have  been  the  first  to  reduce  to 
writing,  for  the  very  purpose  of  entrusting  the  name  of 
Christ  the  King  to  them. 

The  vigilance  of  the  priests  scented  possible  danger  in 
the  reading  of  the  title  by  the  crowds,  and  their  brusque 
demand  to  have  it  altered  shows  how  they  were  ready 
to  presume  on  Pilate's  compliance.  But,  like  all  who 
yield  what  they  know  they  should  not  give  up,  he  tried 
to  cover  his  weakness  by  obstinacy.  If  he  had  asserted 
himself  a  little  sooner,  he  would  have  escaped  his  bad 
pre-eminence.  He  did  not  know  what  he  had  written, 
in  imperishable  characters,  in  the  record  of  his  deeds ; 
and,  while  he  thought  himself  announcing  with  fitting 
dignity  his  determination,  he  was  declaring  that  the  black 
lines  he  had  traced  would  last  for  ever.  Strange  that  the 
awful  truth  of  the  ineffaceableness  of  our  deeds  should 
come  from  his  lips  !  Blessed  we  if  we  have  learned  that 
He  whom  Pilate  slew  will  blot  out  our  sins  from  His 
book.  The  characteristic  of  the  whole  procedure  of 
Jewish  accusers  and  Roman  governor  is  repeated  here. 
They  reject,  and  he  proclaims,  the  King. 

HI.  The  additions  in  the  account  of  the  soldiers 
dividing  His  garments  are  as  significant  as  in  the  other 
sections.  All  tell  of  parting  them  and  casting  lots  ;  but 
John,  who  stood  there,  saw  and  heard  the  whole,  and 
fills  up  the  narrative  of  the  Synoptics.  There  is  some- 
thing very  horrible  in  the  matter-of-course  way  in  which 
the  soldiers,  as  soon  as  they  had  finished  their  grim  task, 
set  about  securing  their  booty.  They  had  not  nerves 
easily  thrilled  by  the  sight  of  pain,  and  could  coolly  allot 
a   dying   man's  garments,  their  perquisites,  before  his 


Less.  XXII.]  "  It  is  Finished "  203 

very  eyes.  The  outer  garments  could  be  divided  among 
them  into  four  parts,  but  the  inner  vestment  was  all  of 
one  piece,  and  would  be  ruined  if  cut.  Therefore  it 
was  drawn  lots  for. 

The  literal  correspondence  of  their  proceeding  with 
the  words  of  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  from  which  Jesus 
took  the  bitter  cry,  "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou 
forsaken  Me  ?  "  seemed  to  the  evangelist  a  fulfilment  of 
prophecy.  No  doubt  the  Psalm  came  from  the  heart 
of  a  sufferer,  whether  David  or  an  ideal  impersonation 
of  Israel,  but  equally  certainly  it  contains  details  which 
never  had  been  applicable  to  any  sufferer,  and  in  which, 
if  we  do  not  see  the  foreshadowing  of  the  Prince  of 
sufferers,  we  can  only  see  tasteless  exaggerations.  We 
do  not  need  to  construct  a  theory  of  prophecy  (which 
only  a  prophet  could  do)  in  order  to  be  sure  that  unless 
these  and  other  parts  of  this  Psalm  are  direct  prophecies 
of  the  minute  details  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  they 
swing  in  the  air,  attached  to  no  one.  "These  things 
therefore  the  soldiers  did,"  says  John,  as  if  they  were 
but  the  bhnd  instruments  to  fulfil  the  prophecy.  High 
above  all  their  cruelty  and  stohd  greed  we  are  to  see 
the  working  out  of  the  purpose  of  God, — a  point  of 
view  which  does  not  in  the  least  diminish  the  freedom 
or  responsibility  of  the  actors. 

IV.  Another  group,  as  profoundly  moved  as  the 
soldiers  were  indifferent,  stood  by  the  cross,  and  the 
original  marks  the  striking  contrast  between  the  weeping 
friends  and  the  legionaries.  Does  John  mean  that  there 
were  three  women  there,  or  four?  There  are  strong 
reasons  for  supposing  four ;  and,  if  so,  the  likelihood  is 
that   the   unnamed   sister   of  Jesus'   mother  was  "  the 


204  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xix.  17-30 

mother  of  Zebedee's  children,"  which  makes  the  sub- 
sequent incident  all  the  more  natural  and  pathetic. 
Jesus  knew  that  sorrow  which  accompanies  death,  the 
pain  of  leaving  dear  ones  whom  we  have  sheltered  to  a 
rough  world ;  and  on  His  cross  His  heart  not  only  bore 
the  sins  of  men,  but  felt  filial  care  for  the  mother  whom 
He  loved  as  a  son. 

His  address  to  Mary  as  "  woman  "  has  no  trace  of  the 
associations  which  now  cling  to  the  word,  while  yet  it 
gently  warns  her  that  the  special  relationship  is  ended, 
and  that  henceforth  adoring  love  of  her  Lord  is  to  take 
the  place  of  maternal  love.  Mary's  experience  of  the 
conflict  between  earthly  and  heavenly  love  was  peculiarly 
sharp,  because  the  same  person  was  the  object  of  both. 
*'  Behold  thy  son  ! "  authoritatively  commanded  her  to 
thmk  no  longer  of  Him  in  that  relation,  and  lovingly 
provided  for  her  another  comforter,  protector,  and  object 
for  her  affections. 

Does  He  not  speak  thus  to  all  mourning  souls  who 
love  Him,  bidding  them  find,  and  assuring  them  that  they 
may  find,  in  those  who  represent  Him  in  the  world, 
solace  for  their  grief  and  objects  for  their  care  ?  And 
does  not  His  entrusting  of  Mary  to  John  illustrate  by  a 
tender  example  how  love  to  Him  fits  us  to  carry  on  His 
tasks,  and  makes  us,  in  very  blessed  and  wonderful 
fashion.  His  representatives  on  earth  ?  Happy  we  if  we 
accept  as  swiftly  and  thankfully  the  offices  which  He 
honours  us  by  giving,  as  did  that  disciple  who  left  even 
the  cross  in  order  to  take  Mary  to  "his  own  home." 
So  the  mother  glides  out  of  the  Gospels ;  and  the  only 
time  we  hear  of  her  again  is  when  she  is  named,  after 
the  apostles,  as  one  of  the  disciples. 


Less.xxii.]  « It  is  Finished "  205 

V.  The  last  earthly  act  was  to  provide  for  His  mother, 
and,  that  done,  Jesus  knew  "  that  all  things  "  were  ''  now 
finished,"  and  nothing  remained  but  to  die.  The  con- 
sciousness of  accomplished  work  calmly  fills  His  mind. 
That  consciousness  allows  Him  to  give  heed  to  the 
physical  craving  which  He  had  repressed,  or,  possibly, 
scarcely  felt,  while  anything  remained  to  be  done.  Of 
course,  the  narrative  does  not  mean  that  Jesus  said  "  I 
thirst "  in  order  to  carry  out  the  Messianic  programme, 
but  that  His  cry,  like  all  the  rest  of  the  passion,  was 
Divinely  ordered  so  as  to  fulfil  the  prophecies.  It  is 
the  last  expression  of  bodily  suffering,  keenly  felt  once 
more,  in  the  cessation  of  the  tension  of  care  for  others. 
His  pity  and  love  bore  Him  above  these  pangs,  but 
not  so  completely  as  to  deaden  them.  He  had  refused 
the  stupefying  draught  previously  offered,  but  now  He 
accepted  the  vinegar,  which  was  meant  to  refresh,  and 
was  given  with  a  touch  of  human  kindness. 

The  same  lips,  which  were  parched  with  thirst  and 
feebly  uttered  the  complaint,  spoke  in  the  next  moment, 
when  moistened  with  the  drops  from  the  sponge,  the 
triumphant  "  It  is  finished."  Mark  the  absence  of 
specification  of  what  was  finished.  The  indefinite  ex- 
pression is  a  universal  one.  All  that  Jesus  had  come 
to  do  was  known  by  Him  to  be  accomplished.  Who 
of  us  dare  go  out  of  this  life  of  half-done  tasks  and 
imperfect  service  with  such  a  claim  on  our  lips  ?  It  far 
transcends  Paul's  "  I  have  finished  my  course."  Jesus, 
and  only  He,  dying,  looks  back  on  no  defects,  departures, 
or  omissions.  He  has  done  all  that  the  Father  gave 
Him  to  do,  all  that  love  prompted,  all  that  the  world 
needed.     That  dying  word  is  like  to,  but  greater  than, 


2o6  The  Gospel  of  St.  John    [Chap.  xix.  17-30 

the  voice  of  the  Creator  pronouncing  that  His  world 
was  "  very  good."  The  Divine  ideal  of  redemption, 
mightier  than  that  of  creation,  is  accomplished,  and 
that  finished  work  remains  for  ever,  needing  no  supple- 
ment, and  tolerating  none,  but  abiding  through  the  ages, 
the  foundation  of  men's  hopes  and  the  assurance  of  their 
salvation. 

The  consciousness  of  completed  work  could  only 
be  followed  by  the  voluntary  death.  "  He  bowed  His 
head,"  unbent  till  then,  and  inclined  at  last,  not  by 
reason  of  weakness,  but  by  His  own  will.  He  "  gave 
up  His  spirit," — an  expression  which  is  not  a  mere 
euphemism  for  natural  death,  but  distinctly  means  that 
the  death  of  Jesus  was  the  act  of  Jesus.  The  dark 
waters  were  indeed  round  Him,  but  could  not  cover 
Him  till  He  chose,  as  some  man,  standing  breast-high 
in  the  ocean,  might  will  to  bow  his  head  beneath  the 
sullen  sea,  and  so  voluntarily  let  it  roll  its  heavy,  sluggish 
wave  above  his  corpse. 


LESSON   XXIII 


The  Dawnings  of  Faith  in  the  Risen  Lord 

St.  John  xx.  i-i8 


1.  "  The  first  day  of  the  week 
Cometh  Mary  Magdalene  early, 
when  it  was  yet  dark,  unto  the 
sepulchre,  and  seeth  the  stone 
taken  awaj'  from  the  sepulchre. 

2.  Then  she  runneth,  and 
Cometh  to  Simon  Peter,  and  to 
the  other  disciple,  whom  Jesus 
loved,  and  saith  unto  them, 
They  have  taken  away  the  Lord 
out  of  the  sepulchre,  and  we 
know  not  where  they  have  laid 
Him. 

3.  Peter  therefore  went  forth, 
and  that  other  disciple,  and 
came  to  the  sepulchre. 

4.  So  they  ran  both  together  : 
and  the  other  disciple  did  out- 
run Peter,  and  came  first  to  the 
sepulchre. 

5.  And  he  stooping  down,  and 
looking  in,  saw  the  linen  clothes 
lying  ;  yet  went  he  not  in. 

6.  Then  cometh  Simon  Peter 
following  him,  and  went  into 
the  sepulchre,  and  seeth  the 
linen  clothes  lie, 

7.  And  the  napkin,  that  was 
about  His  head,  not  lying  with 
the  linen  clothes,  but  wrapped 
together  in  a  place  by  itself. 

8.  Then  went  in  also  that 
other  disciple,  which  came  first 
to  the  sepulchre,  and  he  saw, 
and  believed. 


9.  For  as  yet  the}'  knew  not 
the  scripture,  that  He  must  rise 
again  from  the  dead. 

10.  Then  the  disciples  went 
away  again  unto  their  own 
home. 

11.  But  Mary  stood  without 
at  the  sepulchre  weeping  :  and 
as  she  wept,  she  stooped  down, 
and  looked  into  the  sepulchre, 

12.  And  seeth  two  angels  in 
white  sitting,  the  one  at  the 
head,  and  the  other  at  the  feet, 
where  the  body  of  Jesus  had 
lain. 

13.  And  they  say  unto  her, 
Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ? 
She  saith  unto  them.  Because 
they  have  taken  away  my  Lord, 
and  I  know  not  where  they 
have  laid  Him. 

14.  And  when  she  had  thus 
said,  she  turned  herself  back, 
and  saw  Jesus  standing,  and 
knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus. 

15.  Jesus  saith  unto  her, 
Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ? 
whom  seekest  thou  ?  She,  sup- 
posing Him  to  be  the  gardener, 
saith  unto  Him,  Sir,  if  thou 
have  borne  Him  hence,  tell  me 
where  thou  hast  laid  Him,  and 
I  will  take  Him  away. 

16.  Jesus  saith  unto  her, 
Mary.     She  turned  herself,  and 


207 


2o8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xx.  i-iS 


saith     unto     Him,      Rabboni ; 
which  is  to  say,  Master. 

17.  Jesus  saith  unto  her. 
Touch  Me  not ;  for  I  am  not 
yet  ascended  to  My  Father  :  but 
go  to  My  brethren,  and  say 
unto   them,   I  ascend  unto  My 


Father,  and  your  Father  ;  and 
to  My  God,  and  your  God. 

18.  Mary  Magdalene  came 
and  told  the  disciples  that  she 
had  seen  the  Lord,  and  that  He 
had  spoken  these  things  unto 
her." 


JOHN'S  purpose  in  his  narrative  of  the  resurrection  is 
not  only  to  estabhsh  the  fact,  but  also  to  depict  the 
gradual  growth  of  faith  in  it,  among  the  disciples. 
The  two  main  incidents  in  this  lesson,  the  visit  of  Peter 
and  John  to  the  tomb  and  the  appearance  of  our  Lord 
to  Mary,  give  the  dawning  of  faith  before  sight  and  the 
rapturous  faith  born  of  sight.  In  the  remainder  of  the 
chapter,  beyond  our  lesson,  are  two  more  instances  of 
faith  following  vision,  and  the  teaching  of  the  whole  is 
summed  up  in  Christ's  words  to  the  doubter :  "  Because 
thou  hast  seen  Me,  thou  hast  believed  :  blessed  are  they 
that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed." 

I.  The  open  sepulchre  and  the  bewildered  alarm  it 
excited.  The  act  of  resurrection  took  place  before  sun- 
rise. "  At  midnight,"  probably,  "  the  bridegroom  came." 
It  was  fitting  that  He  who  was  to  scatter  the  darkness  of 
the  grave  should  rise  while  darkness  covered  the  earth, 
and  that  no  eye  should  behold  "  how  "  that  dead  was 
"raised  up."  The  earthquake,  and  the  descent  of 
angels,  and  the  rolling  away  of  the  stone,  were  after  the 
tomb  was  empty. 

John's  note  of  time  seems  somewhat  earlier  than  that 
of  the  other  Gospels,  but  is  not  so  much  so  as  to  require 
the  supposition  that  Mary  preceded  the  other  women. 
She  appears  alone  here,  because  the  reason  for  mention, 
ing  her  at  all  is  to  explain  how  Peter  and  John  knew  of 
the  empty  tomb,  and  she  alone  had  been  the  informant. 


Less.  XXIII.]    Dawnings  of  Faith  in  the  Risen  Lord    209 

In  these  Eastern  lands,  "  as  it  began  to  dawn/'  ''  very 
early,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,"  and  "  while  it  was  yet 
dark,"  are  times  very  near  each  other,  and  JNIary  may  have 
reached  the  sepulchre  a  little  before  the  others.  Her 
own  words  "  we  know  not "  show  that  she  had  spoken 
with  others  who  had  seen  the  empty  grave.  We  must 
therefore  suppose  that  she  had  with  the  others  come  to 
it,  seen  that  the  sacred  corpse  was  gone  and  their  spices 
useless,  exchanged  hurried  words  of  alarm  and  bewilder- 
ment, and  then  had  hastened  away,  before  the  appearance 
of  the  angels. 

The  impulse  to  tell  the  leaders  of  the  forlorn  band  the 
news  which  she  thinks  to  be  so  bad  was  womanly  and 
natural.  It  was  not  hope,  but  wonder  and  sorrow,  that 
quickened  her  steps,  as  she  ran  through  the  still  morning 
to  find  them.  Whether  they  were  in  one  house  or  not  is 
uncertain  ]  but,  at  all  events,  Peter's  denial  had  not  cut 
him  off  from  his  brethren,  and  the  two  who  were  so  con- 
stantly associated  before  and  afterwards  were  not  far 
apart  that  morning.  The  disciple  who  had  stood  by  the 
cross  to  almost  the  last  had  an  open  heart  and  probably 
an  open  house  for  the  denier.  "Restore  such  an 
one,  .  .  .  considering  thyself." 

Mary  had  seen  the  tomb  empty,  and  springs  to  the 
conclusion  that  "  they  " — some  unknown  persons — have 
taken  away  the  dead  body,  which,  with  clinging  love  that 
tries  to  ignore  death,  she  still  calls  "  the  Lord."  Possibly 
she  may  have  thought  that  the  resting-place  in  Joseph's 
new  sepulchre  was  only  meant  for  temporary  shelter 
(ver.  15).  At  all  events,  it  was  gone,  and  the  fact 
suggested  no  hope  to  her.  How  often  do  we,  in  like 
manner,  misinterpret  as  dark  what  is  really  pregnate  with 

14 


210  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xx.  1-18 

light,  and  blindly  attribute  to  "  them  "  what  Jesus  does  ! 
The  tone  of  mind  thus  remote  from  anticipation  of  the 
great  fact  is  a  precious  proof  of  the  historical  truth  of 
the  resurrection  ;  for  here  was  no  soil  in  which  hallu- 
cinations would  spring,  and  such  people  would  not  have 
believed  Him  risen  unless  they  had  seen  Him  living  ! 

II.  Peter  and  John  at  the  tomb,  the  dawning  of  faith 
and  the  continuance  of  bewildered  wonder.  In  the 
account,  we  may  observe,  first,  the  characteristic  con- 
duct of  each  of  the  two.  Peter  is  first  to  set  out,  and 
John  follows,  both  men  doing  according  to  their  kind. 
The  younger  runs  faster  than  his  companion.  He 
looked  into  the  tomb,  and  saw  the  wrappings  lying ;  but 
the  reverent  awe  which  holds  back  finer  natures  kept 
him  from  venturing  in.  Peter  is  not  said  to  have  looked 
before  entering.  He  loved  with  all  his  heart,  but  his 
love  was  impetuous  and  practical,  and  he  went  straight 
in,  and  felt  no  reason  why  he  should  pause.  His  bold- 
ness encouraged  his  friend,  as  the  example  of  strong 
natures  does.  Most  of  my  readers  will  recall  Bushnell's 
noble  sermon  on  "  Unconscious  Influence,"  from  this 
incident,  and  need  no  more  about  it. 

Observe,  too,  the  further  witness  of  the  folded  grave- 
clothes.  John  from  outside  had  not  seen  the  napkin, 
lying  carefully  rolled  up  apart  from  the  other  cloths.  It 
was  probably  laid  in  a  part  of  the  tomb  invisible  from 
without.  But  the  order  of  these  came  to  him,  when  he 
saw  them,  with  a  great  flash  of  illumination.  There  had 
been  no  hurried  removal. 

Here  had  been  no  hostile  hands,  or  there  would  not 
have  been  this  deliberation  ;  nor  friendly  hands,  or  there 
would  not  have  been  such  dishonour  to  the  sacred  dead 


Less.xxiii.]    Dawnings  of  Faith  in  the  Risen  Lord    211 

as  to  carry  away  the  body  nude.  What  did  it  mean? 
Could  He  Himself  have  done  for  Himself  what  He  had 
bade  them  do  for  Lazarus  ?  Could  He  have  laid  aside 
the  garments  of  the  grave  as  needing  them  no  more  ? 
"They  have  taken  away," — what  if  it  were  not  "  they," 
but  He  ?  No  trace  of  hurry  or  struggle  was  there.  He 
did  "  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight,"  but 
calmly,  deliberately,  in  the  majesty  of  His  lordship  over 
death.  He  rose  from  His  slumber  and  left  order  in  the 
land  of  confusion. 

Observe,  too,  the  birth  of  the  apostle's  faith.  John 
connects  it  with  the  sight  of  the  folded  garments.  "  Be- 
lieved "  here  must  mean  more  than  recognition  of  the 
fact  that  the  grave  was  empty.  The  next  clause  seems 
to  imply  that  it  means  belief  in  the  resurrection.  The 
scripture,  which  they  "  knew  "  as  scripture,  was  for  John 
suddenly  interpreted,  and  he  was  lifted  out  of  the 
ignorance  of  its  meaning,  which  till  that  moment  he  had 
shared  with  his  fellow-disciples.  Their  failure  to  under- 
stand Christ's  frequent  distinct  prophecies  that  He 
would  rise  again  the  third  day  has  been  thought 
incredible,  but  is  surely  intelligible  enough  if  we  re- 
member how  unexampled  such  a  thing  was,  and  how 
marvellous  is  our  power  of  hearing,  and  yet  not  hearing, 
the  plainest  truth.  We  all  in  the  course  of  our  lives  are 
lost  in  astonishment,  when  things  befall  us  which  we 
have  been  plainly  told  will  befall.  The  fulfilment  of 
all  Divine  promises  (and  threatenings)  is  a  surprise,  and 
no  warnings  beforehand  teach  one  tithe  so  clearly  as 
experience. 

John  believed,  but  Peter  still  was  in  the  dark.  Again 
the  former  had  outrun  his  friend.     His  more  sensitive 


212  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap.  xx.  i-iS 

nature,  not  to  say  his  deeper  love, — for  that  would  be 
unjust,  since  their  love  differed  in  quality  more  than  in 
degree, — had  gifted  him  with  a  more  subtle  and  swifter- 
working  perception.  Perhaps  if  Peter's  heart  had  not 
been  oppressed  by  his  sin,  he  would  have  been  readier 
to  feel  the  sunshine  of  the  wonderful  hope.  We  con- 
demn ourselves  to  the  shade  when  we  deny  our  Lord  by 
deed  or  word. 

III.  The  first  appearance  of  the  Lord,  and  revelation 
of  the  new  form  of  intercourse.  Nothing  had  been  said 
of  Mary's  return  to  the  tomb  ;  but  how  could  she  stay 
away?  The  disciples  might  go,  but  she  lingered, 
woman-like,  to  indulge  in  the  bitter-sweet  of  tears. 
Eyes  so  filled  are  more  apt  to  see  angels.  No  wonder 
that  these  calm  watchers,  in  their  garb  of  purity  and  joy, 
had  not  been  seen  by  the  two  men.  The  laws  of  such 
appearance  are  not  those  of  ordinary  optics.  Spiritual 
susceptibility  and  need  determine  who  shall  see  angels, 
and  who  shall  see  but  the  empty  place.  Wonder  and 
adoration  held  these  bright  forms  there.  They  had 
hovered  over  the  cradle  and  stood  by  the  shepherds  at 
Bethlehem,  but  they  bowed  in  yet  more  awestruck 
reverence  at  the  grave,  and  death  revealed  to  them  a 
deeper  depth  of  Divine  love. 

The  presence  of  angels  was  a  trifle  to  Mary,  who  had 
only  one  thought, — the  absence  of  her  Lord.  Surely 
that  touch  of  her  unmoved  answer,  as  if  speaking  to 
men,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  art.  She  says  "  My  Lord  " 
now,  and  "/  know  not,"  but  otherwise  repeats  her 
former  words,  untouched  by  any  hope  caught  from  John. 
Her  clinging  love  needed  more  than  an  empty  grave  and 
folded  clothes  and  waiting  angels  to  stay  its  tears,  and 


Less.xxiii.]    Dawnings  of  Faith  in  the  Risen  Lord    213 

she  turned  indifferently  and  wearily  away  from  the  inter- 
ruption of  the  question  to  plunge  again  into  her  sorrow 
Chrysostom  suggests  that  she  "  turned  herself,"  because 
she  saw  in  the  angels'  looks  that  they  saw  Christ  sud- 
denly appearing  behind  her  ;  but  the  preceding  explana- 
tion seems  better.  Her  not  knowing  Jesus  might  be 
accounted  for  by  her  absorbing  grief.  One  who  looked 
at  white-robed  angels,  and  saw  nothing  extraordinary, 
would  give  but  a  careless  glance  at  the  approaching 
figure,  and  might  well  fail  td  recognise  Him.  But 
probably,  as  in  the  case  of  the  two  travellers  to 
Emmaus,  her  "  eyes  were  holden,"  and  the  cause  of  non- 
recognition  was  not  so  much  a  change  in  Jesus  as  an 
operation  on  her. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  noteworthy  that  His  voice, 
which  was  immediately  to  reveal  Him,  at  first  suggested 
nothing  to  her  ;  and  even  His  gentle  question,  with  the 
significant  addition  to  the  angels'  words,  in  "  Whom 
seekest  thou  ? "  which  indicated  His  knowledge  that 
her  tears  fell  for  some  person  dear  and  lost,  only  made 
her  think  of  Him  as  being  the  gardener,  and  therefore 
probably  concerned  in  the  removal  of  the  body.  If 
He  were  so.  He  would  be  friendly  ]  and  so  she  ventured 
her  pathetic  petition,  which  does  not  name  Jesus  (so 
full  is  her  mind  of  the  one,  that  she  thinks  everybody 
must  know  whom  she  means),  and  which  so  overrated 
her  own  strength  in  saying  "I  will  take  Him  away." 
The  first  words  of  the  risen  Christ  are  on  His  lips  yet 
to  all  sad  hearts.  He  seeks  our  confidences,  and  would 
have  us  tell  Him  the  occasions  of  our  tears.  He  would 
have  us  recognise  that  all  our  griefs  and  all  our  desires 
point  to  one  person, — Himself, — as  the  one  real  object 


2  14  The  Gospel  of  St.  John      [Chap  xx.  1-18 

of  our    "  seeking,"   whom    finding,   we    need   weep    no 
more. 

Verse  sixteen  tells  us  that  Mary  turned  herself  to  see 
Him  when  He  next  spoke,  so  that,  at  the  close  of  her 
first  answer  to  Him,  she  must  have  once  more  resumed 
her  gaze  into  the  tomb,  as  if  she  despaired  of  the  new- 
comer giving  the  help  she  had  asked. 

Who  can  say  anything  about  that  transcendent 
recognition,  in  which  all  the  stooping  love  of  the  risen 
Lord  is  smelted  into  one  word,  and  the  burst  of  rapture, 
awe,  astonishment,  and  devotion  pours  itself  through 
the  narrow  channel  of  one  other  ?  If  this  narrative  is" 
the  work  of  some  anonymous  author  late  in  the  second 
century,  he  is  indeed  a  "  great  unknown,"  and  has 
managed  to  imagine  one  of  the  two  or  three  most 
pathetic  "  situations "  in  literature.  Surely  it  is  more 
reasonable  to  suppose  him  no  obscure  genius,  but  a 
well-known  recorder  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  knew 
for  fact.  Christ's  calling  by  name  ever  reveals  His 
loving  presence.  We  may  be  sure  that  He  knows  us 
by  name,  and  we  should  reply  with  the  same  swift 
cry  of  absolute  submission  as  sprang  to  Mary's  lips. 
"  Rabboni !  Master  !  "  is  the  fit  answer  to  His  call. 

But  Mary's  exclamation  was  imperfect  in  that  it  ex- 
pressed the  resumption  of  no  more  than  the  old  bond, 
and  her  gladness  needed  enlightenment.  Things  were 
not  to  be  as  they  had  been.  Christ's  "  Mary "  had 
indeed  assured  her  of  His  faithful  remembrance  and  of 
her  present  place  in  His  love  ;  but  when  she  clung  to 
His  feet  she  was  seeking  to  keep  what  she  had  to  learn 
to  give  up.  Therefore  Jesus,  who  invited  the  touch 
which  was  to  establish  faith  and  banish  doubt  (Luke  xxiv. 


Less.  XXIII.]    Dawnings  of  Faith  in  the  Risen  Lord    215 

39  ;  John  XX.  27),  bids  her  unclasp  her  hands,  and 
gently  instils  the  ending  of  the  blessed  past  by  opening 
to  her  the  superior  joys  of  the  begun  future.  His  words 
contain  for  us  all  the  very  heart  of  our  possible  relation 
to  Him,  and  teach  us  that  we  need  envy  none  who  com- 
panied  with  Him  here.  His  ascension  to  the  Father  is 
the  condition  of  our  truest  approach  to  Him.  His  pro- 
hibition encloses  a  permission.  "  Touch  Me  not ;  for  I 
am  not  yet  ascended,"  implies  "  When  I  am,  you  may." 

Further,  the  ascended  Christ  is  still  our  Brother. 
Neither  the  mystery  of  death  nor  the  impending  mystery 
of  dominion  broke  the  tie.  Again,  the  resurrection  is 
the  beginning  of  ascension,  and  is  only  then  rightly 
understood  when  it  is  considered  as  the  first  upward 
step  to  the  throne.  "  I  ascend,"  not  "  I  have  risen,  and 
will  soon  leave  you,"  as  if  the  ascension  only  began  forty 
days  after  on  Olivet.  It  is  already  in  process.  Once 
more  the  ascended  Christ,  our  Brother  still,  and  capable 
of  the  touch  of  reverent  love,  yet  is  separated  from  us 
by  the  character,  even  while  united  to  us  by  the  fact,  of 
His  fihal  and  dependent  relation  to  God.  He  cannot 
say  "  Our  Father  "  as  if  standing  on  the  common  human 
ground.  He  is  Son,  as  we  are  not,  and  we  are  sons 
through  Him,  and  can  only  call  God  our  Father  because 
He  is  Christ's. 

Such  were  the  immortal  hopes  and  new  thoughts 
which  Mary  hastened  from  the  presence  of  her  recovered 
Lord  to  bring  to  the  disciples.  Fragrant  though  but 
partially  understood,  they  were  like  half-opened  blossoms 
from  the  tree  of  life  planted  in  the  midst  of  that  garden, 
to  bloom  unfading,  and  ever  disclosing  new  beauty  in 
believing  hearts  till  the  end  of  time. 


LESSON    XXIV 
The  Sea  and  the   Shore 

St.  John  xxi.   1-14 


1.  "After  these  things  Jesus 
showed  Himself  again  to  the 
disciples  at  the  sea  of  Tiberias  ; 
and  on  this  wise  showed  He 
Himself. 

2.  There  were  together  Simon 
Peter,  and  Thomas  called  Didy- 
mus,  and  Nathanael  of  Cana  in 
Galilee,  and  the  sons  of  Zebe- 
dee,  and  two  other  of  His 
disciples. 

3.  Simon  Peter  saith  unto 
them,  I  go  a  fishing.  They  say 
unto  him,  We  also  go  with 
thee.  They  went  forth,  and 
entered  into  a  ship  immediately; 
and  that  night  they  caught 
nothing. 

4.  But  when  the  morning  was 
now  come,  Jesus  stood  on  the 
shore  :  but  the  disciples  knew 
not  that  it  was  Jesus. 

5.  Then  Jesus  saith  unto 
them,  Children,  have  ye  any 
meat  ?  They  answered  Him, 
No. 

6.  And  He  said  unto  them, 
Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side 
of  the  ship,  and  ye  shall  find. 
They  cast  therefore,  and  now 
they  were  not  able  to  draw  it 
for  the  multitude  of  fishes. 

7.  Therefore  that  disciple 
whom  Jesus  loved  saith  unto 
Peter,    It    is    the    Lord.      Now 


when  Simon  Peter  heard  that 
it  was  the  Lord,  he  girt  his 
fisher's  coat  unto  him,  (for  he 
was"  naked,)  and  did  cast  him- 
self into  the  sea. 

8.  And  the  other  disciples 
came  in  a  little  ship  ;  (for  they 
were  not  far  from  land,  but  as 
it  were  two  hundred  cubits,) 
dragging  the  net  with  fishes. 

9.  As  soon  then  as  they  were 
come  to  land,  they  saw  a  fire 
of  coals  there,  and  fish  laid 
thereon,  and  bread. 

10.  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
Bring  of  the  fish  which  3'e  have 
now  caught. 

11.  Simon  Peter  went  up,  and 
drew  the  net  to  land  full  of 
great  fishes,  an  hundred  and 
fifty  and  three  :  and  for  all  there 
were  so  many,  yet  was  not  the 
net  broken. 

12.  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
Come  and  dine.  And  none  of 
the  disciples  durst  ask  Him, 
"Who  art  Thou  ?  knowing  that 
it  was  the  Lord. 

13.  Jesus  then  cometh,  and 
taketh  bread,  and  giveth  them, 
and  fish  likewise. 

14.  This  is  now  the  third 
time  that  Jesus  showed  Him- 
self to  His  disciples,  after  that 
He  was  risen  from  the  dead." 


216 


Less.  XXIV.]        The  Sea  and  the  Shore  217 

THE  last  chapter  of  this  Gospel  is  obviously  an 
appendix  by  the  author.  The  last  verses  of 
chapter  xx.  are  clearly  intended  as  the  conclusion  of 
the  whole,  and,  as  clearly,  chapter  xxi.  is  by  the  same 
hand  as  the  former.  It  falls  into  two  parts, — the  former 
setting  forth  the  work  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and  the 
latter  the  varying  tasks  of  individuals.  The  former  is 
our  lesson,  which  is  parted  off  from  the  second  half  by 
the  notice  in  verse  fourteen. 

I.  We  note  the  little  group  and  their  night  of  toil. 
The  catalogue  is  significant.  There  are  seven  of  the 
disciples  together,  and  the  fact  that  they  were  together 
implies  the  resurrection.  What  stopped  the  disintegrat- 
ing process  which  began  at  Calvary  ?  Why  had  not  the 
sheep  scattered  when  the  Shepherd  was  smitten  ?  They 
would  certainly  have  sought  safety  in  flight,  and  buried 
their  shattered  illusions  and  hopes  in  isolation,  unless 
some  powerful  magnet  had  drawn  them  together.  It  is 
no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  holding  together  of  the 
apostles  after  the  crucifixion  is  not  the  least  cogent  proof 
of  the  resurrection. 

The  fact  that  they  were  in  Galilee  is  significant.  Jesus 
had  bid  them  go  ;  and  by  the  narration  of  this  incident 
John  unites  the  cycle  of  appearances  of  the  risen  Lord 
in  Jerusalem  and  in  Galilee,  which  are  recorded  separately 
in  the  Synoptics.  Nor  is  the  composition  of  the  company 
unimportant.  As  a  whole,  it  is  the  reproduction  of  the 
original  nucleus  mentioned  in  chapter  i.  Peter,  John, 
and  Nathanael  are  named  here  ;  and  the  conjecture  that 
the  remaining  two  of  the  first  five  disciples — namely, 
Andrew  and  Philip — are  the  anonymous  two  of  this 
narrative  seems  reasonable.     If  so,  all   who   had  been 


2t8  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap. xxi.  1-14 

at  the  beginning  were  recipients  of  this  "  manifestation," 
with  the  addition  of  Thomas  and  James,  who  make 
up  the  number  of  completeness,  the  symboHc  seven, 
which  indicates  the  representative  character  of  the 
group. 

The   individuals    are   significant,   as    is    the  order   of 
mention.     First   comes    Peter,   not   merely  because  he 
was  usually  foremost ;  for  he  is  associated  with  Thomas, 
the  denier  with  the  doubter,  as  if  the  two  greatest  sinners 
were  put  first,  the  more  to  enhance  the  love  which  drew 
near  to  them.     Then  comes  Nathanael,   the  guileless, 
who  had  been  seeing  ever  greater  things  during  all  the 
Lord's  ministry,  and   had  never   been  heard  of  again 
since  that  first  day.     He  is  the  type  of  quiet  growth, 
silent  advance  in  vision,   and   Christ-like  guilelessness. 
Then  come  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  John  hiding  himself  as 
much  as  possible,  according  to  his  wont.     Who  but  him- 
self would  have  put  him  in  that  place  ?     It  is  an  unmis- 
takable  sign  of  his   authorship.     Then  come    the   two 
anonymous  disciples,  who   had  nothing  to   make   their 
names  worth  handing  down,  but  yet  were  worthy  to  see 
the  Lord  on  the  shore.     Commonplace  people,  with  no 
special   brilliancy  of  gifts   or   distinguished  capacity   of 
service,  are  none  the  worse  for  obscurity,  and  see  the 
Master  just  as  well. 

Peter  is  leader  as  usual.  His  purpose  to  "  go  a-fish- 
ing  "  was  welcomed  by  the  others.  It  was  no  despairing 
return  to  their  old  trade,  as  if  the  high  hopes  with  which 
they  had  left  it  were  all  gone  to  water,  but  the  calm  oc- 
cupation of  themselves  with  wholesome  toil,  while  with 
patience  waiting  for  the  promised  presence  of  Jesus. 
The  best  way  of  spending  times  of  expectation  of  great 


Less.  XXIV.]        The  Sea  and  the  Shore  219 

events  is  in  the  discharge  of  small  ordinary  duties.  To 
fishers  at  their  work  Jesus  manifests  Himself. 

II.  What  befell  them  at  sea.  The  long  night  of  fruit- 
less toil  perhaps  may  have  reminded  some  of  them  of  the 
other  similar  experience ;  but,  more  probably,  they  were 
too  busy  and  weary  to  think  of  anything  but  their  empty 
nets.  Whether  they  remembered  that  first  miraculous 
draught  of  fishes  or  no,  we  must  keep  it  constantly  in 
view,  if  we  would  understand  this  incident,  and  must 
remember  that  our  Lord  Himself  gave  it  a  symbolical 
meaning.  The  whole  of  the  events  in  this  lesson  point 
to  that  symbolism  as  a  chief  part  of  the  intention  ;  and, 
while  it  is  easy  to  be  over-ingenious  in  translating  the 
facts  into  parables,  it  is  unwise  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the 
broad  features  which  receive  their  full  meaning  only 
when  so  translated. 

As  the  day  was  breaking  over  the  Eastern  girdling 
hills,  and  the  cold  air  at  sunrise  telling  of  a  change  in 
the  dark  world,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore.  The  place  is 
significant, — the  disciples  tossing  on  the  water,  the  Lord 
standing  on  the  firm  beach,  with  the  light  playing  round 
Him.  Can  we  fail  to  see  in  that  the  picture  of  the  con- 
dition of  His  servants  in  contrast  with  the  rest  and 
stable  glory  where  He  dwells  ?  And  may  we  not  see 
in  His  attitude  the  same  inspiring  truth  which  upheld 
Stephen  dying,  when  he  saw  the  Son  of  Man  in  the 
opened  heaven,  standing  as  ready  to  help  ?  The  dis- 
ciples did  not  recognise  Him.  Throughout  the  forty 
days  His  will  determined  when  He  should  be  known. 

The  Unknown  speaks  as  a  superior,  using  the  address 
"  Children,"  and  His  question  in  the  original  implies 
the  expectation  of  a  "No."     "Then  you  have  not  any- 


220  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xxi.  1-14 

thing  to  eat  ?  "  He  knew  the  state  of  things  before 
asking,  but  He  wished  the  acknowledgment.  Is  not 
that  ever  His  procedure  with  His  servants,  drawing 
them  to  confess  their  failure,  and  so  preparing  them  for 
the  blessing,  which  He  cannot  send  except  to  the  con- 
sciously weak  and  powerless  ?  An  honest  and  humble 
"  No  "  is  generally  followed  by  correction  of  methods  or 
fields,  and  that  by  full  nets.  If  we  said  it  more  readily 
to  Him  who  is  ever  interested  in  our  work,  we  should  not 
have  to  say  it  so  often  to  ourselves. 

The  prompt  obedience  to  the  Stranger's  directions 
was  probably  due  to  the  disciples'  belief  that  He  had 
seen  from  the  shore  some  sign  of  a  shoal  which  they  in  the 
twilight  had  not  noticed.  None  of  them  had  any  thought 
of  His  being  anything  more  than  a  passing  traveller, 
stopping  to  look  on.  The  swift  result  is,  alas  !  not 
always  the  experience  of  even  the  humblest  and  most 
docile  of  Christ's  servants  ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that, 
though  in  regard  to  immediate  issues  the  parable  of 
this  incident  may  fail,  it  does  not  fail  in  regard  to  their 
certainty.  Jesus  did  not  promise  them  that  they  should 
find  at  once,  nor  does  He  promise  us ;  but  He  does 
promise  that,  sooner  or  later,  our  labour  will  not  be  "  in 
vain,"  if  it  be  "  in  the  Lord."'     And  that  may  content  us. " 

The  beautiful  episode  of  Peter  and  John  is  full  of 
meaning.  Love  has  quick  eyes,  and  is  first  to  discern 
the  Christ.  Its  prerogative  is  to  trace  His  working 
where  others  do  not  see  Him ;  and  for  love  it  is  enough 
to  know  that  "  it  is  the  Lord,"  and  to  sit  quietly  blessed 
in  contemplation.  But  there  is  another  kind  of  faithful 
devotion,  not  so  quick  to  discern,  but  eager  to  act. 
John  could  sit  still,  satisfied  to  gaze,  but  Peter  flung  his 


Less.  XXIV.]        The  Sea  and  the  Shore  221 

upper  garment  about  him,  and  was  over  the  side  and 
splashing  in  the  water  before  he  knew  what  he  was  doing. 
He  was  only  a  hundred  yards  off,  and  would  have  been 
by  Jesus  almost  as  soon  if  he  had  sat  still ;  but  that  was 
not  his  way,  and  "there  are  diversities  of  operations." 
Besides,  penitence  and  the  blended  shame  and  joy  of 
restoration  made  him  flounder  thus  quickly  to  his  Lord. 
He  had  said,  "  Depart  from  me  ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man, 
O  Lord,"  on  that  first  similar  occasion ;  but  the  sense 
of  sin  which  drives  to  Jesus  is  deeper  and  wholesomer 
than  that  which  drives  from  Him.  The  safest  place  for 
the  forgiven  penitent  is  close  to  the  Lord. 

HI.  What  befell  on  the  shore.  If  the  sea  is  the 
symbol  of  this  unquiet  world,  and  the  night  of  toil  ended 
by  the  securing  the  fish,  that  of  the  Church's  work  as 
fishers  of  men,  the  stable  shore  and  what  happened  there 
must  be  the  symbol  of  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God.  Who  kindled  that  mysterious  fire,  or 
whence  came  the  fish  and  bread,  we  cannot  tell.  But 
its  meaning  is  clear  enough.  Not  only  may  it  teach  us 
how  even  here  Jesus  provides  seasons  of  refreshing 
repose  for  wearied  servants,  and  cares  for  their  need, 
but  it  prophesies  of  the  repast  which  He  prepares  here- 
after for  them  ;  and  that  aspect  of  the  meal  gives  signi- 
ficance to  the  command  to  bring  of  the  fish  now  caught. 
For  in  that  world  of  rest  we  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  our 
doings,  and  the  results  of  Christian  service  are  parts  of 
the  provision  of  His  table  in  His  kingdom. 

Peter  is  again  first  to  haul  in  the  net.  An  eye-witness 
speaks  in  the  precise  enumeration  of  number  and  speci- 
fication that  they  were  "  great  fishes."  Fantastic  expla- 
nations of  these  points  have  been  given,  which  need  not 


222  The  Gospel  of  St.  John     [Chap.  xxi.  1-14 

be  repeated,  but  the  unbroken  net  may  be  meant  to 
teach  that  all  Christ's  true  servants  will  be  landed  on 
that  peaceful  shore. 

Jesus  invites  His  disciples  to  the  meal,  but  they  hold 
back  in  awe.  There  the  parallel  fails  ;  for  then  the 
profounder  the  reverence,  the  closer  the  approach,  and 
in  the  sunlit  certainties  of  the  land  where  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is,  none  of  the  disciples  will  need  to  ask, 
Who  art  Thou  ?  knowing  that  it  is  the  Lord.  Then  He 
Himself  will  come  forth  and  serve  His  feasting  servants, 
according  to  His  own  promise,  and  as  He  did  on  that 
morning  by  the  lake.  For  us,  too,  the  scene  of  our 
labours,  failures,  and  darkened  nights  of  toil  and  weeping 
will  he  sleeping  in  the  morning  sunlight,  and  from  the 
Lord's  own  hands  we  shall  receive  the  blessed  results 
which  His  grace  has  given  to  issue  from  our  poor  service, 
mingled  with  the  yet  more  blessed  and  glorious  issues, 
with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  them 
at  His  hands. 


LESSON   XXV 
Review  Lesson  Thoughts 

THE  passion  week  occupies  nearly  half  of  this  Gospel. 
Why  should  it  ?  The  answer  will  carry  us  far 
into  the  mystery  of  the  Cross,  which  thus  throws  its 
shadow,  or  rather  its  light,  over  so  wide  a  field. 

Lessons  XIIL  and  XIV.  are  preliminary  to  the  main 
theme.  The  raising  of  Lazarus  was  closely  connected  with 
the  crucifixion,  as  the  excitement  it  produced  steeled  and 
precipitated  the  rulers'  resolution.  It  casts  light  on  the 
Cross,  by  the  strange  contrast  between  Jesus  as  giving 
life  to  the  dead  and  Himself  dying. 

The  narrative  brings  out  three  phases  in  the  self- 
revelation  of  Jesus, — His  dignity,  as  expressed  in  His 
majestic  promise  to  the  sisters ;  His  declaration,  impos- 
sible to  sane  human  lips,  that  He  is  resurrection  and 
life,  in  whom,  believing,  dead  men  live,  and,  living, 
never  die;  His  authoritative  questioning  as  to  faith  in 
Him,  and  His  acceptance  of  the  twofold  tide  of  the 
Christ  and  Son  of  God.  The  second  phase  is  that  of 
His  sharing  in  the  true  human  emotions  of  sorrow  and 
indignation  at  the  ravages  of  sin,  His  troubles  and  tears. 
The  third  is  His  Divine,  life-giving  power,  breaking  the 
fetters  with  a  word.  He  weeps,  and  He  says,  "  Lazarus, 
come  forth."     To  know  Him  aright,  we  must  take  both 

223 


2  24  T^®  Gospel  of  St.  John 

into   account.      To   understand    the    Cross,    we    must 
remember  the  grave  of  Lazarus. 

Lesson  XIV.  gives  a  further  preparation  for  that  central 
mystery  of  love,  by  teaching  us  to  look  at  Christ's  death 
with  His  eyes.  So  beheld  it  is  wondrously  transfigured, 
and  becomes  radiant  with  glory, — the  condition  of  His 
bringing  forth  much  fruit,  the  pattern  to  which  the  lives 
of  all  true  servants  must  conform,  since  only  followers 
are  reckoned  servants.  But  amid  all  the  glorious 
anticipations  there  blends  the  minor  key  of  human 
shrinking,  and  the  calm  spirit  is  troubled,  and  flesh 
prompts  the  cry  for  escape  ;  but  the  unfaltering  will  and 
unwavering  love  to  us  keep  Him  from  yielding  to  the 
innocent  recoil  from  death.  The  heavenly  Voice 
answered  the  filial  prayer,  and  once  more  the  visions 
of  what  His  death  would  do  filled  His  thoughts.  It  was 
to  be  the  judgment  of  the  world,  the  casting  out  of  the 
world's  Prince, — the  all-attractive  magnet  to  bring  hearts 
to  Him,  drawn  by  the  all-subduing  forces  of  His  sacri- 
fice. There  is  but  one  conception  of  Christ's  death, 
which  saves  these  visions  from  the  name  of  fond 
delusions,  and  delivers  Him  from  the  charge  of  going  to 
His  death  with  a  false  idea  of  His  own  importance ;  and 
that  is  the  belief  that  He  died  the  sacrifice  for  the  sins 
of  the  world. 

Lessons  XV.  to  XIX.  carry  us  to  the  upper  room, 
that  simple  chamber  on  the  roof,  which  by  these  few 
hours  has  become  for  all  time  "  the  holy  place  of  the 
tabernacles  of  the  Most  High."  First  came  a  deed  of 
transcendent  love,  fitly  followed  by  the  inexhaustible 
words  of  comfort  and  teaching;  and  these,  again,  lead 
up  to  the  great  prayer,  than  which  the  speech  of  earth 


Review  Lesson  Thoughts  225 

can  utter,  and  the  ears  of  mortals  hear,  nothing  more 
sacred.  Silent  adoration  is  more  to  the  purpose  than 
many  words. 

In  Lesson  XV.  the  central  truth  is  that  of  Jesus  as 
servant,  and  of  cleansing  as  His  lowliest,  loftiest  service. 
The  sweet  and  wondrous  story  is  preceded  by  a  pro- 
found exposition  of  its  motives,  from  which  we  learn 
that  even  Christ's  love  was  capable  of  increasing  tender- 
ness, and  that  He  too  felt  the  truly  human  impulse  to 
make  last  moments  specially  full  of  tokens  of  love.  The 
consciousness  of  His  Divine  origin,  authority,  and 
destination  moved  Him  to  the  lowly  garb  and  act 
of  the  attendant  slave.  So  His  humiliation  became  a 
revelation  of  His  exaltation,  and  in  it  He  taught  us  the 
right  use  of  felt  power  and  superiority.  How  different 
the  world  and  we  should  be  if  we  laid  that  lesson  to 
heart !  The  act  of  service  reminds  us,  as  in  a  sensible 
symbol,  of  the  emptying  Himself  of  His  garments  of 
glory,  but  is  yet  more  impressive  and  touching  in  its 
literality  than  as  a  symbol.  This  unclothed,  stooping 
Man,  washing  the  dusty  feet,  and  taking  their  foulness 
on  to  the  cloth  that  wrapped  Himself,  is  the  incarnate 
God.  Who  can  say  anything  worthy  ?  The  lesson  of 
cleansing,  as  essential  to  participation  in  Him,  needs 
no  enforcement,  nor  the  teaching  that  this  lowly  act 
of  His  is  the  law  for  us.  What  they  need  is  that 
we  should  live  as  if  we  believed  them,  and  should 
not  be  content  with  admiring  the  story,  but  should 
follow  it. 

The  sweet  and  deep  consolations  of  the  three  succeed- 
ing lessons  scarcely  admit  of  summarising;  but  we 
should  try  to  grasp  firmly  the  main  thought  of  each. 

15 


2  26  The  Gospel  of  St.  John 

That  of  Lesson  XVI.  seems  to  be  the  great  truth  that 
the  absent  Christ  is  present  with  all  who  love  Him, 
and  that  through  the  Divine  Spirit.  "  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled"  gives  the  purpose  of  the  whole. 
"  Believe  also  in  Me  "  shows  how  troubled  hearts  may 
be  calmed  and  solitary  ones  companioned.  His  absence 
is  but  in  continuation  of  the  design  of  His  presence. 
He  has  gone  before  us  to  prepare  the  many  mansions 
of  the  Father's  house,  just  as,  if  we  may  say  so,  the 
two  disciples  had  gone  before  the  rest  to  prepare  the 
chamber  where  they  were.  Separation  for  such  a 
purpose  means  reunion.  The  permanent  presence  of 
the  Advocate,  the  Spirit  of  strength,  is  assured  to  all 
Christians,  and  in  that  presence  Jesus  Himself  comes 
to  us.  "Presence"  and  "absence"  are  delusive  words 
when  applied  to  the  relations  between  us  and  our  Lord. 
No  Christian  has  any  right  to  think  of  Jesus  as  away 
from  him.  He  comes  by  His  Spirit,  and  we  can  bring 
and  keep  Him  by  keeping  His  word.  Then  He  will 
make  His  abode  wath  us. 

Lesson  XVIL  sets  forth  the  indissoluble  union, 
independent  of  "  place,"  between  Christ  and  us,  by  the 
parable  of  the  vine.  The  main  idea  in  it  is  the  unity  of 
life  between  Christ  and  us.  That  unity  is  not  to  be 
weakened  and  watered  down  into  metaphor.  The  life 
of  Jesus  Christ  does  move  in  every  Christian  spirit,  as 
truly  as  the  vine's  sap  permeates  every  blushing  cluster 
and  tiny  twig.  We  are  fruitful  only  in  the  measure  in 
which  it  permeates  us.  But  that  unity  is  of  a  higher 
kind  than  vegetative  oneness,  which  does  not  mean  that 
it  is  less  real.  A  branch  can  depart  from  this  Vine, 
and  there  must  be  the  conscious  effort  to  abide.     How 


Review  Lesson  Thoughts  227 

do  we  resist  the  tendency  to  separation?  By  letting 
His  words  abide  in  us  (John  xv.  7),  and  keeping  His 
commandments  (John  xv.  10).  And  what  are  His 
commandments  ?  They  are  all  one, — love  (John  xv. 
12).  And  what  are  the  results  of  abiding?  Fruit, 
true  discipleship,  the  abiding  in  us  of  His  perfect  joy, 
filling  our  hearts,  the  possession  of  His  confidence, 
insight  into  His  doings.  His  friendship,  and  the  power 
of  reception  of  all  that  we  desire  when  our  desires  are 
abiding  in  Him. 

Lesson  XVHI.  expands  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  as  the 
continual  possession  of  believers,  and  that  especially  in 
two  ways,  as  convicting  the  world  by  the  ministry  of 
Christians,  and  as  teaching  the  Church.  In  regard  to 
their  defenceless  position  in  a  hostile  world.  Christians 
are  to  fall  back  trustfully  on  the  assurance  that  they 
have  an  unfailing  Helper,  who,  through  them,  will  carry 
on  the  great  plea  against  the  world.  The  world's  sin  is 
mainly  manifest  in  its  unbelief  in  Him.  What  must 
He  have  been  who  could  set  that  at  the  head  of  the 
catalogue  of  sins  ?  A  righteousness  which  may  be  the 
world's  is  revealed  by  the  ascension  and  glory  of  the 
Crucified,  and  a  judgment  which  will  crush  sin,  if  it 
have  not  been  cleansed  by  accepting  Christ's  righteous- 
ness, is  established  by  the  fact  that  already  in  the  Cross 
the  Prince  of  the  world  has  been  cast  out.  These  three 
truths  are  the  staple  of  the  Church's  message,  and  will 
be  victorious  in  proportion  as  we  hold  to  them,  and 
proclaim  them  in  dependence  on  the  convincing  Spirit. 
His  work  lies  within  the  Church  as  well  as  on  the  world 
by  the  Church ;  and  step  by  step  He  guides  docile 
souls  into  all  truth  concerning  Jesus,  glorifying  Him  as 


2  28  The  Gospel  of  St.  John 

Jesus  has  glorified  the  Father.  This  teaching  Spirit  is 
with  us  if  we  are  abiding  in  Christ. 

The  unapproachable  sanctity  of  the  intercessory 
prayer  bids  us  listen  in  silence.  Jesus  prays  for  Himself. 
Note  His  petition,  that  He  may  be  glorified  ;  its  purpose 
not  His  own  advantage,  but  ours,  attained  by  His  glori- 
fying of  the  Father  ;  its  grounds,  namely,  that  His  return 
to  His  eternal  glory  is  the  completion  of  the  gifts  and 
mission  already  His  (vers.  2,  3),  and  the  fit  reward  of  His 
work  (ver.  4).  Then  comes  the  prayer  for  the  disciples, 
which  is  summed  in  that  one  petition,  "keep."  That 
prayer,  like  the  former,  is  grounded  on  two  thoughts, — 
the  genuine  though  imperfect  discipleship  of  His  disciples 
(vers.  6-10),  and  their  desolation  when  left  by  Him  (ver. 
11).  To  be  kept  "in  the  Name"  is  the  true  security 
and  blessedness.  It  is  Christ's  desire  for  us,  if  we  are 
His.  This  prayer  was  the  beginning  of  His  continual 
intercession.  Like  the  mighty  angel  of  the  Apocalypse, 
He  stands  here,  as  with  one  foot  on  the  sea  of  time  and 
the  other  on  the  eternal  shore,  and  lifts  up  the  voice 
which  God  heareth  always,  for  us  tossing  on  the  billows. 
The  glorified  Christ  is  the  interceding  Christ. 

Lessons  XX.  and  XXI.  go  together,  as  the  arrest  and 
trial.  The  chief  point  in  the  former  is  the  revelation  of 
Christ's  voluntary  surrender  to  force  which  by  one  flash  of 
His  will  He  could  paralyse.  The  contrast  between  such 
power  kept  by  Him  sheathed  and  idle,  and  Peter's  foolish 
brandishing  of  his  useless  weapon,  heightens  the  impres- 
sion of  the  Lord's  meek  submission,  while  His  words  to 
the  soldiers  express  the  motive  for  His  submission  to 
suffering  and  death  so  distinctly  that  they  need  no 
change    in    order   to    set  forth    the   very  heart  of  His 


Review  Lesson  Thoughts  229 

redeeming  work  :  "  If  ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go  their 
way." 

The  next  lesson  is  more  occupied  with  Pilate  and 
rulers  than  with  Jesus,  and  that  very  fact  is  eloquent  of 
His  meek  patience,  as  a  lamb  silent  before  its  shearers. 
Three  types  of  character  appear  united  against  Jesus. 
The  rude  soldiers  mock,  and  their  mockery  turns  to 
honour  and  prophecies.  Pilate  is  self-interested,  irreso- 
lute, troubled  by  suspicions  that  this  is  no  common  man, 
and  certainly  no  malefactor.  But  he  gets  no  answer  to 
his  question,  because  he  had  not  heeded  former  answers 
to  former  ones,  was  stifling  convictions,  and  doing  violence 
to  conscience  for  personal  advantage.  His  taunts  at  the 
Jews  and  their  helpless  King  told  how  ill  at  ease  he  was, 
and  how  degraded  in  his  own  eyes  by  cowardly  compli- 
ance with  a  howling  mob.  The  bitter  enmity  of  the 
rulers  drove  them  on  to  deny  their  King,  and  to  be  false 
to  their  national  hopes.  They  hated  Jesus  so  much  that 
they  swore  loyalty  to  Tiberius.  Christ,  or  tyrants,  is  the 
alternative  for  us  too. 

John's  account  of  the  crucifixion  is  intended  to 
emphasise  the  calm  majesty  of  the  dying  Christ,  and  to 
point  to  His  cross  as  His  regal  throne.  Hence  he  tells 
of  the  central  place  between  the  malefactors,  and  not  of 
the  scoffs  of  one  of  them,  and  dwells  on  the  fact  that  the 
inscription  was  set  by  Pilate's  order,  and  that  it  pro- 
claimed Christ's  royalty  in  the  three  languages  which 
divided  the  civilised  world ;  and  that  it  not  only  pro- 
claimed His  royalty  as  His  claim,  but  as  a  fact,  and  that 
it  was  a  permanent  record.  Hence,  too,  he  tells  of  the 
rent  garments  and  unrent  robe,  and  points  to  the  minute 
correspondence  of  the  details  with  the  Psalm  in  which  a 


230  The  Gospel  of  St.  John 

royal  sufferer  of  old  had  spoken.  Hence  he  tells,  hid- 
ing himself,  of  the  calmness  of  loving  care  which  had 
entrusted  him  with  the  precious  bequest  of  the  mother  of 
the  Lord ;  and  hence  he  tells  how,  with  that  last  act  of 
thoughtful  filial  love,  Jesus  felt  His  mission  done,  and,  in 
triumphant  consciousness  of  a  finished  work,  willed  to 
die,  and  bowing  His  head,  which  drooped  because  He 
bowed  it,  died,  and  therein  proved  Himself  the  Lord  of 
death  and  life. 

The  tvv^o  scenes  from  the  resurrection  morning  illustrate 
the  growth  of  the  disciples'  faith  in  the  risen  Lord.  The 
evangelist  hides  his  own  personality,  but  he  tells  that  he 
was  the  first  to  believe  in  the  resurrection  ;  and  his  narra- 
tive, so  vivid  and  minute,  shows  how  that  morning  lived 
in  his  memory.  The  first  faith  in  Christ's  resurrection 
came  not  from  sight,  but  from  the  evidence  of  the  empty 
tomb,  the  folded  grave-clothes,  and  the  flash  of  light 
upon  "  the  Scripture,"  which  these  brought  to  John.  He 
outran  Peter  and  them  all  in  faith  ;  and  though  Peter 
was  first  in  the  tomb,  his  companion  was  first  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  what  met  them  there.  The  second 
believer  in  the  resurrection  was  the  first  beholder  of  the 
risen  Lord.  But  it  was  not  sight,  but  hearing,  that 
revealed  Him  ;  and  we  may  be  sure  that  hearing  would 
have  been  as  ineffectual  as  sight,  unless  He  had  willed  to 
be  known.  We  cannot  tell  why  Jesus  chose  to  be  seen 
first  by  Mary,  unless  we  take  the  other  evangelist's  hint, 
"out  of  whom  He  had  cast  seven  devils,"  as  supplying 
the  reason,  in  that  she  owed  so  much  and  loved  so 
much  ;  but  we  can  lay  to  heart  the  teaching  as  to  the 
possibility  of  more  blessed  intercourse  with  the  ascended 
Lord  than  any  clasping  of  His  feet  here  could  ever  bring, 


Review  Lesson  Thoughts  231 

and  may  thankfully  and  humbly  claim  the  brotherhood 
with  Him  on  His  throne,  and  the  participation  with  Him 
in  the  Fatherhood  of  His  Father  and  ours,  which  He  has 
given  to  us  all,  when  He  gave  them  to  the  kneeling 
woman. 

The  last  scene  by  the  lake  in  the  morning  light  is 
clearly  best  understood  as  being  a  prophetical  repetition, 
with  significant  differences,  of  the  first  miraculous 
draught  of  fishes,  directed  not  only,  as  that  was,  to 
impressing  by  symbol  the  conditions  of  service  on  the 
future  fishers  of  men,  but  also,  while  confirming  the 
lessons  of  that  earlier  scene,  going  beyond  it,  in  its 
blessed  symbols  of  the  reward.  The  fire  on  the  shore, 
the  presence  of  the  recognised  Lord  in  the  breaking 
morning,  the  various  ways  by  which  the  disciples  reach 
the  beach,  the  firm  shore  itself,  the  refreshment  prepared, 
the  command  to  bring  the  fish  they  had  caught,  the 
meal  at  which  Jesus  is  the  servant,  all  point  on  to  the 
result  and  reward  of  His  servants'  toil,  when  they  "  rest 
from  their  labours,"  by  the  fire  which  His  own  hands 
have  kindled  on  the  eternal  shore,  and  "  their  works  do 
follow  them,"  inasmuch  as  they  are  bidden  "  to  bring  of 
the  fish  which  they  had  caught." 


Printed  by  Hazelly  Watson,  6^  Vzney,  Ld.,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


Date  Due 


n 


-U. 


jic2  5  '4>|JA4--54^C 


^ 


*T  ■  ', 


m- 


i^ 


4^ 


'--■'*?  ^ 


W 


RO  ^i\mij'Aq 


■MKeP!!^?^ 


TT?-^^ 


DE  1  b  ^53 


