ie 
j 
RATI 
oye 


: 


Fae ew yr 

Ye Neuen? i 

Sy Fa era OES 
a 


Scere Scape eye 


ere Naa st 
Cee Ae Yi saa ries ove 


Tom 
fry 


ive es í i 
Ey y j j A ; 

- : Na YN E aw 

ues pall aie nee 


4.17 Py eA 


yar ee 


YD yaen sae 
ie Og 


‘Cah aie ah die ? 
PEE teres J f > 
eo i RA ji P i : 
Sry Peet a Í ies aa X l See = twits 
: = p! N " A t ApS 
è 4 x inas 
AN 
~ 


es, 


Deas NE 


<1 
f : N n rr PAAS UAA 


Rees A z SN ai 
ene : Re se > a R Ra fa 
nana DA, SEA MS Aayi : i ; 
oan get Carew j aes 
Ney t hw ; oe Pees 
Na Ny 
apes arte SR 
PV ok Reuters 
bs oe 
RN 
TON Rha x 


Pilla > Sui seh 
puis baer 


eae 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2025 


httops://archive.org/details/owb_T5-CWR-083 


The 
Lamp of Prophecy 


OR 


Signs of the Times 


By 
H. A. IRONSIDE, Lirt.D. 
Pastor, Moopy MEMORIAL CHURCH, CHICAGO 


Author, “Lectures on the Revelation,” “Lectures on 
Daniel,” “The Mysteries of God,” “In the 
Heavenlies,’ “Four Golden Hours on the 
Second Coming,” “Is the Church 
Built on Peter,” etc., etc. 


FOURTH EDITION 


ZONDERVAN PUBLISHING HOUSE 
GRAND RAPIDS ` MICHIGAN 


COPYRIGHT, MCMXL, BY 
ZONDERVAN PUBLISHING HOUSE 


PRINTED IN U. S. A. 


EIGHT FORTY-SEVEN OTTAWA AVENUE 
GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN 


PREFACE 


THE Apostle Peter tells us in the first chapter of 
his Second Letter that we do well to take heed in our 
hearts to the sure word of prophecy, which shines as 
a light in a dark place, while we are waiting for the 
dawning of the day and looking for the rising of the 
morning star. These words should be of special in- 
terest to the people of God in such portentous times 
as those in which our lot has been cast. It is a great 
pity that in many evangelical churches the study of 
prophecy is almost entirely ignored and sometimes 
even frowned upon: and yet there is nothing more cal- 
culated to rouse Christians to a sense of their re- 
sponsibility to live for God and give the gospel to 
a lost world as the expectation of our Lord’s imminent 
return. 

In my own ministry, I have found untold blessing 
followed the proclamation of the great truths that are 
linked with this blessed hope. The pages that com- 
pose the present volume are either articles that have 
appeared in various periodicals during the past ten 
years or are stenographic reports of actual addresses 
delivered. While there is no exact order of presenta- 
tion, yet they are all, in my judgment, intimately 
enough connected to form one whole, and may thus 
be read in order, as an attempt to open up the truth 
of the prophetic Word. I have in mind particularly 
those who have not given much attention to these things 


or others who by wrong teaching have had their faith 
shaken. All I ask of each reader is that he read the 
messages with an open mind, and if at times he does 
not find himself in agreement with what is presented, 
that he search the Scriptures carefully to see whether 
these things be so. If they are not in accord with the 
Word, I would have no one receive them. But if con- 
vinced, as I am myself, that they do indeed set forth 
the truth concerning the near future as revealed in 
the inspired Writings, my hope is that under God they 
will prove to be for the edification and sanctification 
of those who accept their teaching. ` 
H. A. IRONSIDE 

Chicago, Ill. 


VIII. 


XIII. 


CONTENTS 


ALL Sicns POINT TO WHAT? . . aN aaa? 
THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH . . 18 
SIME GRINGS OF THE RAST’ Sarl. ooo ceed 
REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH . . 34 


Was THE KincpoOM OFFERED TO IsRAEL AND RE- 


PECTED Eran BUG Rhee: eit gio wie LL: oe lee ee Oe 
WILL ISRAEL BE REGATHERED? . .... . 71 
ISRAEL, JEHOVAH'S WITNESS: . e . e + « 87 
THE GREAT, TRIBULATION o o oot. Se) 6.98 


ARE THE Jews RESPONSIBLE FOR THE Protocots? 109 


Witt THERE BE AN AGE or RIGHTEOUSNESS? . . 116 
Witt THERE Be a MILLENNIUM? . .... . 127 
May We Expect a Great REVIVAL? .. . . 140 


WorLp-WIDE MISSIONS AND THE Lorp’s Return . 151 


ALL SIGNS POINT—TO WHAT? 


WE ARE LIVING in very remarkable times. Even 
statesmen of the world recognize this. We seem to 
be at the converging of the ages; one era appears to 
be closing and another already beginning. Apart 
from divine revelation, no man can tell what the next 
age holds in store for the human race. But any man 
or woman who has learned to accept the Holy Scrip- 
tures as divinely inspired finds here, in God’s blessed 
Book, the key that solves the mystery, finds here a 
complete revelation concerning the times in which we 
live and the period that is to follow, which will be 
ushered in by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
and our gathering together unto Him. Everything 
shows that we are rapidly nearing the end of the 
present dispensation. 


A THREEFOLD CORD 


The Scripture says: “ʻA threefold cord is not quickly 
broken” (Eccl. 4:12). There is a threefold cord that 
we shall do well to consider. It is what Scripture 
predicts will take place immediately before the coming 
of the Lord; first, in connection with the church of 


7 


8 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


God, then with the Gentile nations and, lastly, with 
the people of Israel. If we saw conditions prevail- 
ing in the church such as Scripture predicts will pre- 
vail before the coming of our Lord, but saw no such 
conditions in Israel or among the Gentile nations, we 
might well think there was considerable time to elapse 
before the closing of this age; or if we were to see 
fulfilled certain conditions predicted concerning the 
church and concerning Israel, and yet others in re- 
gard to the Gentile nations still unfulfilled, we might 
well say, “My Lord delayeth His coming.” But when 
we see everything moving on in exact accord with 
Scripture in these three spheres, we may be sure that 
the end is near. 

We see the church drifting into deeper and deeper 
apostasy. We see Israel already gathering back to 
the Land of Palestine, not by two and threes, but by 
tens of thousands. And we see prevailing over there 
conditions such as the Word declares will prevail im- 
mediately before the coming of our Lord. Then we 
look out upon the Gentile nations and see the various 
combinations predicted in Scripture already forming 
before our eyes. We see the great hordes of Slavic 
people banding together, as predicted in Ezekiel 38 
and 39; we see the Roman nations entering into an 
alliance for the restoration of the Roman power; and 
we see movements of the kingdoms of the eastern 
countries getting ready for the Battle of Armageddon. 
All is moving on in exact accord with the sure word of 
prophecy, so we may be very certain that it will not 
be long before we shall hear the voice of the arch- 
angel, the shout of the Lord, and the trump of God, 
and we who are redeemed by the blood of Christ will 
rise to meet the Savior. 


ALL Sicns Point — TO WHat? 9 
BROKEN LINES OF SEPARATION 


Let us look particularly at one line of prediction, 
one prediction uttered by our blessed Lord Himself 
in regard to the end times. He said solemnly in the 
twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, where He was tell- 
ing of the signs that would prevail before His coming: 
“As the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming 
of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were 
before the flood they were eating and drinking, marry- 
ing and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe en- 
tered into the ark, and eke not, until the flood came, 
and took them all away; so shall also the coming of 
the Son of man be.” 

What characterized those days of Noah? Were they 
days of great revival? Were they days of great 
awakening and of wonderful conviction? Nothing of 
the kind! They were days of fearful apostasy, days 
when men had turned away from the revelation 
divinely given after the fall of man in Eden’s Garden. 
They were days, too, of brilliant achievement. I think 
this is implied in the words used elsewhere, “They 
planted, they builded.”” They were days when men 
built great works and prided themselves on their re- 
markable intelligence. They were also days of break- 
ing down of moral barriers. 

I do not know what is involved in that passage in 
Genesis 6, where it says: “It came to pass, when men 
began to multiply on the face of the earth, and 
daughters were born unto them, That the sons of God 
saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and 
they took them wives of all which they chose.” I do 
not know whether that implies a strange mystic union 
of spirit-beings from the heavens with mortals here 


10 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


on earth, as many eminent Bible teachers are sure that 
it does. I am not certain whether it means that the 
line of Seth forgot its separation and mingled with the 
line of Cain, that ungodly race—it may be that. But 
I do know that there was a complete breaking down 
of divinely set barriers. All through Scripture, God 
has been calling His people to walk in holy separa- 
tion from the world that refuses His testimony. What- 
ever else this passage means, it certainly means this: 
that in the days of Noah definite dividing lines be- 
tween the people of God and the enemies of God were 
no longer recognized. And what does Jesus say? “As 
the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the 
Son of man be.” 

What is the great business of the devil today? It 
is to destroy every barrier between the church and 
the world. We see it on every hand. After nineteen 
centuries of gospel preaching, instead of the world 
being converted, as Dr. Pierson used to put it, “the 
world has become a little churchy, but the church has 
become immensely worldly.” We may expect to see 
lines clearly laid down in Scripture deliberately ob- 
literated by the enemies of the people of God as we 
draw nearer the end. At the beginning of the dispensa- 
tion, the church of God went forth, a little separated 
company, to tell men, “Ye must be born again.” But 
we live in a day when the leaders of religious thought 
talk about the universal fatherhood of God and the 
universal brotherhood of man, a doctrine that leaves 
no room for the necessity of regeneration. 

The world is that multitude of men and women 
who are dominated by the prince of this world, the 
devil, and they are going on to judgment. The church 
of God is a little company of redeemed sinners who 


ALL Sicns Point — To WHat? I 


have been saved through the precious atoning blood 
of the Lord Jesus Christ—and how the devil hates to 
see them walking separately from the world! He 
would do anything in his power to break down all 
these barriers, for that would utterly destroy the 
church’s testimony. 


Days oF CORRUPTION AND VIOLENCE 


In the days of Noah, there was a great coming to- 
gether of people who should not have been linked to- 
gether at all. Very few stood out against the amalga- 
mation. Noah was a just man and perfect in his 
generation. There were no mixed marriages in his 
family. His was a family that walked apart in separa- 
tion to God; and God came to him and told him that 
He was sick of the whole thing, and that He was going 
to wipe it all out in a flood. He said: “Make thee 
an ark of gopher wood . . . pitch it within and without 
with pitch” (Gen. 6:14); and when the flood came, 
Noah had a safe refuge. 

Then, Scripture tells us that the days of Noah were 
days of moral corruption and great violence. If you 
had lived a hundred years ago and acquainted your- 
self with the highest ideals of the fathers of this great 
nation, would you have believed it possible that in 
our day the United States of America would sink to 
such a condition of corruption and violence as we see 
on every hand? Would you not have thought that 
America would have been a kind of Utopia where 
people would come saying, “We want to come here to 
worship God according to our own convictions, to bring 
up our children in this happy place; of course, we 
will respect the laws of the country, for this will be 
for our own best interest”? We have lived to see the 


T2 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


laws of our country shamelessly broken on every 
hand—corruption and violence all about us. Pick up 
your morning newspaper, and you are treated to a 
record of lawlessness and immorality such as you 
would never have dreamed of a few years ago. Turn 
to what country you will, and everywhere you find 
loose ideals about morals, about the marriage relation, 
and all kinds of similar corruptions. Russia is in some 
respects the fountain head of all this iniquity and im- 
purity, the devils agency for distributing these evil 
principles throughout the world and for destroying 
civilization. i 


TuE MILITANT GODLESS 


The following is clipped from a recent number of 
a reliable journal: 


The Soviet Government is doing everything possible to 
eliminate religion, especially Christianity. She is going 
to follow the Fascist example, by adopting her own 
calendar next year, when the Christian calendar will be 
abolished, and it will be called the year fifteen of the 
revolution. The changing of “time” is characteristic 


of Antichrist (Dan. 7:25). 


The idea is to obliterate Sunday; the week is to 
consist of five days instead of seven so there will be 
no opportunity for any to come together on the Lord’s 
Day; there will be no way to figure the time so as to 
know when the Lord’s Day comes around. 


All churches are to be destroyed throughout Russia, 
and religion eradicated. The London Times (December 
28, 1929) states: “Five hundred seventy-six churches 
were closed from January to August, 1929, and it is 
expected that the number will reach 1,000 by the end 
of the year.” 


ALL Sicns Point — TO WHAT? 13 


“The Militant Godless in Soviet Russia” is the name 
given to an organization formed, some eighteen months 
ago, by order of the ruling clique in the Kremlin, as 
a body for “the final destruction of every vestige of re- 
ligion.” Their president is Yaroslavsky, one of Stalin’s 
henchmen and the chief of the Control Commission, an 
inquisitorial department of the Central Executive. For 
the past eleven years, this man has been disseminating 
the most blasphemous anti-religious propaganda ever 
recorded in history, and has in consequence been rapidly 
promoted to high offices in the Soviet State. . . . The 
Militant Godless are true followers of their president; 
they are young people of both sexes, reared and edu- 
cated under the Soviets. At the second congress of the 
Godless at Moscow, Yaroslavsky, in order to inflame the 
passions of his followers, stated quite deliberately that 
“believers are the enemies of the Socialist State . . . and 
they must be exterminated.” 

The members of this powerful body are particularly 
happy when participating in organized campaigns for 
the demolition of churches and other places of worship 
and in orgies of blasphemy known as “Godless Carni- 
vals.” These consist of a series of spectacles specially 
written and rehearsed, ridiculing and insulting the belief 
in God in general and certain aspects of the Christian 
faith in particular. These spectacles cannot be described 
in an English newspaper; in fact, some of the Soviet 
newspapers take refuge in evasions. 

The organization is said to be two millions strong, 
and its finances are described as excellent. This is not 
surprising, since by Stalin’s orders the Godless are 
financed by the State, and special donations are allotted 
to them from party and trade union funds. The at- 
tempts to destroy religion are costly, but the Soviets 
disregard the question of finances since they are con- 
fident of success. 


Since these statements were published, the Soviet 
program to destroy every thing holy has been carried 


14, LAMP OF PROPHECY 


on with terrible success, though God still preserves 
in Russia His election of grace. 


TEACHING BLASPHEMY 


What is going on in Russia is simply the beginning 
of what may soon prevail all over the world. People 
say that this idea of Red propaganda dominating the 
world is just talk. I was speaking with a leading 
educator in Pennsylvania some days ago, and he said 
that the sad fact is that by far the majority of our 
professors are teaching Bolshevism to their students. 

I am teaching in a theological college part of the 
year, and I find that atheistic literature is being poured 
into the mail of our students. The Reds of Europe 
are doing their best to send the atheistic literature 
through all the colleges and schools of America. They 
are doing their best to pervert our youth and to poison 
the very fountain of knowledge at its source. Societies 
are forming today in many of our colleges, named 
“The Society of Damned Souls”; that is their own 
name for it. Think of the blasphemy of it, the God- 
defying spirit of the movement—and it is spreading 
everywhere! 

There was something like that in the days of Noah. 
God said: “My spirit shall not always strive with 
man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be 
an hundred and twenty years” (Gen. 6:3). What do 
these words mean? They mean that God by His Spirit 
had sought to bring certain influences to bear upon 
the hearts of men. But we read: “Hast thou marked 
the old way which wicked men have trodden? Which 
were cut down out of time, whose foundation was over- 
flown with a flood: which said unto God, Depart from 
us: and what can the Almighty do for them” (Job 


ALL Siens Point — TO WHAT? 15 


22:15-17)? In the Book of Job, Eliphaz tells us how 
wicked men acted before the flood, and it is the way 
they are doing now. 


Gop’s Day or GRACE 


The wonderful thing is that a good God bears it 
all and that He still waits in mercy. This reminds 
me of the day when Ingersoll, after delivering one of 
his addresses, pulled his watch from his pocket and 
said: “According to the Bible, God has struck men to 
death for blasphemy. I will blaspheme Him and give 
Him five minues to strike me dead and damn my 
soul.” There was a period of perfect silence while 
one minute went by; two minutes passed, and people 
began to get nervous; three minutes, and a woman 
fainted; four minutes, and Ingersoll curled his lip. 
At five minutes, he snapped his watch shut, put it in 
his pocket, and said: “You see, there is no God, or 
He would have taken me at my word.” 

The story was later told to Joseph Parker, who said, 
“And did the American gentleman think he could ex- 
haust the patience of God in five minutes?” The 
patience of God! He says: “My Spirit shall not always 
strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days 
shall be an hundred and twenty years” (Gen. 6:3). 
It is just about one hundred and twenty years now since 
the truth of the second coming was revived; since then, 
God has been sending His servants into the world de- 
claring, “Behold, the bridegroom cometh.” I wonder 
if there will be the same period of dealing with men 
and seeking to bring them to repentance ere the Lord 
returns for His own. 

There is something to hold the evil in check today. 
Listen to the words of Jesus: “As in the days that 


16 Lamp oF PROPHECY 


were before the flood they were eating and drinking, 
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that 
Noe entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood 
came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming 
of the Son of man be” (Matt. 24:38-39). What is 
it that answers to that in this day? The moment the 
redeemed will hear the cry, “Arise, my love, my fair 
one, and come away,” and the true church of God is 
caught up, who can imagine the unspeakable corrup- 
tion, the violence that will prevail? Then the Lord 
will descend in power with His saints and bring in 
the reign of everlasting righteousness. 

If ever there was a time when men and women 
ought to be serious, this is the day; and yet the people 
today are pleasure mad. You find people all over the 
land turning away from the things of God and turning 
to fables or devoting themselves to pleasure in its most 
extravagant forms—anything to give them a new sen- 
sation, a new amusement. 

Did you ever think of that word “amusement”? 
David said, “While I was musing the fire burned.” 
“Muse” means “to think.” But in “amuse,” the “a” 
is the negative; so “amuse” means “to not think”— 
and the devil is busy today with all kinds of devices 
to keep men from thinking. If men think, there is 
some hope for their salvation. When the prodigal 
came to himself, he said, “How many hired servants 
of my father’s have bread enough and to spare, and 
I perish with hunger!” (Luke 15:17). God, give us 
courage to face realities. 

Unsaved one, the days of grace are very near their 
end; if you are ever going to be saved, you will have 
to be saved very soon. I have tried to visualize Noah 
getting that ark ready. When the last day and the last 


ALL Sicns Point — TO WHAT? I 


hour of that day of grace came, he had to turn regret- 
fully away, leaving them all behind. He entered into 
the ark, he and all his; and God shut them in. The 
hand that shut them in was the same that shut out 
the antediluvian world. Soon the redeemed of the 
Lord will be shut in up yonder, and men will come 
knocking, saying, “Lord, Lord, open to us,” only to hear 
Him say, “I never knew you.” As the storms de- 
scended from above, and the water rolled up from 
below, I wonder if there were not some of Noah’s 
neighbors who came and knocked at that door, saying, 
“Noah, Noah, open the door,” only to hear him say, 
“It is too late; I did not lock the door. God did.” 
“When once the master of the house is risen up and 
hath shut the door, who is there that will open it?” 

You have been invited for years to enter the ark 
of safety, and yet you are still unsaved. How much 
longer are you going to go on resisting the Spirit? 
Why not flee to Christ for refuge while the door stands 
wide open, and then, in that day when the world’s 
distress lowers, you will be safe in Christ. 


H 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 


I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that 
ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 
with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, 
forbearing one another in love; endeavouring to keep 


the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace—EPH. 4:1-3 
I. THE FOUNDING OF THE CHURCH 


In view of the exhortation of our text, we naturally 
raise the question, What is the vocation wherewith we 
are called? And that leads us to turn to various por- 
tions of the New Testament to consider what the Spirit 
of God has been pleased to reveal concerning that 
marvelous mystic society to which every believer in 
the Lord Jesus Christ has been joined by the Holy 
Spirit. What is the church? How do we become mem- 
bers of the church? What are our responsibilities 
as belonging to the church? What is the destiny of 
the church of God? 

I want to be very elementary and shall begin at the 
beginning by turning to the first place in the New 
Testament, where we read of the church—Matthewl6. 
Here, immediately after Peter’s remarkable confession, 


“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” we 
18 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 19 


read, “and Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed 
art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not 
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven, 
and I say also unto thee that thou art Peter [thou art 
a piece of rock] and upon this rock [I take it this rock 
refers to the blessed truth that Christ is the Son of God] 
I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it.” Notice, “I will build” My church. 
Observe, our Lord Jesus Christ did not here speak of 
something that was in the process of building. He did 
not say, “I am building My church,” or “I have been 
building My church,” as though it had been in course 
of construction either throughout the centuries before 
Christ came into the world or during the time He was 
on earth as man, but He spoke of the building of the 
church as something still in the future. 

“The gates of hell [that is, the gates of the unseen 
world] shall not prevail against it.” I get great en- 
couragement from that statement of my Lord, that the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against the church that 
Jesus builds. Sometimes people are very pessimistic re- 
garding the future of the church. They see atheism and 
unbelief rolling in like a flood and the cults and isms 
appearing like mushrooms, and they are afraid that the 
true faith of the church of God will be over-thrown by 
all these things, but we have the assurance of the Lord 
Jesus Christ that so long as the church of God shall 
remain in this scene it will remain undefeated. Dr. 
Campbell Morgan says in this connection, “It not only 
suggests that the church will be able to hold her own 
ground to the end, but also will be able to wage an 
offensive warfare.” An army does not take the gates 
of the city out to war with it, and the church does not 
sit on a hill and the gates of hell surround her, but 


20 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the church of God is a conquering army carrying on 
a battle against the powers of hell and they shall not 
prevail against her. A right-thinking man does not 
shut his eyes to the signs of the times and will not 
be ignorant of Satan’s devices, but he knows that greater 
is He that is in us than he that is in the world and the 
church of Jesus Christ will not retire from the scene 
a defeated company. 

Here Christ called it “My church” for the first time. 
He was not speaking of any separate company. He 
was not speaking of any particular sect or denomina- 
tion. He was speaking of the aggregate of the re- 
deemed in this dispensation of grace and called them 
“My church.” 

Now let us look farther: there were saints of God in 
the world from the beginning, right down to the time 
Jesus uttered these words. In a sense these saints 
constituted churches. Stephen spoke of the people 
in the wilderness as a church, an assembly, but we 
must distinguish between any such companies and that 
unique company that Christ called “My church.” This 
church of which He spoke could not come into being 
until He had died on the cross, had been raised from 
the dead, was received up into glory, and sent the 
Spirit down into the earth, which He did at Pentecost. 

Matthew 18 records the next place Christ spoke of 
the church, and this time it is about discipline in the 
church, and it would apply just as well to the congre- 
gation of Israel. He used the word ‘“‘church” here 
in a narrower sense than He did in chapter 16, He 
spoke of trespass. 

“If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell 
him his fault between thee and him alone—if he will 
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more— 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 21 


if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church.” 

This is not very often done now. The command is 
to tell it to the called out company, not to the whole 
world. The church here is not the aggregate of all 
the redeemed but a local company in any given place. 
We are not able to tell it to the whole church of Jesus, 
but, meeting with a company of believers in a given 
place, which company of Christian people is an as- 
sembly of saints, we should go to them and bring the 
matter before them, and they will act on behalf of 
their glorified Lord. 

There is not one other word regarding the church 
in Matthew. Christ presented Himself to Israel 
as the promised Messiah, but all the way through 
He met with increasing rejection until in chapter 23 
He announced their rejection (vs. 37). In these words 
our blessed Lord brought home the solemn truth that 
God, for the time being, was through with Israel as a 
testimony in the world. “Your house is left unto you 
desolate.” He came presenting Himself as the promised 
Messiah. They refused to acknowledge His claim, 
even though they had to go to the length of imputing 
the works of His power to Beelzebub, and in that He 
saw the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit. From this 
point on, Israel, as the people of God, had no longer 
any standing before God. They will have, by and 
by, when they are gathered back again and the Lord 
works upon their hearts and the veil is taken away, 
and when the Lord returns in glory they will cry, 
“Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.” 
This is redeemed Israel. But, between the moment 
that the Lord uttered these words and that time, their 
house would be left desolate. 


22 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


It has often been said that in the Book of Acts we 
have God still dealing with Israel and calling out 
from Israel a remnant people, and that He never gets 
to the end until we get to the last chapter of that book. 
I believe this view contradicts the words of Christ re- 
corded in Matthew. Everything was settled; their trial 
was ended. 

What then was He doing? In Acts we find, after 
the death, resurrection, and ascension of our Lord, the 
advent of the Holy Spirit to become the vicar of Christ 
here in this world, and to gather together in one the 
children of God that are scattered abroad, and to 
baptize into one body those of Israel and those of 
the nations who receive the Lord Jesus Christ as their 
Savior. In accordance with the divine order, it is 
necessary that this message first be preached to Israel 
so that they may side with Him instead of against 
Him. Every Israelite who accepts Jesus Christ puts 
himself on record as taking sides with the One whom 
the nation rejected and the people abhorred, and these 
find in Him a new place, and by the reception of the 
Holy Spirit are linked with Christ. In the first part 
of Acts the greater part is the calling out of this elect 
remnant of Israel, who forego the earthly hopes of 
Israel and accept the heavenly calling instead. In 
due time the gospel message was broadened out to the 
Gentiles, starting with Cornelius, when the Holy Spirit 
fell on them, and then linked these Gentiles and those 
of Israel who had accepted Jesus Christ into one body, 
and then the message broadened out to the ends of 
the world, and assures all who believe of their union 


with Christ. 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 23 
II. THe CHURCH as THE Bopy or CHRIST 


The Apostle Paul was the one chosen of God to 
unfold this teaching in the largest way. He was not 
the only one to whom this truth was revealed, but he 
received the largest revelation (See Eph. 3:1-6). 
Paul did not write by consultation with other believers, 
not even with the original Twelve, but he received his 
message as a direct revelation from Christ. The word 
rendered “mystery” here means, not something pecu- 
liarly difficult and mystical, but a sacred secret made 
known only to initiates. The mystery Paul speaks of 
is something not found in the Old Testament, not pro- 
claimed by the former prophets; it is something new. 
It was revealed to a body of holy apostles and 
prophets. In God’s due time it was opened up to the 
other members of the apostolic band and those as- 
sociated with them. It is the special truth of what 
God is doing in this age, taking people from among 
the Jews and Gentiles and uniting them by the Spirit’s. 
baptism into one body. Into what body? The body 
that had been formed on the Day of Pentecost. There 
was no other body into which the Gentiles could be 
brought. 

“That the Gentiles should be made fellow heirs.” 

Fellow heirs with whom? Those Jews who were 
already converted. They entered into partnership 
with the Jews. Paul said, “I was made a minister 
of this.” It was to tell the Gentiles who believed in 
the Lord Jesus Christ that they are no longer strangers 
and foreigners to the covenant promises of God but 
are made fellow citizens with the Jews of the house- 
hold of God. 


“Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, 


24 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


is this grace given, that I should preach among the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ.” 

I like the humility of Paul. What a lowly place 
this mighty man of God was willing to take! The 
implication is clear the gospel had already been 
preached among the Jews and many had believed, 
and now in a special sense it was given to him to go 
out and proclaim it among the Gentiles that they 
might enter into the same testimony and have the same 
blessing. 

“To the intent that now unto the principalities and 
powers in heavenly places might be known by the 
church the manifold wisdom of God.” 

This is unto angelic hosts, unfallen beings, who 
look on redeemed men and women and learn the 
riches of Christ. 

Here are saints on earth, since the cross and Pente- 
cost—many Jews, others Gentiles, come to the same 
common ground, God meeting them all as sinners ap- 
proaching Him through the redeeming blood of Christ, 
which are cleansed from every stain, given a new life 
and nature, and are indwelt by the Holy Spirit Him- 
self, and then everyone is linked up by the Spirit . 
with their risen, glorified Head in heaven, and so 
intimate is that union that they are as close to Him 
as the members of my body are to each other. 

The principalities and powers looking down on the 
world and seeing the work of God here, that is, grace 
picking up sinful Jews and Gentiles and making them 
one in Christ, are the angels who glorify God for the 
work He is doing, and they learn the wisdom of God. 
This is what God is doing now. This body relationship 
is spoken of in Eph. 4:15-16: “But speaking the truth 
in love, may grow up into him in all things, which 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 25 


is the Head, even Christ: from whom the whole body 
fitly joined together and compacted by that which every 
joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in 
the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body 
unto the edifying of itself in love.” 

There you have this corporate union with Christ. 
He is the Head, and every believer is occupying some 
place in that body. I do not know what part of the 
-body I am. The members of my physical body do 
not know what part they are. The consciousness is 
in the head; so with the spiritual body, the conscious- 
ness is in the Head up yonder, and He knows what 
each one is placed there for. My brethren, what a 
wonderful thing it is for each member to be in good 
working order! If one member of our body is not 
functioning right the whole body suffers, and so 
Scripture says of Christ’s body, if one member suffers 
all the members suffer with it, and if one be honored, 
all the members rejoice together. If you are not going 
on with God and living for Him, if your life is not 
a godly life, you are like some member of the body 
out of order and failing to function. If you are 
living for God and walking with God, you may not 
be conscious of it, but you are a help and blessing 
to all the other members. 


HI. Tue CuHurcu as A BUILDING 


We are not only pictured in this wonderful epistle 
as members of the body of Christ, but in Eph. 2:19-22, 
we are pictured as each one part of a building. Here 
we have our heavenly citizenship. Here is a new house- 
hold: “Now therefore ye are no more strangers and 
foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of 
the household of God; and are built upon the founda- 


26 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


tion of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself 
being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building 
fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in 
the Lord; in whom ye also are builded together for 
an habitation of God through the Spirit.” 

Believers constitute that spiritual house. Notice how 
he used the word “fitly.” In chapter 4, “fitly joined 
together,” in chapter 2, “fitly framed together.” A 
master builder is very careful that every stone fits 
properly, that every board is properly fitted together, 
otherwise the beauty and perhaps the safety is marred. 
It is the work of the Spirit of God fitly to frame the 
building together. Peter speaks of us as lively stones 
come to the Living Stone and thus are builded together 
into an house of God. 


IV. THE CHURCH AS THE BRIDE OF CHRIST 


Eph. 5:22-27, 30, 32: ““Wives, submit yourselves unto 
your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband 
is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of 
the church: and he is the saviour of the body. There- 
fore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the 
wives be to their own husbands in everything. Hus-. 
bands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the 
church, and gave himself for it; That he might sanc- 
tify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the 
word, That he might present it to himself a glorious 
church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; 
but that it should be holy and without blemish . . . For 
we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of 
his bones. . . . This is a great mystery; but I speak 
concerning Christ and the church.” 

Here he has changed the figure. You do not sanc- 
tify and cleanse your body to present it to yourself; 


THE CALLING AND DESTINY OF THE CHURCH 27 


it is part of you. He has changed the figure from 
the body to the bride, and I dare say as he penned 
these words he thought of Hosea when he was com- 
manded by God to do something that was most repug- 
nant, to illustrate God’s dealings with Israel, and 
typically the Lord’s dealing with the church. He had 
to go to the slave market to buy his wife, and the 
Spirit pointed her out. She was vile, filthy, contam- 
inated, and a slave, but he took her and cleansed and 
clothed her, and presented her to himself, and yet 
she was not faithful to him, and he had to buy her 
back again. This is a picture of Israel. She is called 
the bride of God, and later on the wife. These are 
just symbols. Christ has to cleanse the church in 
order to present her to Himself a glorious church 
without a spot or wrinkle. It is a figure of a wife 
presented to her husband. 

We are members of His body, of His flesh, and of 
His bones. This reminds us that when Adam received 
Eve he said, she is bone of my bone and flesh of my 
flesh. Paul is now quoting (verse 31) from Genesis. 
Paul is here telling us that the mystery of marriage 
illustrates the relationship between Christ and the 
church. 

We have seen the church then as a redeemed com- 
pany, as the body of Christ, as a glorious building 
in which the Spirit of God dwells, and as the bride 
soon to be presented to the Lamb, Who died to re- 
deem her. That in itself speaks of her destiny. 


V. Tue DESTINY oF THE CHURCH 


What, then, is the destiny of the church of God? 
Eph. 2:4-7: “But God, who is rich in mercy, for his 
great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were 


28 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, 
(by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us up to- 
gether, and made us sit together in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus; That in the ages to come he might show 
the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward 
us through Christ Jesus.” 

Sitting in heavenly places does not mean we are 
now sitting together “with” Christ Jesus. Now we are 
sitting “in” Christ, not “with.” “With” Christ will 
be our happy portion by and by when Christ comes 
and takes us home, that in the ages to come He may 
show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kind- 
ness toward us through Christ Jesus. Show means 
that He might exhibit. The church, then, called out 
of sin and darkness, redeemed to God with the precious 
blood of Christ, and linked to the Head with the 
Spirit, will be one with Christ throughout all the ages 
to come, and so whatever experiences our Lord may 
be called upon to go through we shall go through with 
Him. We shall reign with Him and be with Him when 
He is all and in all. Our portion will be with Him 
through all eternity. Let us, therefore, walk worthy 
of the calling wherewith we are called. 


Ill 


“THE KINGS OF THE EAST” 


THERE ARE certain aspects of prophetic truth that 
in the very nature of things could not be understood 
clearly until the time of the end drew near. This’ 
principle is indicated in the angel’s instruction to 


Daniel when he said: “But thou, O Daniel, shut up» 
the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the / 


end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall 
be increased. . . . But go thou thy way till the end be: 
for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end 
of the days” (Dan. 12:4,13). Many things were re- 
vealed to Daniel that it was not the mind of God 
for him to understand fully in his own days nor could 
they be comprehended clearly in the early centuries 
of the Christian dispensation. 

The Book of the Revelation, contrary to the Book 
of Daniel, was to be unsealed, and thus this unsealed 
book of New Testament prophecy has to a very large 
extent removed the seal from Daniel, the outstanding 
book of Old Testament prophecy. But even in Revela- 
tion there is much that it pleased God to conceal 
from general understanding until the end had drawn 
nigh. Take, for instance, the prophecy relating to 


29 


; 
f 


30 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the kings of the East and their apparent onslaught 
upon the powers of the West. In Rev. 16:12-16, we 
read: 

“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon 
the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was 
dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might 
be prepared. And I saw three unclean spirits like 
frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out 
of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of 
the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, 
working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of 
the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to 
the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold, 
I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and 
keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they 
see his shame. And he gathered them together into a 
place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.” 


IDENTIFYING “THE KINGS OF THE EAST” 


Who are “the kings of the east” here referred to? 
They are clearly distinguished from the powers of the 
West animated by the unclean spirits that proceeded 
out of the mouth of the dragon, the beast, and the 
false prophet. Armageddon is really the clashing of 
vast Eastern and Western armies contending for the 
possession of Palestine. This, I have no doubt, is all 
in the future and perhaps in the very near future, 
though not to take place until after the rapture of 
the church. 

It has often been noticed that the trumpet and vial 
judgments [beginning in Revelation 8:6 and 16:1, re- 
spectively] run parallel, to a certain extent; that is, 
in each instance the same spheres or groups of 
people are referred to under the respective num- 


“THE KINGS OF THE EAST” 31 


bers. The first trumpet and the first vial are similar 
in character, and so on down through the lists. 
Now, if the prophecy of the sixth trumpet (Rev. 9: 
13 ff.) be compared with that of the sixth vial (Rev. 
16:12-16), we may see that the kings of the East 
are the leaders of a tremendous Oriental army that 
will come down upon Palestine in the last days. For 
the sake of convenience, I quote the trumpet passage 
from Rev. 9:15-21, that it may be considered care- 
fully in connection with what we have already read: 

“And the four angels were loosed, which were 
prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and 
a year, for to slay the third pərt of men. And the 
number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred 
thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them. 
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that 
sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, 
and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as 
the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued 
fire and smoke and brimstone. By these three was the 
third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, 
and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths. 
For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: 
for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, 
and with them they do hurt. And the rest of the men 
which were not killed by these plagues yet repented 
not of the works of their hands, that they should not 
worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, 
and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor 
hear, nor walk: neither repented they of their murders, 
nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor 
of their thefts.” 


32 LAMP OF PROPHECY 
SYMBOLISM IN THE REVELATION 


In reading such a passage as this, we must recog- 
nize the fact that we have before us a very highly 
figurative vision. The angel made known the unveil- 
ing to John in symbols: “He sent and signified it by 
his angel” (Rev. 1:1). “Signified” is literally “szgn- 
i-fied’”’—that is, symbolized. If this key is kept in 
mind when one is reading the Apocalypse, it will save 
from many erroneous interpretations. 

The symbolic picture, then, of the sixth trumpet 
judgment is that of a great army—on land and in air 
belching forth fire and smoke—coming down over the 
eastern steppes and plains of Asia, across the Eu- 
phrates into the land of Palestine, with the cry, “Asia 
for the Asiatics.” 

Who will be the leaders of this horde? The definite 
explanation of the sixth vial makes this clear. The 
way of the kings of the East is to be prepared by 
the drying up of the great river that was once the 
eastern boundary of the Roman Empire. I am inclined 
to believe that this symbolizes the complete destruction 
of the Turkish power, which has acted as a buffer 
between the East and West for so long. Others think 
it refers to the actual drying up of the river itself, 
that river which was one of the four that of old went 
forth from Eden. 

In either case, as a result of some great cataclysm, 
the way is to be effectually opened up for the on- 
slaught of the kings of the East. 


VIEWING THE EMPIRE OF THE RISING SUN 


Who are these kings? It is not necessary to guess. 
The word for “East” is simply “‘sun-rising.” The 


“THE KINGS OF THE EAST” 33 


kings of the sun-rising! Japan has been known as 
the empire of the rising sun for a millennium. 

The last three decades have brought this nation to 
the front in a marvelous way, but recent events have 
shown up her malignity, her ferocity, and her evident 
determination to dictate all the policies and dominate 
all the nations of the Far East. The puppet king of 
Manchukuo, possibly Japanese-controlled rulers in 
other northeastern Chinese territories, perhaps at last 
an alignment with China itself, and there you have 
the kings of the sun-rising—all in readiness for the 
great day of God Almighty—the Armageddon conflict. 

The instructed believer in the inspired Word of God 
knows that the fierce winds of the great tribulation 
will not be let loose on the earth till the church is 
raptured and the remnant of Israel sealed, but “com- 
ing events cast their shadows before,” and we may 
well look with bated breath upon the amazing and 
truly horrible developments in the territory of the 
coming kings of the East. 

The tocsin of doom is sounding. The yellow peril 
becomes more and more ominous. The preparation 
of the day of the Lord goes on apace. Christian, lift 
up your head. “Your redemption draweth nigh.” 


LV 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 


By THIs SUBJECT I have in mind certain objections 
that have lately been taken to the dispersational view 
of the Word of God. It has often been said that the 
dispensational teachers are quite unable to meet the 
new position, but I really think that most of us have 
too profound a regard for one or two of the brethren 
who are leading the new dispensational departure to 
like to appear in public against them; at any rate, to 
take sharp issue with them. We realize that in this 
age men and women who firmly believe in the inspira- 
tion of the Word of God ought to stand shoulder to 
shoulder as far as possible. It is always with greatest 
regret that I take issue with any who love the Lord. 
Jesus Christ, who believe firmly in His true deity, who 
believe in His virgin birth, His sinlessness, humanity, 
His atoning work, the work of the Holy Spirit in re- 
generation and sanctification, and the full inspiration 
of the Word of God. We consider that however we 
may differ on other lines, if they agree with us on 
these, on our part we don’t like to be found apparently 
in opposition to them. Therefore, many dispensational 
teachers have felt it hardly wise to say very much 


34 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 35 


about this issue, but in schools such as this school and 
similar institutions, it is well to make clear our posi- 
tion on dispensational truth and reaffirm it to the 
-tudents. 

For years I have read carefully and prayerfully 
nearly all the books written from the other side, and 
I see no reason to change my point of view. The 
Scriptures are plain on the subject. 

Turn to Eph. 3:1-11: “For this cause I Paul, the 
prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, If ye have 
heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which 
is given me to you-ward: How that by revelation he 
made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore 
in few words, Whereby, when ye read, ye may under- 
stand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ;) Which 
in other ages was not made known unto the sons of 
men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and 
prophets by the Spirit; That the Gentiles should be 
fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of 
his promise in Christ by the gospel; Whereof I was 
made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of 
God given unto me by the effectual working of his 
power. Unto me, who am less than the least of all 
saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among 
the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: And to 
make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, 
which from the beginning of the world hath been hid 
in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: To the 
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in 
eavenly places might be known, by the church, the 


anifold wisdom of God, According tothe eternal 
urpose’—literally, “according fo the purpose of the 


ages.” I call attention to that expression. There is 


in Scripture a doctrine of the ages—God working out 


36 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


a very definite purpose of the ages—and we are now 
living in one particular age, the age of grace. “Ac 
ćording to the eternal purpose which he purposed in 
Christ Jesus our Lord.” l 

Eph. 1:8-10: “Wherein he hath abounded toward u 
in all wisdom and prudence; Having made known unto 
us the mystery of his will, according to his good 
pleasure, which he hath purposed in himself: That in 
the dispensation of the fulness of time, he might 
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which 
re in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him.” 

I have quoted these Scriptures, to which many more 
could be added, to show in the first place that the word 
“dispensation” is an eminently Scriptural term, It 
different ways in the New Testament. In these passages 
and in several others, it is rendered “dispensation.” 
In the Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 12, it is trans- 
lated “administration.” It is elsewhere rendered 
“order,” and in the Gospel of Luke it is rendered 
“stewardship.” “Give an account of thy steward- 
SDIDE cos 

The only way really to understand our Bible and 
get things in their places so that we are not in con- 
fusion of mind as we read and study is by noticing 
the various dispensations or administrations or steward- 
ships or other periods that run through the Scripture. 
But we have recently been told by some prominent 
writers that this is all a mistake. There is, they de- 
clare, no dispensational plan running through the 
Scripture, or, if there are any dispensations, there are 
only two—the dispensation of the Old Testament and 
the dispensation of the New; and that Dr. Scofield and 
others who have been glad to learn from him, and 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 37 


many great men who have learned independently of 
him, are all wrong in thinking that the Old Testament 
presents a series of dispensations and that in the New 
Testament we find people passing out of one dispensa- 
tion into another, and that there is still ahead of us 
a glorious dispensation of the “fulness of time.” So 
when a position like this is challenged, we shall ex- 
amine the foundations again and see if dispensational 
teaching rests upon any solid basis. 

_. First, let us be very clear as to what we mean by 
a dispensation. The original word simply means the 
“ordering of a house.” It is a word we have taken 
over bodily into English. The English word “economy” 
is but the Greek word oikonomia, anglicized, which 
is translated “dispensation,” “administration,” “stew- 
ardship,” or “order.” 

We know what that word “economy” means. Our 
statesmen study political economy. What is that? It 
is the ordering of the affairs of the nation. If the 
affairs of all nations were ordered just exactly the 
same way, then the study of international politics 
would be very simple, but the affairs of nations differ. 
Take this great country of ours in contrast with Great. 
Britain. We have largely the same civilization. It 
isn’t the easiest thing to tell a Britisher from an 
American, yet their fundamental systems of govern- 
ments are altogether different. We base everything 
on a constitution. Great Britain has no constitution. 
Here is this great government and it rests on its con- 
stitution, while in Great Britain the government rests 
on tradition. Their body of law has been built up 
century after century and changes have come very 
slowly, for the English people are strong for custom, 
and it is very hard to bring about a change. With 


38 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


us in America, we just put up an amendment to the 
constitution and have the people vote on it, and if 
endorsed, it is added to the constitution. Whether 
we keep the amendments or not is another thing! The 
laws of nations differ. Each nation has its own 
peculiar economy. Now, I might be well versed in 
American economy and go over to Great Britain 
and find myself constantly at outs with the people 
there and yet be perfectly innocent about it. I have 
been brought up differently, and I don’t understand. 
I have been taught from boyhood in the United 
States what to do under certain circumstances, but I 
find I have to learn a new dispensation over there. 
Our children go to school, especially our girls, and 
they study domestic economy, which is the ordering 
of a house or a home. Sometimes I illustrate domestic 
economy like this: Suppose a young girl goes out to 
learn how to become a housekeeper. She takes a 
position in a certain home. By and by she becomes 
thoroughly adept and trustworthy. The mistress can 
depend upon her under all circumstances and feels 
that Mary knows just how she wants things run, and 
with a mere word from her, everything is understood. 
Well, after a few years, Mary feels that she is so 
proficient that she can get a better position. She is 
working in a little home where the people are work- 
ing people who get up early in the morning, so she 
has to be up at five, have the breakfast ready at 5:30, 
on the table by 6:00, lunches prepared for the men 
by 6:30, etc., and she knows exactly how this house 
is to be run. But now she learns that the big house 
up yonder on the heights is in need of a housekeeper. 
They pay more and Mary wants to earn all she can, 
so she interviews the mistress, and finally, everything 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 39 


being satisfactory, she leaves the one place and goes 
to work in the mansion. 

She comes to the new home, and the mistress takes 
her into the kitchen and says, “Mary, let me tell you 
now what to do.” 

“Oh, you don’t need to bother. I know exactly how 
a house should be run. I wouldn’t have taken this 
position if I didn’t understand how to run a house.” 

“But, Mary, not all houses are run the same way.’ 

“Oh, that’s all right; you needn’t tell me anything. 
It isn’t necessary. You can leave everything to me.” 

So the first morning Mary is up at five o’clock and 
the gong is duly rung at 5:30. The man of the house 
‘jumps up and calls to his wife, “My dear, whatever 
is the matter? Is the house on fire?” 

“Why, I don’t know,” she replies, and rushes to the 
head of the stairs and calls down, “Mary, what is it?” 

“Why, mum, it just means that breakfast will be on 
the table in half an hour.” 

“Breakfast in half an hour! Why, we don’t sit down 
to breakfast here until nine o’clock. What do you 
mean?” 

“Why, I mean that they always had breakfast at six 
o’clock where I have been working.” 

“That’s all right, Mary, but I tried to explain to 
you yesterday that you must learn how to run things 
in this house. I can’t have this sort of thing! Now, 
do your best until nine o’clock. Ring a rising bell 
at eight-thirty if you like.” 

Poor Mary bursts into tears because her thriftiness 
is not appreciated. She learns the importance of dis- 
pensational truth. 

How do we apply this? Some of us remember 
the time when we read the Bible fervently and devoutly 


40 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


prayed to understand it; but we were always in con- 
fusion of mind. Why? Because we were trying to 
apply the order that prevailed in the house of Israel 
to the church, the house of God, in this dispensation. 
Then we took the passages that apply to the dispensa- 
tion of the “fulness of time,” when Christ will come 
and “in his own times, show who is that blessed and 
only potentate, the King of kings and the Lord of 
lords,” and we applied all those passages to the present 
dispensation, and we couldn’t make them fit. 

I am reminded of the Scotch Covenanters, those 
good old people among whom were some of my own 
ancestors. The Scotch Covenanters took their swords 
and were ready to fight for their religion. They 
entered into a solemn covenant to oppose Episcopacy 
and establish Presbyterianism, which they conceived as 
the only divine religion on earth. They did this with 
good conscience because they believed that God had 
set up His kingdom now, that Jesus Christ is King, 
and that those who rejected Presbyterianism were the 
enemies of the kingdom of God on earth. They did 
not understand dispensational truth. Then take Roman 
Catholicism in the Middle Ages. The church fought 
with sword and fire to destroy heresy because they did 
not understand the present age of grace. 

When you come to the Word of God and you recog- 
nize this dispensational principle running through the 
Scriptures, everything opens up in a perfectly marvel- 
ous way. 

In Ephesians, we have read of “the purpose of the 
ages.” Augustine said, “Distinguish the ages and the 
Scriptures are plain.” I saw a sentence in a book the 
other day that all this dispensational teaching has come 
about within the last fifty years. There was never a 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 41 


greater mistake and blunder. Godly men in all the 
Christian centuries have taught it, but in our day, this 
light is shining brighter and brighter. 


DISPENSATION OF INNOCENCE 


Going back to the creation of man, we see that God 
placed Adam and Eve in the garden of delight. You 
can see that the economy under which our first parents 
were placed in the Garden of Eden was altogether dif- 
ferent to the economy under which we are placed in 
this present day. What was the stewardship com- 
mitted to Adam and Eve? They were to dress and 
keep the garden and have authority over all creation. 
The beasts were brought to Adam and whatever he 
called them, they were named. All was subject to 
them, but there was one stipulation—they were not 
to eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good 
and evil. 

That was their stewardship. That was the dispensa- 
tion of innocence. Who would say for a moment that 
that dispensation, that stewardship, that administration 
fits with ours? They failed in their stewardship and 
were turned out. “Give an account of thy steward- 
ship,” the master says to the servant. “Give an ac- 
count of thy dispensational responsibility.” So they 
were turned out and that dispensation ended. 


DISPENSATION OF CONSCIENCE 


Take them outside of the garden—from the garden 
to the flood. Who would dare to say that the same 
dispensation, the same stewardship, the same adminis- 
tration was committed to the patriarchs in those so far 
distant millenniums as to us? For instance, we have 
no record of a Bible, a written revelation, though 


42 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


there may have been one. We are told by Jude that 
Enoch prophesied concerning the second coming, so 
there may have been some written record, but as far 
as we know, writing was not invented before the flood. 
We have no record of any inspired Bible of any kind 
before the writings of Moses. The Book of Job may 
or may not have been written before Moses. Enoch’s 
prophecy may simply have been spoken. It is certain 
that they had no body of rules and regulations in regard 
to conduct as we have in the law. The great thing that 
seems to stand out in that dispensation is that men 
now had conscience. They were able to discern be- 
tween good and evil, and they were held responsible 
by God to choose the good and reject the evil. If 
men sought consistently after the good, God revealed 
Himself to them. Abel, bringing his lamb of sacri- 
fice, we are told in Hebrews, offered it by faith. God 
from time to time revealed Himself to them, but they 
had no written law, no body of doctrine, no organized 
church. The line of Seth chose the ways of God and 
the line of Cain chose the path of evil, and the two were 
separated. One called upon the name of the Lord; 
the other refused obedience to the revealed will of 
God. 

We often hear it said by people who don’t think 
things through that we don’t need a Bible; men need 
only to obey the dictates of their consciences. For 
a period of sixteen hundred years by the Hebrew 
Version, but nearly two thousand years by the Sep- 
tuagint, men were left largely to the dictates of con- 
science. What was the result? Corruption and vio- 
lence filled the earth. God said, “The only thing to 
do is to wipe it out with a flood.” Thus that dispensa- 
tion came to an end. 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 43 
DISPENSATION OF HUMAN GOVERNMENT 


A dispensation is a period of time, long or short, in 
which God is dealing with men in a different way than 
He has ever dealt with them before. He dealt with 
them one way in the garden. He dealt with them dif- 
ferently from the expulsion until the flood. Now, 
consider the period from the flood to the calling out 
of Abraham. What difference have we in God’s way 
of dealing with men in this period? We do not yet 
have a written Bible. We do not yet have a called-out 
nation nor a called-out church, but we do have some- 
thing added to check man’s natural propensities and 
hold him in subjection. We now have the principle 
of human government. God constituted Noah the first 
magistrate, so far as records show, that the world ever 
knew. We have no word whatever of magistracy be- 
fore the flood—no divinely given form of government. 
God, Himself, out of love for His creatures, seeing 
their need of Him, instituted human government. 
Brutal and wicked men came into the place of power, 
but the Apostle tells us that the institution was a divine 
one. God appointed a magistrate, and a new principle 
came into operation. With all the experience of the past 
and with the fearful warning of the flood, surely this 
little company coming out from the ark will remember 
the past and will be grateful to God for the new pro- 
vision He has made, and will be in subjection to Him, 
and the authority He has instituted. What is the re- 
sult? Follow it down, and again if you take the Sep- 
tuagint, about one thousand years go by and at the 
end of the first millennium after the flood the whole 
human race has gone into idolatry. Instead of men 
obeying conscience and being subject to government 


44, LAMP OF PROPHECY 


and authority, the governors themselves have become 
apostate. Nimrod, the mighty hunter before the Lord, 
the hunter of the souls of men, is the first despot and 
first apostate. We find that men need more than con- 
science, need more than corrective power of environ- 
ment and government to turn them to God. Of course, 
in all dispensations, God has undoubtedly saved thou- 
sands of men for heaven of whom we have no record 
in Scripture. I do not suppose that all of the people 
who lived before the flood were lost eternally. 
Wherever men in any dispensation have obeyed the 
light God has given them, He has revealed Himself 
to them so that they could believe and be saved. But 
the dispensation of government closed in the darkness 
of idolatry. 


DISPENSATION OF PROMISE 


With the call of Abraham we have the beginning 
of another dispensation, God calling Abraham out 
from an idolatrous people and revealing Himself and 
giving the promise of the coming Savior. Up to that 
time there had been only one promise given — the 
primeval promise made in the garden that the serpent 
should bruise the seed of the woman and He should 
bruise its head. Men could look forward, as they did 
undoubtedly, to the coming Seed of the woman, who 
was eventually to make propitiation for sin. When 
God calls Abraham and tells him, “In thee and in thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,” 
He gives Abraham the promise of the coming Savior. 
What we may call the dispensation of promise began 
with Abraham. We have something we have not had 
before. The old dispensation changes and the new dis- 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 45 


pensation comes in. God is dealing with men in a 
different way. 

How were men to be saved now? Abraham be- 
lieved God, and it was counted to him for righteous- 
ness. “Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw it 
and was glad,” said our blessed Lord. He looked 
forward in faith to the coming Savior. That dispensa- 
tion was a brief one. Our definition says “‘a period 
of time either long or short.” 

Now, the people of Israel go down into Egypt. They 
have the promise and are sure of it, and that promise 
is so well known even in Egypt that the time comes 
when the man looked upon as the heir to the throne 
of Egypt, the adopted son of Pharaoh’s daughter, 
considers that promise. I suppose it had been told 
him by his own mother; we read, “He chose rather 
to suffer affliction with the people of God than to 
. enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.” Why? Be- 
cause he was ready to assume the reproach of Christ. 
What did Moses know about the reproach of Christ? 
He knew that Christ was to come through the despised 
people, the seed of Abraham, and he said, “I will 
identify myself with them.” 


DISPENSATION OF Law 


Then we come to the scene on Mount Sinai. Now 
what? A new dispensation altogether, that of law. 
The moment the Law is given, God has committed 
an altogether different administration to them. Yet 
we are told there is only one dispensation in the Old 
Testament. What did Abraham know about the pro- 
vision of Law? What did Noah know about the Law 
before the flood? Nothing whatsoever. They were 
given something they had never had before. Was the 


46 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


Law given in order that men might be saved? The 
Law was given even at the very first in order to prove 
to man his helplessness. God always casts man upon 
His own infinite mercy and grace for salvation. 

I attended a little church in a country village one 
Sunday and got there just as Sunday school was con- 
vening. I was asked to go into the Bible class. I do 
not remember the particular chapter they were study- 
ing, but the leader put this question: “Class, how were 
people saved before Christ came into the world?” 

Someone answered, “By keeping the Law.” 

“Exactly,” said the leader. He was going on, and 
I did not, as a stranger, want to interrupt, but I said, 
“I beg your pardon, but did I understand that cor- 
rectly? Did you say that people were saved by keep- 
ing the Law before Christ came into the world?” 

“Certainly, until Christ came that was the only way.” 

“Well, then, what do you do with this verse in 
Galatians, ‘If there had been a law given which could 
have given life, then verily righteousness would have 
been by the law’?” 

“Oh, yes, I hadn’t thought of that. Well, class, we 
were wrong. What other suggestions have you?” 

Finally a woman spoke up, “Why, by offering animal 
sacrifices.” 

“Exactly; I think the woman is right. Now, is that 
satisfactory?” 

“It would be but for a verse here, ‘It is not possible 
that the blood of bulls and of goats should put away 
Sinai 

“Oh, yes, that’s true isn’t it? Well, then how do 
you think that people were saved before Christ came 
into the world?” 

“Why, exactly as RAY on He rejoiced to see the 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 47 


salvation of the Lord. He saw it and was glad. They 
looked on in faith to the Seed of Abraham.” 

Wherever men will honestly judge themselves and 
repent, God will give them light enough to be saved. 
They were saved through the same sacrifice as that 
which saved us; they were saved through the coming 
Savior as we are through the risen Savior. 

David lived in the dispensation of law. David com- 
mitted a fearful sin, and he cried aloud, “Against 
thee and thee only have I sinned and done this evil 
in thy sight.” Why did he not hurry down to the 
temple and offer a sacrifice? “In burnt offerings and 
sacrifice [for sin] thou hast no pleasure. Purge me 
with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I 
shall be whiter than snow.” He depended upon the 
infinite sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ yet to be 
offered. The dispensation of law did not propose 
the Law as a means of salvation but proposed the 
Law as the expression—of integrity of heart toward 
God. People honest toward God would seek to keep 
that Law, and failing to keep it, it would impress 
upon them their own sinfulness and the need of a 
Savior. Paul said, “The law is a schoolmaster to bring 
us to Christ.” 

Our blessed Lord, when He died on Calvary, cried, 
“Tt is finished.” What was finished? The work of 
saving poor sinners was finished. The dispensation of 
law was finished. On the cross, He bore in His own 
body all the penalty of that outraged Law. 


DISPENSATION OF GRACE 


There is a verse in Colossians that is rarely ever 
explained in a way that seems at all clear, and yet 


I believe it is a most striking picture. \Col. 2:14: 


48 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


taal T 


3lotting out the handwriting of ordinances tha 

operat Ue which was contrary to us, and took it out 
of the way, nailing it to his cross.” In this connection 
we often Ea e of the old-fashioned 
way of keeping books. There were nails on the wall, 
and when you bought something, the groceryman made 
out a slip and placed it on the nail. Then when you 
paid your bill, you presented your slips and he put 
them on another nail. They were nailed to the wall. 
But we learn from history that it was customary under 
the Roman law if a man were to be hanged on a tree 
for some crime, to write out the indictment, the law, 
the particular crime of which he was guilty and nail 
it on the cross above his head. Pilate did that. He 
placed a placard over the head of Jesus Christ, which 
read, “Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews,” 
which meant that He was a traitor to Caesar. He had 
dared to set Himself up as King of the Jews. That 
was the crime for which He hung on the tree. Over 
each of the robbers’ heads a placard was nailed upon 
which was written the crime of which they were guilty, 
the laws they had broken. They were suffering for 
having broken those laws. So our blessed Christ, 
hanging upon the tree, with Pilate’s statement over 
His head, was supposed to die because He had de- 
clared Himself King of the Jews! But, although His 
hands were nailed to that cross, yet in a spiritual 
sense they were free to nail His own accusation to 
that cross. He, as it were, nailed over His own head, 
the Law; the ten words given at Mount Sinai. He 
died because of the violation of that holy Law. Who 
broke it? Did He? No. He took it out of the way 
for us, nailing it to His cross. Now the penalty is 
paid. Everything is settled. So far as we are con- 


| 


nS eee ee 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 49 


cerned, we are under grace, and that brings us to the 
present glorious dispensation the Apostle Paul calls 
the dispensation of the grace of God, and the dispensa- 
tion of the mystery, the dispensation of the grace of 
God because He is making TA free grace in 
Christ Jesus to all who believe. |“By grace are_ye 
saved through faith and that not of yourselves; it is 
ift of God. Not of works, lest any man should 


I remember some years ago preaching in Salt Lake 
City. I was younger then and had a little more fire 
and energy. Every night I would stand out in the 
snow and preach—it was during the winter time—and 
although I had a place with an awning where the people 
were protected, I was standing in the snow and preach- 
ing to them. One night I was preaching the gospel 
to about three hundred Mormons, when a surly man 


. came along and said, “Look here, may I ask you a 


question?” 

“Yes, if you will be prompt, please.” 

“T am an elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of 
the Latter Day Saints. I understood you to say that 
we could be saved by grace apart from human merit. 
I deny that, and I challenge you to show me a place 
in the Bible that says that anybody can be saved by 
grace without works.” 

I opened my Bible and read Rom. 4:4-5: 
him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justi- 
fieth , his faith is counte righteous- 

éss. Now to him t i éward not 
feckoned of grace, but of debt.” I also read in 
Ephesians (chapter 2), “Ry grace are ye saved throngi 
faith, and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God. 
ot of works, lest any man should boast.” 


50 ` LAMP OF PROPHECY 


“Let me see that,” he said, and I handed him my 
Bible. “This is not in my Bible.” 

“What kind of a Bible have you? I think it is.” 

“I have read my Bible a good many times, but I 
never saw that.” 

“Well, when you go home tonight, you just look 
ite ap 

“What kind of a Bible have you?” 

“This is the Authorized Version.” 

“Oh, well, that explains it all. I use the King James 
Version.” 

“Well,” I said, “you know perhaps that the Au- 
thorized Version and the King James are the same.” 

“Is that so? I never knew that. Does yours have 
the letter to King James in the front of it?” 

SVE cia 

“Well, all I have got to say is that I have never seen 
that in my Bible, and if that is in the Bible, I would 
rather have the Book of Mormon any day,” and he 
ripped out a fearful oath and cursed and damned the 
Bible. 

I saw my advantage, and I said, “Look here, this 
is a practical demonstration of the thing that I have 
been preaching. Here is an elder of the Church of 
Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints, and he tells us 
that he is saved by his own works. We have just had 
a sample of his works—cursing and swearing. Now, 
I come to you as a younger in the church of Jesus 
Christ of the former-day saints, telling you that I am 
saved by grace alone, without works, and I challenge 
you to put a detective on my tracks, and if you can 
find one unholy thing that I am saying or one wicked 
thing that I am doing, you can proclaim it from the 
housetops.” Grace makes us righteous. 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 51 


This is also called the dispensation of mystery. 
This is the age when God had made known His eternal 
purpose to take out of Jew and Gentile a people and 
unite them into one body; His body and His bride. 
When He reigns, He will not reign alone. This secret 
was never revealed in the Old Testament period—that 
the church, brought out of Jew and Gentile, united by 
the Holy Ghost during this present dispensation, should 
some day reign with Him. 

When this dispensation is ended, are there any others 
to follow? According to some of our recent writers, 
there are not. The next great event will be, they say, 
the coming of the Lord; that the rapture and the ap- 
pearing will all take place at the same time and that 
God is then through with Israel; that the promises to 
Israel are now being fulfilled spiritually in the church; 
that we are to be called up to heaven and the earth is 
to be destroyed by fire; that there is no dispensation 
to follow this. They are telling us that we have been 
misled during all these years of dispensational teach- 
ing; that they don’t know when the Lord may come; 
that all the things and signs of the times leading on 
to the end amount to nothing; that there will not be a 
millennium; that we may be here a few thousand years 
or less, that they don’t know, but when this dispensa- 
tion is ended, we shall enter immediately into our 
eternal state. 


THE MILLENNIUM 


What do we find when we come to this old Book? 
Paul points out to the Ephesians another dispensation. 
I shall not touch on the brief dispensation of judgment. 
Some think that hardly deserves the dignified name of 
a dispensation. I am thinking of this glorious dis- 


52 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


pensation of the “fulness of time,” commonly called 
the millennium. The time will come when our Lord 
Jesus will be King over all the world, and He will 
show the world a happy potentate. Shakespeare says, 
“Unhappy lies the head that wears the crown,” but 
when Jesus comes, He will be a happy King. When 
He comes He will show us who is that blessed (or 
happy) and only potentate; there will be no other. 
Jesus alone will be King in that day. There will be 
no one to dispute His sway. 

We are told that the term “millennium” is never 
found in Scripture. It is true that the Latin word is 
not found, but we have the English equivalent, “a 
thousand years,” and this is found six times in the 
twentieth chapter of Revelation. We read that the 
serpent is bound for one thousand years. When did 
the binding of Satan take place? If this is all in the 
past, we have never known the time when Satan was 
really bound. He has always seemed active so far as 
our own day is concerned. He is to be bound for one 
thousand years and is not to deceive the nations any 
more until the thousand-year period is over. Rev. 
20:4: “And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, 
and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls 
of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, 
and for the word of God, and which had not wor- 
shipped the beast, neither his image, neither had re- 
ceived his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; 
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand 
years.” This refers to the church and the martyred 
tribulation saints. Verse 5: “But the rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thousand years were finished.” 
This is the fourth time this is mentioned. “Blessed 
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: 


REAFFIRMATION OF DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH 53 


on such the second death hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with 
him a thousand years.” Verse 7: “And when the thou- 
sand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of 
his prison.” And this is what we mean by “the mil- 
lennium.” This term has been used in the church 
from the very earliest ages, but now men rise up who 
profess to have increased light and suddenly discover 
that there is never to be a millennium. But this Scrip- 
ture stands as a bulwark in the way of all who would 
deny that Christ is yet to reign for a thousand glorious 
years. 


WAS THE KINGDOM OFFERED TO ISRAEL 
AND REJECTED? 


ACCORDING TO THE teaching many of us are familiar 
with, John the Baptist came preaching the nearness 
of the kingdom of heaven, that is, proclaiming that the 
time had drawn nigh when the rule of heaven was to 
be set up over this world; when heaven was to take 
manifest control over human affairs. He predicted the 
coming of the King to set up this kingdom. When our 
Lord came, He himself proclaimed the same message 
as John, “Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is 
at hand.” We have taught that during His ministry 
here on earth, He and His disciples went everywhere 
proclaiming the kingdom and declaring that the door 
into the kingdom now was open but the people must 
be regenerated to enter into it. The day had come 
when the kingdom of heaven was to be set up on earth, 
provided the people were ready to receive it. This is 
the message of the Gospel of Matthew. The offer of 
the kingdom met with ever-increasing rejection until 
finally it was completely set to one side, when our 
Lord Jesus said, “The kingdom of God is taken from 
you and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the 


54 


Was KINGDOM OFFERED IsRAEL AND REJECTED? 55 


fruits thereof.” That nation is not the Gentiles as 
such, but that nation refers to regenerated Israel in 
a coming day, and, in the meantime, the kingdom has 
been, as it were, deferred, and the gospel of the grace 
of God is going out to all the world. God has not 
changed His purpose, but He is not now setting up 
His kingdom in this world. That kingdom awaits the 
coming again of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Recently these views have been challenged by some 
very respected people, and I want to examine a few 
Scriptures to see whether they hold or not. 

Turn to the second Psalm. This is the great dis- 
pensational Psalm. It is referred to again and again 
in the New Testament. After our blessed Lord as- 
cended to heaven, it seems that the Spirit of God 
directed the attention of the apostolic company to 
this second Psalm in a very special way. It revealed 
to them what God was doing. 

In the second Psalm we have twelve verses divided 
into four sections, of three verses each. We have four 
different speakers. In the first section (verses 1-3) 
we hear the voice of the world. In the second (4-6) 
we listen to the voice of the Father. In the third (7-9) 
we hear the voice of the Son, and in the fourth (10-12) 
it is the voice of the Holy Spirit. 

Notice the attitude of the world. “Why do the 
heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?” 
You remember that the Apostle Peter applied this 
to what took place when our Lord Jesus Christ was 
rejected. He showed that both the Jew and Gentile 
were linked together in this rejection. 

“The kings of the earth [represented by Caesar and 
his minions] set themselves, and the rulers [i.e., of 
the Jews] take counsel together, against the Lord, and 


56 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands 
asunder, and cast away their cords from us,” i.e., they 
deliberately refused to acknowledge the kingly au- 
thority of Jesus Christ. 

He was presented to them as the King promised 
through the Old Testament period, and when He came 
He offered Himself to the people in that character. 
It was in that character that He was rejected. There- 
fore, to say that the kingdom was not offered to Israel 
is nonsensical, They could only have received the 
kingdom by receiving the King. The King presented 
Himself, and in presenting Himself, He offered them 
the kingdom. He said, ‘““The kingdom of God is among 
you.” Sometimes this is rendered, “The kingdom of 
God is within you.” Personally, I think this is a mis- 
taken rendering. This is popular with Eddyites, New 
Thought people, and all the various esoteric systems. 
They like to think that the kingdom of God is some- 
thing inside of all men; that the Lord addresses 
everybody, including the scribes and Pharisees, ““God’s 
kingdom is within you. Get into harmony with that 
and everything is all right.” But it may well be 
rendered, “The kingdom of God is among you.” 

The Lord said, “You don’t need to look for the 
kingdom of God. Here is the kingdom. While you 
are looking for it, here it is. Now the question is, 
Will you receive it or reject it?” They rejected it. It 
was set to one side. 

“Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away 
their cords from us.” 

What about the kingdom? Has God changed His 
plans or has He set up the kingdom among the Gen- 
tiles? Not at all. Hear the voice of the Father (verses 
4.6): “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the 


Was KINGDOM OFFERED IsRAEL AND REJECTED? 57 
Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he 


speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his 
sore displeasure. Yet have I set my king upon my 
holy hill of Zion.” It is as though He said, “I haven’t 
changed my plans. My kingdom shall be established 
on Mount Zion.” Mount Zion means Mount Zion. All 
the Old Testament prophets declared that the King’s 
throne should be established there. Although the 
people of Israel have refused Him, His plans are un- 
changed, and the day is coming when the kingdom 
will be actually set up on Mount Zion, and regenerated 
Israel will accept the kingdom and bow the knee to 
the King. 

Now, in the meantime, hear the voice of the Son: 
“T will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto 
me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. 
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for 
thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of 
iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s 
vessel.” That is, although He has been rejected by 
His own nation, the Son now announces the fact that 
God the Father has not changed His plans. God owns 
Him as His Son, and though He is rejected of man, 
the day is coming when not only the people of Israel 
but all the Gentiles everywhere will be brought into 
subjection to His benevolent, yet righteous sway, when 
He will rule the nations with a rod of iron. When 
will that be? A multitude of Scriptures show that 
this will be at His second coming. He is not ruling 
the nations with a rod of iron now. Even where the 
gospel is believed, He is not ruling the nations. That 
awaits the day of the establishment of His kingdom 
in millennial glory. In the meantime, while He sits 


58 LAMP OF PROPHECY 
exalted on the throne of Jehovah (110th Psalm) the 


voice of the Holy Spirit is heard, “Be wise now there- 
fore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. 
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. 
Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the 
way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed 
are all they that put their trust in him.” 

When we come to the New Testament, as in the nine- 
teenth chapter of Luke, we find our blessed Lord in- 
dicating the course of things in regard to the kingdom. 
Verse 11: “And as they heard these things, he added 
and spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, 
and because they thought that the kingdom of God 
should immediately appear.” 

Now, the writer of the book I referred to not only 
wrote that the kingdom of God should immediately 
appear, but he thinks that the kingdom did appear. 

“Because they thought that the kingdom of God 
should immediately appear,” Jesus related a parable 
to show them it would not! “He said therefore, A 
certain nobleman went into a far country to receive 
for himself a kingdom, and to return.” There is our 
blessed Lord. He has gone into a far country. He 
is seated on the Father’s throne waiting to receive 
the kingdom and then to return. This is in exact 
accord with the 110th Psalm. The Father says to the 
Son, “Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine 
enemies thy footstool.” Then comes the second time, 
when He is to establish His kingdom. While He is 
in the far country, the servants act for Him in His 
absence, as recognizing His rightful authority. 

“And he called his ten servants and delivered them 
ten pounds and said unto them, Occupy till I come. 
But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after 


Was Kincpom OFFERED IsRAEL AND REJECTED? 59 


him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over 
us. And it came to pass, that when he was returned, 
having received the kingdom, then he commanded 
these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had 
given the money, that he might know how much every 
man had gained by trading. Then came the first, 
saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. And 
he said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because 
thou hast been faithful in a very little, have thou 
authority over ten cities. And the second came, 
saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds. And 
he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities. 
And another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is thy 
pound which I have kept laid up in a napkin: for I 
feared thee, because thou art an austere man... . But 
the nobleman replied, Out of thine own mouth will 
I judge thee. Thou knowest that I was an austere 
_ man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that 
I did not sow: wherefore then gavest not thou my 
money into the bank, that at my coming I might have 
required mine own with usury? And he said unto 
them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and 
give it to him that hath ten pounds. (And they said 
unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.) For I say unto 
you, That unto every one which hath shall be given; 
and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall 
be taken away from him. But those mine enemies, 
which would not that I should reign over them, bring 
| hither, and slay them before me.” 
The rule of the iron rod begins. The Lord said, 
“I am the way, the truth, and the life.” The Lord 
was not only the truth in all the actions of His life, 
but He was the truth in everything He said. Our 
Savior never said anything that was false. He didn’t 


60 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


make up little fancy stories. These parables were 
actual facts. For instance, “A certain man had two 
sons. The younger of them said to his father,” etc. 
What were the names of those two sons? He could 
have told you. He didn’t make that story up. “A 
certain rich man was clothed in purple and fine linens.” 
He names the beggar because He calls His own people 
by name, but He leaves the rich man unnamed. 

And so here, this story is one of fact. Everyone 
listening to Him knew exactly to what He was re- 
ferring. Just about the time that the Lord was born, 
Herod the Great had died. In his will he selected 
Archelaus, his son, to be king. The people didn’t 
want Archelaus. They had suffered under the father 
and thought his son would be even worse. Archelaus 
attempted to take the throne, but finding the Jews so 
hostile, he determined to go to Caesar and put the 
case before him and have the title to his throne con- 
firmed. Before leaving he distributed a sum of money 
to certain of his servants, and they were to work in 
his absence to make friends for him. Soon after the 
Jews heard that he had gone to Caesar to put the case 
before him, they sent messengers after him to say, “We 
don’t want this man.” But when Augustus heard the 
case he confirmed Archelaus in the title to the throne. 
He returned with a Roman legion to back him in taking 
his position. The servants who had acted in his ab- 
sence were rewarded and given various places in the 
kingdom, while, on the other hand, he turned upon 
those who were out and out enemies and destroyed 
them. The Lord is not endorsing everything he did, 
but He uses this story to illustrate the present condition. 

He was the rightful King, but they didn’t want Him. 
They were not willing to submit to Him. So He says, 


Was KINGDOM OFFERED ISRAEL AND REJECTED? 61 


“It is like the nobleman who went into a far country. 
I am going to leave the world, as the rejected one 
going back to the Father’s throne.” He is going to 
put the case in His hands. In the meantime He has 
servants in the world. “Now you take what I have 
committed to you and use it in my interest. Use it to 
make friends for me. Use it to prepare men and 
women to acknowledge my authority. When I come 
back, I am coming to reign.” He had scarcely gone 
to the Father when they sent messengers to say, “We 
don’t want Him.” We see these messengers in the 
stoning of Stephen. Stephen went into the very 
presence of God to say in behalf of the people, “They 
don’t want Thy Son. I preached the gospel to them 
and gave them opportunity to repent, but they don’t 
want Thy Son. See the treatment they gave me; they 
put me to death.” All through the centuries since, 
the servants of Christ have been working in His ab- 
sence. We recognize Him as King. Does that not 
mean then that the kingdom is already set up? Not 
at all. It implies this: We believe that a usurper 
is dominating this world, that the rightful King is 
rejected. We acknowledge the authority of the right- 
ful King. We own His authority, but that kingdom 
is not being displayed in any sense. When Christians 
try to exert the authority of the King over the world 
they always make a mistake. The kingdom is not set 
up yet. But those who are saved are translated into 
the kingdom of God in the sense that they own the 
authority of Christ. John writes, “I, John, your 
brother and companion in the kingdom and patience 
of Jesus Christ.” We are waiting for the One whom 
we recognize to come back. He is not called our 
King. Christ is our Lord. He is our Lord. He is 


62 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


our Head. But nowhere in Scripture is Jesus Christ 
said to be King of the church. He is the Head of the 
church and Lord of the individual believer. Our re- 
lationship to Him is that of His body and His bride, 
and therefore, you can see how incongruous it would 
be to speak of Him as King of the church. Take the 
queen of England. She doesn’t speak of George VI 
as her King, but as her husband or her head. She 
recognizes him as the king of the realm of England. 
His word has all the force of law to her because she 
is his wife, and so the church sustains intimate relation- 
ship to Christ. She recognizes Him as the rightful but 
rejected King. When He comes back again the king- 
dom will be displayed. In the meantime, we are to 
work in His interest, to bring men everywhere to recog- 
nize Him as the rightful King. He wants men to sub- 
mit to Him as Savior and as Lord. “Therefore, if 
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus and 
shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him 
from the dead, thou shalt be saved.” We are to preach 
the gospel of the grace of God. 

In the Gospels, the Lord proclaims the gospel of 
the kingdom. After the church is taken out, the 
gospel of the kingdom will again be proclaimed, i.e., 
the gospel that the King is coming to reign. Now, the 
good news is that God is offering remission of sins. 
When the people accept that message, they are linked 
up by the Holy Spirit with the risen Christ, and when 
He comes as King, they will come with Him to reign 
over a regenerated universe. 

Right here comes the question of the place of the 
Gospels in connection with our present message. We 
sometimes say that Matthew is decidedly a Jewish 
Gospel. When I say that, I am apt to be misunder- 


Was Kincpom OFFERED ISRAEL AND REJECTED? 63 


stood on one side or on the other. Some people may 
think that I mean that Matthew has no interest for me 
because I am not a Jew and other people may go to 
the other extreme, namely, that all Christians are now 
spiritual Israel and, in that sense, the Gospel is for 
them. 

But when I say that Matthew is the Jewish Gospel, 
it is practically the same thing in relation to the 
Gospels as when I say that Mark is the Roman Gospel, 
Luke, the Gentile, and John, the Christian Gospel. 

Mark is the Roman Gospel.: Of course, that doesn’t 
apply as well today as the day it was written. When 
Mark was written, the Romans dominated the world. 
Mark had in view the instruction of the Romans. In 
those days, if you were to sit down with a busy Roman 
to prove to him that Jesus is the Son of God, you 
would turn to Mark’s Gospel and meet him on familiar 
ground. But when he believed the Gospel and became 
a Christian, did that mean he no longer valued the 
Gospel of Mark? No. He found in that Gospel 
the expressed will of the Lord. He was thankful for 
it. 

If you were to deal with a Greek, you would turn 
to Luke. Luke was written by a cultured, Greek- 
speaking physician. He may have been a Gentile, 
but I take it that he was probably a Jew. He was a 
cultured man of science. The Gospel was written in 
such a way as to meet the questionings of the cultured 
Greeks. But after this Greek believed the message, 
what did he become? A Christian. Did he discount 
Luke’s Gospel? Not at all. He valued it to the end 
of his days, and would go over and over it. He would 
feed his soul on it. 

Therefore, I say, Matthew is the Jewish Gospel. 


64 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


Some of my brethren who do not understand dis- 
pensational truth think that this is casting a slur on 
it, that it is undervaluing it; that I mean that the 
Gospel of Matthew is not for a Christian. But I do 
not say this. I am saying that if I wanted to prove 
to a Jew that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, I would 
take him to—not Mark, not Luke, and certainly not 
to John—I would take him to Matthew, and I would 
sit down with that Jew, and I would point out to him 
how every claim made by Matthew is backed by the 
Old Testament. I would show him that Jesus Christ 
is in the direct order of the direct genealogical line 
of Abraham and David; how, in accordance with the 
Old Testament, the Gentiles came to greet Him at the 
brightness of His rising; that He was born in Judea 
as the Old Testament said He would be. I would 
show him how John came, the forerunner promised 
in Isaiah 40.. I would show him how the King came 
and was baptized of John, anointed by God, proclaimed 
to be the Son of God, the One sent to redeem Israel. 
I would go on chapter by chapter and show how He 
was tested and how He came at last to the mountain 
and proclaimed the principles of His kingdom. I would 
give him the Sermon on the Mount. 

There is a great deal of mistaken teaching about 
the Sermon on the Mount. Some people say that the 
Sermon on the Mount is the sweetest gospel found in 
the Bible. If it is the gospel, then everyone of us is 
lost forever, for the Sermon on the Mount puts before 
us the highest possible standard of morals and spirit- 
uality, and we have never come up to it. 

A young student from a Bible college who had held 
some meetings in Nova Scotia was telling how he visited 
a blacksmith shop. 


Was KINGDOM OFFERED IsRAEL AND REJECTED? 65 


The blacksmith said to him, “I believe that if a man 
keeps the Ten Commandments and lives up to the 
Sermon on the Mount, that is all that will be required 
of him.” : 

The young man looked at him quietly for a few 
seconds, and then said, “How are you getting along 
with the commandments and the Sermon on the 
Mount?” 

“Oh, well, of course we all come short.” 

“That puts you in a rather bad way, doesn’t it? 
Have you ever kept them?” 

“Well, no, nobody could ever reach to that stand- 
ard.” 

“Don’t you see where you are? That is the reason 
God gave them—to show men where they are, and 
their need of a Savior.” 

The principles of the Sermon on the Mount will 
govern the entire world when the kingdom is set up. 
In the days of the tribulation, when the people of 
Israel will be afflicted, they will have every occasion 
in the world to fall back on exactly what we have 
here in the Sermon on the Mount, but only as regen- 
erated Israel will they have the grace to live up to 
its principles. 

As Christians, do we set it aside? Not at all. We 
come to it again and again to see the principles that 
are to characterize the followers of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. So it is with everything in Matthew’s Gospel. 
We dare not say that the instruction given there was 
given in behalf of the church. In chapter 10:5, we 
read: “These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded 
them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go 
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And 


66 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is 
at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the 
dead, cast out devils.” There are some people today 
who profess to do this. They are living in the days 
of the Gospel of Matthew. They say that they “heal 
the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead.” I do 
not know that they have ever done that, but they 
profess to do something nearly as great. The funny 
thing about it is that they seldom, if ever, quote this, 
“Freely ye have received, freely give.” It is very 
dishonest to take part of a passage and leave the 
other. “Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass 
in your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither 
two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the work- 
man is worthy of his meat.” People are ready to 
deceive themselves and deceive others. No, you cannot 
apply this today. The Gospel of Matthew gives us a 
definite message for a definite time. It is all linked 
with the presentation of the kingdom, but when they 
refused the King, they refused the kingdom. 

When the Christian is linked with Christ, he asks 
himself, “What are the principles that characterized 
my Lord’s life? What would He like to reproduce 
in me?” Turn to the New Testament Epistles, and 
you will be lifted far above what you get either in the 
Law of the Old Testament or in the Sermon on the 
Mount. May I put it this way? If you and I did 
not know one syllable about the law of the Old Testa- 
ment, or one word of the teachings of the Lord on 
the earth, but had the Epistles of the New Testament, 
we would have everything we need to show us how 
to live lives of piety in this world. 

So do not misunderstand when dispensational teach- 
ers say to you, “Don’t go back to the Gospels to find 


Was Kincpom OFFERED ISRAEL AND REJECTED? 67 


your rule of life. Go to the Epistles because there 
you have life in the energy of the Holy Spirit.” Do 
not ignore the expressed will of the Lord. 

I sometimes use this illustration in connection with 
the Christian’s relation to the old question of law. 
Here is a man who is a bachelor and keeps up a 
large establishment. He hires a housekeeper who is 
rather self-willed; he endures her for a while, but he 
finally lets her go. The next one he gets is too care- 
less, so he lets her go, also. By this time he is 
desperate; but by and by he takes a pen and a 
piece of paper, sits down and writes ten rules, or 
ten commandments, and puts them on the wall in 
the kitchen. Then he advertises for a housekeeper. 
A woman comes in answer to the advertisement. He 
chats with her for a few minutes, and then says, “Come 
downstairs with me. Will you kindly read those rules? 
I want you to understand that you have come to work 
for me and you must do exactly as I tell you. Will 
you agree to run this house in accordance with these 
rules?” She reads them over. 

“Now,” he says, “do you thoroughly understand 
that? Will you agree?” 

I can imagine her looking at him sweetly saying, 
“All that thou hast spoken will I do and be obedient.” 

She is now under the law. As long as she is obedient 
and satisfactory, she holds her position. But suppose 
she is exceptional. She keeps the regulations pretty 
well and he is quite delighted with the change. By 
and by the acquaintance ripens into respect, respect 
into affection, affection into love; finally he tells her 
how lonely he has been, how wonderfully she has come 
to fit into the order of things, how he dreads the time 


68 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


when she might terminate her engagement, and would 
she think of remaining with him permanently? 

She exclaims, “Why, this is so sudden!” They are 
engaged. Then they are married. They are not master 
and servant anymore. 

Does he take her down to the kitchen and say, “Now, 
look here, my dear, you remember that when you came 
to work for me, you promised faithfully to keep these 
rules and regulations. Now, although our relations 
are somewhat changed, you are still to keep these rules. 
Do you promise faithfully to obey these rules?” 

I think I can see her laugh in his face. “Take them 
down, my dear. When I was your hired servant, I was 
under rules. Now that I am your wife, do you think 
that I will be less careful about running this house 
in a way that will please you?” You can depend upon 
it that she will be more concerned about running the 
house in a way that will please and gratify him because 
she loves him, than when she worked for wages. 

Now, as Christians, as believers, when we say that 
we are not under law, but under grace; when we say 
that the Sermon on the Mount is not primarily 
Christian, but is instruction as to the kingdom prin- 
ciples, we are not ignoring the will of the Lord, the 
desire of the Lord as to holiness and lowliness of spirit; 
but we find in the Epistles the obedience of those who 
love Him because He first loved them. We delight 
to obey His commandments. We find the greatest joy 
in living according to His will, and we are enabled 
to do this in the power of the indwelling Spirit, who 
has come to control us for the glory of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. So here we are, seeking to glorify Him. We 
are to endeavor to make Him known by life and word 
to the world which is still rejecting Him. 


Was KINGDOM OFFERED IsRAEL AND REJECTED? 69 


By and by He will come back again. When He 
comes, we will come with Him, having been already 
caught up to meet Him in the air. We shall share 
in His joy when the entire world is brought into sub- 
jection to Him, when men and women everywhere 
will bow at His feet. He will rule the nations with the 
iron rod of righteousness. There is no setting aside 
of the principles of holiness and righteousness because 
we seek to give things a dispensational place. 

I have often felt when I have read the criticisms 
of some of these writers that they simply build their 
arguments upon some strong man’s statement, for in- 
stance, Dr. C. I. Scofield. I know that no man more 
faithfully taught devotedness to Christ, nor did any 
man more faithfully live it. They seem to feel that 
now we are no longer under Jewish regulations, and 
that Dr. Scofield left us free to do as we please. If 
this had been presented to Dr. Scofield, he might have 
said quietly, with a smile, “We are free to do as we 
please now that we please to live for God. The new 
nature pleases to live for God.” And if you under- 
stand what one means when he uses that expression, 
it is perfectly safe to use it. However, we all have 
the flesh within us. It is always ready to take ad- 
vantage. But Paul said, “Brethren, we are called unto 
liberty, only use not liberty as an occasion for the 
flesh.” We haven’t been called unto the liberty of 
doing as the natural heart desires. We have been 
called unto the liberty of serving Jesus Christ in the 
freedom and joy of the Spirit of God. While we 
are doing this we are glorifying the absent King and 
showing to the world the principles that will be mani- 
fest when the kingdom is set up. It will mean suffering 
for us, but if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him 


qo LAMP OF PROPHECY 


by and by. The kingdom has been offered, has been 
rejected, has been set to one side. God has not been 
taken by surprise. He saw from the beginning just 
what course things would take. It was His purpose 
to teach Israel in this way. He saw that men would 
crucify the Lord of glory, yet Christ was presented 
to them, and they were given the opportunity of ac- 
cepting or rejecting Him. 

In the second chapter of Daniel, we see that the 
stone will smite the image at the feet and toes. If 
this other theory is true, the stone would have to hit 
the image around the knees. Our Lord came in the 
days of the Roman Empire. His kingdom was not then 
set up. The stone falls not upon the knees, not on 
the ankles, but upon the feet and toes. In those days 
—-the feet and toes—the God of heaven will set up 
His kingdom. Whosoever falls upon that stone will 
be broken. Israel stumbled over the stone, but on 
whomsoever it will fall, it will grind him to powder. 
Then all the kingdoms of this world will give way to 
the glorious kingdom of God. 


WILL ISRAEL BE REGATHERED? 


As you KNOW, I am trying to answer some questions 
that have been raised and answered negatively in some 
recent books that have had for their object the shaking 
of our faith in what some of us believe to be the 
dispensational teaching of the Scriptures. 

We have already seen (I hope clearly) that God 
has dealt with man through a series of dispensations; 
that we are living in the dispensation of the grace 
of God, or the dispensation of the mystery, when God 
is taking out from among the Gentiles a people for 
His name. He is gathering out a company to be for 
all eternity the body and bride of His Son. We have 
also seen (I hope clearly) that in due time God is 
going to fulfill the promises made to Israel. Will the 
fulfilment of those promises involve the return of the 
nation to the Land of Palestine? Must the Land of 
Palestine again become the acknowledged home of the 
people of Israel, and will Mount Zion, the actual city 
of Jerusalem, become the seat of the throne of the 
King in the coming day? 

Let us first turn to the Book of Genesis and see what 
promises God made in regard to the land. Gen. 12:7: 


wl 


Ta LAMP OF PROPHECY 


“Unto thy seed will I give this land.” There is the 
first promise. It is very short and very clear. There 
are no conditions made. God simply appears to Abra- 
ham and says, “I am going to do a certain thing.” 
He does not say, “If you do so and so, I will do so 
and so. If your seed after you prove faithful to me, 
I will confirm this,” but “unto thy seed will I give 
_this land.” He amplifies that promise in 13:14: “And 
the Lord_said-unto Abram, after that Lot was separated. 


A ene enone rs i aaa 


from him, Lift up now “thine eyes, and look from the 
place ATTE northward, and southward, and- 
eastward, and westward: for all the land which thou 
seest, to thee-will-I give it, and to thy seed for ever.” 
This is an added word to the promise, and it seems 
at least to imply that God will never revoke this land 
grant to the nation of Israel, to the seed of Abraham: 
} “Unto thy seed will I give this land for ever, And 
|I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that 
if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall 
thy seed also be numbered,” 5 

Abraham has both a spiritual and a natural seed. 
But when God speaks of his seed as numberless as the 
dust of the earth, that necessarily refers to the earthly 
seed. When He speaks of his seed as the stars of the 
heaven, that refers to the heavenly seed. Here is dis- 
tinctly the earthly seed, as numerous as the dust of 
the earth. Verse 17: + Arise, walk through. the land 
in the length of it and if the ‘breadth of it; for I will 
give it-unto thee.” 

In 15:18, we have the limits of the land divided 
in a fuller way: “In-the same day the Lord made a 
covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I_ 
given this land, from the river of Egypt unto.the.great. 
river, the river Euphrates: The Kenites, and the Keniz- 


ah 


WILL IsraeL BE REGATHERED? T3 


zites, and the Kadmonites, and the Hittites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Rephaims, and the Amorites, and 
the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.” 
Those of us who are thoroughly familiar with ancient 
geography know where these “ites” lived; at any rate, 
the limits of the rivers tell us—from the river of the 
Euphrates on the one side to Egypt; that is all the 
way from Egypt on the west to the Euphrates on the 
east. Israel never possessed that much of the land. 
Even in the day of King Solomon, the land Israel 
possessed was not so great as that here promised to 
Abraham. So I take it that in the coming day, God 
will confirm this promise. Gen. 17:7-8: “And I will 
establish my covenant between me and thee and thy 
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting 
covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after 
thee: And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after 
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land 
of Canaart; for an everlasting possession; and I will 
“pe their-God:? 

Now, to one who did not have a theory to main- 
tain, it should seem perfectly clear that God meant 
what He said, when He declared that He would give 
this land to Abraham and his seed, to be their inheri- 
tance forever. The term “forever” means forever, as 
long as the world stands. Yet for nineteen hundred 
years they have not dwelt in their land. God fore- 
saw all this. He warned Israel through Moses 
(Deuteronomy 28)~that if they were not obedient to 
His Holy Word, the day-would-come_when He would 
bring a nation against ae from the ends of the earth. / 
Italy was the very extreme of the world on the w 
in the days when Moses uttered these words: “The 
Lord shall bring.a_nation against thee from far, from 


74 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle-flieth;—a- 
nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand.” They 
had no difficulty in understanding the tongue of the 
Chaldeans. That was almost fie the Hebrew; very 
much as the Swedish is similar to the Norwegian, and 
the English to broad Scotch; but God was going to 
bring against them a people with a tongue altogether 
different, the Latin-speaking Roman, and these people 
were to destroy the sanctuary, and as a result of this 
desolation, “the Lord shall scatter thee among all 
people from the one end of the earth -even-unto the 
other; and. there thou shalt serve other gods, which 
neither thou nor thy fathers“havé known, even wood 
and’ stone. And among these nations shalt thou find 
no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: 
but the ‘Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, 
and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind.” So at 
present, they are scattered, due to their disobedience 
to God. Does that invalidate, does that cancel the 
unconditional promise that God made to Abraham? 
It does not. We are told in connection with the Abra- 
hamic covenant of grace, that the law which came 430 
years after could not make that promise of none effect, 
so all the experiences of Israel through the centuries 
cannot suffice to annul the promise God made. We 
have been told by some that the land would have been 
theirs if they had been faithful to the Law; but God 
said nothing to Abraham about keeping the Law. The 
Law was not given at that time. But the inheritance 
was forever. They have forfeited the present posses- 
sion of the land, but Scripture contains abundant 
promises that in due time they will return to that land 
and possess it again. 

Let us turn to some of these promises. Jer. 30:18: 


WILL ISRAEL Be RECATHERED? to 
“Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring again the 


“This precludes the thought of the return under 
Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah being the fulfilment. 
It was not true of the time after they came back from 
Babylon, because they came back subject to the Medes 
and the Persians; then later, to the various divisions 
of Alexander’s empire; and, at last, to the Romans. 
In the days of the Romans, Pilate, the representative 
of Caesar, exercised authority in Jerusalem, and Herod 
was king in Galilee. It is clear that the return in the 
days of Ezra and Nehemiah could not be the return 
contemplated when God opened up the way for as 
many as would to come back, for they didn’t have faith 
to take hold of the promise and very few returned. 


See the next chapter (31:7): “For thus saith the 
Lord; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among 


the chief of the nations: publish ye, praiseye,—and 
say, O-hord,; save thy people, the remnant of Israel. 
Béhold I will bring them from the north country, and 
rather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them 


the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her 


that travaileth with child together: a great company” 


76 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


shall return thither. Ha- shall_come with weeping, 
them to walk by the rivers of PEN in a straight 
way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father 
to Israél,; and Ephraim is my firstborn. Hear the word 
of the ere O ye nations and declare it in the isles 
afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather 
him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock. For. 
the Lord hath redeemed.Jacob, and ransomed him 
from the hand of him that was stronger than he. There- 
fore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, 
and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, 
for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the 
young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul 
shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sor- 
“row any more at all.” Notice the spiritual blessing 
that is to accompany their return in the latter days 
to Palestine — such spiritual blessings as they knew 
nothing of in the days of the former restoration. They 
will return in heart to God, as well as to the land. 
“Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young 
men and old together: for I will turn their mourning 
into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice 
from their sorrow. And I will satiate the soul of the 


\ priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied 


‘with my goodness, saith the Lord.” 

In verse twenty-three we have further instruction 
in regard to this return. In these two great chapters— 
Jeremiah 30 and 31—we have God’s covenant with 
them concerning the land and His promise to fulfill 
all He has spoken concerning it. i ““Thus. saith. the) 
Lord of hosts, the God-of Israel; As yet they shall use 
this speech in the-land~ of Judah and in the cities 
thereof, when I shall erie Cee their captivity; the 


WILL ISRAEL BE REGATHERED? vig) 


Lord bless thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain 
of holiness. And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and 
in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they 
that go forth with flocks. For I have satiated the 
LEN soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful 
soul.” i 
“Evidently God said this to Jeremiah while he was 
asleep, for in verse 26 he says: “Upon this I awakened, 
and behold; my sleep was sweet unto me,” in other 
words, “I was refreshed by the good news God gave 
me concerning the testimony of my people.” Now, 
God continues to enlarge upon the return. ‘Behold, 
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will sow the house 
of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of 
man, and with the seed of beast. And it shall come 
to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck 
up, and to break down, and to throw down, and ta 
destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to ` 
build, and to plant, saith the Lord. In those days they 
shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, 
and the children’s teeth are set on edge.” That is, 
God will exercise judgment. He will clear the land 
by judgment and restore the faithful remnant to Him- 
self in that day. For with the restoration of the people 
to the land, a new covenant will be confirmed to Israel. 
The blood of this covenant has already been shed. 
Our blessed Lord held the communion cup in His hand 
and said, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood.” 
This is the basis of all blessing both for Jew and 
Gentile. In this age all who believe are united in the 
one body of Christ. After the church age ends, God 
will take up the nation of Israel again and the New 
Covenant as such will be made with them. We come 
under the blessings of it because it is a covenant of 


f 


78 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


pure grace, but you could hardly speak of the New 
Covenant being made with us, inasmuch as the Old 
Covenant was never made with us. The Old Covenant 
was made between God and Israel at Mount Sinai, 
which covenant they broke. The New Covenant will 
some day be confirmed to Israel and Judah. 
Jeremiah goes on in chapter 31, verse 31: “Behold 
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a 
‘new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the 
house of Judah: not according to the covenant that 
I made with their fathers in the day that I took them 


a ~À by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; 


L 


which my covenant they brake, although I was an 

\ husband unto them, saith the Lord.” God never made 
any covenant with our fathers, nor took them by the 
hand and led them out of the land of Egypt. He is 
referring here to literal Israel, Israel after the flesh. 
“Which covenant they brake.” This covenant was 
made with the house of Israel. “But this shall be 
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; 
After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law 
in their inward parts, and write in their hearts; and 
will be their God, and they shall be my people.” 

This is already true of believers in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. We who have been born again have a new 
nature, and we delight in the will of God. 

Permit me to add an illustration as to what it means 
to have the law written in your heart. Some years ago 
I had a small school for Indian young people. I 
brought them up from the desert of Arizona to educate 
them in order that they might go back to their people 
as missionaries. John C was a bright young 
Navajo. The first Sunday we brought him home to 
Oakland, John was with us in the morning meeting, 


WILL IsraeL Be REGATHERED? 79 


and then he went home with one of the ladies for 
dinner and came back to the young people’s meeting. 
We sat down in the back seat. They were just having 
a discussion on law and grace, and, frankly, they 
didn’t get on very well. Finally the leader turned to 
the Indian and said, “John, what do you thing about 
this subject?” 

John got to his feet and, slowly and methodically, 
said, “Well, you know I think this is a lesson to you 
all. I come here to try to learn things to go back 
and tell my people. I think if I tell my people what 
you were saying here, they look at me and wonder 
what it is all about, because I have been wondering 
what it is all about. I don’t know whether you know 
what it is all about.” Of course they were all rather 
taken aback. “Now,” he continued, “this business of 
law and grace—let me tell you something I think make 
it plain to me so I can explain to my people. I come 
away from the desert with Mr. Ironside. I never take 
so long journey on the train before. It is wonderful. 
Every time the train stopped, I get out and walk 
around and look at everything, rubbernecking, very 
much interested. At Barstow I get out and see the 
great hotel that the Santa Fe railroad put up. I walked 
down to one end of this great hotel and on the nice 
cement wall I see a sign there, “Please do not spit here.’ 
I look at the sign and then look down at the cement 
walk, and I see many people spit there. Before I think 
what I am doing, I spit there myself. Then I hurry 
and walk away from the sign. I think a lot about 
it. That is quite a thing. If there was no sign, nobody 
pay attention to it. I come here to Oakland this morn- 
ing for the meeting, and Mrs. A. take me to a beautiful 
home. I have never been in such a home before. I 


80 Lamp OF PROPHECY 


am led into a room, such a wonderful room. I put 
my foot on the carpet; it is so beautiful and soft, and 
then I sit down in a big chair. My, I have never been 
in such a comfortable chair. I look all around at 
the beautiful pictures and at the grand piano. I just 
looking all the time till I am ashamed to be looking 
so much. By and by they all go out of the room, and 
I am sitting there thinking about something, and I get 
up and look all around. I look at the walls in those 
two big rooms, and I look for signs, “Please do not 
spit here.’ I look for that sign, and I can’t find that 
sign, and I say to myself, “Too bad, such a beautiful 
home and no sign here, “Please do not spit here.” Then 
I think, ‘Let me look and see,’ and I walk all around 
through those two rooms and look everywhere, and by 
and by I find that nobody has spit here. Then it comes 
to me in a moment, ‘Now I understand this law and 
grace business. Outside there, there is the law, “Do 
not spit here,” and some see it and it stir up the very 
thing it say don’t do, but inside here it is grace. They 
love the beautiful home, and because they love it, they 
want to keep it pure and sweet and clean, so they do 
not need any sign on the wall. Nobody even think to 
do that. They love to keep it nice.’ I think that is 
law and grace.” 

You see, God puts in the hearts of those born again 
a delight in His holy will. That is the very opposite 
to the “Thou shalt” and “Thou shalt not.” The law 
stirs up everything corrupt within our hearts. The soul 
won by the love of Christ delights in His holy will. 

So, by and by, it will be with Israel. They shall 
be restored to their land, but they will not only be 
restored as a nation; they will be regenerated and as 
a people they will be restored to God Himself, and 


WILL IsRAEL Be REGATHERED? 81 


He will put His law in their hearts, and He says, 
“I will be their God and they shall be my people.” 
Verse 34—“And they shall teach no more every \ 
man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, 
Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from 
the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the 
Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will re- | 
-member their sin no more.” k 
Ah, but if something goes wrong, if in the mean- 
time they sin and grieve Him, may not God cancel all 
this? Does He not reserve the right to Himself to 
close the way to the Land of Palestine and leave them _ 
Still scattered among the Gentiles? Oh, no! “Thus. 
saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day, | 
and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a | 
light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves 
thereof roar; the Lord of hosts is his name: If those 
ordinances depart from before’ me, saith the Lord, 
then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being 
a nation before-me_ for ever.” Could you sét™any ' 
stronger affirmation? As long as the sun and moon 
and stars remain, so long will Israel remain as a 
nation, a separated nation, a nation of His favors ad. 
Verse 37—“Thus saith the Lord; If heaven above 
fcan be measured, and the foundations of the earth 
| searched. out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed 
of Israel for all that-they have done, saith-the Lord.” 
Oh, well, maybe He only means spiritual blessings. 
No, lest anyone think that, something very literal fol- 
lows: ‘Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the | 
‘city shall be built to the Lord from the tower of | 
Hananeel unto the gate of the corner. And the | 
measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon; 


the eb, and shall compass about_to Goath. _And) 


82 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, 
and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the 
corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy 
unto the Lord; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown 
down any more for ever.” Jerusalem was destroyed 
again and again; it was practically dismantled over 
twenty-eight times, but when these words are fulfilled, 
it will be restored, never to be demolished again. 

I think it is very striking that God refers to this 
corner of the land for us to realize how literally this 
promise will be fulfilled. In Zech. 14:9, we have an- 
other reference to the same corner. Zechariah de- 
scribes the return of the people to the land, the coming 
of the King, and he adds, “And the Lord shall be king 
over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, 
and his name one. All the land shall be turned as 
a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem: 
and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, 
from Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the first gate, 
unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel 
unto the king’s wine-presses. And men shall dwell in 
it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but 
Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.” 

I wonder if you are familiar with this fact. Some- 
time before the breaking out of the World War, I read 


| a letter published in the “Christian Herald.” A party 


of German capitalists made an arrangement to open 
up a new subdivision outside the wall of the ancient 
city of Jerusalem. When they sent a surveyor to run 


the lines and divide the lots, etc., the very first stake 


he undertook to drive down hit something so hard 
that he couldn’t drive it deeper than a very short dis- 
tance, so he cleared the earth away and found the top 
of an ancient stone, a surveyor’s mark, one of the land- 


WILL ISRAEL Be REGATHERED? 83 


marks of olden days. He cleared away more of the 
earth until the whole stone came into view and found 
some Hebrew characters quite different from the square 
letter in use today. He sent for an expert, and when 
he read these characters, to the surprise of all con- 
cerned, they explained that this was the corner of 
Hananeel. They had come to the very place referred 
to in Zechariah. “The measuring-line shall go forth 
from the corner of Hananeel.” God leaves an old 
surveyor’s stone that He might prove to the people 
who would not believe that He would fulfill His Word 
to the letter when the day should come. I saw a photo- 
graph of that stone. 

I mentioned this fact at a lecture I gave at Lake 
Geneva. When I was through, a man tame up and 
said, “I was most interested in what you told us about 
the stone of Hananeel. I am a native of Jerusalem. 
I was born in the city of Jerusalem and I was a Mo- 
hammedan until about six years ago. After my con- 
version I emigrated to America. I was present the 
day they dug up that stone of Hananeel and with a 
great company of people went out to see it.” This 
shows that God’s Word can be depended upon. 

Now, someone may say, “Well, these passages do 
not convince me that there will be any future restora- 
tion of Israel. I do not see anything more than the 
restoration under Ezra and Nehemiah. Just as God 
gave them the land in the first place, then fulfilled His 
promise and gathered them back to the land, may 
they not again have forfeited it, and may we not say 
that possibly God’s patience has been exhausted and 
they will never again be restored?” 

Let us turn to Isa. 11:10, which is clearly the mil- 
lennial chapter. The chapter begins: “And there shall 


84 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,” etc. This 
gives us the seven spirits of the Lord. How can there 
be seven spirits if there is only one Holy Spirit? 
Second verse: “And the spirit of the Lord shall rest 
upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the 
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge 
and of the fear of the Lord.” The spirit of Jehovah 
is one; wisdom, two; understanding, three; counsel, 
four; might, five; knowledge, six; of the fear of Je- 
hovah, seven. Of course there is one Holy Spirit. 
Now, verse ten, “And in that day there shall be a root 
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; 
to it shall the Greeks seek: and his rest shall be glori- 
ous. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the 
Lord shall set his hand again the second time to re- 
cover the remnant of his people, which shall be left.” 
Oh, but He has done that already! Yes, He brought 
them back once, but they forfeited the land again and 
crucified the Lord of glory. God in infinite grace 
will set His hand the second time to recover the rem- 
nant of His people. Where are they coming from? 
They are to come from Assyria, Egypt, Elim (Persia), 
Sinim, Mesopotamia, the islands of the sea. This ex- 
pression as used by the Hebrews included all the in- 
definite lands of which they knew very little, beyond 
the limits of the Roman Empire. Of course Great 
Britain and all the Western Continent were unknown 
at that time. 

The Lord was to recover His people from lands to 
which they had never traveled when they came back 
the first time. 

“And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and 
shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather to- 


WILL ISRAEL BE REGATHERED? 85 


gether the dispersed of Judah from the four corners 
of the earth.” 

“And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will 
praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine 
anger is turned away.” 

It is restored Israel, who had been scattered so long, 
eventually returned to God and His land. They are 
singing, “Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust 
and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my 
strength and my song: he also is become my salvation. 
Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the 
wells of salvation. . . . Cry out and shout, thou in- 
habitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel 
in the midst of thee.” 

Now, I have only touched this subject. There are 
scores of other passages just as clear and definite as 
these that declare that He that scattered Israel will 
gather them. If I can’t trust the promises God made 
to His earthly people, how can I dare trust the promises 
that He has made to His heavenly people? Our Lord 
Jesus Christ said to Nicodemus, “If I had spoken to 
you of earthly things and ye believed not, how can 
ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things?” We come 
thus to the Book and see the promises that God made 
to His earthly people and we look back over the cen- 
turies and find that not one has failed that should have 
been fulfilled up to date. Everything has been fulfilled 
in exact accord with the prophetic Word, and so we 
may be quite certain that the last promises will be ful- 
filled. 

I shall read one more passage as I close. We have 
the whole history of Israel for nineteen hundred years 
epitomized for us in one verse (Hos. 3:4), and we 
have the promise for the future in the next verse: 


86 Lamp OF PROPHECY 


)\ without a king, and without a sacrifice, and without an 
‘©, |image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim: 
| Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek 
f the Lord their God, and David their king; and shall | 

\ fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.” 

Has not verse 4 been fulfilled to the aE orto 

teen hundred years Israel has had no king, no pre- 

tender to the throne, no sacrifice. Think of it! 
When Hosea wrote these words, the sacrifice was 

the very center of their ritual. The Roman Catholic 
Church is built around the sacrifice of the mass. Take 
the mass away and the church will go to pieces; take the 
sacrifice away from Israel, and one might suppose 
the nation of Israel would go to pieces! But no, they 
abide in the world today as a witness to the unity of 
the Godhead. Without sacrifice, they would be very 
likely to go into idolatry, but they abide without 
images. In all Israel today there is no priest, and yet 
the nation abides. Truly as verse 4 has been ful- 
filled, so verse 5 will be— ‘Afterward shall the chil 
dren of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, 
and David their king; and shall fear the Lord and 
his goodness in the latter days.” 


| “F or the children of irad shall abide many ‘ie i 


Vil 


ISRAEL, JEHOVAH’S WITNESS 


In Isarn 43:10, we read (“Ye are my CERES 
saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen 
that ye may_ iow and believe me, and understar T 
that Í am he: before me there was no God formed, 
neither shall there be after me.”| It is customary to 
use these words in order to stir up Christians to give 
public testimony for Christ, but while it may be le- 
gitimate so to use them, a careful study of the context 
makes it evident that this is not their true and primary 
import. When Jehovah said to Israel, “Ye are my wit- 
nesses,” He meant that the history of this particular 
nation is the proof that He was speaking through the 
prophets. In the Scriptures, we have set forth the 
past, present, and future of this remarkable people, 
and their history for thirty-five hundred years has been 
a positive authentication of the inspiration of the Bible. 
Let us briefly notice how wonderfully this comes out in 


the Word of God. 
THEIR Past CONDITION 


We have to go back to the Book of Genesis from 
chapter 12 on to get the beginning of this nation. There 


87 


88 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


we have the Abrahamic Covenant with its solemn and 
unconditional promises to the “friend of God and his 
seed.” Note the exact promises made: 

a) “I will make of thee a great nation.” 


(b) “Iwill bless thee, and make thy name great.” 

(c) “Thou shalt be a_ blessing.” 

(d) “Iwill bless them that bless thee, and curse 
them that curseth thee.” 
“(ey “In thee shall all families of the earth be 
blessed” (Gen.12:1-3). An additional promise is 
given in verse 7—“Unto thy seed will I give this land.” 

In various forms, these promises are repeated again 
and again to Abraham, Isaac, and to Jacob. To what 
extent have they been fulfilled? As we follow the 
history of the record in Genesis to II Chronicles, we 
see the people in the Land of Palestine, the objects 
of God’s peculiar care. To them was committed the 
Oracles of God, and thus they were blessed and made 
a blessing. When we turn to the four Gospels, we come 
face-to-face with the “Promised Seed” through Whom 
the blessing was to come to all the world. But alas, 
“He came unto his own and his own received him not.” 
So we have the sad record of His rejection and cru- 
cifixion and, for the time being, Israel’s national his- 
tory as a divinely favored people comes to a close. 
Have, then, the promises of God failed? Not at all, 
for in the prophetic writings of both Testaments it is 
clearly predicted that because of their sins they would 
be scattered throughout the entire world, and this is 
and has been their state for nineteen hundred years. 


THEIR PRESENT CONDITION 


Mose? plainly predicted this when on the plains of 
Moab; fand said to them: “The Lord shall cause thee 


ISRAEL, JEHOVAH’s WITNESS 89 


to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out 
one way against them, and flee seven ways before 
them: and shalt be FE CREP into all the kingdoms of 
the earth”) (Deut. 28:25). He depicted the Roman 
invasion and destruction of their cities in unmistakable 
terms in the same chapter from verse 48 to the end. 
Space forbids quoting it all, but the following verses 
are too plain to be misunderstood: 
/ “The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from 
(far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle 
flieth; a nation whose tongue “thou shalt not under- 
stand: a nation of fierce countenance, which shall not 
regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the 
young: and he shall eat the Tn: thy cattle, and the 
fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which also 
shall” not_ leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the 
lincrease of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he 
have destroyed thee. And he shall besiege thee in all 
| thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, 
| wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and 
“he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all 
thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee ... 
\And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from 
as one end of the earth even unto the other; and there 
ou~shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor 
(thy fathers have known, even wood and stone, And 
¿among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither 
shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall 
give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, 
and sorrow of mind?’ (Deut. 28:49-52, 64-65). 
——One might almost Ta these words must have been 
written in the present century, but for thousands of 
years they have been in the hands, first of Jews, and 
then of Christians, a solemn witness to God’s dis- 


Very far distant. 


90 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


pleasure with His people because of their great sin 
and a conclusive proof that Moses wrote by divine 
inspiration. The Jew ordinarily takes it for granted 
that the greatest sin of which a Hebrew can be guilty 
is that of idolatry. Because of this sin their fathers 
were carried into Babylon and not permitted to return 
to their land until seventy years had expired. But the 
greater sin was committed nineteen hundred years ago 
as a result of which they have been out of the land all 
the centuries since, and that sin was the rejection of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

During all these years, Israel as a nation is set to 
one side and “blindness in part has happened to them,” 
so that even when they read their own Scriptures there 
is a veil over their hearts and they cannot see the many 
references to Jesus, their rejected Messiah. But while 
this is true of the nation as such, an individual Jew 
may be saved if he will put himself on the same ground 
as the Gentile sinner. He must come to God owning 
his guilt and putting his trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the One whom his fathers rejected. 

Our blessed Lord referred to this present time and 


, their wretched spiritual condition when He declared 


“Your house is left_unto you. desolate, Ye shall not_ 


see me again until ye say, Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord, a Thank God, that day is is not 


During all this time of Israel’s national rejection, 
God is taking out from among the Gentiles a people 
for His name. From Jew and Gentile saved by grace, 
He is forming one new man, the body of Christ. When 
this special work is finished, He will turn again to 
Israel who are still beloved, for the Father’s sake. We 


read in Rom. 11:25-27: “For I would not, brethren, 


ISRAEL, JEHOVAH’S WITNESS 91 


e should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye 
Tete | be wise in your own conceits; that blindness 
if’ part is “happened to Israel, until the fulness of the 
Gentiles be come in. And_so “all Israel shall be_saved: 
as it is written, There shall- come-out-of Zion the ai 
liverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jaco 
for this is my covenant unto them, when Ishall Ee 
away_their sins,” 

This brings us then to think of 


THER GLORIOUS F UTURE 


reenact 


concerning which ite prophetic Reais: have much 
to say. Unfortunately a great deal of this has been 
lost to the average Christian through the pernicious 
habit of calmly appropriating to the church the wonder- 
ful prophecies of blessing for Israel and Judah and 
Jerusalem, with which the prophetic writings abound. 
Most illogically, many expositors apply all such Scrip- 
tures to the progress of the church in this age, ignor- 
ing completely their true relationship to Israel, God’s 
earthly people. As someone has well said, “They 
give all the curses to the Jews and take all the blessings 
for the church,” whereas it should be perfectly plain 
to any thoughtful person that if the judgments pre- 
dicted as about to fall on Israel were fulfilled in the 
sufferings of that people, then the prophecies of their 
future restoration and blessing must be just as literally 
fulfilled in the Lord’s appointed time. 

It is plainly predicted that there will be a great 
national return to God when they shall recognize in 
the once rejected Jesus their rightful King and Savior. 
Then they will be restored to their own land and the 
Abrahamic covenant fulfilled in the largest possible 
way. 


92 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


_Already..we,see-agreat.stirring among them., Thou- 
sate in recent years have returned to Palestine, and 
Vast changes are going on in that country, but this is 
not yet the great return spoken of by the prophets. 
It is rather that preliminary movement in unbelief that 
will result in the reestablishment of a Jewish state to 
be eventually dominated by the Antichrist, but when 
the Lord Jesus Christ descends from heaven at the 
close of the Great Tribulation, then will come the 
great recognition and the great ingathering, and then 
through the “Promised Seed” will all nations be 
brought into fulness of blessing. The world’s redemp- 
tion hangs upon the restoration of Israel. 

“Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, 
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; 
how much more their fulness? . . . For if the casting 
away of them be the reconciling of the world, what 
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the ‘dead?? 
(Rom. TT:12-T15). 

Well may Christians heed the Psalmist’s pleading: 
“Pray for. the. peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper 
that t love thee.” For in Jerusalem’s peace will be 
D found the peace of the world, when the Prince of peace 
- reigns in righteousness and all nations will know Him 
and be subject to His scepter. 


A DEPE i, | 
TLE kr i j 


Vill 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 


THOSE wHo have been attacking dispensational truth 
in the manner in which I have been referring, tell us that 
the Great Tribulation is all in the past. They declare 
that the truth we have been teaching people for years— 
that the Christian dispensation now on the verge of 
closing will be followed by the Great Tribulation—is 
all wrong. They say that it is just a fantastic notion 
unsupported by Scripture. I want to turn, therefore, 
to the Book, and try to answer this question: Is the 
Tribulation in the past? Of course, if it is not in the 
past, it is still in the future. 

And first I must speak briefly of the seventy weeks 
of Daniel 9. Let me say that, having been familiar” 
with these things for thirty- three years, and having 
examined very carefully much that has been written 
contrary thereto, I am absolutely convinced that the 
seventieth week of Daniel is yet unfulfilled. It is the 
only view that, to my mind, harmonizes with all the 
prophecies i in Scripture. It makes the Book of Revela- 
tion perfectly clear. It explains the difficult things 
in the Book of Daniel and other prophetic books. Until 
you see the break between the 69th and 70th week, 


93 


94 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


all is confusion. The Great Tribulation is to occur 
in this seventieth week and the time of the end for 
the Jewish people. This I know is what is denied, 
but this is what I want to show is clearly taught in the 
Word. 

Those who teach that the Tribulation was in the 
past are divided into several distinct schools. One 
is called the Preterist. They maintain that the Great 
Tribulation was at the time of the trouble which the 
Jewish people passed through when the Roman armies, 
under Titus, destroyed Jerusalem and wrought havoc 
throughout Palestine. The Great Tribulation, accord- 
ing to them, began in A.D. 70, and ended a very short 
time after. The Roman Catholic view ordinarily held 
refers to the two hundred or more years’ persecution 
under pagan Rome, which ended with the Church’s 
triumph over the paganism of the empire. The other 
view, commonly called the historical interpretation, 
holds that the Great Tribulation referred to the period 
of trial during which those who protested against the 
Romish dogmas were persecuted. Those who are 
called Futurists maintain that the Great Tribulation 
has never yet taken place and cannot begin as long as 
the church of God is in the world. It will not take 
place until we have been called up to meet the Lord 
in the air. This is the view I hold. Now, we shall 
turn to some passages and see whether it is at all pos- 
sible logically to believe that the Great Tribulation 
is in the past. 

Jeremiah 30: In the opening verses of this book 
we have a prophecy in regard to the restoration of 
Israel to the Land of Palestine. Scripture shows that 
they are restored to the Land of Palestine still in un- 
belief. Conviction and regeneration take place after 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 95 


the restoration to the Land of Palestine when the 
church has been caught up. 

Here in Jeremiah 30, verse 3, we read: “For, lo, 
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again 
the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the 
Lord: and I will cause them to return to the land that 
I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.” This 
does not refer to the temporary return under Ezra 
and Nehemiah. “They shall possess it,” indicates that 
they will enter into possession of the land, not to sur- 
render it again to any other people. 

We have, beginning with verse 4, a description of 
the hour of trial coming upon the land. “And these 
are the words that the Lord spoke concerning Israel 
and concerning Judah. For thus saith the Lord: We 
have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of 
peace. Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth 
travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with 
his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all 
faces are turned into paleness? Alas! for that day 
is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time 
of Jacob’s trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.” 
Now, observe that this is not the time of the church’s 
trouble; it has nothing whatsoever to do with the 
church. It is the time of Jacob’s trouble; and what 
must be the result? That Jacob is scattered and broken 
and practically destroyed? No, the very opposite. 
He is saved out of it. The Great Tribulation will end 
with the deliverance of Israel rather than the scattering 
of Israel. Now, that doesn’t fit in at all with what 
took place in the Land of Palestine in 70 A.D., and 
the years that followed. Instead of Jacob being saved 
out of it, Jacob was scattered throughout the entire 
world as a result of it. 


96 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


Follow on: “For it shall come to pass in that day, 
saith the Lord of hosts, that I will break his yoke 
[Whose yoke? The yoke of the Gentiles] from off 
thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall 
no more serve themselves of him.” They will no more 
make a servant of him, for he is the true Son of David. 
“Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith 
the Lord; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will 
save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of 
their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and shall be 
in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.” 

Now, turn to Daniel (chapter 12). Chapter 11 gives 
us a very remarkable prophecy that reaches right on 
down to the end of the Jewish dispensation, to the 
“time of the end,” a term used again and again. We 
read of Israel’s sorrows and sufferings under the 
Antichrist. We have a description of the Antichrist 
in 11:36-39: a “king which shall do according to his 
will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every god, and shall speak marvelous things 
against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the in- 
dignation be accomplished.” l 

Daniel 12:1: “And at that time shall Michael stand 
up, the great prince which standeth for the children 
of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, 
such as never was since there was a nation even to 
that same time: and at that time thy people shall be 
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the 
book.” Is it not true that there has never been a time 
of more dreadful suffering than Israel endured under 
Rome? Read Josephus, filled with the horror which 
the people of Israel endured in those days. That might 
be the time referred to so far as Israel is concerned, 
and many think it is. 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 97 


But notice the last of the verse, “And at that time 
thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be 
found written in the book.” Now, they weren’t de- 
livered at the time of the Roman persecution. Instead 
of that, they were scattered everywhere throughout the 
world. That this goes on to the kingdom is clear— 
“And many of them that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some 
to shame and everlasting contempt.” Some do not 
think this is the literal resurrection. It may be the 
picture we get in the Book of Ezekiel, the. dry bones 
of Israel springing into life, coming up from the dust 
of the earth, from being scattered among the Gentiles, 
some to everlasting life, and some, who are apostate, 
to shame and everlasting contempt. ‘They that be 
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; 
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars 
for ever and ever.” 

To what time does this refer? “But thou, O Daniel, 
shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time 
of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge 
shall be increased.” One mark of the time of the 
end is vastly increased running to and fro throughout 
the world and a wide diffusion of knowledge. 

Commenting on these words over one hundred years 
ago, Sir Isaac Newton said, “Personally, I cannot but 
believe these words concerning the end of the times. One 
sign of the end will be a remarkable increase in means 
of getting about. Men will travel from country to 
country in an unprecedented manner. There may be 
some means of travel invented which will enable people 
to go much more quickly than now.” Sir Isaac Newton 
affirmed the opinion that, in accordance with this word, 
he believed it possible as the end drew near that some- 


98 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


body might invent some means of locomotion enabling 
people to travel at the astonishing rate of fifteen or 
twenty miles an hour. 

Voltaire said, “See what a fool Christianity makes 
of an otherwise brilliant man. Here a scientist like 
Newton actually writes that men may travel at the 
rate of fifteen or twenty miles an hour. Has he 
forgotten that if a man would travel at fifteen miles 
an hour, he would be suffocated; the heart would stand 
still?” And yet think what took place at Daytona— 
a man traveled at the rate of 23l miles an hour, 
and his heart didn’t stand still. 

The last part of Zechariah, from chapter twelve on, 
seems to deal almost entirely with this period, this 
time of great trouble. In chapter 14, Jerusalem itself 
is affected. 14:1, “Behold, the day of the Lord 
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst 
of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses 
rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city 
shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the 
people shall not be cut off from the city.” Of course, 
the Preterist interprets this by a system of acconicda- 
tion, and says, “Well, were not the Roman armies the 
representatives of all nations, all fighting under the 
banner of Caesar?” That is not what we have here. 
Here we have the definite armies of all the nations of 
the world gathered together against Jerusalem in that 
last great conflict. When this takes place, “Then shall 
the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as 
when he fought in the day of battle.” 

Notice the order here—Jerusalem surrounded by 
the armies of the nations, a time of great distress, 
and great trouble; the people crying to God for help; 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 99 


the Lord going forth to destroy the armies, as we also 
see Hin in battle in the nineteenth of Revelation, and 
coming right down to earth, “His feet shall stand in 
that day upon the Mount of Olives.” The Preterist 
tells us that this has already been fulfilled; that His 
feet have already stood on the Mount of Olives, before 
He went up into heaven. But here He descends at 
the close of this period of trouble, and His feet stand 
on the Mount of Olives. What happens? “And the 
mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof 
toward the east and toward the west, and there shall 
be a very great valley; and half of the mountain 
shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward 
the south.” 

Some years ago there was a great earthquake in 
Palestine. The Mount of Olives was badly shaken, 
and many buildings were shaken down. Some English 
scientists investigated this. After making an examina- 
tion of the geological strata in Palestine, they said, 
“We have found the occasion of the earthquake. There 
is a geological fault running right through the moun- 
tains of Lebanon, particularly evident in the Mount of 
Olives. There is a great shifting of strata, and some 
of these days there will undoubtedly be a greater earth- 
quake in Palestine, as a result of which the Mount of 
Olives will be torn in two.” We knew about that 
long ago. We know just what will make it break 
in two. The blessed feet of my Savior will again 
touch this earth, and the moment He takes His stand 
on the Mount of Olives, there will be a great earth- 
quake, and the Mount of Olives will be torn asunder, 
at the close of the Great Tribulation. Then Israel will 
be delivered. 

This is enough from the Old Testament. Let us 


100 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


turn to the New Testament (Matt. 24:21), and we have 
the events that will take place before His second 
coming: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as 
was not since the beginning of the world to this time, 
no, nor ever shall be.” How manifestly He chose to 
use almost the identical language that the angel used 
in talking to Daniel in order that we may understand 
that it refers to exactly the same event: “And except 
those days be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: 
but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened. 
Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, 
or there; believe it not. For there shall arise false 
Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs 
and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect.” Men look for the return 
of the Lord, and there are all sorts of false theories 
proclaimed. “For as the lightning cometh out of the 
east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also 
the coming of the Son of man be. For wheresoever 
the carcase is there will the eagles be gathered to- 
gether.” The carcase will be Jerusalem, the apostate 
part of Israel found in the Land of Palestine. There 
the vultures come, the armies of all nations, and while 
things are in this condition, the Son of man will ap- 
pear. “Immediately after the tribulation of those days 
shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give 
her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and 
the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: and then 
shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: 
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and 
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds 
of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall 
send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and 
they shall gather together his elect [i.e., the elect of 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 101 


Israel] from the four winds, from one end of heaven 
to the other.” 

Now, the Preterists interpret our Lord as depicting 
the desolation of Palestine under Rome, but did the 
events here predicted follow the desolation? The his- 
torical interpreters tell us that these events took place 
during the persecution of the Christians under the 
papacy for something like twelve centuries and a half. 
Well, when the persecution came to an end with the 
destruction of the Spanish Inquisition, did these events 
take place? Even supposing that one could spiritualize 
everything in the 29th verse, what about the 30th? 
One could take the 29th to mean a great imperial 
power darkened, etc. But what about the next verse? 
“Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in 
heaven.” This is to take place when? Immediately 
after the tribulation of those days! 

Now turn to Luke’s account and notice a very im- 
portant distinction there between the Great Tribulation 
and the sorrows of Palestine under the Romans. Chap- 
ter 21, verse 20: “And when ye shall see Jerusalem 
compassed with armies, then know that the desola- 
tion thereof is nigh.” Here, unquestionably, our Lord 
predicted the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus. 
All of this prophecy has been fulfilled with the strictest 
literality. 

We have no way of judging the future but by the 
past. If in the past, prophecy has only had a spiritual 
fulfilment, then in the future it will have only a 
spiritual fulfilment. But if in the past, prophecy has 
had a strictly literal fulfilment, then it is absolutely 
certain that prophecy will have a strictly literal fulfil- 
ment in the future. 

Here our Lord prophesied what will come to Jeru- 


102 Lamp OF PROPHECY 


salem, and if you are familiar with the history of the 
fall of Jerusalem, you will know how definitely the 
events: predicted came to pass. We read, “Jerusalem 
compassed with armies,” and in accordance with this, 
three Roman armies besieged Jerusalem. “Then know 
that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them 
which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let 
them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let 
not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.” 

You remember how when Titus was to make his 
final onslaught, he first proclaimed an armistice and 
allowed anyone who desired to do so, to leave the city. 
He appointed Pella, a mountain city, as a place of 
refuge for them. They left—everyone who believed 
in the Lord Jesus Christ. Everyone who honored His 
name left the city. There was not a Christian left in 
that siege. Our Lord gave them instructions: “When 
ye shall see this . . . flee,” and they went to Pella 
for protection. “For these be the days of vengeance, 
that all things which are written may be fulfilled. But 
woe unto them that are with child, and to them that 
give suck, in those days! for there shall be great dis- 
tress in the land, and wrath upon this people. And 
they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall 
be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem 
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times 
of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” 

Now, did this tribulation under Titus result in the 
deliverance of Israel? No, it resulted in the scattering 
of Israel. Israel was led captive of all nations. Very 
well, what about centuries since? ‘‘Jerusalem shall 
be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of 
the Gentiles be fulfilled.” Here is a long period 
during which Jerusalem, the Land of Palestine, and 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 103 


the people of Israel are under Gentile dominion. 
That period is known as the times of the Gentiles and 
will run until its fulfilment, and then what? How 
will they know they have come to the end of that 
period? Verse 25: “And there shall be signs in the 
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the 
earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and 
waves roaring; ... and then shall they see the Son of 
man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.” 
So the tribulation will come at the end of the times of 
the Gentiles and will close with the descent of the 
Lord from heaven. 

What will characterize the time of the tribulation? 
It will be the day of Antichrist. Turn to II Thessa- 
lonians. The Thessalonians were perplexed and trou- 
bled because of the sufferings they were passing 
through, and they feared that already they were in the 
time of the Great Tribulation, which is also called 
the Day of the Lord’s Vengeance. Paul wrote in 
chapter two: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gather- 
ing together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken 
in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, 
nor by letter as from us [someone had evidently forged 
a letter from Paul telling them that the tribulation 
was already upon them] as that the day of Christ is 
at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for 
that day shall not come, except there come a falling 
away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son 
of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above 
all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that 
he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing him- 
self that he is God.” Somebody might say, “Surely, 
the Great Tribulation began when Gregory declared 


104, LAMP OF PROPHECY 
himself to be the head of all the churches of Christen- 


dom; therefore, it refers to the papal persecution.” 
However, we have seen that the Great Tribulation 
will end with the deliverance of Israel and the visible 
return of our Lord to this earth, a return so literal 
that His feet shall stand in that day on the Mount 
of Olives. Surely this cannot refer to the papacy: 
“Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that 
is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as 
God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that 
he is God.” Now, in order to believe that it is the 
papacy, the pope would have to sit in the temple of 
God. I don’t believe that St. Peter’s Cathedral is the 
temple of God. It is a temple of idolatry. Nor do 
I believe that the Roman Church is the temple of 
God. It is an apostate system. But the temple of 
God is the temple frequently spoken of by the prophets 
as the temple yet to be built. The Antichrist sits there 
and declares himself to be God. “Remember ye not, 
that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? 
And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be 
revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth 
already work: only he who now letteth will let, until 
he be taken out of the way.” Some say that this meant 
that the Roman Empire would be dissolved first. Paul 
was talking about something here that every Christian 
ought to know, because the Bible reveals it. What 
hinders full development of evil in the world? The 
Spirit of God restrains now. The Spirit of God is 
here in the church of God restraining the full develop- 
ment of evil. Some day the church of God will be 
gone. The Spirit of God will no longer be active on 
earth as a divine person in the church of God. 


“And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 105 


Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and 
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: even 
him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with 
all power and signs and lying wonders.” These signs 
and lying wonders are pictured in Revelation 13. 

Now, Revelation 7: What will be the outcome when 
the period of tribulation comes upon the earth? A 
great part of Revelation evidently has to do with the 
Great Tribulation, ending with the personal appear- 
ing of our Lord Jesus Christ. It fits so perfectly with 
what we read of the Great Tribulation that I am sure 
it is the same time. Not all of Israel are really Israel. 
It must be regenerated Israel in that day to be really 
Israel and to be so counted, just as today, the Israel 
of God are those regenerated. In the first part of 
Revelation 7, you have the remnant of Israel 1-8: 
“And after these things I saw four angels standing 
on the four corners of the earth, holding the four 
winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow 
on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. 
And I saw another angel ascending from the east, 
having the seal of the living God: and he cried with 
a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given 
to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the 
earth, neither the sea nor the trees, till we have sealed 
the servants of our God in their foreheads,” i.e., the 
four angels are seen sealing the servants of our God 
before the Great Tribulation begins. “And I heard 
the number of them which were sealed: and there were 
sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all 
the tribes of the children of Israel.” 

Now, in the fourteenth chapter, the Savior actually 
appears, and we find the one hundred forty-four 
thousand delivered out of the tribulation waiting to 


106 Lamp OF PROPHECY 


receive Him, and they form what we might call a royal 
bodyguard in the coming day when He will establish 
His glorious millennial kingdom. We have Israel 
sealed by God at the beginning of the tribulation in 
chapter 7; Israel preserved for the kingdom at the 
end of the tribulation (chapter 14). 

The one hundred forty-four thousand are out of 
every tribe of Israel. No one can possibly be misled 
on this. Look at the latter part of the 7th chapter. 
I do not know whether the number one hundred forty- 
four thousand can be taken literally or not. Verse 9, 
“After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which 
no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, 
and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and 
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms 
in their hands.” 

“And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, 
What are these which are arrayed in white robes? 
and whence came they?” John answered, “Sir, thou 
knowest. And he said unto me, These are they which 
came out of great tribulation, and have washed their 
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” 
Literally it is the “tribulation, the great one.” 

“And have washed their robes and made them 
white in the blood of the Lamb.” How are people 
saved in the tribulation day? Just exactly as they 
are saved today, through the same precious blood of 
Christ. Every soul saved in any dispensation from 
the day of Abel down to the end of the millennium 
owes all its blessing to the precious atoning blood of 
the Son of God. 

“Therefore are they before the throne of God, and 
serve him day and night in his temple: and he that 
sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 107 


shall hunger no more, neither thirst anymore; neither 
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the 
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of 
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes.” 

Now the company saved in the tribulation days are 
not saved for heaven but to share in the millennial 
kingdom. In Isa. 49:8, we have a prophecy that re- 
fers to this very same company: “Thus saith the Lord, 
In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a 
day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will pre- 
serve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, 
to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate 
heritages; that thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go 
forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. 
They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall 
be in all high places. They shall not hunger nor 
thirst; neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them: for 
he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by 
the springs of water shall he guide them. And I will 
make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall 
be exalted. Behold, these shall come from afar; and lo, 
these from the north and from the west; and these 
from the land of Sinim”—the ancient name for China. 
There will be a vast throng of Gentiles to whom the 
light will come in those dark days of the tribulation 
to prepare them for the glorious kingdom of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

So I think that the Scriptures looked at, and there 
are many more that could have been added, are suf- 
ficient surely to show us that the Great Tribulation 
did not take place when Jerusalem was destroyed by 
the Romans; did not take place under pagan Rome, 


108 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


nor under papal Rome, but will take place by and by 
immediately before the appearing of the Lord Jesus 
Christ to establish His glorious kingdom in this world. 
It will not take place before the church has gone to 
heaven. 

Proof 1. The tribulation cannot take place before 
the Lamb opens the book with seven seals. Revelation 
5—When the seals are broken, troubles begin to come. 

2. The Lamb does not receive the seven sealed 
book from the hand of the Father until the crowned 
saints are seen in heaven. In Revelation 4 and 5 we 
have the twenty-four elders seated about the throne 
wearing crowns of gold upon their heads. 

3. No saints will be crowned in heaven until the 
Apostle Paul gets his crown. “Henceforth is laid up 
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the 
righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not 
to me only, but unto all them also that love his ap- 
pearing.” 

4. The Apostle Paul and other saints with him do 
not get their crowns until the judgment seat of Christ. 
That is referred to as “that day.” 

5. The judgment seat of Christ is immediately after 
the rapture of the church. Jesus says, “Behold, I come 
quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man 
according as his work shall be.” 

Deduction, therefore: There will be no Great Tribu- 
lation before the church has gone to be with the Lord. 
The Rapture must take place first before the time of 
the Great Tribulation can begin here on the earth. 


1X 


ARE THE JEWS AS A PEOPLE RESPONSIBLE 
FOR THE SO-CALLED “PROTOCOLS OF 
THE ELDERS OF ZION”? 


Much discussion pro and con has raged in recent 
years regarding the mysterious documents with which 
many are now somewhat familiar, known as the “Pro- 
tocols of the Elders of Zion.” These are supposed 
to be the findings and plottings of Jewish leaders 
who are aiming to destroy all Gentile governments 
and debauch the so-called Christian nations of the 
world. That is, these records purport to be the secret 
minutes of the meetings of a group of influential 
Hebrews known as the “Elders of Zion.” The history 
of the documents so far as it can now be verified, 
indicates that they were first made public in Russia 
shortly before the downfall of the Czarist régime. 
In a rather remarkable way, they indicate the course 
of extreme Marxian activity. There can be no ques- 
tion but that they are the production of Sovietizing 
leaders intent upon destroying all orderly government 
and substituting’ Bolshevism in its place. No one 
questions, so far as I am aware, the fact that some 
apostate Jews may have been associated with apostate 


109 


110 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


Gentiles in the preparation of these remarkable docu- 
ments. But it is a matter to be greatly regretted and 
something that has caused deep chagrin to many in- 
structed Christians, who are lovers of Israel, to find 
that the Protocols are being used not only by godless 
Gentiles but even by some fundamentalist Christians 
to stir up suspicion and hatred against the Jewish 
people as a whole. This is most unfortunate for it 
cannot but work against the earnest efforts of Hebrew 
Christians and Gentile believers to bring the Jews to 
a saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. In fact, 
it is already having this effect. A wave of anti- 
Semitism is sweeping over Central Europe, and its 
blighting influence is even now being felt on this side 
of the Atlantic. 


INNOCENT JEWS SUFFER 


No matter how patriotic and disinterested Jewish 
statesmen, business men, literati, and professional men 
may be, they are being looked upon with suspicion 
as enemies of the human race apart from their own 
group, simply because they are of Jewish descent. In 
Germany, Hebrew Christians are suffering as bitterly © 
as their brethren after the flesh who have not accepted 
the Messiahship of Jesus. 

Is there any legitimate reason for this amazing 
change of public opinion toward the Jewish people 
as a whole? It is a fundamental of the Hebrew 
religion as expressed in their own Scriptures, that they 
should pray for the peace of the nation in which they 
dwell, and history abounds in instances of the splendid 
patriotism and loyalty of the Jews in various lands 
where they have been permitted to enjoy the privileges 
of enlightened government. Is it conceivable that now 


ARE THE Jews RESPONSIBLE FoR Protocots? 111 


there is a movement on foot to which practically the 
whole of this people are privy, to overthrow these 
governments and substitute for them a world-wide 
Jewish Soviet state? It seems to me to ask the question 
is to answer it. Such a thing is absolutely unthinkable 
in the light of past history and particularly in the light 
of the remarkably fine spirit shown by the Jews in the 
various nations during the World War. Thousands 
of Jewish soldiers were in all the armies of Europe 
faithfully contending for the ideals of the countries 
in which they lived. Jewish bankers and other finan- 
ciers manifested the most philanthropic interest in the 
welfare of Gentile and Jew alike during those trying 
times. So that whatever may be said for the Protocols 
and whoever their authors may be, it ought to be 
clear that they do not represent the aims and ambi- 
tions of the Hebrew people as such. 


No ELDERS or ZION 


Then again, who are the Elders of Zion? Those 
of us who refuse to credit the authorship of the Pro- 
tocols have been asked to name these mysterious per- 
sonages if we do not believe that they are Jews in a 
position to speak for their coreligionists. But it is 
not necessary to name them. Personally, I have no 
idea who the actual authors of the Protocols may have 
been, but of this I feel sure, there is no Council of 
Israel operating anywhere in the world holding the 
title of the Elders of Zion by authority of the Jews 
as a people. 

There are in the world today many thousands of 
sincere Christians who are Jews after the flesh but are 
adorning the Gospel of Christ by devoted lives in ac- 
cordance with the teachings of our Savior. Ask any 


112 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


of these honest men and women, who certainly ought 
to know of such leaders, if they exist or have ever 
existed, “Have you ever heard of the Elders of Zion?” 
I have put this question to scores of them. In every 
instance the answer has been, “Never; neither in my 
unconverted days nor since I became a Christian have 
I heard of such a group of Jewish leaders, until these 
Protocols were brought to my attention.” 

It is, therefore, it seems to me, not only most un- 
fortunate but really wicked to attempt to foist re- 
sponsibility for the Protocols upon the people of the 
Jews. Whoever may have written these documents, 
certainly they were not penned by Jews entitled to 
speak for the race. In my judgment, Christian teachers 
would do well to stress this fact in order that they 
may not participate in putting upon Christ’s brethren 
after the flesh a responsibility that does not belong to 
them and thus expose them to a persecution they do 
not deserve. 


THE CURSE oF EDOM 


It is true that blindness in part has happened to Israel 
because of their rejection of their Messiah when He came 
to them in lowly grace. It is true that they joined with 
the Gentiles in crucifying the Lord of glory. It is true 
that many of them hate Christianity and Christians 
as much as some professed Christians hate them. It 
is true that they have been scattered among the nations 
in accordance with the prophetic Word, and are suffer- 
ing to this day because of their sins in the past. It is 
true that they are still under the hand of God in govern- 
ment. But to Edom of old, God said: “But thou 
shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother 
in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest 


ARE THE Jews RESPONSIBLE FOR PROTOCOLS? 113 


thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the 
day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have 
spoken proudly in the day of distress. Thou shouldest 
not have entered into the gate of my people in the 
day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have 
looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, 
nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of 
their calamity; neither shouldest thou have stood in 
the cross-way, to cut off those of his that did escape; 
neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his 
that did remain in the day of distress” (Obadiah 12, 
13, 14). 

These are solemn words and may well be taken to 
heart by the Gentile nations at the present time. Surely 
no real Christian wants to be found in such company 
but rather would seek to manifest the grace of Christ 
to those through whose fall salvation has come to us. 
A number of Jewish brethren have put forth very clear 
and helpful statements both orally and in print, ex- 
posing the real nature of the plot of the Protocols. 
To these utterances and booklets I would refer any 
inquirer who is perplexed regarding them. I do not 
attempt to speak with any authority as to the true 
origin of these Protocols, but after reading them several 
years ago, the impression left on my own mind was 
that they could not be in any possible way the Pro- 
tocols of Jewish leaders as such. As already intimated, 
I quite recognize the fact that some Jews have been 
more or less connected with the group that produced 
them, but what I mean is they do not represent Jewish 
thoughts or Jewish schemes characteristically. 


114 LAMP OF PROPHECY 
UNFAIR AND FALSE 


I have noticed of late that certain teachers are 
constantly drawing special attention to anyone op- 
posed to orderly government who happens to have 
a Jewish name. But in all fairness such should 
surely point out that there are far more men of He- 
brew parentage who are in the forefront of civilization 
and progress than are to be found among those who are 
seeking to destroy the present order. The idea seems 
to be prevalent in many quarters that practically all 
the great financiers of France, Britain, and America 
are Jews. Look over the roster for yourself. Take the 
great banking houses of America and England with 
which I am personally more familiar than with those 
of France. How many Jewish names do you find 
among them? How large a proportion of the money 
barons of Wall Street are Jews? How many of the 
millionaires still left in America are Jews? By far 
the great majority are Gentiles, and it is absurd to 
think that the small minority of Jews could even if 
they would overthrow this or any other Gentile govern- 
ment. 


THE CHRISTIAN’S Duty 


It should be the business of Christians not to sow 
seeds of distrust and dissension among men, but to 
exemplify so far as they possibly can, the grace that 
is in Christ Jesus, Who gave Himself a ransom for all, 
Whose Gospel is to be proclaimed to Jew and Gentile 
alike and in Whose mystical body, the church, there is 
neither Jew nor Gentile, but all are one in Christ Jesus. 
Let us then devote ourselves to preaching the glad tid- 
ings in the power of the Holy Spirit of God, seeking to 


a 


ARE THE JEws RESPONSIBLE FOR PROTOCOLS? 115 


reach as many of all classes as we possibly can ere 
the coming of our Lord Jesus and our gathering to- 
gether unto Him. “The night cometh when no man can 
work.” Christendom is fast nearing its end. The re- 
turn of our Savior is drawing nigh. We cannot af- 
ford to waste our time stirring up racial hatreds instead 
of seeking by all means to save some, “giving none 
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles nor 


to the church of God.” 


WILL THERE BE AN AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 
ERE THE CLOSE OF TIME? 


Ir HAS BEEN the generally accepted teaching of 
Christian leaders throughout all the centuries since 
apostolic days, that the Scriptures teach there will be 
an era when righteousness will prevail over all the 
earth and all nations be subject to the Lordship of 
Christ ere time has run its course. Some have taken 
literally the indicated number of years mentioned in 
Revelation 20, and therefore have designated the 
period in question as the millennium. Others, while 
questioning the literalness of the thousand years, have, 
nevertheless, believed and taught that God’s kingdom 
would spread throughout the entire world, that wicked- 
ness would be abolished and righteousness become 
triumphant. For convenience sake, we shall use the 
term “millennium” in this article for both of these 
views, meaning thereby the reign of righteousness over 
the earth. 

Recently, a group of theologians, who make great 
claims as to their orthodoxy, declared that they have 
discovered that the views in question are utterly un- 
scriptural and that there is no reason to expect any 


116 


WILL THERE BE AN AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS? 117 


such glorious condition to prevail in this world before 
time comes to an end and the eternal state begins. In 
addition to the two classes, which have been known 
for many years as premillennial (if they believe that 
Christ Himself will come before the age of righteous- 
ness) and postmillennial (if they believe this age will 
be brought about by the preaching of the gospel and 
Christ will come only to wind up earth’s affairs), we 
now have the additional group who call themselves 
“amillennialists,” the word, of course, implying that 
there will be no millennium at all. 

If it were simply a matter of difference of opinion 
in regard to the prophetic program, there would be 
abundant room for toleration here and no one need 
feel unduly disturbed because of differing eschato- 
logical conceptions. But there is far more involved 
than the mere question of prophetic interpretation. 
If the amillennialists are right, much precious sanctify- 
ing truth must needs be relinquished or explained away, 
for if their position is correct, there will be no rapture 
of the church or judgment seat of Christ preceeding 
the resurrection of the wicked dead and the judg- 
ment of the Great White Throne. Hence, no one can 
speak with assurance as to his final salvation, because 
that matter awaits settlement at the judgment day, and 
the saints will not reign with Christ over this world, 
because His kingdom will not be established until 
eternity begins. The whole dispensational outline of 
Bible truth is destroyed if Christ is not to reign over 
the earth and be acclaimed by all peoples as “King of 
kings and Lord of lords.” 

It behooves us then to turn once more to the Word 
of God and examine carefully the Scriptures which 


118 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


millennialists have taken as proof of a “good time 
coming,” when 


Jesus shall reign where’er the sun 
Doth his successive journeys run; 

His kingdom stretch from shore to shore, 
Till moons shall wax and wane no more. 


Isaac Watts’s magnificent hymn is based upon and 
is almost a paraphrase of the Seventy-second Psalm, 
a portion of inspired Scripture which certainly depicts 
the kingdom of God everywhere triumphant. While 
originally written for Solomon and possibly sung at 
the time of his coronation, we realize as we read it 
that a greater than Solomon was in view. The follow- 
ing verses were never fulfilled in the days of David’s 
own son, but unless the truth of inspiration is to be 
denied, they must of necessity have their fulfilment 
in and through “great David’s greater Son, our Lord 
Jesus Christ”: 

“He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall 
save the children of the needy, and shall break in 
pieces the oppressor. They shall fear thee as long 
as the sun and moon endure, throughout all genera- 
tions. He shall come down like rain upon the mown 
grass: as showers that water the earth. In his days 
shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so 
long as the moon endureth. He shall have dominion 
also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness 
shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick the 
dust. The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall 
bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer 
gifts. Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all 
nations shall serve him. . . . His name shall endure 


WILL THERE BE AN AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS? 119 


forever: his name shall be continued as long as the 
sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations 
shall call him blessed” (Ps. 72:4-11, 17). 

No wonder, in view of such a glorious reign, the 
Psalm concludes with the words, “The prayers of 
David the son of Jesse are ended.” So far as earth’s 
blessing is concerned, there will be nothing left to pray 
for when this Psalm has its complete fulfilment. 

Now, it has never been true in the past that all 
kings have made obeisance to Him and all nations 
have served Him, or that all nations have called Him 
blessed. But as truly as God is God and as this Psalm 
is part of His inspired Word, such a time of blessing 
must yet come for this poor world. 

It has been said that the whole doctrine of the mil- 
lennium rests upon a misapprehension inasmuch as 
the very word “millennium” is unknown to the English 
Bible. Because of this, we are told, the doctrine of 
the millennium is an unscriptural fallacy. But such 
reasoning would rob us of many other precious truths 
which even our amillennial friends hold to be self- 
evident and important. The word “trinity” is not found 
in the Bible, but the doctrine of one God existing 
eternally in three persons, revealed to us by our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Spirit, is clearly taught in the Bible. The word “sub- 
stitution” is not found in Scripture, but Isa. 53:5 
clearly teaches it, and when Paul exclaims, “The 
Son of God loved me and gave himself for me,” 
he is proclaiming the truth of a substitutionary atone- 
ment. And though the word “millennium” is not found 
in the Bible, yet it is a fact not easy to explain away 
that the expression “ʻa thousand years,” which is the 


120 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


English equivalent of the Latin form millennium, is 
found six times in Revelation 20. 

There we learn that a time will come when Satan, 
the great enemy of God and man, will be bound for 
a thousand years and unable to go out and deceive 
the nations until the thousand years are finished. The 
first resurrection we are told, will take place at the 
beginning of that thousand years and the resurrected 
saints will live and reign with Christ a thousand years. 
The rest of the dead will not be raised until the thou- 
sand years are finished, and after the thousand years 
we have the judgment of the Great White Throne. 

Certainly, nothing answering to this thousand year 
period, whether we take the time literally or not, has 
ever been known on this earth. It is folly to say that 
Satan was bound at the beginning of the Christian era, 
as some do, and that now we are living in the time of 
his loosing. He has had fearful and awful power 
throughout all the centuries since Christ died on the 
cross. But if Revelation 20 is to have a fulfilment 
at all, the day must come when Satan will be not only 
restrained in measure, but will have no power at all 
to deceive the nations, and during that time the saints 
of God are to reign over this world. 

This is in accord with the former prophecies found 
in the Old Testament. “And in the days of these 
kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which 
shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not 
be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and 
consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever” 
(Dan. 2:44). 

This is the fifth great dominion that will bear rule 
over all the earth. It would be absurd to say that 
Christianity has been the fulfilment of this prophecy. 


WILL THERE BE AN AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS? 121 


The same is true concerning the similar predictions 
in chapter 7: “I saw in the night visions, and, behold, 
one like the Son of man came with the clouds of 
heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they 
brought him near before him. And there was given 
him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all 
people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his 
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not 
pass away, and his kingdom that whicb shall not be 
destroyed. . . . Until the Ancient of days came, and 
judgment was given to the saints of the most High; 
and the time came that the saints possessed the king- 
dom. And the kingdom and dominion, and the great- 
ness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be 
given to the people of the saints of the most High, 
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all do- 
minions shall serve and obey him” (Dan. 7: 13-14, 
Zama). 

The kingdom spoken of in those verses and desig- 
nated as everlasting is certainly not a kingdom set up 
in eternity, but in the very world where the beast 
powers have exercised their dominion. It is called 
everlasting because it will never come to an end, that 
is, it will never be superseded by any other dominion. 

The characteristics of this time of blessing come 
before us in many other passages. For convenience 
sake, we may notice them under seven distinct heads: 

l. The regeneration of Israel, who will become a 
blessing to all the earth. This is clearly predicted in 
Isa. 60:1-22: “And the Gentiles shall come to thy 
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising... . 
For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee 
shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted. 
. . . Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall 


122 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, 
the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little 
one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong 
nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time.” 

Chapter 61 takes up the same wondrous story, as 
do many other parts of this great prophecy. 

Jeremiah 31 declares the inviolability of God’s cove- 
nant with Israel and shows that when their day of 
blessing comes, the entire world will be blessed through 
them. 

Zech. 14:16-21 depicts a time when Jerusalem will 
be a great spiritual center and the representatives of 
all nations will go up there to worship the King, the 
Lord of hosts. To these many other Scriptures might 
be added. 

2. A warless world. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in 
answer to the disciples’ question, “What shall be the 
sign of thy coming, and of the end of the age?” tells 
us that wars and rumors of wars should characterize 
the entire present period (Matt. 24:6). 

“Beat your plowshares into swords, and your prun- 
inghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong” 
(Joel 3:10). 

Here we have the nations called upon to beat their 
agricultural implements into weapons of war, but note 
the wondrous contrast in the twin passages of Isa. 2: 
2-5 and Mic. 4:1-5. Notice particularly: 

“And he shall judge among the nations, and shall 
rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords 
into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: 
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more” (Isa. 2:4). 

“And he shall judge among many people, and re- 
buke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their 


WILL THERE BE An AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS? 123 


swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning- 
hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, 
neither shall they learn war any more” (Mic. 4:3). 

Who would presume to say that anything like this has 
ever yet come to pass? Yet it is clearly predicted for 
this world before time will come to an end. 

3. Poverty abolished. The same Scriptures to which 
we have just called attention also tell us of a time 
when all men will enjoy temporal comfort, when “they 
shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig- 
tree; and none shall make them afraid” (Mic. 4:4). 

Zechariah gives the same testimony, and Isa. 65: 
21-23 confirms it: “‘And they shall build houses, and 
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat 
the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another 
inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as 
the days of a tree are the days of my people, and 
mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. 
They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for 
trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the 
Lord, and their offspring with them.” 

4. Changed conditions of the lower creation. When 
this time of blessing comes, even the lower creation 
will share in it. 

“The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the 
lion shall eat straw like the bullock; and dust shall be 
the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy 
in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord” (Isa. 65:25). 

The eleventh chapter of the same prophecy is en- 
tirely millennial and there, too, we learn of the change 
that will take place in the very nature of the beasts 
of the field and of the forest. 

“The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the 
leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and 


124 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the young lion and the fatling together; and a little 
child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear 
shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: 
and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suck- 
ing child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the 
weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice’ den. 
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy moun- 
tain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of 
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Isa. 11:6-9). 

5. Sickness will practically disappear from the 
earth. 

“And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the 
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their 
iniquity” (Isa. 33:24). 

In Zechariah 14, a passage we have already noticed, 
we find that even in that wonderful age there will be 
the possibility of sickness, but only for any who wil- 
fully disobey the Word of the Lord. 

6. Death will no longer be prevalent, but inflicted 
only judicially. Let us notice carefully Isa. 65:18-20. 
It is very evident from this Scripture that in the com- 
ing day of Jehovah’s power those who enter into mil- 
lennial blessings on the earth will, under ordinary 
circumstances, be granted the gift of long life, such 
as the patriarchs enjoyed before the flood. In fact, 
it would seem as though they will live right on through 
the entire period, unless there be some wilful sin that 
will be dealt with immediately in judgment, and under 
such circumstances we read that a sinner dying at the 
age of one hundred years will be accursed and his 
death will be as the death of a child. This shows us 
that the kingdom age will not be like the eternal state 
in which sin can never again lift up its head and 


WILL THERE BE an AGE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS? 125 


death will be absolutely unknown. It will still be 
possible for man to sin against divine light even though 
there be no adversary to tempt him, but such be- 
havior will not be tolerated when righteousness reigns, 
without immediate judicial dealing. 

7. Righteousness will be everywhere triumphant. 
During the present time we are called upon to suffer 
for righteousness’ sake. In the day of which we speak 
“a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall 
rule in judgment” (Isa. 32:1). This will be the time 
when God’s “judgments are in the earth, the inhabi- 
tants of the world will learn righteousness” (Isa. 26:9). 
“Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and 
righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the 
work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect 
of righteousness quietness and assurance forever. And 
my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and 
in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places” (Isa. 
32:16-18). For we read, “In those days, and at that 
time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow 
up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and 
righteousness in the land” (Jer. 33:15). “For the 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory 
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Hab. 2:14). 

These are but a very few of the passages that de- 
clare the same general truth, that ere God closes up 
the history of this world He will give to man a demon- 
stration of life on earth at its very best—no tempting 
devil, no poverty and distress, no wasting sickness and 
disease, no wickedness and corruption prevailing, death 
itself practically banished, and the divine authority 
everywhere established. This it is that God is going 
to bring to pass in His own time, in accordance with 
the prophetic Word. 


126 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


In the face of the Scriptures we have noticed, to 
which scores of others might be added, how can any 
Bible believer declare that the millennium is but an 
idle dream, hopeless of fulfilment? 

As to whether this glorious state will be brought 
about through the preaching of the gospel and thus 
the world prepared for Christ’s postmillennial coming 
or whether it can be ushered in only by the personal 
premillennial return of the Lord, is not the question 
I am attempting to take up in this chapter. Most of 
my readers, I am sure, hold with me that the latter view 
is correct. All I have been trying to do now is to 
demonstrate that Scripture does indeed teach that there 
will be an age of righteousness on this earth before 
time ends and eternity begins. 


WILL THERE BE A MILLENNIUM BEFORE 
CHRIST COMES? 


I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth 
all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate 
witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this command- 
ment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ: which in his times he shall show, who 
is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord 
of lords—I Tim. 6:13-15 


I WANT To try to let Scripture answer this question: 
“Will that glorious period be brought about through 
the efforts of the church of God before the second ad- 
vent of our Lord Jesus Christ or will it take place 
after our blessed Lord appears?” We have read of the 
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, “which in his 
times he shall show, who is the blessed and only 
Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords.” 
What does this really mean? In what time or times 
will He thus be manifested as King of kings and Lord 
of lords? 

Here we find two schools of thought among Chris- 
tian teachers—those who believe that the Lord Jesus 
Christ must come first before the millennium can pos- 
sibly be ushered in are generally called, for conveni- 


127 


128 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


ence sake, “premillennialists,” while those who be- 
lieve that the kingdom must first come and then that 
the Lord will come at the close of it to wind up the 
affairs of this world are generally called “postmillen- 
nialists.” Let me make myself clear as to one thing: 
I do not question for a moment the sincerity of 
brethren who hold views differing from me in regard to 
the prophetic future, but I quite recognize the fact 
that there are many of my postmillennial brethren and 
my amillennial brethren who doubtless love the Lord 
Jesus Christ far more intensely than I do and who 
would be willing to endure far more for His name’s 
sake than I have ever endured. I do not question their 
piety; I do not question their love for Christ; I do 
not question their orthodoxy. 

Some few years ago it was my great privilege to 
sit at the feet of Dr. A. T. Robertson as he gave a 
course of lectures on the Epistle to the Colossians 
directly from his Greek Testament in Calvary Baptist 
Church in New York City. He was conducting a mini- 
sterial conference, and it was my privilege in that 
conference to give a series of addresses from my 
English Bible (because I am not scholar enough to 
give them from a Greek Testament and most folk are 
not scholars enough to follow me if I were) and I 
was rather gratified to see the great man sitting down 
before me every day. I recognized Dr. Robertson as 
undoubtedly the outstanding Greek scholar of America, 
if not of the world, and yet that dear, kindly man of 
God sat and listened to a poor insignificant person like 
myself, and he was just as gracious and just as at- 
tentive as anyone could possibly be. I went through 
the two letters to the Thessalonians, and at the close 
of the last address, Dr. Robertson came to me and 


WiLL THERE Be a MILLENNIUM? 129 


said, “Well, this is the first time that I have ever 
listened to anyone go carefully through those epistles 
from the premillennial standpoint, and I must say 
that my judgment has gone with you through the en- 
tire series. I have never definitely declared myself 
as a premillennialist, but I think if I had my life to 
live over again I would be much more positive con- 
cerning this for I have never in all my ministry 
known a premillennialist who was a Modernist.” I 
thought that was an interesting testimony. There is 
that about the premillennial position that necessitates 
a belief in the full inspiration of this Book. Every- 
thing is based upon that. And that is one reason 
why, though I can respect the views of brethren who 
look at it from another standpoint, I think it is impor- 
tant to reiterate from time to time the premillennial 
teaching of Holy Scripture. 

I remember a great many years ago, I do not think 
I could have been more than twenty-two years of age, 
it was my privilege to participate in a Bible conference 
in San Francisco. On that occasion I listened to one 
of the biggest preachers I have ever known in my life, 
Dr. A. J. Frost. I may have been so small then that 
he looked bigger, but I think he must have weighed 
three hundred pounds. In those days, everyone rode 
bicycles, and he had to have one made to order to 
hold his immense body. He was one of the greatest 
Bible teachers I have ever listened to, and I recall his 
giving an address on eight reasons in proof of the 
premillennial coming of Christ. Unfortunately I did 
not have the good habit of taking notes and so did 
not get all of his points clearly in mind, but the general 
idea has never left me and the impression made has 
been with me all the years since. While I cannot fol- 


130 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


low exactly the order he did, I want to take this up 
in a similar way. 

There are clear, definite, logical reasons for be- 
lieving that the Lord Jesus Christ must come before 
the millennium dawns. First, there can be no millen- 
nium until our Lord Jesus Christ comes again because 
there can be no millennium until Satan is bound. I 
wish you would think that through, because if I am 
wrong there, I shall be wrong in the next point. There 
can be no millennium until our Lord Jesus Christ 
comes again because there can be no millennium until 
Satan is bound. Is that not clear from Scripture? Is 
it not evident from the study of the twentieth chapter 
of Revelation that if we are to believe in a millennium 
at all we have to believe that that millennium cannot 
begin until Satan is bound? Very well, that is the 
major premise. But Satan is to be bound at the second 
coming of Christ; consequently there can be no mil- 
lennium until Christ comes. Is that not perfectly 
clear? Turn back to the nineteenth chapter of Revela- 
tion, and you have that glorious vision of the descend- 
ing Christ. He is pictured there as a mighty warrior 
riding on a white horse clothed with a vesture dipped 
in blood, and His name is called the Word of God. 
He is riding forth conquering and to conquer, and it 
is as He descends that the mighty angel lays hold of 
Satan and binds him for one thousand years, and that 
is the beginning of the thousand years of blessing. 

Then again, there can be no millennium until the 
second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, because there 
can be no millennium until the Antichrist is destroyed. 
Think that through. You cannot conceive of Christ 
and Antichrist reigning at the same time, can you? 
And if the time is coming when Christ is going to 


WILL THERE BE a MILLENNIUM? 131 


reign supreme over all the earth as King of kings and 
Lord of lords, manifestly Antichrist, the false Messiah, 
must be destroyed first. But now the Antichrist is to be 
destroyed at the second coming of Christ, consequently 
there can be no millennium until Christ comes. I do 
not care who you may understand the Antichrist to be. 
It does not alter the argument in the least. You may 
think that the Antichrist refers to some false religious 
system like, for instance, Mohammedanism, or if you 
are a Catholic, you may think that the Antichrist is 
Protestantism. If you are a Protestant, you may re- 
turn the compliment and think of the Antichrist as 
the papacy. You may think it refers to some specific 
individual. Some of us believe the Antichrist will 
be a personality, an individual who will yet arise in 
this world and will be recognized and owned by many 
as the Christ of God. But it does not make any dif- 
ference as to who he may be. The point I want to bring 
out is that there can be no millennium until Christ 
comes because there can be no millennium until the 
Antichrist is destroyed, and Antichrist is to be de- 
stroyed at the second coming of Christ. The Scripture 
that deals most fully with this is the second chapter 
of Second Thessalonians. In that chapter you have 
the description of the lawless one who “exalteth him- 
self above all that is called God, . . . whom the Lord 
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming” 
(II Thess. 2: 4,8) and the coming refers to that 
second coming of Christ. So it is at the second coming 
that Antichrist is destroyed. And then we have this 
wonderful, glorious kingdom age. 

There can be no millennium until Christ comes be- 
cause there can be no millennium until Gentile power 
and authority is abolished; Gentile power and authority 


132 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


will be abolished by the second coming of Christ. I 
could refer to many Scriptures to demonstrate the proof 
of that, but take the second chapter of Daniel, where 
you have that great metallic and mud image represent- 
ing the times of the Gentiles. There you come on 
down to the last condition of Gentile dominion, ten 
kingdoms bound together acting under one head, like 
the ten toes on a man’s two feet, representing the last 
Gentile powers. And then you read this: “Thou saw- 
est till that a stone was cut out without hands, .. . 
and filled the whole earth” (Dan. 2:34,35). Our 
Lord Jesus Christ applies that falling stone to Him- 
self; He says, “The stone which the builders rejected, 
the same is become the head of the corner. Whoso- 
ever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but 
on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to 
powder” (Luke 20:17-18). When He was here on 
earth, Israel stumbled over the stumbling-stone; they 
have been broken to pieces and scattered all over 
the world, but when He comes again Gentile power 
and authority will be arrayed against Him, but He 
shall smite them all in judgment. Therefore, there 
can be no millennium until Christ comes. 

Then again, in the fourth place, we believe there 
can be no millennium until the coming again of our 
Lord Jesus Christ because there can be no millennium 
until Israel will be restored to the Lord and to their 
own land, but Israel will be restored to the Lord at 
the second coming of Christ. Consequently there can 
be no millennium until Christ comes. We turn to the 
Book of Zechariah for proof of this, and there see the 
people of Israel at last brought to repentance, broken 
down before God, confessing their sins and failures. 
That is the trouble with them now. They are going back 


WILL THERE BE a MILLENNIUM? 133 


to the Land of Palestine, but the greatest trouble with 
Israel is they are constantly justifying themselves in- 
stead of owning their sin before God. I have talked 
with hundreds of God’s earthly people and have ex- 
pressed my sincere sympathy with them in their suf- 
fering, but the moment I try to bring before them the 
suggestion that this is because of their rejection of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, they are on the defensive. They 
do not want to confess that; they seek some other 
reason for their sorrow; but some day the nation as 
a whole will be brought to repentance. And when 
will that be? When they look upon Him Whom they 
have pierced. And when will they look upon Him 
Whom they have pierced? In the first chapter of 
Revelation we read: “Behold, he cometh with clouds; 
and every eye shall see him, and they also which 
pierced Him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail 
because of him” (verse 7). It is when our Lord Jesus 
Christ comes again, when His feet will stand in that 
day upon the Mount of Olives, when He presents Him- 
self the second time to His people, that “they shall 
look upon me whom they have pierced” (Zech. 12:10) 
and cry, “What are these wounds in thine hands? 
Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded 
in the house of my friends” (Zech. 13:6). Then they 
break and confess their sins and ‘‘mourn for him, as 
one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitter- 
ness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first- 
born” (Zech. 12:10). Then the Spirit from on high 
will be poured out on them and their hearts will be 
turned back to God, a nation will. be born in a day, 
there will be a regenerated Israel, and they will be 


gathered back to the land of their fathers, and God 


134 LAMP oF PROPHECY 


will fulfil all the promises made to them through the 
prophets throughout the centuries. 

Let me remind you of this—there can be no millen- 
nium until Christ comes because there can be no mil- 
lennium until the first resurrection, that is, the resur- 
rection of the saints who have died all down through 
the centuries. These saints who have died are to have 
part in that great kingdom; they are to reign with 
Christ when He reigns. Manifestly they must be 
raised from the dead before that can be true, but the 
resurrection of the saints will take place at the second 
coming of Christ, consequently there can be no mil- 
lennium until Christ comes. Whether one thinks of 
Old Testament saints or of the saints of the church age 
or whether he thinks of those who shall die under 
the Antichrist in the days of the Great Tribulation 
yet to come, they will have part in one of the cohorts 
of the first resurrection. That term includes all the 
people of God who will be raised prior to the reign 
of Christ. Our Lord’s own resurrection was the be- 
ginning of the first resurrection. Turn to the twentieth 
chapter of Revelation, and see how two very distinct 
cohorts are brought before us there. In the fourth verse, 
we read: “And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them 
[or sitters upon them] and judgment was given unto 
them.” There you have the saints of the Old Testa- 
ment times and the present church age who will be 
raised when “the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be 


with the Lord” (I Thess, 4:16-17). 


WILL THERE BE A MILLENNIUM? 135 


“I saw thrones, and sitters upon them.” But look 
at the next company: “And I saw the souls of them 
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for 
the word of God, and which had not worshipped the 
beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark 
upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived 
and reigned with Christ a thousand years” (Rev. 20:4). 
That is the last cohort. What about the wicked dead? 
“But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished. This is the first resur- 
rection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in 
the first resurrection: on such the second death hath 
no power, but they shall be priests of God and of 
~ Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.” 
There can be no millennium then until after the first 
resurrection. The saints who have died must be raised 
because they are to have part with Christ in that 
glorious kingdom era, and they will be in their physi- 
cal, resurrected bodies. 

Further, there can be no millennium until Christ 
comes because there can be no millennium until the 
Rapture, the change of the living believers of this 
dispensation, for we are promised a part in that 
glorious kingdom. We are not to be down here for 
Christ to reign over us, but yonder with Him in the 
heavenly Jerusalem to reign with Him over a regen- 
erated world. ‘This I say brethren, that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God”; so we 
must have our glorified bodies, our changed bodies 
in order to participate in that wonderful reign of our 
blessed Lord Jesus Christ. Daniel says that “the time 
came that the saints possessed the kingdom” (Dan. 
7:22) and we will be fitted for our part in that king- 
dom by the Rapture, that is, those who live until the 


136 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle tells 
us in the fifteenth chapter I Corinthians, “Behold, I 
show you a mystery [I tell you a secret]; we shall not 
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised in- 
corruptible, and we shall be changed. For this cor- 
ruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality” (vss. 51-53). That glorious event 
will take place when? At the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Then there can be no millennium until 
Christ comes because there can be no millennium until 
that event has already taken place. 

And then, linked very intimately with that, there can 
be no millennium until after the judgment seat of 
Christ. But the judgment seat of Christ takes place 
at the second coming of the Lord; therefore there can 
be no millennium until Christ comes because the 
judgment seat of Christ is the place where the works 
of saints are judged. Saints are going to stand before 
the Lord Jesus Christ in order that He may give them 
their rewards and tell each just what part he will have 
with Him in that coming kingdom. Therefore, you 
cannot have the millennium until the judgment seat of 
Christ. He will say to one, “You were faithful in a 
few things, have thou authority over ten cities:” and 
to another, “Have thou authority over five cities.” And 
you must stand there before His judgment seat and 
have your works appraised. You are saved by grace, 
but you are awarded according to your works. Think 
of one who has lived in a great city and perhaps never 
was heard of beyond a few blocks from his home, 
but this one lived devotedly for the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Imagine that one standing in the presence of the Lord 


Witt THERE BE a MILLENNIUM? To 


at His judgment seat, and Him saying: “I took note of 
you when you lived down there in Chicago. You were 
faithful in a few things; you were real, true, devoted, 
and so I tell you what I am going to do. I am going 
to reign in righteousness for one thousand years, and 
I am going to make you mayor of Chicago. You go 
back to that city where you were unknown but where 
you lived for Me, and take charge of it.” The Lord 
is going to fit His servants, each one, for the place He 
has for them, but you see, there can be no millennium 
until this inquiry into the works of the believers has 
gone on, until the Lord has brought everything to 
light and has apportioned everyone’s reward. 

And then let me go a little further. There can be 
no millennium until Christ comes because there can 
be no millennium until the judgment of the living na- 
tions. The nations as such are not going to be de- 
stroyed when Jesus comes to reign. There will be 
millions of earth’s inhabitants living in ignorance of 
His Word when He will begin His thousand-year reign, 
and the people composing these nations are to enter 
into the kingdom, but before they do there must take 
place the judgment of the living nations. But that 
is to take place at the second coming of Christ. Con- 
sequently there can be no millennium until Christ 
comes. Turn to Matthew 25: “When the Son of man 
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with 
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: 
and before him shall be gathered all nations” (verses 
31, 32). Do not make any mistake about this. This 
is not the judgment of the wicked dead; this is 
the judgment that takes place when Christ comes; and 
in accordance with the decisions of this judgment the 
nations will have their place in His coming glorious 


138 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


kingdom. “Before him shall be gathered all nations: 
and he shall separate them one from another, as a 
shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he 
shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on 
the left.” And you remember how He will reward 
the one and deal in judgment with the other according 
to their treatment of His brethren. That must take 
place before His kingdom is fully established here on 
the earth and in accordance with that the nations that 
have His blessing will go into the kingdom and have 
their place in it and enjoy the benefits of His righteous 
reign. 

While Scripture tells us of a glorious era when 
righteousness will prevail over all the earth before the 
close of time, it also tells us that when our Lord comes 
back again He will find a very different condition of 
affairs. There is not one Scripture that intimates that 
our Lord will return to find a converted world, that 
He will find nations subject to His holy will, but the 
very contrary. What did the Lord Jesus Himself say? 
“As the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming 
of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were 
before the flood they were eating and drinking, marry- 
ing and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe 
entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came, 
and took them all away; so shall also the coming of 
the Son of man be” (Matt. 24:37-39). If you admit 
that there must be an age of righteousness before this 
world comes to an end, you must also admit that that 
cannot be until after Christ comes, because when He 
does come He will not find the earth in any such con- 
dition. How was the world in the days of Noah? 
Corruption and violence filled the earth. And what 
do we see all about us today? Corruption and vio- 


WILL THERE BE a MILLENNIUM? 139 


lence everywhere. The people of God are still just 
a little flock. After nineteen centuries of gospel 
preaching, the conversion of the world seems as far 
off as ever. We have seen in our own day whole 
nations who once professed to receive the gospel 
trampling the truth of God beneath their feet. Europe 
has become a foreign mission field to which we send 
missionaries in order to carry the gospel to a people 
sitting in darkness, “to give the light of the knowl- 
edge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ” 
(II Cor. 4:6). 

We thank God for every victory of the cross in 
pagan lands. We thank God for the thousands and 
millions who have been brought to a saving knowl- 
edge of the Lord Jesus Christ, but we are not going 
to shut our eyes to facts. There are more heathen in 
the world today than when Jesus said to His disciples, 
“Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost” (Matt. 28:19). His servants have 
carried the message; millions have believed it; but 
the converts to Christianity have not kept even with 
the birth rate. So if we had to bring in the millennium 
with our best efforts, we might well become discouraged. 
But we realize that conditions are exactly as our Lord 
predicted they would be. He says: “And when these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up 
your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh” (Luke 
21:28). And so instead of becoming discouraged, we 
are encouraged. Jesus will soon be here. “The Spirit 
and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth 
say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And 
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely” 


(Rev. 22:17). 


XII 


MAY WE EXPECT A GREAT REVIVAL BEFORE 
THE COMING OF CHRIST? 


O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, 
revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the 
years make known; in wrath remember mercy.—Has. 3:2 


May WE expect a great revival before the coming of 
our Lord Jesus Christ? In attempting to answer the 
question in a Scriptural way, there are some things 
that need to be defined. First, what do we mean by 
revival? I do not know any term that is more mis- 
used than this term. A series of meetings may be an- 
nounced and called “revival meetings,” and if it were 
not so sad, it would be almost ludicrous to see the 
way the advertisements sometimes read. I have picked 
up a newspaper and read that on a given Sunday 
night a “revival” would begin in a certain church. 
How does anybody know that? Then I have read, a 
few weeks later, “The revival which has been in 
progress at such a church during the past few weeks 
will close on such and such a night.” If there had 
been a revival, what a pathetic thing to have it broken 
off so suddenly! A revival is not simply a series of 
- well attended meetings where there is good preaching, 


140 


May We Expect a Great REVIVAL? 141 


good singing, and possibly a number of people coming 
to Christ. A revival is something far more than that. 

Some years ago, I found myself in a strange town 
on Sunday morning. I went to the largest Protestant 
church I could find, and I shall never forget an an- 
nouncement the pastor made. Outside was a striking 
placard announcing revival meetings under the leader- 
ship of a well-known evangelist, but the evangelist was 
not there, and the pastor was evidently rather hu- 
miliated over it. Coming to the front, he said: 

“My dear friends, I was very confident that our re- 
vival was to begin today. You remember I announced 
that it would begin last Sunday, but on the Saturday 
night previous I received a telegram from the evangelist 
saying he was in a great meeting in Indiana and could 
not leave for another week. I wired him giving per- 
mission to remain, but said we would expect him for 
this Sunday. Last night, to my disgust, I received an- 
other telegram saying the meetings were going on with 
such interest he could not come for another week. My 
patience is about at an end. I am going to send him 
a night letter this evening telling him he must be here 
next Sunday without fail, or there will be no revival 
in this church this year!” 

It was very evident that revival, to that minister, 
meant just a special series of meetings under the leader- 
ship of an evangelist. I have no hope whatever that 
there will be anything like a great world-wide demon- 
stration under the leadership of some one or more par- 
ticular preachers in our day or generation. 


REVIVALS IN SCRIPTURE 


What do we mean, what does Scripture mean when 
it speaks of revival? In the Psalms, we hear David 


142 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


saying, “Though I walk in the midst of trouble thou 
wilt revive me,” and again he cries out, “Wilt thou 
not revive us again that thy people may rejoice in 
thee?” And here Habakkuk prays, “O Lord, revive 
thy work in the midst of the years.” What is meant 
by revival in these passages of Scripture? The word 
itself is most suggestive. It means to stir afresh that 
which is already alive. There is a life in every born- 
again person that needs from time to time to be freshly 
stirred and roused up, and when this takes place, it 
results in increased devotion to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
in greater carefulness as to one’s own individual walk 
before God, and in deeper exercise in getting the 
gospel to those who are out of Christ. 

We are not to think of meetings for only the un- 
converted as necessarily revival meetings. It is God’s 
people who need to be revived. There never was a 
time, and there never will be a time until our Lord 
Jesus Christ comes back again, when the people of 
God will not do well to cry, “O Lord, revive us again 
that thy people may rejoice in thee.” 

It is folly for anyone to say, “We are so near the 
end of the dispensation; the coming of the Lord has 
now drawn so near that it is useless to think of revival 
and of awakening to any great extent.” Why, the very 
fact that the coming of the Lord has drawn so near, 
the very fact that we are so near the close of this 
dispensation of the grace of God, is the very reason 
why people of God all over this globe ought to be 
on their faces crying out, “Wilt thou not revive us 
again?” We are expecting to meet our Lord very soon; 
we are expecting to hear His voice, to rise to meet Him 
in the air, but many of us are far from being in that 
condition of soul in which we would like to be found 


May We Expect a Great REVIVAL? 143 


when Jesus comes, and therefore we should be praying, 
“Wilt Thou not revive us again?” It is God’s will that 
His people should be duly exercised. I take it as one 
of the signs of the times, one of the evidences that 
the Lord is preparing His people for His return, that 
all over this and other civilized lands, and in every 
land where missionaries are carrying the gospel to a 
heathen people, there seems to be a growing sense of 
the need of a special arousing, an awakening, and a 
revival. It is unthinkable that when tens of thousands 
of God’s beloved people are crying from the depths 
of earnest hearts, “Revive thy work. in the midst of 
the years,” that God does not intend to bring revival 
and blessing. 

But people ask, “Where do you find in Scripture any 
definite prophetic word saying that the Christian dis- 
pensation will close with a great revival?” I do not 
know with what the Christian dispensation will close. 
I do not find any prophecy that has to do particularly 
with the Christian dispensation as such. Prophecy has 
to do largely with God’s dealings with His earthly 
people, Israel, and with the great Gentile nations; but 
the church does not belong to the ages; it does not 
belong to time; it is a thing of eternity; it is the mystery 
that was hid in God from before the foundation of 
the world, and that has now been made manifest. God 
is taking out of Jew and Gentile those who believe in 
the Lord Jesus Christ and is bringing them into one 
new Man, the body of Christ, and prophecy does not 
have to do particularly with the experiences of the 
church of God as such. All we know is that the 
church is taught to be constantly waiting for the coming 
of the Lord. There never was a century since apostolic 
days when the church could be absolutely certain that 


144 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


the Lord Jesus Christ would not return in that day; 
and while we have no absolute assurance that He will 
return in our day or in the day of our children, yet 
we are taught to look for His coming, so that whether 
He return at midnight or at cock crowing or at noon, 
we shall be ready. In the meantime, He says, “Occupy 
till I come.” We are set here to glorify Him, and 
it is only as a revived, quickened people that we can 
glorify Him as we should. 


How a ReEvivaL BEGINS 
What would be the evidences of revival? If God 


were working in some large way, one of the first evi- 
dences would be great humiliation before Him because 
of our past sins and failures, because of our unbelief, 
because of our slowness to send out the gospel to the 
heathen world, because of the way we have hoarded our 
money and made ourselves comfortable and forgotten 
the needs of those sitting in darkness and in the shadow 
of death. In other words, the first evidences would be 
deep and sincere repentance on the part of the people 
of God. Often we hear people singing the chorus: 


O Lord, send a revival, 
Lord, send a revival; 

O Lord, send a revival, 
And let it begin in me. 


When I hear them singing that, I say to myself, “I 
wonder now what they really mean!” When one and 
another says, “Lord, send a revival, and let it begin 
in me,” do they mean, “Lord, strike me down in 
some strange sort of way; give me some very vivid 
emotional experience in order that I may feel wonder- 
fully exalted and wrought up, and I shall consider I 
am being revived”? I think that is why wild-fire emo- 


May WE Expect a Great REVIVAL? 145 


tionalism of the most unscriptural character prevails 
in many places today, and people call it the reviving 
work of the Spirit of God. 

If revival is going to begin in me, if it is going to 
begin in you, it is going to lead us to self-judgment 
in the presence of God; it is going to lead us back over 
our lives, to examine conditions, to ask ourselves and 
honestly to answer the questions in the presence of God, 
“Have I really been living’a yielded life? Have I truly 
been holding all that I possess as that which belongs to 
the One who has redeemed me? And have I been so 
speaking and so acting from day to day that my words 
and my life have been a testimony for Christ?” And 
wherein conscience convicts me of failure, wherein the 
Spirit of God shows me that I have not been manifesting 
the Spirit of Christ as I should, it will lead to contrition, 
to repentance, to confession, and to humiliation. As 
long as the people of God can sit calmly and sing, “O 
Lord, send a revival,” and nobody gets down before 
the Lord to confess his failure and put things right 
that have been wrong, revival will never begin in 
them. Singing hymns is not going to bring revival, 
but doing faithfully that which the Spirit of God puts 
before one will bring it. 


THE KoREAN REVIVAL 


How did the great revival in Korea begin? Years 
ago, I listened to Dr. Underwood, who has since gone 
to glory, as he told something of the beginning of the 
work of God in that land. Many hundred Koreans 
had gathered together to pray for revival and blessing 
upon the people of God and upon the people of Korea, 
and as the prayer-meeting went on, an elder of the 
church got to his feet and said with a broken voice, 


146 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


“My friends, let me interrupt the prayer-meeting. I 
have something I must say. God has been speaking 
to me. I did something the other day that is troubling 
me, and I feel if I do not confess it, I am going to 
hinder this work. I feel like Achan in the camp. I 
have the unclean thing hidden away, and the people 
of God can never triumph over their foes until this 
is made right. I have to confess that I am a thief.” 

They looked in amazement, and then he said, “On 
a certain occasion, I was passing the home of such and 
such a brother; I saw lying out in front of his home 
an ax. I wanted one very badly. I knew this one wasn’t 
mine; but it was his. As nobody was around, I slipped 
over and carried it home. It is back in my woodshed, 
and it is like Achan’s wedge of gold; I am here to 
confess and apologize to my brother, and I will return 
the ax.” 

Dr. Underwood said another and another stood up, 
with burdened hearts and tears streaming down their 
faces, and confessed their sins. That thing went on for 
hours, and by and by the heathen outside heard what 
was going on among the Christians, and then a great 
work of grace began that brought hundreds and thou- 
sands into the flock of the Lord Jesus Christ. 


THE BACKWARD Loox 


If there is going to be a revival now or at any time, 
we must judge ourselves in His presence. I am afraid 
that our consciences are terribly dull; we have become 
used to so many things that we take for granted they 
are all right and never stop to think how they look 
in the sight of our blessed Lord. 

Glance back over one week of your life, you who 
are Christians. Just imagine as you do so that at any 


May We Expect a Great REVIVAL? 147 


hour of that week the Lord had suddenly come upon 
you, had beheld what you were engaged in, had heard 
what you were saying, and had given you to know that 
He was taking note of all that you were doing. Are 
you quite sure you would have been well satisfied with 
yourself and with your life, even for one week? Then 
let me ask another question. Have you been definitely 
to God during this past week and have you been facing 
these things from day to day? You say, “Well, I kneel 
in prayer at night.” What do you pray for? To ask 
the Lord to take care of you in the dark? Before you 
ask Him to take care of you in the dark, do you talk 
to Him about what you did in the light? Do you go 
over your life in His presence? Do you bring out 
everything before Him? Do you let the full clear 
light of the sanctuary shine upon your words and your 
behavior? And then as He shows you things that are 
so opposed to His own infinite holiness, to His tender- 
ness, to His compassion for men; as He shows you 
things that are so contrary to the Spirit of an unworldly 
Christ, do you make your frank, honest confession 
before Him and seek His grace to turn from these 
things once and forever, henceforth to be devoted alone 
to Him? If you do, you are on the way to revival, for 
that is how God works. 


HABAKKUK’S PRAYER 


‘As a rule, when people use this word “revival,” they 
mean “awakening.” They are not really thinking so 
much of revival among the people of God as an 
awakening of the unsaved, and it is very good that 
we should be thinking of that. It is right in that con- 
nection that we have the prayer of Habakkuk, “O Lord, 
I have heard thy speech, and was afraid.” 


148 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


If there ever was a man who might well have asked, 
“Is there any use praying for revival in days such 
as mine?” it was this man. He lived just a short time 
before the Babylonian captivity of the people of Judah, 
and he knew that, in a very little while, God was 
going to give the people over to the Gentile avenger. 
Judgment would shortly be meted out to the people 
of Judah; and therefore Habakkuk might have been 
excused if he had shaken his head and said, “It is no 
use trying to do anything now. We are just at the end 
of one of God’s dispensations with us; the enemy is 
coming, and God will not defend this city anymore. 
There is no use expecting revival or blessing.” But, 
no, he said to himself, “The very fact that we are down 
to the end of one of God’s dealings with us is the 
reason we need Him more than ever; it is the very 
reason why intercessors should be before Him to cry 
out, ‘In wrath remember mercy.’ ” 

If you and I and the people of God throughout the 
world come to Him with earnest purpose of heart to 
cry like this, we can be assured that He will be de- 
lighted to answer. I am not a prophet nor the son of 
a prophet, but if there is world-wide brokenness of 
spirit on the part of the people of God, if there is 
repentance and crying to Him, God will delight to 
do some mighty work before the coming again of His 
blessed Son. And when the people of God are thus 
stirred, there will be an awakening outside. 


REVIVAL AND AWAKENING IN INDIA 


I read of a little group of missionaries in India, 
associated with a company of believers with whom 
I happened to be intimately in Christian fellowship. 
They were what we might call hyper-Calvinistic. They 


May We Expect a Great REVIVAL? 149 


not only believed in the sovereignty of the Lord, but 
their belief was almost akin to the Mohammedan doc- 
trine of fatalism. They had been in one district for 
sixteen years and had not found one convert. They 
tried to comfort themselves with Judson’s answer to 
the Baptist Board when they asked him, after he had 
labored in his field for twenty years, “What are the 
prospects?” His answer was, “The prospects are as 
bright as the promises of God.” That was real faith 
on Judson’s part, and it was not long until God re- 
warded his faith. And so with this they tried to com- 
fort themselves. But they were put to shame by the fact 
that, not very far from them, another mission started 
work, manned by a people who did not have anything 
like the same knowledge of the Bible that these people 
had. They were overgiven to emotionalism and yet 
simple earnest Christians who believed God and sought 
to walk before Him in simple faith. These people soon 
had one and another and even whole families come to 
them in brokenness of spirit, confessing their sins and 
trusting the Lord Jesus Christ as Savior. 

The hyper-Calvinistic missionaries went over to visit 
the newcomers, for they felt it could not be a real 
work. But to their amazement they got into a testi- 
mony meeting, and one after another the heathen got 
up and, oh, the stories of redeeming grace they told! 
These brethren went back humbled before God and said, 
“The fault cannot be with God; it cannot be with the 
gospel we preach; it must be in ourselves.” So they 
put up a placard outside which read, “No public 
services for the present; the missionaries will gather 
for prayer and humiliation before God.” They began 
with a day of prayer and went on, eating as little as 
they could, till six days had gone by, and then on the 


150 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


seventh day there came a knock at the door. During 
these days, there had been great confessions, much self- 
judgment, many idols torn down, getting right with 
God themselves, and they were amazed to find how 
much there could be in the life of a missionary that 
needed to be made right. 

When one of them answered the knock, he found a 
native standing there who said, “I want to get into 
the meeting.” 

“But,” said the missionary, “this is just a meeting 
for the missionaries.” 

“Oh, but I must get in,” the man said. “I have lain 
awake for two nights, I am so miserable. You must 
let me in and show me the way of life.” And of course 
they all gathered around him and pointed him to 
Christ. The dear fellow was hardly saved when some- 
one else came to the door. 

He said, “When I found the chapel closed, I won- 
dered if God had given us up. The missionaries have 
been here for sixteen years, and I have heard the mes- 
sage and have never received it; but I never thought 
the chapel door would be closed in my face; so I 
wondered whether God was through with us, whether 
He had given us up.” 

Of course the door was thrown open. Just after that, 
I read an article in a certain periodical and it said, 
“Six weeks have gone by since we began our time of 
prayer, and already we have baptized sixty converts. 
There are scores more inquiring the way of life.” 

Awakening follows revival, that is, revival among 
the people of God comes first, and then an awakening 
among the Christless. You do not have to hold special 
meetings to bring this about. All that is needed is 
integrity of purpose and honesty of spirit before God. 


XIII 


WORLD-WIDE MISSIONS AND THE LORD’S 
RETURN 


And the gospel must first be published among all nations. 
—MarK 13:10 


YoU WILL remember that our blessed Lord Jesus 
predicted the destruction of Jerusalem because its 
people knew not the time of their visitation. His dis- 
ciples showed Him the magnificent buildings of the 
temple area, and they said, with pardonable pride, 
“Lord, behold what great and glorious buildings are 
here.” But He had no eyes for their beauty for His 
heart was burdened because of the sins and the sorrows 
of the people. He said, “There shall not be left one 
stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down” 
(Mark 13:2). With prophetic eye He looked forward 
to and pictured the time when their enemies should 
throw a trench around the city, when the dwellings 
and the marts of commerce, the palaces, and the very 
temple of God should be in ruins, when at last the 
desolation should be so complete that, as Isaiah had 
predicted, Zion should be ploughed as a field. When 
this prophecy was spoken, it seemed that there was 
no possibility of its fulfilment, and yet within a very 


15} 


152 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


short time it was fulfilled to the letter. One of the 
striking evidences of its accuracy is that for over fifteen 
hundred years Mount Zion has been as a great wheat 
field and has been ploughed from year to year, as the 
prophet predicted, while the stones of the sacred build- 
ings in Jerusalem were so truly cast down that not one 
was left upon another. 

When our Lord spoke these words, the disciples 
found them almost unbelievable and afterward, when 
they stood with Him on the Mount of Olives, over- 
looking the city, they asked Him three questions. 
Notice these questions and their import: 

“When shall these things be? When shall Jerusalem 
be destroyed, when will the city be so utterly ruined 
as Thou_hast predicted?” 

“What shall be the sign of Thy coming? How will 
we know that Thy coming has drawn nigh?” 

“What shall be the sign that the end of the age is 
upon us—the end of the age of Gentile times during 
which Israel is suffering affliction and the Land of 
Palestine is under alien domination?” 

Our Lord answers these questions, but in order to 
get His answers in their fulness, it is necessary to 
read the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew’s Gospel, 
the thirteenth chapter of Mark, and the twenty-first 
chapter of Luke. In these three great prophetic pas- 
sages He goes into these questions and answers them 
in detail, 

KWhen : shall these things be?” In Luke 21:20, He 


says: “When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed_ with 


armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. 


Notice ‘again the accuracy of prophecy; not “merely 
when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with an army 
but — with armies — in the plural. The Lord says, 


ted 


WORLD-WIDE Missions 153 


“When you shall see that, you will know that all hope 
for the city is gone.” “Then let them which are in 
Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are 
in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that 
are in the countries enter thereinto. For these be the 
days of vengeance, that all things which are written 
may be fulfilled. . . . Jerusalem shall be trodden down 
of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be ful- 
filled.” “These things have already taken place. In 
A.D-~70, Jerusalem was compassed about with the 
armies of the Romans, under Titus, and was destroyed 
and for nineteen hundred years since, it has been trod- 
den down of the Gentiles. The day of its deliverance 
is very near. Already God has begun to make bare 
His arm in behalf of Jerusalem; marvelous things have 
taken place there and in the Land of Palestine within 
the last fifteen years. God is working for the complete 
restoration of His people Israel, as predicted in 
prophecy. 

“What shall be the sign of Thy coming?” Our 
Lord’s answér to this is, “Consider the fig-tree”; and 
the fig-tree is the well-known symbol of Israel—of the 
Jews. That fig-tree for nineteen hundred years has 
been dried up from the roots like the fig-tree that Jesus 
pronounced a curse upon that day when He was seeking 
fruit and found nothing but leaves. In our day the 
fig-tree is beginning to manifest signs of life. National 


` consciousness has come back to Israel; they have a i 


flag of their òwn. Today their own country has been 
“ zoe ; 

opened fo"them as a Jewish homeland, and the Jews 
of the world are looking toward it. But this is not all 
that is involved in the budding of the fig-tree, because 
there must be more than mere national movement to 
indicate that the end times are right upon us. There 


j 


154 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


must be a spiritual awakening in Jewry. That full 
awakening will come after the church of God has 
been caught up from this scene. “Blindness in part is 
happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles 
be come.in” (Rom. 11:25). The fulness of the Gen- 
tiles will come in when God has finished His present 
work of grace, and taken out from among the Gentiles 
a people for His name—when the Body of Christ is 
completed and “the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord” (I Thess. 4:16-17). That will be the 
fulness of the Gentiles. Then God’s present work will 
come to a close, and the scales will fall from Israel’s 
eyes. The veil will be torn away from their hearts, 
and they will discern Christ in their own Bible and 
will realize that the Jesus whom their fathers crucified 
was indeed their Messiah. But the marvelous thing 
is that already there are great movements in Israel. 
It is estimated that more Jews have turned to Christ 
and have been baptized in the thirty years of this 
century than in perhaps a number of centuries before 
this. Thousands of Jews, yes, scores of thousands 
have turned to Christ in Central Europe and in other 
parts of the world; and so the fig-tree is beginning 
to bud and blossom, telling the story that He is near, 
even at the door. 

But the Lord gave them another word. He as much 
as said, “You are not to be constantly watching for 
signs, constantly straining your eyes to see just when 
the end of the age will come, thinking all the time 


Worwp-WipE Missions 155 


about when the new age will begin. You have the 
responsibility in this present age of evil and it is 
this, to ‘Go into all the world and preach the gospel 
to every creature.” You remember how His disciples 
came to Him after the resurrection and said, ‘Master, 
wilt thou at this time restore the kingdom of Israel?” 
That was just another way of putting the old question: 
“What will be the sign of the end of the age?” Our 
Lord says to them, “It is not for you to know the 
times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in 
his own power” (Acts 1:7). How I wish that T could 
sound that word down into the very soul of everyone 
who is trying to set dates for the coming of the Lord! 
It is not for you to know! That is what Jesus said, 
and He has never revoked it. Jt is not for you to 
know. After this, if you try to figure out the date 
for the close of this age, if you try to find out from 
the mystic numbers of Daniel and Revelation just when 
the times of the Gentiles will end, remember, you 
are sure to be wrong, for it is not for you to know 
that. “But,” He says, “ye shall receive power, after 
that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall 
be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all 
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part 
of the earth” (Acts 1:8). It is as though He said to 
them, “While you are looking on to the time when I 
am coming to reign, you are not to sit down and 
watch for signs, but you are to keep busy carrying 
my gospel to the ends of the earth,” and so in Mark 
13, after He has given them a great many signs, He 
says, “And the gospel must first be published among 
all nations.” 

I have purposely read Mark’s text because I know 
very well that if I read the text from Matthew, some 


156 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


of my ultra-dispensational brethren would come to me 
and say, “My dear brother, do you not know the dif- 
ference between the gospel of the grace of God and the 
gospel of the kingdom?” The gospel of the kingdom 
is the announcement of the Lordship of Christ. The 
gospel of the grace of God is that great and glorious 
message that I have been trying to carry throughout 
the world for forty years, that glorious message of free 
grace through a crucified, risen, and glorified Savior. 

ut on the other hand, I remember that the Apostle 
Paul went everywhere preaching the kingdom of God 
as well as proclaiming the grace of God. But here 


“in ‘Mark’s gospel you notice how careful the Holy 


. f host is; He does not speak of the gospel of the king- 
dom. He simply says, “And the gospel must_ first, „be 


I, 


published among all nations.” We are looking for 
“Him: Would you like to bring Him back? Remember, 
“The gospel must first be published among all na- 


WHE? 
7 l tions.” We say sometimes that there are certain closed 
countries where the gospel has not gone; but, of course, 


we do not actually know whether the gospel has gone 
there. God may have many witnesses of whom we 
know nothing. Our responsibility, however, is this— 
to go with the gospel into all the world, to every 
nation of the earth. If we cannot go ourselves, we 
are to have fellowship with others who do go, and to 
pray the Lord of the harvest that He will thrust forth 
workers into the field. Then, after He thrusts them 
out, we are to help keep them out by sending the means 
needed. This is our part and our responsibility. Are 
you looking for the coming of the Lord? Do you love 
His appearing? The quickest way to bring Him back 
is to send out the message to those who have never 


heard. 


WoruLp-W1IpE Missions 157 


The Holy Ghost tells us that the reason Christ has 
not returned is that there are still people to be reached 


with the gospel. In II Pet. 3:4, we read of those who | 
asked, “Where is the promise: of his coming?” And 7 


He declared, “Since the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning of the crea- 
tion.” But the Apostle says, “The Lord is not slack 
concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; 
but is long suffering to us-ward, not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.” 
We are no more anxious for Him tò come than He 
is to return. “The husbandman waiteth for the precious 
fruit of the earth, and hath long patiencé’for it; until 
he receive thé éarly”and’ latter rain” (James 5:7). I 
am quite sure that He™inténds” us to see something 
symbolical there. I believe the early rain was when 
the Apostles went unto the ends of the earth with 
the gospel of Christ. They started out as a little band 
of twelve men, and in three hundred years had over- 
thrown the idolatry of the Roman Empire. They had 
carried the gospel to every part of the known world. 
But declension and worldliness followed. Then there 
came the dark ages when the church left her first love 
and gross superstition prevailed. Then the Spirit 
wrought afresh and produced the glorious reformation 
when the precious truth of justification by faith alone 
was preached, and with that came the opening of the 
Word of God, and one truth after another was brought 
before the people. 

The last one hundred and fifty years have been the 
greatest missionary years since the days of the Apostles; 
and what marvels God hath wrought! You hear 
people talk about “signs and wonders,” about miracles, 
etc., and they look at you solemnly and quote, gatos 


158 LAMP OF PROPHECY 


that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do 
also; and greater works than these shall he do also; 
because I go unto my Father” (John 14:12); and they 
take this to mean the miracles of healing and talking 
in tongues! Put all those miracles together, and you 
would not have anything so great as that miracle when 
Jesus called Lazarus out of the tomb after he had been 
dead four days, and that other remarkable sign when 
He and His disciples were in the little ship and the 
storm came up, and they said, “Lord, save us; we 
perish.” And Jesus said to them, “Why are ye fear- 
ful, O ye of little faith?” and to the wind, He said, 
“Peace”; and to the waves, “Be muzzled.” Immedi- 
ately there was a great calm. Whoever wrought mir- 
acles like these? But Jesus spent all of His days in 
Palestine, except when as a babe He was taken to 
Egypt. There He did all His works, and when at last 
He ascended into heaven, as a result of His glorious 
ministry on earth, about five hundred brethren were 
there to see Him go up. But ten days later, when the 
Holy Ghost came, at the very first meeting of the new 
dispensation, three thousand were converted, and a few 
days afterwards the number of those who believed be- 
came about five thousand, and then the work went on 
and on till millions knew the Savior’s love. And just 
think what has been wrought in these last days, in these 
wonderful missionary days, just before He comes back 
again! I am persuaded that what He is doing now 
is sending out the last call to the Gentiles in order to 
complete the bride of the Lamb and then He is coming 
to take His own to be with Himself. I know that after 
that Jewish missionaries will carry the gospel to the 
ends of the earth, but I want to impress upon you our 


WorLb-WIDE Missions 159 


responsibility to publish the gospel to the people of | 
our day while we are waiting for His return. 

Think, for instance, of John G. Paton going to the 
New Hebrides (the cannibal islands) and years after “ 
being able to say, “When we came, there wasn’t a 
Christian; when we left, there wasn’t a heathen.” That 
did not mean that everybody had been born again, but 
that cannibalism had disappeared and all of them had 
the light of the gospel. Think of the miracles that 
have been wrought in China, India, Africa, and the 
Islands of the Sea. As I have heard the missionaries 
of the cross tell of the marvelous things that God has 
done in these heathen lands, I have thought, “These are 
the ‘greater things’ that we are to do because Christ has 
gone to the Father.” 

Unsaved one, God is not willing that you should 
perish. His great loving heart looked upon you and 
. saw you in your sin and “God so loved the world that 
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
He wants you to come and be saved and is waiting 
until the last soul of this dispensation says, “I won’t 
have Him; I don’t want Him”; then He is going to 
rise and shut the door and the day of grace for 
Christendom will be over. Hear Him saying, “Turn 
ye, oh, turn ye, for why will ye die?” Why die in 
your sins when Christ has died that those sins may be 
forever put away? 

The heralds of the cross are fast publishing the 
gospel in all nations. Soon this witness-testimony will 
be completed. If it ends tonight, what about your 
soul? Then the door will be shut for guilty, apostate 
Christendom. Enter now while the day of grace is 
still here. 


+ 


« 


eT. +e 
r 
i [i 


2 


EINSA, 
ey) 
yr 
ear 
thet Weare shy 


nee: 
ies 
> 


Wy 
- ees 
CECI 


TEYA 
prat aay 


RET 


Dwi 
ay 
Alaa Beet 


nee 


e 
NEED 


y 


PRA 


Ste 


Be 


EPTO toes 
Ch bebo ee PERE E e 
a tT 


POP Day me et om: 


PE 


È 
$ 
m 


renere 


RA 
INED te 


pien 


Tar 
i isra iaaa o 
r e 
E AAE NEPE RH 


Bates 


Lutes es 


Ne 
eh 


Gt ERE 


hi 
apes 


"He 


ars 
so 


TERE, 


= 


Sis? 
re r 


EERE. 
ny EF 


a 


e 
Pa 
ep 


wee 


