-MS  vflf 

**.'•>  • • • 

‘ y 

DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


PV" 


. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


I 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe28wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 


Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-Collcge,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXVIII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street, 

MDCCLXXXV. 


C 3 ] 


Ws'/i 


A N 

. . . < 

E X 

T R 

A 

C 

T 

O F T H 

E 

Rev. 

Mr.  John  Wes 

ley’s 

J o' 

U R 

N 

A 

L, 

From  September  g , 1741 

, to  Oftober 

27» 

J743- 

Number 

V. 

Sunday,  September  6. 

OBSERVING  fome,  who  were  beginning  to 
ufe  their  liberty  as  a cloak  for  licentiouf- 
nefs,  I inforced  in  the  morning  thofe  words  of 
A 2 St. 


[ 4 ] 

St.  Paul,  (worthy  to  be  written  in  the  heart  oF 
every  believer)  All  things  are  lawful for  me\  but 
all  things  are  not  expedient : and  in  the  evening 
that  necelTary  advice  of  our  Lord,  That  men  ought 
always  to  pray , and  not  to  faint . 

Mond.  7.  I vifited  a young  man  in  St.  Tho- 
mas’s-hofpital,  who  in  flrong  pain,  was  praifing 
God  continually.  At  the  delire  of  many  of  the 
patients,  I fpent  a fhort  time  with  them,  in  ex- 
hortation and  prayer.  O what  a harveft  might 
there  be,  if  any  lover  of  fouls,  who  has  time  upon 
his  hands,  would  conftantly  attend  thefe  places 
of  diftrefs,  and  with  tendernefs  and  meeknefs  of 
wifdom,  inftruQ:  and  exhort  thofe  on  whom  God 
has  laid  his  hands,  to  know  and  improve  the  day 
of  their  vifitation  ! 

Wednef.  9.  I expounded  in  Greyhound-lane, 
Whitechappel,  part  of  the  107th  Pfalm.  And 
they  did  rejoice  whom  the  Lord  had  redeemed  and 
delivered from  the  hand  of  the  enemy. 

Satur.  12.  I was  greatly  comforted  by  one, 
whom  God  had  lifted  up  from  the  gates  of  death, 
and  who  was  continually  telling,  with  tears  of 
joy,  what  God  had  done  for  his  foul.  Sund.  13. 
I met  about  two  hundred  perfons,  with  whom 
feverally  I had  talked  the  week  before,  at  the 
French  chappel,  in  Hermi-tage-ftreet,  Wapping, 
where  they  gladly  joined  in  the  fervice  of 
the  church ; and  particularly,  the  Lord's 
fupper. 

Frid,  18.  I buried  the  only  child  of  a tender 

parent, 


[ 5 3 


parent,  who  having  foon  finifhed  hercourfe,  af- 
ter a fliort  ficknefs,  went  to  him  her  foul  loved, 
in  the  fifteenth  year  of  her  age. 

Sund.  20.  I preached  in  Charles’s  fiquare, 
Hoxton,  on  thefe  folernn  words,  This  is  life  eter- 
nal, to  know  thee , the  only  true  God,  and  Jefus 
Chriji  whom  thou  hajl  fcnt.  I frufi,  God  blefi  his 
word.  The  {coffers  flood  abafhed,  and  opened 
not  their  mouth. 

Mond.  21.  I fet  out,  and  the  next  evening  met 
my  brother  at  Briftol,  with  Mr.  Jones  of  Fon- 
mon  Caflle  in  Wales  : now  convinced  of  the 
truth  as  it  is  injefus,  and  labouring  with  his  might 
to  redeem  the  time  he  had  lofi,  to  make  his  calling 
Jure,  and  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life. 

Thurfday  24.  In  the  evening  we  went  to 
Kingfwood.  The  houfe  was  filled  from  end  to 
end.  And  we  continued  in  minillring  the  word 
of  God,  and  in  prayer  and  praife  till  the  morn- 
ing. 

Sund.  27.  I expounded  at  Kingfwood  (morn- 
ing and  afternoon)  at  Briflol  and  at  Baptifl- 
Mills,  the  meffage  of  God  to  the  church  of 
Ephefus  ; particularly,  that  way  of  recovering 
our  firll  love,  which  God  hath  prefcribed  and  not 
man  : Remember  from  whence  thou  art fallen,  and 
repent,  and  do  the  firfl  works . 

Tuef.  29.  I was  prefl  to  vifit  Nicholas  Pal- 
mer, one  who  had  feparated  from  us,  and  be- 
haved with  great  bitternefs,  till  God  laid  his 
hand  upon  him.  He  had  fent  for  me  feveral 
A 3 times, 


[ 6 ] 

times,  faying,  “ He  could  not  die  in  peace  till 
he  had  feen  me.'’  1 found  him  in  great  weak- 
nefs  of  body  and  heavinefs  of  fpirit.  We  wref- 
led  with  God  on  his  behalf.  Arid  our  labour  was 
not  in  vain.  His  foul  was  comfoited  : and  a few 
hours  after  he  quietly  fell  aileep. 

Thurf.  Oft.  1.  We  fet  out  for  Wales:  but 
miffing  our  paffiage  over  the  .Severn  in  the  morn- 
ing, it  was  fun  fet  before  we  could  get  to  New- 
port. We  enquired  there  if  we  could  hire  a 
guide  to  Cardiff.  But  there  was  none  to  be  had. 
A lad  coming  in  quicklv  after,  who  was  going 
(he  faidj  to  Laniffan,  a li  tie  village,  two  miles 
to  the  right  of  Card.ff  we  refolved  to  go  hither. 
At  feven  we  fet  out.  It  rained  pretty  laid,  and 
there  being  neither  moon  nor  flars,  we  could 
neither  fee  any  road,  nor  one  another,  nor  our 
own  horfes  heads.  But  the  promife  of  Gcd  did 
not  fail.  He  gave  his  angels  charge  over  us.  And 
foon  after  ten  we  came  lafe  to  Mr.  V\  illiams’s 
houfe  at  Laniflan. 

Frid.  2.  We  rode  to  Fonmon  Caflle.  We 
found  Mr.  Jones’s  daughter  ill  of  the  fma’l-pox. 
But  lie  could  chearfullv  leave  her  and  ali  the  reft 
in  the  hands  of  him  in  whom  he  now  believed. 
In  the  evening  I preached  at  Cardiff,  in 
the  Shi  re  hall,  a large  and  convenient  place, 
on  God  hath  given  unto  us  eternal  hjs,  and  this  lift 
is  in  his  Son . There  having  been  a feafl  in  the 
town  that  day,  I believed  it  needful  to  add  a few 
words  upon  intemperance.  And  while  I wasfay- 

.i  ‘ ing, 


[ 7 1 


ing,  u As  for  you,  drunkards,  you  have  no  part 
in  this  life : you  abide  in  death ; you  chufe 
death  and  hell a man  cried  out  vehemently, 
“ I am  one  : and  thither  I am  going.”  But  I truft 
God  at  that  hour  began  to  fhew  him  and  others 
a more  excellent  way. 

Satur.  3.  About  noon  we  came  to  Pontypool. 
A clergyman  Hopped  me  in  the  firlb  ftreet;  a few- 
more  found  me  out  foon  after,  w-hofe  love  I did 
not  find  to  be  cooled  at  all,  by  the  bitter  adverfa- 
ries  who  had  been  among  them.  True  pains  had 
been  taken  to  fet  them  againlt  my  brother  and 
me,  by  men  who  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit 
they  are  of.  But  infiead  of  difputing  we  betook 
aurfelves  to  prayer.  And  all  our  hearts  were  knit 
together  as  at  the  firft. 

in  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Abergavenny. 
Thofe  who  are  bitter  of  fpirit  have  been  here 
alfo.  Yet  Mrs.  James  (now  Mrs.  Whitefield) 
received  us  gladly  as  Ihe  had  done  aforetime. 
But  we  could  not  procure  even  two  or  three  to 
join  with  us  in  the  evening  befide  thofe  of  her 
own  houfhold.  Sund.  4.  I had  an  unexpected 
opportunity  of  receiving  the  holv  communion. 
In  the  afternoon  we  had  a plain,  ufeful  fermon, 
on  the  Pharijee  anf  the  Publican  praying  in  the 
temple  ; which  I explained  at  large  in  the  even- 
ing, to  the  bejl  drejl  congregation  I have  ever  yet 
feen  in  Wales.  Two  perfons  came  to  me  after- 
wards, who  were  it  feemed,  convinced  of  fin  and 
groaning  for  deliverance. 

A 4 


Mond. 


C 8 3 

Mond.  5.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  Pon- 
typool,  to  a fmall  but  deeply  attentive  congrega- 
tion. Mr.  Price  conduced  us  from  thence  to  his 
houfe  at  Watford.  After  refting  here  an  hour, 
•we  haftened  on  and  came  to  Fonmon,  where  I 
explained  and  inforced  thofe  words,  What  mud  I 
do  to  be  Javed?  Many  feemed  quite  amazed, 
while  I fhewed  them  the  nature  of  falvation,  and 
the  gofpel-way  of  attaining  it. 

Tuef.  6.  I read  pra\  ers  and  preached  in 
Porth-kerrv  church.  My  text  was  By  grace  ye 
are.  faved  through  faith.  In  the  evening  at  Car- 
diff I expounded  Zachariah  iv.  7.  U ho  art  thou, 

0 great  mountain , before  Zerubbable  thou  Jhalt  be- 
come a plain.  The  next  morning  we  fet  out,  and 
in  the  evening  praifed  God  with  our  brethren  in 
Briftol. 

Thurf.  8.  I dined  with  C I , greatly 

praifing  God  for  having  done  his  own  wife 
and  holy  will  in  taking  away  the  defire  of 
his  eyes  : in  the  evening  1 preached  on  Looking 
unto  Jejus.  And  many  were  filled  with  confo- 
lation. 

Frid.  9.  The  fame  fpirit  helped  our  infirmities 
at  the  hour  of  interceffion  : and  again  at  Kingf- 
wood  in  the  evening.  I was  juft  laid  down,  "hen 
one  came  and  told  me,  Howel  Harris  defired  to 
fpeak  with  me  at  Briftol,  being  juft  come  from 
London,  and  having  appointed  to  fet  out  for 
Wales  at  three  in  the  morning.  I went  and 
found  him  with  Mr.  Humphreys  and  Mr.  S— — • 


[ 9 ] 

They  immediately  fell  upon  their  favourite  fub- 
jeft  : on  which  when  we  had  difputed  two 
hours,  and  were  juft  where  we  were  at  ftrft,  I 
begged  we  might  exchange  controverfy  forprayer. 
We  did  fo,  and  then  parted  in  much  love,  about 
two  in  the  morning. 

* Sat.  10.  His  journey  being  deferred  till  Mon- 
day, H.  Harris  came  to  me  at  the  New-Room. 
He  faid,  “ As  to  the  decree  of  reprobation,  he 
renounced  and  utterly  abhorred  it.  And  as  to  the 
not  falling  from  grace,  1.  He  believed,  that  it 
ought  not  to  be  mentioned  to  the  unjuftified,  or 
to  any  that  were  flack,  and  carelefs,  much  lefs 
that  lived  in  fin,  but  only  to  the  earned  and  dif- 
conlolate  mourners.  2.  He  did  himfelf  believe, 
it  was  poflible  for  one  to  fall  away,  who  had  been 
enhghtned  with  fome  knowledge  of  God,  who 
had  tcfled  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  been  made  par- 
taker of  the  Holy  Ghof : and  wilhed  we  could  all 
agree,  to  keep  clofe  in  the  controverted  points, 
to  the  very  words  of  holy  writ.  3.  That  he  ac- 
counted no  man  fo  juftified  as  not  to  fall,  till  he 
had  a thorough,  abiding  hatred  to  all  fin,  and  a 
continual  hunger  and  third  after  all  righte- 
oufnefs.”  Blefled  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  thou 
man  of  peace  ! Still  follow  after  peace  and  hoii- 
nefs. 

Thurf.  15.  I was  preparing  for  another  jour- 
ney to  Wales,  which  I had  defigned  to  begin  on 
Friday,  when  I received  a mefiage  from  H.  Har- 
ris, defiring  me  to  fet  out  immediately,  and  meet 
A 5 him 


[ io  j 

him  near  the  New  Paffage.  I accordingly  fet  out 
at  noon,  but  being  obliged  to  wait  at  the  water- 
fide,  did  not  reach  Will-creek  (the  place  he  had 
appointed  for  our  meeting)  till  an  hour  or  two 
after  night.  But  this  was  foon  enough  : for  he 
had  not  been  there  : nor  could  we  hear  any  thing 
of  him.  So  we  went  back  to  Mather,  and  thence 
in  the  morning  to  Lanmarton,a  village  two  miles 
off,  where  we  heard  Mr.  Daniel  Rowlands  was 
to  be,  and  whom  accordingly  we  found  there. 
Evil-furmifings  prefently  vanilhed  away,  and  our 
hearts  were  knit  together  in  love.  We  rede  to- 
gether to  Machan  (five  miles  beyond  Newport) 
which  we  reached  about  twelve  o’clock.  In  an 
hour  after  H.  Harris  came,  and  many  of  his 
friends  from  diitant  parts.  W e had  no  dilpute  of 
any  kind,  but  the  fpirit  of  peace  and  love  was  in 
the  midlt  of  us.  At  three  we  went  to  church. 
There  was  avail  congregation,  though  at  only  a 
few  hours  warning.  Alter  prayers,  I preached  on 
thofe  words  in  the  fecond  leffon,  The  UJe  v hick 
I now  live , 1 live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  oj  God.  who 
loved  me  and  gave  him f elf  foe  me.  Mr.  Row- 
lands then  preached  in  Welch,  on  Matthew 
xxviii.  8.  Fear  ye  not  \ for  ye  jeek  him  that  was 
crucified. 

We  rode  afterwards  to  St.  Bride’s  in  the 
Moors : where  Mr.  Rowlands  preached  again. 
Here  we  were  met  by  Mr.  Humphreys  and  Tho- 
mas Bi hicks  of  Kingfwood.  About  eleven  a few 
of  us  retired,  in  order  to  provoke  one  another, 

to 


C 11  ] 

to  love,  and  to  good  works.  ButT.  Bifficks  im- 
mediately introduced  the  difpute,  and  others  fe- 
condcd  lnm.  1 his  H.  Harris  and  Mr.  Rowlands 
ftrongly  withftood  ; but  finding  it  profited  no- 
thing, Mr.  Rowlands  foon  withdrew.  H.  Harris 
kept  them  at  a hay,  till  about  one  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  I then  left  them  and  Capt.  T.  toge- 
ther : about  three  they  left  off  juft  where  they 
began. 

Satur.  17.  Going  to  a neighbouring  houfe,  I 
found  Mr.  H.  and  T.  Bifficks,  tearing  open  the  • 
fore  with  all  their  might.  On  my  coming  in  all 
was  hufhed.  But  Mrs.  James  of  Abergavenny  (a 
woman  of  candour  and  humanity)  infilled,  that 
“ thofe  things  fhould  be  faid  to  my  face.”  There 
followed  a lame  piece  of  work.  But  although  the 
accufations  brought  were  eafily  anfwered,  vet  I 
found  they  left  a forenefs  on  many  fpirits.  When 
H.  Harris  heard  of  what  had  paft,  he  halted  to 
Hand  in  the  gap  once  more,  and  with  tears  be- 
fought  them  all,  “ To  follow  after  the  things  that 
make  for  peace.”  And  God  bleft  the  healing 
words  which  he  fpoke,  fo  that  we  parted  in 
much  love,  being  all  determined,  to  let  contro- 
verfy  alone,  and  to  preach  Jefus  Chrift  and  him 
crucified. 

I preached  at  Cardiff  at  three,  and  about  five 
fetout  thence  for  Fonmon  Caftle.  Notwithftand- 
ing  the  great  darknefs  of  the  night,  and  our  be- 
ing unacquainted  with  the  road,  before  eight  vre 
A 6 came- 


[ 12  ] 

came  fafe  to  the  congregation,  which  had  been 
fome  time  waiting  for  us. 

Sund.  18.  I rode  to  Wenvo.  The  church  was 
thoroughly  filled  with  attentive  hearers,  while  I 
preached  on  thofe  words,  Whom  ye  ignorantly 
worjhip,  him  declare  I unto  you.  In  the  afternoon 
I read  prayers  and  preached  at  Porth-kerry : 
in  the  evening  there  was  a great  concourfe  of 
people  at  the  caftle,  to  whom  I Itrongly  de- 
clared the  hope  of  righteoufnefs  which  is  through 
faith. 

Mond.  19.  I preached  once  more  at  Porth- 
kerry,  and  in  the  afternoon  returned  to  Car- 
diff, and  explained  to  a large  congregation, 
When  they  had  nothing  to  pay , he  frankly  forgave 
them  both. 

Tuef.  20.  At  eleven  1 preached  at  the  prifon, 
on  I came  not  to  call  the  righteous , but  /inner s to 
repentance.  In  the  afternoon  I was  defined  to 
meet  one  of  the  honourable  women-,  whom  I 
found  a mere  firmer , groaning  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God.  About  fix,  at  Mr.  W.:s  de- 
fire, I preached  once  more  on  thofe  words* 
Whom  ye  ignorantly  worfdp,  him  declare  I unto 
you. 

Wednef.  21.  I fet  out  foon  after  preaching, 
and  about  nine  came  to  Newport.  A clergyman, 
foon  after  I was  fet  down,  came  into  the  next 
room,  and  afked  aloud,  with  a tone  unufually  Iharp, 

“ Where  thofe  vagabond  fellows  were  ?'*  Capt. 
T,  without  any  ceremony,  took  him  in  hand. 

But 


[ *3  ] 

But  I,e  foon  quitted  the  field  and  walked  out  of 
the  houfe.  Juft  as  I was  taking  horfe,  he  re- 
turned and  faid,  “ Sir,  I am  afraid  you  are  in  a 
wrong  way.  But  if  you  are  right,  I pray  God 
to  be  with  you,  and  profper  your  under- 
takings.” 

About  one  I came  to  Callicut,  and  preached  to 
a fmall  attentive  company  of  people,  on  Biffed 
are  they  which  hunger  and  thirjl  after  righteouf- 
nefs  \ for  they  fnall  be  filled > Between  feven  and 
eight  we  reached  Briftol. 

Thurf.  22.  I called  upon  Edward  W. 

who  had  been  ill  for  feveral  days.  I found  him- 
in  deep  defpair.  Since  he  had  left  off  prayer, 
all  the  waves  and  forms  were  gone  over  him » 
We  cried  unto  God,  and  his  foul  revived. 
A little  light  fbone  upon,  him,  and  juft  as  we 
fung, 

“ Be  Thou  his  ftrength  and  righteoufnefs. 

His  Jefus  and  his  all : 

his  fpirit  returned  to  God.. 

Frid.  23.  I faw  feveral  others  who  were  ill  of 
the  fame  diftemper.  Surely  our  Lord  will  do 
much  work  by  this  ficknefs.  I do  not  find  that  it 
comes  to  any  houfe  without  leaving  a bleffing 
behind  it.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Kingfwood, 
and  found  Ann  Steed  alfo  praifing  God  in  the 
fires,  and  teftifying,  That  all  her  weaknefs  and 
pain  wrought  together  for  good. 


Satun 


C ‘4  ] 


Satur.  24.  I vifited  more  of  the  fick,  both  in 
Kingfwood  and  Briftol.  And  it  was  pleafant 
work;  for  I found  none  of  them  forr owing  as 
men  without  hope.  At  fix  I expounded,  God  is 
light,  and  in  him  is  no  darknefs  at  all.  And 
his  light  broke  in  upon  us  in  luch  a manner, 
that  we  were  even  loll  in  praife  and  thankf- 
giving. 

* Sund.  25.  After  the  facrament  at  All-Saints, 

I took  horfe  for  Kingfwood.  But  before  I came 
to  Lawrence-hill,  my  horfe  fell,  and  attempting 
to  rife  again  fell  down  upon  me.  One  or  two 
women  ran  out  of  a neighbouring'  houfe,  and 
when  I rofe  helped  me  in.  I adore  the  wifdom  of 
God.  In  this  houfe  were  three  perfons,  who 
began  to  run  well  ; but  Satan  had  hindered 
them.  But  they  refolved  to  fet  out  again.  And 
not  one  of  them  has  looked  back  fince. 

Notwithftanding  thisdelay,  I got  to  Kingfwood 
by  two.  The  words  God  enabled  me  to  fpeak 
there,  and  afterwards  at  Briftol  (fo  I mull  exprefs 
inyfelf  Hill,  for  I dare  not  afcribe  them  to  my 
own  wifdom)  were  as  a hammer  and  a flame. 

1 And  the  fame  bleffing  we  found  at  the  meeting 
of  the  fociety.  But  more  abundantly  at  the  love- 
feaft  which  followed.  I remember  nothing  like 
it  for  many  months.  A cry  was  heard  from  one 
end  of  the  congregation  to  the  other : not  of. 
grief,  but  of  overflowing  joy  and  love.  0 
continue  forth  thy  loving  kindnefs  unto  them  that 

kncvj) 


[ *5  ] 

know  thee ; and  thy  mercy  to  them  that  are  true  of 
heart ! 

The  great  comfort  I found  both  in  public  and 
private,  almolt  every  day  of  the  enfuing  week, 
I apprehend  was  to  prepare  me  for  what  follow- 
ed : a fhort  account  of  which  I fent  to  London 
foon  after,  in  a letter,  the  copy  of  which  I have 
fubjoined  j although  I am  not  fenfible,  there  are 
feveral  circumllances  therein  which  fome  may 
fet  down  for  mere  enthufiafm  and  extravagance* 

“ Dear  Brother. 

All  laft  week  I found  hanging  upon  me  the 
effecis  of  a violent  cold  I had  contraci  ed  in  Wales  t 
not,  I think,  (as  Mr.  Turner  andW alcam  fuppofed); 
by  lying  in  a damp  bed  at  St.  Bride’s  ; but  ra- 
ther by  riding  continually  in  the  cold  and  wet 
nights,  and  preaching  immediately  after.  But 
I believed  it  would  pafs  off,  and  fo  took  little 
notice  of  it  "till  Friday  morning,  I then  found  my» 
felf  exceeding  fick  : and  as  I walked  to  Baptift- 
mills,  (to  pray  with  Sufanna  Bafil,  who  was- 
ill  of  a fever)  felt  the  wind  pierce  me,  as  it  were,, 
thro’.  At  my  return  I found  myfelf  fomething 
better.  Only  I could  not  eat  any  thing  at  all. 
Yet  1 felt  no  want  of  ftrength  at  the  hour  of  in- 
terceffion,  nor  at  fix  in  the  evening,  while  I was 
opening  and  applying  thofe  words,  Sun Jiand  thou 
JIM  in  Gibeon,  and  thou  moon , in  the  valley  of  Aja~ 
Ion.  I was  afterwards  refrefhed  and  flept  well  t 
fo  that  I apprehended  no  farther  diforder ; but 

rofe 


[ t6  ] 

rofe  in  the  morning  as  ufual,  and  declared,  with 
a ftrong  voice  and  inlarged  heart,  Neither  cirumci- 
fon  availeth  any  thing, .nor  uncircumcijion,  but  faith 
that  zvorketh  by  love.  About  two  in  the  afternoon 
juft  as  I was  fet  down  to  dinner,  a fhivering 
came  upon  me,  and  a little  pain  in  my  back  : 
but  no  ficknefs  at  all,  fo  that  I eat  a little  ; and 
then  growing  warm,  went  to  fee  fome  that  were 
fick.  Finding  myfelf  worfe  about  four  I would 
willingly  have  lain  down.  But  having  promifed 

to  fee  Mrs..  G , who  had  been  out  of 

order  for  foine  days,  I went  thither  firft,  and 
thence  to  Weavers-halL  A man  gave  me  a token 
for  good  as  I went  along.  “ Ay,  faid  he.  he  will 
be  a martyr  too  by  and  by  The  fcripture  I 
enfored  was,  My  little  children  thtje  things  I mite 
unto  you,  that  ye  fin  not.  But  if  any  man  fin,  zee 
have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jefus  Chri/l  the 
righteous.  I found  no  want  either  of  inward  or 
outward  ftrength.  But  afterwards  finding  my 
fever  increafed,  I called  on  Dr.  Middleton.  By 
his  advice  I went  home  and  took  my  bed : a 
ftrange  thing  to  me  who  had  not  kept  my  bed  a 
day,  (for  five  and  thirty  years)  ever  fince  I had 
the  fmall-pox.  I immediatly  fell  into  a profufe 
fweat,  which  continued  ’till  one  or  two  in  the 
morning.  God  then  gave  me  refrefhing  fleep, 
and  afterwards  fuch  tranquility  of  mind,  that  this 
day,  Sunday,  Nov.  1.  feemed  the  fhorteft  day 
to  me,  I had  ever  known  in  my  life.” 

I think  a little  circumftance  ought  not  to  he 

omitted. 


[ *7  ] 

omitted,  although  I know  there  may  be  an  ill 
conlkuftion  put  upon  it.  Thofe  words  were 
now  fo  ftrongly  impreft  upon  my  mind,  that  for 
a confiderable  time  I could  not  put  them  out  of 
my  thoughts.  BleJJed  is  the  man  that  provuleth 
for  the  poor  and  needy  ; the  'Lor&fiall  deliver  him, 
in  the  time  of  trouble.  The  Lord  fhall  frengthen 
him  when  he  lieth  fck  upon  his  bed  : make  thou  all 
his  bed  in  his  ficknefs. 

On  Sunday  niglu  iikewife  I flept  well,  and  was 
eafy  all  Monday  morning.  But  about  three  in 
the  afternoon  the  Ihivering  returned  much  more 
violent  than  before.  It  continued  'till  I was  put 
to  bed.  I was  then  immediately  as  in  a fiery  fur- 
nace. In  a little  fpace  I began  fweating:  but  the 
fweating  feemed  to  increafe  rather  than  allay  the 
burning  heat.  Thus  I remained,  'till  about  eight 
o’clock  : when  I fuddenly  awaked  out  of  a kind 
of  doze,  in  fuch  a fort  of  diforder  (whether  of 
body  or  mind,  or  both)  as  I know  not  how  tode- 
fcribe.  My  heart  and  lungs  and  all  that  was  with- 
in me,  and  my  foul  too,  feemed  to  be  in  perfeft 
uproar.  But  I cried  unto  the  Lord  in  my  trou- 
ble, and  he  delivered  me  out  of  my  diftrefs.” 

“ I continued  in  a moderate  fweat  till  near 
midnight,  and  then  flept  pretty  well  till  morning. 
On  Tuefday,  Nov.  3.  About  noon,  I was  remov- 
ed to  Mr.  Hooper’s.  Here  I enjoyed  a blefled 
calm  for  feveral  hours,  the  fit  not  returning  till 
fix  in  the  evening:  and  then  in  fuch  a manner 
as  I never  heard  or  read  of.  I had  a quick  pulfe, 

attended 


C i*  3 

attended  with  violent  heat;  but  no  pam  either  in 
my  head,  or  back,  or  limbs ; no  ficknefs,  no 
flitch,  no  thirft.  Surely  God  is  a prefent  help 
in  time  of  trouble  ! And  he  does  make  all  my 
bed  in  my 'ficknefs. 

“ Wednef.  4.  Many  of  our  brethren  agreed  to 
feek  God  to  day  by  fafting  and  prayer.  About 
twelve  my  fever  began  to  rage.  At  two  I dozed 
a little,  and  fuddenly  awaked  in  fuch  a diforder 
(only  more  violent)  as  that  on  Monday-  The 
filver  cord  appeared  to  be  juft  then  loofing,  and 
the  wheel  breaking  at  the  ciflern.  The  blood 
whirled  to  and  fro,  as  if  it  would  immediately 
force  its  way  through  all  its  veflels,  efpecially  in 
the  breaft  : and  exceffive  burning  heat  parched 
up  my  whole  body,  both  within  and  without. 
About  three,  in  a moment  the  commotion  ceaf- 
ed,  the  heat  was  over,  and  the  pain  gone.  S'oon 
after  it  made  another  attack ; but  not  near 
fo  violent  as  the  former.  This  lafted  till  half 
paft  four,  and  then  vanifhed  at  once:  I grew 
better  and  better  till  nine.  Then  1 fell  afleep, 
and  fcarce  awaked  at  all  till  morning. 

“ Thurf.  5.  Thenoifyjoy  of  the  people  in 
the  ftreets  did  not  agree  with  me  very  well  : 
though  I am  afraid  it  difordered  their  poor  fouls, 
much  more  than  it  did  my  body.  About  five  in 
the  evening  my  cough  returned,  and  foon  after 
the  heat  and  other  fymptoms  ; but  with  this  re- 
markable circumftance,  that  for  fourteen  or  fif- 
teen hours  following,  I had  more  or  lefs  fleep  in 

every 


[ *9  I 

every  hour.  This  was  one  caufe  why  I was  never 
light-headed  at  all,  but  had  the  ufe  of  my  under- 
landing,  from  the  firlf  hour  of  my  illnefs  to  the 
laft,  as  fully  as  when  in  perfeft  health. 

* “ h'rid.  6.  Between  ten  and  twelve  the 
main  fhock  began.  I can  give  but  a faint  ac- 
count  of  this,  not  for  want  of  memory,  but 
of  words.  I felt  in  my  body  nothing  but 
florm  and  temped,  hail  Hones  and  coals  of 
fire.  But  I do  not  remember  that  I felt  any 
fear  (fuch  was  the  mercy  of  God  !)  nor  any 
murmuring.  And  yet  I found  but  a dull,  heavy 
kind  of  patience,  which  I knew  was  not  what  it 
ought  to  be.  The  fever  came  rulhing  upon  me 
as  a lion,  ready  to  break  all  my  bones  in  pieces. 
My  body  grew  weaker  every  moment ; but  I 
did  not  feel  my  foul  put  on  flrength.  Then  it 
came  into  my  mind,  “ Be  dill,  and  fee  the  fal- 
vation  of  the  Lord.  I will  not  flir  hand  or  foot; 
but  let  him  do  with  me  what  is  good  in  his  own 
eyes.”  At  once  my  heart  was  at  eafe.  My 
mouth  was  filled  with  laughter  and  my  tongue 
with  joy.  My  eyes  overfiowed  with  tears,  and 
I began  to  fing  aloud.  One  who  dood  by  faid, 
“ Now  he  is  light-headed.”  I told  her,  “ O 
no.  I am  not  light-headed ; but  I am  praifing 
God.  God  is  come  to  my  help,  and  pain  is 
nothing.  Glory  be  to  God  on  high.  I now 
found  why  it  was  not  expedient  for  me,  to  re- 
cover my  health  fooner  : becaufe  then  I fhould 
have  loft  this  experimental  proof,  how  little 

every 


[ *0  ] 

every  thing  is  which  can  befall  the  body,  fo  long 
as  God  carries  the  foul  aloft,  as  it  were  on  the 
wings  of  an  eagle. 

* “An  hour  after  I had  one  more  grapple 
with  the  enemy,  who  then  feemed  to  colleft  all 
his  ftrength.  I elfayed  to  fhake  myfelf,  and 
praife  God  as  before.  But  I was  not  able  : the 
power  was  departed  from  me.  I was  (horn  of 
my  ftrength,  and  became  weak  and  like  another 
man.  Then  I faid,  “ Yet  here  I hold:  lo  I 
come  to  bear  thy  will,  O God."  Immediately 
he  returned  to  my  foul,  and  lifted  up  the  light 
of  his  countenance.  And  I felt,  “ He  rideth  ea- 
fily  enough,  whom  the  grace  of  God  carrieth.’f 

* “ I fuppofed  the  fit  was  now  over,  it  being 
about  five  in  the  afternoon,  and  began  to  com- 
pofe  myfelf  for  deep  * when  I felt  firft  a chill, 
and  then  a burning  all  over,  attended  with  fuch 
an  univerfal  faintnefs,  and  wearinefs,  and  utter 
lofs  of  ftrength,  as  if  the  whole  frame  of  nature 
had  been  diffolved.  Juft  then  my  nurfe  I know 
not  why,  took  me  out  of  bed,  and  placed  me  in 
a chair.  Prefently  a purging  began,  which  I be- 
lieve faved  ”my  life.  I grew  eafier  from  that 
hour,  and  had  fuch  a night’s  reft  as  I have  not 
had  before,  fince  it  pleafed  God  to  lay  his  hand 
upon  me.’' 

From  Sat.  Nov.  7.  to  Sund.  15.  I found  my 
ftrength  gradually  increafing,  and  was  able  to 
read  Turretin’s  hiftory  of  the  church  (a  dry,  hea- 
vy, barren  treatifej  and  the  life  of  that  truly  good 

and 


C 2*  3 


-ind  great  man,  Mr.  Philip  Henry.  On  Monday 
and  Tuefday  I read  over  the  life  of  Mr.  Mat- 
thew Henry,  a man  not  to  be  defpifed,  either 
as  a fcholar  or  a Chriftian,  though  (I  think)  not 
equal  to  his  father.  On  Wednefday  I read  over 
once  again  Tkeologia  Germamca.  O how  was  it, 
that  I could  ever  fb  admire,  the  affe&ed  obfeu- 
rity  of  this  unfcriptural  writer!  Glory  be  to 
God,  that  I now  prefer  the  plain  apoftles  and 
prophets,  before  him  and  all  his  myjlic  followers. 

Thurf.  19.  I read  again  with  great  furprize, 
part  of  the  ecclefiflical  hiflory  of  Eufebius.  But 
fo  weak,  credulous,  throughly-injudicious  a 
writer,  have  I feldom  found.  Frid.  20.  I began 
Mr.  Laval’s  hiftory  of  the  reformed  churches  in 
France,  full  of  the  moft  amazing  inllances  of  the 
wickednefs  of  men,  and  of  the  goodnefs  and 
power  of  God.  About  noon  the  next  day,  I 
went  out  in  a coach  as  far  as  the  fchool  in  Kingf- 
wood  : where  one  of  the  miflreffes  lay  (as  we  be- 
lieved) near  death,  having  found  no  help  from 
all  the  medicines  fire  had  taken.  We  determin- 
ed to  try  one  remedy  more.  So  we  poured  out 
our  fouls  in  prayer  to  God.  From  that  hour 
(he  began  to  recover  (Length,  and  in  a few  days 
was  out  of  danger. 

O 

Sund.  22.  Being  not  fuffered  to  go  to  church 
as  yet,  I communicated  at  home.  I was  advif- 
ed  to  flay  at  home  fome  time  longer.  But  I 
could  not  apprehend  it  neceffary  : and  there- 
fore on  Mond.  23,  went  to  the  New  Room, 

where 


C 22  ] 


■where  we  praifed  God  for  all  his  mercies.  And 
I expounded,  for  about  an  hour,  (without  any 
faintnefs  or  wearinefsj  on  What  reward.  Jhall  l 
give  ante  the  Lord  for  all  the  benefits  that  he  hath 
done  unto  me  ? I will  receive  the  cup  of  Jalvation, 
and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

1 preached  once  every  day  this  week,  and 
found  no  inconvenience  by  it.  Sund.  29.  I 
thought  I might  go  a little  farther.  So  I preached 
both  at  Kingfwood  and  at  Briftol  : and  after- 
wards fpent  near  an  hour  with  the  fociety,  and 
about  two  hours  at  the  love-feaft.  But  my  body 
could  not  yet  keep  pace  with  my  mind.  I had 
another  fit  of  my  fever  the  next  day.  But  it  lafted 
not  long,  and  I continued  flowly  to  regain  my 
ftrength. 

On  Thurf.  Dec.  3.  I was  able  to  preach  again, 
on  By  their fruits  ye fiatl  know  them  ; and  Friday 
evening  on  Ca/l  thy  bread  upon  the  waters,  and 
after  many  days  thou fialt  fnd  it  again. 

Mond.  7.  I preached  on  Truft  ye  in  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  for  in  the  Lord  is  ever/a/ling  Jlrength. 
1 was  fhowing,  what  caufe  we  had  to  truft  in  the 
Captain  of  our  falvation,  when  one  in  the  midft 
of  the  room  cried  out,  “ Who  was  your  captain 
the  other  day,  when  you  hanged  yourfelf  ? 1 
know  the  man  who  faw  you  when  you  was  cut 
down.”  This  wife  ftory,  it  feems,  had  been  dili- 
gently fpread  abroad  and  cordially  believed  by 
many  in  Briftol.  I deftred  they  would  make  room 
lor  the  man  to  come  nearer.  But  the  moment  he 

faw 


[ 23  ] 

Caw  the  way  open,  he  ran  away  with  all  pofii- 
i>le  fpeed,  not  fo  much  as  once  looking  behind 
him. 

Wednef.  9.  God  humbled  us  in  the  evening 
by  the  lofs  of  more  than  thirty  of  our  little  com- 
pany, who  I was  obliged  to  exclude,  as  no  longer 
adorning  the  gofpel  of  Chrift.  I believed  it  beft, 
openly  to  declare,  both  their  names  and  the  rea- 
fons  why  they  were  excluded.  We  then  all 
cried  unto  God,  that  this  might  be  for  their  edi- 
fication, and  notdefiruftion. 

* Frid.  lx.  I went  to  Bath.  I had  often  rea- 
foned  with  myfelf  concerning  this  place,  Hath 
God  left  himj elf  without  wilnejs?  Did  he  never 
raife  up  fuch  as  might  be  finning  lights,  even  in 
the  midft  of  this  finful  generation  ? Doubtlefs 
he  has  : but  they  are  either  gone  “ to  the  de- 
fect,” or  hid  under  the  bulhel  of  prudence * Some 
of  the  molt  ferious  perfons  I have  known  at 
Bath  are  either  J'olitary  Chnjhans  fca-rce  known 
to  each  other,  unlefs  by  name.:  prudent  Chnfians , 
as  careful  not  to  give  offence,  as  if  that  were  the 
unpardonable  fin  : and  as  zealous,  to  keep  their 
religion  to  themfclves,  as  they  fhould  be,  to  let  it 
Jhine  before  men . 

I returned  to  Briftol  the  next  day.  In  the 
evening  one  defired  to  fpeak  with  me.  I per- 
ceived him  to  be  in  the  utmoftconfufion,  fo  that 
for  a while  he  could  not  fpeak.  At  length  he 
faid,  “ lam  he  that  interrupted  you  at  the  New- 
z Room 


[ H ] 


Room  on  Monday.  I have  had  no  reft  fince, 
day  or  night,  nor  could  have  till  I had  fpoken  to 
you.  I hope  you  will  forgive  me,  and  that  it 
will  be  a warning  to  me  all  the  days  of  my 
life.” 

Tuef.  15.  It  being  a hard  froft,  I walked  over 
to  Bath;  and  had  a converfation  of  feveral  hours, 
with  one  who  had  lived  above  feventy,  and 
Jludied  divinity  above  thirty  years.  Yet  remiflion 
of  fms  was  quite  a new  doflrine  to  him.  But  I 
truft  God  will  write  it  on  his  heart. 

I returned  to  Briftol  the  next  day.  Thurfday 
17.  We  had  a night  of  folemn  joy,  occafionedby 
the  funeral  of  one  of  our  brethren,  who  died 
with  a hope  full  of  immortality. 

Frid.  18.  Being  difappointed  of  my  horfe,  I 
fat  out  on  foot  in  the  evening  for  Kingfw-ood.  I 
catched  no  cold,  nor  received  any  hurt,  though 
it  was  very  wet,  and  cold,  and  dark.  Mr.  Jones 
of  Fomnon,  met  me  there  ; and  we  poured  out 
our  fouls  before  God  together.  I found  no  wea- 
rinefs,  till  a little  before  one,  God  gave  me  re- 
frefhing  fleep. 

Sund.  20.  I preached  once  more  at  Briftol,  on 
Little  children  keep  yourf elves  from  idols : imme- 
diately after  w'hich,  I forced  myfelf  away,  from 
thofe  to  whom  my  heart  was  now  more  united 
than  ever.  And  I believe  their  hearts  were  even 
as  my  heart.  O what  poor  words  are  thofe, 
“ You  abate  the  reverence  and  refpedl  which  the 
people  owe  to  their  pallors.”  Love  is  all  in  all ; 

2 and 


L 25  ] 

and  all  who  are  alive  to  God  mu/l  pay  this  to 
every  true  paftor  : wherever  a flock  is  duly  fed 
with  the  pure  milk  of  the  word,  they  will  be 
ready  (were  it  poflible)  to  pluck  out  their  eyes, 
and  give  them  to  thofe  that  are  over  them  in  the 
Lord. 

I took  coach  on  Monday  21.  and  on  Wed- 
nefday  came  to  London.  Thurf.  24.  I found 
it  was  good  for  me  to  be  here  ; particularly, 
while  I was  preaching  in  the  evening.  The  fo- 
ciety  afterwards  met : but  we  fcarce  knew  how 
to  part,  our  hearts  were  fo  inlarged  toward  each 
other. 

Satur.  26.  The  morning  congregation  was  in- 
creafed  to  above  thrice  the  ufual  number,  while 
I explained  Grace  be  unto  you  and  peace , from 
God  the  Father , and  from  our  Lord  jffus  Ckrijl. 
At  Long-lane  likewife  in  the  evening  I had  a 
crowded  audience,  to  whom  I fpoke  from  thofe 
words,  0 the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wifdom 
and  knowledge  of  God  ! How  unfearchable  are  his 
judgments  and  fas  ways  pajl  fading  out. 

Thurf.  31.  By  the  unufual  overflowing  of 
peace  and  love  to  all  which  I felt,  I was  inclined 
to  believe  fome  trial  was  at  hand.  At  three  in 
the  afternoon  my  fever  came.  But  finding  it  was 
not  violent,  I would  not  break  my  word,  and 
therefore  went  at  four  and  committed  to  the 
earth  the  remains  of  one  who  had  died  in  the 
Lord  a few  days  before  : neither  could  I refrain 
from  exhorting  thealmoft  innumerable  multitude 
Vol.  XXVIII.  B of 


[ 26  ] 

of  people,  who  were  gathered  together  round 
her  grave,  to  cry  to  God,  that  they  might  die 
the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  their  lad  end  be 
like  hers.  I then  defignedto  lie  down  ; but  Sir 

John  G coming,  and  fending  to  fpeak 

with  me,  I went  to  him,  and  from  him  into  the 
pulpit,  knowing  God  could  renew  my  drength.  I 
preached  according  to  her  requed,  who  was  now 
with  God,  on  thofe  words  with  which  her  foul 
had  been  fo  refrefhed,  a little  before  fhe  went 
hence,  alter  a long  night  of  doubts  and  fears  : 
Thy  fun  fiall  no  more  go  down,  neither  Jhall  thy 
moon  withdraw  itfelf.  For  the  Lord fiall  be  thine 
everlafing  light , and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  fall 
be  ended. 

At  the  fociety  which  followed,  many  cried  af- 
ter God,  with  a loud  and  bitter  cry.  About  ten  I 
left  them,  and  committed  mvfelfinto  his  hands, 
to  do  with  me  what  feemed  him  good. 

* Frid.  Jan.  l.  After  a night  of  quiet  deep,  I 
waked  in  a llrong  fever,  but  without  any  fick- 
nefs,  or  third,  or  pain.  I confented  however  to 
keep  my  bed  ; but  on  condition,  that  every  one 
who  defiled  it,  fhould  have  liberty  to  fpeak  with 
me.  I believe  fifty  or  fixty  perfous  did  fo  this 
day,  nor  did  I find  any  inconvenience  from  it. 
In  the  evening  I fent  for  all  of  the  bands  who 
were  in  the  houfe,  that  we  might  magnify  our 
Lord  together.  A near  relation  being  with  me 
when  they  came,  I alked  her  afterwards,  If  fhe 
was  notoflended  ? “ Offended  ! faid  fhe : I wifh  I 

could 


[ *7  ] 

could  be  always  among  you.  I thought  I was  in 
heaven.'’ 

This  night  alfo,  by  the  bidding  of  God,  I flept 
well,  to  the  utter  aflonifhment  of  thofe  about 
me,  the  apothecary,  in  particular,  who  faid,  “ He 
had  never  feen  fuch  a fever  in  his  life.”  I had  a 
clear  remiffion  in  the  morning  : but  about  two 
in  the  afternoon,  a Wronger  fit  than  any  before. 
Gtherwife  I had  determined  to  have  been  at  the 
meeting  of  the  bands.  But  good  is  the  will  of 
the  Loid. 

Sund.  3.  Finding  myfelf  quite  free  from  pain, 
I met  the  leaders,  morning  and  afternoon:  and 
joined  with  a little  company  of  them,  in  the 
great  facrifice  of  thankfgiving.  In  the  evening, 
it  being  the  men’s  love-feaft,  Idefired  they  would 
all  come  up.  Thofe  whom  the  room  would  not 
contain,  flood  without  : while  we  all  with  one 
mouth  fang  praife  to  God. 

* Mondi  4.  I waked  in  perfeft  health.  Does 
not  God  both  kill  and  make  alive  ? This  day  (I 
underftand)  poor  Charles  Kinchin  died  ! 

. Cui  pudor,  Scjuflitias  foror 
Incorrupta  fides,  nudaque  veritas 
Quando  ullum  invenient  parem  ? 

I preached  morning  and  evening  every  day,  for 
the  remaining  part  of  the  week.  On  Saturday, 
while  I was  preaching  at  Long-lane,  a rude  rout 
B 2 lift 


[ 28  ] 

lift  up  their  voice  on  high.  I fell  upon  them 
without  delay.  Some  pulled  off  their  hats,  and 
opened  their  mouth  no  more.  The  reft  ftole  out, 
one  after  another.  All  that  remained  were  quiet 
and  attentive. 

* Sund.  xo.  I got  a little  time  to  fee  Mr.  Dol- 
man. Two  years  ago  he  feemed  to  be  dying  of  an 
afthma:  being  hardly  able  to  rife  at  eight  o’clock 
in  a morning,  after  ftruggling,  as  it  were,  for  life. 
But  from  the  time  he  came  thither  firft,  he 
rarely  failed  to  be  at  die  Founder)-,  by  five 
o’clock.  Nor  was  he  at  all  the  woife  : hisdiftem- 
per  being  fufpended,  till  within  a very  few  days. 
I found  him  juft  on  the  wing,  and  full  of  love, 
and  peace,  and  joy  in  believing.  And  in  the 
fame  fpirit  (as  1 afterwards  underftood)  he  conti- 
nued, till  God  took  him  to  himfelf. 

Mond.  it.  I went  twice  to  Newgate,  at  the 

requeft  of  poor  R R , who  lay  there 

under  fentence  of  death,  but  was  refufed  admit- 
tance. Receiving  a few  lines  from  him  the  day 
he  was  to  die,  I deftred  Mr.  Richards  to  try,  if 
he  could  be  admitted  then.  But  he  came  back 
with  a frefh  refufa!. 

It  was  above  two  years  before,  that  being  def- 
titute  and  in  didrefs,  he  applied  to  me  at  Briftol 
for  relief.  I took  him  in,  and  employed  him  for 
the  prefent,  in  writing  and  keeping  accounts  for 
me.  Not  long  after  I placed  him  in  the  little 
fchool,  which  was  kept  by  the  United  Society. 
There  were  many  fufpicions  of  him  during  that 

time, 


[ 29  1 

time,  as  well  as  of  his  companion,  Gwillim 
Snowde.  But  no  proof  appeared  : fo  that  after 
three  or  four  months,  they  quietly  returned  to 
London.  But  they  did  not  deceive  God,  nor  ef- 
capehis  hand.  Gwillim  Snowde  was  foon  appre- 
hended for  a robbery,  and  when  condemned  fent 
for  me,  and  faid,  nothing  lay  heavier  upon  him, 
than  his  having  thus  returned  evil  for  good.  I 

believe  it  was  now  the  defire  of  poor  R- too, 

to  tell  me  all  that  he  had  done.  But  the  hour  was 
pall:  I could  not  now  be  permitted  to  fee  or 
fpeak  with  him.  So  that  he  who  before  would 
not  receive  the  word  of  God  from  my  mouth, 
now  defired  what  he  could  not  obtain.  And  on 
Wednefday  he  fell  a facrilice  to  the  juftice  of  a 
long-offended  God.  O confider  this,  ye  that  now 
forget  God,  and  know  not  the  day  of  your  vili- 
tation! 

In  the  afternoon  I buried  the  body  of  James 
St.  Angel,  who  having  long  been  tried  in  the 
fire,  on  Monday  in  the  full  triumph  of  faith, 
gave  up  his  fpirit  to  God. 

I heard  of  feveral  to  day,  who  began  to  run 
well; but  did  not  endure  to  the  end.  Men  fond  of 
their  own  opinions  tore  them  from  their  brethren, 
and  could  not  keep  them  when  they  had  done  : 
but  they  foon  fell  back  into  the  world,  and  are 
now  fwallowed  up  in  its  pleafures  or  cares.  I 
fearthofe  zealots  who  took  thefe  fouls  out  of  my 
hands,  will  give  but  a poor  account  of  them  to 


On 


[ 3°  ] 

On  Thurf.  and  Frid.  I vifited  die  lick,  by  many 
of’  whom  I was  greatly  refrefhed.  Monday  18. 
we  greatly  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  at  Long-lane, 
even  in  the  midfl  of  thole  that  contradicted  and 
blafphemed.  Nor  was  it  long  before  many  of 
them  alfo  were  touched,  and  blafphemies  were 
turned  to  praife. 

Thurf.  21.I  again  vifited  many  that  were  Tick, 
but  I found  no  fear  either  of  pain  or  death  among 
them.  One  (Mary  Whittle)  Laid,  “ I lhall  go  to 
my  Lord  to-morrow.  But  belore  I go,  he  will 
finifh  his  work/’  The  next  day  Die  lav  quiet  for 
about  two  hours,  and  then  opening  her  eyes, 
cried  out,  “ It  is  done,  it  is  done  ! Clirifl  liveth 
in  me!  He  lives  in  me:”  and  died  in  a mo- 
ment. 

Frid.  22.  I met  the  focietv  at  Short’s-Gardens, 
Drury-lane,  for  the  fir fl  time.  Satur.  23.  1 called 
on  another,  who  was  believed  to  be  near  death, 
and  greatly  triumphing  over  it.  “ I know,  faid 
file,  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  will  Hand  at 
the  latter  day  upon  the  earth.  I fear  not  death. 
It  hath  no  fling  for  me.  I fhall  live  for  ever- 
more.” 

Mond.  25.  While  I was  explaining  at  Long- 
lane,  He  that  committetk  fin  is  of  the  devil ; his 
fervants  were  above  meafure  enraged : they 
not  only  made  all  poflible  noife,  (although,  as  I 
had  defired  before,  no  man  flirred  from  his  place, 
or  anfwered  them  a word)  but  violently  thrufl 
many  perfons  to  and  fro,  flruck  others,  and  biake 

down 


[ 3*  ] 

down  part  of  the  houfe.  At  length  they  began 
throwing  large  flones  upon  the  houfe,  which 
forcing  their  way  wherever  they  came,  fell  down 
together  with  the  tiles  among  the  people,  fo  that 
they  were  in  danger  of  their  lives.  I then  told 
them,  “ You  muff  not  go  on  thus.  I am  or- 
dered by  the  magiflrate,  who  is  in  this  refpeft  to 
us  the  mimfter  of  God,  to  inform  him  of  thole 
who  break  the  laws  of  God  and  the  king.  And  I 
muff  do  it,  if  you  perfift  herein  ; otherwife  I am 
a partaker  of  your  fin.”  When  I ceafed  fpeak- 
ing,  they  were  more  outrageous  than  before. 
Upon  this  I faid,  “ Let  three  or  four  calm  men, 
take  hold  of  the  foremofi,  and  charge  a conflable 
with  him,  that  the  law  may  take  its  courfe.” 
They  did  fo,  and  brought  him  into  the  houfe, 
curfing  and  blafpeming  in  a dreadful  manner.  I 
defired  five  or  fix  to  go  with  him  to  juftice 
Copeland,  to  whom  they  nakedly  related  the 
fa£l.  Thejuflice  immediately  bound  him  over  to 
the  next  feffions  at  Guildford. 

* I obierved,  when  the  man  was  brought  into 
the  houfe,  that  many  of  his  companions  were 
loudly  crying  out,  “ Richard  Smith,  Richard 
Smith  1”  Who,  as  it  afterward  appeared,  was  one 
of  their  flouted  champions.  But  Richard  Smith 
anfwerednot;  he  was  fallen  into  the  hands  of  one 
higher  than  they.  God  had  flruck  him  to  the 
heart,  as  alfo  a woman,  who  was  fpeaking  words 
not  fit  to  be  repeated,  and  throwing  whatever 
came  to  hand,  whom  he  overtook  in  the  very  aft. 

B ^ She 


r 32  ] 

She  came  into  the  houfe  with  Richard  Smith, 
fell  upon  her  knees  before  us  all,  and  ftrongly 
exhorted  him,  “ Never  to  turn  back,  never  to 
forget  the  mercy  which  God  had  {hewn  to  his 
foul.  From  this  time  we  had  never  anv  confide- 
rable  interruption  or  difturbance  at  Long-lane: 
although  we  withdrew  our  profecution,  upon  the 
offender’s  fubmiflion  andpromife  of  better  beha- 
viour. 

* Tuef.  2 6.  I explained  at  Chelfea,  the  faith 
which  worketh  by  love.  I was  very  weak  when  I 
went  into  the  room.  But  the  more  the  beajls  of 
the  people  increafed  in  madnefs  and  rage,  the 
more  was  I (Lengthened,  both  in  body  and  foul: 
fo  that  I believe  few  in  the  houfe,  which  was 
exceeding  full,  loft  one  fentence  of  what  I fpoke. 
Indeed  they  could  not  fee  me,  nor  one  another 
at  a few  yards  dillance,  bv  reafon  of  the  exceed- 
ing thick  fmoke,  which  was  occafioned  by  the 
wild  fire  and  things  of  that  kind,  continually 
thrown  into  the  room.  But  they  who  could 
praife  God  in  the  midftof  the  fires,  were  not  to 
be  affrighted  by  a little  fmoke. 

* Wednef.  2 7.  I buried  the  body  of  Sarah 
Whifkin,  a young  woman  late  of  Cambridge  : a 
ftiort  account  of  whom  follows,  in  the  words  of 
one  that  was  with  her,  during  her  laft  ftruggle 
for  eternity. 

“ The  firft  time  fhe  went,  intending  to  hear 
Mr.  Weftey,  was  Jan.  3.  But  he  was  then  ill. 
She  went  again,  Tuef.  5.  and  was  not  difap- 


C 33  ] 


pointed.  From  that  time  fhe  feemed  quite  taken 
up  with  the  things  above,  and  could  willingly 
have  been  always  hearing,  or  praying,  or  Tinging 
hymns.  Wednef.  13.  She  was  Tent  for  into  the 
country  : at  which  news  fhe  cried  violently,  be- 
ing afraid  to  go,  left  fhe  fhould  again  be  conform- 
able  to  the  world.  With  tears  in  her  eyes  fhe 
afked  me,  “ What  fhall  I do  ? I am  in  a great 
llrait.”  And  being  advifed,  to  commit  her  caufe 
to  God,  and  pray  that  his  will  might  be  done, 
not  her  own,  fhe  laid,  “ She  would  defer  her 
journey  three  days,  to  wait  upon  God,  that  he 
might  fhew  his  will  concerning  her.”  The  next 
day  fhe  was  taken  ill  of  a fever.  But  being  fome- 
thing  better  on  Friday,  fhe  fent  and  took  a place 
in  the  Cambridge  coach,  for  the  Tuefday  follow- 
ing. Her  ftfter  afked  her.  If  fhe  thought  it  was 
the  will  of  God  fhe  fhould  go  ? She  anfwered, 
“ I leave  it  to  the  Lord;  and  am  lure  he  will 
find  a way  to  prevent  it,  if  it  is  not  for  my  good.’’ 
Sund.  17.  She  was  ill  again,  and  defired  me  to 
write  a note,  that  fhe  might  be  prayed  for.  I 
afked,  What  I fhould  write  ? She  anfwered, 
“ You  know  what  I want,  a lively  faith.”  Being 
better  on  Monday  18,  fhe  got  up,  to  prepare  for 
her  journey;  though  ftill  defiring  God  to  put  a 
flop  to  it,  if  it  was  not  according  to  his  will.  /\s 
foon  as  (he  rofe  from  prayer  fhe  fainted  away. 
When  fhe  came  to  herfelf  lhe  faid,  “ Where  is- 
that  fcripture  of  Balaam  journeying,  and  the  an- 
gel  of  the  Lord  (landing  in  the  way  ? l ean  bring 
B 5 this 


[ 34  ] 

this  home  to  myfelf.  I was  juft  going  this  morn- 
ing, and  fee,  God  has  taken  away  all  my 
ftrength.” 

“ From  this  hour,  file  was  almoft  continttally 
praying  to  God,  that  he  would  reveal  himfelf  to 
her  foul.  On  Tuef.  19.  being  in  tears,  I afked, 

“ What  was  the  matter  ?”  She  anfwered,  “ The 
devil  is  very  bufy  with  me.”  On  afking,  “ Who 
condemns  you  ?”  She  pointed  to  her  heart,  and 
,faid,  “ This  : and  God  is  greater  than  my  heart.” 
On  Thurf.  after  Mr.  Richards  had  prayed  with 
her,  flie  was  much  chearfuller,  and,  flie  could  not 
doubt  but  God  would  fulfil  the  defire  which  he 
had  given  her. 

“ Frid.  22.  One  of  her  filters  coming  out  of 
the  country  to  fee  her,  {he  faid.,  “ If  I had  come 
to  you,  evil  would  have  befallen  me.  But  lam 
fnatched  out  of  the  hands  of  the  devil.  Though 
God  has  not  vet  revealed  himfelf  unto  me,  vet  I 
believe,  were  I to  die  this  night,  before  to- 
morrow I fhould  be  in  heaven.”  Her  fifter  fay- 
ing, “ I hope  God  will  reftore  you  to  health  ; ’ 
fhe  replied,  “ Let  him  do  what  feemeth  him 
good.” 

Satur.  23.  She  faid,  “ I faw  my  mother  and 
brother  and  fifter  in  my  fleep,  and  they  all  re- 
ceived a bleflirigin  a moment.”  I afked.  If  flie 
thought  flie  fhould  die  ? And  whether  flie  be- 
lieved, the  Lord  would  receive  her  foul  ? Look- 
ing very  earneftly,  flie  faid,  “ I have  not  feen  the 
Lord  yet.  But  I believe  I {hall  fee  him  and  live : 
, although 


L 35  3 

although  tliefe  are  bold  words  for  a (inner  to  fa}'. 
Are  they  not  ?” 

“ Sund.  24.  I afked  her,  How  have  you  red- 
ed ?”  She  anfwered,  “ Very  well : though  I have 
had  no  deep  ; and  I wanted  none  : for  I have  had 
the  Lord  with  me.  O let  us  not  be  afliamed  of 
him,  but  proclaim  him  upon  the  houfe-top.  And 
I know,  whatever  I a(k  in  the  name  of  Jefus,  ac- 
cording to  his  will,  I (hall  have.”  Soon  after  (lie 
called  hallily  to  me,  and  faid,  “ I fear  I have  de- 
ceived myfelf.  I thought  the  amen  was  fealed  in 
my  heart ; but  I fear  it  is  not.  Go  down  and 
pray  for  me,  and  let  him  not  go,  till  he  has  given 
my  heart’s  defire.”  Soon  alter  fire  broke  out  into 
finging,  and  faid,  “ I was  foon  delivered  of  my 
fears.  I was  only  afraid  of  a flattering  hope  : 
but  if  it  had  been  fo,  I would  not  have  let  him 
go.” 

Her  fifier  that  was  come  to  fee  her  was  much 
upon  her  mind.  “ You,  faid  fhe,  are  in  pain  for 
her.  But  I have  faith  for  this  little  child.  God 
has  a favour  unto  her.”  In  the  afternoon  fhe  de- 
fired  me  to  write  a bill  for  her.  I alked.  What 
(hall  I write  ? She  faid,  “ Return  thanks  for  what 
God  has  done  for  me,  and  pray  that  he  would 
manifefl  himfelf  to  my  relations  alfo.  Go  to  the 
preaching.  Leave  but  one  with  me.”  Soon 
after  we  were  gone  fire  rofe  up,  called  to  the 
perfon  that  was  with  her,,  and  faid,  “ Now  it  is 
done.  I am  affined  my  fins  are  forgiven.”  The 
perfon  anfwering,  “ Death  is  a little  thing  to 
B 6 them 


[ 36  ] 

them  that  die  in  the  Lord:”  fhe  replied  with 
vehemence,  “ A little  thing  ! It  is  nothing.” 
The  perfon  then  defirins,  fhe  would  pray  for 
her,  fhe  anfwered,  “ I do:  I pray  for  all.  I 
pray  for  all  I know,  and  for  them  I do  not  know. 
And  the  Lord  will  hear  the  prayer  of  faith.”  At 
our  return,  her  filler  kneeling  by  the  bed- fide 
fhe  faid,  “ Are  you  not  comforted,  my  dear,  for 
me  ?”  Her  fpeech  then  failing,  fhe  made  figns 
for  her  to  be  by  her,  and  killed  her  and  fmiled 
upon  her.  She  then  lay  about  an  hour  with- 
out fpeaking  or  llirring  ; till  about  three  o’clock 
on  Monday  morning,  fhe  cried  out,  “ My  Lord 
and  my  God  !”  fetched  a double  figh,  and  died.” 

Friday  29.  Hearing  of  one  who  had  been 
drawn  away  by  thofe  who  prophefy  fmooth 
things,  I went  to  her  houfe.  But  fhe  waspur- 
pofely  gone  abroad.  Perceiving  there  W2S  no 
human  help.  I defired  the  congregation  atShort's- 
Gardens,  to  join  with  me  in  prayer  to  God,  that 
he  would  fuffer  her  to  have  no  reft  in  her  fpirir, 
till  fhe  returned  into  the  way  of  truth.  Two  days 
after  fhe  came  to  me  of  her  own  accord,  and 
confeft,  in  the  bitternefs  of  her  foul,  that  fhe 
had  no  reft,  day  or  night,  while  fhe  remained 
with  them,  out  of  whofe  hands  God  had  now 
delivered  her. 

Mond.  Feb.  1.  I found,  after  the  exclufion 
of  fome,  who  did  not  walk  according  to  the  gof- 
pel,  about  eleven  hundred,  who  are  I trull  of 
a more  excellent  fpirit,  remained  in  the  fociety. 


C 37  ] 

Thurf.  4.  A clergyman  lately  come  from  Ame3 
rica,  who  was  at  the  preaching  loft  night,  called 
upon  me,  appeared  full  of  good  defires,  and 
feemed  willing  to  call  in  his  lot  with  us.  But 
I cannot  fuddenly  anfwer  in  this  matter.  I niuft 
firft  know,  what  fpirit  he  is  of.  For  none  can 
labour  with  us,  unlefs  he  count  all  things  dung 
and  drojs  that  he  may  u in  ChriJL 

Frid.  5.  I fet  out,  and  with  fome  difficulty 
reached  Chippenham  on  Saturday  evening  ; the 
weather  being  fo  extremely  rough  and  boiftrous, 
that  I had  much  ado  to  fit  my  horfe.  On  Sun- 
day about  noon  I came  to  Kingfwood,  where 
were  many  of  our  friends  from  Bath,  Briftol  and 
Wales.  O that  we  may  ever  thus  love  one  ano- 
ther, with  a pure  heart  fervemly  1 

Mond.  8.  I rode  to  Bath,  and  in  the  evenincr 
explained  the  latter  part  of  the  feventh  of  St. 
Luke.  Obferving  many  noify  perfons  at  the  end  of 
the  room,  I went  and  flood  in  the  midft  of  them. 
But  the  greater  part  flipt  away  to  that  end  from 
which  I came,  and  then  took  heart,  and  cried 
aloud  again.  I paufed,  to  give  them  their  full 
fcope;  and  then  began  a particular  application 
to  them.  They  were  very  quiet  in  a ffiort  time, 
and  I trud,  will  not  fofget  it  fo  foon  as  fome  of 
them  may  defue. 

Wednef.  10.  And  the  following  days  of  this 
week,  I fpoke  feverallv  with  all  thofe,  who  de- 
fired  to  remain  in  the  united  fociety,  to  watch 
over  each  other  in  love. 

Mond.  15.  Many  met  together  to  con fult,  on 

a pro- 


[ 38  ] 

a proper  method  for  difcharging  the  public  debt. 
And  it  was  at  length  agreed,  1.  That  every  mem- 
ber of  the  fociety  who  was  able,  (hould  contri- 
bute a penny  a week  : 2.  That  the  whole  fo- 
ciety {hould  be  divided  into  little  companies  or 
claffes,  about  twelve  in  each  clafs ; and,  3.  That 
one  perfon  in  each  clafs  fhould  receive  the  con- 
tribution of  the  reft,  and  bring  it  in  to  the  Rew- 
ards weekly. 

Trid.  19.  I went  to  Bath.  Many  threatned 
great  things.  But  I knew  the  ftrength  of  them 
and  their  god.  I preached  on,  He  fliall fave 
his  people  from  their  Hus  : none  dtflurbing  or 
interrupting  me. 

Sat.  20.  I preached  at  Weaver’s-Hali.  It  was 
a glorious  time.  Several  dropped  to  the  ground 
as  if  flruck  by  lightning.  Some  cried  out  in 
bitternefs  of  foul . I knew  not  where  to  end,  be- 
ing conftraincd  to  begin  anew,  again  and  again- 
In  this  acceptable  time  we  begged  of  God  to  re- 
flore  our  brethren,  who  are  departed  from  us  for  a 
feafon  : and  to  teach  us  all,  to  Jollozv  after  the 
things  that  make  for  peace,  and  the  things  whereby 
»ne  may  edify  another. 

Sund.  2 x.  In  the  evening  I explained  the  ex- 
ceeding great  and  precious  promifes  which  are 
(riven  us  : a {Irons  confirmation  whereof  I read, 
in  a plain,  artlefs  account,  of  a child,  whofe  bo- 
dy then  lay  before  us.  The  fubflance  of  this 
was  as  follows : 

,l  John  Woolley  was  for  fome  time  in  your 
2 fchools  £ 


[ 39  ] 


fchool  ; but  was  turned  out  for  Ids  ill  behaviour: 
foon  after  lie  ran  away  from  his  parents,  lurking 
about  for  fcveral  days  and  nights  together,  and 
hiding  himfelf  in  holes  and  corners,  that  his  mo- 
ther might  not  find  him.  During  this  time  he 
differed  both  hunger  and  cold.  Once  he  was 
three  whole  days  without  fufienarice,  fometimes 
weeping  and  praying  by  himfelf,  and  fometimes 
playing  with  other  loole  boys. 

One  night  he  came  to  the  New-Room.  Mr. 
Wefley  was  then  fpeaking  of  difobedien'ce  to 
parents.  He  was  quite  confounded,  and  thought 
there  never  was  in  the  world,  fo  wicked  a child 
as  himfelf.  He  went  home,  and  never  ran  away 
any  more.  His  mother  faw  the  change  in  his 
whole  behaviour,  but  knew  not  the  caufe.  He 
would  often  get  up  flairs  by  himfelf  to  prayer, 
and  often  go  alone  into  the  fields,  having  done 
with  all  his  idle  companions. 

* And  now  the  devil  began  to  fet  upon  him 
with  all  his  might,  continually  tempting  him  to 
felf-murder.  Sometimes  he  was  vehemently 
prefi  to  hang  himfelf,  fometimes  to  leap  into  the 
river.  But  this  only  made  him  the  more  earned 
in  prayer  ; in  which  after  he  had  been  one  day 
wreftiing  with  God,  he  faw  himfelf,  he  faid,  fur- 
rounded  on  a hidden  with  an  inexprefhble  light, 
and  was  fo  filled  with  joy  and  the  jlove  of  God, 
that  lie  fcarce  knew  where  he  was,  and  with  fuch. 
love  to  all  mankind,  that  he  could  have  laid 

himfelf 


[ 40  ] 

himfeif  on  the  ground,  for  his  worft  enemies  te 
trample  upon. 

From  this  time  his  father  and  mother  were  fur- 
prized  at  him,  he  was  fo  diligent  to  help  them 
in  all  things.  When  they  went  to  the  preach- 
ing, he  was  careful  to  give  their  fupper  to  the 
other  children  : and  when  he  had  put  them  to 
bed,  hurried  away  to  the  room,  to  light  his  fa- 
ther or  mother  home.  Meantime,  he  loft  no 
opportunity  of  hearing  the  preaching  himfeif,  or 
of  doing  any  good  he  could  either  at  home  or  in 
any  place  where  he  was. 

One  day  walking  in  the  fields,  he  fell  into  talk 
with  a farmer,  who  fpoke  very  flightly  of  reli- 
gion. John  told  him,  he  ou^htnot  to  talk  fo  ; 
and  inlarged  upon  the  word  of  the  apoftle,  (which 
he  begged  him  to  confider  deeply)  Without  holi - 
nefs  no  man  Jhall  Jee  the  Lord.  The  man  was 
amazed  ; caught  the  child  in  his  arms,  and 
knew  not  how  to  part  with  him. 

His  father  and  mother  once  hearing  him  fpeak 
pretty  loud  in  the  next  room,  liftened  to  hear 
what  he  faid.  Fie  was  praying  thus : “ Lord,  I 
do  not  expe£t  to  be  heard  for  my  much  fpeaking. 
Thou  knoweft  my  heart.  Thou  knoweft  my 
wants.”  He  then  defcended  to  particulars.  Af- 
terward he  prayed  very  earneftly  for  his  parents, 
and  for  his  brothers  and  fifters  by  name  : then 
for  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wefley,  that  God 
■yyonld  fet  their  faces  as  a flint,  and  give  them 
,to,go  on,  conquering  and  to  conquer  : then  for 

all 


C 4*  ] 

all  the  other  miniders  he  could  remember  by 
name,  and  for  all  that  were,  or  defired  to  be, 
true  minilters  of  Chrid. 

In  the  beginning  of  hisillnefs,  his  mother  afk- 
ed  him,  if  he  wanted  anv  thing?  He  anfwcred, 
“ Nothing  but  Chrid,  and  I atn  as  fure  of  him, 
its  if  I had  him  already.”  He  often  faid,  “ O mo- 
ther, if  all  the  world  believed  in  Chrifl,  what  a 
happy  world  would  it  be  ? And  they  may.  lor 
Chnll  died  for  every  foul  of  man.  I was  the 
word  of  Tinners,  and  he  died  for  me.  O thou 
that  called  the  word  of  fmners,  call  me.  O,  it 
is  a free  gift,  I am  fure  I have  done  nothing  to 
deferve  it.” 

On  Wednefday  he  faid  to  his  mother,  “ I am 
in  very  great  trouble  for  my  father.  He  has  al- 
ways taken  an  honed  care  of  his  family.  But 
he  does  not  know  God : if  he  dies  in  the  date 
he  is  in  now,  he  cannot  be  faved.  I have  pray- 
ed for  him,  and  will  pray  for  himt.  If  God 
fhould  give  him  the  true  faith,  and  then  take 
him  to  himfelf,  do  not  you  fear:  do  not  you  be 
troubled.  God  has  promifed  to  be  a father  to 
the  fatherlefs  and  a hufband  to  the  widow.  I 
will  pray  for  him  and  you  in  heaven:  and  I 
hope  we  lhall  fing  Hallelujah  in  heaven  toge- 
ther.” 

To  his  elded  fider  he  faid,  “ Do  not  puff 
yourfelf  up  with  pride.  When  you  receive  your 
wages,  which  is  not  much,  lay  it  out  in  plain 

neceffaries4 

+ N.  B,  His  father  died  not  long  after. 


f 42  ] 

neceffaries.  And  if  you  are  inclined  to  be  mer- 
ry, do  not  fing  fongs;  that  is  the  devil’s  diver- 
fion  ; there  are  many  lies  and  ill  things  in  thofe 
idle  fongs.  Do  you  fing  pfalms  and  hymns.  Re- 
member your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth. 
When  you  are  at  work,  you  may  lift  up  your 
heart  to  God.  And  be  fure  never  to  rife  or  go 
to  bed,  without  afking  his  bleffing.’' 

* He  added,  “ I ilial!  die.  But  do  not  cry  lor 
me.  Why  fhould  you  cry  for  me  ? Confider 
what  a joyful  thing  it  is,  to  have  a brother  go  to 
heaven.  I am  not  a man.  1 am  but  a boy. 
But  is  it  not  in  the  bible,  Out  of  the  mouths  of 
babes  and Jucklings  thou  liajl  ordained  fhength  ? I 
knew  where  I am  going.  I would  not  be  with- 
out this  knowledge  for  a thoufand  worlds,  dor 
though  I am  not  in  heaven  yet,  I am  as  fure  of 
it,  as  if  I was.” 

On  Wednefday  night,  he  wreflled  much  with 
God  in  prayer.  At  lafh»  throwing  his  arms 
open,  he  cried,  “ Come,  come,  Lord  Jefus  ! 
I am  thine.  Amen  and  Amen.  He  faid, 
“ God  anfwers  me  in  my  heart,  Be  of  good 
cliear ; thou  haft  overcome  the  world  : and 
immediately  after,  he  wras  filled  with  love  and 
joy  unfpeakable. 

* He  faid  to  his  mother,  “ That  fchool  was 
the  faving  of  my  foul ; for  there  I began  to  feek 
the  Lord.  But  how  is  it,  that  a perfon  no 
fooner  begins  to  feek  the  Lord,  but  Satan  ftrait 
flirs  up  all  his  inftruments  againft  him  r 


When 


r 43  j 


When  he  was  in  agony  of  pain  he  cried  out, 
“ O Saviour  give  me  patience.  Thou  had;  given 
me  patience.  But  give  me  more.  Give  me 
thy  love,  and  pain  is  nothing.  I have  deferv- 
ed  all  this,  and  a thoufand  times  more.  For 
there  is  no  fin  but  I have  been  guilty  of.” 

* A while  after  he  faid,  “ O mother,  how  is 
this  ? If  a man  does  not  do  his  work,  the  inaf- 
ters in  the  world  will  not  pay  him  his  wages. 
But  it  is  not  fo  with  God.  He  gives  me  good 
wages,  and  yet  I am  hire,  I have  done  nothing 
to  gain  them.  O it  is  a free  gift.  It  is  free  for 
every  foul.  For  Chrid  has  died  for  all.  ’ 

On  Thurfday  morning  his  mother  afked  him, 
How  he  did  ? He  laid,  “ I have  had  much  drug- 
ging to  night.  But  my  Saviour  is  fo  loving  to 
me,  I do  not  mind  it : it  is  no  more  than  no- 
thing to  me.” 

Then  he  faid,  “ I defire  to  be  buried  from  the 
room,  and  I defire  Mr.  Wedey  would  preach  a 
fermon  over  me,  on  thofe  words  of  David  (un- 
lefs  he  thinks  any  other  to  be  more  fit)  Before  / 
was  af hided  I went  ajlray  : but  ?iow  I have  kept 
thy  word. 

* I afked  him,  how  do  you  find  yourfelf 
now  ? He  faid,  “ In  great  pain,  but  full  of  love.” 
I afked,  but  does  not  the  love  of  God  overcome 
pain  ? He  anfwered,  “Yes  1 pain  is  nothing  to 
me.  I did  fing  praifes  to  the  Lord  in  the  midd 
of  my  greated  pain.  And  I could  not  help  it.” 
I afked  him,  if  he  was  willing  to  die  ? He  re- 
plied. 


[ 44  ] 

plied,.  “ Oyes  ; with  all  my  heart.5*  1 faid,  but 
il  life  and  death  were  fet  before  your  what  would 
you  choofe  then  P He  anfwered,  “ To- die  and 
to  be  with  Chrifl.  I long  to  be  out  of  this 
vvicl  ed  world.” 

On  Thurfday  night  he  fleptmuch  fweeter  than 
he  had  done  for  fome  time  before.  In  the  morn- 
ing he  begged  to  fee  Mr.  John  Weflev.  When 
Mr.  Wefley  came  and  after  fome  other  quef- 
tions,  afked  him,  what  he  fhould  pray  for  ? He 
faid,  “ That  God  would  give  him  a clean  heart, 
and  renew  a right  fpirit  within  him.”  When 
prayer  was  ended,  he  feemed  much  enlivened 
and  faid,  “ I thought  I fhould  have  died  to  day. 
But  I muff  not  be  in  hafte.  I am  content  to 
flay.  I will  tarry  the  Lord’s  leifure.” 

On  Saturday,  one  alked,  if  he  ftiU  chofe  to 
die  ? He  faid,  “ I have  no  wifi  : my  will  is  re- 
figned  to  the  will  of  God.  But  I (hall  die.  Mo- 
ther, be  not  troubled.  I fhall  go  away  like  a 
lamb.” 

On  Sunday  he  fpoke  exceeding  little.  On 
Monday  his  fpeech  began  to  fauher.  On  Tuef- 
day  it  was  gone;  but  he  was  fully  in  his  fenfes, 
ahnoft  continually  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven. 
On  Wednefday  his  fpeech  being  reltored,  his 
mother  faid,  “ Jacky,  you  have  not  been  with 
your  Saviour  to  night.”  He  replied,  ‘‘Yes  I 
have.”  She  afked,  “ What  did  he  fay  ?”  He  an- 
fwered,  “ He  bid  me  not  be  afraid  of  the  devil. 
For  he  had  no  power  to  hurt  me  at  all,  but  I 

fhould 


[ 45  ] 


fhonld  tread  him  under  my  Feet.”  He  lay  very 
quiet  on  Wednefday  night.  The  next  morn- 
ing he  fpent  in  continual  prayer:  often  repeat- 
ing the  Lord’s  praver,  and  earnestly  commend- 
ing his  fou!  into  the  hands  of  God. 

He  then  called  for  his  little  brother  and  filler 
to  kifs  them  ; and  for  his  mother,  whom  he  de- 
fired  to  kifs  him.  Then  (between  nine  and  ten) 
he  find,  “ Now,  let  me  kifs  you  which  he 
did.  and  immediately  fell  afleep. 

He  lived  fome  months  above  thirteen  years; 

Sund.  28.  In  the  evening,  I fet  out  for  Wales. 
I lay  that  night  about  fix  miles  from  Brillol,  and 
preached  in  the  morning,  March  1,  to  a few  of 
the  neighbours.  We  then  haftened  to  the  paf- 
fage  : but  the  boat  was  gone,  half  an  hour  be- 
fore the  ufual  time.  So  I was  obliged  to  wait 
till  five  in  the  afternoon  7 wfeihen  fet  out  with  a 
fair  breeze.  But  when  we  were  nearly  half 
over  the  river,  the  wind  entirely  failed.  The 
boat  could  not  bear  up  again  ft  the  ebbing-tide, 
but  was  driven  down  among  the  rocks,  on  one 
of  which  we  made  fiiift  to  fcrabble  up,  whence 
about  feven  we  got  to  land. 

That  night  I went  forward  about  five  miles, 
and  the  next  morning  came  to  Cardiff.  There 
I had  the  pleafure  of  meeting  Mr.  Jones  of  Fon- 
mon.  Hill  prelfing  on  into  all  the  fullnefs  of 
God.  I rode  with  him  to  Wenvo.  The  church 
was  throughly  filled,  while  I explained  the 
former  part  of  the  fecond  leflon,  concerning  the 

barren 


[ 46  ] 

"barren  fig-tree:  and  the  power  of  the  Lord  was 
prefent  both  to  wound  and  to  heal. 

I explained  in  the  evening  at  Fonmon,  tho* 
in  weaknefs  and  pain,  how  Jefus  favetli  usfrom. 
our  fins.  The  next  morning  at  eight  I preach- 
ed at  Boldon,  a little  town  lour  miles  from  Fon- 
mon. Thence  1 rode  to  Lantrifl'ent,  and  fent 
to  the  miniller,  to  defire  the  ufe  of  his  church. 
His  anfwer  was,  l>  He  lhould  have  been  verv 
willing ; but  the  bilhop  had  forbidden  him.” 
By  what  law  ? I am  not  legally  convifled,  ci- 
ther of  herejy  or  any  other  crime.  Bv  what  au- 
thority then  am  I fufpended  from  preaching  ? 
By  bare- faced  arbitral  v power. 

Another  clergyman  immediately  offered  me 
his  church.  But  it  being  too  far  off,  I preached 
in  a large  room  : fpent  a little  time  with  the  fo- 
-cietv  in  prayer  and  exhortation,  and  then  took 
horle  for  Cardiff. 

Thurf.;  4.  About  noon  I preached  at  Laniffan, 
and  was  afterward  much  rcfrelhed  in  meeting  the 
little  earneft  fociety.  1 preached  at  Cardiff  at 
feven,  on  Be  not  righteous  overmuch , to  a larger 
congregation  than  before:  and  then  exhorted 
the  fociety,  to  fear  only,  the  being  over  wicked, 
or  the  falling  fiiort  of  the  full  image  of  God. 

Frid.  5.  I talked  with  one,  who  ufed  fre- 
quently to  fay,  “ I pray  God,  I may  never  have 
this  new  faith.  I defire  that  I may  not  know  my 
fins  forgiven,  till  I come  to  die.”  But  as  file 
was  fome  weeks  fince  reading  the  bible  at  home, 

the 


[ 47  3 

the  clear  light  broke  in  upon  her  foul.  She  knew 
ail  her  fins  were  blotted  out,  and  cried  aloud, 
“ My  Lord  and  my  Godf” 

In  the  evening  I expounded,  This  is  the  vic- 
tory that  overcometli  the  world,  even  our  faith. 
We  afterwards  admitted  fevcral  new  members 
into  the  fociety,  and  were  greatly  comforted  to- 
gether. Satur.  6.  I left  Cardiff  and  about  eight 
in  the  evening  came  to  Briffol. 

Wedrref,  to.  I was  with  a gentlewoman, 
whofe  dillemper  has  puzzled  the  mod  eminent 
phyficians  for  many  years  : it  being  fuch  as  they 
could  neither  give  any  rational  account  of,  nor 
find  any  remedy  for.  The  plain  cafe  is,  She  is 
tormented  by  an  evil  fpirit,  following  her  day 
and  night.  Yea,  try  all  your  drugs  over  and  over; 
but  at  length  it  will  plainly  appear  that  this  kind 
goeth  not  out,  but  by  prayer  and fa  fling. 

TVid.  12.  I read  part  of  Dr.  Chyne’s  natural 
method  of  cuiing  difeafts  : ol  which  I cannot  but 
obferve,  it  is  one  of  the  moil  ingenious  books 
which  I ever  faw.  But  what  epicure  will  ever  re- 
gard it?  For1'  the  man  talks  againftgood  eating 
and  drinking  1” 

Our  Lord  was  glorioufly  prefent  with  us  at  the 
watch-night:  fo  that  my  voice  was  loft  in  the 
cries  of  the  people.  After  midnight  about  an  hun- 
dred of  us  walked  home  together,  finging  and  re- 
joicing and  praifing  God. 

Frid.  19.  I rode  once  more  to  Pensford,  at  the 

earneft 


[ 48  ] 

earned  requeft  of  feveral  ferious  people.  The 
place  where  they  defired  me  to  preach  was  a lit- 
tle green  fpot,  near  the  town.  But  I had  no 
fooner  begun,  than  a great  company  of  rabble, 
hired  (as  we  afterwards  found)  for  that  purpofe, 
came  iurioufly  upon  us  bringing  a bull  which 
they  had  been  baiting,  and  now  llrove  todrive  in 
among  the  people.  But  the  bead  was  wifer  than 
his  drivers,  and  continually  ran,  either  on  one 
fide  of  us  or  the  other,  while  we  quietly  fang 
praife  to  God,  and  prayed  for  about  an  hour. 
The  poor  wretches  finding  themfelves  difap- 
pointed,  at  length  feized  upon  the  bull,  now 
weak  and  tired,  after  being  fo  long  torn  and 
beaten  both  by  dogs  and  men,  and  by  main 
drength,  partly  dragged  and  partly  thrud  film  in 
among  the  people.  When  they  had  forced  their 
way  to  the  little  table  on  which  I flood,  they 
drove  feveral  times  to  throw  it  down,  by  thruft- 
ing  the  helplefs  bead  againd  it,  who  of  himfelf 
ilirred  no  more  than  a log  of  wood.  1 once  or 
twice  put  afide  his  head  with  mv  hand,  that  the 
blood  might  not  drop  upon  my  cloaths  ; intend- 
ing to  go  on,  as  foon  as  the  hurry  {hould  be  a lit- 
tle over.  But  the  table  falling  down,  fome  of  our 
friends  caught  me  in  their  arms,  and  carried  me 
right  away  on  their  fhoulders,  while  the  rabble 
wreaked  their  vengeance  oja  the  table,  which 
they  tore  bit  from  bit.  We  went  a little  way  off, 
where  I finiflied  my  difeourfe,  without  anynoife 
or  interruption. 

2 


Sund. 


C 49  J 


Sund.  2 1.  In  the  evening  I rode  to  Marfhfield, 
and  on  Tuefday  in  the  afternoon  came  to  Lon- 
don. Wednef.  24. 1 preached  for  the  laft  time, 
in  the  French  chappel  at  Wapping,  on,  If 
ye  continue  in  my  word , then  are  ye  my  difcipUs 
indeed. 

* Thurf.  25.  I appointed  feveral  earned  and 
fenfible  men  to  meet  me,  to  whom  J fhewed  the 
great  difficulty  I had  long  found,  of  knowing  the 
people  who  defired  to  be  under  my  care.  After 
much  difcourfe,  they  all  agreed,  there  could  be 
no  better  way,  to  come  to  a fure,  thorough  know- 
ledge of  each  perfon,  than  to  divide  them  into 
clafles  like  thofe  at  Briftol,  under  the  infpeftion 
of  thofe  in  whom  I could  mod  confide.  This 
was- the  origin  of  our  claffes  at  London,  for 
which  I can  never  fufficiently  praife  God : 
the  unfpeakable  ufefulnefs  of  the  inftitution, 
having  ever  fince  been  more  and  more  manifeff. 

* Wednef.  31.  My  brother  fet  out  for  Oxford. 
In  the  evening  1 called  upon  Ann  Calcut.  She 
had  been  fpeechlefs  for  fome  time.  But  almoft  as 
foon  as  we  began  to  pray,  God  reftored  her 
fpeech.  She  then  witneffed  a good  confeffion 
indeed.  I expefted  to  fee  her  no  more  : but 
from  that  hour  the  fever  left  her,  and  in  a few 
days  flie  arofe  and  walked,  glorifying  God. 

Sund.  April  4.  About  two  in  the  afternoon  ; 
being  the  time  my  brother  was  preaching  at  Ox- 
ford, before  the  Univerfity,  I defired  a few  per- 
fons  to  meet  with  me  and  join  in  prayer.  We 
Vo  I.  XXVIII.  C continued 


[ 5®  ] 

continued  herein  much  longer  than  we  at  firft 
defigned,  and  believed  we  had  the  petition  we 
alked  of  God. 

Frid.  9.  We  had  the  firft  watch-night  in  Lon- 
don. We  commonly  chufe  for  this  folemn  fer- 
vice,  the  Friday  night,  neared  the  full  moon,  ei- 
ther before  or  after,  that  thofe  of  the  congrega- 
tion who  live  at  a diftance,  may  have  light  to 
their  feveral  homes.  The  fervice  begins  at  half 
an  hour  paft  eight,  and  continues  till  a little  after 
midnight.  We  have  often  found  a peculiar  blef- 
fing  at  thefe  feafons.  There  is  generally  a deep 
awe  upon  the  congregation,  perhaps  in  forne 
meafure  owing  to  the  filence  of  the  night  ; par- 
ticularly in  hinging  the  hymn,  with  which  we 
commonly  conclude : 

“ Hearken  to  the  folemn  voice  ! 

The  awful  midnight  cry, 

Waiting  fouls,  rejoice,  rejoice, 

And  feel  the  Bridegroom  nigh.” 

* April  16.  Being  Good-friday,  I was  defired 
to  call  on  one  that  was  ill  at  Iftington.  I found 
there  feveral  of  my  old  acquaintance,  who  loved 
me  once  as  the  apple  of  their  eye.  By  flaying 
with  them  but  a little  I was  clearly  convinced, 
that  was  I to  ftav  but  one  week  among  them,  (un- 
lefs  the  providence  of  God  plainly  called  me  fo 
to  do)  I fhould  be  as  Jlill  as  poor  Mr.  St — . I felt 

* their 


[ 5 1 ] 

Vjieir  words  as  it  were  thrilling  through  my  veins. 
So  ToTt!  So  pleafmg  to  nature  ! It  Teemed  our 
religion  was  but  a heavy,  coarfe  thing ; nothing 
To  delicate,  To  refined  as  /heirs.  I wonder  any 
perTon  of  tafie  (that  has  not  faitl  1)  can  hand  be- 
fore them ! 

* Suiid.  i8.  In  the  aTternoon,  one  who  had 
tailed  the  love  oT  God,  but  had  turned  again  to 
folly,  was  deeply  convinced,  and  torn  as  it  were 
in  pieces,  by  guilt,  and  remorle,  and  Tear.  And 
even  aTter  the  Termon  was  ended,  The  continued 
in  the  Tame  agony,  it  Teemed  both  oT  body  and 
foul.  Manv  ol  us  were  then  met  together  in  ano- 
ther part  oT  the  houfe ; but  her  cries  were  To 
piercing,  though  at  a dillance,  that  I could  not 
pray,  nor  hardly  Tpeak,  being  quite  chilled  every 
time  I heard  them.  I afked.  Whether  it  were 
belt  to  bring  her  in,  or  Tend  her  out  oT  the 
houTe  ? It  being  the  general  voice,  The  was 
brought  in,  and  we  cried  to  God,  to  heal  her 
backfliding.  We  Toon,  found  we  were  afking 
according  to  his  will.  He  not  only  bad  her 
depart  in  peace,  but  filled  many  others,  till  then 
heavy  ol  heart,  with  peace  and  joy  in  be- 
lieving. 

Mond.  19.  At  noon  I preached  at  Brentford, 
and  again  about  Teven  in  the  evening.  Many  who 
had  threatened  to  do  terrible  things  were  pre- 
Tent:  but  they  made  no  dilturbance  at  all. 

TueT.  20.  Was  the  day  on  which  our  noiTy 
neighbours  had  agreed,  to  Tummon  all  their 
C 2 forces 


C 52  ] 

forces  together:  a great  number  of  whom  came 
early  in  the  evening,  and  planted  themfelves  as 
near  the  defk  as  pofhble.  But  he  that  fitteth  iii 
heaven  laugheth  them  to  fcorn.  The  greater  part 
foon  vanilhed  away  ; and  to  fome  of  the  red,  I 
truft  his  word  came  with  the  demonllration  of 
his  Spirit. 

Frid.  23.  I fpent  an  agreeable  hour  with  Mr. 

Wh . I believe  he  is  fincere  in  all  he  fays 

concerning  his  earned  defire  of  joining  hand  in 
hand,  with  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jelus  Chrift. 
But  if  (as  fome  would  perfuade  me)  he  is  not, 
the  lofs  is  all  on  his  own  fide.  I am  juft  as  I was. 
I go  on  my  way,  whether  he  goes  with  me,  or 
ftays  behind. 

Sund.  25.  At  five  I preached  in  RadclifF- 
fquare,  near  Stepnev,  on,  i came  not  to  call  the 
righteous , but  [tuners  to  repentance . A multitude 
of  them  were  gathered  together  before  I came 
home,  and  filled  the  ftreet  above  and  below  the 
Foundery.  Some  who  apprehended  we  ftiould 
have  but  homely  treatment,  begged  me  to  go  in 
as  foon  as  pofhble.  But  I told  them,  “ No  : pro- 
vide you  ior  yourfelves.  But  I have  a meftage  to 
deliver  firft.”  I told  them,  after  a few  words, 
“ Friends,  let  every  man  do  as  hepleafes.  But  it 
is  my  manner  when  I {peak  of  the  things  of  God, 
or  when  another  does,  to  uncover  my  head:” 
which  I accordingly  did,  and  many  of  them  did 
the  fame.  I then  exhorted  them,  to  repent  and  be- 
lieve 


[ 53  ] 


lieve  the  gofpel.  Not  a few  of  them  appeared 
to  be  deeply  affe&ed.  Now,  Satan,  count  thy 
gains. 

Mond.  2 6.  I called  on  one  who  was  borrow- 
ing as  without  hope,  for  her  fon  who  was  turn- 
ed again  to  folly.  I advifed  her,  to  wreftle  with 
God  for  his  foul.  And  in  two  days,  he  brought 
home  the  wandering  (heep,  fully  convinced  of 
the  error  of  his  ways,  and  determined  to  chufe 
the  better  part. 

Saturd.  May  l.  One  called,  whom  I had 
often  advifed,  “ Not  to  hear  them  that  preach 
fmooth  things.”  But  {he  could  not  believe  there 

O 

was  any  danger  therein,  “ Seeing  we  were  all 
(fhe  faid)  children  of  God.”  The  effefts  of  it 
which  now  appeared  in  her  were  thefe  : t.  She 
was  grown  above  meafure  wife  in  her  own  eves. 
She  knew  every  thing  as  well  as  ‘any  could  tell 
her,  and  needed  not  to  be  taught  of  man.  2, 
She  utterly  defpifcd  all  her  brethren,  faying, 
“ They  were  all  in  the  dark  ; they  knew  not 
what  faith  meant.  3.  She  defpifed  her  teachers 
as  much,  if  not  more  than  them  : faying,  “ They 
knew  nothing  of  the  gofpel : they  preached  no- 
thing but  the  law,  and  brought  all  into  bondage 
who  minded  what  they  faid.”  Indeed,  faid  fhe, 
after  I had  heard  Mr.  Sp — I was  amazed  : for 
I never  fince  heard  you  preach  one  good  fer- 
mon.  And  I faid  to  my  hufband,  “ My  dear, 
did  Mr.  Wefley  always  preach  fo  ? And  he 
C 3 faid, 


[ 54  ] 

{aid,  “ Yes,  my  dear  : but  your  eyes  were  not 
opened.” 

Thurfd.  6.  I defcribed  that  falling  away,  fpok- 
en  of  by  St.  Paul  to  the  ThefTalonians,  which 
we  fo  terribly  feel  to  be  already  come,  and  to 
have  over-fpread  the  (fo  called)  Chriltian  world. 
One  of  my  hearers  was  highly  offended  at  mv 
fuppofxng  any  of  the  church  of  England  to  be 
concerned  in  this.  But  his  fpeech  foon  bewray- 
ed him  to  be  of  no  church  at  all,  zealous  and 
orthodox  as  he  was.  So  that  after  I had  appeal- 
ed to  his  own  heart,  as  well  as  to  all  that  heard 
him,  he  retired  with  confufion  of  face. 

Saturd.  8.  One  of  Fetter-lane  mentioning  a 
letter  he  had  received  from  a poor  man  in  Lin. 
colnlhire,  I read  and  defired  a copy  of  it  : part 
of  which  is  as  lollows: 

May  3,  1742. 

Samuel  Meggot  to  Richard  Ridley, 

Brother, 

“ I have  notv  much  communion  with  thee, 
and  defire  to  have  more. — But  till  now’  I found 
a great  gulph  between  us,  fo  that  we  could  not 
one  pafs  to  the  other.  Therefore  thv  letters 
were  very  death  to  me,  and  thou  waft  to  me  as 
a branch  broke  off  and  thrown  by  to  wither. — 
Yet  I waited,  if  the  Lord  fhould  pleafe  to  let  us 
into  the  fame  union  wre  had  before.  So  the 
Lord  hath  given  it.  And  in  the  fame  I w’rite  ; 
defiring  it  may  continue  until  death. 


I wrote 


[ 55  ] 


I wrote  before  to  thee  and  John  Harrifon, 
<•  Be  not  afraid  to  be  found  Tinners,”  hoping 
you  would  not  fcparate  the  law  from  the  fpirit, 
until  the  flefh  was  iounddead.  For  I think  our 
hearts  are  difcovered  by  the  law,  yea,  every  tit- 
tle, and  condemned  by  the  fame.  Then  are  we 
quickened  in  the  fpirit.  Juflice  cannot  be  fe- 
parated  from  mercy  : neither  can  they  be  one 
greater  than  the  other.  Keep  the  commandments 
and  I will  pray  the  father , and  he  jhall  give  you 
another  comforter.  Mark  that ! Thy  f ns  be  for- 
given thee!  AnJ'e,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk. 
Here  is  work  before  mercy,  and  merev  before 
work. — So  then,  through  the  law  by  faith  our 
heart  is  pine — Beware  therefore  of  them,  who 
while  they  promife  vou  liberty,  are  themfelves 
the  fervants  of  corruption.  O dead  faith,  that 
cannot  always  live  pure  ! Treacherous  Judas, 
that  thus  betraveft  thy  matter  1 — • 

* Let  the  law  arraign  you,  till  Jefus  Chritt 
bring  forth  judgment  in  your  hearts  unto  viftory. 
Yea,  let  your  hearts  be  open  wide,  receiving 
both,  that  the  one  may  confirm  the  other.  So 
thou  liveft  fo  much  in  the  Ton’s  righteouTnefs, 
that  the  law  Taith,  I have  nought  againtt  thee 
— »This  is  faith,  that  thus  conquers  the  old 
man,  in  putting  him  off,  and  putting  on  Chritt. 
Purify  your  hearts  by  faith  : fo  fhall  the  temple 
of  God  be  holy  and  the  altar  therein,  that  fpi- 
ritual  facrifices  may  be  ottered,  acceptable  to 
C 4 the 


[ 56  3 

the  Lord.  Now  if  any  man  be  otherwife  mind- 
ed let  him  be  afhamed.  For  if  there  lives  any 
of  ourfelf  in  us,  that  one  branch  of  nature,  that 
one  member,  (hall  caufe  the  whole  man  to  burn 
everlalfingly.  Let  as  many  as  know  not  this 
perfefhon,  which  is  by  Jefus  Chrilf , prefs  for- 
ward by  faith  till  they  come  to  the  experimental 
knowledge  of  it. 

But  how  many  fouls  have  I feen  wafhed,  and 
turned  again  to  the  wallowing  in  their  fins  ? — 
O that  Lamb  ! How  is  he  put  to  an  open  lhame 
again,  who  had  once  reconciled  them  to  the 
Father ! 

* Now  I would  write  a little  of  the  travel  of 
my  own  foul.  I thought  mvfelf  right  long  fince. 
But  when  the  light  of  life  came,  I faw  mvfelf 
ready  to  die  in  my  fins. — I had  faith  ; but  lhad 
it  bv  knowledge  and  not  in  power.  Yet  by  this 

faith  I had  great  liberty. Neverthelefs  this 

laith  kept  my  heart  corrupt,  and  the  whole  man 
of  fin  alive. — My  way  of  proceeding  was  thus. 
Sometimes  I was  overtaken  in  a fault,  and  fo 
was  put  to  a {land  a little.  But  as  foon  as  I 
could,  I would  wipe  mvfelf  bv  knowledge,  hav- 
ing, “ Chrilf  died  for  finners.”  I was  right  fo  far 
and  no  farther.  He  died  for  finners  : but  not  to 
lave  him  that  continues  in  his  fins.  Forwhomfo- 
ever  he  cleanfes  they  are  clean  indeed  : firll  fin- 
ners, then  faints,  and  fo  they  remain.  By  and 
by  I was  overtaken  again  : and  the  ofiner  I was 
overtaken,  the  ftronger  I thought  myfelf  in  the 

Lord. 


[ 57  ] 

Lord.  Yea,  for  my  corruptions  fake  I was 
forced  to  get  more  knowledge,  or  elfe  I fhould 
have  been  condemned.  So  1 arrived  at  fuch  a 
pitch  of  knowledge”  (t.  e.  of  notional  faith) 
“ that  I could  crucify  Chrifi  with  one  hand,  and 
take  pardon  with  the  other : fo  that  I was  al- 
ways happy. — Here  was  the  myfiery  of  iniquity, 
conceived  in  my  heart.  For  it  led  me  to  this ; 
if  I was  to  take  of  any  man’s  goods,  I would  fay 
or  think,  “ I am  a firmer  of  myfelf ; but  Chrifi 
died  for  me  : fo  his  righteoufnefs  is  mine.”  And 
farther,  I could  not  fee,  but  if  I was  to  kill  a 
man,  yet  I fhould  be  pure.  So  great  a friend 
to  fin  and  the  devil  was  I,  that  I would  have 
made  fin  and  the  devil  to  become  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  God  in  Chrifi:  : yea,  that  I began  to 
love  him,  whom  the  Lord  hath  referved  for 
everlafting  fire. 

So  I held  Chrifi  without,  and  the  devil  with- 
in. This  is  a myftery,  that  I fhould  feel  myfelf 
fafe  and  pure,  and  yet  the  devil  to  be  in  me. 
Judge  who  gave  me  this  purity,  and  taught  me 
to  be  thus  perfeft  in  Chrifi  ! But  e’er  long  that 
began  to  break  forth  in  aftion,  which  I had 
conceived  in  my  heart.  But  it  was  the  Lord’s 
will  I fhould  not  go  far,  before  I was  again 
brought  under  the  law.  Then  did  I ftand  fiript 
and  naked  of  that  knowledge.  I wifh  all  who 
are  fo  deceived  as  I was,  were  brought  under 
the  law,  that  they  might  learn  what  it  is  to 
come  to  Jefus  Chrifi.  And  I wifh  them  not  to  pafs 
C 5 from 


[ 58  ] 

from  under  the  law,  till  they  clearly  fee  the  end 
of  the  law  come  into  their  hearts. 

* The  law  being  mixed  with  faith  makes  it 

quick  and  powerful.  For  as  the  law  will  not 
leave  one  hair  of  our  heads  uncondemned,  fo 
faith  will  not  leave  one  unreconciled.  And 
blefled  is  he  who  lives  in  the  fame  reconcilia- 
tion, and  turns  not  as  a dog  to  his  vomit.  Then 
fhall  he  be  called  the  child  of  God,  who  can- 
not fin,  becaufe  his  feed  remaineth  in  him. 

* Thou  writeft,  “ Jefus  makes  it  manifeft  to 
thee,  that  thou  art  a great  finner.”  That  is 
well ; and  if  more,  it  would  be  better  for  thee. 
Again  thou  fayft,  “ Since  thou  firft  receivedfl  a 
full  and  free  pardon  for  all  thy  fins,  thou  haft 
received  fo  many  frefh  pardons,  that  they  are 
quite  out  of  count.”  And  this  thou  fayft,  is 
fpoken  “ to  thy  own  ftiame  and  thy  Saviour’s 
praife.”  Come,  my  brother,  let  us  both  be 
more  afhamed.  Let  us  fee  where  we  are,  and 
what  we  are  doing  to  the  Lamb.  W e are  not 
glorifying  him : (let  us  not  miftake  ourfelves 
thus)  we  are  crucifying  him  afrefh.  We  are 
putting  him  to  an  open  fhame,  and  bringing 
fwift  damnation  on  our  own  heads. 

Again  thou  fayft,  “ Though  thy  fins  be  great 
and  many,  yet  thy  Saviour’s  grace  is  greater.” 
Thou  fayft  right:  or  elfe,  how  fhould  we  have 
been  cleanfed  ? But  his  great  cleanfing  power 
does  not  defign,  that  we  fhould  become  foul 
again  ; left  he  call  us  away  in  our  uncleannefs, 

and 


[ 59  ] 

and  we  perifh  for  ever.  For  it  will  not  profit 
us,  that  we  were  once  cleanfed,  if  we  be  found 
in  uncleannefs. 

Take  heed  to  thyfelf,  that  the  knowledge  that 
is  in  thee  deceive  thee  not.  For  thou  writefl  fo 
to  my  experience,  that  I can  tell  thee  as  plain 
how  thou  art,  or  plainer  than  thou  canft  thyfelf. 
Thou  fayft,  “ After  thou  haft  done  fomething 
amifs,  thou  needed:  not  to  be  unhappy  one  mo- 
ment, if  thou  wilt  but  go  to  thy  Saviour.  Is  not 
this  the  very  ftate  I have  mentioned  ? O that 
that  knowledge  was  caft  out  1 So  fhouldft  thou 
always  do  the  things  that  pleafe  the  Father.  O 
my  dear  brother,  how  art  thou  bewitched  by  the 
deceiver  of  thy  foul  ? Thou  art  a ftranger  to  the 
Saviour,  who  is  gone  to  heaven,  to  give  repent- 
ance to  his  people  and  remiftion  of  fins.  I am 
afraid,  the  devil  is  thy  faviour  : more  of  him  is 
manifeft  in  thee,  than  of  Chrift.  He  tells  thee, 
thou  art  pure  and  wafhed  : but  he  couzens  thee. 
Yea,  his  deceitfulnefs  cries  out  for  vengeance. 
Yet  he  would  be  a Chrift  or  a God. 

* Thou  fayft,  thou  “ haft  need  of  remiftion 
of  fins  every  day.”  Yes,  fo  thou  haft  : and 
more.  Thou  haft  need  every  moment  ; fo 
(houldeft  thou  be  clean  ; for  this  every  moment 
fliould  be  eternity  to  thy  foul.  Thou  thankeft 
God  that  “ He  hath  provided  fuch  an  high- 
prieft  for  thee.”  Let  him  be  thine ; fo  fhalt 
thou  be  ruled  by  him  every  moment.  What  ? 
Is  he  fuch  a Saviour  as  can  cleanfe  us  from  fin, 
C 6 and. 


t 60  ] 

and  not  keep  us  in  the  fame  ? Judge  where  thou 
art.  Thou  and  I and  many  more  were  once 
made  pure.  And  we  were  pure  while  we  be- 
lieved the  fame,  and  were  kept  by  the  Father 
for  his  own  name’s  fake.  But  how  long  did  we 
thus  believe?  Let  every  man  judge  himfelf. 

Now,  my  brother,  anfwer  for  thyfelf.  Doft: 
thou  believe,  that  thou  mull  always  have  this 
heart,  which  is  corrupted  through  and  through 
with  fin  ? I fay,  doll  thou  believe,  thy  heart 
mull  be  thus  unpure  ? If  thou  doft,  the  fame 
do&rine  mud  be  preached  to  thee  which  was  at 
firft,  “ Ye  muft  receive  the  Holy  Gkojl  that  is, 
thou  muft  be  brought  to  the  firft  remiiTion,  and 
there  thou  wilt  fee  Jefus  laid  {lain  in  thy  heart. 
This  thy  firft  purity  I will  acknowledge,  and 
none  elfe.  I believe  the  foundation  of  life  was 
once  in  thee.  But  many  together  with  thee 
have  fallen  away.  Thou  heareft  how  I acknow- 
ledge thee  and  where,  and  no  where  elfe.  And 
herein  I have  communion  with  thee  in  my  fpi- 
rit.  and  hope  it  will  continue  to  the  end.  — — 

And  is  poor  Samuel  Meggot  himfelf,  now  fal- 
len into  the  very  fame  fnare,  againft  which  he 
fo  earnellly  warned  his  friend?  Lord,  what  is 
man  ! 

Sund.  9.  I preached  in  Charles-Square  to  the 
large!!  congregation  I have  ever  feen  there. 
Many  of  the  bafer  people  would  fain  have  inter- 
rupted. But  they  found  after  a time,  it  was 
loft  labour.  One  who  was  more  ferious,  was 

(as 


[ 6i  ] 


(as  fiie  afterwards  confeft)  exceeding  angry  at 
them.  But  file  was  quickly  rebuked,  bv  a fione 
■which  light  upon  her  forehead,  and  ftruck  her 
down  to  the  ground.  In  that  moment  her  anc;er 
was  at  an  end,  and  love  only  filled  her  heart. 

Wednef.  12.  I waited  on  the  archbilhop  of 
Canterbury  with  Mr.  Whitefield,  and  again  on 
Friday  : as  alfo  on  the  bifhop  of  London.  I 
truft  if  we  fiiould  be  called  to  appear  before 
princes,  we  fiiould  not  be  afiiamed. 

Mond.  17.  I had  defigned  this  morning  to 
fet  out  for  Brifiol ; but  was  unexpectedly  pre- 
vented. In  the  afternoon  I received  a letter 
from  Leicefierfiiire,  pre fling  me  to  come  with- 
out delay,  and  pay  the  laft  office  of  friendfhip 
to  one,  whofe  foul  was  on  the  wing  for  eternity, 
On  Thurf.  20.  I fet  out.  The  next  afternoon, 
1 ftopt  a little  at  Newport-Pagnell,  and  then  rode 
on  till  I overtook  a ferious  man,  with  whom  I 
immediately  fell  into  converfation.  He  pre- 
fently  gave  me  to  know,  what  his  opinions  were; 
therefore  I faid  nothing  to  contradift  them.  But 
that  did  not  content  him.  He  was  quite  uneafy 
to  know,  “ Whether  I held  the  doflrine  of  the 
decrees  as  he  did;  but  I told  him  over  and  over, 
“ We  had  better  keep  to  pra&ical  things,  leafl 
we  fiiould  be  angry  at  one  another.”  And  fo  we 
did  for  two  miles,  till  he  caught  me  unawares* 
and  dragged  me  into  the  difpute  before  I knew 
where  I was.  He  then  grew  warmer  and  warmer : 
fold  me,  “ I was  rotten  at  heart,  and  fuppofed  I 

was 


[ 62  ] 

was  one  of  John  Wefley’s  followers.”  I told 
him,  “ No,  I am  John  WefLey  himfelf.”  Upon 
which 

Lnpr ovifum  afpris  vduti  qui  fenlibus  anouem 

PreJJit 

he  would  gladly  have  run  away  outright.  But 
being  the  better  mounted  of  the  two,  I kept 
clofe  to  his  fide,  and  endeavoured  to  fhew  him 
his  heart,  till  we  came  into  the  ftreet  of  North- 
ampton. Sat.  22.  About  five  in  the  afternoon, 
I reached  Donnington-Park. 

Mifs  Cowper  was  juft  alive.  But  as  foon  as 
we  came  in,  her  fpirit  greatly  revived.  For  three 
days  we  rejoiced  in  ihe  grace  of  God,  whereby 
fhe  was  filled  with  a hope  full  of  immortality; 
with  mceknefs,  gentlenefs,  patience  and  humble 
love,  knowing  in  whom  fhe  had  believed. 

Tuefd.  25.  I fet  out  early  in  the  morning 
with  John  Taylor,  (Tince  fettled  in  London)  and 
Wednf.  26.  in  the  evening  reached  Birftal,  fix 
miles  beyond  Wakefield. 

John  Nelfon  had  wrote  to  me  fome  time  be- 
fore : but  at  that  time  I had  little  thought  of  fee- 
ing  him.  Flearing  he  was  at  home,  I fent  for 
him  to  our  inn  : whence  he  immediately  carried 
me  to  his  houfe;  and  gave  me  an  account  of 
the  Orange  manner  wherein  he  had  been  led  on, 
from  the  time  of  our  parting  at  London. 

He  had  full  bufinefs  there  and  large  wages. 

Bet 


C 63.  ] 

But  from  the  time  of  his  finding  peace  with  God, 
it  was  continually  upon  his  mind,  that  he  mull 
return  (though  he  knew  not  why)  to  his  native 
place.  He  did  fo,  about  Chriftmas,  in  the 
year  1740.  His  relations  and  acquaintance  foon 
began  to  enquire,  “ What  he  thought  of  this 
new  faith  ?”'  And  wdiether  he  believed,  there 
was  any  fuch  thing,  as  a man’s  knowing  that  his 
fins  wTere  forgiven  ? John  told  them  point  blank, 
that  “ this  new  faith  as  they  calledit,  was  the 
old  faith  of  the  gofpel : and  that  he  himfelf  was 
as  fure  his  fins  were  forgiven,  as  he.  could  be  of 
the  lhining  of  the  fun.”  1 his  was  foon  noifed 
abroad ; more  and  more  came  to  enquire,  con- 
cerning thefe  ftrange  things.  Some  put  him 
upon  the  proof  of  the  great  truths,  which  fuch 
inquiries  naturally  led  him  to  mention.  And 
thus  he  w’as  brought  unawares  to  quote,  explain, 
compare  and  inforce  feveral  parts  of  icripture. 
This  he  did  at  firft,  fitting  in  his  houfe,  till  the 
company  increafed  fo  that  the  houfe  could  not- 
contain  them.  Then  he  flood  at  the  door, 
which  he  w7as  commonly  obliged  to  do*  in  the 
evening,  as  foon  as  he  came  from  work.  God 
immediately  fet  his  feal  to  what  was  fpoken  : and 
feveral  believed,  and  therefore  declared,  that 
God  was  merciful  alfo  to  their  unrighteoufnefs* 
and  had  forgiven  all  their  fins. 

Mr.  Ingham  hearing  of  this,  came  to  Birflal, 
enquired  into  the  fafts.  talked  with  John  him- 
felf, and  examined  him  in  the  clofell  manner, 

both. 


[ 64  ] 

both  touching  his  knowledge  and  fpiritua!  expe- 
rience : after  which  he  encouraged  him  to  pro- 
ceed, and  preft  him  as  often  as  he  had  opportu- 
nity, to  come  to  any  of  the  places  where  himfelf 
had  been,  and  fpeak  to  the  people  as  Godfhould 
enable  him. 

But  he  foon  gave  offence,  both  bv  his  plain- 
nefs  of  fpeech,  and  advifing  people  to  go  to 
church  and  facrament.  Mr.  Ingham  reproved 
him;  hut  finding  him  incorrigible,  forbad  any 
that  were  in  his  focieties  to  hear  him.  But  be- 
ing perfuaded,  this  is  the  will  of  God  concerning 
him,  he  continues  to  this  hour  working,  in  the 
day,  that  he  may  be  burthenfome  to  no  man, 
and  in  the  evening  tejiifying  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jefus. 

I preached  at  neon,  on  the  top  of  Birftal-hill, 
to  feveral  hundreds  of  plain  people:  and  fpent 
the  afternoon,  in  talking  feverally  with  thofe, 
who  had  tailed  of  the  grace  of  God.  Allofthefe, 

I found  had  been  vehemently  preft,  “ Not  to  run 
about  to  church  and  facrament,”  and  to  “ keep 
their  religion  to  thernfelves  ; to  be  ftill;  not  to 
talk  about  what  they  had  experienced.”  At 
eight  I preached  on  the  fide  of  Dewfbury-moor, 
about  two  miles  from  Birftal,  and  earneftly  ex- 
horted all  who  believed,  to  wait  upon  God  in 
his  own  ways,  and  to  let  their  light  fhine  before 
men. 

Thurf.  27.  We  left  Birftal,  and  on  Frid.  28, 
fame  to  Newcaftle-upon-Tyne. 


* I read 


[ <55  ] 


* I read  with  great  expectation,  yederday  and 
to  day,  Xenophon’s  memorable  things  of  Socrates . 
I was  utterly  amazed  at  his  want  of  judgment. 
How  many  of  thefe  things  would  Plato  never 
have  mentioned  ! But  it  may  he  well,  that  we  fee 
the  fhades  too  of  the  bl  ighted  pifture  in  all  Hea- 
then antiquity. 

We  came  to  Newcadle  about  fix,  and  after  a 
fhcrt  refrelhment,  walked  into  the  town.  I was 
fi.irpriz.ed ; lo  much  drunkenncfs,  curling  and 
fwearing  (even  from  the  mouths  of  little  chil- 
dren] do  I never  remember  to  have  feen  and 
heard  before,  in  fo  ftnall  a compafs  of  time. 
Surely  this  place  is  ripe  for  him,  who  came  not 
to  call  the  righteous,  but /inner  s to  repentance. 

Satur.  19.  I was  informed,  that  “ One  Mr. 
Hall  had  been  there  about  a year  before,  and  had 
preached  feveral  times;”  but  I could  not  learn, 
that  there  was  the  lead  fruit  of  his  labour.  Nor 
could  I find  any  that  defired  to  hear  him 
again,  nor  any  that  appeared  to  care  for  fuch 
matters. 

Sund.30.  At  feven  I walked  down  to  Sand- 
gate,  the  poored  and  mofi  contemptible  part  of 
the  town,  and  danding  at  the  end  of  the  dreet 
with  John  Taylor,  began  to  ling  the  hundredth 
pfalm.  Three  or  four  people  came  out  to  fee 
what  was  the  matter,  who  foon  increafed  to  four 
or  five  hundred.  I fuppofe,  there  might  be 
twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  before  I had  done 
preaching;  to  whom  I applied  thofe  folemn 

words. 


[ 65  J 

words,  He  was  wounded,  for  our  tranfgr ejjions, 
he  was  bruifed  for  our  iniquities  ; the  chaflifement 
oj  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  by  his  Jiripes  we 
are  healed. 

Gbferving  the  people  when  I had  done  to 
{land  gaping  and  flaring  upon  me,  with  the  moil 
profound  aflonifhment,  I told  them,  “ If  you  de- 
fire to  know  who  I am,  ray  name  is  JohnWeflev. 
At  five  in  the  evening,  with  God’s  help,  I defign- 
to  preach  here  again.” 

At  five,  the  hill  on  which  I defigned  to  preach,, 
was  covered  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  I ne- 
ver faw  fo  large  a number  of  people  together, 
either  in  Moorfields,  or  at  Kennington-common. 
1 knew  it  was-  not  pofhble  for  the  one  half  to 
hear,  although,  my  voice  was  then  ftrong  and 
clear,  and  I flood  fo  as  to  have  them  all  in 
view,  as  they  were  ranged  on  the  fide  of  the 
hill.  The  word  of  God  which  I fet  before 
them  was,  / will,  heal  their  bachjlidir.g , I will  love 
them  freely.  After  preaching,  the  poor  people 
were  ready  to  tread  me  under  foot,  out  of  pure 
love  and  kindnefs..  I was  fome  time  before  I 
could  poffibly  get  out  of  the  prefs.  1 thc-n  went 
back  another  way  than  I came.  But  feveral  were 
got  lo  our  inn  before  me  ; by  whom  I was  ve- 
hemently importuned,  to  flay  with  (hem,  at  lead, 
a few  days  : or,  however,  one  day  more.  But 
I could  not  confent ; having  given  mv  word, 
to  be  at  BirflaJ,  with  God's  leave,  on  Tuefday 
night. 


Some 


C 67  ] 

Some  of  thefe  told  me,  “They  were  member^ 
of  a religious  fociety , which  had  fubfifted  for  many 
rears,  and  had  always  gone  on  in  a prudent,  regu- 
lar manner,  and  been  well  fpoken  of  by  all  men. 
They  likewife  informed  me,  what  a fine  library 
they  bad,  and  that  the  fleward  read  a fennon 
every  Sunday.”  And  yet  how  many  of  ihe publi- 
cans and  harlots  will  go  into  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven  b©fore  thefe ! 

Mond.  31.  About  three  I left  Newcaflle.  I 
read  over  to-day  the  famous  Dr.  Pitcairn’s 
works.  But  I was  utterly  difappointed,  by  that 
dry,  four,  controverfial  book  ! We  came  in  the 
evening  to  Borough-bridge,  where  to  my  great 
furprize,  the  miflrefs  of  the  houfe,  though  much 
of  a gentlewoman,  defired  fhe  and  her  family 
might  join  with  us  in  prayer.  They  did  fo 
likewife  between  four  and  five  in  the  morn- 
ing. Perhaps  even  this  feed  may  bring  forth 
fruit. 

Tuef.  June  1.  A.s  we  were  riding  through 
Knarefborough,  not  intending  to  flop  there, 
a young  man  flopped  me  in  the  flreet,  and  ear- 
neflly  defired  me  to  go  to  his  houfe.  I did  fo. 
He  told  me,  “ Our  talking  witli  a man,  as  we  went 
through  the  town  before,  had  fe't  many  in  a 
flame,  and  that  the  fermon  we  gave  him,  had 
travelled  from  one  end  ol  the  town  to  the  other.” 
While  I was  with  him,  a woman  came  and  de- 
fired to  fpeak  with  me.  I went  to  her  houfe, 
whither  five  or  fix  of  her  friends  came,  one  of 

whom 


L 68  J 

whom  had  been  long  under  deep  conviction. 
We  fpent  an  hour  in  prayer,  and  all  our  fpirits 
were  refrelhed. 

About  one  we  came  to  Mr.  Moore’s,  at  Bee- 
lion,  near  Leeds.  His  fon  rode  with  me  after- 
dinner  to  Birllal,  where  (a  multitude  of  people 
beinggathered  from  all  parts)  I explained  to  them 
the  fpirit  of  bondage  and  adoption.  I began 
about  feven,  but  could  not  conclude  till  half  an 
hour  pall  nine. 

Wednef.  2.  I was  invited  to  Mrs.  Holmes’s, 
near  Hallifax  ; where  I preached  at  noon,  on 
Sjk  and  ye  Jliall  receive.  Thence  I rode  to  Dr. 
L— — ’s,  the  vicar  of  Hallifax  ; a candid  en- 
quirer after  truth.  I called  again  upon  Mrs. 
Holmes  in  my  return  ; when  her  filter  a little 
fnrpri/ed  me,  by  afking,“  Ought  not  aminifterof' 
Chrift  to  do  three  things,  Fil  l!  to  preach  his  law, 
in  order  to  convince  of  fin  : Then  to  offer  free 
pardon  through  faith  in  his  blood  to  all  convinced 
fmners;  and  in  the  third  place,  To  preach  his 
law  again,  as  a rule  for  thofe  that  believe  ? 1 
think,  if  any  one  does  otherwife,  he  is  no  true 
minifter  of  Chrift.  He  divides  what  God  has 
joined,  and  cannot  be  Laid  to  preach  the  whole 
gofpel.” 

I preached  at  eight  near  Dewfbury-moor  ; and 
at  eight  the  next  morning,  Thurf.  3,  at  Mirfield, 
where  I wound  Mr.  I had  been  an  hour  be- 

fore. Great  part  of  the  day  I fpent  in  fpeaking 
with  thofe,  who  have  tailed  the  powers  of  the 

world 


C 69  ] 

world  to  come.  Bv  whofe  concurrent  teftimony 

I find,  that  Mr.  I ’s  method  to  this  day  isr  1. 

To  endeavour  to  perfuade  them,  that  they  are  in 
a delufion,  and  have  indeed  no  faith  at  all  : if 
this  cannot  be  dene,  then  2.  To  make  them  keep 
it  to  themfelves.;  and  3.  To  prevent  their  going 
to  the  church  or  facrament,  at  lead  to  guard 
them  from  having  any  reverence,  or  expect- 
ing to  find  any  blefiing  in  thofe  ordinances  of 
God. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Advvalton,  a mile 
from  Birflal,  in  a broad  part  of  the  highway,  the 
people  being  too  numerous  to  be  contained  in 
any  houfe  in  the  town.  After  preaching,  and 
the  next  day  I fpoke  with  more,  who  had,  or 
fought  for  redemption  through  Chridr  all  of 
whom  I perceived  had  been  ad-vifed  alfo,  to  put 
their  light  under  a bufhel ; or  to  forfake  the  or- 
dinances of  God,  in  order  to  find  Child. 

hi  id.  3.  At  noon  I preached  at  Birflal  once 
more.  All  the  hearers  were  deeply  attentive  : 
whom  I now  'confidently  and  chearfully  com- 
mitted to  the  great  Shepherd  and  Bijhop  of 
jouh. 

* Hence  I rode  to  Beeflon.  Here  I met  once 
more  with  the  works  of  a celebrated  author,  of 
whom  many  great  men  cannot  fpeak  without 
rapture,  and  the  firongefl  expreflions  of  admira- 
tion. I mean  Jacob  Behme.  The  book  I now 
opened  was,  his  Myfterium  Magnum,  or  expofi- 
tion  of  Genefis.  Being  confcious  of  my  igno- 
rance, 


2 


ranee,  I earneflly  befought  God  to  enlighten  my 
un&erftanding.  I ferioufly  confidered  what  I 
read,  and  endeavoured  to  weigh  it  in  the  ballance 
of  the  fanttuary.  And  what  can  I fay  concerning 
the  part  I read  ? I can  and  mulf  fay  thus  much 
(and  that  with  as  full  evidence  as  I can  fay,  that 
two  and  two  make  four)  it  is  mod  fublime  non- 
fenfe  ; inimitable  bombaft;  fuflian  not  to  be  pa- 
ralleled ! All  of  a piece  with  hisinfpired  inter- 
pretation, oi  the  word  letragramwaton  : on  which 
(miflaking  it  for  the  unutterable  name  itfelf, 
whereas  it  means  onlv,  a word  confiding  of  four 
letters)  he  comments  with  fuel}  exquifite  gravity 
and  folemnity,  telling  you  the  meaning  of  every 
Jyllable  of  it! 

Satur.  g.  I rode  for  Epworth.  Before  we 
came  thither,  I made  an  end  oEMadam  Guyon  s 
fliort  method  ol  prat  er,  and  Les  Torrents  Jpiri- 
tuelles.  Ah  my  brethren  ! 1 can  anfwer  your 
riddle,  now  I have  ploughed  with  your  heifer. 
The  very  words  I bat  e lo  often  heard  fome  of 
you  ufe,  are  not  your  own,  no  more  than  they 
are  God's.  They  are  only  retailed  from  this  poor 
quietift  : and  that  with  the  utmoft  faithfulnefs. 
O that  ye  knew  how  much  God  is  wifer  than 
rnan  ! Then  would  you  drop  quiet  ills  and  myf- 
tics  together,  and  at  all  hazards  keep  to  the  plain, 
practical,  written  word  of  God. 

It  being  many  years  fince  I had  been  in  Ep- 
wortli  before,  I went  to  an  inn,  in  the  middle  of 
the  town,  not  knowing  whether  there  were  anv 
2 left 


C 71  ] 


left  in  it  now,  who  would  not  be  afharried  of  my 
acquaintance.  But  an  old  fervant  of  my  father’s, 
with  two  or  three  poor  women,  prefently  found 
me  out.  1 allied  her,  “ Do  you  know  any  in 
Epworth  who  are  in  earned  to  be  faved  ?”  She 
-anfwered,  “ I am,  by  the  grace  of  God  ; and  I 
know  1 am  faved  through  faith.”  I alked, 
“ Have  you  then  the  peace  of  God  ? Do  you 
know  that  he  has  forgiven  your  fins?”  She  re- 
plied, “ I thank  God,  I know  it  well.  And  many 
here  can  fay  the  fame  thing.” 

Sund.  6.  A little  before  the  fervice  began,  I 
went  to  Mr.  Rcmley  the  curate,  and  offered  to 
afiilthim  either  by  preaching  or  reading  pray- 
ers. But  he  did  not  care  to  accept- of  my  allif- 
tance.  The  church  was  exceeding  lull  in  the 
afternoon,  a rumour  being  fpread,  that  I was  to 
preach.  But  the  fermon  on  Qua  nek  not  the  Jjji- 
ril  was  not  bailable  to  the  expectation  of  many 
of  the  hearers.  Mr.  Rom  ley  told  them,  “ One 
of  the  moll  dangerous  ways  of  quenching  the 
fpirit  was  by  enlhufiafm:  and  enlarged  on  the 
character  of  an  enthuliaft,  in  a very  florid  and 
oratorical  manner.  After  fermon  John  Taylor 
flood  in  the  church  yard,  and  gave  notice  as  the 
people  were  coming  out,  “ Mr.  Wefley,not  be- 
ing permitted  to  preach  in  the  church,  defigns  to 
pieach  here  at  fix  o'clock.” 

Accordingly  at  fix  I came,  and  found  fuch  a 
congregation,  as  I believe  Epworth  never  faw 
before.  I flood  near  the  eafl  end  of  the  church, 

upon 


[ 72  ] 


•upon  my  father’s  tombftone,  and  cried,  The 
kingdom  of  heaven,  is  not  meats  and  drinks ; 
but  righleoufnej s , and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 

Ghoft. 

At  eight  I went  to  Edward  Smith’s,  where 
were  many  not  only  of  Epworth,  but  of  Burn- 
ham, Haxev,  Oufton,  Belton,  and  other  villages 
around  about,  who  greatly  defired,  that  I would 
come  over  to  them  and  help  them.  I was  now 
in  a flrait  between  two  : defiring  to  fallen  for- 
ward in  my  journey,  and  yet  not  knowing 
how  to  leave  thole  poor  bruifed  reeds  in  the 
confufion  wherein  I found  them.  John  Harri- 
fon  it  feems,  and  Richard  Ridley,  had  told 
them,  in  exprefs  terms,  “ All  the  ordinances 
are  mail's  inventions  ; and  if  you  go  to 
church  or  facrament,  you  will  be  damned.” 
Many  hereupon  wholly  forfook  the  church,  and 
others  knew  not  what  to  do.  At  ialt  I determined 
to  fpend  fotne  days  here,  that  I might  have  time 
both  to  preach  in  each  town,  and  to  fpeak  ieve- 
rally  with  thofe  in  every  place,  who  had  found 
or  waited  for  falvation. 

Mond.  7.  I preached  at  Burnham,  a mile  from 
Epworth,  on,  The  Son  of  Man  hath  pouer  on 
earth  to  forgive  fins.  At  eight  in  the  evening  I 
Hood  again  on  my  father’s  tomb,  (as  I did  every 
evening  this  week)  and  cried  aloud  to  the  ear- 
neflly -attentive  congregation,  By  grace  ye  are 
faved  through  faith. 

Tuef.  8.  1 walked  to  Hibbaldllow  (about  ten 

miles 


C 73  ] 


miles  from  Epworth)  to  fee  my  brother  and  filler. 
The  minifter  of  Oufton,  (two  miles  from  Ep- 
worth) having  fent  me  word,  “ I was  welcome  to 
preach  in  his  church,”  I called  there  in  my  re- 
turn : but  his  mind  being  changed,  I went  to 
another  place  in  the  town,  and  there  explained, 
Thou JJialt  call  his  name  Jefus  ; for  he  Jhall  fave 
his  people  from  their  fins . At  eight  I largely  in- 
forced  at  Epworth  the  great  truth  (fo  little  un- 
derftood  in  what  is  called  a Chrijlian  country) 
Unto  him  that  zvorheth  not,  but  belie.veth  on  him 
that  juf  if  eth  the  ungodly , his  faith  is  counted  to 
him  for  righteoufnefs.  I went  thence  to  the 
place  where  the  little  fociety  met,  which  was  fuf- 
ficiently  thronged  both  within  and  without. 
Here  I found  fome  from  Hairiton  (a  town  twenty 
miles  off,)  who  informed  us,  that  God  had  begun 
a work  there  alfo,  and  conflrained  feveral  to  cry 
out,  in  the  bitternefs  of  their  foul,  What  mujl  I 
do  to  be  javed  ? 

* Wednef.  9.  I rode  over  to  a neighbouring 
town,  to  wait  upon  ajuflice  of  peace,  a man  of 
candour  and  underhanding  ; before  whom  (I  was 
informed)  their  angry  neighbours  had  carried  a 
whole  waggon-load  of  thefe  new  heretics.  But 
when  he  afked,  What  they  had  done  ? There 
was  a deep  filence ; for  that  was  a point  their 
conduftors  had  forgot.  At  length  one  faid, 
“ Why  they  pretended  to  be  better  than  other 
people.  And  befides,  they  prayed  from  morn- 
ing to  night.  ’ Mr.  S.  afked,  “ But  have  they 
Vol.  XXVIII.  D done 


[ 74  ] 


done  nothing  befides?”  Yes,  Sir,  faid  an  old 
man  : An’t  pleafe  your  worfhip,  they  have  con - 
varted  my  wife.  Till  (lie  went  among  them,  {he 
had  fuch  a tongue  ! And  now  {he  is  as  quiet  as  a 
lamb.”  “ Carry  them  back,  carry  them  back, 
replied  the  juftice,  and  let  them  convert  all  the 
fcolds  in  the  town.” 

I went  from  hence  to  Belton,  to  H - 

F r’s,  a young  man  who  did  once  run  well; 

but  now  faid,  “ He  faw  the  devil  in  every  cor- 
ner of  the  church,  and  in  the  face  of  every  ene 
who  had  been  there.  ’ But  he  was  eafily  brought 
to  a better  mind.  I preached  under  a fltady  oak, 
on,  The  Son  oj  Man  hath  power  upon  earth  to  for- 
give fins.  At  Epworth,  in  the  evening,  I ex- 
plained the  flory  of  the  Pharifee  and  the 
Publican.  And  I believe  many  began  in 
that  hour  to  cry  out,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
I. 

Thurf.  to.  I fpoke  feverallv  with  all  who  de- 
filed it.  In  the  evening  I explained,  Ye  have  not 
received  the fpint  of  bondage  again  unto fear , but — 
the  [pint  oj  adoption  whereby  we  cry , Abba  Father . 
I had  afterwards  an  hour’s  calm  converfation  with 
Samuel  Meggot  and  James  Herbury.  What  good 
did  God  do  by  thefe  for  a time  ! O let  not  their 
latter  end  be  worfe  than  the  firft! 

Frid.  li.  I vifited  the  Tick,  and  thofe  who  de- 
fired,  but  were  not  able  to  come  to  me.  At  fix 
I preached  at  Overthorp,  near  Haxey  (a  little 
village  about  two  miles  from  Epworth)  on  that 

comfortable 


C 75  ] 

comfortable  fcripture,  When  they  had  nothing  to 
pay , he  frankly  forgave  them  both.  I preached 
,at  Epworth  about  eight  on  Ezekiel’s  vifion  of 
the  refurreftion  of  the  dry  bones.  And  great  in- 
deed was  the  {baking  among  them  : lamentation 
and  great  mourning  were  heard  ; God  bowing 
their  hearts,  fo  that  on  every  fide,  as  with  one 
accord,  they  lift  up  their  voice  and  wept  aloud. 
Surely  he  who  fent  his  fpirit  to  breathe  upon 
them,  will  hear  their  cry  and  will  help  them. 

* Satur.  12.  I preached  on  the  righteoufnefs 
of  the  law  and  the  righteoufnefs  of  faith.  While 
I was  fpeaking  feveral  dropped  down  as  dead: 
and  among  the  reft,  fuch  a cry  was  heard,  of  fin- 
ners  groaning  for  the  righteoufnefs  of  faith,  as 
almoft  drowned  my  voice.  But  many  of  thefe 
foon  lifted  up  their  heads  with  joy,  and  broke 
out  into  thankfgiving  : being  aflured,  they  now 
had  the  defire  of  -their  foul,  the  forgivenefs  of 
their  fins. 

* I obferved  a. gentleman  there,  who  was  re- 
markable for  not  pretending  to  be  of  any  reli- 
gion at  all.  I was  informed,  he  had  not  been  at 
public  worfhip  of  any  kind,  for  upwards  of  thirty 
years.  Seeing  him  ftand  as  motionlefs  as  a ftatue, 
I afked  him  abruptly,  “ Sir,  are  you  a ftnner  ?” 
He  replied  with  a deep  and  broken  voice,  “ Sin- 
ner enough,”  and  continued  flaring  upwards, 
till  his  wife  and  a fervant  or  two,  who  were  all 
in  tears,  put  him  into  his  chaife  and  carried  him 
home. 

D 2 


Sund 


[ 76  ] 


Sund.  13.  At  feven  I preached  at  Haxey,  on 
What  mujl  I do  to  be  faved ? Thence  I went  to 
W roote,  of  which  (as  well  as  Epworth)  my  fa- 
ther was  reflor  for  feveral  years.  Mr.  White- 
lamb  offering  me  the  church,  I preached  in  the 
morning,  on  Afk  and  it  Jhall  be  given  you  : in  the 
afternoon  on  the  difference  between  the  riglut - 
oufnefs  of  the  law  and  the  righteoufnf  of  faith. 
But  the  church  could  not  contain  the  people  ; 
many  of  whom  came  from  far:  and,  I truft,  not 
in  vain. 

■*  At  fix  I preached  for  the  laft  time  in  Ep- 
worth church-yard  (being  to  leave  the  town  the 
next  morning,)  to  a vafl  multitude  gathered  to- 
gether from  all  parts,  on  the  beginning  of  our 
Lord’s  fermon  on  the  mount.  I continued 
among  them  for  near  three  hours : and  yet  we 
fcarce  knew  how  to  part.  O let  none  think  his 
labour  of  love  is  loll,  becaufe  the  fruit  does  not 
immediately  appear.  Near  forty  years  did  my 
father  labour  here.  But  he  faw  little  fruit  of  all 
his  labour.  I took  fome  pains  among  this  people 
too  : and  my  ftrength  alfo  feemed  fpent  in  vain. 
But  now  the  fruit  appeared.  There  were  fcarce 
any  in  the  town,  911  whom  either  my  father  or  I 
had  taken  any  pains  formerly,  but  the  feed  fown 
fo  long  fmce  now  fprung  up,  bringing  forth  re- 
pentance and  remifhon  of  fins. 

Morid.  14.  Having  a great  defire  to  fee  David 
Tavlor,  whom  God  had  made  an  inftrument  of 
good  to  many  fouls,  I rode  to  Sheffield:  but  not 
, 2 finding 


[ 77  ] 


finding  him  there,  I was  minded  to  go  forward 
immediately.  However  the  importunity  of  the 
people  conflrained  me  to  flay,  and  preach  both 
in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning.  Tuef.  15. 
He  came.  I found  he  had  occafionally  exhorted 
multitudes  of  people  in  various  parts.  But 
after  that  he  had  taken  no  thought  about 
them.  So  that  the  greater  part  were  fallen  afleep 
again. 

In  the  evening  I preached  on  the  inward  king- 
dom of  God  : in  the  morning,  Wednef.  16,  on 
the  fpirit  of  fear  and  the  fpirir  of  adoption.  It 
was  now  firft  I felt  that  God  was  here  alfo  : 
though  not  fo  much  as  at  Barlev-Hall  (five  miles- 
from  Sheffield)  where  I preached  in  the  after- 
noon. Many  were  here  melted  down  and  filled 
with  love  toward,  him,  whom  God  hath  exalted  to 
le  a Prince  and  a Saiiour. 

I talked  with  one  here,  who  for  about  fix 
months,  (from  the  hour  that  fhe  knew  the  par- 
doning love  of  God)  has  been  all  peace  and  love. 
She  rejoices  evermore,  and  prays  without  ceaf- 
ing.  God  gives  her  whatever  petitions  Ihe  afks 
of  him,  and  enables  her  in  every  thing  to  give 
thanks.  She  has  the  witnefs  in  herfelf,  that  what- 
foeverfhe  does,  it  is  all  done  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Her  heart  never  wanders  from  him.  no,  not  for 
a moment,  but  is  continually  before  the  throne. 
Yet  whether  ffie  w>as  fan&ified  throughout  or 
not,  I had  not  light  to  determine. 

0 3 


Thurf. 


C 78  ] 

Thurf.  17.  I began  preaching  about  five,  on 
The  right eoufnefs  of  faith.  But  I had  not  half 
finilhed  my  difcourfe,  when  I was  conftrained  to 
break  offin  the  midft  ! Our  hearts  were  fo  filled 
with  a fenfe  of  the  love  of  God,  and  our  mouths 
with  prayer  and  thankfgiving.  When  we  were 
fomewhat  futisfied  herewith,  I went  on  to  call  Tin- 
ners to  the  falvation  ready  to  be  revealed. 

The  fame  blefiing  from  God  we  found  in  the 
evening  while  I was  (hewing,  how  he  jollifies  the 
ungodly.  Among  the  hearers  was  one,  who  fome- 
time  before  had  been  deeply  convinced  of  her 
ungodlinefs;  infomuch  that  Ihe  cried  out,  day 
and  night,  Lord,Jave,  or  Iperifh.  All  the  neigh- 
bours agreeing  that  Ihe  was  Hark  mad,  her  huf- 
band  put  her  into  a phyfician’s  hands,  who 
blooded  her  largely,  gave  her  a llrong  vomit,  and 
laid  on  feveral  blitters.  But  all  this  proving  with- 
out fuccefs,  Ihe  was  in  a fliort  time  judged  to  be 
incurable.  He  thought  however  he  would  fpeak 
to  one  perfon  more,  who  had  done  much  good  in 
the  neighbourhood.  hen  Mrs.  Johnfon  came, 
Die  loon  faw  the  nature  of  the  difeafe,  having  her- 
felf  gone  through  the  fame.  She  ordered  all  the 
medicines  to  be  thrown  away,  and  exhorted  the 
patient,  To  look  unto  fefus  : which  this  evening 
Ihe  was  enabled  to  do  by  faith.  And  lie  healed 
the  broken  in  heart. 

I' rid.  18.  I left  Sheffield,  and  after  preaching 
at  Ripley,  by  the  way,  flattened  on  to  Donning- 

ton- 


[ 79  ] 

ton-Park.  But  Mifs  Cowper,  I found,  was  gone 
to  reft,  having  finifhed  her  courfe  near  three 
weeks  before. 

Sund.  20.  I read  prayers  at  Ogbrook  and 
preached  on  A6ts  xvii.  27.  Whom  ye  ignorantly 
zvorjhip,  him  declare  I unto  you.  At  fix  in  the 
evening  I preached  at  Melbourn.  There  was 
many  hearers.  But  I fee  little  fruit. 

* Tuef.  22.  I had  along  converfation  with  Mr. 
Simpfon.  And  of  this  I am  fully  perfuaded,  that 
whatever  he  does,  is  in  the  uprightnefs  of  his 
heart.  But  he  is  led  into  a thoufand  miflakeshy 
one  wrong  principle;  (the  fame  which  many  ei-. 
ther  ignorantly  or  wickedly  afcribe  to  the  body 
of  the  people,  called  Methodijls,)  the  making  in- 
ward impre/Jions  his  rule  of  aflion,  and  not  the 
written  word . 

About  eight  I left  Donnington-Park,  and  be- 
fore noon  came  to  Markfield.  We  lay  at  Coven- 
try, and  the  next  day,  Wednef.  23,  in  the  after- 
noon came  to  Evefham.  At  eight  I preached. 
There  were  many  who  came  with  a defign 
to  difturb  the  reft.  But  they  opened  not  their 
mouth. 

Thurf.  24.  I fpent  great  part  of  the  day,  in 
fpeaking  with  the  members  of  the  focietv  : 
whom  in  the  evening  I earneftly  befought,  no 
more  to  tear  each  other  to  pieces  by  difputing, 
but  to  follow  after  holine/s,  and  provoke  one  ano- 
ther to  love  and  to  good  works. 

Frid.  25.  I rode  to  Painfwick;  where  in  the 
D 4 evening 


C 80  ] 

evening  I declared  to  all  thofe,  who  had  been 
fighting  and  troubling  one  another,  from  the 
beginning  hitherto,  about  rites  and  ceremonies, 
and  modes  of  worfhip,  and  opinions,  The  king- 
dom of  God  is  not  meats , and  drinks , but  righte- 
oufnefs,  and  peace,  and joy  in  the  Holy  Ghojl. 

Satur,  2 6.  I was  defiled  to  call  upon  Mr. 

Mr , The  pillar  oj  the  church  in  thefe 

parts.  As  foon  as  I came  in,  he  fell  upon  me 
with  might  and  main,  for  faying,  “ People 
might  know  their  (ins  were  forgiven:”  and 
brought  a great  book  to  confme  me  at  once.  I 
afked,  if  it  was  the  bibJe  ? And  upon  his  an- 
fwering,  “ No,”  inquired  no  farther,  but  laid  it 
quietly  down.  I his  made  him  warmer  ftill:  upon 
which  I held  it  bef,  to  ihake  him  by  the  hand 
and  take  my  leave. 

I had  appointed  to  preach  in  Stroud  at  noon. 
But  about  ten,  obferving  it  to  rain  fafler  and  faf- 
ter,  was  afraid  the  poor  people  would  not  be 
able  to  come,  many  of  whom  lived  fome  miles 
off.  But  in  a quarter  of  an  hour  the  rain  ceafed, 
and  we  had  a fair,  pleafant  day  : fo  that  many 
were  at  the  market-place,  while  I applied  the 
flory  of  the  Pharifce  and  Publican  ; the  hard 
rain  in  the  morning  having  difengaged  them 
from  their  work  in  the  grounds.  There  would 
probably  have  been  more  diflurbance,  but  that  a 
drunken  man  began  too  foon,  and  was  fo  fenfe- 
lefly  impertinent,  that  even  his  comrades  were 
quite  alhamed  of  him. 


In 


[ 8i  ] 

In  the  evening  I preached  on  Hampton-com- 
mon. Many  of  Mr.  Whitefield’s  fociety  were 
there  : to  whom,  as  well  as  to  all  the  other  Tin- 
ners (without  meddling  with  any  of  their  opini- 
ons) I declared  in  the  name  of  the  great  phyfi- 
cian,  I will  heal  their  backfliding,  I will  love  them 
freely . 

Sund.  27.  I preached  in  Painfwick  at  feven, 
on  The  Jpirit  of  fear  and  the  fpirit  oj  adoption . I 
went  to  church  at  ten,  and  heard  a remarkable 
difcourfe,  alferting,  “ That  we  are  juftified  by 
faith  alone  : but  that  this  faith,  which  is  the  pre- 
vious condition  of  juftiftcation,  is  the  complex 
of  all  Chriftian  virtues,  including  all  holinefs  and 
good  works,  in  the  very  idea  of  it.” 

Alas ! How  little  is  the  difference  between 
alferting,  either  1.  That  we  are  juftified  by  works, 
which  is  Popery  bare- faced,  (and  indeed  fo  grofs 
that  the  fober  Papiffs,  thofe  of  the  council  of 
Trent  in  particular,  are  afhamed  of  it)  or,  2^ 
That  we  are  juftified  by  faith  and  works  ; which 
is  Popery  refined  or  veiled:  (but  with  fo  thin  a 
veil,  that  every  attentive  obferver,  mull  difcern 
it  is  the  fame  ftill)  or,  3.  That  we  are  juftified  by 
faith  alone,  but  by  fuch  a faith  as  includes  all 
good  works.  What  a poor  fhift  is  this!  “ I will 
not  fay,  We  are  juftified  by  works  ; nor  yet  by 
faith  and  works:  becaufe  I have  fubfcribed  arti- 
cles and  homilies,  which  maintain  juft  the  con~ 
trary.  No,  I fay,We  are  juftified  by  faith  alone. — 
But  then  by  faith  I mean  works  1” 

£>5 


When 


[ s2  ] 

When  the  afternoon  fervice  was  ended  at 
Runwick,  I flood  and  cried  to  a vaft  multitude  of 
people,  Unto  him  that  worketh  not , but  believelh, 
hisjaith  is  counted  for  righteoufnefs.  I concluded 
the  day  on  Hampton-common,  by  explaining  to  a 
large  congregation,  the  effential  difference  be- 
tween the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  and  the  righ- 
teoufnefs of  faith. 

Mond.  28.  I rode  to  Briltol.  I foon  found, 
difputing  had  done  much  mifchief  here  alfo.  I 
preached  on  thofe  words,  From  that  time  many  of 
his  d fifes  went  back  and  walked  no  more  with  him. 
Then  Jaid  Jefus  unto  the  twelve.  Will  ye  afo  go 
away?  Many  were  cut  to  the  heart.  A cry  went 
forth  ; and  great  was  the  company  of  the  mour- 
ners. But  God  did  not  leave  them  comfortlefs. 
Some  knew  in  the  fame  hour,  that  he  had  the 
words  of  eternal  life. 

Tuef.  29.  I was  defired  to  vifrt  one  in  New- 
gate. As  1 was  coming  out,  poor  Benjamin  Rut- 
ter flood  in  my  way, and  poured  out  fuch  a flood 
of  curbing  and  bitternefs,  as  I fcarce  thought  was 
to  be  found  out  of  hell. 

From  Thurfday,  July  1,  till  Monday,  I endea- 
voured to  compofe  the  little  differences  which 
had  arifen.  On  Monday  I rode  to  Cardiff,  and 
found  much  peace  and  love  in  the  little  fociety 
there.  Tuef.  6. 1 rode  over  to  Fonmon,  and  found 
Mrs.  Jones  throughly  refigned  to  God,  although 
feeling  what  it  was  to  lofe  an  hufband,  and  fuch 
an  hufband,  in  the  flrength  of  his  vears! 

Wednef. 


[ 83  ] 

Wednef.  7.  I returned,  and  at  five  in  the  af- 
ternoon, preached  to  a fmall  attentive  congrega- 
tion near  Henbury.  Before  eight  I reached 
Briftol,  and  had  a comfortable  meeting  with 
many  who  knew  in  whom  they  had  belie\ed. 

Now  at  length  I fpent  a week  in  peace,  all  de- 
putes being  laid  afide.  Thurf.  15.  I w'as  defiled 
to  meet  one  who  was  ill,  of  a very  uncommon 
diforder.  She  faid,  “ For  feveral  years,  1 have 
heard,  wherever  I am,  a voice  continually  fpeau- 
ing  to  me,  curbing,  fwearing  and  blafpheming  in 
the  moil  horrid  manner,  and  inciting  me  to  all 
manner  of  wickednefs.  I have  applied  to  phy* 
ficians,  and  taken  all  forts  of  medicines,  but  am 
never  the  better.’’ — No,  nor  ever  will,  till  abet- 
ter phyfician  than  thefe,  bruifes  Satan  under  her 
feet. 

I left  Briftol  in  the  evening  of  Sund.  18.  and 
on  Tuef.  came  to  London.  I found  my  mother 
on  the  borders  of  eternity.  But  fhe  had  no  doubt 
or  fear:  nor  any  defire  but  (as  foon  as  God  fhould 
call]  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Chrifi _ 

* Frid.  13.  About  three  in  the  afternoon,  1 
went  to  my  mother,  and  found  her  change  was 
near.  I fat  down  on  the  bed- fide.  She  was  in 
her  laft  conflift  ; unable  to  fpeak,  but  I believe 
quite  fenfible.  Her  look  was  calm  and  ferene, 
and  her  eyes  fixt  upward,  while  we  commended 
her  foul  to  God..  From  three  to  four,  the  filver 
cord  was  looking,  and  the  wheel  breaking  at  the 
ciftern : and  then  without  any  ftr.uggle  or  figh  or 
Di  . groan* 


C 84  1 

groan,  the  foul  was  fet  at  liberty.  We  flood 
round  the  bed,  and  fulfilled  her  laft  requefled, 
uttered  a little  before  fhe  lofl  her  fpeech,  “ Chil- 
dren, as  foon  as  I am  releafed,  fing  a pfalm  of 
praife  to  God.” 

* Sund.  Aug.  1.  Almoft  an  innumerable  com- 
pany of  people  being  gathered  together,  about 
five  in  the  afternoon,  I committed  to  the  earth, 
the  body  of  my  mother,  to  deep  with  her  fathers. 
The  portion  of  fcripture  from  which  I after- 
wards fpoke  was,  1 Jaw  a great  white  throne  and 
him  that fat  on  it ; from  whofe  face  the  earth  and 
the  heaven  fed  away , and  there  was  found  no  place 
for  them.  And  I Jaw  the  dead , Jmall  and  great, 
Jland  before  God , and  the  books  were  opened — 
And  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  thoj'e  things  which 
were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their 
works.  It  was  one  of  the  moft  folemn  alfem- 
blies  I ever  faw,  or  expeft  to  fee  on  this  fide 
eternity. 

We  fet  up  a plain  ftone  at  the  head  of  her 
grave,  infcribed  with  the  following  words : 

“ Hereliesthe  body  of  Mrs.SufannahWefley, 
the  youngeft  and  laft  furviving  daughter  of  Dr. 
Samuel  Annefley.” 

“ In  fure  and  ftedfaft  hope  to  rife 
And  claim  her  manfion  in  the  {kies, 

A Chriftian  here  her  flefh  laid  down, 

The  crofs  exchanging  for  a crown. 


True 


[ % ] 

True  daughter  of  affli&ion  (he 
Inured  to  pain  and  mifery, 

Mourn’d  along  night  of  griefs  and  fears, 

A legal  night  of  feventy  years. 

The  Father  then  reveal’d  his  Son, 

Him  in  the  broken  bread  made  known. 

She  knew  and  felt  her  fins  forgiven, 

And  found  the  earned  of  her  heaven. 

Meet  for  the  fellowfhip  above, 

She  heard  the  call,  “ Arife,  my  love  :’r 
“ I come,  her  dying  looks  replied, 

And  lamb-like,  as  her  Lord,  Ihe  died.” 

* I cannot  but  further  obferve,  That  even  fhe 
fas  well  as  her  father  and  grandfather,  her  huf- 
band,  and  her  three  fons)  had  been,  in  her  mea- 
fure  and  degree,  a preacher  of  righteoufnefs. 
This  I learned  from  a letter,  wrote  long  fince 
to  my  father ; part  of  which  I have  here  fub- 
joined, 

Feb.  6,  1711-12. 

A S I am  a woman,  fo  I am  alfo  mif- 

'*■  **■  trefs  of  a large  family.  And  though 
the  fuperior  charge  of  the  fouls  contained  in  it, 
Ues  upon  you, — yet  in  your  abfence,  I cannot 

but 


[ 86  ] 

but  look  upon  every  foul  you  leave  under  my 
care,  as  a talent  committed  to  me  under  a trull,  by 
the  great  Lord  of  all  the  families,  both  of  heaven 
and  earth.  And  if  I am  unfaithful  to  him  or 
you,  in  neglecting  to  improve  thefe  talents,  how 
(hall  I anfwer  unto  him,  when  he  fhall  com- 
mand me,  to  render  an  account  of  my  fleward- 
fhip  ? 

As  thefe  and  other  fuch  like  thoughts,  made 
me  at  fi r lb  take  a more  than  ordinary  care,  of  the 
Louis  of  my  children  and  fervants,  fo  knowing 
our  religion  requires  a drift  obfervaiion  of  the 
Lord’s  day,  and  not  thinking  that  we  fully  an- 
fwered  the  end  of  the  inllitution,  by  going  to 
church,  unlefs  we  filled  up  the  intermediate  fpa- 
ces  of  time  by  other  afts  of  piety  and  devotion  : 

1 thought  it  my  duty  to  fpend  fome  part  of  the 
day,  in  reading  to  and  infirufting  my  family, — 
And  fuch  time  1 elleemed  fpent  in  a way  more 
acceptable  to  God,  than  if  I had  retired  to  my 
own  private  devotions. 

* This  was  the  beginning  of  my  prefent  prac- 
tice. Other  people’s  coming  and  joiningwith  us 
was  merely  accidental.  Our  lad  told  hisparents: 
they  fill!  defired  to  be  admitted : then  others 
that  heard  of  it,  begged  leave  alfo.  So  our  com- 
pany increafed  to  about  thirty  : and  it  feldonx 
exceeded  forty  laft  winter.” — 

But  foon  after  you  went  to  London  laft,  I 
light  on  the  account  of  the  Danifh  milfionaries. 
1 was,  I think,  never  more  affefted  with  any 

thing- 


[ 87  ] 


thing.— I could  not  forbear  (pending  good  part 
of  that  evening,  in  praifing  and  adoring  the  di- 
vine goodnefs,  for  infpiring  them  with  fuch  ar- 
dent zeal  for  his  glory.-— For  feveral  days  I could 
think  or  (peak  of  little  elfe.  At  lafl  it  came  in- 
to my  mind,  though, I am  not  a men,  nor  a mi- 
niffer,  yet  if  my  heart  were  fincerely  devoted 
to  God,  and  I was  infpired  with  a true  zeal  for 
his  glory,  I might  do  fomewhat  more  than  1 do/ 
I thought,  I might  pray  more  for  them,  and 
might  (peak  to  tliofe  with  whom  I converfe  with 
more  warmth  of  afFeftion,  I refolved  to  began 
with  my  own  children  ; in  which  I obferve  the 
following  method.  I take  fuch  a proportion  of 
time  as  I can  fpare  every  night,  to  difcourfe 
with  each  child, apart.  On  Monday  I talk  with 
Molly ; on  Tuefday  with  Hetty ; Wednefday 
with  Nancy;  Thurfdav  with  jacky ; Friday 
with  Patty ; Saturday  with  Charles  ; and  with 
Emily  and  Suky  together  on  Sunday. 

With  thofe  few  neighbours  that  then  came  to- 
me, I difcourfed  more  freely  and  affeHionately. 
Ichofethe  beftandmoft  awakening  fermons  we 
have.  And  I fpent  fomewhat  more  time  with 
them  in  fuch  exercifes,  without  being  careful 
about  the  fuccefs  of  my  undertaking.  Since 
this  our  company  increafed  every  night.  For  I 
dare  deny  none  that  afk  admittance. 

Laft  Sunday  I believe  we  had  above  two 
hundred.  And  yet  many  went  away,  for  want 
of  room  to  ftand^ 

We 


[ 8*  ] 

We  banifh  all  temporal  concerns  from  our  fo- 
clety.  None  is  differed  to  mingle  any  difcourfe 
about  them,  with  our  reading  o-r  Tinging.  We 
keep  clofe  to  the  buftnefs  of  the  day,,  and 
when  his  over,  all  go  home. 

I cannot  conceive,  why  any  fhoukl  reflect 
upon  you,  hecaufe  your  wife  endeavours  to  draw 
people  to  church,  and  to  reftrain  them  from 
profaning  the  Lord’s-day,  by  reading  to  them, 
and  other  perfuafions.  For  my  part,  I value 
no  cenfure  upon  this  account.  I have  long  ft  nee 
fhook  hands  with  the  world.  And  I heartily 
wifh,  I had  never  given  them  moie  reafon  to 
fpeak  againfl  me. 

As  to  its  looking  particular,  I grant  it  does. 
And  fo  does  almoft  any  thing  that  is  ferious,  or 
that  may  any  wav  advance  the  glory  of  God,  or 
the  falvation  of  fouls. 

As  for  your  propofal,  of  letting  fome  other 
perfon  read,  alas!  You  do  not  confider  what  a 
people  thefe  are.  I do  not  think  one  man  among 
them  could  read  a fermon,  without  fpelling  a 
good  part  of  it.  Nor  has  any  of  our  family  a 
voice  ftrong  enough,  to  be  heard  by  fuch  a num- 
ber of  people. 

But  there  is  one  thing  about  which  I am  much, 
diffatisfied  ; that  is,  their  being  prefent  at  fami- 
ly prayers.  I do  not  fpeak  of  any  concern  I am 
under,  barelv  becaufe  fo  many  are  prefent.  For 
thofe  who  have  the  honour  of  fpeaking  to  the 
Great  ancN  Holy  God,  need  not  be  afhamed  to 

fpeak 


C 89  ] 

fpeak  before  the  whole  world : but  becaufe  of 
my  fex.  I doubt,  if  it  is  proper  for  me,  to  pre- 
fers the  prayers  of  the  people  to  God,  Laft 
Sunday  I would  fain  have  difinift  them  before 
prayers ; but  they  begged  fo  earneftly  to  flay,  I 
durfl  not  deny  them 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Weller,  in  St.  Margaret  s 
Church-yard,  Weftminfler. 

For  the  benefit  of  thofe,  who  are  intruded,  as 
file  was,  wi  h the  care  of  a numerous  family,  I 
cannot  but  add  one  letter  more,  which  I receiv- 
ed from  her  many  years  ago. 

July  24,  1732. 

* Dear  Son, 

ACCORDING  to  your  defire,  I have  col- 
lected the  principle  rules  I obferved  in 
educating  my  family  : which  I now  fend  you  as 
they  occurred  to  my  mind,  and  von  may  (if  you 
think  thev  can  be  of  ufe  to  any]  difpofe  of  them 
in  what  order  you  pleafe. 

The  child  ren  were  always  put  into  a regular 
method  of  living  in  fuch  thing's  as  thev  were 
capable  of,  from  their  birth  ; as  in  dre fling,  un- 
dreffing,  changing  their  linen,  See.  The  fir  ft 
quarter  commonly  palfes  in  deep.  After  that, 
theyr  were,  if  poftible,  laid  into  their  cradles 
awake,  and  rocked  to  fleep  ; and  fo  they  were 
kept  rocking,  till  it  was  time  for  them  to  awake. 
This  was  done  to  bring  them  to  a regular  courfe 

of 


[ 9°  ] 

keeping  ; which  at  Srft  was  three  hours  in 
the  morning,  and  three  in  the  afternoon  : after- 
ward two  hours,  till  they  needed  none  at  all. 

When  turned  a year  old  (and  fome  before) 
they  were  taught  to  fear  the  rod,  and  to  cry 
foftly  : by  which  means  they  efcaped  abundance 
of  correction  they  might  otherwife  have  had  ; 
and  that  moll  odious  noife  of  the  crying  of 
children  was  rarely  heard  in  the  houfe  ; but  the 
family  ufually  lived  in  as  much  quietncfs,  at  i£ 
there  had  not  been,  a child  among  them. 

As  foon  as  they  were  grown  pretty  flrong, 
they  were  confined  to  three  meals  a dav.  At 
dinner  their  little  table,  and  chairs  were  fet  by 
ours,  where  they  could  be  overlooked  ; and  they 
were  fuffered  to  eat  and  drink  (fmall  beer)  as 
much  as  they  would,  but  not  to  call  for  any 
thing.  If  they  wanted  ought,  they  ufed  to  whif- 
per  to  the  maid  which  attended  them,  who  came 
and  fpake  to  me ; and  as  foon  as  they  could 
handle  a knife  and  fork,  they  were  fet  to  our 
table.  They  were  never  fuffered  to  chufe  their 
meat  but  always  made  to  eat  fuch  things,  as  w'ere 
provided  for  the  family. 

Mornings  they  had  always  fpoon-meat ; fome- 
times  at  nights.  But  whatever  they  had,  they 
were  never  permitted  to  eat  at  thofe  meals,  of 
more  than  one  thing,  and  of  that  fparingly 
enough.  Drinking  or  eating  between  meals 
was  never  allowed,  unlefs  in  cafe  of  ficknefs, 
which  feldom  happened.  Nor  were  they  fuffer- 
ed 


[ 1 

ed  to  go  into  the  kitchen  to  afk  any  thing  of 
the  fervants,  when  they  were  at  meat ; if  it  was 
known  they  did,  they  were  certainly  beat,  and  the 
fervants  feverely  reprimanded. 

At  fix,  as  foon  as  family-prayers  was  over, 
they  had  their  flipper  ; at  feven  the  maid  walked 
them,  and  beginning  at  the  youngeft,  flie  un- 
dreft  and  got  them  all  to  bed  by  eight ; at  which 
time  fhe  left  them  in  their  feveral  rooms  awake, 
for  there  was  no  fucli  thing  allowed  of  in  our 
houfe,  as  fitting  by  a child  till  it  fell  afleep. 

They  were  fo  conftantly  ufed  to  eat  and  drink 
what  was  given  them,  that  when  any  of  them 
was  ill,  there  was  no  difficulty  in  making  them 
take  the  mod  unpleafant  medicine  : for  they 
durft  not  refufe  it,  though  fome  of  them  would 
prefently  throw  it  up.  This  I mention  to  fhew 
that  a perfon  may  be  taught  to  take  any  things 
though  it  be  never  fo  much  againft  his  ffi>. 
mach. 

In  order  to  form  the  minds  of  children,  (he 
firfl  thing  to  be  done  is  to  conquer  their  will,  and 
bring  them  to  an  obedient  temper.  To  inform 
the  underftanding  is  a work  of  time,  and  mull 
with  children  proceed  by  llow  degrees  as  they 
are  able  to  bear  it ; but  the.  fubjefting  the  will, 
is  a thing  which  mull  be  done  at  once  ; and  the 
fooner  the  better.  For  by  neglefling  timely  cor- 
rection they  will  contrafl  a flubbornnefs,  and 
obftinacy,  which  is  hardly  ever  after  conquered, 
and  never  without  ufing  fuch  feveri.ty  as  would 

be 


[ 92  ] 

be  as  painful  to  me  as  to  the  child.  In  the  ef- 
t eem  of  the  world  they  pafs  for  kind  and  indul- 
gent,whom  I call  cruel  parents,  who  permit  their 
children  to  get  habits,  which  they  know  muflbe 
aiterwards  broken.  Nay,  fome  are  fo  flupidly 
fond,  as  in  fport  to  teach  their  children  to  do 
things,  which  in  a while  after  thev  have  feverely 
beaten  them  for  doing.  When  a child  is  cor- 
refted  it  muff  be  conquered,  and  this  will  be  no 
hard  matter  to  do,  if  it  be  not  grown  headfhong 
by  too  much  indulgence.  And  when  the  wilb 
of  a child  is  totally  fubdued,  and  it  is  brought 
to  revere  and  Hand  in  awe  of  the  parents,  then 
a great  many  chi Idifh  follies,  and  inadvertencies- 
may  be  paft  by.  Some  fhould  be  overlooked 
and  taken  no  notice  of,  and  others  .mildlv  re- 
proved, but  no  wilful  tranfgreiTion  ought  ever 
to  be  forgiven  children,  without  chaflifemenf, 
Jefs  or  more,  as  the  nature  and  circumftances  of 
the  offence  require. 

I infill  upon  conquering  the  will  of  children 
betimes,  bccaufe  this  is  the  only  flrong  and  ra- 
tional foundation  of  a religious  education  ; with- 
out which  both  precept  and  example  will  he  in- 
effeblual.  But  when  this  is  thoroughly  done, 
then  a child  is  capable  of  being  governed  by  the 
reafon  and  piety  of  its  parents,  till  its  own  un- 
derflanding  comes  to  maturity,  and  the  princi- 
ples of  religion  have  taken  root  in  the  mind. 

I cannot  yet  difmifs  this  fubject.  Asfelf-will 
is  the  root  of  all  fin  and  mifery,  fo  whatever 

cherifhes. 


r 93  3 

cherifhes  this  in  children,  in  fares  their  after 
wretchednefs  and  irreligion : whatever  checks 
and  mortifies  it,  promotes  their  future  happinefs 
and  piety.  This  is  hill  more  evident,  if  we  far- 
ther confider,  that  religion  is  nothing  elfe  than 
the.  doing  the  will  of  God,  and  not  our  own  : 
that  the  one  grand  impediment  to  our  temporal 
and  eternal  happinefs  being  this  felf-will,  no  in- 
dulgences of  it  can  be  trivial,  no  denial  unpro- 
fitable. Heaven  or  hell  depends  on  this  alone. 
So  that  the  parent  who  ftudies  to  fubdue  it  in 
his  child,  works  together  with  God  in  the  re- 
newing and  faring  a foul : the  parent  who  in- 
dulges it  does  the  devil’s  work,  mal  es  religion 
imprafficable,  falvation  unattainable,  and  does 
all  that  in  him  lies  to  damn  his  child,  foul,  and 
body  for  ever. 

The  children  of  this  family  were  taught,  as  foon 
as  they  could  fpeak,  the  Lord’s  prayer,  which 
they  were  made  to  fay  at  riling  and  bed-time 
conllantly:  to  which  as  they  grew  bigger,  were 
added  a fhort  prayer  for  their  parents,  and  fome 
collefls ; a fhort  catechifm,  and  fome  portion 
of  feripture,  as  their  memories  could  bear. 

They  were  very  early  made  to  diflinguifh  the 
fabbath  from  other  davs  ; before  they  could  well 
fpeak,  or  go.  They  were  as  foon  taught  to  be 
Hill  at  family  prayers,  and  to  alk  a bleffing  inline- 
tliatelv  after,  which  they  ufed  to  do  by  figns,  be- 
fore they  could  kneel  or  fpeak. 

They  were  quickly  made  to  under  Hand,  they 

might 


C 94  ] 


might  have  nothing  they  cried  for,  and  inftrucl- 
ed  to  fpeak  handfomly  for  what  they  wanted. 
They  were  not  fuffered  to  afk,  even  the  1 owe  ft 
fervantfor  ought  without  faying  “ Pray  give  me 
fuchathing;”  and  the  fervant  was  chid,  if  fhe 
ever  let  them  omit  that  word.  Taking  God’s 
name  in  vain,  curfing  and  fwearing,  profane- 
nefs,  obfcenity,  rude,  ill-bred  names,  were 
never  heard  among  them.  Nor  were  they  ever 
permitted  to  call  each  other  by  their  proper 
names,  without  the  addition  of  brother  or  filler. 

None  of  them  were  taught  to  read  till  five 
years  old,  except  Kezzy,  in  whofe  cafe  I was 
over-ruled ; and  fhe  was  more  years  learning, 
than  any  of  the  reft  had  been  months.  The  way 
of  teaching  was  this  : the  day  before  a child  be- 
gan to  learn,  the  houfe  was  fet  in  order,  every 
one’s  work  appointed  them,  and  a charge  given, 
that  none  fhould  come  into  the  room  ircm  nine 
till  twelve,  or  from  two  till  five,  which  you 
know,  were  our  fchool-hours.  One  dav  was 
allowed  the  child,  wherein  to  learn  its  letters, 
and  each  of  them  did  in  that  time  know  all  its 
letters,  great  and  fmall,  except  Molly  and  Nan- 
cy, who  were  a day  and  a half  before  they  knew 
them  perfectly  : for  which  I then  thought  them 
very  dull;  but  fince  I have  obfeived  how  long 
many  children  are  learning  the  horn-book,  I 
have  changed  my  opinion.  But  the  reafon  why 
I thought  them  fo  then  was,  becaufe  the  reft 
learned  fo  readily,  and  your  brother  Samuel, 

who 


[ 95  3 

■who  was  the  firft  child  I ever  taught,  learnt  the 
alphabet  in  a few  hours.  He  was  five  years  old 
on  the  ieth  of  February  : the  next  day  he  began 
to  learn,  and  as  foon  as  he  knew  the  letters,  be- 
gan at  the  firft  chapter  of  Genefis.  He  was 
taucrfit  to  fpell  the  firft  verfe,  then  to  read  it 
over  and  over,  till  he  could  read  it  off  hand  with- 
out any  hefitation : fo  on  to  the  fecund,  &c. 
(till  he  took  ten  verfes  for  a leffon,  which  be 
quickly  did.)  Eafter  fell  low  that  year,  and  by 
Whitfuntide  he  could  read  a chapter  very  well ; 
for  he  read  continually,  and  had  fuch  a prodi- 
gious memorv,  that  I cannot  remember  ever  to 
have  told  him  the  fame  word  twice. 

What  was  yet  ftranger;  any  word,  he  had 
learnt  in  his  leffon,  he  knew  wherever  he  fawit, 
either  in  his  bible,  or  any  other  book,  by  which 
means  he  learnt  very  foon  to  read  an  Englifh  au- 
thor well. 

The  fame  method  was  obferved  with  them  all. 
As  foon  as  they  knew  the  letters,  they  were  put 
firft  to  fpell  ; and  read  one  line,  then  a verfe, 
never  leaving  till  perlefft  in  their  leffon,  were, 
it  fhorter  or  longer.  So  one  or  other  continued 
reading  at  fchool-  time,  without  any  intermiffion, 
and  before  we  left  fclvool  each  child  read  what 
he  had  learnt  that  morning  ; and  e’er  we  parted 
in  the  afternoon,  what  they  had  learnt  that  day. 

There  was  no  fuch  thing  as  loud  talking  or 
plating  allowed  of ; but  every  one  was  kept 
clofe  to  their  bufinefs  for  the  fix  hours  of  fchoof. 

And 


2 


[ 96  ] 

Ann  it  is  almoft  incredible,  what  a child  may  be 
taught  in  a quarter  of  a year,  by  a vigorous  appli- 
cation, if  it  have  but  a. tolerable  capacity,  and 
good  health.  Every  one  of  thefe,  ICezzy  ex- 
cepted, could  read  better  in  that  time,  than  the 
mo  ft  of  women  can  do  as  long  as  they  live. 

Rifing  out  ol  their  place?,  or  going  out  of  the 
room,  was  not  permitted  unlefs  for  good  caufe, 
and  running  into  theyard,  garden,  or  flreet  with 
out  leave,  was  always  efteemed  a capital  of- 
fence. 

For  fome  years  we  went  on  very  well.  Never 
were  children  in  better  order.  Never  were  chil- 
dren better  difpofcdto  pietv,  or  in  more  fubjec- 
tion  to  their  parents ; ’till  that  fatal  difperfion  of 
them  after  the  fire  into  feveral  families.  In  thofe 
they  were  left  at  lull  liberty  to  converfewith  fer- 
vants,  which  before  they  had  always  been  re- 
flrained  from,  and  to  run  abroad  and  play  with 
any  children,  good  or  bad.  They  foon  learnt  to 
negleft  a fh  i£l  obfervation  ofthe  fabbath,  and  got 
knowledge  of  feveral fongs  and  bad  things,  which 
before  they  had  no  notion  of.  That  civil  beha- 
viour which  made  them  admired  when  at  home, 
by  all  which  faw  them,  was  in  great  meafure  loft, 
and  a clownifh  accent  and  many  rude  ways  were 
learnt,  which  were  not  reformed  without  fome 
difficulty. 

When  the  houfe  was  re-built,  and  the  children 
all  brought  home,  we  entered  upon  a ftrift  re- 
form ; and  then  was  begun  the  cuftom  of  fiug- 

ing 


C 97  ] 


mg  pfalms  at  beginning  and  ieaving  fchool, 
morning  and  evening.  Then  alfo  that  of  a ge- 
neral retirement  at  five  a clock  was  entered  upon, 
when  the  oldeft  took  the  youngeft  that  could 
fpeak,  and  the  fecond  the  next,  to  whom  they 
fead  the  pfalms  for  the  day,  and  a chapter  in  the 
new  teilament  ; as  in  the  morning  they  were 
directed  to  read  the  pfalms  and  a chapter  in  the 
old,  after  which  they  went  to  their  private  pray- 
ers, before  they  got  their  breakfaft,  or  come 
into  the  family.  And  I thank  God,  the  cuflom  is 
ftill  preferved  among  us. 

There  were  feveral  by-laws  obferved  among 
us,  which  dipt  my  memory,  or  elfe  they  had 
been  inferted  in  their  proper  place  : but  I men- 
tion them  here,  becaufe  I think  them  ufe- 
ful. 

i.  It  had  been  obferved,  that  cowardice  and 
fear  of  punilhment,  often  lead  children  into  lying, 
till  they  get  a cufiom  of  it,  which  they  cannot 
leave.  To  prevent  this,  a law  was  made,  That 
whoever  was  charged  with  a fault,  of  which  they 
were  guilty,  if  they  would  ingenuoully  confefs  it, 
and  promife  to  amend,  fhould  not  be  beaten. 
This  rule  prevented  a great  deal  of  lying,  and 
would  have  done  more,  if  one  in  the  family 
would  have  obferved  it.  But  he  could  not  be 
prevailed  on,  and  therefore  was  often  impofed 
on  by  falfe  colours  and  equivocations,  which 
none  would  have  ufed  (except  one)  had  they 
Vol.  XXVIII.  ' E been 


been  kindly  dealt  with.  And  fome  in  fpite  of  all 
would  always  fpeak  truth  plainly. 

2.  That  no  finful  aftion,  as  lying,  pilfering 
at  church,  or  on  the  Lord’s  day,  difobedience, 
quarrelling  &c.  fhould -ever  pafs  unpunilhed. 

3.  That  no  child  Ihould  ever  be  chid,  or  beat 
twice  for  the  farne  fault,  and  that  if  they  amend- 
ed, they  Ihould  never  be  upbraided  with  it  after- 
wards. 

4.  That  every  fignal  aft  of  obedience,  efpeci- 
ally  when  it  eroded  upon  their  own  inclinations, 
fhould  be  always  commended,  and  frequently 
rewarded,  according  to  the  merits  of  the  caufe, 

5.  That  if  ever  any  child  performed  an  aft  of 
obedience,  or  did  any  thing  with  an  intention 
to  pleafe,  though  the  performance  was  not  well, 
yet  the  obedience  and  intention  fhould  be  kind- 
ly accepted,  and  the  child  with  fweetnefs  direct- 
ed how  to  do  better  for  the  future. 

6.  That  propriety  be  inviolably  preferved,  and 
none  fuffered  to  invade  the  property  of  another 
in  the  fmallefl  matter,  though  it  were  but  of  the 
value  of  a farthing,  or  a pin;  which  they  might 
not  take  from  the  owner,  without,  much  lefs, 
aoainft  his  confent.  This  rule  can  never  be  too 

O 

much  inculcated  on  the  minds  of  children  ; and 
from  the  want  of  parents  or  governors  doing  i-t 
as  they  ought,  proceeds  that  fhameful  negleft 
ofjuflice,  which  we  may  obferve  in  the  world. 

7.  That  promifes  be  flriftly  obferved  : and 
a gift  once  bellowed,  and  fo  the  right  paffed 

away 


i 99  ] 


away  from  the  donor,  be  not  refumed,  but  left 
to  the  difpofal  of  him  to  whom  it  was  given  ; un- 
lefs  it  were  conditional,  and  the  condition  of  the 
obligation  not  performed. 

8.  That  no  girl  be  taught  to  work  till  fhe  can 
read  very  well ; and  then  that  fhe  be  kept  to 
her  work  with  the  fame  application,  and  for 
the  fame  time  that  fhe  was  held  to,  in  reading. 
This  rule  alfo  is  much  to  be  obferved  ; for  the 
putting  children  to  learn  fewirtg  before  they  can 
read  perfeffly,  is  the  very  reafon,  why  fo  few 
women  can  read  fit  to  be  heard,  and  never  to 
be  well  underftood.” 

Sund  8.  I cried  aloud,  in  Radcliff-fquare, 
Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of  IJrael?  Only  one 
poor  man  was  exceeding  noify  and  turbulent. 
But  in  a moment  God  touched  his  heart.  He 
hung  down  his  head.  Tears  covered  his  face; 
and  his  voice  was  heard  no  more. 

I was  contained  this  evening  to  feparate 
from  the  believers,  fome  who  did  not Jhew  their 
faith  by  their  works.  One  of  thefe  Sam.  Prig,  was 
deeply  difpleafed,  fpoke  many  very  bitter  words, 
and  went  abruptly  away.  The  next  morning  he 
called ; told  me,  “ Neither  my  brother  nor  I, 
preached  the  gofpel,  or  knew  what  it  meant.” 

I afked,  “ What  do  we  preach  then  ?”  He  faid, 

“ Heathen  morality:  TulLy’s  offices,  and  no 
more.  So  I wafh  my  hands  of  you  both.  We 
fhall  fee  what  you  will  come  to  in  a little  time.” 

Wednef.  n.  He  fent  me  a note,  demand- 

E 2 ing 


■Gl  1°°  ] 

ing  tlie  payment  of  one  hundred  pounds,  which, 
he  had  lent  me  about  a year  before,  to  pay  the 
workmen  at  the  Foundry.  On  Friday  morning 
at  eight,  he  came  and  faid,  “ He  wanted  his 
money  and  could  flay  no  longer.”  I told  him, 
**  I would  endeavour  to  borrow  it,”  and  defired 
him  to  call  in  the  evening.  But  he  faid,  “ He 
could  not  flay  folong,  and  muft  have  it  at  twelve 
o’clock.”  Where  to  get  it  I knew  not:  be- 
tween nine  and  ten,  one  came  and  offered  me 
the  ufe  of  an  hundred  pounds  for  a year.  But 
two  others  had  been  with  me  before,  to  make 
the  fame  offer.  I accepted  the  bank  note  which 
one  of  them  brought,  and  faw  that  God  is  oveT 
all! 

Mond.  16.  I rode  to  Oxford,  and  the  next 
day  to  Evefham.  On  Wednefday  and  Thurfday, 
in  riding  from  Evefham  to  Briftol,  I read  over 
that  furprizing  book,  the  life  of  Ignatius  Loyola: 
furely  one  of  the  greateff  men  that  ever  was  en- 
gaged in  the  fupport  of  fo  bad  a caufe!  I won- 
der any  man  fhould  judge  him  to  be  an  enthu- 
fiafl : no  : but  he  knew  the  people  with  whom 
he  had  to  do.  And  fetting  out  (like  Count 

Z ),  with  a full  perfuafion,  that  he  might  ufe 

guile,  to  promote  the  glory  of  God,  or  (which 
he  thought  the  fame  thing)  the  interefl  of  his 
church,  he  a£fed  in  all  things  confident  with  his 
principles. 

In  the  evening  I met  mv  brother  and  Mr. 
Graves ; who  being  able  to  delay  it  no  longer, 

at 


[ lOl  ] 

at  length  font  the  following  letter  to  the  fellows 
of  St.  Mary  Magdalen -college,  in  Oxford. 

“ Gentlemen,  Briflol,  Aug.  20.  1742. 

IN  December,  1740,  I figncd  a paper  contain- 
ing the  following  words,  “ I Charles  Cafpar 
Graves,  do  hereby  declare,  that  1 do  renounce 
the  modern  praftice  and  principles  of  the  per- 
fous  commonly  called  Methodids,  namely,  of 
preaching  in  fields,  of  afiembling  together  and 
expounding  the  holy  fcriptures  in  private  houfes, 
and  elfewhere  than  in  churches,  in  an  irregular 
manner:  and  their  pretenfions  to  an  extraordi- 
nary infpiration  and  inward  feeling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

“ I do  farther  declare  my  conformity  to  the 
liturgy  of  the  church  of  England,  and  mv  un- 
feigned alien  t and  confent  to  the  articles  thereof, 
commonly  called  the  thirty-nine  articles. 

“ Laftly,  I do  declare,  that  I ain  hearti- 
ly forry,  that  I have  given  offence  and  fcan- 
dal,  by  frequenting  the  meetings  and  attending 
the  expofitions  of  the  perfons  commonly 
called  Method  ills,  and  that  I will  not  fre- 
quent their  meetings,  nor  attend  their  expofi- 
tions for  the  future  : nor  take  upon  me  to  preach 
and  expound  the  fcripture,  in  the  manner 
preached  by  them.” 

Charles  Caspar  Graves. 

I believe  myfelf  indifperifably  obliged,  open- 

E 3 ' iy 


[ 102  J 

ly  to  declare  before  God  and  the  world,  that  the 
motives  whereby  I was  induced  to  fign  that  pa- 
per were,  partly  a fmful  fear  of  man,  partly  an 
improper  deference  to  the  judgment  of  thofe, 
whom  I accounted  wifer  than  rnyfelf,  and  lattlv, 
a refolution  that  if  my  own  judgment,  fliould  at 
any  time  be  better  informed,  I would  then  open- 
ly retraft,  in  the  prefence  of  God  and  man,  what- 
ever I fhould  be  convinced  I had  faid  or  done 
ami  Is. 

Accordingly,  having  now  had  (befides  a flrong 
conviftion  immediatelv  confequent  thereon) 
many  opportunities  of  informing  my  judgment 
better,  and  being  fully  convinced  ol  my  fault,  I 
do  hereby  declare,  my  fincere  repentance,  for 
my  wicked  compliance  with  thofe  oppreflive 
men,  who  without  any  colour  of  law,  divine  or 
human,  impofed  fuch  a condition  of  receiving  a 
teftimonial  upon  me. 

1 do  farther  declare,  that  I know  no  princi- 
ples of  the  MethodiJIs  (fo  called)  which  are  con- 
trary to  the  word  ol  God  ; nor  any  practices  of 
them,  but  what  are  agreeable  both  to  fcriptuvc 
and  to  the  laws  of  the  church  of  England  : that 
I believe,  in  particular,  their  preaching  the  gof- 
pel  in  the  Julds  (being  firfl  forbid  fo  to  do  in 
churches,  although  a dfpenjation  of  the  gefpel  is 
committed  to  them,  and  wo  unto  them  if  they  preach 
not  the  gofpel)  or  in  private  heujes,  or  in  any 
part  of  his  dominion  who  filletli  heaven  and 
earth  ; can  never  be  proved  to  be  contrary  to 

any 


C 1°3  ] 

any  written  law,  either  of  God  or  man : that 
I am  not  apprized,  of  their  preaching  any  where, 
in  an  irregular,  diforderty  manner  ; neither  of 
their  pretending  to  any  extraordinary  infpiration, 
or  extraordinary  feelings  of  the  Holy  Spirit : 
but  to  thofe  ordinary  ones  only,  which  if  a man 
have  not,  he  is  without  hope  and  without  God  in 
the  world . 

I do  yet  farther  declare,  that  (whatever  indif- 
cretion  I may  in  other  refpefl  have  been  guilty 
of)  I know  of  no  juft  offence  of  Jcandal  which  I 
ever  gave,  by frequenting  the  meetings,  or  attend- 
ing the  expo/itions  of  the  perfons  commonly  called 
Methodifls : and  that  I verily  believe  no  offence 
was  ever  taken  thereat,  unlefs  either  by  perfons 
loaded  with  prejudice,  or  by  thofe  who  enter 
not  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  themfelves,  and 
and  if  others  would  enter  in,  fuffer  them  not. 

Ido,  laftly,  declare,  that  I look  upon  mvfelf 
to  be  under  no  kind  of  obligation,  (except  only, 
that  Ido  ftill  alfent  and  confent  to  the  articles 
and  liturgy'  of  the  church)  to  obferve  any  thing 
contained  in  that  fcandalous  paper,  fo  unchrif- 
tianly  impofed  upon  me. 

Witnefs  my  hand, 

Charles  Caspar  Graves.” 

After  having  regulated  the  fociety  here  and 
in  Kingfwood,  I fet  out  again  for  London.  On 
Monday  30,  I read  over  that  excellent  traft, 
Mr.  Middleton’s  eflay  on  church  government, 
E 4 fo 


[ 104  ] 

fo  nicely  avoiding  the  two  extreams  of  either 
exalting  or  deprefting  the  regal  power.  Tuefd. 
31.  I read  once  more  the  life  of  that  good  and 
wife  (though  much  miftaken  man)  Gregory  Lo- 
pez. Surely  it  muff  be  a compliment  made  him 
by  the  biographer,  (of  which  Gregory  himfelf 
was  in  no  wife  worthy)  that  “ he  afcribed  all 
his  virtues  to  the  merits  and  mediation  of  the 
queen  of  heaven.” 

We  reached  London  in  the  afternoon.  Frid. 
Sept.  3.  I preached  on  Phil.  i.  9.  This  I pray, 
that  your  love  may  abound  more  and  more , in 
knowledge , and  in  all  judgment : or  rather  feel- 
ing, as  it  is  in  the  margin.  It  pleafed  God  to 
make  this  difcourfe,  an  occafion  of  difcovering 
fuch  wiles  of  Satan,  as  it  never  entered  into  my 
heart  to  conceive, 

Saturd.  3.  I was  prefl  tovifit  a poor  murderer 
in  Newgate,  who  was  much  afflidied  both  in  bo- 
dy and  foul.  I objedled,  “ It  could  not  be  ; for 
all  the  turnkeys,  as  well  as  the  keeper,  were  Jo 
good  Chrijlians,  they  abhorred  the  name  of  a 
Methodijl : and  had  abfolutely  refufed  to  admit 
me  even  to  one,  who  earneflly  begged  it,  the 
morning  he  was  to  die.  ’ However  I went : 
and  found,  by  a furprizing  turn,  that  all  the 
doors  were  now  open  to  me.  I exhorted  the  Tick 
malefadtor,  to  cry  unto  God  with  all  his  might, 
for  grace  to  repent  and  believe  the  gofpel.  It 
was  not  long  before  the  reft  of  the  felons  flock- 
ed round  ; to  whom  I fpoke  ftrong  words,  con- 
cerning 


cerning  the  friend  of  finners ; which  they  rece4V- 
ed  with  as  great  ligns  of  amazement,  as  if  it  had 
been  a voice  from  heaven.  When  I came  down 
into  the  common  hall,  (I  think  they  called  it) 
one  of  the  prifoners  there  alking  me  a queftion, 
gave  me  occafion  to  fpeak  among  them  alfo  : 
more  and  more  ft  ill  running  together,  while  I 
declared,  God  was  not  willing  any  of  them 
fhould  perifh,  but  that  all  (huuld  come  to  re- 
pentance. 

* Mond.  6.  Finding  many  had  been  offended, 
at  the  fermon  I preached  on  Friday  night,  efpe- 
cially  thofe  who  were  fuppofed  to  be  flrong  in 
faith,  I determined  to  examine  the  matter  tho- 
roughly. Accordingly  I defired  M.  C,  M.  F, 
E.  H,  and  A.  G,  and  a few  others,  to  meet  me 
with  Sarah  Cl.  Jane  J — n,  and  Ann  P.  to  whom 
they  had  faid  moil,  concerning  the  point  in  quef- 
tion. I then  heard  each  of  them  relate  her  ex- 
perience at  large  ; I afterwards  examined  them 
feverally,  touching  the  circumftances  which  I 
had  not  underftood ; on  which  I then  talked 
with  feveral  others  alfo.  And  thus  far  I approv- 
ed of  their  experience,  (becaufe  agreeable  to  the 
written  word)  as  to  their  feeling  the  working  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  peace  and  joy  and  love. 
But  as  to  what  fome  of  them  faid  farther,  con- 
cerning M feeling  the  blood  of  Chrift,  running 
upon  their  arms,  or  going  down  their  throat,,  or 
poured  like  warm  water  upon  their  bread;  or 
heart,”  I plainly  told  them,  “ The  utmofl  I 
E 5 could 


[ to6  ] 


could  allow,  without  renouncing  both  fcripture 
and  reafon,  was,  that  fome  ofthefe  circumftances 
might  be  Irom  God  (though  I could  not  affirm 
they  were)  working  in  an  unufual  manner, 
no  way  efiential  either  to  juftification  or  fanfti- 
fication  : but  that  all  the  reft  I muft  believe,  to 
be  the  mere,  empty  dreams  of  an  heated  imagi- 
nation.” 

* Wednef.  8.  I obferved,  that  the  leaven  of 
ftillnefs  is  not  yet  purged  out  from  among  us. 
One  of  our  brethren  faying,  “ He  was  uneafy, 
becaufe  he  had  wilfully  neglefied  the  Lord’s 
/upper another  replied,  “ Then  his  faith  was 
weak  : elfe  his  peace  could  not  be  ffiaken  by 
fuch  little  things.”  Yea,  but  I ihiuk  fitch  little 
things  as  thefe,  will  ffiake  the  peace  of  any  true 
believer,  viz.  A wilful  breach  of  any  command- 
ment of  God.  If  it  does  not  ffiake  us,  we  are 
afleep  in  the  devil’s  arms. 

Thurf.  9.  I buried  the  body  of  Lucy  Godffiall, 
one  of  the  fir  ft  women  bands  at  Fetter-lane. 
After  prefling  toward  the  mark  for  more  than 
two  years,  fince  ffie  had  known  the  pardoning 
love  of  God,  ffie  was  for  fome  time  weary  and 
faint  in  her  mind,  till  I put  her  out  of  the  bands. 
God  bleft  this  greatly  to  her  foul,  fo  that  in  a 
ffiort  time  ffie  was  admitted  again.  Soon  after, 
being  at  home,  ffie  felt  the  love  of  God,  in  an 
unufual  manner  poured  into  her  heart.  She  fell 
down  upon  her  knees,  and  delivered  up  her  fotil 

and 


[ i°7  ] 

and  body  into  the  hands  of  God.  In  the  inftant, 
the  ufe  of  all  her  limbs  was  taken  away,  and  fhe 
Was  in  a burning  fever.  For  three  days  fhe 
mightily  praifed  God,  and  rejoiced  in  him  all  the 
day  long.  She  then  cried  out,  “ Now  Satan  hath 
defired  to  have  me,  that  he.  may  fift  me  as 
wheat.”  Immediately  darknefs  and  heavinefs 
fell  upon  her,  which  continued  till  Saturday  the 
4th  inftant.  On  Sunday  the  light  fhone  again 
upon  her  heart.  About  ten  in  the  evening  one 
faid  to  her,  “ Jefus  is  ready  to  receive  your  foul.” 
She  faid,  “ Amen  ! Amen  !”  Clofed  here  eyes 
and  died. 

Sund.  12.  I was  defired  to  preach  in  an  open 
place,  commonly  called  the  Great  Gardens,  lying 
between  Whitechapel  and  Coverlet’s-fields, 
where  I found  a vaft  multitude  gathered  together. 
Taking  knowledge  that  a great  part  of  them  were 
little  acquainted  with  the  things  of  God,  I called 
upon  them  in  the  words  of  our  Lord,  Repent  ye, 
and  believe  the  gofpel.  Many  of  the  beafls  of  the 
people  laboured  much  to  difturb  thofe  who  were 
of  a better  mind.  They  endeavoured  to  drive 
in  a herd  of  cows  among  them  : but  the  brutes 
were  wider  than  their  mailers.  They  then  threw 
whole  (howers  of  Hones,  one  of  which  ftruck  me 
juft  between  the  eyes.  But  I felt  no  pain  at  all; 
and  when  1 had  wiped  away  the  blood,  went  on 
teftifying  with  a loud  voice,  that  God  hath  given 
to  them  that  believe,  not  the  /pint  of fear , but  of 
F.  € power 


t .08  ] 

power  and  love  and  of  a found  mind.  And  by  the 
fpirit  which  now  appeared  through  the  whole 
congregation,  I plainly  faw,  What  a blefting  it  is 
when  it  is  given  us,  even  in  the  lowed  degree, 
to  fuffer  for  his  name’s  fake. 

Mond.  13.  I preached  about  nine  at  Windfor, 
and  the  next  evening  came  to  Briftol.  I fpent 
the  remainder  of  this,  and  the  following  week, 
in  examining  thofe  of  the  fociety  ; fpeaking  fe- 
verally  to  each,  that  I might  more  perfectly 
know,  the  Hate  of  their  fouls  to  Gcdward. 

Thurf.  23.  In  the  evening,  almoft  as  foon  as 
I began  to  pray  in  the  focieLy,  a voice  of  lamen- 
tation and  bitter  mourning  was  heard,  from  the 
whole  congregation.  But  in  a while,  loud 
thankfgiving  were  mixt  therewith,  which  in  a 
fhort  fpace  fpread  over  all  : lo  that  nothing  w'as 
to  be  heard  on  every  fide,  but  “ Praiie  to  God 
and  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever!” 

* Frid.  24.  1 had  notes  from  nineteen  per- 
fons,  defiring  to  return  God  thanks.  Some  ot 
them  follow. 

“ John  Merriman,  a blind  man  defircs  to  re- 
turn thanks  to  almighty  God,  for  the  difcovery  of 
his  love  to  him,  an  old  finner. 

“ One  defnes  to  return  God  thanks,  for 
giving  her  a token  of  Ins  love,  in  removing 
all  prejudices,  and  giving  her  love  to  all  man- 
kind. 

“ Edith  W- — ■ — defires  to  return  thanks,  for 
great  and  unfpeakable  mercies,  which  the  Lord 

w'as 


f 109 


1 


was  pleafed  to  reveal  to  her  heart;  even  telling 
me,  I am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  tranfgrefiions, 
and  thy  (ins  1 will  remember  no  more.  And  I 
defire,  that  the  praife  of  the  Lord  may  be  ever  in 
my  heart. 

“ Ann  Simmonds  defires  to  return  hearty 
thanks  to  God,  for  the  great  mercies  (he  received 
laft  night.  For  fhe  has  a full  aflitrance  of  her  re- 
demption in  the  blood  of  Chrift. 

“ Mary  K defires  to  return  thanks  to 

God,  for  giving  her  a frefh  fenfe  of  her  forgiv- 
nefs. 

“ Mary  F defires  to  return  thanks,  for  that 

the  Lord  hath  made  her  triumph  over  fin,  earth 
and  hell. 

“ Mary  W n defires  to  return  thanks 

to  almighty  God,  for  a frefh  fenfe  of  forgive- 
nefs. 

“ Sir,  I defire  to  return  humble  thanks  to  al- 
mighty God,  for  the  comfortable  affurance  of  his 
pardoning  love.”  E.  C . 

* Many  others  took  an  opportunity  of  fpeak- 
ing  to  me,  and  declaring,  what  God  had  done 
for  their  fouls.  But  one  came  to  me,  Mrs. 

Sp , who  was  dill  torn  in  pieces  with  for- 

row  and  doubts  and  fears.  Her  chief  fear,  fhe 
faid,  was,  “ That  we  are  all  Papifls.”  I alked 
her,  How  fhe  came  to  fear  this,  after  fire  had 
heard  us  preach  for  near  three  years,  and  been 
more  than  a twelvemonth  in  the  fociety  ! She 
faid,  “ Why  it  is  not  long  fince  I met  with  a 

gentleman, 


[ 110  ] 

gentleman,  who  told  me,  He  was  a Roman- 
Cathohc.  And  when  I afkedhim,  If  Mr.  Wefley 
was  a Papifl,  he  would  not  fay,  yes  or  no  : but 
only  Mr.  W.  is  a very  good  man,  and  you  do 
well  to  hear  him.”  Befides,  it  is  but  two  or 
three  nights  fmce,  as  I was  juft  fetting  out  to 

come  to  the  room,  Mifs  Gr met  me  and 

faid,  “ My  dear  friend,  you  {han’t  go  : indeed 
you  fhan’t:  you  don’t  know  what  you  do.  I af- 
fure  you,  Mr.  W.  is  a Papift  : and  fo  am  I : he 
converted  me.  You  know',  how  I ufed  to  prav  to 
faints  and  to  the  Virgin  Mary.  It  was  Mr.  W. 
taught  me  when  I was  in  the  bands.  And  1 faw 
him  rock  the  cradle  on  Chriftmas  eve : you 
know  I fcorn  to  tell  a lie.”  “Well,  but,  faid  I, 
how  comes  it  that  none  of  the  reft  w’ho  are  in 
the  bands,  have  found  this  out  as  well  as  you  ?” 
“ O,  replied  fhe,  they  are  not  let  into  the  fecret 
yet.  Perhaps,  if  you  was  in  the  bands,  you  might 
not  hear  a word  cf  it  for  a year  or  more.  O ! 
you  can’t  imagine  the  depth  of  the  defign.”  The 
maid  at  her  back  then  fell  a crying  and  faid, 

“ Indeed,  Madam ! . Mifs  Gr talks  fo  fine  ! 

Do  ! Madam,  mind  what  fhe  fays.”-  So  between 

one  and  the  other,  poor  Mrs.  Sp was  utterly 

confounded. 

Perhaps  I need  obferve  no  more  upon  this, 
than  that  the  Popifh  prieft  knew  well,  how  much 
it  would  be  for  the  intereft  of  his  church,  to  have 
me  accounted  a member  of  it : and  that  Mifs 
Gr — — had  lately  been  raving  madj  (in  confe- 
rence 


C 111  1 

quence  of  a fever)  that  asfuch,  fhe  was  tied  down' 
in  bed  and  as  ibon  as  fhe  was  differed  to  go 
abroad,  went  to  Mr.  Whitefield  to  inquire  of 
him,  whether  Jhe  was  not  a Papijl  ? But  he 
quickly  perceived,  fhe  was  only  a lunatic,  the 
nature  of  her  difurder  foon  betraying  itfelf.  O 
that  all  who  advance  the  fame  affertion  with 
her,  had  as  good  a plea  to  urge  in  their  ex- 
cufe  ! 

bund.  26.  In  the  evening  I rode  to  Marfhfield. 
The  next  evening  I reached  Whitchurch.  Tuef. 
28.  In  the  morning  I preached  at  Grear  Mar- 
low, on  the  Pharifee  and  the  Publican.  Many 
were  furprized,  and  perhaps  in  fome  meafure 
convinced,  (but  how  fhort  lived  are  mod  of  thefe 
convictions !)  That  it  is  very  pofftble  a man  may 
be  a Pharifee  now — yea,  though  he  be  not  a Me- 
thodif. 

A little  before  twelve  I came  to  Windfor.  I 
was  foon  informed,  that  a large  number  of  the 
rabble  had  combined  together,  and  declared 
again  and  again,  “ There  fhoukl  be  no  preach- 
ing there  that  day.”  In  order  to  make  all  fure, 
they  had  provided  gun-powder  enough,  and 
other  things  fome  days  before.  But  Burnham- 
fair  coming  between,  they  agreed  to  go  thither 
firft,  and  have  a little  diverfiou  there.  Accord- 
ingly they  went,  and  bellowed  a few  of  their 
crackers,  upon  their  brother-mob  at  Burnham. 
But  thefe,  not  being  Metkodifls,  did  not  take  it 
well,  turned  upon  them,  and  gave  them  chafe. 

They 


[ 112  ] 


They  took  {Belter  in  an  houfe.  But  that  would 
not  ferve.  For  thole  without  foon  forced  a way 
in,  and  feized  on  as  many  as  they  could  find, 
who,  upon  information  made,  were  lent  to  gaol. 
The  reft  run  aw  ay  : fo  that  when  I came,  none 
hindered  or  interrupted.  In  the  evening  I came 
to  London ; I propofed  fpending  a fortnight 
there,  and  then  returning  to  Briftol. 

I fpent  this  time,  partly  in  fpeaking  feverally 
to  all  the  members  ol  the  fociety;  partly  in 
making  a full  enquiry  into  thofe  devices  of  Satan 
wrhereof  I had  fcarce  ever  heard  or  read  before. 
And  I believe  they  were  now  throughly  dis- 
covered and  brought  to  nought.  O may 
they  never  more  deceive  the  hearts  of  the 
fimple  ! 

Mond.  Oft.  11.  I had  defigned  to  leave  Lon- 
don. But  Mr.  Richards  being  taken  ill,  I put  off 
my  journey.  He  was  much  better  on  Tuefday  ; 
fo  I let  out  the  next  mornings  and  before  feven 
in  the  evening  reached  the  half-wav  houfe,  four 
miles  Ihort  of  Hungrerford. 

O 

I now  found  it  was  well  I did  not  fet  out  on 
Monday,  in  order  to  be  at  Briftol  on  Tuefday 
'night,  as  ufual.  For  all  the  travellers  who  went 
that  way  onTuefday  were  robbed.  But  on  Thurf- 
dav,  the  road  was  clear,  fo  that  I came  fafe  to 
Kingfwood  in  the  afternoon,  and  in  the  evening 
preached  at  Btiftol. 

My  chief  bufinefs  now  was,  to  examine 

throughly 


C 113  ] 


throughly  thefociety  in  Kingfwood.  This  found 
me  full  employment  for  feveral  days.  On  Wed. 
2 7,  having  finiflied  my  work,  I fet  out  very  ear- 
ly, and  (though  my  horfe  fell  lame)  on  Thurfday 
evening  came  to  London. 

* Frid.  29.  I largely  explained,  Where  the  hi- 
nt of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty : namely,  liberty 
to  obey  the  whole  will  of  God  ; to  be  and  do 
whatfoever  he  hath  commanded  : in  a word,  to 
love  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  to  Serve  him 
with  all  our  (Length. 

Sund.  31.  Several  of  the  leaders  deSIred,  to 
have  an  hour’s  converfation  with  me.  I found 
they  were  greatly  perplext  about  “ Want  of  ma- 
nagement, ill  hufbandry,  encouraging  idlenefs, 
improper  distribution  of  money,”  “ being  im-. 
pofed  upon  by  fair  pretences,”  and  “ men  who 
talked  well,  but  had  no  grace  in  their  hearts.”— 

I aSked,  “ Who  thofe  men  were  ?”  But  that  they 
could  not  tell.  “ Who  encouraged  idlenefs  ? 
When  and  how  ?”  “ What  money  had  been 
improperly  distributed  P By  whom  and  to 
whom  ?”  “ In  what  instances  I had  been  impofed 
on  (as  I prefumed  they  meant  me)  and  what  were 
the  particulars  of  that  ill  hufbandry  and  misma- 
nagement of  which  they  complained  ?”  They 
flared  at  one  another,  as  men  in  amaze.  I be- 
gan to  be  amazed  too,  not  being  able  to  imagine 
what  was  the  matter,  till  one  dropt  a word,  by 
which  all  came  out.  They  had  been  talking 
with  Mr.  Hall,  who  had  Started  fo  many  objefti- 

ons 


[ 1 

ons  againft:  all  I faid  or  did,  that  they  were 
in  the  utmofl  conflernation,  till  the  fire 
thus  broke  out ; which  then  at  once  vanifhed 
away. 

* Wednef.  Nov.  3.  Two  of  thofe  who  are 
called  prophets,  defired  to  fpeak  with  rr.e.  They 
told  me,  “ The)’  were  fent  irrom  God,  with  a 
meffage  to  me,  which  was,  That  very  fhortlv,  I 
Ihould  be  bcni'd  again.”  One  of  them  added, 
“ They  would  flay  in  the  houfe  till  it  was  done, 
unlefs  I turned  them  out.”  I anfwered  gravely, 
“ I will  not  turn  you  out,”  and  fhewed  them  down 
into  tire  fociety-room.  It  was  tolerably  cold, 
and  they  had  neither  meat  nor  drink.  However 
there  they  fat  from  morning  to  evening.  They 
then  went  quietly  away,  and  I have  heard  no- 
thing from  them  fince. 

* Sund.  7.  I concluded  the  epi file  to  the  He- 
brews, that  flrong  barrier  againfl  the  too  prevail- 
ing imagination,  That  the  privileges  of  Chrijlian 
believers  are  to  be  meafured  by  thofe  of  the 
Jews.  Not  fo  : that  Chrifiians  are  under  a better 
covenant,  cilablifhed  upon  better  promifes;  that 
although  the  law  made  nothing  perjecf,  made  none 
perfect  either  in  holinefs  or  happinefs,  yet  the 
bringing  in  of  a better  hope  did,  by  which  we  now 
draw  nigh  unto  Gad ; this  is  the  great  truth  con- 
tinually inculcated  herein,  and  running  through 
this  whole  epi fl le. 

Mond.  8.  I let  out  at  four,  reached  Northamp- 
ton that  night,  and  the  ne.\t  evening,  Donning- 

toiv- 


[ ”5  ] 

ton-Park.  Weduef.  10.  I rode  on  to  Rufworth- 
Inn,  and  on  Satur.  13,  reached  Newcallfo. 

My  brother  had  been  here  for  foine  weeks  be- 
fore, and  was  but  juft  returned  to  London.  At 
eight  I met  the-  wild,  loving,  ftaring  lociety. 
But  not  them  alone,  as  I lsad  defigned.  For 
we  could  not  perfuade  the  ftrangers  to  leave 
us.  So  that  we  only  fpent  about  an  hour  in 
prayer. 

Sund.  14.  I began  preaching  about  five  o'clock, 
(a  thing  never  heard  of  before  in  thefe  parts)  on, 
I came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  jinners  to  re- 
pentance. And  the  vifforious  fweemefs  of  the 
grace  of  God,  was  prefem  with  his  word.  At 
ten  we  went  to  All-Saints,  where  were  fuch  a 
number  of  communicants,  as  I have  fcarce  feen 
but  at  Briftul  or  London.  At  four  I preached  in 
the  ftjuare  of  the  Keelman’s  hofpital,  on,  By 
grace  ye  are  Javtd  through  faith.  It  rained  and 
hailed  hard,  both  before  and  after:  but  there 
were  onlv  foine  fcattered  drops  while  I preach- 
ed, which  friglred  away  a few  carelefs  hear- 
ers. I met  the  lociety  at  fix,  and  exhorted  all, 
who  had  jet  their  hand  to  the  plough,  not  to  look 
back. 

Mond.  1,5.  I began  at  five  expounding  The 
aids  oj  the  apoflles.  In  the  afternoon  (and  every 
afternoon  this  week)  I fpoke  feverally  with  the 
members  of  the  lociety.  On  Tuefday  evening  I 
began  the  epillle  to  the  Romans.  After  fermon  the 
lociety  met.  I reproved  fome  among  them  who 

walked 


[ M6  ] 

walked  diforderly  ; andearneftly  befought  them 
all,  to  beware  leaf!  by  reafon  of  their  fins,  the 
way  of  truth  fhould  be  evil  fpoken  of. 

* Thurf.  18.  I could  not  but  obferve,  the  dif- 
ferent manner,  wherein  God  is  pleafed  to  work 
in  different  places.  The  grace  of  God  flows  here 
with  a wider  ftream  than  it  did  at  firft  either  at 
Briflol  or  Kingfwood.  But  it  does  not  fink  fo 
deep  as  it  did  there.  Few  are  throughly  con- 
vinced of  fin,  and  fcarce  any  can  witnefs, 
That  the  Lamb  of  God  has  taken  away  their 
fins. 

Frid.  19.  I found  the  firft  witnefs  of  this  good 

confeffion.  Margaret  H (O  how  fallen  fince 

then  !)  told  me,  that  the  night  before,  her  fight 
(an  odd  circumftance)  and  her  ftrength  were 
taken  away  at  once.  At  the  fame  time  the  love 
of  God  fo  overflowed  her  foul,  that  fhe  could 
not  fpeak  or  move. 

James  R alfo  gave  me  an  account  to 

day,  that  in  going  home  the  day  before,  he  loft 
his  fight  in  a moment,  and  was  forced  to  catch 
hold  of  fome  rails  for  fear  of  failing.  He  conti- 
nues under  a ftrong  convi£lion,  longing  for  the 
falvation  of  God. 

Sund.  21.  After  preaching  in  the  room  at 
five,  I began  preaching  about  eight  at  the  hof- 
pital.  It  rained  all  the  time;  but  that  did  not 
dillurb  me  or  the  congregation,  while  I ex- 
plained, Thou  Jhalt  call  his  name  Jtfus  ; jor  he 
Jhall  fave  his  people from  their  fins . 


Tuef. 


i «7  ] 


Taef.  23.  There  feemed  in  the  evening  to  be 
a deeper  work  in  many  fouls  than  I had  obferv- 
ed  before.  Many  trembled  exceedingly  : fix  or 
feven  (both  men  and  women)  dropped  down 
dead.  Some  cried  unto  God  out  of  the  deep ; 
others  would  have  cried  : but  their  voice  was 
loft.  And  fome  have  found  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious  and  merciful , forgiving  iniquity  and 
tranfgrejfion  and  Jin. 

Thurfd.  23.  In  the  evening  God  was  pleafed, 
to  wound  many  move  who  were  quiet  and  at  eafe. 
And  I could  not  but  obferve,  that  here  the  very 
bejl  people , fo  called,  were  as  deeply  convinced 
as  open  finners.  Several  of  thefe  were  now  con- 
ftrained  to  roar  aloud,  for  the  difquietnefs  of 
their  hearts : and  thefe  generally  not  young,  (as 
in  moll  other  places)  but  either  middle-aged,  or 
well-ftricken  in  years. 

* I never  faw  a work  of  God  in  any  other 
place,  fo  evenly  and  gradually  carried  on.  It 
continually  rifes  ftep  by  ftep.  Not  fo  much 
feems  to  be  done  at  any  one  time,  as  hath  fre- 
quently been  at  Briftol  or  London:  but  fome- 
thing,  at  every  time.  It  is  the  fame  with  parti- 
cular fouls.  I faw  none  in  that  triumph  of  faith, 
which  has  been  fo  common  in  other  places.  But 
the  believers  go  on,  calm  aud  fteddy.  Let  God 
do  as  feemeth  him  good. 

Frid.  26.  Between  twelve  and  one,  I preach- 
ed, in  a convenient  ground  at  Wickham,  two 
or  three  miles  from  Newcaftle.  I fpoke  ftrong 
rough  words : but  I did  not  perceive,  that  any 

regarded 


[ ii8  ] 

regarded  what  was  fpoken.  The  people  indeed 
were  exceeding  quiet,  and  the  cold  kept  them 
from  falling  sfieep  ; till  (before  two)  I left  them, 
very  well  fatisfied  with  the  preacher,  and  with 
themfelves. 

Sund.  28.  I preached  both  at  five  in  the  room, 
and  at  eight  in  the  hofpitai,  on  Him  hath  God 
exalted  to  be  a Prince  and  a Saviour , to  give  re- 
pentance and  remiffion  of  fins.  We  then  walked 
over  to  Tanfield- Leigh,  (about  feven  miles  from 
Newcallle.)  Here  a large  company  of  people 
were  gathered  together,  from  all  the  country 
round  about  : to  whom  I expounded  the  former 
part  of  the  fifth  chapter  to  the  Romans.  But 
fo  dead,  fenfelefs,  unafTefted  a congregation, 
have  1 fcarce  feen  except  at  Whickam.  Whe- 
ther the  gofpel  or  law,  or  Englilh  or  Greek 
feemed  all  one  to  them  ! 

Yet  the  feed  fown  even  here,  was  not  quite 
loft.  For  on  Thurfdav  morning,  between  four 
and  five,  John  Brown,  then  of  Tanfield- Leigh, 
•was  waked  outoffleep,  by  the  voice  that  raif- 
eth  the  dead.  And  ever  fince  he  has  been  full 
of  love  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

At  four  I preached  in  the  Hofpital-Square,  to 
the  largeft  congregation  I had  feen  fince  we  left 
London,  on  Jefus  Chrif  our  wiflom,  righteouf- 
nefs , fan&ifi cation  and  redemption. 

Wednefd.  Dec.  1.  We  had  feveral  places  of- 
fered, on  which  to  build  a room  for  the  fociety. 
But  none  was  fuch  as  we  wanted.  And  perhaps 

there 


[ 1^9  ] 


there  was  a providence  in  our  not  finding  any  as 
yet.  For  by  this  meaas  I was  kept  at  Newcas- 
tle, whether  I would  or  no. 

Satui d.  4.  I was  both  furprized  and  grived,  at 

a genuine  infiance  of  enthufiafm.  J B — 

of  Tanfield-Leigh,  who  had  received  a fenfe  of 
the  love  of  God  a few  days  before,  came  rid- 
ing through  the  town,  hollowing  and  fhouting, 
and  driving  all  the  people  before  him,  telling 
them,  “ God  had  told  him,  he  (hould  be  a king, 
and  Ihould  tread  all  his  enemies  under  his  feet.” 
I fent  him  home  immediately  to  his  work,  and 
advifed  him  to  cry  day  and  night  to  God,  that 
he  might  be  lowly  in  heart ; left  Satan  Ihould 
again  get  an  advantage  over  him. 

To  day  a gentleman  called  and  offered  me  a 
piece  of  ground.  On  Monday  an  article  was 
drawn,  wherein  he  agreed  to  put  me  into  pof- 
feffion  on  Thurfday,  upon  payment  of  thirty 
pounds. 

Tuefd.  7.  I was  fo  ill  in  the  morning,  that  I 
was  obliged  to  fend  Mr.  Williams  to  the  room. 

IHe  afterwards  went  to  Mr.  Stepbenfcn,  a mer- 
chant in  the  town,  who  had  a palTage  through 
the  ground  we  intended  to  buy.  I was  willing 
to  purchafe.  Mr.  Stepbenfon  told  him,  “ Sir, 
I do  not  want  money.  But  if  Mr.  Wefley  wants 
ground,  he  may  have  a piece  of  my  garden,  ad- 
joining to  the  place  you  mention.  I am  at  a 
word.  For  forty  pounds  he  fhali  have  fixteen 
yards  in  breadth,  and  thirty  in  length.” 

2 Wednefd, 


[ 120  ] 


■ Wednefd.  B.  Mr.  Stephenfon  and  I figned 
an  article,  and  I took  poffeflion  of  the  ground. 
But  I could  not  fairly  go  back  from  my  agree- 
ment with  Mr.  Riddel.  So  I entered  on  his 
ground  at  the  fame  time.  The  whole  is  about 
forty  yards  in  length  : in  the  middle  of  which  we 
determined  to  build  the  houfe,  leaving  room  for 
a fmall  court-yard  before,  and  a little  garden  be- 
hind the  building. 

Sund.  12.  I expounded  at  five  the  former 
part  of  the  parable  of  the  fower.  At  eight  I 
preached  in  the  Square,  on,  I am  the  good  Shep- 
herd: the  good  Shepherd  layeth  down  his  life  for 
the  Jheep,  The  effedl  of  what  had  been  fpoken 
in  the  morning,  now  evidently  appeared.  For 
one  could  not  obferve  any  in  the  congregation, 
to  ftir  hand  or  foot.  When  the  fermon  was 
done,  they  divided  to  the  right  and  left,  none 
offering  to  go  til!  I was  part.  And  then  they 
walked  quietly  and  filently  away,  left  Satan 
fhould  catch  the  feed  out  of  their  hearts. 

Mond.  13.  I removed  into  a lodging  adjoin- 
ing to  the  ground  where  we  were  preparing  to 
build.  But  the  violent  froft  obliged  us  to  delay 
the  work.  I never  felt  fo  intenfe  cold  before. 
In  a room  where  a conftant  fire  was  kept,  tho’ 
mv  defk  was  fixed  within  a yard  of  the  chimney, 
I could  not  write  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  to- 
gether, without  my  hands  being  quite  be- 
numbed. 

Wednefd.  1,5.  I preached  at  Horfely  upon 
1 Tyne, 


[ 121  J 

Tyne,  eight  (computed)  miles  from  Newcaftle. 
It  was  about  two  in  the  afternoon.  The  houfe 
not  containing  the  people,  we  flood  in  the  open 
air,  in  fpite  of  the  froft.  I preached  again  in 
the  evening,  and  in  the  morning.  We  then 
chofe  to  walk  home,  having  each  of  us  catched 
a violent  cold,  by  riding  the  day  before.  Mine 
gradually  wore  off.  But  Mr.  Meyrick’s  increaf- 
ed,  fo  that  on  Friday  he  took  his  bed.  I ad- 
vifed  him  to  bleed  : but  he  imagined  he  Ihould 
be  well  without  it,  in  a few  days. 

Sund.  19.  I cried  to  all  who  felt  themfelves 
loft,  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl  and  thou 
Jhalt  be J'aved  : and  in  the  afternoon,  Ho  ! every 
one  that  tkirjleth , come  ye  to  the  waters.  At  that 
hour  one  who  was  bitterly  mourning  after  Chrifl 
(Mary  Emerfon)  was  filled  with  joy  unfpeak- 
able. 

Mond.  20.  We  laid  the  firft  ftone  of  the 
houfe.  Many  were  gathered  from  all  parts  to 
fee  it : but  none  fcoffed  or  interrupted,  while 
we  praifed  God  and  prayed,  that  he  would  prof- 
per  the  work  of  our  hands  upon  us.  Three  or 
four  times  in  the  evening,  I was  forced  to  break 
off  preaching,  that  we  might  pray  and  give 
thanks  to  God. 

When  1 came  home,  they  told  me  the  phyfi- 
cian  faid,  he  did  not  expeft  Mr.  Meyrick  would 
live  till  the  morning.  I went  to  him ; but  his 
pulfe  was  gone.  He  had  been  fpeechlefs  and 
Jenfelefs  for  fome  time.  A few  of  us  immedi- 
Vol.  XXVIII.  F ately 


f 122  ] 

ately  joined  in  prayers ; (I  relate  the  naked  fact.) 
Before  we  had  done,  his  fenfe  and  his  fpeech 
returned.  Now  he  that  will  account  for  this  by 
natural  caufes , has  my  free  leave.  But  I chufe 
to  fay,  This  is  the  power  of  God  ! 

Thurf.  23.  It  being  computed,  that  fuch  a 
houfe  as  was  propofed,  could  not  be  finifbed 
under  feven  hundred  pounds,  many  were  pofi- 
tive,  it  would  never  be  finifhed  at  all  : others, 
that  1 fhould  not  live  to  fee  it  covered.  I was  of 
another  mind;  nothing  doubting  but  as  it  was 
begun  for  God’s  fake,  he  would  provide  what 
was  needful  for  the  finifhing  it. 

Sat.  Dec.  25.  The  phyfician  told  me,  “ He 
could  do  no  more:  Mr.  Meyrick  could  not  live 
over  the  night.”  I went  up  and  found  them  all 
crying  about  him  ; his  legs  being  cold  and  (as  it 
feemed)  dead  already.  We  all  kneeled  down, 
and  called  upon  God,  with  ftrong  cries  and 
tears.  He  opened  his  eyes,  and  called  for  me. 
And  from  that  hour  he  continued  to  recover  his 
ftrength,  till  he  was  reftored  to  perfeft  health. 
— I wait  to  hear,  who  will  either  difprove  this 
faft  or  philofophically  account  for  it. 

Sund.  26.  From  thefe  words,  Sing  we  merrily 
unto  God  our  jlrength  : make  a chearfj.1  ncife  unto 
the  God  of  Jacob  : I took  occafion  to  fhew  the 
ufual  way  of  keeping  thefe  days  holy  in  honour 
of  the  birth  of  our  Lord  : namely.  By  an  extraor- 
dinary degree  of  gluttony  and  drunkennefs ; by 
heathen,  and  woife  than  heathen  diveifions, 

(with 


C 123  ] 

(with  their  conftant  attendants,  paffion  and  ftrife, 
curftng,  fwearing  and  blafphemy and  by  danc- 
ing and  card-playing,  equally  conducive  to  the 
glory  of  God.  I then  defcribed  the  right  way 
of  keeping  a day  holy  to  the  Lord;  by  extraor- 
dinary prayer,  public  and  private  ; by  thankf- 
giving;  by  hearing,  reading  and  meditating  on 
his  word,  and  by  talking  of  all  his  wondrous 
works. 

Mond.  27.  I rode  to  Horfeley.  The  houfe 
being  too  fruall,  I was  obliged  again  to  preach  in 
the  open  air.  But  fo  furious  a ftorm  have  I fel- 
dom  known.  The  wind  drove  upon  us  like  a 
torrent,  coming  by  turns  from  eafl,  well,  north 
and  fouth.  The  flraw  and  thatch  flew  round 
our  heads  ; fo  that  one  would  have  imagined,  it 
could  not  be  long,  before  the  houfe  mull  follow ; 
but  fcarce  any  one  ftirred,  much  lefs  went  away, 
till  I difmifl  them  with  the  peace  of  God. 

Tuefd.  28.  I preached  in  an  open  place  at 
Swalwell,  two  or  three  miles  from  Newcallle. 
The  wind  was  high  and  extremely  fharp  : but  I 
faw  none  go  away  till  I went.  Yet  I obferved 
none  that  feemed  to  be  much  convinced  : only 
ftunned,  as  if  cut  in  the  head. 

Wednef.  29.  After  preaching  (as  ufual)  in  the 
fquare  I took  horfe  for  lanfield.  More  than 
once  I was  only  not  blown  off  my  horfe.  How- 
ever at  three  I reached  ;he  Leigh,  and  explain- 
ed to  a multitude  of  people  the  falvation  which 
is  through  faith.  After  .vards  I met  the  fociety 
F 2 in 


C 124  ] 

in  a large  upper  room,  which  rocked  to  and  fro 
with  the  violence  of  the  ftorm.  But  all  was 
calm  within,  and  we  rejoiced  together  in  hope 
of  a kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved. 

* Thurfd.  30.  I carefully  examined  thofewho 
had  lately  cried  out  in  the  congregation.  Some 
of  thefe,  I found,  could  give  no  account  at  all, 
how  or  wherefore  they  had  done  fo  : only,  that 
of  a fudden  they  dropt  down  they  knew  not 
how  ; and  what  they  afterwards  faid  or  did  they 
knew  not;  others  could  juft  remember,  they 
were  in  fear.;  but  could  not  tell,  what  they  were 
in  fear  of.  Several  faid,  they  were  afraid  of  the 
devil  i and  this  was  all  they  knew.  But  a few 
gave  a more  intelligible  account  of  the  piercing 
fenfe  they  then  had  of  their  fins,  both  inward 
and  outward,  which  were  fet  in  array  againft 
them  'round  about : of  the  dread  they  were  in, 
of  the  wrath  of  God  and  the  puniftiment  they 
had  deferved,  into  which  they  feemed  to  be  juft 
falling,  without  any  way  to  efcape.  One  of 
them  told  me,  “ I was  as  if  I was  juft  falling 
down,  from  the  higheft  place  I had  ever  feen. 
I thought  the  devil  waspufhing  me  off,  and  that 
God  had  foifaken  me.”  Another  faid,  “I  felt 
the  very  fire  of  hell,  already  kindled  in  my 
bread  : and  all  my  body  was  in  as  much  pain,  as 
if  I had  been  in  a burning  fiery  furnace.-’  What 
wifdom  is  that,  which  rebuketh  thefe,  that  they 
J/jould  hold  their  peace  ? Nay,,  let  fuch  an  one 

cry 


C 12  5 ] 

cry  after  Jefus  of  Nazareth,  till  he  faith,  Thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole  ! 

At  eleven  I preached  my  farewell  fermon  in 
the  Hofpital-fquare.  I never  faw  fuch  a congre- 
gation there  before;  nor  did  I ever  fpeak  fo 
fearchingly.  I could  not  conclude  till  one,  and 
then  both  men,  women  and  children  hung  upon 
me,  fo  that  I knew  not  which  way  to  difengage 
myfelf.  After  fome  time  I got  to  the  gate,  and 
took  horfe  : but  even  then  “ a muckle  woman” 
(as  one  called  her  in  great  anger)  kept  her  hold 
and  ran  by  the  horfe’s  fide,  through  thick  and 
thin,  down  to  Sandgate.  Jonathan  Reeves  rode 
with  me.  We  reached  Darlington  that  night, 
and  Borough-bridge  the  next  day. 

What  encouragement  have  we  to  fpeak  for 
Gyd  t"  At  our  inn  we  met  an  ancient  man,  who 
feemed  by  his  converfation,  never  to  have 
thought,  whether  he  had  any  foul,  or  no.  Be- 
fore we  fet  out,  I fpoke  a few  words,  concern- 
ing his  curbing  and  idle  converfation.  The  man 
appeared  quite  broken  in  pieces.  The  tears 
flarted  into  his  eyes.  And  he  acknowledged, 
(with  abundance  of  thanks  to  me]  his  own  guilt 
and  the  goodnefs  of  God. 

Sat.  January  2,  1743.  Between  Doncafier 
and  Epworth,  I overtook  one  who  immediate- 
ly accofted  me,  with  fo  many,  and  fo  imperti- 
nent queftions,  that  I was  quite  amazed.  In  the 
midft  of  fome  of  them  concerning  my  travels 
and  my  journey,  I interrupted  him  and  afked, 
F 3 “ Are 


E 126  ] 

11  Are  you  aware,  that  we  are  on  a longer  jour- 
ney ? That  we  are  travelling  toward  eternity  ?” 
He  replied  inllantly,  “ O,  I find  you,  I find 
you ! I know  where  you  are.  Is  not  your  name 
Wefley  ? T is  pity  ! ’Tis  great  pity  ! Why  could 
not  your  father’s  religion  rerve  you  ? Why  mull 
you  have  a new  religion  ?”  I was  going  to  reply; 
but  he  cut  me  fliort,  by  crying  out  in  triumph, 

I am  a Chrillian  ! I am  a Chrillian  ! I am  a 
churchman  ! I am  a churchman  ! I am  none  of 
your  Culamites  as  plain  as  he  could  fpeak  ; 
for  he  was  fo  drunk,  he  could  but  juft  keep  his 
feat.  Having  then  clearly  won  the  day,  or  as 
his  phrafe  was,  “ put  them  all  down,”  he  began 
kicking  his  borfe  on  both  fides,  and  rode  oft  as 
fall  as  he  could. 

In  the  evening  I reached  Epworth.  Sunday 
2.  At  five,  I preached  on.  So  is  every  one  who  is 
horn  oj  the  Spirit.  About  eight  I preached  from 
my  father’s  tomb,  on  Hcb.  viii.  11.  Many  from 
the  neighbouring  towns,  afked,  If  it  would  not' 
be  well,  as  it  was  facrament  Sunday,  for  them  to 
receive  it  ? I told  them,  “ By  all  means.  But 
it  would  be  more  refpeflful  firft  to  afkMr.  Rom- 
ley,  the  curate's  leave.”  One  did  fo,  in  the 
name  of  the  reft.  To  whom  he  faid,  “ Pray 
tell  Mr.  Wefley,  I fhall  not  give  him  the  facra- 
ment. For  he  is  not  fit.’’ 

How  wife  a God  is  our  God!  There  could 
not  have  been,  fo  fit  a place  under  heaven, 
where  this  ihould  befall  me  firft,  as  my  father’s 

houfe, 


[ 127  ] 

houfe,  the  place  of  my  nativity,  and  the  very 
place,  where,  according  to  the Jhaitefl ftdl  oj  our 
religion,  I had  fo  long  lived  a pharifte  ! It  was 
alfo  fit  in  the  high  eft  degree,  that  he  who  repel- 
led me  from  ihat  very  table,  where  I had  my- 
felf  fo  often  diftributed  the  bread  of  life,  Ihould 
be  one  who  owed  his  all  in  this  world,  to  the 
tender  love  which  my  father  had  fhewn  to  his, 
as  well  as  perfonally  to  himfelf. 

Mond.  3.  I rode  to  Birllal,  where  JohnNel- 
fon  gave  a melancholy  account,  of  many  that 
did  ran  well.  I told  him,  “ I was  willing  they 
fhould  be  with  the  Germans,  as  with  us,  if  they 
did  but  grow  in  grace.”  He  faid,  “ But  this  is 
not  the  cafe.  They  grow  worfe  in  dead  of  bet- 
ter. They  are  changed  both  in  their  tempers 
and  lives.  But  not  for  the  better  at  all.  They 
now  do  things  without  fcruple,  which  they  could 
not  do  before.  They  are  light  and  trilling  in 
their  behaviour.  They  are  eafy  and  ihought- 
lefs  ; having  now  no  holy  loar,  no  earned  care 
to  work  out  their  own  lalvation.” 

Wednef.  5.  I came  wet  and  weary  to  Shef- 
field, and  on  Friday  to  Donnington-Park : 
which  I left  before  eight,  the  next  morning,  in 
order  to  go  to  Wednefbury  in  Staffordlhire.  I 
was  immediately  met  by  a vehement  fhower  of 
rain,  driven  full  in  my  face  by  a llrong  wind. 
But  in  an  hour,  the  day  was  clear  and  calm. 
About  four  in  the  afternoon  I came  to  Wednef- 
bury. At  feven  I preached  in  the  Town-hall. 

F 4 It 


t »8  ] 

It  was  filled  from  end  to  end  ! and  all  appeared 
to  be.  deeply  attentive,  while  I explained,  This 
is  the  covenant  which  I will  make  ajter  thof  days , 
faith  the  Lord . — — 

Sund.  g.  The  hall  was  filled  again  at  five  ; 
and  I proclaimed-  The  name  of  the  Lord ; The 
Lord,  the  Lord  God,  mcrcijul  and  gracious,  long - 
JuJfering,  and  abundant  in  goodnejs  and  truth. 
At  eight  we  met  in  the  place  where  my  brother 
preached,  made,  as  it  were,  for  the  great  con- 
gregation. It  is  a large  hollow,  not  half  a 
mile  from  the  town,  capable  of  containing  four 
or  five  thoufand  people.  They  flood  in  a half 
circle  one  above  another,  and  feemed  all  to  re- 
ceive with  joy,  that  great  truth,  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  not  meats  and  drinks,  but  righteoufnefs  and 
peace  and joy  in  the  Ihly  Ghof. 

In  the  afternoon,  Mr.  Egginton  preached  a 
plain  uleful  fermon.  Almofl  the  whole  congre- 
gation, then  went  down  to  the  place,  where 
abundance  of  people  were  already  waiting  for 
us  ; fo  that  the  hollow  could  not  contain  them, 
but  was  edged  round,  withthofe  who  came  from 
all  parts.  My  fubjefds  was,  Bv  grace  ye  are  fav- 
ed  through  faith.  O that  all  who  heard  might 
experience  this  falvation ! 

Mond.  10.  I preached  at  five,  at  eight,  and 
at  three.  In  the  intervals  of  preaching  I fpoke 
to  all  who  defiled  it.  Laft  night  twenty-nine  of 
them  were  joined  together.  Tuefd.  n.  about  an 
hundred.  O that  none  of  thefe  may  draw  back 

to 


C 129  ] 

to  perdition  Let  thefe  believe,  unto  the  faving  of 
the  foul ! 

Wednef.  12.  I took  my  leave  of  them  in 
the  morning,  by  fhewing  the  difference  between 
the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  and  that  of  faith : 
and  in  the  evening,  explained  to  a large  con- 
gregation at  Evefham,  So  is  every  one  that  is  born 
of  the  Spirit. 

Thurf.  13.  I rode  to  Stratford  upon  Avon. 
I had  fcarce  fat  down,  before  I was  informed, 
Mrs.  K — , a middle  aged  woman,  of  Shattery, 
half  a mile  from  Stratford,  had  been  for  many 
weeks  laft  pad,  in  a way  which  no  body  could 
underftand:  that  fhe  had  fent  for  a minifter,  but 
almoft  as  foon  as  he  came,  began  roaring  in  fo 
ftrange  a manner,  (her  tongue  at  the  fame  time 
hanging  out  of  her  mouth,  and  her  face  being 
diftorted  into  the  molt  terrible  form)  that  he 
cried  out,  “ It  is  the  devil  doubtlefs ! It  is  the 
devil !”  And  immediately  went  away. 

I fuppofe,  this  was  fome  unphilofophical  mi- 
nifter. Elfe  he  would  have  faid,  “ Stark  mad! 
Send  her  to  Bedlam.” 

I afked,  “ What  good  do  you  think  I can 
do?”  One  anfwered,  “ We  cannot  tdl.  But 
Mrs.  K.  (I  juft  relate  what  was  fpoken  to  me, 
without  pafting  any  judgment  upon  it)  earneftly 
defired  you  might  come,  if  you  was  any  where 
near : faying,  She  had  feen  you  in  a dream, 
and  fhould  know  you  immediately.  “ But  the 
devil  faid  (thofe  were  her  own  expreflions,)  I 
F 5 wilt; 


C 130  ] 


will  tear  thy  throat  out  before  he  comes.”  But 
“ afterwards  (fhe  faid)  his  words  w7ere,  “ If  he 
does  come,  I will  let  thee  be  quiet ; and  thou 
fhalt  be  as  if  nothing  ailed  thee,  till  he  is  gone 
away.” 

A very  odd  kind  of  madnefs  this  ! I walked 
over  about  noon : but  when  we  came  to  the 
houfe,  defiled  all  thofe  who  came  with  me,  to 
flay  below.  One  (hewing  me  the  way,  I went 
up  (trait  to  her  room.  As  foon  as  I came  to  the 
bedfide,  Hie  fixt  her  eyes  and  faid,  “ You  are 
Mr.  Wefley.  I am  very  well  now,  I thank. 
God.  Nothing  ails  me  : only  I am  weak.”  I 
called  them  up,  and  we  began  to  fing,. 

“ Jefu,  thou  halt  bid  us  pray. 

Pray  always  and  not  faint : 

With  the  word,  a power  convey 
To  utter  our  complaint 

After  Tinging  a verfe  or  two  we  kneeled  down  to- 
prayer.  I had  but  juft  begun  (my  eyes  being  fhut) 
when  I felt  as  if  I had  been  plunged  into  cold 
water.  And  immediately  there  was  fuch  a roar, 
that  my  voice  was  quite  drowned,  though  I 
fpoke  as  loud  as  I ufually  do,  to  three  or  four 
thoufand  people.  However  I prayed  on.  She 
was  then  reared  up  in  the  bed,  her  whole  body 
moving  at  once,  without  bending  one  joint  or 
limb,  juft  as  if  it  were  one  piece  of  ftone.  Im- 
mediately after  it  was  writhed  into  all  kind  of 

poftures* 


[ *3*  ] 

podures,  the  fame  horrid  yell  continuing  ftill. 
But  we  left  her  not,  till  all  the  fymptoms  ceafed, 
and  Ihe  was,  (for  the  prefent,  at  lead)  rejoicing 
and  praifing  God. 

Between  one  and  two  I preached  at  Stratford, 
on,  The  Son  of  Man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive 
fins.  Moll  of  the  hearers  ftood  like  pods.  But 
fome  mocked.  Others  blafphemed.  And  a few 
believed. 

I preached  at  Evefham  in  the  evening,  rode  to 
Painfwick  the  next  day,  and  on  Satur.  15.  to 
Bridol:  where,  the  following  week  I fpoke  to 
each  member  of  the  fociety,  and  rejoiced  over 
them,  finding  they  had  not  been  barren  or 
unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrijl. 

Mond.  24.  I preached  at  Bath.  Some  of  the 
rich  and  great  were  prefent : to  whom,  as  to  the 
red,  I declared  with  all  plainnefs  of  fpeech,  1. 
That,  by  nature,  they  were  all  children  of  wrath, 
2.  That  all  their  natural  tempers  were  corrupt 
and  abominable,  and  3.  All  their  words  and: 
works,  which  could  never  be  any  better  but  by 
faith  : and  that,  4.  A natural  man  has  no  more 
faith  than  a devil,  if  fo  much.  One  of  them,  my 

Lord , dayed  very  patiently  till  I came  to 

the  middle  of  the  fourth  head.  Then  darting  up 
he  faid,  “ ’Tis  hot ! This  very  hot,”  and  got 
down  dairs  as  fad  as  he  could. 

Several  of  the  gentry  defired  to  day,  at  the 
meeting  of  the  fociety-:  to  whom  I explained 

E 6 < thee 


[ ‘32  ] 

the  nature  of  inward  religion,  words  flowing  up- 
on me  fafler  than  I could  fpeak.  One  of  them 
(a  noted  infidel)  hung  over  the  next  feat  in  an 
attitude  not  to  bedefcribed  : and  when  he  went, 
left  half  a guinea  with  Mary  Naylor,  for  the  nfe 
of  the  poor. 

On  the  following  days  I fpoke  with  each 
member  of  the  fociety  in  Kingfwood.  I cannot 
underhand,  how  any  minifler  can  hope  ever  to 
give  up  his  account  with  joy,  unlefs  as  (Igna- 
tius advifes)  he  “ knows  all  his  flock  by  name  ; 
not  overlooking  the  men  fervants  and  maid  fer- 
vants.” 

I left  Briftol  on  Friday  28.  came  to  Reading 
on  Saturday,  and  to  Windfor  on  Sunday  morn- 
ing. Thence  I walked  over  to  Egham,  where 

Mr. preached  one  of  the  mofl  miferable 

fermons  I ever  heard : fluffed  fo  full  of  dull, 
fenfelefs,  improbable  lies,  of  thofe  he  compli- 
mented with  the  title  of fa^Je  prophets. 

I preached  atone,  and  endeavoured  to  refcue 
the  poor  text  (Matt.  vii.  16.)  out  of  fo  bad 
hands.  About  four  I left  Egham,  and  at  eight  in 
the  evening  met  with  a joyful  congregation  at 
the  Foundery. 

Mond.  31.  One  writing  to  defire,  that  1 would 
preach  on  Ifaiah  lviii.  I willingly  complied  with 
his  requeft  in  the  evening.  A day  or  two  after  I 
received  a letter  from  a girl  of  fixteen  or  feven- 
teen,  whom  I had  often  obferved,  as  being  in  an 
eminent  degree,  of  a meek  and  lowly  fpirit. 

Some 


C *33.  ] . 

Some  of  her  words  were;  “ I do  not  think, 
there  were  above  fix  or  feven  words  of  the  true 
gofpel  in  your  whole  fermon.  T think  nothing 
ought  to  concern  you , but  the  errand  which  the 
Lord  gave  you.  But,  how  far  are  you  from 
this  ? You  preach  more  the  law  than  the  gof- 
pel !”  Ah,  my  poor  Jlill  fifter  ! Thou  art  an  apt 
fcholar  indeed ! I did  not  expeft  this  quite  fo 
foon. 

Wednef.  Feb.  2.  My  brother  and  I began 
vifiting  the  fociety  together,  which  employed  us 
from  fix  in  the  morning  every  day,  till  near  fix 
in  the  evening.  Sund.  6.  I preached  in  the 
morning,  on,  While  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do 
good  unto  all  men,  and  in  the  afternoon,  on,  By 
manifejlation  of  the  iruth,  commending  ourfelves 
to  every  man s confcience  in  the  fight  of  God.  So 
rough  a charity  fermon  was  fcarce  ever  heard. 
But  God  gave  it  his  blefiing  : infomuch  that  fifty 
pounds  were  contributed,,  toward  finifhing  the 
houfe  at  Newcaftle. 

* Frid.  it.  I called  on  poor  Jofeph  Hodges, 
who  after  fo  long  withflanding  all  the  wiles  of 
the  enemy,  has  been  at  laft  induced,  by  bis  fataf 
regard'  for  Mr.  Hall,  to  renounce  my  brother  and 
me,  in  form.  But  he  had  perfeftly  learned  the 
exercife  of  his  arms.  He  was  fo  happy,  fo  poor 
a finner,  that  to  produce  either  fcripture  or 
reafon  againft  him,  was  mere  beating  of  the 
air. 

Mond.  14.  I left  London*  and^riding  early 

and 


[ ‘34  1 

and  late)  the  next  evening  came  to  Newark, 
Here  I met  with  a iew  who  had  tafted  the  good 
word  : one  of  whom  received  me  gladly,  and  de- 
fired  me  whenever  I came  to  Newark,  to  make 
his  houfe  my  home. 

Wednef.  1 6.  I reached  Epworth.  I was  to 
preach  at  fix.  But  the  houfe  not  being  able  to 
contain  half  the  congregation,  I went  out  and 
declared,  We  love  him , becaufe  he  firjl  loved  us. 
In  the  morning,  Thurf.  17.  I largely  explained, 
The  fpirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba  Fa- 
ther. And  it  was  high  time  ; for  I foon  found 
the  fpirit  of  delufion  was  gone  abroad  here  alfo  : 
and  fome  began  to  boaft,  that  Chrift  had  made 
them  free,  who  were  Hill  the  fervants  of  fin.  In 
the  evening  I preach  on  that  bold  affertion  of  St. 
John  (indeed  of  all  who  have  the  true  fpirit  of 
adoption)  We  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the 
whole  world  lieth  in  wickednefs. 

* Frid.  18.  I rode  forward  for  Newcaflle. 
We  enquired  at  Poplington,  a little  town  three 
miles  beyond  York,  and  hearing  there  was  no 
other  town  near,  thought  it  bell  to  call  there.  A 
bible  lying  in  the  window,  my  fellow-traveller 
afked  the  woman  of  the  houfe,  If  {he  read  that 
book  ? She  faid,  “ Sir,  I can’t  read,  the  worfe 
is  my  luck.  But  that  great  girl  is  a rare  fcholar. 
And  yet  flie  cares  not  if  fhe  ever  looks  in  a book. 
She  minds  nought  but  play.’’  I began  foon  after 
to  fpeak  to  our  landlord,  while  the  old  woman 
drew,  clofer  and  clofer  to  me.  The  girl  fpunon. 

But 


[ *35  ] 

But  all  on  a fudden  fhe  flopped  her  -wheel, 
burft  out  into  tears,  and,  with  all  that  were  in 
the  houfe,  fo  devoured  our  words,  that  we  fcarce 
knew  how  to  go  away. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  Borough-bridge, 
and  Satur.  19,  to  Newcaftle. 

Sund.  20.  I went  on  in  expounding  the  A£ls 
of  the  apoflles,  and  St.  Paul’s  epiftle  to  the  Ro- 
mans. In  the  following  week  I diligently  en- 
quired, who  they  were  that  did  not  walk  accord- 
ing to  the  gofpel  ? In  confequence  of  which 
I was  obliged  to  put  away  above  fifty  perlons. 
There  remained  above  eight  hundred  in  the 
fociety. 

Satur.  26.  I vifited  thofe  that  werefick.  One 
of  thefe  had  kept  her  room  for  many  months,  fo 
that  fhe  had  never  heard  the  voice  or  feen  the 
face  of  any  preacher  of  this  way.  But  God  had 
taughtlaer  in  the  fchool  of  affliftion.  She  gave  a 
plain  and  diftinft  account  of  the  manner  wherein 
fhe  received  a fenfe  of  her  acceptance  with  God, 
more  than  a year  before  : and  of  a fuller  mani- 
feftation  of  his  love,  of  which  fhe  never  after 
doubted  for  a moment. 

Mond.  28.  I preached  again  at  Horfeley,  and 
fpoke  feverally  with  thofe  of  the  fociety.  The 
world  now  begins  to  take  alarm,  and  to  call;  out 
their  name  as  evil.  After  a very  good  woman  (fo 
called)  had  ufed  abundance  of  arguments,  to  hin- 
der her  neighbour  from  going  near  thefe  people, 

fhe 


L ‘as  ] 


fhe  told  her  at  length,  “ Why  none  but  the 
wicked-eft  people  upon  earth  go  there  “ Nay 
therti  replied  {he,  1 will  go  immediately. 
For  I am  fure,  none  upon  earth  is  wickeder 
than  me Such  be  the  event  of  all  worldly 
wifdom  ! 

Tuef.  March  1.  I preached  at  two  in  Pelton, 
five  miles  fouth  of  Newcaftle.  A multitude  of 
people  were  gathered  together,  from  all  the 
neighbouring  towns,  and  (which  I rejoiced  at 
much  more)  from  all  the  neighbouring  pits.  In 
riding  home,  I obferved  a little  village  called 
Chowden,  which  they  told  me  confifted  of  col- 
liers only.  I refolved  to  preach  there  as  foon  as 
poflible  ; for  thefe  are  finners,.  and  need  repen- 
tance. 

Sund.  6.  I read  over  in  the  fociety,  the  rules 
which  all  our  members  are  to  obferve,  and  de- 
fined every  one  ferioufly  to  confider,  whether  he 
was  willing  to  conform  thereto  or  no  ? That  this 
would  (hake  many  of  them  I knew  well : and 
therefore  on  Mond.  7,  I began  vifiting  the  daf- 
fies again,  left  that  which  is  lame Jhould be  turned 
out  of  the  way . 

* Tuef.  8.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  on  a 
fmooth  part  of  the  Fell  (or  common)  near 
Chowden.  I found  we  were  got  into  the  very 
Kingfwood  of  the  north.  Twenty  or  thirty  wild 
children  ran  round  us,  as  foon  as  wre  came,  flar- 
ing as  in  amaze-  Thev  could  not  properly  be 
fiaid  to  be  either  cloathed  or  naked.  One  of 

the 


[ *37  ] 

the  largeft,  (a  girl,  about  fifteen)  had  a piece  of  a 
ragged,  dirty  blanket,  fome  way  hung  about  her, 
and  a kind  of  cap  on  her  head,  of  the  fame  cloth 
and  colour.  My  heart  was  exceedingly  enlarged 
towards  them.  And  they  looked  as  if  they 
would  have  fwaliowed  me  up  ; efpecially  while 
I was  applying  thefe  words,  Be  it  knoum  unto 
you,  men  apd  brethren,  that  through  this  man  is 
preached  unto  you  Jorgivenefs  oj fins* 

Satur.  12.  1 concluded  my  fecond  courfe  of 
vifiting,  in  which  I enquired  particularly  into 
two  things,  l.  The  cafe  of  thofe  who  had  almclt 
every  night  the  lad  week  cried  out  aloud,  dur- 
ing the  preaching.  2.  The  number  of  thofe  who 
were  feparated  from  us,  and  the  reafon  and  occa- 
fion  of  it. 

* As  to  the  former  I found, 

l.  That  all  of  them  (I  think,  not  one  except- 
ed) were  perfons  in  perfeft  health,  and  had  not 
been  fubjeft  to  fits  of  any  kind,  till  they  were 
thus  affected  ; 

a.  That  this  had  come  upon  everyone  of  them 
in  a moment,  without  any  previous  notice, 
while  they  were  either  hearing  the  word  of  God, 
or  thinking  on  what  they  had  heard. 

3.  That  in  that  moment  they7  dropt  down, 
loft  all  their  ftrength,  and  were  feiz.ed  with  vio- 
lent pain. 

This  they  expreiTed  in  different  manners. 
Some  faid.  They  felt,  juft  as  if  a fword  was  run- 
ning through  them  : others,  That  they  thought, 

a great 


[ *38  ] 

a great  weight  lay  upon  them,  as  if  it  would 
fqueeze  them  into  the  earth.  Some  faid,  They 
were  quite  choaked,  fo  that  they  could  not 
breathe:  others,  That  it  was  as  if  their  heart,  as 
if  their  infide,  as  if  their  whole  body  was  tearing 
all  to  pieces. 

Thefe  fymptoms  I can  no  more  impute  to  any 
natural  caufe,  than  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  1 can 
make  no  doubt,  but  it  was  Satan  tearing  them,  as 
they  were  coming  to  Chriji.  And  hence  proceeded 
thofe  grievous  cries,  whereby  he  might  deftgn 
both  to  difcredit  the  work  of  God,  and  to  af- 
fright fearful  people  from  hearing  that  word, 
whereby  their  fouls  might  be  faved. 

1 found  4.  That  their  minds  had  been  as  va- 
rioufly  affeffed  as  their  bodies.  Of  this  fome 
could  give  fcarce  any’account  at  all,  which  alfo 
I impute  to  that  wife  Spirit,  purpofely  Cunning 
and  confounding  as  many  as  he  could,  that  they 
might  not  be  able  to  bewray  his  devices.  Others 
gave  a very  clear  and  particular  account,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end.  the  word  of  God 
pierced  their  fouls,  and  convinced  them  of 
inward,  as  well  as  outward  fin.  1 hey  faw 
and  felt  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them, 
and  were  afraid  of  his  judgments.  And  here 
the  accufer  came  with  great  power,  telling  them, 
“ There  was  no  hope,  they  were  loft  for  ever.  ’ 
The  pains  of  body  then  feizea  them  in  a 
moment,  and  extorted  thofe  loud  and  bitter 
cries. 

* As 


* As  to  the  latter,  I obferved,  the  number  of 
thofe  who  had  left  the  fociety,  fince  Dec.  30, 
was  feventy-fix : 

Fourteen  of  thefe  (chiefly  dnTenters)  faid, 
u They  left  it,  becaufe  otherwife  their  minifters 
would  not  give  them  the  facrament : 

Nine  more,  “ becaufe  their  hufbands  or  wives 
were  not  willing  they  fhould  flay  in  it : 

Twelve,  “ becaufe  their  parents  were  not 
willing : 

Five,  “ becaufe  their  mailer  and  miftrefs 
would  not  let  them  come  : 

Seven,  “ becaufe  their  acquaintance  perfuaded 
them  to  leave  it : 

Five,  “ becaufe  people  faid  fuch  bad  things 
of  the  fociety : 

Nine,  “ becaufe  they  would  not  be  laughed  at : 

Three,  “ becaufe  they  would  not  lofe  the 
poor’s  allowance  : 

Three  more,  “ becaufe  they  could  not  fpare 
time  to  come : 

Two,  “ becaufe  it  was  too  far  off: 

One,  “ becaufe  fhe  was  afraid  of  falling  into 
fits : 

One,  “ becaufe  people  were  fo  rude  in  the 
llreet : 

Two,  “ becaufe  Thomas  Naifbit  was  in  the 
focietv : 

One,  “ becaufe  he  would  not  turn  his  back 
oh  his  baptifm : 

One, 


[ *4°  J 

One,  “ becaufe  we  were  mere,  church  of  Eng- 
land men : And 

One,  “ becaufe  it  was  time  enough  to  ferve 
God  yet.” 

The  number  of  thofe  who  were  expelled  the 
fociety  was  fixty-four. 

Two,  for  curfingand  fwearing, 

Two,  for  habitual  fabbath  breaking,. 
Seventeen,  for  drunkennefs, 

Two,  for  retailing  fpirituous  liquors, 

Three,  for  quarrelling  and  brawling, 

One,  for  beating  his  wife, 

Three,  for  habitual,  wilful  lying, 

Four,  for  railing  and  evil-fpeaking, 

One,  for  idlenefs  and  lazinefs  : And 
Nine  and  twenty,  for  lightnefs  and  carelefs- 
nefs. 

Sund.  13.  I went  in  the  morning  in  order  to 
fpeak  feverally  with  the  members  of  the  fociety 
at  Tanfield.  From  the  terrible  inflances  I met 
with  here  (and  indeed  in  all  parts  of  England) 
I am  more  and  more  convinced,  that  the  devil 
himfelf  defires  nothing  more  than  this,  that  the 
people  of  any  place  fhould  be  half-awakened, 
and  then  left  to  themfelves  to  fall  afleep  again. 
Therefore  I determine,  by  the  grace  of  God,  not 
to  ftrike  one  ftroke  in  any  place  where  I cannot 
follow  the  blow. 

Mond.  14.  I preached  again  near  Chowden: 
and  this  I continued  to  do  weekly,  as  well  as  at 

all 


C 1 

all  the  other  places  round  Newcaftle,  (except 
Swalwell)  where  I had  preached  once. 

Thurfd.  17.  As  1 was  preaching  at  Pelton,  one 
of  the  old  colliers,  not  much  accuftomed  to 
things  of  this  kind,  in  the  middle  of  the  fer- 
mon,  began  fhouting  amain,  for  mere  fatisfac- 
tion  and  joy  of  heart.  But  their  ufual  token  of 
approbation  (which  fomewhat  furprized  me  at 
firft)  was  clapping  me  on  the  back. 

Frid.  18.  As  I was  meeting  the  leaders,  a 
company  of  young  men,  having  prepared  them- 
felves  by  ftrong  drink,  broke  open  the  door,  and 
came  rulhing  in  with  the  utmoft  fury.  I began 
praying  for  them  immediately.  Not  one  open- 
ed his  mouth,  or  lifted  up  a finger  agaiuit  us. 
And  after  half  an  hour,  we  all  went  away  toge- 
ther,  in  great  quietnefs  and  love. 

Tuefd.  22.  I went  to  Southbiddick,  a village 
£>f  colliers,  feven  miles  fout’n-eaft  of  Newcaftle. 
The  fpot  where  I ftood,  was  juft  at  the  bottom 
of  a femi-circular  hill,  on  the  rifing  Tides  of 
which  many  hundreds  ftood;  but  far  more  on 
the  plain  beneath.  I cried  to  them,  in  the 
words  of  the  prophet,  0 ye  dry  bones , hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  Deep  attention  fat  on  every 
face.  So  that  here  alfo  I believed  it  w'ould  be 
well,  to  preach  weekly. 

Wed.  23.  I met  a gentleman  in  the  ftreets, 
curling  and  fwearing  in  fo  dreadful ~a  manner, 
that  I could  not  but  ftop  him.  He  foon  grew 
calmer,  told  me",  “ He  mujl  treat  me  with  a glafs 

2 of 


C 142  ] 


of ’wine ; and  that  he  would  come  and  hear  me : 
only  he  was  afraid,  I Ihould  fay  fomething  a- 
gain  ft  fighting  of  cocks 

* Frid.  25.  At  the  prefling  inftance  of  a curf- 
ing,  fwearing,  drunken  Papift,  who  would  needs 
bring  me  into  a ftate  of  falvation,  I fpent  fome 
hours  in  reading  an  artful  book,  intitled,  The 
grounds  of  the  old  religion.  In  the  firft  thirty 
pages  the  author  heaps  up  fcriptures,  concern- 
ing the  privileges  of  the  church.  But  all  this  is  , 
beating  the  air,  till  he  proves  the  Romanifts  to  I 
be  the  church,  i.  e.  That  a part  is  the  whole.  In 
the  fecond  chapter  he  brings  many  arguments  to 
{hew,  “ That  the  fcripture  is  not  the  foie  rule  , 
of  faith  ; at  lead,  not  if  interpreted  by  private 
judgment,  becaufe  private  judgment  has  no  place  , 
in  matters  of  religion  !”— Why  at  this  moment 
you  are  appealing  to  my  pr ivate  judgment  : and  ; 
you  cannot  poflibly  avoid  it.  The  foundation  of 
your , as  well  as  my  religion,  muft  neceflarily  reft 
here.  Firft  you  fas  well  as  I)  muft  judge  foryour-  , 
felf,  w hether  you  are  implicitly  to  follow  the 
church  or  no;  and  alfo  which  is  the  true  church  ? 
Elfe  it  is  not  poflible  to  move  one  ftep  forward. 

This  evening  I preached  in  the  fhell  of  the 
new  houfe,  on  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  A 
great  multitude  were  gathered  together  there, 
moft  of  whom  flayed  wTith  us  and  watched  unto 
the  Lord. 

. Sat.  26.  I preached  atBurtley,  a village  four 
miles  fouth  of  Newcaftle,  furrounded  by  colliers 


1 


on 


[ HZ  1 

• on  every  fide.  The  greater  part  of  the  congre- 
gation, earneltly  attended  to  thofe  folemn  words, 
The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me  : becaufe  he 
hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  the  poor. 

Monday  28.  I was  aftonifhed  to  find  it  was 
real  fa£l  (what  I would  not  believe  before)  that 
three  of  the  difienting  minifters,  (Mr.  A — rs, 
Mr.  A— ns,  and  Mr.  B— ) had  agreed  together, 
<lTo  exclude  all  thofe  from  the  holy  com- 
munion, who  would  not  refrain  from  hearing 
us.”  Mr.  A — ns  publicity  affirmed,  “ We  were 
all  Papiffs,  and  our  doftrine  was  mere  popery.” 
And  Mr.  B— , in  the  conclufion  of  a courfe  of 
fermons,  which  he  preached  profeffedly  againft 
us,  went  a flep  farther  ftill:  for  after  he  had 
confeft  many  texts  in  the  bible  are  for  them 
he  added,  “ But  you  ought  not  to  mind  thefe 
texts:  for  the  papifts  have  put  them  in  !” 

Wednef.  go.  While  I was  reajoning  (from  the 
xxivth  chapter  of  the  Afts)  on  righteou fiefs,  tem- 
perance and  judgment  to  come.  God  conftrained 
many  of  the  ftout-iiearted  fi  oners  to  tremble.  O 
that  they  may  not  put  him  off  to  a more  conveni- 
ent feajon  ! 

April  1.  Being  Good-friday,  I had  great  defire 
tovifita  little  village  called  Placey,  about  ten 
meafured  miles  north  of  Newcaftle.  It  is  inhabit- 
ed by  colliers  only,  and  fuch  as  had  been  always 
in  the  fir B rank  for  favage  ignorance  and  wick- 
ednefs  of  every  kind.  Their  grand  affembly 
ufed  to  be  on  the  Lord’s  day,  on  which  men, 

women 


[ *44  ] 

women  and  children  met  together,  to  dance, 
fight,  curfe  and  fwear,  and  play  at  chuck,  ball, 
fpan-farthing,  or  whatever  came  next  to  hand.  I 
felt  great  compaflion  for  thefe  poor  creatures, 
from  the  time  I heard  of  them  flrlt  ; and  the 
more,  becaufe  all  men  feemed  to  defpair  of 
them.  Between  fevcn  and  eight  I fet  out  with 
John  Heally,  my  guide.  The  north  wind  being 
unufually  high,  drove  the  fleet  in  our  lace,  which 
froze  as  it  fell,  and  cafed  us  over  prefently.  When 
we  came  to  Placey,  we  could  very  hardly  Hand. 
As  foon  as  we  were  a little  recovered,  I went 
into  the  fquare,  and  declared  him  who  was  bruij- 
ed for  our  fins , and  wounded  for  our  iniquities. 
The  poor  finnners  were  quickly  gathered  toge- 
ther and  gave  earneft  heed  to  the  things,  which 
were  fpoken.  And  fo  they  did  in  the  afternoon 
again,  in  fpite  of  the  wind  and  mow,  when  I 
befought'them  to  receive  him  for  their  king  ; to 
repent  and  believe  the  gcfptL 

On  Eafler  Monday  and  Tuefday  I preached 
there  again,  the  congragation  continually  increaf- 
ing.  And  as  moll  of  thefe  had  never  in  their 
lives  pretended  to  any  religion  of  any  kind,  they 
were  the  more  ready  to  cry  to  God  as  mere 
Jinners , for  the  free  redemption  which  is  in 
Jefus. 

Thurf.  7.  Having  fettled  all  things  according 
to  my  delire.  1 chearfully  took  leave  of  my 
friends  at  Newcaftle,  and  rode  that  day  to  Sand- 
button.  At  our  inn  I found  a good  natured  man 

fitting 


[ *45  3 

fitting  and  drinking  in  the  chimney  corner ; 
with  whom  I began  adifcourfe,  fufpefting  noth- 
ing lefs,  than  that  he  was  the  minifter  of  the 
parifh.  Before  we  parted  I fpoke  exceeding  plain. 
And  he  received  it  in  love;  begging  he  might 
fee  me  when  I came  that  way  again.  But  be- 
fore I came,  he  was  gone  into  eternity. 

Frid.  8.  I preached  at  Knarefborough  and  at 
Leeds,  on  By  grace  ye  are  faved  through  faith . 
The  three  following  days  I divided  between 
Leeds  and  Birftal,  and  on  Tuefday  rode  to 
Sheffield. 

I found  the  fociety  both  here  and  at  Barley- 
hall,  earneftly  prefling  on  toward  the  mark  i 
altho’  there  had  not  been  wanting  here  alfo 
thofe,  who  by  fair  fpeeches  deceive  the  hearts  of 
the  fimple. 

Frid.  1,5.  I rode  in  two  days  to  Wednefbury, 
found  things  furpizingly  altered  here.  The  in- 

excufable  folly  of  Mr.  W s had  fo  provoked 

Mr.  E n that  his  former  love  was  turned  into 

bitter  hatred.  But  he  had  not  yet  had  time  to 
work  up  the  poor  people,  into  the  rage  and  mad- 
nefs  which  afterwards  appeared  ; fo  that  they 
were  extremely  quiet  both  this  and  the  following 
days,  while  I improved  the  prefent  opportunity 
and  exhorted  them,  morning  and  evening,  to  be- 
lieve on  the  Lord  Jefus,  and  to  work  out  their 
falvation  with  fear  and  trembling. 

Yet  on  Sund.  17.  The  fcene  began  to  open, 
1 think  I never  heard  fo  wicked  a fermon,  and 
Yol,  XXVIII.  G delivered 


I 146  ] 

delivered  with  fuch  bitternefs  of  voice  and  man- 
ner, as  that  which  Mr.  E preached  in  the 

afternoon.  I knew  what  effeft  this  mull 
have  in  a little  time,  and  therefore  judged  it 
expedient,  to  prepare  the  poor  people  for  what 
was  to  follow,  that  when  it  came,  they  might 
not  be  offended.  Accordingly  on  Tuefd.  19. 
I ffrongly  inforced  thofe  words  of  our  Lord,  If 
any  man  come  after  me,  and  hate  not  his  father 
and  mother — yea,  and  his  own  life , he  cannot  be 
tny  difciple.  And  whcjoever  doth  not  bear  his 
crofs  and  come  after  me  cannot  be  my  difciple ; 

While  I was  fpeaking,  a gentleman  rode  up 
very  drunk,  and  after  many  unfeemly  and  bitter 
words,  laboured  much  to  ride  over  fome  of  the 
people.  I was  furprized  to  hear,  he  was  a neigh- 
bouring clergyman.  And  this  too  is  a man  zea- 
lous for  the  church  ! Ah  poor  church ! If  it  flood 
in  need  of  fuch  defenders  ! 

Thurf.  21.  I fpent  an  hour  with  fome  of  my 
old  friends,  whom  I had  not  feen  for  many 
years.  I rejoiced  to  find  them  ftill  loving  and 
open  of  heart,  juft  as  they  were  before  I went 
to  Georgia.  In  the  afternoon  I called  at  Barkf- 
well,  near  Coventry  ; where  I had  formerly 
fpent  many  pleafant  hours.  And  here  likewife 
I found  friendfhip  and  opennefs  ftill.  But  the 
mafter  of  the  houfe  was  under  heavy  affliction  : 
and  fuch  affliftion  as  I believe  will  never  be  re- 
moved, till  he  is  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  the 
Huly  Ghofl. 


Frid. 


C 14  7 ] 

Frid.  22.  I rode  to  Painfwick  : and  on  Sat. 
sg.  through  heavy  rain  to  Briftol. 

I had  now  a week  of  reft  and  peace,  which 
was  refrefhing  both  to  my  foul  and  body.  Sund. 
May  1.  I had  an  opportunity  of  receiving  the 
Lord’s-fupper,  at  St.  James’s,  our  parifh-church. 
We  had  another  comfortable  hour  in  the  after- 
noon, while  I was  explaining,  This  is  ike  cove- 
nant which  I will  make,  faith  the  Lord,  / will  put 
my  laws  in  their  minds  and  write  them  in  their 
hearts,  and  I will  be  unto  them  a God,  and  they 
Jhall  be  unto  me  a people 

Tuefd.  May  3.  I fet  out  for  Wales,  in  com- 
pany with  one  who  was  my  pupil  at  Oxford. 
We  could  get  that  night  no  farther  than  the 
Bull,  five  Welch  miles  beyond  Abergavenny. 
The  next  morning  we  came  to  Builth,  juft  as 
the  church-prayers  began.  Mr.  Phillips,  the 
re£lor  of  Maefmennys,  (at  whofe  invitation  I 
came)  foon  took  knowledge  of  me,  and  we  be- 
gan a friendfhip  which  I truft  fhall  never  end.  I 
preached  on  a tomb  at  the  eaft  end  of  the  church 
at  four,  and  again  at  feven.  Mr.  Gwynne  and 
Mr.  Prothero  (juftices  of  peace)  flood  on  either 
hand  of  me  : and  all  the  people  before,  catching 
every  word,  with  the  moil  ferious  and  eager  at- 
tention. 

Thurfd.  g.  1 rode  over  fuch  rugged  moun- 
tains, as  I never  faw  before,  to  Cardiff.  But  it 
was  late  before  we  came  in,  fothatl  could  not 
preach  that  night.  Friday  6.  I preached  at 
G 2 eleven 


[ i48  ] 

eleven  in  the  new  room,  which  the  fociety  had 
juft  built  in  the  heart  of  the  town.  And  our 
fouls  were  fweetly  comforted  together.  About 
two  I preached  at  Lantriffent ; and  at  Fonmon- 
caftle  in  the  evening,  to  a loving  and  ferious 
congregation. 

Saturd.  7.  I was  defired  to  preach  at  Cow- 
bridge.  We  came  into  the  town  about  eleven. 
And  many  people  feemed  very  defirous  to  hear 
for  themfelves,  concerning  the  way  which  is 
every  where  fpoken  againft.  But  it  could  not 
be.  The  fons  of  Belial  gathered  themfelves  to- 
gether, headed  by  one  or  two  wretches,  called 
gentlemen  : and  continued  {homing,  curfing, 
blafpheming,  and  throwing  fhowers  of  ftones, 
almoft  without  intermiflion.  So  that  after  fome 
time  fpent  in  prayer  for  them,  I judged  it  bell 
to  difmifs  the  congregation. 

Sund.  8.  I preached  in  the  caftle-yard  at  Car- 
diff, at  five  in  the  morning  and  feven  in  the 
evening : in  the  afternoon  at  Wenvo,  where 
the  church  was  quite  filled,  writh  thofe  who  came 
from  many  miles  round.  And  God  anfwered 
many  of  them  in  the  joy  of  their  hearts ; it  was 
a folemnand  refrefhing  feafon. 

Mond.  9.  I returned  to  Briftol.  Moft  of 
the  week  I {pent,  in  vifiting  the  fociety  inKingf- 
wood  : whom  I now  found  quite  clear  of  thofe 
vain  ianglings,  which  had  for-  a time  well  nigh 
torn,  them  in  pieces. 

Tuefd.  17.  Ivly  brother  fet  out  for  Cornwall: 

where 


[ 149  ] 

where  (according  to  the  accounts  we  had  fre«- 
quently  received)  abundance  of  thofe,  who  be- 
fore neither  feared  God,  nor  regarded  man,  be- 
gan to  enquire  what  they  mult  do  to  be  faved  ? 
But  the  fame  imprudence,  which  had  laid  the 
foundation  for  all  the  diflurbances  in  Stafford- 
fhire,  had  broke  out  here  alfo,  and  turned  many 
of  our  friends,  into  bitter  and  implacable  ene- 
mies. Violent  perfecution  was  a natural  confe- 
quence  of  this  : but  the  power  of  God  triumph- 
ed over  all. 

May  22.  being  Whitfunday,  I preached  both 
at  Kingfwood  and  Briflol,  on  thofe  folemnwords, 
JeJus  flood  and  cried , If  any  man  ihirjl,  let  him 
come  unto  me  and  drink.  He  that  believeth  on  me, 
as  the  fcripture  hath  Jaid , out  of  his  belly Jhall 
flow  river  s of  living  water. 

Thurfd.  2q.  I rode  to  Cirenceiler,  and  preach- 
ed on  a green  place,  at  a little  didance  from  the 
town,  on  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meats  and 
drinks,  but  righteoufnefs  and  peace  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghojl.  Wednef.  25.  I preached  to  a little 
company  at  Oxford  : Thurfd.  26.  1 had  a large 
congregation  at  Wycombe  ; from  whence  I haf- 
tened  to  London  and  concluded  the  day,  by  in- 
forcing thofe  awful  words  at  the  Foundery,  The 
Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  world ; 
fay,  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zicii,  Behold  thy  falva - 
tion  cometh!  Behold  his  reward  is  with  him , and 
his  work  before  him. 

Sund.  29  beingTrinity-Sunday,  I began  officiate. 

G 3 ing 


[ J5°  ] 

ing  at  thechappel  in  Weft-flreet,near  the  Seven- 
dials,  of  which  (by  a flrange  chain  of  providences) 
we  have  a leafe  for  feveral  years.  I preached 
on  the  gofpel  lor  the  day,  part  of  the  third  chap- 
ter of  St.  John ; and  afterwards  aaminiftered 
the  Lord’s  fupper,  to  fome  hundreds  of  communi- 
cants. I was  a tittle  afraid  at  firft,  that  my  ftrength 
would  not  fulhce,  for  the  bufinefs  of  the 
day,  when  a fervice  of  five  hours  (lor  it  la  lied 
from  ten  to  three)  was  added  to  my  ufual  em- 
ployment. But  God  looked  to  that.  So  I mull 
think,  and  they  that.will  call  it  enthufiafm  may. 
I preached  at  the  Great-gardens  at  five  to  an 
immenfe  congregation,  on  Ye  muff  be  born  again. 
Then  the  leaders  met  (who  filled  all  the  time 
that  I was  not  fpeaking  in  publick  :)  and  after 
them,  the  bands.  At  ten  at  night,  I was  lefs 
weary  than  at  fix  in  the  morning. 

The  following  week  I fpent  in  vifiting  the 
fociety.  On  Sunday,  June  g,  the  fervice  at  the 
chappel  lafted  till  near  four  in  the  afternoon  : fo 
that  I found  it  needful  for  the  time  to  come  to 
divide  the  communicants  into  three  parts,  that  we 
might  not  have  above  fix  hundred  at  once. 

Wednef.  8.  I ended  my  courfe  of  vifiting; 
throughout  which  I found  great  caufe  to  blefs 
God  : fo  very  few  having  drawn  back  to  perdition 
out  of  ninteen  hundred  and  fifty  fouls. 

Saturd.  18.  I received  a full  account  of  the 
terrible  riots  which  had  been  in  StafFordfhire. 
1 was  not  furprized  at  all ; neither  Ihould  I have 

wondered 


C w ] 

wondered  if  after  the  advices  they  had  fo  often 
hea’d  from  the  pulpit,  as  well  as  from  the  epis- 
copal chair,  the  zealous  high  church-men  had 
rofe,  and  cut  all  that  were  called  Methodifts  in 
pieces. 

Mond.  20.  Refolving  to  affill  them  as  far  as  I 
could,  I fet  out  early  in  the  morning,  and  after 
preaching  at  Wycombe  about  noon,  in  the  even- 
ing came  to  Oxford.  Tufed.  21.  We  rode  to 
Birmingham;  and  in  the  morning,  Wed.  22. 
to  Francis  Ward’s  at  Wednelbury. 

Altho’  I knew  all  that  had  been  done  here, 
was  as  contrary  to  law,  as  it  was  to  juflice  and 
mercy,  yet  I knew  not  how  to  advife  the  poor 
Sufferers,  or  to  procure  them  any  redrefs.  I was 
then  little  acquainted  with  the  Englifll  courfe  of 
law,  having  long  had  fcruples  concerning  it. 
But,  as  manv  of  thefe  were  now  removed,  I 
thought  it  belt  to  enquire  whether  there  could  be 
any  help  from  the  laws  of  the  land  ? I there- 
fore rode  over  to  counfellor  Littleton  at  Tamf- 
worth  ; who  allured  us,  “ we  might  have  an  eafy 
remedy,  jf  we  refolutely  profecuted,  in  the 
manner  the  law  directed,  thofe  rebels  againft 
God  and  the  king.” 

Thurfd.  23.  I left  W edne fbury,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  at  Melbourn  in  Derby  fhire.  I 
preached  at  Nottingham  (where  I met  my  bro- 
ther coming  from  the  north]  on  Friday,  and  on 
Saturday  and  Sunday'  at  Epworth. 

Mond.  27,  I preached  at  Awkborough,  on  the 
G 4 Trentfide 


[ *5*  ] 

Trentfide  to  a ftupidly-attentive  congregation. 
We  then  crofs’d  over,  and  rode  to  Sykehoufei 
on  Tuefday  to  Smeton,  and  on  Wednefday  to 
Newcaftle. 

Thurfd.  30.  I iinmediately'enquired  into  the 
ftate  of  thofe  whom  I left  here  driving  for  the 
maftery.  And  fome  of  them  I found  were  grown 
faint  in  their  minds  ; others  had  turned  back  as 
a dog  to  the  vomit.  But  about  fix  hundred  ftill 
continued,  driving  together  for  the  hope  of  the 
gofpel. 

Monday,  July  4,  and  the  following  days  I had 
time  to  finifh  the  lnJlruElions for  Children.  Sund. 
10.  I preached  at  eight  on  Chowdon-Fell,  on 
Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfeof  Ifrael?  Ever  fince  I 
came  to  Newcaflle  the  firft  time,  my  fpirit  had 
been  moved  within  me,  at  the  crowds  of  poor 
wretches,  who  were  every  Sunday  in  the  after- 
noon, fauntring  to  and  fro  on  the  Sandhill.  I 
refolved,  if  poilible,  to  find  them  a better  employ, 
and  as  foon  as  the  fervice  at  All-faints  was  over, 
walked  ftraitfrom  the  church  to  the  Sandhill,  and 
gave  out  a verfe  of  a pfalm.  In  a few  minutes  I 
had  company  enough,  thoufands  upon  thoufands 
crowding  together.  But  the  prince  of  this  world 
fought  with  all  his  might,  left  his  kingdom  (hould 
be  overthrown.  Indeed  the  very  mob  of  New- 
caftle,  in  the  height  of  their  rudenefs,  have 
commonly  fome  humanity  left.  I fcarce  obferv- 
ed,  that  they  threw  any  thing  at  all : neither 
did  I receive  the  leaf!  perfonal  hurt.  But  they 

continued 


[ 1<53  ] 


continued  thrufting  one  another  to  and  fro,  and 
making  fuch  a noife,  that  my  voice  could  not 
be  heard  : fo  that  after  fpending  near  an  hour 
in  finging  and  prayer,  I thought  it  bell  to  ad- 
journ to  our  own  houfe. 

Mond.  11.  I had  almoflfuch  another  congre- 
gation, in  the  High-flreet  at  Sunderland.  But 
the  tumult  fubfided  in  a fhort  time  : fo  that  I 
explained,  without  any  interruption,  the  one 
true  religion,  Righteoufnefs  and  pe.au  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghof. 

Thurf.  14.  I preached  at  the  Lower-fpen,  fe- 
ven  or  eight  (northern)  miles  from  Newcaftle. 
John  Brown  had  been  obliged  to  remove  hither 
from  Tanfield  Leigh,  (I  believe  by  the  peculiar 
providence  of  God)  By  his  rough  and  flrcng, 
though  artlefs  words,  many  of  his  neighbours 
had  been  much  convinced  ; and  began  to  fearch 
the  fcriptures  as  they  never  had  done  before  ; 
fo  that  they  did  not  feem  at  all  furprized,  when 
I declared,  He  that  bekeveth , hath  everlajlin<r 
life. 

Sund.  17.  I preached  (as  I had  done  the  Wed- 
nefday  before)  to  my  favourite  congregation  at 
Placey,  on  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  own 
right-hand , to  be  a Prince  and  a Saviour.  I 
then  joined  a little  company  of  them  together, 
who  defire  Repentance  and  remiffion  of  Jins. 

Mond.  18.  I fet  out  from  .Newcaftle  with 
John  Downs  of  Horfley.  We  were  four  hours 
riding  to  berry-hill,  about  twenty,  meafnred 
G 5 miles. 


C 154  ] 


miles.  After  refling  there  an  hour,  we  rode 
foftly  on  : and  at  two  o’clock  came  to  Darling- 
ton. I thought  my  horfe  was  not  well.  He 
thought  the  fame  of  his  ; though  they  were  both 
young,  and  very  well  the  day  before.  We  or- 
dered the  hofller  to  fetch  a farrier,  which  he 
did  without  delay.  But  before  the  men  could 
determine,  what  was  the  matter,  both  the 
horfes  laid  down  and  died. 

I hired  a horfe  to  Sandhutton,  and  rode  on, 
defiring  John  Downes  to  follow  me.  Thence  I 
rode  to  Borough-bridge,  on  Tuefday  morning, 
and  then  walked  on  to  Leeds. 

Wednef.  20.  I preached  at  Birflal  and  High- 
town.,  After  I had  vifited  all  the  focieties  in 
thefe  parts,  and  preached  at  as  many  of  the 
little  towns  as  I could,  on  Mond.  2^.  I rode  to 
Barley-hall.  Many  from  Sheffield  were  there. 
We  rejoiced  greatly  together,  in  Him  whojujli- 
Jietk  the  ungodly.  On  Tuef.  night  and  Wednef. 
morning!  preached  at  Nottingham  : on  Wednef. 
evening,  at  Markfield.  Frid.  28.  We  rode  to 
N'ewport-Pagnel,  and  Sat.  29.  to  London. 

Sat.  Auguft  6.  A convenient  chappel  was  of- 
fered me  inSnowfield  on  the  other  fide  the  wa- 
ter. It  was  built  on  purpofe,  it  feems  by  a poor 
Arian  mifbehever,  for  the  defence  and  propa- 
gation of  her  bad  faith.  But  the  wifdom  of  God 
brought  that  device  to  nought,  and  ordered  by 
his  over-ruling  providence,  that  it  fhould  be  em- 
ployed, 


C *55  3 

ployed,  not  for  crucifying  the  Son  of  God  afrejh , 
but  for  calling  all  to  believe  on  his  name. 

Mond.  8.  Upon  mention  made  of  my  defign 
to  preach  here,  a zealous  woman  warmly  repli- 
ed, “ What  \ At  Snowsfields  \ Will  Mr.  W. 
preach  at  Snowsfields  ? Surely  he  will  not  do 
it!  Why,  there  is  not  fuch  another  place  in  all 
the  town.  The  people  there  are  not  men  but 
devils.”  However  I refolved  to  try,  if  God 
was  not  ftronger  than  them.  So  this  evening  I 
preached  there  on  that  feripture,  Jefus /aid,  they 
that  be  whole  need  not  a pkyjkian ; but  they  that 
are  fick . / came , not  to  call  the  righteous , but  jin~ 
ners  to  repentance. 

Sund.  14.  Mr.  G.  affifled  me  at  the  chappel, 
one  who  had  then  a deep  fenfe  of  the  goodnefs 
of  God,  in  lifting  him  up  from  the  gates  of 
death,  and  delivering  him  out  of  all  his  trou- 
bles. 

Mond.  22.  After  a few  of  us  had  joined  in- 
prayer,  about  four  I fet  out,  and  rode  foftly  to 
Snow-hill,  where  the  faddle  flipping  quite  upon 
my  mare’s  neck,  I fell  over  her  head,  and  lire  ran 
back  into  Smithfield.  Some  boys  caught  her, 
and  brought  her  to  me  again,  curling  and  {wear- 
ing all  the  way.  I fpoke  plainly  to  them,  and 
they  promifed  to  amend.  I was  fetting  forward, 
when  a man  cried,  “ Sir,  you  have  loft  your 
faddle-clotli.”  Two  or  three  more  would  needs 
help  me  to  put  it  on  ; but  thefe  two  fwore  at 
almoft  every  word.  I turned  to  one  and  ano- 
G 6 ther 


C 15&  ] 


ther  and  fpokein  love.  They  all  took  it  well  and 
thanked  me  much.  I gave  them  two  or  three  little 
books  which  they  promifed  to  read  over  carefully. 

B efore  I reached  Kenfington,  I found  my 
mare  had  loft  a fhoe.  This  gave  me  an  oppor- 
tunity of  talking  clofely,  for  near  half  an  hour, 
both  to  the  fmith  and  his  fervant.  I mention 
thefe  little  circumftances  to  fhew,  how  eafy  it 
is  to  redeem  every  fragment  of  time  (if  I may  fo 
fpeak)  when  we  feel  any  love  to  thofe  fouls  for 
which  Chrift  died. 

Tuef.  23.  I came  to  Kingfwood  in  the  after- 
noon, and  in  the  evening  preached  at  Briftol. 
Wednef.  24.  I made  it  my  bufinefs  to  inquire, 
concerning  the  truth  of  a ftrange  relation  which 
had  been  given  me.  And  I found  there  was 
no  pofftbility  of  doubting  it,  the  plain  fa£t  was 
this. 

“ The  Reverend  Mr. (I  ufe  the  words 

of  a gentleman  of  Briftol,  whofe  manufcript  lies 
by  me)  preached  at  two  or  three  churches  on 
thefe  words,  Having  the  form  of  godlinefs,  hut 
denying  the  power  thereof.  After  (hewing  the 
different  forts  of  diftenters  from  the  church  of 
England,  who  (as  he  faid)  had.  only  the  form  of 
godlinefs,  he  inveighed  very  much  againft  the 
novel  fd , the  upjlart  Method fs,  (as  he  termed 
them)  which  indeed  he  was  accuftomed  to  do, 
more  or  lefs,  in  almoft  all  his  fermons.  “ Thefe 
are  the  men,  faid  he,  whom.  St.  Paul  foretold, 
who  have  the  form,  the  outward,  (how  of  holi- 

nefs. 


[ i57  ] 

nefs,  but  not  the  power for  they  are  ravening 
wolves,  full  of  hypocrify  within.”  He  then  al- 
ledged  many  grievous  things-  againft  them ; but 
without  all  colour  of  truth  : and  warned  his 
flock  to  turn  away  from  them,  and  not  to  bid 
them  God-fpeed,  leaf!  they  fhould  be  partakers 
of  their  evil  deeds. 

“ Shortly  after  he  was  to  preach  at  St.  Nicho- 
las church.  He  had  named  the  above-mentioned 
text  twice,  when  he  was  fuddenly  feized  with  a 
rattling  in  his  throat,  attended  with  an  hideous 
groaning.  He  fell  backward  againfl  the  door  of 
the  pulpit ; burft  it  ©pen,  and  would  have  fallen 
down  the  flairs,  but  that  fome  people  caught 
him,  and  carried  him  away,-,  as  it  feemed,  dead 
into  the  veftry.  In  two  or  three  days  he  reco- 
vered his  fenfes,  and  ihe  Sunday  following, 
died  !” 

In  the  evening,  the  word  of  God  was  indeed 
quick  and  powerful.  Afterwards  I defired  the 
men  as  well  as  the  women  to  meet.  But  I could 
not  fpeak  to  them.  The  fpirit  of  prayer  was  fa 
poured  upon  us  all,  that  we  could  only  fpeak  to 
God. 

Having  found,  for  fome  time  a ftrong  defire 
to  unite  with  Mr.Whitefield  as  far  as  poflible,  to 
cut  off  needlefs  difpute,  I wrote  down  my  fenti- 
ments,  as  plain  as  I could,  in  the  following 
terms : 

* “ There  are  three  points  in  debate,  1.  Un- 
conditional 


L *5*  ] 

conditional  eleftion,  2.  Irrefiftible  grace,  3.  Fi- 
nal  perfeverance. 

With  regard  to  the  firft,  unconditional  elec- 
tion, I believe,. 

That  God  before  the  foundation  of  the  tvorld, 
did  unconditionally  tied:  certain  perfons  to  do 
certain  works,  as  Paul  to  preach  the  gofpel  : 

That  he  has  unconditionally  eleBed  fome  nati- 
tions  to  receive  peculiar  privileges,  the  Jewifh 
nation  in  particular: 

That  he  has  unconditionally  eleBed  fome  nati- 
ons to  hear  the  gofpel,  as  England  and  Scotland 
now,  and  many  others  in  pad  ages  : 

That  he  has  unconditionally  e/cBed  fome  per- 
fons, to  many  peculiar  advantages,  both  with  re- 
gard to  temporal  and  fpiritual  things  : 

And  I do  not  deny  (though  I cannot  prove,  it 
is  fo,J 

That  he  has  unconditionally  eleBed  fome  per- 
fons, to  eternal  glory. 

But  I cannot  believe, 

That  all  thofe  who  are  not  thus  eleBed  to  glo- 
ry ; w«/?perifh  everlaftingly : or, 

That  there  is  one  foul  on  earth,  who  has  not 
ever  had,  a pojfibility  of  efcaping  eternal  damna- 
tion. 

With  regard  to  the  fecond,  irrefiftible  grace,  I 
believe, 

That  the  grace  which  brings  faith,  and  thereby 
falvatjon  into  the  foul,  is  irrefiftible  at  that  mo- 
ment* 


That 


[ *59  ] 

That  moft  believers  may  remember  fome- 
time  when  God  did  irrejijlibly  convince  them  of 
fin  : 

That  moft  believers  do  at  fome  other 
times  find  God  irre/ifiibly  aiding  upon  their 
fouls : 

Yet  I believe,  that  the  grace  of  God  both  be* 
fore  and  after  thofe  moments,  may  be  and  hath, 
been  refilled  : And 

That,  in  general  it  does  not  aid  irrejijlibly,  but 
we  may  comply  therewith  or  may  not.. 

And  I do  not  deny, 

That  in  fome  fouls  the  grace  of  God  is  fo  far 
irrefijlble ,.  that  they  cannot  but  believe  and  be. 
finally  fav.ecL 

But  T cannot  believe, 

That  all  thofe  muft  be  damned,  in  whom  ft 
does  not  thus  irrefijlibly  work:  Or, 

That  there  is  one  foul  on  earth,  who  has  not, 
and  never  had  any  other  grace,  than  fuch  as  does 
in  fa£l  increafe  his  damnation,  and  was  defigned. 
of  God  lo  to  do. 

With  regard  to  the  third,  final  perfeverance, 

I incline  to  believe, 

That  there  is  a ftate  attainable  in  this  life,  from 
which  a man  cannot  finally  fall : And 

That  he  has  attained  this,  who  can  fay.  Old 
things  are  pajl  away ; All  things  in.  me  are  be- 
come new. 

Thurf,  2g.  My  fubjefd  in  the  evening  was. 

As 


[ lG°  ] 

As  ye  have  received  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrif,  fo  vcalh 
ye  in  him.  O what  a feafon  was  this ! I fcarce 
remember  fuch  an  hour,  fince  the  firft  ftone  of 
the  houfe  was  laid. 

Frid.  26.  I fet  out  for  Cornwall.  In  the  even* 
ing  I preached  at  the  crofs  in  Taunton,,  on,  The 
kingdom  oj  God  is  not  meats  and  drinks , but  rigk- 
teoujnefs  and  peace  and ]oy  in  the  Holy  Ghojl . A 
poor  man  had  ported  himfeif  behind,  in  order  to 
make  home  dilturbance,  But  the  time  was  not 
come.  The  zealous  wretches  who  deny  the 
Lord  that  bought  them,  had  not  yet  rtirred  up  the 
people.  Many  cried  out,  “ Throw  down  that 
rafcal  there  : knock  him  down:  beat  out  his 
brains.”  So  that  I was  obliged  to  intreat  for  him 
store  than  once,  or  he  would  have  been  but 
roughly  handled. 

Satur.  27.  I reached  Exeter  in  the  afternoon; 
but  as  no  one  knew  of  my  coming,  I did  not 
preach  that  night,  only  to  one  poor  finner  at 
the  inn  : who  after  liftning  to  our  converfation. 
for  a while,  looked  earneftly  at  us  and  afked,. 
whether  it  was  portable  for  one  who  had  in  feme 
meafure  known  the  power  of  the  world  to  come y 
and  was  fallen  away,  (which  fhe  faid  was  her 
cafe)  to  be  renewed  again  to  repentance  ? We  be- 
fought  God  in  her  behalf,  and  left  her  forrow- 
ing  ; and  yet  not  without  hope. 

Sund.  28.  I preached  at  fevento  a handful  of 
people.  The  fermon  we  heard  at  church,  was 

quite 


[ 161  ] 


quite  innocent  of  meaning:  what  that  in  th«  af- 
ternoon was,  I know  not ; ior  I could  not  hear 
a fingle  fentence. 

From  church  I went  to  the  caflle : were 
where  gathered  together  (as  fome  imagined)  half 
the  grown  perfons  in  the  city.  It  was  an  awful 
fight.  So  vafl  a congregation  in  that  folemn  am- 
phitheatre ! And  all  filent  and  flill,  while  I ex- 
plained at  large  and  inforced  that  glorious  truth. 
Happy  are  they  tuhofe  iniquities  are  j or  given  and 
wliofe/ins  are  coveted. 

I went  thence  to  poor  Mr.  V the  clergy- 

man, lying  under  fentence  of  death.  He  had  for 
fome  time  a&ed  the  lunatic  : but  I foon  put  him 
out  of  his  play  ; and  he  appeared  to  have  wit 
enough  in  his  anger.  I defigned  to  clofe  in  with 
him  immediately  : but  two  cruelly-impertinent 
gentlemen,  would  needs  come  into  the  room,  fo 
that  I could  fay  no  more,  but  was  obliged  to 
leave  him  in  their  hands. 

The  lad,  who  was  to  die  the  next  day,  was 
quite  of  another  fpirit.  He  appeared  deeply  af- 
fected while  we  were  fpeaking,  and  vet  more 
during  our  prayer.  And  no  fooner  were  we 
gone,  than  he  broke  out  into  a bitter  cry.  Who 
knows  but  he  might  be  heard  by  him  that  made 
him  P 

Mond.  29.  We  rode  forward.  About  funfet 
we  were  in  the  middle  of  the  firfl,  great,  pathlefs 
moor  beyond  Launcefton.  About  eight  we  were 
got  quite  out  of  the  way.  But  we  had  not  gone 

far 


[ ***  ] 

far  before  we  heard  Bodmin-bdf.  Dire&ed  by 
this,  we  turned  to  the  left,  and  came  to  the  town 
before  nine. 

Tuef.  30.  In  the  evening  we  reached  St. 
Ives.  At  feven  I invited  all  guilty,  helplefs  Tin- 
ners, who  were  confcious,  they  had  nothin. 3 to 
pay,  to  accept  of  free  forgivenefs.  The  room 
was  crowded  both  within  and  svithout.  But  all 
were  quiet  and  attentive. 

* Wednef.  31.  I fpoke  feverally  with  thofe 
of  the  fociety,  who  were  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty.  Near  an  hundred  of  thefe  had  found 
peace  with  God.  Such  is  the  bleffing,  of  being 
perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs  fake  ! As  we  were 
going  to  church  at  eleven,  a large  company  at 
the  market-place,  welcomed  us  with  a loud 
huzza  : wit  as  harmlefs  as  the  ditty  fung  under 
my  window  (compofed,  one  allured  me,  by  a 
gentlewoman  of  their  own  town) 

“ Charles  Wefley  is  come  to  town. 

To  try  if  he  can  pull  the  churches  down.” 

In  the  evening  I explained  “ the  promife  of 
the  Father.”  After  preaching,  many  began  to 
be  turbulent.  But  John  Nelfoti  went  into  the  i 
midlb  of  them,  fpoke  a little  to  the  loudeft,  i 
who  anfwered  not  again,  but  went  quietly  ' 
away. 

Tliurf.  Sept.  1.  We  had  a dav  of  peace.  Frid. 

2.  I 


[ »63  1 

§ 

2.  I preached  at  Morva.  about  eight  miles  weft 
of  St.  Ives,  on  the  north  fea.  My  text  was,  The 
land  of  Zabulon  and  the  land  of  Nephtkali,  by  the 
way  of  the  fea — The  people  which  fat  in  darknefs 
Jaw  great  light,  and  to  them  which  fat  in  the  region 
and  fliadow  of  death,  light  is  fprung  up. 

I obferved  an  earneft,  ftupid  attention  in  the 
hearers,  manv  of  whom  appeared  to  have  good 
defires,  but  I did  not  find  one  who  was  convinced 
cf fin,  much  lefs  who  knew  the  pardoning  love 
of  God. 

Satur.  3.  I rode  to  the  Three-corner’d  down 
,(,fo  called)  nine  or  ten  miles  eaft  of  St.  Ives, 
where  we  found  two  or  three  bundled  tinners, 
who  had  been  fome  time  waiting  for  us.  They 
all  appeared  quite  pleafed  and  unconcerned  : and 
many  of  them  ran  after  us  to  Gwenap,  (two 
miles  eall)  where  their  number  was  quickly  in- 
creafed,  to  four  or  five  hundred.  I had  much: 
comfoit  here,  in  applying  thefe  words,  He  hath 
anointed  me  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  the  poor.  One 
who  lived  near,  invited  us  to  lodge  at  his  houfe; 
and  conduced  us  back  to  the  green  in  the  morn- 
. ing.  We  came  thither  juft  as  the  day  dawned,  I 
ftrongly  applied  thofe  gracious  words,  I will  heal 
, their  bac/Jhding,  l will  love  them  freely,  to  five  or 
1!  . fix  hundred  ferious  people.  At  Trezuthan- 
downs,  five  miles  nearer  St.  Ives,  we  found  fe- 
ven  or  eight  hundred  people  : to  whom  I cried 
1 aloud,  Caf  away  all  your  tranfgreffons  ; for  why 
] Will  ye  die,  0 houfe  of  Ifrael?  After  dinner  I 

preached 


t 164  ] 

preached  again  to  about  a thoufand  people,  on. 
Him  whom  God  hath  exalted  to  be  a Prince  and 
Saviour . It  was  here  firft  I obferved  a little  im- 
preflien  made,  on  two  or  three  of  the  hearers  : 
the  refl  (as  ufual)  (hewing  huge  approbation,  and 
abfolute  unconcern. 

At  feven  I met  the  fociety  at  St.  Ives,  where 
two  women,  who  came  from  Penzance,  fell  down, 
as  dead,  and  foon  after  cried  out,  in  the  bitter- 
nefs  of  their  fouls.  But  we  continued  crying  to 
God  in  their  behalf,  till  he  put  a new  fong  in 
their  mouths.  At  the  fame  time,  a young  man 
ofthe  fame  place, who  had  once  known  the  peace 
of  God,  but  had  finned  it  away,  had  a 
frefh  and  clear  manifeftation  of  the  love  of 
God. 

Tuef.  6.  I preached  at  Morva,  on  Rigkteouf 
nefs  and  pecce  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghofl.  But  (t  ill 
I could  not  find  the  way  into  the  hearts  of  the 
hearers : although  they  were  earned  to  hear,  i 
what  they  underftood  not. 

Wednef.  7.  I preached  to  two  or  three  hun- 
dred people  at  Zennor,  (four  miles  weft  of  St. 
Ives,)  and  found  much  good-will  in  them,  but 
no  life.  It  was  much  the  fame  on  Thurf.  8. 
while  I preached  at  Cannegy-downs,  five  miles 
fouth  of  St.  Ives)  on  The  refurrettion  ofthe  dry 
hones.  There  is  not  yet  fo  much  as  a (haking 
among  them  : much  lefs  is  there  any  breath  in 
them. 

Frid.  9.  I rode  in  queft  of  St.  Hilary-downs. 

tec 


[ ] 


ten  or  twelve  miles  fouth-eaft  of  St,  Ives.  And 
the  downs  I found,  but  no  congregation,  neither 
man,  woman  nor  child.  But  by  that  I had  put 
cn  my  gown  and  calfock,  about  an  hundred  ga- 
thered themfelves  together,  whom  I earneftly 
called  To  repent  and  believe  the  gofpd.  And  if  but 
one  heard,  it  was  worth  all  the  labour. 

Satur.  10.  There  was  prayers  at  St.  Juft  in 
the  afternoon,  which  did  not  end  till  four.  I then 
preached  at  the  Crofs,  to,  I believe,  a thoufand 
people,  who  all  behaved  in  a quiet  and  ferious 
manner. 

At  fix  I preached  at  Sennan,  near  the  Land’s- 
end,  and  appointed  the  little  congregation  (con- 
fifting  chiefly  of  old,  grey  headed  menj  to  meet 
me  again  at  five  in  the  morning.  But  on  Sund: 
1 1,  great  part  of  them  were  got  together  between 
three  and  four  o’clock.  So  between  four  and  five 
we  began  praifing  God  ; and  I largely  explained 
and  applied,  / will  heal  their  backjluhngs ; I will 
love  them freely . 

* We  went  afterwards  down,  as  far  as  we 
could  go  fafely,  toward  the  point  of  the  rocks 
h|  at  the  Land's-end.  It  was  an  awful  fight ! But 
how  will  thefe  melt  away,  when  God  arifeth 

to  judgment ! The  fea  between  does  indeed 

boil  like  a pot.  One  would  think  the  deep  to  be 
hoary.  But  though  they  fuel 7,  yet  can  they 
not  prevail:  he  hath  fet  their  bounds , which  they 
cannot  pafs.. 


Between 


[ >66  ] 

Between  eight  and  nine  I preached  at  St. 
Juft,  on  the  green  plain  near  the  town,  to  the 
largeft  congregation  (I  was  informed)  that  ever 
had  been  feen  in  thefe  parts.  I cried  out,  with  all  ' 
the  authority  of  love,  Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe 
efl/rael?  The  people  trembled  and  were  (fill.  I 
I had  not  known  fuch  an  hour  before,  in  Corn-  ■ 
wall. 

Soon  after  one,  we  had  fuch  another  congre- 
gation, on  the  north  fide  of  Morva church.  The 
Spirit  of  the  great  King  was  in  the  midft.  And  I 
was  filled  both  with  matter  and  words,  even  more  : 
abundantly  than  at  St.  Juft.  My Jlrength  will  l 
ajeribe  unto  thee. 

At  Zennor  1 preached  about  five,  and  then 
haftened  to  St.  Ives,  where  we  concluded  the 
day  in  praifing  God  with  joyful  lips. 

Mond.  12.  I preached  at  one  on  Trezuthan-  j 
downs,  and  in  the  evening  at  St.  Ives.  The  < 
dread  of  God  fell  upon  us  while  I was  | 
fpeaking,  fo  that  I could  hardly  utter  a 
word:  but  moft  of  all  in  prayer,  wherein  I 
was  fo  carried  out,  as  fcarce  ever  before  in 
my  life. 

I had  had  for  fome  time  a great  defire  to  go 
and  publilh  the  love  of  God  our  Saviour,  if  it 
were  but  for  one  day,  in  the  ifles  of  Scilly. 
And  I had  occafionallv  mentioned  it  to  feveral.  i 
This  evening  three  of  our  brethren  came  and  of- 
fered to  carry  me  thither,  if  I could  procure  the 

Mayor’s 


t l67  ] 

Mayor’s  boat,  which  (they  faid)  “ was  the  bell 
failor  of  any  in  the  town.”  I lent,  and  he  lent 
it  me  immediately.  So  the  next  morning, 
Tuef.  13,  John  Nelfon,  Mr.  Shepherd  and  J, 
with  three  men  and  a pilot  failed  from  St.  Ives. 
It  feemed  ftrange  to  me,  to  attempt  going  in  a 
filher-boat,  fifteen  leagues  upon  the  main  ocean: 
efpecially  when  the  waves  began  to  fwell,  and 
hang  over  our  heads.  But  I called  to  my  compa- 
nions, and  we  all  joined  together  in  finging 
lufiily  and  with  a good  courage, 

When  palling  through  the  watry  deep, 

I alk  in  faith  his  promis’d  aid, 

The  waves  an  awful  diflance  keep, 

And  {brink  from  my  devoted  head, 
Fearlefs  their  violence  I dare  : 

They  cannot  harm  ; for  God  is  here. 

About  half  an  hour  after  one,  we  landed 
on  St.  Mary’s,  the  chief  of  the  inhabited 
illands. 

We  immediately  waited  upon  the  governor, 
with  the  ufual  prefent,  viz.  A news-paper.  I 
defired  him  likewife  to  accept  of  an  Earnejl 
Appeal.  The  miniiter  not  being  willing  I fhould 
preach  in  the  church,  I preached  at  fix  in  the 
ftreet,  to  almoft  all  the  town,  and  many  foldi- 
ers,  failors  and  workmen,  on,  Why  will  ye  die , 
0 houfe  oj  If raelf  It  was  a blelfed  time,  fo 
2 that 


[ 168  ] 

that  I fear ce  knew  how  to  conclude.  After 
fermon  I gave  them  fome  little  books  and 
hymns,  which  they  were  fo  eager  to  receive, 
that  they  were  ready  to  tear  both  them  and  me 
to  pieces. 

For  what  political  reafon  fuch  a number  of 
workmen  were  gathered  together,  and  em- 
ployed at  fo  large  an  expence,  to  fortify  a few 
barren  rocks,  which  whofoever  would  take, 
deferves  to  have  them  for  his  pains,  I 
could  not  poffiblv  devile : but  a providential 
rtafon  was  eafy  to  be  difeovered.  God  might 
call  them  together  to  hear  the  gofpel,  which 
perhaps  otherwife  they  might  never  have  thought 
of. 

At  five  in  the  morning  I preached  again  on, 
I will  heal  their  bacljliding , I will  love  them  freely. 
And  between  nine  and  ten,  having  talked  with 
many  in  private  and  diflributed  both  to  them 
and  others  between  two  and  three  hundred 
hymns  and  little  books,  we  left  this  barren, 
dreary  place,  and  fet  fail  for  St.  Ives,  tho’  the 
wind  was  ftrong,  and  blew  direftly  in  our  teeth. 
Out  pilot  faid  we  fhould  have  good  luck,  if  we 
reached  the  land:  but  he  knew  not  him  whom 
the  wind  and  feas  obey.  Soon  after  three  we 
were  even  with  the  Land’s-end,  and  about  nine 
we  reached  St.  Ives. 

I rid.  1 6.  I preached  to  four  or  live  hundred 
on  St.  Hilary-Downs.  And  many  feerned 

amazed. 


[ *69  ] 

Amazed.  But  I could  find  none  as  j et,  who  had 
anv  deep  or  lading  convi&ion. 

In  the  evening,  as  I was  preaching  at  St. 
Ives,  Satan  began  to  fight  for  his  kingdom.  The 
mob  of  the  town,  burft  into  the  room,  and  creat- 
ed much  difiurbance  ! Roaring  and  linking 
thofe  that  fiood  in  their  way,  as  tho’  Legion 
himfelf  poffeft  them.  I would  fain  have  perfuad- 
ed  our  people  to  Hand  dill  : but  the  zeal  of 
fome,  and  the  fear  of  others  had  no  ears  : fo 
that  finding  the  uproar  increafe,  I went  into 
the  midd,  and  brought  the  head  of  the  mob  up 
with  me  to  the  defk.  I received  but  one  blow 
on  the  fide  of  the  head  ; after  which  we  reafon- 
ed  the  cafe  : ’till  he  grew  milder  and  milder, 
and  at  length  undertook  to  quiet  his  compani- 
ons. 

Sat.  17.  I preached  at  St.  Juft,  and  at  the 
Land' s-end,  where  in  the  morning,  Sund.  18.  I 
largely  declared  (what  many  fhall  witnefs  in  due 
time,)  By  grace  ye  are  faved  through  faith. 

The  congregation  at  St.  Juft  was  greatly  in- 
creafed,  while  I pioclaimed  to  every  convi&ed 
{inner,  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jtjus  Chrijl,  and  thou 
Jha/t  he  faved. 

* About  one  I preached  at  Morva  on  Rom. 
viii.  15.  to  the  larged;  congregation  I had  feen 
in  Cornwall.  - The  fociety  afterwards  met, 
confifting  of  above  an  hundred  members.  Which 
of  thefe  will  endure  to  the  end  ? 

At  Zennor  I preached  on  Ifaiah  the  53d,  feel- 
Vol.  XXVIII.  H ing 


[ *7°  ] 


mg  no  wearinefs  at  all ; and  concluded  the  day 
with  our  brethren  at  St.  Ives,  rejoicing  and  praif- 
ing  God. 

Mond.  19.  We  were  informed  the  rabble  had 
defigned,  to  make  their  general  aflault  in  the 
evening.  But  one  of  the  aldermen  came,  at  the 
requeft  of  the  mayor,  and  flayed  with  us  the 
whole  time  of  the  fervice.  So  that  no  man 
opened  his  mouth,  while  I explained,  None  is 
like  unto  the  God  of  Jefiur un,  who  rideth  upon  the 
heavens  unto  thy  help , and  in  his  excellency  upon 
the  Jky. 

Tuefd.  20.  I concluded  my  preaching  here, 
by  exhorting  ali  who  had  e/caped  the  coi  ruption 
that  is  in  the  world , to  add  to  their  faith , courage, 
knowledge,  temperance,  patience,  godlinefs,  bro- 
therly kindnefs  and  charity.  At  eleven  I fpent 
fome  time  w’ith  our  brethren  in  prayer  and  com- 
mended them  to  the  grace  of  God.  At  Trezuthan- 
downs  I preached  to  two  or  three  thoufand  peo- 
ple, on  The  highway  of  the  Lord,  the  way  of  holi- 
nefs.  We  reached  Gwenap  a little  before  fix,  and 
found  the  plain  covered  from  end  to  end.  It  was 
fuppofed  there  were  ten  thoufand  people  ; to 
whom  I preached  Chrifl  our  Wifdom,  nghteovf 
rtefs,  fantlif  cation  and  redemption.  I could  not 
conclude  till  it  was  fo  dark,  we  could  fcarce  fee 
one  another.  And  there  was  on  all  Tides  the 
deepell  attention,  none  fpeaking,  flirring  or 
fcarce  looking  afide.  Surely  here,  though  in  a 

temple 


[ 1 7 1 ] 

temple  not  made  with  hands,  was  God  worjhip- 
pid  in  the  beauty  of  hohnejs ! 

One  of  thofe  who  were  prefent  was  Mr.  P— = 
■once  a violent  adverfary.  Before  fermon  began, 
he  whifperea  one  of  his  acquaintance,  “Cap- 
tain, hand  by  me,  don’t  ilir  from  me.’’  He 
foon  burft  out  into  a flood  of  tears  ; and  quickly 
after,  funk  down.  His  friend  caught  him  and 
prevented  his  falling  to  the  ground,  O may  the 
friend  of  Tinners  lift  him  up  ! 

Wednef.  21.  I was  waked  between  three  and 
four,  by  a large  company  of  tinners,  who  fear- 
ing they  fhould  be  too  late,  had  gathered  round 
the  houfe,  and  were  fmging  and  praifing  God. 
At  fi  ve  I preached  once  more,  on  Believe  in  the 
Lord  JeJ'us  Chrift,  and  thou  Jhalt  be faved.  They 
all  devoured  the  word.  O may  it  be  health  to 
their  foul  and  marrow  unto  their  bones ! 

We  rode  to  Launcelton  that  day.  Thurfd. 
22.  as  we  were  riding  tkruugh  a village,  called 
Sticklepath,  one  ftopt  me  in  the  llreet,  and  dik- 
ed abruptly,  “ Is  not  thy  name  John  Wefiey  ?’* 
Immediately  two  or  three  more  came  up,  and 
told  me,  “ I mujt  flop  there.”  I did  fo,  and  be- 
fore we  had  fpeke  many  words,  our  fouls  took 
.acquaintance  with  each  other.  I found,  they 
were  called  Quakers  : but  that  hurt  not  me\  fee- 
ing the  love  of  God  was  in  their  hearts. 

In  the  evening  I came  to  Exeter,  and 
preached  in  the  caltle  : and  again  at  five  in  the 
H 2 morning-. 


C *72  ] 

morning,  to  fuch  a people  as  I have  rarely  feen  ; 
void  both  of  anger,  fear  and  love. 

We  went  by  Axminfter,  at  the  requeft  of  a 
few  there  that  feared  God,  and  had  joined  them- 
felves  together  fome  years  fince.  I exhorted, 
them,  So  to  feek  after  the  power,  as  not  to  def- 
pife  the  form  of  godlinefs;  and  then  rode  on  to 
Taunton,  where  we  were  gladly  received,  by  a 
little  company  of  our  brethren  from  Briflol- 
I had  defigned  to  preach,  in  the  yard  of  our 
inn;  but  before  I had  named  my  text,  having 
uttered  only  two  words,  Jefus  Chrift,  a tradef- 
man  of  the  town,  (who  it  feems  was  mayor  elefl) 
made  fo  much  noife  and  uproar,  that  we  thought 
it  belt,  to  give  him  the  ground.  But  many  of 
the  people  followed  me  up  into  a large  room, 
where  I preached  unto  them  Jefus.  The  next 
evening,  Sat.  24,  we  arrived  fafe  at  Briftol. 

Sund.  25.  I preached  at  Briftol  in  the  morn- 
ing and  at  Kingfwood  in  the  afternoon,  on  Je- 
fus Chrift,  the  fame  yejler  day  and  to  day  and for 
ever.  A vaft  congregation  in  the  evening,  were 
quite  ferious  and  attentive. 

Mond.  26.  I had  a great  defire  to  fpeak  plain 
to  a young  man,  who  went  with  us  over  the 
New-Palfage.  To  that  end  I rode  with  him  three 
miles  out  of  my  way  : but  I could  fix  nothing 
upon  him.  Juft  as  we  parted,  walking  over 
Caerleon-bridge,  he  {tumbled  and  was  like  to 
fall.  I caught  him,  and  began  to  fpeak  of  God’s 
care  over  us.  Immediately  the  tears  ftood  in 

his 


[ 173  3 

his  eyes,  and  he  appeared  to  feel  every  word 
which  was  faid  ; fo  I fpoke  and  fpared  not.  The 
fame  I did  to  a poor  woman,  who  led  my  horfe 
over  the  bridge,  to  our  landlord  and  his  wife, 
and  to  one  who  occaftonally  came  in.  And  they 
all  expreh  a furprizing  thankfulnefs. 

About  feven  in  the  evening  we  reached  Kirk- 
howell,  four  miles  beyond  Abergavenny.  Tuef. 
27.  we  came  to  Mr.  Gwynne’s  at  Garth.  It 
brought  frefh  to  my  mind  our  firlt  vifit  to  Mr. 
Jones  at  Fonmon  : how  foon  may  the  mailer  of 
this  great  houfe  too,  be  called  away  into  an  ever- 
lalting  habitation  ! 

Having  fo  little  time  to  flay,  I had  none  to 
lofe.  So  the  fame  afternoon,  about  four  o’clock, 
I read  prayers  and  preached,  to  a fmall  congre* 
gation  on  the  faith  which  is  counted  to  us  for 
righteoufnefs. 

Very  early  in  the  morning  I was  obliged  to  fet 
out  in  order  to  reach  Cardiff  before  it  was  dark, 
I found  a large  congregation  waiting  there,  to 
whom  I explained  Zech.  ix.  11.  By  the  blood  of 
thy  covenant  1 have  fent  forth  thy  prifoners  out  of 
the  pit  wherein  is  no  water . 

Thurfd.  29.  I preached  at  the  cable  of  Fon- 
mon, to  a loving,  fimple  people.  Frid.  30,  it  be- 
ing a fair,  hill  evening,  I preached  in  the  cahle- 
yard  at  Cardiff;  and  the  whole  congregation, 
rich  and  poor,  behaved  as  in  the  prefence  of 
God.  Saturday,  Oft.  1.  I preached  at  Car- 
H 3 philly 


[ *74  3 

philly  in  the  morning.  LantrifTent  at  noon,  ant! 
Caro  ff  at  night. 

Sund.  2.  Fearing  my  ftrength  would  not  fuf- 
fice  for  preaching  more  than  four  times  in  the 
day,  Ionlvfpent  half  an  hour  in  prayer,  with 
the  focietv  in  the  morning.  At  feven,  and  in 
the  evening  I preached  in  the  Caftle,  at  eleven 
in  Wenvo  church  : and  in  the  ahernoon  in 
Portkerry-church,  on  Repent  ye  and  believe  the 
gofpel. 

Mond.  3.  I returned  to  Briftol,  and  employ- 
ed feveral  days  in  examining  and  purging  the  fo- 
ciety,  which  flill  confifted,  (after  many  were 
put  away)  of  more  than  feven  hundred  perfons. 
The  next  week  I examined  the  fociety  in  Kingf- 
wood,  in  which  I found  hut  a few  things  to  re- 
prove. 

Saturd.  15.  The  leaders  brought  in  what  had 
heen  contributed  in  their  feveral  claffes,  toward 
the  public  debt.  And  we  found  it  was  fufficient 
to  difeharve  it:  which  was  therefore  done  with- 
out  delay. 

Mond.  17.  I left  Briflol  and  preached  in  the 
evening  to  a very  civil  congregation  at  Patnf- 
wick.  Tuefd.  18.  I preached  to  a little  earnefl 
company  at  Gutherton,  near  1 ewkfburv  ; and 
in  the  evening  at  Evelham,  on  the  happinels  of 
him  whoje  iniquities  are  forgiven , and  his  fins  co- 
vered. 

Wednefd.  19.  I called  on  Mr.  Taylor  at 

Quinton,  fix  or  feven  miles  north  of  Evefham. 
~ About 


[ m ] 

About  eleven  I preached  in  his  church,  to  a thin 
dull  congregation,  and  then  rode  on  to  Birming- 
ham. 

Thurfd.  20.  After  preaching  to  a fmall,  atten- 
tive congregation,  I rode  to  Wednefbury.  At 
twelve  I preached  in  a ground  near  the  middle 
of  the  town,  to  a far  larger  congregation  than 
was  expefted,  on  Jefus  Chrijl,  the  Jame  yefier - 
day,  and  to  day , and  for  ever.  I.  believe  every 
one  prefent  felt  the  power  of  God.  And  no 
creature  offered  to  moleft  us,  either  going  or 
coming  : but  the  Lord  fought for  us,  and  we  held 
our  peace. 

I was  writing  at  Francis  Ward’s  in  the  after- 
noon,  when  the  cry  arofe,  that  “ the  mob  had 
befet  the  houfe.”  We  prayed,  that  God  would 
difperfe  them.  And  it  was  fo  : one  went  this 
way,  and  another  that  : fo  that  in  half  an  hour, 
not  a man  was  left.  I told  our  brethren,  “ Now 
is  the  time  for  us  to  go but  they  prefl  me  ex- 
ceedingly to  flay.  So,  that  I might  not  offend 
them,  I fat  down,  though  I forefaw  what  would 
follow.  Before  five  the  mob  furrounded  the 
houfe  again,  in  greater  numbers  than  ever. 
The  cry  of  one  and  all  was,  “Bring  out  the  mi- 
nifter:  we  util  have  the  minifler.”  Idefired  one, 
to  take  their  captain  by  the  hand,  and  bring  him 
into  the  houfe.  After  a few  fentences  inter- 
changed between  us,  the  lion  was  become  a 
lamb.  I defired  him  to  go  and  bring  one  or  two 
more  of  the  moll  angrv  of  his  companions.  He 
H 4 brought 


C *76  ] 

brought  in  two,  who  were  ready  to  fwallow  the 
ground  with  rage:  but  in  two  minutes,  they 
were  as  calm  as  he.  I then  bad  them  make 
way,  that  I might  go  out  among  the  people. 
As  foon  as  I was  in  the  midft  of  them,  I called 
fora  chair,  and  Handing  up  afked,  “ What  do 
any  of  you  want  with  me  ?”  Some  faid,  “ We 
want  you  to  go  with  us  to  the  juflice?”  I re- 
plied, “ 1 hat  I will  with  all  my  heart.”  I then 
ipoke  a few  words,  which  God  applied  ; fo  that 
they  cried  out  with  might  and  main,  “ The 
gentleman  is  an  hone  ft  gentleman,  and  we  will 
fpillour  blood  in  his  defence.”  I alked,  “ Shall 
we  go  to  the  juflice,  to  night  or  in  the  morning  ?” 
Mofl  of  them  cried,  “ To  nisjht,  to  night 
on  which  I went  before,  and  two  or  three 
hundred  followed,  the  relt  returning  whence 
they  came. 

The  night  came  on  before  we  had  walked  a 
mile,  together  with  heavy  rain.  However  on 
we  went  to  Bentley-hall,  two  miles  from 
Wenfbury.  One  or  two  ran  before  to  tell  Mr. 
Lane,  “They  had  brought  Mr.  Wefley  before 
hisworfliip.”  Mr.  Lane  replied,  “ What  have  I 
to  do  with  Mr.  Wefley  ? Go  and  carry  him 
back  again.”  By  this  time  the  main  body  came 
up,  and  began  knocking  at  the  door.  A fervant 
told  them,  “ Mr.  Lane  was  in  bed.”  His  fon 
followed,  and  afked,  “ What  was  the  matter5” 
One  replied,  “ Why,  an’t  pleafe  you,  they  fing 
pfalms  all  day;  nay,  and  make  folks  rife  at  five 

in 


[ *77  3 


in  the  morning.  And  what  would  your  worfhip 
advife  us  to  do  “ To  go  home,  laid  Mr.  Lane, 
and  be  quiet.” 

Here  they  were  at  a full  flop,  till  one  advif- 
ed,  “ To  go  to  juftice  Perfehoufe  at  Walfal.” 
All  agreed  to  this.  So  we  hallened  on,  and 
about  feven  came  to  his  houfe.  But  Mr.  P — . 
likewife  fent  word,  “ That  he  was  in  bed.” 
Now  they  were  at  a hand  again  : but  at  laft 
they  all  thought  it  the  wifelt  courle,  to  make 
the  bell  of  their  way  home.  About  fifty  of 
them  undertook  tu  convoy  me.  But  we  had 
not  gone  a hundred  yards,  when  the  mob  of 
Walfal  came,  pouring  in  like  a flood,  and  bore 
down  all  before  them.  The  Darlafton-mob  made 
what  defence  they  could;  but  they  were  weary, 
as  well  as  out  numbered.  So  that  in  a fhort 
time,  many  being  knocked  down,  the  reft  ran 
awav,  and  left  me  in  their  hands. 

To  attempt  fpeaking  was  vain;  for  the  noife 
on  every  fide  was  like  the  roaring  of  the  fea.  So 
they  dragged  me  along  till  we  came  to  the  iown ; 
where  feeing  the  door  of  a large  houfe  open,  I 
attempted  to  go  in  ; but  a man  catching  me  by 
the  hair,  pulled  me  back  into  the  middle  of  the 
mob.  They  made  no  more  flop  till  they  had 
carried  me  through  the  main  ftreet,  from  one 
end  of  the  town  to  the  other.  I continued  fpeak- 
ing all  the  time  to  thofe  within  hearing,  feeling 
no  pain  or  wearinefs.  At  the  weft- end  of  the 
town,  feeing  a door  half  open,  1 made  toward 
H 5 it, 


[ >7«  ] 

it,  and  would  have  gone  in.  But  a gentleman 
in  the  fhop  would  not  fuffer  me,  faying,  “ They 
would  pull  the  houfe  down  to  the  ground.”  How- 
ever, I ftood  at  the  door  and  afked,  “ Aie  you 
willing  to  hear  me  fpeak  ?”  Many  cried  out, 
“ No,  no  ! knock  his  brains  out : down  with 
him  : kill  him  at  once.”  Others  faid,  “ Nay  ; 
but  we  will  hear  him  firft.”  I began  alking, 
“ What  evil  have  I done  ? Which  of  you  all 
have  I wronged  in  word  or  deed  ?”  And  con- 
tinued fpeaking  for  above  a quarter  of  an  hour, 
’till  my  voice  fuddenly  failed.  Then  the^floods 
began  to  lift  up  their  voice  again  : many  crying 
out,  “ Bring  him  away,  bring  him  away.” 

In  the  mean  time  my>  ftrengih  and  my  voice 
returned  and  I broke  out  aloud  into  prayer.  And 
now  the  man  who  juft  before  headed  the  mob, 
turned  and  faid,  “ Sir,  I will  fpend  my  hfefor 
you.  Follow  me,  and  not  one  foul  here  Thai! 
touch  a hair  of  your  head.”  Two  or  three  of  his 
fellows  confirmed  his  words,  and  got  clofe  to  me 
immediately.  At  the  fame  time  the  gentleman 
in  the  fhop  cired  out,  “ For  lhame,  for  lhame, 
let  him  go.”  An  honeft  butcher,  who  was  a 
little  farther  off',  faid,  “ It  was  a fhame  they 
fhould  do  thus :”  And  pulled  back  four  or  five 
one  after  another,  who  were  running  onthemoft 
fiercely.  The  people  then  as  if  it  had  been  by 
common  confent,  fell  back  to  the  right  and  left : 
while  thofe  three  or  four  men  took  me  between 
them,  and  carried  me  though  them  all.  But  on 

the 


[ *79  ] 

the  bridge  the  mob  rallied  again  : we  there- 
fore went  on  one  fide,  over  the  Mill-dam,  and 
thence  thro’  the  meadows  : ’till  a little  before  ten 
God  brought  me  fafe  toWedne(bury : having  loft 
only  one  flap  of  my  waiftcoat,  and  a little  fkin 
from  one  of  my  hands. 

I never  faw  fuch  a chain  of  providences  be- 
fore : fo  many  convincing  proofs,  that  the  hand 
of  God  is  on  every  perfon  and  thing,  over- 
ruling all  as  itfeemethhim  good. 

The  poor  woman  of  Darlafton,  who  had 
headed  that  mob,  and  fworn,  that  none  fhould 
touch  me,  when  (he  faw  her  followers  give  way, 
ran  into  the  thickeft  of  the  throng,  and  knocked 
down  three  or  four  men.  one  after  another.  But 
many  affaulting  her  at  once,  fhe  was  foon  over- 
powered, and  had  probably  been  killed  in  a few 
minutes,  (three  men  keeping  her  down  and  beat- 
ing. her  with  all  their  might)  had  not  a man 
called  to  one  of  them,  “ Hold,  Tom,  hold  !” 
“ Who  is  there  faid  Tom.  What  honeft  Mun- 
chin  ? Nay,  then  let  her  go.”  So  they  held  their 
hand  and  let  her  get  up,  and  crawl  home  as  wrell 
as  fhe  could. 

From  the  beginning  to  the  end  I found  the 
fame  prefence  of  mind,  as  if  I had  been  fitting  in 
my  own  ftudy.  But  I took  no  thought  for  one 
moment  before  another  : only  once  it  came  into 
my  mind,  That  if  they  fhould  throw  me  into 
the  river,  it  would  fpoil  the  papers  that  were  in 
my  pocket.  For  myfelf,  I did  not  doubt  but  I 
H 6 fhould 


[ i8o  J 

iliould  fwlm  acrofs,  having  but  a thin  coat,  and 
a light  pair  of  boots. 

The  circumftances  that  follow  I thought,  were 
particularly  remarkable,  1.  That  many  endea- 
voured to  throw  me  down  while  we  were  going 
down-hill  on  a flippery  path  to  the  town  ; as 
well  judging,  that  if  I was  once  on  the  ground,  I 
fhould  hardly  rife  any  more.  But  I made  no 
flumble  at  all,  nor  the  leaft  flip  ’till  I was  intire- 
ly  out  of  their  hands.  2.  That  altho’  many 
ftrove  to  lay  hold  on  my  collar  or  clothes,  to  pull 
me  down,  they  could  not  fallen  at  all:  only  one 
got  fall  hold  of  the  flap  of  my  waiftcoat,  which 
was  foon  left  in  his  hand.  The  other  flap,  in  the 
pocket  of  which  was  a bank  note,  was  torn  but 
hall  off.  3.  That  a lully  man  juft  behind,  ftruck 
at  me  feveral  times,  with  a large  oaken  Hick  ; 
with  which  if  he  had  ftruck  me  once  on  the  back 
part  of  mv  head,  it  would  have  faved  him  all 
farther  trouble.  But  every  time  the  blow  was 
turned  afide  I know  not  hour ; for  I could  not 
move  to  the  right-hand  or  left.  4.  That  another 
came  ruffling  thro’  the  prefs,  and  raifing  his  arm 
to  ftrike,  on  a hidden  let  it  drop,  and  only  ftrok- 
ed  my  head,  faying,  “ What  fofi  hair  he  has  ?” 
5.  That  I Hopped  exa£l:v  at  the  mayor’s  door,  as 
if  I had  known  it,  (which  the  mob  doubtlefs 
thought  I did  :)  And  found  him  Handing  in  the 
fhop,  which  gave  the  firft  check  to  the  mad- 
nefs  of  the  people;  6.  That  the  very  firft  men 
whole  hearts  were  turned  were  the  heroes  of  the 

town, 


[ i8i  ] 

town,  the  captains  of  the  rabble  on  all  occafions, 
one  of  them  having  been  a prize-fighser  at  the 
bear-garden.  7.  That  from  firft  to  lad,  I heard 
none  give  a reviling  word,  or  call  me  by  any 
opprobrious  name  whatever.  But  the  cry  of 
one  and  all  was  “ The  preacher  ! The  preach- 
er 1 The  parfon  ! The  minider  1”  8.  That  no 
creature,  at  lead  within  my  hearing,  laid  any 
thing  to  my  charge,  either  true  or  falfe  : Hav- 
ing in  the  hurry  quite  forgot  to  provide  them- 
felves,  with  an  accufation  of  any  kind  : and, 
ladly,  That  they  were  as  utterly  at  a iofs,  what 
they  fhould  do  with  me  ; none  propofing  any 
determinate  thing  ; only,  “ Away  with  him  ; kill 
him  at  once.’’ 

* By  how  gentle  degrees  does  God  prepare 
us  for  his  will  ! Two  years  ago  a piece  of 
brick  grazed  my  fhoulders.  It  was  a year  after, 
that  the  done  druck  me  between  the  eyes.  Lad 
month  I received  one  blow  : and  this  evening 
two  : one  before  we  came  into  the  town,  and 
one  after  we  were  gone  out.  But  both  were  as 
nothing : for  though  one  man  flruck  me  on  the 
bread  with  all  his  might,  and  the  other  on  the 
mouth  with  fuch  a force  that  the  blood  guihed 
out  immediately  ; I felt  no  more  pain  from  ei- 
ther of  the  blows,  than  if  they  had  touched  me 
with  a draw. 

* It  ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  that  when  the 
red  of  the  fociety,  made  all  hade  to  elcape  for 
their  lives,  four  only  would  not  dir,  William 

Stitch, 


[ 182  ] 


Stitch,  Edward  Slater,  John  Griffiths,  a’ld  Joan 
Parks : thefe  kept  with  me,  refolving  to  live  or 
die  together.  And  none  of  them  received  one 
blow,  but  William  Sti  ch,  who  held  me  by  the 
arm,  from  one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other.  He 
was  then  dragged  away  and  knocked  down  : but 
he  foon  rofe  and  got  to  me  again.  I afterwards 
afked  him,  “ What  he  expected  when  the  mob 
came  upon  us?”  He  faid,  “ To  die  for  him  who 
had  died  lor  us  : and  he  felt  no  hurry  or  fear, 
but  calmly  waited,  till  God  ffiould  require  his  foul 
of  him.” 

* I afked  J.  P , If  fhe  was  not  afraid,  when 

they  tore  her  from  me  ? She  faid,  “ No : no 
more  than  I am  now..  I could  trull  God 
for  you,  as  well  as  for  myfelf.  From  the 
beginning.  I had  a full  perfuafion,  that  God 
would  deliver  you.  I knew  not  how  ; but  I left 
that  to  him,  and  was  as  fure  as  if  it  were  already 
done.”  I afked,  If  the  report  was  true,  that  Ihe 
had  jought  for  me  ? She  faid,  “ No  : I knew 
God  would  fight  for  his  children.” — And  fhall 
thefe  fouls  perifh  at  the  laft  ? 

When  I came  back  to  Francis  Ward’s,  1 
found  many  of  our  brethren  waiting  upon  God. 
Many  alfo  whom  I never  had  feen  before,  came 
to  rejoice  with  us.  And  the  next  morning,  as  I 
rode  through  the  town  in  my  way  toNottingham, 
every  one  I met  expreffed  fuch  a cordial  affec- 
tion, that  I could  fcarce  believe  what  I faw  and 
heard. 


I cannot 


r ig3  ] 


I cannot  ciofe  this  head  without  inferting  as 
great  a cunofity  in  its  kind,  as  I believe,  was 
ever  yet  feen  in  England  ; which  had  its  birth 
within  a very  few  days,  of  this  remarkable  occur- 
rence at  Walfal. 

S t afford  fh  ire. 

To  all  high-conftables,  petty-conftables, 
and  other  of  his  majefty’s-  peace  offi- 
cers, within  the  faid  county,  and  particu- 
larly to  the  conftable  of  Tipton,”  (near 
Walfal.) 

“ Whereas  w’e  his  majefty’s  juftices  of  the 
peace,  for  the  faid  county  of  Stafford,  have  re- 
ceived information,  that  feveral  diforderly  per- 
fons,  ftiling  themfelves  Methodrft  preachers,  go 
about,  raifing  routs  and  riots,  to  the  great 
damage  of  his  majefty’s  leige  people,  and 
againft  the  peace  of  our  fovereign  lord  the 
king: 

“ Thefe  are  in  his  majefty’s  name,  to  com- 
mand you  and  every  one  of  you,  wdthin  your 
refpeftive  diftri£ts,  to  make  diligent  fearch  after 
the  faid  Methodijl  preachers,  and  to  bring  him 
or  them  before  fome  of  us  his  faid  majefty’s  juf- 
tices of  the  peace,  to  be  examined  concerning 
their  unlawful  doings.” 


Given 


C *84  J 

Given  under  our  hands  and  feals,  this 
day  of  O&ober,  1743. 

J.  Lane, 

W.  Perfehoufe. 

N.  B.  The  very  juftices  to  whofe  houfes 
I was  carried,  and  who  feverally  refufed  to  fee 
me  ! 

* Satur.  22.  I rode  from  Nottingham  to  Ep- 
worth,  and  on  Monday  fet  out  for  Grimfby. 
But  at  Ferry  we  were  at  a full  hop:  the  boat- 
men telling  us,  “We  could  not  pafs  the  Trent: 
it  was  as  much  as  our  lives  were  worth  to  put 
fromfhore,  before  the  liorm  abated.”  We  waited 
an  hour.  But  being  afraid  it  would  do  much 
hurt,  if  I fhould  difappoint  the  congregation  at 
Grimfby,  I afked  the  men,  “ If  they  did  not 
think  it  poffible,  to  get  to  the  other  fhore  ?” 
They  faid,  “ They  could  not  tell ; but  if  we 
would  venture  our  lives,  they  would  venture 
theirs.”  So  we  put  off,  having  fix  men,  two  wo- 
men, and  three  horfes  in  the  boat.  Many  flood 
looking  after  us  on  the  river-fide:  in  the  middle 
of  which  we  were,  when  in  an  inflant,  the  fide 
of  the  boat  was  under  water,  and  the  horfes  and 
men  rolling  one  over  another.  We  expe&ed 
the  boat  to  fink  every  moment,  but  I did  not 
doubt  of  being  able  to  fwim  afhore.  The  boat- 
men were  amazed  as  well  as  the  reft  ; but  they 
quickly  recovered  and  rowed  for  life.  And 

foon 


C i*5  ] 


Toon  after  our  horfes  leaping  overboard,  light- 
ened the  boat,  and  we  all  came  unhurt  to  land. 

They  wondered  what  was  the  matter  I did  not 
rife,  (for  I lay  along  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat; 
and  I wondered  too ; til!  upon  examination  I 
found,  that  a large  iron  crow,  which  the  boat- 
men fometimes  ufed,  was  (none  knew  how)  run 
through  the  firing  of  my  boot,  which  pinned  me 
down  that  I could  not  fHr.  So  that  if  the  boat 
had  funk,  I fhould  have  been  fafe  enough  from 
fwimmingany  further. 

The  fame  day,  and  as  near  as  we  could  judge, 
the  fame  hour,  the  boat  in  which  my  brother 
was  eroding  the  Severn,  at  the  New  Paffage,  was 
carried  away  by  the  wind,  and  in  the  utmoft 
danger  of  fplitting  upon  the  rocks.  But  the  fame 
God,  when  all  human  hope  was  pad,  delivered 
them  as  well  as  us. 

In  the  evening,  the  houffe  at  Grimfby  not  be- 
ing able  to  contain  one  fourth  of  the  congrega- 
tion, I flood  in  the  ftreet,  and  exhorted  every 
prodigal,  to  arife  and  go  to  his  father . One  or 
two  endeavoured  to  interrupt;  but  they  were 
foon  flilled  by  their  own  companions.  The  next 
day,  Tuef.  25.  one  in  the  town  promifed  us  the 
ufe  of  a large  room.  But  he  was  prevailed  upon 
to  retraft  his  promife,  before  the  hour  of  preach- 
ing came.  I then  defigned  going  to  the  crofs  ; 
but  the  rain  prevented  : fo  that  we  were  a little 
at  a lofs,  till  we  were  offered  a very  convenient 
place,  by  a woman  which  was  a /inner,  I there 

declared 


C 186  ] 

declared  him  (about  one  o’clock)  whom  God  hath 
exalted , to  give  repentance  and  remijjwn  of  fins. 
And  God  fo  confirmed  the  word  of  his  grace, 
that  I marvelled  any  one  could  withftand  him. 

* However  the  prodigal  held  out  till  ihe  even- 
ing, when  I inlarged  upon  her  fins  and  faith, 
who  wajhed  our  Lord's  feet  with  tears , and  wiped 
them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.  She  was  then  ut- 
terly broken  in  pieces  (as  indeed,  was  well  nigh 
the  whole  congregation)  and  came  after  me  to 
my  lodging,  crying  out,  “ O Sir  ! What  naif  I 
do  to  be  faved  ?”  Being  now  informed  of  her 
cafe,  I faid,  “ Efcape  for  your  life.  Return 
inftantly  to  your  hufband.”  She  faid,  “ But  how 
can  it  be  ? Which  way  can  I go  ? He  is  above 
an  hundred  miles  off.  I have  jufi  received  a letter 
from  him;  andheisatNewcafile-upon-Tvne.  I told 
her,  “ I am  going  for  Newcaftle  in  the  morning. 
You  may  go  with  me,  William  Blow  {hall  take 
you  behind  him.”  And  fo  he  did.  Glory  be  to 
the  friend  of  finners  ! He  hath  plucked  one  more 
brand  out  of  the  fire. — Thou  poor  finner,  thou 
haft  received  a prophet  in  the  name  of  a 
prophet:  and  thou  art  found  of  him  that  fent 
him. 

Wednef.  26.  I inlarged  upon  thofe  deep 
words,  Repent  and  believe  the  go  [pel.  When  I had 
done,  a man  flood  forth  in  the  midft,  one  who 
had  exceedingly  troubled  his  brethren,  vehe- 
mently maintaining  (for  the  plague  had  fpread 
hither  alfo)  that  they  ought  not  to  pray,  to  fing, 

to 


[ i*7  ] 

to  communicate ; to  fearch  the  fcriptures  or  to 
trouble  themfelves  about  works,  but  only  10  be* 
lieve  and  be  jlill)  and  faid  with  a loud  voice,  Mr. 
Wefley  ! Let  wefpeak  a few  words.  Is  it  not  faid, 
A certain  man  had  tzuo  Jons  ? And  he  ) aid.  unto 
the  younger , Go  and  work  in  my  vineyard.  Ana [ 
he  anfwered , I will  not  : but  afterwards  he  re- 
pented and  zoent  ? I am  he.  I faid  yeflerday,  “ I 
will  not  go  to  hear  him  : I will  have  nothing  to 
do  with  him.”  But  I repent.  Here  is  my  hand. 
By  the  grace  of  God,  I will  not  leave  you  as  long 
as  I live. 

* William  Blow,  Mrs.  S.  and  I fet  out  at  fix. 
During  our  whole  journey  to  Newcaltle,  I fcarce 
obferved  her  to  laugh  or  even  fmile  once.  Nor 
did  Ihe  ever  complain  of  any  thing,  or  appear 
moved  in  the  lead  with  thofe  trying  circumftan- 
ces,  which  many  times  occurred  in  our  way.  A 
lleddy  ferioufnefs  or  fadnefs  rather  appeared  in 
her  whole  behaviour  and  converfation,  as  be- 
came one  that  felt  the  burden  of  fin  and  was 
groaning  after  falvation.  In  the  fame  fpirit,  by 
all  I could  obferve  or  learn,  fhe  continued  dur- 
ing her  flay  at  Newcafile.  Not  long  after  her 
hufband  removed  from  thence,  and  wrote  to  her 
to  follow  him.  She  fet  out  in  a fhip  bound  for 
Hull.  A ftorm  met  them  by  the  way.  The  (hip 
fprung  a leak.  But  though  it  was  near  the  fhore, 
on  which  many  people  flocked  together,  yet  the 
fea  ran  fo  exceeding  high,  that  it  was  impoflible 
to  make  any  help.  Mrs.  S.  was  feen  {landing  on 

the 


[ i88  ] 

the  deck,  as  the  Chip  gradually  funk  : and  after- 
wards hanging  by  her  hands  on  the  ropes,  till  the 
mails  likewife  difappeared.  Even  then  for  fome 
moments  they  could  obferve  her,  floating  upon 
the  waves,  till  her  cloaths,  which  buoyed  her  up, 
being  throughly  wet,  fhe  funk — I trull,  into  the 
ocean  of  God’s  mercy. 


AN 


[ i89  ] 


A N 


X 

T 

R 

A 

c 

0 

F T H E 

Rev. 

Mr. 

John 

Wes 

ley’s 

O 

u 

R 

N 

A 

From  O&ober  27,  1743,  to  November  17, 
1746. 


Number  VI. 


Friday,  O&ober  28,  1743. 

TE  rode  with  William  Holmes,  an  Ifraelite 
V * ’ indeed,  from  Epworth  to  Syke-houfe. 
Jere  I preached  at  ten,  and  haftenedontoLeeds: 

from 


I 150  ] 

from  whence,  fetting  out  early  in  the  morning,  1 
had  hopes  of  reaching  Wenfley-dale  before  h 
was  dark.  But  it  could  not  be.  So  in  the  dufk 
of  the  evening,  underftanding  we  had  five  or 
fix  miles  ftill  to  ride,  I thought  it  belt  to  procure  . 
a guide.  In  lefs  than  an  hour,  it  being  extremely 
dark,  I perceived  we  were  got  out  of  all  road.  < 
Wo  were  in  a large  meadow,  near  a river,  and 
(it  feemed  to  me)  almolt  furrounded  with  water. 

I afked  our  guide,  “ Do  you  know  where  you 
are?”  And  he  honeftly  anfwered  “ No.”  So  we 
rode  on  as  we  could,  till  about  eight  we  came  to 
a little  houfe,  whence  we  were  directed  into  a 
lane  which  led  to  Wenfley. 

Sund.  30.  Mr.  Clayton  read  prayers,  and  I 
preached,  on,  What  mujl  I do  to  be  Javed  ? I 
{hewed  in  the  plaineft  words  I could  devife, 

“ That  mere  outfide  religion  would  not  bring  us 
to  heaven  : that  none  could  go  thither  without 
inward  holinefs,  which  was  only  attained  by 
faith.”  As  I went  back  through  the  church-vard, 
many  of  the  parifh  were  in  high  debate  “ What 
religion  this  preacher  is  of  :J”  Some  faid,  He 
mult  be  a quaker  : others  an  anabaptilt  : but  a; 
length  one  deeper  learned  than  the  relt 
brought  them  all  clearly  over  to  his  opinion 
“ That  he  was  a Prejbyterian-papiji! ” 

Mond.  31.  We  fet  out  eaily  in  the  morning 
and  in  the  evening  came  to  Newcaltle. 

Wednefl 


C 19l  J 


Wednef.  Nov.  2.  The  following  advertife- 
snent  was  publifhed. 

for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  Efte  : 

“ By  the  Edinburgh  company  of  comedians, 
on  Frid.  Nov.  4,  will  be  a£led  a comedy  called, 
The  Confcious  Lovers  : to  which  will  be  added,  a 
farce,  called  Trick  upon  Trick , or  Methodijm  Dif- 
played .” 

* On  Friday,  a vaft  multitude  of  fpeffators 
were  affembled  in  the  Moot-hall  to  fee  this.  It 
*,  was  believed,  there  could  not  be  lefs  than  fifteen 
hundred  people,  fome  hundreds  of  whom  fat  on 
rows  of  feats,  built  upon  the  ftage.  Soon  after 
the  comedians  had  begun  the  firft  a£l  of  the  play, 
on  a fudden  all  thofe  feats  fell  down  at  once,  the 
fuppor'ters  of  them  breaking  like  a rotten  Hick. 
The  people  were  thrown  one  upon  another, 
about  five  foot  forward,  but  not  one  of  them  hurt. 
After  a fhort  time,  the  reft  of  the  fpeftators  were 
quiet,  and  the  aflors  went  on.  In  the  middle  of 
the  fecond  a£i,  all  the  {hilling  feats  gave  a crack, 
and  funk  feveral  inches  down.  A great  noife 
and  fhrieking  followed,  and  as  many  as  could 
readily  get  to  the  door,  went  out  and  returned 
no  more.  Notwithftanding  this,  when  the  noife 
was  over,  the  aftors  went  on  with  the  play.  In 
the  beginning  of  the  third  a£i,  the  entire  ilage 
fuddenly  funk  about  fix  inches.  The  players  re- 
tired with  great  precipitation  : yet  in  a while 
they  began  again.  At  the  latter  end  of  the  third 
ftd,  all  the  fix-penny  feats,  without  any  kind  of 

notice, 


[ *92  ] 

notice,  fell  to  the  ground.  There  was  now  a 
cry  on  every  fide,  it  being  fuppofed,  that  many 
were  crufhed  in  pieces.  But  upon  enquiry,  not 
a fingle  perfon  (fuch  was  the  mercy  of  God  !) 
was  either  killed  or  dangeroufly  hurt.  Two  or 
three  hundred  remaining  ftillinthe  hall.  Mr. 
Efte  (who  was  to  aft  the  Methodiftj  came  upon 
the  ftage  and  told  them,  “ For  all  this,  he  was 
refolved,  the  farce  fhould  be  afted.’’  While  he 
was  fpeaking,  the  ftage  funk  fix  inches  more; 
on  which  he  ran  back  in  the  utmoft  con. 
jufion,  and  the  people  as  fall  as  they  could 
out  of  the  door,  none  flaying  to  look  behind 
him. 

Which  is  mofl  furprlzing,  “ That  thofe 
players  afted  this  farce  the  next  week  ?”  Or, 
**  That  fome  hundreds  of  people  came  again  to 
fee  it  ?” 

Sund.  6.  We  had  an  ufeful,  practical  fermon 
at  St.  Nicholas  church  in  the  morning,  and  ano- 
ther at  St.  Andrew’s  in  the  afternoon.  At  five  I 
preached  to  a willing  multitude,  on  the  prodigal 
fon.  How  many  ol  thele  were  loft,  and  now  are 
found  ? 

In  the  following  week  I endeavoured  to  fpeak 
feverally,  to  each  member  of  the  fociety.  1 he 
numbers,  I found,  neither  to  rife  nor  fall  ; but 
many  had  increaled  in  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  God. 

Sund.  13.  And  the  following  days,  I preached 
and  regulated  the  focieties  at  Painfher,  Tanfield, 

Horefely, 


[ *93  J 

Horfely  and  Placey.  Thurf.  17.  I preached  at 
the  Spen,  on,  Chrijt  Jefus  our  wifdom , righteouf- 
nefs,  fanBificatipn  and  redemption.  I have  fel- 
dom  feen  an  audience  fo  greatly  moved,  fince 
the  time  of  my  firft  preaching  at  Briftol.  Men, 
women  and  children  wept,  and  groaned,  and 
trembled  exceedingly.  Many  could  not  contain 
themfelves  in  thefe  bounds,  but  cried  with  a loud 
and  bitter  cry.  It  was  the  fame  at  the  meeting  of 
the  fociety  ; and  likewife  in  the  morning,  while 
I was  Chewing  the  happinefs  of  thefe  whoje  ini- 
quities are  forgiven , and  whofe  fin  is  covered.  I 
afterwards  fpake  with  twelve  or  fourteen  of 
them  feverally  ; and  found  good  ground  to  be- 
lieve, that  God  had  given  them  to  tafe  of  the 
good  word , and  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come. 

Sund.  20.  After  preaching  at  Neweaftle 
morning  and  evening,  I earneftly  exhorted  the 
fociety,  “ To  beware  of  fpeaking  evil  of  each 
other,  and  of  cenfuring  thofe  who  followed  not 
with  us.”  Mond.  21.  I befought  them  in  my 
farewel  fermon,  “ To  forget  the  things  which  are 
behind,  and  prefs  on  to  the  piize  of  their  high 
calling.” 

Tuef.  22.  I preached  at  Norton,  five  miles 
from  Ferrybridge,  and  in  the  evening  at  Syke- 
houfe.  Here  I received  a full  account  of  poor 
David  Taylor,  once  a workman  that  needed  not 
to  be  afhamed.  Three  years  fince,  he  knew  all 
we  preached  to  be  true.  Then  Mr.  I,  brought 
Vo  l.  XXVIII.  I him 


[ 194  3 


him  over  to  German  Jlillnefs.  When  I talked 
with  him  at  Sheffield,  he  was  thoroughly  fenfi- 
hie  of  his  miftake  : but  Mr.  Simpfon  foon  drew 
him  into  it  again.  A third  time  he  was  deeply 
convinced  by  my  brother,  and  unconvinced 
ffiortly  after.  He  was  once  more  brought  into 
the  fcripture-way  by  Mr.  Graves,  and  feemed 
to  be  eftablifhed  therein.  But  in  a few'  months 
he  veered  about  to  the  old  point,  and  has  been  a 
poor  firmer  indeed  ever  fince. 

Wednef.  23.  1 rode  to  Leeds,  preached  in 
the  evening  and  morning,  Tkurf.  24,  and  went 
on  to  Birftal,  where  I preached  at  one  in  the  af- 
ternoon ; and  again  about  feven  in  the  evening. 
Frid.  2,5.  At  the  defire  ol  Arthur  Bate  I rode  to 
Wakefield,  in  order  to  talk  with  his  wife.  But 
I foon  found,  I did  not  come  to  talk  but  to  hear. 
After  an  hour  or  twm,  we  rode  on  to  Barley- 
hall,  where  I preached  on,  God  is  a Spirit,  and 
they  that  worfup  him , mujt  worfnp  him  in  Jpirit 
and  in  truth.  Thence  we  rode  to  Sheffield, 
where  I preached,  in  perfeft  peace,  on  Jf'e  know 
that  we  are  0)  God. 

Satur.  26.  I v'ent  on  to  Nottingham.  In  the 
morning,  Sund.  27,  I preached  in  the  houfe  at 
five,  and  about  eight,  at  the  high  crofs,  on  Why 
will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of  Ifael?  I w'ent  thither  again 
from  St.  Mary’s  in  the  afternoon,  and  proclaimed 
to  an  imjnenfe  multitude,  Jefus  Ckrifi , the  fame 
yejierday , to-day,  and  for  ever.  I faw  not  one 
2 fcoffer, 


C >95  ] 

fcoifer,  or  one  trifler,  but  all  to  a man  appeared 
ferious  and  attentive. 

* Mond.  28.  I rode  to  Brefon,  and  fpent  an 
hour  or  two  in  converfation  with  Mr.  Simpfon  : 
the  oddeft,  honefteft  enthufiaft  furely,  that  ever 
was  upon  earth.  Before  we  parted  he  told  me, 
“ One  thing  I don’t  like ; your  taking  away  my 
flock  at  Nottingham.  Juft  now  that  text  is 
brought  to  my  mind.  It  is  the  very  cafe.  Pray 
read  it  out.”  I did  fo,  as  follows,  And  Abraham 
reproved  Abimeledi , btcaufe  of  the  well  which  Abi- 
melech’s  fervants  had  violently  taken  away.  I de- 
fired  him  to  read  my  anfwer  in  the  next  verfe. 
And  Abimcleck  faid  unto  Abraham , I wot  not  who. 
hath  done  this  thing:  neither  heard  1 any  thing 
thereof  from  thee,  /live  this  day. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Markfield.  After 
preaching  there  twice,  on  Thurf.  29,  1 went  on 
to  Hinkley,  and  preached  to  a large  and  quiet 
congregation.  We  rode  to  Market-Harborough 
that  day,  the  next  to  Hockley,  and  on  Thurf. 
Dec.  1.  to  London. 

I had  full  employment  here  for  fome  weeks 
following,  in  fpeaking  feverally  to  the  members 
of  the  fociety.  Many  of  thefe  I was  obliged  to 
fet  afide  ; there  remained  about  two  and  twenty 
hundred  perfons. 

* January  1,  1744.  I received  a letter  from  a 
poor  man,  wrote  in  the  fullnefs  of  his  heart,  as 
follows, 

I 2 


“ Herein 


C 196  ] 

“ Herein  is  written  lamentation,  and  mourn- 
ing, and  woe. 

S 1 R, 

0 T Have  had  but  very  little  reft  fince  I left 
A you,  the  caufe  of  which  was,  my  leaving 
God  firft.  ’Tis  true,  I did  in  a very  folemn  man- 
ner, on  my  knees  break  from  you,  as  though  I 
had  done  fo,  merely  to  pleafe  God ; but  by 
what  followed,  it  appears  otherwife.  For  I no 
fooner  broke  off  from  you,  than  I began  to  think 
how  I might  make  a worldly  advantage  bv  it. 
O,  thought  I,  I Ihall  not  now  be  fo  fcrupulous  in 
many  things,  particularly  in  doing  work  on  the 
Lord’s  day.  Then  I got  me  feme  rabbits  and 
fowls,  and  I would  be  fure  to  feed  and  clean  them 
well  on  that  day,  and  to  be  out  on  the  hunt  for 
food  for  them.  And  I took  care  my  poor  family 
fhould  be  lharers  with  me  in  the  drudgery;  or 
elfe  they  muft  expeft  many  a four  look  and  bit- 
ter word  at  leaft.  I then  grewworfe  and  worfe; 
infomuch  that  I have  given  fuch  occafion  to  the 
enemy  to  blafpheme,  l'uch  a wound  to  religion, 
as  1 could  not  heal,  were  I to  live  ten  thoufand 
years.  O what  have  I done  ? O what  have  I 
loft  ! O that  I might  be  admitted  into  God’s  fa- 
vour once  more  ! Pray  for  me,  I befeech  you ; 
if  you  fee  any  hope  left,  if  you  do  not  think  that 
repentance  will  be  denied  me,  though  I feek  it 

carefully 


C 197  ] 

carefully  with  tears.  Then  if  you  can  think  of 
any  frame  that  will  be  bad  enough  for  me  to  un- 
dergo, before  1 am  admitted  into  that  company 
I fo  willingly  left,  fee  whether  I will  not  readily 
fubmit  to  it.  O that  God  would  be  pleafed  to 
bring  me  into  light  and  love  again  ! How  care- 
ful would  I be  of  his  grace  ! How  would  I deny 
myfelf,  take  up  my  cvofs,  endure  frame,  fuffer 
perfecution  of  every  kind,  follow  the  dear  Lord 
jefus  without  the  camp ! But  I have  crucified 
him  afrefh.  O that  I could  give  full  fcope  to  my 
mind.  But  I cannot.  Thefe  lines  are  but  a 
very  imperfefi  defcription  of  the  flate,  condi- 
tion and  defire,  of  that  backflider,  that  apoftate, 
that  tray  tor, 

John  Ewer.5’ 


Sund.  8.  In  the  evening  1 rode  to  Brentford, 
on  Monday  to  Marlborough,  and  the  next  day 
to  Briftol. 

Wednef.  11.  I began  examining  the  fociety  : 
and  not  before  it  was  wanted.  For  the  plague 
was  begun.  1 found  many  crying  out,  “ Faith, 
faith!  Believe,  believe!”  But  making  little  ac- 
count of  the  fruits  of  faith,  either  of  holinefs  or 
good  works.  In  a few  days  they  came  to  them- 
felves,  and  had  a more  thorough  underftanding 
of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus. 

Wednef.  23.  I preached  at  Bath,  on  James  ii. 
14.  Can  faith  fave  him  ? Many  of  the  audience 
1 3 appeared 


E *98  ] 

appeared  to  be  deeply  convinced.  And  one, 
though  a gentlewoman,  could  not  conceal  the 
emotion  of  her  mind,  but  broke  out  into  flrong 
cries  and  tears.  Perhaps  even  here  the  bread  we 
have  cajl  ttpon  the  waters,  Jhall  be  found  after 
many  days. 

Frid.  27.  Having  finifhed  the  work  I pro- 
pofed,  I left  Briltol,  and  Satur.  28.  reached 
London. 

Wednef.  Feb.  1.  Juft  before  the  time  I had 
defigned  to  begin  preaching  at  the  chappel,  I was 
feized  with  fuch  a pain  as  I do  not  remember 
ever  to  have  felt  before  in  my  life.  But  I forgot 
it  as  foon  as  I had  read  my  text,  Pfal.  xviii.  1,  & c. 
I will  love  thee , 0 Lord,  my  frength — And  from 
that  time  I felt  it  no  more. 

About  this  time  the  foldiers  abroad  began  to 
meet  together,  as  we  learned  from  the  fol- 
lowing letter. 


Ghent,  Feb.  2,  1744. 

“Sir, 

“ T Make  bold  to  fend  you  thefe  lines.  Feb. 

X 18,  1743,  we  beganour  marchforGermany. 
I was  then  much  call  down,  and  my  heart  was 
ready  to  break.  But  the  day  we  marched  to 
Maftricht,  I found  the  love  of  God  fhed  abroad 
in  my  heart,  that  I thought  my  very  foul  was  dif- 

folved 


[ *99  1 


folved  into  tears.  Bur  this  lafted  not  above  three 
weeks,  and  then  T was  in  heavinefs  again  : till  on 
April  24,  as  1 was  walking  in  the  fields,  God 
broke  my  hard  heart  in  pieces.  And  yet  I was 
not  delivered  from  the  fear  of  death.  I went  to 
my  quarters  very  fick  and  weak,  in  great, 
pain  of  foul  and  body.  By  the  morning  I was 
fo  weak  I could  fcarce  go.  But  this  proved  a 
fweet  night  to  my  foul.  For  now  I knew,  there 
was  no  condemnation  for  me,  believing  in 
Chrift  Jefus. 

June  16,  The  day  we  engaged  the  French  at 
Dettingen,  as  the  battle  began,  I faid,  “ Lord, 
in  thee  have  1 nulled,  let  me  never  be  confound- 
ed.” Joy  overflowed  my  foul,  and  I told  my 
comrades,  “ If  I fall  this  day,  I fhall  reft  in  the 
everlafting  arms  of  Chrift.”  Now  I felt,  I could  be 
content  to  be  call  into  the  fea,  for  the  fake  of 
my  dear  brethren,  fo  their  eyes  might  be  opened 
and  they  might  fee,  before  it  was  too  late,  the 
things  that  belong  unto  their  peace. 

When  we  came  to  winter  quarters,  there  were 
but  three  of  us  joined  together.  But  now,  by 
the  blefling  of  God,  we  are  increafed  to  twelve. 
And  we  have  reafon  to  believe,  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  is  with  us.  I defire,  for  the  fake  of  him 
whom  we  follow  after,  that  you  would  fend  us 
fome  inftruftions,  how  to  proceed  in  our  little 

fociety. God  is  become  a mouth  to  me,  and 

hasbleft  even  my  word  to  fome  of  their  fouls. 

1 4 All 


[ 200  } 

All  praife,  and  glory,  and  honour,  be  unto  him 
and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever  ! 

From  your  ajfeEhonate  brother , 

J.  H. 

Wedn.  15.  We  were  informed  of  the  inva- 
fion  intended  by  the  French  who  were  expected 
to  land  every  hour.  I therefore  exhorted  the 
congregation,  in  the  words  of  our  Lord,  (Luke 
xxi.  36.)  IFatck  ye  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may 
be  accounted  worthy  to  efcape  all  thefe  things,  and 
to jland  before  the  Son  of  man. 

d hurf.  16.  In  the  evening,  after  expounding 
the  third  chapter  of  Jonah,  I befought  every 
one  to  turn  from  Jus  evil  way,  and  cry  mightily  to 
God  : and  inlarged  on  thefe  words,  Who  can  tell 
if  God  will  turn  and  repent,  and  turn  away  from 
his  fierce  anger,  that  we penfh  not  ? 

We  obferved  Frid.  17.  as  a day  of  folemn 
falling  and  prayer.  In  the  afternoon  many 
being  met  together,  I exhorted  them,  now, 
while  they  had  opnortunitv,  to  make  to  tlrem- 
fel  ves,  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteouf- 
nefs:  to  deal  their  bread  to  the  hungry’,  to  cloth 
the  naked,  and  not  to  hide  themfelves  from  their 
own  flefh . And  God  opend  their  hearts,  fo 
that  they  contributed  near  fifty  pounds,  which 
I began  laying  out  the  very  next  hour,  in  linen, 
woollen  and  fhoes  for  them  whom  I knew  to 
be  diligent  and  yet  in  want.  In  the  evening  I 
expounded  Daniel  3;  and  thofe  words  in  parti- 
cular: 


[ 201  ] 

cular:  The  God  whom  weferve  is  able  tode'iver  us 
from  the  burning  fiery  furnace.  But  if  not , we 
will  not  ferve  thy  gods,  nor  worfhip  the  golden 
image  which  thou  hafl  Jet  up. 

Sat.  1 8.  I received  an  account  from  James 
Jones,  of  another  kind  of  invafion  in  Stafford- 
fhire.  The  Subftance  of  it  was  as  follows. 

“ On  Monday,  January  23,  a great  mob  ga* 
thered  together  at  Darlaflon,  a mile  from  Wed- 
nefbuvy.  They  fell  upon  a few  people  who  were 
going  to  Wednefbury,  and  among  the  reft,  on 
Jofhua  Conftable’s  wile  of  Darlaflon.  Some  of 
them  threw  her  down,  and  five  or  fix  held 
her  down,  that  another  might  force  her.  But 
fhe  continued  to  refift,  till  they  changed  their 
purpofe,  beat  her  much,  and  went  away. 

“ Mond  Jan.  30.  The  mob  gathered  again, 
broke  into  Jofhua  Conftable’s  houfe,  pulledpart 
of  it  down,  broke  fome  of  his  goods  in  pieces, 
and  carried  the  reft  away  : particularly,  all  his 
fhop  goods,  to  a conftderable  value.  But  not 
fatisfied  with  this  they  fought  for  him  and  his 
wife,  fwearing  they  would  knock  their  brains 
out.  Their  little  children  mean-time,  as  well 
as  themfelves,  wandered  up  and  down,  no  one 
daring  to  relieve  or  take  them  in,  leaft  they 
fhould  hazard  their  own  lives. 

“ Tuef.  31.  About  a hundred  of  the  mob  met 
together,  on  the  Church -Hill  at  Wednefbury. 
But  hearing  foipe  of  Wednefbury.  were  refolved 
I 5 to 


[ 202  ] 

to  defend  themfelves,  they  difperfed  for  that 
time. 

“ Wedn  Feb.  1.  Mr.  Charles  Wefley  came 
to  Birmingham,  and  the  next  day  preached  at 
Wednefbury.  The  whole  congregation  was 
quiet  and  attentive,  nor  had  we  any  noife  or 
interruption. 

“ Mond.  6.  I accompanied  him  part  of  his 
way,  and  in  the  afternoon  came  back  to  Wednef- 
bury. I found  the  fociety  met  together,  and 
commending  themfelves  to  God  in  prayer,  hav- 
ing been  informed,  that  many  both  at  Darlafton 
and  other  places,  had  bound  themfelves  by  an 
oath,  to  come  on  Shrove-Tuefday  (the  next 
day)  and  plunder  all  the  Methodills  in  Wednef- 
bury. 

“ We  continued  in  prayer  till  the  evening.  I 
defired  as  many  as  could,  to  meet  me  again  at 
eight  in  the  morning.  But  I had  fcarce  begun 
to  fpeak,  when  one  came  running  with  all  fpeed, 
and  told  us,  a large  mob  was  coming  into  the 
town,  and  had  broke  into  fome  houfes  already. 
I immediately  retired  to  my  father's  houfe  ; but 
he  did  not  dare  to  receive  me.  Nor  did  any  one 
elfe;  till  at  length  Henry  Parks  took  me  in; 
whence  early  in  the  morning  I went  to  Birming- 
ham. 

“ The  mob  had  been  gathering  all  Monday 
night,  and  onTuefday  morning  they  began  their 
work.  They  affaulted,  one  after  another,  alt  the 
houfes  of  thofe  who  were  called  Methcdifts. 

They 


[ 203  ] 

They  firfl  broke  all  their  windows,  fuffering  nei- 
ther glafs,  lead,  nor  frames  to  remain  therein. 
Then  they  made  their  way  in : and  all  the  tables, 
chairs,  chells  of  drawers,  with  whatever  was  not 
eafily  removable,  they  dafhed  in  pieces,  particu- 
larly fhop-goods,  and  furniture  of  every  kind. 
What  they  could  not  well  break,  as  feather-beds, 
they  cut  in  pieces,  and  flrewed  about  the  room. 
William  Sitch’s  wife  was  lying-in  : but  that  was 
all  one  ; they  pulled  away  her  bed  too,  and  cut 
it  in  pieces.”  (Had  the  French  come  in  that 
place,  would  they  have  done  more  ?)  “ All  this 
time  none  offered  to  refill  them.  Indeed  moll 
part,  both  men  and  women,  fled  for  their  lives. 
Only  the  children  flayed,  not  knowing  whither 
to  go. 

“ Wearing  apparel,  and  things  which  were 
of  value,  or  eafily  faleable,  they  carried  away: 
every  man  loading  himfelf  with  as  much  as  he 
could  well  carry,  of  whatever  he  liked  bell. 

“ Some  of  the  gentlemen  who  had  fetthe  mob 
to  work,  or  threatened  to  turn  away  collier  or 
miner  out  of  their  fervice,  that  did  not  come 
and  do  his  part,  now  drew  up  a paper,  for  thofe 
of  the  fociety  to  fign,  importing,  that  they 
would  never  invite,  or  receive  any  Method)  11 
preacher  more.  On  this  condition,  they  told 
them  they  would  flop  the  mob  at  once  ; other- 
wife  they  mull  take  what  followed. 

“ This  they  offered  to  feveral  ; but  they  de- 
clared one  and  all,  we  have  already  loll  all  our 
I 6 goods ; 


[ 2°4  J 


goods ; and  nothing  more  can  follow,  but  the 
lofs  of  our  lives,  which  we  will  lofe  too,  rather 
than  wrong  our  confidences. 

“ On  Wednefaay  the  mob  divided  into  two 
or  three  companies,  one  of  which  went  to  Aid- 
ridge,  four  miles  from  Wednefbury,  and  plun- 
dered many  houfes  there,  as  they  had  done  in  fe- 
veral  other  villages.  Here  alfo  they  loaded  them- 
felves  with  cloaths  and  goods  of  all  forts,  as  much 
as  they  could  (land  under.  They  came  back 
through  Walfal  wTith  their  fpoils.  But  the  gen- 
tlemen of  Walfal  being  apprifed  of  their  com- 
ing, raifed  a body  of  men,  who  met  them,  took 
what  they  had  away,  and  laid  it  up  in  the  Town- 
hall.  Notice  was  then  fent  to  Aldridge,  that 
every  man  who  had  been  plundered,  might  come 
and  take  his  own  goods. 

“ Mr.  Wood  of  Wednefbury  likewife  told  fe- 
veral  they  fhould  have  what  could  be  found  of 
their  goods,  on  condition  they  would  promife, 
not  to  receive  or  hear  thefe  preachers  any  more. 

“ On  Friday  in  the  afternoon  I went  from  Bir- 
mingham, defignirig  to  go  to  Tipton- Green. 
But  finding  the  mob  were  ftill  raging  up  and 
.down,  I returned  to  Birmingham,  and  foon 
after  (having  as  yet  no  more  place  in  thefe  parts) 
fet  out  for  London.” 

Any  who  defires  to  fee  a fuller  and  more  par- 
ticular account  of  thefe  furprizing  tranfaflions, 
may  read  a fmall  trafl,  intitled  “ Modern  Chrif- 
tianity  exemplified  at  Wednefbury.  ’ 


Before 


[ 2°5  J 

Before  I leave  this  fubjeft,  it  may  be  proper 
to  infert  an  adyertifement,  which  was  not  long 
after  inferted  in  the  public  papers. 

In  the  Whitehall  and  London  Evening-Poft, 
Saturday,  February  18,  was  a paragraph  with 
fome  miflakes,  which  it  may  not  be  amifs  to 
reftify.  “ By  a private  letter  from  Stafford- 
fhire,  we  have  advice  of  an  infurre&ion  of  the 
people  called  Methodifls.”  The  infurreflion  was 
not  of  the  people  called  Methodifls,  but  againjl 
them  : “ Who  upon  fome  pretended  infults  from 
the  church  party’’ They  pretended  no  in- 

fults from  the  church  party : being  themfelves 
no  other  than  true  members  of  the  church  of 
England  ; but  were  more  than  infulted  by  a mixt 
multitude  of  Church-goers  (who  feldom,  if  ever, 

go  near  a church)  diflenters  and  papifls  : 

“ have  aflembled  themfelves  in  a riotous  manner” 
— Here  is  another  fmall  error  perfonae.  Many 
hundreds  of  the  mob  did  aflemble  themfelves  in 
a riotous  manner,  having  given  publick  notice 
feveral  days  before  (particularly  by  a paper  fet  up 
in  Walfal  market-place,  that  on  Shrove-Tuefday 
they  intended  to  come  and  destroy  the  Methodifls, 
and  inviting  all  the  county  to  come  and  join 
them  “ And  having  committed  feveral  outrages 

without  ever  committing  any,  they  have 

fufFered  all  manner  of  outrages  for  feveral  months 
paft  : “ They  proceeded  at  laft  to  burn  the  houfe 
of  one  of  their  adverfaries.” Without  burn- 

ing any  houfe  or  making  any  refiflance,  fome 

hundreds 


[ 2o6  ] 

hundreds  of  them  on  Shrove-Tuefday  laid,  had 
their  ownhoufes  broken  up,  their  windows,  win- 
dow-cafes, beds,  tools,  goods  of  all  fons,  broke 
all  to  pieces,  or  taken  aways  by  open  violence  ; 
their  live  goods  driven  off,  themfelvcs  forced  to 
fly  for  their  lives,  and  moll  of  them  ftript  of  all 
they  had  in  the  world. 

Ever  fince  the  20th  of  laft  June,  the  mob  of 
Walfal,  Darlaflon  and  Wednefbury,  hired  for 
that  purpofe  by  their  betters,  have  broke  open 
their  poor  neighbour’s  houfes  at  their  pleafure, 
by  night  and  by  dav,  extorted  money  from  the 
few  that  had  it,  took  away  or  deflroved  their 
victuals  and  goods,  beat  and  wounded  their 
bodies,  threatened  their  lives,  abufed  their  wo- 
men (fome  in  a manner  too  horrible  to  name) 
and  openly  declared,  they  would  deftroy  every 
Methodift  in  the  countiy:  the  Chrijlian  country 
where  his  Majefty’s  innocent  and  loyal  fubjefts 
have  been  fo  treated  for  eight  months,  and  are 
now,  by  their  wanton  perfecutors,  publickly 
branded  for  rioters  and  incendiaries ! 

Sund.  19.  Mr.  Viney  came  to  me  from  York- 
shire, and  told  me,  “ About  a year  ago,  being 
then  Vor-fleher  (a  kind  of  prefident)  in  the 
church  of  the  brethren,  I propofed  fome  fcruples 
I had  concerning  our  difeipline,  with  the  reafons 
cn  which  they  were  grounded,  to  Mr.  Spangen- 
berg,  and  begged,  that  till  thefe  were  removed, 
I might  have  liberty  to  remain,  not  a governor, 
but  a private  member  of  the  church.” 


With 


[ 207  ] 

With  this  Mr.  Spangenberg  would  not  com- 
ply. So  at  his  inftance,  I continued  in  my  of- 
fice, and  the  thing  llept  till  May  1743,  when  in 
a meeting  of  the  labourers  (fo  they  term  their 
church-officers)  I was  ordered  to  withdraw,  and 
the  following  queftions  were  propofed-  x.  Whe- 
ther Richard  Viney  were  not  of  Satan,  and  an 
enemy  to  the  church  ? And  2.  Whether  his  ob- 
jections to  the  difcipline  of  the  brethren,  did  not 
fpring  from  anger,  and  felf,  and  pride  ? After  a 
debate  of  four  hours,  I was  called  in  and  afked, 
“ If  I was  convinced  thofe  objections  were 
wrong?”  I faid,  I was  not,  and  defiled  they 
would  caft  lots  : which  after  a little  debate,  they 
did.  The  Lot  came,  “the  objections  are  juft/* 
So  for  a time  the  thing  llept  again. 

“ But  in  November  following,  they  confider- 
ed  the  point  again  : the  refult  was,  that  they 
fent  one  to  tell  me,  “ I was  of  Satan,  had  railed 
objections  againlt  the  brethren  from  anger,  and 
felf,  and  pride,  and  therefore  I was  cut  off  from 
the  church,  and  delivered  over  to  Satan.”  I 
was  greatly  furprized,  but1  not  dilturbed.  God 
.gave  me  perfeCt  peace.  After  much  prayer,  I 
wrote  to  you,  to  know  where  I might  meet  you. 
I know  it  was  the  will  of  God  I fhould  come, 
and  that  I fhould  give  my  felf  up  to  your  direction  : 
and  therefore  I have  fpoke  without  any  difguife 
orreferve.”  I told  him,  “If  you  go  back,  you 
are  welcome  to  go,  if  you  flay  with  me,  you  are 
welcome  to  flay.  Only  whatever  you  do,  do  it 

with 


['  2cS  j 

with  a clear  confcience,  and  I (hall  be  fatisfied 
either  way.1’ 

After  a lew  days,  he  went  back  to  Yorklhire 
to  talk  with  his  wife.  The  brethren  faw  him. 
again,  and  I faw  him  no  more. 

Sat.  25.  In  returning  at  night  from  Snow’s- 
fields,  at  the  corner  of  Joyner-ftreet,  the  coach, 
wherein  five  of  us  were,  was  overturned,  but 
without  any  one’s  being  hurt : although  the 
fbock  was  fo  great  as  not  only  to  dafli  the  fore- 
windows  in  pieces,  but  to  break  the  pole  in  two. 

Mon.  27.  Was  the  day  I had  appointed  to  go 
out  of  town.  But  underftanding  a proclamation 
was  juft  publifhed,  requiring  allpapijls  to  go  out 
ol  London,  before  the  Friday  following,  I was 
determined  to  Hay  another  week,  that  I might 
cut  off  all  occafion  of  reproach.  I was  the  more 
willing  to  flay,  that  I might  procure  more  rai- 
ment for  the  poor,  before  I left  London. 

For  this  purpofe  I made  a fecond  collection, 
which  amounted  to  about  thirty  pounds.  But 
perceiving,  that  the  whole  money  received, 
would  not  anfwer  one  third  of  the  expence,  I 
determined  to  go  round  the  clafles,  and  beg  for 
the  reft,  till  I had  gone  through  the  whole  fo- 
ciety. 

Fri.  March  2.  I began  to  put  this  in  execu- 
tion. While  I was  at  an  houfe  in  Spittle-fields,  a 
juftice  of  peace  came,  with  the  parifh-officers, 
being  on  their  fearch  for  papifts.  I was  glad  of 
tire  opportunity  to  talk  with  them  at  large,  both 

of 


[ 209  ] 

of  our  principles  and  pra&ice.  When  I went 
out  a pretty  large  mob  attended  me  to  the  door 
of  the  houfe  to  which  I was  going.  But  they  did 
us  no  hurt  only  gaped,  and  flared,  and  hollowed 
as  loud  as  they  could. 

Mond.  5.  I was  much  prefl  to  write  an  addrefs 
to  the  king,  which  I did  in  the  following 
terms  : 

“ To  the  King’s  Moft  Excellent  Majefty  ; 

The  humble  addrefs  of  the  Societies  in  England 
and  Wales,  in  derifion  call  Methodifls : 

Mojl  gracious  Sovereign, 

SO  inconfiderable  as  we  are,  a People fcattered 
and  peeled  and  trodden  under foot  from  the  be- 
ginning hitherto,  we  Ihould  in  no  wife  have  per- 
fumed, even  on  this  great  occafion,  to  open  our 
lips  to  your  majefty,  had  we  not  been  induced, 
indeed  conftrained  fo  to  do,  by  two  confidera- 
tions  : The  one  that  in  fpite  of  all  our  remon- 
ftrances  on  that  head,  we  are  continually  repre- 
fented,  as  a peculiar  fe£t  of  men,  feparating  our- 
felves  from  the  eftablilhed  church  ; the  other, 
that  we  are  ftill  traduced  as  inclined  to  Popery, 
and  confequently  difafle&ed  to  your  majefty. 

Upon  thefe  conliderations,  we  think  it  incum- 
bent upon  us  if  we  muft  Hand  as  a diftinft  body 
from  our  brethren,  to  tender  for  ourfelves,  our 
moft  dutiful  regards  to  your  facred  majefty  : 

and 


C 2.10  I 

and  to  declare  in  the  prefence  of  him  we  ferve, 
the  King  of  Kings,  and  Lord  of  Lords,  That  we 
are  a part  (however  mean)  of  that  protedant 
church,  edablifhed  in  thefe  kingdoms  : That  we 
unite  together  for  this,  and  no  other  end  to  pro- 
mote, fo  far  as  we  may  be  capable,  juflice, 
mercy,  and  truth,  the  glory  of  God,  and  peace 
and  good-will  among  men  : that  we  deteff  and 
abhor  the  fundamental  doftrines  of  the  church  of 
Rome,  and  are  Readily  attached  to  your  Majef- 
ty’s  royal  perfonand  illudrious  houfe. 

We  cannot  indeed  fay  or  do  either  more  cr 
lefs,  than  we  apprehend  confident  with  the  writ- 
ten word  of  God.  But  we  are  ready  to  obey 
your  majedy  ta  the  uttermoff,  in  all  tilings 
which  we  conceive  to  he  agreeable  thereto.  And 
we  earnedly  exhort  all  with  whom  we  con- 
verfe,  as  they  fear  God,  to  honour  the  king. 
We  of  the  clergy  in  particular,  put  all  men  in 
mind,  to  revere  tire  higher  powers  as  of  God  : 
and  continually  declare,  ye  mud  needs  be  fub* 
jeft,  not  only  for  wrath,  hut  alfo  for  confcience 
fake. 

Silver  and  gold  '"(mod  of  us  mud  own)  we 
have  none.  But  fuch  as  we  have,  we  humbly 
beg  your  majedy  to  accept:  together  with  out 
hearts  and  prayers : may  he  who  hath  bought  us 
with  his  blood,  the  prince  of  all  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  fight  againd  all  the  enemies  of  your  ma- 
jedy', with  the  two-edged  fwoTd  that  cometh  out 
of  his  mouth  ! And  when  he  calleth  your  majef- 


[ *11  ] 

ty  From,  this  throne,  full  of  years  and  victories, 
may  it  be  with  that  voice,  Come,  receive  the 
kingdom  prepared  for  thee,  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world ! 

Thefe  are  the  continual  prayers  ofvottr  Ma- 
jefly's  dutiful  and  loyal  fubjects, 

T OH  N W E S l E Y '&C. 

•J  1 

But  upon  farther  confideration  it  was  judged 
bell  to  lay  it  abide. 

Sund.  11.  I found  it  was  abfolutely  neceffary 
for  me  to  fpend  a few  days  at  Brillol.  In  the 
evening  I let  out.  As  I rode  through  Newbury 
the  next  day,  my  horfe  fell  and  threw  me  into  a 
deep  mire.  I was  not  hurt,  but  after  cleaning 
myfelf  a little,  went  on,  and  came  to  Kingfwood 
between  one  and  two  on  Tnefday.  I preached 
here  with  great  enlargement  of  heart,  as  I did  at 
Bridal  in  the  evening. 

Wednef.  14.  I endeavoured  to  clear  up  the 
mifunderflandings,  which  had  arifen,  by  hearing 
the  contending  parties  face  to  face.  It  was  as  I 
fufpe£led,  a meer  flrife  of  words : of  which  they 
were  all  fo  fully  fenfible,  that  I believe,  they 
will  not  fo  eafily  again  fall  into  this  fnare  of  the 
devil. 

Thurf.  1,5.  I talked  largely  with  the  Kingf- 
*rood  Rewards,  concerning  the  Rate  of  their 
chools  and  fociety;  and  then  with  the  mafler, 
niRrefs,  and  children,  and  found  great  caufe  to 

blefs 


[ 212  ] 

blefs  God  on  their  behalf.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Briftol,  on,  / will  love  thee,  0 Lord, 
my  Jlrength-,  and  after  commending  myfelf  to 
their  prayers,  rode  to  Marfhfield. 

Satur.  17.  We  reached  London.  Sund.  18. 
was  a day  of  reft.  Tuef.  20.  Having  received  a 
Summons  from  the  juftices  of  Surry,  to  appear  i 
at  their  court  at  St.  Margaret’s-hill,  I did  fo,  and  | 
afked,  “ Has  any  one  any  thing  to  lay  to  my  1 
charge?”  None  made  any  reply.  At  length,  one 
of  the  juftices  faid,  “ Sir,  are  you  willing  to 
take  the  oaths  to  his  Majefty  ? And  to  fian 
the  declaration  againft  Popery  ?”  I faid,  I 
am ; which  I accordingly  did,  and  returned 
home. 

Thurf.  22.  I gave  the  fociety  an  account  of 
what  had  been  done  with  regard  to  the  poor. 
By  the  contributions  and  cohesions,  I had  re- 
ceived about  one  hundred  and  feventy  pounds ; 
with  which  above  three  hundred  and  thirty  poor 
had  been  provided  with  needful  clothing.  Thirty 
or  forty  remaining  ft  ill  in  want,  and  there  being 
fome  debts  for  the  cloaths  already  diftributed,  the 
next  day,  being  Good-friday,  I made  one  col- 
leftion  more  of  about  fix  and  twenty  pounds. 
This  treafure,  at  leaft,  neither  ruft  nor  moth 
fhall  corrupt,  nor  thieves  break  through  and 
fteal. 

Satur.  24.  My  brother  and  I agreed,  it  was 
enough  for  one  of  us  to  ftay  in  town,  while  the 
other  endeavoured  to  {Lengthen  our  brethren 

id  I 


[ 213  ] 


in  other  parts.  So  on  Mond.  2 6.  I fet  out,  and 
came  in  the  evening  to  Newbury.  While  we 
were  at  breakfaft  the  next  day,  two  or  three  poor 
men  were  with  many  oaths  relating  their  exploits 
the  day  before.  I turned,  and  appealed  to  their 
own  hearts,  “ Whether  they  were  doing  well  ?” 
They  owned  their  fault,  and  were  fo  loving 
we  could  fcarce  get  away. 

We  called  at  an  houfe  in  the  afternoon, 
wherein  the  firft  perfon  we  met,  was  fo  drunk, 
that  fhe  could  not  fpeak  plain,  and  could  but  juft 
make  fhift  to  curfe  and  fwear.  In  the  next  room 
we  found  three  or  four  more  merry  people, 
keeping  Eafter  in  much  the  fame  manner.  But 
their  mirth  was  foon  fpoiled.  They  gave  earned: 
heed  to  the  things  they  little  regarded  before, 
and  knew  not  how  to  exprefs  their  thankfulnefs 
or  our  advice,  and  for  a few  little  books  which 
ive  left  with  them. 

In  the  evening  1 preached  at  Briftol.  On 
: tVednefday  and  Thurfday  I fettled  all  things 
here,  and  on  Frid.  go.  rode  to  Middlefey, 

: where  I preached  to  a final],  ferious  congrega- 
ion.  Satur.  31.  Calling  at  Chard,  I light  upon 
' t poor  woman,  unawares,  who  was  earneftly 
1:  groaning  for  redemption.  At  noon  we  fpent  an 
lour  with  a little  company  in  Axminfter,  and 
■.aliened  on  for  Crockern-wells.  But  the  hail 
nd  fnow  falling  fall,  we  could  not  reach  it,  till 
■aft  nine  o’clock. 

-Sund.  April  1.  I rode  to  Sticklepath.  At 

one 


[ ai4  ] 

•one  I preached  in  an  open  place,  on  This  is  the 
record,  that  God  hath  given  us  eternal  life , and 
this  life  is  in  his  Son.  A ilorm  of  rain  and  hail 
began  while  I was  preaching:  but  the  congrega- 
tion did  not  move.  At  five  I preached  again. 
Manv  of  the  poor  people  followed  ine  to  the 
houfe  at  which  I lodged  : and  we  could  not 
confent  to  part,  till  I had  fpent  another 
hour  in  exhortation,  and  prayer,  and  thankf- 
giving. 

1 read  to-day  the  ftrange  account  of  that  John 
Endicot,  governor  of  New-England,  and  his  af- 
fociates  there,  who  beat  and  imprifoned  fo  many 
of  the  poor  quakers,  and  murdered  William 
Robinfun,  Marmaduke  Stephenfon,  and  others. 
O who  would  have  looked  for  farther  inquifitors 
atBoflon!  Surely  thefe  men  did  not  cry  out 
again  ft  Popifh  cruelty! 

Mond.  2.  I preached  at  five,  and  rode  on  to- 
ward Launcefton.  The  hills  were  covered  with, 
fnow,  as  in  the  depth  of  winter.  About  two  we 
came  to  Trewint,  wet  and  weary  enough,  hav- 
ing been  battered  by  the  rain  and  hail  for  fome 
hours.  I preached  in  the  evening  to  many 
more  than  the  houfe  would  contain,  on  the 
happinefs  of  him  whofe  fins  are  forgiven.  In  the 
morning  Degory  Ilhel  undertook  to  pilot  us 
over  the  great  moor,  all  the  paths  being  covered 
with  fnow,  which  in  many  places  was  driven 
together,  too  deep  for  Lorfe  or  man  to  pafs. 

The 


I 2i5  ] 

The  hail  followed  us  for  ih-e  fir  ft  feven  miles  $ 

I we  had  then  a fair,  though  exceeding  fharp  day. 

I I preached  at  G we  na,p-  in  the  evening  to  a plain, 
fimple-hearted  people  ; and  God  comforted  us 
by  each  other. 

Wednef.  3.  About  eleven  we  reached  St. 
Ives,  I was  a little  furprized  at  entering  John 
■Nance’s  houfe,  being  received  by  many  who 

i were  waiting  for  me  there,  with  a loud  (though 
-not  bitter)  cry.  But  they  foon  recovered,  and  we 

I poured  out  our  fouls  together  in  praifes  and 
■thank  {giving. 

As  foon  as  we  went  out,  we  were  faluted,  as 
ufual,  with  a huzza,  and  a few  hones  or  pieces 
of  dirt.  But  in  the  evening  none  opened  his 
mouth,  while  I proclained,  I will  love  thee , 0 

Lord , myjlrtngth. / will  call  upon  the  Lord 

which  is  worthy  to  be  praijed ; fo  JJiall  1 be  fafe 
{from  my  enemies. 

Thurf.  5.  I took  a view  of  the  ruins  of  the 
houfe  which  the  mob  had  pulled  down  a little 

ii  before,  for  joy  that  Admiral  Matthews  had  beat 

i the  Spaniards.  Such  is  the  Cornilh  method  of 
thankfgiving ! I fuppofe  if  Admiral  Lehock  had 
fought  too,  they  w'ould  have  knocked  all  the 
Methodijls  on  the  head. 

Both  this  morning  and  evening  the  congre- 
gation was  as  large  as  the  houfe  could  well  con- 
tain. In  the  fociety,  God  did  indeed  fit  upon 
his  people,  as  a refiner’s  fire.  He  darted  into 

Iall  (I  believe,  hardly  one  excepted)  the  melting 

flame 


[ 216  ] 

flame  of  love : fo  that  their  heads  were 
as  water,  and  their  eyes  as  fountains  of  tears. 

Frid.  6.  1 fpoke  with  the  members  of  the  fo- 
ciety  feverally,  and  obferved  with  great  fatis- 
faftion,  that  perfecution  had  driven  only  three 
or  four  away,  and  exceedingly  ftrengthened  the 
reft.  The  perfecution  here  was  owing  in 
great  meafure  to  the  indefatigable  labours 
of  Mr.  Hoblin,  and  Mr.  Simmons : gentlemen 
worthy  to  be  had  in  everlafting  remem-  | 
brance,  for  their  unwearied  endeavours  to  de- 
ftroy  herefy. 

Fortunati  ambo  ! Siquid  mea  pagina  pojjit, 

Nulla  dies  unquam  memori  uos  exunetcevo. 

Satur.  7.  1 took  down  part  of  the  account  of 
the  late  riot ; which  (to  fhew  the  deep  regard  of 
the  attors  herein  for  his  Majefty)  was  on  the 
felf  fame  day  on  which  his  Majefty’s  proclama-  jj 
tion  againft  rioters  was  read.  Yet  I fee  much 
good  has  been  brought  out  of  it  alreadv;  parti- 
cularly, the  great  peace  we  now  enjoy. 

About  eleven  John  Nance  and  I fet  out  for 
Morva.  Having  both  the  wind  and  rain  full  in 
our  faces,  we  were  thoroughly  wet  before  we 
came  to  Rofemargay,  where  fome  of  our  bre- 
thren met  us.  I found  there  had  been  a fhaking 
among  them,  occafioned  by  the  confident  affer- 
tions  of  fome,  that  they  had  feen  Mr.  Welley, 

a week 


1 


C 2,7  ] 

a week  or  two  ago,  with  the  pretender  in  France; 
and  others,  that  he  was  in  prifon  at  London. 
Yet  the  main  body  ftill  flood  firm  together,  and 
were  not  removed  from  the  hope  of  the  gofpel. 

The  wind  and  rain  beat  hard  upon  us  again, 
as  we  walked,  from  Morva  to  St.  Juft,  which 
alfo  frighted  many  from  coming.  However 
fome  hundreds  were  there,  to  whom  I declared. 
“ If  ye  have  nothing  to  pay,  God  will  frankly 
forgive  you  all.”  It  is  remarkable.  That  thofe  of 
St.  Juft,  were  the  chief  of  the  whole  country,  for 
hurling,  fighting,  drinking,  and  all  manner  of 
wickednefs.  But  many  of  the  lions  are  become 
lambs,  are  continually  praifing  God,  and  calling 
their  old  companions  in  fin,  to  come  and  mag- 
nify the  Lord  together. 

Sund.  8.  I preached  here  at  five  and  at  twelve, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Morva.  Morxl.  9.  I 
preached  at  noon  on  Triggivary  Downs  about 
two  miles  from  Penzance,  a great  congregation 
was  deeply  attentive  while  I defcribed  fthe  feH 
which  is  every  where  fpoke  again/}.  At  four  I 
preached  near  Gulval,  regulated  the  little  fo- 
ci e tv  and  returned  to  St.  Ives. 

Tuef.  10.  I was  inquiring,  how  Dr.  B — e,  a 
perfon  of  unqueflioned  fenfeand  learning,  could 
fpeak  evil  of  this  way,  after  he  had  feen  fuch  a 
change  in  the  moft  abandoned  of  his  parifhion- 
ers  ? But  I was  fatisfied,  when  Jonathan  Reeves 
informed  me,  “ That  on  the  Dr's,  afking  him, 
who  had  been  the  better  for  this  preaching  ? And 
Vol.  XXVIII.  K his 


[ »>8  ] 


his  replying,  “ The  man  before  you  fjohn 
Daniel)  for  one,  who  never  before  knew  any 
work  oj  God  upon  his  foul the  Dr.  anfwered  ; 

“ Get  along;  you  are  a parcel  of  mad,  crazy- 
headed fellows and  taking  him  by  the  fhoulder, 
fairly  thruft  him  to  the  door.  See  here,  what  it 
is,  which  the  world  accounts  madnefs!  The 
knowing  a work  of  God  upon  our  foul. 

In  the  afternoon  I walked  over  to  Zunnor,  and 
after  preaching,  fettled  the  infant  fociety. 

Wedn.  11.  Being  the  public  faft,  the  church 
at  St.  Ives  was  well  filled.  After  reading  thofe 
ft  rang  words,  If  they  have  called  the  mafer  of  the 
houfe  Beelzebub , how  much  more  them  of  his  houf- 
hold ? Mr.  H.  fulfilled  them,  by  vehemently 
declaiming  againft  the  new  fed , as  enemies  of 
the  church,  jacobites,  papifts,  and  what  not! 
After  church  we  met,  and  fpent  an  hour  in 
prayer,  not  forgetting  the  poor  finner  againft  his 
own  fouh 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Gwenap.  I Rood  on 
the  wall,  in  the  calm,  ftill  evening,  with  the  fet- 
ting  fun  behind  me,  and  almoft  an  innumerable 
multitude  before,  behind,  and  on  either  hand. 
Many  likewife  fat  on  the  little  hills,  at  fotne  dif- 
tance  from  the  bulk  of  the  congregation.  But 
they  could  all  hear  diftinaiy  while  I read,  The 
difciple  is  not  above  his  Mailer,  and  the  reft  of 
thofe  comfortable  words,  which  are  day  by  day 
fulfilled  in  our  ears. 

Thurf.  12.  About  eleven  I preached  at 

Crovan. 


[ 219  3 

Crovan.  In  the  afternoon  we  heard  of  the  fuccefs 
of  Mr.  H’s.  fermon.  James  Wheatley  was  walk- 
ing through  the  town  in  the  evening,  when  the 
mob  gathered,  and  began  to  throw  ftones  from 
all  quarters.  He  Hepped  into  an  houfe,  but  the 
mailer  of  it  followed  him,  like  a lion,  to  drag 
him  out.  Yet  after  a few  words,  his  mind  was 
changed,  and  he  fwore,  nobody  fhouldhurt  him. 
Meantime  one  went  for  a juftice  of  peace,  who 
came,  and  promifed  to  fee  him  fafe  home.  The 
mob  followed,  hollowing  and  ihouting  amain. 
Near  John  Painter’s  houfe  the  juilice  left  him  : 
they  quickly  befet  the  houfe.  But  a melfenger 
came  from  the  mayor,  forbidding  any  to  touch 
Mr.  Wheatley,  at  his  peril.  He  then  went 
home.  But  between  feven  and  eight  the  mob 
came  and  befet  John  Nance’s  houfe.  John 
Nance  and  John  Paynter  went  out  and  Hood  be- 
fore the  door,  though  they  were  quickly  cover- 
ed with  dirt.  The  cry  tvas  “ Bring  out  the 
preacher;  pull  down  the  houfe:”  and  they  be- 
gan to  pull  down  the  boards  which  were  nailed 
again!!  the  windows.  But  the  mayor  hearing  it, 
came  without  delay  and  read  the  proclamation 
againft  riots : upon  which,  after  many  oaths 
and  imprecations,  they  thought  proper  to  dif- 
perfe. 

About  fix  I reached  Morva,  wet  through  and 
through,  the  rain  having  continued  with  fcarce 
any  intermiffion.  However  a little  company 
were  gathered  together,  to  whom  I preached  on, 
K 2 AJk, 


[ 220  ] 


AJk,  and  it  Jliall  be  given  you.  The  next  clay  I 
had  time  to  dry  my  cloaths  ac  Mr.  John’s,  near 
Penzance.  At  noon  I preached  on  the  Downs, 
not  far  from  his  houfe.  About  three  at  Gulval, 
and  at  St.  Ives  in  the  evening. 

Sat.  14.  I took  my  leave  of  St.  Ives  ; preach- 
ed at  two  in  Cambourn,  and  at  Gwenap  in  the 
evening.  Sund.  15.  I preached  here  again  at 
five,  and  at  eight  in  Stithian  parifh.  The  place 
was  a green,  triangular  plat,  capable  of  holding 
eight  or  ten  thoufand  men.  I flood  on  one  of 
the  walls  that  inclofed  it.  Many  fat  on  the  other 
two.  Some  thoufands  flood  between  and  receiv- 
ed the  word  with  all  readinefs  of  mind. 

At  five  I preached  at  Gwenap,  on  a little  hill, 
near  the  ufual  place.  It  rained  from  the  time  I 
began,  till  I concluded.  I felt  no  pain  while  I 
fpoke,  but  the  inflant  I had  done,  and  all  the 
time  I was  with  the  fociety,  my  teeth  and  head 
aked  fo  violently,  that  I had  hardly  any  fen fe*. 
1 lav  down  as  foon  as  I could  and  fell  alleep.  In 
the  morning  (blefled  be  God)  I ail  d nothing. 

Mond.  16.  In  the  afternoon  we  came  again  to 
Trewint.  Here  I learned.  That  notice  had  been 
given  of  my  preaching  that  evening  in  Laneaft 
church,  which  was  crouded  exceedingly.  Mr. 
Bennet  (the  minifler  of  Lanead)  carried  me  af- 
terwards to  his  houfe,  and  (though  above  feven- 
ty  years  old)  came  with  me  in  the  morning  to 
Trewint,  where  I had  promifed  to  preach  at  five. 

Before  we  parted,  Degory  lfbel  informed  me, 

of 


[ 221  ] 

of  an  accufation  againft  me,  current  in  thofe 
parts.  It  was  really  one  which  I did  not  expett: 
no  more  than  that  other,  vehemently  afierted  at 
St.  Ives,  ol  my  bringing  the  Pretender  with  me 
laft  autumn,  under  the  name  of  John  Downes. 
It  was,  that  “ I called  myfelf  John  Wefley, 
whereas  every  body  knew  Air.  Wefley  was 
dead.” 

In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Sticklepath  ; I 
preached  at  five  in  the  evening:  the  houfe  was 
crouded  as  before.  After  a fhort  exhortation, 
and  an  hour  fpent  in  prayer,  I commended 
them  to  the  grace  of  God. 

* Wednef.  r8.  Before  eight  we  reached  Cre- 
diton  (or  Kirton)  or  rather  the  ruins  of  it.  For 
the  houfes  on  both  fides  were  all  in  allies,  for 
feveral  hundred  yards.  Lighting  on  a ferious  wo- 
man I afked,  “ Are  the  people  of  this  place  now 
warned  to  feek  God  ?”  She  anfwered,  although 
fome  of  them  perifhed  in  the  flames,  the  reft  are 
juft  as  they  were  before,  curbing,  fwearing,  drink- 
ing, playing,  and  making  merry,  without  God 
in  all  their  thoughts.”  She  added,  “No  longer 
ago  than  Thurfday  laft,  the  men  who  were  re- 
building one  of  the  houfes,  were  bitterly  curb- 
ing and  fwearing  one  at  another,  and  two  of 
them  above  the  reft,  when  an  arch  they  were 
under,  fell  and  cruflied  thofe  two,  with  all  their 
bones  in  pieces.”  Will  ye  not  at  length  hear  the 
rod,  and  him  that  hath  appointed  it  ? 

Between  five  and  fix  in  the  evening  we  reach* 
K 3 ed 


[ 222  ] 

ed  Minehead.  Finding  a general  expectation  of 
it  among  the  people,  about  feven  I preached 
near  the  fea-fhore,  to  almoft  all  the  inhahitants 
of  the  place.  Moft  of  the  gentlemen  of  the 
town  were  there,  and  behaved  with  ferioufnefs 
and  decency. 

Thurf.  19.  Having  a floop  ready,  which  came 
on  purpofe,  we  ran  over  the  channel  in  about 
four  hours.  Some  of  our  friends  were  waiting 
for  us  on  the  Ihore.  About  one  we  came  to 
Fonmon  caRle.  I found  a natural  wifli,  “ O for 
eafeand  a refiing-place.”  Not  yet.  But  eterni- 
ty is  at  hand  ! 

I preached  at  fix,  and  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing. Frid.  20.  About  ten  we  fet  out  for  Car- 
diff: where  in  the  evening  I preached  in  the 
Cafile-Yard.  All  were  ferious  and  attentive. 

Sat.  21.I  rode  to  Garth  in  Brecknockfliire,  and 
on  Sund.  22.  preached  in  the  church  there, 
both  morning  and  afternoon.  On  Mond.  23.  1 
preached  in  Maefmennys  church,  and  aftcrwaids 
in  the  church-yard  at  Builth.  I obferved  only 
one  man  with  his  hat  on  : probably  through  in- 
attention ; for  he  Iikewife  kneeled  down  on  the 
grafs  with  the  reft,  as  foon  as  I began  to  pray.’. 

Tuef.  24.  I preached  at  Maefmennys  again, 
and  about  five  in  Landau  church  near  Breck- 
nock. Such  a church  I never  faw  before.  There 
was  not  a glafs- window  belonging  to  it ; but  only 
boards,  with  holes  bored  here  and  there,  through 
which  a dim  light  glimmered  in.  Yet  even  here 

may 


[ 223  ] 

may  the  light  of  God’s  countenaftce  fhine.  And 
it  has  (hone  on  many  hearts. 

Wedn.  25.  We  rode  over  the  hill  fnowy 
mountains.  At  twelve  I preached  at  Killigaer  : 
in  the  evening  at  Cardiff,  and  the  next  evening 
at  Fonmon.  On  Sat.  28.  I returned  to  Briftol. 

After  refting  here,  for  eight  days  (though  not 
unemployed)  on  Mond.  May  7.  I fet  out  for 
the  north.  I preached  about  eight  at  A£lon : in 
the  afternoon  at  Stroud  : in  the  evening  at  Painf- 
wick,  and  at  five  the  next  morning.  About 
eight,  Tuef.  8.  I called  at  Glocefter,  defigning 
only  to  fpeak  with  a friend ; but  finding  an 
houfe  full  of  people,  I would  not  difappoint 
their  expectation,  but  flayed  and  preached  on 
the  form  and  the  power  of  godlinefs.  This 
made  me  fomewhat  later  than  I intended  at 
Cheltenham,  where  I preached  on,  By  grace  ye 
are  faved  through  faith,  to  a company  who  feem- 
ed  to  underhand  juft  as  much  of  the  matter,  as 
if  I had  been  talking  Greek.  I found  a people 
of  quite  another  kind  at  Gutherton,  to  whom  I 
preached  on,  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gofpel. 
And  many  called  upon  God  for  grace  fo  to  do, 
even  with  llrong  cries  and  tears. 

We  had  a remarkable  bleffing  again  at  five  in 
the  morning,  Wedn.  9.  About  noon  I preach- 
ed at  Stanley,  (a  mile  from  Gutherton)  at  three 
in  Tewfkbury,  and  in  the  evening  at  the  Abby 
in  Evefham, 

Thurf.  10.  Riding  by  Birmingham,  I called 
K 4 at 


[ 224  ] 

at  a village  three  miles  beyond  it.  Here  a 
a poor  man  was  curling  and  {wearing  at  fo  un- 
common a rate,  that  I was  conftrained  to  (peak 
to  him  very  plainly.  He  received  it,  drunk  as 
he  was,  in  great  love,  and  fo  did  all  his  com- 
panions. 

Frid.  xi.  I preached  at  Sheffield-:  on  Sat. 
12.  about  Ten,  at  Barley-hall.  In  the  after- 
noon I rode  to  Epworth,  and  immediatelv  went  to 
Mr.  Maw’s,  to  return  him  thanks  for  his  good 
offices  to  Mr.  Downes,  and  his  honell  and 
open  teftimonv  for  the  truth,  before  the  wor- 
fhipful  bench  at  Kirton.  It  was  not  his  fault, 
that  thofe  honourable  men,  regarded  not  the  laws 
either  of  God,  or  the  king.  But  a foldier  they 
were  refolved  he  ffiould  be,  right  or  wrong — 
“Because  he  was  a preacher.”  So  to  make 
all  fure,  they  fent  him  away,  a prifoner  to  Lin- 
coln goal  ! 

My  firll  defign  was,  to  have  gone  the  fhorteft 
way  from  Sheffield  to  Nfewcalllp.  But  it  was 
well  I did  not,  confidering  the  inexpreffible  pa- 
nick,  which  had  fpread  itfelf  in  all  places.  So 
that  I came  juft  in  time  to  remind  all  the  poor 
frighted  fheep.  That  even  the  hairs  oj  our  head 
are  all  numbered. 

I preached  thrice  at  Epworth  on  Sunday,  and 
on  Mond.  14.  at  Ferry.  The  conftable  who  took 
Mr.  Downes  for  a loldier,  with  one  of  the 
church-wardens  were  of  my  audience.  I was 
informed,  they  had  threatened  great  things  before 

I came. 


[ 225  , ] 

I came.  But  their  threatnings  vani(hed  into  air. 

At  two  many  of  our  brethren  at  Epworth  met, 
whom  I chearfully  commended  to  the  grace  of 
God.  We  were  riding  gently  toward  Filhlake, 
when  two  or  three  perfons  met  us,  and  begged 
“ we  would  not  go  that  way  ; for  the  town,  they 
laid,  was  all  up  in  arms,  and  abundance  were 
waiting  for  us  in  the  way,  many  of  whom  had 
made  themfelves  very  drunk,  and  fo  were  ripe 
for  any  manner  of  mifchief.”  We  accordingly 
rode  to  Sykehoufe  another  way.  Some  came  in 
all  hade  hither  alfo,  to  tell  us,  “ All  the  men  in 
the  congregation  would  be  preft.”  Others  af- 
firmed, “ The  mob  was  juft  a coming,  and  that 
they  would  certainly  fire  the  houfe,  or  pull  it 
down  to  the  ground.”  I told  them  “ Then  our 
only  way  was,  to  make  the  bell  ufe  of  it  while 
it  was  Handing.”  So  I began  expounding  the 
tenth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew.  But  no  man 
opened  his  lips  againft  us. 

Tuef.  jj.  After  comforting  the  little  flock  at 
Norton,  I rode  the  fhorteftway  to  Birftal.  Here 
I found  our  brethren  partly  mourning,  and  part- 
ly rejoicing,  on  account  of  John  Nelfon.  On 
Friday  the  4th  inflant  (they  informed  me)  the 
conftables  took  him,  juft  as  he  had  ended  his 
fermon  at  Atherton,  and  the  next  day  carried 
him  before  the  commiftioners  at  Halifax,  the 
mod  acfive  of  whom  was  Mr.  Coleby,  vicar  of 
Birftal.  Many  were  ready  to  teftify,  that  he  was 
in  no  refpeH  fuch  a perfon  as  the  acl  of  parlia- 
K mezai 


[ 226  ] 

ment  fpecified.  But  they  were  not  heard.  He 
was  a preacher ; that  was  enough.  So  he  was 
fent  for  a foldier  at  once.t 

At  feven  I preached  on  the  hill,  no  man  in- 
terrupting me.  Afterwards  I inquired  into  the 
flate  of  the  fociety,  and  found  great  caufe  to  hlefs 
God,  whofe  grace,  even  in  thefe  trying  times, 
was  fufficient  for  them. 

Wedn.  16.  I talked  at  large  with  Mr.  Viney. 
He  faid,  “ His  firfl  perplexity  arofe,  from  read- 
ing and  reflecting  upon  fome  writings,  which 
the  Count  publifhed  in  Penfylvania:  and  that 
the  more  deeply  he  confidered  the  whole  affair, 
the  more  thoroughly  he  was  convinced,  j.  That 
the  Count  was  at  leaft  as  much  the  head  of  theirs, 
as  the  Pope  of  the  Roman  church.  2.  That  he 
had  cruelly  and  unjuftly  broke  up  the  congrega- 
tion at  Pilger-ruh  in  Holftein,  becaufe  (in  obe- 
dience to  the  king  of  Denmark,  their  lawful 
prince)  they  had  difclaimed  his  fuperiority  over 
them.  3.  That  the  labourers  among  the  brethren, 
were  abfolutely  arbitrary  in  their  government  of 
the  people  ; and  laflly.  That  the\  grofly  abufed 
The  Lot,  in  fupport  of  their  arbitrary  power.” 

Thurf.  17.  I preached  at  five  on  Matthew  the 
tenth : about  noon,  at  Little  Horton,  near 
Bradford  : about  three  in  the  afternoon  at 
Stickerlane,  and  at  Birftal  in  the  evening. 

Frid.  18.  I rode  to  Leeds,  and  preached  in 
great  peace.  Sat.  19.  I went  on  to  Mr.  Clay- 
ton's 

+ All  the  particulars  of  this  mfmoratlo  tranfa£Hcn  are  fet  down 
i.a  l:  The  cafe  of  John  Kcl/vn,  written  by  fcimfclf.” 


C 227  3 

ton’s  at  Wenfley ; and  on  Sand.  20,  preached 
in  Redmire  church  on  part  of  John  iii.  the  got 
pel  for  the  day.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  at 
Bolton  chappel,  on  We  know  that  we  are  of  God. 
I was  much  pleafed  at  the  ferious  behaviour  of 
the  congregation,  both  in  the  morning  and  af- 
ternoon ; efpecially  at  Redmire,  where  from  a 
village  of  about  thirty  lioufes,  we  had  more  than 
fifty  communicants. 

Mond.  21.  I rode  to  Newcaftle  and  palled  a 
quiet  week.  Mond.  28.  I began  vifiting  the 
dalles  in  the  town,  and  on  Sund.  June  3,  thofe 
in  the  country,  which  I had  never  found  fo 
much  in  earned;  before.  I trull,  there  is  not 
only,  not  a diforderly  walker,  but  hardly  a trifler 
left  among  them. 

Frid.  8.  I preached  at  night  on  John  xvii,  3. 
The  houfe  could  not  contain  the  congregation  : 
and  moll  of  them  flayed  either  within  or  with- 
out, till  the  end  of  the  midnight  hymn. 

Sund.  10.  I preached  at  Biddick,  about  eight  : 
at  Tanfield,  as  foon  as  morning  prayer  was  over. 
At  Spen  about  three,  and  in  Newcaftle  at  Six. 
I concluded  the  day',  in  praifing  God  with  the 
fociety. 

Mond.  11.  I left  Newcaftle,  and  in  the  after- 
noon met  John  Nelfon  at  Durham,  with  Thomas 
Beard  : another  quiet  and  peaceable  man,  who 
had  lately  been  torn  from  his  trade  and  wife 
and  children,  and  fent  away  as  a foldier  : that  is 
banilhed  from  all  that  was  near  and  dear  to  him, 
K 6 and 


[ 228  j 

and  conftrained  to  dwell  among  lions,  for  no 
other  crime,  either  committed  or  pretended, 
than  that  of  calling  finners  to  repentance.  But 
his  foul  was  in  nothing  terrified  by  hisadverfaries. 
^ et  the  body  after  a while,  funk  under  its  burden. 
He  was  then  lodged  in  the  hofpital  at  Newcaltle, 
where  he  flill  praifed  God  continually.  His 
fever  increafing,  he  was  let  blood.  His  arm  fef- 
tered,  mortified  and  was  cut  off:  two  or  three 
days  after  which  God  figned  his  difeharge,  and 
called  him  up  to  his  eternal  home. 

“ Servant  of  God,  well  done ! Well  hail  thou 

(foudit 

The  better  fight  ; who  fingle  liafl  maintain’d 

Again!!  revolted  multitudes  the  caule 

Of  God,  in  word,  mightier  than  they  in  arms.” 

Tuef.  12.  In  the  evening  I came  to  Knaref- 
borough.  About  nine  o’clock  I was  informed, 
that  the  houfe  in  which  we  were,  was  befet  on 
every  fide,  with  men,  women  and  children.  I 
defired  thofe  within  to  fet  open  the  doors,  and 
let  all  come  in  that  would.  When  the  houfe 
was  full,  I came  down.  The  noife  prefently 
ceafed,  and  I proclaimed,  Chrijl  our  u'ifdom, 
righteouJhefs,Jan£lificaUon  and  redemption.  Only 
one  drunken  man  gave  a little  interruption  ; but 
his  companions  foon  thruil  him  out  of  doors.  So 
let  all  Satan's  devices  fall  on  his  own  head  ! I 
trull,  this  mob  did  not  come  together  in  vain. 

Wedn. 


[ 229  ] 

Wed'n.  13.  I rode  to  Leeds,  and  thence- to 
Birftal.  Tuef.  14.  I accompanied  John  Bennet 
into  Lancafh-ire.  I preached  to  a fmall  congre- 
gation at  eleven  ; in  the  afternoon  at  Woodley 
in  Chelhire;  and  in  the  evening  at  Chinley- 
end.  in  Derbyfhire,  on  Repent  ye  and  believe  the 
gojpel 

Frid.  ig.  I preached  at  Chinley  at  five  : about1 
noon  in  the  Peak,  and  in  the  evening  at  Barley- 
hall.  Sat.  16.  in  the  evening  I preached  at 
Sykenoufe.  And  by  fetting  out  early  in  the 
morning,  Sund.  17,  at  eight  preached  in  Ep- 

I worth.  I came  thither  in  feafon.  For  two  fuch 
fermons  as  Mr.  Ramley  preached  on  this  day, 
fa-  exquifitely  bitter,  and  totally  falfe,  I cannot 
fay  I ever  heard  before. 

After  evening  fervice  I preached  on  Rom.  iii. 
22.  to  a much  larger  congregation  than  in  the 
morning.  And  1 believe  all  that  were  fincere- 
of  heart,  were  exceedingly  comforted.. 

Mond.  i8.  I left  Epworth,  and  on  Wedn. 
20,  in  the  afternoon’met  my  brother  in  London.. 

Mond.  25.  and  the  five  following  days-,  we 
fpent  in  conference  with  many  of  our  brethren 
(come  from  feveral  paits)  who  defire  nothing 
hut  to  fave  their  own-  fouls,  and  thofe  that  hear 
them.  And  furely  as  long  as  they  continue  thus- 
minded,  their  labour  (hall  not  be  in  vain  in  the' 
Lord. 

The  next  week  we  endeavoured  to  purge  the 
fociety  of  all  that  did  not  walk,  according  to  the 

gofpel. 


[ 2 3°  ] 


gofpel.  By  this  means  we  reduced  the  num- 
ber of  members  to  iefs  than  nineteen  hun- 
dred. But  number  is  an  inconfiderable  circutn- 
ftance.  May  God  increafe  them  in  faith  and  love! 

Mond.  July  9.  Mv  brother  fet  out  for  Corn- 
wall. I had  much  trouble  for  the  fortnight  fol- 
lowing, in  endeavouring  to  prevent  an  unwary 
man  from  deifroying  his  own,  and  many  other 
fouls.  On  Mond.  23.  when  I fet  out  for  Brif- 
tol,  I flattered  myfelf  that  the  work  was  done. 
But  upon  my  return,  I found  I had  done  juft  no- 
thing : fo  that  on  Thurfday,  Aug.  2.  I was  con- 
ftrained  to  declare  in  the  fociety,  that  Thomas 
Williams  was  no  longer  in  connection  with  us. 

Frid.  10.  I preached  to  the  debtors  in  New- 
gate, and  defired  two  or  three  of  my  friends  to 
attend  them  weekly.  I had  a ferious,  well-be- 
haved congregation.  Perhaps  God  may  give  us 
fome  fruit  here  alfo. 

Tuef.  14.  Mr.  Piers  rode  over  with  me  to 
Shoreham,  and  introduced  me  to  Mr.  Perronet. 
I hope  to  have  caufe  of  blening  God  for  ever, 
for  the  acquaintance  begun  this  day. 

Wednef.  15.  I went  to  Bedlam,  at  the  re- 
peated requeft  of  Mr.  S who  had  been  con- 

fined there  above  two  years.  This  u’as  the  per- 
fon,  who  while  he  was  fpeaking  againft  my 
brother  and  me  to  the  fociety  at  Kingfwood, 
was  in  a moment  ftruck  raving  mad.  But  it 
feems,  God  is  at  length  intreated  for  him,  and 
has  reftored  him  to  a found  mind. 


Thurf. 


C 23*  ] 


Thurf.  16.  I received  a remarkable  letter* 
part,  of  which  is  here  Subjoined  : 

Aug.  14,  1744. 

Rev.  SIR , 

“ T Was  Surprized  on  Sunday,  when  you  was 
X pleafed  to  tell  me,  I carried  things  to  ex- 
tremes,  in  denying  the  lawful  pleafuresin  eating. 

I denied  only  felf-indulgence  in  eating All 

which  I advance  is,  that  he  who  will  be  Chrift’s 
difciple,  mull  abfolutely  deny  himfelf.  It  was 
once  a great  felf-denial  to  me,  Not  to  go  to  a 
play,  or  to  other  diverfioos.  But  this  is  now  no 
felf-denial  to  me  at  all.  So  that  if  I was  now 
called  to  deny  myfelf  in  thefc  things  only,  I 
might  take  up  with  what  is  pad,  and  now  live  an 
agreeable,  felf-indulgent  life.  But  God  forbid.  I 
plainly  fee  every  hour  produces  occafrons  of 
felf-pleajing.  And  this  I apprehend  is  a fuffici- 
ent  call  for,  and  rule  of  felf-denial.  For  inftance : 
in  the  morning,  it  is  a great  felf-denial,  to  rife 
out  of  a warm  bed.  But  if  I do  not,  I am  im- 
mediately condemned  as  a flothful  Servant.  If 
I do,  I find  a great  inward  blefling.  Under  the 
preaching,  it  is  felf-pleafing,  to  fee  who  is  here, 
who  there.  But  if  I do  let  my  eye  wander,  I 
become  cold  and  lifelefs : if  I deny  myfelf,  I 
often  find  even  a prefent  reward.  In  walking  the 
flreets,  I can  pleafe  myfelf,  by  looking  this  way 
and  that ; on  this  chariot,  that  houfe  and  pic- 
ture. But  if  I deny  myfelf,  for  Chrilf’s  fake,  his 
confolations  abound  with  me. 

But  I may  deny  myfelf  outwardly,  and  vet  be 

' felF. 


[ 232  ] 

felf-indulgent,  namely  by  allowing  myfelf  in 
vain  and  trifling  thoughts.  Here  is  a continual 
fight,  and  a hard  druggie  I muft  have  before  I 
conquer.  But  when  I do  overcome,  I lofe  no- 
thing hy  it ; for  my  foul  is  delighted  with  fecret 
refrefnments. 

At  noon,  I may  find  many  pieafant  things. 
And  of  this  it  was,  that  I faid  to  Mr.  Richards,. 
“ If  there  are  two  difhes  fet  before  you,  by  the 
rule  of  felf  denial,  you  ought  to  eat  of  that 
which,  you  like  the  lead.”  And  this  rule  I de- 
file to  obferve  myfelf:.  always  to  choofe  what  is 
lead  pleading  and  c heaped.  Therefore  I feed 
much  upon  milk.  It  is  pieafant  enough,  and  no- 
thing I can  find  is  fo  cheap.  Whereas  if  one 
fort  of  food  be  dearer  than  another,  and  yet  I. 
life  it,  becaufc  more  agreeable  to  my  appetite: 
this  I apprehend  is  direflly  cou  rary  to  the  dif- 
ci-plefbip  of  a felf-denving  Mafler.  And  this 
kind  of  felf- indulgence  (not  in  food  only)  is 
praftifed  by  too  many  that  know  the  truth. 

I fuppofe.  Sir,  you  now  perceive,  I do  not 
condemn  all  pleafure  in  eating.  But  I cond’emn 
all  felt-indulgence,  both  in  that  and  other 
things,  particularly  in  talking.  Many  who  think 
themfelves  believers,  pleafe  themfelves  with 
talking  more  than  is  profitable.  The}  talk  even 
of  the  things  of  God,  till  they  bring  a deadnc.fs, 
nay,  an  unaccountable  carelelfnefs  over  their 
fpirits.  1 don’t  fay.  they  laugh  or  talk  idly.  But 
dill  they  are  not  deeply  ferious,  nor  is  their 
sonverfation  truly  folid : whereas  I fliould  tlunk 

■ the 


t 233  ] 

the  confcience  of  a true  believer,  is  tender  as 
the  apple  of  an  eye  ^ and  that  to  fuch  a one  it 
would  be  lefs  pain  to  fuffer  the  rack,  than  to. 
trifle,  either  in  word  or  deed.” 

Tuef.  zi.  I fet  out  with  a few  friends  for  Ox- 
ford. On  Wednefday  my  brother  met  us  from 
Briflol.  Frid.  24.  St.  Bartholomew’s  day,  I 
preached,  I fuppofe,  the  lad  time  at  St.  Mary ’s'. 
Be  it  fo.  I am  now  clear  of  the  blood  of 
thele  men.  I have  fully  delivered  my  own 
foul. 

* 1 he  beadle  came  to  me  afterwards,  and  told 
me,  “ l’lie  Vice-chancellor  had  fent  him  for  my 
notes.  ’ I fent  them  without  delay,  not  without 
admiring  the  wife  providence  of  God.  Perhaps 
lew  men  of  note  would  have  given  a fermon  of 
mine  the  reading,  if  I had  put  it  into  their 
hands.  But  by  this  means  it  came  to  be  read, 
probably  more  than  once,  by  every  man  of  emi- 
i nence  in  the  uni verfjtv. 

1 left  Oxford  about  noon,  preached  at  Wy- 
l!  combe  in  the  evening,  and  onSatur.  2j.  returned 
to  London. 

Satur.  Sept.  1.  I talked  pretty  largely  with 

I George  Newans,  the  fuppofed  Shropfhire 
prophet.  I am  inclined  to  think,  he  believes 
himfelf : but  I cannot  believe  God  has  fent 
him. 

Wednef.  5.  One  fent  me  word,  “ He  had 
v noA^f 


[ 2 34  ] 

slow  found  the  right  way  of  worfhipping  God: 
and  therefore  he  mufl  leave  off  prayer  and  the 
reft  of  our  vvill-worftiip,  and  join  himfelf  with 
the  Quakers.  ’ However  in  the  evening,  he 
ventured  among  us  once  more.  And  God  fmote 
him  to  the  heart : fo  that  he  knew,  and  felt,, 
and  declared  aloud,  that  he  had  no  need  of  going 
elfewhere,  to  find  the  pow«r  of  God  unto  falva- 
tion, 

* Thurf.  6.  I committed  to  the  duft  the  re-  t 
mains  of  Elizabeth  Marfh,  a young  woman  who 
had  received  a fenfe  of  the  pardoning  love  of 
God  about  four  years  before  her  death,  and  had  i 
never  left  her  firft  love.  She  had  fcarce  known 
health  or  eafe  from  that  hour.  But  {he  never  mur-  \ 
mured  or  repined  at  any  thing.  Ifaw  her  many  j 
times  after  fhe  was  confined  to  her  bed  ; and 
found  her  always  quiet  and  calm,  always  chear- 
ful,  praifing  God  in  the  fires;  though  longing  j 
to  depart  and  to  be  with  Chrift.  1 could  not 
learn  that  her  mind  was  ever  clouded,  no,  not  a 1 
moment,  from  the  beginning  of  her  illnefs.  But 
a few  days  before  fhe  died,  (he  told  me,  “ 1 am 
concerned,  I fpoke  a hafty  word  to-dav.  One 
told  me,  You  {hall  recover  within  ten  days.  And 
I faid,  “ I don’t  want  to  recover.”  A little  before 
her  fpeech  failed,  file  beckoned  one  to  her,  and 
faid,  “ Go  and  tell  Molly  Brown  from  me,  fhe 
mull  come  back  to  Mr.  Weflev.  I have  not 
breath  to  fpeak  to  her  myfelf:  but  do  you  tell 
her,  fhe  muj f come  back.”  She  had  loft  her 

voice 


[ 2 35  ] 

Voice  when  I prayed  with  her  the  laft  time,  and 
.commended  her  foul  to  God.  But 

“ Her  eye  dropt  fenfe,  diftinfl  and  clear, 

As  any  mufe’s  tongue  con’d  fpeak.” 

Itisfaid,  “ To  me,  to  die  is  gain.  I walk  through 
the  valley  of  the  lhadow  of  death,  and  fear  no 
evil.” 

I could  only  fpeak  a few  words  at  her  grave. 
But  when  I returned  to  the  Foundery,  God 
made  his  woid  as  a flame  of  fire.  I fpoke  from 
that  palfage  in  the  Revelation,  And  one  of  the 
elder s Jaid  unto  me,  IVhat  areihcfe  who  art  ar- 
rayed in  white  robes  ; and  whence  came  ihey  ? 
And  I /aid,  Sir,  thou  knowejl.  And  he  faid  unto 
me,  thej'c  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribula- 
tion, and  they  waf  ted  their  garments,  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blood  oj  the  Lamb. 

A young  man,  fervant  to  Mrs.  Clark  of  New- 
ington, went  home  deeply  affefcted.  The  next 
day  he  was  taken  ill,  and  every  da)'  grew  worfe; 
fo  that  when  I came  to  the  houfe  on  Monday 
the  toth,  (though  I knew  nothing  of  him,  or  of 
his  illnefs  before)  he  was  juft  gafping  for  breath. 
It  was  a melancholy  fight.  Both  his  woids  and 
his  eyes  “witneffed  huge  affliction  and  difmay.” 
Death  flared  him  in  the  face.  And  he  knew  not 
God.  He  could  but  juft  fay,  “ For  God’s  fake, 
pray  for  me.” 

John  Nelfon  coming  in,  we  afked  life  for  our 

brother, 


r 236  ] 

Brother,  in  full  confidence  of  the  promife.  * Ad 
tins  day  as  his  illnefs  fo  his  terrors  increafe<F. 
But  the  next  day,  God  gave  him  life  from  the 
dead.  He  told  me,  “ Now  1 am  not  afraid  to 
die:  for  I know  God  loves  me.  I did  nat  ufe 
to  los  e you  or  your  people  : but  now  I love 
you  as  my  own  foul.  I love  you  all : I know 
you  are  the  people  of  God  ; and  I am  juft  going 
to  him."’  He  continued  praifing  God  as  long  as 
he  could  fpeak,  and  when  he  could  not,  his  eyes 
were  fixt  upwards.  Between  one  and  two  on 
"W  ednefday  morning  he  cried  out,  “ I have  loft 
my  God  ! Where  is  he  ? I cannot  fee  him.1' 
But  he  foon  recovered  himfelf  and  faid,  “ Now 
I have  found  him : and  I (hall  lofe  him  no 
more.”  About  feven  I prayed  with  him,  and 
praifed  God  on  his  behalf;  and  not  long  after 
he  fell  afieep. 

Frid.  14.  I performed  the  laft  office  'accord- 
ing to  his  defire)  oveF  his  bodv,  which  was  in- 
terred in  the  prefence  of  a vaft  multitude  of 
people,  at  a fmall  diftance  from  that  of  Elizabeth 
Marfh. 

* Sund.  16.  I buried  near  the  fame  place,  one 
who  had  foon  finiflred  her  courfe,  going  to 
God  in  the  full  affurance  of  faith,  when  fhe  was 
little  more  than  four  years  old.  In  her  laft  fick- 
nefs  (having  beeir  deeply  ferrous  in  her  behavi- 
our for  leveral  months  before'  ftie  fpent  all  the 
intervals  of  her  convulfions,  in  fpeaking  of,  or 
to  God.  And  when  (lie  perceived  her  ftrength 

to 


to  be  near  exhaufted,  fhe  defired  all  the ‘family 
to  come  near,  and  prayed  for  them  all,  one  by 
one;  then  for  her  miniflers,  for  the  church,  and 
for  all  the  world.  A fhort  time  after,  recoverinf 
from  a fit,  fhe  lifted  up  her  eyes,  faid,  “ Tliy 
kingdom  come,”  and  died. 

All  this  fummer,  our  brethren  in  the  weft  had 
as  hot  fervice,  as  thofe  in  the  north  of  England, 
The  war  againft  'the  Methodijfs,  fo  called, 
being  every  were  carried  on,  with  far  more  vi- 
gour than  that  againft  the  Spaniards.  I had  ac- 
counts of  this  from  all  parts:  one  of  which  was 
as  follows. 


Rev.  Sir, 


‘HE  word  of  God  has  free  courfe  here,  it 


A runs  and  is  glorified.  But  the  devil 
rages  horribly.  Even  at  St.  Ives,  we  cannot  fhut 
the  doors  of  John  Nance’s  houfe,  to  meet  the 
fociety,  but  t he  mob  immediately  threaten  to 
break  them  open.  They  now  triumph  over  us 
more  and  more,  faying,  It  is  plain,  nothing  can 
be  done  againft  them.  And  in  other  places  it  is 
worfe.  I was  going  to  Crouan  on  Tuefday  was 
fennight : on  the  road  two  of  our  brothers  met 
me.  When  we  came  within  a mile  of  the  houfe, 
we  faw  a great  mob  at  fome  diftance;  but  they 
were  going  another  way.  We  then  left  our 
horfes  at  the  houfe  of  a friend,  and  went  forward 
on  Toot.  Within  a quarter  of  a mile  of  the  place 


where 


2 


1 238  ] 

where  I was  to  preach,  two  perfons  met  us,  who 
ufed  to  be  perfecutors.  But  they  now  defired 
me,  for  God's  fake,  “ Not  to  go  up  : for  if  I did, 
they  faid,  there  would  furely  be  murder : if 
there  was  not  already  ; for  many  were  knocked 
down  before  they  came  away.” 

“ By  their  advice  and  the  intreaties  of  thofe 
that  were  with  me,  I turned  back  to  the  houfe 
where  we  left  our  horfes.  We  had  been  there 
but  a fhort  time,  when  many  of  the  people  came, 
being  very  bloody,  and  having  been  beaten  very 
bad.  But  the  main  cry  of  the  mob  was  alter  the 
preacher,  whom  they  fought  for,  in  every  corner 
of  the  houfe;  fwearing  bitterly  “ they  only 
wanted  to  knock  him  on  the  head,  and  then 
they  fhould  be  fatisfied.’’ 

“ Not  findingme  there,  they  faid,  However  they 
fhould  catch  him  on  Sunday  atCambourn.  But  it 
was  Mr.Weftell’s  turn  to  go  thither  on  Sunday. 
While  he  was  preaching  there,  at  Mr.  Harris’s 
houfe,  a tall  man  came  in,  and  pulled  him  down. 
Mr.  Harris  demanded  his  warrant.  But  he 
fwore,  “ Warrant  or  no  warrant,  he  fhould  go 
with  them  fo  he  carried  him  out  to  the  mob, 
who  took  him  away  to  the  church-town.  They- 
kept  him  there  till  Tuefday  morning,  and  then 
carried  him  to  Penzance  ; where,  in  the  after- 
noon, he  was  brought  before  three  juflices,  and 
afked  abundance  of  queftions,  to  which  they  re- 
quired him  to  anfwer  upon  oath.  Then  Dr. 

2 Borlace 


r 


23 9 ] 


L 


Borlace  wrote  his  mittimus , by  virtue  of  which 
he  was  to  be  committed  to  the  houfe  of  correc- 
tion at  Bodmin  as  a vagrant.  So  they  took  him 
as  far  as  Cambourn  that  night;  and  the  next 
day,  on  to  Bodmin. 

I defire  your  continual  prayers  for  me. 


Your  weak  fervant  in  Chrift, 

Henry  Millard.” 


I pTay,  for  what  pay,  could  we  procure  men 
to  do  this  fervice  ? To  be  always  ready,  to  go 
to  prifon,  or  to  death  ? 

Henry  Millard  did  not  long  continue  therein. 
After  he  had  for  fome  time  fought  a good  fight, 
he  took  the  fmall-pox,  and  in  a lew  days  joyfully 
refigned  his  fpirit  to  God. 

The  juflices  who  met  at  the  next  qtiarter-fefli- 
ons  at  Bodmin,  knowing  a little  more  of  the 
laws  of  God  and  man,  declared  Mr.  WefteH’s 
commitment  to  be  contrary  to  all  law,  and  fet 
him  at  liberty  without  delay. 

Tuef.  OH.  30.  I was  defii  ed  to  call  on  a young 
gentlewoman  dangeroufly  ill.  Bui  I foon  found. 
Die  needed  no  phyfician  for  her  foul,  being  full 
of  righteoufnefs  and  good  works.  However  I 
fpoke  to  her  with  all  plainnefs  ; and  fhe  awoke 
as  one  out  of  deep.  She  drank  in  every  word, 
and  foon  perceived  the  want  of  a better  righte- 
oufnefs than  her  own.  But  her  companion  fent 


her 


[ 2d°  ] 

Eer  father  word,  and  fhe  was  immediately  re- 
moved; fo  that  I faw  her  no  more. 

Sund.  Nov.  4.  Poor  Richard  Jefferis,  who  in 
fpite  of  his  former  convibhon,  was  now  deter- 
mined to  renounce  us  and  join  the  Quakers, 
ventured  however  once  more  to  the  Lord’s  ta- 
ble. He  had  no  fooiier  received,  than  he 
dropt  down,  and  cried  with  a loud  voice,  “ I 
have  finned  ; I have  (inned  againft  God.”  At 
that  inftant,  many  were  pierced  to  the  heart.  I 
could  hardly  fpeak  for  fotne  time.  Several 
mourners  w'ere  filled  with  ftrong  confuta- 
tion. And  all  faid,  “ Surely  God  is  in  tins 
place !” 

About  this  time  I received  a letter,  dated 
from  the  camp  at  Lille.  Part  of  it  ran  as 
follows. 

• 

# May  J.  We  marched  to  the  camp,  near 
Bruffels.  There  a few’  of  us  joined  into  a fo- 
ciety,  being  fenhble,  where  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  his  name,  there  is  our  Lord 
in  the  midft  of  them.  Our  place  of  meeting 
was  a fmali  wood  near  the  camp.  We  remained 
in  this  camp  eight  days,  and  then  removed  to  a 
place  called  Arfk.  Here  I began  to  fpeak  openly, 
at  a fmali  diflance  from  the  ramp,  juft  in  the 
middle  of  the  Englifh  army.  And  here  it  pleafed 
God  to  give  me  fome  evidences,  that  my  labour 
was  not  in  vain.  We  fung  an  hymn,  which 

drew 


I 24*  ] 

drew  about  two  hundred  foldiers  together, 
and  they  all  behaved  decently.  After  1 had 
prayed,  I begun  to  exhort  them,  and  though  it 
rained  very  hard,  yet  very  few  went  away.  Ma- 
ny acknowledged  the  truth ; in  particular  a 
young  man,  John  Greenwood,  byname;  who 
has  kept  with  me  ever  ftnce,  and  whom  God 
has  lately  been  pleafed  to  give  me  for  a fellow- 
labourer.  Our  fociety  is  now  increafed  to  up- 
wards of  two  hundred,  and  the  hearers  are  fre- 
quently more  than  a thoufand;  although  many 
fay,  I am  mad  ; and  others  have  endeavoured  to 
incenfe  the  field-marfhal  againft  us.  I have 
been  fent  for,  and  examined  feveral  times. 
But,  blefTed  be  God,  he  has  always  delivered 
me.5’ 

“ Many  of  the  officers  have  come  to  hear  for 
themfelves,  often  nine  or  ten  at  a time.  I en- 
deavoured to  lofe  no  opportunity.  During  our 
abode  in  the  camp  at  Arfk,  I have  preached 
thirty-five  times  in  feven  days.  One  of  thofe 
times  a foldier  who  was  prefent,  called  aloud  to 
his  comrades,  to  come  away,  and  not  hear  that 
fool  any  longer.  But  it  pleafed  God,  to  fend  the 
word  fpoken  to  his  heart : fo  that  he  roared  out 
in  the  bitternefs  of  his  foul,  for  a confiderable 
time:  and  then  he  who  never  fails  thofe  that 
feek  him,  turned  his  heavinefs  into  jov. 
He  is  now  never  fo  happy,  as  when  he  is  pro- 
claiming the  loving-kindnefs  of  God  his  Sa- 
viour. 

Vo  l.  XXVIII.  L “I  was 


[ 242  ] 


“ .1  was  a little  (hocked  at  my  firft  entrance 
on  this  great  work,  becaufe  I was  alone,  having 
none  to  help  me.  But  the  Lord  helped  me,  and 
foon  raifed  up  William  Clements,  and  in  June, 
John  Evans  belonging  to. the  train  to  my  aflif- 
tance.  Since  we  have  been  in  this  camp,  we 
have  built  two  (mail  tabernacles,  in  which  we 
meet  at  eight  in  the  morning,  at  three  in  the 
afternoon,  and  feven  at  night  : and  commonly 
two  whole  nights  in  each  week. 

“ Since  I began  to  write  this,  we  are  come  to 
our  winter  quarters  : fo  that  our  fociety  is  now 
parted.  We  .are  fome  in  Bruges,  fome  in  Ghent. 
But  it  has  pleafed  the  Lord  to  leave  neither 
without  a teacher.  For  John  Greenwood  and  I 
are  in  this  city  ; and  B.  Clements  and  Evans 
are  in  Ghent.  So  that  we  truft  our  Lord  will 
carry  on  his  work  in  both  places. 

“ We  that  are  in  Bruges  have  hired  a (mail 
place,  in  which  we  meet.  And  our  dear 
Lord  is  in  the  midft  of  us.  Many  times  the 
tears  run  down  every  face,  and  joy  reigns  in 
every  heart. 

“ I (hall  conclude  with  a full  affurance  of 
your  prayers,  with  a longing  defire  to  fee  you. 
O when  will  the  joyful  meeting  be  ? Perhaps 
not  on  this  fide  death.  If  not,  my  Mafter’s  will 
be  done. 

Your  unworthy  brother  in  the  Lord, 

J.  H.” 


Sund, 


[ 243  ] 

Sund.  11.  In  the  evening  I rode  to  Brent- 
ford. In  the  inn  where  I lodged  the  next  night, 
was  a company  of  men  exceeding  drunk.  Nature 
fuggefted,  “ Why  fhould  you  fpeak  to  them  ? It 
will.be,  at  bed,  labour  loll.  For  you  maybe 
well  allured,  none  of  them  will  mind  one  word 
you  fay.”  However  we  fpoke  a few  words  to 

them.  One  of  them  immediately  rofe  up,  and 
laid,  “ It  was  all  true,”  followed  us  as  well  as 
he  could  into  our  room,  and  appeared  deeply 
convinced  andllrongly  defirous  to  ferve  a better 
Matter. 

Tuef.  13.  In  the  evening  we  reached  Bath, 
and  the  next  morning  rode  to  Briftol.  After 
fpending  a few  days  there  and  at  Kingfwood,  on 
Satur.  24.  I came  again  to  London. 

* Sund.  23.  I converfed  with  one,  who  was 
• greatly  extolling  the  comfortable  way  wherein 

the  brethren  preach.  I underftood  him  well. 
One  who  was  a believer  falls  into  carelelfnefs, 
or  wilful  fin.  If  he  comes  to  hear  our  preaching 

then,  we  lhake  all  his  bones  in  pieces.  If  he 
comes  to  them,  they  llroke  him  and  lull  him 
a-fleep-  O how  does  any  backflider  efcape  this 
comfortable  preaching  P 

* Sund.  Dec.  2.  I was  with  two  perfons  who 
believe  they  are  faved  from  all  fin.  Be  it  fo;  or 
not,  why  fhould  we  not  rejoice  in  the  work  of 
God,  fo  far  as  it  is  uriquettionably  wrought  in 
them  ? For  inflance.  I afk  John  C.  “ Do  you 
pray  always  ? Do  you  rejoice  in  God  every 

L 2 moment  ? 


[ 244  3 


moment  ? Do  you  in  every  thing  give  thanks  ? 
In  lofs  ? In  pain  ? In  ficknefs,  wearinefs,  difap- 
pointments  ? Do  you  defire  nothing  ? Do  you 
fear  nothing  ? Do  you  feel  the  love  of  God  con- 
tinually in  your  heart  ? Have  you  a witnefs  in 
whatever  you  fpeak  or  do,  that  it  is  pleafing  to 
God?  “ If  he  can  folemnly  and  deliberately  an- 
fwer  in  the  affirmative,  why  do  I not  rejoice  and 
praife  God  on  his  behalf?  Perhaps,  becaufe  I 
have  an  exceeding  complex  idea  of  fan£lifica- 
tion,  or  a fan&ified  man.  And  fo  for  fear  he 
ffiould  not  have  attained  all  I include  in 
that  idea,  I cannot  rejoice  in  what  he  has  at- 
tained. 

After  having  often  declared  the  fame  thing 
before  many  witneffes,  this  day  Mr.  Williams 
wrote  a folemn  retra&ion,  of  the  grofs  flanders 
he  had  been  propagating  for  feveral  months, 
concerning  my  brother  and  me.  This  he  con- 
cluded in  thefe  words  : “ Though  I doubt  not 
but  you  can  forgive  me,  yet  I can  hardly  forgive 
myfelf:  I have  been  fo  ungrateful  and  difobe- 
dient  to  the  tendereft  of  friends,  who  through 
the  power  of  God,  were  my  fuccour  in  all  my 
temptations 

“ I intreat  your  prayers  in  mv  behalf,  that 
God  may  reflore,  ftrengthen.  ftablifh  and  fettle 

me  in  the  grace  to  which  I have  been  called 

that  God  may  blefs  you,  and  your  dear  brother, 
and  that  w’e  may  be  all  united  again  in  one  fel- 

lowlhip. 


C 245  ] 

Iowlhip,  is  the  prayer  of  him,  who  for  the  fu- 
ture, hopes  to  be 

Your  obedient  fon  and  fervant 

For  Chrift’s  fake, 

Thomas  Williams. 


* Mond.  3.  I anfwered  another  letter  I had 
received  from  Flanders ; an  extraft  of  which  is 
here  fubjoined* 

Gent, 

Nov.  12.  Or  S.  1744. 

Rev.  SIR, 

“ "T  ^ 7"E  made  bold  to  trouble  you  with  this, 
* » to  acquaint  you  with  fome  of  the 
Lord’s  dealings  with  us  here.  We  have  hired 
two  rooms,  one  fmall  one,  wherein  a few  of  us 
meet  every  day  at  one  o’clock ; and  another 
large  one  for  public  fervice,  where  we  meet 
twice  a day,  at  nine  in  the  morning,  and  four  in 
the  afternoon:  and  the  hand  of  the  omnipotent 
God  is  with  us,  to  the  pulling  down  of  the 

ftrong  holds  of  Satan 

“ The  feventh  inftant,  when  we  were  met  to- 
gether in  the  evening,  as  I was  at  prayer,  one 
that  was  kneeling  by  me,  cried  out  (like  a wo- 
man in  travailj  “ My  Redeemer!  my  Re- 
deemer ! ’ Which  continued  about  ten  minutes. 

L 3 When 


[ *4«  3 

"When  he  was  alked,  “ What  was  the  matter,” 
he  faid,  “ He  had  found  that  which  he  had  of- 
ten heard  of,  that  is,  an  heaven  upon  earth 
and  fome  others  had  much  a- do  to  forbear  crying 
out  in  the  fame  manner. 

“ Dear  Sir,  I am  a ftranger  to  you  in  the  flefh. 
I know  not  if  I have  feen  you  above  once, 
when  I faw  you  preaching  on  Kennington  com- 
mon, And  then  I hated  you,  as  much  as  now 
(by  the  grace  of  God)  I love  you;  The  Lord 
purfued  me  with  convictions  from  mv  infancy, 
and  I often  made  abundance  of  good  refolutions. 
But  finding  as  often,  that  I could  not  keep  them 
(as  being  made  wholly  in  my  own  flrength)  I at 
length  left  off  all  driving  and  gave  myfelf  over  to 
all  manner  of  lewdnefs  and  profanenefs.  So  I 
continued  for  fome  years,  till  the  battle  of Det- 
tingen.  The  balls  came  then  very  thick  about  me, 
and  my  comrades  fell  on  every  fide.  Yet  I was 
preferved  unhurt.  A few  days  after  this,  the 
Lord  was  plea-fed  to  vifit  me  again.  The  pains 
of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me,  the  fnares  of  death 
incompaffed  me.  I durft  no  longer  commit  any 
outward  fin,  and  I prayed  God  to  be  merciful  to 
my  foul.  Now  I was  at  a lofs  for  books.  But 
God  took  care  for  this  alfo.  One  day  as  I was 
at  work,  I found  an  old  bible  in  one  of  the  train 
waggons.  To  read  this,  I foon  forfook  my  old 
companions  ; all  but  one,  who  was  ftill  a thorn 
in  my  flefh.  But  not  long  after  he  fickened  and 
died. 


[ 24 7 ] 

““  My  bible  was  now  my  only  companion, 
and  I believed  myfelf  a very  good  Chriftian,  till 
we  came  to  winter-quarters,  where  I met  with 
John  Haime.  But  I was  foon  lick  of  his  com- 
pany. For  he  robbed  me  of  my  treafure  ; he 
Hole  away  my  gods,  telling  me,  “ I and'my 
works  were  going  to  hell  together.”  This  was 
hrange  doftrine  to  me,  who  being  wholly  igno- 
rant of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl,  fought  only 
to  eftablifh  my  own  righteoufnefs.  And  being 
naturally  of  a ftubborn  temper,  my  poor  brother 
was  fo  perplexed  with  me,  that  fometimes  he 
wasrefolved  (as  he  afterwards  told  me)  to  forbid 
my  coming  to  him  any  more. 

“ When  the  Lord  bad  at  length  opened  my 
eyes,  and  fhewn  me  that  by  grace  we  are  faved 
through  jaith,  I began  immediately  to  declare  it 
to  others,  though  I had  not  as  yet  experienced 
it  myfelf.  But  Oft.  23.  as  William  Clements 
was  at  prayer,  I felt  on  a fudden  a great  altera- 
tion in  rnv  foul.  My  eyes  overflowed  with  tears 
of  love.  I knew  I w'as  through  Chrilt  reconciled 
to  God  ; which  inflamed  my  foul  with  fervent 
love  to  him,  whom  I now  law  to  be  my  compleat 
Redeemer. 

“ O the  tender  care  of  almighty  God,  in 
bringing  up  his  children  ! How  are  we  bound  to 
love  fo  indulgent  a.  Father,  and  to  fall  down  in 
wonder  and  adoration  of  his  great  and  glorious 

name,  for  his  tender  mercies!- Dear  Sir,  I 

L 4 beer 


[ *4«  ] 

beg  you  will  pray  for  him  who  is  not  worthy  to 
be  a door-keeper  to  the  leaft  of  ir.y  Mailer’s 
fervants. 

John  Evans.” 

* He  continued  both  to  preach  and  to  live  the 
gofpel,  till  the  battle  of  Fontenoy.  One  of  his 
companions  faw  him  there,  laid  acrofs  a cannon, 
both  his  legs  having  been  taken  off  by  a chain- 
fhot,  praifing  God  and  exhorting  all  that  were 
round  about  him  ; which  he  did  till  his  fpirit 
returned  to  God. 

Mond.  17.  In  the  evening  I rode  to  Brent- 
ford. Many  poor  wretches  endeavoured  to  make 
a difturbance,  juff  as  I began  to  preach,  and  em- 
ployed one  of  their  number,  one  utterly  void 
of  lhame,  to  lead  the  way.  But  he  a£ted  his  part 
with  fo  uncommon  a degree,  both  of  impu* 
dence  and  dulnefs,  that  when  I turned  about, 
and  afked,  to  whom  he  belonged  ? His  compa- 
nions were  afhamed  to  own  him.  So  fome  went 
away,  and  the  reft  flood  ftill.  And  we  had  a 
quiet  and  comfortable  hour. 

Sund.  23.  I was  unufually  lifelefs  and  heavy, 
till  the  love  feaft  in  the  evening  : when  juft  as  I 
was  conftraining  myfelf  to  fpeak,  I was  flopped, 
whether  I would  or  no.  For  the  blood  gufhed 
out  of  both  my  noftrils,  fo  that  I could  not  add 
another  word.  But  in  a few  minutes  it  flayed, 
and  all  our  hearts  and  mouths  were  opened  to 
praife  God. 


Yet 


[ 249  ] 

Yet  the  next  day  I was  again  as  a dead  man. 
But  in  the  evening,  while  I was  reading  prayers 
at  Snow’s-fields,  I found  fuch  light  and  ftrength, 
as  1 never  remember  to  have  had  before.  I faw 
every  thought  (as  well  as  abfion  or  word}  juft  as 
it  was  rifmg  in  my  heart;  and  whether  it  was 
right  before  God,  or  tainted  with  pride  or  felfifh- 
nefs.  I never  knew  before  (I  mean  not  as  at  this 
time)  what  it  was,  to  be Jhll  before  God. 

* Tuef.  25.  I waked,  by  the  grace  of  God,  in 
the  fame  fpirit : and  about  eight,  being  with 
two  or  three  that  believed  in  Jefus,  I felt  fuch 
an  awe  and  tender  fenfe  of  the  prefence  of  God, 
as  greatly  confirmed  me  therein.  So  that  God 
was  before  me  all  the  day  long : I fought  and 
found  him  in  every  place ; and  could  truly  fay, 
when  I lay  down  at  night,  “ Now  I have  lived  a 
day.” 

Thurf.  2 7.  I called  on  the  follicitor  whom  I 
had  employed,  in  the  fuit  lately  commenced 
againft  me  in  chancery.  * And  here  1 firft  faw 
that  foul  monfter,  a Chanccry-bill ! A fcroll  it  was 
of  fortv-two  pages*  in  large  folio,  to  tell  a ftory 
which  needed  not  to  have  taken  up  forty  lines! 
And  Huffed  with  fuch  ftupid,  fenfelefs,  impro- 
bable lies-fmany  of  them  too,  quite  foreign  to  the 
queftion)  as  I believe,  would  have  coft  the  com- 
piler his  life  in  any  Heathen  court,  either  of 
Greece  or  Rome.  And  this  is  equity  in  a Chrif- 
-tian  country  ! This  is  the  Englifh.  method  of  re~ 
dreffing  other  grievances  1 

^ -5 


X com 


[ 25°  ] 

I conclude  this  year  with  the  extract  of  & 
letter,  which  1 received  fome  weeks  before. 

Hon.  SIR, 

“ T Beg  leave  to  give  you  a fhort  account  of 

A my  experience,  from  the  time  I can  re- 
member. 

“ In  my  childhood,  confufe  1 conviftdons  often 
paffed  through  my  mind,  fo  that  I almoft  always 
had  the  fear  of  God  before  my  eyes,  and  a fenfe 
of  his  feeing  me,  and  I frequently  ufed  to  abffain 
from  fin  upon  that  account.  When  I did  fin,  I 
was  immediately  checked  and  grieved  ; fo  that 
I generally  was  ferious,  nothing  like  any  of  my 
other  brothers,  and  was  on  that  account  efleemed 
a good  child,  and  greatly  care  {fed.  I conflantly 
faid  my  prat  ers,  and  was  much  given  to  reading; 
but  it  was  chiefly  plays  and  romances;  of 
which  I was  as  fond  as  I was  of  cards,  (hews, 
races,  feafls,  and  w hatever  are  called  innocent 
diverfions.  Yet  even  thefe  were  always  a bmderr 
to  me  when  over;  fo  that  I was  forced  to  own/ 
all  thefe  are  vanity. 

“ At  about  frxteen  I was  fent  to  Yarmouth/ 
where  1 fell  twice  or  thrice  into  intemperance/ 
for  which  I was  feverely  reproved  in  my 
confcience ; but  I ufed  to  make  up  matters 
by  going  oftener  to  church.  And  having 
good,  health,  and  no  care,  I was  generally  eafy 

irr 


C 25*  ] 

in  my  mind,  and  gay  andjocofe  in  my  conver- 
fation. 

“ In  this  temper  after  about  fix  months  I re- 
turned home.  But  a fevere  temptation  foon 
following,  and  a fevere  illnefs  in  my  head,  made 
me  think  more  and  more  of  what  is  beyond  the 
grave  : this  alfo  made  me  exceeding  diligent  in 
prayer,  till ’God  not  only  reftored  my  bodily 
health,  but  alfo  gave  me  power  againft  my  in- 
ward enemy,  and  peace  to  my  troubled  foul. 

“ In  half  a year  after,  I was  called  to  Lon- 
don, where,  for  the  firfl  year,  I had  little  reli- 
gion left,  onlv  that  I never  miffed  church.  But 
after  I was  fettled,  conviftion  began  to  revive, 
particularly  for  fins  of  omiffion.  I prayed  three 
times  in  a day,  and  I was  uneafy  if  I miffed 
once.  I read  all  books  of  religion  that  came  in 
my  way.  And  now,  becaufe  I prayed  and  read 
fo  much,  and  went  conflantly  to  church,  and 
fometimes  to  the  facrament,  I thought  myfelf  in 
a right  good  way.  And  yet  I was  continually 
uneafy,  though  I knew  not  why  ; till  one  day  I 
light  on  Thomas  a Kempis,  The  more  I read, 
the  morel  liked  it.  I bought  one  of  the  books, 
and  read  it  over  and  over.  I was  more  con- 
vinced of  fin  than  ever,  and  had  more  power 
again fl  it.  I forfook  many  things  which  I al- 
lowed myfelf  in  before  : though  I ft  ill  allow- 
ed myfelf  to  fee  a play  once  a month.  But  the 
hit  I faw,  I felt  hell  in  my  confidence,  for  z 
L 6 week 


[ 252  j 

week  after,  fo  that  I determined,  even  for  eafe, 
never  to  go  again. 

“ I was  now  well  fettled  in  the  form  ofgodli- 
nefs,  and  I knew  a little  of  the  power  of  it,  when 
I was  prelfed  by  a relation,  to  pay  him  a vifit  at 
Oxford,  which  I did  at  Whitfuntide  1742.  But 
here  I foon  loft  both  power  and  form.  I faw 
many  places,  was  much  in  companv,  and  grew 
more  dead  to  the  things  of  God,  every  dav  than 
other.  I was  truly  glad  to  fee  London  again, 
and  the  very  firft  night,  began  to  confider,  how 
1 might  recover  my  peace  ? But  before  I had 
executed  any  thing,  I was  feized  with  a fever. 

I looked  up  to  God.  But  all  was  dark  : with 
the  trouble  both  of  mv  body  and  mind,  I really 
thought,  I fhould  have  gone  di Drafted.  Yet  I 
was  too  felf-righteous,  to  beg  for  mere  mercy. 
All  my  cry  was,  Lord  give  me  health,  and  I will 
obey  thee. 

“ God  did  give  me  health,  and  I was  more 
diligent  than  ever  in  going  to  church  and  facra- 
ment:  infomuch  that  on  a week  day,  I have 
gone  four  or  five  times  to  church  in  a day.  Yet 
fin  was  my  mailer,  although  every  time  I fell  in- 
to it,  I was  condemned  exceedingly.  I began 
now  to  fee,  that  my  laughter  and  jelling  were 
wrong.  But  I thought,  if  I left  them,  mv  friends 
would  call  me  off.  So  I went  on,  finning  a- 
gainft  light,  and  never  finding  peace  for  one 
whole  day  together. 

“ One  day  being  in  great  trouble  of  mind,  and 

thinking, 


[ *53  ] 

thinking,  where  fliall  I find  a man,  who  lives  tip 
to  the  rules  given  by  Kempis,  it  came  ftrongly 
into  mv  mind,  “ Go  to  the  Foundery.”  Imme- 
diately  I went,  but  with  fear  and  trembling. 
Here  I continued  a conflant  hearer  for  above  two 
months,  before  I fpoke  to  one  perfon  belonging 
to  it:  which  I purpofely  abllained  from,  that  I 
might  the  more  exactly  obferve  the  whole  be- 
haviour, both  of  yourfelf  and  thofe  that  heard 
you.  And  the  more  clofely  I examined,  the 
more  clearly  I was  convinced,  “ Thefe  are  the 
men  I have  been  feeking  fo  long.'’ 

“ At  laft  I was  admitted  into  the  fociety,  and 
after  the  ufual  trial,  into  the  bands  : I was  now 
continually  walking  upon  the  wings  of  love. 
The  life  and  power  of  religion  was  all  my  talk. 
I was  not  afhamed  to  declare  it  before  all  men  ; 
for  the  candle  of  the  Lord  conftantly  fhone  upon 
my  head. 

“ At  prefent,  I find  my  foul  continually 
hungring  and  thirfting  after  the  fpirit’s  indwell- 
ing in  me  I often  find  a folid  peace,  a ferious 
watchfulnefs,  a prefence  of  mind,  never  con- 
fufed  or  hurried:  a fweet  communion  with  God, 
good-will  toward  all  men,  with  much  grief  at 
their  raifery.  but  no  fear.  I can  with  unaccount- 
able boldnefs,  yet  with  meeknefs  and  love,  re- 
prove the  moll  daring  finner.  And  the  more  I 
obey  this  fpirit,  the  more  of  it  I feel  : the  more 
fenfible  I am  of  my  own  weaknefs,  and  at  the 

fame 


[ 2M  ] 

fame  time  filled  with  praife  and  amazement,  to 
feel  my  ftrength  in  the  Lord.” 

W.  B. 

Saturday,  January  the  5th,  1745. 

Defiring  to  fee  once  more  our  old  acquaint- 
ance Mr.  Gambold,  my  brother  and' I called  at 
James  Hutton's.  We  found  there  not  him, but 
Mr.  S.  A new  creature  indeed ! (though  not 
in  the  gofpel  fenfe)  fo  extremely  gay,  eafy,  un- 
concerned ; that  one  of  the  primitive  Chrif- 
tians,  inftead  of  fuppofing  him  to  be  at  rejl , as 
he  termed  it,  in  the  wounds  of  ft  [us , would  have 
judged,  he  had  never  heard  of  his  name  : much' 
lefs  of  taking  up  his  crofs  daily. 

I had  often  wondered  atmyfelffand  fometimes 
mentioned  it  to  others)  that  ten  thoufand  cares 
of  various  kinds,  were  no  more  weight  or  bur- 
then to  my  mind,  than  ten  thoufand  hairs  were 
to  my  head.  Perhaps  I began  to  afcribe  fome- 
thing  of  this  to  my  own  ftrength.  And  thence  it 
mightbe,  that  on  Sund.  13.  thatftrength  was  with- 
held, and  1 felt  what  it  was  to  be  troubled  about 
many  things.-  One,  and  another,  hurrying  me 
continually,  it  feized  upon  my  fpirit  more  and 
more:  till  I found  it  absolutely  neceflary  to  fly 
for  my  life ; and  that  without  delay.  So  the 
next  day,  Mond.  14.  I took  horfe,  and  rode, 
away  for  Briftol. 

Between  Bath  and  Briftol,  1 was  earneftly  de- 

fired 


[ *55  3 

ffred  to  turn  afide,  and  call  at  the  houfe  of  a 
poor  man,  William  Shalwood.  I found  him 
and  his  wife  fick  in  one  bed,  and  with  fmal! 
hopes  of  the  recovery  of  either.  Yet  (after 
prayer)  I believed  they  would  not  die  but  live , and 
declare  the  loving-kindnefs  oj  the  Lord.  The  next 
time  I called,  he  was  fitting  below  flairs,  and  his 
wife  able  to  go  abroad.  . 

As  foon  as  we  came  into  the  houfe  at  Briflol, 
my  foul  was  lightened  of  her  load,  of  that  infuf- 
ferable  weight  which  had  lain  upon  my  mind, 
more  or  lefs,  for  feveral  days.  On  Sunday  fe- 
veral  of  our  friends  from  Wales,  and  other 
parts,  joined  with  us  in  the  great  facrifice  of 
lhankfgiving.  And  every  day  we  found  more 
and  more  caufe  to  praife  God,  and  to  give  hirm 
thanks  for  his  ftill-increafing  benefits. 

I found  peculiar  reafon  to  praife  God,  for  the 
flate  of  the  fociety,  both  in  Briflol  and  Kingf- 
wood.  They  feemed  at  laft  clearly  delivered 
from  all  vain  jangling,  from  idle  conf  rover  lies' 
and  ftrife  of  words,  and  determined,  not  to  know 
any  thing,  fave  Jefus  Chrift  and  him  crucified. 

Wedn.  Jan.  30-  All  our  family  were  at  St. 
James’s  our  parifh  church.  At-  twelve  we  met 
together,  to  pour  out  our  fouls  before  God,  and 
to  provoke  each  other  to  love  and  to  good 
works.  The  afternoon  I fet  a-part  for  vifiting 
the  fick.  Bleffed  be  God,  this  was  a comforta- 
ble day. 

A'hurfi.git  I rode  to  Coleford,  about  twenty 

(real 


[ 256  ] 

(real,  twelve  computed)  miles  fouth-eaft  from 
Briftol.  The  colliers  here  were  only  not  as  fa- 
mous as  thofe  at  Kingfwood  were  formerly.  I 
preached  near  the  road-hde;  lor  the  houfe  could 
not  contain  a tenth  part  of  the  congregation. 
None  oppofed,  or  mocked,  or  fmiled.  Surely 
fome  of  the  feed,  is  fallen  upon  good  ground. 

Mon.  Feb.  4.  I had  the  pleafure  of  receiv- 
ing 'from  Dr.  Hartley,  a particular  account  of 
Dr.  Chevne’s  lalf  hours.  During  his  laft  illnefs, 
he  felt  a gentle  and  gardual  decay,  fo  that  he 
apprehended  what  the  event  would  be.  But  it 
did  not  appear  to  give  him  any  concern.  He 
feemed  quite  loofe  from  all  below,  till  without 
any  flruggle,  either  of  body  or  mind,  he  calmly 
gave  up  his  foul  to  God. 

Tuef.  5.  We  fet  out  early,  and  the  next  day 
at  noon,  met  the  little  fociety  at  Windfor.  We 
called  at  Brentford  likewife  and  after  afhortlfop, 
rode  on  and  reached  London  in  the  even- 
ing. 

Sund.  17.  1 laboured  much  with  one  of  our 
brethren,  whole  eyes  the  antinomians  hadjuft 
opened,  and  for  the  prefent  he  feemed  to  be 
convinced.  But  I doubt  that  convi&ion  will  not 
continue  ; it  being  not  fo  eafy  to  remove  any 
one  from  that  gofpel,  which  flefh  and  blood  hath 
revealed  unto  them. 

My  exhorting  the  congregation  here,  not  to 
confult  with  flefh  and  blood,  but  to  attend  the 

morning, 


C 2 57  ] 

morning  preaching,  occafioned  my  receivingthe 
following  letter. 

Dear  SIR , 

“ T7OR  fome  time  paft  I have  been  very 

J-1  negligent  of  coming  in  a morning,  though 
I have  been  often  feverely  reproved  in  my  own 
mind  for  omitting  that,,  which  I knew  was  my 
duty  both  to  God  and  my  brethren.  And  from- 
time  to  time,  when  you  have  exhorted  us  to 
partake  of  fo  ufeful  a privilege,  1 have  always 
been  condemned. 

“ A few  days  ago  I fet  myfelf  to  confider, 
whence  this  flacknefs  muft  proceed.  And  I foon 
faw,  the  root  of  it  was,  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,, 
departing  from  the  living  God,  and  therefore 
from  his  fervice.  The  pernicious  branches  of 
this  I found  to  be  ignorance  and  floth.  It  was 
ignorance  of  myfelf  that  caufed  me  to  cry,  Peace 
peace,  and  to  fay  within  myfelf,  I know  enough 
and  am  fatisfied.  And  while  I was  in  this  ftate, 
pride,  anger,  lull,  worldly-mindednefs,  levity, 
and  carelelfnefs  toward  God  and  man,  fuccef- 
fively  got  the  dominion  over  me,  fo  that  I was  no 
more  like  a Chrillian  than  like  an  angel.  Yet 
I felt  but  little  trouble  for  it,  (fave  at  times)  and 
thereby  I funk  into  a gulph  of  floth,  which  got 
the  dominion  over  me  in  fuch  a manner,  that  I 
not  only  was  content,  frequently  to  lie  in  bed 
till  eight,  but  in  the  day  time  did  not  care  to  liir 
one  Hep  forward,  efpecially  if  it  was  to  vifit  the 

fick 


[ ‘5*  ] 

Tick  or  diftrefied.  I was  forced  to  drag  myfelf  to 
and  fro,  and  a heavy  load  I was  to  myfelf.  And 
yet  my  eyes  were  fo  blinded,  that  I was  fcarce 
fenfible  of  my  fin.  The  crofs  I could  hardly 
bear  naming  ; for  being  fo  ufed  to  fhun  it  at  ail 
times,  it  became  a very  harfh  word  to  me,  and  I 
did  not  love  to  hear  of  it.  But  glory  be  to  God 
ever  fince  this  examination,  I have  been  a little 
ftirred  up  ; though  {till  I am  in  danger  of  this 
evil  or  any  other.  Lord  leave  me  not  ! for 
without  thee  I can  do  nothing. 

“ I find  whenever  I know  myfelf,  poor,  and 
miferable,  and  blind,  and  foolilh  ; and  while 
I have  a deep  fenfe  of  my  want  of  love,  humility, 
meeknefs,  ferioufnefs  and  wifdom  ; 1 then  am 
in  earneft  in  every  duty,  particularly  rifing  in 
the  morning.  But  when  I am  inwardly  careleis 
and  proud,  full  and  wife  enough,  then  I can 
very  quietly  negleCt  not  only  this,  but  every 
help  which  God  has  given  me. 

“ And  yet  (to  fpeak  the  whole  truth)  I am 
apt  to  attribute  fome  part  of  my  late  {loth  and 
flacknefs,  to  too  fmooth  a do&rine,  which  it 
feems  to  me  has  been  lately  preached  among  us: 

I thought  the  doCtrine  of  perfection  in  all  its  parts 
(perfe&love,  meeknefs, humility,  refignation)  has 
not  been  fo  firenuoufly  infilled  on,  as  in  timespaft 
but  only  now  and  then  mentioned  in  general 
terms  : and  hereby  1 was  incouraged  to  be  con- 
tent in  this  groveling  {late,  hanging  between 
.nature  and  grace,  flefh  and  fpirit.  Then  it  was 

fuggefied  y 


[ *59  ] 

Tnggefted,  “ Laying  in  bed  is  not  exprefly  forbid- 
den in  fcripture,  nor  is  riflng  early  exprefly 
commanded.”  Yet  glory  be  to  God,  I had  power 
from  him  to  refift  and  overcome  this  thought: 
and  being  earned:  with  the  Lord  laft  night,  this 
morning  he  did  give  me  both  a will  and  a power 
to  break  through,  which  I thankfully  ufed,  and 
came  to  meet  my  brethren  at  five,  with  primi- 
tive joy  and  fatisfadlion 

W.  B. 

Mond.  18.  I fet  out  with  Richard  Mofs  for 
Newcaflle,  Wedn.  20.  Soon  after  we  pafled 
through  Leicefler,  a gentleman  of  Leicefter,  over- 
took us  and  kept  us  company  to  Loughborough, 
dined  with  us  there,  then  rode  back  to  Leicefler. 
His  main  bufinefs,  I found  was  to  talk  with  me. 
He  faid,  he  had  long  been  very  low-fpirited, 
had  had  the  very  beft  advice,  and  taken  abun- 
dance of  phyfic  and  yet  was  as  bad,  or  worfe  than 
ever.  I explained  his  cafe  to  him  at  large,  and 
advifed  him  to  apply  to  that  Phyfician,  who 
alone  heals  the  broken  in  heart.. 

In  the  evening  I preached  to  the  little  flock 
at  Nottingham,  next  day  William  Holmes  met 
us  at  Doncafter,  and  piloted  us  through  the 
mire,  and  water,  and  fnow,  lately  fallen,  to  Syke- 
houfe.  Finding  the  congregation  ready,  I began 
preaching  as  foon  I came  in,  and  exhorted  them 
to  follow  after  the  great  gift  of  God.  Several  from 

Epworth 


[ 260  J 

Epworth  met  us  here,  and  we  rejoiced  unte 
God  with  reverence. 

Frid.  22.  There  was  fo  much  fnow  about 
Boroughbridge,  that  we  could  go  on  but  very 
flowly  : infomuch  that  the  night  overtook  us 
when  we  wanted  fix  or  feven  miles  to  the  place 
where  we  defigned  to  lodge.  But  we  pulhed  on 
at  a venture  acrofs  the  moor,  and  about  eight 
came  fafe  to  Sandhutton. 

* Sat.  23.  We  found  the  roads  abundantly 
worfe  than  they  had  been  the  day  before  : not 
only  becaufe  thefnows  were  deeper,  which  made 
the  caufeways  in  many  places  unpayable  (and 
turnpike  roads  were  not  known  in  thefe  parts  of 
England,  till  fome  years  after)  but  likewife  be- 
caufe the  hard  frolt,  fucceeding  the  thaw,  had 
made  all  the  ground  like  glafs.  We  were  often 
obliged  to  walk,  it  being  impolfible  to  ride,  and 
ourhorfes  feveral  times  fell  down  while  we  were 
leading  them,  but  not  once  while  we  were  rid- 
ing them,  during  the  whole  journey.  It  was 
paft  eight  before  we  got  to  Gatefhead  Fell,  which 
appeared  a great,  pathlefs  wade  of  white.  The 
fnow  filling  up  and  covering  all  the  roads,  we 
were  at  alofs  how  to  proceed  ; when  an  honeft 
man  of  Newcaftle  overtook  and  guided  us  fafe 
into  the  town. 

Many  a rough  journey  have  I had  before  ; but 
one  like  this  I never  had,  between  wind  and  hail, 
and  rain,  and  ice,  and  fnow,  and  driving  fleet, 
and  piercing  cold.  But  it  is  paft.  Thofe  davs 

will 


[ «**  ] 

Tviil  return  no  more,  and  are  therefore  as  though 
they  had  never  been. 

“ Pain,  disappointment,  ficknefs,  ilrife, 
Whate’er  molefls  or  troubles  life  ; 

However,  grievous  in  its  ftay. 

It  Shakes  the  tenement  of  clay, 

When  part,  as  nothing  we  effeem  ; 

And  pain,  like  pleasure,  is  but  a dream.” 

On  Monday  and  Tuefday  I diligently  enquir- 
ed, Who  were  offended  at  each  other  ? Thisbe- 
insj  the  fin  which  of  all  others  moll  eafilv  befets 
the  people  of  Newcaftle.  And  as  many  of  them 
as  had  leifure  to  meet,  I heard  face  to  face.  It 
was  now  an  eafy  thing  to  remove  their  offences. 
For  God  was  in  the  work.  So  that  they  were, 
one  and  ail,  as  willing  to  be  reconciled  to  each 
other,  as  I was  to  have  them. 

Feb.  27.  Being  Alh-Wednefday,  after  the 
public  prayers,  the  little  church  in  our  houfe 
met  together.  Mifunderftandings  were  cleared 
up,  and  we  all  agreed,  to  fet  out  anew,  hand  in 
hand,  and  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  forward  one 
another,  in  running  the  race  which  is  fet  before 
us. 

Sund.  March  3.  As  I was  walking  up  Pilgrim- 
flreet,  hearing  a man  call  after  me,  I hoodftill. 
He  came  up  and  ufed  much  abufive  language,  in- 
termixed with  many  oaths  and  curfes.  Several 
people  came  out  to  fee  what  was  the  matter  : 

on 


[ 262  ] 

®n  which  he  pufhed  me  twice  or  thrice  and  went 
away. 

Upon  enquiry,  I found  this  man  had  fignaliz- 
ed  himfelf  of  a long  feafon,  by  abufing  and 
throwing  ftones  at  any  of  our  family  who  went 
that  way.  Therefore  I would  not  lofe  the  op- 
portunity, but  on  Mond.  4.  fent  him. the  folio-w- 
ing note  ; 

Robert  Young, 

T Expefl  to  fee  you,  between  this  and  Friday, 
-*■  and  to  hear  from  you,  that  you  are  fenfible 
of  your  fault.  Otherwife,  in  pity  to  your  foul, 
1 fhall  be  obliged  to  inform  the  magiftrates  of 
your  affaulting  me  yefterday  in  the  flreet. 

I am 

Your  real  Friend, 

John*  W esley. 

Within  two  or  three  hours,  Robert  Young 
came,  and  promifed  a quite  different  behaviour. 
So  did  this  gentle  reproof,  if  not  fave  a foul  from 
death,  yet  prevent  a multitude  of  fins. 

Sund.  10.  We  had  a ufeful  fermon  at  All- 
Saints  in  the  morning,  and  another  at  our  own 
church  in  the  afternoon.  1 was  much  refrefhed 
by  both,  and  united  in  love  both  to  the  two 
preachers,  and  to  the  clergy  in  general. 

The  next  day  I wrote  to  a friend  as  folloavs, 

J'lewcaftle  upon  Tyne, 
March  11,  1745-6. 

I Have  been  drawing  up  this  morning  afhort 
ftate  of  the  cafe  between  the  clergy  and  us, 

1 leave 


a 


[ a63  ] 


I -leave  you  to  make  any  fuch  ufe  of  it,  as  you 
believe  will  be  to  the  glory  of  God. 

1.  About  feven  years  fince  we  began  preach- 
ing inward , prejint  falvation,  as  attainable  by 

faith  alone. 

2.  For  preaching  this  do&rine  we  were  forbid- 
den to  preach  in  the  churches. 

3.  We  then  preached  in  private  houfes,  as 
occafion  offered  : and  when  the  houfes  could 
nv>t  contain  the  people,  in  the  open  air. 

4.  For  this  many  of  the  clergy  preached  or 
.printed  again#  us,  as  both  heretics  and  fchifma- 
ties. 


5.  Perfons  who  were  convinced  of  fin,  begged 
-us  to  advife  them  more  particularly,  how  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come  ? We  replied  if  they 
would  all  come  at  one  time  (for  they  were  nu- 
merous) we  would  endeavour  it. 

6.  For  this  we  were  reprefented,  both  from 
:the  pulpit  and  the  prefs  (we  have  heard  it  with 
.our  ears  and  feen  it  with  our  eyes)  as  introduc- 
ing popery,  raifing  /edition,  praflifing  both  a- 
gain  ft  church  and  flate  : and  all  manner  of  evil 
was  publickly  Paid  both  of  us,  and  thofe  who 
.were  accuftomed  to  meet  with  us. 


7.  Finding  fome  truth  herein,  viz.  That  fome 
.of  thofe  who  fo  met  together,  walked  diforderly, 
*we  immediately,  defir ed  them,  not  to  come  to  us 
,any  more. 


"8.  And 


[ a64  ] 


8.  And  the  more  fteady  were  defired  to  over- 
look the  reft,  that  we  might  know  if  they  walked 
according  to  the  gofpel. 

9.  But  now  feveral  of  the  Bijhops  began  to 
fpeak  againft  us,  either  in  converfation  or  in 
public. 

10.  On  this  encouragement  feveral  of  the 
clergy  ftirred  up  the  people  to  treat  us  as  out- 
laws or  mad-dogs. 

1 1.  The  people  did  fo,  both  in  Staftordfhire, 
Cornwall,  and  many  other  places. 

12.  And  they  do  fo  ftil),  wherever  they  are 
not  reftrained  by  their  fear  of  the  fecular  magif- 
trate. 

Thus  the  cafe  ftands  at  prefent.  Now  what 
can  we  do,  or  what  can  you  our  brethren  do  to- 
ward healing  this  breach  ? Which  is  highly  de- 
ftrable  ; that  we  may  withftand,  with  joint  force, 
the  ftill  increafing  flood  of  popery,  deiftn,  and 
immorality. 

Defire  of  us  any  thing  we  can  do  with  a fafe 
confcience,  and  we  will  do  it  immediately. 
Will  yen  meet  us  here?  Will  you  do  what  we 
defire  of  you,  fo  far  as  you  can  with  a fafe  con- 
fcience ? 

Let  us  come  to  particulars.  Do  you  defire  us, 
1.  To  preach  another,  or  to  deftfl  from  preach- 
ing this  doftrine  ? 

We  think  you  do  not  defire  it,  as  knowing 
we  cannot  do  this  with  a fafe  confcience.  Do 

you 


1 


r 

L 


265  ] 


you  defire  us,  2.  To  defift  from  preaching  in 
private  houfes,  or  in  the  open  air  f As  things 
are  now  circumftanced,  this  would  be  the  fame, 
as  defiring  us  not  to  preach  at  all. 

Do  you  defire  us,  3.  To  defift  from  advifing 
thofe  who  now  meet  together  for  that  pur- 
pofe?  Or  in  other  words,  to  diffolve  our  fo- 
cieties  ? 

We  cannot  do  this  with  a fafe  confcience  : 
for  we  apprehend  many  fouls  would  be  loft 
thereby,  and  that  God  would  require  their  blood 
at  our  hands. 

Do  you  defire  us,  4.  To  advife  them  only  one 
by  one  ? 

This  is  impoffible,  becaufe  of  their  number. 

Do  you  defire  us,  5.  To  fuffer  thofe  who 
walk  diforderly,  ftill  to  mix  with  the  reft? 

Neither  can  we  do  this  with  a fafe  confid- 
ence; becaufe  evil  communications  corrupt  good 
manners. 

Do  you  defire  us,  6.  To  difcharge  thofe  lea- 
ders of  bands  or  claffes  (as  we  term  them)  who 
overlook  the  reft  ? 

This  is  in  effeft,  to  fuffer  the  diforderly 
walkers  ftill  to  mix  with  the  reft,  which  we  dare 
not  do. 

Do  you  defire  us,  laftly,  To  behave  with  re- 
verence toward  thofe  who  are  overfeers  of  the 
church  of  God  ? And  with  tendernefs,  both  to 
VOL.  XXVIII.  M the 


[ e66  ] 

the  charafter  and  perfons  of  our  brethren,  the 
inferior  clergy  ? 

By  the  grace  of  God,  we  can  and  will  do  this. 
Yea,  our  confcience  beareth  us  witnefs,  that  we 
have  already  laboured  fo  to  do ; and  that,  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places. 

If  you  alk,  What  we  defire  of  you  to  do  ? 
We  anfwer,  l.  We  do  notdefire  any  one  of  you 
to  let  us  preach  in  your  church,  either  if  you 
believe  us  to  preach  falfe  dodrine,  .or  if  you 
have  upon  any  other  ground,  the  leaft  fcruple 
of  confcience  concerning  it.  But  we  defire,  any 
who  believes  us  to  preach  true  doClrine,  and 
has  no  fcruple  at  all  in  this  matter,  may  not  be 
either  publicly  or  privately  difcouraged,  from 
inviting  us  to  preach  in  his  church. 

2.  We  do  not  defire  that  any  one  who  thinks 
we  are  hereticks  or  fchifmaticks,  and  that 
rt  is  his  duty  to  preach  or  print  againft  us, 
as  fucb,  Ihould  refrain  therefrom,  fo  long  as  he 
thinks  it  is  his  duty:  (although  in  this  cafe,  the 
breach  can  never  be  healed.) 

But  we  defire,  that  none  wrill  pafs  fuch  a fen- 
tence,  till  he  has  calmly  confidered  both  fides  of 
the  queftion : that  he  would  not  condemn  us 
unheard,  but  firftread  what  we  have  written,  and 
pray  earneflly,  that  God  may  direct  him  in  the 
right  way. 

.3.  We  do  not  defire  any  favour,  if  either 
popery,  fedition,  or  immorality  be  proved 
againll  us. 


But 


C z67  ] 

But  we  defire,  you  will  not  credit  without 
proof  any  of  thofe  fenfelefs  tales  that  pafs  cur- 
rent with  the  vulgar  : that  if  you  do  not  credit 
them  yourfelves,  you  will  not  relate  them  to 
others  (which  we  have  known  done)  yea,  that 
you  will  confute  them,  fo  far  as  ye  have  oppor- 
tunity, and  difcountenance  thofe  who  fiill  retail 
them  abroad. 

4.  We  do  not  defire  any  preferment,  favour 
or  recommendation  from  thofe  that  are  in 
authority,  either  in  church  or  fiate.  But  we 
defire 

(1.)  That  if  any  thing  material  be  laid  to  our 
-charge,  we  mav  be  permitted  to  anfwer  for  our 
ourfelves.  (2.)  That  you  would  hinder  your 
dependents  from  ftirring  up  the  rabble  againft  us, 
who  are  certainly  not  the  proper  judges  of  thefe 
matters:  and  (3.)  That  you  would  effe&ually 
fupprefs  and  throughly  difcountenance  all  riots 
and  popular  infurreflions,  which  evidently 
ftrike  at  the  foundation  of  all  goverment,  whe- 
ther of  church  or  Hate. 

Now  thefe  things  you  certainly  can  do,  and 
that  with  a fafe  confcience.  Therefore  till  thefe 
things  are  done,  the  continuance  of  the  breach 
is  chargeable  on  you  and  you  only.” 

Satur.  16.  I vifited  part  of  the  fick  : (for  I 
could  not  fee  them  all  in  one  dav.)  I found  many 
in  heavinefs,  through  various  temptations,  added 
M s to 


[ 2&S  ] 


to  that  of  bodily  pain:  but  none  forrowisg  as 
men  without  hope ; though  fome  deeply 
mourning  after  God. 

The  following  week  I vifued  the  focieties  in 
the  country.  On  Thurf.  28.  a gentleman  called 
at  our  houfe,  who  informed  me  his  name  was 
Adams : that  he  lived  about  forty  miles  from 
Newcaflle,  at  Ofmotherly  in  Yorkiliire,  and  had 
heard  fo  many  flrange  accounts  of  the  Metho- 
difls,  that  he  could  not  reft  till  he  came  to  in- 
quire forhimfelf.  I told  him,  he  was  welcome 
to  ftay  as  long  as  he  pieafed,  if  he  could  live  on 
our  lenten  fare.  He  made  no  difficulty  of  this, 
and  willingly  ftaid  till  the  Monday  fe’nnight 
following,  when  he  returned  home  fully  fatisfied 
with  his  journey. 

Satur.  April  6.  Mr.  Stephenfon  of  whom  I 
bought  the  ground,  on  which  our  houfe  is  built, 
came  at  length,  after  delaying  it  more  than  two 
years,  and  executed  the  writings.  So  I am  freed 
from  one  more  care.  May  I in  every  thing, 
make  known  my  requeft  to  God  ! 

We  met  at  four  in  the  morning  on  Eafter-day, 
and  great  was  our  joy  in  the  Lord.  I preached 
on,  The  Lord  is  rifen  indeed ; and  at  Southbid- 
dick  at  feven  o’clock.  In  the  evening  many  of 
our  brethren  from  all  parts  were  prefent,  and  we 
aaain  praifed  God  with  joyful  lips. 

Mond.  15.  We  met  at  half  hour  paft  four, 
and  the  room  was  filled  from  end  to  end.  Many 

of 


[ 2 6gr  ] 


ef  the  rich  and  honourable  were  there  ; fo  that 
I found  it  was  time  for  me  to  fly  away.  At 
eight  I preached  in  the  ftreet  at  Chefter,  to  a 
large  and  quiet  congregation.  At  Darlington  (it 
being  the  fair-day)  we  could  fcarce  find  a place 
to  hide  our  head.  At  length  we  got  into  a little 
inn,  but  were  obliged  to  be  in  a room,  where 
there  was  another  fet  of  company,  fome  of  whom 
were  curfing  and  fwearing  much.  Before  we 
went  away,  I flepped  to  them,  and  alked,  “ Do 
you  think  yourfelves,  that  this  kind  of  talking  is 
right  ?”  One  of  them  warmly  replied,  “ Sir, 
We  have  faid  nothing  which  we  have  need  to 
be  afhamed  of.”  I faid,  “ Have  you  not  need  to 
beafhamed  of  difobliging  your  bell  friend  ? And 
is  not  God  the  beft  friend  you  have  ?”  They 
flared  firfl  at  me,  and  then  at  one  another.  But 
no  man  anfwered  a word. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  the  inn  in 
Northallerton,  where  Mr.  Adams  and  fome  of  his 
neighbours  met  me.  On  his  faying,  “ He 
wifhed  I could  have  time  to  preach  in  his  houfe 
at  Ofmotherley  I told  him,  “ I would  have 
time,  if  he  defired  it,”  and  ordered  our  horfes 
to  be  brought  out  immediately.  We  came  thi- 
ther between  nine  and  ten.  It  was  about  an 
hour  before  the  people  were  gathered  together. 
It  was  after  twelve  before  I lay  down ; yet 
(through  the  blefling  of  God)  I felt  no  wearinefs 
at  all. 

m3 


Tuef. 


[ 27°  ] 

Tuef.  16.  I preached  at  five  on  Rom.  iii.  22. 
to  a large  congregation,  part  of  whom  had  fat 
up  all  night,  for  fear  they  fhould  not  wake  in 
the  morning.  Many  of  them  I found,  either 
were,  or  had  been  Papifls.  O how  wife  are  the 
ways  of  God ! How  am  I brought,  without  any 
care  or  thought  of  mine,  into  the  centre  of  the 
Papifis  in  Yorkfhire  ? O that  God  would  arife 
and  maintain  his  own  caufe  ! And  all  the  idols 
let  him  utterly  abolifh  ! 

After  fermon  an  elderly  woman  afked  me 
abruptly,  “ Doft  thou  think  water  baptifm  an 
ordinance  of  Chrift  ?”  I faid,  What  faith  Pe- 
ter? Who  can  Jorbid  waltr,  that  thefe Jhould  not 
be  baptized,  who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghojl 
even  as  we?  I fpoke  but  little  more  before  fhe 
cried  out,  “ ’Tis  right!  ’Tis  right!  I will  be 
baptized.”  And  fo  file  was  the  fame  hour. 

About  eight  in  the  evening,  I reached  Syke- 
houle,  and  preached  to  a little  company  there. 
Wednef.  17.  I rode  by  Epworth  to  Grimfby. 
T he  north-eafi  wind  was  full  in  our  face,  and 
exceeding  fharp.  I began  preaching  before 
eight : but  to  fuch  a congregation  as  I had  not 
lately  feen  : fo  fiupidly  rude  and  noify,  encou- 
raged therto,  by  their  fore-fpeaker,  a drunken 
alehoufe-keeper.  I fingled  him  out  and  fafiened 
upon  him,  till  he  chofe  to  withdraw.  The  reft 
were  foon  calmed  and  behaved  very  quietly  till 
the  fervice  was  ended. 

Thurf.  18.  In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Hain- 

ton. 


[ 271  3 

fon.  Mr.  Clark,  the  minifter  of  Barkfworth,  a 
mile  from  thence,  having  feveral  times  fent 
word  he  Ihould  be  glad  to  fee  me,  I went  to  his 
houfe,  and  fpent  an  agreeable  hour,  with  an 
open-hearted,  friendly  man,  not  ffrongly  pre- 
poffeft,  and  I believe,  truly  defirous  to  know  the 
whole  will  of  God. 

Frid.  19.  William  Fenwick,  rode  with  me  to 

L d:  the  minilter  of  which  had  told  him 

again  and  again,  * “ Be  fure  to  bring  Mr.  Wef~ 
ley  with  you  when  he  comes.  It  is  for  my  foul  : 
for  the  good  of  my  poor  foul.”  When  we  were 
alone  he  told  me,  “ Sir,  I have  read  your  writ- 
ings : but  I could  not  believe  them  till  very 
lately.  Now  I know  your  dofitrine  is  true.  God 
himfelf  has  fhewn  it  to  me.  A few  days  fince  I 
was  in  a great  agony  of  foul,  praying  to  God  to 
forgive  my  fins.  And  there  was  fuch  a light 
about  me  as  I cannot  exprefs  : and  I knew  God 
had  heard  my  prayer.  And  my  heart  wras  filled 
with  the  love  of  God  ; and  ever  fince  I pray 
and  praife  him  all  day  long.” 

I afked,  If  he  had  told  this  to  any  one  elfe  ? 
He  faid,  “ I began  to  tell  it  one  I thought  a very 
good  Chriflian.  But  he  feemed  to  think  I was 
difirafifed.  So  I fpoke  no  more.  And  indeed  I 
don’t  know  any  that  would  hear  me.” 

I told  him,  “ You  will  meet  with  many  fuch 
trials  as  this,  and  with  many  others,  which  you 
are  not  yet  aware  of.”  He  anfwered,  “ I know 
that  I cannot  bear  them  of  myfelf.  I have  no 
M 4 ftrength, 


[ £7  2 ] 

flrength,  unlefs  I watch  and  pray  always.  But  I 
do  pray  always.  And  what  are  trials  to  me  ? I 
am  not  in  the  world.  I live  in  eternity.  I cannot 
turn  any  way  but  I fee  God.  He  is  with  me 
continually,  and  on  every  fide.’’ 

I found  much  comfort  from  this  flrong  in- 
flance  of  the  mercy  of  God.  And  fo  I did  alfo 
from  a letter  wrote  by  one  of  our  preachers, 
concerning  whom  I often  feared  I had  laboured 
in  vain.  It  ran  in  thefe  words. 

Dear  SIR, 

“ T Am  fully  convinced,  your  fear  concerning 
me  proceeds  intirely  from  your  love  to  my 
foul.  Therefore  I fhould  think  my felf  guilty  of 
the  greateft  ingratitude,  if  I did  not  endeavour 
to  make  a proper  ufe  of  your  kind  reproof. 

“ I know  my  foul  has  not  profpered.  I know 
my  converfation  has  not  always  been  as  in  the 
prefence  of  God.  I know  I have  not  been,  nor 
yet  am,  as  I defire  to  be,  a ferious,  lowlv  fol- 
lower of  Jefus  Chrift.  I have  not  been  fo  exem- 
plary in  my  behaviour,  as  was  confident  with 
the  important  work  wherein  I was  employed. 
But,  dear  Sir,  let  me  befeech  you,  in  God’s 
name,  tell  me,  Do  you  really  think,  that  indead 
of  profiting,  I deftroy  others  P That  fo  by  defid- 
. ing  to  preach,  I may  perifh  alone,  and  not  the 
people  perifh  with  me.  O,  Sir,  fhall  I be  an  indru- 

nient 


C 273  ] 

ment  in  the  devil’s  hand,  to  deftroy  the  fouls  for 
which  Chrift  died?  O that  my  tongue  may 
cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth,  rather  than  I 
lhould  continue  to  do  this  great  evil  ! O Lord, 
be  merciful  unto  me,  and  forgive  my  fin  ; for 
it  is  great ! 

“ I am  not  guiltlefs.  But  blelfed  be  God,  I 
have  lately  difcovered,  or  rather  felt  many 
things  which  were  hindrances  of  the  work  of 

O 

God  in  my  foul.  I faw  them  before  ; but  I faw 
in  vain.  I was  not  reftlefs  to  be  delivered  from 
them,  and  therefore  they  hill  continued  as  fo 
many  infurmountable  barriers  in  my  way.  I 
have  been  lately  in  great  trouble  of  mindJ:  the 
reproofs  I received  putting  me  upon  a narrow 
felf-examination,  I foon  found  many  things 
wrong,  and  they  lay  fo  heavy  upon  me,  that  I 
went  mourning  all  the  day  long.  God  only 
knows  the  uneafinefs  I felt.  But,  blelfed  be 
God,  he  did  not  leave  me  in  diftrefs,  but  in  the 
midft  of  trouble  fent  me  comfort.  O may  my 
foul  for  ever  praife  him  ! 

4t  I have  long  been  in  a kind  of  dead  and  life- 
lefs  ftate,  having  loft  thofe  pleafing  taftes  of 
God’s  love  I once  enjoyed.  I have  not  been 
able  to  find  any  delight  in  prayer.  Nor  could  I 
pray  from  my  heart.  If  I forced  myfelf  to  pray 
(for  it  was  a grievous  crofs)  fhame  covered  my 
face:  and  I durft  fcarce  lift  up  my  eyes,  confci- 
ous  of  my  own.  unfaithfulnefs  to  God,  and  my 
negligence  in  watching.  All  intercourfe  was 
M 5 Hopped 


C 274  ] 

flopped  between  God  and  ray  foul.  Indeed  when 
I have  been  praying  with,  or  fpeaking  to  others, 
I have  often  found  the  Spirit  of  God,  inlivening 
my  own  foul.  But  when  I came  before  God  in 
fecret,  intending  to  pour  out  my  complaint  be- 
fore him,  my  mouth  hath  been  flopped,  and  the 
devil  prefently  whifpered,  “ What  profit  is  it 
that  you  pray  ?”  If  I perfevered  notwithflanding, 
my  mind  has  been  filled  with  a thoufand  imper- 
tinent thoughts,  fo  that  I was  either  forced  from 
my  knees,  or  could  only  figh  or  groan  under- 
neath my  mifery.  My  heart  feemed  harder  and 
harder,  fo  that  I verily  thought  I fhould  at  length 
become  a caft-away. 

“ But  blefled  he  God,  I have  for  fome  time 
found  a revival  of  love,  and  have  had  more  com- 
munion with  God  than  for  a loner  feafon.  O 

O 

may  it  be  my  conflant  care,  to  watch  and  pray  ; 
the  neglefl  of  which  was  the  chief  caufe  of  my 
former  deadnefs.  The  levity  and  inconflancy 
of  mind  which  ufed  to  opprefs  me,  I find  greatly 
taken  away  ; and  at  prefent,  (God  grant  it  may 
always  continue)  the  remembrance  of  them  is 
grievous  to  me.  I often  BjSd  great  fweetnefs  in 
my  foul,  and  can  weep  for  my  pail  ingratitude  to 
God.  O pray  for  me,  dear  Sir,  if  you  love  me, 
that  I may  never  more  refill  his  grace  ! 

“ I cannot  tell  you  how  much  I think  myfelf 
obliged  to  you,  under  God,  for  all  your  care,  re- 
proofs, and  kindneffes.  May  God  reward  you! 
And  may  I never,  never  n»ke  an  ill  ufe  of  them ; 

but 


C 275  ] 


hut  love  and  reverence  you,  and  praife  God  for 
his  love,  in  making  you  an  happy  inftrument  of 
good  to  my  foul.” 

I rode  to  Epworth  in  the  afternoon.  Sund.  21. 
I preached  in  the  houfe  at  five,  on,  Quench  not 
the  fpirit : about  eight,  at  the  crofs,  and  again  in 
the  evening,  to  moll  of  the  adults  in  the  town. 
Poor  Mr.  R.’s  fermon,  from  beginning  to  end, 
was  another  railing  accufation.  Father,  forgive 
him  ! For  he  knoweth  not  what  he  doth. 

Mond.  22.  I rode  with  William  Ffolmes  to 
Norton,  and  after  preaching  there  to  a fmall 
company,  went  on  to  Oulton,  three  miles  from 
Leeds,  where  a numerous  congregation  was 
waiting.  On  Tuefday  I preached  at  Leeds, 
Armley,  and  Birftal.  The  next  evening,  I was 
conflrained  to  continue  my  difcourfe  there, 
near  an  hour  longer  than  ufual  : God  pouring 
outfuch  a bleffing,  that  I knew  not  how  to  leave 
off. 

Thurf.  25.  I preached  at  Horton  and  Brad- 
ford. Here  I could  not  but  obferve,  how  God 
has  made  void  all  their  labour,  who  make  void 
the  law  through  faith.  Out  of  their  large  focie- 
ties  in  thefe  towns,  how  fmall  a remnant  is  left  P 
In  Horton,  fcarce  ten  perfons  out  of  fouxfcore : 
in  Bradford  not  one  foul. 

Friday  and  Saturday,  at  John  Bennet’s  re- 
queft,  I preached  at  feveral  places  in  Lancafhire 
M 6 and 


C 276  ] 

and  Cheffiire.  Sand.  28.  I preached  at  five  (as 
I had  done  over-night)  about  a mile  from  Al- 
tringham,  on,  Walch  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not 
into  temptation.  A plain  man  came  to  me  after- 
ward and  faid,  “ Sir,  I find  Mr.  Hutchings  and 
you  do  not  preach  the  fame  way.  You  bid  us 
read  the  bible,  and  pray,  and  go  to  church  ; but 
he  bids  us  let  all  this  alone  : and  fays,  “ If  we  go 
to  church  and  facrament,  wre  (hall  never  come  to 
Chrilt. 

At  nine  I preached  near  Stockport  to  a large 
congregation.  Thence  we  rode  to  Bongs  in 
Derbylhire,  a lone  houfe,  on  the  fide  of  a high, 
fteep  mountain,  whither  abundance  of  people 
were  got  before  us.  I preached  on  God’s  juftify- 
ing  the  ungodly,  and  his  word  was  as  dew  upon  the 
tender  herb.  At  five  I preached  at  Mill-town, 
near  Chappel  in  the  Frith.  The  poor  miller, 
near  whofe  pond  we  flood,  endeavoured  to 
drown  my  voice,  by  letting  out  the  water,  which 
fell  with  a great  noife.  But  it  was  labour 
loft ; for  my  ftrength  was  fo  increafed,  that 
I was  heard  to  the  very  fkirts  of  the  congrega- 
tion. 

Mond.  29.  I preached  at  Taddington  in  the 
Peak,  and  rode  from  thence  to  Sheffield, 
where  I preached  on  the  floor  of  the  late 
houfe,  (which  the  good  proteflant  mob  had  juft 
pulled  down)  to  the  largeft  and  one  of  the  quiet- 
eft  congregations  I ever  remember  to  have  feen 

there. 


[ 277  3 

there.  Tuef.  30.  I preached  at  Barley-hall,  and 
Wednef.  May  1.  at  Nottingham. 

Thurf.  2.  I rode  to  Markfield.  The  church 
was  full,  though  the  notice  was  fo  fhort.  But  I 
was  forry  to  hear,  fome  of  the  neighbouring 
churches  are  likely  to  be  empty  enough.  For  the 
Jiill  brethren  I found  had  fpread  themfelves  into 
feveral  of  the  adjacent  parilhes.  And  the  very 
firft  Jins  their  hearers  leave  off,  are  reading 
the  bible,  and  running  to  the  church  and  facra- 
ment. 

Frid.  3.  In  the  evening  we  came  to  Wednef- 
bury.  A while  ago  the  waves  here  were  mighty , 
and  raged  horribly.  But  the  Lord  that  dwelleth  on 
high  is  mightier , and  has  hilled  the  madnefs  of 
the  people.  I preached  at  feven  without  any 
noife  or  hindrance  at  all.  All  was  equally  quiet 
on  Saturday.  Sund.  5.  The  number  of  people 
even  at  five,  obliged  me  to  preach  abroad. 
About  one  I preached  at  Tipton-green,  and 
about  four  at  Wednefbury.  A few  perfons  at  firft 
threw  fome  clods : but  they  were  quickly  glad  to 
retreat:  fo  that  there  was  no  interruption  at  all 
while  I applied  thofe  gracious  words  of  our  Lord, 
Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  la- 
den, and  I will  give  you  rejl. 

I made  hafte  from  hence  to  Gofton’s-green, 
near  Birmingham,  where  I had  appointed  to 
preach  at  fix.  But  it  was  dangerous  for  any  who 
flood  to  hear ; for  the  ftones  and  dirt  were  flying 
from  every  fide,  almoft  without  intermiflion,  for 

near 


C 278  ] 

near  an  hour.  However  very  few  perfons  went 
away.  I afterwards  met  the  fociety,  and  exhort- 
ed them,  in  fpite  of  men  and  devils,  to  continue 
in  the  grace  of  God. 

Mond.  6.  I dined  at  Studley,  where  a poor 
man  was  fwearing  almofi;  at  every  fentence.  I 
afked  him,  “ If  he  thought  that  was  well  done  ? 
And  began  to  tell  him,  how  God  loved  him.” 
He  got  up  as  in  amaze,  made  many  bows,  faid, 
“ I a(k  pardon,  Sir,  of  God  and  you,  and  hope 
it  will  be  a warning  to  me  all  the  days  of  my 
life.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Evefham.  The 
next  day,  Mr.  Taylor  of  Quinton  came,  who  on 
Wedn.  8.  rode  with  us  to  Oxford.  I cannot 
fpend  one  day  here,  without  heavinefs  in  my 
heart,  for  my  brethren’s  fake.  O God.  when 
wilt  thou  {hew  thefe,  who  fay  they  are  rich,  that 
they  are  poor,  and  miferable,  and  blind,  and 
naked  ? 

Frid.  10.  I preached  at  High- Wycombe  in  an 
open  place,  to  a mixed  multitude  : fome  of 
whom  were  as  rude  as  they  dared  to  be,  having 
none  of  the  great  vulgar  to  fet  them  on. 

Sat.  11.  I came  to  London.  The  fower  of 
tares,  I found,  had  not  been  idle,  but  fhaken 
many,  and  moved  fome  from  their  ftedfaftnefs, 
who  once  feemed  to  be  pillars.  The  next  week, 
finding  no  other  way  to  convince  fome  who 
were  hugely  in  love  with  that  folemn  trifle,  mv 
brother  and  I were  at  the  pains  of  reading  over 

Robert 


[ 279  1 

Robert  Barclay’s  apology  with  them.  Being  wit- 
ling to  receive  the  light,  their  eyes  were  open- 
ed. They  faw  his  nakednefs  and  were  afhamed. 

Thurf.  23.  We  had  one  more  converfation 
with  one  that  had  often  flrengthened  our  hands ; 
but  now  earneflly  exhorted  us  (What  is  man!] 
“ To  return  to  the  church  : to  renounce  all  our 
lay-affiflants  : to  diffolve  our  focieties  : to  leave 
off  field-preaching,  and  to  accept  of  honourable 
preferment !” 

Wedn.  29.  I talked  at  large  with  Howel  Har- 
ris, not  yet  carried  away  by  the  torrent  of  anti- 
ncmianifm.  But  how  long  will  he  be  able  to 
Hand  ? Only  till  he  confents  to  Hand  neuter. 
When  he  is  brought,  not  to  oppofe,  he  will 
quickly  yield. 

I would  wifh  all  to  obferve,  that  the  points 
in  queflion  between  us  and  either  the  German 
or  Engl i fh  antinomians,  are  not  points  of  opini- 
on, but  of  praftice.  We  break  with  no  man 
for  his  opinion.  We  think  and  let  think.  I 
cannot  better  exprefs  myfenfe  of  this,  than  it  is 
done  by  a ferious  man  in  the  following  letter. 

Dear  S I R, 

“ T Ought  to  have  mentioned  fooner  my 
X receiving  yours,  concerning  Mr.  Ed- 
wards of  New-England.  Mr.  Robe  is  of  his 
opinion  as  to  the  thing  (the  doftrine  of  particu- 
lar redemption]  but  not  as  to  the  abfolute  ne- 
ceffity  of  believing  either  the  one  or  the  other 

fide 


[ 28o  ] 


fide  of  the  queftion.  And  it  is  the  maintaining 
the  neceflity  of  his  fide  of  the  queftion,  which 
youjuftly  blame.  For  the  fame  reafon  I fup- 
pofe  you  would  blame  the  maintaining  the  ne- 
celfity  of  your  fide  of  the  queftion.  On  what- 
foever  fide  of  the  queftion  one  be,  I apprehend, 
this  miftake  of  the  neceftity  of  it,  proceeds  from 
what  Mr.  Lock  calls,"  The  alfociation  of  ideas.” 
People  long  accuftomed  to  explain  the  eflential 
things  of  Chriftianity,  in  fuch  a particular  way, 
and  never  having  obferved,  how  they  can  be 
explained  in  any  other,  transfer  their  zeal  for 
thefe  eflential  things,  to  their  own  way  of  ex- 
plication, and  believe  there  is  a neceflary  con- 
nexion between  them,  when  in  faft  there  is  not. 
This  has  produced  many  mifchiefs  and  animoft- 
ties,  among  all  forts  of  people.  I would  take 
my  ground  to  ftand  on  for  clearing  this,  on  what 
you  fay  in  the  fame  letter  to  me.  “ Whofoever 
agrees  with  us  in  that  account  of  practical  reli- 
gion given  in  the  character  of  a Meikodift,  I re- 
gard not  what  his  other  opinions  are:  the  fame 
is  my  brother,  and  After,  and  mother.  I ara- 
more  aflured,  that  love  is  of  God,  than  that 
any  opinion  whatfoever  is  fo.  Herein  may  we 
increafe  more  and  more.” 

“ I have  often  thought  fince  I was  favoured 
with  that  letter,  how  far  it  natively  and  clearly 
went,  as  to  many  things  that  occafion  conten- 
tions and  fchifms,  even  among  real  Chriftiansr 

and 


[ *«*  ] 

and  what,  as  it  natively  and  clearly  follows  from 
this  principle,  our  practice  ought  to  be. 

“ One  effeft  of  this  has-been,  to  make  me 
think  I have  not  yet  met  with  any  fet  of  people, 
whofe  praftice  is  not,  in  feveral  remarkable  par- 
ticulars, inconfiftent  with  this  good  principle- 
But  I will  not  fuffer  myfelf  to  be  fully  perfuaded 
of  this,  as  to  one  fet  of  men,  till  I have  the  hap- 
pinefs  to  meet  with  your  brother  and  you,  and 
talk  over  fome  particulars,  which  you  will  allow 
me  calmly  and  impartially  to  lay  before  you. 
May  the  Holy  Ghoft  lead  you  into  all  truth,  and 
into  every  right  way. 

“ As  to  outward  communion  with  thofe  in 
whom  your  chara&erHtic  is  found, 

1.  Is  it  not  our  duty  and  theirs,  to  keep  that 
communion  together,  as  far  as  we  can  without 
fin  ? And  except  in.  that  cafe,  is  not  feparating 
from  each  other,  even  in  outward  communion* 
a fin  ? Confequently,  Is  it  not  a fin  in  any  of  us* 
to  fet  out  outward  communion  on  fucli  a foot, 
that  others  who  have  this  chara&eriftic,  cannot 
join  in  that  communion  without  fin  in  them? 
Is  it  not  alfo  our  duty,  not  to  Humble  them,  by 
our  way  of  infilling  on  our  particular  opinions  ? 
And  is  it  not  a fin  in  them,  To  be  eafilyflnmbled 
at  us  on  that  account  ? 

2,  Is  it  not  far  wrong  in  any  of  us  to  teach 
our  particular  opinions  (efpeciallv  to  thofe  whom 
we  are  to  inftruft  in  the  effentials  of  religion)  fo 
as  to  lead  them  into  fuch  an  afTociation  of  ideas 

between 


[ 282  ] 

Between  thefe  effentials  and  thofe  opinions, 
which  want  of  judgment,  narrownefs  of  thought, 
and  impatience  of  fpirit,  are  fo  apt  to  lead  even 
the  firong  into  ? Do  we  not  often  fee,  how  al- 
moft  incurably  this  prejudices  the  weak  againfl 
their  brethren  in  Cbrift,  and  perplexes  their 
minds  about  thofe  opinions,  and  takes  them  off 
from  the  ferious  confideration  of  the  effentials  ? 
Nay,  have  we  not  feen  even  the  ftrong  in  grace, 
as  well  as  learning,  miftake  the  Lord’s  fhining 
on  their  fouls,  on  account  of  their  receiving  and 
applying  the  effentials,  for  an  approbation  of 
their  particular  opinions  ? And  have  we  not  feen 
fuch hereby  led,  to  bear  perfecution  from,  and 
in  their  turn,  to  inflift  it  on  their  brethren? 
Almoft  every  one  cries  out  againfl  this  fpirit  of 
perfecution.  But  few  feem  to  dive  into  the 
caufes  of  it : and  fewer  flill  heartily  feek  after 
and  follow  the  effeftual  cure.  And  there- 
fore, 

3.  Is  it  not  [the  duty  both  of  minifters  and 
of  private  Chriftians  in  their  feveral  ftations,  to 
{hew  that  our  particular  opinions  are  not  fo  im- 
portant but  that  one  in  whom  the  grand  cha- 
ra&eriftic  is  found,  may  hold  different,  nay  con- 
trary opinions  ? Is  it  not  the  duty  of  all,  in 
their  refpeftive  ftations,  to  prevent  or  diffolve 
that  groundlefs  aflociation  of  ideas  ? And  is  not 
the  quite  contrary  done  by  almoft  all  ? Do  they 
not  proceed,  as  if  they  were  rather  defirous,  to 
eftablifh  (not  diffolve)  that  affociation  of  ideas, 

in 


I ] 


in  favour  of  their  own  particular  opinions  ? 
And  thereby  (tho’  perhaps  their  own  hearts  hide 
it  from  them)  to  eftablifh  their  party,  and  fix 
their  adherents  unto  them  P 

4.  Since,  as  youjuftly  fay,  “ We  are  more 
fure.  that  love  is  of  God  than  that  any  opinion 
whatfover  is  fo,”  Is  it  not  our  duty  to  follow 
that  love  with  all  our  brethren  in  Chrift,  and  the 
native  confequence  of  it,  outward  communion  ? 
So  far,  I mean,  as  that  communion  does  not 
imply  our  owning  as  true,  an  opinion  which  we 
do  not  believe  to  be  fo.  And  yet, 

5.  When  one  is  a member  of  a community, 
where  many  are  extremely  bigotted  to  their  own 
opinions  : in  fuch  a cafe  may  not  outward  com- 
munion with  our  other  brethren  in  Chrifl,  be 
kept  in  fome  inflances  and  notin  others?  But 
ftill,  Is  it  not  our  duty  to  ufe  all  our  prudence 
and  diligence,  to  bring  all  the  Lord’s  people  from 
this  bigotry,  into  that  dear,  mutual,  univerfal 
love,  and  that  aftual  communion,  which  is  the 
native  confequence  of  it  ? 

James  E e.” 

Sund.  June  9.  In  the  evening  I rode  to 
Colebrook,  on  Monday  to  Marlborough,  and  on 
Tuefday  to  Briftol.  The  antinomians.had  taken 
true  pains  here  alfo,  to  feduce  thofe  who  were 
fhewing  their  faith  by  their  works.  But  they 
had  reaped  little  fruit  of  their  bad  labour.  For 
upon  the  moil  diligent  enquiry,  I could  not 

find. 


[ =84  3 

find,  that  feven  perfons  out  of feven  hundred, 
had  been  turned  out  of  the  old  bible-wav. 

We  left  Briftol  early  on  Frid.  14.  and  on 
Sunday  morning  reached  St.  Ginnys.  The 
church  was  moderately  filled  with  ferious 
hearers,  but  few  of  them  appeared  to  feel 
what  they  heard.  I preached  both  morning 
and  afternoon,  and  on  Monday  evening.  And. 
many  affenltd  to  and  approved  of  the  truth. 

Tuef.  18.  Being  invited  by  the  renter  of  St; 
Mary  Week  (about  feven  miles  from  St.  Ginnys) 
to  preach  in  his  church,  we  went  thither  in  the 
afternoon.  I had  not  feen  in  thefe  parts  of 
Cornwall,  either  fo  large  a church  or  fo  large  a 
congregation.  Thence  we  rode  to  Laneft,  where 
Mr.  Bennet  read  prayers,  and  I preached  on 
The  redemption  that  is  in  JeJus  Chriji. 

Wednf.  19  Trefmere  church  was  filled  with* 
in  and  without,  wrhile  I preached  on  Rom.  iv. 
7.  Here  I took  leave  of  a poor,  mad,  original 
enthufiaft,  who  had  been  fcattering  abroad  lies 
in  every  quarter.  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Thompfon 
and  Shepherd  rode  with  me  to  St.  Eath,  and 
the  next  day  to  Redruth. 

Being  informed  here  of  what  had  befallen 
Mr.  Maxfield,  we  turned  afide  toward  Crowan 
cburchtown.  But  in  the  way,  we  received  in- 
formation, That  he  had  been  removed  from 
thence  the  night  before.  It  feems,  the  valiant 
conftables,  who  guarded  him,  having  received 
timely  notice,  that  a body  of  five-hundred  Me- 

thodifis 


[ 2%  ] 

thodifts  were  coming  to  take  him  away  by  force, 
had  with  great  precipitation  carried  him  two 
miles  further,  to  the  houfe  of  one  Henry 
Tomkins. 

Here  we  found  him,  nothing  terrified  by  his 
tjdverfaries.  I defired  Henry  Tomkins  to  fhew 
me  the  warrant.  It  was  direfted  by  Dr.  Borlace 
^and  his  father,  and  Mr.  Eu flick,  to  the  con- 
•ftables  and  overfeers  of  feveral  parifhes, requiring 
•them  to  “ apprehend  all  fuch  able-boiled  men, 
as  had  no  lawful  calling  or  fufficient  maintenance : 
and  to  bring  them  before  the  aforefaid  gentlemen 
at  Marazion.  on  Frid.  21.  to  be  examined,  whe- 
ther they  were  proper  per/on-s,  to  ferve-his  Ma- 
jefty,  in  the  land-fervice. 

It  was  indorfed  (by  the  dewardof  Sir  John  St. 
Aubin)  with  the  names  of  feven  or  eightperfons, 
mod  of  whom  were  well  known,  to  have  lawful 
callings,  and  a fufficient  maintenance  thereby. 
But  that  was  all  one  ; they  were  called  Mdhodijh. 
Therefore  foldiers  they  mud  be.  Underneath  was 
- added,  “ A perfon,  his  name  unknown,  who  dif- 
■turbs  the  peace  of  the  pavilh.” 

A word  to  the  wife  ! The  good  men  eafily  un- 
derdood,  this  could  be  none  but  the  Methodiji- 
preacher,  for  who  “ didurbs  the  peace  of  the  pa- 
'riffi,”  like  one  who  tells  all  drunkards,  whore- 
mongers, and  common -fwearers,  “ You  are  in 
the  high  road  to  hell  ?” 

When  we  came  out  of  the  houfe,  forty  or  fifty 
myrmidons  flood  ready  to  receive  as.  But  Iyurn- 

2 ed 


[ 286  ] 

ed  full  upon  them,  and  their  courage  failed  i not 
■did  they  recover,  till  we  were  at  fome  diftance. 
Then  they  began  bluftring  again,  and  throwing 
flones ; one  of  which  ftruck  Mr.  Thompfon’s 
fervant. 

Frid.  31.  We  rode  to  Marazion  (vulgarly 
called  Marketjew.)  Finding  the  juftices  were  not 
met,  we  walked  up  St.  Michael’s  Mount.  The 
houfe  at  the  top  is  furprizingly  large  and  plea- 
fant.  Sir  John  St.  Aubin  had  taken  much  pains, 
and  been  at  a confiderable  expence,  in  repair- 
ing and  beautifying  the  apartments.  And  when 
the  feat  was  finifhed,  the  owner  died  J 

About  two  Mr.  Thompfon  and  I went  into  the 
room,  where  the  juftices  and  commiftioners 
were.  After  a few  minutes.  Dr.  Borlafe  flood 
up  and  alked.  “ Whether  we  had  any  bufinefs  ?” 
1 told  him  “ We  have.  We  defiled  to  be  hear- 
ed,  concerning  one  who  was  lately  apprehended 
at  Crowan.”  He  faid,  “ Gentlemen,  the  bufinefs 
of  Crowan  does  not  come  on  yet.  You  lhall  be 
fent  for,  when  it  does.”  So  we  retired,  and 
waited  in  another  room,  till  after  nine  o’clock. 
They  delayed  the  affair  of  Mr.  Maxfield  (as  we 
imagined  they  would)  to  the  very  laft.  About 
nine  he  was  called.  I would  have  gone  in  then. 
But  Mr.  Thompfon  advifed  to  wait  a little 
longer.  The  next  information  we  received  was 
that  they  had  fentenced  him  to  go  for  a foldier. 
Hearing  this,  we  went  ftrait  to  the  commiffion- 

chamber. 


1 


[ 287  ] 

■chamber.  But  the  honourable  gentlemen  were 
gone. 

They  had  ordered  Mr.  Maxfield,  to  be  im- 
mediately put  on  board  a boat,  and  carried  for 
Penzance.  We  were  informed,  “ They  had 
iarfl  offered  him  to  the  captain  of  a man  of  war, 
that  was  juft  come  into  the  harbour.  But  he  an- 
fwered,  “ I have  no  authority  to  take  fuch  men 

I as  thefe : unlefs  you  would  have  me  give  him 
fo  much  a week,  to  preach  and  pray  to  my  peo- 
»!  pie.” 

Sat.  22.  We  reached  St.  Ives  about  two  in 
in  the  morning.  At  five  I preached  on  Love  your 
enemies  : and  at  Gwenap,  in  the  evening,  on  All 
thatzui/l  live  godly  in  Ckrijl  JeJus,Jhall fuff er  per- 
\ fecution. 

We  heard  to-day,  that  as  foon  as  Mr.  Max- 
field  came  to  Penzance,  they  put  him  down  in- 
to the  dungeon  : and  that  the  mayor  being  inclin- 
ed to  let  him  go,  Dr.  Borlafe  had  gone  thither 
on  purpofe,  and  had  himfelf  read  the  articles  of 
war  in  the  court,  and  delivered  him  to  one,  who 
was  to  aft  as  an  officer. 

Sund.  23.  I preached  in  Gwenap  at  five,  and 
about  eight  at  Stithians,  to  a large  and  quiet 
congregation.  Thence  we  went  to  Wendron 
i church.  At  two  I preached  a mile  and  half  from 
the  church,  under  a large,  ffiady  tree,  on  part 
of  the  epiflle  for  the  day,  Marvel  not,  if  the 
world  hale  you.  At  five  I began  at  Crowan,  the 
head-quarters  of  the  people  that  delight  in  \vrar. 

While 


[ 288  ] 


While  I was  expounding  part  of  the  fecond 
morning  leffon,  Capt.  R ds  came  with  a par- 

ty of  men,  ready  for  battle.  But  their  mailer 
riding  away  in  two  or  three  minutes,  their  coun- 
tenances quickly  fell.  One  and  another  Hole  off 
his  hat,  till  they  were  all  uncovered  ; nor  did 
they  either  move  or  fpeak,  till  I had  finifhed 
my  difcourfe. 

We  rode  hence  to  St.  Ives;  where  Mond. 
24.  I preached  at  five,  on  Watch  and  pray , that 
ye  enter  not  into  temptation . As  we  returned  from 
church  at  noon,  a famous  man  of  the  town,  at- 
tacked 11s,  for  the  entertainment  of  his  mailers. 
I turned  back,  and  fpoke  to  him,  and  he  was 
alhamed.  In  the  afternoon,  as  I was  walking 
over  the  Market-place,  he  jult  put  out  his  head  ; 
but  after  one  fcream,  ran  back  into  the  houfe 
with  great  precipitation.  We  expended  a vifit 
in  the  evening  from  fome  ol  the  deviPs  drunken 
•companions,  who  fwarm  here  on  a holy-day,  fo 
called.  But  none  appeared.  So  after  a com- 
fortable hour,  we  praifed  God,  and  parted  in 
peace. 

Tuef.  25.  We  rode  to  St.  Juft.  I preached 
at  feven  to  the  largefi  congregation  I have  feen 
fince  my  coming.  At  the  meeting  of  the  earnelt, 
loving  fociety,  all  our  hearts  were  in  a Came  : 
and  again  at  five  in  the  morning,  while  I ex- 
plained, There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Chrijl  jfefns . 

When  the  preaching  was  ended,  the  conltable 

apprehended 


[ a89  ] 

apprehended  Edward  Greenfield  (by  a warrant 
from  Dr.  Borlafe)  a tinner,  in  the  forty-fixth 
vear  of  his  age,  having  a wife  and  feven  children. 
Three  years  ago  he  was  eminent  lor  curfing, 
fwearing,  drunkennefs,  and  all  manner  of  wick- 
ednefs.  But  thofe  old  things  had  been  for  fome 
time  paft  away.  And  he  was  then  remarkable 
for  a quite  contrary  behaviour. 

* 1 alked  a little  gentleman  at  St.  Juft,  “ What 
obje&ion  there  was  to  Edward  Greenfield  ?”  He 
laid,  “ Why,  the  man  is  well  enough  in  other 
things.  But  his  impudence  the  gentlemen  can- 
not bear.  Why,  lir,  he  fays,  he  knows  his 
fins  are  forgiven  !’’ — And,  for  this  caufe,  he  is 
adjudged  to  banilhment  or  death! 

I preached  at  Morva  and  Zunnor,  in  my  re- 
turn to  St.  Ives.  Fri.  28.  Mr.  Thompfon  and 
Bennet  returned  home.  Sat.  29.  I preached  at 
St.  Juft  again,  and  at  Morva  and  Zunnor  on 
Sund.  30.  About  fix  in  the  evening,  I began 
preaching  at  St.  Ives,  in  the  ftreet,  near  John 
Nance’s  door.  A multitude  of  people  were 
quickly  aftembled,  both  high  and  low,  rich  and 
poor.  And  I obferved  not  any  creature  to  laugh 
or  fmile,  or  hardly  move  hand  or  foot.  I ex- 
pounded the  gofpel  for  the  day,  beginning  with, 
Then  drew  n ear  all  the  publicans  and  /inner  s for 
to  hear  him.  A little  before  feven  came  Mr. 
Edwards  from  the  mayor,  and  ordered  one  to 
read  the  proclamation  againft  riots.  I conclud 
ed  quickly  after  ; but  the  body  of  the  people 
. Vol.  XXVIII.  N appeared 


[ 2 9°  1 


appeared  utterly  unfatisfied,  not  knowing  how 
to  go  away.  Forty  or  fifty  of  them  begged  they 
might  be  prefent  at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety. 
And  we  rejoiced  together  for  an  hour  in  fuch  a 
manner,  as  I had  never  known  before  in  Corn- 
wall. 

Tuef.  July  2.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
St.  Juft.  I obferved  not  only  feveral  gentlemen 
there,  who  I fuppofe  never  came  before,  but  a 
large  body  of  tinners,  who  flood  at  a diftance 
from  the  reft,  and  a great  multiiude  of  men,  wo- 
men and  children  befide,  who  feemed  not  well 
to  know,  why  they  came.  Almoft  as  foon  as 
we  had  done  finging,  a kind  of  gentlewoman 
began.  I have  feldora  feen  a poor  creature  take 
fo  much  pains.  She  fcolded  and  fcreamed,  and 
fpit,  and  ftamped,  and  wrung  her  hands,  and 
diftorted  her  face  and  body  all  manner  of  ways. 
1 took  no  notice  of  her  at  all,  good  or  bad  : nor 
did  almoft  any  one  elfe.  Afterwards  I heard, 
ihe  was  one  that  had  been  bred  a papill;  and 
when  flic  heard,  we  were  fo,  rejoiced  greatly. 
No  wonder  file  (hould  be  proportionably  angry, 
when  Ihe  was  difappointed  of  her  hope. 

Mr.  Euftick,  a neighbouring  gentleman  came, 
juft  as  I was  concluding  ray  fermon.  The  peo- 
ple opening  to  the  right  and  left,  he  came  up  to 
me  and  laid,  “ Sir,  I have  a warrant  from  Dr. 
Borlafe,  and  you  muftgo  with  me.”  Then  turn- 
ing round,  he  laid,  “ Sir,  are  vou  Mr,  Shep- 
herd ? If  fo,  you  are  mentioned  in  the  warrant 

too. 


[ 291  ] 


too.  Be  pleafed,  Sir,  to  come  with  me.”  We 
walked  with  him  to  a public  houfe,  near  the  end 
of  the  town.  Here  he  afked  me,  if  I was  willing 
to  go  with  him  to  the  do£k>r?  I told  him,  juft 
then,  if  he  pleafed.  “ Sir,  faid  he,  I muft  wait 
upon  you  to  your  inn  ; and  in  the  morning,  if 
you  will  befo  good  as  to  go  with  me,  I will  fhew 
you  the  way.”  So  he  handed  me  back  to  my  inn 
and  retired. 

Wedn.  3.  I waited  till  Nine.  But  no  Mr. 
Euftick  came.  I then  defired  Mr.  Shepherd, 
to  go  and  inquire  for  him  at  the  houfe  wherein 
he  had  lodged  ; fi forte  edormijfd  hoc  villi  : he 
met  him  coming,  as  he  thought,  to  our  inn. 
But  after  waiting  fome  time  we  inquired  again, 
and  learned  he  had  turned  afide,  to  another 
houfe  in  the  town.  I went  thither  and  afked, 
“ Is  Mr.  Fuftick  here  ?”  After  fome  paufe  one 
faid  Yes  ; and  fhewed  me  into  the  parlour. 
When  he  came  down  he  faid,  “ O fir,  will  you  be 
fo  good  as  to  go  with  me  to  the  doHor’s/’  I an- 
fwered,  “ Sir,  I came  for  that  purpofe.”  “ Are 
you  ready,  fir  ? ” I anfwered,  Yes.  “ Sir,  I am 
not  quite  ready.  In  a little  time,  fir.  In  a quar- 
ter of  an  hour.  I will  wait  upon  you.  I will 
come  to  William  Chenhall’s.”  In  about  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour  he  came,  and  finding  there 
was  no  remedy,  he  called  for  his  horfe,  and  put 
forward  towards  Dr.  Borlafe’s  houfe.  But  he 
was  in  no  hafle  ; fo  that  we  were  an  hour  and  a 
quarter  riding  three  or  four  meafured  miles.  As 
N 2 foon 


[ 252  ] 

foon  as  we  came  into  the  yard,  he  afked  a fef- 
vant,  is  the  doflor  at  home?  Upon  whofe  an- 
swering, “ No,  fir,  he  is  gone  to  church  he 
prefently  Said,  “ Well,  Hr,  I have  executed  my 
commiffion.  I have  done,  fir,  I have  no  more 
to  fay.  ’’ 

About  noon  Mr,  Shepherd  and  I reached  St. 
Ives  : alter  a few  hours  reft,  we  rode  to  Gwe- 
nap.  binding  the  houfe  would  not  contain  one 
fourth  of  the  people,  I flood  before  the  door.  I 
was  reading  my  text,  when  a man  came,  raging 
as  ifjufl  broke  out  of  the  tombs  : and  riding  into 
the  thickeft  of  the  people,  Seized  three  or  four, 
one  after  another,  none  lifting  up  a hand  againft 
him.  A Second  (gentleman,  fo  called)  foon  came 
after,  if  poflible  more  furious  than  he  ; and  or- 
dered his  men  to  Seize  on  fome  others,  Mr.  Shep- 
herd in  particular.  Mod  of  the  people  however 
flood  ftill  as  they  were  before,  and  began  Sing- 
ing anhvmn.  Upon  this  Mr.  B.  loll  all  patience, 
and  cried  out  with  all  his  might,  “ feize  him, 
feize  him.  I fay,  feize  the  preacher  for  his  Ma- 
jefty’s  Service.”  But  no  one  ftirring,  he  rode  up 
and  ftruck  Several  of  his  attendants,  curfmg  them 
bitterly  for  not  doing  as  they  were  bid.  Perceiv- 
ing Hill,  that  they  would  not  move,  he  leaped  off 
his  horfe,  Swore  he  would  do  it  himfelf,  and 
caivht  hold  of  my  caffock,  crving  “ I take  you 
to  Serve  his  Majetly.’’  A Servant  taking  his  horfe, 
he  took  me  by  the  arm,  and  we  walked  arm  in 
arm  for  about  three  quarters  of  a mile.  He  en- 
tertained 


[ 293  ] 

tertained  me  all  the  time,  with  the  “ wickednefs 
of  the  fellows  belonging  to  the  fociety.”  When 
he  was  taking  breath,  I faid,  “ Sir,  be  they  what 
they  will,  I apprehend  it  will  not  juftify  yea , in 
fe’izingmein  this  manner,  and  violently  carry- 
ing me  away,  as  you  faid,  to  ferve  his  Majelty.” 
He  replied,  “ I feize  you!  And  violently  carry 
you  away  ! No,  fir,  no.  Nothing  like  it.  I alk- 
ed  you  to  go  with  me  to  my  houfe.  And  you 
faid,  you  was  willing.  And  if  fo,  you  are  wel- 
come. And  if  not,  you  are  welcome  to  go  where 
you  pleafe.”  I anfwered,  “ Sir,  I know  not  if 
it  would  be  fafe,  for  me  to  go  back  through  this 
rabble.”  “ Sir,  faid  he,  I will  go  with  you  my- 
felf.”  He  then  called  for  his  horfe,  and  another 
for  me,  and  rode  back  with  me  to  the  place  from 
whence  he  took  me. 

Thurf.  4.  I rode  to  Falmouth.  About  three 
m the  afternoon  I went  to  fee  a gentlewoman 
who  had  been  long  indifpofed.  Almoft  asfoon 
as  I was  fet  down,  the  houfe  was  befet  on  all  fides 
by  an  innumerable  multitude  of  people.  A 
louder  or  more  confuTed  noife,  could  hardly  be 
at  the  taking  of  a city  by  {form.  At  firft  Mrs. 
B.  and  her  daughter  endeavoured  to  quiet  them. 
But  it  was  labour  loll.  They  might  as  well  have 
attempted  to  Hill  the  raging  of  the  fea.  They 
were  foonglad  to  Ihift  for  themfelves,  and  leave 
K.  E.  and  me  to  do  as  well  as  we  could.  The 
rabble  roared  with  all  their  throats,  “ Bring  out 
the  Canorum ! Where  is  the  Canorum  ?”  (an 
N 3 unmeaning 


C 294  ] 

unmeaning  word  which  the  Cornifh  generally  ufe 
tnflead  of  Methodic.)  No  anfwer  being  given, 
they  quickly  forced  open  the  outer  door,  and 
filled  the  pafTage.  Only  a wainfcot-partition  was 
between  us,  which  was  not  likely  to  ftand  long. 
I immediately  took  down  a large  looking-glafs 
which  hung  againft;  it,  fuppofing  the  whole  fide 
would  fall  in  at  once.  When  they  began  their 
work  with  abundance  of  bitter  imprecations, 
poor  Kitty  was  utterly  aftonifhed,  and  cried  out, 
“ O Sir,  what  mud  we  do  ?”  I faid,  “ We 
mull  pray.”  Indeed  at  that  time,  to  afl  appear- 
ance, our  lives  were  not  worth  an  hour’s  pur- 
chafe.  Sheafked,  “But,  fir,  is  it  not  better  for 
you  to  hide  yourfelf?  To  get  into  the  clofet  ?” 
I anfwered  “ No.  It  is  bed  for  me  to  Hand  jud 
where  I am.”  Among  thofe  without,  were  the 
crews  of  fome  privateers,  which  were  lately 
come  into  the  harbour.  Some  of  thefe,  be- 
ing angry  at  the  flownefs  of  the  red,  thrufl  them 
away,  and  coming  up  altogether,  fet  their 
Ihoulders  to  the  inner  door,  and  crycd  out, 
“ Avail,  lads,  Avafl  !”  away  went  all  the  hinges 
at  once,  and  the  door  fell  back  into  the  room. 
I ftepod  forward  at  once  into  the  midfl  of  them 
and  faid,  “ Here  I am.  Which  of  you  has  any 
thing  to  fay  to  vie?  To  which  of  you  have  I 
done  any  wrong  ? To  you  ? Or  you  ? Or  you  ?” 
I continued  fpeaking,  till  I came,  bare-headed 
as  I was  (for  I purpofely  left  my  hat,  that  they 
might  all  fee  mv  face)  into  the  middle  of  the 

flreet, 


[ *95  ] 

ftreet,  and  then  raifing  my  voice,  faid,  “ Neigh- 
bours, countrymen  ! Do  you  defire  to  hear  me 
fpeak !”  They  cried  vehemently,  “ Yes,  yes. 
He  Jhall  fpeak.  He  fhall.  No  body  {hall  hinder 
him.”  But  having  nothing  to  {land  on,  and  no 
advantage  of  ground,  I could  be  heard  by  few 
only.  However  I fpoke  without  intermiffion, 
and  as  far  as  the  found  reached,  the  people  were 
Hill;  till  one  or  two  of  their  captains  turned 
about  and  fwore,  “ Not  a man  Ihould  touch 
him.”  Mr.  Thomas  a clergyman  then  came  up, 
and  alked,  “ Are  you  not  afhamed  to  ufe  a 
{Iranger  thus  ?”  He  was  foon  feconded  by  two 
or  three  gentlemen  of  the  town,  and  one  of  the 
aldermen  : with  whom  I walked  down  the  town 
fpeaking  all  the  time,  till  I came  to  Mrs.  Mad- 
dern’s  houfe.  The  gentlemen  propofed  fending 
for  ray  horfe  to  the  door,  and  defined  me  to  fiep 
in  and  reft  the  mean  time.  But  on  fecond 
thoughts,  they  judged  it  not  advifeable  to  let  me 
go  out  among  the  people  again.  So  they  chofe 
to  fend  my  horfe  before  me  to  Penryn,  and  to 
fend  me  thither  by  water;  the  fea  running 
clofe  by  the  back-door  of  the  houle  in  which  we 
were. 

* I never  faw  before,  no,  not  at  Walfal  itfelf, 
the  hand  of  God  fo  plainly  fhewn  as  here. 
1 here  I had  many  companions,  who  were  will- 
ing to  die  with  me:  here  not  a friend,  but  one 
fimple  girl;  who  likewnfe  wras  hurried  away  from 
.N  4 me 


[ =96  ] 

me  in  an  inftant,  asfoon  as  ever  fhe  came  out  ol 
Mrs.  B.’s  door.  There  I received  home  blows, 
loft  part  of  my  cloaths,  and  was  covered  over 
with  dirt.  Here,  although  the  hands  of  perhaps 
fome  hundreds  of  people  were  lifted  up  to  ftrike 
or  throw,  yet  they  were  one  and  all  flopped  in 
the  mid-way,  fo  that  not  a man  touched  me  with 
one  of  his  fingers.  Neither  was  any  thing  thrown 
from  firft  to  laft  : fo  that  I had  not  even  a fpeck 
of  dirt  on  my  cloaths.  Who  can  deny,  that  God 
heareth  the  prayer?  Or  that  he  hath  all  power 
in  heaven  and  earth  ? 

* I took  boat  at  about  half  an  hour  paft  five. 
Many  of  the  mob  waited  at  the  end  of  the  town, 
who  feeing  me  efcaped  out  of  their  hands,  could 
only  revenge  themfelves  with  their  tongues.  But 
a few  of  the  fierceft  ran  along  the  fhore,  to  re- 
ceive me  at  my  landing.  I walked  up  the  ftcep, 
narrow  paffage  from  the  fea,  at  the  top  of  which 
the  foremofl-man  flood.  I looked  him  in  the 
face  and  faid,  “ I wilh  you  a good  night.”  He 
fpake  not,  nor  moved  hand  or  foot  till  I was  on 
horfe-back.  Then  he  faid,  “ I wifh  you  was  in 
hell and  turned  back  to  his  companions. 

* As  foon  as  I came  within  fight  of  Tolcarn 
lin  Wendron  parilhj  where  I was  to  preach  in 
the  evening,  I was  met  by  many,  running  as  it 
were  for  their  lives,  and  begging  me  to  go  no 
fuither.  I alked,  “ Why  not?”  They  faid. 

The  church-wardens  and  confiables,  and  all 
the  heads  of  the  parifh,  are  waiting  for  you  at 

the 


[ 29  7 ] 

the  top  of  the  hill,  and  are  refolved  to  have.  you. 
They  have  a fpecial  warrant  from  the  juftices 
met  at  Helfton,  who  will  ftay  there  till  you  are 
brought.”  I rode  direttly  up  the  hill,  and  ob« 
fervino-  four  or  five  horfe-men  well-dreffed, 

O 

went  ftrait  to  them  and  faid,  “ Gentlemen,  has 
any  of  you  any  thing  to  fay  to  me  ? I am  John 
Wefley.”  One  of  them  appeared  extremely  an- 
gry at  this,  that  I fhould  “prefume  to  fay,  I 
was  Mr.  John  Wefley.”  And  I know  not  how  1 
might  have  fared,  for  advancing  fo  bold  an  affer- 
tion,  but  that  Mr.  Collins,  the  minifter  of  Red- 
ruth (accidentally,  as  he  faid)  came  by.  Upon  his 
accoftir.g  me,  and  faying,  He  knew  me  at  Ox- 
ford ; my  firff  antagonist  was  filent,  and  a difpute 
of  another  kind  began,  “ Whether  this  preach- 
ing had  done  any  good  ?”  I appealed  to  matter 
of  faff.  He  allowed  (after  many  words)  “ People 
are  the  better  for  the  prefent:”  but  added,  “ To 
be  fure,  by  and  by,  they  will  be  as  bad,  if  not 
worfe  than  ever.” 

When  he  rode  .away,  one  of  the  gentlemen 
faid,  “ Sir,  I would  fpeak  with  you  a little.  Let 
us  ride  to  the  gate.”  We  did  fo,  and  he  faid, 
“ Sir,  1 will  tell  you  the  ground  of  this.  All  the 
gentlemen  of  thefe  parts  fay,  That  you  have 
been  a long  time  in  France  and  Spain,  and  are 
now  fent  hither  by  the  Prentender ; and  that 
thefe  focieties  are  to  join  him.”  Nay  Purely.  All 
the  gentlemen  in  thefe  partSj  will  not  lie  again  fl 
their  own  confcience  ! 


1 rode. 


[ 298  ] 

1 rode  hence  to  a friend’s  houfe  fome  miles 
off,  and  found  the  fleep  of  a labouring  man  is 
fweet.  I was  informed  there  were  many  here 
alfo,  who  had  an  earned  defire  to  hear  “ this 

preaching.’’  But  they  did  not  dare.  Sir 

V n having  folemnly  declared,  nay,  and  that 

in  the  face  of  the  whole  congregation,  as  they 
were  coming  out  of  church,  “ If  any  man  of  this 

parifh  dares  hear  thefe  fellows,  he  (hall  not 

come  to  my  Chriftmas-feaft.” 

Frid.  5.  As  we  were  going  to  Trezilla,  (in 
Gulval  parifh)  feveral  met  us  in  a great  conifer- 
nation,  and  told  us,  the  conflables  and  church- 
wardens were  come  and  waited  for  us.  I went 
flrait  on,  and  found  a ferious  congregation,  but 
neither  churchwarden  nor  conflable : nor  any 
creature  to  moleft  us,  either  at  the  preaching,  or 
at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety.  After  fo  many 
{forms,  we  now  enjoyed  the  calm,  and  praifed 
God  from  the  ground  of  the  heart. 

Satur.  16.  I rode  with  Mr.  Shepherd  to  Gwe- 
nap.  Here  alfo  we  found  the  people  in  the  ut- 
mofl  confternation.  Word  was  brought,  that  a 
great  company  of  tinners,  made  drunk  on  pur- 
pofe.  were  coming  to  do  terrible  things.  I la- 
boured much  to  compofe  their  minds.  But  fear 
had  no  ears  : fo  that  abundance  of  people  went 
away.  I preached  to  the  reft,  on.  Love  your  ene- 
mies. The  event  (hewed,  this  alfo  was  a falfe 
alarm,  an  artifice  of  the  devil,  to  hinder  men 
from  hearing  the  word  of  God. 


Sund. 


C 299  ] 

Sund,  7.  I preached  at  five  to  a quiet  congre- 
gation, about  eight  at  Stithians.  Between  fix 
and  feven  in  the  evening  we  came  to  Tolcarn. 
Hearing  the  mob  was  rifing  again,  I began  preach- 
ing immediately.  I had  not  fpoke  a quarter  of 
an  hour,  before  they  came  in  view.  One  Mr. 
Trounce  rode  up  fird,  and  began  fpeaking  to  me, 
wherein  he  was  roughly  interrupted  by  his  com- 
panions. Yet  as  I docd  on  a high  wall,  and 
kept  my  eyes  upon  them,  many  were  foftened 
and  grew  calmer  and  calmer : which  fome  of 
their  champions  obferving,  went  round  and  fud- 
denly  pufhed  me  down.  Ilightonmvfeet,  without 
any  hurt,  and  finding  myfelfclofe  to  the  warmed 
of  the  horfemen,  I took  hold  of  his  hand  and 
held  it  faft,  while  I expofiuiated  the  cafe.  As 
for  being  convinced,  he  was  quite  above  it. 
However  both  he  and  his  fellows  grew  much 
milder,  and  we  parted  very  civilly. 

Mond.  8.  I preached  at  five,  on.  Watch  and 
pray , to  a quiet  and  earned  congregation.  We 
then  rode  on  to  St.  Ives,  the  mod  dill  and  ho- 
nourable pod  (fo  are  the  times  changed)  which 
we  have  in  Cornwall. 

Tuef.  9.  I had  jud  begun  preaching  at  St.Jud, 
when  Mr.  E.  came  once  more,  took  me  by  the 
hand,  and  faid,“  I mud  go  with  him.”  To  avoid 
making  a tumult,  I went.  He  faid,  “ I had  pro- 
mifed  lad  week,  not  to  come  again  to  St.  Jud 
for  a month.”  i abfolutely  denied  the  having 
N 6 made 


[ 3°°  ] 

made  any  fuel)  promife.  After  about  half  an  liour, 
he  handed  me  back  to  my  inn. 

Wednef.  10.  In  the  evening  I began  to  ex- 
pound (at  Trevonan  in  Morva)  Ho!  everyone 
that  thirjleth,  come  ye  to  the  waters.  In  lefs  than 
a quarter  of  an  hour,  the  conftable,  and  his  com- 
panions came,  and  read  the  proclamation  againft 
riots.  When  he  had  done,  I told  him,  “ We 
will  do-  as  you  require  ; we  will  difperfe  within 
an  hour,”  and  went  on  with  my  fermon.  After 
preaching  I had  defigned  to  meet  the  focietv 
alone.  But  many  others  alfo  followed  wuh  fuch 
earnellnefs,  that  I could  not  turn  them  back.  So 
I exhorted  them  all,  To  love  their  enemies,  as 
Chrift  hath  loved  us.  The}'- felt  what  was  fpoken. 
Cries  and  tears  were  on  every  fide  : and  all  could 
bear  witnefs, 

“ Even  now  the  Lord  doth  pour 
Thebleffing  from  above; 

A kindlv,  gracious  Ihower 
Of  heart-reviving  love.” 

Thurf.  11.  I found  fome  life  even  at  Zunnor 
and  on  Frid.  12.  at  Gulval.  Satur.  13.  I met  the 
ftewards  of  all  the  focieties  at  St.  Ives,  and 
preached  in  the  evening  at  Gwenap  without  in- 
terruption. Sund.  14.  At  eight  I preached  at 
Stithians,  and  earneftly  exhorted  the  fociety, 
'*  Not  to  think  of  pleafing  men,  but  to  count  all 

things 


[ 301  1 

things  lofs,  fo  that  they  might  win  Chrift.'’  Be- 
fore I had  done,  the  confiables  and  church- 
wardens came,  and  prefied  one  of  the  hearers  for 
a foldier. 

Mond.  15.  Mr.  Bonnet  met  us  at  Trewint, 
and  told  us,  Francis  Walker  had  been  driven 
thence,  and  had  fince  been  an  inftrument  of  great 
good,  wherever  he  had  been.  Indeed  I never 
remember  fo  great  an  awakening  in  Cornwall, 
wrought  in  fo  fhort  a time  ; among  young  and 
old,  rich  and  poor,  from  Trewint  quite  to  the 
fea-fide. 

I preached  between  four  and  five,  and  then 
went  on  to  Laneaft  church,  where  I read  prayers, 
and  preached,  on,  There  is  no  condemnation  to 
them  that  are  in  Chrijl  Jefus.  O how  pleafant  a 
thing  is  even  outward  peace  ! What  would  nota 
man  give  for  it,  but  a good  confcience  ! 

Tuef.  16.  I read  prayers  at  five,  and  preached 
in Trefmere  church.  About  three  I preached  in 
St.  Mary  Week  church,  on,  Repent  ye,  and  be- 
lieve the  gofpel.  Between  fix  and  feven  I began 
reading  prayers  at  Tamerton,  where  I preached 
on  John  iv.  24.  Wednef.  17.  I rode  to  Mr, 
Thompfon’s  near  Barnfiaple,  and  the  next  even- 
ing to  Minehead.  Early  on  Frid.  19.  we  went  on 
board,  and  in  about  four  hours  croffed  the  chan- 
nel and  reached  Fonmon. 

We  were  here,  as  it  were,  in  a new  world,  in 
peace,  and  honour,  and  abundance.  How  foon 
fhould  I melt  away  in  this  funfhine ! But  the 

goodnefs 


[ 3°2  } 

goodnefs  of  God  fuffered  it  not.  In  the  morning 
I rode  to  Cardiff,  where  alfo  there  had  been 
much  dilfurbance;  but  now  all  was  calm.  I 
preached  there  in  the  evening.  God  gave  a blef- 
fing  with  his  word,  and  we  greatly  rejoiced  be- 
fore him. 

Sund.  21.  I preached  at  Cardiff  at  five,  and  at 
Wenvo  morning  and  afternoon.  In  the  evening; 

I preached  again  at  Cardiff  in  the  Caflle-yard, 
on,  Great  is  the  myjlery  oj godhnrjs.  I never  faw 
fitch  a congregation  in  Wales  before.  And  all 
behaved  as  men  fearing  God. 

Mond.  22.  I preached  at  half  an  hour  after 
four,  and  then  fet  out  with  Mr.  Hodges,  refior 
of  Wenvo,  for  Garth.  Mr.  Philips  guided  us, 
till  he  thought  all  the  difficulty  was  over.  But  it 
proved  otherwife  ; for  almoff  as  foon  as  he  left 
us,  the  night  coming  on,  we  got  out  of  the  road, 
and  might  very  probably  have  wandered  till  dav- 
light,  had  not  a gentleman  met  us,  and  rode  out 
of  his  way,  to  fnew  us  to  Mr.  Gwynne’s  houfe. 

Tuef.  23.  I preached  about  noon  at  Maef- 
mennys,  to  a larger  congregation,  than  the  church 
could  contain.  About  three  I preached  at  Builth. 
Five  clergymen  of  us  were  prefent,  two  juffices 
of  peace,  and  well  nigh  all  the  grown  people  in 
the  town.  I had  not  known  fo  folemn  a feafon 
before,  ftnee  we  came  into  Wales. 

Wednef.  24.  I preached  at  Builth  again,  and 
afterwards  at  Mafemennys.  Thence  Mr.  Philips 

rode 


C 3°3  ] 

rode  with  us  toLanddu  church,  where  I preached 
at  fix  to  a fmall  ferious  congregation.  And  the 
next  evening, Thurf.  25,  I came  back  fafe,  blefTed 
be  God,  to  Brifloh 

I found  both  my  fold  and  body  much  refrefhed 
in  this  peacefid  place.  Thurf.  Aug.  1.  and  the 
following  days,  we  had  our  fecond  conference, 
with  as  many  of  our  brethren  that  labour  in  the 
word  as  could  be  prefent. 

During  my  flay  here,  I took  the  opportunity 
of  vifiting  the  little  focieties  round  Briflol,  in 
Wiltfhire  and  Somerfetfhire. 

Mond,  12.  I was  defirei  to  read  over  my  old 
friend  Anthony  Purvor’s  effav,  toward  a new 
tranflation  of  the  bible.  But  how  was  I difap- 
pointed  ! I found  the  text  flat  and  dead  ; much 
altered  indeed,  but  commonly  for  the  worfe  : and 
the  notes  merely  critical,  dull  and  dry,,  without- 
any  unftion,  or  fpirit,  or  Hfe. 

I had  now  leifure  to  look  over  the  letters  I had 
received  this  fummer : fome  extrafts  of  which 
are  here  fubjoined, 

London,  May  25,  1745, 

Rev.  SIR , 

u "A/TARY  COOK,  who  had  been  ill  for 
above  fix  months,  grew  much  worfe  a 
week  or  two  ago.  She  had  been  long  remark- 
ably ferious,  and  greatly  defirous  of  knowing  her 
intereft  in  Chriflt  but  then  her  defires  were 

much 


[ 3°4  3 


much  increafed,  and  fhe  had  no  reit  in 
her  fpirit,  but  cried  unto  him  day  and 
night.  On  Monday  lafl,  file  mourned  more 
than  ever,  and  would  not  be  comforted. 
Then  fhe  lay  hill  a while,  and  on  a fudden 
broke  out, 

“ Praife  God  from  whom  pure  bleffings  flow," 

Her  mother  afked  her  the  caufe  of  this,  fhe  faid, 

“ O mother,  I am  happy,  I am  happy.  I {hall 
foon  go  to  heaven  and  many  more  words  fhe 
fpoke  to  the  fame  effe£l.  I called  upon  her  a 
few'  hours  after,  and  found. her  hill  in  a fettled 
peace.  She  told  me,  “ I am  affured  of  God’s 
love  to  my  foul.  I am  not  afraid  to  die.  I know 
the  Lord  will  take  me  to  himfelf ; Lord  haften 
the  time.  I long  to  be  with  thee.’’  On  Tuefday 
and  Wednefday  file  fpoke  little,  being  exceeding 
weak,  but  continued  inftant  in  prayer.  On  Wed- 
nefday about  noon  hie  defired  her  mother  to  get 
her  up  into  the  chair,  which  fhe  did.  A little 
before  three,  her  mother  holding  her  in  her  arms, 
fhe  defired  her  to  let  her  go.  Then  placing  her-- 
felf  upright  in  the  chair,  with  her  hands  laid  in 
her  lap,  and  a calm  majefty  in  her  countenance, 
fhe,  faid  “ Lord,  receive  my  foul,  and  ex- 
pired.” 


Briftal, 


I 3 °5  ] 


Briftol,  June  6,  174 5. 

“ T H ave  delivered  another  of  my  charge  to 
-*•  the  Lord.  On  Saturday  night  Molly 
Thomas  was  taken  home.  She  was  always  con- 
11a nt  in  the  ufe  of  all  the  means,  and  behaved 
well,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  After  fhe  was 
taken  ill,  fhe  was  diftrefled  indeed,  between  the 
pain  of  her  body,  and  the  anguifh  of  her  foul. 
But.  where  is  all  pain  gone,  when  Jefus  comes  ? 
When  he  rnanifefls  himfelf  to  the  heart  ? In  that 
hour  flie  cried  out,  “ Chrift  is  mine  ! I know  my 
fins  are  forgiven  me.”  Then  fhe  fung  praife  to 
him  that  loved  her,  and  bought  her  with  his  own 
blood.  The  fear  of  death  was  gone,  and  fhe 
longed  to  leave  her  father,  her  mother,  and  all  her 
friends.  She  faid,  “ I am  almoft  at  the  top  of 
the  ladder.  Now  I fee  the  towers  before 
me,  and  a large  company  coming  up  behind 
me.  I fhall  foon  go.  ’Tis  but  for  Chrift  to 
fpeak  the  work,  and  I am  gone.  I only  wait 
for  that  word,  “ Rife  up,  my  love,  and  come 
away.” 

When  they  thought  her  firength  was  gone,  fhe 
broke  out  again, 

“ Chrift  hath  the  foundation  laid. 

And  Chrift  fhall  bnild  me  up  : 

Surely  I fhall  foon  be  made 
Partaker  of  my  hope. 


Author 


E 3°6  ] 

Author  of  my  faith  he  is  ; 

He  its  fmifher  fhall  be  : 

Perfect  love  (hall  feal  me  his 
1 o all  eternity.” 

So  hie  fell  afieep.  O Lord,  my  God,  glory  be 
to  thee  for  all  things.  I feel  fuch  defires  in  my 
foul  after  God,  that  my  ftrengih  goes  away.  I 
feel  there  is  not  a moment’s  time  to  fpare  : and 
yet  how  many  do  I loofe  ? Lord  Jefus,  give  me 
to  be  more  and  more  diligent  in  all  things.  It 
is  no  matter  to  me,  how  I was  an  hour  ago..  Is 
my  foul  now  waiting  upon  God  ? O that  I may 
in  all  things,  and  through  all  things,  fee  nothing 
but  Chrift.  O that  when  the  comes,  he  may 
fmd  me  watching !” 

S.  C. 


Dear  SIR, 


June  2 7,  1 745. 


“ T Sat  up  with  Ifaac  Kilby  three  nights,  and 
-*•  being  greatly  comforted  by  many  of  his 
exprefiions,  I believed  it  would  not  be  lofmg 
time  to  fet  a few  of  them  down. 

“ On  Wednef.  June  18.  When  I came 
into  the  lioufe,  he  w’as  fuppofed  to  be  near  his 
end.  His  body  was  in  great  pain,  and  juft  gafp- 
ing  for  breath,  But  his  mind  was  in  perfect 
peace. 


He 


C 3°7  ] 

“ He  had  little  ftrength  to  fpeak.  But  when 
he  did  (which  was  now  and  then  on  a hidden,  as 
if  immediately  fupported  for  that  purpofe)  his 
words  were  ftrangely  powerful,  juft  as  if  they 
came  from  one,  who  was  now  before  the  throne 
of  glory. 

“ When  he  had  juft  drank  fomethi ng,  I faid, 
“ All  may  drink  of  the  water  of  life  freely.’1  He 
lifted  up  his  hands  in  great  love  and  faid,  “ Yea, 
all,  all:  all  the  world.” 

“ After  long  filence,  he  fuddenly  afked  me. 
How  I felt  myfelf  ? I replied,  “ I find  great  con- 
folation  from  the  Lord.”  He  faid,  “ How 
ftrange  it  is,  that  fuch  a rebel  as  I,  fhould  bring 
glory  {to  God?” 

“ When  dofing  his  mind  would  rove,  but 
even  then  his  difcourfe  confifted  chiefly,  of 
ftrong  exhortation  to  fome  of  his  acquaintance, 
to  repent  and  perfevere  in  the  ways  of  God. 

“ On  Friday  I called  and  found  him  in  the 
famefpirit,  full  of  pain,  yet  full  of  joy  unfpeak- 
abie.  I could  not  forbear  fitting  up  with  him  a^ 
gain.  All  his  words  were  full  of  divine  wifrlom, 
cxprc-fTing  a deep  fenfe  of  the  prefence  and  mer- 
cy of  God,  and  of  his  own  unworthinefs. 

“ Mention  being  made  concerning  his  burial ; 
(in  the  beginning  ofhis  ficknefs,  he  had  defired, 
that  Mr.  Wefley  might  bury  him,  and  preach  a 
fermon  from,  that  text,  Renumber  thy  Creator  in 
the  days  of  thy  youth.)  He  faid  “ Now  I do  not 
think  of  fuch  things.  Bury  me  as  you  will.  Yet 

I fhould 


I fhould  be  glad  to  have  a fermon  preached.  But 
juft  as  Mr.  Wefley  pleafes.” 

“ He  faid  to  me,  “ O go  on,  and  you  wilt 
rejoice  as  I do,  in  the  like  condition.”  He  pray- 
ed, that  he  might  die  before  the  morning  : but 
added,  Not  as  I will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

“ Thus  he  continued  till  Wedn.  June  25. 
when  I fat  up  with. him  again.  Being  now  much 
weaker,  he  roved  more  than  ever.  Yet  when  I 
alked  “ Ifaac,  How  do  you  find  your  foul  ?” 
He  anfwered,  “ I rejoice  in  God  my  Saviour.  I 
I am  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter.’’  AnJ 
about  half  an  hour  after  twelve,  he  went  to  fing 
praifeto  God  and  the  Lamb  for  ever.” 

Some  circumftances  related  in  the  following 
letter,  w’hich  fome  may  account  odd  accidents, 
I think  are  fuch  inftances  of  the  providence  of 
God,  as  ought  to  be  had  in  remembrance. 


June  28,  1745.  Briftof. 


Rev.  SIR, 

N May  31,  I went  to  Sykehoufe,  and  ex- 


horted  the  people  at  all  opportunities. 
On  Mond.  June  3,  about  three  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  W.  Holmes  came  to  me  and  faid,  “ bro- 
ther Mofs,  I have  been  juft  awaked  by  a dream, 
that  the  conftables  and  churchwardens  came,  to 
prefs  you  for  a foldien  I would  have  you  get  up 
and  go  to  Norton.  I did  fo,  and  he  walked 
with  me  about  half  a mile.  At  his  return,  the 
conftables  and  churchwardens  were  come.  They 


alked 


[ 3<>9  ] 

-aiked  him,  Where  is  the  preacher  ? He  faidv 
*'•  I havejull  carried  him  away.  But  have  you 
.a  warrant  to  prefs  fuch  men  as  thefe  ?”  They  an- 
fwered,  “ Yes,  we  have,  and  will  prefs  him,  if 
we  fee  him  here  again.”  He  replied,  “ You 
{hall  fee  him  again  in  that  day,  when  the  Lord 
fhalljudge  the  world  in  raght-eoufnefs.” 

“ Hecame  and  told  me,  andadvifed  me,  to  go 
thence.  So  I went  to  Epworth  on  Tuefday.  On 
Wednefday  night  I had  fpoke  about  a quarter  of 
an  hour,  when  the  churchwardens  and  conftables 
•tame.  They  bad  me  Hop.  I told  them,  “ I will, 
when  I have  delivered  my  melfajie.”  They  cri- 
ed, “ Bring  him  away,  bring  him  away.”  I 
thought,  “ But  they  cannot,  unlefs  the  Lord 
will.”  The  conflable  coming mp  to  me,  I look- 
ed him  in  the  face,  and  he  fhrunk  back,  and 
faid,  “ I cannot  take  him.”  His  companions 
fwore,  “ But  we  will  fetch  him  foon.”  As  they 
were  prefhng  on,  many  of  the  people  got  be- 
tween, and  kept  fo  clofe  together,  that  for  near 
half  an  hour  they  could  get  no  further.  Glory  be 
to  God,  my  foul  all  the  time  was  rather  in  hea- 
ven than  on  earth. 

“ They  went  out  to  confult  what  to  do,  and 
foon  returned  with  great  ftaves,  wherewith  they 
beat  down  feveral  that  hood  in  their  way  ; but 
{fill  they  could  not  make  their  pallage  through, 
till  Mr.  Maw  came,  (the  chief  gentleman 
in  the  town)  and  fent  fof  me  into  the  houfe. 
There  we  prayed  and  fung  hymns,  till  about 

eleven 


[ 3io  J 


eleven  o'clock.  He  then  advifcd  me  to  go  out  of  I; 
the  town.  So  many  of  our  brethren  went  with  1 
me  to  Robert  Taylor's  houfe  at  Burnham  ; < 
where  we  continued  praying  and  praifmg  God,  • 
till  about  four  o’clock  in  the  morning.  I then 
Tode  hack  to  Norton,  and  Irom  thence  by  Leeds, 
Birftal,  and  Barley-hall  to  Sheffield. 

“ On  Wedn.  Evening.  June  12.  As  I was 
privately  converting  with  a few  of  the  people,  the 
-conflables  and  churchwardens  came  up,  and 
draged  me  down  flairs.  But  quickly,  one  of 
them  liftened  a little  and  cried  out,  “ They  are 
•at  prayers.  I will  have  nothing  to  do  in  this 
matter.”  The  reft  began  to  look  at  one  another, 
took  their  hands  off  me,  and  went  their  way. 
d went  from  Sheffield  through  Derbvfliiie,  Che- 
fit  ire,  and  Stafford  fliire,  to  Birmingham  ; and  fo  '■ 
on  by  Evefham  and  Stanley.  In  rnoft  places  I 
was  threatened:  but  out  of  all  dangers,  the  Lord  i 

delivered  me, I remain 

Your  child  and  fervant  in  Chrift, 
Richard  Mofs. 

Lond.  July  to,  1745,  \ 

Dear  SIR, 

" r I ^ H E faith  you  mention,  I have  e.xperi- 

enced  much  of,  though  not  continually.  > 
But  am  groaning  for  all  the  glorious  privileges  of 
the  children  of  God.  And  I really  believe  the 
greater  part  of  us  are  earneftly  feeking,  and 
patiently  afpiring  after  this  full  redemption. 

“ Heavenly 


2 


L 311  ] 

“ Heavenly  meetings  we  have  hadonWed- 
nefday  evenings,  fmce  we  have  opened  our 
minds  freely  to-each  other.  No  one  fpeaks  but 
in  the  fear  of  God,  fo  that  what  is  fpoke  by  any 
is  felt  by  all  the  reft.  And  if  any  one  begins  to 
tell  an  unprofitable  tale,  there  is  a flop  put  to  it 
without  offence.  So  that  fmce  I have  belonged 
to  the  fociety  I never  found  fo  great  love  and 
-unity  in  this  meeting.  Indeed  fo  awful  it  fome- 
^times  is,  that  1 feem  to  be  little  lefs,  than  a fpirit 
calling  down  my  crown  before  the  throne. 

“ I find  it  neceflary  to  follow  after  perfec- 
tion in  every  thing, in  ever)-  place,  and  in  every 
hour.  There  are  many  thoughts -I  think,  many 
-words  I fpeak,  and  many  of  my  works,  I find 
are  now  perfecl  in  their  kind,  L e . thought, 
■fpoke,  and  done  with  a fingle  eye  to  the  glory 
of  God.  I cannot  think  I ought  to  look  for  per- 
fection in  the  future,  and  fo  fit  fl  ill  and  be  idle  at 
prefent.  1 received  the  grace  of  God,  which  I 
now  nmft  occupy,  or  fuller  lofs. 

“ Certainly  God  is  pleafed  or  difpleafcu  with 
all  my  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  which  is 
Tnanifefted  to  me  by  the  convidions  of  his  holy 
Spirit.  And  the  more  I obey  God,  the  more 
holy  I am  ; and  the  more  holy  I am,  the  more  I 
pleafe  God.  Or,  as  one  expreffes  it,  “ The 
more  I deny  myfelf  in  thought,  word  and  deed  : 
of  pride,  lull,  anger,  felf-will,  worldly-minded- 
nefs,  the  more  the  good  fpirit  will  dwell  and. 
abide  in  me  ; for  where  fin  is,  it  drives  the  good 

fpirit 


[ 3t2  ] 

fpirit  away.”  When  my  confidence  is  voiii  of 
offence,  1 enjoy  a continual  fenfe  of  my  juftifi-’- 
cation,  from  which  flows  unfpeakable  peace, 
love  and  happinefs. 

“ I find  more  and  more,  I mull  deny  myfelf; 
Whatever  others  may  do,  I find  no  peace  (nor 
do  I defire  it)  while  my  thoughts,  words  or  ac- 
tions are  agreeable  to  nature. 

41  This  is  my  misfortune.  Nature  has  flill  a 
part  in  me,  and  I often  yield  to  evil  thoughts, 
trifling  words,  or  foolifh  addons ; wor  ks  done, 
not  in  faith,  which  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
bring  me  into  mifery  and  trouble.  Yet  I have  a 
good  hope  I fhall  go  on,  from  ftrength  to  ftrength, 
from  conquering  to  conquer. 

“ All  is  peaceable  in  this  great  dty.  How 
long  it  will  remain  fo,  is  known  only  to  him  that 
knows  all  things.  My  foul  feems  preparing  for 
a ftorm,  and  the  Spirit  of  Truth  is  continually 
teaching  me,  to  diveft  mvfelf  of  all  things,  that 
being  in  readinefs,  that  hour  may  not  come  up- 
on me  unawares.  I have  nothing  outwardly, 
glory  be  to  God,  that  keeps  me  confined  to  the 
earth.  And  I hope  what  is. flill  in  me  contrary 
to  the  purity  of  him,  before  whom  1 muft  lhort- 
ly  ftand  without  a covering,  will  be  taken  away, 
before  I depart  hence,  to  be  no  more  feen.” 

Tuef.  Aug.  13.  I rode  to  Cnencefter,  and 
preached  there  in  the  evening.  Wedn.  tq.  at 
Oxford,  Thurf.  15,  at  Wycombe,  and  on  Frid. 
16,  at  London. 


1 


Sat. 


L 8*3  ] 

to  the  glory  of  God.”  “ What,  faid  he,  Do  you 
■ deny  all  diverfions  ?”  I faid,  “ All  which  do  not 
agree  with  that  rule.”  He  hurried  away,  and 
faid  as  he  went,  “ 1 wifh  you  do  not  fall  into 
fome  error.” 

“The  following  week,  grievous  threatnings 
were  given  out,  of  what  we  fhould  fuffer  if  we 
met  again.  On  Frid.  9.  a gentleman  fent  for 
me,  and  told  me,  He  would  hire  a mob,  to  pull 
the  houfe  down  ; for  we  were  the  molt  dillurb- 
ing  dogs  in  the  nation.”  I faid,  “ Sir,  if  there 
be  a difturbance  now,  it  will  lie  at  your  door.’’ 
A few  of  us  intend  to  meet  on  Sunday  after  fer- 
.aion,  to  incourage  one  another  in  ferving  God. 
You  fay,  if  we  do,  you  will  have  the  houfe 
pulled  down.  And  then  you  will  fay,  “ We 
have  made  the  difturbance !”  He  faid,  “ He 
would  fend  for  me  another  time,  and  have  an 
hour’s  difcourfe  with  me.” 

“ On  Sunday,  the  man  at  whofe  houfe  we  were 
-to  meet,  was  warned  by  his  landlady,  not  to  re- 
ceive us  ; for  if  he  did,  the  houfe  would  furely 
-be  pulled  down.  However  he  did  receive  us. 
A great  many  people  coming  about  the  houfe, 
he  told  them,  If  they  had  a mind  they  might 
come  in  : fo  they  came  in,  as  many  as  the  houfe 
would  hold.  I told  them  all,  the  defign  of  our 
meeting.  Then  we  prayed,  and  I read  the  firft 
chapter  of  St.  James,  and  fpoke  a little  on  thofe 
"words,  If  any  man  lack  zvifdom , let  him  ajk  of 
■God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraid - 
O 2 elk 


C 3H  ] 

tlh  not,  And  two  more  of  our  brethren  teftified, 
by  their  own  experience,  that  he  is  a God  of 
truth.  They  flood  as  dumb  men,  till  we  had 
done,  nor  did  one  afterward  open  his  mouth 
againfl  us. 

“ From  this  time  we  have  been  threatened 
more  and  more,  efpecially  by  the  gentry,  who 
fay  they  will  fend  us  all  for  foldiers.  Neverthe- 
lefs  on  Sunday  18.  we  had  a quiet  and  comforta- 
ble meeting.  We  confklered  the  third  chapter 
of  the  firll  epiftle  of  St.  Peter,  which  was  the 
evening  1 effort  for  the  day.  We  were  thankful 
for  the  record  that  is  there  left  ns,  of  the  treat- 
ment we  are  to  meet  with.  And  we  are  all  much 
humbled,  that  we  are  counted  worthy  to  fuffer 
fhame  for  the  fake  of  Chrifl. 

“ I have  been  ill  this  fortnight,  having  got  a 
great  cold,  but  am  obliged  to  keep  it  to  mvfelf 
as  much  as  I can : becaufe  a perfon  here  cannot 
have  the  very  form  of  godlinefs,  but  if  he  is  Tick, 
that  is  the  caufe  of  it.  I feem  not  to  defire  life 
or  death,  but  that  the  will  of  God  may  be 
done.’" 

Frid.6.  Many  of  our  friends  were  grieved  at 
the  advertifement  which  James  Hutton  had  juft 
publifhed,  by  order  of  Count  Zinzendorf,  de- 
claring, that  he  and  his  people  had  no  connection 
with  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wefley.  But  I be- 
lieved, that  declaration  would  do  us  no  more 
2 harm, 


[ 3*5  ] 


harm,  than  the  prophecy  which  the  Count 
fubjoined  to  it,  That  we  ffiould  “ foon  run  our. 
heads  againfl:  the  wall.”  We  will  not,  if  we  can 
help  it. 

Sund.  8;  In  the  evening,  I defined  the  fociety 
to  flay,  that  we  might  commend  each  other  to 
God,  as-  not  knowing  how  he  might  fee  good  to 
difpofe  of  us,  before  we  faw  each  other’s  face 
again. 

Mond.  9.  I left  London,  and  the  next  morn- 
ing called  on  Dr.  Doddridge  at  Northampton.  It 
was  about  the  hour  when  he  was  accuftomed  to 
expound  a portion  of  fcripture  to  the  young  gen- 
tlemen under  his  care.  He  defil  ed  me  to  take 
his  place.  It  may  be  the  feed  was  not  altogether 
fown  in  vain. 

In  the  evening,  the  church  at  Mark  field  was 
full,  while  I explained,  7 he  Jcripture  hath  con- 
cluded all  under  Jin.  Wednef.  1 1 . 1 preached  at 
Sheffield.  I had  defigned  to  go  round  by.Ep- 
worth  : but  hearing  of  more  and  more  commo- 
tions in  the  north,  I judged  it  bed,  to  go  ftrait  on 
to  Newcaftle. 

Thurf.  12.  I came  to  Leeds,  preached  at  five, 
and  at  eight  met  the  fociety  :•  after  which  the 
mob  pelted  us  with  dirt  and  hones,  great  part 
of  the  way  home.  The  congregation  was  much 
larger  next  evening.  And  fo  was  the  mob  at  our 
return,  and  likewife  in  higher  fpirits,  being  ready 
to  knock  out  all  our  brains,  for  joy  that  the 
Duke  of  Tufcany  was  Emperor.  * What  a 
O 3 melancholy 


{ 3l6  ] 


melancholy  confideralion  is  this  ? That  the  bulk 
of  the  Englifh  nation,  will  not  fuff'er  God  to  give 
them  the  bleffings  he  would becaufe  they 
would  turn  them  into  curfes.  He  cannot,  for 
inftance,  give  them  fuccefs  againft  their  ene- 
mies ; for  they  would  tear  their  own  country- 
men in  pieces.  He  cannot  truft  them  with  vic- 
tory, Jeaft  they  fhould  thank  him  by  murthering, 
thofe  that  are  quiet  in  the  land. 

On  Saturday  and  Sunday  I preached  at  Arm- 
ley,  Birftal  and  Leeds,  and  on  Mond.  16.  rode  to 
Ofmotherly.  Tuef.  17.  I faw  the  poor  remains 
of  the  old  chappel  on  the  brow  of  the  hill ; as 
well  as  thofe  of  the  Carthufian  monaftry  (called 
mount  Grace)  which  lay  at  the  foot  of  it.  The 
walls  of  the  church,  of  the  cloifler,  and  fome  of 
the  cells,  are  tolerably  intire.  And  one  may  flill 
difcern  the  partitions  between  the  little  gardens, 
one  of  which  belonged  to  every  cell.  Wha- 
knowsbut  fome  of  the  peer,  fuperflitious  monks, 
who  once  ferved  God  here  according  to  the 
light  they  had,  may  meet  us  by  and  by,  in  that 
houfe  of  God,  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
the  heavens  ? 

Wednef.  18.  About  five  we  came  to  New- 
caflle,  in  an  acceptable  time.  We  found  the  ge- 
nerality of  the  inhabitants,  intheutmofl  confter- 
nation  ; news  being  juft  arrived,  that  the  morn- 
ing before,  at  two  o’clock,  the  pretender  had 
entered  Edinburgh.  A great  concourfe  of  peo- 
ple were  with  us  in  the  evening,  to  whom  I ex- 
pounded. 


[ 3 *7  ] 

pounded  the  third  chapter  of  Jonah : infilling 
particularly  on  that  verfe,  Who  can  tell,  if  God 
will  return , and  repent , and  turn  away  from  his 
fierce  anger , that  we  perifi  not  ? 

Thurf.  19.  The  mayor,  (Mr.  Ridley)  fum- 
moned  all  the  houfliolders  of  the  town,  to  meet 
him  at  the  town-hall : and  defired  as  many  of 
them  as  were  willing,  to  fet  their  hands  to  a pa- 
per, importing,  that  they  would,  at  the  hazard  of 
their  goods,  and  lives,  defend  the  town  againfl 
the  common  enemy.  Fear  and  darknefs  were 
now  on  every  fide  ; but  not  on  thofe  who  had 
feen  the  light  of  God’s  countenance.  We  re- 
joiced together  in  the  evening  with  folemn  joy, 
while  God  applied  thofe  words  to  many  hearts, 
Fear  not  ye:  for  I know  that  ye  Jeek  fefus  which 
was  crucfed. 

Frid.  20.  The  mayor  ordered  the  townfmento 
be  under  arms,  and  to  mount  guard  in  their 
turns,  over  and  above  the  guard  of  foldiers,  a few 
companies  of  whom  had  been  drawn  into  the 
town  on  the  full  alarm.  Now  alfo  Pilgrim- 
ftreet-gate  was  ordered  to  be  walled  up.  Many 
began  to  be  much  concerned  for  us.  becaufe  our 
houfe,  flood  without  the  walls.  Nav,  but  the 
Lord  is  a wall  of  fire  unto  all  that  trufl  in 
him. 

I had  defired  all  our  brethren,  tojoin  with  us 
this  day,  in  feektng  God  by  faffing  and  prayer. 
About  one  we  met  and  poured  out  our  fouls  be- 
O 4.  ore 


[ 3‘*  1 

fore  him.  And  we  believed  he  would  fend  an  an- 
fwer  of  peace. 

Satur.  21.  The  fame  day  the  aftion  was,  came 
the  news  of  General  Cope’s  defeat.  Orders  were 
now  given  for  the  doubling  of  the  guard,  and 
for  walling  up  Pand'on,  and  Sallv-port-gates.  In 
the  afternoon  I wrote  the  following  letter: 

To  the  worfhipful,  the  mayor  of  N’ewcaftle. 

SIR, 

MY  not  waiting  upon  you  at  the  town-hall, 
was  not  owing  to  any  want  of  refpeft.  I 
reverence  you  for  your  office  fake:  and  much 
more  for  your  zeal  in  the  execution  of  it.  I 
would  to  God  every  magiftrate  in  the  land,  would 
copy  after  fuch  an  example!  Much  lefs  was  it 
owing  to  any  difaffeffion  to  his  majefty  King 
George.  But  I Ttnew  not  how  far  it  might  be 
either  neceflary  or  proper  for  me  to  appear  ort 
fuch  an  occafion.  I have  no  fortune  at  Newcas- 
tle— I have  only  the  bread  I ear,  and  the  ufe  of 
a little  room  for  a few  weeks  in  the  vear. 

All  I can  do  for  his  majefty,  whom  I honour 
and  love,  I think  not  lefs  than  I did  my  own  fa- 
ther, is  this;  I cry  unto  God  day  by  day,  in 
public  and  in  private,  to  put  all  his  enemies  to 
confufion.  And  I exhort  all  that  hear  me,  to  do 
the  fame,  and  in  their  feveral  ftations  to  exert 

themfelves 


[ 3 l9  1 

themfelves  as  loyal  fubjefts,  who  fo  long  as  they 
fear  God,  cannot  but  honour  the  king. 

Permit  me,  Sir,  to  add  a few  words  more,  out 
of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart.  I am  perfuaded  you 
fear  God,  and  have  a deep  fenfe,  that  his  king- 
dom ruleth  over  all.  Unto  whom  then  (I  may 
afk  you ) fhould  we  flee  for  fuccour,  but  unto 
him  whom  by  our  fins  we  have  juilly  dif- 
pleafed  ? O,  Sir,  is  it  not  poflible  to  give  any 
check  to  thefe  overflowings  of  ungodlinefs  ? To 
the  open,  flagrant  wickednefs,  the  drunkennefs 
and  profanenefs,  which  fo  abound,  even  in  our 
flreets  ? I juft  take  leave  to  fuggeft  this.  May 
the  God  whom  you  ferve,  direft  you  in 
this,  and  all  things ! This  is  tlie  daily  prayer 
of,  Sir, 

Your  obedient  fervant,  for  Chrift’s  fake, 

J-  w. 

Sund.  22.  The  walls  were  mounted  with  can- 
non, and  all  things  prepared  for  fuftaining  an 
aflault.  Mean  time  our  poor  neighbours  on  ei- 
ther hand,  were  bufy  in  removing  their  goods. 
And  moft  of  the  beft  houfes  in  our  ftreet  were 
left  without  either  furniture  or  inhabitants. 
Thofe  within  the  walls  were  almoft  equally  bufy 
in  carrying  away  their  money  and  goods : and 
more  and  more  of  the  gentry  every  hour,  rode 
fouthward  as  faft  as  they  could.  At  eight  I 
preached  at  Gatefhead,  in  a broad  part  of  the 
ftreet,  near  the  popilh-chappel,  On  the  wiftlonr 
0(5  of 


C 320  ] 

of  God  in  governing  the  world  ! How  do  alf 
things  tend  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel  ! 

I never  faw  before  fo  well-behaved  a congre- 
gation in  any  church  at  Newcaftle,  as  was  that 
at  St.  Andrews  this  morning.  The  place  ap- 
peared as  indeed  the  houfe  of  God.  And  the 
fermon  Mr.  Ellifon  preached  was  drong  and 
weighty,  which  he  could  fcarce  conclude  for 
tears. 

* All  this  week  the  alarms  from  the  north 
continued,  and  the  dorm  feemed  nearer  every 
day.  Many  wondered  we  would  day  without  the 
walls.  Others  told  us,  We  mud  remove  quickly. 
For  if  the  cannon  began  to  play  from  the  top  of 
the  gates,  they  would  beat  all  the  houfe  about 
our  ears.  This  made  me  look  how  the  cannons 
on  the  gates  were  planted.  And  I could  not  but 
adore  the  providence  of  God.  For  it  was  obvi- 
ous, l.  They  were  all  planted  in  fuch  a manner, 
that  no  fhot  could  touch  our  houfe.  2.  The 
cannon  on  Newgate  fo  fecured  us  on  one  dde, 
and  thofe  upon  Pilgrim- dreet-gate  on  the- other, 
that  none  could  come  near  our  houfe  either 
wav,  without  being  torn  in  pieces. 

On  Friday  and  Saturday,  many  medengers  of 
lies  terrified  the  poor  people  of  the  town,  as  if 
the  rebels  were  juft  coming  to  fwallow  them  up. 
Upon  this  the  guards  were  increafed,  and  abun- 
dance of  country  gentlemen  came  in,  with  their 
fervants,  horfes  and  arms.  Among  thofe  who 
came  from  the  north,  was  one  whom  the  mayor 

ordered. 


[ 321  ] 

ordered  to  be  apprehended,  on  fufpicion  of  his 
bein^  a fpy.  As  foon  as  he  was  left  alone,  he  cut 
bis  own  throat ; but  a furgeon  coming  quickly, 
fewed  up  the  wound.  So  that  he  lived  to  difco- 
ver  thofe  defigns  of  the  rebels,  which  were 
thereby  effeftually  prevented. 

Sund.  29.  Advice  came,  that  they  were  in 
full  march  fouthward,  fo  that  it  was  fuppofed 
they  would  reach  Newcaftle  by  Monday  even- 
ing. At  eight  I called  on  a multitude  of  finnersin 
Gatefhead,  to  feek  the  Lord  while  he  might  be 
found.  Mr.  Ellifon  preached  another  earned: 
fermon,  and  all  the  people  feemed  to  bend  be- 
fore the  Lord.  In  the  afternoon  I expounded 
part  of  the  leffon  for  the  day,  Jacob  wreftling 
with  the  angel.  The  congregation  was  fo  moved, 
that  I began  again  and  again,  and  knew  not  how 
to  conclude.  And  we  cried  mightily  to  God,  to 
fend  his  majefty  King  George  help  from  his 
holy  place,  and  to  fpare  a fmful  land  yet  a little 
longer,  if  haply  they  might  kn,ow  the  day  of  their 
vifitation. 

On  Monday  and  Tuefday  I vifited  fome  of 
the  focieties  in  the  country,  and  on  WedneL 
Oft.  2.  returned  to  Newcaftle ; where  they 
were  juft  informed,  that  the  rebels  had  left 
Edinburgh  on  Monday,  and  were  fwiftlv  march- 
ing toward  them.  But  it  appeared  foon,  that  this 
alfo  was  a falfe  alarm  : it  being  only  a party 
which  had  moved  fouthward  ; the  main  body 
O 6 ftill 


[ 322  ] 

ftill  remaining  in  their  camp,  a mile  or  two  from 
Edinburgh. 

On  Thurfday.and  Friday  I vifited  the  reft  of 
the  country  focieties.  On  Saturday  a party  of 
the  rebels  (about  a thoufand  men)  came  within 
feventeen  miles  of  Newcaftle.  This  occafioned  a 
frefh  alarm  in  the  town  : and  orders  were  given 
by  the  General,  that  the  foldiers  fhould  march 
againft  them  on  Monday  morning.  But  tbefe 
orders  were  countermanded. 

Mr.  Nixon  (the  gentleman  who  had  fomc 
days  fince,  upon  being  apprehended,  cut  his  own 
throat)  being  ftill  unable  to  fpeak,  wrote  as  well 
as  he  could,  “ That  the  deftgn  of  the  prince  (as 
they  called  him)  was  to  feize  on  Tinmouth 
caftle,  which  he  knew  was  well  provided  both 
with  cannon  and  ammunition  ; and  thence  to 
march  to  the  hill  on  the  eaft  fide  of  Newcaftle, 
which  intirely  commands  the  town."  And  if  this 
had  been  done,  lie  would  have  carried  his  point, 
and  gained  the  town  without  a blow.  The 
mayor  immediately  fentto  Tinmouth  caftle,  and 
lodged  the  cannon  and  ammunition  in  a fafer 
place. 

Tuefdav  8.  I wrote  to  General  Hulk,  as 
follows  : 

“ A furly  man  came  to  me  this  evening,  as 
he  faid  from  you.  He  would  not  deign  to  come 
up  ftairs  to  me,  nor  fo  much  as  iuto  the  houfe : 

kut 


[ 323  ] 

but  flood  in  the  yard  till  I came,  and  then  ob- 
liged me  to  go  with  him  into  the  flreet  r where 
he  faid,  “ You  mull  pull  down  the  battlements 
of  your>  houfe,  or  to-mopr-ow-  the  General  will 
pull  them  down  for  you.” 

Sir,  to  me  this  is  nothing.  But  I humbly  con- 
ceive, it  would  not  be  proper  for  this  man,  who- 
ever he  is,  to  behave  in  fuch  a manner  to  any 
other  of.  his  majefly’s  fubjedls,  at  fo  critical  a 
time- as' this. 

I am  ready,  if  it  may  be  for  his  majefly’s  fer- 
vice,  to  pull  not  only  the  battlements,  but  the 
houfe  down  : or  .to  give  up  any  part  of  it,  or 
the  whole,  into  your  excellency's  hands.!’ 

Wednef.  9.-  It  being  fuppofed  that  the  danger 
was  over  for  the  prefent,  I preached  at  four  in 
Gatefhead  (at  John  Lyddel’s)  on,  Stand  JaJl  in 
the faith,  quit  you  like  -men,  be  firon.fr:  and  then 
taking  horfe  with  Mr.  Shepherd,  in  the  evening 
reached  Sand-hutton. 

Thurf;  10.  We  dined  at  Ferry  bridge,  where 
we  were  conducted  to-General  Wentworth,  who 
did  us  the  honour  to  read  over  all  the  letters  we 
had  about-  us.  We  layr  at  Doncafler,  nothing 
pleafed  with  the  drunken,  curfing,  fwearing  fob 
diers,  who  furrounded  us  on  every  fide.  Can 
thefe  wretches  fucceed  in  any  thing  they  under- 
take ? I fear  not,  if  there  be  a God  that  judgeth 
the  earth  ?- 

F-rid. 


[ 324  1 

Frid.  11.  I rode  to  Ep worth,  and  preached  in 
the  evening  on  the  third  of  Jonah.  I read  to- 
day part  of  the  meditations  of  Marcus  Antonins. 
What  a drange  emperor  ! And  what  a drange 
Heathen  ! Giving  thanks  to  God  for  all  the  good 
things  he  enjoyed  ! In  particular  for  his  good  in - 
jpiration,  and  for  twice  revealing  to  him  in  dreams 
things  whereby  he  was  cured  of  (otherwife)  in- 
curable didempers.-  I make  no  doubt,  but  this 
is  one  of  thofe  many , who  Jhall  come  from  the 
eajl  and  the  weft,  and  fit  down  with  Abraham , 
Ifaac  and  Jacob,  while  the  children  of  the  king- 
dom, nominal  Chridians,  are  fiut  out. 

Sun.  13.  I had  the  fatisfa£fion  ofhearingMr. 
Romley  preach  an  earned,  affeftionate  fermon,. 
exhorting  all  men,  to  prevent  the  judgments  of 
God,  by  fincere,  inward,,  univerfal  repentance. 
It  rained  both  before  and  afterj  but  not  while  I 
preached  at  the  crofs  in  the  afternoon.  In  the 
evening  I drongly  exhorted  the  fociety,  to  fear 
God  and  honour  the  king. 

Mond.  14.  I rode  to  Sheffield.  We  were 
much  at  a lofs  in  the  evening,  what  to  do  with 
the  congregation.  They  Hood  above  flairs,  and 
below,  and  in  the  yard  ; but  dill  there  was  not 
room.  Tuef.  14.  I wrote  A word  in  feafon,  or 
Advice  to  an  Engli/hman.  The  next  morning  1 
preached  at  Barley- hall,  and  then  rode  on  for 
Leeds.  I preached  there  at  five,  and  the  next 
morning  and  evening,  without  any  noife  or  in- 
terruption. Frid.  18.  At  one  I preached  at 

Oulton* 


[ a25  ] 

Oulton.  The  little  company  there  do  indeed 
love  as  brethren.  I divided  the  refidue  of  my 
time  between  Birftal  and  Leeds  ; and  on  Mond. 
21.  took  my  leave  of  them  for  a fhort  feafon, 
and  rode  to  Mr.  Adams's  at  Ofmotherley. 

Tuef.  22.  I came  to  Newcaftle  in  the  evening 
juft  as  Mr.  Trembath  was  giving  out  the  hymn  : 
and  as  foon  as  it  was  ended,  began  preaching, 
without  feeling  any  want  of  ftrength. 

Wedn.  23.  I found  all  things  calm  and  quiet ; 
the  confternation  of  the  people  was  over.  But 
the  ferioufnefs  which  it  had  occafioned  in  many, 
continued  and  increafed. 

Sat.  26. 1 fent  Alderman  Ridley  the  following 
letter. 

S I R, 

r~|'"'HE  fear  of  God,  the  love  of  my  country, 
and  the  regard  I have  for  his  Majelty  King 
George,  con  drain  me  to  write  a few  plain  words 
to  one,  who  is  no  ftranger  to  thefe  principles  of 
aftion. 

My  foul  has  been  pained  day  by  day,  even  in 
walking  the  flreets  of  Newcaftle,  at  the  fenfolefs, 
lhamelefs  wickednefs,  the  ignorant  profanenefs 
of  the  poor  men,  to  whom  our  lives  are  in- 
truded. The  continual  curling  and  fwearing, 
the  wanton  blafphemy  of  the  foldiers  in  general,, 
mull  needs  be  a torture  to  the  fober  ear,  whether 
of  a Chriftian  or  an  honeft  infidel.  Can  any  that 
either  fear  God  or  love  their  neighbour,  hear 

thi* 


t 3*  ] 


this  without  concern  ? Efpecially  if  they  confider 
the  intereft  of  our  country,  as  well  as  of  thefe 
unhappy  men  themfelves  ? For  can  it  be  ex- 
pected, that  God  fhould  be  on  their  fide  who 
are  daily  affronting  him  to  his  face  ? And  if 
God  be  not  on  their  fide,  how  little  will  either 
their  number,  or  courage,  or  ffrength  avail. 

Is  there  no  man  that  careth  for  thefe  fouls  ? 
Doubtlefs  there  are  fome  who  ought  fo  to  do. 
But  many  of  thefe,  if  1 am  rightly  informed, 
receive  large  pay,  and  do  juft  nothing. 

I wrould  to  God  it  were  in  my  power,  in  any 
degree,  to  fupply  their  lack  of  fervice.  I am 
ready  to  da, what  in  me  lies  ; to  call  thefe  poor 
finnet's  to  repentance,  once  or  twice  a day  (while 
I remain  in  thefe  parts)  at  any  hour,  or  at  any 
place.  And  I defire  no  pay  at  all  for  doing  this : 
unleis  what  my  Lord  (hall  give  at  his  appear- 
ing. 

If  it  be  objefted  (from  our  heathenifb  poet) 
“ This  confcience  will  make  cotvards  of  us  all 
I anfwer,  Let  us  judge  by  matter  of  fact.  Let 
either  friends  or  enemies  fpeak.  Did  thofe  who 
feared  God  behave  as  cowards  at  Fontenoi  ? Did 
J.  H.  the  dragoon  betray  any  cowardice,  before 
or  after  his  hcrfe  funk  under  him  ? Or  did  \\  . 
C.  when  he  received  the  firft  ball  in  his  left,  and 
the  fee  on  d in  his  right  arm?  Or  John  Evans, 
when  the  cannon-ball  took  off  both  his  legs  ? 
Did  he  not  call  all  about  him  as  long  as  he  could 
fpeak,  to  praife  and  fear  God,  and  honour  the 

king  3 


[ 327  ] 

king?  As  one  who  feared  nothing,  bat  left  his 
laft  breath  fhould  be  fpent  in  vain. 

If  it  were  objeffed,  That  I fhould  only  fill 
their  heads  with  peculiar  whims  and  notions  ! 
That  might  eafily  be  known.  Only  let  the  of- 
ficers hear  with  their  own  ears  : and  they  may 
judge,  whether  I do  not  preach  the  plain  prin- 
ciples of  manly,  rational  religion. 

Having  myfelf  no  knowledge  of  the  general, 
I took  the  liberty  to  make  this  offer  to  you.  I 
have  no  intereft  herein  : but  I fhould  rejoice  to 
ferve,  as  I am  able,  my  king  and  country.  Ifit 
be  judged,  that  this  will  be  of  no  real  fervice, 
let  the  propofal  die,  and  be  forgotten.  But  I 
beg  you,  fir,  to  believe,  that  I have  the  fame 
glorious  caufe,  for  which  you  have  fhewn  fo  be- 
coming a zeal,  earneftly  at  heart : and-  that 
therefore  I am,  with  warm  refpeft, 

S I R, 

Your  moil  obedient  fervanir. 

Sund.  27.  I received  a meffage  from  Mr. 
Ridley,  that  he  would  communicate  my  propor 
fal  to  the  general,  and  return  me  his  anfwer  as 
foon  as  poffible. 

Mornl.  28.  I rode  to  Biddick,  wh  ere  the  fir  ft 
are  become  laft;  I preached,  on  Will yt  alfo  go 
away?  Many  appeared  to  be  cut  to  the  heart. 
But  'tis  well  in  thefe  convifilions  alfo,  do  net 
pafs  away  as  the  morning-cloud. 


Titefd. 


C 3”*  ] 

Tuefd.  29.  A young  gentleman  called  upon- 
me,  whofe  father  is  an  eminent  minifter  in  Scot, 
land,  and  was  in  union  with  Mr.  Glafs,  till  Mr.. 
Glafs  renounced  him,  becaufe  they  did  not  agree 
as  to  the  eating  of  blood.  (Although  I wonder 
any  fhould  difagree  about  this,  who  have  read 
the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  A6ls,  and  confidered, 
that  no  Chriftian  in  the  univerfe  did  eat  it,  till 
the  Pope  repealed  the  law  which  had  remained 
ever  fince  Noah’s  flood.)  Are  not  thefe  things 
in  Scotland  alfo  for  our  inftru&ion  ? How  often 
are  we  warned,  not  to  fall  out  bv  the  way  ? O 
that  we  may  never  make  any  thing,  more  or  lefs,. 
the  term  of  union  with  us,  but  the  having  the 
mind  which  was  in  Chrift,  and  the  walking  as  he 
walked ! 

Thurf.  31.  At  ten  I preached  on  the  Town-  j 
moor  at  a fmall  diftance  from  the  Englifh  camp,.  , 
(the  Germans  lying  by  themfelves)  on  Ho  ! 
Every  one  that  thirjleth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  ! 
None  attempted  to  make  the  leaf!  difturbance,  J 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  Yet  I could  not. 
reach  their  hearts.  The  words  of  a fcholar  did 
not  affeft  them,  like  thofe  of  a dragoon  or  a 
grenadier. 

Frid.  Nov.  t.  A little  after  nine,  juft  as  I be- 
gan  to  preach  on  a little  eminence  before  the 
camp,  the  rain  (which  had  continued  all  the 
morning)  flayed,  and  did  not  begin  again  till  I 
had  finifhed.  A lieutenant  endeavoured  to  make 
fome  difturbance.  However^  when  I had  done, 

he 


[ 329  ] 

Be  tried  to  make  amends,  by  getting  up  where  I 
flood,  and  telling  the  foldiers,  all  I had  faid  was 
very  good. 

Sat.  2.  The  rain  was  ftaid  to-day  alfo  from 
nine  to  ten  (it  fell  both  before  and  after)  while  I 
preached,  on  The fcripture  hath  concluded  all  un- 
der fin,  that  the  promife — might  be  given  to  them 
that  believe.  And  I began  to  perceive  fome  fruit 
of  my  labour ; not  only  in  the  number  of  hearers, 
but  in  the  power  of  God,  which  was  more  and. 
more  among  them,  both  to  wound  and  to  heal. 

Sund.  3.  I preached  about  half  hour  after 
eight,  to  a larger  congregation  than  any  before, 
on  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand ; repent  ye  and 
believe  the  gcfpel.  And  were  it  only  for  the  fake 
of  this  hour,  I fhould  not  have  thought  much  of 
flaying  here  longer  than  I intended.  Between 
one  and  two  in  the  afternoon,  I went  to  the 

camp  once  more.  Abundance  of  people  now 
flocked  together,  horfe  and  foot,  rich  and  poor,, 
to  whom  I declared.  There  is  no  difference,  for 
all  have  finned,  and  come  fort  of  the  glory  of  God. 
I obferved  many  Germans  Handing  difconfolate 
at  the  Hurts  of  the  congregation  : to  thefe  I was 
conftrained  (though  I had  difcontinued  it  fo 
long)  to  fpeak  a few  words  in  their  own  lan- 
guage. Immediately  they  gathered  up  clofe  to« 
gether,  and  drank  in  every  word. 

I received  two  or  three  letters  while  I was  at 
Newcaflle,  part  of  which  is  here  fubjoined. 

Dear 


[ 33P  ] 


Dear  SIR, 

OR  more  than  three  years  I walked 


clearly  in  the  light  of  God’s  counte- 
nance. Nothing  could  interrupt  my  peace,  nor 
did  I find  the  lead  rifing  of  any  evil  temper  : fo 
that  I believed,  I' was  in  the  full  fenfeborn  of 
God  ; but  at  lad,  I found,  I had  been  midaken. 
It  is  now  about  a year  fince  I found,  I could' 
not  bear  all  things  : I could  not  hear  to  be  flight- 
ed by  thofe  I loved.  This  occafioned  pride 
and  refentment  to  rife  in  my  heart,  fo  that  I was 
forced  to  own,  “ I have  dill  an  evil  heart.”  Then 
I was  tempted  to  defpair.  But  the  Lord  was  dilf 
nigh  me,  and  lifted  up  my  head.  He  fhewed  me 
my  fin;  yet  did  he  not  hide  himfelf  from  me  : 
but  I could  dill  call  him,  “ My  Lord,  and  my 
God.” 

“ It  does  not  appear  to  me,  that  there  is  any 
need  for  us,  in  this  cafe, to  try  to  pulldown  one 
another.  For  though  a perfon.  does  think  he 
has  attained,  when  he  has  not,  ye  if  he  be  fimple 
and  fincere,  and  defires  to  know  hinjelf,  God 
will  (hew  him,''  in  the  time  and  manner  that 
feerneth  him  bed. 

“ As  tomyfelf,  I often  think  had  I been  faith- 
ful to  the  grace  of  God,  I never  had  needed  to 
know  trouble  more.  For  I believe  he  would 
have  carried  me  on  from  grace  to  grace,  till  he 
had  made  me  meet  for  glory.  But  I know  not, 
if  bis  needful  that  I flrould  fee  more  of  my  heart. 
May  his  will  be  done  ! Only  make  me  laithful 


in 


[ 331  ] 

in  the  fight,  and  then  do  what  feemeth  thee 
good. 

“ l find  a great  difference  between  what  I 
once  felt  in  myfelf,  and  what  I feel  now.  Then 
I felt  nothing  but  love,  and  peace,  and  jov  in 
believing.  Now,  though  I feel  a meafure  of  all 
thefe  heavenly  tempers,  yet  I feel  other  tem- 
pers alfo  : and  if  I do  not  continually  fight  againft 
them,  I am  overcome.  The  devil  tempted  me 
then-;  hut  it  was  as  nothing:  for  he  feemed  to 
have  no  part  in  me.  But  now  I find  an  enemy  in 
my  own  bofoin,  that  is  ready  to  betray  me  every 
moment.  I believe,  did.I  not  yet  expert  a full  de- 
liverance from  fin,  I fhould  grow  faint  and  weary. 
But  the  hope  of  that  gives  me  frefh  courage 
to  50  on.  d or  I cannot  doubt  but  I (hall  be  a liv- 
ing  witnefs  of  it.  O may  the  Loid  hailen  the 
time  ! Dear  fir,  Do  not  fail  to  pray,  that  he 
may  fulfil  that  great  work  in 

Your  daughter  in  Chrift, 

M.  F. 


Dear  S I R, 


Sept.  21,  1745. 


“ T Will  let  you  know,  as  near  as  I can,  how 
the  Lord  hath  dealt  with  me  ever  fince  I 
can  remember.  When  I was  five  or  fix  years 
old,  I had  many  ferious  thoughts  about  -death 
and  judgment.  I wanted  to  be  good,  but  1 knew 
not  how.  I was  often  in  great  trouble  for  fear  I 

fhould 


[ 332  ] 

fhould  die  and  go  to  hell.  If  at  any  time  I told  a 
lie,  I was  like  one  in  hell.  I was  afraid  to  be  one  , 
moment  by  myfelf,  for  I thought  the  devil  would 
come  and  tear  me  in  pieces  ; and  fo  I continued 
till  I was  about  eight  years  old.  Then  I re- 
ceived a meafure  of  the  love  of  God.  I loved 
Jefus  Chrift,  fo  that  I thought  I could  fuffer  any 
thing  for  his  fake.  I could  not  bear  to  be  with 
•other  children,  but  when  I was  from  fchool,  I 
would  go  by  myfelf,  and  pray,  and  read  : I 
prayed  much  for  death,  for  I wanted  to  be  with 
Chrift.  And  I thought  if  I lived  I fhould  fin 
and  offend  God. 

■“  I continued  in  this  temper  till  1 went  to  a 
boarding-fchool.  There  I foon  trifled  away  all  the 
grace  of  God,  and  could  play  as  well  as  the  reft, 
though  not  without  conviftions  ; but  I foon 
ftifled  them.  As  I grew  in  years  I grew  in  fin, 
and  delighted  more  and  more  in  vanity,  till  I 
was  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old.  I had  then  a 
fevere  fit  of  illnefs,  in  which  I made  many  good 
refolutions,  and  when  I recovered.  I began  to  be 
more  flrift  in  outward  duties.  I went  conftant- 
ly  to  church  and  facrament,  but  I had  the  fame 
heart  ftill,  that  could  not  forfake  my  bofom  fins, 
fuch  as  dancing,  going  to  plays,  and  reading  trifl- 
ing books : the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  often  reprov- 
ed me  for  theie  things;  but  I ftifled  it  by  think- 
ing, “ fuch  and  fuch  an  one  does  fo,  and  they 
are  very  good  people.” 

“ When  Mr.  Whitefield  firft  preached,  I 

i went 


[ 333  3 

•went  to  hear  him,  and  I found  great  drawings 
from  God.  But  till  I heard  your  brother  and 
you,  I did  not  know  myfelf.  Then  I found  I 
was  an  unbeliever,  and  that  none  could  help  me 
hut  Chrift.  I cried  unto  him,  and  he  heard  me, 
and  fpoke  thofe  words  with  power  to  my  heart. 
Go  in  peace,  thy Jins  are  forgiven  thee.  I was  in 
great  extafy  of  joy,  and  love ; and  cried  out,  “ I 
ihall  never  fin  any  more.”  This  continued  about 
two  months.  But  having  no  acquaintance  with 
any  perfon  of  experience,  I was  ignorant  of  Sa- 
tan’s devices,  when  he  transformed  himfelf  into 
an  angel  of  light.  He  fuggefted,  “ Chrift  has 
fulfilled  the  law  for  you.  You  are  no  longer  fub- 
je£l  to  ordinances.  You  are  now  to  be  fill  and 
zvait  upon  God.”  So  I did  not  go  to  the  facra- 
ment  for  two  months.  Neither  did  I kneel  down 

to  pray,  or  ufe  any  other  ordinance unlefs  I 

was  moved  to  it.  At  firft  God  ftrove  with  me: 
but  the  devil  told  me,  “ It  was  the  fpirit  ofbond- 
age,  and  I mull  refill  it : for  I was  free  from  the 
law.”  In  a little  time  he  left  off  ftriving,  and 
.1  grew  quite  eafy  and  fatisfied:  but  withal  quite 
dead  and  cold.  I could  now  hear  idle  talking 
without  any  pain  ; nay,  and  my  heart  began  to 
join  with  it.  Then  I awoke,  as  one  out  of  fleep, 
and  looked  for  the  Lord ; but  he  was  departed 
from  me.  Juft  then  the  brethren  at  Fetter- 
lane  began  to  preach  fillnefs.  I cried  out,  this 
do£lrine  is  not  right;  for  by  yielding  to  this,  I 
have  loft  all  my  peace  and  love.”  I was  now 

i» 


t 334  ] 

in  great  diflrefs.  The  devil  told  me,  it  was  im- 
poffible  to  renew  me  again  to  repentance  : fo 
that  I fell  into  utter  defpair,  and  all  my  friends 
believed  me  to  be  quite  diflracfed. 

“ I was  in  this  dark  Hate  for  more  than  a 
•year.  It  was  at  the  facramertt  the  Lord  return- 
ed to  me.  The  love  and  joy  were  the  fame  I 
felt,  when  I received  remiflion  of  fins,  only  much 
greater.  I was  in  a new  world.  My  heart  was 
fo  filled  with  love  to  God  and  to  all  mankind, 
that  I thought  all  old  things  were  paffecl  away, 
and  all  things  in  me  become  new.  lor  near 
lour  jyears  1 felt  no  evil  in  my  heart,  nor  any 
defire  but  in  fubmiflion  to  the  will  of  God. 

“ I Hill  retain  a fenfe  of  the  love  of  God  to 
me,  and  a power  to  love  him  at  all  times.  Other 
defires  ate  often  ready  to  creep  in  ; but  through 
the  Lord  flrengthning  me,  I am  more  than  con- 
queror.  I find  a thirft  in  my  foul,  which  noth- 
ing fhort  of  the  fulnefs  of  God  can  fatisfy.  O 
may  the  Lord  haflen  that  time,  when  my  foul 
ihall  be  filled  with  God  1” 

Leeds,  30.  Sept.  1743. 

Rev.  SIR, 

“ ' | TIE  firft  fight  of  you  at  Wakefield  funk 
mv  proud  fpirits  : and  I believe  had  I 
not  gone  up  Hairs,  to  harden  my  heart  againft 
the  truth,  w'hat  you  faid  would  have  made  a 
deeper  impreffion  upon  me.  I often  afterwards 
thought,  “ Thefe  things  are  true  : but  why  does 

nobody 


[ 335  ] 

nobody  underftand  them,  but  my  hufband  and 
Frank  Scot  ? Then  the  rich  clave  to  me,  and 
advifed  me  to  ufe  my  hufband  ill,  and  fee  if  that 
would  not  drive  him  from  this  way.  And  fome- 
times  I ufed  fair  means.  But  this  was  dangerous : 
for  then  he  could  fpeak  freely  to  me,  and  I 
found  it  dole  upon  me.  But  I took  great  care, 
he  fhould  not  perceive  it,  leaft  he  fhould  follow 
on,  and  make  me  like  himfelf.  Then  I went  to 
the  vicar,  who  faid,  my  hufband  was  mad,  and 
there  were  no  fuch  things  as  he  pretended  to. 
Hereby  my  heart  was  hardened  more  and  more, 
till  I refolved  to  go  away  and  leave  him.  So  I 
told  him,  which  made  him  weep  much,  and 
ftrive  to  fhew  me  the  wickednefs  of  my  refolution. 
However  by  the  advice  of  my  old  friend  the  vi- 
car, I got  over  that  doubt,  took  about  fixty 
pounds  of  my  hufband's  money,  and  fixed  the 
time  of  my  privately  fetting  out  for  London. 
But  God  prevented  me  ; fori  found  myfelf  with 
child  : fo  that  defign  was  at  an  end. 

“ Soon  after,  as  few  in  Wakefield  would  em- 
ploy my  hufband,  he  was  obliged  to  remove  to 
Leeds.  What  I now  feared  was,  that  they  of 
the  fociety  would  come  and  talk  to  me.  But  I 
foon  forced  them  to  flay  away,  I was  fo  {harp 
and  abufive  to  any  that  came.  Yet  my  heart  be- 
gan to  foften,  and  when  I fpoke  things  of  them 
which  I thought  were  falfe,  1 was  afterwards 
checked  in  my  own  mind.  I began  to  like  that 
my  hufband  fhould  overcome  when  talking  to 
Vol.  XXVIII.  P gainfayers. 


L 336  ] 


gainfayers.  I went  more  to  church  and  facra- 
ment : and  the  time  you  was  here  before,  when 
my  hufband  faid,  you  fhould  come  and  fee  me, 
it  pleafed  me  much,  though  I hid  it  from  him, 
and  when  he  faid,  you  were  gone,  it  grieved  me 

fore.  Then  being  uneafy,  I went  to  Mr.  M d. 

He  faid,  You  were  all  wrong.  And  that  if  I went 
to  church  and  facrament,  and  did  as  I would  be 
done  by,  all  would  be  well.  So  my  wound  was 
healed  and  I was  eafy. 

“ On  Sund.  June  22.  about  midnight,  I was 
taken  ill  of  a fever,  but  thought  nothing  of  death 
till  Thurfday,  when  the  dcffor  and  apothecary- 
declared  my  danger,  which  with  my  hufband’s' 
home  fpeeches,  funk  my  fpirits.  And  I pro- 
mifed  God,  how  good  I would  be,  if  he  would 
fpare  me;  but  yet  could  not  abide  the  Metho- 
dills.  On  Friday,  while  my  hufband  was  talking 
with  the  apothecary,  of  the  wickednefs  of  flat- 
tering people,  with  the  hopes  of  life,  till  they 
died  and  dropped  into  hell  : my  mother  brought 
in  the  vicar.  He  afked  the  apothecarv,  How  I 
did  ? Who  faid,  I was  very,  ill ; but  ray  hufband 
made  me  woife,  by  talking  of  my  dying  out  of 

Chrifl,  and  being  damned.  The  v flew 

very  vehemently  at  my  hufband,  and  faid  many 
warm  things.  My  hufband  anfwered,  “ Speak 
agreeably  to  fcripture,  and  the  doftrine  of  our 
church,  or  I will  not  hear  you.’’  “ What,”  faid 
he,  “ are  you  infpired  ?”  “ Are  not  you,  Sir, 
faid  my  hufband  ? To  the  articles  of  the  church. 

Before 


[ 337  ] 

Before  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  infpiration 
of  his  holy  Spirit,  can  no  good  work  be  done.” 
He  made  no  anfwer,  but  left  the  room  in 
hade. 

On  Saturday,  my  mother  brought  the  reve- 
rend Mr.  S.  who  faid,  “ I fuppofe  you  are  one 
of  thofe  perfe£lion-men  ?”  “ Sir,”  faid  my  hul- 
band,  “ Are  not  you  ? Do  you  not  pray,  every 
Sunday,  that  you  may  perfectly  love  God  ?”  He 
was  going  away,  but  my  mother  begged  him  to 
fee  me,  and  afked,  if  there  was  any  fuch  thing  as 
knowing  one’s  fins  forgiven  ? He  faid,  fome 
might ; but  I might  be  faved  without.  My  huf- 
band  faid,  “ Sir,  the  homilies  fpeak  otherwife,” 
and  added  a few  words  from  them.  Mr.  S.  an- 
fwered,  “ You  want  your  head  breaking,”  which 
furprized  me  much.  However  he  went  to 
prayers,  but  in  fuch  a flutter,  he  forgot  I was  a 
woman,  and  prayed  for  a man,  and  then  went 
away. 

“ I was  fometimes  more,  fometimes  lefs  feri- 
ous-,  till  Monday  afternoon,  when  an  old  ac- 
quaintance from  Wakefield  came  to  fee  me,  a 
poor,  drunken,  idle,  talking  man.  When  he  was 
gone,  my  hufband  faid,  He  would  fuller  no  more 
fuch  as  him  to  come  near  me.  I flew  into  a great 
rage,  on  which  he  went  into  another  room,  and 
poured  out  his  foul  before  God  for  me.  The 
Lord  hearkened,  and  heard,  and  fent  his  holy 
Spirit,  who  gave  me  to  think,  “ What  I had. 
been  doing  all  my  life ; and  to  refolve  to  give. 

Pa  up 


[ 338  ] 

up  all  for  Chrift/’  Immediately  I felt  a ftrong 
love  to  God,  and  a ftedfaft  hope,  that  if  I cried 
to  him,  1 fhould  have  the  knowledge  of  falva- 
tion,  by  the  remiftion  of  my  fins.  When  my 
hufoand  came  into  the  room,  I called  him  to  me, 
and  told  him,  how  I was.  He  could  hardly  be- 
lieve  it,  and  to  try  me,  afked,  If  John  Nelfon 
fiiould  come  and  pray  with  me?  I faid,  Yes,  or 
any  of  the  children  of  God.  Then  he  took  cou- 
rage, and  we  wept  on  each  others  neck.  When 
John  Nelfon  came,  he  firengthened  me  much. 
H e came  a fecond  time  between  nine  and  ten. 
After  he  went,  my  hufband  and  filler  Fenton 
prayed  with  me,  till  they  were  quite  fpent:  but 
I thought,  if  they  were,  I muft  not.  So  I looked 
to  God  for  ftrength,  and  he  gave  it,  and  I prayed 
without  ceafing,  till  that  text  came  frefh  into  my 
mind,  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  [inner  that 
repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine jujl  ptr- 
fons,  that  need  no  repentance.  I was  then  I know 
not  how.  I thought  Chrifl  flood  in  the  front, 
and  all  the  angels  behind,  and  on  each  fide  of 
him,  rejoicing  over  me  : but  ftill  I had  not  a 
clear  fight  that  my  fins  were  forgiven.  However 
I now  ventured  to  take  a little  deep.  I flept  from 
two  till  five.  When  I awaked,  I began  to  cry 
out  for  help:  I thought  his  chariots  were  long  a 
coming.  1 continued  in  prayer,  till  my  hufband, 
who  fat  by  me,  perceived  my  prayers  were  fwal- 
lowed  up  in  praife.  Indeed  I was  loft  in  Chrift; 

I knew 


[ 339  ] 

I knew  not  where  I was.  My  burthen  was  quite 
gone,  and  I found  my  nature  quite  changed,  and 
my  affe&ions  carried  away  to  heaven.  Then  I 
broke  out  into  fuch  exprelfions  as  I cannot  utter 
now,  praifing  God  for  what  lie  had  done  for  my 
foul.  My  fever  alfo  was  gone.  As  foon  as  I was 
allured  of  his  love,  I was  healed  both  in  body  and 
foul ; which  I told  the  doflor  and  apothecary  in 
the  morning, who  flood  like  men  in  amaze,  and 
confeft,  they  had  never  feen  fuch  a thing  be- 
fore. A deal  of  people  came  all  that  week : 
on  Wednefday  in  particular  I was  talking  to 
them,  without  any  time  for  breakfaft  or  dinner, 
from  fix  in  the  morning  to  fix  at  night.  Dear 
Sir,  pray  for  me,  that  God  may  keep  me, 
who  am, 

Your  unworthy  filler, 

Jane  Bate, 

Having  now  delivered  my  own  foul,  on 
Mond.  4. 1 left  Newcaftle.  Before  nine  we  met 
feveral  exprefies  fent  to  countermand  the  march 
of  the  army  into  Scotland,  and  to  inform  them, 
that  the  rebels  had  palfed  the  Tweed,  and  were 
marching  fouthward.  Tuefi  5.  In  the  evening 
I came  to  Leeds,  and  found  the  town  full  of  bon- 
fires, and  people  Ihouting,  fireing  of  guns,  curfing 
and  fwearing,  as  the  Englifh  manner  of  keeping 
holy-days  is.  I immediately  fent  word  to  fome 
of  the  magiflrates,  of  what  I had  heard  on  the 
road.  This  ran  through  the  town,  as  it  were,  in 
P 3 an 


[ 34°  ] 

an  inflant.  And  I hope  it  was  a token  for  good: 
the  hurry  in  the  flreets  was  quafhed  at  once  : 
fome  of  the  bonfires  indeed  remained.  But 
fcarce  any  one  was  to  be  feen  about  them,  but  a 
few  children  warming  their  hands. 

Thurf.  7.  I rode  to  Stabley-hall  in  Chefiiire, 
alter  many  interruptions  in  the  way,  by  thofe 
poor  tools  of  watchmen,  who  flood  with  great 
folemnity,  at  the  end  of  almoft  every  village.  I 
preached  there  on  Mark  i,  1^.  and  rode  on  to 
Bradbury-green. 

FriJ.  8.  Underflanding  that  a neighbouring 
gentleman,  Dr.  C.  had  affirmed  to  many,  “ That 
Mr.  Wefley  was  now  with  the  pretender  near 
Edinburgh,”  I wrote  him  a few  lines  : it  may  be 
he  will  have  a little  more  regard  to  truth,  or 
fhame  for  the  time  to  come. 

About  noon  I preached  near  Maxfield  ; in  the 
evening  at  the  Black-houfe.  Satur.  9.  In  the 
afternoon  we  came  to  Penkridge,  and  light  on  a 
poor,  drunken,  curbing,  fwerring  landlord,  who 
feemed  fcarce  to  think,  there  was  either  God  or 
devil.  But  I had  fpoke  very  little,  when  his 
countenance  changed,  and  he  was  fo  full  of  his 
thanks  and  bleffings,  that  I could  hardly  make  an 
end  of  my  fentence.  May  falvation  come  to  this 
houfe  alfo  ! 

It  was  exceeding  dark  w'hen  wre  rode  through 
Billion.  However  we  did  not  flick  faff,  till  we 
came  to  Wednefbury  town-end.  Several  coming 

with 


C 341  ] 

with  candles,  I got  out  of  the  quagmire,  and 
leaving  them  to  difengage  ray  horfe,  walked  to 
Francis  Ward’s,  and  preached,  on.  Fear  not  ye  ; 
for  I know  ye  fee.k  him  that  was  crucified. 

Sund.  10.  I preached  at  five,  and  at  eight  in 
Wednefbury  (about  one  at  Tipton-green)  and  at 
four  in  the  afternoon,  to  well  nigh  the  whole 
town,  high  and  low,  as  at  the  beginning. 

Mond.  xi.  I preached  at  Birmingham;  the 
next  morning  I fet  out,  and  on  Wednef.  13. 
reached  London. 

* Mond.  18.  I fpent  a little  time  with  B. 
Armlted,  weak  in  body,  but  ftrong  in  faith.  She 
had  been  calmly  waiting  for  God,  till  her  hands 
and  feet  grew  cold,  and  Ihe  was  in  all  appear- 
ance at  the  point  of  death.  Then  Satan  returned 
with  all  his  force,  and  covered  her  with  thick 
darknefs.  This  threw  her  into  fuch  a vehement 
wrefiling  with  God,  as  brought  back  her  fever 
and  her  firength : fo  that  in  all  probability,  the 
old  murderer  faved  her  life,  by  his  furious  at. 
tempt  to  deftroy  her  foul. 

Frid.  22.  The  alarm  daily  increafing,  concern- 
ing the  rebels  on  one  hand,  and  the  French  on 
the  other,  we  perceived  the  wifdom  and  good- 
nefs  ol  him,  who  hath  his  way  in  the  whirl- 
wind. The  generality  of  people  were  a little  in- 
clined to  think.  And  many  began  to  own  the 
hand  of  God. 

Mond-  23.  I retired  to  Newington,  in  order 
P ^ to 


C 342  ] 

to  finifh  the  Farther  Appeal:  the  Hate  of  the 
public  affairs  loudly  demanding,  that  whatever 
was  done,  fhould  be  done  quickly. 

Thurf.  28.  I wrote  A IFord  to  a Drunkard . 
Frid.  29.  I fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  Lampe,  who 
had  been  a deift  for  many  years,  till  it  pleafed 
God  by  the  Earnejl  Appeal,  to  bring  him  to  a 
better  mind. 

Mond.  Dec.  2.  The  alarms  Hill  increafed  in 
London,  on  account  of  the  nearer  approach  of 
the  rebels.  But  bow  eafy  are  all  tliefe  things  to 
them  who  can  commit  both  foul  and  bodv  to  a 
merciful  and  faithful  Creator  f 

About  this  time  I received  fome  farther  ac- 
counts from  the  army:  the  fnbllance  of  which 
was  as  follows. 


October  10,  1745. 

* Rev.  SIR , 

“ T Shall  acquaint  you  with  the  Lord’s  dealings 
X with  us,  fince  April  laft.  We  marched 
from  Ghent  to  Alloft  on  the  14th,  where  I met 
with  two  or  three  of  our  brethren  in  the  fields, 
and  we  fung  and  prayed  together,  and  were  com- 
forted. On  the  15th,  I met  a fmall  company 
about  three  miles  from  the  town,  and  the  Lord 
filled  our  hearts  with  love  and  peace.  On  the 
17th,  we  marched  to  the  camp  near  Brulfels.  On 
the  18th,  I met  a fmall  congregation  on  the  fide 

of 


[ 343  ] 


of  a hill,  and  fpoke  from  thofe  words,  Let  us  go 
forth  therefore  to  him  without  the  camp , hearing 
his  reproach.  On  the  28th,  I fpoke  from  thole 
words  of  Ifaiah,  Thus  faith  the  Lord  concerning 
the  houfe  of  Jacob , Jacob  Jhall  not  now  be  ajham 
ed , neither  fiall  his  face  now  wax  pale . On  the 
29th,  we  marched  clofe  to  the  enemy,  and  when 
I faw  them  in  their  camp,  my  bowels  moved  to- 
ward them,  in  love  and  pity  for  their  fouls.  We 
lay  on  our  arms  all  night.  In  the  morning, 
April  30,  the  cannon  began  to  play,  at  half  an 
hour  after  four : and  the  Lord  took  away  all  fear 
from  me,  fo  that  I went  into  the  field  with  joy. 
The  balls  flew  on  either  hand,  and  men  fell  in 
abundance  ; but  nothing  touched  me  till  about 
two  o’clock.  Then  I received  a ball  through 
my  left  arm,  and  rejoiced  fo  much  the  more. 
Soon  after  I received  another  into  my  right, 
which  obliged  me  to  quit  the  field.  But  I 
fcarce  knew,  whether  I was  on  earth  or  in  hea- 
ven. It  was  one  of  the  fweeteft  days  I ever 
enjoyed.” 

Win.  Cle — ts. 

Leare  near  Antwerp, 
061.  21,  1745. 

“ O INCE  I wrote  to  you  laft,  I have  gone 
^ through  great  trials.  It  was  not  the  leaft, 
that  I have  loft  my  dear  brother  Clements  for  a 
P 5 feafon* 


r 344  ] 

feafon,  being  fhot  through  both  the  arms.  To 
try  me  farther,  L Evans  and  Biffiop  were  both 
killed  in  the  battle,  as  was  C.  Greenwood  foon 
after.  Two  more  who  did  fpeak  boldly  in  the 
name  ofj  efus,  are  fallen  into  the  world  again. 
So  I am  left  alone.  But  I know  it  is  for  my  good. 
Seeing  iniquity  fo  much  abound,  and  the  love  of 
many  wax  cold,  adds  wings  to  my  devotion, 
and  my  faith  grows  daily  as  a plant  by  the  water- 
fide. 

“ April  30.  The  Lord  was  pleafed  to  try  our 
little  flock,  and  to  fliow  them  his  mighty  power. 
Some  davs  before,  one  of  them  flandina  at  his 
tent  door,  broke  out  into  raptures  of  joy,  know- 
ing his  departure  was  at  hand,  and  was  fo  filled 
with  the  love  of  God,  that  he  danced  before  his 
comrades.  In  the  battle,  before  he  died,  he 
openly  declared,  “ I am  going  to  reft  from  my 
labours  in  the  bofom  of  Jefus.”  I believe  no- 
thing like  this  was  ever  heard  of  before,  in  the 
midlt  oi  fo  wicked  an  army  as  ours.  Some  were 
crying  out  in  their  wounds,  “ I am  going  to  my 
Beloved,  others,  “ Come  Lord  Jefus,  come 
quickly  and  many  that  were  not  wounded, 
crying  to  their  Lord,  To  take  them  to  himfelf. 
I here  was  fuch  boldnefs  in  the  battle  among  this 
little,  defpifed  flock,  that  it  made  the  officers,  as 
well  as  common  foldiers,  amazed.  And  they  ac- 
knowledge it  to  this  day.  As  to  my  own  parq  I 
flood  the  fire  of  the  enemy  for  above  feven 

hours. 


C 345  ] 

hours.  Then  my  horfe  was  fhot  under  me,  and 
I was  expofed  both  to  the  enemy  and  our  own 
horfe.  But  that  did  not  difcourage  me  at  all  ; 
lor  I knew  the  God  of  Jacob  was  with  me.  I 
had  a long  way  to  go,  the  balls  flying  on  every 
fide;  and  thoufands  lay  bleeding,  groaning,  dy- 
ing, and  dead  on  each  hand.  Surely  I was  as  in 
the  fiery  furnace,  but  it  never  Tinged  one  hair  of 
my  head.  The  hotter  it  grew,  the  more  ftrength 
was  given  me.  I was  full  of  joy  and  love,  as 
much  as  I could  well  bear.  Going  on,  I met  one 
of  our  brethren,  with  a little  diih  in  his  hand, 
feeking  for  water.  He  fmiled,  and  faid,  he  had 
got  a fore  wound  in  his  leg:  I afked,  “Have 
you  gotten  Chrift  in  your  heart?”  He  an- 
fwered,  “ I have,  and  I have  had  him  all  the  ' 
day.  Bleffed  be  God  that  I ever  faw  your  face.” 
Lord,  what  am  I,  that  I fhould  be  counted  wor- 
thy to  fet  my  hand  to  the  gofpel -plough  ? Lord, 
humble  me,  and  lay  me  in  the  duft !” 

J.  H. 

Sund.  7.  I took  my  leave  of  poor  J.  C.  juft- 
embarking  for  Germany.  I admire  the  juftice 
of  God  ! He  who  would  never  long  be  advifed 
by  any  who  treated  him  as  a reafonable  creature, 
is  at  length  fallen  among  thofe,  who  will  make 
him  as  paftive  a tool,  as  ever  moved  upon  wire. 

Wedtief.  18.  Being  the  day  of  the  national 
faft,  we  met  at  four  in  the  morning.  I preached 
P 6 on 


[ 346  ] 


on  Joel  ii.  12,  &c.  At  nine  our  fervice  in  Weft- 
ftreet  began.  At  five  I preached  at  the  Foundery 
again,  on,  The  Lord fitleth  above  the  -water -floods. 
Abundance  of  people  were  at  Weft-ftreet  chap- 
pel,  and  at  the  Foundery  both  morning  and 
evening  : as  alfo  (we  underfiood)  at  every  place 
of  public  worfhip,  throughout  London  and  Weft- 
minfter.  And  fuch  a folemnitv  and  ferioufnefs 
every  where  appeared  as  had  not  been  lately  feen 
in  England. 

* We  had  within  a fhort  time  given  away 
fome  thoufands  of  little  traQs  among  the  com- 
mon people.  And  it  pleafed  God  hereby  to  pro- 
voke others  to  jealoufy.  Infomuch  that  the  lord 
mayor  had  ordered  a large  quantity  of  papers, 
difluading  from  curfing  and  fwearing,  to  be 
printed,  and  diftributed  to  the  train-bands.  And 
this  day,  an  earneft  exhortation  to  ferious  repen- 
tance, was  given  at  every'  church  door  in  or  near 
London,  to  every  perfon  who  came  out,  and  one 
left  at  the  houfe  of  every  houlholder  who  was 
abfent  from  church.  I doubt  not  but  God  gave 
a bleffing  therewith.  And  perhaps  then  the  fen- 
tence  of  defolation  was  recalled. 

* It  was  on  this  very  day,  that  the  Duke  s 
army  was  fo  remarkably  preferved,  in  the  midft 
of  the  ambufeades  at  Clifton-moor.  The  rebels 
fired  many  vollies  upon  the  King’s  troops, 
from  the  hedges  and  walls,  behind  which 
they  lay.  And  yet,  from  firft  to  laft,  only 

ten 


C 347  ] 

ten  or  twelve  men  fell,  the  ihot  flying  over  their 
heads. 

Wednef.  25.  I talked  with  a young  man,  who 
feemed  to  be  under  flrong  conviftions.  But  I 
fear,  only  feemed.  I am  furprized,  that  in  fo 
many  years,  this  is  the  firft  hypocrite  of  the 
kind  I have  met  with  ; the  firft,  who  appeared 
to  have  deliberately  put  on  the  malk  of  religion, 
purely  to  ferve  a fecular  end. 

Frid.  27.  Having  received  a long  letter  from 
Mr.  Hall,  earneftly  preffing  my  brother  and  me 
to  renounce  the  church  of  England  (for  not  com- 
plying with  which  advice  he  foon  renounced  us) 
I wrote  to  him  as  follows. 

* Dear  Brother , 

NOW  you  aft  the  part  of  a friend.  It  has 
been  long  our  defire,  that  you  would  fpeak 
freely.  And  wre  will  do  the  fame.  What  we 
know  not  yet,  may  God  reveal  to  us  ! 

You  think,  firft,  That  we  undertake  to  defend. 
fome  things,  which  are  not  defenfible  by  the 
word  of  God . You  inftance  in  three;  on  each 
of  which  we  will  explain  ourfelves  as  clearly  as 
we  can. 

1.  “ That  the  validity  of  our  minifry  depends 
on  a fuccejfion  fuppofed  to  be  from  the  apoftles, 
and  a commfion  derived  from  the  Pope  of  Rome, 
and  his fuccefors  or  dependents.” 


We 


[ 34?  ] 

We  believe,  it  would  not  be  right  for  us  to 
adminifler , either  baptifm  or  the  Lord’s  fupper, 
unlefs  we  had  a commifflon  fo  to  do  from  thofe 
bifhops,  whom  we  apprehend  to  be  in  a fuccejjion 
from  the  apollles.  And  yet  we  allow,  thefe  bi- 
fhops are  the  fuccelfors  of  thofe,  who  are  depen- 
dent on  the  bifhop  of  Rome. 

But  we  would  be  glad  to  know,  on  what  rea- 
fons  you  believe  this,  to  be  inconfiflent  with  the 
word  of  God  ? 

2.  “ That  there  is  an  outward,  prieflhood,  and 
confequently  an  outward  facrijicc,  ordained  and 
offered  by  the  bifhop  of  Rome,  and  bis  Jucceffors 
or  dependents , in  the  church  of  England,  as  vicars 
and  vicegerents  of  Chrift.” 

We  believe  there  is  and  always  was,  in  every 
Chriftian  church  (whether  dependent  on  the  bi- 
fhop of  Rome  or  not)  an  outward  prieflhood  or- 
dained by  Jefus  Chrift,  and  an  outward  facriflct 
offered  therein,  by  men  authorized  to  a Et,  as 
ambajfadors  of  Chrifl , and  Jtewards  of  the  myfl.e- 
r-ies  oj  God. 

On  what  grounds  do  you  believe,  that  Chrift 
has  abolifhed  the  priejlhood  or facrifce? 

3. “  That  this  papal  heirarchy  and  prelacy  which 
full  continues  in  the  church  of  England,  is  of 
apoflolical  injtitution  ; and  authorized  thereby  ; 
though  not  by  the  written  word." 

We  believe  that  the  threefold  order  of  mini- 
fters  (which  you  feem  to  mean  by  papal  heirarchy 

and 


L 349  3 


and  prelacy)  is  not  only  authorized  by  its  apofo- 
licalinjlitulion , but  alfo  by  the  written  zoord. 

Yet  we  are  willing  to  hear  and  weigh  what- 
ever reafons  induce  you  to  believe  to  the  con- 
trary. 

You  think,  fecondly,  “ That  we  ourfelves 
give  up  fome  things  as  indejenfible,  which  are 
defended  by  the  fame  law  and  authority  that  elta- 
blifhes  the  things  above-mentioned  ; fuch  as  are 
many  of  the  laws,  cufloms  and  praclices  of  the 
eccleflaflical  courts .” 

We  allow,  i.  That  thofe  laws , cufloms  and 
praclices  are  really  indejenfible  : 

2.  That  there  are  a£ls  of  parliament,  in  defence 
of  them  : and  alfo  of  the  threefold  order. 

But  will  you  (hew  us,  how  it  follows,  either 
l.That  thofe  things  and  thefe  Hand  or  fall  toge- 
ther ? Or,  2.  That  we  cannot  Jincerely  plead  for 
the  one,  though  we  give  up  the  other  ? 

Do  you  not  here,  quite  overlook  one  circum- 
ftance,  which  might  be  a key  to  our  whole  be- 
haviour ? Namely,  that  we  no  more  look  upon 
thefe  flthy  abufes  which  adhere  to  our  church, 
as  pa7t  of  the  building;  than  we  look  upon  any 
filth  which  may  adhere  to  the  walls  of  Weflmin- 
fler-  Abbey,  as  a part  of  that  ftrufture. 

You  think,  thirdly,  “ That  there  are  other 
things  which  we  defend  and  praclife,  in  open 
contradiilion  to  the  orders  of.  the  church  of 
England.  And  this  you  judge  to  be  a jufl  excep- 
tion 


[ 350  ] 

tion  again#  th t finceriiy  of  our  profejfwns  to  ad- 
here to  it.” 

Compare  what  we  profefs  with  what  we 
praEtife,  and  you  will  poflibly  be  of  another 
judgment. 

We  profefs,  t.  That  we  will  obey  all  the  laws 
of  that  church  (fuch.  we  allow  the  rubrics  to  be, 
but  not  the  cuftoms  of  the  ecclefiaftical  courts) 
fo  far  as  we  can  with  a fafe  confcience. 

2.  That  we  will  obey,  with  the  fame  reftri&i- 
on,  the  biihops,  as  executors  of  thofe  lazes.  But 
their  bare  will,  diftinft  from  thofe  laws,  we  do 
not  prnfejs  to  obey  at  alt. 

Now  point  out,  \\  hat  is  there  in  out  practice, 
which  is  an  open  contradiction  to  thefe  pzofef 
Jions  ? 

Is  field-preaching  ? Not  at  all.  It  is  contrary’ 
to  no  law  which  we  profefs  to  obey. 

The  allowing  lay-preachers  ? We  are  not 
clear,  that  this  is  contrary  to  any  fuck  law.  But 
if  it  is,  this  is  one  of  the  exempt  cafes,  one 
wherein  we  cannot  obey  with  a fafe  confcience. 
Therefore  (be  it  right  or  wrong  on  other  ac- 
counts) it  is  however  no  juft  exception  again#: 
our  fincerity. 

The  rules  and  directions  given  to  our  focie- 
ties  ? Which,  you  fay,  is  adifeipline  utterly  for- 
bidden by  the  bifheps. 

When  and  where  did  any  bifhop  forbid  this  ? 
And  if  any  did,  By  what  law  ? We  know  not 

either 


C 351  j 

either  the  man,  who  ever  did  forbid,  or  the  law 
by  which  he  coidd  forbid  it. 

The  “ allowing  pa  fans  (for  we  require  none 
to  communicate  at  the  chappel  ?)  In  contradi&ion 
(you  think)  to  all  thoje  rubrics  which  require  all 
to  attend  always , on  their  own  pamjh  church 
and  pador , and  to  receive  only  at  his  table  ?'J 

Which  rubrics  are  thofe  ? We  cannot  find 
them.  And  till  thefe  are  produced,  all  that  is  fo 
frequently  faid  of  parochial  unity,  &c.  is  merely 
gratis  didtum  Consequently,  neither  is  this  any 
juft  exception  againft  the  Sincerity  of  any  of  our 
profeflionS. 

Dec.  30,  1745.  j.  rr. 

Wednefday,  January  the  lft,  1746. 

I preached  at  four  io  the  morning,  on  I am 
the  Almighty  God : walk  before , me,  and  be  thou 
perfeB.  We  dined  with  poor  John  Webb,  now 
throughly  poifoned  by  Robert  Barclay’s  apolo- 
gy, which  he  was  fure  would  do  him  no  hurt, 
till  all  his  love  to  his  brethren  was  Swallowed  up, 
in  dotage  about  queftions  and  ftrife  of  words. 

Wedn.  8.  I waited  on  Mr.  B e,  reflor  of 

who  had  Sent  to  me,  as  Soon  as  he  had  read 

the  Farther  Appeal,  he  faid,  Sir,  “ All  this  is  fad 
truth.  But  what  can  we  do  to  help  it  ?”  I went 
afterwards  to  another  clergyman,  who  had  like- 
wife  fent  and  defired  to  fpeak  with  me.  How 
is  this?  I thought  the  publication  of  this  traff* 
would  have  inraged  the  world  above  meafure. 

Arad 


[ 352  3 

And  on  the  contrary,  it  feems  nothing  ever  was 
publifhed,  which  foftened  them  fo  much ! 

Mond.  13.  I had  a vifit  from  Mr.  S.  an  ho- 
ned:, zealous  Anabaptift-teacher.  Finding  he 
would,  difpute,  I let  him  difpute,  and  held  him 
to  the  point  till  between  eleven  and  twelve 
o’clock.  By  that  time  he  was  willing  to  take 
breath.  Perhaps  he  may  be  lefs  fond  of  difpute 
for  the  time  to  come. 

Mond.  20.  I fet  out  for  Britlol.  On  the  road 
I read  over  Lord  King’s  account  of  the  primitive 
church.  In  fpite  of  the  vehement  prejudice  of 
my  education,  I was  ready  to  believe,  that  this 
was  a fair  and  impartial  draught.  But  if  fo,  it 
would  follow,  that  bilhops  and  prefbyters  are  (ef- 
fentially)  of  one  order  : and  that  originally  every 
Chriftian  congregation  was  a church  indepen- 
dent on  all  others ! 

Tuef.  2 1.  I read  bifhop  Butler’s  difcourfe  on 
analog)',  a flrong  and  well  wrote  treatife  : but  I 
am  afraid,  far  too  deep  for  their  underftanding, 
to  whom  it  is  primarily  addrefled. 

Mond.  Feb.  3.  And  the  following  days,  I vi- 
fited  feveral  of  the  country  focieties.  Mond.  10. 
I preached  at  Paulton.  On  Thurfday  noon  at 
Shepton Mallet,  and  at  Oak-hill  in  the  evening. 
The  next  morning  I walked  (it being  fcarce  pof- 
fible  to  ride,  becaufe  of  the  frod)  to  Coleford. 
Sund.  16.  I took  my  leave  of  Briftol  and  Kingf- 
wood,  and  Mond  17,  fet  out  for  Nev'caflle. 

I preached  near  Thcrnbury  about  noon,  and 

in 


. 

[ 3,53  ] 

in  the  evening  at  Wall-bridge  near  Stroud.  Tuef. 
18.  vve  puffied  oil  through  thick  and  thin,  and 
with  much  difficulty  got  to  Stanley.  Thence, 
after  an  hour’s  hop,  we  haflened  on.  The  brooks 
i were  fo  fwoln  with  the  late  rains,  that  the  com- 
mon roads  were  impaffable.  But  our  guide,  know- 
ing the  country,  carried  us  round  about  through 
the  fields,  fo  that  we  efcaped  the  dangerous  wa- 
ters, and  foon  after  fun-fet,  came,  (wet  and 
dirty  enough)  to  Evefham. 

Wednef.  19.  We  rode  to  Birmingham,  where 
many  of  our  brethren  from  feveral  parts  met  us 
in  the  evening.  * Thurf.  20,  we  fet  out  as  foon 
as  it  was  light.  Before  we  came  to  Aldridge- 
heath,  the  rain  changed  into  fnow,  which  the 
Northerly  wind  drove  full  in  our  faces,  and 
crufted  us  over  from  head  to  foot,  in  lefs  than 
an  hour’s  time.  We  inquired  of  one  who  lived 
at  the  entrance  of  the  moors,  which  was  our  beft 
way  to  Stafford?  “Sir,  faid  he,  ’tisa  thoufandpound 
to  a penny,  that  you  do  not  come  there  to-day. 
Why,  ’tis  four  long  miles  to  the  far  fide  of  this 
common,  and  in  a clear  day,  I am  not  hire  to 
go  right  a-crofs  it.  And  now  all  the  roads  are 
covered  with  fnow,  and  it  fnows  fo,  that  you 
cannot  fee  before  you.”  However  we  went  on 
and,  I believe  did  not  go  ten  yards  out  of  the 
way  till  we  came  into  Stafford. 

In  the  evening  we  reached  Roger  Mofs’s  hottfe. 

I preached  on  Rom.  iii.  22.  and  joined  a few 
together  as  a fociety.  Frid.  21.  We  breakfafl- 

ed 


[ 354  ] 

ed  at  Bradbury- Green  : whence  we  rode  on  to 
Marfden.  and  the  next  day,  Sat.  22.  to  LeedSi 
I preached  at  fire.  As  we  went  home  a great 
mob  followed,  and  threw  whatever  came  to 
hand.  I was  ftruck  feveral  times,  once  or  twice 
in  the  face,  but  not  hurt  at  all.  1 walked  on  to 
the  recorder's,  and  told  him  the  cafe.  He  pro- 
mifed  to  prevent  the  like  for  the  time  to  come..  1 

Snnd.  23.  I preached  at  eight  without  any  in* 
terraption;  in  Birfial  at  one,  and  again  at  five. 
Mond.  24.  I preached  at  Skircoat-green,  near 
Halifax,  to  a whole  company  of  quakers.  The 
good  man  of  the  houfe,  about  fourfcore  years 
old,,  bad  formerly  been  a fpeaker  among  them.  ; 
But  from  fear  of  man,  he  defifted,  and  fo  1 
quenched  the  fpirit,  that  he  was  in  darknefs  for 
near  forty  years : till  hearing  John  Nelfon  de-  j 
clare  the  love  of  God  in  Chrift,  light  again 
fprung  up  in  his  foul. 

In  the  evening  I preached  to  a quiet  congre-  ; 
gation  at  Bradford.  Tuef.  25.  About  nine  1 be- 
gan at  Kighley,  Thence,  (finding  the  fnow  was  jl 
{0  deep,  I could  not  go  through  the  vales,)  I 
went  the  ftrait  way  and  came  to  Newcafile,  Wed.  I 
26. 

Pi  id.  28. 1 took  my  leave  of  Katy  Parks,  calmly  M 
waiting  till  her  change  fhould  come.  A day  or 
two  after  fire  had  her  defire,  fweetly  giving  up 
her  foul  to  God. 

Of  the  fame  fpirit  was  the  writer  of  the  follow- 
ing  letter. 

Febiuary 


[ 3 56  ] 


February  22,  1745, 


Dear  S I R, 


O U ruav  remember  to  have  feen  me  at 


Oxford  once.  Since  then,  by  walking 
fomewhat  different  from  the  ways  of  the  world, 
I have  incurred  the  difpleafure  of  the  world. 
And  1 have  gone  through  many  trials.  My 
friends  and  neared  relations  have  done  their  ut- 
mofl,  to  feparate  me  from  God  and  his  children. 
But,  bleffed  be  our  dear  Lord,  all  their  attempts 
have  hitherto  been  in  vain.  Of  late  they  have 
feemed  refolved  on  other  meafures  ; namely,  to 
1 feparate  me  from themfelves.  But  notwithfland- 
ing  all  their  threats,  1 hope  by  the  power  of  God, 

1 to  remain  unfhaken  to  the  end.  I would  willing- 
1 ly  fuffer  the  lofs  of  all  things,  rather  than  deny 
the  Lord  that  bought  me.  And  I am  perfuaded, 
that  neither  life  nor  death  fhall  ever  feparate  me 
from  his  love. 

“ The  fum  of  all  my  defires  and  hopes  in  this 
world,  for  many  years  has  been  this,  To  be  re- 
gularly fent  as  an  ambaffador  of  Chrifl.  I long 
to  fpend  and  be  fpent  for  the  heft  of  mailers,.  But 
I doubt  my  relations  have  difappointed  me  of 
this  ; for  Oxford  knows  my  place  no  more. 

“ My  uncle  fees,  that  nobody  can  do  his 
bufinefs  better,  or  perhaps  fo  well  as  myfelf. 
But  he  can’t  bear  a MethodiJ ? in  his  houfe.  He 
wants  to  have  me  of  his  own  tafle.  But  as  I have 
been  wafhed,  I cannot,  1 dare  not,  I will  not,  by 


the 


[ 356  ] 

the  grace  of  God,  turn  to  my  former  wallowing  . 
in  the  mire. 

“ Dear  fir,  you  fee  my  cafe.  There  is  nothing 
I fo  much  long  for,  as  to  be  employed  in  the 
Lord’s  vineyard,  though  utterly  unworthy : I 
fhould  be  glaid  to  be  advifed  and  dirfted  by  you, 
what  to  do?  I will  do  whatfoever  you  judge 
moft  proper,  toward  the  promoting  our  Saviour’s 
intereft.  I am  happy  in  his  love,  and 

"Your  moft  obedient  fervant, 

John  Boficorth. 

But  there  was  no  need  for  his  taking  thought 
for  the  morrow.  For  in  a few  weeks,  God  took 
him  to  himfelf. 

Sat  March  1.  I vifitedthe  Tick,  who  increaf- 
ed  daily  in  every  quarter  of  the  town.  It  is  fup- 
pofed  that  two  thoufand  of  the  foldiers  only, 
have  diedfince  their  incampment  : the  fever  or 
flux  fweeping  them  away  by  troops,  in  fpite  of 
all  the  phyficians  could  do. 

Wedn.  5.  I preached  at  Wickham  at  noon  : 
in  the  evening  atSpen  : the  next  day  at  Burnup- 
field,  andon  Sat.  8.  in  the  fquare  at  Placey.  A 
vehement  ftorm  began  in  the  middle  of  the  fer- 
mon,  which  was  driven  full  upon  us  bv  the  north 
eaft  wind.  But  the  congregation  regarded  it 
not. 

Sund.  9.  Was  a day  offolemnjoy.  Yet  in 
the  afternoon  I felt  a great  damp,  occafioned  by 
my  neglebling  to  fpeak  plainly,  to  fome  who 
1 were 


I 357  ] 

were  deceiving  their  own  fouls.  I dd  not  wonder 
at  the  laft  words  of  St.  Auguftine  and  archbi- 
fhop  Ufher,  “ Lord  forgive  me  my  fins  of  omif- 
fion.” 

I preached  on  Monday  at  Horfeley,  on  Tuef- 
day  at  Biddick,  and  on  Wednef.  12.  at  Sunder- 
land, where  I endeavoured  to  bring  the  little 
fociety  into  fome  kind  of  Order.  In  the  after- 
noon, being  at  Mrs.  Fenwick’s,  and  feeing  a 
child  there  of  ten  or  twelve  years  old,  I afked, 
“ Does  your  daughter  know  Chrift  ? Or  know 
fire  has  need  of  him  ? She  replied  with  much 
concern,  “ 1 fear  not : nothing  has  ever  affedled 
her  at  all.’’  Immediately  that  word  come  into  my 
mind,  Before  they  call , I will  anfuier.  I was  going 
to  fay,  “ Come  let  us  call  upon  God,  to  fhew 
her  file  has  need  of  a Saviour  : ” but  before  the 
words  were  pronounced,  the  child  turned  away 
her  face,  and  began  crying  as  if  fhe  would  break 
her  heart.  I could  get  no  word  from  her  but, 
“ My  fins,  my  fins !”  We  then  befought  God 
to  carry  on  his  own  work. 

Mond,  17.  I took  my  leave  of  Newcaftle,  and 
fet  out  with  Mr.  Downes  and  Mr.  Shepherd.  But 
when  we  came  to  Smeton,  Mr.  Downes  was  fo 
ill,  that  he  could  go  no  further.  When  Mr. 
Shepherd  and  I left  Smeton,  my  horfe  was  fo 
exceeding  lame,  that  I was  afraid  I mull  have 
lain  by  too.  We  could  not  difeern  what  it  was 
that  was  amifs ; and  yet  he  would  fcarce  fet  his 
foot  to  the  ground.  By  riding  thus  feven  miles. 

I was 


[ 358  j 

I was  thoroughly  tired,  and  my  head  ached  more 
than  it  had  done  for  feme  months.  (What  I 
here  aver,  is  tire  naked  fact : let  every  man 
account  for  it  as  he  fees  good.)  I then  thought 
“ Cannot  God  heal  either  man  or  beaft,  by  any 
means,  or  without  any  ?”  Immediately  my  weari- 
nefs  and  head-ach  ceafed,  and  my  horfe's  lame- 
nefs  in  the  fame  inftant.  Nor  did  he  halt  any 
more  either  that  day  or  the  next.  A very  odd 
accident  this  alfo  ! 

Tuef.  18.  I ride  to  Pontefra£l : on  Wednefday 
to  Epworth,  and  on  Turfday,  by  Barley-hall  to 
Sheffield.  I was  glad  of  having  an  opportunity 
here,  of  talking  with  a child  I had  heard  of.  She 
was  convinced  of  fin  fome  weeks  before  by  the 
words  of  her  elder  brother  (about  eight  years  of 
age)  dying  as  an  hundred  years  old,  in  the  full 
triumph  of  faith.  I afked  her  abruptly,  “ Do 
you  love  God?”  She  faid,  “ Yes,  I do  love  him 
with  all  my  heart.”  I faid,  *•  Why  do  von  love 
him  ?”  She  anfwered,  “ Becaufe  he  has  faved 
me.”  I afked,  “ How  has  he  faved  you  ?"  She 
replied,  “ He  has  taken  away  my  fins.”  I faid, 
“ How  do  you  know  that  ?”  She  anfwered, 
“ He  told  me  himfelf  on  Saturday.  Thy  fins  are 
forgiven  thee.  And  I believe  him.  And  I pray 
to  him,  without  a book.  I was  afraid  to  die. 
But  now  I am  not  afraid  to  die,  for  if  I die,  I 
(hall  go  to  him.” 

Frid.  21.  I came  to  Nottingham.  I had  long 
doubted  what  it  was,  which  hindred  the  work 
2 of 


[ 359  ] 

of  God  here.  But  upon  enquiry  the  cafe  was 
plain.  So  many  ol  the  fociety  were  either  triflers 
or  diforderly  walkers,  that  the  blefling  of  God 
could  not  reft  upon  them.  So  I made  fhort 
work,  cutting  off  all  fuch  at  a ftroke,  and  leav- 
ing  only  that  little  handful,  who  (as  far  as  could 
bejudged)  were  really  in  earneft  to  fave  their 
fouls. 

Sat.  22. 1 came  to  Wednelbury.  The  antinomi- 
an-teachers  had  laboured  hard  to  deftroy  this 
poor  people.  Sund.  23.  I talked  an  hour  with 
the  chief  of  them,  Stephen  Timmins.  I was  in 
doubt  whether  pride  had  not  made  him  mad. 
An  uncommon  wildnefsand  fiercenefs  in  his  air, 
his  words,  and  the  whole  manner  of  his  behavi- 
our, almoft  induced  me  to  think  God  had  for  a 
feafon  given  him  up  into  the  hands  of  Satan. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Birmingham. 

Here  another  of  their  pillars  J W d, 

came  to  me,  and  looking  over  hisfhoulder,  faid, 
“ D on’t  think  I want  to  be  in  your  fociety  : but 
if  you  are  free  to  fpeak  to  me  you  may.”  I will 
fet  down  the  converfation,  dreadful  as  it  was,  in 
the  very  manner  wherein  it  palled  : that  every 
ferious  perfon  may  fee  the  true  pifture  of  anti- 
nomianifm  full-grown  : and  may  know  what 
thefe  men  mean  by  their  favourite  phrafe,  of  be- 
ing “ Perfefl  in  Chrift,  not  in  themfelves.” 

“ Do  you  believe  you  have  nothing  fo  do  with 
the  law  of  God  ?”  I have  not.  I am  not  under 
the  law.  I live  by  faith.  “ Have  you,  as  liv- 
Vol.  XXVIII.'  Q ing 


[ 3^°  1 


htg'by  faith,  a right  to  every  thing  in  the  world  ?” 

I have.  All  is  mine,  fince  Chrift  is  mine.  “ May 
you  then  take  any  thing  you  will  any  where  ? 
Suppofe,  out  of  a fhop,  without  the  confent  or 
knowledge  of  the  owner?”  I may,  if  I want  it. 
For  it  is  mine.  Only  I will  not  give  offence. 
“ Have  you  alfo  a right  to  all  the  women  in  the 
world  ?”  Yes,  if  they  confent.  “ And  is  not 
that  a fin  ?”  Yes,  to  him  that  thinks  it  is  a fin. 
But  not  to  thofe  whofe  hearts  are  free.  The 
fame  thing  that  wretch  Roger  Ball,  affirmed  in 
Dublin.  Surely  thefeare  the  firfl-born  children 
of  Satan  ! 

Tuef.  25.  I preached  at  Evefham  : Wedn. 
26,  about  ten  at  Stanley;  in  the  afternoon,  at 
the  Friers  in  Glocefter.  I preached  at  Wall- 
bridge,  near  Stroud  in  the  evening,  and  on 
Thurfday  27,  rode  to  Biiffol. 

Thurf.  April  3.  I fpent  an  agreeable  hour  with 
our  old  fellow-labourer,  Mr,  Humphreys.  I 
found  him  open  and  friendly,  but  rigoroufly 
tenacious  of  the  unconditional  decrees.  O that 
opinions  fhould  feparate  chief  friends  ! This  is 
bigotry  all  over. 

Mond.  7.  I preached  atKingfwood,  on  Ifaiah 
lx.  the  feventeenth  and  following  verfes,  and 
laid  the  firfl  ftone  of  the  new  houfe  there.  In 
the  evening  I rode  (with  Mr.  Shepherd)  to  Bath, 
and  Tuefday  the  8th  to  Newbury.  Here  we  met 
with  feveral  of  the  little  fociety  in  Blewbury, 
fome  of  whom  were  truly  alive  to  God.  What 

a proof 


[ 3°i  ] 

a proof  is  this,  that  God  fends  by  whom  he 
will  fend  ? Who  hath  begotten  us  thefe  ? David 
Jeffries ! 

Wedn  9.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Brent- 
ford. Many  were  got  together  there  who  threat- 
ned  great  things.  I went  and  took  one  or  two  of 
their  chiefs  by  the  hand,  and  defired  them  to 
come  in.  They  did  fo,  and  were  calm  and 
filent.  It  was  a feafon  of  great  refrelhment. 
The  next  morning  we  rode  to  London. 

In  the  afternoon  I buried  the  body  of  Ann  Clow- 
ney,  a poor  woman  whom  many  could  never 
think  to  be  a believer,  becaufe  (he  was  a fool 
(one  of  exceeding  weak  underftanding,  though 
not  direEUy  a natural.)  But  in  the  time  of  fick- 
nefs  and  pain,  none  could  deny  the  work  of 
God.  Neither  did  fhe  die  as  a fooldieth. 

* Tuef.  22.  I rode  with  Mr.  Piers  to  fee  one 
who  called  himfelf  a prophet.  We  were  with 
him  about  an  hour.  But  I could  not  at  all 
think,  that  he  was  fent  of  God.  1.  Becaufe  he 
appeared  to  be  full  of  himfelf,  vain,  heady,  and 
opinionated.  2.  Becaufe  he  fpoke  with  extreme 
bitternefs  both  of  the  king,  and  of  all  the  bifhops, 
and  all  the  clergy.  3.  Becaufe  he  aimed  at  talk- 
ing Latin,  but  could  not;  plainly  (hewing,  he 
underftood  not  his  own  calling. 

Wedn.  23.  At  the  earned  requeft  of  a friend, 
I vifited  Matthew  Henderfon,  condemned  for 
murdering  his  miftrefs.  A real,  deep  work  of 
God  feemed  to  be  already  begun  in  his  foul.  Per- 
Q 2 haps 


[ 362  3 

haps  by  driving  him  too  fall,  Satan  has  driven 
him  to  God  ; to  that  repentance,  which  lhall 
never  be  repented  of. 

About  this  time  I received  a letter  from  John 
Nelfon  (whom  I had  left  at  Birmingham.  ; Part 
of  which  was  as  follows. 

Birltal,  April  22,  1746. 
“ A FTER  I left  Wednefbury,  I Hayed  two 
XJL  nights  at  Nottingham,  and  had  large 
congregations.  But  while  I was  meeting  the  fo- 
ciety  the  fecond  night,  there  came  a mob,  rag- 
ing as  if  they  would  pull  thehoufe  to  the  ground. 
As  foon  as  we  had  done  meeting,  the  conllable 
came  and  feized  me,  and  faid,  I mull  go  before 
the  mayor  for  making  a riot.  So  he  took  me  by 
the  arm  and  led  me  through  the  llreets,  the  mob 
accompanying  us  with  curfes  and  huzza’s.  God 
gave  me  as  we  went,  to  fpeak  very  plain  to  the 
conllable,  and  to  all  that  were  near  me  ; till  one 
cried  out,  “ Don’t  carry  him  to  the  mayor,  for 
he  is  a friend  to  the  Methodills;  but  to  Aider- 

man  .”  Upon  this,  he  turned,  and  led 

me  to  the  Alderman’s.  When  we  were  brought 
in  lie  faid,  “ Sir,  I have  brought  you  another 
MethodiH-preacher.”  He  alked  my  name,  and 
then  faid,  “ I wonder  you  cannot  Hay  at  home  : 
you  fee  the  mob  won’t  fuffer  you  to  preach  in 
this  town,”  I faid,  “I  did  not  know  this  town 
was  governed  by  the  mob.  Moll  towns  are  go- 
verned by  the  magillrates.”  He  faid,  “ What, 

do 


[ 363  ] 

dovouexp eft  us  to  take  your  parts,  when  you  take 
the  people  from  their  work  ?”  1 faid,  “ Sir,  you 
are  wrong  informed.  We  preach  at  five  in  the 
morning,  and  feven  at  night.  And  thefe  are  the 
hours  when  moil  people  are  in  their  beds  in  the 
morning,  and  at  night,  either  at  play  or  at  the 
ale-houfe.”  Then  he  faid,  “ I believe  you  are 
the  caufe  of  all  the  evil  that  is  fallen  upon  the 
nation.  ”1  faid,  “ What  reafon  have  you  to  be- 
lieve fo  ? Can  you  prove  that  one  Methodiff  in 
England  did  affift  the  rebels,  with  either  men, 
money,  or  arms  ?”  He  anfwered,  “ No.  But  it 
has  been  obferved,  that  there  has  been  always 
fuch  a people,  before  any  great  evil  fell  on  the 
land.”  I faid,  “ It  hath  been  as  you  fay.  But 
that  people  was  not  the  caufe  of  the  evil,  no 
more  than  we  are  at  this  time.  But  thefe  mob- 
bers  and  fwearers,  and  drunkards,  and  whore- 
mongers, and  extortioners,  and  lovers  of  plea- 
fure,  more  than  lovers  of  God  ; thefe  are  the 
caufe  why  God  afflibfeth  both  man  and  beafr. 
Not  we  : we  are  fent  to  perfuade  them  to  break 
off  their  fins  by  repentance,  that  the  heavy  judg- 
ments of  God  may  not  confume  fuch  a people. 
And  if  there  be  not  a general  reformation,  God 
will  be  avenged  of  fuch  a nation  as  this.”  Then 
he  faid,  “ Do  not  preach  here  but  God  open- 
ed my  mouth,  and  I did  not  ceafe  to  fet  life  and 
death  before  him.  The  conflable  began  to  be 
uneafy,  and  faid,  “ What  muff  we  do  with 
him?”  “ Well,  he  faid,  I underhand  he  is  for 
Q 3 leaving 


r 3^  ] 

leaving  the  town  to-morrow ; I think  you  mud 
take  him  to  your  houfe.”  But  he  defired  to  be 
excufed.  Then  the  juftice  faid,  “ You  may  go 
where  you  came  from.”  When  I had  gone  a 
iittie  way  through  the  mob,  he  came  to  the  door, 
and  called,  “ Mr.  Nelfon,  flop  a little.”  "I  hen 
he  ordered  the  conflable  to  condu£l  me  to  the 
houfe  he  fetched  me  from,  and  take  care  that  the 
mob  did  not  hurt  me.”  This  feemed  to  be  a 
great  mortification  to  him.  But  he  was  obliged 
to  do  it.  So  he  brought  me  to  our  brethren 
again.  And  left  us  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  all 
his  mercies.” 

Sunday,  May  4.  We  left  London  in  the 
evening,  and  on  Tuefday  came  to  Briftol. 

* Mond.  12.  1 dined  with  a gentleman  who 
is  fully  perfuaded,  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as 
either  virtue  or  happinefs  upon  earth  : “ Hav- 
ing found,  he  faid,  by  repeated  experiments, 
that  notwiihfianding  athoufand  fair  appearances, 
every  man  living  was  at  the  bottom  wholly  fel- 
fifh,  and  truly  miferable.”  I Ihould  not  wonder 
if  every  rational  deift,  were  of  the  fame  mind. 
Nay,  they  mull,  if  confiftent  with  themfelves. 
For  it  is  fure  all  men  are  both  miferable  and  fel- 
fifh,  whatever  Ihow  they  may  make,  who  have 
not  faith;  even  that  evidence  of  things  not  f ren , 
the  very  being  whereof  they  queflion. 

Thurf.  15.  I preached  at  Bath,  and  fetting 
out  at  three  the  next  morning,  in  the  evening 
came  to  Blewbury. 

In 


[ 3^5  ] 

In  riding,  I read.  Dr.  H’s  “ Le&ures  on  the 
firft  chapters  of  St.  Matthew.”  Are  they  not 
more  ftrange  than:  true  ? Here  are  the  firft  ele- 
ments  of  the  gofpel  of  the  myfticks!  But  is  this 
the  gofpel  of  Chrift  ? 

I preached  in  the  evening,  on  Rom.  i.  16. 
1 am  not  ajhamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Chrifl : for  it  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  falvation,  to  every  one  that 
helieveth.  And  fetting  out  early  in  the  morning, 
Satur.  17.  in  the  evening  came  to  London. 

* Mond.  19.  I faw  an  amazing  inftance  of 
diftrefs..  A fenfible  young  woman  (no  Metho- 
dic) conftantly  attending  her  church,  had  all  her 
life  long  believed  herfelf  to  be  a right,  good 
Chriftian,  And  in  this  perfuafion  {he  continued 
during  a.  violent  fever,  till  the  phyfician  told  her 
brother.  “ She  imtfl  die  on  which  fhe  cried 
out,  “ So  my  brother  and  you  are  going  to  hea- 
ven, and  I am  going  to  hell.”  Her  brother 
faid,  “ From  that  hour  fhe  was  in  the  agony  of 
defpair,  faying,  Ihe  was  in  hell  already,  fhe  felt 
the  flames ; the  devil  had  her  foul  and  body, 
and  was  now  tearing  her  in  pieces.  If  fhe 
fwallowed  any  thing,  fhe  cried  out,  {he  was 
fwallowing  fire  and  brimftone.  And  for  twelve 
days  fhe  took  nothing  at  all ; for  above  twenty, 
nothing  but  water.  She  had  no  fleep,  day  or 
night,  but  lay  curfing  and  blafpheming,  tearing 
her  cloaths,  and  whatever  file  could  reach,  in 
pieces.  The  fins  which  lay  heavieft  upon  her, 
were,  the  having  no  knowledge  or  love  of  God; 

Q 4 the 


L 366  ] 

the  not  believing  in  Chrifl,  and  yet  having  per- 
fuaded  herfelf,  and  others,  that  fhe  was  a good 
Chriflian.”  She  was  quieter  from  the  time  we 
prayed  with  her  firft,  and  left  off  curfing  and 
blafpheming.  In  a few  days  after  fhe  began  to 
drink  a little  tea,  though  flill  remaining  in  fettled 
defpair.  But  afterwards  God  turned  her  heavi- 
nefs  into  joy. 

Frid.  23.  I made  over  the  houfes  in  Briflol 
and  Kingfwood,  and  the  next  week,  that  at  New- 
caflle,  to  feven  tru flees,  referving  only  to  my 
brother  and  myfelf,  the  liberty  of  preaching  and 
lodging  there. 

Frid.  30. 1 light  upon  a poor,  pretty,  fluttering 
thing,  lately  come  from  Ireland,  and  going  to  be 
a finger  at  the  play-houfe.  She  went  in  the 
evening  to  the  chappci,  and  thence  to  the 
watch-night,  and  was  almoji  perjuaded,  to  be  a 
Chriflian.  Her  convictions  continued  flrong  for 
a few  days  : but  then  her  old  acquaintance  found 
her,  and  we  faw  her  no  more. 

Satur.  June  7.  I afked  Richard  Langman  and 
his  wife,  Flow  they  recovered  from  their  Ger- 
man delufion  ? She  laid,  “ None  could  ever 
have  delivered  us  from  them  but  themfelves,  for 
there  is  no  fence  againft  their  foft  words.  But 
one  or  two  of  their  fennons  opened  our  eyes  ; 
particularly  one,  wherein  the  preacher  was  de- 
feribing.  How  the  Virgin  “ fed  the  dear  little 
Lamb  with  pap;  and  how  when  he  grew  bigger, 
fhe  might  fend  him  of  an  errand,  perhaps  for  a 

porringer 


[ 3«7  ] 


porringer  of  milk,  which  if  he  happened  to  let 
fall,  he  might  work  a miracle  to  mend  the  por- 
ringer.” They  were  not  then  able  to  digelt  thefe 
things. — But  now  they  never  turn  their  ftomach 
at  all. 

* In  the  afternoon,  an  old  friend  (now  with 
the  Moravians)  laboured  much  to  convince  me, 
that  I could  not  continue  in  the  church  of  Eng- 
land, becaufe  I could  not  implicitly  Jubmit  to  her 
determinations  : “ For  this,  he  faid,  was  effenti- 
ally  neceftary  to  the  continuing  in  any  church.” 
Not  to  the  continuing  in  any,  but  that  of  the  bre- 
thren : if  it  were,  I could  be  a member  of  no 
church  under  heaven.  For  I mull;  Hill  infill  on 
the  right  of  private  judgment.  I dare  call  no 
man  Rabbi.  I cannot  yield  either  implicit  faith 
or  obedience,  to  any  man  or  number  of  men 
under  heaven. 

Frid.  ig.  I was  defired  to  vifit  a poor  finner, 
who  had  juft  made  his  fortune  on  board  a priva- 
teer, and  was  preparing  to  enjoy  it,  when  he  was 
fummoned  of  God,  to  arife  and  go  hence.  I 
found  God  had  fhewn  him  terrible  things,  and 
had  afterwards  cut  the  work  Ihort  in  his  foul. 
For  he  already  knew  in  whom  he  had  believed, 
and  a few  days  after  flept  in  peace. 

Mond.  16.  I had  an  hour’s  converfation  with 
Mr.  Simpfon  (not  the  fame  with  him  above- 
mentioned)  a man  of  a clear  head  and  a loving 
heart.  But  O ! The  abyfs  of  the  providence  of 
God!  1 faw  him  fome  time  after  in  a fever. 

Q £ Before 


[ 368  ] 

Before  this  intermitted,  the  bark  was  poured  in 
upon  him.  He  was  cured  of  his  fever,  and  de- 
prived of  his  fenfes  ; and  has  been  confined  ever 
finre.  Is  it  not  the  Methodifts  who  have  driven 
this  man  alfo  di  ft  rafted  ? 

Satur.  28.  1 inquired  more  particularly  of 
Mrs.  Nowen’s  concerning  her  little  fon.  She 
faid,  “ He  appeared  to  have  a continual  fear  of 
God,  and  an  awful  fenfe  of  his  prefence  : that 
he  frequently  went  to  prayers  by  himfelf,  and 
prayed  for  his  father,  and  many  others  by  name  : 
that  he  had  an  exceeding  great  tendernefs  of 
confciencc,  being  fenfible  of  the  leaft  fin,  and 
crying  and  refufing  to  be  comforted,  when  be 
thought  he  had  in  any  thing  difpleafed  God: 
that  a few  days  fince,  he  broke  out  into  prayer 
aloud,  and  then  faid,  “ Mamma,  I fhall  go  to 
heaven  foon,  and  be  with  the  little  angels.  And 
you  will  go  there  too,  and  my  pappa ; but  you 
will  not  go  fo  foon  that  the  day  before,  he 
went  to  a little  girl  in  the  houfe  and  faid,  “ Polly, 
you  and  I muft  go  to  prayers.  Don’t  mind  your 
doll.  Kneel  down  now.  1 muft  go  to  prayers, 
God  bids  me.”  When  the  Holy  Ghoft  teaches, 
is  there  any  delay  in  learning?  This  child  was 
then  juft  three  years  old  ! A year  or  two  after 
he  died  in  peace. 

Wednef.  July  2.  I received  the  following 
letter  from  that  amiable  man,  who  is  now  with 
God. 


Northampton, 


[ 3 69  ] 


Northampton,  July  29,  1746. 
Rtv.  and  dear  SIR, 

“ T Am  truly  glad,  that  the  long  letter  I laft 
Tent  you  was  agreeable  to  you.  I blefs 
God  that  my  prejudices  againft  the  writers  of  the 
eftablifhment  were  fo  earlv  removed  and  con- 
quered. And  I greatly  rejoice  when  I fee  in 
thofe,  whom  upon  other  accounts,  1 muff  highly 
efteem  as  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  that  their 
prejudices  againft  their  brethren  of  any  denomi- 
nation are  likewife  fubfided,  and  that  we  are 
coming  nearer  to  the  harmony  in  which  1 hope 

we  fhall  ever  be  one  in  Chrift  Jefus. 

“ I have  always  efteemed  it  to  be  the  trueft 
afl:  of  friendfhip,  to  ufe  our  mutual  endeavours 
to  render  the  chara&ers  of  each  other  as  blame- 
lefs,  and  as  valuable  as  poffible.  And  I have 
never  felt  a more  affe&ionate  fenfe  of  my  obli- 
gations, than  when  thofe  worthy  perfons  who 
have  honoured  me  with  their  affe£Uon  and  cor- 
refpondence,  have  freely  told  me  what  they 
thought  amifs,  in  my  temper  and  conduft.  This 
therefore,  dear  Sir,  is  an  office  which  you  might 
reafonably  expeft  from  me,  if  I had  for  fome 
time  enjoyed  an  intimate  knotvledge  of  you. 
But  it  has  always  been  a maxim  with  me,  not  to 
believe  any  flying  ftory,  to  the  prejudice  of  thofe, 
whom  I had  apparent  reafon,  from  what  I knew 
of.  them,  to  efteem.  And  confequently,  as  I 
Q 6 fhauld 


[ 37°  ] 

fhould  never  make  this  a foundation,  you  muff 
be  contented  to  wait  longer,  before  you  will  be 
Jikely  to  receive  that  office  of  fraternal  love 
which  you  afk  from. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  affectionate 
Brother  and  fervant, 

P.  Doddridge. 

* “ Your  caution  has  fuggefled  a thought  to 
me,  whether  it  be  modeft  to  call  ourfelves  hum- 
ble P If  the  expreffion  means,  a real  readinefs  to 
ferve  in  love,  in  any  thing  low,  as  waffiing  the 
feet  of  another,  I hope  I can  fay,  I am  your 
humble  fervant  ; but  if  it  means  one  who  is  in 
all  refpefts  as  humble  as  he  could  wiffi,  God 
forbid  I fhould  arrogate  fo  proud  a title.  In  what 
can  I fa)-,  / have  already  attained?  Only  I love  my 
divine  Mafler,  and  I would  not  have  a thought 
in  my  heart,  that  he  fhould  difapprove.  I feel  a 
fweetnefs  in  being  affiiredly  in  his  gracious 
hand,  which  all  the  wo>  Id  cannot  poffibly  afford; 
and  which  I really  think,  would  make  me  hap- 
pier in  a dark  dungeon,  than  ten  thoufand 
worlds  could  make  me  without  it.  And  there- 
fore I love  every  creature  on  earth  that  bears 
his  image.  And  I do  not  except  thofe,  who 
through  ignorance,  rafhnefs,  or  prejudice,  have 
greatly  injured  me.” 


* Sund. 


[ 37 1 ] 

* Sund.  6.  After  talking  largely  with  both  the 
men  and  women  leaders,  we  agreed  it  would 
prevent  great  expence,  as  well  of  health  as  of 
time,  and  of  monev,  if  the  poorer  people  of  our 
fociety,  could  be  perfuaded,  to  leave  off  drink- 
ing of  tea.  We  refolved  ourfelves  to  begin  and 
fei  the  example.  I expefted  fome  difficulty,  in 
breaking  off  a cuflom  of  fix  and  twenty  years 
Handing.  And  accordingly  the  three  firft  days* 
my  head  ached,  more  or  lefs,  all  day  long,  and  I 
was  half  afleep  from  morning  to  night.  The  third 
day,  on  Wednefday  in  the  afternoon,  my  me- 
mory failed,  almoft  in'tirelv.  In  the  evening  I 
fought  my  remedy  in  prayer.  On  Thurfday 
morning  my  head-ach  was  gone.  My  memory 
was  as  flrong  as  ever.  And  I have  found  no  in- 
convenience, but  a fenfible  benefit  in  feveraL 
refpe&s,  from  that  very  day  to  this. 

Thurf.  17. 1 finifhed  the  little  colleflion  which 
I had  made  among  my  friends  for  a lending- 
ftock : it  did  not  amount  to  thirty  pounds ; 
which  a lew  perfons  afterwards  made  up  fifty. 
And  by  this  inconfiderable  fum,  above  two 
hundred  and  fifty  perfons  w’ere  relieved  in  one 
year. 

Mond.  20.  I fet  out  for  Salilbury,.  where,  to 
my  utter  amazement,  on  Wednef.  22.  Mr.  Hall 
defired  me  to  preach.  Was  his  motive  only,  To 
grace  his  own  caufe  ? Or  rather,  was  this  the 
laftgafp  of  expiring  love  ? 

I did  not  reach  Briflol  till  Frid,  25,  On  Sund. 

27- 


[ 372  ] 

27..  I preached  at  Baptift-mills,.  to  the  largeft 
congregation  1 had  feen  at  that  place,  fmce  I 
was  there  with  Mr.  Whitefield. 

About  this  time  I received  a melancholy 
letter  from  abroad  : part  of  which  1 have  fub.- 
joined.. 


Meerkerk  in  Holland, 
July  29,  1746. 

T Have  for  fome  years  endeavoured  to  keep 
JL  a confcience  void  of  offence,  toward  God 
and  toward  man.  And  for  above  two  years,  I 
have  known,  that  God  for  Chrift’s  fake  had  for- 
given me  all  my  fins.  I lived  in  the  full  affu- 
rance  of  faith,  which  made  me  rejoice  in  all 
dates.  Wet  or  weary,  cold  or  hungry,  I could 
rejoice.  And  faith,  and  love  did  increafe  fofaft, 
that  it  was  my  foul’s  delight  to  do  good  to  them 
that  hated  me,  to  blefs  them  that  curfed  me, 
and  to  call  all  thofe  that  were  in  a perifhing  con- 
dition, to  accept  of  life  and  falvation.  But  O ! 
How  are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of 
war  perifhed  ! April  6,  1746.  I was  overcome 
by  a great  temptation  : it  came  as  quick  as  light- 
ning. I know  not  if  I was  well  in  my  fenfes. 
But  I fell.  I rofe  the  fame  moment,  and  called 
upon  my  offended  God.  And  fo  I have  done 
ever  fince.  But  notwithftanding,  his  Spirit  has 
departed  from  me.  I have  wounded  my  confci- 
ence 


[ 373  J 

ence  exceedingly.  I am  fallen  into  the  fpiritof 
bondage  and  fear  : and  I often  cry  out, 

“ Who  fhall  tell  me,  if  the  ftrife- 
In  heaven  or  hell  fhall  end  ?” 

Mond.  Aug.  4. 1 received  a letter  from  York- 
(hire,  part  of  which  was  in  thefe  words,. 

* “ On  Wednef.  July  16.  I called  on  good, 
old  Mr.  Clayton.  He  was  exceeding  weak,  and. 
feemed  like  one  that  had  not  long  to  continue 
here.  I called  again  on  Mond.  21.  and  found  him 
very  ill.  He  told  me,  No  one  elfe  fhould  have 
been  admitted  : that  he  had  much  to  fay  to  me  to 
tell  you,  and  defired  me  to  fend  his  kind  refpeHs- 
to  you,  and  wifhed  you  profperity  in  your  pious 
undertakings.  Finding  he  was  not  able  to  talk 
much,  I took  my  leave,  not  thinking  it  would 
be  the  lad  time.  But  when  I returned  into  thefe 
parts  on  Saturday  lad,  I found  he  died  that 
morning  between  two  and  three.  On  Monday 
lad  I went  to  his  burial,  and T was  unexpectedly 
made  mourner  for  my  good  old  friend.  I fol- 
lowed his  corpfe  to  the  ground,  where  I faw  it 
folemnly  interred.  Many  of  his  parifhioners 
dropt  tears,  he  having  been  a father  to  the  poon 
He  died  very  poor,  though  he  had  an  edate  of 
forty  pounds  a year,  and  a living  of  near  three 
hundred,  of  which  he  has  been  reCor  three 
and  forty  years.” 


Wednef, 


C 374  ] 

Wednef.  6.  I preached  at  Oak-hill.  How  is 
this  ? I have  not  known  fo  many  perfons  ear- 
neflly  mourning  after  God,  of  any  fociety  of  this 
fize  in  England,  and  fo  unblamable  in  their  be- 
haviour. And  yet  not  one  perfon  has  found  a 
fenfe  of  the  pardoning  love  of  God,  from  the 
firft  preaching  here  to  this  day  ! 

When  1 mentioned  this  to  the  fociety,  there 
was  fuch  a mourning,  as  one  would  believe 
fhould  pierce  the  clouds.  My  voice  was  quickly 
drowned.  We  continued  crying  to  God,  with 
many  loud  and  bitter  cries,  till  I was  conltrained 
to  break  away,  between  four  and  five,  and  take 
horfe  for  Shepton. 

Here  the  good  curate  (I  w-as  informed)  had 
hired  a filly  man,  with  a few  other  drunken 
champions,  to  make  a difturbance.  Almoft  as 
foon  as  I began,  they  began  fereaming  out  a 
pfalm : but  our  finging  quickly  fwallowed  up 
theirs.  Soon  after  their  orator  named  a text, 
and  (as  they  termed  it)  preached  a fermon  : his 
attendants  mean  time  being  bufy  (not  in  hearing 
him,  but)  in  throwing  Hones  and  dirt  at  oar  bre- 
thren : thofe  of  them  I mean,  who  were  obliged 
to  Hand  at  the  door.  When  I had  done  preach- 
ing, I would  have  gone  out  to  them  ; it  being 
my  rule,  confirmed  by  long  experience,  always 
to  look  a mob  in  the  face.  But  our  people  took 
me  up  whether  I would  or  no,  and  carried  me 
into  the  houfe.  The  rabble  melted  away  in  a 

quarter 


[ 375  ] 

quarter  of  an  hour,  and  we  walked  home  in 
peace. 

Thurf.  7.  The  venerable  old  man,  Mr.  Tindal, 
called  upon  me  once  more.  How  ftiange  is  it, 
to  find  one  of  fourfcore  and  ten,  as  humble 
and  teachable  as  a little  child! 

Sund.  10.  In  the  evening,  having  determined 
to  fpend  a little  time  in  Wa!es,  I rode  to  S. 
Crocker’s,  to  be  ready  for  the  firft  p adage  in  the 
morning.  On  Mond.  1 1.  we  came  to  the  water 
fide,  at  half  an  hour  after  five:  but  we  did  not 
pafs  till  near  twelve,  and  then  rode  on  to  Aber- 
gavenny. Mr.  Philips  aftewards  met  us  on  the 
road,  and  brought  us  to  a friend’s  houfe  between 
nine  and  ten. 

Tuef.  12.  I preached  at  Maefmenny’s  church, 
and  in  the  afternoon,  in  Builth  church-yard. 
The  greateft  part  of  the  town  w’as  prefent 
there,  as  ufual ; and  God  gave  us  the  ufuai 
bleffing. 

Wednef.  ig.  I preached  at  Lanzufried.  As 
foon  as  we  came  out  of  the  church,  a poor  wo- 
man met  us,  whom  Satan  had  bound  in  an  un- 
common manner  for  feveral  years.  She  followed 
us  to  the  houfe  where  our  horfes  were,  weeping 
and  rejoicing,  and  praifing  God,  Two  clergy- 
men were  there,  befides  me,  and  the  houfe  was 
full  of  people.  But  fhe  could  not  refrain  from 
declaring  before  them  all,  what  God  had  done  for 
her  foul.  And  the  words  which  came  from  the 
heart,  went  to  the  heart.  I fcarce  ever  heard 

fuch 


[ 376  ] 

fuch  a preacher  before.  All  were  in  tears  round 
about  her,  high  and  low;  for  there  was  no  refitt- 
ing the  Spirit  by  which  fhe  fpoke. 

* The  odd  account  fhe  gave  of  herfelf  was 
this  : (concerning  which  let  every  one  judge  as 
he  pleafes  :J  That  near  feven  years  fince  fhe  af- 
fronted one  of  her  neighbours,  who  thereupon 
went  to  Francis  Morgan  (a  man  famous  in  thol’fe 
partsj  and  gave  him  fourteen  fhillings  to  do  his 
worj}  to  her  : that  the  next  night,  as  foon  as  fhe 
was  in  bed,  there  was  a fudden  fiorm  of  thunder, 
lightning  and  rain,  in  the  mid  ft  of  which  fhe  felt 
all  her  flefh  fhudder,  and  knew  the  devil  was 
clofe  to  her  : that  at  the  fame  time  a horfe  fhe 
had  in  the  ftable  below,  which  ufed  to  be  as 
quiet  as  a lamb,,  leaped  to  and  fro  and  tore  in 
fuch  a manner,  that  fhe  was  forced  to  rife  and 
turn  him  out  : that  a tree  which  grew  at  the  end 
of  the  houfe,  was  torn  up  by  the  roots:  that 
from  thenceforth  fhe  had  no  reft,  day  or  night, 
being  not  only  in  fear  and  horror  of  mind,  but 
in  the  ucmoft  torment  of  body,  feeling  as  if  her 
flefh  was  tearing  off  with  burning  pincers : that 
till  this  day,  file  had  never  had  any  refpite  or 
eafe;  but  now  fhe  knew  God  had  delivered  her, 
and  file  believed  he  would  ttill  deliver  her  body 
and  foul,  and  bruife  Satan  under  her  feet.” 

At  three  in  the  afternoon  I'  preached  at 
Builth,  defigning  to  go  from  thence  to  Carmar- 
then. But  notice  having  been  given,  by  a mif- 

t.\ke,; 


[ 377  ] 

lake,  of  my  preaching  at  Leominfler  in  Here- 
fordfhire,  I altered  my  defign,  and  going  to  Lan- 
zufried  that  night,  the  next  day  rode  to  Leo- 
minfter. 

At  fix  in  the  evening,  I began  preaching  on  a 
tombftone,  clofe  to  thefouth  fide  of  the  church. 
The  multitude  roared  on  every  fide ; but  my 
voice  foon  prevailed.  And  more  and  more  of 
the  people  were  melted  down,  till  thev  began 
ringing  the  bells.  But  neither  thus  did  they 
gain  their  point,  for  my  voice  prevailed  Hill. 
Then  the  organs  began  to  play  amain.  Mr,  C. 
the  curate,  went  into  the  church,  and  endea- 
voured to  flop  them  ; but  in  vain.  So  I thought 
it  bed  to  remove  to  the  corn-market.  The 
whole  congregation  followed,  to  whom  many 
more  were  joined,  who  would  not  have  come  to 
the  church -yard.  Here  we  had  a quiet  time, 
and  I (hewed  what  that  feEl  is,  which  is  every 
where fpoken  againjl  ? I walked  with  a large  train 
to  our  inn  : but  none,  that  I heard,  gave  us  one 
ill  word.  A Quaker  followed  me  in  and  told  me, 
“ I was  much  difpleafed  with  thee,  becaufe 
of  thy  Lajl  Appeal.  But  my  difpleafure  is  gone. 
I heard  thee  fpeak,  and  my  heart  clave  to 
thee.” 

Frid.  15.  I preached  at  five  to  a large  com- 
pany of  willing  hearers.  We  breakfafled  with  a 
lovely  old  woman,  worn  out  with  ficknefs  and 
pain,  but  full  of  faith  and  love,  and  breathing  no.* 
thing  but  prayer  and  thankfgiving. 


About 


[ 375  ] 

About  ten  we  came  to  Kington,  three  hours 
ride  (which  they  call  eight  miles)  from  Leomin- 
fler.  I preached  at  one  end  of  the  town : the 
congregation  divided  itfelfinto  two  parts.  One 
hall  flood  near,  the  other  part  remained  a little 
way  off,  and  lowered  defiance.  But  the  bridle 
from  above  was  in  their  mouth,  fo  they  made  no 
diflitrbance  at  all. 

At  four  we  had  another  kind  of  congregation 
at  Maefmennys  ; many  who  had  drank  largely 
of  the  grace  of  God.  1 examined  them,  Do  ye 
nou>  believe  ? And  the  word  was  as  a trvo-edged 
fword.  After  taking  a fweet  leave  of  this  lov- 
ing people,  we  rode  with  honefl  John  Price  of 
Mertha  to  his  houfe.  We  had  four  hours- rain  in 
the  morning,  but  a fair,  mild  afternoon,  in  the 
clofe  of  which  we  came,  to  Cardiff. 

Sund.  17.  I preached  at  W envo  church, 
morning  arid  afternoon  : at  five  in  the  evening 
in  the  caflle-yard  at  Cardiff,  to  the  far  largeft 
congregation  which  I had  ever  feer.  in  Wales. 
All  flood  uncovered  and  attentive,  and  I trufl, 
few  went  empty  awav. 

* Mond.  18.  I rode  with  Mr.  Hodges  to 
Neath.  Here  I found  twelve  young  men,  wham 
I could  almofl  envy.  They  lived  togeiher  in 
one  houfe,  and  continually  gave  away  whatever 
they  earned  above  the  neceffaries  of  life.  Moft 
of  them  (they  told  me)  were  predeflinarians,  but 
fo  little  bigotted  to  their  opinion,  that  they 
would  not  fuffer  a predeflinarian  to  preach 


among 


[ 379  ] 

among  them,  unlefs  he  would  lay  all  controvert 
fy  afide.  And  on  thefe  terms  they  gladly  re- 
ceived thofe  of  the  oppofite  opinion. 

The  multitude  of  people  obliged  me  to  preacli 
in  the  ftreet,  on  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gof- 
pel.  One  man  would  fain  have  interrupted,  and 
had  procured  a drunken  fidler  for  his  fecond. 
But  finding  none  to  join  them,  they  were  afham- 
ed  ; fo  the  gentleman  Hole  away  on  one  fide, 
and  the  fidler  on  the  other. 

Tuf.  ig.  I preached  again  at  five.  What- 
ever prejudice  remained,  now  vanifhed  away  as 
a dream,  and  our  fouls  took  acquaintance  with 
each  other',  as  having  all  drank  into  one 
fpirit. 

About  ten  I preached  in  my  return  atMargnm, 
on  By  grace  ye  are  Javed,  thro''  faith.  There 
being  many  prefent,  who  did  not  well  under- 
hand Englifh,  one  repeated  to  them  in  Welch, 
tiie  fubltance  of  what  I had  faid.  At  one  we 
came  to  Bridge-End,  where  I preached  on  a 
Email  green,  not  far  from  the  church,  on  jfefus 
Uirijf  made  ofGod  unto  us  wifdom , righteoijnejs, 
fan&ificaiion  and  redemption.  It  being  the  time 
of  the  yearly  revel,  we  had  many  firangers  from 
all  parts.  But  none  behaved  unfeemly  ; none 
opened  his  mouth  ; for  the  fear  of  God  was 
amongft  them.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Fonmon  caflle,  on  the  fruits  of  the  fpirit  : I 
concluded  the  day  with  the  little  fociety  there, 
rejoicing  and  praifing  God. 


2 


Wed. 


[ 3&>  ] 

Wed.  20.  I preached  near  Wilton,  a little 
town  about  a mile  from  Cowbridge  : and  on 
Thurfday  at  Lanmais,  four  miles  from  Fonmon, 
to  a people  of  a fimple,  loving,  childlike 
fpirit. 

Frid.  22.  I returned  to  Cardiff,  and  fpoke 
plain  to  thofe  who  were  wife  in  their  own  eyes. 
'I  his  however  was  matter  ofjoy  : they  were 
willing  to  receive  reproof.  Otherwife  I fhould 
have  feared  that,  with  regard  to  them,  I had 
laboured  in  vain. 

Sat.  23.  Returning  to  Briflol,  I found  poor 
C.  G.  there  proclaiming  open  war.  He  had 
preached  at  S — G — s once  or  twice  ; but  I 
believe  had  done  neither  £ood  nor  harm.  I in- 
vited  him  to  lodge  at  our  houfe  ; but  he  did  not 
choofe  it.  O poor  head  ! and  honed  heart  ! 

Frid.  29.  1 talked  largely  with  S — F — , and 
took  from  her  the  following  account. 

“ On  Sat.  July  15,  1743,  S—  T— , then 
about  ten  years  and  three  quarters  old,  waked  in 
perfeft  health.  She  had  never  had  any  fits  of 
any  kind,  nor  any  confiderable  ficknefs.  About 
fix  in  the  morning  (he  was  lifing,  and  inwardly 
praying  to  God,  when  on  a fudden  (he  was  feiz- 
ed  with  a violent  trembling.  -Quickly  after 
flie  loft  her  fpeech  : in  a few  minutes  her  hear- 
ing : then  her  fight,  and  at  the  fame  time,  all 
fenfe  and  motion. 

Her  mother  immediately  fent  for  Mrs.  De- 
ficme.  to  whom  (he  then  went  to  fchool.  At  the 

fame 


[ 3«*  ] 

fame  time  her  father  fent  for  Mr.  Smith,  apothe- 
cary, who  lived  near.  At  firft,  he  propofed 
bleeding  her  immediately,  and  applying  a large 
blifter.  But  upon  examining  her  farther,  he 
faid,  “ It  fignifies  nothing,  for  the  child  is 
dead.” 

About  twelve  o’clock,  fhe  began  to  ftir  ; then 
fhe  opened  her  eyes,  and  gave  the  following 
account. 

“ As  foon  as  I loft  mv  fenfes,  I was  in  adifmal 
place,  full  ofbriars,  and  pus,  and  ditches,  ftumbl- 
ing  up  and  down,  and  not  knowing  where  to 
turn  or  which  way  to  get  either  forward  or  back- 
ward, and  it  was  almoft  quite  dark,  there  being 
but  a little  faint  twilight,  lo  that  I could  fcarce 
fee  before  me.  I was  crying  ready  to  break  my 
heart ; and  a man  came  to  me  and  faid,  “ Child, 
where  are  you  going  ?”  I faid,  I could  not  tell.” 
He  faid,  What  do  you  want  ? ” I anfwered,  “ I 
want  Chrift  to  be  my  refuge.”  He  faid,  “ What 
is  your  name  ? And  I told  him.  But  I did  not  tell 
him  S — T — . I told  him  a name  which  I never 
heard  before.  He  faid,  “ You  are  the  child  for 
whom  I am  fent.  You  are  to  go  with  me.”  I 
faw  it  grew  lighter  as  he  fpoke.  We  walked  to- 
gether till  we  came  to  a ftile.  He  went  over, 
and  bid  me  flay  a little.  I ftayed  about  half  a 
quarter  of  an  hour.  And  then  I obferved  his 
cloatbs.  They  reached  down  to  his  feet,  and 
were  Ihining,  and  white  as  fnow. 

Then  he  came  back,  and  kneeled  down  and 
2 prayed. 


[ 3^  ] 

prayed.  You  never  heard  fuch  a prayer  in  your 
life.  Afterward  he  faid,  “ Come  with  me.”  I 
went  over  the  ftile,  and  it  was  quite  light.  He 
brought  me  thro’  a narrow  lane,  into  a vaft  broad 
road,  and  told  me,  “ This  leads  to  hell.  But  be 
not  afraid.  You  are  not  to  Hay  there.”  At  the 
end  of  that  road  a man  flood  clothed  like  the 
other,  in  white,  fhining  cloaths,  which  reached 
down  to  the  ground.  None  could  pafs  in  or 
out  without  his  knowledge.  But  he  had  not  the 
key.  The  man  that  was  with  me,  carried  the 
key,  and  unlocked  the  doer,  and  we  went  in 
together. 

For  a little  wav  we  walked  flrait  forward  ; 
then  turning  to  the  left  hand,  we  went  down  a 
very  high,  keep  hill.  I could  fcarce  bear  the 
flench  and  fmoke  ofbiimftcne.  1 faw  a Vc.fl  ma- 
ny people,  that  feemed  to  be  chained  down, 
crying  and  gnafhing  their  teeth,  1 he  man  told 
me,  the  fins  they  delighted  in  cnce,  thev  are 
tormented  with  now.  I faw  a vaft  number  who 
flood  up  curbing  and  blafpheming  God,  andfpit- 
ting  at  each  other.  And  many  were  making 
balls  of  fire,  and  throwing  them  at  one  another. 
I faw  many  others  who  had  cups  of  fire,  out  of 
which  they  were  drinking  down  flames.  And 
others  who  held  cards  of  fire  in  their  hands,  and 
feemed  to  be  playing  w'i'h  them. 

We  (laid  here,  I thought,  about  half  an  hour. 
Then  my  guide  faid,  “ Come  ; I will  fhew  you 
glorious  place.”  I walked  with  him  till 

we 


now  a 


[ 383  }. 


we  came  into  a narrow  road,  in  which  we  could 
hardly  walk  a- bread.  This  brought  us  into  a 
great  broad  place.  And  I faw  the  gate  of  hea- 
ven, which  flood  wide  open;  hut  it  was  fo 
bright,  I could  not  look  at  it  long.  We  went 
flrait  in,  and  walked  through  a large  place, 
where  I faw  faints  and  angels : and  through 
another  large  place,  where  were  abundance 
more.  They  were  all  of  one  height  and  ftature. 
And  when  one  prayed,  they  all  prayed,  when 
one  fung,  thev  all  fung.  And  they  all  fung 
alike,  with  a fmooth,  even  voice,  not  one 
higher  or  lower  than  another. 

We  went  through  this  into  a third  place. 
There  I faw  God  fitting  upon  his  throne.  It 
was  a throne  of  light,  brighter  than  the  fun.  I 
could  not  fix  my  eyes  upon  it.  I faw  three, 
hut  all  as  one.  Our  Saviour  held  a pen  in  his 
hand.  A great  book  lay  at  his  right  fide;  ano- 
ther at  his  left,  and  a third  partly  behind  him. 
In  the  firlt  he  fet  down,  the  prayers  and  good 
works  of  his  people.  In  the  fecond  he  fet  down 
all  the  curfes,  and  all  the  evil  works  of  the  wick- 
ed. I faw  that  he  difeerns  the  whole  earth  at  a 
glance.  And  he  difeerns  the  whole  heavens. 
At  once  he  beholds  earth  and  heaven  with  one 
look. 

Then  our  Lord  took  the  firfl  hook  in  his  hand, 
and  went  and  faid,  “ Father,  Behold  the  prayers 
and  the  works  of  my  people.’’  And  he  held  up 
his  hands,  and  prayed,  and  interceeded  to  his  fa- 
Vol.  XXVIII.  R ther 


[ 3«4  ] 

ther  for  us.  I never  heard  any  voice  like  that. 
But  I cannot  tell  how  to  explain  it.  And  his  fa- 
ther faid,  “ Son,  I forgive  thy  people;  not  for 
their  fake,  but  thine.”  Then  our  Lord  wrote 
it  down  in  the  third  book,  and  returned  to  his 
throne  rejoicing  with  the  hofl  of  heaven. 

It  feemed  to  me,  as  if  I flayed  here  feveral 
months.  But  I never  flept  all  the  while.  And 
there  was  no  night.  And  I faw  no  fky  or  fun, 
but  clear  light  every  where. 

Then  we  went  back  to  a large  door,  which  my 
guide  opened,  and  we  walked  into  pleafant  gar- 
dens, by  brooks  and  fountains.  As  we  walked, 

I faid,  “ I did  not  fee  my  brother  here  (who 
died  feme  time  before]  he  faid,  “ Child,  thou 
canlt  not  know  thy  brother  yet : becaufe  thy 
breath  remains  in  thy  body.  Thy  fpirit  is  to  re- 
turn to  the  earth.  Thou  mud  watch  and  pray  : 
and  when  thy  breath  leaves  thy  body,  thou  fhalt 
come  again  hither,  and  be  joined  to  thefe,  and 
know  every  one  as  before.  I faid,  When  is  that 
to  he  ? He  faid,  I know  not : nor  any  angel  in 
heaven  ; but  God  alone.” 

Then  he  took  me  into  another  pleafant  gar- 
den, where  were  all  manner  of  fruits.  He  told 
me,  This  garden  bears  fruit  always.  Here  I 
faw  a glorious  place,  which  had  large  gold  let- 
ters writ  over  the  door.  He  bid  me  read,  and  1 
read,  “ This  is  a fountain  for  fin  and  unclean- 
nefs  for  my  people.  At  what  time  foever  they 
will  return,  they  lhall  be  cleanfed  from  all  their 

idols.” 


[ 385  ] 

idols.”  The  door  flood  open,  and  I looked  in, 
and  I faw,  as  it  were,  a great  ciftern,  full  of  wa- 
ter, white  as  milk.  We  feemed  to  walk  up  and 
down  in  this  garden  for  fome  weeks,  and  he 
told  me  what  every  thing  meant.  I never  want- 
ed to  eat  or  drink,  nor  felt  any  wearinefs. 

While  we  were  walking,  he  faid,  “ Sing.”  I 
faid,  “ What  final  1 I ling  ?”  And  he  faid,  “Sing 
praifes  unto  the  king  of  the  place.”  I fung  fe* 
veral  verfes.  Then  he  faid,  “ I muft  go.”  I 
would  have  fain  gone  with  him.  But  he  faid, 
“ Your  time  is  not  yet.  You  have  more  work 
to  do  upon  the  earth.”  Immediately  he  was 
gone  : and  I came  to  myfelf,  and  began  to 
fpeak.” 

Her  mother,  told  me  farther,  “ As  foon  as 
ever  fine  tecovered  her  fpeech,  Ihe  gave  me  juft 
the  fame  account  : adding,  “ I have  learnt  the 
fineft  hymn  you  ever  heard  in  your  life.”  She 
then  fung  three  verfes,  the  mod  folid,  awful 
words  which  I have  ever  heard.  She  continu- 
ed fpeaking  many  awful  words,  with  many  fighs 
and  tears;  till  about  three  in  the  afternoon,  Ihe 
fell  into  a {lumber,  which  continued  till  feven. 
She  then  fpoke  the  fame  things  to  Mrs.  Defigne: 
after  which  fhe  was  filent,  till  about  five  in  the 
morning. 

She  received  remiffion  of  fins  when  {lie  was 
nine  years  old,  and  was  very  watchful  from  that 
time.  Since  this  trance,  fhe  has  continued  in 
R 2 faith 


[ 386  ] 

faith  and  love,  but  has  been  very  fickly  and  weak 
in  body.” 

Mond.  Sept.  i.  I rode  with  T.  Butts  to  Mid- 
dlefey,  and  preached  to  a (mail,  earned  congre- 
gation. We  fet  out  early  in  the  morning,  and 
were  thoroughly  wet  by  noon.  In  the  evening 
we  reached  Sticklepath. 

Wedn.  3.  About  one  we  came  to  Plvmouth. 
After  dinner  I walked  down  to  Herbert  Jenkins, 
and  with  him  to  the  Dock.  In  the  way  we  over- 
took Mr.  Mignon  ; then  a pattern  to  all  that  be- 
lieved. Herbert  preached  a plain,  honed  fer- 
mon.  But  the  congregation  was  greatly  difpleaf- 
ed  ; and  many  went  away  as  foon  as  he  began, 
having  come  on  purpofe  to  hear  me. 

Thurf.  4.  Abundance  of  people  from  Ply- 
mouth were  at  the  room  by  half  hour  after  four. 
I was  much  refrefhed  in  applying  thofe  words  to 
them.  The  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
peace  in  believing.  And  manv  of  us  found  our 
hearts  knit  together,  in  that  love  which  never 
faileth. 

As  many  as  the  room  could  well  contain,  fol- 
lowed me  to  Mr.  Hide’s,  and  importuned  me 
much,  to  call  again,  in  ray  return  from  Corn- 
wall. We  dined  at  Loo,  (a  town  near  half  as 
large  as  Ifiington,  which  fends  only  four  burgef- 
fes  to  the  parliament)  called  at  Crampond  in  the 
afternoon,  and  juft  at  feven  reached  Gwenap. 
The  congregation  waiting,  I began  without  de- 
lav.  and  found  no  faintnefs  orwearinefs,  while  I 

expounded. 


[ 387  ] 

expounded,  We  all  beholding,  as  in  a glafs,  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  are  transformed  into  the  fume 
image,  from  glory  to  glory,  ashy  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord. 

k'ri.  g.  I inquired  concerning  John  Trembath’s 
late  illnefs.  It  was  a fecond  relapfe  into  the  fpot- 
ted  fever : in  the  height  of  which  they  gave 
him  fack,  cold  milk  and  apples,  plumbs,  as 
much  as  he  could  fwallow.  I can  fee  no  way  to 
account  for  his  recovery,  but  that  he  had  not 
then  finifhed  his  work.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed at  St.  Ives. 

Sat.  6.  I rode  to  Trewillard,  in  the  parifh  of 
St.  Juft.  I found  no  fociety  in  Cornwall  fo  live- 
ly as  this.  Yet  a few  of  them  I was  obliged  to 
reprove  for  negligence  in  meeting,  which  is  al- 
ways the  forerunner  of  greater  evils. 

I preached  in  the  evening  in  the  Green-court, 
which  was  well  filled  with  earneft  hearers.  I 
thought  the  houfe  would  have  contained  the  con- 
gregation at  five  (Sund.  7.)  but  it  would  not.  At 
eight  I preached  to  a large  congregation  at  Mor- 
va,  and  rode  on  to  Zunnor  before  the  church 
fervice  began.  As  foon  as  it  was  ended,  I began 
near  the  church-vard  (and  furely  never  wTas  it 
more  wanted)  to  expound,  Whom  ye  ignorantly 
worjlnp,  him  declare  I unto  yon.  I preached  at 
St.  Ives  about  five,  to  a more  underftanding  peo- 
ple, on  Thou  are  not  Jar  from  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

R 3 


On 


[ 388  ] 

On  Mond.  8.  I wrote  the  following  letter  t® 

Mr. . 

My  dear  brother , 

ON  Tuefday  lalt  I light  upon  a letter  ofyour’s 
in  Dev'onfhire,  whichl  underhand  has  been 
a great  traveller.  I think  it  is  the  part  of  brotherly 
love,  to  mention  to  you  fome  points  therein, 
wherein  I doubt  whether  you  are  not  a little  mif- 
taken  ; if  I millake,  you  will  fetme  right.  You  fay, 
1.  “ Firlt  as  to JlillneJs,  “ The  thing  meant 
hereby  is,  that  man  cannot  attain  to  falvation  by 
his  own  wifdom,  ftrength,  righteoufnefs,  good- 
nefs,  merits,  or  works : that  therefore  when  he 
applies  to  God  for  it,  he  is  to  call  away  all  de- 
pendence upon  every  thing  of  his  own,  and  mail- 
ing only  to  the  mercy  of  God,  through  the  me- 
rits ofChrih,  in  true  poverty  of  fpirit,  to  refign 
himfelf  up  to  the  will  of  God,  and  thus  quietly 
wait  for  his  falvation.”  I conceive  this  to  be 
the  firll  millake.  I have  nothing  to  objeft  to 
this JlillneJs.  i never  did  oppofe  this  in  word 
or  deed.  But  this  is  not  the  thing  meant  thereby , 
either  by  Molther,  or  the  Moravians,  or  the 
Englifli  brethren,  at  the  time  that  I,  (and you, 
at  Mr.  Bower’s)  oppofed  them. 

2.  “ That  the  brethren  teach,  that  people 
who  are  feeking  after  falvation,  are  all  the  while 
to  fit  Hill  and  do  nothing,  that  they  are  not  to 
read,  hear  or  pray,  is  altogether  falfe.”  This  I 
apprehend  to  be  a fecond  millake.  M hatever 
the  brethren  do  now,  they  did  teach  thus,  and 

that 


[ 389  ] 

that  explicitly  in  the  years  1739  and  1740.  In 
particular  Mr.  Brown,  Mr.  Bowers,  Mr. 
Bell,  Mr.  Bray,  and  Simplon,  then  with,  the 
Moravians.  Many  of  their  words,  I heard  with 
my  own  ears  ; many  more  I received  from  thofe 
who  did  fo.  And  Mr.  Molther  himfelf,  on  Dec. 
31,  1739,  faid  to  me,  in  many,  and  plain  words, 
that  the  way  to  attain  faith,  is,  To  be Jlill,  that  is, 

Not  to  ufe.  (what  we  term)  the  means  ofgrace. 

Not  to  go  to  church  ; 

Not  to  communicate ; 

Not  to  fall ; 

Not  to  ufe  fo  ?nuck  private  prayer; 

Not  to  read  the  fcriptures  : 

Not  to  do  temporal  good,  and^ 

Not  to  attempt  to  do  fpirityal  good.” 

Thefe  things  I myfelf  heard  him  fpeak  : as  I am 
ready  to  give  upon  oath  whenever  required.  You 
ought  not  therefore  to  fay,  “This  isaltogether  falfe,” 
on  the  bare  denial  of  Mr.  Molther,  or  any  other. 

3.  “ Some  of  Fetter-lane  fociety,  when  the 
difference  broke  out,  fpoke  and  afied  very  im- 
prudently. But  then  to  lay  the  blame  on  the 
Moravian  church,  as  if  it  were  their  fault,  is  quite 
wrong.”  I think  fo  too;  and  have  faid  fo  in  my 
anfwer  to  Mr.  Chur  ch,  publifbed  fome  time  be- 
fore you  fent  your  letter.  Ifthereforeyouimagine, 
that  Hay  the  blame  on  the  Moravian  church,  you 
are  under  a miflakehere  alfo : orifyou  think,  I “ lay 
the  faultofone  man,  upon  a whole  community.” 

4.  £‘  As  to  the  Englifh  that  really  were  to  blame, 
R 4 they 


[ 39°  ] 

they  confefTed  their  faults,  and  afked  Mr.  W’s. 
pardon.  And  fome  of  them,  if  I miflake  not, 
did  it  with  tears.”  I really  think  you  do  mif- 
take  again.  1 remember  no  fuch  thing.  Fifty 
perfons,  and  more,  fpoke  bitter  things  coneern- 
ing  me.  One  or  two  alked  my  pardon  for  fo 
doing,  but  in  fo  flight  and  curfoiv  a manner, 
that  1 do  not  fo  much  as  know,  who  were  the 
men  ; neither  the  time  or  place,  where  it  was 
done  : fo  far  were  they  from  doing  it  with  tears, 
or  with  any  folemniiy  or  earneflnefs  at  all.  As 
for  the  reft,  if  they  were  ever  convinced  or 
ajhamed  at  all,  it  is  a fecrct  to  me  to  this  day. 

5.  “ Therefore  to  publilh  things  which  ought 
to  have  been  buried  in  eternal  oblivion,  is  what 
I do  not  like.”  This  whole  matter  of  afking 
pardon,  you  feem  to  miftake,  as  Count  Z.  did  be- 
fore. 1 wifh you  would  confiderthe  anf.ver  I gave 
him,  “ They  alked  my  pardon,  for  ufing  me  ill. 
1 replied,  that  was  fnperfluous.  I was  not  angiy 
with  them  ; bull  was  afraid  of  two  things,  1. 
That  there  was  error  in  their  doffrine,  2.  That 
there  was  fin  (allowed'  in  their  practice.  This 
was  then  and  is  at  this  day,  the  011c  queflion 
between  them  and  me.”  Now  this  cannot  be  buri- 
ed in  oblivion.  T hat  error  and  fin  have  fpread 
too  far  already  ; and  it  was  mv  part,  after  private 
reproof  had  been  tried  again  and  again  to  no  pur- 
pofe,  to  give  publick  warning  thereof  to  all  the 
world,  that  ifpoffible,  thev  might  fpread  no  farther. 

6. -“  Mr.  \V.  is  partial  thoughout  his  jour- 

nal 


[ 39 1 J 


"'nal  I want  to  know  the  particular  inftances, 

“ In  what  he  mentions  of  me,  he  does  not  repre- 
fent  our  converfation  rightly.”  Then  it  is  the 
fault  of  my  memory.  But  be  fo  kind  as  to  point 
out  the  particulars  that  are  not  rightly  repre- 
fented,  “ he  has  done  the  caufe  of  our  Saviour 
more  mifchief,  than  any  one  elfe  could  have 
done.”  Tell  me  how  ? — unlefs  you  mean,  the 
the  antinomian  caufe,  by  the  caufe  of  our  Saviour. 

“ I have  feveral  times  gone  to  Mr.  W.  to  ex- 
plain matters,  and  to  defire  him  to  be  reconcil- 
ed.” Several  times  ! When  and  where  ? You, 
furprizeme  much  ! Either  my  memory  oryour’s 
fails  flrangely.  “ In  truth,  it  is  he  that  has  flood 
out.”  Alas,  my  brother  ! What  an  affertion  is 
this  ? Did  not  I come  three  years  ago  (before 
that  journal  was  publifhed)  in  all  hafle,  from 
Newcahle  upon  Tyne,  and  my  brother,  in  five 
days,  from  the  Lands-End,  to  a fuppofed  con- 
ference in  London  ? Was  this  /landing  out? — 
But  with  what  effect  ? Why  Mr.  Spangenberg, 
had  juft,  left  London.  None  befides  had  any 
power  to  confer  with  us.  And  to  cut  us  oft' 
from  any  fuch  expeftation,  James  Hutton  faid, 

“ They  had  orders,  not  to  confer  at  all,  unjefis 
the  archbifhop  of  Canterbury,  or  the  biflipp  of 
London  were  prefent.” 

* There  cannot  be  under  heaven  a greater 
miftake  than  this,  that  I ever  did  fland  out , or  . 
that  1 do  fo  now.  There  has  not  been  one  dav 
for  thefe  feven  years  laft  paft,  wherein  my  foul 
R g has 


[ 392  ] 

has  not  longed  for  union.  And  they  have  grofs- 
Jy  abufed  your  boned  credulity,  whoever  have 
made  you  believe  the  contrary. 

7.  “ Since  Mr,  Wefleys  have  publifhed  fuch 
fluff  and  inconfidences,  I cannot  a^ree  with 
them.’’  My  brother,  make  fome  of  thofe  incon- 
fiflences appear,  and  it  will  be  an  a£l  of  folid 
friendlhip.  But  “ Time  will  manifefl  matters, 
and  what  is  of  God  will  fland,  and  what  is  of 
man,  will  come  to  nought.”  Moll  true ; and 
according  to  this  fure  rule,  it  has  alreadv  appear- 
ed, whofe  work  is  of  God  ; both  at  Bradford, 
at  Horton,  and  in  feveral  towns,  not  far  from 
your  own  neighbourhood. 

8.  The  account  you  give  of  the  Moravians 
in  general,  is  the  very  fame  I had  given  before: 
viz.  That  next  to  thofe  of  our  own  church,  “ w’ho 
have  the  faith  and  love  which  is  among  them, 
without  thofe  errors  either  of  judgment  or  prac- 
tice, the  body  of  the  Moravian  church,  however 
miflaken  Jome  oj  them  are,  are  in  the  main,  of  all 
whom  I have  feen,  the  befl  Chridians  in  the 
world.”  In  the  fame  tra£l,  I fum  up  my  latefl 
judgment  concerning  them,  in  thefe  terms. 
“ I believe  they  love  the  Lord  Jefus  in  fincerity, 
and  have  a meafure  of  the  mind  that  was  in  him. 
And  I am  in  great  earned  when  I declare  once 
more,  that  I have  a deep,  abiding  conviction, 
by  how  many  degrees  the  good  which  is  among 
them  over-balances  the  evil,  and  that  1 cannot 
fpcak  of  them  but  with  tender  affettion,  were  it 

only 


C 393  3 


only  for  the  benefits  I have  received  from 
them  : and  that  at  this  hour  I defire  union  with 
t!iem(we re  thofe  Humbling  blocksonce  put  away, 
which  have  hitherto  made  that  defire  ineffe&ual) 
above  all  things  under  heaven.'’ 

9.  In  what  refpefls  the  brethren  are  Antino- 
mians,  in  what  fenfe  they  lean  to  quietijm , I have 
fpoken  at  large.  If  they  can  refute  the  charge, 
I fhall  rejoice  more  than  if  I had  gained  great 
fpoils. 

* My  brother  I heartily  wifh  both  you  and 
them,  the  genuine,  open  gofpel-fimplicity  : that 
you  may  always  ufe  that  artlefs  plainnefs  of 
fpeech,  in  which  you  once  excelled : and  that  by 
manifeftation  of  the  truth,  you  may  commend 
yourfelf  to  every  man’s  confcience  in  the  fight 
of  God.  I am, 

Your  affectionate  brother, 

J.  w. 

Tuefi  9.  I preached  at  Crowan.  The  night 
came  upon  us  while  I was  fpea king:  but  none 
offered  to  go  away,  Wednef.  10.  I preached  at 
Portkellis  in  Wendown,  to  many  more  than  the 

houfe  could  contain.  W T of  Sithney 

rode  with  me  to  Gwenap,  a conflant  companion 

of  Mr.  N ’s,  fo  long  as  he  would  join  with 

him  in  riot  and  drunkennefs.  But  with  his 
drunkennefs  ended  Mr.  N ’s  friendfhip. 

When  he  heard,  that  one  John  O n,  a 

R 6 tinner 


[ 394  ] 

tinner  was  preaching,  he  went  on  purpofe  to 
make  fport.  But  the  word  of  God  flruck  him 
to  the  earth.  * Yet  he  ftruggled  in  the  toils; 
fometimes  wanting  to  go  again  ; fometimes  re- 
volving never  to  go  anymore.  But  one  day,  call- 
ing at  his  filler’s,  he  took  up  a little  girl  (about 
« four  ) ears  oldj  and  faid,  “ 1 hey  tell  me  you  can 
ling  hymns.  Come,  fing  me  an  hymn.”  She  be- 
gan immediately, 

“ My  foul,  don’t  delay! 

Chrifl  calls  thee  away  : 

Rife!  Follow  thy  Saviour,  and  b!efs  the  glad  day  ! 
No  mortal  doth  know 
What  he  can  bellow  ; 

What  peace, love  and  comfort:  go  after  him,  go!” 

He  flarted  up  at  once,  and  went  to  the  preach- 
ing. And  the  fame  night  lie  found  peace  to  his 
foul. 

Thurf.  it.  E T (W T ’s 

filler)  rode  with  me  to  Cambourn.  When  Ihe 
heard  her  brother  was  perverted,  Ihe  went  over 
to  Sithney,  on  purpofe  to  reclaim  him.  But 
finding  neither  fair  words,  nor  hard  names,  nor 
oaths,  nor  curfes,  nor  blows  would  prevail,  Ihe 
went  away,  renouncing  him  and  all  that  be- 
longed to  him,  and  fully  refolved  to  fee  him  no 
more. 

Six  weeks  after  flte  met  him  at  Redruth,  and 

defired 


[ 395  ] 

deftred  him  to  Hep  into  an  houfe.  When  the) 
were  fat  down,  fhe  burft  into  tears,  and  faid, 
“ Brother,  follow  thofe  men  in  God’s  name. 
And  fend  me  word  when  any  of  them  preaches 
in  your  houle,  and  I will  come  and  hear  him.” 

* He  alked,  “ How  is  this  ? How  came  )ou 
to  be  fo  changed?’’  She  replied,  “ A fortnight 
aso,  1 dreamed  a man  flood  bv  me  and  faid,  •*  Do 
not  fpeak  evil  of  thefe  mem  For  the}’  are  the 
fervants  of  God.’’  I laid,  “ What  are  )ou  one 
ol  them  ? I defy  you  all.  1 will  keep  to  my 
church.”  He  laid,  “ And  when  you  are  at 
church,  how  are  your  thoughts  employed?  Or 
even  at  the  Lord’s  table.  And  he  went  on,  tell- 
ing me  all  that  was  in  my  heart.  And  every 
word  went  through  me.  And  I looked  up,  and 
faw  him  veiy  bright  and  glorious.  And  I knew  it 
was  our  Saviour.  And  I fell  down  at  his  feet. 
And  then  I waked.” 

The  week  after  fhe  went  to  Sithney,  where 

Mr.  M- was  preaching,  and  faying,  “ Is- 

there  any  of  you  that  has  flint  your  doors  againft 
the  mefl'engers  of  God  ? How  if  our  Lord  (hut 
the  door  of  mercy  againft  you  ?”  She  cried  out, 
“ It  is  I,”  and  dropped  down.  Nor  had  fhe  anyr 
reft,  till  God  made  her  a witnefs  of  the  faith 
which  once  fhe  perfecuted. 

Satur.  13.  I took  my  leave  of  our  brethren  of 
St.  Ives,  and  between  one  and  two  in  the  after- 
noon began  preaching  before  Mr.  Probis’s  houfe 

at 


t 396  ] 

at  Bray,  on,  The  promife  which  is  given  to  them 
that  believe.  Many  were  there  who  had  been  ve- 
hement oppofers.  But  from  this  time  they  op- 
pofed  no  more. 

At  fix  I preached  at  Sithney.  Before  I had 
done,  the  night  came  on  ; but  the  moon  fhone 
bright  upon  us.  I intended  after  preaching  to 
meet  the  fociety  ; but  it  was  hardly  pra&icable; 
the  poor  people  fo  eagerly  crouding  in  upon  us. 
So  I met  them  altogether,  and  exhorted  them, 
not  to  leave  their  firft  love. 

Sund.  14.  For  the  fake  of  thofe  who  came 
from  far,  I delayed  preaching  till  eight  o’clock. 
Many  of  Helfton  were  there,  and  moft  of  thofe 
who  in  time  paft  had  fignalized  themfelves  by 
making  riots.  But  the  fear  of  God  was  upon 
them  : they  all  flood  uncovered,  and  calmly  at- 
tended from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

About  one  I began  preaching  near  Portkellis, 
to  a much  larger  congregation  : and  about  half 
an  hour  after  four  at  Gwenap,  to  an  immenfe 
multitude  of  people,  on,  To  me  to  live  is  Chrift, 
and  to  die  is  gam.  I was  at  firft  afraid  mv  voice 
would  not  reach  them  all ; but  without  caufe  ; 
for  it  was  fo  firengthened,  that  I believe  thou- 
fands  more  might  have  heard  every  word.  In  the 
clofe  of  my  fermon,  I read  them  the  account  of 
Thomas  Hitchins’s  death.  And  the  hearts  of 
many  burned  within  them,  fo  that  they  could 
not  conceal  their  defire,  to  go  to  him,  and  to  be 
with  Chrift.  At  fix  we  took  horfe,  and  about 


nine 


[ 397  3 

nine  (having  bright  moonfhine)  reached  St.  Co- 
Jamb. 

Mond.  1,5.  A guide  meeting  us  at  Camelford, 
conduced  us  to  St.  Mary  Week.  Mr.  Bennet 
overtook  us  on  the  road,  and  Mr.  Thompfon 
came  in  foon  after,  having  loft  his  wav,  and  fo 
picked  up  Air.  Mevrick  and  Butts,  who  were 
wandring  they  knew  not  were.  It  was  the  time 
of  the  yearly  revel,  whicli  obliged  me  to  fpeak 
very  plain.  Thence  we  rode  to  Laneaft,  where 
was  a much  larger  congregation,  and  of  quite 
another  fpirit. 

Tuef.  16.  I rode  to  Plymouth-dock,  and 
preached  in  the  evening,  and  the  next  morning 
at  five.  A little  after  ten-I  began  preaching  in  a 
meadow  near  Taviftock.  In  the  afternoon  we 
called  at  Sticklepath,  and  about  nine  at  night 
came,  weary  enough,  to  Exeter. 

Thurf.  18.  About  one  I preached  at  Beercro- 
comb.  About  five  we  reached  Bridgewater.  We 
expefted  much  tumult  here,  the  great  vulgar 
flirting  up  the  fmall.  But  we  were  difappointed. 
The  very  week  before  our  coming,  the  grand 
jury  had  found  the  bill  againft  the  rioters,  who 
had  fo  often  aflaulted  Mary  Lockyer’s  houfe. 
This,  and  the  awe  of  God,  which  fell  upon 
them,  kept  the  whole  congregation  quiet  and 
ferious. 

Before  I preached  my  ftrength  was  quite  ex- 
haufted,  and  I was  exceeding  feverifh  through 
mere  fatigue.  But  in  riding  to  Middlefey  I 

revived : 


[ 3 98  J 

revived  : and  in  the  morning,  Friday  19,  I 
rofe  quite  well.  My  Jlrength  will  lajaibeunto 
thee. 

After  a long  morning’s  ride,  we  came  to  Mr. 
Star’s  at  Warwick.  Mr.  S.  a neighbouring  gen- 
tleman, who  not  long  fince  hired  a mob  to  make 
a dillurbance,  coming  in,  Mrs.  Star  detained  him 
till  the  time  ol  preaching.  He  feemed  llruck 
much  more  than  the  congregation.  In  the  even- 
ing we  came  to  Briflol. 

Tuef.  23.  1 went  to  Road,  where  the  mob 
threatned  loud.  I determined  however  to  look 
them  in  the  face.  And  at  twelve,  I cried,  to  the 
lamed  contneiration  by  far,  which  I had  ever  feen 
in  thefe  parts,  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be 
jound : call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near.  The 
defpifers  flood  as  men  adonilhed,  and  neither 
jpoke  nor  flirred,  till  I had  concluded  my  fer- 
mon. 

Between  five  and  fix  I preached  at  Bearfield  : 
the  next  evening  at  Blewberry.  While  I was  af- 
terwards meeting  the  fociety,  one  grievous  back- 
fiider,  who  had  been  for  fome time,  as  in  the 
belly  of  hell,  was  flruck  to  tire  earth  and  roared 
aloud.  He  ceafed  not  till  God  reftored  the  pearl 
he  had  loft.  Does  not  our  God  abundantly  par- 
don ? 

Thurf.  25.  I came  to  Wycombe.  It  being 
the  day  on  which  the  mayor  was  chofen,  abun- 
dance of  rabble,  full  of  ftrong  drink,  came  to  the 
preaching,  on  purpofe  to  diftorb.  Butthey  foen 

fell 


r 399  i 

fell  out  among  themfdves  : fo  that  I finififfed  my 
fernton  in  tolerable  quiet. 

Frid.  2 6.  Mr.  B.  went  to  the  mayor  and  faid, 
“ Sir,  I come  to  inform  atjainlt  a common 
fwearer.  1 believe  he  fwore  an  hundred  oaths 
lafl  night  ; hut  I marked  down  only  twenty.” 
“ Sir,  faid  the  mayor,  you  do  very  i ight  ir.  bring- 
ing him  to  juftice.  What  is  his  name  ?”  He  re- 
plied, R—  D . *•  R D ! an- 

fvvered  the  mayor;  whv,  that  is  my  Ion  ’’’  Yes, 
Sir,  fa  d Mr.  B.  fo  I underfland.  “ Nay,  Sir, 
faid  he,  I liave  nothing  to  fav  in  his  defence. 
If  he  breaks  the  law,  he  mull  take  what  fol- 
lows.” 

Satur.  061.  q.  My  brother  and  I took  up  our 
crofs,  and  talked  largelv  with  Mr.  G.  But  he 
hill  infilled,  i.  7 hat  there  was  no  repentance  at 
all,  antecedent  to  fjving  faith  : 2.  That  naked 
faith  alone  was  the  only  condition  of  cverlalling 
falvation  : and  g.  That  no  works  need  he 
preached  at  all,  neither  were  ncctflary  either 
before  or  after  faith. 

We  took  hoi  le  at  nine,  and  foon  after  one 
came  to  Sevenoaks.  After  refrelhing  ourfelves  a 
little,  we  went  to  an  open  place  near  the  fiee- 
fchool,  where  I declared  to  a large,  wild  com- 
pany, There  is  no  difference',  for  ail  have  finned  and 
come  Jhort  of  the  o/o>y  of  God.  They  grew  calmer 
and  calmer  till  I had  done,  and  then  went 
quietly  away.  As  we  returned,  a poor  Shimei 
came  to  meet  us,  bitterly  curbing  and  blafphent- 

ing. 


[ 400  ] 

ing.  But  we  walked  ftrait  on,  and  even  Lis  com- 
panions, the  mob,  neither  laughed  nor  opened 
their  mouth. 

Sund.5.  I preached  in  the  church  at  Shore- 
ham,  morning  and  afternoon.  The  congregation 
feemed  to  underhand  juft  nothing  of  the  matter. 
But  God  can  give  them  underltanding  in  his 
time. 

Thurf.  9.  The  day  of  public  thankfgiving  for 
the  victory  at  Cuiloden,  was  to  us  a day  of  fo- 
lemn  joy.  Satur.  11.  I had  the  pleafure  of 
fpending  an  hour  with  Mr.  P.  He  Paid,  “ I re- 
joiced greatly  when  the  Count  came  over,  hop- 
ing now  I fhould  underhand  the  truth  of  the 
matter,  and  1 went  to  hear  him,  full  of  expecta- 
tion. His  text  was,  Neither  do  I condemn  thee. 
He  began,  “ The  Saviour  fays,  I came  not  to 
deftroy  the  law  : but  the  fad  is  contrary  ; for  he 
does  deftrov  it.  It  is  plain,  the  law  condemned 
this  woman,  but  the  Saviour  does  not  condemn 
her.  Again,  the  law  commands  to  keep  the  fab- 
bath  holy.  But  the  Saviour  did  not  keep  it  holy. 
Nay,  God  himfelf  does  not  keep  the  law.  For 
the  law  fays,  Put  away  all  lying.  But  God  faid, 
Nineveh  Jhall  be  dejlroyed ; yet  Nineveh  was  not 
deilroyed.”  The  whole  fermon  was  of  the  fame 
thread.  I underftood  him  well,  and  do  not  defire 
to  hear  him  any  more.” 

Sa'ur,  26. 1 buried  the  body  of  George  Adams, 
a child  about  twelve  years  old.  He  is  the  firft  of 
the  children  brought  up  at  our  fchool,  whom 

God 


[ 4««  ] 

God  has  called  to  himfelf.  From  the  time  God 
manifeded  his  love  to  him,  he  was  eminently 
of  a meek  and  quiet  fpirit.  And  as  he  lived,  lo 
he  died  in  fweet  peace. 

Sat.  Nov.  1.  I dined  at  J E . Is  not 

this  a brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  P Has 
there  been  one  in  our  memory  that  fo  fignalized 
himfelf  as  an  enemy  to  all  ferious,  inward  reli- 
gion ? But  it  is  pad.  He  was  going  out  on  plea- 
fure,  as  ufual.  His  foot  ilipt,  and  as  he  was  falling, 
a thought  came,  “ What  if  inltead  of  falling  to 
the  earth,  thou  hadd  now  died  and  fallen  into 
hell?”  He  heard  and  acknowledged  the  voice 
of  God,  and  began  to  feek  his  face. 

Wed.  12.  In  the  evening  at  the  chappel,  my 
teeth  pained  me  much.  In  coming  home  Mr. 
Spear  gave  me  an  account  of  the  rupture  he  had 
had  for  fome  years,  whiclyafter  the  mod  eminent 
phyficians  had  declared  it  incurable,  was  per- 
fe£lly  cured  in  a moment.  I prayed,  with  fub- 
miffion  to  the  will  of  God.  Mv  pain  ceafed,  and 
returned  no  more. 

Sund.  16.  I was  deftred  to  pray  with  one  in 
defpair.  I had  never  feen  her  before,  but  foon 
found  fhe  was  a fenfible  woman,  and  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  theory  of  religion;  yet  when  I 
fpoke  to  her  fome  of  the  fird  principles  of  Chrif- 
tianitv,  die  cried  out,  as  if  die  had  never  heard 
them  before.  “ Here  ! He  fays,  I may  be  faved  ! 
He  fays,  God  loves  me!  Chrid  died  for  me! 
And  that  I may  live  with  him  in  heaven  ! O 

then, 


[ 402  ] 

then,  what  is  this  world  ? What  is  life,  what  rs 
pain  ! I do  not  care  for  it.  Let  me  die  ; let  me 
fufferanv  thinghere,  fo  I in  tv  but  live  with  Chrifl 
in  heaven.” 

About  this  time  I received  a remarkable  ac- 
count from  Grimlby  in  Lincolnfhire. 

“ William  Blow,  John  Melton,  and  Thomas 
Wilkinl'on  were  going,  on  Friday  lafl,  in  a boat 
on  the  lea  near  Grimibv.  John  Melton  could 
fwim  exceeding  well,  but  William  Blow  not  at 
all.  When  they  were  about  half  a league  from 
the  fhore,  they  were  both  beat  over-board. 
John  Melton  funk  to  the  bottom  like  a Hone. 
William  Blow  funk  and  rofe  feveral  times,  and 
was  in  the  water  near  a quarter  ol  an  hour,  befoie 
Thomas  Wilkinfon  could  get  near  him.  At  lafl 
he  faw  his  hand  above  the  water.  He  then  flruck 
down  his  boat-hook,  at  a venture,  and  ^caught 
him  by  the  flap  of  his  coat,  and  pulled  him  to 
the  boat  fide.  He  was  quite  fenfible,  and  (aid, 
“ Tommv,  I am  afraid  you  can't  get  me  in.  ’ 
“ Nay  then,  Laid  1 homas,  we  will  fmk  together, 
for  I will  not  let  thee  go.”  At  lafl  he  did  get 
him  in,  and  brought  him  fafe  to  land. 

We  afked  li  How  he  could  keep  in  the  water 
fo  long,  and  not  be  drowned Hefaid,  “ God 
gave  him  that  thought,  to  keep  his  mouth  fhut, 
and  when  he  was  almofl  choakcd,  he  gave  a 
fpring  up,  and  got  a little  breath.  ’ I afked  him 
“ How  he  felt  himfeif,  when  he  was  under 
water  ? If  lie  was  bot  afraid  of  death  He  an- 

fwered, 


[ 4°3  ] 

fwered,  “ No.  His  foul  was  lifted  up  unto  the 
Lord,  and  he  freely  rcfigned  himfelf  into  his 
hands.” 

I received  likewife  from  feveral  of  our  bre- 
thren abroad,  an  account  of  the  deliverance  God 
had  latelv  wrought  for  them. 

Bujh  oj  Brabant. 

Rev.  S I R. 

“ T Have  long  had  a defire  to  write,  hut  had 

-A-  not  an  opportunity  till  we  came  to  our 
winter-quarters.  W hen  we  came  over,  we 
thought  we  fhould  have  had  B.  Haim  with  us,  as 
formerly:  but  we  were  difappointed.  We  were 
about  three  weeks  upon  our  march,  and  endured 
a great  deal  through  the  heat  of  the  weather,  and 
for  want  of  water.  At  Viilear  camp,  we  lav  fo 
near  the  enemy,  and  were  forced  to  mount  fo 
many  guards,  that  we  had  hardly  any  trine  to 
ourfelves,  nor  had  J.  Haim  time  to  meet  with 
us.  We  left  this  camp  in  twelve  or  fourteen 
days  time,  and  wherever  we  marched,  we  had 
the  French  always  in  our  view ; only  a few 
days,  when  we  were  marching  through  woods, 
and  over  high  mountains.  Coming  back  to  Maf- 
tricht,  at  fome  camps  we  have  lain  fo  near  the 
enemv,  that  their  centries  and  ours  have  taken 
fnuff  with  one  another:  having  then  no  orders 
to  fire  at,  or  hurt  each  other.  But  the  day  we 
•came  ofl,  we  found  it  othcrwife.  For  at  eleven 
o’clock  the  night  before,  orders  came  for  us  to 

be 


[ 404  ] 

be  ready  to  turn  out  an  hour  before  day,  which 
was  the  30th  of  September.  At  day- break,  or- 
ders came  to  our  regiment,  and  Col.  Graham’s 
to  advance  about  a mile  and  a half  toward  the 
French.  We  were  placed  in  a little  park,  and 
Graham’s  regiment  in  another,  to  the  right  of 
us.  We  lay  open  to  the  French:  only  we  cut 
down  the  hedge  breaft-high,  and  filled  it  up 
with  loofe  earth.  Thus  we  waited  for  the  ene- 
my feveral  hours,  who  came  firft  with  their  right 
wing  upon  the  Dutch,  that  were  upon  our  left. 
They  engaged  in  our  fight,  and  fired  brifkly  up- 
on each  other,  cannon  and  fmall  Ihot  for  two 
hours.  Then  the  Dutch,  being  overpowered, 
gave  way,  and  the  French  advanced  upon  us, 
and  inarched  a party  over  the  ditch  on  the  left 
of  Graham’s,  and  fell  in  upon  them;  notwith- 
flanding  our  continual  firing  both  with  our  fmall- 
arins  and  lour  pieces  of  cannon.  So  when  the 
French  had  got  pad  us,  our  regiment  retreated, 
or  we  fhould  have  been  furrounded.  In  our  re- 
treat, we  faced  about  twice  and  fired  on  the  ene- 
my, and  fo  came  off  with  little  lofs;  though 
they  fired  after  us  with  large  cannon  fhot,  I be- 
lieve four  and  twenty  pounders. 

“ We  loft  one  brother  of  Graham’s  regiment, 
and  two  of  our’s.  Andrew  Paxton,  fhot  dead  in 
our  retreat,  and  Mark  Bend,  who  was  wounded 
and  left  on  the  field.  The  Lord  gave  us  all  on 
that  day  an  extraordinary  courage,  and  a word 
to  fpeak  to  our  comrades,  as  we  advanced  to- 
ward 


[ 405  ] 

ward  the  enemy,  to  tell  them,  how  happy  tLey 
were  that  had  made  their  peace  with  God.  We 
likewife  fpoke  to  one  another,  while  the  cannon 
were  firing,  and  we  could  all  rely  on  God,  and 
refign  to  his  will. 

“ A few  of  us  meet  here  twice  a day  ; and 
thanks  be  to  God,  his  grace  is  Hill  fufficient  for 
us.  We  defire  all  our  brethren  to  praife  God 
on  our  behalf.  And  we  defire  all  your  prayers, 
that  the  Lord  may  give  us  to  be  fledfafl,  unmova- 
ble, alwavs  aboundingin  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

I remain, 

061.  17.  Your  loving  brother, 

5.  5. 

Nearly  the  fame  account  we  received  a few 
days  before,  in  a letter  from  the  cainp  near 
Maeftricht.  Part  of  this  ran  as  follows, 

“ Ever  fince  the  eed  of  July,  our  army  and 
the  French  have  lain  fo  clofe,  and  marched  fo 
clofe  together,  that  we  have  expeHed  them  to 
come  upon  us  almoll  every  night,  and  have  had 
for  many  nights  flrift  orders,  not  to  take  off  our 
accoutrements,  but  to  be  ready  to  turn  out  at  a 
minute’s  warning.  And  almoft  every  day,  fome 
of  our  out-guards  have  had  fkirmifhes  with  them. 
On  Sept.  29,  at  night,  Prince  Charles  had  in>- 
telligence,  that  they  defigned  to  fall  upon  11s 
with  all  their  force.  So  we  had  orders  to  be 
ready,  and  at  break  of  day,  our  regiment  and 
Graham’s  were  ordered  to  march  in  the  front  of 
the  arm}-,  with  two  Heffian,  two  Hanoverian, 
2 and 


[ 4<>6  ] 

and  a part  of  the  Dutch.  We  marched  a mile 
forward  into  little  parks  and  orchards,  a village 
being  between  us  and  our  army,  in  this  pofiure 
we  remained  about  three  hours,  while  their  right 
wing  was  engaged  with  the  Dutch,  the  cannon 
playing  every  where  all  this  time.  But  we  were 
all  endued  with  ftrength  and  courage  from  God, 
fo  that  the  fear  of  death  was  taken  away  from 
us.  And  when  the  French  came  upon  us,  and 
overpowered  us,  we  were  troubled  at  our  regi- 
ment’s giving  way,  and  would  have  flood  our 
ground,  and  called  to  the  reft  of  the  regiment,  to 
flop  and  face  the  enemy,  hut  to  no  purpofe.  In 
the  retreat  we  were  broke;  set  alter  we  had 
retreated  about  a mile,  we  rallied  twice  and  fir- 
ed again.  When  we  came  where  we  thought 
the  annv  was,  they  were  all  gone.  So  we  march- 
ed good  part  of  the  night,  and  the  next  day, 
about  lour  o’clock,  we  came  to  the  camp.  We 
left  our  brother  Mark  Bend  in  the  field;  whe- 
ther he  be  alive  or  dead  we  cannot  tell  ; but  the 
laft  of  our  brothers  that  fpoke  to  him,  after  he 
was  wounded,  found  him  quite  refigned  to  the 
will  of  God.  We  that  he  has  fpared  a little 
longer,  defire  you  to  return  thanks  to  God,  for 
all  his  mercies  to  ns.” 


End  of  t}ie  Twenty-Eighth  Volume. 


2 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Twenty- Eighth  Volume. 


Page 

An  extraB  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’j 
journal,  from  Sept.  3,  1741,  to  OB.  27, 

1743-  — — 3 

An  extraB  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefleyh 
journal, from  OB.  27,  1743,  to  Nov.  17, 

1 746-  — — i8< 


' . 


: w~ 


* - » 


- 

. ' 


SPir7  ' % 


* ">V 

■ ,.  I V > . - 


- 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

