GOULD  UBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COUMGE 


r 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/gospelfortodayneOOtorr 


The  Gospel  for  To-day 


Works  by  R.  A.  TORREY 


LATEST  ISSUES 

The  Power  of  Prayer  and  Prayer  of  Power,  $1.75. 
Soul- Winning  Sermons.  Sermons  used  in  Saving 
Myriads  of  Sinners  All  Around  the  Globe. 
$4.00. 

Divine  Healing.  Does  God  Perform  Miracles 
Today?  Paper,  35c. 

Why  God  Used  D.  L.  Moody.  Paper,  35c. 

FOR  REVIVAL  WORK 
Anecdotes  and  Illustrations.  Cloth,  $1.00. 

How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ,  75c. 

How  to  Work  for  Christ,  $3.00. 

How  to  Promote  and  Conduct  a Successful 
Revival,  $1.25. 

Personal  Work.  $1.25. 

REVIVAL  TALKS  AND  ADDRESSES 

The  Gospel  of  Today — ^New  Evangelistic  Ser- 
mons, $1.50. 

The  Voice  of  God  in  the  Present  Hour,  $1.50. 
The  Bible  and  Its  Christ.  75c. 

Revival  Addresses.  $1.50. 

Real  Salvation  and  Whole-Hearted  Service.  $1.50. 

FOR  BIBLE  STUDY 
What  the  Bible  Teaches.  Cloth,  $3.00. 

How  to  Study  the  Bible  for  Greatest  Profit.  75c. 
Difficulties  and  Alleged  Errors  and  Contradic- 
tions in  the  Bible.  75c. 

Practical  and  Perplexing  Questions  Answered. 
75c. 

FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE 

The  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Cloth. 
$1.50. 

How  to  succeed  in  the  Christian  Life.  75c. 

How  to  Pray.  75c. 

How  to  Obtain  Fullness  of  Power  in  Christian 
Life  and  Service.  75c. 

The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  75c. 

A Vest  Pocket  Companion  for  Christian  Workers. 
Flexible  Cloth,  35c. 


The  Gospel  for  To-day 

New  Evangelistic  Sermons 
for  a New  Day 


By 

R.  A.  TORREY,  D.D. 

Author  of  **How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ,** 
** Anecdotes  and  Illustrations,'*  etc. 


New  York  Chicago 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London  and  Edinburgh 


1391 


Copyright,  1922,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANV 


New  York:  158  Fifth  Avenue 

Chicago:  17  North  Wabash  Ave. 
London:  21  Paternoster  Square 
Edinburgh : 75  Princes  Street 


Preface 


Repeated  and  insistent  demands  for  a new 
volume  of  evangelistic  sermons  have  been 
coming  to  me  from  pastors,  evangelists  and 
publishers.  I have  felt  the  force  of  these  demands 
and  at  last  am  yielding  to  them  in  publishing  this  new 
volume  of  sermons. 

These  sermons  were,  for  the  most  part,  preached  to 
my  own  congregation  in  Los  Angeles  in  the  past  few 
months,  and  God,  in  His  wondrous  condescension, 
has  seen  fit  to  bless  them  to  the  conversion  of  a good 
many  persons,  the  great  majority  of  whom  have  been 
men  from  the  ages  of  twenty-five  up  to  fifty;  but 
there  have  been  some  men  of  riper  years  converted, 
even  up  to  seventy  or  eighty  years  of  age.  There 
have  also  been  some  notable  conversions  among 
women.  We  have  been  greatly  interested  in  the 
number  of  Jews  and  Roman  Catholics  who  have  re- 
cently made  a public  profession  of  accepting  Christ 
in  our  after-meetings,  many  of  whom  have  after- 
wards united  with  our  church,  the  Church  of  the 
Open  Door.  Not  a few  of  those  converted  were 
formerly  sceptics,  agnostics,  infidels  and  atheists,  and 
quite  a number  of  ‘‘  Christian  Scientists.^' 

The  Gospel  presented  in  these  sermons  is  the  same 
Gospel  of  a crucified  Christ,  a Saviour  from  the  guilt 
of  sin,  and  a risen  Christ,  a Saviour  from  the  present 
power  of  sin,  that  we  have  been  preaching  through- 

5 


6 


PEEFACB 


out  our  entire  ministry  as  pastor,  and  as  evangelist  in 
all  parts  of  the  world.  We  are  certainly  living  in  a 
New  Day.  The  War  and  its  after-results  have 
worked  a radical  transformation  in  the  ethical  and 
religious  as  well  as  social  and  economic  outlook  of 
the  minds  of  the  men  and  women  of  the  present  day; 
nevertheless,  we  find  that  the  same  Gospel  that  was 
**  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  ” before  the  War, 
and  from  the  days  of  the  Apostle  Paul  (Rom.  i : i6), 
is  the  Gospel  that  men  will  listen  to  and  yield  to  to- 
day. All  of  these  new  gospels,  The  Social  Gospel 
with  the  rest,  are  proving  utterly  ineffective  in  saving 
individual  men  or  in  lifting  up  communities.  The 
Real  Gospel,  when  preached  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  produces  the  same  effects  in  individual  lives 
to-day,  and  in  the  transformation  of  families  and 
communities,  that  it  has  produced  throughout  all  the 
centuries  since  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  died  on  the 
Cross  of  Calvary  and  rose  again  and  ascended  to  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father  and  poured  out  His  Holy 
Spirit  upon  His  people.  Practical  results  prove  that 
that  Gospel  does  not  even  need  to  be  restated,  though 
of  course  it  is  desirable  to  adapt  the  illustrations  and 
method  of  argument  to  the  thinking  of  our  own  day. 

There  seems  to  be  a great  religious  awakening  In 
Scotland  and  in  some  parts  of  Ireland  and  England, 
and  there  are  Indications  here  and  there  of  an  awak- 
ening In  our  own  land.  It  cannot  be  denied  that 
many  pastors  who  are  thoroughly  evangelical  and 
many  of  our  most  intelligent  laymen  are  tired  of  some 
of  the  methods  of  evangelism  that  have  been  in  vogue 
in  our  own  country  during  the  past  few  years;  but 
this  does  not  mean  for  one  moment  that  they  do  not 


PEEFACE 


7 


believe  in  evangelism  or  in  true  revivals.  We  seem 
to  be  ripe  for  a revival  now,  and  it  is  hoped  these 
sermons  may  prove  helpful  in  promoting  that  greatly 
longed  for  and  earnestly  prayed  for  genuine  revival. 
It  is  hoped  that  they  may  be  helpful  to  pastors  in  their 
desire  to  become  their  own  evangelists,  that  they  may 
be  helpful  to  those  evangelists  whom  God  has  chosen, 
and  that  they  may  be  directly  used  to  the  salvation  of 
many  souls,  by  being  put  in  the  hands  of  men,  women 
and  children  who  are  unsaved  and  need  a Saviour. 
It  has  been  a great  joy  to  the  author  of  this  book  to 
receive  letters  from  different  parts  of  the  world,  from 
all  classes  of  people,  saying  that  they  had  been  led 
to  Christ  through  reading  printed  reports  of  his 
sermons. 

In  our  own  church,  we  have  found  that  it  has  not 
been  necessary  to  introduce  movies,  or  other  sensa- 
tional features,  to  draw  the  crowds.  We  have  never 
had  a movie,  or  anything  of  that  kind  in  our  church, 
and  never  expect  to  have ; and  yet  our  Sunday  even- 
ing audiences  at  which  these  sermons  were  preached 
were  probably  larger  than  those  of  any  other  church 
in  the  community,  even  those  resorting  to  the  movies 
as  a means  of  drawing  a crowd;  in  fact,  we  think 
there  is  no  other  building  used  for  religious  services 
in  the  city  that  would  hold  the  thousands  of  people 
who  Sunday  night  after  Sunday  night  have  listened  to 
these  sermons.  What  the  great  attraction  is  to  bring 
men  and  women  to  the  house  of  God,  as  well  as  to 
bring  them  to  a better  life,  is  stated  In  the  fifth  ser- 
mon In  this  book. 


Los  Angeles f Cah 


R.  A.  T. 


I. 


IV. 


VII. 

y<^ii, 

l^ix. 

X. 


Contents 

A Converted  Infidel’s  Preaching 
Acis  g : 20. 

The  Key-Note  of  the  Bible 
I John  4 : 8. 

The  Most  Wonderful  Sentence  Ever 

Written 

John  3 : i6. 

The  Only  Gospel  that  Has  Saving 

Power 

Romans  I : i6;  Galatians  i : 8,  g. 

The  Great  Attraction  : The  Up- 
lifted Christ  . . . . 

John  12  : 32,  R.  V. 

The  Most  Important  Question  of 

THE  Day  

Matthew  27 : 22. 

Great  Things  and  How  Any  One  Can 
Get  Them 

1 Corinthians  3 : 21. 

Noah  and  His  Ark  . . . , 

Genesis  7 .•  i. 

Time  and  Eternity  Contrasted 

2 Corinthians  4 : 13-18. 

Eternal  Life  or  the  Wrath  of  God  : 
Which  Will  You  Choose?  . 

John  3 ; 36. 


II 

26 

43 

62 

77 

93 

no 

125 

142 

15* 


9 


10 

CONTENTS 

XL 

A Perfect  Cure  for  Poverty  and 
All  Other  Evils  of  the  Day 
Matthew  ii ; 28-30. 

168 

XII. 

Jesus  is  the  Christ, the  Son  of  God. 
John  20  :3i. 

186 

XIII. 

Which  Shall  We  Believe  ; God  or 

Man  ? 

Romans  3 .-3,  4.. 

201 

f 

A CONVERTED  INFIDEUS  PREACHING 

*'And  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  syna- 
gogues, that  he  is  the  Son  of  God,*' — Acts  9:20. 

YOU  will  find  the  text  in  Acts  9:20:  '‘And 
straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  syna- 
gogues, that  he  is  the  Son  of  God."  The 
Revised  Version  is  even  more  suggestive,  ‘‘And 
straightway  in  the  synagogues  he  proclaimed  Jesus, 
that  he  is  the  Son  of  God/’  There  was  perhaps 
never  a more  amazed  audience  than  that  one  which 
heard  Saul  of  Tarsus  preach  his  first  sermon  in 
Damascus.  Saul  was  known  far  and  wide  as  a hater 
of  Jesus  Christ  and  as  a persecuter  of  Christians. 
He  had  come  to  Damascus  for  the  express  purpose  of 
laying  waste  the  church,  arresting  all  believers  in 
Jesus  Christ,  and  dragging  them  to  Jerusalem  for 
punishment  and  death.  There  is  not  on  earth  to-day, 
and  has  not  been  for  centuries,  so  bitter  an  infidel  as 
Saul  of  Tarsus ; and  yet  on  his  first  public  appearance 
in  Damascus,  this  same  Saul  of  Tarsus  preaches  a 
sermon  of  tremendous  power,  declaring  and  proving 
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God.  Will  you  please  look 
at  two  things  to-night,  and  if  you  will  look  at  them 
earnestly  and  honestly,  it  will  result  in  some  of  you 
being  converted  to-night.  The  first  thing  I wish  you 

II 


12 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


to  look  at  is  the  preacher  in  the  text,  the  second  thing 
I wish  you  to  look  at  is  the  preacher’s  message, 

I.  The  Preacher. 

Look  first  at  the  preacher.  The  preacher  was  Saul 
of  Tarsus.  As  you  look  at  him,  I wish  to  submit 
three  good  reasons  why  this  particular  preacher’s 
message  should  command  attention,  and  should  be 
accepted.  Taken  together,  these  three  reasons  prove 
that  the  message  is  beyond  an  honest  question  true. 

I.  The  first  reason  why  this  preacher’s  message 
should  command  attention  and  should  be  accepted  is 
that  he  had  been  a hater  of  the  Jesus  whom  he  now 
proclaimed. 

Saul  had  not  been  brought  up  to  believe  that  Jesus 
was  the  Son  of  God,  and  therefore  he  did  not  keep 
on  preaching  it  because  it  was  what  he  had  been 
taught  to  believe  from  childhood.  There  are  many 
who  say  of  our  modern  preachers,  “ Oh,  he  believes 
that  and  preaches  that  just  because  it  is  what  his 
parents  and  early  teachers  taught  him  to  believe.” 
But  no  such  charge  can  be  brought  against  Saul  of 
Tarsus.  The  doctrine  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
God  was  not  something  Saul  had  taken  up  without 
any  due  thought,  not  something  that  he  had  inherited 
from  his  parents  and  early  teachers.  Saul  had  op- 
posed this  doctrine  with  all  the  vigour  of  an  intense 
soul ; he  had  gone  up  and  down  the  streets  of  the  city 
of  Jerusalem,  in  and  out  of  the  houses,  arresting  men, 
women  and  children,  for  no  other  reason  than  that 
they  believed  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God,  and 
confessed  their  faith  in  Him  as  such.  He  had  at- 
tended their  trials  and  voted  for  their  death.  Noth- 


A CONVEETED  INFIDEL^S  PEEAOHING  13 


ing  seemed  to  cause  him  greater  joy  than  the  violent 
death  of  some  Christian.  He  had  had  a part  in  the 
murder  of  the  first  Christian  martyr,  Stephen.  Not 
only  so,  but  when  he  had  exhausted  all  his  oppor- 
tunities of  manifesting  in  violent  ways  his  hatred  of 
Christians  in  Jerusalem,  his  hatred  of  Christ  and 
Christianity  was  not  satisfied,  and  he  had  sought  and 
obtained  authority  to  go  to  Damascus  to  carry  out  a 
similar  work  of  opposition  and  destruction  there. 
Now  when  a man  like  that  turns  completely  around 
and  says,  I was  wrong,  I was  utterly  wrong,  I was 
awfully  wrong,  in  my  denial  that  Jesus  was  the  Son 
of  God,’’  then  we  ought  to  give  his  change  of  opinion 
careful  attention;  he  must  have  had  some  good  rea- 
son for  it. 

2.  But  Saul’s  testimony  ought  to  have  great 
weight  for  another  reason,  and  that  is  because  of  what 
he  sacrificed  for  his  change  of  opinion.  Saul’s  change 
of  opinion  cost  him  much.  It  cost  him  everything 
of  a worldly  character  that  he  possessed.  It  cost 
him  the  loss  of  a position  of  great  influence  and  prom- 
ise ; it  cost  him  the  loss  of  all  his  old  friends ; it  cost 
him  the  severest  persecution ; it  cost  him  arrest  after 
arrest,  and  imprisonment  after  imprisonment,  and 
scourging  after  scourging,  and  stoning  and  insult, 
and  attempted  assassination.  It  cost  him  wandering, 
and  hunger  and  nakedness;  it  cost  him  suffering  of 
the  most  intense  kind,  and  dangers  of  indescribable 
magnitude.  When  a man  of  standing  and  education 
like  Saul  of  Tarsus  makes  sacrifices  like  that  for  a 
change  of  opinion,  his  new  opinion  must  demand 
great  consideration. 

Of  course,  men  are  constantly  changing  their  opin- 


14 


THE  GOSPEL  POE  TO-DAY 


ions  because  they  are  going  to  gain  something  by  the 
change.  Many  a Republican  becomes  a Democrat, 
and  vice  versa,  many  a Democrat  becomes  a Repub- 
lican because  of  some  personal  profit  that  is  to  come 
to  them  in  one  way  or  another  from  the  change,  and 
of  course  a change  of  opinion  in  a case  like  that  is 
not  worthy  of  much  consideration.  There  are  pro- 
fessed Christians  who  have  become  infidels,  out- 
spoken infidels,  because  they  could  make  money  by 
the  change,  or  because  they  had  sinned,  and  the  truth 
of  Christianity  was  causing  them  pain  of  conscience, 
and  they  wished  to  save  their  consciences,  or  because 
of  some  other  low  end  that  was  to  be  gained  by  the 
change  of  opinion. 

When  I was  in  Sydney,  Australia,  a man  was  urged 
to  come  and  hear  my  address,  but  he  replied  that  he 
took  no  stock  in  that  sort  of  thing,  that  he  himself 
had  been  a preacher  once,  and  a missionary,  and  had 
found  that  the  whole  thing  was  a humbug.  I took 
occasion  to  look  into  the  man’s  history,  and  I found 
that  he  had  been  a missionary,  but  that  his  change  of 
opinion  was  not  due  to  the  fact  that  further  informa- 
tion and  study  had  shown  him  that  Christianity  was 
untrue,  but  because  as  a missionary  he  had  gotten 
into  trouble  for  his  immorality,  and  that  he  was  ex- 
pelled from  the  mission,  as  he  should  have  been,  and 
in  that  way  was  led  to  change  his  opinion  about 
Christianity  and  to  accept  infidelity.  But  when  a 
man  of  great  intelligence  changes  his  opinion,  and 
sacrifices  everything  that  men  hold  dear,  for  that 
change,  and  is  transformed  in  character  by  the 
change,  and  when  the  man  who  does  thus  change  is 
a man  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who  became  Paul  the 


A CONVEETED  INFIDEI/S  PEEACHING  16 


Apostle,  any  honest  man  will  hesitate  a long  time 
before  he  says  Saul  was  mistaken  in  the  change. 

3.  But  there  is  a third  reason,  and  a better  one 
yet,  why  Saul’s  opinion  must  have  great  weight. 
Indeed  this  reason  is  so  absolutely  conclusive,  if  we 
are  thoroughly  honest,  we  must  say  that  Saul  was 
certainly  right  in  what  he  says,  and  that  Jesus  is 
as  Saul  said  he  was,  ‘‘  the  Son  of  God.”  That  rea- 
son is  found  in  the  way  in  which  Saul  of  Tarsus  came 
to  change  his  opinion.  Why  did  Saul  change  from 
the  opinion  that  Jesus  was  an  impostor  and  blas- 
phemer to  the  opinion  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God? 
Saul  himself  tells  us  why  he  changed  his  opinion. 
He  says  it  was  because  as  he  drew  near  to  Damascus 
whither  he  was  going  to  arrest  the  Christians  and 
bring  them  to  Jerusalem  to  be  punished,  at  the  noon 
hour  suddenly  there  shone  around  about  him  from 
Heaven  a great  light,  above  the  light  of  the  noontime 
sun,  and  that  in  that  light  he  saw  the  face  and  form  of 
Jesus  who  was  once  crucified,  now  risen  and  glorified, 
and  that  he  heard  a voice  saying  unto  him,  ‘‘  Saul, 
Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ? ” and  that  when  he 
inquired  who  was  speaking  to  him,  the  form  there  in 
the  glory  said,  I am  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  thou 
persecutest  ” (Acts  22:  6-8,  i6~i8;  cf.  9:  5,  6). 

Now  if  Saul  of  Tarsus  really  saw  Jesus  there  in 
the  glory,  and  if  Jesus  said  to  Saul  what  Saul  re- 
ports that  He  said,  and  if  Saul  was  commissioned  at 
that  time,  as  he  said  he  was,  to  be  the  authoritative 
representative  of  this  same  Jesus,  then  Jesus  cer- 
tainly is  the  Son  of  God.  There  remains  no  room  for 
debate  about  that.  But  the  question  arises.  Did  Saul 
really  see  Jesus  in  this  way  and  hear  Him  say  the 


16 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


things  he  said  He  did?  He  either  did,  or  else  Saul 
was  a liar  and  made  the  story  up,  or  else  he  was  mis- 
taken and  had  a sunstroke  or  something  of  that  sort 
that  he  fancied  was  a reality. 

Did  he  lie  and  make  the  story  up?  Such  a sup- 
position is  incredible;  there  was  no  object  for  the 
lie,  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained  by  the  lie,  there 
was  everything  to  be  lost  by  it.  Men  do  not  manu- 
facture lies  for  the  sake  of  sacrificing  position,  home, 
money,  comfort,  ease,  reputation,  love  of  friends,  and 
everything  dear  to  them  in  life.  The  supposition 
then,  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  lied  in  this  matter,  is  ruled 
out.  Was  Paul  the  victim  of  delusion  and  fancy 
through  sunstroke  or  a flash  of  lightning  and  peal  of 
thunder  (which  he  mistook  for  the  voice  of  Jesus) 
or  overwrought  imagination,  or  something  of  that 
kind,  so  that  he  imagined  that  he  saw  some- 
thing he  did  not  see,  and  heard  something  he 
did  not  hear?  To  this  we  would  say  that  the 
record,  and  well  attested  facts  in  the  case,  make 
this  explanation  impossible.  Not  only  did  Saul  see 
the  light,  but  those  who  journeyed  with  him  saw  the 
light,  so  it  could  not  have  been  Paul’s  imagination. 
And  not  only  did  those  who  journeyed  with  him  see 
the  light,  they  heard  the  voice  also,  though  they  did 
not  distinguish  the  message  that  was  spoken.  Fur- 
thermore, Paul  v/as  blind  for  three  days,  and  that 
was  no  fancy.  Further,  there  was  another  man, 
Ananias,  who  saw  Jesus  in  a vision,  and  this  Jesus 
whom  he  saw  in  the  vision  said,  "^Arise  and  go  into 
the  street  which  is  called  Straight,  and  inquire  in  the 
house  of  Judas  for  one  named  Saul,  a man  of  Tarsus : 
for  behold,  he  prayeth;  and  he  hath  seen  a man 


A CON  VESTED  INFIDEUS  PEE  ACHING  17 


named  Ananias  coming  in  and  laying  his  hands  on 
him,  that  he  might  receive  his  sight/'  Ananias  pro- 
tested against  going,  saying,  “ Lord,  I have  heard 
from  many  of  this  man,  how  much  evil  he  did  to  thy 
saints  at  Jerusalem;  and  here  he  hath  authority  from 
the  chief  priests  to  bind  all  that  call  upon  thy  name.” 
But  the  Lord  who  appeared  to  him  in  the  vision  in- 
sisted upon  his  going  and  he  obeyed.  He  found  Saul 
where  the  Lord  Jesus  had  told  him  in  the  vision  he 
would  find  him,  and  he  entered  into  the  house ; and 
laying  his  hands  on  him  said.  Brother  Saul,  the  Lord 
even  Jesus  who  appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way  which 
thou  earnest,  hath  sent  me  that  thou  mayest  receive 
thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.”  And 
immediately  there  fell  from  Saul's  eyes  the  scales 
and  he  received  his  sight.  There  is  absolutely  no 
room  for  the  theory  of  delusion  and  fancy  on  Paul's 
part  here.  Does  some  one  say  the  whole  story  in 
Acts  is  a fiction?  Let  them  study  it.  I challenge 
any  honest  lawyer  or  historical  critic  to  study  this 
story  carefully  and  candidly,  with  the  desire  to 
find  out  whether  it  is  truth  or  fiction,  and  see  if 
this  story  does  not  bear  the  unmistakable  marks  of 
truth. 

In  the  eighteenth  century  rationalism  had  swept 
everything  before  it  in  England.  There  were  very 
few,  even  among  the  clergy,  who  still  believed  in  the 
supernatural,  but  there  were  some  remains  of  faith 
in  the  miracles  and  in  the  historic  accuracy  of  the 
Bible,  so  the  rationalists  of  the  day  appointed  two  of 
their  ablest  reasoners  to  undertake  a campaign  for  the 
destruction  of  what  remained  of  faith  in  the  super- 
natural— Lord  Lyttleton,  an  able  lawyer,  and  Sir 


18 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAT 


Gilbert  West,  Clerk  of  the  Privy  Council.  These 
two  men  planned  a campaign  for  the  destruction  of 
belief  in  the  supernatural.  One  of  them  said  to  the 
other,  “ If  we  are  to  destroy  faith  in  the  super- 
natural, there  are  two  alleged  incidents  in  the  Bible 
that  we  must  prove  to  be  legend  or  myth.  One  is  the 
alleged  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead, 
and  the  other  is  the  alleged  conversion  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus/' 

Lord  Lyttleton  said  to  Sir  Gilbert  West,  Well,  I 
will  take  the  story  of  the  conversion  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus  as  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and 
show  it  is  not  historic  fact  but  legend."  And  Sir 
Gilbert  West  replied  that  he  would  take  the  story  of 
the  alleged  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  show 
that  that  was  not  historic  fact  but  legend  or  myth. 
Then  West  turned  to  Lyttleton  and  said,  I will 
depend  upon  you  for  my  Bible  material,  for  I must 
confess  that  I am  somewhat  rusty  in  the  Bible." 
Lyttleton  replied,  ‘‘  I was  intending  to  depend  upon 
you  for  my  Biblical  material,  for  I also  am  somewhat 
rusty  in  the  Bible."  Then  one  of  them  said,  ‘‘  Well, 
we  must  be  candid  and  therefore  we  must  carefully 
study  the  records  in  the  Bible."  They  met  a number 
of  times  while  they  were  preparing  their  books.  On 
one  of  these  occasions  Lyttleton  said  to  West,  “ West, 
as  I have  been  studying  the  record  in  the  Bible,  I 
have  become  somewhat  shaken  in  my  position." 
West  replied,  “ Well,  I am  glad  to  hear  you  say  it, 
for  I confess  that  as  I have  been  studying  the  records 
regarding  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  I have  become 
somewhat  shaken  in  my  position."  But  they  went  on 
and  completed  their  books. 


A CONVERTED  INFIDEUS  PREACHING  19 


At  a last  conference,  West  said  to  Lyttleton, 
‘‘  Have  you  written  your  book?  ’’  He  replied,  ‘‘  Yes, 
I have,  but  as  I have  studied  the  facts  as  presented 
in  the  Bible  and  applied  to  them  the  canons  of  evi- 
dence received  in  courts  of  law  I have  become  satis- 
fied of  the  truth  of  the  Bible  record,  and  that  Saul  of 
Tarsus  was  converted  just  as  it  is  recorded  in  the 
ninth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles/’  Then 
he  added,  ‘‘  Have  you  written  your  book?  ” 

Yes,”  Sir  Gilbert  West  replied,  I have  written 
my  book,  but  as  I have  sifted  the  evidence  regarding 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  as  found  in  the 
Bible,  I have  become  satisfied  that  Jesus  Christ  did 
rise  from  the  dead,  just  as  recorded  in  the  Gospels, 
and  I have  written  my  book  on  that  side.” 

Any  one  who  will  do  what  this  gifted  lawyer  did, 
sit  down  to  a careful  study  of  the  conversion  of 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  as  related  in  three  different  places 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  as  referred  to 
in  the  Epistles,  with  an  honest  desire  to  know 
whether  it  is  truth  or  fiction,  will  be  compelled  to 
come  to  the  same  conclusion  that  Lord  Lyttleton 
did. 

We  arrive,  then,  at  this  point — that  Saul  of  Tarsus 
changed  from  a bitter  infidel  to  a believer  in  Jesus 
Christ  and  preached  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,” 
because  Jesus  Christ  appeared  to  him  in  glory  as  the 
Son  of  God.  Saul  of  Tarsus  actually  saw  him  and 
Jesus  Christ  appointed  Saul  His  authoritative  repre- 
sentative. It  has  been  absolutely  settled,  not  as  a 
theological  speculation,  but  as  an  established  historic 
fact,  established  by  absolutely  conclusive  testimony 
and  evidence,  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God. 


20 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


II.  The  Converted  Infidel’s  Message.' 

We  can  now  turn  from  a consideration  of  the 
preacher  to  a consideration  of  the  preacher’s  mes- 
sage. What  was  the  preacher’s  message?  What 
was  the  message  this  converted  infidel  brought  to  the 
people  of  Damascus  and  brings  to  us  to-day?  His 
message  can  be  summed  up  in  one  short  sentence, 

Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God/^  Look  at  Saul  as  he 
stands  there  and  proclaims  it.  There  he  stands,  a 
man  who  a few  days  before  had  been  a bitter  hater 
of  Jesus  Christ  and  Christianity,  a man  who  had 
stained  his  hands  with  Christian  blood,  a man  who 
had  come  to  Damascus  for  the  express  purpose  of 
arresting  men  and  women  because  they  believed  in 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
professed  their  faith  in  Him.  There  about  him  stood 
Jews  and  others  who  had  heard  of  him  as  the  bitter- 
est enemy  that  the  cause  of  Jesus  Christ  had,  as  a 
man  who  stopped  at  nothing  in  his  efforts  to  stamp 
out  Christianity,  and  to  their  amazement,  he  declares 
to  them  that  this  Jesus  whom  he  had  persecuted,  he 
had  found  upon  indisputable  testimony  to  be  the  Son 
of  God.  But  God  Himself  stands  in  this  audience 
to-night  proclaiming  this  same  message.  Let  us  look 
closely  at  this  message. 

I.  Note  first  that  the  message  is  not  that  Jesus  is  a 
good  man,  or  even  the  best  man  that  ever  lived  on 
this  earth,  no,  the  message  is  that  ‘‘  Jesus  is  the  Son 
OF  God.”  That  is,  that  He  is  a man  who  stands 
absolutely  apart  from  all  other  men,  that  while  He  is 
a man,  He  is  more  than  a man.  He  is  of  divine  ori- 
gin, and  partakes  of  all  the  attributes  of  Deity^  and  is 


A CONVEETED  INFIDEL’S  PEEACHING  21 

io  be  honoured  and  worshipped  even  as  God  the  Fa- 
ther is  honoured  and  worshipped. 

2.  Note  second,  that  the  message  is  not  merely 
that  Jesus  is  a great  teacher,  but  that  “Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God.’^ 

3.  Note  third,  that  the  message  is  not  merely  that 
Jesus  is  a perfect  man,  and  our  example,  but  that 
“Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God/’ 

4.  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  What  does  that  in- 
volve ? 

(i)  First  of  all  it  involves  absolute  and  whole- 
hearted trust  in  Him.  If  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  then 
I can  trust  Him  absolutely  and  whole-heartedly.  I 
cannot  trust  any  man  absolutely  and  whole-heartedly, 
no  matter  how  good  he  may  be.  I could  not  abso- 
lutely and  whole-heartedly  trust  any  man.  The  Word 
of  God  is  right  when  it  says,  “Thus  saith  Jehovah; 
cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man  ” (Jer.  17 : 5). 
If  Jesus  is  not  merely  man,  if  He  is  divine,  if  He  is 
the  Son  of  God,  if  He  is  God  manifest  in  human 
form,  I can  trust  Him  absolutely,  and  that  is  what 
He  demands  that  I shall  do.  On  the  night  before 
His  crucifixion  He  demanded  of  His  disciples  the 
same  absolute  trust  in  Himself  that  they  put  in  God 
the  Father.  He  said,  “ Let  not  your  heart  be  trou- 
bled, believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me  ” (John  14:  i, 
A.  R.  V.).  As  He  is  the  Son  of  God  He  had  a right 
to  make  that  demand,  that  men  should  put  their 
absolute  trust  in  Him.  If  He  had  been  merely  man, 
even  the  best  of  men.  He  would  not  have  demanded 
that  these  men  bring  the  curse  of  God  upon  their 
heads  by  putting  their  absolute  trust  in  Him.  But 
because  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  because  He  was 


22 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  He  could  say,  “Believe  in 
God,  BELIEVE  ALSO  IN  me/'  And  that  is  what  He  is 
saying  to  each  of  us  to-night,  that  is  what  He  is 
demanding  of  us  to-night. 

(2)  Believing  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  involves 
in  the  second  place,  that  we  not  only  trust  Him  abso- 
lutely and  whole-heartedly  in  a general  way,  hut  that 
we  trust  Him  specifically  for  salvation,  for  salvation 
from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  salvation  from  the  power  of 
sin.  No  matter  how  utterly  lost  we  may  be,  no 
matter  how  many  sins  we  may  have  committed,  no 
matter  how  completely  we  may  be  in  the  power  of  sin 
to-night,  as  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  according  to 
His  own  word  died  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary  in  our 
stead.  He  could,  as  the  Son  of  God,  make  a perfect 
atonement  for  sin,  and  the  moment  we  trust  in  Him 
our  sins  are  all  forgiven;  and  furthermore,  as  He  is 
the  Son  of  God,  He  has  power  to  save  us  from  the 
power  of  sin.  Sin  may  be  stronger  than  we  are, 
Satan  may  be  stronger  than  we  are ; they  are,  but  they 
are  not  as  strong  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  this  Son 
of  God  undertakes  to  save  from  the  power  of  sin 
every  one  who  puts  their  trust  in  Him.  He  also  said, 
“If  therefore  the  Son  shall  set  you  free,  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed’’  (John  8:36).  As  the  Son  of  God  He 
has  power  to  set  free  from  the  power  of  sin  any  one 
who  puts  their  trust  in  Him. 

(3)  In  the  third  place,  a real  faith  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God  involves  the  surrender  of  our  life  to  Him. 
If  Jesus  is  divine,  if  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  if  He  is 
God  made  manifest  in  the  flesh,  we  should  surrender 
to  Him  all  that  we  are  and  all  that  we  have.  That  is 
what  He  demands  of  us  and  has  a right  to  demand  of 


A CONVEETED  mPIDEL’S  PEEACHING  23 


us.  Remember,  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God ! Have  you 
made  a surrender  of  your  whole  life  to  Him?  If  not, 
will  you  make  that  surrender  to-night  ? 

(4)  In  the  fourth  place,  real  belief  that  Jesus  is 
the  Son  of  God  involves  the  surrender  of  our 
thoughts  to  Him.  If  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  He  is 
infallible.  He  can  never  be  mistaken;  therefore  if 
some  man,  no  matter  how  learned  he  may  be,  no  mat- 
ter how  high  he  may  stand  in  circles  of  education  and 
culture,  says  one  thing,  and  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God, 
says  another,  no  man  who  really  believes  that  Jesus  is 
the  Son  of  God  will  hesitate  one  moment  which  to 
believe.  I have  surrendered  my  thoughts  absolutely 
to  the  shaping  and  to  the  control  of  Jesus  Christ;  for 
I am  convinced,  I am  absolutely  sure,  that  He  is  the 
Son  of  God,  and  I say  to  any  man,  ‘‘  Do  you  dare  to 
set  up  your  poor  miserable  opinions  against  the  plain 
declarations  of  the  Son  of  God?  If  you  do  you  are 
a fool,  and  however  much  you  may  resent  the  state- 
ment the  day  is  coming  when  you  will  see  that  you  are 
a fool.  God  grant  that  it  may  not  come  when  it  is 
too  late  to  repent.’’ 

There  is  saving  power  in  this  doctrine  that  Jesus  is 
the  Son  of  God.  It  will  save  any  man  who  believes 
it  from  the  heart  and  acts  upon  it. 

I.  This  doctrine  will  bring  eternal  life  to  any  one 
who  believes  it,  really  believes  it  from  the  heart,  and 
shows  that  he  believes  it  by  acting  upon  it.  The 
Apostle  John  says  in  John  20:  31,  These  are  written 
(that  is,  these  things  written  in  the  Gospel  of  John 
are  written)  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is 
THE  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ; and  that  believing 
ye  may  have  life  in  his  name.”  We  see  here  that 


24 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAT 


through  simply  believing  that  Jesus  is  the  Qirist,  the 
Son  of  God,  believing  it  with  the  heart,  believing  it  in 
such  a way  as  leads  us  to  take  the  steps  involved  in 
thus  believing  it,  any  one  who  thus  believes,  obtains 
eternal  life. 

2.  Believing  in  this  doctrine  will  also  bring  victory 
over  the  world,  John  in  his  first  epistle  says,  ‘‘  Who 
is  he  that  overcometh  the  world  but  he  that  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God?  ’’  (i  John  5:5).  The 
world  has  a mighty  power,  a power  to  blind  our 
minds,  a power  to  break  our  resolutions,  a power  to 
degrade  our  lives.  The  great  mass  of  men  and 
women  are  yielding  to  this  power  of  the  world,  they 
are  giving  up  their  high  ideals,  they  are  compromising 
with  things  that  their  own  consciences  condemn, 
things  that  are  low  and  debasing.  The  world,  the 
spirit  of  the  times,  the  ideas  that  rule  in  this  world 
which  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,’’  are  making  a mighty 
assault  on  the  faith  and  moral  principles  and  the 
conduct  of  us  all.  That  assault  is  too  strong  for  any 
of  us  to  resist  in  our  own  strength,  but  there  is  a 
way  of  victory,  by  believing,  really  believing,  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God. 

I believe  that  practically  every  one  in  this  audience 
to-night  is  convinced  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God; 
but  being  intellectually  convinced  of  a thing  is  one 
thing,  and  really  believing  it  from  the  heart,  yielding 
our  will  to  that  which  our  mind  accepts,  is  quite  an- 
other thing.  Will  you  to-night  accept  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  Son  of  God?  Will  you  take  that  attitude  to- 
ward Him  that  you  ought  to  take  toward  one  that 
you  know  to  be  the  Son  of  God?  Will  you  from 
this  time  on  trust  Him  absolutely,  will  you  trust  Him 


A CONVEETED  INFIDEUS  PEEACHING  26 


through  His  atoning  death  for  the  pardon  of  all  your 
sins  ? Will  you  trust  Him  daily  for  His  divine  power 
for  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin?  Will  you 
surrender  your  life  absolutely  to  Him?  Will  you 
surrender  your  thoughts  to  Him,  for  Him  to  be 
absolute  ruler  of  your  thoughts?  It  is  up  to  each 
one  of  you  to  answer  the  question.  You  can  say 
yes  ” or  no,”  whichever  you  will.  Which  will 
you  say? 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


God  is  love/' — i John  4:8. 

OUR  subject  is,  The  Key-note  of  the  Bible.” 
You  will  find  the  key-note  of  the  Bible  in 
my  text.  You  will  find  the  text  in  i John 
4:8,  God  is  love.”  That  is  one  of  the  shortest 
sentences  ever  written,  and  it  is  certainly  one  of  the 
greatest  and  profoundest.  It  is  inexhaustible  in  its 
meaning  and  in  its  scope.  Men  have  been  studying, 
scrutinizing,  pondering,  and  digging  into  that  sentence 
through  the  eighteen  centuries  that  have  passed  since 
it  was  written,  and  they  have  not  exhausted  it  yet. 
Thousands  upon  thousands  of  sermons  have  been 
preached  upon  that  text,  yet  something  new  awaits 
every  preacher  who  studies  it  and  seeks  to  expound 
it.  Thousands  of  volumes  have  been  written  by  some 
of  the  world’s  greatest  thinkers,  devoted  to  the  study, 
exposition,  and  application  of  that  sentence,  but  it  is 
as  fresh  and  full  as  ever,  and  it  is  constantly  yielding 
new  treasures  to  each  new  century,  and  to  each  new 
explorer  of  its  exhaustless  wealth.  Men  and  angels 
will  ponder  that  sentence  throughout  the  endless  ages 
of  eternity  and  not  exhaust  it. 

The  Book  that  contains  that  matchless  sentence 
bears  the  unmistakable  seal  of  having  God  for  its 
Author.  The  golden  truth  of  priceless  worth  con- 
tained in  this  sentence  is  peculiar  to  the  Bible.  All 

26 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


27 


the  philosophers  in  the  world  never  discovered  that 
stupendous  truth  until  God  revealed  it  and  the  Bible 
declared  it.  The  world  would  never  have  known 
that  “ God  is  love/'  had  not  God  revealed  the  fact  in 
His  own  Word.  It  is  true  that  there  are  evidences 
of  beneficent  design  in  nature  and  in  history,  but 
nature  and  history  have  both  been  marred  by  Satan's 
work  and  by  the  entrance  of  Sin  into  the  world,  and 
it  is  only  that  interpretation  of  history  and  that  insight 
into  the  future  of  man  and  nature  and  Satan  that  the 
Bible  gives  that  enables  us  to  see  love  reigning  above 
all  and  through  all.  We  hear  much  in  these  days  of 
the  profound  truths  contained  in  the  teachings  of  the 
world's  great  philosophers  of  ancient  and  of  modern 
times,  in  philosophers  like  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle, 
Seneca,  Isocrates,  Epictetus,  Marcus  Aurelius  An- 
toninus, and  in  the  teachings  of  the  great  founders  of 
religions  like  'Buddha,  Mohammed,  Confucius  and 
Zoroaster;  but  ii?  none  of  them  do  we  find  this  great 
truth  that  God  is  Love,''’  nor  anything  akin  to  it, 
not  until  the  Bible  revealed  it.  We  owe  this  truth 
wholly  and  solely  to  the  Bible.  We  must  go  then  to 
the  Bible  for  the  interpretation  of  this  truth. 

This  sentence  is  the  key-note  of  the  entire  Bible. 
It  is  the  great  fundamental  thought  of  the  Bible.  If 
any  one  were  to  ask  me  to  put  into  one  sentence  what 
the  Bible  teaches,  I could  do  it.  And  this  would  be 
the  sentence,  God  is  love."  From  start  to  finish, 
from  Genesis  i : i to  Revelation  22:21,  the  Bible  is 
one  great,  ever  swelling  anthem  and  the  theme  of  that 
anthem  is,  ‘‘  God  is  love."  God's  love  is  the  key-note 
of  the  whole  Bible,  of  each  one  of  the  sixty-six  books 
that  go  to  make  up  the  completed  whole.  It  was  the 


28 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


love  of  God  that  led  to  the  Creation  as  described  in 
the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,.  It  was  God’s  love  that 
led  to  the  banishment  of  Adam  and  Eve  from  the 
Garden  of  Eden  when  they  fell  as  recorded  in  the 
third  chapter  of  Genesis.  It  was  God’s  love  that  led 
to  the  promise  of  the  Saviour,  the  seed  of  the  woman, 
immediately  after  Adam  and  Eve  had  fallen.  It 
was  God’s  love  that  led  to  the  call  of  Abraham  and 
Jacob  to  be  a blessing  first  to  their  own  descendants 
and  ultimately  to  the  whole  human  race.  It  was 
God’s  love  that  led  to  the  bondage  of  Israel  in  Egypt 
and  to  their  deliverance  from  that  bondage  when  the 
time  was  ripe.  It  was  God’s  love  that  led  to  the 
giving  of  the  Law  through  Moses  on  Sinai,  and  it 
was  God’s  love  that  led  to  the  extermination  of  the 
Canaanites. 

It  was  God’s  love  that  led  to  the  planting  of  Israel 
in  that  land  so  wondrously  adapted  by  its  natural 
configuration  and  by  its  location  in  the  then  inhabited 
world  to  be  the  training-place  of  the  nation  that 
should  bring  blessing  to  the  whole  earth,  and  from 
which  the  Saviour  should  be  born.  It  was  God’s  love 
that  shaped  Israel’s  history  through  all  their  wander- 
ings from  Him.  It  was  God’s  love  that  at  last  rooted 
Israel  out  of  ‘^the  land”  He  had  given  them  and 
scattered  them  through  the  earth.  It  will  be  God’s 
love  that  restores  them  again  to  the  land  ” that 
belongs  to  them  by  eternal  covenant,  when  the  time 
is  full.  It  was  God’s  love  that  sent  Jesus  Christ  to 
die  for  sinful  men,  to  rise  again  from  the  dead,  and 
to  ascend  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  in  the  glory. 
And  it  will  be  God’s  love  that  will  send  Him  back 
again  to  earth  when  the  fulness  of  time  for  that  great- 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OP  THE  BIBLE 


29 


est  event  in  all  this  earth’s  history  has  come.  Heaven 
and  all  its  glories,  Hell  and  all  its  horrors  both  have 
their  origin  in  the  love  of  God.  Yes,  God  is  love,” 
is  the  key-note  of  the  Bible,  the  secret  of  history,  the 
explanation  of  nature  and  the  solution  of  eternity’s 
mysteries. 

I wish  to  call  your  attention  to  some  of  the  ways 
in  which  the  love  of  God  is  manifested.  Of  course, 
it  would  take  many  sermons  to  recount  all  the  mani- 
festations of  the  love  of  God,  but  we  can  look  at  some 
of  them  though  it  would  take  all  eternity  to  fully 
understand  and  appreciate  even  them. 

I.  God^s  Love  Manifests  Itself  in  His  Minister- 
ing TO  Our  Needs  and  Joy. 

In  the  first  place,  God's  love  manifests  itself  in 
His  ministering  to  all  our  needs  and  to  our  fullest  joy. 
This  comes  out  again  and  again  in  the  Bible,  e.  g., 
our  Lord  Jesus  in  expounding  to  His  disciples  their 
own  duty,  says,  in  Matthew  5 : 44,  45,  Love  your 
enemies,  and  pray  for  them  that  persecute  you;  That 
ye  may  be  sons  of  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven:  for 
he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good, 
and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.”  And 
way  back  in  the  Old  Testament  in  Deuteronomy  32: 
9-12,  we  read,  For  Jehovah’s  portion  is  his  people; 
Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance.  He  found  him  in 
a desert  land,  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness;  he 
compassed  him  about,  he  cared  for  him,  he  kept  him 
as  the  apple  of  his  eye.  As  an  eagle  that  stirreth  up 
her  nest,  that  fluttereth  over  her  young,  he  spread 
abroad  his  wings,  he  took  them,  he  bore  them  on 


30 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO  DAY 


his  pinions.  Jehovah  alone  did  lead  him,  and  there 
was  no  foreign  God  with  him.^' 

This  is  a marvelous  picture  of  the  wondrous  love 
of  God  that  we  cannot  stop  to  go  into  in  detail. 
Every  blessing  of  life  is  a love  token  from  God.  As 
the  Holy  Spirit  puts  it  through  the  Apostle  James  in 
James  i : 17,  ‘‘  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift 
is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of 
lights,  with  whom  can  be  no  variation,  neither  shadow 
that  is  cast  by  turning.’'  When  the  sun  shines  with 
its  warmth  and  light  and  gladness,  lift  up  your  head 
with  joy  and  say,  This  is  a token  of  my  Father’s 
love.”  When  you  look  upon  the  blossoming  flowers, 
the  growing  grass,  the  budding  trees  in  their  spring 
beauty,  say,  “ All  this  beauty  with  which  God  adorns 
the  earth,  this  is  another  token  of  God’s  love  to  me.” 
When  you  feel  health  and  strength  coursing  through 
your  veins,  look  up  and  thank  God  again  for  this 
another  token  of  His  love.  The  countless  blessings 
that  come  to  us  all  every  day  of  our  lives,  most  of 
them  unnoticed  in  our  blindness  and  ingratitude,  are 
all  tokens  of  His  great  and  constant  love. 

II.  God’s  Love  is  Manifested  in  Chastening  Us 
When  We  Forget  Him,  and  Wander  from 
Him,  and  Fall  into  Sin. 

In  the  second  place,  God's  love  to  His  children, 
yes,  to  those  also  who  are  not  yet  His  children,  is 
manifested  in  His  chastening  us  when  we  forget 
Him,  and  wander  from  Him  and  fall  into  sin.  This 
comes  out  very  clearly  in  that  beautiful  passage, 
Hebrews  12:6-10,  “For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  re- 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


31 


ceiveth.  It  is  for  chastening  that  ye  endure;  God 
dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons ; for  what  son  is  there 
whom  his  father  chasteneth  not?  But  if  ye  are 
without  chastening,  whereof  all  have  been  made  par- 
takers, then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons.  Further- 
more, we  had  the  fathers  of  our  flesh  to  chasten  us, 
and  we  gave  them  reverence:  shall  we  not  much 
rather  be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and 
live?  For  they  indeed  for  a few  days  chastened  us 
as  seemed  good  to  them ; but  he  for  our  profit,  that 
we  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness.”  Here  we  see 
that  God's  love  manifests  itself  in  chastening  us  and 
in  sending  us  trial  and  pain  and  bereavement  and 
sorrow.  Many  cannot  see  in  their  many  and  great 
afflictions  any  proof  of  God's  love.  It  seems  to  them 
that  God  does  not  love  them  to  allow  them  to  suffer 
such  awful  and  sometimes  such  appalling  griefs  and 
trials,  but  they  who  so  think  are  very  blind.  Do  we 
not  chasten  our  own  beloved  children?  Do  we  not 
do  it  because  we  love  them  and  for  their  good?  It 
would  oftentimes  be  far  easier  for  us  not  to  do  it. 
It  would  spare  our  feelings,  for  we  suffer  far  more 
than  they  do  when  we  punish  them,  if  we  are  true 
parents.  Some  parents  are  so  unloving  and  so  self- 
centered  that  they  allow  their  children  to  go  unpun- 
ished in  their  folly  and  sin  in  order  to  spare  their 
own  feelings.  But  not  so  our  Heavenly  Father. 
He  really  loves  us,  wisely  loves  us,  and  so  chastens 
us  for  our  highest  good,  and  sometimes  when  our 
conduct  makes  it  necessary,  very  severely  chastises 
us,  or  as  the  Bible  puts  it,  ^'scourges'"  us.  Every 
wise  man  thanks  God  for  His  chastening  love,  even 
in  its  severest  manifestations. 


32 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


For  twelve  years  or  more  God  spared  my  wife  and 
me  and  our  family  in  our  home  life  from  serious 
sickness.  We  had  gone  through  epidemics  of  many 
kinds  unscathed.  When  threatened  with  croup,  scar- 
let fever,  typhoid  fever,  and  diphtheria  and  other  dis- 
eases, we  had  cried  to  God  and  He  had  given  de- 
liverance again  and  again.  But  a day  came  when 
God  permitted  diphtheria  to  enter  our  home,  and  a 
few  short  hours  after  the  real  character  of  the  dis- 
ease was  discovered  to  take  away  from  us  a beauti- 
ful child  and  to  take  her  away  when  we  thought  all 
danger  of  death  was  past.  It  was  a stunning  blow, 
just  twenty-four  years  ago  this  week,  and  March 
17th  never  comes  round  without  our  thinking  of  it. 
For  the  first  time  the  family  circle  was  broken.  The 
body  of  our  child  had  been  carried  from  our  happy 
home  and  laid  away  in  the  lonely  cemetery.  Why 
did  God  permit  it?  Because  He  loved  us.  We 
needed  it. 

The  following  Sunday  night  I spoke  on  Hebrews 
12:6:  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth, 

and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.”  This 
chastisement,  yes  this  scourging,  led  to  deep  heart 
searchings  and  discovery  of  failure  and  thereby  led 
to  confession  of  sin.  It  led  also  to  new  consecra- 
tion and  love  for  souls  and  devotion  to  God.  It 
brought  the  answer  to  prayers  that  had  been  ascend- 
ing to  Him  for  years.  It  was  one  of  the  things  that 
led  to  my  leaving  Chicago  a few  years  later  to  enter 
upon  a world-wide  ministry.  If  God  had  not  in  His 
infinite  wisdom  and  love  taken  our  greatly  beloved 
child,  our  rarely  beautiful  and  gifted  child  from  us, 
I think  I would  never  have  seen  China,  Japan,  Aus* 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


33 


tralia,  New  Zealand,  India,  and  the  marvelous  work 
of  God  in  these  countries,  and  the  great  work  of  God 
that  followed  in  England,  Ireland,  Wales,  Germany 
and  many  other  places,  God’s  judgments  are  ‘‘un- 
searchable,” “his  ways  past  finding  out!”  (Rom. 
II : 33)  but  they  are  always  wise  and  loving,  though 
we  for  the  time  cannot  understand  how.  All  of 
God’s  seemingly  severe  dealings  with  us  came  from 
the  wise  and  wondrous  love  of  God,  and  we  both 
saw  it  and  praised  Him.  There  is  no  kinder  mani- 
festation of  the  love  of  God  than  His  chastening  us 
when  we  forget  Him  or  wander  from  Him  or  be- 
come immersed  in  the  world. 

One  beautiful  spring  day  years  ago  a friend  of 
mine  in  Ohio  asked  me  to  take  a drive  with  him. 
We  drove  out  into  the  country  to  a quiet  cemetery. 
We  entered  and  went  to  a remote  corner  of  the 
cemetery  and  there  found  side  by  side  three  graves, 
one  the  grave  of  an  adult,  and  the  other  two  of  chil- 
dren. They  were  the  graves  of  that  man’s  wife  and 
his  two  little  girls,  all  the  family  he  had  at  the  time 
in  the  world,  with  the  exception  of  one  little  boy. 
We  knelt  beside  the  graves  in  prayer.  As  we  drove 
back  to  town  that  man  said  to  me,  “'Brother  Torrey, 
I pity  the  man  whom  God  has  not  chastened.” 

What  did  he  mean  ? He  meant  this : He  had  been 
a man  of  the  world,  an  honourable,  highly  respected 
man,  but  a thoroughgoing  worldling.  Diphtheria 
came  into  his  home.  It  took  one  of  his  little  daugh- 
ters. As  she  lay  in  her  casket  the  father  knelt  be- 
side it  and  promised  God  that  he  would  become  a 
Christian.  But  when  the  first  bitterness  of  the  sor- 
row had  passed  he  forgot  his  vow.  Again  sickness 


34 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


and  death  entered  his  home.  This  time  the  second 
daughter  died.  Beside  her  coffin  he  renewed  his 
vow,  and  kept  it.  He  came  to  know  the  joy  that 
every  true  Christian  knows,  to  have  the  glorious 
hope  for  eternity  that  only  the  Christian  has.  He 
became,  I think,  take  it  all  in  all,  the  most  active  and 
efficient  Christian  in  the  community,  and  it  all  came 
from  God’s  chastening  love.  He  told  me  again  and 
again  that  his  favourite  text  of  Scripture  was. 
Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth.”  Ah, 
friends,  if  some  affliction  has  come  upon  you  see  in 
it  a token  of  God’s  love  and  learn  the  sweet  lessons 
He  would  teach  by  this  sorrow. 

III.  The  Love  of  God  is  Manifested  by  His  Sym- 
pathizing With  Us  in  All  Our  Afflictions. 

In  the  third  place,  God's  love  is  manifested  in  His 
sympathizing  with  us  in  all  our  afflictions.  This 
comes  out  very  clearly  in  a wonderful  verse  in  the 
Old  Testament  (Isa.  63:9),  In  all  their  affliction 
he  was  afflicted,  and  the  Angel  of  his  presence  saved 
them : in  his  love  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  them ; 
and  he  bare  them,  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of 
old.”  While  God  in  His  wise  love  to  us  chastens  us, 
yes,  even  scourges  us,  when  we  forget  Him  and  wan- 
der into  sin  and  worldliness,  nevertheless  He  deeply 
sympathizes  with  us  in  every  sorrow,  and  trial,  and 
heartache  that  our  sin  brings  upon  us.  In  all  our 
affliction  he  is  afflicted.”  It  may  be  His  own  hand 
that  sends  the  affliction,  as  it  was  in  the  passage  just 
read;  we  need  the  affliction,  it  does  us  good,  so  He 
sends  it;  but  He  suffers  with  us  in  it.  God  is  the 
one  great  sympathizer,  “ In  all  (our)  afflictions  he 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


36 


is  afflicted.’"  In  our  own  sorrow,  we  had  many,  very 
many  sympathizing  human  friends,  and  letters  and 
telegrams  of  heartfelt  sympathy  poured  in  upon  us. 
But  no  one  sympathized  with  us  so  fully,  so  ten- 
derly, so  deeply,  so  intelligently  as  God  Himself.  He 
saw  what  no  human  eye  could  see  and  entered  into 
it  all.  And  there  were  very  many  tender  little  min- 
istries of  His  in  those  days  of  profound  sorrow  and 
many  wondrous  great  ministries  also.  No  human 
being  will  ever  know  what  Mrs.  Torrey  and  I passed 
through  the  night  following  the  burial  of  our  little 
child,  and  the  next  morning.  The  waters  were  deep. 
It  seemed  as  if  they  would  go  over  our  heads,  but 
One  walked  beside  us.  It  was  God.  He  suffered 
with  us.  He  kept  His  Word : When  thou  passes! 

through  the  waters,  I will  be  with  thee ; and  through 
the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee:  when  thou 
walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned; 
neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee  ” (Isa.  43:2). 

Friends,  some  of  you  are  in  deep  sorrow,  some  in 
sorrow  of  one  kind  and  some  in  sorrow  of  an  entirely 
different  kind,  but  I want  to  tell  you  one  and  all  that 
God  sympathizes  with  you  all  in  your  sorrow  what- 
ever it  may  be.  It  may  seem  to  you  that  no  one 
sympathizes  with  you,  that  no  one  even  understands, 
that  no  one  cares,  and  that  may  be  true  of  men,  but 
it  is  not  true  of  God.  He  understands  it  all  and 
enters  into  it  all.  Our  Father  cares.” 

A woman  came  to  see  me  at  the  hotel  where  I was 
stopping  in  Bendigo,  Australia.  She  told  me  that 
an  awful  sorrow  had  come  into  her  life,  but  that  she 
could  not  tell  it  to  any  one  there,  for  they  all  knew 
her;  but  I was  a stranger  and  would  soon  leave  the 


36 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


place,  and  her  burden  was  so  heavy  she  felt  that  she 
must  have  the  sympathy  of  some  one  and  so  she  had 
come  to  me.  It  was  a terrible  story  that  she  told  me. 
She  was  passing  through  one  of  the  greatest  sorrows 
that  ever  overtakes  any  true  woman  and  her  heart 
was  nearly  crushed.  When  she  had  finished  that  sad 
story  she  said  to  me,  I feel  better  now  that  there  is 
some  one  who  knows  my  sorrow  and  can  sympathize 
with  me.”  I said  to  her,  I do  indeed  sympathize 
with  you.  I am  glad  you  came  and  told  me  the 
story  that  I might  help  you  bear  your  burden.  But,” 
I added,  ‘‘  there  is  One  who  has  known  all  about  it 
from  the  beginning.  God  has  known  all  about  it  and 
He  has  sympathized  with  you  all  the  time.”  Oh,  it  is 
true,  not  a sorrow,  not  a heartache,  not  a disappoint- 
ment, not  a calamity,  not  a grief,  ever  comes  to  us 
but  our  Heavenly  Father  knows  it  all,  knows  it  in  all 
its  details,  and  sympathizes  with  us  in  all  the  suffering 
and  He  Himself  suffers  far  more  than  we  suffer. 

IV.  God's  Love  is  Manifested  in  His  Never  For- 
getting Those  Whom  He  Loves. 

In  the  fourth  place,  God's  love  is  manifested  in  His 
never  forgetting  those  whom  He  loves.  This  He 
Himself  tells  us  in  the  wonderful  words  in  Isaiah 
49: 15,  16:  Can  a woman  forget  her  sucking  child, 

that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of 
her  womb  ? yea,  these  may  forget,  yet  will  not  I for- 
get thee.  Behold,  I have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms 
of  my  hands;  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me.” 
God  sometimes  seems  to  forget,  but  He  never  does. 
We  cry  and  no  answer  comes.  The  heavens  seem 
to  be  as  brass  above  our  heads  but  God  has  not  for- 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE  37 


gotten.  He  never  forgets.  A mother  may  forget 
her  child,  though  that  is  not  likely,  yet  she  may,  but 
God  has  said,  ‘‘  Yet  will  not  I forget  thee.”  He  has 
said  furthermore,  “ Behold,  I have  graven  thee  upon 
the  palms  of  my  hands.” 

V.  God's  Love  is  Manifested  in  His  Forgiving 
Our  Sins. 

In  the  fifth  place,  God's  love  is  manifested  in  His 
forgiving  our  sins.  Hezekiah  cried  unto  the  Lord: 
‘‘  Behold,  it  was  for  my  peace  that  I had  great  bitter- 
ness: but  thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul  delivered  it 
from  the  pit  of  corruption ; for  thou  hast  cast  all  my 
sins  behind  thy  back”  (Isa.  38:17).  God  stands 
ready  in  His  love  to  pardon  the  sins  of  the  vilest  sin- 
ner. There  are  two  things  and  only  two  which  in  His 
love  He  demands  as  a condition  of  that  pardon.  They 
are,  first,  that  we  forsake  our  sins;  second,  that  we 
turn  to  Him  in  faith  and  surrender  to  His  will.  Lis- 
ten to  His  own  word : “ Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts;  and  let 
him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy 
upon  him ; and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  par- 
don” (Isa.  55:7).  God  will  not  pardon  our  sins  if  we 
hold  on  to  them.  There  is  a theory  regarding  God's 
love  current  in  the  world  to-day  that  has  no  warrant 
in  the  Word  of  God,  namely,  that,  because  God  is 
love  ” He  will  pardon  and  save  all  men  whether  they 
repent  and  believe  on  Jesus  Christ  or  not. 

This  theory  is  wholly  and  utterly  unscriptural.  To 
believe  it  you  must  give  up  the  Bible.  But  if  you  give 
up  the  Bible  you  must  give  up  your  belief  that  “ God 
is  love,”  for  it  is  from  the  Bible  and  from  the  Bible 


38 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO  DAY 


alone  that  we  leam  that  God  is  love.”  There  is 
absolutely  no  other  proof  that  ‘‘  God  is  love,”  than 
that  the  Bible  says  so.  That  is  proof  enough,  for  the 
Bible  can  be  easily  proven  to  be  the  Word  of  God. 
But  if  you  give  up  the  Bible  and  are  logical  you  must 
give  up  your  belief  that  God  is  love  ” ; for  when  the 
Bible  is  gone  the  belief  that  “ God  is  love  ” has  no 
foundation  of  any  kind.  But  if  you  retain  the  Bible 
you  cannot  believe  that  God  will  pardon  and  save 
all  men  whether  they  repent  or  not.  The  most  il- 
logical system  in  the  world  (except  Unitarianism)  is 
Universalism.  It  starts  out  with  the  Bible  state- 
ment that  God  is  love  ” as  its  foundation  stone. 
Then  it  goes  to  work  to  discredit  the  Bible  by  re- 
jecting other  plain  statements  in  it,  statements  about 
Hell,  and  the  future  state  of  those  who  reject  Christ, 
and  by  doing  that  it  undermines  the  authority  of  the 
Bible,  and  thus  undermines  the  foundation  of  our 
faith  that  God  is  love.”  In  other  words,  it  tries 
to  build  up  a superstructure  by  undermining  its  foun- 
dation. Give  up  the  Bible  and  there  is  no  proof  that 
God  is  love,”  and  so  Universalism  goes  by  the 
board.  Believe  in  the  Bible  and  you  must  believe  in 
Hell,  and  so  Universalism  goes  by  the  board.  Take 
either  horn  of  the  dilemma  you  please  and  Univer- 
salism has  absolutely  no  foundation.  The  very  love 
of  God,  God's  love  to  the  righteous  and  His  love  to 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  demands  that  if  men  persist 
in  sin  and  persist  in  the  rejection  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  that  they  be  separated  from  the  righteous  and 
punished.  The  love  of  God  makes  Hell  a neces- 
sity IF  MEN  PERSIST  IN  SIN.  And,  if  they  persist 
eternally  in  sin,  it  makes  eternal  Hell  a necessity. 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OP  THE  BIBLE 


39 


And  it  is  psychologically  certain,  as  well  as  clearly 
revealed  in  the  Bible,  that  if  men  persist  in  sin  be- 
yond a certain  point  they  will  persist  in  sin  eternally. 

But  if  the  vilest  sinner  repents,  God  will  pardon. 
He  says  so.  He  goes  so  far  as  to  say  in  Isaiah  i : i8 : 
Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  Je- 
hovah ; though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be 
as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool.’’  A man  once  said  to  me. 
My  sins  are  too  great  for  God  to  pardon.”  I an- 
swered, I do  not  wish  you  to  think  that  your  sins 
are  any  less  than  you  now  think  they  are,  no  doubt 
they  are  even  greater  than  you  think,  but  I want  you 
to  see  that  great  as  your  sins  are  God’s  pardoning 
love  is  greater  still.”  How  often  God  proved  this  in 
the  Bible.  David’s  sin  was  great,  it  was  monstrous, 
he  was  an  adulterer  and  a murderer;  yet  God  par- 
doned him.  Manasseh’s  sin  was  exceeding  great,  he 
hated  God  and  he  hated  God’s  people,  and  he  made 
the  streets  of  Jerusalem  to  run  with  the  blood  of 
God’s  servants,  yet  God  pardoned  him  (2  Kings 
24:3,  4;  cf.  2 Chron.  33 : 1-13).  Saul  of  Tarsus  was 
a great  sinner,  he  hated  Jesus  Christ,  he  persecuted 
the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  and  took  part  in  their 
murder,  he  was  a bold  blasphemer  and  compelled 
others  to  blaspheme;  yet  God  pardoned  him.  So 
down  through  the  centuries  many  of  the  vilest  sin- 
ners this  world  has  ever  seen  have  repented,  and 
God  has  pardoned  them.  There  sit  in  this  building 
to-night  men  and  women  who  have  gone  down  into 
the  deepest  depths  of  sin  but  God  has  pardoned  and 
saved  them,  and  they  sit  here  to-night  rejoicing  in 
His  pardoning  love,  knowing  that  their  every  sin  is 


40 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


blotted  out,  and  furthermore,  they  have  been  trans- 
formed by  the  power  of  His  grace. 

VI.  God's  Love  was  Manifested  in  His  Giving 
His  Only  Begotten  Son  to  Die  for  Us. 

In  the  sixth  place,  God's  love  was  manifested  in 
His  giving  His  only  begotten  Son  to  die  in  our  place. 
As  the  Spirit  of  God  puts  it  in  John  3:16:  ‘‘  For  God 
so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  And  again  we 
read  in  Romans  8:32:  ''  He  spared  not  his  own  Son, 
but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all ; " and  we  read  in 
I John  4:  10:  ‘‘  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God, 
but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins."  And  away  back  in  the 
prophetic  vision  of  the  Old  Testament,  seven  hun- 
dred years  before  the  Saviour  was  born,  we  read: 
'"All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ; we  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  Jehovah  hath  made 
to  strike  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all"  (Isa.  53:6). 
This  manifestation  of  God's  love  is  greatest  of  all. 
This  manifestation  of  God's  love  is  stupendous,  it 
seems  past  believing  but  we  know  it  is  true.  God 
made  the  greatest  sacrifice  in  His  power  for  our 
good.  He  made  the  greatest  sacrifice  in  the  world's 
history.  He  gave  up  " that  which  was  dearest  to 
Him,  His  own  Son. 

No  earthly  son  was  ever  so  dear  to  his  father  as 
Jesus  Christ  was  dear  to  God.  I have  a son,  an  only 
son,  and  I love  him,  but  my  love  for  my  boy  is  but 
the  faintest  adumbration  of  God's  love  to  Jesus 
Christ.  And  yet  God  gave  that  only  begotten  Son, 


THE  KEY-NOTE  OF  THE  BIBLE 


41 


that  eternally  beloved  Son,  up  for  you  and  me.  Gave 
Him  up  to  die.  To  die  an  awful  death,  an  appalling 
death.  Gave  Him  up  to  be  crushed  by  the  weight 
of  man’s  sin  and  guilt.  And  for  what  purpose  did 
He  give  Him  up?  ‘‘That  whosoever  believeth  on 
him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life.” 
God  has  done  everything  in  His  power  to  provide 
everlasting  life  for  each  one  of  us.  If  we  do  not 
have  it  it  is  our  own  fault.  God  has  exhausted  the 
resources  of  infinite  wisdom  and  infinite  love  and 
infinite  power  to  provide  everlasting  life  for  you  and 
me,  and  you  and  I can  have  it  for  the  taking. 

Such  is  the  love  of  God,  very  inadequately  de- 
scribed. But  I wish  to  ask  a question  in  closing. 
The  question  is  this:  What  are  you  going  to  do 

WITH  THAT  WONDROUS  LOVE  OF  GOD  TO-NIGHT  ? Our 
guilt  never  looks  so  black  as  when  seen  in  the 
dazzling  light  of  God’s  amazing  love.  To  be  a sin- 
ful man  or  woman  seems  bad  enough,  to  despise  and 
break  God’s  holy  and  excellent  laws  seems  bad 
enough,  but  the  worst  thing  about  men  and  women 
out  of  Christ,  the  most  shocking  thing  about  men  and 
women  out  of  Christ,  the  most  horrible  thing  about 
men  and  women  out  of  Christ,  the  most  damnable 
and  damning  thing  about  men  and  women  out  of 
Christ  is,  that  they  are  trampling  under  foot  the  love 
of  God.  What  would  you  think  of  a man  who  had 
a true  and  loving  mother,  a mother  who  had  done 
everything  for  him,  a mother  who  had  made  every 
sacrifice  for  him,  a mother  who  had  impoverished 
herself  and  imperilled  and  wasted  her  life  for  him, 
and  then  he  despised  that  love,  rejected  that  love, 
sneered  at  that  love,  denied  that  love,  and  sought  to 


42 


THE  GOSPEL  POE  TO-DAY 


discredit  that  love?  Would  you  not  say  that  that 
man  was  a wretch  ? But  no  mother’s  love  is  so  great 
and  wonderful  as  the  love  of  God  to  you  and  me. 
No  mother  ever  made  a sacrifice  for  her  child  as 
great  as  God  has  made  for  you  and  me.  Now  what 
will  you  do  with  that  love  to-night?  Will  you  ac- 
cept it  or  despise  it?  Will  you  put  your  trust  in  it 
or  spurn  it?  Will  you  open  your  heart  to  it  or  spit 
upon  it  ? What  will  you  do  with  it  ? 

Oh,  men  and  women,  are  you  rejecting  Christ? 
Are  you  trampling  under  foot  the  wondrous  love  of 
God  revealed  by  giving  His  Son  to  die  on  Calvary’s 
Cross  for  you?  If  you  are,  what  have  you  to  say 
for  your3elves?  Oh,  give  up  your  awful  treatment 
of  this  glorious  Son  of  God,  and  accept  Him  now, 
as  your  personal  Saviour,  and  surrender  to  Him*  as 
your  Lord  and  Master,  begin  the  confession  of  Him, 
a confession  that  most  of  you  should  have  begun 
long,  long  ago,  and  go  out  from  this  place  to-night  to 
serve  Him  all  the  remainder  of  your  days  with  all 
your  strength. 


Ill 

THE  MOST  WONDERFUL  SENTENCE  EVER 
WRITTEN 

For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,*' — ^John  3 : 16. 

My  text  is,  The  most  wonderful  sentence 
that  was  ever  written.  Of  co^urse  that 
sentence  is  in  the  Bible.  All  the  greatest 
sentences  that  were  ever  written  are  found  in  one 
book,  God's  Word,  the  Bible.  The  Bible  is  a book 
that  abounds  in  illuminating,  stirring,  startling,  mar- 
velous, bewildering,  amazing  and  life-transforming 
utterances,  utterances  with  which  there  is  absolutely 
nothing  to  compare  in  all  the^  other  literature  of  the 
world.  But  I am  inclined  to  think  that  the  one  we 
are  to  consider  to-night  is  the  most  remarkable  of 
them  all.  I think  that  after  we  have  given  it  care- 
ful thought  to-night  you  will  agree  with  me  that  this 
sentence  is  the  most  wonderful  that  was  ever  written. 

You  are  all  perfectly  familiar  with  it.  I doubt  if 
there  is  a person  in  this  audience  who  has  not  heard 
it  again  and  again.  Indeed  our  very  familiarity  with 
it  has  blinded  many  of  us  to  the  wonderful  char- 
acter of  it  and  the  stupendous  significance  of  it. 
But  we  are  going  to  look  at  it  steadily  and  closely, 
turning  it  around  and  around,  as  one  would  turn 
43 


44 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


around  and  scrutinize  a diamond  of  unusual  purify, 
beauty,  brilliance  and  play  of  prismatic  colours,  until 
its  beauty,  its  profundity,  its  glory,  its  sublimity  and 
its  amazing  significance  are  more  fully  seen  and  ap- 
preciated by  us. 

The  sentence  is  found  in  John  3 : 16,  For  God  so 
loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life.’’  There  are  whole  volumes 
of  incomparably  precious  truth  packed  into  that  one 
sentence.  Indeed  many  volumes  have  been  devoted 
to  the  exposition  of  that  one  verse,  but  it  is  not  ex- 
hausted yet  and  never  will  be.  These  marvelous 
words  of  God  never  become  hackneyed  nor  worn  out 
nor  wearisome.  We  are  always  beholding  new  beauty 
and  new  glory  in  them.  When  all  the  millions  of 
volumes  that  men  have  written  in  many  languages 
throughout  the  many  centuries  of  literary  history 
have  become  obsolete  and  are  forgotten,  that  imper- 
ishable sentence  shall  shine  out  in  its  matchless  beauty 
and  peerless  glory  throughout  the  endless  ages  of 
eternity.  Let  me  repeat  it  again,  ''  For  God  so  loved 
the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life.''  God  Himself  has  used  that 
statement  to  save  thousands  of  souls,  to  lift  men  out 
of  the  sad,  yes  appalling  ruin  which  sin  had  wrought 
into  the  glory  of  likeness  to  Himself.  I trust  that 
He  may  use  it  to-night  to  save  many  more. 

The  verse  tells  us  five  exceedingly  important  facts: 
First,  God's  attitude  toward  the  world ; second,  God's 
attitude  toward  sin ; third,  God's  attitude  toward  His 
Son;  fourth,  God's  attitude  toward  all  who  believe 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTEN^CE  WEITTEN  46 


in  His  Son;  fifth,  God’s  attitude  toward  all  who  re- 
fuse or  neglect  to  believe  in  His  Son. 

^ God’s  Attitude  Toward  the  World. 

Fi^t  of  all,  this  verse  from  God's  Word  tells  us 
what  God's  attitude  is  toward  the  world.  What  is 
God’s  attitude  toward  the  world?  Love.  The  sen- 
tence reads,  God  so  loved  the  world.”  Love  is  the 
most  wonderful  thing  in  the  world,  and  Love  is  one 
of  the  most  uncommon  things  in  the  world.  There 
is  in  the  world  to-day  much  that  is  called  ‘‘  love,” 
but  most  of  that  which  is  called  love  is  not  love  at 
all.  We  speak  oftentimes  of  a young  man’s  love  ” 
for  a young  woman,  and  all  we  mean  by  it  is  that 
this  young  man  wishes  to  get  that  young  woman  for 
his  own  pleasure  and  gratification.  That  is  not  love 
at  all;  it  oftentimes  has  not  the  slightest  semblance 
of  love.  It  is  oftentimes  utter  selfishness,  and  not 
infrequently  the  vilest  and  most  unbridled  lust.  It 
is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  if  the  young  woman  refuses 
to  accept  him  as  a husband  or  so-called  lover  ” he 
will  shoot  her  down  or  seek  to  blast  her  reputation. 
And  that  hideous  thing  we  call  love  ” ! He  ''loved" 
her  so  much  that  he  killed  her.  It  is  really  as  remote 
from  love  as  anything  possibly  can  be,  as  remote  from 
love  as  Hell  is  from  Heaven.  It  is  the  very  lowest 
order  of  selfishness  and  the  grossest  beastliness. 
When  a lawyer  here  in  this  city  week  before  last 
shot  his  former  wife  in  the  back,  when  she  was  not 
looking,  because  she  would  not  return  to  him  and 
endure  longer  the  outrages  that  he  had  inflicted  upon 
her  for  years,  was  it  love  that  prompted  his  amaz- 
ingly cowardly,  sneaking,  cruel,  ruffianly,  devilish 


46 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


act?  No ! it  was  a passion  that  would  have  disgraced 
the  lowest  wild  beast  of  the  jungle. 

We  speak  of  one  man's  love  for  another.  What 
do  we  usually  mean?  Only  this,  the  two  men  are 
friendly  because  in  many  respects  they  are  congenial 
and  enjoy  one  another's  society.  But  if  one  does 
some  little  thing  that  offends  the  other  the  so-called 
love  is  turned  into  utter  indifference  or  even  into 
bitter  hate.  It  was  never  ‘‘  love."  It  was  mere 
self-centered  fondness. 

All  this  is  not  love.  What  is  love?  Love  is  the 
consuming,  absorbing  desire  for  and  delight  in  an- 
other's highest  good.  Real  love  is  entirely  unselfish. 
It  loses  sight  utterly  of  self-interest  and  sets  itself 
to  seeking  the  interest  of  the  person  loved.  This 
was  God's  attitude  toward  the  world.  He  loved  the 
world,  really  loved  it. 

He  looked  down  upon  this  world,  the  whole  mass 
of  men  living  at  any  time  upon  it  and  that  should 
live  upon  it  in  all  times  to  come,  and  He  loved  them 
all.  His  whole  being  went  out  in  infinite  yearning  to 
benefit  and  bless  the  world.  Any  cost  to  Himself 
would  be  disregarded,  if  it  would  bless  the  world  to 
pay  the  cost.  “ God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son''  Oh,  men  and  women,  stand 
and  wonder!  Oh,  angels,  and  archangel,  cherubim 
and  seraphim,  stand  and  wonder ! “ God  so  loved 

the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son." 

Some  men  tell  us  that  they  cannot  believe  the  Bible 
to  be  the  Word  of  God  because  there  are  so  many 
incredible  statements  in  it.  But  that  is  the  most  in- 
credible statement  in  the  whole  Book,  and  yet  we 
know  it  is  true.  If  I can  believe  that  statement  I 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  47 


ought  not  to  have  any  difficulty  with  any  other  state- 
ment in  the  whole  Book,  and  I can  believe  that  state- 
ment, I do  believe  that  statement.  I know  that  state- 
ment is  true.  I have  put  it  to  the  test  of  personal 
experience  and  found  it  true.  ‘‘  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,''  that  has 
been  God's  attitude  toward  the  world  from  the  be- 
ginning. That  is  God's  attitude  toward  the  world 
to-pight, 

God  loves  THE  WORLD.  There  are  men  and  women 
and  children  in  this  world  whom  you  and  I love,  but 
God  loves  the  whole  world.  Not  a man  in  it,  not  a 
woman  in  it,  not  a child  in  it  whom  God  does  not 
love.  From  the  intellectually  most  rarely  gifted  and 
morally  most  saintly  man  and  woman  down  to  the 
most  apelike  and  ignorant  naked  African  in  the  heart 
of  the  Dark  Continent,  and  the  morally  most  de- 
graded and  brutelike  man  or  woman  in  the  slums  of 
a great  city  or  in  the  jungles  of  some  cannibal 
island,  God  loves  each  and  every  one.  God  so 
loved  THE  WORLD.'' 

There  are  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  people  who 
gather  in  this  church,  about  whom  you  care  absolutely 
nothing.  You  never  saw  them  before,  you  will 
never  see  them  again.  If  you  should  read  in  your 
paper  to-morrow  morning,  John  Jones,  who  was  at 
the  Church  of  the  Open  Door,  as  he  was  going  home 
from  the  meeting,  got  in  front  of  a Sixth  Street  car 
and  was  instantly  killed,"  you  would  hardly  give  it  a 
second  thought.  John  Jones  is  nothing  to  you.  But 
John  Jones  is  something  to  God.  God  loves  John 
Jones,  and  John  Smith,  and  John  Johnson,  and  every 
other  man  and  woman  and  child.  You  may  be  a 


48 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


very  lonely  stranger  in  a great  city’s  crowd.  Perhaps 
you  have  been  unfortunate  and  are  penniless  and 
friendless,  perhaps  you  have  gone  down  into  some 
black  depth  of  sin  and  you  say  to  yourself,  ‘‘  Not  one 
person  in  this  great  crowd  has  the  slightest  interest 
in  me,”  and  that  may  be  true.  But  there  is  One 
Who  has  an  interest  in  you.  There  is  One  Who  so 
loved  you  that  He  ‘‘  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  ” to 
die  for  you,  and  that  One  is  God.  God  loves  the 
world  and  every  one  in  it.  God  loves  the  world  in 
the  purest,  deepest,  and  highest  sense  of  that  word 
‘‘  love.”  Yes,  God  loves  you.  ‘‘  Whom  do  you  mean 
by  you?  ” some  one  asks.  I mean  every  man,  woman, 
and  child. 

There  is  nothing  about  the  world  why  God  should 
love  it.  It  is  a sinful  world,  it  is  a selfish  world,  it  is 
a corrupt  world.  The  more  I get  to  know  the  world 
of  which  I am  a part,  and  the  more  I get  to  know 
myself,  the  more  I am  humbled.  John  was  entirely 
right  when  he  said,  The  whole  world  lieth  in  the 
Evil  One”  (i  John  5:  19).  I am  an  optimist,  but  I 
am  not  an  optimist  by  painting  a black  world  white. 
Look  at  the  rich  world.  What  a cruel  thing  it  is. 
How  it  marches  on  trampling  down  every  one  that 
lies  in  its  path  to  greater  wealth.  How  are  great 
fortunes  usually  built  up?  You  know.  I know. 
By  the  trampling  of  human  hearts  under  foot.  But 
look  at  the  poor  world.  It  is  nearly  as  cruel  as  the 
rich  world.  One  day  in  Chicago  two  men  were  work- 
ing hard  to  make  an  honest  living  for  themselves  and 
families  just  four  doors  north  of  the  church  of  which 
I was  pastor.  Four  other  poor  men  sneaked  in  and 
chopped  their  heads  open  with  hatchets,  and  ran. 


MOST  WONDEEPUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  49 


Why  did  they  do  it?  Simply  because  they  wanted 
the  jobs  of  these  two  men.  The  two  men  struck 
down  by  the  four  heartless  cowards  were  guilty  of 
no  crime  and  no  wrong  against  the  ones  that  cut  them 
down.  They  did  not  belong  to  the  union,  that  was 
all.  If  you  wish  to  know  the  spirit  of  the  rich  world, 
look  at  some  of  the  greedy,  conscienceless  Trusts.  If 
you  wish  to  know  the  spirit  of  the  poor  world,  look 
at  the  present  day  methods  of  the  Trades  Unions. 
The  spirit  of  both  is  essentially  the  same,  greed  for 
gold;  money  must  be  secured  at  any  cost,  even  the 
cost  of  murder  of  others  by  the  slow  process  of 
starvation  on  the  part  of  the  rich,  or  the  rapid  process 
of  hatchet  and  bullet  and  dynamite  on  the  part  of  the 
poor. 

A cruel,  selfish,  bloodthirsty  world  is  this.  What 
the  world  really  is,  we  saw  in  the  late  war.  But 
God  loves  it.  God  loves  those  four  cowards  who 
cut  down  their  fellow  labouring  man.  God  loves 
those  millionaires  who  already  having  more  than  is 
for  their  own  good  or  for  the  good  of  their  families 
are  trying  to  increase  their  wealth  by  crowding  com- 
petitors to  the  wall  and  their  families  to  the  poor- 
house.  God  loves  those  moral  monsters  that  made 
Europe  flow  with  blood  and  gasp  with  poison  gas. 
God  loves  the  world.  As  I come  to  know  more  and 
more  of  the  cruelty,  the  greed,  the  cupidity,  the  self- 
ishness, the  falsehood,  the  villainy,  the  lust,  the  vile- 
ness and  beastliness  there  is  in  this  world,  in  the 
social  world,  high  and  low,  in  the  business  world  in 
all  its  departments,  and  in  the  political  world,  I some- 
times almost  wonder  why  God  does  not  blot  out  this 
whole  world  as  He  did  Sodom  and  Gk)morrah  of  old. 


60 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


Why  does  He  not  do  it?  I will  tell  you  why.  God 
loves  the  world.  In  spite  of  all  its  cruelty,  in  spite 
of  all  its  greed,  in  spite  of  all  its  selfishness,  in  spite 
of  all  its  lust,  in  spite  of  all  its  vileness  in  thought 
and  word  and  deed,  God  loves  the  world.  Is  it  not 
wonderful,  is  it  not  amazing,  that  a Holy  God  should 
love  a sinful  world  like  this?  But  He  does! 

There  is  not  a man  whom  God  does  not  love. 
There  is  not  a woman  whom  God  does  not  love. 
There  is  not  a thief  whom  God  does  not  love.  There 
is  not  a woman  who  has  forgotten  her  modesty  and 
her  true  womanhood  that  God  does  not  love.  There 
is  not  an  adulterer  whom  God  does  not  love,  not  a 
sinner,  not  an  outcast,  not  a criminal  of  any  kind 
whom  God  does  not  love.  God  so  loved  the  world/* 

Years  ago  I said  to  a woman,  in  deep  despair  be- 
cause of  the  depths  of  iniquity  and  infamy  into 
which  she  had  fallen,  ‘‘  God  loves  you.’'  ''  Not  me, 
Mr.  Torrey.  God  doesn’t  love  me.  I have  killed  a 
man,”  she  cried.  Yes,  I know  that,  but  God  loves 
you.”  “ No,  not  me.  I have  murdered  innocent, 

unborn  babes.”  ‘‘  Yes,  I know  that,  but  God  loves 

you.”  ‘‘  Not  me.  My  heart  is  as  hard  as  a rock.” 

''Yes,  but  God  loves  you.”  "Not  me.  I have 

prayed  to  the  devil  to  take  away  all  my  convictions, 
and  he  has  done  it.”  " Yes,  I know  all  that,  but 
God  loves  you.”  Then  I made  that  woman  get  down 
on  her  knees,  and  she  came  to  believe  in  God’s  love 
to  her,  and  she  found  a great  peace.  I saw  her  again 
last  month  when  I was  in  Chicago.  She  came  down 
to  the  platform  to  speak  to  me  at  the  close  of  one  of 
my  meetings,  with  others  who  crowded  around  me. 
She  said,  “ Do  you  know  me  ? ” I replied,  " Of 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  61 


course,  I know  you/'  and  called  her  by  name.  Her 
face  was  wreathed  with  smiles.  Oh/'  she  said, 

Mr.  Torrey,  I am  still  at  the  old  work  of  winning 
others  to  Christ."  Ah,  some  of  you  self-righteous 
sceptics  hold  up  your  hands  in  holy  horror  and  dis- 
gust and  say,  ‘‘  I don't  want  to  believe  in  a God  who 
welcomes  sinners  so  vile  as  that."  You  miserable 
Pharisee,  you  old  hypocrite,  you  are  essentially  as  bad 
as  she  once  was  and  infinitely  worse  than  she  now  is. 
But  God  loves  you,  even  you.  God's  attitude  toward 
the  whole  wide  world  is  love. 

II.  God's  Attitude  Toward  Sin. 

But  what  is  God's  attitude  toward  sin?  Our  text 
tells  us,  God's  attitude  toward  sin  is  hate.  God 
loves  the  world  with  infinite  love!  God  hates  sin 
with  infinite  hate!  How  does  our  text  show  that? 
Listen.  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his 
only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  How 
does  that  show  that  God  hates  sin?  In  this  way: 
If  God  had  not  hated  sin  He  could  have  saved  the 
world  He  loved  without  an  atonement,  without  the 
atonement  that  cost  Him  so  much,  the  death  and 
agony  of  His  only  begotten  Son,  Who  died  as  an 
atoning  sacrifice  on  the  Cross.  But  because  God  was 
holy  and  therefore  hated  sin,  hated  it  with  infinite 
hatred.  His  hatred  of  sin  must  manifest  itself  some- 
how, either  in  the  punishment  of  the  sinner,  and  the 
banishment  of  the  sinner  forever  from  Himself  and 
from  life,  and  from  hope,  or  in  some  other  way. 
But  God's  love  would  not  permit  the  just  punishment 
of  the  sinner.  So  God  in  the  person  of  H .s  Son  took 


62 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


the  penalty  of  sin  upon  Himself  and  thus  saved  the 
world  He  loved.  “ All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way; 
and  Jehovah  hath  made  to  strike  on  him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all"  (Isa,  53:6,  exactly  translated  from  the 
Hebrew).  In  this  way  God  made  possible  eternal 
life  for  every  sinner  who  would  accept  the  salvation 
that  He  Himself  purchased  for  them  by  the  atoning 
death  of  His  only  begotten  Son. 

The  Cross  of  Christ  declares  two  things:  first, 
God’s  infinite  love  of  the  world;  second,  God's  in- 
finite hatred  of  sin.  Oh,  wicked  man,  do  not  fancy 
because  God  loves  you.  He  will  wink  at  your  sin. 
Not  for  one  moment.  He  hates  your  sin.  He  hates 
your  greed.  He  hates  your  selfishness.  He  hates  your 
cruelty.  He  hates  your  dishonesty.  He  hates  your 
lying.  He  hates  your  drunkenness.  He  hates  your  im- 
pure imagination.  He  hates  your  moral  uncleanness. 
He  hates  your  beastliness.  He  hates  every  sin,  great 
and  small,  of  which  you  are  guilty.  The  hatred  of  a 
true  man  for  all  falsehood,  the  hatred  of  honest  men 
for  all  dishonesty,  the  hatred  of  a true,  pure  woman 
for  the  unspeakable  vileness  of  the  woman  of  the 
street  and  gutter,  is  nothing  to  the  blazing  wrath  of 
God  at  your  smallest  sin.  Nevertheless,  God  loves 
you. 


III.  God’s  Attitude  Toward  His  Son. 

This  wonderful  verse  also  tells  of  God’s  attitude 
toward  His  Son.  What  is  God’s  attitude  toward  His 
Son  ? Listen.  “ God  so  loved  the  world  that  he 
gave  HIS  ONLY  BEGOTTEN  SoN.’’  God’s  attitude  to- 
ward His  Son,  “his  only  begotten  Son,”  is  infinite 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  63 


love.  The  Lord  Jesus  Is  the  only  Son  of  God.  We 
become  sons  of  God  through  our  faith  in  Him,  but 
He  is  the  only  Son  of  God  by  eternal  and  inherent 
right.  He  was  the  object  of  His  Father’s  infinite 
love  in  the  measureless  ages  before  any  one  of  the 
worlds  was  created;  yes,  before  there  was  angel  or 
archangel  or  any  of  the  heavenly  beings.  Let  me 
speak  to  you  fathers.  What  is  your  attitude  toward 
your  son?  How  you  love  him.  And  if  you  have 
only  one  son  how  intensely  you  love  him.  I have  but 
one  son.  I have  longed  for  more,  but  God  in  His 
wisdom  has  seen  fit  to  give  us  but  one  son.  How  I 
love  him!  God  only  knows  how  I love  him.  But 
my  love  to  my  one  son  is  nothing,  nothing  at  all  to 
God’s  love  to  His  only  begotten  Son. 

I sometimes  think  of  my  boy  and  fancy  I know 
something  of  God’s  love  for  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  is 
only  a little,  a very  little  that  I know.  But  though 
God  thus  loved  His  Son,  God  gave  that  Son  whom 
He  so  infinitely  loved,  that  Son  who  through  all 
eternity  had  been  the  object  of  His  delight,  God  gave 
that  only  begotten  Son  for  the  world,  for  you  and 
for  me.  He  gave  Him  to  leave  heaven  and  His 
own  companionship  to  come  down  to  earth  to  live  a 
lonely  stranger  here.  He  gave  Him  to  be  spit  upon 
and  buffeted  and  ‘‘  despised  and  rejected  of  men.” 
He  gave  Him  to  be  crowned  with  thorns,  and  mocked 
at  and  derided.  He  gave  Him  to  be  dragged  through 
the  streets  before  a howling,  yelling,  jeering  mob. 
He  gave  Him  to  be  nailed  to  the  Cross.  Yes,  to  a 
Cross ! and  to  hang  there  In  misery,  and  pain,  and 
agony,  for  hours,  the  object  of  the  rude  jests  and 
jeers  of  the  merciless  mob.  He  gave  Him  to  die  of 


54 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


a broken  heart/"  a heart  broken  by  the  reproach  of 
the  men  He  loved  (Ps.  69:20),  and  by  grief  over 
man’s  sins  which  He  had  taken  upon  Himself.  Yes, 
God  gave  Him,  His  only  begotten  Son,  thus  to  be 
separated  from  Himself,  to  suffer,  and  to  die.  Why? 
Because  God  loved  you  and  me  and  that  was  the 
only  price  that  would  purchase  our  salvation.  And 
God  paid  that  price,  that  awful  price. 

Oh,  it  is  wonderful ! I can  think  of  but  one  other 
thing  that  is  anywhere  near  as  wonderful  as  the  love 
of  God  for  sinners.  What  is  that?  The  way  we 
treat  that  love.  The  way  men  treat  it.  The  way 
some  of  you  despise  it.  The  way  you  reject  it.  The 
way  you  trample  it  under  foot.  The  way  you  even 
try  to  doubt  it  and  disbelieve  it  and  deny  it  and 
discredit  it,  and  try  to  make  yourself  think  that  you 
have  ‘‘  intellectual  difficulties  about  the  Doctrine  of 
the  Atonement.’"  Men,  at  least  be  honest.  Your 
real  difficulty  is  not  intellectual,  you  want  to  save 
your  pride,  and  excuse  the  enormity  of  your  ingrati- 
tude. And  to  do  that  you  do  not  hesitate  at  the 
gross  sin  of  ''  even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought "" 
you,  bought  you  by  His  atoning  agony  and  death 
(2  Pet.  2:1).  Oh,  be  honest  with  the  wondrous  love 
of  God,  even  if  you  are  determined  to  spurn  it. 
Your  pretended  ‘‘  theological  difficulties  with  the 
atonement""  that  Jesus  Christ  made  upon  the  Cross 
are  simply  your  dishonest  attempt  to  excuse  your 
abominable  ingratitude  and  damnable  rejection  of  in- 
finite love.  Bear  with  me  for  talking  thus  plainly 
about  your  sin.  I do  it  in  love  to  you.  You  may 
not  be  willing  to  admit  that  to-night,  but  you  will 
have  to  admit  it  in  that  day  when  you  stand  in  the 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  66 


light  of  the  Great  White  Throne  where  all  lies  and 
pretexts  and  deceptions  and  hypocrisies  will  be 
burned  up. 

IV.  God's  Attitude  Toward  Believers  in  Christ. 

Now  let  us  look  at  another  thing,  what  our  sen- 
tence teaches  about  God's  attitude  toward  believers 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  What  is  God's  attitude  to- 
ward all  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ?  It  can  be  put 
in  a few  words.  God's  attitude  toward  all  believers 
in  Jesus  Christ  is  to  give  them  eternal  life,  God 
so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,"  The  death  of 
Jesus  Christ  has  opened  for  all  who  believe  in  Him 
a way  of  pardon,  and  made  it  possible  for  a Holy 
God  to  forgive  sin  and  to  give  eternal  life  to  the 
vilest  sinner,  if  only  he  will  believe  on  Jesus  Christ. 
“ The  wages  of  sin  is  death  " and  these  wages  must 
be  paid,  but  Jesus  Christ  paid  the  price  and  so  life 
and  not  death  is  possible  for  you  and  me,  the  free 
gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ” 
^Rom.  6:23).  '' Whosoever"  believes  on  Jesus 

Christ,  whom  God  gave  to  die  for  him,  can  have 
eternal  life,  yes,  does  have  eternal  life.  Any  one 
can  have  eternal  life.  There  is  but  one  condition, 
just  believe  on  Jesus  Christ.  You  ought  to  do  it 
anyhow,  even  if  there  were  nothing  to  be  gained  by 
your  believing  on  Him;  you  owe  it  to  Jesus  Christ 
to  believe  on  Him.  He  is  infinitely  worthy  of  your 
faith. 

But  there  is  something  to  be  gained  by  believing  on 
Him,  something  of  infinite  worth,  eternal  life.  Do 


66 


THE  GOSPEL  POE  TO-DAY 


you  wish  eternal  life?  You  can  have  it.  Any  one 
can  have  it,  no  matter  what  his  past  may  have  been. 

God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  be- 
gotten Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.’’  Oh,  if  I of- 
fered you  great  honour  it  would  be  nothing  compared 
with  this.  If  I offered  you  enormous  wealth  it 
would  be  nothing  compared  with  this.  If  I offered 
you  exemption  from  all  sickness  and  pain,  it  would 
be  nothing  compared  with  this.  Eternal  life  ! 
That  is  what  God  offers.  And  God  offers  it  to  each 
one  of  you.  Oh,  how  it  makes  the  heart  swell  and 
throb  with  hope  and  joy  and  rapture,  eternal  life! 

V.  God’s  Attitude  Toward  All  Those  Who 
Will  Not  Believe  in  Jesus  Christ. 

There  is  just  one  thing  left  to  mention,  and  that 
is  God’s  attitude  toward  all  those  who  will  not  be- 
lieve on  Jesus  Christ.  What  is  it?  Listen.  For 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  be- 
gotten Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.”  God's  atti- 
tude toward  those  who  will  not  believe  on  Jesus 
Christ,  those  who  prefer  sin  and  vanity  and  pride  to 
the  glorious  Son  of  God,  is  simply  this:  God  with 
great  grief  and  reluctance  withdraws  from  them  the 
infinite  gift  He  has  purchased  at  so  great  cost,  and 
which  they  will  not  accept.  God  leaves  them  to 
PERISH.  There  is  no  hope  for  any  man  who  rejects 
God’s  gift  of  eternal  life,  obtained  by  simply  be- 
lieving in  His  only  begotten  Son.  God  has  exhausted 
all  the  possibilities  of  a saving  love  and  power  in 
Jesus  Christ’s  atonement  on  the  cross  of  Calvary. 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  57 


Reject  Him,  neglect  to  accept  Him,  and  you  must 
eternally  perish. 

God's  attitude  toward  the  world  is  infinite  love; 
God's  attitude  toward  sin  is  infinite  hatred;  God's 
attitude  toward  His  Son  is  unutterable  love,  but  He 
gave  that  Son  up  to  die  for  you  and  me ; God's  atti- 
tude toward  the  believer  is  to  give  him  eternal  life, 
regardless  of  what  his  past  has  been;  God's  attitude 
toward  those  who  will  not  believe  is  to  leave  them  to 
the  perdition  they  so  madly  choose.  Men  and 
women,  what  will  you  choose  to-night.  Life  or 
Death?  Some  of  you  will  decide  that  question  in  a 
few  minutes,  decide  it  for  all  eternity.  God  help 
\ you  to  decide  it  right. 

night  in  Minneapolis,  years  ago,  I knelt  in 
prayer  beside  a young  woman  who  was  having  an 
awful  struggle.  A fearful  battle  was  going  on  in 
her  soul  between  the  forces  of  light  and  the  forces 
of  darkness.  She  heard  God  calling  her  to  accept 
His  love,  and  to  accept  the  eternal  life  that  that  love 
had  purchased  by  the  atoning  death  of  His  own  Son. 
But  she  heard  other  voices  too,  voices  of  the  world, 
and  the  voice  of  Satan  himself,  luring  her  to  turn 
her  back  upon  Jesus  Christ  and  choose  the  world. 
It  was  awful  to  watch  the  battle  and  my  heart  ached 
as  I watched  the  battle,  and  I kept  crying  to  God 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  might  gain  the  victory.  Now 
and  then  I spoke  to  her.  Finally  I took  out  my 
watch  and  said,  ‘‘  This  battle  cannot  last  much  longer. 
Continue  to  resist  the  Holy  Spirit  as  you  are  re- 
sisting Him  now  and  you  will  seal  your  doom.  I 
believe  if  you  do  not  yield  to  God  in  the  next  ten 
minutes  that  you  will  never  yield  but  will  be  lost 


68 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


forever.”  Then  I prayed  but  said  nothing  more  to 
her,  but  now  and  again  looked  at  my  watch.  The 
fight  went  on.  Which  way  would  she  decide!  Be- 
fore the  ten  minutes  were  up  she  yielded  to  God. 

There  is  a like  battle  going  on  in  the  hearts  of  some 
who  are  reading  these  words.  Some  of  you  have 
been  brought  to  realize  the  wondrous  love  of  God  for 
you  as  you  have  never  realized  it  before.  Some  of 
you  have  been  brought  to  see  that  eternal  life  is  pos- 
sible for  you  to-night  if  you  will  only  choose  Christ. 
But  the  power  of  the  world  and  of  sin  and  of  Satan 
is  strong  upon  you  still,  and  the  world,  and  sin,  and 
above  all  Satan  will  not  let  you  go  without  making  a 
mighty  effort  to  keep  you  in  his  power,  to  blind  you 
and  to  forever  destroy  your  soul.  Oh,  men  and 
women  out  of  Christ,  each  and  every  one  of  you  look, 
look,  look ! Look  once  more  at  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
See  Him  hanging  there  in  awful  agony,  paying  the 
penalty  of  your  sin,  and  as  you  look,  listen  once 
more  to  the  precious  words  of  the  most  wonderful 
sentence  that  was  ever  written,  God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who- 
soever believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life.”  What  will  you  do  with  that  love 
to-night?  Will  you  yield  to  it  and  believe  on  the 
Saviour  and  obtain  eternal  life?  Or  will  you  trample 
that  wondrous  love  of  God  under  foot,  and  say  again 
to-night,  as  you  have  often  said  before,  I will  not 
accept  Christ,”  and  go  out  to  perish,  perish  eternally? 

One  night,  many  years  ago,  I was  preaching  the 
first  sermon  I ever  preached  in  the  city  of  Chicago. 
(It  was  some  years  before  I went  there  to  live.)  I 
was  at  the  first  International  Convention  of  Chris- 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  69 


tian  Workers.  The  morning  the  Convention  opened 
I entered  a little  late,  and  the  Nominating  Committee 
was  just  bringing  in  its  report,  and,  to  my  amaze- 
ment, I heard  them  announce  my  name  as  nominated 
for  Chairman  of  the  Convention  and  President  of  the 
International  Christian  Workers’  Association.  I was 
not  yet  thirty  years  old,  and  there  were  many  workers 
there  who  knew  far  more  about  aggressive  methods 
of  Christian  work  than  I had  ever  learned. 

However,  there  was  nothing  to  do  but  to  accept 
the  position,  and  during  the  days  of  that  wonderful 
Convention  I occupied  the  Chairman’s  seat.  The  Con- 
vention was  held  in  the  old  First  Methodist  Church, 
in  the  heart  of  the  city,  at  the  corner  of  Washington 
and  Clark  Streets.  When  Sunday  came,  of  course 
the  church  held  its  own  services,  but  I was  invited 
to  preach  at  the  evening  service.  There  had  been 
much  prayer  and  the  Spirit  of  God  was  present  in 
great  power,  and  when  I gave  out  the  invitation  many 
arose  to  say  that  they  would  accept  Jesus  Christ  as 
their  Saviour  then  and  there,  and  then  came  down 
to  the  altar.  Among  those  who  had  arisen  I noticed 
a beautifully  dressed  lady  near  the  front,  an  in- 
telligent looking  woman,  but  I noticed,  also,  that  she 
did  not  come  to  the  altar  with  the  others.  While  the 
altar  service  was  in  progress,  I stepped  down  and 
urged  her  to  come  to  the  front,  but  she  refused. 

On  Monday  night,  at  the  regular  session  of  the 
Convention,  I saw  her  come  in  and  take  a seat  just  a 
few  rows  from  the  back  of  the  building.  When  the 
meeting  was  drawing  to  a close,  I called  Mayor  How- 
land, of  Toronto  (who  was  Vice-President  of  the 
Convention),  to  the  chair  and  slipped  down  to  the 


60 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAT 


back  of  the  church,  in  order  that  I might  speak  with 
this  lady  before  she  got  out  of  the  building.  The 
moment  the  benediction  was  pronounced  I hastened 
to  her  side  and  asked  if  she  would  remain  a few  mo- 
ments. As  the  others  passed  out,  she  sat  down,  and 
I took  a seat  beside  her  and  commenced  to  urge  upon 
her  an  immediate  and  whole-hearted  acceptance  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

‘‘  Let  me  tell  you  my  story,”  she  replied-  I have 
attended  a Sunday  School  in  this  city  ever  since  I 
was  a little  girl.  I scarcely  missed  a Sunday.”  (She 
told  me  what  Sunday  School  it  was ; one  of  the  aris- 
tocratic Sunday  Schools  on  the  North  Side.)  But,” 
she  continued,  ‘‘  though  I have  been  going  to  Sunday 
School  all  these  years,  do  you  know  that  you  are 
the  first  person  in  all  my  life  that  ever  spoke  to  me 
personally  about  my  accepting  Christ.”  Then  she 
went  on  to  tell  me  the  story  of  her  life.  She  was 
unusually  well  educated,  occupying  a high  position 
of  responsibility,  but  the  story  that  she  told  me  of 
her  career  was  so  shameless  that  I was  amazed  that 
a woman  of  sense,  to  say  nothing  of  character,  would 
dream  of  telling  such  a story  to  a man.  Then  she 
hurried  on  and  told  me  how  she  had  passed  the  pre- 
ceding Easter  Sunday.  It  was  a story  I could  not 
repeat.  Having  finished,  she  said,  with  a mocking 
laugh,  Funny  way  to  spend  Easter,  wasn’t  it?  ” 

I was  astounded  and  shocked.  I did  not  attempt 
to  say  anything  in  reply ; I did  not  wish  to.  I simply 
opened  my  Bible  to  John  3 : 16,  handed  It  to  her  and 
asked  her  to  read.  It  was  a diamond  print  Bible, 
and  she  had  to  hold  it  close  to  her  face  to  see  the 
jvords.  She  began  to  read  with  a smile  on  her  lips. 


MOST  WONDEEFUL  SENTENCE  WEITTEN  ^6l 


"For  God  so  loved  the  world”  (the  smile  vanished, 
she  read  on)  " that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son.” 
She  choked  and  broke  down,  the  tears  literally  poured 
from  her  eyes  on  the  page  of  the  Bible  and  on  the 
beautiful  silk  robe  she  wore.  The  love  of  God  had 
conquered  that  sinful,  hardened,  trifling,  seemingly 
shameless  heart.  Oh ! friend,  I would  that  that  love 
might  break  your  heart,  break  down  your  hardness, 
and  unbelief,  and  worldliness,  and  resistance  to  God 
and  His  love.  See  the  Lord  Jesus  hanging  on  yon- 
der cross  in  unutterable  agony,  in  indescribable  pain, 
His  heart  breaking  for  you,  breaking  for  your  sins, 
and  hear  again  this  most  wonderful  sentence  that 
was  ever  written,  " For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that 
he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  be- 
lieveth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlast- 
ing life,” 


THE  ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING 
POWER 


For  I am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel:  for  it  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth:  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greeks 

— Romans  i : i6. 

^^But  though  I,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  should 
preach  unto  you  any  Gospel  other  than  that  which  we 
preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  Anathema.  As  I have 
said  before,  so  say  I now  again,  If  any  man  preacheth 
unto  you  another  Gospel  from  that  which  ye  received, 
let  him  be  Anathema.^* — Galatians  i : 8,  9. 

My  subject  is  The  Only  Gospel  that  has 
Saving  Power/’  I have  two  texts:  Ro- 
mans 1:16:  For  I am  not  ashamed  of 

the  Gospel : for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth/’  Galatians  i : 8,  9 : But 

though  I,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  unto  you 
any  Gospel  other  than  that  which  we  preached  unto 
you,  let  him  be  Anathema.  As  I have  said  before, 
so  say  I now  again,  If  any  man  preacheth  unto  you 
another  Gospel  from  that  which  ye  received,  let  him 
be  Anathema.” 

We  hear  much  in  these  days  about  various  Gospels. 
Some  extol  the  Gospel  of  Social  Service,  others  talk 
of  the  Gospel  of  the  Universal  Fatherhood  of  God 
and  the  Universal  Brotherhood  of  Man;  and  others 
62 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  63 


of  the  Gospel  of  Work,  others  of  the  Social  Gospel, 
and  others  of  various  other  Gospels.  But  there  is  but 
one  real  Gospel,  only  one  Gospel  that  in  actual  fact 
has  saving  power.  That  Gospel  is  ‘‘  the  Gospel  of 
Christ,''  the  Gospel  which  Paul  preached,  and  of 
which  he  said  that  if  any  man,  or  even  an  angel  from 
Heaven,  should  preach  any  other  Gospel,  he  would 
be  accursed  of  God.  All  these  Gospels  have  one 
fatal  fault,  they  don't  save.  These  other  Gospels 
may  sound  well,  they  may  be  described  with  entranc- 
ing rhetoric,  they  may  be  preached  with  great  elo- 
quence, with  marvelous  beauty  of  diction,  with  charm- 
ing figures  of  speech,  they  may  seem  exceedingly  al- 
luring, but  they  dont  save.  For  all  their  pretenses 
and  prettiness,  instead  of  saving,  they  darken,  de- 
base and  damn.  They  do  not  enlighten,  elevate  and 
save. 


I.  Man's  Need  of  Salvation. 

What  man  needs  is  salvation,  not  mere  social  uplift 
nor  mere  moral  improvement,  not  mere  intellectual 
enlightenment.  Man  is  lost.  Every  man  is  lost  until 
he  is  definitely  saved.  The  only  thing  that  will  save 
him  is  the  Gospel  that  Paul  preached. 

I.  Every  man  needs  salvation  from  the  guilt  of 
sin.  Every  man  and  woman  on  this  earth  is  a sinner. 
Every  man  and  woman  on  this  earth  has  been  a great 
sinner.  Every  man  and  woman  on  this  earth  has 
broken  the  first  and  greatest  of  God's  command- 
ments, namely,  ‘‘  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all 
thy  mind"  (Matt.  22:37,  38)  and  every  one  of  us, 
therefore,  is  a guilty  sinner  in  the  sight,  of  a Holy 


64 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


God,  and  we  need  salvation  from  the  guilt  of  sln^ 
That  is  the  first  need,  the  great  need,  the  crying  need, 
the  fundamental  need  of  every  one  of  us. 

2.  But  every  man  also  needs  salvation  from  the 
power  of  sin.  Sin  has  a hold  upon  every  one  of  us, 
a mastery  over  every  one  of  us,  that  we  cannot  over- 
come in  our  own  strength.  We  must  find  a deliverer 
from  the  power  of  sin.  The  one  universal  need  is  the 
need  of  salvation,  the  need  of  salvation  from  the  guilt 
and  power  of  sin. 

2^,  The  Gospel  has  power  to  save.  As  our  text 
puts  it,  ‘‘  the  Gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 
tion to  every  one  that  believeth:  to  the  Jew  first,  and 
also  to  the  Greek,’’  and  no  other  religion  of  philos- 
ophy has  power  to  save,  nothing  else  in  all  the 
world  has  power  to  save  from  the  guilt  and  power 
of  sin. 

II.  What  is  the  Gospel? 

We  come  now  right  to  the  question,  What  is  the 
Gospel  that  has  power  to  save?  Gospel  means,  as  I 
presume  you  all  know,  ‘‘  Good  news  ” or  Glad  tid- 
ings.” What  is  the  good  news,  or  the  glad  tidings, 
that  has  saving  power  in  it?  Paul  himself  tells  us 
what  this  Gospel  was  which  he  preached,  and  of 
which  he  said,  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 
tion to  every  one  that  believeth.”  We  are  not  left 
to  speculate  about  that  for  Paul  himself  defines  in  the 
simplest  and  most  easily  understood  terms  exactly 
what  the  Gospel  was  that  he  preached,  the  Gospel 
that  had  saving  power  and  the  only  Gospel  that  has 
saving  power.  Paul’s  full,  and  at  the  same  time  very 
plain,  description  of  the  Gospel  which  he  preached, 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  65 


you  will  find  in  i Corinthians  15 : 1-4:  Now  I make 

known  unto  you,  brethren,  the  Gospel  which  I 
preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  received,  wherein 
also  ye  stand,  hy  which  also  we  are  saved,  if  ye  hold 
fast  the  word  which  I preached  unto  you,  except  ye 
believed  in  vain,''  and  now  comes  the  description  of 
the  Gospel,  For  I delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that 
which  I also  received : that  Christ  died  for  our  sins 
according  to  the  Scriptures ; and  that  he  was  buried; 
and  that  he  hath  been  raised  on  the  third  day  accord- 
ing to  the  Scriptures." 

1.  You  notice  first  of  all  in  regard  to  this  Gospel 
that  Paul  preached,  that  the  good  news  is  facts,  not 
theories,  not  speculations,  not  guesses,  but  solid,  sub- 
stantial, established,  unmistakable,  inescapable,  abso- 
lutely sure  facts.  I am  glad  of  that.  Most  of  the 
gospels  one  hears  nowadays  are  mere  theories.  The 
Gospel  of  Christ  is  facts. 

2.  The  facts  that  constitute  the  good  news  were 
thre^^^' 

First,  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins/^  That 
certainly  is  good  news.  You  and  I are  sinners. 
Every  one  of  us  has  sinned.  If  any  one  here  to-night 
seeks  to  deny  that  he  is  a sinner,  his  denial  that  he  is 
a sinner  does  not  make  him  any  less  a sinner ; indeed, 
it  makes  him  all  the  more  a sinner;  for  it  makes  him 
a liar,  as  well  as  a sinner  in  other  respects.  As  we 
read  in  i John  i : 8,  10,  If  we  say  that  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in 
us.  ...  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned  we 
make  him  (God)  a liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in  us." 
So,  by  the  denial  of  our  sin  we  do  not  make  our- 
selves any  less  sinners,  but  we  prove  ourselves  to  be 


66 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


liars  and  make  ourselves  guilty  of  the  enormous  sin 
of  making  God  a liar.  That  is  what  every  Christian 
Scientist  does,  he  makes  God  a liar,  and  that  is  what 
every  one  else  who  denies  that  he  is  a sinner  does,  he 
makes  God  a liar.  God  says  that  we  are  sinners  and 
when  we  deny  the  fact  we  give  the  lie  to  God.  Every 
man,  therefore,  who  denies  that  he  is  a great  sinner 
is  a liar,  and  all  liars,  unless  they  repent,  are  bound 
for  the  eternal  fire;  for  God  says  in  Revelation  21 : 8, 
The  fearful,  and  the  unbelieving,  and  the  abomi- 
nable, and  murderers,  and  fornicators,  and  sorcerers, 
and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  their  part  shall  be  in  the 
lake  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone;  which  is 
the  second  death/" 

But  not  only  are  we  sinners,  but  God  is  holy,  in- 
finitely holy,  and  cannot  tolerate  sin.  God  is  '^of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,""  and  He  can  “ not  look 
on  iniquity,""  and  some  day  you  and  I must  meet  Him. 
We  must  either  meet  Him  bearing  our  sin,  with  all 
our  sin  upon  us,  or  else  we  must  find  some  one  else  to 
bear  our  sin  for  us.  If  we  should  meet  this  Holy 
God  with  our  sin  upon  us  then  must  we  be  forever 
banished  from  His  presence,  be  punished  with  ever- 
lasting destruction  from  the  presence  of  God  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power.""  But  the  Gospel  tells 
us  that  some  one  else  has  borne  our  sin  in  our  place. 
It  tells  us  that  a competent  sin-bearer  has  been  found. 
It  tells  us  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,""  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  paid  our  debt,  all  the  debt  we  owe,"" 
that  though  sin  had  left  a crimson  stain,""  He 
washed  it  white  as  snow.""  Even  Isaiah,  seven  hun- 
dred years  before  Christ,  got  a glimpse  of  this  won- 
derful truth  of  the  Gospel.  Speaking  in  the  Holy 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  67 


Spirit,  he  said,  ‘'All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all''  (Isa. 
53:6).  So  if  we  accept  the  Lord  Jesus  who  died  for 
our  sins  as  our  substitute  Saviour,  then  no  matter 
how  long  we  have  sinned,  no  matter  how  greatly  we 
have  sinned,  we  can  meet  God  with  absolutely  no  sin 
upon  us,  for  God  Himself  has  put  it  upon  Another. 
So  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  His  death,  saves  us  completely 
from  all  the  guilt  of  sin. 

(2)  The  second  fact  that  goes  to  make  up  the 
Gospel  is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  “ was  buried/^  At  first 
sight,  it  is  not  clear  how  this  is  “ good  news," 
but  it  is  good  news;  for  the  fact  of  His  burial 
shows  the  reality  of  His  death  and  the  actuality 
and  literalness  of  His  resurrection.  The  burial  of 
Jesus  Christ  shows  that  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  was 
no  sham  death,  no  mere  “ illusion,"  it  was  not  merely 
“ mortal  thought,"  as  the  “ Christian  Scientists " 
would  have  us  believe.  It  was  a real  death  and  there- 
fore it  was  a real  atonement.  All  that  “ Christian 
Science  " and  various  other  false  systems  offer  us  is  a 
sham  atonement  for  imaginary  sin,  and  thus  they 
offer  us  only  a sham  salvation.  The  Gospel  of  Christ, 
the  Gospel  that  God  makes  known,  the  Gospel  that 
Paul  preached,  the  Gospel  of  a Saviour  who  not  only 
died,  but  was  buried,  offers  us  a real  atonement  for 
sins  that  we  know  are  very  real  and  very  great  and 
therefore  it  offers  us  a real  salvation  from  the  guilt 
of  sin.  This  true  Gospel  says  to  the  vilest  sinner  in 
the  world,  “ There  is  perfect  pardon  and  justification 
for  you,  for  the  Son  of  God  really  died.  He  was 
really  buried,  and  there  is  therefore  a real  and  per- 


68 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


feet  salvation  for  you  from  all  your  guilt:  ^The 
hlood  of  Jesus  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
(i  John  1:7). 

(3)  The  third  fact  in  the  good  news  is  that  Jesus 
Christ  rose  again,  or  as  Paul  puts  it  in  his  description 
of  the  Gospel  in  i Corinthians  15:4,  ‘‘  He  hath  been 
raised  on  the  third  day  according  to  the  Scriptures.” 
That  is  certainly  good  news,  it  is  great  news.  It  is 
good  news  for  many  reasons,  but  especially  good 
news  from  the  standpoint  of  salvation,  because  it 
shows  that  Jesus  Christ  cannot  only  save  from  all 
the  guilt  of  sin  by  His  atoning  death,  but  that  He 
can  also  save  from  all  the  power  of  sin  by  His  resur- 
rection power.  As  it  is  put  in  that  wonderful  verse 
in  PIebr^ws,_JyWherefore  also  he  is  able  to  save 
-to  the^uttermost  them  that  draw  near  unto  God 
through  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  interces- 
sion for  them”  (Heb.  7:25).  We  need  not  only 
salvation  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  but  we  need  just  as 
much  salvation  from  the  power  of  sin.  Supposing  I 
were  a great  sinner  and  through  faith  in  Christ 
crucified,  should  find  salvation  from  all  my  guilt,  and 
find  perfect  peace  of  conscience,  and  should  go  out 
of  here  to-night  very  happy  in  the  thought  that  all  my 
sins  were  blotted  out.  Then  suppose  that  on  the 
morrow  the  same  old  temptations  that  have  overcome 
me  in  the  past,  for  example  the  appetite  for  drink,  or 
some  form  of  lust  or  impurity,  or  an  appetite  for 
drugs,  or  an  ungovernable  temper,  should  confront 
me,  and  I had  no  power  to  resist  the  temptation,  and 
down  I go,  how  much  would  such  a salvation  be 
worth?  But  Jesus  Christ  not  only  died  and  was 
buried.  He  rose  again,  and  to-night  He  lives  and  He 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  69 


has  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  and  so  He  can 
save  me  from  my  appetite  for  drink,  or  from  the 
power  of  any  evil  desire,  or  from  my  temper,  or 
whatever  my  sin  may  be ; and  however  weak  I may 
be  I can  begin  here  and  now  to  live  a clean  and  vic- 
torious life. 

The  following  incident  of  a man  who  once  called 
upon  me  in  Chicago  I have,  I believe,  related  before. 
This  man  sought  a private  interview  and  when  we 
had  taken  our  seats  alone  in  Mr.  Moody’s  office  the 
man  said,  I Avant  to  tell  you  my  story,”  and  he  went 
on  as  follows : I am  a Scotchman.  When  I was  a 

child  of  seven  over  in  Scotland  I began  to  read  the 
Bible  through.  One  day  I came  to  a passage  in 
Deuteronomy  that  told  me  that  if  I should  keep  the 
law  of  God  a hundred  years  and  then  broke  it  at  one 
point  after  having  kept  it  a hundred  years,  I would 
be  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  law  of  God.  Was 
that  right?”  *‘Yes,”  I replied,  ''the  Bible  doesn’t 
put  it  in  just  that  way,  but  the  Bible  does  say, ' Cursed 
is  every  one  that  confirmeth  not  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them.  ’ ” " That’s 
the  passage,”  he  said,  " that  I found  and  I knew  that 
I had  already  broken  the  law  of  God  and  therefore  I 
knew  that  I was  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  law. 
Though  I was  only  seven  years  of  age,  I was  in  deep 
distress.  Night  after  night  I went  to  bed  and  wept 
myself  to  sleep,  thinking  how  I was  under  the  curse 
of  the  broken  law  of  God.  But  I went  on  reading  my 
Bible  and  the  next  year  when  I was  eight  years  old  I 
came  to  John  3:  16,  ‘For  God  so  loved  the  world, 
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 


70 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


lasting  life/  and  all  my  burden  rolled  away.  Was  I 
converted  ? ** 

Well/'  I replied,  that  sounds  like  a good, 
evangelical  conversion." 

Let  me  tell  you  the  rest  of  my  story,"  he  con- 
tinued. I grew  up  to  manhood.  I came  to  America, 
I came  out  here  to  Chicago,  I found  work  down  in 
the  stockyards.  I am  living  down  in  the  stockyards. 
Now,  the  stockyards,  as  you  know,  are  a hard  place, 
and  I got  to  drinking  and  every  little  while  I go  off 
on  a drunk.  What  I have  come  to  ask  you  is  if  there 
is  any  way  in  which  I can  get  victory  over  the 
drink?  " You  have  come  just  to  the  right  place,"  I 
replied.  I can  answer  your  question.  There  is  a 
way  in  which  you  can  get  victory  over  the  drink. 
You  have  only  believed  half  the  Gospel,  and  there- 
fore you  have  only  got  half  a salvation."  I said, 
“ Let  me  show  you  the  whole  Gospel,"  and  I opened 
to  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  First  Corinthians  and  read, 
' Moreover,  brethren,  I declare  unto  you  the  Gospel 
which  I preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  have  re- 
ceived and  wherein  ye  stand;  by  which  also  we  are 
saved,  if  ye  keep  in  memory  what  I have  preached 
unto  you,  except  ye  believed  in  vain,  for  I delivered 
unto  you  first  of  all  that  which  I also  received,  that 
Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures; 
and  that  he  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose  again  the 
third  day  according  to  the  Scriptures/ 

Now,"  I went  on,  “You  have  believed  the  first 
part  of  this  Gospel,  that  Christ  died  and  was  buried, 
and  through  believing  that  you  have  found  pardon 
and  peace."  “ Yes."  “ But,"  I continued,  “ that  is 
only  half  the  Gospel.  There  is  another  half  to  it,  and 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  71 


that  is  that  He  rose  again.  Do  you  believe  that  ? ” 
‘‘  I believe  everything  in  the  Bible/’  he  replied.  Again 
I asked,  Do  you  believe  that  Jesus  rose  again  the 
third  day  ? ” ‘‘  Yes,  I do.”  ‘‘  Very  well,  then,  if  He 

rose  the  third  day,  then  He  has  all  power  in  heaven 
and  on  earth.”  Yes.”  ''And  He  has  power  to 
keep  you  from  the  power  of  the  drink,  and  from  the 
power  of  sin.  Do  you  believe  that?”  "Yes,”  he 
said,  " I do.”  " Will  you  trust  Him  to  do  it  ? ” "I 
will,”  he  replied.  " Let  us  kneel  down  and  tell  God 
so,”  I said.  We  knelt  side  by  side.  I prayed  first 
and  then  he  prayed.  These  were  about  the  words  he 
uttered.  " O God,  I have  been  believing  half  the 
Gospel  and  I have  had  half  a salvation.  I have 
believed  that  part  of  the  Gospel  that  told  me  that 
Christ  died  for  my  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures 
and  through  believing  that  I have  found  pardon  and 
peace ; but  now  I have  come  to  believe  the  other  half 
of  the  Gospel,  that  Christ  not  only  died,  but  that  He 
rose  again  and  that  He  has  all  power  in  heaven  and 
on  earth  and  that  He  has  power  to  keep  me  from  the 
power  of  the  drink.” 

Then  he  changed  his  mode  of  address  and  com- 
menced speaking  directly  to  Jesus  Christ.  " Lord 
Jesus,”  he  said,  " I believe  that  Thou  art  risen  from 
the  dead  and  I believe  that  Thou  hast  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  I believe  that  Thou  hast  power 
to  save  me  from  the  drink.  O Lord  Jesus,  save  me 
from  the  power  of  drink  right  now.  I ask  it  in  Thine 
own  name.  Amen.”  As  he  still  knelt  there,  his  head 
bowed  in  prayer,  I said,  " Did  you  really  trust  Him 
to  do  it?”  He  replied,  "I  did.”  He  rose,  I gave 
him  some  instruction  as  to  how  to  make  a success  of 


72 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


this  life  upon  which  he  had  entered,  he  left  the  office 
and  I didn't  hear  from  him  for  some  weeks.  Then  I 
received  a brief  letter,  but  the  letter  was  very  much 
to  the  point.  It  ran  this  way : Dear  Mr.  Torrey,  I 

am  so  glad  I came  to  see  you.  It  works” 

Yes,  thank  God,  it  does  work.  It  works  with  any 
one  who  really  believes  it.  The  Gospel  of  a Saviour 
who  died  and  was  buried  and  rose  again  has  power 
to  save  from  the  guilt  of  sin  and  it  also  has  power  to 
save  from  the  power  of  sin.  It  has  power  to  save 
to  the  vittermost”  those  who  come  to  God  through 
Jesus  Christ.  And  it  is  the  only  Gospel  that  can  do 
it.  The  Gospel  of  Christian  Science,  with  a sham 
death  and  a sham  resurrection,  cannot  do  it.  The 
Gospel  of  New  Thought  cannot  do  it.  The  Gospel  of 
Theosophy  cannot  do  it.  The  Gospel  of  Social  Serv- 
ice, of  which  we  are  hearing  so  much  in  our  day,  can- 
not do  it.  No  Gospel  but  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Gospel  of  a Saviour  who  really  died,  who  was 
really  buried,  and  who  really  rose  again,  can  do  it.  A 
short  while  ago  a well  known  pastor  in  Los  Angeles 
announced  that  he  was  going  to  preach  a Gospel 
without  an  atonement  of  blood”  Well,  if  he  does  he 
will  preach  a Gospel  that  cannot  save,  he  will  preach 
a Gospel  that  will  send  men  to  hell  and  not  a Gospel 
that  will  ever  fit  men  for  heaven.  And  any  one  who 
preaches  a Gospel  that  Christ  died,  but  not  a Gospel 
that  He  rose  again,  will  preach  a Gospel  that  will 
not  save  from  the  power  of  sin.  But  the  Gospel  con- 
tained in  this  blessed  Book  of  God,  the  Gospel  that 
Jesus  both  died  and  rose  again,  will  save.  It  will 
save  from  both  the  guilt  and  the  power  of  sin,  it  will 
save  to  the  uttermost.’’ 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWER  73 


III.  Whom  the  Gospel  Saves. 

But  whom  does  the  Gospel  save  ? It  does  not  save 
everybody.  This  Gospel  has  been  proclaimed  for 
more  than  eighteen  hundred  years,  but  it  has  not 
saved  everybody  yet,  and  it  never  will.  There  are 
many  in  these  days  who  are  saying.  The  Gospel  is  a 
failure  because  the  great  majority  of  men  and  women 
are  not  saved.  They  say,  “ Christianity  is  a failure, 
because  after  eighteen  centuries  our  governments  are 
not  Christian,  and  wars  and  other  damnable  things 
are  still  possible.’’  But  herein  lies  their  mistake,  God 
never  intended  the  Gospel  to  save  everybody.  He 
never  gave  it  to  save  everybody.  He  never  expected 
it  to  save  everybody..  He  gave  it  to  save  those  who 
would  believe  it  and  those  only.  It  is  not  Christianity 
that  has  failed,  but  man  that  has  failed,  by  rejecting 
this  glorious  Gospel.  The  Gospel  has  not  failed  be- 
cause it  has  not  saved  everybody  any  more  than  a 
perfectly  good  medicine  that  will  cure  anybody  who 
takes  it  fails  where  it  doesn’t  cure  those  who  don’t 
take  it.  God  has  told  us  plainly  from  the  beginning 
just  who  the  Gospel  would  save.  Who  does  it  save? 
Listen : The  Gospel  ...  is  the  power  of  God 

unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth/^  This  tells 
us  whom  the  Gospel  saves. 

I.  First  of  all,  it  saves  those  who  believe.  Not 
those  who  hear,  but  those  who  believe.  The  Gospel 
does  not  save  every  one  who  hears  it.  Millions  of 
men  have  heard  the  Gospel  all  through  their  lives  and 
died  in  their  sins  and  gone  to  hell.  There  are  many 
who  fancy  that  merely  hearing  the  Gospel  or  living  in 
a Christian  land  makes  them  Christians.  One  night 


74 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


I approached  a very  intelligent  looking  man  in  Duluth, 
Minn.  I said  to  him,  ‘‘Are  you  a Christian?'’  He 
replied,  “ Certainly ; do  you  think  I am  a Moham- 
medan ? " He  thought  that  simply  because  he  was 
born  and  brought  up  in  a Christian  land  and  heard 
the  Gospel  that  made  him  a Christian ; but  it  does  not. 
It  is  believing  the  Gospel,  not  merely  hearing  the 
Gospel,  that  saves.  It  is  believing  the  Gospel  and  not 
merely  hearing  it  that  makes  one  a Christian,  The 
Gospel  does  not  even  save  the  one  who  merely 
admires  it.  A man  may  have  a great  admiration  for 
the  Gospel,  for  the  profound  philosophy  of  the  Bible, 
and  yet  be  an  utterly  unsaved  man.  The  Gospel 

SAVES  THE  ONE  WHO  BELIEVES  IT  AND  HIM  ALONE. 

The  one  who  believes  what?  The  Gospel.  Really  be- 
lieves it,  believes  it  with  the  heart.  The  one  who  has 
that  kind  of  faith  that  leads  to  action,  the  faith  that 

(1)  leads  you  to  accept  Christ  as  your  atoning 
Saviour  and  to  trust  God  to  forgive  you  simply  be- 
cause Jesus  Christ  died  in  your  place; 

(2)  the  faith  that  leads  you  to  accept  Christ  as 
your  risen  Saviour  and  to  trust  Him  to  deliver  you 
from  the  power  of  sin ; 

(3)  the  faith  that  leads  you,  having  accepted  Him, 
to  show  the  reality  of  your  faith  by  an  open  confes- 
sion of  Him  before  the  world,  as  it  is  written,  “ If 
thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and 
shalt  believe  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him  from 
the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved : for  with  the  heart  man 
believeth  unto  righteousness;  and  with  the  mouth 
confession  is  made  unto  salvation  " (Rom.  10:  9,  10). 

2.  But  it  not  only  saves  those  who  believe.  It 
saves  “ every  one  that  believeth.”  As  it  is  put  in  our 


ONLY  GOSPEL  THAT  HAS  SAVING  POWEE  76 


text,  The  Gospel  . . , is  the  power  of  God 

unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth”  There  is 
not  a man  or  woman  in  this  room  to-night  whom  the 
Gospel  cannot  save.  There  is  not  a man  or  woman 
in  the  world  so  sunken  in  sin,  so  lost  to  all  that  is 
good  and  true  and  pure,  that  the  Gospel  cannot  save, 
if  they  will  only  believe.  There  is  not  a man  or 
woman  so  utterly  weak  and  helpless  in  sin  that  the 
Gospel  will  not  save  them,  if  they  believe  it.  Why 
then  is  there  a man  or  woman  in  the  world  who  is  not 
saved  ? Why  is  there  a man  or  woman  in  the  world 
who  is  not  saved  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin? 
Simply  because  you  will  not  believe.  Let  me  illustrate. 
Here  is  a great  Mogul  engine  on  the  track.  It  is 
coaled  and  has  water  in  the  boiler,  there  is  fire  under- 
neath the  boiler,  the  steam  is  up,  there  is  a full  head 
of  steam,  there  is  power  in  that  locomotive  to  draw 
a heavily  loaded  freight  train  up  the  steepest  grade, 
and  now  that  locomotive  backs  down  to  the  train  and 
now  the  engineer  reverses  the  lever  and  the  locomo- 
tive starts  up  the  grade,  but  not  a car  moves.  Why 
not?  Was  it  because  there  was  not  power  in  the 
locomotive  to  draw  the  train?  No,  there  was  plenty 
of  power  for  that.  What  was  the  trouble?  The 
brakeman  had  not  put  in  the  coupling  pin.  And  now 
the  locomotive  backs  down  again  and  backs  up  to  the 
train  of  cars.  The  brakeman  goes  in  between  the 
tender  of  the  locomotive  and  the  train,  and  drops  in 
a little  coupling  pin  and  now  the  engineer  reverses  the 
lever  and  the  locomotive  starts  up  the  track  again,  and 
this  time  the  train  moves  up  the  grade.  Just  so,  the 
Gospel  has  power  to  save,  if  you  couple  on.  The 
Gospel  locomotive  stands  on  the  track,  there  is  power 


76 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


in  that  locomotive  to  carry  the  train  most  heavily 
loaded  with  sin  up  the  track,  steam  is  up,  it  is  start- 
ing up  the  grade  to  glory,  it  can  pull  you,  no  matter 
how  heavily  weighted  you  are  with  tons  of  sin,  up 
the  grade  to  glory.  Fall  in  line.  Couple  on.  Faith 
is  the  coupling  pin.  Just  believe  the  Gospel.  It  rests 
with  every  man  and  woman  here  to-night  to  say 
whether  you  will  be  saved  or  not,  saved  right  now' 
from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin.  It  all  turns  upon 
whether  you  will  or  will  not  believe  the  Gospel. 
“ For  I am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel,  for  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  be- 
lieveth.” 


V 


THE  GREAT  ATTRACTION;  THE  UPLIFTED 
CHRIST 

**And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw 
all  men  unto  myself” — ^John  12:32  (R.  V.). 

IN  a recent  advertisement  of  a Sunday  evening 
service  in  one  of  our  American  cities  it  was 
stated  that  there  would  be  three  attractions:  a 
high-class  movie  show,  a popular  gospel  pianist  and 
his  wife,  and  an  aria  from  the  opera.  Madam  But- 
terfly, rendered  by  a well-known  prima  donna.  It 
is  somewhat  startling  when  an  unusually  gifted  and 
popular  preacher,  or  his  advertising  committee, 
thinks  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  as  having  so 
lost  its  power  to  draw,  that  it  must  be  bolstered  up 
by  putting  on  a selection  from  a very  questionable 
opera,  rendered  by  a professional  opera  singer,  as  an 
additional  attraction  to  help  out  our  once  crucified 
and  now  glorified  Saviour  and  Lord. 

This  advertisement  set  me  to  thinking  as  to  what 
really  was  the  great  attraction  to  men  in  this  day  as 
well  as  in  former  days?  At  once  there  came  to  my 
mind  the  words  of  our  text  containing  God’s  answer 
to  this  question:  '^And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  myself.”  There  is 
nothing  else  that  draws  like  the  uplifted  Christ. 
Movies  may  get  a crowd  of  empty-headed  and  empty- 
hearted  young  men  and  maidens,  and  even  middle- 

77 


78 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


aged  folks  without  brains  or  moral  earnestness,  for  a 
time,  but  nothing  really  draws  and  holds  the  men  and 
women  who  are  worth  while  like  Jesus  Christ  lifted 
up.  Nineteen  centuries  of  Christian  history  prove 
the  drawing  power  of  Jesus  when  He  is  properly  pre- 
sented to  men.  I have  seen  some  wonderful  verifica- 
tions of  the  assertion  of  our  text  as  to  the  marvelous 
drawing  power  of  the  uplifted  Christ. 

In  London,  for  two  continuous  months,  six  after- 
noons and  evenings  each  week,  I saw  the  great  Royal 
Albert  Hall  filled  and  even  jammed,  and  sometimes 
as  many  turned  away  as  got  in,  though  it  would  seat 
10,000  people  by  actual  count  and  stand  2,000  more 
in  the  dome.  On  the  opening  night  of  these  meetings 
a leading  reporter  of  the  city  of  London  came  to  me 
before  the  service  began  and  said,  ‘‘  You  have  taken 
this  building  for  two  consecutive  months?'’  ‘"Yes." 
“And  you  expect  to  fill  it  every  day?"  “Yes." 
“ Why,"  he  said,  “ no  one  has  ever  attempted  to  hold 
two  weeks'  consecutive  meetings  here  of  any  kind. 
Gladstone  himself  could  not  fill  it  for  two  weeks. 
And  you  really  expect  to  fill  it  for  two  months  ? " I 
replied,  “ Come  and  see."  He  came  and  he  saw. 

On  the  last  night,  when  the  place  was  jammed  to 
its  utmost  capacity  and  thousands  outside  clamoured 
for  admission,  he  came  to  me  again  and  I said,  “ Has 
it  been  filled  ? " He  smiled  and  said,  “ It  has."  But 
what  filled  it?  No  show  on  earth  could  have  filled  it 
once  a day  for  many  consecutive  days.  The  preacher 
was  no  remarkable  orator.  He  had  no  gift  of  wit 
and  humour,  and  would  not  have  exercised  it  if  he 
had.  The  newspapers  constantly  called  attention  to 
the  fact  that  he  was  no  orator,  but  the  crowds  came 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEAOTION 


79 


and  came  and  came;  rainy  days,  and  fine  days  they 
crowded  in  or  stood  outside,  oftentimes  in  a down- 
pour of  rain,  in  the  vain  hope  of  getting  in.  What 
DREW  THEM  ? The  Uplifted  Christ  preached  and  sung 
in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  given  in  answer  to 
the  daily  prayers  of  40,000  people  scattered  through- 
out the  earth. 

In  Liverpool,  the  Tournament  Hall,  that  was  said 
to  seat  20,000  people,  and  that  by  actual  count  seated 
12,500  comfortably,  located  in  a very  out-of-the-way 
part  of  the  city,  several  blocks  from  the  nearest 
street-car  line,  and  perhaps  half  a mile  from  all  the 
regular  street-car  lines,  was  filled  night  after  night 
for  three  months,  and  on  the  last  night  they  crowded 
15,000  people  into  the  building  at  seven  o'clock,  and 
then  emptied  it,  and  crowded  another  15,000  in  who 
had  been  patiently  waiting  outside;  30,000  people 
drawn  in  a single  night!  By  what?  By  whom? 
Not  by  the  preacher,  not  by  the  singer,  but  by  Him 
who  had  said  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  before, 
''And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  myself." 

I.  The  Exact  Meaning  of  the  Text. 

Let  us  now  look  at  the  exact  meaning  of  the  text. 

I.  First,  notice  who  is  the  speaker,  and  what  were 
the  circumstances  under  which  He  spoke?  The 
Speaker  was  our  Lord  Jesus.  Not  the  Christ  of 
men's  imaginings,  but  the  Christ  of  reality,  the  Christ 
of  actual  historic  fact.  Not  the  Christ  of  Mary 
Baker  Eddy's  maudlin  fancy,  or  of  Madam  Besant's 
mystical  imaginings,  but  the  Christ  of  actuality,  who 
lived  here  among  men  and  was  seen,  heard  and  han- 


80 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


died  by  men,  and  who  was  soon  to  die  a real  death 
to  save  real  sinners  from  a real  Hell  to  a real  Heaven, 

The  circumstances  were  these.  Certain  Greeks 
among  those  who  went  up  to  worship  at  the  Jewish 
feast  came  to  one  of  the  apostles,  Philip,  and  said, 
‘‘  We  would  see  Jesus.''  And  Philip  went  to  Andrew 
and  told  Andrew  what  these  Greeks  said.  Andrew 
and  Philip  together  came  and  told  Jesus.  In  the 
heart-cry  of  these  Greeks,  ‘‘  We  would  see  Jesus," 
our  Lord  recognized  the  yearning  of  the  universal 
heart,  the  heart  of  Greek,  as  well  as  Jew,  for  a satis- 
fying Saviour.  The  Greeks  had  their  philosophers 
and  sages,  their  would-be  satisfiers  and  saviours,  the 
greatest  the  world  has  ever  known,  Socrates,  Aris- 
totle, Plato,  Epictetus,  Epimenides,  and  many  others, 
but  they  did  not  save,  and  they  did  not  satisfy,  and 
the  Greeks  cried  ‘‘We  would  see  Jesus";  and  in 
their  eager  coming  Jesus  foresaw  the  millions  of  all 
nations  who  would  flock  to  Him  when  He  had  been 
crucified  as  the  universal  Saviour,  meeting  all  the 
needs  of  all  mankind,  and  so  He  cried,  “And  I,  if  I 
be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
myself." 

2.  In  the  second  place,  notice  the  words,  “ If  I he 
lifted  up/'  To  what  does  Jesus  refer?  The  next 
verse  answers  the  question.  “ 'But  this  he  said,  signi- 
fying by  what  manner  of  death  he  should  die." 
Jesus  referred  to  His  lifting  up  on  the  cross,  to  die 
as  an  atoning  Saviour  for  all  mankind.  This  verse 
is  often  quoted  as  if  it  meant  that,  if  we  lifted  up 
Christ  in  our  preaching.  He  would  draw  men.  That 
is  true,  and  it  is  a crying  shame  that  we  do  not  hold 
just  Him  up  more  in  our  preachings  and  we  would 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEACTION  81 

draw  far  more  people  if  we  did ; but  that  is  not  our 
Lord’s  meaning.  The  lifting  up  clearly  referred  not 
to  His  not  being  lifted  up  in  our  preaching,  but  to  His 
lifting  up  by  His  enemies  on  the  cross,  to  expose  Him 
to  awful  shame  and  to  an  agonizing  death.  It  is 
Christ  crucified  who  draws,  it  is  Christ  crucified  who 
meets  the  deepest  needs  of  the  heart  of  all  mankind, 
it  is  an  atoning  Saviour,  a Saviour  who  atones  for 
the  sins  of  men  by  His  death,  and  thus  saves  from 
the  holy  wrath  of  an  infinitely  holy  God,  Who  meets 
the  needs  of  men,  and  thus  draws  all  men,  for  all  men 
are  sinners.  Preach  any  Christ  but  a crucified  Christ, 
and  you  will  not  draw  men  for  long.  Preach  any 
gospel  but  a gospel  of  atoning  blood,  and  it  will  not 
draw  for  long. 

Unitarianism  does  not  draw  men.  Unitarian 
churches  are  born  only  to  die.  Their  corpses  strew 
New  England  to-day.  Many  of  their  ministers  have 
been  intellectually  among  the  most  brilliant  our  coun- 
try has  ever  known,  but  their  churches  even  under 
scholarly  and  brilliant  ministers  die,  die,  die.  Why? 
Because  Unitarianism  presents  a gospel  without  aton- 
ing blood,  and  Jesus  has  said  and  history  has  proven 
it  true,  “And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will 
draw  all  men  unto  myself.”  “ Christian  Science,” 
strangely  so  called,  for  as  has  been  often  truly  said, 
“ it  is  neither  Christian  nor  scientific,”  draws  crowds 
of  men  and  women  of  a certain  type,  men  and  women 
who  have  or  imagine  that  they  have  physical  ailments, 
and  who  will  follow  anything  no  matter  how  absurd, 
that  promises  them  a little  surcease  from  their  real 
or  imagined  pains.  It  also  draws  crowds  who  wish 
to  fancy  that  they  have  some  religion  without  paying 


82 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


the  price  of  true  religion,  genuine  love,  real  self-sac- 
rifice and  costly  sympathy.  But  Christian  Science 
does  not  draw  all  men,  that  is,  all  kinds  and  condi- 
tions and  ranks  of  men.  In  fact  for  the  most  part  it 
does  not  draw  men  at  all,  but  women,  and  the  alleged 
men  it  draws  are  for  the  most  part  women  in  trou- 
sers, and  men  who  see  an  easy  way  to  make  a living 
by  preying  upon  the  credulity  of  luckless  females. 
No,  a bloodless  gospel,  a gospel  with  a Christ  but  not 
a Christ  lifted  up  on  a cross,  does  not  meet  the  uni- 
versal needs  of  men,  and  so  does  not  draw  all  men. 

Congregationalism  of  late  years  has  been  sadly 
tinctured  with  Unitarianism.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that 
it  has  been  an  eye-witness  to  Unitarianism’s  steady 
decay  and  death,  Congregationalism  has  largely 
dropped  the  atoning  blood  out  of  its  theology,  and 
consequently  it  is  rapidly  going  to  the  wall.  Its  once 
great  Andover  Seminary,  still  great  in  the  size  of  its 
endowment  that  was  given  for  the  teaching  of  Bible 
Orthodoxy,  but  which  the  conscienceless  teachers  of 
a bloodless  theology  have  deliberately  taken  for  the 
exploitation  of  their  ‘‘  damnable  heresies ''  (2  Pet. 
2:1),  and  which  is  still  great  in  the  number  of  its 
professors,  graduated  at  their  annual  graduating  ex- 
ercises last  spring  just  three  men,  one  a Japanese,  one 
a Hindoo,  and  one  an  American.  A theology  with- 
out a crucified  Saviour,  without  the  atoning  blood, 
won’t  draw.  It  does  not  meet  the  need.  No,  no,  the 
words  of  our  Lord  are  still  true,  ‘‘  And  I,  if  I be 
lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  my- 
self.” 

3.  Note,  in  the  third  place,  the  words,  ''  Draw  all 
meny  Does  ‘‘  all  men  ” mean  all  individuals  or  men 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEACTION 


83 


of  all  races?  Did  Jesus  mean  that  every  man  and 
woman  who  lived  on  this  earth  would  be  drawn  to 
Him,  or  did  He  mean  that  men  of  all  races  would  be 
drawn  to  Him?  The  context  answers  the  question. 
The  Greeks,  as  we  have  seen,  came  to  one  of  the 
apostles,  Philip,  and  said,  ‘‘We  would  see  Jesus,’’  and 
Philip  had  gone  and  told  Andrew,  and  Andrew  and 
Philip  had  gone  and  told  Jesus.  Our  Lord’s  minis- 
try during  His  earthly  life  was  to  Jews  only,  and  in 
the  coming  of  these  Greeks  so  soon  before  His  death, 
our  Lord  saw  the  presage  of  the  coming  days  when 
by  His  death  on  the  cross  the  barrier  between  Jews 
and  Gentiles  would  be  broken  down  and  all  nations 
would  have  their  opportunity  equally  with  the  Jews, 
when  by  His  atoning  death  on  the  cross  men  of  all 
nations  would  be  drawn  to  Him.  He  did  not  say  that 
He  would  draw  every  individual,  but  that  all  races  of 
men,  Greeks  as  well  as  Jews,  Romans,  Scythians, 
French,  English,  Germans,  Japanese,  Americans,  and 
men  of  all  nations.  He  is  a universal  Saviour,  and 
true  Christianity  is  a universal  religion.  Moham- 
medanism, Buddhism,  Confucianism,  and  all  other 
religions  but  Christianity  are  religions  of  a restricted 
application.  Christianity,  with  a crucified  Christ  as 
its  center,  is  a universal  religion  and  meets  the  needs 
of  all  mankind.  It  meets  the  needs  of  the  European 
as  well  as  the  needs  of  the  Asiatic,  the  needs  of  the 
Occident  as  well  as  the  needs  of  the  Orient,  the  needs 
of  the  American  Indian  and  the  needs  of  the  African 
negro ; and  so  our  Lord  said,  “And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  myself.” 

No  race  has  ever  been  found  anywhere  on  this 
earth  to  which  the  Gospel  did  not  appeal  and  whose 


84 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


deepest  need  the  crucified  Christ  did  not  meet. 
Many  years  ago,  when  Charles  Darwin,  the  eminent 
English  scientist,  came  in  contact  with  the  Terre  del 
Fuegans  in  their  gross  degradation,  he  publicly  de- 
clared that  here  was  a people  to  whom  it  was  vain  to 
send  missionaries,  as  the  Gospel  could  not  do  anything 
for  them.  But  brave  men  of  God  went  there  and 
took  the  Gospel  to  them  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  demonstrated  that  it  met  the  need  of 
the  Terre  del  Fuegans,  with  such  great  results  that 
Charles  Darwin  publicly  admitted  his  mistake  and 
became  a regular  subscriber  to  the  work. 

The  Gospel,  with  a crucified  Christ  as  its  center, 
meets  the  needs  of  all  conditions  and  classes  of  men 
as  well  as  of  all  races.  It  meets  the  need  of  the  mil- 
lionaire and  the  need  of  the  pauper ; it  meets  the  need 
of  great  men  of  science  like  James  D.  Dana  and  Lord 
Kelvin,  and  the  need  of  the  man  or  woman  who  can- 
not read  nor  write ; it  meets  the  need  of  the  king  on 
the  throne  and  the  need  of  the  labourer  in  the  ditch. 
I myself  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes  noblemen  and 
servant  girls,  University  Deans  and  men  who  could 
scarcely  read,  prisoners  in  penitentiaries  and  leaders 
in  moral  uplift,  brilliant  lawyers  and  dull  plodding 
workingmen,  come  under  its  attraction,  and  saved  by 
its  power.  But  it  was  only  because  I made  Christ 
crucified,''  His  atoning  work,  the  center  of  my 
preaching. 

4.  Notice  in  the  fourth  place,  the  words  " Unto 
me."  I will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  The  Revised 
Version  reads  Unto  myself,"  and  that  was  just  what 
Jesus  said,  “And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  myself."  It  is  not  to  a creed 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEACTION 


86 


or  a system  of  doctrine  that  Jesus  draws  men,  but  to  a 
Person,  to  Himself.  That  is  what  we  need,  a Person, 
Jesus  Himself.  As  He  Himself  once  said,  ''  Come 
unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I will  give  you  rest’’  (Matt.  11:28).  Creeds  and 
confessions  of  faith  are  all  right  in  their  place,  they 
are  of  great  value ; the  organized  church  is  of  great 
value,  it  is  indispensable,  and  it  is  the  most  important 
institution  in  the  world  to-day ; society  would  soon  go 
to  rack  and  ruin  without  it ; we  are  all  under  solemn 
obligation  to  God  and  to  our  fellow-man  to  support 
it  and  belong  to  it;  but  creeds  and  confessions  of 
faith  cannot  save ; the  Church  cannot  save ; a Divine 
Person  can  save,  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  alone.  So  He 
says,  ''And  I,  if  I be  lifted,  up  from  the  earth,  will 
draw  all  men  unto  myself/' 

II.  Why  Christ  Lifted  Up  on  the  Cross  Draws 
All  Men  Unto  Himself. 

But  why  does  Christ  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  the  cru- 
cified Christ,  draw  all  men  unto  Himself  ? There  are 
two  reasons  why  Christ  lifted  up,  and  Christ  crucified 
draws  all  men  unto  Plimself. 

I.  First  of  all:  Christ  crucified  draws  all  men 
unto  Himself  because  Christ  crucified  meets  the  first, 
the  deepest,  the  greatest  and  most  fundamental  need 
of  man.  What  is  man’s  first,  greatest,  deepest,  most 
fundamental  need?  A Saviour?  A Saviour  from 
what?  First  of  all,  and  underlying  all  else,  a Saviour 
from  the  guilt  of  sin.  Every  man  of  every  race  has 
sinned.  As  Paul  put  it  in  Romans  3 : 23,  " There  is 
no  difference,  for  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of 


86 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


the  glory  of  God/^  There  is  no  difference  hetweem 
Jew  and  Gentile,  at  this  point,  nor  is  there  any  differ- 
ence between  English  and  German  at  this  point,  there 
is  no  difference  between  American  and  Japanese  at 
this  point,  no  difference  between  European  and  Asi- 
atic, no  difference  between  the  American  and  the 
African,  there  is  no  difference;  for  all  have  sinned 
and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God/'  Every  man  of 
every  race  is  a sinner,  there  is  no  difference  " at  this 
point.  And  every  man  shall  have  to  answer  for  his 
sin  to  the  infinitely  holy  God  Who  rules  this  universe. 
Therefore,  all  men  need  an  atoning  Saviour,  who  can 
by  His  atoning  death  make  propitiation  for,  and  so 
cover  up,  our  sins,  and  thus  reconcile  us  to  this  holy 
God,  and  deliver  us  from  His  awful  wrath,  and  bring 
us  out  into  the  glorious  sunlight  of  His  favour.  And 
Jesus  lifted  up  is  the  only  atoning  Saviour  in  the 
universe.  He  Who  alone  was  at  the  same  time  God 
and  man.  He  alone  can  make  atonement  for  sin ; and 
He  has  made  it,  has  made  a perfect  atonement,  and 
God  has  accepted  His  atonement  and  testified  to  His 
acceptance  of  His  atonement  by  raising  Him  from 
the  dead.  The  Lord  Jesus  actually  meets  our  need, 
He  actually  meets  every  man's  first,  greatest,  deepest, 
most  fundamental  need,  and  He  alone.  In  all  the 
universe  there  is  no  other  religion  but  Christianity 
that  even  offers  an  atoning  Saviour.  Mohammedan- 
ism offers  Mohammed,  The  Prophet,"  a teacher, 
but  not  a Saviour;  Buddhism  offers  Buddha,  sup- 
posedly at  least  a wonderful  teacher,  The  Light  of 
Asia,"  but  not  an  atoning  Saviour;  Confucianism  of- 
fers Confucius,  a marvelous  teacher  far  ahead  of  his 
time,  but  not  an  atoning  Saviour.  No  religion  offers 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEACTION 


87 


an  atoning  Saviour,  offers  an  atonement  of  any  real 
character,  but  Christianity.  This  is  the  radical  point 
of  difference  between  Christianity  and  every  other 
religion  in  the  world,  yet  some  fool  preachers  are 
trying  to  eliminate  from  Christianity  this,  its  very 
point  of  radical  difference  from  all  other  religions. 
But  such  an  emasculated  Christianity  will  not  reach 
the  needs  of  men  and  will  not  draw  men.  It  never 
has  and  it  never  will  The  Bible  and  history  are  at 
one  at  this  point.  Jesus  Christ  offers  Himself  lifted 
up  on  the  cross  to  redeem  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  by  becoming  a curse  in  our  behalf.'^  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
made  a curse  for  us ; for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  hangeth  on  a tree’’  (Gal.  3:13).  Men 
know  their  need ; they  may  try  to  forget  it,  they  may 
try  to  deny  it,  they  may  try  to  drown  their  sense  of  it 
by  drink  and  dissipation  or  by  wild  pleasure-seeking 
or  wild  money-getting,  or  by  listening  to  fake  preach- 
ers in  supposedly  orthodox  pulpits,  like  one  who  in 
this  city  declared  recently  that,  the  old  sense  of  sin 
is  fast  disappearing,”  and  added,  the  change  is  for 
the  better  not  for  the  worse.”  He  spoke  also  of 
‘‘  imaginary  and  artificial  sins  like  " the  sin  of  unbe- 
lief,’ ” and  then  went  on  to  say,  In  this  we  agree 
with  Christ,”  apparently  not  knowing  enough  about 
the  Bible  to  know  that  Jesus  Himself  was  the  very 
one  who  said  in  John  16:8,  9,  ‘‘And  he,  when  he  is 
come,  will  convict  the  world  in  respect  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment;  of  sin,  because  they 
believe  not  on 

But  in  spite  of  all  our  attempts  to  drown  or  stupefy 
or  silence  our  sense  of  sin,  our  consciousness  of  guilt 


88 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


before  a Holy  Gk)d,  we  all  have  it,  and  like  Banquo’s 
Ghost,  it  will  not  down.  Nothing  gives  the  guilty 
conscience  abiding  peace  but  the  atoning  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  And  so,  Christ  lifted  up  draws  all  men 
unto  Him,  and  even  wicked  ministers  of  Satan,  like 
the  preacher  I have  just  referred  to,  sometimes  come 
to  their  senses  and  flee  to  the  real  Christ,  Christ  cruci- 
fied, as  I hope  this  one  may.  Yes,  Jesus,  Jesus  only, 
Jesus  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  Jesus  crucified  for  our 
sins,  making  full  atonement  for  our  sins,  He  and  He 
alone  meets  the  deepest  need  of  us  all,  and  so  His 
cross  draws  us  all  unto  Himself.  Happy  the  man  or 
the  woman  who  yields  to  that  drawing.  Woe  be  to 
the  man  or  woman  who  resists  that  drawing;  final 
gloom,  despondency,  and  despair  are  their  lot.  Oh, 
how  many  men  and  women  who  have  gotten  their 
eyes  opened  to  see  the  facts,  to  see  their  awful  guilt, 
and  who  have  been  plunged  into  deepest  consequent 
despair,  have  come  to  me,  and  I have  pointed  them  to 
Jesus  on  the  cross,  and  have  shown  them  by  God’s 
Word  all  their  sins  laid  upon  Him  and  thus  settled, 
and  they  have  come  to  Him,  and  believed  God’s  tes- 
timony about  Him,  that  He  had  borne  all  their  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  cross,  and  they  have  found 
perfect  peace  and  boundless  joy.  And  that  is 
the  only  way  to  find  perfect  peace  and  boundless 
joy. 

Will  you  set  out  to  find  peace?  If  you  do  not, 
great  gloom,  utter  despair,  awaits  you  some  day,  in 
this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come.  In  my  first  pas- 
torate I tried  to  get  a man  to  come  to  Christ  lifted  up 
to  meet  his  need  of  pardon ; but  though  it  was  many 
years  ago  he  held  to  the  theology  that  is  preached  as 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEACTION 


89 


new  theology  ” to-day,  and  sought  to  still  the  voice 
of  conscience,  and  stupefy  his  sense  of  sin  by  denying 
his  guilt  and  his  need  of  an  atoning  Saviour,  He  did 
not  wish  to  listen  to  me  nor  to  see  me.  But  the  hour 
came  when  death  drew  nigh.  A cancer  was  eating 
its  way  through  scalp  and  skull  into  his  brain ; then 
he  cried  to  those  about  his  dying  bed,  ‘‘  Send  for  Mr. 
Torrey.”  I hurried  to  his  side.  He  was  in  despair. 
“ Oh ! he  said,  ‘‘  Dr.  Tidhall  tells  me  that  I have  but 
a short  time  to  live,  that  as  soon  as  this  cancer  gets  a 
little  further  and  eats  through  the  thin  film  of  skull 
and  touches  the  brain  I am  a dead  man.  Tell  me 
how  to  be  saved.”  I sat  down  beside  him,  and  told 
him  what  to  do  to  be  saved.  I tried  to  make  as  plain 
as  I knew  how  the  way  of  salvation  through  the  up- 
lifted  Christ,  Christ  uplifted  on  the  cross,  and  I think 
I know  how  to  make  it  plain,  but  he  had  waited  too 
long,  he  could  not  grasp  it.  I stayed  with  him. 
Night  came  on.  I said  to  his  family,  You  have 
been  up  night  after  night  with  him,  I will  sit  with 
him  to-night.”  They  instructed  me  what  to  do,  how 
to  minister  to  him.  Time  after  time  during  the  night 
I had  to  go  to  another  room  to  get  some  nourishment 
for  him,  and  as  I would  come  back  into  the  room 
where  he  lay,  from  his  bed  in  the  corner  there  would 
rise  the  constant  cry,  ‘‘  Oh,  I wish  I were  a Christian. 
Oh,  I wish  I were  a Christian.  Oh,  I wish  I were  a 
Christian.”  And  thus  he  died. 

2.  In  the  second  place:  Christ  lifted  up  on  the 
cross,  Christ  crucified  draws  all  men  unto  Him, 
because  lifted  up  there  to  die  for  us  He  reveals  His 
wonderful  love,  and  the  wondrous  love  of  the  Father 
for  us.  Hereby  know  we  the  love  of  God,  because 


90 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


he  laid  down  his  life  for  us”  (i  John  3: 16),  and 

God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while 
we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  (Rom. 
5 : 6,  8).  There  is  nothing  that  draws  men  like  Love. 
Love  draws  all  men  in  every  clime.  But  no  other 
love  draws  like  the  love  of  God.  John  3 : 16,  “ For 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  per- 
ish, but  have  everlasting  life,”  has  broken  thousands 
of  hard  hearts. 

One  night,  preaching  in  my  own  church  in  Minne- 
apolis, the  whole  choir  stayed  for  the  after-meeting. 
The  leading  soprano  was  an  intelligent  young  woman 
but  living  a worldly  life.  She  remained  with  the 
rest.  In  the  after-meeting  her  mother  arose  in  the 
back  of  the  church  and  said,  ‘‘  I wish  you  would  pray 
for  the  conversion  of  my  daughter,”  I did  not  look 
around  but  knew  instinctively  that  her  cheeks  were 
flushing,  and  her  eyes  flashing  with  anger.  As  soon 
as  the  meeting  was  dismissed,  I hurried  down  so  that 
I would  meet  her  before  sht  got  out  of  the  church. 
As  she  came  toward  me  I held  out  my  hand  to  her. 
She  stamped  her  foot,  and  with  flashing  eyes  cried, 

Mr.  Torrey,  my  mother  knows  better  than  to  do 
that.  She  knows  it  will  only  make  me  worse.”  I 
said,  Sit  down,  Cora.”  She  sat  down,  and  without 
any  argument  I opened  my  'Bible  to  Isaiah  53 : 5,  and 
began  to  read,  But  he  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions; he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities;  the 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him;  and  with 
his  stripes  we  are  healed.”  She  burst  into  tears,  and 
the  next  night  accepted  Jesus  Christ.  I had  to  go  to 
Duluth  for  a few  days,  and  when  I returned  I found 


THE  GEEAT  ATTEAOTION 


91 


that  she  was  seriously  ill.  One  morning  her  brother 
came  hurrying  up  to  my  home  and  said  that  she  was 
apparently  dying,  that  she  was  unconscious,  and 
white  from  the  loss  of  blood.  I hastened  down,  and 
as  I entered  the  room  she  lay  there  with  her  eyes 
closed,  with  the  whitest  face  I ever  saw  on  one  who 
was  not  actually  dead.  She  was  apparently  uncon- 
scious, scarcely  breathing.  I knelt  by  her  side  to 
pray,  more  for  the  sake  of  the  mother  who  stood  be- 
side the  bed  than  for  her,  for  I supposed  that  she 
was  beyond  help  or  hearing.  But  no  sooner  had  I 
finished  my  prayer,  than  in  a clear,  full,  richly  mu- 
sical tone  she  began  to  pray.  These  were  about  her 
words,  ‘‘  Heavenly  Father,  if  it  be  Thy  will,  raise  me 
up  that  as  I have  used  my  voice  for  myself  and  only 
to  please  myself,  I may  use  my  voice  for  Thy  glory, 
but  if  in  Thy  wisdom  Thou  seest  that  it  is  best  for 
me  not  to  live,  I shall  be  glad  to  go  to  be  with  Christ,” 
and  she  went  to  be  with  Christ. 

Oh,  I have  seen  thousands  melted  as  I have  re- 
peated to  them  and  shown  them  the  picture  of  Christ 
on  the  cross,  as  told  in  Isaiah  53 : 5,  ‘‘  But  he  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions;  he  was  bruised  for 
our  iniquities;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.” 

A few  days  ago  I received  a missionary  magazine 
containing  a testimony  from  one  who  was  going  to 
Egypt  under  the  Egypt  General  Mission.  This  young 
missionary  said,  When  I was  twelve  years  old,  dur- 
ing the  Torrey- Alexander  meetings,  in  1904,  I gave 
my  heart  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Dr.  Torrey  was 
speaking  on  the  text,  Isaiah  53 : 5,  and  he  asked  us  to 
repeat  the  words  with  him,  but  changing  the  word 


92 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


‘ our  ’ into  the  word  ‘ my,’  While  repeating  the  text 
in  this  way  I suddenly  realized,  as  if  for  the  first 
time,  that  Jesus  had  really  suffered  all  this  for  me, 
and  there  and  then  I gave  my  life  to  Him.” 

Oh ! men  and  women,  look  now ! See  Jesus  Christ 
lifted  up  on  the  cross,  see  Him  hanging  on  that  awful 
cross,  see  Him  wounded  for  your  transgressions, 
bruised  for  your  iniquities,  and  the  chastisement  of 
your  peace  laid  on  Him.  Oh,  men  and  women  living 
in  sin,  men  and  women  rejecting  Christ  for  the 
world,  men  and  women  who  have  looked  to  the  lies 
of  Christian  Science,  Unitarianism  and  other  systems 
that  deny  His  atoning  blood.  Listen ! “ But  he  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions ; he  was  bruised  for 
our  iniquities;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.” 
Won’t  you  yield  to  that  love,  won’t  you  give  up  your 
sin,  give  up  your  worldly  pleasures,  give  up  your  wil- 
ful errors,  and  accept  the  Saviour  who  loves  you, 
and  died  for  you,  who  was  “ wounded  for  your  trans- 
gressions; bruised  for  your  iniquities”  and  upon 
whom  the  chastisement  of  your  peace  was  laid? 
Accept  Him  right  now. 


VI 


THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  QUESTION  OF 
THE  DAY 

What  shall  I do  then  with  Jesus  which  is  called 
Christ f '' — Matthew  27 : 22. 

IF  I should  put  to  this  audience  to-night  the  ques- 
tion, What  is  the  most  important  question  of  the 
day,  I presume  I would  get  a great  variety  of 
answers.  Some  of  you  would  say  that  the  Disarma- 
ment question  or  the  Four  Power  Treaty  question 
was  the  most  important  question  of  the  day.  Some 
would  say  that  the  Labour  question  was  the  most 
important  question  of  the  day.  And  still  others 
would  say  that  the  Prohibition  question  was  the  most 
important  question  of  the  day,  and  so  on.  But  all 
these  answers  would  be  wrong.  There  is  another 
question  of  vastly  more  importance  than  any  one  of 
these,  a question  upon  the  right  decision  of  which 
immeasurably  more  depends  than  upon  the  decision 
of  any  of  these  questions.  That  question  is  this, 
‘‘What  shall  I do  with  Jesus,  which  is  called  Christ?” 
(Matt.  27:22). 

It  is  not  a new  question.  Pontius  Pilate  asked  it 
nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  answered  it 
wrong,  and  his  earthly  life  went  out  in  darkness,  and 
his  eternity  was  blasted.  Thousands  upon  thousands 
have  asked  it  since.  Upon  a right  decision  of  that 
question  everything  that  is  really  worth  having  for 

93 


94 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


time  and  for  eternity  depends  for  each  one  of  us.  If 
you  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  God, 
you  will  get  everything  that  is  really  worth  having 
for  time  as  well  as  for  eternity,  whether  a right  de- 
cision is  given  on  these  various  other  questions  or  not. 
If  you  do  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus,  the  Christ  of 
God,  you  will  lose  everything  that  is  worth  having 
for  time  as  well  as  for  eternity,  even  though  all  these 
other  questions  are  decided  as  they  should  be. 

I.  What  We  Will  Get  if  We  Do  the  Right 
Thing  with  Jesus  Christ. 

Let  us  look  at  some  of  the  things  that  we  will  get 
if  we  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  In  the  first  place.  If  you  do  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  you  will  get  the  forgiveness  of  all  your 
sins.  Saint  Peter  says  in  Acts  lo:  43,  “ To  him  bear 
all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name  every 
one  that  believeth  on  him  shall  receive  remission  of 
sins."  Now  this  statement  13  as  plain  as  day,  and  in 
it  God’s  inspired  apostle  declares  that  “ every  one 
that  believeth  on  ” Jesus  Christ,  “ shall  receive  remis- 
sion (of  his)  sins.”  If  the  vilest  sinner  on  earth 
should  come  in  here  to-night  and  should  put  his  trust 
in  Jesus  Christ,  the  moment  he  did  it  all  his  sins 
would  be  forgiven,  blotted  out. 

The  forgiveness  of  our  sins  depends  solely  upon 
what  we  do  with  Jesus  Christ.  It  does  not  depend 
upon  our  prayers  or  upon  our  penances  or  upon  our 
good  works.  If  you  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ,  you  get  forgiveness  of  all  your  sins  whatever 
else  you  may  do  or  not  do.  If  you  do  the  wrong 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  not  get  forgiveness 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  96 


of  sins  whatever  else  you  may  do  or  not  do.  The 
same  truth  is  put  in  a different  way  in  John  3:18, 
He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned;  but  he 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he 
hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God” 

What  an  unspeakable  blessing  the  forgiveness  of 
all  your  sins  is.  Wealth,  honours,  pleasures,  are  not 
so  eagerly  to  be  desired  as  the  forgiveness  of  our 
sins.  All  of  them  together  are  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  Forgiveness  of 
sin  brings  joy  anywhere  it  comes,  whether  it  be  into 
the  palace  or  into  the  prison  cell.  King  David  had 
wealth,  honour,  power,  pleasures  and  privileges  with- 
out number,  but  he  was  not  happy.  Indeed  he  was 
perfectly  miserable.  His  own  description  of  his  con- 
dition is  found  in  the  Thirty-second  Psalm,  the  third 
and  fourth  verses : When  I kept  silence,  my  bones 

waxed  old  through  my  roaring  all  the  day  long.  For 
day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me:  my 
moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer.” 
Then  he  found  forgiveness  of  sin  and  in  his  joy  he 
shouted,  ‘‘  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  for- 
given, whose  sin  is  covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  unto 
whom  Jehovah  imputeth  not  iniquity  ” (Ps.  32 : i,  2). 

Down  in  a wretched  cell  in  Sing  Sing  prison  there 
was  a man  under  a fifteen-year  sentence  for  man- 
slaughter. He  was,  of  course,  a very  unhappy  man. 
But  there  in  his  cell  he  got  hold  of  a Bible  and  read 
it  and  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  Bible  showed  him 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  Saviour  who  died  in  his  place, 
and  he  accepted  Jesus  Christ  as  his  Saviour.  It  was 
in  the  middle  of  the  night  when  he  finally  found  the 


96 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


Saviour  through  meditating  on  what  he  had  read  in 
the  Word  of  God,  and  though  it  was  in  the  middle 
of  the  night  and  in  a prison  cell,  such  joy  came  into 
his  soul  that  he  began  to  shout.  The  guard  came 
along  and  rapped  on  his  door  and  told  him  to  keep 
still.  I can’t  keep  still,”  he  shouted  back,  my  sins 
are  forgiven.”  Yes,  there  is  a more  wonderful  joy 
in  knowing  that  our  sins  are  all  forgiven  than  there 
is  in  anything  that  this  world  has  to  give.  And  we 
GET  this  FORGIVENESS  OF  SIN  BY  SIMPLY  BELIEVING 
ON  THE  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  In  the  second  place.  You  will  get  peace  of  con-- 
science  by  doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  a blessed  thing  to  have  a conscience  that  does 
not  accuse  you,  a conscience  that  has  found  perfect 
peace.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  have  a conscience  that 
does  accuse.  It  is  the  greatest  misery  on  earth.  It 
drives  many  men  and  many  women  to  suicide.  Oh, 
in  what  agony  of  mind  men  and  women  have  come 
to  me  from  different  ranks  of  society  because  of  an 
accusing  conscience.  And  there  are  many  who  never 
unburden  their  hearts  to  others  who  are  in  misery 
from  the  same  cause.  There  are  men  and  women 
here  to-night  who  spend  days  and  nights  of  misery 
because  of  an  accusing  conscience.  You  try  to 
drown  the  voice  of  conscience  in  many  ways  but  you 
fail  utterly.  You  try  to  drown  the  voice  of  con- 
science in  pleasure  and  dissipation.  You  try  to 
drown  the  voice  of  conscience  in  business.  You  try 
to  drown  the  voice  of  conscience  in  drink  and  in 
dope,  and  In  other  ways;  but  you  do  not  succeed. 
You  never  will  succeed. 

One  who  perhaps  knows  as  much  about  the  life  of 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  97 


the  Movie  Colony  in  Hollywood  as  any  one  else  told 
a friend  of  mine  a few  weeks  ago  of  two  of  the  lead- 
ing stars  in  the  movie  world,  two  women  whose 
names  are  constantly  in  the  daily  papers  and  who  are 
admired  and  envied  by  thousands,  that  they  were  the 
hopeless  slaves  of  dope,  and  all  over  this  land  people 
who  are  counted  gifted,  and  on  whom  others  look  in 
envy,  are  trying  to  silence  the  voice  of  conscience  by 
dope.  But  no  one  ever  yet  found  real  peace  in  that 
way,  and  no  one  ever  will  Jesus  Christ  alone  can 
give  the  guilty  conscience  peace.  In  Romans  5 : i 
God  put  it  through  the  Apostle  Paul  in  this  way, 

Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ/^  Do  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  Christ  and  you  will  get  true  peace  of  con- 
science, deep,  abiding  peace,  perfect  peace.  As 
Isaiah  puts  it,  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace, 
whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee : because  he  trusteth  in 
thee”  (Isa.  26:3).  But  do  the  wrong  thing  with 
Jesus  Christ,  and  you  cannot  find  peace  of  conscience 
in  this  world  or  in  the  next,  no  matter  what  else  you 
may  do  to  get  peace. 

I was  dealing  once  in  my  office  with  a woman  who 
told  me  that  she  had  been  in  a perfect  hell  through 
an  accusing  conscience  for  fourteen  years.  I pointed 
her  to  Jesus  Christ.  I showed  her  from  God’s  Word 
how  all  her  sins  had  been  laid  upon  Jesus  Christ. 
She  believed  it.  She  took  God’s  Word  for  it,  put  her 
trust  in  Him  as  her  atoning  Saviour.  After  fourteen 
years  of  agony,  of  hell  on  earth,  she  went  out  from 
my  office  that  day  with  a radiant  countenance;  for 
she  had  found  peace  of  conscience  in  the  only  way  in 
which  peace  of  conscience  can  ever  be  found  by  any- 


98 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


body,  through  her  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  that  joy 
continues  until  this  day. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  You  will  get  deliverance 
from  the  power  of  sin  by  doing  the  right  thing  with 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a dreadful  thing  to  be  in  the 
power  of  sin.  There  is  no  other  slavery  so  binding, 
so  degrading,  and  so  crushing  as  the  slavery  of  sin. 
W e all  know  what  a dreadful  thing  it  is  to  be  in  the 
power  of  some  sins.  We  all  know,  for  example, 
what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  in  the  power  of  strong 
drink.  We  know  what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  in 
the  power  of  morphine,  or  cocaine,  or  some  other 
kind  of  dope.  Many  of  us  know  through  stories^ 
distressing  and  agonizing,  that  have  been  poured  into 
our  ears,  what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  in  the  power 
of  lust.  How  many  men  have  come  to  me  in  despair 
this  past  year  and  told  the  story  of  their  dreadful 
slavery.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  be  in  the  power  of 
sin  of  any  kind. 

There  is,  however,  a way  to  get  free.  There  is  a 
way  by  which  any  man  or  woman  who  is  the  slave  of 
any  sin  of  any  kind  can  get  instantaneous  and  com- 
plete deliverance  from  the  power  of  that  sin.  There 
is,  however,  only  one  way.  That  way  is  by  doing  the 
right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ.  The  Apostle  Paul  was 
once  in  the  power  of  sin.  He  was  once  helplessly 
and  hopelessly  enslaved.  With  all  the  power  of  an 
unusually  strong  will  he  tried  to  break  away  from  the 
power  of  sin,  but  the  more  he  tried  to  break  away  the 
more  completely  he  seemed  to  be  in  sin’s  grip  for- 
ever, until  at  last  in  utter  despair  he  cried,  ‘‘  O 
wretched  man  that  I am ! who  shall  deliver  me  out  of 
the  body  of  this  death?”  (Rom.  7:24).  And  then 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  99 


he  found  Christ  and  took  Him  as  his  Deliverer  from 
the  power  of  sin,  and  he  found  perfect  freedom  and 
cried  again,  ‘‘  I thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord’’  (Rom.  7:25).  You  cannot  get  out  of  sin's 
power  unless  you  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ.  You  may  get  free  from  some  bad  habits. 
You  may,  for  example,  give  up  drinking  without  the 
help  of  Christ,  though  very  few  do ; but  whether  you 
do  or  do  not,  you  will  not  get  out  of  sin's  grip,  you 
will  simply  turn  from  one  sin  to  another.  Christ 
alone  can  save  you  from  sin's  power.  I could  stand 
here  by  the  hour  and  tell  you  of  men  and  women  I 
have  personally  known,  men  and  women  as  com- 
pletely enslaved  by  sin  in  one  form  or  another  as  any 
man  or  woman  who  ever  walked  the  earth,  whom  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  set  free  when  they  did  the 
right  thing  with  Him. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place.  You  will  get  great  joy 
doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ.  The  Apostle 
Peter  says  in  i Peter  1:8,  On  whom,  though  now 
ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  greatly  with 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  You  can  get 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory " by  doing  the 
right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ.  You  cannot  get  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  in  any  other  way.  You 
know  happy  people,  of  course,  who  are  not  Chris- 
tians, but  you  do  not  know  any  one  who  is  not  a 
Christian  who  has  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory."  You  do  not  know  any  one  who  is  not  a 
Christian  who  has  the  deep,  constant,  satisfying,  and 
overflowing  joy,  that  those  men  and  women  have  who 
are  not  merely  nominal  Christians  but  real  Christians, 
those  men  and  women  who  have  fully  accepted  Christ 


100 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


as  their  personal  Saviour  and  are  really  trusting  God 
for  the  forgiveness  of  all  their  sins  because  they  fully 
believe  God’s  testimony  concerning  Jesus  Christ  hav- 
ing borne  every  one  of  their  sins  when  He  died  on  the 
Cross,  thus  fully  settling  their  sins  forever,  and  who 
have  without  reservation  surrendered  the  entire  con- 
trol of  their  thoughts  and  lives  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
who  are  confessing  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Lord  before 
the  world  every  reasonable  opportunity  they  get,  and 
who  are  watching  for  every  opportunity  to  lead 
others  to  Christ,  and  who  are  serving  Jesus  Christ 
with  all  their  strength  every  day. 

Do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  and  you  get 
this  wonderful  joy.  Reject  Jesus  Christ  and  you 
lose  it.  How  foolish  men  and  women  are!  There 
are  many  men  in  this  audience  to-night  who  are  re- 
jecting Christ  because  they  think  they  will  lose  joy  if 
they  take  Christ.  Are  you  blind,  men  ? Do  you  not 
see  that  those  who  have  taken  Christ  really  are  hap- 
pier than  you  are  ? Do  you  not  see  that  many  Chris- 
tians are  happier  in  poverty  than  sceptics  and  world- 
lings are  in  wealth?  Are  you  deaf,  women?  Have 
you  not  heard  many  whose  word  you  must  believe, 
and  from  all  ranks  of  society,  testify  that  they  have 
found  a joy  since  they  took  Christ  that  they  never 
dreamed  of  in  the  world? 

I do  not  think  that  many  of  you  could  tell  me  much 
that  I do  not  know  about  this  world’s  joys.  I have 
tasted  them  pretty  much  all,  but  I never  knew  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  ” until  I took  Jesus 
Christ.  I do  now.  My  every  day  is  full  of  joy.  I 
have  perplexities,  I have  annoyances,  I have  experi- 
ences that  could  easily  prove  exasperating,  I have 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  101 


burdens  of  many  kinds,  I have  what  may  appear  to 
be  gi'eat  losses,  I have  things  said  to  me  and  written 
to  me,  and  said  and  printed  about  me,  that  would  cut 
to  the  quick  if  I did  not  know  the  Lord  Jesus;  but 
through  all,  every  day  is  unspeakably  happy.  Not  so 
long  ago  I had  more  things  come  to  me  that  might 
have  caused  grief  and  anxiety  and  worry  and  heart- 
ache and  deep  sorrow  than  in  almost  any  other  week 
of  my  life,  but  it  was  a radiantly  happy  week.  Why? 
Simply  because  of  what  Jesus  Christ  is  to  me,  and 
what  He  is  to  me  just  because  I have  done  the  right 
thing  with  Him. 

5.  In  the  fifth  place.  If  you  do  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  Christ  you  will  get  eternal  life.  Eternal 
Life!  What  a wonderful  phrase  that  is.  Eternal 
Life.  Life  that  never  ends  1 Life  that  knows  no 
death!  Life  of  unutterable  beauty  and  dignity  and 
honour  and  glory  and  rapture ! Life  that  is  endless 
in  its  duration  and  perfect  in  its  quality!  Life  like 
the  life  of  God  Himself.  Eternal  Life!  What 
has  the  world  to  put  in  comparison  with  that  ? What 
is  the  wealth  of  a John  D.  Rockefeller  or  a Henry 
Ford  compared  with  eternal  life  ? I would  rather  be 
a penniless  pauper  all  my  days,  living  in  destitution 
and  hunger  and  rags  and  cold,  and  have  eternal  life, 
than  to  roll  in  wealth  all  my  days  and  have  all  that 
wealth  can  buy,  and  not  have  eternal  life.  I have  no 
envy  for  the  rich.  No ; I know  their  lives  and  hearts 
too  well.  I have  often  a greater  pity  for  them  than 
for  the  poor;  for  they  are  often  more  to  be  pitied 
than  the  poor.  The  life  of  the  average  millionaire  is 
a sad,  sad  life. 

What  is  the  wisdom  of  an  Edison,  or  of  the  world’s 


102 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


greatest  scientist  or  philosopher,  compared  with  eter- 
nal life?  What  are  the  honours  of  a great  general  or 
a mighty  ruler  of  men  compared  with  eternal  life? 
What  are  the  pleasures  of  the  most  successful  votary 
of  pleasure  compared  with  eternal  life?  Put  all  the 
world  has,  absolutely  everything  the  world  can  give, 
into  one  pan  of  the  scales.  Put  eternal  life  into  the 
other  scale.  See  the  world’s  side  go  up.  It  is  lighter 
than  the  smallest  dust  of  the  balance  in  comparison 
with  Eternal  Life.  Eternal  Life ! Oh,  who  can 
fathom  all  the  depth  of  meaning  that  there  is  in  these 
two  wondrous  words? 

And  you  get  it  by  simply  doing  the  right  thing  with 
Jesus  Christ.  Do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ 
and  you  get  Eternal  Life.  Do  the  wrong  thing  with 
Jesus  Christ  and  you  lose  Eternal  Life.  Listen  to 
God’s  own  Word  about  that,  John  3 : 36,  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  eternal  life:  and  he 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.”  Listen  to  God’s 
Word  again,  '‘And  the  witness  is  this,  that  God  gave 
unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son.  He 
that  hath  the  Son  hath  the  life;  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  the  life  ” (i  John  5:11,  12). 

Are  you  going  to  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ  to-night  and  get  Eternal  Life,  or  are  you  going 
to  do  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  and  forever 
lose  Eternal  Life? 

6.  But  there  is  something  better  even  than  Eter- 
nal Life  that  you  get  by  doing  the  right  thing  with 
Jesus  Christ.  By  doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ  you  become  a child  of  God,  an  heir  of  God  and 
joint  heir  with  Jesus  Christ.  We  read  in  God's  own 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  103 


Word  in  John  i : 12,  ‘‘As  many  as  received  him,  to 
them  gave  he  the  right  to  become  children  of  God, 
even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name/'  And  in 
Romans  8 : 17  we  read,  “ If  children,  then  heirs ; heirs 
of  Grod,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ."  Just  think  of 
that  a moment,  a child  of  God,  and  an  heir  of  God, 
and  a joint  heir  (or  fellow-heir)  with  Jesus  Christ. 
We  have  heard  these  words  very  often  but  have  we 
ever  stopped  to  weigh  their  meaning  and  to  take  in 
their  wondrous  import?  A child  of  God!  Think 
of  it ! God  the  Infinite  One ; God  the  Creator  of  all 
things ; God  to  whom  the  whole  race  of  men  and  the 
whole  company  of  angels  is  as  nothing,  less  than  a 
speck  of  dust  ir>  in  comparison  to  the  whole  earth; 
God  in  comparison  with  whom  the  greatest  of  philos- 
ophers, the  mightiest  of  monarchs,  and  the  purest  of 
saints  is  less  than  the  most  ignorant  idiot  is  in  com- 
parison with  the  greatest  philosopher:  and  we  to 
become  His  children  and  His  heirs ! Heirs  of  all 
this  Infinite  God  is  and  all  this  Infinite  God  has.  It 
almost  staggers  the  mind  to  try  to  think  of  it.  That 
is  what  is  open  to  each  one  of  us.  That  is  what  is 
open  to  you  and  open  to  me  by  just  doing  the  right 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ. 

One  day,  years  ago,  I met  the  son  and  heir  of  one 
of  the  richest  men  in  the  whole  world,  and  he  invited 
me  to  dinner.  As  I sat  and  talked  with  him  it 
seemed  to  me  as  if  it  might  be  in  some  respects  a fine 
thing  to  be  the  son  and  heir  of  the  richest  millionaire 
on  earth.  But  that  is  nothing,  just  nothing  at  all  to 
being  a child  of  God,  an  heir  of  God  and  fellow-heir 
with  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  what  is  open  to  us,  to 
each  one  of  us;  but  it  can  be  obtained  in  only  one 


104 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO  DAY 


way,  and  that  is  by  doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ.  Do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  and  in 
a moment  you  become  a child  of  God,  an  heir  of  God 
and  fellow-heir  with  Jesus  Christ.  Listen  to  God’s 
own  statement  about  it  again.  ‘‘As  many  as  received 
him,  to  them  gave  he  the  right  to  become  children  of 
God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name  ” (John 
1 : 12). 

Do  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  and  you  lose 
forever  your  chance  of  becoming  a child  of  God,  an 
heir  of  God  and  a fellow-heir  with  Jesus  Christ.  Oh, 
what  a loss  that  is ! The  loss  of  untold  wealth,  the 
loss  of  earth’s  greatest  honours,  the  loss  of  dearest 
friends,  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  loss  of  be- 
coming a child  of  God,  an  heir  of  God,  and  a fellow- 
heir  with  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  the  awful  cost  of 
doing  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus  Christ.  We  see 
then  something  of  what  we  gain  by  doing  the  right 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  something  of  what  we 
lose  by  doing  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus  Christ.  By 
doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  we  gain  For- 
giveness of  all  our  sins.  By  doing  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  Christ  we  gain  Peace  of  Conscience.  By 
doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ  we  gain  De- 
liverance from  Sin’s  power.  By  doing  the  right 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ  we  gain  Joy  Unspeakable  and 
Full  of  Glory.  By  doing  the  right  thing  with  Jesus 
Christ  we  gain  Eternal  Life.  By  doing  the  right 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ  we  become  Children  of  God, 
Heirs  of  God,  and  Fellow-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ. 
Is  it  not  evident  then  that  the  most  important  ques- 
tion of  this  day  and  of  all  days  is,  “ What  shall  I do 
then  with  Jesus,  which  is  called  Christ?  ” 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  106 


But  what  will  you  do  with  Him  ? Will  you  do  the 
right  thing  with  Him,  or  will  you  do  the  wrong  thing 
with  Him  ? Will  you  do  the  right  thing  and  gain  all 
or  will  you  do  the  wrong  thing  and  lose  all  ? I put 
the  question  to  each  individual  reader.  What  will 
you  do  with  Jesus?  It  does  not  matter  whether  you 
are  a church  member  or  not,  I put  the  question  to 
you,  What  will  you  do  with  Jesus?  I put  the  ques- 
tion to  the  most  worldly  man  or  woman  here  as  well 
as  to  the  most  religious,  What  will  you  do  with 
Jesus  who  is  called  Christ?’’  I put  the  question  to 
the  one  who  is  most  sunken  in  sin ; for  there  is  hope 
for  you  of  getting  all  these  things  if  you  do  the  right 
thing  with  Jesus  Christ,  just  as  much  as  there  is  for 
the  most  moral  and  upright  and  highly  respected  man 
or  woman  here.  What  then  will  you  do  with  Jesus 
which  is  called  Christ?  ” Of  each  one  of  you  I ask, 
Will  you  do  the  right  thing  with  Jesus  Christ,  or  will 
you  do  the  wrong  thing  with  Jesus  Christ? 

7.  But  there  is  something  better  than  anything  I 
have  mentioned  yet  that  depends  entirely  upon  what 
you  do  with  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  do  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  Christ  then  some  day  you  will  become  just 
like  Him.  Listen  to  what  God  says,  ''  Behold,  what 
manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us, 
that  we  should  be  called  the  children  of  God:  and 
such  we  are.  . . . Beloved,  now  are  we  the  chil- 

dren of  God,  and  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what 
we  shall  be.  We  know  that,  when  he  shall  be  mani- 
fested, WE  SHALL  BE  LIKE  HIM ; for  we  shall  see  him 
even  as  he  is  ” ( i John  3:1,2).  ‘‘  What  ? ” some  one 
will  say,  ''can  I become  like  Jesus  Christ?”  Yes, 
even  you  can  become  just  like  Jesus  Christ.  Think 


106 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


of  it ! You  and  I with  all  our  present  failings,  with 
all  our  shortcomings,  meannesses  and  pettinesses, 
some  of  which  we  do  not  see  but  others  see  very 
clearly,  for  they  stick  out  all  over  us  and  generally 
they  stick  out  most  conspicuously  upon  those  of  us 
who  have  the  best  opinion  of  ourselves.  But  even 
we  can  become  just  like  Him,  be  like  Him  in  every 
perfection  and  glory  of  His  matchless,  faultless, 
glorious,  Divine  character.  Yes,  and  we  can  be  like 
Him  in  the  glory  of  His  outward  appearance  too ; for 
it  is  written  in  the  Word  of  God,  ‘‘  For  our  citizen- 
ship is  in  heaven;  from  whence  also  we  wait  for  a 
Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall  fashion 
anew  the  body  of  oui  humiliation,  that  it  may  be  con- 
formed to  the  body  of  his  glory,  according  to  the 
working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subject  all  things 
unto  himself (Phil.  3:20,  21).  And  how  can  we 
become  just  like  Him?  By  doing  the  right  thing 
with  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  What  is  the  Right  Thing  to  Do  With  Jesus 
Christ  ? 

But  what  is  the  right  thing  to  do  with  Jesus  Christ? 

i.  First  of  all,  The  right  thing  to  do  with  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  receive  Him,  to  receive  Him  as  your  Sa- 
viour. This  is  evident  from  the  verse  that  we  have 
quoted  already  a number  of  times,  John  i : 12,  “As 
many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  the  right  to 
become  children  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on 
his  name.''  He  died  for  your  sins.  “All  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray ; we  have  turned  every  one  to 
his  own  way;  and  Jehovah  hath  made  to  strike  on 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all"  (Isa.  53:6).  Will  you 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  107 


accept  Him  as  your  sin-bearer  ? Will  you  say,  ‘‘  Oh 
God,  I believe  what  Thy  Word  says  about  Jesus 
Christ.  I believe  He  bore  my  sins  in  His  own  body 
on  the  Cross.  I believe  every  one  of  my  sins  was 
laid  upon  Him  and  settled  fully  and  forever  when  He 
died  on  the  Cross  in  my  place.  And  I now  take  Him 
as  my  sin-bearer.  Forgive  all  my  sins  for  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake”? 

Take  Him  not  only  as  your  Saviour  from  the  guilt 
of  sin  but  also  take  Him  as  your  Saviour  from  the 
power  of  sin.  He  not  only  died  to  make  atonement 
for  your  sins,  He  also  rose  again  and  He  lives  to-day 
to  set  you  free  from  the  power  of  sin  and  to  make 
intercession  for  you  (Heb.  7:25).  Will  you  take 
Him  to-night  as  your  Deliverer  from  the  power  of 
sin?  Will  you  come  to  this  risen  and  mighty  Lord 
Jesus  with  all  your  weakness  and  sins  and  trust  Him 
to  set  you  free?  That  is  the  right  thing  to  do  with 
Jesus  Christ:  just  take  Him  as  your  Saviour,  your 
crucified  Saviour  from  the  guilt  of  sin  and  your  risen 
Saviour  from  the  power  of  sin. 

2.  The  next  right  thing  to  do  with  Jesus  is  to  let 
Him  into  your  heart.  He  says,  “ Behold,  I stand  at 
the  door,  and  knock : if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and 
open  the  door,  I will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup 
with  him,  and  he  with  me”  (Rev.  3:20).  Jesus  is 
standing  at  the  door  of  every  heart.  He  is  knocking 
at  the  door  of  every  heart.  Will  you  open  the  door 
and  let  Him  in?  Who  will?  Who  will  say,  ‘‘Lord 
Jesus,  come  in.  Come  in  and  reign.” 

3.  The  next  right  thing  to  do  with  Jesus  is  to 
enthrone  Him  in  your  heart.  He  is  the  Christ, 
God’s  anointed  King,  because  God  has  made  Him 


108 


THE  GOSPEL  EOE  TO-DAY 


so.  As  Peter  said  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  ^^  Go3 
hath  made  him  both  Lord  and  Christ,  this  Jesus 
whom  ye  crucified (Acts  2:36).  Will  you  en- 
throne Him  as  King  in  your  heart?  Will  you  say 
honestly  to  Him,  ‘‘  Lord  Jesus,  take  the  throne  of 
my  heart  and  live  and  reign  there  supreme.”  Whc 
will  do  it  ? 

4.  Once  more,  the  right  thing  to  do  with  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  confess  Him  before  the  world  as  your 
Lord  and  Master.  He  Himself  says  in  Matthew 
10*32,  33,  ‘‘Every  one  therefore  who  shall  confess 
me  before  men,  him  will  I also  confess  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall 
deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I also  deny  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.”  And  Paul  says  in 
Romans  10:9,  ^o,  '‘If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy 
mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shalt  believe  in  thy  heart 
that  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved:  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  right- 
eousness; and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made 
unto  salvation.”  Who  will  do  it? 

There  is  just  one  more  right  thing  to  do  with 
Jesus.  What  is  it?  Go  tell  others  about  Him,  when 
you  yourself  have  taken  Him  as  your  Saviour,  and 
let  Him  into  your  heart,  and  enthroned  Him  as  King 
and  confessed  Him  before  the  world  as  your  Lord, 

When  Jesus  was  here  on  earth  He  cast  several 
thousand  demons  out  of  a wretched  man  who  was  in 
their  control.  The  condition  of  that  man  before  he 
met  Jesus  was  awful  beyond  description,  but  the 
condition  of  that  man  after  he  met  Jesus  was  glori- 
ous beyond  description.  And  that  man  naturally 
jvanted  to  go  with  Jesus  wherever  He  went.  But 


THE  MOST  IMPOETANT  QUESTION  109 

Jesus  said,  ‘‘  No,  do  not  go  away  with  me,  but  stay 
right  here  and  go  to  your  home,  and  ‘ declare  how 
great  things  God  hath  done  for  thee.  And  he  went 
his  way  publishing  throughout  the  whole  city  how 
great  things  Jesus  had  done  for  him*^'  (Luke  8:38, 
39)* 

Oh,  if  you  have  taken  Jesus  go  tell  every  one  you 
can  about  Him  and  bring  every  one  you  can  to  Him. 

These  are  the  right  things  to  do  with  Jesus.  Who 
will  do  them  to-night  and  gain  all  that  is  worth  hav- 
ing for  time  and  for  eternity?  Who  will  take  Him 
as  your  Saviour?  Who  will  listen  to  His  voice  and 
let  Him  into  your  heart  ? Who  will  enthrone  Him  in 
his  heart  as  King?  Who  will  begin  the  confession 
of  Him  as  your  Lord  ? 


GREAT  THI^fGS  AND  HOW  ANY  ONE  CAN 

/ " - 1 \get  them 

All  things  d^e  yburs/' — i Corinthians  3:21. 

YOU  will  knd  toy  text  in  i Corinthians  3:21, 
“ All  thing^re  yours/'  That  is  a text  that 
stirs  the  blood.  I pity  any  man  who  is  not 
stirred  to  the  very  depths  of  his  being  by  an  utter- 
ance of  God  like  that,  “All  things  are  yours/' 
There  are  many  who  think  that  only  a few  men  can 
ever  attain  unto  great  things,  that  the  great  mass 
tent  with  small  things,  with 


^ ^ , everything  that  is  of  infinite 

and  eternal  value  is  open  to  all  men.  There  is  not  a 
man  or  woman  here  to-night  who  cannot  have  great 
things,  the  very  greatest  things,  those  things  which 
are  of  most  priceless  worth.  Certainly,  if  any  one  will 
become  a member  of  that  class  of  people  to  whom 
God,  in  our  text,  makes  the  marvelous  promise,  “All 
things  are  yours,"  he  can  have  the  very  greatest 
things,  those  things  which  a,re  of  most  priceless  value. 


First  of  all.  Any  one  here  can  have  great  joy. 
When  Christ  was  born  at  Bethlehem  an  angel  came 
down  from  heaven  and  proclaimed,  “ Behold,  I bring 


That  is  not  so.  The  very 


Great  Joy. 


GEEAT  THINGS 


111 


you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all 
people.  For  unto  you  is  born  this  day,  in  the  city  of 
David  a Saviour,  who  is  Christ  the  Lord  ’’  (Luke 
2: 10,  ii).  The  birth  of  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  God, 
into  this  world  brought  great  joy  into  the  world:  the 
reception  of  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour  and  Lord  by  the 
individual  man  or  woman  brings  great  joy  into  the 
heart  of  that  man  or  woman.  No  matter  who  the 
man  or  woman  may  be  who  receives  Jesus  Christ,  he 
will  find  joy,  great  joy  ''  in  Him.’’  The  highest  form 
of  joy  known  to  man  is  joy  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  The 
Lord  Jesus  fills  every  heart  into  which  He  is  ad- 
mitted with  boundless  joy.  One  may  be  very  gloomy 
and  despondent  by  nature  but  if  he  really  receives 
Jesus  Christ  he  will  find  great  joy. 

I recall  a man  who  I think  was  one  of  the  gloom- 
iest men  I ever  met.  He  had  one  of  those  despon- 
dent, despairing  faces  that  make  you  shudder.  I 
dreaded  to  have  him  approach  me.  The  man  had  at 
one  time  been  the  inmate  of  an  insane  asylum  where 
he  was  sent  for  melancholia,  and  he  looked  and  acted 
as  if  he  ought  to  be  there  still.  It  was  my  privilege 
to  point  that  man  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  did  not  accept 
Jesus  Christ  in  a day.  I dealt  with  him  day  after 
day  for  quite  a while,  and  he  seemed  so  deeply  im- 
mersed in  his  gloom  that  the  light  could  not  pene- 
trate his  darkened  heart.  It  seemed  as  if  he  never 
would  see  the  truth  and  accept  the  Lord  Jesus.  He 
was  one  of  the  most  discouraging  men  with  whom 
I have  ever  dealt.  'But  he  kept  coming  back  to  me, 
and  at  last,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  light 
broke  in  upon  his  darkened  heart  and  he  received 
Jesus  Christ,  and  became  at  once  one  of  the  brightest. 


112 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


happiest  men  I ever  knew,  as  well  as  one  of  the 
most  faithful  and  effective  Christian  workers. 

I met  another  man  who  had  made  a shipwreck  of 
life.  He  belonged  to  a good  family,  he  was  a man 
of  unusual  ability  and  well  educated ; but  he  had  gone 
wrong  and  had  thrown  away  his  life  in  sin.  The 
night  I first  met  him  he  was  a wanderer  on  the  face 
of  the  earth,  hundreds  of  miles  from  home,  money 
gone,  friends  gone,  manhood  gone,  and  seemingly 
everything  worth  while  gone.  He  came  to  me  at  the 
close  of  a service  I was  conducting  and  asked  me  if 
I thought  there  was  any  hope  for  a man  like  him? 
I told  him,  “ Yes,”  that  I knew  that  there  was,  and 
pointed  him  to  the  Lord  Jesus  and  he  took  Him  that 
night  and  became  a very  happy  man.  That  was  years 
ago,  but  for  many  years,  every  now  and  then,  I got 
a letter  from  him  telling  me  of  his  great  joy.  He  is 
happy  indeed,  to-day;  for  he  is  with  Christ  in  the 
glory. 

No  one  ever  really  took  Jesus  Christ,  rich  or  poor, 
learned  or  ignorant,  moral  or  vicious,  honest  or 
criminal,  of  any  nation  or  character,  who  did  not 
find  great  joy.  God  has  provided  great  joy  for  every 
one  in  Jesus  Christ.  I know  a man  at  the  present 
time  in  San  Quentin  for  murder,  but  in  San  Quentin 
where  he  has  already  been  some  years  he  was  led  to 
accept  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  letters,  some  of 
which  his  father  lets  me  see,  are  among  the  most 
joyous  letters,  and  the  most  full  of  Jesus  Christ,  of 
any  letters  I have  even  seen. 

If  any  one  has  not  great  joy,  it  is  wholly  his  own 
fault.  No  one  can  rob  another  of  his  joy  if  his  joy 
is  really  in  Jesus  Christ.  Men  may  rob  you  of  your 


GEEAT  THINGS 


113 


money,  \hey  may  rob  you  of  your  good  name,  they 
may  rob  you  of  your  friends,  but  they  cannot  rob 
you  of  your  joy,  if  it  really  is  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I met  a woman  in  Chicago  many  years  ago.  She 
was  most  wretched.  She  had  had  great  misfortunes 
come  into  her  life.  She  had  been  defrauded  of  her 
money.  She  had  been  robbed  of  her  husband  and 
his  love.  Her  soul  was  bitter.  She  had  a hard,  sour 
face, — one  of  the  hardest  faces  I ever  saw.  I spoke 
to  her  of  Jesus  Christ.  She  would  not  listen.  She 
hated  the  one  who  had  wronged  her  and  longed  to 
get  even,  and  would  not  listen  to  the  story  of  the  love 
of  God.  She  said  God  did  not  love  her  or  He  would 
never  have  permitted  her  to  suffer  what  she  had 
suffered.  I met  the  same  woman  again  in  the  Moody 
Church  some  years  later.  Again,  I spoke  to  her  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  of  God's  love.  This  time  she  pro- 
fessed to  be  an  infidel.  I knew  she  was  lying  to  me 
and  told  her  so,  and  recalled  her  story  as  she  had 
told  it  to  me  several  years  before.  She  supposed 
that  I had  forgotten  her  and  so  had  ventured  on  this 
new  story  that  she  was  an  infidel.  But  she  was  still 
hard  and  bitter.  A year  or  two  later  I met  her  again. 
Again  I spoke  to  her  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  time 
she  broke  down  and  accepted  Him.  Immediately  her 
life  was  changed.  Instead  of  bitterness,  she  found 
great  joy  at  once.  I met  her  again  some  time  later. 
She  had  been  very  sick  but  was  still  rejoicing  in 
Jesus  Christ  and  longing  to  tell  others  of  this  won- 
derful Saviour  and  the  joy  He  brings  into  the  heart 
of  those  who  accept  Him. 

I was  once  sitting  in  my  office  in  Minneapolis  and 
a woman  with  a very  hard  face  came  in.  She  ap- 


114 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


preached  my  desk  and  said,  Do  you  send  mis- 
sionaries to  talk  with  people  who  are  dying?” 

Yes,”  I replied.  ''  Well,  there  is  a woman  dying  at 
my  house  ” (and  she  gave  me  the  street  and  number). 

I wish  you  would  send  a missionary  around  to  talk 
to  her.”  I judged  from  the  woman’s  appearance  the 
kind  of  place  it  must  be  and  the  kind  of  woman  it 
must  be  who  was  dying.  In  a little  while  two  women 
missionaries  came  in.  I said  to  them,  There  is  a 
woman  dying  around  at  such  and  such  a street  and 
number.  Will  you  go  around  and  talk  with  her? 
I think  it  is  a wicked  place  and  that  the  woman  has 
lived  a life  of  sin.” 

The  two  missionaries  went  aside  and  prayed  and 
then  went  around  to  this  house.  It  was  as  I had 
suspected, — a den  of  infamy,  and  the  dying  woman 
was  a woman  who  had  made  the  worst  shipwreck  of 
life  that  a woman  can  make.  They  told  the  dying 
woman  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  death  for  her  upon 
the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  how  He  had  made  full 
atonement  for  all  her  sins.  And  then  she  received 
Jesus  Christ  and  great  joy  at  once  came  into  the 
heart  which  sin  had  so  darkened.  When  the  mis- 
sionaries came  back  I asked  them,  Did  she  accept 
Jesus  Christ?”  ‘"Yes,”  they  said,  '‘but  that  is  not 
all,  Mr.  Torrey,  though  she  was  dying  of  an  incur- 
able disease  that  no  physician  could  heal,  we  were 
led  to  kneel  down  and  pray  that  God  would  not  only 
save  her  soul  but  would  also  heal  her  body.  God 
heard  our  prayer  and  she  is  healed.”  The  woman 
was  beyond  any  human  physician’s  skill,  but  these 
missionaries  had  been  given  faith  to  pray  for  her 
recovery  from  an  incurable  and  loathsome  disease. 


GEEAT  THINGS 


115 


God  had  heard  their  prayer.  She  got  up  from  that 
bed,  a saved,  happy,  and  well  woman.  Years  after- 
ward, when  I had  moved  to  Qiicago,  one  of  these 
two  missionaries  came  to  Chicago  to  study  at  the 
Moody  Institute,  and  this  woman  heard  that  she  was 
coming  and  came  to  her  and  told  her  to  bring  me  a 
message  of  her  joy  in  the  Lord. 

Oh,  there  is  great  joy  for  everybody,  if  they  will 
only  seek  it  in  God’s  way.  Any  one  can  have  it.  If 
you  wish  it,  come  to  me  at  the  close  of  this  service 
and  I will  tell  you  just  what  to  do  to  get  it. 

We  are  told  in  Acts  8:8,  that  when  Samaria  re- 
ceived the  truth  regarding  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
there  was  great  joy  in  that  city.”  If  any  one  will 
receive  the  truth  regarding  Jesus  Christ  and  receive 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  into  his  heart,  there  will  be 
‘‘  great  joy 


But  there  is  another  great  thing  any  one  here  can 
have.  You  can  have  great  peace.  Peace  and  joy 
are  closely  related  but  they  are  not  the  same  thing 
by  any  means.  But  they  are  to  be  obtained  in  much 
the  same  way.  If  we  accept  Jesus  Christ,  and  trust 
in  Him,  and  obey  His  Word,  we  shall  have  great 
peace  as  well  as  great  joy.  Paul  says  in  Philippi ans 
4 : 6,  7,  In  nothing  be  anxious ; but  in  everything  by 
prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  to  God.  And  the  peace  of 
God,  which  passeth  all  unde^^standing,  shall  guard 
your  hearts  and  your  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus.'*  And 
the  experience  of  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands 


in  ” that  heart. 


II.  Great  Peace. 


116 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


of  people  proves  this  promise  that  God  made  through 
Paul,  to  be  absolutely  true. 

Think  of  that ! The  peace  of  God,  which  pass- 
ETH  ALL  understanding/'  Is  not  that  a ‘‘great 
peace  " ? It  is  infinite  peace,  “ the  peace  of  God/^ 
i,  e.,  not  only  the  peace  which  God  gives,  but  the 
deep,  infinite  peace  that  there  is  in  the  heart  of  God 
Himself.  And  it  is  for  any  one  of  you  here  who 
wishes  it.  Your  heart  may  be  tempest  tossed  to- 
night. Your  heart  may  be  a raging  sea  of  doubts, 
and  fears,  and  anxieties,  and  unsatisfied  desires  and 
passions.  But  there  is  peace  for  you,  “ great  peace,'' 
“ perfect  peace,"  “ the  peace  of  God  which  passeth 
all  understanding." 

I wonder  if  there  was  ever  a more  tempestuous 
soul  than  that  of  Saul  of  Tarsus?  He  breathed  an 
atmosphere  of  storm,  and  passion,  and  hatred.  He 
“breathed  out  (or,  to  translate  more  exactly, 
“ breathed  in  ")  threatening  and  slaughter  against  the 
disciples  of  the  Lord  " (Acts  9:  i).  But  that  stormy 
soul  found  such  peace  in  Jesus  Christ  and  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  whom  Jesus  Christ  be- 
stows upon  all  those  who  receive  Him,  that  even  in 
jail  at  Philippi,  at  midnight,  when  his  back  was  tom 
and  bleeding  from  the  stripes  he  had  just  received, 
we  find  him  singing  praises  to  God  (Acts  16:  23-25). 
And,  later,  in  prison  at  Rome,  awaiting  sentence  of 
death,  no  ruffle  of  anxiety  or  fear  disturbs  the  deep 
calm  of  his  soul.  It  was  at  that  time  he  uttered  such 
words  as  these,  “Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway:  again, 
I say,  rejoice."  And  a little  further  on  he  writes  the 
words  I just  quoted,  “ In  nothing  be  anxious;  but  in 
everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks- 


GEEAT  THINGS 


117 


giving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God. 
And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understand- 
ing, shall  guard  your  hearts  and  your  thoughts  in 
Christ  Jesus.”  And  a little  further  on  he  says  again, 
‘‘  I have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I am,  therein 
to  be  content.”  And  two  verses  still  further  on  he 
says,  ''  I can  do  all  things  in  Him  that  strengtheneth 
me.”  Yes,  every  one  can  have  great  peace,  abiding 
peace,  abounding  peace,  never  failing  peace,  ‘‘  the 
PEACE  OF  God  which  passeth  all  understanding.” 
Jesus  said  the  night  before  His  crucifixion,  in  His 
farewell  words  to  His  disciples  and  to  all  who  should 
become  disciples  in  after  years,  Peace  I leave  with 
you;  MY  PEACE  I give  unto  you:  not  as  the  world 
giveth,  give  I unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be  trou- 
bled, neither  let  it  be  fearful”  (John  14:27). 

HI.  A Great  Position. 

There  is  another  great  thing  any  one  can  have  and 
that  is,  A GREAT  POSITION.  We  have  a way  of  think- 
ing that  the  great  positions  are  only  for  a very  select 
few.  That  is  a great  mistake.  The  greatest  and 
grandest  and  most  glorious  of  all  positions  is  for  any 
one  who  will  have  it.  Very  few  can  ever  be  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States.  Very  few  can  become 
United  States  Senators  or  members  of  Congress. 
Very,  very  few  can  ever  become  kings  or  emperors. 
But  there  is  a position  higher  far  than  that  of  con- 
gressman or  senator,  or  President  of  the  United 
States,  or  king  or  emperor,  that  is  open  to  any  one 
of  us.  Turn  to  John  i : 12  and  you  will  find  out  just 
what  that  position  is.  This  is  what  it  says,  ‘‘  As  many 
as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  the  right  to  become 


118 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


CHILDREN  OF  GoD,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his 
name/'  To  be  a “ child  of  God  " is  surely  to  occupy 
a higher  position  than  to  be  an  earthly  president, 
prince,  king  or  emperor.  What  is  any  earthly  mon- 
arch to  the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of  lords? 
The  greatest  and  most  potent  monarch  of  this  earth 
looks  like  a gnat  when  compared  with  the  Infinite, 
Eternal  God,  Who  created  all  things  seen  and  un- 
seen. The  greatest  earthly  throne  is  but  a toadstool 
compared  with  the  throne  of  God.  And  the  position 
of  becoming  God's  child  and  God's  heir  is  open  to 
any  one  who  desires  it  in  his  heart. 

One  day  it  was  my  fortune  to  run  by  accident  upon 
a real,  live  king.  I was  not  looking  for  him,  and  he 
certainly  was  not  looking  for  me.  I was  coming 
down  the  hall  of  the  University  at  Leipzig  all  alone, 
and  I saw  a man  coming  up  the  stairway  all  alone.  I 
instantly  recognized  him  as  the  King  of  Saxony.  Of 
course,  I uncovered  and  bowed  as  we  passed  one 
another,  and  he  bowed  back  with  a smile,  very 
courteously  and  very  pleasantly.  And  I had  met  a 
king — and  he  had  met — what  had  he  met?  He  had 
met  a free  American  citizen,  but  he  had  met  some- 
thing more  than  that,  he  had  met  a child  of  God,  and 
to  be  a child  of  God  is  to  hold  a far  higher  position 
than  to  be  a king.  And  this  position  is  open  to  any 
one  who  wishes  to  fill  it,  '‘As  many  as  received 
HIM,  to  them  gave  he  the  right  to  become  children 
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name/' 
Think  of  it ! Any  man  or  woman  can  become  a 
CHILD  OF  God.  Yes,  any  one. 

But  some  of  you  will  decline  that  great  honour. 
Why  ? Because  you  had  rather  have  some  disgusting 


GEEAT  THINGS 


119 


sin  or  some  contemptible  sin  than  to  become  a child 
of  God.  Or  you  would  rather  have  the  silly  satisfac- 
tion of  calling  yourself  a sceptic  and  therefore  fancy- 
ing yourself  very  brainy  and  an  independent  thinker, 
than  to  become  a child  of  God.  Or  you  are  not  will- 
ing to  endure  the  world’s  sneers,  and  you  would 
rather  have  this  fool  world’s  praise,  than  to  be  even 
a child  of  God.  Oh,  for  what  paltry  baubles  we  trade 
this  great  honour  of  becoming  children  of  God! 
What  pitiable  fools  we  are.  I did  it  for  years  my- 
self, I thank  our  wondrous  God  that  He  had  mercy 
upon  me  and  patience  with  me,  and  at  last  brought 
me  to  my  senses. 

IV.  A Great  Hope. 

There  is  another  great  thing  that  any  one  can  have 
and  that  is,  a great  hope.  Paul  describes  this  great 
hope.  He  says  in  Titus  1:2,  In  hope  of  eternal 
life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised.”  What  a 
hope  that  is,  hope  of  eternal  life  ” ! The  world 
has  nothing  to  match  against  that.  The  very  best  the 
world  can  give  cannot  last  more  than  eighty,  ninety 
or  a hundred  years  at  the  longest.  We  say  this  world 
has  been  good  to  Rockefeller,  it  has  given  him  several 
hundred  millions  or  it  may  be  a billion.  But  for 
how  long?  For  but  a very  little  while.  The  poor- 
est living  newsboy  on  the  streets  of  this  city  will  be 
richer  than  Rockefeller  in  this  world’s  wealth  in  a 
very  few  years.  This  world’s  hopes  are  poor  things, 
for  upon  them  all  is  written,  ‘‘  For  a few  days  only.” 

One  day,  quite  a while  ago,  the  newspapers  con- 
tained glowing  accounts  of  the  magnificent  gifts  of 
gold  and  precious  stones  presented  to  two  young 


120 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


people  who  were  to  be  married,  the  man  the  son  o£ 
one  of  America’s  richest  millionaires,  and  the  woman, 
the  daughter  of  another  multi-millionaire.  But  in  a 
very  few  years  they  will  leave  all  these  costly  gifts, 
all  these  diamonds  and  pearls  and  all  this  gold.  But 
the  one  who  will  believe  on  Jesus  Christ  gets  a hope 
that  is  indeed  great,  eternal  life;  life,  Divine  in  its 
quality,  endless  in  its  duration,  the  very  life  of  God 
Himself.  Years  roll  on,  the  life  eternal  still  lasts. 
Centuries  fly  by,  the  life  eternal  still  lasts.  Ages  and 
ages  sweep  on  in  endless  procession  but  the  life 
eternal  is  just  beginning.  Ah ! Eternal  Life ! that  is 
something  worth  while.  To  me  there  is  a growing 
charm  in  these  words,  Eternal  Life.”  In  former 
years  I did  not  think  much  of  them.  The  present 
life  seemed  fair  and  long  and  very  alluring.  But  of 
late  years  as  I have  seen  one  thing  after  another  end, 
as  I have  seen  vast  fortunes  crumble,  and  one  great 
man  after  another  pass  into  oblivion  and  some  one 
else  come  on  and  take  his  place,  as  I have  seen  not 
only  vast  fortunes  but  mighty  kings  and  even  vast 
empires  collapse  and  vanish,  as  I have  seen  the  stamp 
of  transitoriness  and  decay  upon  everything  earthly, 
I have  felt  an  ever  increasing  pity  for  the  poor  fools 
who  live  for  the  present  fleeting  world,  and  an  in- 
creasing joy  in  these  great  words,  eternal  life.” 

‘‘  In  hope  of  eternal  life,”  that  is  indeed  a hope 
worth  having.  And  any  one  here  can  have  it.  The 
poorest  can  have  it  just  as  well  as  the  richest.  The 
weakest  can  have  it  just  as  well  as  the  strongest. 
The  sinfullest  can  have  it  just  as  well  as  the  holiest. 
The  great,  the  glorious  hope  of  life  eternal  is  open  to 
all. 


GEBAT  THINGS 


121 


V.  A Great  Inheritance. 

Then  there  is  another  great  thing  that  is  open  to 
all  and  that  is,  a great  inheritance.  Peter  de- 
scribes this  inheritance  in  this  way,  “ An  inheritance 
incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away,  reserved  in  heaven ''  (i  Pet.  1:4).  Now  that 
cannot  be  said  about  any  earthly  inheritance.  What 
earthly  inheritance  is  incorruptible?  The  hand  of 
decay  is  upon  every  earthly  inheritance.  What 
earthly  inheritance  is  undefiled?  My!  how  dirty 
most  great  earthly  inheritances  are!  What  earthly 
inheritance  fadeth  not  away?  They  are  fading,  every 
last  one.  The  fool  son  or  grandson  of  the  shrewdest 
millionaire  is  likely  to  wind  up  in  jail,  and  the  in- 
heritance disappears  entirely  in  every  case  as  soon 
as  the  owner  of  it  dies. 

Paul  describes  this  great  inheritance  that  any  one 
of  us  can  get  in  a still  more  remarkable  way  in 
Romans  8: 16,  17,  ‘‘The  Spirit  himself  beareth  wit- 
ness with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God: 
and  if  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ/^  Think  of  that  a moment  please. 
“ Heirs  of  God  ! Heirs  of  all  God’s  infinite  wealth, 
joy,  and  glory,  and  “joint  heirs  (fellow-heirs, 
co-heirs)  with  Christ,”  heirs  in  the  way  in  which 
Jesus  Christ  is  heir  and  to  the  extent  to  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  an  heir.  Co-heirs  with  Him  in  whom  dwelt 
“ all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  ” ; and  who 
was,  therefore,  the  “heir  of  all  things.”  In  that 
same  way  the  one  who  receives  Jesus  Christ  becomes 
an  heir  of  God.  Look  out  upon  the  whole  earth  with 
all  its  wealth  and  say,  “ this  all  belongs  to  God,  and  I 


122 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


am  His  child  and  His  heir,  and  therefore  I am  heir 
of  all  this/'  Look  up  at  the  stars,  those  great  im- 
measurable, incomprehensible,  overwhelmingly  stu- 
pendous worlds  of  light  and  splendour  and  bewilder- 
ing magnitude  and  majesty,  and  say,  I am  an  heir 
of  all  these."  Think  of  the  infinite  wisdom,  infinite 
joy,  and  infinite  glory  of  the  Deity,  and  say,  ‘‘  I am 
His  child.  Therefore  all  this  is  my  inheritance. 
There  is  absolutely  no  limit  to  what  is  open  to  me.” 
Millionaire  ? that  is  nothing.  Billionaire  ? that  is  still 
nothing.  I am  an  heir  of  God,  a co-heir  with  Jesus 
Christ!  It  fairly  makes  one's  head  swim  just  to 
think  of  it.  This  inheritance  is  open  to  any  one.  Take, 
for  example,  some  washer-woman.  This  inheritance 
is  open  to  her.  Or  some  labouring  man.  This  in- 
heritance is  open  to  him.  Or  an  ex-convict.  This 
inheritance  is  open  to  him.  Or  men  and  women  who 
have  squandered  their  lives.  This  inheritance  is  open 
to  them. 

One  night  in  Birmingham,  England,  upon  going 
on  to  the  platform  in  Bingley  Hall  I received  a note 
from  a young  woman.  She  asked  me  to  pray  for 
her  brother  who  she  said  had  squandered  two  for- 
tunes and  had  just  returned  from  India  where  he 
had  squandered  a third.  I read  the  note  from  the 
platform  and  the  audience  joined  me  in  prayer  for 
this  man.  Though  we  did  not  know  it,  miles  away 
in  Worcester,  while  we  prayed,  that  man  was  seated 
by  a table  with  a loaded  revolver  upon  it  preparatory 
to  taking  his  own  life.  But  God  heard  our  prayer, 
and  he  was  converted  and  saved  as  he  sat  by  that 
table,  just  within  a few  minutes  of  hell.  He  had 
thrown  away  three  inheritances,  but  he  received  that 


GEBAT  THINGS 


123 


night  an  inheritance  to  which  all  three  together  were 
as  nothing. 

There  are  poor  men,  there  are  rich  men.  There 
are  good  men,  there  are  bad  men.  But  this  inherit- 
ance is  open  to  one  and  all  without  distinction. 
Listen  to  the  way  Peter  puts  it,  an  inheritance  in- 
corruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away, 
reserved  in  heaven  for  you,^^  For  whom?  Listen. 

For  you  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  a salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
time/'  Do  you  take  in  the  force  of  these  words? 
This  inheritance  is  for  any  one  who  believes  on  Jesus 
Christ  and  who,  therefore,  is  kept,  not  by  his  own 
power,  but  by  the  power  of  God,"  unto  that  com- 
plete salvation  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  that  is  to  be 
made  manifest  in  the  last  time.  That,  then,  is  all  one 
has  to  do  to  get  this  great  inheritance,  just  place 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  be  “ kept  by  the  power  of 
God  through  faith  unto  (that  glorious,  infinite)  sal- 
vation ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  Any 
one  can  do  that,  and  therefore  any  one  can  get  this 
inheritance. 

We  see,  then,  that  there  is  for  us  all,  for  any  one 
who  will  have  them,  a great  joy,  a great  peace,  a 
great  position,  a great  hope,  and  a great  inheritance. 
Do  you  want  these  five  great  things  ? I put  the  ques- 
tion to  each  one  of  you.  Do  you  want  these  five 
great  things?  You  can  have  them.  Take  Jesus 
Christ  as  your  Saviour  and  surrender  to  Him  as  your 
Lord,  and  confess  Him  as  such  before  the  world,  and 
these  five  great  things  become  yours.  Do  that  and 
you  will  get  them  all.  Oh,  how  can  any  one  of  you 
refuse  to  do  it  ? How  can  you  hesitate  to  do  it  ? If 


124 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


I should  take  a bushel  basket  full  of  large  diamonds 
of  the  finest  water  and  make  it  known  that  any  one 
who  wished  could  have  one,  would  you  hesitate? 
There  might  be  some  friend  near  you,  to  laugh  at 
you,  but  you  would  come  just  the  same.  Well,  I am 
setting  out  something  infinitely  better  than  a basket 
full  of  fine  diamonds.  I set  forth  a great  peace,  I set 
forth  here'  a great  joy,  I set  forth  a great  position,  I 
set  forth  a great  honour,  I set  forth  here  a great  hope, 
I set  forth  here  a great  inheritance,  and  I say  on  the 
authority  of  God,  Who  cannot  lie,  “ Come  up  and 
help  yourself.”  How  many  of  you  will  ? 


c 


VIII 

NOAH  AND  HIS  ARK 

^^And  Jehovah  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  and  all 
thy  house  into  the  arkJ' — Genesis  7:1. 

Noah  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men 
in  the  world's  history.  He  stands  out  ab- 
solutely alone  of  all  the  men  of  his  day. 
He  was  the  one  man  whom  God  chose  out  of  the 
whole  human  race  then  living  to  be  the  head  of  a new 
race.  The  story  of  the  Flood  is  a most  amazing  one, 
so  unusual  indeed  that  one's  first  impulse  is  to  ques- 
tion its  historicity.  But  it  has  abundant  confirmation 
even  outside  the  Bible.  Legends  of  a universal  flood 
are  found  well-nigh  everywhere  where  men  are 
found.  The  Cuneiform  Tablets  of  Central  Asia,  the 
Bhagavatas  of  Ancient  India,  the  Legend  of  Deu- 
calion in  Greece,  the  traditions  of  the  Cree  Indians 
in  the  North  and  of  the  natives  of  Orinoco  on  the 
South  and  of  China  on  the  East,  of  Mexico  on  the 
Southwest,  of  Scandinavia  in  the  Far  North,  and  of 
the  ancient  Celts  all  contain  accounts  of  such  a flood. 
The  three  great  branches  of  the  human  race,  the 
Turanians,  Semites  and  Aryans  all  have  it.  So  it  is 
evident  that  this  extraordinary  story  of  the  Flood  has 
abundant  historic  confirmation  outside  of  the  very 
plain  and  very  full  and  very  precise  statements  of  the 
Bible. 


I2S 


126 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


But  more  important  than  all  this  is  that  the  Old 
Testament  story  has  the  endorsement  of  Jesus  Christ. 
You  cannot  doubt  the  truth  of  the  story  of  the  Flood 
as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  without  discredit- 
ing Jesus  Christ.  If  this  story  is  not  true  Jesus 
Christ  was  a fool,  for  He  expressed  in  the  most  un- 
mistakable terms  His  belief  in  the  truth  of  the  story. 
Yes,  if  this  story  is  not  true  Jesus  Christ  was  worse 
than  a fool.  He  was  a fraud.  He  claimed  to  be  a 
teacher  sent  from  God,  who  spoke  the  very  words  of 
God,  and  if  the  story  of  the  Flood  be  not  true,  if  it  be 
not  accurate  history,  Jesus  accepted  an  idle  tale  as 
true  history,  and  His  claim  to  be  a teacher  sent  from 
God,  who  spoke  the  very  words  of  God,  was  abso- 
lutely false  and  He  was  a gross  impostor. 

Not  only  the  credibility  but  the  honour  of  Jesus 
Christ  are  involved  in  the  truthfulness  and  accuracy 
of  this  Old  Testament  story  of  the  Flood.  But  Jesus 
Christ’s  claims  to  have  been  a teacher  sent  from  God 
who  spoke  the  very  words  of  God,  are  abundantly 
substantiated.  They  are  so  abundantly  substantiated 
that  no  one  can  thoroughly  and  candidly  study  the 
conclusive  proofs  of  the  truth  of  His  claims  and  not 
believe  in  them,  and  consequently  he  must  believe  in 
the  truth  of  the  story  of  the  Flood  which  Jesus  Christ 
so  explicitly  and  fully  endorsed. 

So  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  the  story  of  the 
Flood  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  is  true  his- 
tory. It  is  true  that  the  world  was  swept  in  judg- 
ment by  a Flood  and  Noah  and  his  family,  eight  per- 
sons in  all,  alone  were  saved  of  all  members  of  the 
Adamic  race  then  living  on  the  earths  Why  was 
Noah  saved?  The  Bible  tells  us. 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


127 


I.  Noah  Was  Saved  by  Grace, 

I.  In  the  first  place,  Noah  was  saved  because  he 
found  grace  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah.  God’s  own 
statement  is,  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  Je- 
hovah” (Gen.  6:8).  Noah  was  not  saved  because 
he  deserved  to  be  saved.  He  was  “ saved  by  grace.” 
He  was  not  saved  because  he  was  sinless.  It  is  true 
that  he  was  righteous,”  Genesis  7 • i says  so,  but  it 
says  that  he  was  ‘‘  righteous  before  God”  and  the 
only  righteousness  in  God’s  sight  is  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith,”  and  Hebrews  11:7  tells  us  that  Noah’s 
righteousness  was  a righteousness  of  faith  and  not  a 
righteousness  which  he  worked  out  for  himself.  The 
exact  words  are,  “ Noah  . . . became  heir  of 

the  righteousness  which  is  according  to  faith.” 
Noah’s  righteousness  was  the  kind  of  righteousness 
that  is  open  to  every  one  of  us,  open  to  the  vilest  sin- 
ner on  earth.  Noah  was  a sinner.  He  was  not  sin- 
less, he  was  far  from  it.  He  was  far  from  perfect, 
he  got  drunk  even  after  the  Flood  and  his  wonderful 
deliverance  (Gen.  9:21).  Of  course  he  had  more 
excuse  for  getting  drunk  than  you  or  I would  have 
to-day.  He  did  not  understand  the  effects  of  alcohol 
as  fully  as  we  do,  but  he  surely  must  have  known  that 
it  was  not  right  to  get  drunk.  He  was  a sinner  saved 
by  grace.  So  must  we  be  sinners  saved  by  grace  if 
we  are  saved  at  all  and  we  all  can  be  saved  in  that 
way,  and  not  one  of  us  can  be  saved  in  any  other 
way.  God*s  Word  is  as  plain  as  day  on  that  point, 
and  universal  experience  confirms  God’s  Word  at  this 
point.  God  says,  There  is  no  difference : for  all 
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God ; be- 


128 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


ing  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemp- 
tion that  is  in  Christ  Jesus ''  (Rom.  3 : 22-24).  And 
He  says  again,  For  by  grace  have  ye  been  saved 
through  faith;  and  that  not  of  yourselves;  it  is  the 
gift  of  God  (Eph.  2:8). 

II.  Noah  Was  Saved  by  Faith. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  Noah  was  saved  because 
he  believed  God.  As  God  puts  it  in  Hebrews  11:7, 
‘‘  By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not 
seen  as  yet,  moved  with  godly  fear,  prepared  an  ark 
to  the  saving  of  his  house.’'  God  told  Noah  that 
there  was  to  be  a flood,  and  Noah  believed  Him. 
Noah  believed  that  there  was  to  be  a flood  just  be- 
cause God  said  so.  He  had  no  other  reason  whatever 
for  believing  it,  he  asked  no  other  reason  for  believ- 
ing it.  The  wisest  philosopher  on  earth  is  the  man 
who  has  sense  enough  to  believe  what  an  infinitely 
wise  God,  who  cannot  lie,  says,  even  if  he  has  no 
other  ground  for  believing  it.  And  there  is  no  bigger 
fool  on  earth  than  the  would-be  philosopher  who 
doubts  anything  God  says  simply  because  he  has  no 
other  ground  for  believing  it  than  God’s  unsupported 
Word.  The  wisest  man  of  his  day  well  said,  Seest 
thou  a man  wise  in  his  own  conceit?  there  is  more 
hope  of  a fool  than  of  him”  (Prov.  26:12),  and 
these  puny  self-styled  philosophers  ” and  would-be 
''  scientists  ” of  our  day  who  are  so  wise  in  their 
own  conceit  ” that  they  venture  to  doubt  God’s  Word 
because  it  does  not  agree  with  some  of  their  “ eru- 
dite ” notions,  would  do  well  to  lay  this  wise  utter- 
ance of  Solomon’s  to  heart. 

Jehovah  said,  ‘‘  There  is  to  be  a flood,”  and  Noah 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


129 


had  sense  enough  to  believe  it  with  all  his  heart  just 
because  God  said  so,  and  thus  he  condemned  the 
world,  and  became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is 
according  to  faith  (Heb.  11:7).  And  by  his  wise 
action  in  this  matter  he  not  only  condemned  the 
world that  then  was,  but  condemned  a very  large 
share  of  the  world  that  now  is.  Happy  is  the  man 
to-day  who  has  as  good  sense  in  this  matter  as  Noah 
had  so  many  centuries  ago. 

There  was  no  sign  of  a flood.  The  sun  rose  and 
set  year  after  year  just  as  it  always  had.  The  laws 
of  nature  moved  on  in  their  uniform  course.  No 
man  of  science  saw  anything  indicative  of  an  ap- 
proaching flood.  But  God  said  to  Noah,  ''  There  is 
to  be  a flood,''  and  Noah  believed  it.  People  tried  to 
laugh  him  out  of  it.  They  pointed  to  the  steady 
course  of  the  seasons,  the  uniformity  of  nature,  to 
the  fact  that  all  of  the  great  scientists  were  against 
him,  that  the  theologians  and  the  scholarly  critics 
were  all  against  him,  that  indeed  all  kinds  of  scholars 
were  against  him,  that  in  fact  he  stood  entirely  alone. 
Nevertheless,  Noah  stuck  to  his  faith  in  God's  Word. 
Many  doubtless  said,  “ Noah,  you  are  mistaken  in 
thinking  it  is  God's  Word.  It  is  not  God's  Word. 
If  it  were  God's  Word  our  great  men  would  believe 
it."  Some  doubtless  said  that  there  was  no  God  any- 
way, and  that  all  this  belief  in  God  and  God's  Word 
was  mere  empty  superstition. 

But  Noah  believed  God  in  the  face  of  it  all,  and  it 
was  well  for  him  that  he  did.  Unquestionably  be- 
lieving God's  Word  saved  him  and  his  whole  family 
from  utter  destruction.  You  and  I must  be  saved  in 
exactly  the  same  way  if  we  are  saved  at  all.  We  also 


130 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


have  God’s  Word.  The  proof  that  this  Book  is  God’s 
Word  is  overwhelmingly  conclusive,  and  God’s  Word, 
as  found  in  this  Book,  tells  of  another  coming  judg- 
ment, it  tells  us  that  in  that  judgment  many  will  be 
eternally  lost.  God’s  Word  about  that  is  not  gener- 
ally believed.  Many  men  of  science  do  not  believe 
it,  and  in  this  day  many  theological  professors  do  not 
believe  it,  and  not  a few  preachers  even  ridicule  the 
idea.  Many  scoff  at  the  very  idea  of  God  having  a 
Word  at  all,  and  some  even  question  whether  there 
is  a God.  But  there  is  a God,  and  this  Book  is  God’s 
Word.  That  can  be  easily  proven.  And  God’s 
Word  says  that  there  is  to  be  a judgment  of  all  man- 
kind (Acts  17:31),  and  God’s  Word  about  that, 
just  as  God’s  Word  about  the  Flood,  will  be  fulfilled 
to  the  letter. 

Our  salvation  depends  upon  our  holding  fast  to 
God's  Word  and  believing  it  to  the  very  letter,  in 
spite  of  objections  and  sneers  and  specious  argu- 
ments of  men,  even  of  scholarly  men.  Oh,  happy  is 
the  man  who  has  sense  enough  to  learn  from  the  un- 
varying history  of  the  past  and  believe  what  God 
says  in  spite  of  the  proud  unbelief  of  men,  no  matter 
who  they  may  be. 

III.  Noah  Was  Saved  by  Obedience. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  Noah  was  saved  because  he 
obeyed  God.  Jehovah  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou 
and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,”  and  Noah  came  and 
brought  all  his  house  with  him  just  as  God  had 
bidden  him  do  (Gen.  7:5).  Noah’s  faith  was  a 
real  faith.  Noah’s  faith  was  not  a mere  opinion  of 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


131 


the  head.  That  sort  of  faith  will  not  save  any  one. 
Noah's  faith  was  a faith  of  the  heart,  a faith  that 
acts  upon  what  it  believes,  that  obeys  the  God  it  be- 
lieves in ; and  that  is  the  only  kind  of  faith  that  saves 
anybody.  God  said,  Make  thee  an  ark"  (Gen. 
6 : 14),  and  told  Noah  exactly  how  to  make  it.  Noah 
made  the  ark  and  made  it  exactly  after  God's  specifi- 
cations. He  attempted  no  improvements  of  his  own 
upon  God's  plans.  He  was  wise  enough  to  do  ex- 
actly as  God  told  him.  The  ark  God  commanded 
him  to  build  was  on  a vast  scale,  and  it  must  have 
seemed  like  a huge  undertaking.  Not  only  that,  it 
must  have  seemed  like  an  absurd  undertaking.  And 
it  was  a very  expensive  undertaking.  No  doubt 
Noah  was  ridiculed.  No  doubt  men  tried  to  dissuade 
him.  No  doubt  some  of  his  most  judicious  and 
trusted  friends  pointed  out  more  profitable  ways  to 
invest  his  money  and  more  pleasant  ways  to  employ 
his  time,  but  Noah  went  right  on  doing  exactly  what 
God  told  him  to  do. 

It  is  probable  that  he  put  all  that  he  had  into  that 
old  ark.  He  had  nothing  to  bank  on  but  God's  Word, 
but  that  was  enough.  It  was  well  for  him  that  he 
banked  on  it.  It  is  always  well  to  bank  on  God's 
Word.  Very  likely  it  cost  Noah  his  entire  fortune 
to  build  the  ark,  and  when  the  last  nail  was  driven  he 
had  nothing  left.  But  when  he  came  out  of  the  ark 
he  owned  the  whole  earth.  It  was  all  his.  There 
were  no  rival  claimants.  His  title  was  clear  and  in- 
disputable. All  the  men  who  had  laughed  at  him 
were  dead.  They  had  lost  everything.  Noah  had 
gained  everything.  So  will  it  be  with  you  and  me,  if 
we  obey  God.  The  one  who  obeys  God  may  lose 


132 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


everything  for  the  time  being,  but  he  will  gain  every- 
thing for  eternity ; for  he  becomes  an  “ heir  ot  God 
and  joint  heir  with  Christ  (Rom.  8:  17). 

God  told  Noah  to  build  the  ark  for  his  own  salva- 
tion and  the  salvation  of  his  house.  What  does  God 
command  us  to  do  for  our  salvation  and  that  of  our 
house?  Acts  16:31  answers  the  question:  '"Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy 
house.''  God  commands  us  to  believe  on  Jesus 
Christ,  not  to  believe  about  Him,  but  to  believe  on 
Him,  i.  e.,  to  accept  Him,  to  take  Him,  to  take  Him 
as  your  Saviour,  to  take  Him  as  your  Lord  and  Mas- 
ter, surrender  yourself  absolutely  to  His  will,  and 
confess  Him  as  your  Lord  and  Master  before  the 
world  (John  1:12;  Rom.  10:9,  Do  that  and 

you  shall  have  life,  eternal  life.  You  will  be  ridi- 
culed if  you  do.  No  doubt  of  that.  If  some  young 
men  who  may  read  these  words  accept  Christ,  their 
companions  will  make  fun  of  them  to-morrow  morn- 
ing. If  some  business  man  accept  and  confess  Christ 
some  of  his  business  friends  will  make  fun  of  him. 
If  some  wdves  accept  Jesus  Christ  now  their  husbands 
will  certainly  ridicule  them.  It  may  cost  any  of  these 
a good  deal.  It  may  cost  some  of  them  their  posi- 
tion. It  may  cost  some  of  them  all  they  have  in  the 
world,  just  as  it  cost  Noah.  But  it  will  pay.  They 
will  gain  more  than  even  Noah  did,  though  he  gained 
the  whole  earth.  They  will  gain  an  " inheritance  in- 
corruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away, 
reserved  in  heaven  for  you"  (i  Pet.  1:4).  They 
will  become  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus 
Christ.  They  may  have  to  suffer  with  Christ  but  the 
old  Book  of  God  says,  "If  we  suffer  with  him  we 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


133 


(shall)  be  also  glorified  with  him’’  (Rom.  8:  i6,  17, 
18). 

When  Noah  came  out  of  the  ark  safe  and  found 
the  whole  earth  his  I do  not  think  he  regretted  the 
ridicule  he  had  endured,  nor  the  money  he  had  ex- 
pended. And  when  you  who  read  my  words  stand 
before  God  and  all  things  are  yours  for  all  eternity 
you  will  not  regret  the  ridicule  you  may  have  endured 
nor  the  money  you  have  expended  because  of  your 
belief  in  Jesus  Christ  and  your  obedience  to  God. 
On  the  other  hand,  wtien  those  who  had  ridiculed 
Noah  saw  the  flood  arising  they  wished  they  too  had 
invested  all  in  an  ark  and  were  safely  housed  inside. 
So  in  the  Judgment  Day  that  is  surely  coming  on 
this  old  world  those  who  sneer  at  the  Christian  now, 
and  ridicule  the  Christian  now,  will  wish  that  they 
too  had  invested  their  all  in  Jesus  Christ.  There 
were  no  more  sceptics  when  the  flood  had  gotten  well 
to  work,  and  there  will  be  no  sceptics  or  agnostics  nor 
theosophists  in  the  Judgment  Day,  and  there  will  be 
a good  many  of  you  gentlemen  and  ladies  who  will 
wish  you  never  had  been  sceptics  or  agnostics  or 
theosophists  or  Christian  Scientists  falsely  so-called. 
I tell  you  the  smart  young  man  who  has  caught  a few 
of  the  stock  phrases  and  arguments  of  modern  Infi- 
delity and  goes  around  laughing  at  preachers  and 
Christians  and  those  who  invite  him  to  the  church 
and  to  Christ,  will  wish  in  that  day  that  he  had  had 
more  sense  and  had  not  done  it. 

lY.  Noah  was  Saved  Because  He  Accepted  God's 
Invitation. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place,  Noah  was  saved  because 


134 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


he  accepted  God's  invitation.  God  had  said,  Come 
thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,'"  and  Noah  just 
came.  It  was  not  merely  the  invitation  that  saved 
Noah,  but  his  own  acceptance  of  the  invitation.  That 
is  what  will  decide  the  matter  with  each  one  of  us. 
We  are  all  invited.  God  says,  ‘‘  Whosoever  will,  let 
him  take  the  water  of  life  freely"  (Rev.  22:17). 
The  Lord  Jesus  says,  ‘‘  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I will 
in  no  wise  cast  out " (John  6:37).  Will  you  accept 
the  invitation  or  will  you  decline  it?  It  is  just  as 
true  of  many  to-day  as  it  was  when  our  Lord  said  it 
when  He  was  here  upon  earth,  '‘Ye  mil  not  come  to 
me  that  ye  may  have  life  " (John  5 : 40),  and  that  is 
the  sole  reason  why  they  are  lost;  they  won't  accept 
the  invitation. 

A friend  of  mine  told  me  many  years  ago  a story. 
I do  not  know  where  he  heard  it  and,  of  course,  I 
cannot  vouch  for  its  truth;  but  it  exactly  illustrates 
my  point.  He  said  that  a certain  rich  Christian 
worker  who  wished  to  illustrate  how  men  are  saved 
by  simply  accepting  the  Gospel  invitation,  offered  to 
pay  the  debts  of  every  one  who  came  to  his  office  for 
that  purpose.  Most  men  naturally  regarded  it  as  a 
hoax  or  a trick  of  some  kind  and  did  not  go  to  his 
office.  One  man  believed  it  at  least  enough  to  try  it. 
He  went,  and  the  rich  worker  paid  every  penny  of  his 
debts.  That  man  was  saved  from  his  burden  of  debt 
by  accepting  the  invitation.  The  invitation  was  for 
all  but  only  the  one  who  accepted  it  received  the  sal- 
vation offered  in  it.  Noah  accepted  God's  invitation 
to  " Come  into  the  ark " and  was  saved,  and  every 
one  of  us  who  accepts  God's  invitation  to  come  into 
Jesus  Christ  by  accepting  Him  as  our  personal  Sa- 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


136 


viour,  surrendering  to  Him  as  our  Lord,  and  confess- 
ing Him  as  such  before  the  world,  will  be  saved. 
Every  one  who  does  not  accept  God's  invitation  to 
come  into  Christ  will  be  lost.  It  is  up  to  every  one  of 
you  to  say  for  yourself  whether  you  will  be  saved  or 
whether  you  will  be  lost,  whether  you  will  spend  eter- 
nity in  Heaven  or  whether  you  will  spend  eternity  in 
Hell.  You  decide  that  by  your  decision  whether  you 
will  accept  God's  invitation  or  decline  God's  invita- 
tion. 

Noah  accepted  the  invitation  for  his  family  as  well 
as  for  himself.  He  took  them  in  with  him.  The 
whole  family  were  gathered  in.  The  record  reads, 
''And  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and 
his  sons'  wives  with  him,  into  the  ark"  (Gen.  7:7). 
It  has  been  said  that  it  speaks  well  for  Noah  that  in 
the  midst  of  such  prevailing  unbelief  Noah's  whole 
household  had  such  faith  in  the  old  man  that  they  all 
accompanied  him  into  the  ark.  Perhaps  it  speaks 
even  better  for  his  consistency  and  integrity  and  no- 
bility of  character  that  his  daughters-in-law  had  as 
much  confidence  in  him  as  his  own  sons.  It  is  cer- 
tainly more  than  can  be  said  of  all  professed  Chris- 
tian parents  to-day  that  every  member  of  their  house- 
hold follows  them  in  the  acceptance  of  Christ.  I 
think  the  Bible  plainly  indicates  that  when  a man's 
family  does  not  come  along  with  him  it  is  somehow 
the  parent's  fault.  There  is  some  screw  loose  some- 
where in  his  character  or  his  conduct.  He  is  worldly 
or  overbearing  or  not  strictly  truthful  or  unchristian 
somewhere,  or  else  he  neglects  persistent  prayer  or 
wise,  spirit-filled  personal  effort.  At  all  events  God 
is  saying,  " Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the 


136 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


ark,”  and  He  says  in  Acts  16:31:  Believe  bn  tHe 

Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  thou  and  thy^ 
house/'  I do  not  see  how  any  Christian  man  or 
woman  can  rest  while  even  one  child  is  out  of  the 
ark.  Suppose  Noah  had  found  Shem,  Ham,  or 
Japheth  lacking,  do  you  not  think  he  would  have 
made  a strenuous  effort  to  find  him  and  bring  him  in? 

In  the  first  church  of  which  I was  pastor  there 
were  two  women,  who  were  members  of  the  church. 
One  of  these  women,  a farmer’s  wife,  had  a large 
family  of  children,  but  saw  to  it  that  every  one  of 
them  was  saved.  Several  of  them  became  mission- 
aries. At  least  three  of  them  are  missionaries  at  the 
present  time.  The  other  woman’s  children  were  un- 
saved. The  woman  who  had  brought  her  own  chil- 
dren to  Christ  one  by  one,  went  to  the  other  woman 
in  a time  of  deep  religious  interest  and  tried  to  stir 
her  up  to  win  her  own  children  to  Christ.  But  the 
woman  replied,  Oh,  I believe  they  will  all  be  saved 
— sometime.”  But  they  were  not.  One  of  them  at 
least  is  dead  now  and  died  out  of  Christ. 

Dr.  George  Pentecost  once  talked  with  a young 
man  whose  mother  was  a professing  Christian.  The 
young  man  sneered  at  Christianity  and  at  Christians. 
Dr.  Pentecost  said  to  him,  Oh,  you  think  then  that 
Christians  are  weak  in  their  minds,  that  they  have  a 
soft  spot  in  their  brains  somewhere,  or  else  they  are 
hypocrites?”  The  young  man  replied,  ‘‘Well,  I 
don’t  like  to  put  it  just  that  way,  but  that  is  about 
what  I think.”  “ But,”  said  Dr,  Pentecost,  “ is  not 
your  mother  a Christian?”  “Yes.”  “Is  your 
mother  weak-minded  or  is  she  a hypocrite?  ” “ You 

have  no  right  to  speak  that  way  of  my  mother,”  the 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


137 


young  man  hotly  replied.  No,  but  you  said  that  all 
Christians  had  a soft  spot  in  their  brains  somewhere 
and  you  say  your  mother  is  a Christian.’'  The  young 
man  blushed,  hesitated  and  then  replied,  ‘‘If  my 
mother  really  is  a Christian,  why  then  has  she  never 
spoken  to  me  about  my  soul  ? ” That  is  what  some 
of  your  children  are  thinking  of  some  of  you  profess- 
ing Christians.  Which  one  of  your  children  are  you 
willing  to  have  lost?  Oh,  if  you  have  an  unsaved 
child  let  God’s  invitation  sink  down  to  the  very 
depths  of  your  heart,  “ Come  thou,  and  all  thy  house 
into  the  ark.” 

V.  Jehovah  Shut  Him  In. 

Just  one  thing  more.  Let  me  call  your  attention 
to  five  wonderfully  expressive  words  in  the  Bible  ac- 
count of  the  Flood.  They  are  found  in  the  seventh 
chapter  and  the  sixteenth  verse,  “And  Jehovah  shut 
him  in.”  When  God  shut  to  the  door  of  that  ark 
Noah  was  safe.  The  torrential  rains  might  fall  from 
above,  the  earth  might  subside  beneath,  and  the 
waters  of  the  sea  might  rush  in  upon  the  doomed 
land,  but  Noah  was  safe  inside  the  ark  built  accord- 
ing to  God’s  pattern.  And  so  with  us  also,  when 
once  we  are  in  the  ark  huilt  according  to  God^s  pat- 
tern, when  we  are  in  Christ,  by  accepting  Christ  with 
our  whole  heart.  When  we  accept  Christ  fully  as 
our  Saviour,  surrender  to  Him  unreservedly  as  our 
Lord,  and  gladly  confess  Him  as  such  before  the 
world,  God  shuts  us  in  and  we  are  safe.  There  may 
be  appalling  storms,  there  may  be  fierce  tempests, 
there  may  be  an  awful  Judgment  Day,  we  may  be 
;weak  in  ourselves,  but  we  are  safe.  That  awful 


138 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


Great  Tribulation  ’’  of  which  the  Bible  so  often 
speaks  and  toward  which  things  seem  to  be  so  rapidly 
moving  to-ddy,  in  Russia  and  Germany  and  England 
and  even  in  America,  may  come,  but  we  are  safe, 
“shut  in’"  the  ark.  And  our  Lord  Jesus  Himself 
says  in  John  10:28,  29,  “I  give  unto  them  eternal 
life;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  and  no  one  shall 
snatch  them  out  of  my  hand.  My  Father,  which 
hath  given  them  unto  me,  is  greater  than  all ; and  no 
one  is  able  to  snatch  them  out  of  the  Father's  hand.” 

It  was  not  any  strength  or  goodness  of  his  own  that 
made  Noah  safe  in  that  awful  day,  it  was  being  in 
the  ark  that  made  him  safe.  It  is  not  any  strength  or 
goodness  that  you  or  I may  have  that  makes  us  safe, 
it  is  being  in  Christ  Jesus,  being  in  the  ark  made  on 
God’s  pattern,  thoroughly  well  built,  and  that  ark  will 
stand  any  storm. 

But  the  door  that  shut  Noah  and  his  family  in,  shut 
the  unbelieving  world  out,  and  when  the  door  was 
once  shut  the  day  of  grace  was  ended.  The  door  had 
stood  open  many  years,  “ the  long-suffering  of  God 
(had)  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was 
a preparing”  (i  Pet.  3:20).  God’s  long-suffering 
grace  had  waited  one  hundred  years  and  more.  But 
the  day  of  grace  was  now  over.  The  day  of  grace 
will  soon  be  over  with  you.  The  door  is  still  open. 
It  will  be  shut  some  day.  It  will  be  shut  for  some 
of  you  before  another  year  passes,  it  will  be  shut  for 
some  of  you  before  another  month  passes,  it  will  be 
shut  for  some  of  you  before  another  week  passes, 
it  will  be  shut  for  some  of  you  before  another 
day  passes.  Of  course,  I do  not  know  who  the 
people  are  who  will  read  this  solemn  declaration. 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


139 


But  whoever  you  are,  do  not  presume  on  God’s  long- 
suffering  mercy.  Listen  to  the  solemn  words  of  Him 
who  proved  His  love  by  dying  to  save  you,  When 
once  the  master  of  the  house  is  risen  up,  and  hath 
shut  to  the  door,  and  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and 
to  knock  at  the  door  saying.  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us ; 
and  he  shall  answer  and  say  to  you,  I know  ye  not 
whence  ye  are”  (Luke  13:25). 

Let  us  go  back  in  thought  to  the  last  day  of  the 
antediluvian  world.  One  of  the  most  wonderful 
paintings  I ever  saw  is  Schorn’s  picture  of  the  Deluge 
in  the  new  Pinakothek  in  Munich,  Germany.  The 
painting  is  unfinished,  but  it  is  a masterpiece.  That 
day  broke  bright  and  clear  as  other  days  had.  There 
was  little  sign  of  any  approaching  catastrophe.  Noah 
had  gone  into  the  ark,  the  animals  had  gathered  from 
near  and  far  and  gone  in  too,  and  the  people  had  been 
a little  startled  by  this  strange  procession  of  animals 
come  from  the  four  points  of  the  compass.  But 
seven  days  had  gone  by  since  then  and  nothing  had 
happened  and  their  fright  had  passed  away  (Gen. 
7:  4~io).  These  seven  days  were  seven  days  of  de- 
pised  mercy.  Not  only  their  fear  had  passed  away, 
so  also  had  their  opportunity.  Men  and  women  went 
about  their  ordinary  pursuits  again  (Matt.  24:38), 
They  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giv- 
ing in  marriage,  until  the  (very)  day  that  Noah  en- 
tered into  the  ark.”  Evening  came  on,  the  streets 
were  crowded  with  people.  In  many  a house  there 
were  gay  festal  scenes.  The  sun  went  down  in  a 
cloud.  There  were  rumblings  of  distant  thunder. 
Men  laugh  and  say,  ‘‘  This  is  a striking  coincidence. 
Old  Noah  said  the  flood  would  come  to-day,  and 


140 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


really  it  does  look  like  raia/'  The  more  timid  are 
fearful.  The  rain  begins  to  patter  in  the  streets  and 
people  hurry  on  to  their  destination.  Now  the  storm 
bursts  in  its  fury.  The  heavens  are  illumined  with 
white  and  purple  light,  then  all  is  dark.  The  thunder 
roars  and  reverberates,  the  water  falls  in  cloud- 
bursts, the  earth  seems  to  be  sinking.  It  is  sink- 
ing. It  is  slowly  sinking  beneath  the  level  of 
the  sea.  The  waters  of  the  lake  overflow  and 
the  Caspian  Sea  will  soon  burst  its  ancient  bar- 
riers and  flood  the  entire  inhabited  earth.  Yes ! 
the  waters  are  pouring  in  now,  ‘‘  the  fountains 
of  the  great  deep  (are)  broken  up.’"  Terror-stricken 
men  and  women  with  ashen  faces  flee  from  theatres, 
ballrooms,  and  homes.  To  the  hills  and  to  the  moun- 
tains! Still  the  land  is  sinking  and  the  waters  are 
rising.  The  beasts  of  prey  forget  their  savage  in- 
stincts and  cower  beside  terror-stricken  men  and 
women.  Higher  and  higher  rise  the  waters.  Strong 
men  fight  with  feeble  women  for  the  place  of  van- 
tage. The  waters  sweep  over  a low  hill  and  a hun- 
dred souls  huddled  upon  it  are  swept  into  eternity. 

Look!  on  yonder  hill  stand  a husband  and  wife 
alone.  The  waters  are  fast  coming  nearer  and 
nearer.  With  her  former  love  turned  into  savage 
hate  the  woman  turns  on  the  man  she  has  loved  and 
cries,  Man,  you  have  deceived  me,  ruined  me.  I 
longed  to  enter  the  ark  and  you  laughed  me  out  of 
it.”  The  remorseless  waters  sweep  them  away  to- 
gether. 

Look  again!  yonder  is  a maiden.  She,  too,  had 
longed  to  enter  the  ark  but  no  one  of  her  friends  had 
gone  in  and  she  was  unwilling  to  go  alone.  The 


NOAH  AND  HIS  AEK 


141 


waters  sweep  her  away  on  their  angry  bosom,  and 
soon  the  fair  face  sinks  beneath  the  flood.  Yonder 
is  a man  who  had  mocked  at  Noah's  faith,  but  now 
fear  and  agony  are  depicted  on  the  distorted  counte- 
nance and  now  it  sinks  beneath  the  flood.  A young 
man  who  has  hesitated  long  in  indecision  turns  an 
appealing  look  toward  heaven,  but  it  is  too  late,  and 
he  too  sinks  beneath  the  engulfing  waters.  Thus 
they  go  down,  singly,  by  pairs,  by  hundreds,  until  the 
last  man  of  the  unbek'eving  world  has  disappeared. 
The  end  has  come.  The  whole  land  is  submerged, 
not  an  unbeliever  left,  but  yonder  floats  the  ark  of 
God  in  safety  while  the  moon  sheds  its  gentle  light 
upon  the  unbroken  surface  of  the  great  deep. 

There  is  another  day  of  doom  hurrying  on.  God 
tells  us  in  this  Book,  He  hath  appointed  a day,  in 
the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by 
that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained;  whereof  he  hath 
given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised 
him  from  the  dead''  (Acts  17:31),  Are  you  ready 
for  that  day?  Come  into  the  ark.  Believe  God. 
Obey  God.  Accept  the  invitation,  accept  Jesus 
Christ.  Confess  Him  before  the  world.  Let  the 
world  laugh  if  it  will.  Some  of  you  in  the  deepest 
impulses  of  your  heart  would  like  to  get  right  down 
on  your  knees  now  and  beg  God  for  mercy.  Do  it. 
Don't  mind  what  people  say.  Don't  mind  who  laughs. 

Come  into  the  Ark." 


IX 

TIME  AND  ETERNITY  CONTRASTED 

For  our  light  affliction,  which  is  for  the  moment, 
worketh  for  us  more  and  more  exceedingly  an  eternal 
weight  of  glory;  while  we  look  not  at  the  things 
which  are  seen,  hut  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen; 
for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal  (for  a 
season) ; but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  eter- 
nal'^ (for  eternity). — 2 Corinthians  4: 17-18. 

The  Apostle  Paul  had  to  endure  some  things 
that  to  most  men  would  seem  very  hard  to 
bear,  and  some  of  these  afflictions  continued 
through  many  years.  Indeed  the  thirty  years  of  his 
Christian  experience  seem,  at  first  sight,  like  thirty 
years  of  self-denial  and  suffering  for  Christ.  But  in 
speaking  of  these  afflictions  in  our  text,  Paul  speaks 
of  them  as  ‘‘  our  light  afflictions ''  and  also  as  “ our 
affliction  which  is  for  a moment.’’  Is  thirty  years 
‘'but  a moment”?  Yes,  when  compared  with  eter- 
nity. Your  life  of  eighty  or  ninety  years  or  one 
hundred  years,  is  but  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  when 
compared  with  eternity.  And  is  the  loss  of  friends, 
the  loss  of  ease,  the  loss  of  the  admiration  and  ap- 
plause of  men,  the  loss  of  home  and  native  land,  the 
loss  of  all  that  men  ordinarily  hold  dear ; and  impris- 
onment, and  shipwreck  and  scourging  and  wandering 
and  hunger  and  stoning,  is  all  this  " light  afflictions  ” ? 
Yes,  when  compared  with  the  joy  and  honour  and 

142 


TIME  AND  ETEENITY  CONTEASTED  143 


glory  which  are  to  be  revealed  in  us  in  a glad  day 
that  is  soon  coming.  When  the  sufferings  of  this 
present  time  are  put  in  comparison  with  the  eternal 
glories  that  are  thus  secured,  they  are  nothing  at  all. 
And  when  all  the  wealth  and  pleasure  and  honours 
that  one  can  possibly  get  in  this  world  are  put  in  com- 
parison with  the  eternal  agony  and  ruin  and  despair 
and  shame  that  it  costs  to  live  for  this  world,  they, 
too,  are  nothing.  Suppose  one  gets  a million  dollars 
or  two  million  dollars  or  one  hundred  million  dollars 
at  the  cost  of  being  lost  forever?  Does  it  pay?  Sup- 
pose one's  whole  life  from  boyhood  or  girlhood  to  old 
age  is  one  constant  round  of  parties,  and  feasts,  and 
frolics,  and  merriments,  at  the  cost  of  spending  an 
eternity  in  hell.  Does  it  pay?  The  truly  wise  man 
does  not  look  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  which  are 
‘‘  for  a time,"  but  at  the  things  which  are  unseen, 
which  are  for  eternity.  This,  then,  is  really  our  sub- 
ject to-night,  ETERNITY. 

I.  There  is  an  Eternity  and  We  Must  Go 
There. 

The  first  thing  our  text  teaches  us,  and  which  we 
know  to  be  true  even  though  it  were  not  in  our  text, 
is.  There  is  an  Eternity,  and  we  must  go  there.  It  is 
the  height  of  folly  to  refuse  to  think  of  eternity.  A 
lady  said  to  me  one  day,  speaking  of  a certain  shift- 
less young  man  who  has  had  great  opportunities  in 
life  but  thrown  them  all  away,  ‘‘  He  just  lives  for  to- 
day; he  never  thinks  of  the  future  either  in  the  life 
that  now  is  or  the  life  that  is  to  come."  Everybody 
sees  that  that  young  man  is  an  ass.  I do  not  think 
there  is  any  difference  of  opinion  on  that  point  among 


144 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


any  of  those  who  know  him.  But  is  he  really  much 
more  of  a blockhead  than  the  man  or  the  woman  who 
lives  only  for  the  brief  days  that  we  spend  on  this 
earth,  and  never  thinks  of  that  vast  eternity  which 
stretches  beyond,  and  to  which  we  are  all  hurrying  on 
at  express  speed?  There  is  an  eternity.  I may 
live  ninety  or  a hundred  years  of  the  life  that  now  is, 
but  I shall  certainly  live  millions  and  billions  and  tril- 
lions of  years  in  the  endless  seons  of  years  in  the  life 
that  is  to  come.  I shall  live  forever  and  forever. 

Eternity  is  the  important  thing.  The  life  that  now 
is  is  important  only  because  it  determines  our  eter- 
nity. Many  a man  who  is  wise  enough  to  look  some- 
what into  the  future,  asks  himself  the  question, 
“ Where  and  how  shall  I spend  my  middle  life,  and 
where  and  how  shall  I spend  my  old  age  V A man 
who  is  still  wiser  will  ask  himself  the  question, 
Where  and  how  shall  I spend  my  eternity  ? Have 
you  settled  that  question  ? Let  me  put  it  to  every  one 
of  my  readers : ‘‘  Have  you  settled  where  and  how 
you  will  spend  eternity?  If  you  have  not,  there  is 
really  but  one  sane  thing  for  you  to  do,  and  that  is  to 
settle  the  question  to-night  as  to  where  and  how  you 
will  spend  eternity. 

II.  Where  and  How  We  Shall  Spend  Eternity 
IS  Settled  in  the  Life  that  Now  is. 

The  second  thing  that  I wish  to  say  to-night  is. 
Where  and  how  we  shall  spend  eternity  is  settled  in 
the  life  that  now  is.  The  life  that  now  is,  is  the 
preparation  time,  and  the  only  preparation  time  for 
the  life  that  is  to  come.  Time  is  the  preparation 
time  and  the  only  preparation  time  for  eternity.  The 


TIME  AND  ETEENITY  CONTEASTED  146 


boy  who  has  wasted  his  school  days,  and  failed  to 
make  preparation  for  business  life,  when  he  gets  into 
the  weary  grind  of  a life  that  is  the  inevitable  out- 
come of  a wasted  boyhood  and  young  manhood, 
would  gladly  go  back  and  live  his  wasted  boyhood 
over  again;  but  he  cannot.  Much  less  can  any  man 
or  woman  who  wastes  this  present  life  on  earth  come 
back  from  a ruined  eternity  and  live  this  present  life 
over.  It  cannot  be  done.  You  are  making  your  eter- 
nity to-day. 

Men  have  tried  to  fancy  that  there  is  some  other 
time  of  preparation  in  the  future  for  those  who  waste 
this  present  opportunity  for  preparation  in  the  life 
that  now  is.  Such  a hope  is  the  ''  baseless  fabric  of 
a dream which  has  not  one  atom  of  foundation 
either  in  common  sense  or  the  more  sure  Word  of 
God.  ‘‘  If,'’  says  Jesus,  ye  die  in  your  sins,  whither 
I go  ye  cannot  come."  This  word  of  our  Lord  Him- 
self makes  it  as  clear  as  day  that  where  and  how  we 
shall  spend  eternity  is  settled  in  the  life  that  now  is, 
settled  this  side  the  grave. 

You  are  making  your  eternity  now.  Some  young 
man  or  woman  may  be  saying  in  their  heart,  ‘‘  I will 
go  out  and  have  one  more  fling  at  sin."  Do  it,  and  it 
may  land  you  in  hell  for  all  eternity.  In  the  lost 
world  of  endless  midnight  and  despair  you  will  look 
up  and  say,  ''  Dr.  Torrey  told  me  that  if  I went  out 
to  spend  one  more  night  in  sin  I would  spend  eternity 
in  hell,  and  here  I am."  And  you  will  wring  your 
hands,  and  you  will  shriek,  and  you  will  agonize,  and 
you  will  despair,  but  it  will  be  too  late,  too  late  for- 
ever. 

I was  dealing  one  night  with  a man  in  Minneapolis 


146 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


who  was  under  deep  conviction  of  sin.  I urged  upon 
him  immediate  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  he 
hesitated,  and  he  went  out  without  deciding.  He 
thought  he  would  go  into  a saloon  and  have  one  more 
drink  and  he  did,  and  that  led  to  another,  and  so  on. 
Two  years  later  I received  a letter  from  him  from 
the  State  Prison  at  Stillwater,  telling  me  how  near  he 
had  come  to  accepting  Christ  that  night,  but  how  he 
had  gone  to  have  another  drink  and  then  another,  and 
how  he  had  become  intoxicated,  and  while  intoxi- 
cated he  had  stolen  an  overcoat,  was  arrested,  tried 
and  found  guilty.  He  had  no  recollection  of  stealing 
the  coat,  but  said  he  had  no  doubt  that  he  did.  He 
was  sentenced  to  two  years  in  Stillwater  State  Prison. 
He  added,  I have  accepted  Christ  here,  but  these 
two  years  have  been  wasted,  because  I did  not  do  as 
you  urged  me  to  that  night.’'  But  ah,  that  was  not  so 
bad  as  to  wake  up  in  hell  and  know  that  you  are  to 
spend  all  eternity  there,  because  you  did  not  take  the 
step  that  you  know  you  ought  to  take  to-night. 

III.  How  TO  Secure  a Blessed  and  Glorious 
Eternity. 

We  have  seen  that  there  is  an  eternity,  we  have 
seen  that  where  and  how  we  shall  spend  eternity  is 
settled  in  the  life  that  now  is;  so  we  come  face  to  face 
with  the  question.  What  must  I do  in  the  life  that 
now  is  that  I may  have  a satisfactory  and  glorious 
eternity? 

First  of  all,  if  you  are  to  have  a satisfactory 
and  glorious  eternity,  you  must  believe  on  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  life  that  now  is.  This  God  tells  us  in 
His  Word  over  and  over  again.  For  example.  He 


TIME  AND  ETEENITY  CONTEASTED  147 


says  in  John  3 : 36,  ‘‘  He  that  belie veth  on  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life:  and  he  that  believeth  not  the 
Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him/^  And  He  says  in  Romans  6 : 23,  ‘‘  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death ; but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal 
life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord/'  The  first  thing 
to  do,  then,  if  we  are  to  have  a satisfactory  and  glori- 
ous eternity,  indeed  the  first  thing  we  must  do  if  we 
are  to  spend  eternity  outside  of  hell,  is  to  believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Just  what  does  it  mean  to 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  God  Himself  an- 
swers that  question  in  John  1:12:  ‘‘As  many  as  re- 
ceived him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name/' 
Here  we  are  told  that  to  believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  to 
“ believe  on  his  name,"  is  to  “ receive  him,"  that  is  to 
simply  accept  Him  to  be  to  us  what  God  offers  Him 
to  be  to  every  one,  to  receive  Him  as  the  Saviour  who 
has  borne  our  sins  for  us,  borne  them  in  His  own 
body  on  the  cross,  and  who  is  therefore  ready  and 
able  to  forgive  all  our  sins  as  soon  as  we  confess 
them,  and  forsake  them  and  put  our  trust  in  Him,  to 
receive  Him  also  as  our  Lord  and  Master  to  whom 
we  surrender  the  entire  control  of  our  lives,  to  re- 
ceive Him  as  our  divine  teacher  to  whom  we  sur- 
render our  thoughts.  Whatever  else  we  may  do  or 
not  do,  it  is  absolutely  sure  we  shall  not  have  a blessed 
eternity  if  we  do  not  thus  receive  Jesus  Christ. 

In  the  second  place,  if  we  are  to  have  a satisfac- 
tory and  glorious  eternity,  we  must  serve  Jesus 
Christ.  We  are  saved  by  grace ; but  we  are  rewarded 
according  to  our  works.  Eternity  begins  with  the 
coming  of  Christ,  and  at  His  coming,  Jesus  Christ 


148 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAT 


shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works 
(Matt.  16:27).  Our  eternity  will  be  rich  and  full 
just  in  proportion  to  the  faithfulness  of  our  service 
here  on  earth.  There  are  many  who  fancy  that  all 
professed  Christians  will  have  an  equally  glorious 
eternity,  but  this  is  pure  fancy.  It  contradicts  the 
plain  teachings  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  teach- 
ings of  sanctified  common  sense  as  well.  The  Word 
of  God  tells  us  that  some  will  be  saved,  so  as  by 
fire (i  Cor.  3:  15);  but  that  others  will  have  an 
abundant  entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ (2  Pet.  i : ii). 
The  one  who  barely  accepts  Christ,  and  who  holds 
on  to  the  world  in  a measure,  and  does  scarcely  any- 
thing for  his  Master,  will  have  no  such  entrance  into 
the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,^'  he  will  have  no  such  glorious  eternity 
as  the  one  who  turns  away  from  the  world  with  his 
whole  heart,  and  gives  up  all  its  follies  and  self-in- 
dulgences and  ‘‘  comes  out  and  is  separate  ’’  and 
lives  wholly  for  Christ,  a life  of  constant  self-denial 
and  constant  service.  Do  you  realize,  you  professed 
Christians,  that  you  are  preparing  your  eternity  by 
the  way  you  serve  Christ  in  the  life  that  now  is?  Do 
you  realize  that  your  eternity  will  be  richer  or 
poorer  by  the  way  in  which  you  serve  Jesus  Christ  on 
earth?  Do  you  realize  that  every  day  spent  in  hard 
service  will  make  Heaven  that  much  richer  and  every 
day  and  hour  frittered  away  will  make  Heaven  that 
much  poorer?  Ah,  ponder  again  those  familiar 
words  that  God  spake  to  Daniel,  They  that  be  wise 
shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  and 
they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for 


TIME  AND  ETEENITY  CONTEASTED  149 

ever  and  eve'r/'  How  important  then  is  every  day 
of  our  Christian  life.  Let  me  put  to  you  the  ques- 
tion, Has  to-day  counted  as  much  as  it  might  have 
counted  for  eternity? 

Again  let  me  say,  that  the  sufferings  we  endure, 
and  the  sacrifices  we  make  for  Christ  will  make  eter- 
nity richer.  The  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  are  very 
plain  on  this  point ; He  says,  ‘‘  Blessed  are  ye  when 
men  shall  reproach  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  say 
all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  sake. 
Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad  for  great  is  your  re- 
ward in  Heaven;  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets 
which  were  before  you”  (Matt.  There 

are  some  who  bitterly  regret  it  when  they  are  called 
upon  to  be  reproached  or  slandered  or  in  any  way  to 
suffer  persecution  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  So  far 
from  regretting  it,  we  should  rather  rejoice  in  it  in- 
stead, we  should  be  exceeding  glad,”  these  things 
bring  great  reward  in  Heaven.  Every  sneer  that  one 
endures,  every  reproach  that  is  heaped  upon  us,  every 
loss  that  we  sustain  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  and  for 
the  sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  brings  glorious  re- 
ward in  eternity.  Never  forget  what  Paul  said, 
‘‘  For  I reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time 
are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  to  usward  ” (Rom.  8:  i8),  and  how 
he  says  again,  If  I suffer,  I shall  also  reign  with 
him.”  The  seemingly  awful  tortures  endured  by  the 
Armenian  Christians  rather  than  give  up  their  faith 
in  Christ,  and  which  to  some  people  seem  so  inexpli- 
cable are  no  longer  a mystery  if  we  only  bear  in  mind 
how  they  will  bring  reward  a thousand-fold  through- 
out all  eternity.  Do  not  whine,  but  thank  God  every 


160 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


time  it  is  your  privilege  to  suffer  for  Clirist,  and 
the  more  you  suffer  the  more  rejoice.  The  oppor- 
tunity to  suffer  for  Christ  or  for  the  truth  is  an 
opportunity  for  an  investment  that  pays  an  eternal 
dividend. 

Again,  if  we  would  have  a thoroughly  satisfactory 
and  glorious  eternity,  we  must  use  our  money  for 
Jesus  Christ.  The  use  we  make  of  our  money  in  the 
life  that  now  is,  enriches  or  impoverishes  our  eter- 
nity. The  Apostle  Paul  says  in  i Timothy  6:  17-19, 
‘‘  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this  present  world, 
that  they  be  not  high-minded,  nor  have  their  hope  set 
on  the  uncertainty  of  riches,  but  on  God,  who  giveth 
us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy;  that  they  do  good,  that 
they  be  rich  in  good  works,  that  they  be  ready  to  dis- 
tribute, willing  to  communicate;  laying  up  in  store 
for  themselves  a good  foundation  against  the  time  to 
come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is  life 
indeed.’’  And  the  Lord  Jesus  says  in  Matthew  6 : 19, 
20,  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon  the 
earth,  where  moth  and  rust  consume,  and  where 
thieves  break  through  and  steal : but  lay  up  for  your- 
selves treasures  in  Heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor 
rust  doth  consume,  and  where  thieves  do  not  break 
through  nor  steal.”  How  few  people  seem  to  realize 
that  they  are  making  their  eternity  by  their  use  of 
their  money  here  on  earth,  but  it  is  so.  I think  some 
of  us  will  look  back  with  regret  from  the  other  world 
and  say,  ‘‘  What  a fool  I was  to  invest  my  money  in 
houses  and  lands  and  jewels  and  luxuries,  in  gew- 
gaws and  trinkets,  when  I might  have  invested  it  so 
it  would  be  paying  me  interest  to-day.” 

Men  and  women,  the  greatest  practical  question 


TIME  AND  ETEENITY  CONTEASTED  161 


that  confronts  you  and  me  is  where  shall  we  spend 
eternity  and  how  shall  we  spend  eternity  ? Will  you 
spend  eternity  in  heaven  or  will  you  spend  eternity  in 
hell?  Will  you  spend  it  in  joy  and  glory  unutterable, 
or  will  you  spend  it  in  misery  and  shame  unutterable  ? 
Time  is  nothing  comparable  with  eternity.  Ten, 
twenty,  eighty  years  is  nothing  compared  with  eter- 
nity— eternity — eternity*  That  is  the  all-important 
matter.  Where  you  will  spend  eternity  and  how  you 
will  spend  eternity  will  be  determined  by  your  action 
in  this  life;  it  may  be  determined,  it  will  be  in  a 
measure  determined  by  your  action  to-day.  What 
you  do  to-day  is  of  tremendous  importance.  If  you 
have  not  already  accepted  Christ,  accept  Him  now. 
And  even  if  you  have  accepted  Christ,  but  have  been 
serving  Him  in  a half-hearted  way,  give  yourself  up 
wholly  to  Him  from  this  time  henceforward.  If  you 
have  been  holding  back  from  sacrificing  for  Christ, 
make  the  sacrifice  at  once.  I desire  with  all  my  heart 
that  my  eternity  be  just  as  rich,  just  as  full,  just  as 
glorious  as  possible,  and  by  God's  grace  I am  going 
to  make  it  so,  whatever  it  costs. 


X 


ETERNAL  LIFE  OR  THE  WRATH  OF  GOD: 
WHICH  WILL  YOU  CHOOSE? 

“He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting 
life;  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see 
life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.” — ^John 

3:36. 

/l|r  TE  have  in  these  words  of  God  a most  vivid 
Y \/\/  contrast.  I know  of  no  verse  in  the  Bible 
▼ ▼ that  is  more  full  of  glory  in  the  first  part 

of  it  and  more  full  of  darkest  despair  in  the  last  part 
of  it.  It  presents  God's  alternative,  an  alternative 
open  to  all,  “ eternal  life  " for  all  those  who  believe 
on  the  Son,  the  wrath  of  God  " for  those  who  re- 
fuse to  believe  Him.  It  leaves  each  one  of  us  to 
choose  which  we  shall  have. 

' One  of  the  most  meaningful  and  glorious  phrases 
fhat  was  ever  uttered  is  that  which  was  so  often  upon 
the  lips  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  “ eternal  life one 
of  the  most  awful  and  appalling  phrases  ever  uttered 
is  that  other  phrase  which  occurs  in  our  text,  “ the 
wrath  of  God.'^  It  cannot  be  put  into  words,  it  can- 
not be  even  conceived  in  fancy,  the  wealth  of  glory 
there  is  wrapped  up  in  those  two  words  ‘‘  eternal 
life,"  nor  can  it  be  put  into  words,  nor  can  it  be  con- 
ceived by  human  imagination  the  depth  of  dishonour, 
horror,  shame,  woe  and  despair,  that  is  wrapped  up 

152 


ETEEFAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  t 163 


in  that  other  phrase  “ the  wrath  of  God.”  It  is  be- 
tween these  two,  the  unutterably  glorious  “eternal 
life”  and  the  immeasurably  and  unspeakably  awful 
“ wrath  of  God,”  that  each  of  us  to-night  is  called  to 
make  his  choice : “ He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life;  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him.” 

The  question  then  that  confronts  each  of  us  in  this 
place  to-night  is  this.  Eternal  Life  or  the  Wrath  of 
God? 

Which  shall  it  be?  Which  shall  I choose?  That 
should  not  be  a difficult  question  to  settle.  If  any 
man  is  not  a hopeless  fool  or  an  utter  maniac  he  will 
certainly  say,  “ Give  me  eternal  life : as  for  the  wrath 
of  God,  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  God,  save  me  from  that.” 
But  that  is  not  the  choice  that  some  of  you  who  are 
here  to-night  really  are  making.  You  are  deliberately 
turning  your  backs  on  eternal  life,  and  you  have  been 
turning  your  backs  on  eternal  life  for  years.  Some 
of  you  are  deliberately  choosing  the  wrath  of  God 
and  you  have  been  choosing  the  wrath  of  God  for 
years.  How  can  we  doubt  the  existence  of  a personal 
devil  of  great  cunning  and  great  power  when  we  see 
how  men  are  so  utterly  blinded  and  deceived  by  his 
cunning  and  so  completely  enslaved  mentally  by  his 
power,  that  they  choose  the  wrath  of  God  rather 
than  eternal  life?  The  existence  of  such  a devil  as 
the  Bible  presents  is  the  only  rational  explanation  of 
this  indubitable  fact.  You  question  the  existence  of 
a personal  devil,  yet  you  yourselves  are  living  demon- 
strations of  his  existence  and  of  his  marvelous  cun- 
jiing  and  his  exceedingly  great  power. 


164 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


I.  The  Things  Contrasted.) 

Now  let  us  look  more  closely  at  the  two  possibili- 
ties that  are  put  in  such  vivid  contrast.  We  cannot 
possibly  conceive  the  glory  of  the  one  or  the  horror 
of  the  other,  but  we  can  get  some  hint  of  what  they 
paean. 

^ I.  First  of  all,  ^‘eternal  life,’"  what  is  it? 

(i)  In  the  first  place,  Eternal  Life  is  Real  Life. 
In  I Timothy  6:  19  Paul  says,  ‘'lay  hold  on  eternal 
life.’'  The  Revised  Version  translates  this  differ- 
ently. It  reads,  “ lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is  life 
indeed.^^  The  Revised  Version  gives  the  correct 
translation,  and  that  is  what  Eternal  Life  is,  **  Life 
Indeed,”  life  not  merely  in  seeming  but  life  in  reality. 
Much  that  we  call  life  is  not  really  life  at  all,  but 
death.  Many  a young  man  or  woman  plunges  into 
a life  of  gaiety,  worldliness  and  sin  and  cries  as  he 
does  it,  “ I am  going  to  see  life  for  myself."  No, 
you  are  not  going  to  see  life,  you  are  going  to  see 
death.  Paul  was  right  when  he  said,  “ She  that  liveth 
in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth"  (i  Tim.  5:6). 
It  is  really  God  who  says  it,  God  speaking  through 
Paul.  It  is  not  life  that  you  see  in  the  saloon  with 
its  carousals,  it  is  death.  It  is  not  life  that  you  see 
in  the  gambling  hell  with  its  strange  fascination  and 
intense  excitement,  it  is  death.  It  is  not  life  that 
you  see  in  the  theatre  with  its  appeal  to  your  lust 
and  your  impure  fancy,  with  its  many  times  married 
actresses,  with  their  fair  faces  and  foul  hearts,  and 
with  its  actors  who  are  so  often  the  wreckers  of 
happy  homes,  it  is  death.  It  is  not  life  that  you  see 
in  the  movies  with  their  constant  appeal  to  all  that 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 166 


is  lowest  and  vilest  in  men  and  women,  it  is  death* 
It  is  not  life  that  you  see  in  the  ballroom  where  sup- 
posedly decent  women  permit  a familiarity  of  ap- 
proach and  contact  that  is  nowhere  else  permitted 
except  by  the  most  indecent  women,  it  is  death.  It 
is  not  life  that  you  see  in  the  costly  receptions  of 
the  rich  with  their  vain  display  of  jewels  and  fine 
apparel,  and  with  their  so  frequently  disgusting  and 
shocking  immodesty  in  dress,  it  is  death.  Anywhere 
and  everywhere  a life  of  sin  is  death,  a life  of  self- 
ishness is  death,  a life  of  pleasure  is  death  (i  Titus 
5:6),  a life  of  worldliness  is  death;  it  is  not  life,  it 
is  death.  But  ‘‘  eternal  life  really  is  life,  it  is  life 
indeed,"'  it  deserves  the  name  life,  and  no  one  really 
knows  what  life  is  who  has  not  received  eternal  life 
through  Jesus  Christ  Our  Lord.  Eternal  Life  is 
Life  Indeed. 

l,{2)  In  the  second  place.  Eternal  life  is  fullness  of 
life.  It  is  life  abundant.  Jesus  once  said,  I came 
that  they  may  have  life,  and  may  have  it  abundantly  " 
(John  10:10,  R.  V.).  Eternal  Life  is  life  full  of 
beauty,  full  of  peace,  full  of  joy,  full  of  power, 
full  of  glory,  abundant  life,  abounding  life,  overflow- 
ing life. 

y (3)  In  the  third  place.  Eternal  Life  is  satisfying 
life.  No  life  but  Eternal  Life  can  ever  satisfy  the 
longing  and  capacity  of  these  souls  of  ours  made  in 
the  likeness  of  God.  No  life  that  is  purely  earthly, 
no  life  that  we  inherit  from  our  ancestors,  no  matter 
how  fine  they  may  have  been  and  how  refined  in 
character,  no  life  but  the  life  we  derive  directly  from 
God  when  we  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  no  life 
but  Eternal  Life  can  satisfy  the  infinite  yearnings  of 


166 


THE^GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


these  spirits  of  ours  made  originally  in  the  image  of 
God,  and  that  still  in  the  most  depraved  of  us  in  their 
infinite  longings  retain  traces  of  that  divine  image  in 
which  we  were  made.  “ Give  me  wealth,”  one  man 
cries,  ‘‘  and  I shall  be  satisfied.”  ‘‘  Give  me  power/^ 
another  cries,  ‘‘  and  I shall  be  satisfied.”  Give  me 
pleasure,”  another  cries,  “ and  I shall  be  satisfied/^ 
Give  me  fame,”  another  cries,  and  I shall  be  sat- 
isfied.” No,  you  will  not  be  satisfied  with  any  of 
these  nor  with  all  of  these.  You  would  far  better 
cry,  “ Give  me  God  and  I shall  be  satisfied,  give  me 
Eternal  Life  and  I shall  be  satisfied.”  Oh!  how 
many  I have  known  to  whom  this  world  seemed  to 
have  given  all  that  it  had  to  give — ^but  they  were  not 
satisfied.  And  how  many  I have  known  to  whom 
this  world  had  given  very  little  of  all  it  has  to  give, 
and  yet  they  were  satisfied;  for  they  had  God  and 
they  had  Eternal  Life. 

X /(4)  In  the  fourth  place.  Eternal  Life  is  life  of 
highest  knowledge.  Our  Lord  brings  that  out  in  a 
wonderful  way  in  an  utterance  that  He  made  at  one 
of  the  supreme  moments  of  His  life,  in  His  prayer 
with  His  disciples  the  night  before  His  crucifixion, 
when  as  He  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven  and  spoke 
to  the  Father  He  said,  ""  This  is  eternal  life,  that  they 
should  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  him  whom 
thou  didst  send,  even  Jesus  Christ”  (John  17:3, 
R.  V.).  Eternal  life  is  full  knowledge  of  the  In- 
finite, The  knowledge  the  most  erudite  scholar  has 
gathered  from  books,  the  knowledge  the  profoundest 
philosopher  has  reasoned  out  for  himself  in  his  rea- 
sonings, the  knowledge  the  most  brilliant  scientist  has 
discovered  as  he  studied  the  rocks  beneath  his  feet 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 157 


or  the  stars  above  his  head,  is  nothing  to  the  knowl- 
edge that  the  humblest  man  or  woman  obtains  who 
enters  into  Eternal  Life,  knowledge  of  God,  full 
knowledge  of  the  Infinite. 

(5)  In  the  fifth  place.  Eternal  Life  is  perfect  life, 
completeness  of  life.  It  is  life  in  its  perfection,  in 
its  completeness.  All  other  life  than  the  Eternal 
Life  which  we  receive  when  we  receive  Jesus  Christ 
is  partial,  fragmentary,  unsymmetrical,  unbalanced, 
incomplete.  ''Eternal  life”  is  life  perfected,  filled 
out,  symmetrical,  perfectly  balanced,  complete.  We 
have  a suggestion  of  this  in  the  words  of  Paul  to 
Timothy  in  2 Timothy  3:15-17  where  he  says, 
‘‘  From  a babe  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures 
which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation 
through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Every  scrip- 
ture is  inspired  of  God  and  is  profitable  for  teaching, 
for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  which  is 
in  righteousness ; that  the  man  of  God  may  be  com- 
plete, furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work.’’ 
Here  we  see  that  a saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ 
comes  through  the  written  Word,  and  thus  Eternal 
Life  comes  through  the  Word,  as  John  puts  it  in 
John  20:31,  these  are  written,  that  ye  might  be- 
lieve that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and 
that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name.” 
And  we  further  see  that  by  receiving  the  Eternal 
Life  through  the  Word  a man  becomes  complete,” 
obtains  complete  life.  Eternal  Life. 

(6)  In  the  sixth  place,  Eternal  Life  is  Divine  life, 
the  very  life  of  God  imparted  to  us.  The  Apostle 
John  says  in  his  first  epistle,  the  first  chapter  and  the 
second  verse,  and  the  life  was  manifested  (that  is 


168 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


manifested  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ),  and  we 
have  seen  and  bear  witness,  and  declare  unto  you  the 
life,  the  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  and 
was  manifested  unto  us/'  Eternal  Life  then  is  the 
life  of  the  infinitely  Holy  and  Blessed  God,  the  In- 
finite Life,  imparted  to  us.  Oh ! it  is  wonderful,  it  is 
amazing!  Oh!  think  of  it,  that  it  is  your  privilege 
and  my  privilege,  the  privilege  of  me,  a poor  sinner, 
an  ignoramus,  a worm  of  the  dust,  one  whose  heart 
was  once  set  upon  the  silly  follies  of  the  world  and 
revolting  sin,  to  have  the  life  of  the  Blessed  God, 
the  very  life  of  God  Himself,  mind  you,  this  Infinite 
Life,  imparted  to  me ! 

(7)  In  the  seventh  place.  Eternal  Life  is  endless 
life.  Endlessness  is  not  the  most  essential  character- 
istic of  Eternal  Life,  its  quality  is  more  than  its 
duration,  but  nevertheless  it  is  endless.  I thank  God 
it  is.  I thank  God  that  He  offers  me  a life  that  is 
not  only  infinite  in  its  quality  but  endless  in  its  dura- 
tion. I cannot  be  satisfied  with  anything  that  ever 
comes  to  an  end.  I love  flowers.  I look  in  joy  upon 
the  little  daisy  in  the  grass,  on  the  pansy  with  its 
happy,  sweetly  speaking  face,  upon  the  lily  of  the 
valley,  in  its  modesty  and  purity  and  matchless  beauty, 
to  me  the  dearest  of  all  flowers,  upon  the  rose  in  its 
rich,  superb  splendour;  but,  as  I look  upon  an  ex- 
quisite bunch  of  roses,  sadness  steals  over  me  for  I 
cannot  but  think  how  soon  they  will  fade.  Leaf 
by  leaf,  the  roses  fall;  drop  by  drop,  the  springs  run 
dry.”  I love  Nature,  especially  the  glorious  beauty 
of  a sunset  in  the  mountains  or  by  the  sea.  But  as 
I look  at  the  green  and  the  crimson,  the  azure  and 
the  gold  and  it  seems  as  if  the  very  gates  of  heaven 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 159 


were  about  to  swing  open,  it  all  fades,  and  it  is  night 
and  I am  chill  and  lonely.  I love  high  and  noble  and 
ennobling  human  friendships  (in  which  I have  been 
peculiarly  favoured  of  God)  ; but  a few  years  pass 
and  they  are  broken  by  separation  or  by  death  and  it 
is  all  over,  and  nothing  but  a memory  and  a heartache 
remain. 

So  it  is  with  everything  of  earth,  it  ends.  Thank 
God  for  something  that  never  ends,  something  that 
always  has  in  it  the  freshness  of  the  dawn,  some- 
thing that  ever  stretches  on  and  on  and  on  into  the 
illimitable  spaces  of  ever  increasing  glory  before  you. 
Thank  God  for  everlasting  life,''  Such  then  is 
eternal  life,  real  life,  fullness  of  life,  satisfying  life, 
life  of  highest  knowledge,  complete  life,  the  life  of 
God  imparted  to  us,  and  life  that  never  ends.  Do 
you  not  desire  it?  Do  you  not  desire  it  with  an  in- 
tensity that  will  not  take  No’'  for  an  answer?  I 
do.  I would,  if  necessary,  sacrifice  everything  I hold 
dear  on  earth  to  obtain  it,  and  still  think  I had  made 
a good  bargain  even  if  it  should  cost  me  the  sacrifice 
of  everything  that  men  hold  dear  on  earth.  Thank 
God  Eternal  Life  is  mine ! It  is  mine ! It  is  mine ! 
I have  it  now.  I already  have  it  in  its  beginnings 
and  I have  the  sure  promise  of  its  fullness.  I shall 
never  lose  it  (John  10:28,  29).  Will  you  have  it 
tjpo? 

2.  Now  let  us  look  at  the  other  experience  that 
is  offered  us,  The  wrath  of  God."  What  is  that? 

It  is  just  what  the  words  express.  I have  given  a 
good  deal  of  study  to  the  etymology  and  the  usage 
of  the  Greek  word  which  is  rendered  wrath " in 
this  verse.  It  means  the  intense  and  settled  dis- 


160 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


pleasure  of  God,  the  intense  displeasure  of  that  in- 
finitely Holy  Being  Who  created  us  and  all  things,  and 
Who  has  the  absolute  control  of  all  the  powers  and 
forces  of  the  universe.  Every  true  and  wise  husband 
dreads  the  displeasure  of  his  wife,  that  is,  he  would 
not  if  it  could  be  avoided  do  anything  to  incur  her 
displeasure.  Every  true  and  wise  citizen  dreads  the 
displeasure  of  his  government.  Every  true  son 
dreads  the  displeasure  of  his  father.  But  how  much 
more  will  every  man  of  understanding  and  of  char- 
acter dread  ‘‘  the  wrath  of  God.''  The  Wrath  of 
God!  There  is  nothing  more  awful  than  that.  To 
have  yon  infinitely  Holy  One  displeased  with  you ; to 
have  yon  Holy  Being,  before  whom  the  seraphim 
veil  their  faces  and  cry,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  is  the 
Lord  God  Almighty,’'  displeased  with  you;  to  have 
yon  omnipotent  and  infinite  ruler  of  the  universe 
displeased  with  you;  to  have  yon  mighty  One  who 
holds  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars,  and  all  the 
myriad  systems  of  worlds  of  light  that  stud  the 
illimitable  expanse  of  heaven,  in  the  hollow  of  His 
hand,  as  they  move  through  space  with  incredible 
momentum  displeased  with  you ; to  have  yon  infinitely 
wise  ruler  and  shaper  of  the  whole  history  of  this 
tiny  ball  that  we  call  the  earth  displeased  with  you; 
yes,  to  have  God  displeased  with  you,  to  incur  His 
wrath,  His  intense,  deep-seated  settled  displeasure, 
that  is  awful!  That  is  appalling!  But  that  is  cer- 
tainly what  stares  in  the  face  to-night  many  a man 
and  many  a woman  in  this  audience.  The  wrath 
OF  God.”  Gather  your  thoughts  together.  Think  of 
it!  Will  you  have  it?  Will  you  choose  it? 

Here  then  there  are  before  you  the  two  alternatives. 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 161 


On  the  one  hand  Eternal  Life,  real  life,  fullness  of 
life,  satisfying  life,  life  of  highest  knowledge,  com- 
plete life,  the  life  of  God,  never  ending  life,  blessed- 
ness and  glory.  Eternal  Life.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Wrath  of  God,  the  intense,  deep-seated,  settled  dis- 
pleasure of  the  All  Holy  One,  the  Maker  and 
Governor  of  the  Universe.  Which  will  you  choose  ? 
If  you  choose  the  latter,  some  day  you  will  be  among 
those  who  are  described  as  saying  ‘‘  to  the  mountains 
and  to  the  rocks.  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the 
face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  and  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb : for  the  great  day  of  their  wrath 
is  come;  and  who  is  able  to  stand? ''  (Rev.  6:15). 

II.  How  One  Determines  Whether  Eternal 
Life  or  the  Wrath  of  God  Shall  be  His 
Portion. 

Now  we  come  to  the  question,  and  it  is  a tre- 
mendously important  question.  By  what  act  do  we 
determine  whether  Eternal  Life  or  The  Wrath  of 
God  is  to  be  our  portion?  Listen  to  God’s  own  an- 
swer to  this  immensely  important  question.  It  is  not 
the  answer  of  all  modern  philosophers,  it  is  not  the 
answer  of  all  modern  theologians,  it  is  not  the  answer 
of  all  modern  preachers,  but  it  is  God's  answer  and 
therefore  it  is  true.  You  will  find  that  answer  in  the 
words  of  our  text,  he  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  eternal  life;  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him.”  Nothing  could  be  plainer  or  more  simple  or 
more  unmistakable  than  this  answer.  The  one  and 
only  act  by  which  we  get  Eternal  Life  is  the  act  of 
believing  on  the  Son  of  God,  believing  on  Jesus 


162 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE'  TO-DAY 


Christ.  The  one  and  only  act  by  which  jve  lose 
Eternal  Life  and  bring  upon  ourselves  the  abiding 
“ wrath  of  Ck>d  ” is  by  refusing  to  believe  on  Jesus 
Christ. 

Whosoever  believeth  on  Jesus  Christ  gets  Eternal 
Life.  There  it  stands  in  God’s  sure  Word  in  lan- 
guage a child  can  understand,  “ he  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  hath  eternal  life,”  irrespective  of  who  he  is 
or  what  he  is,  irrespective  of  what  he  has  been  or 
what  he  has  done.  He  may  be  a millionaire  or  he 
may  be  a pauper,  he  may  be  a scholar  or  he  may  be 
unable  to  read  or  write,  he  may  be  moral  and  upright 
and  clean,  or  he  may  be  immoral  and  dishonest  and 
vile,  but  the  moment  any  man  or  woman  or  child 
believes  on  the  Son,  believes  on  Jesus  Christ,  that 
moment  that  person  gets  eternal  life,  they  get  the 
actual  experience  of  the  beginnings  of  it,  and  the  full- 
ness that  awaits  them  in  the  world  to  come  is  assured. 
Any  man,  any  woman  may  get  eternal  life  right  now. 
You  may  get  eternal  life  before  you  read  another 
page  in  this  book  if  you  desire  to  do  so  and  you  can 
have  that  perfect  assurance  that  comes  from  know- 
ing that  you  have  God’s  own  Word  back  of  you  when 
you  say  it. 

But  what  is  it  to  believe  on  the  Son  of  God?  It  is 
to  accept  God’s  testimony  about  Jesus  Christ,  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  act  upon 
that  testimony  by  putting  your  full  and  absolute  con- 
fidence in  Him  Who  is  so  entirely  worthy  of  your 
confidence,  and  therefore  accepting  Him  to  be  to 
yourselves  all  that  He  offers  Himself  to  be,  your 
crucified  Saviour,  Who  bore  every  one  of  your  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  cross  and  thus  settled  them. 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 163 


your  risen  Saviour  Who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and 
on  earth,  and  is  therefore  able  to  keep  you  day  by 
day,  and  your  absolute  Lord  and  Master,  to  whom 
you  surrender  the  entire  control  of  your  thoughts 
and  life.  Believing  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  put- 
ting  your  confidence  in  Him,  It  leads  you  to  entrust 
to  Him  your  salvation,  and  to  entrust  to  Him  your 
whole  self.  Believing  on  the  Son  of  God  will  lead 
you  to  go  right  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
say  to  Him,  Lord  Jesus,  I believe  God’s  testimony 
about  you,  that  you  are  God’s  Son,  and  that  you  bore 
my  sins  in  your  own  body  on  the  cross,  and  that  you 
rose  again  and  are  a living  Saviour  to-day,  and  I 
commit  myself  to  Thee  to  save,  and  keep  and  guide 
and  teach  and  govern,  to  do  what  you  will  with  me. 
I put  my  trust  in  Thee  to  save  me  from  the  guilt  of 
sin  by  Thine  atoning  death,  I put  my  trust  in  Thee 
to  save  me  from  the  power  of  sin  day  by  day  by  Thy 
resurrection  power,  I surrender  to  Thee  the  entire 
control  of  my  life  and  thoughts.”  It  is  this  unre- 
served committal  of  yourself  to  Jesus  Christ  that 
brings  Eternal  Life,  and  when  you  make  it  you  can 
say  with  Paul,  “ I know  whom  I have  believed,  and 
am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I 
have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day”  (2  Tim. 
1 : 12). 

Will  you  take  that  decisive  step?  You  have  every 
reason  for  believing  on  the  Son  of  God.  The  testi- 
mony that  He  really  is  the  Son  of  God,  God’s  own 
testimony  to  that  fact,  is  unanswerable.  Will  you 
yield  to  the  testimony  and  believe  on  Him? 

Now  what  is  the  act  by  which  we  bring  upon  our- 
selves the  wrath  of  God  ? Oh ! the  answer  to  that  is 


164 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


so  plain.  Here  it  is : “ He  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him/"  The  Revised  Version  renders  it,  he  that 
obeyeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  on  him/"  The  truth  is  in  both  the 
Authorized  and  the  Revised,  but  neither  the  Author- 
ized nor  the  Revised  give  the  exact  force  of  the  word 
which  is  translated  “ believeth  not ""  in  the  one  case, 
and  obeyeth  not ""  in  the  other.  The  word  so  trans- 
lated means  to  refuse  to  be  persuaded,  or  to  refuse 
to  believe,  so  exactly  translated  it  would  be,  but  he 
that  refuseth  to  believe  (or,  disbelieveth)  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him/"  The  thought  is  that  those  who  have  heard  of 
Him  and  do  not  believe  are  responsible  for  not  be- 
lieving, for  they  have  refused  to  be  persuaded  by  the 
evidence,  they  have  refused  to  yield  to  the  evidence, 
they  have  refused  to  believe.  That  is  the  exact  truth 
about  every  one  who  goes  on  without  believing  on 
the  Son  of  God,  without  putting  their  confidence  in 
the  Son  of  God,  without  accepting  the  Son  of  God  as 
their  Saviour,  their  Lord,  their  King. 

You  have  had  abundant  evidence  that  He  is  the 
Son  of  God.  You  have  had  abundant  evidence  that 
He  can  save  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  but 
through  love  of  the  world  or  love  of  sin  or  fear  of 
man  or  for  some  other  reason  you  refuse  to  believe, 
you  will  not  believe  on  the  Son.  Well,  if  you  will 
not  believe  on  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  if  you  continue  to  refuse  to  yield  to  the  evi- 
dence that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  with 
that  real  faith  that  leads  to  obedience  to  His  Word 
and  trust  in  Himself,  you  will  not  get  eternal  life. 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OF  GOD  ? 166 


No,  not  only  that,  but  you  will  get  ‘"the  wrath  of 

Godr 

Do  you  believe  Jesus  Christ?  Do  you  believe  Him 
with  that  real  faith  that  leads  you  to  act  upon  what 
He  says,  with  that  faith  that  leads  you  to  put  your 
unhesitating  confidence  in  His  promises,  and  to  yield 
unquestioning  obedience  to  His  commands,  and  to 
put  your  confidence  in  Himself?  If  not,  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  upon ""  you.  It  makes  absolutely  no 
difference  who  or  what  you  are.  You  may  not  be  a 
criminal,  you  may  not  be  a moral  monster,  you  may 
not  be  low  and  selfish  and  dishonest,  you  may  not 
be  contemptible  and  mean;  you  may  be  refined,  you 
may  be  cultivated,  you  may  be  highly  cultured,  you 
may  be  a university  student  or  university  professor, 
you  may  be  amiable,  you  may  be  gentlemanly  or 
ladylike,  you  may  be  true  and  kind  and  generous, 
but  if  you  do  not  believe  on  the  Son  of  God,  if  you 
refuse  to  be  persuaded  by  His  words  and  to  put  con- 
fidence in  Himself  as  your  atoning  Saviour,  your 
risen  Saviour,  to  obey  Him,  if  you  are  not  ready  to 
act  upon  His  every  word,  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
upon ''  you.  The  wrath  of  God,  the  deep,  settled, 
intense  displeasure  of  God  is  resting  upon  every  man 
and  woman,  young  and  old,  who  does  not  put  con- 
fidence in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
and  stand  ready  to  act  upon  His  every  word.  “ He 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life ; but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.’’  Oh!  it  is  awful! 
awful!  awful! 

If  we  could  represent  God’s  wrath  by  a black  thun- 
der cloud,  and  could  see  things  as  they  really  are,  we 
would  see  a blacker  storm  cloud  than  human  eye 


166 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


ever  beheld  hanging  over  the  head  of  many  a man 
and  many  a woman  in  this  audience  to-night,  ready 
to  break.  I have  been  an  eye  witness  of  some  terrific 
storms  on  sea  and  land.  I was  once  in  a house  that 
was  struck  by  lightning,  and  at  another  time  I was 
standing  in  the  door  of  another  house  when  the 
lightning  struck  and  splintered  a great  oak  a few  feet 
away,  and  a part  of  the  lightning  passed  through  the 
very  door  where  I was  standing.  One  summer  at 
Northfield,  I had  to  go  out  into  an  electric  storm  to 
quiet  a horse  that  was  trembling  like  a leaf,  and  take 
him  from  underneath  a tree,  and  the  lightning  in  a 
short  time  struck  three  times  within  sight  of  where 
I stood. 

But  I had  a dream  one  night  far  more  terrible 
than  anything  I ever  saw  in  life.  It  was  more  than 
twenty  years  ago  but  I remember  it  vividly  even 
yet,  and  the  appalling  horror  that  swept  over  me  in 
the  midst  of  the  dream.  Enormous  bags  of  black, 
smoke-like,  cyclonic  clouds  with  ragged  edges  rolled 
up  full  of  wind  and  electricity,  and  every  moment  I 
expected  to  see  one  burst  and  shoot  down  with  deaf- 
ening reverberation  awful  death  upon  my  poor  de- 
voted head.  That  awful  dream  that  made  my  blood 
fairly  run  cold  even  in  my  sleep,  is  I believe  only  a 
faint  picture  of  every  man  and  woman  in  this  house 
to-night  who  is  out  of  Christ.  ‘‘  The  wrath  of  God 
abideth  upon  ” you.  That  awful  storm  cloud  full  of 
lightning,  thunder,  death,  shame,  woe,  despair,  hangs 
over  your  head  to-night,  ready  to  burst.  But  God  is 
long-suffering  and  merciful.  He  ‘‘  is  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish ''  (2  Pet.  3:9),  and  holds  back  the 
execution  of  His  long  pent-up  wrath.  Nay  more,  He 


ETEENAL  LIFE  OE  WEATH  OP  GOD  f 167 


offers  you  eternal  life,  real  life,  fullness  of  life,  per- 
fectly satisfying  life,  life  of  highest  knowledge,  com- 
plete life.  His  own  life,  endless  life,  infinite  life,  life 
of  measureless  joy  and  beauty  and  power  and  glory 
instead.  Which  will  you  have.  Eternal  Life  or  the 
Wrath  of  God?  Do  I hear  some  one  mutter,  I do 
not  like  that  kind  of  preaching.  I do  not  believe  it” 
Then  you  are  giving  the  lie  to  God ; for  it  is  not  I, 
it  is  God  who  says,  ‘‘  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life:  and  he  that  believeth  not  the 
Son  shall  not  see  life ; but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him."'  Oh!  men  and  women,  there  are  two  pos- 
sibilities open  before  you  to-night,  one  infinitely 
glorious,  the  other  inconceivably  appalling.  Eternal 
Life  or  the  Wrath  of  God,  which  will  you  take? 


14^  XI 

A PERFECT  CURE  FOR  POVERTY  AND  ALL 
OTHER  EVILS  OF  THE  DAY 


Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon 
you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I am  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart:  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For 
my  yoke  is  easy  and  my  burden  is  light/' 

— Matthew  i i : 28-30. 


n 


UMAN  life  is  full  of  Evils ; Poverty,  Sick- 
ness, Bereavement,  Failure,  Bitterness  of 
Heart,  Despair,  Death.  If  we  could  see  all 
the  tears  that  have  been  shed  in  America  to-day,  hear 
all  the  sighs  and  groans  and  wails  and  shrieks  that 
have  been  uttered,  witness  the  dumb  heart-breaking 
and  despair  that  have  found  no  visible  or  audible  ex- 
pression, we  would  believe  in  Hell.  Not  in  a hell 
lying  beyond  the  grave,  but  a hell  existing  right  here 
and  just  now.  That  might  make  it  easier  for  us  to 
Is^eve  in  a hell  hereafter. 

\7  But  is  there  no  cure  ? Must  this  all  go  on  and  on 
forever?  No!  it  need  not  go  on.  There  is  a perfect 
cure  for  all  the  ills  that  man  is  heir  to.  There  is  a 
cure  that  is  sovereign,  sufficient,  sure  and  speedy. 
Jesus  Christ  announced  that  cure  nearly  nineteen 
hundred  years  ago,  but  the  overwhelming  majority 

168 


A PEEPECT  CXJEE  FOE  POVEETY  169 


of  men  and  women  have  not  listened,  and  so  our 
evils,  and  miseries  and  despair  continue.  You  will 
find  this  cure  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  proposed 
for  all  our  ills  in  Matthew  1 1 : 28-30,  “ Come  unto 
me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and 
learn  of  me ; for  I am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart : and 
ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is 
easy  and  my  burden  is  light.’'  Christ  Jesus  Him- 
self IS  THE  CURE  FOR  ALL  OUR  EVILS.  He  came  to 
'‘destroy  the  works  of  the  Devil”  (i  John  3:8). 
He  does  it  for  all  who  receive  Him.  Poverty,  sick- 
ness, bereavement,  failure,  bitterness  of  heart,  despair 
and  death,  as  well  as  sin  and  unbelief,  are  all  works 
of  the  devil,  and  we  can  have  done  with  them  by 
coming  to  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  God. 

I propose  to  take  up  these  various  Evils  and  show 
how  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  God,  is  the  Cure  for  them 
all  and  how  each  one  of  us  may  be  done  with  them 
right  now. 

I.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Cure  for  Sin. 

^JVe  begin  with  the  greatest  of  all  Evils,  sin.  Men 
tell  us  Poverty  is  an  evil,  and  I believe  it.  They  tell 
us  Sickness  is  an  Evil,  and  I believe  that  too.  But 
the  monster  evil,  the  evil  that  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
other  evils,  is  Sin.  Sin  is  the  first  great  evil  to  be 
gotten  rid  of.  The  preachers  of  the  so-called  “ So- 
cial Gospel,”  and  all  these  philanthropists  who  are 
trying  to  lift  men  out  of  their  miseries  while  leaving 
them  in  their  sins,  mean  well,  but  they  are  attempt- 
ing the  impossible,  and  must  meet  finally  with  utter 
disappointment.  It  is  like  trying  to  rid  men  of  some 


170 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


sickness  by  attacking  the  symptoms  and  not  going  to 
the  root  of  the  disease  itself.  It  is  like  trying  to  cure 
the  smallpox  by  merely  painting  the  pustules.  Sin  is 
the  radical  evil,  the  root  evil,  so  we  begin  there  to- 
night, and  that  is  where  we  all  need  to  begin  in  our 
own  lives.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  cure  for  sin. 

1 1.  In  the  first  place,  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Cure  for 
Sin  in  the  individual.  He  is  the  Cure  for  Sin  in 
every  individual  who  will  take  the  remedy. 

First  of  all,  Christ  Jesus  saves  from  the  guilt  of 
Sin,  Sin  cuts  men  off  from  God.  God  is  infinitely 
Holy  and  so  Sin  makes  a great  gulf  between  us  and 
the  Holy  Being  who  rules  this  universe,  the  Being 
whom  we  call  God,  the  only  Being  who  is  worthy  to 
be  called  God.  Separated  from  God,  cast  off  from 
His  grace  and  power,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  fight 
Sin  in  our  own  strength.  But  Jesus  Christ  removes 
the  barrier  between  us  and  God.  He  takes  our  guilt 
upon  Himself  and  therefore  as  soon  as  we  take  Him 
as  our  Sin-bearer  we  have  again  perfect  access  to 
God  and  to  His  strengthening,  delivering  and  trans- 
forming grace.  We  read  in  Galatians  3 ; 13,  ‘‘  Christ 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  be- 
come a curse  for  us : for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  hangeth  on  a tree.’*  And  we  read  again  in 
2 Corinthians  5:21,  Him  who  knew  no  sin,  he 
(i,  e,,  God)  made  to  be  sin  on  our  behalf;  that  we 
might  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.” 

One  day,  some  years  ago,  I heard  a man  who  was 
brought  up  in  childhood  as  a thief,  who  had  spent 
years  in  prison  in  various  states  in  the  Union,  and 
also  in  other  lands,  but  who  had  been  brought  to  see 
that  God  loved  him  vile  as  he  was,  and  that  Jesus 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETY  171 


had  died  for  him,  tell  the  story  how  faith  in  this 
Christ,  Christ  Jesus,  had  opened  to  him  the  way  to 
God  and  to  salvation.  Thousands  upon  thousands 
could  tell  essentially  similar  stories.  Christ  Jesus  is 
beyond  question,  on  the  testimony  of  countless,  com- 
petent witnesses,  a cure  for  the  guilt  of  sin. 

This  last  week  I was  standing  on  the  street 
waiting  for  a car,  and  a man  stepped  up  to  me  and 
began  to  talk  to  me,  and  I thought  at  first  he  was 
going  to  talk  about  the  common  subjects  of  the  day, 
as  so  many  do.  But  instead  of  that  he  at  once  asked, 
‘‘  Do  you  think  a man  can  sin  away  the  day  of 
grace  I looked  into  his  face  and  into  the  depths 
of  his  eyes,  yes,  into  the  depths  of  his  soul.  I saw 
the  anxiety  and  sorrow  that  were  in  his  heart,  and 
asked  him,  Why  do  you  ask  ? Then  he  opened 
his  breaking  heart  to  me  right  there  on  the  street,  and 
I was  able  to  speak  to  him  of  our  glorious  Gospel, 
how  according  to  it  all  our  sins  had  been  laid  on 
Jesus  Christ  and  settled,  how  Jesus  had  said,  ''  Him 
that  cometh  unto  me  I will  in  no  wise  cast  out’' 
(John  6:37).  ^ light  and  a new  hope  came 
into  the  man’s  eyes,  and  when  I left  him  to  take  the 
car  there  was  a smile  of  peace  upon  his  face.  There 
IS  NO  OTHER  GOSPEL  THAN  THE  GoSPEL  OF  THE 

Christ  who  was  crucified  for  our  sins  that  will 
bring  to  a man  a profound  sense  of  sins  forgiven,  and 
give  him  to  know  that  no  matter  how  many  or  how 
great  his  sins  may  have  been  there  is  pardon  for  him 
on  the  ground  of  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  that  on  that  single  but  all  sufficient  ground  he 
has  access  to  God. 

But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  saves  not  only  from 


172 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


the  guilt  of  sin,  He  also  saves  from  the  power  of  sin: 
This  man  of  whom  I spoke  a few  moments  ago  as 
having  been  brought  up  in  childhood  as  a thief,  who 
had  spent  years  in  prison  in  this  country  and  other 
lands,  told  of  the  desperate  struggles  he  had  made  to 
break  away  from  the  power  of  sin  and  to  be  a man. 
But  failure  followed  failure  and  despair  stared  the 
man  in  the  face.  Then  he  took  Jesus  Christ  as  his 
personal  Saviour,  and  the  fetters  of  sin,  the  fetters  of 
the  appetite  for  drink,  the  fetters  of  impurity  and 
profanity,  and  a host  of  evil  habits  were  snapped  in 
a moment. 

This  is  but  one  case  in  thousands.  Christ 
is  a sure  cure  for  sin,  a sure  deliverer  from  the  power 
of  sin,  no  matter  how  deep-seated  and  desperate  the 
case  may  be.  We  read  in  i Timothy  i : 15,  This  is 
a faithful  saying  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners’'; 
then  Paul  added  his  own  experience,  ‘‘  of  whom  I 
am  chief.”  This  statement  of  Paul’s  was  true  of 
course.  Every  statement  in  the  Bible  is  true,  but  this 
particular  statement  that  Jesus  Christ  came  to  save 
the  chief  of  sinners,  if  he  will  only  put  his  trust  in 
Him,  I have  seen  verified  in  countless  instances. 

One  morning  in  the  People’s  Church  in  Minne- 
apolis, of  which  I was  then  pastor,  at  the  close  of 
the  morning  service,  one  of  my  deacons  stepped  up 
to  a gentleman  and  said,  Are  you  a Christian  ? ” 
‘‘No,  sir,”  he  replied.  “Why  not?”  the  deacon 
asked.  “ I am  too  great  a sinner  to  be  saved,”  was 
the  reply.  To  his  amazement  the  deacon  exclaimed, 
“ Thank  God ! ” Then  the  deacon  turned  to  me  on 
the  platform  and  called,  “ Brother  Torrey,  here  is  a 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETY  173 


man  who  says  he  is  too  great  a sinner  to  be  saved. 
Thank  God ! The  gentleman  looked  more  bewil- 
dered than  ever.  I stepped  down  to  him  and  asked, 
‘‘Is  what  the  deacon  says  true?’'  “Yes,”  he  said, 
“ I am  too  great  a sinner  to  be  saved.”  Though  he 
had  the  appearance  of  a gentleman  he  was  a gr^at 
sinner.  He  had  run  away  and  left  his  wife  in  To- 
ronto, Canada,  and  was  squandering  his  manhood 
and  his  money  in  gambling  in  Minneapolis.  He  had 
lost  thirty-five  thousand  dollars  at  the  gaming-table 
just  the  week  before. 

When  he  said  “ I am  too  great  a sinner  to  be 
saved,”  I said,  “ let  me  show  you  something,”  and 
opening  my  Bible  to  i Timothy  1:15!  asked  him  to 
read.  And  he  read,  “ This  is  a faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom  I am  chief.” 
“Well,”  he  said,  “I  am  chief.”  “Well,”  I said, 
“ then  it  means  you.”  “ It  is  a precious  promise,”  he 
said.  “ Will  you  accept  it  now  ? ” I asked.  He  said, 
“ I will.”  I said,  “ Let  us  kneel  down  and  tell  God 
so.”  We  knelt  side  by  side  and  prayed,  and  when 
he  arose  he  knew  that  God  had  forgiven  all  his  sins. 
He  left  the  following  week  for  the  Northwest  and  I 
lost  sight  of  him  for  nearly  a year;  for  he  never 
wrote  me.  Then  I learned  that  he  had  returned  to 
St.  Paul  and  was  working  every  night  for  the  sal- 
vation of  others,  that  he  had  brought  on  his  wife 
from  Toronto,  that  they  were  reunited  and  so  happy 
in  their  new  life  that  they  had  adopted  a little  girl 
from  an  orphanage  to  make  their  home  complete. 

No  man  need  continue  in  sin.  God  has  provided  a 
cure.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  tells  us  what  that 


174 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


cure  IS  in  John  8:  36,  If  the  Son  (i.  e,,  the  Son  of 
God,  Jesus  Himself)  shall  make  you  free  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed ''  (John  8:  36). 

2.  Christ  Jesus  is  not  only  the  cure  for  sin  in  the 
individual.  He  is  the  cure  for  sin  in  society  as  a 
whole.  Men  propose  various  remedies  for  the  cure 
of  sin  and  crime  in  the  world.  The  best  of  them 
will  prove  only  partially  availing.  Whatever  pro- 
hibition laws  may  effect  they  will  never  banish  sin 
or  crime.  I believe  in  prohibition.  I believe  it  was 
a good  thing,  a great  thing  in  many  ways,  as  many 
of  us  know  by  personal  observation  and  experience, 
when  the  prohibition  enactment  went  into  effect  in 
this  land.  But  prohibition  does  not  banish  sin  and 
it  never  will.  There  has  been  more  sin  and  crime 
in  our  country  since  the  adoption  of  prohibition  than 
before.  Prohibition  is  not  to  blame  for  that.  There 
are  numerous  causes,  prominent  among  which  is  the 
fact  that  we  are  reaping  the  aftermath  of  the  war. 
Oh!  war  is  a hellish  thing,  a most  damnable  thing. 
Crime  would  have  been  even  worse,  far  worse  than 
it  is,  if  it  had  not  been  for  prohibition.  But  while 
prohibition  is  not  to  blame  for  the  increase  of  sin 
and  crime,  the  increase  of  sin  and  crime  after  the 
adoption  of  prohibition  does  show  that  prohibition 
will  not  cure  sin.  Neither  will  any  other  kind  of 
external  law,  no  matter  how  wise  and  beneficent  the 
law  may  be,  cure  sin.  Jesus  Christ  alone,  the  per- 
sonal Jesus  Christ,  is  the  cure  for  sin  in  the  indi- 
vidual and  also  the  cure  for  sin  and  crime  in  the 
state,  in  the  home,  and  in  society  in  general.  It  is 
His  coming  again  that  will  utterly  banish  sin  and 
crime  from  the  earth,  so  that  righteousness  and  the 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETY  176 


knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea  (Isa.  11:9). 

Jesus  then  is  the  cure  for  all  sin  in  every  aspect 
of  its  working. 

II.  Christ  Jesus  the  Cure  for  Unbelief. 

The  next  greatest  evil  to  Sin  is  Unbelief,  Indeed 
the  two  go  hand  in  hand;  where  sin  reigns  unbelief 
reigns,  where  unbelief  reigns  sin  reigns.  Unbelief 
begets  sin,  and  sin  fosters  further  unbelief.  Un- 
dermine the  faith  of  men  in  the  Bible  and  in  the 
God  of  the  Bible,  and  in  the  Christ  of  the  Bible,  and 
a carnival  of  lust,  greed,  passion,  hate,  dishonesty, 
and  murder  and  war,  with  all  its  accompanying  hor- 
rors, is  the  result.  Increasing  unbelief  is  one  of  the 
chief  causes,  the  one  fundamental  cause,  of  the  car- 
nival of  lust,  crime,  immorality,  immodesty,  in- 
decency, lawlessness,  banditry,  and  murder  that  is 
sweeping  over  our  land  to-day.  Our  schools  and 
colleges  and  universities  have  been  undermining  faith 
in  the  Bible  and  in  the  God  of  the  Bible  and  in  the 
Christ  of  the  Bible,  and  we  are  reaping  the  harvest; 
and  an  awful  harvest  it  is. 

The  things  I read  in  the  papers  about  men  and 
women  being  held  up  and  robbed  every  night,  and 
sometimes  murdered,  are  depressing,  but  to  a man 
who  looks  ahead  with  a clear  eye  they  are  not  so 
depressing  as  what  one  sees  on  every  hand  of  the 
immodest,  bold,  shameless  conduct  of  the  rising  gen- 
eration, our  high-school  boys  and  girls,  yes,  our 
grammar-school  boys  and  girls.  Unbelief  has  come 
into  our  schools  and  homes  like  a flood,  and  multi- 
tudes of  our  boys  and  girls  on  the  Lord’s  Day  in- 


176 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


stead  of  being  found  in  Sunday  School  studying  the 
one  book  of  all  other  books  that  makes  for  noble 
character  and  good  citizenship  are  found  off  spending 
the  week-end  in  the  mountains,  boys  and  girls  to- 
gether, and  down  at  the  seashore  watching  and 
joining  in  immodest  parades  and  various  other 
things,  and  are  also  found  in  the  movies  by  the  thou- 
sands, movies  whose  chief  attraction  oftentimes  is 
indecency. 

Take  any  daily  paper  and  you  will  find  that  it 
advertises  indecent  movies  with  grossly  suggestive 
pictures  to  allure  the  young,  advertisements  of  such 
a character  that  not  so  many  years  ago  a paper  would 
have  been  prosecuted  if  it  had  dared  to  publish  them. 
Even  the  Y.  W.  C A.,  that  is  supposed  to  be  a Chris- 
tian institution  and  an  arm  of  the  Church,'"  takes 
off  hiking  parties  of  young  girls  on  the  Lord's  Day, 
takes  them  away  from  home  and  Sunday  School  and 
church  to  spend  the  week-end  in  a canyon.  A 
further  spread  of  infidelism  in  our  city  would  bring 
more  profit  to  the  bootleggers,  gambling  hells  and 
brothels  than  a governmental  subsidy.  But  men  say, 
“ That  may  be  so,  but  I cannot  help  my  unbelief.  If 
I cannot  believe  I cannot,  and  that  is  all  there  is  to 
it."  No,  that  is  not  all  there  is  to  it.  There  is  a 

CURE,  A SURE  CURE  FOR  UNBELIEF.  ThE  CURE  IS 

Jesus  Christ.  Go  to  Christ  Jesus.  Tell  Him  your 
unbelief.  Make  a clean  breast  of  it.  Tell  Him  you 
cannot  believe  in  the  Bible,  that  you  cannot  believe 
in  God,  that  you  cannot  believe  in  Him,  the  way 
Christians  claim  to  believe  in  Him;  but,  tell  Him 
also,  that  if  the  Bible  is  true  you  want  to  know  it, 
that  if  there  is  a God  you  want  to  know  it,  and  want 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETT  177 


to  know  Him,  and  that  if  He  is  Himself  the  Son  of 
God  you  want  to  know  that  too,  and  that  if  He  will 
show  you  it,  you  will  accept  Him  as  your  Saviour, 
and  surrender  to  Him  as  your  Lord,  and  confess 
Him  as  such  before  the  world.  Then  take  the  words 
of  Jesus  as  they  have  been  recorded  in  the  Four 
Gospels,  take  in  particular  the  Gospel  of  John  and 
read  it  honestly  looking  for  light,  and  obeying  the 
light  just  as  fast  as  you  get  it,  and  your  scepticism 
and  your  unbelief  will  soon  vanish.  My  friend,  you 
may  not  be  to  blame  for  your  unbelief ; but  you  will 
be  to  blame  if  you  continue  in  it,  for  I have  pointed 
out  a cure.  Thousands  have  tried  this  cure.  It  has 
never  failed  ii?  one  single  instance. 

For  years  I stood  in  the  pulpit  of  the  Moody 
Church  in  Chicago  and  challenged  unbelievers  to 
come  to  me  and  I would  show  them  a rational  cure 
for  their  unbelief,  and  if  it  did  not  succeed  in  any 
case  I would  let  the  unbeliever  speak  from  that  plat- 
form. Many  came,  but  there  was  never  a case  of 
failure,  not  a single  one  where  men  really  took  the 
remedy  suggested.  One  night  a man  was  brought  to 
me.  He  had  boasted  very  loudly  that  he  wanted  to 
ask  me  a few  questions.  Well,  I asked  him  a few. 
I asked  him  if  he  thought  there  was  an  absolute 
difference  between  right  and  wrong?  He  said, 
Yes.”  Well,”  I said,  then  you  ought  to  take 
your  stand  upon  the  right  to  follow  it  wherever  it 
carries  you.  Will  you  do  it  ? ” He  tried  to  hedge, 
but  I held  him  to  it,  and  finally  he  said,  ‘‘  Yes.” 
Then  I asked  him  if  he  knew  that  there  was  no 
God,  or  if  he  knew  that  God  did  not  answer  prayer? 
He  replied,  ‘‘  No,  I do  not  know  it.  In  fact  I think 


178 


THE  GOSPEL  POE  TO-DAY 


there  is  a Supreme  Being/'  But  he  added  that  he  did 
not  believe  that  this  Supreme  Being  answered  prayer. 
‘‘Well,  do  you  know  He  does  not  answer  prayer?” 
I asked.  “ No,”  he  replied,  “ I do  not  know  that  He 
does  not.”  “ Well,”  I said,  “ I know  that  He  does, 
but  I do  not  ask  you  to  take  my  word  for  it,  try  it 
for  yourself.  Here  is  a possible  clue,  it  may  be  that 
God  answers  prayer.  If  you  are  honest  as  you  say 
you  are  in  your  search  for  truth  you  will  try  this 
clue,  and  find  what  there  may  be  in  it.  Will  you 
pray  this  prayer,  O God,  if  there  be  any  God,  show 
me  if  Jesus  Christ  is  Thy  Son  or  not,  and  if  Thou 
wilt  show  me  that  He  is,  I promise  to  accept  Him 
as  my  Saviour  and  to  confess  Him  as  such  before 
the  world  ? ” 

He  tried  now  to  hedge  and  crawl  more  than  ever. 
He  wanted  to  ask  me  what  life  was,  and  a lot  of 
irrelevant  questions.  But  I held  him  to  the  point.  I 
showed  him  that  he  did  not  dare  to  pray.  At  last  in 
desperation  he  got  down  on  his  knees  and  in  his 
excitement  kicked  over  a chair  in  doing  it  and  blurted 
out  the  words  of  a prayer.  “ Now,”  I said,  “ will 
you  just  take  the  Gospel  of  John  and  read  it  honestly 
looking  for  light,  and  come  back  in  two  weeks  and 
tell  me  the  result?  ” “ Yes,  I will,”  he  said.  But  he 
never  came  back.  Why  not?  You  know.  He  did 
not  want  to  be  cured  of  his  unbelief.  He  wanted 
unbelief  because  he  wanted  sin. 

But  many  did  come  back  and  they  all  came  back 
cured.  I have  been  making  substantially  this  same 
offer  for  many  years  now  in  many  cities,  in  many 
states  and  in  many  lands  and  there  has  never  been 
a single  case  of  failure  yet.  Never  a man  yet  has 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETT  179 


come  back  who  has  been  able  to  tell  me  that  he  had 
taken  the  remedy  and  remained  a sceptic  still.  Now, 
If  you  doubt  that  cure,  try  it  yourself. 


Thd  third  Evil  I desire  to  refer  to  is  Poverty. 
Christ  Jesus  is  the  cure  for  poverty.  Now  I stand 
with  Henry  George  when  he  says  poverty  is  an  evil. 
Men  may  get  good  out  of  poverty,  many  men  have 
gotten  good  out  of  poverty ; but  nevertheless  poverty 
is  an  evil.  It  is  all  very  well  for  philosophers  like 
Seneca,  whom  Ingersoll  lauded  and  exalted  above 
Paul  and  Jesus  Christ,  to  write  about  the  excellences 
of  poverty  when  they  themselves  are  squandering,  as 
Seneca  himself  did,  vast  fortunes  in  the  most  ex- 
travagant luxury.  Such  philosophy  may  suit  a 
reckless  discharger  of  verbal  pyrotechnics  such  as 
Colonel  Ingersoll  was,  but  it  will  not  suit  honest, 
thinking  people  who  love  their  kind  and  keep  their 
eyes  open.  Poverty  is  an  evil. 

When  I walk  through  the  homes  of  the  very  poor 
in  various  cities  of  this  and  other  countries,  when  I 
see  the  crowding,  when  I breathe  the  poisonous  air, 
when  I hear  the  curses  and  oaths  and  obscenity  that 
greet  the  ears  of  the  innocent  children  of  the  poor 
from  the  day  they  open  their  eyes  upon  this  world 
to  the  day  they  are  carried  out  to  the  Potters’  Field, 
when  I hear  and  see  these  things,  I feel  like  saying, 
cursed  be  poverty.”  Poverty  is  an  evil  and  I hate 
it.  Hate  it  not  only  for  myself  but  hate  it  for  the 
sake  of  those  who  do  suffer  from  it.  I cannot  walk 
among  the  homes  of  the  poor  without  a heartache; 


Christ  Jesus  is  a Cure  for  Poverty. 


180 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


and  I do  not  wish  to.  Poverty  is  an  evil:  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  cure. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  cure  for 
poverty  with  the  individual 

(i)  First  of  all,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  cure  for  poverty 
in  the  life  that  now  is.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  if 
a man  comes  to  Christ  he  will  become  a man  of 
wealth  in  this  present  life.  That  is  not  desirable  for 
most  men.  Indeed  there  are  very  few  men  who 
have  great  wealth  in  the  life  that  now  is,  who  are 
not  spoiled  by  it.  But  there  is  a guarantee  that  if 
one  comes  to  Christ,  really  believing  in  Him  as 
Saviour,  and  surrendering  absolutely  to  Him  as  Lord 
and  Master,  their  every  real  need  will  be  supplied. 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  says  in  Matthew  6:33,  ‘‘But 
seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteous- 
ness; and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.'' 
And  the  “ all  these  things ''  are  the  things  spoken  of 
in  the  verses  immediately  preceding,  food,  drink,  and 
clothing,  and  the  necessities  of  daily  life.  This  state- 
ment of  Jesus  Christ  is  true.  I have  watched  the 
testing  of  it  under  peculiarly  trying  circumstances 
for  forty  years,  and  I have  never  known  a case  of 
failure.  I have  known  cases  of  seeming  failure,  but 
when  examined  into  fully  I have  found  that  the 
failure  was  not  in  the  promise  of  God  but  in  those 
to  whom  the  promise  was  unavailing,  simply  because 
they  did  not  meet  the  conditions  of  the  promise. 
Paul  says  in  Philippians  4:  19,  “ My  God  shall  supply 
every  need  of  yours  according  to  his  riches  in  glory 
in  Christ  Jesus.^"  That  great  promise  is  also  true, 
when  you  meet  the  conditions  stated  in  the  context. 
I have  seen  these  promises  tested  again  and  again 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETY  181 


in  the  most  unpromising  circumstances  and  neither  of 
them  has  ever  failed.  It  has  seemed  oftentimes  as 
if  they  were  going  to  fail,  but  they  never  have. 

How  many  people  I have  known  who  were  in  the 
most  abject  poverty  who  have  attained  to  positions 
of  comfort  and  plenty  through  accepting  Jesus  Christ. 
A multitude  of  them  go  trooping  by  in  my  memory 
as  I speak.  All  over  the  city  of  Chicago  and  all  over 
the  country  there  are  people  who  have  been  lifted 
from  poverty  to  plenty  and  affluence  by  the  influence 
of  one  church,  the  Moody  Church  in  Chicago.  Not 
that  this  church  has  given  them  money,  but  the 
church  has  brought  them  to  Christ  and  Christ  has 
brought  them  to  plenty.  The  same  is  true  of  many 
churches  throughout  the  land.  As  a matter  of  dem- 
onstrated fact  Jesus  Christ  is  the  cure  for  poverty 
with  the  individual. 

(2)  But  Christ  Jesus  is  the  cure  for  poverty  with 
the  individual  not  only  in  the  life  that  now  is  but 
still  more  abundantly' in  the  life  which  is  to  come. 
The  man  or  woman  who  accepts  Jesus  Christ  by  that 
act  becomes  a child  of  God  and  if  a child  then  an 
heir,  an  heir  of  God  and  joint  heir  with  Christ  (John 
1:12;  Rom.  8:17).  If  the  poorest  beggar  in  the 
land  were  to  accept  Jesus  Christ,  that  beggar  would 
become  at  once  an  heir  to  estates  before  whose  mag- 
nificence all  the  multi-millionaires  in  the  land  fade 
into  utter  insignificance.  I pass  by  and  behold  the 
mansions  of  the  rich  in  many  cities,  I enter  and  go 
through  the  magnificent  palaces  of  kings  and  em- 
perors, as  I have  done  in  many  lands;  and  I say  all 
this  is  nothing,  nothing  at  all  to  what  I am  soon  to 
have. 


182 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


Oh!  I invite  all  to  riches  untold.  There  is  for 
the  child  of  God  just  a little  way  ahead  ‘‘  an  inherit- 
ance incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away.'’ 

2.  But  Jesus  Christ  is  not  only  the  cure  for  pov- 
erty in  the  individual.  He  is  also  the  cure  for  pov- 
erty in  society  at  large.  How  earnestly  and  fruit- 
lessly Social  Philosophers  have  sought  for  a cure  for 
poverty.  I think  Henry  George  has  come  the  nearest 
of  any  one  to  hitting  upon  a cure  that  would  be  ef- 
fective and  practicable.  But  I confess  I do  not  ex- 
pect to  ever  see  it  put  into  operation  in  the  large  way 
it  would  be  necessary  to  put  it  into  operation  to  have 
it  accomplish  any  real  and  permanent  good.  And 
even  if  it  were  put  into  operation,  I should  not  expect 
to  see  all  the  results  that  its  more  sanguine  supporters 
imagine  would  follow.  There  would  be  poverty  still, 
because  there  would  still  be  cunning  greed  on  the  one 
side  and  improvidence  and  laziness  and  waste  on  the 
other  side.  But  when  Jesus  comes  again  to  reign  He 
will  banish  poverty.  Love  will  reign.  ‘‘  The  lion 
and  the  lamb  will  lie  down  together,”  and  the  lamb 
will  not  be  inside  the  lion,  as  is  now  so  often  the  case. 
No  more  poverty,  no  more  oppression,  no  more  com- 
mercial warfare,  no  more  brigandage  of  the  strong 
robbing  the  weak,  when  Christ  Jesus  comes.  Equal- 
ity, Fraternity,  and  Plenty  will  reign  everywhere. 

People  ask  me  why  I long  for  the  coming  again  of 
Jesus  Christ.  I long  for  the  speedy  coming  of  Jesus 
Christ  for  many  reasons.  But  for  one  reason,  be- 
cause, when  I go  out  and  see  the  poor  thousands,  and 
tens  of  thousands  in  the  great  cities  of  our  land,  when 
I see  the  human  hogs  that  dominate  so  much  of  the 


A PEEFECT  CUBE  FOE  POVEETY  183 


business  and  politics  and  society  of  our  day,  and 
trample  the  weak  under  their  feet  and  into  the  mud 
in  their  gluttonous  desire  to  get  at  their  swill,  I feel 
like  crying,  ‘‘  How  long,  O Lord,  how  long  ? Come, 
Lord  Jesus.  Come  quickly. This  is  my  only  hope 
for  those  who  are  underneath  in  the  present  mad 
scramble  that  we  call  business.  But  that  is  an  all- 
sufficient  hope.  He  is  coming!  and  when  He  comes 
society  will  be  reconstructed  from  the  bottom  up  and 
the  principle  that  governs  human  life  will  no  longer 
be  ‘‘  competition,’'  that  is,  to  put  it  in  plain  language, 
‘‘  every  man  for  himself  and  the  devil  take  the  hind- 
most,” but  when  He  comes  the  governing  principle  of 
all  society  will  be  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself,” 
and  poverty  and  want  and  oppression  will  then  be  no 
more  forever. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  cure  for  poverty.  If  you  wish 
to  see  poverty  done  away  with  enlist  in  the  army  of 
Christ  Jesus. 

IV.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Cure  for  Sickness. 

The  next  Evil  is  Sickness.  Some  people  consider 
sickness  a blessing,  and  God  undoubtedly  does  make 
a blessing  out  of  sickness  to  some  of  us.  I have  had 
sicknesses  and  pains  for  which  I have  thanked  God. 
But  if  I read  my  Bible  right,  sickness  was  a curse  and 
it  belongs  properly  to  the  Devil’s  kingdom  and  not 
God’s.  And  I notice  that  most  of  the  people  who 
consider  sickness  a blessing  are  perfectly  willing  that 
the  other  fellow  should  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  this 
kind;  and,  if  the  blessing  does  chance  to  come  their 
way,  they  are  willing  to  take  all  kinds  of  bitter  pills 
and  nauseating  potions  to  rid  themselves  of  this 


184 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


highly  esteemed  blessing.  In  plain,  unvarnished  En- 
glish, sickness  is  a great  evil.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 

CURE  FOR  sickness. 

1.  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  first  place,  is  the  cure  for 
sickness  in  this  present  life.  The  general  rule  of 
God  regarding  His  children  is  that  God  wishes  them 
to  be  well,  and  Christ  Jesus  makes  them  well  when 
they  trust  Him  to  do  it.  I am  not  going  into  the  fine 
and  disputed  points  about  Divine  Healing  and  the 
Faith  Cure,  but  I know  from  personal  experience  and 
from  a wide  and  careful  observation  extending  over 
many  years  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  Himself 
was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  ascended  to  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father  and  has  to-day  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  does  cure  sickness  to-day. 
Jesus  Christ,  the  risen  Son  of  God,  has  cured  many 
a man  and  woman  who  has  been  hopelessly  sick  for 
years  and  whom  all  physicians  failed  to  heal. 

2.  But  it  is  in  the  life  to  come  that  the  fullness  of 
Christ* s healing  power  will  be  manifested.  God’s 
dearest  and  purest  and  noblest  children  do  sicken  and 
die  in  the  life  that  now  is,  but  in  that  life  that  lies 
just  a little  ways  ahead  there  will  be  no  death,  no 
sickness,  and  no  pain.  There  will  be,  however,  in 
that  other  world  for  those  who  reject  Christ  in  this 
world,  plenty  of  sickness,  and  plenty  of  pain,  and 
eternal  death — endless  dying.  Oh,  sick  one,  come  to 
Jesus.  He  is  the  cure  for  sickness. 

Time  fails  me  to  mention  other  evils  such  as  Be- 
reavement, Disappointment,  Bitterness  of  Heart,  De- 
spair, Death,  for  which  Jesus  and  Jesus  only  is  the 
cure.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  cure  for  every  evil 
KNOWN  TO  MAN.  He  Stands  to-night  with  out- 


A PERFECT  CURE  FOR  POVERTY  186 


stretched  hands  as  He  did  that  day  in  Capernaum  of 
old  when  He  uttered  the  words  of  our  text.  And  He 
calls  to  us  as  He  did  to  them,  ‘‘  Come  unto  me,  all  ye 
that  labour  and  are  heavy  lacfen,  and  I will  give 
you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of 
me ; for  I am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart : and  ye  shall 
find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy  and 
my  burden  is  light/' 


XII 

JESUS  IS  THE  CHRIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD 

These  are  written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and  that  believing  ye 
may  have  life  in  his  name,” — John  20:  31. 

My  subject  to-night  is  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God.  You  will  find  the  text 
in  John  20:31,  ‘‘These  are  written,  that 
ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  his 
name.” 

Our  text  declares  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  and  that  every  one  who  really  be- 
lieves that  fact  obtains  eternal  life  by  so  believing. 
Listen  to  the  text  again : “ These  are  written,  that  ye 
may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God; 
and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  his  name.” 

I.  How  Do  We  Know  That  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
THE  Son  of  God? 

How  do  we  know  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God  ? 

I.  First  of  all,  we  know  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  by  a careful  and  candid  study  of  the 
Gospel  of  John.  John  says,  “ These  are  written,  that 
ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  his 
186 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  187 


name/’  In  other  words,  John,  in  his  Gospel,  pre- 
sents the  evidence  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God.  We  have  not  time  to  take  up  that  evidence 
in  detail  to-night,  nor  do  we  need  to.  Any  of  you 
may  take  it  up  for  yourselves,  and  if  you  will  read 
the  evidence  as  John  presents  it  candidly,  i.  e,,  read  it 
with  a sincere  desire  to  know  the  truth  and  with  an 
earnest  determination  to  obey  the  truth  when  dis- 
covered, you  will  know  to  a certainty,  before  you 
get  through  the  Gospel,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God.  I challenge  any  man  to  study  the  Gos- 
pel of  John  with  a candid  mind,  i.  e.,  with  a sincere 
desire  to  know  the  truth  and  willingness  to  obey  it 
when  it  is  found,  and  to  come  to  any  other  conclu- 
sion than  that  beyond  a peradventure  Jesus  is  the 
very  Christ  of  God,  and  the  very  Son  of  God.  I 
have  seen  men  try  it  again  and  again,  many  that 
were  sceptics  or  even  thoroughgoing  agnostics, 
when  they  began,  and  in  every  case  where  any  man 
has  pursued  that  study  with  a mind  eager  to  know 
the  truth  and  a willingness  to  obey  the  truth  at  any 
cost,  that  man  has  become  a believer  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  by  the  time  he  completed 
the  Gospel.  The  result  has  been  the  same  in  every 
instance.  Every  one  of  them  has  come  to  see  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  by  believ- 
ing in  Him  as  such,  has  obtained  eternal  life.  I 
suppose  I could  stand  here  by  the  hour  and  tell  you 
of  specific  instances  that  have  come  under  my  own 
personal  observation.  Let  me  give  you  only  one. 

When  I was  holding  meetings  in  Wellington,  New 
Zealand,  I spoke  at  the  noon  hour  in  one  of  the 
theaters  to  business  and  professional  men,  At  the 


188 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


close  of  one  of  these  meetings,  a prominent  travel- 
ling man  came  to  me — he  was  said  to  be  the  most 
prominent  travelling  man  in  New  Zealand.  He  said 
to  me,  Charlie  George  (that  is  one  of  the  pro- 
prietors of  the  leading  department  store  in  the  city) 
thinks  I ought  to  have  a talk  wdth  you,  but  you  can't 
help  me."  I said,  ''  What  is  the  trouble  ? " He  re- 
plied, ‘'I  am  an  agnostic  and  you  can't  help  me." 

Well,"  I said,  I have  helped  a good  many  agnos- 
tics and  perhaps  I can  help  you."  Then  I continued : 
What  do  you  believe  anyhow  ? " He  said,  I 
don't  believe  anything."  I said,  Do  you  not  be- 
lieve that  there  is  an  absolute  difference  between 
right  and  wrong?"  Oh,  yes,"  he  said,  ‘'I  do  be- 
lieve that."  ‘‘  Well,"  I said,  “ you  do  believe  some- 
thing after  all.  That  is  all  that  I believed  to  begin 
with  and  that  is  enough  for  any  one  to  believe  to 
begin  with."  Then  I said  to  him,  If  you  have 
some  of  anything  and  want  more,  what  do  you  do?  " 
Why,"  he  said,  I use  what  I have."  I said. 
That  is  right."  I said,  ''If  you  have  some  muscle, 
and  want  more  muscle,  what  do  you  do  ? " He  said, 
" I use  the  muscle  I have."  " If  you  have  some 
memory  and  want  a better  memory,  what  do  you 
do?"  "I  use  the  memory  I have."  "If  you  have 
some  money  and  want  more  money,  what  do  you 
do  ? " "I  use  the  money  I have."  " All  right,"  I 
said,  "you  have  some  faith.  You  believe  there  is 
an  absolute  difference  between  right  and  wrong. 
You  want  more.  Will  you  use  what  you  have?  You 
say  you  believe  that  there  is  an  absolute  difference 
between  right  and  wrong.  Will  you  use  that  faith? 
Will  you  take  your  stand  upon  the  right  to  follow  if 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  189 


wherever  it  carries  you,  at  any  cost  ? ” With  a little 
hesitation,  he  said,  ‘‘  Yes,  I will  do  that,  but  you 
can’t  help  me,  you  are  just  wasting  your  time.” 
Now,”  I said,  “ do  you  know  that  there  is  no  God  ? ” 
‘‘  No,”  he  said,  I don’t  know  there  is  no  God.  I 
don’t  know  anything  about  it.”  Well,”  I said,  “ I 
know  that  ther^  is  a God  but  that  won’t  do  you  any 
good.  Do  you  know  that  God  does  not  answer 
prayer?”  '‘No,”  he  said,  “I  don’t  know  that  God 
doesn’t  answer  prayer.  I don’t  believe  that  He  does 
but  I don’t  know  that  He  doesn’t.”  " Well,”  I said, 
“ I know  that  He  does,  but  that  won’t  do  you  any 
good,  but,”  I said,  “ you  know  the  method  of  modern 
science.  The  method  of  modern  science  is  this — 
that  whenever  you  find  a possible  clue  to  knowledge 
you  follow  that  clue  out  to  find  out  what  there  may 
be  in  it.  You  don’t  have  to  know  that  there  is  any- 
thing in  it.  You  simply  follow  it  out  to  find  out 
what  there  may  be  in  it.”  " Yes,”  he  said,  “ that  is 
right.”  " Well,  now,”  I said,  “ are  you  willing  to 
apply  this  method  of  modern  science  to  religious  in- 
vestigation? You  admit  that  there  may  be  a God 
and  it  may  be  He  answers  prayer.  Here  then  is  a 
possible  clue  to  knowledge.  Will  you  follow  it  out 
to  find  out  what  there  may  be  in  it?  Will  you  pray 
this  prayer — ' Oh,  God,  if  there  be  any  God,  show 
me  if  Jesus  Christ  is  Thy  Son  or  not,  and  if  Thou 
showest  me  that  He  is,  I promise  to  accept  Him  as 
my  Saviour  and  confess  Him  as  such  before  the 
world.’  ” " Yes,”  he  said  in  a half  laughing  way, 

"I’ll  do  that  too,  but  it  won’t  do  any  good;  you 
can’t  help  me,  you  are  just  wasting  your  time.’^ 
" Well,”  I replied,  " I have  helped  a good  many  and 


190 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


perhaps  I can  help  you.  Now,”  I said,  just  one 
thing  more.  John  says  in  John  20:31,  ‘These  are 
written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God ; and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life 
in  his  name.’  Now,”  I said,  “ John  presents  you 
in  his  Gospel  the  evidence  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God.  Will  you  take  the  evidence  and 
read  it?  I don’t  ask  you  to  believe  it,  I don’t  want 
you  even  to  try  to  believe  it,  I simply  want  you  to  be 
willing  to  be  convinced.  Will  you  take  the  Gospel 
and  read  it  with  an  open  mind  ? ” “ Oh,”  he  said, 

“ I have  read  it.”  “ Yes,”  I said,  “ but  I want  you 
to  read  it  a new  way.  Begin  at  the  first  chapter  and 
the  first  verse  and  read  on  verse  after  verse  until 
you  finish  the  Gospel.  Don’t  read  too  many  verses 
at  any  one  time.  Pay  careful  attention  to  what  you 
read  and  each  time  before  you  read,  offer  this  prayer 
— ‘ Oh,  God,  if  there  be  any  God,  show  me  what  of 
truth  there  is  in  these  verses  I am  about  to  read  and 
what  Thou  showest  me  to  be  true,  I promise  to  take 
my  stand  upon.’  ” Rather  languidly  and  wearily  he 
said,  “Yes,  I will  do  that,  too,  but  it  won’t  do  any 
good.”  Then  I went  over  what  he  had  agreed  to  do 
and  got  him  to  promise  me  he  would  write  me  the 
result.  Several  weeks  passed.  I left  Wellington 
and  had  gone  to  Christ  Church  and  from  Christ 
Church  to  Dunedin.  After  I had  been  a few  days 
in  Dunedin,  a lady  called  at  the  house  where  I was 
stopping  and  asked  to  see  me.  When  I entered  the 
reception-room,  she  arose  and  walked  toward  me 
with  a letter  in  her  hand,  which  she  held  out  to  me. 
She  said,  “ I have  a letter  from  my  husband  and  it 
is  the  queerest  letter  I ever  received.  I don’t  un- 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  191 


derstand  it  but  he  said  I could  show  it  to  you/"  She 
handed  me  the  letter  and  I took  it  and  read  it.  It 
was  from  this  man.  It  began : 

My  dear  Wife  : 

I think  I have  been  converted.  I am  not  sure 
yet  and  I don’t  wish  you  to  tell  any  one  until  I am 
sure,  but  you  can  show  this  letter  to  your  pastor  and 
to  Dr.  Torrey;  for  it  was  he  who  spoke  to  me  in 
Wellington.” 

That  man  came  out  clear  cut  as  a Christian,  as  a 
believer  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God,  and  when  we  got 
to  England,  his  mother,  who  was  a very  prominent 
woman  in  public  life  in  England,  wrote  to  Mr.  Alex- 
ander to  thank  us  for  what  we  had  done  for  her 
son  in  New  Zealand.  Any  one  of  you  can  try  it  for 
yourself.  The  result  always  has  been  the  same  and 
always  will  be  the  same.  There  has  never  been  an 
exception. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  we  know  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  because  that  is  what  Jesus 
Himself  claimed  to  he,  and  God  set  the  stamp  of 
His  endorsement  on  Jesus  Chrisfs  claim  by  raising 
Him  from  the  dead.  That  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  in  an  en- 
tirely unique  sense,  in  a sense  that  no  other  man 
who  ever  walked  this  earth  was  the  Son  of  God, 
admits  of  no  honest  question.  In  Mark  12:6  our 
Lord  Jesus  draws  a contrast  between  Himself  and 
all  the  prophets  of  the  old  dispensation,  even  the 
greatest,  and  says  that  while  they  were  servants  and 
merely  servants,  He  was  the  Son,  the  one  and  only 


192 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO  DAY 


Son  of  God.  (See  R.  V.)  In  John  10:30  Jesus 
went  so  far  as  to  say,  ''  I and  the  Father  are  one.'" 
In  John  14:9,  He  even  dared  to  say,  He  that  hath 
seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  In  John  5 : 23,  He 
goes  so  far  as  to  say,  ‘‘  All  men  should  honour  the 
Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father/*  Such  was 
Jesus'  oft-repeated  claim.  This  was  a stupendous 
claim  to  make.  If  the  claim  was  not  true,  it  was  an 
utterly  and  shamefully  blasphemous  claim.  The 
Jews  put  Jesus  Christ  to  death  on  a charge  of  blas- 
phemy for  making  this  claim.  And  if  this  claim  of 
Jesus  was  not  true,  if  Jesus  was  not  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  in  a sense  that  no  other 
is  the  Son  of  God,  then  the  Jews  did  right,  accord- 
ing to  their  own  God-given  law,  in  putting  Him  to 
death  on  the  charge  of  blasphemy,  only  they  should 
have  put  Him  to  death  by  stoning  and  not  by  cruci- 
fixion. You  cannot  deny  the  Deity  of  Jesus  without 
thereby  justifying  the  Jews  in  putting  Him  to  death. 
If  you  are  a Unitarian,  and  are  also  logical,  you 
must  justify  the  putting  to  death  of  Jesus  Christ. 
But  before  the  Jewish  authorities  put  Him  to  death, 
Jesus  said  to  them  that  God  would  set  the  stamp  of 
His  endorsement  upon  His  claim  for  which  they 
were  putting  Him  to  death,  by  raising  Him  from  the 
dead.  Put  Him  to  death  they  did,  lay  Him  in 
Joseph's  sepulchre  they  did;  roll  the  stone  to  the 
door  of  the  sepulchre  they  did;  seal  the  stone  with 
the  Roman  seal,  which  to  break  was  death,  they  did ; 
but  when  the  appointed  hour  came,  just  as  Jesus  had 
foretold,  the  quickening  breath  of  God  swept 
through  that  sleeping  clay  and  God  raised  Him 
triumphant  over  death  and  grave,  and  so  proclaimed 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OP  GOH  193 

to  all  coming  generations,  and  to  us,  more  clearly 
than  if  He  should  proclaim  it  from  the  open  heavens 
above  Los  Angeles  to-night,  “ This  man  is  what  He 
claimed  to  be;  He  is  the  Christ,  He  is  the  Son  of 
God,  He  is  very  God  of  very  God,  all  men  should 
honour  Him  even  as  they  honour  Me,  the  Father.” 
I have  proved  time  and  time  again  from  this  plat- 
form that  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  from  the  dead 
is  the  best  proven  fact  of  history;  and  the  abso- 
lutely certain  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
proves  to  a demonstration  that  He  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  VERY  God  of  very  God. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  we  know  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  by  His  influence  upon  all 
subsequent  history.  That  Jesus  Christ  claimed  to  be 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  in  an  entirely  unique 
sense  admits,  as  we  have  already  seen,  of  no  honest 
question;  but  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  a Divine  person  to  be  honoured  and 
worshipped,  even  as  God  the  Father  is  honoured  and 
worshipped,  does  not  prove  that  He  really  was  so. 
But  it  does  prove  that  He  either  was  the  Son  of  God 
in  an  entirely  unique  sense,  as  He  claimed  to  be,  or 
else  that  He  was  the  most  daring  and  blasphemous 
and  outrageous  impostor  that  ever  walked  this  earth, 
or  else  that  He  was  one  of  the  most  hopeless  lunatics 
that  ever  disgraced  humanity  by  his  mental  imbecil- 
ity. The  modern  Unitarian  position,  the  position 
also  of  some  preachers  who  do  not  call  themselves 
Unitarians  but  orthodox  and  evangelical,  that  Jesus 
was  not  a Divine  person,  very  God  of  very  God, 
that  He  was  the  Son  of  God  only  in  the  sense  that 
we  are  all  sons  of  God,  but  that  He  was  a good  man, 


194 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


perhaps  the  best  man  who  ever  lived  on  this  earth, 
is  the  very  acme  of  irrationality  and  intellectual 
absurdity.  Whatever  Jesus  was,  He  was  not  a good 
man;  that  is  to  say,  if  He  were  not  God  as  He 
claimed  to  be.  He  was  not  good,  but  one  of  the  most 
outrageous  impostors  or  one  of  the  most  hopeless 
lunatics  that  ever  walked  this  earth.  Now  let  me 
put  to  each  one  of  you  a question.  Was  the  influ- 
ence of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  upon  subsequent  history 
the  influence  of  cin  impostor?  Only  one  whose  own 
heart  is  cankered  by  imposture  and  fraud  would  think 
for  one  moment  of  asserting  it.  Let  me  ask  you  a 
second  question.  Was  the  influence  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  upon  subsequent  history  the  influence  of  a 
lunatic?  Only  a lunatic  would  venture  to  assert  it. 
Here  then  we  are — not  a lunatic,  not  an  impostor, 
then  beyond  question,  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place,  we  know  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  by  the  Divine  power  that  He 
displays  to-day.  Jesus  displayed  Divine  power  when 
He  was  here  on  earth.  He  displayed  Divine  power 
when  He  stilled  the  tempest  and  calmed  the  waves 
by  His  word,  saying,  Peace,  be  still, and  there 
was  a great  calm.  He  displayed  Divine  power  when 
He  called  Lazarus,  who  had  been  four  days  dead, 
from  the  grave  and  Lazarus  came  forth.  He  dis- 
played Divine  power  when  He  turned  water  into 
wine.  He  displayed  Divine  power  when  He  fed  five 
thousand  men,  besides  women  and  children,  with  five 
small  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  and  had  more  left 
over  when  He  was  through  than  when  He  began, 
which  was  a creative  act.  Over  and  over  again  He 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OP  GOD  195 

displayed  Divine  power  when  He  was  here  on  earth. 
But  we  do  not  need  to  go  way  back  into  the  history 
of  His  life  here  upon  earth,  nearly  1,900  years  ago, 
to  find  Him  displaying  Divine  power.  He  displays 
Divine  power  to-day.  He  raises  the  dead  to-day. 
He  raises  men  and  women  who  are  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins  into  spiritual  life  and  power  and 
victory.  He  does  something  far  more  wonderful 
than  turning  water  into  wine.  He  turns  outrageous 
sinners  into  glorious  saints. 

He  turned  a Jerry  McAuley,  a miserable,  contempt- 
ible, low-down  river  thief,  an  inmate  of  Sing  Sing 
States  Prison,  into  Jerry  McAuley,  the  apostle  of 
life  to  the  outcasts  of  New  York;  so  honoured  when 
he  came  to  die  in  the  very  city  where  he  had  been 
a water  thief,  that  the  best  people  of  New  York 
gathered  by  the  thousands  at  his  funeral  to  do 
honour  to  his  blessed  memory.  He  turned  Sam  Had- 
ley, a fugitive  from  justice,  with  138  counts  for  for- 
gery out  against  him,  and  a hopeless  barrel  house 
bum,  into  Sam  Hadley,  one  of  the  most  lovable 
men  and  self-sacrificing  lovers  of  his  fellow  men  I 
ever  knew,  and  whom  I once  met  in  Washington 
as  the  honoured  guest  in  the  home  of  the  Postmaster 
General  of  the  United  States  of  America.  He 
turned  William  S.  Jacoby,  a drunkard  at  nine,  a 
tough  at  fifteen,  a criminal  at  nineteen,  and  a com- 
panion of  thugs,  a desperado  in  Omaha,  twice  dis- 
honourably discharged  from  the  regular  army,  in- 
vited to  join  the  Jesse  James  Gang,  unanimously 
chosen  chief  of  a gang  of  desperados  in  the  Leaven- 
worth Federal  Prison,  riding  through  the  streets  of 
Omaha  firing  his  revolver  out  of  the  window  of  a 


196 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


cab  at  everything  he  passed,  into  the  Rev.  William  S. 
Jacoby,  the  most  loved  man  in  Chicago,  the  dearest 
and  truest  friend  I ever  had,  and  the  most  truly 
Christlike  man  I ever  knew.  Yes,  and  He  changed 
me.  I will  not  tell  you  from  what;  but  at  least  from 
hopeless  bondage  to  glorious  liberty,  and  from  awful 
death  to  exultant  life.  Yes,  Jesus  is  surely  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  very  God  of  very  God. 
There  is  no  possibility  of  honest  and  intelligent  doubt 
of  that 

II.  The  Result  of  Believing  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 

Now  let  us  look  at  the  result  of  believing  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  If  one  be- 
lieves that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  what 
will  be  the  result  ? Listen  to  my  text  again — ‘‘  These 
are  written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and  that  believing  ye  may 
have  life  in  his  name.’’ 

I.  The  result  will  be  that  the  one  who  believes 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  will  obtain 
eternal  life.  All  that  any  one  needs  to  do  to  obtain 
eternal  life,  that  greatest  of  all  gifts,  a gift  in  com- 
parison with  which  all  the  wealth,  and  splendour 
and  honour  and  glory  and  pleasure  of  this  world  are 
as  nothing,  the  gift  of  eternal  life,  all  that  any  one 
has  to  do  to  obtain  this  wondrous  gift  is  to  believe 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Any  one 
in  this  audience  may  have  eternal  life  in  the  twin- 
kling of  an  eye  by  just  believing  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Listen  again  to  our  text, 
“ These  are  written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  197 


is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God ; and  that  believing  ye 
may  have  life  in  his  name/'  Listen  to  another  verse : 
John  3 : i6,  ‘‘  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he 
gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life." 
You  may  be  a drunkard,  you  may  be  a thief,  you 
may  be  an  embezzler,  you  may  be  a forger,  you  may 
be  a man  or  woman  who  is  disgraced  by  divorce  and 
you  yourself  the  guilty  party,  you  may  be  an  out- 
rageous blasphemer;  you  may  have  a polluted  im- 
agination and  a rotten  heart;  you  may  be  the  victim 
of  the  lowest  and  vilest  passions  that  ever  cursed  a 
man  or  woman;  you  may  be  anybody  or  anything; 
but  BELIEVE  THAT  JeSUS  IS  THE  CHRIST,  THE  SON  OF 

God,  and  eternal  life  is  instantly  yours.  Oh, 
how  often  I have  seen  men  and  women  of  all  kinds 
and  conditions  and  nationalities,  get  eternal  life  in 
an  instant  by  simply  believing  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 

2.  But,  of  course,  it  must  be  real  faith.  The 
faith  that  John  here  speaks  of  is  not  a mere  intel- 
lectual opinion;  John  never  uses  ‘"faith"  in  that 
sense.  No  man  ever  obtained  eternal  life  by  merely 
having  an  orthodox  opinion  about  Jesus.  When 
Jesus  Himself  was  here  on  earth,  the  demons  held 
a perfectly  orthodox  opinion  about  Him.  They 
cried  out  (even  before  men  saw  it  and  confessed 
it),  I know  thee,  who  thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of 
God"  The  Devil  himself  holds  a perfectly  orthodox 
opinion  about  Christ.  He  knows,  and  only  too  well 
for  his  own  comfort,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God.  He  does  not  teach  it,  but  he  knows  it. 
He  gets  men  to  teach  that  Jesus  is  not  the  Christy 


198 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


the  Son  of  God,  very  God  of  very  God,  l^ecause  he 
is  a liar,  and  the  father  of  it/'  He  gets  men  to 
teach  that  Jesus  is  a good  man,  that  He  is  a great 
example,  but  that  He  is  not  Divine,  that  He  does 
not  save  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood  but  by  His 
example  and  His  teaching;  for  the  Devil  is,  as  I 
say,  a liar,  and  the  father  of  it ; but  all  the  time  the 
Devil  knows  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God.  He  knows  that  some  day  he  will  himself  be 
forced  to  bow  his  knee  to  Jesus  and  confess  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  Fa- 
ther/' Yes,  the  Devil  believes  in  that  sense  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  but  that  belief 
does  not  save  him  from  going  to  the  everlasting 
fire  prepared  for  him  and  his  angels.  No,  the  faith 
that  saves  is  real  faith,  a faith  with  the  heart.  As 
Paul  puts  it  in  Romans  10:9,  ^^9  If  thon  shalt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shalt 
believe  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved,  for  with  the  heart  man  he- 
lieveth  unto  righteousness,  and  with  the  mouth  con- 
fession is  made  unto  salvation." 

What  is  heart  faith,  real  faith,  saving  faith,  eternal- 
life-giving  faith?  Heart  faith,  real  faith,  saving 
faith,  eternal-life-giving  faith  is  the  faith  that  not 
only  enlightens  the  mind  but  governs  the  will  and  the 
feelings  and  the  conduct.  It  is  the  faith  that  leads 
to  action  in  accordance  with  the  truth  believed.  To 
believe  with  the  heart  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  will  lead  you  to  act  in  accordance  with 
the  fact  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 
The  word  Christ  is  really  a Greek  word  and  means 
‘‘Anointed  One,"  It  means  just  the  same  as  the 


JESUS  IS  THE  CHEIST,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  199 


Hebrew  word  Messiah.”  It  means  Anointed 
King.”  To  believe  with  the  heart  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  will  lead  you  to  enthrone  Jesus  as  King  in 
your  heart  and  to  surrender  the  whole  control  and 
conduct  of  your  life  to  Him.  And  to  believe  with 
the  heart  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  will  lead  you 
to  surrender  every  thought  to  H:s  control:  so  that 
if  the  whole  world  of  German  ‘‘  scholarship  ” and 
English  scholarship  ” and  Scotch  ''  scholarship  ” 
and  American  scholarship  ” should  say  one  thing 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  should  say  another,  you  would 
believe  Jesus  against  the  whole  crowd.  If  the  great 
and  widely-respected  Dean  Shaler  Matthews  and  the 
scholarly  Professor  Case  and  a whole  bevy  of  self- 
styled  scholars,”  some  of  whom  have  more  degrees 
after  their  names  than  they  have  real  sound  sense 
in  their  heads  and  humility  in  their  hearts,  should 
say  one  thing,  and  they  do,  and  Jesus  Christ  should 
say  another  thing,  and  they  admit  that  He  does,  I 
would  believe  the  glorious  Son  of  God  against  the 
whole  pretentious  but  pitiable  pack.  And  if  you 
believe  with  your  heart  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  you  will  accept  Him  as  your  divine 
Saviour,  who  purchased  forgiveness  for  you  by 
dying  in  your  place  on  the  cross,  for  that  is  what 
He  said  He  did  (Matt.  20:28),  and  your  risen 
Saviour  who,  by  His  resurrection  power,  can  set  you 
free  from  the  power  of  sin  to-day,  for  that  is  what 
He  Himself  offers  to  do  (John  8:34-36).  Once 
more,  if  you  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God,  you  will  bow  down  before  Him  and  honour 
Him,  even  as  you  honour  God  the  Father.  You  will 
worship  Him  as  the  Divine  person  He  claims  to  be 


200 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


and  that  you  know  Him  to  be.  You  will  do  exactly 
what  Thomas  did  when  at  last  after  many  stubborn 
doubts  he  was  brought  by  seeing  the  Risen  Christ 
to  believe  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
you  will  fall  down  upon  your  knees  and  look  up  into 
His  blessed,  glorious.  Divine  face  and  cry  to  Him, 
“ My  Lord  and  my  God,”  and  you  will  obtain  eternal 
life  the  moment  you  do.  Will  you  do  it? 


XIII 


WHICH  ^ALL  WE  BELIEVE:  GOD  OR 
MAN? 

**  For  what  if  some  did  not  believe?  Shall  their 
unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect?  God 
forbid:  yea,  let  God  be  found  true,  but  every  man  a 
liar?' — Romans  3:3,  4. 

WHAT  I shall  say  to-night  will  save  some 
of  you,  eternally  and  gloriously  save  you. 
But  alas ! it  will  lead  to  the  eternal  doom 
and  destruction  of  some  of  you.  It  will  save  some 
of  you  because  you  will  listen  to  the  truth  and  in 
consequence  of  your  listening  attentively  and  hon- 
estly to  the  truth  you  will  take  the  steps  to-night  that 
will  lead  to  your  salvation  right  here  and  now.  But 
what  I shall  say  to-night  will  lead  to  the  eternal 
doom  and  destruction  of  some  of  you;  because  you 
will  not  listen  to  the  truth  but  harden  your  hearts 
against  it  and  reject  it,  and  thus  this  very  sermon 
that  might  have  saved  you,  if  you  had  heeded  it,  will 
come  up  against  you  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Truth 
heeded  saves,  truth  rejected  damns.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
says  in  John  12:48,  ‘‘He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  re- 
ceiveth  not  my  words,  hath  one  that  judgeth  him: 
the  word  that  I have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge 
him  in  the  last  day.’’ 

And  the  truth  I am  to  present  to-night  has  in  it 
201 


202 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


a peculiar  saving  power  if  you  will  only  heed  it  and 
believe  it  and  obey  it:  and  it  also  has  in  it  peculiar 
power  to  bring  condemnation  and  doom  and  destruc- 
tion to  those  who  refuse  to  heed  it  and  thereby  re- 
ject it 

My  subject  is,  Which  Shall  We  Believe,  God  or 
Man?  You  will  find  my  text  in  Romans  3:3,  4, 
‘"For  what  if  some  did  not  believe?  Shall  their 
unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  ? God 
forbid : yea^  let  God  be  found  true,  but  every  man  a 
liar/^ 


I.  God's  Word  Better  Than  Man's. 

We  live  in  a day  when  men  are  disposed  to  put 
great  faith  in  what  men  say,  especially  what  learned 
men  say,  but  very  little  faith  or  no  faith  at  all  in 
what  God  says.  Let  some  great  man  of  science  an- 
nounce some  discovery  and  no  matter  how  astonish- 
ing or  even  incredible  that  discovery  may  seem  to 
be,  no  matter  how  much  there  is  about  it  that  we 
cannot  understand,  we  believe  it  at  once.  But  let  a 
man  find  something  in  the  Word  of  God  that  is 
contrary  to  his  preconceived  notions,  or  outside  his 
own  experience,  or  that  has  something  in  it  that  he 
cannot  understand,  or  something  that  for  one  reason 
or  another  appears  incredible  at  the  first  glance,  he 
discards  it  at  once.  Tell  men  what  great  men  say 
and  they  accept  it  at  once:  tell  men  what  the  Bible 
says  and  they  look  wise  and  shrug  their  shoulders 
and  say,  “ Yes,  but  I don't  think  so.  This  is  what 
I think."  And  yet  tell  them  what  some  great 
scientist  or  some  leading  literary  critic  or  some  bril- 
liant but  erratic  preacher  says  and  they  think  that 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  t 


203 


settles  it,  that  it  must  be  so.  What  utter  foolish- 
ness ! The  opinion  of  the  greatest  scientist  that  ever 
lived,  or  the  greatest  philosopher,  or  the  most 
learned  Hebrew  or  Greek  scholar,  or  the  most  bril- 
liant pulpit  orator  is  of  no  value  whatever  against 
the  Word  of  the  infinitely  wise  and  eternally  truthful 
God,  against  the  Word  of  the  God  who  cannot 
lie ""  and  who  is  never  mistaken.  The  opinion  of  all 
the  wise  men  on  earth  is  of  no  weight  whatever 
against  the  Word  of  God.  One  short  sentence  from 
God’s  sure  Word  is  worth  whole  volumes  of  man’s 
vain  speculations,  “ let  God  be  found  true,  and  every 
man  a liar.”  The  man  who  believes  any  man  against 
God  is  a fool.  The  man  who  believes  any  company 
of  men  against  God  is  a fool.  The  man  who  be- 
lieves God  against  the  whole  world  is  a truly  wise 
man. 

w^The  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.  That  can  be 
pf^oven  by  many  unanswerable  proofs.  I have  proven 
it  'time  and  time  again  from  this  platform.  For 
eighteen  centuries  and  more  the  opinions  of  scien- 
tists and  philosophers  have  come  and  gone,  to-day 
regarded  as  the  final  and  absolute  wisdom,  to-mor- 
row regarded  as  sheerest  folly.  But  the  teachings 
of  this  Book  have  stood  fast  amid  the  wreck  of 
centuries  of  man’s  thinking.  The  experience  of 
eighteen  centuries  proves  that  the  man  who  banks 
on  the  Bible  is  wise.  The  man  who  throws  the  Bible 
overboard  at  any  point  and  turns  to  any  other  source 
of  ‘‘  light  and  leading  ” always  misses  it.  He  al- 
ways has  missed  it  for  eighteen  centuries ; he  always 
will  miss  it  for  all  the  centuries  to  come.  The  truly 
wise  man  is  the  man  who  always  believes  this  Book 


204 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


against  any  man,  against  any  scientist,  against  any 
philosopher,  against  any  literary  scholar,  against  any 
council  of  theologians  or  any  congress  of  philosophers 
and  savants.  If  the  Bible  says  one  thing  and  any 
man  on  earth  says  another,  every  truly  wise  man  will 
say,  ‘‘  let  God  be  found  true,  and  every  man  a liar.” 

II.  Some  Points  on  Which  Many  Great  Men 
AND  God  Differ. 

Let  me  call  your  attention  to  some  points  on  which 
many  great  men  and  God  differ. 

I.  In  the  first  place.  Many  great  and  scholarly 
men  differ  from  God  regarding  the  existence  of  a 
personal  Devil.  A very  large  number  of  men  in  our 
day,  including  some  great  thinkers  and  even  some 
theologians  of  high  repute,  laugh  at  the  very  idea 
of  there  being  any  such  person  as  the  Devil.  Many 
men  have  said,  “ There  is  no  Devil  but  sin.^^  And 
Mrs.  Mary  Baker  Eddy  who  has  a great  following, 
including  many  people  of  intelligence  and  culture, 
ridicules  the  idea  of  there  being  a personal  Devil. 
Now  that  is  what  many  men  say,  very  many  men 
say,  many  men  whom  you  and  I would  be  disposed 
to  listen  to  on  many  subjects,  There  is  no  personal 
Devil.'’  What  does  God  say?  Turn  in  your  Bible 
to  Ephesians  6:  ii,  12,  and  you  will  see  for  your- 
selves exactly  what  God  says,  “ Put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against 
the  wiles  of  the  devil.  For  our  wrestling  is  not 
against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  the  principalities, 
against  the  powers,  against  the  world  rulers  of  this 
darkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  f 206 


In  the  heavenly  places.”  Four  verses  further  down 
God  says,  ‘‘withal  taking  up  the  shield  of  faith, 
wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery 
darts  of  the  evil  one”  (not  of  evil,  mind  you,  but 
the  evil  one  ”).  Now  turn  to  i Peter  5 : 8 and  you 
will  see  again  what  God  says,  “ Be  sober,  be  watch- 
ful; your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a roaring  lion, 
walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.” 
There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  meaning  of  these 
words  by  any  one  who  reads  them  with  the  purpose 
of  finding  out  what  they  were  intended  to  teach  and 
not  merely  with  the  purpose  of  distorting  and  twist- 
ing them  to  fit  into  his  own  preconceived  notions. 
So  we  see  that  God  says  in  the  most  unmistakable 
terms,  that  there  is  a personal  Devil.  Furthermore, 
God  says  that  the  Devil  is  a being  of  such  great 
cunning  and  great  power  that  he  is  more  than  a 
match  for  you  or  me  and  that  he  is  plotting  our 
destruction  and  all  the  time  working  to  compass  it. 
Is  God  right  about  this?  or  is  Mrs.  Eddy  and  the 
others  who  deny  the  existence  of  a personal  Devil 
right?  God  is  right  about  it.  Certainly  God  is  right 
about  it.  God  is  always  right:  and  any  man  or 

WOMAN  WHO  DIFFERS  FROM  GOD  IS  ALWAYS  WRONG. 
When  you  believe  that  there  is  no  Devil  but  your 
own  sins  you  are  a sorely  deceived  individual;  and 
the  very  Devil  you  do  not  think  exists  has  deceived 
you,  and  he  has  done  it  in  order  to  destroy  you. 
A.n  enemy  in  ambush  is  a particularly  dangerous 
enemy.  And  a Devil  who  has  persuaded  people  that 
he  does  not  exist  at  all  is  a particularly  dangerous 
Devil.  No  class  of  people  fall  so  easy  a prey  to  the 
Devil’s  subtlety  as  the  people  who  do  not  believe 


208 


THE  GOSPEL  POE  TO-DAY 


that  there  is  any  Devil.  Show  me  a man  or  woman 
who  does  not  believe  that  there  is  any  Devil  and  I 
will  show  you  every  time  a man  or  woman  whom 
the  Devil  has  blinded  cind  upon  whom  he  is  getting 
in  his  work. 

2.  In  the  second  place.  Many  men  differ  from 
God  regarding  a future  judgment.  Many  men  in 
this  day,  yes,  very  many  men,  do  not  believe  that 
there  is  to  be  a future  judgment.  Tell  many  men 
of  our  day  that  there  is  a time  coming  when  they 
shall  have  to  stand  before  the  judgment  bar  of  God, 
with  His  holy  and  all-seeing  eye  piercing  them 
through  and  through,  and  answer  to  Him  for  all 
their  deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  all  their  words 
spoken  in  this  present  life,  tell  them  that,  and  they 
will  laugh  at  you  in  derision.  But  what  does  God 
say?  Turn  to  Acts  17: 30,  31  and  listen  to  what  He 
said  through  Paul  to  a group  of  Epicurean  and  Stoic 
philosophers  gathered  on  the  historic  Areopagus, 
listen,  “ God  now  commandeth  men  that  they  should 
all  everywhere  repent : inasmuch  as  he  hath  ap- 
pointed a day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness  by  the  man  whom  he  hath  ordained ; 
whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in 
that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead.”  Turn  to 
Romans  14: 12  and  read  what  God  says  about  it, 
“ So  then  each  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  him- 
self to  God.”  Turn  to  2 Corinthians  5:10  and  read 
what  God  says,  “We  must  all  be  made  manifest 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ;  that  each  one 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  according 
to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.” 
Turn  to  Matthew  12:36,  and  read  what  God  says. 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  1 207 


*^I  say  unto  you,  that  every  idle  word  that  men 
shall  speak  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the 
day  of  judgment/’  Can  anything  be  plainer  than 
God’s  word  on  this  point  ? Is  God  right  or  are  these 
learned  gentlemen  who  differ  from  God  right?  God 
is  right,  and  these  men  who  differ  from  God  are 
wrong.  God  is  always  right  and  men  are  always 
wrong  when  they  differ  from  God.  There  is  one 
thing  concerning  the  future  that  is  absolutely  sure. 
It  is  absolutely  sure  that  there  will  be  a judgment 
day.  It  is  not  absolutely  sure  that  you  or  I will  live 
another  day.  I saw  a neighbour  of  mine  walking 
down  the  street  the  day  before  yesterday.  This 
morning,  just  before  I came  here,  another  neighbour 
came  in  and  told  me  this  neighbour  died  at  ten  min- 
utes before  ten  last  night.  It  is  not  absolutely  sure 
that  there  will  be  another  election  or  another  Christ- 
mas, it  is  not  absolutely  sure  that  there  will  be  times 
of  peace  right  ahead  of  us  or  times  of  great  con- 
flict, it  is  not  absolutely  sure  what  will  be  the  out- 
come of  the  great  Peace  Conference  now  being  held 
in  Washington  upon  which  the  attention  of  the  bet- 
ter part  of  the  civilized  world  is  now  focused.  But 
it  is  absolutely  sure  that  there  will  be  a Judgment 
Day,  It  is  sure  that  you  and  I will  stand  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ  to  give  account  of  the  deeds 
done  in  the  body  and  the  words  spoken  in  the  life 
that  now  is.  It  is  absolutely  sure  that  ‘‘  each  one  of 
us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God.” 

3.  In  the  third  place.  Many  men,  including  men 
who  are  accorded  wise  by  the  world,  differ  from 
God  regarding  Hell. 

(i)  There  are  many  in  our  day  who  do  not  be- 


208 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


lieve  that  there  is  to  be  any  hell  at  all  in  the  world 
to  come.  There  are  many  able  and  scholarly  men 
who  say,  There  is  no  hell  except  the  hell  a man 
makes  for  himself  in  the  life  that  now  is,  the  hell  of 
his  own  tormenting  conscience  and  the  hell  of  trou- 
bles arising  from  his  own  misdoings.”  An  intelli- 
gent woman  said  to  me  a while  ago,  ‘'Why,  Mr. 
Torrey,  you  don't  believe  in  hell ! ” It  is  not  a ques- 
tion of  what  I believe,  but  of  what  God  says.  What 
does  God  say?  Turn  to  Matthew  5:29,  30,  “And 
if  thy  right  eye  causeth  thee  to  stumble,  pluck  it  out, 
and  cast  it  from  thee:  for  it  is  profitable  for  thee 
that  one  of  thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  thy 
whole  body  be  cast  into  hell.  If  thy  right  hand 
causeth  thee  to  stumble,  cut  it  off,  and  cast  it  from 
thee:  for  it  is  profitable  for  thee  that  one  of  thy 
members  should  perish,  and  not  thy  whole  body  go 
into  hell/^  Turn  to  Luke  12:4,  5 and  read  what 
God  says.  “ Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the 
body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can 
do.  But  I will  warn  you  whom  ye  shall  fear:  Fear 
him,  who  after  he  hath  killed,  hath  power  to  cast 
into  hell;  yea,  I say  unto  you.  Fear  him.”  Turn  to 
the  last  book  in  the  Bible  and  next  to  the  last  chap- 
ter in  the  Bible,  the  eighth  verse  (Rev.  21:8)  and 
read  what  God  says.  “ But  for  the  fearful,  and  un- 
believing, and  abominable,  and  murderers,  and  for- 
nicators, and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  all  liars, 
their  part  shall  be  in  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire 
and  brimstone;  which  is  the  second  death/^ 

(2)  Then  there  are  many  who  believe  that  there 
is  to  be  a future  hell  but  they  do  not  believe  it  will 
be  everlasting.  Many  say  to  me,  “ You  don't  believe 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  ? 


209 


In  everlasting  punishment,  do  you  ? Again  I say 
it  is  not  a question  of  what  I believe  or  what  you 
believe,  but  of  what  God  says.  Turn  to  Matthew 
25 : 41  and  read,  Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them 
on  the  left  hand.  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into 
the  eternal  fire,  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels.'"  Compare  that  with  Revelation  20 : 10, 
where  we  are  told  definitely  about  that  fire  that  is 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  and  about  its 
duration.  This  is  what  we  read,  And  the  devil 
that  deceived  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone,  where  are  also  the  beast  and  the 
false  prophet  (in  the  next  to  the  closing  verse  of  the 
preceding  chapter  compared  with  the  preceding  verse 
of  this  chapter  we  are  told  that  the  Beast  and  the 
false  prophet  had  already  been  there  a thousand 
years)  and  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night 
for  ever  and  ever!'  Turn  to  Revelation  14:9-11 
and  read,  If  any  man  worshippeth  the  beast  and 
his  image  and  receiveth  a mark  on  his  forehead,  or 
upon  his  hand,  he  also  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  is  prepared  unmixed  in  the  cup 
of  his  anger ; and  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and 
brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in 
the  presence  of  the  Lamb:  and  the  smoke  of  their 
torment  goeth  up  forever  and  ever;  and  they  have 
no  rest  day  and  night,  they  that  worship  the  beast 
and  his  image  and  whoso  receiveth  the  mark  of  his 
name."  Turn  once  more  to  Revelation  20:15 
where  we  are  told  plainly  what  will  come  to  pass  at 
the  judgment  of  the  great  White  Throne,  at  the  end 
of  the  Millennium : And  if  any  was  not  found 

written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into  the  lake 


210 


THE  GOSPEL  FOR  TO-DAY 


of  fire/’  Is  your  name  written  in  the  Book  of  Life? 
If  it  is  not  you  would  better  speed  up  and  get  it 
written  there  to-night,  or  you  will  spend  an  endless 
eternity  in  Hell.  I do  not  state  that  as  my  own 
opinion,  I declare  it  as  God’s  Word  plainly  set  forth 
in  His  Book. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place.  Not  a few  wise  men,  as 
the  world  counts  zvisdom,  not  a few  prominent 
theologians,  differ  from  God  about  a future  proba- 
tion. There  are  many  men,  oftentimes  men  whom 
the  world  considers  very  wise,  who  say  with  great 
positiveness  that  if  men  do  not  repent  of  their  sins 
and  accept  Jesus  Christ  now  in  this  life  they  will  get 
another  chance  to  repent  and  turn  to  Christ  after 
they  have  died.  I used  to  believe  that  myself.  But 
what  does  God  say?  Turn  to  John  8:  21.  Read  for 
yourself  what  God  says  through  the  lips  of  His  Son, 
Who  spoke  the  very  words  of  God,  ''  He  said  there- 
fore again  unto  them,  I go  away,  and  ye  shall  seek 
me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sin:  whither  I go,  ye  can- 
not come.”  Here  the  Lord  Jesus  speaking  for  God 
declares  in  the  plainest  kind  of  language  that  if  men 
die  in  their  sin  they  cannot  go  where  He  goes.  Turn 
to  Hebrews  9 : 27  and  read  what  God  says,  It  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the 
judgment.”  In  these  words  God  plainly  declares 
that  what  comes  after  death  is  not  another  probation 
but  ''  the  judgment.”  If  you  still  have  any  doubt  as 
to  what  God  says  on  this  point,  turn  to  2 Corinthians 
5:  10,  For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done, 
whether  it  be  good  or  bad.”  Here  we  are  distinctly 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  ? 


211 


told  that  the  basis  of  the  judgment  will  be  the 

things  done  in  the  body/^  i.  e.,  the  things  done 
before  we  leave  this  present  life,  the  things  done  ’’ 
before  we  “ shuffle  off  this  mortal  coil,”  the  things 
done  while  we  are  still  in  the  body,  the  things  done 
this  side  the  grave.  And  here  again  God  is  right. 
God  is  always  right  and  any  mans  who  differs  from 
God  is  always  wrong. 

5.  In  the  fifth  place.  Very  many  men,  including 
some  of  the  brightest  thinkers  and  most  brilliant 
writers,  differ  from  God  regarding  the  way  of  sal- 
vation. Many  men  say  that  if  a man  lives  a good 
moral  life  he  will  be  saved.”  They  say,  ‘‘  He  may 
be  a Jew,  or  a Mohammedan,  or  a Buddhist,  or  a 
Christian,  but  if  he  is  only  sincere  he  will  be  saved 
just  the  same.”  They  say,  No  man  will  be  lost 
simply  because  he  did  not  believe  on  Jesus  Christ 
and  confess  Him  before  the  world.”  When  I lived 
in  Chicago  a preacher  who  had  a very  wide  reputa- 
tion for  his  ability  and  who  claimed  to  be  a Chris- 
tian said  not  long  after  the  death  of  Colonel  Robert 
Ingersoll,  Heaven  or  any  good  country  will  wel- 
come a man  like  Colonel  Ingersoll.”  And  the  in- 
fidels applauded  when  he  said  it,  and  exclaimed, 
“ What  a broad-minded  preacher.”  I suppose  that 
this  professedly  Christian  preacher  was  highly 
pleased  to  get  the  applause  of  the  avowed  enemies 
of  Jesus  Christ.  But  what  does  God  say?  Turn  to 
the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  in  John  14:6, 

I am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life:  No  man 

COMETH  UNTO  THE  FATHER  BUT  BY  (THROUGH) 

ME.”  Turn  to  Acts  4: 12,  "'Neither  is  there  salva- 
tion in  any  other:  for  there  is  none  other  name  un- 


212 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


der  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be 
saved/’  Turn  to  John  3:  18,  ‘‘  He  that  believeth  on 
him  is  not  conaemned:  but  he  that  believeth  not  is 
condemned  already  because  he  hath  not  believed  in 
the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God/^  Turn 
to  John  3 : 36,  ‘‘  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life:  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall 
not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him/' 
Turn  to  Romans  10:9,  10,  If  thou  shalt  confess 
with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in 
thine  heart  that  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou 
shalt  be  saved;  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth 
unto  righteousness;  and  with  the  mouth  confession 
is  made  unto  salvation."  Turn  to  the  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Himself  in  Matthew  10:32,  33,  “Who- 
soever therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him 
will  I confess  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men, 
him  will  I also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven/’  There  is  no  mistaking  the  meaning  of 
these  words  by  any  man  who  desires  to  know  what 
God’s  Word  really  does  say. 

6.  In  the  sixth  place.  Many  thoughtful  men  in- 
cluding not  a few  professors  in  Methodist  and  other 
professedly  Christian  colleges  and  universities  and 
theological  seminaries,  differ  from  God  regarding  the 
conditions  of  entering  into  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Many  men  say  that  the  way  to  get  into  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  by  leading  an  upright  life,  by  treating 
your  wife  well  and  your  children  well,  and  being 
honest  in  business,  being  kind  to  the  poor,  prac- 
tising “ the  social  gospel,”  etc.,  etc.  Others  say  that 
the  way  to  enter  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  by  being 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE! 


213 


baptised,  and  uniting  with  the  church,  partaking  of 
the  Communion,  reading  the  Bible,  saying  your 
prayers,  going  to  confession,  and  doing  other  re- 
ligious works.  Others  say  that  the  way  to  enter  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  by  having  a good  ancestry,  be- 
ing carefully  reared  and  well  educated  in  Christian 
schools  and  colleges.  But  what  does  God  say?  Turn 
to  John  3 : 3,  5 and  you  will  see  exactly  what  God 
says.  ‘"Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him.  Verily, 
verily,  I say  unto  thee.  Except  a man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  see  the  Kingdom  of  God.  . . , Jesus 
answered.  Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  thee,  Except  a 
man  be  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit  he  cannot  enter 
into  the  Kingdom  of  God.'’  Turn  to  Titus  3 : 5, 
“ Not  by  works  done  in  righteousness,  v/hich  we  did 
ourselves,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us, 
through  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Spirit”  God  says  that  the  only  way  to 
enter  the  Kingdom  and  be  saved  is  by  being  born 
again,  becoming  a new  creation  through  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us. 

7.  In  the  seventh  place.  Very  many  men  differ 
from  God  regarding  the  best  time  to  repent  and  ac- 
cept Christ  Many  of  you  here  to-night  differ  from 
God  concerning  that.  Many  men  are  saying  that 
there  will  be  some  day  a better  time  than  to-night 
to  repent  of  your  sins  and  turn  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
to  confess  Christ  before  the  world.  Many  of  you 
here  to-night  are  saying  it,  or  thinking  it  if  you  do 
not  actually  say  it,  or  acting  it  if  you  do  not  dis- 
tinctly think  it.  But  what  does  God  say?  Listen. 
2 Corinthians  6:2,  “ Behold,  now  is  the  acceptable 
time;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation/'  Listen 


214 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO-DAY 


again,  Hebrews  3 : 7,  The  Holy  Spirit  saith,  to-day 
if  ye  will  hear  his  voice/'  Listen  again  to  Proverbs 
27:1,  “Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  a day  may  bring  forth/'  Listen 
once  more,  Proverbs  29:1,  “He  that  being  often 
reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  de- 
stroyed, and  that  without  remedy/'  Felix,  the  great 
Roman  Governor  of  old,  fancied  there  would  be  a 
“ more  convenient  season  " and  waited  for  it,  but  he 
never  found  it.  That  is  why  he  will  spend  eternity 
in  Hell. 

These  are  some  of  the  things  that  men  say  and 
some  of  the  things  that  God  says.  Which  will  you 
believe?  I say  with  Paul,  “let  God  be  found  true 
and  every  man  a liar." 

But  perhaps  some  one  here  will  say,  “ But  I don't 
believe  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God."  My  friend, 
did  it  ever  occur  to  you  that  doubting  a fact  does 
not  alter  the  fact?  Did  it  ever  occur  to  you  that 
your  not  believing  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of  God 
does  not  alter  in  the  least  the  fully  proven  fact 
that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God? 

At  the  time  of  the  Boxer  uprising  in  China  some 
of  the  Boxers  did  not  believe  they  could  be  killed 
by  bullets.  They  thought  their  incantations  and 
strange  rites  made  them  invulnerable.  These  men 
were  very  honest  and  entirely  sincere  about  this  be- 
lief. A Chinese  army  officer  demanded  that  they 
prove  their  sincerity  by  drawing  up  in  line  that  he 
might  have  his  soldiers  shoot  at  them.  They  im- 
mediately consented,  they  were  very  sincere.  They 
drew  up  in  line  and  fearlessly  faced  the  firing  squad. 
The  Chinese  soldiers  blazed  away  and  the  Boxers 


WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE  ! 216 


dropped  dead.  Their  doubt  of  the  power  of  bullets 
to  kill  them  did  not  alter  the  fact.  Your  doubt  that 
the  Bible  is  God's  Word  does  not  alter  the  fact,  not 
one  iota.  Suppose  for  a moment  that  the  Bible  turns 
out  to  be  the  Word  of  God.  You  must  admit  that 
there  is  at  least  a possibility  that  the  Bible  may  be 
the  Word  of  God.  You  must  admit  that  the  men 
and  women  who  are  really  living  nearest  God  and 
know  God  best  believe  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of 
God.  Suppose  they  prove  to  be  right.  Where  then 
will  you  be?  Damned.  And  that  is  just  exactly 
what  you  will  be  if  you  go  on  doubting  God's  Word 
and  rejecting  God's  Son,  listening  to  the  voice  of 
men  rather  than  to  the  voice  of  God. 

God  says  that  there  is  a Devil  and  that  you  need 
Christ's  help  against  his  cunning  and  power;  God 
says  that  there  is  a future  judgment  that  we  must 
all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  to  re- 
ceive the  things  done  in  the  body;  God  says  that 
there  is  a Hell  and  that  it  is  a place  of  torment  where 
all  who  reject  Christ  in  the  life  that  now  is  will 
spend  eternity ; God  says  that  there  is  no  future  pro- 
bation, that  the  issues  of  eternity  are  settled  in  the 
life  that  now  is ; God  says  that  there  is  but  one  way 
to  be  saved,  i.  e.,  by  accepting  Jesus  Christ  as  our 
Saviour,  surrendering  ourselves  to  Him  as  our  Lord, 
and  confessing  Him  as  such  before  the  world;  God 
says  that  the  only  way  to  enter  the  Kingdom  of  God 
is  by  being  born  again  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  upon  our  accepting  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
God  says  that  the  best  time  to  accept  Christ  and  to 
be  saved  is  right  now.  Behold,  now  is  the  accept- 
able time."  ‘^The  Holy  Spirit  sayeth  to-day." 


216 


THE  GOSPEL  FOE  TO  DAY 


“ Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow ; for  thou  knowest 
not  what  a day  may  bring  forth.”  “ He  that  being 
often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly 
be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy.” 

Who  will  turn  from  sin  and  unbelief  and  turn  to 
Christ  right  now? 


PvinUd  in  the  United  States  of  America 


EVANGELISTIC  WORK 


OZORA  8,  DAVIS 

President^ 

Chicago  Theological  Seminary 

Evangelistic  Preaching 

With  Sermon  Outlines  and 
Talks  to  Children  and  Young 
People.  $1.50 

“The  best  help  on  this  important 
subject  that-  we  have  ever  seen. 

Sets  forth  with  skill  and  complete- 
ness the  method  of  evangelism  that 
best  appeals  to  the  men  and  women 
of  the  present  day.” — C.  E,  World. 

WILLIAM  E.  BIEDERWOLF """ 

Sec.  The  National  Federated  Evangelistic  Committee 

Evangelism 

Its  Justification — Operation — Value.  $1.75 

“It  is  a text-book  and  a call.  Every  chapter  is  full 
of  value.  It  tells  how  to  give  the  invitation  and  how  to 
conduct  the  after-meeting.  It  is  a book  for  every  on^ 
who  is  interested  in  doing  evangelistic  work.” 

Herald  and  Presbyter. 

FREDERICK  L.  FAGLEY 

Executive  Secretary  Commission  on  Evangelisi% 
Congregation  Churches. 

Parish  Evangelism 

An  Outline  of  a Year’s  Program.  $1.00 

Mr.  Fagley  lays  down  a sensible,  workable  plan  of 
work,  including  the  formalities  and  maintenance  of  an 
evangelistic  committee,  a program  of  preaching,  methods 
of  personal  work,  deepening  of  the  prayer-life,  etc, 

J.  W.  PORTER 

The  Assurance  of  Salvation 

And  Other  Evangelistic  Sermons.  $1.25 

“Sermons  of  the  distinctly  orthodox  type  and  sug*' 
gestive  in  outline  and  illustration.  Warm  the  soul  and 
stimulate  the  thought.” — Evangelical  Messenger, 

CHARLES  FORBES  TAYLOR  (The  Boy  Evan- 

geiist)  Riveter’s  Gang 

and  Other  Revival  Addresses.  $1.25 

“The  value  of  this  book  lies  not  alone  in  the  anecdotes 
and  sermons  that  it  contains,  but  in  the  illustration  of 
bow  a successful  evangelistic  preacher  may  enforce  his 
teaching.” — Lookout. 


BIBLE  STUDY 


P.  WHITWELL  WILSON 
Author  of  the  **Christ  We  Forget** 

The  Vision  We  Forget 

A Layman’s  Eeading  of 
the  Book  of  Kevelation. 

$2.00 

‘‘Certainly  this  is  the  most  en- 
tertaining treatise  on  the  Revela- 
tion ever  written.  Will  make  the 
Revelation  a new  book  in  the 
reading  of  many  Christians.  It 
brings  the  Revelation  down  into 
the  present  day  and  makes  it  all 
intensely  vital  and  modern.’" 

C.  World. 


BOOK  OF  REVELATION 


THE  VISION 
WE  FORGET 


Ely  P WHTTWEU  WILSOW 


J.  J.  ROSS 


The  author  of 
**The  Kingdom  in  Mystery.** 


Thinking  Through  the  New  Testament 
An  Outline  Study  of  Every  Book  In  the 
New  Testament.  $1.75 


A course  of  study  in  the  books  of  the  New  Testament. 
Dr.  Ross  has  prepared  a volume  which  can  be  used  by 
the  individual  student  as  well  as  by  study  groups. 


FREDERIC  B.  OXTOBY 

Making  the  Bible  Real 

Introductory  Studies  in  the  Bible.  $1.00 

In  simple,  direct  language.  Dr.  Oxtoby  brings  his 
readers  into  close,  intimate  contact  with  the  wonderful 
story  of  God’s  chosen  People,  their  Land,  their  History, 
their  Prophets  and  their  Literature. 

PHILIP  MAURO  Author  of  **The  Number  of  Man** 
Bringing  Back  the  King 
Another  Volume  on  the  Kingdom.  $1.00 

Continuing  his  study  of  the  Kingdom,  the  author  in 
this  volume  sets  forth  the  relation  of  King  David  with 
the  Gospel. 

PHILIP  MAURO 

Our  Liberty  in  Christ 

A Study  in  Galatians.  $1.25 

An  exposition  of  Galatians  from  the  standpoint  that 
its  main  theme  is  “the  Liberty  wherewith  Christ  has 
made  us  free.”  Special  attention  is  given  to  the  unfold- 
ing  of  the  remarkable  “allegory”  in  Chapter  TV. 


PRAYER  AND  DEVOTIONAL 


H.  L.  WILLETT  and  C,  C,  MORRISON 

The  Daily  Altar 

An  Aid  to  Private  Devotion  and  Family 
Worship.  $1.50 

A book  that  has  come  for  just  such  a time  as  this. 
Some  churches  report  that  they  are  growing  a new  re- 
ligious spirit  in  their  congregation  through  the  ministry 
of  this  book  in  the  homes  of  their  peop^. 

F.  B.  MEYER 

Daily  Devotional  Commentary 

Notes  on  Every  Chapter  Throughout  the 
Bible.  Five  Volumes,  each  75c.  The  Set,  $3.75 

“The  author  has  selected  from  each  chapter  of  the 
Bible  a keynote  which  epitomizes  the  thought  and  teach- 
ing of  the  entire  chapter.  These  inspiring  notes  consti- 
tute an  exposition  of  the  most  important  facts  and  doc- 
trines of  Holy  Scripture,*'— Christian  Work. 

E.  M.  BOUNDS 

Heaven 

A Place,  A City,  A Home. 

$1.25 

“Possessed  of  a wonderfully  full 
knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture,  a man 
of  unswerving  faith  and  mystical 
insight,  Mr.  Bounds  writes  with  a 
certitude,  confidence  and  joyous  an- 
ticipation of  the  eternal  felicity 
awaiting  the  faithful  believer.  This 
book  should  be  hailed  with  unfeigned 
satisfaction  by  devout  Christian  men 
and  women.’* — Christian  Work, 


EDWARD  LEIGH  PELL  Author  of  **Secrets  of 
" Sunday  School  Teaching** 

What  Did  Jesus  Really  Teach  About 
Prayer?  $1.50 

Dr.  Pell’s  new  book  is  a helpful  inquiry  into  the  ques« 
tion  of  how  the  Christian  of  to-day  should  use  prayer, 
the  greatest  weapon  in  his  arsenal,  and  an  emphasis  of 
the  fact  that  Christ  in  this,  as  in  all  other  matters  re- 
lating to  spiritual  life  and  growth,  is  the  great  Pattern 
for  us  all. 


CHURCH  AND  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  WORK 


ROGER  W.  BABSON 

The  Future  of  the  Churches 

Historic  and  Economic  Facts.  $1.00 

Mr.  Babson  shows  in  a constructive  way  how  the  fu- 
ture prosperity  and  achievement  of  the  church  are  de- 
pendent on  its  ability  to  enter  fully  into  the  manifold 
life  of  the  people,  and  stand  as  firmly  for  social  and 
civic  righteousness  as  for  the  meeting  and  supplying 
distinctly  spiritual  needs. 


Pres.  V/ILLIAM  ALLEN  HARPER 

Author  of  “The  New  Church  For  The  New  Time*'  etc. 

The  Church  in  the  Present  Crisis  $1.75 

Dr.  Harper's  new  book  is  a refreshing,  stimulating  an- 
tidote to  the  host  of  works  concerning  the  church's  fail- 
ure and  of  mankind’s  growing  worse  and  worse  year  by 
year.  Dr.  Harper  is  fully  aware  of  what  the  church 
lacks  and  of  the  necessity  for  new  methods  and  fresh 
life  and  he  discusses  various  modus  operandi  which  should 
lead  to  a larger  increase  of  usefulness  and  power. 


P.E.  BURROUGHS  Author  of  **The  Present-Day 
,11  , , Sunday  School,** 

Building  a Successful  Sunday  School 

$1.50 

A valuable  study  of  means  and  methods  from  tho 
adoption  of  which  the  best  results  may  be  looked  for, 
in  the  management  of  a large  school.  Dr.  Burroughs 
writes  out  of  a large  experience,  and  his  suggestions 
and  ]^ans  of  management  are  of  an  unusually  valuable 
sort. 


ROBERT  F.  Y.  PIERCE  international  Illustrator 

Blackboard  Efficiency 

Illustrated  $1.50 

A new  book  by  the  author  of  “Pictured  Truth"  and 
“Pencil  Points"  contains  a new  wealth  of  lessons  on 
both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  with  sketches  for 
blackboard  work.  The  simplicity  and  charm  of  Dr. 
Pierce’s  work  is  well  known.  His  “Chalk  Sketches"  are 
so  simple  that  any  teacher  can  draw  them,  yet  wonder- 
fully pointed  and  helpful  in  bringing  out  the  essence  oi 
the  lessons. 


", 


i 


GOULD  LIBRARY 

eastern  nazarene  college 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BV3797  .T56  GOULD 

Torrey  R.  A./The  gospel  for  to-day  : ne 


3 2999  00042  6879 


