3  3433  06824389  2 


i!l!i!!!|f 


ijiiiii-  .::^  Way  Made  Plai  n 

lames  t1.Bi^oke<i,D.D. 


■:> 


"S 


-rooKi 


The  Way  Made  Plain 


By  the 

Rev.  JAMES  H.  BROOKES,  D.  D. 

Juthor  of  **Hozu  to  be  Saved^^  etc. 


>   0«  9     > 
3    ■»        '  O 


J»,    ' 


PHILADELPHIA : 

American  Sunday-School  Union, 


[8i6  Chestnut  Street 


t  **  •     • 

*       c  «        • 
«  c  «      *  • 


PREFACE 

THOSE  who  carefully  read  the  first  tMrteen  verses 
of  the  tenth  chapter  of  Romans  cannot  fail  to 
perceive  the  logical  order  and  marvellous  clearness 
with  which  the  Holy  Ghost  there  sets  forth  the  Way 
of  Life.  It  is  the  aim  of  this  little  book  to  follow  that 
order,  and  in  some  feeble  measure  to  reflect  that 
clearness.  Hence  the  Scriptures  are  closely  followed 
at  every  step  of  the  argument,  because  they  alone  can 
guide  our  feet  in  the  paths  of  peace. 

Frequently  has  the  author,  when  dealing  with  in- 
quiring souls,  undertaken  a  simple  exposition  of  this 
instructive  and  interesting  passage,  and  often  has  the 
Lord  been  pleased  to  own  it  in  imparting  light  to  the 
darkened  understanding  and  comfort  to  the  troubled 
heart  of  the  anxious  sinner.  To  his  blessing  and  favor 
it  is  now  commended  with, the, earnest  prayer  that,  as 
sent  forth  by  th-i ,  Ajnerioan  Sunday-School  Union,  it 
may  be  more  greatly  owned  in  His  service,  to  the  glory 
of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghosf  forever. 


3 


c         ^    *■ 

t>  c   t 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XL 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 


PAGE 

Man's  Need  of  Salvation  ...  7 
Man's  Need  of  Salvation  .  .  .19 
Man's  Sincerity  Cannot  Save  Him  .  29 
Man's  Sincerity  Cannot  Save  Him  .  40 
Man's  Righteousness  Cannot  Save  Him  54 
Man's  Righteousness  Cannot  Save  Him  62 
Christ  the  Saviour  of  the  Believer  .  yj 
Christ  the  Saviour  of  the  Believer  .  ZZ 
No  Hope  for  the  Sinner  in  the  Law  .  103 
No  Hope  for  the  Sinner  in  the  Law  .  115 
Nothing  Between  the  Sinner  and  the 

Saviour 132 

Nothing  Between  the  Sinner  and  the 

Saviour i44 

Belief  and  Confession  .  .  .163 
Belief  and  Confession  .  .  .176 
The  Believer's  Safety  .  .  .194 
The  Believer's  Safety  .  .  .  208 
The  Believer  Calling  on  the  Lord  .  229 
The  Believer  Calling  on  the  Lord  .  245 
Assurance  of  Faith  ....  263 
Assurance  of  Faith  ....  278 
Index 299 


The  Way  Made  Plain 

CHAPTEE  I 

MAN'S  NEED  OF  SALVATION 

"  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that 
they  might  be  saved." — Romans  x.  1. 

IN  the  great  work  of  delivering  lost  men  from  the 
ruin  in  which  they  are  involved,  the  Holy  Ghost 
produces  the  conviction  that  they  need  to  be  saved. 
Without  this  conviction  "  they  are  like  the  deaf  adder 
that  stoppeth  her  ear  ;  which  will  not  hearken  to  the 
voice  of  charmers,  charming  never  so  wisely."  *  How- 
ever alarming  their  state  as  "  strangers  from  the  cove- 
nants of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in 
the  world,"  ^  and  however  appalling  their  peril  as  ex- 
posed to  the  righteous  infliction  of  "  indignation  and 
wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of 
man  that  doeth  evil,"  ^  they  neither  understand  their 
condition  nor  perceive  their  danger  until  made  to  feel 
that  they  are  sinners. 

There  are  multitudes  of  our  race  of  whom  it  can  be 
truthfully  said  that  "  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross 
of  Christ :  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  God  is 
their  belly,  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who 

» Ps.  Iviii.  4,  5.  2  Eph.  ii.  12.  ^jjora.  ii.  8,  9. 

7 


8  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

mind  earthly  things  ; "  *  and  yet  they  go  their  down- 
ward way  profoundly  indifferent  to  their  guilt  and 
their  doom.  They  eat  and  drink,  they  awake  and 
sleep,  they  give  their  thoughts  and  time  entirely  to 
the  pursuits  of  the  world,  and  run  their  round  of 
business  or  of  pleasure,  without  one  correct  concep- 
tion of  the  Being  who  made  them,  and  without  one 
spark  of  spiritual  life. 

Their  ignorance  of  their  real  character  and  their 
insensibility  to  their  eternal  interests  furnish  con- 
clusive evidence  both  of  their  sinfulness  and  of  their 
deplorable  unconsciousness  of  sin.  Hence  the  first 
practical  step  towards  their  recovery  is  taken  when 
the  Divine  Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  to  "  reprove  [or 
rather,  to  convince]  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  righteous- 
ness, and  of  judgment,"  ^  leads  them  to  see  that  they 
are  undone,  and  need  an  ahnighty  Arm  to  rescue 
them  from  impending  destruction. 

The  agency  He  employs  in  teaching  them  this 
essential  and  fundamental  truth  is  the  revealed  word 
of  God,  or  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  whether  communi- 
cated in  the  pulpit  or  through  the  press ;  whether 
made  known  in  public  instruction  or  in  private  study ; 
whether  carried  to  the  heart  by  a  popular  address  or 
by  a  personal  appeal.  "  By  the  word  of  the  Lord 
were  the  heavens  made,"  ^  and  in  the  new  creation 
"  the  word  of  God  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper 
than  any  twoedged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  divi- 
ding asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and 
marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 

»Phil.  iii.  18,  19.  ^  j^^jq  ^vi.  8.  ^Ps.  xxxiii.  6. 


man's  need  of  salvation  9 

of  the  heart."  '  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hear- 
mg  by  the  word  of  God."  ^ 

If,  therefore,  we  would  inquire  whether  man,  as 
such,  and  as  born  into  the  world,  is  in  urgent  need 
of  salvation,  we  must  surely  consult  the  testimony  of 
the  "  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever."  ^  Eemember,  it  is  the  word  of  God^  and  He 
is  too  wise  to  err,  too  holy  to  tell  a  lie,  too  just  to 
bring  false  accusations  against  His  creatures,  and  too 
kind  to  heap  upon  them  undeserved  reproaches.  Let 
those  who  claim  that  they  are  entitled  to  His  favor 
on  the  ground  of  their  own  merits  make  good  their 
claim,  and  most  gladly  will  He  recognize  it  and  bestow 
upon  them  the  full  reward  of  their  vu^tue.  He  is  not 
an  unfeeling  t3rrant  rejoicing  in  the  exercise  of  an  un- 
restrained power  to  crush  and  kill ;  nor  is  He  an  un- 
merciful Judge,  eagerly  inclining  to  inflict  upon  the 
terrified  delinquent  the  extremest  rigors  of  the  law 
without  regard  to  the  palliating  circumstances  under 
which  the  offence  was  committed.  Not  only  His 
name,  but  His  very  nature,  is  "  Love ;  "  ^  and  it  is  cer- 
tain that  His  testimony  concerning  man,  and  His 
sentence  in  view  of  that  testimony,  are  in  perfect 
harmony  with  His  boundless  benevolence  and  His 
inexhaustible  patience. 

But  every  one  must  at  once  see  the  utter  absurdity 
of  accepting  as  true  the  revelation  which  He  has  made 
of  His  attributes  in  the  Bible,  and  of  rejecting  as  false 
the  revelation  which  He  has  made  in  the  same  Bible 

^Heb.  iv.  12.  ^j^om.  x.  17. 

5 1  Peter  i.  23.  *  1  John  iv.  8. 


10  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

of  ourselves.  Either  all  is  true  or  all  is  false,  or,  at 
best,  there  is  no  criterion  to  distinguish  the  true  from 
the  false,  except  the  odd  fancies  and  foolish  whims  of 
the  reader.  If  one  is  at  liberty  to  set  aside  as  in- 
credible what  the  Scriptures  affirm  of  man's  char- 
acteristics, another  is  at  equal  liberty  to  treat  with 
contempt  what  they  declare  of  God's  perfections  ; 
and  thus  are  we  hurled  back  into  the  darkness  of 
nature,  or  left  to  grope  our  way  to  the  unknown 
future  by  the  feeble  glimmerings  of  reason. 

It  must  be  obvious,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  that 
consistency,  logic,  and  sound  sense  require  us  to  place 
the  teachings  of  the  Bible  on  a  common  footing  with 
respect  to  their  authority,  authenticity,  and  genuine- 
ness. Especially  is  our  faith  demanded  in  a  doctrine 
which  pervades  the  whole  book  from  first  to  last,  and 
which  is  interwoven  in  all  the  narratives,  in  all  the 
Psalms,  in  all  the  prophecies,  in  all  the  parables,  in 
all  the  sermons,  and  in  all  the  epistles,  that  are  con- 
tained in  the  inspired  records.  If,  then,  it  can  be 
shown  that  a  uniform  testimony  is  borne  from  Genesis 
to  Eevelation  touching  man's  pressing  need  of  salva- 
tion, we  are  compelled  to  conclude  that  by  nature  we 
are  fallen,  lost,  and  ruined  ;  or,  as  the  only  alterna- 
tive, we  are  forced  to  deny  that  God  has  spoken  the 
truth  in  His  blessed  Word. 

My  argument  here  is  not  designed  for  the  sceptic 
who  can  never  be  convinced  of  his  fatal  error  by  hu- 
man wisdom,  but  for  the  reader  whose  ear  has  been 
opened  to  hear  the  "  still  small  voice " '   breathing 

*1  Kiiii^s  xix.  12. 


man's  need  of  salvation  11 

through  the  Book  of  books,  and  whose  head  is  rever- 
ently bowed  in  the  presence  of  its  recognized  divinity. 
Taking  it  for  granted  that  those  for  whom  these  pages 
are  intended  are,  through  infinite  grace,  j^ast  the  dreary 
region  of  infidehty,  and  that  they  are  now  turning  to 
the  "  living  oracles  "  *  with  the  docility  of  the  child 
Samuel,  who  said,  "  Speak,  Loed  ;  for  thy  servant 
heareth,"  ^  I  desire  to  sum  up  briefly  the  solemn  tes- 
timony which  God  gives  of  man's  condition  apart 
from  redeeming  love,  and,  therefore,  of  man's  un- 
speakable need  of  salvation. 

I.  We  assuredly  learn  from  the  language  which  I 
have  placed  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  that  the 
Jews  as  a  people,  although  they  were  highly  favored 
above  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  were  not  delivered 
from  the  curse  and  dominion  of  sin ;  for  the  apostle 
writes,  "Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to 
God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved."  This 
earnest  expression  of  concern  for  his  countrymen 
would  of  course  be  meaningless  or  self -contradictory 
if  they  were  not  under  the  condemnation  of  God's 
broken  law ;  and  hence  the  inspired  writer,  "  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  ^  asserts  that  they  were  still  un- 
saved. The  unavoidable  inference  which  we  thus 
gather  from  his  words  will  be  confirmed,  and  the  ar- 
gument to  prove  man's  need  of  salvation  will  be 
strengthened,  if  we  glance  at  other  statements  rela- 
tive to  the  condition  of  the  Jewish  nation.  In  the 
ninth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans,  for  exam- 
ple, the  same  inspired  writer  exclaims  with  the  great- 

1  Acts  vii.  38.  '  j  gam.  Hi.  9.  3  2  Peter  i.  21. 


12  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

est  emotion,  "  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my 
conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in 
my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  ac- 
cursed from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh :  who  are  Israelites  ;  to  whom 
pertaineth  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  cov- 
enants, and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service  of 
God,  and  the  promises  ;  whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of 
whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  over 
all,  God  blessed  for  ever.     Amen." ' 

The  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  of  heart 
expressed  in  this  touching  assurance,  and  the  astound- 
ing declaration  that  he  could  wish  that  himself  were 
accursed  from  Christ  for  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh,  are  wholly  unaccountable  on  the 
supposition  that  they  were  already  saved.  No,  they 
were  lost !  and  the  apostle,  taught  by  the  Spirit,  knew 
they  were  lost,  in  the  very  face  of  their  exalted  privi- 
leges and  their  high  religious  character  in  the  estima- 
tion of  men.  To  them  pertained  the  adoption,  and 
the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the 
law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises,  and 
the  fathers,  and  national  connection  with  the  Messiah ; 
but  still  they  needed  to  be  saved.  Many  of  them 
could  say,  as  did  Paul  describing  his  own  state  pre- 
vious to  his  new  birth  by  faith  in  Jesus,  "  Circumcised 
the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin,  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews ;  as  touching  the 
law,  a    Pharisee;    concerning  zeal,   persecuting  the 

'  Roiu.  ix.  1-5. 


man's  need  of  salvation  13 

church ;  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the 
law,  blameless ; "  ^  but  still  they  needed  to  be  saved. 
Many  of  them,  like  the  Pharisee  of  whom  our  Saviour 
speaks,  could  stand  in  the  temple  and  pray  by  them- 
selves, and  say,  "  God,  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men  are,  extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even 
as  this  pubKcan.  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes 
of  all  that  I  possess ; "  ^  but  still  they  needed  to  be 
saved.  Many  of  them  made  broad  their  phylacteries, 
and  enlarged  the  borders  of  their  garments,  and  of- 
fered long  prayers,  and  scrupulously  observed  the 
Sabbath,  and  compassed  sea  and  land  to  gain  one  pros- 
elyte, and  added  to  the  burdensome  requirements  of 
the  ceremonial  law  by  self-imposed  regulations,  and 
in  the  ardor  of  their  devotion  outstripped  the  demands 
of  divine  ordinances  by  keeping  pace  with  the  numer- 
ous traditions  of  the  elders ;  but  still  they  needed  to 
be  saved. 

Eead  the  pathetic  lamentation  of  our  Lord  when 
He  beheld  the  city  of  David  and  wept  over  it :  not 
the  tears  of  silent  sympathy,  as  at  the  grave  of  Laza- 
rus, but  with  all  the  tokens  of  consummate  and  con- 
vulsive grief,  saying,  ^'If  thou  hadst  known,  even 
thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong 
unto  thy  peace !  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine 
eyes."  ^  Eead  the  last  message  which  He  delivered  in 
the  presence  of  the  people  when  He  cried,  "  O  Jeru- 
salem, Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the  prophets,  and 
stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee,  how  often 
would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as 

iPhil.  iii.  5,  6.  ^Luke  xviii.  11,  12.  ^Luke  xix.  42. 


14  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye 
would  not !  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  des- 
olate. For  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  shall  not  see  me 
henceforth,  till  ye  shall  say.  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord." '  Surely  it  requires  no 
other  evidence  to  prove  that  the  Israelites  as  a  bod}^ 
were  unsaved  at  the  time  the  apostle  wrote  ;  but  if  they 
needed  to  be  saved,  what  must  be  said  of  the  rest  of 
mankind  ?  If  they  were  lost,  notwithstanding  their 
favorable  cu^cumstances,  their  peculiar  advantages, 
their  distinguishing  mercies,  their  strict  morality, 
their  religious  fervor,  their  illustrious  ancestry,  and 
their  wonderful  history, — radiant  w^ith  the  glory  of 
Jehovah's  presence, — how  is  it  possible  that  "  sinners 
of  the  Gentiles"^  have  no  need  of  a  gracious  and 
mighty  hand  to  pluck  them  as  brands  from  the  burn- 
ing ?  Should  any  one  reply  to  all  this  that  the  Jews 
were  condemned  for  their  rejection  of  Christ,  I  admit 
the  justice  of  the  answer,  but  immediately  turn  and 
bring  the  charge  of  the  same  stupendous  sin  against 
every  unbeliever  who  may  read  this  book. 

II.  Yes,  my  friend,  you  are  involved  in  the  same 
condemnation,  as  I  shall  now  proceed  to  show,  and 
thus  bring  forward  my  second  argument  to  convince 
you  of  your  need  of  salvation.  All  who  profess  to 
accept  any  portion  of  the  Scriptures  as  inspired  agree 
that  the  words  of  Jesus  must  be  regarded  as  authorita- 
tive and  final  upon  every  doctrine  which  He  teaches. 
Let  us  see,  then,  what  He  repeatedly  affirms  touching 
the  necessity  of  faith  and  the  soul-destroying  crime  of 
» Matt,  xiiii.  37-3©.  '  Gal.  ii.l5. 


man's  need  of  salvation  15 

unbelief.  In  His  memorable  interview  with  Nico- 
demus,  after  setting  forth  the  amazing  love  of  God  in 
the  gift  of  this  dear  Son,  He  adds,  "  He  that  believeth 
on  him  is  not  condemned  :  but  he  that  believeth  not 
is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed 
in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God." ' 

Again  we  hear  His  solemn  testimony,  "  Yerily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life, 
and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation  [or  judgment]  ; 
but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."^  "Then  said 
they  unto  him.  What  shall  we  do,  that  we  might 
work  the  works  of  God  ?  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them.  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on 
him  whom  he  hath  sent."  ^  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life."  ^ 
"  If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your 
sins."  ^  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  I  am  the 
door  of  the  sheep.  .  .  .  But  ye  believe  not,  be- 
cause ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  unto  you."  ^ 
"Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because  that 
Esaias  said  again.  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
hardened  their  heart ;  that  they  should  not  see  with 
their  eyes,  nor  understand  with  their  heart,  and  be 
converted,  and  I  should  heal  them."^  When  the 
Spirit  is  come  He  will  convince  the  world  "  of  sin,  be- 
cause they  believe  not  on  me."^ 

These  passages  are  taken  almost  at  random  from  a 

>  John  iii.  18.  '  John  v.  24.  »  John  vi.  28,  29. 

*  John  vi.  47.  ®  John  viii.  24.  » John  x.  7,  26. 

'  John  xii.  39,  40.  »  John  xvi.  9. 


16  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

single  Gospel,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  there 
is  nothing  in  all  the  word  of  God  to  contradict  them. 
Elsewhere  it  is  written  that  the  Saviour,  whose  infinite 
love  for  the  sinner  led  Him  to  the  cross,  declared 
among  the  last  words  He  uttered  on  earth,  "  He  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned  ; "  '  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
says,  by  the  apostle  John,  "He  that  believeth  not 
God  hath  made  him  a  liar  ;  because  he  believeth  not 
the  record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son."  ^  Such,  then, 
is  the  vital  importance  of  belief  in  Christ,  that  salva- 
tion in  all  its  unutterable  meaning,  in  all  its  boundless 
extent,  in  all  its  everlasting  joys,  depends  upon  its 
exercise ;  and  such  is  the  horrible  sin  of  unbelief  that 
if  persisted  in  to  the  close  of  life,  it  will  certainly 
drown  the  soul  in  perdition. 

How  imperative,  then,  is  the  duty  of  the  unbeliever 
to  flee  for  refuge  to  the  cross  of  Christ !  That  such  a 
refuge  should  have  been  provided  in  the  immeasurable 
grace  and  unsearchable  wisdom  of  God  affords  over- 
whelming demonstration  of  the  fact  that  the  entire 
human  race  was  in  extremest  need:  "For  God  so 
loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."  ^  The  preciousness  of  the 
gift  proves  the  vastness  of  the  want  it  was  designed 
to  meet,  and  the  costliness  of  the  sacrifice  reveals  the 
depth  of  the  woe  it  was  intended  to  reach.  Oh,  if 
man  did  not  need  salvation,  Jesus  had  not  died ;  for 
it  is  inconceivable  that  the  Father  could  have  sent 
Him  forth  from  His  bosom,  and  emptied  Him  of  His 

^  Mark  xvi.  16.  '  1  Johu  v.  10.  'John  iii.  16. 


lY 

divine  and  eternal  glory,  and  humbled  Him  to  be 
made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  and  laid  upon 
Him  the  crushing  burden  of  our  iniquities,  and  looked 
upon  His  prostrate  form  in  Gethsemane,  and  witnessed 
the  blows  that  bruised  His  face,  and  heard  His  dis- 
consolate cry  on  Calvary,  unless  a  stern  necessity  had 
demanded  this  profound  condescension  and  mysterious 
suffering. 

The  Russian  mother,  who  threw  one  and  another, 
and  then  another,  of  her  children  to  the  howling 
wolves  pursuing  her  sleigh,  showed  the  desperate 
straits  to  which  she  was  driven  to  save  her  life ;  and 
the  Russian  serf,  who  stayed  the  hungry  pack  with 
his  own  body  that  his  master  might  escape  their  de- 
vouring jaws,  proved  how  fearful  was  the  emergency 
that  required  such  an  act  of  dauntless  courage  and 
moral  heroism.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this, 
that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends ; "  ^  and 
when  Christ  laid  down  His  life,  not  for  His  friends, 
but  for  His  enemies.  He  gave  the  most  convincing 
proof  of  which  the  human  mind  can  conceive  both  of 
the  greatness  of  His  love  and  the  greatness  of  their 
need. 

Unbelief,  therefore,  is  a  rejection  of  love  in  its 
highest  possible  manifestation,  and  hence  it  is  repre- 
sented as  the  root  of  all  other  sin  and  the  crowning 
iniquity.  It  not  only  sets  at  defiance  the  insulted 
justice  of  God,  but,  far  more,  it  treats  with  disdain  or 
receives  with  unmoved  indifference  His  overtures  of 
mercy.  It  derides  His  authority,  it  despises  His  law, 
» John  XV.  13. 


18  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

it  ridicules  His  warnings,  it  rejects  His  invitations,  it 
slights  His  compassion,  it  calls  Him  a  liar  when  He 
says,  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,"  and 
it  joins  the  ribald  crowd  in  reviling  His  dying  Son, 
or  at  least  it  turns  with  heartless  unconcern  from  that 
wail  of  forsaken  woe  that  shook  the  mighty  pillars  of 
the  globe. 

*^  I  asked  the  heavens,  What  foe  to  God  hath  done 
This  unexampled  deed  ?    The  heavens  exclaim  : 

*  ^  Tivas  man  !  and  we,  in  horror,  snatched  the  sun 
From  such  a  spectacle  of  guilt  and  shame  !  ^ 

**  I  asked  the  Sea  :  the  Sea  in  fury  boiled, 

And  answered  with  his  voice  of  storms, ' '  Ttcas  man  ! 
My  waves  in  panic  at  his  crime  recoiled, 
Disclosed  the  abyss,  and  from  the  centre  ran  ! ' 

^*I  asked  the  Earth  :  the  Earth  replied  aghast, 

* '  Twas  man !  and  such  strange  pangs  my  bosom 
rent. 
That  still  I  groan  and  shudder  at  the  past !  ^ 

To  man,  gay,  smiling,  thoughtless  mail,  I  went, 
And  asked  him  next :  he  turned  a  scornful  eye. 
Shook  his  proud  head,  and  deigned  me  no  reply." 

Think  you  that  a  sin  like  this,  which  remains  un- 
subdued and  unaffected  even  at  the  cross,  can  be  a 
slight  offence,  or  that  man  does  not  need  salvation 
while  it  holds  dominion  over  him  ?  H  every  other 
sin  were  forgiven,  or  if  no  other  sin  had  been  com- 
mitted, this  alone  would  drive  the  unbeliever  away 
forever  from  the  presence  of  God,  and  rear  an  insur- 
mountable barrier  between  his  soul  and  true  happi- 
ness. 


CHAPTEK  II 
MAN'S  NEED  OF  SALVATION 
III 

UNBELIEF  and  all  other  iniquities  spring  from  a 
nature  essentially  corrupt,  according  to  the 
abundant  testimony  of  God,  and  consequently  the 
force  of  the  argument  to  establish  man's  need  of  sal- 
vation becomes  irresistible  if  this  can  be  shown.  Let 
us  look,  then,  at  some  of  the  testimony  as  it  lies  scat- 
tered throughout  the  Bible.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
inspired  word,  and  at  a  period  in  the  history  of  our 
race  which  poets  delight  to  celebrate  as  marked  by 
winning  simplicity  and  crowned  with  childlike  inno- 
cence, we  are  told,  "  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of 
man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagina- 
tion of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  con- 
tinually."* The  words  every  and  only  and  evil  and 
continually  are  exceedingly  significant  in  this  connec- 
tion, for  they  show  that  the  whole  fabrication  or 
formation  which  distinguished  him  from  the  brute 
creation,  including  all  the  imaginations,  desires,  and 
purposes  of  the  soul,  were  sinful,  and  sinful  unceas- 
ingly. 

Again,  we  read  :  "  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and, 
behold,  it  was  corrupt ;  for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his 
way  upon  the  earth."  ^     Again,  hundreds   of  years 

*  Gen.  vi.  5.  '  Gen.  vi.  12. 

19 


20  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

later,  it  is  said:  *'The  Lord  looked  down  from 
heaven  upon  the  children  of  men,  to  see  if  there  were 
any  that  did  understand,  and  seek  God.  They  are  all 
gone  aside,  they  are  all  together  become  filthy  :  there 
is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one."  '  Again, 
Jehovah  says,  by  the  prophet  Isaiah :  "  The  whole 
head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  From  the 
sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no  sound- 
ness in  it ;  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrefying 
sores :  they  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound  up, 
neither  mollified  with  ointment."^  Again,  He  de- 
clares, by  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  that  "  the  heart  is 
deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wucked : 
who  can  know  it  ?  "  ^ 

Passing  by  other  testimony  in  the  old  covenant 
Scriptures  which  could  be  gathered  from  every  book, 
and  in  some  form  from  nearly  every  chapter,  we  hear 
our  Lord  saying,  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh,"  ^  and,  "  From  ^^ithin,  out  of  the  heart  of  men, 
proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  mur- 
ders, thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit,  lascivi- 
ousness,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness: 
all  these  evil  things  come  from  within,  and  defile  the 
man."  * 

Glancing  forward  a  little  farther,  we  find  the  in- 
spired apostle  writing,  "  We  have  before  proved  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  they  are  all  under  sin ;  as  it 
is  written,  there  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one : 
There  is  none  that  understandeth,  there  is  none  that 

*  Ps.  xiv.  2,  3.  '  Isa.  i.  5,  6.  '  Jer.  xvii.  9. 

*  John  iii.  6.  '  Mark  vii.  21-23. 


man's  need  of  salvation  21 

seeketh  after  God.  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way, 
they  are  together  become  unprofitable  ;  there  is  none 
that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one.  Their  throat  is  an  open 
sepulchre  ;  with  their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit ; 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips  :  whose  mouth  is 
full  of  cursing  and  bitterness  :  their  feet  are  swift  to 
shed  blood  :  destruction  and  misery  are  in  their  ways  : 
and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known  :  there  is 
no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  * 

The  same  apostle  also  says,  "  I  know  that  in  me 
(that  is,  in  my  flesh,)  dwelleth  no  good  thing ; "  ^ 
"  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it  is 
not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can 
be  ; "  ^  and,  "  You  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead 
[not  sick  nor  dying,  but  dead]  in  trespasses  and  sins  ; 
wherein  in  time  past  ye  walked  according  to  the 
course  of  this  world,  according  to  the  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience :  among  whom  also  we  all 
had  our  conversation  in  times  past  in  the  lusts  of  our 
flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
mind ;  and  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even 
as  others."  ^ 

Without  quoting  other  declarations  of  the  same 
import,  enough  has  been  said  to  show  that,  according 
to  the  infallible  testimony  of  God,  man  is  utterly 
ruined.  Whenever,  wherever,  and  however  tried,  he 
has  proved  a  miserable  fail  are.  He  was  tried  in 
Eden,  and  failed  ;  for  having  believed  the  devil's  lie, 

1  Rom.  iii.  9-18.  ^  Eom.  vii.  18. 

'  Rom.  viii.  7.  *  Eph.  ii.  1-3. 


22  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

and  plucked  the  forbidden  fruit,  conscious  guilt  took 
the  place  of  original  innocence,  "  and  Adam  and  his 
wife  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
God  amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden." '  He  was 
tried  before  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  failed,  for 
"  until  the  law  sin  was  in  the  world  ;  "  ^  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  deduces  from  the  universal  prevalence  of  death 
the  universal  supremacy  of  sin  ;  leading  us  to  hear  in 
every  dying  groan  the  thrilling  announcement  and  to 
see  in  every  new-made  grave  the  visible  demonstra- 
tion of  Jehovah's  righteous  abhorrence  of  iniquity. 
He  was  tried  under  the  law,  and  failed ;  for  it  is 
written,  "  We  know  that  what  things  soever  the  law 
saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law :  that 
every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  may 
become  guilty  before  God.  Therefore,  by  the  deeds 
of  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight : 
for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  ^  He  was  tried 
under  grace,  and  failed ;  f or  "  this  is  the  condemnation, 
that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  dark- 
ness rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil."  * 
We  cannot  be  surprised  at  this  repeated  failure 
under  the  most  favorable  circumstances,  when  we 
learn  that  after  Adam  fell  from  the  high  estate  in 
Avhich  he  was  created,  in  the  image  and  likeness  of 
God,  he  "  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his 
image."  ^  "In  Adam  all  die."  ^  "Through  the 
offence  of  one  many  be  dead."  ^     "  By  one  man's  dis- 

1  Gen.  iii.  8.  ^  i^o,^^   ^^  13^  s  j^q^j    m  19^  20. 

<  John  iii.  19.  »  Qen.  v.  3.  ^  1  Cor.  xv.  22. 

'  Rom.  V.  15. 


man's  need  of  salvation  23 

obedience  many  were  made  [or  constituted]  sinners."  ^ 
"  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ? 
not  one."  ^  "  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity ;  and 
in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  ^  We  discover, 
therefore,  that  there  is  an  evil  lying  back  of  mere  out- 
ward transgressions ;  for  God,  who  knows  all  about 
us,  declares  that  we  are  hy  nature  children  of  wrath, 
or  exposed  to  punishment,  and  hence  by  nature  we 
are  corrupt.  We  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding 
what  is  meant  when  it  is  said  that  a  tiger  is  by  nature 
bloodthirsty ;  and  he  who  is  willing  to  accept  God's 
testimony,  although  it  profoundly  abases  self,  can 
have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  what  the  Bible 
means  when  it  says  that  by  nature  we  are  sinful. 

lY.  Out  of  this  corrupt  nature  necessarily  spring 
those  evil  deeds  which  are  plainly  contrary  to  the 
law  of  God,  and  therefore  promptly  recognized  by  an 
enlightened  conscience  as  sinful.  "  Do  men  gather 
grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles  ?  Even  so  every 
good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit;  but  a  corrupt 
tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  A  good  tree  cannot 
bring  forth  evil  fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree  bring 
forth  good  fruit."  ^  Do  what  you  will  with  a  tree  in 
cultivating,  pruning,  or  transplanting  it,  you  can  never 
so  change  its  nature  that  thorns  will  bring  forth  grapes 
and  thistles  will  produce  figs.  So,  do  what  you  will 
with  man  by  all  the  appliances  of  the  highest  culture 
and  the  most  refined  civilization,  you  cannot  so 
change  his  nature  that  it  will  become  holy.     God  can 

'  Rom.  V.  19.  ^  Job  xiv.  4, 

8  Ps.  li.  5.  *  Matt.  vii.  16-18. 


24  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

— and,  blessed  be  His  name  !  He  does — impart  a  new 
nature  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ,  as  revealed  in  His  word;  but  the 
nature  which  we  derive  by  birth  from  our  parents  is 
evil,  and  only  evil,  continually. 

That  the  outward  manifestations  of  such  a  nature 
should  be  in  open  conflict  Avith  the  law  of  God  is  just 
what  might  be  expected.  "  Sin,"  we  are  told,  "  is 
the  transgression  of  the  law  "  ;  ^  or,  to  render  strictly, 
"  sin  is  lawlessness  "  :  it  is  that  spirit  of  insubordina- 
tion, that  inward  resistance  to  Divine  authority,  which 
distinguishes  the  soul,  and  which  finds  expression  in 
unceasing  and  flagrant  disobedience.  The  law  says, 
*'  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with 
all  thy  strength :  this  is  the  first  commandment. 
And  the  second  is  like,  namely  this.  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbor  as  thyself."^  Our  theological  writers 
are  much  in  the  habit  of  speaking  of  the  law  as  the 
transcript  or  reflection  of  the  Divine  nature ;  but 
surely  the  Divine  nature  is  more  than  law,  "  for  God 
is  love  "  ;  ^  and  hence  it  would  be  better  to  say  that  the 
law  is  the  transcript  or  reflection  of  the  Divine  will 
concerning  the  duty  of  man  to  his  Creator  and  his  fel- 
low creatures. 

Of  this  law  it  may  be  afiirmed,  first,  that  it  "  is 
holy,  and  the  commandment  holy,  and  just,  and 
good  "  ;  ^  second,  that  it  is  immutable,  for  it  "  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 

»  1  John  iii.  4.  »  Mark  xii.  30,  31. 

8  1  John  iv.  8.  *  Rom.  vii.  12. 


25 

variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning,"  '  and  "  till 
heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no 
wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled";^  and 
third,  that  it  has  a  penalty,  for  "  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  "  ;3  "  the  wages  of  sin 
is  death  "  ;  "^  and  "  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  ^ 
Now,  when  you  add  to  this  the  solemn  and  distinct 
testimony  of  the  Bible,  over  and  over  again  repeated 
that  ''  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God,"  ^  it  is  impossible  to  resist  the  conclusion  that 
every  man  by  nature  is  in  immediate  and  inexpress- 
ible need  of  salvation. 

Y.  After  what  has  been  said  it  is  hardly  necessary 
to  dwell  upon  the  words  of  our  Lord  when  He  ex- 
claimed, "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a 
man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God."^  When  He  made  this  statement  He  was 
speaking  with  Nicodemus,  who  was  a  master  of  Israel, 
a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  and  blameless,  as  we  would  say, 
in  all  his  character  and  conduct.  Even  he  was  in- 
formed that,  Except  a  man  (or,  as  it  is  in  the  original, 
Except  any  one.  Except  every  one)  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  best,  therefore, 
can  do  with  nothing  less  than  this,  whatever  may  be 
their  standing  in  their  own  estimation  or  in  the 
estimation  of  others.  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto 
thee.  Ye  must  be  born  again."  ^     I  do  not  deny  for  a 

^  James  i.  17.  2  ^i^^^^  y.  18.  ^  Gal.  iii.  10. 

^  Rom.  vi.  23.  ^  Ezek.  xviii.  4.  ^  Rom.  iii.  23. 

'  John  iii.  3.  ^  John  iii.  7. 


26  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

moment  the  possession  of  amiable  traits  of  character 
and  virtuous  principles  of  conduct  by  thousands  who 
know  nothing  of  Christ  as  their  Saviour  ;  but  still  I 
dare  not  go  back  of  His  own  explicit  declaration, 
"  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God."  * 

All  the  attractiveness  of  the  most  lovely  disposition, 
and  all  the  firmness  of  the  most  incorruptible  integrity, 
may  exist  without  the  slightest  reference  to  the  will 
and  glory  of  God,  and  therefore  they  may  exist  w^ith- 
out  the  least  spiritual  life.  We  often  witness  in  the 
brute  creation  touching  exhibitions  of  devoted  affec- 
tion, of  unswerving  fidelit}",  of  unflinching  courage, 
and  of  w^hat  w^ould  be  termed  in  man  the  loftiest 
nobility  of  action  ;  but  among  the  inferior  animals 
there  is  a  total  w^ant  of  spiritual  life,  because  there  is 
a  total  want  of  capacity  to  know  God  and  to  perform 
these  heroic  deeds  from  the  high  and  commanding 
motive  of  regard  to  the  pleasure  of  God.  Now,  of 
human  beings  it  may  truthfully  be  affirmed,  no  less 
than  of  the  lower  orders  of  beings,  that  by  nature 
they  are  incapable  of  knowing  and  loving  the  true 
God  and  that  they  are  utterly  devoid  of  spiritual  life 
until  born  again  and  made  a  new^  creation  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Out  of  scores  of  texts  that  could  be  easily 
quoted  to  sustain  this  important  proposition,  two  or 
three  must  answer  for  the  present :  "  He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  life  ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of 
God  hath  not  life."  ^     "  Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is 

'  Johu  iii.  5.  »1  Jobu  v.  12. 


man's  need  of  salvation  27 

sin." '  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  him."  ^ 
Whatever  else  a  man  has,  whatever  excellences  that 
excite  our  admiration  and  win  our  regard,  he  has  not 
life  until  he  has  the  Son  by  faith  in  His  name ;  and 
hence  we  again  see  man's  deep  need  of  salvation. 

YI.  The  last  argument  I  advance  to  prove  this  fact, 
which  it  is  absolutely  essential  that  my  readers  should 
receive  with  an  intelligent  and  fixed  conviction  of  its 
truth,  is  derived  from  the  oft-repeated  declarations  of 
God  threatening  the  most  terrible  punishment  against 
those  who  reject  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  Divine 
person  and  atoning  work.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and  he  that  believeth  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  ^  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  be- 
lieveth and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  ^  "  And  these  shall 
go  away  into  everlasting  punishment :  but  the  right- 
eous into  life  eternal."^  ^'But  the  fearful,  and 
unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and  murderers,  and 
whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  all 
liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth 
with  fire  and  brimstone  :  which  is  the  second  death."  ^ 

Every  careful  reader  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  knows 
that  such  passages  are  constantly  found  in  the  sacred 
pages  ;  and  if  any  are  disposed  to  call  them  in  question, 
they  should  remember  that  their  controversy  is  not 
with  the  author  of  this  book,  but  with  the  Author  of 

^Rora.  xiv.  23.  ^Heh.  xi.  6.  «John  iii.  36. 

*  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  ^  Matt.  xxv.  46.  «  Kev.  xxi.  8. 


28  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

the  Bible,  God  Himself,  "  the  Father  of  mercies,"  * 
who  "  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children 
of  men,"  ^  has  distinctly  warned  us  that  if  we  die  in 
unbelief  eternal  and  intolerable  sufferings  await  us 
in  the  future  world.  Dear,  dying  reader,  heed  the 
warning,  I  beseech  you,  and  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come."  ^  I  have  shown  you,  upon  the  testimony  of 
One  who  cannot  lie,  that  all  men,  without  a  single 
exception,  as  they  are  born  into  the  world,  need  sal- 
vation, and  I  pray  God  that  you  will  not  slight  this 
testimony.  Your  unbelief  will  not  affect  its  truth  for 
an  instant,  but  as  the  Lord  liveth,  your  unbelief,  if 
persisted  in,  will  seal  your  "  everlasting  destruction 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of 
his  power  ;  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his 
saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe 
(because  our  testimony  among  you  was  believed)  in 
that  day."  * 

*2Cor.  i.  3.  ^Lam.  iii.  33. 

3  Matt.  iii.  7.  *  2  Thess.  i.  9,  10. 


CHAPTEE  III 
MAN'S  SINCERITY  CANNOT  SAVE  HIM 

"For  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  ac- 
cording to  knowledge." — Romans  x.  2. 

IT  is  a  common  opinion  that  it  matters  little  what  a 
man's  religious  views  may  be,  provided  he  is  sin- 
cere in  his  belief.  This  opinion  is  sometimes  advanced 
with  all  the  assurance  of  conscious  truth,  sometimes 
with  all  the  arrogance  of  conscious  error,  and  at  all 
times  with  a  confidence  in  its  soundness  that  surprises 
the  thoughtful  mind.  It  is  not  only  received  as  an 
axiom  by  the  world,  lulling  the  dead  soul  into  a  pro- 
founder  slumber,  but  it  is  held  to  a  lamentable  extent 
by  the  Church,  crippling  her  energies  and  nullifying 
her  testimony  for  Jesus. 

"We  often  hear  Christians  apply  the  term  "  good  " 
to  those  who  embrace  and  propagate  fatal  heresies, 
simply  because  they  appear  to  be  honest  in  their  con- 
victions and  labor  for  the  advancement  of  various 
humanitarian  and  philanthropic  schemes.  Nay,  in 
some  of  the  most  popular  pulpits  of  the  day  preachers 
are  found  sneering  at  "  creeds,"  and  journals  profess- 
edly conducted  in  the  interest  of  Christ's  suffering 
cause  pour  contempt  through  their  columns  upon  what 
they  are  pleased  to  call  "  a  dry  orthodoxy."  It  seems 
to  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  time  has  come  to  do 

29 


30  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

awa}''  with  "  doctrinal  differences,"  as  belonging  to  a 
former  and  darker  age,  and  to  substitute  a  polite  edu- 
cation, a  benevolent  disposition,  and  refined  manners, 
in  place  of  regeneration  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  and  holiness  of  life. 

Public  speakers  and  writers  of  distinction  boldly 
avow  that  man  is  no  more  responsible  for  his  belief 
than  he  is  for  the  color  of  his  eyes  or  the  height  of 
his  stature  ;  and  they  assume  that  it  is  the  narrowest 
bigotry  to  make  him  an  offender  not  only  for  his 
words,  but  for  his  very  thoughts.  It  must  be  con- 
fessed that  their  position,  viewed  from  an  earthly 
instead  of  a  heavenly  standpoint,  is  guarded  by 
strong  defences,  and  it  is  useless  to  attack  it  except 
with  "  the  SAvord  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of 
God." '  I  do  not  assert  that  it  is  impregnable  to  the 
assaults  of  human  reason,  for,  no  doubt,  arguments 
can  be  constructed  which  would  sweep  it  from  its 
very  foundations ;  but,  after  all,  it  is  only  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  accompanied  with 
Divine  energy,  that  can  convince  the  intellect,  con- 
quer the  heart,  and  control  the  conduct.  Some  of 
these  arguments  may  be  briefly  noticed  in  their  proper 
place  ;  but  I  frankly  say  I  do  not  expect  my  readers 
to  receive  any  real  good  from  the  discussion  of  this 
important  subject  unless  they  bow  with  implicit  sub- 
mission to  the  authority  of  the  Bible. 

The  question,  then,  is  simply  this,  Does  God  hold 
man  responsible  for  his  belief  as  well  as  for  his  con- 
duct, or  will  mere  sincerity,  although  we  may  sincerely 

1  Eph.  vi.  17. 


man's  sincerity  cannot  save  him        31 

believe  an  error,  entitle  us  to  His  favor  ?  The  former 
I  affirm,  the  latter  I  deny ;  and  I  appeal  at  once  to 
the  inspired  Book  which  contains  the  authentic  de- 
cision of  "  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth." 

I.  We  gather  from  the  words  of  the  apostle  which 
introduce  the  present  chapter  that  the  Jews  were  not 
only  sincere  in  their  religious  convictions,  but  zealous, 
and  zealous  for  God  ;  and  yet  they  were  lost,  for  he 
writes  :  "  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to 
God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved."  They 
had  zeal,  but  it  was  not  according  to  knowledge  ;  and 
therefore  it  could  not  commend  them  to  the  regard 
of  Him  who,  though  abundant  in  love  and  mercy,  yet 
desireth  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts." '  The  Holy 
Ghost  informs  us  that  they  were  ignorant  of  God's 
righteousness,  and  that  they  were  held  accountable 
for  this  ignorance  ;  for  all  their  efforts  to  establish 
their  own  righteousness  ^vere  unavailing,  and  they 
were  finally  rejected,  and  sent  as  wanderers  through 
the  earth  under  the  visible  marks  of  Jehovah's  dis- 
pleasure, "  I  bear  them  record,"  says  the  apostle, 
"  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to 
knowledge  ;  "  and  hence  their  sincerity  did  not  save 
them. 

The  Saviour  tells  us  that  in  the  ardor  of  their  zeal 
they  compassed  "  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte  ; 
and  when  he  is  made,"  He  adds,  "  ye  make  him  two- 
fold more  the  child  of  hell  than  yourselves."  "^  Here 
we  see  that  the  most  intense  sincerity  in  maintaining 
their  religious  opinions,  and  the  most  fervent  devotion 

iPs.  li.  6.  ^^l^XX,,  xxiii.  15. 


32  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

in  seeking  to  spread  them  abroad,  could  not  deliver 
them  from  the  fearful  charge  of  being  the  children 
of  hell,  and  of  involving  all  whom  they  persuaded  to 
receive  their  views  in  a  common  ruin.  Again,  our 
Lord  wept  over  Jerusalem,  exclaiming,  "If  thou 
hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day, 
the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace !  but  now 
they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes." '  According  to  this 
solemn  testimony,  their  crushing  doom  came  upon 
them  just  because  they  knew  not  the  things  which 
belonged  to  their  peace,  and  their  overthrow  as  a 
nation  was  the  result  of  their  ignorance.  Again,  He 
said  to  them,  "  Now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that 
hath  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of  God. 
.  .  .  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts 
of  your  father  ye  will  do.  He  was  a  murderer  from 
the  beginning,  and  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because 
there  is  no  truth  in  him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he 
speaketh  of  his  own :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father 
of  it.  And  because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  ye  believe  me 
not."  ^  They  were  called  the  children  of  the  devil, 
not  because  they  were  insincere,  irreligious,  or  indif- 
ferent to  the  claims  of  God  upon  their  worship,  but 
because  they  believed  not  the  truth  when  it  was  made 
known  by  Him  who  is  Truth  itself. 

So  the  apostle  Peter,  after  boldly  telling  the  people 
that  they  had  "  killed  the  Prince  of  life,"  ^  says : 
"  And,  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance 
ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers."  ^    But  did  their 

'  Lnke  xix.  42.  ^  John  viii.  40,  44,  45. 

»  Acts  iii.  15.  *  Acts  iii.  17. 


man's  sincerity  cannot  save  him        33 

ignorance  of  Christ's  true  character  as  the  anointed 
One,  or  their  sincere  belief  that  He  was  an  impious 
blasphemer,  atone  for  their  stupendous  crime  in  put- 
ting Him  to  death  ?  Not  at  all ;  for  the  same  apostle 
earnestly  exhorts  them  to  repent  of  that  crime,  de- 
claring that  with  wicked  hands  they  had  crucified 
and  slain  Him.  The  apostle  Paul,  also  referring  to 
the  hidden  wisdom  which  God  ordained  before 
the  world  unto  our  glory,  writes,  "Which  none 
of  the  princes  of  this  world  knew  ;  for  had  they 
known  it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of 
glory," '  but  their  want  of  knowledge  did  not  release 
them  from  responsibility,  however  sincere  their  con- 
victions ;  because  God  has  again  and  again  announced 
that  He  will  bring  them  into  judgment  for  the  murder 
of  His  Son. 

By  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  Hosea,  He  said,  "  My 
people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge :  because 
thou  hast  rejected  knowledge,  I  will  also  reject 
thee  "  ;  ^  and  the  same  principle  holds  good  under  the 
dispensation  of  grace.  He  "  will  have  all  men  to  be 
saved,"  we  are  told,  "  and  to  come  unto  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  truth  "  ;  ^  and  again  :  "  For  this  cause 
God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should 
believe  a  lie  :  that  they  all  might  be  damned  who  be- 
lieved not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteous- 
ness." ^  "  For  some,"  says  the  apostle,  "  have  not  the 
knowledge  of  God ;  I  speak  this  to  your  shame."  ^ 
"  Why,"  asked  the  disciples  of  our  Lord,  "  speakest 

1 1  Cor.  ii.  8.  2  jj^g^  j^^  q^  3  j  tj^^    .•_  4^ 

*  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12.  s  i  cor.  xv.  34. 


34:  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

thou  nnto  them  in  parables  ?  He  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  them  it  is 
not  given.  For  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be 
given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundance :  but  who- 
soever hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even 
that  which  he  hath.  Therefore  speak  I  to  them  in 
parables :  because  they  seeing  see  not ;  and  hearing 
they  hear  not,  neither  do  they  understand."  * 

But  Avithout  quoting  additional  statements  of  the 
same  import  from  the  inspired  word,  enough  has  been 
said  to  prove  that  according  to  the  unerring  testimony 
of  God  it  is  not  a  thing  of  small  moment  whether  a 
man  does  or  does  not  believe  the  truth.  If  in  His 
infinite  grace  and  condescension  He  has  given  us  a 
revelation,  He  justly  requires  us  to  accept  it  as  true  ; 
and  our  disbelief  of  it  He  justly  regards  and  treats  as 
a  sin  demanding  the  severest  punishment.  Christ  is 
the  centre  and  circumference  of  that  revelation  ;  for 
in  its  symbols  and  songs,  in  its  prophecies  and  para- 
bles, in  its  doctrines  and  duties,  it  all  revolves  around 
His  Divine  person  and  atoning  work  on  the  cross,  and 
hence  our  reception  or  rejection  of  the  Saviour  is  made 
the  turning-point  in  the  destiny  of  the  soul.  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ;  but  he 
that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  ^  "  He  that  be- 
lieveth on  him  is  not  condemned :  but  he  that  be- 
lieveth not  is  condemned  ah^eady,  because  he  hath  not 
believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
God."^     And  to  the  same  effect.  He  declares,  "He 

*Matt.  xiii.  11-13.  ^Mark  xvi.  16.  'John  iii.  18. 


35 

that  believetti  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and 
he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  * 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  deserving  the  serious  atten- 
tion of  my  reader,  that  while  so  many  are  saying,  It 
is  of  no  consequence  what  a  man  believes,  provided 
he  is  sincere,  the  "  Lord  God  of  truth  "  ^  is  solemnly 
saying,  "  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see 
life."  The  opinion  which  I  am  here  opposing  con- 
fidently asserts  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  believe  the 
very  doctrine  which  our  Maker  declares  to  be  essential 
to  the  deliverance  of  the  soul  from  endless  death  ! 
One  says,  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  saved,  if  he 
is  sincere  in  his  unbelief  ;  the  other  says,  He  that  be- 
lieveth not  shall  be  damned.  Judge  ye  which  of 
these  two  witnesses  is  entitled  to  our  confidence. 
"  Let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar."  ^  "  Who  is 
a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  "  ^ 
"  He  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar."  ^ 
It  comes,  then,  to  this :  either  the  common  notion 
that  man  is  not  responsible  for  his  belief  is  false,  or 
the  eternal  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  has  not 
spoken  the  truth  in  the  Bible ;  for  the  former  is  a 
flat  contradiction  of  the  latter.  The  word  of  the 
Lord,  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  way  of  redemption 
from  first  to  last,  all  hold  forth  the  necessity  not  only 
of  a  sincere  belief,  but  of  a  belief  according  to  knowl- 
edge :  and  there  is  no  meaning  nor  reality  in  any- 
thing that   is  written  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures  if  a 

»  John  iii.  36.  Ts.  xxxi.  5.  ^  j^om.  iii.  4. 

*  1  John  ii.  22.  ^  1  John  v.  10, 


36  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

sinner  can  be  saved  by  believing  an  error,  although 
he  may  believe  it  with  all  his  heart.  Of  the  saved 
our  Lord  says  in  His  prayer  to  the  Father,  "  This  is 
life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true 
God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent."  ^  Of 
the  lost  it  is  said,  they  have  "  the  understanding 
darkened,  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them,  because  of  the 
blindness  of  their  heart " ;  ^  and  "  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels, 
in  flaming  fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know 
not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  ^ 

Even  the  heathen  who  walk  or  stumble  in  the  dim 
starlight  of  nature  are  accountable  for  their  belief ; 
and  hence  it  is  written,  "  The  wrath  of  God  is 
revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and 
unrighteousness  of  men,  w^ho  hold  the  truth  in  un- 
righteousness ;  because  that  which  may  be  known  of 
God  is  manifest  in  them ;  for  God  hath  showed  it 
unto  them.  For  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the 
creation  of  the  w^orld  are  clearly  seen,  being  under- 
stood by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal 
power  and  Godhead ;  so  that  they  are  without  ex- 
cuse." ^  Again :  ''  As  many  as  have  sinned  without 
law  shall  also  perish  without  law :  and  as  many  as 
have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the  law ; 
(for  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  just  before  God, 
but  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  be  justified :  for  when 

^Tolin  xvii.  3.  «Eph.  iv.  18. 

8  2  Thess.  i.  7,  8.  *Kom.  i.  18-20, 


MAN'S  SIIS^CERITY   CANNOT  SAVE  IIIM  37 

the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature 
the  things  contained  in  the  law,  these,  having  not  the 
law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves:  which  shew  the 
work  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts,  their  con- 
science also  bearing  witness,  and  their  thoughts  the 
meanwhile  accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another;) 
in  the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by 
Jesus  Christ  according  to  my  gospel."  ^  If  then  those 
who  have  no  revelation  in  the  written  word  are  re- 
sponsible according  to  the  measure  of  their  opportunity 
for  knowing  God,  surely  we  who  live  in  the  unclouded 
glory  of  His  grace  will  be  called  to  a  strict  account 
for  the  manner  in  which  we  treat  the  messages  of  His 
love.  If  we  reject  them,  the  plea  that  we  sincerely 
believed  they  were  not  worthy  of  credit  will  not 
avail  to  justify  us  at  His  bar  ;  for  unbelief  is  the  re- 
sult, as  He  declares,  of  unwillingness  to  believe ;  it  is 
the  crowning  sin  of  our  race ;  and  our  belief  or  dis- 
belief cannot  alter  the  nature  of  eternal  truth.  "  This 
is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world, 
and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because 
their  deeds  were  evil."  We  are  compelled,  therefore, 
to  surrender  the  vain  conceit  that  sincerity  will  save 
us,  or  to  yield  our  pretended  faith  in  God's  revealed 
word  and  take  our  proper  place  in  the  ranks  of  scoffers 
and  sceptics. 

II.  The  denial  that  man  is  responsible  for  his  re- 
ligious belief  leads  legitimately  and  logically  to  the 
conclusion  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  his  conduct : 
because  the  two  sustain  an  intimate  and  indissoluble 

iRom.  ii.  12-16. 


38  THE  WAY  3IADE  PLAIN 

relcation  to  each  other.  One  is  the  fountain,  the  other 
is  the  stream ;  one  is  the  foundation,  the  other  is  the 
superstructure ;  one  is  the  root,  the  other  is  the  tree 
which  springs  from  it  and  bears  good  or  evil  fruit. 
"Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles? 
Even  so  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit ; 
but  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  A  good 
tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt 
tree  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Every  tree  that  bringeth 
not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the 
fire.  Wherefore  by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  * 
Human  actions  of  a  moral  character  are  always  the 
result  of  certain  opinions  or  principles ;  and  they  can 
neither  rise  higher  than  the  source  from  which  they 
spring,  nor  fail  to  partake  of  its  nature.  Good  actions 
cannot  proceed  from  evil  principles,  nor  can  evil  actions 
proceed  from  good  prmciples.  A  person's  principles 
are  himself:  and  surely  it  is  a  shallow  philosophy 
which  would  not  only  divide  him  in  twain,  but  array 
the  separated  portions  of  his  being  in  direct  opposi- 
tion, pronouncing  one  part  of  him  virtuous  and  the 
other  vicious. 

If  a  man  sincerely  believes  that  there  is  no  God,  he 
will  be  an  atheist  practically;  if  he  believes  that 
prayer  is  a  vain  and  useless  ceremony,  he  will  never 
bow  the  knee  in  supplication  to  the  throne  of  grace ; 
if  he  believes  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  confess  Christ 
before  men,  he  will  refuse  to  be  enrolled  among  the 
number  of  the  Saviour's  disciples ;  if  he  believes  that 
the  gratification  of  his  a})petites  is  the  highest  end  of 

*Matt.  vii.  16-20. 


39 

life,  he  will  be  a  sensualist ;  if  he  believes  that  the 
acquisition  of  wealth  in  any  manner  is  the  supreme 
good,  he  will  be  a  thief  or  swindler  whenever  he  can 
feed  the  passion  of  his  soul  without  danger  of  detec- 
tion and  punishment;  and  so  of  every  other  belief 
that  is  connected  with  our  conduct  as  accountable 
beings  in  the  unavoidable  relations  we  sustain  to  our 
Creator  and  our  fellow  creatures.  We  may  or  may 
not  believe  the  assertions  of  human  science,  the  testi- 
mony of  uninspired  history,  and  the  narratives  of 
travellers  in  new  and  unknown  countries,  without 
damage  to  our  eternal  interests,  because  these  matters 
do  not  necessarily  carry  our  faith  into  the  high  region 
of  morals :  but  the  moment  we  invade  that  loftier 
sphere,  our  belief  is  clothed  with  the  dread  respon- 
sibility of  personal  action,  because  it  is  sure  to  express 
itself  in  outward  manifestations  that  exhibit  its  char- 
acter as  righteous  or  sinful  in  the  sight  of  God.  If 
the  belief  is  wrong,  the  life  must  be  wrong ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  if  the  life  is  wrong,  the  belief  must  be 
wrong.  We  may  say  reverently,  therefore,  that  it  is 
impossible  for  the  "  Judge  of  all  the  earth,"  '  "  which 
searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts,"  ^  to  take  notice  of  the 
life  without  also  taking  notice  of  the  belief  which 
gives  shape  to  the  deeds,  and  tone  to  the  speech,  and 
direction  to  the  behavior,  of  His  creatures.  Hence, 
the  more  sincerely  an  error  is  believed,  the  more 
surely  it  will  receive  a  righteous  retribution,  because 
the  more  certainly  it  leads  to  open  disregard  of  His 
truth  or  defiance  of  His  authority. 
1  Gen.  xviii.  25.  ^jjev.  ii.  23. 


CHAPTEK  TV 

MAN'S  SINCEEITY  CANNOT  SAVE  HIM 

III 

THAT  man  is  responsible  for  his  belief  is  the  dis- 
tinct testimony  of  consciousness.  The  process 
of  reasoning  by  which  this  proposition  may  be  estab- 
lished is  simple,  but  direct  and  conclusive.  That  he 
is  conscious  of  responsibility  for  his  actions  is  al- 
most universally  admitted,  and  is  fully  attested  by 
the  sacrifices  and  superstitions,  by  the  penances  and 
prayers,  by  the  terrors  and  remorse,  that  have  marked 
his  history  in  all  ages  and  in  all  lands.  That  he  is 
also  conscious  of  responsibility  for  the  dispositions  of 
his  heart  is  equally  obvious,  for  they  alone  give  moral 
character  to  his  conduct ;  and  if  they  are  left  out  of 
view,  he  is  no  more  accountable  for  his  deeds  than  are 
the  brutes  that  perish.  Hence,  if  he  flies  into  an  un- 
reasonable rage  at  the  bidding  of  an  unsubdued  temper, 
when  the  calm  of  sober  reflection  has  succeeded  the 
storm  of  passion  he  condemns  himself  not  only  for  what 
he  has  done,  but  for  what  he  has  felt.  And  our  opinion 
with  regard  to  moral  truth  being  largely  under  the 
control  of  our  dispositions,  and  intimately  associated, 
as  has  been  proved,  with  our  moral  actions,  a  conscious- 
ness of  responsibility  for  our  belief  inevitably  follows  ; 
and  the  moment  we  are  awakened  from  the  deep 

40 


MAKS   SIKCEEITY   CANNOT  SAVE  HIM  41 

sleep  of  sill  and  spiritual  death  by  the  quickening 
voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  pass  judgment  upon  our 
belief  as  wrong,  no  less  than  upon  our  conduct. 

The  Saviour,  describing  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  salvation  of  men,  says  He  will  convince 
"  of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me  "  ; '  and  the 
first  experience,  perhaps,  of  the  enlightened  and  re- 
generated soul  is  to  see  that  his  unbelief  for  so  many 
years  is  the  most  aggravated  of  all  his  iniquities.  It 
is  certain,  then,  that  with  the  millions  of  Christians 
who  have  lived  there  has  been  a  clear  consciousness 
of  responsibility  for  belief;  and  if  it  is  not  so  with 
others,  it  only  proves  that  they  have  fallen  under  the 
spell  of  a  dreadful  sorcery  which  has  locked  them  fast 
in  spiritual  insensibility.  There  are  multitudes  who 
have  no  consciousness  of  sin  for  their  conduct ;  but 
this  fact,  instead  of  showing  that  they  are  not  sinners, 
only  reveals  the  depth  of  ruin  into  which  they  are 
plunged.  If  they  are  ever  raised  out  of  that  ruin  by 
the  exceeding  greatness  of  God's  power,  they  will  not 
only  perceive  that  they  are  sinful  in  their  outward  ac- 
tions, but  will  pass  an  immediate  sentence  of  condem- 
nation against  themselves  for  the  long-cherished  sin  of 
unbelief. 

Thus  the  apostle  Paul,  referring  to  the  character  of 
his  belief  before  he  was  a  Christian,  says :  "  I  verily 
thought  with  myself  that  I  ought  to  do  many 
things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Kazareth. 
Which  things  I  also  did  in  Jerusalem :  and  many 
of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison,  having  received 

^  John  xvi.  9. 


42  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

authority  from  the  chief  priests ;  and  when  they 
were  put  to  death,  I  gave  my  voice  against  them." ' 
Again,  he  writes  to  the  Galatians :  "  Ye  have  heard 
of  my  conversation  in  time  past  in  the  Jews'  re- 
ligion, how  that  beyond  measure  I  persecuted  the 
church  of  God,  and  wasted  it ;  and  profited  in  the 
Jews'  religion  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own 
nation,  being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  tradi- 
tions of  my  fathers."^  But  the  sincerity  of  his  at- 
tachment to  the  religious  system  under  which  he  was 
educated,  and  the  ardor  of  his  zeal  in  upholding  it, 
did  not  excuse  him  even  at  the  bar  of  his  own  con- 
science when  he  received  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  ; 
for  years  after  he  was  saved  he  speaks  of  himself  as 
the  chief  of  sinners,  and  ''  the  least  of  the  apostles,  that 
am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle,  because  I  perse- 
cuted the  church  of  God."  ^  In  the  light  from  heaven 
tliat  flashed  around  him  on  the  road  to  Damascus  he 
saw  that  his  conduct  had  been  fearfully  wrong  ;  and 
as  his  conduct  was  the  natural  and  necessary  result  of 
his  belief,  he  saw  that  his  belief  had  been  equally 
wrong,  and  was  worthy  of  no  slighter  censure  than  the 
cruelties  to  which  it  led.  So  will  it  be  with  you,  dear 
reader,  if  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out 
of  darkness,  shines  in  your  heart  "  to  give  the  light  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ."  ^ 

IV.     It  is  the  judgment  of  mankind  that  we  are 
responsible  for  our  belief,  and  they  hold  us  account- 

1  Acts  xxvi.  9,  10.  »Gal.  i.  13,  14. 

'^l  Cor.  XV.  9.  <2Cor.  iv.  6. 


man's  sincerity  cannot  save  iiim        43 

able  for  it  both  to  civil  governments  and  at  the  bar  of 
public  opinion.  A  criminal  is  never  acquitted  on  the 
ground  that  he  sincerely  believed  the  law  which  he 
had  violated  to  be  wrong,  or  that  he  sincerely  believed 
it  had  been  repealed,  or  that  he  sincerely  believed  its 
penalty  would  not  be  enforced.  The  law  goes  on  the 
presumption  that  its  subjects  are  acquainted  with  its 
provisions  and  punishments,  and  it  requires  them  to 
answer  not  only  for  what  they  know,  but  for  what 
they  might  know.  It  does  not  lay  its  arrest  upon  the 
idiotic  or  the  insane  to  treat  them  as  culprits,  but 
where  the  moral  faculty  exists,  associated  with  even 
a  low  degree  of  intelligence,  it  demands  obedience  to 
its  authority  under  pain  of  its  avenging  justice. 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  law  is  enacted  by  the  legisla- 
tive department  of  the  government,  declaring  that  on 
and  after  a  certain  day  the  crime  of  theft  shall  be 
punished  with  death  instead  of  imprisonment.  Let  us 
suppose  further  that  this  law  has  received  the  ap- 
proval of  the  Executive  and  the  sanction  of  the  high- 
est judicial  decision  pronouncing  it  to  be  constitutional 
in  all  its  features ;  and,  still  further,  that  it  has  been 
fully  promulgated  through  the  press  and  placarded  on 
the  streets  and  highways.  If  a  thief  should  be  ar- 
rested, tried,  and  found  guilty  under  this  laAV,  it 
would  avail  him  little  to  plead  that  he  sincerely  be- 
lieved it  had  not  been  decreed,  or  that  he  sincerely 
believed  its  penalty  was  unreasonably  severe,  or  that 
he  sincerely  believed  it  would  remain  a  dead  letter  on 
the  statute-book.  It  is  probable  that  all  the  thieves 
in  the  community  would  sympathize  with  his  feelings, 


44  THE    WAY    MADE   PLAIN 

and  claim  that  there  was  some  force  in  his  defence ; 
but  surely  every  honest  man  would  say  that  he  was 
responsible  for  his  belief  and  should  be  held  to  a  strict 
account  for  his  felony.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  he 
might  have  informed  himself  of  the  existence  of  the 
law  and  the  consequences  of  its  violation,  no  good 
citizen  would  urge  that  his  ignorance  or  his  mistake 
should  form  the  ground  of  extenuating,  much  less  of 
justifying,  his  offence. 

There  are  some  things  which  a  man  may  believe  or 
disbelieve  without  receiving  either  commendation  or 
censure,  because  the  will  and  the  dispositions  of  the 
heart  are  not  called  into  exercise  in  accepting  them  as 
true  or  in  rejecting  them  as  false.  We  do  not  say 
that  he  deserves  praise  for  believing  that  two  and  two 
make  four ;  or  for  refusing  to  believe  that  two  and  two 
make  five ;  or  for  crediting  the  evidence  of  his  senses ; 
or  for  relying  upon  the  testimony  of  his  own  con- 
sciousness. In  such  cases  the  action  of  his  mind  is  in- 
voluntary, so  to  speak,  and  does  not  depend  upon  his 
inclination  or  power  of  choice.  He  is  obliged  to  be- 
lieve as  he  does ;  or  if,  owing  to  some  rare  eccentricity, 
he  believes  otherwise,  his  condition  is  justly  regarded 
as  demanding  pity  rather  than  blame.  But  there  are 
other  subjects  which  cannot  be  reached  by  mathe- 
matical reasoning,  nor  perceived  by  the  senses,  nor 
known  by  intuition,  and  when  these  subjects  embrace 
moral  truth,  they  at  once  determine  man's  responsibil- 
ity for  his  belief,  because  his  belief  here  depends  upon 
his  will  and  the  state  of  his  heart. 

I  do  not  assert  that  he  is  responsible  for  believing 


45 

without  sufRcient  evidence  ;  but  as  evidence  cannot  bo 
weighed  without  attention,  and  as  the  attention  is  sub- 
ject to  his  control,  he  is  responsible  for  directing  his 
thoughts  dispassionately,  earnestly,  and  without  prej- 
udice, to  questions  that  claim  his  regard,  and  that 
may  at  least  affect  his  eternal  destiny  for  weal  or  for 
woe.  There  are  duties,  for  example,  which  arise  from 
the  various  relations  we  sustain  to  our  fellow  crea- 
tures ;  and  those  who  are  too  indifferent  to  inquire  into 
the  nature  of  these  duties,  or  too  depraved  to  care  for 
them,  or  too  selfish  to  perform  them,  we  hold  respon- 
sible for  being  in  a  condition  that  prevents  the  dis- 
charge of  their  social  obligations.  ISTor  is  it  enough 
to  say  that  they  are  responsible  merely  for  their  con- 
duct ;  because  a  moment's  reflection  will  convince  you 
that  our  judgment  of  them  goes  back  to  the  state  of 
mind  or  dispositions  out  of  which  their  conduct 
naturally  flows.  If  we  know  of  a  man  who  sincerely 
believes  that  he  has  a  right  to  take  his  neighbor's 
property,  although  he  may  not  actually  steal ;  or  of 
one  who  sincerely  believes  he  has  a  right  to  take  his 
neighbor's  life  on  some  slight  provocation,  although 
he  may  not  actually  kill ;  or  of  one  who  sincerely  be- 
lieves he  has  a  right  to  use  his  neighbor's  name,  al- 
though he  may  not  actually  commit  forgery, — we  do 
not  hesitate  to  say  that  his  very  belief  is  wrong  ;  and 
we  could  not  employ  this  term  unless  we  held  him 
responsible  for  his  principles  as  well  as  his  actions. 
Or  if  you  deny  this,  then  I  immediately  fasten  you 
upon  the  other  horn  of  the  dilemma  by  showing  that 
you  cannot,  with  the  least  degree  of  consistency,  hold 


46  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

such  a  man  responsible  for  his  actions,  which  neces- 
sarily spring  out  of  his  principles ;  and  thus  this 
wretched  theory  which  I  am  opposing,  if  left  to  work 
out  its  legitimate  results,  would  undermine  the  foun- 
dations of  human  gov^ernment  and  destroy  the  entire 
structure  of  human  society. 

But  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  warmest 
advocates  of  this  delusive  and  dangerous  opinion  do 
not  pretend  to  apply  it  except  in  man's  relations  to 
God.  None  are  more  unsparing  than  they  in  their 
denunciations  of  what  they  conceive  to  be  his  errone- 
ous political  belief,  or  his  wrong  views  of  the  standard 
of  integrity  that  should  be  observed  in  business  trans- 
actions, or  even  his  religious  convictions  when  they 
differ  from  their  own.  If  man  is  not  responsible  for 
his  belief,  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  justify  them 
in  so  persistently  assailing  those  of  us  who  hold  that 
he  is  responsible ;  since,  according  to  their  own  notion, 
it  is  of  no  consequence  what  we  believe,  provided  we 
are  sincere  ;  and  if  he  is  responsible,  what  becomes  of 
their  shallow  conceit  that  he  is  not  responsible  ?  This 
alone  is  sufficient  to  condemn  them  ;  for  why  are  they 
so  prompt  to  recognize  man's  responsibility  for  his  be- 
lief of  the  truth,  save  when  they  come  to  the  in- 
finitely important  truth  contained  in  the  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures ?  Does  not  their  position  confirm  the  testimony 
of  the  Bible  when  it  declares  that  "  the  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God  :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of 
God,  neither  indeed  can  be  "  ?  '  Does  it  not  prove 
that  they  have  taken  counsel  together  ^'  against  the 

'  Kom.  viii.  7. 


man's  siis^ceeity  cannot  save  him        47 

Lord  and  against  his  anointed,  saying,  Let  us  break 
their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from 
us  "  ?  ^  Alas  !  their  astounding  inconsistency  in  hold- 
ing man  responsible  for  his  opinions  to  themselves, 
while  stoutly  denying  his  responsibility  for  unbelief 
towards  Christ,  only  reveals  a  guilty  conscience  full  of 
fears,  or  a  wicked  purpose  to  throw  the  reins  upon  the 
neck  of  the  transgressor  and  encourage  him  in  a  career 
of  unrestrained  sin. 

Y.  An  argument  from  analogy  is  suggested  by  the 
admitted  fact  that  man  is  made  responsible  for  his 
belief  by  the  physical  laws  of  his  being.  He  sees,  for 
example,  a  white  powder  which  he  sincerely  believes 
to  be  harmless ;  but  if  it  is  arsenic,  and  he  is  rash 
enough  to  act  upon  his  belief  by  swallowing  it,  his 
sincerity  will  not  prevent  excruciating  pain,  and  prob- 
ably death.  An  intelligent  and  conscientious  physi- 
cian may  inform  him  that  his  continued  dissipation 
will  result  in  disease  and  drag  him  down  prematurely 
to  the  grave  ;  and  although  he  may  sincerely  believe 
that  his  medical  adviser  is  mistaken,  his  sincerity  can- 
not avert  the  consequences  of  his  folly  and  crime. 
He  may  be  correctly  told  that  a  remedy  has  been  dis- 
covered for  some  fearful  plague  which  has  laid  its 
grasp  upon  him  ;  but  sincerely  believing  that  his  in- 
formant is  mistaken,  and  preferring  to  follow  the 
counsels  of  his  own  judgment,  he  may  decline  to  act 
upon  the  testimony  he  has  received,  and  yet  his  sin- 
cerity will  not  stay  for  a  single  moment  the  approach 
of  the  fell  destroyer.  He  may  be  warned  by  friends 
1  Ps.  ii.  3. 


48  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

that  a  vessel  in  which  he  intends  to  make  a  voyage 
is  not  seaworthy;  but  sincerely  believing  that  the 
warning  is  the  expression  of  unreasonable  prejudice 
or  unmanly  fear,  he  may  confidently  set  sail,  and  yet 
his  sincerity  cannot  deliver  him  from  going  down 
with  a  shriek  into  the  yawning  depths  when  the 
storm  is  let  loose  in  its  fury  upon  his  frail  craft. 
Without  citing  other  illustrations  of  a  truth  so  ob- 
vious that  none  will  have  the  hardihood  to  call  it  in 
question,  it  may  be  asked  why  a  merciful  God  does 
not  respect  the  sincerity  of  His  creatures  in  such  cases, 
and  save  them  from  the  sufferings  which  they  bring 
upon  themselves.  If  it  be  replied  that  they  violate 
certain  fixed  laws,  and  therefore  receive  the  merited 
penalty,  I  answer  that  they  also  violate  a  certain  and 
fixed  law  who  refuse  to  believe  the  testimony  of  the 
Son  of  God  ;  and  we  have  already  proved  that  the 
Almighty  will  no  more  interfere  to  arrest  the  penalty 
in  one  instance  than  in  the  other. 

]S'o  one  can  assert  that  the  law  of  gravitation  is 
more  thoroughly  established  in  the  natural  world 
than  is  the  great  law,  as  I  here  term  it,  of  the  spirit- 
ual world,  which  says,  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
life.'"  The  glorious  Being  who  ordained  both  in 
their  different  spheres  possesses  the  same  adorable 
and  unchangeable  perfections  whether  we  view  Him 
as  the  God  of  nature  or  of  revelation  ;  and  those,  who 
imagine  that  because  they  are  sincere  they  may  with 
impunity  reject  or  neglect  the  unalterable  expression 
» 1  John  V.  12. 


49 

of  His  will,  however  made  known,  will  surely  discover 
that  they  have  been  woefully  deceived.  It  is  childish, 
therefore,  for  the  objector  to  cavil  at  the  harshness 
of  the  doctrine  I  am  advocating  until  he  first  finds 
fault  with  God  for  the  facts  that  occur  in  our  daily 
experience  and  observation.  If,  however,  he  is  dis- 
posed to  insist  that  in  the  natural  world  man  is  re- 
sponsible, not  for  his  opinions,  but  for  his  acts,  it  is 
sufiicient  to  remind  him  of  what  I  have  already  shown, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  hold  religious  opinions  without 
an  expression  of  thenj  in  acts  of  obedience  or  disobe- 
dience that  at  once  place  him  among  the  friends  or 
the  foes  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

If  any  of  the  Hebrews  on  that  terrible  night  of  the 
passover  in  Egypt  had  sincerely  believed  that  the 
blood  of  a  slain  lamb  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts  of 
their  houses  could  not  save  them  from  the  stroke  of 
the  destroying  angel,  or  that  the  Almighty  was  too 
merciful  to  inflict  the  threatened  vengeance,  their  be- 
lief would  have  certainly  manifested  itself  in  their 
conduct,  and  they  would  have  certainly  perished  with 
their  enemies.  If  any  of  them,  when  bitten  of  the 
fiery  serpents  in  the  wilderness,  had  argued  that  there 
was  no  remedial  or  restorative  power  in  looking  at  a 
piece  of  brass,  and  hence  had  sincerely  believed  that 
there  was  more  wisdom  in  expecting  help  from  some 
other  source,  they  would  have  refused,  of  course,  to 
obey  the  Divine  direction  ;  and  of  course  they  would 
have  miserably  perished  because  of  their  unbelief, 
however  sincere  they  might  have  been. 

YI.    Another   argument  to  prove  man's  responsi- 


50  THE   WAY  MADE   PLAIN 

bility  for  his  belief  might  be  derived  from  the  consti- 
tution of  the  human  mind.  As  I  do  not  wish  to 
extend  this  chapter  to  an  undue  length,  I  shall  throw 
out  only  a  hint  or  two,  which,  with  the  blessing  of 
God,  may  be  profitable  to  the  awakened  soul.  Even 
the  heathen  philosophers  of  ancient  times  clearly  per- 
ceived that  the  mind  is  the  organ  of  truth,  as  the  eye 
is  the  organ  of  vision  and  the  ear  the  organ  of  hear- 
ing. The  jaundiced  eye  can  impart  a  sickly  yellow 
appearance  to  the  pure  white  snow,  and  the  deaf  ear 
is  dull  to  the  most  entrancing  melody ;  but,  for  all 
that,  no  one  doubts  that'they  were  originally  consti- 
tuted to  be  the  proper  organs  of  sight  and  sound. 
And  although  it  is  written  that  "the  wicked  are 
estranged  from  the  womb ;  they  go  astray  as  soon  as 
they  be  born,  speaking  lies,"  *  yet  they  were  created 
at  first  with  reference  to  truth  as  much  as  to  any 
other  end  of  their  existence.  Their  minds  have  be- 
come sadly  diseased  and  perverted  from  the  use  for 
which  they  were  so  wonderfully  organized ;  but  this 
fact  proves  their  responsibility,  because  it  is  the  intro- 
duction of  sin  which  has  wrought  the  change. 

A  careful  observation  will  convince  you  that  the 
vast  majority  of  men  are  so  absorbed  in  their  worldly 
pursuits  and  pleasures  that  they  are  profoundly  indif- 
ferent to  religious  truth ;  or  they  are  so  entirely  the 
slaves  of  prejudice  that  they  will  not  impartially  in- 
vestigate it ;  or  they  are  so  anxious  to  escape  persecu- 
tion and  reproach  in  an  apostate  world  that  they  are 
not  prepared  to  suffer  for  it ;  or  they  are  so  blinded 

^  Ps.  Iviii.  3. 


51 

under  the  delusive  influence  of  Satan  that  they  do  not 
perceive  its  divine  beauty  and  inestimable  value.  In 
other  words,  it  is  manifest  that  they  are  led  by  the 
dispositions  of  our  corrupt  nature;  and  surely  for 
this  they  are  responsible,  if  they  are  responsible  for 
anything.  But  they  turn  away  from  the  commands 
of  God  with  contemptuous  unconcern,  or  with  proud 
reliance  upon  their  own  wisdom,  or  with  a  fixed  pur- 
pose to  admit  nothing  as  an  article  of  faith  which 
will  abase  them  as  helpless  sinners  at  the  cross  of 
Calvary. 

Just  here  their  guilt  comes  in  ;  for  as  our  Lord  said 
of  the  unbelieving  world,  "  If  I  had  not  come  and 
spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin ;  but  now 
they  have  no  cloak  [or,  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  no  ex- 
cuse] for  their  sins."  ^  In  His  blessed  grace.  He  did 
not  ask  those  to  whom  He  presented  Himself  as  the 
promised  Messiah  to  receive  Him  without  exhibiting 
His  credentials,  so  to  speak ;  for  He  says,  "If  I  do 
not  the  works  of  my  Father,  believe  me  not.  But  if 
I  do,  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works."  ^ 
A  few  like  Nicodemus  recognized  the  validity  of  the 
credentials,  and  said  to  Him,  "We  know  that  thou 
art  a  teacher  come  from  God :  for  no  man  can  do 
these  miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with 
him ; "  ^  but  the  great  mass,  offended  by  His  lowly 
appearance  and  soul-humbling  doctrines,  refused  to 
give  to  His  claims  even  a  candid  examination.  The 
result  was,  they  could  not  believe  because  they  would 
not ;  and  they  were  brought  to  a  terrible  account  for 

»  Johu  XV.  22.  ^  Johu  x.  37,  38.  '  John  iii.  2. 


52  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

their  rejection  of  Christ,  even  when  they  thought 
they  did  God  service  in  despising  His  overtures  of 
mercy.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me,"  was  His  sad  com- 
plaint, "  that  ye  might  have  life ; " '  and  this  loill  not, 
which  was  the  root  of  unbelief,  as  it  still  is,  made 
them  responsible  for  their  opinions,  however  sincere 
their  plea  that  they  were  unable  to  accept  the  evi- 
dences of  His  Messiahship.  If  God  should  command 
us  to  look  at  a  beautiful  landscape  which  He  had 
created  to  glorify  Himself  and  to  gratify  us,  and  we 
should  deliberately  put  out  our  eyes,  our  blindness 
would  be  no  excuse  for  disobeying  His  requirement. 
And  so  if  we  have  wronged  our  souls  and  injured  our 
minds  by  sin  until  the  wonderful  organ  of  truth 
which  He  bestowed  on  man  at  first  can  no  longer  per- 
form its  proper  functions,  we  have  ourselves  to  blame 
for  groping  in  darkness. 

^'  But  what  is  Truth  ?     'Twas  Pilate's  question  put 
To  Truth  itself,  that  deigned  him  no  reply. 
And  wherefore  ?    Will  not  God  impart  His  light 
To  them  that  ask  if?     Freely  :  'tis  His  joy, 
His  glory,  and  His  nature  to  impart. 
But  to  the  proud,  uncaudid,  insincere. 
Or  negligent  inquirer,  not  a  spark." 

And  now,  dear  reader,  I  leave  what  is  here  written 
to  your  reflections  ;  praying  that  (however  imperfect 
the  discussion  of  this  great  subject  in  these  pages)  the 
Lord  will  lead  you  to  see  the  hollowness  of  Satan's 
crafty  device  when  he  would  persuade  you  that  man 
is  not  responsible  for  his   belief.     Depend  upon  it, 

^  John  V.  40. 


MAN  S    SINCERITY    CANNOT   SAVE  IIIM  i>'3 

this  is  the  devil's  lie  and  not  God's  truth.  Even 
under  the  Levitical  law  an  offering  was  provided  for 
sins  of  ignorance ;  and  in  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God  it  is  written,  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect 
so  great  salvation  ?  "  '  although  we  may  be  perfectly 
sincere  in  our  neglect.  The  great  Bacon  has  well 
said,  "  Truth  and  goodness  differ  but  as  the  print  and 
seal ;  for  truth  prints  goodness,"  and  holiness  is  obedi- 
ence to  the  truth.  If  man,  therefore,  is  responsible 
for  anything,  he  is  surely  responsible  for  his  opinions, 
since  they  necessarily  determine  whether  his  outward 
life  is  in  accordance  with  truth  and  holiness  or  with 
error  and  unrighteousness.  "  God  shall  bring  every 
work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether 
it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil."^  "Be  not  de- 
ceived ;  God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man 
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."^  "O  Lord,  thou 
hast  searched  me,  and  known  me.  Thou  knowest  my 
down-sitting  and  mine  uprising,  thou  understandest 
my  thought  afar  off.  Thou  compassest  my  path  and 
my  lying  down,  and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways. 
For  there  is  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  but  lo,  O  Lord, 
thou  knowest  it  altogether."  ^ 

^Heb.  ii.  3.  ^^pgigg   xii.  14. 

'  Gal.  vi.  7.  *  Fs.  cxxxix.  1-4. 


CHAPTER  y 
MAN'S  RIGHTEOUSNESS  CANNOT  SAVE  HIM 

"For  tliey  being  iguoraut  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about 
to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  have  not  submitted  themselves 
unto  the  righteousness  of  God." — Eomans  x.  3. 

THE  first  question  to  be  settled  here  is  the  mean- 
ing of  the  term  righteousness.  Some  idea  of 
the  importance  of  the  question  may  be  gathered  from 
the  fact  that  the  same  word,  which  is  used  three 
times  in  the  passage  placed  at  the  head  of  this  chap- 
ter, occurs  ninety-two  times  in  the  New  Testament, 
and  is  found  thirty-six  times  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans.  Many  inquirers  after  the  way  of  eternal 
life  are  kept  in  darkness  and  uncertainty  from  a  fail- 
ure to  see  the  signification  of  the  language  employed 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures.  They 
might  often  be  spared  weary  months  of  struggling, 
and  feebleness  in  all  their  subsequent  walk,  if  dis- 
tinctly taught  at  the  very  beginning  of  their  religious 
experience  the  precise  import  of  such  expressions  as 
redemption,  regeneration,  repentance,  faith,  grace, 
justification,  adoption,  sanctification,  and  righteous- 
ness. 

The  last  of  these  it  is  my  purpose  to  notice  at 
present,  with  the  hope,  through  God's  blessing,  of 
leading  my  readers  to  see  that  their  own  good  char- 

54 


man's  kighteousness  canitot  save  him    55 

acter  and  conduct  cannot  save  them.  The  word 
which  is  so  often  translated  "  righteousness  "  in  the 
Bible  is  defined  in  Kobinson's  Greek  and  English 
Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament  as  follows :  "  The 
doing  or  being  what  is  just  or  right ;  and  when  spoken 
of  character,  conduct,  and  the  like,  it  is  the  being  just 
as  one  should  be."  So  the  word  translated  righteous 
is  explained,  when  applied  to  character  or  conduct,  as 
meaning  "  just  as  it  should  be " ;  and  hence  a 
righteous  man  "  is  strictly  one  who  does  right."  In 
the  lexicons  of  Classic  Greek  the  word  which  is 
translated  righteoits  is  rendered  "  observant  of  the 
rules  of  right,  upright,  in  all  duties  both  to  gods  and 
men."  In  the  Hebrew  the  word  translated  righteous- 
ness comes  from  a  verb  which  means  "to  be  right, 
straight "  ;  and  hence  in  a  moral  sense  it  is  "  rectitude, 
right,  righteousness,  what  is  right  and  just,  such  as  it 
should  be  "  ;  and  a  righteous  person  is  said  to  be  one 
who  is  ''  obedient  to  divine  laws."  In  English,  Web- 
ster says  righteousness  means  "  purity  of  heart  and 
rectitude  of  life  ;  conformity  of  heart  and  life  to  the 
divine  law."  The  term  righteous  he  defines  as  "just, 
accordant  to  divine  law.  Applied  to  persons,  it 
denotes  one  who  is  holy  in  heart,  and  observant  of 
the  divine  commands  in  practice  ;  as  a  righteous  man. 
Applied  to  things,  it  denotes  consonance  to  the  divine 
will  or  to  justice;  as  a  righteous  act."  The  word 
right,  he  says,  means  "  conformity  to  the  wiU  of  God, 
or  to  His  law,  the  perfect  standard  of  truth  and  justice. 
In  a  literal  sense,  7'ight  is  a  straight  line  of  conduct, 
dJidi  wrong  a  crooked  one." 


56  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

According  to  these  various  authorities,  righteous- 
ness is  the  state  or  quality  of  being  righteous,  and 
righteous  is  that  which  is  right,  and  right  implies 
some  rule,  standard,  or  test  to  distinguish  it  from 
wrong.  If  there  were  no  such  rule,  it  is  obvious  that 
right  and  wrong  would  lose  their  meaning,  and  the 
difference  between  them  would  instantly  cease  to 
exist.  Whether  this  rule  is  supposed  to  be  found  in 
the  decisions  of  conscience  or  of  custom,  of  reason  or 
of  revelation,  its  authority  is  instinctively  and  uni- 
versally recognized.  JSTot  only  the  best  but  the  worst 
of  men  pronounce  certain  acts  to  be  right  and  other 
acts  to  be  wrong,  and  thus  show  that  they  have  before 
their  minds,  it  may  be  unconsciously,  some  rule  to 
which  the  right  acts  are  conformed,  and  which  the 
wrong  acts  have  violated.  A  few  infidel  writers  like 
Hobbes  have  maintained  that  the  only  foundation  of 
right  and  wrong  is  the  civil  law ;  and  a  few  like 
Eousseau  have  ventured  to  affirm  that  all  the  morality 
of  our  actions  lies  in  the  judgment  we  ourselves  form 
of  them.  But  even  these  reckless  sceptics  confess  that 
there  is  a  rule,  however  low  and  imperfect,  that  must 
decide  whether  our  conduct  is  worthy  of  commenda- 
tion or  of  censure.  Although  in  their  view  that  is 
right  which  is  conformed  to  civil  law,  or  which  meets 
the  approval  of  our  own  judgment,  still  they  acknowl- 
edge the  existence  and  power  of  a  rule  to  determine 
what  should  be  done  and  what  should  be  left  un- 
done. 

Now  if  it  be  true  that  God  has  made  known  in  the 
Sacred   Scriptures   His  will  concerning  the  way  in 


57 

which  He  would  have  men  feel  and  think  and  speak 
and  act,  it  is  certain  that  this  revealed  will  is  the 
supreme  rule  of  duty.  Of  course,  a  Being  who  "  is 
righteous  in  all  his  ways  and  holy  in  all  his  works  " ' 
cannot  enjoin  us  to  be  or  to  do  anything  in  the  slight- 
est degree  improper  or  unbecoming  in  the  relations  we 
sustain  to  Him  and  to  our  fellow  creatures  ;  and  as 
"  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,"  ^  it  will  at  once  be 
admitted  that  no  higher  rule  is  possible  as  the  stand- 
ard of  right.  Webster  is  correct,  therefore,  in  defin- 
ing righteousness  as  "  conformity  of  heart  and  life  to 
the  divine  law."  The  law  of  God  is  like  a  plumb-line 
(if  I  may  so  speak),  let  down  from  heaven  to  test  the 
uprightness  of  our  character  and  the  rectitude  of  our 
conduct ;  it  is  like  an  exact  measure  applied  both  to 
our  inward  and  outward  life  to  discover  whether  it  is 
according  to  holiness  ;  it  is  like  light  shining  into  the 
chambers  of  our  souls  to  reveal  their  real  condition. 
If  any  are  perfectly  obedient  in  every  respect  to  the 
requirements  of  the  law,  they  are  righteous,  and  the 
obedience  they  render  constitutes  their  righteousness. 
The  phrase  "righteousness  of  God,"  which  fre- 
quently occurs  in  the  inspired  Epistles,  next  demands 
our  consideration.  We  find  the  apostle  writing  to  the 
Eomans,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ, 
.  .  .  for  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  re- 
vealed from  faith  to  faith."  ^  Again,  "  The  righteous- 
ness of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested,  being  wit- 
nessed by  the  law  and  the  prophets  ;  even  the  right- 
eousness of  God  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto 

»  Ps.  cxlv.  17.  2  Ps.  xix.  7.  3  Rom.  i.  16,  17. 


58  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

all,  and  upon  all  them  that  believe." '  Again,  "  He 
hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that 
w^e  mio^ht  be  made  the  rio^hteousness  of  God  in  him."^ 
Again,  he  expresses  an  earnest  desire  to  be  found  in 
Christ ;  not  having,  he  says,  "  mine  own  righteousness, 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith 
of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  ^ 
Simon  Peter  also  sends  his  salutation  "  to  them  that 
have  obtained  like  precious  faith  w^ith  us  through  the 
righteousness  of  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."^ 
The  term  righteousness,  when  applied  to  God,  does 
not  so  much  refer  to  any  one  attribute  as  it  denotes 
the  perfection  of  His  nature  and  sets  forth  the  fact 
that  He  is  most  holy  in  Himself  and  most  just  in  all 
His  dealings  with  His  creatures.  The  righteousness  of 
God  as  used  in  the  passages  just  quoted  is  understood 
by  some  writers  to  mean  nothing  more  than  God's 
method  of  justification  ;  but  that  they  are  mistaken  in 
their  view  is  evident,  first,  because  the  Holy  Ghost 
would  have  said  God's  method  of  justification  if  this 
had  been  the  thought  in  His  mind  ;  and,  secondly,  be- 
cause no  man  can  be  justified  until  there  is  a  right- 
eousness that  precedes  as  the  ground  upon  which  the 
sentence  of  justification  is  pronounced.  "Wordsworth 
well  says,  "  This  significant  phrase,  the  righteousness 
of  God,  is  not  to  be  lowered,  weakened,  and  impaired, 
so  as  to  mean  only  the  method  of  justification  by  which 
God  acquits  and  justifies  mankind."  Other  writers 
tell  us  that  the  expression  means  "  the  righteousness 

*  Rom.  iii.  21,  22.  2  2  Cor.  v.  21. 

'  Phil.  iii.  9.  ■*  2  Peter  i.  1. 


man's  eigiiteousness  cannot  save  iiim    59 

wliich  God  gives  and  which  He  approves  "  ;  but  while 
this  is  the  truth,  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  not  the  whole 
truth.  God  might  give  and  approve  a  creature-right- 
eousness such  as  Adam  had  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  and 
such  as  angels  possess  in  the  paradise  of  heaven  ;  but 
there  is  something  better  and  nobler  than  this  in  store 
for  the  redeemed  sinner. 

"  The  righteous  Loed  loveth  righteousness  ;  "  *  and 
His  love  for  it  is  so  great  that  when  He  saw  our  utter 
destitution  and  extreme  wretchedness,  in  His  infinite 
kindness  and  amazing  condescension  He  gave  us  His 
own.  He  gave  Christ,  His  co-equal,  co-eternal,  and 
only-begotten  Son,  who  was  and  is  forevermore  the 
true  God  in  our  nature,  and  who  not  only  furnished 
the  most  illustrious  exhibition  of  His  Father's  right- 
eousness the  universe  has  ever  seen,  but  by  His  perfect 
obedience  to  all  the  demands  of  the  divine  law,  and 
by  His  endurance  of  its  penalty  in  the  room  and  for 
the  justification  of  His  people,  becomes  their  right- 
eousness ;  and  this  righteousness  is  the  righteousness 
of  God  Himself.  It  is  that  kind  of  righteousness 
which  is  worthy  of  admittance  into  His  presence ;  and 
He  imputes  to  believers  the  righteousness  of  His  Son, 
which  is  only  another  name  for  His  own  righteousness. 
Hence  we  read  such  astonishing  language  as  this : 
"Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the 
world  ?  "  ^  "  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  an- 
gels ? "  ^  "He  that  overcometh,  and  keepeth  my 
works  unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the 
nations  :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  as 

1  Ps.  xi.  7.  « 1  Cor.  vi.  2.  ^  1  Cor.  vi.  3. 


60  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

the  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers : 
even  as  I  received  of  my  Father."  *  "  Him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my 
God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out :  and  I  will  write 
upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name 
of  the  city  of  my  God,  Avhich  is  new  Jerusalem, 
which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my  God; 
and  I  will  write  upon  him  my  new  name."^  "To 
him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me 
in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set 
down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne."^  In  other 
words,  the  righteousness  of  God  gives  a  title  to  those 
who  are  saved  to  be  associated  with  "  the  Prince  of 
the  kings  of  the  earth  "  Mn  the  most  endeared  intimacy 
and  in  places  of  highest  dignity,  which  would  be  im- 
possible if  they  did  not  stand  upon  the  ground  of  a 
perfect  righteousness  before  the  Father,  arrayed  as  it 
were  in  the  robe  of  His  own  unsullied  perfections. 

The  righteousness  of  God,  then,  is  an  expression 
which  has  a  broader  and  deeper  significance  than  that 
given  to  it  by  those  who  explain  it  to  mean  simply 
God's  method  of  justification  or  the  righteousness  of 
which  God  is  the  author  and  approver.  The  law 
demands  righteousness  ;  and  as  we  cannot  meet  the 
high  demand,  grace  gives  righteousness  ;  and  as  it  is  a 
gift,  it  is  bestowed  in  a  manner  worthy  of  God  who 
gives  us  His  own  righteousness.  Nothing  less  than 
this  could  satisfy  the  desires  of  His  loving  heart,  and 
nothing  less  than  this  could  suffice  to  admit  us  into 

»  Rev.  ii.  26,  27.  » Rev.  iii.  12. 

»Rev.  iii.  21.  *  Rev.  i.  5. 


man's  righteousness  cannot  save  him    61 

His  blessed  presence.  If  the  soul  has  upon  it  the  faint- 
est stain  of  sin,  it  must  be  excluded  forever  from  His 
glorious  dwelling-place ;  for  "  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  it  anything  that  defileth,"  ^  and  only  those  who 
are  righteous  in  the  sense  that  God  Himself  is  right- 
eous can  appear  for  a  moment  in  the  dazzling  splendor 
of  His  holiness.  Hence,  amid  the  untold  wonders  of 
His  creation  and  providence  the  most  wonderful  thing 
He  has  ever  done  is  to  impute  a  Divine  righteousness 
to  the  believing  sinner  who  can  say,  with  perfect  con- 
fidence :  "  Holy  Father !  there  is  no  difference  now 
between  Thy  righteousness  and  mine  ;  for  I  am  made 
the  very  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ."  I  need  not 
add  that  this  righteousness  is  no  less  enduring  and 
immutable  than  is  the  self-existent  and  unchangeable 
nature  of  the  Almighty  ;  and  never,  never  can  it  be 
torn  from  those  to  whom  it  has  been  reckoned  as  the 
ground  of  their  justification  until  the  eternal  Jehovah 
shall  cease  to  exist  or  be  hurled  from  His  throne. 
^  Eev.  xxi.  27. 


CHAPTEE  VI 
MAN'S  EIGHTEOUSNESS  CANNOT  SAVE  HIM 


IGNOEANCE  of  God's  righteousness  is  declared  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  as  fatal  and  soul-destroying 
as  the  grossest  wickedness,  because  it  led  the  Jews  and 
it  leads  others  to  go  about  the  vain  attempt  to  estab- 
lish their  own  righteousness ;  and  therefore  they  refuse 
to  submit  themselves  unto  the  righteousness  of  God. 
You  will  observe  that  He  does  not  charge  the  Israel- 
ites with  insincerity,  but  only  with  ignorance ;  and  yet 
practically  one  was  as  ruinous  to  the  soul  as  the  other. 
When  our  Lord  in  His  sermon  on  the  mount  said  to 
His  disciples,  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 
the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall 
in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven," '  He 
did  not  accuse  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  hypocrisy 
as  the  reason  for  asserting  that  we  must  have  a  better 
righteousness  than  theirs,  if  we  would  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Some  of  them,  we  know,  were 
hypocrites,  but  there  is  not  the  slightest  authority  for 
saying  that  all  of  them  were  practiced  and  wilful  im- 
postors. Saul  of  Tarsus,  for  example,  tells  us  he  was 
perfectly  sincere  in  his  religion  when  he  was  a  Pharisee, 
and  verily  thought  with  himself  that  he  ought  to  do 

1  Matt.  V.  20. 
62 


man's  eighteousness  cannot  save  him    63 

many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  N^aza- 
reth  ;  but  he  afterwards  informs  us  that  he  did  these 
things  "  ignorantly  in  unbelief."  ^  Surely  there  were 
others  equally  sincere ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
among  the  Jews  of  that  day  there  were  many  who 
attained  a  height  of  creature-righteousness  which  has 
never  been  surpassed  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

They  counted  six  hundred  and  thirteen  precepts  that 
were  binding  on  man,  dividing  them  into  three  hun- 
dred and  sixty-five  prohibitions  and  two  hundred  and 
forty-eight  commands,  and  were  scrupulously  exact  in 
striving  to  observe  every  one  of  them.  They  read  the 
Scriptures  diligently  ;  they  prayed  constantly ;  they 
kept  the  Sabbath  strictly ;  they  contributed  systemat- 
ically to  support  the  services  of  God's  house;  they 
adorned  themselves  with  all  the  beauties  of  a  faultless 
morality  and  maintained  an  incorruptible  integrity  in 
their  social  relations ;  but  even  then  our  Lord,  w^ho 
can  neither  deceive  nor  be  deceived,  solemnly  an- 
nounced that  their  righteousness  utterly  failed  to  pro- 
cure for  them  a  title  to  the  heavenly  inheritance ; 
"  for  they,  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness  and 
going  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  have 
not  submitted  themselves  unto  the  righteousness  of 
God."  Paul,  too,  assures  us  that,  ''touching  the 
righteousness  w^hich  is  in  the  law,"  he  w^as  blameless 
before  he  became  a  Christian ;  and  yet  this  boasted 
blamelessness  could  not  save  him,  but  afterwards  was 
regarded  by  him  as  sinfulness.  If,  then,  the  testi- 
mony of  Jesus  Christ  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  speaking 

» 1  Tim.  i.  13. 


64  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

by  the  apostle  is  to  be  believed  on  any  subject,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  a  creature-righteousness  could  not  save  the 
Jews,  and  it  is  no  less  certain  that  it  cannot  save  the 
Gentiles. 

It  has  been  the  great  purpose  of  Jehovah  from  the 
beginning,  I  may  say,  to  teach  this  fundamental  truth 
to  mankind,  for  He  stated  and  rehearsed  it  as  dis- 
tinctly before  the  coming  of  the  Saviour  into  the 
world  as  He  did  afterwards.  Thus  when  our  first 
parents  plucked  the  forbidden  fruit,  we  are  told,  "  the 
eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and  they  knew  that 
they  were  naked,  and  they  sewed  fig-leaves  together, 
and  made  themselves  aprons."  *  The  violated  law  in- 
stantly thundered  its  curse  against  them :  "  Thou  shalt 
surely  die ;  "  *  but  grace  sweetly  spoke  in  the  promise 
of  the  conquering  seed,  and  then  it  is  added,  "  Unto 
Adam  also  and  to  his  wife  did  the  Lord  God  make 
coats  of  skins  and  clothed  them."  ^  What  have  we 
here  but  the  insufiiciency  of  man's  righteousness 
as  well  as  the  precious  truth  of  Divine  righteousness 
taught  in  symbol  ?  The  attempt  which  Adam  made 
with  his  apron  of  fig-leaves  to  cover  his  nakedness 
utterly  failed,  and  hence  he  and  his  wife  hid  them- 
selves from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  among  the 
trees  of  the  garden  ;  but  the  robe  which  Jehovah  pro- 
vided, and  which  told  the  story  of  the  shedding  of 
blood  (as  the  appointed  victim  had  to  be  slain  before 
it  could  be  presented),  was  Divinely  perfect  in  its 
way ;  and  when  once  received  we  read  no  longer  of 
the  sinner  hiding  from  the  view  and  voice  of  his 

*Geu.  iii.  7  «Gen.  ii.  17.  'Gen.  iii.  21. 


man's  eighteousness  cannot  save  him    65 

Father.  Again,  in  the  next  chapter,  we  learn  that 
"  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  pass,  that  Cain  brought 
of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  an  offering  unto  the  Lord. 
And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock 
and  of  the  fat  thereof.  And  the  Lord  had  respect 
unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering :  but  unto  Cain  and  to 
his  offering  he  had  not  respect.  And  Cain  was  very 
wroth,  and  his  countenance  fell.  And  the  Lord  said 
unto  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth,  and  why  is  thy 
countenance  fallen  ?  If  thou  doest  well  [that  is.  If 
thou  offerest  properly],  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ? 
And  if  thou  doest  not  well  [offerest  not  properly], 
sin  lieth  at  the  door." '  Here  we  have  two  altars, 
the  one  laden  with  beautiful  fruits  and  fragrant 
flowers,  the  product  of  the  worshipper's  honorable 
toil,  and  the  expression,  no  doubt,  of  his  grateful 
and  sincere  homage,  while  the  other  is  dripping 
with  the  blood  of  a  dead  lamb.  The  difference 
between  the  two  brothers  did  not  consist  in  the 
superiority  of  either  by  nature,  but  in  the  sacrifices 
which  they  presented.  The  one  occupied  the  ground 
of  man's  righteousness  in  his  worship,  and  hence  was 
rejected ;  the  other  occupied  the  ground  of  Divine 
righteousness,  and  consequently  was  accepted  ;  for  the 
Holy  Ghost  informs  us  that  "  by  faith  Abel  offered 
unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,  by 
which  he  obtained  witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God 
testifying  of  his  gift."^  The  offerer  and  the  offering 
were  identified,  and  stood  or  fell  together,  God  re- 
garding the  former  in  the  light  of  the  latter,  and  pro- 
iGen.  iv.  3-7.  ^Ueb.  xi.  4. 


66  THE  WAY   MADE   PLAIl^ 

claiming,  even  in  that  early  age,  that  man's  righteous- 
ness cannot  save  him. 

It  would  be  impossible,  without  writing  a  book 
nearly  as  large  as  the  Bible  itself,  to  give  all  the  state- 
ments and  illustrations  of  this  essential  doctrine  found 
in  the  Scriptures,  for  the  word  of  God  from  first  to 
last  views  man  as  hopelessly  ruined  in  himself,  and 
sets  forth  in  every  variety  of  form  his  need  of  a  bet- 
ter, even  of  a  Divine,  righteousness  to  enter  into  life. 
It  is  true,  Moses  said  to  the  Hebrews  in  the  wilder- 
ness, "  It  shall  be  our  righteousness,  if  we  observe  to 
do  all  these  commandments  before  the  Lord  our  God, 
as  he  hath  commanded  us ; "  *  but  the  little  word 
"^Z""  is  very  important  in  this  connection,  and  the  in- 
spired history  shows  that  they  did  not  observe  to  do 
any  of  the  commandments  before  the  Lord  their  God 
as  He  commanded  them.  When  they  came  to  Sinai 
under  the  gentle  conduct  of  grace  that  bare  them  on 
eagles'  wings  and  promised  to  make  them  a  kingdom 
of  priests  and  a  holy  nation,  "  all  the  people  answered 
together,  and  said,  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
we  will  do ; "  ^  and  yet  scarcely  had  the  rash  vow 
proceeded  from  their  lips  before  they  were  found 
dancing  and  bowing  in  idolatrous  worship  around  a 
golden  calf.  Alas  poor  man  !  such  is  ever  the  end  of 
his  effort  to  obtain  a  righteousness  of  his  own  :  defeat, 
discomfiture,  disgrace,  is  the  invariable  result.  Hence 
we  hear  the  Psalmist  exclaiming :  "  I  will  go  in  the 
strength  of  the  Lord  God :  I  will  make  mention  of 
thy  righteousness,  even  of  thine  only."^     "  Who  shaU 

^Deut.  vi.  25.  ^E^od.  xix.  8.  »Ps.  Ixxi.  16. 


man's  eighteousness  cannot  save  him    67 

ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?  or  who  shall  stand 
in  his  holy  place  ?  .  .  .  He  shall  receive  the  bless- 
ing from  the  Lord,  and  righteousness  from  the  God 
of  his  salvation.'"  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  to- 
gether; righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each 
other.  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth;  and 
righteousness  shall  look  down  from  heaven."  ^  By  the 
mouth  of  His  prophets  the  Almighty  says,  "  O  Israel, 
thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;  but  in  me  is  thine  help."  ^ 
"  Their  righteousness  is  of  me,  saith  the  Lord."  ^ 
"  And  this  is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called,  The 
Lord  our  Kighteousness."  ^ 

The  Old  Testament,  then,  clearly  shows  how  and 
where  righteousness  is  to  be  obtained  ;  and  in  every 
instance  it  entirely  excludes  man's  righteousness  as 
the  ground  upon  which  God  pronounces  the  sentence 
of  justification.  "  All  our  righteousness,"  it  declares, 
"  are  as  filthy  rags  "  ^  (not  all  our  wickednesses  merely, 
for  this  any  one  is  ready  to  admit,  but  all  our  right- 
eousnesses are  as  rags,  nay,  filthy  rags),  and  "  he  that 
trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  ^ 

Even  the  most  illustrious  saints  whose  splendid 
achievements  are  recorded  in  its  pages  are  held  up 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  illustration,  not  of  the  value, 
but  of  the  worthlessness,  of  creature-righteousness  as 
the  means  of  gaining  acceptance  w^ith  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel.  "  For  what  saith  the  Scripture  ?  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  [his  believing  God]  was  counted 

iPs.  xxiv.  3,  5.  2ps^  Ixxxv.  10,  11.  »  Hos.  xiii.  9. 

Isa.  liv.  17.  'Jer.  xxiii.  6.  ^Isa,  Ixiv.  6. 

'  Prov.  xxviii.  26. 


68  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

« 

unto  him  for  righteousness." '  "  Even  as  David  also 
describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man  unto  whom 
God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works."  ^  To 
this  must  be  added  the  testimony  of  the  selfsame 
Spirit  in  the  New  Testament,  who  says,  "•  To  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  belie veth  on  him  that  justifieth  the 
ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  ^ 
Again,  he  speaks  of  righteousness  not  as  a  reward 
fairly  earned,  but  as  a  gift  freely  bestowed :  "  For 
if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by  one ;  much 
more  they  which  receive  abundance  of  grace  and  of 
the  gift  of  righteousness  shall  reign  in  life  by  one, 
Jesus  Christ.  Therefore,  as  by  the  offence  of  one 
judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation  ;  even 
so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the  free  gift  came 
upon  all  men  [all  united  to  Christ]  unto  justification 
of  life."  ■'  Again :  ''  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  That 
the  Gentiles,  which  followed  not  after  righteousness, 
have  attained  to  righteousness,  even  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  faith.  But  Israel,  which  followed  after 
the  law  of  righteousness,  hath  not  attained  to  the  law 
of  righteousness.  Wherefore  ?  Because  they  sought 
it  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the 
law."  ^  Again :  "  After  that  the  kindness  and  love 
of  God  our  Saviour  towards  man  appeared,  not  by 
works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  ac- 
cording to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of 
regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  which 
he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ,  our 

*  Rom.  iv.  3.  ^  Rom.  iv.  6.  ^  Rom.  iv.  5. 

«  Rom.  V.  17,  18.  *  Rom.  ix.  30-32. 


Saviour ;  that  being  justified  by  bis  grace,  we  should 
be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life." ' 

It  is  useless,  however,  to  quote  other  passages  bear- 
ing the  same  testimony,  because  if  my  readers  bow 
to  the  authority  of  God's  word  they  are  already  con- 
vinced by  w^hat  has  been  written  ;  and  if  they  refuse 
to  accept  that  word  as  true,  it  would  avail  nothing  to 
quote  the  whole  Bible.  It  is  certain  that  there  is  not 
a  line  in  the  book  in  conflict  with  the  testimony  here 
given;  and  hence  it  is  equally  certain  that  man's 
righteousness  cannot  save  him.  It  is  true  "  that  faith 
without  works  is  dead  ; "  ^  but  this  is  not  saying  that 
works  save ;  or  that  faith  and  works  put  together 
save  the  soul,  for  this  would  make  faith  itself  a  work. 
If  it  be  true  that  faith  without  works  is  dead,  do  not 
forget  that  works  without  faith  are  also  dead.  "  What 
doth  it  profit,  my  brethren,"  writes  James,  "  though 
a  man  say  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not  works  ?  Can 
faith  save  him  ?  "  ^  What  doth  it  profit,  my  brethren, 
though  a  man  say  he  hath  ten  thousand  a  year,  and 
have  it  not  ?  Can  his  saying  it  do  him  any  good  ? 
Depend  upon  it,  Paul  and  James  speak  the  same 
things  ;  for  it  is  one  Spirit  who  speaks  through  them 
both.  Paul  speaks  of  a  real  possession  of  faith ; 
James  of  a  mere  profession  of  faith.  Paul  speaks  of 
a  faith  that  justifies  us  before  God ;  James  of  a  faith 
that  justifies  us  in  the  sight  of  men.  Paul  speaks  of 
an  inward  principle  ;  James  of  its  active  development. 
Paul  speaks  of  a  hidden  life ;  James  of  its  outward 
manifestation.     Paul  speaks  of  a  "  faith  which  work- 

^  Tit.  iii.  4-7.  ^  janies  ii.  20.  ^  James  ii.  14.  ' 


70  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

eth  b}^  love,"  '  and  so  does  James ;  and  hence  these 
two  honored  servants  of  the  Lord  are  in  perfect 
accord,  only  they  view  the  same  landscape  from  dif- 
ferent points,  and  are  fighting  the  same  foe  of 
legalism  with  their  backs  to  each  other.  Both  of 
them  join  all  the  holy  men  of  God  who  "  spake  as 
they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  ^  in  solemnly 
declaring  that  righteousness  is  the  gift  of  grace,  that 
is,  of  God's  mimerited  favor ;  for  "  by  grace  ye  are 
saved,"  ^  "  and  if  by  grace,  then  it  is  no  more  of 
works  :  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  But  if  it 
be  of  works,  then  it  is  no  more  grace :  otherwise  work 
is  no  more  work."  ^ 

II.  Keeping  in  mind  that  righteousness,  when  ap- 
plied to  man,  signifies  the  state  or  condition  of  being 
right  according  to  the  infallible  judgment  of  God's 
law,  a  moment's  reflection  will  show  that  we  can 
never  be  saved  in  virtue  of  our  own  good  character 
and  conduct.  The  Holy  Spirit  tells  us  that  "  as  many 
as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse : 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them."  ^  If,  therefore,  a  man  expects  to  be 
saved  by  means  of  his  well-doing,  it  is  obvious  that 
he  must  not  only  profess  to  do,  or  try  to  do,  right, 
but  he  must  actually  do,  and  continue  to  do,  not  only 
some  things,  but  all  things,  which  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law.  If,  however,  he  has  failed  to  do 
right,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  has  done  wrong,  it  is 

»  Gal.  V.  6.  2  2  Pet.  i.  21.  '  Eph.  ii.  5. 

*  Kom.  xi.  6.  *  Gal.  iii.  10. 


man's   EIGllTEOUSNESS   CANNOT   SAVE  HIM      71 

no  less  obvious  that  he  cannot  be  saved  by  his  doing, 
whatever  other  ground  of  hope  may  suggest  itself  to 
his  mind.  "Master,"  said  a  certain  lawyer  to  our 
Saviour,  "  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ?  He 
said  unto  him,  What  is  written  in  the  law  ?  How 
readest  thou?  And  he  answering,  said,  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with 
all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all 
thy  mind ;  and  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  And  he  said 
unto  him,  Thou  hast  answered  right :  this  do,  and 
thou  shalt  live."  ^  Those,  then,  and  only  those,  who 
can  truthfully  assert  that  they  have  always  loved  God 
with  all  the  faculties  of  their  being,  and  their  fellow 
men  as  themselves,  may  claim  to  be  righteous,  and 
expect  eternal  life  on  the  ground  of  their  own  right- 
eousness. But  what  shall  we  say  when  we  find  it 
written  in  the  Word  of  Truth,  "  There  is  none  right- 
eous, no  not  one,"  ^  "  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  ?^  Clearly,  the  only  pos- 
sible conclusion  is  that  reached  by  the  apostle  when 
he  argues,  "  Therefore,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight :  for  by  the  law 
is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  ^ 

It  will  not  remove  the  difficulty  a  hair's-breadth  to 
repent  and  promise  to  abstain  in  the  future  from  any 
violation  of  the  law ;  for  if  such  a  promise  could  be 
kept  for  a  day  or  an  hour,  could  it  atone  for  past 
transgressions?  Suppose  that  a  criminal,  arrested 
after    repeated    offences    running    through    a    long 

1  Luke  X.  25-28.  « Rom.  iii.  10. 

3Kom.  iii.  23.  <Kom.  iii.  20. 


72  THE   AVAY   MADE  PLAIN 

course  of  years,  and  put  upon  his  trial  and  con- 
victed, and  asked  by  the  judge  if  he  had  anything  to 
say  why  sentence  should  not  be  pronounced  against 
him,  could  only  reply  that  he  was  sorry  he  had  com- 
mitted the  crimes,  and  would  hereafter  conduct  him- 
self as  a  good  citizen.  Could  such  a  plea  be  accepted 
as  vindicating  the  majesty  of  violated  law  or  as 
satisfying  the  claims  of  insulted  justice?  But  the 
sinner  has  been  going  on  all  his  lifetime  breaking  the 
law  of  God  with  every  breath,  and  at  every  beat  of 
the  pulse  ;  and  manifestly  it  is  the  silliest  delusion  to 
expect  that  he  will  be  acquitted  and  pronounced  right- 
eous before  the  high  tribunal  of  heaven  simply  be- 
cause he  has  undertaken  at  length  to  perform  the 
duties  he  was  required  to  perform  from  the  first. 
But,  alas  !  his  efforts  to  keep  the  law  in  its  true  intent 
will  be  as  futile  as  his  hope  of  acceptance  on  the 
ground  of  his  own  works.  "  Thy  commandment," 
says  the  Psalmist,  "  is  exceeding  broad ;  "  *  and  it 
sweeps  over  the  whole  extent  of  our  being,  including 
the  thoughts  and  emotions  as  well  as  the  words  and 
deeds.  Our  Lord,  who  knew  the  meaning  of  the  law, 
declares  that  "  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust 
after  her  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already 
in  his  heart,"  ^  and  the  Spirit  declares  that  "  whoso- 
ever hateth  his  brother,"  though  the  hand  may  not  be 
raised  nor  anger  gleam  from  the  eye,  "  is  a  murderer."  ^ 
"  Wherefore,  then,  serveth  the  law  ?  It  was  added 
because  of  transgressions,  till  the  seed  should  come  to 
whom  the  ^^romise  w^as  made."  ^     "  Moreover,  the  law 

^  Ps.  cxix.  96.        '  Matt.  v.  28.      ^  1  Jolm  iii.  15.        ^  Gal.  iii.  19. 


entered  that  the  offence  might  abound."  ^  It  was 
never  designed  to  give  life  nor  to  be  a  rule  of  life  to 
a  sinner  with  the  expectation  that  he  would  keep  it, 
but  its  ministry  is  to  penetrate  the  soul  like  the  sun- 
light streaming  into  a  dark  room  to  reveal  the  dust 
and  defilement  that  had  remained  concealed.  Hence 
he  who  has  been  truly  awakened,  and  who  seeks  to 
be  conformed  to  the  law,  invariably  finds  that  it  keeps 
ahead  of  his  most  earnest  strivings,  discovering  im- 
purities and  iniquities  of  which  he  had  never  dreamed 
before,  and  often  wringing  from  him  the  cry  of 
anguish,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death ? " ^  "If  we," 
says  the  apostle  John,  .speaking  for  himself  and  all 
his  brethren — "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  de- 
ceive ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  ^  "  Who- 
soever shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in 
one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all ; "  ^  but  "  in  many  things 
we  offend  all,"  ^  and  therefore  it  is  sheer  madness  to 
claim  that  man's  righteousness  can  save  him,  because 
he  has  no  righteousness,  and  never  will  have  any,  of 
his  own.  If,  however,  any  are  disposed  to  argue  that, 
notwithstanding  their  imperfections,  God  will  be 
merciful,  and  bestow  eternal  life  for  the  sake  of  the 
good  they  have  done,  you  observe  that  they  shift  the 
ground  of  their  hope  from  their  own  doings,  and 
really  admit  that  their  righteousness  cannot  save 
them. 

III.     The  work  of  Christ  shows  conclusively  that 

'  Rom.  V.  20.  'Rom.  vii.  24.  '1  John  i.  8. 

*  James  ii.  10.  *  James  iii.  2. 


74:  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

we  need  a  better  righteousness  than  we  ourselves  can 
render  ;  "  for  if  there  had  been  a  law  given  which 
could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness  should  have 
been  by  the  law ; " '  and  "  if  righteousness  come  by 
the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain."^  Yes:  he 
who  relies  for  salvation  upon  his  own  works  defiantly 
sets  his  opinion  in  opposition  to  the  eternal  counsel  of 
Jehovah,  and  boldly  declares  that  the  awful  scene  on 
Calvary,  when  the  tender  heart  of  the  immaculate 
and  incarnate  One  was  broken  by  reproach  upon  the 
cross,  was  altogether  unnecessary.  Every  one  must 
see,  then,  at  a  glance,  the  gross  inconsistency  of  pro- 
fessing to  believe  the  Bible,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
denying  the  necessity  of  the  atonement;  for  Christ 
and  His  cross  form  the  key  to  unlock  the  meaning  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  constitute  the  all-pervading  theme 
of  its  sacred  pages.  They  exhibit  in  every  possible 
form  of  expression  the  Divine  person  and  mediatorial 
w^ork  of  Christ  Jesus,  "  who,  being  in  the  form  of 
God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God : 
but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon 
him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men :  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he 
humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  God  also 
hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which 
is  above  every  name  :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and 
things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that 
every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord, 

»Gal.  iii.  21.  »Gal.  ii.  21. 


75 

to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  '  Whoever,  in  proud 
or  ignorant  dependence  upon  his  good  character  and 
conduct,  refuses  to  confess  that  most  worthy  name 
which  raises  the  anthems  of  heaven  to  their  highest 
notes,  will  certainly  find  his  boasted  righteousness  a 
foundation  of  sand  when  the  Lord  "  ariseth  to  shake 
terribly  the  earth,"  ^ 

Dear  reader !  be  persuaded,  "  before  that  great  and 
notable  day  of  the  Lord  come,"  ^  to  accept  the  perfect 
and  proffered  righteousness  of  Christ,  which  alone  can 
stand  the  inspection  of  Him  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame 
of  fire.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  "  give  your  heart  to 
God,"  or  to  "  enter  into  covenant  with  God  that  you 
will  serve  him,"  as  the  means  of  obtaining  His  favor, 
for  this  is  wretched  advice,  although  you  often  hear 
it  urged.  God  is  already  favorable,  and  in  His  in- 
finite love  is  holding  out  to  your  immediate  accept- 
ance a  Divine  righteousness, — yea,  His  own  righteous- 
ness,— as  the  ground  of  your  instant,  complete,  and 
eternal  justification.  Without  this  you  may  unite 
with  any  church,  or  with  all  the  churches,  on  the  face 
of  the  earth  ;  you  may  be  baptized  in  any  mode,  or  in 
all  the  modes  ever  practiced  ;  you  may  receive  confir- 
mation at  the  hands  of  the  most  distinguished  ecclesi- 
astical dignitary  in  the  world ;  you  may  regularly 
partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  most  stately  cathe- 
dral and  amid  the  most  imposing  ceremonies ;  you 
may  bestow  all  your  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  give 
your  body  to  be  burned ;  and  after  all  remain  the 
same  condemned  and  ruined  sinner  you  are  at  present. 

1  Phil,  ii,  6-11.  'Isa.  ii.  19.  "  Acts  ii.  20. 


T6  THE  AVAY   MADE  PLAIN 

But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  which  is  by  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  unto  all,  that  is,  it  is  offered  to  all, 
and  it  is  actually  upon  all  them  that  believe.  The 
righteousness  of  God !  What  a  wonderful  truth ! 
Blessed  be  His  name,  the  worst  need  nothing  better 
than  this,  but  the  best  can  do  with  nothing  less. 
"While  such  a  righteousness  is  so  generously  pressed 
upon  dying  men,  sad  indeed  it  is  to  think  of  the  vast 
multitudes  who,  "  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteous- 
ness, and  going  about  to  establish  their  own  right- 
eousness, have  not  submitted  themselves  unto  the 
righteousness  of  God."  I  would  not  undervalue,  in 
the  slightest  degree,  the  real  worth  of  morality  in  its 
relation  to  human  society,  but  do  not,  I  beseech  you, 
put  it  in  the  place  of  righteousness ;  for  the  former 
may  shine  in  its  brightest  glory  without  receiving  one 
ray  from  the  latter  to  mingle  v^ith  its  radiance. 
"  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  :  and  yet  show  I  unto 
you  a  more  excellent  way."  ' 

» 1  Cor.  xii.  31. 


CHAPTEE  YII 
CHEIST  THE  SAYIOUE  OF  THE  BELIEVEE 

**  For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one 
that  believeth." — Romans  x.  4. 

HAYING  proved  by  the  testimony  of  God,  first, 
that  man  needs  salvation,  second,  that  his  sin- 
cerity cannot  save  him,  and,  third,  that  his  righteous- 
ness cannot  save  him,  it  may  be  asked  by  my  reader. 
How  then  can  he  be  saved  ?  The  reply  to  this  in- 
quiry has  already  been  given  incidentally  in  the 
passages  of  Scripture  that  were  quoted  for  another 
purpose ;  but  in  the  present  chapter  I  ask  your  atten- 
tion to  the  special  discussion  of  a  subject  which  is 
beyond  all  comparison  the  most  important  that  can 
engage  our  regard.  We  know  not  how  soon  death 
may  come  to  summon  us  away  to  our  unchanging 
destiny  beyond  the  grave,  nor  how  soon  the  Lord  may 
come  to  gather  His  people  to  Himself  as  a  prelimi- 
nary step  to  the  infliction  of  terrific  judgments  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;  and  surely  every  reason- 
able man  must  see  that  the  question  of  his  salvation 
should  be  distinctly,  definitely,  and  intelligently  set- 
tled without  delay.  Blessed  be  God,  it  may  be  settled 
instantly ;  for  according  to  the  same  unimpeachable 
testimony  which  has  established  the  propositions  thus 
far  advanced,  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  right- 
eousness to  every  one  that  believeth." 

77 


TS  THE  WAY   MADE   PLAIIS- 

The  precise  meaning  of  the  terms  in  this  statement 
is  the  first  point  that  demands  our  notice.  The  word 
translated  end  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  forty-one 
times.  The  corresponding  verb  is  sometimes  rendered 
"  to  accomplish,"  sometimes  *'  to  finish,"  sometimes 
''  to  fulfil,"  and  sometimes  "  to  perform."  When, 
therefore,  it  is  said  that  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law, 
we  may  understand  that  as  the  object  of  its  types 
and  the  subject  of  its  predictions  He  accomplished  all 
that  it  announced  as  needful  to  be  done ;  or  that  He 
finished  its  career  in  its  bearing  upon  our  salvation ; 
or  that  He  fulfilled  its  requisitions,  its  symbols,  and  its 
ceremonies  ;  or  that  He  performed  the  work  which  it 
exacted  as  essential  to  the  deliverance  of  the  sinner 
from  its  curse.  But  clearer  light  will  be  thrown 
upon  the  signification  of  the  word  if  we  will  inquire 
for  a  moment  how  it  is  employed  in  other  portions  of 
the  sacred  volume.  For  example,  we  read  in  Mat- 
thew, "  Ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men  for  my  name's 
sake ;  but  he  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be 
saved." '  "  This  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be 
preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all 
nations ;  and  then  shall  the  end  come."  ^  In  Mark 
we  read,  "  If  Satan  rise  up  against  himself,  and  be  di- 
vided, he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  end."  ^  "  When 
ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumors  of  wars,  be  ye 
not  troubled  :  for  such  things  must  needs  be  ;  but  the 
end  shall  not  be  yet."  ^  In  Luke  we  read,  "  He  shall 
reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever  ;  and  of  his 

» Matt.  X.  22.  «  Matt.  xxiv.  14. 

•  Mark  iii.  26.  *  Mark  xiii.  7. 


CHRIST  THE   SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       79 

kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  *  "  For  I  say  unto 
you,  that  this  that  is  written  must  yet  be  accom- 
plished in  me,  And  he  was  reckoned  among  the  trans- 
gressors :  for  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  end."  ' 
In  John  we  read,  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were 
in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  ^  In  Ro- 
mans, "  The  end  of  those  things  is  death.  But  now 
being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become  servants  to 
God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end 
everlasting  life."  ^  In  Corinthians,  "  Waiting  for 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall  also 
confirm  you  unto  the  end."  ^  "  But  every  man  in  his 
own  order :  Christ  the  first  fruits ;  afterwards  they 
that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming.  Then  cometh  the 
end,  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to 
God,  even  the  Father."  ^ 

These  quotations  are  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  or- 
dinary use  of  the  word  by  the  inspired  writers,  and 
they  show  that  we  are  to  take  it  in  its  obvious  sense 
when  it  is  said,  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  belie veth."  The  law 
at  Sinai  demanded  righteousness,  but  grace  at  Cal- 
vary gives  righteousness,  even  the  perfect  righteous- 
ness of  Christ ;  and  to  him  that  believeth,  the  law 
comes  to  an  end,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  right- 
eousness of  God  Himself  as  the  immovable  ground 
upon  which  the  believer  forever  stands.  If  a  man 
owes  a  debt  which  he  cannot  discharge,  and  his 
surety  pays  it  for  him,  the  law  comes  to  an  end  so  far 

*  Luke  i.  33.  '  Lnke  xxii.  37.  ,  ^  John  xiii.  1. 

*Rom.  vi.  21,  22.        » 1  Cor.  i.  7,  8.  •  1  Cor.  xv.  23,  24. 


80  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

as  that  debtor  is  concerned,  because  its  requirements 
have  been  met  and  its  claims. satisfied,  although  by 
another,  and  it  has  no  further  demands  upon  him.  If 
a  murderer  has  been  tried,  convicted,  and  executed 
for  his  crime,  the  law  is  at  an  end  in  his  case,  because 
it  has  been  honored  and  vindicated  in  the  infliction 
of  the  threatened  penalty,  and  it  cannot  cause  the 
lifeless  body  of  the  felon  to  be  again  swung  from  the 
gallows.  In  like  manner,  the  law  of  God  is  at  an  end 
in  its  bearing  upon  the  believer  in  Jesus,  not  because 
it  has  been  set  aside  and  trampled  under  foot  by  the 
lawgiver,  but  because  Christ  took  the  place  of  the 
believing  sinner,  paying  his  debt  and  suffering  the 
deadful  penalty  in  his  stead. 

The  word  "  law  "  in  English  is  said  to  be  derived 
from  a  Saxon  term  which  signifies  "  to  lay."  Worces- 
ter is  correct,  therefore,  in  defining  it  as  "  a  rule  of 
action  laid  down  or  prescribed  by  a  superior."  The 
Greek  word  here  used  strictly  signifies  "  anything  as- 
signed, distributed,  apportioned ;  hence  a  usage,  cus- 
tom, and  all  that  becomes  law  thereby ;  a  law ;  ordi- 
nance." We  are  safe,  then,  in  asserting  that  the  word 
"  law,"  which  occurs  about  seventy-five  times  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Eomans,  denotes  the  rule  of  action 
which  God  has  laid  down  or  assigned  for  the  govern- 
ment of  man  in  his  relations  to  his  Creator  and  his 
fellow  creatures.  About  this  rule  of  action  a  few 
remarks  must  be  made  that  will  carry  us  back  for  a 
moment  to  ground  which  we  have  previously  trav- 
ersed to  some  extent,  but  which  it  is  well  for  us  to 
notice  again. 


CHRIST   THE   SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER        81 

First,  It  is  a  rule  which  it  is  right  and  proper  for 
man  to  observe.  "  The  law  is  holy,  and  the  com- 
mandment holy,  and  just,  and  good."  '  "  We  know 
that  the  law  is  good."^  It  is  the  expression  of  the 
will  of  a  righteous  God  concerning  the  way  He  would 
have  us  feel  and  act,  and  hence  its  requirements  can- 
not be  wrong.  JSTo  one  will  venture  to  affirm  that 
there  is  anything  unjust  or  unbecoming  in  command- 
ing us  to  love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  the  heart, 
and  with  all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  strength,  and 
with  all  the  mind,  and  our  neighbors  as  ourselves,  and 
"  on  these  two  commandments,"  says  the  Saviour, 
"  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets."  ^ 

Second,  It  is  a  rule  which  applies  to  the  thoughts, 
emotions,  and  desires  no  less  than  to  the  words  and 
deeds.  We  have  just  seen  that  it  demands  supreme, 
unfaltering,  unceasing  love  to  God  and  to  our  fellow 
men,  and  love  exists  in  the  heart.  Hence  it  is  writ- 
ten, "  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of 
angels,  and  have  not  charity  [love],  I  am  become  as 
sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  And  though  I 
have  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  understand  all  mys- 
teries, and  all  knowledge;  and  though  I  have  all 
faith,  so  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and  have  not 
charity  [love],  I  am  nothing.  And  though  I  bestow 
all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give  my 
body  to  be  burned  and  have  not  charity  [love],  it 
profiteth  me  nothing."  ^  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law."  ®    I^o  man,  therefore,  can  keep  the  law  in  its 

^  Rom.  vii.  12.  ^  1  Tim.  i.  8.  ^  jvjatt.  xxii.  40. 

*  1  Cor.  xiii.  1-3.  ^  Rom.  xiii.  10. 


82  THE    WAY    MADE   PLAIN 

true  intent,  unless  love  is  the  sovereign  principle  of 
his  soul,  subordinating  to  its  imperial  and  undisputed 
sway  every  aspiration  and  sentiment,  every  aim  and 
purpose,  of  his  being.  His  life  may  be  conformed  to 
the  highest  standard  of  human  integrity,  but  ''  the 
Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth  ;  for  man  looketh  on  the 
outward  appearance,  but  the  Loed  looketh  on  the 
heart."  *  "  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the 
reins,"  ^  and  hence  in  His  sight  the  look  of  lust  is 
"  adultery,"  ^  and  the  secret  passion  of  hate  is  "  mur- 
der." ' 

Third,  It  is  a  rule  which  consists  of  two  parts :  a 
precept  or  command,  and  a  penalty  or  punishment  in 
case  of  disobedience.  Without  this  threatened  penalty 
it  could  not  constitute  a  rule  of  action.  We  might 
have  advice  or  exhortation,  but  law,  in  the  sense  in 
which  the  word  is  here  used,  cannot  exist  unless  it 
carries  with  it  rewards  and  punishments  as  its  high 
sanction  to  encourage  and  enforce  obedience.  Human 
governments  never  lay  down  or  assign  a  rule  of  action 
for  the  observance  of  their  subjects  until  they  arm  it 
with  a  penalty,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  could  not 
be  a  law  at  all  were  it  not  clothed  with  power  to 
punish  the  transgression  or  neglect  of  its  requirements. 
In  the  Divine  government  too,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
penalty  is  connected  with  every  rule  of  action  which 
God  has  laid  down  for  our  guidance,  so  far  as  our  ex- 
perience and  observation  extend.  There  are  certain 
rules  of  action  which  apply  to  our  bodies,  as  the  law 

^  1  Sam.  xvi.  7.  ^  jer.  xvii.  10. 

»  Matt.  V.  28.  *  1  John  iii.  15. 


CHEIST  THE   SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       83 

of  gravitation,  and  hygienic  laws,  or  laws  pertaining 
to  the  preservation  of  health.  If  these  rules  are  dis- 
regarded, the  penalty  is  inevitable.  Sometimes  it  fol- 
lows instantly,  and  sometimes  it  is  long  delayed,  but 
sooner  or  later  its  relentless  inflictions  are  sure  to 
vindicate  the  majesty  of  broken  law.  There  are  also 
certain  rules  of  action  which  pertain  to  our  mental 
faculties,  and  the  infraction  of  them  entails  derange- 
ment, weakness,  or  other  forms  of  punishment,  unless 
indeed  a  miracle  is  wrought  to  arrest  the  merciless 
operation  of  violated  law.  Still  further,  there  are 
certain  rules  of  action  which  are  plainly  intended  for 
the  regulation  of  our  moral  nature  ;  and  often,  very 
often,  we  witness  the  fearful  results  of  disobeying 
these  rules  in  the  agony,  remorse,  and  sufferings  of 
various  kinds  that  overtake  the  wicked.  Indeed,  it  is 
universally  admitted,  I  believe,  that  sin  is  punished ; 
while,  with  strange  inconsistency  and  a  feebleness  of 
reasoning  actually  puerile,  many  argue,  or  rather  hope 
and  suppose,  that  it  is  punished  only  in  the  present 
life.  They  do  not  reflect  that,  if  God  is  too  merciful 
to  punish  it  hereafter.  He  should  be  too  merciful,  ac- 
cording to  their  view,  to  punish  it  here,  since  it  is  a 
mere  question  of  degree  or  duration.  They  seem  to 
recognize  the  justice,  or,  at  all  events,  they  are  com- 
pelled to  acknowledge  the  fact,  of  its  punishment  to 
some  extent ;  and  hoAV  can  they  hesitate  to  accept  the 
logical  conclusion  that  God  will  deal  with  it  in  eternity 
as  He  deals  with  it  in  time,  and  manifest  towards  it 
His  righteous  displeasure  forever?  The  wish  with 
them  is  plainly  father  to  their  thought ;  but  whatever 


84  THE  AVAY   MADE  PLAIN 

their  desires  and  conjectures,  it  remains  unalterably 
true  that  God's  law  has  a  penalty,  and  that  ever}^  sin 
committed  under  His  government  will  be  strictly 
punished  either  in  the  person  of  the  sinner  or  in  the 
person  of  the  Divine  Substitute.  "  The  wages  of  sin 
is  death  ;  "  '  and  death  includes  all  the  penal  evils  in- 
flicted as  the  consequence  of  sin  both  in  this  world  and 
the  world  to  come.  ''  When  lust  hath  conceived,  it 
bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bring- 
eth  forth  death."  ^  "  Indignation  and  wrath,  tribula- 
tion and  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth 
evil ;  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile."  ^ 

Fourth,  It  is  a  rule  of  action  which  every  human 
being,  except  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  has  violated.  Sin 
is  any  desire,  thought,  word,  action,  or  omission  con- 
trary to  the  law  of  God,  and  it  is  written,  "  There  is 
no  man  that  sinneth  not."  ^  "  There  is  not  a  just  man 
on  earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not."  ^  "  All 
have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  ^ 
"  In  many  things  we  offend  all."  ^  *'  If  we  say  that 
we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word 
is  not  in  us." '  "If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  ^  The 
conclusion  which  the  apostle  draws  from  such  state- 
ments as  these  is  unavoidable  when  he  writes  :  "  ISTow 
we  know  that  what  things  soever  the  law  saith,  it 
saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law :  that  every 
mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become 

'  Rom.  vi.  23.  '  James  i.  15.  ^  Rom.  ii.  8,  9. 

4  1  Kings  viii.  46.  ^  Eccles.  vii.  20.  «  Rom.  iii.  23. 

'  James  iii.  2.  ^  i  john  1.  10.  ^  1  Johu  i.  8. 


CHKIST  THE   SAVIOUE   OF  THE  BELIEVER        85 

guilty  before  God.  Therefore  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight :  for 
by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  '  Yes,  the 
plummet  has  been  let  down  only  to  prove  that  there 
is  a  total  lack  of  rectitude  on  our  part ;  the  straight 
rule  has  been  applied  to  our  character  and  conduct 
only  to  show  an  utter  want  of  righteousness  ;  the  light 
from  heaven  has  flashed  into  our  souls  only  to  reveal 
the  defilement  of  our  nature.  It  is  impossible,  then, 
that  a  sinner  can  be  justified  by  doing  the  things  re- 
quired by  the  law,  because  he  has  already  failed,  and 
continually  fails,  to  do  them ;  and  the  law  convicts 
and  condemns,  and  curses  him,  as  it  is  said,  "  Cursed 
is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which 
are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  ^ 
You  will  observe  it  is  not  said.  Cursed  are  some  very 
wicked  j)eople,  but.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  con- 
tinueth not  in  all  things — not  some  things,  but  all 
things — which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them  ;  for  again  it  is  said,  "  Whosoever  shall  keep 
the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is 
guilty  of  all."^  If  a  criminal  were  arraigned  for 
murder,  it  would  avail  him  little  to  plead  that  he  had 
never  committed  more  than  one  murder,  or  that 
there  were  many  other  offences,  such  as  theft  and 
burglary,  of  which  he  was  not  guilty.  He  might  be 
pardoned  in  view  of  his  general  good  character,  but 
surely  he  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  as  right- 
eous, and  his  pardon  could  be  obtained  only  by  setting 
the  law  aside.  Neither  can  you  be  justified  by  the 
*  Rom.  iii.  19,  20.  *  Qal.  iii.  10.  ^  james  ii.  10. 


86  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

law  of  God,  my  unsaved  reader,  if  you  have  ever 
broken  it  in  a  single  particular,  for  "  the  soul  that 
sinneth  [be  it  once  or  ten  thousand  times],  it  shall 
die." '  You  may  urge  that  you  have  done  no  harm, 
but  the  question  is  not  whether  you  have  done  any 
harm ;  it  is  whether  you  have  done  good,  and  nothing 
but  good,  out  of  the  high  and  commanding  principle 
of  supreme  and  unchanging  love  to  your  Creator  and 
your  fellow  men.  The  law  does  not  pronounce  its 
curse  against  you  because  you  are  a  particularly  bad 
person,  but  because  you  are  a  person  at  all  with  a 
nature  whose  essential  characteristic  is  lawlessness. 

Having  considered  the  meaning  of  the  term  "  end  " 
and  the  term  "  law,"  we  must  now  glance  at  the  im- 
port of  the  word  "  Christ."  It  properly  signifies  the 
Anointed  One,  and  is  equivalent  to  Messiah  in 
Hebrew,  as  denoting  an  illustrious  personage  who 
was  to  be  anointed  or  consecrated  to  the  work  of  sal- 
vation. From  the  time  the  promise  of  the  woman's 
conquering  seed  was  made  to  our  fallen  parents  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  holy  men  of  God  who  spake  as  they 
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  constantly  uttered 
predictions  concerning  this  personage,  and  looked 
forward  to  His  coming  with  eager  expectation.  The 
entire  economy  under  which  they  lived  was  so  ordered 
that  its  priesthood  and  offerings  and  altar,  its  ark  and 
tabernacle  and  temple,  down  to  the  pillars  and  ribands, 
the  coverings  and  curtains,  the  bars  and  boards,  the 
loops  and  taches,  found  in  the  sacred  building,  were 
radiant  with  the  light  of  His  anticipated  appearing 

*  Ezek.  xviii.  4. 


CHEIST  THE  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       87 

and  eloquent  in  His  praise.  He  is  presented  through- 
out the  Scriptures  under  a  wonderful  variety  of  names, 
among  which  we  find  Him  called  our  Advocate,  Alpha 
and  Omega,  Almighty,  the  Amen,  the  Angel  of  the 
Covenant,  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  the  Apostle  of  our 
Profession,  the  Author  of  our  Faith,  the  Beginning 
of  Creation,  Beloved,  Branch,  Bread,  Bridegroom, 
Brother,  Captain  of  our  Salvation,  Creator,  Com- 
mander, Counsellor,  Corner  Stone,  Covert  from  the 
Tempest,  Daysman,  Deliverer,  Door,  Elect,  Ensign, 
End,  Example,  Father  of  Eternity,  Faithful  Witness, 
First  and  Last,  Fountain  of  Life,  Foundation,  Friend, 
God,  Guard,  Guide,  Governor,  Head,  Healer,  Helper, 
Hope,  Horn  of  Salvation,  Husband,  I  am.  Image  of 
God,  Immanuel,  Intercessor,  Jesus,  Jehovah,  Judge, 
Just  One,  Keeper,  King,  Lamb,  Leader,  Life,  Light 
of  the  World,  Lion,  Lord,  Maker,  Mediator,  Mes- 
senger, Messiah,  Morning  Star,  Passover,  Peace,  Phy- 
sician, Priest,  Prince,  Prophet,  Eansom,  Kedeemer, 
Refiner,  Resurrection,  Righteousness,  Restorer,  Ruler, 
Rock,  Rose  of  Sharon,  Root  of  David,  Sacrifice, 
Saviour,  Sceptre,  Shepherd,  Shield,  Shiloh,  Star, 
Stone,  Sun,  Teacher,  Tower,  Truth,  Yine,  Way, 
Witness,  Wisdom,  and  Word. 


CHAPTER  YIII 
CHEIST  THE  SAYIOUE  OF  THE  BELIEVER 

AND  not  only  are  these  remarkable  names  applied 
to  Him,  many  of  which  imply  His  true  and 
proper  divinity,  but  the  attributes  of  God  are  ascribed 
to  Him  by  the  inspired  writers  without  the  slightest 
hesitation  or  apology.  Eternity  is  said  to  be  the 
measure  of  His  existence ;  for  it  is  written,  "  In  the 
beginning  was  the  Word  ; "  '  *'  Yerily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you.  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am ;  "  ^  "  And  now, 
O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self,  with 
the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world 
was ; "  ^  "  But  thou,  Beth-lehem  Ephratah,  though 
thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah,  yet 
out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me,  that  is  to 
be  ruler  in  Israel ;  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from 
of  old,  from  everlasting."  ^  Immutability  belongs  to 
Him ;  for  God  addresses  Him  in  the  sublune  words, 
"  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  earth ;  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of 
thine  hands.  They  shall  perish,  but  thou  remainest ; 
and  they  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment ;  and  as 
a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be 
changed :  but  thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  shall 
not  fail."  ^    "  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and 

'  John  i.  1.  '  John  viii.  58.  ^  John  xvii.  5. 

<  Mic.  V.  2.  5  Heb.  i.  10-12. 

88 


CHRIST  THE   SAVIOUR   OF   THE   BELIEVER        89 

to-day,  and  forever."  '  Omnipotence  is  His  ;  for  even 
as  Mediator,  He  could  say,  "  All  power  is  given  unto 
me  in  heaven  and  in  earth ; "  ^  and  He  reveals  Him- 
self to  John  on  Patmos  as  the  "  Alpha  and  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  ending,  saith  the  Lord,  which 
is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Al- 
mighty." ^  Omnipresence  is  His  ;  for  while  on  earth 
He  spoke  of  Himself  as  "  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in 
heaven  "  ;  *  and  encouraged  the  hearts  of  His  disciples 
with  the  sweet  promise,  "  Where  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst 
of  them  ;  "  5  "  and,  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  ^  Omniscience  is  His ;  for  it  is 
said,  "  He  knew  all  men,  and  needed  not  that  any  should 
testify  of  man :  for  he  knew  what  was  in  man  ; "  ^  and 
Peter,  led  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  said  to  Him,  "  Lord, 
thou  knowest  all  things  ; "  ^  and  He  Himself  declares, 
"  I  am  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts."  ^ 

"We  look  a  little  farther  and  find  that  the  works  of 
God  are  ascribed  to  Him  throughout  the  Scriptures  ; 
for  we  learn  that  "  all  things  were  made  by  him ;  and 
without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was 
made " ;  ^'^  and  "  by  him  were  all  things  created, 
that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and 
invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or 
principalities,  or  powers :  all  things  were  created  by 
him  and  for  him  ;  and  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by 

^  Heb.  xiii.  8.  ^  jyiatt.  xxviii.  18.  ^  p^ev.  i.  8. 

*  John  iii.  13.  ^Matt.  xviii.  20.  «  Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

■>  John  ii.  24,  25.  « john  xxi.  17.  »  Rev.  ii.  23. 

1^  John  i.  3. 


90  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIIT 

him  all  things  consist.  And  he  is  the  head  of  the 
body,  the  Church." '  "  God,  who  at  sundry  times 
and  in  divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the 
fathers  by  the  prophets,  hath  in  these  last  da3^s  spoken 
unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of 
all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds ;  who 
being  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the  express 
image  of  his  person,  and  upholding  all  things  by  the 
word  of  his  power,  when  he  had  by  himself  purged 
our  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
on  high."  ^  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I 
work."^  "For  as  the  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead, 
and  quickeneth  them ;  even  so,  the  Son  quickeneth 
whom  he  will."  *  "  I  and  my  Father  are  one."  * 
"My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and 
they  follow  me  ;  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life."  ^ 
"  If  I  go  not  away  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto 
you  ;  but  if  I  depart  I  will  send  him  unto  you,"  ^  and 
"  he  shall  glorify  me,  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine, 
and  shall  show  it  unto  you."  ^  "  When  the  Son  of 
man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels 
with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory :  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations."  ^ 
"  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done 
in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad."  ^°     "  Again  the  high  priest  asked 

»  Col.  i.  16,  18.  5  Heb.  i.  1-3.  '  John  v.  17. 

<  John  V.  21.  «  John  x.  30.  «  John  x.  27,  28. 

'  John  xvi.  7.  ^  john  xvi.  14.  « Matt.  xxv.  31,  32. 

»0  2Cor.  V.  10. 


CHRIST  THE  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       91 

him,  and  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  the  Blessed  ?  And  Jesus  said,  I  am  :  and  ye  shall 
see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, 
and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  ^ 

Once  more,  we  find  that  He  is  the  object  of  wor- 
ship which  is  due  to  God  alone,  and  which  it  is  the 
height  of  blasphemy  to  render  to  the  most  exalted 
creature  in  the  universe.  When  Paul  and  Barnabas 
were  at  Lystra,  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  amazed 
by  a  miracle  wrought  upon  a  cripple,  said,  "  The  gods 
are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men,"  and  pre- 
pared to  offer  sacrifices  to  the  strangers ;  "  which, 
when  the  apostles,  Barnabas  and  Paul,  heard  of,  they 
rent  their  clothes,  and  ran  in  among  the  people,  cry- 
ing out,  and  saying.  Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things  ?  "  ^ 
When  John  had  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  purpose 
w4th  respect  to  the  Church  in  the  heavenly  glory  and 
of  the  world  smitten  by  terrible  judgments,  he  says, 
"  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the  angel 
w^hich  showed  me  these  things.  Then  saith  he  unto 
me,  See  thou  do  it  not :  for  I  am  thy  fellow-servant, 
and  of  thy  brethren  the  prophets,  and  of  them  which 
keep  the  sayings  of  this  book:  worship  God."'  But 
when  the  risen  Christ  appeared  to  Thomas,  that 
doubting  disciple,  who  demanded  the  evidence  of  his 
own  senses  to  satisfy  his  mind,  "  said  unto  him.  My 
Lord  and  my  God  ;  "  *  and  he  said  this  without  the 
slightest  intimation  that  he  was  guilty  of  blasphemy 
in   applying   these   high   titles  to  Jesus.     Our  Lord 

'  Mark  xiv.  61,  62.  «  Acts  xiv.  14,  15. 

'Rev.  xxii.  8,  9.  '♦John  xx.  28. 


92  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

subsequently  appeared  to  the  disciples  in  a  mountain 
of  Galilee  where  He  had  appointed  to  meet  them,  and 
it  is  said  that  "  when  they  saw  him  they  worshipped 
him  "  ;  *  and  they  evidently  worshipped  Him  without 
rebuke,  for  immediately  afterwards  He  claims  uni- 
versal power,  and  commands  them  to  teach  all 
nations,  baptizing  in  His  name  as  well  as  in  the  name 
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  promising  to  be 
with  them  always.  IS'ay,  He  tells  us  it  is  the  Father's 
will  "  that  all  men  should  honor  the  Son,  even  as  they 
honor  the  Father.  He  that  honoreth  not  the  Son 
honoreth  not  the  Father  which  hath  sent  him."  ^  He 
said  to  his  apostles,  "  Ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also 
in  me ; "  ^  and  we  know  it  is  the  sovereign  pleasure 
and  eternal  purpose  of  God  '*  that  at  the  name  of 
Jesus  every  knee  should  bow ;  of  things  in  heaven, 
and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ;  and 
that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  ^  We  are  not 
surprised,  then,  to  learn  that  when  the  martyred 
Stephen  fell  asleep  he  addressed  his  dying  prayer  to 
Christ,  saying,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  ^ 
Nor  are  we  surprised  to  learn  that  the  inspired 
writers  through  the  Epistles  constantly  assert  His 
Divinity,  supplicate  His  blessing,  and  associate  Him 
on  terms  of  perfect  equality  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  apostolic  benediction,  for  the  Fa- 
ther Himself  sends  forth  the  royal  proclamation,  say- 
ing, "And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him."® 

^Matt.  xxviii.  17.  ^  j^i^^  ^   03.  »  John  xiv.  1. 

<Pbil.  ii.  10,  11.  »Acts  vii.  59.  ^  Heb.  i.  6. 


CHKIST  THE   SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       93 

If  the  Being  of  whom  all  this  can  be  truthfully 
affirmed  is  not  God,  surely  there  is  no  God.  If  He 
who  is  called  by  Divine  names,  who  wears  Divine 
titles,  who  possesses  Divine  attributes,  who  performs 
Divine  works,  and  is  represented  as  worthy  of  Divine 
worship,  has  not  a  Divine  nature,  it  is  simply  impos- 
sible to  express  the  doctrine  of  the  Deity  in  language. 
I  have  hastily  skimmed  over  the  surface  of  a  very 
limited  portion  of  the  Scriptures  to  establish  this 
doctrine,  but  enough  has  been  said  to  prove  it  to  the 
satisfaction  of  any  mind  that  is  submissive  to  the  au- 
thority of  God's  word;  and  I  must  add  that  its 
cordial  reception  on  your  part,  dear  reader,  is  abso- 
lutely essential  to  your  salvation.  J^othing  can  be 
more  offensive  in  the  sight  of  the  Father  than  the 
denial  of  the  Divinity  of  His  Son ;  and  hence  He  says 
to  us  by  the  Spirit,  "  If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and 
bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your 
house,  neither  bid  him  Godspeed :  for  he  that  biddeth 
him  Godspeed  is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds."  ^  But 
besides  the  blasphemy  of  denying  His  Divinity,  I  may 
say  that  it  becomes  an  absolute  necessity  if  we  are  to 
be  saved,  because  none  but  a  Divine  person  could  be 
the  end  of  a  Divine  law.  I  would  not  hang  the  in- 
terests of  my  undying  soul  upon  the  arm  of  the 
strongest  seraph  in  heaven;  for  angels  have  sinned 
and  fallen  from  their  high  estate  ;  ^  and  I  need,  yea,  I 
must  have,  the  righteousness,  the  power,  and  the  un- 
changeableness  of  a  Divine  Eedeemer  as  the  solid 
foundation  of  my  hope  before  I  can  find  lasting  repose. 

1  2  JohD  X.  11.  2  2  Pet.  ii.  4. 


94  THE   WAY    MADE   PLAIN 

This  need  is  precisely  and  perfectly  met  in  the 
person  and  work  of  ^'  Christ  Jesus,  who,  being  in  the 
form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
God :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation  [emptied 
himself],  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant, 
and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  and  being 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
cross."  *  If  the  phrase,  "  took  upon  him  the  form  of 
a  servant,"  means  that  He  was  truly  man,  it  is  equally 
certain  that  the  phrase,  "  being  in  the  form  of  God," 
means  that  He  was  truly  God;  and  if  you  ask  me 
how  God  could  become  man,  I  reply,  I  do  not  know, 
nor  care  to  know,  because  the  blessed  fact  satisfies  my 
mind  and  heart ;  and  until  I  can  tell  how  I  raise  my 
hand,  or  how  a  blade  of  grass  grows,  I  shall  not  reject 
the  glorious  doctrine  of  the  incarnation  on  account  of 
its  mystery.  "Without  controversy  great  is  the 
mystery  of  godliness  :  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  unto 
the  Gentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up 
into  glory."  ^  Man's  ignorance  should  never  be 
weighed  against  God's  positive  testimony,  and  we 
find  that  this  testimony  was  given  hundreds  of  years 
before  the  birth  of  Jesus  in  the  form  of  a  prophecy  : 
'•'  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and 
shall  call  his  name  Immanuel."  ^  Turning  to  the  Xew 
Testament,  we  read,  "  Now  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ 
was  on  this  wise :  When  as  his  mother  Mary  was 
espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they  came  together,  she 

» Phil.  ii.  6-8.  3 1  Tim.  iii.  16.  »  Isa.  vii.  14. 


CHEIST  THE  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       95 

was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  .  .  . 
Now  all  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet,  say- 
ing, Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and  shall 
bring  forth  a  son,  and  they  shall  call  his  name 
Immanuel,  which,  being  interpreted,  is,  God  with 
us."  ^  Here  the  voice  of  the  Eternal  is  heard  speak- 
ing to  the  proud  intellect,  saying,  "  Be  still,  and  know 
that  I  am  God :  "  ^  and  here  it  is  the  highest  province 
of  reason  to  sit  reverently  at  the  manger  of  Beth- 
lehem, and  gaze  with  adoring  gratitude  upon  the  sub- 
lime mystery  of  incarnate  love.  "  When  the  fulness 
of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made 
of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them 
that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive  the 
adoption  of  sons."  ^  "  For  what  the  law  could  not  do, 
in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending 
his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for 
sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh :  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."* 

The  word  "  redeem,"  in  the  first  of  these  passages, 
properly  means  to  deliver  by  the  payment  of  a  ran- 
som ;  and  we  know  the  price  paid  for  our  deliverance 
from  the  curse  of  the  law :  for  the  Saviour  tells  us 
"the  Son  of  man  came  ...  to  give  his  life  a 
ransom  for  many."  ^  In  the  second  passage,  when  it 
is  said,  "  What  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,"  we  are  to  understand  that 

J  Matt.  i.  18,  22,  23.  ^pg  xi^j,  iq.  ^  Gal.  iv.  4,  5. 

*Rom.  viii.  3.  4.  'Matt.  xx.  28. 


96  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

the  law  could  not  give  us  righteousness ;  not  that  it 
was  imperfect  in  itself,  but  because  it  was  rendered 
inadequate,  ineffectual,  inoperative,  by  reason  of  our 
flesh  or  corrupt  nature ;  and,  therefore,  God,  in  His 
amazing  grace  sending  forth  His  own  Son,  inflicted 
upon  Him  the  sentence  of  condemnation,  not  only 
against  sins  in  their  outward  form,  but  against  sin  in 
the  flesh,  or  the  sin  of  our  nature.  And  "  now  the 
righteousness  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested, 
being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  even 
the  righteousness  of  God  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus 
Christ  unto  all  [that  is,  it  is  offered  to  all],  and  upon 
all  them  [that  is,  it  is  the  actual  portion  of  all  them] 
that  believe."  ^  I  cannot  be  too  emphatic  in  remind- 
ing you  that  the  law  has  not  been  set  aside,  but  that 
it  has  been  honored,  vindicated,  obeyed,  satisfied,  in 
every  jot  and  tittle  of  its  claims  upon  the  believer, 
because  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of 
the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  ^ 

As  another  has  beautifully  written,  "We  were 
under  the  curse,  because  we  had  not  kept  the  law ; 
but  Christ,  the  perfect  Man,  having  magnified  the 
law  and  made  it  honorable  by  the  very  fact  of  His 
obeying  it  perfectly,  became  a  curse  for  us  by  hang- 
ing on  the  tree.  Thus,  in  His  life  He  magnified  God's 
law,  and  in  His  death  He  bore  our  curse.  There  is, 
therefore,  now,  no  guilt,  no  curse,  no  wrath,  no  con- 
demnation for  the  believer;  and  albeit  he  must  be 
manifested  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  he  will 
find  that  judgment-seat  every  whit  as  friendly,  by 

»  Rom.  iii.  21,  22.  «Gal.  iii.  13. 


CHEIST  THE  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER       97 

and  by,  as  the  mercy-seat  is  now.  It  will  make 
manifest  the  truth  of  his  condition,  namely,  that  there 
is  nothing  against  him ;  what  he  is,  it  is  '  God  that  hath 
wrought  him.'  He  is  God's  workmanship.  He  was 
taken  up  in  a  state  of  death  and  condemnation,  and 
made  just  what  God  would  have  him  to  be.  The 
Judge  Himself  has  put  away  all  his  sins  and  is  his 
righteousness,  so  that  the  judgment-seat  cannot  but 
be  friendly  to  him ;  yea,  it  will  be  the  full,  public, 
authoritative  declaration  to  heaven,  earth,  and  hell, 
that  the  one  who  is  washed  from  his  sins  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb  is  as  clean  as  God  can  make  him."  Yes, 
he  is  as  clean  as  God  can  make  him,  because  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth  ;  and,  as  we  have  ah*eady  seen,  this  right- 
eousness which  he  receives  through  faith  is  the  very 
righteousness  of  God  Himself.  The  law  is  satisfied 
and  can  ask  no  more.  It  stood,  if  I  may  so  speak, 
hand  in  hand  with  justice,  looking  upon  that  awful 
scene  in  Calvary  where  God  "  made  him  to  be  sin  for 
us  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  '  and  when  they  heard 
the  cry,  "  It  is  finished,"  ^  they  knew  that  the  dying 
Kedeemer  had  prevailed  through  death  "  to  make  an 
end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity, 
and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,"  ^  and  now 
they  join  grace  and  mercy  in  extending  a  joyful  wel- 
come to  the  believing  sinner. 

They  pursue  him  to  the  grave  of  Jesus,  but  they 
can  go  no  farther,  for  their  demands  have  all  been 

1  2  Cor.  V.  21.  2  John  xix.  30.  ^  j)aii.  ix.  24. 


98  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

met  by  Him  who  lay  in  the  sepulchre  of  stone,  and 
they  come  to  an  end,  Avliile  the  believer  passes  safely 
through,  and  stands  in  the  new  creation  upon  which 
God  looks  down  with  infinite  delight  and  sees  that  it 
is  "  very  good."  On  this  side  of  that  tomb  there  is 
nothing  but  sin ;  on  the  other  side  there  is  nothing 
but  righteousness.  On  this  side  there  is  nothing  but 
condemnation ;  on  the  other  side  there  is  nothing  but 
justification.  On  this  side  there  is  nothing  but  death  ; 
on  the  other  side  there  is  nothing  but  life.  Theolog- 
ical writers  tell  us  that  while  the  law  is  no  longer  the 
rule  of  justification,  it  is  still  the  rule  of  life ;  but 
surely  they  have  no  authority  in  the  word  of  God  for 
the  assertion.  In  their  anxiety  to  avoid  the  evils  of 
Antinomianism,  or  the  infamous  doctrine  that  the 
Christian  has  license  to  sin,  they  fall  into  the  opposite 
error  of  legalism,  and  "  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of 
the  disciples,  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  are 
able  to  bear."  '  When  they  affirm  that  the  law  is 
still  the  rule  of  life,  if  they  mean  that  it  still  declares 
the  mind  of  God  as  to  what  man  ought  to  be  and  do, 
there  can  be  no  objection  to  the  expression ;  but  if 
they  mean  that  the  believer  is  required  to  walk  ac- 
cording to  this  rule  in  order  to  salvation,  and  that  he 
will  be  judged  and  condemned  if  he  fails  in  conform- 
ity to  its  demands,  nothing  can  be  more  false.  The 
very  ground  upon  which  the  apostle  exhorts  Christians 
to  abstain  from  sin,  and  assures  them  that  it  shall  not 
have  dominion  over  them,  is,  that  they  "are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace.     What  then  ?  shall 

^  Acts  XV.  10. 


CHRIST  THE   SAVIOUK   OF  THE  BELIEVER       99 

we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
grace  ?  God  forbid."  '  "  What  shall  we  say  then  ? 
Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ? 
God  forbid.  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live 
any  longer  therein  ?  .  .  .  Knowing  this,  that  our 
old  man  is  [or  rather  teas']  crucified  with  him,  that 
the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  that  henceforth 
we  should  not  serve  sin.  .  .  .  Likewise  reckon  ye 
also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive 
unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  ^ 

Elsewhere  the  same  apostle  says,  "  As  many  as  are 
of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,"  ^  and  no 
exception  is  made  in  favor  of  the  believer.  "  But  now 
we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead 
wherein  we  were  held  [or  we  being  dead  to  that 
wherein  we  were  held] ;  that  we  should  serve  in  new- 
ness of  spirit  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter."  ^ 
Christ  took  our  place  under  the  law,  and  by  enduring 
its  penalty  made  an  end  of  it,  and  henceforth  He  is 
our  life  and  rule  of  life,  and  all  in  all  to  the  saved 
soul.  The  Bible  everywhere  affirms  that  when  He 
died  we  who  believe  also  died  ;  and  when  He  was 
made  alive,  God  "  quickened  us  together  with  Christ, 
(by  grace  ye  are  saved  ; )  and  hath  raised  us  up  to- 
gether, and  hath  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly 
places  in  Christ  Jesus."  ^  There  the  believer  is  now, 
as  God  views  him ;  no  longer  on  earth,  but  in  the 
heavenly  places ;  having  a  perfect  righteousness  be- 
cause his  Divine  Surety  has  met  all  the  demands  of 

»  Rom.  vi.  14,  15.  '  Rom.  vi.  1,  2,  6,  11.  =*  Gal.  iii.  10. 

*  Rom.  vii.  6.  *  Eph.  ii.  5,  6. 


^SUG'Pi 


100  THE   WAY    MADE   PLAIN 

the  law  for  him,  and  possessing  the  resurrection  life  of 
Jesus,  which  is  something  infinitely  better  than  the 
life  given  to  Adam  in  Eden. 

Thus  it  is,  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  right- 
eousness to  every  one  that  belie veth ;  "  because  His 
righteousness,  or  that  which  He  did  to  satisfy  the 
claims  of  the  law,  is  imputed  to  the  believer ;  and  if 
you  desire  to  know  the  meaning  of  the  term  "  im- 
puted," turn  to  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  where  the 
apostle,  speaking  of  Onesimus,  says,  "If  he  hath 
wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee  aught,  put  that  on 
mine  account."  ^  There  the  phrase,  "  put  that  on 
mine  account,"  is  precisely  the  same  word  in  Greek 
which  the  apostle  uses  in  Eomans  where  he  says, 
"  Sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no  law."  ^  The 
righteousness  of  Christ,  then,  is  put  on  the  account  of 
the  believer ;  and  whatever  merits  Christ  has  in  the 
sight  of  the  Father  the  believer  also  possesses.  He 
who  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners  "  ;  ^  "  who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
in  his  mouth  "  ;  ^  who  had  the  approval  of  God  in  "  a 
voice  from  heaven  saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased";^  who  could  say,  "I  do 
always  those  things  that  please  him,"  ^  and  who  "  ap- 
peared to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,"  ^ 
is  no  nearer  to  the  heart  of  the  Father  than  is  the 
believing  sinner.  The  measure  of  the  acceptance  of 
one  in  the  sight  of  God  is  the  precise  measure  of  the 

1  Philera.  18.  ""^oxw.  v.  13.  '  Heb,  vii.  26. 

*  1  Pet.  ii.  22.  ^  j^iatt.  iii.  17.  «  John  viii.  29.    . 

'  Heb.  ix.  26. 


CHRIST  THE  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  BELIEVER     101 

acceptance  of  the  other.  Oh,  matchless  grace  !  I  do 
not  wonder  that  men  are  so  slow  to  believe  it,  for  the 
news  seems  too  good  to  be  true.  But  it  is  true,  for 
the  Holy  One  hath  said  it,  and  it  is  true  to  every  one 
that  believeth.  Believeth  ^vhat?  Believeth  that 
Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness ;  be- 
lieveth that  Christ  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself ;  believeth  the  testimony  of  God 
that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin." ' 

Many  precious  thoughts  here  crowd  upon  my  mind, 
but  I  must  not  give  utterance  to  them  at  present,  for 
I  have  already  made  this  chapter  too  long.  The  dis- 
cussion of  belief  will  come  up  again,  if  the  Lord  will, 
and  I  cannot  dwell  upon  it  now.  I  merely  wish  to 
say  that  when  men  tell  you  to  do  anything  to  be  saved 
they  are  preaching  the  law  and  not  the  Gospel.  You 
have  only  to  believe ;  and  believing  is  not  doing :  it  is 
the  opposite  of  doing ;  it  is  simply  receiving,  and  rest- 
ing on  the  finished  w^ork  of  Christ  which  is  already 
done,  and  done  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago.  The  sin-hating  God  met  the  sin-bearing  Jesus  at 
the  place  of  a  skull,  and  there  once  and  forever  settled 
the  question  of  the  believer's  salvation,  and  we  had 
nothing  to  do  with  it.  Now  the  glad  tidings  are  sent 
forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth :  "  Be  it  known  unto 
you,  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that  through  this 
man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and 
by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things, 
from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law 

'  1  John  i.  7. 


102  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

of  Moses."  *  Are  justified :  mark  that.  They  are 
already  justified  ;  and  tliey  cannot  be  partly  justified 
and  partly  unjustified,  partly  saved  and  partly  un- 
saved. If  they  believe  that  what  God  has  said  about 
His  Son  is  true,  and  true  for  them,  as  it  is  for  any 
other  sinner,  they  have  at  this  present  moment  a  per- 
fect righteousness,  and  there  is  not  one  condemnation 
against  them.  What,  then,  do  these  doubting  be- 
lievers mean,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  use  such  an 
expression  as  doubting  believers  ?  If  their  doubts 
are  true,  God  is  a  liar,  but  if  God  is  true  their  doubts 
are  liars ;  for  He  hath  said,  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the 
law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  belie veth." 

^  Acts  xiii,  38,  39. 


CHAPTEE  IX 
NO  HOPE  FOE  THE  SIN:^EE  IN  THE  LAW 

*'  For  Moses  describetb  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  That 
the  mau  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them. ' ' — liomans  x,  5. 

TIIEEE  are  only  two  ways  by  which  men  expect 
to  enter  heaven.  One  is  by  domg,  the  other  is 
by  believing.  We  often  hear  doleful  and  sometimes 
unmeaning  complaints  about  the  great  diversity  of 
religious  opinions  in  the  world,  but  all  systems  of 
faith  can  be  readily  reduced  to  the  two  already 
mentioned.  In  the  one  class  w^e  must  place  that  vast 
multitude  without  the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church 
who,  acknowledging  in  general  terms  the  existence  of 
God  and  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments, 
seek  to  win  the  approval  of  their  Creator  by  their 
amiable  character,  or  by  their  upright  conduct,  or  by 
certain  acts  of  worship  sanctioned  by  custom  or  sug- 
gested by  conscience.  To  these  must  be  added  that 
vast  multitude  within  the  pale  of  the  Church  who 
seek  to  win  the  approval  of  their  Creator  by  their 
prayers,  or  good  works,  or  reception  of  what  are 
called  the  Sacraments.  I  am  not  here  referring  to 
any  particular  denomination  of  professing  Christians, 
but  to  all  in  every  denomination  who  rely  upon  any- 
thing whatever  that  they  have  done  or  can  do  to  be 
saved. 

103 


104  TUE   AVAY   MADE   PLAIN 

They  agree  precisely  with  the  former  class,  and 
stand  upon  precisely  the  same  ground,  and  are  doomed 
to  the  same  end ;  for  the  unbelievei's  are  to  have  their 
"  portion  with  the  hypocrites,"  ^  and  the  hypocrites 
are  to  have  their  "  portion  with  the  unbelievers."  ^  If 
the  one  will  be  saved  by  well-doing,  so  will  the  other, 
unless  it  can  be  shown  that  God  has  promised  eternal 
life  for  a  special  kind  of  well-doing ;  but  if  the  one 
will  be  lost  for  refusing  to  rest  simply  and  solely  upon 
the  finished  work  of  Christ,  so  will  the  other.  The 
fact  that  some  are  members  of  the  Church  and  some 
are  not  does  not  change  in  the  slightest  degree  the 
principle  on  which  they  act,  and  which  in  both  cases 
is  the  principle  of  doing  as  the  procuring  cause  of 
salvation.  One  man  hopes  to  be  saved  because  he 
pays  his  just  debts,  or  because  he  is  honorable  in  his 
business  transactions,  or  because  he  is  a  faithful  hus- 
band, an  indulgent  father,  and  a  kind  neighbor,  or  be- 
cause he  contributes  his  money,  example,  and  energies 
to  advance  the  welfare  of  the  community  and  country 
in  which  he  lives.  Another  man  hopes  to  be  saved 
because  he  has  been  baptized  in  what  he  supposes  to 
be  an  authorized  form  and  by  an  authorized  minister, 
or  because  he  has  partaken  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  or 
because  he  goes  to  church,  or  because  he  tries  to  live 
up  to  the  rules  of  the  ecclesiastical  body  which  he  has 
joined  and  does  his  part  in  promoting  the  interests  of 
that  body. 

It  is  obvious  that  these  two  men  do  not  differ  with 
respect  to  the  principle  which  underlies  their  hope  of 

1  Matt.  xxiv.  51.  '  Luke  xii.  46. 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE   SINNER  IN  THE  LAW     105 

salvation,  for  they  depend  alike  upon  their  own  doing 
to  be  admitted  into  the  glorious  d^Yelling-place  of 
God  when  called  to  leave  the  world.  One  may  ut- 
terly reject  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  the 
other  may  be  a  Presbyterian,  or  Baptist,  or  Congrega- 
tionalist,  or  Methodist,  or  Episcopalian,  or  Koman 
Catholic,  or  known  by  any  other  denominational 
title ;  but  it  is  clear  that  they  build  upon  the  same 
foundation  and  must  stand  or  fall  together.  If  you 
ask  for  the  reason  of  their  expectation  that  they  will 
be  saved,  you  will  find  that  in  both  cases  they  rely  on 
something  that  they  have  done^  or  are  doing ^  or  intend 
to  do^  and  hence  the  ground  of  their  hope,  so  far  as 
they  put  themselves  to  the  trouble  of  forming  any  dis- 
tinct views  of  the  subject,  is  one  and  the  same,  whether 
they  are  in  or  out  of  the  Church.  It  is  to  be  feared 
that  there  are  thousands  in  all  the  churches  who  would 
listen  with  blank  amazement  to  the  solemn  direction 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  an- 
swer to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the 
hope  that  is  in  you ; "  '  but  when  we  are  able  by  close 
questioning  to  arrive  at  that  reason,  it  amounts  to 
nothing  more  than  this :  they  were  taught  to  believe 
that  they  are  sinners,  and  sometimes  a  slumbering 
conscience  wakes  up  long  enough  to  confirm  the  teach- 
ing ;  and  influenced  by  the  example  and  wishes  of 
parent,  or  husband,  or  wife,  or  friend,  they  made  a 
profession  of  religion,  as  it  is  significantly  called. 
They  are  not  happy  in  their  relations  to  God,  who  is 
an  object  of  dread  or  indifference,  and  hence  they 

^  1  Peter  iii.  15. 


106  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

think  it  wise  to  do  something  to  secure  them  against 
punishment  in  the  eternal  world  in  case  of  sudden 
death,  while  their  tastes,  aims,  and  aspirations  centre 
with  supreme  regard  about  the  present  world.  I  have 
known  Christian  mothers  to  take  great  comfort  from 
the  fact  that  their  daughters,  after  a  night  of  God-for- 
getting and  God-defying  revelry,  were  pious  enough 
to  say  their  prayers  before  retiring  to  rest ;  and  the 
poor  deluded  daughters  really  fancy  that  they  have 
done  something  to  cause  the  sleepless  eye  of  Jehovah 
to  look  upon  them  complacently. 

Upon  ministers  of  the  Gospel — nay,  ministers  of 
the  law,  I  should  term  them — largely  rests  the  re- 
sponsibility for  this  lamentable  state  of  things ;  be- 
cause in  reply  to  the  earnest  question  of  many  an 
anxious  soul,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " '  in- 
stead of  answering  in  the  language  of  the  apostle, 
and  preaching  the  good  news  of  God's  love  and  of  a 
finished  salvation  to  the  believer,  they  tell  the  inquirer 
to  be  confirmed,  or  to  unite  with  the  Church,  or  to 
enter  into  covenant  with  God  to  serve  Him,  or  to 
keep  on  praying  and  striving,  and  thus  put  the  dead 
sinner  on  a  course  of  worthless  doing.  "  They  be 
blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  And  if  the  blind  lead 
the  blind,  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch."  ^  God 
knows  I  do  not  desire  to  express  myself  harshly ;  and 
surely  I  can  have  no  wish  to  excite  the  enmity  and 
call  forth  the  opposition  of  those  who  are  warmly  at- 
tached to  their  religious  teachers  and  to  the  systems 
of  religious  faith  in  which  they  have  been  educated ; 

1  Acts  xvi.  30.  "J  Matt.  xv.  14. 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE   SIN"NER  IN   THE  LAW      107 

but  the  interests  involved  in  this  discussion  are  too 
precious  to  allow  the  use  of  honeyed  phrases  concern- 
ing men  who  claim  to  be  "  the  servants  of  the  most 
high  God,  which  shew  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation."  * 
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  not 
according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light 
in  them."  ^  "  For  Moses  describe th  the  righteousness 
w^hich  is  of  the  law.  That  the  man  which  doeth  those 
things  shall  live  by  them." 

If  then  a  man  expects  to  obtain  righteousness  by 
the  law  or  by  the  principle  of  doing,  he  must  do  the 
things  required  by  the  law.  It  is  not  enough  that  he 
tries  to  do  them ;  or  that  he  promises  to  do  them ; 
or  that  he  is  sorry  because  he  has  not  done  them  ;  or 
that  he  does  some  of  them  ;  but  he  must  actually  do, 
and  do  without  faltering,  and  do  all  the  things  de- 
manded by  the  law,  or  a  voice  breaks  like  thunder 
above  his  head,  saying,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  con- 
tinueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them."^  God,  who  gave  the  law 
and  knows  why  He  gave  it,  has  also  said,  "  Whosoever 
shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point, 
he  is  guilty  of  all."  ^  "  And  the  Levites  shall  speak, 
and  say  unto  all  the  men  of  Israel  with  a  loud  voice, 
.  .  .  Cursed  be  he  that  confirmeth  not  all  the 
words  of  this  law  to  do  them  ;  and  all  the  people  shall 
say.  Amen."**  Even  the  incarnate  One  who  came  on 
a  mission  of  love  and  salvation  to  our  lost  race  sol- 
emnly declared,  "  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot 

^Acts  xvi.  17.  ^Isa.  viii.  20.  ^Gal.  iii.  10. 

*  James  ii.  10.  ^  Deut.  xxvii.  14,  26. 


108  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all 
be  fulfilled."  *  The  law,  therefore,  cannot  lower  its 
demands  to  humor  the  caprices  or  to  suit  the  necessi- 
ties of  the  sinner,  for  then  it  would  be  no  law  at  all. 
It  is  an  unalterable  expression  of  the  will  of  God  con- 
cerning the  duty  of  man,  and  it  remains  forever  the 
same  in  its  holy  precepts  and  in  its  dread  penalty, 
whatever  may  be  our  state.  Human  laws  are  often 
repealed ;  or  changed  in  some  of  their  principal  fea- 
tures ;  or  suffered  to  lie  on  the  statute  book  as  a  dead 
letter ;  because  the  legislators  and  the  executive  are 
frequently  ignorant,  passionate,  fickle,  and  powerless 
to  enforce  their  decrees ;  but  the  Divine  law,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  is  perfect ;  and  the  Divine  Law- 
giver has  all  the  resources  of  the  universe  at  His  com- 
mand to  do  His  bidding.  Hence  it  is  written,  "  If 
the  word  [that  is  the  law]  spoken  by  angels  was  stead- 
fast, and  every  transgression  and  disobedience  re- 
ceived a  just  recompense  of  reward  ;  how  shall  we  es- 
cape if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  ^ 

The  law,  we  here  learn,  is  steadfast,  stable,  firmly 
established  ;  and  every  transgression — not  only  some 
gross  and  enormous  transgressions,  but  every  trans- 
gression and  disobedience — is  sure  to  receive  a  just  rec- 
ompense of  reward;  "  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  ^ 
AVhat  hope,  then,  can  the  sinner  derive  from  the  law 
or  from  reliance  upon  his  own  doing  to  be  saved  ? 
Kone  whatever.  The  righteousness  which  Moses  de- 
scribeth,  that  the  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall 
live  by  them,  most  clearly  can  be  of  no  avail  to  the 

*Matt.  V.  18.  2|je}j,  n,  o,  3.  ^B.om.  vi.  23. 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE  SINNER  IN  THE  LAW     109 

man  who  has  not  done  them.  The  promise  is  only  to 
him  who  doeth  them,  and  not  to  him  who  fails  to  do 
them.  If  any  can  be  found  who  have  perfectly  obeyed 
the  requirements  of  the  law  in  thought,  emotion, 
word,  and  deed,  they  may  begin  to  speak  of  winning 
heaven  on  the  principle  of  doing ;  but  if  it  can  be 
proved  that  all,  without  exception,  have  disobeyed 
these  requirements,  it  follows,  so  far  as  the  law  is 
concerned,  that  it  condemns  and  curses  the  entire  hu- 
man family,  and  demands  that  the  threatened  penalty 
shall  be  inflicted. 

I  am  not  now  speaking  of  the  adorable  grace  and 
unsearchable  wisdom  of  the  Lawgiver  in  providing  a 
substitute  upon  whom  the  penalty  descended,  instead 
of  upon  "  his  people  which  he  foreknew,"  but  my  aim 
is  to  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fact  that  if 
his  reliance  for  salvation  is  upon  keeping  the  law  or 
upon  his  own  doing,  he  is  utterly  helpless  and  hope- 
less. Law  knows  no  mercy.  Its  whole  office  is 
discharged  when  it  lays  down  a  rule  of  action  and 
promises  to  justify  or  to  declare  righteous  those  who 
conform  to  this  rule,  with  the  fearful  alternative  of 
punishment  if  the  rule  is  violated  in  the  slightest  par- 
ticular. They,  then,  know  not  what  they  say,  nor 
whereof  they  affirm,  who  dismiss  the  tremendous 
realities  of  eternity  from  their  attention  with  the 
flippant  remark  that  they  will  be  saved  if  they  do  the 
best  they  can.  Even  if  this  were  true,  there  is  not 
an  honest  man  in  the  world  who  will  dare  say,  in  the 
presence  of  the  holy  God,  that  he  has  always  done 
the  best  he  could.     The  general  confession  contained 


110  THE    WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

in  the  Episcopal  prayer-book,  "  to  be  said  by  the  whole 
congregation  after  the  minister,"  might  well  be  said 
by  the  whole  human  race  in  the  humble  acknowledg- 
ment: "Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father:  we 
have  erred,  and  strayed  from  thy  ways  like  lost  sheep. 
We  have  followed  too  much  the  devices  and  desires 
of  our  own  hearts.  We  have  offended  against  thy 
holy  laws.  We  have  left  undone  those  things  which 
we  ought  to  have  done ;  and  we  have  done  those 
things  which  we  ought  not  to  have  done ;  and  there 
is  no  health  in  us."  ]S"ot  only  have  we  left  undone 
many  things  which  we  ought  to  have  done,  but  many 
things  which  we  might  have  done ;  and  not  only  have 
we  done  many  things  which  we  ought  not  to  have 
done,  but  many  things  which  we  might  have  avoided. 
This,  I  am  sure,  every  candid  and  intelligent  person 
will  promptly  admit,  and  hence  those  who  claim  that 
they  will  be  saved  if  they  do  the  best  they  can  must 
see,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  that  they  will  have 
no  ground  upon  which  they  can  stand  in  the  Judg- 
ment. 

But  I  will  go  a  step  farther  and  say  that  if  my 
reader  were  able  from  the  hour  his  eye  falls  upon 
these  lines  to  abstain  entirely  from  sin,  he  could  not 
be  saved  in  \artue  of  his  own  doing.  Yes,  I  will  take 
it  for  granted,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  hence- 
forth he  can  perfectly  keep  the  law  of  God  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed ;  and,  after  all,  he  must  inevitably  be 
lost  if  his  dependence  is  placed  on  his  own  good  char- 
acter and  conduct ;  "  for  Moses  describeth  the  right- 
eousness which  is  of  the  law.  That  the  man  which 


NO   HOPE   FOR  THE   SINNER  IN   THE  LAW      111 

doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them."  He  does  not 
say  that  the  man  which  doeth  those  things  part  of  the 
time,  but  all  the  time ;  for  if  life  is  to  be  earned  on 
the  principle  of  doing  the  things  required  by  the  law, 
they  must  not  be  left  undone,  but  done.  If  they  are 
left  undone  once  or  for  a  single  instant,  all  hope  of 
being  saved  by  doing  is  gone,  and  gone  forever.  Sup- 
pose, then,  that  when  judged  by  the  law  you  could 
truthfully  claim  that  you  had  strictly  observed  all  its 
commands  for  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  years,  the  Judge 
would  very  properly  reply,  Why  did  you  not  observe 
them  all  the  time  ?  What  were  you  doing  the  many 
years  previous  to  your  observance  of  them  but  com- 
mitting sin  continually?  According  to  your  own 
showing,  you  have  utterly  failed  in  your  duty,  and  as 
you  prefer  to  be  judged  by  the  law,  O  sinner,  you  are 
condemned.  "  Cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into 
outer  darkness :  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing 
of  teeth."  ' 

What  would  be  thought  of  a  court  of  justice  which 
would  justify  or  declare  righteous  a  man  arraigned  at 
its  bar  on  the  ground  that,  although  he  had  committed 
innumerable  crimes  through  a  long  series  of  years,  he 
had  subsequently  reformed  and  become  an  upright 
citizen  ?  The  chief  executive  might  possibly  pardon 
him  in  view  of  his  reformation,  but  he  could  not  do  it 
without  setting  the  law  aside;  and  surely  he  could 
not  pronounce  him  a  righteous  man,  or  right  accord- 
ing to  law.  But  God  can  never  set  His  "  holy,  just 
and  good  "  law  aside,  nor  can  He  fail,  as  has  been 

» Matt.  XXV.  30. 


112  THE    WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

previously  shown,  to  punish  sin  ;  and  therefore,  if  the 
sinner  could  be  obedient  hereafter  in  every  respect  to 
the  demands  of  the  law,  his  subsequent  good  conduct 
could  not  possibly  atone  for  his  former  bad  conduct, 
nor  exempt  him  from  the  penalty  which  is  denounced 
against  "  every  transgression  and  disobedience." 

But  it  adds  immensely  to  the  embarrassment  of  the 
sinner,  and  still  further  proves  that  there  is  no  hope 
for  him  in  the  law  or  upon  the  principle  of  doing,  when 
we  remember  that,  strive  as  he  may,  he  will  continue 
to  sin.  Admitting  that  he  can  wholly  abstain  from 
transgression  by  the  strength  of  his  will,  and  resolu- 
tions, and  vowSj  and  efforts,  the  law  cannot  possibly 
justify  him,  because  he  has  already  disobeyed  its  pre- 
cepts, and  he  cannot  with  his  utmost  endeavors  do 
more  than  it  requires ;  so  that  he  comes  short  of  his 
duty  although  he  should  never  again  be  guilty  of  a 
single  offense.  How  helpless,  then,  is  his  condition 
when  he  discovers  by  sad  experience,  as  he  surely  will 
discover,  that  the  good  which  he  would,  he  does  not, 
and  the]evil  which  he  would  not,  that  he  does !  When, 
aroused  from  his  death  sleep  by  the  quickening  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God,  he  undertakes  to  do  something  to 
be  saved  and  flies  to  the  law  for  refuge,  he  finds  to 
his  amazement  that  he  had  not  known  before  the 
hidden  evils  of  his  heart.  He  is  like  a  man  who 
dwells  in  a  dark  room  and  imagines  that  it  is  clean, 
until  the  law  enters  like  the  sunlight  and  reveals  the 
dust  and  defilement  lying  all  around.  He  is  like  a 
man  who  thinks  in  his  intoxication  that  he  is  pursuing 
a  straight  path,  until  the  law  comes,  like  a  perfect 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE  SINNER  IN  THE  LAW      113 

rule,  and  shows  him  how  crooked  his  ways  have  been. 
"  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  Is  the  law  sin  ?  God 
forbid.  Xay,  I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by  the  law ; 
for  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had  said. 
Thou  shalt  not  covet."  * 

I  am  but  stating  the  experience  of  all,  without  ex- 
ception, who  have  earnestly  and  resolutely  tried  the 
law,  or  the  principle  of  doing,  in  order  to  be  saved, 
when  I  say  that  a  miserable  failure  has  been  the  uni- 
form result ;  and  it  is  owing  to  my  anxiety  to  save 
you  this  bitter  experience,  dear  reader,  that  I  dwell  so 
much  upon  a  point  which  may  seem  to  you  of  little 
importance.  How  many  sincere  souls  might  be  spared 
months  and  years  of  gloomy  despondency  and  harass- 
ing fears  if  taught  at  the  beginning  of  their  religious 
experience  the  utter  uselessness  and  worthlessness  of 
their  own  doing !  You  remember  that  when  our 
blessed  Lord  was  on  the  earth,  "  there  came  one  run- 
ning, and  kneeled  to  him,  and  asked  him.  Good 
Master,  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal 
life  ?  "  Observe  that,  like  sinners  now,  he  wanted  to 
do  something,  and  the  Saviour  met  him  on  his  own 
ground.  It  is  as  if  He  had  said.  You  ask  what  you 
must  do  ;  and,  since  you  are  determined  to  seek  salvar 
tion  by  doing,  "  thou  knowest  the  commandments.  Do 
not  commit  adultery.  Do  not  kill,  Do  not  steal.  Do  not 
bear  false  witness,  Defraud  not.  Honor  thy  father  and 
mother."  You  will  notice  that  Christ  takes  him  only 
to  that  part  of  the  ten  commandments  which  requires 
us  to  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves,  and  does  not  refer 
*  Rom.  vii.  7. 


114  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

to  that  higher  part  which  requires  us  to  love  God  with 
all  the  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength,  and  mind  ;  be- 
cause the  former  was  sufficient  to  disclose  to  the  in- 
quirer the  deceitfulness  of  his  heart.  "  And  he  an- 
swered and  said  unto  him.  Master,  all  these  have  I 
observed  from  my  youth.  Then  Jesus  beholding  him 
loved  him,  and  said  unto  him,  One  thing  thou  lackest : 
go  thy  way,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the 
poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven :  and 
come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me."  If  he  really 
loved  his  neighbor  as  himself,  why  did  he  wish  to  re- 
tain his  immense  wealth  and  leave  others  around  him 
wretchedly  poor,  when,  if  he  had  been  poor  and  they 
rich,  he  would  have  desired  to  share  in  their  abun- 
dance ?  "  And  he  was  sad  at  that  saying,  and  went 
away  grieved ;  for  he  had  great  possessions."  '  Alas ! 
with  all  his  doing  that  made  him  so  amiable  and  at- 
tractive, he  had  not  complied  with  the  spirit  of  the 
second  table  of  the  Decalogue,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
first.  My  reader,  if  you  really  insist  upon  trying  to 
be  saved  by  trying  to  keep  the  law,  you  will  discover 
that  it  will  baffle  your  best  efforts,  and  outstrip  your 
most  arduous  pursuit  of  holiness,  and  more  and  more 
reveal  the  abyss  of  ruin  in  which  you  are  plunged,  and 
drag  from  their  secret  lurking-places  in  3^our  soul  sins 
of  whose  existence  you  have  probably  been  ignorant. 

1  Mark  x.  17-22. 


CHAPTEE  X 
NO  HOPE  FOE  THE  SINNEE  W  THE  LAW 

WHAT,  then,  will  you  do  ?  Go  to  the  Church  to 
save  you  ?  Poor  sinner !  how  can  the  Church 
save  you  when  it  is  nothing,  as  its  name  implies,  but 
an  assembly  of  sinners  called  out  from  the  world  to 
be  the  witness  of  the  grace  that  has  plucked  them  as 
brands  from  the  burning  ?  I  verily  believe  that  there 
is  nothing  about  which  there  is  such  mischievous  con- 
fusion of  mind  and  such  horrible  darkness  as  concern- 
ing "  The  Church."  If  the  Church  saves,  pray  in 
what  part  of  it  is  salvation  found  ?  Is  it  in  the 
preacher,  or  the  people,  or  the  services  ?  Do  you  not 
perceive  at  a  glance  that  in  going  to  the  Church  for 
salvation  you  are  going  back  to  the  law  and  to  this 
fatal  principle  of  doing  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  you 
are  guilty  of  blasphemy  in  transferring  the  perfec- 
tions of  Jehovah,  whose  high  province  and  sole  prerog- 
ative it  is  to  save,  to  sinful  creatures  like  yourself  ? 
Take  heed,  I  beseech  you,  how  you  put  your  trust  in 
the  Church,  lest  you  should  be  aroused  by  the  terrors 
of  the  judgment  to  the  frightful  discovery  that  you 
have  been  building  your  hope  of  life  on  a  foundation 
of  sand.  There  is  not  a  church  organization  on  earth 
that  has  not  departed  from  the  simplicity  and  purity 
in  doctrine  and  practice  of  the  Gospel  standard  ;  and 

115 


116  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

inasmuch  as  the  Lord  has  plainly  revealed  that  all 
these  ecclesiastical  systems  are  to  perish  amid  the 
crash  and  wreck  that  will  close  the  present  dispensa- 
tion, he  who  expects  to  be  saved  in  virtue  of  his  con- 
nection with  any  body  of  professing  Christians  will 
feel  the  ground  on  which  he  stands  give  way  as  with 
the  throes  of  an  earthquake,  and  no  resting-place  shall 
be  found  for  his  soul.  God  forbid  that  I  should  dis- 
parage the  real  Church,  or  the  assembly  of  the  saved 
which  constitutes  the  mystical  body,  and  by  and  by 
will  be  manifested  as  the  beautiful  bride,  of  the  King 
of  kings ;  but  woe  to  him  who  hangs  his  hope  of  eter- 
nal life  upon  her  impotent  arm  !  He  is  ascribing  to 
the  creature  the  power  and  grace  that  belong  only  to 
the  Creator  and  deludes  himself  with  the  vain  confi- 
dence of  the  Jews,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  when 
they  lost  sight  of  Christ  to  trust  for  salvation  in 
circumcision  and  other  appointed  ordinances.  The 
Church,  however  imposing  her  ceremonies  and  how- 
ever exalted  her  dignitaries,  is  composed  of  sinners 
who,  believing  in  Jesus,  "  are  builded  together  for  a 
habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit ;  "  '  and  it  would 
be  a  strange  thing  indeed  if  the  saved  could  become 
the  Saviour  in  any  other  sense  than  to  testify  of  His 
redeeming  love  and  of  the  infinite  merit  of  His  aton- 
ing blood. 

But  I  will  go  a  step  farther  with  my  argument  and 
assert  that  there  could  be  no  hope  for  the  sinner,  in 
the  law  or  on  the  principle  of  doing,  even  if  he  were 
able  to  abstain  entirely  hereafter  from  the  transgres- 

^  Eph.  ii.  22. 


KO   HOPE   FOR  THE   SINNER  IN  THE  LAW      117 

sion  of  the  commandments ;  and  even  if  he  were  able 
to  say  truthfully  that  he  has  never  in  the  past  violated 
one  of  these  precepts ;  and  even  if  he  were  able  to  dis- 
cover a  Church  exactly  conformed  in  all  respects  to 
the  apostolic  standard,  and  should  become  the  most 
prominent  leader  in  its  services.  When  you  read  this 
assertion,  do  not,  I  pray  you,  throw  the  book  con- 
temptuously down,  but,  however  offensive  it  may  be, 
at  least  consider  what  I  have  to  say  in  its  support.  I 
would  not  thrust  a  bony  and  cold-blooded  theology  at 
you  to  haunt  your  dreams  like  a  spectre,  and  I  have  as 
little  relish  as  you  can  possibly  have  for  those  nice 
hair-splitting  distinctions  in  doctrinal  statement  that 
are  of  no  practical  value  to  the  soul.  But,  dear  reader, 
I  am  dealing  with  a  solemn  truth  and  a  tremendous 
fact  when  I  repeat  that  if  your  outward  life  were  per- 
fectly blameless,  and  if  you  were  a  distinguished  mem- 
ber of  the  only  true  Church  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
could  you  find  such  a  body,  you  vf  ould  still  need  some- 
thing else  before  obtaining  a  scriptural  hope  of  salva- 
tion. My  authority  for  this  declaration  is  found  in 
the  oft-repeated  testimony  of  the  word  of  God  that 
our  very  nature  is  sinful,  and  hence  our  Lord,  as  if 
addressing  each  person  belonging  to  our  race,  distinctly 
affirms,  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee" — I  who 
can  neither  deceive  nor  be  deceived — I  who  came 
down  from  heaven  to  die  in  the  room  and  stead  of  lost 
men — "  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  [except  any 
one,  every  one]  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God." ' 

*  John  iii.  3. 


118  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

Those  who  reject  the  finished  work  of  Christ  as 
the  only  ground  of  their  hope  may  cavil  as  much 
as  they  please  at  these  words  ;  but  there  they  stand 
forever  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  no  impious  hand 
can  tear  them  from  the  Bible,  and  no  ingenious  criti- 
cism can  force  them  to  signify  mere  reformation  or 
the  reception  of  rites  and  sacraments.  When  the 
blessed  Saviour  said,  '*  Ye  must  be  born  again,"  '  He 
obviously  meant  just  what  He  said,  and  not  something 
He  did  not  say.  ^Ye  have  been  born  once, — born  of 
our  earthly  parents, — and  now  we  must  be  born  again, 
or  we  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  way  in 
which  we  are  born  again  is  very  simple,  and  the  Lord 
states  it  in  language  that  cannot  be  misunderstood 
when  He  says,  ^'  And  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in 
the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  son  of  Man  be  lifted 
up :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  eternal  life."  ^  Whosoever  believeth,  then, 
has  eternal  life,  and  whosocA^er  has  eternal  life  surely 
sees  and  enters  the  kingdom  of  God  :  so  that  whoso- 
ever believeth  is  born  again.  "  For  God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who- 
soever believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life."  ^  God  loved  and  gave,  and  we  believe 
and  have  ;  and  this  is  all  of  it  in  order  to  attain  life 
and  experience  the  new  birth.  To  the  same  effect  we 
read,  ''As  many  as  received  him  [Christ],  to  them 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name :  which  were  born,  not 
of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 

»  John  iii.  7.  '  Johu  iii.  14,  15,  ^  John  iii.  16. 


KO   HOPE   FOR  THE   SINXER  IN  THE   LAW      119 

of  man,  but  of  God."*  " Whosoever  believetli  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  ^  "  Ye  are  all  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  ^  "  Therefore 
if  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature,"  ^  or,  as 
it  might  be  rendered,  he  is  an  unimpaired,  uncontami- 
nated  creation.  In  other  words,  he  is  born  again  ;  and 
no  one  has  the  right  to  say  that  we  can  be  born  only 
once.  Indeed,  unless  we  are  born  a  second  time,  born 
from  above,  born  of  God,  it  is  certain  that  we  can 
never  see  heaven  ;  for  the  old  nature  which  we  inherit 
from  fallen  Adam  cannot  be  admitted  into  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Holy  One  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Thou 
art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not 
look  on  iniquity."  ^  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh 
is  flesh,"  says  Jesus,  "  and  that  which  is  born  of  the 
Spirit  is  spirit."  ^  The  birth,  then,  is  as  real  and  literal 
in  one  case  as  in  the  other,  and  the  one  is  no  more 
mysterious  than  the  other. 

It  is  upon  such  statements  as  the  last  quoted  I  rest 
the  important  doctrine  that  there  is  no  hope  for  the 
sinner  in  the  law,  even  if  he  is  and  always  has  been 
perfectly  conformed  to  its  precepts  in  his  outward 
life  ;  and  even  if  he  faithfully  goes  through  the  whole 
round  of  religious  observances  required  by  the  Church. 
*'  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  ; "  and  our 
Saviour  obviously  designs  to  teach  us  that  it  can  never 
be  anything  but  flesh,  while  that  which  is  born  of  the 
Spirit  is  spirit,  and  can  never  be  anything  but  spirit. 
The  word  Jlesh,  which  is  often  used  in  the  Bible  to  de- 

1  John  i.  12,  13.  '  1  John  v.  1.  '  Gal.  iii.  26. 

*  2  Cor.  V.  17.  *  Hab.  i.  13.  «  John  iii.  6. 


120  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

note  mankind,  is  also  frequently  employed  to  set  forth 
the  fact  that  man  is  corrupt  and  depraved  ;  as  it  is 
written,  "  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold,  it 
was  corrupt ;  for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon 
the  earth."  '  Keeping  in  view  this  universal  corrup- 
tion which  is  characteristic  of  the  human  race,  it  is 
easy  to  see  why  the  Holy  Ghost  directed  the  inspired 
writers  to  describe  our  fallen,  sinful  nature,  as  we  are 
born  into  the  world,  by  the  term  flesh.  The  Apostle 
Paul  says,  "  I  know  that  in  me  (that  is,  in  my  flesh) 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."  ^  "  With  the  mind  I  myself 
serve  the  law  of  God ;  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of 
sin."  ^  "  They  that  are  after  the  flesh  do  mind  the 
things  of  the  flesh ;  but  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit, 
the  things  of  the  Spirit.  For  to  be  carnally  minded 
[or  the  minding  of  the  flesh]  is  death  ;  but  to  be 
spiritually  minded  [or  the  minding  of  the  spirit]  is 
life  and  peace."  *  "  Make  not  provision  for  the  flesh, 
to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof."^  "Walk  in  the  Spirit, 
and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  For  the 
flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  ; 
so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."  ^ 
"  The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  these  : 
adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idol- 
atry, witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  emulations,  wrath, 
strife,  seditions,  heresies,  envyings,  murders,  drunken- 
ness,  re  veilings,   and  such  like."  ^     "  They  that  are 

^Gen.  vi.  12.  ^j^om.  vii.  18.  'Rom.  vii.  25. 

*  Rom.  viii.  5,  6.  «  Rom,  xiii.  14.  «Gal.  v.  16,  17. 

''  Gal.  V.  19-21. 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE  SINNEE  IN  THE  LAW      121 

Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections 
and  lusts." '  "  He  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of 
the  flesh  reap  corruption  ;  but  he  that  soweth  to  the 
Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  ^ 

These  quotations,  taken  from  two  of  the  Epistles, 
prove  that  the  word  flesh,  very  often,  at  least,  indi- 
cates the  depravity  and  sinfulness  of  our  nature ;  and 
they  still  further  prove  that  the  nature  we  inherit 
from  fallen  Adam  remains  depraved  and  sinful  to  the 
end  of  life.  "That  w^hich  is  born  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh,"  and  do  what  you  will  with  it,  you  can  never 
make  anything  of  it  but  flesh.  Adorn  it  with  all  the 
charms  of  the  most  attractive  morality,  beautify  it 
with  all  the  graces  of  the  most  refined  culture,  and 
still  it  remains  flesh.  "Do  men  gather  grapes  of 
thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles  ?  "  ^  Can  you  by  any  amount 
of  care  and  industry  cause  thorns  to  produce  grapes 
or  thistles  to  bring  forth  figs  ?  This  may  be  done  just 
as  soon  as  flesh  can  be  turned  into  spirit,  or  that 
which  is  inherently  and  essentially  sinful  can  be 
changed  into  holiness.  "  Can  the  Ethiopian  change 
his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots  ?  Then,"  says  the 
Lord,  "  may  ye  also  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to 
do  evil."  *  In  other  words,  neither  in  the  case  of  the 
Ethiopian,  nor  the  leopard,  nor  the  sinner,  can  the 
nature  be  changed  into  another  nature.  A  new  na- 
ture may  be  imparted  or  a  new  creation  wrought  by 
the  power  of  the  almighty,  but  the  old  nature  will  be 
the  old  nature  still.     Hence  the  Bible  in  describing 

1  Gal.  V.  24.  '  Gal.  vi.  8. 

'  Matt.  vii.  16.  *  Jer.  xiii.  23. 


122  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

the  way  of  salvation  does  not  represent  it  as  due  to 
certain  moral  influences  which  God  brings  to  bear 
upon  the  soul,  but  to  "  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his 
power  to  usward  who  believe,  according  to  the  work- 
ing of  his  mighty  power  [or  the  energy  of  the  might 
of  his  power]  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he 
raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at  his  own 
right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places."  ^  Nothing  short 
of  the  highest  exercise  of  Divine  power  can  avail  to 
raise  us  out  of  the  profound  abyss  of  our  misery,  be- 
cause our  nature  is  helplessly  sinful  and  hopelessly 
ruined.  God's  judgment  of  our  state  by  nature  is 
contained  in  His  own  solemn  declaration,  "  the  heart 
is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked ; "  ^ 
and  it  will  give  the  full  force  of  this  declaration  to 
remember  that  the  word  translated  "  desperately  "  is 
rendered  "  incurable  "  and  "  fatal "  when  applied  to  a 
disease  or  a  wound.  Man's  nature  then  is  incurably 
wicked,  it  is  fatally  injured ;  and,  therefore,  in  the 
promise  of  salvation  which  the  Lord  addresses  to 
Israel,  He  says,  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you, 
and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  ^  The  psalm- 
ist, taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  prays,  "  Create  in  me 
a  clean  heart,  O  God ;  "  ^  and  neither  he  nor  any  other 
of  the  inspired  writers  ever  use  the  unscriptural  phrase, 
"  a  change  of  heart,"  which  we  so  often  hear  in  our 
pulpits  and  read  in  our  religious  books. 

The  phrase  is  objectionable  because  it  implies  that  the 
new  birth  does  not  consist  in  the  imparting  of  the  new 

^Eph.  i.  19,  20.  'Jer.  xvii.  9. 

»  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26.  *  Ps.  li.  10. 


NO   HOPE  FOR  THE   SINNER  IN   THE  LAW      123 

nature,  but  in  the  improvement  or  reformation  of  the 
old ;  and  for  this  view  I  am  satisfied  there  is  no  foun- 
dation whatever  in  the  word  of  God  or  in  Christian 
experience.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  written,  "  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it  is  not  sub- 
ject to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  '  Here 
we  are  told  that  the  carnal  mind,  the  fleshly  mind, 
that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh,  man's  nature,  is  not 
only  an  enemy,  but  enmity  itself  against  God,  and 
that  it  cannot  he  subject  to  the  law  of  God.  "  So, 
then,  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  ^ 
The  carnal  mind,  or  the  flesh,  or  the  old  nature  cannot, 
therefore,  be  changed  or  improved  ;  for  then  it  could 
become  subject  to  the  law  of  God  and  please  Him, 
which  is  here  declared  to  be  impossible.  Again :  *'  The 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can 
he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  dis- 
cerned ;  "  ^  and  if  the  natural  man  can  neither  receive 
nor  know  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  seems  to 
be  quite  certain  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  chang- 
ing, improving  and  reforming  the  natural  man  or 
man's  old  nature.  Again :  "  The  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh :  and  these  are 
contrary  the  one  to  the  other  ; "  ^  and  if  this  perpetual 
conflict  is  going  on  between  the  two,  how  can  it  be  said 
that  the  Spirit  is  gradually  transforming  the  flesh  or 
the  old  nature  into  His  own  likeness  ?  Again :  Chris- 
tians are  exhorted  to  "  put  oif,"  not  change  or  reform, 

^Rora.  viii.  7.  *  Rom.  viii.  8. 

3  1  Cor.  ii.  14.  -»  Gal.  v.  17. 


124  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

but  put  off^  "the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  [mark  it, 
is  corrupt],  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts  ; "  and  to 
"  put  on  the  new  man  which  after  God  is  created 
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."  *  Again :  "In 
Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything, 
nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature  "  ^  (or  new 
creation). 

In  the  light  of  these  clear  statements,  and  of  many 
others  like  them  that  could  be  quoted  if  necessary,  we 
are  compelled  to  see  that  the  natm^e  we  have  inherited 
from  fallen  Adam  is  totally  ruined.  There  is  not,  ac- 
cording to  the  vain  thought  of  many,  a  little  good  in 
man  as  he  is  born  into  the  world,  "  for  I  know  that  in 
me  (that  is,  m  my  flesh)  dwelleth  no  good  thing,"  ^ 
and  in  God's  sight,  "  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts 
of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually."  ^  He  is  not 
like  a  ship  whose  sails  have  been  split  by  a  storm  and 
whose  masts  have  been  splintered  by  the  lightning,  so 
that  it  needs  repair ;  but  like  a  shattered  wreck  upon 
the  shore.  A  new  vessel  must  be  built.  He  is  not 
like  a  musical  instrument  whose  strings  have  become 
discordant  by  the  violence  of  some  rude  clashing  hand, 
but  like  one  broken  to  pieces.  A  new  instrument 
must  be  constructed.  He  is  not  like  a  temple  whose 
altar  is  desecrated,  whose  walls  are  defaced,  and  whose 
pillars  have  been  dismantled  of  their  beauty  ;  but  the 
magnificent  edifice  that  once  reflected  the  glory  of  the 
Godhead  now  lies  a  shapeless  mass  of  worthless  rub- 
bish, the  fit  abode  of  unclean  birds  and  venomous 

»  Eph.  iv.  22,  24.  « 0^1.  vi.  15. 

*Rom.  vii.  18.  *Geu.  vi.  5. 


NO  HOPE  FOR  THE  SINNER  IN  THE  LAW      125 

reptiles;  and  a  new  building  must  be  reared.  Our 
nature  is  like  a  human  body  full  of  "  wounds,  and 
bruises,  and  putrefying  sores ;  they  have  not  been 
closed,  neither  bound  up,  neither  mollified  with  oint- 
ment : "  ^  and  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  come  down  in 
witness  of  the  ascension  of  Christ,  to  inhabit  such  a 
thing  as  this,  and  seek  its  improvement.  It  has  been 
cast  out  as  vile  ;  and  not  only  has  the  righteous  sen- 
tence of  its  doom  been  pronounced,  but  it  has  been 
executed ;  for  "  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  like- 
ness of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the 
flesh."  Blessed  be  His  name.  He  struck  at  the  very 
root  of  the  evil,  at  sin  in  the  flesh  or  in  our  nature ; 
and  yet,  in  His  adorable  grace,  the  blow  fell  not  upon 
us,  but  upon  His  own  Son,  "  for  he  hath  made  him  to 
be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin;  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  ^ 

Sin,  then,  in  its  broadest  and  deepest  sense,  in- 
cluding both  actual  transgressions  and  the  depravity 
of  our  nature,  has  already  been  judged  and  condemned 
and  punished,  so  far  as  the  believer  is  concerned,  in 
the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  who  his  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree ; "  *  who  "  appeared 
to  put  away  sin  [not  sins  only,  but  sin,  the  poisonous 
root  down  in  our  nature]  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself ; "  '^ 
and  on  the  ground  of  that  ample  and  atoning  sacrifice, 
the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  to  impart  a  new  nature,  to 
give  a  new  life,  to  form  a  new  creation  in  Christ 
through  faith  in  His  name  as  He  is  made  known  to 

'  Isa.  i.  6.  2  jjom^  Yiii.  3.  ^2  Cor.  v.  21. 

*  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  ^  Heb.  ix.  26. 


126  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

US  in  the  Gospel.  But,  dear  reader,  you  are  laying  up 
for  yourself  much  sorro\y  and  trouble  if  you  fail  to 
remember  that  the  "  flesh  "  in  a  Christian  is  no  better 
than  the  "  flesh  "  in  an  infidel.  ''  That  which  is  born 
of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  on  becoming  "the children  of 
God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,"  we  do  not  cease  to  be- 
come the  children  of  Adam.  It  is  true  that  "  ye  are 
not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you  ;  "  '  but  it  is  equally  true 
that  the  flesh  is  in  you ;  and  you  will  find  it  to  be  the 
same  flesh  that  it  was  before  you  believed  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Gospel,  and  were  thus  "  born  again." 
Forgetfulness  or  ignorance  of  this  fact  has  cast  many 
young  believers,  and  many  old  ones  too,  into  the 
depths  of  despondency,  and  made  them  all  their  life- 
time subject  to  bondage  through  fear  of  death.  They 
have  been  taught  to  expect  a  gradual  change  and  in- 
creasing sanctification  of  the  old  nature  until,  as  I  have 
heard  eminent  ministers  express  it,  the  Spirit  puts  the 
finishing  touch  on  the  Christian  in  his  dying  hour, 
who  is  thus  made  meet  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  inher- 
itance of  the  saints  in  light. 

Kow  the  fact  is,  he  was  made  meet  the  moment  he 
was  in  Christ  by  faith  ;  for  the  apostle,  in  behalf  of  all 
Christians  alike,  gives  "  thanks  unto  the  Father  which 
hath  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light ;  "  ^  and  as  to  the  gradual  change 
and  improvement  of  the  old  nature,  I  boldly  challenge 
the  experience  of  every  intelligent,  thoughtful  be- 
fiever  to  testify  whether  it  is  not  the  merest  delusion. 

» Rom.  viii.  9.  «  Col.  i.  12. 


NO   HOPE  FOR  THE   SINNER   IN  THE  LAW      127 

Does  he  find  that  it  is  a  whit  better  after  ten,  twenty 
or  forty  years  than  it  was  the  day  he  confessed  Christ  ? 
Kay,  does  he  not  find  that  it  is  precisely  the  same,  ex- 
cept that  there  is  a  growing  conviction  of  its  exceed- 
ing sinfulness  ?  True,  he  may  be  enabled  through  the 
indwelling  Spirit  to  subdue  it  more  thoroughly,  but 
■unless  it  is  constantly  "  mortified  "  and  "  kept  under," 
it  will  spring  up  in  all  its  original  deformity,  and 
obscure  the  shining  of  the  new  nature.  Careful  ob- 
servation also  will  convince  you  that  a  Christian  car- 
ries with  him,  along  the  whole  progress  of  his  earthly 
journey,  the  same  characteristics,  the  same  peculiari- 
ties, the  same  nature  he  had  previous  to  his  conver- 
sion ;  and  though  it  is  now  hated  and  held  down,  ever 
and  anon  it  rises  into  view,  and,  when  faith  falters, 
extorts  the  cry,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  '  If 
it  is  the  fact  that  the  old  nature  of  the  Christian  must 
undergo  this  gradual  and  progressive  change  for  the 
better,  it  is  unaccountable  that  the  most  abandoned 
sinners,  like  the  dying  thief,  sometimes  pass  in  an  hour 
from  the  lowest  depths  of  iniquity  into  the  paradise  of 
God  ;  and  that  the  most  devoted  saints,  like  David, 
are  guilty  of  fearful  falls  that  leave  a  dark  stain  on 
the  record  of  their  lives  ;  since,  according  to  the  theory 
that  the  old  nature  ceases  to  be  what  it  was,  there 
should  not  be  found  in  it  any  power  to  lust,  or  to  plan 
a  murder,  or  to  commit  any  other  heinous  sin.  It  is 
astonishing,  therefore,  that  so  many  excellent  ministers 
of  the  Gospel  persist  in  speaking  of  regeneration  as  a 
*  Rom.  vii.  24. 


128  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

change  wrought  in  the  old  nature  until  it  reaches  per- 
fection at  the  moment  of  death,  when  their  views  are 
not  only  directly  in  the  face  of  the  Scriptures,  but 
flatly  contradicted  by  the  experience  and  observation 
of  their  hearers. 

The  preachers  of  a  former  age,  when  a  sounder 
theology  prevailed,  spoke  far  otherwise,  as  did  Ealph 
Erskine,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  Christian 
"  half  devil  and  half  saint ;  "  and  as  did  Stillingfleet, 
bishop  of  Worcester,  England,  in  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury,  who  wrote,  "  In  an  unconverted  person  there  is 
but  one  nature ;  in  a  real  Christian  there  are  two 
natures ;  the  one  is  called  the  flesh ;  the  other  the 
Spirit."  This  I  think  expresses  the  precise  difference 
between  the  unbeliever  and  the  believer  ;  the  former 
has  but  one  nature,  while  the  latter  has  two  natures  ; 
but  of  course  I  do  not  mean  to  say  he  has  two  souls. 
The  second  man,  the  Lord  from  heaven,  has  two 
natures  in  one  person,  dwelling  together  without  ad- 
mixture, change,  or  confusion,  yet  He  has  but  one  soul. 
"Webster  defines  the  word  nature  as  ''  the  essence,  es- 
sential qualities,  or  attributes  of  a  thing,  which  con- 
stitute it  what  it  is  ;  "  and  I  affirm  that  "  the  essence, 
essential  qualities,  or  attributes  "  which  belong  to  man 
when  he  is  born  into  the  world  continue  with  him  un- 
changed to  the  end ;  and  that  when  he  is  born  again 
another  thing  is  communicated  to  him,  "  the  essence, 
essential  qualities,  or  attributes  "  of  which  link  him  to 
God  and  constitute  him  truly  a  child  of  God.  Of  the 
one  nature  it  is  written,  "  he  that  committeth  sin  is 
of  the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  begin- 


NO  HOPE  rOR  TnE  SINNEE  IN   THE  LAW      129 

ning."  *  Of  the  other  nature  it  is  written,  "  Whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin ;  for  his  seed 
remaineth  in  him ;  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is 
born  of  God."  ^  Of  the  one  it  is  written,  "  The  old 
man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful 
lusts."  ^  Of  the  other  it  is  written,  "  The  new  man, 
which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness."  ^  Of  one  it  is  written,  "  They  are  of  the 
world :  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the 
world  heareth  them."  ^  Of  the  other  it  is  written, 
"  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world."  ^ 
The  sharp  and  unchanged  contrast  between  the  two 
natures  as  presented  in  the  Bible  might  be  continued 
at  great  length,  but  enough,  probably,  has  been  said 
to  convince  you  that  if  you  are  looking  for  the  gradual 
sanctification  of  the  old  nature,  instead  of  trusting  in 
the  accomplished  sacrifice  of  Christ,  you  will  be  woe- 
fully  disappointed.  You  will  find  that  the  old  nature 
remains  the  old  nature  in  spite  of  all  your  struggles 
and  tears  and  vows.  *'  No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  new 
cloth  into  an  old  garment ;  for  that  which  is  put  in  to 
fill  it  up  taketh  from  the  garment,  and  the  rent  is  made 
worse.  Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles : 
else  the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  runneth  out,  and 
the  bottles  perish  :  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new 
bottles,  and  both  are  preserved."  ^  If  men  are  not 
guilty  of  the  folly  described  here  by  the  Saviour, 
neither  is  the  Lord ;  for  He  just  casts  aside  the  old 

1  1  John  iii.  8.  '  1  John  iii.  9.  '  Eph.  iv.  22. 

*  Eph.  iv.  24.  *  1  John  iv.  5.  « 1  John  v.  4. 

'  Matt.  ix.  16,  17. 


130  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

garment,  the  old  bottles,  the  old  nature,  as  condemned 
and  worthless,  and  gives  unto  us  ''  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises:  that  by  these  ye  might  be  par- 
takers of  the  divine  nature,"  '  and  "  in  Christ  a  new 
creation."  It  is  all  in  Christ,  for  "  they  that  are 
Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affection  and 
lusts."  ^  "  Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  [was] 
crucified  with  him."  ^  "I  am  [have  been]  crucified 
with  Christ."  ^  The  scene  of  this  crucifixion  is  not  in 
ourselves — as  so  many  imagine,  to  their  own  perpetual 
discomfort  and  sorrow — but  it  was  on  Calvary,  for 
w^hen  Christ  w^as  crucified  the  believer  was  crucified  ; 
when  Christ  died  the  believer  died ;  when  Christ  was 
buried  the  believer  was  buried ;  when  Christ  was 
quickened  the  believer  was  quickened ;  when  Christ 
arose  the  believer  arose ;  when  Christ  was  seated  in 
the  heavenly  places  the  believer  was  seated  together 
wath  Him,  forever  past  condemnation,  and  judgment, 
and  death,  and  standing  in  the  light  and  glory  of  the 
new  creation,  an  heir  of  God  and  joint-heir  with  Christ, 
saved  now  and  saved  forever. 

This  will  come  up  again  more  fully  hereafter,  but 
for  the  present  I  ask  you  to  consider  that  if  you  were 
perfectly  obedient  to  the  law  in  your  outward  life,  and 
if  you  were  the  most  prominent  member  of  what  is 
called  by  various  denominations  the  only  true  Church, 
you  would  require  something  else  as  long  as  the  old 
nature  remains  the  old  nature,  and  as  long  as  it  is  true 
that  "  ye  must  be  born  again."     The  worst  need  noth- 

»  2  Pet.  i.  4.  »  Gal.  v.  24. 

'  Rom.  vi.  6.  «  Gal.  ii.  20. 


NO   HOPE   FOR  THE   SINNER  IN   THE   LAW       l31 

ing  more  than  this,  but  the  best  can  do  with  nothing 
less.  Thanks  to  God,  there  is  nothing,  nothing  what- 
ever, between  the  worst  of  sinners  and  the  gracious 
Saviour,  as  I  shall  now  proceed  to  show. 


CHAPTER  XI 

NOTHING  BETWEEN  THE  SINKER  AND  THE 
SAVIOUR 

"But  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith  speaketh  on  this  wise,  Say 
not  in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  (that  is,  to  bring 
Christ  down  from  above.)  Or,  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep? 
(that  is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead.)  But  whatsaith  it? 
The  word  is  nigh  unto  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart  : 
that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we  preach," — Romans  x.  6-8. 

THE  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth 
came  by  Jesus  Christ."  ^  The  law  says,  Do  and 
be  saved ;  grace  says,  Believe  and  be  saved.  The  law 
says,  Do  and  live  ;  grace  says,  Live  and  do.  The  law 
says,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  ;  "  ^  grace  says, 
"  Deliver  hhn  from  going  down  to  the  pit :  I  have 
found  a  ransom."  ^  The  law  says,  "  If  a  man  have  a 
stubborn  and  rebellious  son,  w^hich  will  not  obey  the 
voice  of  his  father,  or  the  voice  of  his  mother,  and 
that,  when  they  have  chastened  him,  will  not  hearken 
unto  them  :  then  shall  his  father  and  his  mother  lay 
hold  on  him,  and  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his 
city,  and  unto  the  gate  of  his  place ;  and  they  shall 
say  unto  the  elders  of  his  city.  This  our  son  is  stub- 
born and  rebellious ;  he  will  not  obey  our  voice ;  he 
is  a  glutton  and  a  drunkard.  And  all  the  men  of  his 
city  shall  stone  him  with  stones  that  he  die  :  so  shalt 

*  John  i.  17.  ^  Ezek.  xviii.  4.  ^  Job  xxxiii.  24. 

132 


THE   SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE  SINNER  133 

thou  put  away  evil  from  among  you  ;  and  all  Israel 
shall  hear,  and  fear." '  Grace  says,  concerning  the 
wretched  prodigal,  although  "  stubborn  and  rebel- 
lious," a  "  glutton  and  a  drunkard,"  that  "  when  he 
was  yet  a  great  way  off  his  father  saw  him,  and  had 
compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed 
him."  ^  The  law  says,  "  Lay  hold  on  him  ; "  grace 
says,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him."  ^ 
The  law  says,  "  Stone  him ;  "  grace  says,  "  Put  a  ring 
on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet."  ^  The  law  says, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them;"^  grace,  speaking  only  of  believers,  says, 
"  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us."  ° 

This  shows  us  precisely  how  we  are  delivered  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  for  it  is  said,  "  Christ  hath  re- 
deemed us,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  He  was 
"  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive 
the  adoption  of  ^sons."  ^  The  law,  therefore,  has  not 
been  set  aside,  but  satisfied.  It  has  not  been 
trampled  under  foot,  but  it  has  triumphed  in  the  in- 
fliction of  the  threatened  penalty  against  sin ;  only 
the  penalty  has,  in  amazing  grace,  fallen  upon  the 
person  of  the  sinner's  Divine  Substitute.  The  word 
penalty  is  defined  by  "Worcester  as  "punishment, 
whether  in  property  or  in  person,  imposed  by  law  or 

'  Dent.  xxi.  18-21.  2  \,xxV%  xv.  20.  '  Luke  xv.  22. 

4  Luke  XV.  22.  «  Gal.  iii.  10.  «  Gal.  iii.  13. 

'  Gal.  iv.  4,  5. 


134:  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

by  judicial  decision."  Webster  sa3^s  it  means,  "  The 
suffering  in  person  or  property  which  is  annexed  by 
law  or  judicial  decision  to  the  commission  of  a  crime, 
oifence,  or  trespass,  as  a  punishment."  "When  I  affirm, 
then,  that  the  threatened  penalty  of  God's  law  against 
sin  fell  upon  Christ,  I  wish  to  be  understood  as  as- 
serting that  He  endured  precisely  the  kind  and  degree 
of  suffering  or  punishment  which  the  law  demanded 
on  account  of  sin,  as  necessary  to  procure  the  complete 
deliverance  and  entire  redemption  of  all  who  believe 
on  Him.  He  endured  the  penalty  in  the  fullest  and 
truest  sense,  because  penalty  is  what  the  law  exacts  in 
order  to  vindicate  its  insulted  majesty  and  meet  its 
righteous  claims,  and  this  is  what  Christ  did  when 
He  suffered  on  the  cross. 

If  a  man  were  put  in  prison  for  debt,  and  a  friend 
should  pay  the  full  amount  to  the  creditor,  it  would 
be  impossible  in  strict  justice  to  retain  the  debtor  in 
confinement,  because  the  law  would  be  satisfied — 
not  by  anything  the  prisoner  could  do,  but  by  what 
his  friend  does  as  his  representative  and  in  his  place. 
His  farther  detention  in  prison  after  the  discharge  of 
the  debt  would  be  grossly  illegal  and  tyrannical.  If 
a  monarch  should  condemn  one  of  his  subjects  to  death 
for  treason,  and  then  permit  his  own  son  to  suffer  in- 
stead of  the  insurgent,  it  would  be  impossible  in  strict 
justice  to  execute  the  threatened  sentence  upon  the  per- 
son of  the  traitor.  His  death  under  such  circum- 
stances would  shake  the  very  foundations  of  the  gov- 
ernment and  destroy  all  confidence  in  the  integrity  of 
the  ruler.     A  Christian  teacher  states  in  a  recent  peri- 


THE   SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE  SINNER  135 

odical  that  there  were  two  pupils  in  his  school  who 
were  warmly  attached  to  each  other,  and  yet  totally 
unlike  in  disposition  and  deportment.  One  was  a  model 
scholar,  obedient,  prompt,  and  perfect  in  his  lessons 
and  conduct,  while  the  other  had  attained  a  bad  dis- 
tinction by  his  indolence  and  waywardness.  On  a  cer- 
tain occasion  he  was  about  to  inflict  punishment  upon 
the  unruly  boy  for  some  misdemeanor,  when  the  good 
boy  stepped  forward  and  said  in  substance,  "  I  know 
he  deserves  punishment,  and  your  authority  must  be 
maintained  and  the  rules  of  the  school  enforced,  but 
please  punish  me  in  his  stead,  for  it  will  answer  the 
same  purpose  as  if  you  punished  him,  and  I  cannot  bear 
to  see  him  suffer,"  The  teacher,  wishing  to  illustrate 
the  great  central  truth  of  the  Bible  setting  forth  Christ 
as  the  Substitute  for  His  people,  bearing  their  sins, 
complied  with  the  request ;  and  then  calling  back  the 
astonished  and  weeping  scholar  whose  offence  had  de- 
manded the  infliction  of  the  penalty,  and  whose  heart 
seemed  to  be  deeply  touched  by  the  generous  self- 
sacrifice  of  his  friend,  he  told  him  that  he  must  endure 
the  punishment  in  his  own  person.  At  once,  it  is  said, 
every  hand  was  lifted  and  every  voice  in  the  room 
was  raised  in  indignant  protest,  the  scholars  together 
exclaiming,  "  Oh,  no  !  that  would  not  be  just  to  the 
noble  boy  who  has  borne  the  punishment,  and  for  his 
sake  not  a  stroke  can  fall  upon  the  bad  boy." 

These  illustrations  come  far  short  of  presenting 
fully  the  work  of  Christ  in  our  behalf,  because  in  the 
cases  of  the  debtor  and  the  traitor  and  the  disobedient 
pupil  there  was  a  mere  escape  from  punishment,  with- 


136  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

out  peace  of  conscience,  without  refuge  from  fears  of 
the  future,  without  restoration  to  their  good  standing, 
while,  as  we  have  akeady  seen,  "  Christ  is  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  belie veth." 
But  they  serve  at  least  to  clear  the  point  we  are  now 
considering,  that  Christ  having  been  "  made  a  curse 
for  us,"  it  is  impossible  for  God,  w^ho  is  "  faithful  and 
just,"  to  inflict  the  penalty  of  His  satisfied  law  upon 
those  in  whose  stead  it  has  once  been  endured  by  His 
only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son.  ''  For  when  we 
were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died 
for  the  ungodly.  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man 
will  one  die :  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man  some 
would  even  dare  to  die.  But  God  commendeth  his 
love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners, 
Christ  died  for  us."  *  If  the  phrase,  to  die  for  a 
righteous  man  and  for  a  good  man,  means  to  die  in 
the  place,  room,  and  stead  of  a  righteous  or  good  man 
so  as  to  keep  him  from  dying,  then,  beyond  question, 
the  distinct  statement  of  the  Holy  Ghost  declaring 
that  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly  and  for  us  means 
that  He  died  in  the  i^lace,  room,  and  stead  of  the  un- 
godly, and  the  "  us  "  who  are  believers.  The  stu- 
pendous difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  sinner's  salvation 
was  the  claim  of  God's  violated  law,  demanding  by 
all  the  perfections  of  the  Divine  Being,  and  by  all  the 
necessities  of  His  government,  that  sin  should  be  pun- 
ished ;  but  when  Jehovah  (or  Jahveh,  the  coming 
One),  of  whom  the  prophets  sung,  "  He  will  magnify 
the  law  and  make  it  honorable,"  ^  descended  from  the 

iKom.  V.  6-8.  «Isa.  xlii.  21. 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE   SINNER  137 

throne  of  universal  sovereignty,  and  slirouded  His 
divinity  in  human  flesh,  and  bowed  His  head  in  the 
shameful  death  of  the  cross,  the  law  has  no  further 
claim  upon  behevers  for  whom  this  death  was  en- 
dured, but,  sheathing  its  flaming  sword,  it  joins  with 
mercy  in  the  sweet  invitation,  ''  Ho,  every  one  that 
thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no 
money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine 
and  milk  without  money  and  without  price."  * 

It  is  most  important  in  the  present  discussion  to 
keep  in  mind  that  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ  has 
already  been  endured,  and  His  atoning  work  abeady 
accomplished.  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgres- 
sions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  :  the  chastise- 
ment of  our  peace  was  upon  him  ;  and  with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed.  Ail  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray : 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  ;  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."' 
*'  Who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  was  raised 
again  for  our  justification."  ^  "  Christ  died  for  our 
sins  according  to  the  Scriptures."  ^  God  "  hath  made 
him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  ^  He 
"  gave  himself  for  our  sins."  ^  "  Christ  also  loved  the 
church,  and  gave  himself  for  it."^  He  "became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  ^ 
"  Ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and 
true  God  ;  and  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom 

^  Isa.  Iv.  1.  2  Isa.  liii.  5,  6.  »  Rom.  iv.  25. 

*1  Cor.  XV.  3.  "2  Cor.  v.  21.  «Gal.  i.  4. 

•»  Epb.  V.  25.  « Phil.  ii.  8. 


138  THE  WAY  MADE   PLAIN" 

he  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesas,  which  delivered 
us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  '  ''  Isow  once  in  the  end 
of  the  world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself."^  "Christ  was  once  offered  to 
bear  the  sins  of  many."  ^  "  Who  his  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  ^  "  Christ  also 
hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."^  "  Christ  hath  suf- 
fered for  us  in  the  flesh."  ^ 

You  wiU  observe  that  in  these  texts  not  only  is  the 
death  of  Christ  directly  connected  with  our  sins,  and 
described  as  vicarious,  or  endured  in  our  stead,  and 
represented  as  furnishing  the  only  ground  upon  which 
we  can  be  saved,  but  the  past  tense  is  used  in  every 
passage,  to  indicate  that  the  great  transaction  has  al- 
ready taken  place.  More  than  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago  our  redemption  was  accomplished,  and  by  the 
power  of  faith  even  the  Old  Testament  saints  regarded 
it  as  achieved  in  their  day,  because  their  impressive 
types  daily  proclaimed  ''  the  precious  blood  of  Christ, 
as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot :  who 
verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  ^  The  Saviour  in  His  adorable  love  and  pity 
did  not  wait  for  man  to  seek  Him,  but  came  unasked 
to  our  lost  world  and  undeserving  race.  He  did  not 
come  that  God  might  love  us,  but  because  God  did 
love  us,  and  love  us  while  we  were  "  ungodly,"  and 
"  sinners,"  and  "  enemies,"  and  so  love  us  that  He 

^  1  Thess.  i.  9,  10.  »  Heb.  ix.  26.  »  Heb.  ix.  28. 

*  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  '  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  *  1  Pet.  iv.  1. 

'  1  Pet.  i.  19,  20. 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAE  THE   SINNER  139 

gave  His  only  begotten  Son  to  take  our  place  under 
His  dishonored  law,  and  endure  its  dreadful  penalty 
in  our  stead.  The  Father,  as  representing  the  un- 
sullied holiness  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  the  invio- 
lable majesty  of  the  Divine  law,  and  the  unspeakable 
interests  of  the  Divine  government,  met  the  Son  at 
Calvary  bearing  upon  Him  the  mighty  load  of  our 
iniquities ;  and  there,  amidst  bursting  tombs,  and 
rending  rocks,  and  earthquake  shocks,  and  the  inde- 
scribable sufferings  of  the  cross  that  extorted  the  fear- 
ful cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?  " '  the  question  of  sin  and  salvation  was  once  and 
forever  settled. 

Since  that  event  occurred,  and  even  since  it  was 
announced  in  the  first  promise  made  to  our  fallen 
parents  concerning  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  in  the 
first  type  of  the  coats  of  skins  with  which  God's  own 
hand  clothed  them,  no  other  atonement  has  been 
demanded,  no  other  sacrifice  has  been  possible,  no 
other  righteousness  has  been  accepted;  but  the 
gracious  Redeemer  says  in  His  blessed  word,  "  I  bring 
near  my  righteousness  ;  it  shall  not  be  far  off,  and  my 
salvation  shall  not  tarry."  ^  When  the  dying  Jesus 
said,  "  It  is  finished,"  ^  and  bowed  His  head  and  gave 
up  the  ghost,  He  joyfully  announced  that  all  His 
sacrificial  sufferings  were  past ;  that  all  the  types 
of  the  law  were  answered ;  that  all  its  rites  were 
abolished ;  that  all  its  claims  were  met ;  that  all 
its  demands  were  satisfied  ;  that  all  its  purposes  were 
secured ;  that   all  its  threatenings  against  His  cov- 

*Matt.  xxvii.  46.  ^  Isa.  xlvi.  13.  ^John  xix.  30. 


140  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAI]^ 

enanted  people  were  silenced ;  that  all  its  power  to 
injure  them  was  ended;  and  that  nothing  more 
remained  to  be  done  but  for  the  whole  world,  if  it 
will,  to  rest  upon  i\ns,  finished  work  with  the  calmness 
of  an  unfaltering  confidence  and  in  the  sure  anticipa- 
tion of  eternal  glory.  There  is  nothing,  then,  and 
there  can  be  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  between 
the  sinner  and  the  Saviour — no,  not  so  much  as  the 
thickness  of  the  thinnest  tissue-paper  or  the  most 
delicate  gold-leaf. 

I  know  how  common,  alas !  it  is  for  the  anxious 
soul  to  be  put  upon  a  course  of  presumptuous  and 
profitless  doing  in  order  to  be  saved ;  as  when  urged 
to  enter  into  covenant  with  God  to  serve  Him  ;  or  to 
draw  up  a  form  of  solemn  self-surrender  and  self- 
dedication  ;  or  to  be  confirmed  ;  or  to  be  baptized  ;  or 
to  join  the  Church ;  or  to  seek  religion ;  or  to  give  the 
heart  unto  the  Lord  as  the  means  of  inclining  Him  to 
be  gracious ;  or  to  keep  on  praying  until  He  will  be 
merciful  and  answer  fervent  and  frequent  supplica- 
tions. My  reader,  be  persuaded  that  such  advice  is 
not  the  Gospel,  but  the  law,  and  you  will  never, 
never,  obtain  an  intelligent  and  assured  hope  in  this 
w^ay.  Under  this  law-preaching,  as  I  do  not  hesitate 
to  denounce  the  instructions  too  frequently  given  in 
the  pulpit  and  in  books  intended  for  inquirers,  it  has 
come  to  pass  that  nearly  every  one  who  is  awakened 
to  consider  the  interests  of  eternity  thinks  of  the 
blessed  God  as  an  unfeeling  Governor  whose  com- 
pliance with  a  request  is  to  be  won  by  the  force  of 
importunity  ;  or  as  a  stern  judge  whose  favor  is  to  be 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE   SINNER  141 

gained  by  eloquent  appeals  and  tearful  entreaties  ;  or 
as  a  fickle  and  foolish  father  who  is  at  length  over- 
come by  the  persistent  pleadings  of  a  child  to  give 
what  he  is  not  disposed  to  grant. 

Hence,  we  seldom  find  sinners  coming  at  once  to 
Christ  after  conviction,  and,  through  an  immediate 
and  unquestioning  faith  in  the  testimony  of  His  word, 
so  promptly  receiving  a  full  and  finished  salvation  as 
to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  Bible  when  it  says, 
"  We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"  '  and 
"rejoice  evermore."^  JSTot  only  days,  but  generally 
weeks  or  months,  and  sometimes  years,  pass  away 
while  they  are  trying  to  be  fit  and  to  be  good  enough 
to  come ;  and  then,  after  making  a  profession  of 
religion,  as  they  very  properly  call  it,  their  whole 
subsequent  life  is  apt  to  pass  away  in  uncertain  hopes 
and  vague,  unsatisfying  conceptions  of  the  entire 
subject.  They  imagine  that  to  attain  salvation  they 
must  climb  as  it  were  some  steep  and  laborious  ascent 
or  plunge  into  some  profound  abyss,  not  remembering 
that  "  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith,"  which  is 
received  through  faith,  which  is  the  result  of  faith, 
which  is  ours  by  faith,  "  speaketh  on  this  wise.  Say 
not  in  thine  heart,  "Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ? 
(that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down  from  above).  Or,  Who 
shall  descend  into  the  deep?  (that  is,  to  bring  up 
Christ  again  from  the  dead).  But  what  saith  it  ? 
The  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy 
heart :  that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we  preach." 
Oh,  if  the  inquirer  who  reads  these  lines  only 
iHeb.  iv.  3.  2 1  Tbess,  v.  16, 


14:2  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIl^ 

knew  how  nigh  salvation  is  to  him  this  very  moment, 
surely  he  w^ould  eagerly  lay  hold  of  it  without  the 
slightest  delay.  Nay,  he  does  not  have  to  lay  hold  of 
it ;  he  has  just  to  receive  it  in  all  its  completeness.  It 
is  nigher  to  you,  my  friend,  than  the  door,  than  any 
article  of  furniture  in  the  room  where  you  are  sitting, 
than  any  object  within  your  reach,  for  it  is  as  nigh  as 
3^our  mouth  and  your  heart.  You  are  not  asked  to 
stir  from  your  seat,  to  lift  your  finger,  to  move  an 
eyelash,  to  wait  a  single  second,  but  now,  just  now, 
and  just  as  you  are,  to  believe,  and  to  enter  straight- 
way into  everlasting  life.  There  is  no  need  to  plead 
with  God  to  be  merciful,  for  He  is  already  merciful, 
and  has  given  the  most  convincing  exhibition  of  His 
mercy  in  the  wonderful  provisions  He  has  made  for  your 
recovery  from  the  dominion  and  ruinous  consequences 
of  sin.  There  is  no  need  to  beseech  Him  to  love  you, 
for  He  already  loves  you,  and  has  furnished  the  most 
touching  manifestation  of  that  love  of  which  the  mind 
of  man  or  of  an  angel  can  conceive.  "  Some  years 
ago  two  gentlemen  were  riding  together,  and  as  they 
were  about  to  separate,  one  addressed  the  other  thus : 

*  Do  you  ever  read  your  Bible  ? '  ^  Yes ;  but  I  get  no 
benefit  from  it,  because,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  feel  I 
do  not  love  God.'     *  No  more  did  I,'  replied  the  other, 

*  but  God  loved  me.'  This  answer  produced  such  an 
effect  upon  his  friend  that,  to  use  his  own  words,  it 
was  as  if  one  had  lifted  him  off  the  saddle  into 
the  skies.  It  opened  up  to  his  soul  at  once  the  great 
truth  that  it  is  not  how  much  I  love  God,  but  how 
much  God  loves  me." 


THE   SAVIOUR   NEAR  THE   SIT^NER  143 

This  is  indeed  the  great  truth,  "  for  God  so  loved 
the  world  [the  guilty,  sinful,  ruined  world]  that  he 
gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  ' 
"  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward  us, 
because  that  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the 
world,  that  we  might  live  through  him.  Herein  is 
love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and 
sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."^ 
"  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us  ;  "  ^  and  if 
you  attempt  to  reverse  this  Divine  order  so  as  to  love 
Him  first  that  He  may  love  you  in  return,  you  will 
soon  be  involved  in  hopeless  confusion  and  darkness. 
The  devil  would  like  to  persuade  you  that  God  can- 
not love  you  as  you  are,  and  hence  he  is  constantly 
suggesting  to  parents  to  tell  their  little  children  that 
God  will  not  love  them  if  they  are  naughty,  but  "  he 
is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it."  ^  And  when  he 
whispers  to  your  soul  that  you  must  do  something,  or 
get  to  be  something,  different  from  what  you  now 
are  before  God  can  love  you,  he  is  whispering  a  lie  ; 
for  God  loves  you  at  this  very  instant,  and  sees  you 
afar  off,  and  yearns  over  you  with  unutterable  tender- 
ness, and  longs  to  take  you  to  His  heart  of  love  and 
make  you  happy  forever. 

*  John  iii.  16.  '1  John  iv.  9,  10. 

'  1  John  iv.  19.  *  John  viii.  44. 


CHAPTEE  XII 

KOTHING  BETWEEN  THE  SINNEE  AND  THE 
SAVIOUE 

WHO,  then,  puts  the  slightest  barrier  between  the 
sinner  and  the  Saviour  ?  Not  the  Saviour 
Himself,  for  His  language  is,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye 
that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest. 
Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me  : "  '  but  you 
will  observe  that  He  does  not  bid  us  take  His  yoke 
until  we  first  come,  laboring  and  heavy  laden  with  our 
sins  or  sorrows,  nor  does  He  expect  us  to  learn  until 
He  first  gives  us  rest.  You  will  find  upon  examina- 
tion that  this  is  the  order  always  laid  down  in  the 
word  of  God.  Salvation  is  first  bestowed  as  a  free 
gift,  and  then  service  follows  ;  privilege  is  first  granted, 
and  then  responsibility  ensues ;  relationship  with  God 
as  our  Father  is  first  established  by  grace,  and  then 
the  aff'ections  of  children  are  expected ;  our  standing 
in  Christ  is  first  secured  through  faith  in  His  blood, 
and  then  obligation  is  imposed.  There  is  no  telling 
the  amount  of  evil  that  has  followed  man's  attempt 
to  reverse  this  order,  and  I  beg  you  to  remember  that 
as  a  sinner  you  have  nothing,  nothing,  to  do  but  to 
come  to  Christ  as  you  are  ;  by  which  I  mean,  you  have 
nothing  to  do  but  to  believe,  upon  the  sure  testimony 

»  Matt.  xi.  28,  29. 
144 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAK  THE  SINNER  145 

of  God's  word,  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  save 
your  soul,  and  to  save  it  without  delay.  "  In  the  last 
day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried, 
saying,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and 
drink."  '  In  the  eagerness  of  His  desire  to  save.  He 
arose  from  the  sitting  posture  usual  with  Jewish 
teachers,  and  stood,  that  His  voice  might  ring  like  a 
trumpet  above  the  crowd,  crying,  ^'  If  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  unto  me  " — come,  thirsty  and  needy,  and 
not  because  he  has  done  something  to  quench  his 
thirst  and  satisfy  his  need. 


li 


Let  not  conscience  make  you  linger, 

Nor  of  fitness  fondly  dream  j 
All  the  fitness  He  requireth 

Is  to  feel  your  need  of  Him  ; 
This  He  gives  you — 

'Tis  the  Spirit's  rising  beam.'' 

There  is  a  question  just  here  I  wish  you  to  consider, 
and  it  is  this :  Are  there  many  ways  by  which  men 
are  saved,  or  is  there  only  one  way  ?  I  know,  if  you 
accept  the  Scriptures  as  inspired,  that  you  will 
reply.  There  is  only  one  way ;  for  it  is  written, 
"He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  [no  matter  who 
he  is]  hath  everlasting  life :  and  he  that  believeth 
not  the  Son  [no  matter  who  he  is]  shall  not  see 
life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  ^ 
"  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other  ;  for  there  is 
none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men, 
whereby  we  must  be  saved."  ^     This,  then,  prepares 

»  John  vii.  37.  *  j^jj^  ^^^  ^6,  '  Acts  iv.  12. 


146  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

the  way  for  another  question  :  How  was  the  dying 
thief  saved  ?  There  are  many  who,  in  answering  this 
question,  seem  to  take  it  for  granted  that  he  was  a 
better  thief  than  the  other,  who  was  not  saved,  but 
not  so  does  the  word  of  God  speak  of  him.  Matthew 
informs  us  that  "  the  thieves  also  [that  is,  both  of 
them],  which  were  crucified  with  him,  cast  the  same 
in  his  teeth." '  Mark  says,  "  They  [that  is,  both  of 
them]  that  were  crucified  with  him  reviled  him."  ^ 
The  fact  is,  when  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross  he  joined 
his  guilty  companion  and  the  brutal  crowd  in  heap- 
ing insults  and  reproaches  upon  the  dying  Saviour  ; 
but  God  determined  to  show  what  His  grace  can  do, 
and  hence  flashed  into  his  ruined  soul  conviction  of 
sin  which  was  the  "  Spmt's  rising  beam."  Then  fol- 
lows the  humble  confession  of  guilt,  and  the  sublime 
testimony  concerning  Jesus,  that  "  this  man  hath  done 
nothing  amiss."  ^  I  call  it  sublime  testimony,  because 
it  was  delivered  in  the  face  of  a  scoffing  world  that 
had  united  to  condemn  and  crucify  the  Son  of  God. 
The  Jews  spurned  His  claims  as  the  Messiah ;  the 
Romans  scourged  Him  as  a  seditious  fanatic  or  im- 
postor ;  and  the  confidence  of  His  own  disciples  re- 
ceived a  staggering  blow  when  they  saw  Him  dragged 
like  a  common  felon  through  the  streets  and  suspended 
upon  the  instrument  of  shame  and  torture. 

Truly  there  was  little  appearance  of  royalty  about 
that  thorn-crowned  brow,  and  that  bleeding  back 
mangled  by  the  cruel  lash,  and  those  hands  and  feet 
pierced  with  nails;  but  the  poor  thief  had  faith  to 

'  Matt,  xxvii.  44.  '  ]\Iark  xv.  32.  '  Luke  xxiii.  41. 


THE   SAVIOUR   NEAR  THE   SINNER  147 

say,  '"■  Lord,  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 
kingdom."  ^  He  had  no  time  to  get  better ;  he  had 
no  time  to  make  hunself  fit  to  come  to  Christ ;  he  had 
no  time  to  observe  rites  and  ordinances ;  but  he  had 
time  to  helieve  that  the  meek  Sufferer  at  his  side  was 
what  He  clauned  to  be,  and  to  trust  in  Him  for  some 
humble  place  in  the  kingdom  which  he  helieved  that 
Sufferer  would  in  due  time  establish  on  the  earth, 
according  to  the  Scriptures.  These  Scriptures  say, 
"  Whosoever  belie veth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born 
of  God ; "  ^  and  this  is  what  the  dying  thief  did,  and 
it  is  all  he  did,  when  forth  came  the  sweet  assurance 
from  the  pallid  lips  of  the  Saviour  mighty  to  save  in 
death  and  through  death,  "  Yerily,  I  say  unto  thee, 
To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise ; "  ^  and  a 
few  hours  later  the  ransomed  sinner  went  his  way,  the 
first  glad  herald  from  earth  to  announce  to  the  rejoic- 
ing multitude  on  high  that  the  work  of  redemption 
was  finished.  And  now,  if  it  be  true  that  there  is  only 
one  way  of  salvation,  and  therefore  that  all  men  are 
to  be  saved  the  same  way  the  thief  was  saved,  what 
should  be  done  with  the  preaching  that  puts  the  small- 
est obstacle,  though  it  be  nothing  more  than  a  straw, 
between  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour  ?  Why,  toss  it 
overboard  as  an  accursed  thing,  and  make  haste  to 
believe,  because  God  has  said  it,  that  "  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  ^ 

But  let  us  glance  at  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  who 
received  from  their  Master  the  great  commission,  "  Go 

^  Luke  xxiii.  42.  '  1  John  v.  1. 

3  Luke  xxiii.  43.  ^  1  John  i.  7. 


148  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAI^ 

ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature;"  ^  or,  in  other  words,  Preach  the  good  news, 
the  glad  tidings  of  the  boundless  love  of  God  and  the 
finished  work  of  Christ.  We  learn  that  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  in  Avitness  of  our 
Lord's  ascension  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and 
wonderful  results  followed  His  manifested  presence 
among  the  disciples.  There  were  at  that  time  in  Jerusa- 
lem "  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the  dwell- 
ers in  Mesopotamia,  and  in  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  in 
Pontus,  and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamphylia,  in  Egypt, 
and  in  the  parts  of  Lybia  about  Cyrene,  and  strangers 
of  Eome,  Jews  and  proselytes,  Cretes  and  Arabians."  ^ 
To  this  mixed  multitude,  together  with  many  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  city,  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  apos- 
tles proclaimed  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  "  Then 
they  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  baptized :  and 
the  same  day  there  were  added  unto  them  about  three 
thousand  souls.  And  they  continued  steadfastly  in 
the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking 
of  bread,  and  in  prayers.  .  .  .  And  they,  con- 
tinuing daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple,  and 
breaking  bread  from  house  to  house,  did  eat  their 
meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,  praising 
God,  and  having  favor  with  all  the  people.  And  the 
Lord  added  to  the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be 
saved." ^  There  was  no  delay  here;  no  waiting  to 
get  better ;  no  striving  to  be  fit  to  come ;  no  probing 
into  their  hearts  to  test  their  feelings,  whether  they 
had  repented  enough,  and  whether  they  loved  God 

'  Mark  xvi.  15.  « Acts  ii.  9-11.  ^  ^^j^g  ^^  41    42   45   47, 


THE   SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE   SI:>T:N^ER  149 

enough,  and  whether  they  believed  aright,  but  im- 
mediately upon  receiving  the  word  as  true,  the  same 
day  there  were  added  to  the  Church  about  three 
thousand  rejoicing  converts. 

We  look  a  little  farther,  and  find  that  "  a  man  of 
Ethiopia,  an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  Candace, 
queen  of  the  Ethiopians,  who  had  charge  of  all  her 
treasure,  and  had  come  to  Jerusalem  for  to  worship, 
was  returning,  and  sitting  in  the  chariot,  read  Esaias 
the  prophet."  '  He  was  an  anxious  inquirer,  as  we  say 
in  these  days,  for,  having  become  utterly  dissatisfied 
with  heathenism,  he  had  gone  to  the  city  of  David  to 
bow  before  the  true  God,  and  was  still  diligently 
seeking  the  way  of  life.  Philip,  one  of  the  seven 
deacons  elected  by  the  Church  to  look  after  the  poor, 
was  commanded  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  join  himself  to 
the  chariot  of  the  officer.  Having  promptly  obeyed 
the  direction,  although  it  took  him  from  great  crowds 
that  attended  his  ministry  in  Samaria,  to  preach  to  a 
single  sinner,  he  asked  him  whether  he  understood 
what  he  was  reading.  "  How  can  I,"  was  the  reply, 
"  except  some  man  should  guide  me  ?  And  he  desired 
Philip  that  he  would  come  up  and  sit  with  him."  The 
place  he  was  reading  was  the  fifty-third  chapter  of 
Isaiah,  which  so  clearly  and  beautifully  sets  forth  the 
atoning  work  of  Christ  for  the  certain  and  com- 
plete salvation  of  His  people,  and  "  Philip  opened  his 
mouth,  and  began  at  the  same  Scripture,  and  preached 
unto  him  Jesus."  Having  shown  that  the  prophet 
predicted  the  death  of  Him  Avho  was  crucified  between 

^  Acts  viii.  27,  28. 


150  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

two  thieves,  he  may  have  dwelt  a  little  upon  the  sixth 
verse  of  that  remarkable  chapter  which  has  brought 
relief  to  many  troubled  souls.  He  may  have  slowly 
read  the  first  clause,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray,"  and  fixing  the  attention  of  his  interested 
hearer,  pointedly  asked,  *'  Do  you  believe  that  ? " 
"  Oh,  yes,"  would  be  the  reply ;  "  that  describes  my 
condition  precisely,  for  like  a  silly  sheep  I  have  wan- 
dered from  the  path  of  duty  and  of  safety."  He  may 
then  have  read  the  second  clause,  "  We  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way,"  and  asked,  "  Do  you  be- 
lieve that  ?  "  "  Indeed  I  do,"  would  be  the  answer, 
"  for  I  have  followed  the  counsels  of  my  oAvn  heart 
and  trusted  in  my  own  righteousness."  He  may  then 
have  read  the  last  clause,  "  And  the  Lord  hath  laid  on 
Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,"  and  solemnly  said,  "  Do 
you  believe  that  f  You  believe  you  have  gone  astray 
like  a  lost  sheep  ;  you  believe  you  have  turned  to  your 
own  way ;  and  now  do  you  believe,  because  God  hath 
said  it,  that  He  has  laid  your  iniquities  upon  Christ 
the  Sin-bearer  ?  If  so,  they  cannot  be  upon  you,  and 
therefore  you  are  a  saved  man."  At  all  events,  how- 
ever Philip  may  have  talked  to  him,  he  replied,  "  I 
believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,"  and  was 
immediately  baptized,  and  "  went  on  his  way  rejoic- 
ing." *  Just  so  soon  as  Jesus  was  preached  he  received 
the  testimony  concerning  Him  as  true,  and  hence 
pursued  his  journey  filled  with  peace  and  gladness, 
because  his  thoughts  were  not  occupied  about  himself, 
but  about  Christ  and  His  finished  work. 

*  Acts  viii.  39. 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE   SIISTITER  151 

Once  more,  T\^e  are  told  that  Paul  and  Silas  were 
preaching  in  the  city  of  Philippi,  where  a  great  up- 
roar occurred  as  the  result  of  a  miracle  wrought  on 
"  a  certain  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divina- 
tion." The  preachers  were  seized,  dragged  before  the 
magistrates,  savagely  beaten,  and  committed  to  prison, 
with  a  command  to  the  jailer  to  keep  them  safely ; 
"  who,  having  received  such  a  charge,  thrust  them 
into  the  inner  prison,  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the 
stocks."  But  the  hand  of  violence  could  not  touch 
the  resurrection  life  they  had  received  from  the 
Saviour,  nor  could  the  stroke  of  suffering  mar  its  hap- 
piness ;  and  therefore  at  midnight  they  "  prayed,  and 
sang  praises  unto  God :  and  the  prisoners  heard 
them."  He  who  had  sent  them  to  Europe  determined 
to  plant  the  banner  of  the  cross  on  this  new  continent, 
whether  men  would  hear  or  forbear,  "  and  suddenly 
there  was  a  great  earthquake,  so  that  the  foundations 
of  the  prison  were  shaken  ;  and  immediately  all  the 
doors  were  opened,  and  every  one's  bands  were 
loosed."  The  jailer,  awakened  by  the  tumult,  natu- 
rally inferred  that  the  prisoners  had  fled,  and,  knowing 
that  he  would  be  held  accountable  for  their  escape, 
was  on  the  point  of  committing  suicide,  when  Paul 
arrested  his  uplifted  hand  by  calling  with  a  loud  voice, 
"  Do  thyself  no  harm ;  for  we  are  all  here."  Then 
conviction  seems  to  have  fastened  on  the  man's  con- 
science, and  he  was  persuaded  by  the  extraordinary 
events  he  had  witnessed  that  the  poor  girl  had  uncon- 
sciously uttered  the  truth  when  she  followed  Paul 
and  his  companions  for  many  days  through  the  streets, 


152  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

crying,  "  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  most  high 
God,  which  show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation."  Ac- 
cordingly, "  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in,  and 
came  trembling,  and  fell  down  before  Paul  and  Silas, 
and  brought  them  out,  and  said.  Sirs,  what  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ?  "  This  is  a  very  earnest,  but  very  plain 
and  simple,  question,  and  the  answer  is  equally  plain 
and  simple.  Do  f  Why  do  you  ask  about  doing  ? 
You  must  do  nothing  but  "  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house."  As 
he  was  an  ignorant  heathen  who  probably  had  never 
heard  before  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  course  he  needed  in- 
struction ;  "  and  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house.  And  he  took 
them  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  and  washed  their 
stripes  ;  and  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway. 
And  when  he  had  brought  them  into  his  house,  he  set 
meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  beheving  in  God  with 
all  his  house."  ' 

In  considering  these  examples  of  instantaneous  con- 
version it  is  useless  to  reply  that  the  times  have 
changed  since  Christ  and  the  apostles  preached.  It  is 
true  the  times  have  changed,  but  the  word  of  God  has 
not  changed,  and  man's  need  has  not  changed,  and 
human  nature  has  not  changed,  and  the  way  of  salva- 
tion has  not  changed.  It  is  true  that  most  of  the  con- 
versions in  our  day  occur  only  at  the  close  of  a  pro- 
tracted period  of  darkness,  and  effort,  and  pra^^er,  and 
reading,  and  reflection,  and  repentance  ;  but  this  only 
goes  to  show  how  far  we  have  departed  from  the  sim- 

^  Acts  xvi.  32-34. 


THE  SAVIOUR   NEAR  THE  SINNER  153 

plicity  and  blessedness  of  the  Gospel  as  at  first  pro- 
claimed, when  the  disciples  went  abroad  telling  the 
good  news  of  Christ's  death  on  the  cross  for  sinners, 
and  as  many  as  believed  the  glad  tidings  to  be  true, 
and  true  for  themselves,  straightway  entered  into  life. 
If  a  friend  of  undoubted  veracity  were  to  enter  your 
house  or  meet  you  on  the  street  and  tell  you  good 
news  that  greatly  concerned  your  welfare,  how  long 
a  time  must  elapse  before  you  would  believe  him  ? 
A  day,  a  week,  a  month,  a  year  ?  Would  you  say  to 
him,  "  I  wish  I  could  beheve  you  ;  I  am  trying  to  be- 
lieve you ;  I  must  wait  until  I  feel  that  I  believe  you ; 
I  cannot  realize  that  what  you  tell  me  is  true ;  "  or 
would  you  just  believe  him  and  rejoice  ?  "  Where- 
fore as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  To-day  if  ye  will  hear 
his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  ;  "  '  and  the  way  to 
harden  the  heart,  as  we  learn  from  the  chapter  in 
which  this  text  is  found,  is  to  continue  in  unbelief. 
*'  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time  ;  behold,  now  is 
the  day  of  salvation,"  ^  and  the  noxo  refers  not  only  to 
the  gospel  age  as  distinguished  from  the  dispensation 
of  the  law,  but  to  this  passing  moment. 

The  way  some  men  set  forth  what  they  call  the 
Gospel  would  require  their  hearers  to  spend  about  four 
years  in  college  and  three  years  in  a  theological  sem- 
inary in  order  to  be  saved,  and  even  then  they  could 
not  be  certain  of  their  salvation.  But  God  the  Father 
says,  "  Now  !  "  and  God  the  Son  says,  "  Now  !  "  and 
God  the  Spirit  says,  "  Now !  "  and  the  Bible  says, 
"  Now  !  "  and  the  very  depths  of  the  sinner's  guilty 

*  Heb.  iii.  7,  8.  »  2  Cor.  vi.  2. 


154  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

and  ruined  nature  echo  the  cry,  "  JSTow."  If  he  stays 
away  from  Christ  trying  to  do  something  until  he  is 
as  old  as  Methuselah,  could  such  a  thing  be,  at  the 
close  of  nine  hundred  and  sixty-nine  years  he  will  not 
be  a  step  nor  a  hair's  breadth  nearer  salvation  than 
he  was  the  moment  of  conviction ;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  the  moment  he  is  in  Christ  by  believing  on  Him 
he  is  as  certainly  and  completely  saved  as  he  will 
be  a  thousand  years  afterward.  If  the  dying  thief, 
after  receiving  from  the  dying  Saviour  the  assurance 
of  salvation,  had  been  permitted  to  descend  to  the 
earth  and  to  remain  among  men  preaching  and  pray- 
ing for  a  hundred  years,  at  the  end  of  this  time  he 
would  not  have  been  more  certainly  and  completely 
saved  than  he  was  when  hanging  on  the  cross,  nor 
would  he  have  had  any  other  ground  of  comfort  than 
he  had  then,  even  the  sure  word  of  the  Son  of  God. 
The  certainty  of  salvation,  therefore,  cannot  be  in- 
creased by  delay,  but  while  the  sinner  is  delaying, 
suppose  he  should  die  ;  what  then  ?  He  has  not  the 
slightest  assurance  that  he  will  live  an  hour  longer, 
and  hence  God  does  not  deal  with  him  on  the  ground 
that  he  has  years  to  study  and  struggle  before  he  is 
saved,  but  says,  in  all  the  urgency  of  His  love,  *'  Ho^o, 
NOW,  XOW  !  " 

Inquirers  meet  with  obstacles  in  trying  to  find 
peace  simply  because  they  persist  in  thinking  of  them- 
selves instead  of  directing  their  thoughts  to  Christ, 
and  to  the  object  of  His  mission  to  earth,  and  to  His 
finished  work.  They  complain  that  they  are  not 
good  enough  to  come.     Xo,  and  they  never  will  be  in 


THE   SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE   SINNER  155 

themselves  :  but  they  forget  that  Jesus  has  said,  "  I 
am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  simiers  to 
repentance."  '  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and 
to  save  that  which  was  lost."  ^  "  This  is  a  faithful 
saying,"  says  Paul,  "  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ; 
of  whom  I  am  chief."  ^  Who  was  Paul,  and  what 
was  he  doing  when  Christ  Jesus  saved  him  ?  He 
himself  tells  us  he  was  "  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor, 
and  injurious,"  ^  and  "  I  verily  thought  with  myself," 
he  writes,  "  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary 
to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  ISTazareth.  "Which  thing  I 
also  did  in  Jerusalem :  and  many  of  the  saints  did 
I  shut  up  in  prison,  having  received  authority  from 
the  chief  priests  ;  and  when  they  were  put  to  death, 
I  gave  my  voice  against  them.  And  I  punished  them 
oft  in  every  synagogue,  and  compelled  them  to 
blaspheme ;  and  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them, 
I  persecuted  them  even  unto  strange  cities."  ^  Truly, 
Paul  did  nothing  to  make  himself  fit  or  good  enough 
to  come,  but  he  was  "a  brand  plucked  out  of  the 
fire,"  ^  just  as  every  other  sinner  is  ;  for  all  of  us  are 
far  worse  than  we  think  ourselves  to  be  even  when 
most  deeply  humbled  under  a  sense  of  our  guilt. 

The  fact  is  that  out  of  Christ  we  have  no  worth  or 
worthiness  at  all,  do  what  we  may  ;  but  m  Christ  the 
vilest  of  the  vile  are  infinitely  worthy,  for  the}^  are 
clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  God.  A  wicked, 
swearing  teamster,  who  had  been  the  terror  of   the 

iMatt.  ix.  13.  2  Luke  xix.  10.  n  Tim.  i.  15. 

*1  Tim.  i.  13.  ^Acts  xxvi.  9-11.  «Zech.  iii.  2. 


156  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

neighborhood,  was  led  by  the  Spirit  to  believe  in 
Jesus,  and  it  was  announced  that  he  would  openly 
confess  the  Sa^dour  before  men  and  partake  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  Driving  through  a  town  where  he 
was  well  known,  he  was  met  by  an  old  woman  with 
the  question,  "  They  tell  me,  Thomas,  that  you  be 
going  to  take  the  Sacrament  on  Sunday ;  is  it  true 
that  you  be  ?  "  "  By  the  grace  of  Christ  my  Saviour," 
he  replied,  "  I  expect  to  have  the  privilege  of  showing 
His  death  with  others  who  believe  in  Him,  if  that  is 
what  you  call  taking  the  Sacrament."  *'•  But,  Thomas, 
do  you  think  that  you  be  worthy  ? "  said  the  old 
woman.  "  I  don't  mean  to  reflect  on  ye,  but  you 
know  what  kind  of  man  you  have  been,  and  what 
kind  of  life  you  have  led,  and  do  you  think, 
Thomas,  that  you  be  worthy  ? "  "As  worthy  as 
any  man  in  Coalford,"  was  the  reply,  "for  I  am  a 
poor  worthless  sinner  saved  by  the  grace  of  God 
through  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  I  trust  in  Him 
alone."  Such  is  ever  the  language  of  faith  leading 
the  sinner  to  lose  sight  of  self  in  the  believing,  adoring 
contemplation  of  Christ,  who  so  graciously  and  sweetly 
says,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast 
out." ' 

^'  But  I  am  a  great  sinner,  say  est  thou? 
I  ivill  in  no  wise  cast  out,  says  Christ. 
But  I  am  an  old  sinner,  sayest  thou? 
I  loill  in  no  wise  cast  out,  says  Christ. 
But  I  am  a  hard-hearted  sinner,  sayest  thou? 
I  will  in  no  wise  cast  outy  says  Christ. 

iJohu  vi.  37. 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE  SII^NER  157 

I  have  served  Satan  all  my  days,  sayest  thou  ? 

I  tcill  in  no  wise  cast  out,  says  Christ. 

But  I  have  siuued  against  light,  sayest  thou? 

I  ivill  in  no  ivise  cast  out,  says  Christ. 

But  I  have  sinned  against  mercy,  sayest  thou? 

I  ivill  in  no  ivise  cast  out,  says  Christ. 

I  have  no  good  thing  to  bring,  sayest  thou  ? 

I  will  in  no  ivise  cast  out,  says  Christ.'^ 

"  But,"  says  the  sinner,  "  must  I  not  be  born  again 
before  I  can  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  ?  " 
I  reply,  You  are  born  again  the  moment  you  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  has  been  previously 
shown.  Faith  is  the  first  throb  of  life,  so  to  speak,  in 
the  new-created  man,  the  first  cry  of  the  new-born 
child.  "  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."  '  •'  As  many  as  received  him,  to  them 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name."  ^  "  Whosoever  be- 
lieveth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."^ 
"  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  in- 
corruptible, by  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  forever."  ^  "  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us 
with  the  word  of  truth."  ^  These  passages  are  suiS- 
cient  to  show  that  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  the  word  of 
God,  or  the  word  of  truth,  or  the  Gospel,  to  set  forth 
Christ  in  His  Divine  person  and  atoning  work ;  and 
when  we  believe  on  Him  as  there  revealed,  we  are 
born  again.  We  are  not  called  upon  to  be  worrying 
ourselves  about  regeneration,  nor  to  be  looking  for  its 
fruits,  but  to  believe  in  Christ,  knowing  then,  accord- 

» Gal.  iii.  26.  « John  i.  12.  ^  i  Jq^j^  ^^  j 

*  1  Pet.  i.  23.  5  James  i.  18. 


158  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

ing  to  His  own  teaching,  that  we  are  assuredly  born 
of  water  (the  scriptiu-al  symbol  of  the  word)  and  of 
the  Spirit.  Regeneration,  therefore,  does  not  stand 
between  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour ;  for  the  new  life 
is  imparted,  the  new  nature  is  implanted,  the  new  man 
is  formed,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  through  faith 
in  Jesus  made  known  in  the  Gospel. 

"  But,"  says  another,  "  must  I  not  repent  before 
coming  to  Christ  ?  "  If  you  mean  as  a  condition  upon 
which  God  will  be  merciful,  or  as  the  means  of  win- 
ning His  favor,  or  as  a  preliminary  work  to  lit  you 
to  approach  Him,  I  reply,  most  emphatically,  No,  you 
must  not.  There  are  thousands  who  try  to  make  a 
Saviour  out  of  their  repentance,  but  this  is  contrary  to 
the  Scriptures.  True  repentance,  as  described  in  the 
Bible,  always  implies  faith  in  Christ,  and  the  tw^o 
cannot  be  sq^arated.  No  man  really  repents  unless 
he  believes  in  Jesus,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  no  man 
really  believes  in  Jesus  unless  he  repents,  for  repent- 
ance is  the  tear  which  the  believing  sinner  drops  when 
by  faith  he  sees  the  Son  of  God  extended  on  the  cross. 
The  word  in  the  Greek,  however,  which  is  translated 
"  repentance  "  in  our  English  Bible,  does  not  neces- 
sarily imply  emotion  of  any  kind,  but  simply  means 
an  "  after- thought  "  or  "  after-mind,"  and  hence  "  a 
change  of  mind ; "  but  whether  this  change  of  mind  is 
accompanied  with  joy  or  sorrow  depends  wholly  upon 
the  cause  or  occasion  which  gives  rise  to  it.  About 
what,  then,  is  the  sinner  called  to  change  his  mind  ? 
Obviously,  about  God  and  His  character,  for  he  has  had 
wrong  thoughts  of  the  Almighty  all  his  life ;  and  hence 


THE  SAVIOUE  NEAP.  THE   SINNER  159 

it  is  written,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts."  '  But  surely  he 
can  never  change  his  mind  about  his  Creator  until  he 
sees  "  God  in  Christ "  hating  sin  and  yet  putting  sin 
away,  judging  evil  and  yet  forgiving  the  evil-doer. 
Unless,  then,  by  faith  you  behold  the  atoning  sacrifice 
on  the  cross,  it  is  impossible  to  repent,  for  it  is  said, 
"  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  ^ 
It  is  not  thy  badness,  but  God's  goodness^  that  leadeth 
thee  to  repentance,  and  until  you  believe  in  that  good- 
ness as  manifested  in  the  gift  of  His  well-beloved  Son, 
you  might  as  soon  expect  to  obtain  light  by  looking  at 
darkness,  or  to  receive  life  by  looking  at  a  corpse,  as 
to  repent  by  working  at  your  poor,  dead  soul.  Re- 
pentance, therefore,  does  not  stand  between  the  sinner 
and  the  Saviour,  but  it  always  accompanies  and  flows 
from  faith  in  Christ ;  for,  as  you  at  once  observe,  if 
you  must  be  occupied  with  repentance  before  believing, 
it  is  incumbent  on  those  who  tell  you  to  repent  as  a 
preliminary  step  that  must  be  taken  in  order  to  reach 
salvation  also  to  inform  you  how  much  you  must  re- 
pent, and  for  what  length  of  time. 

"  But,"  says  another,  "  must  I  not  be  baptized  before 
I  can  rest  in  the  assurance  that  I  am  saved  ?  "  Again 
I  reply,  l^o  ;  not  that  I  would  undervalue  baptism  in 
its  true  place,  but  that  I  would  keep  it  in  its  true  place, 
where  the  Word  of  God  puts  it,  and  from  which  it  has 
been  wrested  by  the  rude  hand  of  legalism  to  "  drown 
men  in  destruction  and  perdition."  There  is  not  an  in- 
stance of  Christian  baptism  in  the  New  Testament  un- 

^  Isa.  Iv.  7.  2  Eom.  ii.  4. 


160  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

less  it  was  preceded  by  faith  in  Christ  on  the  part  of 
the  person  baptized.  I  am  not  referring  to  infant 
baptism,  for  it  does  not  fall  in  with  my  purpose  to 
discuss  that  question  ;  but,  among  adults,  only  believers 
in  Jesus  were  baptized,  and  the  common  practice  in 
these  days  of  seeking  to  make  Christians  by  the  use  of 
water  in  sprinkling,  pouring,  or  immersion  is  utterly 
subversive  of  the  work  of  Christ  and  ruinous  to  the 
souls  of  countless  thousands.  It  is  a  fact  in  striking 
contrast  with  the  estimate  placed  upon  baptism  now 
that  the  Saviour  in  all  His  wonderful  discourses  never 
preached  about  it,  and  we  know  that  "  Jesus  himself 
baptized  not."  '  Not  only  so,  but  we  find  the  Apostle 
Paul  saying,  "  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of 
you,  but  Crispus  and  Gains  ;  .  .  .  and  I  baptized 
also  the  house  of  Stephanas :  besides,  I  know  not  whether 
I  baptized  any  other.  For  Christ  sent  me  not  to  bap- 
tize, but  to  preach  the  gospel."  ^  When  we  add  to  all 
this  that  the  dying  thief  was  saved  although  he  was 
not  baptized,  and  that  in  thirteen  of  the  inspired  Epis- 
tles baptism  is  not  once  mentioned,  and  very  seldom 
in  the  others,  it  is  apparent  that  man  in  his  proud  and 
obdurate  self-righteousness  has  sought  to  make  a  sim- 
ple and  significant  ordinance  an  enemy  of  the  cross  of 
Christ.  No,  sinner  !  baptism  does  not  stand  between 
you  and  the  Saviour,  but  after  belie^ang  you  will  joy- 
fully receive  it,  as  Abraham  received  "  the  sign  of  cir- 
cumcision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith 
which  he  had  yet  being  uncircumcised."  ^ 

Nothing,  indeed,  nothing  but  your  unbelief,  stands 
1  John  iv.  2.  '  1  Cor.  i.  14,  16,  17.  '  Rom.  iv.  11. 


THE  SAVIOUR  NEAR  THE  SINNER  161 

between  you  and  an  instant,  complete  salvation.  You 
do  not  need  to  go  up  to  heaven  for  it,  for  that  would 
imply  that  Christ  had  not  come  down  "  to  put  away 
sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself ; "  ^  nor  are  you  required 
to  descend  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  for  that 
would  imply  that  Christ  was  not  delivered  for  our 
offences  and  "  raised  again  for  justification  ;  "  ^  but  the 
word  is  nigh  thee,  and  so  nigh  that,  without  waitiug 
an  hour  or  a  minute,  without  thinking  of  the  past  or 
the  future,  without  stopping  to  look  into  the  exercises 
of  your  mind,  without  tarrying  to  understand  this 
doctrine  or  that  doctrine,  without  pausing  at  regener- 
ation, or  repentance,  or  baptism,  or  anything  else,  you 
may  immediately  enter  into  life,  eternal  life,  if  you 
truly  believe  that  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according 
to  the  scriptures ;  and  that  he  was  buried,  and  that  he 
rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the  scriptures."^ 
What  a  glorious  salvation,  and  what  a  precious 
Saviour  !  It  is  not  by  what  we  do,  but  by  what  He 
has  done,  we  are  saved,  and  hence  in  answer  to  your 
question,  "  What  must  I  do  ? "  let  the  sweet  hymn 
answer : 

*^  Nothing,  either  great  or  small, 
NotbiDg,  sinner,  no ! 
Jesus  did  it,  did  it  all, 
Long,  long  ago. 

"  When  He  from  His  lofty  throne 
Stoop 'd  to  do  and  die, 
Everything  was  fully  done — 
Hearken  to  His  cry — 

1  Heb.  ix.  26.  ^  rq^^  j^^  25.  ^  i  q^j.^  ^v.  3,  4. 


162  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

"  ^  It  IS  FINISHED  : '  yes,  indeed — 
rinish'd  every  jot. 
Sinner,  this  is  all  you  need  ; 
Tell  me,  is  it  not  ? 

<^  Weary,  working,  plodding  one, 
Wherefore  toil  you  so  ? 
Cease  your  doing  ;  all  was  done 
Long,  loDg  ago. 

"Till  to  Jesus^  work  you  cling 
By  a  simple  faith, 
^  Doing '  is  a  deadly  thing — 
'•  Doing '  ends  in  death. 

*'  Cast  your  deadly  ^  doing  '  down — 
Down  at  Jesus'  feet ; 
Stand  IN  Him,  in  Him  alone, 
Gloriously  'complete.'" 


CHAPTEK  XIII 
BELIEF  AND  CONFESSIOI^ 

"  That  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
thou  shalt  be  saved.  For  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  right- 
eousness ;  and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation." — 
Romans  x.  9,  10. 

IT  is  said  that  soon  after  the  execution  of  Mary, 
Queen  of  Scots,  a  French  lady  who  had  been  in  her 
service  attempted  to  assassinate  Elizabeth,  Queen  of 
England.  Having  been  arrested  while  hanging  about 
the  court,  she  boldly  announced  her  name  and  design, 
expressing  regret  that  she  had  failed  to  accomplish  her 
purpose.  She  was  brought  into  the  presence  of  Eliza- 
beth, who  said  to  her,  "  What,  think  you,  is  my  duty 
upon  the  hearing  of  such  a  case  ?  "  "  Do  you  put  the 
question  to  me  as  a  queen  or  a  judge  ? "  asked  the 
prisoner.  "  As  a  queen,"  was  the  reply.  "  Then  you 
should  grant  me  a  pardon,"  she  answered.  "  But," 
inquired  the  queen,  ''  what  assurance  can  you  give  me 
that  you  will  not  abuse  my  mercy  and  attempt  my 
life  again  ?  Should  I  pardon,  it  should  be  based  upon 
conditions  to  be  safe  from  your  murderous  revenge  in 
future."  "  Grace  fettered  by  precautions — grace  that 
hath  conditions — is  no  grace,"  exclaimed  the  woman  ; 
and  history  states  that  the  remark  so  charmed  Eliza- 
beth that  she  immediately  ordered  her  release,  and 

163 


164:  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

bound  her  to  her  royal  person  ever  afterward  by  the 
ties  of  fervent  gratitude  and  devoted  affection. 

Whether  this  incident  occurred  precisely  as  here  re- 
lated may  be  called  in  question,  but  it  admits  of  no 
doubt  that  "  grace  fettered  by  precautions — grace  that 
hath  conditions — is  no  grace."  I  am  unwilling,  there- 
fore, to  say  that  belief  and  confession  are  the  condi- 
tions of  salvation,  because  the  word  condition  in  pop- 
ular use  implies  generally  something  done  by  one  per- 
son or  party  on  account  of  which  another  person  or 
party  does  something  promised  or  stipulated.  ISTow, 
God  has  not  promised  or  stipulated  to  give  eternal  life 
to  the  sinner  on  account  of  his  belief  and  confession, 
but  solely  on  account  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ. 
Belief  and  confession  are  requisites,  or  they  are  abso- 
lutely necessary,  with  those  old  enough  to  be  respon- 
sible, in  order  to  enjoy  eternal  life,  but  they  are  not 
conditions,  for  "  grace  fettered  by  precautions — grace 
that  hath  conditions — is  no  grace."  I  wish  to  make 
the  impression  upon  your  mind  that  the  grace  of  God 
in  saving  lost  men  is  entirely  unfettered — that  it  hath 
no  conditions  ;  but  if  belief  and  confession  are  pre- 
sented as  conditions  upon  which  forgiveness  is  extended, 
the  inquiring  soul  is  sure  to  be  turned  back  to  the  law, 
or  works,  or  the  principle  of  doing,  to  obtain  peace. 
Very  often  have  I  known  anxious  sinners  to  keep 
themselves  in  darkness  and  distress  because  they 
feared  their  faith  was  not  of  the  right  kind,  and  not 
strong  enough,  as  they  express  it,  or  because  they 
were  solicitous  to  confess  Christ  in  a  proper  form. 

Thus  do  they  unconsciously  strive  to  find  a  Saviour, 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSIO]^  165 

not  in  Christ,  but  in  their  belief  and  confession  ;  and 
owing  to  the  deep-seated  legalism  of  the  human  heart, 
they  pervert  the  very  purpose  of  God  in  ordaining 
salvation  by  faith.  "Therefore,  it  is  of  faith,"  He 
says,  "  that  it  might  be  by  grace ; '"  and  again :  "  By 
grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith  [not  on  account  of 
faith,  but  through  faith] ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves  : 
it  is  the  gift  of  God :  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should 
boast."  ^  But  if  a  man  is  saved  on  account  of  his  be- 
lief and  confession,  they  obviously  become  works  as 
truly  as  his  attempted  obedience  of  the  law,  and  they 
will  be  regarded  as  works  to  be  done  when  set  forth 
as  conditions  upon  which  God  grants  salvation.  Hence 
the  desire,  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  been  taught 
to  look  upon  them  as  conditions,  to  discover  some 
evidence  of  the  genuineness  and  strength  of  their  faith 
in  their  good  feelings  and  happy  frame  of  mind,  and 
hence  the  mad  search  of  thousands  for  a  true  Church 
to  furnish  a  refuge  from  the  frown  of  incensed  justice. 
Satan,  with  his  practiced  cunning,  succeeds  in  turning 
away  their  attention  from  Christ  to  themselves  ;  and 
thus,  if  he  cannot  destroy  he  keeps  them  uncertain  in 
their  hopes,  feeble  in  their  spiritual  growth,  and  "  all 
their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,"  ^  instead  of  going 
forth  the  emancipated  and  rejoicing  children  of  light, 
and  of  liberty,  and  of  God. 

I  cannot  consent,  then,  to  speak  of  belief  and  con- 
fession as  conditions  of  salvation,  but  rather  as  the 
means  or  channel  through  which  salvation,  devised  in 
grace,  accomplished  in  grace,  and  bestowed  in  grace, 

»  Rom.  iv.  16.  «  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  '  Heb.  ii.  15. 


166  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN" 

is  received  by  the  sinner,  who  is  dependent  on  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  every  proper  exercise  of  his  mind,  for 
every  right  emotion  of  liis  heart,  and  for  every  ac- 
ceptable word  of  his  mouth,  from  the  first  to  the  last 
stage  of  his  religious  experience.  His  ability  both  to 
believe  and  to  confess  Christ  sincerely  and  truly  is 
due,  as  we  are  plainly  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  to  the 
sovereign  grace  of  God,  and  this  ability  is  a  Divine 
gift,  not  a  human  work,  "  lest  any  man  should  boast." 
It  is  the  height  of  folly,  therefore,  for  my  reader  to  be 
occupied  about  his  faith  in  place  of  fixing  his  thoughts 
upon  Christ ;  for,  faith  being  a  gift,  he  ought  to  know 
at  once  that  it  is  imparted  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the 
glorious  Giver,  since  "  every  good  gift  and  every  per- 
fect gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning."  '  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  ^  and  because 
He  gives  us  faith  we  should  be  perfectly  satisfied  that 
it  is  amply  sufficient  to  secure  the  end  for  which  it  is 
conferred.  He  intends  to  have  the  whole  glory  of  our 
salvation,  to  the  praise  of  His  dear  Son,  through  the 
wonder-working  power  of  His  Spirit ;  and  consequently 
the  way  of  life  revealed  in  His  Gospel  is  precisely 
suited  to  attain  His  object  and  precisely  suited  to  our 
need  as  guilty,  helpless  sinners.  Blessed  be  His 
name !  He  proclaims  Avith  heavenly  sweetness  and 
simplicity  "  that  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that 

^  Jiaues  i.  17.  ^  i^om.  viii.  32. 


BELIEF   AND   CONFESSION  167 

God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved.  For  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  right- 
eousness ;  and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto 
salvation." 

It  is  possible  that  some  one  may  be  perplexed  by 
the  fact  that  in  the  first  of  these  two  verses  confession 
is  mentioned  before  belief,  and  hence  it  is  important 
to  observe  that  in  the  second  verse  belief  is  placed  be- 
fore confession  ;  and  evidently,  if  confession  is  any- 
thing more  than  the  grossest  hypocrisy  or  the  merest 
mockery,  it  is  only  the  result  or  expression  of  the  be- 
lief already  exercised.  It  must  be  apparent  upon  a 
moment's  reflection  that  we  cannot  honestly  and  in- 
telligently confess  Jesus  to  be  our  Lord  until  we  first 
believe  in  the  heart  that  God  has  raised  Him  from 
the  dead.  Confession,  therefore,  is  mentioned  before 
belief  in  the  former  verse,  just  to  mark  the  character 
of  genuine  faith,  and  this  having  been  done,  the  mode 
of  statement  is  changed  in  the  latter  verse,  and  the 
natural  order  is  given.  Both  are  necessary,  but  they 
are  necessary  for  a  very  different  reason.  Belief  is 
necessary  before  we  are  saved,  and  confession  is  neces- 
sary after  we  are  saved.  Confession  sustains  to  belief 
the  same  kind  of  relation  which  works  do  to  faith,  and 
as  the  apostle  argues,  "  What  doth  it  profit,  my  breth- 
ren, though  a  man  say  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not 
works  ?  can  faith  [that  is,  such  faith,  his  saying  he 
hath  faith]  save  him  ?  "  '  So  what  does  it  profit,  my 
brethren,  though  a  man  say  he  believes  in  his  heart 
that  God  hath  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  yet 

^  James  ii.  14. 


168  THE   WAY  MADE   PLAIN 

refuses  to  confess  with  the  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 
Can  his  saying  he  believes  this  save  him  while  he  gives 
no  outward  manifestation  of  the  reality  of  his  belief  ? 
Confession,  then,  forms  no  part  of  the  meritorious 
cause  or  reason  of  our  salvation,  but  it  is  equally  true 
that  real  belief  will  be  sure  to  result  or  express  itself 
in  confession.  Lazarus  was  not  made  alive  because 
he  came  forth  from  the  grave  and  appeared  among 
men,  but  he  came  forth  and  appeared  because  he  was 
made  alive.  Neither  do  we  confess  Christ  with  the 
mouth  that  we  may  have  life,  but  because  through 
faith  we  already  have  life.  I^ay,  I  will  go  farther 
and  assert  that  where  the  belief  is  intelligent  and  sin- 
cere it  will  manifest  itself  in  confession  as  surely  as 
the  healthful  life  of  a  child  will  manifest  itself  in 
constant  activity  and  joyous  gambols.  If  a  true  be- 
liever were  cast  on  an  uninhabited  island,  I  think  his 
songs  of  praise  would  echo  along  the  lonely  shore  and 
the  voice  of  his  thanksgiving  would  daily  break  the 
silence  of  nature.  If  he  were  dumb,  the  soul-stirring 
belief  that  he  "  is  passed  from  death  unto  life  "  and  be- 
come a  ^'  joint  heir  with  Christ  "  would  sparkle  in  his 
eye,  and  give  shape  to  his  gestures,  and  regulate  his 
gait,  and  lead  him  by  the  powerful  instincts  of  the 
''  new  man  "  to  seek  the  society  and  fellowship  of 
those  who  like  himself  are  "  born  again."  Tell  me, 
if  you  will,  of  one  who,  having  been  rescued  from 
flame  or  flood  by  the  heroic  efforts  of  a  friend,  ever 
after  persistently  refuses  to  recognize  his  deliverer,  or 
to  take  his  proffered  hand  in  an  assembly,  but  do 
not  tell  me  that  a  sinner,  saved  from  the  fires  of  hell 


BELIEF   AN^D   CONFESSION  169 

and  from  the  boundless  sea  of  God's  indignation  and 
wrath  through  the  death  of  Jesus,  can  deliberately 
decline  to  confess  his  Lord  or  to  acknowledge  his  in- 
debtedness for  redeeming  grace. 

*^  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory, 

Shall  Thy  praise  uuuttered  lie  ? 
Fl}^,  my  tongue,  such  guilty  silence  ; 

Sing  the  Lord  who  came  to  die. 
Did  the  angels  sing  Thy  coming  ? 

Did  the  shepherds  learn  their  lays  ? 
Shame  would  cover  me  ungrateful. 

Should  my  tongue  refuse  to  praise." 

The  time  has  been  when  those  who  confessed  Christ 
*'had  trial  of  cruel  mockings  and  scourgings,  yea, 
moreover,  of  bonds  and  imprisonment :  they  were 
stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were  tempted,  were 
slain  with  the  sword  ;  they  wandered  about  in  sheep- 
skins and  goatskins  ;  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tor- 
mented (of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy) ;  they 
wandered  in  deserts  and  in  mountains,  and  in  dens 
and  caves  of  the  earth." '  "When  this  time  again 
comes,  and  the  faithful  witnesses  for  the  truth  shall 
be  slain,  it  will  be  no  less  the  duty — no,  I  will  not  say 
duty,  but  it  will  be  no  less  the  exalted  privilege — of 
the  saints  then  on  the  earth  to  confess  with  the  mouth 
the  Lord  Jesus,  because  they  believe  in  the  heart  that 
God  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  Animated  by 
the  sublime  hopes  of  the  Gospel,  and  rendered  fearless 
by  the  fervor  of  a  personal  affection  for  Christ,  every 
true  believer  will  be  ready  to  exclaim,  "  Come  and 

1  Heb.  xi.  36-38. 


170  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will  declare  what  he 
hath  done  for  my  soul."  '  So  it  is  now  ;  for  wherever 
a  sincere,  heartfelt  belief  exists,  it  always  causes  the 
knee  to  bow  at  the  name  of  Jesus  and  the  tongue  to 
"  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father."  ^  Levity  may  laugh  and  scepticism 
sneer,  false  friends  may  entreat  and  foes  assail,  but 
the  soul  linked  to  God  in  holy  communion  by  faith  in 
the  Son  of  His  love  will  be  lifted  above  the  reach  of 
this  poor  world's  temptations  and  threats,  and  look 
down  upon  it  in  tender  pity  and  with  undisturbed 
composure.  It  is  enough  for  such  a  soul  to  hear  the 
Master  say,  "  Whosoever,  therefore,  shall  confess  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."  ^  It  is  enough  to  read  the  solemn 
declaration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  recorded  by  the  pen  of 
the  inspired  apostle :  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he 
in  God."^  "Ye  are  my  friends,"  says  the  Saviour, 
"  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you  ;  "  ^  and  know- 
ing that  He  has  commanded  us  to  confess  Him  before 
men,  to  be  ba])tized  in  His  name,  and  to  eat  the  bread 
and  drink  the  cup  at  the  Lord's  Supper  in  remem- 
brance of  Him  to  show  His  death  till  He  come,  the 
believer  cannot  hesitate  to  wear  the  badge  of  disciple- 
ship — not,  as  I  said  before,  that  he  may  be  saved,  but 
because  he  is  saved. 

»Ps.  Ixvi.  16.  8  Phil.  ii.  11.  niatt.  x.  32,  33. 

*  1  John  iv.  15.  ^  JqIj^  ^v.  14. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  171 

But  you  will  notice  that  confession  is  a  personal 
thing :  "If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the 
Lord  Jesus."  It  is  not  enough  that  you  confess  Jesus 
to  be  Lord,  or  the  Lord  of  others,  but  thy  Lord,  thus 
acknowledging  your  individual  obligation  to  Him,  and 
His  Divine  sovereignty  and  rightful  authority  over 
you  as  redeemed  by  His  blood  and  the  object  of  His 
love.  Confession,  then,  is  the  necessary  result  and  ex- 
ternal evidence  of  your  personal  faith  in  Christ,  who 
came  down  from  heaven  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacri- 
fice of  Himself,  and  is  noAV  exalted  "  far  above  all 
principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion, 
and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world, 
but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come."  *  Hence  it  is  writ- 
ten, "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by 
the  Holy  Ghost ; "  ^  for  no  man  can  say  this  intelli- 
gently, and  as  the  expression  of  his  firm  conviction, 
until  he  believes  in  Jesus  as  his  Divine  and  almighty 
Saviour ;  and  no  man  can  believe  that  the  meek  and 
lowly  "  carpenter,  the  Son  of  Mary,"  was  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh,  until  he  is  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
"  Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of  God :  Every  Spirit 
that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh 
is  of  God :  and  every  Spirit  that  confesseth  not  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God."  ^ 

What  is  it,  then,  to  "  confess  with  thy  mouth  the 
Lord  Jesus  "  ?  Let  us  suppose  that  you  should  say  to 
some  friend  entering  your  room  while  reading  this 
chapter,  or  to  any  number  of  persons  assembled  on 
any    occasion,    "I    sincerely    confess  that   Jesus   of 

1  Eph.  i.  21.  2  1  Cor.  xii.  3.  ^  ^  j^i^  i^^  2,  3. 


172  THE  AVAY  MADE  PLAIN 

Xazareth  who  was  crucified  between  two  thieves  was 
not  what  the  world  took  Him  to  be, — an  impious  im- 
postor or  weak  fanatic, — but  that  He  was  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  Saviour  of  men ;  and  I  joyfully  acknowl- 
edge Him  to  be  my  Lord,  entitled  to  my  faith,  and 
worship,  and  obedience."  This  would  surely  be  con- 
fessing Him  with  the  mouth,  and  this  is  so  simple  a 
child  can  understand  it.  If  a  true  Christian  were  in 
your  presence,  or  in  the  presence  of  "  governors  and 
kings,"  or  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  human  race, 
and  a  fitting  opportunity  should  occur,  he  would  gladly 
speak  of  Jesus  as  Thomas  did  when  he  said  to  the 
risen  Saviour,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God," '  and  he  would 
carefully  avoid  the  fearful  sin  of  Joseph  of  Arimathea, 
who  was  "  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly  for  fear  of 
the  Jews,"  ^  and  who,  in  consequence  of  his  unmanly 
fear,  did  nothing  worthy  of  a  disciple  until  compelled, 
after  the  Saviour's  death,  to  confess  Him  in  an  imper- 
fect manner  by  begging  of  Pilate  the  privilege  of 
burying  the  mangled  body.  There  can  be  no  diffi- 
culty, then,  in  understanding  what  is  meant  by  con- 
fessing with  the  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  since  it  implies 
a  readiness  on  your  part  on  all  suitable  occasions  to 
own  Him  in  His  true  character  and  relation  to  your- 
self as  your  Lord  and  Saviour. 

Neither  can  there  be  any  trouble  in  understanding 
what  is  meant  by  believing  in  thine  heart  that  God 
hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  unless  the  expression, 
to  believe  in  thine  heart,  may  cause  some  perplexity. 
About  this  it  is  only  necessary  to  state  that  the  Holy 

'  John  XX.  28.  «  Jobu  xix.  38. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  173 

Ghost  in  the  Bible  takes  very  little  notice  of  the  dis- 
tinctions made  by  modern  science  between  the  differ- 
ent faculties  and  departments  of  the  soul.  We  are  in 
the  habit  of  referring  the  understanding  to  the  mind 
and  the  affections  to  the  heart  as  their  appropriate 
seat ;  but  the  word  of  God  very  often  includes  the 
whole  inner  man,  embracing  the  understanding,  the 
will,  and  the  affections,  under  the  term  heart.  But 
even  if  we  observe  our  human  definitions  and  distinc- 
tions, it  is  still  true  that  we  must  believe  in  the  heart 
that  God  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  in  order  to  be 
saved.  It  is  no  idle  speculation  with  which  we  are 
now  engaged ;  it  is  no  cold  system  of  philosophy  com- 
manding the  homage  of  the  intellect  by  its  logical 
force  and  beauty ;  but  there  is  a  Divine  person  inviting 
our  confidence  and  a  divinely-attested  fact  requiring 
our  faith. 

It  is  an  easy  thing  to  crush  the  cavils  of  such  scep- 
tics as  Strauss  and  Eenan,  and  to  bring  forward  an 
array  of  arguments  to  prove  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord  that  will  force  the  assent  of  the  mind ;  and  yet, 
if  the  heart  remains  unaffected,  not  a  step  will  be 
taken  to  secure  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  There  are 
multitudes,  doubtless,  among  the  worldly  and  ungodly, 
who  profess  to  believe  that  Christ  rose  from  the  dead, 
or  at  least  they  can  claim  that  they  do  not  dispute  it. 
But  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  not  disputiug  a 
truth  and  believing  a  truth.  They  may  not  dispute  it 
because  they  never  had  sufficient  interest  to  investi- 
gate the  question  ;  or  they  may  make  a  careless,  un- 
thinking avowal  of  their  faith  in  this  important  teach- 


174  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

ing  of  God's  word,  not  upon  His  testimony,  but  be- 
cause it  seems  to  be  generally  accepted  by  the  better 
class  of  persons  among  whom  they  live  ;  or  they  may 
be  convinced  it  is  true  without  the  slightest  personal 
concern  in  its  momentous  consequences.  Absorbed  in 
the  business  and  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  they  re- 
ceive it  as  they  receive  any  other  well-established  his- 
torical statement,  and  it  produces  no  more  marked 
effect  upon  them.  It  is  to  guard  us  against  the  fatal 
mistake  of  supposing  that  such  a  faith  as  this  can  be 
of  any  real  value  we  find  it  written  "  that  if  thou  shalt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  be- 
lieve in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from 
the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

Let  a  few  simple  illustrations  exhibit  the  difference 
between  believing  with  the  mind  and  believing  with 
the  heart ;  or  rather  let  them  show  what  is  meant  by 
believing  both  with  the  mind  and  heart.  All  belief 
in  the  first  instance  is  necessarily  an  act  of  the  mind, 
but  there  are  some  things  we  believe  with  the  mind 
alone,  and  there  are  other  things  we  believe  with  the 
heart  also.  "We  may  believe  that  Alexander  invaded 
Asia ;  that  Hannibal  crossed  the  Alps ;  that  Julius 
Caesar  was  assassinated  in  Kome ;  that  John  Milton 
wrote  Paradise  Lost ;  that  the  sun  is  ninety -five  millions 
of  miles  distant  from  the  earth ;  that  light  travels 
with  the  velocity  of  more  than  one  hundred  and  ninety 
thousand  miles  in  a  second ;  but  we  do  not  believe 
these  facts  with  the  heart.  If  a  friend  should  inform 
you  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  England  an- 
nouncing the  dispositon  by  will  of  an  immense  estate 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  175 

without  giving  the  name  of  the  heir,  you  would  prob- 
ably believe  him,  but  you  would  believe  him  with 
the  mind  only,  because  the  news  could  be  of  no 
personal  interest  to  you.  But  if  he  should  proceed 
with  his  information  and  declare  that  you  yourself  are 
the  heir  to  whom  this  estate  immediately  descends, 
you  would  then  believe  with  the  heart,  provided 
wealth  seems  to  you,  as  it  does  to  many,  a  most  desir- 
able object.  You  might  doubt  whether  such  good 
news  could  be  true ;  but  if  there  was  no  room  to 
question  the  credibility  of  the  statement,  you  would 
believe  it  with  more  than  your  mind,  because  your 
heart  would  be  at  once  summoned  to  rejoice.  A 
criminal  under  sentence  of  death  might  believe  the 
testimony  of  his  jailer  that  a  certain  man  had  been 
elected  governor  during  the  period  of  his  imprison- 
ment, but  he  would  believe  it  only  with  the  mind. 
If,  however,  the  jailer  should  go  on  to  tell  him  that 
this  newly-elected  governor  had  extended  to  him  an 
unconditional  pardon,  and  that  he  was  at  liberty  to 
leave  his  dungeon,  he  would  believe  the  second  state- 
ment both  with  the  mind  and  the  heart.  When 
absent  from  your  home  a  correspondent  might  relate 
many  ordinary  occurrences  that  had  transpired  after 
your  departure,  and  you  would  doubtless  believe  the 
statements,  but  only  with  the  mind.  If,  however,  a 
letter  or  telegraphic  despatch  should  at  length  be 
received  announcing  the  sudden  death  of  your  child, 
or  the  one  who  was  dearest  to  you  on  earth,  you 
would  know  what  is  meant  by  believing  with  the 
heart  as  well  as  with  the  mind. 


CHAPTEE  XIY 
BELIEF  AND  CONFESSION 

NOW,  when  you  say  that  you  believe  God  raised 
Christ  from  the  dead,  the  question  is  not  whether 
you  believe  it  as  you  believe  that  Oliver  Cromwell  was 
once  Lord  Protector  of  England  or  that  George 
Washington  was  the  first  President  of  the  L^nited 
States,  but  are  you  glad  that  God  raised  Him  from 
the  dead  ?  Do  you  see  in  His  resurrection  the  crown- 
ing proof  and  overwhelming  demonstration  of  the  fact 
that  He  is  indeed  the  Saviour  of  lost  men,  and  your 
Saviour  ?  Do  you  see  in  it  in  connection  with  His 
death  the  only  way  of  escape  from  the  dreadful  curse 
of  the  violated  law  of  God,  and  the  only  ground  on 
which  you  can  build  your  hope  of  immortal  glory  ? 
Do  you  see  in  it  the  satisfactory  evidence  that  your 
sins  were  left  behind  in  the  grave  where  they  con- 
signed Him,  and  the  certain  pledge  of  your  own 
joyful  resurrection  when  He  shall  come  a  second  time 
apart  from  sin  unto  salvation  ?  It  is  written,  "  Who 
was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  was  raised  again 
for  our  justification,"  ^  and  it  is  vain  to  speak  of 
believing  such  a  truth  as  this  unless  it  finds  a  lodg- 
ment in  your  heart  and  becomes  the  mainspring  of 
your   actions.      It   is   too   important   and   bears   too 

1  Kom.  iv.  25. 
176 


BELIEF  a:n^d  confession  177 

directly  upon  your  personal  salvation  to  be  dismissed 
from  your  mind  with  the  hasty  admission  that  you 
do  not  call  it  in  question.  If  you  were  dangerously 
ill,  and  really  believed  there  was  but  one  remedy  that 
could  stay  the  ravages  of  your  malady,  you  would  not 
be  content  with  an  indifferent  announcement  of  your 
faith  in  its  restorative  power,  but  you  would  gladly 
and  thankfully  receive  it.  If  you  were  on  trial  for 
your  life,  you  would  not  listen  with  quiet  unconcern 
to  the  verdict  of  the  jury  that  swept  the  dreadful 
gallows  from  your  view,  but  your  heart  would  give  a 
great  throb  of  joy  on  hearing  words  which  could  give 
you  back  freedom,  and  home,  and  friends.  The 
belief  of  religious  truth,  also,  is  sure  to  be  attended  by 
the  exercise  of  the  affections  ;  and  hence  Christian  faith 
is  the  heartfelt  reception  of  what  God  says  in  His 
word  concerning  the  person,  the  death,  and  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ. 

This  will  plainly  appear  as  we  proceed  to  inquire 
out  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  precisely  what  is  to  be 
believed  in  order  to  be  saved.  I  beg  your  careful, 
undivided  attention  to  what  follows,  because  helief  is 
the  turning-point  in  the  destiny  of  your  soul.  I  shall 
quote  passages  with  which  you  are  probably  familiar, 
but  nevertheless  I  ask  you  to  read  them,  and  to  read 
them  again  and  again,  until  their  full  meaning  is 
received  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of 
power." '  It  will  give  you  some  idea  of  the  impor- 
tance of  the  truth  we  are  now  to  consider  when  you 
are  informed  that  the  words  helieve  and  faith  occur 
» 1  Cor.  ii.  4. 


178  THE  WAY   MADE   PLAIIT 

about  ^y^  hundred  times  in  the  New  Testament.  Our 
Lord's  first  recorded  conversation  with  an  inquiring 
sinner  was  about  the  necessity  of  belief ;  all  His  dis- 
courses and  mii'acles  were  directed  to  the  point  of 
inducing  men  to  believe  in  Him ;  and  after  His  resur- 
rection, we  hear  Him  saying  to  His  disciples,  "  Go  ye 
into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  [whether  he  is  or  is 
not  baptized]  shall  be  damned."  ^  Accordingly,  the 
apostles  went  forth,  and  everywhere,  and  among  all 
classes  of  men,  Jew  and  Gentile,  rich  and  poor, 
educated  and  illiterate,  moral  and  immoral,  in  answer 
to  the  question,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  their 
reply  was,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved."  ^ 

But  to  illustrate  the  frequency  and  prominence  with 
which  belief  in  Christ  is  taught,  let  us  glance  at  the 
testimony  of  a  single  Gospel  on  this  subject.  "  There 
was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  John. 
The  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear  witness  of  the 
Light,  that  all  men  through  him  might  believe."  ^ 
"  As  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on 
his  name."  ^  "  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus 
in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  manifested  forth  his  glory ; 
and  his  disciples  believed  on  him."  ^  "  Now  when  he 
was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  passover,  in  the  feast  day, 
many   believed    in   his   name,   when   they   saw    the 

'  Mark  xvi.  15, 16.  ^  Acts  xvi.  31.  ^  Johu  i .  6,  7. 

<  Johu  i.  12.  6  John  ii.  11. 


BELIEF  a:n"d  confession  179 

miracles  which  he  did."  *  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man 
be  lifted  up  :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life.  For  God  so  loved 
the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  beheveth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life.  .  .  .  He  that  believeth  on 
him  is  not  condemned :  but  he  that  believeth  not  is 
condemned  already ;  because  he  hath  not  believed  in 
the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  ^  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life  ;  and  he 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  ^  "  And  many  of  the 
Samaritans  of  that  city  believed  on  him  for  the  saying 
of  the  woman,  which  testified,  He  told  me  all  that 
ever  I  did.  .  .  .  And  many  more  believed  be- 
cause of  his  own  word ;  and  said  unto  the  woman, 
Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying :  for  we 
have  heard  him  ourselves,  and  know  that  this  is  in- 
deed the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  ^  ''  And 
the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus  had  spoken  unto 
him,  .  .  .  and  himself  believed,  and  his  whole 
house."  ^  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  He  that 
heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  con- 
demnation ;  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."  ^ 
"  Had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would  have  believed 
me."  ^     "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on 

1  John  ii.  23.        ^  John  iii.  14,  16,  18.     ^  John  iii.  36. 
*  John  iv.  39,  41,  42.   ^  John  iv.  50,  53.       ^  John  v.  24. 
''  John  V.  46. 


ISO  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

him  whom  he  hath  sent."*  "He  that  believethon 
me  shall  never  thirst."  ^  "  This  is  the  will  of  him  that 
sent  me,  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son  and  be- 
lieveth  on  him  may  have  everlasting  life :  and  I  will 
raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  ^  "  He  that  belie veth 
on  me,  as  the  scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall 
flow  rivers  of  living  water.  But  this  spake  he  of  the 
Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  re- 
ceive." ^ 

"  Then  said  Jesus  to  those  Jews  which  believed  on 
him.  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  then  are  ye  my  dis- 
ciples indeed."  ^  "  Dost  thou  beUeve  on  the  Son  of 
God  ?  He  answered  and  said.  Who  is  he,  Lord,  that 
I  might  believe  on  him  ?  And  Jesus  said  unto  him, 
Thou  hast  both  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh 
with  thee.  And  he  said.  Lord,  I  believe.  And  he 
worshipped  him."^  "If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my 
Father,  believe  me  not.  But  if  I  do,  though  ye  be- 
lieve not  me,  believe  the  works :  that  ye  may  know, 
and  believe,  that  the  Father  is  in  me,  and  I  in  him."  ^ 
"  He  that  belie  veth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet 
shall  he  live :  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in 
me  shall  never  die.  BeUevest  thou  this  ?  She  saith 
unto  him.  Yea,  Lord:  I  believe  that  thou  art  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  which  should  come  into  the 
world."  ^  "  Because  of  the  people  which  stand  by  I 
said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me."  ^ 
"  Then  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  Mary,  and 

^  John  vi.  29.        »  John  vi.  35.       ^  John  vi.  40. 
4  John  vii.  38,  39.     *  John  viii.  31.      «  John  ix.  35-38. 
^  John  X.  37,  38.      «  John  xi.  25-27.     »  John  xi.  42. 


BELIEF  AlsB   CONFESSION  181 

had  seen  the  things  which  Jesus  did,  believed  on 
him." '  ''  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in  the  light, 
that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  light."  ^  "  I  am  come 
a  light  into  the  world,  that  whosoever  believe th  on  me 
should  not  abide  in  darkness."  ^  ''  l^ow  I  tell  you  be- 
fore it  come,  that,  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  be- 
lieve that  I  am  he."  ^  "  Ye  believe  in  God,  believe 
also  in  me."  ^  "  Believe  me  that  I  am  in  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  in  me  :  or  else  believe  me  for  the  very 
works'  sake."  ^  "  And  when  he  [the  Comforter]  is 
come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  right- 
eousness, and  of  judgment :  of  sin,  because  they  be- 
lieve not  on  me."  ^  "  The  Father  himself  loveth  you, 
because  ye  have  loved  me,  and  have  believed  that  I 
came  out  from  God."  ^  "  ]S^ either  pray  I  for  these 
alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me 
through  their  word ;  that  they  all  may  be  one ;  as 
thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also 
may  be  one  in  us  :  that  the  Avorld  may  believe  that 
thou  hast  sent  me."  ^  "  And  he  that  saw  it  bare 
record,  and  his  record  is  true  :  and  he  knoweth  that 
he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe."  ^"  "  And  many 
other  signs  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  his  dis- 
ciples, which  are  not  written  in  this  book,  but  these 
are  written,  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God ;  and  that  believing  ye  might 
have  hfe  through  his  name."  " 

1  John  xi.  45.  «  john  ^ii.  36.  '  John  xii.  46. 

*  John  xiii.  19.  *  John  xiv.  1.  ^  John  xiv.  11. 

'  John  xvi.  8,  9.  «  John  xvi.  27.  ^  john  xvii.  20,  21. 

"  John  xix.  35.  "  John  xx.  30,  31. 


182  THE  WAY   MADE   PLAIIS" 

These  are  not  all  the  passages  concernmg  belief  in 
Christ  that  might  be  quoted  from  the  Gospel  written 
by  John,  but  enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  how 
large  a  place  the  doctrine  occupies  in  the  word  of 
God.  They  still  further  show  that  the  truth  to  be  be- 
lieved in  order  to  salvation  is  the  great  truth  expressed 
by  Martha  when  she  said,  "  I  believe  that  thou  art 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  which  should  come  into  the 
world  ;  "  or,  as  Simon  Peter  expressed  it  on  a  certain 
occasion,  "  We  believe  and  are  sure  that  thou  art  that 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  '  If  you  will  look 
with  a  little  more  care  at  some  of  the  texts  already 
given,  and  at  a  few  others,  you  will  soon  be  convinced 
that  the  heartfelt  belief  of  the  truth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  salvation  to  the  person  so 
believing.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  by  John 
we  read,  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  [that 
is,  the  Jews]  received  him  not.  But  as  many  as  re- 
ceived him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name : 
which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  ^ 
When  He  manifested  Himself  to  the  people  of  Israel, 
they  were  offended  by  His  lowly  apj^earance.  They 
had  expected  their  Messiah  to  be  clothed  at  His  first 
coming  with  Divine  majesty,  and  to  march  in  royal 
state  for  their  national  deliverance  ;  and  when  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  the  reputed  son  of  Joseph  and  the  real 
son  of  a  humble  virgin,  presented  His  claims  to  their 
faith  and  allegiance,  they  received  Him  not.     *' But 

i  Jolm  vi.  G9.  '^  John  i.  11-13. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  183 

as  many  as  received  him  " — received  Him  in  His  true 
character — to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons 
of  God,  for  they  were  born  of  God  by  believing  on 
His  name,  or  by  believing  that,  notwithstanding  His 
unpretending  exterior,  He  w^as  indeed  Immanuel,  Won- 
derful, Counsellor,  The  Mighty  God,  The  Everlasting 
Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace. 

When  He  said  to  Kathanael  that  He  had  seen  him 
under  a  fig  tree  before  Philip  called  him,  ^'  JSTathanael 
answered  and  saith  unto  him,  Kabbi,  thou  art  the 
Son  of  God;  thou  art  the  King  of  Israel.  Jesus 
answered  and  said  unto  him.  Because  I  said  unto 
thee,  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig  tree,  believest 
thou  ? "  Believest  thou  what  ?  Why,  manifestly, 
that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God,  the  King  of  Israel ; 
and  so  believing,  the  man  was  saved ;  for  the  Lord 
said  unto  him,  "  Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than 
these."  ' 

When  He  spoke  so  kindly  to  the  fallen  woman  at 
the  well  of  Samaria,  seeking  in  matchless  grace  and 
wisdom  to  draw  her  to  Himself,  she  said  at  length, 
perhaps  with  a  dim  consciousness  of  the  truth  stealing 
like  the  gray  dawn  into  her  opening  mind,  "  I  know 
that  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called  Christ :  when  he 
is  come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things.  Jesus  saith  unto 
her,  I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  he,"  ^  and  obviously  it 
was  the  belief  of  this  statement  which  saved  her  soul. 
No  further  conversation  ensued  between  them  ;  but 
instantly  receiving  as  true  His  own  word  that  He  was 
the  Messias,  or  Christ,  she  left  her  waterpot,  and  in 

^  John  i.  49,  50.  ^  John  iv.  25,  26. 


184  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

the  joy  of  her  heart  announced  to  every  one  she  met 
that  she  had  found  the  Saviour. 

Another  instance  of  salvation  through  belief  of  the 
same  truth  occurs  in  the  account  of  the  man  who  was 
born  blind,  to  whom  our  Lord  gave  sight.  Although 
the  person  of  Christ  was  unknown  to  him,  yet  he 
boldly  defended  His  character  against  the  sneers  of 
the  Pharisees,  and  accordingly  was  cast  out  of  the 
synagogue,  or  excommunicated.  "Jesus  heard  that 
they  had  cast  him  out ;  and  when  he  had  found  him, 
he  said  unto  him.  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of 
God  ?  He  answered  and  said.  Who  is  he.  Lord,  that 
I  might  believe  on  him  ?  And  Jesus  said  unto  him, 
Thou  hast  both  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh 
with  thee.  And  he  said,  Lord,  I  believe.  And  he 
worshipped  him." '  It  is  perfectly  obvious  that  the 
truth  here  believed  in  order  to  salvation  was  nothing 
more  than  this,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Son 
of  God,  and  therefore  the  proper  object  of  worship. 

In  like  manner,  we  hear  the  confession  of  the 
eunuch  who  said  to  Philip,  "I  believe  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  And  he  commanded  the 
chariot  to  stand  still :  and  they  went  down  both  into 
the  water,  both  Philip  and  the  eunuch  ;  and  he  bap- 
tized him."^  The  cordial  belief  of  this  truth  was  the 
way,  simple  as  it  is,  by  which  the  troubled  sinner  im- 
mediately entered  into  rest,  and  joy,  and  life  everlast- 
ing. The  same  noble  confession  was  heard  from  Peter 
when  our  Lord  "  asked  his  disciples,  saying,  Whom  do 
men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man,  am  ?    And  they  said, 

1  Jobu  ix.  35-38.  '  Acts  viii.  37,  38. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  185 

Some  say  that  thou  art  John  the  Baptist ;  some,  Elias ; 
and  others,  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  prophets.  He 
saith  unto  them.  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  And 
Simon  Peter  answered  and  said,  Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  God.  And  Jesus  answered  and 
said  unto  him.  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona  :  for 
flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven."  '  How  certain  it  is  from 
this  that  if  any  man  sincerely  believes  Jesus  of  Kaza- 
reth  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  the 
truth  is  revealed  to  him  by  the  Father,  and  is  the 
channel  or  means  through  which  the  blessing  of  salva- 
tion is  bestowed  !  Hence,  the  Saviour  says,  "  He  that 
believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life  ;  "  "^  and  "  if  ye 
believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  ^ 
"  These  are  written,"  says  John,  "  that  ye  might  be- 
lieve that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God ;  and 
that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name."  * 
Believing  what  ?  Evidently,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God  ;  and  so  believing,  the  assurance  is  we 
have  life  through  His  name.  ''  Whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  ^  "  Who  is 
he  that  overcometh  the  Tvorld,  but  he  that  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  ^  ISTothing  more  need 
be  said  to  prove  that  every  one  who  truly  and  in  the 
heart  believes  Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God  is  saved. 

But  you  at  once  perceive  that  no  one  can  really  be- 
lieve this  without  also  believing  that  He  died  in  the 
manner  and  for  the  object  set  forth  in  the  Sacred 

'  Matt.  xvi.  13-17.  »  John  vi.  47.  ^  j^y,^  y^^  24. 

4  John  XX.  31.  ^  1  John  v.  1.  «  1  John  v.  5. 


186  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

Scriptures.  It  would  be  absurd  and  self-contradictory 
to  believe  upon  the  testimony  of  these  Scriptures  that 
He  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  at  the  same  time  to  deny 
in  the  face  of  the  same  testimony  that  He  died  upon 
the  cross,  and  died  as  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."  '  "  The  Son  of  man  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give 
his  life  a  ransom  for  many."  ^  "  This  is  my  blood  of 
the  new  testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the 
remission  of  sins."  ^  "God  sending  his  own  Son  in 
the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin 
in  the  flesh."  ^  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us, 
who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  him."  ^  "  Who  gave  himself  for 
our  sins,  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  present 
evil  world,  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Fa- 
ther." ^  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
scriptures."  ^  "  When  he  had  by  himself  purged  our 
sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on 
high."  ^  "  Once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  ap- 
peared to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  ® 
"  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree." ''  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  ''  "  He  is  the  propitiation 
for  our  sins."  ^^  "  Ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to 
take  away  our  sins."^^    "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and 

^  John  i.  29.  «  Matt.  xx.  28.  '  Matt.  xxvi.  28. 

*  Rora.  viii.  3.  »  2  Cor.  v.  21.  «  Gal.  i.  4. 

'  1  Cor.  XV.  3.  8  Heb.  i.  3.  '  Heb.  ix.  26. 

10 1  Pet.  ii.  24.  '"'  1  John  i.  7.  i»  1  John  ii.  2. 

^^  1  John  iii.  5. 


BELIEF   AND   CONFESSION  187 

washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath 
made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father ; 
to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  forever  and  ever. 
Amen."  ' 

The  Bible  is  full  of  such  texts,  for  its  great  design 
from  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis  onward  to  the  close 
is  to  proclaim  our  deliverance  from  sin  and  its  dread- 
ful consequences  through  the  death  of  God's  only 
begotten  and  well-beloved  Son.  It  is  impossible, 
therefore,  to  believe  in  the  heart  that  He  is  the  Son 
of  God  without  also  believing  that  He  died,  not  by 
accident,  not  by  the  uncontrolled  vindictiveness  of 
His  enemies,  not  as  an  example,  for  then  His  example 
were  thrown  away,  since  none  of  us  are  called  to  die 
upon  the  cross  under  the  hidings  of  God's  face,  but 
that  He  died  as  the  sin-hearer  and  divinely-appointed 
substitute  of  His  people,  who  was  made  to  be  sin  for 
them  in  that  fearful  hour  when  from  His  breaking 
heart  'and  pallid  lips  ascended  the  mournful  cry  of 
desertion.  The  question,  then,  is  just  this :  Do  you 
sincerely  believe  that  He  died  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself  ?  If  you  do,  you  are  a  saved 
person,  and  saved  now ;  and  if  you  were  to  ask  me 
how  I  know,  I  would  reply,  I  know  it  upon  precisely 
the  same  testimony  that  tells  me  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God.  He  who  declares  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His 
blessed  word  that  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was 
come  He  "  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made 
under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the 
law  "  by  being  made  a  curse  for  them,  still  further 

^  Rev.  i.  5,  6. 


188  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

declares  that  the  belief  of  this  truth  is  salvation ;  and 
we  have  as  much  authority  for  believing  one  state- 
ment as  the  other. 

And  now  what  renders  assurance  doubly  sure  is  the 
fact  that  Jesus,  who  lived  and  was  crucified,  rose 
again,  and  was  thus  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead." '  If  God  Himself  had 
not  connected  the  forgiveness  of  your  sins  and  eternal 
life  with  your  belief  of  what  He  says  in  the  Bible 
concerning  the  person,  the  death,  and  the  resurrection 
of  His  Son,  you  could  not  be  blamed  for  remaining  in 
anxiety  and  fear  as  to  your  salvation.  But  after  He 
has  so  distinctly  stated  that  if  you  believe  in  your 
heart  that  He  raised  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead, 
you  shall  be — not  may  be,  nor  hope  to  be,  no,  shall  he 
— saved,  a  moment's  doubt  of  your  pardon  and  ac- 
ceptance is  a  grievous  dishonor  to  Him  who  is  too 
holy  to  tell  a  lie,  too  good  to  trifle  with  your  eternal 
interests.  When  the  multitude  listened  to  Peter  and 
the  other  apostles  preaching  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
they  heard  of  the  person,  the  death,  and  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ,  but  they  did  not  at  once  hear  that  the 
belief  of  the  testimony  which  had  been  delivered  in 
their  presence  was  the  simple  and  yet  sure  way  of 
receiving  life.  Hence  for  a  little  while  they  were 
greatly  perplexed  and  troubled,  being  convicted  of 
sin,  but  seeing  no  way  of  escape  from  ruin,  until  they 
were  told  of  the  remission  of  sins  in  immediate  con- 
nection with    the    name    of    Jesus,   who  had   been 

^  Kom.  i.  4. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSIOlSr  189 

preached  to  them ;  and  believing  that  He  had  put 
away  sin,  they  that  gladly  received  the  word  were 
baptized,  and  rejoiced. 

Saul  of  Tarsus,  also,  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  had 
overwhelming  proof  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and 
yet  he  continued  in  darkness  and  distress  until  in- 
formed that  the  Lord  had  risen,  not  to  condemn  the 
world,  but  that  the  world  through  Him  might  be 
saved,  and  believing  this,  "  immediately  there  fell  from 
his  eyes  as  it  had  been  scales,"  and  "  straightway  he 
preached  Christ  in  the  synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son 
of  God."  *  In  the  chapter  that  follows  the  narrative 
of  Paul's  conversion  we  find  Peter  preaching  for  the 
first  time  to  the  Gentiles,  in  the  house  of  the  Koman 
centurion,  Cornelius.  He  first  set  forth  the  person  of 
Jesus  Christ,  declaring  that  "  he  is  Lord  of  all,"  and 
then  His  death  upon  the  cross,  and  then  His  resurrec- 
tion, adding  :  "  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness, 
that  through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
shall  receive  remission  of  sins."  ^  Believeth  what  ? 
Clearly  what  the  apostle  had  just  afiirmed  concerning 
Him  as  the  Lord  of  all  who  came  down  from  heaven 
to  die  and  to  rise  again  for  the  salvation  of  men.  In 
the  next  chapter  but  two  we  find  Paul  preaching  to 
his  own  countrymen  in  Antioch,  and  again  first  setting 
forth  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  whose  shoes  John  the 
Baptist  was  not  worthy  to  loose,  and  then  declaring 
His  death,  and  then  announcing  His  resurrection,  and 
then  summing  all  up  in  the  blessed  words,  "Be  it 
known  unto  you  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that 

1  Acts  ix.  20.  ^  Acts  x.  43. 


190  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAII^-       . 

through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  :  and  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 
all  things,  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the 
law  of  Moses."  '  Believe  what  ?  Evidently  the  testi- 
mony they  had  just  heard  about  the  person,  the  death, 
and  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  and,  receiving  this 
testimony  as  true,  they  e\ddently  had  the  same  au- 
thority for  believing  that  their  sins  ^vere  forgiven, 
and  that  they  were  justified  from  all  things,  that  they 
had  for  believing  the  statements  to  which  they  had 
listened. 

This  is  still  the  plain  and  only  way  by  which  sin- 
ners are  saved  ;  f or  "  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  be- 
lie veth  in  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is 
counted  for  righteousness,"  ^  and  "  therefore  it  is  of 
faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace ;  to  the  end  the  prom- 
ise might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed."^  Yes,  it  is  sure, 
and  there  are  no  "  ifs  "  nor  "  ands  "  nor  "  buts  "  about 
it.  God  does  not  say  to  him  that  believeth,  "  if  "  he 
feels  good ;  to  him  that  believeth  "  and  "  does  some- 
thing else  ;  to  him  that  believeth  "  but "  feareth  ;  no  ! 
He  says.  To  him  that  believeth,[his  faith  is  counted  for 
righteousness.  Luther  used  to  say  the  devil  would 
sometimes  come  to  him  with  the  question,  "  Martin, 
do  you  feel  that  you  are  saved  ?  "  "  No,"  the  man 
taught  of  the  Spirit  would  reply,  "  I  do  not/<?^Z  it,  but 
I  Icnow  it."  It  is  said  that  toward  the  close  of  the 
first  Napoleon's  career  he  was  one  day  reviewing  his 
troops  in  Paris,  when  having  inadvertently  dropped 
the  bridle-reins  of  the  horse  he  was  riding,  the  spirited 

1  Acts  xiii.  38,  39.  '  Rom.  iv.  5.  ^  Rom.  iv.  16. 


BELIEF  AND   CONFESSION  191 

animal  gave  a  bound  and  came  near  dashing  the 
emperor  to  the  earth.  A  young  soldier  standing  in  the 
lines  sprang  forward,  and,  seizing  the  bit,  saved  the 
chieftain  from  a  fall.  Napoleon,  glancing  at  him, 
said,  in  his  quick,  curt  way,  "  Thank  you,  captain." 
The  soldier,  knowing  his  peculiarities,  looked  up  with 
a  smile,  and  inquired,  "  Of  what  regiment,  sire  ? " 
"  Of  my  guards,"  replied  the  emperor,  and  galloped 
away.  The  soldier  had  no  epaulettes  on  his  shoulders 
and  no  sword  at  his  side  to  prove  his  rank,  but  in- 
stantly laying  his  musket  on  the  ground,  with  the  re- 
mark, "  Let  whoever  will,  carry  it ;  I  am  done  with 
it,"  he  proceeded  to  join  a  group  of  staff -officers  stand- 
ing at  a  little  distance.  One  of  them,  seeing  him  ap- 
proach, said,  "What  is  this  insolent  fellow  doing 
here  ?  "  "  This  insolent  fellow,"  responded  the  soldier, 
looking  the  other  steadily  in  the  eye — "  this  insolent 
fellow  is  a  captain  of  the  guards."  "  Why,  man," 
replied  the  officer,  "  you  are  deranged  ;  why  do  you 
speak  thus  ? "  "  He  said  it,"  shouted  the  soldier, 
pointing  to  the  emperor,  far  down  the  lines.  "  I  beg 
your  pardon,  captain,"  responded  the  officer  ;  "  I  was 
not  aware  of  your  promotion." 

And  now,  my  friend,  "  if  thou  shalt  confess  with 
thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus  and  shalt  believe  in  thine 
heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou 
shalt  be  saved ; "  and  if  the  world,  the  flesh,  or  the 
devil  asks  you  how  you  know  you  are  saved,  reply  by 
looking  up  to  Jesus,  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and 
boldly  exclaim,  "  He  said  it."  Surely  He  has  said  it 
in  the  "  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abide th  for- 


192  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

ever,"  '  and  who  shall  gainsay  it  ?  You  are  authorized 
to  believe  this  very  moment  that  He  bare  your  sins  in 
His  own  body  on  the  tree ;  and  if  He  bare  them  in  His 
own  body,  they  cannot  be  found  on  you.  You  are 
commanded  to  believe  that  He  put  away  sin,  root  and 
branch,  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself ;  and  if  He  put  it 
away,  it  can  no  longer  be  upon  your  conscience. 
You  are  entreated  to  accept  as  true  the  testimony  of 
God  that  He  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scrip- 
tures— not  according  to  our  feelings,  or  deservings, 
but  according  to  the  Scriptures — and  he  who  believes 
this  may  hnow  upon  that  same  testimony  that  he  is 
saved.  Oh,  that  you  may  believe  God  as  Abraham 
did  when  "  he  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God 
through  unbelief ;  but  w^as  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory 
to  God  ;  [for  it  glorifies  and  pleases  God  to  have  us 
believe  him  ;]  and  being  fully  persuaded,  that  what  he 
had  promised,  he  was  able  also  to  perform.  And 
therefore  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness. 
Now  it  was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone,  that  it  was 
imputed  to  him  ;  but  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be 
imputed,  if  we  believe  in  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our 
Lord  from  the  dead,  who  was  delivered  for  our 
offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification. 
Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  [not  by  feelings  or 
works]  we  have  [not  hope  to  have,  nor  try  to  have] 
peace  with  God,  through  oar  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  by 
whom  also  we  have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace 
wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God."  2 

'  1  Pet.  i.  23.  2  jjom   iv^  20-25 ;  v.  1,  2. 


BELIEF  AND   COITFESSIOIi?'  193 

*'  Faith  is  a  very  simple  thing, 
Though  little  understood  ; 
It  frees  the  soul  from  death's  dread  sting 
By  resting  in  the  blood. 

*^  Faith  is  not  what  we  feel  or  see, 
It  is  a  simple  trust 
In  what  the  God  of  love  has  said 
Of  Jesus  as  '  the  Just.' 

**  What  Jesus  is,  and  that  alone. 
Is  faith's  delightful  plea  j 
It  never  deals  with  sinful  self, 
Nor  righteous  self  in  me. 

^^  It  tells  me  I  am  counted  '  dead  ^ 
By  God,  in  His  own  word  ; 
It  tells  me  I  am  '  born  again  ' 
In  Christ,  my  eisen  Lokd. 

"  If  He  is  free,  then  I  am  free 
From  all  unrighteousness  ; 
If  He  is  just,  then  I  am  just, 
He  is  my  righteousness." 


CHAPTER  XV 
THE  BELIE VEE'S  SAFETY 

"  For  the  scripture  saith,  "Whosoever  believeth  ou  him  shall  not  be 
ashamed." — Bomans  x.  11. 

A  YOUNG  minister  was  in  tlie  habit  of  visiting 
an  aged  Scotch  woman  in  his  congregation  who 
was  familiarly  called  "  Old  Nanny."  She  was  bed- 
ridden and  rapidly  approaching  the  end  of  her  "  long 
and  weary  pilgrimage,"  but  she  rested  with  undis- 
turbed composui-e  and  full  assurance  of  faith  upon  the 
finished  work  of  Christ.  One  day  he  said  to  her, 
"  Now,  Nanny,  what  if,  after  all  your  confidence  in 
the  Saviour,  and  your  watching  and  waiting,  God 
should  suffer  your  soul  to  be  lost  ?  "  Raising  herself 
on  her  elbow,  and  turning  to  him  with  a  look  of  grief 
and  pain,  she  laid  her  hand  on  the  open  Bible  before 
her,  and  quietly  replied,  "  Ah,  dearie  me,  is  that  a' 
the  length  you  hae  got  yet,  man  ?  God,"  she  con- 
tinued earnestly,  "  would  hae  the  greatest  loss.  Poor 
Nanny  would  but  lose  her  soul,  and  that  would  be  a 
great  loss  indeed,  but  God  would  lose  His  honor  and 
His  character.  Haven't  I  hung  my  soul  upon  His 
*  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  '  ?  and  if  He 
brak'  His  word.  He  would  make  Himself  a  liar,  and 
a'  the  universe  would  rush  ixto  confusion." 
This  anecdote  reveals  the  true  ground  of  the  be- 
194 


THE  believer's   SAFETY  195 

liever's  safety.  It  is  as  high  as  the  honor  of  God ; 
it  is  as  trustworthy  as  His  character  ;  it  is  as  immu- 
table as  His  promises ;  it  is  as  broad  as  the  infinite 
merits  of  His  Son's  atoning  blood.  There  has  long 
been  a  sharp  controversy  between  theological  writers 
concerning  the  doctrine  of  "  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints,"  as  it  is  called,  but,  like  most  controversies 
among  true  Christians,  it  is  owing  largely  to  a  misap- 
prehension or  misapplication  of  the  terms  employed  in 
the  dispute.  The  question,  properly  presented,  is  not 
about  the  perseverance  of  the  saints,  but  the  persever- 
ance of  the  Lord.  If  the  saints  were  left  to  them- 
selves, it  is  not  only  probable,  but  certain,  that  they 
would  not  persevere,  but  if  the  Lord  perseveres  in  His 
purpose  of  grace,  it  is  not  only  probable,  but  certain, 
that  they  will  be  saved.  Inasmuch,  then,  as  the 
phrase,  "  perseverance  of  the  saints,"  is  not  found  in 
the  Bible,  and  as  it  may  possibly  turn  our  attention 
from  the  Saviour  to  ourselves,  which  is  always  fraught 
with  evil,  I  prefer  to  think  of  the  perseverance  of  the 
Lord  in  speaking  of  the  believer's  safety. 

"  The  Scripture  saith,"  or,  in  other  words,  God  saith 
in  the  Scripture,  "  whosoever  believeth  on  him  [that 
is,  on  Christ]  shall  not  be  ashamed."  Mark  the  vast 
extent  of  this  blessed  declaration,  "  whosoever  believ- 
eth." The  word  "  w^hosoever "  goes  like  the  light 
over  the  entire  surface  of  our  globe,  and  includes 
within  the  ample  and  urgent  invitations  of  the  Gospel 
every  member  of  the  human  race.  There  are  many 
who  fear  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  elect,  or  that 
they  are  not  embraced  in  the  plan  of  redemption,  and 


196  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

hence  they  long  to  have  some  direct  and  personal  evi- 
dence of  the  willingness  of  God  to  forgive  and  save 
them^  but  surely  there  is  here  full  Avarrant  for  the 
faith  of  every  sinner.  The  most  illiterate,  the  most 
degraded,  and  the  most  fidendless,  as  well  as  the  in- 
telligent, the  virtuous,  and  the  honored,  among  the 
sons  of  men,  are  invited,  and  exhorted,  and  com- 
manded, to  believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  for  "  whosoever 
believeth  shall  not  be  ashamed."  This  Divine  proc- 
lamation is  not  only  a  good  way,  but  unquestionably 
the  best  way  that  could  be  devised,  to  encourage  the 
doubting  and  hesitating  sinner  to  trust  in  the  prom- 
ises of  God,  for  if  there  had  been  a  better  way,  cer- 
tainly it  would  have  been  adopted.  Suppose  there 
were  a  book  somewhere  in  the  world  containing  the 
names  of  all  the  saved  in  the  past,  present,  and  future. 
If  you  were  to  find  your  name  on  one  of  its  countless 
pages,  you  would  not  be  satisfied :  because  there  may 
have  been,  or  may  be  now,  or  may  be  hereafter,  an- 
other person  of  the  same  name.  Suppose  the  voice  of 
God  should  speak  down  from  heaven,  as  it  did  at  the 
baptism  and  transfiguration  of  His  well-beloved  Son, 
audibly  and  articulately  announcing  you  to  be  one  of 
His  redeemed  children  ;  still  you  would  not  be  satis- 
fied, because  you  might  fear  your  ears  had  deceived 
you,  or  that  the  announcement  was  intended  for  a 
different  person.  But  when  the  voice  of  God  saith  in 
the  Scripture,  "  whosoever  believeth,"  you  hioio  that 
you  are  brought  within  the  circle  of  mercy  and  desig- 
nated in  a  surer  manner  than  by  name. 

If  a  wealthy  and  benevolent  gentleman  were  to 


197 

advertise  that  lohosoever  applied  at  his  residence  before 
a  certain  day  should  receive  a  valid  title  to  a  valuable 
piece  of  property,  you  would  not  refuse  to  apply 
because  he  had  not  mentioned  your  name  in  the 
advertisement.  If  you  were  travelling  on  a  railroad 
with  a  number  of  passengers,  and  the  conductor  should 
announce  that  whosoever  is  going  to  the  place  you  are 
anxious  to  reach  must  leave  the  train  at  the  next 
station,  you  would  not  retain  yoar  seat  and  be  carried 
away  from  your  destination  because  he  did  not  call 
out  your  name.  If  you  were  in  a  city  besieged  by  a 
powerful  army,  and  the  commanding  officers  of  the 
opposing  forces  should  order  a  suspension  of  hostilities 
that  whosoever  among  the  inhabitants  desired  to  re- 
move to  a  place  of  safety  might  withdraw  before  the 
assault  was  made,  you  would  not  complain  because 
your  name  did  not  occur  in  the  order.  In  such  cases 
a  class  is  specified,  and  if  you  belong  to  the  class  you 
need  no  other  warrant  to  act.  In  like  manner,  you 
have  abundant  authority  for  acting  without  a  mo- 
ment's delay  upon  the  broad  statements  and  general 
invitations  of  the  Gospel.  Jesus  says,  "  God  so  loved 
the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  Life." '  "  And  the  Spirit  and  the 
bride  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say. 
Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And 
whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  ^ 
Surely,  you  cannot  ask  or  desire  anything  more 
earnest,  more  tender,  more  definite  than  this  ;  and  if 
1  John  iii.  16.  sEev.  xxii.  17. 


198  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

it  fails  to  convince  you  that  you  are  authorized  to 
believe  on  Christ,  there  is  no  conceivable  mode  by 
which  you  can  be  assured  of  God's  willingness  to  save 
you. 

But  to  make  this  point  still  clearer  you  will  observe 
it  is  said,  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  him."  There  is  a 
difference  between  believing  a  person  and  believing 
in  or  on  a  person.  The  former  implies  that  we  accept 
his  statements  as  true  without  going  farther,  but  the 
latter  implies  that  we  trust  in  or  rely  on  him.  If  a 
man  of  undoubted  veracity  were  to  inform  us  of 
something  which  he  had  witnessed,  but  of  which  we 
ourselves  had  no  personal  knowledge,  we  would  be- 
lieve him  ;  but  if  he  should  promise  to  confer  upon 
us  a  favor  which  we  greatly  desired  to  receive,  we 
would  confide  in  him  or  depend  on  him  to  fulfil 
his  promise.  Xow,  the  salvation  held  out  to  us  in 
the  Gospel  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  belief  of 
certain  doctrines,  but  belief  in  a  person.  Peter  and 
the  other  apostles,  in  defending  themselves  before  the 
Jewish  council,  said,  "  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised 
up  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree.  Him 
hath  God  exalted  with  his  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and 
forgiveness  of  sins." '  He  showed  Himself  alive  to 
His  disciples,  "  after  his  passion,  by  many  infallible 
proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speaking 
of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  "  ^ 
and  when  He  had  "led  them  out  as  far  as  to 
Bethany,"  ^  and  had  given  His  final  commands,  "  while 

1  Acts  V.  30, 31.  2  Acts  '^   3^  3  Luijg  j.^.  j^^  59^ 


THE   believer's   SAFETY  199 

they  beheld,  he  was  taken  up  ;  and  a  cloud  received 
him  out  of  their  sight."  '  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  dead 
but  a  living  Christ  which  speaks  to  us  in  His  word, 
and  in  whom  we  are  urged  to  trust.  From  His  exalted 
seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  He  sees  you  now 
while  reading  these  lines,  and  if  it  were  best,  He 
would  instantly  descend  from  heaven  and  stand  before 
you  in  personal,  visible  form.  So  full  of  sympathy  is 
His  heart  of  love,  and  so  deep  His  concern  for  your 
salvation,  that  the  sight  of  your  burdened  soul  would 
arrest  His  attention,  I  think,  even  if  engaged  in 
making  a  new  world,  and  bring  Him  once  more  to 
the  cross,  could  His  death  a  second  time  avail  more 
fully  to  deliver  you  from  the  condemnation  and  curse 
of  God's  violated  law. 

Suppose  He  should  appear  at  this  moment  in  your 
presence  and  with  His  own  voice  promise  to  give  you 
the  crown  of  eternal  life  before  asking  you  to  do  any- 
thing or  to  feel  anything.  Would  you  trust  in  Him  ? 
Would  you  depend  on  Him  to  make  good  His  promise  ? 
If  you  would,  remember  He  speaks  to  you  as  truly 
and  directly  in  His  word  as  He  could  possibly  do 
were  He  to  reveal  Himself  bodily,  so  that  your  eyes 
could  see  Him  and  your  ears  could  hear  Him.  It  is 
the  peculiarity  of  His  word  that,  unlike  any  other  word, 
it  "  liveth  and  abideth  forever,"  ^  so  that  it  is  as  fresh, 
and  sweet,  and  powerful  to-day  as  if  it  had  just  fallen 
from  His  lips.  But  there  is  this  immense  advantage 
in  the  written  word  over  the  spoken — that  having 
once  received  assurance  of  salvation  in  the  former 

1  Acts  i.  9.  n  Pet.  i.  23. 


200  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

you  can  always  receive  it  there,  for  "  the  word  of  the 
Lord  endureth  forever.  And  this  is  the  word  which 
by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  ' 

It  is  an  unspeakable  relief  to  the  troubled  sinner  to 
find  that  this  word  which  by  the  Gospel  is  preached 
unto  you  does  not  say,  Whosoever  belie veth  and  is 
good ;  Whosoever  believeth  and  f eeleth  happy ; 
Whosoever  believeth  and  prayeth  well;  Whosoever 
believeth  and  loveth  God  fervently;  Whosoever 
believeth  and  findeth  the  true  Church ;  but,  "  Who- 
soever believeth  on  him,"  or,  in  other  words,  "  Who- 
soever trusteth  in  Christ,  shall  not  be  ashamed." 
Of  course  I  am  far  from  saying  that  the  sincere  be- 
liever will  not  follow  holiness ;  or  that  he  will  not  be 
happy;  or  that  he  will  not  hold  communion  with 
God ;  or  that  he  will  not  love  the  Saviour  and  confess 
Him  before  men  ;  but  the  sinner  is  not  to  be  occupied 
with  these  first,  for  he  needs  first  to  be  saved,  and  he 
is  saved  by  believing,  simply  and  only  believing,  in 
Jesus.  Nor  does  the  word  intimate  whether  our  be- 
lief must  be  strong  or  weak.  It  is  not,  Whosoever 
believeth  strongly,  but,  Whosoever  believeth.  It  is 
Jesus  Christ  who  saves  us,  and  not  our  belief;  and 
hence,  "  if  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  ^ 
or  if,  like  the  suffering  woman  "  which  had  spent  all 
her  living  upon  physicians,"  ^  your  faith  is  greatly 
wanting  in  knowledge,  still  3^ou  may  come,  creeping, 
if  you  cannot  walk,  to  that  compassionate  and  gentle 
Saviour    of  whom  it  is   written,  "  A   bruised  reed 

» 1  Pet.  i.  25.  nisiU.  xvii.  20. 

^  Luke  viii.  43. 


201 

shall  he  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  he  not 
quench."  * 

*'  Whosoever  belie veth  on  him  shall  not  be  ashamed." 
He  shall  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  Him  with  the 
mouth,  for  the  "  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion,"  ^  and 
the  saints  of  old  "  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms, 
wrought  righteousness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the 
mouth  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped 
the  edge  of  the  sword  ;  out  of  weakness  were  made 
strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the 
armies  of  the  aliens."^  Kor  shall  he  be  ashamed 
"  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven 
with  his  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fire,  taking  venge- 
ance on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not 
the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  ^  The  solemn 
language  of  our  Lord  does  not  apply  to  him  :  "  Who- 
soever therefore  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  my 
words,  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation,  of  him 
also  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he 
Cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy 
angels."^  On  the  other  hand,  he  can  joyfully  ex- 
claim with  the  apostle,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ :  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  [not  the 
power  of  man,  but  the  power  of  God]  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth."  ^  And  again  with  the 
apostle  he  can  say,  *'  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory, 
save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the 
world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  ^ 

^Matt.  xii.  20.  ^p^ov.  xxviii.  1.  ^Heb.  xi.  33,  34. 

*2  Thess.  i.  7,  8.  *Mark  viii.  38.  ^Eoin.  i.  16. 

'  Gal.  vi.  14. 


202  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

The  secret  of  tins  bold  confession  of  the  crucified  One, 
and  of  this  strange  glorifjang  in  the  cross,  is  given  by 
the  same  apostle  when  he  says,  "  We  having  the  same 
spirit  of  faith,  according  as  it  is  written,  I  believed, 
and  therefore  have  I  spoken;  we  also  believe,  and 
therefore  speak;  knowing  that  he  which  raised  up 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus,  and 
shall  present  us  with  you."*  The  believer,  then, 
knows  upon  the  sure  testimony  of  God's  word  that  he 
shall  not  be  ashamed  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord  here- 
after, and  consequently  he  cannot  be  ashamed  to  own 
the  Lord  as  his  Saviour  here. 

The  foundation  of  his  safety  is  laid  on  the  finished 
work  of  Christ,  and  is  guarded  by  the  infinite  power, 
the  eternal  purpose,  and  the  immutable  promise  of 
Jehovah.  Nothing,  therefore,  in  this  world  or  in  the 
world  to  come  can  blight  his  hopes  or  defeat  his 
aspirations.  ^'  If  God  be  for  us,  Tvho  can  be  against 
us  ?  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered 
him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also 
freely  give  us  all  things  ?  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth. 
Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died, 
yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for 
us."  ^  In  this  most  interesting  and  comforting  passage 
the  Holy  Ghost  first  gives  us  to  understand  that  God 
is  for  us,  and  hence  triumphantly  asks,  Who  can  be 
against  us  ?  He  then  asserts  that  God's  love  for  us  is 
so  great  that  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  though  He 

» 2  Cor.  iv.  13,  14.  2  Eom.  viii.  31-34. 


THE  believer's  SAFETY  203 

must  endure  the  sorrow  and  shame,  the  deep  humilia- 
tion and  terrible  agonies,  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary, 
and  makes  this  the  proof  of  our  Father's  willingness 
to  bestow  upon  us  freely  all  things  necessary  to  secure 
the  end  of  so  much  suffering,  since  the  greater  gift 
includes  the  less.  He  then  challenges  the  universe  to 
bring  the  slightest  charge  against  those  whom  God 
Himself  has  justified.  He  then  mentions  the  death 
of  Christ,  which  was  in  the  room  and  place  of  our 
death,  because  of  our  offences ;  and,  as  if  this  were 
not  enough.  He  tells  us  of  His  resurrection,  which  is 
the  unanswerable  demonstration  of  our  complete 
justification;  and,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  he 
points  to  Him  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Head  over 
all  things  to  the  Church,  and  swaying  the  sceptre  of 
supreme  sovereignty  ;  and,  as  if  this  were  not  enough, 
He  bids  us  listen  to  the  ever  prevalent  intercession  of 
One  who  could  say  even  upon  the  earth,  although  de- 
spised and  rejected  of  men,  "  Father,  I  thank  thee  that 
thou  hast  heard  me ;  and  I  knew  that  thou  hearest 
me  always."  *  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom 
thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am."  ^ 

It  is  not  surprising  that  a  chapter  containing  such  a 
passage  should  begin  by  declaring  that  there  is  no 
condemnation  against  the  believer,  and  end  by  declar- 
ing that  there  is  no  separation  from  the  Saviour  when 
once  we  truly  believe  on  His  name.  "  The  Spirit 
searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  ^ 
"  By  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body,"  ^ 

^  John  xi.  41,  42.  2  JqIjh  ^vii.  24. 

3  1  Cor.  ii.  10.  -» 1  Cor.  xii.  13. 


204  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

no  matter  how  widely  removed  from  each  other  by 
time  or  place.  "  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy 
Spirit  ?  "  *  asks  the  Psalmist.  It  is  certain,  then^  that 
the  Spirit  is  everywhere  present,  and  is  perfectly 
familiar  with  all  that  occurs  in  heaven  above,  and  in 
the  earth  beneath,  and  in  the  darkness  of  the  under- 
world, and  yet  having  passed  across  the  boundless 
empire  which  the  word  of  the  Almighty  has  created, 
and  over  the  hell  which  sin  has  dug,  He  distinctly  an- 
nounces "  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 
principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  ^ 

There  are  thousands  of  Christians  who,  on  the 
pretence  of  humility,  make  a  merit  of  doubting  their 
salvation,  but  in  the  light  of  such  statements  as  you 
have  just  read  the  faintest  shadow  of  doubt  is  seen  to 
be  a  grievous  dishonor  to  God.  If  doubts  are  becom- 
ing to  those  who  are  believers,  God  is  a  liar,  but  if 
God  speaks  the  truth,  how  should  we  look  upon  our 
doubts,  and  how  should  we  regard  ourselves  for  call- 
ing in  question  His  clear  and  oft-repeated  testimony  ? 
But,  you  may  reply,  your  difficulty  does  not  lie  in  this 
direction.  You  firmly  believe,  you  say,  that  God 
speaks  the  truth,  but  you  doubt  your  acceptance,  you 
doubt  whether  you  are  saved,  because  your  faith  is  so 
weak,  and  your  love  is  so  cold,  and  your  feelings  are 
so  variable,  and  there  is  so  much  evil  in  you,  and  you 
make  so  little  progress,  or  none  at  all  that  you  can 

>  Ps.  cxxxix.  7.  '  Rom.  viii.  38,  39. 


THE  BELIEVEPw'S   SAFETY  205 

perceive,  in  holiness.  Xow,  it  is  not  for  man  to  de- 
cide whether  you  are  or  are  not  a  believer  in  Christ, 
but  I  do  confidently  affirm  that  these  things  have 
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  ground  upon  which 
God  makes  peace  with  the  sinner,  though  they  may 
have  much  to  do  with  our  enjoyment  of  peace. 

When  Jehovah  in  infinite  grace  redeemed  Israel 
from  Egyptian  bondage,  what  was  the  ground  of 
their  peace  and  the  precise  cause  of  their  deliverance  ? 
It  was  not  their  goodness  in  any  respect ;  for  they 
were  certainly  no  better  by  nature  nor  by  practice,  for 
aught  we  are  told,  than  the  Egyptians,  and  there  was 
nothing  to  recommend  them  to  the  Divine  mercy  but 
their  utter  wretchedness.  "  The  children  of  Israel 
sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage,  and  they  cried, 
and  their  cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason  of  the 
bondage.  And  God  heard  their  groaning,  and  God 
remembered  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  with  Isaac, 
and  with  Jacob." '  But  before  He  could  deal  with 
them  in  manifested  love  He  must  first  deal  with  their 
sins  in  manifested  righteousness.  Their  lives  were 
forfeited  by  reason  of  their  iniquities,  and  the  judg- 
ment must  descend :  but  in  the  tenderness  of  God's 
compassion  for  His  covenant  people  it  descended  upon 
the  head  of  a  divinely-appointed  Substitute.  They 
were  commanded  to  slay  a  lamb,  and  to  take  the  blood 
— "  for  the  blood  is  the  life  "  ^ — and  to  strike  it  on  the 
two  side-posts  and  on  the  upper  door-post  of  their 
houses.  "  And  the  blood,"  it  is  added,  "  shall  be  to 
you  for  a  token  upon  the  houses  where  you  are ;  and 
1  Ex.  ii.  23,  24.  »  Deut.  xii.  23. 


206  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAi:?f 

when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you,  and  the 
plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you,  when  I 
smite  the  land  of  Egypt."  ' 

The  blood  made  all  the  difference  that  existed  be- 
tween the  Israelites  and  the  Egyptians,  for  it  was  a 
token  that  the  sentence  of  death  had  abeady  been 
executed  in  the  behalf  of  those  within  the  blood- 
sprinkled  houses,  because  it  had  fallen  upon  their  rep- 
resentative and  substitute.  The  slightest  doubt  of 
safety,  therefore,  on  the  part  of  an  Israelite  sheltered 
behind  those  red  door-posts,  would  have  been  the  same 
as  saying  that  Jehovah  is  a  liar.  He  had  said, 
"  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you,"  and 
this  ought  to  have  been  enough :  it  was  enough  for  all 
who  believed  His  word.  Some  of  them  may  have 
complained  that  their  faith  was  so  weak,  and  their 
love  was  so  cold,  and  their  feelings  were  so  variable, 
and  there  was  so  much  evil  in  them,  and  so  little 
progress  in  holiness,  that  they  could  not  see  the  evi- 
dences of  their  salvation.  But  this  was  not  the  ques- 
tion. God  did  not  say,  "  When  you  see  the  evidences," 
but,  "  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you." 
He  did  not  say.  When  I  see  your  strong  faith,  your 
ardent  love,  your  happy  feelings,  yom*  victory  over 
the  evil  of  your  nature,  your  rapid  growth  in  holiness, 
I  will  pass  over  you,  but.  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will 
pass  over  you.  It  was  not  the  blood  and  something 
else,  but  it  was  the  blood  by  itself,  the  blood  which 
God  provided,  that  formed  the  ground  of  their  safety 
and  their  redemption.     During  that  frightful  night  of 

1  Ex.  xii.  13. 


THE  believer's  SAFETY  207 

destruction  there  may  have  been  fathers  and  mothers 
who,  hearing  the  shrieks  of  the  terror-stricken  Egyp- 
tians, caught  their  first-born  to  their  hearts  in  inexpress- 
ible anxiety,  but  if  so,  their  fear  was  a  most  un- 
generous and  unworthy  suspicion  of  the  God  of  their 
salvation,  for  they  were  as  secure  from  harm  as  the 
power  and  purpose  and  promise  of  the  Almighty  could 
make  them. 


CHAPTER  XVI 
THE  BELIEVER'S  SAFETY 

LET  us  take  from  the  Old  Testament  Scripture 
one  more  illustration  of  the  believer's  perfect 
safety  on  the  ground  that  blood  has  been  shed,  or  that 
life  has  been  given  up  in  the  stead  of  his  life.  On 
the  great  day  of  atonement  Aaron  was  directed  to 
select  two  goats,  one  for  the  Lord  and  the  other  for 
the  scapegoat.  "  And  Aaron,"  it  is  said,  "  shall  bring 
the  goat  upon  which  the  Lord's  lot  fell,  and  offer 
him  for  a  sin  offering." '  The  victim  was  not  pre- 
sented as  a  burnt-offering,  for  that  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  who  "  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,"  ^ 
not  as  a  sin-bearer,  but  "  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to 
God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savor."  ^  Nor  was  he  pre- 
sented as  a  meat-offering ;  for  that  was  a  type  of 
Christ  in  His  faultless  life  on  earth,  fulfilling  all  His 
duties  to  man  as  man.  l^or  was  he  presented  as  a 
peace-offering ;  for  that  was  a  type  of  our  communion 
with  God  in  Christ,  so  that  it  can  be  said,  "  Ye  who 
sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of 
Christ."  ^  But  he  was  presented  distinctly  as  a  sin- 
offering,  to  put  away  iniquity  from  the  sight  of  a  holy 
God.  Having  been  slain,  the  high  priest  was  com- 
manded to  bring  his  blood  within  the  veil  of  the  tab- 

1  Lev.  xvi.  9.  2  Heb.  ix.  14. 

^Eph.  V.  2.  *Eph.  ii.  13. 

208 


THE  believer's   SAFETY  209 

ernacle  where  Jehovah  dwelt,  and  to  sprinkle  the  blood 
upon  the  mercy -seat  and  before  the  mercy -seat  seven 
times,  or  the  complete  number.  Then  he  was  to  go 
out  unto  the  altar  that  is  before  the  Lord  (see  Levit- 
icus xvi.  18),  and  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  it  seven 
times.  Afterwards,  it  is  said,  "  Aaron  shall  lay  both 
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess 
over  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins,  putting 
them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,  and  shall  send  him 
away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness : 
and  the  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  their  iniquities 
unto  a  land  not  inhabited."  * 

The  act  of  laying  both  the  hands  upon  the  head  of 
the  goat  showed  that  the  guilt  of  the  people  was  trans- 
ferred or  imputed  to  their  substitute,  because,  the 
blood  being  shed,  the  law  of  God  was  perfectly  satis- 
fied, the  demands  of  His  justice  were  thoroughly  met, 
and  in  unsullied  righteousness  He  could  now  put  away 
their  sin.  "  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood,"  we 
are  told,  "  for  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh  an  atone- 
ment for  the  soul."  2  Mark  that !  "  It  is  the  blood 
that  maketh  an  atonement  for  the  soul ; "  or,  as  the 
word  translated  atonement  here  properly  means  "  to 
cover  or  cover  over,"  it  is  the  blood  that  coverethover 
the  sins  of  the  soul ;  and  because  covered  over  with 
blood  so  that  God's  pure  eyes  cannot  see  them,  at-one- 
ment  is  made,  and  God  and  the  sinner  are  brought 
together  in  peace.  Hence  it  is  said,  *'  The  goat  shall 
bear  upon  him  all  their  iniquities  [not  some  of  them 

^  Lev.  xvi.  21,  22.  '  Lev.  xvii.  11. 


210  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

merely,  but  all  of  them]  unto  a  land  not  inhabited," 
and  there  they  are  lost  to  view  forever.  If,  then, 
any  of  the  assembled  Israelites  who  watched  the  high 
priest  coming  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  to 
sprinkle  the  altar  with  the  blood  of  the  slain  goat, 
and  to  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live 
goat,  should  doubt  for  a  single  moment  the  forgive- 
ness of  all  their  iniquities,  it  would  be  in  effect  to  say 
that  the  blessed  God  had  uttered  a  falsehood.  It  was 
not  a  question  of  fitness  or  unfitness,  of  feeling  or  of 
realization,  on  their  part,  but  it  was  a  simple  question 
concerning  the  veracity  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
who  had  said,  "  It  is  the  blood  that  maketh  an  atone- 
ment for  the  soul,"  and,  "  The  goat  shall  bear  upon 
him  all  their  iniquities  unto  a  land  not  inhabited." 

Let  us  turn  now  to  the  New  Testament,  and  we 
find  it  written,  "  Christ  being  come  an  high  priest  of 
good  things  to  come,  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect 
tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  not  of 
this  building;  neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and 
calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in  once  into 
the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption 
for  us.  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the 
ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth 
to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh :  how  much  more  shall 
the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  con- 
science from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  "  ^ 
"  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as 
silver  and  gold,     .     .     .     but  with  the  precious  blood 

» Heb.  ix.  11-14. 


THE  BELIE VEE'S   SAFETY  211 

of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
spot." '  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin." ^  "In  whom  we  have  [not  hope  to 
have,  nor  try  to  have,  nor  shall  have,  but  have]  re- 
demption through  his  blood."  ^  *'Much  more,  then, 
being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved 
from  wrath  through  him."  *  "  For  it  pleased  the 
Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell ;  and  hav- 
ing made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross,"  ^  of 
course  we  may  add,  we  do  not  have  to  make  peace, 
for  it  is  already  made,  and  all  we  are  asked  to  do  is 
to  accept  the  overtures  of  peace  extended  so  freely 
and  generously  in  the  Gospel.  Such  is  the  plain  tes- 
timony of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  this  must  be  added 
the  testimony  of  the  translated  saints  in  heaven,  as 
recorded  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  book  of  Kevela- 
tion.  Certainly  those  who  are  in  glory  know  how 
they  got  there,  and  the  Spirit  tells  us  they  raise  their 
anthems  of  praise  to  the  Lamb,  sayings  "  Thou  wast 
slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood  out 
of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation ; 
and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests  : 
and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth."  ^ 

It  is  the  blood,  then,  not  example,  nor  influence, 
nor  power,  but  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  alone, 
that  forms  the  ground  of  the  believer's  safety.  It  is 
not  the  blood  and  something  else — the  blood  and  our 
estimate  of  it,  the  blood  and  our  thoughts  about  it, 
the  blood  and  our  feelings — but  the  blood  by  itself 

1 1  Pet.  i.  18,  19.  2 1  John  i.  7.  ^  Eph.  i.  7. 

*  Rom.  V.  9.  «*  Ck)l.  i.  19,  20.  « Eev.  v.  9,  10. 


212  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

which  was  poured  out  upon  the  cross  more  than  nine- 
teen hundred  years  ago ;  and  if  you  believe  that  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  you  from  all  sin,  ac- 
cording to  the  testimony  of  God's  word  you  are  saved. 
God  is  infinitely  satisfied  with  it ;  and  if  you  are  satis- 
fied, there  can  be  no  further  cause  of  controversy  be- 
tween you  and  Him.  His  own  dear  Son,  who  knew 
no  sin,  w^as  made  to  be  sin  for  us  that  we  might  be- 
come the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  He  took  our 
place  under  the  law  with  all  its  dreadful  consequences 
that  we  might  be  exalted  to  His  place  in  heaven  with 
all  its  unspeakable  blessedness.  He  w^as  cast  out  of 
His  Father's  presence  as  evil  that  we  might  stand  in 
His  Father's  presence  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing.  He  bore  the  curse  which  we  merited 
that  w^e  might  receive  the  blessing  which  He  merited. 
He  drank  the  cup  of  wrath  which  was  pressed  to  our 
lips  that  we  might  drink  of  the  fountain  of  the  water 
of  life  freely.  He  endured  the  condemnation  which 
was  due  to  us  that  we  might  obtain  the  justification 
which  was  due  to  Him.  He  went  down  into  the  jaws 
of  death  that  were  ready  to  devour  us  that  we  might 
rise  to  a  rapturous  immortality.  He  was  regarded 
and  treated  as  sin  that  we  might  be  regarded  and 
treated  as  righteoasness,  and  that  the  righteousness 
of  God.  Blessed  Saviour  !  eternity  will  be  too  short 
to  speak  Thy  praise. 

When  I  say  that  the  believer  is  regarded  and  treated 
as  righteousness,  I  do  not  mean  to  affirm  that  he  is 
merely  regarded  and  treated  as  7nghteous,  for  he  is 
righteous.     God  Himself  declares  him  righteous,  and 


THE  believer's  SAFETY  213 

**  we  are  sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according 
to  truth."*  He  cannot  declare  a  thing  to  be  true 
which  is  really  untrue,  and  at  best  a  sham,  such  as 
many  of  our  theologians  make  the  believer's  standing 
to  be.  They  deny  that  he  is  righteous,  but  argue  that 
God  treats  him  as  if  he  were  righteous  ;  or,  in  other 
words,  they  represent  the  blessed  God  as  a  party  to  a 
wretched  delusion  and  pretence.  If  the  believer  is 
not  righteous,  God  cannot  treat  him  as  righteous,  but 
he  is  righteous,  perfectly  righteous,  in  Christ,  for  "  by 
him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things."^ 
Christ's  standing,  then,  is  the  believer's  standing. 
The  measure  of  Christ's  acceptableness  in  the  sight  of 
the  Father  is  the  precise  measure  of  the  acceptable- 
ness of  the  believer ;  and  if  you  ask  me  to  define  a 
believer,  I  reply  in  the  one  word,  Christ.  We  are 
"  accepted  in  the  beloved."  ^  "  We  are  in  him  that  is 
true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  ^  "  For  as  the 
body  is  one,  and  hath  many  members,  and  all  the 
members  of  that  one  body,  being  many,  are  one  body  : 
so  also  is  Christ ; "  ^  and  hence  the  oneness  between 
the  two  is  so  entire  that  the  whole  body  is  called 
Christ,  "and  ye  are  complete  in  him."^  "Herein  is 
our  love  [love  with  us,  not  our  love  to  God,  but  God's 
love  to  us]  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness 
in  the  day  of  judgment :  because  as  He  is,  so  are  we 
in  this  world ; "  ^  not  simply,  so  shall  we  be  in  the 
world  to  come,  but,  so  are  we  in  this  world.     The 

^  Rom.  ii.  2.  '  Acts  xiii.  39.  '  Eph.  i.  6. 

<  1  John  V.  20.  ^  1  Cor.  xii.  12.  «  Col.  ii.  10. 

'  1  John  iv.  17. 


214  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

fact  is,  whatever  Christ  did  in  achieving  redemption 
He  did  "  for  us,"  and,  if  I  may  so  say,  as  us.  He 
stood,  as  we  were,  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
stand,  as  He  is,  before  the  Father.  God,  there- 
fore, sees  us  as  Christ  in  His  presence,  for  He  ''  hath 
raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places,  in  Christ  Jesus." '  He  no  longer 
views  us  as  on  the  earth,  but  in  heaven,  and  we 
appear  to  Him  as  Christ  does.  He  sees  us  through 
the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  "  as  he  is,  so 
are  we." 

Such,  then,  is  the  believer's  standing,  and  if  so, 
where  are  his  sins  ?  Let  Hezekiah  answer,  who  said 
to  God  in  his  prayer,  "  Thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul 
delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption  ;  for  thou  hast 
cast  all  my -sins  behind  thy  back  "  ^ — not  only  some  of 
them,  but  all  of  them,  were  cast  behind  God's  back, 
and  therefore  could  no  longer  be  seen  by  Him.  Let 
the  prophet  reply  who,  predicting  the  future  restora- 
tion and  conversion  of  Israel,  exclaims,  "Thou  wilt 
cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."^  Here, 
then,  are  all  the  sins  of  the  believer  drowned  in  the 
deep  waters  of  oblivion,  and  not  a  ripple  is  left  on  the 
surface  to  indicate  where  they  are  buried.  Is  it  not  a 
pitiful  business  for  the  Christian  to  be  always  diving 
down  in  the  attempt  to  drag  to  the  surface  these 
loathsome  things  and  hold  them  up  in  the  face  of  a 
smiling  God  ?  Be  sure  there  is  no  merit  in  groaning 
forever  over  your  sins  when  you  are  plainly  and  re- 
peatedly told  that  they  have  been  removed  from  you 

^  Eph.  ii.  6.  Msa.  xxxviii.  17.  ^Mic.  vii.  19. 


THE  believer's   SAFETY  215 

"  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west." '  God,  of 
course,  not  only  knows  all  that  will  occur  in  the 
future,  but  He  remembers  all  that  has  occurred  in  the 
past,  except  one  thing.  There  is  one  thing  which  He 
is  pleased  to  forget,  and  if  you  wish  to  know  what 
this  is,  you  read  in  the  Old  Testament  and  twice  in 
the  New  Testament,  that,  speaking  of  those  who  be- 
lieve on  His  Son,  He  says,  "  Their  sins  and  their 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."^  "And  you, 
being  dead  in  your  sins  and  the  uncircumcision  of 
your  flesh,  hath  he  [God]  quickened  together  with 
him  [Christ],  having  forgiven  you  all  trespasses ; 
blotting  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was 
against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out 
of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cross."  ^  There  was  every- 
thing against  the  believer  once,  but  there  is  nothing 
against  him  now,  for  the  law,  or  the  handwriting  of 
ordinances,  having  been  righteously  and  completely 
met  and  satisfied,  it  has  been  blotted  out ;  and  then, 
as  if  the  tablet  or  parchment  on  which  it  was  written 
might  still  terrify  the  Christian,  it  has  been  taken 
out  of  the  way  and  nailed  in  triumph  to  the  cross  as 
an  open  proclamation  to  the  universe  that  "  there  is 
therefore  now  no  [not  one]  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  ^  He  has  become  the  all- 
sufficient  substitute  for  those  who  believe  on  Him,  and 
hence  the  law  has  no  further  claim  upon  them.  Let 
us  suppose  that  during  the  late  war  a  man  was  drafted 
into  the  army.     Let  us  suppose  that  he  did  not  choose 

'  Ps.  ciii.  12.  2  jje]3   yju   12  ;  x.  17. 

3  Col.  ii.  13,  14.  4Kom.  viii.  1. 


216  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

to  fight,  and  consequently  procured  a  substitute  to  go 

in  his  place.     Let  us  suppose  that  the  substitute  was 

killed  in  the  next  battle,  and  that  under  another  act 

of  conscription  the  man  was  again  drafted.     In  that 

case  he  would  have  refused  to  go  or  to  procure  a 

substitute,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  already  dead  so 

far  as  the  law  was  concerned.      "Wherefore,  my 

brethren,  ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the 

body  of  Christ."  * 

But  in  addition  to  all  that  has  been  said,  it  is  well 

to  consider  for  a  moment  the  believer's  new  nature  as 

another  proof  of  his  perfect  safety.      The  Saviour 

says,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 

kingdom  of  God  ;  "  ^  and  the  Spirit  says,  "  Whosoever 

believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."^ 

*'  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ 

Jesus." ^     "Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 

great  and  precious  promises :  that  by  these  ye  might 

be  partakers  of  the  divine  nature."  ^     Of  such  passages 

I  can  only  repeat  what  was  said  about  the  believer 

being  called  "  righteous  "  in  the  Bible.     God  does  not 

treat  him  merely  as  if  righteous,  but  he  is  righteous. 

So  God  does  not  speak  of  him  as  if  born  again,  but 

he  is  born  again.     He  is  as  truly  "  born  of  God," 

"  born  of  the  Spirit,"  and  made  a  "  partaker  of  the 

Divine  nature,"  as  he  is  born  of  man,  born  of  the 

flesh,  and  made  a  partaker  of  the  nature  of  his  earthly 

parents.     There  are  many  who  compare  the  adoption 

of  Christians  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  with  the 

'  Rom.  vii.  4.  'Jobniii.  3.  'IJohnv.  1. 

*  Gal.  iii.  26.  6  2  pet.  i.  4. 


THE  believer's  SAFETY  217 

adoption  which  takes  place  among  men,  but  there  is  a 
wide  difference.  With  men  children  are  transferred 
to  a  family  to  which  they  do  not  belong  by  birthright, 
and  treated  as  if  they  had  been  born  in  the  household 
that  now  shelters  them ;  but  God  adopts  His  own 
children,  having  first  made  them  "  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature  "  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit  through 
faith  in  the  promises  of  His  word.  Hence  it  is 
written,  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage 
again  to  fear;  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father."  *  "  God 
sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the 
law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that 
we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons.  And  because 
ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son 
into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father."  ^ 

IS'o  man  can  say  to  God,  "  Abba,  Father,"  unless 
he  is  born  again  by  believing  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ; 
and  when  the  unregenerate  mumble  the  words,  "  Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven,"  they  offer  a  worship  not 
a  whit  more  intelligent  or  acceptable  than  the  prostra- 
tion of  the  native  African  before  his  fetich.  "  Be  not 
deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked ; "  ^  for  "  he  that  honoreth 
not  the  Son  honoreth  not  the  Father  which  hath  sent 
him."  ^  Those  who  pray  without  faith  in  the  Son  of 
the  Father's  love  may  be  very  religious,  as  the  Atheni- 
ans Avere  who  reared  an  altar  to  the  unknown 
GOD,  but  surely  they  are  not  Christians  ;  and  the  dif- 
ference between  being  a  Christian  and  being  religious 

1  Rom.  viii.  15.  "^G^A.  iv.  4,  6. 

»Gal.  vi.  7.  ^Johnv.  23. 


218  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIX 

is  just  the  difference  there  is  between  light  and  dark- 
ness, between  heaven  and  hell.  On  the  other  hand, 
whosoever  believeth  on  Christ  is  surely  born  of  God ; 
and  the  thought  that  God  can  suffer  His  own  child — 
a  part  of  Himself,  if  I  may  so  speak — to  be  eternally 
lost,  is  too  monstrous  to  be  entertained  for  a  moment. 
If  you  are  a  father  or  a  mother,  you  know  what  it  is 
to  love  a  little  child,  although  the  helpless  babe  may 
be  nothing  but  an  expense  to  you,  and  may  not  at  all 
respond  to  your  love.  Your  death  would  not  disturb 
its  happiness,  nor  would  it  retain  the  slightest  recol- 
lection of  you,  and  yet  you  hang  over  it  with  unutter- 
able affection  and  tenderness.  What,  then,  must  be 
the  love  of  God  for  His  children,  redeemed  by  the 
blood  of  His  only  begotten  Son,  although  they  do  so 
little  in  His  service  and  feel  so  faintly  His  claims 
upon  their  gratitude !  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her 
sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on 
the  son  of  her  womb  ?  yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will 
I  not  forget  thee."  *  This  language  was  addressed  to 
the  Israelites  as  such,  but  it  may  be  applied  without 
the  slightest  strain  to  every  one  who  is  born  again  in 
the  present  or  church  dispensation.  I  will  go  further, 
and  state  that  God  loves  you,  if  you  are  a  believer,  as 
He  loves  His  "  well-beloved  Son."  Do  not  be  staggered 
at  such  an  assertion,  but  open  wide  your  heart  to  re- 
ceive the  blessed  truth ;  for  the  Saviour  says  in  His 
touching  prayer  for  all  His  disciples,  "  I  in  them, 
and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect 
in   one ;   and   that   the  world  may  know  that   thou 

^  Isa.  xlix.  15. 


THE  believer's   SAFETY  219 

hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them,   as  thou  hast 
loved  me."  ' 

To  this  must  be  added  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
and  in  glancing  at  it  you  need  to  be  guarded  at  the 
outset  against  two  errors  into  which  many  sincere  be- 
lievers are  led  to  their  own  disquietude  and  distress. 
The  first  arises  from  the  common  mistake  of  seeking 
amid  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  for  the  ground  of  peace. 
It  can  never  be  found  there.  It  is  not  the  Spirit's 
work  in  us,  but  Christ's  work  for  us,  that  delivers  us 
from  condemnation  and  places  us  on  the  heavenward 
side  of  the  cross  beyond  Judgment ;  and  it  is  only  by 
looking  at  Christ's  finished  work  instead  of  the  Spirit's 
unfinished  work  that  we  can  find  perfect  repose  of 
conscience  and  heart.  The  second  error  arises  from 
the  still  more  common  mistake  of  thinking,  or,  at 
least,  of  practically  acting,  about  the  Spirit  as  if  He 
came  on  occasional  and  uncertain  visits  to  the  believer, 
in  place  of  knowing  that  He  abides  with  us  forever. 
Many  Christians  are  continually  singing  and  praying, 
"Come,  Holy  Spirit,  heavenly  dove,"  but  He  is  al- 
ready come.  They  may  say  they  know  this,  and  do 
not  intend  to  intimate  that  He  is  really  absent  from 
them,  but  it  is  very  important  to  avoid  the  use  of 
language  that  does  not  express  the  precise  truth  on 
such  a  subject.  Owing  to  the  constant  employment 
of  incorrect  language,  even  admitting  a  correct  knowl- 
edge lying  back  of  it,  it  has  come  to  pass  that  multi- 
tudes are  guilty  of  the  fearful  sin  of  regarding  the 
Spirit  rather  as  an  influence  than  as  a  Divine  person, 

1  John  xvii.  23. 


220  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

and  multitudes  more  look  upon  Him  as  a  cloud  mov- 
ing about  from  one  church  to  another,  or  visiting 
some  sections  of  the  country  with  His  refreshing 
presence,  while  other  sections  are  necessarily  left 
during  His  absence  parched  and  desolate. 

When  our  Lord  was  about  to  take  His  departure 
from  the  earth  He  said  to  His  disciples,  *'  I  will  pray 
the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter, 
that  he  may  abide  with  you  forever ;  even  the  Spirit 
of  truth ;  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him :  but  ye  know 
him ;  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 
you."  *  "  What  ?  know  ye  not  that  yom^  body  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  in  you,  which 
ye  have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own  ?  "  ^  "  In 
whom  [Christ]  also,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were 
sealed  with  that  holy  Spirit  of  promise."  ^  The  seal- 
ing, then,  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  only  marks  the 
believer  as  God's  property,  but  renders  him  perfectly 
secure,  and  is  the  "  earnest  of  our  inheritance,"  part 
of  the  inheritance  already  bestowed,  as  a  Divine 
guarantee  that  all  the  rest  will  be  given  in  due 
time,  "  for  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  ^vithout 
repentance."  ^  The  Spirit,  who  abideth  with  us  for- 
ever, who  is  in  us,  and  who  seals  us  unto  the  day  of 
redemption,  is  never  taken  from  us ;  and  we  would 
be  far  more  profitably  engaged  if,  instead  of  praying 
and  singing,  "  Come,  Holy  Spirit,  heavenly  dove,"  we 
laid  to  heart  the  solemn  admonition  of  the  Sacred 

1  John  xiv.  16,  17.  2  j  Cor.  vi.  19. 

'  Eph.  i.  13.  ♦  Eom.  xi.  29. 


221 

Scriptures  addressed  to  Christians,  '^  Grieve  not  the 
holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the 
day  of  redemption."  ^  What  we  are  called  to  do  is 
to  judge  ourselves  according  to  the  word  of  Truth, 
and  to  put  away  all  that  the  word  shows  Us  is  a  grief 
to  the  Holy  Spirit :  "  For  if  we  would  judge  ourselves, 
we  should  not  be  judged.  But  when  we  are  judged, 
we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be 
condemned  with  the  world."  ^  It  is  a  sweet  truth  that 
the  Lord  judges  and  chastens  His  children  not  to  con- 
demn them,  but  to  reclaim  them  from  their  wanderings ; 
and  the  moment  they  repent  of  the  evil  into  which 
they  have  been  betrayed  the  Spirit  again  manifests 
the  blessedness  and  energy  of  Llis  presence.  That 
Spirit  never  withdraws  from  true  believers,  and  His 
permanent  abode  in  their  hearts  becomes  therefore 
the  sure  pledge  of  their  salvation. 

But  it  niay  be  asked  whether  the  consciousness  of  in- 
dwelling sin  and  the  slow  and  irregular  growth  of 
most  Christians  in  sanctification  are  not  arguments 
against  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
hence  against  the  believer's  perfect  safety  ?  That  they 
are  not  will  be  apparent  if  you  will  keep  in  mind  who 
and  what  the  believer  is.  As  shown  in  a  previous 
chapter,  he  is  a  child  of  man  and  at  the  same  time  a 
child  of  God.  He  has  two  natures,  one  born  of  the 
flesh  and  the  other  of  the  Spirit ;  one  called  the  "  old 
man,"  and  the  other  the  "new  man."  "The  flesh 
lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the 
flesh :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other."  ^ 

1  Eph.  iv.  30.  « 1  Cor.  xi.  31,  32.  ^  Qaj.  v,  17. 


222  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

As  long,  therefore,  as  the  flesh  is  in  him  he  will  have 
a  consciousness  of  sin  in  him ;  but  if  he  is  an  intelligent 
believer,  he  will  not  have  a  conscience  of  sins  on  him^ 
"because  that  the  worshippers  once  purged  should 
have  had  no  more  conscience  of  sins."  *  Christ  hath 
"  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  him- 
self ; "  *  and  if  it  is  put  away,  it  can  no  longer  be  on 
the  believer.  "  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree  ;  "  ^  and  if  He  bare  them  in  His 
own  body,  surely  they  cannot  be  on  us.  The  con- 
demning power  of  sin,  therefore,  or  its  power  to  des- 
troy, is  forever  gone,  even  while  its  presence  in  the 
old  nature  is  still  a  source  of  mortification  and  annoy- 
ance. Suppose  an  enormous  serpent  should  spring 
upon  you  from  its  covert  and  fold  you  in  its  horrid 
embrace,  but  as  it  was  preparing,  with  glittering  eye 
and  darting  tongue,  to  inflict  the  fatal  sting,  a  friend 
standing  near,  by  a  well-directed  blow,  severed  its 
head  from  the  body,  and  it  fell  dead  around  your  neck 
and  arms.  If  you  could  not  get  rid  of  it  immediately, 
but  were  compelled  to  carry  it  about  for  a  while,  its 
presence  would  doubtless  distress  and  disgust  you,  and 
sometimes  wring  from  you  the  anxious  cry,  "  O 
wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  ^  but  you  would  know  that 
it  could  no  longer  kill  or  injure  you ;  "  Likewise  reckon 
ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin ; "  ^ 
"  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  [icas]  crucified 
with  him  [Christ] ,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  des- 

1  Heb.  X.  2.  »  Heb.  ix.  26.  »  1  Pet.  ii.  24. 

*  Rom.  vii.  24.  «  Rom.  vi.  11. 


THE  BELIEVEE'S   SAFETY  223 

troyed,  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin  ;  "  * 
"  for  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  :  for  ye  are 
not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  ^  The  conscious- 
ness of  indwelling  sin,  therefore,  cannot  shake  the  se- 
curity of  the  believer,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  also 
dwells  in  him,  the  author  and  upholder  of  the  "  new 
creature  "  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  sweetly  whispers  to  his 
troubled  heart,  "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  your  feet  shortly."  ^ 

In  close  connection  with  this,  it  may  be  useful  to 
call  your  attention  for  a  moment  to  the  feeble  and 
varying  progress  in  sanctification  which  is  a  source  of 
grief  and  dread  to  so  many  true  Christians.  They  are 
perplexed  and  pained  when  they  think  of  this  impor- 
tant doctrine,  because  they  view  it  only  on  one  side,  not 
remembering  that,  like  almost  every  other  truth  of 
God's  word,  it  has  two  sides,  each  of  which  must  be 
carefully  considered.  If  you  look  at  justification,  for 
example,  you  will  find  Paul  arguing  that  on  the  Divine 
side,  or  in  God's  sight,  it  is  by  faith  alone,  while 
James  argues  that  on  the  human  side,  or  in  man's 
sight,  it  is  by  works  also.  So  on  the  Divine  side,  or 
in  God's  sight,  our  sanctification  is  by  the  blood  of 
Christ,  and  complete  as  soon  as  we  believe  on  Him, 
while  on  the  human  side,  or  in  man's  sight,  it  is  pro- 
gressive and  carried  on  by  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in 
us  and  enabling  us  "  more  and  more  to  die  unto  sin, 
and  live  unto  righteousness." 

The  fundamental  idea,  as  well  as  the  object,  of  Sanc- 
tification, i^  fitness  for  the  Divine  presence  and  service, 

1  Rom.  vi.  6.  «  Rom.  vi.  14.  '  Rom.  xvi.  20. 


224  THE  WAY  MADE   PLAIN 

and  it  is  in  this  sense  the  word  is  used  when  I  affirm 
that  such  fitness  we  have  the  moment  we  are  in  Chi'ist 
by  faith.  IS'ow,  if  you  will  turn  to  the  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  you  will  see  that  the  apostle  addresses 
"  the  Church  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that 
are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus."  '  He  is  about  to  rebuke 
them  for  erroneous  doctrines  and  evil  practices,  but  still 
he  does  not  hesitate  to  write  to  them  as  those  that  are 
sanctified.  We  look  a  little  farther  and  read,  "  Of 
him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption." ^  Christ,  then,  is  as  much  our  sanctifica- 
tion as  He  is  our  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  redemp- 
tion. Many  separate  these  words  most  unwarrantably, 
referring  righteousness  to  Christ,  but  sanctification  to 
ourselves,  admitting  that  we  must  depend  on  Christ 
for  righteousness,  but  supposing  that  we  must  depend 
upon  our  own  exertions  for  sanctification ;  seeing 
clearly  that  we  are  justified  by  faith,  but  not  seeing 
that  we  are  sanctified  by  faith. 

When  our  risen  Lord  appeared  to  Saul  of  Tarsus,  on 
the  road  to  Damascus,  and  converted  him  from  the 
error  of  his  way.  He  du^ected  the  regenerated  perse- 
cutor to  preach  to  the  Gentiles,  "  that  they  may  re- 
ceive forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me."  ^  It  is  not 
surprising,  then,  that  this  apostle,  in  writing  to  certain 
Christians,  some  of  whom,  he  declares,  had  been 
fornicators,  and  idolaters,  and  adulterers,  and  thieves, 
and  drunkards,  should  so  boldly  add,  "But  ye  are 

»  1  Cor.  i.  2.  '1  Cor.  i.  30.  ^  Acts  xxvi.  18. 


THE  believer's   SAFETY  225 

washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 
God."  '  They  were  as  truly  and  completely  sanctified 
as  they  were  washed  and  justified.  Accordingly,  it  is 
said  that  the  Saviour  came  to  do  the  will  of  God,  "  by 
the  which  will  we  are  sanctified  through  the  offering 
of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all."  ^  "  For  by 
one  offering  he  hath  perfected  forever  them  that  are 
sanctified."  ^  "  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might 
sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered  with- 
out the  gate."  ^  Hence  the  word  of  God  places  our 
justification  and  our  sanctification  on  precisely  the 
same  Divine  and  immutable  foundation,  even  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus.  We  are  not  partly  justified, 
neither  are  we  partly  sanctified,  and  you  have  no  bet- 
ter right  to  put  the  word  ''  partly  "  before  the  word 
"  sanctified,"  as  it  applies  to  the  believer,  than  you  have 
to  put  it  before  the  word  "  justified." 

The  moment  we  are  in  Christ  by  believing  on  Him, 
God  says  we  are  sanctified — not  shall  be,  nor  try  to 
be,  nor  hope  to  be,  but  ''  Ye  are  sanctified."  ]N"ot 
only  is  it  true  that  the  justice  of  the  satisfied  law 
brings  no  accusation  against  us,  but  the  hoKness  of  the 
law  finds  no  spot  nor  stain  upon  us  ;  no,  not  the 
slightest.  We  are  "  clean  every  whit  " — as  clean  as 
the  blood  of  Christ  and  the  will  of  God  can  make  us. 
When  we  receive  the  Saviour  by  faith  we  do  not  re- 
ceive a  divided  Saviour,  but  "  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  ^ 
He  is  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 

»  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  » Heb.  x.  10.  »  Heb.  x.  14. 

*  Heb.  xiii.  12.  «  Col.  iii.  11. 


226  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

demption,  and  sanctification  no  less  than  everything 
else  the  soul  needs.  It  is  forgetf ulness  or  ignorance 
of  this  blessed  truth  that  leads  so  many  sincere  be- 
lievers to  doubt  their  safety,  and  opens  the  way  for 
Satan  to  cast  the  shadows  of  a  deep  gloom  along  the 
path  of  their  pilgrimage.  They  are  seeking  for  com- 
fort in  a  gradual  sanctification  instead  of  an  offered 
sacrifice — in  a  progressive  work  of  holiness  in  them  in- 
stead of  an  accomplished  work  of  redemption  already 
done  for  them.  They  will  never  find  it  thus.  On  the 
other  hand,  they  will  surely  discover  that  the  "  flesh  " 
is  always  the  "  flesh,"  and  that  the  "  old  man  "  will  be 
deceitful  and  desperately  wicked  to  the  end  of  the  jour- 
ney. But  when  we  put  on  the  "  new  man  "  our  place  and 
portion  are  in  the  heavenlies,  and  our  position  before 
God  is  perfect  in  every  respect,  for  "  we  are  in  him 
that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  *  The 
practical  results  of  this  perfect  sanctification  will  be 
more  and  more  perfectly  developed  in  the  sight  of 
men,  and  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day ; 
but  it  is  the  happy  privilege  of  the  Christian  to  know 
that  by  the  one  offering  of  Christ  he  is  perfected  for- 
ever as  already  sanctified,  and  therefore,  whatever 
conflicts  and  defeats  he  may  meet  on  the  way,  it  is 
still  true  that  "  whosoever  belie veth  on  him  shall  not 
be  ashamed." 

The  limits  which  I  have  assigned  to  this  chapter 
forbid  a  farther  discussion  of  the  subject  at  present, 
but  it  will  come  up  again  when  w^e  consider  the 
promises  addressed  to  the   believer  calling   on  the 

1  1  John  V.  20. 


THE  believer's  SAFETY  227 

Lord.  Enough,  however,  has  been  said  to  convince 
3^oUj  if  you  will  receive  the  testimony  of  the  word  of 
Truth,  that  all,  without  exception,  who  trust  in  Jesus, 
are  now  and  forever  saved ;  for  "  God,  willing  more 
abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the 
unmutability  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath ; 
that  by  two  immutable  things  [his  promise  and  his 
oath],  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we 
might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for 
refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us  :  which 
hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and 
steadfast,  and  which  entereth  into  that  within  the 
veil ;  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even 
Jesus,  made  a  high  priest  forever,  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedek." ' 

''•  I  hear  the  words  of  love, 
I  gaze  upou  the  blood, 
I  see  the  mighty  Sacrifice, 
And  I  have  peace  with  God. 

"•  'Tis  everlasting  peace, 

Sure  as  Jehovah's  name  ; 
'Tis  stable  as  His  steadfast  throne  ; 
Forevermore  the  same. 

*^  The  clouds  may  go  and  come, 

And  storms  may  sweep  my  sky  : 
This  blood-sealed  friendship  changes  not  j 
The  cross  is  ever  nigh. 

"  My  love  is  ofttimes  low, 

My  joy  still  ebbs  and  flows ; 
But  peace  with  Him  remains  the  same : 
No  change  Jehovah  knows. 

»  Heb.  vi.  17-20. 


228  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

^^  That  which  can  shake  the  cross 
May  shake  the  peace  it  gave, 
Which  tells  me  Christ  has  never  died, 
Or  never  left  the  grave. 

"  I  change,  He  changes  not ; 
The  Christ  can  never  die ; 
His  love,  not  mine,  the  resting-place  ; 
His  truth,  not  mine,  the  tie." 


CHAPTEE  XYII 
THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  O^  THE  LOED 

"For  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek :  for 
the  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him. " — Bo' 
mans  x.  12. 

WHEN  Peter  was  directed  by  the  Spirit  to  visit 
the  Eoman  centurion,  Cornelius,  in  the  city  of 
Cesarea,  he  listened  with  amazement  to  the  statements 
of  the  Gentile  officer,  and  then  opened  his  mouth  and 
said,  "  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter 
of  persons ;  but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  him, 
and  worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with  him."  ' 
Of  course  he  did  not  mean  to  teach  that  the  fear  of 
God  and  our  personal  works  of  righteousness  form  the 
ground  or  reason  of  our  acceptance,  for  such  a  doc- 
trine would  not  only  contradict  the  whole  tenor  of 
Sacred  Scripture,  but  it  would  be  in  direct  conflict 
with  the  apostle's  own  testimony  on  this  very  occa- 
sion. At  the  close  of  the  address  of  which  the  words 
just  quoted  are  the  beginning,  after  speaking  of  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  he  adds,  "  To  him 
give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of 
sins."  ^  He  could  not,  therefore,  be  guilty  of  the  ab- 
surdity of  affirming  in  one  breath  that  we  are  saved 
by  our  fear  of  God  and  works  of  righteousness,  and 

>  Acts  X.  34,  35.  2  Acts  x.  43. 

229 


230  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

in  another  breath  that  we  are  saved  according  to  the 
witness  of  all  the  prophets  only  through  faith  in  Chi'ist. 
He  obviously  designed  to  assert  that  whatever  is  ac- 
ceptable to  Jehovah  in  one  nation  is  acceptable  in  any 
other,  without  reference  to  the  ground  of  acceptance. 
Man's  filial  fear  of  God  and  works  of  righteousness 
are  nowhere  in  the  Bible  presented  as  the  cause,  but 
as  the  consequence,  of  acceptance.  They  are  not  the 
conditions  on  which  salvation  is  bestowed,  but  the 
fruits  of  salvation  received. 

These  fruits,  however,  are  not  now  confined  to  the 
land  of  Palestine,  "  for  there  is  no  difference  between 
the  Jew  and  the  Greek."  Once  saving  mercy  was  re- 
vealed to  a  single  race,  but  when  "  God  was  manifest 
in  the  flesh,"  '  to  accomplish  human  redemption,  grace 
overflowed,  as  it  were,  the  narrow  bounds,  and  spread 
like  a  sea  of  glory  from  pole  to  pole.  In  the  lan- 
guage of  Dr.  Chalmers,  commenting  on  the  words 
placed  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,  the  precious  truth 
here  announced  "  invests  with  an  ample  warrant  the 
messengers  of  salvation,  who  might  go  forth  the 
bearers  of  a  full  and  unexpected  commission,  to  assail 
even  a  whole  world  lying  in  wickedness  and  uncon- 
cern, by  plying  with  the  overtures  of  a  free  salvation, 
each  and  every  individual  of  the  great  human  family. 
God,  it  is  said  here,  makes  no  difference  between  the 
Jew  and  the  Greek ;  and  there  are  some  who,  in  de- 
fending the  articles  of  their  own  scientific  theology, 
would  make  the  universality  of  the  Gospel  offer  lie  in 
this,  that  now,  when  the  middle  waU  of  partition  is 

1  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 


THE   BELIEVEE   CALLING   ON   THE  LOED        231 

broken  down,  it  might  be  offered  to  men  of  every  na- 
tion. But  the  scriptural  theology  carries  the  univer- 
sality farther  down  than  this — and  so  as  that  the  Gospel 
might  be  offered,  not  merely  to  men  of  every  nation, 
but  to  each  man  of  every  nation.  God  is  not  only  no 
respecter  of  nations,  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  It 
is  not  only  whatsoever  nation  shall  call  on  the  name 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved,  but  whatsoever  man  of 
that  nation  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  he 
shall  be  saved." 

The  word  Lord  as  a  title  descriptive  of  God  always 
refers  in  the  Xew  Testament  to  Jesus  Christ,  except 
in  the  few  instances  where  the  context  shows  that  the 
Father  or  the  Holy  Ghost  is  meant.  When,  there- 
fore, it  is  written,  "  The  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich 
unto  all  that  call  upon  him,"  our  minds  are  to  turn 
particularly  to  the  Second  person  of  the  adorable 
Trinity,  though,  of  course,  not  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
First  and  Third  persons.  What  one  does  the  others 
do,  and  the  purposes  and  resources  of  one  are  the  pur- 
poses and  resources  of  the  others.  But  because  of 
Christ's  atoning  death  on  the  cross,  "  God  also  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is 
above  every  name :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father." '  The  Spirit  of  truth 
also,  says  the  Saviour,  "  shall  not  speak  of  himself ; 
but  whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak ;  and 
1  Phil.  ii.  9-11. 


232  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

he  will  show  you  things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify 
me ;  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it 
unto  you." '  Both  of  these  Divine  persons,  then,  re- 
joice to  see  the  Son  honored,  and  listen,  no  doubt, 
with  delight  to  the  voices  of  believers  singing  the 
noble  hymn : 


iC 


All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name  ! 

Let  angels  prostrate  fall  ; 
Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 

To  crown  Him  Lord  of  all." 

It  is  a  sweet  consolation  to  many  souls,  burdened 
with  the  crushing  memory  of  some  past  crime  or  with 
the  heavy  sorrows  of  life,  to  feel  that  they  can  go 
with  their  confessions  and  supplications  directly  to 
"  the  second  man,  the  Lord  from  heaven."  ^  If  they 
are  trusting  in  Him  ulone  for  salvation,  they  can  un- 
derstand the  cheering  language  of  the  inspired  apostle 
when  he  says,  "  Seeing,  then,  that  we  have  a  great 
high  priest,  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the 
son  of  God,  let  us  hold  fast  our  profession.  For  we 
have  not  a  high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  ;  but  was  in  all  points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  Let  us  there- 
fore come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  ^ 
An  unconverted  friend  of  mine,  in  extreme  sickness 
and  suffering,  replied  to  a  visitor  who  urged  him  to 
look  to  God  for  help,  "  Do  not  talk  to  me  about  God, 
whom  I  cannot  comprehend,  but  tell  me  about  Jesus, 

1  Jobu  xvi.  13,  14.  2 1  Cor.  xv.  47  »  Heb.  iv.  14-16. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  ON  THE  LORD        233 

for  my  thoughts  can  grasp  one  who  as  a  man  has  the 
experience  and  sympathies  of  a  man."  His  language 
is  not  to  be  approved,  for  the  Saviour  says,  "  He  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  ;  "  ^  and  as  this  Sa- 
viour is  called  "  the  word,"  ^  He  sustains  to  the  unseen 
Father  the  same  relation  that  a  word  does  to  thought : 
He  is  God  expressed  or  uttered,  if  I  may  so  speak, 
"  for  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily." ' 

Still,  without  detracting  in  the  slightest  degree  from 
the  infinite  love  and  tenderness  of  the  Father,  there 
are  periods  in  our  history  which  drive  us  with  our  pe- 
titions more  immediately  to  Him  who  knew,  as  we 
know,  the  force  of  fierce  temptations,  and  who,  "  when 
he  had  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  sat  down  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  ^  "  For  verily  he 
took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on 
him  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Wherefore  in  all  things  it 
behooved  him  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that 
he  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest  in  things 
pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins 
of  the  people.  For  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered 
being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succor  them  that  are 
tempted."  ^  All  that  call  upon  Him  in  all  their  mani- 
fold trials  and  various  troubles  address  their  supplica- 
tions to  a  gracious  Lord  who  trod  the  rough  path  they 
are  required  to  follow,  and  hence  can  enter  into  their 
feelings,  share  their  sufferings,  and  pity  their  infirmi- 
ties.    A  number  of  persons  may  assemble  at  a  funeral, 

^  John  xiv.  9.  2  jojin  j  i  a  q^i   jj   g^ 

4  Heb.  i.  3.  ^  Heb.  ii.  16-18. 


234  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

and  all  of  them  will  know  that  the  mother  or  wife 
who  is  weeping  by  the  side  of  her  dead  is  sorely  be- 
reaved, but  they  who  have  endured  a  similar  affliction 
will  know  it  in  a  different  sense  from  the  others  and 
utter  their  words  of  condolence  with  a  deeper  mean- 
ing. So  the  Lord  on  whom  we  call,  and  ''  who  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh,  when  he  had  ofifered  up  prayers  and 
supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears  unto  him 
that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death,"  ^  has  a  personal 
and  practical  acquaintance  with  the  anxieties  and  cares 
to  which  His  disciples  are  exposed,  and  whispers  to 
their  troubled  hearts  words  of  most  precious  sympathy. 
"In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted."^  "Surely 
he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows."  ^ 
"  Himself  took  om^  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sick- 
nesses." ^ 

But  you  will  observe  that  only  believers  can  truly 
call  on  Hun :  for  unless  we  believe  that  He  died  for 
our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification,  and  now 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us,  Head  over  all  things 
to  the  Church,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  it  is 
impossible  to  present  our  petitions  before  His  throne. 
When,  therefore,  we  pray  to  Him,  we  are  praying  to 
One  whom  it  is  our  duty  to  honor  in  all  respects  even 
as  we  honor  the  Ancient  of  days  from  whose  bosom 
He  came  down  into  our  world ;  though  it  is  a  more  ex- 
act definition  of  Christian  prayer  to  say  that  it  is  the  sin- 
cere expression  of  our  hearts'  desires  to  God  the  Father, 
in  the  name  of  God  the  Son,  for  those  things  that  are 

^  Heb.  V.  7.  '  Isa.  Ixiii.  9. 

'  Isa.  liii.  4.  *  Matt.  viii.  17. 


THE  BELIEVER   CALLING   OX   THE  LOPwD        235 

suggested  to  us  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Likewise 
the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities :  for  we  know 
not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought :  but  the 
Spirit  himself  maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings 
which  cannot  be  uttered."  ^  Again,  our  Saviour  de- 
clares, "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that 
will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son. 
If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it."^ 
Here,  then,  we  learn  that  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  in- 
firmities by  showing  us  what  we  should  pray  for  as 
we  ought,  and  that  our  supplications  are  to  be  offered 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  who  speaks  as  a  mighty  God 
and  promises  to  do  whatsoever  we  thus  ask.  Hence 
the  important  question  at  once  arises,  What  is  it  to 
ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus  ?  Is  it  merely  to  say  at  the 
conclusion  of  our  prayers,  "  This  we  ask  in  the  name 
or  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  "  ?    Surely  not. 

Suppose  you  were  exceedingly  anxious  to  obtain  a 
favor  from  an  earthly  potentate,  but  knew  that  you 
had  no  influence  whatever  in  his  court,  and  that  you 
could  not  even  gain  admittance  into  his  presence 
without  the  aid  of  others.  In  this  extremity  you  go 
to  a  friend  who  stands  higher  in  the  esteem  of  the 
monarch  than  all  other  persons  in  the  realm,  and  who 
is  deeply  interested  in  the  success  of  your  suit.  He 
gives  you  a  letter  of  introduction  and  recommenda- 
tion, warmly  espousing  your  cause.  With  such  a  let- 
ter you  may  command  easy  access  to  the  throne,  and 
while  urging  your  request  you  are  but  expressing  the 
known  wishes  of  your  powerful  friend,  and  represent- 

1  Rom.  viii.  26.  ^  joi^n  ^iv.  13,  14. 


236  THE  WAY  SrADE  PLAIN 

ing  him  indeed  in  the  audience-chamber  of  the 
sovereign.  You  are  speaking  as  he  would  have  you 
speak,  as  he  would  speak  if  he  were  in  your  place, 
and  your  petition  is  granted  because  it  is  understood 
to  convey  the  desires  of  one  who  may  not  be  denied. 
Suppose  you  should  present  your  check  with  nothing 
but  your  own  signature  upon  it  at  the  counter  of  a 
bank  where  not  a  cent  was  on  deposit  to  your  credit. 
Of  course  it  would  be  instantly  rejected,  but  if  you 
should  return  and  exhibit  a  check  signed  by  a  friend 
who  had  thousands  stored  away  in  the  coffers  of  the 
association,  it  would  be  promptly  accepted  and  paid, 
because  you  would  appear  in  the  name  and  as  the  rep- 
resentative of  another  who  was  entitled  to  the  high- 
est consideration. 

In  like  manner,  if  you  attempt  to  approach  the 
eternal  throne  in  your  own  name  or  depending  for  ac- 
ceptance upon  the  fact  that  you  pray,  we  well  know 
the  result,  for  God's  word  says,  "  He  that  turneth 
away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer 
shall  be  abomination."  *  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  the  Lord  will  not  hear 
me."  ^  "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord  :  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his 
delight."  ^  Now,  the  fact  is  we  have  all  turned  away 
the  ear  from  hearing  the  law  ;  we  have  all  regarded 
iniquity  in  the  heart,  and  continue  to  regard  it  until 
born  again  through  faith  in  Christ,  for  it  is  the  crown- 
ing sin  of  man's  innumerable  transgressions  that  he 
refuses  to  believe  on  Jesus ;  we  all  bring  forward,  in 

*  Prov.  xxviii.  9.  «  Ps.  Ixvi.  18.  ^  Prov.  xv.  8. 


THE  BELIEVEE  CALLING  ON" THE  LOED   237 

our  vain  religiousness,  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked,  and 
never  present  the  prayer  of  the  upright  until  we  are 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  His  dear  Son.  But 
when  we  receive  and  rest  upon  Him  alone  for  salva- 
tion as  He  is  freely  offered  to  us  in  the  Gospel,  then 
He  gives  us  His  own  standing  before  the  Father's 
throne  ;  then  we  know  what  it  is  to  pray  in  His  name ; 
for  God  sees  us  in  Him,  and  hears  in  our  prayer  His 
voice,  for  He  and  we  are  one ;  we  representing  Him 
in  the  presence  of  God  ;  to  pray  sustained  by  the  in- 
finite merits  of  His  atoning  blood  ;  to  pray  endorsed 
by  Him  as  His  friends  and  brethren ;  to  pray,  as 
He  would  have  us  pray,  under  the  suggestions  and 
teachings  of  His  blessed  Spirit  abiding  with  us  for- 
ever. 

Hence  we  see  how  fearfully  abused  and  perverted  is 
that  beautiful  form  of  supplication  commonly  called 
the  Lord's  Prayer.  The  meaningless  jargon  of  the 
rudest  heathenism  is  not  a  more  shocking  mockery  of 
true  and  acceptable  worship  than  is  the  manner  in 
which  multitudes  in  Christian  lands  are  in  the  habit 
of  saying,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  Thou- 
sands of  the  unregenerate,  who  are  bound,  soul  and 
body,  to  the  world  by  the  ties  of  an  idolatrous  attach- 
ment, and  who  rush  with  mad  eagerness  from  one 
scene  to  another  of  God-forgetting  and  God-defying 
revelry,  hope  to  gain  the  ear  of  the  Almighty  by  the 
utterance  of  this  sublime  language,  and  thus  lull  the 
conscience  into  the  fatal  slumber  of  a  profounder  in- 
sensibility. They  do  not  seem  to  know  that  we  are 
the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 


238  THE  WAY   MADE   PLAIN 

hence  that  believers  alone  can  say  with  any  propriety, 
"  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  One  single  peti- 
tion in  this  wonderful  prayer  would  consign  them  to 
perdition  if  answered.  Let  any  man  intelligently  and 
sincerely  address  the  Searcher  of  hearts  with  the 
words,  "  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our 
debtors  ;  "  and  if  he  depends  on  this  for  salvation,  he 
simply  invokes  destruction  upon  himself  ;  for  if  the 
Divine  forgiveness  is  extended  to  him  only  as  he  ex- 
tends forgiveness  to  those  indebted  to  him,  a  moment's 
serious  reflection  will  convince  him  that  he  is  hope- 
lessly lost.  But  even  if  we  were  able  to  forgive 
others  as  fully  and  freely  as  we  desire  God  toiorgive  us, 
still  this  could  not  be  the  meritorious  cause  of  our 
salvation,  miless  the  whole  work  of  Christ  is  in  vain, 
and  unless  the  whole  Bible  from  Genesis  to  Eevela- 
tion  is  an  idle  fable,  for  it  declares  in  every  conceiv- 
able form  of  statement  that  "  without  shedding  of 
blood  is  no  remission."  * 

The  name  of  Jesus  is  nowhere  mentioned  in  the 
prayer,  and  it  was  plainly  intended  only  for  His 
disciples  in  their  circumstances  at  that  particular 
time.  It  was  given  to  them  before  He  became  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  be- 
lieveth,  and  opened  a  new  and  living  way  of  access  to 
the  Father  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  His  flesh. 
There  is  not  the  slightest  allusion  to  it  in  any  of  the 
inspired  Epistles,  nor  is  there  the  slightest  reason  to 
suppose  that  it  was  designed  for  permanent  use,  al- 
though it  must  forever  remain  unspeakably  precious 
1  Heb.  ix.  22. 


THE   BELIEVER   CALLIT^G   Oli   THE  LORD        239 

to  the  Christian  because  it  is  in  the  words  of  our 
Lord,  and  contains  a  remarkable  summary  of  the 
petitions  proper  for  those  who  are  ab-eady  saved 
through  the  merits  of  His  blood.  We  have  His  own 
authority  for  asserting  that  He  did  not  require  its 
continued  employment  after  His  death,  and  resurrec- 
tion, and  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  when 
He  was  about  to  take  His  departure  from  the  disciples 
He  addressed  them  thus :  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name, 
he  will  give  it  you.  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing 
in  my  name :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy 
may  be  full."  ^  Again,  "  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in 
my  name." '  At  what  day  ?  The  day  when  the 
promised  Spirit  should  come  to  teach  them  the  true 
nature  of  His  kingdom,  and  of  their  mission,  and  to 
gather  out  of  the  world  a  church  to  be  builded  to- 
gether for  a  habitation  of  God.  After  that  day  the 
disciples  had  very  different  views  of  the  purpose  of 
Christ's  first  advent  to  earth,  and  of  the  testimony 
of  the  Gospel,  and  of  their  oneness  with  the  Saviour ; 
and  therefore  the  prayer  which  they  used  as  children 
slowly  learning  the  alphabet  of  Christianity  could  not 
suitably  and  fully  express  their  enlarged  desires  when 
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  behold  the  match- 
less worth  of  the  name  of  Jesus. 

Praying  in  that  name,  they  had  the  positive,  un- 
mistakable assurance  that  whatsoever  they  asked  He 
would  do  it  that  the  Father  might  be  glorified  in  the 
Son.     It  is  so  still ;  and  if  we  would  only  pray  in  the 

^  John  xvi.  23,  24.  ^  j^j^q  ^^^^  26. 


240  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

consciousness  of  our  complete  acceptance  in  Christ, 
and  as  expressing  His  mind  and  will,  we  could  remove 
mountains,  and  nothing  should  be  impossible  unto  us. 
Such  prayer,  though  breathed  by  the  prisoner  in  his 
lonely  dungeon  or  lisped  by  the  tongue  of  infancy, 
goes  rushing  across  the  universe,  "  mighty  through 
God  to  the  pulling  down  of  strong  holds ;  " '  swifter 
than  the  lightning ;  more  powerful  than  the  hur- 
ricane. "  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as 
we  are,  and  he  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not 
rain :  and  it  rained  not  on  the  earth  by  the  space  of 
three  years  and  six  months.  And  he  prayed  again, 
and  the  heavens  gave  rain,  and  the  earth  brought 
forth  her  fruit."  ^  "  All  things,  whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive."^  "Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you :  for  every  one 
that  asketh  receiveth ;  and  he  that  seeketh  findeth ; 
and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  opened.  Or 
what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  his  son  ask  bread, 
will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?  Or  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he 
give  him  a  serpent  ?  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much 
more  shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good 
things  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  "  * 

These  promises,  and  scores  of  others  like  them  that 
could  be  quoted,  are  to  be  taken  in  their  plain,  obvious 
sense,  and  they  are  not  to  be  fettered  by  human  doubt 
nor  explained  away  by  human  criticism.     The  Sacred 

i2Cor.  X.  4.  ajamesv.  17,  18. 

'Matt.  xxi.  22.  «Matt.  vii.  7-11. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  ON  THE  LORD        241 

Scriptures  are  full  of  striking  illustrations  which  prove 
that  God  means  precisely  what  He  says  when  He  de- 
clares that "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
man  availeth  much,"  ^  "  for  the  same  Lord  over  all  is 
rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him."  He  is  rich  in  all 
the  plenitude  of  the  Divine  perfections ;  rich  in  the 
absolute  control  of  His  boundless  empire  that  in  all 
its  shining  suns  and  countless  systems,  in  all  its  loftiest 
intelligences  and  minutest  forms  of  life,  is  subject  to 
His  imperial  command  ;  and  rich  in  the  inexhaustible 
fulness  of  His  love  to  believers  of  every  race  and 
rank.  He  possesses  omnipotence,  and  is  able  therefore 
to  help  His  people  who  call  on  Him :  "  For  by  him 
were  all  things  created,  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that 
are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be 
thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers : 
all  things  were  created  by  him,  and  for  him :  and  he 
is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist."  ^ 
"  All  power,"  He  says,  "  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth ; "  ^  and  He  proclaims  Himself  to  be  the 
"  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  ending, 
saith  the  Lord,  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is 
to  come,  the  Almighty."  ^ 

He  possesses  omniscience,  and  can  therefore  foresee 
and  guard  against  all  the  schemes  of  devils  and  all  the 
contingencies  of  human  events  that  may  threaten  to 
arrest  the  bestowal  of  His  purposed  and  promised 
blessings  upon  His  disciples.  "  Even  the  very  hairs 
of  your  head  are  all  numbered,"  ^  He  says ;  and,  "•  I 

1  James  v.  16.  ^qqI^  i^  16^  17^  SMatt.  xxviii.  18. 

*  Rev.  i.  8.  ^  Luke  xii.  7. 


242  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

am  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts,"  ^  He  de- 
clares. ^'  Lord,"  exclaimed  Peter,  "  thou  knowest  all 
things;"^  and  hence  it  is  evident  that  His  mind  is 
perfectly  familiar  with  all  that  has  occmTed  in  the 
past,  and  all  that  shall  occur  in  the  future ;  and  takes 
knowledge  not  only  of  the  march  of  tempests,  the 
revolution  of  planets  and  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires, 
but  also  of  the  silent  budding  of  a  rose  and  the  noise- 
less flight  of  an  insect.     Like  the  ocean, 

^^  Vast  as  it  is,  it  answers  as  it  flows, 
The  breathing  of  the  lightest  air  that  blows." 

He  possesses  unchangeable  faithfulness,  and  there- 
fore we  may  rely  upon  His  word  with  implicit  con- 
fidence. "  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also 
will  do  it,"  ^  writes  the  apostle.  "  The  Lord  is  faith- 
ful, who  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep  you  from  evil."  * 
''  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  (for  he  is  faithful  that  promised)."  ^  "  And 
I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse  ;  and 
he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True."  ® 
He  possesses  infinite  love  for  those  who  have  been  re- 
deemed with  His  precious  blood,  and  therefore  cannot 
deny  them  any  petition  which  it  is  best  for  them  to 
receive.  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  ^  "  Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his 

^  Rev.  ii.  23.  ^  j^jjn  ^xi.  17.  »  1  Thess.  v.  24. 

*  2  Thess.  iii.  3.  ^  Hg^^  j..  23.  «  Rev.  xix.  11. 

'  John  xiii.  1. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  ON  THE  LORD   243 

life  for  his  friends." '  "  He  that  loveth  me  shall  be 
loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will 
manifest  myself  to  him."  ^  "  As  the  Father  hath 
loved  me,  so  have  I  loved  you."  ^  "  The  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,"  says  Paul,  "  I  live  by  the  faith 
of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself 
for  me."  ^  "  Christ  also  loved  the  church,  and  gave 
himself  for  it."  ^ 

Oh,  how  rich  He  is  in  His  own  eternal  and  immeas- 
urable resources  to  all  that  call  on  Him  !  There  is 
no  possible  condition  in  which  we  can  be  placed  that 
may  deprive  us  of  the  privilege  of  prayer ;  and  quick 
as  thought  can  ascend  to  our  Lord  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father,  His  eye  is  turned  towards  our  longing 
glance  and  His  heart  responds  to  our  trustful  desire. 
"  And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him, 
that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he 
heareth  us :  and  if  we  know  that  he  hear  us,  whatso- 
ever we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that 
we  desired  of  him."  ^  He  "  is  able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  '  for  the 
name  by  which  He  introduced  Himself  to  Moses  in  the 
solitudes  of  Horeb,  and  the  name  that  is  still  appro- 
priate to  Him,  is  the  I  am.  As  another  has  beauti- 
fully said,  in  taking  this  title  He  was  "  furnishing  His 
people  with  a  blank  check  to  be  filled  up  to  any 
amount.  He  calls  Himself  I  am,  and  faith  has  but 
to  write  over  against  that  ineffably  precious  name 

*  John  XV.  13.  2  John  xiv.  21.  ^  jqi^  ^v.  9. 

*  Gal.  ii.  20.  ^  ^ph.  v.  25.  « 1  John  v.  14,  15. 

'  Eph.  iii.  20. 


244  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

whatever  we  want."  Do  we  w^ant  pardon,  justifica- 
tion, adoption,  sanctification,  support  in  weakness, 
consolation  in  sorrow,  guidance  in  perplexity,  deliver- 
ance from  temptation,  victory  over  death,  full  redemp- 
tion, and  unfading  glory  ?  I  AM  all  this,  says  Christ, 
and  all  that  you  desire. 


CHAPTER  XYHI 
THE  BELIEVEE  CALLING  ON  THE  LOBD 

IN  the  light  of  this  precious  truth  every  believer 
may  be  addressed  in  the  language  of  Elisha  to  ''  a 
certain  woman  of  the  wives  of  the  sons  of  the  proph- 
ets," who  was  reduced  to  the  last  pot  of  oil,  and 
whose  sons  were  about  to  be  taken  by  the  creditor  as 
bondmen.  "Go,"  he  said,  "borrow  thee  vessels 
abroad  of  all  thy  neighbors,  even  empty  vessels  ;  bor- 
row not  a  few." '  With  faith  in  the  word  of  God 
spoken  by  His  servant,  she  obeyed  the  direction,  and 
it  was  only  when  there  was  not  a  vessel  more  that  the 
oil  stayed.  So,  when  we  can  go  to  the  Lord  emptied 
of  self  and  the  world,  and  relying  with  implicit  con- 
fidence upon  His  promises,  we  shall  receive  from  His 
inexhaustible  resources  "  above  all  that  we  ask  or 
think,"  and  ^never  until  faith  fails  will  the  supplies 
which  it  commands  cease.  By  a  law  more  fixed  and 
more  unalterable  than  the  law  of  gravitation,  God  has 
determined  that  whatsoever  we  ask  in  the  name  of 
Jesus,  it  shall  be  done  for  us.  It  may  be  that  the 
instrumentality  by  which  this  amazing  result  is  pro- 
duced was  included  from  the  first  in  the  department 
men  call  "  natural,"  and  that  it  belonged  to  the  origi- 
nal, comprehensive  plan  which  embraced  the  physical 
arrangement  and  government  of  the  earth  ;  but  with- 

*  2  Kings  iv.  3. 
245 


246  THE  WAY    MADE  PLAIN 

out  undertaking  to  discuss  such  a  question,  about  the 
result  itself  there  is  not  the  shadow  of  doubt.  Prayer 
ascends  from  an  earnest  heart  for  those  things  that 
are  according  to  the  will  of  our  Lord  ;  and  without 
the  slightest  disturbance  in  the  delicate  mechanism  of 
the  universe,  without  the  faintest  discord  in  the 
"  music  of  the  spheres,"  as  softly  and  silently  as  the 
snowflake  falls  from  heaven,  as  certainly  and  surely 
as  the  ripened  fruit  drops  from  the  shaken  bough  to 
the  outstretched  hand  beneath,  does  it  call  down  bless- 
ings upon  the  believing  suppliant. 

We  are  never  straitened  in  God,  but  only  in  our- 
selves ;  for  when  temptations  assail,  or  troubles  arise, 
we  too  often  fail  to  put  Christ,  by  faith,  between  them 
and  us,  and  too  often  through  unbelief  put  them  be- 
tween Christ  and  us,  so  that  we  lose  courage  and 
power.  Ten  of  the  twelve  spies  who  were  sent  from 
all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  search  out  the  land  of 
Canaan  returned  in  great  fear,  saying,  "  AVe  be  not 
able  to  go  up  against  the  people ;  for  they  are  stronger 
than  we.  .  .  .  And  there  we  saw  the  giants,  the 
sons  of  Anak,  which  come  of  the  giants ;  and  we  were 
in  our  own  sight  as  grasshoppers,  and  so  we  were  in 
their  sight."  *  But  Caleb  endeavored  to  quiet  the 
alarmed  congregation  with  the  bold  language,  "  Let 
us  go  up  at  once  and  possess  it ;  for  we  are  well  able 
to  overcome  it,"  and  Joshua  and  Caleb  thus  warned 
and  encouraged  their  brethren :  "  Only  rebel  not  ye 
against  the  Lord,  neither  fear  ye  the  people  of  the 
land ;  for  they  are  bread  for  us  ;  their  defence  is  de- 

^  Num.  xiii.  31-33. 


THE   BELIEVER  CALLIIs^G  ON   THE  LOKD        247 

parted  from  them,  and  the  Loed  is  with  us :  fear 
them  not."  *  The  ten  fixed  their  minds  upon  the 
giants,  not  the  Lord,  and  therefore  could  think  of 
nothing  but  disaster,  defeat,  and  death,  while  the  two 
believers  fixed  their  minds  upon  the  Lord,  not  the 
giants,  and  therefore  could  think  of  nothing  but  de- 
liverance, and  success,  and  victory.  The  former  were 
already  unmanned  because  they  looked  not  to  the  hills 
whence  cometh  our  help,  but  the  latter  cared  not 
whether  their  conflict  lay  with  giants  or  grasshoppers, 
because  they  could  confidently  say,  "  They  that  be 
with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them."  "  So 
when  David  was  sent  by  his  father,  from  attending  a 
"  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness,"  with  parched  corn  and 
loaves  of  bread  to  his  brothers  in  the  Hebrew  army, 
he  found  the  host  of  Israel  trembling  at  the  boastful 
challenge  of  Goliath  of  Gath.  Having  obtained  per- 
mission to  meet  the  monster  in  mortal  combat,  he 
threw  off  the  armor  of  Saul,  in  which  faith  could  not 
freely  move,  and  taking  with  him  five  smooth  stones 
out  of  the  brook  and  his  sling  in  his  hand,  he  went 
forth  without  the  slightest  trepidation.  Saul  and  his 
soldiers  thought  only  of  Goliath,  and  were  afraid,  but 
David  thought  only  of  Jehovah^  and  hence  could 
calmly  reply  to  his  mail-clad  foe,  "  I  come  to  thee  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  the  armies 
of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied  ; "  ^  and  the  next  in- 
stant a  stone  from  his  sling  was  buried  in  the  forehead 
of  the  uncircumcised  Philistine,  and  *'  he  fell  upon  his 
face  to  the  earth." 
» Num.  xiii.  30 ;  xiv.  9.       -  2  Kings  vi.  16.       '  1  Sam.  xvii.  45. 


248  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

Whenever  Satan  can  divert  our  minds  from  the 
Lord  to  ourselves  or  to  our  circumstances,  we  are  sure 
to  lose  h^art  and  hope,  and  our  prayers  will  be  want- 
ing in  the  essential  elements  of  faith  and  fervor.  Look, 
for  example,  at  Moses,  who  "  was  very  meek,  above 
all  the  men  which  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,"  * 
and  see  how  his  meekness  became  weakness,  and  how 
his  fortitude  gave  way  to  fear,  and  how  he  yielded  to 
discouragement,  despondency,  and  despair  the  mo- 
ment he  took  his  eyes  from  the  Lord  to  view  himself 
and  his  difficulties.  "  I  am  not  able,"  he  cried,  *'  to 
bear  all  this  people  alone,  because  it  is  too  heavy  for 
me.  [The  Lord  had  not  asked  him  to  do  it.]  And 
if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  kill  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of 
hand,  if  I  have  found  favor  in  thy  sight ;  and  let  me 
not  see  my  wretchedness."  ^  Look  at  Job,  of  whom 
the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  "  Hast  thou  considered  my 
servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth, 
a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God, 
and  escheweth  evil  ?  "  ^  "  After  this  opened  Job  his 
mouth,  and  cursed  his  day.  And  Job  spake,  and  said, 
Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born,  and  the  night 
in  which  it  was  said.  There  is  a  man  child  conceived. 
Let  that  day  be  darkness  ;  let  not  God  regard  it  from 
above,  neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it."  ^  Look  at 
Elijah,  who,  as  Moses  was  the  meekest  man  and  Job 
the  most  patient,  may  be  called  the  bravest  man  on 
the  earth,  and  yet,  terrified  at  the  threat  of  a  woman 
whose  powerful  husband  he  had  withstood  to  the  face 

*  Num.  xii.  3.  *  Num.  xi.  14,  15. 

»  Job  i.  8.  *  Job  iii.  1-4. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  ON  THE  LORD   249 

and  humbled  into  the  dust,  "  he  arose,  and  went  for 
his  life,  and  came  to  Beer-she ba,  which  belongeth  to 
Judah,  and  left  his  servant  there.  But  he  himself 
went  a  day's  journey  into  the  wilderness,  and  came 
and  sat  down  under  a  juniper  tree :  and  he  requested 
for  himself  that  he  might  die ;  and  said.  It  is  enough ; 
now,  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life  ;  for  I  am  not  better 
than  my  fathers."  ^  Look  at  Jeremiah,  who  was  sanc- 
tified before  he  came  out  of  the  womb  and  ordained 
to  be  a  prophet  unto  the  nations,  and  yet,  after  all  his 
experience  of  the  goodness  of  God,  he  bitterly  ex- 
claimed, "  Cursed  be  the  day  wherein  I  was  born :  let 
not  the  day  wherein  my  mother  bare  me  be  blessed. 
Cursed  be  the  man  who  brought  tidings  to  my  father, 
saying,  A  man  child  is  born  unto  thee ;  making  him 
very  glad.  And  let  that  man  be  as  the  cities  which 
the  Lord  overthrew,  and  repented  not :  and  let  him 
hear  the  cry  in  the  morning,  and  the  shouting  at 
noontide ;  because  he  slew  me  not  from  the  womb ; 
or  that  my  mother  might  have  been  my  grave,  and 
her  womb  to  be  always  great  with  me.  Wherefore 
came  I  forth  out  of  the  womb  to  see  labor  and  sor- 
row, that  my  days  should  be  consumed  with  shame?  "  ^ 
All  this  shows  that  Moses  was  not  meek,  and  that 
Job  was  not  patient,  and  that  Elijah  was  not  brave, 
and  that  Jeremiah  was  not  submissive,  except  as  their 
thoughts  rested  on  the  Lord.  The  moment  their 
minds  were  occupied  with  themselves  or  with  their 
circumstances,  the  first  became  irritable,  and  the 
second  gave  way  to  self-righteous  complaints,  and  the 

^  1  Kings  xix.  3,  4.  2  j^^  ^x.  14-18. 


250  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

third  was  panic-stricken,  and  the  fourth  fell  into  the 
depths  of  despair.  Thus  do  the  distinguished  men 
whose  names  have  been  given  furnish  a  striking  illus- 
tration, not  only  of  the  truth  previously  stated,  that 
the  "  flesh  "  in  a  believer  is  no  better  than  the  ''  flesh  " 
in  an  unbeliever,  but  of  the  importance  of  keeping  the 
eye  steadily  fixed  on  the  Lord  if  we  would  retain 
perfect  composure  of  spirit  amid  our  sharpest  trials. 
Contrast  their  hasty  and  intemperate  language  with 
the  calm  and  joyful  words  of  the  Son  of  man  at  a 
period  in  His  earthly  ministry  darker  than  any  known 
to  the  saints  who  had  longed  for  His  appearing.  The 
generation  that  heard  His  tender  messages  of  love 
heaped  cruel  slanders  upon  Him,  saying,  "  Behold  a 
man  gluttonous,  and  a  winebibber."  Chorazin,  Beth- 
saida,  and  Capernaum,  that  had  listened  to  His  mar- 
vellous discourses  and  witnessed  His  mighty  works, 
rejected  with  contempt  His  gentle  entreaties  and  re- 
pelled with  anger  His  solemn  admonitions.  He  stood 
alone  in  the  world  He  came  to  save,  but  "  at  that 
time  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  O  Father, 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  .  .  .  Even  so,  Father ; 
for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight,"  '  and  then  im- 
mediately followed  the  sweetest  invitation  ever  ad- 
dressed to  the  weary  and  sorrowful :  ''  Come  unto  me, 
all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest."  "^  Blessed  example !  He  kept  His  gaze 
constantly  directed  to  His  Father,  and  therefore  noth- 
ing could  disturb  His  peace  or  arrest  the  stream  of 
grace  that  flowed  from  His  loving  heart. 

'  Matt.  xi.  25,  26.  ^  i^i^tt.  xi.  28. 


THE   BELIEVER   CALLING   ON   THE   LORD        251 

"We  see,  then,  that  we  can  never  know  in  onr  own 
experience  the  riches  of  the  Lord  unto  all  that  call 
upon  Him  unless  our  souls  have  formed  the  habit,  so 
to  speak,  of  looking  to  Him  continually.  There  are 
many  who  pray  "  by  fits  and  starts,"  now  wrapped 
up  in  worldliness,  and  anon  at  a  season  of  special  re- 
ligious interest,  or  under  the  pressure  of  some  per- 
sonal trouble,  bethinking  them  of  the  God  whom  they 
have  long  neglected,  and  then  wondering  that  they  do 
not  receive  an  immediate  answer  to  their  supplications. 
The  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  noth- 
ing wavering.  For  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave 
of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed.  For  let 
not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of 
the  Lord."  '  The  fearfully  common  sin,  even  among 
professed  Christians,  of  making  the  glorious  God  a 
convenience  or  necessity  in  times  of  need,  when  ordi- 
narily the  mind  is  carried  like  a  wind-driven  wave 
hither  and  thither  across  the  sea  of  life,  may  account 
for  the  number  of  prayers  that  are  offered  in  vain. 
It  is  the  privilege  of  every  child  of  God  to  ahide  in 
the  Saviour ;  to  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light ; 
to  have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  to  maintain  a  communion  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  so  intimate  and  so  endearing  that  prayer 
will  become  as  natural  as  breathing,  and  almost  as 
constant.  "Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint."  ^  ''  Pray  without  ceasing."  ^  "  Praying  al- 
ways with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit."  ^ 

*  James  i.  6,  7.  '  Luke  xviii.  1. 

8 1  Thess.  V.  17.  *  Eph.  vi.  18. 


252  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

"In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with 
thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto 
God." ' 

A  Christian  servant-girl  overheard  a  number  of 
ministers  discussing  the  text,  "  Pray  without  ceasing," 
and  found  that  at  length  they  appointed  one  of  their 
number  to  prepare  an  essay  upon  the  subject  to  be 
read  at  their  next  meeting.  She  modestly  expressed 
surprise  to  a  fellow  servant  that  they  should  take  so 
much  time  about  a  passage  of  Scripture  so  plain  and 
simple ;  and  her  remark  having  reached  the  ears  of 
one  of  the  ministers,  he  asked  her  why  she  thought  it 
easy  to  understand  the  text.  She  replied  with  hu- 
mility that  it  seemed  to  her  believers  were  compelled 
to  pray  without  ceasing,  for  everything  they  did  re- 
minded them  of  the  Saviour  and  salvation.  "  When, 
for  example,"  she  went  on  to  say,  "  I  open  my  eyes  in 
the  morning,  I  praise  God  who  hath  shined  into  my 
heart  to  give  me  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  His 
glory  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  I  dress,  I 
bless  Him  for  having  clothed  me  in  the  spotless  robe 
of  His  dear  Son's  righteousness.  When  I  wash  my 
face,  I  thank  Him  for  the  precious  blood  that  cleans- 
eth  from  all  sin.  When  I  kindle  the  fire,  I  think  of 
the  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  came  down  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  to  dwell  with 
the  disciples  of  Jesus  forever.  When  I  sweep  the 
room,  I  ask  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  remove  from 
me  all  defilement,  and  keep  me  clean  through  the 
word.     When  I  eat  my  breakfast,  I  turn  my  mind  to 

*  Phil.  iv.  6. 


THE  BELIEVER   CALLING   ON  THE  LOED        253 

the  Bread  of  heaven  that  daily  nourishes  my  soul ; 
and  thus  in  all  my  little  duties  there  is  something 
that  brings  Christ  before  me  and  causes  me  to  pray 
without  ceasing." 

If  there  were  more  Christians  living,  like  the  poor 
girl,  in  close  and  constant  communion  with  Jesus, 
there  would  be  fewer  to  exclaim,  "  My  leanness,  my 
leanness,  woe  unto  me ! "  *  The  trouble  with  too 
many  of  us  is  that  we  have  learned  to  ''say  our 
prayers,"  as  it  is  significantly  called,  and  to  be  con- 
tented with  a  parrot-like  repetition  of  words,  without 
understanding  or  feeling  their  real  import.  Hence 
the  formality  and  feebleness  of  our  supplications  un- 
til the  Holy  Spirit  leads  us  back  into  real  fellowship 
with  God,  when  prayer  becomes  the  delight  of  the 
soul  and  establishes  it  in  a  posture  of  unceasmg  wor- 
ship before  the  throne.  Then  we  can  pray  continually, 
even  in  the  midst  of  our  ordinary  pursuits,  in  walking 
the  streets,  in  turning  the  leaves  of  a  book,  in  the 
pauses  of  a  conversation.  Then  we  can  know  how  it 
was  Nehemiah  found  time  to  pray  when  the  king 
asked  him  a  question,  and  when  it  was  necessary  that 
he  should  immediately  answer.  He  was  the  cup- 
bearer of  Artaxerxes,  and  as  he  took  up  the  wine  to 
give  it  unto  the  monarch  on  a  certain  occasion,  the 
latter  noticed  the  sad  expression  of  his  face,  and  said 
to  him,  "  Why  is  thy  countenance  sad  ?  "  It  would 
not  do  to  be  sorrowful  in  the  presence  of  royalty,  and 
he  was  forced  to  confess  that  he  mourned  because,  as 
he    writes,   "  The    city,   the    place    of    my  fathers' 

^  Isa.  xxiv.  16. 


264:  THE  WAY  MAJyi^  PLAIX 

sepulchres,  lietli  waste,  and  the  gates  thereof  are  con- 
sumed  with  fire.  Then  the  king  said  unto  me,  For 
what  dost  thou  make  request  ?  So  I  prayed  to  the 
God  of  heaven ;  and  I  said  unto  the  king,  If  it  please 
the  king,  and  if  thy  servant  have  found  favor  in  thy 
sight,  that  thou  wouldest  send  me  unto  Judah,  unto 
the  city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres,  that  I  may  build 
it."  ' 

He  certainly  did  not  go  aside  to  pray,  and  he  cer- 
tainly had  very  little  time  to  call  upon  the  Lord,  for 
the  haughty  Persian  despot  would  not  brook  delay  in 
response  to  a  question  ;  and  yet  between  the  question 
and  the  reply  which  promptly  followed  the  Hebrew 
captive  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven.  He  offered 
what  is  termed  ejaculatory  prayer,  and  as  the  word 
ejaculatory  comes  from  a  Latin  word  signifying  a  dart 
or  javelin,  his  prayer  darted  up  instantly  to  the  throne 
of  Jehovah,  and  as  instantly  gained  the  blessing  he 
sought.  So  when  our  souls  are  in  habitual  commun- 
ion with  God  we  can  flash  forth  our  petitions,  as  it 
were,  wherever  we  may  be,  and  they  are  borne  faster 
than  by  electric  wires  to  the  loving  heart  of  the 
Saviour  who  said,  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words 
abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  T\all,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you."  ^ 

But  it  is  important  in  this  connection  for  the  be- 
liever to  inquire  what  motive  leads  him  to  pray  or 
what  object  he  hopes  to  attain.  The  Holy  Ghost 
directed  the  apostle  to  write,  "  Ye  ask,  and  receive 
not,  because  ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  consume  it 

1  Neh.  ii.  2-5.  ^  joim  ^v.  7. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  ON  THE  LORD   255 

upon  your  lusts  "  [or  desires].*  There  is  reason  to  fear 
that  through  the  deceitfulness  of  the  old  nature  many 
Christians  often  pray  merely  that  their  wishes  may 
be  gratified  and  their  comfort  promoted,  without  a 
becoming  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  without 
a  proper  regard  for  His  glory.  I  do  not  say  that  it  is 
wrong,  when  under  the  burden  of  heavy  affliction,  to 
exclaim  with  the  Master  in  Gethsemane,  "  O  my 
Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  ; " 
but  surely  it  is  right  to  add  with  the  Master,  "  ISTever- 
theless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."^  Still,  let  us 
not  be  too  much  troubled  about  our  motive  in  pray- 
ing when  there  is  a  sincere  desire  to  honor  God  ;  be- 
cause we  have  the  sweet  assurance  in  His  word  that 
"  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord 
pitieth  them  that  fear  him.  For  he  knoweth  our 
frame ;  he  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."  ^  I  only 
desire  to  put  you  on  your  guard  "  against  the  wiles  of 
the  devil,"  ^  and  then  to  encourage  you  to  continue  in 
prayer  with  the  confident  expectation  that  it  will  be 
answered,  even  though  you  may  not  live  to  see  the 
evidence  of  it  in  this  world.  No  doubt  one  of  the 
most  delightful  surprises  in  store  for  us  in  heaven  will 
be  the  glorious  demonstration  of  the  truth  that  ^'  pray- 
ing breath  was  never  spent  in  vain." 

I  have  the  authority  of  a  devoted  and  well-known 
minister  and  author  for  the  following :  A  Christian 
father  and  mother  had  a  son  whom  they  sought  to 
bring  up  "in  the  nurture  and  admonition   of  the 

^  James  iv.  3.  ^  Matt.  xxvi.  39. 

3  Ps.  ciii.  13,  14.  4  Eph.  vi.  11. 


256  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAIX 

Lord,"  '  and  for  whom  they  made  contimial  supplica- 
tion at  the  throne  of  grace.  As  he  advanced,  how- 
ever, in  years,  he  became  more  and  more  profligate, 
until  he  completed  his  disgrace  and  well-nigh  broke 
the  hearts  of  his  parents  by  running  away  from  home 
and  going  to  sea  as  a  common  sailor.  On  his  first  voy- 
age he  was  standing  upon  the  bulwarks  of  the  ship, 
uttering  the  most  horrible  blasphemies,  when  by  a 
lurch  of  the  vessel  he  was  tossed  into  the  waves. 
Eescued  with  difficulty,  he  was  brought  back  appar- 
ently lifeless,  and  every  one  around  his  prostrate  body 
believed  that  he  was  dead,  except  the  surgeon,  who 
Avas  moved  by  some  unaccountable  impulse  to  persevere 
in  efforts  to  resuscitate  him,  although  all  hope  seemed 
to  be  gone.  His  persistent  purpose  was  at  length  re- 
warded by  seeing  a  faint  spark  of  life,  which  he  care- 
fully nourished,  and  at  length  the  young  man,  opening 
his  eyes,  slowly  and  deliberately  said,  "  Jesus  Christ 
has  saved  my  soul."  After  he  had  fully  recovered  the 
power  of  speech,  he  stated  that  as  he  fell  into  the  great 
ocean  he  felt  that  he  was  lost  forever,  and  his 
multiplied  sins  came  trooping  about  him  like  demons 
to  drag  him  down  into  hell ;  but  suddenly  a  text  which 
his  father  had  taught  him  in  his  childhood  came  to  his 
remembrance :  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners  ;  of  whom  I  am  chief ;  "  ^  and 
while  sinking,  as  he  thought,  into  perdition,  he  cast 
himself  upon  a  gracious  Eedeemer.  His  subsequent 
life  proved  that  he  was  really  born  again  in  that 
»  Eph.  vi.  4.  '  1  Tim.  i.  15. 


THE   BELIEVER   CALLING  OlST  THE   LORD        257 

dreadful  moment  when  the  sea  closed  over  his  head, 
for  he  returned  home  to  become  a  faithful  and  useful 
minister  of  the  Gospel,  although  his  salvation  was  not 
more  complete  after  years  of  service  in  the  cause  of 
the  Saviour  than  it  was  the  instant  he  believed  on 
Him  who  came  to  save  the  chief  of  sinners. 

If  he  had  perished  in  the  water,  doubtless  his  par- 
ents would  have  gone  down  to  the  grave  fearing  that  he 
had  made  shipwreck  of  his  soul ;  and  yet  at  the  second 
coming  of  Jesus  they  would  have  been  caught  up  with 
him  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  "  In 
the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  with- 
hold not  thine  hand  ;  for  thou  knowest  not  whether 
shall  prosper,  either  this  or  that,  or  whether  they  both 
shall  be  alike  good." '  Eemember  for  your  comfort 
that  in  prayer  you  are  not  coming  to  an  unjust  Judge 
or  an  unfeeling  Governor,  from  whose  unwilling  hand 
a  favor  has  to  be  wrung  by  the  force  of  importunity, 
but  you  are  approaching  a  kind  and  loving  Father, 
who  is  far  more  willing  to  bestow  upon  you  things 
that  are  for  your  good  than  you  are  to  confer  a  pleas- 
ure upon  your  child  or  the  dearest  friend  you  have  on 
earth.  It  dishonors  and  grieves  Him  when  His  peo- 
ple act  as  did  the  priests  of  Baal  to  whom  Elijah  said, 
"  Cry  aloud :  for  he  is  a  god ;  either  he  is  talking,  or 
he  is  pursuing,  or  he  is  in  a  journey,  or  peradventure 
he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  awaked."  ^  Why  not  believe 
these  precious  promises  ?  "  He  that  keepeth  thee  will 
not  slumber."  ^  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the 
righteous  [that  is,  those  who  are  righteous  by  faith  in 

*  Eocles.  xi.  6.  '1  Kiugs  xviii.  27.  '  Ps.  cxxi.  3. 


258  THE   WAY   MADE   PLAi:^ 

Christ],  and  his  ears  are  open  unto  their  cry."  '  "  He 
hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee. 
So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is  my  helper."  ^ 
If,  therefore,  you  are  troubled  in  your  prayers  by 
the  consciousness  of  your  own  sinfulness  as  well  as  by 
the  cares  and  sorrows  arising  from  other  sources,  you 
know  the  remedy.  Go  to  Him  who  never  slumbers, 
whose  ear  is  always  open  to  your  cry,  and  who  is  a 
mighty  helper,  and  frankly  confess  your  iniquities,  for 
"  if  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  for- 
give us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness." ^  This  language  is  addressed  only  to  believers 
in  Christ,  and  it  points  out  the  way  of  relief  from  the 
torturing  recollection  of  the  errors  and  evils  into 
which  we  have  been  betrayed.  Our  relationship  to 
God  as  His  dear  children  can  never  be  destroyed, 
blessed  be  His  name  !  but  our  communion  with  Him 
may  often  be  disturbed,  and  the  method  which  He  re- 
veals to  restore  that  communion  is  an  honest  and  sin- 
cere confession  of  our  faults.  He  has  said,"  If  we  con- 
fess our  sins  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins," 
and  this  is  enough.  Suppose  you  have  been  grievously 
wronged  by  one  with  whom  you  had  lived  for  years 
in  confidential  and  pleasant  intercourse.  Being  con- 
vinced of  the  injustice  he  has  done  you,  he  comes  at 
length  with  confession  upon  his  lips  asking  to  be  for- 
given. You  assure  him  that  he  is  fully  forgiven,  and 
that  your  relations  to  each  other  shall  be  in  the  future 
as  they  have  been  in  the  past.  He  goes  away,  but  re- 
turns the  next  day  with  a  sad  countenance  and  sorrow- 

'  1  P3.  xxxiv.  15.  » Heb.  xiii.  5,  6.  »  1  John  i.  9. 


THE  BELIEVER  CALLING  OJS"  THE  LORD        259 

ful  heart,  saying,  ''  Please  forgive  me."  You  reply 
that  he  is  already  forgiven,  and  you  now  repeat  the 
assurance  in  all  sincerity  and  love,  but  he  returns  the 
next  day,  and  the  next,  and  the  next,  with  the  same 
cry,  "  Please  forgive  me."  You  at  once  perceive  that 
his  ungenerous  suspicion  and  unbelief  would  be  a  more 
cruel  insult  than  his  original  offence,  for  his  conduct 
would  plainly  declare  that  he  looked  upon  you  as  a 
liar. 

God  has  solemnly  declared  that  ''if  we  confess  our 
sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  our  sins,"  and 
"  he  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar."  * 
He  uses  the  words  faithful  and  just  rather  than  the 
words  gracious  and  merciful,  because  He  is  addressing 
those  who  are  already  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  of 
whom  the  Saviour  says,  "  He  that  is  washed  needeth 
not  save  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  clean  every  whit."  ^ 
Here  we  have  washed  and  wash^  but  in  the  original 
they  are  entirely  different  words.  The  former  was 
employed  by  the  Greeks  to  imply  the  bathing  of  the 
entire  person,  but  the  latter  denoted  the  washing  of  a 
part  of  the  person,  as  the  hands,  the  face,  or  the  feet. 
Among  the  ancients  sandals  were  worn  instead  of  shoes, 
and  hence  that  portion  of  the  feet  which  was  ex- 
posed would  soon  become  defiled  with  the  dust  of  the 
earth.  If  a  man  had  bathed  before  going  to  an  enter- 
tainment, he  would  not  need  to  bathe  again,  but  his 
feet  being  washed  from  the  defilement  contracted  by 
the  way,  he  would  be  "  clean  every  whit."  So  he  who 
believes  upon  the  sure  testimony  of  God's  word  that 

^  John  V.  10.  '  John  xiii.  10. 


260  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  him  from  all  sin  is 
bathed  as  to  his  entire  person,  and  he  needeth  not  to 
go  back  to  that  blood  as  if  it  had  lost  its  efficacy  ;  and 
yet  he  cannot  travel  far  in  this  sinful  world  without 
getting  his  feet,  his  walk,  his  ways,  polluted  by  com- 
ing into  contact  with  that  which  is  evil.  Let  him, 
then,  judge  himself  in  the  light  of  the  inspired  word, 
and  discovering  thus  what  is  wrong  about  him,  let  him 
frankly  confess  his  sins,  and  arise  from  the  confession 
knowing  that  he  is  "  clean  every  whit." 

It  only  remains  to  say  a  word  about  wandering 
thoughts  in  prayer,  of  which  every  Christian,  perhaps, 
has  reason  to  complain.  It  may  be  well  that  we  are 
troubled  in  this  way,  for  he  who  is  acquainted  with 
his  own  heart  knows  his  proneness  to  trust  in  legalism 
or  in  self-righteousness,  in  place  of  resting  calmly  on 
the  finished  work  of  Christ.  If  we  could  pray  with 
the  fervency  and  fluency  we  desire,  fixing  our  minds 
intently  on  the  majestic  Being  whom  we  address,  it  is 
probable  that  we  would  soon  be  puffed  up  with  a  high 
conceit  of  our  attainments,  and  grieve  the  Spirit  of 
God  whereby  we  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion. Still,  it  is  a  sore  evil  to  approach  God  as  sup- 
plicants and  worshippers  while  thinking  of  other  ob- 
jects ;  and  it  may  be  of  service  to  suggest  that  as  far 
as  possible  you  should  pray  aloud  even  in  your  private 
devotions,  and  especially  that  you  pray  frequently, 
after  reminding  yourself  that  you  are  about  to  enter 
into  the  presence  of  the  great  King.  A  hymn  on  this 
subject  by  Faber  has  brought  comfort  to  many  souls  ; 
and  without  adding  anything  of  my  own,  which  the 


THE  BELIEVER   CALLING   ON  THE  LOED        261 

limits  of  the  present  chapter  forbid,  I  will  here  tran- 
scribe it  for  the  benefit  of  the  reader. 


**  Ah !  dearest  Lord,  I  cannot  pray, 
My  fancy  is  not  free  ; 
Unmannerly  distractions  come, 

And  force  my  thoughts  from  Thee. 

^'  The  world  that  looks  so  dull  all  day 
Glows  bright  on  me  at  prayer. 
And  plans  that  ask  no  thought  but  then, 
Wake  up  and  meet  me  there. 

*^  All  nature  one  full  fountain  seems 
Of  dreamy  sight  and  sound. 
Which,  when  I  kneel,  breaks  up  its  deeds. 
And  makes  a  deluge  round. 

"  Old  voices  murmur  in  my  ear, 
New  hopes  start  into  life, 
And  past  and  future  gayly  blend 
In  one  bewitching  strife. 

*^  My  very  flesh  has  restless  fits  ; 
My  changeful  limbs  conspire 
With  all  these  phantoms  of  the  mind 
My  inner  self  to  tire. 

"  I  cannot  pray  ;  yet,  Lord,  Thou  know'st 
The  pain  it  is  to  me 
To  have  my  vainly  struggling  thoughts 
Thus  turn  away  from  Thee. 

"  Had  I,  dear  Lord,  no  pleasure  found 
But  in  the  thought  of  Thee, 
Prayer  would  have  come  unsought,  and  been 
A  truer  liberty. 


262  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

"  Yet  Thou  art  oft  most  present,  Lord, 
In  weak,  distracted  prayer  ; 
A  sinner  out  of  heart  with  self 
Most  often  finds  Thee  there. 

*^  And  prayer  that  humbles  sets  the  soul 
From  all  illusions  free, 
And  teaches  it  how  utterly, 
Dear  Lord,  it  hangs  on  Thee. 

**  Ah,  Jesus,  why  should  I  complain, 
And  why  fear  aught  but  sin  ? 
Distractions  are  but  outward  things  j 
Thy  peace  dwells  far  within. 

**  These  surface-troubles  come  and  go 
Like  ruffliugs  of  the  sea  ; 
The  deeper  depth  is  out  of  reach 
To  all,  my  God,  but  Thee.'^ 


CHAPTEK  XIX 
ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH 

"For  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved." — Romans  x.  13. 

NEXT  to  the  inquiry,  "What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "  '  perhaps  the  most  important  question 
is,  "  How  may  I  know  I  am  saved  ?  "  But  important 
as  is  this  question,  there  are  probably  in  the  Christian 
Church  very  many  who  have  never  seriously  pon- 
dered it,  and  there  are  certainly  very  many  more  who 
are  wholly  unable  to  meet  it  with  an  intelligent  and 
satisfactory  answer.  Such  indifference  to  the  interests 
of  the  soul  on  the  part  of  unbelievers  does  not  sur- 
prise us,  for  they  are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; "  ^ 
but  surely  it  should  cause  profound  astonishment  to 
find  that  there  are  multitudes  claiming  to  be  "  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ^  who  are 
contented  to  travel  on  their  way  to  eternity  without 
knowing  whither  they  are  journeying.  What  would 
you  think  of  a  man  hurrying  along  a  highway  if  he 
were  to  inform  you  that  he  was  escaping  from  a  city 
doomed  to  destruction,  and  on  being  asked  where  he 
was  going  he  should  quietly  reply,  "  I  do  not  know  ; 
sometimes  I  am  not  without  hope  that  I  am  going  to 

1  Acts  xvi.  30.  3  Eph.  ii.  1.  ^Gal.  iii.  26. 

263 


264  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

a  place  of  safety,  but  generally  I  have  too  much 
reason  to  fear  that  the  road  I  am  pursuing  leads  to 
fearful  suffering  and  a  terrible  death ;  and  really,  I 
can  tell  you  nothing  about  it "  ?  You  would  justly 
suspect  the  sincerity  or  the  sanity  of  such  a  man,  and 
yet  his  supposed  reply  indicates  preciselj^  the  state  of 
thousands  who  profess  to  believe  that  "  the  wrath  of 
God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men."  ' 

They  say  they  have  listened  to  the  voice  of  love 
warning  us  "to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come," ^  but 
whether  the  road  they  have  taken  will  conduct  them 
to  the  unutterable  horrors  of  that  wrath,  or  to  the 
ineffable  glories  of  heaven,  they  confess  is  a  matter  of 
doubt,  or  at  best  of  vague  conjecture.  It  is  the  height 
of  presumption,  they  think,  for  one  who  is  perplexed 
with  the  cares  and  pressed  by  the  engagements  of 
worldly  business  to  be  confident  of  salvation,  and 
they  imagine  that  the  assurance  of  forgiveness  can  be 
attained  only  by  a  privileged  number  who  devote 
their  undivided  time  to  religious  meditation  and  study 
and  prayer.  Hence,  in  ansAver  to  the  question,  "  How 
may  I  know  that  I  am  saved  ?  "  they  will  either  re- 
main silent  or  reply  that  we  can  never  know  it  unless 
we  are  conscious  of  superior  holiness,  and  of  fervent 
love  for  God,  and  of  unceasing  fidelity  in  His  service. 
In  other  words,  they  make  the  reply  to  the  question 
depend  upon  something  done  hy  us,  instead  of  the 
work  done  foi^  us  by  the  Saviour  ;  whereas  the  reply 
contained  in  the  blessed  Gospel  is  very  simple,  for  it  is 
^liom.  i.  18.  'Luke  iii.  7. 


ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH  265 

written,  "  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved." 

The  word  "Lord"  here  refers,  as  stated  in  the 
previous  chapter,  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  "  died  for  our 
sins  according  to  the  Scriptures,"  and  "  rose  again  the 
third  day  according  to  the  Scriptures."^  A  few 
years  after  His  ascension  His  followers  began  to  be 
termed  Christians,  and  they  are  described  by  an  in- 
spired apostle  as  "  all  that  in  every  place  call  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  ^  To  call  upon 
the  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  Hebrew  form  of  speech  de- 
noting the  Lord  Himself,  and  it  signifies,  therefore,  to 
call  upon  Christ,  who,  "when  he  had  by  himself 
purged  our  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high."  ^  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  we 
cannot  truly  call  upon  Him  unless  we  believe  in  Him ; 
but  if  we  sincerely  believe  in  Him  as  our  Saviour,  we 
may  know  upon  the  best  evidence  possible — that  is, 
upon  His  own  infinitely  trustworthy  testimony — that 
heaven  is  certain,  because  He  has  said,  "  Whosoever 
shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved." 

All  the  knowledge  we  possess  is  derived  from  con- 
sciousness, or  from  the  evidence  of  our  senses,  or  from 
testimony ;  and  the  knowledge  we  gain  from  testimony 
may  be  entitled  to  as  much  credit  as  that  which  we 
obtain  from  consciousness  or  the  evidence  of  our 
senses.  We  are  conscious,  for  example,  of  certain 
thoughts  and  emotions,  and  we  say  w^ithout  hesi- 
tation we  Icnow  they  really  came  into  our  minds  and 
hearts.     Or  we  see  a  great  crowd  assembled,  and  say 

» 1  Cor.  XV.  3,  4.  n  Cor.  i.  2.  ^Heb.  i.  3. 


266  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

we  hnow  that  many  persons  have  met  together.  Or 
we  hear  an  entrancing  melody,  and  say  we  hioio 
charming  sounds  are  uttered.  Or  we  taste  honey, 
and  say  we  knoio  it  is  sweet.  Or  we  lay  hold  of  an 
object,  and  say  we  hnow  we  touch  it.  But  surely  we 
may  say  with  equal  confidence  we  knoio  that  George 
Washington,  and  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  Oliver 
Cromwell,  and  Julius  Caesar  lived,  although  we  are 
not  conscious  of  their  existence,  nor  have  we  seen 
them.  He  who  would  gravely  express  a  doubt 
whether  these  men  actually  lived,  because  the  fact 
has  not  been  revealed  to  him  by  his  consciousness  or 
the  evidence  of  his  senses,  would  be  held  in  merited 
contempt  for  his  silly  eccentricity,  and  no  one  could 
be  induced  to  waste  an  argument  upon  his  stupid 
mind.  The  testimony  that  proves  their  existence  is 
not  less  certain  and  conclusive  than  that  of  which  we 
are  conscious,  or  which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes 
and  heard  with  our  ears.  Indeed,  it  is  more  certain 
and  conclusive ;  for  while  it  is  possible  to  believe  that 
consciousness  and  our  senses  may  sometimes  deceive 
us,  it  is  not  possible  to  believe  that  Washington  and 
Napoleon  never  had  any  existence  whatever  except  in 
the  imagination  of  fictitious  writers.  We  know  that 
they  lived.  We  know  that  one  Avas  President  of  the 
United  States  and  that  the  other  was  Emperor  of 
France.  We  know  that  one  died  and  was  buried  at 
Mount  Yernon,  and  that  the  other  died  and  was 
buried  on  the  island  of  Saint  Helena ;  and  so  of  any 
other  fact  in  their  history  of  which  we  have  clear  and 
unequivocal  testimony. 


ASSUKANCE  OF  FAITH  267 

Suppose  a  jury  of  twelve  intelligent,  upright  citizens 
were  summoned  to  try  a  man  indicted  for  homicide.  If 
two  witnesses,  respected  by  the  entire  community  for 
their  strict  truthfulness,  should  come  into  court  and 
solemnly  swear  that  they  saw  the  prisoner  at  the  bar 
strike  the  fatal  blow  which  deprived  his  victim  of 
Kfe,  would  the  jury  bring  in  a  verdict  of  "  not  guilty  " 
on  the  ground  that  they  did  not  and  could  not  hiow 
that  the  defendant  had  committed  the  crime  with 
which  he  was  charged  ?  Suppose  that,  in  addition  to 
the  two  witnesses,  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  or  one  hundred 
men  of  the  highest  character  for  veracity  should  swear 
the  same  thing,  without  the  slightest  rebutting  evi- 
dence, would  the  jury  still  say  to  the  judge,  We  can- 
not know  that  the  prisoner  is  guilty?  Surely  not. 
Theu'  action  in  the  case  would  say  in  effect.  We  hiow 
that  he  is  guilty  ;  and  although  we  would  have  gladly 
given  him  the  benefit  of  a  doubt  if  any  had  existed, 
and  although  we  shrink  from  the  dread  responsibility 
of  consigning  a  fellow  creature  to  an  ignominious 
death,  we  are  bound  to  render  a  verdict  according  to 
the  law  and  evidence,  and  therefore  hand  him  over  to 
the  executioner.  Their  knowledge  would  not  be  de- 
rived either  from  consciousness  or  their  own  senses, 
but  nevertheless  they  could  not  be  more  positive  as  to 
the  fact  if  they  had  personally  witnessed  the  murder- 
ous act. 

Most  of  the  knowledge  we  possess  is  derived  from 
testimony,  but  still  it  is  knowledge,  and  not  conjec- 
ture, nor  guessing,  nor  supposition,  nor  surmise.  All 
our  knowledge  of  past  events  in  the  history  of  the 


268  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

world  is  due  entirely  to  testimony  ;  all  our  knowledge 
of  present  events  that  are  occurring  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  beyond  the  narrow  range  of  our  own  observa- 
tion is  due  entirely  to  testimony ;  all  our  knowledge 
of  the  discoveries  made  in  various  departments  of 
science  as  the  result  of  patient  thought  and  careful  in- 
vestigation is  due,  in  most  instances,  entirely  to  testi- 
mony ;  and  yet  we  do  not  hesitate  to  rely  upon  it  with 
the  utmost  confidence.  We  are  so  constituted  that  we 
are  compelled  to  believe  the  testimony  of  competent 
witnesses — that  is,  witnesses  who  know  whereof  they 
affirm,  and  whose  w^ord  is  worthy  of  credit.  If  a 
thousand  such  witnesses  should  declare  that  they  had 
visited  some  place  of  which  we  had  never  heard  be- 
fore, we  could  no  more  doubt  their  statement  than  we 
could  call  in  question  the  evidence  of  our  sight.  Nay, 
if  one  man  of  spotless  reputation  communicates  to  us 
a  fact  that  fell  under  his  personal  observation,  we  are 
prepared  to  assert  that  we  know  it  to  be  true  simply 
and  singly  upon  our  faith  in  his  veracity.  Every  day 
we  are  gaining  knowledge  in  this  manner  from  inter- 
course w^ith  friends  ;  and  if,  on  repeating  information 
thus  obtained,  it  should  be  disputed,  we  would  regard 
the  denial  as  an  insult  to  ourselves  or  to  those  from 
whom  we  received  the  statement.  Visiting  a  member 
of  the  church  recently  w^ho  is  rapidly  approaching  the 
eternal  world,  she  told  me  that  her  distressing  cough 
had  deprived  her  of  sleep  during  the  previous  night, 
and  that  she  was  sufi'ering  greatly.  My  reply  was, 
"  Cheer  up !  for  you  will  soon  be  where  '  there  shall 
be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither 


ASSUEANCE   OF   FAITH  269 

shall  there  be  any  more  pain.' "  *  "  Oh,"  she  ex- 
claimed, with  touching  anxiety  depicted  on  her  face, 
"  if  I  only  knew  that !  How  can  I  know  it  ?  "  "  Sup- 
pose," I  answered,  ''  when  I  leave  your  house,  I  meet 
an  acquaintance  who  asks,  '  How  is  Mrs.  S to- 
day ? '  I  tell  her  that  you  coughed  nearly  all  night 
and  feel  very  badly.  She  then  says,  '  How  can  I 
know  that  ? '  "What  should  I  reply  ?  "  "  You  would 
inform  her,"  she  answered,  "  that  I  told  you."  "  Pre- 
cisely so,  and  God  tells  you  in  His  word  that  if  you 
believe  on  His  dear  Son  you  shall  certainly  be  saved. 
If  I  can  believe  you  without  a  moment's  hesitation, 
will  you  not  believe  the  blessed  God  ?  " 

My  object  in  these  arguments  and  illustrations  is  to 
show  that  we  may  hnow  that  of  which  we  have  no 
evidence  either  from  consciousness  or  from  our  own 
senses,  merely  upon  credible  testimony.  It  is  in  this 
way  the  believer  hioios  he  is  saved.  He  knows  it 
upon  the  sure  testimony  of  God,  who  can  neither  de- 
ceive nor  be  deceived,  and  who,  "  willing  more  abun- 
dantly to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immuta- 
bility of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that  by 
two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for 
God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who 
have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  be- 
fore us  :  which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul, 
both  sure  and  steadfast."  ^  The  testimony  of  the 
eternal  Jehovah  is  more  worthy  of  credit  than  the 
testimony  of  the  entire  human  race  of  all  generations 
combined,  and  He  has  given  both  His  promise  and 

»  Rev.  xxi.  4.  «  Heb.  vi.  17-19. 


270  THE  WAY  MADE   PLAIN 

His  oath  to  save  with  an  everlasting  salvation  every 
soul  that  trusts  in  Jesus  Christ.  "  How,  then,  does 
the  believer  know  that  he  is  saved  ?"  He  knows  it 
because  God  has  said  and  sworn  that  we  shall  come 
off  ''  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved 
us." '  "  For  when  God  made  promise  to  Abraham, 
because  he  could  swear  bj  no  greater,  he  sware  by 
himself ;  "  ^  and — glory  to  His  name  ! — He  still  lives 
to  swear  by  Himself,  "  to  the  end  the  promise  might 
be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only  which  is  of 
the  law,  but  to  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abra- 
ham ;  who  is  the  father  of  us  all."  ^  Observe,  the 
promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed. 

Ponder  a  few  of  the  words  of  Jesus,  and  then  de- 
cide whether  a  believer  may  know  upon  such  testi- 
mony that  he  is  saved  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt. 
"  This  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent  me,  that 
of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing, 
but  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day.  And  this 
is  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which 
seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him,  may  have  ever- 
lasting life :  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  * 
"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and 
they  follow  me :  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ; 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand.  My  Father,  which  gave  them 
me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no  one  is  able  to  pluck 
them  out  of  my  Father's  hand.  I  and  my  Father 
are  one."  *    "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 

1  Rom.  viii.  37.  «Heb.  vi.  13.  '  Rom.  iv,  16. 

*  John  vi.  39,  40.  ^  John  x.  27-30. 


ASSURANCE   OF  FAITH  271 

lasting  life  " ' — not  life  for  a  few  weeks,  or  months, 
or  years — not  life  to  be  bestowed  and  taken  away,  to 
be  gained  and  lost — but  everlasting  life,  and  he  has  it 
now  and  has  it  forever.  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him 
that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
into  condemnation  [judgment]  ;  but  is  passed  from 
death  unto  life."  ^  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 
also."  ^  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou 
hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they 
may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me :  for 
thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  ^ 
Do  you  still  ask  how  you  may  Tcnow  that  you  are 
saved  ?  I  still  reply.  By  believing  the  sure  testimony 
of  God's  word.  You  know  you  w^ere  a  condemned 
and  ruined  sinner  by  believing  that  word ;  you  know 
Christ  came  to  die  for  a  lost  world  by  believing  that 
word ;  and  you  may  know  you  are  saved,  if  you  trust 
in  Jesus  Christ,  by  believing  the  same  word.  Let  me 
ask  a  few  plain  questions  that  may  present  this  im- 
portant subject  in  a  clearer  light  to  your  mind.  How 
do  you  know  that  the  law  of  God  has  pronounced  a 
curse  against  every  one  who  continues  not  in  the  strict 
performance  of  all  the  Divine  commandments  in  all 
their  extent,  reaching  to  the  most  secret  emotions  of 
the  soul  ?  You  know  it  only  by  believing  His  word. 
How  do  you  know  that  He  who  was  in  the  form  of 
God,  and  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God, 
emptied  Himself  of  His  visible  glory,  and  was  born  of 

1  John  iii.  36.  »  John  v.  24. 

^  John  xiv.  19.  *  John  xvii,  24. 


272  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

the  Virgin  IMary,  and  performed  many  wonderful 
miracles,  and  preached  many  sublime  and  sweet  truths, 
and  died  upon  the  cross,  and  rose  from  the  tomb,  and 
ascended  up  to  heaven  ?  You  know  it  only  by  be- 
lieving His  word.  How  do  you  know  that  He  is  to 
come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  His 
appearing  and  kingdom  ?  You  know  it  only  by  be- 
lieving His  word.  How  do  you  know  that  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  ? 
You  know  it  only  by  believing  His  word.  How, 
then,  do  you  know  that,  not  relying  upon  yourself, 
nor  upon  forms  and  ceremonies,  but  upon  Christ  alone, 
you  shall  certainly  be  saved  ?  Obviously,  in  the  same 
way — only  by  believing  His  word. 

You  cannot  y^^Z  that  the  Saviour  was  born  in  Beth- 
lehem of  Judea,  and  that  He  suffered  on  Calvary,  for 
this  occurred  more  than  nineteen  hundred  years  ago ; 
but  you  can  know  it  upon  the  unimpeachable  testi- 
mony of  God.  And  so  you  are  not  called  iofeel  that 
you  can  be  saved  in  order  to  obtain  assurance  of  sal- 
vation, but  to  Iciiow  it  upon  the  sworn  testimony  of 
God  revealed  in  His  word ;  or,  to  put  it  in  another 
shape,  you  cannot  know  that  you  are  saved  because 
you  feel  it,  but  you  will  feel  it  because  you  know  it. 
If  you  hear  good  news,  you  do  not  first  feel  that  it  is 
true,  and  then  believe  it,  but  you  first  believe  it,  and 
then  feel  happy.  If  you  are  anxious  to  obtain  a  fa- 
vor from  a  friend  who  promises  to  grant  your  request, 
you  do  not  first  feel  that  he  will  do  it,  and  then  be- 
lieve him,  but  you  first  believe  him,  and  then  feel  glad 
and  grateful.     If  you  have  lost  your  sight,  and  a  sue- 


ASSUKANCE   OF   FAITH  273 

cessful  operation  has  been  performed  to  remove  the 
obstruction  from  your  vision,  you  do  not  turn  your 
attention  within  to  examine  the  optic  nerve,  but  you 
open  your  eyes  to  look  without,  and  thus  discover  that 
you  can  see.  If  you  have  been  deaf,  and  something 
is  done  to  relieve  you  of  the  affliction,  you  do  not  be- 
gin to  study  the  structure  of  the  tympanum  or  ear- 
drum, but  hearken  to  the  sounds  that  are  going  around 
you,  and  thus  discover  that  you  can  hear.  In  like 
manner,  if  you  would  know  that  you  are  saved,  you 
must  fix  your  gaze  upon  Christ,  and  listen  to  His  pre- 
cious declarations  in  the  Gospel,  instead  of  seeking 
for  comfort  amid  the  darkness  and  disease  that  not 
only  belong  by  nature  to  the  "  old  man,"  but  will  con- 
tinue to  cling  to  it  until  it  is  laid  down  at  the  grave, 
or  left  behind  at  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  The 
Westminster  Confession  of  Faith  well  says,  "  This  cor- 
ruption of  nature,  during  this  life,  doth  remain  in 
those  that  are  regenerated ;  and  although  it  be 
through  Christ  pardoned  and  mortified,  yet  both  it- 
self and  all  the  motions  thereof  are  truly  and  prop- 
erly sin." 

It  is  my  earnest  desire  and  effort  to  turn  your 
thoughts  entirely  away  from  yourself  to  the  Saviour, 
for  it  is  the  most  melancholy  business  that  can  engage 
even  a  redeemed  sinner  to  be  probing  into  his  own 
soul  to  find  some  assurance  that  he  is  saved.  You 
can  never  find  it  there,  but  only  in  the  word ;  and, 
thank  God  !  having  once  seen  it  in  the  word,  you  can 
see  it  every  day  and  every  hour,  and  as  often  as  you 
read  and  believe  what  Jesus  says.     Nor  is  this  assur- 


274  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

ance  the  privilege  exclusively  of  ministers  or  of  a 
favored  few  who  have  made  higher  attainments  in 
holiness  than  the  common  crowd  can  ever  hope  to 
reach,  but  it  is  the  privilege  of  every  one  without  ex- 
ception who  believes  the  testimony  of  God's  word  ad- 
dressed alike  to  all.  The  merchant  plunged  in  the 
noisy  whirl  of  trade ;  the  mechanic  working  at  his 
bench  ;  the  professional  man  in  the  wearisome  routine 
of  his  daily  duties ;  the  wife  and  mother  harassed  with 
the  anxieties  and  cares  of  her  household ;  the  child  of 
affliction  bowed  under  the  burden  of  a  well-nigh  insup- 
portable sorrow, — may  all  rejoice  in  this  cheering  as- 
surance, and  hiow  by  simply  and  sincerely  believing 
God  that  they  are  forever  saved.  Christ  died  for  one 
as  much  as  another  of  His  people,  and  "  he  that  be- 
lieveth  on  him  is  not  condemned,"  '  no  matter  what 
may  be  his  circumstances  in  life.  To  believe  this  is  to 
know  that  we  are  saved. 

Hence,  in  some  of  the  chief  confessions  and  cate- 
chisms which  express  the  doctrinal  views  of  Christians, 
assurance  is  represented  as  the  common  experience  of 
all  who  believe  in  Jesus.  Thus  in  the  celebrated 
Heidelberg  Catechism,  in  answer  to  Question  21, 
"  What  is  true  faith  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  True  faith  is 
not  only  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby  I  hold  for 
truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  His  word,  but 
also  an  assured  confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
works  by  the  Gospel  in  my  heart ;  that  not  only  to 
others,  but  to  me  also,  remission  of  sin,  everlasting 
righteousness,  and  salvation,  are  freely  given  by  God, 

1  Johu  iii.  18. 


ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH  275 

merely  of  grace,  only  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits." 
So  again  in  the  equally  celebrated  Catechism  of  the 
Westminster  Assembly  of  Divines,  in  answer  to 
Question  36,  "  What  are  the  benefits  which  in  this  life 
do  accompany  or  flow  from  justification,  adoption, 
and  sanctification ? "  the  answer  is,  "The  benefits 
which  in  this  life  [in  this  life,  observe]  do  accompany 
or  flow  from  justification,  adoption,  and  sanctification, 
are  assurance  of  God's  love,  peace  of  conscience,  joy 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  increase  of  grace,  and  perseverance 
therein  to  the  end."  These  questions  and  answers  are 
heard  in  a  thousand  Sunday-schools  every  Lord's  day, 
but  the  meaning  of  the  words  they  contain  is  seldom 
understood  or  even  considered ;  for  there  are  very  few 
in  our  time  who  believe,  according  to  their  own 
standards,  that  true  faith  is  "  a  certain  knowledge  " 
and  "an  assured  confidence,"  or  that  the  benefits 
which  in  this  life  do  accompany  justification  are  "  as- 
surance of  God's  love,"  etc. 

The  multitude  regard  it  as  impious  presumption 
when  they  hear  Christians  at  rare  intervals  say  they 
know  they  are  saved,  but  they  do  not  regard  it  as  im- 
pious presumption  to  make  God  a  liar,  as  they  do  by 
their  doubts  and  fears  ;  f or  "  he  that  belie veth  not  God 
hath  made  him  a  liar  ;  because  he  believeth  not  the 
record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son."  '  They  seem  to 
think  that  it  is  only  a  preeminently  holy  walk  that 
can  secure  assurance  of  faith  ;  whereas  it  is  only  as- 
surance of  faith  that  can  secure  a  preeminently  holy 
walk.    They  seem  to  think  that  to  obtain  this  price- 

J  1  John  V.  10. 


276  THE  WAY  MADE   PLAKT 

less  boon  they  must  struggle  hard  and  long,  and  refer 
as  an  illustration  to  Jacob  wrestling  all  night  with  the 
Lord,  whereas  a  glance  at  the  passage  in  Genesis 
would  show  them  that  it  was  the  Lord  who  wrestled 
with  Jacob ;  just  as  He  is  now  wrestling  with  their 
ungenerous  and  unworthy  unbelief,  seeking  to  cast  it 
down  by  the  precious  word  of  His  grace.  They  seem 
to  think  that  it  is  a  token  of  becoming  humility  and 
self-abasement  when  they  lament  their  wretched  con- 
dition as  sinners,  or,  at  best,  indulge  a  faint  hope  that 
they  will  be  admitted,  after  they  are  judged,  to  "  the 
lowest  seat  in  heaven,"  whereas  it  is  a  token  of  pride 
and  self-righteousness  that  keep  them  from  seeing  how 
totally  lost  they  really  are,  and  so  prevent  them  from 
resting  at  once  and  fully  upon  the  finished  work  of 
Christ  for  eternal  life. 

They  are  not  "  altogether  without  hope,"  they  say ; 
but  if  they  believe  in  Christ  (and  this  is  a  simple  mat- 
ter of  consciousness),  why  do  they  not  say  they  hiow 
they  are  saved  according  to  the  Scriptures  ?  A  young 
lady  teaching  her  class  in  Sunday-school  found  the 
lesson  for  a  certain  day  embracing  the  Saviour ^s  dec- 
laration, "  Yeril}^  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life."  '  A  little  girl 
inquired,  "  Is  that  true — is  it  surely  true  ?  "  "  Oh, 
yes  ! "  replied  the  teacher,  "  it  is  surely  true,  for  Christ 
says  so,  and  whatever  He  says  is  true."  "  It  must  be 
very  nice,"  said  the  child,  "  to  have  everlasting  life, 
and  to  know  that  whatever  comes  you  are  saved,  and 
saved  even  now."  "  Yes,"  answered  the  teacher,  *'  it 
*  John  vi.  47. 


ASSURANCE   OF   FAITH  277 

is  a  great  blessing  indeed."  "  Then  you  are  saved, 
are  you  not  ?  "  asked  the  interested  scholar.  "  I  hope 
so,"  was  the  reply.  "  Hope  so  ! "  exclaimed  the  child  ; 
"  why,  I  thought  you  told  me  just  now  it  was  sure 
enough  ?  "  The  conversation  is  said  to  have  led  the 
young  lady  to  see  her  folly,  and  to  cast  herself  with 
undoubting  confidence  upon  Christ  for  a  present,  com- 
plete, and  assured  salvation.  So  it  would  be  with 
numbers  of  professed  Christians  who  seek  to  lead 
souls  to  the  Saviour,  if  they  would  reflect  for  a  mo- 
ment upon  the  absurdity  of  telling  the  inquiring  sin- 
ner, upon  the  infinitely  trustworthy  testimony  of  Je- 
hovah, that  through  faith  in  Jesus  he  shall  certainly 
be  saved,  while  they  themselves,  although  saying  they 
believe,  are  filled  with  doubt  and  fear  concerning  their 
own  state  and  standing  before  God. 


CHAPTER  XX 
ASSURANCE  OP  FAITH 

THE  objection,  however,  may  be  here  raised  that 
the  real  point  of  the  difficulty  is  not  yet  reached. 
It  will  be  admitted,  some  are  ready  to  reply,  that  the 
true  believer  may  know  he  is  saved,  but  the  question 
is,  How  can  he  know  he  is  a  true  believer  ?  Is  he  not 
compelled,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  to  look  at  his 
own  heart  and  life  before  he  can  be  assured  of  his  in- 
terest in  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  As  Professor  Lindsay 
has  put  it  in  his  expository  Lectures  on  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  (which  are  for  the  most  part  admirable), 
"  When  the  question  is.  What  is  the  ground  of  a  sin- 
ner's acceptance  ?  the  answer  is,  Christ's  righteous- 
ness received  by  faith  alone.  When  the  question  is, 
What  is  the  ground  of  a  true  saving  faith  ?  the  an- 
swer is.  The  testimony  of  God  applied  to  the  con- 
science by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  when  the  question 
is.  Has  some  particular  man,  A  or  B,  really  believed 
the  Gospel  and  obtained  pardon  ?  it  must  obviously  be 
something  connected  with  the  man  himself  to  which 
you  look  for  an  answer.  Has  the  Gospel  produced  its 
legitimate  influence  upon  his  dispositions  and  life  ?  Is 
he  bringing  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance  ?  Is  he 
yielding  a  diligent  and  cheerful  obedience  to  the  com- 
mandments of  Christ  ?  " 

278 


ASSURAKCE   OF  FAITH  279 

To  this  the  troubled  Christian  might  fairly  respond, 
What  is  the  legitimate  influence  of  the  Gospel  upon 
my  dispositions  and  life,  and  how  far  does  it  extend  ? 
What  are  fruits  meet  for  repentance,  and  how  abun- 
dant and  constant  must  be  their  growth  and  mani- 
festation ?  What  is  a  diligent  and  cheerful  obedience 
to  the  commandments  of  Christ,  and  where  is  the 
standard  to  determine  whether  the  obedience  is  suifi- 
ciently  diligent  and  cheerful  to  entitle  me  to  assurance 
of  salvation  ?  With  all  deference  for  Dr.  Lindsay's 
ability  as  a  scholar  and  writer,  I  am  bold  to  say  that 
assurance  can  never,  never  be  obtained  in  this  manner; 
for  in  proportion  as  a  child  of  God  is  conscientious  and 
painstaking  in  his  walk,  so  is  he  made  aware  of  the 
evils  of  his  nature  and  his  deficiencies  in  meeting  the 
full  measure  of  his  obligations.  The  holiest  saints  on 
earth  are  invariably  those  who  most  clearly  perceive 
and  most  promptly  confess  the  vileness  of  their  hearts 
and  their  failures  in  duty ;  and  they  would  be  the  first 
to  confess  that  if  assurance  is  derived  from  anything 
found  in  them  or  done  by  them,  it  is  a  privilege  en- 
tirely beyond  the  reach  of  their  experience. 

The  fact  is,  assurance  does  not  depend  upon  our 
conduct,  but  our  conduct  greatly  depends  upon  our  as- 
surance. Let  no  one  infer  from  this  that  it  matters  not 
how  a  Christian  lives,  for  whatever  gives  the  slightest 
encouragement  to  sin  ;  whatever  leads  any  to  suppose 
that  the  least  iniquity  in  the  soul  or  life  is  a  little 
thing  ;  whatever  tends  to  dampen  the  ardor  of  a  fer- 
vent aspiration  to  be  perfectly  conformed  to  the  will 
of  God, — is  utterly  contrary  both  to  the  letter  and  the 


280  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

spirit  of  the  Gospel.  Its  solemn  language  is,  "  As  he 
which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all 
manner  of  conversation ;  because  it  is  written,  Be  ye 
holy ;  for  I  am  holy." '  But  the  calling  here  does 
not  depend  upon  the  holiness,  although  the  holiness 
depends  upon  the  calling.  The  divine  order  is,  first 
faith  and  then  works;  first  grace  and  then  govern- 
ment ;  fii^t  privilege  and  then  responsibility ;  first 
relationship  and  then  affection;  first  life  and  then 
activity  ;  first  salvation  and  then  holiness.  "  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children ;  "  ^  but 
mark,  as  dear  cJiildren  ;  and  the  exhortation  is  based 
upon  the  fact  stated  in  the  preceding  verse — that 
"  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you."  ^  So  you 
will  find  that  all  the  exhortations  addressed  to  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  in  the  New  Testament  take  it  for 
granted  that  faith  is  already  exercised  ;  that  grace  is 
already  received ;  that  privilege  is  already  enjoyed ; 
that  relationship  with  God  as  the  Father  of  believers 
is  already  established  ;  that  life  is  already  bestowed  ; 
that  salvation  is  already  secured.  They  are  not 
asked  to  pray,  and  work,  and  give,  and  be  holy,  in 
order  to  be  saved,  but  because  they  are  saved ;  and 
salvation  is  not  made  to  hang  upon  their  discern- 
ment of  themselves  as  true  believers,  but  upon  their 
discernment  of  Christ  as  the. only  and  all-sufficient 
Saviour. 

It  is  nowhere  written  in  the  Bible,  Believe  that 
thou  art  a  believer,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  but,  "  Be- 
lieve on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,   and  thou  shalt  be 

» 1  Pet.  i.  15,  16.  2  Eph.  v.  1.  » gpij,  i^.  32. 


ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH  281 

saved."  '  It  is  nowhere  said,  He  that  believeth  him- 
self to  be  a  believer  hath  everlasting  life,  but,  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life."  ^  Do 
you  ask,  then,  how  you  may  know  that  you  are  a  be- 
liever ?  I  reply,  You  cannot  know  it  by  looking  at 
yourself,  but  only  at  the  Saviour  who  speaks  to  you 
in  His  word.  If  a  friend  of  undoubted  veracity  were 
to  tell  you  of  something  that  had  occurred  within  his 
personal  knowledge,  you  would  not  think  of  your 
own  heart  and  life  to  find  out  whether  you  believed 
him,  but  only  of  his  unspotted  reputation  for  truthful- 
ness. If  a  common  Har  were  to  relate  a  wonderful 
story  as  a  fact,  you  would  not  w^atch  the  operations  of 
your  own  mind,  and  the  expressions  of  your  own  face, 
to  discover  whether  you  doubted  or  believed  his  state- 
ment, but  you  would  remember  his  bad  character,  and 
for  this  reason  dismiss  what  he  has  said  as  unworthy 
of  credit.  If  you  were  dangerously  ill,  and  your  phy- 
sician, w^ho  through  long  years  of  practice  had  never 
been  known  to  deceive  a  patient,  should  at  length  de- 
clare that  the  crisis  of  the  disease  had  been  safely 
passed,  that  all  your  symptoms  were  encouraging,  and 
that  you  were  on  the  way  to  speedy  recovery,  you 
would  not  be  occupied  with  thoughts  about  yourself 
to  learn  whether  you  believed  him,  but  your  attention 
would  be  instantly  turned  from  self  to  think  of  his 
skill,  his  integrity,  and  his  cheering  words.  You 
would  not  first  feel  glad,  and  then  believe  him,  but 
you  would  first  believe  him,  and  then  feel  glad.  You 
would  not  first  look  for  signs  of  returning  health,  and 
^  Actaxvi.  31.  2  JqI^u  m  -js. 


282  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAINT 

then  accept  his  declaration  as  true,  but  you  \\"ould  first 
accept  his  declaration  as  true,  and  then  look  for  signs 
of  returning  health.  You  would  not  say,  "  Doctor,  I 
wish  I  could  believe  you  ;  I  am  trying  to  believe  you ; 
how  can  I  believe  you  ?  how  can  I  know  that  I  be- 
lieve you  ?  "  but  immediately  upon  the  announcement 
of  the  good  news  you  would  believe  him,  and  straight- 
way rejoice. 

So  it  was  with  those  who  became  the  disciples  of 
Jesus  in  the  earliest  and  best  days  of  the  Christian 
Church.  They  heard  the  good  news  of  the  love  of 
God  for  a  lost  world,  and  of  the  death  of  Christ  for 
sin,  and  of  His  resurrection  for  the  justification  of 
His  people,  and  without  any  delay  they  believed,  and 
at  once  were  made  happy  in  the  assurance  of  salvation. 
Among  them  were  physicians,  and  lawyers,  and  mer- 
chants, and  mechanics,  and  farmers,  and  priests  who 
gave  up  their  oflSce,  and  women,  composing  a  great 
company,  having  the  same  sinful  nature  with  which 
we  are  born  into  the  world,  and  bearing  on  their 
weary  souls  the  same  cares  that  burden  us,  and 
knowing  "that  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh, 
not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,"  '  were  called  to 
help  them  in  the  struggle  of  life.  Some  of  them  had 
been  fornicators,  and  idolaters,  and  adulterers,  and 
effeminate,  and  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind, 
and  thieves,  and  covetous,  and  drunkards,  and  revilers, 
and  extortioners ;  and  yet  it  could  be  said  to  them, 
"  But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are 
justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 

» 1  Cor.  i.  26. 


ASSUEANCE  OF  FAITH  283 

Spirit  of  our  God."  '  This  wondrous  change  from  the 
deepest  degradation  to  the  highest  blessedness  was 
brought  about  by  simply  believing  upon  the  testimony 
of  God  that  Christ  had  put  away  their  sins  ;  and  there 
is  not  the  slightest  evidence  that  they  doubted  their 
acceptance,  or  that  they  worried  themselves  in  trying 
to  discover  whether  their  faith  was  of  the  right  kind, 
and  whether  it  was  sufficiently  strong.  They  were 
troubled  about  other  questions,  which  they  referred  to 
the  decision  of  the  inspired  apostles,  but  there  is  no 
proof  that  they  ever  asked  how  they  might  know  they 
were  true  believers  and  thus  obtain  full  assurance  of 
faith. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  abundant  proof  that 
they  were  strangers  to  the  fear  and  uncertainty  that 
make  up  the  gloomy  experience  of  at  least  nine-tenths 
of  the  people  of  God  in  modern  times.  Whoever  they 
were,  whatever  they  had  been,  wherever  they  lived, 
they  had  an  assurance  of  salvation  which  must  have 
formed  at  once  an  unfailing  fountain  of  joy  to  their 
hearts  and  an  effective  instrument  for  achieving  an 
easy  victory  over  the  world.  Thus  in  writing  to  the 
Eomans  the  apostle  says  in  his  salutation,  "  To  all  that 
be  in  Eome,  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be  saints."  ^ 
If  they  did  not  know  that  they  were  beloved  of  God, 
called  to  be  saints,  it  is  obvious  that  they  could  not 
know  that  the  Epistle  was  intended  for  them.  In  the 
same  strain  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  To  him  that  worketh 
not,  but  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly, 
his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  ^     ''  Therefore 

1 1  Cor.  vi.  11.  ^  Rom.  i.  7.  ^  Rom.  iv.  5. 


2S4  THE  WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

being  jiistiiied  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  by  whom  also  we 
have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand, 
and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  ^  "  What 
shall  we  say  then  ?  Shall  Ave  continue  in  sin,  that 
grace  may  abound  ?  God  forbid.  How  shall  we  that 
are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ?  "  ^  "  Know- 
ing this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  that 
the  body  of  sm  might  be  destroyed,  that  henceforth 
we  should  not  serve  sin."  ^  "  There  is  therefore  now 
no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  * 
''  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died, 
yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for 
us."  ^  "  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we 
believed."  ^  ^'  Whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the 
Lord ;  and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord : 
whether  we  live  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's." ' 
*'  And  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly."  ^  Is  it  possible  that  those  to  whom 
such  language  was  addressed  could  doubt  their  safety, 
or  need  anything  else  to  give  them  perfect  assurance  ? 
In  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  the  same 
apostle  sends  his  salutations  "  unto  the  church  of  God 
which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,"  and  he  describes 
them  as  "  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ :  who  shall  also  confirm  you  unto  the  end,  that 

*Rom.  V.  1,  2.  «Rora.  vi.  1,  2.  ^Rora.  vi.  6. 

*Rom.  viii.  1.  *  Rom.  viii.  34.  «Roni.  xiii.  11. 

'  Rom.  xiv.  8.  e  Ro„j^  ^yi.  20. 


ASSURATs^CE   OF  FAITH  285 

ye  may  be  blameless  in  the  clay  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  *  *'  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of 
God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and 
sanctiiication,  and  redemption."  ^  "  Know  ye  not 
that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  "  ^  "  All  things  are  yours  ; 
Avhether  Paul,  or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or 
life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come ; 
all  are  yours ;  and  ye  are  Christ's ;  and  Christ  is 
God's."  *  "  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall 
judge  the  world  ?  and  if  the  Avorld  shall  be  judged  by 
you,  are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters  ? 
Know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels  ?  "  ^  *'  Ye 
are  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify  God  in 
your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  ® 
'*  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but  such  as  is 
common  to  man  :  but  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not 
suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  ;  but 
will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape, 
that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  ^  "  When  we  are 
judged,  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should 
not  be  condemned  with  the  world."  ^  "  Now  ye  are 
the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular."  ^ 
"Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  steadfast, 
unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  labor  is  not  in 
vain  in  the  Lord."  ^^ 

» 1  Cor.  i.  7,  8.  '1  Cor.  i.  30.  '  1  Cor.  iii.  16. 

*  1  Cor.  iii.  21-23.  ^  1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3.  n  Cor.  vi.  20. 

'  1  Cor.  X.  13.  ^  1  Cor.  xi.  32.  » 1  Cor.  xii.  27. 

101  Cor.  XV.  58. 


286  THE  WAY   MADE  PLAIN 

Turning  to  the  second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
we  find  the  apostle  saying, "  ISTow  he  which  stablisheth 
us  with  you  in  Christ,  and  hath  anointed  us,  is  God  ; 
who  hath  also  sealed  us,  and  given  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit  in  our  hearts.'^*  "Forasmuch  as  ye  are  mani- 
festly declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ  ministered 
by  us,  written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  Spirit  of  the 
living  God."  ^  "  For  we  know  [not  suppose,  nor  hope, 
but  know]  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle 
were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  ^  "  All 
things  are  of  God  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself 
by  Jesus  Christ."  ^  "  For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin 
for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  him."  ^  To  the  Galatians  he 
says,  "  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."  ^  To  the  Ephesians  he  says,  "  He  hath 
made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved :  in  whom  we  have 
redemption  through  his  blood ; "  ^ "  Kow  in  Christ  Jesus 
ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the 
blood  of  Christ."  ^  To  the  Philippians  he  says,  "  Being 
confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun 
a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ."  ^  To  the  Colossians  he  says,  "  Giving 
thanks  unto  the  Father,  w^hich  hath  made  us  meet  to 
be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light : 
who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and 
hath  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son."  ^® 

»2  Cor.  i.  21,  22.  ^2  Cor.  iii.  3.  ^2  Cor.  v.  1. 

*2  Cor.  V.  18.  * 2  Cor.  v.  21.  «Gal.  iii.  26. 

'Eph.  i.  6,  7.       ^Eph.  ii.  13.        'Phil.  i.  6.      »0Col.  i.  12,  13. 


ASSURANCE   OF   FAITH  287 

"  And  ye  are  complete  in  him."  '  To  the  Thessaloni- 
ans  he  says,  "  Ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve 
the  living  and  true  God  ;  and  to  wait  for  his  Son  from 
heaven,  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus, 
which  delivered  us  [mark  the  past  tense]  from  the 
wrath  to  come."  ^  To  Timothy  he  says,  "  God  hath 
not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear ;  but  of  power,  and  of 
love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."  ^  To  Titus  he  says,  "  Not 
by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but 
according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  w^ashing 
of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour;  that  being  justified  by  his  grace  we 
should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal 
life."  ^  To  the  Hebrews  he  says,  "  For  both  he  that 
sanctifieth  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one : 
for  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren."  ^  "  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the 
sins  of  many ;  and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall 
he  appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation."  ^ 
Having  thus  hurriedly  passed  through  the  Epistles 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  dictated  to  Paul,  it  only  re- 
mains to  glance  at  the  testimonj^  given  by  the  other 
inspired  apostles.  James  says,  "  Every  good  gift  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down 
from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variable- 
ness, neither  shadow  of  turning.  Of  his  own  will  be- 
gat he  us  with  the  word  of  truth."  ^     Peter,  writing 

»  Col.  ii.  10.  » 1  Thess.  i.  9,  10.  ^2  Tim.  i.  7. 

4  Tit.  iii.  5-7.  '  Heb.  ii.  11.  «  Heb.  ix.  28. 

'  James  1.  17,  18. 


288  THE   WAY  MADE  PLAIN 

to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pontius,  Galatia, 
Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia,  declares  that  they 
were  "  elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God,"  * 
and  blesses  "  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  according  to  his  abundant  mercy  hath 
begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,"  ^  "  whom  having 
not  seen,  ye  love  ;  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  him 
not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory ;  receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the 
salvation  of  your  souls."  ^  John  writes  not  only  to 
the  fathers  and  the  young  men  who  were  strong,  but 
to  "  little  children,  because,"  he  says,  "  your  sins  are 
forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake ; "  and  again,  "  I 
write  unto  you,  little  children,  because  ye  have  known 
the  Father."  ^  ''  Beloved,  now  we  are  the  sons  of 
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  ;  but 
we  know  that  when  he  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like 
him."  ^  "  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  that 
believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God ;  that  ye  may 
know  that  ye  have  eternal  life."  ^  "  We  know  that 
we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wicked- 
ness [or  the  wicked  one].  And  we  know  that  the  Son 
of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding, 
that  we  may  know  him  that  is  true  ;  and  we  are  in  him 
that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the 
true  God,  and  eternal  life."  ^  Jude  addresses  "  them 
that  are  sanctified  by  God  the  Father,  and  preserved  in 

»  1  Pet.  i.  2.  3  1  Pet.  i.  3.  n  Pet.  i.  8,  9. 

*  1  Jobu  ii.  12,  13.         '  1  John  iii.  2.  « 1  John  v.  13. 

'  1  John  V.  19,  20. 


ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH  289 

Jesus  Christ,  and  called ;  "  '  and  the  beloved  disciple 
raises  an  ascription  of  praise,  in  behalf  of  all  his 
brethren,  "  unto  him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from 
our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  and  his  Father."  ^ 

It  is  plain  from  these  passages  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  His  communications  to  the  early  disciples  as  to 
those  who  were  already  saved  and  who  knew  they 
were  saved.  Indeed,  He  manifestly  designed  to  give 
them  assurance  of  this  fact ;  and  they  could  obtain  as- 
surance only  by  believing  His  word.  When  it  is  said, 
"  The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God,"  ^and,  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself,"  ^  we 
are  to  remember  that  the  witness-bearing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  not  apart  from  the  word,  but  that  it  consists 
in  leading  the  soul  to  rest  with  unwavering  confidence 
upon  the  testimony  of  that  word.  When  our  Lord 
said  to  those  who  received  Him  as  their  Saviour,  "  Ke- 
joice  because  your  names  are  written  in  heaven,"  ^ 
and,  "  Fear  not,  little  fiock,  for  it  is  your  Father's 
good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom,"  ^  bow  were 
they  assured  of  salvation  ?  Clearly,  by  believing  His 
word  ;  and  if  they  did  sincerely  believe  Him,  they  not 
only  hoped,  but  they  knew,  that  their  names  were 
written  in  heaven,  and  that  they  would  at  length 
reign  in  the  kingdom.  They  could  not  know  it  in 
any  other  way.  Suppose  Christ  should  now  descend 
from  heaven  in  visible  form  and  say  the  same  thing 

*  Jude  1.  «  Rev.  i.  5,  6.  '  Rom.  viii.  16. 

*  1  John  V.  10.  »  Lnke  x.  20.  «  Luke  xii.  32. 


290  THE   AVAY   MADE  PLAIN 

to  you ;  would  you  believe  Him  ?  Suppose  He  should 
send  an  angel  to  you  as  He  did  to  Cornelius  to  an- 
nounce the  same  thing ;  would  you  believe  Him  ? 
Suppose  He  should  write  the  same  thing  in  a  letter  and 
convey  it  to  your  mind  in  that  form ;  would  you  be- 
lieve Him  ?  Why  not  believe  Him,  then,  when  He 
says  the  same  thing  in  a  book,  and  says  it  to  you  no 
less  personally  and  directly  than  He  did  to  those  who 
received  Him,  while  He  was  on  the  earth,  as  the  Son 
of  God  ? 

Surely  you  hiow  whether  you  believe  that  He  lived 
here  below,  and  died  upon  the  cross,  and  arose  from 
the  grave,  and  ascended  up  to  heaven ;  and  whether 
He  lived,  and  died,  and  arose,  and  ascended,  as  the 
Saviour  of  all  who  believe  that  thus  He  put  away  sin ; 
and  if  you  so  believe,  you  may  know  that  you  are  a 
child  of  God,  because  it  is  written,  "  Whosoever  be- 
lieveth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."* 
You  have  already  confessed  with  the  mouth  that  this 
Jesus  is  your  Lord — or  you  are  only  waiting  a  suitable 
opportunity  to  confess  Him — and  you  do  sincerely  be- 
lieve that  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead  for  the  justi- 
fication of  all  His  people ;  and  hence  you  may  know 
that  you  are  delivered  from  the  wrath  to  come,  because 
it  is  written,  ''  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that 
God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  ^  You  hioio  whether  you  are  trusting  in  Him 
alone  for  salvation,  or  whether  you  expect  to  enter 
heaven  on  the  ground  that  you  are  good,  or  on  the 

'  1  Jolm  V.  1.  ^  Ixom.  X.  9. 


ASSUEANCE   OF   FAITH  291 

ground  that  you  have  joined  the  church,  or  on  the 
ground  of  something  else  you  are  doing ;  and  if  you 
can  trutlifuliy  say  that  your  trust  is  in  Jesus  and  in 
none  but  Jesus,  you  may  hnoio  that  you  have  passed 
out  of  death  into  life,  because  it  is  written,  "  He  that 
belie veth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life."  ' 

The  question  here  is  not  whether  you  are  a  sinner, 
for  it  is  certain  that  you  are  a  sinner,  and  that  you 
will  remain  a  sinner  as  long  as  you  live,  but  it  is  sim- 
ply this,  Do  you  believe  that  Christ  is  your  Saviour  ? 
If  you  do,  although  the  flesh  is  still  in  you,  "  ye  are 
not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit."  ^  In  other  words, 
although  you  are  a  sinner,  you  are  not  a  sinner ;  and 
if  you  say  this  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  so  it  is  a 
contradiction  in  terms  to  say  that  you  are  mortal  and 
at  the  same  time  immortal,  and  yet  both  statements 
are  strictly  true.  As  the  great  Bacon  has  described 
the  believer  in  one  of  his  striking  Christian  "  para- 
doxes and  seeming  contradictions,"  "  He  hath  within 
him  both  flesh  and  Spirit,  yet  he  is  not  a  double- 
minded  man  ;  he  is  often  led  captive  by  the  law  of  sin, 
yet  it  never  gets  dominion  over  him  ;  he  cannot  sin, 
yet  can  do  nothing  without  sin."  Or,  to  quote  a  far 
higher  authority,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us ; "  ^  but 
the  same  apostle  says,  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God 
doth  not  commit  sin ;  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  : 
and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God."  ^ 
"  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be 

^  John  V),  47,  ^Rom.  viii.  9. 

»  1  John  i.  8.  4  1  John  iii.  9. 


292  THE  IV AY  MABE  PLAIN 

a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened."  If  the  Christian 
had  not  leaven  in  him,  he  could  not  be  told  to  purge 
it  out ;  and  yet  the  very  reason  assigned  for  purging 
it  out  is  that  he  has  not  leaven.  The  truth  is,  our 
"  old  man  "  is  essentially  corrupt,  but  our  "  new  man  " 
which  is  created  in  Christ  Jesus  is  essentially  holy ;  and 
the  moment  we  are  in  Him  by  faith  alone,  twenty 
things  are  said  of  our  sins.  First,  they  are  blotted 
out ;  '  second,  they  are  home  by  another ;  ^  third,  they 
are  cast  behind  God^s  back;^  fourth,  they  are  cast 
into  the  dejyths  of  the  sea  /  ^  fifth,  they  are  washed 
away  with  cleansing  blood  ;  ^  sixth,  they  are  covered  /  ® 
seventh,  they  dire  finished  ;'^  eighth,  they  diVQ  for- 
given;  ^  ninth,  they  are  not  beheld ;  ^  tenth,  they  are 
not  imputed  I  ^^  eleventh,  they  are  not  remembered  ;  " 
twelfth,  they  are  pardoned ;  ^^  thirteenth,  they  are 
passed  away  ;^^  fourteenth,  they  are  purged  ;^^  fif- 
teenth, they  are  put  away  /  ^^  sixteenth,  they  are  re- 
mitted;  ^^  seventeenth,  they  are  removed  ;  ''  eighteenth, 
they  are  subdued ;  ^^  nineteenth,  they  are  sought  for 
and  not  found  ;^^  twentieth,  they  are  talcen  away."^ 
The  believer  in  Christ  may  knovj  upon  the  sure  testi- 
mony of  God  that  all  this  is  true  as  it  respects  both 
the  sin  of  his  nature  and  the  sins  of  his  life  ;  and  hence 
the  believer  may  hiow  in  the  same  way  that  he  is  saved. 

^  Isa.  xliii.  25.  '  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  ^  jga.  xxxviii.  17. 

*  Micah  vii.  19.  » 1  John  i.  7.  «  Rom.  iv.  7. 

'  Dau.  ix.  24.  ^  (^q\   jj   13^  9  j^nnj   xxiii.  21. 

^0  Rora.  iv.  8.  "  Heb.  viii.  12.  "  Micah  vii.  18. 

"  Zech.  iii.  4.  "  Heb.  i.  3.  »"  Heb.  ix.  26. 

^fi  Acts  x.  43.  1'  Ps.  ciii.  12.  »« Micah  vii.  19. 

"Jer.  i.  20.  'ojsa.  vi.  7. 


ASSURANCE   OF  FAITH  293 

But  it  may  be  asked  whether  there  are  not  certain 
evidences  of  conversion  found  in  the  Scriptures.  Un- 
doubtedly there  are,  but  they  are  not  given  that  we 
might  derive  from  them  the  assurance  of  salvation. 
It  was  never  intended  that  we  should  receive  assur- 
ance by  believing  ourselves  to  be  Christians,  but  by 
believing  that  Christ  is  our  all-sufficient  Saviour. 
Look  at  any  of  the  evidences  of  regeneration  men- 
tioned in  the  Bible,  and  a  moment's  reflection  will 
convince  you  that  they  were  not  designed  to  furnish 
assurance  for  which  so  many  sad  hearts  are  longing 
and  striving.  Take,  for  example,  the  text,  "  Every 
one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God." ' 
This  cannot  give  assurance,  for  there  is  not  a  Christian 
in  the  world  whose  love  does  not  fall  far  below  the 
measure  of  his  desire  and  his  duty.  Take  the  text, 
"  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren."^  This  cannot  give 
assurance,  for  there  is  no  test  to  decide  who  are  the 
brethren,  and  no  standard  to  determine  how  fervent 
our  love  must  be,  or  how  far  it  must  extend  in  cover- 
ing the  faults  of  those  who  claim  to  be  Christians. 
Take  the  text,  "  He  that  keepeth  his  commandments 
dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  him."  ^  This  cannot  give 
assurance ;  for  every  true  Christian,  unless  deluded 
by  Satan,  will  confess  that  he  fails  to  observe  them  in 
many  particulars ;  that  when  he  would  do  good  evil 
is  present  with  him ;  and  that  "  no  mere  man,  since 
the  fall,  is  able,  in  this  life,  perfectly  to  keep  the  com- 
mandments of  God  ;  but  doth  daily  break  them,  in 

» 1  John  iv.  7.  ^  1  John  iii.  14.  » j  ^^^^  jjj^  24. 


294  THE   WAY   MADE  PLAIJf 

thought,  word,  and  deed."  Whatever  purpose,  there- 
fore, these  evidences  may  serve,  it  is  a  self-righteous 
and  fruitless  task  to  look  to  them  for  assurance. 

Still,  it  may  be  urged  that  we  are  commanded  to 
examine  ourselves.  But  not,  I  reply,  to  discover 
whether  we  are  Christians.  In  the  first  passage 
where  this  command  is  given  the  context  plainly  shows 
that  the  examination  refers  only  to  the  question 
whether  the  disciples  of  Christ  were  pursuing  a  course 
of  conduct  unbecoming  those  who  came  to  the  Lord's 
table.  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him 
eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup."  '  The 
question  of  personal  salvation  is  not  at  all  involved ; 
but  they  were  exhorted  to  examine  their  ways,  and 
put  from  them,  as  the  dear  children  of  God,  detected 
evil ;  "  for  if  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not 
be  judged."  ^  In  the  second  passage  we  read,  "  Exam- 
ine yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith,"  ^  but  here 
again  the  context  clearly  shows  that  the  question  un- 
der discussion  was  about  the  apostle's  right  to  exercise 
his  high  office,  and  not  at  all  about  personal  salvation. 
"  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking  in  me,"  he 
says,  "  examine  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the 
faith  ; "  for  the  fact  that  they  were  in  the  faith  was 
conclusive  proof  that  Christ  had  owned  his  ministry, 
and  therefore  that  he  was  not  an  impostor  in  claiming 
to  be  an  apostle.  Self-examination  as  conducted  in 
the  manner  and  to  attain  the  ends  for  which  it  is 
usually  urged  is  the  most  painful  and  profitless  exer- 
cise that  can  engage  the  soul,  and  I  would  confidently 

'  1  Cor.  xi.  28.  »  1  Cor.  xi.  31.  ^  2  Cor.  xiii.  5. 


ASSURANCE   OF  FAITH  295 

appeal  to  the  experience  of  every  conscientious  and  in- 
telligent Christian  to  testify  whether  this  is  not  true. 
If  you  expect  to  get  assurance  in  this  way,  you  might 
as  well  expect  to  get  health  by  looking  at  disease,  to 
get  light  by  looking  at  darkness,  to  get  life  by  look- 
ing at  a  corpse.  Self -judgment  is  quite  another  thing, 
and  daily  should  we  consider  our  ways  :  not  to  find  a 
ground  of  assurance,  but  to  confess  and  forsake  all 
that  is  evil  as  judged  by  the  word  of  God. 

It  may,  however,  occur  to  the  reader  that  there  are 
numerous  passages  in  the  Scriptures  which  warn  us 
against  the  danger  and  deception  of  apostasy.  Want 
of  space  forbids  an  examination  of  these  passages,  but 
without  going  into  details,  it  is  sufficient  to  state  that 
Scripture  cannot  contradict  itself ;  and  having  already 
shown  by  the  abundant  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
the  safety  of  the  believer  in  Jesus,  it  is  certain  that 
the  same  Spirit  cannot  teach  a  directly  contrary  doc- 
trine. Such  passages,  which  are  often  wrested  from 
their  proper  meaning  by  those  who  are  "  unskilful  in 
the  word  of  righteousness,"  ^  are  sometimes  given  to 
expose  hypocrites,  and  sometimes  to  put  true  Chris- 
tians on  their  guard  "  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil,"  ^ 
but  never  to  shake  the  confidence  of  the  believer.  "  To 
all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are  at  Philippi "  ^ 
(the  home  of  the  redeemed  and  rejoicing  jailer)  the  in- 
spired apostle  writes,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh 
in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  * 

'  Heb.  V.  13.  2  Eph.  vi.  11. 

»  Phil.  i.  1.  4  Phil.  ii.  12,  13. 


206  THE   AVAY   MADE   PLAIN 

In  other  words,  God  had  worked  salvation  in  them, 
and  now  they  were  commanded  to  work  it  oiU — to 
ivork,  noi  for  salvation,  hut  from  salvation  already  re- 
ceived ;  to  work,  not  for  life,  hwi  from  life  already  be- 
stowed. And  if  anything  can  arouse  us  to  ceaseless  ac- 
tivity, to  sustained  enthusiasm,  to  practical  holiness, 
and  to  personal  love  in  the  service  of  our  divine  Mas- 
ter, it  is  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  through  His 
pitying  grace  and  precious  blood  He  has  freely,  fully, 
and  forever  saved  us.  Then  we  will  understand  the 
deep  meaning  of  the  words, 

*'  I'm  a  poor  sinner,  and  nothiug  at  all, 
And  Jesus  Christ  is  my  all  in  all.'' 

Then  w^e  can  say,  in  the  confidence  and  joy  of  a  simple 
faith,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  per- 
suaded that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com- 
mitted unto  him  against  that  day."  * 

"  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  fall- 
ing, and  to  present  you  faultless  before  the  presence 
of  his  glory,  with  exceeding  joy,  to  the  only  wise  God 
our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and 
power,  both  now  and  ever.     Amen."  ^ 

*'  Can  it  be  right  for  me  to  go 

On  in  this  dark,  uncertain  way  ? 
Say  *  I  believe,'  and  yet  not  know 
Whether  my  sins  are  put  away  ? 

^*  Not  know  my  trespasses  forgiven, 
Until  I  meet  Him  in  the  air  ! 
Not  kuow  that  I  shall  get  to  heaven 
Until  I  wake  and  Hud  me  there  ! 
1  2  Tim.  i.  12.  «  Jude  24,  25. 


ASSURANCE   OE  FAITH  297 

**  Not  know  my  state  till  on  my  brow 
Beams  the  celestial  diadem  ! 
Why,  surely  all  the  world  will  know 
That  I'm  a  pardoned  sinner  then. 

**  Mnst  clouds  and  darkness  veil  my  brow 
Until  I  dwell  with  saints  in  light  ? 
And  must  I  walk  in  darkness  now, 
Because  I  cannot  walk  by  sight  ? 

*^  And  shall  I  just  begin  to  say, 

*  Father,  Thine  every  word  is  true,' 
And  cast  my  doubts  and  fears  away. 
When  all  the  world  will  own  it  too  I 

**  Is  this  the  way  to  treat  the  God 

Who  bids  me  love  and  trust  Him  now  ? 
Is  this  the  way  to  use  the  word 
Given  to  guide  me  here  below  ? 


n 


How  can  I  forth  to  sinners  go. 
And  tell  of  grace  so  rich  and  free, 

If  all  the  while  I  do  not  know 
Whether  that  grace  has  smiled  on  me  ? 


b' 


*'  How  can  it  be  my  joy  to  dwell 

On  the  rich  power  of  Jesus'  blood. 
If  all  the  while  I  cannot  tell 
That  it  has  sealed  my  peace  with  God  ? 

**  How  can  I  be  like  Christ  below — 

How  like  my  Lord  in  witness  shine — 
Unless  with  conscious  joy  I  know 
His  Father  and  His  God  as  mine  ? 

*'  Oh,  crush  this  cruel  unbelief; 

These  needless,  shameful  doubts  remove  j 
And  suffer  me  no  more  to  grieve 
Tlie  God  w^hom  I  do  really  love." 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX 


Abel,  offering  of,  65. 
Abraham,  faith  of,  192. 

righteousness  of,  69. 
Acceptance  of  the  believer,  99. 
Actions  and  belief,  38 

principles,  38 
Adam,  children  of,  126. 

in  Eden,  100. 

promise  to,  86,  139. 

sin  of,  12,  63,  125. 
Adoption  of  Christians,  216. 
"  Ah !    dearest     Lord,     I     cannot 

pray,"  261. 
Alexander  invades  Asia,  174. 
Antinomianism,  evils  of,  98. 
Antioch,  Paul  in,  189. 
Apostasy,  warnings  against,  295. 
Artaxerxes  and  Nehemiah,  253. 
Assurance  of  Faith,  263,  297. 
Atonement,  Christ's,  74,  137,  157. 

day  of,  208. 
Attributes  of  God,  88. 

Baal,  priests  of,  257. 

Bacon,  Francis,  on  goodness,  53. 

truth,  53. 
Baptism,    Christian,    27,     75,     92, 

104,  140,  148,  159,  170,  178. 
Bathing,  Greek,  259. 
Belief,  actions  and,  38. 

based  on  testimony,  266,  267. 

Confession  and,  163,  193. 

evidence  and,  45. 

importance  of,  176,  182. 

prayer  and,  38. 

responsibility   for,   35,  40,  44, 

47.  49- 
"Belief"  occurs   about  500  times 
in  New  Testament,  177. 


Believe  with  the  mind,  173,  174, 

175- 

Believer,  acceptance  of  the,  100. 

Calling  on  the  Lord,  229,  261. 

justification  of  the,  loi. 

knows  he  is  saved,  270. 
Believer's  Safety,  194,  227. 
Believing,  hopes  founded  on,  I03. 
Bible,  teachings  of  the,  10. 
Birth,  new,  26,  118. 
Blind  man  cured,  184. 
Blood  of  Christ,  208. 
"  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory," 

169. 
Brutes,  good  traits  of,  26. 

Cain,  offering  of,  65. 

Caleb,  courage  of,  246. 

Calling  on  the  Lord,  The  Believer, 

229,  261. 
"  Can  it  be  right  for  me  to  go,"  296. 
Carnal  mind,  123. 
Catechism,  Heidelberg,  274. 

Westminster  Assembly,  275. 
Certainty  of  salvation,  154, 
Chalmers,  Dr.  T.,on  salvation,  230. 
Change  of  heart,  122. 
Character,  judging  by,  281. 
Christ,  ascension  of,  186,  188. 

atonement  of,  137,  157. 

blood  of,  208. 

crucifixion  of,  32,  74,  146,  178, 
185,  188. 

discourses  of,  178. 

divinity  of,  74,  88. 

end   of  the   law,  77,   93,  97, 
loi,  136. 

eternity  of,  88. 

faith  in,  14,  27,  34. 


299 


300 


ANALYTICAL   INDEX 


Christ,  faithfulness  of,  242. 

humihalion  of,  51,  74,  94. 

justification  by,  59. 

Lazarus  and,  13. 

meaning  of  the  name,  86. 

merits  of,  100. 

miracles  of,  178,  179. 

Nicodemus  and,  15,  25,  5 1. 

Omnipotence  of,  89,  241. 

Omnipresence  of,  89. 

Omniscience  of,  89,  24 1. 

prayer  to,  232. 

praying  in  the  name  of,  240. 

predicted  by  Isaiah,  149. 

rejection  of,  14,  27,  33,  52, 1 18. 

resurrection  of,   173,  176,  189. 

sacrifice  of,  137,  138,  208. 

Saviour   of  the   Believer,   77, 
102, 

sin-bearer,  187. 

substitute  for  the  sinner,  135. 

theme  of  revelation,  34. 

titles  of,  87,  183. 

weeps  over  Jerusalem,  1 3,  32. 

worshipped,  91, 
Christianity,  early,  282. 
Christians,  adoption  of,  216. 

sins  of,  204,  214 
Church  cannot  save,  115. 

early,  282. 

joining  the,  75,  130,  140. 

trust  in  the,  115. 
Circumstantial  evidence,  266. 
Civil  law,  Hobbes  on,  56, 
Condition,  meaning  of,  164. 
Conditions,  grace  with,  163. 

of  salvation,  164. 
Confession,  Belief  and,  163,  193. 

General,  109. 

Westminster,  273. 
Conscience,  decisions  of,  56. 

enlightened,  23,  40,  41,  113. 

slumbering,  105. 
Consciousness,    knowledge     based 

on,  265,  267,  269. 
Constitution  of  the  mind,  50. 
Conversion,  evidences  of,  293. 

instantaneous,  152. 


Conversion  of  a  sailor,  256. 
Conviction  of  sin,  7. 
Conduct,  responsibility  for,  37. 
Cornelius,  Peter  visits,  229. 
Creation  ascribed  to  Christ,  89. 
Creeds,  sneering  at,  29. 
Criminal,  condemned,  71,  83,  II4. 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  176,  266. 
Crucifixion.     See  Christ. 

David  conquers  Goliath,  247. 

on  righteousness,  68. 
Day  of  atonement,  208. 
Judgment,  75,  no. 
of  salvation,  153. 
Death,  punishment  of  sin,  84. 
uncertainty  of  time  of,  77. 
Debt,  discharge  of,  79. 
Debtor,  release  of  the,  134. 
Deity,  doctrine  of  the,  93. 
Depravity  of  nature,    19,    22,  51, 

117,  120,  121. 
Devil,  a  murderer  and  liar,  32. 
Disposition,  natural,  26. 
Divine  government,  82. 
Doctrines  neglected,  30. 
Doing,  hopes  founded  on,  103,  104, 
105,    113,    116,    140,    151,    152, 
165. 
Drafted  into  the  army,  215,  216. 
Duty  of  man,  109. 

rule  of,  57. 
Dying  thief,  how  saved,  146,  154, 
160. 

Eden,  Adam  in,  21,  100. 
Ejaculatory  prayer,  254. 
Elijah,  temptation  of,  248. 
Elisha  and  the  widow,  245. 
Elizabeth,  Queen,  163. 
End,  meaning  of,  78. 
End  of  the  Law.     See  Christ. 
Eunuch,  Ethiopian,  149,  184. 
Episcopal  Prayer-book,  109,  1 10. 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  1 1,  54,  57. 
Erskine,    Ralph,    on    regeneration, 

127. 
Eternity  ascribed  to  Christ,  88. 


Aiq-ALYTICAL   ITTDEX 


Europe,  Gospel  preached  in,  147- 

148. 
Eve,  promise  to,  86,  139. 

sin  of,  21,  64. 
Everlasting  punishment,  27. 
Evidence,  belief  and,  44,45. 

circumstantial,  269. 

of  the  senses,  265,  267. 
Evidences  of  conversion,  293. 
Examination,  object  of  self,  294. 

Faith,  Assurance  of,  263-297. 

in  Christ,  15,  27,  34. 
*•  Faith  "  occurs  about  500  times  in 

Nevi^  Testament,  177,  178. 
Faith,  salvation  by,  1 64-165. 

What  is  true,  274. 

without  v^'orks,  69. 
"  Faith   is   a   very  simple    thing," 

193- 
Faith  and  repentance,  158. 
Faithfulness  of  Christ,  242. 
Flesh,  unchanged,  126. 
works  of  the,  119. 

General  confession,  109,  no. 
God,  attributes  of,  88. 

character  of,  9,  28,  159, 

goodness  of,  159. 

law  of,  24,  57,  70,  71,72,80, 
96,  107,  136. 

love  of,  81,  143. 

man's  ignorance  of,  8. 

mercy  of,  73,  83,  142. 

omniscience  of,  53. 

righteousness  of,  57,  58,  60. 

will  of,  56,  108. 
Goliath  and  David,  247. 
Good  works.     See  Doing. 
Goodness,  Bacon  on,  53, 

of  God,  159. 
Gospel,  preaching  the,  loi,  147. 
Government,  Divine,  82. 
Governments,  human,  82. 
Grace,    contrasted   with    the    law, 
132. 

man's  trial  under,  22. 

righteousness  the  gift  of,  70. 


Grace,  salvation  by,  144. 

with  conditions,  163. 

without  conditions,  164. 
Gravitation,  law  of,  48,  82. 
Greek  and  English  Lexicon,  55. 
Greeks,  bathing  of  the,  259. 

Hannibal  crosses  tlie  Alps,  174. 
Hearing,  recovery  of,  273. 
Heart,  believe  in  thine,  163,  172, 
i73>  188. 

change  of,  122. 

God's  judgment  of  the,  122. 

natural  fruit  of  the,  20. 
Heathen,  philosophers  of  the,  50. 

responsible  for  their  belief,  36. 
Hebrew,  <•  righteousness  "  in   the, 

55. 
Hebrews  in  the  wilderness,  66. 
Hebrews,  Epistle  to  the,  278. 
Heidelberg  Catechism,  274. 
Hobbes  on  right  and  wrong,  56. 
Holy  Ghost   always  with   the   be- 
liever, 216. 

convinces  of  sin,  8. 

dependence  upon  the,  165,  166. 

on  justification,  58. 

righteousness,  68. 

works,  70. 

reproves  the  world,  181. 

teachings  of  the,  105. 

testimony  of  the,  86,  187,  21 1, 
254,  274. 
Horsemen,  the  two,  142. 
Human  governments,  82. 

laws,  43,  108,  III. 

nature    depraved,    19,  22,  50, 
117,  120,  121. 
Humility,  false,  204. 
Hygienic  laws,  83. 
Hypocrites,  portion  of,  104. 

*'  I  asked  the  heavens,"  18. 

"  I  am  a  great  sinner,"  156. 

"  I  hear  the  words  of  love,"  227. 

*'  I'm  a  poor  sinner,  and  nothing  at 

all,"  296. 
Ignorance  of  God,  8. 


302 


ANALYTICAL   INDEX 


Ignorance,  sins  of,  53. 
Immutability  ascribed  to  Christ,  88. 
Indifference  to  religion,  8. 
Infidelity,  dreariness  of,  1 1. 
Intellectual  philosophy,  173. 
Isaiah  on  Christ,  149. 
Israel,  release  of,  205. 

Jacob  wrestling,  276. 

James,  Apostle,  on  faith  and  works, 

69. 
Jeremiah,  temptation  of,  249. 
Jerusalem,  Christ  weeps  over,  13, 

32. 
Jesus,  grace  of,  97, 

sacrifice  of,  16. 
Jews,  character  of  the,  31,  63. 

condemnation  of,  11-14. 

crucify  Christ,  33. 
Job,  temptation  of,  248,  249. 
Joining  the  Church,  75,  130,  140. 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  172. 
Judgment  Day,  53,  75,  1 10, 
Julius  Caesar,  assassination  of,  174, 
Justice  satisfied,  97. 
Justification  of  the  believer,  58,  102. 

Knov^^ledge  based  on  testimony, 
265,  267. 

based  on  the  senses,  265. 
consciousness  based   on,  265, 
267,  269. 

Law  at  Sinai,  79, 

cannot  justify,  1 12. 

Christ  the  end  of  the,  77,  93, 

97,  loi,  102,  136. 
civil,  56,  71. 
end  of  the,   77,  93,  97,  loi, 

102,  136. 
human,   43,    71,  80,  82,  107, 

III. 
hygienic,  82. 
knows  no  mercy,  109. 
Levitical,  138. 
man's  trial  under  the,  22. 
meaning  of  the  word,  80. 
of  mind,  83. 


Law  of  God,  57,  70,  71,  72,  80, 
96,  107,  136. 

gravitation,  48,  82. 
the  spiritual  world,  48. 
physical,  47. 

preaching  the,  loi,  102,  140. 

requisitions  of  the,  132. 

righteousness  of  the,  107. 

rule  of  life,  98. 

satisfied,  97,  139, 

salvation  not  by  the,  1 19. 
Lazarus,  Christ  and,  13. 

resurrection  of,  13,  168,  180. 
Legalism,  error  of,  98. 
Levitical  law,  138. 
Life,  spiritual,  26. 
Light,  velocity  of,  174. 
Lindsay  on  Hebrews,  278. 
Lord's  Prayer,  the,  237. 

Supper,  75,  104,  156,  170. 
Love  of  God,  9,  143. 

to  God,  81. 
Luther  and  the  devil,  190. 

Man,  duty  of,  108. 

responsible  for  his  belief,  35. 
Man's  need  of  salvation,  10, 
Man's  Righteousness  Cannot  Save 

Him,  54,  76. 
Man's  Sincerity  Cannot  Save  Him, 

29-53- 
Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  163. 
Mercy  of  God,  73,  83,  142. 
Merits  of  Christ,  100. 
Messiah,  meaning  of,  86. 
Milton,  John,  174. 
Mind,  believe  with  the,  173,  174, 
175,  182,  187,  188. 
carnal,  123. 
constitution  of  the,  49. 
laws  pertaining  to,  83. 
Ministers,  Christian,  106,  140,  147. 
Mouth,  confess  with  thy,  163,  168, 

171. 
Moral  nature,  rules  of  the,  83. 
Morality  cannot   save,  76,  81,  84, 
104,  109,  114. 
Rousseau  on,  56. 


ATTALYTICAL   INDEX 


303 


Moses,  temptation  of,  248,  249. 
Mother,  love  of  a,  17. 

Napoleon  I,  190,  206. 

Nathanael,  faith  of,  183. 

Nature,  depraved,   19,  22,  51,  1 17, 

120,  121. 
meaning  of,  128. 
old,  unchanged,  129, 
Need  of  salvation,  7,  10. 
Nehemiah,  prayer  of,  253. 
New  birth,  the,  26,  157,  168,  216, 

226. 
Nicodemus  and  Christ,  15,  25,  51, 
No    Hope  for   the   Sinner   in    the 

Law,  103,  131. 
Nothing   Between  the  Sinner  and 

the  Saviour,  132,  162. 
"  Nothing,  either  great  or  small," 

161. 
Now  is  the  day  of  salvation,  153. 

Old  Nanny's  faith,  194. 
Old  Testament  saints,  138. 
Omnipotence  of  Christ,  89,  241. 
Omnipresence  of  Christ,  89. 
Omniscience  of  Christ,  89,  241. 
God,  53. 

Paradise  Lost,  174. 

Passover,  the,  49,  205. 

Paul,  character  of,  12,  41,  62,  63. 

conversion  of,  41,  189. 

on  baptism,  160. 
faith  and  works,  69. 
the  Jews,  11. 

persecutes  Christians,  155. 

preaches  at  Antioch,  189. 
Penalty,  meaning  of,  133. 
Penitent,  unbelieving,  258. 
Pentecost,  day  of,  148,  188. 
Perseverance  of  the  Lord,  195. 

saints,  195. 
Peter,  confession  of,  184,  242. 

visits  Cornelius,  229. 
Pharisee  and  The  Publican,  13. 
Pharisees,  character  of  the,  13,  31, 
62,  184. 


Philip  and  the  Eunuch,  149. 
Philippi,  jailer  of,  151,  295. 
Philosophers,  heathen,  50. 
Philosophy,  heathen,  50. 

intellectual,  50,  173. 
Physical  lavv^s,  47. 
Physician,  confidence  in  a,  281. 
Pilate,  Pontius,  52,  172. 
Poets  in  early  history,  19. 
*'  Pray  without  ceasing,"  252. 
Prayer  and  belief,  38. 

definition  of,  234. 

efficacy  of,  239. 

ejaculatory,  254. 

Lord's,  237. 

to  Christ,  232. 

wandering  thoughts  in,  260. 
Prayer-book,  Episcopal,  109. 
Preaching  the  Law,  10 1,  140. 
Precepts  of  the  Jews,  63. 
Priests  of  Baal,  257. 
Principles  and  actions,  38. 
Prodigal  son,  133. 
Profession  of  religion,  141. 
Punishment  everlasting,  27. 

of  sin,  83. 

vicarious,  134,  138. 

Redeem,  meaning  of,  95. 
Regeneration,     errors     respecting, 
127. 

evidences  of,  293. 

fruits  of,  158. 
Rejection  of  Christ,  14,  27,  34,  52, 

118. 
Religion,  indifference  to,  7,  51. 

profession  of,  14 1. 
Religious  opinions,  1 15, 
Renan,  cavils  of,  173. 
Repentance  and  faith,  158. 

meaning  of,  158. 
Responsibility   for   belief,    35,   40, 

44,  47.  49. 

conduct,  38. 
Resurrection.     See  Christ. 
Right  and  wrong,  Hobbes  on,  56. 

standard  of,  56. 
Righteousness  Cannot  Save,  54,  76. 


304 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX 


Righteousness,  gift  of  grace,  70. 

meaning  of,  54. 

of  God,  57,  60. 

the  Law,  107. 
Robinson's  Lexicon,  55. 
Romans,  Epistle  to  the,  1 1,  54,  57. 
Rousseau  on  morality,  56. 
Russian  mother,  17. 

serf,  17. 

Sacrifice  of  Christ,  16,  208. 
Safety,  Believer's,  194,  227. 
Sailor,  conversion  of  a,  256. 
Saints,  perseverance  of  the,  I94. 
Salvation  a  free  gift,  144. 

by  faith,  165. 
grace,  144. 

conditions  of,  164. 

day  of,  now,  ic^. 

instant,  160. 

need  of,  7,  10. 

nigh  to  all,  142. 
Samaria,  woman  of,  183. 
Samaritans  believe,  179. 
Sanctification  described,  223. 

errors  respecting,  126. 

growth  of,  221. 
Sandals,  use  of,  259. 
Saul,  conversion  of,  189,  224. 
Saved,  believer  knows  he  is,  270. 

way  to  be,  145. 
Saviour  Near  the  Sinner,  132,  163. 
Scapegoat,  the,  208, 
Sceptic,  fatal  error  of  the,  lO. 
Scholars,  the  two,  134. 
Scribes,  righteousness  of  the,  62. 
Scriptures  convince  of  sin,  8. 

reveal  God's  will,  56, 
Senses,  evidence  of  the,  265,  267. 
Servant  girl  on  prayer,  252. 
Sight,  recovery  of,  272. 
Sin,  conviction  of,  7. 

defined,  84. 

punishment  of,  84. 

unconsciousness  of,  41. 
Sin-bearer,  Christ  the,  187. 
Sincerity  Cannot  Save,  29,  35. 
Sinner  for  life,  291. 


Sinner,  Saviour  Near  the,  1 32,  162. 
Sins  of  believers,  214. 

ignorance,  53. 

pardoned,  292. 
Soul,  faculties  of  the,  172. 
Spiritual  life,  26. 
Stephen,  martyrdom  of,  92. 
Stillingfleet  on  regeneration,  128. 
Strauss,  cavils  of,  173. 
Substitute,  Christ  a,  135. 
Sun,  distance  of  the,  174. 
Sunday-schools,  275,  276. 

Teamster,  converted,  155. 
Testimony,   knowledge    based   on, 

265,  267,  269. 
Theft,  p'lnishment  of,  43. 
Thief,  dying,  how  saved,  146,  154, 

160, 
Thieves  on  the  cross,  146. 
Thomas,  confession  of,  172. 

worships  Christ,  91. 
Thomas,  the  teamster,  156. 
Tiger,  nature  of  the,  23. 
Titles  of  Christ,  183. 
Tongues,  gift  of,  148. 
Truth,  Bacon  on,  53. 

organ  of,  50,  52. 

Pilate  and,  52. 

what  is,  52. 
Types,  ancient,  138,  139. 

Unbelief,  effects  of,  16. 

sin  of,  17,  28,  37,  236. 

source  of,  19. 
Unbelievers,  portion  of,  104. 
Unbelieving  penitent,  258. 

Veracity,  confidence  in,  281. 
Vicarious  punishment,  134,  138. 

Wandering    thoughts   in  prayer, 

260, 
Wash,  meaning  of,  259. 
Washed,  meaning  of,  259. 
Washington,  George,  176,  266, 
Webster,  on  "  Nature,"  128. 
"  penalty,"  134. 


ANALYTICAL  IT^DEX 


305 


Webster,  on  "  righteousness,"  55, 

57- 
Westminster  Assembly,  Catechism 

of,  275. 

Confession,  273. 
"Whosoever  believeth,"  195. 
Will  of  God,  109. 
Woman  of  Samaria,  183. 
Worcester  on  "  law,"  80. 


Worcester  on  "  penally,"  133. 
Word  of  God,  revealed,  8. 
Wordsworth  on  justihcation,  58. 
Works  of  the  flesh,  119. 

without  faith,  69. 
Wrong,  test  of,  56. 

Young  ruler,  113. 


