DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe16wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  FelJow  of  Lincoln-Collegt,  Oxford. 


Volume  XVI. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street, 
MDCCLXXII. 


£ 3 ] 

w.s'/sWr 

V.  I £ 


D V 


E 


To  the  PEOPLE  called 

METHODISTS. 


Dijce,  docendus  adhuc  qua  cenfet  amiculus. 

Hor. 


TT  may  be  needful  to  fpecify  whom  "I  mean  by 
this  ambiguous  term  ; fince  it  would  be  loft 
labour  to  fpeak  to  Metkndijls,  fo  called,  without 
firft  defcribing  thofe  to  whom  I fpeak. 

By  Methodijls  I mean,  a people  who  profefs 
"to  purfue  (in  whatsoever  m-eafure  they  have  at- 
tained] nohnefs  of  heart  and  life,  inward  and 
outward  conformity  in  all  things  to  the  revealed 
will  of  God;  who  place  religion  in  an  uniform 
refemblance  of  the  great  object  of  it ; in  a fteady 
imitation  of  him  they  worfhip,  in  all  his  imita- 


I 4 3 

Lie  perfections  ; more  particularly,  in  juflice, 
mercy,  and  truth,  or  univerfal  love  filling  the 
heart,  and  governing  the  life. 

You, , to  whom  I now  fpeak,  believe  this  love 
of  human  kind  cannot  fpring  but  from  the  love 
of  God.  You  think  there  can  be  no  inftance  oi 
one,  whofe  tender  aflfeftion  embraces  every 
child  of  man,  (though  not  endeared  to  him  either 
by  ties  of  blood,  or  by  any  natural  or  civil  rela- 
tion) unlefs  that  aflfeftion  flow  from  a grateful, 
filial  love,  to  the  common  Father  of  all  : to 
God,  confidered  not  only  as  his  Father,  but  as 
the  Father  of  the  fpirits  of  ail  fletTi;  yea,  as  the 
general  parent  and  friend  of  ali  the  families,  both 
of  heaven  and  earth. 

This  filial  love  you  fuppofe  to  flow  only  from 
faith,  which  vou  defcribe  as  a fupernatural  evi- 
dence (or  conviftion)  of  things  not  feen  : fo  that 
fo  him  who  has  this  principle, 

The  things  unknown  to  feeble  fenfe , 

Unjeen  by  reafon's  glimm  ring  ray, 

With frong  commanding  evidence. 

Their  heav'nly  origin  difplay. 

Faith  lends  its  realizing  light. 

The  clouds  difperfe,  the  Jhadows  f)  : 

Tli  Invifible  appears  in fight , 

And  God  is  Jeen  by  mortal's  eye. 


You 


E 5 ] 

You  fuppofe  this  faith  to  imply  an  evidence 
that  God  is  merciful  to  me  a (inner  ; that  he  is 
reconciled  to  me  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  and 
now  accepts  me,  for  his  fake.  You  accordingly 
dfefcribe  the  faith  of  a real  Chriftian,  as,  “ A 
“ fure  trujl  and  confidence  (over  and  above  his 
“ alfcnt  to  the  facred  writings)  which  he  hath  in 
“ God,  that  his  fins  are  forgiven  ; and  that  he  is, 
“ through  the  merits  of  Chrift,  reconciled  to  the 
“ favour  of  God.” 

You  believe  farther,  that  both  this  faith  and 
love  are  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God ; 
nay,  that  there  cannot  be  in  any  man,  one  good 
temper  or  defire,  or  fo  much  as  one  good 
thought,  unlefs  it  be  produced  by  the  almighty 
power'of  God,  by  the  infpiration  or  influence  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft. 

If  you  walk  by  this  rule,  continually  endea- 
vouring to  know,  and  love,  and  refemble,  and 
obey  the  great  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrift,  as  the  God  of  love,  of  pardoning  mercy: 
if  from  this  principle  of  loving,  obedient  faith, 
you  carefully  abftain  from  all  evil,  and  labour,  as 
you  have  opportunity,  to  do  good  to  all  men, 
friends  or  enemies  : if,  laftly,  you  unite  together, 
to  encourage  and  help  each  other,  in  thus  work- 
ing out  your  falvation,  and  for  that  end  watch 
over  one  another  in  love,  you  are  they  whom  I 
mean  by  Methodijls. 

The  firft  general  advice  which  one  who  loves 
your  fouls,  would  earneftly  recommend  to  every 
A 3 one 


L ] 

ene  of  you,  is,  Confider  with  deep  and  frequent 
Attention , the  peculiar  cvrcumjlances  wherein  yow 
ftand. 

One  of  thefe  is,  That  you  are  a new  people, 
your  name  is  new,  (at  lead,  as  ufed  in  a religi- 
ous fenfe)  not  heard  of,  till  a few  years  ago,, 
either  in  our  own,  or  any  other  nation.  Your 
principles  are  new,  in  this  refpect,  that  there  is 
no  other  fet  of  people  among  us  (and,  poffiblyr 
not  in  the  Chrillian  world)  who  hold  them  all,  in 
the  fame  degree  and  connexion  ; who  fo  dre- 
nuoufly  and  continually  infill  on  the  abfolute 
neceffity  of  univerfal  holinefs  both  in  heart  and 
life ; of  a peaceful,  joyous  love  of  God  ; of  a 
fupernatural  evidence  of  things  not  feen  ; of  an 
inward  witnefs  that  we  are  the  children  of  God 
and  of  the  infpiration  of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  in 
order  to  any  good  thought,  or  word,  or  work. 
And  perhaps  there  is  no  other  fet  of  people,  (at 
lead  not  vifibly  united  together)  who  lay  fo  much 
and  yet  no  more  flrefs  than  you  do,  on  re£litude 
of  opinions,  on  outward  modes  of  worfhip,  and 
the  ufe  c-f  thofe  ordinances  which  you  acknow- 
ledge to  be  of  God.  much  drefs  you  lay  even 
on  right  opinions,  as  to  profefs,  that  you  earneflly 
defire  to  have  a right  judgment  in  all  things, 
and  are  glad  to  ufe  every  means  which  you 
know  or  believe  may  be  conducive  thereto;  and 
vet  not  fo  much  as  to  condemn  any  man  upon 
earth,  merely  for  thinking  otherwife  than  you 
do;  much  lefs  to  imagine,  that  God  con- 
demns 


[ 7 ] 

dermis  him  for  this,  if  he  be  upright  and  fincere 
of  heart.  On  thofe  outward  modes  of  worjhip , 
wherein  you  have  been  bred  up,  you  lay/?  much 
ftrefs  as  highly  to  approve  them  ; but  not  fo  much 
as- to  leffen  your  love  to  thofe  who  confcienti- 
ouflv  diffent  from  you  herein.  You  likewife  lay 
fo  much  ft  refs  on  the  ufe  of  thofe  ordinances, 
which  you  believe  to  be  of  God,  as  to  confefs 
there  is  no  falvation  forj you,  if  you  wilfully  neg- 
lect them.  And  yet  you  do  not  judge  them  that 
are  otherwife  minded ; you  determine  nothing 
concerning  thofe,  who,  not  believing  thofe  ordi- 
nances to  be  of  God,  do,  out  of  principle,  ab- 
ftain  from  them. 

Your  fritlnefs  of  life,  taking  the  whole  of  it 
together,  may  likewife  be  accounted  new.  I 
mean,  your  making  it  a rule,  to  abftain  from 
fafhionable  diverfons,  from  reacting  plays,  ro- 
mances, or  books  of  humour,  from finging  inno- 
cent fongs,  or  talking  in  a merry,  gay,  diverting 
manner ; your  plainnefs  of  drefs  ; your  manner 
of  dealing  in  trade  ; your  exaftnefs  in  obferving 
the  Lord's  day  ; your  fcrupulofity  as  to  things  that 
have  not  paid  cufom  ; your  total  abftinence  from 
fpirituous  liquors , (unlefs  in  cafes  of  neceffity,) 
your  rule,  “ not  to  mention  the  fault  of  an 
abfent  perfon,  in  particular,  of  mimfers,  or 
of  thofe  in  authority ,”  may  juftly  be  termed  new. 
Seeing,  although  fome  are  fcrupulous  in  fome  of 
thefe  things,  and  others  are  ftrift  with  regard  to 
other  particulars ; yet  we  do  not  find  any  other 
A 4 body 


[ « 3 


body  of  the  people,  who  infill  on  all  thefe  rules 
together.  With  refpeft  therefore  both  to  your 
name , principles , and  j brattice,  you  may  be  confi- 
dered  as  a new  people. 

Another  peculiar  circumftance  of  your  prefent 
fituation,  is,  that  you  are  newly  united  together; 
that  you  are  juft  gathered,  or  (as  it  feems)  gather- 
ing rather,  out  of  all  other  focieties  or  congrega- 
tions; nay,  and  that  you  have  been  hitherto, 
and  do  ftill  fubfift  without  power,  (for  you  are  a 
low,  infignificant  peo  pie)  without  riches,  (for 
you  are  poor  almoft  to  a man,  having  no  more 
than  the  plain  neceftaries  of  life)  and  without 
either  any  extraordinary  gifts  of  nature,  or  the 
advantages  of  education : moft  even  of  your 
teachers  being  quite  unlearned,  and  (in  other 
things)  ignorant  men. 

There  is  yet  another  circumftance,  which  is 
quite  peculiar  to  yourfelves:  whereas  every  other 
religious  fet  of  people,  as  foon  as  they  were 
joined  to  each  other,  Separated  tkemjelves  from 
their  former  focieties  or  congregations  : you,  oi» 
the  contrary,  do  not ; nay,  you  absolutely  dif- 
avow  all  defire  of  feparating  from  them.  You 
openly  and  continually  declare  you  have  not,  nor 
ever  had  Inch  a defign.  And  whereas  the  con- 
gregations to  which  thofe  feparatifts  belonged, 
have  generally  fpared  no  pains  to  prevent  that 
reparation;  thofe  to  which  you  belong,  fpare  no 
pains  (not  to  prevent,  but)  to  occafion  this  Sepa- 
ration, to  drive  you  from  them,  to  force  you  on 

that 


[ 9 3 

that  divifion,  to  which  you  declare  you  have  the 
ftrongeft  averfion. 

Confider  thefe  peculiar  circumffances  wherein 
you  Hand,  you  will  fee  the  propriety  of  a ' Jecond 
advice  I would  recommend  to  you,  Do  not  ima- 
gine you  can  avoid  giving  offence:  your  very  name 
renders  this  impoffible.  Perhaps  not  one  in  a 
hundred-of  thofe  who  ufe  the  term  Methodijl , 
have  any  ideas  of  what  it  means.  To  ninety- 
aine  of  them  it  is  flill  Heathen  Greek.  Only  they 
think  it  means  fomething  very  bad,  either  a pa- 
pill,  an  heretic,  an  underminer  of  the  church, 
or  fome  unheard  of  monller ; and  in  all  probabi- 
lity, the  farther  it  goes,  it  muft  gather  up  more 
and  more  evil.  It  is  vain  therefore  for  any  that 
is  called  a Methodijl,  ever  to  think  of  not  giving 
offence. 

And  as  much  offence  as  you  give  by  your  name,  , 
you  will  give  Hill  more  by  your  principles.  You 
will  give  offence  to  the  bigots  for  opinions, 
modes  of  worfhip  and  ordinances,  by  laying  no 
niore  ftrefs  upon  them  : to  the  bigots  againjl  them, 
by  laying  Jo  much:  to  men  of form. , by  infilling 
fo  frequently  and  ftrongly  on  the  inward  power  of 
religion  : fo  moral  men , (fo  called)  by  declaring 
the  abfolute  neceflity  of faith,  in  order  to  accep- 
tance with  God  : to  men  of  reajon  you  will  give 
offence,  by  talking  of  infpiration  and  receiving 
the  Holy  Ghoft  : to  drunkards,  fabbath-breakers, 
common  fwearers,  and  other  open  finners,  by  re- 
fraining from  their  company,  as  well  as  by  that 
A § difap»  - 


[ 10  ] 

difapprobation  of  their  behaviour,  which  you 
will  often  be  obliged  to  exprefs.  And  indeed 
your  life  muff  give  them  continual  offence  ; your 
fobriety  is  grievoufly  offenfive  to  a drunkard; 
your  ferious  converfation  is  equally  intolerable 
to  a gay  impertinent  ; and  in  general,  that  “ you 
“ are  grown  fo  precife  and  fingular,  fo  mon- 
“ flroufly  Jlrit 7,  beyond  all  fenfe  and  reafon,  that 
“ you  fcruple  fo  many  lrarmlefs  things,  and  fancy 
“ you  are  obliged  to'  do  fo  many  others  which 
“ you  need  not,”  cannot  but  be  an  offence  to 
abundance  of  people,  your  friends  and  relations 
in  particular.  Either  therefore  you  muff  confent 
to  give  up  your  principles,  or  your  fond  hope  of 
pleafmg  men. 

What  makes  even  your  principles  more  offem 
five  is,  this  uniting  of  yourfelves  together:  be- 
caufe  this  union  renders  you  more  confpicuous, 
placing  you  more  in  the  eye  of  men  ; mot  zfuf 
iticious , I mean,  liable  to  be  fufpefted  of  carrving 
on  fome  finifler  defign,  (efpecialiy  by  thofe  who 
do  not,  or  mil  not,  know  your  inviolable  attach- 
ment  to  his  prefent  Majefly;)  more  dreadful,  to 
thofe  of  a fearful  temper,  who  imagine  you  have 
any  fuch  defign  ; and  more  odious  to  men  of 
zeal,  if  their  zeal  be  any  other  than  fervent  love 
to  God  and  man. 

This  offenc.e  will  fink  the  deeper,  becaufe  you 
are  gathered  out  of  fo  many  other  congregations  : 
for  the  warm  men  in  each  will  not  eafily  be  con- 
yincedj  that  you  do  not  defpife  either  them  or 

their 


[ » ] 

their  teachers ; nay,  will  probably  imagine,  that 
you  utterly  condemn  them,  as  though  they  could 
not  be  faved.  And  this  occafion  of  offence  is 
now  at  the  height,  becaufe  you  are  juft  gathered, 
or  gathering  rather,  fo  that  they  know  not  where 
it  will  end:  but  the  fear  of  lofing  (fo  they  ac- 

count it)  more  of  their  members,  gives  an  edge 
to  their  zeal,  and  keeps  all  their  anger  and  re- 
fentment  in  its  ftrength. 

Add  to  this,  that  you  do  not  leave  them  quiet, 
you  flill  rank  yourfelves  among  their  members, 
which,  to  thofe  who  know  not  that  you  do  it  for 
confcience  fake,  is  alfo  a provoking  circum- 
flance.  “ If  you  would  but  get  out  of  their 
fight !”  But  you  are  a continual  thorn  in  their 
fide,  as  long  as  you  remain  with  them. 

And  (which  cannot  but  anger  them  the  more) 
you  have  neither  power,  nor  riches , nor  learn- 
ing ; yet,  with  all  their  power,  and  money,  and 
wifdom,  they  can  gain  no  ground  againft  you. 

You  cannot  but  expecf,  that  the  offence  con- 
tinually arifing  from  fuch  a variety  of  provoca- 
tions, will  gradually  ripen  into  hatred,  malice, 
and  all  other  unkind  tempers.  And  as  they  who 
are  thus  affefted  will  not  fail  to  reprefent  you  to 
others  in  the  fame  light  as  you  appear  to  them, 
fometimes  as  madmen  and  fools,  fometimes  as 
wicked  men,  fellows  not  fit  to  live  upon  the 
earth ; the  confequence,  humanly  fpeaking, 
muff  be,  that,  together  with  your  reputation, 
A 6 you. 


[ » ] 

you  will  lofe,  firft  the  love  of  your  friends,  rela- 
tions and  acquaintance,  even  thofe  who  once 
loved  you  the  molt  tenderly  : then  your  bufinefs ; 
for  many  will  employ  you  no  longer,  nor  “ buy 
of  fuch  an  one  as  you  are  and,  in  due  time, 
(unlefs  he  who  governs  the  world  interpofe)  your 
health,  liberty,  and  life. 

What  further  advice  can  be  given  to  perfons 
in  fuch  a fituation  ? I cannot  but  advife  you, 
thirdly , conjider  deeply  with  yourfelf,  is  the  God 
whom  I J'ervt  able  to  deliver  me  ? I am  not  able  to 
deliver  myfelf  out  of  thefe  difficulties  ; much  lefs 
am  I able  to  bear  them.  I know  not  how  to 
give  up  my  reputation,  my  friends,  my  fubflance, 
my  liberty,  my  life.  Can  God  give  me  to  rejoice 
in  doing  this  ? And  may  I depend  upon  him, 
that  he  will  ? Are  the  hairs  of  my  head  all  num- 
bered ? And  does  he  never  fail  them  that  trull; 
in  him?  Weigh  this  throughly;  and  if  you 
can  truft  God  with  your  all,  then  go  on,  in  the 
power  of  his  might. 

Go  on,  I would  earneftly  advife  you,  fourthly, 
keep  in  the  very  path  wherein  you  now  tread. 
Be  true  to  your  principles.  Never  reft  again  in  the 
dead  formality  of  religion.  Purfue  with  your 
might  inward  and  outward  holinefs;  a fleady 
imitation  of  him  you  worfhip  ; a ftill  increafing 
refemblance  of  his  imitable  perfections,  hisjuf- 
tice,  mercy,  and  truth. 

Let  this  be  your  manly,  noble,  generous  rcli- 
gioD,  equally  remote  from  the  mearmefs  of_/«- 

perjlition. 


[ ] 

petjliiion,  (which  places  religion  in  doing  what 
God  hath  not  enjoined,  or  abftaining  from  what 
he  hath  not  forbidden)  and  from  the  unkindnefs- 
of  bigotry,  (which  confines  onr  affeflion  to  our 
own  party,  feft,  or  opinion.)  Above  all,  Hand 
fall  in  obedient  faith,  faith  in  the  God  of  par- 
doning mercy,  in  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who  hath  loved  you,  and  given 
himfelffor  you.  Afcribe  to  him  all  the  good  you 
find  in  vourfelf ; all  your  peace,  and  joy,  and  love ; 
all  your  power  to  do  and  fuffer  his  will,  through 
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  Yet  in  the  mean 
time,  carefully  avoid  tnthufiafm  : impute  not  the 
dreams  of  men  to  the  all-wife  God;  and  expe£l 
neither  light  nor  power  from  him,  but  in  the 
ferious  ufe  of  all  the  means  he  hath  ordained. 

Be  true  alfo  to  your  principles,  touching  opi- 
nions, and  the  externals  of  religion.  Ufe  every 
ordinance  which  you  believe  is  of  God  : but  be- 
ware of  narrownefs  of  fpirit  towards  thofe  who 
ufe  them  not.  Conform  yourfelf  to  thofe  modes 
of  worjhip  which  you  approve;  yet  love,  as  bre- 
thren, thofe  who  cannot  conform.  Lay  fo 
much  firefs  on  opinions,  that  all  your  own  (if  it 
be  poffible)  may  agree  with  truth  and  reafon  ; 
but  have  a care  of  anger,  difhke,  or  contempt 
towards  thofe.  whofe  opinions  differ  from  yours. 
You  are  daily  accufed  of  this  : (And  indeed, 
what  is  it,  whereof  you  are  not  accufed  ?)  But 
beware  of  giving  any  ground  lor  fuch  an 
accufation.  Condemn  no  man  for  not  thinking 

as 


[ H ] 

as  you  think.  Let  every  one  enjoy  the  full  and 
free  liberty  ofthinking  for  himfelf.  Let  every  man 
ufe  his  own  judgment ; fince  every  man  mull 
give  an  account  of  himfelf  to  God.  Abhor  every 
approach,  in  any  kind  or  degree,  to  the  fpirit  of 
perfecution.  If  you  cannot  reafon  cr  perfuade  a 
man  into  the  truth,  never  attempt  to  force  him 
into  it.  If  love  will  not  compel  him  to  come  in, 
leave  him  to  God,  the  Judge  of  all. 

Yet  expe£I  not,  that  others  will  deal  thus  with 
you.  No  : fome  will  endeavour  to  fright  you 
out  of  your  principles;  fome  tofname  you  into 
a more  popular  religion,  to  laugh  and  rally  you 
out  of  your  fingularity  : but  from  none  of  thefe 
will  you  be  in  fo  great  danger,  as  from  thofe  w’ho 
alfault  you  with  quite  different  weapons,  w’ith 
foftnefs,  good  nature,  and  earneft  profeffions  of 
(perhaps  real)  good-will.  Here  you  are  equally 
concerned,  to  avoid  the  very  appearance  of  an- 
ger, contempt,  or  unkindnefs,  and  to  hold  fall 
the  whole  truth  of  God,  both  in  principle  and  in 
praftice. 

This  indeed  will  be  interpieted  as  unkindnefs, 
Your  former  acquaintance  will  look  upon  this, 
that  you  will  not  fin  or  Irife  with  them,  as  a 
plain  proof  of  your  coldnefs  towards  them  ; and 
this  burthen  you  muff  be  content  to  bear:  but 
labour  to  avoid  all  real  unkindnefs,  all  difoblig- 
ing  words,  or  harfhnefsof  fpeech,  all  fhynefs  or 
flrangenefs  of  behaviour.  Speak  to  them  with 
all  the  tendernefs  and  love,  and  behave  with  all 
the.  fweetnefs  and  courtefy  you  can;  taking  care 

nov 


[ *5  ] 

sot  to  give  any  needlefs  offence,  to  neighbour, 
or  ftranger,  friend  or  enemy. 

Perhaps  on  this  very  account,  I might  advife 
you  fifthly,  not  to  talk  much  of  zohatyou  fujfer  ± 
“ of  the  perfecution  you  endured  at  fuc'h  a time,, 
and  the  wickednefs  of  your  persecutors.”  No- 
thing more  tends  to  exafperate  them  than  this: 
and  therefore,  (although  there  is  a time  when 
thefe  things  mull  be  mentioned,  yet]  it  might  be 
a general  rule,  to  do  it  as  feldom  as  you  can  with 
a fafe  confcience.  For  (belides  its  tendency  to 
inflame  them)  it  has  the  appearance  of  evil,  of 
oftentation,  of  magnifying  yourfelves.  It  alfo 
tends  to  puff  you  up  with  pride,  and  to  make 
you  think  yourfelves  fome  great  ones,  as  it  cer- 
tainly does  to  excite  orincreafe  in  your  heart  ill- 
will,  anger,  and  all  unkind  tempers.  It  is,  at 
bell,  lofs  of  time  ; for  inflead  of  the  wickednefs 
of  men,  you  might  be  talking  of  the  goodnefs  of 
God:  nay,  it  is,  in  truth,  an  open  wilful  fin; 
it  is  tale-bearing,  back-biting,  evil-fpeaking,  (a 
fin  you  can  never  be  fufficiently  watchful  againft, 
feeing  it  Heals  upon  you  in  a thoufand  fhapes.) 
Would  it  not  be  far  more  profitable  for  your  fouls, 
inflead  of  fpeaking  againft  them,  to  pray  for 
them?  To  confirm  your  love  towards  thofe  un- 
happy men,  whom  you  believe  to  be  fighting 
againft  God,  by  crying  mightily  to  him  in  their 
behalf,  that  he  may  open  their  eyes  and  change 
their  hearts. 

I.have  no  tv  only  to  commend  you  to  the  care,- 

of 


[ 16  3 

of  him  who  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  in 
earth  : befeeching  him,  that  in  every  circum- 

ftance  of  life,  you  may  fland  “ firm  as  the  beaten 
anvil  to  the  ftroke defiring  nothing  on 
earth,  accounting  all  things  but  dung  and  drofs, 
that  you  may  win  Chrift  ; and  always  remem- 
bering, “ It  is  the  part  of  a good  champion,  to  be 
flead  alive  and  to  conquer!” 

October  10, 

► 


TH  E- 


[ *7  1 


The  PRINCIPLES  of  a 

METHODIST. 


Written  in  1740. 


Occafioned  by  a late  pamphlet,  intitled,  A brief 
hijlory  of  the  principles  ^/"Methodism. 


To  the  READER . 

1.  J H A V E often  wrote  on  controverted  points 
hefore\  but  not  with  an  eye  to  any  particular 
perfon.  So  that  this  is  the  frf  time  1 have  ap- 
peared in  controverfy,  properly  fo  called.  Indeed 
I have  not  wanted  occafion  to  do  it  before.  Parti- 
cularly when  after  many fabs  in  the  dark,  I was 
publicly  attacked,  not  by  an  open  enemy , but  by 
my  own  familiar  friend.  But  /gottld  not  anfiuev 

him. 


[ !«•  ] 

him.  I could  only  cover  my  j ace  and  fay,  kJ  c* 
U tz£( vciiv : K dl  av,  tezw;  Art  thou  alfo  among  them  ? 
Art  thou , my  fon  ? 

2.  1 now  tread  an  untried  path  with  fear  and 
trembling ; fear,  net  of  my  adverfary , but  of  my- 

fedf  Ifear  my  own  fpirit,  lejl  I " fall,  where 
many  mightier  have  been  fain.’’  I never  knew  one 
( or  but  one ) man  write  controverfy,  with  what  I 
thought  a right  fpirit.  Every  difputant  feems  to 
think  ( as  every  foldier ) that  he  may  hurt  his  op- 
ponent as  much  as  he  can;  nay,  that  he  ought  to 
do  his  word  to  hum,  or  he  cannot  make  the  bed 
of  his  own  caufe  : that,  fo  he  do  not  bely  or  wilful- 
ly mifreprefent  him,  he  mu  ft  expofe  him  as  far  as 
he  is  able.  It  is  enough,  we  fuppofe,  if  we  do  not 
Jhezu  heat  or  pafion  againjl  cur  adverfary.  But, 
not  to  defpife  him,  or  endeavour  to  make  others  do 
fo,  is  quite  a work  of  fupererogation. 

3.  But  ought  thefe  things  to  be  fo  ? (I Jpeak  on- 
the  Cluifian  fcheme ) Ought  we  not  to  love  our 
neighbour  as  ourfelves  ? And  does  a man  ceafe  to  be 
our  neighbour,  becaufe  he  is  of  a different  opinion  ? 
Nay,  and  declares  himfelf  fo  to  be?  Ought  we  not, 
for  all  this,  to  do  to  him  as  we  would  he  fiould  do 
to  us  ? But  do  we  ourfelves  love  to  be  expofed,  or 
fet  in  the  word  light  ? Would  we  willingly  be  treat- 
ed with  contempt  ? If  not,  why  Jo  we  treat  others 
thus  ? And  yet  who  fcruples  it  ? Who  does  not  hit 
every  blot  he  can,  however  foreign  to  the  merits  of 
the  caufe  ? Who,  in  controverfy,  cafls  the  mantle 
of  love  over  the  nakednefs  of  his  brother  ? Urho 

keeps 


[ *9  ] 


keeps  fleadily  and  uniformly  to  the  quejlion,  with- 
out ever  fit  iking  at  the  perfon  ? Who Jhezus  in  every 
fentence  that  he  loves  his  brother,  only  lefs  than  the 
truth  ? 

4.  I have  made  a little  jaint  ejfiay  towards  this, 
I have  1 1 brother  who  is  as  my  own  foul.  My  de- 
fire is,  in  every  word  I fay,  to  look  upon  Mr. 
Tucker,  as  in  his  place ; and  to [peak  no  tittle  con- 
cerning the  one  in  any  other  fpirit,  than  I would 
fpeak  concerning  the  other.  But  whether  I have 
attained  this  or  no,  I know  not ; for  my  heart  is 
deceitful  and  defperately  wicked.  If  I have  fpoken 
any  thing  in  another  fpirit,  I pray  God  it  may  not 
be  laid  io  my  charge  l And  that  it  may  not  condemn 
me  in  that  day,  when  the  fecrets  of  all  hearts  fall 
be  made  manfefl  Alean  while  my  heart’s  defre , 
and-  prayer  to  God  is,  that  both  I and  all  who 
think  it  their  duly  to  oppofe  me,  may  put  on  bowels 
of  mercies,  kindnefs,  humblenefs  of  mind,  meek- 
nefs,  long-fuffering  : forbearing  one  another,  and 
forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  for  Chrift’s 
fake  hath  forgiven  us. 


1.  r~|pHERE  has  lately  appeared  in  the  world 
a traft  intitled,  A brief  hifory  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  Methodifm.  I doubt  not,  but  the  writer’s 
defign  was  good,  and  believe  he  has  areal  defire 
to  know  the  truth.  And  the  manner  wherein  he 

purfues 


C 20  ] 

purfues  that  defign,  i.s,  generally,  calm  a fid 
difpaffionate.  He  is  indeed  in  feveral  miftakes  : 
but  as  many  of  thefe  are  either  of  fmall  con- 
fequence  in  themfelves,  or  d©  not  immediately 
relate  to  me,,  it  is  not  my  concern  to  mention 
them.  All  of  any  confequence  which  relates  to 
me,  I think,  falls  under  three  heads  : 

Firlf,  That  I believe  juftification  by  faith  alone ; 

Secondly,  That  I believe  finlefs  perfeflion  : 
and 

Thirdy,  that  I believe  inconfiftencies. Of 

each  of  thefe  I will  fpeak  as  plainly  as  I can. 

2.  Firft,  that  I beli  eve  jujiification  by  faith  alone. 
This  I allow.  For  I am  firmly  perfuaded,  that 
every  man  of  the  offspring  of  Adam  is  very  far 
gone  from  original  riglueoufnefs,  and  is  of  his 
own  nature,  inclined  to  evil  : that  this  corruption 
of  our  nature,  in  every  perfon  born  into  the 
world,  deferves  God's  wrath  and  damnation,  that 
therefore  if  ever  we  receive  the  remiffion  of  our 
fins,  and  are  accounted  righteous  before  God,  it 
muff  be  only  for  the  merit  of  Chrift,  by  faith, 
and  not  for  our  own  works  or  defervings  of  any 
kind.  Nay,  I am  perfuaded,  that  all  works  done 
before  juflification,  have  in  them  the  nature  of  fin  : 
and  that,  confequently,  till  he  isjuflified,  a man 
has  no  power  to  do  any  workwhich  is  pleafmgand 
acceptable  to  God. 

3.  To  exprefs  my  meaning  a little  more  at 
large.  I believe,  three  things  muff  go  together 
in  our  juflification:  upon  God’s  part,  his  great 

mercy 


t ™ ] 

sraercy  and  grace  ; upon  Chi  ill’s  part,  the  fatisfac- 
,-tion  of  God’s  juftice,  by  the  offering  his  body 
and  ffiedding  his  blood,  and  upon  our  part,  true 
and  living  faith  in  the  merits  of  Jefus  Chrifl. 
So  that  in  our  jufiification  there  is  not  only  God’s 
mercy  and  grace,  but  his  juftice  alfo.  And  fd 
the  grace  of  God  does  not  fhut  out  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  God  in  our  juftification,  but  only  (huts 
out  the  righteoufnefs  of  man,  that  is,  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  our  works. 

4.  And  therefore  St.  Paul  requires  nothing  on 
-the  part  of  man,  but  only  a true  and  living  faith. 
Yet  this  faith  does  not  fhut  out  repentance,  hope, 
-$nd  love,  which  are  joined  with  faith  in  every 
man  that  is  juftified.  But  it  fhuts  them  out  from 
the  office  ofjuftifying.  So  that  although  they  are 
all  prefent  together  in  him  that  is  juftified,  yet 
■.they  juft ify  not  ail  together. 

5.  Neither  does  faith  fhut  out  good  works, 
neceffarilv  to  be  done  afterwards.  But  we  may 
not  do  them  to  this  intent , to  be  jujlified  by  doing 
them.  Our  juftification  comes  freely,  of  the 
mere  mercy  of  God  : for  whereas  all  the  world 
was  not  able  to  pay  any  part  towards  their  ranfom, 
it  pleafed  him,  without  any  of  our  deferving,  to 
prepare  for  11s  Chrift’s  body  and  blood,  whereby 
our  ranfom  might  be  paid,  and  his  jujhce  fatisfed. 
Chrift  therefore  is  now  the  righteoufnefs  of  all 
them  that  truly  believe  in  him. 

6.  But  let  it  be  obferved,  the  true  fenfe  of 
thofe  words,  We  are  jujlified  by  faith  in  Chrijl  only , 

is 


[ 22  ] 

w not,  that  this  our  own  a cl,  To  believe  in  Chrifl, 
or  this  our  faith  which  is  within  us,  juflifies  u 
(for  that  were,  to  account  ourfelves  to  be  jullified 
by  fome  aft  or  virtue  that  is  within  us)  but  that 
although  we  have  faith,  hope  and  love  within  us, 
and  do  never  fo  many  good  works,  yet  we  mull 
renounce  the  merit  of  all,  of  faith,  hope,  love, 
and  all  other  virtues  and  good  works,  which 
•we  either  have  done,  lhall  do,  or  can  do, 
as  far  too  weak  to  deferve  our  jullification  : 
•for  which  therefore  we  mull  trull  only  in  God's 
mercy,  and  the  merits  of  Chrifl.  For  it  is  be 
- alone  that  taketh  away  our  fins.  To  him  alone 
are  we  to  go  for  this  ; forfaking  all  our  virtues, 
good  words,  thoughts  and  works,  and  putting 
our  trull  in  Chrifl  only. 

7.  In  ftri&nefs  therefore,  neither  our  faith 
nor  our  works  jullify  us,  1.  e.  deferve  the  remif- 
fion  of  our  fins.  But  God  himfelf  jullifies  us, 
of  his  own  mercy,  through  the  merits  of  his  Son 
only.  Neverthelefs,  becaufe  by  faith  we  em- 
brace the  promife  of  God’s  mercy  and  of  the  re- 
million of  our  fins,  therefore  the  fcri pture  fays. 
That  faith  does  jujlify , yea,  faith  without  works. 
And  it  is  all  one  to  fay,  Faith  without  works,  and 
faith  alone  jujlifies  us.  therefore  the  antient  fa- 
thers from  time  to  time  fpeak  thus : Faith  alone 
jufifies  us.  And  becaufe  we  receive  faith, 
through  the  only  merits  of  Chrifl,  and  not 
through  the  merit  and  virtue  we  have,  or  work 
we  do;  therefore  in  that  refpecl  we  renounce,  as 
it  were,  again,  faith,  works,  and  all  other  virtues. 

For 


[ 23  ] 

Tor  our  corruption  through  original  fin  is  fo  great, 
that  all  our  faith_,  charity,  words  and  works,  can- 
not merit  or  deferve  any  part  of  our  juftification 
for  us.  And  therefore  we  thus  fpeak,  humbling 
ourfelves  before  God,  and  giving  Chrift  all  the 
glory  of  our  juftification. 

8.  But  it  fhould  alfo  be  obferved,  what  that 
faith  is,  whereby  we  arejuftified.  Now  that  faith 
which  brings  not  forth  good  works,  is  not  a living 
faith,  but  a dead  and  devilifli  one.  For  even  the 
devils  believe,  “ That  Cbrift  was  born  of  a vir- 
gin, that  he  wrought,  all  kind  of  miracles,  declar- 
ing himfelf  to  be  very  God,  that  for  our  fakes 
he  died  and  rofe  again,  and  afcended  into  hea- 
ven, and  at  the  end  of  the  world  fhall  come  again, 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.”  This  the  de- 
vils believe,  and  fo  they  believe  all  that  is  writ- 
ten in  the  Old  and  NewTeftament.  Andvetftill, 
for  all  this  faith,  they  are  but  devils.  They  re- 
main ftill  in  their  damnable  eftate,  lacking  the 
true  Chriftian  faith, 

9.  The  true  Chriftian  faith  is,  not  only  to  be- 
lieve the  holy  fcriptures  and  the  articles  of  our 
faith  are  true  ; but  alfo,  to  have  a fure  trujl  and 
confidence  to  be  fared from  everlafling  damnation 
by  Chrift,  whereof  doth  follow  a loving  heart,  to 
obey  his  commandments.  And  this  faith  neither 
any  devil  hath,  nor  any  wicked  man.  No  un- 
godly man  hath  or  can  have  this  fure  truf  and 
confdcnce  in  Cod , that  by  the  merits  of  Thrift  his 

fin,s 


C 24  ] 


Jins  are  forgiven  and  he  reconciled  to  the favour  of 
God. 

10.  This  is  what  I believe  (and  have  believed 
for  fome  years)  concerning  jujlif  cation  by  faith 
alone.  I have  chofe  to  exprefs  it  in  the  words 
of  a little  treatife,  publifhed  feveral  years  ago  ; as 
being  the  moft  authentic  proof,  both  of  my  pafl 
and  prefent  lentiments.  If  I err  herein,  let  thofe 
who  are  better  informed  calmly  point  out  my 
error  to  me  : and  I truft,  I {hall  not  fbut  my 
eyes  againft  the  light,  from  whatfoever  fide  it 
comes. 

11.  The  fetond  thing  laid  to  my  charge  is, 
that  I believe  fnlefs  perfection.  -I  will  limply  de- 
clare what  I do  believe,  concerning  ibis  alfo, 
and  leave  unprejudiced  men  to  judge. 

12.  My  laft  and  moft  deliberate  thoughts  on 
this  head  were  publifhed  but  a few  months  fince. 
in  thefe  words. 

1.  “ Perhaps  the  general  prejudice  againft 
Chrifian  perfection  may  chiefly  arife  from  a mif- 
apprehenfton  of  the  nature  of  it.  We  willingly 
allow,  and  continually  declare,  there  is  no  fuck 
perfeflion,  in  this  life,  as  implies  either  a dif- 
penfation  from  doing  good  and  attending  all  the 
ordinances  of  God  ; or  a freedom  from  igno- 
rance, miftake,  temptation,  and  a thoufand  infir- 
mities neceffarily  connefledwith  flefh  and  blood.  ' 

13.  If  there  be  any  thing  unfcriptural  in  thefe 
words,  any  thing  wild  or  extravagant,  any  thing  con- 
trary to  the  analogy  of  faith,  or  the  experience  of 

adult 


[ 25  ] 

adult  Chriftians,  let  them finite  vie  friendly  and  re » 
prove  vie  ; let  them  impart  to  me  of  the  clearer 
light  God  has  given  them.  How  knoweft  thou, 
O man,  but  thou  mayejl  gain  thy  brother  ? But 
he  may  at  length  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  ? And  thy  labour  of  love,  (hewn  forth  with 
meeknefs  of  wifdom,  may  not  be  in  vain  ! 

-14.  There  remains  yet  another  charge  againlt 
me,  that  I beBtveiiiconfiJiencies : that  my  tenets, 
particularly  concerning  juftification,  are  con « 
iraditlory  to  than/ elves  : that  Mr.  We/ley  “ fmce 
Ins  return  from  Germany,  has  improved  in  the 
Spirit  of  inconfjlcney.  “ For  then  he  publilhed 
two  treatifes,  Dr.  Barnes's,  the  calvinili,  or 
dominican  rather,  who  fufFered  1541  [Let  us 
fpare  the  allies  of  the  dead.  Were  T Juch  a 
dominican  as  he  was,  1 fhould  rejoice  too  tcrdie 
in  the  flames]  “ the  firft  on  .if  ification  by  faith 
only,  the  other  on  the.  fitful nefs  of  man  s natural 
will,  and  his  litter  inability  to  do  works  acceptable 
to  God,  until  he  bejufified.  Which  principles' 
if  added  to  his  former  tenets”  (nay  they  need  not 
be  added  to  them,  for  they  are  the  ve;  ...  'ej 
“ will  give  the  whole  a new  vein  of  incoiifjtency, 
and  make  the  contradictions  more  grofs  and  srlar- 
ing  than  before.” 

35.  If  will  he  neceflary  to  fpeak  more  largely 
•on  this  head,  than  on  cither  of  the  preceding. 
And  in  order  to  fpeak  as  dillinftly  as  I can,  I 
propofe  taking  the  paragraphs  one  by  one,  as  they 
lie  before  me. 

Vol.  XVI.  B 


16.  (ij  Ic 


[ 26  ] 

16.  (1)  It  is  “ ajferied  that  Mr.  Law’s  fyfiem 
was  the  Creed  of  the  Methodifts.”  But  it  is  not 
proved.  I had  been  eight  years  at  Oxford , before 
I read  any  of  Mr.  Law's  writings  : and  when  I 
did,  I was  fo  far  from  making  them  mv  creed, 
I had  objections  to  almofl  every  page.  But  all 
this  time  my  manner  was,  to  fpend  fevera]  hours 
a day,  in  reading  the  feripture  in  the  original 
tongues.  And  hence  my  fyfiem  (fo  termed,  was 
wholly  drawn,  according  to  the  light  I then  had. 

17.  It  was  in  my  paffage  to  Georgia,  I met 
with  thofe  teachers , who  would  have  taught  me 
the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.  But  I under- 
flood them  not.  Neither  on  my  arrival  there , 
did  they  infuje  any  particularities  into  me,  either 
about  juflifi cation  or  any  thing  elfe.  For  I came 
hack  with  the  fame  notions  I went.  And  this 
I have  explicitly  acknowledged  in  my  fecond 
journal,  where  fome  of  my  words  are  thefe.f 
“ When  Peter  Bolder,  as  foon  as  I came  to 
London,  affirmed  of  true  faith  in  Chrift,  (which 
is  but  one)  that  it  had  thefe  two  fruits  infepara- 
blv  attending  it,  “ Dominion  over  fin,  and  con- 
llant  peace  from  a fenfe  of  forgivenefs,”  I was 
quite  amazed,  and  looked  upon  it  as  a new  go/pel 
If  this  was  fo,  it  was  clear,  I had  no  faith.  But 
I was  not  willing  to  be  convinced  of  this.  There- 
fore I difputed  with  all  my  might,  and  laboured 
to  prove,  that  faith  might  be  where  thefe  were 
not:  efpecially,  where  that  fenfe  of  forgivenefs 

was 


+ Page  32. 


[ *7  ] 

Was  not : for  all  the  fcriptures  relating  to  this,  I 
had  been  long  fince  taught  to  conllrue  away,  and 
to  call  all  prefbytenans  who  fpoke  otherwife.  Be- 
fides,  I well  faw,  no  one  could,  (in  the  nature 
of  things)  have  fuch  a fenle  of  forgivenefs,  and 
not  fed  it.  But  I felt  it  not.  If  then  there  was 
no  faith  without  this,  all  my  pretenfions  to  faith 
dropt  at  once.” 

j8.  (2)  Yet  it  was  not  Peter  Bolder , who  con- 
vinced me  that  converfon  (I  mean  jollification)  was 
an  infantaneous  work.  On  the  contrary,  when 
I was  convinced  of  the  nature  and  fruits  of  jolli- 
fying faith,  hill  “ ^ I could  not  comprehend 
what  he  fpoke  of  an  infantaneous  work.  I could 
not  underfiand,  how  this  faith  fhouid  be  piven 
in  a moment ; how  a man  could  at  once  be  thus 
turned  from  darknefs  to  light,  from  fin  and  mi- 
fery  to  righteoufnefs  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 
I fearcbcd  the  fcriptures  again,  touching  this  very 
thing,  particularly  the  Ads  of  the  appfles.  But 
to  my  utter  aftonifhment,  I found  fcarce  any 
inftances  there  of  other  than  infantaneous  conver- 
{ions ; fcarce  any  other  fo  flow  as  that  of  St.  Paul, 
who  was  three  days  in  the  pangs  of  the  new 
birth.  I had  but  one  retreat  left;  viz.  “ Thus 
I grant,  God  wrought  in  th ? firf  ages  of  Chrifti- 
auity  : but  the  times  are  changed.  Whatreafon 
have  I to  believe,  he  works  in  the  fame  manner 
now  ? 

“ Blit  on  Sunday  22,  I was  beat  out  of  this 
B 2 

t See  journal,  page  19. 


retreat 


[ 28  j 

retreat  too,  by  the  concurring  evidence  of  feveral 
living  witnefies,  who  teR'ihe&G  o& had  thus  u:  fought 
in  themfelves  : giving  them  in  a moment , fuch  a 
faith  in  the  blood  of  his  Son,  as  tranflatcd  them 
out  of  darknefs  into  light,  out  of  fin  and  fear  into 
holinefs  and  happinefs.  Here  ended  my  deput- 
ing. I could  now  cry  out,  “ Lord,  help  thou 
my  unbelief.” — The  remaining  part  of  t his  fec- 
tion  ; with  the  third  and  fourth,  contain  my  own 
words,  to  which  I hill  fubfciibe. 

And  if  there  is  a mihake  in  the  fifth  it  is  not 
material. 

20.  (6)  It  is  true,  that  “ on  Urednefday,  July 
12,  the  Count  fpoke  to  this  effeft  : 

“ l.  Juhification  is  the  forgivenefs  of  fins : 

2.  The  moment  a man  flies  to  Chrih,  he  is 
juhified  : 

3.  x\nd  has  peace  with  God,  but  not  always 

j°y; 

4.  Nor  perhaps  may  he  know  he  is  juhified, 
till  long  after  : 

5.  For  the  aiTurance  of  it  is  dihinfl  from  jufli- 
fication  itfelf : 

6.  But  others  may  know  he  is  juhified,  by  his 
power  over  fin,  by  his  ferioufnefs,  his  love  of the 
brethren,  and  his  hunger  and  thirh  after  righte- 
oufnefs,  which  alone  proves  the  fpiritual  life  to  be 
begun. 

7.  To  be  juhified  is  the  fame  thing  as  to  be 
born  of  God  : when  a man  is  awakened,  he  is 
begotten  of  God,  and  his  fear  and  forrow,  and 

fenfe- 


[ *9  ] 

fenfe  of  the  wrath  of  God,  are  the  pangs  of  the 
new  birth.”  *" 

It  is  true  alfo,  that  I then  recollefted  what  P. 
Bolder  had  often  faid  on  this  head,  which  was  to 
this  effeft  : 

1.  When  a man  has  living  faith  in  Chrift,  then 
he  is  jullified  : 

2.  This  is  always  given  in  a moment  : 

g.  And  in  that  moment,  he  has  peace  with 
God : 

4.  Which  he  cannot  have  without  knowing 
that  he  has  it : 

r).  And  being  born  of  God  he  finneth  not : 

6.  Which  deliverance  from  fin  he  cannot  have 
without  knowing  that  he  has  it. 

O 

21.  I did  not  apprehend  it  poffible,  for  any 
man  living  to  have  imagined,  that  I believed 
both  thefe  accounts:  the  words  whereof  I had  pur- 
pofely  fo  ranged,  and  divided  into  fhort  fen- 
tences,  that  the  grofs,  irreconcileable  difference 
between  them,  might  be  plain  to  the  meaneft 
reader.  I cannot  therefore  but  be  a little  fur- 
prifed,  at  the  flrength  of  that  prejudice,  which 
could  prevent  any  one’s  feeing,  that  in  appor- 
tion to  the  Count’s  opinion  (which  in  many  re- 
fpefls  I wholly  difapproved  of]  I quoted  the 
words  of  one  of  his  own  church,  which,  if  true-, 
overturn  it  altogether. 

22.  I have  nothing  to  objefl  to  the  quotati- 
ons made  in  the  7th,  8th,  and  9th  fe&ions.  In 
the  10th  are  thefe  words : “ Now  fince  Mr. 


[ 3°  J 


41  Wejlley  went  fo  far,  to  gather  fuch  materials 
“ together,  let  us  fee  what  was  the  fyjlem  (or 
“ rather  the  medley ) of  principles  he  had  to  return 
“ with  to  England.” 

Of  the  Affurance  of j ajlif cation. 

I believe  that  converfion  is  an  inftantaneous 
work.  And  that  the  moment  a man  is  converted, 
or  has  living  faith  in  Chrift,  he  is  juftified. 
Which  faith  a man  cannot  have,  without  knour- 
ing  that  he  hath  it. 

Yet  I believe  he  may  not  know  that  he  is 
juftified  (z.  e.  that  he  has  living  faith)  till  a long 
time  after. 

I believe  alfo  that  the  moment  a man  is  jufti- 
fied, he  has  peace  with  God. 

Which  he  cannot  ha\e  without  knowing  that 
he  has  it. 

“ Yet  I believe  he  may  not  know  that  he  is 
juftified  (i.t ;.  that  he  has  peace  with  God)  till  a 
long  time  after. 

I believe  when  a man  is  juftified,  he  is  born 
of  God. 

And  being  born  of  God  he  finneth  not. 

Which  deliverance  from  fin  he  cannot  have 
without  knowing  it. 

Yet  I believe  he  may  not  know  that  he  is 
juftified  (z.  e.  delivered  from  fin)  till  a long  time 
after. 

Though  I believe  that  others  may  know  that 

he 


[ 31  ] 

lie  isjuftified  by  his  power  over  fin,  his  feriouf- 
nefs,  and  love  of  the  brethren.” 

23.  “ Of  the  Conditions  of j unification. 

I believe  that  Chrift  formed  in  us  fubordinately 
to  Chrift  given for  us  (?’.  e.  our  own  inherent  righ- 
teoufnefs  fubordinate  to  Chrift’s  merits)  ought 
to  be  infilled  upon,  as  neceftary  to  our  jufti- 
fication. 

And  it  is  juft  and  right  that  a man  fhould  be 
humble  and  penitent,  and  have  a broken  and 
contrite  heart  (i.  e.  fhould  have  Chrift  formed  in 
him ) before  he  can  expefl  to  be  juftified. 

And  that  this  penitence  and  contrition  is  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.” 

“ Yet  I believe  that  all  this  is  nothing  towards, 
and  has  no  influence  on,  our  juftification. 

Again,  I believe  that  in  order  to  juftification, 
I mult  go  ftrait  to  Chrift,  with  all  my  ungodli- 
nefs,  and  plead  nothing  elfe. 

Yet  I believe  that  we  fhould  not  infill  upon 
any  thing  we  do  or  fed,  as  if  it  were  necefiarily 
previous  to  juftification.” 

24.  “ Of  the  Effefts  of jufiification. 

I believe,  that  juftification  is  the  fame  thing  as 
to  be  born  of  God.  Yet  a man  may  have  a firong 
affuramce,  that  he  is  juftified,  and  not  be  able  to 
affirm,  that  he  is  born  of  God. 

B 4 


A man 


[ 32  ] 

A man  may  be  fully  allured  that  his  fins  are 
forgiven,  yet  may  not  be  able  to  tel!  the  Hour,  or 
day,  when  he  received  this  full  affurance,  becaufe 
ft  may  grow  up  in  him  by  degrees. — Though  he 
can  remember  that  from  the  time  this  full  affur- 
ance  was  confirmed  in  him,  he  never  loft  it,  no 
not  for  a moment. 

A man  may  have  a weak  faith  at  the  fame 
time  that  he  hath  peace  with  God,  not  one  uneafy 
thought , and  freedom  from  fin,  not  one  unholy 
dejire. 

“ A man  may  be  juftified  (e.  i.  born  of  God) 
who  has  not  a clean  heart  (z.  e.  is  net  fanftified.) 

He  may  be  juftified  (z.  e.  born  of  Godj  and  not 
have  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit.” 

25.  I entirely  agree,  “ That  the  foregoing 
creed  is  a very  extraordinary  and  odd  compofuion .” 
But  it  is  not  mine.  I neither  compofed  it,  nor 
believe  it : as  I doubt  not  every  impartial  reader 
will  be  fully  convinced,  when  wre  fhall  have  gone 
over  it,  once  more,  ftep  by  ftep. 

The  parts  of  it  which  I do  believe,  I fhall 
barely  repeat:  on  the  others  it  will  be  needful  to 
add  a few  words. 

Of  the  Affurance  of  juflif  cation. 

“ I believe  that  converfion  (meaning  thereby 
juftification)  “ is  an  inftantaneous  work  : and  that 
the  moment  a man  has  living  faith  in  Chrift,  he 
is  convened  or  juftified.  (So  the  propofition 

muft 


[ 33  ] 

mu  ft  be  expreffed  to  make  it  fenfe.)  Whi-ch 
faith  he  cannot  have,  without  knowing  that  he 
has  it.” 

“ Yet  I believe  he  may  not  know  that  he  has 
it  till  long  after.”  This  I deny : I believe  no 
fuch  thin?. 

“ I believe  the  moment  a man  is  juftihed  he 
has  peace  with  God 

“ Which  he  cannot  have,  without  knowing 
that  he  has  it : 

“ Yet  I believe,  he  may  not  know  he  has  it 
till  long  after.”  This  again  I deny.  I believe  it 
not.  Nor  Michael  Linner  neither.  To  clear 
whom  intirely,  one  need  only  read  his  own 
words. 

“ About  fourteen  years  ago,  I was  mote  than 
ever  convinced,  tnat  I was  wholly  different  from 
what  God  required  me  io  he,  i confulted  his 
word  again  and  again;  but  it  fpoke  nothing  hut 
condemnation ; til!  at  laft  I could  not  read,  nor 
indeed  do  any  thing  elf  , having  no  hope  and  no 
fpirit  left  in  me.  I had  been  in  this  ftate  for 
feveral  day's,  when  being  muftng  by  rnvfelt,  thofe 
words  came  ftrongly  into  my  mind,  Gc  ■ fo  loved 
the  zvorld  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son , to  the 
end  that  all  zvho  believe  in  him , Jhall  not  perijh, 
but  have  tverlajhng  iife.”  I thought,  “ All! 
Then  I am  one.  Then  he  is  given  for  me.  But 
I am  a (inner.  And  he  came  to  fave  linners.” 
Immediately  my  burden  dropped  oft,  and  my 
“heart  was  at  reft. 

• b5 


“-But 


C 34  ] 

“ But  the  full  affurance  of  faith  I had  not  yet, 
nor  for  t.,e  two  years  I continued  in  Moravia. 
When  I was  driven  out  thence  by  the  JeJ'uits,  I 
retired  hither,  and  was  foon  afier  received  into 
the  church.  And  here  after  fometime  it  pleafed 
our  Lord  to  manileft  himfelf  more  clearly  to  my 
foul;  and  give  me  that  full  fenfe  of  acceptance 
in  him,  which  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear. 

“ Indeed  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  is  different 
in  different  fouls.  His  more  ufual  method,  I 
believe,  is,  to  give  in  one  and  the  fame  moment, 
forgivenefs  of  fins,  and  a full  affurance  of  that 
forgivenefs.  Yet  in  many  he  works  as  he  did  in 
me  : give  fir  ft  the  reiniffion  of  fins,  and  after 
fome  weeks  or  months  or  years,  the  full  affurance 
of  it,”§ 

All  I need  obferve  is,  that  the  firjl fenfe  of 
forgivenefs  is  often  mixed  with  doubt  or  fear. 
But  the  full  affurance  of  faith , excludes  all  doubt 
and  fear,  as  the  very  term  implies. 

Therefore  in  Read  of,  “ He  may  not  know  that 
he  has  peace  with  God  till  long  after/’  it  fhould 
be  (to  agree  with  Michael  Linnet’s  words)  “ He 
may  not  have  till  long  after  the  full  affurance  of 
faith,  which  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear.” 

“ I believe  a man  is  juftified  at  the  fame  time 
that  he  is  born  of  God. 

“ And  he  that  is  born  of  Gou  finneth  not. 

“ Which  deliverance  from  fin  he  cannot  have, 
without  knowing  that  he  has  it.” 

“ Yet 


t Second  7our.net,  Page  65,  65. 


[ 35  ] 

“ Yet  I believe  he  may  not  know  it  till  long 
after.”  Thisalfo  I utterly  deny. 

2 6.  Oj  the  Conditions  of  j unification. 

“ I believe,  that  Chrift  formed  in  us  ought  to 
be  inffiled on,  as  necefifiary  to  our  jufiificaiion.” 

I no  more  believe  this  than  Chrijlian  David 
does,  whofe  words  concerning  it  are  thefe : 

“ It  pleafed  God  to  fliew  me,  that  Chrift  in 
us,  arid  Chrift  for  us,  ought  to  be  both  infilled 
on 

But  I dearly  faw  we  ought  not  to  infi.fi  on  any 
thing  we  feel,  any  more  than  any  thing  we  do,  as 
if  it  were  necefifiary  previous  to  our jujiification. 

“ And  before  a man  can  expect  to  be  jufiified, 
he  ftiould  be  humble  and  penitent,  and  have  a 
broken  and  contrite  heart,  that  is,  fhould  have 
Chrift  jormed  in  him.  ’ No  ; that  is  quite  ano- 
ther thing.  I believe  every  man  is  penitent , be- 
fore he  is  jufiified ; he  repents,  before  he  believes 
the  gofpel.  But  it  is  never  bejoie,  he  is  jufiified, 
that  Chrift  is fanned  in  him. 

“ And  that  this  penitence  and  contrition  is  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.” 

“ Yet  I believe  that  all  this  is  nothing  towards, 
and  has  no  influence  on  our  juftifieation,” 

Chrijlian  David's  words  are,  “ Obferve,  this 
is  not  the  foundation.  It  is  not  this  by  which 
(for  the  fake  of  which]  you  are  jufiified.  This  is- 
not  the  righteoufnefs,  this  is  no  part  of  the  righte- 
B 6 oufnefs- 


[ 36  ] 

oufnefs,  by  which  you  are  reconciled  to  God, 
You  grieve  for  you  has.  You  are  deeply  hum- 
bled. Your  heart  is  b hen.  Well:  but-  all  this 
is  nothing  to  your  j u lifi  oiionF  (The  words  im- 
mediately following  fix  the  fenfe  of  this  other- 
wise exceptionable  fentence)  “ The  remiffion  of 
your  fins  is  not  owing;  to  this  caufe , either  in 
whole  or  in  part.  Your  humiliation  has  no  in- 
fluence on  that.  Not  as  a caufle-,  fo  the  very  lair 
words  explain  it. 

“ Again,  I believe  that  in  order  to  obtain  juf- 
tification,  I mull:  go  firait  to  Chrift,  with  all  my 
ungodlinefs,  and  plead  nothing  elfle.” 

“ Yet  I believe  we  fhould  not  infill  upon  any 
thing  we  do  or  feel,  as  if  it  were  necelTarilv  previ- 
ous to  jollification.”  No,  nor  on  any  thing  elfle. 
So  the  whole  tenor  of  Chriflian  David's  words 
implies.” 

Of  the  Effects  of juflif cation. 

27.  “ I believe  a man  may  have  a firong  affu- 
rance  he  is  j:  (lifted,  and  not  be  able  to  affirm  he 
is  a child  of  God.” 

Feeler’ s words  are  thefe  : “ I found  my  heart  at 
refl,  in  good  hope  that  viyflns  were  forgiven',  of 
which  I had  a firong  efflurance  fix  weeks  after.” 
(True,  comparatively  fironger,  though  ftill  mixt 
with  doubt  and  fear.)  “ But  I dare  not  affirm,  I 
ana  a child  of  God,”  I fee  no  inconfiftencv  in 

all 


[ 37  J 

all  this.  Many  fuch  indances  I know  at  this 
day.  I myfelf  was  one,  for  home  time. 

“ A man  may  be  fully  allured,  that  his  fins 
are  forgiven,  yet  may  not  be  able  to  tell  the  day, 
when  he  received  this  full  affurance;  becaufe  it 
grew  up  in  him  by  degrees.”  (Of  this  alfo  I 
know  a few  other  inflances) But  from  the  time 
this  full  affurance  was  confirmed  in  him , he  never 
loll  it.”  Very  true,  and  I think,  confident. 

Neufer  s own  words  are,  “ In  him  I found 
true  red  to  my  foul,  being  fully  affured,  that  all 
my  fins  were  forgiven.  Yet  I cannot  tell  the 
hour  or  day,  when  I firfl  received  that  full  affu- 
rance.  For  it  v/as  not  given  me  at  firfl,  neither 
at  once  (not  in  its  fulnefs)  but  grew  up  in  me 
by  degrees.  And  from  the  time  it  zvas  confrmed 
in  me,  I have  never  loll  it,  having  never  fince 
doubted,  no,  not  for  a moment.” 

“ A man  may  have  a weak  faith,  at  the  fame 
time  that  he  has  peace  with  God,  and  no  unholy 
defires.” 

A man  may  be  juflified,  who  has  not  a clear 
heart. 

28.  (11)  Notin  the  full  fenfe  of  the  word. 
This  I do  verily  believe  is found  divinity,  agreea- 
ble both  to  feripture  and  experience.  And  I 
believe  it  is  confident  with  itfelf.  As  to  the 
“ hundred  other  abfurdities  which  might  be  fully 
and  fairly  made  out,”  it  will  be  time  enough  to 
confider  them,  when  they  are  produced. 

29.  (12,  13.}  But  whether  I have  fucceeded  in 

attempting 


[ 33  J 

attempting  to  econcile  thefe  things  or  no,  I veri- 
ly think  Mr.  Tucker  has.  I defire  not  a more 
confiftent  account  of  my  principles,  than  he  has 
himfelf  given  in  the  following  words : 

“ Our  fpiritual  ftate  fhould  be  cor.fidered  dif- 
tinftly  under  each  of  thefe  views. 

1.  “ Before  jujlif  cation  ; in  which  ftate  we 
may  be  faid  to  be  unable  to  do  any  thing  acceptable 
to  God : becaufe  then  we  can  do  nothing  but 
come  to  Chrift.  Which  ought  not  to  be  confiaered 
as  doing  any  thing,  but  as  J'upplicating  (or  wait- 
ing) to  receive  a power  of  doing  for  the  time  to 
come.” 

“ For  the  preventing  grace  of  God,  which  is 
common  to  all,  is  fufticient  to  bring  us  to  Chrift, 
though  it  is  not  fufticient  to  carry  us  any further, 
’till  we  are  juftified.” 

2.  “ After  jujlification.  The  moment  a man 
comes  to  Chrift  (by  faith)  he  is  juftified,  and 
born  again  that  is,  he  is  born  again  in  the  vn- 
perfcB  fenfe  (for  there  are  two,  [if  not  more]  de- 
crees of  regeneration)  and  he  has  power  over  all 
the  ftirrings  and  motions  of  fin,  but  not  a total 
freedom  from  them.  Therefore  he  hath  not  yet, 
in  the  full  and  proper  fenfe,  a new  and  clean 
heart.  But  being  expofed  to  various  temptations, 
he  may,  and  will  fall  again  from  this  condition, 
if  he  doth  not  attain  to  a more  excellent  gift.”  jj 

g.  .SanfHfication  ; 

|]  “ Mr.  Charles  Wejley , (the  note  fays)  was  not  penuaded  of 
the  truth  of  the  Moravian  faith,  till  fome  time  after  his  brother’s 
return  from  Germany,''  There  is  a great  mittake  in  this.  I re- 


[ 39  1 

3.  San&ification ; the  Iaft  and  higheft  date  of 
perfcElion  in  this  life.  For  then  are  the  faithful 
born  again  in  the  full  and  perfett  fenfe.  Then  is 
there  given  unto  them  a new  and  clear  heart; 
and  the  druggie  between  the  old  and  new  man  is 
over,  t 

30.  (14.)  That  I may  fay  many  things  which 

have 

turned  not  from  Germany  till  Sat.  Sept.  16.  Whereas  my  brother 
was  fully  pci  fuaded  of  the  truth  of  the  Moravian  faith  (fo  called) 
on  WtdneJ.  May  3,  preceding.  The  note  adds,  “ This  (r.  e.  jufti- 
fying  faith)  he  received  but  very  lately.”  This  alfo  is  a miftake. 
What  we  believe  to  be  juftifying  faith,  he  received  Mat  21,  1 738; 

See  fecond  Journal , page  20,  26. 

t The  next  note  runs  thus,  “ Mr.  Wejley  has  fuch  a peculiar 
turn  and  tendency  towards  the  inconliflencies  in  his  principles, 
that  in  his  preface  to  Ha/iburton’s  life  (wrote  Feb.  g,  1738-g,  juji 
after  his  return  from  Germany ) he  contraaifts  all  that  he  has  faid 
elfewhcre  for  this fintefs  perfection,  viz.  “ But  it  may  be  faid  the 
grfpe I covenant  does  notfromife  entire  freedom  from fin.  What  do  you 
mean  by  the  word  fin  ? The  infeftion  of  nature  P Or  thofe 
numberlefs  weaknelfes  and  follies,  fometimes  (improperly) 
termed  fins  of  infirmity?  If  you  mean  only  this,  you  fay  molt  true. 
We  fliall  not  put  off  thefe,  but  with  our  bodies.  But  if  you 
mean,  it  does  n.ot  promife  entire  freedom  from  fin,  in  its  proper 
fenfe,  or  from  committing  fin  : this  is  by  no  means  true,  unlefs 
the  fcripturcs  be  falfe.  For  thus  it  is  written,  Whofoeier  is  born  of 
God , doth  not  commit  fin.  (Unlefs  he  lofe  the  fpirit  of  adoption, 
if  not  finally,  yet  for  a while,  as  did  this  child  of  God)  For  his  . 
feed  remaineth  in  him , and  he  cannot  fin,  becaufe  he  is  born  of  God.  He 
cannot  fin,  fo  long  as  he  keepeth  himfelj,  for  then  the  wicked  one 
toucheth  him  not." 

The  queffion  is  not,  whether  this  be  right  or  wrong  : but 
whether  it  contradict  any  thing  I have  faid  elfewhere.  Thrice  I 
have  fpoken  exprefiy  on  this  fubjeft ; in  a fermon,  and  in  tw® 
prefaces.  If  in  any  of  thefe  I have  contradicted  what  I faid  bii 
fore,  1 will  own  the  former  afl'ettion  as  a mLdakc. 


[ 4°  ] 

have  been  faid  before,  and  perhaps  by  Calvin  or 
Arminius,  by  Montague  or  Barclay,  or  the  arch- 
bifhop  of  Cambray,  is  highly  probable.  But  it 
cannot  thence  be  inferred,  that  1 hold  “ a medley 
of  all  their  principles  ; Calvinifm,  Arrninianifm, 
Montanifm,  Quakerijm,  Quietifm,  all  thrown  to- 
gether.” There  might  as  well  have  been  added 
Judaifm,  Mahomdanifm,  P'aganifm.  It  would 
have  made  the  period  rounder,  and  been  full  as 
eafily  proved,  I mean* ljferted.  For  no  other  proof 
is  not  yet  produced. 

31.  I pafs  over  the  fmaller  miftakes  which  oc- 
cur in  the  15th  and  16th  paragraphs,  together 
with  the  prophecy  or  prognofiication,  concern- 
ing the  approaching  divifions  and  downfal  of  the 
Methodifls.  What  follows  to  the  end,  concern- 
ing the  ground  of  our  hope,  is  indeed  of  greater 
importance.  But  we  have  not  as  yet  the  ftrenglh 
of  the-caufe.  The  differtation  promifed,  is  hill 
behind.  Therefore  as  my  work  is  great,  and 
my  time  fhort,  I wave  that  difpute  for  the  pre- 
fent.  And  perhaps,  when  I fhall  have  received 
farther  light,  I may  be  convinced,  that  “ gofpel- 
holinefs  (as  Mr.  Tucker  believes)  is  a neceffary 
qualification,  antecedent  to  juftifioation.”  This 
appears  to  me  now  to  be  direftly  oppofite  to  the 
gofpel  of  Chrifl.  But  I will  endeavour,  impartially, 
to  confider,  what  fhall  be  advanced  in  defence 
of  it.  And  may  he  who  knoweth  my  fimplenefs, 
teach  me  his  way,  and  give  me  a right  judgment 
in  all  things  1 

A N 


I 4*  ] 


A N 

ANSWER 

TO  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  Church’s  Remarks  on  the  Rev. 
Mr.  John  Wejley’s  laft  Journal. 

In  a LETTER  to  that  Gentleman. 


Let  not  him  that  putteth  on  his  harnefs , hoajl  himfelf 
as  he  that  putteth  it  off.  1 Kings  xx.  11. 


Reverend  Sir, 

1.  A /TY  firft  defire  (and  prayer  to  God)  is, 
LVA  That  I may  live  peaceably  with  all  men. 
My  next,  That  if  Imufldifpute  at  all,  it  may  be 
with  a man  of  underftanding.  Thus  far  therefore 
I rejoice  on  the  prefent  oecafion,  I rejoice  alfo 

in 


C v ] 

in  that  I Iiave  confidence  of  vour  finceritv,  of 
your  real  defire,  to  promote  the  glory  of  God,  by 
peace  and  good-will  among  men.  I am  likewife 
thankful  to  God,  for  your  calm  manner  of  writ- 
ing; (a  few  paragraphs  excepted  :)  and  yet  more 
for  this,  That  fell  an  opponent,  fhould  by  writ- 
ing in  fuck  a manner,  give  me  an  opportunity  of 
explaining  myfelf  on  thofe  very  heads,  whereon 
I wanted  an  occafion  fo  to  do. 

2.  I do  not  want  indeed  (though  perhaps  vou 
think  I do)  to  widen  the  breach  between  us, 
or  to  reprefent  the  difference  of  the  docilities  we 
{Severally  teach,  as  greater  than  it  really  is.  So 
far  from  it,  that  I earneflly  wifii,  there  were  none 
at  all : or  if  there  mull  be  fomCj  that  it  may  be 
as  fmall  as  potTible  : being  fully  perfuaded,  that 
could  we  once  agree  in  doctrines,  other  differ- 
ences would  foon  tall  to  the  ground. 

3.  In  order  to  contribute,  as  I am  able,  to 
this,  it  will  be  my  endeavour,  to  acknowledge 
what  I think  you  have  fpoken  right,  and  to  an- 
fwer  what  1 cannot  think  right  as  yet,  with  what 
brevity  and  clearnefs  I can.  I defire  to  do  this, 
in  as  inoffenfive  a manner,  as  the  nature  of  the 
thing  will  bear;  and  confidently  with  that  bro- 
therly love,  which  I cannot  deny  you,  without 
wronging  my  own  foul. 

4.  You  fum  up  your  charge  thus : You  have 

now.  Sir,  my  Jentiments It  is  impojjible for  you 

to  put  an  entire  fop,  to  the  enormities  of  the  Mora- 
vians, while  you,  fill . I.  Too  much  commend  thefe 

men , 


[ 43  1 

men,  II.  Hold  principles  in  common  with  them, 
from  which  theft  enormities  naturally  follow,  and 
III.  Maintain  other  eirors  more  than  theirs,  and 
are  gui  ty  of  enthnfiafn  to  the  highcjl  degree .+ 

I.  1.  You,  firft,  charge  me  with  too  much 
commending  the  Moravians.  That  the  cafe  may 
be  fully  underllood,  I will  tranferibe  the  palfages 
which  you  cite  from  the  journal  concerning 
them,  and  then  give  a general  anfwer. 

“ She  told  me,  Mr.  Molther  had  advifed  her, 
till  fhe  received  faith,  to  be  fill,  ceafngfrom 

outward  works In  the  evening,  Mr.  Bray 

alfo  was  highly  commending  the  being  fill 

He  likewife  fpoke  largely,  of  the  great  danger 
that  attended  the  doing  of  outward  works,  and  of 
th z folly  of  people  that  keep  running  about  to 
church  and facrament.’f 

“ Sund.  Nov.  4.  Our  focietymet,  and  conti- 
nuedfilent  till  eight. ,:§ 

“ Sund.  June  22.  I fpoke  thus  : Eight  or  nine 
months  ago,  certain  men  arofe,  who  affirmed, 
that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  any  means  of  grace 
— — and  that  we  ought  to  leave  off  ihefe  works  of 
the  lawd  j| 

“ You  (Mr.  Molther)  believe,  that  the  way  to 
attain  faith,  is,  not  to  go  to  church,  not  to  com- 
municate, not  to  fall,  not  to  ufe Jo  much  private 

prayer, 

+ Remarks,  p.  73,  74.  £ 4th  Journal,  p.  7,  § lb.  p.  42. 

II  P-  42- 

N.  B.  The  fentences  quoted  from  the  Remarks,  are  all  printed 

in  italicks. 


[ 44  ] 

prayer,  not  to  read  the  fcripture;  not  to  do  tem- 
poral good,  or  attempt  to  do  fpiritual  good.’  r 

“ You  undervalue  good  works , efpectally  works 
of  outward  mercy,  never  publicly  infilling  on  the 
neceflity  of  them.”| 

“ Some  of  our  brethren  afferted.  1.  That  till 
they  had  true  faith,  they  ought  to  be Jiill,  that  is 
(as  they  explained  themfelves)  to  abfiain  from  the 
means  of  grace,  as  they  are  called,  the  Lord’s 
fupper  in  particular.  2.  That  the  ordinances  are 
not  means  of  grace,  there  being  no  other  means 
than  Chrifl.”§ 

“ I could  not  agree,  either  that  none  has  any 
faith,  fo  long  as  he  is  liable  to  any  doubt  or  fear, 
or  that  till  we  have  it,  we  ought  to  abfiain  from 
the  ordinances  of  God.'  jj 

“ Mr.  Br -d  fpeaks  fo  {lightly  of  the  means 

of  grace,  that  many  are  much  grieved  to  hear 
him.  But  others  are  greatly  delighted  with  him. 
Ten  or  fourteen  of  them  meet  at  our  brother 
Clark’s,  with  Mr.  Molther,  and  make  a meer  jell 
of  going  to  church  or  to  the  facrament."? 

“You  (Mr.  Moltker)  believe,  it  is  impoffible 
for  a man  to  ife  theft  means,  without  trujling  in 
them’  ’++ 

“ Believers  (faid  Mr.  Simpfon ) are  not  fubjeil 
to  ordinances,  and  unbelievers  have  nothing  to 
do  with  them.”^ 

“ Believers  need  not,  and  unbelievers  may  not 

ufe 

| p.  108.  ^ p.8.  ||  ib. 

ftp.  20,  +fp-34. 


■f  T).  20. 


i p,  17. 


[ 45  ] 

life  them.  Thefe  do  not  fin  when  they  abjlain 
from  them  ; but  thofe  do  Jin,  when  they  do  not 
abltain.’t 

“ For  one  who  is  not  born  of  God,  to  read  the 
fcriptures,  or  to  pray,  or  to  communicate,  or  to 
do  any  outward  work  is  deadly  poij on. — If  he  does 
any  of  thefe  things,  li e dejroys  himfelf.”^; 

“ Mr.  Bed  earned ly  defended  this.” 

“ At  eight  thefociety  (at  Nottingham]  met  ; I 
could  not  but  obierve — that  not  one  who  came 

in,  ufed  any  prayer  at  all. 1 looked  for  one 

ol  our  hymn-books,  but  both  that  and  the  bible 
were  vamfhed  away,  and  in  the  room  thereof 
lay,  the  Moravian  hymns  and  the  Count's  Jer- 
rnons.”\ ) 

“ One  of  our  Engli/h  brethren,  joined  with 
you,  fan!  in  his  public  expounding,  “ As  many 
go  to  hell  by  praying,  as  by  thieving.”  Another, 
“ I knew  one,  who  leaning  over  the  back  of  a 
chair,  received  a great  gilt.  But  he  mull  kneel 
down,  to  give  God  thanks.  So  he  loft  it  imme- 
diately. And  I know  not  whether  be  will  ever 
have  it  again.  And  yet  another,  “ You  have  loft 
your  fir  ft  joy.  Therefore  you  pray,  rhat  is  the 
devil.  \ou  read  the  bible.  That  is  the  devil. 
You  communicate.  That  is  the  devil.' j| 

“ 1 hey  affirmed,  that  there  is  no  commandment 
in  the  New  Teilament,  but  to  believe  ; that  no 
other  duty  lies  upon  us;  and,  that  when  a man 

does 

+ p.  43-  tp-l8-  § p.  88.  | p.  106. 


[ 4$  1 

does  believe,  he  is  not  bound  or  obliged , to  da 
any  thing  which  is  commanded  there.”+ 

“ Mr.  St told  me,  No  one  has  any  degree 

of  faith,  till  he  is  perfeft  as  God  is  perfect.”^: 

“ You  believe  there  are  no  degrees  in  faith. 

“ I have  heard  Mr.  Molther  affirm,  that  there 
is  no  juftifying  faith,  where  there  is  ever  any 
doubt.’|| 

“ The  moment  a man  is  jtiflified,  he  is  fanc- 
tified  wholly.  Thenceforth,  till  death,  he  is 
neither  more  nor  lefs  holy. ”5 

“ We  are  to  grow  in  grace,  but  not  in  hoi i- 
nefs.”  t+ 

“ 2.  I have  frequently  obferved,  that  I wholly 
difapprove,  of  all  thefe  pofitions,  “ That  there 
are  no  degrees  in  faith;  “ That  in  order  to  attain 
faith,  we  mull  abjlain  from  all  the  ordinances  or 
God  ; “ That  a believer  does  not  grow  in  holi- 
nefs,  and  “ That  he  is  not  obliged  to  keep  the 
commandments  of  God."  But  I muff  alio  o'j- 
ferve,  i.  That  you  ought  not  to  charge  the  Mo- 
ravian church  with  the  firft  ol  thefe  ; fmee  in  the 
very  page  from  which  you  quote  thofe  words, 
“ There  is  no  juftifying  faith  where  theie  is  ever 
any  doubt'5  that  note  occurs,  “ In  the  preface  to 
the  fecond  journal,  the  Moravian  church  -is 
cleared  from  this  miilake."  2.  That  with  refpecl 
to  the  ordinances  of  God,  their  praftice  is  better 
than  their  principle.  They  do  ufe  them  them- 
felves,  I am  a witnefs;  and  that  with  reverence 

and 

+ p.  41.  tfp.  35.  Ub.  O’ p.105.  ?p.  100.  +tp.  101. 


[ 4;  ] 

■and  godly  fear.  Thofe  expreffions  however,  of 
our  own  countrymen,  are  utterly  indefenftble  : 
as,  I think  are  Mr.  Molther’s  alfo ; who  was 
quickly  after  recalled  into  Germany.  The  great 
fault  of  the  Moravian  church  feems  to  lie  in  not 
openly  difclaiming  all  he  had  faid  : which  in  all 
probability  they  would  have  done,  had  they  not 
leaned  to  the  fame  opinion.  I mull  3.  obferve, 
that  I never  .knew  one  of  the  Moravian  church, 
but  that  fingle  perfon  affirm,  “ That  a believer 
does  not  grow  in  holinefs.”  And  perhaps  he 
would  not  affirm  it,  on  reflection.  But  I am 
Hill  afraid  their  whole  church  is  tainted  with 
Quietijm,  Univtrjal  Salvation , and  Antinomianifm  : 
I fpeak  (as  I fa  id  elfewbere)  of  Antinomian  opi- 
nions, abflraded  from  praftice,  good  or  bad.” 

3.  But  I fbould  re  joice  if  there  lay  no  other 
objection  again!!  them,  than  that  of  erroneous 
opinions.  I know  in  fome  meafure,  how  to 
halve  companion  on  the  ignorant  : I know  the 
incredible  force  of  pre-pofleffion.  And  God  only 
knows,  what  ignorance  or  error  (all  things  con- 
sidered) is  invincible;  and  what  allowance  his 
mercy  will  make  in  fuch  cafes,  to  thofe  who  de- 
fire to  be  lead  into  all  truth.  But  how  far  what 
follows  may  be  imputed  to  invincible  ignorance 
or  pre  poffeffion,  I cannot  tell. 

Many  of  “ t you  greatly,  yea  above  meafure, 
exalt  yourfelves  (as  a church)  and  defpife  others  : 

“ I 

+ 4th  journal,  p,  107,  108. 


[ 4*  ] 

“ I have  fcarce  heard  one  Moravian  brother 
own  his  church  io  be  wrong  in  any  thing  : 

“ Many  of  you  I have  heard  fpeak  of  it,  as  if 
it  were  infallible  “ Some  oi  you  have  fet  it 
up.  as  the  judge  of  all  the  earth,  of  ail  perfons 
as  well  as  doftrines  : 

“ Some  of  you  have  faid,  that  there  is  no 
true  church  but  yours ; yea,  that  there  are  no  true 
Ckrifhans  out  of  it : 

“ And  your  own  members  you  require  to  have 
implicit  faith  in  her  decifions,  and  to  pay  implicit 
obedience  to  her  direftions.” 

I can  in  no  degree  juftify  thefe  things.  And 
yet  neither  can  I look  upon  them  in  the  fame 
light  that  you  do,  as  J fame  of  the  very  worjl  things 
which  are  objeBed  to  the  church  of  Rome.  They 
are  exceeding  great  miftakes  : yet  in  as  great 
miflakes,  have  holy  men  both  lived  and  died  : 
Thomas  a Kempis,  for  in  fiance,  and  Francis 
Sales.  And  yet  I doubt  not,  they  are  now  in 
Abraham  s bo  form 

4.  1 am  more  concerned  for  their  “ f Defpif- 
i-ng  and  decrying  felf-denial  for  their  “ ex- 
tending Chriftian  liberty  beyond  all  warrant  of 
holy  writ  ; ? for  their  “ jj  Want  of  zeal  for  good 
works  ; and  above  all  for  their  fuppofing,  that 
“ 5 we  may,  on  fome  accounts  ufe  guile  : i:i 

confequence  of  which  they  do  “ t ufe  guile  or 
dilTnnulation  in  many  cafes.1’  “ f Nay,  in  manv 

of 

t Rcrcaiks,  p.  7,  § Journal,  p.  80.  (j  p.  80. 

t p.  111.  i p.  104. 


- p.  21, 


C 49  I 

'of  them  I have  found”  (not  in  all,  nor  in  mod) 
much  fubtlety,  much  evafion  and  difguife ; ,fo 
becoming  all  tilings  to  all  men , as  to  take  the  co- 
lour and  fhape  of  any  that  were  near  them.” 

I can  neither  defend  nor  excufe  thofe  among 
the  Moravians,  whom  I have  found  guilty  of  this. 
But  neither  can  I condemn  all  for  the  fake  of 
fame . Every  man Jha.ll  give  an  account  of  himfelf 
to  God. 

But  you  fay,  § Your  preiefing  againf fame  oj 
their  opinions,  is  not  fuficicnt  to  di/ckarge  you— 
Have  you  not  prepared  the.  way  jor  thefe  Moravians, 
by — countenancing  and  commending  them:  and  by 
fill  fpeaking  of  them  as  if  they  were  in  the  main 
the  befl  Chrijhans  in  the.  world,  and  only  deluded  or 
■ mijlefien  i:i  a.  few  points  ? 

I cannot  fpeak  of  them  otherwife  than  I think. 
-And  I dill  think  i.  That  God  has  fame  thou- 
fands  in  our  own  church,  who  have  the  faith  and 
love  which  is  among  them,  without  thofe  errors 
either  of  judgment  or  praftice  ; 2.  That  next  to 
thefe,  the  body  of  the  Moravian  church,  however 
mf  alien  fame  of  them  are,  are  in  the  main,  of  all 
whom  I have  feen,  the  bef  Ckrifians  in  the  world. 

5.  Becaufe  i am  continually  charged  with 
inconfiftency  herein,  even  by  the  Moravians 
themfelves,  it  may  be  “ needful  to  give  a fhort 
account  of  what  has  occurred  between  us  from 
the  beginning.” 

Vol.  XVI.  C “ My 


k Remarks,  p.  11.  is. 


[ 5<>  ] 

“ + My  firfl:  acquaintance  with  the  Moravia r. 
Tiretbren  began  in  my  voyage  to  Georgia.  Be- 
ing then  with  many  of  them  in  the  fame  fhip, 

I narrowly  obferved  their  whole  behaviour.  And 
I greatly  approved  of  all  I faw."’  (The  particu- 
lars are  related  in  the  firff  journal.) 

“ From  Feb.  14,  1735,  to  Decem.  2,  1737, 
being  with  them  (except  when  I went  to  Fre- 
derica or  Carolina ) twice  or  thrice  every  day,  I 
loved  and  elleemed  them  more  and  more,  I et 
a few  things  I could  not  approve  of.  Thefe  :I 
mentioned  to  them  from  time  to  time,  and  then 
commended  the  caufe  to  God.” 

“ In  February'  following  I met  with  Peter 
Bohlcr.  My  heart  clave  to  him  as  foon  as  he 
fpoke.  And  the  more  we  converfed,  fo  much 
the  more  did  I efleem,  both  him  and  the  Mo- 
ravian church.  So  that  I had  no  reft  in  my 
fpirit,  till  I executed  the  defign,  which  I had 
formed  long  before  ; till  after  a fhort  flay  in  Hol- 
land, I hallened  forward,  firfl  to  Marienbourn , 
and  then  to  Hernhuth .” 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  I had  before  feen  a 
few  things  in  the  Moravians  winch  I could  not  ap- 
prove of.  In  this  journey  I faw  a few  more,  in 
the  midfl  of  many  excellent  things : in  con- 
fequence  whereof, 

“ In  Septan.  1738,  foon  after  my  return  k> 
England,  I began  the  following  letter  to  the 
Moravian  church.  But  being  fearful  of  trufling 

my 

+ Tbefc  are  the  words  of  the  4th  journal,  p.  :og,  &c. 


C 5X  ] 

tny  own  judgment,  I determined,  to  wait  yet  a 
little  longer,  and  fo  laid  it  by  unfinished,” 

“ My  Dear  Brethen, 

“ Y Cannot  but  rejoice  in  your  ftedfaft  faith, 
in  your  love  to  our  bleffed  Redeemer, 
your  deadnefs  to  the  world,  your  meeknefs, 
temperance,  chaftity,  and  love  of  one  another. 

I greatly  approve  of  your  conferences  and  £ 
•bands,  of  your  methods  of  in  ft  ruffing  children  ; 
and  in  general,  of  your  great  care  of  the  fouls 
committed  to  your  charge. 

“ But  of  fome  other  things  I ftand  indoubt, 
which  I will  mention  in  love  and  meeknefs. 
And  I wifh  that,  in  orderto  remove  tliofe  doubts, 
vou  would,  on  each  of  tbofe  heads,  firft,  plainly 
anfwer,  whether  the  faff  be  as  I fuppofe ; and 
if  fo,  Secondly,  confider,  whether  it  be  right  ? 

“ Is  not  the  Count  all  in  all  among  you? 

“ Do  you  not  magnify  your  own  church  too 
much  ? 

“ Do  you  not  ufe  guile  and  difiimulation  in 
many  cafes  ? 

“ Are  yon  not  of  a clofe,  dark,  referved 
temper  and  behaviour  ?” 

“ It  may  eatily  he  Seen,  that  my  objeffions 
tlien  were  nearly  the  fame  as  now.”  (Only  with 
this  difference  ; I was  not  then  affured,  that  the 
faffs  were  as  I fuppofed.)  “ Yet  I cannot  fay  my 
C 2 affeffion 

+ The  band  fociety  in  London,  began  May  1,  fome  time  be- 
fore I fet  out  for  Germany. 


[ 52  ] 

affe&ion  was  leffened  at  all,  (for  I did  not  dare  to 
determine  any  thing.)  But  from  Nov.  1,  I could 
not  but  fee  more  and  more  things  which  I could 
not  reconcile  with  the  gofpel.” 
t “ Thefe  I have  fet  down  with  all  fimplicity 
— Yet  do  I this,  becaufe  I love  them  not  ? God 
knoweth  : yea,  and  in  part,  I efleetn  them  Hill  : 
becaufe  I verily  believe,  they  have  a lincere 
defire  to  ferve  God  ; becaufe  many  of  them  have 
tailed  of  his  love,  and  fome  retain  it  in  fimplicity  ; 
becaufe  they  love  one  another  ; becaufe  they 
have  fo  much  of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel,  and  Jo 
Jar  abftain  from  outward  fin.  And  laflly,  be- 
caufe their  difcipline  is,  in  mojl  refpe&s,  fo 
truly  excellent  : (notwithflanding  that  vifible 
blemifh,  the  paying  too  much  regard,  to  their 
great  patron  and  benefactor,  Count  Zinzrndorf } 
6.  1 believe  if  you  coolly  confider  this  ac- 
count, you  will  not  find,  either  that  it  is  in- 
confiffent  with  itfelf  ; or  that  is  lays  you  under 
any  neceffity  of  fpeaking  in  the  following  manner: 
+ What  charms  there  may  be  in  a demure  look , and 
a four  behaviour,  I know  not.  But Jure  they  muf 
be  in  your  eye  very  extraordinary,  as  they  can  be 
fuffcient  to  cover Juch  a multitude  of  errors  and 
crimes,  and  keep  up  the  fame  regard  and  affection 
for  the  authors  and  abettors  of  them.  I doubt  your 
regard  for  them  was  not  leffened,  till  they  began  to 
interfere  with  what  you  thought  your  province. — 
Yen  was  influenced,  not  by  a juf  refentment  to  fee 

the 


+ Remarks,  p.  18,  rg. 


[ 53  ] 

the  honour  of  religion  and  virtue  Jo  injurioufy  and 
fcandaloufly  trampled  upon,  but  by  a fear  of  lofing 
your  own  authority 

I doubt,  there  is  fcarce  one  line  of  all  thefe, 
which  is  conhllent  either  with  truth  or  love. 
But  I will  tranfcribe  a few  more,  before  I an- 
fwer.  How  could  you fo  long  and Jo  intimately  con- 
verfe  with,  fo  much  commend,  and  give  fur.h  coun- 
tenance to,  fuch  clefperately  wicked  people,  as  the 
Moravians,  according  to  your  own  account,  were 
known  by  you  to  be  ? — And  you  Jhll  fpeak  of  than , 
as  if  they  were,  in  the  main,  the  bef  Chriftians  in 
the  world. — An  one  place  you  fay,  “ A few  things 
I could  not  approve  of."  But  in  God’s  name.  Sir, 
is  the  contempt  of  almojl  the  whole  of  our  duty,  of 
every  Chriftian  ordinance,  to  be  fo  gently  touched? 
Can  detejlation  in  fuch  a cafe,  be  too  frongly  ex- 
prejl  ? Either  they  are  fome  of  the  vilef  wretches 
in  the  world,  or  you  are  the  falfef  accufer  in  the 
world.  Chriftian  charity  has  fcarce  an  allowance 
to  make  for  them  as  you  have  defcribed  them.  If 
you'have  done  this  truly,  they  ought  to  be  difcour ag- 
ed, by  all  means  that  can  be  imagined. 

7.  Let  us  now  weigh  thefe  affertions.  They 
(i.  e.  the  charms  of  their  four  behaviour ) mujl  be  in 
your  eye  very  extraordinary. — Do  not  yon  Hum- 
ble at  the  threfnoui  ? The  Moravians  excel  in 
Jweetnefs  oi  behaviour — as  they  can  be  fiffi.de  nt  to 
cover  fuch  a multitude  of  errors  and  crimes— 
Such  a multitude  ci  a ears  and  crimes  ! I believe, 
as  to  errors,  they  hold  univerfal  falvation,  and 
C 3 are 


E <54  J 

are  partly  Antinomians  (in  opinion,  and  partly 
Quietifls.  And  for  this  caufe  I cannot  join  with 
them.  But  where  is  the  multitude  of  errors  ? 
Wbofoever  knows  2 or  300  more,  let  him  pleafe 
to  mention  them. 

Such  a multitude  of  crimes  too  ! That  fome  of 
them  have  ufed  guile,  and  are  of  a clofe,  referv- 
ed  behaviour,  I know.  And  I excufe  them  not. 
But  to  this  multitude  of  crimes  I am  an  utter 
itranger.  Let  him  prove  this  charge  upon  them 
who  can.  For  me,  2 declare,  I cannot. 

To  keep  up  the  fame  regard  and  affeclion. — Not 
fo.  I fay,  my  affection  was  not  Iff  tried,  till  after 
September  1739,  till  I had  proof  of  what  I had 
before.  But  I had  not  the  fame  degree  of 
regard  for  them,  when  I faw  the  dark  as  well  as 
the  bright  fide  of  their  chara£ter.  I doubt  your 
regard  for  them  was  not  lejfened,  till  they  began  to 
interfere  with  what  you  thought  your  province.  If 
this  were  only  a doubt,  it  were  not  much  amifs-j 
but  it  prefently  fhoots  up  into  an  affection  : equal- 
ly groundlefs ; for  my  regard  lor  them  lejfened , 
even  while  I was  in  Georgia.  But  it  increafed 
again,  after  my  return  from  thence,  efpecially 
while  I was  at  Hernhuth.  And  it  gradually  lejfen- 
ed again  for  fome  years,  as  I faw  more  and  more 
which  I approved  not.  How  then  does  it  appear, 
that  I was  irffluenced  herein,  by  a Jear  oj  lofng  my 
own  authority  ? Not  by  a jujl  refentment  to  fee  the 
honour  of  religion  and  virtue  fo  fcandaloujly 
trampled  upon . — Trampled  upon  ! By  whom  ? 


C 55  ] 

Not  by  the  Moravians:  I never  faw  airy  fuch 
thing  among  them- 

* But  what  do  you  mean  by  a juft  refentment  ? 
I hope  you  do  not  mean,  what  is  commonly  called 
Zeal:  a flame  which  often  fets  on  fire  the  whole 
courfe  of  nature , and  is  in  itfelf fet  on  fre  of  hell! 
— Rivers  of  water  run  from  my  eyes,  becaufe  men 
keep  not  thy  law.  This  refentment  on  fuch  an 
occafion  I underftand. . From  all  other  may  God 
deliver  me! 

8.  You  goon..  How  could  youfo  long  and fo 
intimately  converfe  with— fuck  clefpercitely  wicked 
people,  as  the  Moravians,  according  to  your  own 
account,  toere  known  by  you  to  be?  O Sir,  what 
another  affertion  is  this  ? The  Moravians,  accord- 
ing to  your  own  account,  were  known  by  you  to 
be  defperately  wicked  people,  while  you  intimately 
converfed  with  them  ! Utterly  faife  and  injurious. 
I never  gave  any  fuch  account.  I converfed  in- 
timately with  them,  both  at  Savannah  and  Hern- 
huth.  But  neither  then,  nor  at  any  other  time, 
did  I know,  or  think,  or  fay,  they  were  defperate- 
ly wicked  people.  I think  and  fay,  nay,  you 
blame  me  for  faying,  juft;  the  reverfe,  viz.  That 
though  I foon  “ found  among  them  a few  things 
which  I could  not  approve,”  yet  I believe  they 
are  in  the  main  fome  of  the  bejl  Chrijlians  in  the 
world. 

You  furprize  me  yet  more  in  going  on  thus: 
In  God's  name,  Sir,  is  the  contempt  of  alrnojl  the 
C 4 whole 


.[  <5®  J 

whole  of  our  duty , of  every  Chriflian  ordinance,  Co 
be  fo  very  gently  touched ? Sir,  this  is  not  the 
cafe.  This  charge  no  more  belongs  to  the  Mo- 
ravians, than  that  of  murder.  Some  of  our 
countrymen  fpoke  very  wicked  things.  The 
Moravians  did  not  fufficiently  difavow  them. 
Thefe  are  the  premifies.  By  what  art  can  you 
extort  fo  dreadful  a conclufion  from  them  ? 

Can  detejiaticn,  in  fuch  a cafe,  he  too  jlrongly 

expref? Indeed  it  can  ; even  were  the  cafe 

as  you  fuppofe either  they  are  fome  of  the 

vilejl  wretches  in  the  world,  or  you  are  the falfefl 

accufer  in  the  world neither  one,  nor  the 

other  ; though  I prove  what  I alledge,  yet  they 

may  be,  in  the  main,  good  men chant]  has 

farce  an  allowance  to  make  for  them,  as  you  have 

dcfcriked  than. 1 have  defended  them,  as 

of  a mixt  charafler,  with  much  evil  among  them, 
but  more  good.  Is  it  not  a flrange  kind  of 
charity,  which  cannot  find  an  allowance,  to  make 
in  fuch  a cafe  ? — If  you  have  defcribed  them 
truly,  they  ought  to  be  difeouraged  by  all  means 

that  can  be  imagined By  all  means  ! I hope 

not  by  fire  and  faggot  : though  the  houfe  of  mercy 
imagines  thefe  to  be  of  all  means  moll  effec- 
tual. 

9.  You  proceed,  t How  can  you  jujlfy  the 
many  good  things  you fay  of  the  Moravians,  not- 

withjlanding  this  char  aider  ? You  fay  they 

love  God. — But  how  can  this  be,  when  they  even 

plead 


i Remarks,  p.  20,  21. 


C 57  ] 

plead  againf  keeping  mof  of  his  commandments  ? 

You  Jay,  you  believe,  they  have  a fincere 

defire  to  ferve  God. How  then  can  they  defpife 

his  fa-vice  in  fo  many  infances  ? You  declare 

fome  of  them  much  holier  than  any  people  you  had 
yet  known.  Strange  ! if  they  fail  in  Jo  many  prime 
points  of  Chrijlian  duty,  and  this  not  only  habitually 
and  prefumptuoujly,  but  even  to  the  denying  their 
life  and  necejfty.  You  praife  them,  for  trampling 
under  foot  the  lufi  of  the  flefh,  the  !uf  of  the  eye, 

and  the  pride  of  life. And  yet  you  make  them 

aclofe,  refer  ved,  inf  nc ere,  deceitful  people. 

How  you  will  explain  thoje  things,  I know  not. 

By  nakedly  declaring  each  thing  as  it  is. 

They  are,  I believe,  the  molt  felf-inconfiltent 
people,  now  under  the  fun  : and  I defcribe  them 
juft  as  I find  them,  neither  better  nor  vvorfe,  but 
leaving  the  good  and  bad  together.  Upon  this 
ground  I can  very  eafily  juftify,  the  faying  many 
good  things  of  them,  as  well  as  bad.  For  infiance. 

I am  Bill  perfuaded,  that  they  (many  of  them)  love 
God  : although  manv  others  of  them  ignorantly 
plead  againf  the  keeping,  not  mof,  but  fome  of 
his  commandments.  I believe,  they  have,  a fincere 
defire  to  ferve  God.  And  yet,  in feveral  inftanees, 
fome  of  them  (I  think)  defpife  that  manner  of 
ferving  him,  which  I know  God  hath  ordained. 
I believe  fame  of  them  are  much  holier  than  any 
people  I had  known  in  Augujl  1740.  Yet  fure  I 
am,  that  others  among  them  fail,  not  indeed 
in  the  prime  points  of  Chrijlian  duty  [ for  thefe  are 
C 5 faith 


[ ] 

faith  and  the  love  of  God  and  man)  but  in 
feveral  points  of  no  fmall  importance.  Not  that 
they  hexein  fi n prefumpiuoufy  neither;  for  they 
are  fully  (though  errcneoufly)  perfuadtd  in  their 
own  minds.  From  the  fame  perfuafion  they  acf, 
when  they  (in  fome  fenfe)  deny  the  ufe  or  necejfty 
of thofe  ordinances.  How  far  that  perfuafion  will 
juftify  or  excufe  them,  I leave  to  him  who  know- 
eth  their  hearts.  Laflly,  I believe  they  trample 
under  foot,  in  a good  degree,  the  luf  of  the  fefh , 
the  lujl  of  the  eye , and  the  pride  of  life.  And  yet 
many  of  them  ufe  referve,  yea  guide.  Therefore 
my  foul  mourns  for  them  in  fecret  places. 

10.  But  I mujl  ohferve,  you  fay,  that  i you 
fall  not  only  into  inconfflencies,  but  into  diredl 
contradidlions. — —You  commend  them  for  “ lozing 
one  another,  in  a manner  the  world  hnoweth  not 
of And  yet  you  charge  them  with  being  “ in  the 
utmojl  confufion , biting  and  devouring  one  another  A 
You  jay , “ They  caution  us  againjl  natural  love 

of  one  another And  had  'well-nigh  de~ 

f royed  brotherly  love from  among  us.” 

You  praife  them,  for  “ ufing  no  diver  fens  but 
fitch  as  become  faints ,”  and  for  “ not  regarding 
outward  adorning.”  Yet  you  fay,  they  “ conform  to 
the  world  in  wearing  gold  and  coftly  apparel  : and 
by  joining  in  worldly  diverfions,  in  order  to  do 

You  call  their  difcipline,  “ in  mojl  refpcEls, 

truly. 


^ Remarks,  p,  21.  22. 


[ 59  ] 

truly  extellent .”  I wifh  you  had  more  fully  ex- 
plained yourjelf  — I am  Jure,  it  is  no  fgn  of  good 
difcipline,  to  permit  fuch  abominations.  And  you 
tell  them  your [elf  “ I can  Jhezu  you  fuch  a fubor di- 
nation,  as  anfwers  all  Chrijhan  purpofes,  and  yet 
is  as  dijlant  from  that  among  you , as  the  heavens 
are  from  the  earth. 

You  mention  it  as  a good  effeSl  of  their  difcipline, 
that  “ every  one.  knows  and  keeps  his  proper  rank." 
Soon  after,  as  if  it  were  a defign  to  confute  your- 
felf,  you  fay,  “ Our  brethen  have  neither  wifdom 
enough  to  guide,  nor  prudence  enough  to  let  it 
alone.” 

And  now,  Sir how  can  you  reconcile  thefe 

oppofte  defcriptions  ? Juft  as  eafiiy  as  tbofe 

before,  by  fimply  declaring  the  thing  as  it  is. 
You  “ X commend  them  (the  Moravians ) for  loving 
one  another.  And  yet  charge  them  with  biting  t and 
devouring  one  another. ” Them ! whom  ? Not 
the  Moravians ; but  the  Fnglfrbrethren  of  Fetter- 
lane,  before  their  union  with  the  Moravians. 
Here  then  is  no  fhadowof  contradifiion.  For 
the  two  fentences  do  not  relate  to  the  fame  per- 
fons. 

You  fay,  § “ They  had  well-nigh  defroyed  bro- 
therly love  from  among  us  partly  by  “ cautions 
§ againjl  natural  loved  It  is  a melancholy  truth; 
fo  they  had.  But we  had  then  no  connexion  with 
them.  Neither  theielore  does  this  contradift 
C 6 “ their 

t Journal,  p.  4.  £p.i8.  §p.io8. 


C 6°  ] 

“ their  loving  one  another,  in  a manner  the  world 
knoweth  not  of.” 

You  praifc  them  for  t ujing  no  diver  [ions  but 
fuck  as  become  finds  : and  yet  fay,  (I  recite  the 
whole  fentence)  “ i I have  heard  [owe  of  you 
affirm,  that  Chrijhan  falvaticn  implies  liberty  to- 
conform  to  the  world,  by  joining  in  v or  Idly  dicer  - 
fons,  in  order  to  do  good!’ — And  both  thefe  are 
true.  The  Moravians,  in  general,  ,4  ufe  no  di- 
verfions  but  fuch  as  become  faints  and  yet  I 
have  heard  feme  of  them  affirm  (in  contradidlion 
to  their  own  praflice)  that  “ One  then  mentioned 
did  well,  when  he  joined  in  playing  at  tennis,  in 
order  to  do  good.’ 

11,  You  praife  them  for  not  “ § regarding  out - 
ward  adorning."- — So  I do,  the  bulk  of  the  con- 
gregation— And  yet  you  fay  (I  again  recite  the 
whole  fentence)  “ I \\  have  heard Jo  me  of  you  af- 
frm,  that  Ckrijiian  falvaiion  implies  liberty  to  con- 
form to  the  world,  by  putting  on  of  gold  and  cofly 
apparel.’'  I have  fo.  And  I blame  them  the 
more,  becaufe  they  are  condemned  b);  the  gene- 
ral praftice  of  their  own  church. 

You  call  their  difeipline  “ in  mofl  refpeBs  truly 
excellent  A H I could  wifi  you  had  more  fully  ex- 
plained yourfelf 1 have,  in  the  fecond  journal, 

from  the  44th  to  the  82d  page.  It  is  no jign  of 
good  difeipline,  to  permit  fuch  abominations,  (i.  e. 
error,  in  opinion,  and  guile,  in  practice  :)  true,  it 
is  not;  nor  is  it  any  demonflration  againft  it. 

Fox 

dp- 5-  i.p.  103.  ^ P- 5-  '1  P*  103-  5P*£*. 


[ 6,  ] 

For  there  may  be  good  difcipline  even  in  a college 
of  Jefuits . Another  fault  is,  too  great  a defer- 

ence to  the  Count.  And  yet,  “ in  mojl  ref  pedis, 
their  difcipline  is  truly  excellent.” 

You  mention  it  as  a good  ejfetl  of  their  difcipline, 
that  “ + every  one  knozus  and  keeps  his  proper  rank." 
Soon  after,  as  it  were  with  a defign  to  confute your- 
f elf,  you  fay,  “ Our  brethren  have  neither  wifdom 
enough  to  guide,  nor  prudence,  enough  to  let  it 
alone.'  \ Pardon  me,  Sir.  1 have  no  defign 
either  to  confute  or  to  contradift  myfelf  in  thefe 
words.  The  former  fentence  is  fpoken  of  the 
Moravian  brethren  : the  latter,  of  the  Englfh 
brethren  of  Fetter-lane. 

* 12.  You  need  not  therefore  § imagine,  that 
either  the frong  pretences  or  warmpr  ofeffions  of  the 
Moravians,  or  their  agreeing  with  me  infomefa- 
vourite  topicks  (for  my  love  to  them  was  antece- 
dent to  any  fuch  agreement J induce  me  to  overlook 
their  iniquity , and  to  forgive  their  other  crimes.  No. 
I love  them  upon  quite  different  grounds  : even, 
becaufe  I believe  (notwithflanding  all  their  faults) 
they  love  the  Lord  Jefus  in  fncerity,  and  have  a 
meafure  of  the  mind  that  was  in  him.  And  I am 
in  great  earnef  when  I declare  once  more,  That 
I have  a deep,  abiding  convidiion,  by  how  many 
degrees  the  good  which  is  among  them,  over- 
balances the  evil : That  I cannot  fpeak  of  them 
but  with  tender  ajfeclion , were  it  only  for  the 
benefits  I have  received  from  them  : and  that  at 

this 

f p.  5-  f p.  17.  § Remarks,  p.  33. 


[ 62  ] 


this  hopr,  I defae  union  with  them  (were  thofe 
ftumblipg-blocks  once  put  away,  which  have 
hitherto  made  that  defire  ineffedtual)  above  all 
things  under  heaven. 

II.  x.  Your  fecond  charge  is,  That  1 hold,  in 
common  with  them,  principles  from  which  their 
errors  naturally  follow.  You  mean,  juftification 
by  faith  alone.  To  fet  things  in  the  cleareft  light 
I can,  I will,  fir  ft,  obferve,  what  I hold,  and  what 
you  objeft,  and  then  enquire,  what  the  confe- 
quences  have  been  ? 

Firft,  As  to  what  I hold,  my  lateft  thoughts 
upon  juftification,  are  expreft  in  the  following 
words  : |[ 

“ Juftification  fometimes  means  our  acquittal 
at  the  laft  day.  But  this  is  out  of  the  prefent 
queflion  : that  juftification  whereof  our  articles 
and  homilies  fpeak,  meaning  prefent  pardon,  and 
acceptance  with  God  : who  therein  declares  his 
righte.oufnefs  and  mercy,  by  or  for  the  remiffion  of 
the  fins  that  are  paft. 

“ I believe,  the  condition  of  this  is  faith  : I 
mean  not  only.,  that  without  faith  we  cannot  be 
juftified;  but  alfo,  that  as  foon  as  any  one  has 
true  faith,  in  that  moment  he  is  juftified. 

“ Good  works  follow  this  faith,  but. cannot  go 
before  it.  Much  leis  can  fandlification,  which 
implies  a continued  courfe  of  good  works, 
fpringing  from  holinefs  of  heart.  But — entire 

fan£H- 

)[  Farther  Appeal  to  Men  of  Reafon  and  Religion,  p.  1,  .2,  5. 


C 63  ] 

fan&ification  goes  before  our  juftification  at  the 
laft  day. 

“ It  is  allowed,  that  repentance  and  fruits  meet 
for  repentance,  go  before  faith.  Repentance 
abfolutely  muff  go  before  faith  : fruits  meet  for  it, 
if  there  be  opportunity.  By  repentance  I mean, 
convi&ion  of  fin,  producing  real  defines  and 
fincere  refolutiens  of  amendment : and  by  fruits 
meet  for  repentance , forgiving  our  brother,  ceaf- 
ing  from  evil,  doing  good,  uling  the  ordinances 
of  God,  and  in  general,  obeying  him  according 
to  the  meafure  of  grace  which  we  have  received, 
Butthefe  I cannot,  as  yet  term  good  works-,  be- 
caufe  they  do  not  fipring  from  faith  and  the  love 
of  God.” 

2.  “ Eaith  in  general  is,  a divine,  fupernatura! 
Dvdx©'  (evidence  or  conviction)  of  things  not 
feen,  not  difcoverable  by  our  bodily  fenfes,  as 
being  either  paft,  future,  or  fipiritual.  Juftifving 
faith  implies,  not  only  a divine  & eJ^©.,  that  God 
was  in  Chrift,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himfelf 
but  a fure  trull  and  confidence,  that  Chrift  died 
for  ray  fins,  that  he  loved  me,  and  gave  himfelf  for 
me.  And  the  moment  a penitent  finner  thus  be- 
lieves, God  pardons  and  abfolves  him.” 

+ Now,  it  being  allowed,  that  both  inward  and 
outward  holinefis  are  the  ftated  conditions  of  final 
juftification : what  more  can  you  defire,  who 
have  hitherto  oppofed  jujhfication  by  faith  alone, 
merely  upon  a principle  of  confidence;  becaufie 

you 


+ ibid.  p.  13,  14,  15. 


[ 64  ] 


you  was  zealous  for  holinefs  and  good  works  ? 
Do  I not  effe&ually  fecure  thefe  from  contempt, 
at  the  fame  time  that  I defend  the  doftrines  of 
the  church?  I not  only  allow,  but  vehemently 
contend,  that  none  fhall  ever  enter  into  glory, 
who  is  not  holy  on  earth,  as  well  in  heart,  as 
in  all  manner  of  converfation.  I cry  aloud,  Let  all 
that  have  believed,  be  careful  to  maintain  good 
works : and,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the.  name 
d^Chrift,  depart  from  all  iniquity.  I exhort  even 
thofe  who  are  confcious  they  do  not  believe, 
Ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  at  hand-,  therefore,  repent,  and  bring 
forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  Are  not  thefe 
direftions  the  very  fame,  in  fubflance,  which 
you  yourfelf  would  give  to  perfons  fo  circum- 
ftanced? — 

3.  “ Many  of  thofe  who  are  perhaps  as  zealous 
of  good  works  as  you,  think  I*  have  allowed  you 

too  much Nay,  my  brethren,  but  how  can 

we  help  allowing  it,  if  w'e  allow  the  feriptures  to 
be  from  God  ? For  is  it  not  written,  and  do  not 
you  yourfelves  believe,  Without  holinefs  no  man 
fiall  fee  the  Lord  ? And  how  then,  without  fight- 
ing about  words,  can  we  deny,  that  holinefs  is  a 
condition  of  final  acceptance  ? And  as  to  the  firil 
acceptance  or  pardon,  does  not  all  experience  as 
well  as  feripture  prove,  that  no  man  ever  yet 
truly  believed  the  gofpel,  who  did  not  firfl  repent. 

Repentance  therefore  wre  cannot  deny,  to 

be  necefiarily  previous  to  faith.  Is  it  not  equally 

undeniable. 


[ % i 

undeniable,  that  the  running  back  into  wilful 
known  fin  (fuppofe  it  were  drunkennefs  or  un- 
cleanriefs) ' iiifles  that  repentance  or  conviftion? 
And  can  that  repentance  come  to  any  good  ilfue 
in  his  foul,  who  refolves,  not  to  forgive  his  bro- 
ther ? Or  who  obflinately  refrains  from  what 
God  convinces  him  is  right,  whether  it  be  prayer 
or  hearing  his  word  ? Would  you  fcruple  yourfelf 

to  tell  one  of  thefe Unto  him  that  hath Jhall  he 

given:  but  from  him  that  hath  not,  i.'e.  ufes  it 
not,  fall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  hath. 
Would  you  fcruple  to  fay  this?- But  in  fay- 

ing this,  you  allow  all  which  I have  faid,  viz. 
That  previous  to  juftifying  faith,  there  mujl  be 
repentance,  and  if  opportunity  permit,  fruits  meet 
for  repentance .” 

“ And  yet  I allow  you  this,  That  although 
both  repentance  and  the  fruits  thereof  are  in 
fome fnfe  necelfary  before  juftification,  yet  nei- 
ther the  one  nor  the  other  is  necelfary  in  the fame 
Jenfe , or  in  the fame  degree  with  faith;  for  in  what- 
ever moment  a man  believes,  (in  'the  Chriftian 
fenfe  of  the  word)  he  is  juftified,  his  fins  are 
blotted  out,  his  faith  is  counted  to  him  for  righte- 
oufnefs.  But  it  is  not  fo,  at  whatever  moment 
he  repents,  or  brings  forth  any  or  all  the  fruits 
of  repentance.  Faith  alone  therefore  juftifies ; 
which  repentance  alone  does  not ; much  lefs 
any  outward  work.  And  confequently,  none  of 
thefe  are  necelfary  to  juflification,  in  the  fame 
degree  with  faith. 


“ Nor 


[ 66  ]; 

“ Nor  in  the  fame  fenfe.  For  none  o t thefe  has- 
fo  direft,  immediate  a relation  to  juflification  as 
faith.  This  is  proximately - neceffary  thereto; 
repentance,  remotely , as  it. is  neceffary  to  the  in- 
creafe  or  continuance. of  repentance.  And  even 
in  this  fenfe,  thefe  are  only  necefTary  on  fuppo* 

fition if  there  be.  time  and  opportunity  for 

them:  for  in  many  inftances  there  is  not;  but 
God  cuts  fhort  his  work,  and  faith  prevents  the 
fruits  of  repentance.  So  that  the  general  propo- 
fnion  is-  not  overthrown,  but  clearly  eflablillied 

by  thefe  conceffions;  and  we  conclude  ftill 

That  faith  alone  is  the  proximate  condition  of 
jullification.” 

* q.This  is  what  I hold  concerning  juflification, 
T am  next,  briefly  to  obferve  what  you  obje£i. 
\IJ  faith. Jay  you,  is  the  foie  condition  oj juf if  ca- 
tion, then  it  is  our  foie  duty.  I deny  the  confer 
quence.  Faith  may  be  (in  the  fenfe  above  de- 
fcribed)  the  foie  condition  of  juflification,  andr 
yet  not  only  repentance  be  our  duty  before , but 
all  obedience  after  we  believe. 

* You  go  on.  Jj  i good  works  are  not  condi- 
tions of  oar  juflification,  they  are  not  conditions  of 
oar  (final ) falvation.  I deny  the  confequence 
again.  Good  works  (properly  fo  called)  cannot 
be  the  conditions  of  jullification : becaufe  it  is 
impoffible  to  do  any  good  work,  before  we  are 
juflified.  And  yet  notwithflanding,  good  works 
may  be  (and  are)  conditions  of  final  falvation. 

For 


t Remarks,  p.  25. 


± ibid. 


[ «7  1 

For  who  will  fay  it  is  impoffibie  to  do  any  good 
work,  before  we  are  finally  faved  ? 

You  proceed.  § Can  we  be J'aved. , in  the  con- 
temptuous neglett  of  repentance , prayer , &c.  ? 
No  : nor  juftified  neither;  but  while  they  are 
previous  to  faith,  thefe  are  not  allowed  to  be 
good  works . 

You  afterwards  argue  from  my  own  concef- 
fions,  thus. — + Your  notion  of  true  Jiillnefs  is,  “ A 
patient  waiting  upon  God,  by  lowlinefs,  meeknefs, 
refgnation,  in  all  the  ways  of  his  holy  law , and 
the  works  of  his  commandments. — But  how  is  it 
pofible  to  reconcile  to  this  the  poftion,  that  thefe 
duties  are  not  conditions  of  our  jufification  ? If 
we  are  ju fifed  without  them,  we  may  be  faved  with- 
out them.- This  confequence  cannot  be  too  often 

repeated." 

Let  it  be  repeated  ever  fo  often,  it  is  good  for 
nothing.  For,  far  other  qualifications  are  re- 
quired, in  order  to  our  flanding  before  God  in 
glory,  than  were  required  in  order  to  his  giving 
us  faith  and  pardon.  In  order  to  this,  nothing 
is  indfpenfably  required,  but  repentance,  or  con- 
viftion  of  fin.  But  in  order  to  the  other  it  is  in- 
difpenfably  required,  that  we  be  fully  cleanfed 
from  all Jin  : that  the  very  God  oj' peace  fan&ify 
us  wholly,  even  to  o^exTwjpon  our  entire  body, 
foul,  and  fpirit.  It  is  not  neceffary  therefore 
(nor  indeed  poffible)  that  wefhould  before  j uni- 
fication, patiently  wait  upon  God,  by  lowlinefs, 

meeknefs , 


$ p.  26,  f p.  26. 


[ 65  ] 

mcekncfs,  and  rejignation,  in  all  the  mays  of  his 
holy  law.  And  yet  it  is  necelTary  in  the  high  eft 
degree,  that  we  iliould  thus  wait  upon  him  after 
juftification.  Otherwife,  how  fhall  we  be  meet  to 
be  partaker  s of  the  inheritance  of  the Joints  in  light  ? 

g.  t Soon  after  you  add,  In  thepajjages  loft 
cited,  you  plead  for  the  necejfty  of  a good  life.  But 
in  others , the  force  of  your  principles  flews  itfe’f. 
— An  anfwer  approved  by  you  is,  “ My  heart  is 
defperately  wicked.  But  I have  no  doubt  or  fear . 

I know  my  Saviour  loves  me  and  I love  him.'' 

Both  thefe particulars  are  impojfible,  ij the  fcripture 
be  true. 

You  amaze  me!  Is  it  poflible  you  fliould  be 
ignorant,  that  your  own  heart  is  defperately  wick- 
ed ? Yet  I dare  not  fay,  either  that  God  does 
not  love  you  ; or  that  you  do  not  love  him. 

§ Again,  You  fay  “ you  defcmbed  the  fate  of 
thofe ( who  have  forgivenefs  oj  fins , but  not  a clean 
_fieart\  (not  in  the  full,  proper  fenfe)  Very  true  : 
but  even  then,  they  had  power  over  both  inward 
and  outward  corruptions  : far  from  being,  as  you 
fuppo  feflill  wedded  to  their  vices,  and  refolvedto 
continue  in  them. 

||  In  another  place , after  having  obferved,  that 
“ Sin  does  remain  in  one  that  is  juftified,  though 
it  has  not  dominion  over  him,”  you  go  on,  “ But 
fear  not,  though  you  have  an  evil  heart ; yet  a lit- 
tle while  and  you  fiall  be  endued  with  power  fr om 

on. 


$ Remarks,  p.  29.  $ p.  30.  (|  p.  31. 


[ 69  ] 


sn  high,  whereby  ye  may  purify  your  fives,  even  as 
he  is  pure.” — Sinners,  if  they  believe  this,  maybe 
quite  fcure , and  imagine  they  have  nothing  to fear, 
though  they  continue  in  their  iniquities. — For  God’s 
Jake,  Sir,  /peak  out. — If  they  that  have  an  evil 
heart  have  not,  who  has  reafon  to  fear  ? — All 
who  have  not  dominion  over  fin  : all  who  con- 
tinue in  their  iniquities.  You,  for  one,  if  any 
fin  has  dominion  over  you.  Iffo,  I teftify  againli 
you  this  day,  (and  you  will  not  be  quite fe.cure, 
if  you  believe  me ) 2 he  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
you  ! 

§ J!  licit  do  you  mean  by  “ Sin  remains  in  one 
that  is  juf  fed  ?”  That  he  is  guilty  of  any  known, 
wilful,  habitual  fn? — Judge  by  what  has  gone 
before — I mean  the.  fame  as  our  church  means, 
by  “ Sin  remains  in  the  regenerate.” 

6.  You  proceed  to  another  paflage,  which  in 
the journal  Hands  thus :t 

Alter  we  had  wandered  many  years,  in  the 
new  path  of  falvation  by  faith  and  works,  about 
two  years  ago  it  pleafed  God,  to  fhew  us  the 
old  way  of  falvation  by  faith  only.  And  many 
foon  tailed  of  this  falvation,  being  jufhined  free- 
ly, having pe.ace  with  God,  rejoicing  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God,  and  having  his  love  £hed 
abroad  in  their  hearts.’’  Thus  I define  what  I 
mean  by  this  falvation,  viz.  righteoufnefs  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Gitoft. 


$ p.  32.  + p.  41, 


But 


[ 7°  3 

But  you  objeft,  § Here  you  deny  the  neceffty  of 
good  works,  in  order  to  falvation  — I deny  the 
necefTity,  nay  poflibility,  of  good  works  as  pre- 
vious to  this  falvation  ; as  previous  to  faith  or 
thofe  fruits  of  faith,  righteoufnefs  and  peace  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghofl:.  This  is  my  real fenii- 
ment,  not  a flip  of  my  pen,  neither  any  proof  of 
my  want  of  accuracy. 

7.  + I Jhall  now,  you  fay,  confder  the  account 
you  give  in  this  journal,  oj  the  doclnne  ofjufifica - 
lion. 

I will  recite  the  whole,  jufl  as  it  ftands,  toge- 
ther with  the  occafion  of  it. 

“ In  ^ the  afternoon  I was  informed,  how 
many  who  cannot,  in  terms,  deny  it — explain 
juftific2tion  by  faith.  They  fay  1.  Juftificatton 
is  twofold ; th c fr/f.  in  this  life,  the  fecond,  at 
the  laft  day.  2.  Both  thefe  are  by  faith  alone , 
that  is,  by  objective  faith,  or  by  the  merits  of 
Chrift  which  are  the  ohjecl  of  our  faith.  And 
this,  they  fay,  is  all  that  Sr.  Paul  and  the  church 
mean  by,  We  are  jufified  by  faith  only.  But  thev 
add,  3.  We  are  not  jollified  by  [ubjeElive  faith 
alone,  that  is,  by  the  faith  which  is  in  us.  But 
good  works  alfo  muff  be  added  to  this  faith,  as  a 
joint  condition  both  of  the firf  and  fcond  fU'dx- 
cation. 

“ In  flat  oppofition  to  this,  I cannot  but  main- 
tain (at  leafl  til!  I have  clearer  light)  1.  That 
the  juflification  which  is  fpoken  of  by  St.  Paid  to 

the 

SP-33-  + Remarks,  p.  30.  t Journal,  p.  16,  17, 


t 71  ] 

?the  Romans,  and  in  our  articles,  is  not  two-fold. 
It  is  one  and  no  more.  It  is  the  prefent  remif- 
fion  of  our  fins,  or  our  firft  acceptance  with 
God.  2.  It  is  true,  that  the  merits  of  Chrill 
are  the  foie  caufe  of  this  our  juftification.  But 
it  is  not  true,  that  this  is  all  which  St.  Paul  and 
our  church  mean,  bv  our  being  juftified  by  faith 
only  : neither  is  it  true,  that  either  St.  Paul  or 
the  church  mean  by  faith,  the  merits  of  Chrill. 
But  3.  Bv  our  being  juftified  by  faith  only,  both 
St.  Paul  and  the  church  mean,  that  the  condi- 
tion of  our  juftification,  is  faith  alone,  and  not 
good  works  : inafmuch  as  all  works  done  before 
juftification,  have  in  them  the  nature  of  fin. 
Lafllv,  That  faith  which  is  the  foie  condition  of 
juftification,  is  the  faith  which  is  wrought  in  us, 
by  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  a fure  trull  which 
a man  hath,  that  Chrill  hath  loved  him  and  died 
for  .him." 

8.  To  the  firft  of  thefe  propofitions  you  ob- 
ject, “ That  § juftification  is  not  only  two-fold, 
but  manifold.  For  a man  may  poflibly  fin  many 
times,  and  as  many  times  be  juftified  or  for- 
given.” 

I grant  it.  I grant  alfo,  that  juftification  fume 
times  means,  a Jlate  of  acceptance  with  God. 
But  all  this,  does  not  in  the  leaft  afFeft  my  after- 
tion,  that  “ that  j unification  which  is  fpoken  of 
by  St.  Paul  to  the  Romans,  and  by  our  church 
in  the  11th,  12th,  and  13th  articles,  is  not  our 

acquittal 


S Remarks,  p.  37,  38,  39. 


[ 72  ] 

acquittal  at  the  lafi  day,  but  the  prefent-reinffftoa  of 
our  fins.” 

You  add,  ||  You  write  in  other  places  fo  varioufy 
about  this  matter,  that  I def pair  to  find  any  coiijif- 
tency.  Once  you  held  “ a degree  of juftfying faith, 
Jhort  of  the  full  affurance  of  faith,  the  abiding  wit- 
nefs  of  the  Spirit,  or  the  clear  perception  that  Chrijl 
abideth  in  him.” — And  yet  you  afterwards  “ learn- 
ed all,  not  to  think  they  were  juflf  cd,  before  they 
had  a clear  afiurance,  I hat  God  had for  given  their 
fins.” — What  difference  there  is  between  this  clear 
afiurance,  and  the  former  full  affurance  and  clear 
perception,  I know  not. 

Let  us  go  on  flep  by  fiep,  and  you  will  know. 
Once  you  held  a “ Degree  of jufiffying faith, fiiori 
f the  full  affurance  of faith , the  abiding  witnefs 
of  the  Spirit,  or  the  clear  perception  that  Chrifi: 
abideth  in  him.'  And  fo  I hold  fiill,  and  have 
done  for  fome  years.  And  yet  you  afterwards 
- warned  all,  not  to  think  they  were  jufiified,  before 
they  had  a clear  affurance  that  God  had  forgiven 
their  fins — I did  fo —What  difference  there  is  be- 
tween this  clear  affurance,  and  that  full  afiurance 
and  clear  perception,  I know  not — Sir,  I will  tell 
you.  The  one  is,  an  affurance  that  my  fins  are 
forgiven,  clear  at  firft,  but  foon  clouded  with 
doubt  or  fear.  The  other  is,  fuch  a plerophorv, 
or  Tall  affurance,  that  I am  forgiven,  and  fo  clear 
a perception,  that  Chrifi  abideth  in  me,  as  ut- 
terly 


II  P-  40- 


. C 73  ] 

tcrly  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear,  and  leaves 
them  no  place,  no  not  for  an  hour.  So  that  the 
difference  between  them  is  as  great  as  the  dif- 
ference between  the  light  of  the  morning  and 
that  of  the  mid-day  fun. 

9.  On  the  fccond  propofition  you  remark, 
That  |f  I ought  to  have  faid,  the  merits  oj  Chriff, 
are  [not  the  (ole  caufe,  but)  the  foie  meritorious 
caufe  of  this  our  jujiifi cation.  2.  That  St. 

Paul  and  the  church,  by  jufifying  faith  mean, 
faith  in  the  gofpel  and  merits  of  Chrift.  The 
very  thing ; fo  I contend,  in  flat  oppofition  to 
thofe,  who  fay  they  mean,  only  the  objebl  of  this 
faith. 

Upon  the  third  propofition,  “ By  our  being 
juflified  by  faith  only,  both  St.  Paul  and  the 
church  mean,  that  the  condition  of  our  justifica- 
tion, is  faith  alone  and  not  good  works:  ” You 
fay,  t Neither  of  them  mean  any  fuch  thing.  You 
greatly  wrong  them,  in  afcribing  fo  mifchievous  o, 
fentiment  to  them.  Let  me  beg  you,  Sir,  to  have 
patience,  and  calmly  to  confider,  1.  "What  I 
mean  by  this  propofition.  Why  fhouid  you  any 
longer  run  as  uncertainly,  and  fight  as  one  that 
beateth  the  air  ? 2.  What  is  advanced  touching 
the  fentiments  of  the  church,  in  the  traft  referred 
to  above.  Till  you  have  done  this,  it  would  be 
mere  lots  of  time  to  difpute  with  vou  on  this 
head. 

VOL.  XV L D I wave 


Remarks,  p.  41. 


t Ibid. 


[ 74  ] 

I wave  therefore,  for  the  prefent,  the  con- 
fideration  of  fome  of  your  following  pages. 
Only  I cannot  quite  pafs  over  that  (I  believe, 
new)  affertion,  i That  the  13 th  article,  intiiled, 

“ Of  Works  done  before  jujlifi cation  ” 

does  not  /peak  of  works  done  before  juflifi  cation, 
but  of  works  before  grace,  which  is  a very  different 
thing  ! I befeech  you,  Sir,  to  confider  the  1 1 th, 
12th,  and  13th  articles,  juft  as  they  he,  in  one 
view.  And  you  cannot  but  fee,  that  it  is  as 
abfolutely  impoffible  to  maintain  that  propofuion, 
as  it  is  to  prove,  that  the  11th  and  12th  ai  tides 
fpeak  not  of  jujlif cation,  but  of  fome  very  different 
thing. 

10.  Againft  that  part  of  the  4th  propofuion, 
« faith  is  a fure  truft  which  a man  hath,  that 
Chrift  loved  him  and  died  for  him  : you  objeQ, 

+ This  definition  is  abfurd  ; as  itfuppofes  that 
fuch  a fure  truft  can  be  in  one  who  does  not  repent 
of  his  fins.— I fuppofe  quite  the  contrary, as  I have 
declared  over  and  over : nor  therefore  is  there 
any  fuch  danger  as  you  apprehend. 

But  you  fay,  |j  There  is  nothing  difinguiftv.r.g 
enough  in  this,  to  point  out  the  true  juffying  faith. 
I errant  it  : fuppofing  a man  were  to  write  a 
hook,  and  fay  this  of  it,  and  no  more.  But  did 
you  ever  fee  any  trealife  of  mine,  wherein  I faid 
this  of- faith,  and  no  more  ? Nothing  whereby  to 

diftingnith 

d p.  45.  + p.  48.  (|  Ibid. 


[ 75  ] 

-diftinguifh  true  faith  from  falfe  ? Touching  this 
journal,  your  own  quotations  prove  the  contrary. 
Yea,  and  I every  where  infill,  that  we  are  to 
dihinguifh  them  by  their  fruits,  by  inward  and 
outward  right  eon  fiefs , by  the  peace  of  God  filling 
and  ruling  the  heart,  and  by  patient,  a£li vejoy 
• in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

You  conclude  this  point.;  t I have  vow,  Sir, 
examined  at  large  your  account  of  juflifi cation  ; 
and  I hope  fully  refuted  the  fevered  articles  in 
which  you  have  comprized  it. — We  differ  in  our 
judgment.  I do  not  apprehend,  you  have  refuted 
any  one  propofition  of  the  four.  You  have 
indeed  amended  the  fecond,  by  adding  the  word 
meritorious-,  for  which  I give  you  thanks. 

it.  You  next  give  what  you  flile  f The 
‘Chriflian  fcheme  of juflrfication,  and  afterwards 
point  out  the  confequenccs,  which  you  appre- 
•herid  to  have  attended  the  preaching  juftincatron 
by  faith  : the  third  point  into  which  I was  to 
inquire. 

You  open  the  caufe  thus  : § The  denying  the 
veceffty  of  good  worts,  as  the  condition  of jufifica- 
<tion,  direElly  draws  after  it,  or  rather  includes  in 
■ it,  all  manner  of  impiety  and  vice  — It  has  often 
fcrlexed  and  difurbed  the  minds  of  men,  and  in  the 
lafl  century  occafoned great  confufions  in  this  nation 
—Tkefe  are  points  which  are  tver  liable  to  mif- 
■c-onflruTlio  ns,  and  have  tver  yet.  been  more  or  lefs 
-attended  with  them.  And  it  appears  from  what 
D 2 you 

t p.  49.  t p.  so.  § p.  1,  a. 


[ 76  ] 

you  have  lately  publijked,  that  fince  you  have 
preached  the  doctrine , it  has  had  its  old  confe- 
queue es , or  rather  worfe  ones:  it  has  been  more 
mifunderjlood , more  perverted  and  abufed  than 
ever. 

The  denying  the  necejfty  of  good  worls , as  the 
condition  oj jiff  cation,  draws  after  it , or  rather 
includes  in  it , all  manner  of  impiety  and  vice. 
Here  {lands  the  propofition  : but  where  is  the 
proof  ? Til!  that  appears,  I Amply, fay,  It  does  not. 

It  has  often  perplexed  and  dijlurbed  the  minds  cf 
men.  And  fo  have  many  other  points  in  St. 
Fault,  epiftles. 

But  thefe  are  points  which  are  ever  liable  to  mif 
conf  millions,  and  have  ever  yet,  more  or  lefs,  been 
attended  with  them — And  what  points  of  revealed 
religion  are  thofe,  which  are  not  ever  liable  to  mif  • 
coultruflions  ? Or  of  what  material  point  can  we 
fay,  that  it  has  not  ever  yet,  more  or  lefs,  been 
attended  with  them  ? 

In  the  la/)  century  it  occafioned  great  confufions 
in  this  nation — It  occafioned  ! No  : in  no  wife. 
It  is  demonllrable,  the  occafions  of  thofe  confu- 
fions were  quite  of  another  kind. 

And  it  appears — That  fince  you  have  pr  eached 
the  doBrine,  it  has  had  its  old  con/equences,  or  ra- 
ther worfe.  It  has  been  more  mifunderfood,  more 
perverted  and  abufed  than  ever — What  ! Worfe 
confequences  than  regicide,  (which  you  fay,  was 
the  old  one)  and  making  our  whole  land  a held 
of  blood?  Or  has  it  been  more  perverted  and 

abb  fed, 


[ 77  J 

abufed,  than  when  (in  your  account]  it  over- 
turned the  whole  frame  both  of  church  and  hate  ? 

12.  You  go  on.  § The  terms  of  the  gofpel  are , 
repentance  toward  God,  andfaith  tozuarcl  our  Lord 
Jefus  Gkrijl. — But  when  we  undervalue  either 
oj  thefe  terms,  zue  involve  the  confaences  of 
the  weak  in  fatal  perplexities  ; we  give  a handle  to 
others  to  jufify  their  impieties ; zve  confirm  the  ene- 
mies of  religion  in  their  prejudices. 

All  this  I grant.  But  it  affe&s  not  me.  For  I 
do  not  undervalue  either  faith  or  repentance. 

f Was  not  ir  religion  and  vice  already  prevailing 
enough  in  the  nation,  hut  we  mujl — throwfnares  in 
peopled  way,  and  root  out  the  remains  of  piety  and 
devotion,  in  the  weak  and,  well-meaning  ? That  this 
has  been  the  cafe,  your  own  confeffions  put  beyond 
all  doubt.  And  you  even  nozo  hold  and  teach  the 
principles, from  which  thefe  dangerous  confequences 
do  plainly  and  direElly  follow. 

Was  not  irreligion  and  vice  already  prevailing 
enough  (whether  I have  increafed  them,  we  will 
confider  by  and  by) — but  we  mufl  throw fnares  in 
people's  way — God  forbid  ! My  whole  life  is  em- 
ployed in  taking  thofe  fnares  out  of  people’s 
way,  which  the  wot  Id  and  the  devil  have  thrown 
there — And  root  out  the  remains  of  piety  and  devo- 
tion in  the  weak  and  well-mcarnng~Y~QiL  whom 
fpeaketh  the  prophet  this?  Of  bimfelf  ? Or  tjf 
fome  other  man  ? — Your  own  (onfefions  put  this 
beyond  all  doubt — What  ? That  I root  cut  the  re- 
D 3 mains 

§ Remarks,  p,  2. 


+ P-  3- 


[ 7.8  ]. 

mains  of  piety  and  devotion ? Not  fo.  The  fun: 
of  them  all  (recited  above)  amounts  to  this  and 
no  more  : “ That  while  my  brother  and  I were 
abfenc  from  London,  many  weak  men  were  taint- 
ed with  wrong  opinions : mod  of  whom  we  re- 
covered at  our  return  : but  even  thofe  who  con- 
tinued therein,  did  notwithflanding  continue  to 
live  a holier  life,  than  ever  they  did  before  they 
heard  us  preach.  — And  you . even  now  hold  the 
principles  from  which  theje  dangerous  confe- 
quences do  plainly  and  dir  eBly  follow — But  I know 
not  where  to  find  thcTe  confequences — Unlefs  it 
be  in  your  title-page:  there  indeed  I read  of  the 
very  fatal  tendency  of  juffification  by  faith  only, 
the  divifions  and  perplexities  of  the  Methodifts,  and 
the  many  errors  relating  both  to  faith  and pradhce, 
which  (as  you  conceive)  have  already  arijtn  among 
t'h'efe  deluded  people. 

However  + you  charitably  believe,  I was  not 
aware  of  theft  confequences  atfirfl.  No,  noram 
I yet : though  his  ftrange  I fhould  not,  if  they 
fo  naturally  fuccecd that  doBrine.  I will  go  a flep 
farther.  I do  not  know,  neither  believe,  that 
they  ever  did  fucceed  that  doBrine:  unlefs  per- 
haps accidentally,  as  they  might  have  fucceeded 
any  doBrine  whatfoever.  And  till  the  contrary 
is  proved,  thofe  confequences  cannot  Jhew,  that 
theje  principles  are  not  true. 

13.  Another  confequence  which  you  charge 
©n  mv  preaching  juftification  by  faith,  is,  the  in- 
troducing 


\ Remarks,  p.  4. 


[ 7'9  ] 

{reducing  the  errors  of  the  Moravians.  J Had 
the  people,  fay  you,  gone  on  in  a quiet  and  regular 
pradice  of  their  duty,  as  moft  of  them  did  before 
you  deluded  them,  it  zuould  have  been  impoffible  for 
the  Moravian  tenets  to  have  prevailed  among  them. 

• — But  vihen  the\  had  been  long  and  often  ufed  to 
hear  good  works  undervalued — I cannot  wonder — 
that  they  fiould plunge  into  new  errors — and  wax 
worfeand  zvorfe. 

This  is  one  firing  of  miflakes.  Had  the  people 
gone  on  in  a quiet  and  regular  pratlice  of  their 
duty,  as  mof  of  them  aid  before  you  deluded  them 
— Deluded  them  ! Into  what  ? Into  the  love  of 
God  and  all  mankind,  and  a zealous  care  to  keep 
his  commandments.  I would  to  God  this  delu- 
fion  (if  fuch  it  is  accounted)  may  fpread  to  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth  ! Eat  how  did  moft  of 
them  go  on,  before  they  were  thus  deluded  ? 
Four  in  five,  by  a moderate  computation,  evert 
as  other  baptized  Heathens ; in  the  works  of  the 
devil,  in  all  the'  wretchednefs  of  unclean  living 
— In  a quiet  and  regular  praElice  of  their  duty  ! — 
What  duty  ? The  duty  of  curling  and  fwearing  ? 
The  duty  of  gluttony  and  drunkennefs  ? The 
duty  of  whoredom  and  adultery?  Or  of  beating 
one  another,  and  any  that  came  in  their  way  ? 
In  this,  (not  very  quiet  or  regular)  praElice,  did 
mof  of  thofe  go  on  before  they  heard  us,  who  have 
now  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  are 
holy  in  all  manner  of  converfation. 

D 4 

t Remarks,  p.  12, 


Have 


J 


[ So 

Have  thefe,  think  you,  been  long  and  often 
fed  to  hear  good  works  undervalued?  Or,  are 
they  prepared  for  receiving  the  Moravian  errors, 
by  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God  ? O Sir,  the 
Moravians  know,  if  you  do  not,  that  there  is  no 
fuch  barrier  under  heaven  againfl  their  tenets,  as 
thofe  very  people,  whom  you  fuppofe  juft  prepar- 
ed for  receiving  them. 

But  complaints  (you  fay)  of  their  errors,  come 
very  ill from  you,  becavfe you  have  occafoned  them. 
Nay,  if  it  were  fo,  for  that  very  caufe  they  ought 
to  come  from  me.  If  I had  occafoned  an  evil, 
furely  I am  the  very  perfon,  who  ought  to  re- 
move it  as  far  as  I can  : to  recover,  if  poffible, 
thofe  who  are  hurt  already,  and  to  caution  others 
againft  it. 

34.  On  fome  of  thofe  complaints  (as  you  term 
them)  you  remark  as  follows : + “ Many  of  thofe  who 
once  knew  in  whom  they  had  believed  (thefe  are  mr 
words)  were  thrown  into  idle  reafonings,  and  there- 
by filled  with  doubts  and fears."  This,  you  add, 

it  is  be  feared , has  been  too  much  the  cafe  of  the 
Metbodifts  in  general. — Accordingly  we  find  in 
this  journal,  fiveral  infiances  net  barely  of  doubts 
and  fears,  but  of  the  mcjl  defperaledefpair . This 
is  the  confequence  of  refiing  fo  much  on  fenfible  i;n~ 
preffions. — • — Bad  men  may  be  led  into  prefumption 
thereby : an  infiance  of  which  you  give,  p.  66. 

That  inftance  will  come  in  our  way  again. 
Many  of  thofe  who  once  knew  in  whom  they  had  be- 
lieved. 


•f  Remarks,  p.  13. 


[ 8i  ] 

lieved,  were  thrown  (by  the  Antinomans ) into  idle 
reafonings , and  thereby  filled  with  doubts  and fears. 
This,  you  fear,  has  been  the  cafe  with  the  Metho- 
difts  in  general.  You  mull  mean  (to  make  it  a 
parallel  cafe)  “ That  the  generality  of  the  people, 
now  termed  Methodifts,  were  true  believers  till 
they  heard  us  preach ; but  were  thereby  thrown 
into  idle  reafonings,  and filled  with  needlefs  doubts 
and fiears.”  Exaftly  contrary  to  truth  in  every 
particular.  For  1.  They  lived  in  open  fins  till 
they  heard  us  preach,  and  confequencly  were  no 
better  believers  than  their  father,  the  devil.  2. 
They  were  not  then  thrown  into  idle  reafonings , 
but  into  ferrous  thought , how  to  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come.  Nor  3.,  were  they  filled  with 
needlefs  doubts  and fears  ; but  with  fuch  as  were 
needful  in  the  highelt  degree  : fuch  as  abfually 
iffued  in  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  in. 
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifi. 

Accordingly  we  find  in  this  journal  fever al  in- 
fiances,  of  the.mofi  defperate  defy  air  : page  24. 
36.  63. 

Then  I am  greatly  miftakem  _ But  I will  fet 
down  at  length  the  feveral  inftances  you  refer  to. 

Pag.  24,  “ I was  a little  furprifedin  going  out 
of  the  room,  at  one  who  catched  hold  of  me, 
and  faid  abruptly,  “ I mull  fpeak  with  you  and 
will.  I have  finned  againll  light  and  again!!: 
love.”  (N.  B.  She  was  foon  after,  if  not  at  that 
very  time,  a common  proflitute)  “ I have  finned 
beyond  forgivenefs.  ■ I have  been  curfing  you  in 
0^5  my 


[ *2  ] 

my  heart,  and  blafpheming  God,  ever  fince  I 
came  here.  I am  damned.  I know  it.  I feel 
it.  I am  in  hell.  I have  hell  in  my  heart."  I 
defired  two  or  three  who  had  confidence  in  God, 
to  join  in  crying  to  him  on  her  behalf.  Imme- 
diately that  horrible  dread  was  taken  away,  and 
file  began  to  fee  fome  dawnings  of  hope." 

Pag.  38.  “ The  attention  of  all  wasfoon  fixed, 

on  poor  L S . One  fo  violently  and 

varioufiy  torn  of  the  evil  one,  did  I never  fee 
before.  Sometimes,  fire  laughed  till  almofi 
Srangled ; and  then  broke  out  into  curfing  and 
blafpheming  ; then  fiamped  and  flruggled  with 
incredible  firength,  fo  that  four  or  five  could 
fcarce  hold  her  : then  cried  out,  “ O eternity  ! 
eternity  ! O that  I had  no  foul  1 O that  1 had 
never  been  born  !”  At  lafi  fhe  faintly  called  on 
Chrift  to  help  her.  And  the  violence  of  her 
pangs  ceafed.” 

(It  fliould  be  remembered,  that  from  that  time 
to  this,  her  converfation  has  been  as  becometh. 
the  gofpel.) 

Pag.  63.  ThurJJ.  Dec.  25.  “ I met  with  fuch  a 
cafe  as  I do  not  remember  either  to  have  known 

or  heard  of  before.  L S (the  fame 

perfon)  after  many  years  of  mourning  (long  be- 
fore fire  heard  of  its)  was  filled  with  peace  and 
joy  in  believing.  I11  the  midft  of  this,  without 
any  difcernable  caufe,  fuch  a cloud  fuddenly 
overwhelmed  her,  that  fire  could  not  believe  her 
fins  were  ever  forgiven  at  all,  nor  that  there 


was 


C g3  1 

was  any.  fuch  thing  as  forgivenefs  of  fins.  She 
could  not  believe,  that  the  fcriptures  were  true, 
that  there  was  any  heaven,  or  hell,  or  angel,  or 
fpirit,  or  any  God.  One  more  I have  lince 
found  in  the  fame  Hate.  (But  obferve,  neither 
of  thefe  continued  therein:  nor  did  I ever  know 
one  that  did.)  So  fure  it  is,  that  all  faith  is  the 
gift  of  God,  which  the  moment  he  withdraws, 
the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  will  poifoa  the  whole 
foul,’’ 

Which  of  thefe  is  an  injlance  of  the  moji  defpe - 
rate  dej'pair  ? Surely  the  moji  dejperate  of  any, 
yea,  the  only  one  which  is  properly  faid  to  be 
defperate  at  all,  is  that  which  produces  inftant 
felf-murder  : which  caufes  a poor  wretch,  by  a 
fin  which  he  cannot  repent  of,  to  rufh  llrait 
through  death  into  hell.  But  that  was  not  the 
cafe  in  any  of  thefe  infiances  ; in  all  which  we 
have  already  feen  the  end  of  the  Lord. 

ig.  That  I raife  feparate  + focieties  agairfl  the 
church,  is  a charge  which  I need  not  examine 
till  the  evidence  is  produced.  You  next  cite  a 
Moravian's  words  to  me  (an  Engl f man  joined 
with  the  Moravians ) You  have  eyes full oj  adultery , 
and  cannot  ceafe  f rom  Jm ; you  take  upon  you  to 
guide  unftable  fouls , and  lead  them  in  the  way  of 
damnation : and  remark,  This  is  only  returning 
fome  of  your  own  treatment  upon  yourfelf  Here 
afoyou Jet  the  pattern.  At  what  time  and  place  ? 
When  and  where  were  fuch  abufes  as  thefe  thrown tv 
D 6 out 

7 Remarks,  p,  14,. 


1 h 3 

out  by  me,  againjl  our  univerfities , and  agamfl  our 
regular  clergy , not  the  kighefl  cr  the  worthiejl  ex- 
cepted? I am  altogether  clear  in  this  matter,  a* 
oiten  as  it 'has  been  c:  jefTted  : neither  do  I defire 
to  receive  any  other  treatment  from  the  clergy, 
than  they  have  received  from  me  to  this  day. 

You  have  a note  at  the  bottom  of  this  page 
which  runs  thus:  fee  page  71,  77,  and  73,  where 
fome  Methodilfs  faid,  they  had  heard  both  your 
brother  and  you  many  tunes  preach  popery. 

I am  afraid,  you  advance  here  a wilful  untruth, 
purely  ad  movendam  invidiam.  For  you  cannot 
but  know,  1.  That  there  is  not  one  word  of 
preaching  popery,  either  in  the  71ft  or  77th  page: 
and,  2.  That  when  Mr.  C.  and  two  other predejii- 
narians  (as  is  related,  p.  73)  affirmed,  They  had 
heard  both  my  brother  and  me  many  times  preach 
popery,  they  meant  neither  more  nor  lefs  thereby, 
than  the  doftrine  of  univerjal  redemption. 

16.  You  proceed,  t Kingfwood  you  call  your 
own  houfe.  And  when  one  Mr.  C.  oppofed  you 
there,  you  reply  to  him , “ You  jhould  not  have  J'up- 
planted  me  in  my  own  houfe,  f eating  the  hearts 
of  the  people — The  parochial  clergy  may  call  their 
feveral  dijlr ids  their  own  houfes,  with  much  more 
propriety  than  you  could  call  Kingfwood  yours. 
And  yd  how  have  you  fupplanted  them  therein,  ana 
laboured  to  feal  the  hearts  of  the  people — You  have 
fujfe red  by  the  fame  ways  you  took  to  difeharge your 
fpleen  and  malice  againf  your  brethren. 

Your 

+ Remarks,,  p.  i£. 


[ ®5  ] 

Your  brother  s words  to  Mr.  C.  are — “ Whether 
kis  do  [trine  is  true  or  jalfe  is  not  the  quejlion . 
But  you  ought firf  to  have  fairly  told  him , “I preach 
contrary  to  you.  Are  you  willing  notwith funding , 
that  I Jhould  continue  in  your  houfe,  gain  faying 
you?"  Shall  I fay  here  oppojing  you,  or  fall  I de- 
part ? — Think  you  hear  this  fpoken  to  you  by  us — 
What  can  you  jufly  reply  ? — Again,  if  Mr.  C. 
had  faid  thus  to  you , and  you  had  refufed  him 
leave  to  fay  ; I af  you , whether  in  fuch  a cafe  he 
would  have  had  reafon  to  refent  fuch  a refufal?  I 
think  you  cannot  fay  he  would.  And  yet  how 
loudly  have  you  ohjedled  our  r fufing  our  pulpits  to 
you  ! 

So  you  judge  thefe  to  be  exactly  parallel  cafes. 
It  lies  therefore  upon  me  to  fhew,  that  they  are 
not  parallel  at  all:  that  there  isr  in  many  refpe£tsa 
an  effential  difference  between  them. 

1.  Kingswood  you  call  your  own  houfe.  So  I 
do,  that  is,  the  fchool-houfe  there..  For  I bought 
the  ground  where  it  hands,  and  paid  for  the 
building  if,  partly  from  the  contribution  of  my 
friends  (one  of  whom  contributed  fifty  poundsj 
partly  from  the  income  of  my  own  fellowfhip. 
No  clergyman  therefore  can  call  his  parifh  his 
own  houfe,  with  more  propriety  than  I can  call  this 
houfe  mine. 

2.  Mr.  C.  oppofed you  there.  True  : but  who 
was  Mr.  C.  ? One  I had  fent  for,  to  ajff  me 
there ; a friend  that  was  as  my  own  foul ; that 
even  while  he  oppofed  me,  lay  in  my  bofom. 
What  refemblance  then  does  Mr.  C.  thus  oppof- 


C 86  ] 

ing  me  bear,  to  7ne  oppofing  (if  I really  did)  a 
parochial  minijler  ? 

3.  You  Jaid  to  Mr.  C.  “ You  fhoulcl  not  have 
fupplanted  me  in  my  own  houfe,  jlealing  the  hearts 

oj  the  people.  Yet  you  have  fupplanted  the  clergy  in, 
their  own  houfes ” — What  in  the  fame  manner  as 
Mr.  C.  did  me?  Have  I done  to  any  of  them,  as 
he  has  done  to  me?  You  may  as  juftly  fay,  I 
have  cut  their  throats  ! — Stealing  the  hearts  of 

their  people Nor  are  thefe  their  people  in  the 

JameJenfe  wherein  thofewer zmine,  viz.  Servants 
of  the  devil  brought  through  my  miniflry,  to  be 
fervants  and  children  of  God. — You  havefujfered 
by  the  fame  ways  you  took  to  difeharge  your  fuleen 
and  malice  againf  your-  brethren — To  difeharge 
your  fplecn.  and  malice ! Say,  your  mufkets  and 
bkmderbuffes.  I have  jufl  as  much  to  do  with 
one  as  the  other. 

4.  Your  brother  /aid  to  Mr.  C.  “ You  ought  to 
]Lave  told  my.  brother  fairly , I preach  contrary  to 
you.  Are  you  willing  I Jho.uld  continue  in  your 
houfe , gain  faying  you  ? Shall  I fay  here  oppofing 
you,  or  fiall  I depart  ?”  Think  you  hear  this  fpoken 
to  you  by  us — What  can  you  jujlly  reply  ? — I can 
juftly  reply,  “ Sir,  Mr.  C.’s  cafe  totally  differs 
from  yours.  Therefore  it  makes  abfolutely  no- 
thing to  your  purpofe.” 

17.  A farther  confequence  (von  think)  of  my 
preaching  this  doflrine,  is  the  i introducing  that 
of  abfolute  predefinatlon.  And  whenever  thefe 
errors,  fay  you,  gain  ground , there  can  be  no  won- 
der. 


+ Remarks,  p.  52. 


[ 8;  ] 

der,  that  confujion,  prefumption  and  defpair,  many 
very  Jliocking  infiances  of  all  which  you  give  us 
among  your  followers,  Jhould  be  the  confequences. — 
You  fhould  by  all  means  have  fpecified  a few  of 
thofe  infiances,  or  at  leafl,  the  pages  where  they 
occur.  Till  this  is  done,  I can  look  upon  this 
affection,  as,  no  other  than  a flourifh  of  your, 
pen. 

To  conclude,  this  head.  You  roundly  affirm-, 
once  for  all,  j The  grojjeji  corruptions  have  ever 
followed  the  [proofing  of  this  tenet.  The  greatef 
heats  and  ampiofties  have  been  raifed  thereby.  The 
widejl  errors  have  been,  thus,  occafoned.  And  in 
proportion  to  its  getting  ground,  it  has  never  failed 
— to  perplex  the  weak , to  harden  the  wicked , and  to 
pleaje  the prophane,.  Your  journal  is  a proof  that 
thefe  terrible  confequences  have.  of.  late  prevailed, 

perhaps  more  than  ever. -Suppofe  that  journal 

gives  a true  account  of  faffs  (which  you  feem 
not  to  deny)  could  you  find  there  no  other  fruits 
of  my  preaching,  than  thefe  terrible  ones  year 
here  mention  ! 

“ O who  fo  blind,  as  he  that  will  not  fee  ?” 

18.  But  that  we  may  not  ffill  talk  at  large,  let 
us  bring  this  queffion,  into  as  narrow  a compafs 
as  poffible.  Let  us  go  no  farther,  as  to  time, 
than  feven  years  lafl  part  ; as  to  place,  than  Lon- 
don and  the  parts  adjoining:  as  to  perfons,  than 
you  and  me,  Thomas  Church  preaching  one  doc- 
trine, 


} p.  51. 


[ 88  ] 

trine,  John  Wefley  the  other.  Now  then  let  us 
confider  with  meeknefs  and  fear,  what  have  been 
the  confequences  of  each  dbftrine  ? 

# You  have  preached  jujlif cation  by  faith  and 
works , at  Batterjea  and  St.  Anns,  Wejlminfer ; 
while  I preached  jufification  by  faith  alont,  near 
Moorfelds,  and  at  Short's  Gardens.  I befeech 
you  then  to  confider,  in  the  fecret  of  your  heart, 
how  many  finners  have  you  converted  to  God  ? 
By  their  fruits  we  fhall  know  them.  This  is  a 
plain  rule.  By  this  teff  let  them  be  tried.  How 
many  outwardly  and  habitually  wicked  men, 
have  you  brought  to  uniform  habits  of  outward 
holinefs  ? ’Tis  an  awful  thought!  Can  you  in- 
ftance  in  a hundred  ? In  fifty  ? In  twenty  ? In 
ten  ? — If  not,  take  heed  unto  yourfelf  and  to 
your  doftrine.  It  cannot  be,  that  both  are  right 
before  God. 

* Confider  now  (I  would  not  fpeak  ; but  I dare 
not  refrain)  what  have  been  the  confequences  of 
even  my  preaching  the  other  doftrine  ? By  the 
fruits  fhall  we  know  thofe  of  whom  I fpeak  : even 
the  cloud  of  witneffes,  who  at  this  hour  experi- 
ence the  gofpel  I preach,  to  be  the  power  of  God 
unto  falvation.  The  habitual  drunkard,  that  was, 
is  now  temperate  in  all  things.  The  whoremon- 
ger, now  flees  fornication.  He  that  Hole,  fleals 
no  more,  but  works  with  his  hands.  He  that 
curfed  or  fwore,  perhaps  at  every  lentence,  has 
now  learned  to  ferve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and 
rejoice  unto  him  with  reverence.  Thofe  for- 
merly 


[ % J 

merly  inflaved  to  various  habits  of  fin,  are  now 
brought  to  uniform  habits  ofbolinefs.  Thefe  are 
demonftrable  facts;  I can  name  the  men,  with 
their  feveraf  places  of  abode.  One  of  them  was 
an  avowed  Atluifl  for  many  years  ; forae  were 
Jews-,  a confiderable  number  Papijls : the  great- 
eft  part  of  them  as  much  ftrangers  to  the  form, 
as  to  the  power  ofgodlinefs. 

When  you  have  weighed  thefe  things  touching, 
the  confequences  of  my  preaching , on  the  on« 
hand,  (Tomewhat  different  from  thofe  fet  down 
in  your  remarks)  and  of  your  preaching  on  the 
other,  I would  earneftly  recommend  the  follow- 
ing words  to  yourdeepeft  coufideration  : Beware 
offalfe prophets;  ye Jhall  know  them  by  their  fruits. 
Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  fgs  of  tkijlles  f 
Even  fo  every  good  tree  (every  true  prophet  or 
teacher)  bringeth  forth  good  fruit — Every  tret 
that  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit,,  is  hewn  down, 
and  caft  into  the fire  ? + 

III.  l.  Having  fpoken  more  largely  than  I d«- 
figned,  on  the  principle  I hold  in  common  with  the 
Moravians,  I fhall  touch  very  briefly  on  + thoft 
errors  (fo  called)  which,  you  fay,  I hold,  more 
than  theirs. 

“ You  name,  as  the  firft,  my  holding,  “ that 
a § man  may  have  a degree  of  juftifying  faith, 
before  he  has,  in  the  full,  proper  fenfe,  a new 
a clean  heart.” 

I have 

+ Matt,  vi:  15,  &c,  f § Remarks,  p. 


[ s°  J 

1 have  fo  often  explained  this,  that  I cannot 
throw  away  time  in  adding  any  more  now  : only 
this,  That  the  moment  a finner  is  juflified,  his 
heart  is  cieanfed'in  a low  degree.  But  yet  he  lias 
not  a clean  heart , in  \\iefull,  proper  fenfe,  till  he 
is  made  perfect  in  love, 

2.  Another  error  you  mention,  is  this  |j  doBrine 
of  perfeBion.  To  fave  you  from  a continued 
ignoratio  elenchi,  I wave  difputing  on  this  point 
alfo,  til!  you  are  better  acquainted  with  my  real 
fentiments.  I have  declared  them  on  that  head 
again  and  again  ; particularly  in  the  fermon  on 
Chrifliar,  PerfeBion. 

3.  Into  this  fallacy  you  plunge  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end  of  what  you  {peak  on  my  third 
error  (fo  you  term  it)  relating  to  the  Lord's 
[upper-,  confuting,  as  mine,  t notions  which  I 
know  not.  I cannot  think  any  farther  anfwer  is 
needful  here,  than  the  bare  recital  of  my  own 
words. 

J “ F rid.  June  27.  I preached  on,  Do  this  in 
remembrance  of  me. 

“ It  has  been  diligently  taught  among  us,  that 

0/0  O' 

none  but  thofe  who  are  converted,  who  have  re- 
ceived the  Holy  Ghofi,  who  are  believers  in  the  full 
fenfe,  ought  t©  communicate. 

“ But  experience  lliews  the  grofs  falfhood  of 
that  afiertion,  That  the  Lord's  fupper  is  not  a 
converting  ordinance.  Ye  are  witnefles.  For 
many  now  prefent  knew,  the  very  beginning  of 

your 

8 p.  60.  + Remarks,  p.  56:57.  :£  Journal,  p.  46,  47. 


C p-  ] 

your  converjion  to  God,  (perhaps,  in  fome  the’ 
firft  deep  conviction)  was  brought  at  the  Lord’s 
fupper.  Now  one  fingle  indance  of  this  kind,- 
overthrows  that  whole  adertion. 

“ The  falfnood  of  the  other  adertion  appears 
both  from  fcripture — precept  and  example.  Our’ 
Lord  commanded  thofe  very  men  who  were  then 
unconverted , who  had  not  yet  received  the  Holy 
Ghoji,  who  (in  the  full  fenfe  of  the  word)  were 
not  believers , to  do  this  in  remembrance  oj  him. 
Here  the  precept  is  clear.  And  to  thefe  he  deli- 
vered the  elements  with  his  own  hands.  Here 
is  example  equally  indifputable. 

“ Sat.  28.  I fhewed  at  lame,  1.  That  the  Lord’? 
fupper  was  ordained  by  God,  to  be  a ?neans  of 
conveying  to  men,  either  preventing,  or  jiiflfying7 
or  fanClifying  grace , according  to  their  fieveral 
neceffities.  2.  That  the  perfons  for  whom  it  was 
ordained,  are  all  thofe  who  know  and  feel  that 
they  want  the  grace  of  God,  either  to  refrain 
them  from  fin,  or  to  ftiew  their  fins  forgiven , or 
to  renew  their  fouls  in  the  image  of  God.  3. 
That  inafmuch  as  we  come  to  his  table,  not  to 
give  him  any  thing,  but  to  receive  whatfoever  he 
fees  bed  for  us,  there  is  no  previous  preparation 
indifpenfably  necedary ; but  a define  to  receive 
whatfoever  he  pleafes  to  give.  And  4.  That  no 
fitnefs  is  required  at  the  time  of  communicating, 
but  a fenfe  oj  our  fate,  of  our  utter  finfulnefs  and 
helplefifnefs : every  one  who  knows  he  is  fit for 

lull , 


[ 92 

hell,  beingjufly/?/  to  come  to  CHrift,  in  this  as  well 
as  all  other  ways  of  his  appointment.” 

4- 1 A Jloical  infenfbihty,  you  add,  is  the  next 
error  I have  to  charge  you  with.  You  fay , “ The 
fervants  of  God  fuffer  nothing  f and  fuppofe,  that 
we  ought  to  be  here fo  free,  as  in  the Jlrongef  pain, 
not  once  to  defire  to  have  a moment's  cafe . 

At  the  end  of  one  of  your  hymns,  you  feem  to  carry 
this  notion  to  the  very  height  of  extravagance  and 
prefumpticn.  You  fay, 

“ Doom,  if  thou  canft,  to  endlefs  pains, 

“ And  drive  me  from  thy  face.” 

A foical  inferfibility  is  the  next  error  I have  t* 
charge  you  with — And  how  do  you  fupport  the 
charge  ? Why  thus — You  fay  i “ The fervants  of 
God  fuffer  nothing And  can  you  poffibly  mif- 
underftand  thefe  words,  if  you  read  thofe  that 
immediately  follow  ? “ His  body  was  well  nigh 
torn  afunder  with  pain.  But  God  made  all  his 
bed  in  his  ficknefs.  So  that  he  was  continually 
giving  thanks  to  God,  and  making  his  boall  of 
his  praife.” 

You  fuppofe,  we  ought  to  be  fo  free,  as  in  the 
Jlrongefl  pain,  not  once  to  defire  to  have  a moment’s 
caf — O Sir,  with  what  eyes  did  you  read  thofe 
words  P 

§ “ I dined  with  one  who  told  me  in  all  fimpli- 
»ity,  Sir,  1 thought  laft  week,  there  could  be  no 

fuch 

+ .Remarks,  p.  58.  $ Journal,  p.  59.  $ P-51- 


[ 93  ] 


fuch  reft  as  you  defcribe ; none  in  this  world, 
wherein  we  fhould  be  fo  free,  as  not  to  defire  eafe 
in  pain.  But  God  has  taught  me  better : for  on 
Friday  and  Saturday , when  I was  in  the  ftrongeft 
pain,  I never  once  had  one  moment’s  defire  of 
eafe,  but  only  that  the  will  of  God  might  be 
done.”  Do  I fay  here,  that  we  ought  not,  in  the 
JlrongeJl  pain,  once  to  dejire  to  have  a moment's 
eafe? — What  a frightful  diftortion  of  my  words 
is  this  ? What  I fay  is,  “ A ferious  perfon  af- 
firmed to  me,  that  God  kept  her  for  two  days  in 
fuch  a Hate.”  And  why  not  ? Where  is  the  ab- 
furdity  ? 

At  the  end  of  one  of  your  hymns,  you  feem  to  car- 
ry this  notion,  to  the  very  height  of  extravagancy 
and pr  efumption.  You  Jay, 

“ Doom,  if  thou  canft,  to  endlefs  pains, 

“ And  drive  me  from  thy  face.” 

“ If  thou  canft” i.  e.  If  thou  canji  deny  thy- 

felf,  if  thou  canfz  forget  to  be  gracious,  if  thou 
canft  ceafe  to  be  truth  and  love.  So  the  lines  both 
preceding  and  following  fix  the  fenfe.  I fee 
nothing  of  ftoical  infnfhihty,  neither  of  extrava- 
gancy ox  pr  efumption  in  this. 

g.  Your  laft  charge  is,  that  I am  guilty  of  en- 
thufufm  to  the  higheft  degree . f Enthufiafm  (you 
fay)  is  a fafc  ptrfuafon  of  an  extraordinary  divine 
affiance,  which  leads  men  onto  fuch  conduit  as 

is 


+ Remarks,  p.  Go.  61. 


[ 9A  ] 

-t is  only  to  be jufifed  by  the  fuppofition  of  fuch  aff- 
iance  An  enthufaf  is  then  fincere , but  mi  flake  n. 

His  intentions  are  good — but  his  aflions  mof  abo- 
minable. Inflead  of  making  the  word  God  the 
rule  of  his  aclions,  he  follows  only  thatfecret  im - 
pulfe  which  is  owing  to  a vmrm  imagination — 
Infead  of  judging  of  his  fpiritual  ejlate  by  the  im- 
provement of  his  heart,  he  refs  only  on  extacies, 
&c.  He  is  very  liable  to  err,  as  not  conji dering 
things  coolly  and  carefully.  He  is  very  difficult 
to  be  convinced,  by  reafon  and  argument,  as  he 
acls  upon  a fuppofed  principle  fuperior  to  it,  the 
-direBions  of  God's  Spirit.  IVhoever  oppofes  him 
is  charged  with  rejecting  the  Spirit.  His  own 
dreams  muff  be  regarded  as  oracles. — Whatever  he 
does,  is  to  be  accounted  the  work  of  God.  Hence 
he  talks  in  the  file  of  infpired  perfons : and  ap- 
plies Jiripture phrafes  to  himfelf  without  attending 
to  their  original  meaning,  or  once  confidtnng  the 
difference  of  times  and  cir  cumflances. 

You  have  drawn,  Sir,  (in  the  main)  a true 
pifture  of  an  enthufiafi.  But  it  is  no  more  like 
■me,  than  I am  like  a centaur.  Yet  you  fay  they 
are  thefe  very  tilings  which  have  been  charged 
upon  you,  and  which  you  could  never  yet  df prove  : 

I will  try  for  once  ; and  to  that  end,  will  go  over 
thefe  articles,  one  by  one. 

Enthufiafin  is,  a falfe  perfiafion  of  an  extraor- 
dinary divine  affifance,  which  leads  men  on  to  fuch 
conduB  as  is  only  to  be  jvfifed  by  the  fippofion 
of fuch  affiance — Before  this  touches  me,  yon 

are 


I 95  -] 

rare  to  prove  (which  I conceive  you  have  not 
done  yet)  that  my  conduft  is  fucb,  as  is  only  to 
be juftified  by  the  fuppofition  of  an  extraordinary 
divine  aftiftance.  An  enthujiaji  is  then  fine  ere, 
hut  mifaken,  that  I am  miftaken  remains  alfo  to 

be  proved- His  intentions  are  good ; but  his 

all  ions  mojl  abominable.  Sometimes  they  are; 
yet  not  always.  For  there  may  be  innocent  mad- 
men. But  what  actions  of  mine  are  mojl  abomi- 
nable? I wait  to  learn.  Infead  oj making  the 
word  cj  God  the  rule  of  his  ablions,  he  follows 

only  his  fer.ret  impulfe. In  the  whole  compafs 

of  language,  there  is  not  a propofition  which 
kfs  belongs  to  me  than  this.  I have  declared 
again  and  again,  that  I make  the  word  of  God 
the  rule  of  all  my  actions  : and  that  I no  more 
follow  any  fecret  impulfe  inllead  thereof,  than  I 
f-ollow  Mahomet  or  Confucius.. 

“ Not  even  a word  or  look 
Do  I approve  or  own, 

But  by  the  model  of  thy  book, 

Thy  facred  book  alone.” 

Infead  of  judging  of  his  fpiritual  efate  by  the 
improvement  of  his  heart , he  refs  only  on  extacies 

Neither  is  this  my  cafe.  I reft  not  on  them 

at  all.  Nor  did  I ever  experience  any.  I do 
judge  of  my  fpiritual  eftate  by  the  improvement 
of  my  heart  and  the  tenor  of  my  life  conjointly. 
He  is  very  liable  to  err — • — So  indeed  I am.  I 

find 


[ 96  ] 

£nd  it  every  day  more  and  more.  But  I do  not 
yet  find,  that  this  is  owing  to  my  want  of  con- 
fidering  things  coolly  and  carefully.  Perhaps  you 
do  not  know  many  perfons  (excufemy  fimplicity 
in  fpeaking  it)  who  more  carefully  confider  every 
ftep  they  take.  Yet  I know  I am  not  cool  or 
careful  enough.  My  God  fupply  this  and  all 
'my  wants  ! He  is  very  difficult  to  he  convinced , by 
reafon  and  argument , as  he  afls  upon  a fuppofea 
principle  fuperior  to  it,  the.  diretlion  of  God's  Spi- 
rit.— I am  very  difficult  to  be  convinced,  by  dry 
blows  or  hard  names  ; (both  of  which  I have  not 
wanted  :)  but  not,  by  reafon  and  argument.  At 
leaf!  that  difficulty  cannot  fpring  from  the  caufe 
you  mention.  For  I claim  no  other  dire&ion  of 
God's  Spirit,  than  is  common  to  all  believers. 
Whoever  ogpofes  him  is  charged  with  ref  Bing  the 
Spirit. — What  ! whoever  oppofes  me,  John  Wef- 
ley  ? Do  I charge  every  fuch  perfon  with  reject- 
ing the  Spirit  ? No  more  than  I charge  him  with 
robbing  on  the  highway.  I cite  you  yourfelf, 
to  confute  your  own  words.  For  do  I charge 
you  with  rejecting  the  Spirit  ? His  own  dreams 
muff  be  regarded  as  oracles. — Whofe  ? I defire 
neither  my  dreams  nor  my  waking  thoughts, 
may  be  regarded  at  all,  unlefs  juft  fo  lar  as  they 
agree  with  the  oracles  of  God.  JFhatezer  he  does 
is  to  be  accounted  the  works  of  God. — You  ftrike 
quite  wide  of  me  ftiil.  I never  faid  fo  of  what  I 
do.  I never  thought  fo.  Yet  I truft  what  I do 
is  pleafing  to  God.  Hence  he  talks  in  the ffile  cf 

infpired 


[ 97  ] 


raTpired  perfms. — No  otherwife  i nfpired,  than 
you  are,  if  you  love  God.  And  applies fcripture 
pkrafes  to  hbwfelf  without  attending  to  their  ori- 
ginal meaning,  or  once  conf  dering  the  difference  of 
times  and  circumjlances.  I am  not  confcious  of 
any  thing  like  this.  I apply  no  fcripture  phrafe 
either  to  myfelf  or  any  other,  without  carefully 
confidering  both  their  original  meaning,  and  the 
fccondary  fenfe,  wherein  (allowing  for  different 
limes  and  circumflances)  it  may  be  applied  to  or- 
dinary Chriflians. 

6.  So  much  for  the  bulk  of  your  charge. 
But  it  concerns  me  likewife,  to  gather  up  the 
fragments  of  it.  You  fay,  t We  define  no  more, 
than  to  try  your  f aliments  and  proceedings,  by  the 
zvrittenword.  Agreed.  Begin  when  and  where  you 
pleafe.  VVefnd  there  good  works  asfrongly  in- 
ffed on  as  faith. — I do  as  ftrongly  inlilt  on  them 
as  on  faith.  But  each  in  its  own  order.  iVe  find 
all  railing,  &c.  condemned  therein. — True  ; and 
fo  you  may  in  all  I write  or  preach.  IVe  are  af- 
fired,  that  the  doing  what  God  commands,  is  the 
jure  way  of  knowing,  that  we  have  receiv'd  his  Spi- 
rit.— Wie  have  doubtlefs  received  it,  if  we  love 
God  (as  he  commands)  with  all  our  heart,  mind, 
foul  and  ftrength  : And  not  by  any  fenfible  impulfs 
or  feelings  whatfoever . — Any  Jtnjible  impuljes  zvhat- 
foever?  Do  you  then  exclude  all  fenfible  impulfes  ? 
Do  you  rejeft  inward  feelings  toto  genere?  Then 
you  reject  both  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neigh- 
Vol,  XVI.  E Lour. 

+ P^emarks,  p.  6a- 


[ 93  ] 


bour.  For  if  thefe  cannot  be  inwardly  felt,  no- 
thing can.  Yourejeftall  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 
For  if  we  cannot  be  fenfible  of  this,  it  is  no  joy 
at  all.  You  rejefit  the  peace  of  God,  which  if 
it  be  not  felt  in  the  inmoft  foul,  is  a dream,  a no- 
tion, an  empty  name.  You  therefore  rejeft  the 
whole  inward  kingdom  of  God,  that  is,  in  effeft, 
the  whole  gofpel  of  Jefus  Clu iff. 

You  have  therefore  yourfelf  abundantly  fhewn 
(what  I do  not  infnuate,  hut  proclaim  on  the 
houfe-top)  that  I am  charged  with  enthufiafm , for 
offer  ting  the  power  (as  well  as  the  form'  of  godli- 
ne/s. 

7.  You  go  on  i The  char  adder  of  the  Lnthujiajl 
above  drawn,  will  ft,  I believe,  allfuch  of  the  Me- 
thodifs  as  can  be  thought  fncere. — I believe  not. 
I have  tried  it  on  one,  and  it  fitted  him,  juft  as 
Saul's  armour  did  David.  However,  a few  in- 
Jlances  of  enthufiafm,  you  undertake  to  lliew  in 
this  very  journal . 

And  firft,  You  give  us  one  (fhefe  are  your 
words)  of  a private  revelation,  which  you  feem  to 
pay  great  credit  to.  You  partly  relate  this,  and 
then  remark,  What  enthufiafm  is  here?  To  repre- 
Jent  the  conjeBures  of  a woman,  vdicfe  brain  ap- 
pears to  have  been  loo  much  heated,  as  if  they  had 
been  owing  to  a particular  and  miraculous f fir  it  of 
prophecy? — Defcant,  Sir,  as  you  pleafe  on  this 
enthufiafm ; on  the  credit  I paid  to  this  private  re- 
velation: and  my  reprefenting  the  conjeHures  of 

this 


i Remarks,  p.  63. 


[ 99  ] 

this brain-fick  woman,  as  owing  to  the  miraculous 
power  oj  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  when  you  have 
done  I will  defire  you  to  read  that  paflage  once 
more,  where  you  will  find  my  exprefs  words  are 
(introducing  this  account)  “ Sunday,  11.  + I met 
with  a furprizing  inftance,  of  the  power  of  the 
devil!'  Such  was  the  credit  I paid  to  this  revela- 
tion ! All  which  I afcribe  to  the  Spirit  0/  God  is, 
the  enabling  her  to  flrive  againft  tb  e power  of  the 
devil,  and  at  length  reftoring  peace  to  her  foul. 

8.  As  a fecond  inftance  of  enthufiafm,  you 
cite  thofe  words,  “ t I expounded  out  of  the 
Julnefs  which  was  given  me.”  The  whole  fentence 
is,  “ Out  of  the  fulnefs  that  was  given  me,  I 
expounded  thofe  words  of  St.  Paul  (indeed  of 
every  true  believer)  To  me  to  live  is  Chrifl,  and 
to  die  is  gain."  I mean,  I had  than  a Juller,  deeper 
fenfe  of  that  great  truth,  than  I ordinarily  have. 
And  I flill  think  it  right,  to  afcribe  this,  not  to 
myfelf,  but  to  the.  giver  of  every  good  and  perfeEl 

lift- 

You  relate  what  follows  as  a third  § very 
extraordinary  injlance  of  enthufiafm.  “ Tuef. 
||  Feb.  ly.  I left  London.  In  the  afternoon  I 
reached  Oxford,  and  leaving  my  horfe  there  (for 
he  was  tired,  and  the  horfe-road  exceeding  bad, 
and  my  bufinefs  admitted  of  no  delay)  fetout  on 
foot  for  Stant  on-liar  court.  The  night  overtook 
me  in  about  an  hour,  accompanied  with  heavy 
E 2 lain. 

+ Journal,  p.  66.  J p.  65.  § Remarks,  p.  6j. 

II  Journal,  p.  6g,  70. 


[ loo  ] 

rain.  Being  wet  and  weary,  and  not  well  know- 
ing my  way,  I could  not  help  faying  in  my  heart, 
(tho’  afhamed  of  my  want  of  refignation  to  God’s 
will)  O that  thou  would'fl  Jlay  the  bottles  0} 
heaven  ! Or  at  lead,  give  me  light  or  an  honePc 
guide  ! Or  fome  help,  in  the  manner  thou  know- 
elf  ; prefently  the  rain  ceafed  : the  moon  broke 
out,  and  a friendly  man  overtook  me,  who  fet 
me  on  his  own  horfe,  and  walked  by  my  fide, 
till  we  came  to  Mr.  Gambold' s door.” 

Here  you  remark,  If  you  would  not  have  us  tool 
on  this  as  miraculous,  there  is  nothing  in  it  wor- 
thy oj  bang  related.  — It  may  be  fo  ; let  it  pafs 
then  as  a trifle,  not  worth  relating  : but  (fill  it  is 
no  proof  of  enthufiafm.  l or  I would  not  have 
you  look  on  it  as  miraculous.  I do  not  myfelf 
look  upon  it  as  fuch  ; but  as  a fignal  inffance  of 
God’s  particular  providence  overall  thofe  who 
call  upon  him. 

9.  % In  the  fame  fpirit  of  enihufiafm  (you  go 
on,  citing  this  as  a fourth  inflance)  You  defcribe 
heaven  as  executing  judgments,  immediate  punifii- 
ments,  on  thofe  who  cjpofe  you.  You  fay  “ Mr. 
Moltker  was  taken  ill  this  day . I believe  it  was 
the  hand  of  God  that  teas  upon  him” — I do.  But 
I do  not  fay,  as  a judgment from  .God,  for  oppo- 
fing  me.  That  you  fay  for  me.  Again,  you 
tell  us  of  “ one  who  was  exceeding  angry,  at  thofe 
who  pretended  to  be  in  fits  ; and  was  jufi  going  to 
kick  one  of  them  out  of  the  way,  when  Jhe  dr  opt 

down 


+ Remark.',  p.  66. 


f.  101  ] 

(fown  herfelf  and  was  in  violent  agonies  for  an 

hour. And  you  fay  you  left  her — under  a deep 

fnfe  of  the  juft  judgment  of  God. So  (lie 

termed  it,  and  To  I believe  it  was.  But  obferve. 

Not  for  oppofing  me. Again,  you  mention 

“ as  an  aweful  providence , the  cafe  of  a poor 
wretch,  who  was  laf  week  curfing  and  blafphem-. 
ing , and  had  ho'aftedto  many,  that  he  would  come 
again  on  Sunday , and  no  man  fiould  ftop  his  mouth 
then  (His  mouth  was  flopped  before,  in  the  midft 
of  the  raoft  horrid  blafphemies,  by  afking  him, 
“ If  he  was  ftronger  than  God?”)  But  on  Friday, 
God  laid  his  hand  upon  him,  and  on  Sunday  he 

was  buried.'' 1 do  look  on  this,  as  a manifeft 

judgment  of  God,  on  a hardened  fin  iter,  for 

his  complicated  wickednefs.  t Again,  “ one 

being  juft  going  to  beat  his  wife,  (which  he  fre- 
quently did J God  fmote  him  in  a moment : fo  that 
his  hand  dropped,  and  he  fell  down  upon  the 
ground,  having  no  more  ftrength  than  a new-born 

child. And  can  you,  Sir,  confuler  this,  as 

one  of  the  common  difpenfations  of  providence  ? 
Have  you  known  a parallel  one  in  your  life  ? 
But  it  was  never  cited  by  me,  as  it  is  by  you,  as 
an  immediate punifiment  on  a man  for  oppofing  me. 
You  have  no  authority  from  any  fentence  or 
word  of  mine,  for  putting  fuch  a conftru&ion 
upon  it  : no  more  than  you  have  for  that  ftrange 
intimation  (how  remote  both  from  juftice  and 
charity  !)  That  I paralled  thefe  cafes,  with  tliofe 
E 3 of 

+ p.  67. 


( 102  ] 

of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  or  oj  Eiyrnas  the  for* 
ctrer  ! 

10.  You  proceed  to  what  you  account  a sth 
inftance  of  enihufiafm.  t With,  regard  to  people  s 
falling  in  fts,  it  is  plain,  you  look  upon  both  the 
diforders  and  removals  of  them  to  kt  Jupernatural. 
.It  is  not  quite  plain.  I look  upon  fume  of  thefe 
cafes  as  wholly  natural  : on  the  red,  as  inixt ; 
both  the  diforder  and  the  removal  being  partly 
natural  and  partly  not.  Six  of  thefe  you  pick 
out  from,  it  may  be,  two  hundred,  and  add ,From 
all  which  you  leave  no  room  to  doubt,  that  you 
would  have  thefe  cafes  conjidcred,  as  thefe  of  the 
demomacks  in  the  Neio  Tejl ament-,  in  order , / 
juppoje,  to  parallel  your  Juppofd  cures  of  them, 
with  thehighef  miracles  oj  Chrijl  and  his  difciples. 
— I Ihould  once  have  wondered  at  your  making 
fuch  a fuppofition  : but  I now  wonder  at  nothing 
of  this  kind. — Only  be  pleafed  to  remember 
till  this  fuppofition  is  made  good,  it  is  no  confir- 
mation at  all  oj  my  enihufiafm. 

You  then  attempt  to  account  for  thofe  fits,  by 
olflr uHions  or  irregularities  of  the  blood  and  Jpi- 
rits  ; hyfericcil  diforder  ; watchings,  fafhngs  ; 
clofenefs  of  rooms,  great  crowds,  violent  heat. 
And  laftly,  by  terrors,  perplexities  and  doubts,  in 
weak  and  well.rneaning  men  ; which,  you  think, 
in  many  of  the  cafes  before  us,  have  quite  over- 
fet  their  underfandings. 

As  to  each  of  the  reft,  let  it  go  as  far  as  it  can 

go. 

9 


i Remarks,  p.  68,  69. 


C i03  ] 

gt>.  But  I require  proof  of  the  laft  way  where- 
by you  would  account  for  thefe  diforders.  Why, 
The  infances , you  fay,  of  religious  madnefs,  have 
much  increafed  fine e you  began  to  difturb  the  zuorld .§ 
I doubt  the  fa£t.  Although  if  thefe  infiances  had 
increafed  lately,  ’tis  eafy  to  account  for  them 
-another  way.  Moft  have  heard  of  or  known  feve- 
ral  of  the  Methodifls  thus  driven  to  diftrabhon. 
— You  may  have  heard  of  five  hundred.  But  how 
many  have  you  known  ? Be  pleafed  to  name  eight 
or  ten  of  them.  1 cannot  find  them,  no  not  one  of 
them  to  this  day,  either  man,  woman  or  child. 
I find  fome  indeed,  whom  you  told , “ They 
would  be  dif  cabled,  if  they  continued  to  follow 
•thefe  men  and  whom  at  that  time,  you  threw 
into  much  doubt,  and  terror,  and  perplexity. 
But  though  they  did  continue  to  hear  them  ever 
fince,  they  are  not  diftradied  yet. 

As  for  t the  abilities , learning  and  experience 

of  Dr.  M , if  you  are  perfonally  acquainted 

with  him,  you  do  well  to  teflify  them.  But  if 
not,  permit  me  to  remind  you  of  the  old  advice, 

Oualem  commendes,  etiam  atq\  etiam  afpice\  ne  mox 
lncutiant  aliena  tibipeccata  puclorem. 

In  endeavouring  to  account  for  the  people’s  re- 
covery from  thofe  diforders  you  fay,  £ I fall  not 
difpute  how  far  prayer  may  have  naturally  a good 
E 4 effedl. 

$ Remarks,  p.  68,  69  + Remarks,  p.  70.  d P*  71*' 


[ lc4  1 

#x7.  (Nay,  1 am  perfuaded,  you  will  not  dif- 
putebut  it  may  have  fupernatural  good  effects 
alfo.)  However,  there  is  no  need,  offuppofing  thefe 
recoveries  miraculous. — Who  affirms  there  is  P I 
have  fet  down  the  facts  j nit  as  the)’  were,  paffing 
no  judgment  upon  them  myfeit,  (confequentiv 
here  is  no  foundation  for  the  charge  of  en- 
thujiafm,)  and  leaving  every  man  elfe  to  judge  as 
he  pleafes. 

11.  1 he  next  paffage  you  quote  as  a proof  of 
my  entliujiajm,  taking  the  whole  together  runs 
thus  : “ AT  er  + communicating  at  St.  James's, 
our  pariffi  chinch,  I vifited  feveral  of  the  fick. 
Moft  of  them  were  ill  of  the  fpotted  fever,  which 
they  informed  me,  had  been  extremely  mortal, 
few  perfons  recovering  from  it.  But  God  had 
laid,  Hitherto  Jhalt  thou  come.  I believe  there  was 
not  one  with  whom  we  were,  but  recovered.” — 
On  which  you  comment  thus  ; Here  is  indeed  no 
intimation  of  any  thing  miraculous.-— No  ! Not  fo 
much  as  an  intimation!  Then,  why  is  this  cited 
as  an  inftanceof  mv  enthufiafm?  Why,  Youfeem 
to  defire  to  have  it  believed,  that  an  extraordinary 
biffing  attended  your  prayers  : ■ whereas,  I believe 
they  would  not  have failed  oj  an  equal  blefjing  and 
fuccefs,  had  they  had  the  prayers  of  their  own  parijh 
miniflers. — I believe  this  argument  will  have 
extraordinary  fuccefs,  if  it  convince  any  one, 
that  I am  an  enthufaf. 

12.  You  add,  i I fall  give  but  one  account 

more. 


i Journal,  p.  6i. 


J Remarks,  p.  ;a. 


[ 10  5 ] 

more , and  this  is,  what  you  give  of  your [elf.  The 
fum  whereof  is,  “ At  two  feveral  times,  being  ill 
and  in  violent  pain,  I prayed  to  God  and  found 
immediate  eafe.  ’ I did  fo.  I alTert  the  facl  dill. 
Now  if  thefe  (you  fay)  are  not  miraculous  cures,  all 
this  is  rank  enthufiafm. 

I will  put  your  argument  in  form  : 

He  that  believes  thofe  are  miraculous  cures 
which  are  not  fo,  is  a rank ■enthufiad  : 

But  you  believe  thofe  to  be  miraculous  cures 
which  are  not  fo  : 

Therefore,  you  are  a rank  enthufiaft. 

Before  I anfwer,  I mull,  know,  what  you  mean 
by  miraculous  ? If  you  term  every  thing  fo, 
which  is  not  ftriftly  accountable  for,  by  the  ordi- 
nary courfe  of  natural  caufes ; then  I deny  the 
latter  part  of  the  minor  propofition.  And  unlefs 
you  can  make  this  good,  unlefs  you  can  prove  the 
effefts  in  queftion  are  dri&ly  accountable  for,  by 
the  ordinary  cojirf  of  natural  caufelj,  your  argu- 
ment is  nothing  worth. 

You  conclude  this  head  with,  + Can  you  work 
miracles. — All  your  prefent  pretences  to  the  Spirit, 
till  they  are  proved  by  miracles,  cannot  be  e dot  fed, 
or  acquitted from  enthufiafm. 

My  fhort  anfwer  is  this : I pretend  to  the  Spi- 
rit juft  fo  far,  as  is  eflential  to  a Rate  of  falvation. 
And  cannot  I be  acquitted  from  enthufiafm,  till 
I prove  by  miracles,  that  I am  in  a date  of  falva- 
tion ? 

E 5 3 - We 

+ P-  73* 


[ »o6  ] 

ig.  We  now  draw  to  a period.  The  + confe- 
rences of  Methodifm  (you  fay)  i.  e.  of  our 
preaching  this  do&rine,  which  have  hitherto  ap- 
peared, are  bad  enough  to  induce  you  to  leave  it.  It 
has  in  fad.  introduced  many  diforders,  Erdhufiafm, 
Antinomianifm,  Calvinifm,  a negletl  and  contempt 
of  God’s  ordinances,  and  almojl  all  other  duties. 

* That  whenever  God  revives  his  work  upon 
earth,  many  tares  will  fpring  up  with  the  wheat, 
both  the  word  of  God  gives  us  ground  to  expeft, 
and  the  experience  of  all  ages.  But  where,  Sir, 
have  you  been,  that  you  have  heard  of  the  tares 
only  ? And  that  you  rank  among  the  conse- 
quences of  my  preaching,  A negletl  and  contempt 
of  God's  ordinances,  and  almojl  of  all  duties  ? Does 
not  the  very  reverfe  appear,  at  London,  at  Briflol, 
at  Kingfwood,  at  Newcafle  ? In  every  one  of 
which  places,  multitudes  of  thofe  (I  am  able  to 
name  the  perfpns)  who  before  lived  in  a thorough 
negleft  and  contempt  of  God’s  ordinances  and 
ail  duties,  do  now  zealoufly  difcharge  their  du- 
ties to  God  and  man,  and  walk  in  all  his  ordi- 
nances blamelefs. 

* And  as  to  thofe  drunkards,  whoremongers, 
and  other  fervants  of  the  devil,  as  they  were  be- 
fore, who  heard  us  a while  and  then  fell  to  the 
Calvinijls  or  Moravians  : are  they  not  even  now 
in  a far  better  Hate,  than  they  were  before  they 
heard  us  ? Admit  they  are  in  error,  yea  and  die 
therein,  yet  who  dares  affirm,  they  will  perifh 

everlaftingly  ? 


t p-  7£- 


everlaftingly  ? But  had  they  died  in  thofe  fins, 
we  are  fure  they  had  fallen  into  the  fire  that  never 
Jhall  he  quenched. 

I hope,  Sir,  you  will  rejoice  in  confidering 
this,  how  much  their  gain  ftill  outweighs  their 
lofs : as  well  as  in  finding  the  fentiments  you 
could  not  reconcile  together,  clearly  and  confif- 
tently  explained.  I am  very  willing  to  confider 
whatever  farther  you  have  to  offer.  May  God 
give  us  both  a right  judgment  in  all  things  ! I am 
perfuaded  you  will  readily  join  in  this  prayer 
with, 

Reverend  Sir, 

Yourjervant for  Ckrifi’s fake. 


Brifol,  Feb.  2, 


JOHN  WESLEY* 


[ i°8  1 


The  PRINCIPLES  of  a 


METHODIST 


Farther  explained : 


Oceafioned  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Church’s 
Second  Letter  to  Mr.  Wesley. 

In  a Second  Letter  to  tbaL  GENTLEMAN. 


Reverend  Sir, 

* l.  A T the  time  that  I was  reading  your  for- 
mer  letter,  I expe&ed  to  hear  from 
you  again.  And  I was  not  difpleafed  with  the 
expectation  ; believing  it  would  give  me  a frefii 
opportunity  of  weighing  the  fentimenls  I might 
have  too  lightly  efpoufed,  and  the  aftions  which 
perhaps  I had  not  enough  confidered.  Viewing 

things, 


[ *o9  ] 

things  in  this  light,  I cannot  but  edeem  you,  not 
an  enemy,  but  a friend ; and  one,  in  forne  re- 
fpefts,  better  qualified  to  do  me  real  fervice  than 
thofe  whom  the  world  accounts  fo  ; who  may  be 
hindered,  by  their  prejudice  in  my  favour,  either 
from  obferving  what  is  reproveable,  or  from  ufing 
that  freedom  and  plainnefs  of  fpeecb,  which  are 
requifite  to  convince  me  of  it. 

2.  It  is  at  lead  as  much  with  a view  to  learn 
myfelf,  as  to  fhew  others  (what  I think)  the  truth, 
that  I intend  to  fet  down  a few  refieflions  on 
fome  parts  of  the  traft  you  have  lately  publilhed. 
I fay,  fome  parts ; for  it  is  not  my  defign  to  an- 
fwer  every  fentence  in  this,  any  more  than  in 
the  former.  Many  things  I pafs  over,  becaufe 
I think  them  true;  many  more,  becaufe  I think 
them  not  material : and  fome,  becaufe  I am  de- 
termined not  to  engage  in  a ufelefs,  if  not  hurtful 
controverfy. 

* 3.  Fear  indeed  is  one  caufe  of  my  declining 
this : fear  (as  I faid  elfewhere  t)  not  of  my  ad- 
verfary , but  of  myfelf.  I fear  my  own  fpirit, 
left  “ I fall  where  many  mightier  have  been 
flain.”  I never  knew  one  (or  but  one)  man 
write  controverfy  with  what  I thought  a right 
fpirit.  Every  difputant  feems  to  think  (as  every 
foldier)  that  he  may  hurt  his  opponent  as  much 
as  he  can  ; nay,  that  he  ought  to  do  his  word  to 
him,  or  he  cannot  make  the  bed  of  his  own 
caufe  : that  fo  he  do  not  bely,  or  wilfully  mifre- 
prefent  him,  he  mud  expofe  him  as  much  as  he 

is 

+ In  the  preface  to  the  asfwer  to  Mr.  Tucker . 


[ 110  ] 

is  able.  It  is  enough,  we  fuppofe,  if  we  do  not 
fhew  beat  or  paffion  againft  our  adverfary.  But, 
not  to  defpife  him,  or  endeavour  to  make 
others  do  fo,  is  quite  a work  of  fupererogation. 

* 4.  But  ought  thefe  things  to  be  fo  ? (I  fpeak 
on  the  Chriflian  fcheme.)  Ought  we  not  to  love 
our  neighbour  as  ourfelves?  And  does  a man 
-ceafe  to  be  our  neighbour,  becaufe  he  is  of  a 
different  opinion  P Nay,  and  declares  himfelf  fo 
to  be  ? Ought  we  not,  for  all  this,  to  do  to  him 
as  we  would  he  fhould  do  to  us  ? But  do  we  our- 
felves love  to  be  expojed,  or  fet  in  the  worft 
light?  Would  we  willingly  be  treated  with  con- 
tempt ? If  not,  why  do  we  treat  others  thus  ? 
And  yet,  who  fcruples  it  ? Who  does  not  hit 
every  blot  he  can,  however  foreign  to  the  merits 
of  the  caufe  ? Who,  in  controverfy,  caffs  the 
mantle  of  love  over  the  nakednefs  of  his  bro- 
ther ? Who  keeps  fleddilv  and  uniformly  to  the 
quefiion,  without  ever  firiking  at  the  perfon  ? 
Who  fhews  in  every  fentence,  that  he  loves  his 
brother  only  Iefs  than  the  truth  ? 

g.  I fear  neither  you  nor  I have  attained  to 
this.  I believe  brotherly  love  might  have  found 
abetter  conffruflion  than  that  of  unfairness,  art , 
or  difingenuity,  to  have  put  either  on  my  not  an- 
fwering  every  part  of  your  book  (a  thing  which 
never  once  entered  my  thoughts)  or  on  my  not 
reciting  all  the  words  of  thofe  parts  which  I did 
apfwer.  I cannot  yet  perceive  any  blame  herein. 

I /till.. 


[ 111  ] 

I dill  account  it  fair  and  ingenuous , to  pafs  over 
both  what  I believe  is  right,  and  what  I believe 
is  not  dangeroufly  wrong.  Neither  can  I fee  any 
difingenuity  at  all,  in  quoting  only  that  part  ot 
any  fentence,  againd  which  I conceive  the  ob- 
je&ion  lies  : nor  in  abridging  any  part  of  any 
treatife  to  which  I reply,  whether  in  the  author’s, 
or  in  my  own  words. 

6.  If  indeed  it  were  fo  abridged  as  to  alter  the 
fenfe,  this  would  be  unfair.  And  if  this  were 
dehgnedly  done,  it  would  be  artful  and  difingen- 
uous.  But  I am  not  confcious  of  having  done 
this  at  all;  although  you  fpealc  as  if  I had  done 
it  a thoufand  times.  And  yet  Lcannot  undertake 
now,  either  to  tranfcribe  your-  whole  book,  or 
every  page  or  paragraph,  which  I anfwer.  But 
I mull  generally  abridge  before  I reply  : and  that 
not  only  to  fave  time  (of  which  I have  none  to 
fpare)  but  often  to  make  the  argument  clearer, 
which  is  bed  underdood  when  couched  in  few 
words. 

7.  You  complain  alfo,  of  mv  mentioning,  all ' 
at  once,  fentences  which  you  placed  at  a dillance 
from  each  other,  I do  fo  ; and  I think  it  quite 

fair  and.  ingenuous,  to  lay  together  what  was  be- 
fore fcattered  abroad.  For  indance  : you  now 
fpeak  of  the  conditions  of  judification,  in  the 
18th  and  following  pages : again,  from  the  89th 
to  the  io2d:  and  yet  again,  in  the  127th  page. 
Now  I have  not  leifure  to  follow  you  to  and  fro. 

There- 


[ 112  ] 

Therefore  what  I fay  on  one  head,  I fet  in  one 
place. 

I.  i.  This  premifed,  I come  to  the  letter  itfelf. 
I begin,  as  before,  with  the  cafe  of  the  Moravi- 
ans : of  whom  you  fay,  + I collected  together  the 
chara&er  ■which  you  had  given  of  thefe  men  ; the 
errors  and  vices  whichyou  had  charged  upon  them , 
and  the  rnifchiefs — they  had  dene  among  your  fol- 
lowers, And  I proved , that,  in  fever  al  refpeCis, 
you  had  been  the  occafon  oj  this  mifehiej ; and  are 
therefore , in  fome  meajure,  accountable  for  it.  fet 
us  fee  what  anfwer  you  give  to  all  this.  2d  letter, 
page  79. 

“ With  regard  to  the  denying  degrees  in  faith, 
you  mentioned , that  the  Moravian  church  was 
cleared  from  this  mi  fake  A But  did  you  not  m n- 
tion  this  as  one.  oj  the  tenets  of  the  Moravians  3 f)o 
you  not  fay,  that  “ you  could  not  agree  with  Mr. 
Spangenberg,  that  none  has  any  faith,  Jo  long  as 
he  is  liable  to  any  doubt  or  jear  P”  Do  not  you 
reprefent  Mr.  Molther,  and  other  Moravians  in 
England,  as  teaching  the fame?  In  fiort,  I have 
not  charged  the  Moravian  church  with  any  thing  ; 
but  only  repeat  after  you.  And  if  you  have  accufed 
them,  when  you ■ knew  them. to  be  guilthfs,  you  mujl 
bear  the  blame. 

“ They  do  ufe  the  ordinances  of  God  with  rever- 
ence and  godly  fear  A — You  have  charged  Mr.  Sp. 
and  Mr.  Molther  with  teaching,  that  we  ought  to 

a/jlain 

-f  Mr.  Church' s words  arc  printed  in  ildick. 


[ m J 

nbftain  from  them.  And  the  fame  you :fay  in  general 
of  the  Moravian  brethren , in  your  letter  to  them. — 
“ But  Mr.  Mohher  was  quiclly  after  recalled  into 
German}'.”  This  might  be  on  other  accounts.  You 
do  not  fay  it  was  out  of  any  difikeofhis  doctrines 
or  proceedings.  Nor  indeed  can  you , conjiflently 
with  your  next  words : “ The  great  fault  of  ike 
Moravian  church  feems  to  lie,  in  net  openly  dif- 
claiming  all  he  had  faicl : which  in  all  probability 
they  would  have  done,  had  they  not  leaned  to  the 
fame  opinion.'' 

You  “ never  knew  but  one  of  the  Moravian 
church  affirm,  that  a believer  does  not  grow  in  ho~ 
lineJsT  But  who  was  this  ? No  lefs  aperfon  than 
Count  Zinzendorf,  their  great  bifhop  and  patron, 
whofe  authority  is  very  high,  all  in  all  with  them, 
and  to  whom  you  think  they  pay  too  much  regard 

2.  This  is  the  whole  of  your  reply  to  this 
part  of  my  anfwer.  I will  now  conftder  it,  part 
by  part. 

Firft,  With  regard  to  the  denying  degrees  in  faith, 
you  mentioned,  “ that  the  Moravian  church  was 
cleared  from  this  mi/fake.”  But  did  you  not  men- 
tion this  as  one  of  the  tenets  of  the  Moravians  ?— 
No;  not  of  the  Moravians  in  general  ? — Do  you 
not  fay,  that  you  “ could  not  agree  with  Mr.  Span- 
genberg,  that  none  has  any  faith,  fo  long  as  he  is 
liable  to  any  doubt  or  fear  ?" — I do  fay  fo  ftill. 
But  S pangenberg  is  not  the  Moravian  church. — Do 
you  not  reprefent  Mr.  Molther,  and  other  Mora- 
vians in  England,  as  teaching  the  fame  ? — I do  ? 

three 


C «4  ] 

three  or  four  in  all.  But  neither  are  thefe,  the 
Moravian  church. — In  Jhort , I have  not  charged 
the  Moravian  church  with  any  thing-,  but  only 
repeat  after  you. — Indeed  you  have,  in  the  very 
cafe  before  us.  You  charge  them,  with  denying 
degrees  in  faith.  I do  not  charge  them  herewith. 

I openly  cleared  them  from  any  fuch  charge  near 
fix  years  ago. — If  therefore  you  have  accufed  them 
when  you  knew  them  to  be  guild efs,  you  muf  bear 
the  blame. — In  this  cafe,  I mull  intreat  you  to  bear 
it  in  my  dead.  For  I have  not  accufed  them  (the 
Moravian  church.)  It  is  you  that  have  accufed 
them.  I have  again  and  again  declared,  they 
are  not  guilty. 

Secondly,  “ They  do  ufe  the  ordinances  of  God 
with  reverence  and  godly  fear.'’ — You  have  charged 
Mr.  Sp.  and  Mr.  Molther  with  leaching,  that  we 
ought  to  abjlain  from  them. — That  we?  No.  That 
unbelievers  ought.  The  aflertion  relates  to  them 
only. — And  the  fame  you  fay  in  general  of  the 
Moravian  brethren,  in  your  letter. — I fav,  they 
hold,  that  “ unbelievers  ought  to  abllain  from 
them.”  But  yet  I know  and  bear  witnefs,  they  ufe 
them  themfelves,  and  that  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear?” — “ Mr.  Molther  was  quickly  after 
recalled  to  Germany.” — This  might  be  on  other 
accounts.  You  do  not  fay,  it  was  out  of  any  difhke 
of  his  dotlrines  or  proceedings. — I do  not  fay  fo  ; 
becaufe  I am  not  fure  ; but  I believe  it  was  out 
of  a dillike  to  fome  of  his  proceedings,  if  not,  of 
his  do6Irines  too. — Nor  indeed  can  you,  confflently 

with 


[ ir5  J 


with  your  next  words:  “ The  great  fault  of  the' 
Moravian  church  Jeems  to  lie , in  not  openly  dif 
clairning  all  he  had  faid ” (relating  to  this  head.) 
— They  did  privately  difclaim  what  he  had  faid, 
of  degrees  in  faith.  But  I think,  that  was  not 
enough.  And  I hill  believe,  they  would  have 
done  more,  “ had  they  not  leaned  themfelves  to 
the  fame  opinion,”  touching  the  ordinances. 

Thirdly,  You  “ never  knew  but  one  of  the  Mo- 
ravian church  affirm,  that  a believer  does  not  grow 
in  holinefs.” — But  who  was  this?  A 'o  lefsa  perfcn 
than  Count  Zinzendorf,  their  great  bijhop  and  pa- 
tron, whofe  authority  is  very  high , all  in  all  with 
them,  and  to  whom  you  think  they  pay  “ too  much 
regard.'’ — Do  you  apprehend,  where  the  ftrefs 
of  the  argument  lies  ? I never  heard  one  Mora- 
vian affirm  this,  but  the  Count  alone  ; and  him 
only  once ; and  that  once  was  in  the  heat  of 
difpute.  And  hence  I inferred,  it  is  not  a doc- 
trine of  the  Moravian  church  : nay,  I doubt, 
whether  it  be  the  Count’s  own  fettled  judgment. 

3.  But  I may  not  difmifs  this  paffage  yet.  It 
is  now  my  turn  to  complain  of  unfair  ufage  ; of 
the  exceeding  lame,  broken,  imperfeft  manner, 
wherein  you  cite  my  words.  For  inftance  ; your 
citation  runs  thus  : You  “ never  knew  but  one  of 
the  Moravian  church  affirm,  that  a believer  does 
not  grow  in  holinefs .” — Whereas  my  words  are 
thefe,  “ I never  knewone  of  the  Moravian  church, 
but  that  Angle  perfon,  affirm,  that  a believer  does 
not  grow  in  holinefs:  and  perhaps  he  would 

not 


[ ] 

Tfot  affirm  it  on  reflection." — Now  why  was- the 
former  part  of  the  fentcnce  changed,  and  the 
latter  quite  left  out  ? — Had  the  whole  flood  in 
your  trail,  jufl  as  it  does  in  mine,  it  muft  have 
appeared,  I do  not  here  charge  the  Moravian . 
church. 

I complain  alfo,  of  your  manner  of  replying 
to  the  firft  article  of- this  very  paragraph.  For 
you  do  not  cite  fo  much  as  one  line  of  that  an- 
fwer,  to  which  you  profefs  to  reply.  My  words 
are,  “ You  ought  net  to  charge  the  Moravian 
church  with  the  fir  11  of  theft*  (errors  fince  in  the 
very  page  from  which  you  quote  thofe  words, 
There  is  no Jujlijying  faith,  teller e there  ever  is  any 
doubt,  that  note  occurs,  (viz.  \fourn.  p.  105.) 
“ In  the  preface  to  the  fecund  journal,  the  Mora- 
vian church  is  cleared  from  this  miftake. 

If  you  had  cited  thefe  words,  could  you  poffibly 
have  fubjoined,  I have  not  charged  the  Mora- 
vian church  zvith  any  thing  ; but  only  repeat  after 
you! 

4.  I have  now  confidered  one  page  of  your 
reply,  in  the  manner  you  feein  to  require.  But 
fure  you  cannot  expect  1 fhould  follow  you  thus, 
flep  by  ftep,  through  an  hundred  and  forty  pages! 
If  you  fhould  then  think  it  worth  while,  to  make 
a fecond  reply,  and  to  follow  me  in  the  fame 
manner,  we  might  write  indeed ; but  who 
would  read  ? — I return  therefore  to  what  I pro- 
pofed  at  firft,  viz.  To  touch  only  on  what  feems 


[ '~**7  ] 

or  the  moft  importance,  and  leave  the  reft  juft 
as  it  lies. 

4.  You  fay,  fp.  80.)  With  regard  to  fubtlety, 
evajion,  and  difguife,  you  now  would  have  it 
thought , that  you  only  found  this  “ in  many  of 
them  ; not  in  all,  nor  in  mojl You  now  would 
have  it  thought  ! Yes,  and  always,  as  well  as 
now.  For  my  original  charge  was,  (4  journal, 
p.  104.)  “ I have  found  this,  in  many  of  you, 
1.  e.  much  fubtlety,  much  evafion,  and  difguife.” 
— But  you  add,  let  the  reader  judge  f am  the 
following  peffages,  whether  • you  did  not  charge 
the  Moravians  in  general  with  thefe  crimes.  “ I 
had  a long  conference  with  thofe,  whom  I efeem 
■very  highly  in  love  : but  I could  not  yet  under - 
Jlancl  them  in  one  point,  Chriflian  opennefs  and 
plainnejs  ofjpeech.  They  pleaded for  fuch  a referved- 
nefs  and  clofenefs  of  conver fation.  Yet  I Jcarce  Itnozu 
what  to  think,  couf dering  they  had  the  pra&ice  of  the 
whole  Moravian  church  on  their  fide. — True  ; in 
pleading  for  fuch  z referveclnefs  of  converfation, 
as  I could  not  in  any  ways  approve  of;  but 
not  in  ufing  much  fubtlety , much  evafion,  and 
difguife  : this  I dare  not  charge  on  the  whole 
Moravia, 01  church.  Thofe  words  alfo,  “ There 
is  darknefs  and  clofenefs  in  all  their  behaviour, 
and  guile  in  almoft  all  their  words/’  I fpoke, 
not  of  . all  the  Moravians,  nor  of  moft:  but  of 
thofe  who  were  then  in  England.”  I could  not 
fpeak  if  of  them  all  ; for  I never  found  any  guile 
in  Chrifian  David,  Michael  Linner,  and  many 
others. 


5-  W* 


[ n8  ] 


5.  We  art  next  to  fee,  how  you  get  over  the  ob- 
jeSlion  I made  good  in  three  ftveral  particulars, 
that  you  have  prepared  the  way  for  fpreading  of 
tkefe  tenets.  The  frfyou  fay  nothing  to  here  ; — 
the fecond  you  quote  very  partially  thus — “ by  coun- 
tenancing and  commending  them.'”  And  why  would 
you  not  add,  “ And  being  the  occafion  of  fo  many 
of  them  coming  over  among  us.” — Becaufe  I was 
not  the  occafion.  I was  indeed  the  firft  Englijh- 
man  that  ever  was  at  Hernhutk.  But  before  I 
was  at  Hernhutk,  (I  find  on  later  enquiry)  the 
Count  himfelf  had  been  in  England. 

You  “ fill  think,  (page  81  ) That  next  to  fome 
-thoufands  in  our  own  church,  the  body  of  the  Mo- 
ravian church,  however  mif  alien  fame  of  them  are, 
are,  in  the  main,  the  be/l  Chrijlians  in  the  world." 

I do  ; “ of  all  whom  I have  feen;”  (you  fhould 
not  omit  t hefe  words.) — Thcfe  dreadful  errors  and  - 
crimes  are  here  foftened  into  mijlakes.  (I  terra 
them  “ Errors  of  judgment  and  practice.”)  I 
have  proved,  that  you  have  charged  the  body  with 
fuck. — At  prefent,  the  proof  does  not  amount  to 
demonflration.  There  needs  a little  farther 
proof,  that  I charge  any  dreadful  crimes  on  the 
body  of  the  Moravians. 

I fee  no  manner  ofinconfiftencv  fti’l!,  In  thole 
accounts  of  my  intercourfe  w-ith  the  Moravians, 
which  you  fuppofe  irreconcileable  with  each 
other.  Let  any  one  read  them  in  the  journal, 
.and  judge. 

6.  You  had faid,  “ Your  cbjeElions  then  were 

nearly 


[ “9  ] 


marly  the  fame  as  now."  You  now  add,  “ only 
with  this  difference : I was  not  then  affured , that 
the  faBs  were  as  I fuppofed ; I did  not  dare  to  de- 
termine any  thing." — No  ! Not  when  by  conver- 
fing  among  them  you  faw  thefe  things  ! As  indeed 
the  faBs  are  of  fuck  a nature,  that  you  could  not 
but  be  affured  of  them,  if  they  were  true.  Nor  do 
the  quejhons  inyour  letter  really  imply  ary  doubt  of 
their  truth  : but  are  Jo  many  appeals  to  their  con- 
Jciences,  and  equivalent  to Jlrong  cffertions.  And, 
if  you  had  not  been  affured,  if  you  did  not  dare  to 
determine  any  thing  concerning  what  you  faw, your 
■writing  bare  fufpidons  to  a body  of  men  in  fuch  a 
manner  was  inexcufable . This  excufe  therefore 
will  not  ferve you,  (83.) 

I apprehend  it  will.  “ 1 was  not  then  (in  Sep- 
i dember  1738]  affured  that  the  fafts  were  as  I fup- 

Inofed.  j Therefore  ] I did  not  [then]  dare  to  de- 
termine any  thing.'’  Be  pleafed  to  add  the  im- 
mediately following  words  : “ But  from  Novem- 
ber 1.  [1739]  I faw  more  and  more  things, 
which  I could  not  reconcile  with  thegofpel.” 

If  you  had  not  omitted  thefe  words,  you  could 
have  had  no  colour  to  remark,  on  my  faying, 
•“  I did  not  dare  to  determine  any  thing.” — No! 
Not  when  by  converfng  among  them  you  faw  thefe 
■things. — No,  I did  not  dare  to  determine,  in  Sep- 
tember 1738,  from  what  I faw  in  November  1739- 
— But  the  faBs  are  of  fuch  a nature,  that  you 
could  not  but  be  affured  of  them  if  they  were  true. 
— I cannot  think  fo.  “ Is  not  the  Count  all  in 


all 


[ 120  ] 

all  among  you  ? Do  not"  you  magnify  your  own 
church  too  much?  Do  you  not  ufe  guile  and  dif- 
fimulation  in  many  cafes  ?”  Thefe  facts  are  by 
no  means  of  fuch  a nature,  as  that  whoever  con- 
verfes  (even  intimately)  among  the  Moravians, 
cannot  but  be  allured  of  them. — Nor  do  the  quej- 
tions  in  your  letter  really  imply  any  doubt  of  their 
truth. — No  ! Are  not  my  very  words  prefixed  to 
thofe  queltions,  “ Of  fome  other  things  I hand  in 
doubt. — And  I with  that,  in  order  to  t emove  thofe 
doubts,  you  would — plainly  anfwer,  whether 
the  faff  be  as  I fuppofe. — But  [thefe  queltions] 
are  fo  many  appeals  to  their  confciences. — True. — 
And  equivalent  to  Jlrong  aJJ'ertion:. — Utterly  falfet. 
— If  you  had  not  been  ajfured,  if  you  did  not  dare 
to  determine  any  thing,  concerning  what  you  fazv 
f fifteen  months  after]  your  writing  bare  fufpi- 
cions  to  a body  of  men,  in  fuch  a manner,  was  in- 
excufable. — They  were  Jlrong  prefumptions  then  ; 
which  yet  I did  not  write  to  a body  of  men,  whom 
I fo  highly  elteemed  ; no,  not  even  in  the  ten- 
der Jf  manner,  till  I was  ajfured,  they  were  not 
groundlefs. 

7.  In  a note  at  the  bottom  of  p 8,  you  abferve, 
“ the  Band  fociety  in  London  began  May  1 , fome 
time  before  I fet  out  for  Germany.”  Would  you 
inf  nuate  here,  that  you  did  not  fet  it  up,  in  imita- 
tion of  the  Moravians? — Sir,  I will  tell  vou  the 
naked  truth.  You  had  remarked  (p.  17.)  thus — 

“ You  took  the  trouble  of  a journey  to  Germany 
to  them  ; and  were  fo  much  in  love  with  their 

methods. 


£ 121  ] 

'methods,  that,  at  your  return  hither,  you  fet  up 
their  bands  among  your  difciples.”  This  was  an 
entire  miftake  : for  that  fociety  was  fet  up,  not 
only  before  I returned,  but  before  I fet  out. 
And  I defigned  that  note  to  infmuate  this  to  you, 
without  telling  your  miftake  to  all  the  world. 

I imagined , that  fuppofing  your  account  of  the 
Moravians  true,  it  would  beimpojfiblefor  any/eri- 
qus  Chrijlian  to  doubt  of  then  being  very  wicked 
people. — I know  many  ferious  Chiiftians  who 
fuppofe  it  true,  and  yet  believe  they  are,  in  the 
main,  good  men.  —A  much  worfe  char  adder,  take 
the  whole  body  together,  cannot  be  given  oj  a body 
of  men. — Let  us  try.  “ Here  is  a body  of  men 
who  have  not  one  fpark  either  of  juftice,  mercy, 
or  truth,  among  them  ; who  are  loll  to  all  fenfe 
of  right  and  wrong  $ who  have  neither  fobriety, 
temperance,  nor  chaftity  : who  are,  in  general, 
liars,  drunkards,  gluttons,  thieves,  adulterers, 
murderers.”  I cannot  but  think,  that  this  is 
a much  worfe  charafler  than  that  of  the  Mora- 
vians, take  it  how  you  will. — Let  the  reader  judge 
how  jar  you  are  new  able  to  defend  them — Juft  as 
far  as  I did  at  firit.  Still  I dare  not  condemn 
what  is  good  among  them  ; and  I will  not  excufe 
what  is  evil. 

8.  “ The  Moravians  excel  in  foeeinefs  of  be- 
haviour,” What  though  they  ufe  guile  and  dijfmu- 

lation  ? Yes. Where  is  their  multitude  of 

errors  ?”  In  your  own  journal. — I have  taken  the 
pains  to  place  them  in  one  view  in  my  remarks ; the 

Vol.  XVL  L jujlnefs 


[ 122  ] 

jufnejs  of  which  with  all  your  art  you  cannot  dif- 
prove. — You  have  taken  the  pains  to  tranfcribe 
many  words ; all  which  together  amount  to  this, 
that  they  (generally)  hold  univerfal falvation , and 
are  partly  Antinomians  (in  opinion)  partly  Qiiic- 
iijls.  Thejuflnefs  of  fome  of  your  remarks,  if 
I mi  hake  not,  have  been  pretty  fully  difprovech 
As  to  what  you  fpeak  -of  my  art,  fubtlety,  and  fo 
on,  in  this  and  many  other  places,  I look  upon  it 
as  neither  better  nor  worfe  than  a civil  way  of 
calling  names. 

“ To  this  multitude  of  crimes  + I am  alfo  an  ui- 
ter  jlranger."  Then  you  have  charged  them  wrong- 
fully.— What  do  you  account  guile,  &c.— I account 
guile,  defpifing  felf-denial,  even  in  the  fmalleft 
points,  and  teaching  that  thofe  who  have  not  the 
alfurance  of  faith,  may  not  ufe  the  ordinances  of 
God,  the  Lord’s  flipper  in  particular,  (this  is 
the  real,  unaggravated  charge)  to  be  faults  which 
cannot  be  exc-ufed.  But  I do  not  account  them 
all  together  a multitude  of  crimes.  I conceive 
this  is  a vehement  hvperbole. 

The  honour  of  religion,  faid  you,  end  virtue 
trampled  upon  ? I anfwered,  “ By  whom  ? Not  by 
the  Moravians.” — You  reply.  And  yet  you  have 
accufed fome  of  thefe  as  decrying  all  the  means  of 
grace.-— No.  What  I accufed  them  .of  was,  teach- 
ing that  an  unbeliever  (in  their  fenfe)  ought  to 
abflain  fiom  them — “ Neither  did  I know,  or 
think,  or  fay,  they  were  defperately  wicked  peopled — 

— Your 


+ Second  letter,  p.  8.j. 


L i*3  ] 

—Your  journal  is  before  the  world ; to  whom  I ap- 
peal whether  this  has  not  fo  reprefented  them.— 
But  how  do  you  here  reprefent  your  remark,  and 
my  anfwer  ? My  paragraph  runs  thus,  p.  10. 

“ You  go  on — Row  could  you  fo  long , and  fo 
intimately  courier fe  with— fuck  defperaldy  wicked 
people  as  the  Moravians,  according  to  your  own 
account , were  known  by  you  io  be  ? — O Sir,  what 
another  affertion  is  this  ? The  Moravians,  ac- 
cording to  your  own  account,  were  known  by  you 
to  be  defperately  wicked  people,  while  you  intimately 
cbnverfed  with  than. — Utterly  falfe  and  injurious ! 
I never  gave  any  fuch  account.  I converfed 
with  them  intimately  both  at  Savannah  and  Hern - 
hath.  But  neither  then,  nor  at  any  other  time, 
did  I know,  or  think,  or  fay,  they  were  def- 
perately wicked  people.  1 think  and  fay — juft 
the  reverfe,  viz.  That  tho’  I focn  “ found 
among  them  a few  things  which  I could  not  ap- 
prove, yeti  believe  they  are,  in  the  main,  fomt 
of  the  bcjl  Chrijlians  in  the  world.”— After  this, 
are  you  the  perfon,  who  complains  of  me,  for 
imperfe£i  and  partial  quotations  ? 

I added,  “ You  furprize  me  yet  more  in  going 
on  thus ; In  God's  name,  Sir,  is  the  contempt  of 
almof  the  whole  of  our  duty,  of  every  ChriJUan 
■ordinance  to  be  fo  very  gently  touched?  “ Sir,  this 
is  not  the  cafe.  This  charge  no  more  belongs  to 
the  Moravians  than  that  of  murder.”  p.  n. 

You  reply,  Mr.  Sp.  and  Mr.  Molther,  are 
accufed  by  name.  If falfely,  I am  forry  both  for 
F 2 them 


[ 124  ] 

them  and  you.  Accufed  ? True.  But  of  what? 
Of  the  contempt  of  every  Chrifliati  ordinance, 
of  almoft  the  whole  of  our  duty  ? By  no  means. 
The  plain  cafe  is,  I accufe  them  of  one  thing,  viz. 
“ Teaching  that  an  unbeliever  fhould  abliain 
from  the  ordinances.”  You  accufe  them  of 
another,  “ contemning  every  Cbrifthn  ordi- 
nance, and  almoft  the  whole  of  our  duty-”  And 
this  you  would  father  upon  me.  I defire  to  be 
excufed. 

g.  As  to  what  I faid  in  my  letter  to  the  Mora- 
vian church,  “ You  can  hinder  this  if  you  will. 
— Therefore  if  you  do  not  prevent  their  fpeaking 
thus,  you  do  in  effett  fpeak  thus  yourfelves.”-— 
It  may  be  obferved,  1.  That  this  letter  is  dated, 
Augujl  8,  1741-  2.  That  from  that  time  the 

Moravian  church  did  in  great  tneafuie  prevent 
any  of  their  members  fpeaking  thus. 

You  proceed.  You  dijiingujh  between  the 
Englifh  brelhern  and  the  Moravians.  Ti  Englifh 
brethen , 1 prefume , were  your  followers.  After- 
wards you  reprefent  them  as  perverted  by  the 
Moravians.  Before  they  had fpolte  thefe  wicked 
things,  you  fay,  they  had  joined  thefe  men,  and 
a died  under  their  direclion.  If  they  did  not  learn 
them  from  thefe  new  teachers,  from  whom  aid  they 
learn  than  ? Not  jure  from  yourj'elj , or  am,  other 
Ncthodijls.  You  cannot  therefore  bung  off  the 
Moravians,  without  condemning  your  own  people. 
Here  therefore  you  have  certainly  over/hot  \011r- 
felf,  p.  85.— Perhaps  not — Thefe  Englifh  hi  tiunr 
were,  I prefume , your  followers. — No;  this  is 


vour 


[ 1Z5  ] 

your  firft  miftake.  I was  but  a Tingle,  private 
member  of  that  fociety. — Afterwards  you  repre- 
fent  them  as  perverted  by  the  Moravians.--I  do  ; 
but  not  yet  connected  with  them  .—Before  they 
J poke  tliefe  wicked  things , they  had  joined  thefe 
men , and  ailed  under  their  chredion. — This  is 
another  miflake.  They  did  not  join  thefe  men, 
noraft  by  their  direftion,  till  long  after. — If  they 
did  not  learn  them  from  thefe  nezo  teachers , from 
whom  did  they  learn  them  ? — You  cannot  bring  off 
the  Moravians,  without  condemning  your  own  peo- 
ple.— They  learned  them  from  Mr.  Molther  chief- 
ly; whom  I am  not  at  all  concerned  to  bring  off. 
— Now  let  all  men  judge,  which  of  us  two  has 
overlhot  himfelf! 

10.  In  anfzuer  to  my  objeilions  agctvfl  them- 
conffent  accounts  you  have  given  of  the  Moravians 
— you  fay,  “ They  are , I believe,  the  mof  felf-in- 
confifent  people  under  the  fun.''  Would  not  one 
imagine , that  you  here  [peak  of  the  fame  per fons, 
or  of  the  whole  body  of  them  in  general  ? — I do, 
thus  far  : I afcribe  the  good  to  the  body,  of  them 
in  general;  the  evil  to  part  only  of  that  body,  to 
fome  of  thofe  fame  perfons. 

Your  method  of  getting  over  the  contradictions  / 
had  charged  upon  you,  is  much  the  fame,  (p.  86.) 
To  dijlingufh  either  between  the  Moravians  and 
the  Englifh  brethren  (tko ’ thefe  had  been  their 
clifciples. — This  has  been  abundantly  anfweredj — 
or  between  fome  cf  the  Moravians  and  others. — I 
think  a very  good  method;  for  proportions  are 
F 3 not 


t 126  3 

not  contradictory,  unlefs  they  both  foeak  of  the 
fame  perfons. 

However,  fsnce  you  pcrfill  to  affirm,  that  I 
am  guilty  of  the  contradictions  you  charg'd  upon 
me,  (p.  87.)  I think  there  cannot  be  a fofficient 
reply,  without  reciting  the  {everal  infiances, 

11.  Firfi,  You  commend  them  (the  Moravians) 
for  loving  one  another  ; and  yet  charge  them  with 
biting  and  devouring  one  another. — I anfwered, 
“ Them  ! Whom  ? Not  the  Moravians,  but  the 
Enghjh  brethren  of  Fetter-lane,  before  their  union 
with  the  Moravians.  Herein  then  is  no  fhadow 
of  contradiction.  For  the  two  femences  do  not 
relate  to  the  fame  perfons.'"’ 

You  reply,  Would  you  then  have  us  to  think, 
that  Jo  much  anger  and  conlradiBion  reigned 
among  your  Methodifis  -—I  would  have  you  think, 
this  is  nothing  to  the  purpofe.  Prove  the  con- 
tradiction, and  you  fpeak  to  the  point. — It  is 
plain  they  had  bef  ore  this  been  perverted  by  the  Mo- 
ravians, and  that — they  were  unwilling  to  be  taught 
by  any  others. — They — that  is,  nearly  half  of  the 
fociety.  But  here  is  no  proof  of  the  contradic- 
tion (till. 

2.  You  fay,  “ They  had  well  nigh  deflroyed  bro- 
therly-love from  among  us,  partly  by  cautions 
againf  natural  love  [Partly  by  occafioning  almoft 
continual  difputes] — So  they  had.  But  we  had 
then  no  connexion  with  them.  Neither  there- 
fore does  this  contradict  the  r loving  one  ano- 
ther.  r-You  reply,  As  if  they  can  truly  love  eack 

other. 


[ 127  ] 

ether,  who  teach  you  not  to  do  it,  and Jlir  up  divi- 
sions and  difturbances  among  you. — You  (hould 
fay,  if  yon  would  repeat  after  trie,  “ Who  caution 
yon  againft  natural  love,  and  occafion  many  dif- 
putes  among  you.”  W ell  ; allowing  they  do 
this,  (which  is  utterly  wrong)  yet  where  is  the 
contradiction  ? Yet  they  may  love  one  another. 

3.  You  “ praife  them  for  ufing  no  diverfions, 
but  fuch  as  become  faints : and  yet  fay  (I  recite  the 
whole  fentence)  1 have  heard  Jome  of  you  affirm, 
that  Chrijtian  faivation  implies  liberty  to  conjorm 
to  the  world,  by  joining  in  worldly  diverfions,  in 
order  to  do  good." — And  both  thefe  are  true.  The 
Moravians,  in  general,  “ ufe  no  diverfions  but 
fuch  as  become  faints.”  And  yet  I have  heard 
fome  of  them  affirm  (in  contradiction  to  their 
own  pra&ice)  that  one  then  mentioned  did 
well,  when  he  joined  in  playing  at  tennis,  in  or- 
der to  do  good.”  To  this  you  make  no  reply. 
Silence  then  confents,  that  there  is  no  contradic- 
tion here. 

4.  You  “ praife  them  for  not  regarding  outward 

adorning .” — So  I do,  the  bulk  of  the  congrega- 
tion.-  And  yet  you fay  (I  again  recite  the  whole 

fentence)  I have  heard  fome  of  you  affirm,  that 
Chrifian  faivation  implies  libeity  to  conjorm  to  the 
world,  by  putting  on  gold  and  cofly  apparel A — 
I have  fo.  And  I blame  them  the  more,  becaufe 
they  are  condemned  by  the  general  practice  of 
their  own  church.”— To  this  alfo  you  reply  not. 
-So  I muff  count  this  the  fourth  contradiction 

F 4 which 


[ m ] 

which  you  have  charged  upon  me,  but  have  no: 
proved. 

5.  “ You  call  their  difcipline , in  moli  refpe&s, 
truly  excellent.  1 ccitld  wijh  you  had  more  fully 
explained  yourfelf..—\  have  in  the  2d  journal, 
from  the  44th  to  the  32d  page.—//  is  no  fign  of 
good  discipline , to  permit  fuck  abominations,  (i.  e. 
error  in  opinion,  and  guile  in  practice.)— True ; 
tis  not ; nor  is  it  any  demonftration  againft  it. 
For  there  may  be  good  difcipline,  even  in  a col- 
lege of  Jefuits.  Another  fault  is,  too  great  de- 
ference to  the  Count.  Andyet,  in  molt  refpe&s,. 
their  difcipline  is  truly  excellent.  ’ 

You  reply,  Such  excellent  discipline,  for  all  that 
1 know , they  may  have,  [i.  e.  as  the  Jefuits ;]  but 
I cannot  agree-— that  this  is  f arce  inferior  to  that 
of  the  apofolical  age. — It  may  be,  for  any  thing 

you  advance  to  the  contrarv. Here  I cited 

feme  words  of  yours,  condemning  their Jub  ordina- 
tion, (p.  88.)  which  you  prudently  take  no  notice  of. 
—Yes  ; I had  juft,  before  taken  notice  of  their 
too  great  deference  to  the  Count.  But,  the  con- 
tradiction ! Where  is  the  contradiction  ? 

6.  “ You  mention  it  as  a good  ejftcl  of  their  dif- 
aplme,  that  every  one  knows  and  keeps  Ins  proper 
rank.  Soon  after,  as  it  were  with  a dejign 
to  confute  yourfelf,  you  fay,  Our  brethren  have 
neither  wifdorn  enough  to  guide,  nor  prudence 
enough  to  let  it  alone.— I anfwered,  “ Pardon  me, 
Sir,  I have  no  deftgn  either  to  confute  or  con- 
tradict myfelf  in  thefe  words.  The  former  fen- 

tencc 


[ 129  1 

tence  is  fp'oken  of  the  Moravian  brethren.  The 
latter  of  the  Englifi  brethren  of  Fetter-lane  (not 
then  united  with  the  Moravians , neither  aCting  by 
their  direction.)  To  this  likewife  you  do  not  re- 
ply. Here  is  then  a fixth  contradiction,  alledged 
againft  me,  but  not  proved. 

12.  However  you  add,  Had  you—Jliewn  me 
mifiaken  in  any  point  you  have  attempted  to  reply 
to,  fill— you  confefs  errors  and  wickednefs  enough 
among  the  Moravians,  to  render  your  account  of 
them  very  inconfftent.  But  you  have  not fucceeded 
in  any  one  anfwer.  You  have  not  Jhewn,  that  I 
have  in  any  one  infiance  mif quoted  you,  or  mifurt- 
derfood  the  charaBer  you  had  given  of  them,  or 
argued  falfely  from  what  you  had  faid  of  them. 
And  truly.  Sir,  all  you  have  done,,  has  been  cavil- 
ling at  a few  particulars.  But  the  argument  I was 
urging  all  this  while  you  quite forgot. 

Sir,  if  it  be  fo,  you  do  me  too  much  honour, 
in  fetting  pen  to  paper  again.  But  is  it  fo  ? Have 
I all  this  while  quite forget  the  argument  you  was 
urging?  I hope  not.  I feem  to  remember,  you 
mas  urging  fome  argument  ( Remarks , p.  21.)  to 
prove,  that  I fall  not  only  into  inconfifiencies,  but 
diretl  contradiBions  ; and  that  I fiewed you  mifi 
taken  not  only  in  one,  but  in  every  point  which 
you  advanced  as  fuch  : that  I did  not  confefs  any 
fuch  errors  or  wickednefs  of  the  Moravians,  as 
rendered  my  account  of  them  felf-inconffient : 
that  I fucceeded  in  more  than  one  anfwer,  to  the 
objections  you  had  urged  againft  it ; and  that  I 
F 5 fiewed, 


[ *3°  ] 

Jhewed,  you  had  mifiquoted  or  mifunderjlood  the 
character  I had  given  of  them,  or  argued  fialfiely 
from  it,  not  properly  in  one  infiance,  but  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end. 

Yet  this  I think  it  uncumbent  upon  me  to  fay, 
that  whereinfoever  I have  contributed,  direclly 
or  indire&ly,  to  the  fpreading  of  any  thing  evil, 
which  is,  or  has  been,  among  the  Moravians,  I 
am  forry  for  it,  and  hereby  alk  pardon,  both  of 
God  and  all  the  world. 

II.  1.  I think  it  appears,  by  what  you  yourfelf 
obferved,  that  on  the  fecond  head,  juftification 
by  faith,  I allow,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Farther 
Appeal,  almoft  as  much  as  you  contend  for. 

I defire  leave  to  cite  part  of  that  paffage  again, 
that  we  may  come  as  near  each  other  as  poflible. 

I would  juft  fubjoin  a few  words  on  each  head, 
which  I hope  may  remove  more  difficulties  out  of 
the  way. 

“ That  juftification  whereof  our  articles  and 
homilies  fpeak,  means  prelent  pardon,  and  ac- 
ceptance with  God : who  therein  declares  his 
rigkteoufrejs  or  mercy,  by  or  for  the  remjfion  of 
Jins  that  are  pafili' 

I fay  ,pajt.  For  I cannot  find  anything  in  the 
bible,  of  the  remiffion  of  fins,  paft,  prefent,  and 
to  come. 

* « I believe  the  condition  of  this  is  faith  : I 
m.ean  not  only,  that  without  faith  we  cannot  be 

juftified. 


C 131  ] 


juftified,  but  alfo,  that  as  foon  as  any  one  has  true 
faith,  in  that  moment  he  is  juftified.” 

* You  take  the  word  condition  in  the  former 
fenfe  only,  as  that  without  which  we  cannot  be 
juftified.  In  this  fenfe  of  the  word,  I think  we 
may  allow,  that  there  are  feveral  conditions  of 
jollification. 

* “ Good  works  follow  this  faith,  but  cannot 
go  before  it.  Much  lefs  can  fanftification  • 
which  implies  a continued  courfe  of  good  works, 
fpringing  from  holinefs  of  heart.” 

* Yet  fuch  a courfe  is  without  doubt  abfolutely 
neceffary  to  our  continuance  in  a Jlate  of  jiflifi- 
cation. 

“ It  is  'allowed,  that  repentance  and  fruits  meet 
for  repentance , go  before  faith.  Repentance 
abfolutely  ?nuf  go  before  faith  : fruits  meet for  it , 
if  there  be  opportunity.  By  repentance  I mean 
convi&ion  of  fin,  producing  real  defires  and  fin- 
cere  refolutions  of  amendment : and  by  fruits  meet 
for  repentance , forgiving  our  brother,  ceafing 
from  evil,  doing  good,  ufing  the  ordinances  of 
God,  and,  in  general,  obeying  him  according  to 
the  meafnre  of  grace  which  we  have  received. 
But  thefe  I cannot  as  yet  term  good  works,  be- 
caufe  they  do  not  fpring  from  faith  and  the  love 
of  God.”  Although  the  fame  works  are  then 
good,  when  they  are  performed  by  thofe  who  have 
believed. 

“ Faith  in  general  is,  a divine  fupernatural 
(evidence,  or  convi&ion)  of  things  not 
F 6 feen, 


[ ] 

teen,  not  difcoverable  by  our  bodily  fenfes,  as 
being  either  pall,  future  or  fpiritual.  Juflifying 
faith  implies,  not  only  a divine  that  God 

was  in  Chrift,  reconciling  the  wrorld  unto  himfelf, 
but  a fure  truft  and  confidence,  that  Chrifl  died 
for  my  fins,  that  he  loved  me,  and  gave  himfelf 
for  me.  And  the  moment  a penitent  finner  thus 
believes,  God  pardons  and  abfolves  him.” 

I fay,  a penitent  finner;  becaufe juflifying  faith 
cannot  exifl  without  previous  repentance. 

“ Yet  although  both  repentance,  and  the 

fruits  thereof,  are  in  fome fenfe  neceffary  before 
juftification,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is 
neceffary  in  the  fame  fenfe , or  in  the  fame  degree 
with,  faith.  Not  in  the  Janie  degree.  For  in- 
whatever  moment  a man  believes,  (in  the  Chrif- 
tian  fenfe  of  the  word)  he  is  juffified. — But  it  is 
not  fo,  at  whatever  moment  he  repents,  or 
brings  forth  any,  or  all  the  fruits  of  repen- 
tance.  Confequently,  none  of  thefe  are  ne- 

eeffary  to  juflification,  in  the  fame  degree  with 
&ith.’r 

“ Nor  in  the  fame  ferfe.  For  none  of  thefe 
has  fo  dire£l,  immediate  a relation  to  juflification 
as  faith.  This  is  proximately  neceffary  thereto; 
repentance  remotely,  as  it  is  neceffary  to  faith  (fo 
the  error  of  the  prefs  is  to  be  corredled.)  And 
the  fruits  of  repentance  flill  more  remotely,  as  they, 
are  necefTary  to  the  increafe,  or  continuance  of 
repentance.  And  even  in  this  fenfe,  they  are 

only  neceffary  on  fuppofition if  there  be 

time. 


[ 133  3 

time  and  opportunity  for  them.  For  in  many 
inftances  there  is  not,  but  God  cuts  fhort  his 
work,  and  faith  prevents  the  fruits  of  repen- 
tance.” 

2.  Thus  far  I believe  we  are  nearly  agreed. 
But  on  thofe  words,  “ Far  other  qualifications 
are  required,  in  order  to  our  handing  before  God 
in  glory,  than  were  required  in  order  to  his  giv- 
ing us  faith  and  pardon  : in  order  to  this,  nothing 
is  indifpenfably  required,  but  repentance  or  con- 
viction of  fin;  but  in  order  to  the  other,  it  is 
indifpenfably  required,  that  we  be  fully  cleanfed 
from  all  fin  you  remark.  Here,  I apprehend, 
art  two  great  miftakes,  1.  You  make  too  little  necef- 
fary  before  pardon.  2.  Too  much  afterward.  You. 
confne  repentance  within  too  narrow  limits,  and 
extend  holinefs  beyond  its  juf  bounds.  (p.  92.) 

Firf,  By  repentance  you  mean  only  convidlion  of 
fin.  But  this  is  a very  partial  account  of  it.  Every 
child  that  has  learned  his  catechifn  can  tell,  that 

forjaking  of  fin  isalfo  included  in  it. Living  in. 

obedience  to  God’s  will,  when,  there,  is  opportunity ; 
and  even  when  them  is  not,  a fincere  dejire  and  pur-, 
pofe  to  do  fo — and  a faith  in  God's  mercies  through. 
Chrijl  JeJus. 

I had  faid,  “ In  order  to  God’s  giving  us  faith 
and  pardon,  nothing  is  indifpenfably  required 
but  repentance,”  2.  e.  “ Conviction  of  fin  produc- 
ing real  defires  and  fincere  refolutions-of  amend- 
ment.” But  you  apprehend,  that  I am  here  in  a 
great,  miflake : that  I give  a very  partial  account  of 

repentance : 


C *34  J 

repentance : that  I ought  to  include  therein  a fin- 

cere  clefire  and  purpofe  to  obey  God. 1 do  : I 

have  faid  fo  exprefsly — And  living  in  obedience 

to  God's  will , when  there  is  opportunity. Very 

well ; but  I here  fpeak  of  what  is  indifpenfably 
required,  i.  e.  whether  there  is  opportunity  of 
actual  obedience  or  no. — And  a faith  in  God's 
mercies  through  Chrif  Jefus. — A very  great  mif- 
take  indeed!  My  not  including  faith  in  that 
repentance,  which  I fay  is  indifpenfably  required 
— in  order  to  faith  ! 

Secondly,  You  make  finlefs  perfection  necejfary 
after  jufification,  in  order  to  make  us  meet  for 
glory. — And  who  does  not  ? Indeed  men  do  not 
agree  in  the  time.  Some  bekeve  it  is  attained 
before  death  : fome,  in  the  article  of  death  : 
fome,  in  an  after-flate;  in  the  myjlic,  or  the 
popifi  purgatory.  But  all  writers,  whom  I have 
ever  fecit  till  now  (the  Romifi  themfclves  not 
excepted)  agree,  that  we  muft  be  “ fully  cleanfed 
from  all  fin,”  before  we  can  enter  into  glory. 

g.  After  what  has  already  been  allowed,  I can- 
not think  it  needful,  to  difpute  farther,  on  the 
head  of  juflification. — Rather  fuffer  me  to  clofe 
this  part  of  our  debate,  by  tranferibing  what  I 
affent  to,  from  that  clear  recapitulation  of  your 
fentiments,  which  you  have  given  in  your  45th 
and  46th  pages. 

“ Firft,  Juflification  is  the  a£l  of  God,  pardon- 
ing our  fins,  and  receiving  us  again  to  his  favour. 
This  was  free  in  him,  becaufe  undeferved  by  us; 

unde- 


[ »3  5 ] 


undeferved,  becaufe  we  had  tranfgrefTed  his  law, 
and  could  not,  nor  even  can  now,  perfectly  ful- 
fill it.” 

2.  “ We  cannot  therefore  be  jollified  by  our 
works,  becaufe  this  would  be,  to  be  jollified  by 
fome  merit  of  our  own.  Much  lefs  can  we  be 
j afhified  by  an  external  fhew  of  religion,  or  by  any 
fuperflitious  obfervances. 

3.  “The  life  and  death  of  our  Lord  is  the  foie 
meritorious  caufe  of  this  mercy,  which  mull  be 
firmly  believed  and  trulled  in  by  us.  Our  faith 
therefore  in  him,  though  not  more  meritorious 
than  any  other  of  our  adlions,  yet  has  a nearer 
relation  to  the  promifes  of  pardon  through  him, 
and  is  the  mean  and  inllrument  whereby  we  em- 
brace and  receive  them.” 

4.  “ True  faith  mull  be  lively  and  produdlive 
of  good  works,  which  are  its  proper  fruits,  the 
marks  whereby  it  is  known. 

* 3.  “ Works  really  good,  are  fuch  as  are  com- 
manded by  God  (fpringing  from  faith)  done  by 
the  aid  of  his  holy  Spirit,  with  good  defigns,  and 
to  good  ends.  Thefe  may  be  confidered  as  in- 
ternal or  external.” 

* 6.  “ The  inward  ones,  fuch  as  hope,  trull, 
fear,  and  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  (which 
may  be  more  properly  termed  good  difpojitions 
and  [are  branches  of]  fandlification)  mull  always 
be  joined  with  faith,  and  confequently  be  condi- 
tions prefent  in  jollification — though  they  are  not 
the  means  or  inllruments  of  receiving  it.” 

* 7.  “ The 


[ 136  ]" 

* y.  “ The  outward” — (which  are  more  pro- 
perly termed  good  works)  “ though  there  be  no 
immediate  opportunity  of  prafiifing  them,  and 
therefore  a fincere  defire  and  refolution  to  per- 
form them,  be  fufhcient  for  the  prefent ; yet  muff 
follow  after  as  foon  as  occafion  offers,  and  will 
then  be  neceffary  conditions  of  preferving  our 
juffification.” 

* 8.  “ There  is  a jufl ification  conveyed  to  us 
in  our  baptifm,  or  properly,  this  Rate  is  then  be- 
gun. But — fhould  we  fall  into  fins — we  cannot 
regain  it  without  true  faith  and  repentance,  which 
implies  (as  its  fruits)  a forfaking  of  our  fins,  and 
amendment  of  (our  whole)  life.” 

* I have  only  one  circumfiance  farther  to  add, 
namely,  That  I am  not  72 ewly  convinced  of  thefe 
things.  For  this  is  the  doffrine  which  I have 
continually  taught  for  eight  or  nine  years  laff 
pall  : only,  I abfiained  from  the  word  condition , 
perhaps  more  fcrupuloufly  than  was  needful. 

4.  With  regard  to  the  confequences  of  my  teach- 
ing this  doftrine,  I defire  any  who  will  not  ac- 
count it  lofi  labour,  to  confult  with  his  own  eyes, 
ferioufiy  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  the  3d  and  4th 
journals.  And  if  he  pleafes,  he  may  farther  read 
over  and  compare,  from  the  23th  to  the  29th 
page  of  my  anfwer,  with  your  reply,  from  the 
101ft  (inclufive)  to  the  104th  page. 

Among  the  conferences  you  reckoned  (in 
your  Remarks)  befides  introducing  predejiination, 
ionjufion,  prejiimption,  and  dejpair,  many  very 

Jhocking 


[ m ] 

flocking  infiances  of  all  which  (your  words  'die)  you 
give  as  among  your  followers — p.  gz,  gg — I an- 
swered, “ You  Should  have  Specified  a few  of 
thofe  instances  ; at  leaSf  the  pages  where  they 
occur.  (Suppofe,  only  three  of  each  fort,  out 
of  any,  or  all  the  four  journals)  “ Till  this  is 
done,  I can  look  upon  this  aSfertion  as  no  other 
than  a flourifh  of  your  pen.” 

Upon  this  you  exclaim,  (p.  n l.J  / mujl  beg 
the  reader  to  obferve  your  method  of  citing  my 
words.  Many  infiances  of  cmifions  he  has  had 
already.  But  here  is  fuch  a one , as  I believe  few 

controverfies  can  parallel. Would  not  any  one 

imagine,  from  the  view  of  thefe  zoords  \_Predefina- 
tion,  cortfufion , prefumption , and  defpair ] that 
they  occurred  all  together  in  page  gz,  of  my 
remarks,  and  that  I obferved  nothing  farther  con- 
cerning this  point  ? Could  it  be  thought,  that  any 
thing  intervened  between  the  page  referred  to,  and 
the  laf  fentence  ? And  yet  fo  it  is,  that  near  three 
pages  intervene  ! — Ha!  do  near  three  pages  inter- 
vene! Prodigious  indeed! — And  this  is  called  an 
anfwer  ! — So  it  is,  for  want  of  a better. 

Your  bufinefs  was  to fiew,  that  the  calviniftical 
notions  have  not  prevailed  among  the  Methodifis, 
or  that  they  were  no  conferences  of  unconditional 
jujlifi cation. — No,  Sir,  It  was  not  my  bufinefs  to 
Shew  this.  It  was  not  my  bufinefs  to  prove  the 
negative  ; but  yours,  to  prove  the  affirmative. 
Mr.  Whitefielcl  is  himfelf  a Calvinifl.  Such  there- 
fore doubtlefs  are  many  of  his  followers.  But 

Calvinifm 


[ ] 

Calvl.nifm  has  not  prevailed  at  all,  among  any 
oiher  of  the  Methodifls  (fo  called,)  nor  is.  it  to 
this  clay  any  confequence  of  unconditional  jufli- 
fication,  in  the  manner  wherein  I preach  it. 

5.  You  next  take  the  pains  to  lay  before  ther 
reader,  an  in/lance  or  two  of  confufon,  & c.  The* 
fir  11  I read  thus  : p.  1 1. 

“ iVhile  we  were  at  the  room,  Mrs.  J.  fitting 
at  home , took  the.  bible  to  read.  But  on  a fudden, 
threw  it  away , faying  1 am  good  enough.  I will 
never  read  or  pray  more.  She  was  in  the  fame 
mind  when  I came ; often  repea  fing,  I ufed  to  think , 
1 was  full  of  fin,  and  that  I finned  in  everything 
I did.  But  now  I know  better.  I am  a good 
Chrifian.  I never  did  any  harm  in  my  life.  I 
do  not  defire  to  be  any  better  than  I am  ; fne  fpake- 
many  things  to  the  fame  effect,  plainly  fiewing, 
that  the  fpirit  of  pride  and  of  lies  had  the  full 
dominion  over  her. — I afked,  do  you.  defire  to  be 
healed  ? She  faid,  I am  whole.  But  do  you  defire 
to  befaved?  She  replied,  I am  faved,  l ail  nothing, 
1 am  happy T — This  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  pre- 
fent  falvation  and  Jinlef  perfection,  taught  by  you 
among  the  weak  and  ignorant. 

I fhould  wonder  if  the  fcarecrow  ofmlefs  perfec- 
tion was  not  brought  in  fome  way  or  other.  But 
to  the  point.  You  here  repeat  a relation  as  from 
me,  and  that  in  confirmation,  you  fay,  of  your 
own  veracity,  and  yet  leave  out  both  the  be- 
ginning of  that  relation,  part  of  the  middle,  and 
the  end  of  it. 


I begin 


[ J39  } 


I begin  thus  (4th  Journ,  p.  66}  “ Suncl.  11 » 
I met  with  a furprizing  indance  of  the  power  of 
the  devil.  Thefe  words,  of  all  others,  fhould 
not  have  been  left  out,  being  a key  to  all  that 
follows.  In  the  middle  of  the  relation,  immedi- 
ately after  the  words,  I am  happy,  I add,  “ Yet 
it  was  eafy  to  difcern,  (he  was  in  the  mod  violent 
agony  both  of  body  and  mind  : fweating  exceed- 
ingly, notwithdanding  the  fevered  frod,  and 
not  continuing  in  the  fame  pofture  a moment.  ’ 
A plain  proof,  that  this  was  no  inflance  of pre- 
fumplion,  nor  a natural  fruit  of  any  teaching 
whatever. 

It  ends  thus.  “ About  a quarter  before  fix 
the  next  morning,  after  lying  quiet  a while,  fire 
broke  out,  “ Peace  be  unto  thee,  (her  hufband) 
peace  be  unto  this  houfe,  the  peace  of  God  is 
come  to  my  foul,  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liv- 
eth.”  And  for  feveral  days  her  mouth  was  filled 
with  his  praife,  and  her  talk  was  wholly  of  his 
wondrous  works.” — Had  not  thefe  words  been 
left  out,  neither  could  this  have  pad  for  an  in- 
dance of  defpair. — Though  dill  I do  not  know 
but  it  might  have  dood  for  an  injlance  of  confu- 
fion,  &c. 

I mud  not  forget,  that  this  was  cited  at  fird, 
as  a proof  of  my  enthufiafm  : as  an  indance  of  a 
private  revelation,  which  (you  fay)  I fern  to  pay 
great  credit  to — reprefenting  the  conjetlures  of  a 
woman — wliofe  brain  appears  to  have  been  too 
much  heated , as  if  they  had  been  owing  to  a parti- 
cular 


[ *4°  J 

shiar  a. rid  miraculous  fpirit  of  prophefy.  ''Re- 
marks p.  64.)  I anfwered,  “ Defcani,  Sir,  as 
you  pleafe  on  this  entT/ia/m ; on  the  credit 
paid  to  this  private  revelation  ; and  mv  represent- 
ing the  conjectures  of  this  brain-fick  woman,  as 
owing  to  a miraculous  power  of  she  /pint  of  pro- 
phecy. And  when  you  have  done,  I will  defire 
you  to  read  the  paffage  once  .more;  where  you 
will  find  my  exprefs  words  are  (introducing  this 
account.)  Sunday  11,  I met  with  a furprizing 
inflance  of  the  power  cf  the  devil."  Such  was 
the  credit  I paid  to  this  revelation!  All  which  I 
afcribe  to  the  Spirit  of  God  is,  the  enabling  her 
to  drive  again!!  the  power  oj  the  devil,  and 
at  length  refloring  peace  to  her  fouL  (Anfwer* 

P-  41-) 

I was  in  hopes,  v©u  had  done  with  this  m- 
flance.  But  I am  difappointed.  korinyour2d 
letter  I read  thus  (p.  130.) 

The  inflances  of  enthuftajm  and  prefumption, 
which  your  If l journal  had  furnifhed  me  with, 
remain  now  to  be  reviewed.  The  jirfi  was,  of  a 
private  revelation,  which  you  appeared  to  pay 
great  credit  to.  You  had  reprefented  every  thing 
the  woman  had  /poke  in  her  agony  as  coining  to 
pafs. — But  I had  not  reprefented  any  thing  fiie 
fpoke  then,  whether  it  came  to  pafs  or  no,  as 
coming  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  from  the 
devil. 

You  fay,  When  I read  this  firjl,  1 was  amazed, 
and — impatient  to  look  again  into  ycur  journal. 

But 


C M*  ] 

But  I had  no  fooner  done  this,  but  I was Jlill  more 
afomjhed.  For  you  have  very  grievoujly  mifre- 
. prefented  the  cafe — If  I have,  then  I will  bear  the 
blame;  but  if  not,  it  will  light  on  your  head. 

It  is  not  this  account  which  you  had  thus  intro- 
duced; but  another,  and  a very  different  one,  of 
what  happened  a day  or  two  before.  Sunday,  you 
mention  her  as  being  guilty  ofgrofs  prefumption, — - 
which  you  attribute  to  the  power  of  the  devil.  But 
on  Monday  and  Tuefday  the  oppofle  revelations 
i happened , which— -you  relate  without  the  leaji 
mark  of  diffidence  or  blame,  (p.  131) 

I am  grieved  that  you  condrain  me  to  fay  any 
more.  In  the  66th  and  67th  p.  of  the  lad  journal, 
I gave  an  account  of  Mrs.  Jones,  which  I term, 
•“  a furprizing  indance  of  the  power  of  the  devil.” 
It  includes  the  occurrences  of  three  days.  This 
you  brought  as  a proof  of  my  enthufiafm.  I an- 
fwer,  “ the  very  words  that  introduce  this  ac- 
count f prove  it  is  no  indance  of  enthufiafm  : 
meaning  by  this  account  (as  I fuppofe  is  plain  to 
every  reader,)  the  following  account  of  Mrs. 
Jones.  You  reply.  It  is  not  this  account, 
which  you  had  thus  introduced,  but  another,  and 
a very  different,  one,  of  what  happened  a day  or 
two  before.  Sir,  it  is  the  whole  account  of  Mrs. 
Jones  which  I thus  introduce  ; and  not  another ; 
not  a very  different  one.  And  I attribute  the 
agony  which  fhe  (Mrs.  Jones ) was  in  ; and  mo-ft 
of  the  words  which  die  fpoke,  both  on  Sunday , 

Monday 


[ M2  ] 

Monday  and  Tuejday,  not  to  the  Spirit  of  God, 
but  to  ihe  power  of  the  devil. 

6.  The  next  inftance,  which  you  relate  as  an 
inftance  of  defpair,  is  that  of  a young  woman  of 
Kingfwood ; which  you  break  off  with,  “ Take 
me  away,  ''  & c.  (p.  112.)  But  why  did  you  not 
decypher  that,  &c.  Vv  hy  did  you  not  add  the 
reft  of  the  paragraph  ? Becaufe  it  would  have 
fpoiled  your  whole  argument.  It  would  have 
fhewn  what  the  end  of  the  Lord  was,  in  permit- 
ting that  fevere  vifitation.  The  words  are, 
(Journ.  3.  p.  93.)  “ We  interrupted  her  by  cal- 
ling again  upon  God,  on  which  fhe  funk  down  as 
before  (as  one  afleep)  and  another  young  woman 
began  to  roar  as  loud  as  fire  had  done.  Mv  bro- 
ther  now  came  in,  it  being  about  nine  o’clock. 
We  continued  in  prayer  till  paft  eleven  : when 
God  in  a moment  fpoke  peace  into  the  foul,  firff, 
of  the  firft  tormented,  and  then  of  the  other. 
And  they  both  joined  in  finging  praifes  to  him, 
who  had  ftilledthe  enemy  and  the  avenger.” 

7.  I am  forry  to  find  you  ftill  affirm,  that  with 
regard  to  the  Lord’s  fupper  alfo,  I advance  many 
injudicious,  falfc  and  dangerous  things.  Such  as, 
1.  That  “ a man  ought  to  communicate,  without 
a fure  trufi  in  God’s  mercy  through  Chri/l,  (p. 
117.)”  You  make  thefe  as  my  words;  but  I 
.know  them  not. — 2.  “ That  there  is  no  previous 
preparation  indtfpenfably  necejfary,  but  a defv  e to 
receive  wliatjoever  God pleafes  to  give.” — But  I in- 
elude  abundantly  more  in  that  defire,  than  you 

fee  in 


t M3  ] 

deem  to  apprehend;  even  a willingnefs  to  know 
and  do  the  will  of  God. — 3.  “ That  no  fitnefs  is 
required  at  the  time  of  communicating,  (I  recite  the 
•whole  fentence)  but  a fenfe  of  our fate,  of  our  ut- 
terfinfulnefs  and  he] pleffnefs  l Every  one  who  knows 
he  is  ft  jar  hell,  being  jujl  fit  to  come  to  Chrifl,  in 
this,  as  well  as  in  all  other  ways  of  his  appoint- 
ment— But  neither  can  this  fenfe  of  our  utter 
finfulnefs  and  helpleffnefs  fubfift,  without  earned; 
defires  of  uriiverfal  holinels. — There  was  another 
pafjage  (you  fay)  which  you  chafe  to  omit.  (p.  1 18.) 
Which  th  is  was,  I do  not  underhand.  Nor  do  I 
-perceive  any  one  of  thefe  dreadful  pofuions  (as 
you  ftile  them)  to  be  contrary  to  the  word  of  God. 

8.  You  will  likewife  at  all  hazards  hand  your 
ground,  as  to  the  charge  of fcical  infenjibihty . I 
anfwered  before,  (p-  gb.)  How  do  you  fupport 
-the  charge  ? Why  thus, — You  fay , the f errant  s of 
God fuffer  nothing . — And  can  you  pofhbly  mif- 
-underftand  thefe  words,  if  you  read  thofe  that 
immediately  follow  ? “His  body  was  well  nigh 
torn  afunder  with  pain,  But  God  made  all  his 
bed  in  his  ficknefs.  So  that  he  was  continually 
giving  thanks  to  God,  and  making  his  boafl  of 
his  praife.” 

You  reply,  (118)  If  you  meant  no  more  than 
ihat  a man  under  the  fiarpef  pains,  may  be 
thankful  to  God , why  did  you  call  .this  a Jlrange 
truth  ? — Becaufe  I think  it  is  fo.  I think  it 
exceeding  hrange,  that  one  in  fuch  a degree 
aof  pain,  fhould  be  continually  giving  thanks  to 

God. 


[ Hi  ] 

'God.  Not  that  I fuppofe  him  infenfble  of  hu 
torments.  “ His  body,  I fay,  was  well  nigh 
torn  afunder  with  pain.”  But  the  love  of  God 
fo  abundantly  overbalanced  all  pain,  that  it  was 
nothing  to  him. 

The  next  m fiance  is  as follows.  One  told you^ 
Sir,  I thought  lafl  week  there  could  he  no Juch 
ref  as  you  defcribe  ; none  in  this  world  wherein 
zee Jliould  bej'o  free,  as  not  to  defire  eaje  in  pain. 
But  God  has  taught  me  better.  For  on  Friday  and 
Saturday,  when  I was  in  the  frongef  pain,  / 
never  once  had  one  moment  s defire  of  eafe  (add,  but 
only  that  the  will  of  God  might  be  done.  ') 

Neither  has  this  any  refemblance  o ifoical 
infenfibility.  I never  fuppo/ed,  that  this  per  fort 
did  noijeel  pain  : (nor  indeed  that  there  is  any 
Hate  on  earth,  wherein  we  fhall  not  feel  it.) 
But  that  her  foul  was  filled  with  the  love  of  God, 
and  thankfully  refigned  to  his  will. 

Another  injlance  is  taken  from  one  of  your  hymns 
where  are  thefe  lines  : (p.  a 19.) 

“ Doom  if  thou  canf,  to  endlefs  pains. 

And  drive  me  from  thy  face  : (add. 

But  if  thy  fironger  love  conflrains, 

Let  me  he  fav:d  by  grace.) 

This  I thought  the  height  -of  infenfibility , extrava- 
gance and  prefumption. You  fee  nothing  of 

thefe  in  it.  And  yet  you  explain  yourfelf  thus, 

“ If  thou  canf  deny  thyfelf  if  thou  canf  forget  to 
be  gracious,  if  thou  canf  ceafe  to  be  truth  and 

love  A 


[ H5  ] 

love.”  All  which  in  my  opinion,  is  fixing  the  charge 
mojl Jlrongly  upon  you.  For  the  fuppofition  that 
Chmfl  can  dc  theft  things — Are  you  in  earneft. 
Sir  ? Are  you  really  ignorant,  that  expreffions 
of  this  kind,  do  not  fuppofe  he  can,  but  quite  the 
revei  fe  ? That  they  are  one  of  the  ftrongeft  forms 
of  obteftation,  of  adjuring  God  to  fhew  mercy, 
by  all  his  grace,  and  truth,  and  love  ? So  far  is 
this  alfo  from  proving  the  charge  of  ftoical  infen- 
fibility. 

III.  1.  I come  now  to  confider  the  point  of 
church-communion,  of  which  you  have  fpoke  in 
the  beginning  of  your  trealife.  In  the  entrance 
you  fay,  We  leach  no  other  doBrine  than  has  al- 
ways been  taught  in  our  church. — Our  fentiments 
concerning  j unification  are  reconcileable  to  our  ar- 
ticles, homilies  and  Jervicc. — This  I apprehend fe- 
ver al  of  the  Method ijls  have  been  convinced  of,  and 
have  therefore  left  our  communion  entirely. — You 
give  us  more  infances  than  one  of  this  in  your  lajl 
journal. — (p.  2.)  No,  not  one.  Nor  did  I ever 
yet  know  one  man,  who  therefore  left  the  com- 
munion of  the  church,  becaufe  he  was  convinced 
that  either  her  articles,  homilies  or  liturgy  op- 
pofed  his  fentiments  concerning  juftification. 
Poor  Mr.  St.  and  Mr.  Simp/on  were  induced  to 
leave  it,  by  reafons  of  quite  another  kind. 

. You  add,  We  cannot  wonder,  that  fome  Metho- 
difs,  have  withdrawn  from  her , — while  they  have 
been  ufed  to  hear  doBrines,  which  they  muf  have 
Vol.  XVI.  G been 


[ M6  ] 


been  finfble,  have  no  place  inker  articles  and ftr- 
vice.— So  far  from  it,  that  all  I know  of  them  are 
deeply  J&nfible,  the  doctrines  they  have  been  ufed 
to  hear  daily,  are  no  other  than  the  genuine  doc- 
trines of  the  church,  as  expreft  both  in  her  arti- 
cles and  fervice. 

2.  But  our  prefent  queflion  turns  not  on  doc- 
trine but  difcipline. My  firjl  bufinefs  (you 

fay)  is  to  confider,  fome  very  lax  notions  oj  church- 
communion,  which  l find  in  your  l ajl  journal.  P. 
26,  you  fay,  “ Our  20th  article  defines  a true 
church,  a congregation  of  faithful  people,  wherein 
the  true  word,  oj  God  is  preached,  and  the  facra- 
ments  duly  adminifiered — (p.  3.)  The  ufe  I would 
willingly  make  of  this  definition,  (which,  obferve, 
is  not  mine,  be  it  good  or  bad)  is  to  flop  the 
boalling  of  ungodly  men,  by  cutting  off  their 
pretence  to  call  themfelves,  of  the  church.  But 
you  think,  they  may  call  themfelves  fo  ftill. 
Then  let  them.  I will  not  contend  about  it. 

But  you  cannot  infer  from  hence,  that  my 
notions  of  church  communion  are  either  lax  or 
other  Wife.  The  definition  which  I occafion- 
ally  cite,  (hews  nothing  of  my  femiments  on  that 
head.  And  for  any  thing  which  occurs  in  this 
page,  they  may  be  ftrifit  or  loofe,  right  or 
wrong. 

You  add,  It  will  be  requifie,  (p.  5.)  in  order 
to  approve  your  fief  a minifler  of  our  church,  that 

you  follow  her  rules  and  orders. That  you 

confiantly  conform  to  the  method  of  worfiap  fine  has 

prefiribed , 


['147  } 

pre.fribed,  and  Jludy  to  promote  her  peace.  All 
this  is  good  and  fit  to  be  done.  But  it  properly 
belongs  to  the  following  queftion. 

What  led  you  into  fuck  loofe  notions  of  church- 
communion,  I imagine,  might  he,  your  being  con- 
fcious  to  yourfelf,  that  according  to  the Jlritd,  juf 
account  of  the  church  of  England,  you  could  not 
with  any  grace  -maintain  your  pretenfons  to  belong 
fill  to  her. — Sir,  I have  never  told  you  yet,  what 
my  notions  of  the  church-communion  are.  They 
may  be  wrong,  or  they  may  be  right,  for  all  you 
know.  Therefore,  when  you  are  firfl  fuppofing 
that  I have  told  you  my  notions,  and  then  affign- 
ing  the  reafons  of  them,  what  can  be  faid,  but 
that  you  imagine  the  whole  matter  P 
g.  How  far  I have  aided  agreeably  to  the  rules  and 
orders  of  our  church,  is  a farther  queftion.  You 
think  I have  a£led  contrary  thereto,  firft,  By  uf- 
ing  extemporary  prayer  in  public.  The  church,  you 
fay,  has  frongly  declared  her  mind  on  this  point, 
by  appointing  her  excellent  liturgy , which  you  have 
folemnly  promifed  to  ufe — and  no  other. — 1 know 
not  when  or  where. — And  whoever — does  net  wor- 
ship Godin  the  manner  fie  prefer  ibes — mu  ft  be  f'up- 
pofed  to  fight  and.  contemn  her  offices  and  rules 
and  therefore  can  be  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  her 
minifier.  (p.  7.] 

I do  not  fight  or  contemn  the  offices  of  the 
church.  I efteem  them  very  highly.  And  yet 
I do  not,  at  ail  times,  worfitip  God,  even  in  pub- 
lic, in  the  very  terms  of  thofe  offices.  Nor  yet 
G 2 do 


[ i48  ] 

do  I knowing] y Jhght  or  contemn  her  rules.  For 
it  is  not  clear  to  mv  apprehenfion,  that  (he  has 
any  rule  which  forbids  tiling  extemporary  prayer, 
fuppofe  between  the  morning  and  evening  fer- 
vice.  And  if  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  her 
minijler  (which  I dare  by  no  means  affirm  my- 
fell  to  be)  yet  her  minijler  I am,  and  mull  always 
be,  unlefs  I Ihould  be  judicially  depofed  from  my 
miniflry. 

Your  fecond  argument  is  this.  “ If  you  fuppofe 
the  feripture  enjoins  you  to  ufe  extemporary 
prayer,  then  you  mull  fuppofe  our  liturgy  to  be 
inconfillent  with  feripture,  and  confequently  un- 
lawful to  be  ufed.:’  That  does  not  follow  : un- 
lefs I fuppofed  the  feripture  to  enjoin,  to  ufe 
extemporary  prayer,  and  no  other.  Then  it 
would  follow,  that  a form  of  prayer  was  incon- 
liflent  with  feripture.  But  this  I never  did 
fuppofe. 

Your  third  argument  is  to  this  effedl;  “ You 
aft  contrary  to  the  rule  of  the  church.  Allow 
Ihe  in  the  wrong : yet  while  you  break  her  rule, 
how  do  you  a£l  as  her  minilter  ?"  It  ought  tobe 
exprelfed,  how  are  )ou  her  minijler  ? For  the  con- 
cluhon  to  be  proved  is,  That  I am  not  her 
miniller. 

I anfwer,  1.  I am  not  convinced,  as  I ob- 
ferved  before,  that  I do  hereby  break  her  rule. 
2.  If  I did,  yet  fhould  I not  ceaje  to  be  her 
miniller,  unlefs  I were  formally  deprived.  3.  I 

now 


C *49  ] 

now  aftually  do  continue  in  her  communion,  and 
hope  that  I always  fhall. 

4.  You  objeft  farther,  “ That  I aifobev  the 
governors  of  the  church.”  I an'fwer,  I both  do, 
and  will  obey  them  in  all  things,  where  1 do  not 
apprehend  there  is  fome  particular  lav/  of  God  to 

the  contrary. Here,  you  fay,  you  ccnfefs  that 

in  fome  things  you  do  not,  and  cannot  obey  your  go  - 

vernors  (p.  8.) Did  I confefs  'this  ? Then  I 

fpoke  ralhly  and  foohlhly  : for  I granted  more 
than  I can  make  good. — I do  certainly  appre- 
hend, that  the  law  of  God  requires  me,  both  to 
preach  and  (fometimes)  to  pray  extempore.  Yet 
1 do  not  know  that  I difqbey  the  governors  of  the 
church  herein.  For  I do  not  know,  that  they 
have  forbidden  me  to  do  either. 

But  jour  behaviour  and  method  of  teaching  is 
irregular. — Have  you  any  warrant  from  fcripture 
for  preaching  up  and  down  thus  ? — I think  I 
have  : I think  God  hath  called  me  to  this  work 
by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  prfbytery,  which 
direfts  me  how  to  obey  that  general  command, 
While  we  have  time,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men. 

But  we  ought  to  do  this  agreeably  to  our  refpec- 
tive Jituations,  and  not  break  in  upon  each  other  s 
provinces. — Every  private  man  may  take  upon  him - 
felf  the  office  of  a magiflrate — and  quote  this  text 
as jujlly  as  you  have  done,  (p.  9.)  No.  The  private 
man  is  not  called  to  the  office  of  a magiflrate  ; 
but  I am  to  the  office  of  a preacher. — You  teas 
indeed  authorized  to  preach  the  gofpcl : but  it  was 
G 3 in 


[ 15°  ] 

in  the  congregation  to  which  you  Jhould  belazifully 
appointed. — Whereas  you  have  many  years  preach- 
ed in  places  whereunto  you  was  not  lawfully  appoint- 
ed; nay,  which  were  inlrvjled  to  others , who  nei- 
ther wanted  nor  dejired your  ajjijlance. 

Many  of  them  wanted  it  enough,  whether  they 
defired  it  or  no.  But  I (hall  not  now  debate  that 
point.  I rather  follow  you  to  the  firlt  of  the 
Farther  Appeal,  where  this  objection  is  con- 
fidered. 

5.  “ Our  church  (it  was  faid)  has  .provided 
againfl  this  preaching  up  and  down,  in  the  or- 
dination of  a pried,  by  exprefly  limiting  tbs- 
exercife  of  the  powers  then  conferred  upon  him, 
to  the  congregation  where  he  fhall  be  lawfully 
appoined  thereunto.” 

I anfwered,  1.  “ Your  argument  proves  too 
much.  If  it  be  allowed  juft  as  von  propofe  it,  it 
proves,  that  no  pried  has  authority  either  to 
preach  or  adminifter  the  facrament  in  any  other 
than  his  own  congregation.”  Farther  Appeal 
p.  84. 

You  reply.  Is  there  no  difference  between  a 
thing’s  being  done  occaftonally — and  its  being  done 
for  years  together  ? — Yes  a great  one.  And  more 
inconveniencies  may  arife  from  the  latter  than 
from  the  former.  But  this  is  all  wide  : it  does 
not  touch  the  point.  Still  if  our  church  does 
exprejly  limit  the  exercife  of  the  facerdotal 
powers,  to  that  congregation  whereunto  each 
pried  fhall  be  appointed;  this  precludes  him  fiom 

exercifing 


[ *51  ] 

exercifing  thofe  powers  at  all,  in  any  other  than 
that  congr egation. 

I anfwered,  2.  “ Had  the  powers  conferred 
been  fo  limited  when  I was  ordained  prieft,  my 
ordination  would  have  fignified  juft  nothing. 
For  I was  not  appointed  to  any  congregation'll 
all  : but  was  ordained  as  a member  of  that 
“ college  of  divines,"’’  (fo  our  ftatutes  exprefs  it) 
“ founded  to  overturn  all  herefies,  and  defend 
“ the  catholic  faith.” 

You  reply,  “ I prefume  it  was  expelled  you 
fhould  either  continue  at  your  college,  or  enter 
upon  fome  regular  cure.” — Perhaps  fo  ; but  I 
muft  ftill  infill,  that  if  my  facerdotal  powers  had 
been  then  c xprefly.  limited  to  that  congregation 
whereunto  I fhould  be  appointed , my  ordination 
would  have  fignified  nothing.  I mean,  I could 
never,  in  virtue  of  that  ordination,  have  ex- 
ercifed  thofe  powers  at  all:  feeing  I never  was 
appointed  to  any  fingle  congregation  : at  leaft,  not 
till  I went  to  Georgia. 

I anfwered,  g.  “ For  many  years  after  I was 
ordained  prieft,  this  limitation  was  never  heard  of. 
I heard  not  one  fyllable  of  it,  by  way  of  objec- 
tion to  mv  preaching  up  and  down,  in  Oxford 
or  London , or  the  parts  adjacent  : in  Glocejler- 
fiire  or  V/orcejlerfhire  : in  Lancafdre,  Yorhjhirc , 
or  Lincolnfiire.  Nor  did  the  ftrifleft  difcipli- 
narian  fcruple  fuffenng  me  to  exercife  thofe 
powers  wherever  I came.” 

g4 


You 


[ ] 

You  reply,  There  is  great  difference  between 
preaching  occasionally — with  the  leave  of  the  incum- 
bent, and  doing  it  conflantly  without  their  leave. 
I grant  there  is;  and  there  are  objeftions  to  the 
latter,  which  do  not  reach  the  former  cafe.  But 
they  do  not  belong  to  this  head.  They  do  not  in 
tire  leaft  affeftthis  confequence,  “ If  every  prieft, 
when  ordained,  is  exprefy  limited , touching  the 
cxercife  of  the  power  then  received,  to  that  con- 
gregation to  which  he  fhall  be  appointed  ; then 
is  he  precluded  by  this  exprefs  limitation , from 
preaching,  /with  or  without  the  incumbent’s 
leave,  in  any  other  congregation  whatever.” 

I anfwered,  4.  “ Is  it  not,  in  faft,  univerfaliy 
allowed,  that  every  prieft,  as  fuch,  has  a power, 
in  virtue  of  his  ordination,  to  preach — in  any 
congregation,  where  the  curate  defires  his  affif- 
tance 

You  reply  to  this  by  what  you  judge  a parellel 
cafe.  But  it  does  not  touch  ihe  reJlnElion  in 
queftion.  Either  this  does,  or  does  not  exprefy 
limit  the  exercife  of  the  powers  conferred  upon 
a prieft  in  his  ordination,  to  that  congregation 
whereunto  he  fhall  be  appointed.  If  it  does  not, 
I am  not  condemned  by  this  ; however  faulty  I 
may  be  on  a thoufand  other  accounts.  If  it 
does,  then  is  every  prieft  condemned  who  ever 
preaches  out  of  the  congregation  to  which  he  is 
appointed. 

Your  parallel  cafe  is  this — Becaufe  a man  does 

not 


[ *53  ] 

not  offend  againjl  the  law  of  the.  land,  token  I pre- 
vail upon  him  to  teach  my  children. — Therefore 
he  is  impozvered  to  feize  (read,  he  does  not  offend 
againft  the  law  of  the  land  in  feizing pan  apart- 
ment in  my  houfe , and  againjl  my  will  and  appro- 
bation to  continue  therein , and  to  direcl  and  diclate 
to  my  family]  p.  it. 

An  exafft  parallel  indeed  ! — When  therefore  I 
came  to  live  in  St.  Luke’s  parifh,  was  it  juft  the 
fame  thing  as  if  I had  feizecl  an  apartment  in  Dr. 
Buckley ’s  houfe?  And  was  the  continuing  therein 
againjl  his  will  and  approbation  (fuppofing  it  were 
foj  precifely  the  fame,  as  if  I had  continued  in 
his  houfe,  whether  he  would  or  no  ? Is  the  one 
exactly  the  fame  offence  againjl;  the  law  oj  the 
land  as  the  other?  Once  more.  Is  the  warning 
fnners  in  Moorfields,  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  the  very  fame  with  dire&ing  the  Dr.’s 
family,  under  Jus  own  roof? — I fhould  not  have 
anfwered  this,  but  that  I was  afraid  you  would 
conclude,  it  was  unanfwerable. 

I anfwered  the  former  objeftor,  g.  “ Before 
thofe  words  which  you  fuppofe  to  imply  fuch  a 
reftraint — were  thofe  fpoken  without  any  re- 
ftraint  or  limitation  at  all,  which  I apprehend  to 
convey  an  indelible  charafter,  receive  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  for  the  office  and  work  of  a prieft  in  the 
church  of  God,  now  committed  unto  thee,  by 
the  impofition  of  our  hands.” 

You  reply,  The  quefion  is  not,  whether  you  art 
in  orders,  or  not  ? p.  12. — I am  glad  to  hear  it. 

G g L really. 


[ m 1 

I really  thought  it  was. — But  whether  you  halt 
ailed Juilably  to  the  directions  or  rules  of  the  church 
of  England. — Not  fuitafcly  to  that  rule,  if  it  were 
ftri&ly  to  be  interpreted,  of  preaching  only  in  a 
fmgle  congregation.  But  I have  given  my  rea- 
fons,  why  I think  it  cannot  be  fo  interpreted. 
And  thofe  reafons  I do  not  fee  that  you  have 
invalidated. 

I would  only  add,  If  I' am  in  orders,  if  I am  a 
minifler  fliii,  and  yet  not  a minifter  of  the  church 
of  England,  of  what  church  am  I a minifter  ? 
W hoever  is  a minifler  at  all,  is  a minifler  of 
fome  particular  church.  Neither  can  he  ceafelo 
be  a minifler  of  that  church,  till  he  is  cafl  out  of 
it  by  a judicial  fentence.  Till  therefore  lam 
fo  cafl  out  (which  I truft  wiil  never  be)  I mud 
fliie  myfclf,  a minifter  of  the  church  or  England. 

6.  Your  next  objection  is,  I ou  not  only  erecl 
bands,  which,  after  the  Moravians,  you  call  the 
united focicty,  but  alfo  give  out  tickets  to  thofe  that 
continue  therein. — Tliefc  bands,  you  think,  have 
had  very  bad  caii/equences — as  was,  to  be  expeiled — 
when  weak  people — are  made  leaders — of  their 
brethren,  and  are  ft  upon  .expounding  Jcripture. — 
Ibid. 

You  are  in  fome  mi  flakes  here.  For,  1.  The 
bands  , are  not  called  the  united  focicty.  2.  The 
united  focicty  was  originally  fo  called,  not  after 
the  Moravians,  but  becaule  it  conflfled  offeveral 
fmaller  focieties  united' together.  3.  Neither  the 
bands,  nor  the  leaders  of  them,  as  fuch,  are 


[ Vi5  ] 

Jet  upon  expounding  fcripture.  4.  The  good 
confequences  of  their  meeting  together  in  bands, 
I know  : but  the  very  bad  corfequences  I know 
not. 

When  any  members  of  thefe,  or  of  the  united 
fociety,  are  proved  to  live  in  known  fin,  we 
then  mark  and  avoid  them  ; we  feparate  our- 
feives  from  every  one  that  walks  disorderly. 
Sometimes,  if  the  cafe  be  judged  infectious 
(though  rarely)  this  is  openly  declared.  And 
this  you  Rile  excommunication,  and  fay.  Does  not 
every  one  Jee  a feparate  ecclejiajlical  fociety  or  com- 
munion ? p.  13. — No.  This  fociety  does  not 
feparate  from  the  communion  of  the  reft  of  the 
church  of  England.  They  continuefedfajl/y  with 
them,  both  in  the  apoftolical  doctrine,  and  in  the 
breaking  of  bread , and  in  prayers  (which  neither 
Mr.  St.  nor  Mr.  Si.  does  : nor  the  gentleman  who 
writes  to  you  in  favour  of  the  Moravians  : who 
alfo  writes  preffinglv  to  me,  to  feparate  myfelf 
from  the  church)  a fociety  over  which  you  had 
appointed  youtftlf  a governor. — No  : fo  far  as  I 
governed  them,  it  was  at  their  own  intreaty. — 
And  took  upon  you  all  the  Jpiritual  authority,  which 
the  very  kighejl  church  governor  could  claim. — . 
What!  at  Kingszvood?  In  February  1740-1? 
Not  fo.  I took  upon  me  no  other  authority 
(then  and  there  at  lead)  than  any  Reward  of  a. 
fociety  exerts  by  the  confent  of  the  other  mem- 
bers. I did  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  declare, 
G 6 . that 


[ *56  ] 

that  they  who  had  broken  our  rules,  were  no 
longer  of  our  fociety. 

Can  you  pretend  that  you  received  this  authority 
Jrom  our  church  ? — Not  by  ordination  ; for  I did 
not  exert  it  as  a priejl : but  as  one  W'hom  that  fo- 
ciety had  voluntarily  chofen  to  be  at  the  head  of 
them. — Or  that  you  exercifed  it  in  fiubjeclion , or 
Jhbor dination  to  her  lawful  governors  ? — I think 
fo ; I am  fure  I did  not  exercife  it  in  any  de- 
figned  oppofition  to  them. — Did  you  ever  think 
proper  to  conjnlt  or  advije  with  them , about  fixing 
the  terms  oj  your  communion  ? — If  you  mean, 
about  fixing  the  rules  of  admitting  or  excluding 
from  our  fociety  : I never  did  think  it  either 
needful  or  proper.  Nor  do  I,  at  this  day. 

How  then  will  you  vindicate  all  thefie  powers? — 
All  tlieje  are,  “ Declaring  thofe  are  no  longer  of 
our  fociety.”  Here  is  a rnanifiefi  congregation. 
Either  it  belonged  to  the  church  ^England,  or  not. 
■ 1J  it  did  not — you  Jet  up  a fieparate  -com- 

munion againfi  her.  And  how  then  are  you 
injured , in  being  thought  to  have  withdrawn 
Jrom  her? — I have  nothing  to  do  with  this. 
The  antecedent  is  falfe.  Therefore  the  confe- 
quent  falls  of  courfe. — IJ  it  did  belong  to  the 
church,  Jhew  where  the  church  gave  you  finch  au- 
thority ofi controuling  and  regulating  it? — Autho- 
rity of  putting  diforderly  members  out  of  that 
fociety  ? The  fociety  itfelf  gave  me  that  autho- 
rity. What  private  clergyman  can  plead  her  com- 
miffion,  to  be  thus  a judge  and  ordinary,  even  in 

his 


[ 157  ] 

his  own  parijh? — Any  clergyman  or  layman, 
without  pleading  her  commifhon,  may  be  thus  a 
judge  and  ordinary.  Are  not  theft  powers  inhe- 
rent in  her  governors,  and  committed  to  the  higher 
order  oj  her  clergy  ? — No  ; not  the  power  of  ex- 
cluding members  from  a private  fociety, — unlefs 
on  fuppofition  of  fome  fuch  rule  as  ours  is,  viz. 
“ That  if  any  man  feparate  from  the  church,  he 
is  no  longer  a member  of  our  fociety.” 

7.  But  you  have  more  proof  yet.  The  grand 
jury  in  Georgia  found,  that  you  had  called  your  - 
f elf  ordinary  0/  Savannah.  Nor  was  this fad:  con- 
traditled  even  by  thofe  of  the  jury,  who  you  fay 
wrote  in  your  favour.  So  that  it  appears,  you  have 
long  had  an  inclination,  to  be  independent  and  un- 

controuled. This  argument  ought  to  be  good; 

for  it  is  far  fetched.  The  plain  cafe  was  this. 
That  grand  jury  did  affert,  “ That  in  Mr.  Cau- 
fon’s  hearing,  I had  called  myfelf  ordinary  of 
Savannah.”  The  minority  of  the  jury,  in  their 
letter  to  the  truflees,  refuted  the  other  allegations 
particularly  : but  thought  this  fo  idle  an  one, 
that  they  did  not  deign  to  give  it  any  farther 
reply,  fhan 

“ As  to  the  eighth  bill  we  are  in  doubt,  as  not 
well  knowing  the  meaning  of  the  word  ordinary.” 
See  2 Journal,  p.  47.  49. 

You  add,  1 appeal  to  any  reafonable  man,whethei 
you  have  not  ailed  as  an  ordinary;  nay,  a bifhop  in 

Kingfw'ood. If  you  mean,  in  “ declaring  thofe 

diforderly  members  were  no  longer  of  that  fo- 
ciety.” 


[ \5*  ] 

ciety.  ’ I admit  your  appeal,  whether  I therein 
acfed  as  a bifhop , or  as  any  fteward  of  a fociety 
may.  Nay,  you  have  gone  jar  beycncl  the  genera- 
lity of  the  diffenters  ihtjnfelvis  ; who  do  not  commit 
the  power  of  excommunication  ( and  appointed  to 
preach — that  is  another  queffion)  to  the  hands  cj 
any  private  nuniftcr. — The  powers  of  excommuni- 
cation.— True;  but  this  was  not  excommunication , 
but  a quite  different  thing. 

How  far,  in  what  circumftances,  and  in  what 
fenfe,  I have  appointed  men  to  preach,  I have  ex- 
plained at  large  in  the  third  part  of  the  Farther 
Appeal.  But  I wait  for  farther  light;  and  am  rea- 
dy to  confider,  as  I am  able,  whatever  ihall  be 
replied  to  what  is  there  advanced. 

8,  Your  general  conclufion  is.  Whatever  your 
pretences  or  profefions  may  be,  you  can  be  looked 
upon  by  Jtrious  arid  impartial, perfons,  (not  as  a 
member,  much  lefs  a minffter  of  the  church  of 
England,}  but  as  no  other  than  an  enemy  to  her 
corfitution , worfhip  and  doClnne,  raifmg  divifions 
and  difurbances  in  her  communion,  (p.  76.) — And 
yet  you  fay — “ I cannot  have  greater  regard  to 
her  rides' — “ I dare  not  renounce  communion 
with  her.”  (p.  it.) 

* I do  fay  fo  ff.il.  I cannot  have  a greater 
regard  to  any  human  rules,  than  to  follow  them 
in  all  things,  unlefs  where  I apprehend  there  is  a 
divine  rule  to  the  contrarv.  I dare  not  renounce 
communion  with  the  church  of  England.  Asa 
minifler , I teach  her  doftrines.  I ufe  her  ofhees. 

I conform 


f *59  ] 

I conform  to  her  rubricks.  I fuffer  reproach  for 
my  attachment  to  her.  As  a private  member  I 
hold  her  doffrines.  I join  in  her  offices,  i» 
prayer,  in  hearing,  in  communicating.  I 
f xpefl.  every  reafonable  man,  touching  thefe 
faffs,  to  believe  his  own  eyes  and  ears. — But  if 
thefe  faffs  are  fo,  how  dare  any  man  of  common 
fenle,  charge  me  with  renouncing  the  church  of 
England? 

9.  Ufe  ever  fo  many  exaggerations,  ft  111  the 
whole  of  this  matter  is,  1.  I often  ufe  extem- 
porary prayer.  2.  Wherever  I can,  I preach 
the  gofpeh  3.  Thofe  who  defire  to  live  the  go/pel 
I advife  how  to  watch  over  each,  other,  and  to 
put  from  them  fuch  as  walk  diforderly.  Now 
whether  thefe  things  are,  on  ether  confidera- 
tions,  right  or  wrong,  this  fingle  point  I mult  ftill 
infill  on  ; ‘‘  All  this  does  not  prove,  either  that 
I am  no  member,  or  that  I am  no  minijler  of  the 
church  of  England.'1  Nay,  nothing  can  prove, 
lam  no  member  of  the  church,  till  I either  am 
excommunicated,  or  renounce  her  communion, 
and  no  longer  join  in  her  d'ffririe,  and  in  the 
breaking  of  bread,  and  in  pnr  er.  Nor  can  anv 
thing  prove,  I am  no  minijler  of  the  church,  till 
I either  am  depojed  from  my  miniflry,  ox  volun- 
tarily renounce  her,  and  wholly  ceafe  to  teach  her  . 
d ffrines,  ufe  her  offices,  and  obey  her  rubricks 
for  conlcience  fake. 

However  I grant,  that  wbatfoever  is  urged  on 
this  head,  dejtrves  my  rnojl J'erious  confuleration. 

And 


[ >6o  ] 


And  whenfoever  I am  convinced , that  by  taking 
any  methods,  more  or  lefs  different  from  thofe 
I now  take,  I may  better  confult  the  honour  of 
religion , and  he  able  to  do  more  good  in  the  zvorld ; 
by  the  grace  of  God,  I fhall  notperfiflin  thefe 
one  hour,  but  inflantly  chufe  the  more  excellent 
way. 

IV.  1.  What  you  urge  cn  the  head  of  en- 
thufafn  aTo,  I think  defaves  my  moft  ferious 
confideration.  (You  may  add,  and prefumpticn. 
I let  it  drop  once  more  ; becaufe  I do  not  love 
tautology  ; and  becaufe  I look  upon  prefumption 
to  be  affential  to  enthufiafm,  and  confequently 
contained  therein.)  I will  therefore  weigh  what 
you  advance  concerning  it,  and  explain  myfelf 
fomething  more  at  large. 

/ am  to  examine , you  fay,  (p.  120.)  How 
far  you  have  cleared  yourjelj  of  enthufiajrn.  My 
account  of  this  you  Jet  down,  making  as  many 
alterations  and  omifions  as  there  are  lines — Per- 
haps more  ; for  I never  defigned  to  recite  the 
whole,  but  only  the  material  part  of  it.  If  you 
did  not  wholly  approve  of  it,  why  would  you  not 
let  me  know,  what  you  d ijlikecl  in  it  ? — Becaufe 
I do  not  love  many  words.  Therefore  when  the 
argument  flood  thus  : “ He  that  does  this  is  an 
enthufiafl:  but  you  do  this  I was  generally  con- 
tent with  anfwering  the  2d  propofuion,  and  leav- 
ing the  firft  as  I found  it. 

I laid  this  charge  again  ft  you  find  the  Methodifts 
in  general : between  you  every  part  of  the  characler 

has 


[ i6i  1 

has  heai  verified. — I anfwer  for  one  ; Jet  the  reft 
anfwer  lor  themfelves, — if  they  have  not  better 
employment. 

That  the  queftion  between  ns  may  be  the  more 
fully  underftood,  I ihall  briefly  compare  together, 
1.  Your  remarks.  2.  My  anfwer.  3.  Your  reply  : 
though  ff ill  I cannot  promife  to  repeat  your 
words  at  length. 

2.  You  remark  (p.  60.)  Though  you  would  be 
thought  an  enemy  to  enthufiajm  and  prefiimption, 

■ — yd  in  both  you  are  jar  from  being  inferior  to  the 
Moravians,  or  indeed  to  any  others  : [ftrong  af- 
fertions  ! not  inferior  to  any  others  ? Not  to  the 
French  prophets,  or  John  of  Leyden  ?J  1 . Enthu- 
Jiafm  is,  a falfe  perfuafion  of  an  extraordinary  di* 
vine  affiance,  which  leads  men  to  fucli  conduB,  as 
is  only  to  be  juf  ified  by  the  fuppoftion  of Juch  af- 
ffance . I anfwer,  (p.  38.)  “ Before  this  touches 
me,  you  are  to  prove  (which  I conceive  you  have 
not  done  yet)  that  my  conduft  is  fuch,  as  is  only 
to  be  juftified  by  the  fuppofition  of  fuch  affif- 
tance.”  You  reply  (p.  120.)  This , I think , is 
proved  in  the  preceding  traB. — I think  not.  Let 
men  of  candour  judge. — Yet  I am  perfuaded, 
there  was  fuch  an  affiftance  at  fome  times.  You 
have  alfo  to  prove,  that  this  was  a falfe  perfua- 
fion. 

You  remark,  2.  An  enthufiajl  is  then  fncere,  but 
mflaken.  (p.  61.)  I anfwered,  “ Thatl  am  mif- 
taken,  remains  to  be  proved.”  You  reply,  The 

world 


[ ] 


world  y( 


Agreed,  if  by  the 
ion  and  religion. 

His  intentions  muf  be  good: 
mo  ft  a.bomincil\c.  I anf.ver- 


zoorihl  muf judge. 
mean,  men  of  reu 
You  remark,  3. 
but  his  actions  will 

ed,  \\  hat  actions  of  mine  are  mod  abomina- 
b7Ie  You  reP ]Y>  Th  -world  muf  be  jud-e,  whe- 
theryour  public  actions  have  not  been— in  many 
ref  peas  abominable.  I am  glad  the  charge  foftens. 
I hope  by  and  by  you  will  think  they  are  only 
abominable  in  fome  refpefts. 

You  remark  4.  I aft  cad  of  making  the  word  of 
God— the  rule  of  Jus  actions,  kefollows  only  ferret 
perfuafon  or  impulfe.—l  anfwered,  “ 1 have  de- 
clared again  and  again,  that  I make  the  word  of 
God  the  rule  of  all  my  aflions,  and  that  I no 
more  follow  any  fecret  inftulfe  in  Head  thereof, 
than  I follow  Mahomet  or  Confucius .”  You  reply 
(p.  121.)  J oufall  again  into  yoUr  [train  of  loafing, 
as  if  declarations  could  have  any  weight  again  ft 
fads ; affert,  that  “ you.  make  the  word  of  God 
the  rule  of  all  your  adionsf  and  that  I “ perhaps 

do  not  know  many  perfonsi’ Stop,  Sir.  You 

are  flepping  over  one  or  two  points,  which  I 
have  net  done  with. 


You  remark,  g.  Inftead  of  judging  of  his  fpi- 
ntual  eftate,  by  the  improvement  of  his  heart,  he 
refs  only  on  exfaftes,  &c. — I anfwered,  “ Nei- 
ther is  this  my  cafe.  I reft  not  on  them  at  alh 
1 judge  of  my  fpiritual  eftate,  by  the  improve- 
ment of  my  heart  and  the  tenor  of  my  life  con- 
jointly.” 


C l63  1 

jointly.”  To  this  I do  net  perceive  you  reply 
one  word.  Herein  then  I am  not  an  enthufiaft. 

You  remark,  6.  He  is  very  liable  to  err — not 
conjidtri  :g  things  coolly  and  carefully.  I an- 
fwereu,  “ So  indeed  I am:  I find  it  every  day 
more  and  more.  But  I do  not  yet  find,  that  this 
is  owing  to  my  want  of  confider  ireg  things  coolly 
and  carefully.  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  many 
perfons  (excufemy  fimplicity  in  fpeaking  it)  who 
more  carefully  confider  every  ftep  they  take  (p. 
39.)  Y'et  I know  I am  not  cool  or  careful 
enough.  May  God  fupply  this  and  all  my 
wants  !”  Yrou  reply,  Your  private  life  I have,  no- 
thing to  do  -with  : and  then  enlarge  on  my  method 
of  confuting  feripture,  and  of  ufinglots:  of  both 
which  by  and  by.  But  mean  time,  obferve  this 
does  not  affeef  the  quefiion.  For  I neither  call: 
Jots,  nor  ufe  that  method  at  all,  till  I have  con- 
fidered  things  with  all  the  care  I can.  So  that,  be, 
this  right  or  wrong,  it  is  no  manner  of  proof,  that 
I do  not  “ carefully  confider  every  ftep  I take.” 

But  how  little  did  I profit  by  begging  your  ex- 
cufe,  fuppofel  had  fpoken  a word  unguardedly  ? 
O Sir,  you  put  me  in  mind  of  him  wTho  faid, 
“ I know  not  to  {hew  mercy  !”  You  have  need 
never  to  fight,  but  when  you  are  fure  to  con- 
quer: feeing  you  are  refolved  neither  to  give 
nor  take  quarter. 

You  remark,  7.  He  is  very  difficult  to  be  convinc- 
ed by  reafon  and  argument , as  he  ails  upon  a fup- 
pofed  principle  fuperior  to  it,  the  diredlion  of  God's 

Spirit, 


[ l64  ] 

Spirit.  I anfwered,  “ I am  very  difficult  to  be 
convinced  by  dr)-  blows  or  hard  names. — But  not, 
by  reafon  or  argument.  At  lead  that  difficulty 
cannot  fpring  from  the  caufe  you  mention.  lor 
I claim  no  other  direction  of  God’s  Spir  it  than 

common  to  ail  believers.” 

You  reply  (p.  124;  1. — I fear  this  will  not  be 
eafi/y  reconcileable  to  your  pajl pretences  and  behavi- 
our. I believe  it  will  ; in  particluar  to  what  I 
fpcak  of  the  light  I received  from  God  in  that 
important  affair.  (1  journal  p.  37.)  But  as  to 
the  directions,  in  genera]  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
we  very  probably  differ  in  this  ; you  apprehend 
thofe  direftions  to  be  extraordinary,  which  I fup- 
pofe  to  be  common  to  all  believers. 

You  remark,  8.  Whoever  oppofes  him  will  be 
charged  with  ref/ling  or  rejetting  the  Spirit.  I an- 
fwered, “ What ! Whoever  oppofes  me,  John 
Wefley  ?— Do  I charge  every  fuch  perfon  with 
rejetting  the  Spirit  ? No  more  than  I charge  him 

with  robbing  on  the  highway. Do  I charge 

you  with  rejedfing  the  Spirit  ?”  You  reply,  You 
deny  that  you  charge  the  oppofers  with  rejecting  the 
Spirit,  and  affirm,  that  you  never  f aid  or  thought, 
that  what  you  do  is  to  be  accounted  the  work  cf 
God.  Here  you  blend  different  fentences  toge- 
ther, which  I muff  confider  apart,  as  they  were 
written.  And  firft,  where  do  I charge  you  with 
rejeCting  the  Spirit  ? If  I charge  whoever  op- 
pofes me  with  this,  undoubtedly  I charge  you. 
If  I do  not  charge  you,  that  propofttion  is  falfe  ; 

I do 


[ ] 

I do  not  fo  charge  whoever  oppofes  me.  Your 
next  words  are,  You  affirm  that  you  never  / aid  or 
thought,  that  what  you  do  is  be  accounted  the  work 
off  God. — If  it  be  the  work  of  God,  you  need  not  de- 
ny the  other  point. — Yes,  Sir:  whether  it  be  or 
no,  I mull  hill  deny,  that  I ever  charged  you 
with  rejecting  the  Spirit  in  oppofing  me. 

You  remark,  9.  His  own  dreams  mvf  be  regard- 
ed as  oracles.— I anfwered,  “ Whofe  ? I defire 
neither  my  dreams  nor  my  waking  thoughts, 
may  be  regarded  at  all,  unlefsjuh  fo  far  as  they 
attree  with  the  oracles  of  God.”  To  this  alfo 
you  make  no  reply. 

You  remark,  10.  However  wild- — his  behaviour 
may  be,  whatevr  he — does,  is  to  be  accounted  the 
work  of  God.  It  was  to  this  I anfwered,  “ I ne- 
ver faid  fo  of  what  I do : I never  thought  fo.” 
This  anfwer  was  ill  exprelfed  And  I might  have 
forefeen,  you  would  hardly  fail,  to  make  your 
advantage  of  it.  I muh  therefore  explain  myfelf 
upon  it  a little  farther.  You  faid,  “ An  enthufiaft 
accounts  whatever  he  does  to  be  the  work  of  God.” 
I fhould  have  faid,  but  I do  not  account  what- 
ever I do  to  be  the  work  of  God.”  What  that  is, 
which  I do  account  his  work,  will  be  confidered 
by  and  by. 

You  remark,  11.  He  talks  in  the  file  ofinfpired 
perfons.  I anfwered,  “ No  otherwife  infpired, 
than  you  are,  if  you  love  God.”  You  reply,  (p. 
126.)  The  point  was  not,  whether  you  are  aBually 
infpired,  but  whether  you  have  talked  in  the  file  of 

thoje 


[ i6«  ] 

thofe  who  were fo.  That  was  fo  much  the  paint, 
that  if  it  were  allowed,  it  would  overturn  vour 
whole  argument.  For  if  I was  infpired  in  \our 
fenfe)  you  could  not  term  that  infpiration  enthu- 
fiafm  without  blafphemy  : but  you  again  mifiake 
my  words.  The  plain  meaning  of  them  is,  that 
I talk,  in  the  flile  of  thofe  perfons,  who  are 
“ no  olherwife  infpired  than  you  are,  if  you  love 
God.” 

You  remark,  12.  He  applies  fcripture  phrafes 
to  himjtlj,  without  attending  to  their  original 
meaning,  or  once  confidering  the  difference  of  tunes 
and circumjlances.  (p.  62.)  I anfwered,  “ I am  not 
confcious  of  any  thing  hke  this.  I apply  no 
fcripture  phrafe  (p.  39  ) either  to  myfelf  or  any 
other, without  carefully-confidering  both  the  origi- 
nal meaning , and  th  e fccondary  fen  fe,  wherein,  allow- 
ing for  different  times  and  circumffmces,  it  may 
be  applied  to  ordinary  Chriflians.”  You  reply. 
This  alfo  you  deny  to  have  done ; holding  however 
fame  feco nd ary  fenfe,  ( u hal  it  is  you  have  not  told 
us ) in  which  fcripture  phrafes  may — be  applied  to 
ordinary  Chrif  ians.  I have  largely  told  you, 

what  I mean  by,  a fecondary  fenfe,  in  the  firft 
parLofthe  Farther.  Appeal.  You  aid,  (p.  12 6.) 
many  things  which  were  truly  written  oj  the  preach- 
ing of  Chriflianrty  at  jirf,  you  have  vainly  applied 
to  youfelves.  Sir,  I am  to  anfwer  only  for  my- 
felf:  as  I will  lor  that  e.xpreffton,  Beho'.d  the  day 
of  the  Lord  is  come-,  he  is  again  v fit  mg  and  re- 
deeming his  people  ! 


3.  I come 


[ *7  } 

g.  I come  now  to  what  you  expatiate  upon  at 
large,  as  the  two  grand  inltances  of  enthufiafm. 
The  firli  is  plain!}1  this.  * At  fome  rare  times, 
when  I have  been  in  great  aiftrefs  of  foul,  or  in 
utter  uncertainty  how  to  aft,  in  an  important 
cafe,  which  required  a fpeedy  determination  : 
after  ufing  all  other  means  that  occurred,  I have 
calls  lots,  or  opened  the  bible.  And  by  this 
means  I have  been  relieved  from  that  dihrefs,  or 
direfted  in  that  uncertainty. 

Inltances  of  this  kind  occur  in  the  12.  14. 

28.  and  88th  pages  of  the  third  journal : as  alfo 
in  the  27.  28.  and  80th  page  of  the  lalt  journal. 
I defiie  any  who  would  underltand  this  matter 
throughly,  to  read  thofe  palfages  as  they  Hand  at 
length. 

As  to  the  particular  inftances,  I would  obferve, 
, 1.  That  with  regard  to  my  firll  journey  to  Briftol, 
you  Ihould  in  any  wife  have  fet  down  thofe 
words,  that  preface  the  fcriptures  there  recited. 
“ I was  intreated,  in  the  molt  preffing  manner, 
to  come  to  Brijlol  without  delay.  This  I was 
not  at  all  forward  to  do  : and  perhaps  a little  the 
lefs  inclined  to  it — becaufe  of  the  remarkable 
fcriptures  which  offered,  as  often  as  we  enquired 
touching  the  confequence  of  this  removal ; 
though  whether  this  was  permitted  only  for  the 
trial  of  our  faith,  God  knoweth,  and  the  event 
will  fhewd’ — From  the  fcriptures  afterwards  re- 
cited, fome  inferred,  that  the  event,  they  appre- 
hended, was  yet  afar  off. — I infer  nothing  at  all. 


[ *63  ] 

I Hill  know  not  how  to  judge;  but  leave  the  whole 
to  God.-r-*  i his  only  I know,  that  the  continual 
expeftation  of  death,  was  then  an  unfpeakable 
blefling  to  me:  that  I did  not  dare,  knowingly, 
to  wafle  a moment,  neither  to  throw  away  one 
defire  on  earthly  things  : thofe  words  being  ever 
uppermofl  in  my  thoughts,  and  indeed  frequently 
on  my  tongue, 

E’er  long,  when  fov’reign  wifdom  wills 
My  foul  an  unknown  path  fhali  tread, 

Shall  ftrangely  leave,  who  flrangely  fills 
This  frame,  and  waft  me  to  the  dead. 

0 what  is  death  ? ’T  is  life’s  lafl  fhore, 

Where  vanities  are  vain  no  more  : 

Where  all  purfuits  their  goal  obtain, 

And  life  is  all  re-touch’d  again. — 

Iobferve,  2.  That  in  two  other  of  thofe  inflan* 
ces,  (3 joum.  p.  12  and  14.)  it  is  particularly  men- 
tioned, that  “ I was  troubled;”  and  that  by  the 
feafonable  application  of  thofe  fcriptures,  that 
trouble  was  entirely  removed.  The  fame  blef- 
fing I received  (fo  I mull  term  it  flillj  from  the 
words  fet  down  in  the  88th  page:  and  in  a 
yet  higher  degree,  from  that  exceeding,  oppo- 
fite  fcripture  mentioned  in  the  80th  p.  of  the 
lafl  journal. 

1 obferve,  3.  That  at  the  times  to  which  your 
other  citations  refer,  I was  utterly  uncertain  how 
to  a£t,  in  points  of  great  importance,  and  fuch 

as 


[ i69  ] 

as  required  a fpeedy  determination  : and  that  by 
this  means  my  uncertainty  was  removed,  and  I 
went  on  my  way  rejoicing,  Jo.  3.  p.  12.  15.  Jo. 
4.  p.  27,  28. 

My  own  experience  therefore,  which  you  think 
fhould  difcourage  me jor  the  future  from  any  thing 
of  this  kind,  does  on  the  contrary  greatly  en- 
courage me  herein;  fince  I have  found  much 
benefit,  and  no  inconvenience  : unlefs  perhaps 
this  be  one,  that  you  cannot  acquit  ?ne  of  enthu- 
fafm  : add,  ifyoupleafe,  and  prefumption. 

But  you  a fit.,  Has  God  ever  commanded  us  to  do 
thus?  I believe  he  has  neither  commanded  nor 
forbidden  it  in  fcripture.  But  then  remember. 
That  fcripture  (to  ufe  the  words  which  you  cite, 
from  our  learned  and  judicious  Hooker)  is  not 
the  only  rule  of  all  things , which  in  this  life,  may 
he  done  by  men — All  I affirm  concerning  this,  is. 
That  it  may  be  done ; and  that  I have  in  faff,  re- 
ceived affiance  and  diredlion  thereby. 

4.  I give  the  fame  anfwer  to  your  aflertion,  (p. 
123.)  that  we  are  not  ordered  in  fcripture  to  de- 
cide any  point  in  queftion  by  lots.  You  allow  in- 
deed, there  are  fiances  of  this  in  fcripture-,  but 
affirm,  thefe  were  miraculous  : nor  can  we  without 
prefumption  (a  fpecies  of  enthufiafm)  apply  this 
method.  I want  proof  of.  this : bring  one  plain 
text  of  fcripture,  and  I am  fatisfied. — This,  1 ap- 
prehend, you  learned  from  the  Moravians — I did  ; 
though  ’tis  true,  Mr.  IVkitcfield  thought  I went 
too  far  therein. — Jnfan.es  cf  the  Janie  occur  in 
Vol.  XVI.  H 


your 


[ 1 7 o ] 

y our  journals.  I will  mention  only  one.  It  being 
debated  when  you  Jhould  go  to  Briftol,  you  fay , 
“ We  at  length  all  agreed , to  decide  it  by  lot.  And 
by  this  it  was  determined , I Jhould  go.”  (Jo.  3.  p. 
28.)  Is  this  your  zoay  of  carefully  confidering  every 
Jlep  you  take  ? Can  there  be  greater  rafhnefs  and 
extravagance ? Reafon  is  thus  in  a manner  ren- 
dered ufelefs  : prudence  is  fet  afide,  and  affairs  of 
moment  left  to  be  determined  by  chance  I p.  124. 

So  this  you  give  as  a genuine  inftance  of  my 
proceedings — And,  I fuppofe,  of  your  own  fair- 
nefs  and  candour!  “ We  agreed  at  length,  to  de- 
cide it  by  lot.”  True;  at  length:  after  a debate 
of  fome  hours ; after  carefully  hearing  and  weigh- 
ing coolly,  all  the  reafons  which  could  be  aliedg- 
ed  on  either  fide;  “ Our  brethren  ftill  continu- 
ing the  difpute,  without  any  probability  of  their 
coming  to  one  conclufion,  “ we  at  length  (the 
night  being  now  far  fpent)  all  agreed  to  this.” 
Can  there  be  greater  rafinefs  and  extravagance? — 
I cannot  but  think  there  can.  Reafon  is  thus  in 
a manner  rendered  ufelefs.  No;  we  had  u fed  it 
as  far  as  it  could  go  : from  Saturday,  March  17, 
(when  I received  the  firft  letter)  to  Wednefday  28. 
when  the  cafe  was  laid  before  the  fociety.  Pru- 
dence is  fet  apde  : Not  fo:  but  the  arguments  here 
were  fo  equal,  that  fire  faw  not  how  to  deter- 
mine : — And  affairs  of  moment  left  to  be  determined 
by  chance  ! By  chance  ? What  a blunder  then 
is  that,  The  lot  is  caf  into  the  lap  ; but  the  whole 
difpofal  thereof  is  of  the  Lord ! 


* This 


[ *7*  ] 


* This  1 firmly  believe  is  truth  and  reafon,  and 
will  be  to  the  end  of  the  world.  And  I therefore 
flill  fubfcribe  to  that  declaration  of  the  Moravian 
church  (laid  before  the  whole  body  of  divines  in 
the  univerfity  of  Wirtemberg,  and  not  by  them 
accounted  enthufiafm)  “ We  have  a peculiar 
efleem  for  lots,  and  accordingly  ufe  them  both  in 
public  and  private,  to  decide  points  of  impor- 
tance, when  the  reafons  brought  on  each  fide, 
appear  to  be  of  equal  weight.  And  we  believe 
th  s to  be  then  the  only  way,  of  wholly  fetting 
afide  our  own  will,  of  acquitting  ourfelves  of  all 
blame,  and  clearly  knowing  what  is  the  will  of 
God.”  Jo.  2.  p.  8i. 

g.  You  next  remandedbeven]  injlances  of  my 
enthufiafm.  The  firft  was,  That  of  Mrs.  Jones. 
The  next  ran  thus.  Again,  you  fay,  “ I ex- 
pounded out  of  the  fulnefs  that  was  given  me.” 
(p.  64.)  I anfwered,  11  I mean,  I had  then  a 
fuller,  deeper  fenfe  (of  what  I fpoke)  than  I 
ordinarily  have.”  (p.  41.)  But  if  you  fiill  think, 
It  zoo  aid  have  been  more  decent  to  have  faid,  ac- 
cording to  the  be ft  of  my  power  and  ability,  with 
Hod's  affiance,  I expounded ; I will  fay  fo  ano- 
ther time. 

With  regard  to  the  third  injlance  of  enthufiafm, 
you  remarked.  If  you  would  not  have  us  look  on 
this  as  miraculous,  there  is  nothing  in  it  worthy  of 
being  related,  p.  64. — I anfwered,  “ It  may  be 
fo.  Let. it  pa's  then  as  a trifle  not  worth  relat- 
ing; but  full  it  is  no  proof  of  enthufiafm.  For 
H 2 I would 


[ >7*  ] 

I would  not  have  you  look  upon  it  as  miraculous 
— But  as  a fignal  inftance  of  God’s  particular  pro- 
vidence, p.  42.”  How  friendly  and  generous  is 
your  reply  ! You  feem  ajliamed  oj  it — / am  glad 
you  give  this  fooling  up,  and  hope  for  the  future, 
you  will  treat  your  readers  better,  (p.  131.)  Sir,  I 
am  not  ajliamed  of  it;  nor  fhall  1 ever  give  this 
fooling  up,  till  I give  up  the  bible.  I Hill  look 
upon  this  “ as  a fignal  indance  of  God's  particu- 
lar providence” — But  how  is  this  confijlent  with 
■yielding  it  to  be  a . trifle?  (p.  132.)  My  words  do 
not  imply,  that  I yield  it  fo  to  be.  Being  urged 
with  the  dilemma,  “ Either  this  is  related  as  mi- 
raculous, (and  then  it  is  entoufiafm)  or  it  is  not 
worth  relating I anfwered  (to  avoid  drawing 
the  faw  of  controverfy)  “ Let  it  pafs  then  as  a 
trifle  not  worth  relating.  But  flilJ,  (if  it  be  a 
trifle,  which  I Juppofe,  not  grant)  it  is  no  proof 
of  enthufiafm.  For  I would  not  have  you  look 
upon  it  as  miraculous.” 

And  yet  I believe  I yielded  too  much,  and 
what  might  too  much  favour  your  aflertion,  that 
there  is  a great  difference  between  particular  provi- 
dences and  fuch  extraordinary  inter poftions. — 
Pray,  Sir,  Ihew  me  jivLat  this  difference  is.  It 
is  a fubjeft  that  deferves  your  cooled  thoughts — 
I know  no  ground — to  hope  or  pray  for  fuch  imme- 
diate reliefs . — Thefe  things  muji  be  reprefented 
either  as  common  accidents  or  as  miracles.  I do 
not  throughly  underfland  your  terms.  What  is 
a common  accident  ? That  a fparrow  falls  to  the 

ground  ? 


C m ] 

ground  ? Or  fomething  more  inconHderable 
than  the  hairs  of  your  head  ? Is  there  no  medium 
between  accident  and  miracle  ? If  there  be,  what 
is  that  medium  P — When  we  are  agreed  with  re- 
gard to  thefe  few  points,  I fhall  be  glad  to  refume 
the  fubjecf. 

6.  The  fourth  inftance  of  my  enthufiafm  was 
this,  that  I related  judgments  inf  idled  on  my  op- 
pofers.  As  to  Mr.  Molther,  I mull  obferve  once 
more,  that  I do  believe  there  was  a particular 
providence  in  his  ficknefs,  But  I do  not  believe, 
(nor  did  I defign  to  infinuate).  that  it  was  ajudg- 
ment,  for  oppofmg  me. 

You  go  on.  Again, you  mention  “ as  an  awful 
providence , the  cafe  of  a poor  wretch  who  was  laf 
week  curjing  and  blafpheming. , and  had  boajled  to 
many , that  he  would  come  again  on  Sunday,  and  no 
man fiould flop  his  mouth  then — But  on  Friday  God 
laid  his  hand  upon  him , and  on  Sunday  he  was  bu- 
ried.” (p.  66.)  I anfwered,  “ I look  on  this  as  a 
manifeft  judgment  of  God,  on  a hardened  finner, 
for  his  complicated  wickednefs.  (p.  42.)  You  re- 
ply, p,  133.  Add,  if  you  pleafe,  “ Idis  labouring  with 
all  his  might  to  hinder  the  word  of  God.”  Here 
therefore,  is  a confef  judgment,  for  his  oppoftion 
to  you. — There  is,  for  his  thus  oppofmg  with 
curfes  and  blafphemy.  This  was  part  of  his  com- 
plicated wickednefs.  Here  then  you  think  I plead 
guilty. — Not  of  entliufiafn ; till  you  prove,  this 
was  not  “ an  awful  providence.” 

H 3 


Again, 


r *74  j 

Again,  “ One  was  juft  going  to  beat  his  wife 
(which  he  frequently  did j when  Godjmote  him  in 
a moment,  fo  that  his  hand  dropped,  and  he  fell 
dozen  upon  the  ground,  having  no  morejlrengtk 
than  a new-born  child.  ’ Have  zee  any  warrant 
either  from feripture,  or  the  common  cfpenfalions 
of  providence,  to  interpret  misfortunes  of  this  na- 
ture as  judgments?  p.  67.  I anfwered,  “ Can 
yon,  Sir,  confider  this,  a3  one  of  the  common 
difpenfations  oT  providence  ? Have  you  known 
a parallel  one  in  vour  life?  But  it  was  neveT  cited 
by  me  fas  it  is  by  you  as  an  immediate  punifh- 
ment  on  a man  for  dppofing  me,  p.  42. — You  reply. 
As  if  what  is  not  common,  or  whet  I have  not  known, 
miift  be  a miraculous  judgment. — I believe  it  was, 
whether  miraculous  or  no,  a judgment  mixed 
with  mercy. 

You  now  add  to  the  ref}  the  following  in- 
flance  : “ One  John  Haydon,  a man  of  a regular 
life  and  converfation,  being  informed,  that  people 
fell  int of  range  ft  s at  the  focieties,  came  to  fee 
and  judge  for  himfelf.  But  he  was  flill  lefs  fatis- 
fied  than  before  : infomuch  that  he  went  about 
to  his  acquaintance  one  after  another,  and  la- 
boured above  meafure  to  convince  them,  it  was 
a delufion  of  the  devil.  We  were  going  home, 
when  one  met  us  in  the  flreet,  and  informed  us, 
that  J.  H.  was  fallen  raving  mad.  It  feems  he 
had  fat  down  to  dinner,  but  had  a mind  firll  to 
end  the  fermcn  on  falvation  by  faith.  In  read- 
ing the  Jail  page  he  changed  colour,  fell  off  his 

chair. 


t *75  ] 

chair,  and  began  {creaming  terribly,  and  beating 
himfelf  againfl  the  ground.  The  neighbours 
were  alarmed,  and  flocked  into  the  houfe.  I 
came  in  and  found  him  upon  the  floor,  the 
the  room  being  full  of  people,  whom  his  wife 
would  have  kept  without,  but  he  cried  aloud. 
No ; let  them  all  come  ; [let  all  the  world  fee 
the  juft  judgment  of  God.  Two  or  three  men 
were  holding  him  as  well  as  they  could.  He  im- 
mediately fixed  his  eves  upon  me,  and  cried. 
Ay,  this  is  he,  who  I faid  was  a deceiver  of  the 
people.  But  God  has  overtaken  me.  I faid,  it 
■was  all  a delufion.  But  this  is  no  delufion. 
He  then  roared  out,  O thou  devil!  Thou  curfed 
devil  ! Yea,  thou  legion  of  devils  ! Thou  canft 
not  ftay ! Chrift  will  caft  thee  out.  I know 
his  work  is  begun.  Tear  me  to  pieces  if  thou 
wilt,  but  thou  canft  not  hurt  me.  He  then  beat 
himfelf  againfl  the  ground  again,  his  breaft  heav- 
ing at  the  fame  time,  as  in  the  pangs  of  death, 
and  great  drops  of  fweat  trickling  down  his  face. 
We  all  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer.  His  pangs 
ceafed,  and  both  his  body  and  foul  were  fet  at 
liberty.”  Jo.  3.  p.  44. 

If  you  had  pleafed,  you  might  have  added 
from  the  next  paragraph,  “ Returning  to  J.  H. 
we  found  his  voice  was  loft,  and  his  body  weak 
as  that  of  an  infant.  But  his  foul  was  in  peace, 
full  of  love,  and  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory 
of  God.” 

H 4 ju 


L *76  I 

You  fubjoin,  this  you  may  dejire  for  aught  / 
know,  to  pafs  as  a trifle  too.  (p.  1 34.)  No  : it  is  fo 
terrible  an  inftance  of  the  judgment  of  God,  (tho* 
fit  length  mercy  rejoiced  over  judgment J as  ought 
never  to  be  forgotten  by  thofe  who  fear  God,  fo 
long  as  the  firn  or  moon  endureth. 

7.  The  account  of  people  falling  down  in  fits 
you  cite  as  a fifth  infiance  of  my  enthufiafni  : 
it  being  plain,  you  fay,  that  I look  upon  both  the 
diforders,  and  the  removals  of  them  to  be  fuperna- 
turdl.  (p.  67.)  I anfwered,  “ It  is  not  quite  plain. 
I look  upon  fome  of  thefe  cafes,  as  wholly  na- 
tural : on  the  reft,  as  mixt  : both  the  diforders 
and  the  removals,  being  partly  natural  and  partly 
not."’  (p.  43.)  You  reply,  It  would  have  been 
kind,  to  have  lei  us  know  your  rule,  by  which  you 
difltdguifli  tfilfle.  — I will.  I difiinguifh  them,  by 
the  circumftances,  that  precede,  accompany,  and 
follow.  However  fome  of  thefe  you  here  allow,  to 
be  in  part, fuper  natural.  Miracles  therefore  are  not 
wholly  ceafed.  Can  you  prove  they  are  ? By 
fcripture,  or  reafon  ? — You  then  refer  to  two 
or  three  cafes  related  in  the  42d  and  43d  pages 
of  the  third  journal.  I believe  there  was  a 
fupernatural  power,  on  the  minds  of  the  perfons 
there  mentioned,  which  occafioned  their  bodies 
to  be  fo  affefteJ  by  the  natural  laws  of  the  vital 
union.  This  point  therefore  you  have  to  prove, 
or  here  is  no  enthufiafm  ; that  there  was  no 
fupernatural  power  in  the  cafe. 


Hereon 


[ *77  ] 

Hereon  you  remarked,  You  leave  no  room  to 
doubt  that  you  would  have  thefe  cafes  confidered,  as 
thofe  of  the  danoniacks  in  the  new  Tejlament,  in 
order,  Ifuppofe,  to  parallel  your  [uppofed  cures  of 
them,  with  thofe  highef  miracles  of  Chrift  and  his 
difciples,  the  cafling  out  devils — (R.  p.  68.)  I 
anfwered,  “ I (hould  once  have  wondered  at 
your  making  fuch  a fuppofition.  But  I now 
wonder  at  nothing  of  the  kind/’  You  reply, 
Why  Jo  ? JVhat  have  I done  lately,  to  take  off  your 
fur  prize  ? Have  Iforjeited  my  charader  for  in- 
genuous and  fair  dealing  with  you  ? (ad  L.  p. 
tgj.)  Since  you  alk  me  the  quefrion,  I will 
anfwer  it  (I  hope,  in  love  and  in  the  fpirit  of 
meeknefs.)  I fcarce  know,  of  all  who  have  wrote 
againft  me,  a lefs  ingenuous  dealer  : or  one 
who  has  fh.ewn  a more  fteady,  invariable  difpofi- 
tion,  to  put  an.  ill  confiruflion  on  whatever  I 
fav. 

* 'J 

But  why  would  you  not  particularly  explain  thefe 

cafes  ? 1 will  explain  myfelf  upon  them  once 

for  all.  For  more  than  three  hundred  years  after 
Chrifl,  you  know  demoniacks  were  common 
in  the  church:  and  I fuppofe,  that  you  are 

not  unapprifed,  that  during  this  period,  if) 
not  much  longer)  they  were  continually  reliev- 
ed by  the  prayers  of  the  faithful.  Nor  can  I 
doubt,  but  demoniacks  will  remain,  fo  long  as 
Satan  is  the  God  of  this  world.  I doubt  not,  but- 
there  are  fuch  at  this  day.  And  I believe  John 
Haydon  was  one.  But  of  whatever  fort  his  di- 
forder  was,  that  it  was  removed  by  prayer  is  un=. 

H 5 deniable. 


[ *78  ] 

deniable.  Now,  Sir,  you  have  only  two  points 
to  prove,  and  then  your  argument  will  be  con- 
clufive.  i.  That  to  think  or  fay,  “ There  are 
demomacks  now,  and  they  are  now  relieved  by 
pm\er,  is  enthufiafm  : 2.  That  to  fay  “ De- 

rnomacks  were  or  are  relieved,  on  prayer  made 
°y  Cyprian,  or  their  parifh-minifter,”  is  to  pa- 
rallel (he  aftions  of  Cyprian,  or  that  minifter,  with 
Pie  highejl  miracles  of  Chrifl  and  his  difciples .” 

8.  You  remarked.  It  will  be  difficult  to  ptrfuade 
any  fober  perj'on , that  there  is  any  thing  fuper- 
naturahn  thefe  diforders,  R.  p.  69.  The  remain- 
der of  that  paragraph  I abridged  thus.  You  at- 
tempt to  account  for  thofe  fits,  by  objlrudlions  or 
irregularities  of  the  blood  and  fpirits-,  hyjlcrical 
diforders ; watchings,  faff  ings  ; c'ofenefs  of  rooms , 
great  crouds,  violent  heat.  And  laftly  by  terrors, 
perplexities  and  doubts,  in  weak  and  well-meaning 
men',  which  you  think  in  many  of  the  cafes  before 
us,  have  quite  overfet  their  underfundings,  R.  p. 
43- 

I anfwered,  “ As  to  each  of  the  reft,  let  it 
go  as  far  as  it  can  go.  [Let  it  be  fuppofed  to 
have  fame  influence  i xsfome  cafes;  perhaps,  fully 
to  account  for  one  in  a thoufand.  ] But  I require 
proof  of  the  laft  way,  whereby  you  would  ac- 
count for  thefe  diforders." — Why,  the  infances, 
you  fay,  of  religious  madnefs  have  much  increafd, 
f ace  you  began  to  diffurb-  the  world. — “ I doubt 
the  faff.” — You  reply.  This  no  way  difproves  it, 
p.  137.  — Yes  it  does,  till  you  produce  fome 

proof 


[ *79  . ] 

proof.  For  a bare  negation  is  the  proper  and 
fufficient  anfwer  to  a bare  affirmation.  I add, 
“ If  thefe  infiances  had  increafed  daily,  his  eafy 
to  account  for  them  another  way,’’  (as  is  done  in 
the  find  part  of  the  Farther  Appeal , at  the  101ft 
and  following  pages.)  You  fay,  Mu jl  have  heard 
of  or  known, fever  al  oj  the  Methodifls,  thus  driven 
to  dflradlion:  I anfwered,  “ You  may  have 

heard  of  five  hundred.  But  how  many  have 
you  known  ? Be  pleafed  to  name  eight  or  ten  of 
them.  I cannot  find  them,  no,  not  one  of  them 
to  this  day,  either  man,  woman,  or  child,”  p.  44. 
You  reply,  “ This  (the  naming  them)  wouldbe  very 
improper  and  unnectf  ary , p.  138.”  However,  Sir, 
it  is  extremely  neceffarv,  that  you  (hould  name 
them  to  me  in  private,  I will  then,  if  required, 
excufe  you  to  the  public  ; which  till  then  I 
cannot  do. 

The  perfon  I mentioned  whom  you  threw  in- 
to much  doubt  and  perplexity,  then  lived  in  the 
pari  fh  of  St.  Ann,  Wfhninfer.  I related  the  cafe 
juft  as  fhe  related  it  to  me.  But  Ihe  is  able  and 
ready  to  anfwer  for  herfelf. 

9.  You  go  on.  It  is  the  mojl  charitablefuppo- 
fition  we  can  make,  that  many  of  the  cafes  you  have 
mentioned  in  your  journals,  and  fome  of  which 
have  been  reprefented  above,  are  of  this  kind,  i.  e. 
inftances  of  madnefs> — 2d  L,  p-  138.  O tender 
charity  ! But  cannot  your  charity  reach  one  hair’s 
breadth  farther  than  this? — No:  for  - other  wife 
[i,  e,  if  thofe  perfons  were  not  mad]  the prefump- 
H 6 lion : 


L 180  ] 


Ron  and  defpair  are  terrible  indeed. — But  what  if 
you  were  to  fuppofe  John  Haydon  (to  inftance 
in  one)  was  not  mad,  but  under  a temporary  pof- 
feflion  ? And  that  others  were  deeply  convinced 
of  fin,  and  of  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them  ? 
I fhould  think  this  fuppofition  (be  it  true-  or  falfe) 
was  full  as  charitable  as  the  other. 

I faid,  “ I cannot  find  one  fuch  inftance  to 
this  day/’  You  reply,  Yet  once  you  could  not  but 
be  under  fome  “ Concern,  with  regard  to  one  or 
two  perfons,  who  feemed  to  be  indeed  lunatic,  as 
well  as  fore  vexed. — “ So  they  feemed:  but  it 
foon  appeared,  they  were  net.”  The  very  next 
paragraph  mentions,  that  one  of  thefe  within  a 
few  hours,  was  “ filled  with  the  fpirit  of  love, 
and  of  a found  mind.”  Jo.  3.  p.  88. 

But  you  are  refolved,  come  what  will,  to  car- 
ry this  point:  and  fo  add,  Toward  the  end  of 
your  Farther  Appeal,  £the  firft  part,  p.  101.]  You 
fay,  u You  have  feen  one  infance  of  real,  lafing 
madnefs..  This  was  one  whom  you  took  with  you  to 
Briftol,  'who  was  afterwards  prejudiced  againjl 
you,  and  began  a vehement  inveRion  both  againjl 
your  perfon  and  do&rines.  In  the  rradjl  of  this 
he  was  {truck  raving  mad.”  Add,  “ And  fo  he 
continued  till  his  friends  put  him  into  Bedlam: 
and  probably  laid  his  madnefs  to  my  charge.” — 
If  they  did  not,  it  is  now  done  to  their  hands. 

10.  As  to  the  cure  of  thefe  fts,  L obferved  (fo 
you,  p.  139.  proceed)  that  you  had frequently  repre- 
fented  them  as  miraculous , as  the  infantaneous 

confluences 


[ »8i  3 

confluences  of  your  prayers.— My  former  anfwer 
to  this  was,  “ 1 have  fet  down  the  fafts  juft  as 
they  were,  pafling  no  judgment  upon  them  my- 
felf,  and  leaving  every  man  elfe.  to  judge  as  he 
pleafes.” 

I am  glad  you  give  me  an  occafion  of  review- 
ing this  anfwer  ; for  upon  refle&ion,  I do  not 
like  it  at  all.  It  grants  you  more  than  I can  in 
confcience  do.  As  it  can  be  proved  by  abun- 
dance of  witneffes,  that  thefe  cures  were  fre- 
quently, (indeed  almoft  always)  the  in/lantaneous 
confequences  of  prayer  ; your  inference  is  juft. 
I cannot,  dare  not  affirm,  that  they  were  purely 
natural.  I believe  they  were  not.  I believe 
many  of  them  were  wrought  by  the  fupernatural 
power  of  God.  That  of  John  Haydon  in  parti- 
cular : (I  fix.  on  this,  and  will  join  ifiue  with  you 
upon  it  when  you  pleafe)  and  yet  this  is  noi  bare- 
faced enthufiafn.  Nor  can  you  prove  it  any  en- 
thufiafm  at  all,  unlefs  you  can  prove,  that  this  is 
falftly  afcribed  to  a fupernatural  power. 

The  next  cafe,  you  fay,  relates  to  the fpotted fever , 
which  you  reprefent  as  being  extremely  mortal-,  but 
— you  believe  there  was  not  one  with  whom  you  were 
but  recovered,  I allowed,  that  here  is  no  intimation 
of  any  thing  miraculous  [Rem.  p.  yz.)You.a/k,  (Anf. 
p.  45.  “ Why  then  is  this  cited  as  an  injlanct  of  my 
enthufiafn  — You  fare  cannot  think,  that  falfe 
pr-etences  to  miracles  are  the  whole  of  enthufiafn. 
No  ; but  I think  they  are  that  part  of  enthufiafm, 
•which  you  here  undertook  to  prove  upon  me. 

You% 


C *«*  ] 

You  are  here  to  prove,  that  I boaf  of  curing  bodi- 
ly dijlempers  by  prayer,  without  the  ufe  of  any 
other  means.  (Rem.  p.  71.)  But  if  there  is  no 
intimation  in  my  account  of  any  thing  miraculous , 
or  that  proper  remedies  had  not  been  applied : how 
is  this  a proof,  that  1 boajl  of  curing  bodily  dijlem- 
pers, without  applying  any  remedies  at  all  ? 

But  you  feem  to  defire  to  have  it  believed,  that  an 
extraordinary  bleffmg  attended  your  prayers. 
Whereas  if  the  cir  cuinjlances  could  be  particularly 
inquired  into,  mof  probably  it  would  appear,  that 
either  the  fury  of  the  dflemper  was  abated,  or  the 
perfonsyou  vifited  were  ftized  with  it  in  a more  fa- 
vourable degree,  or  were  by  reafon  of  a good  confu- 
tation, more  capable  of  going  through  it.  Neither 
do  I believe,  that  they  would  have failed  of  an  equal 
blffng  and fuccefs,  had  they  had  the  afjflance  and 
prayers  of  their  own  parfh  minflers. 

There,  Sir  ; now  I have  done  as  you  require : 
I.  have  quoted  your  whole  remark.  But  does  all 
this  prove,  that  I boajl  o) curing  bodily  dijlempers 
by  prayer,  without  the  ufe  of  any  other  means  ? If 
you  fay,  although  it  does  not  prove  this,  it  proves 
that  you  feem  to  defire  to  have  it  believed,  that  an 
extraordinary  biffing  attended  your  prayers  : and 
this  is  another  fort  of  enthufiafm  : — ’tis  very 
well : fo  it  does  not  prove  the  conclufion  you  de- 
figned  ; but  it  proves  another,  which  is  as  good  1 

11.  The  two  laft  inftances  of  my  enthufiafm 
which  you  bring  (Rem.  72,  73.)  I had  fummed 
up  in  two  lines  thus : “ At  two  feveral  times,  be- 
ing 


r.  >83  ] 

ins  ill  and  in  violent  pain,  I prayed  to  God,  and 
found  immediate  eafe.”  ( Anf.  p.  43.)  But  fince 
you  fay,  I mufl  not  hope  to  efcape  fo  ; theje  injlances 
mufl  once  more  he  laid  before  me  particularly,  p.  140. 
I mufl  yield  to  neceffity,  and  fet  them  down  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end. 

“ Sat,  March  21.  I explained  in  the  evening 
the  33d  chapter  of  Ezekiel : in  applying  which,  1 
was  feized  with  fuch  a pain  in  my  fide,  I could 
not  fpeak.  I knew  my  remedy,  and  immediate- 
ly kneeled  down.  In  a moment  the  pain  was 
gone.”  Journ.  4.  p.  77. 

“ Friday , May  8.  I found  myfelf  much  out 
of  order,  however  I made  fhift  to  preach  in  the 
evening.  But  on  Saturday  my  bodily  ftrength 
failed,  fo  that  for  feveral  hours  I,  could  fcarce 
lift  up  my  head.  Sunday  10.  I was  obliged  to 
lie  down  molt  part  of  the  day,  being  eafy  only 
in  that  poflure. — In  the  evening — befide  the  pain 
in  my  back  and  head,  and  the  fever  which  flill 
continued  upon  me,  juft  as  I began  to  pray,  I 
was  feized  with  fuch  a cough,  that  I could  hard- 
ly fpeak.  At  the  fame  time  came  flrongly  into 
my  mind,  Thefefigns  fiall  follow  them  that  believe. 
— I called  on  Jefus  aloud,  To  increafe  my  faith , 
and  to  confirm  the  word  of  his  grace,.  While  I 
was  fpeaking,  my  pain  vanifhed  away,  the  fever 
left  me,  my  bodily  ftrength  returned,  and  for 
many  weeks  I felt  neither  weaknefs  nor  pain. 
Unto  thee,  O Lord,  do  I give  thanks.”  jfo._  4. 

?•  8S’- 


Whea 


[ i84  ] 

When  you  firft  cited  thefe  as  proofs  of  entbu- 
fiafm,  I anfwered,  “ I will  put  your  argument 
into  form. 

“ He  that  believes  thofe  are  miraculous  cures 
which  are  not  fo,  is  a rank  enthufiaft  : but 

“ You  believe  thofe  are  miraculous  cures 
which  are  not  fo,  therefore,  you  are  a rank 
enthufiaft.” 

— “ What  do  you  mean  by  miraculous?  If 
you  term  every  thing  fo,  which  is  not  flriBly  ac- 
countable for  by  the  ordinary  courfe  of  natural 
caufes,  then  I deny  the  latter  part  of  the  minor 
propofition.  And  unlefs  you  can  make  this  good, 
unlefs  you  can,  prove,  the  effects  in  queftion,  are 
JlriElly  accountable  for  by  the  ordinary  courfe  of  na- 
tural caufes , your  argument  is  nothing  worth.” 

You  reply , Your  anfzver  to  the  objection  is  very 
evafve,  though  you  pretend  to  put  my  argument  in 
form.  You  nufake  the  major  propofition  which 
Jhouldhave  been  : 

He  that  reprefents  thofe  cures  as  the  immediate 
cffedls  of  his  own  prayers,  and  as  miraculous, 
which  are  not  fo,  is  a rank  enthufiaft,  if  fencer  e : 

But,  This  you  have  done  : Ergo,  & c. 

To  this  clumfy  fyllcgifm  I rejoin,  1.  That  the 
words,  “ if  Gncere,”  are  utterly  impertinent: 
for  if  infncerity  be  fuppofed,  enthufafn  w ill  be 
out  of  the  queftion.  2.  That  thofe  words,  “ as 
the  effefts  of  his  own  prayers,”  may  likewife  be 
pared  off ; for  they  are  unneceflary  and  cumber- 
fome,  the  argument  being  compleat  without  them. 

3.  That 


[ 1 ^5  } 

g.  That  with  or  without  them,  the  proportion'  is 
falfe  ; unlefs  fo  far  as  it  eo-incides  with  that  you- 
reject.  For  it  is  the  believing  thofe  to  be  miracles 
which  are  not,  that  conftitutes  an  enthufiafi  : not 
the  reprefenting  them  one  way  or  the  other  ; un- 
lefs fo  far  as  it  implies  fuch  a belief. 

12.  Upon  my  anfwer  to  the  fyllogrfm  fir  ft  pro- 
pofed,  you  obferve,  Thus  (by  denying  the  latter 
part  of  the  minor)  yon  clear  yourfelf  from  the 
charge  of  enthufiafm , by  acknowledging  the  cures  to 
befujjernatural  and  miraculous — Why  then  would 
you  not  fpeali  out,  and  direBly  fary,  that  you  can 
'zvork  real  and  undoubted  miracles  ? This  would 
put  the  controverfy  between  you  and  your  oppofers 
on  a fiort  foot,  and  be  an  effetlual  proof  of  the 
the  truth  of  your  pretences,  p.  142. 

V.  1.  I have  in  fome  meafure  explained  my- 
felfon  the  head  of  miracles,  in  the  third  part  of 
the  Farther  AppeaL  But  hence  you  repeat  the 
demand  (tho’  without  taking  any  notice  of  the 
arguments  there  advanced)  I will  endeavour 
once  more  to  give  you  a diftinct,  full  and  de- 
terminate anfwer. 

And  firft,  I acknowledge,  that  I have  feen 
with  my  eyes,  and  heard  with  my  ears,  feveral 
things,  which,  to  the  beft  of  my  judgment, 
cannot  be  accounted  for  by  the  ordinary  courfe 
of  natural  caufes,  and  which,  I therefore  believe 
ought  to  be  aferibed  to  the  extraordinary  interpo- 
fition  of  God.  If  any  man  chufe  to  fiile  thefe 

miracles % 


[ i86  ] 

i miracles , I reclaim  not.  I have  diligent!?  in- 
quired  inro  the  faffs.  I have  weighed  the 
preceding  and  following  circumdances.  I have 
drove  to  account  for  them  in  a natural  way.  I 
could  not,  without  doing  violence  to  my  reafon. 
Not  to  go  far  back,  I am  clearly  perfuaded,  that 
the  hidden  deliverance  of  John  Hayden,  was 
one  inliance  of  this  kind,  and  my  own  recovery, 
on  May  the  tenth,  another.  I cannot  account 
for  either  of  thefe  in  a natural  way.  Therefore 
I believe  they  were  both  Juper natural. 

* I mull,  fecondly,  obferve,  1 hat  the  truth  of 
thefe  faffs  is  fupported  by  the  fame  kind  of  proof, 
as  that  of  all  other  faffs  is  wont  to  be,  namely > 

the  tedimony  of  competent  witnelfes  : and  that 

the  tedimony  here  is  in  as  high  a degree  as  any 
reafonable  man  candefire.  Thofe  witnelfes  were 
many  in  number  : they  could  not  be  deceived 
themfelves ; lor  the  faffs  in  queftton  they  faw 
with  their  own  eyes,  and  heard  with  their  own 
ears.  Nor  is  it  credible,  that  fo  many  of  them 
would  combine  together,  with  a view  of  deceiving 
others ; the  greater  part  being  men  that  leared 
God  ; as  appeared  by  the  general  tenor  o',  their 
lives.  Thus,  in  the  cafe  of  John  Hayden,  this 
thine  was  not  contrived  and  executed  in  a cor- 

O 

ner,  and  in  the  prefence  of  his  own  lamily  only, 
or  three  or  four  perfons  perpared  for  the  purpofe. 
No  ; it  was  in  an  open  Ifreet  of  the  city  of  Brijlci, 
at  one  or  two  in  the  afternoon.  And  the  doors 
being  all  open  from  the  beginning,  not  only 

many 


[ ^7  7 


many  of  the  neighbours  from  every  fide,  hut 
feveral  others,  (indeed  whofoever  defired  it) 
went  in,  till  the  houfe  could  contain  no  more. 
Nor  yet  does  the  account  of  my  own  illnefs  and 
recovery  depend,  as  you  fu-ppofe,  on  my  bare  word. 
There  were  many  witneffes  both  of  my  diforder 
on  Friday  and  Saturday,  and  of  my  lying  down 
motf  part  of  Sunday  (a  thing  which  they  were 
well  fatisfied  could  not  be  the  efTefil  of  a flight  in- 
difpofmon.)  And  all  who  faw  me  that  evening,, 
plainly  difcerned  (what  I could  not  wholly  con* 
ceal)  that  I was  in  pain  : about  two  hundred  of 
whom  were  prefent  when  I was  feized  with  that 
cough,  which  cut  me  fnort,  fo  that  I could  fpeak 
no  more  ; till  I cried  out  aloud,  “ Lord,  increafe 
my  faith  : Lord,  confirm  the  word  of  thy  grace.” 
The  fame  perfons  faw  and  heard,  that  at  that  in- 
ftant  I changed  my  pofture,  and  broke  out  into 
thankfgiving : that  quickly  after  I flood  upright 
(which  I could  not  before)  and  fhewed  no  more 
fign  either  of  ficknefs  or  pain. 

* Yet  I muft  defire  you  well  to  obferve,  thirdly. 
That  my  will,  or  choice,  or  defire,  had  no  place 
either  in  this,  or  any  cafe  of  this  kind,  that  has 
ever  fallen  under  my  notice.  Five  minutes  be- 
fore I had  no  thought  of  this.  I expended  no- 
thing Iefs.  I was  willing  to  wait  for  a gradual  re- 
covery, in  the  ordinary  ufe  of  outward  means. 

I did  not  look  for  any  other  cure,  till  the  moment 
before  I found  it.  And  it  is  my  belief,  that  the 
cafe  was  always  the  fame,  with  regard  to  the  moft 

real 


C i8ff  ] 

rr.al  and  undoubted,  miracles.  I believe  God  never 
interpofed  his  miraculous  power,  but  according 
to  his  own  fovereign  will ; not  according  to  the 
will  of  man;  neither  of  him  by  whom  he 
wrought,  nor  of  any  other  man  whatfoever.  The 
wifdom  as  well  as  the  power  are  his  : nor  can  I 
find,  that  ever,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
he  lodged  this  power  in  any  mere  man,  to  be 
ufed  whenever  that  man  faw  good.  Suppofe 
therefore,  there  was  a man  now  on  earth,  who  did- 
work  real  and  undoubted  miracles ; I would  afk,  by 
whofe  power  doth  he  wrork  thefe  ? And  at  whofe 
pleafure  ? His  own,  or  God’s  ? Not  his  own  ; 
but  God’s.  But  il  fo,  then  your  demand  is  not 
made  on  man,  but  on  God.  I cannot  fay  it  is 
modeft,  thus  to  challenge  God  ; or  well  fuiting 
the  relation  of  a creature  to  his  Creator. 

2.  However,  I cannot  but  think,  there  have- 
been  already  fo  many  plain  interpofuions  of  di- 
vine power,,  as  will  fhortlv  leave  you  without 
excufe,  if  you  either  deny  or  defpife  them.  We 
defire  no  favour,  but  the  julfice  that  diligent 
enquiry  may  be  made  concerning  them.  We 
are  ready  to  name  the  perfons  on  whom  that 
power  was  fhewn,  which  belonged!  to  none  but 
God ; (not  one  or  two,  or  ten  or  twelve  only) 
to  point  out  their  places  of  abode  r and  we  en- 
gage they  fhall  anfwer  every  pertinent  queftion, 
fairly  and  diredtly ; and,  if  required,  fhall  give 
all  thofe  anfwers  upon  oath,  before  any  who  are 
impowered  fo  to  receive  them.  It  is  our  parti- 
cular 


C 1*9  ] 

•cular  requefi,  that  the  circumflances  which  went 
"before,  which  accompanied,  and  which  followed 
after,  the  fa£ls  under  confideration,  may  be 
thoroughly  examined,  and  puncfually  noted  down. 
Let  but  this  be  done  (and  is  it  -not  highly  needlui 
it  ffioidd  ?)  at  lead,  by  thofe  who  would  form  an 
-exaft  judgment)  and  we  have  no  fear,  that  any 
reafonable  man  fhould  fcruple  to  fay,  This  hath 
■God  wrought  l 

As  there  have  been  already  fo  many  inflances 
of  this  kind,  far  beyond  what  we  had  dared  to 
afk  or  think,  I cannot  take  upon  me  to  fay, 
whether  or  no  it  will  pleafe  God  to  add  to  their 
number.  1 have  not  herein  known  the  mind  of 
the  Lord,  neither  am  I his  counfellor.  He  rnav, 
or  he  may  not ; 1 cannot  affirm  or  deny.  I have 
no  light,  and  I have  no  defire  either  way.  It  zs 
the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  Jeemeth  him  good.  I 
defire  only  to  be  as  clay  in  his  hand. 

* 3.  But- what  if  there  were  now  to  be  wrought 
ever  lu  man)-  real  and  undoubted  miracles?  (I 
fuppofe  you  mean  by  undoubted,  fuch  as  being 
fuffictently  attefled,  ought  not  to  be  doubted  ok) 
Why,  this,  you  fay,  would  put  the  controverfy  on 
a fhor.t foot,  and  be  an  effectual  proof  cf  the  truth 
of  y cur  pretences.  By  no  means.  As  common 
as  this  affertion  is,  there  is  none  upon  eatth  more 
Life.  Suppofe  a teacher  were  now,  on  this  very 
day,  to  work  real  and  undoubted  miracles  : this 
would  extremely  little  fhoiten  the  controverfy 
between  him  and  the  greater  part  of  his  oppclers. 

Lot 


[ *9°  j 

For  all  this  would  not  force  them  to  believe  ; but 
many  would  dill  dandjud  where  they  did  belore  : 
feeing  men  may  harden  their  hearts  againd  mira- 
cles, as  well  as  againd  arguments. 

So  men  have  done,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  : even  againd  Inch  fignal,  glorious  mira- 
cles, againd  fuch  interpofitions  of  the  power  of 
God,  as  may  not  be  again  till  the  confummation 
of  all  things.  Permit  me  to  remind  you  only  of 
a few  indances;  and  to  obferve,  that  the  argu- 
ment holds  a fortiori:  for  who  will  ever  be  im- 
powered  of  God  again,  to  work  fuch  miracles  as 
thefe  were  ? Did  Pharaoh  look  on  all  that  Mofs 
and  Aaron  wrought,  as  an  ejfcRu  al  prooj  of  the 
truth  of  their  pretences?  Even  when  the  Lord 
made  the fea  to  be  dry-land,  and  the  waters  were 
divided : when  the  children  of  lfrael  went  into  the 
vndjl  of  the  fea , and  the  waters  were  a wall,  on 
the  right  and  on  the  left?  E\od.  xiv.  21,  22, 
Nay  ; 

The  wounded  dragon  rag'd  in  vain; 

OO  7 

And  fierce  the  utmoft  plague  to  brave, 

Madly  he  dat’d  the  parted  main. 

And  funk  beneath  th’  o’erwhelming  wave. 

Was  all  this  an  effeEiual  proof  of  the  truth  of  their 
pretences , to  the  Ifraelites  themfelves  ? It  was  not. 
They  were  dill  difebedient,  at  the  fea  ; tv  a at  the 
red J'ea ! Was  the  giving  them  day  by  day  bread 
from  heaven,  an  tffeRual proof  to  tbofe  two  nun  - 

. died 


[ igi  ] 

died  and fifty  princes  oft  the  affembly,  famous  in  the 
congregation , men  of  renown,  who  faid,  with  Da- 
tlian  and  Abirarn,  Wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of 
thefte  men  ? We  will  not  come  up.  Numb.  xvi.  14. 
Nay,  when  the  ground  clave  af under  that  was  un- 
der them,  and  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and 
fwallowed  them  up  : (ver.  52.)  Neither  was  this 
an  effectual  proof  to  thofe  who  faw  it  with  their 
•eyes,  and  heard  the  cry  of  thofe  that  went  down 
into  the  pit : but  the  very  next  day  they  murmur- 
ed again  ft  Mofes  and  a gain  ft  Aaron,  faying,  Ye 
have  killed  the  people  oft  the  Lord!  (ver.  41.) 

Was  not  the  cafe  generally  the  fame  with  re- 
gard to  the  prophets  that  followed  ? Several  of 
whom  flopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the 
violence  oft  fire,  did  many  mighty  works ; yet 
their  own  people  received  them  not.  Yet  they 
were  ftoned,  they  were  fawn  afunder,  they  were 
Jledn  zv dli  the  / word  r they  were  defiitute,  qfflidl- 
■ed,  tormented  ! Utterly  contrary  to  the  common- 
ly-received fuppofition,  that  the  working  real  un- 
doubted miracles,  mud  bring  all  controverfy  to  an 
end,  and  convince  every  gainfayer. 

Let  us  come  nearer  yet.  How  flood  the  cafe 
between  our  Lord  himfelf  and  his  oppofers  ? 
Did  he  not  work  real  and  undoubted  miracles  ? 
And  what  was  the  etfeft  ? Still  when  he  came  to 
his  own,  hr  town  received  him  not.  Still  /2c  was 
id efpifed  and  rejected  of  men.  Still  it  was  a chal- 
lenge not  to  be  anfwered.  Have  any  oft  the  rulers, 

or  oft  the  pharifees  believed  on  him  ? After 

this, 


C *92  J 

this,  how  can  you  imagine,  that  whoever  works 
miracles,  muft  convince  all  nun  of  the  truth  of 
his  pretences  ? 

* I would  juft  remind  you  of  only  one  inftance 

more.  There  fat  a certain  man  at  Lyjlra,  impotent 

in  his  feet , being  a cripple  from  his  mother's  womb 
who  never  licul  walked.  1 he Jurat  heard  Paul f peal : 
who JledJajlly  beholding  him,  and  perceiving  that 
he  had  faith  to  be  healed, J aid  with  a loud  voice , 
Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.  And  he  leaped  and  walk- 
ed.— Here  was  fo  undoubted  a miracle,  that  the 
people  lif  ted  up  their  voices,  faying — The  Gods  are 
come  down  in  the  likenejs  of  men.  But  how  long 
were  even  thefe  convinced  oithe  truth  of  his  pre- 
tences? Only  till  there  came  thither  certain  Jews 
from  Antioch  and  Iconium ; and  then  they  foiled 
him  (as  they  fuppofed)  to  death  ! Acls  xiv.  1,  £>?c. 
So  certain  it  is,  that  no  miracles  whatever, 
which  were  ever  yet  wrought  in  the  vvoild,  were 
effeElual  to  prove  the  moft  glaring  truth,  to  thole 
that  hardened  their  hearts  againft  it. 

* 4.  And  it  will  equally  hold  in  every  age 
and  nation.  If  they  hear  not  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
phets, neither  will  they  be  convinced  (of  what  they 
defire  not  to  believe)  tho’  one  rofefrom  the  dead. 
Without  a miracle,  without  one  rifing  from 
the  dead,  Ixv  n;  S/Aei  m-dc  if  any  man  be  willing 
to  do  his  will,  he  fiall  know  of  the  do  Brine  whether 
it'be  of  God.  But  if  he  is  not  willing  to  do  his 
will,  he  will  never  want  an  excufe,  a plaufible 
<reafon  for  rejecting  it.  Yea,  tho' ever  fo  many 

miracles 


[ i93  ] 

miracles  were  wrought  to  confirm  it.  For  let 
ever  fo  much  light  come  into  the'world,  it  will 
have  no  effeft  (luch  is  the  wife  and  juft  will  of 
God)  on  thofe  who  love  clarknefs  rather  than 
light  ? It  will  not  convince  thofe  who  do  not 
limply  defire  to  do  the  will  of  their  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  : thofe  who  mind  earthly  things ; 
who  (if  they  do  not  continue  in  any  grofs  out- 
ward fin,  yet)  love  pleafure  or  eafe ; yet  feek 
profit  or  power,  preferment,  or  reputation.  No- 
thing will  ever  be  an  effectual  proof  to  thefe  of 
the  holy  and  acceptable  will  of  God,  unlefs  firlt 
their  proud  hearts  be  humbled,  their  ftubbcrn 
wills  bowed  down,  and  their  defires  brought,  at 
leaft  in  fome  degree,  into  obedience  to  the  law 
of  Ohrid. 

Hence  altho’  it  fihould  pleafe  God  to  work 
a-new,  all  the  wonders  that  ever  were  wrought 
on  the  earth,  ftill  thefe  men,  however  wife  and 
prudent  they  may  be  in  things  relating  to  the 
prefent  world,  would  fight  againfl  God  and  all 
his  meffengers,  and  that  in  fpite  of  all  thefe 
miracles.  Mean  while  God  will  reveal  his  truth 
unto  babes,  unto  thofe  who  are  meek  and  lowly, 
whofe  defires  are  in  heaven,  who  want  to  know 

nothing  fave  Jefus  Chrijl  and  him  crucified. 

Thefe  need  no  outward  miracle,  to  fhew  them 
his  will  : they  have  a plain  rule,  the  written 
word.  And  the  anointing  which  they  have  received 
of  him,  abideth  in  them,  and  teacheth  them  of  all 
things,  (x  John  ii.  27.)  Thro’  this  they  are 

Vol.  XVI.  I enabled 


[ 194  1 

enabled  to  bring  all  doctrines  to  the  law  and  to 
the  tejlimony.  And  whatsoever  is  agreeable  to 
this  they  receive,  without  waiting  to  fee  it  atteft- 
ed  by  miracles.  As  on  the  other  hand,  whatever 
is  contrary  to  this  they  reje  : : nor  can  any 

miracles  move  them  to  receive  it. 

*5.  Yet  I do  not  know,  that  God  hath  any  way 
precluded  himfelf  from  thus  exerting  his  fo- 
vereign  power,  from  working  miracles  in  any 
kind  or  degree,  in  any  age  to  the  end  of  the 
world.  I do  notrecolleft  any  fcripture,  where- 
in we  are  taught,  that  miracles  were  to  be  con- 
fined within  the  limits  either  of  the  apofiolic 
or  the  cypnanic  age  ; or  of  any  period  of  time, 
longer  or  (hot  ter,  even  till  the  reflitution  of  all 
things.  I have  not  obferved,  either  in  the  Old 
Teftamentor  the  New,  any  intimation  at  all  of 
this  kind.  St.  Paul  fays  indeed  once,  con- 
cering  two  of  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
(fo,  I think,  that  text  is  ufually  underflood) 
whether  there  be  prophecies,  they Jhall  fail,  whe- 
ther there  be  tongues,  they  Jhall  ceafe.  But  he 
does  not  fay,  either  that  thefe  or  anv  other 
miracles  fiiall  ceafe,  till  faith  and  hope  fhall  ceafe 
alfo  : till  they  all  be  fwallowed  up  in  the  vifion 
of  God,  and  love  be  all  in  all. 

I prefume  you  will  allow,  there  is  one  kind  of 
miracles  (loofely  Speaking)  which  are  not  ceafed; 
namely,  Tfyurcc  lying  wonders,  diabolical 

miracles  ; or  works  beyond  the  virtue  of  natural 
caufes,  wrought  by  the  power  of  evil  fpirits. 

Nor 


[ *95  ] 

Nor  can  you  eafily  conceive  that  thefe  will  ceafe, 
as  long  as  the  father  of  lies  is  the  prince  of  this 
world.  And  why  fhould  you  think,  that  the 
God  of  truth  is  Iefs  affive  than  him,  or  that  he 
will  not  have  his  miracles  alfo  P Only,  not  as 
man  wills,  neither  when  he  wills  ; but  according 
to  his  own  excellent  wifdom  and  greatnefs. 

6.  But  even  if  it  were  fuppofed,  that  God  does 
now  work  beyond  the  operation  of  merely  natural 
caufes,  yet  what  impreffion  would  this  make 
upo nyou,  in  the  difpofition  your  mind  is  now 
in  ? Suppofe  the  trial  were  repeated,  were 
made  again  to-morrow.  One  informs  you  the 
next  day,  “ While  a clergyman  was  preaching 
yefterday,  where  I was,  a man  came  who  had 
been  long  ill  of  an  incurable  diflemper.  Prayer 
was  made  for  him,  and  he  was  reflored  to  perfeff 
health.” 

Suppofe  now,  that  this  were  real  faff,  perhaps 
you  would  fcarce  have  patience  to  hear  the  ac- 
count of  it  : but  would  cut  it  fhort,  in  the  midfl, 
with,  “ Do  you  tell  this  as  fomething  fuperna- 
tural?  Then  miracles  are  not  ceafed!”  But  if 
you  fhould  venture  to  afk,  where  was  this  ? And 
who  was  the  perfon  that  prayed  P And  it  was 
anfwered,  “ At  the  Foundery  near  Moorfulds  • 
the  perfon  who  prayed  was  Mr.  JVe/ley What 
a damp  comes  at  once  ! What  a weight  falls  on 
your  mind,  at  the  very  full  fetting  out  ? ’Tis 
well  if  you  have  any  heart  or  defire  to  move  one 
ftep  further.  Or  if  you  fhould,  what  a flrong  ad- 
I 2 ditional 


L *9 6 ] 

ditional  propen  fity  do  you  now  feel  to  deny  the 
faft?  And  is  there  not  a ready  excufe  for  fo  do- 
ing p “ O!  they  who  tell  the  ftory,  are  doubt- 
lefs  his  own  people:  molt  of  whom,  we  may  be 
lure,  will Jay  any  thing  for  him,  and  the  reft  will 
believe  any  thing,” But  if  you  at  length  allow- 

ed the  faft,  might  you  not  find  means  to  account 
for  it  by  natural  caufes  ? Great  crouds,  violent 
heats , with  objlruBions  and  in egularities  of  the 
blood  and  fpirits,  will  do  wonders. — If  you  could 
but  allow,  it  was  more  than  natural,  might  not 
fome  plaufible  reafon  be  found  for  ranking 
it  among  the  lying  wonders,  for  afcribing  it  to  the 
devil  rather  than  God  ? And  if,  after  all,  you 
was  convinced  it  was  the  finger  of  God,  muft 
you  not  ftill  bring  every  doftrine  advanced,  to 
the  law  and  to  the  teftimony,  the  only  fure  and 

infallible  teft  of  all  ? What  then  is  the  ufe 

cf  this  continual  demand,  “ Shew  us  a fign,  and 
we  will  believe  ?”  What  will  you  believe  ? I 
hope  no  more  than  is  written  in  the  book  of 
God.  And  thus  far  you  might  venture  to  be- 
lieve, even  without  a miracle. 

7.  Let  us  confider  this  point  yet  a little  farther. 
“ What  is  it  you  would  have  us  prove  by  mira- 
cles ? The  dofh  ines  we  preach  ?”  We  prove 
thefe  by  fcripture  and  reafon  ; and.,  if  need  be, 
by  antiquity.  What  elfe  is  it  then  we  are  to 
prove  by  miracles?  At  length  we  have  a diftinct 
reply — H Tife  and  Jober  men  will  not  otherwife  he 
convinced  (i.  e.  unlefs  you  prove  this  by  miracles; 

that 


[ *97  3 

that  God  is,  by  the  means  of  Jack  teachers,  and 
fuch  doctrines,  working  a great  and  extraordinary 
zuorkin  the  earth.  Preface,  p.  6. 

So  then  the  determinate  point  which  you,  in 
their  name,  call  upon  us  to  prove  by  miracles,  is 
this.  That  God  is,  by  ihefe  teachers,  zrorking  a 
great  and  extraordinary  workin  the  earth. 

What  I mean  by  a great  and  extraordinary 
work,  is,  the  bringing  multitudes  of  grofs  notori- 
ous finners,  in  a fhort  fpace,  to  the  fear,  and 
love,  and  fervice  of  God,  to  an  entire  change  of 
heart  and  life. 

Now  then,  let  us  take  a nearer  view  of  the 
propofition,  and  fee  which  part  of  it  we  are  to 
prove  by  miracles. 

“ Is  it,  l.  That  A.  B.  was,  for  many  years, 
without  God  in  the  world,  a common  fwearer, 
a drunkard,  a fabbath-breaker  ? 

Or,  2.  That  he  is  not  fo  now. 

Or,  3.  That  he  continued  fo,  till  he  heard 
thefe  men  preach,  and  from  that  time  was  ano- 
ther man  ? 

Not  fo.  The  proper  way  to  prove  this  faff, 
is,  by  the  teflimony  of  competent  witnelfes. 
And  thefe  witnelfes  are  ready,  whenever  required, 
to  give  full  evidence  of  them. 

Or  would  you  have  us  prove  by  miracles, 

4.  That  this  was  not  done  by  our  own  power 
or  holinefs  ? That  God  only  is  able  to  raife  the 
dead,  to  quicken  thofe  who  are  dead  in  trefpaf- 
fes  and  fins 

I 3 


Surely 


T >98  ] 

Surely  no.  Wbofoever  believes  the  fcriptures, 
will  want  no  new  proof  of  this. 

Where  then  is  the  wifdom  of  thofe  men,  who 
demand  miracles  in  proof  of  fuch  a propofition  ? 
One  branch  of  which,  “ That  fuch  finners  were 
reformed  by  the  means  of  thefe  teachers,”  being 
a plain  fa  ft,  can  onlv  be  proved  by  teflimony,  as 
all  other  faffs  are  : and  the  other,  “ That  this  is 
a work  oj  God , and  a great  and  more  than  ordinary 
work,”  needs  no  proof,  as  carrying  its  own  evi- 
dence to  every  thinking  man. 

* 8.  To  fum  up  this.  No  truly  wife  or  Joker 
man  can  poffibly  defire  or  expeft  miracles,  to 
prove,  either,  1.  That  thefe  dochines  are  true : 
this  muff  be  decided  by  fcripture  and  reafon  ; or, 
a.That  thefe  fads  are  true  : this  can  only  be  prov- 
ed by  teflimony  ; or,  3.  That  to  change  finners 
from  darknefs  to  light,  is  the  work  of  God  alone ; 
only  ufing  what  infiruments  he  pleafes  : this  is 
glaringly  felf-evident ; or,  4.  That  fuch  a change 
wrought  in  fo  many  notorious  finners,  within  fo 
fhort  a time,  is  a great  and  extraordinary  work 
of  God.  This  alfo  carries  its  own  evidence. 
What  then  is  it  which  remains  to  be  proved  by 
miracles  ? Perhaps  you  will  fay,  it  is  this  : “ That 
God  hath  called  or fent  you  to  do  this.”  Nay, 
this  is  implied  in  the  third  of  the  foregoing  pro- 
pofitions.  If  God  has  a finally  ufed  us  therein, 
if  his  work  hath  in  fafl  profpered  in  our  hands, 
then  he  hath  called  or fail  11s  to  do  this.  I intreat 
reafonable  men  to  weigh  this  throughly,  whe- 
ther 


C 199  ] ' 

ther  the  faft  does  not  plainly  prove  the  call : 
whether  he  who  enables  us  thus  to  fave  fouls 
alive,  does  not  commijjion  us  fo  to  do  ? Whether 
by  giving  us  the  power  to  pluck  thefe  brands  out 
of  the  burning,  he  does  not  authorize  us  to  ex- 
ert it  ? 

O that  it  were  poffible  for  you  to  confider 
calmly,  whether  the  fuccejs  of  the  gofpel  of  Jefus 
Chrift,  even  as  it  is  preached  by  us,  the  leaf!  of 
his  fervants,  be  not  itfelf  a miracle , never  to  be 
forgotten  ! One  which  cannot  be  denied,  as 
being  vifible  at  this  day,  not  in  one  but  a hun- 
dred places  : one  which  cannot  be  accounted  for, 
by  the  ordinary  courfe  of  any  natural  caufe 
whatfoever:  one  which  cannot  be  aferibed  with 
anv  colour  of  reafon,  to  diabolical  agency ; and 
laflly,  one  which  will  bear  the  infallible  tell,  the 
trial  of  the  written  word.. 

VI.  1.  But  here  I am  aware  of  abundance  of 
objeflions.  You  objefl,  firlf,  that  to  fpeak  anv 
thing  of  myfelf,  of  what  I have  done,  or  am 
doing  now,  is  mere  boajling  and  vanity.  This 
charge  you  frequently  repeat.  So,  p.  102.  The 

following  page  is  full  of  boafling P.  1 13.  You 

boall  very  much  of  the  numbers  you  have  converted : 
and  again,  As  to  rnyfelf. \ I hope  Ifhall  never  be  led 

to  imitate  you  in  boafling. 1 think  therefore 

it  is  needfid,  once  for  all,  to  examine  this  charge 
throughly ; and  to  fhew  diftinhtly,  what  that 
I q good. 


[ 200  ] 

good  thing  is,  which  you  difguife  under  this  bad 

name. 

From  the  year  1725  to  1729,  I preached 
much,  but  faw  no  fruit  of  my  labour.  Indeed 
it  could  not  be  that  I fhould  ; for  I neither  laid 
the  foundation  of  repentance , nor  of  believing  the 
go/pel : taking  it  for  granted,  that  all  to  whom  I 
preached,  were  believers  ; and  that  many  of  them 
needed  no  repentance.  2.  From  the  year  1729  to 
1734,  laying  a deeper  foundation  of  repentance, 
I faw  a little  fruit.  But  it  was  only  a little;  and 
no  wonder.  For  I did  not  preach  faith  in  the 
blood  of  the  covenant.  3.  From  1734  to  1738, 
fpeaking  more  of  faith  in  Chrilf,  I faw  more 
fruit  of  my  preaching,  and  vifiting  from  houfe  to 
houfe,  than  ever  I had  done  before : though  I 
know  not,  if  any  of  thofe  who  were  outwardly 
reformed,  were  inwardly  and  throughly  con- 
verted to  God.  4.  From  1738  to  this  time, 
fpeaking  continually  of  Jefus  Chrilf,  laying  him 
only  for  the  foundation  of  the  whole  building, 
making  him  all  in  all,  the  firft  and  the  lalt : 
preaching  wholly  on  this  plan,  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  at  hand ; repent  ye  and  believe  the  gofpel ; 
The  word  oj  God  ran  as  fire  among  the  Hubble  ; 
it  was  glorified  more  and  more  : multitudes 

crying  out,  What  mujl  we  do  to  be  Javed ? And 
afterwards  witneffing,  By  grace  we  are  Javed 
through faith.  *5-1  confidered  deeply  with  my- 
felf,  what  I ought  to  do  ? W hether  to  declare 


[ 201  J 

the  things  I had  feen  or  not?  I confulted  the 
mod  ferious  friends  I had.  They  all  agreed,  I 
ought  to  declare  them  : that  the  work  itfelf  was 
of  fuch  a kind,  as  ought  in  no  wife  to  be  con- 
cealed  ; and  indeed,  that  the  unufual  circumflan- 
ces  now  attending  it,  made  it  impoffible  that  it 
fbould.  6.  This  very  difficulty  occurred,  “ Will 
not  my  fpeaking  of  this  be  bcafting?  At  leaft, 
will  it  not  be  counted  fo?”  They  replied,  ,l  ii 
you  fpeak  of  it  as  your  own  work,  it  will  be  va- 
nity and  boafting.aW  over:  but  if  you  afcribe  it 
-wholly  to  God,  if  you  give  him  all  the  praife,  it 
will  not.  And  if,  after  this,  fome  will  account 
it  fo  flill,  you  muff  be  content,  and  bear  the 
burden.”  7.  I yielded,  and  tranferibed  my 
papers  for  the  prefs  ; only  labouring,  as  far  as 
poflible,  to  render  unto  God  the  things  which  are 
God’s,  to  give  him  the  praife  of  his  own  work. 

* 2.  But  this  very  thing  you  improve  into  a 
frefli  objection.  If  I afcribe  any  thing  to  God, 
it  is  enthujiafm.  If  I do  not  (or  if  I do)  it  is  va- 
nity and boajhng,  fuppofing  me  to  mention  it  at 
all.  What  then  can  I do  to  efcape  your  cen- 
fure  ? “ Why,  be  filent,  fay  nothing  at  all.”  I 
cannot.  I dare  not.  Were  I thus  to pleajt  men , 
I could  not  be  the  fervant  of  Chiiji. 

* You  do  not  appear  to  have  the  leaf!  idea  or 
conception  of  what  is  in  the  heart  of  one, 
whom  it  pleafes  him  that  worketh  all  in  all,  to 
employ  in  a work  cf  this'  kind.  He  is  in  no 
wife  forward  to  be  at  all  employed  therein  ; he 

I 5 Harts 


[_  202  ] 

flans  back,  again  and  again  : not  only,  becaufe 
he  readily  forefees,  what  (name,  care,  borrow, 
reproach,  what  lofs  of  friends  and  of  all  that  the 
world  accounts  dear,  will  inevitably  follow  : but 
much  more,  becauie  he  (m  fome  meufure)  knows 
himfelf.  This  chiefly  it  is  which  conflrains  him 
to  cry  out,  (and  that  many  times,  in  the  bitter- 
nefs  of  his  foul,  when  no  human  eye  feeth  him,) 
“ O Lord  ! Send  by  whom  thou  wilt  fend  ! Only, 
fend  not  me  ! — What  am  I ? A worm  ! A dead 
dog!  A man  unclean  In  heart  and  lips!” — And 
when  he  dares  no  longer  gainfay  or  refill,  when 
he  is  at  laid  thrujl  out  into  the  harvejl,  he  look- 
esh  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the  left,  he  takes 
every  Itep  with  fear  and  trembling,  and  with  the 
deeped  fenfe  (fucli  as  words  cannot  exprefs)  of, 
mho  is  Jiffiaent  Jot  thefe  things  ? Every  gift 
which  he  has  received  of  God,  for  the  further- 
ance ol  his  word,  whether  of  nature  or  grace, 
heightens  this  fear,  and  increales  his  jealoufy 
over  himfelf:  knowing  that  fo  much  the  fir  icier 
mud  the  enquiry  be,  when  he  gives  an  account 
of  his  flewardfhip.  He  is  mod  of  all  jealous 
ever  himfelf,  when  the  work  of  the  Lord  prof- 
pers  in  his  hand.  He  is  then  amazed  and  con- 
founded before  God.  Shame  covers  his  face. 
Yet  when  he  fees,  that  he  ought  to  praife  the 
Lord  for  his  goodnefs,  and  to  declare  the  wonders 
which  he  doth  for  the  children  of  men,  he  is  in  a 
flrait  between  two : he  knows  not  which 

way  to  turn  : he  cannot  fpeak : he  dares  not  be 

filent. 


[ 2G3  ] 

dent.  It  may  be,  for  a time  he  keeps  his  mouth 
with  a bridle  ; he  holds  his  peace  even  from  good. 
But  his  heart  is  hot  within  him , and  conflrains 
him,  at  length,  to  declare  what  God  hath 
wrought.  And  this  he  then  doth  in  all  fimplicity, 
with  great  plainnefs  of  fpeech , defiring  only  to 
commend  himfelf  to  him,  who  fearcheth  the 
heart  and  trieth  the  reins : and,  (whether  his 
words  are  the  favour  of  life  or  of  death  to  others) 
to  have  that  witnefs  in  himfelf,  as  offncenty,  as 
of  God,  in  the  fight  of  God,  fpeak  we  in  Chrijl. — 
If  any  man  counts  this  boafling , he  cannot  help 
it.  It  is  enough,  that  a higher  judge  ilandeth  at 
the  door. 

3.  But  you  may  fav,  “ Why  do  you  talk  of 
the Juccefs  of  the  gofpel  in  England,  which  was  a 
Chriftian  country  before  you  was  born?”  Was 
it  indeed  ? Is  it  fo  at  this  day  ? I would  explain 
myfelf  a little  on  this  head  alfo. 

And  1.  None  can  deny,  that  the  people  of 
England,  in  general  are  called  Chriflians.  They 
are  called  fo,  a few  only  accepted,  by  others, 
as  well  as  by  themfelves.  But  I prefume  no 
man  will  fay,  that  the  name  makes  the  thing ; 
that  men  are  Chriflians,  barely  becaufe  they 
are  called  fo.  It  mud  be  2.  allowed,  that  the 
people  of  England,  generally  fpeaking,  have 
been  chrifened  or  baptized.  Bi.it  neither  can  we 
infer,  thefe  were  once  baptized-,  therefore  they 
are,  Chriflians  wow.  It  is  3.  allowed,  that,  many 
of  tbofe  who  were  once  baptized , and  are  called 
I 6 Chriflians 


[ 204  ] 

Chtijlidns  to  this  day,  hear  the  word  of  God, 
attend  public  prayers,  and  partake  of  the  Lord’s 
Jupper.  But  neither  does  this  prove,  that  they 
arc  Chriftiuns.  For  notwithftanding  this,  fome 
of  them  live  in  open  fin  : and  others  (though 
not  confcious  to  themfelves  of  hypocrify,  yet) 
are  utter  Grangers  to  the  religion  of  the  heart: 
are  full  of  pride,  vanity,  coveloufnefs,  ambition  ; 
of  hatred,  anger,  malice  or  envy ; and  confe- 
quently,  are  no  more  fcripiural  Chrijtians,  than 
the  open  drunkard  or  common  fwearer. 

Now  thefe  being  removed,  where  are  the 
Chrijlians , from  whom  we  may  properly  term 
England  a ChriJHan  country  ? The  men  who  have 
the  mind  which  was  in  Chrift,  and  who  walk 
as  he  alio  walked  ? Whofe  inmoft  foul  is  renew- 
ed after  the  image  of  God  ; and  who  are  out- 
wardly holy,  as  he  who  hath  called  them  is  holy? 
There  are  doubtlefs  a fewT  fuch  to  be  found.  To 
deny  this,  would  be  want  of  candor.  But  how 
few  ? How  thinly  fcattered  up  and  down  ? And 
as  for  a Chriftian,  vifible  church,  or  a body  of 
Chriftians,  vifibiy  united  together,  where  is  this 
to  be  feen  ? 

Ye  different  fe£ls,  who  all  declare, 

Lo!  here  is  Chrift,  or  Chi  iff  is  there  ; 

Your  flronger  proofs  divinely  give. 

And fiew  me,  where  the  Chrifians  live! 


And 


[ 205  ] 

* And  what  ufe  is  it  of,  what  good  end  does 
it  ferve,  to  term  England  a Chriftian  country  ? 
(although  'tis  true,  melt  of  the  natives  are  called 
Chriltians,  have  been  baptized , frequent  the  or- 
dinances : and  although  a real  Chriftian  is  here 
and  there  to  be  found,  as  a light  Jliining  in  a dark 
place  :)  Does  it  do  any  honour  to  our  great  Maf- 
ter,  among  thofe  who  are  not  called  by  his  name  ? 
Does  it  recommend  Cbriftianity  to  the  Jews,  the 
Mahometans,  or  the  avowed  Heathens  ? Surely  no 
one  can  conceive  it  does.  It  only  makes  Chrif- 
tianity  ftink  in  their  noftrils.  Does  it  anfwer  any 
good  end  with  regard  to  thofe  on  whom  this  wor- 
thy name  is  called  ? I fear  not ; but  rather  an  ex- 
ceeding bad  one.  For  does  it  not  keep  multi- 
tudes eafy  in  their  Heathen  pratlice  ? Does  it  not 
make  or  keep  Hill  greater  numbers,  fatisfied  with 
their  Heathen  tempers  ? Does  it  not  direftly  tend 
to  make  both  the  one  and  the  other  imagine,  that 
they  are  what  indeed  they  are  not ? That  they 
are  Chrijlians,  while  they  are  utterly  without 
Chrift  and  without  God  in  the  world  P — To  clofe 
this  point : if  men  are  not  Chrijlians , till  they 
are  renewed  after  the  image  of  Chrift,  and  if 
the  people  oj  England  in  general  are  not  thus  re- 
newed, why  do  we  teim  them  fo  ? The  God  of 
this  zoorUl  hath  long  blinded  their  hearts.  Let  us 
do  nothing  to  increafe  that  blindnefs  : but  rather 
labour  to  recover  them  from  that  Jlrong  delufion, 
that  they  may  no  longer  believe  a he. 


q.  Let 


[ 2(  6 ] 


4.  Let  us  labour  to  convince  all  mankind,  that 
to  be  a real  Chriftian,  is,  to  love  the  Lord  our 
God  with  all  our  heart,  and  to  ferve  him  with  all 
our  ftrength  ; to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourfelves, 
and  therefore  do  unto  every  man  as  we  would 
he  fhould  do  unto  us.  Nay,  you  fay,  Had  you 
confined  yourftlves  to  theft  great  points , there 
would  have  been  no  objection  agavijl  your  doclnnc. 
But  the  doBrines you  have  diftinguifhed yourftlves 
by — are  not.  the  love  of  God  and  man,  but  many 
falfe  and pernicioiis  errors,  (p.  104.) 

I have  again  and  again,  with  all  the  plainnefs 
I could,  declared,  what  our  conflant  doctrines 
are ; whereby  we  are  difinguified  only  from 
Heathens,  or  nominal  Chriltians  ; not  from  any 
that  worlhip  God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth.  Our 
main  doblrines,  which  include  all  the  red,  are 
three,  that  of  repentance,,  of  faith,  and  of  holinefs. 
The  firft  of  thefe  we  account,  as  it  were,  the 
porch  of  religion  ; the  next,  the  door;  the  third 
religion  itftdf. 

That  repentance,  or  conviction  of  fin,  which 
is  always  previous  to  faith  (either  in  a higher  or 
lower  degree,  as  it  pleafes  God)  we  deferibe  in 
words  to  this  effeft  : 

“ When  men  feel  in  themfelves  the  heavy 
burthen  of  fin,  fee  damnation  to  be  the  reward 
of  it,  behold  with  the  eye  of  their  mind,  the 
horror  of  hell : they  tremble,  they  quake,  and 
are  inwardly  touched  with  forrowfulnefs  of  heart, 
and  cannot  butaccufe  themfelves,  and  open  their 
grief  unto  Almighty  God,  and  call  unto  him  for 

mercy. 


[ 2o7  ] 

mercy.  This  being  done  ferioufly,  their  mind 
is  fo  occupied,  partly  with  borrow  and  heavinefs, 
partly  with  an  earnell  defire  to  be  delivered  from 
this  danger  cf  hell  and  damnation,  that  all  defire 
of  meat  and  drink  is  laid  apart,  and  loathing  of 
all  worldly  things  and  pleafure  cometh  in  place. 
So  that  nothing  then  liketh  them  more,  than  to 
weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn,  and  both  with  words 
and  behaviour  of  body,  to  {hew  themfelves  weary 
of  life.” 

Now  permit  me  to  afk,  what  if  before  you  had 
obferved,  that  thefe  were  the  very  words  of  our 
own  church,  one  of  your  acquaintance  or  pari- 
fhioners  had  come  and  told  you,  that  ever  fince 
he  heard  a fermon  at  the  Foundary,  he  faw  dam- 
nation  before  him,  and  beheld  with  the  eye  oj his 
mind  the  horror  of  hell  ? What,  if  he  had 
trembled  and  quaked,  and  been  fo  taken  up , partly 
until  fotrow  and  heavinefs,  partly  with  an  earnejl 
define  to  be  delivered  from  the  danger  oj  hell  and 
damnation,  as  to  weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn,  and 
both  with  words  and  behaviour,  to  fiew  himjelf 
weary  cf  life?  Would  you  have  fcrupled  to  fay, 
Here  is  another  deplorable  injlanpe  of  the  Metho- 
dijls  driving  men  to  dijlradlion  ! See,  into  what 
excefive terrors,  frights,  doubts  and  perplexities , 
they  throw  weak  and  well-meaning  men  ! Quite  over- 
fetting  their  under  fundings  and  judgments,  and 
making  them  liable  to  all  thefe  mifenes. 

I dare  not  refrain  from  adding  one  plain  quef- 
tion,  which  I befeech  you  to  anfwer,  not  to  me, 

but 


[ 2o3  ] 

but  to  God.  Have  you  ever  experienced  this 
repentance  yourfelf?  Did  you  ever  fed  in  your- 
felf that  heavy  burthen  of  fin  ? Of  fin  in  ge- 
neral ; more  efpecially,  inward  fin  ? Of  pride, 
anger,  luff,  vanity  ? Of  (what  is  ail  fin  in  one) 
that  carnal  mind,  which  is  enmity,  eiTential 
enmity  againft  God  ? Do  you  know  by  experi- 
ence what  it  is,  To  behold  with  the  tye  of  the  mind , 
the  horror  of  lull  ? Was your  mind  ever  fo  taken 
up,  partly  with forrow  and  keavinefis,  partly  with 
an  earnefi  defire  to  be  delivered  from  ibis  danger 
of  hell  and  damnation,  that  even  all  defire  of  meat 
and  drink  was  taken  away,  and  you  loathed  all 
worldly  things  and  pleafiure? — Surely  if  you  had 
known  what  it  is,  to  have  the  arrows  of  the  Al- 
mighty thus flicking  faj 1 in  you,  you  could  not  fo 
lightly  have  condemned  thofe  who  now  cry  out, 
The  pains  of  hell  come  about  me  : the  for  rows  of 
death  compafs  me,  and  the  overflowings  of  ungodli- 
nefs  make  me  af  raid. 

g.  Concerning  the  gate  of  religion  (if  It  may 
be  allowed  fo  to  (peak)  the  true,  Chriflian,  fay- 
ing faith,  we  believe  it  implies  abundantly  more 
than  an  affent  to  the  truth  of  the  bible.  “ Even 
the  devils  believe,  that  Chrift  was  born  of  a 
virgin  ; that  he  wrought  all  kind  of  miracles ; 
that  for  our  fakes  he  buffered  a mod  painful  death 
to  redeem  us  from  death  everlafting.  Thefe 
articles  of  our  faith  the  very  devils  believe,  and 
fo  they  believe  all  that  is  written  in  the  Old  and 
New  Tefiament.  And  vet  for  all  this  faith,  they  be 

but 


C 209  ] 

but  devils.  They  remain  ftill  in  their  damnable 
cllate,  lacking  the  very  true  Chriftian  faith. 

“ The  right  and  true  Chriftian  faith  is.  Not 
only  to  believe  that  the  holy  fcriptuies  and  the 
articles  of  our  faith  are  true,  but  alfo  to  have  a 
fure  truft  and  confidence  to  be  faved  from  ever- 
lafting  damnation  through  Chrift.”  Perhaps  it  may 
be  exprefted  more  clearly  thus,  “ A fure  truft  and 
confidence  which  a man  hath  in  God,  that  by 
the  merits  of  Chrift  his  fins  are  forgiven,  and  he 
reconciled  to  the  favour  of  God.” 

For  giving  this  account  of  Chriftian  faith  (as 
well  as  the  preceding  account  of  repentance,  both 
which  I have  here  alfo  purpofely  defcribed,  in 
the  very  terms  of  the  homilies)  I have  been  again 
and  again,  for  near  thefe  eight  years  paft,  accufed 
of  enthufiaj'm  : fometimes  by  thofe  who  fpoke  to 
my  face,  either  in  converfation,  or  from  the  pul- 
pit : but  more  frequently  by  thofe  who  chofe  to 
fpeak  in  my  abfence  ; and  not  feldom  from  the 
peeks.  I wait  for  thofe  who  judge  this  to  be  en- 
thufiafm,  to  bring  forth  their  ftrong  reafons.  Till 
then,  I muft  continue  to  account  all  thefe,  the 
words  of  truth  and  fobernefs. 

6.  Religion  itfelf  (1  chufe  to  ufe  the  very 
words,  wherein  I defcribed  it  long  ago)  we  de- 
fine, “ The  loving  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  our 
neighbour  as  ourfelves,  and  in  that  love  abftain- 
ing  from  all  evil,  and  doing  all  poftible  good  to 
all  men.”  The  fame  meaning  we  have  fometimes 
exprefted  a little  more  at  large,  thus : “ Religion 

we 


[ 210  ] 

we  conceive  to  be  no  other  than  love  ; the  love 
of  God  and  of  all  mankind  : the  loving  God  with 
all  our  heart,  and  foul,  and  Ilrength,  as  having 
firft  loved  us,  as  the  fountain  of  all  the  good  we 
have  received,  and  of  all  we  ever  hope  to  enjoy  : 
and  the  loving  every  foul  which  God  hath  made, 
every  man  on  earth  as  our  own  foul. 

“ This  love  we  believe  to  be  the  medicine  of 
life,  the  never-failing  remedy  for  all  the  evils 
of  a difordered  world,  for  all  the  miferies  and  vices 
of  men.  Wherever  this  is,  there  are  virtue  and 
happinefs,  going  hand  in  hand.  There  is  hum- 
blenefs  of  mind,  gentlenefs,  long-fufifering,  the 
whole  image  of  God,  and  at  the  fame  time,  a 
peace  thatpaffeth  all  underftanding,  and  joy  un- 
fpeakable,  and  full  of  glory. 

“ This  religion  we  long  to  fee  eftablifhed  in 
the  world,  a religion  of  love,  and  joy,  and  peace; 
having  its  feat  in  the  heart,  in  the  inmoft  foul, 
but  ever  fhewing  itfelf  by  its  fruits:  continually 
fpringing  forth,  not  only  in  all  innocence  (for 
love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour)  but  like- 
wife  in  every  kind  of  beneficence,  fpreading  vir- 
tue and  happinefs  all  around  it.” 

If  this  can  be  proved  by  fcriplure  or  reafon, 
to  be  enthufiaflic  or  erroneous  do£lrine,  we  will 
then  plead  guilty  to  the  indiffment,  of  teaching 
error  and enthufiafm.  But  if  this  be  the  genuine 
religion  of  Chriff,  then  will  all  who  advance  this 
charge  againfl  us,  be  found  falie  wunefies  before 

O O 1 

God,  in  the  day  when  he  {hall  judge  the  earth. 

7.  However, 


[ 211  ] 

7.  However,  with  regard  to  the  fruits  of  our 
teaching,  you  fay,  It  is  to  be  feared,  the  numbers 
of  Jerious  men  who  have  been  perplext  and  delud- 
ed, are  much  greater  than  the  numbers  of  notorious 
finners,  who  have  been  brought  to  repentance  and 
good  life,  (p.  1x3.)  Indeed,  if  you  could  prove, — 
that  the  Methodifis  were  in  general , very  wicked 
people  before  they followed  you,  and  that  all  you  have 
been  leaching  them  is,  the  love  of  God  and  their 
neighbour,  and  a care  to  keep  his  commandments, 
which  accordingly  they  have  done fnce , you  would 
—fop  the  mouths  of  all  adverfanes  at  once.  Bid 
• — we  have  great  reafon  to  believe,  that  the  genera- 
lity of  Methodifis,  before  they  became fo,  wereferi- 
ous,  regular,  and  well-difpofed people,  p.  103. 

If  the  quefiion  were  propofed,  Which  are 
greater,  the  numbers  offerious  men  who  have  been 
perplext  and  deluded,  or  of  notorious  finners  who 
have  been  brought  to  repentance  and  good  life  by 
thefe  preachers,  throughout  England,  within  fe- 
ven  years  : it  might  be  difficult  for  you  to  fix  the 
conclufion.  For  England  is  a place  of  wide  di- 
menfions  ; nor  is  it  eafy  to  make  a fatisfa&ory 
computation,  unlefs  you  confine  yourfelf  within 
a fmaller  compafs.  Suppofe  then  we  were  to 
contraft  the  queftion,  in  order  to  make  it  a lit- 
tle lefs  unweildly.  We  will  bound  our  enquiry, 
for  the  prefent,  within  a fquare  of  three  or  four 
miles.  It  may  be  certainly  known  by  candid 
men,  both  what  has  been,  and  what  is  now  done 
within  this  difiance.  And  from  hence  they  may 

judSe 


[ 212  ] 

judge  of  thofe  fruits  elfewhere,  which  they  can- 
not he  fo  particularly  informed  of. 

* Enquire  then,  Which  are  greater,  the  numbers 
ofjerious  men , perplext  and  deluded  by  thefe  teach- 
ers, or  of  notorious  finners  brought  to  repentance 
and  good  life,  within  the  forefi  of  Kingfwood  ? 
Many  indeed  of  the  inhabitants  are  nearly  as  they 
were  ; are  not  much  better  or  worfe  for  their 
preaching  : becaufe  the  neighbouring  clergy  and 
gentry  have  fuccefsfully  laboured  to  deter  them 
from  hearing  it.  But  between  three  and  four 
hundred  of  thofe  who  would  not  be  deterred,  are 
now  under  the  care  of  thofe  preachers.  Now, 
what  number  of  thefe  were  ferious  Chrijh  ans  be- 
fore ? Were  fifty?  Were  twenty  ? Were  ten? 
Perad venture,  there  might  five  fuch  be  found. 
But  ’tis  a queftion,  whether  there  could  or  no. 
The  remainder  were  grofs,  open  finners,  com- 
mon fwearers,  drunkards,  fabbath-breakers,  whore- 
mongers, plunderers,  robbers,  implacable,  un- 
merciful, wolves  and  bears  in  the  (hape  of  men. 
Do  you  defire  infiances  of  more  notorious  finners 
than  thefe  ? I know  not  if  Turkey  ox  japan  can 
afford  them.  And  what  do  you  include  ;n  repen- 
tance and  good  life  ? Give  the  ftrifteft  definition 
thereof  that  you  are  able:  and  I will  undertake, 
thefe  once  notorious  finners,  {hall  be  weighed  in 
that  balance,  and  not  found  wanting. 

8.  Not  that  all  the  Methodifls  (fo  called'  were 
very  wicked  people  before  they  followed  us.  There 
are  thofe  among  them,  and  not  a few,  who  are  able 

to 


[ 213  ] 

to  flop  the  boafting  of  thofe  that  defpife  them, 

and  to  fay,  Wherein  foever  any  of  you  is  hold , I 
am  bold  alfo  : only  they  count  all  thefe  things  but 
lofs,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Chrifl 
Jefus.  But  thefe  we  found,  as  it  were,  when 
we  fought  them  nor.  We  went  forth  to feek  that 
which  was  lof : (more  eminently  loll)  to  call  the 
mo  ft  flagrant,  hardened,  defperate  f inner s to  re- 
pentance, To  this  end  we  preached  in  the  Horfe- 
Jair  at  Brijlol , in  Kingfwood,  in  Neiccajlle : a- 
mong  the  colliers  in  Staffordjhire,  and  the  tinners 
in  Cornwall : in  Southwark , Wapping,  Moorfelds, 
Drury -Lane , at  London.  Did  any  man  ever  pick 
out  fuch  places  as  thefe,  in  order  to  find  ferious , 
regular , well-difpofed  people?  How  many  fuch 
might  then  be  in  any  of  them  I know  not.  But 
this  I know,  that  four  in  five  of  thofe  who  are 
now  with  us,  were  not  of  that  number,  but  were 
wallowing  in  their  blood,  till  God  by  us  faid  unto 
them,  live. 

Sir,  I willingly  put  the  whole  caufe  on  this 
ifTue  : what  are  the  general  confequences  of  this 
preaching?  Are  there  more  tares  or  wheat ? 
More  good  men  dijhoyedfmx.  is  the  proper  quef- 
tion)  or  wicked  men  faved ? The  lafi  place  where 
we  began  confiant  preaching,  is  a part  of  Wilt- 
Jhire  and  Somerfetjhire,  near  Bath.  Now  let  any 
man  enquire  at  Rhode , Bradford , Rexal,  or  a- 
mong  the  colliers  at  Coleford,  1.  What  kind  of 
people  were  thofe,  before  they  followed  thefe  men  ? 
2.  What  are  the  main  do&rines  they  have  been 

teaching 


[ 214  ] 

leaching  for  this  twelvemonth  ? 3.  What  effeEl 
have  thefe  do&rines  upon  their  followers?  What 
manner  of  lives  do  they  leal  now?  And  if  you 
do  not  find,  1.  That  three  in  four  of  thefe 
were  two  years  ago  notorioufly  wicked  men. 
2.  That  the  main  doftrines  they  have  heard  fince 
were,  “ Love  God  and  your  neighbour,  and 
carefully  keep  his  commandments.”  And  3. 
That  they  have  fince  exercifed  themfelves  here- 
in, and  continue  fo  to  do  : I fay,  if  you  or  any 
reafonable  man,  who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  en- 
quire, does  not  find  this  to  be  an  unquefiionable 
faft : I will  openly  acknowledge  myfelf  an  en- 
thufiafi,  or  whatfoever  elfe  you  fhali  pleafe  to 
ftile  me. 

Only  one  caution  I would  give  to  fuch  an  en- 
quirer, let  him  not  afk  the  colliers  of  Coleford, 
Were  not  the  generality  of  you,  before  you  Jollowed 
thefe  men,  ferious,  regular,  wcll-difpofed  people? 
Were  you  not  offended  at  the  prophanenefs  and 
debauchery  of  the  age  ? And  was  it  not  this  difpo- 
fition,  which  at  firjt  made  you  liable  to  receive  thefe 
impreffons  ? (p.  103.)  Becaufe  if  he  talk  thus 
to  foine  of  thofe  who  do  not  yet  follow  thefe 
men,  perhaps  he  will  not  live  to  bring  back  their 
anfwer. 

* But  will  this,  or  a thoufand  fuch  infiances  as 
this,  flop  the  mouths  of  all  adverfaries  at  once?  O 
Sir,  would  one  expeft  fuch  a thought  as  this,  in 
one  that  had  read  the  bible  ? \\  hat  if  you  could 
convert  as  many  finners  as  St.  Paul  himfelf  ? 

Would 


. [ 2X5  ] 

Would  (hat  flop  the  mouths  of  all  your  adverfanes  ? 
Yea,  if  you  could  convert  three  thoufand  at  one 
fermon,  Hill  you  would  be  fo  far  from  flopping 
all  their  mouths  at  once,  that  the  greater  part  of 
them  would  gnafli  upon  you  with  their  teeth , and 
cry,  “ Away  with  fuch  a fellow  from  the  earth.” 
I never  therefore  expeft  to  perjuade  the  world, 
the  majority  of  mankind,  that  I have  been  for 
fome  years  advancing  nothing  but  what  has  a 
clear,  immediate  connexion  with  the  true  know- 
ledge and  love  of  God : that  God  hath  been  pleaf- 
ed  to  ufe  me,  a weak,  vile  worm,  in  reforming 
many  of  my  fellow  finners,  and  making  them,  at 
this  day,  living  witneffes  of  inward  and  pure  reli- 
gion : and  that  many  of  thcfe,  from  living  in  all 
fin,  are  quite  changed,  are  become  fo  far  holy,  that 
though  they  are  not  free  from  all  Jin,  yet  no  fin 
hath  dominion  over  them.  And  yet  I do  firmly 
believe,  it  is  nothing  but  downright  prejudice,  to 
deny  or  oppofe  any  of  thefe  particulars.  Preface, 
p.  v. 

* Allow  Mr.  Wefley,  you  fay,  but  thefe  few 
points , and  he  will  defend  his  conduct — beyond  ex- 
ception— That  is  mod  true.  If  I have  indeed 
been  advancing ' nothing  but  the  true  knowledge  and 
love  of  God : if  God  has  made  me  an  inflrument  in 
reforming  many  dinners,  and  bringing  them  to  2/2- 
ward  and  pure  religion  : and  if  many  of  thefe 
continue  holy  to  this  day,  and  free  from  all  wilful 
fin,  then  may  I,  even  I,  ufe  thofe  awful  words, 
He  that  defpifeth  one,  defpifeth  him  that  fent  me. 

But 


[ «6  ] 

But  I never  expeft  the  world  to  allow  me  one  of 
thefe  points.  However,  I mull  go  on,  as  God 
fhall  enable  me.  I mud  lay  out  whatfoever  he 
intruds  me  with,  (whether  others  will  believe  I 
do  it  or  no)  in  advancing  the  true  Chridian  know- 
ledge of  God,  and  the  love  and  fear  of  God 
among  men  : in  reforming  (if  fo  be  itpleafe  him 
to  ufe  me  dill)  thofe  who  are  yet  without  God  in 
the  world  ; and  in  propagating  inward  and  pure 
religion,  righteoufnefs,  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghoft. 

10.  But  you  believe,  “ I only  corrupt  thofe 
who  were  good  Chridians  before,  teaching  them 
to  revile  and  cenfure  their  neighbours,  and  to 
abufe  the  clergy,  notwithdanaing  all  their  meek- 
nefs  and  gentlenefs,  as  I do  myfelf.  ’ I muji 
declare  (fay  you)  we  have , in  general,  anfwered 
your  pretence , with  all  meeknefs  and  temper — the 
railing  and  reviling  has  been  chitjly  on  the  fide  of 
the  Methodids,  p.  16. 

Your  did  charge  ran  thus,  (Rem.  p.  15.) 
How  have  fuch  abufes  as  thefe  been  thrown  out  by 
you — againf  our — regular  clergy , not  the  highef 
or  the  worthiejl  excepted ! — I anfwered,  “ lam 
altogether  clear  in  this  matter,  as  often  as  it  has 
been  objected  : neither  do  I defire  to  receive  any 
other  treatment  from  the  clergv,  than  they  have 
received  from  me  to  this  day.”  p.  30. 

You  reply,  1.  One  infance  oj your  mifreprefent- 
ing  and  injuring  a preacher  of  our  church  I men- 
tioned, (p.  log.)  Mentioned  ! Well : but  did  you 

prove 


[ 217  ] 

prove,  it  was  an  injury  or  mij ' representation  ? I 
know  not  that  yon  once  attempted  it.  2.  \ou 
next  quote  part  of  a letter  from  the  third  journal  ; 
(p.  36.)  wherein  (according  to  your  account)  the 
mojl  confiderable  of  our  clergy  are  abufed,  and  at 
once  accufedin  a very  gr of s manner.  (p.  106.)  Set 
down  the  whole  paragraph,  and  I will  prove,  that 
this  alfo  is  naked  truth,  and  no  abufe  at  all.  You 
fay,  3.  You  approved  of  Whitefield’s  railing  a- 
gainjl  the  clergy — i.  e.  I fay,  “ Mr.  Wh.  preach- 
ed, concerning  the  Holy  Ghnjl  which  all  who  be- 
lieve are  to  receive  ; not  without  a juft,  though 
fevere  cenfure  of  thofe,  who  preach  as  if  there 
were  no  Holy  Ghoft,”  [Journ.  3.  p.  65.)  Nor  is 
this  railing,  out  melancholy  truth.  I have  my- 
feJf  heard  feveral  preach  in  this  manner.  4.  You 
cite  my  words,  “ Woe  unto  you,  ye  blind  lead- 
ers of  the  blind  ! How  long  will  you  pervert  the 
right  ways  of  the  Lord  ?” — And  add,  l appeal  to 
yourfelj,  whether  you  did  not  defgn  this  refleElion  a- 
gainjl  the  clergy  m general  zuho  differ  from  you  ? No 
more  than  I did  againft  Mofes  and  Aaron.  I ex- 
prefly fpecify  whom  I defign  : “ Ye  who  tell  the 
mourners  in  Zion,  Much  religion  hath  made  you 
mad.”  You  fay,  5.  (with  a N.  B.)  All  the  clergy 
who  differ  from  you,  you  file,  fo,  p.  82.  in  which  and 
thef ongoing pageyou  caujelefff lancler  than , asf peak- 
ing of  their  own  holinefs — as  that  for  the  ffake  of 
which,  on  account  of  which  we  are  puffed  bejrcre 
God. 

Let  any  ferious  perfon  read  over  thofe  pages. 
I therein  fonder  no  man.  I (peak  what  I know; 
Vo l.  XVI.  K what 


[ 218  J 

what  I have  both  heard  and  read.  The  men  are 
alive,  and  the  books  are  extant.  And  the  fame 
conclufion  I now  defend,  touching  that  part  of 
the  clergy  who  preach  or  write  thus,  viz.  “ If 
they  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus,  I am  found 
a falfe  witnefs  before  God.  But  if  I preach  the 
way  of  God  in  truth,  then  they  are  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind.  6.  You  quote  thofe  words,  “ Nor 
can  I be  fa i d to  intrude  into  the  labours  of  thofe 
who  do  not  labour  at  all ; but  fuffer  thoufands  of 
thofe  lor  whom  C hr i ft  died,  to  perifh  for  lack  of 
knowledge/’  (3  Journ.  p.  69.)  I wrote  that  letter 
near  Kingswood.  I would  to  God  the  obferva- 
tion  were  not  terribly  true!  7.  The  firfl  paffage 
you  cite  from  the  Earnejl  Appeal , p.  36.  evidently 
relates  to  a few  only  among  the  clergy  : and  if 
the  charge  be  true,  but  of  one  in  five  hundred, 
it  abundantly  Jupports  my  reafomng.  8.  In  the 
next,  (p.  47.)  1 addrefs  all  thofe,  and  thofe 
only,  who  affirm  that  I preach  for  gain. 

You  conclude,  The  reader  has  note  before  him 
the  manner  in  which  yen  have  been  pleafed  to  treat 
the  clergy — and  your  late  Jermon — is  too  frejh  an 
injlance  of— the  line  if  age  of  the  univerftics — (p. 
107.)  It  is  an  inflance  nif peaking  the  truth  in  love. 
Sol  defire  all  mankind  may  life  me.  Nor  could 
I have  faid  lefs  either  to  the  univerfity  or  the 
ciertrv,  without  finning  aminft  God  and  rav  own 
foul. 

* it.  But  I muff  explain  myfelf  a little  on  that 
practice,  which  you  fo  often  term  abvfing  the 


clerg  v. 


[ 219  ] 

clergy.  I have  many  times  great  forrow  and  hea- 
vinefs  in  my  heart,  on  account  of  thefe  my  bre- 
thren. And  this  fometimes  conflrains  me  to 
fpeak  to  them,  in  the  only  way  which  is  now  in 
my  power : and  fometimes  (though  rarelyj  to 
fpeak.  of  them  ; of  a few,  not  all,  in  general.  In 
either  cafe,  I take  an  efpecial  care,  i.  To  fpeak 
nothing  but  the  truth.  2.  To  fpeak  this  with  all 
plainnefs;  and,  3.  With  love,  and  in  the  fpirit 
of  meeknefs.  Now  if  you  will  call  this,  abifing, 
railing , or  reviling,  you  mud.  But  ftill  I dare 
not  refrain  from  it.  I mull  thus  rail,  thus  ahufe 
Tinners  of  all  forts  and  degrees,  unlefs  I will  perifh 
with  them. 

When  I firft  read  your  declaration,  That  our 
brethren  in  general  had  treated  us  with  all  meek- 
nefs and  .temper,  I had  thoughts  of  fpreading  be- 
fore you  a few  of  the  flowers  which  they  have 
flrewed  upon  us  with  no  fparing  hand.  But  on 
refleftion,  I judged  it  better  to  forbear.  Let  them 
die  and  be.forgotten  ! .. . 

As  . to  thofe  of  the  people  called  Melhodifls, 
whom  you  fuppofe  to  rail  at  and  aPufe  the  clergy, 
and  to  revile  and  cenfure  their  neighbours,  I can 
only  fay.  Which  are  they  ? Shew  me  the  men. 
And  if  it  appear,  that  any  of  thofe  under  my 
care,  habitually  cenfure  or  revile  others,  whether 
clergy  or  laity,  I will  make  them  an  example, 
for  the  benefit  of  all  the  refl. 

Touching  yen,  I believe  I was  afraid  without 
K 2 caufe. 


[ 220  ] 

caufe.  I do  not  think  you  advanced  a wilful 
untruth.  This  was  a rafh  word.  I hereby  openly 
ret  raft  it,  and  afk  pardon  of  God  and  you. 

To  draw  toward  a conclufion.  Whofoever 
they  are  that  defpife  vie , and  make  no  account  cf 
my  labours , I know  that  they  are  not  in  vain  in 
the  Lord,  and  that  I have  not  fought  as  one  that 
beateth  the  air.  I ftill  fee  (and  I praife  the  Father 
of  lights,  from  whom  every  good  and  pcrfeS  gift 
defcendeth J a continual  increafe  of  pure  religion, 
and  undefiled,  of  the  love  of  God  and  man,  of 
the  wifdom  which  is  pure  and  peaceable , gentle 
and  eafy  to  be  intreated,  full  of  mercy,  and  of  good 
fruits.  1 fee  more  and  more  of  thofe  “ who 
before  lived  in  a thorough  contempt  of  God's 
ordinances,  and  of  all  duties,  now  zealoufly  dif- 
charging  their  duties  to  God  and  man,  and 
walking  in  all  his  ordinances  blamelefs.”  A few 
indeed  I have  feen  draw  back  to  perdition,  chiefly 
through  a fear  of  being  righteous  over-much.  And 
here  and  there  one  has  fallen  into  Calvinifm,  or 
turned  afide  to  the  Moravians.  But  I doubt  not, 
thefe  l£  are  in  a better  Hate  than  they  were  before 
they  heard  us.  Admit  they  are  in  error,  yea  and 
die  therein,  yet  who  dares  affirm,  they  will  periffi 
eyerlafiingiy  ? But  had  they  died  in  grofs  fin,  we 
are  fure  they  had  fallen  into  the  fire  that  never 
Jhall  be  quenched.’’ 

I have  now  confidered,  as  far  as  my  time  would 
permit,  (not  every  thing  in  your  letter,  whether 

. °f 


[ 221  ] 

of  moment  or  no,  but)  thofe  points,  which  I con- 
ceived to  be  of  the  greateft  weight.  That  God 
may  lead  us  both  into  all  truth,  and  that  we  may 
not  drop  our  love  in  the  purfuit  of  it,  is  the  con- 
tinual prayer  of, 

Reverend  Sir, 

Your  friend  and fervant  for  Chrifl’s fake T 

June  17,  1746.  JOHN  WESLEY. 


K3 


A LETTER 


[ 222  ] 


A 

LETTER 

To  the  Right  Reverend  the 

Lord  Bishop  of  LONDON: 

Occafioned  by  his  Lordfhip's  late  charge  to  his 
Clergy. 


Let  me  not , I pray  you,  accept  any  mail  s perjon, 
neither  let  me  give  Jlattering  titles  unto  man.  For 
1 know  not  to  give  Jlattering  titles . In  Jo  doing 
my  Maker  would foon  take  me  away. 

Job  xxxiii.  21,  22. 


My  Lord, 

1.  T IT  THEN  abundance  of  perfons  have  for 
V V feveral  years  laid  to  my  charge  things 
that  I knew  not,  I have  generally  thought  it  my 
duty  to  pafs  it  over  in  filence,  to  be  as  one  that 

heard 


[ 223  ] 

heard  not.  But  the  cafe  is  different,  when  a perfon 
of  your  lordfhip's  charafler  calls  me  forth  to  an- 
fwerfor  myfelf.  Silence  now  might  be  interpreted 
contempt.  It  might  appear  like  a fullen  difregard, 
a with-holding  honour  from  him  to  whom  honour 
is  due,  were  it  only  on  account  of  his  high  office 
in  the  church.  More  efpecially,  when  I appre- 
hend fo  eminent  a perfon  as  this,  to  be  under 
conliderable  miflakes  concerning;  me.  Were  I 
now  to  be  filent,  were  I not  to  do  what  was  in 
my  power  for  the  removal  of  thofe  miflakes,  I 
could  not  have  a confcience  void  of  offence,  ei- 
ther towards  God  or  towards  man. 

2.  But  I am  fenfible,  how  difficult  it  is  to  fpeak 
in  fuel)  a manner  as  I ought,  and  as  I defire  to  do. 
When  your  lordfhip  publiflted  thofe  queries,  un- 
der the  title  of  objervalions , I did  not  lie  under  the 
fame  difficulty;  becaufe,  as  your  name  was  not 
inferibed,  I bad  “ the  liberty  to  Hand,  as  it  were, 
on  even  ground.”  But  I mull  now  always  re- 
memember  to  whom  I fpeak.  And  may  the 
God  whom  I Jerve  in  the  gojpel  of  his  Son,  enable 
me  to  do  it  with  deep  ferioufnefs  of  fpirit,  with 
modedy  and  humility;  and  at  the  fame  time, 
with  the  utmoft  plainncfs  of  fpeech  ; feeing  we 
mull  both  Hand  before  the  judgment  feat  of 
Chrifu 

3.  In  this  then  I intreat  your  lordfhip  to  bear 
with  me  : and  in  particular,  when  I fpeak  ofraV- 
felf,  (how  tender  a point !)  juft  as  freely  as  I would 
of  another  man.  Let  not  this  be  termed  Loading. 

K 4 Is 


[ 224  ] 

Is  there  not  a caufe  ? Can  I refrain  from  fpeaking, 
and  be  guiltlefs?  And  if  I fpeak  at  all,  ought  I 
not  to  fpeak  ("what  appears  to  me  to  be)  the 
whole  truth  ? Does  not  your  lordfh i p defire,  that 
I fhould  do  this  ? I will  then,  God  being  my 
helper.  And  you  will  bear  with  me  in  my  folly 
(if  fuch  it  is)  with  my  fpeaking  in  the  fimplicity 
ol  my  heart. 

4-  Your  lordfhip  begins,  Thereis  ancther  fpzcies 
oj  enemies,  who — give  fiamejul  dijlurbance  to  the 
parochial  clergy,  and  uje  very  unwarrantable  me- 
thods, to  prejudice  their  people  againjl  them,  and 
to  Jeduce  their  jlocks  from  them — the  Methodifts 
and  Moravians,  who — agree  in  annoying  the  ejia- 
biifh.d  mmijlry,  and  in  drawing  over  to  tkcmfelves 
the  lowejl  and  mojl  ignorant  of  the  people,  by  pre- 
tences to  greater  f aridity — p.  4. 

But  have  no  endeavours  been  ufed  to  fhew 
them  their  error  ? Yes:  your  lordfhip  remarks, 
Endeavours  have  not  been  wanting — But  though 
tkefe  endeavours  have  caufed fame  abatement  in  the 
pomp  and  grandeur  with  which  thefe  people  for 
fome  time  aded  (truly,  one  would  not  have  ex- 
pelled it  from  them!)  yet  they  donolfeem — to 
have  made  an  impreffon  upon  their  leaders,  p.  6. 

Your  lordfhip  adds,  Their  innovations  in  points 
of  difcipline,  I do  not  intend  tc  enter  into  at prefent 
— But  to  enquire  what  the  dodrines  are  which  they 
fp  tread,  p.  7. — Dodrines  big  with  pernicious  infu- 
ences  upon pradice.  p.  8. 

Six  of  thefe  your  lordfhip  mentions,  after  hav- 
ing 


[ 225  ] 


ing  premifed,  It  is  not  at  all  needful,  to  the  end  of 
guarding  againf  them,  to  charge  the  particular 
tenets  upon  the  particular  perfons  among  them.  p.  7. 
Indeed,  my  lord,  it  is  needful  in  the  high  eft  de- 
gree. For  if  the  mini  Her  who  is  to  guard  his 
people,  either  againil  Peter  Bolder,  Mr.  White- 
field,  or  me,  does  not  know  what  our  particular 
tenets  are,  he  muft  needs  run,  as  uncertainly , 
and fight,  as  one  that  beateth  the  air. 

I will  fairly  own,  which  of  thefe  belong  to  me. 
The  indued  pr  ad  ices  which  your  lordihip  charges- 
upon  me,  may  then  be  confidered  ; together  with 
the  confequences  of  thefe  doftrines,  and  your  lord- 
fhip’s  inftruftions  to  the  clergy. 

5.  The  firjl  that  I Jhall  take  notice  of  (fays  your 
lordihip)  is  the  antinomian  dodrine.  p._  8.  The- 
fecond,  That  Chrif  has  done  all,  and  left  nothing 
for  us  to  do,  but  to  believe,  p.  9.  Thefe  belong 
not  to  me.  I am  unconcerned  therein.  I have 
earneltly  oppofed,  but  did  never  teach  or  em- 
brace them. 

There  is  another  notion  (youi  lordihip  fays)  zohich 
we  find  propagated  throughout  the  writings  of  thofe 
people,  and  that  is,  the  making  inward,  fecret 
and fudden  impulfes  the  guides  of  their  all  ions, 
refolutions  and  defigns.  p.  14.  Mr.  Church  urged 
the  fame  objection  before.  Infiead  of  making  the 
word  0/  God  the  rule  of  his  adions , he  follovos  only 
his  fecret  impulfe — I beg  leave  to  return  the  fame 
anfwer.  “ In  the  whole  compafs  of  language 
there  is  not  apropofition  which  lefs  belongs  tome. 

K 5 than; 


[ 226  ] 

than  this.  I have  declared  again  and  again, 
that  I make  the  word  of  God  the  rule  of  all  my 
adfions  ; and  that  I no  more  follow  any  fcret 
impulfe  in  head  thereof,  than  I follow  Mahomet 
or  Confucius Anfu).  to  Mr.  Church,  p.  38. 

6.  Before  I proceed,  fuffer  me  to  obferve, 
here  are  three  grievous  errors,  charged  on  the 
Moravians,  Mr.  IVhitefeld  and  me  conjointly, 
in  none  of  which  I am  any  more  concerned, 
than^p  the.  doftrine  of  the  Metempfychofis  ! But 
it  was  not  needful  to  charge  particular  tenets  on 
particular  p erf  on  s.  Juft  as  needful,  my  lord,  as 
it  is  not  to  put  a ftumbling-block  in  the  way  of 
our  brethren : not  to  lay  them  under  an  almoft 
infuperable  temptation,  of  condemning  the  in- 
nocent with  the  guilty.  I befeech  your  lord- 
Ship  to  anfwer  in  your  own  confcience  before 
God,  whether  you  did  not  forefee  how  many 
of  your  hearers  would  charge  thefe  tenets  upon 
me?  Nay,  whether  you  did  not  defign  they 
fhould?  If  fo,  my  lord,  is  this  Chriftianity  ? 
Is  it  humanity  ? Let  me  fpeak  plain.  Is  it 
honeft  heathenifm  ? 

7.  I am  not  one  jot  more  concerned  in  in- 
flantaneous  j unification,  as  your  lordfhip  explains 
it,  viz.  A J'udden  infantaneous  juf  if  cation,  by 
which  the  perfon  receives  from  God,  a certain  feal 
of  his  falvation , or  abfolute  affurance  of  being 

faved  at  lajl , p.  it.  Such  an  infantaneous  work- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  finifhes  the  bufinefs  of 
falvation  once  for  all , ibid.  I neither  teach  nor 

believe. 


C 22  7 ] 

believe,  andam  therefore  clear  of  all  the  confequen- 
ces  that  may  arife  therefrom.  I believe,  a gradual 
improvement  in  grace  and  goodnefs,  I mean,  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  is  a good  teJJi- 
mony  of  our  prefent  Jincerity  towards  Gcd  : al- 
though I dare  not  fay,  it  is  the  only  true  ground 
of  humble  a finance , or  the  only  foundation  oa 
which  a Chriftian  builds  his  hopes  of  acceptance 
and  falvation.  For  I think  other foundation  of 
thefe  can  no  man  lay,  than  that  which  is  laid , 
even  Jefus  Chrift. 

8.  To  the  charge  of  holding  ftnlefs  perfeftion 
as  your  lordfhip  Rates  it,  I might  likewife  plead, 
not  guilty  : feeing  one  ingredient  thereof,  in 

your  lordihip’s  account,  is freedom  from  tempta- 
tion, p.  17.  Whereas  I believe,  “ there  is  no 
fuch  perfection  in  this  life,  as  implies  an  entire 
deliverance  from  manifold  temptations.”  But  I 
will  not  decline  the  charge.  I will  repeat  once 
more  my  cool  eft  thoughts  upon  this  head;  and 
that  in  the  very  terms  which  I did  feveral  years 
ago,  as  I prefume  your  lordfhip  cannot  be  igno- 
rant. 

“ What,  ii  may  be  afked,  do  you  mean  by  one 
that  is  per feB,  or,  one  that  is  ashismajler?  We 
mean,  one  in  whom  is  the  mind  which  was  in 
Chrift,  and  who  fo  walketh  as  he  walked',  a man 
that  hath  clean  hands  and  a pure  heart  ;,  or  that  is 
clean  fed  from  all  flthinefs  of flefi  andfpirit:  one 
in  whom  there  is  no  occafion  of  fumbling,  .and  who 
accordingly  doth  not  commit  fn.  To  declare 
X 6 tlus  - 


[ £28  ] 

this  a little  more  particularly,  we  underhand  by 
that  fcrtptural  expreffion,  a perfect  man , one  in 
whom  God  hath -fulfilled  his  faithful  word,  jrom 
all  your  filthinefs , and  from  all  your  idols  will  l 
cleanft  you — Iwillaljo  J'ave  you  jrom  all  your  un- 
cle annejs.  Vvre  underhand  hereby,  one  whom 
God  hath  fan 8 fed  throughout,  even  in  body , 
foul  and  J pint : one  who  zualketh  in  the  light,  as 
he  is  in  the  light,  in  whom  is  no  darknefs  at  all ; 
the  blood  cf  Jefus  Chrifl:  his  Son  having  cleanfed 
him  from  all  fin.' ’ 

“ This  m2ii  can  now  teflify  to  all  mankind, 
J am  crucified  with  Chrifl;  mverthelfs  I live ; 
yet  I live  not ; but  Chrifl  livethin  me.  He  is  holy, 
as  God  who  called  him  is  holy,  both  in  life,  and 
in  all  manner  of  converjalion.  He  lovcth  the  Lord 
his  God  with  all  his  heart,  and  ferveth  him  with 
all  his  Jlrength.  He  Icveth  his  neighbour  (every 
man)  as  hinfelf ; yea,  as  Chrifl  loved  us : them 
in  particular  that  dcfpitefullj  ufe  him  and perfecute 
him,  becaufe  they  know  not  the  Son,  neither  the 
Father.  Indeed  his  foul  is  all  love,  filled  with 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs , meeknefs , gentlenefs , 
longf offering.  And  his  life  agreeth  thereto,  full 
of  the  work  of  faith,  the  patience  of  hope,  the  labour 
oj  love.  And  whalfqtvtr  he  doth,  either  in  word 
or  deed,  he  doth  it  all  in  the  name , in  the  love 
and  power  of  the  Lord  Jefus;  In  a word,  lie 
doth  the  will  of  God  on  earth , as  it  is  done  in 
heaven.1’ 


“ This 


[ 229  ] 

“ This  is  to  be  a per  fed  man , to  be  fandified 
throughout , created  anew  in  JefusChrift:  even 
“ to  have  a heart  fo  all- flaming  with  the  love  of 
God,”  (to  ufe  archbifhop  UJher  s words,)  “ as 
continually  to  offer  up  every  thought,  word,  and 
work,  as  a fpiritual  facrilice,  acceptable  unto  God 
through  C hi  i ft.”  In  every  thought  of  our  hearts, 
in  every  word  of  our  tongues,  in  every  work  of 
our  hands,  to  fnew forth  his  praife  who  hath  called 
us  out  of  darknefs  into  Ins  marvellous  light.  O 
that  both  we,  and  a’-l  who  feek  the  Lord  Jefus 
in  ftncerity,  may  thus  be  made  pe  f ed  in  one.” 

9.  I conjure  you,  my  lord,  by  the  mercies  of 
God,  ifthefe  are  not  the  words  of  truth  and  fo- 
bernefs,  point  me  out  wherein  I have  erred  from 
the  truth  : {hew  me  clearly,  wherein  I have 
fpoken  either  beyond  or  contrary  to  the  word  of 
God.  But  might  I not  humbly  intreat,  that 
your  lord  [hip,  in  doing  this,  would  abflain  from 
fuch  expreffions  as  thefe,  Ij  they  will  put  them - 
J'elves  under  their  diredion  and  difipline, — after 
their  courfe  of  difipline  is  once  over,,  p.  15.  as  not 
Ratable  either  to  the  weight  of  the  fubjefh,  or  the 
dignity  of  your  lord  flap's  character.  And  might 
I not  expefcf  fornething  more  than  thefe  loofe 
affertions,  that  this  is  a del ufion  altogether  ground- 
lefs,  p.  15.  A notion  contrary  to  the  whole  tenor, 
both  oj  the  old  and  new  tejlament ; that  the  f rip- 
lares  foi  bid  all  thought  of  it',  as  vain,  arrogant 
and  prefumptuous  ; that  they  reprefent  all  man- 
kind., without  diflindion , as  fubjed  to  fin  and 

corruption 


[ 2 3° 


corruption  (fubject  to  fin  and  corruption  f firong 
words ! ) during  their  continuance  in  this  world : 
and  require  no  more  than  an  honejl  defire  and 
endeavour,  to  find  our [elves  le/s  and defs  in  a fate 
oj imperfeBion?  p.  i6. 

Is  it  not  from  your  lordfhi p’s  irrtirely  mifiaking 
♦he  quefiion,  not  at  all  apprehending  what  per- 
feftion  I teach,  that  you  go  on  to  guard  againft 
the  fame  imaginary  confeqaences,  as  your  lord- 
fhip  did  in  the  Ohfervations ? Surely,  my  lord, 
yon  never  gave  yourftlf  the  trouble  to  read  the 
anfwer  given  in  the  Farther  Appeal , to  every 
cbje&ion  which  you  now  urge  afrefii  I feeing 
you  do  not  now  appear  to  kno  w any  more  of  my 
fentiments,  than  if  you  had  never  propofed  one 
queftion,  nor  received  one  anfwer  upon  the 
fubjeft  ! 

to.  If  your  lordfriip  defigned  to  fhew  my  real 
fentiments  concerning  the  lalt  doBnne  which  you 
mention , as  one  would  imagine  by  your  adding, 
ihefe  are  his  own  words,  p.  18.  fhould  you  not 
have  cited  all  my  own  words?  At  leaf!  all  the 
words  ol  that  paragraph,  and  not  have  mangled  it, 
as  Mr.  Church  did  before  ? 

If  runs  thus  (Journal  III.  p.  47.)  “ Sat.  28.  I 
fhewed  at  large  (in  order  to  anfwer  thofe  who 
taught,  that  none  but  they  who  are  full  of  faith 
and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  ought  ever  to  communi- 
cate) 1.  That  the  Lord’s  /upper  was  ordained  by 
God,  to  be  a means  of  conveying  to  men  either 
preventing , ox  jujljymg,  or JanBifying  grace,  ac- 
cording 


[ Z31  J 


cording  (o  their  feveral  neceffities..  2.  That  the 
perfons  for  whom  it  was  ordained,  are  all  thofe 
who  know  and  feel  that  they  want  the  grace  of 
God,  either  to  refrain  them  from  fin,  or  to  fhem 
their  fins  forgiven , or  to  renew  their  fouls  in  the 
image  of  God.  3.  That  in  as  much  as  we  come 
to  his  table,  not  to  give  him  any  thing,  but  to 
receive  -whatfoever  he  fees  bell  for  us,  there  is 
no  previous  preparation  indifpenfably  necelfary, 
but  a defire  to  receive  whatfoever  he  pleafes  to 
give.  And  4.  that  no  fetnefs  is  required  at  the 
time  of  communicating,  but  a fenfe  of  our  fiate, 
of  our  utter  finfulnefs  and  helplefnefs : every  one 
who  knows  he  is  fit for  hell,  being  juft  ft  to  come 
to  Chrift,  in  this  as  well  as  all  other  ways  of  his 
appointment.” 

In  the  feco-nd  letter  to  Mr.  Church,  p.  26.  I 
explain  myfelf  farther  on  this  head.  “ I am 
forry  to  find  you  ftill  affirm,  that  with  regard  to 
the  Lord’s • f upper  al fo,  I advance  many  injudicious , 
falfe  and  dangerous  things.  Such  as,  1.  That  a 
■man  ought  to  communicate,  without  a fare  trujl  in 
God’s  mercy  through  Chrift,  p.  117.”  You 
mark  thefe  as  my  words ; 'out  I know  them  not. 
2.  “ That  there  is  no  previous  preparation  indifpen- 
fably neceffary,  but  a defire  to  receive  whatfoever 
God  pleafes  to  give.”  But  1 include  abundant- 
ly more  in  that  defire,  than  you  feem  to  appre- 
hend; even  a willingnefs  to  know  and  do  the 
whole  will  of  God.  3.  That  no fitnefs  is  required 
at  the  time  of  communicating,  (I  recite  the  whole 

fenteuce). 


[ 232  ] 

fentence)  but  a J'e.nft  of  our  fate,  of  our  utter  fn- 
JulneJ's  and  helplefnefs  ! Every  one  who  knows  he 
is ft for  hell , being  jujl ft  to  come,  to  Chrift,  in  this, 
as  well  as  in  all  other  ways  of  his  appointment .” 
But  neither  can  this  fenfe  of  our  utter  finfulnefs 
and  helplefnefs  fubfiff,  without  earneft  defires  of 
univerfal  hoiinefs. 

10.  And  now  what  can  I fay  ? Kad  your  lord- 
flaip  never  feen  this  ? That  is  hardly  to  be  imagi- 
ned. But  if  you  had,  how  was  it  pofiible  your 
lord  (hip  fhould  thus  explicitly  and  folemnly 
charge  me,  in  the  prefence  oi  God  and  all  my 
brethren  (only,  the  perfon  fo  charged  was  net 
prefent)  with  meaning  by  ihcje  words  to  Cel  aftde 
Jcf -examination  and  repentance  for  f ns  pajl,  and 
refolutions  of  living  better  for  the  time  to  come,  as 
things  no  way  necejjary  to  make  a worthy  commu- 
nicant! p.  18 

Ifan  evidence  at  the  bar  fhould  fwerve  from 
truth,  an  equitable  judge  may  place  the  thing 
in  a true  light.  But  if  the  judge  himfelf  fhall 
bear  falfe  witnefs,  where  then  can  we  find  a 
remedy  ? 

Aftnal  preparation  was  here  intirely  out  of 
the  quefti  m.  It  might  be  abfoluttly  and  indifpen- 
fably  neceffarv,  for  any  thing  I had  either  faid 
or  meant  to  the  contrary.  For  it  was  nor  at  all 
in  my  thoughts.  And  the  habitual  preparation 
which  I had  in  terms  declared  to  be  indifpenfaily 
necelfarv,  was  “ a willingnefs  to  know  and  to 
do  the  whole  will  of  God,”  and  “ eainefl  defires 

of 


[ 333  1 

of  univerfal  holinefs.”  Does  your  lordfhip  think, 
this  is  meant  to  Jet  afide  all  repentance for  fins  paji, 
and  resolutions,  of  living  better for  the  time  to  come  ? 

11.  Your  lordfhip  next  falls  with  all  your  might 
upon  that  flrange  afTertion,  as  you  term  it,  “We 
come  to  his  table,  not  to  give  him  any  thing,  but 
to  receive  whatfoever  he  lees  beff  for  us.  Where- 
as, fays  your  lordfhip,  in  the  exhortation  at  the 
time  of  receiving,  the  people  are  told,  that  they  mujl 
give  mo jl  humble  and  hearty  thanks, — and  immedi- 
ately after  receiving,  both  mirdjler  and  people  join, 
in  offering  and  preferring  them  [elves  before  God, 
p.  20,21.  O God  ! in  what  manner  are  themofl 
facred  things  here  treated  ! The  mofl  venerable 
myfleries  of  our  religion  ! What  quibbling,  what 
playing  upon  words  is  here  ! “ Not  to  give  him 
any  tiling,” — “ Yes,  to  give  him  thanks.”  O my 
lord,  are  thefe  the  woids  of  a father  of  the  church  ? 

12.  Your  lordfhip,  goes  on,  To  the  foregoing 
account  of  theft  modern  principles  and  dotlrines — 
it  may  not  be  improper  to  fubjoin  a few  obfervations 
upon  the  indireEl  praffices  oj  the  Jame  people  in 
gaining  projelytes,  p.  23,  24. 

I.  They  perfuade  the  people,  that  the  eftablifhed 
worjhip,  with  a regular  attendance  upon  it,  is  not 
Sufficient  to  anfwer  the  ends  of  devotion. 

Your  lordfhip  mentioned  this  likewife  in  the 
obfervations.  In  your  fourth  query  it  flood  thus  : 
“ Whether  a due  and  regular  attendance  on  the 
public  offices  of  religion,  paid  in  a ferious  and 

compofed 


r.  234  ] 

compofed  way,  does  not  anfwer  the  trne  ends 
of  devotion?”  Suffer  me  to  repeat  part  of  the 
anfwer  then  given. 

“ I fuppofe,  by  devotion  you  mean  public 
worfhip  ; by  the  true  ends  of  it,  the  love  of  God 
and  man  : and  by  a due  and  regular  attendance 
on  the  public  ojjices  of  religion,  paid  in  a ferious 
and  compofed  way,  the  going  as  often  as  we  can 
to  our  parii'h  church,  and  to  the  facrament  there 
adminiffered.  If  fo,  the  queflion  is,  “ Whether 
this  attendance  on  ikofe  offices,  does  not  produce 
the  love  of  God  and  man  ? I anfwer  fometimes 
it  does  ; and  fometimes  it  does  not.  I my  felt 
thus  attended  them  for  many  years ; and  yet  am 
confeious  to  myfclf,  that  during  that  whole  time, 
I had  no  more  of  the  love  of  God  than  a flone. 
And  I know  many  hundreds,  perhaps  thoufands, 
of  ferious  perfons,  who  are  ready  to  teitify  the 
fame  thing.” 

Ifubjoined,  1.  “ We  continually  exhort  all 
who  attend  on  our  preaching,  to  attend  the  of- 
fices of  the  church.  And  they  do  pay  a more 
regular  attendance  there  than  ever  they  did  be- 
fore. 2.  Their  attending  the  church  did  not, 
in  fad!,  anfwer  thofe  ends  at  all,  till  they  attend- 
ed this  preaching  alfo.  3.  It  is  the  preaching 
remiffion  of  fins  through  Jefus  Chrift,  which  a- 
loneanfwers  the  true  ends  of  devotion.” 

II.  13.  They  cenfure  the  clergy,  fays  your  lord- 
fhip,  as  lefs  zealous  than  theirftlves,  in  the  fi  ral 

branches 


[ 2 35  '] 

branches  of  the  minifterial  function — -For  this  they 
are  undejervedly  reproached  by  thefe  noij'y,  itine- 
rant leaders , p.  24,  25. 

My  lord,  I am  not  confcious  to  myfelf  of  this; 
1 do  not  willingly  compare  myfelf  with  any  man, 
much  lefs  do  I reproach  my  brethren  of  the  cler- 
gy, whether  they  deferve  it  or  net.  But  it  is 
needlefs  to  add  any  more  on.  this  head  than  what 
was  faid  above  a year  ago.  [2d  letter  to  Mr. 
Church , p.  78.] 

“ I mull  explain  myfelf  a little  on  that  praflice, 
which  you  fo  often  term  abnfing  the  clergy.  I 
have  many  times  great  forrow  and  heavinefs  in 
my  heart,  on  account  of  thefe  my  brethren.  And 
this  fometimes  confirains  me  to  fpeak  to  them,  in 
the  only  way  which  is  now  in  my  power:  and 
fometimes  (though  rarely)  to  fpeak  of  them  ; of 
a few,  not  all  in  general.  In  either  cafe,  I take 
an  efpecial  care,  1.  To  fpeak  nothing  but  the 
truth.  2.  To  fpeak  this  with  all  plainnefs ; and, 
3.  With  love,  and  in  the  fpirit  of  meeknefs. 
Now,  if  you  will  call  this  abufing,  railing , or  re- 
viling, you  mull.  But  dill  I dare  not  refrain 
from  it.  I mud  thus  rail,  thus  abufe  finners  of 
all  forts  and  degrees,  unlefs  I will  perifh  with 
them.” 

III.  14.  Thy  value  theirfdves  upon  extraordi- 
nary friElneffes  and feverities  in  life , and fuch  as 
are  beyond  what  the  rules  of  Chriftianity  require. 
They  captivate  the  people  by  fuch  profeffons  and 

appearances 


r i 

appearances  of  uncommon  [anility — But  that 
which  can  never  fail  oj  a general  rejpeil — is  a quiet 
and  exemplary  life,  free  from  the  many  follies  and 
indifcretions  which  thoje  ref  lief  and  vagrant  teach - 
ers  are  apt  to fall  into,  p.  25. 

By  “ extraordinary  ftriftneffes  and  feverities,” 
I prefume  your  lordlhip  means,  the  abltaining 
from  wine  and  animal  food  ; which,  it  is  fure, 
Chriftianity  does  not  require.  But  if  you  do,  I 
fear  your  lordfbip  is  not  throughly  informe.:!  of 
the  matter  of  fa  ft.  I began  to  do  this,  about 
twelve  years  ago,  when  I had  no  thought  of 
“ annoying  parochial  minifters,”  or  of  “ captivat- 
ing any  people”  thereby,  unlefs  it  were  the 
Chicafaw  or  Choclau  Indians.  But  I refumed 
the  ufe  of  them  both,  about  two  years  after,  for 
the  fake  of  fome  who  thought  I made  it  a point 
of  confcience  ; telling  them,  I will  eat  fefi  while 
the  viorld  Jlandeth,  rather  than  make  my  brother 
to  offend.  Dr.  Cheyne  advifed  me,  to  leave  them 
off  again,  alluring  me,  “ Till  you  do,  you  will 
never  be  free  from  fevers.”  And  fince  1 have 
taken  his  advice,  I have  been  free  (bleffed  be 
God)  from  all  bodily  diforders.  t Would  to 
God  I knew  any  method  of  being  equally  free 
from  all  follies  and  indifcretions.  But  this  I 
never  expeft  to  attain,  till  my  fpirit  returns  to 
God. 

1 1.  But  in  how  fl range  a manner  does  vour 
lordfhip  reprefeat  this  ? What  a confiruction  do 

you 

+ I continued  this  about  two  years. 


[ 23  7 ] 

you  put  upon  it  ? Appearances  of  an  uncommon 

fandity,  in  order  to  captivate  the  people 

Pretenfions  to  more  exalted  degrees  of  fridnefs,  to 
make  their  way  into  weak  minds  and fickle  heads , 
p.  25.  Pretences  to  greater  f aridity,  whereby 
they  draw  over  to  ihemfelves  the  mofi  ignorant  of 
the  people,  p.  4.  If  thefe  are  appearances  of 
uncommon  fandity  (which  indeed  might  bear  a 
difpute)  how  does  your  lordfhip  know,  that  they 
are  only  appearances  ? That  they  do  not  fpring 
from  the  heart  ? Suppofe  thefe  were  exalted  de- 
grees of  fridnefs,  is  your  lordfhip  abfolutely 
allured,  that  we  piactife  them  only  to  make  our 
nay  into  weak  minds  and  fickle  heads?  Where  is 
the  proof,  that  thefe  pretences  to  greater  fandity 
(as  you  lordfhip  is  pleaftd  to  phiafe  them)  are 
mere  pretences,  and  have  nothing  of  reality  or 
fincerity  in  them  ? 

My  lord,  this  is  an  accufation  of  the  highed 
nature.  ir  we  are  guilty,  we  are  not  fo  much 
as  moral  Heathens.  We  are  menders,  not  only 
unworthy  of  the  Chriftian  name,  but  unfit  for 
human  fociety.  It  tears  up  ail  pretences  to  the 
love  of  God  and  man  : to  judice,  mercy,  or 
truth.  But  how  is  it  proved  ? Or  does  your 
lordfhip  read  the  heart,  and  fo  pafs  fentence 
without  any  proof  at  all  ? O my  lord,  ought  an 
accufation  of  the  lowed  kind  to  be  thus  received, 
even  againd  the  lowed  of  the  people  ? How 
much  lefs  can  this  be  reconciled  with  the  apof- 
tolical  advice  to  the  bifhop  of  Ephefus,  Againfl 

a prof- 


[ *3»  3 

a prefbyier , receive,  net  an  accufation , but  before 
two  or  three  zuitneffes  ; and  thofe  face  to  face. 
When  it  is  thus  proved,  them  that  fin , rebuke 
before  all.  Your  lordffiip,  doubtlefs  remembers 
the  words  that  follow  (how  worthy  to  be  written 
in  your  heart  !)  1 charge  thee,  before  God  and  tke 
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  the  elect  angels,  that  thou 
obferve  thefe  things , without  preferring  one  before 
another,  doing  nothing  by  partiality,  1 Tim.  v. 
tg,  20,  21. 

IV.  16.  They  miflead  the  people  into  an  opinion 
of  the  high  merit  of  punctual  attendances  on  their 
performances,  to  the  neglccl  of  the  bufinefs  of 
their  Jiation,  p.  26.  My  lord,  this  is  not  fo. 
You  yourfelf,  in  this  very  charge,  have  cleared 
us  from  one.part  of  this. accufation.  You  have 
born  uswitnefs,  p.  10.  that  we  difclain  alt  merit, 
even  in  (really)  good  works  : hovy  much  more, 
in  fuch  works  as  we  continually  declare  are 
not  good,  but  very  evil  ? Such  asuhe  attending 
fermons,  or  any  public  offices  whatever,  to  the 
negletl  of  the  bufinefs  of  ourfation.  . 

When  your  lordffiip  urged'this  before,  in  the 
oifervalions,  I openly  declared  my  belief/' Farther 
Appeal,  part  f.  p.  19.)  “ That  true  religion 
cannot  lead  into  a difregard  or  difefleem  of  the 
common  dutiesand  offices  of  life:  that,  on  the 
contrary,  it  leads  men  to  difeharge  all  thofe  duties 
with  the  i.'ftrifteft  and  clofeft  attention  : that 
Chriftianily  requires  this  attention  and  diligence, 

in 


[ 239  ] 

in  all  ft  at  ions  and  in  all  conditions  : that  the 
preformance  of  the  ioweft  offices  of  life,  as 
unto  God,  is  truly  a Jewing  of  Chrift ; and  that 
this  is  the  do&rine  I preach  continually  a faff, 
whereof  any  man  may  eafily  be  informed.  Now 
if  after  all  this,  your  lordffiip  will  repeat  the 
charge,  as  if  I had  not  once  opened  my  mouth 
concerning  it,  I cannot  help  it.  I can  fay  no 
more.  I commend  my  cafe  to  God. 

17.  Having  confidered  what  your  lordffiip  has 
advanced,  concerning  dangerous  doctrines  and  in- 
direfl  practices,  I now  come  to  the  inftrudiions 
your  lordffiip  gives  to  the  clergy  of  your  diocefe. 

* How  awful  a thing  is  this  ! the  very  occafion 
carries  in  it  a folemnity  not  to  be  expreffed.  Here 
is  an  angel  of  the  church  of  Chrift,  one  of  the 
flats  in  God's  right-hand,  calling  together  all  the 
fubordinate  paflors,  for  whom  he  is  to  give  an 
account  to  God  ; and  dire£ling  them  (in  the  name 
and  by  the  authority  of  the  great  Shepherd  of  the 
JJitep,  Jefus  Chrift,  the  firjt  begotten  from  the  dead, 
the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth ) how  to  make 
full  proof  of  their  minijlry,  that  they  may  he  pure 
from  the  blood  off  all  men;  how  -to  take  heed  unto 
themfelves  and  to  all  the  flock  over  which  the  Holy 
Ghotl  hath  made,  them  cverfeers  ; how  to  feed  the 
flock  of  God,  which  he  hath  pin  chafed  with  his  own 
blood ! To  this  end  they  are  all  aflembled  together. 
And  what  is  the  fuhftance  of  all  his  inftru&ions? 
“ Reverend  brethen,  I charge  you  all,  lift  up 
your  voice  like  a trumpet!  and  warn  and  arm 

and 


L 240  ] 

and  fortify  all  mankind — againd  a people  called 
Methodijls.” 

True  it  is,  your  lordlhip  gives  them  feveral 
advices  ; but  all  in  order  to  this  end.  You  direct 
them,  to  inculcate  the  excellency  of  our  liturgy,  as 
a wife,  grave  and  ferious  fervice  : to  fhew  their 
people,  that  a diligent  attendance  on  their  bufinefs, 
is  a frying  of  God  ; punctually  to  perform  both 
the  public  offices  of  the  church,  and  all  other  pa f 
toral  duties : and  to  engage  the  ejltem  of  their 
parijhioners,  by  a conji ant  regularity  of  life.  But 
all  thefe  your  lordlhip  recommends  eo  nomine,  as 
means  to  that  great  end,  “The  arming  and for  - 
tifying  their  people  againd  the  Moravians  or  Me- 
thodifts,  and  their  doSrines.” 

Is  it  polfible  ! Could  your  lordlhip  difcern  no 
other  enemies  of  thegofpel  of  Chrid  ? Are  there 
no  other  heretics  or  fchifmatics  on  earth  ? Or 
even  within  the  four  fees?  Are  there  nopapids, 
no  deifis  in  the  land  ? Or  are  their  errors  of  lefs 
importance  ? Or,  are  their  numbers  in  England 
lefs  conftderable  ? Or  lefs  likely  to  increafe  ? 
Does  it  appear  then  that  they  have  led  their 
zeal  for  making  profelytcs  ? Or,  are  all  the  peo- 
ple fo  guarded  againd  them  already,  that  then  la- 
bour is  in  vain  ? Can  your  lordlhip  anfwer  thefe 
few,  plain  queflions,  to  the  fatisla£licn  of  your 
own  confcience  ? 

Have  the  Meihodi/ls  (fo  called)  already  mono- 
polized all  the  fins,  as  well  as  errors,  in  the  na- 
tion? Is  Method ij ui  the  only  fm,  or  the  only  fatal 

or 


, {*4>] 

or  fpreading  Fin,  to  be  found  within  the  bills  of 
'mortality  ! Have  two  thoufand  (or  more)  ambaj- 
jadors  of  Clirifl  cond  fewards  of  the  myjlerie-s  of 
God,  no  other  bufir.efs  than  to  guard,  warn,  arm , 
and fortify  their  people  againfi  this  ? O my  lord, 
if  this  engroffes  their  time  and  ftrength  (as  it 
mult,  if  they  follow  your  lordfhip’s  inflruftions) 
they  will  not  give  an  account  with  joy,  either  of 
themfelves  or  of  their  flock  in  that  day  ! 

11.  Your  -lordfhip  feems  in  home  meafure  fen- 
fible  of  this,  when  you  very  gently  condemn  their 
opinion,  who  think  the  Method f s might  better  be 
■difregarded  and  defpifed,  than  taken  notice  of  and 
oppofed- — if  it  were  not  for  the  difurbance  they  give 
to  the  parochial  miniflers,  and  their  unwarrantable 
endeavours  to  f educe  the  people  from  their  lawful 
pafors,  p.  22.  The  fame  complaint  with  which 
your  lordfhip  opened  your  charge.  They  give 
Jhameful  dfnrbances  to  the  parochial  clergy — they 
annoy  the  efablfhcd  minifry,  ufing  very  unwar- 
? ant  able  methods,  firfl,  to  prejudice  their  people 
againf  them,  and  then  to  fecluce  their  focks  from 
-them,  p.  4. 

Whether  we  feduce  them  or  no  (which  will  be 
prefently  confidered)  I am  furry  your  lordfhip 
Should  give  any  countenance  to  that  low,  fenfe- 
lefs,  and  now  generally  exploded  flander,  that 
we  do  it  fora  maintenance,,  This  your  lordfhip 
infinuates,  by  applying  to  us  thofe  words  of  bi- 
fhop  Saunderfon,  “ And  all  this,  to fervt  their 
•own  belly , to  make  a prey  of  the  poor  deluded 

Vo  E,  XVI.  L profelytes : 


[ ] 

projelytes  : for  by  this  means  the  people  fall  unit 
them,  and  thereout  fuc.k  they  no  Jmall  advantage 
p.  ty.  Your  lordfhip  cannot  but  know,  that  my 
fellowfhip,  and  my  brother's  fludentfhip,  afford 
us  more  than  fufficient  for  life  and  godlinefs^ 
efpecially,  for  that  manner  of  life  which  weehufe, 
whether  out  of  oftentation  or  in  fmcerity. 

19.  But  do  we  willingly  annoy  the  ejlablifued 
miniflry,  or  give  dijlurba.net  to  the  parochial  clerg \ ? 
My  lord,  we  do  not.  We  trulf,  herein,  to  have 
a confcience  void  of  offence.  Nor  do  we  de- 
fignedly  prejudice  their  people  againjl  them.  In 
this  alfo  our  heart  condemneth  us  not.  But 
you  feduce  their yflocks  from  than.  No,  not  even 
from  thofe  who  feed  themfelves,  not  the  flock. 
All  who  hear  us  attend  the  fervice  of  the  church, 
at  leaf!  as  much  as  they  did  before.  And  for  this 
very  thing,  are  we  reproached  as  “ bigots  to  the 
church,”  by  thofe  of  mod  other  denominations. 

* Give  me  leave,  my  lord,  to  fav,  you  have 
miftook  and  mifreprefented  this  whole  affair 
from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  And  1 am  the  more 
concerned  to  take  notice  of  this,  hecaufe  fo  man)' 
have  fallen  into  the  fame  miftake.  It  is  indeed, 
and  has  been  from  the  beginning,  the  w:5t oj-vN-Ar, 
the  capital  blunder  of  our  bitterefl  adverfaries: 
though  how  they  can  advance  it,  I fee  not,  with- 
out loving , if  not  making  a lie.  It  is  not  our 
care,  endeavour,  or  defire,  to  profelyte  any  from 
one  man  to  another,  or  from  one  church  (fo 
called)  from  one  congregation,  or  fociety  to 

another : 


< [ 243  ] 

Another  : (we  would  not  move  a finger  to  da 
this  ; to  make  ten  thoufand  fuch  profelytes)  but 
from  darknefs  to  light,  from  Belial  to  Chrift; 
from  the  power  of  Satan  to  God,  Onr  one  aim 
is,  to  profelyte  fmners  to  repentance,  the  fervants 
of  the  devil  to  ferve  the  living;  and  true  God.  If 
this  be  not  done  in  fa£t,  we  will  Hand  condemn- 
ed; not  as  well-meaning  fools,  but  as  devils  in- 
carnate. But  if  it  be,  if  the  inftances  glare  in  tire 
face  of  the  fun,  if  they  increafe  daily.,  maugre 
all  the  power  of  earth  and  hell:  then,  my  lord, 
neither  you  nor  any  man  befide  (let  me  ufe  great 
plainnefs  of  fpeech)  can  oppofie  and  fortify  people 
againjl  us,  without  being  found  even  to  fight 
■againjl  God. 

20.  I would  fain  fet  this  point  in  a clearer 
light.  Here  are,  in  and  near  Moorficlds,  ten  thou- 
fand poor  fouls  for  whom  Chrift  died,  milling 
headlong  into  hell.  Is  Dr.Bul/iely,  the  parochial 
xninifier,  both  willing  and  able  to  ftop  them  ? If 
fo,  let  it  be  done,  and  I have  no  place  in  thefe  parts. 
I go  and  call  other  finners  to  repentance.  But  if 
after  all  he  has  done,  and  all  he  can  do,  they  are  ftill 
in  the  broad  way  to  deftruftion,  let  me  fee  if  God 
will  put  a word,  even  in  my  mouth.  True,  I 
am  a poor  worm  that  of  myfelf  can  do  nothing. 
But  if  God  fends,  by  whomfoever  he  will  fend, 
his  word  fhall  not  return  empty.  All  the  mef- 
fenger  of  God  afes,  is  Aaj  tt5  ; (no  help  of 
man  !)  Va'i  ynv  xiwW  The  arm  of  the  Lord  is  re- 
vealed. The  lion  roars,  having  the  prey  plucked 
out  of  his  teeth.  And  there  is  joy  in  the  prefence 
L 8 of 


C.  244  ] 

of  the  angels  of  God,  over  more  than  one  finer  that 
repf-nteth. 

21.  Is  this  any  annoyan-ce  to  the  parochial  mi- 
nifler  ? Then  what  manner  of  fpirit  is  he  of? 
Does  he  look  on  this  part  of  his  flock  as  loll.  be- 
caufe  they  are  found  of  the  great  Shepherd  3 — 
My  lord,  great  is  my  boltlnefs  toward  you.  You 
fpeak  of  the  confequences  of  our  doctrines.  You 
feetn  well  pleafed  with  the  fuccefs  of  your  end-ea- 
vours  againft  them,  becaufe  (you  fay)  they  have 
pernicious  confequences,  are  big  icith  pernicious  in- 
fluences upon  practice, — dangerous  to  religion  and 
the  fouls  of  men,  p.  8.  22.  In  anfwer  to  all  this, 
I appeal  to  plain  (aft.  I fay  once  more,  “ What 
have  been  the  confequences  (I  would  not  fpeak, 
but  I dare  not  refrain)  of  the  doctrines  I have 
preached  lor  nine  years  Iafl  pad  ? By  the  fruits 
lhall  ye  know  thole  of  whom  I fpeak  : even  the 
cloud  of  witnefles,  who  at  this  hour  experience 
the  gofpel  which  I preach,  to  be  the  power  of 
God  unto  falvation.  The  habitual  drunkard,  that 
was,  is  now.  temperate  in  ail  things.  The  whore- 
monger now  flees  fornication.  He  that  Hole 
Heals  no  more,  but  works  with  his  hands.  He 
that  curfed  or  fwore,  perhaps  at  every  fentence, 
has  now  learned  to  ferve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and 
rejoice  unto  him  with  reverence.  Thofe  former- 
ly inflaved  to  various  habits  of  fin,  are  now 
brought  to  uniform  habits  of  holinefs.  Thefe  are 
demonflrable  fafts.  I can  name  the  men,  with, 
their  places  of  abode.  One  of  them  was  an 

avowed 


[ H5  ] 

avowed  Alhvji  for  many  years ; fome  were  Jews ; 
a confiderable  number  Papifs  : the  greatef  part 
of  them  as  much  flrangers  to  the  form,  as  to  the 
power  of  godlinefs.” 

My  lord,  can  you  deny  thcfe  faffs  ? I will 
make  whatever  proof  of  them  you  {hall  require. 
But  if  the  faffs  be  allowed,  who  can  deny  the 
doffrines  to  be  (in  fubffance)  the  gofpel  of  Chrifl  ? 
For  is  there  any  other  name  under  heaven  given  to 
men,  whereby  they  may  thus  bejaved  ? Or  is  there 
any  other  word  that  thus  commendeth  itfelf  to  every 
man  s confcience  in  the  fight  of  God  ? 

* 22.  But  I mull  draw  to  a conclufion.  Yonr 
lordfhip  has  without  doubt  had  fome  fuccefs  in 
oppofing  this  doffrine.  Very  many  have,  by  your 
lordfhip’s  unwearied  endeavours,  been  deterred 
from  hearing  at  all  : and  have  thereby  probably 
efcaped  the  being  feduced  into  holinefs,  have 
lived  and  died  in  their  fins.  My  lord,  the  time 
is  {hort.  I am  pafl  the  noon  of  life,  and  my  re- 
maining years  flee  away  as  a fliadow.  Your  lord- 
fbip  is  old  and  full  of  days,  having  paf  the  ufual 
age  of  man.  It  cannot  therefore  be  long  before 
we  fhall  both  drop  this  houfe  of  earth,  and  {land 
naked  before  God  : no,  nor  before  we  fhall  fee 
the  great  white  throne  coming  down  from  hea- 
ven, and  him  that  fitteth  thereon.  On  his  left- 
hand  fhall  be  thofe  who  are  Ihortly  to  dwell  in 
everlafting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  an- 
gels. In  that  number  will  be  all  who  died  in 
their  fins : and  among  the  ref,  thofe  whom  you 
L 3 preferved 


[ M*  ] 

preferved  from  repentance.  Will  yc-u  then  re- 
joice in  your  fuccefs  ? The  Lord  God  grant  it 
may  not  be  faid  in  that  hour,  “ Thefe  have  pe- 
rifhed  in  their  iniquity:  but  their  blood  I require 
at  thy  hands,” 

I am. 

Your  lordjhip’s  dutiful 
fon  and  ftrvant, 

London,  JOHN  WESLEY. 

June  11,  1747. 


A LETTER 


[ 247  ] 


A 


-LETT  E R 

To  a CLERGYMAN. 


Tullamore,  May  4,  1748. 

Rev.  Sir, 

I HAVE  at  prefent  neither  leifure  nor  inclina- 
tion to  enter  into  a formal  controverfy  : but 
you  will  give  me  leave,  jufl  to  offer  a few  loofe 
hints,  relating  to  the  fubjeft  of  lafl  night’s  con- 
verfation. 

1.  Seeing  life  and  health  are  things  of  fo  great 
importance,  it  is,  without  queftion,  highly  expe- 
dient, that  phyficians  fhould  have  all  poffible  ad- 
vantages of  learning  and  education. 

2.  That  trial  fhould  be  made  of  them  by  com- 
petent judges,  before  they  pra&ife  publicly. 

3.  That  after  fuch  trial,  they  be  authorized  to 
L 4 praftife 


[ 2-iS  ] 

praftife  by  thofe  who  are  impowered  to  convey 
that  authority. 

4.  And  that  while  they  are  prefcrving  the  lives 
of  others,  they  fhould  have  what  is  fuffic  ient  to 
fuftain  their  own. 

§•  But  fuppofing  a gentleman  bred  at  the  uni- 
verfity  in  Dublin,  with  ail  the  advantages  of  edu- 
cation : after  he  has  undergone  all  theufual. 
trials,  and  then  been  regularly  authorized  to 
prabtife. 

6.  Suppofe,  I fay,  this  phyfician  fettles  at  

for  fome  years,  and  yet  makes  no  cures  at  all : 
but  after  trying  his  fkill  on  five  hundred  perfons, 
cannot  fhew  that  he  has  healed  one;  many  of  his 
patients  dying  under  his  hands,  and  the  reft  re- 
maining juft  as  they  were  before  he  came. 

7.  Will  you  condemn  a man,  who  having 
fome  little  fkill  in  phyfic,  and  a tender  com- 
panion for  thofe  wdio  are  fick  or  dying  all-around 
him,  cures  many  of  thofe,  without  fee  or  reward, 
whom  the  doftor  could  not  cure  ? 

8.  At  leaft,  did  not  (which  is  the  fame  thing 
as  to  the  cafe  in  hand]  were  it  only  for  this  rea- 
fon,  becaufe  he  did  not  go  to  them,  and  they 
would  not  come  to  him. 

9.  Will  you  condemn  him, -becaufe  he  has  not 
learning  ? Or  has  not  had  an  univerfity  educa* 
tion  ? 

What  then  ? He  cures  thofe  whom  the  man  of 
learning  and  education  cannot  cure. 


10.  Will 


[ 249  ] 

10.  Will  you  objeH,  That  he  is  no  phyfician, 
nor  has  any  authority  to  pra&ife  P 

I cannot  come  into  your  opinion.  I think,  lie 
is  a phyfician  who  heals ; Medicus  ejl  qui  medetur: 
and  that  every  man  has  authority  to  fave  the  life 
of  a dying  man. 

But  if  you  only  mean,  he  has  no  authority  to 
take  fees,  I contend  not : for  he  takes  none  at 

all. 

11.  Nay,  and  I am  afraid  it  will  hold,  on  the 
other  hand,  Medicus  non  ejl  qui  non  meddur  : I am 
afraid,  if  we  ufe  propriety  of  fpeech,  he  is  no 
phyfician  who  works  no  cure. 

12.  “ O,  but  he  has  taken  his  degree  of 
“ doftor  of  phyfic,  and  therefore  has  autho» 
“ rity.” 

Authority  to  do  what  ? “ Why,  to  heal  all 
“ the  fick  that  will  employ  him.”  But  (to  wave 
the  cafe  of  thofe  who  will  not  employ  him  : and 
would  you  have  even  their  lives  thrown  away 
He  does  not  heal  thofe  that  do  employ  him. 
He  that  was  fick  before,  is  fick  ftili ; or  elfe  he 
is  gone  hence,  and  is  no  more  feen. 

Therefore  his  authority  is  not  worth  a rufh'j: 
for  it  ferves  not  the  end  for  which  it  was  given.- 

13.  And  furely  he  has  no  authority  to  kill' 
them,  by  hindering  another  from  faving  their: 
lives ! 

14.  If  he  either  attempts  or  defires  to  hinder, 
him,  if  he  condemns  or  dillikes  him  for  it,  it  is 

plain 


C s5°  ] 


plain  to  all  thinking  men,  he  regards  his  owa 
fees,  more  than  the  lives  of  his  patients. 

II.  Now  to  apply,  l.  Seeing  life  everlafling 
and  holinefs,  or  health  of  foul,  are  things  of  fo 
great  importance,  it  is  highly  expedient,  that 
Tninifters  being  phyficians  of  the  foul,  fhould  have 
all  advantages  of  education  and  learning. 

2.  That  full  trial  fhould  be  made  of  them, 
in  all  refpe&s,  and  that  by  the  moil;  compe- 
tent judges,  before  they  enter  on  the  public 
exercife  of  their  office,  The  having  fouls  from 
death. 

3.  That  after  fuch  trial,  they  be  authorized 
to  exercife  that  office,  by  thofe  who  are  im- 
powered  to  convey  that  authoiity:  (I  believe, 
bifhops  are  impowered  to  do  this,  and  have  been 
fo,  from  tire  apoffolic  age.) 

4.  And  that  thofe  whofe  fouls  they  fave,  ought 
mean  time  to  provide  them  what  is  needful  for  the 
body. 

5.  But  fuppofe  a gentleman  bred  at  the  uni- 
verfity  in  Dublin,  with  all  the  advantages  of 
education : after  he  has  undergone  the  ufual 
trials,  and  been  regular  ly  authorized  to  fave  fouls 
from  death. 

6.  Suppofe,  I fay,  this  minifter  fettles  at 

for  fome  years,  and  yet  faves  no  foul  at  all  ; 
fares  nofinners  from  their  fins;  hut  after  he  has 
preached  all  this  time  to  five  or  fix  hundred  per- 

fons, 


[ 251  ] 

fons,  cannot  fhew,  that  he  has  converted  one 
from  the  error  of  his  ways. 

Many  of  his  parifhioners  dying  as  they  lived 
and  the  reft  remaining  juft  as  they  were  before  he 
came. 

7.  Will  you  condemn  a man,  who  having  com- 
panion on  dying  fouls,  and  fome  knowledge  of 
the  gofpel  of  Chrift,  without  any  temporal  re- 
ward, faves  many  from  their  fins,  whom  the  mf- 
nifter  could  not  fave  ? 

8.  At  leaft  did  not  : nor  ever  was  likely  to  do 
it.;  for  he  did  not  go  to  them,  and  they  would 
not  come  to  him. 

9.  Will  you  condemn  fuch  a preacher,  becaufe 
he  has  not  learning  ? Or  has  not  had  an  univer- 
fity  education  P 

What  then  ? He  faves  thofe  finners  from  their 
fins,  whom  the  man  of  learning  and  education 
cannot  fave. 

A peafant  being  brought  before  the  college  of 
phyficians  at  Paris , a learned  doftor  accofted 
him,  “ What,  friend,  do  you  pretend  to  pre- 
“ fcribe  to  people  that  have  agues  ? Doft  thoa 
“ know  what  an  ague  is?” 

He  replied,  “ Yes,  Sir,  an  ague  is,  what  I 
“ can  cure,  and  you  cannot.’’ 

10.  Will  you  objedl,  “ But  he  is  no  minifter  ; 
“ nor  has  any  authority  to  fave  fouls  ?” 

I muft  beg  leave  to  diftent  from  you  iff  this.  I 
think,  he  is  a true,  evangelical  minifter,  otdy.ow> 
fervant  of  Chrift  and  his  church,  who  hxmvit, 
L 6 fo 


C 252  ] 

fo  miniflers,  as  to  fave  fouls  from  death,  to  re- 
claim Tinners  from  their  fins:  and  that  every 
Chriflian,  if  he  is  able  to  do  it,  has  authority  to 
fave  a dying  foul. 

But  if  you  only  mean,  he  has  no  authority  to 
take  tythes,  I grant  it.  He  takes  none.  As  he 
has  freely  recieved,  fo  he  freely  gives. 

it.  But  to  carry  the  matter  a little  farther,  I 
am  afraid,  it  will  hold  on  the  other  hand,  with 
regard  to  the  foul  as  well  as  the  body,  Medicus 
non  ejl  qui  non  meddur.  I am  afraid,  reafonabte 
men  will  be  much  inclined  to  think,  he  that  faves 
no  fouls  is  no  minifler  of  Chriff. 

12.  “ O,  but  he  is  ordained,  and  therefore  has 
“ authority.” 

Authority  to  do  what  ? To  fave  all  the  fouls 
that  will  put  themfelves  under  his  care.  True; 
but  (to  wave  the  cafe  of  them  that  will  not.  And 
would  you  defire  that  even  thofe  fhould  perifh  ?) 
he  does  not,  in  faff,  fave  them  that  are  under  his 
care.  Therefore,  what  end  does  his  authority 
ferve  ? He  that  was  a drunkard,  is  a drunkard 
ftill.  The  fame  is  true  of  the  fabbath-breaker, 
the  thief,  the  common  fwearer.  This  is  the 
bed  ol  the  cafe  : for  many  have  died  in  their  ini- 
quity, and  their  blood  will  God  require  at  the 
watchman’s  hand. 

13.  For  furely  he  has  no  authority  to  murder 
fouls:  either  by  his  negleci,  by  his  finooth  if 
not  falfe  doflrine,  or  by  hindering  another  from 

plucking 


[ 2 <53  ] 

plucking  them  out  of  the  fire,  and  bringing  them 
to  life  everlafling. 

14.  If  he  either  attempts  or  defires  to  hinder 
him,  if  he  condemns  or  is  difpleafed  with  him  for 
it,  how  great  reafon  is  there  to  fear,  that  he 
regards  his  own  profit,  more  than  the  falvation 
of  fouls  ? 

I am,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  ajfeclionate  brother, 

J.  W. 


A LETTER 


1 


[ 254  ] 


A 

LETTER 

To  the  AUTHOR  of  the 

Euthufcafm  of  Methodijls  and  Papifls 

compared. 


Agedum ! Pauca  accipe  centra. 

Hor. 


Sir, 

j,  y N your  late  pamphlets  you  have  undertaken 
L to  prove,  that  Mr.  IVhitefeld  and  I,  are 
grofs  enthufiafts  ; and  that  our  t whole.  conduEl  is 
but  a counter-part  of  the  mojl  wild  fanaticifms  of 
the  mojl  abominable  communion  in  its  mofi  corrupt 


-f  Preface,  page  3. 


[ 255  ] 

You  endeavour  to  fupport  this  charge  againft 
us,  by  quotations  from  our  own  writings:  com- 
pared with  quotations  from  celebrated  writers  of: 
the  Romijli  communion. 

2.  It  lies  upon  me  anfwer  for  one.  But  I muff 
- not  burden  you  with  too  long  an  anfwer;  left 

+ ( 'for  want  either  of  leifure  or  inclination ) you 
fhould  not  give  this,  any  more  than  my  other 
trafts,  a reading.  In  order  therefore  to  fpare 
both  you  and  myfelf,  I fhall  at  prefent  confider 
only  your  firft  part ; and  that  as  briefly  as  poffi- 
ble.  Accordingly  I fhall  not  meddle  with  your 
other  quotations ; but  leaving  them  to  whom 
they  may  concern,  lhall  only  examine,  whether 
thofe  you  have  made  fiom  my  writings,  prove 
the  charge  of  enthufiafm,  or  no. 

This,  I conceive,  will  be  abundantly  fufficient, 
to  decide  the  queftion  between  you  and  me.  If 
thefe  do  prove  the  charge,  I am  call; : if  they  do 
not,  if  they  are  the  words  of  truth  and  fobernefs, 
it  will  be  an  objeflion  of  no  real  weight,  againft 
fentiments  juft  in  themfelves,  though  they  fhould 
alfo  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Papijls : yea,  of 
Mahometans  or  Pagans. 

3.  Let  the  eight  pages  you  borrow,  ftand  as- 
they  are.  I prefume  they  will  do  neither  good 
nor  harm.  In  the  tenth  you  fay,  The  Methodifts 
a cl  on  the  fame  plan  with  the  Papifts — not  perhaps 

from  compaft  and  defign  ; but  afinilar  configura- 
tion and  texture  of  brain , or  the  fumes  of  imagina- 
tion 


+ Preface,  page 


[ 256  ] 

tion producing  Jmilar  efforts,  From  a commijt ra- 
tion of  horror,  arifng from  the  grievous  corrupti- 
ons of  the  world,  perhaps  from  a real  motive  of  fin- 
cere  piety,  they  both  fet  out  with  warm  pretences  to 
a reformation.  Sir,  this  is  an  uncommon  thought ! 
That  fincere  piety  Ihould  arife  from  the  conji ju- 
ration and  texture  of  the  brain  ! As  well  as,  that 
pretences  to  a reformation  fhould  fpring  from  a 
real  motive  of  Juicer e piety ! 

4.  You  go  on,  + both  commonly  begin  their  ad- 
ventures with  field- preaching.  Sir,  do  you  con- 
demn field-preaching  toto  genere,  as  evil  in  itfelf  ? 
Have  a care  ! or  you  (I  fhould  fay,  the  gentleman 
that  afiifls  you)  will  fpeak  a little  too  plain,  and 
betray  the  real  motives  of  his  fncere  antipathy  to 
the  people  called  Methodifs. 

Or  do  you  condemn  the  preaching  on  Hannam- 
mount,  in  particular,  to  the  colliers  of  Kings- 
wood ? If  you  doubt,  whether  this  has  done  any 
real  good,  it  is  a very  eafy  thing  to  be  informed. 
And  I leave  it  with  all  impartial  men,  whether 
the  good  which  has  in  fa£t  been  done  by  preach- 
ing there,  and  which  could  not  poffibly  have  been 
done  any  other  way,  does  not  abundantly  ^ juf 
tify  the  irregularity  of  it. 

5.  But  you  think  I am  herein  inconfflent  with 
myfelf.  For  I fay,  “ The  unccmmonnefs  is  the 
very  circumfance  that  recommends  it."  (I  mean 
that  recommended  it  to  the  colliers  in  Kings- 
wood  : ) And  yet  I faid,  but  a page  or  two  before, 

“ We 

+ Enthufiafm,  &c.  p,  11.  Jp-'o* 


[ 257  ] 

“ JP'e  are  not  fuffered  to  preach  in  the  chin ches  : 
elfe  zee  Jhould prefer  them  to  any  places  zohatfo - 
ever." 

Sir,  I Hill  aver  both  the  one  and  the  other.  I 
do  prefer  the  preaching  in  a church  when  I am 
buffered : and  yet,  when  I am  not,  the  wife  pro- 
vidence of  God  over-rules  this  very  circumflance 
for  good  : many  coming  to  hear,  becaufe  of  the 
uncommonnefs  of  the  thing,  who  would  other- 
wife  not  have  heart!  at  all. 

6.  Your  fecond  charge  is,  That  I t abufe  the 
clergy , throw  out  fo  much  gall  of  bitter nejs  againjl 
them ! And  impute  this  black  art  of  calumny  to  the 

fpirit  and  power  given  from  God. 

Sir,  I plead  not  guilty  to  the  whole  charge. 
And  you  have  not  cited  one  line  to  fupport  it. 
But,  if  you  could  fupport  it,  what  is  this  to  the 
point  in  hand  ? I prefume  calumny  is  not  en- 
thufiafm.  Perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ But  it  is 
fomething  as  bad.”  True  : but  it  is  nothing  to 
the  purpofe  : even  the  implying  this  to  the  Spirit 
of  God,  as  you  here  reprefent  it,  is  an  inflance  of 
art,  not  of  enthufiafm. 

7.  You  charge  me  thirdly,  with  i putting  on  a 
JanBifed  appearance,  in  order  to  draw  followers , 

by  a demure  look,  precife  behaviour , and  other 
marks  of  external  piety.  For  which  reafon,  you 
fay,  Mr.  Wefley  made  and  renewed  that  noble  re- 
folutioh,  not  willingly  to  indulge  himjelf  in  the  leaf 
levity  of  behaviour,  or  in  laughter,  no,  not  for  a 

moment 

+ Page  15.  X Page  18,  tg. 


[ 258  ] 

moment — to  fpeak  no  word  not  tending  to  tils' 
glory  of  God  ; and  not  a tittle  of  worldly  things. 

Sir,  You  mifs  the  mark  again.  If  this  fanc- 
tified  appearance  was  put  on  to  draw  followers , if  it 
was  for  this  reason,  (as  you  flatly  affirm  it  was) 
that.  Mr.  Wefley  made  and  renewed  that  noble 
rejolution  : (it  was  made  eleven  or  twelve  years 
before,  about  the  time  of  my  removal  to  Lincoln * 
College)  then  it  can  be  no  inflance  of  enthiifiafm , 
and  fo  does  not  fall  within  the  defign  of  your 
prefent  work. — Unlefs  your  title  page  does  not 
belong  to  your  book  : for  that  confines  you  to 
the  enthufafm  of  the  Methodijls. 

8.  But  to  confidcr  this  point  in  another  view. 
You  accufe  me  of  putting  on  a fanclified  appear- 
ance, a demure  loch,  precife  behaviour , and  other 
marks  of  external  piety.  How  are  you  affured. 
Sir,  this  was  barely  external?  And  that  it  was  a 
bare  appearance  of  fanclity  ? You  affirm  this  as 
from  perfonal  knowledge.  Was  you  then  ac- 
quainted with  me  three  or  four  and  twenty  y'ears 
ago  ? He  made  and  renewed  that  noble  rejolution,  in 
order  to  draw  followers. — Sir,  How  do  you  know 
that  ? Are  you  in  God’s  place,  that  you  take 
upon  you  to  be  the  fearcher  of  hearts  ? That  no- 
ble rejolution,  not  willingly  to  indulge  hvnfelf  in  the 
leaf  levity  of  behaviour.  Sir,  I acquit  you  of  hav- 
ing any  concern  in  this  matter.  But  I appeal  to 
all  who  have  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts, 
whether  this  is  not  a rational,  fcriptural  refolu- 
tion,  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  we  2re 

called 


r 2 59  j 

called — or  in  laughter,  no,  not  for  a moment.  No, 
nor  ought  I to  indulge  it  at  all  : if  I am  confci- 
ous  to  myfelf,  it  hurts  my  foul.  In  which,  let 
every  man  judge  for  himfelf.  To  fpeak  no  word 
not  tending  to  the  glory  of  God — A peculiar  in- 
ftance  of  enthufiafm  this  ! And  net  a tittle  of  world- 
ly things.  The  words  immediately  following  are. 
Others  may,  nay  muft.  But  what  is  that  io  me  ? 
(Words  which  in  juftice  you  ought  to  have  in- 
fertedj  who  was  then  entirely  difengaged  from 
worldly  bufinefs  of  every  kind.  Notwithftand- 
ing  which,  I have  often  fince  engaged  therein, 
when  the  order  of  Providence  plainly  required  it. 

9.  Though  I did  not  defign  to  meddle  with 
them,  yet  I mull  here  take  notice  of  three  of 
your  in  fiances  of  Popifh  enthufiafm.  The  firft, 
is,  That  t Mechtildis  tortured  herfelf,  for  having 

fpoken  an  idle  word.  (The  point  of  comparifon 
lies  not  in  torturing  herfelf;  but  in  her  doing  it, 
on  fuch  an  occafion ;)  the  fecond,  That  not  a 
word  fell  from  St.  Katharine  of  Sienna,  that  was 
not  religious  and  holy  : the  third,  That  the  lips  of 
Magdalen  di  Pazzi,  were  never  opened  but  to  chant 
the  praifes  of  God,  I would  to  God  the  compa- 
rifon between  the  Methodijls  and  Papifs  would 
hold  in  this  refpeft  ! Yea,  that  you,  and  all  the 
clergy  in  England,  were  guilty  of  juft  fuch  en- 
thufiafm. 

10.  You  cite  as  a fourth  inftance  of  my  en- 
thufiafm, that  I fay,  j:  A Methodif  ( a real  Chrif 

tian  ) 


+ Page  19.  | Page  21, 


[ a6o  } 

dan  cannot  adorn  himfelf  on  any  pretence,  with 
gold  or  ccjlly  apparel.  If  this  be  enthufiafm,  let 
the  apoflle  look  to  it.  His  words  are  clear  and 
exprefs.  If  you  can  find  a pretence  to  fet  them 
aflde,  do  : I cannot ; nor  do  I defire  it. 

11.  My  § feeming  contempt  of  money  you  urge 
as  a fifth  infiance  of  enthufiafm.  Sir,  I under- 
fiand  you.  You  was  obliged  to  call  it  feeming , 
left  you  fhould  yourfelf  confute  the  allegation 
brought  in  your  title-page.  But  if  it  be  only 

feeming,  whatever  it  prove  befides,  it  cannot 
prove  that  I am  an  enthufaJL 

12.  Hitherto  you  have  fucceeded  extremely 
ill.  You  have  brought  five  accufations  again!! 
me  : and  have  not  been  able  to  make  one  good. 
However,  you  are  refolved  to  throw  dirt  enough, 
that  fome  may  ftick.  So  you  are  next  to  prove 
upon  me,  ||  a rejlkfs  impatience  and  infatiable 
thirjl  of  travelling,  and  undertaking  dangerous 
voyages,  for  the  converfion  of  infidels ; together 
with  a declared  contempt,  of  all  dangers,  pains 
and  fuf erings  : and  the  deftgning , loving  and 
praying  for  ill  uf age,  perfecution,  martyrdom, 
death  and  heU.. 

In  order  to  prove  this  uncommon  charge,  you 
produce  H four  feraps  of  fentences,  which  you 
mark  as  my  words,  though  as  they  ftand  in  your 
book,  they  are  neither  fenfe  nor  grammar; 
But  you  do  not  refer  to  the  page  or  even  the 
treatife,  where  any  one  of  them  may  be  found. 

Sir, 

§ Page  26.  1|  p.  27.  5p.3l* 


f 261  ] 

Sir,  ’tis  well  you  hide  your  name  : or  you 
would  be  obliged  to  hide  your  face,  from  every 
man  of  candour,  or  even  common  humanity. 

13.  t Sometimes  indeed,  you  fay,  Mr.  Wefley 
complains  of  the  feoff s both  of  the  great  vulgar  and 
the  final! : to  prove  which,  you  disjoint  and  mur- 
der (as  your  manner  is]  another  of  my  fentences. 
But  at  other  times  the  note  is  changed,  and  “ iill 
he  is  defpifed  no  man  is  in  a fate  of falvation .” 
The  note  is  changed ! How  fo  ? When  did  1 fay 
otherwife  than  I do  at  this  day,  viz.  “ That  none 
are  children  of  God,  but  tbofe  who  are  hated, 
or  defpifed  by  the  children  of  the  devil.’’ 

I muft  beg  you,  Sir,  in  your  third  part  to  in- 
form your  reader,  that  whenever  any  folecifm  or 
mangled  fentences,  appear  in  the  quotations  from 
my  writings,  they  are  not  chargeable  upon  me : 
that  if  the  fenfe  be  mine  (which  is  not  always; 
fometimes  you  do  me  too  much  honour,  even 
in  this  :)  yet  I lay  no  claim  to  the  manner  of  ex- 
preffion  : the  Englifh  is  all  your  own. 

14.  t Corporal  feventies  or  mortification  by 
tormenting  thtjlejh,  is  the  next  thing  you  charge 
upon  me.  Almoft  two  fentences  you  bring  in 
proof  of  this.  The  one,  “ Our  bed  bang  wet  (it 
was  in  a florin  at  fea)  I laid -me  down  on  the  floor, 
and fiept  found  till  morning  : and  I believe  I fhall 
not  find  it  needful  to  go  to  bed,  as  tis  called,  any 
more.'’  But  whether  I do  or  not,  how  will  you 
prove,  that  my  motive  is,  T ogam  a reputation 

for 

+ Page  32,  | p.  3‘* 


[ "262  ] 

for  fanftity  ? I defire  (if  it  be  not  too  great  a 
favour)  a little  evidence  for  this. 

The  other  fragment  of  a fentence  fpeaks, 
§ of  bearing  cold  on  the  naked  head , rain  and 
wind,  frojl  and  [now."  True  ; but  not  as 
-matter  of  mortification , by  tormenting  the  flejh. 
Nothing  lefs.  Thefe  things  are  not  fpoken  of 
there,  as  voluntary  inffances  of  mortification  : 
{you  yourfeif  know  perfectly  well,  they  are 
not;  only  you  make  free  with  your  friend  :■) 
but  as  fome  of  the  unavoidable  inconvenien- 
ces, which  attend  preaching  in  the  open  air. 

Therefore  you  need  not  be  fo  jj  Jure  that  the 
apofile  condemns  that  uQi&a.  c-cfia.-ro;,  not  fparing 
the  body,  as  vftlcfs  and  fuperfhtious,  and  that  it 
is  a falfe  Jliew  of  humility.  Humility  is  entirely 
out  of  the  queftion,  as  well  as  chajtity  ; in  the 
cafe  of  haidfhips  endured  (but  not  properly 
-chofen)  out  of  love  to  the  fouls  for  which  Chriil 
died. 

ig.  You  add  a word  or  two  of  my  ardent 
defire  of  going  to  hell,  which  vou  think,  I + 
adopted  from  the  Jefuit  Nieremberg.  Sir,  I 
know  not  the  man.  I am  wholly  a ftranger 
both  to  his  perfon  and  to  his  do&rine.  But 
if  this  is  his  doftrine,  I difclaim  it  from  my  heart. 
I ardently  defire,  that  both  you  and  I may  goto 
heaven. 

But  Mr.  Wefley  fays,  “ i A poor  old  man 

■decided  the  qaefiion  of  difnterefed  love. He 

find, 

S Pige  36.  p p.  .33.  + p.  34.  t p.  35. 


Jaid,  Ido  not  care  zvliat  place  I am  in.  Let  God 
put  me  where  he  will,  or  do  with  me  what  he 
•will,fo  I may  fet forth  his  honour  and  glory"' 

He  did  fo.  And  what  then  ? Do  thefe  words 
imply,  an  ardent  defire  of  going  to  hell  ? I do 
not  fuppofe  the  going  to  hell  ever  entered  into 
his  thoughts.  Nor  has  it  any  place  in  my  notion 
of  difmterejled  love.  How  you  may  underhand 
that  term,  I know  not. 

But  you  will  prove,  I have  this  delire,  whe- 
ther I will  or  no.  You  are  fore,  this  was  my 
d original  meaning , in  the  words  cited  by  Mr. 
Church, 

“ Doom  if  thou  canh  to  endlefs  pain, 

Or  drive  me  from  thy  face  ;” 

;GodV power  or  juflice,  you  fay,  muf  be  intended 
hecaufe  he  Jpeaks  of  God's  love  in  the  very  next 
lines , 

“ But  if  thy  ftrongerlove  conftrains, 

Let  me  be  fav’d  by  grace.” 

Sir,  I will  tell  you  a fecret.  Thofe  lines  are 
not  mine.  However,  I will  once  more  venture 
to  defend  them,  and  to  aver,  that  your  confe- 
quence  is  good  for  nothing,  “ If  this  love  is 
fpoken  of  in  the  latter  lines,  then  it  is  notin  the 
former.”  No  ! Why  not  ? I take  it  to  be  fpoken 

■of 


E *«4  ] 

of  in  both.  The  plain  meaning  of  which  is,  “ If 
thou  art  not  love,  I am  content  to  perifh.  But 
•if  thou  art,  let  me  find  the  effects  thereof : let  me 
be  faved  by  grace.” 

16.  'You  next  accufe  me  of  maintaining  ajloi - 
cal  inf cnfibility . This  objection  alfo  you  borrow 
from  Mr.  Church.  You  ought  likewife  to  have 
taken  notice,  that  I had  anfwered  it,  and  openly 
■difowned  that  doftrine : I mean,  according  to 
the  rules  of  common  juflice.  But  that  is  not 
your  failing. 

17.  Part  of  your  thirty-ninth  page  runs  thus  : 
with  refpecl  to  all  this  patient  enduring  kardfhips , 
See.  it  has  been  remarked  by  learned  authors, 
“ That  fameperjons  by  conflitutional  temper,  have 
been  jond  oj  bearing  the  zoorjl  that  could  befall  them  : 
that  others  prom  a fturdv  humour,  and  the  force  of 
education,  have  made  light  of  the  mof  exquifite 
tortures  : that  when  enthufiafm  comes  in,  in  aid  of 
this  natural  acquired  fturdinefs,  and  men  fancy 
they  are  upon  God’s  work,  and  intituled  to  his  re- 
wards. they  are  immediately  all  on  fire  for  ri flung 
into  fufferings  and  pain." 

1 take  knowledge  of  your  having  faithfully 
abridged,  your  own  book  hh all  1 fay  ? Or  the 
learned  Dr.  Middleton's  ? But  what  is  it  you  are 
endeavouring  to  prove  P 

Quorftm  lure  tarn  putida  tendunt  ? 

The  paragraph  feems  to  point  at  it!e«  -But  the 

slain. 

, x 7 


[ cS<5  ] 

plain,  natural  tendency  of  it,  is  to  invalidate  that 
great  argument  for  Chriftianity,  which  is  drawn 
from  the  con  (fancy  of  the  martyrs.  Have  you 
not  here  alfo  fpoken  a little  too  plain  ? Had  you 
not  better  have  kept  the  mafic  on  a little  longer  ? 

Indeed  you  lamely  add,  The  folidandjujl  com- 
forts which  cl  true  martyr  receives  from  above,  are 
groundlefly  applied  to  the  counterfeit.  But  this  is 
not  enough  even  to  fave  appearances. 

i§.  You  fubjoin  a truly  furprizing  thought, 
t It  may  moreover  be  obferved,  that  both  antient 
and  modern  enthufiaft-s  always  take  care  to  fecurt 
fame  advantage  by  t h ei r fuff e rings.  O rare  enthu- 
fiafls ! So  they  are  not  fuch  fools  neither,  as  they 
■are  vulgarly  fttppofed  to  be.  This  is  juft  of  a 
piece  with  the  cunning  epileptic  demoniacs,  in 
your  other  performance.  And  do  not  you  think 
{if  you  would  but  fpeak  all  that  is  in  your  heart, 
and  let  us  into  the  whole  fecret)  that  there  was  a 
•compaB,  likewife  between  bifliop  Hooper  and  his 
executioner , as  well  as  between  the  ventriloquiji 
and  the  exorcif.  ? 

But  what  advantage  do  they  take  care  to  fecurt  ? 
A good  fa'iary  ? A handfome  fortune  ? No  ; 
quite  another  matter  ; %Jree  communications  zuitk 
God,  and fuller  manifejlations  of  his  goodnefs.  I 
dare  fay,  you  do  not  envy  them:  no  more  than 
you  do  thofe  fdf  inter  (fed  enthufajls  of  old,  who 
were  tortured , not  accepting  deliverance,  that  they 
might  obtain  a better  refurredion. 

Vol.  XVI.  M 

* P«ge  4° » 


$ Ibid. 


ig.  You 


[ 2 66  ] 

lg.  You  proceed  to  prove  my  enthufiafm 
from  my  notions  of  converfion.  And  here  great 
allowances  are  to  be  made  : becaufe  you  are 
talking  of  things  quite  out  of  your  fphere:  you 
are  got  into  an  unknown  world  ! Yet  you  dill 
talk  as  magiderially,  as  if  you  was  only  running 
down  the  fathers  of  the  primitive  church. 

And,  fird,  you  fay,  I + reprefent  converfion  ai 
fudden  and injlantaneous.  Soft  and  fair  ! Do  you 
know  what  converfion  is  ? (A  term  indeed  which 
1 very  rarely  life,  becaufe  it  rarely  occurs  in  the 
New  Tedament.)  “ Yes  ; it  is,  To  ^ fart  up 
perJeB  men  at  once.”  (Indeed,  Sir,  it  is  not.  A 
man  is  ufually  converted,  long  before  he  is  a per- 
fect man.  ’Tis  probable,  mod  of  thofe  Ephe- 
fians , to  whom  St.  Paul  direfted  his  epifHe,  were 
converted.  Yet  they  were  not-eome  (few,  if  any) 
to  a perfeB  man,  to  the  meafure  of  the  dature 
of  the  fulnefs  of  Chrid. 

20.  I do  not,  Sir,  indeed,  I do  not  undertake 
to  make  you  underhand  thefe  things.  I am  not 
fo  vain  as  to  think  it  is  in  my  power.  !Tis  the 
iitmofl  of  my  hope,  to  convince  you,  or  at  lead, 
thofe  who  read  your  works,  that  you  under- 
hand jud  nothing  about  them. 

To  put  this  out  of  difpute,  you  goon,  JThiis 
faith  and  being  born  of  God,  are  Jaid  to  be  an 
injlantaneous  work,  at  once,  and  in  a moment, 
as  lightning.  Jiff  cation,  the  fame  as  regenera- 
tion, and  having  a lively  faith , this  always  in  a 

moment. 

i Page  40.  + p.  41.  § p.  4 j. 


t =5  7 ] 

moment.  I know  not  which  to  admire  mod.  the 
Eitglifli  or  the  fenfe,  which  you  here  father 
upon  me  : but  in  truth  his  all  your  own  : I do 
not  thus  confound  faith  and  being  born  c/God. 
I always  fpeak  of  them  as  different  things  : ’tis 
you  that  thus  jumble  them  together.  ’Tis  you 
who  difeover  jufifeation  alfo  to  be  the  faint 
as  regeneration , and  having  a lively  faith.  I take 
them  to  be  three  different  things  ; fo  different  as 
not  ever  to  come  under  on e genus.  And  yet  'tis 
true,  that  each  of  thefe,  “ as  far  as  I know,” 
is  at  bird  experienced  fuddenly  : although  two 
of  them  (I  leave  you  to  find  out  which)  gra- 
dually increafe  from  that  hour. 

21.  f After  thefe  fudden  converfons,  fay  you 
they  receive  their  affurances  of  falvation.  Sir, 
Mr.  Bedford' s ignorance  in  charging  this  doc- 
trine upon  me,  might  be  involuntary , and  I am 
perfuaded  was  real.  But  yours  cannot  be  fo. 
It  mud  be  voluntary  ; if  it  is  not  rather  affetl- 
ed.  For  you  had  before  you,  while  you  wrote, 
the  very  traft,  wherein  I correfied  Mr.  Bed- 
ford's mrftake,  and  explicitly; declared,  “ The 
a durance  whereof  I fpeak,  is  not  an  affur- 
ance  of  falvation.”  And  the  very  paffages  you 
cite  from  me,  prove  the  fame  : every  one  of 
which  (as  you  yourfelf  know  in  your  own  con- 
. fcience)  relates  wholly  and  folely  to  prefent 
pardon,  not  to  future  falvation. 

Of  £ Chrijlian  perfedion  1 fliall  not  fay  any 
M 2 thing 

* Psr  it-  t p.  is- 


.[  268  ] 

thing  to  you,  till  you  have  learned  a little  Hea- 
then honefty. 

22.  That  this  is  a lefion  you  have  not  yet  learn- 
ed, appears  alfo  from  your  following  feclion  : 
wherein  you  roundly  affirm,  Whatever  they  think. 
Jay,  or  do,  (i.  e.  the Methodjis,  according  to  their 
own  account)  is  from  God.  And  whatever  o' 
pofetli,  is  from  the  devil  I doubt  not,  but  Mr. 
Church  believed  this  to  be  tiue  when  he  afferted 
it.  But  this  is  no  plea  for  you:  who  having  read 
the  anfwer  to  Mr.  Church,  hill  alTert  what  you 
know  to  be  falfe. 

r Here  we  have , fay  you,  the  true Jpirit  and 
very  ejfcnce  of  enthufia/m,  which  fets  men  cl  eve 
carnal  reajoning,  and  all  convithon  of  plain  fenp- 
ture.  It  may,  or  may  not ; that  is  nothing  to 
me.  I am  not  above  either  reafon  or  feripture. 
To  either  of  thefe  I am  ready  to  fubrnit.  Bud 
cannot  receive  fcurrilous  inveSlive,  inftead  of 
feripture:  nor  pay  the  fame  regard  to  low  buf- 
foonery, as  to  clear  and  cogent  reafons. 

2g.  With  your  two  following  pages,  I have 
nothing  to  do.  Butin  themed,  I read  ss  follows. 
A Methodifl,  Jays  Mr.  W efley,  went  to  receive 
the  Jacr  ament — —when  God  was  plea  fed  to  let  him 
Jee  a crucijed Saviour.  Very  well 4 and  what  is 
this  brought  to  prove?  Why,  x.  That  I am  an 
enthufiaff : 2.  That  / encourage  the  notion  of  tie 
real,  corporeal  prejehet,  in  the  JacriJce  of  the  me /Is. 
How  fo  ? Why  i this  is  as  good  an  argument  for 

tran- 

+ Page  49.  + p.  57. 


[ s69  ] 

fir  an fubflantiation,  as  feveral  produced  by  Bellar • 
min.  Very  likely  it  may  ; and  as  good  as  feveral 
produced  by  you,  for  the  enthufiafm  of  the  Me- 
tkodijls. 

24.  In  that  ft  rapine  rliapfody  of  divine  love,  as 
as  you  term  it,  which  you  condemn  in  the  lump, 
as  rant  and  madnefs,  there  are  feveral  fcriptural 
expreflions,  both  from  the  Old  and  New  Tefla- 
ment.  Atfirff  I imagined  you  did  nor  know 
them  ; thofe  being  books  which  you  did  not 
feem  to  be  much  acquainted  with.  But  upon 
laying  circumffances  together,  I rather  fuppofe, 
you  was  glad  of  fo  handfome  an  opportunity,  to 
make  as  if  you  aimed  at  me,  that  you  might  have 
a home  flroke  at  forne  of  thofe  old  enthufiafls. 

25.  The  next  words  which  you  cite  from  me, 
as  a proof  of  my  enthufiafm,  are,  t The  power  of 
God  was  in  an  unufual  manner  ptefent.  I mean, 
many  found  an  unufual  degree  of  that  peace,  joy 
and  love,  which  St.  Paul  terms,  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit.  And  all  thefe,  in  conformity  to  his  doc- 
trine, I afenbe  to  the  power  of  God.  I know  you, 
in  conformity  to  your  principles,  aferibe  them 
to  the  power  of  nature.  But  I hill  believe,  ac- 
cording to  the  old,  fcriptural  hypothefis,  that 
whenever  in  hearing  the  word  of  God,  men  are 
filled  with  peace  and  love,  God  confirms  that  word 
by  the  Holy  Ghofl  given  unto  thofe  that  hear  it. 

26.  As  a further  proof  of  my  enthufiafm  you 
mention  \f pedal  direHions,  miffions,  and  cab's  by 

M 3 imme- 

+ Page  67. 


i Tagc  6 1 . 


[ 270  ] 

immediate  revelation.  For  an  inftance  of  which, 
you  cite  thofe  words,  “ 1 know,  and  am  affured, 
that  Qo&^fent  forth  his  light  and  his  truth!''  I 
did  know  this.  But  do  1 fay,  by  immediate  re- 
velation ? Not  a tittle  about  it.  This  is  your  own 
ingenious  improvement  upon  my  words. 

“ However,  it  was  by  a [pedal  direct  ion."  For 
your  own  words  in  the  fame  paragraph  are,  § From 
the  direHion  l received  from  God  this  day,  touching 
an  affair  of  the  great tjl  importance. 

What,  are  thefe  words  in  the  fame  paragraph 
with  thofe,  I knowf  and  am  affured , God  font 
forth  his  light  and  his  truth?  Why  then  do  you 
tear  the  paragraph  in  two,  and  put  part  in  your 
67th,  part  in  your  68th  and  69th  pages  ? O,  fof 
a plain  reafon  : to  make  it  look  like  two  inftances 
of  enthufiafm,  otherwife  it  could  have  made  but 
•one  at  the  mod. 

But  you  cannot  make  out  one,  till  you  have 
proved,  that  thefe  directions  were  by  immediate 
revelation.  I never  affirmed  they  were.  I now 
affirm  they  were  not.  Now,  Sir,  make  your  beft 
of  them. 

You  add,  t Let  me  mention  a few  directions 
coining  by  way  of  command — Mr.  Wefley  fays, 
“ I came  to  Mr.  DolamotteV,  where  I expected  a 
tool  reception.  But  God  had  prepared  the  way 
before  me."  What  by  a command  to  Mr.  Dela- 
rnotte  ? Who  told  you  fo  ? Not  I : nor  any  one 
elfe  : only  ycur  own  fruitful  imagination. 

2 j.  Your 


S Page  6S.  99. 


t Page  6q. 


[ 27*  ] 

27.  Your  next  difcovery  is  more  curious  (till  ? 
“hat  i “ itinerants  order  what  they  want  at  a public 
houfe,  and  then  tell  the  landlord , that  he  will  be 
damned,  if  he  takes  any  thing  of  them” 

I was  beating  my  brain,  to  find  out  what  itine- 
rant this  fhould  be  ! as  I could  not  but  imagine, 
fome  filly  man  or  other,  probably  {tiling  himfelf 
a Methodift , mull  fome  where  or  other  have  given 
fome  ground  for  a ftory  fo  punctually  delivered. 
In  the  midft  of  this,  a letter  from  Cornwall  in- 
formed me,  it  was  I : I myfelf  was  the  veiy  man, 
and  acquainted  me  with  the  place,  and  the  perfon 
to  whom  I faid  it.  But  as  there  are  fome  parti- 
culars in  that  letter  (fent  without  a name)  which  f 
did  not  well  underltand,  I tranfcribe  a few  words 
of  it,  in  hopes  that  the  author  will  give  me  fuller 
information. 

“ As  to  the  bifhop’s  declaring,  wrhat  the  land- 
lord of  Mitchel  fays,  in  refpeft  to  your  behaviour, 
I do  not  at  all  wonder  at  the  ftory.”  The  bifhop's 
declaring  ! Whom  can  he  mean  ? Surely  not  the 
Right  Reverend  Dr.  George  Lavington,  lord 
bifhop  of  Exeter!  When,  or  to  whom  did  he 
declare  it  ? At  Truro,  in  Cornwall?  Or  in  Ply- 
mouth, at  his  vifitation  ? To  all  the  clergy  who 
were  affembled  before  God,  to  receive  his  pafto- 
ral  inftruftions  ? His  lordfhip  of  Exeter  muft  cer- 
tainly have  more  regard  to  the  dignity  of  the  epif- 
copal  office ! 

28.  But  to  proceed.  I was  not  offended  with 

M 4 the 

$ Page  O9. 


[ 2 7®  ] 

the  Moravians,  for  warning  men,  § againjl  mixing 
nature  with  grace-,  but  for  their  doing  it  in  fuch 
a manner  as  tended  to  cFefiroy  all  the  work  of 
grace  in  their  fouls.  I did  not  blame  the  thing 
itfelf,  but  their  manner  of  doing  it.  And  this 
you  know  perfe£i!y  well.  But  with  you,  truth 
mull  always  give  way  to  wit.  At  all  events,  you 
muft  have  your  jell. 

29.  Had  you  had  any  regard  to  truth,  or  any 
defire  to  reprefent  things  as  they  really  are,  when 
you  repeated  Mr.  Church' s objection  concerning 
lots,  you  would  have  acknowledged,  that  I have 
anfwered  it  at  large.  When  you  have  replied 
to  that  anfwer,  1 may  add  a word  more. 

30.  You  are  fad'y  at  a lofs  under  the  article  of 
txtafees  and  raptures,  to  glean  up  any  thing  that 
•will  ferve  your  purpofe.  At  la  ft,  from  ten  or 
twelve  trafls,  you  pick  out  two  lines;  and  thofe 
the  fame  you  had  mentioned  before.  “ My foul 
was  got  up  into  the  holy  mount.  I had  no  thought 
cj  coming  down  again  into  the  body 7’  And  truly 
you  might  as  well  have  let  thefe  alone.  For  if 
by  extafy  you  mean  trance,  here  is  no  account  of 
any  fuch  : but  only  of  one  rejoicing  in  God  with 

joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

With  the  t girl  of  feven  years  old,  I have  no- 
thing to  do  : though  you  honeftly  tack  that  rela- 
tion to  the  other,  in  order  to  make  me  accounta- 
ble for  both.  But  all  is  fair  toward  a Method if. 

31.  What  I affert  concerning  ± Peter  JP right, 

is 

h Page  71 . + Page  77.  $ Page  79. 


[ 273  ] 

is  this,  1.  That  he  gave  me  that  relation  (whether 
I believed  it  no,  I did  not  fay.)  2.  That  he  died 
within  a month  after.  Now,  Sir,  give  us  a caft 
of  your  office.  From  thefe  two  propofitions,  ex- 
tra£l  a proof  of  my  being  an  enthufiaft. 

You  may  full  as  eafily  prove  it  from  thefe,  as 
from  the  words  you  quote  next,  § God  does  now 
give  ranijjion  of  Jins,  and  the  gij't  oj  the  Holy 
Ghojl,  and  often  in  dreams  and  vifions  of  God.  But 
afterwards,  you  fay,  I Jpeak  more  difruffully. 
Indeed  I do  not.  But  I guard  againfl  enthufiafm, 
in  thofe  words,  part  of  which  you  have  recited. 
The  whole  paragraph  runs  thus, 

“ From  thofe  words,  Beloved,  believe  not  every 
fpirit ; but  try  the  fpirits,  whether  they  be  oj  God: 
I told  them,  they  were  not  to  judge  of  the  fpirit 
whereby  any  one  fpoke,  either  by  appearances, 
or  by  common.-  report,  or  by  their  own  inward- 
feelings  : no,  nor  by  any  dreams,  vifions,  or  re- 
velations, fuppofed  to  be  made  to  their  fouls,  any 
more  than  by  their  tears,  or  any  involuntary  effefts 
wrought  upon  their  bodies.  I warned  them,  all 
thefe  were  in  themfelves  of  a doubtful,  difputable 
nature  : they  might  be  from  God,  and  they  might 
not,  and  were  therefore  not  fimply  to  be  relied 
on  (any  more  than  fimply  to  be  condemned]  but 
to  be  tried  by  a farther  rule;  to  be  brought  to  the 
only  certain  tell,  the  law  and  the  tellimony.” 
Sir,  can  you  {hew  them  a better  way  P 

32.  The  lall  proof  that  you  procfuce  of  my  en- 
M g thufiafm 

$P-  79- 


C 2 74  ] 

thufiafm  is,  4 My  talking  of  the  great  work  which 
God  is  now  beginning  to  work  upon  earth.  I own 
the  faff.  I do  talk  ol  fitch  a work.  But  I deny 
the  confequence.  For  if  God  has  begun  a great 
work,  then  the  faying  he  has,  is  no  enthufiafm. 

To  bring  finners  to  repentance,  to  fave  them 
from  their  fins,  is  allowed  by  all  to  be  the  work 
of  God.  Yea,  and  to  fave  one  finner  is  a great 
work  of  God  : much  more  to  fave  many. 

But  many  finners  are  faved  from  their  fins  at 
this  day,  in  London,  in  Brifol,  in  Kingswood,  in 
Cornwall : in  Nezvca/l/e-upon-Tyne,  in  Whitehaven, 
in  many  other  parts  of  England:  in  Wales,  in 
Ireland,  in  Scotland:  upon  the  continent  of 
Europe  : in  Afa,  and  in  America.  This  I term 
agreatwoik  oj  God;  fo  great,  as  I have  not 
read  of  for  feveral  ages. 

You  afk,  how  I know,  fo  great  a work  is 
wrought  now  ? By  infpiration  ? No  ; but  by  com- 
mon fenfe.  I know  it  by  the  evidence  of  my 
own  eyes  and  ears.  I have  feen  a confiderable 
part  of  it  : and  I have  abundant  teflimony,  fuch 
as  excludes  all  poffible  doubt,  for  what  I have  not 
feen. 

33.  But  you  are  fo  far  from  acknowledging  any 
thing  of  this,  as  to  conclude,  in  full  triumph, 
^ That  this  new  difpenfation  is  a ccmpof/tion  of  en- 
thufafmfuperfition,  and  impofure.  It  is  not  clear 
what  you  mean  by  a new  difpenfation.  * But  the 

clear,  and  undeniabie  faff  Hands  thus A few 

years 

+ Page  8o.  f Page  8i. 


[ 275  ] 

years  ago,  Great  Britain  and  Ireland , were  co- 
vered with  vice  from  fea  to  fea.  Very  little  of 
even  the  form  of  religion  was  left : and  ftill  lefs 
of  the  power  of  it.  Out  of  this  darknefs  God 
commanded  light  to  fhine.  In  a Ihort  fpace,  he 
called  tboufands  of  Tinners  to  repentance.  They 
were  not  only  reformed  from  their  outward  vices, 
but  likewife  changed  in  their  difpofitions  and 
tempers;  filled  with  a ftrious,  fober  fenfe  oj  true 
religion , with  love  to  God  and  all  mankind,  with 
an  holy  faith  producing  good  works  of  every  kind, 
works  both  of  piety  and  mercy. 

What  could  the  god  of  this  world  do  in  fuch  a 
cafe,  to  prevent  the  fpreading  of  this Jerious ,fober 
religion  ? The  fame  that  he  has  done  from  the. 
beginning  of  the  world.  To  hinder  the  light  of 
thofe  whom  God  hath  thus  changed,  from  film- 
ing before  men,  he  gave  them  all  in  general  a 
nick-name  ; he  called  them  Methodijls.  And  this 
name,  as  infignificant  as  it  was  initfelf,  elfehually 
anfwered  his  Intention.  For  by  this  means,  that 
light  was  foon  obfcured  by  prejudice,  which- 
could  not  be  withflood  by  fcripture  orreafon.  By 
the  odious  and  ridiculous  ideas  affixed  to  that  name, 
they  were  condemned  in  the  grofs,  without 
ever  being  heard.  So  that  now  any  fcribbler, 
with  a middling  fhare  of  low  wit,  not  incumbered 
with  good  nature  or  mode  fly,  may  raife  a laugh 
on  thofe  whom  he  cannot  confute,  and  run  them 
down  whom  he  dares  not  look  in  the  face.  By 
this  means  even  a comparer  of  Methodijls  and: 

M 6 Papjlsf 


C 276  ] 

Papifs,  may  blafpheme  the  great  work  of  God, 
not  only  without  blame,  but  with  applaufe ; at 
lead,  from  readers  of  his  own  ftamp.  But  it  is 
high  time,  Sir,  you  fhould  leave  your  fkulking 
place.  Come  out,  and  let  us  look  each  other  in 
the  face.  I have  little  leifure  and  lefs  inclination 
for  controverfy.  Yet  I promife,  if  you  will  fet 
your  name  to  your  third  part,  I will  anfwer  all 
that  fhali  concern  me,  in  that,  as  well  as  the  pre- 
ceding. Till  then  I remain,  Sir, 

Canterbury,  Your  friend  and  well-wifher , 

Feb.  1,  1749-50.  JOHN  WESLEY. 


POSTSCRIPT. 

WHEN  you  come  to  relate  thofe  horrid  and 
flocking  things,  there  maybe  a danger 
you  are  not  aware  of.  Even  you  yourfelf  may 
fall  (as  little  as  you  intend  or  fufpe£t  it)  into  feri- 
oufnefs.  And  I am  afraid,  if  once  you  put  off 
y oUr  fool’s  coat,  if  you  Hand  naked  before  cool 
r and  fober  reafon,  you  yourfelf  may  appear  as  in- 
confiderable  a creature— to  ufe  your  own  phrafe, 
«»  a3  if  your  name  was  Perrenet. 


A SECOND 


[ 277  ] 


a second- 

LETTER 

To  the  AUTHOR  of  the 


Enthufiafm  of  Methodifts  and  Papifls 

compared. 


Ecce  iterum  Chrifpinus!  Juv. 


To  the  Right  Reverend  the  Lord  Bishop 
of  Exeter, 

My  Lord , 

i.  T Was  grieved  when  I read  the  following 
-1-  words,  in  the  third  part  of  the  enthufiafm 
of  Methodifls  and  Papijls  compared.  “ A fen  ft- 
ble,  honeft  woman  told  the  bijkop  of  Exeter,  in 
prefence  of  fev-eral  witnefles,  That  Mr.  John 

Wejley 


[ 278  ] 

We/ley  came  to  her  houfe,  and  queftioned  her, 
whether  (he  had  an  ajfurance  of  her  falvationf”' 
Her  anfwer  was,  that  “ fhe  hoped  fhe  fhould  be 
faved,  but  had  no  abfolute  ajfurance  of  it.”  Why 
then,  replied  he,  you  are  in  hell , you  are  damned 
already.  This  fo  terrified  the  poor  woman,  who 
was  then  with  child,  that  ihe  was  grievoufly  afraid 
of  mifcarrying,  and  could  not  in  a long  time,  re- 
cover her  right  mind.  For  this,  and  the  Metho- 
dilts  afking  her  to  live  upon  free  coft,  Ihe  deter- 
mined to  admit  no  more  of  them  into  her  houfe. 
So  much  is  her  own  account  to  his  lordfhip,  on 
whofe  authority  it  is  here  publifhed.” 

2-.  This  renewed  the  concern  I felt  fometime 
fince,  when  I was  informed  (in  letters  which  I 
have  Fill  by  me)  of  your  lordfhip’s  publifhing 
this  account,  both  at  Plymouth , in  Devonfhire , 
and  at  Truro,  in  Cornwall,  before  the  clergy  aflem- 
bled  from  all  parts  of  thofe  counties,  at  the  folemn 
feafon  of  your  lordfhip’s  vifiting  your  diocefe. 
But  I was  not  informed,  that  your  lordfhip  fhew- 
ed  a deep  concern  for  the  honour  of  God,  which 
you  fuppofed  to  be  fo  dreadfully  violated,  or  a 
tender  companion  for  a prefbvter  whom  you 
believed  toberufhing  into  everiafiing  deftrufHon. 

3.  In  order  to  be  more  fully  informed,  on 
Saturday,  Augujl  25,  1730,.  Mr.  Tremhath,  of  St~ 
Ginneys,  Mr.  Iiame,  of  Shajtejhury,  and  I,  called 
at  Mr.  Morgans  at  Mitchell.  The  fervant  telling, 
me  her  mailer  was  not  at  home,  I defired  to  fpeak 
with  her  miltrefs,  the  “ honed,  fenfible  woman.” 

Jim  me- 


C 2'79  3 

immediately  afked,  “ Did  I ever  tell  you  or  your 
bulband,  that  you  would  be  damned,  if  you  took 
any  money  of  me  ?”  (So  the  ftory  ran  in  the  firft 
part  of  the  companion  : it  has  now  undergone  a 
very  confiderable  alteration.)  “ Qr  did  you  or  he 
ever  affirm  (another  circumftance  related  at  Truro) 
that  I was  rude  with  your  maid  ?”  She  replied 
vehemently,  “ Sir,  I never  faid  you  was,  or  that 
you  fakl  any  fuch  thing.  And  I do  not  fuppofe 
my  hufband  did.  But  we  have  been  belied  as 
well  as  our  neighbours.”  She  added,  “ When 
the  bifhop  came  down  laft,  he  fent  us  word,  that 
he  would  dine  at  our  houfe.  But  he  did  not, 
being  invited  to  a neighbouring  gentleman’s.  " He 
fent  for  me  thither,  and  faid,  “ Good  woman,  do 
you  know  tbefe  people  that  go  up  and  down  ? 
Do  you  know  Mr.  Wejley  ? Did  not  he  tell  you, 
you  would  de  damned,  if  you  took  any  money  of 
him?  And  did  not  he  offer  rudenefs  to  your 
maid  ?”  I told  him,  “ No,  my  lord.  He  never 
faid  any  fuch  thing  to  me,  nor  to  my  hufband 
that  I know  of.  He  never  offered  any  rudenefs 
to  any  maid  of  mine.  I never  faw  or  knew  any 
harm  of  him.  But  a man  told  me  once  (who  I 
was  told  was-  a Methodift  preacher)  that  I fhould 
be  damned,  if  I did  not  know  my  fins  were  for- 
given.” 

O 

4.  This  is  her  own  account  given  to  me.  And 
an  account  it  is,  irreconcileably  different  (not- 
withftanding  fome  fmall  refemblance  in  the  lafi 
aircumfiance)  from  that  the  is  affirmed  to  have 

given 


[ a8°  ] 

given  your  lordfhip.  Whether  fhe  did  give  that 
account  to  your  lordfhip  or  no,  your  lordfhip 
knows -belt.  That  the  comparer  affirms  it,  is  no 
proof  at  all  ; fince  he  will  affirm  any  thing  that 
fuits  his  purpofe. 

5.  Yet  I was  forry  to  fee  your  lordfhip’s  autho- 
rity cited  on  fuch  an  occafion  ; inafmuch  as  ma- 
ny of  his  readers,  not  confidering  the  man,  may 
think  your  lordfhip  did  really  countenance  fuch 
a writer  : one  that  turns  the  moll  ferious,  the  mod 
awful,  the  moll  venerable  things  into  mere  farce  ; 
that  makes  the  mofl  effential  parts  of  real,  expe- 
rimental religion,  matter  of  low  buffoonery  ; that 
beginning  at  the  very  rife  of  it  in  the  foul,  name- 
ly, Repentance  towards  God,  a broken  and  a con- 
trite heart,  goes  on  to  faith  in  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrifl,  whereby  he  that  believeth  is  born  of  God,  to 
the  love  of  God  fied  abroad  in  the  heart,  attended 
with  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Gho/l ; to  our  fub- 
fequent  wr  filing  not  only  with  fefiand  blood , but 
with  principalities  and  powers  and  wicked  fpirits 
in  high  places,  and  thence  to  per fH love,  the  lov- 
ing the  Lord  our  God,  with  all  our  heart,  mind, 
foul  and Jlrength  : and  treats  every  one  of  thefe 
facred  topics  with  the  fpirit  and  air  of  a merry- 
andrew.  What  advantage  the  common  enemies 
of  Chriflianity  may  reap  from  this,  your  Lord- 
fhip cannot  be  infenfible. 

6.  Your  lordfhip  cannot  but  difeern,  how  the 
whole  tenor  of  his  book  tends  to  deftroy  the  holy 
feriptures,  to  render  them  vile  in  the  eyes  of  the 

people, 


'[  zit  ] 

people,  to  make  them  (link  in  the  noftrils  of  in- 
fidels. For  inftance.  After  reading  Ids  laboured 
ridicule  of  the  forrow  and  fear  which  ufually 
attend  the  firft  repentance  (called  bv  St.  Chry- 
fojlom,  as  well  as  a thoufarrd  other  writers,  The 
pangs  or  throes  of  the  new  birth ) what  can  an  in- 
fidel think  of  thofe  and  the  like  expreffions  in 
fcripture,  I have  roared jor  the  very  difquietnefs  of 
my  heart?  Fearfulnefs  and  trembling  are  come  up- 
on me , and  an  horrible  di  ead  hath  overzvhelmed  me  ? 
After  his  flood  of  fatire  on  all  kind  of  conflifls 
with  Satan,  what  judgment  can  a Deift  form,  of 
what  St.  Paul  fpeaks  concerning  the  various 
wreftlings  of  a Chriflian  with  the  wicked  one? 
Above  all,  how  will  his  bringing  the  lewd  Hea- 
then poets,  to  expofe  the  pure  and  fpiritual  love 
of  God,  naturally  caufe  them  to  look  with  the 
fame  eyes  on  the  moft  elevated  palfages  of  the 
infpired  writings  ? What  can  be  more  diverting 
to  them,  than  to  apply  his  r^vccKvmy.pou  if  mo;,  (bit- 
ter-fweet  of  love)  to  many  expreffions  in  the  can- 
ticles ? (On  which  undoubtedly  he  fuppofes  the 
fair  circajfan  to  be  a very  juft  paraphrafe  !)  “ Ay, 
fay  they,  the  very  cafe  : ftay  me  with  apples:  for 
I am  pick  of  love." 

7.  Probably  the  comparer  will  reply,  “ No  ; 

I do  not  ridicule  the  things  themfelves:  repent- 
ance, the  new  birth,  the  fight  of  faith,  or  the 
love  of  God  ; all  which  I know  are  eflential  to 
religion  : but  only  the  folly  and  the  enthufiafm 
which  are  blended  with  thefe  by  the  Methodifts.” 

But 


[ J 

But  how  poor  a pretence  is  this  ? Had  this  real- 
1 y been  the  cafe,  how  carefully  would  he  have 
drawn  the  line  under  each  of  ihefe  heads,  be- 
tween the  fober  religion  of  a Chridian,  and  the 
enthunafm  of  a Method  ill  ? But  has  he  done 
this  ? Does  he  take  particular  care  to  (hew  under 
each,  what  rs  true,  as  well  as  what  is-falfe  reli- 
gion ? Where  the  former  ends  and  the  latter  be- 
gins ? What  are  the  proper  boundaries  of  each  ? 
Your  lordlhip  knows  he  does- not  fo  much  as  en- 
deavour it,  or  take  any  pains  about  it:  but  indis- 
criminately pours  the  flood  out  of  his  unclean 
mouth,  upon  all  repentance,  faith,  love  and  ho- 
linefs. 

8.  Your  lordlhip  will  plcafe  to  obferve,  that  I 
do  not  here  touch  in  the  lead  on  the  merits  of  the 
eaufe.  Be  the  Methodifis  what  they  may,  fools, 
madmen,  enthufiadsr  khaves,  impodors,  papids, 
or  any  thing,  yet  your  lorddilp  perceives,  this' 
does  not  in  any  degree  affecl  the  point  in  quef- 
tion.  Still  it  behoves  every  Chridian,  nay  every 
reafonable  Heathen  to  confider  the  fubjeFt  he  is 
upon,  and  to  take  care,  not  to  bring  this  into 
contempt  (efpecially  if  it  be  of  the  lad  impor- 
tance) however  inexculable  or  contemptible  h:s 
opponents  may  be. 

9.  This  confideration,  my  Lord,  dwelt  much 
upon  my  mind  when  I read  the  former  parts  of 
the  comparifon.  I immediately  faw  there  was  no 
incountering  a buffoon,  by  ferious  reafon  and  ar- 
gument. This  would  naturally  have  furnidred 

both 


[ *«3  1 

both  him  anti  his  admirers  with  frefh  matter  of 
ridicule.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I fhould  let  my- 
felf  down  to  a level  with  him,  by  a lets  ferious 
manner  of  writing  than  I was  accuftomed  to,  I 
was  afraid  of  debafrng  the  dignity  of  the  fubjebh 
Nay,  and  I knew  not  but  I might  catch  fomething 
of  his  Spirit.  I remembered  the  advice,  + Anfwer 
not  a fool  according  to  his folly , lefl  thou  alfo  be 
like  unto  him.  And  yet  I.  faw  there  muff  be  an 
exception  in  fome  cafes,  as  the  words  immediate- 
ly following  drew.  An  fuser  a fool  according  to  his 
folly , lefl  he  be  wife  in  his  own  conceit.  I conceive, 
as  if  he  had  faid.  Yet  it  is  needful  in  fome  cafes, 
to  anfwer  a fool  according  to  his  folly,  otherwife 
he  will  be  wifer  in  his  own  conceit,  than feven  men 
that  can  render  a reafon.  I therefore  conftrain- 
ed  myfelf  to  approach  as  near  as  I dared,  to  his 
own  manner  of  writing.  And  I trufl  the  occa- 

O 

lion  will  plead  my  excufe  with  your  Lordfhip, 
and  all  reafonable  men. 

10.  One  good  effeft  of  my  thus  meeting  him 
on  his  own  ground,  is  vifible  already.  Indead 
ol  endeavouring  to  defend,  he  intirely  gives  up 
the  firft  part  of  his  comparifon.  Indeed  I did 
not  expeft  this,  when  I obferved,  that  the  third 
part  was  addrefled  to  me.  I took  it  for  granted, 
that  he  had  therein  aimed  at  fomething  like  a re- 
ply to  my  anfwer.  But  going  on,  I found  my- 
felf quite  miflaken.  He  never  once  attempts  a 
reply  to  one  page,  any  otherwife  than  by  fcream- 

i no1 


t Prav.  xxvi. 


[ y 

ing  out,  “ Pertnefs,  fcurrilfty,  effrontery,  and' 
in  fubjoining  that  deep  remark,  “ Paper  and  time 
would  be  wafted  on  fuch.  fluff.”;}: 

u.I  cannot  but  account  it  another  good  effecl, 
that  he  is  fomething  lefs  confident  than  he  was 
before.  He  is  likewife  (not  more  angry  or  more 
bitter,  for  that  cannot  be)  but  a- few  degrees  more 
ferious.  So  that  I plainly  perceive,  this  is  the 
way  I am  to  take,  if  I fhould  have  leifure  to  a.n- 
fwer  the  third  part  ; although  it  is  far  from  my 
defire  to  write  in  tins  manner;  it  is  as  contrary  to 
my  inclination  as  to  my  cuftom. 

12.  But  is  it  poftible,  that  a perfon  of  your 
lordfhip's  character,  fhould  countenance  fuch  a 
performance  as  this  P It  cannot  be  your  lordfhip's 
defire,  to  put  contempt  on  all  that  is  truly  vener- 
able among  men  ! To  ftab  Chriftianity  to  the 
heart,  under  the  colour  of  oppofing  enthufiafm  ! 
And  to  increafe  and  give  a fanflion  to  the  pro- 
pbanenefs,  which  already  overfpreads  our  land 
as  a flood. 

ig.  Were  the  Methodifts  ever  fo  bad,  yet 
are  they  not  too  defpicable  and  inconfiderable 
for  your  lordfhip’s  notice?  Again/}  whom  is  the 
king  of  Ifrael  come  out?  Again/  a fea  ? Againjl  ' 
a partridge  upon  the  mountains  ? Such  they  un- 
doubtedly are,  if  that  reprefentation  of  them  be 
juft  which  the  comparer  has  given.  Againft 
whom  (if  your  lordfhip  efpoufes  his  caufe)  are 
you  ftirring  up  the  fupreme  power  of  the  nation  ? 

Againft 

O 


J Third  part,  Pieface,  p.  i^. 


[ fl*5  3 

Againft  whom  docs  your  lordfliip  arm  the  mi- 
ni Iters  of  all  denominations,  particularly  our 
brethren  of  the  eftablifhed  church  ; inciting 
•them  to  paint  us  out  to  their  feveral  congrega- 
tions, as  not  fit  to  li'-e  upon  the  earth  ? The 
efiebts  of  this  have  already  appeared  in  many 
parts  both  of  Devonjhire  and  Cornwall.  Nor  have 
I known  any  confiderable  riot  in  any  part  of 
. England , for  which  fuel)  preaching  did  not  pave 
the  way. 

14.  I beg  leave  to  afk,  would  it  be  a fatif- 
fablion  to  your  lordfliip,  il  national  perfecution 
were  to  return  P Does  your  lordfliip  defire  to 
■revive  the  old  laws,  De  haretico  comburendo  ? 
Would  your  lordfliip  rejoice,  to  fee  the  Me- 
thodifls  themfelves,  tied  to  fo  many  flakes  in 
Smilhjidd  P Or  would  you  applaud  the  execu- 
tion, though  r.ot  fo  legally  or  decently  perform- 
ed by  the  mob  of  Exeter,  Plymouth-Dock  or 
Launcejlon?  My  lord,  what  profit  would  there 
be  in  our  blood  ? Would  it  be  an  addition  to 
your  lordfhip’s  happinefs  ? Or  any  advantage  to 
the  Proteflant  c a life  ? Or  any  honour  either  to 
our  church  or  nation  ? 

ig.  The  comparer  doubtlefs  would  anfwer, 
“ Yes;  for  it  would  prevent  the  horrid  confe- 
quences  of  your  preaching.”  My  lord,  give 
me  leave  to  fay  once  more,  “ I willingly  put 
the  whole  caufe  upon  this  iffue.  What  are  the 
general  confequences  of  onr  preaching  ? Are 
there  more  tares  or  wheat  ? More  good  men  de - 

Jlroyed, 


[ £86  ] 

frayed,  [as  Mr.  Church  once  ftip-pofe  l;  or  wicked. 
me.nfa.ved?  The  laft  places  in  your  lordfhip's  dio-  ’ 
oefe,  where  we  began  confiant  preaching,  arc 
near  Li/heard  in  Cornwall , and  at  Tiverton  in  De- 
aronjhire.  Now  let  any  man  enquire  here,  1.  What 
kind  of  people  were  thofe  a year  ago,  who  now 
conflantly  hear  this  preaching  ? 2.  What  are  the 
wain  doElrines  the  Methodills  have  been  teaching 
this  twelvemonth?  3.  What  effed,  have  thefe 
dofilrines  had  upon  their  hearers  ? And  if  you 
do  not  find,  1.  That  the  greater  part  of  thefe  were 
a year  or  two  ago  notorioufiy  wicked  men,  2. 
Yet  the  main  -doftriircs  they  have  heard  fince 
were,  “ Love  God  and  your  neighbour,  and 
carefully  keep  his  commandments,”  -and  3.  That 
they  have  fince  exercifed  themfelves  herein,  and 
continue  fo  to  do  : I fay,  if  any  reafonable  man, 
who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  inquire  does  not  find 
this  to  be  an  unquefiionable  faft,  I will  openly 
acknowledge  myfelf  an  enthufiall,  or  whatever 
elfe  he  fhall  pleafe  to  flile  me. 

j6.  I beg  leave  to  conclude  this  addrefs  to 
Tour  lordfhip  with  a few  more  words  tianfcrib- 
ed  front  the  fame  letter,  t Allow  Mr.  Wefley, 
fays  Mr  .Church,  but  the [e few  points,  and  he  will 
■defend  his  conduct  beyond  expeflationT  That  is 
molt  true.  If  I have  indeed  been  advancing  no- 
thing but  the  true  knowledge  and  love  of  God  ; 
if  God  has  made  mean  injlrument  in  reforming 
many  linners,  and  bringing  them  to  inward  and. 

pure;  , 


+ Second  letter  to  Mr.  Church,  p. 


[ 2^7  ] 

pure  religion  ; and  if  many  of  thefe  continue 
holy  to  this  day,  and  free  from  all  wilful  fin  r 
then  may  I,  even  I,  ufe  thofe  awful  words. 
He  that  defpifdh  me,  dejpifeth  him  that  fent  me. 
But  I never  expeft  the  world  to  allow  me  one 
of  thefe  points.  However,  I muft  go  on  as 
•God  {hall  enable  me.  I muft  lay  out  whatfoever 
talents  he  intrulls  me  with  (whether  others  will 
believe  I do  it  or  no)  in  advancing  the  true 
Chriftian  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  Jove  and 
fear  of  God  among  men  ; in  reforming  (if  fo 
be  it  pleafe  him  to  ufe  me  ftill)  thofe  who  are  yet 
without  God  in  the  world  ; and  in  propagating 
inward  and  pure  religion,  righleoufnefs,  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.” 

Sincerely  wifhingyour  lordihip  a'Jl  happinefs 
in  time  and  in  eternity, 

I rem  ain. 

Your  lordjlnp's  rnqfl 
■Obedient  fervant , 

Nov.  27,  17,50.  JOHN  WESLEY, 


SIR , 

jt.  "\7"OU  have  undertaken  to  prove  (as  1 ob- 
lerved  in  my  former  letter,  a lew  fen- 

tences 


[ 288  ] 

fences  of  which  I beg  leave  to  repeat)  That  the  + 
whole  conducl  of  the  Melhodifts.,  is  but  a counter- 
part of  the  mojl  wild  fanaticifms  of  popery. 

You  endeavour  to  fupport  this  charge,  by  quo- 
tations  from  our  own  writings,  compared  with 
quotations  from  Popifh  authors. 

It  lies  upon  me  to  anfwer  for  one.  But  in  or- 
der to  fpare  both  you  and  myfelf,  I fnall  at  pre- 
fent  confider  only  your  J'econd  part,  and  that  as 
briefly  as  polhble.  Accordingly  I fnall  not  med- 
dle with  your  other  quotations,  but  leaving  them 
to  w'nom-they  may  concern,  fhall  examine.  Whe- 
ther ihofe  you  have  made  from,  my  writings,  - 
prove  the  charge  for  which  they  were  made  or 
no. 

If  they  do,  I fubirnt.  But  if  they  do  not,  if 
they  are  the  words  oj  truth  and fobernefs,  it  is  an 
■objeclion  of  no  real  weight,  againft  any  fenti- 
ment,  juft  in  itfelf,  though  it  fliould  alfo  be  found 
in  the  writings  of  Papifs  ; yee,  of  Mahometans 
or  Pagans. 

2.  In  your  firft  feftion,  in  order  to  prove  the 
“ Vain  boafting  of  the  Metkodijlsf  you  quote  a 
part  of  the  following  fenter.ee.  “ When  hath 
religion,  I will  not  fay,  ftnee  the  reformation, 
Tut  hne-e  the  time  of  Conjlantine  the  Great , made 
fo  large  a progrefs  in  any  nation,  within  fo  fhort 
a fpace  ?”  ( I beg  any  impartial  perfon  to  read 
the  whole  pafTage,  from  the  8qth  to  the  90th 
page  of  the  Third  Appeal.)  I repeat  the  quell  ion. 


t Preface  to  the  firft  part,  page  3. 


[ 289  ] 


giving  tlie  glory  to  God.  And,  I tru'd,  without 
either  boafiing  or  enthufiafm. 

In  your  fecond,  you  cite  (and  murder)  four  or 
five  lines  t from  one  of  my  journals,  “ as  inftances 
of  die  perfuafive  eloquence  of  the  Method! ft 
preachers .”  But  it  unfortunately  happens,  that 
neither  of  the  fentences  you  quote,  were  fpoke 
hy  any  preacher  at  all.  You  know  full  well,  the 
one  was  ufed  only  in  a private  letter ; the  other 
by  a woman  on  a bed  of  ficknefs. 

3.  You  next  undertake  to  prove  i “ the  mod 
infufferable  pride  and  vanity  of  the  Metkodifls .” 
For  this  end  you  quote  five  paffages  from  my 
journals,  and  one  from  the  Third  Appeal. 

The  § fin  It  was  wrote  in  the  anguifh  of  my 
heart,  to  which  I gave  vent  (between  God  and 
my  own  foul)  by  breaking  out,  not  into  “ con- 
fidence of  boafling,”  as  you  term  it,  but  into  thofe 
expreffions  of  bitter  borrow.  “ I went  to  Ame- 
rica to  convert  the  Indians.  ButO!  who  fiiall 
convert  me  !” — Some  of  the  words  which  follow, 
you  have  picked  out,  and  very  honefily  laid  be- 
fore your  reader,  without  either  the  beginning  or 
end,  or  one  word  of  the  occafion  or  manner 
wherein  they  were  fpoken. 

Your  next  quotation  is  equally  fair  and  gener- 
ous. ||  “ Are  they  read  in  philofophy  ? So  was 
I,  &c.”  Thisw’hole  “ firing  of  felf-cotnmenda- 
tion,”  as  you  call  it,  being  there  brought,  ex  pro- 

Vo  h.  XVI.  N fejfo, 

+ Page  1.  g.  f Sect.  3.  p.  12,  See.  § 1 Journal,  p.  67,  &cj 
||  Ibid.  p.  68,  &c. 


C 29°  ] 

feffo,  to  prove,  that  notwithflanding  all  this, 
which  I once  piqued  myfelf  upon,  I was  at  that 
hour  in  a Hate  of  damnation  1 

||  The  third  is  a plain  narrative  of  the  manner 
wherein  many  of  Bnjiol  expreffed  their  joy  on  my 
coming  unexpectedly  into  the  room,  after  I had 
been  home  time  at  London.  And  this,  I con- 
ceive, will  prove  the  charge  of  high  treafon,  as 
well  as  that  of  “ infufferable  pride  and  vanity.'' 

You  fay,  fourthly,  A dying  woman,  who  had 
earneflly  defired  to  fee  me,  cried  out,  as  I en- 
teied  the  room,  “ Art  thou  come,  thou  bleffed 
of  the  Lord  ?”  § She  did  fo.  And  what  does 
this  prove  ? 

The  fifth  paffage  is  this  : “ In  applying  which, 
my  foul  was  fo  inlarged,  that  methought  I could 
have  cried  out  (in  another  fenfe  than  poor,  vain 
Archimede)  “ Give  me  where  to  Hand,  and  I 
will  (hake  the  earth.”  My  meaning  is,  I found 
fuch  freedom  of  thought  and  fpeech  (jargon, 
fluff,  enthuCafm  to  you)  that  methought  could  I 
have  then  fpoken  to  all  the  w orld,  they  would  all 
have  fhared  in  the  bleffing1. 

O 

The  paffage  which  you  quote  from  the  Third 
Appeal,  I am  obliged  to  relate  more  at  large. 

“ There  is  one  more  excufe  for  denying  this 
work  of  God,  taken  from  the  inflruraents  em- 
ployed therein  : that  is,  that  they  are  wicked 
men  ; and  a thoufand  flories  have  been  handed 
about  to  prove  it.” 

“ Yet 

4 Jour.  p.  Sr.  ^ 4 Jour  p.  96. 


[ 29*  ] 

Yet  I cannot  but  remind  confiderate  men,  in 
how  remarkable  a manner  the  wifdom  of  God, 
has,  for  many  years,  guarded  againft  this  pre- 
tence, with  regard  to  my  brother  and  me  in  par- 
ticular. This  pretence  i.  e.  “ of  not  employing  fit 
injlr umentsA  Thefe  words  are  yours,  though 
you  infert  them  as  mine.  The  pretence  I 
mentioned,  was,  “ That  they  were  wicked 
men.”  And  how  God-guarded  againll  this,  is 
fhewn  in  what  follows.  “ From  that  time,  both 
my  brother  and  I (utterly  againft  our  will)  came 
to  be  more  and  more  obferved  and  known  ; till 
we  were  more  fpoken  of  than  perhaps  twro  fo  in- 
confiderable  perfons  ever  were  before  in  the  na- 
tion. To  make  us  more  public  ftiil,  as  hontjl 
madmen  at  leaft,  by  a ftrange  concurrence  of 
providences,  overturning  all  our  preceding  re- 
lolutions,  we  were  hurried  away  to  America .” 
Afterward  it  follows,  “ What  perfons  could  in 
the  nature  of  things,  have  been  (antecedently) 
lefs  liable  to  exception,  with  regard  to  their 
moral  charafter  at  leaft,  than  thofe  the  all-wife 
God  hath  now  employed  ? Indeed  I cannot 
devife  what  manner  cf  men  could  have  been 
more  unexceptionable  on  all  accounts.  Had 
God  indued  us  with  greater  natural  or  acquired 
abilities,  this  very  thing  might  have  been  turn- 
ed into  an  objection.  Fladwebeen  remarkably 
defeftive,  it  would  have  been  matter  of  objection 
on  the  other  hand.  Had  we  been  dijfenters  of 
any  kind,  or  even  Low-Church- Men  (fo  called) 
N 2 it 


[ a92  ] 

it  would  have  been  a great  ftumbling-block  in  the 
way  of  thofe  who  are  zealous  for  the  church.  And 
yet,  had  we  continued  in  the  impetuofity  of  our 
high-church  zeal , neither  fhould  we  have  been 
willing  to  converfe  with  diflenters,  nor  they  to 
receive  any  good  at  our  hands.”  Sir,  Why  did 
you  break  off  your  quotation  in  the  middle  of 
this  paragraph,  juft  at  “ move  unexceptionable  on 
all  accounts?”  Was  it  net  on  purpofe  to  give  a 
wrong  turn  to  the  whole  ? To  conceal  the  real 
and  obvious  meaning  of  my  words,  and  put  one 
upon  them  that  never  entered  into  my  thoughts  ? 

5.  You  have  referved  your  ftrong  reafon  for 
the  laft,  namely,  my  own  confeffion.  “ Mr. 
Wejley  fays  himfelf,  “ by  the  moft  infallible  of 
proofs,  inward  feelings  I am  convinced  of 
pride,  &c.”  Sir,  be  pleafed  to  decypher  that, 
&c.  Or  I will  fpare  you  the  pains  and  do  it 
myfelf,  by  reciting  the  whole  fentence. 

“ By  t the  moll  infallible  of  proofs,  inward 
feeling,  I am  convinced, 

1.  “ Of  unbdief,  having  no  fuch  faith  in  Chrift 
as  will  prevent  my  heart  from  being  troubled, 
which  it  could  not  be,  if  I believed  in  God,  and 
rightly  believed  alfo  in  him.” 

2. “  Of  pride  throughout  my  life  paft,  inaf- 
much  as  I thought  I had,  what  I find  I have 
not.” 

Now,  Sir,  you  nave  my  whole  confeffion.  I 
intreat  you  to  make  the  belt  ol  it. 


f 1 Jour;  p.  64. 


“ But 


[ 293  J 

“ But  I my felf  acknowledge,  three  Metliodijlf, 
fo  have ’fallen  into  pride.”  Sir,  I can  tell  you  of' 
three  more.  And  yet  it  will  not  follow,  that  the 
do&rines  I teach,  “ lead  men  into  horrid  pride 
and  blafpliemy .” 

6.  In  the  clofe  of  your  fourth  feftion,  you  charge 
me  with  “ fluffing  and  prevaricating,  with  re- 
gard to  extraordinary  gifts,  and  miraculous 
powers.”  Of  thefe  I fhall  have  occafton  to 
fpeak  by  and  by.  At  prefent  I need  only 
return  the  compliment,  by  charging  you  with 
grofs,  wilful  prevarication,  from  the  begin- 
ning of  your  book  to  the  end.  Some  inftances 
of  this  have  appeared  already.  Many  more  will' 
appear  in  due  time. 

7.  Your  ||  fifth,  charges  me  with  an  affilia- 
tion of prophtfying.  Your  ftrft  proof  of  it  is  this-. 

“ It  was  about  this  time  that  the  foldier  was 
executed.  For  fome  time  I had  vifited  him  every 
day.  But  when  the  love  of  God  was  fhed  abroad 
hr  his  heart,  I told  him,  do  not  expeft  to  fee  me 
any  more. — 1 believe  Satan  will  feparate  us  for  a 
feafon.  Accordingly,  the  next  day,  I was  in- 
formed, the  commanding  officer  had  given  flrift 
orders,  that  neither  Mr.  Wejley,  nor  any  of  his 
people,  fhouid  be  admitted.”  I did  believe  fo, 
having  feen  many  fuch  things  before : yet  with- 
out affefting  a fpirit  of  prophecy. 

But  that  I do  claim  it,  you  will  prove,  fecond- 
iy,  from- my  mentioning  “ the  great  work,  which 
N 3 God 

H 4 journ.  p.  30. 


[ 2 94  ] 

God  intends,  and  is  now  beginning  to  work  over 
all  the  earth.'5  By.  what  art  you  extract  fuch 
a conclufion  out  of  fuch  premifes,  I know  not. 
That  God  intends  this,  none,  who  believe  the 
feripture,  doubt.  And  that  lie  has  begun  it,  both 
in  Europe  and  America , any  who  will  make  ufe  of 
their  eyes  and  ears,  may  know  without  any  “ mi- 
raculous gift  of  prophefying.55 

8.  In  your  fixth  feflion,  you  afTert,  t That  I 
lay  claim  to  other  miraculous  gifts.  As  you 
borrow  this  objediion  from  Mr.  Church , I need 
only  give  the  fame  anfwerl  gave  before. 

* “ 1 Jhall  give  (fays  Mr.  Church ) but  one  ac- 
count more , and  that  is,  what  you  give  of  yourf elf.” 
The  fum  whereof  is,  “ At  tv/o  feveral  times,  be- 
ing ill,  and  in  violent  pain,  I prayed  to  God,  and 
found  immediate  eafe.”  I did  fo.  I afTert  the  faff 
frill.  But  if  thefe  (you  fay)  arc  not  miraculous 
tares,  all  this  is  rank  enthufafm. 

“ I will  put  your  argument  in  form  : 

He  that  believes  thofe  are  miraculous  cures, 
which  are  not,  is  a rank  emhufialt. 

But  you  believe  thofe  to  be' miraculous  cures, 
which  are  not : 

Therefore  you  are  a rank  enthufiaft. 

M Before  I anfwer,  I mud  know  what  you  mean 
by  miraculous?  If  you  term  every  thing  fo,  which 
is  not Jlntlly  accountable  for,  by  the  ordinary  courfe 
of  natural  caufes : then  I deny  the  latter  part 
of  the  fecond  propofition.  And  unlefs  you  can 

make 

J Firft  Letter  to  Mr.  Churth,  p.  45. 


'*  Page  45,  &t. 


t 295  ] 

make  this  good,  unlefs  you  can  prove  the  eflfefls" 
in  queftion  are  ftri&Jy  accountable  for,  by  the 
ordinary  courfe  of  natural  caufes,  your  argument 
is  nothing  worth,” 

Having  largely  anfwered  your  next  objeftion 
relating  to  what  I Hill  term  § “ a lignal  inllance  of 
God’s  particular  providence,”  I need  only  refer 
you  to  thofe  anfwers,  not  having  leifure  to  fay 
the  fame  thing  ten  times  over. 

Whether  I fometimes  claim,  and  fometimes 
difclaim  miracles,  will  be  confidered  by  and  by. 

In  your  feventh  feflion,  you  fay,  “ ||  I fhall 
now  give  fome  account,  of  their  grievous  con- 
flicts and  combats  with  Satan.”  O,  Sir,  fpare 
yourfelf,  if  not  the  Methodijls  ! Do  not  go  fo  far 
out  of  your  depth.  This  is  a fubjecf  you  are  as 
utterly  unacquainted  with,  as  with  jollification,  or 
the  new-birth. 

But  I attend  your  motions.  “ Mr.  TVe/Zey, 
you  fay,  was  advifed,  to  a very  high  degree  of 

filence. And  he  fpoke  to  none  at  all  for  two 

days,  and  travelling  fourfcore  miles  together.” 

“ The  fame  whim  (you  go  on)  has  run  through 

feveral  of  the  religious  orders Hence  St. 

Bonaventura  fays,  That  filence  in  all  the  religi- 
ous, is  neceffary  to  perfe&ion St . Agatho  held 

a Rone  in  his  mouth  for  three  years,  till  he  had 
learned  taciturnity — St.  Alcantara  carried  feveral 
pebbles  in  his  mouth  for  three  years  likewise, 
N 4 and 

\ Letter  to  Mr.  Church,  p.  42.  2 Letter,  p.  46.  ]|  Page 

51,  Sic. 


[ 296  ] 

and  for  the  fame  reafon — Theon  obferved  a con- 
tinual filenee  for  thirty  years. St.  Francis  ob- 

ferved  it  himfelf,  and  enjoined  it  upon  his  bre- 
thren. The  rule  of  filence  was  rel igioufly  obferved 
by  St.  Dcmiuic.” 

I have- repeated  more  of  your  words  than  I 
otherwife  fhould,  in  order  to  fhew  to  a demon- 
ftration,  that  a man  of  a lively  imagination,  may 
run  a parallel  to  any  length,  without  any  founda- 
tion in  nature.. 

You  begin,  “ The  fame  whim  (which  led  Mr. 
Wcjley  to  obferve  an  abfolute  filence  for  two 
days]  and  fo  run  on  to  St.  Bonaventura,  St.  Jga- 
tko,  and  I know  not  whom.”  But  did  Mr.  Wejlcy 
“ obferve  an  abfolute  filence  for  two  days  ?”" 
No  ; not  for  one  hour.  My  words,  “It  fpoke 
to  none  at  all  for  fourfcore  miles  together,”  im- 
ply neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  that  I fpoke  to 
none  “ concerning  the  things  of  God,”  as  it  is 
in  the  words  immediately  preceding.  And  you 
know  this  as  well  as  I.  But  it  is  all  one  for  that. 
Wit,  not  truth,  is  the  point  you  aim  at. 

My  fuppofcd  inconfillency,  with  regard  to  the 
Moravians , which  you  likewife  drag  in  (as  they 
fay)  by  head  and  fhoulders,  I have  fhewn  again 
and  again,  to  be  no  inconfillency  at  all  : particu- 
larly in  both  the  letters  to  Mr.  Church. 

jo.  Well,  but  as  to  conjliEls  with  Satan.  “ Nor 
can  Mr.  Wtjlcy , you  fay,  efcape  the  attacks  of 
this  infernal  fpirit,”  namely,  fuggefling  diflruft- 

ful 


+ 4 Journal,  p.  86. 


[ 297  ] 

ful  thoughts,  and  buffeting  him  with  inward- 
temptations.”  Sir,  did  you  never  hear  of  any 
one  fo  attacked,  unlefs  among  the  Papifis  or  Me- 
thodijis  ? How  deeply  then  are  you  experienced 
both  in  the  ways  of  God,  and  the  devices  of 
Satan  ? 

■ You  add,  with  regard  to  a cafe  mentioned  in 
the  f fourth  journal , “Though  I am  not  con- 
vinced that  thefe  fits  of  laughing , are  to  be  af- 
cribed  to  Satan,  yet  I entirely  agree,  that  they 
are  involuntary  and  unavoidable .”  I am  glad  we 
agree  fo  far.  But  I muff  hill  go  farther;  I can- 
not but  aferibe  them  to  a preternatural  agent : 
having  obferved  fo  many  circumftances  attending, 
them  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  any  na~ 
tural  caufes. 

Under  the  head  of  confirms  with  Satan,  you* 
obferve  farther,  “ Mr.  IV fey  fays,  while  he  was 
preaching,  the  devil  knew  his  kingdom  fhook,> 
and  therefore  flirred  up  his  fervants  to  make  a 
noife  : that,  September  18,  the  ^prince  of  the  air- 
made  another  attempt,  in  defence  of  his  tottering, 
kingdom  : and  that  another  time,  “ the  devil's 
children  fought  valiantly  for  their  maker.”  I own 
the  whole  charge,  I did  fay  all  this.  Nay,  and  if 
need  were,  I fhould  fay  it  again. 

You  cite  one  more  in  fiance  from  my  fourth 
journal , “ The  many-headed  beaf  began  to  roar 
again.”  So  your  head  is  fo  full  of  the  fubjeft,  that 
N 5 yoa. 

± ^se  37* 


[ *98  ] 

}'ou  conftrue  even  poor  Horace  s Bellua  multofum 
capitum  into  the  devil! 

1 hefe  are  all  the  combats  and  conflicts  with 
Satan,  which  you  can  prove  I ever  had.  O,  Sir, 
without  more  and  greater  conflicts  than  thefe, 
none  fhall  fee  the  kingdom  of  God. 

1 1.  In  the  following  fecfions,  you  are  equally 
out  of  your  element.  1 he  t firfl  of  them  relates 
to fpintual  defertions  ; all  which  you  make  the 
fubjedl  of  dull  ridicule,  and  place  to  the  account 
of  enthufiafin.  And  tb#  cafe  of  all  you  give 
in  the  following  words,  “ We  may  look  upon 
enthufiafin  as  a kind  of  drunkennefs,  filling  and 
intoxicating  the  brain  with  the  heated  fumes  of 
fpirituous  particles.  Now  no  fooner  does  the  ine- 
briation go  off,  but  a coldnefs  and  dulnefs  takes 
place.” 

12.  As  wildly  do  you  g talk  of  the  doubts  and 
fears  incident  to  thofe  who  are  creak  in  faith.  I 
cannot  prevail  upon  mvfelf,  to  prollitute  this  aw- 
ful fubjeft,  by  entering  into  any  debate  concern- 
ing it,  with  onewho  is  innocent  of  the  wholeaffair. 
Only  I mu  ft  obferve,  that  a great  part  of  what 
you  advance  concerning  me,  is  intirely  wide  of 
the  queflion.  Such  is  all  you  quote  from  the 
firfl,  and  a confidcrable  part  of  what  you  quote 
from  m yfecond journal.  This  you  know  in  your 
own  confidence  ; for  you  know  I fpeak  of  myfelf, 
during  the  whole  time,  as  having  no  faith  at  all. 
Confequently,  the  “ rifings  and  fallings'  I expe- 
rienced 

+ Scft.  8.  p.  75,  &c.  + Seft.  9.  p.  79: 


C 299  ] 

rienced  then,  have  nothing  to  do  vv'ith  thofe 
“ doubts  and  fears,  which  many  go  through,  after 
they  have  by  faith  received  remiflion  of  fins.” 

The  next  words  which  you  cite,  “ thrown 
into  great  perplexities,”  I cannot  find  in  the  page 
you  refer  to : neither  thofe  that  follow,  i he 
fum  of  them  is,  that  “ at  that  time  I did  not  feel 
the  love  of  God,  but  found  deadnefs  and  wander- 
ings in  public  prayer,  and  coldnefs  even  at  the 
holy  communion.”  Well,  Sir,  and  have  you 
never  found  in  yourfelf,  any  fuch  coldnels,  dead- 
nefs and  wanderings  ? I am  perluaded  you  have. 
And  yet  furely  your  brain  is  always  cool  and  tem- 
perate ! Never  “ intoxicated  with  the  heated 
fumes  of  fpirituous  particles !” 

13.  If  you  quote  not  incoherent  fcraps  (by  which 
you  rnay  make  any  thing  out  of  any  thing)  but 
intire  connected  fentences,  it  will  appear  that  the 
reft  of  your  quotations  make  no  more  for  your 
purpofe  than  the  foregoing.  Thus,  ahhoug’n  I 
allow,  that  on  t May  24,  “ I was  much  buffeted 
with  temptations,  but  I cried  to  God  and  they  fled 
away;  that  they  returned  again  and  again;  las 
often  lifted  up  my  eyes,  and  he  fent  me  help  from 
his  holy  place  it  will  only  prove  the  very  ob- 
fervation  I make  myfelF.  “ I was  fighting  both 
under  the  law  and  under  grace.  But  then  I was 
fometimes,  if  not  often,  conquered  : now  I was 
always  conqueror.” 

That  fometime  after,  I “ was  firongly  affaulted 
N 6 again, 

+ 3 Journal;  p.  3°,  3J.. 


[ goo  J 

again,  and  after  recovering  peace  and  joy,  w3s 
thrown  into  perplexity  afrefli  by  a letter,  a fie  r ting, 
that  no  doubt  or  fear  could  confifl  with  true 
faith  : that  my  weak  mind  could  not  then  bear, 
to  be  thus  fawn  ajunder  Will  not  appear 
flrange  to  any  who  are  not  utter  novices  in  expe- 
rimental religion.  No  more  than  that  one  nigh' 
the  i»ext  year,  “ I had  no  life  orfpirit  in  me,  and 
was  much  in  doubt,  whether  God  would  not  lay 
me  afide,  and  fend  other  labourers  into  his  har- 
veft.“ 

14.  You  add,  “ He  owns  his  frequent  relapfes 
into  fin,  for  near  twice  ten  years.  Such  is  the 
cafe  of  a perfon  who  tells  us,  that  he  carefully 
confidered  every  flep  he  took  : one  of  intimate 
eommunicaton  with  the  Deity.”  Sir,  I did  not 
fell  you  that:  though,  according  to  cullom,  you 
mark  the  words  as  mine.  It  is  well  for  you,  that 
forging  quotations  is  not  felon}-. 

My  words  are,  “ O what  an  hypocrite  have 
I been  (if  this  be  fo)  for  near  twice  ten  years  ! But 
I know  it  is  not  fo.  I know  every  one  under  the 
Law , is  even  as  I was;”  namely,  from  the  time 
I was  twelve  years  old,  till  confiderably  above 
thirty. 

“ And  is  it  flrange  (you  fay)  that  fuch  a one 
fhould  be  deflitute  of  means  to  refolve  his  feru- 
ples  ? Should  be  ever  at  variance  with  himfelf, 
and  find  no  place  to  fix  his  foot  ?” 

Good  Sir,  not  too  fall.  You  quite  out-run 
the  truth  again.  BlcfTcd  be  God,  this  is  not  my 

cafe. 


[ go*  ] 

cafe.  I am  not  deftitute  of  means  to  refolve  mv 
fcruples.  I have  fome  friends,  and  a little  reafoH 
left.  I am  not  ever  at  variance  with  myfelf ; and 
have  found  a place  to  fix  my  foot. 

“ Now  I have  found  the  ground  wherein 
Firm  my  foul’s  anchor  may  remain  ; 

The  wounds  of  Jefusr  for  my  lin 

Before  the  world’s  foundation  {lain.” 

And  yet  one  of  your  alfertions  I cannot  deny  : 
namely,  that  you  “ could  run  the  parallel  between 
me  and  numbers  of  fanatical  papifls.”  And  that 
not  only  with  regard  to  my  temper,  but  my  flature, 
complexion,  yea  (if  need  were]  the  very  colour  of 
my  hair. 

15.  In  your  if  next  feflion,  you  are  to  give  an 
account  of  the  “ fpiritual  fuccours  and  advan- 
tages received  either  during  thefe  trials  or  very 
foon  after.”  It  is  no  wonder  you  make  as  lame 
work  with  thefe,  as  with  the  conflicts  which  pre- 
ceded them.  As  the  heart  knovieth  its  own  bit- 
temefs,  fo  a Jlr anger  doth  not  intermeddle  with 
his  joy.  But  it  is  no  bufinefs  of  mine,  as  you 
have  not  done  me  the  honour  to  cite  any  of  my 
words  in  this  fedlion. 

16.  “ The  % vnjleadinefs  of  the  Methodijls  both 
in  fentiments  and  practice,”  is  what  you  next  un- 
dertake to  prove.  Your  loofe  declamation  with 
which  you  open  the  caufe,  I pafs  over,  as  it  refts 

«•  on 

f Sett,  to.  p.  29,  &c.  5 Sett,  ti.  p.  95,  See, 


[ 302  ] 

on  vour  own  bare  word  ; and  hafle  to  your  main 
reafon,  drawn  from  my  fentiments  and  practice, 
with  regard  to  the  Moravians . 

“ He  reprefents  them,  you  fay,  in  the  blacked 
colours;  yet  declares,  in  the  main  they  are  feme 
of  the  bell  people  in  the  world.  His  love  and 
edeem  for  them,  increafes  more  and  more.  His 
own  difciples  among  the  Mttliodifls  go  ever  to 
them  in  crowds.  But  dill  Methodifm.  is  the 
dronged  barrier  againd  the  Moravian  dc&rines 
and  principles.” 

Sir,  I bear  you  witnefs,  you  have  learnt  one 
principle  at  lead,  from  thofe  with  whom  you  have 
lately  converfed  ; namely,  that  no  faith  is  to  be 
kept  with  hereticks ; of  which  you  have  given 
us  abundant  proof.  For  you  know  I have  fully 
anfwered  every  article  of  this  charge,  which  you 
repeat,  as  if  I had  noj:  opened  my  lips  about  it. 
You  know,  that  there  is  not  one  grain  of  truth, 
in  feveral  things  which  you  here  pofitively  afTert. 
For  in  dance,  “ His  love  and  edeetn  of  them,  in- 
creafes more  and  more.”  Not  fo,  no  more  than 
my  love  and  edeem  for  you.  f love  you  both  ; 
but  I do  not  much  edeem  either.  Again,  “ His 
own  difciples  among  the  Methodifts , go  over  to 
them  in  crowds.”  When?  Where?  I know  not 
that  ten  of  my  difciples,  as  you  call  them,  have 
gone  over  to  them  for  twice  ten  months.  O Sir, 
condder!  How  do  you  know,  but  forae  of  your 
difciples  may  tell  your  name  ? 

17.  With  the  fame  veracity  you  go  on.  “ In 

the 


[ 303  ] 

the  char  after  of  a Metkodifl,  thofe  of  the  feci  are 
deferibed  as  having  all  the  virtues  that  can  adorn 
the  Chrifiian  profefiion.  But  in  their  journals. 
you  find  them  wafpifh,  condemning  all  the  world, 
except  themfelves  ; and  among  themfelves,  per- 
petual broils  and  confufions,  with  various  other 
irregularities  and  vices.” 

I anfwer,  1.  The  traft  you  refer  to  (as  is  ex- 
prefly  declared  in  the  preface)  does  not  deferibe 
what  the  Methodijls  are  already:  but  what  they 
defire  to  be,  and  what  they  will  be  then,  when 
they  fully  praftife  the  doftrine  the}'  hear.  2.  Be 
pleafed  to  poirlt  the  pages  in  my  journals  which 
mention  thofe  “ various  irregularities  and  vices.” 
Of  their  “ perpetual  broils  and  confufions”  I fhall 
fpeak  under  their  proper  head. 

You  add,  “ Sometimes  they  are  fo  far  from 
fearing  death,  that  they  wifh  it.  But  thekeennefs 
of  the  edge  is  foon  blunted.  They  are  full  of 
dreadful  apprehenfions,  that  the  clergy  intend  to 
mur liter  them.”  Do  you  mean  me,  Sir?  I plead 
not  guilty.  I never  had  any  fuch  apprehenfion. 
Yeti  fuppofe,  you  defigned  the  compliment  for 
tne,  by  your  dragging  in  two  or  three  broken  fen- 
ten  ces  from  my  frf  journal.  But  how  little  to 
the  purpofe  ? Seeing  at  the  time  that  was  written, 
I had  never  pretended  to  be  above  the  fear  of 
death.  So  that  this  is  no  proof  of  the  point  in 
view,  of  the  “ unfleadinefs  of  my  fentiments  or 
praftice.” 

18.  You  proceed,  “ One  day,  they  fancy  it 

their 


L.  3°4  ] 

their  duty  to  preach  ; the  next,  they  preach  wit!! 
great  reluclance.”  Very  true  ! But  they  fancy 
it  their  duty  fhll  ; elfe  they  would  not  preach  at 
all.  d his  therefore  does  not  prove  any  inequa- 
lity either  of  fentiment  or  practice. 

“ Mr.  Wtjlcy  is  fometimes  quite  averfe  from 
fpeaking,  and  then  perplext  with  the  doubt,  is  it 
a prohibition  from  the  good  Spirit  ? or  a tempta- 
tion from  nature  and  the  evil  one  ?” 

Juft  of  a piece  with  the  reft.  The  fentence 
runs  thus,  “ I went  feveral  times  with  a delign  to 
fpeak  to  the  failors,  but  could  not.  I mean,  I 
was  quite  averfe  from  fpeaking.  Is  not  this  what 
men  commonly  mean  by,  “ I could  not  fpeak  ?” 
And  is  this  a fufficient  caufe  of  lilence,  or  no  i* 
Is  it  a prohibition  from  the  good  Spirit  ? Or  a 
temptation  from  nature  or  the  evil  one  ? Sir,  I 
was  in  no  doubt  at  all  on  the'occafion.  Nor  did 
I intend  to  exprefs  any  in  thefe  words;  but 
to  appeal  to  mens  confcience,  whether  what 
they  call  a prohibition  from  the  good  Spirit, 
be  not  a mere  temptation  from  nature  or  the 
evil-one  ? 

19.  In  the  + next  fection  you  are  to  fnew, 
41  the  art , cunning , and  fophijiry  of  the  Metho- 
dtfts,  who,  when  hard  preft  by  argument,  run 
themfelves  into  inconfiflencv  and  Jdf-contradic- 
tion ; and  occafionally  either  defend  or  give 
up  fome  of  their  favourite  notions  and  principal 
points.” 


7 Sc£t.  t2,  p.  102, 


I dare 


[ 3°5  ] 

I dare  fay,  Sir,  you  will  not  put  them  to  tires 
trial.  Argument  lies  out  of  the  way  of  one. 

■ Solutos 

Out  captat  rij'us.  hominem  famamque  dicacis. 
But  to  the  proof.  “ Mr.  JVtjley,  you  fay,  at  one 
time  declares  for  a difniterefted  love  of  God  : at 
another,  declares,  There  is  no  one  caution  in 
all  the  bible,  againft  the  felfifh  love  of  God.” 
Nay,  Sir,  I will  tell  you  what  is  ftranger  Hill, 
Mr.  IVtfey  holds  at  one  time,  both  Tides  of  this 
contradiction.  I now  declare,  both  that  “ alt 
true  love  is  difinterefted,  feeketh  not  her  own  : 
and  that  there  is  no  one  caution  in  all  the  bible^ 
againft  the  felfilh  love  of  God.”' 

What  have  I the  art  to  flip  out  of  your 
hands  again  ? “ Pardon  me  (as  your  old  friend 
fays)  for  being  jocular.” 

20.  You  add,  (altius  infurgens ) “ but  it  is  a 
confiderable  offence  to  charge  another  wrong- 
fully and  contradidl  himfelf  about  the  dodlrine 
of  affurance.”  To  prove  this  upon  me,  you 
bring  my  own  words.  “ The  t affurance  we 
preach,  is  of  quite  another  kind  from  that  Mr. 
Bedford  writes  againft.  We  fpeak  of  an  affur- 
ance  of  our  prefent  pardon  ; not,  as  he  does, 
of  our  final  perfeverance.” 

“ Mr.  Wefley  might  have  conftdered  (you  fay) 
that  when  they  talk  of  affurance  of  pardon  and 
falvation , the  world  will  extend  the  meaning  of 
the  words,  to  our  eternal  ftate.”  I do  confider 

ft. 


t 3 Journ.  p.  g. 


[ 3°6  ] 

it,  Sir.  And  therefore  I never  ufe  that  phrafe 
either  in  preaching  or  writing.  AJfurance  of par  don 
and falvation  is  an  exprefiion  that  never  comes 
out  of  my  lips.  And  if  Mr.  Whittjield  does 
ufe  it,  yet  he  does  not  preach  fuch  an  ajfurance, 
as  the  privilege  of  all  Chriflians. 

“ But  Mr.  Wejley  himfelf  fays,  that  though  a 
full  ajfurance  oj jailh  doth  not  neceffarily  imply 
a jail  affhrance  of  our  future  perjeverance vet 
“ fome  have  both  the  one  and  the  other.”  And 
now  what  becomes  of  his  charge  againft  Mr. 
Bedford?  And  is  it  not  mere  evafion  to  fay 
afterwards,  “ This  is  not  porperly  an  alfurance 
of  what  is  future  ?’’ 

Sir,  this  argument  preffes  me  very  hard]  May 
I not  be  allowed  a little  evajion  now  ? Come, 
for  once  I will  try  to  do  without  it,  and  to  am 
fwer  flat  and  plain. 

And  I anfwer,  1.  That  faith  is  one  thing  ; 
the  full  affurance  of  faith  another  : 2.  That 
even  th  z fill  rjjurance  of  faith,  does  not  imply  the 
full  ajfurance  of  perfeverance.  This  bears  ano- 
ther name  ; being  {filed  by  St.  Paul,  the  full 
ajfurance  of  hope.  3.  Some  Chriflians  have  only 
the  firft  of  thefe.  They  have  faith : but  mixt 
with  doubts  and  fears.  Some  have  al [o  the  full 
ajfurance  of  faith  ; a full  conviction  of  prefent 
pardon:  and  yet  not  the  full  afurance.  of hope  ; 
not  a full  conviction  of  their f uture  perfeverance. 
4.  The  faith  which  we  preach,  as  neceflary  to 
all  Chriflians,  is  the  firft  of  thefe,  and  no  other. 

Therefore, 


[ 3°7  ] 

i 

Therefore,  5.  It  is  no  evafion  at  all  to  fay,  “ This 
(the  fail h which  we  pleach  a.s  neceflary  to  all 
ChriftiansJ  is  not  properly  an  affurance  of  what 
is  future.”  And  confequently,  my  charge  againfh 
Mr.  Bedford  Hands  good,  “ That  his  fermon  on 
ajjurancc , is  an  ingoratio  elenchi  (an  ignorance  of 
the  point  in  queftion)  from  beginning  to  end.”' 
Therefore  neither  do  I “ charge  another  wrong- 
fully, nor  contradiB  myfelf , about  the  dobtrine  of 
aflu  ranees.” 

2i.  To  prove  my  art,  aiming  and  evafion,  you 
inflance  next  in  the  cafe  of  impulfes,  and  impref- 
fons.  You  begin  “ With  what  pertinacious  con- 
fidence, have  impulfes , imprejjions,  feelings,  & c. 
been  advanced  into  certain  rules  of  conduft  ? 
Their  followers  have  been  taught  to  depend 
upon  them,  as  fure  guides  and  infallible  proofs 

To  fupport  this  weighty  charge,  you  bring  one 
fmgle  ferap,  about  a line  and  a quarter  from  one 
of  my  journals.  The  words  are  thefe.  “ By 
the  molt  infallible  of  proofs,  inward  feeling,  I 
am  convinced.”  Convinced  of  what  P It  im- 
mediately follows,  “ Of  unbelief,  having  no 
fuch  faith  as  will  prevent  my  heart  from  being 
troubled.” 

I her-e  affert,  that  inward  feeling  or  confci- 
oufnefs,  is  the  mof.  infallible  of  proofs,  of  unbelief, 
of  the  want  of  fuch  a faith,  as  will  prevent  the 
heart’s  being  troubled.  But  do  I here  “ advance 
impreffions,  impulfes,  feelings,  &c.  into  certain 
rules  of  conduct  ? ” Or  any  where  elfe  ? You 

may 


[ 3°8  ] 

may  juft  as  well  fay,  I advance  them  into  certain 
proofs  of  tranlubftantiation. 

Neither  in  writing,  nor  in  private  converfa- 
tion,  have  I ever  *•  taught  any  of  my  follow- 
ers, to  depend  upon  them  as  fure  guides  or 
infallible  proofs”  of  any  thing. 

Nayr  you  yourfelfown,  I have  taught  quite  the 
reverfe  : and  that  at  my  very  firft  fetting  out. 
Then  as  well  as  ever  fince,  I have  told  thefocie- 
ties,  “ They  were  not  to  judge  by  their  own 
inward  feelings.  I warned  them,  ail  thefe  were 
in  themfelves  of  a doubtful,  difputable  nature. 
They  might  be  from  God,  or  they  might  not, 
and  were  therefore  to  be  tried  by  a further  rule, 
to  be  brought  to  the  only  certain  teft,  the  law  anti 
the  teflimony”.  + 

This  is  what  I have  taught  from  firft  to  laft. 
And  now.  Sir,  what  becomes  of  your  heavy 
charge  ? On  which  fide  lies  the  “•  pertinacious  con- 
fidence”  now  ? How  clearly  have  you  made  out, 
my  inconjijlency  and [elf  ecntradxdion  ? And  that 
I “ occafionally  either  defend  or  give  up,  my 
favourite  notions  and  principal  points  ?’* 

22.  “i  Infpirati&n  and  the  extraordinary  calls 
and  guidances  of  the  Holy  Ghojl , are  what  you 
next  affirm  to  be  given  upH  Not  by  me.  I do 
not  give  up  one  tittle  on  this  head,  which  I ever 
maintained.  But  obferve.  Before  you  attempt 
to  prove  my  giving  them  up,  you  are  to  prove-, 
that  I laid  claim  to  them:  that  I laid  claim  to 

forae 

i 3 Joum.  p.6o,  6i.  f St£l.  13  p-  106..  &c. 


C a°9  ] 

fome  extraordinary  infpiration,  call,  or  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Ghofi. 

You  fay,  “ My  concejjions  on  this  head  (to 
Mr.  Chinch ) are  ambiguous  and  evafiveh'  Sir, 
you  miflake  the  faff.  I make  no  conceffions  at 
all,  either  to  him  or  you.  I give  up  nothing 
that  ever  I advanced  on  this  head.  But  when 

Mr.  Church  charged  me  with  what  I did  not 

advance,  I replied,  “ I claim  no  other  direblion 
of  God's , but  what  is  common  to  all  believers, 
I pretend  to  be  no  other  wife  infpired,  than  you 
are,  if  you  love  God.  Where  is  the  ambi- 
guity or  evafion  in  this  ? I meant  it  for  a flat  de- 

nial of  the  charge, 

23.  t Your  next  fefition,  Spiral  tragicum.  fads , 
charges  the  Metkodifls  ; “ with  fcepticifhi  and 
infidelity , with  doubts  and  denials  of  the  truth  of 
revelation,  and  atheifm  itfelf.”  The  palfages 
brought  from  my  journals  to  prove  this  charge, 
which  you  have  prudently  tranfpofed,  I beg  leave 
to  confiderin  the  fame  order,  as  they  Hand  there. 

The  fird,  you  preface  thus : “ Upon  the  peo- 
ple’s ill  ufage  (or  Juppofed  ill  ufage)  of  Mr.  WeJ~- 
ley  in  Georgia , and  their  fpeaking  of  all  manner 
of  evil,  jalfely  (as  he  fays)  againfi  him;  and 
trampling  under  foot  the  word,  after  having  been 
very  attentive  to  it  : what  an  emotion  in  him  is 
hereby  raifed  ? “ I do  hereby  bear  witnefs  againfi 
inyfelf,  that  I could fcarce  refrain  from  giving  the 

lie 

f Scft  14.  p,  no,  &c.  1 Journ.  p.  14, 


[ 3io  ] 

Ue  to  experience  and  reafcn  and  fcripture  all  toge- 
ther. ” 

The  palfage,  as  I wrole  it,  Hands  thus  : “ Sun- 
day, March  7.  I entered  upon  my  miniftry  at 
Savannah.  In  the  fecond  leiTon,  Luke  18.  was 
our  Lord’s  prediction  of  the  treatment  which  he 
himfelf,  and  confequently  his  followers,  were  to 
meet  with  from  the  wotid.” 

“ Yet  notwithftanaing  thefe  plain  declarations 
of  our  Lord,  notwithftanding  my  own  repeated 
experience,  notwithftanding  the  experience  of  all 
the  fincere  followers  of  Chrift,  whom  I ever  talk- 
ed with,  read  or  heard  of,  nay  and  the  reafon  of 
the  thing,  evincing  to  a demonfiration,  that  all 
who  love  not  the  light,  mud  hate  him  who  is 
continually  labouring  to  pour  it  in  upon  them  : 
I do  here  bear  witnefs  againft  myfelf,  that  when 
I faw  the  number  of  people  crowding  into  the 
church,  the  deep  attention  with  which  they  re- 
ceived the  word,  and  the  ferioufnefs  that  after- 
wards fat  on  all  their  faces  : I could  fcarce  re- 
frain from  giving  the  lie  to  experience,  and  rea- 
lon,  and  fcripture,  all  together.  I could  hardly 
believe,  that  the  greater,  the  far  greater  part  of 
this  attentive,  ferious  people,  would  hereafter 
trample  underfoot  that  word,  and  fay  all  manner 
of  evil  falfely  of  him  that  fpoke  it.” 

Sir,  does  this  prove  me  guilty  of  fctpihifm  or 
infidelity  ? Of  doubting  or  denying  the  truth  of 
revelation  ? Did  I fpeak  this,  “ upon  the  peo- 
ples ufing  me  ill,  and  faying  all  manner  of  evil 

again  (l 


[ 3“  ] 

again  ft  me  ? Or  am  I here  defcribing  any  emotion, 
raiftd.  in  me  hereby?  Blufh,  blufh,  Sir,  if  yon 
<an  blulh.  You  bad  here  no  poflible  room  for 
miftake.  You  grofly  and  wilfully  falfify  the 
whole  palfage,  to  fupport  a groundlefs,  fhamelefs 
accufation. 

£ 24.  The  fecond  paflage  (written  January 
24,  1737-8,)  is  this.  “ In  a florin  I think, 
What  if  the  gofpel  be  not  true  P Then  thou  art 
of  all  men  moft  loolifh.  For  what  haft  thou  given 
thy  goods,  thy  eafe,  thy  friends,  thy  reputation, 
thy  country,  thy  life  ? For  what  art  thou  wan- 
dering over  the  face  of  the  earth  ? A dream  ? A 
cunningly  devifed  fable  ?” 

Iam  here  defcribing  the  thoughts  which  paft 
through  my  mind,  when  I was  confefledly  an 
unbeliever.  But  even  this  implies  no fcepticijin, 
much  lefs  atheifm\  no  denial  0)  the  truth  oj  reve- 
lation : but  barely  fuch  tranhent  doubts  as  I pre- 
fume may  aflault  any  thinking  man  that  knows 
not  God. 

The  third  f palfage,  (which  you  tack  to  the 
former,  as  if  they  were  one  and  the  fame)  runs 
thus.  “ I have  not  fuch  a peace  as  excludes  the 
polfibility  either  of  doubt  or  fear.  When  holy 
men  have  told  me,  I had  no  faith,  I have  often 
doubted  whether  I had  or  no  ? And  thofe 
doubts  have  made  me  very  uneafy,  till  I was  re- 
lieved bv  prayer  and  the  holy  fcriptures,” 

Speak  frankly,  Sir,  does  this  prove  me  guilty 

of 


} 1 Journ.  p.  67.  + 3 Journ.  p.  12. 


t 3 12  1 

of fcepiidfm , infidelity  or  atheifm  ? What  elfe 
does  it  prove  ? Juft  nothing  at  all,  but  the  “ per- 
tinacious confidence'’  of  him  that  cites  it. 

25.  You  recite  more  at  large  one  pafiage  more. 
The  whole  paragraph  Hands  thus. 

1 “ St.  Paul  tells  us,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is 
love , joy,  peace,  long-Jujfering , genllenefs,  meek- 
nefs,  temperance.  Now  although  by  the  grace  Gf 
God  in  Chrift,  I find  a meafure  offomeof  thefe 
in  mvfelf,  viz.  of  peace,  long-fuffering,  gentle- 
nefs,  meeknefs,  temperance  ; yet  others  I find 
not.  I cannot  find  in  mvfelf  the  love  of  God  or 
of  Chrift.  Hence  my  deadnefs  and  wanderings 
in  public  prayer.  Hence  it  is,  that  even  in  the 
holy  communion,  I have  rarely  any  more  than  a 
cold  attention.  Hence  when  I hear  of  the  higheft 
inftance  of  God’s  love,  my  heart  is  ftill  fenfelefs 
and  unaffefted.  Yea,  at  this  moment  (f)cl.  14, 

1 73^,)  no  more  love  t0  bhn,  {han  one  I 

had  never  heard  of.” 

To  any  who  knew  fomething  of  inward  religion 
I fhould  have  obferved,  that  this  is  what  ferious 
divines  mean  by  defertion.  But  all  expreflions 
of  this  kind  are  jargon  to  you.  So  allowing  it 
to  be  whatever  you  pleafe,  I alk  only,  do  you 
know  how  long  I continued  in  this  ftate  ? How 
many  years,  months,  weeks  or  days  ? If  not, 
how  can  you  infer,  what  my  ftate  of  mind  is  note, 
from  what  it  was  above  eleven  years  ago  ? 

Sir,  I do  not  tell  you,  or  any  man  elfe,  ihat 

“ I 


$ 3 Jcturn.  p.  ii,  12. 


[ m ] 


'*  I cannot  now  find  the  love  of  God  in  myfelf : ” 
or  that  now,  in  the  year  1751,  “ I rarely  feel 

more  than  a cold  attention  in  the  holy  commu- 
nion.” So 'that  your  whole  argument,  built  on 
this  fuppofition,  falls  to  the  ground  at  once. 

26,  Senfible,  I prefume,  of  the  weaknefs  of 
this  reafun,  you  immediately  apply  to  th e paf- 
fions,  by  that  artful  remark,  <!  Obferve,  reader, 
this  is  the  man,  who  charges  oiir  religion , as  no 
better  than  the  Turkifh  pilgrimages  to  Mecca,  or 
the  Popijli  worfliip  of  our  Lady  of  Loretta!”  Our 
religion  ! How  naturally  will  the  reader  fuppofe, 
that  I fix  the  charge  either  on  the  Proteflant  re- 
ligion in  general,  or  on  that  of  th e church  of  Eng- 
land in  particular  ? But  how  far  is  this  from  the 
truth  ? 

My  words  concerning  thofe  who  are  common- 
ly  called  religious,  are,  t “ Wherein  does  their 
religion  confilt  ? In  righteoufnefs  and  true  holi- 


hefs?  In  love  Wronger  than  death  ? Fervent  gra- 
titude to  God,  and  tender  affedtien  to  all  his 
creatures  ? Is  their  religion  the  religion  of  the 
heart  ? A renewal  of  the  foul  in  theimage  of  God? 
Do  they  refe ruble  him  they  worflrip  ? Are  they 
free  from  pride,  from  vanity,  from  malice,  from 
'envy  ? From  ambition  and  avarice,  from  paflion 
and  lull,  from  every  uncafy  and  unlovely  tem- 
per ? Alas  ! I fear  neither  they  (the  greater  part 
at  lead)  nor  you  have  any  more  notion  of  this  re- 


Vo  L.  XVI.  o 

i Farther  Appeal,  third  Part,  p. 


ligion, 


C 3*4  ] 

iigion,  than  the  peafant  that  holds  the  plow,  of 
the  religion  of  a GymnoJ'ophifl 
“ ’Tis  well  if  the  genuine  religion  ofChrift,  has 
any  more  alliance  wiih  what  you  call  religion , than 
with  the  Turkifli  pilgrimages  to  Mecca,  or  the  Po- 
pijh  worfhip  of  our  lady  of  Loretto.  Have  not 
you  fubffi tuted  in  the  place  of  the  religion  of  the 
heart,  fomething  (I  do  not  fay,  equally  Jinful, 
but)  equally  vain  and  foreign  to  the  worihip- 
ping  of  God  in  fpirit  and  in  truth  ? What  elfe 
can  be  faid  even  of  prayer,  public  or  private,  in 
the  manner  wherein  you  generally  perform  it  ? 
As  a thing  of  courfe,  running  round  and  round, 
in  the  fame  dull  track,  without  either  the  know- 
ledge or  the  love  of  God  ? Without  one  heaven- 
ly temper,  either  attained  or  improved  ?” 

Now,  Sir,  what  room  is  there  for  your  “ own 
exclamations ,”  what  fort  of  heavenly  temper  is 
his?  How  can  he  poffibly,  confiflently  with  cha- 
rity, call  “ this  our  general  performance  Sir,  I 
do  not.  I only  appeal  to  the  confcience  of  you 
(and  each  particular  reader)  whether  this  is,  or 
is  not,  the  manner  wherein  you  (in  the  fingular 
number)  generally  perform  public  or  private 
prayer.  “ How  pofftbly,  without  being  omnif- 
cient,  can  he  affirm,  that  we  (I  prefume  you  mean 
all  the  members  of  our  church)  pray  without  one 
heavenly  temper?  Or  know  any  thing  at  all  of 
our  private  devotions  ? How  monftrous  is  all  this  1° 
Recoiled;  yourfelf,  Sir.  If  your  terror  is  real, 
you  are  more  afraid  than  hurt.  I do  not  affirm 

any 


[ Si5  J 

any  Tuch  thing.  I do  not  take  upon  me,  to  know, 
any  thing  at  all  of  your  private  devotions.  But  I 
fuppofe,  I may  inquire,  without  offence,  and  beg 
you  ferioufiy  to  examine  yourfelf  before  God. 

So  you  have  brought  no  one  proof,  “ That 
Jcepticifn,  infidelity  and  atheifm,  are  either  confti- 
tuent  parts  ox  genuine  confequences  of  Methodijm 
Therefore  your  florid  declamation  in  the  follow- 
ing pages,  is  intirely  out  of  its  place.  And  you 
might  have  fpared  yourfelf  the  trouble  oi account- 
ing for  what  has  no  being,  but  in  your  own  ima- 
gination. 

27.  You  charge  the  Metkodijls  next,  with  + 
“ an  uncharitable  fpirit."  All  you  advance  in 
proof  of  this,  as  if  it  were  from  my  writings,  but 
without  naming  either  page  or  book,  1 have 
nothing  to  do  with.  But  whatever  you  tell  me 
where  to  find,  I fhall  carefully  confider. 

I obferve  but  one  fingle  patTage  of  this  fort. 
And  that  you  have  worn  thread-bare  already-. 
“ By  the  raoft  infallible  of  proofs,  inward  feel- 
ing, I am  convinced of  levity  and  luxuriancy 

of  fpirit by  fpeakir.g  words  not  tending  to 

edify  ; but  moll  by  my  manner  of /peaking  of  my 
enemies Sir,  you  may  print  this,  not  only  in 
Italics,  but  in  C A P I T A L S,  and  yet  it  would 
do  you  no  fervice.  For  what  I was  convinced 
of  then  was  not  unchar itablenejs,  but  as  I expref- 
ly mentioned,  “ Levity  of  Spirit.” 

28.  \ Of  the  fame  uncharitable  nature,  you  fay, 

O 2 is 

+ Sect.  15.  p.  115,  &c.  1 Sect.  d,  119, 


[ 3l6  ] > 

is  “ their  application  oj  divine  judgments  to  their 
oppofers.”  You  borrow  two  infiances  from  Mr. 
Church.  But  you  omit  the  anfwers,  which  I fliali 
therefore  fubjoin. 

His  words  are,  **  You  defcribe  heaven  as  exe- 
cuting judgments,  immediate  punifhments,  on 
thofe  who  oppofe  you.  You  fay,  “ Mr.  Molt'ier 
was  taken  ill  this  day.  I believe  it  was  the  hand 
of  God  that  was  upon  him.”  I do.  But  I do 
not  fay  as  a judgment  for  oppofing  me.  That 
you  fay  for  me.i 

Again,  you  mention,  fays  Mr.  Church,  as  an 
“ awful  providence,  the  cafe  of  a poor  wretch, 
who  was  lafi:  week- curling  and  blafpheming,  and 
had'  boafied  to  many,  that  he  tvould  come  on 

Sunday,  and  no  man  Ihould  flop  his  mouth 

but  on  Friday , God  laid  his  hand  upon  him,  and 
on  Sunday  he  was  buried.”  I do  look  on  this  as 
a manifeft  judgment  of  God,  on  a hardened  fin- 
ner,  for  his  complicated  w-ickednefs.” 

To  repeat  thefe  objections,  without  taking  the 
leafi:  notice  of  the  anfwers,  is  one  of  the  ufual 
proofs  of  your  charitable  fpirit. 

29.  You  j pafs  on  to  “ the  Methodic’s  uncha- 
ritable cufiom  of  fummoning  their  opponents  to 
the  bar  of  judgment?’ 

You  bring  two  paffages  from  my  waitings  to 
prove  this.  The  firft  is,  Calling  at  Newgate 
(m  Bri/lol)  I was  informed,  that  the  poor  wretches 
under  fentence  of  death,  were  earnefiJy  defirous 

to 

JFirft  letter  to  Mr.  Church,  p.  £2.  ^ Sect.  17.  p.  123,  &c. 


[ 3 V J 

fpeak  with  me  ; but  that  alderman  Beecher  had 
font  an  exprefs  order,  that  tliey  fhould  not.  I 
cite  alderman  B.  to  anfwer for  thefe fouls , at  the 
judgment  feat  of  ChrifL” 

Why  do  you  leave  out  thofe  words,  for  thefe 
fouls  ? Becaufe  they  fhew  the  fentence  means 
neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  “ if  thefe  fouls  perlfh, 
he,  not  I,  muft  anfwer  for  them  at  the  great 
"day.” 

The  fecond  palfage  is  dill  more  wide  from  the 
point.  The  whole  of  it  is  as  follows. 

||  “ I have  often  inquired,  Who  were  the  au- 
thors of  fuch  report  (that  I was  a Papif)  and  have 
generally  found,  they  were  either  bigotted  dif- 
fenters,  or  (I  fpeak  it  without  fear  or  favour)  mi- 
nifters  of  our  own  church.  1 have  alfo  frequent- 
ly confidered,  what  pofhble  ground  or  motive 
they  could  have  thus  to  fpeak  t feeing  few  men 
in  the  world  have  had  occafion  fo  clearly  and 
openly  to  declare  their  principles,  as  I have  done 
both  by  preaching,  printing  and  converfation,  for 
feveral  years  laft  pad.  And  I can  no  otherwife 
think,  than  that  either  they  fpoke  thus  (to  put 
the  mod  favourable  condruftion  upon  it)  from 
grofs  ignorance;  they  knew  not  what  Popery 
was:  they  knew  not  what  dodlrines  thefe  are 
which  the  Papif  s teach  : or  they  wilfully  fpoke 
what  they  knew  fo  be  falfe,  probably  thinking 
thereby  to  do  God  fervice.  Now  take  this  to 
yourfelves,  whoever  ye  are,  high  or  low,  diflen- 
O 3 ters 


C 3^3  ] 

ters  or  churchmen,  clergy  or  laity,  who  hare 
advanced  this  fhamelefs  charge,  and  digelf  it  how 
you  can.” 

“ But  how  have  ye  not  been  afraid,  if  ye  be- 
lieve there  is  a God,  and  that  he  knotveth  the  fe- 
crets  of  your  hearts  (I  fpeak  now  to  you  preach- 
ers, more  efpecially,  of  whatever  denomination^ 
to  declare  fo  grofs,  palpable  a lie,  in  the  name 
of  the  God  of  truth  p I cite  vou  all  before  the 
Judge  oj  all  the  earth,  either  publicly  to  prove 
your  charge  ; or  by  publicly  retracing  it,  to  make 
the  beft  amends  you  can,  to  God,  to  me,  and  to 
the  world.” 

Sir,  Do  I here  “ fummon  my  opponents  ta 
the  bar  oj  judgment  ?”  So  you  would  make  me 
do,  by  quoting  only  that  ferap,  “ I cite  you  all 
before  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  !”  You  then  add, 
with  equal  charity  and  fincerity,  “ Here  you 
have  the  true  fpirit  of  an  enthufaf , flufhed  with  a 
modef  alfurance  of  his  own  falvation , and  the 
charitable  profpeff  of  the  damnation  of  others.” 
O Sir,  never  name  modefly  more! 

Here  end  your  laboured  attempts  to  (hew  the 
uncharitable  fpirit  of  the  Methodijls ; who,  for 
any  thing  you  have  (hewn  to  the  contrary,  may 
be  the  moll  charitable  people  under  the  fun. 

go.  You  charge  the  Methodijls  nexit  “ with 
violation  and  contempt  of  order  and  authority," 
namely,  the  authority  of  the  governors  of  the 

church. 


+ Sect.  18.  p.  124. 


[ 3*9  ] 

church.  I have  anfwered  every  article  of  this 
charge,  in  the  fecond  and  third  parts  of  the  Far- 
ther Appeal,  and  the  letter  to  Mr.  Church.  When 
you  have  been  fo  good  as  to  reply  to  what  is 
there  advanced,  I may  poffibly  fay  fomething. 
more. 

What  you  offer  of  your  own  upon  this  head, 
I {hall  confider  without  delay. 

■i  Women  and  boys  are  actually  employed  in 
this  miniffry  of  public  preaching."  Pleafe  to  tell 
me  where  ? I know  them  not,  nor  ever  heard  of 
them  before. 

You  add,  what  is  more  marvellous  fiill,  “ I 
fpeak  from  perffonal knowledge,  that  fometimes,  a 
little  before  delivering  of  the  elements  at  the 
communion,  three  or  four  Methodijls  together 
will  take  it  into  their  heads  to  go  away  : that 
fometimes  while  the  fentences  of  the  offertory 
were  reading,  they  have  called  out  to  the  miniffer 
who  carried  the  bafon,  reproaching  him  for 
afking  alms  off  them',  that  fometimes  when  the 
miniffer  has  delivered  the  bread  into  their  hands, 
inffead  of  eating  it  they  would  flip  it  into  their 
pockets."  Sir,  you  muff  {hew  your  face,  before 
thefe  ffories  will  find  credit  on  your  bare  affe- 
veration. 

“ Yet  they  are  furprized,  you  fay,  that  every 
man  in  his  fenfes,  don’t  without  the  leafl  hefita- 
tion  join  them.” 

Sir,  I am  furprized  (unlefs  you  are  not  in 
O 4 your 


C s2°  ] 

your  fenfes)  at  your  advancing  fuch  a barefaced 
falfhood. 

31.  You  go  on.  “Under  this  head  may  not 
improperly  be  confidered,  their  undutiful  be- 
haviour to  the  civil  powers.'”  What  proof  have 
you  of  this  ? Why  a (ingle  fentence,  on  which 
I laid  fo  little  flrefs  myfelf,  that  it  is  only  in- 
ferted  by  way  of  parenthefis,  in  the  body  of  ano- 
ther fentence.  “ Ye  learned  in  the  law,  what 
becomes  of  Magna  Charta,  and  of  Englijli  liberty 
and  property  ? Are  not  thefe  mere  founds,  while 
on  any  pretence,  there  is  fuch  a thing  as  a 
prejs-gartg  fuffered  in  the  land  ?” 

Upon  this  you  defcant:  “ The  legiflature  has 
at  feveral  times  made  afts  for  preffing  men.  But 
no  matter  for  this ; touch  but  a MsihodijL,  and 
all  may  perifh,  rather  than  a foldier  be  prefl. — 
He  who  had  before  bound  himfelf,  not  to  fpeak 
a tittle  of  worldly  things,  is  now  bawling  for  li- 
berty and  property.” 

(Very  lively  this!)  But  I hope,  Sir,  you  do 
not  offer  it  by  way  of  argument.  You  are  not  fo 
unlearned  in  the  law,  as  not  to  know,  that  the 
legiflature  is  out  of  the  queftion.  The  legiflature 
fix  years  ago  did  not  appoint  prefs-gangs , but 
legal  officers,  to  prefs  men.  Confequentlv  this 
is  no  proof  (and  find  another  if  you  can)  of  our 
iinclutiful  behaviour  to  the  civil  powers. 

32.  + “ Another  natural  confequence  (you 
fay)  of  Methodi/m,  is  their  mutual  jealoufies  and 

cnvyings , 

f 4 Journ.  p.  14* 


[ 321  ] 


envying s,  their  manifold  divifions,  fierce  and 
rancorous  quarrels , and  accufation  of  one  ano- 
ther.” 

I (hall  carefully  attend  whatever  you  produce 
on  this  head.  And  if  you  prove  this,  I will  grant 
you  all  the  reft. 

You  firft  cite  thofe  words  : “ Milling  on  the 
things  that  were  paft,  and  reflecting  how  many 
that  came  after  me,  were  preferred  before  me,  I 
opened  my  teftament  on  thofe  words,  The  Gentiles 
which  followed  not  after  righteoufnefs,  have  attain- 
ed to  righteoufnefs  ; but  Ifrael  which  jollovied  after 
the  law  of  righteoufnefs,  have  not  attained  to  the 
law  of  righteoufnefs T 

And  how  does  this  prove  the  manifold  divi- 
fons  and  rancorous  quarrels  of  the  Methodifts  ? 

Your  fecond  argument  is,  45  Mr.  £ Whitefeld 
told  me,  he  and  I preached  two  different  gofpels  : 
(_his  meaning  was,  that  he  preached  particular, 
and  I univerfal  redemption  and  therefore  he 
would-  not  join  with  me,  but  publicly  preach 
againft  me.” 

Well,  Sir,  here  was  doubtlefs  a divifion  i or  a 
time  ; but  no  fierce  and  rancorous  quarrel  yet. 

You  fay  thirdly,  “ They  write  and  publifh 
againft  each  other.”  True  ; but  without  any  de- 
gree either  of fercenefs  or  rancor. 

You  aflert  fourthly,  “ Mr.  Wefty  in  his  fer- 
mion on  Free-Grace,  oppofes  the  other  for  the 
horrible  blafphemies  ofhis  horrible  do&rine.” 

O 5 Sir'; 

t Sect.  19.  p.  341,  &c. 


f.  322  3 

Sir,  away  with  your  flourifhes  and  write  plain 
Englifh.  I oppofed  the  doclrine  of  predefiina- 
tion  which  he  held.  But  without  any  degree 
either  of  rancor  or  filer  cenefis.  Still  therefore 
you  mifs  the  mark. 

You  quote  fifthly  thefe  words.  “ + I fpent 
an  hour  with  Mr.  Stonehouje.  O what  m 
(perfuafivenefs  of  fpeech)  is  here!  Surely  all  the 
deceivablenefs  of  unrighteoufnefs.”  But  there 
was  no  fiercenefs  or  rancor  on  either  lide. 

The  paffage,  a fragment  of  which  you  pro- 
duce as  a fixth  argument,  hands  thus.  “ % A few 
of  us  had  a long  conference  together.  Mr.  C . 
now  told  me  plainly,  he  could  not  agree  with 
me,  becaufe  I did  not  preach  the  truth,  particu- 
larly with  regard  to  eledlion.”  He  did  fo  ; but 
without  aoy  rancor.  We  had  a long  conference  ; 
but  not  a fierce  one. 

You  fevemhly  obferve,  “ What  fcurrility  oi 
language  the  Moravians  throw  out  againh  Air. 
Wejley Pei  haps  fo.  But  this  will  net  prove, 
that  “ the  Methodifis  quarrel  with  each  other. 

44  And  how  does  he  turn  their  own  artillery 
upon  them  ??I  This  ts  your  eighth  argument. 
But  if  I do,  this  no  more  proves  the  “ mutual 
quarrels  of  the  Methodifis ,”  than  my  turning  your 
own  ar  iHery  upon  you . 

33.  Having  by  thefe  eight,  irrefragable  argu- 
ments, clearly  carried  the  day,  you  raife  your 
erelt,  and  cry  out,  “ is  this  Metkodi/m? 

“ And 

+ 4 Journ,  p.  63.  } 4 JouTtt.  p.  77.  k Ibid.  p.  59. 


[ 323  3 

“ And.  reign  J'uch  mortal  j ends  in  heavenly  minds?” 

Truly,  Sir,  you  have  not  yet  brought  one 
fingle  proof  (and  yet  I dare  fay,  you  have 
brought  the  very  beh  you  have)  of  any  fuch 
feuds  among  the  Methodijls,  as  may  not  be 
found  among  the  moll  heavenly-minded  men  on 
earth. 

But  you  are  refolved  to  purfue  your  victory, 
and  fo  go  on.  “ What  are  we  to  think  of  thefe 
charges,  of  Whitefield  and  Wejley  and  the  Mora- 
vians, one  againlt  another  ?”  The  Moravians , 
Sir,  are  out  of  the  quehion  ; for  they  are  no 
Methodijls.  And  as  to  the  reft,  Mr.  Whitefield 
charges  Mr.  Wejley  with  holding  univerfal  re- 
demption, and  I charge  him  with  holding  parti- 
cular redemption.  This  is  the  handing  charge 
on  either  fide.  And  now,  Sir,  what  are  we  to 
think ! Why,  that  you  have  not  proved  one 
point  of  this  charge  againh  the  Methodijls . 

However  you  humble  on;  “ Are  thefe  things' 
fo  ? Are  they  true,  or  are  they  not  true  ? If  not 
true,  they  are  grievous  calumniators ; if  true, 
they  are  detehable  fedlarijls.  Whether  true  or 
falfe,  the  allegation  hands  good,  of  thei r fierce 
and  rancorous  quarrels,  and  mutual  heinous  accu - 
Jations .” 

Sir,  has  your  paflion  quite  extinguifhed  your 
reafon  ? Ha \cfiercenejs  and  racour  left  you  no 
underhanding  P Otherwife  how  is  it  poffible  you 
fhould  run  on  at  this  fenfelefs,  fharnelefs  rate  ? 

O 6 Thefe 


[ 324  ] 

Thefe  things  are  true  which  Mr.  Whitejidd  and 
We/ley  objeft  to  each  other.  He  holds  the  de- 
crees ; I do  not.  Yet  this  does  not  prove  us 
deteftable  feftarifts.  : And  whether  thefe 

things  are  true  or  falfe,  your  “ allegation  of  our 
jierce  and  rancorous  quarrels,  and  mutual  heinous 
accufations  cannot  hand  good,  without  better 
proof  than  you  have  yet  produced. 

34.  Yet  with  the  utmoft  confidence,  quaf  re 
bene  gejla,  you  proceed,  “ And  how  ftands  the 
matter  among  their  difcipfes  ? They  are  all  to- 
gether by  the  ears,  embroiled  and  broken  with 
unchrijlian  quarrels  and  confufions J’ 

How  do  you  prove  this?  Why  thus.  “‘Mr. 
JVeJley’ s fourth  journal  is  mofily  taken  up,  in 
enumerating  their  wrath , dijfcnlions  and  apojla- 
Jiesd  No,  Sir,  not  a tenth  part  of  it : although 
it  gives  a full  and  explicit  account  of  the 
greateft  dilfentions  which  ever  were  among 
them. 

But  to  come  to  particulars.  You  firft  cite 
thefe  words,  “ At  Oxford  but  a few  who  had  not 
forfaktn  them.'' 

My  words  are.  '■‘■  Alond.  OB.  1,  1738,  I 
rode  to  Oxford,  and  found  a few  who  had  not 
yet  forfaken  the  ajfanbling  themflves  together  d 
This  is  your  firft  proof,  “ that  the  Methodijls  are 
all  together  by  the  ears.”  Your  fecond  is  its 
*ery  twiu-brother.  “ Tuefd.  2.  + I went  to 

many 


+ 3 Jour.  p.  84. 


L 325  1 

many  who  once  heard  the  word  with  joy ; bat 
when  the fun  arofe,  they  withered  away .” 

Your  third  is  this.  ± “ Many  were  induced 
(by  the  Moravians J to  deny  the  gift  of  God,  and 
affirm,  they  never  had  any  faith  at  all.'’  You 
are  at  liberty  to  enjoy  this  argument  alfo  : and  let 
it  prove  what  it  can  prove. 

You  fourthly  cite  thefe  words.  § “ Many  of 
our  fillers  are  ffiaken,  grievoufly  torn  by  rea- 
fonings.  But  few  come  to  Fetter-lane,  and  then 
after  their  names  are  called  over  they  prefently 
depart.  Our  brethren  here  (thofe  who  were 
profelytes  to  the  Moravians  J have  neither  wifdom 
enough  to  guide,  nor  prudence  enough  to  let  it 
alone.  They  (the  Moravians  J have  much  con- 
founded fome  of  our  fillers,  and  many  of  our 
brothers  are  much  grieved.” 

This  proves  thus  much,  that  one  fociety  was 
at  that  time  divided  : but  not  “ that  the  Metho * 
difs',  in  general,  were  even  then,  all  together  by 
the  ears. 

The  palfage  you  quote,  in  the  fifth  place,  is,  || 
“ I believe — are  determined  to  go  on  according 
to  Mr.  Molther’ s dire&ion,  and  I fuppofe  (fays  the 
writer  of  the  letter)  above  half  our  brethren  are 
on  their  fide.  But  they  are  fo  very  confufed,- 
they  do  not  know  how  to  go  on,  and  yet  are  un- 
willing to  be  taught,  except  by  the  Moravians  ” 
Add  to  this,  (I  recite  the  whole  palfages  in 
order;  not  as  you  had  mangled,  and  then  jum- 
bled 

t)  4 Jour.  p.  18, 


t 3 Jour.  p.  85.  § 4 Jour.  p.  8. 


[ 3*6  1 

Sled  them  together:)  “ Wedn.  Bee.  19.  I came  to 
London , though  with  a heavy  heart.  Here  I 
found  every  day  the  dreadful  effects  of  our 
brethrens  veafoning  and  difputing  with  each 
other.  Scarce  one  in  ten  retained  his  firft  love : 
and  mod  of  the  reft  were  in  the  ulmoft  confu- 
fion”  (they  were  fo  more  or  lefs,  for  feveral 
months)  “ biting  and  devouring  one  another.” 
This  alfo  proves  fo  much,  neither  more  nor 
lefs,  that  fome  of  the  Methodijls  were  then  in 
confufion.  And  juft  fo  much  is  proved  by  your 
fixth  quotation.  + “ Many  were  wholly  unfet- 
tled (by  the  Moravians,  taking  advantage  of  my 
abfence)  and  loft  in  vain  reafonings  and  doubtful 
deputations : — Not  likely  to  come  to  any  true 
foundation.” 

Your  feventh  quotation  (I  recite  the  whole 
fentence)  runs  thus.  “ April  19.  I received  a 
letter — informing  me,  that  our  poor  brethren  at 
Fetter-lane,  were  again  in  great  confufion.”  This 
quotation  proves  juft  as  much  as  the  preceding: 
or  as  the  following,  i The  plague  (of  falfe  ftill- 
nefs)  wTas  now  fpread  to  them  alfo — namely  to 
the  “ little  fociety  at  IJlingtonF 

Your  ninth  is  this.  “ § I went  to  the  fociety, 
hut  I found  their  hearts  were  quite  eftranged. 
Frid.  4,  1 met  a little  handful  of  them,  who  ftill 
ftand  in  the  old  paths.” 

Thus  far  you  have  been  fpeaking  of  the  Me- 
thodifls  m London.  And  what  have  you  proved 

con- 
i’ 4 Jour,  p,  2»,  22.  } 4 Jour.  p.  34.  § ibid.  p.  36. 


[ 3 27  ] 


concerning  them  ? Only  that  the  Moravians 
mixing  with  them  twelve  years  ago,  while  they 
were  young  and  unexperienced,  fet  them  a dis- 
puting with  each  other,  and  thereby  occafioned 
much  confufion  for Jevtral  months.  But  you  have 
not  proved,  That  “ the  Methodifls  in  general , 
were  even  then , all  together  by  the  ears  : and 
much  lefs,  that  they  have  been  fo  ever  [vice,  and 
that  they  are  fo  now. 

35.  I now  attend  you  to  Kingswood.  Not  to 
“ Brijlol  and  Kingswood which  you  artfully 
join  together.  The  fociety  at  Bri/lolw as  no  more 
concerned  with  the  difputes  in  Kingswood,  than 
with  thofe  in  London. 

Here  the  firft  quotation,  though  containing 
but  two  lines,  is  extracted  from  three  different 
paragraphs;  in  one  of  which  I fay,  + “ I had 
many  unpleafing  accounts  (in  December,  1740) 
concerning  our  little  fociety  in  Kingswood in 
the  fecond,  “ I went  to  Kingswood,  if  haply  I 
might  repair  the  breaches  which  had  been  made” 
(by  the  predeftinarian  preachers:)  in  the  third, 
“ I laboured  to  heal  the  jealoufies  and  mifunder- 
handings  which  had  arifen.” 

The  lecond  paffage,  part  of  which  you  quote, 
is  this:  t “ I returned  early  in  the  morning  to 
Kingswood.  But  my  congregation  was  gone  to 
hear  Mr.  C.  So  that  I had  not  above  two  or  three 
men  and  as  many  women.” 

The  third  is,  § “ January  1.  I explained,  If 


4 4 Jour,  p.62, 


any 

g ibid.  p.  6$, 


£ ibid.  p.  64. 


[ 3*8  ] 

any  man  be  in  Chrijl  he  is  a new  creature.  But 
many  of  our  brethren  had  no  ears  to  hear,  having 
difputed  away  both  their  faith  and  love.” 

The  fourth:  + “ February  21.  I inquired 
concerning  the  divifions  and  offences  which  be- 
gan afrefh  to  break  out  in  Kingswood.  In  the 
afternoon  I met  a few  of  the  bands ; but  it  was  a 
cold,  uncomfortable  meeting.” 

You  have  picked  out  here  and  there  a worur 
from  feveral  pages,  in  order  to  furnifh  out  a fifth 
quotation.  The  mod  material  part  of  it  is  this: 
Sat.  28.  \ Bread  the  following,  paper  at  Kings- 
wood ; “ For  their  fcoffing  at  the  word  and  mini- 
flers  of  God,  for  their  backbiting  and  evil- 
fpeaking,  I — declare  the  perfons  above-men- 
tioned, to  be  no  longer  members  of  this  fo- 
ciety.” 

“ And  § we  had  great  reafon  to  biefs  God, 
that  after  fifty-two  were  withdrawn,  we  had  flill 
upwards  of  ninety  left.” 

Who  thofe  other  “ forty  were  that,  you  fay, 
left  them,”  I know  not.  Perhaps  you  may  in- 
form me. 

Upon  the  whole,  all  thefe  quotations  prove, 
only  this : that  about  eleven  years  ago,  Mr.  C. 
falling  into  predeflination,  fet  the  fociety  in 
Kingswood  a difputing  with  each  other,  and  occa- 
Goned  much  confufion  for  fome  months.  But 
ftill  you  have  not  gone  one  flep  toward  proving 
(which  is  the  one  point  in  queflion)  “ That  the 

Melhodijis 

i 4 Jour.  p.  70.  4:  ibid.  p.  73.  § p- 74 


[ 359  1 

Metkodijls  in  general  were  even  then,  all  toge- 
ther by  the  ears;  and  much  lefs,  “ that  they  have 
been  fo  ever  fince,  and  that  they  are  fo  now.” 

However  you  fail  not  to  triumph  (like  Lows 
le  Grand,  after  his  viftory  at  Blenheim,)  “ W hat 
fhall  we  fay  now  ? Are  thefe  the  fruits  of  Metho- 
difm ?”  No,  Sir.  They  are  the  fruits  of  oppof- 
ing  it.  They  are  the  tares  fown  among  the 
wheat.  You  may  hear  of  inllances  of  the  fame 
kind,  bdth  in  earlier  and  later  ages. 

You  add,  “ This  is  bad  enough ; but  it  is  not 
the  word.  For  confider  what  becomes  of  thofe 
that  leave  them  ?”  Why,  Sir,  what  if  their  lajl 
end  be  worfe  than  their  jirjl  ? Will  you  charge 
this  upon  me?  By  the  fame  rule  you  mud  have 
charged  upon  the  apodles  themfelves,  whatever 
befel  thofe  who  having  known  the  way  cf  rights 
oufnefs,  afterwards  turned  back  from  the  holy  com- 
mandment once  delivered  to  them. 

36.  You  conclude  this  feftion,  “ Mr.  Wefey 
will  probably  fay,  “ Mud  I be  anfwerable  for 
the  Moravians,  againd  whom  I have  preached 
and  written  ?”  True,  fince  he  and  the  Moravians 
quarrelled.  But  who  gives  them  a box  on  the 
ear  with  the  one  hand,  and  embraces  them  with 
the  other  ? Who  fird  brought  over  this  wicked 
generation  ? Who  made  a Moravian  his  fpiritual 
guide  ? Who  fanaticifed  his  own  followers,  and 
deprived  them  of  their  fenfes  ? Whofe  focieties 
(by  his  own  confeffion)  run  over  in  fhoals  to 
Moraviamjm,  forty  or  fifty  at  a time  ? W ould 

they 


[ 33°  ] 

they  have  fplit  upon  this  rock,  if  they  had  no t 
been  fir  H Mcthodijls?  L.aftly,  Where  is  the  fpawn 
of  Moravianijin  fo  flrongly  working,  as  in  the 
children  of  Method ifm  ?” 

Sir,  you  run  very  fa  ft.  And  yet  I hope  to 
overtake  you  by  and  by.  “ Mr.  We/ley,  you 
fay,  has  preached  againft  the  Moravians,  fmce 
he  quarrelled  with  them.”  Sir,  I never  quarrelled 
with  their  perfons  yet.  I did  with  fome  of  their 
tenets  long  ago.  He  “ gives  them  a box  on 
the  ear  with  the  one  hand,  and  embraces  them 
with  the  other.”  That  is,  I embrace  what  is 
good  among  them,  and  at  the  fame  time  re- 
prove what  is  evil.  “ Who  firjl  brought  over 
this  wicked  generation  ?”  Not  I,  whether  they 
be  wicked  or  not.  I once  thought  I did  ; but 
have  fmce  then  feen  and  acknowledged  my 
miftake.  “ Who  made  a Moravian  his  fpiritual 
guide  ?”  Not  I : though  I have  occafionally 
confulted  feveral.  Who JanaliciJcd  his  own  fol- 
lowers, and  deprived  them  of  their  fenfes  ?’* 
Not  I.  Prove  it  upon  me  if  you  can.  “ Whofe 
focieties  (by  his  own  confeffion)  run  over  in 
fhoals  to  Moravianijin , forty  or  fifty  at  a time  ?” 
Truly  not  mine.  Two  and  fifty  of  Kingszvood 
fociety  ran  over  to  Calvin  J/n,  and  a year  before, 
part  of  Fetter-lane  fociety  gradually  went  over 
to  the  Moravians.  But  I know  none  of  ours  that 
went  over  in Jhoals,  They  never,  that  I remem- 
ber, gained  five  at  a time  : nor  fifty  in  all  (to 
the  belt  of  my  knowledge]  lor  thefe  laft  ten 

years. 


t 33 1 ] 

years.  “ Would  they  (of  Fetter-lane)  have  fplit  on 
this  rock,  if  they  had  not  firfl  been  Metkodi/ls." 
Undoubtedly  they  would  ; for  feveral  of  them 
had  not  firft  been  Methodijls.  Mr.  Viney , for  in- 
flance  (as  well  as  feveral  others)  was  with  the 
Germans , before  ever  he  faw  me.  “ Lathy, 
Where  is  the  fpawn  of  Moravianifm  working  fo 
flrongly  as  in  the  children  of  Methodifsn  ?”  If 
you  mean  the  errors  of  Moravianijhi,  they  are  net 
working  at  all  in  the  generality  of  the  children 
of  Methodifrn  : the  Methodijls  in  general  being 
thoroughly  apprized  of,  and  fully  guarded  againft 
them. 

So  much  for  your  modeft  affertion,  “ That  the 
Method ijls  in  general,  are  all  together  by  the  ears:” 
the  very  reverfe  of  which  is  true.  They  are,  in 
general,  in  perfeft  peace.  They  enjoy  in  them- 
felves  the  peace  of  God,  which  paffeth  all  un- 
demanding. They  are  at  peace  with  each  other. 
And  as  much  as  lieth  in  them,  they  live  peace- 
ably with  all  men. 

37.  Your  next  charge  is,  That  “ Methodifm  F 
has  a tendency  to  undermine  morality  and  good 
works.”  To  prove  this  you  affert,  “ 1.  That 
the  Methodijls  are  trained  up  to  wait  in  quietnefs 
for  fudden  converfion ; whence  they  are  na- 
turally led,  to  negleft  the  means  of  Jalvation .” 
This  is  a miftake  all  over.  For  neither  are  they 
taught  to  wait  in  quietnefs  (if  you  mean  any 
more  than  patience  by  that  term)  for  either  fud- 
den 


+ Seft,  20.  p.  146,  &c. 


r 

L 


332  ] 

den  or  gradual  converfion  : neither  do  they,  in 
fa61,  negleft  the  means.  So  far  from  it,  that  they 
are  eminently  exaCt  in  the  ufe  of  them. 

You  alfert,  2.  “ The  doCtrine  of  affurance  oj 
pardon  and  falvation , prefent  and  future,  caufes 
a falfe  fecurity,  to  the  negleft  of  future  endea- 
vours.” Blunder  upon  blunder  again.  That  all 
Chriflians  haye  an  affurance  of future  falvation 
is  no  Methodif  doftrine  : and  an  affurance  of  pre- 
fent pardon , is  fo  far  from  caufing  negligence, 
that  it  is  of  all  others  the  flrongeft  motive  to  vi- 
gorous endeavours  after  univerfal  holinefs. 

You  affert,  3.  “ Impulfes  and  imprejfions,  being 
made  the  rule  of  duty , will  lead  into  dangerous 
errors.”  Very  true.  But  the  Methodif  s do  not 
make  impulfes  and  imprejfions  the  rule  oj  duty. 
They  totally  difclaim  any  other  rule  of  duty,  than 
the  written  word. 

You  affert  4.  “ A claim  of  unfinning  perfec- 
tion,” (I  mean  by  perfection,  the  loving  God 
with  all  our  heart)  “ drives  fome  into  phrenfies, 
others  into  defpair.”  Sir,  I doubt  the  fa£L 

You  affert  3.  “ The  Moravian  Methodifts 
trample  down  morality,  and  multitudes  of  the 
Wefeyans  have  been  infeCted.”  The  Moravian 
Method ijls  ! You  may  as  will  fay  the  Prefylerian 
Papifls.  The  Moravians  have  no  connexion 
with  the  Method ifs.  Therefore  whatever  they 
do  (though  you  flander  them  too)  they  and  not 
we  are  to  anfwer  for.  The  Methodijls  at  prefent* 
bleffed  be  God,  are  as  little  infeCted.wit’n  this 

plague 


[ 333  3 

-plague  (of  condemning  or  negleTing  good  wot'ks) 
as  any  body  of  people  in  England  or  Ireland. 

38.  From  thefe  loofe  affertions  vou  proceed  to 
quotations  from  my  writings,  every  one  of  which 
I (hall  confider,  to  fhew  that  not  in  one  or  two, 
but  in  everyone  you  area  wilful  prevaricator 
and  falfe  accufer  of  your  neighbour. 

You  fay  firfl,  “ the  Moravians .”  — Hold, 
good  Sir  ! You  are  out  of  the  way  already.  You 
well  know,  the  Moravians  are  to  anfwer  dor 
themfelves.  Our  prefent  queftion  concerns  the 
Methodijls  only. 

You  fay  fecondly,  “A  + general  temptation 
prevails  2mong  the  focielies  of  Methodijls,  of  leav- 
ing off  good  works.”  Sir,  you  are  wrong  again. 
The  focielies  of  Methodijls  are  not  there  fpoken  of: 
but  xhe  Jingle  fociety  of  Fetter-lane.  Among  thefe 
only  that  temptation  then  prevailed. 

You  quote  thirdly,  as  my  words,  “ The  poor 
confufed,  (battered  fociety,  had  erred  from  the 
faith.  My  own  words  are,  + “ I told  the  poor, 
confufed,  (battered  Fociety,  wherein  they. had  erred 
from  the  faith:”  Namely,  with  regard  to  the  or- 
dinances : nor  in  general,  as  your  way  of  expref- 
fmgit  naturally  imports.  Nor  had  all  the  fociety 
•erred  even  in  this  point.  Many  of  them  were 
Till  unfhaken. 

You  quote  fourthly,  “ A woman  of  Deptford 
fpoke  great  words  and  true.  She  ordered  Mr. 
.Humphreys  to  leave  off  doing  good.” 

Mu  ft 


+ 4 Journ.  p.  39.  } 4 Journ.  p,  39. 


T 334  3 

Mull  not  every  reader  fuppofe,  as  you  have 
placed  thefe  words,  that  they  were  all  fpoke  at 
one  time  ? And  that  “ the  great  words  and  true'’ 
were  thofe,  whereby  die  “ ordered  Mr.  Hum- 
phreys to  leave  off  doing  good  ?’’ 

What  then  mult  every  honed  man  think  cf 
you,  when  he  obferves,  that  one  half  of  the 
fentence  (which  you  thus  artfully  put  together) 
dands  in  another  page,  and  at  a confiderabie  dis- 
tance from  the  other  ? And  that  I immediately 
fubjoin  to  the  latter  claufe,  “ we  talked  largely 
with  her,  and  die  was  humbled  to  the  dud,  un- 
der a deepfenfe  of  the  advantage  Satan  had  gained 
over  her.” 

You  quote  fifthly,  a part  of  tire  following 
fentence,  to  prove  that  I “ undermine  morality 
and  good  works.” 

“ His  judgment  concerning  holinefsis  new. 
He  no  longer  judges  it  to  be  an  outward  thing,  to 
conlid  either  in  doing  no  harm,  in  doing  good, 
or  in  ufing  the  ordinances  of  God.”  (And  yet  how 
drongly  do  I infid  upon  all  thefe  ? Sir,  do  not 
you  know  this  ?)  “ He  fees,  it  is  the  life  of  God 
in  the  foul,  the  image  of  God  frefli  dampt  on 
the  heart.”  It  is  fo.  Sir,  can  you  deny  it  ? 
What  then  will  you  prove  by  this  ? 

You  quote  Sixthly,  part  of  thefe  words: 

“ They  § fpeak  of  holinefs,  as  if  it  confided, 
chiedy  if  not  wholly,  in  thefe  two  points,  fir  11 
the  doing  no  harm,  Secondly  the  doing  good  (as 

it 


t 4 Journ.  p.  82. 


[ 335  ] 

'it  is  called]  i.  e.  the  ufing  the  means  of  grace,  and 
helping  our  neighbour.” 

And  this  you  term  “ difparaging  good  works!” 
Sir,  tliefe  things,  conftdered  barely  as  to  the 
opus  operatum , are  not  good  works.  There  rauft 
be  fomething  good  in  the  heart,  belore  any -of 
our  works  arc  good.  Infomuch  that,  though  l 
give  ail  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor , and  have  not 
this,  it  projiteth  me  nothing. 

You  obferve,  by  the  way,  “ the  myjhc  divi- 
nity was  once  the  Methodijls  dotlrine .”  Sir,  you 
have  Hepped  out  of  the  way,  only  to  get  another 
fall.  The  myjlic  divinity  was  never  the  Methodijls 
doElnne.  They  could  never  fwallow  either  John 
Tauler  or  Jacob  Behme  : although  they  often  ad- 
vifed  with  one  that  did.  ■ 

39.  You  fay  feventhly,  “ I do  not  find,  that 
-Mr.  Wejley  has  ever  cited  thofe  exprefs  paffages 
of  St.  James:'  Sir,  what  if  1 had  not  ? (I  mean, 
in  print)  I do  not  cite  every  text  from  Genefis  to 
the  Revelation.  But  it  happens  I have.  Look 
-again,  Sir  ; and  by  and  by  you  may  find  where. 

You  fay  eighthly,  Mr.  Wejley  affirms,  that  the 
condition  of  our  jufiification,  is  faith  alone  and 
not  good  works.”  Mod  certainly  I do.  And  I 
-learnt  it  from  the  txth  and  12th  article,  and  from 
the  homilies  of  our  church.  If  you  can  confute 
them  do.  But  I fubfcribe  to  them,  both  with  my 
hand  and  heart. 

You  fay  ninthly,  “ Give  me  leave  to  make  a 
•remark.  The  Methodijls  wandered  many  years, 


m 


[ 336  ] 

in  the  new  path  of  Salvation  by  faith  and  works, 
which  was  the  time  too  of  their  higheft  glory  and 
popularity.  During  this  time,  they  were  /educ- 
ing their  di/ciples  into  the  moll  deflructive  er- 
rors.” Excufe  me,  Sir.  While  they  preached 
Salvation  by  faith  and  works,  they  had  no  difci- 
ples  at  all  ; (unlefs  you  term  a feu’  pupils  fuch) 
nor  had  they  any  popularity  at  all.  They  then 
enjoyed  (what  they  always  defired)  a quiet,  re- 
tired life.  But  whatever  difciples  we  had,  they 
were  not  /educed  by  us,  into  the  eiror  of  j unifica- 
tion by  works.  For  they  were  in  it,  before  ever 
they  faw  our  face,  or  knew  theie  were  fuch  men 
in  the  world. 

You  fay  tenthly,  “ Mr.  We/ey  only  contends, 
that  it  is  po/ible,  to  n/e  them  without  tri/ing  in 
them.”  Not  in  that  page  ; + becanfe  the  propo- 
rtion I am  confuting  is,  “•  Mis  not  pojjible  to 
uje  them  without  trujling  in  them.” 

You  added,  “ And  now,  are  not  fuch  difparag- 
ing  ertprefhons,  (a  mere  po/ibihty  0/ u/ng  them, 
without  trujling  in  them)  a great  difeouragement 
to  pra&ice  ?” 

O Sir,  when  will  you  deviate  into  truth  ? Dare 
you  affirm,  without  any  regard  to  God  or  man, 
“ Mr.  We/ey  only  contends  for  a mere  pojfibilily 
of  ufing  the  means,  without  trolling  in  them  ?” 
To  go  no  farther  than  the  very  frit  + page 
you  refer  to  : my  exprefs  words  are  thefe. 

“ I 

i 4 Journ.  p 20.  J 3 Joura/p.  .78,  79. 


£ 337  3 

“ I believe  the  way-  to  attain  faith  is,  to  wait 
for  Chrift,  in  ufing  all  the  means  of  grace.'’ 

“ Becaufe  I believe,  thefe  do  ordinarily  con- 
vey God’s  grace  (even)  to  unbelievers.”  Is  this 
“ contending  only  for  a were  pojjibilvty  of  ujing 
them  without  tnifting  in  them  ?” 

Not  only  in  this,  and  many  other  parts  of  the 
journals,  but  in  a fermon  wrote  profefifedly  on 
the  fubjeci,  I contend,  that  all  the  ordinances  of 
God  are  the  dated  channels  of  his  grace  to  man  ; 
.andthatit  is  our  bounden  duty  to  ufe  them  all, 
at  all  pofhble  opportunities.  So  that  to  charge 
the  Mcthodifis  in  general,  or  me  in  particular, 
with  undervaluing  or  difparaging  them,  {hews  juft 
as  much  regard  forjuflice  and  truth,  as  if  you 
was  to  charge  us  with  Mahomet anifim. 

40.  Tedious  as  it  is  to  wade  through  fo  many 
dirty  pages,  I will  follow  you,  flep  by  flep,  a lit- 
tle farther.  Your  eleventh  proof  that  we  “ un- 
dermine morality  and  good  works,’’  is  drawn 
from  the  following  pafiage. 

+ “ I know  every  one  under  the  law  is  even 
as  I was,  for  near  twice  ten  years.  Everv  one 
when  he  begins  to  fee  his  fallen  Hate,  and  to  feel 
the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  him,  relapfes  into 
the  fin  that  mod  eafily  befets  him,  fo-on  after  re- 
penting of  it.  Sometimes  he  avoids,  and  at  many 
other  times  he  cannot  perfuade  himfelf  to  avoid 
the  occafions  of  it.  Hence  his  relapfes  are  fre- 
Vol.  XVI.  P queni-, 

t 3 Joum.  p.  78,  79. 


[ 338  ] 

quent,  and  of  confequence  his  heart  is  hardened. 
more  and  move.  Nor  can  he,  with  all  his fm- 
cerity , avoid  any  one  ofthefe  four  marks  of  hypo- 
crify , till  being  jufifed  by  faith , he  hath  peace 
with  God , through  our  Lord  JeJ'us  Chrif:' 

You,  Sir,  are  no  competent  judge  in  the 
caufe.  But  to  any  who  has  experienced  what 
St.  Paul  fpeaks  in  his  feverth  chapter  to  the  Ro- 
mans, I willingly  fubmit  this  whole  quefiion. 
You  know  by  experience,  that  if  anger  was  the 
fin  that  did  fo  eafily  befet  you,  you  relapfed  into  it 
(for  days,  or  months,  or  years )foon  after  repent- 
ing of  it.  Sometimes  you  avoided  the  occafons  of 
it:  at  other  times  you  did  not.  Hence  your  re- 
lapfes  were  frequent , and  your  heart  was  harden- 
ed more  and  more.  And  yet  all  this  time  you 
was  jincerely  ftriving  againft  fin,  you  could  fay, 
without  hypocrify , the  thing  which  Ido,  I allow 
not ; the  evil  which  I would  not,  that  I do.  To 
will  is  even  now  prefent  with  me  ; but  how  to  per- 
form that  which  is  good,  Ifnd  not. 

But  the  Jefuits,  you  think,  “ could  fcarce 
have  granted  falvation  upon  eafier  terms.  Have 
no  fear,  ye  Methodifis.”  Sir,  I do  not  grant  fal- 
vation (as  you  call  it)  upon  fo  eafy  terms.  I be- 
lieve a man  in  this  Hate,  is  in  a Hate  of  damna- 
tion. “ Have  no  fear!'’  Say  you?  Yea,  but 
thofe  who  are  thus  under  the  lazr,  are  in  fear  all 
the  day  long.  “ Was  there  ever  fo  pleafing  a 
fcheme  ?”  Pleafing  with  a vengeance  ! As  pleaf- 
ing as  to  be  in  the  belly  of  hell.  So  totally  do 

you 


[ 339  ] 

you  miftake  the  whole  matter,  not  knowing  what 
you /peak,  nor  whereof  you  affirm. 

You  are  indeed  fomewhat  pitiable  in  fpeaking 
wrong  on  this  head,  becaufe  you  do  it  in  igno- 
rance. But  this  plea  cannot  be  allowed,  when 
you  gravely  advance  that  trite,  threadbare  objec- 
tion concerning  the  Lord’s  fupper,  without  tak- 
ing any  notice,  that  I have  anfwered  it  again  and 
again,  both  to  Mr.  Church  and  to  the  late  Lord 
bilhop  of  London. 

41.  Your  thirteenth  proof  is  this:  “ Mr.  Wefi- 
ley  has  taught  us,  that  infirmities  are  no fins."  Sir, 
you  have  taught  me  to  wonder  at  nothing  you 
affert;  elfe  I fhould  wonder  at  this.  The  words, 
I fuppofe  you  refer  to,  hand,  in  The  fermon  on 
falvation  by  f faith ; (though  you  do  not  chufe, 
for  a plain  reafon,  to  fnew  your  reader  where 
they  may  be  found.)  “ He  that  is  by  faith  born 
of  God  finneth  not ; 1.  By  any  habitual  fin,  nor 
2.  By  any  wilful  fin;  nor  g.  By  any  finful  de- 
fire ; for  he  continually  defireth  the  holy  and  per- 
feft  will  of  God  ; nor  4.  Doth  he  fin  by  infirmi- 
ties, whether  in  a£i,  word  or  thought.  For  his 
infirmities  have  no  concurrence  of  his  will,  and 
without  this,  they  are  not  properly  fins.”  And 
this  you  ferioufly  declare,  “ is  a loop-hole  to 
creep  out  of  every  moral  and  religious  obliga- 
tion 1” 

In  the  fame  paragraph  you  fay,  I have  ilrong- 
ly  affirmed,  that  “ all  t our  works  ana  tempers 

are 


it  2 Journ.  p.  9. 


E 34°  } 

are  evil  continually : that  our  ;t  whole  heart  is 
altogether  corrupt  and  abominable,  and  confe- 
quently  our  whole  life  ; all  our  § works,  the  mod 
Ipecious  of  them,  our  righteoufnefs,  our  prayers, 
needing  an  atonement  thejnfelves.” 

I-  do  ftrongly  affirm  this.  But  of  whom  ? In 
all  thefe  places,  but  the  laft,  of  myfelf  only.  In 
every  one,  but  this,  I fpeak  in  the  lingular  num- 
ber, and  of  myfelf,  when  confelTedly  an  unbe- 
liever. And  of  whom  do  I fpeak  in  that  laft 
place  ? Of  unbelievers  and  them  only.  The 
words  are,  “ All  our  tempers  and  works  in  our 
natural fate  are  only  evil  continually.” 

Now,  Sir,  where  \s,  your  loop-hole  to  creep 
out  ? If  you  have  none,  I fear  every  impartial 
man  will  pafs  fentence  upon  you,  that  you  have 
no  regard  either  to  moral  or  religious  obligations. 

I have  now  weighed  every  argument  you  have 
brought,  to  prove  “ that  the  Method fs  undermine 
■morality  and  good  works."  A grievous  charge  in- 
deed ! But  the  more  inexcufable  is  he,  who  ad- 
vances it,  but  is  not  able  to  make  it  good,  in 
any  one  fmgle  inftance.  Pardon  mv  pertnefs,  Sir, 
in  not  barely  affirming  (that  is  your  manner)  but 
proving  this:  nay,  and  in  telling  you,  that  you 
cannot  make  amends  to  God,  to  me,  or  to  the 
world,  without  a retraction  as  public  as  your 
calumny. 

42.  You  add,  “ How  the  cafe  Hands  in fail, 
as  to  the  number  of  converts  among  the  Metho- 

difs , 

& i Journ.  p.  69.  $ 2 Jbam.  p.  23.  3 Joum.  p.  io,  70. 


[ 341  ] 

dijls,  and  real  reformation  of  life  to  the  certain 
and  known  duties  of  the  gofpel,  is  matter  of  diffi- 
cult determination/’  Not  at  all.  What  is  eafier 
to  be  determined,  than  i.  That  A.  B.  of  Exeter 
or  Tiverton , was  for  many  years  a notorious 
drunkard,  common-fvvearer,  or  fabbath-breakcr  ? 
2.  That  he  is  not  fo  now  ; that  he  is  really  re- 
formed from  drunkennefs,  fwearing,  fabbath- 
breaking,  to  fobriety,  and  the  other  certain  and 
known  duties  of  the  gofpel  l 

“ But  from  what  inquiry  you  can  make,  there 
is  no  reafon  to  think  them,  for  the  generality, 
better  than  their  neighbours.”  Better  than  their 

O 

neighbours  P Why  are  they  no  worfe  than  their 
neighbours  ? Then  what  have  you  been  doing 
all  this  time?  But  whether  they  are  better  or 
worfe  than  their  neighbours,  they  are  undeniable 
better  than  themfelves : I mean,  better  than  t hey 
were  before  they  heard  this  preaching,  in  the 
certain  and  known  duties  of  the  gofpel. 

But  you  defire  us  to  “ conlider  their  black 
art  of  calumny  ; their  uncharitablenefs  ; their 
exceffive  pride  and-  vanity  ; their  fcepticifm, 
doubts  and  difbelief  of  God  and  Chrilf  ; their 
diforderlv  practices  and  contempt  of  authority  • 
their  bitter  envying  and  inveterate  broils  among 
themfelves  ; their  eoolnefs  for  good  works.”  Sir, 
we  will  confider  all  thefe,  when  you  have  proved 
them.  Till  then,  this  is  mere  bnetum  fulmen. 

43.  You  proved.  “ If  we  take  Mr.  Wefle.fi 
own  account,  it  falls  very  fhort  of  any  confidcra- 
P 3 [da 


[ 342  ] 

Sle  reformation A You  mean  ; if  we  take  theft 
part  of  his  account,  which  you  are  pleafed  to 
tranferibe.  Attpeam  elegantiam  ! But  Jet  any  im- 
partial man  read  my  whole  account,  and  then 
judge. 

However  hence  you  infer,  that  “ the  new  re- 
lormers  have  made  but  a flow  and  flight  prt>- 
grefls  in  the  reformation  of  manners.” 

As  a full  anfwer  to  this,  I need  only  tranferibe 
a page  or  two  from  the  lafl  Appeal , p.  127,  &c. 

God  begins  a glorious  work  in  our  land. 

11  fet  yourfelf  agamft  it  with  your  might  ; to 
prevent  its  beginning  where  it  does  not 'ret  ap- 
pear, and  to  deltroy  it  wherever  it  does.  In 
part  you  prevail,  l eu  keep  many  from  hearing 
the  word  that  is  able  to  fave  their  fouls.  Others 
who  have  heard  it,  you  induce  to  turn  back  f;om 
God,  and  to  lift  under  the  deviFs  banner  again. 
Then  you  make  the  fuccefs  of  your  own  wick- 
ednefsan  excufe  for  not  acknowledging  the  work 
of  God  ! You  urge,  “ That  not  many  Tinners 
were  reformed  ! And  that flome  ofthofeare  now 
as  bad  as  ever!  ” 

“ Whofe  fault  is  this  ? Is  it  ours  ? Or  your 
own  ? Why  have  not  thoufands  more  been  re- 
formed ? Yea,  for  every  one  who  is  now  turned 
to  God,  why  are  there  not  ten  thoufand  ? Be- 
caufe  you  and  your  affociates  laboured  fo  hear- 
tily in  the  caufe  of  hell:  becaufe  you  and  they 
Jpared  no  pains,  either  to  prevent  or  to  deftrov 
the  work  of  God.  By  nfing  all  the  power  and 

wifdom 


[ 3-43  ] 

•wifdom  you  had,  you  hindered  thoufands  from 
hearing  the  gofpel,  which  they  might  have 
found  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto  falvation. 
Their  blood  is  upon  your  heads.  By  invent- 
ing or  countenancing  or  retailing  lies,  fome  re- 
fined, fome  grofs  and  palpable,  you  hindered 
others  from  profiting  by  what  they  did  hear.  You 
are  anfwerable  to  God  for  thefe  fouls  aifo. 
Many  who  began  to  tafte  the  good  word  and  run 
the  way  of  God’s  commandments,  by  various 
methods  you  prevailed  on  to  hear  it  no  more. 
So  they  foon  drew  back  to  perdition.  But  know, 
that  for  every  one  of  thefe  alfo,  God  will  require 
an  account  of  you  in  the  day  of  judgment  ! 

“ And  yet  in  fpite  of  all'  the  malice  and  wif- 
dom  and  flrength,  not  only  of  men,  but  of  prin- 
cipalities and  powers,  of  the  rulers  of  the  darknejs 
of  this  world,  of  the  wicked /pints  in  high  places  ; 
there  are  thoufands  found,  who  are  turned  from 
dumb  idols  to Jerve  the  living  and  true  God.  What 
a harveft  then  might  we  have  feen  before  now, 
if  all  who  fay  they  are  on  the  Lord’s fde,  had 
come,  as  in  all  reafon  they  ought,  to  the  help  of 
the  Lord  againjl  the  mighty  ? Yea,  had  they  only 
not  nppofecl  the  work  of  God,  had  they  only- 
refrained  from  his  meffengers,  might  not  the 
trumpet  of  God  have  been  heard  long  fince,  in 
every  corner  of  our  land?  And  thoufands  of  fin- 
ners  in  every  county,  been  brought  to  fear  God' 
and  honour  the  king  ?” 


44.  With- 


[ 344  ] 

44*  + Without  any  regard  to  this,  your  next 
affertion  is,  That  the  Methodifls  are  “ carrying 
on  the  work  of  popery.”  Thisalfo  being  a charge 
of  a very  high  nature,  I fhall  particularly  con- 
fider  whatever  you  advance  in  defence  of  it. 

Your  full  argument  is,  “ they  have  a flrain  of 
Jefuitical  fophiftry,  artifice  and  craft,  evafion, 
referve,  equivocation  and  prevarication.”  So 
you  Jay.  But  you  do  not  fomuch  as  aim  at  any 
proof. 

Your  fecond  argument  is,  “ Mr.  TVJley  fays, 
where  a Methodift  was  receiving  the  facrament, 
God  was  pleafed  to  let  him  fee  a crucified  Savi- 
our.” Sir,  Mr.  W.  does  not  fay  this.  It  is  one 
that  cccafionaily  wrote  to  him.  But  if  he  had, 
what  would  you  infer  ? That  he  is  a papift  ? 
Where  is  the  confequence  ? Why,  you  fay, 
“ was  not  this  as  good  an  argument  for  tranfubfian  * 
tiaiion,  as  feveral  produced  by  the  papifts  ?”  Yes, 
exa£tly  as  good  as  either  their  arguments  or 
yours.  That  is,  juft  good  for  nothing. 

Your  third  argument  runs  thus,  “ We  may  fee 
in  Mr.  W.\  writings  that  he  was  once  a jlricl 
church-man , but  gradually  put  on  a more  catholic 
fpirit,  tending  at  length  to  Roman  catholic.  He 
rejefts  any  defign  to  convert  others  from  any 
communion  ; and  confequently  not  from  popery.” 
This  is  half  true  (which  is  fomeihing  uncom- 
mon with  you)  and  only  half  falfe.  It  is  true, 
that  for  thirty  years  laft  paft,  I have"  gradually 

put 


+ Seft.  21.  p.  164.  &c. 


[ 345  3 

put  on  a more  catholic  [pint p finding  more  and 
more  tendernefs  for  thofe  who  differed  from  me, 
either  i n opinions  or  modes  of  zcorfiip.  But  it  is 
not  true,  That  I “ rejefl:  any  defign  of  convert- 
ing others  frovi  any  communion .”  I have  by  the 
bleffmg  of  God,  converted  feveral  from  poptry, 
who  are  now  alive  and  ready  to  teftify  it. 

. Your  fourth  argument  is,  d hat  in  a collefhon  of 
prayers,  I cite  the  words  of  an  ancient  liturgy, 
“ for  the  faithful  departed.”  Sir,  whenever  I 
life  thofe  words  in  the  burial  fervice,  I pray  to 
the  fame  effeft.  “ That  we,  with  all  thofe  who 
are  departed  in  thy  faith  and  fear,  may  have  our 
perfect  confummation  of  bltfs,  both  in  body 
and  foul.”  Yea,  and  whenever  I fay,  Thy  king- 
dom come  ; fori  mean  both  the  kingdom  of 
grace  and  glory.  In  this  kind  of  general  prayer 
therefore,  for  the  faithful  departed,  I conceive 
myfelf  to  be  clearly  jollified,  both  by  the  earlier! 
antiquity,  by  the  church  of  England , and  by  the 
Lord’s  prayer  : although  the  Papifs  have  cor- 
rupted this  fcriptural  praftice,  into  praying  for 
thofe  who  die  in  their  fins. 

4,5.  Your  fifth  argument  is,  “ That  they  ufe 
private  confcjfwn , in  which  every  one  is  to  fpeak 
the  liate  of  his  heart,  with  his  feveral  tempta- 
tions and  deliverances,  and  anfwer  as  many 
fearching  queftions  as  may  be.  And  what  fcene, 
fay  you,  is  hereby  difclofed  ? What  a filthy  jakes 
opened,  when  the  moil  fearching  queftions  are 
anfwered  without  referve  ?”  Hold,  Sir,,  unlefs 

you 


you  are  anfwering  foryourfelf.  This  undoubted- 
ly you  have  a right  to  do.  You  can  tell  bell, 
what  is  in  your  own  heart.  And  I cannot  deny 
what  you  fay:  it  may  be  a very  filthy  jakes,  for 
ought  I know.  But  pray  do  not  meafure  others 
by  yourfelf.  The  hearts  of  believers  are  purified 
through  faith.  When  thefe  open  thieir  hearts  one 
to  another,  there  is  no  fuel)  feene  difclofed.  \et 
temptations  to  pride  in  various  kinds,  to  felf- 
will,  to  unbelief  in  many  infiances,  they  often 
feel  in  themfelves  (whether  they  give  any  place 
to  them  or  no)  and  occafionally  difclofc  to  their 
brethren. 

But  this  has  no  refemblance  to  Popijh  corf  ef- 
fort ; of  which  you  are  very  fenfible.  For  you 
cite  my  own  words' : “ The  Popifh  confeffion  is,' 
the'  confeffion  made  by  a fingle  perfon  to  a priefi. 
Whereas  this  is,  the  confeffion  of  feveial  per- 
fons  conjointly,  not  to  a priefi,  but  to  each 
other.”  You  add,  “ Will  Mr.  IV.  abide  by  this, 
and  freely  anfwer  a queftion  ?”  I will,  for  I de- 
fire  only  by  manifflation  of  the  truth , to  commend 
myfelf  to  every  mans  confcience,  in  the fght  cj 
God. 

Your  quefiion  is,  “ After  private  confcffions 
taken  in  their  bands,  are  not  reports  made  to 
Mr.  IV.?' ’ I anfwer,  no : No  reports  are  made  to 
me,  of  the  particulars  mentioned  in  private  bands. 
“ Are  no  delinquents,  male  and  female,  brougnt 
before  him  feparately,  and  conffjed  by  h m No  : 
none  at  all.  You  afk,  “ How  then  do  I know 

the 


[ 347  ] 

the  outward  and  inward  dates  of  thofe  under  my 
care  ?”  I anfwer,  by  examining  them  once  a 
quarter,  more  or  lefs,  not  feparately,  but  ten  or 
fifteen  together. 

Therefore  every  unprejudiced  perforx  mud  fee 
that  there  is  no  analogy  between  the  Popifh  con- 
feffion  to  a pried,  and  our  confejjing  our  faults 
one  to  another,  and  praying  one  for  another,  as  St. 
James  diredts.  Confequently  neither  does  this 
argument,  though  urged  with  all  your  art  and 
force,  amount  to  any  fhadow  of  proof,  that  “ the 
Method fs  are  carrying  on  the  work  of  popery.’’ 

46.  Your  fixth  argument,  fuch  as  it  is,  hands 
thus.  “ Another  tendency  to  Popery  appears,  by 
the  notion  of  a fingle  drop  of  Clirif s blood  being  a 
fufjicunt  atonement  for  the fins  of  the  whole  world. 
For  however  pious  this  may  appear,  it  is  abfo- 
lutely  falfe  and  papiftical.”  Sir,  this  argument  is 
perfeclly  new,  and  intirely  your  own.  It  were 
great  pity  to  difturb  you  in  the  enjoyment  of  it. 

A feventh  argument  you  ground  on  thofe 
words  in  the  Plain  account  of  the  people  called 
Method  ids,  “ ’Tis  a point  we  chiefiy  infid  upon, 
that  orthodoxy  or  right  opinions,  is  a very  fender 
part,  of  religion,  if  any  part  of  it  at  all."  “ The 
plain  confequence  whereof  is  (fo  you  affirm)  that 
teaching  and  believing  the  fundamental  errors  of 
popery,  with  the  whole  train  of  their  abomina- 
tions and  idolatries,  are  of  very  little  moment, 
if  any.”  Strain  again, -Sir  : pull  hard  : or  you  will 

never 


[ 34*  ] 

never  be  able  to  drag  this  conclufion  out  of  thefe 
premifes. 

I affert,  “ 1.  That  in  a truly  religious  man,  right 
opinions  are  a very Jlender  part  of  religion.  2. 
That  in  an  irreligious,  a profane  man,  they  are 
not  any  part  of  religion  at  all : fuch  a man  no! 
being  one  jot  more  religious,  becaufe  he  is  or- 
thodoxSir,  it  does  not  follow  from  either  of 
thefe  propofitions,  that  wrong  opinions  are  not 
an  hindrance  to  religion:  and  much  lefs,  that 
“ teaching  and  believing  the  fundamental  errors 
of  popery,  with  the  whole  train  of  their  abomina- 
tions and  idolatries  (praftifed,  I prefumeyou  mean, 
as  well  as  taught  and  believed)  are  of  very  little 
moment,  if  any.” 

I am  fo  far  from  faying  or  thinking  this,  that 
in  my  printed  letter  to  a pried  of  that  commu- 
nion (did  you  never  read  it,  or  hear  of  it  before  ?) 
are  thefe  exprefs  words,  “ I pity  you  much, 
having  the  fame  alfurance,  that  Jefus  is  the 
Chrifl,  and  that  no  Romany?  can  expeft  to  be 
faved,  according  to  the  terms  of  his  covenant.” 
jour.  p.  77.  Do  you  term  this  “ An  extenua- 
tion of  their  abominations  ? A reducing  them  to 
almoft  a meer  nothing.” 

47.  You  argue,  eighthly,  thus ; “ The  Methodiji 
doftrine  of  imprefhons  and  alfurances,  holds 
equally  for  popifli  enthufiajls .”  This  needs  no 
anfwer  ; I have  alieady  fhewn,  that  the  Mdhodit 
doftrine  in  thefe  re fp efts  is  both  fcriptural  and 
rational. 


Your 


C 349  J 

"V our  ninth  argument  is,  “ Their  fudden  co»- 
verfions  Hand  upon  the  fame  footing  with  the 
popifh.'’  You  fhould  fay,  “ Are  a proof  that  they 
are  promoting  popery .”  I leave  you  to  enjoy 
this  argment  alfo. 

• But  the  dreadful  one  you  referve  for  the  laid, 
namely,  our  “ recommending  popifh  books. 
One  is  the  life  of  Mr.  de  Renty , pf. which  Mr, 
Wejley  has  publilhed  an  extradl .”  To  prove  your 
inimitable  fairnefs  here,  you  fcrape  up  again  all 
the  trafh,  wherein  the  weak  writer  of  that  life 
abounds,  and  which  I had  pared  off  and  thrown 
away.  Sir,  could  you  find  nothing  to  your  pur- 
pofe  in  the  extratt  itfelf?  I fancy  you  might;  for 
I have  purpofely  left  in  two  or  three  particulars, 
to  fhew  of  what  communion  he  was,  which  I 
did  not  think  it  right  to  conceal. 

You  go  on.  “ Francis  of  Sales  is  another  pa- 
pift,  much  commended  by  Mr.  JV. ; and  who  he 
doubts  not  is  in  Abraham's,  bofom.  He  is  the 
Methodijp s bofom  friend.” 

I believe  he  is  in  Abraham's  bofom.  But  he 
is  no  bofom  friend  of  the  Methodijls.  I queftion 
whether  one  in  five  hundred  of  them,  have  fo 
much  as  heard  his  name.  And  as  for  me,  neither 
do  I “ commend  him  much,  nor  recommend” 
him  at  all.  His  life  I- never  faw,  nor  any  of  his 
works,  but  his  “ Introduclion  to  a Holy  Life.” 
This  the  late  Dr.  Nichols  tranflated  into  Engiijhr 
publilhed  and  ftrongly  recommended.  Therefore 
x if 


t 35°  j 

if  this  be  a proof  of  promoting  popery,  that  cen- 
fure  falls  not  on  me  but  him. 

I have  now  confidered  all  the  arguments  you 
have  brought  to  prove,  “ That  the  Methodifis 
are  carrying  on  the  work  of  popery.”  And  I 
am  perfuaded,  every  candid  man,  who  rightly 
weighs  what  has  been  faid,  with  any  degree  of 
attention,  will  clearly  fee  not  only,  that  no  one 
of  thofe  arguments  is  of  any  real  force  at  all,  but 
that  you  do  not  believe  vourfelf;  you  do  not 
believe  the  conclufion,  which  you  make  as  if  you 
toould  prove.  Only  you  keep  clofe  to  your  laud- 
able refolution,  of  throwing  as  much  dirt  as  pof- 
fible. 

48.  It  remains  only  to  gather  up  fome  of  your 
fragments,  as  hill  further  proofs  of  your  integrity. 

You  gracioufly  fay,  “ I do  not  lay  much  ftrefs 
upon  the  charge  of  fome  of  the  angry  Moravians, 
againft  Mr.  W.  and  brother,  for  preaching  po- 
pery.” Sir,  if  you  had,  you  would  only  have 
hurt  yourfelf.  For  l.The  Moravians  never,  that 
I know  of,  brought  this  charge  at  all.  2.  When 
Mr.  C.  and  two  other  predeftinai  ians  (thefe  were 
the  perfons)  affirmed  “ they  had  heard  both  my 
brother  and  me  preach  popeiy they  meant  nei- 
ther more  nor  lefs  thereby,  than  the  do&rine  of 
univerfal  redemption. 

“ Some  connection  between  the  doftrines  of 
the  Methodijls  and  Papijls,  hath  been  ffiewn 
through  this  whole  comparifon.”  Shewn  ! But 
how  ? By  the  fame  art  of  wiredrawing  and  de- 
cyphering, 


[ 35i  ] 

cyphering,  which  would  prove  an  equal  connec- 
tion between  the  Methodijls  and  Mahometans. 

“ Jefuits  have  often  mingled,  and  been  the 
ringleaders  among  our  enthufiajlic  Je Elariesl' 
Sir,  I am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  your  compli- 
ment, as  well  as  for  your  parallel  of  Mr.  Faithful 
Commin. 

And  pray,  Sir,  at  what  time  do  you  think  it 
was,  that  I firft  mingled  with  thofe  enthufiajlic 
fedlaries?  When  I came  back  from  Germany  ? 
Or  when  I returned  from  Georgia  ? Or  while  I 

was  at  Lincoln-College  f Although  the  plot 

itfelf  might  be  laid  before,  when  I was  at  Chrif  - 
Church,  or  at  the  Charter-houfe  fchool. 

But  “ difefuit's,  or  enthufiaft’s  declaring  againft 
popery,  is  no  tell  of  their  fincerity.”  Moftfure; 
nor  is  a namelefs  perfon’s  declaring  againft  Me - 
thodifm,  any  proof  that  he  is  not  a Jefuit.  I re- 
member well,  when  a well-dreffed  man,  taking 
his  ftand  not  far  from  Mporfelds , had  gathered  a 
large  company,  and  was  vehemently  aflerting. 
That  “ thofe  rogues  the  Methodijls  were  all  Pa~ 
pifls  till  a gentleman  coming  by,  fixed  his  eye 
on  him  and  cried,  “ Stop  that  man  : I know  him 
perfonally  : he  is  a Romifi prief." 

I know  not  that  any  thing  remains  on  this 
head,  which  bears  fo  much  as  the  face  of  an  ar- 
gument. So  that  of  all  the  charges  you  have 
brought  (and  truly  you  have  not  been  fparing) 
there  is  not  one  wherein  your  proof  falls  more 
2 miferably 


[ 36®  J 

miferably  fhort,  than  in  this,  That  “ the  Metho- 
dijls  are  advancing  popery” 

49.  I have  at  length  gone  through  your  whole 
performance,  weighed  whatever  you  cite  from 
my  writings,  and  fhewn  at  large  how  far  thofe 
palfages  are  from  proving  all,  or  any  part  of  your 
charge.  So  that  all  you  attempt  to  build  on 
them,  f “ of  the  pride  and  vanity  of  the  Metho- 
dijls\  of  their  j;  fhuffling  and  prevaricating,  of 
their  § affedlation  of  prophefying,  j|  laying  claim 
to  the  miraculous  favours  of  heaven,  unfteadi- 
nefs  ? of  temper,  +t  unfteadinefs  in  fentiment 
and  praflice,  it  art  and  cunning,  \\  giving  up 
infpiration  and  extraordinary  calls,  |jj|  fcepticifm. 
infidelity,  atheifm,  f5  uncharitablenefs  to  their 
opponents,  tt+  contempt  of  order  and  authority, 
and  fierce,  rancorous  quarrels  with  each 
other,  §§§  of  the  tendency  of  Methodifm  to  under- 
mine morality  and  good  works,  and  to  |]j|j|  carry 
on  the  good  work  of  popery all  this  fabric 
falls  to  the  ground  at  once,  unlefs  you  can  find 
fome  better  foundation  to  fupport  it. 

50.  Thefe  things  being  fo,  what  muff  all  un- 
prejudiced men  think  of  you  and  your  whole 
performance?  You  have  advanced  a charge,  not 
againft  one  or  two  perfons  only,  but  indiferimi- 
nately  againft  a whole  body  of  people , of  his  Ma- 

jefty’s 

tSeft.g.  J Se£t.  4.  § Sett.  5.  ||Seft.6.  5Sca9. 

++Se£hn.  ff  Sea,  12.  Seft.  13.  H|  Seft  14. 

US  Sea.  15,  &c.  +++  Sea.  18.  SeS.  19, 

Sea.  20.  Ill  Sea.  21. 


[ 52 3 ] 

jefty’s  fubjefis,  Englijhmen,  proteftants,  members 
I fuppofe,  of  your  own  church:  a charge  con- 
taining abundance  of  articles,  and  moft  of  them 
of  the  higheft  and  blackeft  nature.  You  have 
profecuted  this  with  unparalleled  bitternefs  of 
fpirit  and  acrimony  of  language ; ufing  fometimes 
the  moft  coarfe,  rude,  fcurrilous  terms,  fome- 
times the  keeneft  farcafms  you  could  devife.  The 
point  you  have  fteadily  purTued  in  thus  profecut- 
ing  this  charge,  is,  firft,  To  expofe  the  whole 
people  to  the  hatred  and  fcorn  of  all  mankind  •, 
and  next, -to  ftir  up  the  civil  powers  againft  them. 
And  when  this  charge  comes  to  be  fairly  weighed, 
there  is  not  a fingle  article  of  it  true  ! The  paf- 
fages  you  cite  to  make  it  good,  are  one  and  all 
fuch,  as  prove  nothing  lefs  than  the  points  in 
queftion  : moft  of  them  fuch  as  you  have  palpa- 
bly maimed,  corrupted,  and  ftrained  to  a fenfe 
never  thought  of  by  the  writer  : many  of  them 
fuch  as  are  flat  againft  you,  and  overthrow  the 
very  point  they  are  brought  to  fupport.  What 
can  they  think,  but  that  this  is  the  moft  fhocking 
violation  of  the  Chriftian  rule,  Thou  fhalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyfelf ; the  moft  open  affront  to  all 
juftice,  and  even  common  humanity,  the  moft 
glaring  infultupon  the  common  fenfe  and  reafon 
of  mankind,  which  has  lately  appeared  in  the 
world. 

If  you  fay,  “ But  I have  proved  the  charge 
upon  Mr.  Whitefield, admit  you  have  (which  I 
do  not  allow)  Mr.  Whkejidd  is  not  the  Method ijls'. 


no. 


[ 354  3 

•no,  nor  the  focieties  under  his  care ; they  are 
not  a third,  perhaps  not  a tenth  part  of  iheMetho- 
dijls.  What  then  can  excufe  your  afcribing  their 
faults  (were  they  proved)  to  the  whole  body  ? You 
indift  ten  men.  Suppofe  you  prove  the  indift- 
ment  upon  one,  will  you  therefore  condemn  the 
other  nine  ? Nay,  let  every  man  bear  his  own 
burden,  fince  every  man  mult  give  an  account  of 
himfelf  to  God. 

I had  occafion  once  before  to  fay  to  an  oppo- 
nent, you  know  not  to  {hew  mercy.  Yet  that 
gentleman  did  regard  truth  and  juftice.  But  you 
regard  neither  mercy,  juftice  nor  truth.  To  vi- 
lify, to  blacken  is  your  one  point.  I pray  God, 
it  may  not  be  laid  to  your  charge  ! May  he  fhew 
you  mercy,  though  you  fhew  none  ! 

I am.  Sir, 

Your friend  and  well-wifier, 

JOHN  WESLEY. 


The  End  of  the  Sixteenth  Volume. 


THE 


C ONTENTS 


Of  the  Sixteenth  Volume. 


Page 

Advice  io  the  people  called  Methodifls  ■ — 3 

The  principles  of  a Method  ill  — 

An  anfioer  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Church’j  remarks 
on  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’j  lajl  jour, 
nal , in  a letter  to  that  gentleman  — 41 

The  principles  of  a Methodift  farther  explain- 
ed: occafioned  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  ChurchT 
fecond  letter  to  Mr.  Wefley  : in  a fecond  let- 
ter to  that  gentleman  . — 10g 

A letter  to  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bifhop  of 
London  : occafioned  by  his  lordf, hip's  late 
charge  to  the  clergy  — 222 

A. 


CONTENTS. 


- Page 

A letter  to  a Clergyman  — 247 

A letter  to  the  author  of  the  enthufafm  of  the 
Methodifts  and  Papifts  compared  254 

A fecond  letter  to  the  author  of  the  enthufafm 
of  the  Methodifts  and  Papifts  compared  277 


ERRATA,  Vol.  XVI. 


Pag -c  Line 

9 3 r Conlidering 

24  Sifter  1.  28  Five  para- 
graphs are  left  out , 
•which  Jland  in  the 
2 \th  Volume,  p.  32 


35 

28 

7 

r now  only 

59 

xo 

r w//Z>  a 

79 

22 

r wretchlefnefs 

9i 

2, 

r wrought 

94 

H 

r refilling 

96 

7 

r May 

— . 

17 

r relifting 

97 

8 

r both  the 

117 

22 

r any  wife 

222 

7 

r has 

*5° 

8 

r Part  of 

5 

r appoint/«g 

168 

24 

r appolite 

Page  Line 

177  24  dele  that 
180  23  r inve&ive 
185  19  r 7?nee 
196  10  r could  not 
227  1 r it 

239  9 r caufe 

240  19  r feas 

264  20  r natural  or 
268  penult,  r corpo ral 
279  1 r I immediately 

290  18  r Archimedes 
307  6 r i^Twatio 

321  2 r accufations 

323  antepen.  r.  rancour 

340  27  r retraftur'.on 

341  penult,  r proceed 

345  28  r what  a 
349  5 r argument. 

>—  25  has  fo 


Date  Due 


OCT  IQ. 

NOVfifT 

Demco  293-5 


k 


