THE  GREATEST  THING 

IN 

THE   WORLD 


THE    GREATEST    THING 


IN 


THE    WORLD/ 


BY 

HENRY  ^DRUMMOND,    F.R.S.E.,   F.G.S. 

AUTHOR  OF  "  NATURAL  LAW  IN  THE  SPIRITUAL  WORLD." 


glefo  fork 

JAMES  POTT  &  CO.,  PUBLISHERS 
14  AND  16  ASTOR  PLACE 


COPYRIGHT,  1890,  BY 
JAMES  POTT   &   CO. 


Press  of  J.J.  Little  &  Co., 
Astor  Place,  New  York. 


THIS  address  delivered  to  a  large  body 
of  Students  at  Northfield,  Mass.,  has  found 
its  way  into  several  foreign  languages. 
It  is  now  published  in  English,  corrected 
from  the  original  stenographer's  report,  by 
request,  and  is  the  only  Authorized  Edi 
tion. 

JAMES    POTT    &    Co. 


THOUGH  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of 
angels,  and  have  not  Love,  I  am  become  as  sounding  brass, 
or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  And  though  I  have  the  gift  of 
prophecy,  and  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all  knowledge; 
and  though  I  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  remove  moun 
tains,  and  have  not  Love,  I  am  nothing.  And  though  I 
bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give 
my  body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not  Love,  it  profiteth  me 
nothing. 


Love  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind  ; 

Love  envieth  not  ; 

Love  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up, 

Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly, 

Seeketh  not  her  own, 

Is  not  easily  provoked, 

Thinketh  no  evil  ; 

Rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth  ; 

Beareth  all  things,  believeth   all    things,  hopeth  all  things, 

endureth  all  things. 


Love  never  faileth  :  but  whether  there  be  prophecies, 
they  shall  fail;  whether  there  be  tongues,  they  shall  cease; 
whether  there  be  knowledge,  it  shall  vanish  away.  For  we 
know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part.  But  when  that 
which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  shall 
be  done  away.  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child, 
I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child  :  but  when 
I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish  things.  For  now  we 
see  through  a  glass,  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face  :  now  I 
know  in  part  ;  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am 
known.  And  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  Love,  these  three  ; 
but  the  greatest  of  these  is  Love. — I  COR.  xiii. 


THE    GREATEST    THING 
IN   THE  WORLD 

EVERY  one  has  asked  himself  the  great  ques 
tion  of  antiquity  as  of  the  modern  world  : 
What  is  the  summum  bonum — the  supreme 
good  ?  You  have  life  before  you.  Once  only 
you  can  live  it.  What  is  the  noblest  object  of 
desire,  the  supreme  gift  to  covet  ? 

We  have  been  accustomed  to  be  told  that 
the  greatest  thing  in  the  religious  world  is 
Faith.  That  great  word  has  been  the  key-note 
for  centuries  of  the  popular  religion  ;  and  we 
have  easily  learned  to  look  upon  it  as  the 
greatest  thing  in  the  world.  Well,  we  are 


10  THE  GREATEST  THING 

wrong.  If  we  have  been  told  that,  we  may 
miss  the  mark.  I  have  taken  you,  in  the 
chapter  which  I  have  just  read,  to  Christianity 
at  its  source ;  and  there  we  have  seen,  "  The 
greatest  of  these  is  love."  It  is  not  an  over 
sight.  Paul  was  speaking  of  faith  just  a 
moment  before.  He  says,  "  If  I  have  all  faith, 
so  that  I  can  remove  mountains,  and  have  not 
love,  I  am  nothing."  So  far  from  forgetting 
he  deliberately  contrasts  them,  "  Now  abideth 
Faith,  Hope,  Love,"  and  without  a  moment's 
hesitation  the  decision  falls,  "  The  greatest  of 
these  is  Love." 

And  it  is  not  prejudice.  A  man  is  apt  to 
recommend  to  others  his  own  strong  point, 
Love  was  not  Paul's  strong  point.  The  observ 
ing  student  can  detect  a  beautiful  tenderness 
growing  and  ripening  all  through  his  character 
as  Paul  gets  old  ;  but  the  hand  that  wrote, 


IN  THE  WORLD.  II 

"  The  greatest  of  these  is  love,"  when  we  meet 
it  first,  is  stained  with  blood. 

Nor  is  this  letter  to  the  Corinthians  peculiar 
in  singling  out  love  as  the  summum  bonum. 
The  masterpieces  of  Christianity  are  agreed 
about  it.  Peter  says,  "  Above  all  things  have 
fervent  love  among  yourselves."  Above  all 
things.  And  John  goes  farther,  "  God  is  love." 
And  you  remember  the  profound  remark  which 
Paul  makes  elsewhere,  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of 
the  law."  Did  you  ever  think  what  he  meant 
by  that  ?  In  those  days  men  were  working 
their  passage  to  Heaven  by  keeping  the  Ten 
Commandments,  and  the  hundred  and  ten  other 
commandments  which  they  had  manufactured 
out  of  them,  Christ  said,  I  will  show  you  a 
more  simple  way.  If  you  do  one  thing,  you 
will  do  these  hundred  and  ten  things,  without 
ever  thinking  about  them.  If  you  love,  you 


12  THE   GREATEST  THING 

will  unconsciously  fulfil  the  whole  law.  And 
you  can  readily  see  for  yourselves  how  that 
must  be  so.  Take  any  of  the  commandments. 
"  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me." 
If  a  man  love  God,  you  will  not  require  to  tell 
him  that.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  that  law. 
"  Take  not  His  name  in  vain."  Would  he  ever 
dream  of  taking  His  name  in  vain  if  he  loved 
Him  ?  "  Remember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep 
it  holy."  Would  he  not  be  too  glad  to  have 
one  day  in  seven  to  dedicate  more  exclusively 
to  the  object  of  his  affection?  Love  would 
fulfil  all  these  laws  regarding  God.  And  so,  if 
he  loved  Man,  you  would  never  think  of  telling 
him  to  honour  his  father  and  mother.  He 
could  not  do  anything  else.  It  would  be  pre 
posterous  to  tell  him  not  to  kill.  You  could 
only  insult  him  if  you  suggested  that  he  should 
not  steal — how  could  he  steal  from  those  he 


IN  THE  WORLD.  13 

loved?  It  would  be  superfluous  to  beg  him 
not  to  bear  false  witness  against  his  neighbour. 
If  he  loved  him  it  would  be  the  last  thing  he 
would  do.  And  you  would  never  dream  of 
urging  him  not  to  covet  what  his  neighbours 
had.  He  would  rather  they  possessed  it  than 
himself.  In  this  way  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of 
the  law."  It  is  the  rule  for  fulfilling  all  rules, 
the  new  commandment  for  keeping  all  the 
old  commandments,  Christ's  one  secret  of  the 
Christian  life. 

Now  Paul  had  learned  that ;  and  in  this 
noble  eulogy  he  has  given  us  the  most  wonder 
ful  and  original  account  extant  of  the  summum 
bonum.  We  may  divide  it  into  three  parts.  In 
the  beginning  of  the  short  chapter,  we  have 
Love  contrasted ;  in  the  heart  of  it,  we  have 
Love  analysed ;  towards  the  end,  we  have  Love 
defended  as  the  supreme  gift. 


THE   CONTRAST 

PAUL  begins  by  contrasting  Love  with  other 
things  that  men  in  those  days  thought  much  of. 
I  shall  not  attempt  to  go  over  those  things  in 
detail.  Their  inferiority  is  already  obvious. 

He  contrasts  it  with  eloquence.  And  what 
a  noble  gift  it  is,  the  power  of  playing  upon  the 
souls  and  wills  of  men,  and  rousing  them  to 
lofty  purposes  and  holy  deeds.  Paul  says,  "  If 
I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels, 
and  have  not  love,  I  am  become  as  sounding 
brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal."  And  we  all  know 
why.  We  have  all  felt  the  brazenness  of  words 
without  emotion,  the  hollowness,  the  unaccount- 


THE  GREATEST  THING  IN  THE  WORLD.     15 

able    unpersuasiveness,    of    eloquence    behind 
which  lies  no  Love. 

He  contrasts  it  with  prophecy.  He  con 
trasts  it  with  mysteries.  He  contrasts  it  with 
faith.  He  contrasts  it  with  charity.  Why  is 
Love  greater  than  faith  ?  Because  the  end  is 
greater  than  the  means.  And  why  is  it  greater 
than  chanty?  Because  the  whole  is  greater 
than  the  part.  Love  is  greater  than  faith, 
because  the  end  is  greater  than  the  means. 
What  is  the  use  of  having  faith  ?  It  is  to  con 
nect  the  soul  with  God.  And  what  is  the 
object  of  connecting  man  with  God  ?  That  he 
may  become  like  God.  But  God  is  Love. 
Hence  Faith,  the  means,  is  in  order  to  Love, 
the  end.  Love,  therefore,  obviously  is  greater 
than  faith.  It  is  greater  than  charity,  again, 
because  the  whole  is  greater  than  a  part. 
Charity  is  only  a  little  bit  of  Love,  one  of  the 


l6  THE   GREATEST  THING 

innumerable  avenues  of  Love,  and  there  may 
even  be,  and  there  is,  a  great  deal  of  chanty 
without  Love.  It  is  a  very  easy  thing  to  toss  a 
copper  to  a  beggar  on  the  street ;  it  is  generally 
an  easier  thing  than  not  to  do  it.  Yet  Love  is 
just  as  often  in  the  withholding.  We  purchase 
relief  from  the  sympathetic  feelings  roused  by 
the  spectacle  of  misery,  at  the  copper's  cost. 
It  is  too  cheap — too  cheap  for  us,  and  often 
too  dear  for  the  beggar.  If  we  really  loved  him 
we  would  either  do  more  for  him,  or  less. 

Then  Paul  contrasts  it  with  sacrifice  and 
martyrdom.  And  I  beg  the  little  band  of 
would-be  missionaries — and  I  have  the  honour 
to  call  some  of  you  by  this  name  for  the  first 
time — to  remember  that  though  you  give  your 
bodies  to  be  burned,  and  have  not  Love,  it  pro 
fits  nothing — nothing !  You  can  take  nothing 
greater  to  the  heathen  world  than  the  impress 


IN  THE  WORLD.  I/ 

and  reflection  of  the  Love  of  God  upon  your 
own  character.  That  is  the  universal  language. 
It  will  take  you  years  to  speak  in  Chinese,  or 
in  the  dialects  of  India.  From  the  day  you 
land,  that  language  of  Love,  understood  by  all, 
will  be  pouring  forth  its  unconscious  eloquence. 
It  is  the  man  who  is  the  missionary,  it  is  not 
his  words.  His  character  is  his  message.  In 
the  heart  of  Africa,  among  the  great  Lakes, 
I  have  come  across  black  men  and  women  who 
remembered  the  only  white  man  they  ever  saw 
before — David  Livingstone  ;  and  as  you  cross 
his  footsteps  in  that  dark  continent,  men's  faces 
light  up  as  they  speak  of  the  kind  Doctor  who 
passed  there  years  ago.  They  could  not  under 
stand  him  ;  but  they  felt  the  Love  that  beat  in 
his  heart.  Take  into  your  new  sphere  of 
labour,  where  you  also  mean  to  lay  down  your 
life,  that  simple  charm,  and  your  lifework  must 


18    THE  GREATEST  THING  IN  THE  WORLD. 

succeed.  You  can  take  nothing  greater,  you 
need  take  nothing  less.  It  is  not  worth  while 
going  if  you  take  anything  less.  You  may  take 
every  accomplishment ;  you  may  be  braced  for 
every  sacrifice  ;  but  if  you  give  your  body  to  be 
burned,  and  have  not  Love,  it  will  profit  you 
and  the  cause  of  Christ  nothing. 


THE    ANALYSIS 

AFTER  contrasting  Love  with  these  things, 
Paul,  in  three  verses,  very  short,  gives  us  an 
amazing  analysis  of  what  this  supreme  thing 
is.  I  ask  you  to  look  at  it.  It  is  a  compound 
thing,  he  tells  us.  It  is  like  light.  As  you 
have  seen  a  man  of  science  take  a  beam  of  light 
and  pass  it  through  a  crystal  prism,  as  you 
have  seen  it  come  out  on  the  other  side  of 
the  prism  broken  up  into  its  component  colours 
— red,  and  blue,  and  yellow,  and  violet,  and 
orange,  and  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow — so 
Paul  passes  this  thing,  Love,  through  the  mag 
nificent  prism  of  his  inspired  intellect,  and  it 


•• 


20 


THE   GREATEST   THING 


comes  out  on  the  other  side  broken  up  into  its 
elements.  And  in  these  few  words  we  have 
what  one  might  call  the  Spectrum  of  Love,  the 
analysis  of  Love.  Will  you  observe  what  its 
elements  are  ?  Will  you  notice  that  they  have 
common  names  ;  that  they  are  virtues  which  we 
hear  about  every  day,  that  they  are  things 
which  can  be  practised  by  every  man  in  every 
place  in  life  ;  and  how,  by  a  multitude  of  small 
things  and  ordinary  virtues,  the  supreme  thing, 
the  summum  bonum,  is  made  up  ? 

The   Spectrum  of   Love   has  nine  ingredi 
ents  : — 

Patience  .     .  "  Love  suffereth  long." 
Kindness.     .  "  And  is  kind." 
Generosity    .  "  Love  envieth  not." 
Humility      .  "  Love  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not 
puffed  up." 


IN  THE  WORLD.  21 

Courtesy .  .  "  Doth  not  behave  itself  un 
seemly," 

Unselfishness  "  Seeketh  not  her  own." 

Good  Temper  "  Is  not  easily  provoked." 

Guilelessness    "  Thinketh  no  evil." 

Sincerity  .  .  "  Rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but 
rejoiceth  in  the  truth," 

Patience;  kindness;  generosity;  humility; 
courtesy  ;  unselfishness  ;  good  temper  ;  guile- 
lessness  ;  sincerity — these  make  up  the  supreme 
gift,  the  stature  of  the  perfect  man.  You  will 
observe  that  all  are  in  relation  to  men,  in  relation 
to  life,  in  relation  to  the  known  to-day  and  the 
near  to-morrow,  and  not  to  the  unknown 
eternity.  We  hear  much  of  love  to  God ; 
Christ  spoke  much  of  love  to  man.  We  make 
a  great  deal  of  peace  with  heaven  ;  Christ  made 
much  of  peace  on  earth.  Religion  is  not  a 


22  THE  GREATEST  THING 

strange  or  added  thing,  but  the  inspiration  of 
the  secular  life,  the  breathing  of  an  eternal 
spirit  through  this  temporal  world.  The  su 
preme  thing,  in  short,  is  not  a  thing  at  all,  but 
the  giving  of  a  further  finish  to  the  multitudi 
nous  words  and  acts  which  make  up  the  sum  of 
every  common  day. 

There  is  no  time  to  do  more  than  make  a 
passing  note  upon  each  of  these  ingredients. 
Love  is  Patience.  This  is  the  normal  atti 
tude  of  Love  ;  Love  passive,  Love  waiting  to 
begin  ;  not  in  a  hurry  ;  calm  ;  ready  to  do  its 
work  when  the  summons  comes,  but  meantime 
wearing  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit.  Love  suffers  long ;  beareth  all  things ; 
believeth  all  things  ;  hopeth  all  things.  For 
Love  understands,  and  therefore  waits. 

Kindness.  Love  active.  Have  you  ever 
noticed  how  much  of  Christ's  life  was  spent  in 


IN  THE  WORLD.  23 

doing  kind  things — in  merely  doing  kind  things  ? 
Run  over  it  with  that  in  view,  and  you  will  find 
that  He  spent  a  great  proportion  of  His  time 
simply  in  making  people  happy,  in  doing  good 
turns  to  people.  There  is  only  one  thing 
greater  than  happiness  in  the  world,  and  that 
is  holiness  ;  and  it  is  not  in  our  keeping  ;  but 
what  God  has  put  in  our  power  is  the  happiness 
of  those  about  us,  and  that  is  largely  to  be 
secured  by  our  being  kind  to  them. 

"  The  greatest  thing,"  says  some  one,  "  a 
man  can  do  for  his  Heavenly  Father  is  to  be 
kind  to  some  of  His  other  children."  I  wonder 
why  it  is  that  we  are  not  all  kinder  than  we 
are  ?  How  much  the  world  needs  it.  How 
easily  it  is  done.  How  instantaneously  it  acts. 
How  infallibly  it  is  remembered.  How  super 
abundantly  it  pays  itself  back — for  there  is  no 
debtor  in  the  world  so  honourable,  so  superbly 


24  THE   GREATEST   THING 

honourable,  as  Love.  "  Love  never  faileth." 
Love  is  success,  Love  is  happiness,  Love  is  life. 
"  Love,  I  say,"  with  Browning,  "  is  energy  of 
Life." 

"  For  life,  with  all  it  yields  of  joy  or  woe 
And  hope  and  fear, 

Is  just  our  chance  o*  the  prize  of  learning  love, — 
How  love  might  be,  hath  been  indeed,  and  is." 

Where  Love  is,  God  is.  He  that  dwelleth  in 
Love  dwelleth  in  God.  God  is  Love.  There 
fore  love.  Without  distinction,  without  calcula 
tion,  without  procrastination,  love.  Lavish  it 
upon  the  poor,  where  it  is  very  easy ;  especially 
upon  the  rich,  who  often  need  it  most ;  most  of 
all  upon  our  equals,  where  it  is  very  difficult, 
and  for  whom  perhaps  we  each  do  least  of  all. 
There  is  a  difference  between  trying  to  please 
and  giving  pleasure.  Give  pleasure.  Lose  no 
chance  of  giving  pleasure.  For  that  is  the 


IN  THE      WORLD.  2$ 

ceaseless  and  anonymous  triumph  of  a  truly 
loving  spirit.  "  I  shall  pass  through  this  world 
but  once.  Any  good  thing  therefore  that  I 
can  do,  or  any  kindness  that  I  can  show  to  any 
human  being,  let  me  do  it  now.  Let  me  not 
defer  it  or  neglect  it,  for  I  shall  not  pass  this 
way  again." 

Generosity.  "  Love  envieth  not."  This  is 
love  in  competition  with  others.  Whenever  you 
attempt  a  good  work  you  will  find  other  men 
doing  the  same  kind  of  work,  and  probably 
doing  it  better.  Envy  them  not.  Envy  is  a 
feeling  of  ill-will  to  those  who  are  in  the 
same  line  as  ourselves,  a  spirit  of  covetous- 
ness  and  detraction.  How  little  Christian 
work  even  is  a  protection  against  un-Christian 
feeling.  That  most  despicable  of  all  the  un 
worthy  moods  which  cloud  a  Christian's  soul 
assuredly  waits  for  us  on  the  threshold  of  every 


26  THE   GREATEST  THING 

work,  unless  we  are  fortified  with  this  grace  of 
magnanimity.  Only  one  thing  truly  need  the 
Christian  envy,  the  large,  rich,  generous  soul 
which  "  envieth  not." 

And  then,  after  having  learned  all  that,  you 
have  to  learn  this  further  thing,  Humility— -to 
put  a  seal  upon  your  lips  and  forget  what  you 
have  done.  After  you  have  been  kind,  after 
Love  has  stolen  forth  into  the  world  and  done 
its  beautiful  work,  go  back  into  the  shade  again 
and  say  nothing  about  it.  Love  hides  even 
from  itself.  Love  waives  even  self-satisfaction. 
"Love  vaunteth  not'itself,  is  not  puffed  up." 

The  fifth  ingredient  is  a  somewhat  strange 
one  to  find  in  this  summum  bonum  :  Courtesy. 
This  is  Love  in  society,  Love  in  relation  to 
etiquette.  "  Love  doth  not  behave  itself  un 
seemly."  Politeness  has  been  defined  as  love  in 
trifles.  Courtesy  is  said  to  be  love  in  little 


IN   THE   WORLD.  2/ 

things.     And  the  one  secret  of  politeness  is  to 
love.    Love  cannot  behave  itself  unseemly.  You 
can  put  the  most  untutored  persons  into  the 
highest  society,  and  if  they  have  a  reservoir  of 
Love  in  their  heart,  they  will  not  behave  them- 
selves  unseemly.     They  simply  cannot  do  it. 
Carlyle  said  of  Robert  Burns  that  there  was  no 
truer  gentleman  in  Europe  than  the  ploughman- 
poet.   It  was  because  he  loved  everything — the 
mouse,  and  the  daisy,  and  all  the  things,  great 
and  small,  that  God  had  made.     So  with  this 
simple   passport    he   could    mingle   with   any 
society,  and  enter  courts  and  palaces  from  his 
little  cottage  on   the  banks  of  the  Ayr.     You 
know  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  gentleman." 
It  means    a    gentle   man — a   man   who   does 
things   gently   with   love.      And    that    is   the 
whole  art  and  mystery  of  it.     The  gentle  man 
cannot  in  the  nature  of  things  do  an  ungentle, 


28  THE  GREATEST  THING 

an  ungentlemanly  thing.  The  ungentle  soul, 
the  inconsiderate,  unsympathetic  nature  can 
not  do  anything  else.  "  Love  doth  not  behave 
itself  unseemly." 

Unselfishness.  "  Love  seeketh  not  her  own." 
Observe :  Seeketh  not  even  that  which  is  her 
own.  In  Britain  the  Englishman  is  devoted, 
and  rightly,  to  his  rights.  But  there  come 
times  when  a  man  may  exercise  even  the  higher 
right  of  giving  up  his  rights.  Yet  Paul  does 
not  summon  us  to  give  up  our  rights.  Love 
strikes  much  deeper.  It  would  have  us  not 
seek  them  at  all,  ignore  them,  eliminate  the 
personal  element  altogether  from  our  calcula 
tions.  It  is  not  hard  to  give  up  our  rights. 
They  are  often  external.  The  difficult  thing  is 
to  give  up  ourselves.  The  more  difficult  thing 
still  is  not  to  seek  things  for  ourselves  at  all. 
After  we  have  sought  them,  bought  them,  won 


IN  THE   WORLD.  29 

them,  deserved  them,  we  have  taken  the  cream 
off  them  for  ourselves  already.  Little  cross  then 
perhaps  to  give  them  up.  But  not  to  seek  them, 
to  look  every  man  not  on  his  own  things,  but 
on  the  things  of  others — id  opus  est.  "  Seekest 
thou  great  things  for  thyself?  "  said  the  prophet; 
"  seek  them  not."  Why  ?  Because  there  is  no 
greatness  in  things.  Things  cannot  be  great. 
The  only  greatness  is  unselfish  love.  Even 
self-denial  in  itself  is  nothing,  is  almost  a  mis 
take.  Only  a  great  purpose  or  a  mightier  love 
can  justify  the  waste.  It  is  more  difficult,  I 
have  said,  not  to  seek  our  own  at  all,  than, 
having  sought  it,  to  give  it  up.  I  must  take 
that  back.  It  is  only  true  of  a  partly  selfish 
heart.  Nothing  is  a  hardship  to  Love,  and 
nothing  is  hard.  I  believe  that  Christ's  yoke 
is  easy.  Christ's  "yoke"  is  just  His  way  of 
taking  life.  And  I  believe  it  is  an  easier  way 


3O  THE   GREATEST  THING 

than  any  other.  I  believe  it  is  a  happier  way 
than  any  other.  The  most  obvious  lesson  in 
Christ's  teaching  is  that  there  is  no  happiness 
in  having  and  getting  anything,  but  only  in 
giving.  I  repeat,  there  is  no  happiness  in  having 
or  in  getting,  but  only  in  giving.  And  half  the 
world  is  on  the  wrong  scent  in  the  pursuit  of 
happiness.  They  think  it  consists  in  having 
and  getting,  and  in  being  served  by  others.  It 
consists  in  giving,  and  in  serving  others.  He 
that  would  be  great  among  you,  said  Christ,  let 
him  serve.  He  that  would  be  happy,  let  him 
remember  that  there  is  but  one  way — it  is  more 
blessed,  it  is  more  happy,  to  give  than  to  receive. 
The  next  ingredient  is  a  very  remarkable 
one  :  Good  Temper.  "  Love  is  not  easily  pro 
voked."  Nothing  could  be  more  striking  than 
to  find  this  here.  We  are  inclined  to  look 
upon  bad  temper  as  a  very  harmless  weakness. 


IN  THE  WORLD.  31 

We  speak  of  it  as  a  mere  infirmity  of  nature,  a 
family  failing,  a  matter  of  temperament,  not  a 
thing  to  take  into  very  serious  account  in 
estimating  a  man's  character.  And  yet  here, 
right  in  the  heart  of  this  analysis  of  love,  it 
finds  a  place;  and  the  Bible  again  and  again 
returns  to  condemn  it  as  one  of  the  most 
destructive  elements  in  human  nature. 

The  peculiarity  of  ill  temper  is  that  it  is  the 
vice  of  the  virtuous.  It  is  often  the  one  blot 
on  an  otherwise  noble  character.  You  know 
men  who  are  all  but  perfect,  and  women  who 
would  be  entirely  perfect,  but  for  an  easily 
ruffled,  quick-tempered,  or  "touchy"  disposi 
tion.  This  compatibility  of  ill  temper  with  high 
moral  character  is  one  of  the  strangest  and  sad 
dest  problems  of  ethics.  The  truth  is  there  are 
two  great  classes  of  sins — sins  of  the  Body,  and 
sins  of  the  Disposition.  The  Prodigal  Son  may 


32  THE   GREATEST   THING 

be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  first,  the  Elder  Brother 
of  the  second.  Now  society  has  no  doubt 
whatever  as  to  which  of  these  is  the  worse.  Its 
brand  falls,  without  a  challenge,  upon  the  Pro 
digal.  But  are  we  right  ?  We  have  no  balance 
to  weigh  one  another's  sins,  and  coarser  and 
finer  are  but  human  words  ;  but  faults  in  the 
higher  nature  may  be  less  venial  than  those  in 
the  lower,  and  to  the  eye  of  Him  who  is  Love, 
a  sin  against  Love  may  seem  a  hundred  times 
more  base.  No  form  of  vice,  not  worldliness, 
not  greed  of  gold,  not  drunkenness  itself,  does 
more  to  un-Christianise  society  than  evil  temper. 
For  embittering  life,  for  breaking  up  communi 
ties,  for  destroying  the  most  sacred  relationships, 
for  devastating  homes,  for  withering  up  men 
and  women,  for  taking  the  bloom  off  childhood, 
in  short,  for  sheer  gratuitous  misery-producing 
power,  this  influence  stands  alone.  Look  at 


IN   THE   WORLD.  33 

the  Elder  Brother,  moral,  hard-working,  patient, 
dutiful — let  him  get  all  credit  for  his  virtues — 
look  at  this  man,  this  baby,  sulking  outside  his 
own  father's  door.  "  He  was  angry,"  we  read, 
"  and  would  not  go  in."  Look  at  the  effect 
upon  the  father,  upon  the  servants,  upon  the 
happiness  of  the  guests.  Judge  of  the  effect 
upon  the  Prodigal — and  how  many  prodigals 
are  kept  out  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  by  the 
unlovely  character  of  those  who  profess  to  be 
inside?  Analyse,  as  a  study  in  Temper,  the 
thunder-cloud  itself  as  it  gathers  upon  the  Elder 
Brother's  brow.  What  is  it  made  of  ?  Jealousy, 
anger,  pride,  uncharity,  cruelty,  self-righteous 
ness,  touchiness,  doggedness,  sullenness — these 
are  the  ingredients  of  this  dark  and  loveless 
soul.  In  varying  proportions,  also,  these  are  the 
ingredients  of  all  ill  temper.  Judge  if  such  sins 
of  the  disposition  are  not  worse  to  live  in,  and 


34  THE   GREATEST   THING 

for  others  to  live  with,  than  sins  of  the  body. 
Did  Christ  indeed  not  answer  the  question 
Himself  when  He  said,  "  I  say  unto  you,  that 
the  publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the  King 
dom  of  Heaven  before  you/'  There  is  really  no 
place  in  Heaven  for  a  disposition  like  this.  A 
man  with  such  a  mood  could  only  make  Heaven 
miserable  for  all  the  people  in  it.  Except, 
therefore,  such  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot, 
he  simply  cannot,  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 
For  it  is  perfectly  certain — and  you  will  not 
misunderstand  me — that  to  enter  Heaven  a 
man  must  take  it  with  him. 

You  will  see  then  why  Temper  is  significant. 
It  is  not  in  what  it  is  alone,  but  in  what  it  re 
veals.  This  is  why  I  take  the  liberty  now  of 
speaking  of  it  with  such  unusual  plainness.  It 
is  a  test  for  love,  a  symptom,  a  revelation  of  an 
unloving  nature  at  bottom.  It  is  the  intermit- 


IN  THE  WORLD.  35 

tent  fever  which  bespeaks  unintermittent  disease 
within ;  the  occasional  bubble  escaping  to  the 
surface  which  betrays  some  rottenness  under 
neath  ;  a  sample  of  the  most  hidden  products 
of  the  soul  dropped  involuntarily  when  off  one's 
guard ;  in  a  word,  the  lightning  form  of  a  hun 
dred  hideous  and  un-Christian  sins.  For  a  want 
of  patience,  a  want  of  kindness,  a  want  of  gen 
erosity,  a  want  of  courtesy,  a  want  of  unselfish 
ness,  are  all  instantaneously  symbolised  in  one 
flash  of  Temper. 

Hence  it  is  not  enough  to  deal  with  the  Tem 
per.  We  must  go  to  the  source,  and  change  the 
inmost  nature,  and  the  angry  humours  will  die 
away  of  themselves.  Souls  are  made  sweet 
not  by  taking  the  acid  fluids  out,  but  by  putting 
something  in — a  great  Love,  a  new  Spirit,  the 
Spirit  of  Christ.  Christ,  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
interpenetrating  ours,  sweetens,  purifies,  trans- 


36  THE   GREATEST  THING 

forms   all.     This    only   can    eradicate   what   is 
wrong,  work  a  chemical  change,  renovate  and 
regenerate,    and   rehabilitate    the   inner   man. 
Will-power  does  not  change  men.     Time  does 
not   change   men.      Christ    does.      Therefore 
"  Let  that  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in 
Christ  Jesus."     Some    of   us   have  not   much 
time  to  lose.     Remember,  once  more,  that  this 
is  a  matter  of  life  or  death.     I   cannot  help 
speaking  urgently,  for  myself,  for  yourselves. 
"  Whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones, 
which  believe  in    me,   it  were  better  for  him 
that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck, 
and  that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the 
sea."    That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  deliberate  verdict 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  that  it  is  better  not  to  live 
than  not  to  love.     It  is  better  not  to  live  than 
not  to  love. 

Guilelessness  and  Sincerity  may  be  dismissed 


IN   THE   WORLD. 


almost  with  a  word.  Guilelessness  is  the  grace 
for  suspicious  people.  And  the  possession  of 
it  is  the  great  secret  of  personal  influence. 
You  will  find,  if  you  think  for  a  moment,  that 
the  people  who  influence  you  are  people  who 
believe  in  you.  In  an  atmosphere  of  suspicion 
men  shrivel  up  ;  but  in  that  atmosphere  they 
expand,  and  find  encouragement  and  educative 
fellowship.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  here 
and  there  in  this  hard,  uncharitable  world  there 
should  still  be  left  a  few  rare  souls  who  think 
no  evil.  This  is  the  great  unworldliness. 
Love  "  thinketh  no  evil,"  imputes  no  motive, 
sees  the  bright  side,  puts  the  best  construction 
on  every  action.  What  a  delightful  state  of 
mind  to  live  in  !  What  a  stimulus  and  bene 
diction  even  to  meet  with  it  for  a  day  !  To 
be  trusted  is  to  be  saved.  And  if  we  try  to 
influence  or  elevate  others,  we  shall  soon  see 


38  THE   GREATEST  THING 


that  success  is  in  proportion  to  their  belief  of 
our  belief  in  them.  For  the  respect  of  another 
is  the  first  restoration  of  the  self-respect  a  man 
has  lost ;  our  ideal  of  what  he  is  becomes  to 
him  the  hope  and  pattern  of  what  he  may 
become. 

"Love  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth 
in  the  truth."  I  have  called  this  Sincerity  from 
the  words  rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version 
by  "  rejoiceth  in  the  truth."  And,  certainly, 
were  this  the  real  translation,  nothing  could  be 
more  just.  For  he  who  loves  will  love  Truth  not 
less  than  men.  He  will  rejoice  in  the  Truth — 
rejoice  not  in  what  he  has  been  taught  to 
believe ;  not  in  this  Church's  doctrine  or  in 
that ;  not  in  this  ism  or  in  that  ism  ;  but  "  in 
the  Truth."  He  will  accept  only  what  is  real  ; 
he  will  strive  to  get  at  facts  ;  he  will  search  for 
Truth  with  a  humble  and  unbiassed  mind,  and 


IN   THE   WORLD.  39 

cherish  whatever  he  finds  at  any  sacrifice.  But 
the  more  literal  translation  of  the  Revised 
Version  calls  for  just  such  a  sacrifice  for  truth's 
sake  here.  For  what  Paul  really  meant  is,  as 
we  there  read,  "  Rejoiceth  not  in  unrighteous 
ness,  but  rejoiceth  with  the  truth,"  a  quality 
which  probably  no  one  English  word — and 
certainly  not  Sincerity — adequately  defines. 
It  includes,  perhaps  more  strictly,  the  self- 
restraint  which  refuses  to  make  capital  out  of 
others'  faults ;  the  charity  which  delights  not 
in  exposing  the  weakness  of  others,  but  "  cover- 
eth  all  things  ;  "  the  sincerity  of  purpose  which 
endeavours  to  see  things  as  they  are,  and  re 
joices  to  find  them  better  than  suspicion  feared 
or  calumny  denounced. 

So  much  for  the  analysis  of  Love.  Now 
the  business  of  our  lives  is  to  have  these 
things  fitted  into  our  characters.  That  is  the 


4O  THE   GREATEST   THING 

supreme  work  to  which  we  need  to  address 
ourselves  in  this  world,  to  learn  Love.  Is  life 
not  full  of  opportunities  for  learning  Love? 
Every  man  and  woman  every  day  has  a 
thousand  of  them.  The  world  is  not  a  play- 
ground  ;  it  is  a  schoolroom.  Life  is  not  a 
holiday,  but  an  education.  And  the  one  eternal 
lesson  for  us  all  is  how  better  we  can  love.  What 
makes  a  man  a  good  cricketer?  Practice. 
What  makes  a  man  a  good  artist,  a  good 
sculptor,  a  good  musician  ?  Practice.  What 
makes  a  man  a  good  linguist,  a  good  steno 
grapher?  Practice.  What  ma.kes  a  man  a 
good  man  ?  Practice.  Nothing  else.  There 
is  nothing  capricious  about  religion.  We  do 
not  get  the  soul  in  different  ways,  under  differ 
ent  laws,  from  those  in  which  we  get  the  body 
and  the  mind.  If  a  man  does  not  exercise  his 
arm  he  develops  no  biceps  muscle  ;  and  if  a 


IN   THE   WORLD.  41 

man  does  not  exercise  his  soul,  he  acquires  no 
muscle  in  his  soul,  no  strength  of  character,  no 
vigour  of  moral  fibre,  nor  beauty  of  spiritual 
growth.  Love  is  not  a  thing  of  enthusiastic 
emotion.  It  is  a  rich,  strong,  manly,  vigorous 
expression  of  the  whole  round  Christian  char 
acter — the  Christlike  nature  in  its  fullest  de 
velopment.  And  the  constituents  of  this  great 
character  are  only  to  be  built  up  by  ceaseless 
practice. 

What  was  Christ  doing  in  the  carpenter's 
shop?  Practising.  Though  perfect,  we  read 
that  He  learned  obedience,  and  grew  in  wis 
dom  and  in  favor  with  God.  Do  not  quarrel 
therefore  with  your  lot  in  life.  Do  not  complain 
of  its  never-ceasing  cares,  its  petty  environment, 
the  vexations  you  have  to  stand,  the  small  and 
sordid  souls  you  have  to  live  and  work  with. 
Above  all,  do  not  resent  temptation  ;  do  not 


42  THE  GREATEST  THING 

be  perplexed  because  it  seems  to  thicken  round 
you  more  and  more,  and  ceases  neither  for 
effort  nor  for  agony  nor  prayer.  That  is  your 
practice.  That  is  the  practice  which  God 
appoints  you  ;  and  it  is  having  its  work  in 
making  you  patient,  and  humble,  and  generous, 
and  unselfish,  and  kind,  and  courteous.  Do 
not  grudge  the  hand  that  is  moulding  the  still 
too  shapeless  image  within  you.  It  is  growing 
more  beautiful,  though  you  see  it  not,  and 
every  touch  of  temptation  may  add  to  its  per. 
fection.  Therefore  keep  in  the  midst  of  life. 
Do  not  isolate  yourself.  Be  among  men,  and 
among  things,  and  among  troubles,  and  diffi 
culties,  and  obstacles.  You  remember  Goethe's 
words :  Es  bildet  ein  Talent  sick  in  der  Stille, 
Dock  ein  Character  in  dem  Strom  der  Welt. 
"  Talent  develops  itself  in  solitude ;  character 
in  the  stream  of  life."  Talent  develops  itself 


IN   THE   WORLD.  43 

in  solitude — the  talent  of  prayer,  of  faith,  of 
meditation,  of  seeing  the  unseen  ;  Character 
grows  in  the  stream  of  the  world's  life.  That 
chiefly  is  where  men  are  to  learn  love. 

How?  Now,  how?  To  make  it  easier,  I 
have  named  a  few  of  the  elements  of  love. 
But  these  are  only  elements.  Love  itself  can 
never  be  defined.  Light  is  a  something  more 
than  the  sum  of  its  ingredients — a  glowing, 
dazzling,  tremulous  ether.  And  love  is  some 
thing  more  than  all  its  elements — a  palpitating, 
quivering,  sensitive,  living  thing.  By  synthesis 
of  all  the  colours,  men  can  make  whiteness, 
they  cannot  make  light.  By  synthesis  of  all 
the  virtues,  men  can  make  virtue,  they  cannot 
make  love.  How  then  are  we  to  have  this 
transcendent  living  whole  conveyed  into  our 
souls  ?  We  brace  our  wills  to  secure  it.  We 
try  to  copy  those  who  have  it.  We  lay  down 


44  THE   GREATEST   THING 

rules  about  it.  We  watch.  We  pray.  But 
these  things  alone  will  not  bring  Love  into  our 
nature.  Love  is  an  effect.  And  only  as  we 
fulfil  the  right  condition  can  we  have  the  effect 
produced.  Shall  I  tell  you  what  the  cause  is  ? 
If  you  turn  to  the  Revised  Version  of  the 
First  Epistle  of  John  you  will  find  these  words  : 
"We  love  because  He  first  loved  us."  "We 
love,"  not  "  We  love  Him"  That  is  the  way 
the  old  version  has  it,  and  it  is  quite  wrong. 
"  We  love — because  He  first  loved  us."  Look 
at  that  word  "  because."  It  is  the  cause  of 
which  I  have  spoken.  "Because  He  first  loved 
us,"  the  effect  follows  that  we  love,  we  love 
Him,  we  love  all  men.  We  cannot  help  it. 
Because  He  loved  us,  we  love,  we  love  every 
body.  Our  heart  is  slowly  changed.  Con 
template  the  love  of  Christ,  and  you  will  love. 
Stand  before  that  mirror,  reflect  Christ's  char- 


IN  THE  WORLD.  45 

acter,  and  you  will  be  changed  into  the  same 
image  from  tenderness  to  tenderness.  There 
is  no  other  way.  You  cannot  love  to  order. 
You  can  only  look  at  the  lovely  object,  and  fall 
in  love  with  it,  and  grow  into  likeness  to  it. 
And  so  look  at  this  Perfect  Character,  this 
Perfect  Life.  Look  at  the  great  Sacrifice  as 
He  laid  down  Himself,  all  through  life,  and  upon 
the  Cross  of  Calvary ;  and  you  must  love  Him. 
And  loving  Him,  you  must  become  like  Him. 
Love  begets  love.  It  is  a  process  of  induction. 
Put  a  piece  of  iron  in  the  presence  of  an  electri 
fied  body,  and  that  piece  of  iron  for  a  time 
becomes  electrified.  It  is  changed  into  a  tem 
porary  magnet  in  the  mere  presence  of  a  per 
manent  magnet,  and  as  long  as  you  leave  the 
two  side  by  side,  they  are  both  magnets  alike. 
Remain  side  by  side  with  Him  who  loved  us, 
and  gave  Himself  for  us,  and  you  too  will  be- 


46  THE   GREATEST   THING 

come  a  permanent  magnet,  a  permanently 
attractive  force  ;  and  like  Him  you  will  draw 
all  men  unto  you,  like  Him  you  will  be  drawn 
unto  all  men.  That  is  the  inevitable  effect 
of  Love.  Any  man  who  fulfils  that  cause 
must  have  that  effect  produced  in  him.  Try  to 
give  up  the  idea  that  religion  comes  to  us  by 
chance,  or  by  mystery,  or  by  caprice.  It  comes 
to  us  by  natural  law,  or  by  supernatural  law, 
for  all  law  is  Divine.  Edward  Irving  went  to 
see  a  dying  boy  once,  and  when  he  entered  the 
room  he  just  put  his  hand  on  the  sufferer's 
head,  and  said,  "  My  boy,  God  loves  you,"  and 
went  away.  And  the  boy  started  from  his  bed, 
and  called  out  to  the  people  in  the  house,  "  God 
loves  me  !  God  loves  me  !  "  It  changed  that  boy. 
The  sense  that  God  loved  him  overpowered 
him,  melted  him  down,  and  began  the  creating 
of  a  new  heart  in  him.  And  that  is  how  the 


IN  THE  WORLD.  47 

love  of  God  melts  down  the  unlovely  heart  in 
man,  and.  begets  in  him  the  new  creature,  who 
is  patient,  and  humble  and  gentle  and  unselfish. 
And  there  is  no  other  way  to  get  it.  There  is 
no  mystery  about  it.  We  love  others,  we  love 
everybody,  we  love  our  enemies,  because  He 
first  loved  us. 


THE   DEFENCE 

Now  I  have  a  closing  sentence  or  two  to  add 
about  Paul's  reason  for  singling  out  love  as  the 
supreme  possession.  It  is  a  very  remarkable 
reason.  In  a  single  word  it  is  this :  it  lasts. 
"  Love,"  urges  Paul,  "  never  faileth."  Then  he 
begins  again  one  of  his  marvellous  lists  of  the 
great  things  of  the  day,  and  exposes  them  one 
by  one.  He  runs  over  the  things  that  men 
thought  were  going  to  last,  and  shows  that  they 
are  all  fleeting,  temporary,  passing  away. 

"  Whether  there  be  prophecies,  they  shall 
fail."  It  was  the  mother's  ambition  for  her  boy 
in  those  days  that  he  should  become  a  prophet. 


THE   GREATEST    THING   IN   THE  WORLD.    49 

For  hundreds  of  years  God  had  never  spoken 
by  means  of  any  prophet,  and  at  that  time 
the  prophet  was  greater  than  the  King.  Men 
waited  wistfully  for  another  messenger  to  come, 
and  hung  upon  his  lips  when  he  appeared  as 
upon  the  very  voice  of  God.  Paul  says, 
"  Whether  there  be  prophecies,  they  shall  fail." 
This  Book  is  full  of  prophecies.  One  by  one 
they  have  "  failed  "  ;  that  is,  having  been  ful 
filled  their  work  is  finished  ;  they  have  nothing 
more  to  do  now  in  the  world  except  to  feed  a 
devout  man's  faith. 

Then  Paul  talks  about  tongues.  That  was 
another  thing  that  was  greatly  coveted. 
"  Whether  there  be  tongues,  they  shall  cease." 
As  we  all  know,  many,  many  centuries  have 
passed  since  tongues  have  been  known  in  this 
world.  They  have  ceased.  Take  it  in  any 

sense  you  like.    Take  it,  for  illustration  merely, 
4 


5O  THE   GREATEST   THING 

as  languages  in  general — a  sense  which  was  not 
in  Paul's  mind  at  all,  and  which  though  it  can 
not  give  us  the  specific  lesson  will  point  the 
general  truth.  Consider  the  words  in  which 
these  chapters  were  written — Greek.  It  has 
gone.  Take  the  Latin — the  other  great  tongue 
of  those  days.  It  ceased  long  ago.  Look  at 
the  Indian  language.  It  is  ceasing.  The 
language  of  Wales,  of  Ireland,  of  the  Scottish 
Highlands  is  dying  before  our  eyes.  The  most 
popular  book  in  the  English  tongue  at  the 
present  time,  except  the  Bible,  is  one  of 
Dickens's  works,  his  Pickwick  Papers.  It  is 
largely  written  in  the  language  of  London 
street-life ;  and  experts  assure  us  that  in  fifty 
years  it  will  be  unintelligible  to  the  average 
English  reader. 

Then    Paul    goes    farther,    and   with   even 
greater   boldness    adds,    "  Whether   there   be 


IN   THE  WORLD.  51 

knowledge,  it  shall  vanish  away."  The  wisdom 
of  the  ancients,  where  is  it  ?  It  is  wholly  gone. 
A  schoolboy  to-day  knows  more  than  Sir  Isaac 
Newton  knew.  His  knowledge  has  vanished 
away.  You  put  yesterday's  newspaper  in  the 
fire.  Its  knowledge  has  vanished  away.  You 
buy  the  old  editions  of  the  great  encyclopaedias 
for  a  few  pence.  Their  knowledge  has  vanished 
away.  Look  how  the  coach  has  been  super 
seded  by  the  use  of  steam.  Look  how  elec 
tricity  has  superseded  that,  and  swept  a  hundred 
almost  new  inventions  into  oblivion.  One  of 
the  greatest  living  authorities,  Sir  William 
Thompson,  said  the  other  day,  "  The  steam- 
engine  is  passing  away."  "  Whether  there  be 
knowledge,  it  shall  vanish  away."  At  every 
workshop  you  will  see,  in  the  back  yard,  a  heap 
of  old  iron,  a  few  wheels,  a  few  levers,  a  few 
cranks,  broken  and  eaten  with  rust.  Twenty 


52  THE   GREATEST  THIM1 

years  ago  that  was  the  pride  of  the  city.  Men 
flocked  in  from  the  country  to  see  the  great 
invention ;  now  it  is  superseded,  its  day  is  done. 
And  all  the  boasted  science  and  philosophy  of 
this  day  will  soon  be  old.  But  yesterday,  in 
the  University  of  Edinburgh,  the  greatest  figure 
in  the  faculty  was  Sir  James  Simpson,  the 
discoverer  of  chloroform.  The  other  day  his 
successor  and  nephew,  Professor  Simpson,  was 
asked  by  the  librarian  of  the  University  to  go 
to  the  library  and  pick  out  the  books  on  his 
subject  that  were  no  longer  needed.  And  his 
reply  to  the  librarian  was  this :  "  Take  every 
text-book  that  is  more  than  ten  years  old,  and 
put  it  down  in  the  cellar."  Sir  James  Simpson 
was  a  great  authority  only  a  few  years  ago : 
men  came  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  to  consult 
him ;  and  almost  the  whole  teaching  of  that 
time  is  consigned  by  the  science  of  to-day  to 


IN  THE   WORLD.  53 

oblivion.  And  in  every  branch  of  science  it  is 
the  same.  "  Now  we  know  in  part.  We  see 
through  a  glass  darkly." 

Can  you  tell  me  anything  that  is  going  to 
last?  Many  things  Paul  did  not  condescend 
to  name.  He  did  not  mention  money,  fortune, 
fame  ;  but  he  picked  out  the  great  things  of  his 
time,  the  things  the  best  men  thought  had 
something  in  them,  and  brushed  them  peremp 
torily  aside.  Paul  had  no  charge  against  these 
things  in  themselves.  All  he  said  about  them 
was  that  they  would  not  last.  They  were  great 
things,  but  not  supreme  things.  There  were 
things  beyond  them.  What  we  are  stretches 
past  what  we  do,  beyond  what  we  possess. 
Many  things  that  men  denounce  as  sins  are  not 
sins  ;  but  they  are  temporary.  And  that  is  a 
favourite  argument  of  the  New  Testament. 
John  says  of  the  world,  not  that  it  is  wrong, 


54  THE   GREATEST   THING 

but  simply  that  it  "  passeth  away."  There  is  a 
great  deal  in  the  world  that  is  delightful  and 
beautiful ;  there  is  a  great  deal  in  it  that  is 
great  and  engrossing ;  but  it  will  not  last.  All 
that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life,  are  but  for 
a  little  while.  Love  not  the  world  therefore. 
Nothing  that  it  contains  is  worth  the  life  and 
consecration  of  an  immortal  soul.  The  im 
mortal  soul  must  give  itself  to  something  that 
is  immortal.  And  the  only  immortal  things 
are  these :  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love,  but 
the  greatest  of  these  is  love." 

Some  think  the  time  may  come  when  two 
of  these  three  things  will  also  pass  away — faith 
into  sight,  hope  into  fruition.  Paul  does  not 
say  so.  We  know  but  little  now  about  the 
conditions  of  the  life  that  is  to  come.  But 
what  is  certain  is  that  Love  must  last.  God, 


IN  THE  WORLD.  55 

the  Eternal  God,  is  Love.  Covet  therefore 
that  everlasting  gift,  that  one  thing  which  it  is 
certain  is  going  to  stand,  that  one  coinage 
which  will  be  current  in  the  Universe  when 
all  the  other  coinages  of  all  the  nations  of 
the  world  shall  be  useless  and  unhonoured. 
You  will  give  yourselves  to  many  things,  give 
yourselves  first  to  Love.  Hold  things  in  their 
proportion.  Hold  things  in  their  proportion. 
Let  at  least  the  first  great  object  of  our  lives 
be  to  achieve  the  character  defended  in  these 
words,  the  character — and  it  is  the  character 
of  Christ — which  is  built  round  Love. 

I  have  said  this  thing  is  eternal.  Did  you 
ever  notice  how  continually  John  associates 
love  and  faith  with  eternal  life?  I  was  not 
told  when  I  was  a  boy  that  "  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  have 


56  THE   GREATEST   THING 

everlasting  life."  What  I  was  told,  I  remember, 
was,  that  God  so  loved  the  world  that,  if  I 
trusted  in  Him,  I  was  to  have  a  thing  called 
peace,  or  I  was  to  have  rest,  or  I  was  to  have 
joy,  or  I  was  to  have  safety.  But  I  had  to 
find  out  for  myself  that  whosoever  trusteth  in 
Him — that  is,  whosoever  loveth  Him,  for  trust 
is  only  the  avenue  to  Love — hath  everlasting 
life.  The  Gospel  offers  a  man  life.  Never 
offer  men  a  thimbleful  of  Gospel.  Do  not 
offer  them  merely  joy,  or  merely  peace,  or 
merely  rest,  or  merely  safety ;  tell  them  how 
Christ  came  to  give  men  a  more  abundant  life 
than  they  have,  a  life  abundant  in  love,  and 
therefore  abundant  in  salvation  for  themselves, 
and  large  in  enterprise  for  the  alleviation  and 
redemption  of  the  world.  Then  only  can  the 
Gospel  take  hold  of  the  whole  of  a  man,  body, 
soul,  and  spirit,  and  give  to  each  part  of  his 


IN  THE  WORLD.  57 

nature  its  exercise  and  reward.  Many  of  the 
current  Gospels  are  addressed  only  to  a  part  of 
man's  nature.  They  offer  peace,  not  life  ;  faith, 
not  Love;  justification,  not  regeneration.  And 
men  slip  back  again  from  such  religion  because 
it  has  never  really  held  them.  Their  nature 
was  not  all  in  it.  It  offered  no  deeper  and 
gladder  life-current  than  the  life  that  was  lived 
before.  Surely  it  stands  to  reason  that  only  a 
fuller  love  can  compete  with  the  love  of  the  world. 
To  love  abundantly  is  to  live  abundantly, 
and  to  love  for  ever  is  to  live  for  ever.  Hence, 
eternal  life  is  inextricably  bound  up  with  love. 
We  want  to  live  for  ever  for  the  same  reason 
that  we  want  to  live  to-morrow.  Why  do  you 
want  to  live  to-morrow?  It  is  because  there 
is  some  one  who  loves  you,  and  whom  you 
want  to  see  to-morrow,  and  be  with,  and  love 
back.  There  is  no  other  reason  why  we  should 


58  THE   GREATEST   THING 

live  on  than  that  we  love  and  are  beloved.  It 
is  when  a  man  has  no  one  to  love  him  that  he 
commits  suicide.  So  long  as  he  has  friends, 
those  who  love  him  and  whom  he  loves,  he  will 
live  ;  because  to  live  is  to  love.  Be  it  but  the 
love  of  a  dog,  it  will  keep  him  in  life  ;  but  let 
that  go  and  he  has  no  contact  with  life,  no 
reason  to  live.  He  dies  by  his  own  hand. 
Eternal  life  also  is  to  know  God,  and  God  is 
love.  This  is  Christ's  own  definition.  Ponder 
it.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 
know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ  whom  Thou  has  sent."  Love  must 
be  eternal.  It  is  what  God  is.  On  the  last 
analysis,  then,  love  is  life.  Love  never  faileth, 
and  life  never  faileth,  so  long  as  there  is  love. 
That  is  the  philosophy  of  what  Paul  is  showing 
us ;  the  reason  why  in  the  nature  of  things 
Love  should  be  the  supreme  thing — because  it 


IN  THE  WORLD.  $9 

is  going  to  last  ;  because  in  the  nature  of  things 
it  is  an  Eternal  Life.  It  is  a  thing  that  we  are 
living  now,  not  that  we  get  when  we  die ;  that 
we  shall  have  a  poor  chance  of  getting  when 
we  die  unless  we  are  living  now.  No  worse 
fate  can  befall  a  man  in  this  world  than  to  live 
and  grow  old  alone,  unloving,  and  unloved.  To 
be  lost  is  to  live  in  an  unregenerate  condition, 
loveless  and  unloved  ;  and  to  be  saved  is  to 
love ;  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth 
already  in  God.  For  God  is  love. 

Now  I  have  all  but  finished.  How  many 
of  you  will  join  me  in  reading  this  chapter  once 
a  week  for  the  next  three  months  ?  A  man 
did  that  once  and  it  changed  his  whole  life. 
Will  you  do  it  ?  It  is  for  the  greatest  thing  in 
the  world.  You  might  begin  by  reading  it 
every  day,  especially  the  verses  which  describe 
the  perfect  character.  "  Love  suffereth  long, 


60  THE   GREATEST  THING 

and  is  kind ;  love  envieth  not ;  love  vaunteth 
not  itself."  Get  these  ingredients  into  your 
life.  Then  everything  that  you  do  is  eternal. 
It  is  worth  doing.  It  is  worth  giving  time  to. 
No  man  can  become  a  saint  in  his  sleep;  and  to 
fulfil  the  condition  required  demands  a  certain 
amount  of  prayer  and  meditation  and  time,  just 
as  improvement  in  any  direction,  bodily  or 
mental,  requires  preparation  and  care.  Address 
yourselves  to  that  one  thing ;  at  any  cost  have 
this  transcendent  character  exchanged  for  yours. 
You  will  find  as  you  look  back  upon  your  life 
that  the  moments  that  stand  out,  the  moments 
when  you  have  really  lived,  are  the  moments 
when  you  have  done  things  in  a  spirit  of  love. 
As  memory  scans  the  past,  above  and  beyond  all 
the  transitory  pleasures  of  life,  there  leap  for 
ward  those  supreme  hours  when  you  have  been 
enabled  to  do  unnoticed  kindnesses  to  those 


IN  THE  WORLD.  6l 

round  about  you,  things  too  trifling  to  speak 
about,  but  which  you  feel  have  entered  into 
your  eternal  life.  I  have  seen  almost  all  the 
beautiful  things  God  has  made  ;  I  have  enjoyed 
almost  every  pleasure  that  He  has  planned  for 
man ;  and  yet  as  I  look  back  I  see  standing 
out  above  all  the  life  that  has  gone  four  or  five 
short  experiences  when  the  love  of  God  reflected 
itself  in  some  poor  imitation,  some  small  act  of 
love  of  mine,  and  these  seem  to  be  the  things 
which  alone  of  all  one's  life  abide.  Everything 
else  in  all  our  lives  is  transitory.  Every  other 
good  is  visionary.  But  the  acts  of  love  which 
no  man  knows  about,  or  can  ever  know  about 
— they  never  fail. 

In  the  Book  of  Matthew,  where  the  Judg 
ment  Day  is  depicted  for  us  in  the  imagery  of 
One  seated  upon  a  throne  and  dividing  the 
sheep  from  the  goats,  the  test  of  a  man  then  is 


62  THE  GREATEST  THING 

not,  "  How  have  I  believed?  "  but  "  How  have 
I  loved  ?  "  The  test  of  religion,  the  final  test 
of  religion,  is  not  religiousness,  but  Love.  I 
say  the  final  test  of  religion  at  that  great  Day 
is  not  religiousness,  but  Love ;  not  what  I  have 
done,  not  what  I  have  believed,  not  what  I 
have  achieved,  but  how  I  have  discharged  the 
common  charities  of  life.  Sins  of  commission 
in  that  awful  indictment  are  not  even  referred 
to.  By  what  we  have  not  done,  by  sins  of  omis 
sion,  we  are  judged.  It  could  not  be  otherwise. 
For  the  withholding  of  love  is  the  negation  of 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  the  proof  that  we  never 
knew  Him,  that  for  us  He  lived  in  vain.  It 
means  that  He  suggested  nothing  in  all  our 
thoughts,  that  He  inspired  nothing  in  all  our 
lives,  that  we  were  not  once  near  enough  to 
Him  to  be  seized  with  the  spell  of  His  compas 
sion  for  the  world.  It  means  that — 


IN  THE  WORLD.  63 

"  I  lived  for  myself,  I  thought  for  myself, 
For  myself,  and  none  beside — 
Just  as  if  Jesus  had  never  lived, 
As  if  He  had  never  died." 

It  is  the  Son  of  Man  before  whom  the 
nations  of  the  world  shall  be  gathered.  It  is 
in  the  presence  of  Humanity  that  we  shall 
be  charged.  And  the  spectacle  itself,  the 
mere  sight  of  it,  will  silently  judge  each  one. 
Those  will  be  there  whom  we  have  met  and 
helped  ;  or  there,  the  unpitied  multitude  whom 
we  neglected  or  despised.  No  other  Witness 
need  be  summoned.  No  other  charge  than  love- 
lessness  shall  be  preferred.  Be  not  deceived. 
The  words  which  all  of  us  shall  one  Day  hear 
sound  not  of  theology  but  of  life,  not  of  churches 
and  saints  but  of  the  hungry  and  the  poor,  not 
of  creeds  and  doctrines  but  of  shelter  and 
clothing,  not  of  Bibles  and  prayer-books  but  of 


64    THE  GREATEST  THING   IN  THE  WORLD. 

cups  of  cold  water  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
Thank  God  the  Christianity  of  to-day  is  coming 
nearer  the  world's  need.  Live  to  help  that  on. 
Thank  God  men  know  better,  by  ahairsbreadth, 
what  religion  is,  what  God  is,  who  Christ  is, 
where  Christ  is.  Who  is  Christ  ?  He  who  fed 
the  hungry,  clothed  the  naked,  visited  the  sick. 
And  where  is  Christ  ?  Where  ? — whoso  shall 
receive  a  little  child  in  My  name  receiveth  Me. 
And  who  are  Christ's  ?  Every  one  that  loveth 
is  born  of  God. 


THE  END 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


