X 


"BS^U^  I 


Crpy  I 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,  on    the  Verges    ot   The    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH    S.   EX  ELL,  M.A. 


FIRST  PETER 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  GENERAL 

OF  PETEB. 

The  Title  "  General." — ^It  may  be  well  to  say  a  word  as  to  the  meaning  of  the 
epithet  General  or  Catholic,  which,  since  the  fourth  century,  has  been  given  to  this 
Epistle,  as  well  as  to  2  Peter,  James,  1,  2,  3  John,  and  Jude.  This  is  not  a  question 
of  vital  importance  (for  the  appellation  has  no  claim  to  Divine  authority),  and  it  is 
well  it  is  so,  for  there  seems  no  means  of  determining  it  with  anything  like  cer- 
tainty. The  term  appears  originally  to  have  meant  an  Epistle  directed  not  to  one 
■Church,  but  to  all,  or  at  any  rate  to  many  Churches — a  description  which  belongs 
to  five  of  the  seven  Epistles  so  distinguished ;  the  other  two  being  addressed  to 
individuals.  In  the  time  of  Eusebius,  with  this  sense  seems  to  have  been  connected 
the  somewhat  cognate  one  of  epistles  publicly  read  in  many  or  all  the  Churches, 
on  account  of  the  excellence  and  usefulness  of  their  contents  ;  and,  till  the  writings 
of  the  New  Testament  were  collected  into  one  volume,  it  appears  to  have  been  the 
technical  name  by  which  this  collection  of  Epistles  was  distinguished  from  the 
Pauline  Epistles.     {J.  Brown,  D.D.) 

Authenticity  op  the  Epistle. — The  earliest  testimony  in  its  favour  is  the 
Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  which,  whether  genuine  or  not,  is  generally  admitted  to 
be  a  document  of  a  very  early  date.  In  that  Epistle  the  author  designates  his 
writing  as  his  "  Second  Epistle "  (2  Pet.  iii.  1).  Eusebius  informs  us  that 
Polycarp  (a.d.  110)  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  made  use  of  certain  testi- 
anonies  from  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter  (H.  E.,  iv.  4) ;  and  we  have  only  to  glance 
at  the  Epistle  of  Polycarp  to  see  that  those  references  are  numerous.  Thus  in  the 
eighth  chapter  he  writes,  "Let  us  continually  persevere  in  our  hope  and  in  the 
earnest  of  our  righteousness,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,  who  bore  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree  (chap.  ii.  24),  and  who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His 
mouth  "  (chap.  ii.  22).  Eusebius  also  informs  us  that  Papias  (a.d.  116)  made  use  of 
testimonies  from  the  First  Epistle  of  John  and  likewise  from  that  of  Peter 
;(H.  E.,  iii.  39).  Irenaeus  (a.d.  178)  is  the  first  who  expressly  ascribes  this  Epistle 
io  Peter.  "And  Peter  says,  'Whom  having  not  seen  ye  love,  in  whom,  not  seeing 
Him,  now  ye  believe;  ye  wUl  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable'"  (Adv.  Haer.,  iv.  9,  2). 
And  again,  "  On  this  account  Peter  says  that  we  have  not  liberty  as  a  cloak  of 
maliciousness,  but  for  the  proof  and  manifestation  of  the  faith  "  (Idem.,  iv.  16,  8). 
Clemens  Alexandrinus  (a.d.  180)  frequently  quotes  from  this  Epistle.  "  For,  as 
Peter  says,  the  time  past  of  our  life  may  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the 
Gentiles,  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess  of  wine,  revellings, 
banquetings,  and  abominable  idolatries"  (Paedeg.,  iii.  12).  And  again,  "  Our  aim 
and  our  end  as  regards  perfection  being  demonstrated  to  belong  to  the  man  and  the 
woman,  Peter,  in  his  Epistle  says,  '  Though  now  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are  in 
heaviness  thi-ough  manifold  temptations'"  (Strom.,  iv.  20).  Tertullian  (a.d.  200) 
writes,  "  Peter  says  to  the  Christians  of  Pontus,  '  How  great  indeed  is  the  glory,  if 
ye  suffer  patiently  without  being  punished  as  evildoers.  For  this  is  acceptable,  for 
even  hereunto  were  ye  called,  since  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example 
that  we  should  follow  His  steps  '  "  (Scorpiace,  12).  In  like  manner  Origen  (a.d.  230) 
frequently  refers  to  this  Epistle.  "And  concerning  the  journey  in  spirit  to  prison 
in  Peter's  Catholic  Epistle,  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  he  says,  but  quickened 
in  the  spirit"  (Opp.,  vol.  iv.  p.  135).  Eusebius  always  speaks  of  this  Epistle  as 
undisputed  :  "  Peter  upon  whom  the  Church  of  Christ  is  built,  has  left  one  Epistle 


INTRODUCTION  TO  . 


undisputed  "  (H.  E.,  vi.  25).  We  have  only  further  to  remark  that  this  Epistle  is 
found  in  the  Peshito,  the  Old  Italic,  and  all  the  most  ancient  versions.  And  while 
the  Epistle  is  thus  strongly  supported  by  external  evidence,  it  is  not  defective  in 
that  which  is  internal.  It  bears  upon  it  the  impress  of  Peter's  character,  being 
such  an  Epistle  as  one  would  expect  that  apostle  to  have  written.  The  sanguine 
character  of  the  Epistle,  the  reference  to  the  hopes  of  futurity,  the  consolation 
imparted  to  its  readers,  the  exhortations  given  them  to  prepare  for  trial  and  suffer- 
ing, the  love  of  Christ  prominently  brought  forward,  the  example  of  Christ  con- 
tinually held  up  to  their  imitation,  all  remind  us  of  the  eager  nature  of  the  apostle, 
of  his  intense  love  for  the  Saviour,  and  of  the  command  of  the  Lord,  "  When  thou 
art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  So  also  there  are  in  it  many  personal 
recollections  of  the  author's  intercourse  with  Christ.  Christ  had  named  him  a 
rock ;  and  Peter  speaks  of  believers  as  hving  stones,  built  up  into  a  spiritual  temple 
unto  the  Lord.  Peter  had  denied  Christ,  and  in  his  Epistle  he  is  especially  eager  to 
exhort  believers  to  steadfastness.  Peter  had  been  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ ;  and  these  are  continually  referred  to  in  this  Epistle.  Peter  had  made  a 
noble  profession  of  his  love  to  Christ ;  and  on  this  he  dwells  with  special  affection. 
And  further,  there  are  undesigned  coincidences  between  this  Epistle  and  the  speeches 
of  Peter  as  recorded  in  the  Acts.  In  both  he  speaks  of  himself  as  a  witness  of  the 
sufferings  and  resurrection  of  Christ  (Acts  ii.  32 ;  1  Pet.  v.  1).  The  connection  of 
the  old  prophets  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  is  alluded  to  in  both  (Acts  iii.  18 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  10).  In  his  speech  before  the  Sanhedrim  Peter  refers  to  Christ  as  the 
stone  set  at  nought  of  the  builders,  which  has  become  the  head  of  the  corner  (Acts 
iv.  11),  and  the  same  reference  is  contained  in  his  Epistle  (chap.  ii.  7,  8).  The 
remarkable  phrase  descriptive  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  "  being  hanged  on  a 
tree,"  is  found  alike  in  Peter's  address  and  in  Peter's  Epistle  (Acts  v.  30 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  24).  And  the  phrase,  "  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead,"  which  Peter  used  in  his 
address  to  Cornelius  (Acts  x.  42),  is  also  employed  in  this  Epistle  (chap.  iv.  5). 
(Ibid.) 

Eeaders  of  the  Epistle. — The  Epistle  bears  the  following  inscription :  "  To  the 
strangers  scattered  throughout  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia." 
These  words,  taken  by  themselves  and  without  reference  to  the  contents  of  the 
Epistle,  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  this  Epistle,  like  the  Epistle  of  James, 
was  addressed  to  Jewish  Christians — to  the  Jews  of  the  diaspora.  But  this  opinion 
cannot  well  be  maintained.  The  Churches  in  these  countries,  especially  in  Galatia 
and  Asia,  were  founded  by  Paul,  and,  as  we  learn  from  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles, 
were  mostly  composed  of  GentUe  Christians,  or  at  least  were  mixed  congregations 
formed  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  MichaeUs,  Neudecker  and  Benson  try  to  remove 
this  difficulty  by  supposing  that  they  were  composed  of  Jewish  proselytes  ;  but  this 
is  a  supposition  which  is  not  borne  out  by  Scripture.  Besides,  there  are  numerous 
references  in  the  Epistle  which  are  in  favour  of  the  predominant  Gentile  element 
in  these  Churches ;  as,  for  example,  chap.  iv.  3 ;  referring  evidently  to  the  former 
heathen  life  of  his  readers.  The  terms  of  the  inscription,  then,  "  strangers  scattered 
throughout,"  or  "  sojourners  of  the  dispersion,"  must  be  taken  in  a  somewhat 
figurative  sense,  and  must  allude  to  believers  as  being  strangers  or  sojourners  on 
this  earth;  and  in  this  capacity  Peter  addresses  his  readers  (chap.  ii.  11).  This 
opinion,  that  the  Epistle  is  addressed  not  to  Jewish  Christians,  but  to  Christians  in 
general,  is  maintained  by  the  vast  majority  of  modern  commentators.  The  circle 
of  Churches  addressed  are  enumerated  as  Christians  residing  in  Pontus,  Galatia, 
Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia.  No  reason  can  be  assigned  why  the  Epistle  was 
restricted  to  Christians  resident  in  these  countries  ;  we  are  ignorant  of  the  relations 
of  Peter  to  them.  The  first  country  named  is  Pontus.  We  do  not  know  how  the  gospel 
penetrated  into  that  distant  land.  Jews  from  Pontus  are  mentioned  among  the 
number  of  those  present  at  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  9) ;  and  Aquila, 
one  of  Paul's  feUow-labourers,  was  a  native  of  that  country  (Acts  xviii.  2).  Galatia 
received  the  gospel  by  the  direct  preaching  of  Paul,  and  to  the  Christian  inhabi- 
tants of  that  country  he  wrote  his  celebrated  Epistle.  Cappadocia  probably  received 
the  gospel  from  Jews,  dwellers  in  Cappadocia,  who  were  converted  at  the  Feast  of 
Pentecost  by  the  preaching  of  Peter  (Acts  ii.  9).  Asia  is  the  celebrated  province  of 
Proconsular  Asia,  and  contains,  along  with  Ephesus,  its  capital,  some  of  the  most 
notable  cities  mentioned  in  the  Acts  where  Paul  preached  the  gospel.  The 
Apocalypse  is  addressed  to  seven  Churches  in  Proconsular  Asia.  The  last  country 
mentioned  is  Bithynia.     We  are  informed  that  Paul  and  his  companions  assayed  to 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  vu 

go  into  Bithynia,  but  the  Spirit  suffered  them  not  (Acts  xvi.  7).  When  and  by  whom 
the  gospel  was  diffused  in  this  country  we  know  not ;  but  from  Pliny's  celebrated 
letter  we  know  that  a  few  years  after  Peter  wrote  his  Epistle  Christianity  had  taken 
such  a  firm  hold  on  its  inhabitants  that  the  temples  of  the  gods  were  deserted  and  the 
sacrifices  discontinued.  As  regards  the  condition  of  Christians  in  these  countries, 
it  is  manifest  that  they  were  threatened  with  persecution.  We  meet  in  the  Epistle 
with  continued  references  to  trial.  The  time  was  come  when  judgment  must  begin 
at  the  house  of  God ;  they  were  liable  to  be  dragged  before  the  heathen  tribunals  ; 
they  were  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  and  were  made  partakers  with  Him 
in  His  sufferings ;  the  fact  of  their  being  Christians  was  regarded  as  a  crime.  At 
its  very  commencement  Christianity  aroused  the  hostility  of  the  world,  and  as  time 
elapsed  this  hostility  increased ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  that 
Christians  in  these  countries  were  exposed  to  persecution.  Still,  however,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  suppose  that  any  special  persecution  against  the  Church  had  as  yet 
arisen,  or  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  persecution  under  Nero,  far  less,  with  Schwegler, 
to  assert  that  the  persecution  under  Trajan  is  adverted  to.  The  expressions  are 
general,  and  would  rather  imply  that  persecution  was  threatened  than  that  it  had 
actually  broken  out.  Believers  had  to  be  warned  of  the  trials  that  awaited  them, 
and  to  be  encouraged  and  confinned  in  the  faith.     {Ibid.) 

Date  and  Place  of  Composition. — Various  dates  have  been  assigned  to  this 
Epistle.  Weiss  ranks  it  among  the  earliest  writings  of  the  New  Testament.  Hug, 
Neander,  and  Mayerhoff,  adopting  the  opinion  that  the  apostle  alludes  to  the  perse- 
cution under  Nero,  suppose  that  it  was  written  toward  the  close  of  the  year  64,  when 
that  persecution  was  raging.  Alford  supposes  it  was  written  about  the  year  63, 
before  the  persecution  related  by  Tacitus  broke  out.  In  the  Epistle  itself  there  are 
few  personal  notices,  and  these  have  no  value  in  fixing  the  date.  An  argument  has 
been  drawn  from  the  presence  of  Mark  (chap.  v.  13).  It  is  generally  supposed  that 
this  is  the  same  as  John,  whose  surname  was  Mark,  who  accompanied  Paul  on  his 
first  missionary  journey.  Now,  Mark  was  with  Paul  when  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to 
the  Colossians,  during  his  first  Koman  imprisonment  (Col.  iv.  10) ;  but  he  was 
absent  from  Eome  during  Paul's  second  Koman  imprisonment,  for,  writing  to 
Timothy,  he  says,  "  Take  Mark  and  bring  him  with  thee ;  for  he  is  profitable  to  me 
for  the  ministry  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  11).  Hence  it  is  supposed  that  in  the  interval  Mark 
may  have  been  with  Peter  in  Babylon,  and  if  so  the  Epistle  was  written  between 
the  years  64  and  67.  But  no  inference  can  be  drawn  from  this,  for  it  might  as 
reasonably  be  argued  that  Mark  was  with  Peter  before  Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians.  Another  argument  is  drawn  from  the  probability  that  Peter  would  not 
have  written  to  Paul's  converts  in  Galatia  and  Proconsular  Asia  during  the  apostle's 
lifetime,  or,  at  least,  before  his  imprisonment,  and  whilst  he  was  at  liberty  to  take  a 
personal  superintendence  of  those  Churches  which  he  had  founded.  But  not  much 
can  be  made  of  that  probability ;  the  apostles  must  have  been  free  to  write  to  whom 
they  pleased.  With  regard  to  the  place  of  composition,  this  has  been  the  occasion 
of  much  disputation.  In  the  Epistle  this  place  is  denominated  Babylon  :  "  The  Church 
that  is  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with  you,  saluteth  you."  The  generality  of 
commentators  suppose  that  Babylon  is  here  used  figuratively  for  Eome.  This 
opinion  has  not  its  origin  from  the  peculiar  views  of  the  Eomish  Church ;  but  was 
adopted  by  the  Fathers.  It  was  held  by  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Eusebius,  and 
Jerome.  Thus  Eusebius  says,  "  Peter  makes  mention  of  Mark  in  the  First  Epistle, 
which  he  is  also  said  to  have  composed  at  the  same  city  of  Eome,  and  he  shows 
this  fact  by  calling  the  city  by  an  unusual  name,  Babylon"  (H.  E.,  ii.  15).  The 
same  opinion  is  held  by  Grotius,  Lardner,  Whitby,  Macknight,  Wiesinger,  Hitzig, 
Soiffert,  Thiersch,  Schott,  Hofmaim,  Ewald,  Cook,  and  Farrar.  The  arguments  on 
which  they  found  it  are  the  strong  testimony  in  favour  of  Peter's  presence  at  Eome, 
the  extreme  improbability  of  his  journey  to  Babylon,  and  the  fact  that  Babylon  was 
then  a  current  designation  of  Eome.  The  great  oljjection  to  this  view  is  that  in 
■writing  an  epistle  Peter  would  not  add  an  allegorical  designation  in  his  salutation. 
Accordingly,  others  suppose  that  not  Eome,  but  the  city  of  Babylon  on  the  Euphrates 
is  meant.  This  is  the  view  adopted  by  Calvin,  Neander,  De  Wette,  Bruckner, 
Wieseler,  Weiss,  Bleek,  Fronmiiller,  Huther,  and  Alford.  If  this  were  the  case, 
and  if,  as  is  generally  supposed,  Peter  wrote  his  Epistle  in  the  later  apostolic  age, 
it  is  difficult  to  find  a  period  for  his  residence  in  Eome.  Though  nothing  definite 
can  be  asserted,  yet  upon  the  whole  the  reasons  preponderate  in  favour  of  Eome. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  salutation,  "  The  Church  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected 


viii  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER. 

together  with  you,  saluteth  you,"  the  word  "  church  "  is  not  in  the  original,  and  hence 
the  Eevised  Version  more  correctly  renders  the  passage,  "  She  that  is  in  Babylon, 
elect  together  with  you,  saluteth  you."  In  all  probability  it  is  not  the  Church  at 
Babylon,  but  some  Christian  lady  resident  at  Babylon  or  at  Rome,  who  is  alluded 
to,  like  the  elect  lady  of  John's  Second  Epistle ;  more  especially  as  an  individual, 
Marcus,  immediately  follows.  It  is  the  opinion  of  Neander,  Bengel,  Mayerhoff, 
Eauch,  and  Alford  that  the  lady  alluded  to  by  v  avvsKXfKTT)  was  the  apostle's  wife  ; 
an  opinion  which  we  consider  somewhat  fanciful.  A  still  more  fanciful  opinion  is 
to  suppose  that  the  person  called  "  Marcus  my  son  "  was  not  the  spiritual  but  the 
real  son  of  the  apostle.     (Ibid.) 

Character  and  Contents  of  the  Epistle. — The  natural  warmth  of  the  author's 
disposition  gives  to  the  style  a  character  of  energy  approaching  to  vehemence  ;  and 
there  is  to  be  found  just  such  a  familiarity  with  the  Old  Testament,  manifesting 
itself  not  only  in  direct  quotations,  but  in  numerous  natural  allusions,  which  have 
aU  the  appearance  of  having  been  unconscious,  as  might  be  expected  in  the  com- 
position of  a  pious  though,  when  compared  with  Paul,  an  uneducated  Jew.  This 
Epistle  is  distinguished  for  great  tenderness  of  manner,  and  for  bringing  forward 
prominently  the  most  consolatory  parts  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle  wrote  to  those 
who  were  in  affliction.  He  was  himself  an  old  man.  He  expected  soon  to  be  with 
the  Saviour.  He  had  nearly  done  with  the  conflicts  and  toUs  of  life.  It  was  natural 
that  he  should  direct  his  eye  onward  and  upward,  and  dweU  on  those  things  in  the 
gospel  which  were  adapted  to  support  and  comfort  the  soul.  There  is  therefore 
scarcely  any  part  of  the  New  Testament  where  the  ripe  and  mellow  Christian  will 
find  more  that  is  adapted  to  his  matured  feelings,  or  to  which  he  wiU  more  naturally 
turn.  There  is  great  compactness  of  thought  and  terseness  of  expression  in  this 
Epistle.  It  seems  to  be  composed  of  a  succession  of  texts,  each  one  fitted  to  con- 
stitute the  subject  of  a  discourse.  There  is  more  that  a  pastor  would  like  to  preach 
on  in  a  course  of  expository  lectures,  and  less  that  he  would  be  disposed  to  pass 
over  as  not  so  well  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  rehgious  instruction,  than  in  almost 
any  other  book  of  the  New  Testament.  There  is  almost  nothing  that  is  of  merely 
local  or  temporary  interest.  There  are  plain  traces  in  the  Epistle  of  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  modes  of  thought  and  expression  characteristic  of  the  writings 
of  Paul,  which,  even  without  the  reference  in  the  Second  Epistle  (chap.  iii.  14,  15), 
would  have  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  writer  had  read  that  apostle's  Epistles. 
Peter's  mode  of  writing  is  much  less  than  Paul's  that  of  a  scholar ;  but  he  has 
much  of  the  same  natural  ease  of  diction,  tendency  to  digression,  and  use  of 
figurative  language.  This  Epistle  holds  an  intermediate  place  between  those  of 
the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  and  that  of  James,  the  apostle  of  the  Circum- 
cision. It  resembles  both  in  a  greater  degree  than  they  resemble  each  other. 
(lUd.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 


I.  PETER. 

CHAPTER    I. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Peter. — The  several  names  of  St.  Peter : — 1.  Simeon  or  Simon :  that 
he  had  at  his  circumcision.  2.  Cephas,  a  stone  :  given  him  by  Christ  at  his  calling, 
to  signify  that  He  meant  to  make  him  a  stout  defender  of  the  faith.  3.  Peter  :  the 
Greek  equivalent  of  the  Syriac  Cephas.  Learn — 1.  Christ's  kindness  to  Peter  in 
giving  him  a  name  to  assure  him  of  some  grace  which  He  would  bestow  on  him. 
Though  we  cannot  do  this,  yet  it  behoves  us  to  give  our  children  such  names  as  may 
put  them  in  mind  of  some  good  thing  ;  either  to  imitate  some  good  man  or  woman  w 
whose  name  they  bear,  or  else  to  follow  some  good  that  the  name  puts  them  in  mindj 
of.  2.  In  that  he  puts  his  name  to  his  Epistle,  he  shows  his  godliness.  A  man  bold^ 
for  truth  may  be  blamed,  but  cannot  be  shamed.  This  condemns  the  vile  practice 
of  the  wicked,  who  hide  themselves  in  the  dark.  We  must  do  nothing  but  that  we| 
dare  put  our  hands  to  it,  and  our  names.  (John  Rogers.)  Christ's  selection  of\ 
Peter  : — When  you  have  been  down  on  the  shore  in  the  summer-time  you  have 
found  on  the  beach  a  dull-hued  pebble,  rounded  and  beaten,  with  all  the  colour 
washed  out  of  it.  But  you  have  brought  it  home  and  broken  it  open,  and  lo !  the 
whole  interior  was  full  of  purple  amethysts  and  sparkling  crystals,  of  which  the 
rough  exterior  gave  no  sign.  So  does  Christ  see  in  many  a  duU  and  unattractive 
life  the  jewels  that  shall  sparkle  for  ever.  In  Nathaniel  He  found  an  Israelite 
without  guile,  in  Mary  of  Magdala  a  noble  woman,  and  in  Peter  a  foundation  rock. 
{W.  P.  Faunce.)  The  introductory  greeting  : — I.  The  greeter.  1.  His  name — 
Peter.  The  giving  of  that  name  leads  us  to  recollect — (1)  What  is  recalled  to  him 
of  his  former  life.  (2)  What  it  tells  of  Christ's  knowledge  of  his  capacities  and  pro- 
mise. (3)  What  it  indicates  of  his  ideal.  2.  His  vocation — "  an  apostle."  (1)  His 
dignity — authoritative  messenger.  (2)  His  brotherhood — "an."  No  claim  of 
supremacy.  (3)  His  Lord — "Jesus  Christ."  Sent  by  Him,  to  speak  of  Him,  and 
to  serve  Him.  II.  Those  greeted.  1.  Who  ?  Sojourners  of  the  dispersion. 
Homeless  through  persecution.  2.  Where  ?  Scattered  from  under  the  shadows  of 
the  mountains  of  Galilee  down  to  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.  3.  What  ?  "  Elect." 
Divinely  chosen  to  perfection  of  character.  (1)  To  be  made  holy.  (2)  To  be  made 
holy  by  the  Spirit.  (3)  To  be  made  holy  by  the  Spirit  through  obedience.  III. 
The  greeting — "  Grace  and  peace."  1.  The  highest  conception  of  Greek  and  of 
Hebrew  blessedness.  Greek — grace ;  Hebrew — peace.  Both  combined.  (1)  Grace, 
the  attitude  of  Christ,  the  gift  of  Christ,  the  issue  of  the  work  of  Christ.  (2)  Peace — 
with  God,  with  men,  with  conscience.  2.  This  multiplied  indefinitely,  not  to  say 
infinitely.  They  cannot  have  too  much  to  exceed  the  apostle's  desires  for  them. 
\V.  R.  Thomas.)  An  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ. — Commissioned  by  Christ : — It  makes 
a  great  difference  whether  we  are  going  out,  in  a  kind  of  social  knight  errantry,  to  live 
for  humanity  of  our  own  motion,  or  whether  we  have  met  with  Jesus  Christ  in 
secret,  and  go  forth  with  His  commission  and  promise  at  our  back,  and  with  His 
love  and  inspiration  in  our  souls.  (James  Stalker,  D.D.)  Sent  by  God  : — Giro- 
lamo  Savonarola  was  walking  to  Florence  to  become  prior  of  a  convent.  When  a 
few  miles  from  the  town  he  began  to  feel  faint  from  want  of  food  and  rest,  and  sank 
wearily  upon  the  ground.  Then  an  unknown  man  appeared  to  the  tired  traveller, 
and  walked  with  him.  Savonarola  believed  it  was  a  heavenly  messenger,  and  took 
to  his  heart  the  stranger's  parting  words,  "Remember  that  thou  dost  that  for  which 

1  1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.vp.  i. 

thou  hast  been  sent  by  God,"  and  entered  Florence  ready  to  live  in  the  midst  of  her 
unruly  people,  and  work  among  them  till  his  death.  ("  Three  Great  Lives,''  Frances 
E.  Cooke.)  To  the  strangers  scattered. — Persecution : — 1.  Sundry  of  the  Jews 
received  our  Saviour,  and  believed  in  Him,  though  the  body  of  them  did  not.  Those 
made  a  good  progress  in  the  cause  of  Christianity  who  were  contented  to  undergo- 
such  dangers  as  might  befall  them  in  a  strange  land,  only  that  they  might  keep  faith 
and  a  good  conscience.  2.  The  estate  of  the  Church  of  God  here  on  earth  is  under 
persecution.  The  world  having  power  and  wealth,  is  full  of  malice  against  the 
poor  Church,  so  that  were  it  not  that  God  Almighty  defends  it,  it  could  not  endure. 
It  is  as  a  sheep  among  wolves,  or  a  ship  among  the  waves.  Though  God  will  exer- 
cise it  to  keep  it  from  errors  and  corruptions,  which  it  is  subject  to  through  much 
prosperity  and  peace  ;  though  it  have  need  of  some  peace  to  gather  itself,  yet  if  it 
be  long  in  peace  it  gathers  mud  as  standing  waters,  rust  as  the  ploughshare  in  the 
hedge,  yea,  settles  itself  on  the  lees,  therefore  God  pours  it  out  from  vessel  to  vessel. 
The  Church  never  shines  so  gloriously  as  either  in  or  after  persecution  ;  then  life, 
zeal,  sincerity,  heavenly-mindedness,  and  such  like  graces,  appear  in  their  true 
lustre.  It  follows — (1)  That  as  we  are  not  to  conclude  for  a  company,  because  they 
have  so  much  peace,  that  therefore  they  are  beloved  of  God  ;  so  must  not  we  against 
any  because  they  be  few  in  number  and  outwardly  despised.  (2)  That  we  are  to- 
prepare  ourselves  for  persecution.  (3)  That  it  is  lawful  to  fly  in  time  of  persecution. 
(John  Rogers.)  God's  people  scattered  : — 1.  That  God's  children  may  be  driven 
from  their  native  dwelling,  God  doth  not  always  build  them  a  house  in  their  own 
land.  2.  That  the  Church  of  God  is  not  tied  to  any  one  place,  neither  to  Rome  nor 
to  Jerusalem.  3.  That  the  godly  are  thin  set.  It  is  rare  to  find  true  godly  men, 
they  dwell  here  and  there.  4.  That  the  Church  hath  not  always  an  external  glory 
to  commend  it.  5.  That  there  may  be  a  great  inward  beauty  under  a  despised  con- 
dition. These  dispersed  ones  are  glorious  creatures,  sanctified  in  their  spirits,  and 
shall  have  an  immortal  inheritance.  6.  That  there  may  be  excellent  order  in 
appearing  confusion.  One  might  think  the  husbandmen  spoiled  their  corn  when 
they  scatter  it  abroad  on  the  ground  ;  and  yet  we  know  it  is  better  so  than  when  it 
is  in  the  barn  all  on  a  heap.  So  is  it  with  the  godly.  {N.  Byfield.)  Genuine 
disciples  of  Christ : —  I.  Thet  are  stbangers  in  the  world.  II.  They  are  chosen 
OF  HEAVEN.  1.  To  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit.  2.  To  obedience.  3.  To  a 
consecration  to  Christ.  III.  They  are  prayed  for  by  the  brethren.  1.  For  the 
favour  of  God.  2.  For  peace  of  soul.  [Homilist.)  Elect. — Hoio  may  we  huno 
the  election  of  others  1 — Not  with  the  judgment  of  certainty,  because  the  heart  of 
man  is  known  to  none  but  God,  and  a  man  may  go  far  who  yet  may  fall  away ; 
but  with  the  judgment  of  charity,  which  hath  degrees  according  to  the  fruits 
we  see  in  them :  if  they  only  profess  religion  and  be  in  the  Church,  we  may 
hope,  but  it  is  a  weak  hope,  where  we  see  no  fruits.  Now  when  we  see  the 
fruits  of  faith,  sanctification,  and  godliness  in  men,  and  that  they  show  them  not 
by  fits,  but  constantly  ;  not  in  some  things,  but  in  all ;  not  in  prosperity  only,  but 
in  adversity,  we  may  very  boldly  judge  of  them  as  the  elect  of  God  ;  and  so  does 
the  apostle  here,  as  appears  by  the  next  words,  "  Through  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit."  {John  Rogers.)  The  elect : — St.  Peter  here  tells  you  what  you  are — for 
what  purpose  you  are  such,  and  to  how  great  privilege  you  may  reach.  "  Elect," 
he  says,  "  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God."  I.  What  does  elect  mean  ? 
The  word  is  taken  from  the  Old  Testament,  where  it  is  applied  not  to  one  or  two 
individuals,  but  to  the  Jewish  nation.  They  were  highly  favoured,  they  were 
gathered  from  other  nations ;  they  had  the  law  and  the  prophets  and  means 
which  others  had  not.  To  the  Christian  Church  it  is  now  said,  "  Ye  are  a  chosen 
generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people."  Again,  the  very 
title  of  this  Epistle  shows  for  whom  it  was  meant.  "  Elect  according  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God."  For  what  is  the  title  ?  The  general — in  Greek,  the  catholic — 
Epistle  of  St.  Peter.  Now  what  does  this  mean  but  that  it  is  not  for  a  small  number 
of  Christians,  nor  yet  for  the  Church  of  a  particular  district,  hke  some  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  ;  but  for  the  Church  universal,  all  the  members  of  which  he  calls  "  elect"  ? 
Again,  observe  the  first  verse :  "  To  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pontus," 
&c.  As  to  the  greater  part  of  the  persons  whom  he  addresses,  St.  Peter  could  have 
known  nothing  of  their  character  or  habits  any  more  than  we  can  tell  how  indi- 
viduals are  living  in  private  in  France  or  Ireland.  How,  then,  conld  he  pronounce 
upon  their  eternal  salvation?  But  he  means  nothing  of  the  sort.  He  knew  that 
life  was  before  them ;  that  they  had  light,  and  knowledge,  and  grace,  and  oppor- 
tunities not  given  to  others ;  he  knew  that  they  had  been  gathered  into  the  Christian 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  3 

fold,  which  was  not  the  case  with  others.  Upon  all  these  grounds  he  calls  them 
elect,  and  predestined  to  this  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  That  which  is 
true  of  the  Church  as  a  whole  is  true  of  its  parts.  Accordingly,  St.  Paul,  addressing 
different  parts  of  the  Christian  body,  at  different  times,  calls  them  in  turn  elect, 
chosen,  eaUed,  saints,  sanctified.  He  does  not  mean  to  say  that  all  he  calls  saints 
were  so  in  their  practice,  any  more  than  those  whom  we  call  Christians  are  really 
such.  But  he  means  that  they  were  designed  by  God  to  be  truly  saints  upon  earth 
and  triumphing  souls  in  heaven.  Why,  I  would  ask,  do  you  send  missions  to  the 
heathen  if  you  have  not  something  to  enrich  them  with  which  they  possess  not  ?  You 
are  in  the  light :  you  are  a  chosen  people.  I  say  not  as  to  the  use  of  privileges,  but 
as  to  their  possession.  A  man  may  shut  his  eyes  though  the  sun  be  beaming  ;  a 
man  may  turn  back  from  the  brink  of  heaven.  Nevertheless,  the  possession  of  such 
privileges  proves  you  to  be  high  in  God's  favour — His  chosen  people,  for  an  exalted 
purpose,  n.  And  now  what  does  God,  according  to  St.  Peter,  to  His  elect 
PEOPLE  ?  How  does  He  assure  them  of  their  election,  and  enable  them  to  make 
their  calling  and  election  sure?  He  gives  them  His  Spirit  in  their  hearts  :  "  through 
sanctification,"  it  is  said,  "of  the  Spirit."  It  is  affirmed  in  the  following  words, 
"  that  God  hath  elected  you  unto  obedience."  Surely  to  bear  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
a  man  must  have  the  Spirit.  Therefore  St..  Paul  writes,  "Ye  have  received  the 
Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father,"  &c.  Let  me  mention  two  reasons 
why  it  is  necessary  to  believe  that  Christians  are  sanctified,  or  receive  the  Spirit  in 
their  childhood.  1.  The  first  is  that  our  children  are  all  expected  to  serve  God,  to 
renounce  the  devil,  keep  the  Commandments,  and  believe  the  faith.  But  they  are 
not  able  to  do  it  without  the  Spirit.  2.  When  God  takes  away  any  of  your  children 
from  you  in  their  early  years  you  have  a  confident  belief  that  they  are  saved.  3. 
And  this  conducts  me  very  naturally  to  the  third  point :  supposing  people  to  grow 
up,  and  to  have  passed  the  unconscious  time  of  childhood,  what  is  the  immediate 
object  of  their  sanctification?  The  text  informs  us,  "  Unto  obedience  and  sprinkling 
of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  apostle  is  thought  to  allude  here  to  the  covenant 
God  made  with  Israel,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  sprinkling  of  blood.  Another 
meaning  is,  that  the  Spirit  hath  been  given  to  us  in  order  that  we  might  obey  and 
so  be  pardoned  ;  in  either  case  the  result  is  the  same,  that  without  obeying  Christ 
none  shall  be  saved.  Let  me  address  those  who  think  they  shall  be  saved  without 
obedience.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this  is  a  fearfully  large  number.  Every  man  who 
puts  off  repentance  thinks  he  can  be  saved  without  obedience ;  for  if  he  keep  putting  it 
off,  when  does  he  hope  to  obey  ?  Again,  are  there  not  persons  who  arrive  at  the  same 
deceit  in  another  way  ?  who  are  not  careful  to  inquire  whether  they  keep  the  command- 
ments of  Christ,  but  only  whether  they  feel  in  a  particular  manner  ?  (J.  M.  Chanter, M.  A .) 
The  plan  of  salvation : — I.  Election  in  its  source.  1.  Election  as  an  eternal  act 
of  the  Divine  mind  is  inaccessible  to  us  ;  it  is  only  in  its  effects  that  it  comes  within 
our  mental  cognisance.  2.  This  election  is  "  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of 
God."  God  is  the  only  and  whole  cause  of  every  man's  salvation.  3.  The 
Supreme  Being  not  only  drew  the  plan,  but  continually  emits  a  stream  of  energy  to 
impel  men  into  acquiescence  with  it.  This  energy  is  not  physical  but  mental  and 
spiritual,  making  man  a  willing  co-worker  with  God  in  his  own  salvation.  II. 
Election  in  its  means.  1.  Election  first  shows  itself  in  a  man's  separation  from 
the  world  which  lieth  in  wickedness.  2.  Election  is  indissolubly  connected  with 
holiness  as  the  sphere  in  which  it  moves,  the  atmosphere  in  which  it  breathes. 
8.  The  holiness  of  the  believer  is  not  a  created  finite  thing,  like  that  of  the  angel, 
but  an  active  participation  in  the  uncreated,  infinite  holiness  of  God  in  virtue  of  the 
personal  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  Election  in  its  end.  1.  Election  has 
for  its  object  our  obedience.  (1)  The  obedience  of  which  faith  is  the  substance,  the 
obedience  we  render  God  when  we  believingly  receive  the  truths  of  the  gospel. 
(2)  The  obedience  which  faith  produces.  2.  But  notwithstanding  all  our  efforts, 
aided  even  by  Divine  grace,  bitter  experience  reminds  us  that  we  often  stumble,  and 
sometimes  fall.  Is  there  any  provision  for  our  manifold  imperfections?  Yes,  there 
is  the  "  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ " — to  secure  forgiveness  for  the  sins 
we  daily  commit  despite  our  aspirations  after  holiness,  and  to  wash  away  the 
pollution  cleaving  to  us,  notwithstanding  our  endeavours  after  a  higher  Christian 
life.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Hoiv  a  man  may  know  his  election  : — If  any  man 
would  know  whether  the  sun  shineth  or  not,  let  him  go  no  further,  but  look  upon 
the  ground  and  the  objects  around  him,  to  see  the  reflection  of  the  sunbeams  from 
thence,  and  not  upon  the  body  of  the  sun,  which  will  but  the  more  dazzle  his  sight. 
The  pattern  is  known  by  the  picture,  the  cause  by  the  eifect ;  let  no  man,  then,  soar 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

aloft  to  know  whether  he  be  elected  or  not,  but  let  hun  gather  the  knowledge  of  his 
election  from  the  effectualness  of  his  calling  and  sanctification  of  his  life  spent  in 
obedience  to  the  revealed  will  of  Heaven.  (J.  Spencer.)  According  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God. — Lessons  from  the  foreknowledge  of  God : — 1.  To  fear  God  and 
forsake  sin,  and  not  to  dally  with  disobedience  (Heb.  iv.  13).  2.  To  trust  upon  God 
in  all  estates,  seeing  there  is  nothing  but  He  knows  and  hath  considered  of  it  long 
since.  3.  It  should  inflame  us  to  piety,  seeing  no  good  can  be  done ;  but  He  will 
know  it,  though  it  be  done  never  so  secretly  (Psa.  cxxxix.  17;  1  Thess.  v.  8,  9).  4. 
It  should  quicken  us  to  the  meditation  and  care  of  our  assurance  of  our  eternal 
salvation.  God  hath  delighted  Himself  to  foresee  it  from  eternity,  and  shall  not  we 
foremeditate  of  our  own  glory?  5.  Paul  useth  this  as  a  reason  why  we  should 
help  and  encourage  Christians,  and  do  all  the  good  we  can  for  them.  For  their  names 
are  in  the  book  of  life  (PhU.  iv.  3,  &c.).  6.  When  we  are  to  choose  men  for  any 
calling  we  should  learn  of  God  to  know  before,  and  those  we  see  to  be  wicked  we 
should  never  elect :  custom,  riches,  friends,  intreaty,  kindred,  &c.,  should  never 
prevail  with  us.  7.  It  shows  us  how  we  should  love  one  another.  No  time  should 
wear  out  our  affection ;  God  is  not  wearied  with  love,  though  He  set  His  affections 
upon  us  before  the  beginning  of  the  world.  8.  This  doctrine  of  God's  eternal  know- 
ledge is  terrible  for  wicked  men.  (N.  Byjield.)  Through  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit. — Sanctification,  and  by  whom  wrought  .-^Sanctification  begins  in  regeneration 
and  is  carried  on  in  two  ways — by  vivication  and  by  mortification ;  that  is,  by  giving 
life  to  that  which  is  good,  and  by  sending  death  to  that  which  is  evil  in  the  man. 
Now  this  work,  though  we  commonly  speak  of  it  as  being  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  is 
•quite  as  much  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Sanctification  is  a  work  in  us, 
not  a  work  for  us.  It  is  a  work  in  us,  and  there  are  two  agents :  one  is  the  worker 
who  works  this  sanctification  effectually — that  is  the  Spirit ;  and  the  other 
agent,  the  efficacious  means  by  which  the  Spirit  works  this  sanctification,  is  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  most  precious  blood.  Suppose,  to  put  it  as  plainly  as  we  can,  there 
is  a  garment  which  needs  to  be  washed.  Here  is  a  person  to  wash  it,  and  there  is  a 
bath  in  which  it  is  to  be  washed — the  person  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  bath  is  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ.  It  is  strictly  correct  to  speak  of  the  person  cleansing  as 
being  the  sanctifier ;  it  is  quite  as  accurate  to  speak  of  that  which  is  in  the  bath 
and  which  makes  it  clean  as  being  the  sanctifier  too.  To  repeat  my  illustration : 
here  is  a  garment  which  is  black :  a  fuUer,  in  order  to  make  it  white,  uses  nitre  and 
soap,  both  the  fuller  and  the  soap  are  cleansers  ;  so  both  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the 
atonement  of  Christ  are  sanctifiers.  While  the  Spirit  of  God  is  said  in  Scripture  to 
be  the  author  of  sanctification,  yet  there  is  a  visible  agent  which  must  not  be  for- 
gotten. "  Sanctify  them,"  said  Christ,  "  through  Thy  truth.  Thy  word  is  truth." 
The  Spirit  of  God  brings  to  our  minds  the  commands  and  precepts  and  doctrines  of 
truth,  and  applies  them  with  power.  We  only  progress  in  sound  living  as  we  pro- 
gress in  sound  understanding.  Do  not  say  of  such-an-such  an  error,  "  Oh,  it  is 
a  mere  matter  of  opinion."  If  it  be  a  mere  matter  of  opinion  to-day  it  will  be  a 
matter  of  practice  to-morrow.  As  every  grain  of  truth  is  a  grain  of  diamond  dust, 
prize  it  aU.  The  agent,  then,  is  the  Spirit  of  God  working  through  the  truth.  There 
is  no  being  sanctified  by  the  law ;  the  Spirit  does  not  use  legal  precepts  to  sanctify 
us ;  there  is  no  purification  by  mere  dictates  of  morality,  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not 
use  them.  The  Spirit  of  God  finds  us  lepers,  and  to  make  us  clean  He  dips  the 
hyssop  of  faith  in  the  precious  blood,  and  sprinkles  it  upon  us  and  we  are  clean. 
There  is  a  mysterious  efficacy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  not  merely  to  make  satisfaction 
for  sin  but  to  work  the  death  of  sin.  Just  as  the  Spirit  only  works  through  the 
truth,  so  the  blood  of  Christ  only  works  through  faith.  Our  faith  lays  hold  on  the 
precious  atonement  of  Christ.  It  sees  Jesus  suffering  on  the  tree,  and  it  says,  "  I 
vow  revenge  against  the  sins  which  nailed  Him  there "  ;  and  thus  His  precious 
blood  works  in  us  a  detestation  of  all,  and  the  Spirit  through  the  truth,  working  by 
faith,  applies  the  precious  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  we  are  made  clean,  and  are 
accepted  in  the  Beloved.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Justification  and  sanctification: — 
Justification  was  never  intended  as  a  substitute  for  sanctification.  {J.  H.  Evans.) 
Sanctification  necessary  : — Suppose  you  had  a  son — you  forbad  him  to  enter  a 
place  of  contagion  on  pain  of  losing  all  you  could  leave  him.  He  goes,  and  is  seized 
with  the  infection.  He  is  guilty,  for  he  has  transgressed  your  command ;  but  he  is 
also  diseased.  Do  you  not  perceive  that  your  forgiving  him  does  not  heal  him  ?  He 
wants  not  only  the  father's  pardon  but  the  physician's  aid.  In  vain  is  he  freed 
from  the  forfeiture  of  his  estate,  if  he  be  left  under  the  force  of  the  disorder. 
{W.  Jay.)         The  Spirit  purifying  the  heart : — Germs  of  disease  may  be  constantly 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  5 

breeding  in  an  infected  house ;  but,  so  long  as  the  disinfecting  fluid  is  well  sprinkled 
on  the  floors  and  pendent  sheets,  they  are  kUled  off  as  soon  as  they  are  formed.  So 
sin,  though  present  in  the  heart,  may  be  choked  off,  so  as  to  be  almost  unperceived, 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ever  at  work  acting  as  a  disinfectant ;  but,  so  soon  as  His 
grace  is  withdrawn,  sin  regains  its  old  deadly  sway,  and  breathes  forth  its  pesti- 
lential poison.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  then,  to  keep  in  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (F.  B.  Meyer.)  The  Spirit  counteracting  the  evil  tendency  in  man ; — If 
you  take  a  heavy  book  and  hold  it  at  arm's  length,  the  pull  of  the  law  of  gravitation 
will  soon  draw  it  downwards ;  but  if  some  friend  will  pour  down  that  arm  a  constant 
stream  of  electricity  the  flow  of  the  electric  current  will  set  you  free  from  the  effect 
of  the  downward  pull.  It  will  stiU  be  there,  though  you  will  have  become  almost 
unconscious  of  it.  Thus  it  wUl  be  when  we  are  filled  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  the 
downward  tendency  may  be  in  us  yet,  but  it  will  be  more  than  counteracted  by  the 
habit  of  that  new  life,  in  which  the  power  of  the  living  Saviour  is  ever  at  work, 
through  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Ibid.)  Unto  obedience. — Obedience  : — 
When  obedience  to  God  is  expressed  by  the  simple  absolute  name  of  obedience, 
it  teacheth  us  that  to  Him  alone  belongs  unlimited  obedience,  all  obedience  by  all 
creatures.  It  is  the  shame  and  misery  of  man  that  he  hath  departed  from  thia 
obedience ;  but  grace,  renewing  the  hearts  of  beUevers,  changeth  their  natures  and 
BO  their  names,  and  makes  them  "  children  of  obedience."  This  obedience  consists 
in  receiving  Christ  as  our  Kedeemer,  Lord,  and  King.  There  is  an  entire  rendering 
up  of  the  whole  man  to  his  obedience.  "  By  obedience"  sanctification  is  here  inti- 
mated. It  signifies  then  both  habitual  and  active  obedience,  renovation  of  heart,  and 
conformity  to  the  Divine  wUl.  This  obedience,  though  imperfect,  is  universal  in  three 
ways — in  the  subject,  in  the  object,  in  the  duration,  the  whole  man  is  subjected  to 
the  whole  law,  and  that  constantly  and  perseveringly.  The  first  universaUty  is  the 
cause  of  the  other.  Because  it  is  not  in  the  tongue  alone  or  in  the  hand,  but  has  its 
roots  in  the  heart,  therefore  it  doth  not  wither  as  the  grass  or  flower  lying  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  but  it  flourishes  because  rooted.  And  it  embraces  the  whole 
law,  because  it  arises  from  a  reverence  it  has  for  the  Lawgiver  Himself ;  reverence, 
I  say,  but  tempered  with  love.  Hence  it  accounts  no  law  nor  command  little  or  of 
small  value  which  is  from  God,  because  He  is  great,  and  highly  esteemed  by  the 
pious  heart ;  no  command  hard,  though  contrary  to  the  flesh,  because  aU  things  are 
easy  to  love.  That  this  threefold  perfection  of  obedience  is  not  a  picture  drawn  by 
fancy  is  evident  in  David  (Psa.  cxix.),  where  he  subjects  himself  to  the  whole  law ;  his 
feet  (ver.  105),  his  mouth  (ver.  13),  his  heart  (ver.  11),  the  whole  tenour  of  his  life 
(ver.  24).  He  subjects  himself  to  the  whole  law  (ver.  6),  and  he  professes  his  con- 
stancy therein  (vers.  16  and  33).  {Abp.  Leighton.)  Sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ. — The  sprinkled  blood  of  Christ : — 1.  There  was  blood  in  Christ ;  He 
took  the  true  nature  of  His  brethren  that  He  might  serve  and  satisfy  God  in  the 
same  nature  that  had  offended.  2.  This  blood  was  shed.  If  you  ask,  who  shed  it  ? 
I  answer,  Judas  by  selling  it ;  the  priests  by  advising  it ;  the  people  by  consenting 
to  it ;  Pilate  by  decreeing  it ;  the  soldiers  by  effecting  it ;  Christ  Himself  by  per- 
mitting it,  and  after  presenting  it  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14),  our  sins,  that  chiefly  caused 
it.  3.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  blood  of  Christ  be  shed  unless  it  be  applied  also, 
which  the  word  "sprinkling"  notes.  4.  This  effusion  of  blood  was  solemnly  pre- 
figured or  foretold  by  the  sacrifices  of  the  law.  For  this  word  "sprinkled"  is  a 
metaphor  borrowed  from  the  legal  sprinkling,  which  shows  us  two  things.  (1)  The 
great  account  that  God  and  good  men  make  of  it  in  that  it  was  so  solemnly  and 
anciently  typed  out.  (2)  That  the  ceremonies  of  that  Law  are  now  abolished, 
seeing  we  have  the  true  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  5.  That  our  estate  in  Christ  is 
better  now  than  our  estate  in  Adam  was.  That  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  us 
is  better  then  that  righteousness  was,  inherent  in  Adam.  Now  for  the  world  to  come ; 
heaven  is  better  than  paradise.  6.  We  can  never  discern  our  comfort  in  the  blood  of 
Christ  till  we  be  sanctified  in  spirit,  and  set  upon  the  reducing  of  our  lives  unto  the 
obedience  of  Christ.  Justification  and  sanctification  are  inseparable.  (N.  Byfield.) 
Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  be  multiplied.  —A  loving  salutation : — I.  The  chakacter- 
iSTics  OF  THOSE  ADDRESSED.  1.  They  are  sojourners.  2.  They  have  one  common 
sympathy.  Scattered  in  dwelling,  but  one  in  heart.  II.  The  blessedness  of  the 
REDEEMED.  1.  Elected  by  the  Father.  2.  Salvation  by  Christ.  3.  Sanctification  by 
the  Spirit.  HI.  The  affectionate  desire.  He  does  not  seek  their  restoration,  nor 
their  temporal  welfare,  nor  their  immunity  from  suffering  or  persecution,  but  grace 
and  peace.  1.  Grace  is  help.  It  is  easy  to  bear  trials  and  pains  if  strength  is  given. 
2.  Peace  is  tranquillity.     It  overshadows  all  our  difficulties,  and  sheds  a  halo  of 


€  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

light  upon  our  course.  {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Multiplied  grace  and  peace : — 
What  should  we  do  that  grace  and  peace  might  be  multiplied  ?  1.  Be  sure  it  is  true 
grace,  else  it  will  never  increase.  2.  Thou  must  increase  in  meekness  and  humility 
(James  iv.  8 ;  Psa.  xxxvi.  6, 11).  3.  If  thou  wouldst  have  thy  grace  and  peace  increase, 
thou  must  be  constant  in  the  use  of  all  the  ordinances  of  God.  As  thou  measureth  to 
God  in  the  means,  so  will  God  measure  to  thee  in  the  success  :  thou  must  be  much 
in  hearing.  4.  Thou  must  not  perplex  thy  heart  with  the  cares  of  this  life,  but  in 
all  things  go  to  God  by  prayer,  and  cast  all  thy  care  upon  Him  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7). 
5.  Thou  must  be  resolved  upon  it  to  deny  ungodhness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
righteously  and  religiously  and  soberly  in  this  present  world,  else  thou  canst  never 
meet  with  true  peace.  This  likewise  may  be  comfortable  to  a  poor  Christian,  and 
that  two  ways.  1.  First,  If  he  consider  that  grace  is  not  given  all  at  once  but  by 
degrees,  and  therefore  he  must  not  be  discouraged,  though  he  have  many  wants. 
2.  Secondly,  If  he  consider  the  bountifulness  of  God  to  all  that  seek  grace  and 
peace,  it  may  be  had  in  abundance.  (N.  Byfield.)  Grace  and  peace,  their  true 
order : — While  this  beautiful  introductory  salutation,  "  Grace  unto  you,  and 
peace,"  is  a  formula  common  to  all  the  apostles,  it  is  also  an  exact  theological 
definition,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth.  The  right  thing  is  put  fore- 
most here.  The  living  root  lies  in  the  ground  below,  and  the  fruit-bearing  branches 
tower  above  it.  It  is  grace  first,  and  peace  following  it.  When  God  and  man  meet 
it  is  pardon  first,  and  then  a  mutual  confidence.  When  He  in  the  Mediator  dis- 
penses freely  His  favour,  you  in  the  Mediator  draw  near  without  dread.  He 
manifests  Himself  a  forgiving  Father,  and  that  very  thing  infuses  into  your  heart 
the  spirit  of  a  trusting  child.  "  May  grace  and  peace  be  multiplied."  In  the  Old 
Testament  (Isa.  xlviii.  18)  there  is  a  promise  that  His  people's  peace  "  shall  be  like  a 
river  " — gaining  affluents  from  either  side  as  it  flows,  and  at  the  last  opening  out 
into  "  a  righteousness  Uke  the  waves  of  the  sea."  [W.  Arnot.)  The  beauty  of 
grace : — 1.  The  connection,  grace  and  peace.  The  way  to  have  peace  is  to  have 
grace ;  grace  is  the  breeder  of  peace.  2.  The  order ;  first  grace,  then  peace.  Grace 
is  the  elder  sister.  I.  Wh.'^t  is  meant  by  geace  ?  The  infusion  of  a  new  and  holy 
principle  into  the  heart,  whereby  it  is  changed  from  what  it  was,  and  is  made  after 
God's  own  heart.  II.  The  authok  or  efficient  of  grace  ;  namely,  the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  is  therefore  called  the  Spirit  of  grace.  The  Spirit  is  the  fountain  from  whence 
crystal  streams  of  grace  flow.  1.  Universally;  "the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you 
wholly."  The  Spirit  of  God  infuseth  grace  into  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul ;  though 
grace  be  wrought  but  in  part,  yet  in  every  part  ;  in  the  understanding  light,  in  the 
conscience  tenderness,  in  the  will  consent,  in  the  affections  harmony ;  therefore 
grace  is  compared  to  leaven,  because  it  swells  itself  in  the  whole  soul,  and  makes  the 
conversation  to  rise  as  high  as  heaven.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God  works  grace  pro- 
gressively. He  carries  it  on  from  one  degree  to  another.  lU.  Why  is  the  work  of 
HOLINESS  IN  THE  HEART  CALLED  GRACE?  1.  Becausc  it  has  a  supcr-emineucy  above 
nature.  It  is  of  Divine  extraction  (James  iii.  17).  By  reason  we  live  the  life  of 
men,  by  grace  we  live  the  life  of  God.  2.  It  is  called  grace  because  it  is  a  work  of 
free  grace ;  every  link  in  the  golden  chain  of  our  salvation  is  wrought  and  enamelled 
with  free  grace.  IV.  The  cogency  and  necessity  of  grace.  It  is  most  needful, 
because  it  fits  us  for  communion  with  God.  Alexander  being  presented  with 
a  rich  cabinet  of  king  Darius,  he  reserved  it  to  put  Homer's  works  in,  as  being 
of  great  value.  The  heart  is  a  spiritual  cabinet  into  which  the  jewel  of 
grace  should  be  put.  1.  Grace  hath  a  soul-quickening  excellency  in  it:  "the 
just  shall  live  by  faith."  Men  void  of  grace  are  dead.  2.  Grace  hath  a  soul- 
enriching  excellency :  "  ye  are  enriched  in  all  knowledge."  As  the  sun  enricheth 
the  world  with  its  golden  beams,  so  doth  knowledge  enrich  the  mind.  3.  Grace 
hath  a  soul-adorning  excellency  (chap.  iii.  4,  5).  A  soul  decked  with  grace 
is  as  the  dove  covered  with  silver  wings  and  golden  feathers.  4.  Grace  hath  a  soul- 
cleansing  excellency.  Grace  lays  the  soul  a-whitening,  it  takes  out  the  leopard 
spots,  and  turns  the  cypress  into  an  azure  beauty.  Grace  is  of  a  celestial  nature  ; 
though  it  doth  not  wholly  remove  sin,  it  doth  subdue  it ;  though  it  doth  not  keep 
sin  out,  it  keeps  it  under ;  though  sin  in  a  gracious  soul  doth  not  die  perfectly,  yet 
it  dies  daily.  Grace  makes  the  heart  a  spiritual  temple,  which  hath  this  inscription 
upon  it,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  5.  Grace  hath  a  soul-strengthening  excellency,  it 
enables  a  man  to  do  that  which  exceeds  the  power  of  nature.  Grace  teacheth  to 
mortify  our  sins,  to  love  our  enemies,  to  prefer  the  glory  of  Christ  before  our  own 
lives.  6.  Grace  hath  a  soul-raising  excellency  ;  it  is  a  Divine  sparkle  that  ascends ; 
when  the  heart  is  Divinely  touched  with  the  loadstone  of  the  Spirit,  it  is  drawn  up 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  7 

to  God.  Grace  raiseth  a  man  above  others  ;  he  lives  in  the  altitudes,  while  others 
creep  on  the  earth  and  are  almost  buried  in  it ;  a  Christian  by  the  wings  of  grace 
flies  aloft ;  the  saints  "  mount  up  as  eagles."  A  believer  is  a  citizen  of  heaven.  7. 
Grace  hath  a  perfuming  excellency ;  it  makes  us  a  sweet  odour  to  God.  Hence 
grace  is  compared  to  those  spices  which  are  most  fragrant  (Cant.  iv.  13).  8.  Grace 
hath  a  soul-ennobling  excellency ;  grace  makes  us  vessels  of  honour,  it  sets  us  above 
princes  and  nobles.  The  saints  are  called  kings  and  priests  for  their  dignity,  and 
jewels  for  their  value.  9.  Grace  hath  a  soul-securing  excellency,  it  brings  safety 
along  with  it.  Xerxes,  the  Persian,  when  he  destroyed  aU  the  temples  in  Greece, 
caused  the  temple  of  Diana  to  be  preserved  for  its  beautiful  structure ;  that  soul 
which  hath  the  beauty  of  holiness  shining  in  it  shall  be  preserved  for  the  glory  of 
the  structure ;  God  wUl  not  suffer  His  own  temple  to  be  destroyed.  10.  Grace  hath 
ft  heart-establishing  excellency;  "it  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be  estabUshed 
with  grace."  Before  the  infusion  of  grace,  the  heart  is  like  a  ship  without  a  ballast ; 
it  wavers  and  tosseth,  being  ready  to  overturn.  A  gracious  heart  cleaves  to  God, 
and  let  whatever  changes  come,  the  soul  is  settled  as  a  ship  at  anchor.  11.  Grace  hath 
a  preparatory  excellency  in  it ;  it  prepares  and  fits  for  glory.  First  you  cleanse  the 
vessel,  and  then  pour  in  wine.  God  doth  first  cleanse  us  by  His  grace,  and  then 
pour  in  the  wine  of  glory ;  the  silver  link  of  grace  draws  the  golden  link  of  glory 
after  it :  indeed,  grace  differs  little  from  glory  ;  grace  is  glory  in  the  bud,  and  glory 
is  grace  in  the  flower.  In  short,  glory  is  nothing  else  but  grace  commencing  and 
taking  its  degrees.  12.  Grace  hath  an  abiding  excellency ;  temporal  things  are  for 
a  season,  but  grace  hath  eternity  stamped  upon  it.  Other  riches  take  wings  and 
fly  from  us  ;  grace  takes  wings  and  flies  with  us  to  heaven.  Let  us  try  whether  our 
grace  be  true ;  there  is  something  looks  like  grace  which  is  not.  Chrysostom  saith 
the  devil  hath  a  counterfeit  chain  to  all  the  graces,  and  he  would  deceive  us  with  it. 
Lapidaries  have  ways  to  try  their  precious  stones  ;  let  us  try  our  grace  by  a  Scripture 
touchstone  :  the  painted  Christian  shall  have  a  painted  paradise.  1.  The  truth  of 
grace  is  seen  by  a  displacency  and  antipathy  against  sin  :  "  I  hate  every  false  way." 
2.  Grace  is  known  by  the  growth  of  it,  growth  evidenceth  life.  3.  True  grace  will 
make  us  willing  to  suffer  for  Christ.  Grace  is  like  gold,  it  wUl  abide  the  "  fiery 
trial."  Lessons :  1.  If  we  would  be  enriched  with  this  jewel  of  grace,  let  us  take  pains 
for  it ;  we  are  bid  to  make  a  hue  and  cry  after  knowledge,  and  to  search  for  it  as  a 
man  that  searcheth  for  a  vein  of  gold.  Our  salvation  cost  Christ  blood,  it  wiU  cost 
us  sweat.  2.  Let  us  go  to  God  for  grace  ;  He  is  called  "  the  God  of  all  grace."  We 
could  lose  grace  of  ourselves,  but  we  cannot  find  it  of  ourselves.  3.  If  you  would 
have  grace,  engage  the  prayers  of  others  in  your  behalf.  He  is  hke  to  be  rich  who 
hath  several  stocks  going  ;  he  is  in  the  way  of  spiritual  thriving  who  hath  several 
stocks  of  prayer  going  for  him.  (T.  Watson.)  The  beginnings  of  grace  small : — 
Trace  back  any  river  to  its  source,  and  you  wUl  find  its  beginnings  small.  A  little 
moisture  oozing  through  the  sand  or  dripping  out  of  some  unknown  rock,  a  gentle 
gush  from  some  far-away  mountain's  foot,  are  the  beginning  of  many  a  broad  river, 
in  whose  waters  tall  merchantmen  may  anchor  and  gaUant  fleets  may  ride.  For  it 
widens  and  gets  deeper  tiU  it  mingles  with  the  ocean.  So  is  the  beginning  of  a 
Christian's  or  a  nation's  grace.  It  is  flrst  a  tiny  stream,  then  it  swells  into  a  river, 
then  a  sea.  There  is  life  and  progression  towards  an  ultimate  perfection  when  God 
finds  the  beginning  of  grace  in  any  man.  (J.  J.  Wray.)  Grace  continually  from 
God  : — As  grace  is  at  first  from  God,  so  it  is  continually  from  Him,  and  is  main- 
tained by  Him,  as  much  as  hght  in  the  atmosphere  is  all  day  long  from  the  sun,  as 
well  as  at  first  dawning,  or  at  sunrising.  {J.  Edwards.)  Multiplied  grace  : — I 
have  in  my  garden  a  tree  that  I  have  very  carefully  cultivated.  It  is  not  difficult 
for  me  to  conceive  that  that  tree  may  be  perfect — ^that  there  is  not  a  root  nor  a 
branch  wanting ;  its  foliage  and  fruitage  are  perfect ;  it  is  yielding  fruit ;  but  next 
summer  I  expect  a  little  more  than  it  has  borne  this  year.  The  fruit  may  be  no 
better  than  it  was  last  year ;  it  was  perfect  then,  and  is  perfect  now,  but  there  is 
more  of  it,  because,  in  the  meantime,  the  tree  has  grown.  So  with  your  Christian 
experience.  (Bp.  Bowman.)  Of  peace  : — I.  What  ake  the  sevebaIj  species  or 
KINDS  OF  PEACE  ?  1.  There  is  an  external  peace,  and  that  is — (1)  Economical,  peace 
in  a  family.  (2)  Political,  peace  in  the  State.  (3)  Ecclesiastical,  peace  in  the 
Church.  A  spiritual  peace,  which  is  twofold — peace  above  us,  or  peace  with  God, 
and  peace  within  us,  or  peace  with  conscience.  This  is  superlative ;  other  peace 
may  be  lasting,  but  this  is  everlasting.  II.  Whence  comes  this  peace  ?  This  peace 
hath  the  whole  Trinity  for  its  author.  1.  God  the  Father  is  the  "  God  of  peace  " 
(PhU.  iv.  9).     2.  God  the  Son  is  the  purchaser  of  peace  (Col.  i.  20).     Christ  pur- 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

chased  our  peace  upon  hard  terms.  3.  Peace  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit 
clears  up  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  from  whence  ariseth  peace.  III.  Whether 
MAT  SUCH  AS  ABE  DESTITUTE  OF  GBACE  HAVE  PEACE  ?  No.  Peace  flows  from  sanctifi- 
cation,  hut  they  being  unregenerate,  have  nothing  to  do  with  peaoe:  "  There  is  no 
peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  They  may  have  a  truce,  but  no  peace.  IV. 
What  are  the  signs  of  a  false  peace  ?  1.  A  false  peace  hath  much  confidence  in 
it,  but  this  confidence  is  conceit.  2.  False  peace  separates  those  things  which  God 
hath  joined  together :  God  joins  holiness  and  peace,  but  he  who  hath  a  false  peace 
separates  these  two.  He  lays  claim  to  peace,  but  banisheth  holiness.  3.  False 
peace  is  not  willing  to  be  tried ;  a  sign  they  are  bad  wares  which  wiU  not  endure  the 
light;  a  sign  a  man  hath  stolen  goods,  when  he  will  not  have  his  house  searched. 
A  false  peace  cannot  endure  to  be  tried  by  the  Word.  The  Word  speaks  of  a 
humbling  and  refining  work  upon  the  soul  before  peace  ;  false  peace  cannot  endure 
to  hear  of  this  ;  the  least  trouble  will  shake  this  peace,  it  will  end  in  despair.  V. 
How  SHALL  WE  KNOW  THAT  ouBS  IS  A  TBUE  PEACE  ?  1.  True  pcacc  flows  from  union 
with  Christ.  We  must  first  be  ingrafted  into  Christ,  before  we  can  receive  peace 
from  Him.  2.  True  peace  flows  from  subjection  to  Christ;  where  Christ  gives 
peace,  there  He  sets  up  His  government  in  the  heart.  3.  True  peace  is  after  trouble. 
Many  say  they  have  peace,  but  is  this  peace  before  a  storm,  or  after  it  ?  True  peace 
is  after  trouble.  VI.  Whethee  have  all  sanctified  persons  this  peace  ?  They 
have  a  title  to  it ;  they  have  the  ground  of  it ;  grace  is  the  seed  of  peace,  and  it  wiU 
in  time  turn  to  peace,  as  the  blossoms  of  a  tree  to  fruit,  milk  to  cream.     VH.  But 

WHY  HAVE  NOT  ALL  BELIEVERS    THE    FULL  ENJOYMENT  AND  POSSESSION  OF  PEACE  ?       WhY 

IS  NOT  THIS  FLOWER  OF  PEACE  FULLY  RIPE  AND  BLOWN  ?  1.  Through  the  f ury  of  temp- 
tation. 2.  Through  mistake  and  misapprehension  about  sin.  3.  Through  remiss- 
ness in  duty.  VIII.  What  shall  we  do  to  attain  this  blessed  peace  ?  1.  Ask  it 
of  God.  2.  Make  war  with  sin.  3.  Go  to  Christ's  blood  for  peace.  4.  Walk 
closely  with  God.  Walk  very  holily :  God's  Spirit  is  first  a  refiner  before  a  comforter. 
{T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father. — Man  blessing  God : — I.  Man  blesseth 
God  three  ways.  1.  In  his  heart,  when,  refreshed  with  God's  favour  and  inflamed 
with  the  joys  of  His  presence,  he  doth  lift  up  his  heart  with  affection,  striving  to 
laud  God  and  acknowledge  His  mercy.  2.  In  his  tongue,  when  he  taketh  to  him 
words,  and  openeth  his  Ups  to  confess  and  praise  God  either  in  secret  or  openly. 
8.  In  his  works,  and  that — (1)  When  he  sets  up  memorials  of  God's  great  works  or 
deliverances.  (2)  When  he  receives  the  sacrament,  setting  himself  apart  to  celebrate 
the  memory  of  Christ's  death.  (3)  By  the  obedience  of  his  Ufe,  striving  to  glorify 
God  in  a  holy  conversation.  (4)  And  lastly,  by  showing  mercy,  and  thereby  causing 
others  to  bless  God.  II.  Great  reason  hath  man  to  bless  God.  1.  For  God  is 
blessedness  itself,  and  whither  should  the  water  run  but  into  the  sea,  from  whence 
it  is  originally  taken.  2.  Besides,  the  Lord  hath  required  our  praise,  as  the  chief 
means  of  glorifying  Him.  3.  And  He  hath  blessed  us,  and  therefore  we  have  great 
reason  to  bless  Him.  He  hath  blessed  us  in  the  creatures,  in  His  Son,  by  His 
angels,  by  His  ministers ;  blessed  us  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  blessed  us  in  His 
house,  and  in  our  own  houses,  in  our  sabbaths,  sacraments,  the  Word,  prayer,  <fec., 
blessed  us  in  our  souls,  bodies,  states,  names,  &c.  {N.  Byfield.)  An  ascription  of 
praise: — I.  The  spirit  of  devotional  thankfulness.  "Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  Jesus  Christ."  A  Uving  Christian  cannot  receive  Divine  mercies  like  & 
dumb  animal,  but  rejoices  in  the  sunshine  of  thanksgiving.  1.  It  should  be  the  ruling 
principle  of  our  lives.  How  much  happiness  is  lost  by  forgetting  the  privileges  we 
enjoy  I  Thankfulness  in  our  lives  would  enable  us  to  appreciate  what  we  already 
possess.  2.  It  should  be  the  keynote  of  our  prayers.  It  is  discouraging  to  bestow 
favour  on  a  hard  and  unthankful  recipient.  3.  It  should  permeate  all  our  religion. 
There  is  something  in  praise  that  softens  the  heart  and  ennobles  the  mind.  U.  The 
GRAND  REASON  WHICH  DEMANDS  THIS  SPIRIT.  It  is  the  regeneration  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  This  regeneration  is  represented  as  introducing  us  to  three  grand 
privileges,  which  may  well  excite  our  praise.  1.  A  prospect  of  eternal  life — "  To  a 
lively  hope."  2.  A  prospect  of  unchanging  possession — "To  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible," &c.  3.  A  possession  of  perfect  protection — "  Who  are  guarded  "  by  the 
power  of  God.  4.  A  prospect  of  perfect  victory — "Unto  salvation."  {J.  J.  S.  Bird, 
B.A.)  The  apostolic  benediction : — The  Epistle  at  this  point  where  it  begins  to 
flow  is  like  one  of  those  infant  rivers  which  burst  full-bodied  at  their  birth  from  a 
great  inland  sea  in  which  their  waters  have  been  gathered.     Unlike  the  waters  of 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  9 

Ezekiel's  vision,  that  gathered  volume  as  they  flowed,  this  is  a  river  to  swim  in  the 
moment  that  it  breaks  away  from  the  fountain-head.  1.  Who  is  this  of  whom  the 
prophet  speaks?— God.  2.  In  what  aspect  does  the  Supreme  present  Himself? — As 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  What  has  He  done  ? — Begotten  us  again  ; 
made  us  new  creatures.  4.  From  what  motive  has  He  acted  ? — ^According  to  His 
abundant  mercy.  5.  By  what  means  has  He  accomplished  this  great  change  ? — By 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  6.  To  what  end  in  the  experience 
of  His  people  does  He  thus  work  ? — To  a  living  hope  burning  in  their  hearts  here, 
and  an  inheritance  incorruptible  beyond  the  grave.  (TF.  Arnot.)  An  outburst  of 
praise : — I.  Praise  to  God.  1.  Eeverent.  2.  Loving.  3.  Intelligent.  4.  Grate- 
ful. II.  Praise  to  God,  for  a  bright  hope  of  a  glorious  future.  1.  It  is  praise 
to  God  for  a  hope.  (1)  Expectant  desire.  (2)  Living  hope.  In  contrast  with  dead 
hopes ;  lying  hopes  ;  weak  hopes.  2.  It  is  praise  to  God  for  a  future.  (1)  In 
contrast  with  the  present  lot.  (2)  A  completion  of  what  inheritance  in  Palestine 
might  have  been.  HI.  Praise  to  God,  for  His  wonderful  methods  of  ensuring  the 
future  and  inspiring  that  hope.  1.  The  future  is  ensured.  (1)  God  has  reserved 
it  in  safe  keeping.  (2)  God  will,  in  due  time,  let  it  be  revealed.  (3)  God  has 
ensured  it  as  an  inheritance.  2.  How  is  the  hope  of  the  future  inspired  and 
preserved  ?  (1)  It  is  a  hope  that  is  born  with  man's  new  birth.  (2)  It  is  a  hope 
that  is  continued  by  God  in  connection  with  man's  character.  "  Guarded  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith."  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  A  sevenfold  hymn  of  praise  : — 
1.  "  Abundant  mercy."  Everything  must  start  from  that.  Our  first  cry  must  be, 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  God's  mercy  is  abundant  wherever  you  see  it. 
You  see  mercy  in  nature  and  in  providence,  but  in  Christ  it  seems  to  overflow  its 
banks.  2.  The  new  birth.  If  we  are  to  enjoy  heaven  we  must  be  born  again,  have 
new  tastes.  3.  A  living  hope.  This  irradiates  aU  the  future.  Earthly  hopes  are 
dying  hopes.  The  most  that  the  worldly  man  can  say  is,  "  while  I  breathe  I  hope." 
But  the  Christian's  hope  is  not  crushed  by  death  ;  it  is  a  living  hope  in  that  He 
gives  me  hfe.  See  yonder  swimmer  tossed  about  by  the  waves ;  he  is  sinking,  but 
at  last  they  see  him ;  a  boat  puts  off ;  the  cry  is  raised  from  the  pier-head ;  the 
rescuers  are  on  their  way ;  he  hfts  himself  once  more,  he  sees  the  boat  sweeping 
towards  him ;  he  has  a  hving  hope ;  he  struggles  a  Uttle  longer,  until  the  rescuers 
are  able  to  pull  him  into  the  boat.  So  it  is  with  our  hope ;  Uving  hope  inspires  us 
with  courage.  4.  Then  he  comes  to  the  blessing,  which  is  like  the  central  shaft  of 
the  candlestick — the  blessing  upon  which  all  the  rest  depends — the  risen  Christ. 
"By  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  We  worship  no  dead  hero, 
but  a  Uving,  loving  Lord.  5.  "An  incorruptible  inheritance."  I  once  received  a 
letter  asking  me  to  preach  a  sermon  about  heaven.  I  cannot  preach  about 
heaven.  St.  Peter  could  not.  He  could  only  tell  us  what  it  was  not.  6. 
The  guaranteed  preservation.  "Kept  by  the  power  of  God."  7.  "Salvation 
to  be  revealed."     (E.  A.   Stuart,  3I.A.)  Benedictus   Deus : — The   sum   of  this 

text,  and  the  name  of  it  too,  is  set  down  in  the  very  first  word  of  it.  A. 
Benedictus  it  is  from  us  to  God,  for  something  coming  from  God  to  or  for  us» 
Something  ?  Nay,  many.  And  many  they  are ;  we  reduce  them  to  three  :  Our 
regeneration  which  is  past,  our  hope  which  is  present,  and  our  inheritance- 
which  is  to  come.  1.  Kegenerating,  or  begetting,  is  of  itself  a  benefit ;  we  get  life 
by  it  if  nothing  else.  2.  But  to  beget  to  an  inheritance  is  more  than  simply  to- 
beget.  3.  And  yet  more  than  that,  to  beget  to  such  an  inheritance  as  this,  of  which 
so  many  things  are  here  spoken.  For  the  order  we  will  put  the  words  in  no  other, 
for  we  can  put  them  in  no  better  than  they  stand.  1.  God  first,  and  the  true  God, 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Then  His  mercy,  the  cause  moving.  3. 
Then  Christ's  resurrection,  the  means  working.  4.  Then  our  regeneration,  the  act 
producing.  Producing  hope  of  the  inheritance,  then  after  the  inheritance  we  hope 
for.  Of  which  two  points  there  are :  How  it  is  qualified,  uncorrupt,  undefiled,  not 
fading.  Then,  how  seated,  even  in  heaven  there  it  is,  there  kept  it  is.  Now  then 
for  these.  For  His  mercy  first :  for  our  regenerating  by  His  mercy ;  for  the  hope 
of  this  inheritance,  but  more  for  the  inheritance  itself,  specially  such  a  one  so  con- 
ditioned as  here  is  set  down  ;  for  keeping  it  for  us  in  heaven  ;  for  keeping  us  for  it 
on  earth.  For  these  all,  but  above  all  for  the  means  of  all,  the  rising  of  Christ, 
the  gate  of  this  hope,  the  pledge  of  this  inheritance ;  for  these  owe  we  this  Bene- 
dictus to  God.  To  God  the  Father  and  to  Christ  our  Lord,  by  whom  and  by  whose 
rising,  lose  this  life  when  we  will,  we  have  hope  of  a  better ;  betide  our  inheritance 
on  earth  what  shall,  we  have  another  kept  for  us  in  heaven.  Thus  every  one 
naturally  ariseth  out  of  other.     Blessed  be  God.     Yea,  blessed  and  thanked  and 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u>.  i. 

praised ;  but  here  blessed  suits  best,  that  the  most  proper  return  for  a  blessing 
that  we  inherit  is  the  blessing  (chap.  iii.  9).     The  hope  is  a  blessed  hope  (Titus  ii. 
13).     But  the  inheritance  is  the  state  of  blessedness  itself.     Therefore  Benedictus  is 
said  well.    But  thereby  hangs  a  scruple ;  for  what  are  we  that  we  should  take  upon 
us  to  bless  God  ?     Yes,  He  us,  and  we  Him  too,  as  if  they  were  reciprocal,  one  the 
echo,  the  reflection  of  the  other.     Equal  they  are  not.     It  were  fond  to  imagine  the 
Father  gives  the  child  no  other  blessing  but  the  child  can  give  him  as  good  again. 
What  then  ?     He  that  wisheth  heartily  would  do  more  than  wish  if  his  power  were 
according.     What  say  we,  then,  when  we  say  Benedictus  ?    It  is  a  word  compound ; 
take  it  in  sunder,  and  dicere  is,  to  say  somewhat,  to  speak ;  and  that  we  can ;  and 
bene  is  (speaking),  to  speak  well;  and  that  we  ought.     To  speak,  is  confession;  to 
speak  well,  is  praise ;  and  praise  becometh  Him,  and  us  to  give  it  Him.     And  what 
good  can  we  wish  Him  that  He  hath  not  ?     Say  we  it,  say  we  it  not.  He  is  blessed 
alike.     True  to  Him  we  cannot  wish  ;  not  to  His  person ;  but  to  His  name  we  can, 
and  to  His  Word  we  can ;  we  can  wish  it  more  devoutly  heard.     God  and  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     This  is  the  style  of  the  New  Testament,  ye  read 
it  not  in  the  Old.     The  sun  was  yet  under  the  horizon,  but  now  up,  and  of  a  good 
height.     (1)  Blessed  be  God  ;  say  that,  and  no  more,  and  never  a  Jew,  Turk,  or 
Pagan  but  will  say  as  much.     We  would  not  bestow  our  Benedictus  upon  any  but 
the  true  God,  so  settle  our  Benedictus  upon  the  right  God.     (2)  For  this  cause, 
tut  not  for  this  alone,  when  we  bless  Him  I  daresay  we  would  bless  Him  with 
His  best  title.     So  hath  it  ever  been.     You  shall  observe  in  titles  ever  upon  the 
coming  of  a  greater,  the  less  is  laid  down.     For  if  this  be  to  be  God,  to  be  bounteous, 
beneficial.     In  nothing  was  God  ever  so  beneficial  as  in  sending  His  only  begotten 
Son  into  the  world.     This  shall  be  His  title  for  ever.     For  ever  to  have  a  chief 
place  in  our  Benedictus.     And  yet  there  is  another  on  Christ's  behalf,  our  Lord ; 
even  to  bring  Him  in  too.    For,  seeing  all  that  which  follows  comes  not  but  by  the 
rising  of  Christ,  we  cannot  leave  Him  out.     All  the  good  that  comes  to  us,  as  it  comes 
to  us  from  God,  so  it  comes  to  us  by  Christ.     This  is  most  plain ;  first,  that  did 
generate  Christ ;  before  that  did  regenerate  us.     If  He  not  generate,  we  not  regene- 
rate ;  then  no  children,  then  no  inheritance.     For  in  Him  this  text,  and  all  other 
texts,  are  yea  and  amen.     By  this  time  we  see  why  this  addition,  it  is  His  title  of 
severance,  it  is  the  highest  title  of  His  honour  ;  it  takes  in  Christ,  who  would  not 
be  left  out  in  our  Benedictus.     From  the  party  whom  we  pass  to  the  cause,  why. 
For  we  say  not  this  Benedictus,  as  we  say  many  a  one  here,  without  any  cause ; 
Benedictus  for  nothing ;  nay,  for  God  is  ever  af orehand  with  us.     For  generation  is 
the  proper  act  of  a  Father.     But  before  we  come  to  it  let  us  not  stride  over  that 
which  stands  before  it.     God  did  this,  did  all  that  follows,  but  upon  what  motive  ? 
According  to  His  mercy.     And  mercy  accords  well  with  a  Father ;  no  compassion 
like  His.     But  the  benefits  ensuing  are  too  great  to  run  in  the  common  current  of 
mercy.     "  Great,"   therefore   according  to   His  great  mercy.     Mercy,  the  thing ; 
great,  the  measure ;  a  word  of  number  rather  than  magnitude.     The  meaning  is, 
no  single  mercy  would  do  it ;  no,  though  great,  there  must  be  many.     For  many 
the  defects  to  be  removed,  many  the  sins  to  be  forgiven,  many  the  perfections  to  be 
attained,  therefore,  according  to  His  manifold  mercy.     "According"  is  well  said. 
For  that  indeed  is  the  chord,  to  which  this  and  all  our  Benedictuses  are  to  be  tuned. 
Yea,  many  times  blessed  for  His  manifold  mercies.     Mercy,  then,  first ;  regenera- 
tion second,  the  act  of  this  mercy.  'Verily,  even  for  our  natural  generation,  we  owe 
Him  a  Benedictus.     No  man  by  his  first  birth,  be  it  never  so  high  or  noble,  is  a  whit 
the  nearer  this  inheritance.     Now  "  re  "  hath  in  it  two  powers.     "  Re  "  is  "  again  " 
the  second  time.     For  two  there  be,  that  old  creation,  and  the  new  creature  in 
Christ.     But  "  re  "  is  not  only  again,  but  "  again"  upon  a  loss.     Not  a  second  only, 
but  a  second  upon  the  failing  of  the  first.     So  doth  re-demption,  a  buying  again, 
upon  a  former  aliening.     Re-conciliation,  upon  a  former  falling  out.     Re-stitution, 
upon  a  former  attainder.    Re-surrection,  upon  a  fall  taken  formerly.    Re-generation, 
upon  a  former  degenerating,  from  our  first  estate.     Our  first  would  not  serve ;  it 
was  corrupt,  it  was  defiled,  it  did  degenerate.     There  was  more  then  need  of  a  new, 
a  second,  a  re-generation,  to  make  us  children  of  grace  again,  and  so  of  life.     This 
act  of  regenerating  is  determined  doubly,  Eig  is  twice  repeated.     To  hope  first,  then 
to  the  inheritance ;  ye  may  put  them  together,  to  the  hope  of  an  inheritance.     But 
because  an  inheritance  is  no  present  matter;  it  is  to  come,  and  to  be  coming  to. 
From  begetting,  we  step  not  straight  to  entering  upon  our  inheritance.     There  needs 
no  great  Benedictus  for  hope.     For  what  is  hope  ?     ^Vhat,  but  a  waking  man's 
dream  ?    And  such  hopes  there  be  many  in  the  world.     But  this  is  none  such.     To 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  11 

show  it  is  none  such  it  is  severed  by  two  terms  :  regeneravit  and  vivam.  They  are 
worth  the  marking  both,  (a)  Regeiieravit,  first ;  that  it  is  spes  generata.  So  this 
a  substantial  hope,  called  therefore  by  St.  Paul  the  "helmet  of  hope  "  (1  Thess.  v.),  the 
^'anchor  of  hope  "  (Heb.  vi.),  things  of  substance,  that  will  hold,  that  have  metal  in 
them.  (&)  Then  mark  vivam.  And  vivam  follows  well  of  regeneravit.  For  they 
that  are  begotten  are  so  to  Uve,  to  have  life.  Vivam  also  imports  there  is  a  dead  or 
^  dying  hope,  but  this  is  not  such  but  a  living.  Nay,  viva  is  more  than  vivens,  lively, 
then  living.  Where  viva  is  said  of  ought  the  meaning  is  they  spring,  they  grow, 
they  have  life  in  themselves.  And,  indeed,  regeneravit  is  a  good  verb  to  join  with 
fiope.  There  is  in  hope  a  kind  of  regendering  power ;  it  begets  men  anew.  And 
viva  is  a  good  epithet  for  it.  When  one  droops  give  him  hope,  his  spirits  wiU  come 
to  him  afresh,  it  wiU  make  him  alive  again.  And  for  such  a  hope  blessed  be  God. 
And  whence  hath  it  this  life  ?  The  next  word  shows  it,  vivam,  per  resurrectionem. 
The  vigour  it  hath  from  Christ  rising,  and  by  His  rising  opening  to  us  the  gate  of 
life  at  large.  Life  by  the  resurrection,  the  true  life  indeed.  Not  to  live  here  stiU, 
but  to  rise  again  and  live  as  Christ  did.  We  for  the  most  part  put  it  wrong,  for  we 
put  it  in  them  that  must  die,  and  then  must  our  hope  die  with  them,  and  so  prove  a 
dying  hope.  But  put  it  in  one  that  dies  not,  that  shall  never  die,  and  then  it  will 
be  spes  viva  indeed.  No  reed,  no  cobweb-hope  then  ;  but  helmet-,  anchor-hope — hope 
that  will  never  confound  you.  And  who  is  that,  or  where  is  He,  that  we  might  hope 
in  Him?  That  is  Jesus  Christ,  our  hope  ;  so  calls  Him  St.  Paul  (1  Tim.  i.  1).  Yet 
not  Christ  every  way  considered ;  not  as  yesterday,  in  the  grave,  nor  as  the  day 
before,  giving  up  the  ghost  upon  the  Cross,  dead,  and  buried,  yields  but  dead  hope. 
But  in  Jesus  Christ  rising  again.  We  pass  now  to  the  inheritance.  But  as  we 
pass  will  ye  observe  the  situation  first  ?  It  is  weU  worth  your  observing  that  the 
resurrection  is  placed  in  the  midst,  between  our  hope  and  our  inheritance.  To  hope 
before  it,  before  the  resurrection,  hope  ;  but  after  to  the  inheritance  itself,  to  the 
full  possession  and  fruition  of  it.  An  "  inheritance  "  accords  well  with  "  according 
to  His  mercy."  We  have  it  not  of  ourselves  or  by  our  merits,  but  of  Him  and  by 
His  mercies.  Else  were  it  a  purchase  and  no  inheritance.  It  comes  to  us  freely, 
as  the  inheritance  to  children.  WeU  with  mercy,  and  weU  with  regeneravit.  For 
the  inheritance  is  of  children.  Nor  shaU  we  need  to  doubt  any  prejudice  to  God, 
from  whom  it  comes,  by  our  coming  to  this  inheritance.  Here  the  inheritance 
comes  not  but  by  the  death  of  the  party  in  possession,  but  there  no  prejudice  to  the 
ancestor  ;  he  dies  not  for  the  heir  to  succeed.  Nor  no  prejudice  to  the  heir  neither ; 
to  us  by  Him,  not  to  Him  by  us.  It  is  not  as  here,  one  carries  it  from  all,  and  all 
the  rest  go  without ;  or  if  they  come  in  his  part  is  the  less.  So  say  we  again  now, 
one  thing  to  be  born  to  an  inheritance,  another  to  such  an  inheritance  as  this  here. 
For  in  inheritances  there  is  great  odds,  one  much  better  than  another  even  here 
with  us.  St.  Peter  writes  to  the  dispersed  Jews,  and  by  in  cczlo,  he  gives  them  an 
item,  this  inheritance  is  no  new  Canaan  here  on  earth,  nor  Christ  any  earthly 
Messias  to  settle  them  in  a  new  land  of  promise.  "  In  heaven,"  then.  There  it  is 
first,  and  there  it  is  kept ;  the  being  there  one,  the  keeping  another.  For  that  there 
it  is  kept  is  happy  for  us.  Earth  would  not  keep  it,  here  it  would  be  in  hazard. 
It  would  go  the  same  way  Paradise  went.  Since  it  would  be  lost  in  earth  it  is  kept 
in  heaven.  And  a  Benedictus  for  that  too,  as  for  the  regenerating  us  to  it  here  on 
earth,  so  for  the  keeping,  the  preserving  of  it  there  in  heaven.  Kept,  and  for  us 
kept,  else  aU  were  nothing,  that  makes  up  all  that  it  is  not  oiily  preserved,  but 
reserved  for  us  there.  But  reserved  yet  under  the  veU.  But  time  shall  come 
when  the  veil  shall  be  taken  off,  and  of  that  which  is  now  within  it  there  shall  be 
a  reveiling.  Only  it  stayeth  till  the  work  of  regeneration  be  accompUshed.  For 
these  come  we  now  to  our  Benedictus.  For  if  God,  according  to  His  manifold 
mercy,  have  done  all  this  for  us,  we  also,  according  to  our  duty,  are  to  do  somewhat 
again.  First,  then,  dictus,  somewhat  would  be  said  by  way  of  recognition ;  this 
hath  God  done  for  us,  and  more  also.  But  to  say  Benedictus  anyway  is  not  to 
.content  us,  but  to  say  it  solemnly.  How  is  that?  Benedictus  in  our  mouth  and 
the  holy  Eucharist  in  our  hands.  And  yet  this  is  not  all ;  we  are  not  to  stay  here, 
but  to  aspire  farther,  even  to  strive  to  be  like  to  God,  and  be  like  God  we  shall  not 
unless  our  dicere  be  facere  as  His  is,  unless  somewhat  be  done  withal.  In  very 
deed  there  is  no  blessing,  but  with  the  hand  stretched  out.  {Bp.  Andrewes.) 
According  to  His  abundant  mercy. — God''s  abundant  mercy  : — ^A  Uttle  mercy,  such 
as  is  in  man,  or  some  reasonable  store,  as  in  angels,  would  not  serve  the  turn. 
1.  Was  it  a  small  matter  that  moved  God  to  choose  thee  to  salvation,  rather  than 
thousands  of  others,  or  was  it  a  small  mercy  to  give  us  His  only  Son,  to  deliver 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

us  by  suffering  all  the  wrath  due  to  us  ?  2.  Is  it  a  small  measure  of  mercy  to  call 
us  to  the  hope  of  salvation  from  our  wretched  estate  when  we  went  on  in  sin,  and 
minded  no  good,  nay,  all  evil  ?  3.  They  that  have  had  their  part  in  this  abundant 
mercy  must  be  stirred  up  to  abundant  thanksgiving  (Psa.  cxvi.  12-14).  We  must 
testify  our  love  in  zealous  obedience  all  the  days  of  our  life,  showing  forth  the 
virtues  of  Him  that  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light. 
4.  It  teaches  us  also  to  show  mercy  to  one  another :  in  giving,  forgiving,  and  the 
like.  5.  It  shows  also  the  miserableness  of  our  estate,  that  without  abundant 
mercy  we  can  never  be  saved.  {John  Rogers.)  A  string  of  pearls:— I  might 
almost  entitle  these  three  verses  a  New  Testament  psalm.  They  are  stanzas  of  a 
majestic  song.  You  have  here  a  delightful  hymn ;  it  scarce  needs  to  be  turned 
into  verse ;  it  is  in  itself  essential  poetry.  To  lead  the  mind  to  praise  God  is  one 
of  the  surest  ways  of  uplifting  it  from  depression.  The  wild  beasts  of  anxiety  and 
discontent  which  surround  our  bivouac  in  the  wilderness  will  be  driven  away  by  the 
fire  of  our  gratitude  and  the  song  of  our  praise.  In  these  three  verses  we  have  a 
string  of  pearls,  a  necklace  of  diamonds,  a  cabinet  of  jewels.  I.  I  see  in  the  text, 
as  the  source  of  all  the  rest,  abundant  mekcy.  No  other  attribute  could  have 
helped  us  had  "mercy"  refused.  As  we  are  by  nature,  justice  condemns  us, 
holiness  frowns  upon  us,  power  crushes  us,  truth  confirms  the  threatening  of  the 
law,  and  wrath  fulfils  it.  It  is  from  the  mercy  of  God  that  all  our  hopes  begin. 
Mercy  is  needed  for  the  miserable,  and  yet  more  for  the  sinful.  Misery  and  sin 
are  fully  united  in  the  human  race,  and  mercy  here  performs  her  noblest  deeds. 
God  has  vouchsafed  His  mercy  to  us,  and  we  must  thankfully  acknowledge  that  in 
our  case  His  mercy  has  been  "  abundant "  mercy.  Where  sin  hath  abounded, 
grace  hath  much  more  abounded.  Contemplate  the  abundant  mercy  of  our  blessed 
God.  A  river  deep  and  broad  is  before  you.  Track  it  to  its  fountain-head  ;  see  it 
welling  up  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  in  the  eternal  purposes  of  infinite  wisdom. 
The  secret  source  is  no  small  spring,  no  mere  bubbhng  fount,  it  is  a  very  Geyser, 
leaping  aloft  in  fulness  of  power ;  the  springs  of  the  sea  are  not  comparable 
therewith.  Not  even  an  angel  could  fathom  the  springs  of  eternal  love  or  measure 
the  depths  of  infinite  grace.  Follow  now  the  stream ;  mark  it  in  all  its  course. 
See  how  it  widens  and  deepens,  how  at  the  Cross  it  expands  into  a  measureless 
river  !  Mark  how  the  filthy  come  and  wash  ;  see  how  each  polluted  one  comes  up 
milk-white  from  the  washing  !  1.  It  is  God's  great  mercy  that  is  spoken  of 
herein.  You  must  measure  His  Godhead  before  you  shall  compute  His  mercy. 
2.  But  note  again,  it  is  the  mercy  of  the  "  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  When  I  see  Jesus  descending  from  heaven  to  earth,  paying  all  the  debts  of 
His  people,  I  can  well  understand  that  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  must  be  abundant 
mercy.  3.  Note  carefully  another  word,  it  is  the  mercy  of  "  the  Father."  The 
Father  of  Him  who  is  the  perfect  and  the  ever  blessed  is  also  your  Father,  and  all 
His  mercy  belongs  to  you.  "Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless 
His  holy  name."  II.  The  next  great  blessing  in  the  text  is  that  of  incorruptible 
LIFE,  Mark  that,  0  believer.  One  of  the  first  displays  of  Divine  mercy  which  we 
experience  is  being  begotten  again.  Our  first  birth  gave  us  the  image  of  the  first 
Adam — "  earthly  "  ;  our  second  birfh,  and  that  alone,  gives  us  the  image  of  the 
second  Adam,  which  is  "heavenly."  1.  The  new  life  of  a  Christian  is  Divine  in 
its  origin — God  hath  begotten  us.  The  new  life  cometh  not  from  man,  it  is 
wrought  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  certainly  as  God  spake,  and  it 
was  done,  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  so  He  speaks  in  the  heart  of  man,  and  it  is 
done,  and  the  new  creature  is  born.  2.  The  new  life  in  us,  as  it  has  a  Divine 
origin,  has  also  a  Divine  nature.  Ye  are  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature. 
The  Holy  Spirit  Himself  enters  the  believer  and  abides  in  him,  and  makes  him  a 
living  man.  What  a  great  mystery  is  this,  but  at  the  same  time  what  a  blessing  1 
Observe,  to  be  begotten  again  is  a  very  marvellous  thing.  Suppose  a  man  born 
into  this  world  with  a  predisposition  to  some  sad  hereditary  disease.  There 
he  is,  filled  with  diseiase,  and  medicine  cannot  eject  the  unwelcome  tenant 
from  his  body.  Suppose  that  man's  body  could  be  altogether  new  born,  and  he 
could  receive  a  new  body  pure  from  all  taint,  it  would  be  a  great  mercy.  But  it 
does  not  approach  to  regeneration,  because  our  supposition  only  deals  with  the 
body,  while  the  new  birth  renews  the  soul,  and  even  implants  a  higher  nature. 
Regeneration  overcomes  not  a  mere  material  disease,  not  an  infliction  in  the  flesh, 
but  the  natural  depravity  of  the  heart,  the  deadly  disorder  of  the  soul.  III.  A 
third  blessing,  strictly  connected  with  this  new  life,  is  a  lively  hope.  "  He  hath 
begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope."     Could  a  man  live  without  hope  ?     Men 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  13 

manage  to  survive  the  worst  condition  of  distress  when  they  are  encouraged  by  a 
hope,  but  is  not  suicide  the  natural  result  of  the  death  of  hope  ?  Yes,  we  must 
have  a  hope,  and  the  Christian  is  not  left  without  one.  1.  He  has  "  a  lively 
hope,"  that  is  to  say,  first,  he  has  a  hope  within  him,  real,  true,  and  operative. 
A  Christian's  hope  purifies  him,  excites  him  to  diligence,  makes  him  seek  after  that 
which  he  expects  to  obtain.  2.  It  is  a  "  lively  hope  "  in  another  sense,  namely, 
that  it  cheers  and  enlivens.  3.  It  is  also  called  a  "  living  hope,"  because  it  is 
imperishable.  Other  hopes  fade  like  withering  flowers.  The  only  imperishable 
hope  is  that  which  climbs  above  the  stars,  and  fixes  itself  upon  the  throne  of  God 
and  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  hope  which  God  has  given  to  His  truly 
quickened  people  is  a  Uvely  hope,  however,  mainly  because  it  deals  with  life. 
Charles  Borromeo,  the  famous  bishop  of  Milan,  ordered  a  painter  who  was  about  to 
draw  a  skeleton  with  a  scythe  over  a  sepulchre  to  substitute  for  it  the  golden  key 
of  Paradise.  Truly  this  is  a  most  fitting  emblem  for  a  believer's  tomb,  for  what  is 
death  but  the  key  of  heaven  to  the  Christian  ?  We  notice  frequently  over  cemetery 
gates,  as  an  emblematic  device,  a  torch  turned  over  ready  to  be  quenched.  Ah,  it 
is  not  so,  the  torch  of  our  life  burns  the  better,  and  blazes  the  brighter  for  the 
change  of  death.  IV.  We  notice  another  delightful  possession  which  ought 
effectually  to  chasten  away  from  all  of  us  the  glooms  of  this  life,  and  that  is  a 
RISEN  Saviour.  Jesus  Christ  died,  not  in  appearance,  but  in  reality ;  in  proof 
whereof  His  heart  was  pierced  by  the  soldier's  spear.  He  was  laid  in  the  tomb  of 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  truly  a  corpse.  He  really  and  literally  rose  from  the  dead, 
— the  selfsame  Christ  who  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  who  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate,  and  afterwards  ascended  into  heaven.  Now,  note  ye  well  the 
comfort  which  arises  out  of  this  fact,  since  it  proves  that  we  possess  a  living 
advocate,  mediator,  and  high  priest,  who  has  passed  into  the  heavens.  Moreover, 
since  all  believers,  being  partakers  of  the  incorruptible  life  of  God,  are  one  with 
Jesus  Christ,  that  which  happens  to  Him  virtually  happens  to  them.  They  died  in 
His  death,  they  live  in  His  life,  they  reign  in  His  glory.  V.  The  fifth  is  an 
INCORRUPTIBLE  INHERITANCE.  A  hcavculy  uaturc  requires  a  heavenly  inheritance, 
heaven-born  children  must  have  a  heavenly  portion.  1.  First,  as  to  its  substance — it 
is  "  incorruptible.  2.  Next,  for  purity— it  is  "  undefiled."  3.  And  then  it  is  added 
for  its  beauty,^"  it  fadeth  not  away."  4.  And  then  for  possession,  it  is  secure — 
"  reserved  in  heaven  for  you.  VI.  The  sixth  blessing  is  inviolable  security. 
The  inheritance  is  kept  for  you,  and  you  are  kept  for  the  inheritance.  The  word  is 
a  military  one,  it  signifies  a  city  garrisoned  and  defended.  Each  believer  is  kept 
by  that  same  power  which  "  bears  the  earth's  huge  pUlars  up,"  and  sustains  the 
arches  of  heaven.  VII.  Out  of  the  seven  treasures  of  the  Christian  the  last 
comprehends  all,  is  better  than  all — it  is  a  blessed  God.  "Blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  joy  to  have  heaven,  it  is 
joy  to  possess  a  new  life  to  fit  me  for  heaven,  but  the  greatest  of  all  is  to 
have  my  God,  my  own  Saviour's  God,  my  Father,  my  own  Saviour's  Father,  to 
be  all  my  own.  God  Himself  has  said,  "  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  My 
people."      (C    H.    Spurgeon.)  The   anthem   of   the   redeemed  :■ — Gratitude    is 

happiness,  and  happiness  speaks  in  poetry,  and  delights  in  song.  Music  is  the 
language  of  a  jubilant  heart.  I.  We  have  here  the  "abundant  mercy"  of 
God  in  producing  a  living  hope  in  the  breast  of  rebels  against  His  autho- 
rity. This  expression  implies  thrss  things  :  1.  That  humanity  once  had  a  living 
hope.  The  breast  of  man,  in  the  short  but  bright  period  of  innocence,  was  indeed 
inspired  with  a  living  hope.  2.  That  mankind  have  somehow  or  other  lost  this 
living  hope.  We  know  how  they  lost  it.  It  was  sin  that  quenched  this  glorious 
lamp.  3.  That  the  reproduction  of  this  living  hope  is  a  wonderful  display  of 
Divine  mercy.  Justice  overwhelms  the  sinner  with  terror  and  midnight  despair. 
II.  We  have  here  the  "abundant  mercy"  of  God,  in  the  transcendent  value 
OF  THE  object  ON  WHICH  THIS  LIVING  HOPE  IS  FASTENED.  "An  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible, undefiled,  &c.  Hope  always  implies  an  object.  The  value  of  the  hope 
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  object.  IH.  We  have  here  the  "  abundant 
mercy"  of  God,  in  the  wonderful  instrumentality  by  which  this  living  hope 
IS  reproduced.  It  is  "begotten  again  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead."  How  does  the  resurrection  of  Christ  appear  necessary  for  the  reproduction 
in  man  of  this  living  hope  ?  1.  Christ  taught  the  existence  both  of  the  desirable 
and  the  obtainable  in  connection  with  th»  future  state.  In  the  nature  of  the  case 
hope  implies  both  of  these  things.  This  something  Christ  presented  in  His  teaching. 
He  revealed  to  men  heaven  in  all  its  glories,  and  He  revealed  too  the  manner  in 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  1. 

which  that  heaven  could  be  obtained.  Hence  His  teaching  was  in  every  wiiy 
adapted  to  generate  this  living  hope  in  the  minds  of  men.  2.  His  resurrection  from 
the  dead  was  an  incontrovertible  proof  of  the  truth  of  what  He  taught.   IV.  We  have 

HERE  THE  "  ABUNDANT  MERCY "  OF  GoD,  IN  THE  AXMIGHTY  AGENCY  He  EMPLOYS,  TO- 
SECURE    THE    ULTIMATE    REALISATION    OF    THIS   LIVING  HOPE.       1.    The  impUcd  neCCSSitj 

of  God's  preserving  agency  "  Who  are  kept."  No  power  but  that  of  God  can 
keep  us.  2.  The  expressed  method  of  God's  preserving  agency.  "  Through  faith." 
He  always  works  by  means.  3.  The  glorious  designs  of  God's  preserving  agency. 
"  Unto  eternal  salvation."  And  in  this  constant  agency  what  "  abundant  mercy"  ! 
"  Oh,  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  (Homilist.)- 
God's  mercy  manifold  : — As  John  Bunyan  says,  all  the  iiowers  in  God's  garden  arfr 
double ;  there  is  no  single  mercy ;  nay,  they  are  not  only  double  flowers,  but  they 
are  manifold  flowers.  There  are  many  flowers  upon  one  stalk,  and  many  flowers- 
in  one  flower.  You  shall  think  you  have  but  one  mercy,  but  you  shall  find  it  to  be 
a  whole  flock  of  mercies.  Manifold  mercies  !  Like  the  drops  of  a  lustre,  which 
reflect  a  rainbow  of  colours  when  the  sun  is  glittering  upon  them,  and  each  one, 
when  turned  in  different  ways  from  its  prismatic  form,  shows  all  the  varieties  of 
colour,  so  the  mercy  of  God  is  one  and  yet  many,  the  same,  yet  ever  changing,  a 
combination  of  all  the  beauties  of  love  blended  harmoniously  together.  (C  H.  Spur g eon.) 
Begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope. — The  Christian's  liviiig  hope  and  incorruptible 
inheritance  : — If  I  had  to  say  in  a  word  what  the  Christian's  hope  is,  I  should  say  it 
is  the  hope  of  an  unfading  inheritance,  the  hope  of  being  made  meet  for  it,  the  hope 
of  what  is  condensed  into  that  all-comprehensive  word  "  salvation ! "  And  can  you 
make  mention  of  any  other  hope  that  does  not  pale  when  placed  beside  this  ?     I.  It 

15  A  LIVING  HOPE.  1.  The  living  hope  of  a  living  man.  A  man  spiritually  dead 
cannot  possess  this  hope.  It  is  not  a  phantasy.  It  is  not  an  effeminate  wish,  or  a 
masculine  wish  for  that  matter  ;  it  is  not  a  mere  sentiment  or  a  fond  desire.  It  is 
a  living  hope !  It  is  an  indivisible,  inalienable  part  of  his  new  hfe,  and  it  cannot 
exist  in  any  other  heart  than  that  of  the  spiritually-transformed  man — the  man  who 
is  "  begotten  again."  2.  It  is  a  living  hope  because  it  centres  in  a  living  Christ. 
Begotten  to  it,  how?  "By  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  The 
life  of  Christ,  so  fuU  of  goodness,  and  love,  and  purity,  and  self-sacrifice,  and  His 
death,  so  awful,  the  culminating  sacrifice  of  all,  were  not  enough.  He  must  come 
back  into  life,  or  no  sinner  can  be  forgiven.  Blessed  be  God  !  He  did  come  back  ! 
3.  The  Christian's  hope  is  a  living  one  as  contrasted  with  and  opposed  to  hopes  that 
perish.  God  hath  pledged  its  realisation  under  the  seal  of  His  own  oath.  II.  God  is 
THE  AUTHOR  OF  THIS  HOPE.  He  hath  bcgottcn  us  again  to  it.  It  is  all  of  His  abundant 
mercy.  Therefore  let  us  bless  Him  for  it.  And  let  us  show  our  gratitude  to  Him 
by  letting  the  light  of  our  hope  shine  on  others.  III.  The  inheritance  to  which 
THE  Christian's  hope  points.  {E.  D.  Solomon.)  Shadows  of  the  future  : — To 
the  Christian  the  future  life  is  not  merely  a  subject  of  anticipation,  but  of  confident 
and  well-grounded  assurance.  Our  Saviour  seemed  specially  anxious  to  impress 
this  fact  on  the  minds  of  His  disciples.  He  said  to  them,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also."  Well,  now  we  know  that  Christ  lives.  The  existence  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  to-day  is  an  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  existence  and  continued  activity  of 
Christ.  And  if  Christ  lives,  then  we  shall  live  also.  What  ought  to  be  the  influence 
of  these  anticipations  on  our  life  as  Christian  men  and  women  here?    I.  These 

anticipations  OUGHT  TO  HAVE  A  PLACE  IN  OUR  THOUGHTS,  IN  OUR  CONVERSATIONS, 
IN    OUB    PRAYERS,    IN    OUR    AFFECTIONS,    AND    IN    THE    ACTIVITIES     OF    OUR    LIVES.       It    is 

the  fashion  of  some  preachers  to  decry  this  "  other  world  religion,"  as  they  call  it. 
They  say,  "We  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  other  world  ;  the  present  life 
demands  all  our  care,"  and  they  would  severely  repress  all  interest  in  the  future  life. 
The  human  heart  rebels  against  all  such  unnatural  restriction.  You  may  just  as 
well  say  to  the  mariner,  "  Because  there  are  rocks  and  quicksands  in  the  course 
which  you  have  to  take  you  must  never  lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  stars,  but  keep 
them  steadily  fixed  on  the  waters  you  have  to  cross."  "Why,"  he  would  say,  "I 
guide  my  way  across  the  waters  of  this  world  by  the  light  of  other  worlds."  And 
so  the  Christian  mariner  can  say,  "I  guide  my  course  through  this  world  by  the 
light  and  the  hope  and  the  influence  of  the  other  world."    II.  Our  thoughts  of  the 

FUTURE    LIFE    SHOULD   BE    CHARACTERISED    BY    MODERATION,    REVERENCE,     AND     SPIllITU- 

ality.  Let  US  be  content  with  the  beautiful  simplicity  and  lofty  spirituality  of  the 
New  Testament  representations  as  a  life  of  glorious  spiritual  progress,  of  freedom 
from  sin,  holy  love,  honourable  service,  delightful  fellowship,  and  a  growing  like- 
ness to  Christ:  "  We  shall  be  Uke  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."     We  sball 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  15 

be  with  Him,  and  we  shall  do  Him  service.  (jF.  Binns.)  Great  expectations  : — I. 
Christian  hope  in  the  excellency  of  its  nature.  Life's  pathway  strewn  with 
withered  hopes.     Gold,  pleasure,  fame,  (fee,   disappoint.    II.  Christian  hope  in 

THE  divinity  OF  ITS  SOURCE.  III.  CHRISTIAN  HOPE  IN  THE  MEDIUM  OF  ITS  PRO- 
DUCTION. Jesus,  by  His  resurrection,  the  proof,  pledge,  and  pattern  of  our  future 
heavenly  happiness.  IV.  Christian  hope  in  the  glory  of  its  object.  1.  Vast 
"  inheritance."  2.  Eighteous — gotten  rightly  and  enjoyed  rightly.  3.  Everlasting. 
V.  Christian  hope  in  the  certainty  of  its  realisation.  (B.  D.  Johns.)  The 
lively  hope  : — I.  The  true  character  of  the  Christian's  hope.  I.  It  is  lively  in  the 
sense  of  living.  It  is  not  delusive.  It  is  no  seK-excited  sentiment — the  fruit  of 
ignorance  and  presumption.  It  has  a  real,  a  weU-defined,  and  well-ascertained 
existence  in  the  heart.  2.  It  is  a  lively  hope  in  the  sense  of  activity.  It  produces 
courage,  patience,  holiness.  II.  The  object  of  the  Christian's  hope.  "An 
inheritance,"  (fee.  III.  The  method  of  attaining  this  hope.  1.  Its  author  is 
God.  It  is  a  Divine  creation  in  the  heart.  2.  This  gift  of  God  is  prompted  by  His 
abundant  mercy.  3.  Yet  the  mercy  which  restores  hope  to  man  is  not  indiscriminate 
— it  is  the  mercy  of  righteousness.  4.  The  medium  through  which  this  blessing 
reaches  us — "  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  This  was  pre- 
eminently the  Divine  attestation  of  the  truth  of  the  Saviour's  Messianic  mission. 
IV.  The  security  of  the  possessors  of  this  hope.  {Thos.  Brookes.)  The 
Christian  salvation  described  and  acknowledged  : — I.  The  blessings  acknowledged. 

1.  Divine  sonship.  We  become  the  children  of  God — both  in  reference  to  state  and 
character,  to  condition  and  disposition — through  the  belief  of  the  truth ;  and  this 
belief  of  the  truth  is  produced  and  maintained  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

2.  The  inheritance  provided  for  them.  3.  The  living  hope  of  the  inheritance, 
through  the  resurrection  of  Christ  Jesus  from  the  dead.  This  hope  rests  entirely  on 
God's  free  sovereign  kindness,  manifested  in  harmony  with  His  righteousness  ;  but 
it  is  only  in  the  belief  of  the  truth  that  this  sovereign  kindness  can  be  apprehended 
as  a  ground  of  hope.  II.  The  acknowledgment  of  these  blessings.  1.  God  is 
the  author  of  these  blessings.  2.  It  is  as  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  that  God  bestows  these  blessings.  In  the  riches  of  His  sovereign  mercy  He 
determined  to  save  an  innumerable  multitude  of  sinful  men,  and  in  the  depth  of 
His  wisdom  He  formed  a  plan  for  realising  the  determination  of  His  mercy,  not 
merely  in  consistency  with,  but  in  glorious  illustration  of,  His  hohness  and  justice. 

3.  These  blessings  originate  in  the  "  abundant  mercy  "  of  God.  (1)  Think  on  the 
character  of  Him  who  bestows  these  blessings — the  absolute,  independent  Jehovah, 
perfectly,  infinitely,  unchangeably,  happy  in  Himself.  (2)  Think  on  the  nature  of 
the  blessings, — the  very  highest  that  can  be  conferred  on  creatures,  and  in  their 
measure  limited  by  nothing  but  the  capacity  of  the  recipient.  (3)  Think  on  the 
character  of  those  on  whom  they  are  bestowed— sinners,  guilty,  depraved,  condemned ; 
deserving  everlasting  destruction.  (4)  Think  of  the  number  of  those  on  whom 
these  blessings  are  bestowed  (Kev.  xxi.  24;  vii.  9).  (5)  Think  of  the  means  through 
which  the  blessings  are  communicated — the  Incarnation,  the  sacrifice  of  God's  own 
son  (1  John  iv.  10 ;  John  iii.  16).  4.  These  blessings  are  of  vast  magnitude  and 
incalculable  value.  They  include  deliverance  from  guilt,  depravity,  degradation,  death, 
everlasting  misery ;  the  enjoyment  of  the  favour  of  God,  tranquillity  of  conscience, 
ever-growing  conformity  to  the  Divine  image,  and  happiness  throughout  eternity. 
5.  The  proper  method  of  acknowledging  these  benefits  is  "  to  bless  "  their  munificent 
giver.  This  is  one  of  the  purposes  for  which  we  are  begotten  again  (Isa.  xliii.  21 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  9).  Our  whole  life  should  be  a  hymn  of  praise  to  the  God  of  our  salvation 
(Psa.  ciii.  1-4;  Ixxxvi.  12,  13;  Rom.  xii.  1;  Heb.  xiii.  15,  16;  Rev.  v.  13).  {J. 
Brown,  D.D.)  Begotten  unto  a  living  hope  : — We  are  not  surprised  that  Peter 
attached  special  importance  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  most  signi- 
ficant fact  about  the  crucifixion  was  that  it  culminated  in  the  resurrection.  If 
Christ  had  not  risen  from  the  dead,  there  would  have  been  no  adequate  message  for 
the  world.  Now,  though  the  story  of  the  resurrection  was  to  all  the  apostles 
specially  inspiring,  it  was  that  which  brought  hope  to  Peter  above  all  others.  After 
his  threefold  denial  of  Christ,  he  had  gone  out,  weeping  bitterly.  Hence  the  special 
emphasis  with  which  our  Lord  mentioned  Peter  in  His  message  to  His  disciples  : 
"  TeU  My  disciples,  and  Peter,  that  I  am  risen  from  the  dead,"  <fec.  Thus  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  was  everything  to  Peter.  It  was  that  which  brought 
with  it  hope  to  the  man  who,  of  all  the  apostles — excepting  Judas — had  lost  most 
hope.  I.  Peter's  high  conception  here  of  God's  mercy.  Peter  does  not  under- 
take to  measure  or  to  describe  it.     It  is  a  mercy  that  has  filled  him  with  wonder- 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ment  and  with  boundless  gratitude.  Peter  speaks  these  words  out  of  the  exuberance 
of  his  own  joy.  That  word  "  us  "  has  a  "  me  "  at  the  heart  of  it.  The  powerful 
preacher  is  the  man  who  preaches  out  of  his  own  experience  ;  and  thus  the  greatest 
sinner  forgiven  must  always  be  the  greatest  witness,  if  he  is  only  true  to  his 
privilege.  No  other  disciple  had  experienced  the  intense  grief  which  Peter  had  felt. 
Hence  the  special  significance  of  these  words  upon  his  lips.  This  word  "again" 
further  emphasises  the  testimony.  All  hope  had  practically  died  out  of  Peter.  He 
thought  everything  had  ended  in  darkness  ;  hence  the  thanks  he  gives  to  Him  who 
had  begotten  him  and  his  brethren  unto  a  lively  hope.     II.  Peteb's  high  conception 

OF  THE  HOPE  UNTO  WHICH  HE  AND  OTHERS  HAD  BEEN  BEGOTTEN.   It  WaS  a  hope  fuU 

of  life.  Peter  had  no  patience  with  anything  that  did  not  abound  with  life.  He 
himself  was  all  alive,  whether  he  confessed  or  denied  his  Lord.  His  was  an 
intense  nature.  And  when  hope  was  rekindled  in  him,  it  was  a  living  hope.  Peter, 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  had  that  Living  hope.  Then  he  spoke  in  the  face  of  the 
mightiest  opposition,  spoke  only  as  a  man  with  a  flaming  heart  and  a  fiery  tongue 
could  have  spoken.  He  attributed  all  this  hope  to  God's  mercy.  "  It  was  the  gift 
of  another,"  said  Peter,  practically;  "I  never  could  work  myself  up  into  this 
enthusiasm.  All  my  energy  was  gone,  and  my  enthusiasm  had  died  out  of  me ; 
but  He  who  gave  His  Son  has  given  me  again  this  lively  hope."     III.  Peter's 

HIGH  conception  OF  THE  INHERITANCE  IN  STORE  FOR  US "  AN  INHERITANCE  INCOR- 
RUPTIBLE AND  UNDEFILED,"  &c.  This  assurancc,  if  you  possess  it,  ought  to  make 
a  difference  to  all  your  life.  Here  is  a  man  who  believes  that  this  life  of  fifty, 
sixty,  or  seventy  years,  as  the  case  may  be,  embraces  everything :  that  there  is 
nothing  beyond  it  for  him.  What  noble  heroism  can  you  expect  of  that  man  ? 
But  here  is  another  man  who  feels  that,  after  all,  this  life  is  but  the  preparatory 
period,  the  time  of  schooling  for  an  inheritance  in  which  life  shall  show  its  full 
meaning,  and  every  capacity  of  our  being  shall  be  ennobled  and  find  full  exercise. 
I  will  tell  you  what  such  a  man  ought  to  be.  I  do  not  say  what  those  who  profess 
to  believe  this  often  are,  but  what  each  of  them  ought  to  be.  (D.  Davies.)  A 
right  to  hope  : — My  father  said  once,  "  Harriet,  I  have  been  reviewing  my  evidences. 
I  have  been  putting  the  question  to  myself,  just  as  I  would  press  it  on  a  sinner,  or 
a  person  newly  converted ;  and  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  have  a  right 
to  hope."  That  kind  of  mechanical  or  conventional  test  used  to  prevail  in 
churches  as  now  ;  and  here  was  this  old  saint,  that  had  been  for  fifty  or  sixty  years 
working  almost  beyond  human  strength  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  as  sweet  as 
honey  in  the  honeycomb  in  his  disposition,  putting  himseK  on  the  rack  of  self- 
examination,  and  coming,  with  great  hesitation  and  modesty,  at  last,  to  the 
conclusion  that  he  had  a  right  to  hope  !  Hope  !  When  a  man  has  any  conception 
of  Jesus  Christ,  how  can  he  have  anything  else  ?  Hope !  When  the  heart  of 
Christ  is  pouring  forth  salvation,  and  is  made  manifest,  as  the  shining  of  the  sun, 
and  has  enough  and  to  spare,  how  can  one  do  otherwise  than  hope  ?  And  yet  there 
are  a  great  many  persons  who  cannot  do  it.  There  are  a  great  many  who  do  not 
realise  the  blessing  which  is  vouchsafed  to  them,  sometimes  from  their  bodily 
condition,  and  sometimes  from  their  mental  training  ;  sometimes  from  one  reason, 
and  sometimes  from  another.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Christian's  hope  : — Dr. 
Arnold's  whole  countenance  would  be  lit  up  at  his  favourite  verse  in  the  Te  Deum : 
"  When  Thou  hadst  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death.  Thou  didst  open  the  kingdom 
of   heaven  to  all  believers."     {Stanley's  Life  of  Ar7iold.)  Christian  hope  well 

founded  .-—God  would  never  show  us  a  thing  He  did  not  mean  to  give  us.  This 
is  the  way  one  boy  teases  another.  {Geo.  MacDonald.)  The  death-test: — A  few 
hours  before  Bishop  Jones's  death  (Methodist  Episcopal  Church),  his  son-in-law, 
anxious  for  some  dying  testimony,  bent  over  him  and  asked,  "  Bishop,  say  some- 
thing to  us,  some  parting  words."  The  brief,  emphatic  reply  was,  "  I  am  not 
disappointed."  Christiam}y  j^^'ovides  a  future  : — A  converted  Japanese   artist 

said  recently  to  a  missionary,  "  I  suppose  the  reason  why  English  artists  put  so 
much  perspective  into  their  drawings  is  because  Christianity  has  given  them  a 
future ;  and  the  reason  why  Oriental  artists  fail  to  do  so,  is  because  Buddha  and 
Confucius  do  not  raise  their  eyes  above  the  present."  By  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ. — Easter  hopes : — I.  To  say  that  we  cannot  get  on  without  hope 
is  a  truism.  Hope  is  not  the  salt,  it  is  the  sinew  of  man's  moral  life.  His  capacity 
for  excellence  is  exactly  proportioned  to  his  power  of  throwing  himself  onward  into 
a  future,  which  is  as  yet  beyond  his  reach,  and  which  may  even  be  always  beyond 
it.  This  truth  holds  good  whether  we  look  at  man  as  an  individual  or  as  a  member 
of  society.     The  great  object  of  a  wise  educator  is  to  set  before  the  boy  whom  he 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  17 

is  teaching  some  future  to  which  he  may  aspire,  and  which  may  fire  his  best 
enthusiasms  ;  some  future  which  may  supply  him  with  a  strong  motive  for  making 
the  most  of  his  present  opportunities ;  some  future  upon  which,  during  the  drudgery 
and  toil  of  his  earlier  tasks,  his  eye  may  rest,  as  upon  the  prize  which  will  reward 
him,  the  object  of  his  hope.  And  does  not  the  same  rule  hold  in  later  life  ?  The 
boy  becomes  a  man,  the  father  of  a  family,  and  he  transfers  to  his  childi'en  some 
of  the  hope  which  he  cherished  for  himself.  He  thinks  less  of  what  they  are  than 
of  what  it  is  probable  that  they  will  be  a  few  years  hence.  So  strong  and  pene- 
trating is  his  sympathy,  that  in  them  he  lives  his  own  boyhood  over  again,  only 
with  the  larger  experience  and  wider  horizon  of  his  manhood.  Nor  is  this  less  true 
of  a  professional  work  in  life :  hope  is  ever  the  motive  principle  of  the  exertions 
which  command  success.  Minds  of  a  lower  type  look  forward  to  the  reputation 
which  will  be  won  by  success ;  minds  of  a  higher  order  look  forward  to  the  happi- 
ness of  doing  work  for  God  by  rendering  some  real  service  to  their  generation  or  to 
posterity.  And  it  is  this  hope  which  sustains  them  under  all  discouragements. 
Nor  is  hope  less  essential  to  associations  of  men  than  to  man  in  his  individual 
capacity.  An  army  is  never  thoroughly  demoraUsed  until  the  hope  of  victory  is 
gone.  A  nation  is  not  ruined  until  it  has  reached  a  point  at  which  it  remarks  that 
it  ca.n  make  out  for  itself  no  prospect  of  expansion  in  coming  years.  And  as  hope 
is  thus  necessary  to  the  temporary  well-being  of  societies  of  men,  and  of  individual 
men,  so  is  it  essential  to  the  highest  well-being  of  man  as  man.  The  hope  upon 
which  states,  institutions,  artists,  painters,  military  men,  politicians  rest,  is  directed 
to  objects  within  the  sphere  of  sense  and  time.  But  man,  as  man,  must  look 
beyond  sense  and  time.  The  man  who  has  no  clear  beUef  in  a  future  hfe  may 
undoubtedly  have,  within  some  very  restricted  limits,  a  strong  sense  of  duty.  He 
may  even  persuade  himself  that  this  sense  of  duty  is  all  the  better  aaid  purer  from 
not  being  bribed  by  the  prospect  of  a  future  reward,  or  stimulated,  as  he  would  say, 
unhealthily,  by  the  dread  of  future  punishment.  But,  for  all  that,  his  moral  life 
is  fatally  impoverished.  It  is  not  merely  that  he  has  fewer  and  feebler  motives  to 
right  action  ;  it  is  that  he  has  a  false  estimate  of  his  real  place  in  the  universe. 
He  has  forfeited,  in  the  legitimate  sense  of  the  term,  his  true  title  to  self-respect. 
He  has  divested  himself  of  the  bearing,  the  instincts,  the  sense  of  noble  birth  and 
high  destiny  which  properly  belong  to  him.  H.  Man  then  needs  a  hope,  resting 
ON  SOMETHING  BEYOND  THIS  SCENE  OF  SENSE  AND  TIME.  And  God  has  given  him 
one,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  Our  Lord  indeed  taught, 
in  the  plainest  language,  the  reality  of  a  future  life  (John  xiv.  2 ;  Matt.  xxv.  46 ; 
vi.  20;  Luke  xx.  38).  He  contributed  to  the  establishment  of  this  truth  in  the 
deepest  convictions  of  men,  not  merely  many  lessons  taught  in  words,  but  a  fact, 
palpable  to  the  senses.  His  resurrection  converted  hopes,  surmises,  speculations, 
trains  of  inference,  into  strong  certainties.  Not  that  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion could  force  itself  upon  reluctant  minds,  or  rather  upon  reluctant  wills.  In  the 
eai'liest  ages,  as  now,  there  were  expedients  for  evading  its  force.  The  evangelical 
narrative,  the  convictions  of  the  earliest  Church,  the  moral  strength  of  the  Church, 
advancing  through  blood  and  suffering  to  the  heights  of  a  world-wide  empire,  resist 
these  expedients,  as  inconsistent  with  fact,  inconsistent  with  reason.  There  are  at 
least  three  forms  of  interest  which  might  be  accorded  to  such  a  fact  as  the 
resurrection.  The  first,  the  interest  of  curiosity  in  a  wonder,  altogether  at  variance 
with  the  observed  course  of  nature.  This  interest  may  exist  in  a  high  degree  ; 
observing  and  registering  the  fact,  yet  never  for  one  moment  getting  beyond  it. 
The  second,  the  interest  of  active  reason,  which  is  satisfied  that  such  a  fact  must 
have  consequences  and  is  anxious  to  trace  them.  This  interest  may  lead  a  man  to 
see  that  the  resurrection  does  prove  the  truth  of  Christianity,  even  though  he  may 
know  nothing  of  the  power  of  Christ's  blood  and  of  Christ's  hfe  as  a  matter  of 
experience.  A  third  kind  of  interest  is  practical  and  moral.  It  is  an  effort  to 
answer  the  question.  What  does  the  resurrection  of  Christ  say  to  me,  mean  for  me  ? 
If  it  is  true,  if  Christianity  is  true,  what  ought  to  be  the  effect  on  my  thoughts,  my 
feelings,  my  life  ?  Now  St.  Peter  answers  that  all  should  be  invigorated  by  a  living 
hope.  But  then  this  absorbing  moral  interest  does  not  come  of  ordinary  powers 
of  observation  and  reason,  like  the  two  earlier  forms  of  interest.  We  are,  says 
St.  Peter,  "begotten"  unto  it.  Of  this  birth,  the  Father  of  souls  is  the  Author, 
and  His  Eternal  Spirit  the  instrument,  and  union  with  Christ  the  essence  or  effect. 
It  does  much  else  for  us  ;  but  it  does  this  among  other  things,  and  not  least  among 
them  :  it  endows  us  with  a  living  hope.  III.  St.  Peter  calls  this  "hope"  a  lively, 
OR  living,  one.     What  does  he  mean  by  this?     There  are  within  many  a  soul 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


traces  of  powers,  ideas,  feelings,  which  once  lived,  but  which  have  died  away.  We 
investigate  them  from  time  to  time,  like  the  buried  ruins  of  Pompeii  or  Hercu- 
laneum.  But  a  Christian's  hope  endures.  Earthly  disappointments  do  but  force 
us  to  make  more  of  it.  The  lapse  of  time  does  but  bring  us  nearer  to  its  object. 
Surely  we  can  ask  ourselves  few  questions  so  important  as  "Have  I  this  hope?" 
Not  to  have  this  hope  is  to  be  living  at  random  ;  it  is  to  be  drifting  on  towards 
eternity  without  a  chart  in  hand,  or  a  harbour  in  view.  And  if  we  humbly  trust 
that  we  have  this  hope,  what  are  the  tests  of  our  possessing  it?  1.  A  first  test  is 
that  earthly  things  sit  easily  upon  us.  We  are  not  uninterested  in  them  :  far  from 
it.  We  know  how  much  depends  on  our  way  of  dealing  with  them.  But,  also,  we 
are  not  enslaved  by  them.  To  have  caught  a  real  glimpse  of  the  eternal  is  to  have 
lost  heart  and  relish  for  the  things  of  time.  2.  A  second  test  of  our  having  this 
hope  is  a  willingness  to  make  sacrifices  for  it.  "  What  difference  do  my  hopes  of 
another  world  make  in  my  daily  life  ?  What  am  I  doing,  what  do  I  leave  undone, 
that  I  should  not  leave  undone  or  do,  if  I  believed  that  all  really  ended  at  death  ? 
What  changes  would  be  made  in  my  habits,  occupations,  daily  modes  of  thought 
and  feeling,  if — to  put  a  horrible  supposition — I  could  awake  to-morrow  morning 
and  find  that  Christ's  conquest  of  the  eternal  world  for  me  was  a  fable?"  3.  A 
third  test  is  progressive  efforts  to  prepare  for  the  future  life  (1  John  iii.  3).  {Canon 
Liddon.)  The  risen  Lord  the  Christian's  hope  : — I.  The  ground  of  this  hope. 
II.  The  power  of  this  hope.  III.  The  destiny  of  this  hope.  (J.  E.  H. 
Meier.)         The  right  view    of   Christ's  resurrection  : — I.  The   diffebent  effects 

PRODUCED    UPON    THE    MINDS    OF    MANY,    WHO    HAVE    ONLY   AN    OUTWARD    BELIEF    OF    THE 

RESURRECTION  OF  Jesus  Christ  FROM  THE  GRAVE.  Of  all  the  wondcrful  events 
which  marked  the  Saviour's  abode  upon  earth,  there  does  not  appear  one  for  which 
so  much  was  done  to  make  it  clearly  proved  by  its  evidence  as  His  resurrection. 
It  was  proved  by  the  angels,  by  the  confession  of  the  Eoman  soldiers  who  guarded 
the  sepulchre.  It  was  proved  by  the  single  testimony  of  some  of  the  apostles.  It 
was  proved  by  the  testimony  of  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the  hand  (1  John  i.  1).  The 
consequence  has  been,  that  all  who  profess  to  believe  Christianity  believe  the  fact 
of  Christ's  resurrection.  But  with  many  it  goes  no  further  than  to  convince  their 
reason.  It  brings  no  personal  conviction  of  the  deep  interest  which  the  soul  now 
has,  and  the  soul  and  body  hereafter  shall  have,  in  this  great  truth.  Then,  again, 
many  believe  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  not  only  as  an  established  fact,  but  as 
a  certain  pledge  of  the  general  resurrection  in  the  last  day.  But  here  they  also 
stop.  The  belief  of  their  own  resurrection  has  no  effect  upon  their  will.  They 
cannot  look  forward  with  the  certain  hope  of  holy  Job  (xix.  25-27).  How 
different  a  view  does  St.  Paul  give  us  of  what  the  belief  of  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  as  the  pledge  of  our  own,  ought  to  produce  upon  the  soul  (Eom.  vi.  4).  St. 
Paul  shows  that  there  must  be  a  conformity  of  the  soul  to  Christ  while  it  is  in  the 
fleshly  body,  if  we  would  be  partakers  of  the  glorified  body  "  at  the  resurrection  of 
the  just"  (Col.  iii.  1).  I  will  name  one  other  class  of  persons,  who,  in  a  certain 
way,  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Many  believe  it  because  it  stands  as  an 
article  in  the  creed.  But  here  they  also  stop.  The  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord  produces  no  soul-stirring  feelings  of  wonder,  gratitude,  and  love  towards  this 
triumphant  Conqueror  of  Satan,  sin,  and  death  ;  neither  does  it  beget  in  them  any 
holy  desires  to  be  conformed  to  His  image  in  the  converting  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Beware  of  this  deadening  view  of  any  of  the  great  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
of  our  salvation.     II.  The  only  right  view  of  this  great  and  most  important 

FACT    of    the    resurrection    OF    OUR    LoRD    JeSUS     ChRIST    FROM    THE    GRAVE.         The 

text  shows  us  what  effect  true  faith  in  this  great  fact  had  produced  upon  the  first 
Christians  :  by  it  they  were  "  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope."  It  was  in  them 
a  practical  truth— it  touched  their  hearts.  Through  the  power  of  it,  in  the  pre- 
sence and  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  were  anew  created,  new  born  unto 
God.  It  was  a  hope  which  was  embodied  in  their  whole  character,  gave  strength  and 
substance  to  all  they  did,  and  was  to  them  that  "  hope  which  "  was  "  laid  up  for  them 
in  heaven  "  (Col.  i.  5).  Hence  we  see  that  a  real  and  justifying  belief  of  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  acts  immediately  upon  the  will  and  the  affections.  {H. 
Marriott.)  A  lively  hope  (jenerated  by  Christ's  resurrection  .-—By  speaking  of  ourbcing 
"begotten  again  to  a  lively  hope,"  the  apostle  would  simply  indicate  something  of  a 
universal  change  having  passed,  through  Christ's  resurrection,  over  this  earth  and  its 
inhabitants.  And  such  a  change  did  actually  pass.  There  was  substituted  a  living 
hope  for  a  dead  throughout  every  department  of  this  creation,  amongst  its  irrational 
as  well  as  its  rational  tenants.    It  was  not  that  heretofore  there  had  been  no  hope 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  19 

whatsoever  ;  for  man  is  so  constructed  that  he  cannot  live  without  hope  ;  he  must 
follow  a  meteor  where  there  is  no  star  on  the  firmament.  There  was  hope  amongst 
men,  even  when  truth  had  almost  departed,  and  ignorance  of  God  pressed  heavily 
on  all  countries  and  classes.  There  was  hope  that  Deity  might  be  propitiated  ;  that 
in  some  better  world  the  disorders  of  the  present  might  be  rectified.  Eeason  did 
something,  in  the  midst  of  ponderous  night,  to  keep  men  from  quite  parting  with 
the  expectation  of  immortality ;  and,  combining  the  teachings  of  conscience  with 
the  lingerings  of  tradition,  it  caused  a  spectre  of  hope  to  flit  to  and  fro  amid  the 
cloud  and  the  darkness.  Yes,  a  spectre  of  hope ! — a  dead  thing,  though,  at  times,  it 
appeared  amongst  the  living,  and  wore  something  of  the  hues  which  had  belonged 
to  the  fresh  and  beautiful  visitant  that  had  gladdened  the  earth,  whilst  yet  untainted 
by  sin.  A  living  hope  !  a  hope  that  is  not  merely  performing  some  of  the  actions, 
but  possessing  all  the  energies,  of  life — that  should  not  merely  beckon  onward,  but 
waited  to  be  examined  and  handled — this  never  sprang  from  the  reveries  of  philo- 
sophers, but  eluded  the  searchings  of  those  who  laboured  most  gravely  at  the  open- 
ing a  path  to  happiness  hereafter.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  To  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible.— The  heavenly  inheritance  : — The  greatness  of  God's  mercy  is  to  be  seen 
— I.  In  the  geeat  numbeb  of  the  saved.  II.  In  the  greatness  of  the  change 
which  takes  place  in  this  great  multitude.  The  very  life  of  God  is  transmitted  to 
the  soul  of  the  believer  in  regeneration.  III.  In  the  greatness  of  the  inheritance. 
1.  "  Incorruptible."  Heaven  has  in  it  the  power  of  endless  rejuvenation.  2. 
"Undefiled."  Its  worth  is  intrinsic ;  it  does  not  sometimes  go  up  and  sometimes 
come  down  ;  its  value  is  the  same  the  centuries  through ;  it  was  worth  the  blood  of 
Christ  two  thousand  years  ago,  and  it  is  worth  the  blood  to-day  again.  3.  "  That 
fadeth  not  away" — amaranthine,  evergreen,  always  fruitful,  always  beautiful.  Ko 
autumn  winds  strip  the  trees  of  their  foliage,  no  winter  blasts  rob  the  fields  of  their 
verdure.  A  pamphlet  was  being  lately  circulated  in  this  country  to  persuade  English- 
men to  emigrate  to  Texas,  and  one  reason  adduced  was  that  the  soil  being  so  rich 
and  the  climate  so  equably  soft,  two  harvests  could  be  gathered  in  one  year.  A  very 
cogent  reason,  doubtless,  if  true.  But  my  text  speaks  of  a  better  country  than  Texas 
— a  country  which  will  yield  not  two  crops,  but  twelve  crops  in  the  tv/elve  months 
(Eev.  xxii.  2).  IV.  In  the  greatness  of  the  expense  to  which  He  went  to  be 
able  to  confer  this  great  inheritance.  V.  In  the  greatness  of  the  power  that  is 
pledged  to  bring  the  great  multitude  to  the  possession  of  the  inheritance.  {J.  C. 
Jones,  D.D.)  The  inheritance  of  moral  manhood  : — I.  The  inheritance  of  the 
GOOD  IS  DISTINGUISHED  BY  EVERY  SPECIES  OF  EXCELLENCE.  1.  "Incorruptible." 
The  principle  of  decay  is  not  in  it.  The  pyramid  crumbles  at  the  touch  of  time,  and 
the  long-during  mountains  shake  under  the  footstep  of  ages  ;  but  eternal  cycles  roll 
over  the  plains  of  heaven  without  impairing  the  beauty  or  paling  the  brilliance  of 
the  "  incorruptible  "  inheritance.  2.  "  Undefiled."  Inherently  and  essentially  pure. 
3.  "  Fadeth  not  away."  II.  The  inheritance  of  the  good  is  in  safe  keeping — 
"  reserved  IN  heaven."  This  "  inheritance  "  could  not  be  on  earth.  Its  vitality 
would  perish.  Its  purity  would  be  sullied.  Its  brightness  would  be  dimmed.  It  is 
necessary  that  it  should  be  "  reserved  "  or  kept  back  for  a  season.  You  may  have 
seen  a  parent  reach  down  from  an  eminence  some  valuable  article  and  show  it  to 
the  child ;  the  child  has  lifted  his  tiny  hands  to  grasp  the  prize,  but  the  parent  has 
interposed,  saying,  "  No,  my  son,  this  is  for  you  when  you  are  a  man."  Precisely 
so  with  us:  wait  until  you  are  "made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  with 
the  saints  in  light."  In  what  does  this  meetness  consist?  Undoubtedly  in  moral 
manhood.  The  soul  is  to  "  become  of  age  "  by  growth  in  moral  purity  and  moral 
power.  1.  A  recognition  of  God  in  everything.  In  battle,  and  storm,  and  plague, 
the  clear  eye  of  moral  man  looks  up,  knowing  that  Omnipotence  guides  that  storm, 
and  guards  the  child's  "  inheritance."  2.  Power  over  every  combination  of  circum- 
stances. The  man  is  perfectly  calm  in  positions  which  alarm  the  child.  The 
"heir  "  knows  that  even  if  circumstances  should  press  so  heavily  upon  him  that  his 
"earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  should  be  dissolved,"  he  has  "a  building  of  God 
— a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens"  (2  Cor.  v.  5).  3.  An 
intelligent  decisiveness  of  character.  Is  your  conviction  strong  and  intelligent? 
Is  your  purpose  high  and  determined  ?  Never  was  fixedness  of  moral  view  more 
essential  to  progress  than  in  the  present  day.  Every  breeze  seems  laden  with 
refined  error  and  mystic  heresy.  Know  well  your  doctrines ;  fix  your  eye  earnestly 
on  the  beacon-lights  of  immutable  truth  !  III.  The  inheritance  is  the  portion 
OF  a  special  class.  "  Kept."  1.  By  the  supreme  love  of  their  omnipotent 
Saviour  (John  x.  28,  29).     The  Lord  Jesus  not  only  redeemed  His  people.  He  is  at 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

this  hour  interceding  for  them  ;  and  His  intercession  keeps  the  saints.  Peter  was 
kept  (Luke  xxii.  31)  by  the  Saviour's  mediation.  2.  By  the  ministry  of  angels. 
This  reflection  is  illustrative  not  only  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  but  also  of  the 
dignity  of  the  saved.  No  guardian-band  keeps  watch  over  the  sun  in  his  glorious 
palace,  no  eyes  glitter  upon  the  stars  as  upon  an  appointed  charge ;  but  spirits,  pure 
and  strong,  hover  around  the  humble  child  of  God.  They  constitute  the  military 
guard  of  the  minor  heir,  and  when  he  attains  his  majority  they  cease  to  be  his  pro- 
tectors only  that  they  may  become  his  companions.  3.  By  the  indwelling  presence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  IV.  The  inheritance  of  the  good  can  be  entered  upon  only 
IN  God's  own  time.  "  Eeady  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  The  Bible  does  not 
hold  out  heaven  as  an  inducement  to  cease  from  earth-work,  nor  as  a  prize  to  be 
seized  unconditionally.  Is  it  your  highest  wish  to  enter  heaven  yourself,  and  leave 
your  fellow-creatures  to  do  the  best  they  can  for  themselves  ?  Is  there  no  moral 
work  to  be  done  before  you  enter  on  your  promised  rest  ?  Is  there  no  prodigal  to 
reclaim,  no  aching  heart  to  comfort  ?  We  must  add  labour  to  hope,  and  patience 
to  faith.  It  is  in  this  fashion  that  we  prove  the  practical  value  of  Christianity. 
Lessons:  1.  Seek  to  be  assured  of  your  heirship.  2.  Eemember  that  you  are  under 
age.      3.  Rise  superior  to  your  troubles.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Begotten  to  the 

heiwenly  inlieritance  : — These  two  terms,  "  begotten  again  "  and  the  "  incorruptible 
inheritance,"  are  made  for  each  other,  like  the  two  halves  of  a  sea-shell.  They  shut 
accurately  upon  each  other,  but  upon  nothing  else.  Our  inheritance  by  the  fijipt 
birth  is  neither  undefiled  nor  unfading.  To  escape  the  curse  of  the  first  birthright 
we  must  have  another  birth.  The  new  creature  in  Christ  is  joint  heir  with  Him — 
heir  of  all  things.  The  inheritance  is — (1)  Incorruptible.  It  is  not  liable  to  com- 
plete dissolution,  like  a  dead  body  that  returns  to  dust.  It  is — (2)  Undefiled.  It  is 
not  liable  to  have  all  its  beauty  dimmed  by  some  unclean  spot  falling  on  its  form. 
Often  an  earthly  inheritance,  while  its  substance  abides  the  same,  loses  all  its 
attraction  for  the  owner.  The  eldest  son,  perhaps,  for  whom  it  was  fondly  cherished, 
has  thrown  away  his  good  name.  Henceforth  the  father  cannot  look  with  com- 
placency on  his  green  fields  and  waving  woods.  A  glance  at  the  landscape  makes 
him  shudder.  His  inheritance  is  defiled.  Not  so  the  heritage  to  which  the  children 
of  God  have,  in  the  regeneration,  been  served  heirs.  The  inheritance  is — (3)  Un- 
fading ;  its  bloom  will  never  wither.  The  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof,  and  there  shall 
be  no  night  there.  The  silence  of  Scripture,  especially  in  contrast  with  the  coarseness 
of  earth-born  systems,  is  sometimes  as  emphatic  a  testimony  to  its  Divine  origin  as 
its  positive  revelations.  Lights  on  the  shore  flash  far  over  the  ocean,  and  conduct 
the  voyager  to  the  land  ;  but  they  do  not  reveal  to  him  while  at  sea  the  particular 
features  of  the  landscape ;  it  is  thus  that  the  Bible  exhibits  lights  sufficient  to  guide 
inquirers  safe  to  heaven,  but  not  sufficient  to  reveal  its  interior  beauties.  Those 
who  reach  the  better  land  will  discover  its  glories  after  they  arrive.  {W.  Arnot.) 
The  security  of  the  inheritance  : — Some  are  born  to  a  great  inheritance,  and  yet 
miss  It".  In  our  days  thrones  are  frequently  shaken,  and  their  occupants  cast  off. 
Princes  who  were  born  to  a  royal  heritage  wander  as  exiles  in  a  foreign  land. 
But  there  are  no  revolutions  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Evei-y  one  gets  his 
own  there.  The  laws  of  nature  give  a  token  of  the  certainty  that  prevails  in 
the  region  where  the  Lord  reigns.  Although  a  globule  of  air  were  imprisoned 
for  a  thousand  years  within  a  shell  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  the  moment 
its  prison-house  decayed  it  would  rise  sheer  through  the  water,  though  it  were 
miles  in  depth,  and  never  halt  till  it  emerged  with  a  bound  into  its  native 
element,  the  sky.  Behold  a  specimen  of  His  power,  who  has  promised  "  none  of 
them  shall  be  lost."  (Ibid.)  Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God. — Divine 
power  and  human  faith  : — It  is  not  Divine  power  alone,  which  would  make 
man  a  mere  passive  creature ;  not  human  faith  alone,  which  were  to  risk  salvation 
on  human  strength.  Were  heaven  "  reserved  "  for  man,  and  man  left  to  himself  to 
fight  his  way  there,  even  with  all  the  grand  revelation  of  the  Gospel,  who  would 
ever  enter  there  ?  The  Divine  power  is  the  efficient  cause,  faith  the  instrumental 
cause,  in  salvation.  All  worlds  that  revolve  in  space  are  upheld  by  Omnipotence : 
but  the  God  of  All-might  upholds  them  by  means  of  the  grand  law  of  gravitation. 
A  flower  is  the  work  of  Divine  wisdom  and  beneficence,  the  forthputting  of  the 
Divine  power  of  life  ;  but  it  is  by  means  of  root  and  soil,  and  moisture  and  warmth, 
and  light,  that  the  flower  shoots  and  blossoms  into  beauty.  Such,  however,  are 
illustrations  of  means  in  the  lower  sphere  of  nature.  We  are  sustained  in  life  by 
the  will  and  power  of  God.  But  He  has  given  us  instinct  and  reason,  so  that  in  the 
use  of  food,  air,  exercise,  sleep,  our  bodily  powers  are  maintained.    There  are  two 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  21 

keepings :  heaven  for  us,  us  for  heaven.  How  does  God  guard  His  own  ?  A  large 
question,  which  admits  of  two  main  answers,  the  second  of  which  will  bring  us  to 
speak  of  the  grace  of  faith.  God  guards  His  people  by  outward  defence  and  by 
inward  help.  By  outward  defence,  that  is,  by  providence.  No  man  ever  can  know 
in  this  life  how  much  he  owes  to  the  restraining  and  overruling  providence  of  God. 
He  may  be  able  to  mark  some  things,  but  who  can  fully  trace  the  all-guiding  hand 
of  God  ?  Two  ways  there  are  in  war  to  relieve  a  beleaguered  city.  One  is  by  force 
from  without  to  compel  the  enemy  to  raise  the  siege  and  abandon  the  attack ;  the 
other,  to  throw  La  succours — troops,  provisions.  We  may  know  that  God  by  His 
power  can  do  either.  For  wise  reasons  He  does  not  drive  off  the  assaulting  hosts. 
He  throws  into  the  city  of  Mansoul,  succours.  This  is  grace.  Supplies  of  grace 
make  the  Christian  strong.  And  he  rejoices  in  not  only  the  incoming  of  new  life, 
but  in  the  mortifying  of  inbred  sin.  Observe  God's  method.  He  saves  no  man 
against  his  will  or  without  his  will.  Salvation  is  of  God.  How  then  ?  God  deals 
with  man  as  a  reasonable  being.  Faith  is  really  the  movement  of  the  whole  soul. 
There  is  in  all  this  no  force,  no  compulsion,  no  violation  of  the  laws  of  mind. 
All  is  natural,  while  supernatural.  (D.  S.  Brunton.)  Of  perseverance  : — I.  By 
WHAT  MEANS  DO  Cheistians  COME  TO  PERSEVERE  ?  1.  By  the  help  of  Ordi- 
nances;  prayer,  word,  sacraments.  2.  By  the  sacred  influence  and  con- 
currence of  the  Spirit.  3.  By  Christ's  daily  intercession.  H.  By  what  argu- 
ments   MAY     WE     PROVE     THE      SAINTS*     PERSEVERANCE?         1.      "  FrOm    the     trUth    of 

God."     God  hath  both  asserted  and  promised  it  (1  John  ii.  9,  27 ;  John  x.  28 ; 
Jer.  xxxii.  40  ;    Heb.  ii.  19  ;  Mai.  ii.  16).     2.  From  the  power  of  God.     3.  From 
God's  electing  love.     4.  From  believers'  union  with  Christ.     5.  From  the  nature  of 
a  purchase.     Would  Christ,  think  ye,  have  shed  His  blood  that  we  might  believe  in 
Him  for  a  while,  and  then  fall  away  ?     6.  From  a  believer's  "  victory  over  the 
world."     in.  What  motives  and  incentives  are  there  to  make  Christians  per- 
severe ?     1.  It  is  the  crown  and  glory  of  a  Christian  to  persevere.     The  excellency 
of  a  building  is  not  in  having  the  first  stone  laid,  but  when  it  is  finished.     The 
excellency  of  a  Christian  is,  when  he  hath  finished  the  work  of  faith.     2.  You  are 
within  a  few  days'  march  of  heaven.     3.  How  sad  not  to  persevere  in  holiness ! 
You  expose  yourselves  to  the  reproaches  of  men  and  the  rebukes  of  God.     4.  The 
promises  of  mercy  are  annexed  only  to  perseverance  (Rev.  iii.  5;  Luke  xxii.  28). 
IV.  What  expedients  or  means  may  be  used  for  a  Christian's  perseverance  ?     1. 
Take  heed  of  those  things  which  will  make  you  fall  away.     (1)  Presumption.     (2) 
Hypocrisy.     (3)  An  evil  heart  of  unbelief.     2.  If  you  would  persevere  in  sanctity — 
(1)  Look  that  you  enter  into  religion  upon  a  right  ground ;  be  well  grounded  in  the 
distinct  knowledge  of  God ;  you  must  know  the  love  of  the  Father,  the  merit  of  the 
Son,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     (2)  Get  a  real  work  of  grace  in  your 
heart.     Nothing  will  hold  out  but  grace ;  paint  will  fall  off.     (3)  Be  very  sincere. 
(4)  Be  humble.     (5)  Cherish  the  grace  of  faith.     (6)  Seek  God's  power  to  help.     (7) 
Set  before  your  eyes  the  noble  examples  of  those  who  have  persevered  in  religion. 
(T.  Watson.)         By,  through,  for : — We  have  in  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one  a 
grand  picture  of  the  double  operation  of  the  Divine  power  on  the  two  sides  of  the 
veil.     God  works  amidst  the  unseen  realities,  preserving  the  inheritance  for  us ;  and 
God  works  here,  keeping  us  for  the  inheritance.     It  were  vain  to  prepare  the  house 
unless  He  prepared  its  occupants.     It  were  vain  to  nourish  in  human  hearts  desires 
and  fitnesses  for  that  supernal  bliss,  unless  He  were  preparing  the  fruition  of  our 
desires.     These  two  processes  go  on  side  by  side,  and  at  last  the  results  of  the  two 
shall  fit  together  like  the  two  halves  of  a  tally,  and  neither  shall  the  saints  be 
wanting  for  the  inheritance,  nor  the  inheritance  for  the  saints.   I.  What  are  we  kept 
BY  ?     The  Divine  strength  is  as  a  fortress,  protecting  our  weakness,  and  we  lie  safe 
in  the  hollow  of  that  great  sphere  like  some  weaponless  creature  in  its  shell.     We 
are  imbedded,  surrounded,   over-arched  above,  and  under-propped,  and  guarded 
on  either  side,  and  therefore  we  lie  secure.     The  weakest  of  us  can  get  behind  that 
great  shelter  of  the  power  of  God.     The  fortress  defends  us,  if  we  abide  in  it,  from 
sin  that  would  wreck  our  souls,  but  it  does  not  shelter  us,  though  we  abide  in  it, 
from  sorrows  and  all  the  ills  and  wearuiesses  and  toils  that  flesh  has  to  encounter, 
not  because  it  is  flesh,  but  because  God  is  good.     We  are  kept  from  the  evU  that  is 
in  the  evil.     The  very  exposure  to  the  one  often  becomes  the  defence  from  the  other. 
Then  let  us  remember,  too,  that  this  power  in  which  we  are  kept  is  a  power  which  keeps 
us  by  itself  being  in  us.     So  Paul  speaks  about  being  strengthened  within  with  "  a 
Divine  might."    We  are  kept  in  God  when  God  is  kept  in  us.    II.  What  are  we  kept 
THROUGH?    Faith  is  the  condition,  but  it  is  no  more  than  the  condition.     "  The 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  i. 

name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,"  and  is  safe. 
And  so  one  of  the  Hebrew  words  which  expresses  "  trust  "  or  "  faith,"  literally  ren- 
dered, means  to  flee  to  a  refuge.  That  figure  sets  forth  picturesquely  the  nature  and 
effects  of  faith.  We  are  in  the  shelter  of  the  enclosing  walls,  when  by  faith  we  enter 
into  them.  When  we  "  trust  in  the  Lord  "  we  "  have  a  strong  city,"  and  "  salvation 
will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks."  Faith  is  conscious  need.  Faith 
is  humble  dependence.  Faith  is  brave  confidence.  And  if  we  go  into  our 
daily  conflicts  with  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil,  wanting  either 
of  these  three  things,  we  want  an  indispensable  link  between  our  weakness  and 
God's  strength,  and  therefore  want  a  necessary  condition  for  the  influx  of  His 
power  which  brings  the  victory.  III.  What  are  we  kept  for  ?  It  is  salvation  in  its 
rudimentary  state  here,  it  is  salvation  in  its  loftiest  development  yonder.  All  the 
crystals  of  one  mineral  have  precisely  the  same  angles  and  the  same  facets  and 
planes,  whether  they  be  so  small  that  it  takes  a  strong  microscope  to  see  them,  or 
large  as  basalt  pillars  of  a  Giant's  Causeway.  The  little  salvation  here  and  the 
giant  salvation  of  the  heavens  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  the  difference  is 
wholly  one  of  degree.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  security  of  the  faithful ; — Two  persons 
may  be  in  a  lifeboat,  and  both  being  in  the  boat  are  therefore  equally  safe  ;  yet  one 
may  be  full  of  fear,  because  he  understands  neither  the  qualities  of  the  boat  nor  the 
principles  upon  which  it  is  constructed :  he  sees  the  waves  rolling,  and  he  fears  he 
shall  be  drowned  ;  while  the  other  man,  well  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  con- 
struction, and  knowing  also  those  laws  by  which  it  is  governed,  has  peace  because 
he  is  confident.  So  it  is  with  regard  to  the  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  you 
have  been  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  know  what  Christ  is — to  know  the  pre- 
ciousness  of  His  blood — to  know  its  saving  power — to  know  its  superiority  even  to 
Satan,  then  you  may  sit  under  His  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  perfect  confidence 
and  comfort.  But,  at  the  same  time,  if  you  are  really  trusting  in  Christ,  although 
your  faith  be  feeble,  you  are  not  less  secure.  The  timid  man  is  as  safe  in  the  boat 
as  the  courageous  man,  because  they  depend,  not  upon  their  frames  and  feelings, 
but  their  safety  consists  in  the  fact  of  their  being  in  the  boat.  So  all  that  are  really 
trusting  in  the  Lord  Jesus  are  equally  secure,  although  there  may  be  gi'eat  differences 
in  the  power  of  faith.     (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  Kept: — I.  We  abe  kept  safe.     1. 

God  hides  His  people  (Psa.  xxvii.  5  ;  Col.  iii.  3).  2.  God  guards  His  people.  II. 
We  are  kept  up.  A  corpse  might  be  kept  safe,  but  it  would  only  be  preserved  cor- 
ruption. Let  us  remember  that  He  who  keeps  our  spiritual  life  secure  from  outward 
attack,  also  keeps  it  from  internal  decay.  With  perpetual  preservation  there  is  con- 
tinual renovation.  III.  We  are  kept  back.  He  who  knows  anything  of  the 
tendencies  of  his  heart  praises  God  as  much  for  restraining  as  sustaining  grace, 
IV.  We  are  kept  on.  If  ye  are  found  still  running  with  patience  give  glory  to  Him 
unto  whom  alone  it  belongs.  V.  We  are  kept  through.  There  is  as  much  need 
for  us  to  be  taught  how  to  bear  with  equanimity,  as  how  to  serve  with  unceasing 
zeal.  We  are  kept  through  faith's  trial  as  well  as  in  faith's  service.  VI.  We  are 
KioPT  CLEAN.  We  who  are  kept  safe  in  our  title  are  kept  meet  in  our  persons  for  the 
coming  glory.  VII.  We  are  kept  in  order.  The  grace  that  saves  places  us  in 
Christ's  school-house  for  instruction.  VIII.  We  are  kept  always.  The  keeping 
of  the  text  extends  unto  "the  last  time."  We  are  kept  "  unto  the  end."  What  is 
there  before  us  ?  Well,  there  is  sickness  for  sure.  But  the  promise  is,  "  He,"  that 
is  the  Lord,  "  will  make  his  bed  in  his  sickness."  Beyond  sickness  stands  grim 
death,  but  that  has  lost  all  power  to  sting.  Beyond  death  there  yawns  an  open 
grave.  But  here  the  Lord's  keeping  shines  forth  most  magnificently.  Yes,  kept  for 
the  resurrection  morning.  Kept  by  invincible  might  for  re-union  with  the  glorified 
spirit.  Nothing  short  of  eternal  keeping  becomes  the  ever-living  God,  or  meets  the 
requirements  of  our  immortal  souls.  IX.  We  are  kept  for  a  public  exhibition 
(Eph.  ii.  7).  [A.  G.  Brown.)  The  Divine  keeping  : — When  God  promises  that  we 
shall  be  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  He  does  not  mean  that  we  shall  be  kept  from 
temptation,  struggle,  and  trial.  You  know  that  in  times  of  war  a  commander  would 
throw  his  strong  garrisons  into  those  towns  which  would  be  attacked.  We  have  not 
many  soldiers  in  Islington,  but  at  seaport  towns  like  Dover  and  Portsmouth  you 
will  find  large  numbers,  because  they  are  towns  more  likely  to  be  attacked. 
And  so  when  I  read  in  God's  Word  that  the  Christian  is  "garrisoned  by  the 
power  of  God,"  I  learn  that  the  Christian  must  expect  to  be  attacked,  must 
expect  temptation,  must  expect  to  be  in  the  midst  of  the  battlefield.  But 
it  also  implies  this,  that  the  commander  considers  that  a  most  important 
point,   and   He  throws   a  garrison   into   it.     And  not  only   because   He  expects 


<:haj>.  I.]  I.  PETER.  23 

it  to  be  attacked,  but  because   He  means  to  keep   it.       {E.  A.   Stuart,   M.A.) 
How  God  keeps  His  saints  .-—Those  who  wish  to  see  the  Scottish  regalia,  kept  in 
Edinburgh,  havg  to  climb  the  hill  to  the  castle,  then  pass  guard  after  guard,  and 
through   room  after  room,  until  they  come  to   a  narrow,  steep,  winding  stair. 
Ascending  it  they  enter  a  room,  and  there  before  their  eyes  are  the  Scottish  crown 
jewels.     They  are  openly  displayed,  in  full  view ;  but  while  they  are  where  every 
eye  can  see  them,  they  are  where  no  hand  can  touch  them.     Strong  iron  guards 
cover  them,  so  close  that,  while  they  do  not  interfere  with  sight,  no  hand  could  go 
through.     That  is  how  God  keeps  His  precious  ones.  His  crown  jewels,  so  that 
every  eye  can  see  them,  but  without  His  permission  no  hand  can  touch  them. 
God  fences  them  round  so  that  no  one  may  approach  them  to  do  them  evil.      God's 
protecting  agencies  : — The  traveller  on  the  Highland  railway  can  hardly  fail  to  be 
struck,  as  he  journeys  north,  with  the  unusual  sight  of  a  picturesque  and  well-kept 
flower  garden  blooming  in  the  angle  of  ground  formed  at  the  junction  of  two  rail- 
way lines.     The  helpless  flowers  thrive  there  in  spite  of  the  terrible  forces  that  come 
so  near  them  on  every  side.     If  you  were  to  put  an  untaught  savage  inside  the 
garden  hedge,  and  let  him  hear  the  screaming  engines,  and  see  the  files  of  carriages, 
or  the  trucks  laden  with  coal,  timber,  and  iron,  converging  toward  this  fairy  oasis, 
he  would  be  ready  to  say,  "  These  beautiful  things  will  be  torn  to  shreds  in  a 
moment."    But  behind  the  garden  fences  there  are  lines  of  strong,  faithful  steel, 
keeping  each  engine  and  carriage  and  truck  in  its  appointed  place  ;  and  though  the 
air  vibrates  with  destructive  forces,  the  pansy,  primrose,  and  geranium  live  in  a 
world  of  tremors,  not  a  silken  filament  is  snapped,  and  not  a  petal  falls  untimely 
to  the  earth.     In  the  very  angle  of  these  forces  the  fraUest  life  is  unharmed.     To 
all  these  possibilities  of  destruction  the  steel  puts  its  bound.     So  with  the  fine 
spiritual  husbandries  that  foster  faith  in  the  souls  around  us.     That  faith  some- 
times seems  a  thing  of  hair-spun  filaments,  a  bundle  of  frailties,  a  fairy  fabric  of 
soft-hued  gossamers  trembhng  at  every   breath.     The  avalanche  of   nineteenth 
century  atheism  is  poised  over  it.     The  air   hurtles  with   fiery  hostilities.     The 
mechanisms  of  diabolic  temptation  encroach  on  every  side  upon  our  work.     Public- 
house,  gaming  club,  ill-ordered  home,  threaten  disasters,  of  which  we  do  not  like  to 
think.     The  air  quivers  with  the  anger  of  demons.     Yet  the  work  is  God's,  and  the 
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.     In  the  very  angle  of  these  demoniac  forces 
the  work  shall  thrive,  for  the  hidden  lines  of  His  protecting  power  are  round  about 
it.     (T.  G.  Selby.)        Salvation  ready  to  be  revealed. — Salvation  ready  : — I.  A 
DELIGHTFUL  THEME.     II.  An   INTERESTING  FACT.     "  Ready  to  be  revealcd."     What 
is  implied  here  ?     1.  Concealment  partial  or  entire  for  the  present.     2.  Preparation. 
3.  Completeness.     III.  An  important  crisis.     "  The  last  time."     (Essex  Remem- 
brancer.)       Salvation  ready  for  revelation : — The   complete   future  salvation  is 
both  negative  and  positive.     There  is  a  grand  indefiniteness  which  means  compre- 
hensiveness in  the  word.     In  its  narrowest  literal  sense  it  means  being  made  whole ; 
in  its  wider  signification  it  means  being  deUvered  from  threatening  perils,  discom- 
forts, and  the  like.     On  the  positive  side  the  word  implies  the  bestowal  of  all  true 
good.     So  what  is  ready  to  be  revealed  is,  on  the  one  hand,  absolute  emancipation 
from  everything,  be  it  sorrow,  be  it  sin,  be  it  ignorance,  which  is  of  the  nature  of 
darkness,  and  is  to  any  part  of  the  human  sensibility  a  pain  or  evil.     And  on  the 
other  side,  what  waits  to  be  revealed  in  us  is  the  absolute  fulness  of  all  good  of  every 
sort  which  fits  any  part  of  a  man's  nature,  and  makes  it  feel  blessed  and  at  rest. 
For  heart,  and  mind,  and  will,  and  taste,  and  intellect,  and  imagination,  and  the 
desire  for  society,  and  the  desire  for  love,  and  the  desire  for  progress,  and  the  desire 
for  change,  and  the  desire  for  enterprise,  and  the  desire  for  service,  and  all  else  that 
makes  up  human  nature,  the  full  salvation  of  the  heavens  has  a  corresponding  gift. 
And,  says  Peter,  it  is  all  lying  just  on  the  other  side  of  the  curtain  there.   A  curtain 
is  a  very  thin  thing,  very  easy  to  push  aside ;  a  finger's  touch  and  it  goes.     And,  as 
at  some  great  civic  pageant  the  preparations  for  to-morrow's  show  are  carried  on 
behind  some  interposing  thin  veil  of  canvas  or  the  like,  where  we  can  hear  the 
hammers  at  work,  and  catch  a  light  now  and  then  that  tells  of  preparing  glories, 
so,  on  the  other  side  of  the   thin  partition,  through  which   there   come  furtive 
gleams  and  sounds  that  tell  what  is  going  on,  the  inheritance  is  being  prepared  for 
the  great  unveiling.     It  is  ready  to  be  revealed,  but  the  universe  is  not  ready  for  the 
revelation.      That  unseen   order   of  things  has  present  existence.      All  that  is 
"  future  "  about  it  is  its  manifestation.     Unseen,  it  lies  around  this  little  visible 
life.     A  touch,  a  crumb  of  bread  in  your  windpipe,  a  clot  of  blood  as  big  as  a  pin's 
head  on  your  brain,  and  the  future,  as  we  call  it  foolishly,  proves  itself  the  present, 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  all-encircling.  There  is  but  a  thin  veil  between  us  and  it.  It  is  ready  to  be 
revealed  when  He  puts  out  His  hand  and  draws  back  the  curtain  for  us  one  by  one, 
as  He  will  at  the  last  for  a  universe.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  end  of  salvation 
ready  to  be  revealed: — But  is  salvation  not  already  revealed?  No;  the  way  of 
salvation  is  revealed,  but  the  salvation  itself  is  hid  out  of  sight.  If  the  road  that 
leads  to  the  city  of  God  fills  us  with  such  wonderment  and  praise,  what  ecstasies 
will  possess  us  once  we  find  our  feet  on  the  golden  pavements  !  Imagine  not  that 
you  will  have  to  spend  eternity  in  mental  indolence.  No ;  when  you  shall  have 
exhausted  the  revelation  of  the  way,  the  revelation  of  the  end  will  still  remain  ; 
when  you  shall  have  gone  through  this  Bible  which  teaches  us  how  to  attain  salva- 
tion there  will  be  another  Bible,  the  Bible  of  eternity,  to  disclose  to  your  wondering 
gaze  the  contents  of  that  salvation.  (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  last  revelation  of 
salvation  : — The  finished  work  of  Christ,  the  prepared  home  in  heaven  and  the 
peace  of  God  within  a  believer's  heart — these  are  both  alike  hidden,  secret 
things.  But  these  things  are  although  they  are  not  seen.  They  are  all  ready 
underneath  the  covering  veil,  and  when  that  veil  is  removed  every  eye  shall  see 
them.  When  the  Lord  shall  come  again  His  coming  will  be  like  the  morning.  As 
the  daylight  reveals  the  green  herbs  and  growing  flowers  which  the  veil  of  night 
had  concealed,  the  coming  of  the  Lord  will  expose  to  view  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  The  flowers  and  forests,  the  hills  and 
streams,  were  all  there  in  the  night  though  they  were  not  seen.  They  needed  not 
to  be  made  in  the  morning.  They  were  ready  to  be  revealed.  Suppose  a  creature 
with  the  intelligence  of  a  man,  but  with  the  term  of  life  allotted  to  some  of  the 
insects — a  day.  Suppose  that  creature's  life  begins  after  sunset.  At  midnight  and 
in  the  early  morning  watches  he  looks  around,  but  sees  nothing.  He  reasons,  and 
loses  himself  in  dark  speculation.  A  voice  from  the  abyss  above  reaches  his  ear, 
and  tells  him  that  a  beautiful  furnished  world  is  ready  to  be  revealed,  and  will  be 
revealed  in  the  morning.  He  believes  and  waits ;  the  promise  is  fulfilled.  The 
glory  of  the  world  when  the  sun  is  up  surpasses  all  his  expectation.  Such  a 
creature  is  redeemed  man.  All  is  ready.  The  inheritance  needs  only  to  be 
unveiled.  The  unveiling  only  remains  for  the  last  time.  Now  is  the  time  for 
seeking  and  obtaining  it ;  then  it  only  remains  that  it  should  be  fully  displayed. 
(TF.  Arnot.)  In  the  last  time. — The  last  time  : — I.  God's  last  works  are  His 
BEST  WORKS,  which  should  teach  us  to  imitate  God,  and  never  fear  the  forbearance 
of  God  ;  time  cannot  change  Him,  He  will  be  never  the  worse  for  delay.  II.  If  we 
mark  what  days  these  last  days  are  we  may  also  note  that  God  doth  His  best 
WORKS  WHEN  MEN  DO  THEIR  WORST.  For  of  thesc  last  days  it  is  that  the  apostle 
speaks,  that  they  should  be  wicked  and  perilous  days,  and  this  we  should  learn  of 
God  also,  to  let  our  piety  and  patience  then  shine  most.  III.  There  is  a  tibie 
WHEN  God  will  at  once  fully  deliver  and  save  His  servants,  and  judge  for 
them,  and  therefore  we  should  not  be  weary  of  well-doing.    IV.  God's  servants 

MUST   not    think    TO   BE    FULLY   DELIVERED     TILL    THESE     LAST     TIMES,    and    therefore 

they  must  walk  circumspectly,  and  always  stand  upon  their  guard.     V.  It  is  the 

WILL  OF  God  that  the  day  of  judgment  should  not  be  known  to  ANY  MAN  OR 

ANGEL  FOR  THE  MOMENT  OF  IT,  and  therefore  it  is  here  described  by  ages,  not  by 
days  and  hours,  which  may  confute  curiosity,  and  teach  us  to  watch  at  all  times. 
VI.  The  world  shall  have  an  end,  there  is  a  last  time,  and  therefore  woe  is 
to  them  that  so  greedily  mind  transitory  things,  and  that  place  all  their  happiness 
in  the  things  of  this  life.     (N.  By  field.) 

Vers.  6-9.  Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice. — Joy  and  trial  in  the  Christian's  life  : — 
I.  The  Christian's  joy.  1.  It  is  present  joy.  God's  service  is  gladsome  even 
now  (chap.  i.  8;  Phil.  iv.  4).  Nor  is  this  joy  for  advanced  believers  only,  but  for 
all  true-hearted  seekers  after  God  (Psa.  cv.  3).  2.  It  is  great  joy  (Psa.  Ixviii.  3). 
3.  There  are  many  sources  of  the  Christian's  great  joy,  but  the  particular  one  here 
mentioned  is  the  present  happiness  afforded  by  a  believing  expectation  of  the  joys 
laid  up  for  him  in  eternity.  4.  There  are  important  reasons  why  we  all  ought  to 
be  joyful  Christians.  (1)  It  is  our  privilege  as  Christians.  When  we  may  be  so 
much  happier  than  we  are,  what  folly  not  to  exercise  our  right !  (2)  Our  influence 
for  good  over  others  depends  greatly  upon  the  apparent  result  which  religion  pro- 
duces in  our  own  case.  (3)  Very  much  of  our  own  stability  as  Christians  depends 
upon  our  joyfulness  (Neh.  viii.  10).  II.  The  Christian's  trial.  There  is  nothing 
whatever  unchequered  here  below — no  joy  without  sorrow,  no  sunshine  without 
shadow,  no  harmony  unmixed  with  discord.     Life  is  like  an  April  day.     1.  "  Ye 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  25 

are  in  heaviness  " — pressed  down,  forced  to  the  earth,  as  if  under  some  cruel  load. 
The  Christian's  joy  is  from  heaven,  his  grief  from  earth.  These  two  are  ever  at 
war  with  one  another.  2.  "  Ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations." 
Persecutions  abounded.  The  devil  aimed  his  fiery  darts  at  them.  The  world 
spread  its  allurements  for  them.  3.  Yet  this  state  of  trial  has  its  alleviations.  (1) 
It  is  only  "  for  a  season,"  whereas  the  Christian's  joy  endures  for  ever  (Psa.  xxx.  5; 
2  Cor.  iv.  17).  (2)  It  is  only  "  if  need  be  " — if  there  is  a  necessity,  if  some  good  can 
be  effected  by  it.  III.  The  union  of  jot  and  teial  in  the  Christian's  earthly 
LOT.  Does  the  text  teach  that  times  of  trial  are  destroyers  of  the  Christian's  joy, 
even  for  a  season  ?  On  the  contrary,  St.  Peter  speaks  of  the  "  heaviness  "  only  to 
give  us  a  more  exalted  idea  of  the  mighty  power  of  the  "  joy."  "  Ye  greatly  rejoice, 
though  ye  are  in  heaviness "  ;  your  hearts  remain  glad  in  spite  of  your  trials. 
Clouds  come,  but  the  sun  breaks  through  them  and  goes  on  shining  stiU.  Obstacles 
arise,  but  the  bright  river  of  the  Christian's  peace  flows  past  and  over  them,  deep 
and  glad  as  before.  The  one  great  peculiarity  of  the  Christian's  joy  is  its  compara- 
tive independence  of  outward  circumstances — nay,  its  triumph  over  them.  Worldly 
men  can  rejoice  when  all  is  prosperous.  If,  therefore,  the  Christian's  joy  vanished 
at  the  approach  of  sorrow,  men  might  well  ask  wherein  the  Christian  differed  from 
others  ?  [J.  Henry  Burn,  B.D.)  The  Christianas  joy  and  the  ChristiaiVs  suffer- 
ings : — I.  The  Christian's  jot.  1.  Its  greatness.  "  Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice." 
There  are  only  three  things  really  great  in  the  universe — God  and  the  soul  and 
eternity,  and  as  religion  has  to  do  with  them  all  its  dealings  have  something 
superior  in  them  all.  2.  Its  ground.  (1)  The  Christian's  joy  is  not  unfounded. 
(2)  The  Christian's  joy  is  founded  principally  upon  spiritual  and  eternal  things. 
II.  The  Christun's  grief.  1.  The  nature  of  the  Christian's  sufferings.  2.  The 
number.  3.  Their  influence.  4.  Their  expediency.  5.  Their  duration.  {W. 
Jay.)  The  Christian's  heaviness  and  rejoicing  : — I.  His  heaviness.  1.  If  we 
were  not  in  heaviness  during  our  troubles  we  should  not  be  like  our  Covenant  Head 
— Christ  Jesus.  2.  If  we  did  not  suffer  heaviness  we  would  begin  to  grow  too 
proud,  and  become  too  great  in  our  own  esteem.  3.  In  heaviness  we  often  learn 
lessons  that  we  never  could  attain  elsewhere.  "Ah!"  said  Luther,  "affliction  is 
the  best  book  in  my  library,"  and  let  me  add  the  best  leaf  in  the  book  of  affliction  is 
that  blackest  of  aU  the  leaves,  the  leaf  caUed  heaviness,  when  the  spirit  sinks  within 
us,  and  we  cannot  endure  as  we  could  wish.  4.  This  heaviness  is  of  essential  use 
to  a  Christian  if  he  would  do  good  to  others.  Who  shall  speak  to  those  whose 
hearts  are  broken  but  those  whose  hearts  have  been  broken  also  ?  II.  His  rejoicing. 
Mariners  teU  us  that  there  are  some  parts  of  the  sea  where  there  is  a  strong  current 
upon  the  surface  going  one  way,  but  that  down  in  the  depths  there  is  a  strong 
current  running  the  other  way.  Two  seas  do  not  meet  and  interfere  with  one 
another,  but  one  stream  of  water  on  the  surface  is  running  in  one  direction,  and 
another  below  in  an  opposite  direction.  Now  the  Christian  is  like  that.  On  the 
surface  there  is  a  stream  of  heaviness  rolling  with  dark  waves,  but  down  in  the 
depths  there  is  a  strong  under-current  of  great  rejoicing  that  is  always  flowing  there. 
The  apostle  is  writing  "  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout  Pontus."  1.  The 
first  thing  that  he  says  to  them  is,  that  they  are  "  elect  accordmg  to  the  foreknow- 
ledge of  God,"  "wherein  we  greatly  rejoice."  Ah!  even  when  the  Christian  is 
most  "  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations,"  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  he  can 
know  that  he  is  still  elect  of  God  !  2.  The  apostle  says  that  we  are  "elect  through 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  bW)d  of  Jesus 
Christ" — "wherein  we  greatly  rejoice."  Is  the  obedience  of  the  Lor(?  Jesus  Christ 
girt  about  my  loins,  to  be  my  beauty  ;  and  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  sprinkled  upon  me 
to  take  away  all  my  guilt  and  all  my  sin,  and  shall  I  not  in  this  greatly  rejoice  ? 
3.  But  the  great  and  cheering  comfort  of  the  apostle  is,  that  we  are  elect  unto  an 
inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in 
heaven  for  us.  And  here  is  the  grand  comfort  of  the  Christian.  4.  There  is  one 
more  doctrine  that  will  always  cheer  a  Christian,  this  perhaps  is  the  one  chiefly 
intended  here  in  the  text.  "  Reserved  in  heaven  for  you  who  are  kept  by  the  power 
of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation."  This  will  be  one  of  the  greatest  cordials  to  a 
Christian  in  heaviness,  that  he  is  not  kept  by  his  own  power,  but  by  the  power  of 
God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sweetest  joys  learned  in  trial : — -Very  many  of  the 
sweetest  joys  of  Christian  hearts  are  songs  which  have  been  learned  in  the  bitter- 
ness of  trial.  It  is  said  of  the  canary  bird  that  he  will  never  learn  to  sing  the  song 
his  master  will  have  him  sing  while  it  is  light  in  his  cage.  He  learns  a  snatch  of 
every  song  he  hears,  but  will  not  learn  a  fuU  separate  melody  of  its  own.    And  the 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

master  covers  the  cage  and  makes  it  dark  all  about  the  bird,  and  then  he  listens 
and  learns  the  one  song  that  is  taught  to  him  until  his  heart  is  full  of  it.  Then, 
ever  after,  he  sings  the  song  in  the  light.  With  many  of  us  it  is  as  with  the  bird. 
The  Master  has  a  song  He  wants  to  teach  to  us,  but  we  learn  only  a  strain  of  it,  a 
note  here  and  there,  while  we  catch  up  snatches  of  the  world's  songs  and  sing  them 
with  it.  Then  He  comes  and  makes  it  dark  about  us  till  we  leai'n  the  sweet  melody 
He  would  teach  us.  Many  of  the  loveliest  songs  of  peace  and  trust  sung  by  God's 
children  in  this  world  they  have  been  taught  Ln  the  darkened  chamber  of  sorrow. 
Triumph  of  the  soul  over  trial : — There  are  even  many  facts  in  our  ordinary  human 
experience  that  render  quite  conceivable  this  triumph  of  the  soul  over  all  surround- 
ing tribulations  and  distresses.  What  cares  the  patient,  toiling  man  of  science  for 
the  incredulity  and  jeers  of  his  neighbours,  or  the  vexations  of  poverty,  when  first 
the  obscurity  and  meanness  of  his  lonely  chamber  are  lighted  up  by  the  fiash  of 
some  great  discovery?  How  superior  to  threats  and  discouragements  of  every 
kind  was  the  mighty  heart  of  Columbus  as  he  calmly  forced  his  way  through  the 
veil  of  waters  toward  this  unseen  world !  Nay,  how  often  has  the  bitterness  of 
death  itself  been  overcome  to  the  soldier  on  the  battlefield  and  the  patriot  on  the 
scaffold,  by  the  silent  anticipation  of  the  freedom  and  glory  which  their  agonies 
secured  for  the  country  they  loved  !  And  need  we  then  wonder  if  the  confessors  of 
Jesus  have  gone  singing  to  the  stake,  and  their  shout  of  victory  has  been  stifled 
only  by  the  flames  into  which  they  sank  ?  {J.  Lillie,  D.D.)  Joy  in  heaviness  : — 
They  say  that  springs  of  sweet  fresh  water  well  up  amid  the  brine  of  salt  seas ;  that 
the  fairest  Alpine  flowers  bloom  in  the  wildest,  ruggedest  mountain  passes  ;  that  the 
noblest  psalms  were  the  outcome  of  the  profoundest  agony  of  soul.  Be  it  so.  And 
thus  amid  manifold  trials  souls  which  love  God  will  find  reasons  for  bounding, 
leaping  joy.  Have  you  learnt  this  lesson  yet  ?  Not  simply  to  endure  God's  will, 
nor  only  to  choose  it,  nor  only  to  trust  it,  but  to  rejoice  in  it.  Of  such  joy  there 
are  two  sources :  first,  the  understanding  of  the  nature  and  meaning  of  trial ; 
second,  the  soul's  love  and  faith  in  its  unseen  Lord.  There  is  enough  in 
these  two  for  unsullied  and  transcendent  joy  ;  in  fact,  we  may  question  whether  we 
«ver  truly  drink  of  Christ's  joy  till  all  other  sources  of  joy  are  eliminated  by 
earthly  sorrow,  and  we  are  driven  to  seek  that  joyous  blessedness  which  no  earthly 
sun  can  wither  and  no  winter  freeze  (Hab.  iii.  17,  18,  19).  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Christian  joy : — Greek,  ayaXXidffGe,  Ye  dance  for  joy,  ye  dance  a  gaUiard,  or  as 
children  do  about  a  bonfire :  ye  cannot  but  express  your  inward  joy  in  your  counte- 
nance, voice,  and  gesture.  (J.  Trapp.)  Variableness  of  Christian  moods  : — The 
variableness  of  Christian  moods  is  often  a  matter  of  great  and  unnecessary  suffering ; 
but  Christian  life  does  not  follow  the  changes  of  feeling.  Our  feelings  are  but  the 
torch  ;  and  our  life  is  the  man  that  carries  it.  The  wind  that  flares  the  flame  does 
not  make  the  man  waver.  The  flame  may  sway  hither  and  thither,  but  he  holds 
his  course  straight  on.  Thus  oftentimes  it  is  that  our  Christian  hopes  are  carried, 
as  one  carries  a  lighted  candle  through  the  windy  street,  that  seems  never  to  be  so 
nearly  blown  out  as  wben  we  step  through  the  open  door,  and,  in  a  moment,  we  are 
safe  within.  Our  wind-blown  feelings  rise  and  fall  through  all  our  life,  and  the 
draught  of  death  threatens  quite  to  extinguish  them  ;  but  one  moment  more,  and 
they  shall  rise  and  for  ever  shine  serenely  in  the  unstormed  air  of  heaven.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  The   needs   he : — When   our   hearts   grow   a  grain  too   light,   God 

seeth  it  but  needful  to  make  us  heavy  through  manifold  temptations.  (J.  Trapp.) 
The  duality  of  Christian  life: — As  there  are  two  men  in  every  true  Christian,  a 
new  man  and  an  old  one,  so  heaviness  in  manifold  temptation  and  rejoicing  may 
readily  co-exist.  {J.  P.  Lange.)  In  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations. — 
Why  the  godly  must  undergo  many  troubles : — 1.  To  drive  them  to  repentance 
(2  Sam.  xii.  18  ;  Gen.  xlii.  21).  They  are  as  the  shepherd's  dog,  to  fetch  us  out  of 
the  corn,  to  bring  us  into  compass  again  (Psa.  xxxii.  4,  5 ;  cxix.  67,  71).  2.  To 
keep  them  from  sin,  being  therefore  compared  to  a  hedge  of  thorns  (Hos.  ii.  6 ;  Job 
xxxiii.  17  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  37).  3.  To  humble  them.  We  have  a  proud  nature,  and 
while  in  health  we  think  our  heads  half  touch  the  clouds  ;  therefore  God  pulls  us 
down  by  troubles.  4.  To  make  them  more  holy,  to  scourge  off  the  rust,  purge  out 
some  of  the  remnant  of  the  old  man,  and  renew  the  inner  man  (Isa.  iv.  4  ;  Heb.  xii. 
10 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  9).  5.  To  wean  them  from  the  world,  to  which  even  the  best  are  too 
much  addicted,  and  to  make  them  willing  to  die  and  to  be  gone  hence,  so  setting 
them  on  work  to  look  after  and  make  sure  of  a  better  inheritance.  6.  To  prove  the 
devil  a  liar  (Job  i.  9).  7.  To  keep  them  from  hell  and  condemnation.  8.  To  bring 
them    to  heaven.     (John  Rogers.)        Heaven's  discipline   of  the  good : — I.  The 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  27 

disciplinary  elements  are  very  manifold.     II.  The  disciplinary  elenaants  are  veky 
PAINFUL.  "  Ye  are  in  heaviness."  Or,  as  Dr.  Davidson  renders  it,  "  made  sorrowful." 
"  Heaviness  "  is  a  relative  term.     What  is  heavy  to  one  would  be  light  to  another. 
Paul  gloried  in  tribulation.     III.  The  disciplinary  elements  are  only  temporary. 
"  Now  for  a  season."     1.  The  trials  of  life  are  short  compared  with  the  enjoyments 
of  life.     They  are  exceptional.     2.  The  trials  of  life  are  short  compared  with  the 
blessedness  of  the  future.     IV.  The  disciplinary  elements  are  very  necess.vry.     "  If 
need  be."    As  storms  in  nature  are  necessary  to  purify  the  air,  so  trials  are  neces,- 
sary  to  cleanse  the  atmosphere  around  the  soul.     V.  The  disciplinary  elements  are 
always  beneficent.     "  That  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than 
of  gold  that  perisheth."     Nothing  is  more  important  to  man  than  that  it  should  be 
genuine.     (Homilist.)        The  iises  of  grief : — What !  would  you  choose  that  you 
alone  may  fare  better  than  all  God's  saints  ?  that  God  should  strew  carpets  for  your 
nice  feet  only,  to  walk  into  your  heaven,  and  make  that  way  smooth  for  you  which 
all  patriarchs,  prophets,  evangelists,  confessors,  Christ  Himself,  have  found  rugged  ! 
Away  with  this  self-love,  and  come  down,  you  ambitious  sons  of  Zebedee,  and,  ere 
you  think  of  sitting  near  the  throne,  be  content  to  be  called  unto  the  cross.     Now  is 
your  trial.     Let  your  Saviour  see  how  much  of  His  bitter  portion  you  can  pledge. 
Then  shall  you  see  how  much  of  His  glory  He  can  afford  you.    As  snow  is  of 
itself  cold,  yet  warms  and  refreshes  the  earth,  so  afflictions,  though  in  themselves 
grievous,  yet  keep  the  soul  of  the  Christian  warm  and  make  it  fruitful.     Let  the 
most  afflicted  know  and  remember  that  it  is  better  to  be  preserved  in  brine  than  to 
rot  in  honey.    After  a  forest  fire  has  raged  furiously,  it  has  been  found  that  many 
pine  cones  have  had  their  seeds  released  by  the  heat,  which  ordinarily  wouft  have 
remained  unsown.     The  future  forest  sprang  from  the  ashes  of  the  former.     Some 
Christian  graces,  such  as  humility,  patience,  sympathy,  have  been  evolved  from 
the   sufferings  of  the   saints.     The   furnace  has   been  used  to  fructify.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        Needful  afflictions  .-—Consider  that  all  thy  afflictions  are  needful,  and 
work  for  thy  good.     Nothing  is  intolerable  that  is  necessary.     "  If  need  be,"  whilst 
we  have  diseased  bodies,  physic  is  as  needful  as  food  ;  whilst  we  have  diseased 
souls,  misery  is  as  needful  as  outward  mercies.     The  winter  is  as  necessary  to  bring 
on  harvest  as  the  spring ;  affliction  is  as  necessary  to  bring  on  the  harvest  of  glory 
as  any  condition.     (W.  Swinnock.)         Trials  and  glory  : — Look  upon  a  painted 
post  or  sign  whose  colour  is  laid  in  oil,  how  the  rain  beats  upon  it  in  stormy 
weather,  that  one  would  think  all  the  colour  would  be  washed  off,  yet  how  the 
water  glides  away  and  leaves  it  rather  more  beautiful  than  before.     And  thus  it  is 
with  every  child  of  God,  being  well  garnished  with  graces  of  the  Spirit,  let  the  wind 
of  persecution  blow,  and  the  floods  of  affliction  lift  up  their  voice,  they  shall  never 
deface,  but  rather  add  unto  their  beauty ;  such  is  the  condition  of  grace,  that  it 
shines  the  brighter  for  scouring,  and  is  most  glorious  when  it  is  most  clouded.     {J. 
Spencer.)        The  use  of  trials  : — Suppose  I  made  a  very  wonderful  steam  engine, 
and  put  it  into  a  ship,  to  make  it  into  a  steam  packet.     It  is  all  beautifully  made, 
and  complete,  and  I  want  to  "  try  "  whether  it  is  all  good  ;  whether  the  machinery 
is  right  and  works  well.   Where  should  I  send  it,  into  a  smooth  sea  or  a  rough  sea  ? 
I  should  send  it  "up  the  rapids " — up  the  river — against  the  stream,  to  see  whether 
it  would  go  up,  I  should.     So  God  does  with  you.     He  furnishes  you  with  every- 
thing you  want — then  puts  you  up  "  the  rapids,"  sends  you  on  the  rough  water, 
just  to  "try"  you,  to  see  what  you  are  made  of.     The  trial  of  your  faith. — The 
trial  of  faith  : — I.  The  Christian's  temptations.     1.  They  are  manifold  in  their 
nature.     What  a  world  of  change  and  sorrow  we  live  in  !     2.  They  are  difficult  to 
bear;  for  they  cause  heaviness  or  depression  of  mind  (Heb.  x.  32).    If  you  are  in 
heaviness  bear  it  manfully,  but  do  not  show  it  openly.     Speak  of  your  troubles  to 
your  bosom  friend,  but  do  not  talk  of  them  to  men  of  this  world.    Above  all,  tell 
them  to  Jesus.     3.  They  are  temporary.     The  longest  trials,  and  those  which  leave 
the  deepest  wounds,  are  but  for  a  season.     4.  They  are  necessary.     "  If  need  be." 
Oh,  there  is  "  a  needs  be  "  for  every  stroke,  and  though  we  do  not  now  understand 
why  this  trial  or  the  other  falls  upon  us,  yet  we  shall  know  hereafter.     II.  The  end 
AND  AIM  of  these  temptations  must  be  carefully  observed.     "  They  are  for  the  trial 
of  our  faith."     1.  The  value  of  faith  cannot  be  overestimated.     Gold  perishes,  but 
faith  lives — lives  in  death,  and  far  beyond  it  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13).     2.  But  it  must  be 
tried,  and  sometimes  in  a  very  severe  furnace.     It  is  proved,  tested,  or  verified  by 
trial,  and  the  faith  which  cannot  stand  the  ordeal  is  of  little  or  no  value  (Job 
xxiii.  10).     There  are  many  ways  in  which  faith  is  tried.     (1)  It  is  tried  by  Divine 
commands.     God  gives  His  servants  some  difficult  task  to  perform.  True  faith  will 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   r. 

surmount  all  difficulties.  (2)  Faith  is  often  tried  by  doubts.  (3)  And  faith  is  tried 
by  fire — the  fire  of  discipline,  of  persecution,  of  protracted  bodily  affliction.  3.  The 
ultimate  design  of  the  trial  is  that  it  may  "  be  found,"  nothing  of  it  being  lost, 
"  unto  praise,  and  honour,  and  glory,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."  (Thornley 
Smith.)  The  testing  of  religious  faith  : — I.  The  process  of  testing  a  man's 
FAITH  INVOLVES  MUCH  PAIN.  This  wc  gather — 1.  From  the  use  of  the  word  that 
describes  the  process — "temptation."  2.  From  the  fact  that  those  who  are  being 
tested  are  often  possessed  with  "  heaviness,"  "  grief."  3.  From  the  nature  of  the 
elements  employed  in  the  process.  (1)  No  material  element  causes  more  pain  than 
"fire."  (2)  These  elements  are  "  manifold."  With  those  to  whom  Peter  wrote  it 
was  Gentile  scorn,  slander,  persecution,  martyi'dom.    II.  The  process  of  testing 

A  man's  faith  is  of  SUCH  SUPREME  WORTH  AS  TO    COMPENSATE    FOR   ALL    SUCH    PAIN.       1. 

The  testing  is  only  temporary.  2.  The  worth  of  the  soul  is  tested.  3.  The  purpose 
of  the  process.  (1)  To  try  the  genuineness  of  faith.  (2)  To  remove  alloy.  (3J 
To  train  for  highest  uses.  (4)  To  lead  to  highest  destiny.  {U.  R.  Thomas.) 
Afflictions  a  test  of  faith ;— 1.  To  try  whether  we  have  any  faith.  2.  To  try  whether 
our  faith  be  as  much  as  we  take  it  to  be  or  more ;  this,  affliction  will  discover.  3.  To 
purge  and  purify  that  true  faith  which  we  have,  and  increase  it.  (Joh7i  Rogers.) 
The  trial  of  our  faith  : — The  apostle  here  expresses  his  very  cordial  sympathy  with 
his  Christian  brethren  under  the  cii'cumstances  of  trial  to  which  they  were  exposed. 
"  Ye  greatly  rejoice  in  that  last  time,"  or,  as  the  passage  might  be  rendered, 
"  Wherein  ye  shaU  greatly  rejoice."  "  Now  for  a  season  ye  are  in  heaviness,  but  in 
the  last  time — the  time  of  Christ's  appearing — the  time  of  your  entering  upon  the 
inheritance  that  is  incorruptible,  ye  shall  greatly  rejoice."  But  still  the  prospect  of 
the  great  rejoicing  in  the  last  time  gives  some  measure  of  rejoicing  in  the  present. 
It  is  impossible  for  us  to  hope  with  anything  like  assurance  for  something  that  will 
make  us  very  joyful  without  feeling  in  a  measure  joyful  now.  We  can  in  a  some- 
what cheerful  spirit  bear  the  most  dismal  wintry  weather,  as  we  have  the  assurance 
of  the  spring  and  summer  that  are  to  follow.  But  this  joy  is  mingled  with  sorrow. 
"  Now  for  a  season  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations."  And  this 
brings  us  to  the  subject  of  our  text — namely,  the  trial  of  our  faith.  Now  your  faith 
is  your  confidence  in  God.  Your  faith  is  your  confidence  in  God's  being,  and  doing 
aU  that  in  His  Word  He  is  represented  to  be  and  to  have  done  ;  your  confidence  in 
God  as  infinitely  wise,  and  mighty,  and  righteous,  and  merciful ;  your  confidence  in 
Him  as  having  provided  a  fuU  and  free  redemption  for  mankind  through  the  finished 
work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  your  confidence  in  Him  as  certain  to  fulfil  all  the 
great  promises  that  He  has  given  to  His  people.  That  is  your  faith,  your  confidence 
in  God.  And  concerning  the  trial  of  this  the  apostle  here  speaks.  But,  first,  of  this 
faith  he  says  that  it  is  more  precious  than  gold.  I  think  I  can  appeal  to  every 
Christian  here,  and  say,  "  Now,  you  would  be  sorry  to  lose  your  property,  no 
doubt  ?  "  Quite  natural.  But  still,  do  not  you  as  Christians  feel  that  we  would 
rather  be  beggared  to-day  than  lose  this  precious  faith  of  which  the  Apostle  Peter 
speaks  ?  Well,  this  faith,  he  tells  us,  is  to  be  tried.  That  is  to  say,  our  faith  is 
subjected  to  proof — put  to  the  test.  If  we  profess  to  be  Christians,  it  is  very  impor- 
tant that  the  world  and  the  Church  and  ourselves  should  have  some  proof  of  our 
Christianity  that  this  profession  of  ours  is  a  right,  honest  thing,  and  neither  a  piece 
of  hypocrisy  nor  a  piece  of  self-delusion.  And  so  for  our  own  sakes  first  of  all,  but 
also  for  the  sake  of  the  Church,  which  we  have  no  right  to  deceive,  and  for  the  sake 
of  the  world,  which  also  has  a  claim  to  know  the  genuineness  of  our  religious  pro- 
fession— it  is  necessary  that  our  faith  should  be  proved.  Now,  unfortunately,  we 
have  in  our  religious  phraseology  nearly  lost  sight  of  this  very  common-sense 
meaning  of  the  word  "  trial."  When  you  talk  about  the  trial  of  a  steamship  or  the 
trial  of  a  hundred-ton  gun,  well,  we  understand  that  it  is  putting  these  things  to  a 
proof.  But  in  our  religious  phraseology,  a  trial,  forsooth,  is  simply  a  calamity — 
some  terrible  thing.  And  that  is  almost  the  only  light  in  which  we  regard  it,  with 
scarcely  any  recognition  of  God's  design,  and  of  His  design  being  the  proof  of 
character.  But  that  is  His  design.  Now  here  is  an  alleviation  at  once,  and  a  very 
great  alleviation  of  the  trials  that  you  and  I  may  have  to  pass  through.  Here  is  a 
man  who  comes  forward  and  professes  to  be  a  seaman.  Well,  it  is  a  very  reasonable 
thing  that  he  should  be  required  to  prove  his  seamanship  by  having,  sometimes  at 
any  rate,  to  navigate  his  vessel  amid  the  perils  of  a  storm.  And  here  is  another  who 
professes  to  be  a  soldier.  Well,  no  injustice  is  done,  but  very  much  the  contrary,  if 
this  man  be  required  to  prove  his  courage  and  skill  by  being  sent,  occasionally  at 
any  rate,  upon  some  exceedingly  hazardous  military  duty.    And  here  is  one  who 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  29 

professes  to  be  a  servant  of  God,  and  do  not  let  him  be  surprised  if  God,  like  any- 
other  master,  shall  subject  him  to  proof,  and  ascertain,  by  practical  experiment, 
what  he  is  worth  and  what  he  can  do,  and  whether  he  really  be  what  by  his  profes- 
sion he  ought  to  be.     So  our  faith  is  tried.     A  reasonable  and  perfectly  right  thing 
that  tried  it  ought  to  be,  as  I  said  just  now,  for  our  own  sake,  if  for  the  sake  of  no- 
body else.     And,  as  the  apostle  reminds  us  here,  the  trial  of  our  faith  is  conducted 
through  manifold  temptations.     Let  us  take  the  word  "  trials,"  not  "temptations," 
for  God  does  not  tempt  any  man  in  this  evil  sense  of  the  word  "  temptation."     We 
are  tried  through  manifold  trials.     That  is  to  say,  our  faith  is  subjected  to  more 
proofs  than  one ;  and  so  it  ought  to  be.     I  suppose  that  when  they  try  a  ship  they 
make  her  go  through  many  manoeuvres ;  and  when  they  try  a  horse  there  is  more 
than  one  sort  of  test  to  which  the  creature  is  put.     And  when  a  student  goes  in  for 
examination,  success  in  which  is  to  be  crowned  with  some  distinguished  honour,  he 
is  subjected  to  a  considerable  number  of  trials  in  order  that  the  height  and  breadth 
and  length  and  depth  of  the  man's  mind,  if  there  be  any  height  and  length  and 
depth  and  breadth  in  it,  may  be  ascertained.     And  he  is  subjected  to  various  mani- 
fold trials,  because  the  very  brilliant  capacity  in  one  direction  may,  unfortunately, 
be  accompanied  by  miserable  incapacity  in  another  direction,  and  so  the  man  is 
subjected  to  manifold  trials.     And  faith,  likevnse,  is  subjected  to  more  trials  than 
one.     We  find  that  poverty  tries  our  honesty.    A  sad  reverse  of  circumstances,  such 
as  is  very  frequently  witnessed,  does  certainly  try  the  integrity  of  a  man's  principles 
as  a  man  of  business.   And  then  I  need  not  say  that  unkindness,  injustice,  is  a  great 
trial  of  our  charity  ;  and  persecution  would  be  a  severe  trial  of  our  courage.     Inso- 
lence is  a  trial  of  our  meekness.     And  there  are  trials  of  a  peculiar  character,  not 
very  peculiar  either,  for  they  are  not  uncommon.    I  mean  the  trials  of  our  faith  that 
are  often  experienced  by  men  who  really  find  it  difficult  to  retain  their  confidence  in 
the  revelation  of  God's  will  in  His  Word.     And  you  must  not  at  all  suppose  that 
because  a  man  never  knew  what  bad  health  is,  and  never  knew  anything  of  poverty, 
and  never  had  the  slightest  reason  to  be  anxious  about  a  single  secular  concern,  that 
that  man's  faith  is  going  untried.     It  may  be  being  tried  a  great  deal  more  than 
yours  in  the  midst  of  sickness  and  of  poverty.     There  may  be  a  terrible  war  going 
on  within  that  man's  mind  and  heart  as  he  is  endeavouring,  with  all  earnestness, 
but  often  finds  himself  failing,  endeavouring  to  retain  his  confidence  in  the  great 
principles  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.     Thus  our  faith  is  tried,  and  severe  is  the 
trial  sometimes,  as  the  apostle  indicates  when  he  says,  "Though  it  be  tried  with 
fire."     It  has  been  in  the  most  terribly  literal  sense  tried  with  fire,  for,  as  you  know, 
for  a  long  time  burning  to  death  was  the  method  commonly  resorted  to  in  the  perse- 
cution of  those  who  stood  faithful  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ.     And  so  the  faith 
of  men  like  John  Huss,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  and  Bishop  Latimer,  and  thousands 
upon  thousands  more  in  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  was  in  the  most  literal  and 
severe  sense  tried  with  fire.     But,  of  course,  we  can  understand  this  expression 
"tried  with  fire,"  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  as  indicative  of  any  peculiarly  severe  trial 
to  which  faith  may  be  exposed,  such  as  a  long  and  wearisome  and  painful  iUness. 
And  now  to  notice  some  of  the  alleviations  that  we  have  graciously  granted  to  us  in 
these  trials  of  our  faith.     Do  not  let  us  give  way  to  a  hopeless  sorrow  over  the 
matter,  for  God  has  mingled  very  much  comfort  with  all  this  distress.     In  the 
first  place,  as  the  apostle  reminds  us,  it  is  only  for  a  season,  or,  as  we  might  render 
his  words,  "  Now  for  a  little  while  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptation" 
— for  a  little  while.     It  wiU  not  be  long.     It  cannot  be  long.     And  then,  again,  there 
is  a  necessity  for  it.     "  If  need  be,"  but  not  if  need  not  be.     Only  "  if  need  be,"  and 
only  in  proportion  as  the  need  really  is.     And  we  really  must  allow  God  to  be  the 
judge  and  the  only  judge  of  this  need.     We  leave  it,  of  course,  to  the  goldsmith  to 
determine  how  he  is  to  deal  with  the  gold  that  he  is  to  make  up  into  an  article  of 
use  or  adornment ;  and  we  leave  it  to  the  lapidary  to  decide  how  to  cut  and  to  polish 
the  jewels  which  he  intends  to  set  in  this  fashion  or  in  that.    It  would  be  an  imper- 
tinent thing  for  persons  not  skilled  in  such  work  even  to  venture  an  opinion,  and  an 
impertinent  thing  to  venture  opinions  about  the  manner  in  which  God  Almighty 
should  deal  with  and  make  up  the  gold  and  the  gems  whereof  He  is  preparing  a 
glorious  crown  for  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.     No,  "  if  need  be,"  and  only 
if  need  be.     The  sculptor,  you  know,  would  not  on  any  account  chip  off  a  block  of 
marble  one  atom  more  than  in  his  judgment  is  necessary  to  the  realisation  of  his 
idea  in  the  statue.    And  no  surgeon  or  physician  of  ordinary  humanity  will  give  his 
patient  any  more  pain  than  is  unavoidable  in  order  to  the  healing  of  the  wound  or 
the  curing  of  the  disease.    And  we,  as  the  children  of  God,  are  in  very  wise  hands, 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

in  very  tender  hands,  in  very  safe  hands.     And  then  there  is  a  great  object  secured 
by  these  trials,  that  this  faith  thus  tried  is  found  to  be  unto  praise  and  honour  and 
glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.     Unto  whose  praise  and  honour  and  glory  ? 
Not  unto  ours — at  least,  not  unto  ours  in  the  first  place,  but  unto  our  Lord's.     As 
Archbishop  Leighton  says,  "  God  delights  to  bring  out  His  strongest  champions,  that 
they  might  fight  great  battles  for  Him."    And  although,  certainly,  it  is  sad  to  think 
of  a  good  man  being  cast  into  prison,  and  sadder  still  to  think  of  his  being  committed 
to  the  flame,  yet  I  can  imagine  that  God,  not  although  He  loves  His  people,  but  just 
because  He  loves  them,  rejoices  over  such  a  scene  as  that.     I  can  imagine  God 
rejoicing  to  see  how  His  grace  strengthens  a  poor,  feeble,  mortal  man,  and  makes 
him  firm  and  enduring  unto  the  end.   And  at  the  last  it  will  be  found  that  this  trial 
of  their  faith  was  ever  unto  the  praise  and  honour  and  glory  of  their  Lord,  and  to 
their  own  praise  and  honour  and  glory  likewise.   But,  again,  there  is  this  alleviation 
in  the  trial  of  faith  suggested  in  the  words,  "  Whom  having  not  seen  ye  love ;  in 
whom,  though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing  " — the  love  that  we  bear  to  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  wiU  greatly  help  us  in  the  trial  of  our  faith.     You  know  that  for 
a  person  whom  you  love  you  will  do  and  suffer  things  that  you  would  never  think 
of  doing  or  suffering  for  a  person  towards  whom  you  felt  no  particular  regard. 
How  much  a  man  will  do,  and  how  much  he  will  suffer  for  his  wife  and  for  his 
children !     And  so,  in  proportion   to  the  love  we  bear  to  Jesus  Christ  will  be  the 
lightness  of  the  infliction  involved  in  any  trials  to  which  our  faith  is  subjected. 
Once  more,  there  is  this  alleviation,  that  "  believing  in  Christ  we  rejoice  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  receiving  the  end  of  our  faith,  even  the  salvation  of 
our  souls."    But  some  will  say,  "  Have  not  we  already  received  the  salvation  of  our 
souls  ?  "     Now  salvation  is  a  great  compound  blessing,  if  I  may  so  speak,  and  some 
of  it  we  have  received  already,  and  some  of  it  is  in  reserve.     In  fact,  salvation  is  a 
blessing,  of  which  a  Christian  is  receiving  something  every  day.     I  had  so  much 
salvation  yesterday ;  I  have  got  more  to-day,  and  I  shall  have  more  to-morrow,  if  I 
am  Uving  the  Christian  life,  that  is  to  say.     Now,  in  so  far  as  salvation  is  the  for- 
giveness of  sins,  salvation  is  ours  now.     (H.  S.  Brown.)        Trials  ; — Trials  are 
of  many  kinds.     Some  are  very  slight ;  but  often  a  little  thing  is  more  severely  felt 
than  one  that  is  greater.     There  are  all  the  little  annoyances  which  happen  every 
hour ;  things  go  contrary  to  our  wishes ;  we  have  to  give  up  our  wills  ;  we  are  dis- 
appointed of  our  hopes.     There  are  pains  of  body  and  sickness  ;  there  is  the  sick- 
ness of  our  dear  friends.    Now  trial  is  natural  to  us :  it  belongs  to  us  as  children  of 
Adam.    But  to  Christians  trials  come  in  a  somewhat  different  way.     They  belong 
to  us  as  members  of  Christ.     I.  The  first  thing  to  be  thought  when  we  have  any 
trial,  is  that  it  comes  from  God.     It  is  not  a  proof  of  any  special  wickedness  in  the 
person  to  whom  it  is  sent,  nor  of  God's  being  specially  angry  with  that  person. 
Quite  the  contrary.     God  feels  towards  each  of  you  the  very  same  tender  fatherly 
love  that  you  feel  to  your  dear  boy  ;  and  so  He  corrects  you  as  you  correct  that  boy. 
And  just  as  you  take  the  trouble  to  prune  and  attend  to  the  fruit-tree  which  bears 
well,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  bear  still  better,  so  God  sends  trouble  to  them  who  are 
doing  good,  in  the  hope  that  they  will  do  still  better.     In  all  troubles,  then,  look  to 
God — receive  them  from  Him  as  the  best  things  which  your  loving  Father  can  send 
you.     II.  Think,  next,  WHAT  are  they  sent  foe?     They  are  punishments  for  sins, 
that  is  true  ;  but  see  the  wonderful  goodness  of  God  :  these  punishments  His  love 
turns  into  mercies  and  blessings.     What  does  He  send  them  for  ?     1.  To  remind  us 
of  our  sins  ;  to  make  us  remember  our  sins,  that  through  His  mercy  we  may  repent 
of  them.     2.  To  draw  our  thoughts  towards  Himself.     "  In  their  affliction  they  will 
seek  Me  early."     3.  They  are  called  trials^ — that  means  things  which  try.     What  do 
they  try  ?     They  try  us,  whether  we  can  trust  God  when  matters  seem  to  be  going 
wrong.     4.  To  make  us  patient.     Patience  is  that  great  gift  which  most  especially 
helps  to  make  us  perfect  Christians.     "  Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work,  that  you 
may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing."     When  we  quietly  give  up  our  way  to 
others — when  we  are  disappointed  and  do  not  fret — when  we  ourselves  have  sliarp 
pains  to  bear  and  we  do  not  repine — then  we  are  learning  to  become  more  perfect 
Christians — then  we  are  becoming  holier — we  are  really  growing  into  what  God 
intends  us  to  be.     III.  They  lead  trs  on  to  the  crown.     To  conclude.     1.  Try  to 
thijik  in  this  way  of  all  troubles  whatsoever,  of  all  the  little  vexations  of  life,  as  well 
as  of  the  heavier  afflictions  which  come  more  seldom.   2.  Look  on  continually  to  the 
end — the  end  of  all  things — heaven  and  eternity !     This  will  encourage  you  to  bear 
what  now  seems  so  painful.   The  hope  of  what  is  coming  will  cheer  you  up.   3.  And 
especially  look  continually  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  example  He  has  set  us.    Look 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  31 

to  Him  continually,  "  lest  you  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds."  {W.  H.  Ridley, 
M.A.)  Trials  : — These  words  are  spoken  to  Christians,  to  persons  called  by  the 
apostle  "  elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God,"  and  "  begotten  to  an  inheri- 
tance incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  How  great  a  privilege 
to  be  chosen  to  eternal  life !  Well  may  the  Christian  be  delighted  with  such  thoughts, 
"  wherein,"  says  St.  Peter,  "  ye  rejoice."  But  before  the  enjoyment  of  these  things 
there  are  many  troubles  to  be  encountered  ;  we  may  be  glad,  yet  may  we  perchance, 
when  we  look  at  intervening  difficulties,  "  be  in  heaviness."  It  is  well  known  that 
the  most  devout  Christians  are  sometimes  "  in  heaviness."  Do  not  think  it  any 
strange  thing  for  the  Christian  man  to  be  "  in  heaviness,"  even  as  to  his  salvation. 
The  Lord  often  lays  the  severest  trial,  that  is,  this  feeling  of  desertion,  on  the  most 
perfect,  as  you  would  place  the  boldest  soldier  in  the  front  of  the  battle.  Hence, 
then,  assurance  is  not  necessary  ;  the  spiritual  atmosphere  is  variable.  1.  Poverty 
is  a  great  temptation — a  temptation  which  throws  many  "into  heaviness."  2.  But 
again,  the  temptations  of  the  rich  lie  in  another  direction.  3.  The  heaviness  which 
sometimes  arises  from  the  oppression  and  power  of  sin.  4.  And  some  persons  are 
in  heaviness — they  themselves  know  not  why.  None  are  more  to  be  sorrowed  with. 
There  seems  to  be  no  known  cause — and  yet  they  are  in  lowness  of  spirits,  and 
weary  of  the  world.  (J.  M.  Chanter,  M.A.)  Trial  as  fire  : — Trial  is  here  com- 
pared to  fire ;  that  subtle  element  which  is  capable  of  inflicting  such  exquisite  tor- 
ture on  our  seared  flesh ;  which  cannot  endure  the  least  taint  or  remnant  of  im- 
purity, but  wraps  its  arms  around  objects  committed  to  it  with  eager  intensity  to  set 
them  free  and  make  them  pure ;  which  is  careless  of  agony,  if  only  its  passionate 
yearning  may  be  satisfied ;  which  lays  hold  of  things  more  material  than  itself, 
loosening  their  texture,  snapping  their  fetters,  and  bearing  them  upwards  in  its 
heaven-leaping  energy.  What  better  emblem  could  there  be  for  God,  and  for  those 
trials  which  He  permits  or  sends,  and  in  the  heart  of  which  He  is  to  be  found  ? 
1.  But  this  fire  is  a  refiner's  fire  (Mai.  iii.  3).  (1)  It  is  He  who  permits  the  trial. 
The  evil  thing  may  originate  in  the  malignity  of  a  Judas,  but  by  the  time  it 
reaches  us  it  has  become  the  cup  which  our  Father  has  given  us  to  drink.  The 
waster  may  purpose  his  own  lawless  and  destructive  work,  but  he  cannot  go  an  inch 
beyond  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God.  The  very  devil  must 
ask  permission  ere  he  touches  a  hair  of  the  patriarch's  head.  The  point  up  to 
which  we  may  be  tested  is  fixed  by  consummate  wisdom.  The  weapon  may  hurt 
and  the  fire  sting,  but  they  are  in  the  hands  which  redeemed  us.  (2)  It  is  He  who 
superintends  the  trial.  No  earthly  friend  may  be  near,  but  in  every  furnace  there  is 
One  like  the  Son  of  Man.  (3)  It  is  He  who  watches  the  progress  of  the  trial.  No 
mother  bending  over  her  suffering  child  is  more  solicitous  than  He  is.  Suiting  the 
trial  to  your  strength.  2.  Trial  is  only  for  a  season.  "  Now  for  a  season  ye  are 
in  heaviness."  The  great  Husbandman  is  not  always  threshing.  The  showers 
soon  pass.  Our  light  affliction  is  but  for  a  moment.  3.  Trial  is  for  a  purpose.  "  If 
needs  be."  There  is  utility  in  every  trial.  It  is  intended  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  our 
hearts,  to  humble  and  prove  us,  to  winnow  us  as  corn  is  shaken  in  a  sieve,  to 
detach  us  from  the  earthly  and  visible,  to  create  in  us  an  eager  desire  for  the 
realities  which  can  alone  quench  our  cravings  and  endure  for  ever.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  theology  of  sufferings : — I.  Temptations  or  trials  reveal  faith.  1.  On  the 
one  hand,  they  show  us  the  evil  that  is  in  us.  More  evil  dwells  in  the  heart  than 
we  have  ever  realised.  "  I  never  before  could  believe,"  exclaims  the  afflicted  man, 
"that  so  many  hard  thoughts  of  God  were  nestUng  in  my  brain,  and  so  many 
rebellious  passions  lodging  in  my  heart."  God  sends  trouble  to  bring  out  and 
make  palpable  that  which  is  latent.  2.  Not  only  so,  but  afflictions  further  serve  to 
evoke  our  good,  to  lead  forth  into  visibility  the  faith,  the  hope,  and  the  charity  God 
in  His  loving-kindness  has  infused  into  our  souls.  Certain  things  will  not  disclose 
what  is  in  them  save  under  pressure.  Aromatic  herbs  will  not  diffuse  their  aroma 
till  they  are  bruised.  II.  Temptations  oe  trials  strengthen  faith.  1.  Bitters 
are  the  best  tonic  for  the  spiritual  man  as  for  the  physical.  All  who  are  a  little 
acquainted  with  gardening  operations  know  how  careful  the  gardener  is  to  lop  off 
all  redundant  growths  which  genial  weather  calls  forth,  growths  which  he  signifi- 
cantly calls  "  suckers,"  because  they  drain  away  the  sap  which  would  otherwise  go 
to  form  fruit.  On  just  the  same  principle  the  Divine  Husbandman  ti'eats  the 
"  Trees  of  Eighteousness  "  growing  in  His  vineyard — He  mercilessly  lops  off  the 
worldly  "  suckers  "  which  steal  away  the  juice,  the  fatness,  of  your  religion,  and 
thereby  drives  the  whole  energy  of  your  spirit  Ijack  upon  your  faith.  2.  Sorrows 
further  invigorate  faith,  because  they  call  it  into  frequent,  yea,  constant  exercise. 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

And  it  is  an  universally  admitted  truth  that  all  our  natural  faculties  and  spiritual 
graces  grow  in  exercise.  To  be  a  robust  Christian  you  must  battle  with  difficulties. 
III.  Temptations  or  trials  purify  faith.  1.  They  release  it  from  the  impurities 
which  attach  to  it.  Eeligion  in  this  world  lives  among  pots,  and,  as  might  be 
expected,  it  does  not  quite  escape  "  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through 
lust."  And  God  in  His  wisdom  judges  it  expedient  to  cast  it  into  the  sea  ;  but,  as 
Leighton  quaintly  remarks,  He  does  it  "  not  to  drown  it,  but  to  wash  it."  But  this 
process  of  separation  is  not  an  easy  one,  pleasant  to  flesh  and  blood ;  rather  it 
requires  the  penetrating  action  of  the  flame.  2.  Adversity,  moreover,  throws  faith 
more  upon  its  own  proper  resources,  making  it  draw  its  aliment  and  inspiration 
more  directly  from  God  as  revealed  in  His  Book.  IV.  Temptations  or  trials 
beautify  faith.  1.  Trials  evolve  the  latent  beauty  of  faith.  Faith  is  intrinsically 
a  beautiful  grace,  but  to  disclose  its  beauty  it  must  often  undergo  the  severe  opera- 
tions of  chisel  and  hammer.  2.  But  it  is  also  true  that  sorrows  impart  beauty  to 
faith,  a  kind  of  weird-like  fascination  that  makes  it,  in  its  struggle  with  obstacles, 
a  "  spectacle  worthy  of  the  gods."  God  throws  the  Christian  into  "  many-coloured  " 
afflictions  that  he  may  be  thereby  adorned  and  made  meet  to  enter  the  society  of 
heaven.  He  makes  His  Church  a  coat  of  many  colours  to  show  His  love  to  her  and 
appreciation  of  her.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  trial  of  faith  : — I.  The  value  of 
faith.  1.  Even  considered  intellectually,  as  a  mere  belief  of  revealed  truth,  faith 
is  of  the  highest  possible  value,  as  the  great  instrument  by  which  we  obtain  religious 
knowledge  and  wisdom.  2.  But  its  value — as  it  is  not  merely  an  intellectual 
exercise,  but  an  act  of  trust,  and  thus  a  work  of  the  heart — is  shown  by  this,  that 
it  connects  us  immediately  and  personally  with  the  merits  of  the  great  Atonement. 
3.  The  value  of  faith  is  seen  in  this,  that  it  not  only  connects  man,  as  guilty,  with 
the  meritorious  atonement  of  the  Saviour,  but  man,  as  weak  and  helpless,  with  the 
omnipotence  of  Divine  grace.  4.  Another  proof  of  the  value  of  faith  is  found  in 
that  wonderful  property  which  the  Apostle  Paul  assigns  to  it,  and  which,  indeed,  we 
find  by  actual  experience  that  it  possesses — the  property  of  fixing  its  eye  on 
invisible  and  eternal  realities,  and  keeping  the  soul  continually  under  their 
influence.  II.  The  trial  of  faith.  1.  In  its  lower  sense — merely  considered  as 
belief  of  truth — faith  will  be  tried.  This  may  occur  in  many  circumstances,  and 
especially  from  infidel  sophistry.  2.  But  our  faith  will  not  only  be  tried  by 
sophistry ;  it  will  be  tried  also  by  what  may  be  termed  practical  unbelief.  This  is 
especially  the  case  in  all  temptations  to  sin.  3.  Faith,  in  that  higher  sense  in 
which  the  word  is  used — as  implying  a  simple  trust  in  the  atonement  of  the 
Saviour — will  be  tried  by  our  proneness  to  self-dependence.  4.  Faith  is  also  tried 
by  afflictions  and  sorrows.  In  sorrows  our  faith  has  to  repose  entirely  on  the  great 
doctrine  that  aU  that  concerns  us  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  that  here  there  is  no 
chance,  no  oversight,  no  delegation  of  the  Divine  power  to  the  creature.  III.  The 
final  honours  of  faith.  It  has,  indeed,  its  honours  now,  far  greater  than  any  of 
which  unbelief  can  boast.  Is  it  not  that  which  brings  man  to  God  for  the  blessings 
of  reconciliation  and  adoption  ?  Is  it  not  that  which  brings  with  it  the  mighty 
influence  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which  works  in  man  the  death  unto  sin  and  the  new 
life  unto  righteousness  ?  Is  it  not  that  which  is  the  source  of  our  spiritual 
victories,  which  gives  us  strength  to  do  and  strength  to  suffer?  Is  it  not  that 
which  enables  us  to  resist  the  temptations  with  which  the  present  world  continually 
surrounds  us  ?  And  is  it  not  that  which  extracts  the  sting  of  death  ?  Such  are 
the  honours  of  faith  here  on  earth.  Where  shall  we  look  for  those  of  formality 
and  unbelief  ?  But  the  apostle  refers  to  its  future  honours,  to  the  praise  and  glory 
in  which  our  faith  shall  issue  at  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Then 
shall  the  faith  which  has  received  the  mysteries  of  God  be  honoured.  (R.  ]Vat.<i07i.) 
The  trial  of  faith : — I.  Faith  is  much  more  precious  than  gold.  1.  Gold  is  of 
an  earthly,  but  faith  of  a  heavenly  origin.  2.  Faith  has  its  object,  as  well  as  its 
origin,  in  God  ;  whereas  gold,  unless  placed  in  the  hands  of  him  who  has  the  new 
nature,  tends  to  the  place  whence  it  came,  and  is  often  also  in  the  child  of  God  the 
means  of  dragging  him  too  much  to  earth.  3.  Faith  always  enriches  the  possessor, 
but  gold  often  impoverishes.  II.  This  faith  must  re  tried,  and  that  with  fire. 
1.  The  world  is  a  great  trial  to  faith.  2.  Satan  is  always  attempting  to  try  and  to 
overstep  the  faith  of  God's  people.  III.  What  is  the  great  end  and  purpose 
FOR  WHICH  faith  IS  SO  TRIED?  It  is  that  it  may  be  proved  to  be  faith,  just  as 
the  gold  is  tried  in  the  fire.  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  trial  of  your  faith  : — I. 
Your  faith  will  be  tried  surely.  1.  Faith,  in  the  very  nature  of  it,  implies  a 
degree  of  trial.     God  never  gave  us  faith  to  play  with.     It  is  a  sword,  but  it  was 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  33 

not  made  for  presentation  on  a  gala  day,  nor  to  be  worn  on  state  occasions  only, 
nor  to  be  exhibited  on  a  parade  ground.  It  is  a  sword,  and  he  that  has  it  girt  about 
him  may  expect,  between  here  and  heaven,  that  he  shall  know  what  battle  means. 
Faith  is  a  sound  sea-going  vessel,  and  was  not  meant  to  lie  in  dock  and  perish  of 
dry  rot.  To  whom  God  has  given  faith,  it  is  as  though  one  gave  a  lantern  to  his 
friend  because  he  expected  it  to  be  dark  on  his  way  home.  The  very  gift  of  faith 
is  a  hint  to  you  that  you  will  want  it,  and  that,  at  all  points  and  in  every  place, 
you  will  really  need  it.  2.  Trial  is  the  very  element  of  faith.  Faith  is  a  salamander 
that  lives  in  the  fire,  a  star  which  moves  in  a  lofty  sphere,  a  diamond  which  bores  its 
way  through  the  rock.  Faith  without  trial  is  like  a  diamond  uncut,  the  brilliance 
of  which  has  never  been  seen.  Untried  faith  is  such  little  faith  that  some  have 
thought  it  no  faith  at  all.  What  a  fish  would  be  without  water  or  a  bird  without 
air,  that  would  be  faith  without  trial.  8.  It  is  the  honour  of  faith  to  be  tried.  He 
that  has  tested  God,  and  whom  God  has  tested,  is  the  man  that  shall  have  it  said 
of  him,  "Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  4.  The  trial  of  your  faith 
is  sent  to  prove  its  sincerity.  5.  It  must  also  be  tested  to  prove  its  strength.  6. 
The  trial  of  our  faith  is  necessary  to  remove  its  dross.  "  Why,  a  week  ago,"  says 
one,  "  I  used  to  sing,  and  think  that  I  had  the  full  assurance  of  faith  ;  and  now  I 
can  scarcely  teU  whether  I  am  one  of  God's  people  or  not."  Now  you  know  how 
much  faith  you  really  possess.  You  can  now  tell  how  much  was  solid  and  how 
much  was  sham ;  for  had  that  which  has  failed  you  been  real  faith,  it  would  not 
have  been  consumed  by  any  trial  through  which  it  has  passed.  You  have  lost  the 
froth  from  the  top  of  the  cup,  but  all  that  was  really  worth  having  is  stiU  there. 
II.  Your  faith  will  be  tried  variously.  1.  There  are  some  whose  faith  is  tried 
each  day  in  their  communion  with  God.  That  is,  God  in  Christ,  who  is  our  God, 
is  a  consuming  fire ;  and  when  His  people  live  in  Him,  the  very  presence  of  God 
consumes  in  them  their  love  of  sin  and  all  their  pretentious  graces  and  fictitious 
attainments,  so  that  the  false  disappears  and  only  the  true  survives.  The  presence 
of  perfect  holiness  is  killing  to  empty  boastings  and  hollow  pretences.  2.  God 
frequently  tries  us  by  the  blessings  which  He  sends  us.  (1)  Eiches.  (2)  Praise. 
3.  Another  trial  of  faith  is  exceedingly  common  and  perilous  nowadays,  and  that 
is  heretical  doctrine  and  false  teaching.  4.  The  trial  of  our  faith  usually  comes  in 
the  form  of  affliction.  I  remember  Mr.  Rutherford,  writing  to  a  lady  who  had  lost 
five  children  and  her  husband,  says  to  her,  "  Oh,  how  Christ  must  love  you !  He 
would  take  every  bit  of  your  heart  to  Himself.  He  would  not  permit  you  to  reserve 
any  of  your  soul  for  any  earthly  thing."  Can  we  stand  that  test?  Can  we  let  all 
go  for  His  sake  ?  Do  you  answer  that  you  can  ?  Time  will  show.  HI.  Your  faith 
WILL  BE  TRIED  INDIVIDUALLY.  It  is  an  interesting  subject,  is  it  not,  the  trial  of 
faith  ?  It  is  not  quite  so  pleasant  to  study  alone  the  trial  of  \jour  faith.  It  is 
stern  work  when  it  comes  to  be  your  trial,  and  the  trial  of  your  faith.  Do  not  ask 
for  trials.  Children  must  not  ask  to  be  whipped,  nor  saints  pray  to  be  tested.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  glorified  by  the  trial  of  His  people's  faith.  He  has  to 
be  glorified  by  the  trial  of  your  faith.  IV.  Your  faith  will  be  tried  seaechingly. 
The  blows  of  the  flail  of  tribulation  are  not  given  in  sport,  but  in  awful  earnest. 
The  Lord  tries  the  very  life  of  our  faith — not  its  beauty  and  its  strength  alone,  but 
its  very  existence.  The  iron  enters  into  the  soul ;  the  man's  real  self  is  made  to 
endure  the  trial.  V.  Your  faith  will  be  tried  for  an  abundantly  useful  pur- 
pose. 1.  The  trial  of  your  faith  will  increase,  develop,  deepen,  and  strengthen  it. 
We  may  wisely  rejoice  in  tribulation,  because  it  worketh  patience,  and  patience 
experience,  and  experience  hope  ;  and  by  that  way  we  are  exceedingly  enriched,  and 
our  faith  grows  strong.  2.  The  trial  of  our  faith  is  useful,  because  it  leads  to  a 
discovery  of  our  faith  to  ourselves.  I  notice  an  old  Puritan  using  this  illustration. 
He  says,  you  shall  go  into  a  wood  when  you  please,  but  if  you  are  very  quiet,  you 
will  not  know  whether  there  is  a  partridge,  or  a  pheasant,  or  a  rabbit  in  it ;  but 
when  you  begin  to  move  about  or  make  a  noise,  you  very  soon  see  the  living 
creatures.  They  rise  or  they  run.  So,  when  affliction  comes  into  the  soul,  and 
makes  a  disturbance  and  breaks  our  peace,  up  rise  our  graces.  Faith  comes  out  of 
its  hiding,  and  love  leaps  from  its  secret  place.  3.  Besides,  when  faith  is  tried,  it 
brings  God  glory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  trial  of  faith  precious  : — It  is  not 
faith,  but  the  trial  of  faith,  that  is  here  pronounced  to  be  precious.  Precisely 
because  faith  is  the  link  by  which  the  saved  are  bound  to  the  Saviour,  it  is  of 
unspeakable  importance  to  have  faith  tested  in  time  and  proved  to  be  true.  Here 
the  fire  and  the  crucible  are  the  most  valuable  of  all  things  for  the  investor.  These 
are  his  safeguards.     In  like  manner,  it  is  dangerous  to  venture  our  eternity  on  a 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

fair  weather  profession  ;  an  assay  in  some  form  is  essential  to  determine  whether 
there  is  life  or  only  a  name  that  you  live.  The  trial  of  faith  by  affliction  is  com- 
pared to  the  testing  and  purifying  of  gold  by  fire.  The  greatest  results  will  be  seen 
within  the  veil.  When  Christ  comes  the  second  time  to  reign,  the  effect  of  these 
trials  will  appear  to  his  praise.  {W.Arnot.)  The  trial  of  faith  : — This  trial  is 
made  upon  faith  principally,  rather  than  any  other  grace,  because  the  trial  of  that 
is,  in  effect,  the  trial  of  all  that  is  good  in  us.  {M.  Henry.)  Trials  are  tests  : — 
The  surest  way  to  know  our  gold  is  to  look  upon  it  and  examine  it  in  God's  furnace, 
whei-e  He  tries  it  for  that  end,  that  we  may  see  what  it  is.  If  we  have  a  mind  to 
know  whether  a  building  stands  strong  or  no,  we  must  look  upon  it  when  the  wind 
blows.  If  we  would  know  whether  that  which  appears  in  the  form  of  wheat  has 
the  real  substance  of  wheat  or  be  only  chaff,  we  must  observe  it  when  it  is 
winnowed.  If  we  would  know  whether  a  staff  be  strong  or  a  rotten,  broken  reed, 
we  must  observe  it  when  it  is  leaned  on  and  weight  is  borne  upon  it.  If  we  would 
weigh  ourselves  justly,  we  must  weigh  ourselves  in  God's  scales  that  He  makes  use 
of  to  weigh  us.  [Jonathan  Edivards.)  Burnt  in  : — Yonder  is  a  porcelain  vase 
just  fashioned  ;  it  is  now  in  the  decorator's  hands,  who  paints  on  it  various  pretty 
and  delicate  figures — here  and  there  he  paints  a  passage  of  Scripture.  Presently 
he  passes  it  into  the  hands  of  another  who  glazes  it,  who  in  his  turn  passes  it  on 
to  a  third.  But  what  is  the  third  doing  ?  Why,  he  is  putting  the  vase  into 
a  hot  oven.  "  Sir,"  we  exclaim,  "you  will  spoil  your  ware,  and  your  labour  will 
be  in  vain."  Smiling  at  our  alarm,  he  placidly  replies,  "  Gentlemen,  I  will 
take  care  that  the  vase  suffers  no  injury.  I  put  it  into  the  oven  to  enhance 
its  value,  for  I  mean  thus  to  burn  in  what  has  been  painted  on  it,  which  would 
otherwise  wash  off.  There — it  is  finished  now,"  he  adds,  "  and  you  may  wash 
that  vase  for  twelve  months  without  making  any  impression  on  the  colours.  They 
are  burnt  in,  sirs,  burnt  in."  Similarly  God  burns  in  verses  of  the  Bible 
into  our  experience.  Having  infused  His  grace  into  us  in  regeneration,  and 
made  wholesome  impressions  on  the  mind  through  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  He 
consigns  us  to  the  furnace  of  affiiction  that  they  may  be  burnt  into  the  very  core 
of  our  being,  so  burnt  that  nothing  will  ever  again  erase  them.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Much  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth. — Tried  faith  more  precious  than 
gold  : — 1.  Gold  comes  out  of  the  earth  ;  faith  from  heaven,  whence  every  good  and 
perfect  gift  is.  2.  Faith  is  more  rare,  tenned  therefore  the  faith  of  God's  elect, 
whereas  most,  even  of  the  wicked,  are  not  without  gold.  3.  Faith  cannot  be  pur- 
chased with  all  the  gold  in  the  world.  4.  It  is  hardly  gotten  and  hardly  kept,  and 
has  many  and  strong  enemies — our  own  nature,  the  world  and  the  devil  are  all 
against  faith,  but  not  against  getting  of  gold.  5.  It  apprehends  salvation  and  life 
eternal,  and  so  is  the  instrument  of  our  happiness.  So  is  not  gold  but  the  instru- 
ment of  many  a  man's  damnation  ;  by  unconscionable  getting,  and  covetous  keep- 
ing the  same,  many  cast  away  their  souls.  6.  It  will  comfort  a  man  with  true 
comfort  in  his  life,  carry  him  strongly  through  troubles,  and  boldly  through  the 
gates  of  death.  7.  Gold  perisheth,  here  canker  and  rust  consume  it ;  we  may  be 
taken  from  it,  as  it  from  us ;  but  faith  endureth  till  Christ's  appearing,  to  our 
full  redemption,  as  the  fruit  thereof  for  ever.  Uses :  1.  To  them  that  want  gold, 
and  yet  have  faith.  Know  that  thou  art  richer  than  he  that  hath  thousands  of  gold 
and  hath  not  faith.  2.  To  the  rich.  Eejoice  not  that  thou  art  rich,  but  that  thou 
hast  faith.  Again,  think  all  your  pains  to  become  you  well,  and  well  bestowed  in 
getting  this  precious  faith.  3.  To  those  who  have  not  faith.  Poor  souls,  labour 
after  it,  that  you  may  be  made  inwardly  rich.  4.  To  rich  men  who  have  toiled  for 
gold.  Seek  this  that  is  so  much  better.  (Jolin  Rogers.)  Genuine  faith  more 
precious  than  gold  : — I.  Gold  cannot  satisfy  the  soul.  Genuine  faith  does.  As  a 
rule  it  will,  perhaps,  be  found  that  he  who  has  the  most  gold  is  the  most  dis- 
contented and  restless  in  heart.  Faith  fills  the  soul  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory.  II.  Gold  cannot  strengthen  the  soul.  Genuine  faith  does.  In  what 
does  the  strength  of  the  soul  consist  ?  In  force  of  sympathies  generous  and  devout ; 
force  of  determination  to  pursue  the  right ;  force  to  bear  up  with  buoyant  magna- 
nimity under  all  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  life.  Gold  cannot  give  this  strength.  How 
strong  were  the  men  mentioned  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews  !  III.  Gold 
cannot  ennoble  the  soul.  But  genuine  faith  ennobles  the  soul,  enthrones  it  above 
the  tide  of  passion  and  the  force  of  circumstances.  (Homilist.)  Peter's  list  of 
valuahles  : — Peter  is  very  fond  of  this  word  "  precious."  He  uses  it  more  fre- 
quently than  all  the  other  New  Testament  writers,  with  the  exception  of  John  in  the 
llevelation,  where,  however,  it  is  only  employed  in  reference  to  things  of  material 


cn.'.p.  I.]  I.  PETER.  35 

value,  such  as  jewels  and  costly  woods.  Paul  uses  it  only  once,  and  in  a  similar 
connection,  speaking  about  "  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones."  James  employs  it 
once  in  regard  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  ;  and  all  the  other  instances  of  its  use  are 
in  Peter's  writings.  Here  are  the  cases  in  which  he  uses  it.  First,  in  my  text, 
about  the  process  by  which  Christian  faith  is  tested  ;  then  about  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  then,  in  a  quotation  from  Isaiah,  about  Christ  Himself  as  the  corner-stone. 
These  three  are  the  instances  in  the  first  Epistle.  In  the  second  we  find  two,  where 
he  speaks  of  "  like  precious  faith,"  and  of  "exceeding  great  and  precious  promises." 
I.  That  our  true  treasures  are  all  contained  in,  and  clustered  round,  the 
PERSON  and  work  OF  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  in  order  to  estimate  the  value  of  a  thing, 
the  first  necessity  is  a  correct  standard.  Now,  if  we  are  seeking  for  a  standard  of 
value,  surely  the  following  points  are  very  plain.  Our  true  treasure  must  be  such 
as  helps  us  towards  the  highest  ends  for  which  we  are  fitted  by  our  make.  It  must 
be  such  as  satisfies  our  deepest  needs  ;  it  must  be  such  as  meets  our  whole  nature  ; 
and  it  must  be  such  as  cannot  be  wrenched  from  us.  I  do  not  want  to  undervalue 
lower  and  relative  good  of  any  kind,  or  to  preach  an  overstrained  contempt  of 
material,  transient,  and  partial  blessing.  Competence  and  wealth,  gold  and  what 
gold  buys,  and  what  it  keeps  away,  are  good.  High  above  them  we  rank  the  treasures 
of  a  cultivated  mind,  of  a  refined  taste,  of  eyes  that  see  the  beauty  of  God's  fair 
creation.  Above  these  we  rank  the  priceless  treasures  of  pure  reciprocated  human 
love.  But  none  of  them,  nor  all  of  them  put  together,  meet  our  tests,  simple  and  obvious 
as  they  are.  They  do  not  satisfy  the  whole,  or  the  depths,  of  our  natures.  Only  God 
can  fill  a  soul.  So  Peter  is  right  after  all,  when  he  points  us  in  a  wholly  different 
direction  for  the  true  precious  things.  "  Christ  is  precious."  Now,  the  word  tliat 
he  employs  there  is  slightly  different  from  that  which  occurs  in  the  other  ver.-es. 
The  speaker  in  the  original  words  of  the  prophet  is  God  Himself.  It  is  the  precious- 
ness  in  God's  sight  of  the  stone  which  He  "  lays  in  Zion  "  that  is  glanced  at  in  the 
epithet.  Let  me  suggest  how  the  preciousness  of  His  beloved  Son,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Father  who  gave  Him,  enhances  the  preciousness  of  the  gift  to  us.  God  obeys  the 
law  which  He  lays  upon  His  servants  ;  and  He  "  will  not  give  "  to  us  "  that  which 
costs  Him  nothing."  But  Christ  is  precious  to  us.  Yes,  if  we  know  ourselves  and 
what  we  want ;  if  we  know  Him  and  what  He  gives.  Do  you  want  wisdom  ?  Ha 
is  the  wisdom  of  God.  Do  you  seek  power  ?  He  is  the  power  of  God.  Do  you  long 
for  joy?  He  will  give  you  His  own.  Do  you  weary  for  peace  ?  "  My  peace  I  leave 
with  you."  Do  you  hunger  for  righteousness?  "  He  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom  and  righteousness."  Do  you  need  fulness  and  abundance?  "In  Him 
dwells  all  the  fulness  of  God  ;  and  of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received."  Whatever 
good  any  soul  seeks,  Christ  is  the  highest  good,  and  is  all  good.  Let  us  turn  our 
hearts  away  from  false  treasures  and  lay  hold  on  Him  who  is  the  true  riches. 
Further,  Christ's  blood  is  precious.  Peter  believed  in  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  the  world,  and  of  each  single  soul  therein.  If  you  strike  that  element 
out  of  the  work  of  our  Lord,  what  remains,  precious  as  it  is,  does  not  seem  to  me 
to  so  completely  satisfy  human  necessities  as  to  make  Him  the  one  all-sufficient  and 
single  treasure  and  riches  of  men's  souls.  And  then  there  is  the  third  precious 
thing,  clustering  round  and  flowing  from  Jesus  Christ  and  His  work — and  that  is, 
the  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,"  which  are  given  to  us  "  that  by  them 
we  may  be  partakers  of  a  Divine  nature."  I  presume  that  these  promises  referred 
to  by  the  apostle  are  largely,  if  not  exclusively,  those  which  have  reference  to  what 
we  call  the  future  state.  And  they  are  precious  because  they  come  straight  to  meet 
one  of  the  deepest  needs  of  humanity,  often  neglected,  but  always  there — an  ache, 
if  not  a  conscious  need.  What  about  that  dark,  dim  beyond  ?  Is  there  any  solid 
ground  in  it  ?  Christ  comes  with  the  answer :  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life  ;  he  that  believeth  on  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live."  Then  it  is 
not  mist ;  then  I  can  fling  my  grappUng-iron  into  it  and  it  will  hold,  and  I  can  hold 
on  to  it.  n.  That  which  puts  us  in  possession  of  the  precious  things  is  itself 
PRECIOUS.  So  the  apostle  speaks,  in  his  second  Epistle,  about  "like  precious  faith," 
using  a  compound  word,  which,  however,  is  substantially  identical  with  the  simple 
expression  in  the  other  verses.  The  only  preciousness  of  that  faith  which  the  New 
Testament  magnifies  so  greatly  is  that  it  brings  us  into  possession  of  the  things  that 
are  intrinsically  precious.  Suppose  a  door,  worth  haK  a  crown.  Yes  !  but  it  is  the 
door  of  a  storehouse  full  of  bullion.  Here  is  a  bit  of  lead  pipe,  worth  twopence. 
Yes,  but  through  it  comes  the  water  that  keeps  a  besieged  city  alive.  And  so  your 
faith,  worth  nothing  in  itself,  is  worth  everything  as  the  means  by  which  you  lay 
hold  of  the  durable  riches  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.   Therefore  cherish  it.  A 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

cultivated  mind  is  a  treasure,  because  it  is  the  key  to  many  treasures.  Refined  tastes 
are  treasures  because  they  bring  us  into  possession  of  lofty  gifts.  ^Esthetic  sensi- 
bilities are  precious  because  they  make  our  own  a  pure  and  ennobling  pleasure.  And, 
for  precisely  the  same  reason,  high  above  the  cultivated  understanding,  and  refined 
tastes,  and  the  artistic  sense,  ay,  and  even  above  the  loving  heart  that  twines  its 
tendrils  round  another  heart  as  loving,  we  rank  the  faith  which  joins  us  to  Christ. 
III.  The  process  which  strengthens  that  faith  is  precious.  My  nominal  text 
speaks  about  "  the  trial  of  your  faith  "  as  being  "  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 
that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire."  Peter  meant  that  the  process  by  which 
faith  was  tested,  and,  being  tested,  is  purified  and  perfected,  is  a  precious  treasure. 
If  Christ  and  what  pertains  to  Him  are  our  real  wealth,  and  if  our  faith  is  the 
means  of  our  coming  into  possession  of  our  property,  then  everything  that  tightens 
our  grasp  upon  Him,  and  increases  our  capacity  of  receiving  Him,  is  valuable. 
Let  us  lay  that  to  heart,  and  it  changes  all  our  estimates  of  this  world's  mistaken 
ill  and  good.  Let  us  lay  that  to  heart,  and  it  interprets  much.  We  do  not  under- 
stand life  until  we  have  got  rid  of  the  prejudice  that  enjoyment,  or  any  lower  thing, 
is  the  object  of  it.  Let  us  understand  that  the  deepest  meaning  of  all  our  experience 
here  is  discipline,  and  we  have  come  within  sight  of  the  solution  of  most  of  our 
perplexities.  Sorrow  and  joy,  light  and  darkness,  summer  and  winter,  sunshine  and 
storm,  life  and  death,  gain  and  loss,  failures  and  successes — they  aU  have  the  one 
end,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  wealth  of  His  holiness.  Let  us  try  to  clear 
our  minds  of  the  delusions  of  this  world,  and  to  rectify  our  estimates  of  true  good. 
A  very  perverted  standard  prevails,  and  we  are  too  apt  to  fall  in  with  it.  Many  of 
us  are  no  wiser  than  savages  that  will  exchange  gold  for  trash,  and  barter  away 
fertile  lands  for  a  stand  of  old  muskets  or  a  case  of  fiery  rum.  Listen  to  Jesus 
Christ  counselling  you  to  buy  of  Him  gold  tried  in  the  fire.  Turn  away  from  the 
fairy  gold,  which  by  daylight  will  be  seen  to  be  but  a  heap  of  yellow  fading  leaves,  and 
cling  in  faith,  which  is  precious,  to  Him  who  is  priceless,  and  in  whom  the  poorest 
will  find  riches  that  cannot  be  corrupted  nor  lost  for  ever.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Found  unto  praise  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ. — 
Perfect  salvation  : — These  words  have  reminded  me  of  a  phrase  which,  twenty  or 
thirty  years  ago,  was  constantly  recurring  in  sermons  of  many  of  the  younger  and 
more  ardent  preachers  of  that  time.  They  insisted  that  Christ  had  come  to  achieve 
for  us  what  they  described  as  a  present  salvation.  There  was  a  polemical  element, 
too,  in  preaching  of  this  kind,  for  the  doctrine  of  a  present  salvation  was  asserted  as 
though  it  were  a  part  of  the  Christian  gospel  that  had  never  been  clearly  appre- 
hended; it  was  implied  that  most  Christian  people  had  thought  of  salvation  as 
something  future,  something  that  could  not  be  known  on  this  side  of  death,  while  in 
fact  we  are  to  be  saved,  if  saved  at  all,  here  and  now.  Those  who  preached  a 
present  salvation  said  in  substance,  "  Many  of  you  Christian  people  have  missed  the 
power  and  glory  which  Christ  came  to  make  yours  in  this  life,  because  you  are 
ahvays  thinking  of  heaven  and  the  life  to  come  ;  your  religion  is  unpractical,  you 
do  not  see  that  Christ  came  to  make  an  infinite  difference  in  the  whole  life  of  man 
in  this  world,  as  well  as  to  make  eternal  blessedness  our  inheritance  in  the  next." 
There  is  no  need  to  preach  like  that  now.  None  of  us,  I  imagine,  are  too  much 
occupied  with  thoughts  of  heaven  and  the  life  to  come.  Richard  Baxter,  as  some 
of  you  remember,  tells  us  that  in  the  afternoon,  when  it  began  to  be  too  dark  to  go 
on  with  his  reading  and  writing,  and  before  the  candles  were  brought  in,  he  used  to 
sit  quietly  in  the  twilight  meditating  on  the  saints'  everlasting  rest.  There  are  not 
many  Christian  people,  I  imagine,  who  spend  much  of  their  time  in  that  way  now. 
Whether  we  realise  the  present  salvation  more  fully  than  our  fathers  did  I  cannot 
tell,  but  I  imagine  it  is  certain  that  we  think  very  much  less  about  any  salvation  that 
is  still  to  come.  There  ir  a  present  salvation,  there  is  also  a  salvation  to  be  hoped  for, 
"  Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice."  Christ,  not  the  earthly  Christ  but  the  ascended  Christ, 
is  the  head  of  the  new  race.  His  larger,  diviner,  human  life  is  ours,  and  the  life  which 
we  have  received  from  Him,  and  into  the  full  possession  of  which  He  entered  at  His 
resurrection  and  ascension,  that  life  has  in  its  essence  the  hope  and  assurance  of 
passing  into  the  same  glory  into  which  Christ  has  entered.  Having  this  life  we  are 
born,  therefore,  to  "an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away."  This  inheritance  is  not  here ;  it  is  not  ours  in  possession  yet ;  it  is  no  part 
of  the  present  salvation ;  it  is  reserved  for  us  in  heaven.  And  lest  we  should  come 
to  harm  before  we  reach  it,  we  are  kept  safely  for  the  salvation  which  is  ready  to  be 
revealed  at  the  last  time.  In  this  it  is  that  we  Christian  people  are  to  rejoice.  The 
present  salvation  is  an  incomplete  salvation ;  the  perfect  salvation  is  to  come.    The 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  37 

future  life  Of  those  who  are  to  live  for  ever  in  God — the  complete  salvation — 
transcends  aU  thought  as  well  as  all  hope ;  we  cannot  see  the  inheritance  for  the 
golden  haze  that  surrounds  it ;  it  is  too  intensely  bright  for  mortal  vision ;  it  belongs 
to  another  order  than  this  ;  it  cannot  be  revealed  to  knowledge  until  it  is  revealed 
in  experience.  But  some  elements  of  the  present  salvation  wiU  in  the  future 
salvation  be  perfect.  Our  sins,  through  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  are  ah-eady 
forgiven,  and  we  may  have  the  full  assurance  that  they  are  forgiven.  But  not  until 
we  are  capable  of  a  fuller  knowledge  of  God  shall  we  know  the  infinite  blessedness 
of  the  discovery  that  He  has  blotted  out  our  sins  as  a  thick  cloud  which  varnishes 
and  leaves  no  stain  on  the  blue  of  heaven.  That  blessedness  is  to  come.  There  are 
times  when  we  see  the  manifestations  of  the  love  of  God  for  us — manifestations 
given  to  us  in  secret  and  wonderful  ways  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  making 
the  heart  tremble  with  a  blended  reverence  and  joy.  We  have  no  strength  to  bear 
them  for  long.  If  they  remained  glory  would  break  upon  glory,  and  we  should 
anticipate  the  blessedness  we  hope  for.  What  we  hope  for  is  a  life  that  appears  so 
enlarged,  and  with  so  Divine  an  environment  that  these  manifestations  of  the 
personal  love  of  the  Eternal  for  us,  and  manifestations  still  more  wonderful,  will  be 
with  us  always  ;  that  we  shall  move  freely  among  them  as  we  move  in  the  common 
air  and  in  the  light  of  the  common  sun ;  they  will  never  become  dim,  never  be 
interrupted,  but  that  in  their  tenderness  and  in  their  power  they  will  increase 
through  age  after  age  of  increasing  wonder  and  joy.  There  is  something  in  this 
great  hope  to  give  us  courage  and  to  renew  the  strength  which  too  often  faints  and 
the  resolution  which  too  often  falters.  The  joy  of  the  Christian  life  would  be 
immeasurably  augmented  if  we  dwelt  more  constantly  on  its  eternal  oonsunimation 
in  the  Divine  Presence,  and  the  joy  would  give  strength.  We  have  great  memories 
to  sustain  us,  and,  above  all,  the  memory  of  the  supreme  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
love  in  the  life  and  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  when  hope  is  con- 
federate with  memory,  and  both  are  confirmed  by  the  present  consciousness  that  we 
have  found  God,  every  power  of  our  better  life  receives  new  animation,  and  we  see 
that  all  things  are  possible  to  us.  Further,  apart  from  a  clear  vision  of  the  perfect 
salvation,  faith  is  subject  to  an  unnecessary  strain.  Forget  too  how  large  and  free 
and  blessed  a  life  men  are  destined  for  in  Christ  in  the  next  world,  and  it  will  sometimes 
seem  as  if  there  were  disproportion  between  the  great  discoveries  of  the  Christian 
gospel  and  what  the  gospel  actually  accomplishes.  It  is  as  if  you  were  to  judge 
of  the  labour  which  has  been  spent  on  the  fields  by  the  appearance  of  early  spring, 
when  the  dark  ground  is  hardly  relieved  by  the  faint  green  of  the  wheat  which  has 
just  begun  to  shoot — it  is  so  frail,  apparently  of  so  little  value.  Is  this  all  that  is 
to  come  of  cleaning  the  ground  and  ploughing  it  and  enriching  it  with  the  seed  ? 
Ah !  you  must  wait — wait  till  the  spring  has  expanded  into  the  bright  days  of 
summer,  and  the  summer  into  early  autumn,  and  then  the  corn  ripened,  perfected, 
rising  and  falling  in  golden  billows  under  the  glowing  sun,  will  reveal  the  end  for 
which  the  farmer  laboured.  And  Christ's  harvest  home  is  not  ended  here,  but  in 
worlds  unseen.  Not  until  we  know  the  perfect  righteousness  and  the  perfect  blessed- 
ness of  the  saints  in  glory  shall  we  see  for  what  great  ends  the  Son  of  God  became 
man  and  rose  again  for  our  race.  (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Whom  having  not  seen, 
ye  love. — Love  to  an  unseen  Saviour : — To  produce  in  us  a  love  to  Christ  it  is  not 
necessary  that  we  should  see  Him  with  our  bodily  eyes.  Those  who  actually  saw 
Jesus  and  loved  Him  are  comparatively  few  to  those  who  love  Him  unseen.  I. 
The  properties  of  this  love.  1.  It  is  sincere  and  hearty.  We  must  not  judge  by 
one  single  act  in  life,  but  by  the  habitual  frame  and  the  general  tenor  in  behaviour. 
A  real  concern  of  mind  for  offending  a  friend  is  a  sign  that  we  esteem  him.  2.  It 
has  respect  unto  Christ  in  all  His  characters  and  titles.  3.  This  love  is  superlative. 
It  exceeds  the  esteem  which  the  soul  has  for  all  other  things.  Christ  will  accept  of 
nothing  less.  4.  This  love  is  constant  and  everlasting.  It  is  not  like  the  esteem 
which  we  have  for  our  fellow-creatures,  which  frequently  stops  upon  receiving  an 
affront,  and  is  often  changed  into  resentment.  II.  The  grounds  and  reasons  why 
the  Christian  loves  an  unseen  Jesus.  1.  The  Christian  loves  an  unseen  Jesus 
because  of  the  excellencies  which  He  possesses.  Whatever  excellency  is  in  the 
creature  may  be  found  in  the  highest  perfection  in  Jesus  Christ,  for  He  inherits  all 
true  perfection  :  creatures'  glories  are  all  imperfect.  2.  The  Christian  loves  an 
unseen  Saviour  because  of  the  relation  which  He  stands  in  to  him.  The  ties  of 
nature  and  relation  are  strong  inducements  to  affection  ;  a  mother  must  turn 
monster  if  she  does  not  love  her  babe.  3.  The  Christian  is  under  the  greatest 
obUgations  to  Jesus  for  the  wonders  of  His  free  and  unmerited  love :  no  wonder, 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

then,  that  he  loves  Him,  though  unseen.  III.  The  reasonableness  of  the  Christian's 
love  to  an  unseen  Saviour.  1.  Let  us  view  the  infinite  glory  of  His  person.  2.  The 
amazing  greatness  of  His  condescension  for  His  people's  advantage.  3.  The 
blessings  which  He  has  conferred  upon  the  Christian,  4.  The  endearing  titles  He 
has  given  him.  5.  The  care  He  continually  takes  of  him,  and  the  glory  He  has 
prepared  and  will  secure  for  him.  6.  The  freeness  of  this  love.  (S.Hayward.)  Love 
to  an  unseen  Saviour : — I.  Believe,  though  we  never  saw.  We  should  not  count 
this  a  hardship,  since  we  every  day  believe  in  places  and  peoples  whom  we  have  not 
seen.  Thus,  you  all  believe  that  there  is  such  a  city  as  Rome,  although  few  of  you 
may  have  seen  it.  You  believe  also  that  a  Pontiff  rules  there.  But  in  these  days 
of  widespread  scepticism  men  object  to  believe,  in  the  first  place,  because  the  events 
to  which  we  ask  their  credence  happened  so  long  ago.  But  if  you  believe  that 
Julius  Caesar  fell  at  Pompey's  pillar  pierced  by  traitorous  wounds,  surely  it  is  not 
more  difficult  to  believe  that  about  the  same  period  in  our  world's  history  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  died  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  It  is  objected, 
however,  in  the  second  place,  that  we  ask  faith  in  something  supernatural  concern- 
ing Jesus  Christ,  the  like  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  Julius 
Cffisar — namely,  that  He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  that  He  ascended  into  the 
heavens.  Quite  true ;  but  our  God  affords  evidence  correspondingly  strong.  But 
the  faith  that  pleases  God  is  not  a  mere  conviction  that  the  sacred  oracles  are 
true — it  should  include  also  a  hearty  acceptance  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour  for  our 
own  sinful  souls.  It  is  one  thing  for  you  to  believe  that  a  certain  individual 
is  the  richest  man  in  the  city,  and  quite  an  additional  thing  if  he,  hearing  of  your 
straits,  should  write  you  to  go  to  the  bank  and  draw  on  him  to  any  amount.  And 
suppose  you  had  really  never  seen  the  rich  man,  but  had  only  heard  of  his  goodness, 
as  you  found  all  your  wants  supplied  at  that  bank,  you  would  resemble  these 
primitive  Christians  who  were  thus  addressed:  "Though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet 
believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable,  receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the 
salvation  of  your  souls."  II.  Although  these  Christians  had  never  seen 
Christ,  they,  nevertheless,  loved  Him.  It  is  possible  to  love  those  whom  we 
have  never  seen.  The  experience  is  felt  every  day.  For  example^l.  Men  love 
unseen  benefactors,  and  it  becomes  us  to  love  the  unseen  Saviour — the  greatest 
Benefactor  of  all.  When  the  emancipation  of  the  West  Indian  slaves  became  an 
accomplished  fact,  the  liberated  negroes  in  their  humble  dwellings  loved  the  men 
who  had  done  so  much  for  them,  and  suffered  so  much  for  them.  They  had  never 
seen  them,  and  yet  they  loved  them.  2.  But  let  us  introduce  another  element  into 
the  claims  of  the  ascended  Christ,  and  consider  that  He  is  also  a  brother  unseen. 
It  sometimes  happens  that  an  unseen  benefactor  is  also  an  unseen  brother.  I  knew 
a  family  in  this  city,  the  elder  brother  in  which  had  gone  out  to  an  Indian  appoint- 
msnt  before  the  younger  members  of  it  were  born.  Their  father  died  before  he 
could  be  called  an  old  man,  leaving  a  widow  and  large  family  without  great 
resources.  But  this  elder  brother  did  a  father's  part.  He  sent  home  remittances 
quite  regularly,  which  maintained,  clothed,  and  educated  the  younger  children,  and, 
as  the  daughters  grew  up,  and  were,  one  after  another,  married,  he  sent  them 
special  presents  for  their  marriage  outfits.  Oh,  how  they  loved  him,  although  they 
had  never  seen  him !  Does  not  my  parable  once  more  suit  ?  Is  not  this  Jesus 
whom  we  have  never  seen  occupied  in  high  heavenly  administration  ?  3.  Further, 
the  believer  loves  Christ,  though  he  has  never  seen  Him,  on  account  of  His  beauty. 
We  sometimes  fall  in  love  with  the  character  of  men  whom  we  have  never  seen. 
III.  Though  believers  never  saw  Christ,  they  rejoice  in  Him  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  a  doubtsome  faith,  leaving  a  man  uncertain  as 
to  whether  he  is  saved  or  not,  is  not  countenanced  in  the  Word  of  God.  Further, 
the  New  Testament  does  not  discourage  ecstasy  in  religious  experience.  It  expects 
"  joy  unspeakable  "  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian.  And  if  we  see  men  and  women 
in  tumultuous  joy,  making  processions  and  waving  banners  in  honour  of  Bruce  and 
Wallace,  Tell  and  Garibaldi,  whom  they  never  saw,  have  we  not  infinitely  greater 
cause  to  rejoice  in  present  salvation  and  the  hope  of  future  glory  through  an  unseen 
Christ  ?  When  the  foreman  of  the  jury  says  "  Not  guilty,"  the  prisoner  leaps  up  in 
the  dock  with  joy  unspeakable.  When  the  physician,  feeling  the  pulse,  says  to  the 
anxious  patient:  "  Your  symptoms  are  much  improved  to-day;  in  fact,  you  are  out 
of  danger,  and  will  henceforth  progress  to  complete  recovery,"  his  joy  is  unspeak- 
able. Now,  what  is  holiness  but  wholeness  in  health  ? — the  great  blessing  which 
we  receive  at  the  Cross,  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  the  pardon  of  sin  and  the 
accompanying  indwelling  and  renewal  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    But  the  best  is  coming 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  39 

yet;  the  joy  is  also  "full  of  glory."  We  are  down  in  the  valley;  but  the  hilltops 
are  already  radiant  with  the  rising  orb  of  eternal  day.  Beyond  these  hills  our 
Redeemer  is  preparing  a  place  for  us.  In  conclusion,  let  me  speak  first  a  word  of 
caution,  and  then  a  word  of  encouragement.  1.  The  word  of  caution  I  address  to 
those  who  may  be  ready  to  proclaim  their  love  to  Christ  and  their  assurance  of 
salvation  while  yet  their  lives  are  unholy.  Not  only  must  Christ  have  the  throne  of 
our  affections,  but  also  the  government  of  our  wills  freely  and  habitually  sur- 
rendered— wills  married  to  His  and  sweetly  lost  in  His.  2.  Such  is  the  word  of 
caution ;  now  for  the  word  of  encouragement.  How  many  worthy  people  are  there 
who,  when  we  ask  them  whether  they  love  the  Lord,  or  not,  are  unable  to  answer  in  the 
affirmative.  Eestricted  views  of  the  extent  of  Divine  grace  keep  some  in  darkness, 
while  others  are  the  victims  of  hypochondriacal  spiritual  or  rather  unspiritual 
melancholy.  As  to  the  first  cause  of  fear  I  would  simply  say  that  there  is  no 
doubt  of  God's  love  to  you,  and  therefore  you  should  love  Him  in  return.  As  to 
your  morbid  anxieties,  I  would  exhort  you  to  dismiss  them  all.  Do  not  go  about 
constantly  feeling  your  own  spiritual  pulse.  The  best  proof  of  your  love  to  God  is 
that  you  keep  His  commandments.  {F.  Ferguson,  D.I).)  Love  to  Christ : — I. 
The  natuee  and  ghounds  of  love  to  Christ.  Love  to  Christ  is  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  raptures  of  a  visionary  enthusiasm.  Its  foundation  must  not  be 
laid  in  those  ideal  representations  of  His  person  and  character  which  a  luxuriant 
fancy  is  apt  to  picture.  It  signifies  simply  that  sincere  esteem  of  His  person  and 
character  which  is  founded  on  what  is  revealed  respecting  Him  in  the  records  of 
inspiration.  1.  Love  to  the  Redeemer  is  the  first  movement  of  the  soul  when 
illumined  to  discern  the  perfect  excellencies  of  His  Divine  character.  Is  perfect 
holiness  the  proper  object  of  delight  and  love?  Are  truth  and  faithfulness, 
combined  with  mercy  and  grace,  the  proper  objects  of  moral  approbation  and 
delight  ?  In  Him  "  mercy  and  truth  have  met  together."  He  is  justly  entitled  to 
our  supreme  regard,  whose  nature  is  infinitely  excellent,  and  whose  perfections  are 
boundless.  2.  But  the  believer  will  not  confine  himself  to  the  contemplation  of  his 
Lord  in  the  attributes  of  His  Divine  character  ;  he  will  consider  Him  in  His  human 
nature  also,  and,  as  such,  the  proper  object  of  enlightened  attachment.  As  a  man 
He  exhibited  an  example  of  perfect  conformity  to  the  whole  will  of  God.  3. 
The  mediatorial  character  of  Jesus  justly  entitles  Him  to  our  especial  affection. 
Prom  what  Christ  hath  done,  we  learn  what  He  is ;  and  the  glories  of  His  character 
shine  with  pecuUar  lustre  through  the  veil  of  His  mediation,  suffering,  and  death. 
And  can  we  contemplate  so  much  love  without  feeling  some  corresponding  emotion 
of  love  in  return  ?     II.  Cheist,  though  unseen,  is  the  object  of  a  CHEiSTi.iN's  love. 

1.  Although  Christ  was  never  seen  by  us,  yet  we  have  been  favoured  with  the  most 
full  and  satisfactory  information  regarding  Him.  He  is  brought  near  to  our  view  in 
the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  the  varied   writings  of    the   New. 

2.  Jesus,  though  we  never  saw  Him,  is  ascertained  to  be  unquestionably  our  best 
friend  and  nearest  relation.  He  is  our  instructor  to  point  the  way  ;  our  high  priest 
to  redeem  and  intercede  for  us  ;  our  Captain  and  King  to  bring  many  sons  and 
daughters  to  glory.  3.  He  hath  given  us  the  most  stupendous  evidences  of  His 
disinterested  love.  4.  This  kind  friend  hath  sent  us  many  kind  messages  of  love, 
and  hath  actually  left  us  a  legacy  to  perpetuate  His  remembrance.  5.  Though  not 
personally  present  with  us.  He  hath  given  us,  as  His  representative.  His  Holy  Spirit 
to  abide  with  us  for  ever,  to  enlighten  our  understandings,  to  purify  our  hearts 
from  the  power  of  corruption,  to  raise  our  affections  to  things  spiritual  and  heavenly, 
to  check  in  us  the  power  of  sin,  and  to  guide  us  amid  the  snares  and  temptations  of 
our  pilgrimage  through  the  world.  6.  Though  we  see  not  Christ  now,  we  are 
assured  that  if  we  love  Him  truly  we  shall  see  Him  afterwards.     HI.  The  manner 

IN    WHICH    love     to    ChRIST    WILL    PRACTICALLY     EXPRESS     ITSELF.       1.    LoVC    tO    Christ 

will  lead  us  to  cultivate  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  Him.  2.  Love  to 
Christ  will  lead  us  frequently  to  think  and  to  speak  of  Him.  3.  Love  to  Christ 
will  lead  us  to  seek  intercourse  with  Him  in  all  His  ordinances.  4.  If  we  love 
Christ,  we  will  love  His  people  and  cause.  5.  Finally,  "  If  ye  love  Me,"  says  Jesus, 
"keep  My  commandments."  This  is  the  most  substantial  test  of  the  sincerity  of 
our  love.  {R.  Burns,  D.D.)  Love  to  an  unseen  Saviour : — I.  The  geneeal 
NATURE  OF  LOVE  TO  Christ.  There  are  four  essential  acts  that  form  the  perfect 
notion  of  love.  First,  there  is  esteem,  which  is  as  the  groundwork  of  love.  And  on 
all  accounts  Christ  deserves  this  in  the  highest  degree.  Again,  there  is  inclination 
of  goodwill  to  the  party  beloved.  This  is  called  a  benevolential  esteem,  as  the 
former  is  complacential.     The  former  considers  its  object  as  fit  to  do  us  good  or 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

give  us  pleasure.  The  latter  regards  its  object  as  worthy  to  receive  good,  whether 
absolutely  or  from  us  or  others.  Esteem  and  benevolence,  then,  are  the  two  leading 
branches  of  love,  and  both  find  room  enough  in  Christ.  The  two  remaining,  desire, 
fitly  enough  called  love  in  motion,  and  delight  or  complacency,  called  love  at  rest, 
rank  themselves  under  each  of  the  former  respectively ;  for  it  is  of  the  nature  of 
true  love  to  desire  and  delight  in  the  happiness  of  the  object  as  really  as  its  own 
proceeding  from  it.  II.  The  object  of  the  Christian's  love — the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ — with  the  grounds  that  are  found  with  Him,  of  our  loving  Him.  And  here 
we  might  first  observe  how  the  many  names,  titles,  and  characters  which  Christ 
bears  in  Scripture,  that  convey  various  ideas  of  beauty,  use,  and  pleasure,  do  of 
themselves  recommend  Him  to  our  highest  love.  The  particular  grounds  of  love  to 
Christ  which  His  various  names  import  and  lead  to.  1.  If  the  greatest  personal 
excellencies  and  beauties  imaginable.  2.  If  the  most  intimate  relation  to  God  and 
His  manifestative  glory,  joined  with  the  highest  interest  in  His  favour  and  respect. 

3.  If  the  most  amazing  love  to  us.  4.  If  the  most  arduous  and  excellent  works 
performed  for  our  service  and  advantage.  5.  If  the  most  numerous,  valuable, 
benefits  conferred  on  us  or  promised  to  us.  III.  The  PAKTicuLAii  acts  and 
expressions  of  a  genuine  love  to  Christ.  1.  In  the  first  place,  wherever  love  to 
Christ  is  found,  it  will  certainly  show  itself  in  frequent  thoughts,  attended  ever 
and  anon  with  discourse  of  Him.  And  what  thoughts  are  they  which  love  to 
Christ  wlU  inspire  ?  They  are  thoughts  of  a  noble  elevation  and  of  a  comprehensive 
reach— thoughts  which  dignify  our  understandings.  Further,  the  thoughts 
influenced  by  t  e  love  of  Christ  will  be  with  regard  to  ourselves,  and  other  things 
viewed  in  comparison  with  Christ,  humbling  and  disdaining.  Again,  the  thoughts 
about  Christ  which  love  to  Him  prompts  are  the  most  chosen  and  pleasing  thoughts 
of  any  that  can  employ  the  mind.  Finally,  the  thoughts  that  love  to  Christ 
inspires  are  affectionate  thoughts  and  influential  into  the  heart  from  whence  they 
are  united.  2.  Love  to  Christ  will  express  itself  in  desires  towards  Him  accompanied 
with  suitable  endeavours,  and  these  of  two  sorts,  such  as  respect  ourselves 
immediately,  or  Christ  for  ourselves,  and  such  as  respect  Him  for  Himself.  IV. 
The  properties  and  chaeacters  of  genuine  love  to  Christ.  True  love  to 
Christ  is  sincere  and  unfeigned,  love  incorrupt.  2.  True  love  to  Christ  is  a  judicious 
and  rational  affection.  Though  Christians  love  an  unseen,  they  do  not  love  an 
unknown  Saviour.  3.  Love  to  Christ  is  free,  as  being  the  effect  of  rational  choice  ; 
and  yet  more  free  still,  as  being  a  supernatural  habit  influenced  by  Divine  j.'race. 

4.  True  love  to  Christ  is  of  a  very  active  and  fruitful  nature.  There  is  a  great  deal 
of  life,  strength,  and  sprightliness  in  the  affection  of  love.  5.  True  love  to  Christ 
is  entire  and  universal.  He  must  be  loved  in  His  whole  character,  or  He  is  not 
loved  at  all.  6.  It  must  be  supreme.  7.  It  is  constant.  8.  This  love  to  Christ  is 
great,  so  as  to  become  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  V.  How  faith  accounts 
FOR  this  love  in  WANT  OF  SIGHT,  SO  that  this  should  not  in  reason  be  any  obstruc- 
tion to,  while  yet  it  is  a  commendation  of  it.  1.  Let  us  see  how  faith  contains  a 
just  reason  for  loving  Christ,  though  never  seen.  Than  which  nothing  will  appear 
more  manifest,  if  we  only  consider  what  faith  is,  in  these  two  parts  wherein  the 
apostle  sums  it  up  (Heb.  xi.  1).  2.  Want  of  seeing  Christ,  though  no  reasonable  bar 
against  loving  Him,  must  be  allowed  to  import  some  greater  commendation  of  love 
under  this  circumstance  than  in  the  case  of  personal  sight.  VI.  Improvement.  1. 
How  much  should  we  be  concerned  to  observe  the  too  obvious  want  of  love  to 
Christ  in  the  Christian  world,  and  withal  to  inquire  whether  it  be  not  wanting  in 
our  own  hearts  also !  2.  Suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  to  give  to  Christ  all  the 
love  we  are  capable  of,  suitable  to  His  glorious  dignity,  and  the  obligations  He  has 
laid  on  us,  heartily  and  bitterly  lamenting  withal  our  sin  and  folly  in  having 
withheld  from  Him  so  long  and  so  much  what  has  been  His  due.  (/.  Hubbard.) 
The  highest  Christian  experience  : — I.  Love  for  the  unseen.  This  is  an  axiom 
with  all  true  affection.  1.  It  appears  difficult  theoretically.  2.  It  is  common  in 
experience.  The  absent,  the  dead  are  loved.  3.  It  is  an  element  in  the  highest 
form  of  love.  The  non-sensuous.  4.  It  is  a  very  blessed  emotion.  The  band  of 
love  brings  the  distant  near,  makes  the  remote  easily  discerned.  II.  Trust  in  the 
LOVED.  Love  Christ  more,  and  you  will  trust  Him  more.  You  will  believe  what 
He  says  about — 1.  Salvation.  2.  Duty.  3.  Trial.  4.  Sacrifice.  III.  Jot  in  the 
LOVED  AND  TRUSTED.  1.  The  joy  of  rest.  2.  The  joy  of  communion.  {U.  R. 
Thomas.)  The  reign  of  Christ  in  Christendom : — In  the  first  place,  think 
how  wonderful  a  phenomenon  the  very  existence  of  Christendom  is.  It  is  so 
in  three  particulars.     In  the  first  place,  when  we  turn  to  the  page  of  history,  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  41 

existence  of  Christendom  is  wonderful  when  we  consider  the  opposition  which  it 
had  to  overcome.  And  then,  above  all,  the  establishment  of  Christendom  is 
wonderful  when  we  consider  the  character  of  the  doctrine  which  determined  it. 
The  gospel  flattered  no  pride,  it  gave  quarter  to  no  passion.  Now  I  wish  further 
to  direct  your  attention  to  the  present  reign  of  Christ  in  this  present  Christendom. 
And  here  I  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  our  blessed  Lord  reigns  over  the  intellect 
of  Christendom  by  His  authority.  Human  thinkers  do  not  really  govern  thought. 
There  has  been  no  one-man  government  in  the  realm  of  intellect  since  Aristotle 
was  deposed  in  the  middle  ages.  These  apparent  governors  of  human  thought 
rule  a  party,  or  a  school,  or  a  clique.  Even  there  they  are  not  really  taken  at  their 
own  word.  The  thing  is  not  believed  to  be  true  just  because  they  say  it  is  true. 
Now,  our  blessed  Lord,  beyond  all  question,  does  not  propose  for  the  acceptance  of 
His  people  a  self-evident  doctrine.  You  must  make  an  act  of  faith  in  it,  and  that 
act  of  faith  is  an  inclusive  act.  You  cannot  parcel  it  off  into  two  separate  divisions 
or  compartments,  and  say :  "  Here  is  the  sentiment,  supremely  beautiful,  and  there  is 
the  dogma,  of  which  we  cannot  say  quite  so  much."  We  must  believe  the  dogma 
of  Christ's  authority,  or  we  do  not  fully  receive  Christ.  But  then  it  may  be  said 
to  the  Christian,  "What  is  thy  beloved,  more  than  another  beloved?  "  There  are 
other  teachers  who  receive  the  adoration  of  thousands  of  souls :  the  Buddha  reigns 
over  as  many  souls  as  Christ  does,  and  possibly  a  good  many  more.  Yes,  but  not 
over  as  many  sorts  of  souls.  Jesus  reigns  over  varied  races.  At  all  events,  aU 
nations  who  renounce  Him,  lose,  or  begin  to  lose,  their  place  amongst  the  nations 
of  mankind ;  and  the  fact  of  their  denial  is  written  upon  their  bodily  and  material 
organisations.  Now,  I  mention  further  that  Christ  reigns  over  the  hearts  of  men 
by  love.  Consider  for  a  moment  man's  relation  after  death  to  the  aiJections  of 
those  who  survive  him.  The  place  which  any  of  us  can  keep  in  the  affections 
of  those  who  survive  is  a  narrow  one  indeed.  Forgetfulness,  in  a  very  short  time, 
must  grow  over  us  like  the  grass.  And  now,  with  this,  contrast  Christ  after  His  death 
as  an  object  of  human  affection.  This  love  is  illimitable  in  extent  as  well  as  in 
time.  Every  minute  some  dying  man  or  woman  invokes  that  name  with  a  light  of 
love  upon  the  dying  face.  "  I  am  a  judge  of  men,  and  I  tell  you  that  this  Man 
with  His  power  of  awakening  and  perpetuating  love  was  more  than  man."  Jesus 
reigns  as  God  by  love  in  Christendom.  Here  is  the  strange  fact  of  the  spiritual 
world — this  intense  personal  love  towards  One  whom  we  have  not  seen.  As  St. 
Bernard  says :  "  When  I  name  Jesus  I  name  a  Man,  strong,  gentle,  pure,  holy, 
sympathising,  who  is  also  the  true  and  the  Eternal  God."  And  the  image  of  the 
beauty  is  the  best  proof  to  the  heart  of  the  reality  of  the  object  which  it  represents 
— something  in  the  same  way  as  when  we  are  walking  along  in  meditation  by  a 
clear  river  that  runs  into  the  sea,  the  reflection  of  the  white  sea  bird  in  the  stream, 
even  when  we  are  not  able  to  look  up,  is  a  proof  to  us  that  the  bird  is  really  sailing 
overhead.  There  is  no  fear  of  disappointment  in  that  love  toward  Christ.  There 
was  a  wife  once  who  was  all  in  aU  to  a  husband  who  had  been  blind  from  very 
early  childhood,  and  when  the  question  came  about  an  operation  being  performed, 
she  was  troubled.  She  confessed  she  was  troubled  lest  when  sight  was  restored  to 
her  husband,  whom  she  had  loved  and  tended,  he  should  be  disappointed  in  the 
features  of  which  he  had  thought  so  tenderly.  Yes  !  but  as  spiritual  sight  is  given 
to  us,  as  we  start  up  in  the  light  of  the  Kesurrection  morning,  there  will  be  no 
disappointment ;  when  we  wake  up  after  His  likeness  we  shall  be  satisfied  with 
Him,  with  the  likeness  of  Him,  whom  not  having  seen,  we  love.  {Bp.  Alexander.) 
Love  to  the  unseen  Christ : — We  are  apt  to  suppose  that,  had  we  lived  in  the  days 
of  Christ,  our  faith  and  love  would  have  been  very  much  nearer  perfection  than 
they  ever  can  be  now.  Witnessing  the  expression  of  His  countenance  would  have 
given  so  much  fuller  a  comprehension  of  His  character,  that  our  strongest  affec- 
tions would  necessarily  have  been  moved  towards  Him.  There  are  persons  who 
need  the  perceptions  of  the  senses  to  help  out  the  operations  of  the  understanding, 
before  they  can  realise  facts  with  sufficient  distinctness  for  their  feelings  to  be 
excited.  But  this  is  not  true  of  most  earnest  minds — of  some,  it  is  the  very  reverse 
of  the  truth.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  both  Christ's  teaching  and  His  moral 
qualities,  as  with  regard  to  all  other  things  in  life — the  mind  comprehends  only 
what  it  is  prepared  to  receive.  Things  affect  us,  not  only  according  to  their  nature, 
but  according  to  our  own.  What  we  see  depends,  not  only  upon  what  there  is  to 
be  seen,  but  also  upon  our  capacity  for  seeing.  Goodness  and  purity  immeasurably 
above  us  will  only  aifect  us  in  that  degree  in  which  we  are  able  to  take  them  in. 
Hence,  those  Jewish  disciples  standing  around  our  Saviour,  gazing  into  His  eyes, 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

would  only  be  moved  by  His  character,  in  proportion  as  their  own  goodness,  purity, 
and  inner  spiritual  beauty  enabled  them  to  enter  into  sympathy  with  Him.     Then, 
too,  there  is  another  consideration  greatly  in  our  favour :  the  love  which  rests  upon 
the  idealisation  of  a  character  must,  necessarily,  be  more  refined  and  spiritual  than 
that  which  is  derived  through  the  sensuous   perceptions.       For  the  senses   lend 
influences  of  their  own,  which,  mingling  with  the  spiritual  elements,  prevent  the 
pure  and  simple  operation  of  the  latter,  and  oftentimes  distort  their  proper  impres- 
sions.    Hence,  a  man's  character  is  frequently  better  understood  by  those  unac- 
quainted with  his  person  than  by  those  round  about  him.   And,  still  more  frequently, 
it  is  only  when  distance  of  space  or  time  removes  the  sensuous  presence  that  the 
spiritual   qualities  of    a   man   become  thoroughly  understood.      And,  upon  this 
principle,  too,  it  is  that  a  friend  removed  from  us  by  death,  soon  loses,  in  our 
imagination,  his  distinctive  physical  characteristics,  whilst  his  moral  and  spiritual 
qualities  stand  out  more  and  more  clearly  defined.      To   this  objection  it  may 
possibly  be  replied,  why  should  our  love  for  Christ  be  different  from  the  love  called 
forth  by  our  living  companions  and  friends  ?     Why  since  He  was  in  all  points  like 
unto  us,  should  not  the  sensuous  mingle  with  the  spiritual  ?   I  answer,  first,  because 
it  is  unnatural ;  seeing  He  is  removed  from  our  sight,  we  can  truly  only  follow  the 
natural  law  of  our  minds  and  draw  an  ideal  representation  of  Him.     But,  secondly, 
and  most  of  all,  because  the  whole  spiritualising  influence  of  the  love  depends 
upon  its  spiritual  character.      For  the  power  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  elevate  us 
depends  upon  two  elements.     First,  although  it  is  love  for  a  son  of  man,  it  is  a  son 
of  man  who  is  not  standing  before  us  in  hard  forms  of  sense,  but  whose  very 
humanity  becomes  to  us  as  a  spiritual  essence,  who  eludes  us  when  we  attempt  to 
grasp  him,  but  who  takes  all  the  brightest  lines  our  purified  fancies  project  upon 
him.     And  this  impalpableness  of  the  sensuous  image  leads  us,  more  and  more,  to 
enter  into  the  second  element  upon  which  the  power  depends,  namely,  the  spiritual 
and  moral  qualities  of  his  nature.     By  dwelling  almost  exclusively  upon  these,  the 
mind  becomes,  as  it  were,  saturated  with  their  influences,  and  is  brought  into  closer 
and  closer  sympathy  with  them.     The  ideal  it  thus  forms  of  the  Christ  is  con- 
tinually  rising  higher  and  higher  ;    brighter  and  more  candescent  with  Divine 
holiness,  truth,  goodness,  spiritual  beauty,  the  wondrous  image  glows — no  wonder 
that  the  adoring,  quickened  soul  enthusiastically  exclaims,  "Whom  having  not 
seen  we  love."     And  the  qualities  upon  which  this  love  for  Christ  rests,  are  the 
qualities  upon  which  all  true  love  ever  rests.      For  love  is  the  going  forth  of  spirit 
to  spirit,  of  soul  to  soul — the  giving  of  one's  own  inward  spiritual  life  to  another. 
When  the  soul  thus  discerns  Him,  all  its  deepest  life  is  awakened ;  admiration, 
delight,  and  ineffable  joy  harmonise  as  melodious  chords  of  holy  music  within  its 
inmost  being  ;  it  yields  itself  in  love  to  Him  whom  thus  it  knows.     And  it  is  worth 
our  while  to  note  the  qualities  which  the  soul  thus  discerns  in  Christ  which  so  call 
forth  its  love.     1.  First  of  all,  there  is  the  Divine  truthfulness.     I  mean  the  inward 
harmony  of  the  thought  and  feeling  with  God's  law,  with  God's  idea,  with  eternal 
and  unchangeable  facts.     Stronger,  by  reason  of  this  truthfulness,  than  the  granite 
rock,  more  immovable  than  the  mountains  of  Lebanon,  He  stands  forth  for  God, 
and  for  God's  law  of  right  within  Him.     2.  But,  then,  this  truthfulness  led  to 
purity ;  for  purity  is  truth  reduced  to  life  ;  it  is  the  embodying  of  what  is  right  in 
one's  own  character.     And  you  know  how  the  Saviour  did  this.    You  know  how 
He  followed  the  right  through  evil  and  good  report.     There  may,  however,  be  all 
this,  but  in  hard  forms  like  the  granite  rock,  glittering  in  the  sun  and  standing  out 
with  its   sharply-defined,  hard  lines   against  the  sky,  exciting   our  wonder  and 
admiration,  but  touching  no  chord  of  love  in  the  heart.     3.  And  therefore  there 
must  be  love — the  gentleness  and  tenderness  of  a  loving  nature  added  on  to  and 
rising  out  of  these.     Annihilating  self,  it  seeks  to  lavish  the  resources  of  its  own 
life  and  blessedness  on  the  world  around.     And  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  manifold 
form>  in  which  this  gentle  and  tender  love  manifested  itself  in  Him  who  did  not 
cry  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets — who  brake  not  the  bruised  reed 
nor  quenched  the  smoking  flax.     But  then,  I  take  it,  that  it  is  neither  the  truthful- 
ness, the  purity,  nor  the  love  which  in  itself  and  alone  calls  forth  our  love.     But 
these  qualities  constitute,  when  existing  together  in  their  proper  proportions,  that 
wonderful  thing  which  we  call  spiritual  beauty—  a  thing  we  all  recognise,  according 
to  our  culture,  when  we  meet  with  it,  but  which  is  so  subtle  as  to  defy  our  definition. 
Whilst  theologians  have  been  constructing  their  theories  and  doctrines  about  the 
Divine  nature,  and  rival  sects  have  been  fighting  for  their  individual  shibboleths, 
the  simple,  loving  souls  of  all  churches  have,  out  of  the  brief  narratives  of  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  43 

Gospels,  been  idealising  to  themselves  the  Christ,  and  before  the  overpowermg 
spiritual  beauty  which  thus  they  have  discerned  in  His  character,  have  yielded 
their   heart's   strongest    love  and    purest   devotion.       {Jas.    Cranbrook.)  The 

belkver^s  joyful  love  : — There  have  been  those  who,  by  plausible  arguments,  have 
attempted  to  prove  that  love  to  an  unseen  Saviour  is  impossible.  Sight  is  not  of 
itself  the  foundation  or  cause  of  any  affection  to  be  dignified  by  the  name  of  love. 
It  was  not  by  sight  that  you  learned  the  character  of  your  friend  so  as  to  esteem 
him  for  its  excellence.  And  do  we  not  know  our  blessed  Saviour?  From  the 
delineations  of  the  rapt  Isaiah  and  the  simple  stories  of  the  gospel,  we  know  Him 
as  He  walked  on  earth,  as  far  as  men  need  know.  And  besides  this  blessed  book, 
we  have  other  sources  of  knowledge.  The  works  of  nature  are  ever  telling  of  His 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness ;  are  ever  exciting  to  His  love.  The  history  of  the 
Church,  which  is  the  body  of  Christ,  is  another  continuous  revelation  of  His 
character,  more  perfect  now  than  in  any  former  age.  Just  as  you  learn  the  temper 
of  your  friend  by  markmg  the  methods  which  he  uses  in  governing  his  household, 
you  may  read  the  heart  of  our  Saviour  by  interpreting  His  deaUngs  with  the 
Church.  But  our  most  intimate  and  personal  knowledge  of  the  Kedeemer  is 
obtained  by  personal  experience  and  by  the  revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  our 
hearts.  But  our  text  speaks  of  joy  as  well  as  love :  "  In  whom  though  now  you 
see  Him  not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." 
They  always  exist  together.  Who  ever  thinks  of  a  love  which  does  not  convey 
satisfaction  and  delight  ?  And  who  ever  imagines  that  genuine  happiness  can  be 
enjoyed  where  the  pure  affections  of  the  heart  have  no  exercise  ?  Wherever  there 
exists  true  faith  and  love  to  Christ,  there  must  be,  to  some  extent,  happiness  and 
delight  in  Him.  And  this  is  just  in  proportion  to  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  our 
confidence  and  affection.      (N.  C.  Locke,  D.D.)  Love  of  Christ : — Affections 

are  evoked,  not  created,  educed  from  within,  not  implanted  from  without.  The 
quality  of  the  object  determines  indeed  the  kind  and  quality  of  the  affection. 
Perfect  love  is  perfect  joy  only  where  the  loving  and  the  loved  are  alike  good,  holy, 
and  true.  Love  again  may  be  evoked  in  one  of  two  ways — by  instinct  and  nature, 
or  by  reason  and  spirit.  If  a  man  loves  his  son  simply  because  the  boy  happens  to 
be  his,  or  a  woman  her  daughter  simply  because  the  girl  chances  to  be  hers,  and 
for  no  other  and  higher  reason,  the  love  is  only  blind  impulse  ;  it  has  no  regard  to 
actual  or  possible  spiritual  qualities,  or  any  high  moral  end.  But  love  awakened 
through  the  reason  and  in  the  spirit  is  spiritual  love.  The  qualities  admired  belong 
to  the  spirit,  the  eye  that  sees  is  the  spirit's,  and  the  admiration  excited  lives  in  the 
spirit.  Instinctive  affection  is  blind  and  arbitrary,  but  spiritual  is  not.  Many  a 
man  would  perceive  and  despise  in  another  boy  the  moral  qualities  he  scarcely 
observes  in  his  own  son.  The  first  is  due  to  a  relation,  natural  or  arbitrary,  but 
the  second  to  worth,  personal,  inherent,  moral,  real.  Instinctive  affection  may  be 
blind  and  impure,  but  spiritual  must  be  altogether  lovely  and  true.  Perhaps  it 
may  now  be  superfluous  to  remark  that  the  Christian's  love  to  Christ  must  be  of 
the  latter  kind.  -The  sight  is  spiritual  and  the  affection  the  same.  The  love  may 
lack  the  passion  and  intensity  of  instinct,  but  it  has  the  calmness  and  the  power  of 
spirit.  The  claims  of  Christ  have  not  appealed  to  eye  and  ear,  but  to  heart  and 
mind.  We  love  Him,  not  for  His  beautiful  face,  or  fine  voice,  or  winsome  ways, 
but  for  His  mercy,  and  grace,  the  righteousness  and  truth  that  blend  so  perfectly  in 
His  character.  The  moral  excellencies  of  Jesus,  and  these  alone,  can  be  inex- 
haustible sources  of  spiritual  love.  This  distinction  may  enable  us  to  deal  with  a 
too  common  difficulty.  Many  a  devout  soul  has  said,  "I  cannot  love  my  Saviour 
as  I  love  my  child.  I  db  not,  I  cannot,  love  God  more  than  I  love  my  husband. 
There  is  an  intensity  in  my  affection  for  my  family  and  friends  entirely  wanting  in 
my  affection  for  Divine  things.  I  need  to  be  reconverted.  I  must  be  altogether 
wrong."  But  the  error  lies  in  confounding  things  that  differ.  Man's  affection  for 
man  must  be  more  or  less  instinctive.  Man's  love  for  Christ  must  be  altogether 
spiritual.  Our  love  for  Christ,  then,  while  wanting  the  warmth  of  our  love  for 
man,  has  more  depth  and  root  in  our  being;  while  its  form  is  less  fervent,  its 
essence  is  more  real.  The  one  seems  to  be,  but  the  other  in  reality  is  the  greater. 
Indeed,  it  cannot  be  rightly  compared  to  our  love  for  the  living.  It  resembles 
much  more  closely  our  love  for  the  dead.  Death  at  once  sanctifies  and  sph-itualises 
our  affection.  It  is,  then,  no  hardship  to  have  an  invisible  Saviour.  We  can  love 
Him  the  better  that  He  is  unseen.  Were  God  localised.  He  would  seem  to  our 
thought  much  less  awful  and  majestic  than  when  He  is  conceived  as  everywhere, 
like  the  air  we  breathe,  the  element  in  which  all  beings  live.    It  is,  perhaps,  not 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u>.  i. 

too  much  to  say  that  the  disciples  never  loved  Christ  aright  till  He  became  invisible. 
Their  love  had  much  of  the  intensity  of  passion,  co-existed  with  much  self-seeking. 
But  when  Jesus  ascended  all  this  was  changed.  Their  affections  were  enlarged 
and  clarified.  Note,  now,  how  this  invisibility  enables  the  mind  to  glorify,  to 
idealise  Jesus,  as  the  object  of  its  love.  The  senses  are  very  prosaic  and  tyrannical. 
They  see  but  a  little  way  into  a  man,  and  retain  only  what  of  him  is  superficial 
and  transient.  The  image  of  Christ  that  haunted  the  disciples  would  be  very 
unequal,  one  of  blended  power  and  weakness,  glory  and  shame.  He  would  rise  in 
their  memories  now  as  a  weary  man,  sitting  on  Jacob's  well,  or  asleep  in  the  hinder 
part  of  the  ship,  and  again  as  a  mighty  God,  feeding  the  hungry  multitude,  or 
stilling  the  tempest.  Now,  He  would  be  seen  amid  the  glories  of  the  transfigura- 
tion. But  in  our  case  there  is  no  such  hindrance.  We  enjoy  the  privilege  of  never 
having  seen  Jesus.  The  Saviour,  we  know,  is  one  whose  griefs  are  past,  whose 
glories  have  come,  "  whom  having  not  seen  we  love."  Imagination  should  often 
come  to  the  help  of  love.  Does  not  the  loved,  lost  mother  appear  adorned  with 
every  grace,  and  the  father  apparelled  in  every  virtue?  Does  not  boyhood,  too, 
gleam  to  the  old  man,  when  he  recalls  the  meadows  on  which  he  played  with  a 
light  such  as  the  sun  never  threw  from  its  burning  face  ?  And  since  imagination 
can  lend  a  brilliance  of  hue,  a  splendour  of  colour  to  the  objects  of  time,  calling 
forth  deeper  and  tenderer  love,  why  not  to  the  Object  at  once  of  sacred  memory 
and  eternal  hope — the  invisible  Saviour  ?  The  love  of  the  invisible  Jesus  may  thus 
be  developed  in  us  like  any  other  normal  affection,  and  our  growth  in  grace  will  be 
commensurate  with  this  development.  Here  we  may  note  God's  wisdom  and  good- 
ness in  thus  enlisting  our  natural  capacities  on  the  side  of  our  own  eternal  interests. 
But  can  we  define  this  love  ?  What  are  its  constituent  elements  ?  Love,  like  light, 
seems  simple,  but  is  in  truth  compound.  In  a  simple  beam  of  white  light  there 
are  varied  colours.  Pass  the  beam  through  a  prism  and  it  breaks  into  those  bright 
and  dark  hues  that  blend  so  beautifully  in  the  rainbow.  The  beam  is  one.  yet 
several,  each  constituent  colour  being  necessary  to  its  very  existence.  So  love  has 
its  essential  elements,  each  complementary  to  the  other,  and  all  combining  to  give 
it  real  and  ample  being — goodwill,  approbation,  delight,  desire,  and  trust.  Where 
any  of  these  is  not,  love  cannot  be.  O  Thou  Christ  of  the  living  God,  teach  us  to 
love  Thee,  not  simply  as  a  short  and  easy  method  of  dehverance,  not  as  a  con- 
venient way  of  escaping  the  terrible  pains  of  hell ;  but  as  our  Brother,  our  Fellow, 
our  Friend,  our  one  Supreme  Good,  in  whom  alone  everlasting  happiness  and 
peace  can  be  found  !  And  now,  consider  what  a  privilege,  what  an  honour  thou 
hast  in  being  permitted  to  love  the  invisible  Jesus.  Pencil  cannot  delineate  His 
perfection  ;  colour  cannot  express  His  beauty.  The,  human  form  must  be  trans- 
figured and  transformed  into  the  Divine,  ere  it  can  tell  the  glory  and  the  grace  of 
the  indwelling  Christ.  We  would  not  then,  O  Christ,  wish  Thee  to  become  visible 
— One  we  could  see  with  our  fleshly  eyes,  and  handle  with  our  fleshly  hands. 
Eemain  Thou  within  the  veil ;  there  Thou  art  worthier  to  be  loved ;  and  while 
here  we  abide  we  shall  enjoy  the  blessedness  of  those  who,  because  they  have  not 
seen,  have  only  the  more  believed  and  the  better  loved.  {A.  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D.) 
Seeing  is  not  believing,  but  believing  is  seei7ig  : — I.  How  come  we  into  contact  with 
Jesus  ?  The  uppermost  point  of  contact,  the  most  apparent  in  the  believer's  life, 
is  love.  "  Whom  not  having  seen  ye  love."  But  the  text  tells  of  another  point  of 
contact,  "  In  Whom,  though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing."  We  are  again 
reminded  here  that  we  do  not  see,  but  we  are  assured  of  the  possibility  of  believing 
in  Him  without  sight.  Ah,  have  I  not  by  faith  made  real  to  myself  the  Saviour 
on  the  Cross  ?  In  Christ  you  have  believed,  and  you  know  that  your  sin  is  forgiven, 
that  His  righteousness  is  imputed  to  you,  and  that  you  stand  accepted  in  the 
Beloved.  This  is  not  to  you  a  matter  of  hope ;  it  is  a  matter  of  firm  conviction. 
You  have  not  seen,  but  you  have  believed.  As  to  His  resurrection  also.  You  did 
not  see  him  when  He  rose  early  in  the  morning  from  the  tomb  and  the  watch- 
men in  terror  fled  far  away,  but  you  have  believed  in  Him  as  risen.  I  believe  that 
because  He  hves  I  shall  live  also,  and  it  is  possible  to  believe  this  as  firmly  as 
though  we  saw  it.  Christ  is  in  heaven  pleading  for  us.  We  cannot  see  the  epliod 
and  the  breastplate,  but  we  believe  that  He  intercedes  successfully  there  for  us.  We 
choose  Him  to  be  our  advocate  in  every  case  of  sore  distress,  in  every  case  of 
grievous  sin  ;  we  believe  that  He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come 
unto  God  by  Him,  and  we  leave  our  suit  with  Him  in  perfect  confidence.  Still  the 
point  is,  that  carnal  people  will  imagine  that  if  there  could  be  something  to  touch 
or  smell  they  should  get  on,  but  mere  believing  and  loving  are  too  hard  for  them. 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  45 

Yet  such  thought  is  not  reasonable.  An  illiterate  man  cannot  see  that  mental 
work  is  work  at  all,  but  he  who  is  capable  of  mental  labour  soon  feels  the  reality  of 
it.  Just  transfer  that  thought.  Coming  into  contact  with  Christ  by  touch  looks 
to  most  people  to  be  most  real,  that  is  because  their  animal  nature  is  uppermost ; 
coming  into  contact  with  Jesus  by  the  spirit  seems  to  them  to  be  unreal,  only 
because  they  know  nothing  of  spiritual  things.  Thoughtless  persons  think  that 
mental  pain  is  nothing.  Mere  animal  men  will  often  say,  "  I  can  understand  the 
headache,  I  can  understand  the  pain  of  having  a  leg  cut  off";  but  the  pain  of 
injured  affection,  or  of  receiving  ingratitude  from  a  trusted  friend,  this  by  the 
rough  mind  is  thought  to  be  no  pain  at  all.  "  Oh,"  says  he,  "  I  could  put  up  with 
that."  But  I  ask  you  who  have  minds,  Is  there  any  pain  more  real  than  mental 
pain  ?  Just  so  the  mental  operation — for  it  is  a  mental  operation — of  coming  into 
contact  with  Christ  by  loving  Him  and  trusting  Him  is  the  most  real  thing  in  all  the 
world,  and  no  one  will  think  it  unreal  who  has  once  exercised  it.  II.  What  virtue 
IS  THIS  WHICH  FLOWS  FROM  HiM  ?  1.  The  first  result  of  trusting  and  loving  Christ 
is  joy,  and  joy  of  a  most  remarkable  kind.  It  is  far  above  all  common  joy.  It  is 
spoken  of  as  "  joy  unspeakable."  Now  earth-born  joys  can  be  told  to  the  fuU.  But 
spirit-born  joys  cannot  be  told  because  we  have  not  yet  received  a  spiritual  lan- 
guage. I  have  seen  men's  faces  lit  up  with  heaven's  sunlight  when  the  joy  of  the 
Lord  has  been  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts.  The  very  people  who  a  day  ago  looked 
dull  and  heavy  look  as  if  they  could  dance  for  mirth  because  they  have  found  the 
Saviour,  and  their  soul  is  at  peace  through  Him.  The  apostle  adds  that  it  is  "  full 
of  glory."  Many  sensual  joys  are  full  of  shame — a  man  with  a  conscience  dares 
not  tell  them  to  his  fellows.  The  joy  of  making  money  is  not  full  of  glory,  nor  is 
the  joy  of  killing  one's  fellows  in  battle.  There  is  no  joy  like  that  of  the  Christian, 
for  he  dares  to  speak  of  it  everywhere,  in  every  company.  2.  The  apostle  mentions 
another  blessing  received  by  loving  and  trusting  Christ.  He  says,  "  receiving  the 
end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  Every  man  who  trusts  and 
loves  Christ  is  saved.  When  we  trusted  Jesus,  though  we  used  no  forms  and  cere- 
monies, we  received  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  III.  What  follows  then  from  the 
WHOLE  of  THIS  ?  1.  It  follows,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  state  of  joy  and  salvation 
is  the  fitting  and  expected  condition  of  every  believer  in  Christ.  2.  There  is 
another  inference  to  be  drawn  from  my  subject,  and  that  is  for  the  seeking  soul.  If 
you  want  comfort  go  to  Christ.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Love  a  way  to  faith  : — You 
notice  that  in  the  apostle's  words  love  comes  before  belief.  This  is  certainly  not 
what  we  should  have  expected.  How  can  we  love  before  we  believe?  Must  we  not 
first  feel  convinced  of  the  reality  of  Christ  and  the  genuineness  of  His  claims  ? 
And  yet,  if  we  take  the  case  of  one  who  saw  Christ,  is  it  not  clear  that  love  to  Him 
must  have  preceded  faith  ?  Would  not  love  spring  up  at  once  in  witnessing  some 
act  of  Christ  or  listening  to  some  of  His  words  ?  And  yet  faith  may  have  involved 
more  difiiculty.  It  was  impossible  not  to  love ;  but  how  was  it  possible  to  believe, 
in  spite  of  all  the  difficulties  lying  in  their  expectations  regarding  the  Messiah  ? 
Nay  ;  do  we  not  see  the  love  of  the  disciples  to  their  Master  actually  struggling  to 
attain  to  faith  in  the  face  of  their  old  beliefs?  Love  took  no  heed  of  these  obstacles. 
For  it,  in  view  of  Christ,  there  was  no  obstruction.  It  went  straight  to  its  object. 
But  faith  could  not  avoid  the  encounter.  It  had  to  grapple  with  its  enemies.  Is 
the  case  different  with  men  now  ?  Do  not  men  in  general  learn  to  love  Christ 
before  they  ever  ask  the  question  of  His  reality  and  the  genuineness  of  His  claims  ? 
And  here  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  the  adaptation  of  the  Gospels  especially, 
and  also,  but  not  so  markedly,  of  the  Epistles  to  awaken  love  above  all.  The  appeal 
is  not  made  mainly  and  directly  to  the  understanding  and  reason.  Men  are  not 
argued  with.  There  is  no  elaborate  demonstration  presented.  There  is  no  shutting 
up  of  men  by  inexorable  logic.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  a  picture  presented  of 
a  great  and  marvellous  life  and  a  death  of  outward  ignominy  but  transcendent 
moral  glory.  Observe  how  insinuating  this  appeal  to  love  is.  It  works  itself  into 
your  heart  before  you  are  aware.  You  are  surprised  into  admiration  and  into  love. 
The  life  of  Jesus  is  so  exquisitively  human,  so  full  of  little  touches  that  mean 
nothing  to  the  bare  intellect,  but  are  mighty  with  the  heart.  The  great  qualities  of 
Christ  have  the  effect  of  rousing  some  answering  feelings  in  the  souls  of  men. 
Every  truly  elevated  life  has  such  an  influence ;  but  that  of  Christ  in  an  altogether 
transcendent  manner.  Men,  in  this  way,  by  a  personal  attachment  to  Christ,  or 
admiration  of  Him,  or  enthusiasm  for  Him,  according  as  their  particular  bent  may 
be,  grow  into  a  love  of  all  things  noble  and  pure.  And  then  another  result  appears. 
Keeping  pace  with  this  love  of  righteousness,  penitence  shows  itself.    A  sense  of  sin. 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  a  bitter  shame  on  account  of  it,  grows  on  the  man  who  earnestly  admires 
Christ.  What  takes  place  when  this  stage  is  reached?  The  man  is  now  in 
a  position  to  appreciate  the  rich  and  tender  things  which  Christ  utters  about  for- 
giveness. And  now  he  comes  to  understand  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour.  Whenever 
sin  is  felt  to  be  a  burden,  a  deeper  insight  is  gained  into  Christ.  And  now  faith  in 
Christ  has  been  reached.  The  needs  of  the  soul,  combining  with  love  to  Christ, 
have  called  out  faith.  They  have  made  Christ  real.  When  faith  in  Christ  begins 
to  work,  then  love  becomes  both  wider  and  more  earnest.  Then  love  feels  obligation. 
It  feels  that  it  has  got  a  task  to  fulfil  and  a  debt  to  discharge.  Faith  becomes 
henceforward  the  great  feeder  and  tributary  of  love,  bringing  down  supplies  to  it 
from  all  the  mountains  of  truth  and  showers  of  grace.  Let  us  notice  one  or  two 
inferences  from  this  line  of  thought.  We  see  how  love  to  an  unseen  Christ  operates 
in  keeping  Him  near  to  the  soul  in  spite  of  the  lapse  of  centuries.  There  are 
humble,  earnest  souls  to-day  in  myriads  that  feel  Christ  more  real  and  nearer  than 
many  who  had  seen  Him  in  the  flesh.  How  finely  the  natural  and  the  spiritual 
blend  in  love  to  Christ !  There  are  those  who  never  seem  to  get  beyond  the  natural. 
They  love  Christ  as  they  love  any  great  benefactor  of  the  world.  And  who  can 
tell  just  precisely  when  his  love  to  Christ  rose  out  of  this  sphere,  and  became 
spiritual ;  or  when  any  such  love  becomes  spiritual,  aspiring,  and  active  ?  Is  not 
all  true  love  to  good  and  right  at  bottom  and  ultimately  a  love  to  God,  if  only  it 
knew  itself  ?  Must  we  not  speak  of  it  as  both  an  inspiration  and  an  instrument 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  who  besets  men  everywhere  and  broods  over  them  ?  Is  not  the 
manifestation  of  Christ  the  one  grand  means  by  which  this  latent  love  of  goodness 
is  kindled  and  lifted  up,  and  recognises  its  centre  and  home  ?  Is  not  the  immense 
power  that  Christ  has  over  the  natural  admiration  of  men  one  of  His  own  greatest 
weapons  and  one  of  the  things  which  the  Spirit  of  God  most  uses  ?  And  is  not 
this  one  of  the  main  adaptations  of  the  gospel  to  the  whole  world  ?  And  if  a  man 
attempts  no  tour  round  the  world,  but  simply  seeks  what  medicine  he  can  apply 
to  human  hearts,  what  antidote  he  can  find  for  sin  and  woe,  how  he  can  touch 
souls,  and  win  them  out  of  despondency  and  darkness,  hardness  and  sloth  and 
shame  into  light  and  love  and  joy ;  if  he  is  only  intent  on  sweetening  and  ennobling 
human  life,  he  will  find  there  is  but  one  simple,  ready,  efiicacious  universal 
means,  the  story  of  that  marvellous  life  and  death — love  to  the  unseen  Christ 
(J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  Christ,  though  invisible,  the  object  of  devout  affection  : — It  is 
familiar  to  all  experience  and  observation  how  much  the  action  of  our  spiritual 
nature  is  dependent  on  the  senses,  especially  how  much  the  power  of  objects  to 
interest  the  affections  depends  on  their  being  objects  of  sight.  The  objects  we  can 
see  give  a  more  positive  and  direct  impression  of  reality ;  there  can  be  no  dubious 
surmise  whether  they  exist  or  not.  The  sense  of  their  presence  is  more  absolute. 
Again,  the  good  or  evil,  pleasure  or  grievance,  which  the  visible  objects  cause  to  us, 
are  often  immediate ;  they  are  now ;  without  any  anticipation  I  am  pleased,  bene- 
fited— or  perhaps  distressed.  Whereas  the  objects  of  faith  can  be  regarded  as  to 
have  their  effect  upon  us  in  futurity.  Visible  objects,  when  they  have  been  seen, 
can  be  clearly  kept  in  mind  in  absence — during  long  periods — at  the  greatest 
distance.  But  the  great  objects  of  faith  having  never  been  seen,  the  mind  has 
no  express  type  to  revert  to.  With  visible  objects  (speaking  of  intelligent  beings) 
we  can  have  a  sensible  and  definite  communication.  Invisible  beings  do  not  aft'ord 
us  this  perfect  sense  of  communication.  With  visible  beings  (that  is,  with  human 
beings)  we  have  the  sense  of  equality,  of  one  kind  ;  we  are  of  the  same  nature  and 
economy  ;  in  the  same  general  condition  of  humanity  and  mortality.  But  as  to  the 
unseen  existences  we  are  altogether  out  of  their  order.  With  the  visible  beings, 
again,  we  can  have  a  certain  sense  of  appropriation ;  can  obtain  an  interest  in 
them  which  they  will  acknowledge.  But  the  invisible  beings !  they  have  a  high 
relationship  of  their  own !  They  stand  aloof,  and  far  outside  of  the  circle  within 
which  we  could  comprehend  what  we  can  call  ours.  Such  are  some  of  the  advan- 
tages of  converse  with  objects  that  are  seen  over  that  with  the  invisible.  And,  in 
view  of  this,  taken  exclusively,  it  was  a  high  privilege  that  was  enjoyed  by  those 
who  saw  and  conversed  with  our  Lord  on  earth.  But  this  is  only  one  side  of  the 
subject.  Look  a  moment  at  the  other.  And  we  need  not  fear  to  assert — that,  on 
the  whole,  it  is  a  high  advantage  not  to  have  seen  -Jesus  Christ ;  an  advantage  in 
favour  of  the  affections  claimed  to  be  devoted  to  Him.  We  need  not  dwell  on  the 
possibility  of  feeling  a  great  interest  in  objects  we  have  never  beheld.  EecoUect 
what  a  measure  of  sentiment,  of  affection  in  its  various  modes,  has  been  given  to 
the  illustrious  heroes,  deliverers  of  their  country,  avengers  of  oppression,  and  men 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  47 

of  transcendent  intellectual  power.  But  there  is  a  nobler  manifestation  of  this 
possibility.  Think  of  all  the  affection  of  human  hearts  that  has  been  given  to  the 
Saviour  of  the  world  since  He  withdrew  His  visible  presence  from  it !  And  we  still 
assert  that  it  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  affection  of  His  disciples  toward  Him  that 
they  see  Him  not.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed." 
But,  more  than  this  ;  revert  in  thought  to  the  personal  manifestation  of  our  Lord 
on  earth,  and  consider  how  it  would  act  on  the  believing  spectator's  mind.  Sublime 
greatness  would,  must,  by  an  inevitable  law  of  human  feeling,  be  reduced,  shaded, 
diminished,  as  to  its  impression  on  the  mind,  by  being  shrouded  and  presented  in 
a  mere  human  form.  Consider  also  that,  in  beholding  a  glorious  and  Divine  nature 
in  such  a  manifestation,  the  affection  of  those  devoted  to  him  would  fix  very  much, 
often  chiefly,  on  the  mere  human  quality  of  the  being  before  them,  and  therefore 
would  be  familiarised,  shall  we  say  vulgarised,  down  to  that  proportion ;  it  might 
be  most  warm  and  cordial,  but  not  elevated  and  awful.  Consider  besides  that, 
under  the  full  direct  impression  of  sight,  there  would  be  a  great  restriction  on  faith, 
acting  in  the  way  of  imagination.  The  mind  does  not  know  how  to  expand  into 
splendid  ideal  conception  upon  an  object  presented  close  and  plain  and  familiar  to 
sight.  Should  not  such  considerations  make  it  evident  that  to  see  the  Messiah  in 
His  personal  manifestation  was  a  mode  of  contemplating  Him  very  inferior,  for  the 
excitement  of  the  sublimer  kind  of  affection,  to  that  which  we  have  to  exercise  by 
faith  ?  The  text  may  suggest  to  us  an  additional  idea,  which  it  could  not  to  those 
to  whom  the  apostle  wrote.  We  not  only  have  not  seen  Him,  but  we  live  very  long 
after  the  time  in  which  He  could  be  seen ;  we,  therefore,  in  endeavouring  to  form  a  sub- 
lime conception  of  Him,  can  add,  and  accumulate  upon  the  idea,  all  the  glory  that 
has  arisen  to  Him  from  the  progress  of  His  cause  in  the  world  ever  since.  (/.  Foster.) 
Gratitude  to  Christ : — I.  Gratitude  naturally  begets  an  affectionate  attachment 
TO  ITS  OBJECT.  We  ought  not  only  to  guard  against  an  error  too  prevalent  in  our 
own  times,  namely,  the  excluding  the  affections  altogether  from  religion,  and 
imputing  the  signs  of  them  in  others  to  the  impulse  of  a  heated  imagination,  but 
we  ought  to  cherish  their  influence  as  a  becoming  expression  of  our  love  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  a  pleasing  symptom  of  our  sincerity,  when  we  make  a  public  profession 
of  it.  II.  It  is  a  natural  effect  of  gratitude  to  keep  the  object  of  it  much  in 
OUR  thoughts.  Do  the  privileges  and  benefits  of  the  gospel  interest  our  affections. 
Do  our  hearts  burn  within  us  when  we  contemplate  His  doctrine,  His  character. 
His  astonishing  humility  and  benevolence  ?  III.  Another  effect  of  gratitude  is 
TO  proceed  to  outward  expressions  of  those  thankful  sentiments  which  inspire 
our  hearts.  When  we  either  love  or  hate,  or  grieve  or  rejoice  in  an  intense  degree 
we  are  sensibly  gratified  by  the  verbal  expression  of  these  affections.  Words  not 
only  flow  from  the  affections,  but  react  upon  them,  and  add  to  their  vivacity  and 
strength.  IV.  Gratitude  naturally  disposes  us  to  do  everything  in  our  power 
agreeable  to  our  benefactor,  or  that  tends  to  promote  his  interest.  To  pretend 
to  love  Jesus  Christ  while  we  love  our  sins  and  hold  them  fast  is  not  less  absurd 
than  it  would  be  for  a  man  to  avow  allegiance  to  his  prince  while  leagued  with 
those  rebellious  subjects  who  have  conspired  against  his  person  and  government. 
When  overtaken  in  a  fault  are  we  affected  with  sorrow,  not  only  from  the  fear  of 
danger,   but  from  the  consciousness   of    ingratitude?     V.  Gratitude  naturally 

LEADS    us    TO    GLORY    IN    OUR    CONNECTION    WITH    OUR   BENEFACTORS.        JeSUS,    &   man    Of 

sorrows  while  He  tabernacled  on  earth,  is  now  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  God.  Our  gratitude  cannot  add  to  His  glory,  nor  can  our  ingratitude 
detract  from  it.  But  His  Church,  or  kingdom  on  earth,  like  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world,  is  not  exempted  from  the  vicissitudes  of  prosperous  and  adverse  fates.  How 
many  alarming  symptoms  of  the  declining  credit  and  influence  of  the  Christian 
religion  are  exhibited  in  the  age  and  country  in  which  we  live !  (T.  Somerville, 
D.D.)  In  whom  .  .  ,  believing',  ye  rejoice. — The  duty  and  discipline  of  Christian 
joy : — I.  The  grand  possibilities  of  Christian  joy — unspeakable  and  full  of 
GLORY.  It  is  quite  possible  to  be  beset  all  about  with  cares  and  troubles  and  yet  to 
feel  a  pure  fountain  of  celestial  gladness  welling  up  in  our  inmost  hearts,  sweet 
amidst  bitter  waters.  There  may  be  life  beneath  the  snow.  There  may  be  fire 
burning,  like  the  old  Greek  fire,  below  the  water.  A  man  has  this  power  if  he  have 
two  objects  of  contemplation,  to  one  or  other  of  which  he  may  turn  his  mind^he 
can  choose  which  of  the  two  he  will  turn  to.  Like  a  railway  signalman,  you  may 
either  flash  the  light  through  the  pure  white  glass  or  the  darkly  coloured  one.  You 
may  either  choose  to  look  at  everything  through  the  medium  of  the  sorrows  that 
belong  to  time,  or  through  the  medium  of  the  joys  that  flow  from  eternity.     The 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

question  is,  which  of  the  two  do  we  choose  shall  be  uppermost  in  our  hearts  and  give 
the  colour  to  our  experience.  And  then  the  text  reminds  us  that  the  gladness  which 
thus  belongs  to  the  Christian  life  is  silent  and  a  transfigured  "  joy  unspeakable  and 
glorified,"  as  the  word  might  be  rendered.  "  He  is  a  poor  man  who  can  count  his 
flock,"  said  the  old  Latin  proverb.  Those  joys  are  on  the  surface  that  can  be 
spoken.  The  deep  river  goes  silently,  with  equable  flow,  to  the  great  ocean ;  it  is 
the  little  shallow  brook  that  chatters  amongst  the  pebbles.  The  true  Christian  joy 
is  glorified,  says  Peter.  The  glory  of  heaven  shines  upon  it  and  transfigures  it. 
It  is  suffused  and  filled  with  the  glory  for  which  the  Christian  hopes,  like  Stephen 
when  "  God's  glory  smote  him  on  the  face"  and  made  it  shine  as  an  angel's.  II. 
The  one  great  act  by  which  this  possibility  of  gladness  is  turned  into  a  reality. 
"  In  Whom,  though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing  ye  rejoice."  The  act  of  faith 
is  the  condition  of  joy.  Joy  springs  from  the  contemplation  or  experience  of  some- 
thing calculated  to  excite  it,  and  the  more  real,  permanent,  and  all-sufficient  that 
object  the  fuller  and  surer  the  joy.  But  where  can  we  find  such  an  object  as  Him 
with  Whom  we  are  brought  into  union  by  our  faith  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  all-sufiicient, 
full  of  pity,  full  of  beauty  and  righteousness,  all  that  we  can  desire — and  all  this  for 
ever.  But  mark,  the  language  of  our  text  shows  that  our  gladness  wUl  be  accurately 
contemporaneous  with  our  trust.  As  long  as  we  are  exercising  faith,  so  long  shall 
we  experience  joy — not  one  instant  longer.  It  is  like  a  piano,  whose  note  ceases  the 
moment  you  lift  your  finger  from  the  key — not  like  an  organ,  in  which  the  sound 
persists  for  a  time  after.  III.  The  gift  which  enhances  joy.  The  exercise  of  faith 
is  itself  joy,  apart  from  what  faith  secures.  We  stretch  out  our  hands  to  Christ, 
and  the  act  is  blessedness.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  joy,  and  the  salvation  of  our 
souls,  which  we  receive  as  its  end,  is  the  great  reason  for  joy.  Salvation  is  past, 
present,  and  future.  Here  it  is  clearly  regarded  as  present.  That  present  salvation 
will  be  a  source  of  pure  and  noble  joy.  If  my  heart  is  humbly  and  even  tremulously 
resting  upon  Him,  I  have  got,  in  the  measure  of  my  faith,  the  real  germ  of  all 
salvation.  What  are  the  elements  of  which  salvation  consists  ?  The  fact  and  the 
sense  of  forgiveness  to  begin  with.  Well,  I  have  that,  have  I  not,  if  I  trust  Christ  ? 
A  growing  possession  of  pure  desires,  heaven-wrought  tastes,  of  all  that  is  called 
in  the  Bible  "  the  new  man  "—well !  I  have  that,  surely,  if  I  trust  Him.  Such 
progressive  salvation  is  given  to  me  if  I  am  trusting  in  Him,  "  Whom,  having  not 
seen,  I  love."  All  these  will  tend  to  joy.  The  present  salvation  points  onwards  to 
its  own  completion,  and  in  that  way  becomes  further  a  source  of  joy.  In  its  depths 
we  see  reflected  a  blue  heaven  with  many  a  star.  The  salvation  here  touches  the 
soul  alone,  but  salvation  in  its  perfect  form  touches  the  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  and 
transforms  all  the  outward  nature  to  correspond  to  these  and  makes  a  worthy  dwell- 
ing for  perfected  men.  That  prospect  brings  joy  beyond  the  reach  of  aught  else  to 
afford.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christian  joy: — I.  Its  source.  1.  Belief  in  the 
unseen  Christ  is  present  joy  because  it  creates  harmony  in  the  soul.  2.  Because  it 
fills  the  heart  with  the  deepest  love.  II.  Its  nature.  1.  It  is  inexpressible  from 
the  depth  of  its  emotion.  2.  It  is  the  earnest  of  the  future  heaven.  (E.  L.  Hull, 
B.A.)  Believers  rejoicing  : — I.  The  Christian's  rejoicing.  Joy  belongs  to  them, 
and  it  belongs  to  them  only  in  this  lower  world.  Joy  is  their  duty,  their  privilege  ; 
joy  is  commanded,  promised,  insured :  their  joy  is  begun.  II.  The  source  of  this 
JOY.  There  is  enough  in  Christ  to  relieve  every  want,  to  fulfil  every  hope,  to  sur- 
pass every  wish.  III.  The  medium  of  this  joy.  1.  Faith  is  the  only  medium  of 
an  acquaintance  with  Him.  2.  Faith  is  the  medium  of  all  our  intercourse  with 
Him.  IV.  The  inexpressibleness  of  this  joy.  Who  can  describe  its  sweetness, 
its  efficiency?  V.  The  excellency  of  this  joy.  (W.Jay.)  Rejoiciny  indicates 
strenyth  : — Oh,  that  we  might  have  such  joy  as  that  which  inspired  the  men  at  the 
battle  of  Leuthen !  They  were  singing  a  Christian  song  as  they  went  into  battle. 
A  general  said  to  the  king,  "  Shall  I  stop  those  people  singing?  "  "  No,"  said  the 
king.  "  Men  that  can  sing  like  that  can  fight."  [T.  De  Witt  Talmaye.)  Joy 
unKpeakahle : — It  were  a  poor  thing  if  he  that  hath  it  could  tell  it  all  out.  {T. 
Leiyhton.)  Deep  joys : — It  is  with  joys  as  they  say  of  cares  and  griefs,  the 
deepest  waters  run  stillest.     (Ibid.)  Heart  joys  : — True  joy  is  a  solid,  grave 

thing,  dwells  more  in  the  heart  than  in  the  face ;  whereas  base  and  false  joys  are 
but  superficial,  skin  deep  (as  we  say) ;  they  are  all  in  the  face.  (Ibid.)  Glorified 
joys  : — Glorified  already^a  piece  of  God's  kingdom  and  heaven's  happiness  afore- 
hand.  (J.  Trnpp.)  Glorious  enjoyment : — When  Mr.  Simeon,  of  Cambridge,  was 
dying,  a  friend  sitting  by  his  bedside  asked  of  what  he  was  particularly  thinking. 
•*  I  don't  think  now,"  he  replied,  with  great  animation.     "  I  am  enjoying."     {Tin- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  49 

Zin/j's  Illustrations.)        Receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your 
souL — The  godly,  by  faith,  do  even  here  enjoy  salvation  : — The  servants  of  God,  by 
faith,  do  even  here  enjoy  salvation  and  eternal  life,  even  presently  we  have  glory, 
though  not  in  its  fulness.     1.  Because  we  are  as  sure  of  it  as  if  we  had  it,  as 
having  God's  hand  for  it,  even  His  word,  His  seal,  His  sacrament.    2.  Because  even 
here  we  have  the  earnest  of  it,  which  is  His  Spirit.     When  earnest  is  given  between 
honest  men  there  is  no  going  back,  and  shall  God  say  and  not  do  it  ?     3.  Because 
by  faith  we  are  already  entered  into  the  first  degree  of  it ;  being  knit  to  Christ, 
and  so  perfectly  justified,  we  are  come  to  the  suburbs  of   our  glory,  and  are,  as 
it  were,  at  the  gate,  lacking  nothing  but  to  be  let  in  by  death.     (John  Rogers.) 
Your  personal  salvation  (Psa.  cxix.  41) : — I  shall  aim  at  commending  the  salvation 
of  God  to  those  of  you  who  possess  it,  that  you  may  be  the  more  grateful  for  your 
choice  inheritance  ;    and  still  more  shall  I  labour  to   commend  it  to  those  who 
possess  it  not,  that  having  some  idea  of  the  greatness  of  its  value  they  may  be 
stirred  up  to  seek  it  for  themselves.     I.  I  shall  try  to  commend  the  salvation  of 
God  by  opening  up  what  Peter  has  said  in  the  verses  before  us.     1.  Let  me  urge 
you  to  give  earnest  heed  to  the  salvation  of  God,  because  it  is  a  salvation  of  grace 
(ver.  10).     The  Lord  proposes  to  save  you  because  you  are  miserable  and  He  is 
merciful ;  because  you  are  necessitous  and  He  is  bountiful.     2.  Again,  your  closest 
attention  may  well  be  asked  to  the  salvation  of  God  when  you  are  told  in  the  text 
that  it  is  by  faith.     "  Eeceiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your 
souls."     "  All  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things  from  which  they  could  not 
be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses."     "  "Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
is  born  of  God."      "  He  that  believeth  in  Him  is  not  condemned."      "  He  that 
beMeveth  on  Him  hath  everlasting  lite."     3.  The  gospel  of  salvation  ought  to  be 
regarded   by  you,   for  it  has   engrossed  the  thoughts  of  prophets.     "  Of  which 
salvation  the  prophets  have  inquired  and  searched  diligently,  who  prophesied  of 
the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you."     If  men  that  had  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  were 
called  "  seers,"  nevertheless  searched  into  the  meaning  of  the  Word  which  they 
themselves  spoke,  what  ought  such  poor  things  as  we  are  to  do  in  order  to  under- 
stand the  gospel?    It  should  be  our  delight  to  read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly 
digest  the  doctrines  of  grace.     Furthermore,  when  prophecy  had  ceased,  the  Holy 
Spirit  came  upon  another  set  of  men  of  whom  our  text  speaks.     Peter  says  of  these 
things,  that  they  "  are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that  have  preached  the 
gospel  unto  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven."     4.  The  apostles 
followed  the  prophets  in  testifying  to  this  salvation,  and  with  the  apostles  there 
was  an  honourable  fellowship  of  earnest  evangelists  and  preachers.     These  noble 
bearers  of  glad  tidings  continued  to  report  this  salvation  till  they  had  finished  their 
missions  and  their  lives,  and  therefore  I  feel  that  for  us  in  these  times  to  trifle 
with  God's  Word,  and  give  a  deaf  ear  to  the  invitations  of  the  gospel,  is  an  insult 
to  their  honoured  memories.     You  martyr  them  a  second  time  by  contemptuously 
neglecting   what  they  died  to  hand  to   you.     From  the  dead  they  bear  witness 
against  you,  and  when  they  rise  again  they  wUl  sit  with  their  Lord  to  judge  you. 
5.  Nor  have  we  merely  prophets  and  apostles  looking  on  with  wonder,  but  our  text 
says,  "  Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into."     They  take  such  an  interest 
in   us,  their  feUow  creatures,  that  they  have  an  intense  wish  to  know  all  the 
mysteries  of  our  salvation.     We  have  already  gone  a  long  way  with  this  text,  rising 
step  by  step.     We  now  behold  another  wonder :  we  rise  to  the  angels'  Master.     6. 
Christ  is  the  substance  of  this  salvation.     For  what  saith  the  text  ?     The  prophets 
spake  "  beforehand  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow." 
Ah,  there  is  the  point.     To  save  men  Jesus  suffered.     One  other  step  remains.     It 
cannot  be  higher ;  it  is  on  the  same  level.     It  is  this.     7.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
witness  to  all  this.     It  was  the  Holy  Ghost  that  spake  in  the  prophets  ;  it  was  the 
Holy  Ghost  who  was  with  those  who  reported  the  gospel  at  the  first ;  it  is  the  same 
Holy  Spirit  who  every  day  bears  witness  to  Christ.     II.  So  far  have  I  commended 
my  Lord's  salvation,  and  now  I  would  desire  you,  with  all  this  in  your  own  minds, 
to  turn  to  the  prayer  in  the  one  hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm  :  "  Let  Thy  mercies 
come  also  unto  me,  0  Lord,  even  Thy  salvation  according  to  Thy  word."     Use  the 
prayer  with  this  intent :  Lord,  I  have  been  hearing  what  prophets  and  apostles 
and  angels  think  of  Thy  salvation,  what  Thy  Son  and  what  Thy  Spirit  think  of 
it ;  now  let  me  humbly  say  what  I  think  of  it :  Oh,  that  it  were  mine !      Oh, 
that  it  would  come  to  me !     II.  Thus,  then,  I  would  recommend  the  prayer  of 
THE  Psalmist.     1.  I  will  say  about  it,  that  it  is  in  itself  a  very  gracious  prayer, 
for  it  is  offered  on  right  grounds.     (1)  There  is  no  mention  of  merit  or  desert. 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cfup.  i. 

His  entreaty  is  for  mercy  only.  (2)  It  is  a  gracious  prayer,  because  it  asks 
for  the  right  thing:  "even  Thy  salvation,"  not  a  salvation  of  my  own 
invention.  God's  salvation  is  one  in  which  His  Divine  sovereignty  is  revealed, 
and  that  sovereignty  must  be  accepted  and  adored.  (3)  You  see  that  the  prayer 
is  put  in  the  right  form,  for  it  is  added,  "  Even  Thy  salvation  according  to 
Thy  Word."  He  wishes  to  be  saved  in  the  manner  which  the  Lord  has  appointed. 
Lord,  if  Thy  Word  says  I  must  repent,  give  me  Thy  salvation,  and  cause  me  to 
repent ;  if  Thy  Word  says  that  I  must  confess  my  sin,  give  me  Thy  salvation  in  the 
confession  of  sin  ;  if  Thou  sayest  I  must  trust  to  Christ,  Lord,  help  me  now  to 
trust  Him  ;  only  grant  me  Thy  salvation  according  to  Thy  Word.  (4)  Observe 
that  the  whole  prayer  is  conceived  and  uttered  in  a  humble  spirit.  It  is,  "  Let  Thy 
salvation  come  also  unto  me."  He  owns  his  helplessness.  He  cannot  get  at  the 
mercy,  he  wants  it  to  come  to  him.  He  is  so  wounded  and  so  sick  that  he  cannot 
put  on  the  plaister  nor  reach  the  medicine,  and  therefore  he  asks  the  Lord  to 
bring  it  to  him.  2.  In  the  second  place  this  prayer  may  be  supported  by  gracious 
arguments.  I  will  suppose  some  poor  heart  painfully  longing  to  use  this  prayer. 
Here  are  arguments  for  you.  Pray  like  this.  Say,  "  Lord,  let  Thy  mercy  come  to 
me,  for  I  need  mercy."  Next  plead  this ;  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest,  and  Thou  hast 
made  me  to  know  somewhat  of  what  will  become  of  me  if  Thy  mercy  does  not 
come  to  me  :  I  must  perish,  I  must  perish  miserably."  Then  plead,  "  If  Thy  mercy 
shall  come  to  me  it  will  be  a  great  wonder.  Lord.  I  have  not  the  confidence  to  do 
more  than  faintly  hope  it  may  come  ;  but,  oh,  if  Thou  dost  ever  blot  out  my  sin  I 
will  tell  the  world  of  it ;  through  eternity  I  will  sing  Thy  praises,  and  claim  to  be 
of  all  the  saved  ones  the  most  remarkable  instance  of  what  Thy  sovereign  grace 
can  do."  Then  you  can  put  this  to  the  good  Saviour.  Tell  Him  if  He  will  give 
you  His  salvation.  He  will  not  be  impoverished  by  the  gift.  "  Lord,  I  am  a  thirsty 
soul ;  but  Thou  art  such  a  river  that  if  I  drink  from  Thee  there  wiU  be  no  fear  of 
my  exhausting  Thy  boundless  supply."  There  is  another  plea  implied  in  the 
prayer,  and  a  very  sweet  argument  it  is — "  Let  Thy  mercies  come  also  unto  me,  O 
Lord."  It  means  :  "  It  has  come  to  so  many  before,  therefore  let  it  come  also  unto 
me.  Lord,  if  I  were  the  only  one,  and  Thou  hadst  never  saved  a  sinner  before,  yet 
would  I  venture  upon  Thy  word  and  promise.  Especially  I  would  come  and  trust 
the  blood  of  Jesus  :  but.  Lord,  I  am  not  the  first  by  many  millions.  I  beseech  Thee, 
then,  of  Thy  great  love,  let  Thy  salvation  come  unto  me."  3.  I  will  close  by 
assuring  you  that  this  blessedly  gracious  prayer,  which  I  have  helped  to  back  up 
with  arguments,  will  be  answered  by  our  gracious  God.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Salva- 
tion the  end  of  faith: — I.  Considee  the  aeticle  saved — the  soul,  the  deathless 
spirit  by  which  we  are  distinguished  from  the  beasts  that  perish.  1.  Its  origin. 
"  The  Lord  God  breathed  into  man  the  breath  of  life."  The  body  was  composed 
of  what  existed  before  ;  but  the  soul  that  animated  it  came  immediately  from  God. 
2.  Its  immortality.  Earthly  possessions  are  estimated  according  to  their  duration. 
These  bodies  of  ours  must  soon  go  to  the  dust ;  but  the  soul  shall  exist  through 
endless  duration.  What,  then,  can  be  of  so  much  importance  as  the  salvation  of 
the  soul  ?  II.  What  does  this  salvation  include  ?  1.  Redemption  from  the 
curse  of  the  law.  This  is  the  first  step  in  the  way  to  heaven.  2.  This  salvation 
includes  personal  meetness.  We  must  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds.  HI. 
Observe  the  connection  between  faith  and  salvation.  When  the  Christian 
dies  he  receives  the  end  of  his  faith.  How  is  this  to  be  understood  ?  In  the  verse 
before  the  text  the  apostle  mentions  "  believing"  as  the  cause  of  joy.  The  whole 
end  and  object  of  faith  is  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  The  Scriptures  place  this 
principle  in  a  most  prominent  position  (John  iii.  18-36).  {American  National 
Preacher.)  Salvation — its  subjective  elements  : — I.  Faith.     "  In  whom,  though 

now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing."  1.  Faith  is  the  first  Christian  grace.  Without 
it  you  are  no  Christian  at  all.  2.  This  faith  is  a  personal  trust  in  a  personal 
Saviour.  It  is  more  than  intellectual  assent,  even  heart-reliance.  3.  This  faith 
was,  moreover,  a  faith  in  an  invisible  Saviour.  "In  whom,  though  now  ye  see 
Him  not,  yet  believing."  II.  Love.  "Whom,  having  not  seen,  ye  love."  I.Love 
is  one  essential  element  of  the  Christian  religion.  This  it  is  indeed  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  Christian  religion  from  the  other  religions  of  the  world.  2.  Our 
supreme  love.  His  place  in  our  affection  is  unique — He  enjoys  a  love  deeper, 
profounder,  more  lasting,  than  that  of  father  or  mother,  of  brother  or  sister.  3. 
These  strangers  of  the  Dispersion  evinced  their  supreme  love  of  the  Saviour  by 
suffering  themselves  to  be  despoiled  of  all  their  possessions  rather  than  deny  Him. 
Their  love  was  sorely  tested.     III.  Joy.     "  Ye  rejoice,"  &c.     1.  Joy  is  an  essential 


CHAP.  I.]  J.  PETER.  51 

element  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ ;  not  joy  to  the  exclusion  of  sorrow,  but  joy- 
in  the  midst  thereof.  2.  This  joy  not  only  defies  philosophy  to  explain  it,  but 
language  to  express  it — "joy  unspeakable,"  that  cannot  be  told  out.  (1)  The 
innermost  joy  of  the  Christian's  heart  is  too  Divine  a  thing,  of  too  delicate  a 
texture,  to  be  exposed  to  the  curious,  unhallowed  view  of  worldlings.  And  we  all 
know  of  experiences  too  sacred,  too  precious  and  sweet,  to  be  exposed  to  every 
gazer's  eyes.  (2)  The  joy  which  wells  up  in  the  Christian's  heart  cannot  be  con- 
veyed in  language,  being  too  subtle  and  volatile  a  thing,  evaporating  in  the  very 
attempt  to  pour  it  from  the  heart  into  the  bottles  of  grammatical  construction.  3. 
This  joy  is  "  full  of  glory,"  or  already  glorified.  (1)  The  inner  centre  of  this  joy  is 
already  white  and  glowing.  (2)  This  joy  has  the  evidence  in  itself  of  its  ultimate 
glorification  in  the  world  to  come.  The  process  has  been  begun  here,  it  will  be 
perfected  yonder.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Soul  salvation  : — I.  The  great  worth 
OF  SOUL  salvation.  This  is  seen  from — 1.  The  illustrious  beings  interested  in  it. 
(1)  Prophets.  (2)  Angels.  (3)  Apostles.  (4)  The  Spirit  of  Christ  in  them  all.  2. 
The  Saviour  Himself  by  whom  salvation  comes.  (1)  His  sufferings.  (2)  His 
following  glories.  II.  The  gradual  development  of  the  revelation  for  soul 
salvation.  1.  Predicted  by  the  prophets.  (1)  Gradually  and  partially.  (2) 
Unconsciously.  (3)  By  Divine  illumination.  2.  Fully  declared,  announced,  and 
reported.  III.  The  simple  means  of  attaining  soul  salvation.  1.  Salvation  is 
— (1)  The  thing  for  which  we  believe.  (2)  The  end  to  which  belief  leads.  2.  This 
faith  is — (1)  Assent  of  the  mind.  (2)  Consent  of  the  heart.  (3)  Response  of  the 
will.     {U.  R.  Thomas.)  Salvation  as  it  is  now  received  .-—I.  What  of  salvation 

is  RECEIVED  HERE  ?  1.  The  whole  of  it  by  the  grip  of  faith  and  the  grace  of  hope. 
2.  The  absolute  and  final  pardon  of  sin  is  ours  at  this  moment.  3.  Deliverance 
from  slavish  bondage,  and  from  a  sense  of  awful  distance  from  God  is  a  present 
relief.  Peace,  reconciliation,  contentment,  fellowship  with  God,  and  delight  in  God, 
■we  enjoy  at  this  hour.  4.  Eescue  from  the  condemning  power  of  sin  is  now 
complete.  5.  Eelease  from  its  dominion  is  ours.  It  can  no  longer  command  us  at 
its  will,  nor  lull  us  to  sleep  by  its  soothing  strains.  6.  Conquest  over  evil  is  given 
to  us  in  great  measure  at  once.  Sins  are  conquerable.  Holy  Uving  is  possible. 
Some  have  reached  a  high  degree  of  it.  7.  Joy  may  become  permanent  in  the 
midst  of  sorrow.  II.  How  is  it  received  ?  1.  Entirely  from  Jesus,  as  a  gift  of 
Divine  grace.  2.  By  faith,  not  by  sight  or  feeling.  3.  By  fervent  love  to  God. 
This  excites  to  revenge  against  sin,  and  so  gives  present  purification.  This  also 
nerves  us  for  consecrated  hving,  and  thus  produces  holiness.  4.  By  joy  in  the 
Lord.  This  causes  us  to  receive  peace  unspeakable,  not  to  be  exaggerated,  nor 
even  uttered.  HI.  Have  you  received  it,  and  how  much?  1.  You  have  heard 
of  salvation,  but  hearing  will  not  do.  2.  You  profess  to  know  it,  but  mere  pro- 
fession will  not  do.  3.  Have  you  received  pardon  ?  Are  you  sure  of  it  ?  4.  Have 
you  been  made  holy?  Are  you  daily  cleansed  in  your  walk?  5.  Have  you 
obtained  rest  by  faith  and  hope  and  love?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  greatness  of 

salvation  : — A  German  writer  illustrates  the  greatness  of  our  salvation  after  this 
manner.  A  gentleman,  after  the  most  exemplary  life,  died.  The  gate  of  heaven 
was  opened,  and  he  was  welcomed  as  an  heir  of  glory.  One  of  the  glorious  ones 
was  commissioned  to  be  his  conductor  and  teacher.  Fu-st  he  took  him  to  a  point 
where  he  could  see  the  most  fearful  representation  of  sin  in  its  fruits  of  misery. 
The  objects  of  horror  made  him  shudder.  Then  his  guide  bade  him  look  farther 
and  farther  down  in  the  dismal  vault,  and  he  saw  the  most  hideous  and  terrible  of 
beings,  the  fruit  of  sin.  "  That,"  said  his  guide,  "  is  what  in  ages  of  eternity  you 
would  have  been  had  you  gone  on  in  sin."  His  guide  next  took  him  to  a  point 
from  which  could  be  seen  the  glories  of  the  redeemed.  He  saw  rank  after  rank  of 
angels,  seraphim,  and  cherubim,  dwellmg  in  ineffable  glory.  He  bade  him  look 
beyond  these ;  and  in  the  far  distance  he  beheld  a  being  transcendently  more 
radiant  and  glorious,  around  whom  floated  the  soft  music  of  unspeakable  sweetness 
and  joy.  "  That,"  said  the  guide,  "  is  yourself  many  ages  hence.  Behold  the 
glory  and  bliss  to  which  the  salvation  of  Jesus  will  bring  you." 

Vers.  10-12.  Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have  inquired  and  searched  dili- 
gently.— Salvation — the  central  subject  of  study  : — I.  The  prophets  as  examples  to 
us  in  the  study  of  salvation.  1.  The  intensity  of  their  study.  The  word  here 
translated  "  searched  "  is  used  by  classic  authors  to  describe  hounds  scouring  the 
country  to  discover  their  prey.  We  read  the  Bible  more  from  idle  frivolous  curiosity 
than  from  a  sincere  deep-rooted  wish  to  catch  a  view  of  the  blessed  Messiah  monng 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

in  Divine  stateliness  through  its  histories  and  doctrines.  Another  striking  simihtude 
is  suggested — that  of  anxious  miners  excavating  for  gold.  Two  young  men  catch 
the  gold  fever ;  despite  the  tearful  entreaties  of  parents,  they  resolve  to  emigrate  to 
Australia.  The  first  morning  after  their  arrival  they  rise  earlier  and  with  less 
difficulty  than  they  ever  did  at  home,  shoulder  their  tools,  and  start  eagerly  for  the 
much-coveted  quarries.  They  dig,  loosen  a  portion  of  the  rock,  pick  up  the  stones. 
Observe  how  carefully  they  examine  them  to  see  if  there  be  perceptible  a  slight 
golden  tinge,  just  enough  to  feed  hope ;  and  if  they  discover  a  grain  or  two  of  gold, 
how  the  discovery  cheers  their  hearts,  nerves  their  arms,  and  transfigures  their 
countenances !  Similarly  the  holy  men  of  the  Jewish  Church  dug  into  the  fields  of 
Divine  revelation,  scanned  verse  after  verse,  dissected  the  sacrifices  and  analysed 
the  prophecies,  in  order  to  possess  a  few  grains  of  truth,  a  little  refined  gold. 
2.  The  subject  of  their  study — salvation.  Not  "  after  which  salvation,"  but  "  of 
which,  concerning  which."  This  is  one  difference  between  heathen  philosophers 
and  Jewish  prophets :  the  former  inquired  after  salvation  without  finding  it, 
whereas  the  latter  possessed  salvation  to  start  with,  and  possessing  it  they  had  no 
need  to  search  after  it,  but  concerning  it  and  into  it.  And  our  first  concern  should 
be  to  possess  salvation,  to  be  in  a  state  of  personal  safety  through  faith  in  the 
Redeemer.  Then  we  may  at  our  leisure  institute  investigations  concerning  it  and 
into  it.  3.  The  noble  spirit  of  resignation  they  evinced  in  presence  of  intellectual 
difficulties  which  they  were  not  able  to  surmount.  They  inquired  diligently ;  but 
they  understood  but  little.  11.  The  apostles  as  examples  to  us  in  the  pboclamation  of 
the  gospel.  1.  The  subject-matter  of  their  ministry.  "  The  things  now  reported 
unto  you  " — what  things?  "The  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  which  should 
follow."  These  are  the  only  things  worthy  of  a  Christian  pulpit.  2.  The  manner 
of  their  preaching.  "  The  things  reported."  The  things  invented,  devised, 
imagined  ?  Oh  no ;  the  apostles  were  not  inventors,  but  reporters  ;  not  poets,  but 
historians  ;  not  philosophers,  but  witnesses.  They  were  simply  reporters,  narrating, 
each  one  in  his  own  way,  the  memorable  events  of  that  wonderful  biography.  And 
do  they  not  furnish  us  with  a  much-needed  example  ?  3.  The  power  which  accom- 
panied their  preaching — "with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven."  Just  as 
much  electricity  exists  latent  in  the  air  on  a  serene,  tranquil  day  as  on  a  day  of 
tempest  when  thunders  roar  and  lightnings  flash.  What,  then,  is  the  difference  ? 
Not  in  the  amount  of  electricity,  but  in  the  fact  that  in  certain  conditions  of  the 
atmosphere  the  electricity  flashes  into  visibility,  the  latent  fire  bursts  forth  into 
flame.  Similarly  the  Holy  Spirit  is  as  truly  present  in  the  Church  to-day  as  in 
seasons  of  remarkable  revivals,  now  as  in  the  days  of  Whitfield,  Wesley,  and  Row- 
lands. What  is  wanted  is — for  the  Spirit  to  make  His  presence  felt,  for  the  Divine 
electricity  to  flash  forth  into  lightnings.  Pray  for  His  manifestation ;  and  then 
the  weakest  preacher  among  the  tribes  will  be  as  the  house  of  David,  and  the  house 
of  David  as  the  angel  of  God.  HI.  The  angels  an  example  to  us  in  the  wonder  and 
ADOEATioN  that  should  fill  our  minds  in  the  contemplation  of  this  salvation.  1.  What 
are  the  things  here  referred  to  ?  The  answer  is  obvious — the  same  things  which 
the  prophets  predicted  and  the  apostles  proclaimed.  The  burden  of  the  study  as  of 
the  song  of  these  celestial  beings  is — "  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  And  if  redemp- 
tion in  its  various  phases  receives  the  attention  and  homage  of  angels,  is  it  not 
deserving  of  our  devout  and  worshipful  meditation?  2.  Into  these  things  the 
angels  desire  to  look.  The  word,  it  is  said,  might  be  rendered  a  little  differently — 
"  into  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look,"  to  look  askance,  to  look  one  side  as 
it  were  over  the  shoulder.  What,  then,  is  the  idea  ?  That  salvation  fronts  not  the 
angels,  who  consequently  have  to  stretch  the  neck  and  look  aside,  as  it  were  round 
the  corners,  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  its  glory.  But  so  enraptured  are  they  with  the 
beauty  they  behold  that  they  strive  to  see  more  and  more,  crowding  into  the  churches 
to  learn  what  they  may  of  the  "manifold" — many-coloured — "wisdom  of  God." 
No  ;  salvation  does  not  front  the  angels,  but  it  fairly  and  fully  fronts  the  children 
of  men.  Shall  we  front  it  ?  What  is  our  attitude  towards  it  to-day  ?  Have  we  our 
backs  or  our  faces  towards  this  salvation  ?  His  face  is  towards  us  ;  are  our  faces 
towards  Him  ?  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  gospel  meridian : — St.  Peter  here  exalts 
the  nature  of  that  glorious  reward  which  is  to  be  the  end  of  tried  and  purified  faith 
— the  salvation  of  the  soul.  I.  Unfulfilled  desires.  This  is  a  world  of  desire. 
We  all  crave  for  something  we  have  not  got.  We  crave  for  possessions  and  we  crave 
for  knowledge.  1.  Noblest  desires  are  often  unattained.  It  is  not  every  one  who 
seeks  for  selfish  pleasure.  What  could  have  been  a  more  noble  aspiration  than  that 
of  the  prophets  of  old  to  realise  the  salvation  of  which  they  prophesied?     They  pro- 


CH.u>.  1.]  I.  PETER.  53 

claimed  a  blessedness  which,  after  diligent  search,  they  discovered  was  not  for 
themselves  to  enjoy.  How  often  does  God  put  a  limit  even  to  our  highest  aspirations ! 
One  has  sought  to  gain  a  high  knowledge  of  gospel  truth ;  but  his  health  has  broken 
down.  A  missionary,  in  the  full  possession  of  manhood  and  strength,  is  murdered, 
and  his  work  apparently  crushed.  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  but  it  seems  strange  in 
our  eyes.  2.  Legitimate  curiosity,  when  exerted,  affords  scant  satisfaction.  It 
might  be  in  accordance  with  human  nature  to  inquire  particularly  into  the  plans 
and  purposes  of  God ;  but  the  prophets  of  old  expended  their  curiosity  in  vain. 
There  is  little  purpose  in  investigating  too  closely  the  hidden  purposes  of  God.  God 
expects  us  to  do  His  work,  and  not  to  inquire  very  minutely  into  the  motives  or  ends 
of  that  work.  II.  Unenlightened  instrujiientalities.  The  prophets  had  to  inquire 
respecting  the  salvation.  We  have  here  brought  before  us  one  of  the  mysteries  con- 
nected with  Divine  work.  1.  God's  instrumentalities  are  not  perfect.  It  is  not  neces- 
sary that  they  should  be  so.  The  world  expects  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  to  explain 
all  God's  purposes,  all  the  Divine  plans,  and  to  lay  bare  the  whole  current  of  future 
events.  But  even  the  prophets  of  old  were  not  altogether  wise.  2.  God's  instrument- 
alities do  not  always  possess  that  which  they  announce  to  others.  III.  Unappreciated 
ATTAINMENT.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle  introduces  the  desire  of  the  prophets  and  the 
desire  of  the  angels  to  realise  the  mysteries  of  revelation,  not  out  of  mere  aimless  illus- 
tration, but  to  remind  his  people  of  the  little  interest  they  felt,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  arouse  in  them  a  spirit  of  emulation.  But  how  do  we  act  with  regard  to  them  ? 
Do  we  sell  all  that  we  have  in  order  to  make  them  ours  ?  Do  we  sacrifice  every- 
thing else  to  enjoy  them  ?  Alas  !  the  characters,  and  energy,  and  desire,  and  love 
of  those  who  only  had  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come  ought  to  cause  us  to  lie  low 
with  shame,  and  to  pray  for  the  stirring  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  prick  our 
thankless  and  unappreciative  souls.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird.)  The  value  of  the  Old 
Testament : — 1.  Let  me  caution  you  against  the  ignorant  frivolity  which,  professing 
to  reverence  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  speaks  slightingly  of  those  of  the 
Old.  As  well  may  you  sever  the  light  of  the  meridian  from  its  dawn  ;  or,  cutting  a 
sunbeam  in  two,  retain  only  the  nearer  portion.  2.  Another  popular  conceit  of  our 
day  is,  that  there  is  but  little  use  in  studying  the  prophetic  Word  of  God,  or,  at 
least,  beyond  what  lies  on  the  surface.  This,  you  perceive,  was  not  the  temper  of 
the  prophets  :  They  "  diligently  inquired  and  searched."  Into  these  things  "  angels 
long  to  gaze."  3.  If  such  be  the  interest  felt  by  all  that  is  wisest  and  holiest  in  earth 
and  heaven,  in  whatever  concerns  the  redemption  of  man,  alas  for  those  to  whom 
this  great  salvation  itself  is  offered,  and  who  yet  choose  to  live  and  die  in  the  neglect 
of  it !  4.  Let  the  afflicted  children  of  God  take  comfort  from  the  consideration  of 
what  was  foretold,  and  has  been  fulfilled,  in  regard  to  God's  own  Well-Beloved,  the 
Author  and  Finisher  of  their  faith,  to  whose  image  it  is  God's  purpose,  and  the 
dearest  ambition  of  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  be  in  all  things  conformed.  {J. 
Lillie,  D.D.)  The  Bible  as  a  grand  moral  painting  : — I.  The   extraordinary 

SUBJECT.  What  is  the  subject  ?  "  The  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should 
follow."  Open  this  Book,  spread  out  its  pages,  and  what  have  you  ?  A  wide-spread 
canvas,  on  which  is  displayed  this  one  great  subject  in  every  hue  and  form.  This 
picture  is  divided  into  two  parts.  At  one  end  you  have  "  the  sufferings  of  Christ  "  ; 
at  the  other  end  "the  glory  arising  out  of  these  sufferings."  The  side  on  which  the 
sufferings  are  depicted  is  full  of  incident,  yet  in  dark  shade.  There  you  see  the 
Babe.  In  one  part,  you  see  Him  lying  in  a  manger ;  in  another,  in  the  temple 
undergoing  the  painful  rite  of  circumcision ;  and  in  another,  in  the  arms  of  His 
affrighted  mother  fleeing  into  Egypt.  But  on  the  other  end  of  the  picture  you  have 
a  striking  contrast.  Here  is  "the  glory  that  follows."  Here  you  see  Him  rising 
from  the  grave  as  the  conqueror  of  death,  the  Prince  of  Life,  and  ascending  to 
heaven  amidst  the  rapturous  shouts  of  an  exulting  creation.  What  glory  will  rise 
out  of  these  sufferings  !  What  new  manifestations  of  God !  What  new  motives  to 
virtue  !  What  new  thrills  of  joy !  Amongst  the  lessons  which  this  extraordinary 
picture  suggests  we  may  mention  three  : — 1.  The  malignant  animus  of  sin.  What 
produced  these  sufferings  of  Christ  that  you  see  depicted  here  ?  Sin.  2.  The  benign 
tendency  of  the  Divine  government.  Glory  comes  out  of  these  sufferings ;  good  is 
educed  from  evil.  This  is  God's  work.  As  out  of  sin  comes  suffering,  out  of  suffer- 
ing shall  come  glory.  3.  The  issue  of  suffering  virtue.  The  sufferings  of  Christ 
were  the  sufferings  of  virtue ;  and  they  issued  in  glory.  And  so  it  will  ever  be. 
Goodness,  however  persecuted  and  afflicted,  shall  yet  ascend  the  throne.  II.  The 
DISTINGUISHED  ARTISTS.  Who  are  the  men  that  drew  this  wonderful  picture  ?  The 
text  speaks  of  two  classes  :  The  prophets  who  prophesied  of  the  "  grace  that  should 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

come  unto  you  "  ;  and  the  apostles  who  "  reported."  The  prophets  drew  the  dim 
and  shadowy  outUne.  The  other  class  of  artists  are  the  apostles.  "  The  things" 
concerning  Christ  which  the  prophets  "  did  minister,"  the  apostles  "  reported  " ; 
they  "  reported"  them  when  they  preached  the  gospel  "with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent 
down  from  heaven."  The  apostles,  as  artists,  had  an  advantage  over  the  prophets : 
they  had  those  outlines  of  our  Saviour's  history  which  the  old  prophets  had  drawn. 
And  they  had  in  connection  with  this,  the  living  subject,  Christ.  He  had  appeared 
amongst  them,  they  had  seen  Him,  and  talked  with  Him.  They  therefore  filled  up 
the  outlines  of  the  picture  which  the  old  prophets  had  drawn.  HI.  The  inspiring 
GENIUS.  All  real  art  implies  genius.  Genius  to  conceive  the  true  and  to  embody  it 
— creative  and  executive  genius.  Who  was  the  inspiring  genius  of  this  paintmg  ? 
Peter  tells  us  that  in  the  prophets'  case  it  was  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  was  in 
them  "  ;  and  in  the  apostles'  case,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven."  This 
appears  clear  from  the  very  nature  of  the  work.  Before  a  being  can  draw  a  correct 
picture  of  another  he  must  have  two  things — a  correct  image  of  the  subject  in  his 
own  mind,  and  the  proper  skill  correctly  to  transfer  that  image  to  the  canvas.  1. 
The  character  of  the  subject.  How  did  the  prophets  and  apostles  get  a  conception 
of  Him  whom  they  here  depict? — a  character  so  thoroughly  unique,  so  entirely 
adverse  to  a  priori  impression  and  observation  too !  The  highest  virtue  associated 
with  the  greatest  suffering ;  the  most  despised  man  in  personal  connection  with  God. 
Things  so  contrary  meeting  in  the  same  one  life,  render  the  idea  of  man  creating 
such  a  history  out  of  his  own  imagination  all  but  absurd.  The  "  Spirit  of  Christ," 
within  them,  gave  them  an  image  of  some  strange  personage,  but  they  knew  not  of 
whom.  2.  The  method  of  execution.  A  man  may  form  a  correct  image  of  a  person, 
and  yet  lack  the  artistic  skill  to  transfer  it  to  the  canvas.  The  execution  of  the 
subject  is,  indeed,  as  unique  as  the  conception.  All  mere  human  art  is  labour ; 
effort  is  seen  in  every  touch.  But  these  men,  in  a  few  simple  words  about  what  they 
saw  and  heard,  present  the  hero  life-like  in  every  point.  The  "  Spirit  of  Christ " 
that  was  in  them,  not  only  drew  to  their  imagination  the  manifold  aspect  of  His 
own  being,  but  guided  their  pencil  in  every  line,  to  portray  the  same.  In  human 
productions,  both  in  literature  and  art,  the  author  generally  appears,  and  some- 
times is  offensively  prominent.  But  not  so  here.  IV.  The  illustrious 
SPECTATORS.  "  Into  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look."  But  why  should 
they  be  so  interested  in  it?  1.  Because  it  is  suited  to  excite  their  intellectual 
natures.  Anything  extraordinary  has  a  power  to  rouse  the  inquiring  faculty. 
2.  Because  it  is  suited  to  excite  their  religious  natures.  To  a  devout  spirit  nothing 
is  more  interesting  or  attractive  than  a  manifestation  of  God.  3.  Because  it  is 
suited  to  excite  their  benevolent  natures.  V.  The  glorious  purpose.  1.  Look 
at  the  universality  of  the  purpose.  V  Not  for  themselves,"  but  "  unto  us  they  did 
minister  these  things."  2.  Look  at  the  blessedness  of  the  purpose.  "  Eeceiving 
the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  (X>.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  study  of  salvation : — I.  First,  that  the  doctrine  of  salvation  of  God's 
people  is  a  subject  able  to  fill  the  contemplation  of  the  divinest  and 
wisest  men.  The  prophets  have  a  subject  able  to  fill  them ;  yea,  more  than  they 
are  able  to  conceive  of  to  the  fuU,  which  may  serve  for  two  uses.  First,  for 
humiliation,  that  we  should  be  so  barren-hearted  and  able  to  conceive  so  little  of 
so  Divine  a  subject.  Secondly,  for  singular  consolation  to  the  godly.  For  by  this 
it  appeaueth  that  they  have  an  admirable  portion  in  that  such  worthy  men  so  much 
admire  it.  II.  Secondly,  that  as  ant  have  more  grace,  so  they  are  more  heartily 
affected  with  the  estimation  and  desire  after  the  salvation  of  God's  elect. 
Certainly,  so  long  as  we  can  admire  anything  more  than  the  grace  of  God  to  His 
people,   our   hearts   are   void  of  grace.     III.   Thirdly,  that  when   we  go   about 

ANYTHING  THAT  CONCERNS  SALVATION,  ESPECIALLY  OJR  OWN  SALVATION,  WE  SHOULD 
HERE  LEARN    OF   THE    PROPHETS    TO    DO    IT  WITH  ALL   DILIGENCE.       There  ai'C  three  SOrtS 

of  men  Satan  doth  in  the  Church  bewitch.  1.  The  first  are  they  that  will  take  no 
pains  at  all,  nor  trouble  themselves  to  study  about  their  religion  and  what  belongs 
to  their  souls.  2.  The  second  are  they  that,  though  they  will  study  diligently,  yet 
it  is  in  by-studies,  as  matters  of  controversy,  or  the  general  knowledge  of  religion, 
or  matter  that  may  fit  them  for  discourse,  or  the  like.  3.  Now  a  third  sort  there 
are  that  will  not  be  drawn  aside  from  the  needfulest  studies,  as  repentance, 
assurance,  order  of  life,  &c.,  but  their  fault  is  that  they  study  not  these  diligently. 
For  they  soon  give  over  and  finish  not  their  works  either  of  mortification,  or  sancti- 
fication,  or  illumination,  or  preparation  for  salvation.  (N.  Byjield.)  Salvation 
explored  : — I.    The    party  of   explorers.      1.  Who   they   were — "  the   prophets." 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  55 

2.  Divinely  commissioned.  "  The  Lord  of  Hosts  hath  spoken  it."  3.  Divinely 
guided.  "  What  manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  was  in  them,  did 
signify."  II.  The  ground  explored.  "  Salvation."  (1)  The  limits  of  the  field. 
"  So  great  salvation."  "  Eternal  salvation."  2.  The  nature  and  object  of  their 
labours.     "  Who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you."     III.  The 

SPIRIT     IN     WHICH     THE     EXPLORATION     WAS     CONDUCTED.        1.     A    longing    tO     disCOVCr 

salvation.  2.  Mental  activity.  "  Searched,"  &c.  3.  The  work  was  continuous. 
"  Diligently."  4.  Scrutiny.  "  Searching  what,  and  what  manner  of  time,"  &c. 
IV.  The  meritorious  centre  of  this  explored  salvation.  "  The  suiierings  of 
Christ."  1.  It  centres  itself  in  a  person.  2.  In  a  Divine  person.  3.  In  a 
suffering  person.  V.  Their  explorations  carried  the  prophets  to  the  grand 
reward  of  Christ's  sufferings.  "  And  the  glory  that  should  follow."  [John 
Edwards.)  The  Scriptures  sufficient  for  salvation  : — A  worthy  sufferer  of  the 

name  of  Hawkes  was  under  examination  before  one  of  Bonner's  chaplains,  of  whom 
he  ventured  to  inquire,  "  Is  not  the  Scripture  sufficient  for  my  salvation  ?  "  "  Yes," 
replied  the  chaplain  ;  "  it  is  sufficient  for  our  salvation,  but  not  for  our  instruction." 
"  Well,  then,"  rejoined  the  honest  but  quaint  martyr,  "  God  send  me  salvation,  and 
take  you  the  instruction."  Searching  what  .  .  .  the  Spirit  of  Christ  .  .  .  did  signify 
— The  Spirit  of  Christ  and  the  prophets  : — The  testimony  of  the  Spirit  in  the  prophets 
was — I.  To  Christ  Jesus.  While  the  world  sinned  and  slept,  Infinite  Love  prepared 
its  Saviour.  II.  To  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  The  theme  of  all  Spirit-taught 
ministers.  III.  To  the  glory  that  should  follow  (E.V.,  glories).  Christ's  glories 
are — 1.  The  well-earned  reward  of  His  griefs.  2.  The  majestic  and  fitting  con- 
summation of  His  mediatorial  course  ;  incomparable  in  its  humiliation  ;  peerless  in 
its  purity ;  and  merging  into  the  splendour  of  the  final  glory.  3.  They  mark  the 
full  approbation  and  delight  in  Him  of  the  Eternal  Father,  sealing  redemption  with 
sublime  approval.  4.  They  are  the  consolation  of  God,  angels,  and  men.  We 
.  never  could  have  forgiven  the  Cross  if  the  crown  had  not  followed.  5.  The  Illumi- 
nated Gateway  of  the  saints'  eternity.  "  With  Me  where  I  am,  that  they  may 
behold  My  glory."  6.  A  blessed  counterpart  to  His  sorrows.  Sufferings  balanced 
with  glories.  For  "  sin  "  and  "  curse,"  mediatorial  holiness  upon  essential  holiness. 
7.  They  "  followed  "and  for  ever  foUow.  When  Calvary  shall  be  seen  far  back 
like  a  distant  ruddy  star,  the  glory  shall  still  spread  around  and  onward,  a  measure- 
less sea  of  brightness.  [W.  B.  Haynes.)  Testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of 
Christ. — The  sufferings  of  Christ : — I.  The  sufferings  of  Christ.  1.  The  person 
that  suffered  was  God,  and  also  man.  2.  The  nature  and  extent  of  His  sufferings. 
Corporeal  and  mental.  3.  The  persons  for  whom  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were 
endured.  4.  The  design  for  which  Christ  suffered.  That  He  might  finish  trans- 
gression, and  make  an  end  of  sin.  II.  The  glory  that  should  follow.  (The 
Congregational  Pulpit.)  The  glory  that  should  follow. — Three  degrees  of  Christ's 
glory  ;— 1.  His  resurrection.  2.  His  ascension.  3.  He  shall  one  day  come  unto 
judgment,  and  bring  aU  His  servants  to  His  glory.  [John  Rogers.)  Through 
afflictions  believers  come  to  glory  : — But  how  shall  we  come  to  glory  ?  Even  by  the 
same  way  that  our  Head  hath  gone  before  us,  by  sufferings.  It  follows — 1.  That 
afflictions  or  persecutions  are  no  ill  sign,  but  rather  of  the  way  to  heaven  and  glory  ; 
it  should  encourage  us  to  suffer,  seeing  glory  follows  ;  and  a  great  reward  ensues 
thereupon.  2.  That  those  who  will  suffer  no  affliction  nor  persecution  for  Christ 
and  the  gospel,  but  shifting  themselves  therefrom,  aim  at  the  glory  of  the  world, 
are  not  in  the  way  to  glory,  but  shame  hereafter  will  be  their  portion.  {Ibid.) 
Not  unto  themselves,  but  unto  us  they  did  minister. — Unselfish  ministry  .•—Such  is 
the  Divine  interpretation  of  the  prophet's  work.  Their  ministry  was  not  for  them- 
selves, but  for  a  later  age.  They  must  bear  the  burden  of  perplexity  and  dis- 
appointment, of  hope  deferred  and  doubts  unresolved,  in  the  sure  confidence  that 
others  would  enter  into  their  labours.  And,  indeed,  such  confidence  brings  all  the 
light  which  we  need  for  courageous  endurance.  The  crown  of  service  is  to  know 
that  the  service,  barren,  perhaps,  for  the  moment,  wiU  bear  fruit  in  after-time. 
Thus  the  words  of  the  apostle  are  a  voice  of  encouragement  to  all  who  catch  a 
distant  and  interrupted  vision  of  the  later  fulfilment  of  God's  will.  "  Not  unto 
themselves,  but  unto  you  " — this  is  the  judgment  which  history  addresses  to  us  in 
recording  the  toils  and  aims  of  those  to  whom  we  owe  our  splendid  inheritance  in 
our  national  Church.  They  gave  their  best  in  thought  and  deed  to  the  cause  of 
God,  and  left  the  using  to  His  wisdom.  Now  I  wish  to  speak  of  our  debt  to  the 
future.  For,  as  we  contemplate  our  gathered  treasures,  we  carmot  but  ask  to  what 
use  we  shall  put  them,  and  so  we  pass  on  to  the  wider  question  of  the  office  which 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

we  are  called  to  fulfil  for  our  children.     The  progress  of  human  life  imposes  the 
duty  of  large  forethought  on  each  such  succeeding  generation  with  ever-increasing 
force.     Thought  advances  with  accelerated  motion.     We  may  check  or  we  may 
further  the  expression  of  the  vital  energy.     We  may,  by  wilful  and  imj)atient  self- 
assertion,  delay  the  end  which  even  in  our  ignorance  we  desire  ;  or  we  may  by  wise 
humiUty  become  in  perfect  devotion  fellow-workers  with  God.     Under  this  aspect 
the  work  of  the  Church  is  prophetic.     Its  ministers  are  set  to  provide  that  under 
every  change  of  circumstances  the  Divine  idea  of  hfe  shall  be  presented  in  con- 
formity with  the  circumstances  under  which  it  must  be  realised ;  to  watch  with 
dispassionate   regard  the  currents  of  popular  thought   that   they  may  prepare  a 
natural  welcome  for  fresh  voices  of  the  Spirit ;  to  guard,  to  develop  that  which  in 
the  Divine  order  will  be  the  ruling  idea  of  the  next  generation.     1.  There  is,  I  say, 
already  among  us  a  final  perception  of  the  unity  of  creation  which  it  will  be  the 
health  of  our  children  to  reahse — a  unity  in  Christ.     Many  of  us  have  watched 
from  the  beginning  the  progress  of  the  physical  conceptions  of  the  conservation  and 
transformation  of  energy.     We  have  apprehended  with  increasing  clearness  that 
nothing  in  the  universe  is  isolated,  and  that  we  ourselves  enter  into  all  of  which  we 
are  conscious.      2.  There  is  again  among  us  a  growing   acknowledgment  of    the 
unity  of  society  which  it  will  be  the  strength  of  our  children  to  realise — a  unity  in 
Christ.     Every  one  speaks  of  the  present  tendency  towards  democracy.     The  idea 
of  democracy  is  not,  if  we  look  below  the  surface,  so  much  a  foi'm  of  government 
as  a  confession  of  human  brotherhood.     It  is  the  confession  of  common  duties, 
common  aims,  common  responsibilities.     3.  There  is  yet  more  among  us  a  feeling 
after  a  unity  of  humanity,  a  vaster,  fuller,  enduring  human  life,  which  it  will  be 
the  joy  of  our  children  to  realise — a  unity  in  Christ.     Such  thoughts  as   these 
of  an  unrealised  unity  felt  to  be  attainable,  felt  to  correspond  with  the  idea  of 
creation  given  back  to  us  in  redemption,  answer  to  the  spirit  of  the  age.     They  are 
in   the   air.     They  foreshow,  that  is,  the   truths  which  in  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Divine  order  are  offered  to  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     It  is  for  the  Church  in  the 
fulfilment  of  its  prophetic  office,  even  with  imperfect  and  troubled  knowledge,  to 
welcome  them,  to  give  them  shape,  and  to  transmit  them  to  the  next  age  for  the 
guidance  and  inspiration  of  its  work.     The  truths  lie,  as  I  have  said,  in  the  gospel 
of  the  Incarnation.     The  urgent  problems,  the  very  dangers  which  rise  before  us, 
disclose  in  the  central  fact  of   all  hfe — the  Word  became   flesh — new  depths  of 
wisdom  and  consolation.  We  do  not  yet  know  the  end — we  have  no  power  to  know  it 
— but  we  know  the  way — even  Christ,  who  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Him- 
self.    In  that  Presence  we  confess  that  the  world  is  not  a  factory,  or  a  warehouse, 
or  a  paradise  of  delights,  but  a  sanctuary  in  which  God's  glory  can  be  recognised 
and  His  voice  still  heard.     But  in  spite  of  every  burden  of  toil,  of  ignorance,  of 
weariness,  of  suffering  laid  on  sinful  man,  it  is  a  sanctuary,  full  of  the  glory  of 
God,  in  which  each  believer  offers  the  worship  of  life  and  the  sacrifice  of  his  whole 
being.   This  light,  this  larger  significance  of  things,  this  heavenly  splendour  of  earth, 
this  sense  of  opportunity,  is  even  now  borne  in  upon  us  on  many  sides,  and  it  is  the 
prophetic  office  of  the  Church  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  fresh  dayspring  from 
on  high,  and  prepare  her  sons  to  use  the  lessons  of  the  new  order.     (Bp.  WestcDtt.) 
Livint)  for  future  rjenerations  : — Sometimes  in  worldly  things  this  thought  of  living 
for  a  future  generation  comes  with  startling  effect  upon  a  worldly  man.     "  What 
am  I  toiling  and  moiling  for  ?     I  shall  soon  be  dead  and  gone,  and  these  houses, 
lands,  estates,  debentures,  shares,  what  not,  will  be  for  others ! "     Even  in  this 
there  may  be  some  far  off  touch  of  the  Divine ;  for  such  men  sometimes  live  in  this 
respect  unselfish  lives — not  for  them  the  enjoyment  of  those  soft  luxuries  they  are 
gathering  about  them,  but  for  their  children  and  children's  children.     Not  to  them- 
selves they  minister — and  so  far  we  say  there  may  be  some  soul  of  good  even  in 
this ;  only  let  us  all  remember  that  the  best  heritage  we  can  ever  leave  to  our  children 
is  that  of  a  wise,  pious,  charitable  example.     (T.  C.  Fitilaynon.)         Unselfish  minis- 
tries self-remunerritive  :—'Eh.e  true  preachers  of  the  gospel,  though  their  ministerial 
gifts  are  for  the  use  of  others,  yet  that  salvation  they  preach  they  lay  hold  on  and 
partake  of  themselves,  as  your  boxes  wherein  perfumes  are  kept  for  garments  and 
other  uses,  are  themselves  perfumed  by  keeping  them !     (T.  Leuihton.)         Whicli 
things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into. — Tlie  doctrine  of  salvation,  the  study  of 
amjels : — I.   The  nature  of  the  tuuth  affiumed.     1.  The  object  of  inquiry  is — 
salvation  and  its  concomitants  :    a  salvation  which  consists  in  deliverance  from 
condemnation,  from  the  love  and  power  of  sin,  and  in  restoration  to  peace  and 
happiness;   a  salvation   revealed  in   the   Scriptures;   a  salvation   the  subject  ol 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  57 

prophecy;  a  salvation  which,  both  in  respect  to  its  nature  and  the  time  of  its 
accomplishment,  engaged  the  most  serious  attention  of  the  prophets ;  a  salvation 
which  rests,  not  on  the  merit  or  power  of  many,  but  on  the  grace  of  God ;  a 
salvation  effected  by  the  sufferings,  death,  and  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  The  persons  engaged  in  this  inquiry.  The  angels  do  not  partake  of  body,  nor 
organic  eye,  nor  ear,  nor  other  sense,  yet  they  have  powers  equivalent  to  these 
faculties,  even  increased  and  extended;  for  they  are  represented  as  knowing  the 
interior  as  well  as  the  surface  of  things.  They  are  as  powerful  as  they  are  wise. 
They  have  been  corrupted  by  no  apostasy  from  God.  They  are  true,  just,  benevo- 
lent, devout,  they  glorify  God,  and  thereby  completely  answer  the  ends  of  their 
creation.  They  are,  at  the  same  time,  as  happy  as  they  are  good ;  they  feel  no 
pain,  know  no  want ;  their  perceptions  are  all  pleasant,  thoughts  all  elevated, 
employments  aU  dignified.  6.  The  manner  in  which  they  conduct  this  inquiry. 
They  "desire  to  look  into"  them.  Looking  is  a  species  or  modification  of  seeing. 
It  implies  seeing,  but  it  includes  more.  In  seeing,  the  mind  is  often  in  a  consider- 
able degree  passive  ;  an  object  is  brought  before  the  eye,  and  it  must  be  seen, 
although  it  may  not  be  considered  or  attended  to.  In  looking,  the  mind  is  not  only 
active,  but  it  puts  forth  aU  its  powers  with  energy.  The  object  is  not  brought  to  it, 
but  it  is  sought  for ;  and  when  it  is  found  the  eye  is  directed  towards  it,  and  kept 
fixed  upon  it,  to  the  exclusion  of  other  objects.  When  we  speak  of  seeing,  as 
applied  to  the  mind,  it  means  apprehension  or  discovery.  Nothing  is  so  laborious 
and  fatiguing  to  the  mind  as  fixed,  intense  thought ;  and  very  great  must  be  the 
importance  or  charms  of  an  object  which  can  engage  it.  But  such  is  the  importance 
and  such  are  the  charms  of  the  things  of  salvation  to  angels,  that  they  not  only 
bend  their  capacious  minds  to  this  subject,  and  prosecute  it  with  fixed,  intense,  and 
eager  thought,  but  they  consider  it  as  an  object  of  pleasure;  for  they  not  only  look, 
but  they  desire  to  look  into  the  things  which  pertain  to  salvation.  II.  The  credi- 
bility OF  THIS  TEUTH.  It  naturaUy  excites  surprise  when  we  are  told  that  angels, 
who  have  no  immediate  connection  with  salvation,  should  leave  their  native  employ- 
ments to  investigate  it  with  so  much  earnestness  and  solicitude.  This,  however, 
upon  reflection,  will  be  found  to  be  a  fact  as  reasonable  as  it  is  true.  1.  The  things 
which  pertain  to  salvation  form  an  object  the  contemplation  of  which  is  peculiarly 
adapted  to  the  capacities  of  angels.  In  the  salvation  of  Christ  there  is  a  new 
revelation  of  God  ;  a  new  display  of  Divine  character  and  attributes ;  not  to  be 
discovered  in  any  other  thing  or  in  any  other  way  within  the  whole  compass  of 
the  universe  of  God.  An  object  so  completely  adapted  to  the  talents  and  to  the 
duties  of  angels  imposes  obligations  upon  them  to  inquire  into  its  nature  and 
properties,  which  without  blame,  they  could  not  neglect.  2.  The  things  which 
pertain  to  salvation  form  an  object  which  is  peculiarly  calculated  to  attract  the 
notice  of  angels.  They,  in  visiting,  age  after  age,  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  creation. 
of  God,  must  have  seen  mighty  wonders  unknown  to  man ;  yet,  after  all,  there  is 
something,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,  in  the  nature  and  texture,  in  the  magnitude 
and  utihty  of  salvation,  which  has  not  its  equal  in  the  whole  universe  of  God.  It 
is  this,  therefore,  that  justly  attracts  their  notice,  and  leads  them  to  bend  their 
mighty  minds  to  the  investigation  of  a  subject  so  singularly  astonishing.  3.  The 
things  which  pertain  to  salvation  form  an  object  the  knowledge  of  which  will  be 
highly  beneficial  to  angels.  It  reveals  to  them  new  attributes,  and  discovers  new 
glories  in  the  Divine  character  ;  it  increases  their  piety  and  devotion  ;  it  will  afford 
them  new  employments,  and  add  to  their  usefulness ;  it  will  enable  them  to  discharge 
better  the  duties  of  their  high  office  of  ministering  to  the  heirs  of  salvation ;  and  it 
will  give  them  a  sweeter  voice  and  a  loftier  tone  in  performing  the  heavenly  song, 
which  ascribes  blessing  and  power  and  dominion  to  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.  4.  The  things  which  pertain  unto 
salvation  form  an  object  in  attending  to  which  angels  serve  God.  When  angels 
trace  in  salvation  evidences  of  wisdom,  power,  and  glory,  far  superior  to  those 
which  appear  in  the  other  works  of  God ;  when  they  admire  the  wonderful  events 
of  the  incarnation,  atonement,  and  redemption,  these  new  things  which  have 
happened  in  the  earth,  their  reverence  and  love  towards  the  Divine  Being  are 
thereby  increased ;  they  render  homage  to  the  Son  of  God ;  and,  in  so  doing,  they 
obey  the  commandment  which  God  hath  given ;  for  when  He  bro*ight  His  First 
Begotten  into  the  world.  He  said,  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him"  ;  and 
thus  they  serve  Him  with  increasing  diligence  and  zeal.  HI.  The  utility  of  this 
TRUTH.  1.  It  is  calculated  to  rescue  the  doctrine  of  salvation  from  unworthy 
treatment.     Yes  t  angels  are  captivated  by  the  doctrines  of  salvation  which  men 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat   'w 

presume  to  neglect.     2.  It  should  give  the  doctrine  of  salvation  dignity  in  the  eye* 
of  men.     3.  It  indicates  the  manner  in  which  the  doctrine  of  salvation  should  be 
studied.     4.  It  should  encourage  perseverance  in  endeavouring  to  attain  the  know- 
ledge of  the  doctrine  of  salvation.     5.  The  greatness  of  the  privileges  of  those  to 
whom  the  knowledge  of  salvation  is  offered.     Jesus  Christ  is  emphatically  styled  in 
the  Scriptures  the  unspeakable  gift  of  God  ;  and  surely  to  attain  the  knowledge  of 
salvation  through  Him,  must  be  the  most  important  privilege  that  possibly  can  be 
enjoyed.     (J.  C.  Jones.  D.D.)         Redemption,  a  study  to  the  angels  : — It  cannot  but 
be  deemed  remarkable  that  we  should  be  so  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  universe. 
Here  are  millions  of  orbs  brought  within  the  range  of  our  vision  by  the  telescope. 
We  cannot  doubt  that  they  are  the  abodes  of  rational  creatures.     Yet  of  the  races 
that  tenant  these  countless  worlds  we  know  absolutely  nothing.     One  race  only 
besides  our  own  is  introduced  to  us  :  and  of  that,  the  notices  are  quite  too  meagre 
to  satisfy  us.     We  see  just  enough  of  the  angels  to  wish  to  see  a  great  deal  more. 
We  "  desire  to  look  "  into  their  affairs,  as  they  into  ours.     We  are  on  safe  grounfl 
in  ascribing  to  them  superior  intelligence  and  ample  knowledge.    But  the  knowledge 
of  a  creature,  whatever  his  rank,  must  necessarily  be  progressive.     The  angels,  like 
ourselves,  must  learn  things  by  the  event — excepting  when  God  may  have  been 
pleased  to  reveal  His  purposes  to  them.    But,  except  through  some  special  revelation, 
of  which  we  have  no  hint,  it  was  impossible  they  should  foresee  the  extraordinary 
transactions  which  were  to  distinguish  this  orb  from  all  the  others  scattered  through 
the  wide  fields  of  space.     From  the  very  first,  however,  the  Divine  procedure  on 
this  planet  would  arrest  their  attention.     How  would  it  astonish  them  to  witness 
the  temptation.     They  had  seen  Satan  and  his  fellow-apostates  cast  down  to  hell : 
and  yet  he  is  now  permitted  to  come  to  this  new-born  world,  and  to  appropriate  one 
of  the  lower  animals  to  the  atrocious  purpose  of  seducing  the  happy  pair  from  their 
allegiance.     Is  it  fanciful  to  imagine  that  this  event  would  fill  the  angels  with 
amazement?  that  they  would  say  one  to  another,  "How  can  these  things  be?" 
But  something  no  less  inexplicable  would  now  inflame  their  curiosity.     They  had 
heard  the  threatening,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shaft  surely  die."     It 
came  from  lips  which  could  not  lie.     And  yet  Adam  and  Eve  do  not  "  die," — i.e., 
they  do  not,  on  their  transgression,  "return  to  the  dust,"  nor  are  they  banished 
into  outer  darkness.     Whether  this  was  intelligible  to  them  we  do  not  know.     The 
fall  occurred  before  the  birth  of  Cain.     We  are  not  certain  that  the  angels  had  ever 
seen  an  infant.     Among  their  own  race  we  may  with  confidence  atfirm  they  had 
not.     The  difference  between  our  race  and  their  own,  in  this  particular,  could  not 
fail  to  interest  them.     They  were  all  created  in  the  full  maturity  of  their  powers. 
In  some  way  the  seed  of  this  woman  is  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head.     Obscure  as 
this  intimation  must  have  been,  as  well  to  the  angels  as  to  the  guilty  pair,  it  would 
unveil  to  them  a  new  attribute  of  the  Godhead.     Up  to  this  period,  it  would  seem, 
they  had  known  nothing  of  the  Divine  mercy.     Its  absence  could  be  no  defect  in 
their  eyes,  for  the  idea  of  mercy  was  not  yet  born  into  the  universe  of  creatures. 
What  a  discovery  was  this  which  now  broke  upon  them !     Truth,  justice,  goodness, 
holiness — with  these  attributes  they  were  familiar.     But  of  mercy  they  had  never 
heard.     Enfolded  in  the  depths  of  His  own  infinitude,  she  had  been  from  eternity 
awaiting  the  appointed  day  of  her  epiphany,  her  glorious  manifestation  to  heaven 
and  earth.    Yet  even  now  that  the  period  has  come,  she  does  not  rise  full-orbed 
upon  the  world,  but  mild  and  gentle,  like  the  dawn,  as  befits  the  quality  of  mercy. 
But  this  shall  suffice  for  angelic  eyes.    Though  mercy  never  spake  before,  she  needs 
no  interpreter.     These  occurrences  could  not  fail  to  stimulate  the  curiosity  of  the 
angels.     They  would  watch  with  deep  solicitude  the  course  of  the  Divine  adminis- 
tration towards  our  world.     They  would  treasure  every  fresh   intimation  of  the 
future  deliverance  to  be  effected  by  the  seed  of  the  woman.     The  presumption  is, 
that  during  those  forty  centuries  it  was  a  perpetual  study  to  them ;  and  that  as  the 
beneficent  scheme  was  gradually  developed,  it  only  increased  their  desire  to  look 
into  its  unfathomable  mysteries.     1.  The  first  and  chief  of  these  is,  to  quote  St. 
Peter's  own  words,  "the  sufferings  of  Christ"  :  by  which  we  may  understand  His 
entire  work  of  humiliation  from  Bethlehem  to  Calvary.     We  must  believe  that  the 
angels  knew,  long  before  the  advent,  that  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity  was  to 
be  the  Redeemer  of  the  world.     But  it  is  not  certain  that  they  had  any  distinct 
conception  of  the  Incarnation.     "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh."     How  could  they  have  penetrated  this  mystery  beforehand  ?     There 
was  neither  precedent  nor  analogy  to  aid  them  in  resolving  it.     Accustomed  as  they 
were  to  render  co-equal  honours  to  the  Trinity,  and  especially  to  adore  the  Son  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  59 

"the  possession  of  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  v.'as," 
how  could  they  think  of  Him  as  stooping  to  be  "  born  of  a  woman,"  as  coming  into 
this  revolted  world  as  an  infant,  blending  His  Divinity  and  our  humanity  in  an 
indissoluble  unity  ?  Imagine  what  a  season  of  suspense  those  thirty  years  must 
have  been  to  them  which  Jesus  passed  at  Nazareth.  How  often  would  they  visit 
the  favoured  village.  In  what  vast  encampments  would  they  spread  around  it. 
As  He  emerged  from  His  seclusion  to  enter  upon  His  public  ministry,  their  interest 
would  become  deeper  and  deeper  still,  until  it  found  its  culmination  in  the  Cross. 
2.  Not  only  would  the  angels  desire  to  look  into  the  "  sufferings  of  Christ,"  but  into 
the  application  of  redemption  also.  They  were  familiar  with  two  types  of  character, 
perfect  holiness  and  unmitigated  depravity ;  and  with  two  conditions  of  being, 
unalloyed  happiness  and  absolute  misery.  Neither  their  own  history  nor,  so  far  as 
we  are  informed,  the  annals  of  any  other  sphere  supplied  them  with  any  example 
of  a  character  in  which  these  elements  were  commingled,  or  afforded  any  hint  of  a 
possible  transition  from  one  state  to  the  other.  They  knew  nothing  of  forgiveness, 
nothing  of  renewal.  The  sacrifice  on  Calvary  now  opens  to  them  a  new  world,  on 
earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  They  had,  indeed,  seen  something  of  this  before,  for 
the  efficacy  of  the  great  expiation  reached  backward  to  the  fall.  But  its  triumph 
was  reserved  for  the  new  dispensation.  And  here  they  see  Hi^  miracles  of  mercy — 
not  less  marvellous  in  their  effects  upon  the  souls  of  men  than  had  been  those  of 
the  Messiah  upon  their  bodies.  There  must  be  much  in  the  history  of  individual 
believers  to  awaken  their  sympathies,  but  still  more  in  the  general  welfare  of  the 
Church.  We  may  be  sure  that  things  have  not  always  gone  as  they  expected  :  that 
events  have  constantly  occurred  which  were  well-nigh  as  mexplicable  to  them  as  to 
us.  Must  it  not  be  a  marvel  to  them  that  the  Church,  the  purchase  of  Christ's 
blood,  should  have  made  its  way  so  slowly  and  so  painfully  in  the  world  ?  that 
at  one  time  it  should  be  poisoned  with  error ;  at  another,  frozen  with  form- 
alism ;  at  a  third,  debauched  with  secularity ;  at  a  fourth,  fissured  and  rent  with 
internal  strife  ?  3.  Here,  in  fact,  is  another  of  the  themes  which  stimulate  the 
curiosity  of  the  angels,  "  the  glories  which  should  follow."  They  have  seen  the 
"  sufferings  of  Christ "  :  they  would  fain  see  His  glory.  They  have  seen — they  see 
now — the  sufferings  of  His  Church :  they  would  see  its  glory.  They  can,  no  doubt, 
frame  a  better  conception  of  them  than  we  can.  And  this  very  circumstance  must 
increase  their  solicitude  to  witness  the  final  result.  They  saw  the  first  faint  linea- 
ment of  the  august  plan  in  Eden.  They  see  also  the  preparation  for  it  which  is 
going  on  in  heaven.  No  wonder  that  they  long  for  its  sublime  consummation.  If 
we  inquire  whence  this  curiosity  on  their  part,  we  may  easily  conjecture  some  of 
the  motives  which  prompt  it.  (1)  Without  dwelling  upon  that  simple  craving  after 
knowledge  which  pertains  to  every  created  intelligence,  we  may  refer  to  the  aid 
which  the  angels  derive  from  redemption  in  their  study  of  the  character  and 
government  of  God.  To  any  creature  the  knowledge  of  the  Creator  is  the  most 
important  of  all  knowledge.  To  holy  beings,  no  study  can  be  so  attractive.  The 
angels,  as  already  observed,  have  signal  advantages  for  this  study.  But  there  is  no 
volume  open  to  them  which  yields  so  much  information  concerning  God  as 
redemption.  Heaven  cannot  lack  for  evidences  of  the  Divine  wisdom ;  but  if  it 
would  see  this  attribute  in  its  glory,  it  must  come  down  to  earth.  Its  grand 
achievement  is  redemption.  And  what  we  affirm  of  His  wisdom  we  claim  also  for 
His  other  moral  attributes.  Here  "  mercy  and  truth  meet  together,  righteousness 
and  peace  kiss  each  other."  Nowhere  else  has  the  Deity  made  so  full,  so  august, 
so  grateful,  a  revelation  of  Himself.  (2)  A  second  reason  is  to  be  found  in  their 
personal  concern  in  the  results  of  redemption.  It  is  an  opinion  sanctioned  by  many 
eminent  names  in  theology,  that  the  good  angels  owe  their  confirmation  in  holiness 
in  some  way  to  the  mediation  of  Christ.  We  read,  e.g.,  of  "  the  elect  angels.''  We 
are  told  that  God  "  gathers  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in 
heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even  in  Him."  And  that  "  all  power  is  given  Him 
in  heaven  and  in  earth."  There  is  another  respect  in  which  they  are  interested  in 
this  work.  In  the  revolt  of  their  associates,  they  become  no  less  their  enemies  than 
the  enemies  of  God.  In  all  the  plots  and  counterplots,  the  assaults  and  repulses, 
the  victories  and  defeats,  of  this  war  of  centuries,  they  have  taken  a  conspicuous 
part.  Their  immediate  personal  concern  in  it,  then,  is  a  cogent  reason  why  they 
should  desire  to  look  into  the  mystery  which  infolds  it.  (3)  And  this  imports  that 
their  own  happiness  is  involved  in  the  issue.  Merely  to  glance  at  this  point,  the 
benevolence  of  the  angels  must  attract  them  to  the  study  of  redemption.  They 
know  what  the  happiness  of  heaven  is.    Here  is  a  race  whose  destiny  is  undecided, 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai-.  i. 

the  only  race  which  is  in  this  anomalous  condition.  Whatever  the  issue,  it  must  be 
irreversible.  The  fate  of  millions  of  souls  hangs  upon  the  trembling  balance.  Is 
it  for  an  angel  to  look  upon  such  a  scene  with  indifference  ?  Reflections — 1.  Let 
us  borrow  from  this  scripture  a  single  ray  of  light  to  set  forth  the  quality  of  that 
scepticism  which  men  of  cultivated  minds  sometimes  cherish  respecting  Christianity. 
Now,  as  of  old,  the  gospel  is  "  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greek 
foolishness."  You  stigmatise  it  as  not  only  oppressive  in  its  demands,  but  even 
irrational  in  its  principles.  Go  to  the  angels  for  a  lesson  of  humility.  2.  There  is 
a  keen  rebuke  in  this  scripture  for  those  who  are  living  in  the  neglect  of  the  gospel. 
{H.  A.  Boardman,  D.D.)  Salvation — mysterious  and  glorious  : — I.  Mysterious, 
and  therefore  a  subject  of  angelic  study.  1.  From  its  novelty.  2.  From  the  moral 
character  of  the  race  to  be  redeemed.  3.  From  the  manner  of  its  accomplishment. 
4.  From  the  mode  of  its  promulgation.  5.  From  the  manner  in  which  the  tidings 
of  this  salvation,  even  when  preached  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven, 
are  received  by  the  children  of  men.  II.  Infinitely  glorious.  1.  In  its  exhibition 
of  the  Divine  character.  2.  In  its  transforming  efficacy.  3.  In  its  diffusive  nature. 
4.  In  the  freeness  with  which  its  blessings  are  offered.  (1)  To  all  indiscriminately. 
(2)  In  perfect  sincerity.  (3)  On  terms  easy,  and  within  the  reach  of  every 
individual.  5.  In  the  perpetuity  and  fulness  of  its  blessings.  (James  Floy,  M.A.) 
The  angels^  attitude  towards  the  redemptive  plan : — I.  Close  attention.     II.  Deep 

AMAZEMENT.        III.     WaRM    ADMIRATION.        IV.      HiGH    DELIGHT.       [A.     Roberts,     M.A.) 

Redemption  the  subject  of  admiration  to  the  angels  : — I.  First,  we  are  to  mention 

THOSE  circumstances  IN  THE  MYSTERY  OF  REDEMPTION  WHICH  ARE  PROBABLY  THE 
SUBJECT  OF  ADORING  INQUIRY,  OR  PERHAPS  HOLY  ASTONISHMENT,  TO  THE  ANGELS  OF  GoD. 

1.  The  first  thing  I  shall  mention  is  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God ;  the  union 
of  the  Divine  and  human  nature,  by  the  Word's  being  made  flesh.  It  is  probable 
that  this  discovery  was  made  to  the  angels  gradually,  as  it  was  to  men.  There  is 
one  circumstance  in  the  Incarnation  itself,  which  is  certainly  as  astonishing  as  any, 
That  He  was  not  only  made  flesh,  but  sent  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  What 
so  opposite  to  the  nature  of  God  as  sin  ?  And  what  so  surprising,  as  that  the  Son 
of  God,  though  without  sin,  yet  should  in  all  respects  outwardly  be  like  to  sinners  ? 
that  He  should  be  taken  for  a  sinner,  treated  as  a  sinner,  and  at  last  crucified  as  a 
more  than  ordinary  sinner  ?  2.  Another  circumstance  which  must  afford  matter 
for  adoring  inquiry  to  the  celestial  spirits,  is  the  substitution  of  an  innocent  person 
in  the  room  of  the  guilty,  and  His  suffering  from  the  hand  of  God.  The  angels  had 
always  hitherto  seen  innocence  and  holiness  attended  with  peace  and  felicity,  and 
they  had  seen  the  apostate  spirits  laid  under  an  irreversible  sentence  of  condem- 
nation. What  astonishment,  then,  must  it  have  given  them,  what  new  views  of  the 
boundless  sovereignty  and  unsearchable  wisdom  of  the  Most  High  must  it  have 
opened  to  them,  when  they  heard  Him  saying,  "  Deliver  him  from  going  down  into 
the  pit,  I  have  found  a  ransom !  "  How  often  must  they  have  been  put  to  a  stand, 
what  to  think  of  the  severity  and  persecution,  the  contempt  and  opposition  which 
Christ  met  with  from  those  very  sinners  whom  He  came  to  save !  But  above  all, 
how  must  they  have  been  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  His  being  exposed,  not  only  to 
the  contempt  of  man,  but  to  the  wrath  of  God !  For  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
Him,  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief."  3.  Another  circumstance  in  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion through  Christ,  which  will  afford  matter  of  wonder  to  the  celestial  spirits,  is 
the  free  justification  of  sinners,  and  their  acceptance  with  God,  through  the  imputed 
righteousness  of  Christ.  Must  not  this  appear  a  new  and  extraordinary  plan  to  the 
angels,  who,  by  personal  and  perfect  obedience,  retain  the  favour  of  their  Creator, 
and  who  had  been  hitherto  strangers  to  the  influence  and  intercession  of  a  mediator  ? 
who  had  seen  no  such  thing  take  place  when  their  brethren  sinned  (Heb.  ii.  16). 
The  holy  angels  will  rather  say,  "  Let  us  step  aside  and  see  this  great  sight."  They 
will  then  see  that  there  is  no  way  more  proper  for  maintaining  the  dignity  of  the 
Divine  Government ;  nay,  that  it  is  the  only  way  by  which  those  who  have  been 
sinners  can  be  received  into  favour.  They  will  see  and  confess  that  there  is  no 
circumstance  whatever  that  tends  more  to  level  the  pride  of  the  sinner's  heart,  and 
bring  him  to  universal  submission,  and  absolute  subjection  to  the  sovereignty  of 
God.  4.  Another  circumstance  in  the  mystery  of  the  gospel  which  will  be  matter  of 
wonder  to  the  angels,  is  the  application  of  redemption,  or  the  manner  and  means 
of  translating  sinners  "  from  darkness  to  light,"  and  "  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God."  II.  Practical  Improvement.  1.  What  you  have  heard  will  contribute, 
I  hope,  to  show  the  guilt  of  those  who  despise  the  gospel,  and  serve  to  remove  the 
offence  of  the  Cross.    2.  You  may  learn  from  what  has  been  said  the  encouragement 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  61 

that  is  given  to  sinners  to  return  to  God  through  Christ.  3.  From  what  hath  been 
said  upon  this  subject,  you  may  examine  your  title  to  partake  of  the  holy  ordinance 
of  the  Lord's  Supper ;  or,  in  other  words,  your  right  to  the  favour  of  God  and  to 
eternal  life.  No  disposition  more  suitable,  none  more  necessary  at  a  communion- 
table than  a  grateful  and  admiring  sense  of  redeeming  love.  4.  From  what  has 
been  said,  learn  what  is  your  most  proper  employment  at  the  Lord's  table.  Adore 
and  contemplate  the  riches  of  redeeming  grace,  that  great  theme  which  "  the  angels 
desire  to  look  into."     (J.  Witherspoon,  D.D.)  Angels,  students  in  the  mysteries 

of  redemption  : — I.  What  those  things  are  which  the  angels  look  into.  They 
must  of  necessity  be  the  things  which  the  apostle  had  been  speaking  of,  especially 
in  the  three  preceding  verses :  the  things  of  Christ.  1.  The  Incarnation  of  Christ, 
or  His  coming  into  this  world  (1  Tim.  iii.  16.)  2.  The  life  of  Christ.  That  perfect 
pattern  of  all  that  -as  excellent  is  often  before  their  eyes.  3.  The  death  of  Christ. 
The  love  of  it,  in  His  dying  for  sinful  man,  must  be  to  them  subject  of  perpetual 
wonder  and  praise.  4.  The  doctrines  of  Christ.  His  admirable  lessons  of  piety 
and  virtue  ;  His  wise  precepts  and  instructions ;  His  wonderful  revelations  of  the 
Divine  will  must  be  highly  entertaining  to  them  (Eev.  xiv.  6).  5.  The  promises  of 
Christ.  II.  The  manner  in  which  the  angels  look  into  these  things.  1.  With 
wonder.  2.  With  the  closest  attention.  3.  With  reverence.  4.  With  delight.  5. 
With  praise.  III.  The  proof  ok  reason  of  their  doing  so.  1.  The  angels  being 
employed  so  much  about  these  things,  seems  to  show  that  they  desire  to  look  into 
them.  2.  These  things  concern  angels  as  well  as  men.  God  is  their  Father  as 
well  as  ours,  and  the  portion  of  both.  3.  God  is  glorified  in  and  by  these  things. 
Their  work  is  to  glorify  Him  (Eev.  vii.  11;  Psa.  cxlviii.  2).  4.  They  are  for  the 
highest  good  of  man,  and  therefore  the  angels  desire  to  look  into  them.  They  have 
a  generous  concern  for  our  welfare.  5.  The  subject  matter  of  these  things  is  such, 
as  that  the  angels  must  needs  desire  to  look  into  them.  Never  were  greater  things 
than  those  which  Christ  has  revealed  to  us.  Application  :  1.  Since  the  angels  look 
into  these  things,  do  you  look  more  into  them  ?  2.  Since  the  angels  look  into  these 
things,  do  you  put  a  higher  value  upon  them  ?  3.  Since  the  angels  look  into  these 
things,  see  that  you  have  a  saving  interest  in  them,  otherwise  the  angels  that  look 
into  them  will  witness  against  you.  {T.  Hannam.)  The  angelic  study  of  redemp- 
tion : — In  order  to  ascertain  what  Peter  means  by  the  phrase  "  which  things,"  we 
must  look  back  to  the  antecedent  context.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  the  matters 
of  angehc  solicitude  here  referred  to,  are  just  the  same  as  those  of  prophetic  study  ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  salvation  of  the  gospel ;  or,  as  it  is  more  minutely  described  in 
the  eleventh  verse,  "the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  foUow." 
The  text  farther  declares  in  what  manner  the  angels  study  these  subjects.  In  the 
holy  of  holies,  the  most  secret  shrine  of  the  Jewish  temple,  stood  the  ark  of  the 
covenant,  an  apparatus  in  whose  interior  was  deposited  the  canon  of  the  Mosaic 
law,  the  blessings  and  the  curses,  the  promises  and  the  threatenings,  of  God's  most 
holy  word.  Over  the  top  of  this  ark  was  laid  a  covering  or  lid  of  massive  gold, 
which  was  denominated  the  Mercy-Seat.  It  was  a  symbol  of  our  Saviour's  propitia- 
tion. Now,  above  the  mercy-seat  were  figures  of  cherubim,  whose  expanded  wings 
overshadowed  its  circumferences,  and  whose  many  faces  were  aU  bent  down  in 
silent  gaze  upon  the  emblems  underneath.  They  looked  down,  in  the  attitude  of 
eager  gladness  and  adoring  wonder,  upon  the  interposing  medium  which  annihilated 
the  presence  and  the  power  of  the  law.  These  cherubim,  as  the  prophecies  clearly 
show,  represent  the  heavenly  angels;  and  therefore  we  have  here  found,  in  the 
typical  emblems  of  the  Jewish  economy,  a  literal  picture  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostle,  that  the  pure  spirits  of  the  upper  world  bend  down,  in  the  attitude  of 
learners,  to  explore  "  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  foUow." 
But  once  more  our  text  indicates  not  merely  the  posture  but  the  spirit  with  which 
the  angels  engage  in  this  contemplation.  They  desire  to  look  into  it.  They  are 
anxious,  warm,  eager,  ardent  in  the  matter.  Their  hearts,  as  well  as  their  eyes,  are 
bent  on  it ;  and,  with  intent,  assiduous,  and  persevering  zeal,  they  devote  them- 
selves to  scrutinise  it  in  all  its  depth,  though  it  is  unfathomable,  and  in  all  its 
extent,  though  it  is  limitless.  I.  We  remark  that  the  angels  desire  to  look  into 
"  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  shall  foUow,"  not  by  ant  means  in 

CONSEQUENCE    OF    IGNORANCE    IN    REFERENCE    TO    THE    GRAND   FACTS    OF    THE    SCHEME    OF 

redemption.  When  Adam  was  expelled  from  Paradise,  and  an  angel  stationed  at 
its  gate  to  deter  the  guilty  rebel  from  ever  approaching  the  place  whose  sanctity  he 
had  profaned,  we  may  imagine  that  that  angel  was  aware  of  the  hopes  and  consola- 
tions sealed  up  in  the  great  promise,  and  knew  man  was  not  accursed  for  ever. 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  i. 

Angels  visited  in  his  tent  the  Father  of  the  faithful,  and  knew  that  unto  his  off- 
spring God  had  promised  eternal  blessings.  Choirs  of  angels  welcomed  the  in-  ar- 
nation  of  the  Lord  with  strains  of  heavenly  music.  Doubtless,  these  blessed  spirits 
knew  the  subject  of  which  they  sang  so  sweetly.  Heaven's  heralds  knew  they  were 
greeting  the  human  nature  of  Heaven's  eternal  King.  However,  it  is  proper  to  take 
notice  of  a  text,  which,  at  first  sight,  will  rather  appear  to  demonstrate  that  the 
angels  are  not  deeply  versed  in  the  matters  of  fact  connected  with  the  redemption 
of  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  9-10).  But  this  passage  by  no  means  implies  that  it  is  the 
Church  alone  which  enlightens  the  heavenly  host  in  the  glorious  dispensation  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ.  The  assertion  of  the  passage  is -not  that  the  heavenly  host  were 
in  ignorance  of  that  subject  till  the  Church  instructed  them,  but  that  they  never 
learned  the  subject  through  the  Church  till  the  Church  received,  and  professed,  and 
obeyed  the  truth.  The  angels  knew  the  mystery  of  redemption  before  the  apostles 
went  forth  on  the  theatre  of  the  world  to  preach  salvation  to  every  creature.  But  it 
was  not  till,  from  their  lofty  dwelling-place  in  heaven,  they  saw  the  Gentile  and  the 
Jew  alike  being  gathered  into  one  fold  of  the  one  great  Shepherd,  that  they  knew, 
by  the  Church,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.  H.  We  remark  that  the  angels  desire 
to  look  into  the  sufferings  and  glory  of  Christ,  because  there  they  obtain  the 
BRIGHTEST  DISPLAY  OF  THE  DiviNE  PERFECTIONS.  HI.  The  augcls  desirc  to  look  into 
"  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow,"  because  the  eternaIi 

INTERESTS  OF  MANKIND  DEPEND  ON  THESE  THINGS,  AND  BECAUSE  THESE  ETERNAL 

INTERESTS  ARE  AT  STAKE.  When  we  analyse  the  motive  which  impels  the  angels  to 
look  into  the  mystery  of  redemption,  it  resolves  itself  not  only  into  a  reverential 
desire  of  studying  the  Divine  perfections,  but  also  into  an  anxious  concern  for  the 
salvation  of  sinners.  This  concern  is  itself  twofold,  depending  partly  on  the  desire 
of  the  angels  to  see  Christ  glorified  in  the  salvation  of  sinners,  and  partly  on  the 
benevolent  affection  of  the  angels  to  these  sinners,  whom  they  see  in  such  imminent 
danger  of  everlasting  destruction.  IV.  The  angels  desire  to  look  into  "  the  sufferings 
of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow,"  in  other  words,  into  the  progress  of 

THE  WORK  OF  REDEMPTION,  BECAUSE  THE  ISSUE  OF  THAT  WORK  WILL  BE  THE  ELEVATION 
OF  THE  CHURCH  TRIUMPHANT  OVER    THE    ANGELIC   RACE,  IN    DIGNITY,  GLORY,  AND    POWER. 

What  strange  and  striking  thoughts  it  must  suggest  to  an  angelic  being  to  look  upon 
a  human  creature,  depraved,  condemned,  absorbed  in  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  at 
last  falling  a  prey  to  death,  who  yet,  in  virtue  of  a  previous  union  to  Christ  by  faith, 
shall  rise  above  the  fetters  of  mortality,  shall  be  elevated  to  the  holiness  and 
happiness  of  heaven.  [Alex.  Nishet.)  The  angels'  desire  to  look  into  salvation  : — 
It  is  thought  to  be  a  sign  of  weakness  to  bow  down  before  the  Cross.  The  context 
teaches  a  different  lesson.  The  prophets,  who  were  men  of  great  mental  gifts,  were 
deeply  interested  in  this  "  salvation."  The  apostle  goes  a  step  beyond.  He  declares 
that  the  angels  desired  to  look  into  these  sublime  truths.  I.  The  nature  of  these 
ANGELS.  The  Scriptures  have  revealed  but  little  about  them.  The  Bible  was  not 
given  us  to  reveal  their  nature,  but  to  make  known  to  us  the  plan  of  salvation.  Yet 
there  is  something  about  the  nature  of  angels  which  we  may  know  by  the  study  of 
ourselves.  1.  We  have  memory.  History  has  a  meaning  to  us.  Our  memories, 
at  best,  are  very  imperfect,  but  there  are  some  things  we  never  forget.  Now,  the 
memory  of  any  one  thing  implies  the  possibility  of  a  memory  that  will  never  forget. 
Now,  angels,  no  doubt,  have  memories  far  more  tenacious  than  ours.  How 
this  will  add  to  their  knowledge.  2.  Then  we  have  the  power  of  connecting 
cause  and  effect,  and  the  power  of  pure  reason ;  and  we  have  that  still 
more  marvellous  power,  imagination.  Whither  cannot  imagination  go?  How 
much  better  are  angels  fitted  by  powers  far  more  perfect  than  these  to 
gather  knowledge.  3.  Then,  again,  we  are  hindered  by  our  bodies — one-third 
of  our  time  is  taken  up  in  eating  and  sleeping.  Angels  are  free  from  all  this. 
4.  Then  consider  how  much  more  we  know  than  we  did  fifty  years  ago.  Yet  the 
angels  witnessed  the  birth  of  the  worlds  and  systems  of  worlds.  All  history  lays 
open  before  them.  They  know  of  God's  providence.  How  much  then  these  angels 
must  know  of  God ;  I  had  almost  said  what  do  they  not  know  of  Him  ?  II.  Con- 
sider,   that   notwithstanding   all  this  knowledge    the  angels  were  not  satiskied 

BECAUSE    THEY    DID    NOT    UNDERSTAND    THE    PLAN    OF    SALVATION.       They    heard    of    tllis 

plan  and  were  deeply  interested.  They  "desire  to  look  into  it."  With  all  their 
powers  of  investigation,  with  all  their  vast  knowledge,  here  was  a  matter  that  they 
had  not  fathomed,  and  that  they  greatly  desired  to  know.  Yet  scientists  sometimes 
feel  that  they  are  so  busy  as  to  have  no  time  to  study  this  salvation.  They  are  busy 
at  studying  the  structures  of  crystals.    Why  angels  know  all  about  them.    They  saw 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  63 

the  particles  taking  their  positions.  These  men  are  busy  in  investigating  the  strata 
of  the  rocks.  Why,  the  angels  saw  the  upheaval  of  the  rocks  which  so  diversified 
and  distorted  the  strata.  Thev  were  there  at  the  formation  of  the  earth  and  have 
witnessed   all   the   changes.  these   things,    which   so    deeply   concern    these 

scientists,  are  plain  as  A  B  C  tv-  ..ese  angels,  who.  nevertheless,  so  desire  to  see  into 
the  plan  of  salvation,  that  subject  which  the  scientists  deem  of  so  little  importance. 
III.  It  is  not  revealed  to  us  how  angels  sought  to  understand  this  matter. 
The  visions  concerning  it  came  to  the  prophets,  doubtless,  as  pictures.  They  did 
not  fully  understand  all  they  saw.  Moses,  when  he  desired  to  see  God,  was  told 
that  no  one  could  see  the  face  of  God  and  live.  Another  prophet  saw  a  different 
picture.  He  saw  Christ  as  a  lamb  led  to  the  slaughter.  Others  saw  still  different 
pictures.  Now  I  imagine  that  the  angels,  as  the  prophets  traced  the  pictures  they 
saw,  would  look  over  their  shoulders  to  study  this  marvellous  salvation.  That  word 
which  is  translated  in  the  text,  "  look  into,"  is  a  wonderful  word.  It  means  to  look 
down  into.  It  implies  eagerness  to  see  the  bottom.  (Bishop  Simpson.)  Angels 
studying  redemption : — I.  The  things  which  the  angels  contemplate.  1.  Salvation. 
2.  The  grace  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  sufferings  of  Christ.  4.  The  glory  that  should 
follow.  II.  The  jllnner  in  which  the  angels  contemplate  these  things.  1. 
Attentively.  2.  Humbly  and  reverentially.  3.  With  eager  and  prevailing  desire. 
III.  The  instructions  and  admonitions  which  their  contemplation  of  these 
things  aefords  to  us.  The  deske  which  angels  manifest  to  look  into  these  things, 
teaches — 1.  The  dignity  and  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  has  furnished  them 
with  such  subjects  of  contemplation.  2.  The  magnitude  and  importance  of  the 
work  of  redemption.  3.  The  means  which  we  must  use,  in  order  to  be  influenced 
by  them  ourselves.  We  must  "  look  "  into  them — we  must  make  them  the  subject 
of  devout  and  studious  contemplation.  4.  The  propriety  and  the  duty  of  making 
them  known  to  aU  mankind.  5.  The  criminality  of  those  persons  who  treat  the 
same  things  with  indifference  and  neglect.     [J.  Alexander.) 

Vers.  13-16.  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind. — Tighten  the  belt: — 
"  Wherefore,"  for  this  reason,  that  your  salvation  was  so  great  an  object  of  interest 
to  prophets  and  to  angels,  it  becomes  you  to  maintain  your  faith,  your  courage,  and 
expectation  to  the  end.  "  Wherefore,  girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  The 
allusion  is  to  the  long  loose  garments  worn  by  the  Asiatics.  I.  The  me.vn-jng  then, 
IS,  BE  thoroughly  COURAGEOUS,  GENUINE,  SINCERE.  Make  your  life  compact  by  the 
girdle  of  truth.  Avoid  loose,  unsubstantial  convictions  regarding  spiritual  and 
eternal  things.  Eemember,  however  little  the  word  of  revealed  truth  is  to  you,  it  is 
God's  greatest  and  best  thought :  that  it  is  the  divine  record  concerning  yourself 
and  His  dear  Son  ought  to  make  it  of  infinite  importance  to  you.  Therefore,  "  ghd 
up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  Tighten  the  belt.  You  can  do  better  work,  run  a 
better  race,  or  be  better  ready  for  fight.  Then  shall  you  be  fitted  for  the  best  service 
the  King  demands.  Settled  convictions  of  divine  truth  are  of  great  value  ;  they 
give  stability,  contentment,  and  influence.  The  girdle  compact,  and  everything 
is  made  available  for  comfort  and  usefulness,  you  are  stable  and  helpful  when  others 
are  weak  and  vacillating.  11.  This,  also,  will  induce  sobriety,  gravity,  thought- 
fulness.  And,  impressed  with  the  magnitude  and  sustained  by  the  certainty  of 
divine  truth,  you  will  "  set  your  hope  perfectly  on  the  grace,  or  favour,  that  is  to  be 
brought  unto  you  when  Jesus  shall  come  again,"  to  give  eternal  honour  to  His 
people.  Stop,  then ;  think,  tighten  your  belt.  Many  are  not  ready  for  the  sudden 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  Are  you?  0,  the  supreme  importance  of  being  ready 
now,  and  each  moment !  HI.  "  Tell  us  how  we  shall  do  this  girding."  Peter 
wrote  these  words  in  the  shadow  of  the  greatest  truths  :  the  Cross,  and  the  possibility 
of  your  salvation.  Think  often  of  the  Cross  and  its  mystery  of  grace ;  it  will  fill 
your  life  with  the  mightiest  motives.  Think  of  the  end  of  your  faith,  the  salvation 
of  your  soul.  Think ;  you  are  in  possession  of  God's  revelation,  His  best  thought, 
the  sunlight  of  your  present  joy  and  your  future  hope.  Think ;  you  are  in  fellow- 
ship wilh  Jesus  Christ.  Do  it  by  much  prayer.  {J.  Parker.)  A  seasonable 
exhortation : — 1.  How  full  of  their  Lord  were  the  minds  of  these  holy  writers ! 
2.  How  ardently  these  men  expected  the  coming  of  the  Lord !  3.  It  is  equally 
noticeable  that  whUe  apostolic  men  looked  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  they  looked  for 
it  with  no  idea  of  dread,  but,  on  the  contrary,  with  the  utmost  joy.  4.  Observe 
also,  how  constantly  they  were  urging  this  as  a  motive !  Peter  never  holds  it  out 
as  a  mere  matter  of  speculation,  nor  exclusively  as  a  ground  of  comfort ;  but  as  the 
grand  motive  for  action,  for  hoHness,  for  watchfulness.     The  teaching  necessary 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

for  to-day  is  this :  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,"  brace  yourselves  up ;  be  firm, 
compact,   consistent,   determined.     Do   not  be   like   quicksilver,  which  keeps   on 
dissolving  and  running  into  fractions  ;  do  not  fritter  away  life  upon  trifles,  but  live 
to  purpose,  with  undivided  heart,  and  decided  resolution.     These  are  equally  days 
in  which  it  is  necessary  to  say  "  be  sober."     We  are  always  having  some  new  fad 
or  another  brought  out  to  infatuate  the  unstable.     "  Be  sober,"  and  judge  for  your- 
selves.    Nor  is   the  third  exhortation  unnecessary:   "Hope  to  the  end."     Be  so 
hopeful  as  to  be  "  calm  mid  the  bewildering  cry,  confident  of  victory."     I.  An 
AEGUMENT.     "  Wherefore."     True   religion    is   not   unreasonable ;    it    is    common 
sense  set  to  heavenly  music.     The  apostle  begins  by  saying,  "  Elect  according  to 
foreknowledge,"  &c.     Shall  the  elect  of  God  be  timorous  ?     Shall  those  who  are 
chosen  of  the  Most  High  give  way  to  despair  ?     God  forbid  !     There  is  an  argument, 
then,  in  the  first  and  second  verses,  forcibly  supporting  the  precepts  of  the  text.     It 
well  behoves  the  elect  of  God  to  choose  His  service  resolutely,  to  abide  in  it  stead- 
fastly, and  hope  for  its  reward  with  supreme  confidence.     But  next,  Peter  declares 
that  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  "  begotten  us  again  unto  a 
lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."     0  ye  begotten  of 
God,  see  that  ye  live  as  such  !     You  are  twice-born  men ;  live  not  the  low  life  of 
the  merely  natural  man.     You  are  descended  from  the  King  of  kings ;  degrade  not 
your    descent !     Your   election   and    your   regeneration    call  you    to  holy   living. 
Further,    the    apostle    goes   on  to   say  that  you   are  heirs   of   "  an  inheritance 
incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not   away,  reserved   in  heaven  for 
you."     Courage,  then,  if  this  be  your  destiny  :  do  not  be  cast  down  by  the  abound- 
ings  of  sin,  nor  even  by  your  own  personal  temptations.     Then  he  goes  on  to  say 
that  you  are  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be 
revealed  in  the  last  time."     If  the  power  of  God  keeps  me,  shall  I  be  hopeless  ? 
Shall  I  speak  like  one  that  has  no  hereafter  to  rejoice  in?     Further,  the  apostle 
goes  on  to  say  that  we  may  be  passing  through  needful  trial,  but  it  is  only  for  a 
little  while.     Come,  then,  if  this  fire  is  to  be  passed  through,  let  us  gird  up  our  loins 
to  dash  through  it.     Let  us  hope  to  be  sustained,  and  sanctified  as  the  result,  and 
let  no  unbelieving  fear  cast  a  cloud  over  our  sky.     Is  not  this  good  argument  ?     Nor 
is  this  all.     He  tells  us  that   even  while  we  are  in  trial  we  are  still  full  of  joy. 
Once  more  :  the  apostle  goes  on  to  say  that  the  gospel  which  we  believe,  and  for 
which  we  are  ready  to  suffer,  is  a  gospel  that  comes  to  us  with  the  sanction  of  the 
prophets.     It  seems  to  me  that  with  such  men  as  Moses  and  David,  Isaiah  and 
Jeremiah,   to  support  our  faith,  we  need  not  be  ashamed  of  our  company,  nor 
tremble  at  the  criticisms  of  the  moderns.     II.  The  exhortation.     1.  "  Gird  up  the 
loins  of  your  mind.     (1)  That  certainly  teaches  us  earnestness.     We  brace  ourselves 
for  a  supreme  effort ;  and  the  Christian  life  is  always  such.     (2)  Does  it  not  also 
mean  preparedness  ?     A  true  believer  should  be  ready  for  suffering  or  service — ready, 
indeed,  for  anything.     (3)  It   means   determination    and    hearty   resolution.     By 
conflict  throughout  a  whole  life  we  come  to  our  rest ;  and  there  is  no  other  way. 
You  cannot  go  round  to  a  back-door,  and  enter  into  heaven  by  stealth.     You  must 
fight  if  you  would  reign.     Wherefore,  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind.     (4)  Once 
more,  the  figure  teaches  us  that  our  life  must  be  concentrated.     "  Gird  up  the  loins 
of  your  mind."    We  have  no  strength  to  spare  ;  we  cannot  afford  to  let  part  of  our 
force  leak  away.     We  need  to  bring  all  our  faculties  to  bear  on  one  point,  and  exert 
them  all  to  one  end.     2.  "  Be  sober."     (1)  This  means  moderation  in  all  things. 
Do  not  be  so  excited  with  joy  as  to  become  childish.     Do  not  grow  intoxicated  with 
worldly  gain  or  honour.     On  the  other  hand,  do  not  be  too  much  depressed  with 
passing  troubles.     (2)  Keep  the  middle  way  ;  hold  to  the  golden  mean.     Make  sure 
of  your  footing  when  you  stand ;  make  doubly  sure  of  it  before  you  shift.     (3)  Be 
clear-headed.     Ask  that  the  grace  of  God  may  so  rule  in  your  heart  that  you  may  be 
peaceful,  and  not  troubled  with  idle  fear  on  one  side  or  with  foolish  hope  on  the 
other.     "  Be  sober,"  says  the  apostle.     You  know  the  word  translated  "be  sober" 
sometimes  means  "  be  watchful  "  ;  and  indeed  there  is  a  great  kinship  between  the 
two  things.     Live  with  your  eyes  open ;   do  not  go  about  the  world  half  asleep. 
3.  "Hope  to  the  end."     Be  strong  in  holy  confidence  in  God's  Word,  and  be  sure 
that  His  cause  will  live  and  prosper.     Hope  to  the  end ;  go  right  through  with  it ; 
if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  hope  still.     Hope  as  much  as  ever  a  man  can  hope ; 
for  when  your  hope  is  in  God  you  cannot  hope  too  much.     But  let  your  hope  be  all 
in  grace.     Do  not  hope  in  yourself  or  in  your  works  ;  but  "  hope  in  the  grace  "  ;  for 
Fo  the  text  may  be  read.     Hope,  moreover,  in  the  grace  which  you  have  not  yet 
received,  in  "  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  65 

Christ."    Bless  God  for  the  grace  that  you  have  not  yet  obtained,  for  He  has  it  in 
store  for  you  ;  yea,  He  hath  put  it  on  the  road,  and  it  is  coining  to  you.     IH. 
Expectation.     What  you  have  got  to  hope  for  is  more  grace.     God  will   never 
deal  with  you  upon  the  ground  of  merit ;  He  has  begun  with  you  in  grace,  and  He 
will  go  on  with  you  in  grace,  therefore  "  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace."     The  grace 
you  are  to  hope  for  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.     He 
has  been  revealed  once,  at  His  first  advent ;  hence  the  grace  you  have.     He  is  to  be 
revealed  very  soon  in  His  second  advent ;  hence  the  grace  that  is  a-coming  to  you. 
"  My  ship  is  coming  home,"  says  the  child.     So  is  mine :  Jesus  is  coming,  and 
that  means  all  things  to  me.     But  what  can  this  grace  be  that  will  be  received  at  His 
coming  ?    Justification  ?    No,  we  have  that  already  by  His  resurrection.     Sanctifica- 
tion  ?    No ;  we  have  that  already,  by  being  made  partakers  of  His  life.     What  is 
the  grace  that  is  to  be  revealed  at  His  coming  ?    Just  look  at  the  chapter,  and  you 
will  read  in  the  fifth  verse,  "  Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto 
salvation,  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."     1.  Perfect  salvation  is  one  part  of 
the  grace  which  is  to  be  brought  in  the  last  time  when  Christ  comes.     When  He 
comes  there  will  be  perfection  for  our  souls  and  salvation  for  our  bodies.     2.  The 
second  grace  that  Christ  will  bring  with  Him  when  He  comes  is  the  perfect  vindica- 
tion of  our  faith :  "  that  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than  of 
gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  might  be  found  unto  praise  and 
honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."    To-day  they  sneer  at  our 
faith,  but  they  will  not  do  so  when  Jesus  comes ;  to-day  we  ourselves  tremble  for 
the  ark  of  the  Lord,  but  we  shall  not  do  so  when  He  comes.     Then  shall  all  men 
say  that  believers  were  wise,  prudent,  philosophical.     Those  who  believe  in  Jesus 
may  be  called  fools  to-day,  but  men  will  think  otherwise  when  they  see  them  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  Father's  kingdom.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Christian  morality  : 
— The  great  privileges  we  enjoy  are  here  urged  upon  us  as  a  reason  why  we  should 
live  like  regenerate  persons.     I.  The  essentials  of  Christian  character.     They 
are — diligence,  sobriety,  and  hope.     1.  Diligence.     This  virtue  is  here  exemphfied 
by  a  very  striking  figure.     Christians  are  not  to  be  like  pompous  peacocks,  mere 
objects  of  beauty,  strutting  about  over  the  green  fields  of  earth.     They  are  not  to  be 
languid  and  effeminate  dreamers.     They  are  to  engage  in  the  activities  of  man- 
hood, and  for  this  purpose  must  brace  themselves  with  vigour.     There  is  much  to  be 
accomplished.     There  is  much  to  be  learnt.     There  is  much  to  be  obtained.     There 
is  much  to  be  endured.     But  the  apostle  is  particular  to  remind  us  of  the  spiritual 
nature  of  this  work — "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."     The  Christian  life  is  not 
an  outward  thing.     The  mind  is  the  battle-field.     Here  the  battles  are  lost  or  won. 
How  much  does  the  mind  require  bracing  up  !     It  soon  sinks  into  indifference  and 
sluggishness,  especially  under  trials  or  difficulties.    A  healthy  soul  results  from 
moral  disciphne.     We  are  to  brace  up  our  thoughts  by  wholesome  restraint,  our 
desires  by  a  strong  curb,  our  sentiments  by  calm  deliberation.     This  requires  patient 
and  persevering  diligence.     2.  Sobriety.     "  Be  sober."     This  does  not  refer  to  what 
we  call  temperance.     It  is  that  calm,  quiet  dignity  which  so  well  befits  a  Christian 
man,  and  which  raises  him  above  the  flighty,  giddy,  thoughtless  throng  of  worldly 
people.     There  is  something  noble  in  his  character.     3.  Patient  hope.     Here  is  a 
rebuke  to  the  restless  uneasiness  at  the  trials  of  life  which  was  the  cause  of  writing 
this  Epistle.     II.  The  great  Christian  motive.     "  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought 
unto  you  at  the  revelation  of   Jesus  Christ."     And  is  it  not  worth  hoping  for? 
1.  Consider  its  greatness.     It  is  not  an  earthly  blessing — temporary,  passing,  and 
mingled  with  what  is  evil,  sinful,  and  transitory.    It  is — (1)  An  eternal  state.     All 
our  chief  sorrows  here  are  caused  by  change.     (2)  A  perfect  state.     Life  will  be 
perfect ;  here  most  men  only  half  live.     Health  will  be  perfect.     Taste  will  be 
perfect.     Employment  will  be   perfect.     And   all  the  surroundings  of   this  state 
will  be  perfect  also.     2.  Consider  its  fulness.     There  is  no  stint  in  the    eternal 
life  which  is  provided.     The  vastness  of  heaven  is  one  of  the  mysteries  we  have 
to   contemplate,    but  at  present  cannot   understand.     III.   The    GRE.iT    end    of 
Christian  development — holiness.     All  discipline   has   one   object  to    carry  out. 
1.  Under  the   aspect  of   dutiful    children.     "As   obedient   children,"    &c.     Here 
is   a    grand    motive — the   motive  of   love.     2.  Under    the    aspect    of    similitude. 
We  desire  to  be  like  those  whom  we  love.     Holiness,  then,  makes  us  like  God. 
Without  it  we  cannot  be  conformed  to  Him.     Without  it  we  cannot  associate  with 
Him.     3.  Under  the  aspect  of   universaUty.     "  In  all  manner   of   conversation," 
i.e.,  in  all  your  behaviour.     Holiness  is  to  pervade  all  things.     {J.  J.  S.  Bird.) 
The  right  influence  of  a  Christian  creed  : — I.  Mental  activity.     "  Wherefore  gird 

5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  First :  That  man  has  a  mind.  He  has  a  thinking, 
conscious,  undying  spirit.  This  fact  is  attested  both  by  philosophy  and  the  Bible. 
Secondly :  That  this  mind  has  a  great  work.  There  are  some  minds  that  are  very 
inactive.  Other  minds  are  active,  but  it  is  the  activity  of  children  playing  with  toys. 
What  is  the  real  work  of  the  mind  ?  Rightly  to  culture  self,  to  bless  society,  and 
to  honour  God.  The  figure  implies— Thirdly :  That  the  present  condition  of  the 
mind  is  unfavourable  to  this  work.  What  are  those  entangling  robes  ?  Wrong 
thoughts,  earthly  sympathies,  carnal  tendencies,  moral  indifferences,  <fec.  "  Gird 
up  the  loins,"  &c.  II.  Mokal  sobriety.  "  Be  sober."  It  may  include  three  things. 
First :  Moral  judiciousness.  Judiciousness  in  our  opinions,  our  affections,  our 
expectations,  and  speech.  Souls  are  often  intoxicated  with  wild  and  extravagant 
sentiments.  Second:  Moral  steadfastness.  The  soul  should  not  reel  to  and  fro 
like  a  drunken  man  ;  it  should  be  steadfast.  "  Stand  fast  in  the  Uberty  wherewith 
Christ  has  made  you  free."  Thirdly :  Moral  seriousness.  Christian  seriousness 
stands  in  sublime  contrast  both  to  gloom  on  the  one  hand  and  to  levity  on  the 
other.  III.  Peemanent  hope.  "  Hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought 
unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  language  implies  three  things. 
First :  That  the  perfection  of  our  being  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  future.  Secondly : 
That  our  future  perfection  is  to  be  obtained  in  connection  with  grace.  "  Hope  to  the 
end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you."  Thirdly :  That  the  grace  that  is 
to  ensure  our  perfection  will  be  fully  manifested  at  the  appearance  of  Jesus  Christ. 
"  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  (P. 
Thomas,   D.D.)  Wise   counsel: — I.   The   preparation.      "Gird    up,"   drc.      1. 

Righteousness.  2.  Faithfulness.  3.  Truth.  II.  The  consideration.  "  Be  sober."' 
There  is  such  a  thing,  of  course,  as  being  drunk  mentally  or  spiritually.  A  drunken 
man  is  very  foolish,  yet  conceited  ;  and  he  is  quarrelsome,  and  hazardous,  and  he 
would  lie  down  and  go  to  sleep  anywhere.  III.  The  decision.  "  Hope  to  the  end." 
Your  hope  is  to  be  in  the  perfect  work  of  Christ.  "  Be  not  moved  away  from  the 
hope  of  the  gospel."  IV.  The  prospect.  "  For  the  grace,"  &c.  {James  Wells.) 
The  2}l(ice  of  mind  in  religion : — One  thing  is  presupposed — St.  Peter  counted  it 
self-evident — the  mind  has  place  in  the  things  of  God.  Orthodoxy  has  too  ofien 
warned  off  reason  from  the  things  of  God.  It  has  made  it  sacrilege  to  touch  the 
Bible.  What  St.  Peter  rebukes  is  the  slovenly,  the  untidy,  the  dissolute  mind.  He 
does  not  fear  the  practised,  the  disciplined,  the  intense  intellect.  The  "  mind  "  of 
which  he  vsTote  was  the  rock-hewn  element  of  thinking,  equally  available,  for  its 
highest  processes  and  purposes,  in  palace  and  cottage,  in  philosopher  and  peasant. 
It  needs  not  education  in  man's  sense,  classical  or  scientific,  to  gird  its  loins  for  the 
enterprise  St.  Peter  has  in  view.  That  enterprise  is  the  knowledge  of  a  Father,  in 
a  Saviour,  and  in  a  Spirit.  The  enterprise  is  a  personal  knowledge,  the  girding  up 
of  the  loins  for  it  is  a  personal  exertion.  Shall  we  try  to  sketch  one  or  two  of  the 
particulars  of  that  girding  ?  1.  "  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes 
lofty."  In  reference  to  all  knowledge,  what  is  the  chief  hindrance  ?  Is  it  not 
vanity?  Is  it  not  the  "  saying.  We  see  ?  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind  by  a 
deep  humility.  "  Thou  art  near,  they  tell  me,  0  Lord  :  but  I  am  so  far  off — so 
ignorant,  so  stupid,  so  sin-bound— 0  quicken  me."  2.  But  next  to  it  I  would  place  its 
sister  grace — which  is  patience.  Patience,  perhaps  above  all,  for  the  reconciliation  of 
apparently  contradictory  principles,  and  the  harmonising  of  certain  parts  of  Reve- 
lation with  the  character  of  God  Himself  the  Revealer.  Be  willing  to  wait.  Not 
indolently,  not  in  indifference,  but  in  a  submissive  waiting.  3.  Hope.  "Hope  to  the 
end,"  St.  Peter  says — "  Hope  perfectly  "  are  his  very  words — meaning  doubtless,  perse- 
veringly  and  amidst  all  obstacles.  And  St.  Peter  makes  hope  very  definite  when  he 
adds,  "  for  the  grace  that  is  being  brought  to  us."  It  cannot  be  that  this  scene  of 
confusion  should  be  for  ever.  As  God  is  true,  as  God  is  holy,  as  God  is  merciful, 
it  shall  not.  We  see  not  as  yet  how  it  shall  be.  But,  where  explanation  fails, 
where  reason  fails,  where  revelation  itself  fails,  hope  fails  not.  (Dean  Vaiinhon.) 
Be  sober. — Sobi-ictT/ : — Sobriety  is  a  virtue  that  keeps  us  not  only  from  things 
unlawful,  but  moderates  us  in  the  use  of  things  lawful,  that  we  exceed  not  our  bounds 
therein.  These  may  be  referred  to  two  heads,  pleasures  and  profits,  which  we  are 
most  subject  to  abuse.  I.  For  the  former,  which  is  pleasure,  thereto  may  be 
referred  meat,  drink,  apparel,  recreation,  &c.  All  which  we  must  use  soberly  to  the 
glory  of  the  Giver,  our  own  good,  and  the  good  also  of  others.  1.  For  our  meat 
and  drink,  we  must  neither  be  excessive  nor  over-curious,  as  Dives  who  fared 
deliciously  every  day,  making  his  belly  his  god.  We  must  eat  to  live,  and  thereby 
be  more  fit  for  duty.     2.  For  our  apparel,  we  must  not  exceed  for  the  matter  of  it. 


CHAP.  I.]  J.  PETER.  67 

nor  for  the  fashion.  God  hath  given  it  for  necessity,  comeliness,  and  decency.  3. 
For  recreation,  it  must  be  sparing  in  time,  place,  measure,  to  make  us  more  fit  for 
our  duty ;  for  God  hath  not  set  us  here  to  pamper  the  flesh,  but  to  mortify  the  lusts 
thereof :  not  to  play,  but  to  do  His  work.  II.  For  the  latter,  namely,  profits,  we 
must  also  be  sober,  both  in  getting  and  keeping  them.  We  must  not  only  use  no 
unlawful  means  to  get  the  world,  but  use  the  lawful  means  moderately,  not  filling  our- 
selves with  too  many  businesses,  and  following  the  same  too  eagerly,  lest  we  neglect 
good  duties,  or  be  hindered  from  doing  them  as  we  should.  [John  Rogers.)  Hope 
to  the  end. — The  duty  and  discipline  of  Christian  hope  : — "  Girding  up  the  loins  of 
your  mind,  being  sober,  hope "  is  the  accurate  reproduction  of  the  form  of  the 
original.  "  Hope  "  is  the  principal  exhortation,  and  it  is  to  be  fulfilled  by  bracing 
up  the  mind  and  by  sobriety.  The  Revised  Version,  which  has  partially  shown  this 
construction  in  its  rendering,  has  given  the  more  accurate  "  perfectly,"  instead  of 
"  to  the  end."  It  is  a  question,  first,  of  the  quality,  and  only  after  that  of  the 
duration  of  the  hope.  If  our  hope  be  perfect  it  will  take  care  of  itself  in  another 
respect,  and  be  permanent.  I.  The  object  on  which  this  Christian  hopefulness 
IS  TO  FASTEN,  like  a  limpet  on  a  rock.  "  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you 
at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Here  "  grace  "  means  the  sum  of  the  felicities 
of  a  future  life.  That  is  clear  from  two  considerations — that  this  grace  is  the 
object  of  our  hope  all  through  life,  which  only  an  object  beyond  the  grave  can  be,  and 
also  that  its  advent  is  contemporaneous  with  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
expression,  though  unusual,  is  valuable  because  it  brings  out  two  things.  It 
reminds  us  that  whatever  of  blessedness  we  may  possess  in  the  future  it  is  all  a 
gratuitous,  unmerited  gift  of  that  loving  God  to  whom  we  owe  everything.  And 
then  there  is  another  thought  suggested  by  this  word,  namely,  the  substantial 
identity  of  the  Christian  life  here  and  hereafter.  Grace  is  glory  in  the  bud,  glory 
is  grace  in  the  flower  ;  and  all  which  we  hope  for  in  the  future  is  but  the  evolving 
of  that  which  is  planted  in  our  hearts  to-day,  if  we  love  Him,  though  it  may  have 
to  fight  with  much  antagonism  to  itself  both  without  us  and  within.  The  inheri- 
tance is  a  hope,  but  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance,  which  is  of  the  same  stuff  as 
the  inheritance,  is  a  present  possession.  Further,  this  grace  is  on  its  way  to  us.  It 
is  "  being  brought,"  as  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version  has  it ;  or  "  a-bringing," 
as  Leighton  translates  it.  It  is  on  its  road  as  if  some  band  of  strong-winged  angels 
had  already  left  the  throne,  and,  like  them  who  bore  the  Holy  Grail,  were  steadily 
flying  nearer  and  nearer  to  us.  With  all  the  power  of  strong  winds  and  waves 
lifting  it  on,  it  is  bearing  down  upon  us  as  a  ship  at  sea.  By  all  the  passions  and 
convulsions  of  earth  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  hastened  on  its  course.  Further,  this 
grace,  which  is  on  its  way  to  us,  is  wrapped  up  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  brought  to  us  encased  in  that  revelation,  like  a  fair  jewel  in  a  golden  setting. 
When  He  who  "  is  our  life  shall  be  manifested,"  says  another  apostle,  then  shall  we 
also  "  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory."  As  in  an  old  picture  you  will  sometimes 
see  a  saint  represented  as  standing  near  the  Master  with  a  glory  encompassing  him, 
that  rays  from  the  Christ,  so  our  glory  in  the  future  is  aU  to  be  but  the  effluence  and 
the  reflection  of  His  glory.  Why  should  we  let  our  hopes  go  trailing  along  the  ground, 
like  some  poor  creeping  plant  that  the  gardener  has  forgotten  to  put  a  stick  to,  when 
they  might  lift  themselves  to  the  heavens  ?  Why  should  you  ever  feed  your  hopes 
upon  the  bread  that  perishes,  and  sometimes  upon  husks,  when  you  may  feed  them 
on  angels'  food?  Why  should  you  confine  your  hope  within  the  limits  of  this 
world  when  it  might  expand  to  the  width  of  that  great  eternity  that  lies  there  before 
you  through  which  you  may  let  your  hope  wander  at  will  ?  Set  your  hope  there, 
and  then  it  wiU  never  be  ashamed  or  confounded.  II.  The  perfect  hope  which 
GRASPS  the  perfect  OBJECT.  "  Hopc  perfectly  "  would  be  the  true  rendering,  it 
being  a  question  not  at  all  of  duration  but  of  quality."  There  are  all  degrees  of 
hope  from  the  most  doubtful  "  peradventure  "  up  to  almost  certainty.  But  there  is 
always  a  kind  of  doubt  and  dread  minghng  with  hope.  A  certain  wistful  look  as 
of  one  who  knows  not  what  may  be  drawing  on  is  ever  in  Hope's  blue  eyes  ;  and 
"  hopes,  and  fears  that  kindle  hope "  are  an  indistinguishable  throng.  That  is 
necessarily  so,  because  here  our  hopes  are  fixed  on  contingent,  external  things,  and 
are  mostly  born  of  our  wishes  rather  than  of  reasonable  probabilities.  Therefore, 
this  exhortation  here,  in  effect,  bids  us  lift  our  hopes  higher,  and  set  them  on  God 
that  they  may  be  sure.  Are  we  letting  our  hearts  lead  our  hopes  astray  after  the 
will-o'-the-wisps  of  earth,  instead  of  ordering  their  march  by  the  pole-star  of  God's 
faithful  promise  ?  Does  our  hope  leap  up  to  lay  hold  on  that  cord  let  down  from 
heaven,  and  by  it  to  climb  above  the  level  of  mutation  and  disappointment  ?    III. 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  self-discipline  by  which  the  perfect  hope  is  maintained.     Girding  up  the 
loins  of  the  mind  and  being  "  sober"  are  the  two  great  means  to  that  end.     The 
first  of  them  enjoins  concentration  of  mind  and  will,  a  determined  effort  to  realise 
the  future  and  persistently  to  hope  in  the  teeth  of  all  discouragement.     Travellers, 
servants,  soldiers  have  to  brace  up  their  robes  and  buckle  them  tight  with  their 
girdles.     So  we  have  to  gather  up  our  thoughts  and  cultivate  the  habit  of  fixed 
attention  to  unseen  things.     The  loosely  braced  mind  will  be  unable  to  cherish  a 
lively  hope  ;  a  man  with  his  robes  flapping  about  his  feet  cannot  run.     They  hinder 
his  stride,  catch  in  the  briars,  get  trodden  on  by  rivals.     There  are  many  difficul- 
ties in  the  way  of  our  Christian  hope.     It  is  hard  to  keep  its  light  burning  through 
the  darkness  of  the  night  and  the  howling  of  the  storm.     Why,  a  man  cannot  have 
earthly  hopes  bright  unless  he  concentrates  his  thoughts  upon  them.    And  how  can 
our  hope  of  heaven  be  clear,  triumphant,  unless  we  coerce  our  vagrant  imaginations 
and  loose  flowing  affections  and  by  a  dead  lift  and  effort  set  our  hopes  in  God  ? 
Wherefore,  brace  up  the  loins  of  your  minds  and  hope.     "  Be  sober."    Rigid  self- 
control  and  repression  are  needed  for  such  a  hope.     The  clear  eye  of  hope  cannot 
see  the  land  that  is  very  far  off  through  the  fogs  that  rise  from  the  undrained 
marshes  of  our  animal  nature.     In  this  sense,  too,  the  flesh  lusts  against  the  spirit. 
But  not  only  must  bodily  appetites  be  held  well  in  hand,  all  desires  that  go  out  towards 
the  present  must  be  subdued.   Hope  follows  desire.  The  vigour  of  our  hopes  is  affected 
by  the  warmth  of  our  desires.   The  warmth  of  our  desires  towards  the  future  depends 
largely  on  the  turning  away  of  our  desires  from  the  present.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Hope  : — As  we  read  this  Epistle  and  drink  in  its  spirit  we  become  aware  of  some- 
thing that  lifts  and  enkindles ;  it  is  as  if  we  were  inhaling  sea  air,  were  basking  in 
the  glow  of  a  genial  warmth.     The  Peter  of  the  Gospels  was  of  an  eager,  sanguine 
disposition,  and  his  hopefulness,  while  it  was  yet  unchastened,  repeatedly  outran 
his  real  strength.     The  Pentecostal  fire  descends  upon  him,  and  he  continues  to  be 
the  same  man,   with  the  same  basis  and   structure  of  character;  but  there  has 
passed  over  him  a  refining  and  invigorating  touch.     He  has  become  more  truly  a 
Peter  ;  he  has  drawn  strength  from  the  Rock  of  Ages.     He  is  "  the  apostle  of  hope." 
To  speak  of  hope  at  all  is  to  speak  of  what  we  instinctively  recognise  as  a  condition 
of  fruitful  effort,  of  anything  like  success  or  satisfaction,  even  in  the  affairs  of 
ordinary  life.     To  take  hope  from  a  man  is  to  paralyse  him  morally ;  if  he  lives  on 
in  so  dreary  a  condition  we  think  of  him  as  surviving  himself.     The  teaching  of 
Scripture  may  help  us  to  distinguish  and  appreciate  three  characteristics  of  that 
hope  which  apostles  would  recognise  as  true.     1.  First,  then,  Christian  hope,  as 
St.  Peter  tells  us,  is   seated  "  in  God  " ;  it  is,  as  it  has  been  called,  one  of  the  triad 
of  virtues  specially  "  theological "  ;  it  takes  its  stand  on  Divine  revelation,  it  looks 
on  to  the  attainment  of  Divine  promises.     It  draws  its  life-blood  from  no  mere 
surmise  as  to  what  is  possible  for  humanity,  in  the  race  at  large  or  in  the  individual, 
but  from  the  manifestation  of  Divine  truth  and  goodness  in  the  Incarnate,  whom 
St.  Paul  calls  "our  hope"  (1  Tim.  i.  1),  because  our  hope  is  grounded  on  Him  and 
centred  in  Him.    St.  Paul,  indeed,  cannot  think  of  hope  without  thinking  of  Christ ;  it 
is  characteristic  of  him  that  the  object  of  his  "  earnest  expectation  and  hope  "  should 
be  the  glorification  of  Christ  in  his  body,  whether  by  life  or  by  death.     So  he  else- 
where speaks  of  Christians  as  having  been  "  called  in  one  hope  "  which  grows  out 
"  of  their  calling,"  which  derives  all  its  force  and  charm  from  the  act  of  grace  that 
brought  them  into  that  sacred  and  supernatural  fellowship.     Christian  hope,  being 
rooted  in  faith,  is,  like  faith,  vivid,  positive,  and  definite ;  it  is,  as  St.  Peter  calls  it, 
"living,"  because  it  is  a  fruit  of  the  resurrection-life  of  Jesus;  it  gazes  with  calm, 
trustful   eyes,    onward   and  still    onward,   into   a    future    literally   boundless,    as 
illuminated  by  the  person  and  the  work  of  the  one  everlasting  Redeemer ;  it  is  a 
"  hope   of  eternal  life,"  as  based  on  Him.     2.  A  hope  which  is  thus  essentially 
religious,  thus  Christian  from  the  root  upwards,  and  impossible  except  on  the  terms 
of  Christian  belief,  is  strong  enough  to  face  all  facts,  even  such  as  are  unwelcome 
or  austere.     Certainly  there  will  be  temptations  to  unhopefulness ;  there  must  be 
the  discipline  of  hopes  deferred,  of  success  marred,  of  apparent  defeats  and  dis- 
appointments, of  much   that  might  tempt   impatience   to  despair.     A  hope  thus 
trained,  while  resting  on  august  realities,  is  strong  because  it  is  not  fanciful ;  it  has 
realised  the  conditions  of  Christian  life  as  an  uphill  march ;  it  can  aiford  to  take 
full  account  of  the  gravest  requirements  of  His  service,  who  bids  no  one  follow  save 
where  He  Himself  has  trod  ;  it  does  not  dream  of  being  exempt  from  anxieties,  but 
it  "  casts  "  the  whole  weight  of  them  on  "the  strong  hand"  of  that  good  Father 
who  has  proved  so  well  how  much  He  "  careth  for  us."     3.  True  hope  is  a  great 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  69 

instrument  of  moral  and  spiritual  discipline.  When  St.  Peter  is  about  to  say, 
"make  your  hope  perfect,"  he  prefaces  it  with  a  call  to  sustained  effort;  we  are  to 
"  gird  up  the  loins  of  our  mind."  It  is  remarkable  also  that  St.  Paul  does  not  merely 
exhort  us  to  cherish  hope,  but  to  see  that  our  hope  is  of  the  right  kind,  that  it  is 
such  as  is  secured  through  endurance,  and  endurance  as  fortified  by  the  encourage- 
ment, the  quickening  impulse  to  Christian  exertion,  which  the  pages  of  Scripture 
will  supply  (Rom.  xv.  4).  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  The  further  you  advance  in  the 
spiritual  life,  the  more  will  you  need  of  strength  to  resist  temptation,  or  to  bear 
outward  trials  bravely,  brightly,  and  patiently ;  and  the  more  you  can  do  this,  the 
more  of  true  hope  will  you  acquire."  Thus  we  see  that  the  hope  which  maketh  not 
ashamed  is  always  humble  and  always  active.  (W.  Bright,  D.D.)  Hoio  and  for 
ivhat  to  hope: — The  word  "wherefore"  bases  the  exhortation  upon  all  that  has 
preceded,  not  merely  upon  the  sentence  immediately  before  it.  I.  The  discipline 
NEEDED  FOB  CHRISTIAN  HOPE.  "  Girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober." 
Here  are  two  practical  injunctions,  given  as  means  towards  a  vigorous  Christian 
hope.  The  first  of  these  is  too  familiar  to  require  many  words.  Girding  up  the 
loose  garments  was  instinctively  done  before  any  kind  of  vigorous  effort,  whether  it 
was  pilgrimage,  labour,  or  conflict.  Elijah  girded  up  his  loins  when  he  ran  before 
Ahab's  chariot.  The  soldier  tightens  his  belt  by  another  hole  before  the  great 
struggle  comes.  The  symbol,  then,  stands  definitely  here  as  expressing  effort  and 
concentration.  There  must  be  both,  as  Peter  thinks,  if  there  is  to  be  any  pulse  of 
vitality  throbbing  under  a  Christian  man's  hope.  And,  says  the  apostle,  thus 
making  a  concentrated  effort  to  secure  the  vigour  and  clearness  of  hope,  do  another 
thing,  "  Be  sober."  Of  course  if  I  let  my  tastes,  inclinations,  desires,  appetites, 
passions,  run  wild  anywhere,  there  will  be  very  little  strength  left  me  with  which  to 
hope  for  anything  beyond.  A  man's  mind  is  only  capable  of  a  given  quantity  of  desire 
and  expectation :  and  if  he  fritter  it  all  away  on  the  things  seen  and  temporal,  of 
course  there  will  not  be  any  left  over  for  tl^e  things  that  are  unseen.  Every 
gardener  knows  that  if  he  wants  a  tree  to  grow  high  he  must  pull  off  the  side  shoots, 
but  if  he  likes  to  clip  it  at  the  top  and  take  away  the  leader,  it  will  grow  nice  and 
bushy  down  below.  A  man's  mind  obeys  the  same  law.  II.  The  characteristics 
AND  QUALITIES  OF  THIS  CHRISTIAN  HOPE.  As  you  are  awarc,  our  A.V.  gives  one 
translation  of  part  of  this  verse,  and  the  R.V.  gives  another.  "  Hope  to  the  end," 
says  the  older.  "  Hope  perfectly,"  says  the  newer  and  the  better  rendering.  What 
are  the  imperfections  that  attach  to  men's  hopes  ?  1.  The  first  glaring  one  which 
attaches  to  the  world's  idea  of  hope  is  that  it  is  something  short  of,  less  reliable 
than,  certainty.  We  have  not  sufficiently  concentrated  our  effort,  nor  have  we 
sufficiently  washed  our  hands  of  earthly  follies  and  filths,  so  long  as  there  is  one 
shade  of  difference  between  the  certitude  with  which  we  know  to-day  and  the 
confidence  with  which,  trusting  to  Christ,  we  expect  the  remotest  eternity  in  the 
most  glorious  heavens.  2.  Then  there  is  another  imperfection  from  which  it  is  our 
duty  and  our  joy  to  be  able  to  clear  our  Christian  hope,  and  that  is  that  men's 
hopes  fluctuate  according  to  their  moods  and  their  circumstances.  But  the  Cliristian 
man's  hope  should  have  this  for  the  very  signature  of  its  perfection,  that  it  is  altogether 
independent  of  the  changes  of  external  circumstances.  Nay !  rather  it  should  be 
like  the  pillar  of  fire  that  was  only  a  thin  film  of  smoke  while  the  sunshine  blazed, 
but  kindled  at  its  heart  as  darkness  fell,  and  in  the  murkiest  night  was  brightest 
and  most  blessed.  3.  Then  there  is  another  imperfection  which  the  Christian 
hope  is  permitted  to  put  away  from  it ;  and  that  is  that  most  of  our  hopes  have  no 
ennobling,  no  staying,  no  stimulating  effect  upon  our  lives.  What  a  man  hopes  for 
he  waits  for  with  patience,  and  the  perfection  of  the  Christian  hope  is  measured 
roughly  by  this,  the  extent  to  which  it  is  fruitful  of  all  lowly,  persistent  adherence 
to  the  most  uncongenial,  common-place,  and  smallest  duties.  III.  The  object 
THAT  IS  here  proposed  FOR  HOPE.  The  apostlc  tells  us  to  "hope  for  the  grace," 
&c.  There  are  three  things  we  have  to  note  here.  1.  The  loftiest  hope  of  the 
furthest  eternity  is  the  hope  of  grace.  We  usually  keep  that  word  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  glory  as  expressive  of  the  gifts  of  God  which  we  receive  here  upon  earth  in 
our  pilgrimage.  But  the  apostle  here  goes  even  deeper  than  that,  and  says,  "  Ah  ! 
it  is  all  of  a  piece  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  The  first  gifts  that  a  believing 
soul  receives,  whilst  it  is  struggling  here  with  darkness  and  light,  are  of  the  same 
sort  as  the  eternal  gifts  that  it  receives  when  it  stands  before  the  throne,  after 
millenniums  of  assimilation  to  the  brightness  and  blessedness  of  Jesus  Christ." 
They  are  all  grace  ;  the  gifts  of  earth  and  heaven  are  one  in  their  source  and  one 
in  their  nature.     2.  Further,  says  the  apostle,  this  grace  is  "  being  brought  to  you." 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  light  that  set  out  from  the  sun  centuries  ago  has  not  reached  some  of  the  stars 
yet,  but  it  is  on  the  road.  And  the  grace  that  is  to  be  given  to  us  has  started  from 
the  throne,  and  it  will  be  here  presently.  We  are  like  men  standing  in  the  crowded 
streets  of  some  royal  city  through  which  the  king's  procession  has  to  pass.  If  we 
listened  we  have  heard  the  guns  fire  that  told  that  He  had  left  the  palace ;  and  He 
will  sweep  in  front  of  us  and  sweep  us  up  into  His  train  before  very  long.  The 
grace  is  "  being  brought  to  us."  3.  And  it  is  being  brought  not  merely  at,  but  "  in 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  be  mani- 
fested, then  shall  we  also  be  manifested  together  with  Him  in  glory."  The 
Christ  in  me  will  be  manifested  when  Christ  is  manifested  on  His  throne,  and 
that  will  be  my  glory.  If  you  can  fancy  a  planet  away  out  on  the  edge  of  our 
system,  such  as  that  one  that  welters  in  the  fields  of  space,  I  know  not  how 
far  from  the  central  sun,  and  gets  but  a  little  portion  of  his  light  and  warmth, 
and  moves  slowly  in  a  torpid  round;  and  imagine  it  laid  hold  of  and  borne 
right  into  the  orbit  of  the  planet  next  the  sun,  what  a  difference  in  its  tem- 
perature, what  a  difference  in  the  lustre  and  the  hght,  what  a  difference  in  the 
swiftness  of  its  motion  there  would  be !  We  here  are  moving  round  a  half- veiled 
Christ,  and  we  get  but  little,  and  oh!  we  give  less,  of  His  light  and  glory. 
But  the  day  comes  when  we  shall  be  swept  nearer  the  throne,  and  all  the  light 
that  is  manifested  to  us  shall  be  incorporated  within  us.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christian  hope  : — I.  Hope  in  its  preliminary  but  indispensable  conditions.  II. 
Hope  in  its  operation.  1.  Hope  is  natural  to  the  human  mind,  nothing  more 
natural.  It  is  a  sweet-scented  flower  growing  in  every  poor  man's  garden ;  a 
perennial  flower,  never  blooming  so  exquisitely  as  in  the  midwinter  of  adversity. 
2.  "  Hope  perfectly."  By  this  St.  Peter  probably  means  the  same  as  St.  Paul  when 
the  latter  speaks  of  "  the  full  assurance  of  hope,"  an  unfaltering  persuasion  in  the 
mind  that  we  have  a  personal  interest  in  the  "  inheritance  reserved  in  heaven," 
"  the  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  "  When  I  live,"  wrote 
Latimer  to  Ridley,  "  in  a  settled  and  steadfast  assurance  about  the  state  of  my  soul, 
methinks  I  am  as  bold  as  a  lion ;  I  can  laugh  at  all  trouble ;  no  affliction  daunts 
me  ;  but  when  I  am  eclipsed  in  my  comforts  I  am  of  so  fearful  a  spirit  that  I  could 
run  into  a  very  mouse-hole."  Now,  how  to  attain  this  perfection  of  hope,  this  full 
assurance?  Evidently  by  constantly  but  legitimately  exercising  this  grace 
according  to  the  Divine  word  and  testimony,  for,  like  other  things,  it  grows  bright  in 
use.  3.  "  Hope  unto  the  end."  Persevere  in  the  face  of  difficulties,  however 
colossal,  "  f or  he  that  continueth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved."  Turn  your  face  to 
the  Sun,  pitch  your  hope  fixedly  on  the  inheritance  reserved  for  you  up  yonder, 
and  the  shadows  will  all  fall  behind  you.  III.  Hope  in  its  immutable  foun- 
dation. 1.  Our  hope  of  salvation  is  based  on  Divine  grace  as  brought  to 
us  in  the  past  at  the  first  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  But  not  only  has  grace 
been  brought  to  us  in  the  past,  but  fresh  supplies  are  being  brought  to  us  in 
the  present.  "  The  grace  that  is  a-bringing,  that  is  being  brought  to  you,  as 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Grace  came  to  the  world  in  the  person  and 
vv  ork  of  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is  still  coming,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble,  to  God's 
people,  whether  that  trouble  be  in  the  shape  of  sufferings  or  temptations. 
John  Bunyan  in  his  immortal  dream  beheld  a  fire  which  burnt  on  brightly 
notwithstanding  all  efforts  to  extinguish  it.  What  was  the  explanation  of  this 
persistence  ?  Oh,  a  man  stood  the  other  side  of  the  wall  continually  pouring  oil 
into  it.  "  Hope  perfectly,  unto  the  end,"  for  the  gospel  treasury  of  grace  will  never 
fail  you.  3.  But  this  hope  looks  forward  to  the  future,  to  the  final  triumph  of 
grace  "  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Much  grace  has  already  been  revealed  ; 
but  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  the  heart  of  man  the 
things  God  hath  in  store  for  His  people.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Hope  as  a 
power  in  moulding  character : — I.  The  power  of  hope  in  human  character. 
What  makes  the  difference  between  human  beings  and  beasts  ?  Very  largely,  the 
presence  of  hope  as  a  factor  in  character.  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of 
the  air  have  nests."  So  much  the  worse  for  them.  Man  is  distinguished  from  the 
animals  by  the  fact  that  you  cannot  so  easily  satisfy  him.  He  may  begin  by  living  in 
the  hole  in  the  ground,  or  by  lodging  in  the  branches ;  but,  by  and  by,  that  hole  is 
not  good  enough.  Something  in  man  demands  improvement.  Hope  is  therefore  one 
of  the  loreniost  elements  in  human  character ;  distinguishing  man  as  man,  giving 
him  a  higher  rank  than  all  the  rest  of  the  animal  creation.  And  as  it  is  a  necessary 
factor  in  character,  so  it  is  in  human  progress.  Any  conditions  in  human  society 
which  tend  to  repress  hope  are  abnormal  and  unnatural,  and  hostile  to  man's  well- 


CH\p.  I.]  I.  PETER.  71 

being.  Who  is  to-day  at  the  bottom  of  society  may,  under  the  encouragement  of 
our  republican  institutions  and  freedom,  rise  until  he  occupies  the  highest  position 
that  the  people  can  bestow.  Hope  presents  a  perpetual  incentive  to  progress : — 
not  an  ignis  fatuus,  a  will-o'-the-wisp,  beguiling  us  into  mire  and  marsh,  but 
impelling  us  continually  onward  to  things  higher  and  better.  The  hopes  of  boy- 
hood do  not  satisfy  manhood,  and  the  hopes  even  of  manhood  do  not  satisfy 
maturer  years ;  and  so  that  which  once  beckoned  you  forward,  as  you  reach  up  and 
move  up  toward  it,  keeps  still  ahead  of  you,  and  becomes  a  perpetual  inspiration, 
urging  you  ever  onward  and  upward.  If  hope,  therefore,  could  be  quenched  or 
crushed,  we  could  make  no  more  advancement.  Because  hope  is  so  important  an 
element  in  character,  and  so  essential  to  human  development  and  progress,  the 
Word  of  God  lays  such  heavy  stress  on  this  essential  element  of  all  true  manhood. 
No  other  grace  seems  more  vital  to  a  true  Christian  life  than  hope.  Then  see  how 
hope  helps  us  to  bear  trials.  It  surrounds  us  with  a  kind  of  "  elastic  medium,"  so 
that  when  the  terrible  afflictions  of  this  life  beat  against  us,  they  rebound  from  us. 
There  is  a  power  in  hope  that  prevents  the  severity  of  their  blows  from  utterly 
crushing  us.  II.  What,  now,  are  the  objects  set  before  the  Cheistian  hope? 
"  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ." 
Few  of  us  ever  think  of  this.  When  we  speak  of  the  grace  that  is  revealed  we 
think  of  what  is  already  manifested,  of  Golgotha  with  its  Cross,  of  Gethsemane 
with  its  agony.  Peter  is  speaking  of  something  future,  not  grace  already  mani- 
fested. "  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ."  Jesus  Christ's  Incarnation  was  not  a  revelation.  His  divinity  was 
rather  hidden  within  the  veil  of  His  humanity :  only  now  and  then  the  glory  of 
that  divinity  shone  forth.  When  Jesus  was  here  He  was  in  disguise.  God  was 
only  feebly  and  faintly  manifested  in  the  flesh,  which  obscured  the  glory.  But 
when  Christ  comes  a  second  time,  no  longer  to  make  a  sin-offering,  but  to  bring 
full  salvation  unto  His  people,  then  will  be  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will 
come  like  the  King  in  His  glory.  All  the  grace  that  comes  to  you  from  the  hour  of 
your  regeneration  to  the  hour  of  your  complete  sanctification  is  nothing  in  com- 
parison with  the  grace  that  is  to  be  revealed  to  you  by  Christ  in  the  day  when  you 
are  presented  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy.  III. 
In  view  of  the  glorious  hopes  that  the  Bible  inspires.  "  Girding  up  the  loins  of 
TOUR  MIND,  BE  SOBER,  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto 
you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Let  us  mark  these  subordinate  phrases: 
"Girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober."  That  they  may  not  be  entangled 
m  thorns  and  briars,  or  be  defiled  by  the  dust  and  the  filth  of  the  way.  And  so 
the  apostle  says,  "  Girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,"  your  affections,  so  that  they 
may  not  be  defiled  by  earthly  things.  John  Wesley  used  to  say,  "The  child  of 
God  ought  to  be  too  proud  to  sin.  When  I  think  of  myself  as  the  disciple  of  Christ, 
born  of  the  Spirit,  I  say,  '  How  can  I  sin  against  God  ?  '  "  Set  your  affections  on 
things  above;  gird  up  your  loins,  and  keep  your  white  garments  "unspotted  from 
the  world."  And  then  "  be  sober."  Now,  it  would  do  a  pilgrim  very  little 
good  if  he  gathered  up  his  garments  and  did  not  maintain  sobriety.  He  might  fall 
in  the  dust  of  the  way,  bruising  himself  as  well  as  defiling  his  robe.  And  so  we 
must  not  only  gird  ourselves,  but  keep  sober  and  clear-minded  for  the  journey. 
IV.  What  a  contrast  between  the  objects  of  Christian  hope  and  worldly 
HOPE !  Contrast  the  reality  of  Christian  hopes  with  the  illusiveness  of  worldly 
hopes.  And  consider,  once  more,  the  permanence  and  reliability  of  the  Christian 
objects  of  desire  and  expectation.  We  come  to  a  limit  in  this  world.  The  glory 
of  your  possessions  and  your  achievements  wiU  all  pale  and  grow  dim  when  you 
face  the  last  great  destroyer.  But,  blessed  be  God,  the  point  at  which  human 
hopes  are  utterly  blasted  is  the  point  at  which  Christian  expectations  only  arrive  at 
their  consummation.  What  should  we  care  for  the  perishing  treasures  of  this 
world  ?  for  the  evanescent  pleasures  that  charm  for  a  moment,  and  then  lose  their 
power?  {A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  Hope: — Hope  is  mentioned  in  the  text  and 
in  other  parts  of  Scripture  as  a  distinct  grace  or  virtue,  which  the  Christian 
should  cultivate.  I.  I  shall  point  out  the  distinctions  between  hope  and 
FAITH.  1.  Faith  and  hope  differ  as  to  their  extent.  Faith  relates  to  all  things 
which  Almighty  God  has  revealed  in  Scripture,  bad  as  well  as  good  ;  whereas  hope 
has  only  to  do  with  the  good  things  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  2.  Again,  hope  may 
be  described  as  ever  looking  forward,  and  advancing  from  one  blessed  prospect  to 
another,  with  its  eyes  bent  upon  God  and  the  promises.  But  faith  has  to  do  with 
the  present  and  past,  as  well  as  with  the  future.    With  past  facts.    3.  Once  more, 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai-.  i. 

there  is  this  great  diiJerence  between  hope  and  faith ;  that  faith  has  to  do  with 
certainty,  hope  with  uncertainty.  You  believe  with  full  assurance,  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  faith  that  the  righteous  go  to  heaven.  But  that  you  individually  are 
righteous,  and  shall  finally  go  to  heaven,  is  the  subject  of  hope.  Now  the  absolute 
necessity  of  this  grace  in  your  hearts  will  be  at  once  evident,  if  you  consider  that  it 
would  interest  you  but  little  to  be  told  of  the  felicities  of  heaven,  had  you  no  hope 
of  ever  attaining  them.  When  you  read  of  kings  of  the  earth,  of  their  royal 
appearance  and  great  wealth,  you  at  once  feel  that  these  things  interest  you  but 
slightly,  because  they  are  so  utterly  beyond  your  reach.  II.  Now,  let  us  illus- 
trate THE  FORCE  AND  POWER  OF  HOPE.  Storics  are  told  us  of  travellers  journeying 
in  other  climes,  who  having  wandered  from  their  course,  have  by  degrees  found 
themselves  involved  in  the  intricacies  of  the  wilderness  without  any  probable 
chance  of  rescue.  What  so  overwhelming  as  the  feeling  of  utter  loneliness  which 
must  press  on  the  heart  in  the  midst  of  unlimited  sand  ?  At  such  a  time  surely,  a 
man  may  well  give  himself  up  as  lost,  and  submissively  lie  down  to  perish.  But 
there  is  a  God  beyond  that  sky  and  sun.  Who  has  preserved  men  from  worse 
dangers,  and  a  hope  springs  up  within  his  bosom,  in  the  protection  of  that  God. 
Hope  cheers  his  soul,  braces  him  to  exertion,  overcomes  fatigue,  and  rescues  from 
peril.  He  had  no  certainty  of  deliverance,  but  his  hope  was  of  sufficient  power  to 
make  him  persevere  until  he  found  the  path,  or  was  discovered  by  others  and 
rescued.  When  the  wife  of  the  mariner  sits  at  home  solitary,  what  sustains  her 
soul  but  the  hope  that  all  will  be  well  ?  There  can  be  no  certain  safety  for  him  who 
is  on  the  water ;  nothing,  as  we  know,  is  so  variable  and  treacherous  as  the  waves 
and  wind.  When  the  prodigal  child  of  God,  like  him  in  the  parable,  comes  to 
himself  and  remembers  his  transgressions,  what  is  to  bring  him  to  the  feet  of 
Almighty  God  but  the  hope  of  pardon?  When  the  Christian  soldier  has  taken  his 
oath  of  service  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  calmly  considers  the  duties  which  are  necessary 
to  his  reward,  when  he  thinks  of  the  enemies  who  encompass  him,  and  of  his  own 
frailness  and  alienated  affections,  what  can  lead  him  to  the  contest  and  keep  him 
undismayed  ?  What  but  a  sure  and  certain  hope  of  Christ's  continued  assistance  ? 
Lastly :  There  is  a  moment,  if  possible  more  trying  than  all,  when  hope  is  the  stay 
and  anchor  of  the  tossed  soul.  It  is  in  that  hour  when  even  the  most  saintly  may 
look  forward  with  something  of  dread  to  the  departure  from  earth.  "In  hope  of 
eternal  life,  which  God  Who  caniiot  lie  promised  before  the  world  began " ;  my 
flesh,  he  thinks  within  himself,  "shall  rest  in  hope"  ;  "Thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  hell ;  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life :  in  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of 
joy,  and  at  Thy  right  hand  are  pleasures  for  evermore."  (J.  M.  Chanter,  M.A.) 
Hojie  ennobles  the  spirit : — It  is  pleasing  to  observe  how  the  hopes  of  persons,  by 
degrees,  greaten  their  spirits  from  their  childhood.  The  proper  spirit  of  a  noble- 
man, a  prince,  or  a  king,  is  greater  than  that  of  an  inferior  person.  And  the 
reason  is  because  as  he  comes  to  understand  his  quality,  his  spirit  grows  with  his 
hopes  of  what  he  shall  attain  to ;  his  very  hopes  greaten  his  spirit,  ennoble  him, 
and  make  him  think  of  living  like  one  that  expects  to  be  in  such  a  state  as  that  to 
which  he  is  born.  And  such  is  the  property  of  the  Christian's  hope.  It  not  only 
makes  him  not  ashamed,  but  it  heightens  and  ennobles  his  spirit,  makes  him 
aspire  high,  and  look  forward  to  great  things.  (J.  Howe.)  Present  the  germ  of 
future  revelation  : — I  am  well  aware  that  the  words  of  the  original  will  bear  the 
present  signification.  "Hope  perfectly  for  the  grace  which  is  being  brought  unto 
you  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  But  after  careful  consideration  I  am 
convinced  that  the  future  sense  is  the  right  one,  though  the  fact  that  the  present 
is  employed  is  full  of  significance,  and  discloses  a  fact  which  underlies  the  whole 
word  of  God.  The  future  revelation  will  be  but  the  full  unveiling  of  the  present ; 
just  as  in  the  creation  round  us  were  our  eyes  cured  of  their  films,  we  should 
see  a  splendour  which  would  reveal  heaven.  The  whole  life  of  what  lives  in  the 
world  has  in  it  the  germ  of  that  full  revelation ;  just  as  when  you  unfold  one  of 
the  soft  buds  of  spring,  sheath  within  sheath  of  delicate  leafage  is  found  there,  and 
in  the  heart  of  it  all,  visible  only  to  the  aided  eye,  is  every  petal,  every  stamen  of 
the  flower.  The  forms  are  already  perfect  in  their  microcosm,  but  the  colours 
that  are  to  blaze  in  the  sunlight,  and  the  odours  that  are  to  scent  the  air, 
wait  the  inspirations  of  the  spring.  The  colour,  which  is  the  glory  of  a  flower, 
glows  only  under  the  perfect  conditions  of  its  life.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  A 
perfect  hope  : — I.  We  note  the  remarkable  designation  here  of  the  object  op 
Christian  hope — "  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  appearing  of 
Jesus  Christ."     Now,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  the  various  phases  under  which  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  73 

future  perfecting  of  the  Christian  life  and  feUcity  in  heaven  is  set  forth  in  the  New 
Testament.  Sometimes  we  read  of  the  object  of  our  hope  as  being  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead.  Sometimes  we  read  of  the  "  hope  of  righteousness  "  ;  sometimes  we 
read  of  the  "  hope  of  eternal  life  "  ;  sometimes  of  the  "  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  ; 
sometimes  of  the  "  hope  of  salvation."  But  all  these  are  but  the  many  facets  of 
the  one  jewel,  flashing  many  coloured  and  yet  harmonious  light.  Peter  adds  another 
general  expression  when  he  sums  up  the  felicities  and  perfectness  of  that  future  life 
in  this  remarkable  and  unusual  phrase,  "  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought."  "  Grace 
reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life" ;  and  no  man  of  the  countless  nations 
of  the  blessed  can  say,  "  Give  me  the  portion  for  which  I  have  worked,"  but  all 
must  bow  and  say,  "  Give  me  from  thine  own  loving  heart  that  which  I  do  not 
deserve,"  "the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."  Such, 
then,  is  the  object  of  Christian  hope,  stated  in  its  most  general  terms,  a  grace  which 
includes  resurrection,  salvation,  righteousness,  eternal  life,  the  glory  of  God,  and 
that  grace  ever  tending  towards  us,  and  that  ever  tending  grace  to  be  ours  in  its 
fulness,  when  Christ  is  manifested  and  "we  shall  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory." 
How  different  in  its  dignity,  in  its  certainty,  in  its  remoteness,  which  is  a  blessing — 
how  different  from  the  paltry,  shortsighted  anticipations  of  a  near  future  which 
delude  us  along  the  path  of  earthly  effort !  II.  Notice  the  enjoined  perfection  op 
Christian  hope.  What  constitutes  perfect  hope  ?  First,  that  it  shall  be  certain ; 
and  no  earthly  hope  is  so.  If  my  anticipations  are  set  upon  contingent  things  they 
must  vary  with  their  objects.  You  cannot  build  a  solid  house  on  a  quagmire  ;  you 
must  have  rock  for  that.  So,  the  only  perfect  hope  is  that  which  grasps  a  perfect 
certainty.  Christian  hope  ought  to  be,  if  I  might  so  say,  screwed  up  to  the  level 
of  that  on  which  it  is  fastened.  It  is  a  shame  that  Christian  people  should  be 
wavering  in  their  anticipations  of  that  which  in  itself  is  certain.  Again,  the  perfection 
of  hope  lies  in  its  being  patient,  persistent  through  discouragements,  burning  bright 
in  the  darkness,  like  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night ;  and  most  of  all  in  its  being  operative 
upon  life,  and  contributing  to  steadfastness  of  endurance  and  to  energy  of  effort. 
This  is  exactly  what  the  feeble  and  fluctuating  hopes  of  earth  never  do.  For  the 
more  a  man  is  living  in  anticipation  of  an  uncertain  good,  the  less  is  he  able  to 
fling  himself  with  wholeness  of  purpose  and  effort  into  the  duties  or  enjoyments  of 
the  present.  But  a  perfect  hope  will  be  the  aUy  and  not  the  darkener  of  the 
brightness  of  the  present.  And  if  we  hope  as  we  should  for  that  we  see  not,  then 
shaU  we  with  patience  wait  for  it.  Here,  then,  is  the  sort  of  hope  which  it  is  laid 
upon  us  Christian  people  consciously  to  try  to  cherish,  one  which  is  fixed  and 
certain,  one  which  is  the  mother  of  patience  and  endurance,  one  which  persists 
through,  and  triumphs  over  all  trouble  and  sorrow,  one  which  nerves  us  for  effort 
and  opens  our  eyes  to  appreciate  the  blessings  of  the  present,  and  one  which  wars 
against  all  uncleanness,  and  lifts  us  up  in  aspiration  and  aim  towards  the  purity  of 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  neglecting  a  plain  duty  and  impoverishing  ourselves  unneces- 
sarily by  the  want  of  a  treasure  which  belongs  to  us,  unless  we  are  making  conscious 
efforts  for  our  increase  in  hope  as  in  faith  and  charity.  Think  of  the  blessedness 
of  living  <iius,  Ufted  up  above  all  the  uncertainties  that  rack  men  when  they  think 
about  to-morrow.  Try  to  reaUse  the  blessedness  of  escaping  from  the  disappointments 
which  come  from  aU  earthward  turned  expectations.  The  brightest  blaze  of  Christian 
hope  may  be  on  the  verge  of  the  darkness  of  the  grave.  III.  Lastly,  the  discipline 
OF  Christian  hope.  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  It  suggests  that  there  is 
a  great  deal  in  this  Ufe  that  makes  it  very  difficult  for  us  to  keep  firm  hold  of  the 
facts,  on  which  alone  a  perfect  hope  can  be  built.  Unless  we  tighten  up  our  belt, 
and  so  put  aU  our  strength  into  the  effort,  the  truths  of  the  resurrection  which 
beget  to  a  lively  hope,  of  the  great  salvation  wrought  by  Jesus  Christ,  of  the 
meaning  and  end  of  aU  our  trials  and  sorrows,  wiU  sUp  away  from  us,  and  we  shall 
be  left  at  the  mercy  of  the  varying  anticipations  of  good  or  evU  which  may  emerge 
from  the  varying  circumstances  of  the  fleeting  moment.  "  Be  sober."  That  means, 
not  only  gather  yourselves  together  with  a  consecrated  effort,  but  "  keep  your  heel 
weU  down  on  the  necks  of  lower  and  earthly  desires."  The  fleshly  lusts  that 
belong  to  everybody  must  be  subdued.  That  goes  without  saying.  But,  then, 
there  are  others  more  subtle,  more  refined,  but  not  less  hostile  to  the  perfectness 
of  a  heaven-directed  hope  than  are  these  grosser  ones.  We  must  keep  down 
aU  the  desires  and  appetites  of  our  nature,  both  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit. 
For  we  have  only  a  certain  quantity  of  energy  to  expend,  and  if  we  expend  it 
upon  the  things  of  earth  there  is  nothing  left  for  the  things  above.  If  you 
take  the  river,  and  lead  it  all  out  into  the  gardens  that  are  irrigated  by  it,  or 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

into  the  stream  that  drives  your  mills,  its  bed  will  be  left  bare,  and  little  of  the 
water  will  reach  the  great  ocean  which  is  its  home.  We  may,  if  we  will,  be  as 
certain  of  the  future  as  of  the  past.  We  may,  if  we  will,  have  a  hope  which  maketh 
us  not  ashamed.  We  may  have  a  great  light  burning  steadily,  like  a  lamp  fed 
with  abundant  oil,  and  shielded  from  every  wind.  We  may  see  His  coming  shining 
afar  off,  and  be  warranted  in  saying,  not  merely  "we  hope,"  but  "we  know,  that 
when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him."  This  Christ-given  hope  is  the  only 
one  that  persists  through  calamity,  old  age,  and  death.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  grace  that  is  to  he  brought  unto  you. — Coming  grace : — I.  Theee  is  to  be 
A  REVELATION  OF  Jesus  Chkist.  He  has  promised  to  come;  He  has  given  His 
people  the  hope  of  His  coming ;  His  coming  is  necessary — 1.  For  His  own  final 
and  perfect  glorification.  2.  For  the  complete  salvation  and  glorification  of  His 
Church.  3.  For  the  full  and  everlasting  destruction  of  His  and  its  enemies. 
4.  For  the  vindication  of  God's  way  and  the  exhibition  of  His  glorious  attributes 
to  the  world.  H.  What  the  revelation  brings.  Grace.  The  Lord  keeps  His 
best  wine  unto  the  last,  but  He  certainly  sets  forth  good  wine  even  now.  We 
may,  and  do,  receive  grace  now.  Now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  But  with  all 
the  grace  given  now  to  believers,  and  notwithstanding  its  present  variety,  fulness, 
and  freeness,  and  all  that  it  does  in  Christ's  people,  they  need  yet  more  at  His  reve- 
lation. 1.  The  grace  of  perfect  vision  of  Him  who  is  now  unseen.  2.  The  grace  of 
perfect  likeness  to  Christ.  3.  The  grace  of  perfect  acquittal.  4.  The  grace  of 
perfect  avowal  and  recognition.  5.  The  grace  of  perfect  joy  and  glory  for  ever. 
III.  What  influence  this  revelation  should  now  exert.  1.  Spiritual  readiness, 
in  the  loins  of  the  mind  girded,  the  thoughts  collected,  braced,  prepared,  and  on  the 
alert,  with  nothing  left  till  the  last  (Luke  xii.  35,  36).  2.  Spiritual  self-restraint,  in 
sobriety ;  neither  too  elated  nor  too  depressed.  3.  Perfect  hope  ;  desiring,  picturing, 
expecting  the  revelation  and  what  it  brings ;  hoping  perfectly,  never  letting  go  hope, 
though  the  day  seems  far  off.  {Alex.  Warrack,  M.A.)  Grace  and  glory  : — We 
take  grace  as  denoting  in  our  text  precisely  what  it  ordinarily  denotes  in  God's  deal- 
ing with  a  sinner,  and  wish  to  show  you  that  grace  thus  understood  may  become,  or 
rather,  produce  glory.  We  wiU  briefly  examine  into  the  twofold  achievement  of 
grace — deliverance  from  sin,  and  consignment  to  God's  set  vice.  1.  As  to  deliverance 
from  sin,  shaU  not  we  be  borne  out  by  the  experience  of  every  believer,  when  we 
declare  that  it  is  his  happiness  to  overcome  sin,  and  his  misery  to  be  exposed  to  its 
assaults  ?  If  this  corruption  were  wholly  eradicated,  he  might  continually  walk  in 
the  shinings  of  the  countenance  of  his  Maker,  and  feel,  so  to  speak,  the  fresh  and 
free  air  of  a  better  land  circulating  around  him,  as  he  passed  on  in  his  pilgrimage. 
So  that  all  the  interruptions  of  happiness  are  to  be  referred  to  sinfulness,  and  happi- 
ness becomes  uniform,  or  rather,  advances  uniformly  towards  perfection,  just  in 
proportion  as  the  sinfulness  is  subdued,  and  the  whole  man  given  over  to  a  holy 
dominion.  And  if  this  be  a  correct  account  of  a  believer's  experience,  it  will  show 
us  that  grace  and  glory  are  one  and  the  same.  It  is  to  the  operations  of  grace  that 
we  must  ascribe  all  the  progress  I  have  made  in  overcoming  sinfulness  ;  and  if  this 
progress  be  the  same  as  progress  in  happiness,  we  proclaim  that  to  the  operations  of 
grace  must  be  ascribed  all  the  happiness  which  a  believer  attains.  And  if  it  would 
thus  be  perfect  happiness  to  realise  to  the  full  the  renewing  power  of  grace,  how  can 
we  better  describe  perfect  happiness  than  by  supposing  grace  given  without  measure, 
and  acting  without  rival  ?  And  if,  yet  further,  perfect  happiness  be  one  ingredient 
of  future  glory,  is  not  the  gift  of  grace  the  gift  of  glory,  and  does  not  St.  Peter 
address  himself  to  the  highest  and  most  rapturous  imagination  when  he  bids  us 
"  hope  for  grace  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ?  "  This  will  be  yet  clearer  if  you 
observe  the  period  at  which  the  grace  will  be  received.  The  second  advent  of  our 
Lord  was  unquestionably  present  to  St.  Peter's  mind.  It  is  on  this  grand  consum- 
mation that  apostles  and  holy  men  of  old  delight  to  linger,  and  from  this  that  they 
fetch  their  motives  and  consolations.  They  well  knew  that  whatever  the  happiness 
of  separate  spirits,  however  deep  and  beautiful  their  repose  after  the  clang  and  din 
of  warfare,  there  can  be  no  perfection  of  felicity  untQ  the  widowhood  be  over,  and 
the  soul  dwell  once  more  in  the  body.  They  looked  for  grace  "  at  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ,"  because  they  knew  with  that  revelation  would  come  the  resurrection 
of  the  saints,  the  body  and  soul  both  redeemed,  both  purified,  both  endowed 
with  eternity.  If,  therefore,  this  consummation  be  glory,  what  is  glory  but  grace 
completed  ?  2.  We  have  thus  far  only  treated  of  grace  as  producing  deliverance 
from  sin  ;  but  this  is  not  the  only  achievement  of  grace ;  yet  further  we  must 
consider  it  as  consignment  to  the  service  of  God.     There  are  none  but  true  Chris- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  75 

tians  who  at  all  fulfil  the  great  end  of  their  being,  that  of  promoting  the  glory  of 
their  Maker  ;  and  it  is  not  through  the  workings  of  any  human  principle  that  they 
propose  to  themselves  so  sublime  an  honour ;  there  must  have  been  an  alienation  of 
the  affections,  and  a  withdrawment  of  the  heart  from  temporary  interests.  We  know, 
indeed,  that  all  things,  wickedness  as  well  as  righteousness,  one  way  or  another, 
promote  God's  glory ;  but  while  the  Almighty,  in  the  exercise  of  His  sovereignty, 
compels  a  tribute  from  the  rebellious,  that  tribute  is  offered  by  none  but  the  believer. 
It  is,  therefore,  to  grace,  the  principle  imparted  by  God,  that  we  ascribe  every  effort 
to  promote  God's  glory ;  nothing  can  be  presented  to  God  which  has  not  first  been 
received  from  Him ;  according  to  the  words  of  David — "  All  things  come  of  Thee, 
and  of  Thine  own  have  we  given  Thee  "  ;  and  if  it  be  the  direct  result  of  the  work- 
ings of  grace  that  we  are  led  to  consecrate  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  then  let 
grace  have  unrestrained  operation,  and,  dust  and  ashes  though  we  be,  should  we  not 
become  ineffably  glorious  ?  It  will  not  be  the  robe  of  light  which  shall  make  us 
glorious,  though  brighter  threads  than  sunbeams  shall  be  woven  into  its  texture  ;  it 
will  not  be  the  palm  and  the  harp  that  shall  make  us  glorious,  though  the  one  shall 
have  grown  on  the  trees  of  Paradise,  and  the  other  have  been  strung  by  the  Media- 
tor's hands ;  we  shall  be  glorious  as  ministering  to  God's  glory — glorious  as  the 
servants  of  the  Almighty — glorious  with  more  than  an  angel's  glory,  because- 
entrusted  with  more  than  an  angel's  commission.  And,  if  this  be  our  glory,  poetry 
may  give  her  music  to  what  she  counts  more  beautiful,  and  painting  its  tints  on 
more  sparkling  and  captivating  things,  but  Christianity,  the  scheme  of  human 
restoration,  recognises  no  glory  but  the  living  to  the  glory  of  God.  If  this  be  glory, 
then  where  is  the  word  which  could  describe  glory  so  emphatically  as  grace  ?  Grace 
is  that  which  produces  consecration  to  God's  service,  and  therefore  grace  is  nothing 
less  than  incipient  glory.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  At  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. — 
The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ : — I.  The  grand  object  kefebbed  to.  "  The  reve- 
lation of  Jesus  Christ."  II.  The  blessings  which  besult  to  believees  in  conse- 
quence OF  this  bevelation.  1.  By  means  of  this  revelation  the  kindness  of  God 
our  Saviour  to  man  is  made  known.  2.  This  revelation  brings  heaven  to  the  view  of 
believers,  and  assures  them  that  they  shall  inherit  that  glory  which  is  yet  to  be 
revealed.  3.  This  revelation  teaches  those  who  in  consequence  of  receiving  it  have 
truly  believed  on  the  Son  of  God,  that  when  He  shaU  come  again  it  will  be  to  con- 
summate their  salvation.  III.  "The  entibe  confidence  and  joyous  anticipation, 
which  it  becomes  believers  consequently  to  indulge.  1.  It  is  very  important  to 
Christians  that  they  should  indulge  hope — that  they  should  '•  perfectly  hope."  "  We 
are  saved  by  hope."  2.  A  firm  foundation  is  laid  for  the  exercise  of  perfect  hope  in 
the  promises  of  God,  ratified  by  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  confirmed 
by  solemn  oaths.  (W.  Temple.)  Christ  and  His  grace  : — The  display  of  Him  is 
everything.  Be  it  therefore  observed  that  "  the  revelation "  of  Him  is  four- 
fold. 1.  The  first  revelation  of  Him  we  call  scriptural.  This  began  very  early, 
even  in  Paradise.  There  the  Sun  of  righteousness  dawned,  and  from  thence 
shone  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  This  exhibition  of  Him  may  be 
likened  to  a  perfect  portraiture  of  a  most  distinguished  and  endeared  person- 
age, at  full  length,  rolled  up  on  the  side  of  a  room,  and  which  the  owner 
gradually  opens  to  the  beholders,  till  the  whole  figure  stands  disclosed.  2.  The 
second  revelation  of  Him  is  incarnate.  Thus  He  was  not  only  declared  but  per- 
ceived. He  appeared  not  in  vision  but  in  person.  Not  tremendously,  as  in  the 
giving  of  the  law,  but  familiarly,  "  clothed  in  a  body  like  our  own."  Not  transiently, 
as  when  He  paid  visits  to  His  people  of  old,  but  by  a  continuance  of  three-and-thlrty 
years — for  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us — full  of  grace  and  truth." 
3.  The  third  revelation  of  Him  is  spiritual.  And  we  call  it  spiritual  because  it  is 
produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  spirit  of  man.  It  is  expressed  by  sight ;  not  a 
carnal  sight  of  Him,  but  by  the  eye  of  faith.  It  is  such  an  acquaintance  with  Him 
as  draws  forth  our  admiration,  excites  our  love,  gains  our  confidence,  and  secures 
our  obedience.  4.  The  fourth  revelation  of  Him  is  glorious.  After  all  He  is  now 
much  concealed.  There  are  millions  who  know  nothing  even  of  His  existence.  Even 
where  He  is  professedly  known,  there  are  multitudes  to  whom  He  has  no  form  or 
comeliness,  nor  any  beauty,  that  they  should  desire  Him.  But  Christians  are 
relieved  and  cheered  with  the  thought  that  it  will  not  be  so  always.  But  what  is  to 
be  expected  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto 
you."  Two  inquiries  may  here  arise — 1.  What  does  "  the  grace  "  here  spoken  of 
mean?  It  comprehends  the  fulness  of  the  promise,  "  I  will  come  again  and  receive 
you  to  Myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."    "  Well  done,  thou  good  and 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

faithful  servant."  His  invitation,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father."  2.  But  why 
is  it  called  grace  ?  Why  is  it  not  said,  "  The  glory  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  "?  (1)  May  it  not  be,  first,  to  exclude  merit  from  all 
share  in  attaining  it  ?  (2)  And  may  it  not  be  so  called  to  show  the  identity  of  grace 
with  glory?  (W.  Jay.)  As  obedient  children. — Obedience: — I.  Why  must  we 
OBEY  ?  1.  Because  obedience  is  the  universal  law.  Divinely  appointed,  which  no 
creature  can  escape.  Man  created  to  obey  does  not  avoid  this  duty  by  separating 
himseK  from  God  ;  he  only  changes  masters.  What  constitutes  his  greatness  is  that 
he  freely  responds  to  the  design  of  his  Creator.  2.  Because  as  Christians  we  are  the 
redeemed  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  consequently  the  property  of  God.  Everything  in 
the  gospel  teaches  obedience.  II.  How  must  we  obey  ?  God  will  not  be  served  by 
mercenaries  nor  by  slaves.  Who  then  wiU  serve  Him  ?  The  apostle  answers, 
children.  III.  What  influence  does  this  obedience  exekt  over  our  life  ?  Action 
is  but  a  part  of  obedience ;  to  suffer  is  another.  For  many  it  is  the  larger  part ;  for 
aU  it  is  the  most  difficult.   Walking,  speaking,  working  are  to  us  means  of  obedience. 

1.  Some  complain  at  being  obliged  to  obey,  and  rebel.  Direct  them  to  Nazareth,  to 
Gethsemane,  to  Calvary.  2.  Some  apparently  accept  the  yoke  of  the  Lord,  but 
reserve  to  themselves  the  right  of  obeying  in  their  way.  Under  the  cover  of  Divine 
will  they  accomplish  their  own  designs.  3.  Some  wait  till  an  inward  impulse  moves 
them  to  obedience.  If  it  does  not  act  they  do  not  obey  at  all.  In  obeying  at  first 
passively  and  without  joy,  their  obedience  would  soon,  under  Divine  blessing,  be 
transformed  into  a  joyous  doing  of  His  wiU.  One  word  to  such  as  do  not  yet 
possess  the  truth.  If  they  ask  me  what  is  the  best  way  of  obtaining  faith,  I  will  not 
hesitate  to  answer,  "  Obey  !  "  {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  Obedience  : — 1.  We  must  obey, 
not  by  halves,  or  where  we  list,  but  in  all  things  (Psa.  cxix.  6  ;  Luke  i.  6  ;  Lev.  x.  2). 

2.  We  must  not,  on  the  other  side,  run  without  our  errand,  nor  do  things  whereof 
■we  have  no  commandment ;  this  is  no  obedience,  be  it  never  so  costly  or  painful, 
have  it  never  so  goodly  a  show  (Jer.  vii.  31).  3.  Moreover,  we  must  obey  the  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord,  be  it  never  so  strange,  harsh,  unpleasing,  or  contrary  to 
custom,  though  all  the  world  counsel  to  the  contrary.  4.  We  must  obey  without 
reasoning  the  case,  or  consulting  with  flesh  and  blood  :  we  must  bind  reason  hand 
and  foot  to  follow  God  (as  it  were)  blindfold,  as  Abraham  offering  Isaac,  and  Joshua 
compassing  Jericho.  5.  We  must  obey,  whosoever  or  whatever  be  against  it.  If 
profits,  pleasure,  farm,  oxen,  &c.,  call  us  away,  and  God  invite  us,  we  must  follow 
Him,  else  we  have  no  part  in  Him.  6.  Speedily,  not  hereafter,  but  to-day.  7. 
Voluntarily,  not  be  haled  only  by  pain  and  misery.  God  loves  a  cheerful  servant. 
8.  Constantly,  not  for  a  while  only.  Beasons  hereof.  (1)  God's  sovereignty  over  us. 
We  clay.  He  our  Maker.  (2)  His  wiU  a  rule  of  righteousness.  (3)  His  great  mercies 
every  way,  even  to  the  worst,  but  to  His  children  wonderful  ones.  (JoJm  Rogers.) 
Obedience  a  Christian  virtue : — The  idea  of  the  Christian  life,  as  a  new  sphere 
in  which  hope  is  predominant,  and  into  which  by  virtue  of  our  Lord's  resur- 
rection Christians  enter  by  a  second  birth,  leads  the  apostle  to  address  those  to 
whom  he  wrote  as  "  children " ;  and  among  the  typical  excellencies  of  children 
he  selects  the  virtue  of  obedience.  Now  it  may  be  noticed,  first  of  all,  that 
obedience  is  not  in  our  day  one  of  the  more  popular  Christian  graces  or  virtues. 
There  have  been  days  in  the  Church  when  men  have  been  possessed  by  nothing 
short  of  a  passion  for  putting  themselves  under  rule — sometimes,  it  must  be 
granted,  not  being  sufficiently  careful  as  to  the  sort  of  rule  they  put  themselves 
under.  Those  days  have  gone  by;  and  while  we  hear  of  Church  Temperance 
Societies  and  Church  Purity  Societies  devoted  to  the  enforcement  of  these  par- 
ticular virtues,  we  do  not,  as  yet,  hear  of  a  "  Church  Obedience  Society."  Now 
the  neglect  into  which  obedience  has  fallen  is  apparently  part  of  a  larger  neglect — 
that  of  the  passive  vu'tues  generally ;  because,  although  obedience  has  an  active, 
sometimes  a  very  active,  side,  it  is  in  the  main  a  passive  excellence.  As  the  soul 
loses  touch  with  the  great  Master  of  love,  humility,  self-repression,  obedience  it  falls 
back  on  the  old  pagan  ideal  of  regulated  self-assertion,  and  a  virtue  like  that 
insisted  on  by  St.  Peter — child-like  obedience — is  apt  to  be  very  soon  at  a  discount. 
And  there  is  another  characteristic  of  our  time  which  makes  obedience  a  more  or 
less  difficult  virtue.  Obedience  is  said  to  be  the  virtue  of  older  social  conditions, 
such  as  accompanied  feudalism  or  absolute  monarchy,  older  conditions  to  which 
democracy  has  succeeded.  It  was  natural,  we  are  reminded,  for  arbitrary  rulers 
to  make  much  of  a  temper  of  mi..d  which  buttressed  their  power,  but  in  a 
democratic  age  liberty  takes  the  place  of  obedience  :  liberty  is  the  typical  virtue  of 
free,  self-improved,  self-governing  man ;  obedience,  as  a  virtue,  has  had  its  day. 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  77 

Again,  we  are  reminded  that  we  are  living  in  an  age  of  liberty,  nor,  can  it  be  denied 
that  the  difficulties  of  doing  justice  to  the  virtue  of  obedience  have  been  aggravated 
by  the  abuses  which  have  gathered  round  the  ancient  centres  of  authority  ?  Nothing 
discredits  the  claims  of  obedience  like  the  exaggerations  of  the  rightful  claims  of 
any  who  ought  to  be  obeyed.  The  Monarchy  of  France,  as  Eichelieu  contrived  to 
make  it,  was  the  natural  forerunner  of  the  great  Eevolution ;  the  Papacy,  when, 
among  other  causes,  the  false  decretals  had  exaggerated  a  legitimate  supremacy  of 
order  into  a  spiritual  absolutism,  led  by  reaction  into  that  enfeeblement  of  Church 
authority  which  is  the  weakness  of  our  part  of  Christendom.  We  have  accordingly 
fallen  upon  times  when,  both  in  Church  and  State,  the  rights  of  liberty  have  been 
pleaded  against  the  duties  and  the  instincts  of  obedience,  and  pleaded  more  or  less 
successfully  because  of  abuses  in  the  support  of  which  obedience  has  been,  or  might 
be,  conceivably  enlisted.  And,  further,  as  a  consequence  of  these  three  tendencies, 
attention  has  been  in  modern  times  largely  concentrated  on  those  parts  of  Holy 
Scripture,  to  the  neglect  of  others,  which  lay  stress  upon  the  rights,  as  distinct  from 
the  duties,  of  a  Christian  ;  upon  his  freedom  from  the  Jewish  law  as  distinct  from 
his  obligations  to  the  eternal  moral  law  ;  upon  the  liberty  with  which  Christ  has 
made  him  free,  as  distinct  from  that  service  which  he  owes  to  God  and  which  is 
itself  perfect  freedom.  It  is  impossible  to  mistake  the  charm  and  power  which 
attach  to  this  word  "  liberty."  There  is,  we  feel,  something  in  our  own  human 
nature  which  at  once  responds  to  it ;  it  appeals  to  sympathies  which  are  universal 
and  profound.  Liberty  is  even  in  one  particular  sense  the  excellence  of  man  as 
man — that  is  to  say,  of  man  as  being  endowed  with  a  free  will.  To  attempt  to 
crush  the  exercise  of  this  endowment  of  freedom  is  regarded  as  a  crime  against 
human  nature,  while  the  undertaking  to  strengthen  its  vigour  and  to  enlarge  its 
scope  appeals  to  man's  profound  desire  to  make  the  best  of  that  which  is  his  central 
self ;  and  hence  the  indefinite,  the  magic  charm  which  always  attends  upon  the 
word  and  the  idea  of  liberty.  But,  when  in  this  connection  we  use  the  word 
♦'  liberty,"  two  different  things  are  often  intended.  The  hberty  to  choose  between 
good  and  evil,  with,  it  must  be  added,  in  our  fallen  state,  an  existing  inclination 
in  the  direction  of  the  evil,  is  one  thing ;  the  true  moral  liberty  of  man  is  another. 
True  liberty  is  secure  when  the  will  moves  freely  within  its  true  element,  which  is 
moral  good.  Moral  good  is  to  the  human  soul  what  the  air  is  to  the  bird,  what  the 
water  is  to  the  fish.  Bird  and  fish  have  freedom  enough  in  their  respective 
elements;  water  is  death  to  the  bird,  as  the  atmosphere  is  to  the  fish.  A  bird  can 
sometimes  drown  itself,  a  fish  can  leap  out  of  the  water  and  die  upon  the  bank  ; 
but  the  liberty  of  fish  and  bird  alike  is  sufficiently  complete  without  this  added 
capacity  for  self-destruction ;  and  so  it  is  with  man.  Every  Christian  who  is  living 
in  a  state  of  grace  will  understand  this.  He  knows  that  he  would  gain  nothing  in 
the  way  of  moral  freedom  by  a  murder,  or  an  adultery,  or  a  lie ;  he  knows  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  did  no  sin,  who  could  have  done  no  sin,  was  not,  there- 
fore, other  than  morally  free,  since  it  is  His  freedom  in  giving  HimseK  to  death 
which  is  of  the  essence  of  His  self-sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world  :  "  No  man 
taketh  My  life  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself."  Nay,  a  Christian  knows, 
too,  that  God  could  not  choose  evil  without  doing  violence  to  His  essential  nature. 
But  is  God,  therefore,  without  moral  freedom  ?  Is  not  God  rather  the  one  Being 
who  is  perfectly  free  because  His  perfections  make  it  impossible  for  Him  to  choose 
evil ;  and  would  it  not  follow  that  the  more  closely  man  approaches  to  the  holiness 
of  God,  the  more  closely  does  he  approach  to  the  true  idea  of  liberty  ?  We  may  look 
at  this  fundamental  truth  from  another  side.  The  sense  of  liberty  within  the  soul  of 
man  is  the  conscious  energy  of  the  will,  its  felt  vigour  its  power  of  making  straight  for 
the  aim  before  it.  But  what  is  more  certain  than  that  the  will  acquires  this  two- 
fold excellence — strength  and  directness  of  purpose — by  the  discipline  of  obedience  ? 
The  man  who  has  never  obeyed  is  not  the  man  to  know  how  to  command.  The 
steady  drudgery  of  an  apprenticeship  is  the  necessary  training  for  the  conduct  of  a 
great  business.  The  submissive  and  persistent  industry  of  the  junior  clerk  is  the 
true  preparation  for  a  partnership  in  the  firm.  He  would  be  a  poor  general  of 
division  who  had  never  served  as  an  ensign  or  a  lieutenant,  if  not  in  the  ranks. 
Nay,  we  see  the  operation  of  this  law,  that  the  strength  and  freedom  of  the  will  is 
secured  by  obedience,  in  the  very  quarter  where  we  might  beforehand  perhaps  think 
that  it  might  have  been  dispensed  with.  We  are  told  that  the  Divine  Redeemer  of 
the  world  went  down  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  to  His  mother  and  His  foster- 
father  until  a  period  long  past  the  age  of  manhood  ;  and  when  His  ministerial  life, 
which  from  first  to  last  was  a  life  of  obedience,  was  ended,  it  was  ended  by  a 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

supreme  act  of  obedience.  For  He  "  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of 
the  Cross ;  wherefore  also  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  The  obedience  which  St. 
Peter  recommends  is,  let  us  observe,  the  obedience  of  children.  It  is  not  the 
obedience  of  slaves,  of  slaves  who  are  slaves  against  their  will.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  not  fashioned  on  the  lines  of  an  Oriental  court  in  which  a  crowd  of 
unwilling  servitors  tremble  before  a  master  whose  word  may  at  any  moment  bring 
to  any  one  of  them  sentence  of  death.  There  have  been  Christians  who  have 
understood  the  service  of  God  in  some  such  sense  as  this,  but  it  is  not  the  tendency 
or  a  danger  of  our  time.  We  should  perhaps  do  better  to  remember  that  the  use 
which  a  true  Christian  makes  of  his  freedom  is  to  become  willingly  a  slave  of  Jesus 
Christ.  This  is  St.  Paul's  favourite  way  of  describing  himself  ,  "  Paul,  a  servant " 
— it  should  be,  "  a  slave  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  means  that  he  has  freely  surrendered 
himself,  his  soul,  his  body,  his  understanding,  his  affections,  his  will,  his  passions, 
his  entire  liberty,  to  the  will,  to  the  commands  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  then  this 
slavery  is  the  highest  expression  of  freedom,  and  it  differs  vitally  from  the  involun- 
tary slavery  which  has  nothing  to  do  with,  though  it  may  have  at  times  been 
mistaken  for.  Christian  obedience.  In  the  current  sense  of  the  words,  "  Christian 
obedience  "  is  not  the  obedience  of  slaves,  nor  is  it  the  obedience  of  mercenaries.  A 
true  Christian  does  not  serve  God  for  the  sake  of  what  he  can  get  from  Him  ;  he 
does  not  serve  God  only  or  chiefly  even  for  the  sake  of  gaining  heaven,  or  of 
escaping  hell.  But  here  do  not  let  us  exaggerate.  If  God  is  to  be  served  because 
He  is  what  He  is — infinitely  perfect  and  lovable — it  is  not  less  true  that  a  recom- 
pense does  follow  on  Christian  obedience.  The  picture  in  St.  Matthew  xxv.  of  the 
King  sitting  in  judgment  and  making  the  eternal  awards  to  the  blessed  and  to  the 
lost  is  not  an  illusion.  If  the  recompense  is  not  the  first  motive  of  service,  it  is  a 
motive  which  our  Lord  Himself  has  sanctioned.  Nay,  in  the  last  resort  obedience 
to  God  for  His  own  sake  and  obedience  for  the  sake  of  the  reward  which  He  gives 
so  blend  as  not  to  be  distinguishable  from  each  other,  since  God  Himself  is  the 
only  true  and  adequate  reward  of  the  human  soul.  He  says  to  each  true  servant 
now,  as  He  said  to  the  Patriarch,  "  I  am  thy  exceeding  great  reward."  And  yet  it 
remains  true  that  the  obedience  which  keeps  an  eye  only  or  mainly  on  what  it  will 
get  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  higher  temper  of  the  Christian  life.  Every  time  we 
say  "  Our  Father,"  at  the  beginning  of  the  most  authoritative  of  aU  prayers,  we 
bind  ourselves  to  a  life  of  obedience.  Of  this  let  us  be  sure,  that  no  true  obedience 
neglects  orders  and  duties  which  God  has  clearly  prescribed.  If  God  says  by  His 
apostle,  "  Pray,"  even  "  pray  without  ceasing,"  a  true  obedience  does  not  say, 
"  My  heart  is  cold,  my  prayer  will  be  formal,  lifeless,  resultless  " — it  does  its  best. 
If  God  says,  "In  everything  give  thanks,"  true  obedience  does  not  say,  "God 
knows  all  about  me  and  He  will  take  my  thankfulness  for  granted ;  I  need  not  say 
grace  after  meals,  or  thanksgiving  after  Communion,  or  go  out  of  my  way  to  render 
praise  to  Him  for  some  special  deliverances  and  mercies" — it  does  its  best.  And 
if  God  bestows  on  us  the  treasure  of  His  Holy  Word,  and  bids  us  "  Search  the 
Scriptures,"  true  obedience  does  not  say  that  the  Bible  will  not  help  us  until  we 
are  aroused  by  literary  curiosity,  or  some  other  sort  of  eagerness,  to  read  it ;  it 
resolves  to  train  the  spiritual  taste  by  earnest  daily  study — it  does  its  best.  If  God 
desires  us  again  and  again  to  bear  witness  before  the  world  to  the  faith  that  is  in 
us,  true  obedience  does  not  dwell  on  the  feeble  hold  of  the  great  unseen  realities 
which  is  all  that  as  yet  we  have,  on  the  danger  of  saying  more  than  we  feel  or 
mean,  on  the  shifting,  uncertain  character  of  our  present  impressions — it  goes 
straight  to  Holy  Scripture  and  does  its  best.  If  God  bids  us  remember  the  poor, 
visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  afSiction — in  other  words,  look  after 
hospitals,  orphanages,  homes,  penitentiaries,  deserted  children,  tramps,  lone  women, 
and  the  like — true  obedience  does  not  say,  "  There  is  no  knowing,  after  all,  how 
many  of  these  institutions  are  doing  any  real  good."  It  does  not  say,  "  We  cannot 
possibly  decide  how  many  of  these  poor  people  are  not  gross  impostors."  It  goes 
to  work  with  the  love  of  God  in  its  heart,  and,  expecting  to  make  a  full  percentage 
of  mistakes,  it  does  its  best.  Obedience  cannot  hope  to  be  always  and  everywhere 
the  product  of  a  sustained  enthusiasm.  Enthusiasm  is  a  great  gift  of  God  which 
visits  souls  and  visits  churches  at  intervals,  but  there  are  also  intervals  when  there 
is  little  or  no  enthusiasm  abroad,  but  during  which  the  persistence  of  obedience 
is  not  the  less  necessary ;  and  it  is  during  these  colder  periods  that  we  learn  the 
value  of  living  by  rule.  No  obedience  worth  anything  is  to  be  secured  without 
rule.  "  Moral  force,"  it  has  well  been  said,  "is  like  running  water  in  a  narrow 
channel  which  confines  it  on  this  side  and  that;  it  rushes  onwards  towards  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  79 

fields  of  duty  as  the  dispenser  of  fertility  and  of  life ;  but  if  it  has  no  barriers  to 
confine  its  energies  and  to  direct  its  course,  it  will  presently  sink  away  into  the 
sands  and  will  do  no  good  to  any  living  thing."  Not  that  child-like  obedience  is 
always,  mdeed  chiefly,  active.  In  the  majority  of  human  lives  it  is  passive.  It 
consists  in  acceptance  of  what  is  ordered,  in  submission,  in  resignation,  rather 
than  in  anything  demonstrative  ;  and  obedience  of  this  kind  is  at  once  harder  and 
more  sublime  than  active  obedience:  it  is  the  obedience  of  Gethsemane  and  of 
Calvary,  rather  than  that  of  the  preceding  years  of  labour  and  of  miracle.  The 
Holiest,  we  are  told,  Himself  learnt  obedience,  not  by  the  things  which  He  did, 
but  by  the  things  which  He  suffered.  The  best  and  most  fruitful  obedience 
may  in  some  cases  be  that  of  the  confirmed  invalid,  that  of  the  closing  weeks 
of  a  last  illness.  Obedience  is  the  joy  and  glory  of  the  great  intelligences 
who  move  and  worship  around  the  eternal  throne;  and  here  below  on  earth 
the  souls  which  grace  has  fashioned  after  the  likeness  of  the  pattern  Man — 
aye,  the  finest  natures  among  us— have  a  thirst,  nay,  they  have  a  passion,  for 
obedience,  for  they  know  that  in  freely  obeying  they  touch  nearly,  or  quite, 
the    secret     of    moral    victory    and    spiritual    joy.       [Canon    Liddon.)  The 

obedience  of  hope : — These  words  immediately  follow,  and  are  to  be  taken  in 
closest  connection  with,  the  exhortation  to  "  hope  perfectly  for  the  grace  that  is  to 
be  brought  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Hope,  then,  is  to  be  nurtured,  not 
only  by  a  believing  contemplation  of  future  felicities,  but  by  exercising  ourselves  to 
godliness  and  practical  obedience.  Two  points  as  to  the  words  of  this  text  must  be 
noticed  before  dealing  with  the  thoughts.  As  the  Revised  Version  shows,  the  literal 
rendering  is  "  as  children  of  obedience."  The  essential  or  permanent  characteristic 
of  a  person  or  thing  is  regarded  as  his  or  its  parent.  So  obedience  is  represented 
as  the  inalienable  mark  of  a  Christian.  But  the  immediately  following  reference  to 
God  as  our  Father  seems  to  suggest  that  the  Hebrew  idiom  here  is  blended  with  the 
Christian  thought  of  sonship.  One  other  expository  remark  is  necessary.  The 
Eevised  Version  reads  in  the  margin  "  but  like  the  Holy  One  which  called  you." 
If  we  adopt  that  rendering,  and  connect  the  words  closely  with  the  preceding,  God's 
own  holiness  is  proposed  as  the  pattern  by  which  Christians  are  to  fashion  themselves. 
I.  That  Christian  hope  and  Christian  obedience  are  inseparable  companions. 
The  mark  of  a  son  is  to  obey.  And  obedience  means  not  merely  doing  what  we 
are  bid,  but  being  glad  to  be  bidden  to  do  it ;  and  it  means  not  merely  the  active 
submission  of  will  to  the  loving  command  of  the  Father,  but  also  the  quiet  accept- 
ance of  and  bowing  of  the  will  to  the  wise  appointments  of  that  Father.  So  it  is 
the  exact  opposite  of  that  temper  and  attitude  which  are  characteristic  of  the  godless 
world  which  makes  self  and  its  own  will  its  law.  There  are  the  two  courses  of  life, 
obedience  or  rebellion  ;  and  there  is  no  middle  point.  Does  our  obedience  cover  the 
whole  ground — of  action  and  of  surrender  and  submission  ?  Such  obedience  can 
never  be  parted  from  the  great  Christian  hope.  Hope  will  produce  obedience.  Now, 
many  professing  Christians  are  a  great  deal  stronger  in  the  department  of  devout 
emotion  than  in  that  of  practical  righteousness.  I  should  like  all  these  people  who 
find  it  so  good  to  feed  their  souls  on  the  meditation  and  anticipation  of  future 
blessedness  to  notice  how,  as  in  one  volume,  Peter  binds  up  the  two  things  that  they 
keep  so  distinctly  apart,  and  how  emphatically  he  affirms  that,  if  we  have  any 
genuine  Christian  hope,  it  will  have  its  effect  in  helping  us,  as  children  of  obedience, 
to  do  and  to  accept  all  our  Father's  will.  There  we  come  down  to  a  very  plain 
practical  test.  But,  then,  these  two  things  which  the  Apostle  thus  couples  by  an 
iron  band  have  a  reciprocal  action.  They  work  upon  each  other ;  in  fact,  they  are 
the  outside  and  the  inside  of  the  same  thing ;  but  we  may  look  at  them  as  being 
different.  Just  as  strong  hope  will  produce  obedience,  so  true  obedience  will 
nourish  and  strengthen  hope.  For  a  little  sin  will  go  much  further  towards 
obscuring  and  shattering  a  Christian  man's  hope  than  a  great  sorrow  will.  It  is 
comparatively  easy  to  keep  up  the  temper  of  joyous  anticipation  of  the  future  in  the 
midst  of  the  darkness  of  a  present  experience  ;  but  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  a 
man,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  to  be  rebelling  in  heart  and  act  against  the  will  of  God 
and  to  be  entertaining  and  recreating  his  soul  by  the  bright  hope  of  a  future  heaven. 
No  Christian  man's  hope  will  last  through  a  sin.  Therefore  obedience  and  hope 
must  co-exist  and  feed  one  another.    II.  That  hope,  fed  by  and  feeding  obedience, 

SHOULD    CHANGE    US    FROM   THE    LIKENESS    OF    OUR    FORMER    SELVES.       "  Not   fashiouiug 

yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  ignorance  " — that  may  be  said  to 
all  people  who  have  been  brought  out  of  the  darkness  into  the  light.  It  is  but  an 
uncertain  light,  or  twilight  mainly,  at  the  best,  that  shines  upon  the  mysteries  of 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

human  life  and  duty,  until  the  sunshine  of  God,  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ,  rises 
and  is  welcomed  by  our  hearts.  So,  then,  non-Christian  living  is,  in  a  profound 
sense,  ignorance ;  and  in  the  ignorance,  just  as  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest  go  forth 
in  the  dark  and  are  nocturnal  in  their  habits  if  they  are  predatory,  so  the  lusts  that 
war  against  our  souls  expatiate  and  hunt  and  find  their  prey  in  the  darkness.  But, 
says  Peter,  if,  hoping,  you  are  obedient,  and  obedient  you  hope,  then  there  will  be 
a  process  of  transformation  going  on  in  you.  But  in  a  world  like  this,  and  with 
creatures  like  us,  unless  a  man  has  learnt  not  to  do  wrong,  there  is  little  chance  of 
his  doing  right.  The  evil  that  we  have  to  fight  against  is  in  possession,  and  we 
have  to  turn  it  out.  A  large  part  of  all  practical  morality,  Christian  or  not,  consists 
in  negative  precepts ;  and  the  very  heart  and  centre,  in  one  aspect,  of  Christian  duty 
lies  here ;  self-denial,  self -suppression,  self-crucifixion.  You  have  to  put  off  the  old 
self  as  part  of  the  process  of  putting  on  the  new.  I  press  this  upon  you,  "not 
fashioning  yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts,  in  your  ignorance."  And  that 
will  be  a  life-long  task.  For  nobody  knows  how,  like  a  cuttle-fish,  holding  on  to  its 
prey  by  the  suckers  upon  its  arms,  his  evil  habits  cling  to  him,  until  he  have  tried 
to  fling  away  the  loathly  thing  that  prevents  him  from  freely  using  his  limbs. 
"Hope?"  Yes!  "Obey?"  Yes!  and  that  you  may  crucify  the  old  man  with 
his  deeds,  and  put  oiJ  the  garments  spotted  by  the  flesh,  that  you  may  put  on  the 
"  fine  linen,  clean  and  white,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints."    III.  Lastly, 

THIS  OBEDIENCE  AND  HOPE  SHOULD  CHANGE  US  INTO  THE  LIKENESS  OF  THE  FaTHEB. 

If  we  are  children  we  have  the  Father's  life  in  us ;   and  we  ought  to  have  the 
Father's  likeness.    This  is  the  great  aim  that  we  have  to  set  before  ourselves.    And 
oh !  what  an  aim  it  is.     Nothing  less  august  than  absolute  perfection  is  worthy  to 
be  the  goal  of  a  soul.     How  different  it  is  to  say,  Try  to  be  like  God  as  you  have 
learned  to  know  Him  in  Jesus  Christ,  from  what  it  is  to  say,  "  Try  to  be  up  to  the 
ideal  of  humanity  "  ;  "  try  to  cultivate  a  pure  morality  "  ;  "  be  true  to  yourselves," 
and  all  those  other  sayings,  noble  in  their  way  and  to  a  certain  extent,  which  people 
who  turn  away  from  Christianity  try  to  set  up  as  substitutes  for  its  morality.    They 
are  all  hard  and  icy ;  and  no  kind  of  inspiration  comes  out  of  them.   "  Be  ye  perfect 
as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,"  the  ideal  lives ;  the  ideal  loves.     Yes !  and 
more ;  the  ideal  is  our  Father,  and  so  He  will  make  His  child  like  Himself.    And 
that  fashioning  ourselves  like  our  Father,  if  it  does  not  precede  obedience  to  the 
negative  precept,  must  at  all  events  be  carried  on  simultaneously  with  it.     It  is  a 
fatal  mistake  to  try  simply  to  obey  the  negative  precept  unless  we  aim  along  with 
it  at  obedience  to  the  positive  one.     The  more  we  come  close  to  Him  the  further 
•we  withdraw  from  earth  and  evil.     But  notice  how  hope  animates  the  effort  at 
becoming  like  God.     He  is  "  the  Holy  One  which  called  you."    Well,  then,  if  He 
has  called  us  to  be  holy,  it  will  not  be  in  vain  that  we  shall  try  to  be  so.   And  unless 
we  have  this  "hope  of  His  calling,"  sure  I  am  that  we  shall  never  earnestly  and 
successfully  aim  at  being  like  Him.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)         Obedience  in  small 
tilings  : — Do  not  always  be  looking   for  the  large  and  the  heroic,  the  expansive, 
the   typical,   the   magnificent.      Do  with    simplicity   and   consecration   and  faith 
your   duty  as   it  comes,  every  day ;   that   is   all.      The  great   Earl   of   Lincoln 
held  all    his   great   estates   from  the  Crown   on  the  condition  that  he   gave  to 
the  king  every   year  one  white  rose  in  the  time  of  roses.      Now,  it  was  not 
much — a  white  rose  for  a  title  to  these   estates;    but  mind  you  it  was  enough. 
It  was  a  sign  that  the  earl  held  all  from  the  throne,  and  that  he  held  all  for 
the  throne ;  and,  as  he  gave  his  white  rose,  year  by  year,  it  was  the  signal  of  his 
loyalty.     And  God  says  to  us,  "I  do  not  ask  you  for  the  large  and  the  difficult  and 
the  impossible,  day  by  day — but  simple  love,  simple  loyalty,  simple  service,  one 
white  rose  in  the  time  of  roses."    But  mind  you  keep  the  white  rose  of  love,  of 
simple  obedience,  and  consecration  in  your  heart.     That,  then,  is  enough.     He  can 
see  the  heroic  in  the   simplest  service.     (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)        Not  fashioning 
yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts. — We  must  forsake  evil  before  ice  can  do 
good  : — For  the  order  here   used,  he   sets   renouncing  of  our  lusts   first,  before 
embracing  of  holiness ;  men  put  off  their  old  rags,  ere  they  can  put  on  a  new 
apparel ;  purge  the  stomach  of  ill  humours,  ere  they  take  good  nourishment ;  dig 
up  the  weeds,  ere  they  sow  or  set  herbs :  so  in  this  case.     Where,  therefore,  there 
remaineth  the  love  of  any  lust  or  sin,  there  is  no  true  grace  in  the  heart,  neither 
will  any  grow  till  that  be  rooted  out.     God  will  not  plant  any  of  His  grace  there, 
till  the  devil's  planting  be  plucked  up.     Many  think  they  be  Christians,  and  do 
many  things  well,  though  they  keep  the  love  of  some  sin;  no,  mark,  the  love  of 
grace  and  goodness,  and  the  love  of  any  sin,  cannot  be  in  one  heart ;  they  are  so 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  81 

contrary  the  one  to  the  other ;  therefore,  while  thou  hvest  in  any  known  sin,  and 
lovest  any  lust,  as  sure  as  God  is  in  heaven  thou  art  an  hypocrite  and  standest  in  the 
state  of  damnation.  {John  Rogers.)  Lusts  are  not  sensual  impulses  and  wants 
only,  but  desires  of  what  is  different  from  what  God  allows.  (G.  F.  C.  Frau  Midler, 
Ph.D.)         In   your  ignorance. — The    sin    of  ignorance  : — I.  Why   is   ignorance 

NAMfiD  AS  THE  SPECIAL  SIN  TO  SET  OUT  THEIR  UNREGENEEATE    ESTATE,  SCCiug  they  Were 

guilty  of  many  other  sins  ?  Not  because  men  sin  only  by  ignorance,  as  the 
Platonists  think,  but — 1.  It  may  be  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  of  purpose  do  it  to 
aggravate  the  hatefulness  of  the  sin  because  men  use  to  excuse  it  and  make  light 
of  it.  2.  Because  it  is  a  sin  none  are  free  from.  If  he  had  named  whoredom,  or 
drunkenness,  <fec.,  many  unregenerate  men  would  have  pleaded  not  guilty.  3.  This 
sin  serves  more  to  reproach  the  rebellious  nature  of  man.  It  was  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil  that  Adam  so  much  aspired  unto,  and  lo,  now,  he  and  all  his  were 
set  in  gross  ignorance.  4.  Because  ignorance  is  the  mother  and  nurse  of  all  sorts 
of  sins  (Eph.  iv.  18;  2  Pet.  ii.  12;  Psa.  xxxvi.  2,  3,  4).  But  have  unregenerate 
men  no  knowledge?  Yes,  they  have  some  knowledge,  for  they  are  wise  to  do  evil, 
and  they  may  have  great  learning  in  arts  and  sciences;  but  yet  they  are  justly  taxed 
with  ignorance  because  they  know  not  God  as  a  Father  by  the  light  of  faith,  nor 
Christ  Jesus  whom  He  hath  sent ;  and  besides,  they  have  no  desire  to  know  their 
own  iniquities  or  the  way  how  to  reform  their  own  lives ;  they  have  no  knowledge 
to  do  good.  II.  These  things  being  thus  resolved,  there  are  divep.s  observations 
TO  BE  noted  from  HENCE.  1.  That  a  true  convert  must  make  conscience  of  inward 
sins,  as  well  as  outward ;  of  defects  as  well  as  evil  desires  or  lusts,  as  here  of 
ignorance  as  well  as  of  wicked  thoughts.  The  same  God  that  saith,  "  How  long 
shall  thy  evil  thoughts  abide  in  thee?"  complains  also  of  ignorance  (Isa.  i.  3). 
2.  That  ignorance  is  no  small  sin ;  it  is  exceeding  hateful  to  God ;  contrary  to  the 
doctrine  of  those  that  say  it  is  the  mother  of  devotion.  3.  That  without  reforma- 
tion of  ignorance  we  cannot  be  truly  turned  to  God  ;  without  knowledge  the  mind 
is  not  good  ;  therefore,  to  tear  the  veil  is  one  part  of  God's  work  in  our  conversion 
(Prov.  xix.  3  ;  Isa.  xxv.  8).  4.  That  ignorance  is  wanton  and  full  of  lust  (Eph.  iv. 
18).  5.  That  the  way  to  be  rid  of  lusts  is  to  be  rid  of  ignorance.  For  saving 
knowledge  keeps  us  from  sin  (James  iii.  17).  Here  we  may  see  the  principal  use 
we  should  put  our  knowledge  to,  viz.,  to  cleanse  our  hearts  of  base  thoughts  and 
desires.  6.  That  we  may  live  in  places  of  great  means  for  knowledge  and  yet  be 
grossly  ignorant.  For  he  writeth  here  to  the  Jews,  who  had  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  and  the  oracles  of  God  and  the  priests,  &c.  7.  That  all  knowledge  or 
learning  without  the  knowledge  of  God's  favour  in  Christ,  and  the  way  how  to 
reform  our  own  lives,  is  but  foolish  ignorance.  8.  That  habitual  lusts  are  a  sure  sign 
of  ignorance,  whatsoever  knowledge  men  pretend.     III.  Lastly,  seeing  there  is 

IGNORANCE  EVEN  IN  THE  CHILDREN  OF  GoD  AFTER  CALLING,  WHAT  ARE  THE  SIGNS  OF  UNRE- 
GENERATE IGNORANCE?  1.  It  haideus  the  heart  and  works  a  continued  evil  disposition 
to  sin  with  greediness  (Eph.  iv.  11,  18).  Now  the  ignorance  in  the  godly  may  be 
where  the  heart  is  softened  and  the  overflowings  of  corruption  stopped.  2.  It 
hoodwinketh  the  soul  in  the  main  things  needful  to  salvation,  as  the  knowledge  of 
a  man's  own  iniquities,  God  in  Christ,  the  forgiveness  of  a  man's  own  sins,  and 
generally  all  the  thmgs  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  A  wicked  man  may  discern  spiritual 
things  carnally,  but  not  spiritually.  3.  It  hath  never  been  in  the  furnace  of 
mortification ;  it  hath  never  been  truly  repented  of,  whereas  the  ignorance  of 
the  godly  hath  often  been  confessed,  mourned  for,  &c.  4.  It  will  suffer  no  saving 
grace  to  neighbour  by  it ;  where  ignorance  hath  not  been  repented  of,  there  no  fear 
of  God,  no  holy  contemplation,  no  uprightness,  love  of  God,  or  His  Word,  or  His 
people,  will  dweU.  Now  the  ignorance  that  is  in  God's  children  is  well  neighboured 
with  many  holy  graces  that  can  dwell  by  it.  And  as  these  ignorances  differ  in 
nature  and  working,  so  they  differ  in  imputation.  For  unto  the  godly  there  is  a 
sacrifice  for  ignorance.  God  doth  not  impute  ignorance  unto  the  godly :  it  shall 
be  to  them  according  to  what  they  know,  and  not  according  to  what  they  know  not. 
(N.  Biifield.)  Ignorance  the  cause  and  root  of  a  had  life  .•—He  fathers  their 
following  of  lusts  on  their  ignorance ;  and  ignorance  is  the  root  of  a  wicked  life  ; 
for,  till  men  know  the  will  of  God  out  of  His  Word,  how  can  they  do  it?  and 
what  are  we  prone  to  by  nature,  but  to  all  the  evil  in  the  world  ?  Therefore  the 
devil  labours  by  all  means  to  hold  people  in  blindness,  and,  of  all  books,  hath  most 
been  an  enemy  to  the  Bible,  and  to  sincere  and  diligent  reading,  and  preaching  the 
Scriptures,  for  were  those  away,  he  knows  all  iniquity  must  needs  abound.  As,  if 
one  comes  into  a  house  at  midnight,  he  sees  no  faults,  but  when  the  morning 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

comes,  then  he  sees  a  number  of  things  out  of  order ;  so  in  the  clear  light  of  the 
gospel,  we  see  the  wickedness  that  then  appeared  not  in  the  dark.     Whither  will  not 
our  nature  run,  and  whither  may  not  the  devil  and  world  lead  one,  when  he  hath 
no  eyes  to  see  whither  he  goes  ?    As  the  raven  first  picks  out  the  lamb's  eyes,  and 
then  kills  it  at  his  pleasure,  when  it  cannot  see  to  escape,  so  doth  the  devil  by 
people.     (Joh7i  Rogers.)         Slavery  through  ignorance  : — I  have  heard  a  reflection 
often  expressed  by  thoughtful  country  people  when  they  saw  a  great  draught  horse 
meekly  submitting  to  be  bridled  and  led  away  to  labour  by  a  child  :  "  If  the  brute 
creatures  knew  their  own  strength,  they  would  not  submit  to  the  yoke  and  the  lash." 
These  mighty  quadrupeds  could  trample  down  the  stripling  that  puts  bits  in  their 
mouths.     Yet  they  submit  to  whatever  their  master  imposes,  ignorant  of  their  own 
strength.     Oh,  if  man,  God's  greatest  creature,  knew  his  strength,  he  would  not 
submit  to  be  the  slave  of  vile  passions!     Strong  men  in  multitudes  are  in  our 
country  led  not  only  to  the  yoke,  but  even  to  the  shambles,  by  the  appetite  of 
intemperance.     This  possessing  spirit  says  to  the  right  arm,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth 
it ;  to  the  foot.  Go  thither,  and  he  goeth.     Oh,  that  these  captives,  driven  openly 
in  gangs,  not  through  the  marshes  of  interior  Africa,  but  along  the  streets  of 
British  cities,  were  at  last  set  free !     {W.  Arnot.)        Holy  in  all  manner  of  con- 
versation.— Holiness  in  all  things  : — Not  where,  when,  to  whom,  and  what  we  list, 
but  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  towards  all  persons,  and  in  all  things,  as  God  is  holy 
in  all  His  ways  and  works.    1.  This  serves  to  rebuke  those  that  will  yield  in  some  things 
only.     What  is  it  if  a  man  be  not  covetous,  if  he  be  proud,  or  unclean,  &c.  ?     Some 
will  yield  in  great  matters,  but  in  small  do  as  they  list ;  as  to  swear  by  their  faith 
and  troth,  especially  in  that  which  is  true,  talk  vaui  a  little,  put  a  little  false  ware, 
deceive  a  little,  &c.     Some  again  will  yield  in  all  small  matters,  but  in  some  great 
thing  they  will  not ;  as  to  give  all  diligence  to  increase  in  every  grace,  and  that  no 
corrupt  communication  should  come  out  of  their  mouths ;  though  thou  hast  spoken 
many  good  words,  yet  hadst  thou  better  be  silent  than  have  no  more  good  to  speak. 
Some  in  adversity  will  be  very  humble,  good  words,  golden  promises,  but  in  prosperity 
nothing  so.     Some  use  their  superiors  well,  their  poor  tenants  or  work-folks  hardly. 
Alas,  there  is  no  part  of  our  life,  wherein  God  gives  any  license  to  do  evil ;  in  our 
particular  callings   let  us   show  the  truth  of  our  Christianity.     2.  Let  us  prove 
the  truth  of  holiness  in  us  by  the  generality  of  it ;  keep  a  constant  tenour,  an 
even  hand,  and  let  there  be   a  proportion  between  every  part  of  our  life,  not 
one    part,  as    it    were,    devout,   another    profane   and    wicked.      (John  Rogers.) 
Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy. — The  holiness  of  God  the  type  and  model  of  ours  : — What, 
then,  is  the  sort  of  holiness  to  which  He  who  is  holy  in  calling  us,  does  in  fact  call 
us?     I.  Hei-e,  negatively,  let  us  note  what  it  is  not  and  cannot  be.     1.  For  one 
thing,  it  clearly  is  not,  it  cannot  be,  mere  innocence,  the  innocence  of  one  ignorant 
of  evil,  or  of  one  who  knows  evil  only  by  report,  or  of  one  who  knows  it  only  as  a 
possibility,  by  a  prohibitory  enactment  with  a  penalty  attached  to  it.     2.  Neither  is 
it  enough  that  it  should  be  a  holiness  consisting  merely  of  enforced  abstinence  from 
evil,  or  of  such  outward  compliance  with  good  as  a  sense  of  dire  necessity  and  a 
dread  of  unpleasant  consequences  may  produce.     3.  Nor  even  can  it  be  such  painful 
discipline  of  self-restraint,  self-denial,  self-mortification,  as  may  spring  from  better 
and  more  respectable  motives — sometimes  from  motives  of  deep  religious  earnest- 
ness.    4.  For,  as  to  its  essential  character,  our  holiness,  if  it  is  to  be  like  the  holiness 
of  God,  must,  at  the  very  outset,  pass  out  of  the  region  of  the  merely  negative,  which 
implies  a  continual  struggle  to  dethrone  a  tyrant,  into  the  region  of  the  positive, 
which  is  realised  in  our  acknowledgment  of  Him  who  buys  us  to  be  His  freedmen. 
5.  For,  finally,  it  is  indeed  now  a  new  influence,  a  fresh  and  new  power.     II.  The 
POSITIVE  aspect  of  THE  GEACE  IN  QUESTION — how,  in  that  changed  aspect  of  affairs, 
with  our  new  mind  towards  God,  as  connected  with  His  new  mind  towards  us,  may 
His  holiness  thus  purely  and  simply  bear  upon  us  ?    How  otherwise  than  by  our 
being  made  partakers  of  His  holiness,  in  such  a  sense  and  to  such  an  effect  that  we 
do  now  really  become  "as  God,  knowing  good  and  evil"?     We  know  evil  as  God 
knows  it;  because  we  know  good  as  God  knows  it.     For  we  are  partakers  of  "  the 
Divine  nature,"  through  our  faith  in  "  God's  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises" 
(2  Pet.  i.  4).     We  are  thus  "partakers  of  His  holiness"  (Heb.  xii.  10).      [R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.)        Holiness  .-—I.  Explain  the  exuoktation.   1.  The  nature  of  holi- 
ness.    2.  Its  different  stages  and  degrees.     3.  Its  objects.     4.  Its  effects.     II.  Con- 
sider the  motive.     1.  God  is  holy,  and  therefore  without  holiness  we  cannot  be  like 
Him.     2.  God  is  holy,  and  therefore  those  only  who  are  so  can  truly  serve  Him.     3. 
God  is  holy,  and  without  holiness  it  is  impossible  to  please  Him  in  anything  we  do. 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  83 

4.  God  is  holy,  and  unless  we  be  so  too,  we  cannot  be  owned  or  acknowledged  by 
Him.   5.  God  is  holy,  and  we  must  be  holy  in  order  to  enjoy  Him.    [B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
Holiness  : — I.  Holiness  in  the  heakt,  or  as  it  works  its  way  down  to  the  depth  of  our 
nature.     "  As  obedient  children,  not  fashioning  yourselves  according  to  the  former 
lusts  in  your  ignorance."     1.  In  their  unregenerate  state  men  always  fashion  them- 
selves after  the  pattern  of  their  lusts  or  inward  sinful  desires.     2.  The  power  of 
evil,  however,  though  not  expelled,  is  dethroned  in  the  believer's  heart,  and  the  prin- 
ciple of  dutiful  obedience  takes  its  place.      God's  people — ideal,  and  to  a  certain 
extent  actual,  people — are  emphatically  the  "  children  of  obedience."      (1)    This 
implies  for  one  thing  that  they  inwardly  approve  the  Divine  law,  that  they  love 
God's  commandments.    It  is  not  a  law  they  would  alter  if  they  could.     (2)  Obedience, 
however,  contains  another  element,  namely,  that  the  mind  throws  itself  actively  and 
energetically  into  the  duties  prescribed.     II.  Holiness  in  the  life,  or  as  it  widens 
out  over  the  whole  area  of  conduct.     "  As  He  which  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be 
ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation."     1.  This  enjoins  holiness  in  all  our  think- 
ing and  reading.     2.  Holiness  should  also  be  observed  in  all  your  conversation,  in 
the  modern  sense  of  the  word.     "  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned 
with  salt."      (1)    On  the  one  hand,  you  must  renounce  filthy  and  blasphemous 
language.     (2)  But  as  you  should  avoid  evil  communications,  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
your  speech  should  be  such  as  to  cause  grace  in  the  hearers.     We  do  not  faithfully 
mirror  the  Divine  holiness  when  we  foul  each  other's  character.     3.  Christian  holi- 
ness, furthermore,  extends  to  our  acts  as  well  as  to  our  words  and  thoughts.     "  Be 
ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation."     Christianity  influences  the  whole  area  of 
life  private  and  public ;  it  is  commensurate  with  our  existence.     IH.  Holiness  in  its 
STANDAKD.     "  Be  yc  holy,  for  I  am  holy."     1.  Why  is  holiness  a  virtue,  and  therefore 
required  of  us  ?     The  Bible  answer  is.  Because  God  is  holy.     The  essence  of  God — 
that  is  to  say,  that  which  makes  God  to  be  God — is  His  infinite  holiness  and  infinite 
love.     Hence  the  Bible  continually  summons  men  to  holiness ;  not  to  learning  or 
culture,  but  to  holiness,  for  only  in  holiness  and  love  can  we  resemble  our  Maker. 
By  growing  in  other  things,  however  much  to  be  coveted  in  themselves,  we  do  not 
grow  in  likeness  to  our  Maker.     2.  In  the  text  God  is  styled  "  He  that  called  you." 
And  His  "  calling  "  imposes  a  fresh  obligation  upon  you.    You  are  called  by  God — 
to  what?    To  holiness,  "  to  show  forth  the  virtues  of  Him  that  called  you."     If  you 
seek  not  holiness,  you  overlook  the  very  purpose  of  your  separation  from  the  world 
and  your  incorporation  into  the  Church.     Your  "  call "  has  been  in  vain.     3.  As  the 
ground  of  our  holiness  is  in  God,  so  the  standard  of  our  holiness,  that  to  which  it 
is  to  grow,  is  the  holiness  of  God.     "Be  ye  perfect  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is 
perfect."    Infinite  holiness  surely  presents  a  standard  lofty  enough.     Christianity 
in  the  morality,  the  holiness,  it  demands  can  never  be  outdone.     One  argument 
Herbert  Spencer  urges  against  it  is  that  the  standard  of  character  it  offers  for  our 
imitation  is  too  high.     Observe  that  the  objection  carries  in  it  a  homage  to  the  pure 
ethics  of  the  Teacher  of  Nazareth.     (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)         The  family  likeness  : — ■ 
I.  The  pattern  of  holiness.  '  Eeligion  is  imitation.     The  truest  form  of  worship  is 
to  copy.    All  through  heathenism  you  find  that  principle  working.     "  They  that 
make  them  are  like  unto  them."     Why  are  heathen  nations  so  sunken  in  their  foul- 
nesses ?    Because  their  gods  are  their  examples,  and  they,  first  of  all,  make  the  gods 
after  the  pattern  of  their  own  evil  imaginations,  and  then  the  evil  imaginations, 
deified,  react  upon  the  makers  and  make  them  tenfold  more  children  of  hell  than 
themselves.     Worship  is  imitation.     For  religion  is  but  love  and  reverence  in  the 
superlative  degree,  and  the  natural  operation  of  love  is  to  copy,  and  the  natural 
operation  of  reverence  is  the  same.     So  that  the  old  Mosaic  law,  "Be  ye  holy  as  I 
am  holy,"  went  to  the  very  heart  of  religion.    And  the  New  Testament  form  of  it, 
as  Paul  puts  it  in  a  very  bold  word,  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved  children," 
sets  its  seal  on  the  same  thought.    But  then,  says  somebody  or  other,  "  it  is  not 
possible."    Well,  if  it  were  not  possible,  try  it  all  the  same.     For  m  this  world  it  is 
aim  and  not  attainment  that  makes  the  noble  life ;  and  it  is  better  to  shoot  at  the 
stars,  even  though  your  arrow  never  reaches  them,  than  to  fire  it  along  the  low  levels 
of  ordinary  life.     I  do  not  see  that  however  the  unattainableness  of  the  model  may 
be  demonstrated,  that  has  anything  to  do  with  the  duty  of  imitation.     Instead  of 
bewildering  ourselves  with  questions  about  "  unattainable  "  or  "  attainable,"  suppose 
we  asked,  at  each  failure,  "Why  did  I  not  copy  God  then;  was  it  because  I  could 
not,  or  because  I  would  not?  "     U.  The  field  of  this  Godlike  holiness.     Here  is 
no  cloistered  and  ascetic  holiness  which  tabooes  large  provinces  of  every  man's 
experience,  and  says  "  we  must  not  go  in  there,  for  fear  of  losing  our  purity,"  but 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

rather  wherever  Christ  has  trod  before  we  can  go.  That  is  a  safe  guide,  and  what- 
ever God  has  appointed  there  we  can  go  and  that  we  can  do.  "In  all  manner  of 
conversation."  There  is  nothing  so  minute  but  it  is  big  enough  to  mirror  the  hoh- 
ness  of  God.  The  tiniest  grain  of  mica,  upon  the  face  of  the  hill,  is  large  enough 
to  flash  back  a  beam ;  and  the  smallest  thing  we  can  do  is  big  enough  to  hold  the 
bright  light  of  holiness.  III.  The  motive  ok  inspieation  or  holiness.  Peter  would 
stir  his  hearers  to  the  emulation  of  the  Divine  holiness  by  that  thought  of  the  bond 
that  unites  Him  and  them.  "  He  hath  called  you."  In  which  word,  I  suppose,  he 
includes  the  whole  sum  of  the  Divine  operations  which  have  resulted  in  the  placing 
of  each  of  his  auditors  within  the  circle  of  the  Christian  community  as  the  subjects 
of  Christ's  grace,  and  not  only  the  one  definite  act  to  which  the  theologians  attach 
the  name  of  "calling."  In  the  briefest  possible  way  we  may  put  the  motive  thus — 
the  inspiration  of  imitation  is  to  be  found  in  the  contemplation  of  the  gifts  of  God. 
And  not  only  so,  but  in  this  thought  of  the  Divine  calling  there  lies  a  fountain  of 
inspiration  when  we  remember  the  purpose  of  the  calling.  As  Paul  puts  it  in  one 
of  his  letters :  "  God  has  not  called  us  to  uncleanness  but  to  holiness."  And  so,  if 
in  addition  to  the  fact  of  His  "  gift  and  calling  "  and  all  that  is  included  within  it, 
if  in  addition  to  the  purpose  of  that  calling  we  further  think  of  the  relation  between 
us  and  Him  which  results  from  it,  so  as  that  we,  as  the  next  verse  says,  call  Him 
who  hath  called  us,  "  Our  Father,"  then  the  motive  becomes  deeper  and  more  blessed 
still.  Shall  we  not  try  to  be  like  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  and  seek  for  His  grace, 
to  bear  the  likeness  of  sons?  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Of  imitating  the  holiness  of 
God : — I.  The  obligations  we  aee  under  to  imitate  the  God  whom  we  woeship. 
This  is  an  original  obligation,  founded  in  nature  itself,  requiring  us  to  imitate  what 
it  necessitates  us  to  admire.  And  this  obligation  is  confirmed  by  the  light  of  reason, 
teaching  us  further  that  imitation  of  God,  as  it  is  most  fit  in  itself,  so  it  cannot  but 
be  likewise  most  acceptable  unto  Him  and  agreeable  to  His  will.  For  the  same 
absolute  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  which  makes  us  certain  that  God  must 
Himself  be  of  necessity  infinitely  holy,  just,  and  good,  makes  it  equally  certain  that 
He  cannot  possibly  approve  iniquity  in  others.  And  the  same  beauty,  the  same 
excellency,  the  same  importance  of  the  rules  of  everlasting  righteousness,  with  regard 
to  which  God  is  always  pleased  to  make  those  rules  the  measure  of  all  His  own 
actions,  necessarily  prove  that  it  must  hkewise  be  His  will  that  all  rational  creatures 
should  proportionately  make  them  the  measure  of  theirs.  In  the  revelation  which 
God  has  been  pleased  to  make  to  us  of  Himself  in  Scripture,  the  necessity  of  the 
same  duty  is  more  expressly  and  more  clearly  enforced  (Lev.  xi.  44,  xix.  1 ;  Eph. 
iv.  24;  Col.  iii.  10;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  II.  The  teue  extent  and  peoper  limitations  of 
THIS  DUTY.  1.  All  imitation  of  God  must  be  understood  to  be  an  imitation  of  His 
moral  attributes  only,  and  not  of  His  natural  ones.  2.  Even  in  these  moral  excel- 
lencies it  is  evident  further  that  it  must  necessarily  mean  an  imitation  of  likeness 
only,  and  not  of  equality.  3.  Yet  ought  we  also  to  consider  that  even  in  the  degrees 
of  goodness  it  is  our  duty  continually  to  improve.  A  perfect  example  is  set  before 
us  that  aiming  always  at  that,  we  may  make  a  perpetual  progress  in  the  ways  of 
virtue.  Conclusion :  1.  If  true  religion  consists  in  the  imitation  of  God,  and  all 
imitation  of  God  is  of  necessity  confined  to  His  moral  perfections  only,  then  it  hence 
evidently  follows  that  moral  virtue  is  the  chief  end  of  religion,  and  that  to  place  the 
main  stress  of  religion  in  anything  else  besides  true  virtue  is  superstition.  2.  If 
true  religion  consists  in  the  imitation  of  God,  and  that  which  is  imitable  in  God  be 
His  moral  perfections,  hence  it  follows  necessarily  that  moral  excellences,  justice, 
goodness,  truth,  and  the  like,  are  of  the  same  kind  in  God  as  in  men.  3.  From 
hence  it  appears  of  how  great  importance  it  is  to  men  to  frame  to  themselves  right 
and  worthy  notions  of  God.  For  such  as  are  the  conceptions  men  have  of  the  object 
of  their  worship,  such  also  will  proportionably  be  their  own  behaviour  and  practice. 
(.S'.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  true  ideal  of  life,  its  sublime  grandeur  and  implied  attain- 
ability : — I.  Its  sublime  grandeur.  The  holiness  of  God.  To  be  holy  is  to  possess, 
not  one  virtue  or  grace,  but  all  virtues.  "  The  moral  magnates  of  the  old  world," 
says  Luthardt,  "  are  strong  in  this  or  that  particular  virtue ;  but  they  fail  to  give  us 
the  impression  that  the  central  point  of  their  being  is  penetrated  and  renovated  by 
the  spirit  of  morality,  and  that  we  have  in  this  a  guarantee  that  the  moral  spirit  by 
which  they  are  animated  would  manifest  itself  in  all  aspects  as  occasion  offered. 
They  represent  only  single  virtues:  Aristides,  justice;  Epaminondas,  truthfulness; 
Cimon,  liberality ;  Leonidas,  prJriotism,  &c. ;  but  they  do  not  represent  morality 
itself.  Socrates  is  the  model  of  a  noble  Greek ;  but  in  his  last  hours  he  was  un- 
feeling to  his  wife  and  children.    Plato  and  Aristotle  were  teachers  of  wisdom ;  but 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  85 

their  verdict  on  the  sensual  errors  of  their  fellow-countrymen  was  more  than  lenient. 
Cato  was  proverbial  for  his  integrity  in  public  life,  but  was  cruel  to  his  slaves ;  and 
we  might  adduce  many  more  such  instances.  Everywhere  we  see  single  virtues  ; 
nowhere  do  we  find  the  spirit  of  morality  filling  the  whole  man."  God's  character 
is  the  totality.  God  "  is  light."  By  a  prism  we  can  divide  the  light  of  the  sun  into 
various  coloured  rays,  each  of  which  is  an  object  of  interest  and  deserves  study. 
But  as  in  the  light  there  is  the  combination  of  all  these  colours,  so  in  the  character  of 
God  we  have  the  combination  of  all  actual  and  conceivable  virtues.  This  is  our 
standard,  nothing  lower.  First :  Anything  lower  than  this  would  not  suit  our 
nature.  We  are  so  constituted  that  our  faculties  can  never  unfold  themselves 
vigorously,  fully,  without  having  some  grand  object  ever  before  us;  when  that  object 
is  reached  they  collapse,  and  the  soul  sinks  into  dormancy  if  not  death.  Secondly  : 
Anything  lower  than  this  would  damage  the  universe.  The  well-being  and  blessed- 
ness of  the  intelligent  creation  depends  upon  every  member  aiming  at  the  highest 
holiness,  the  holiness  of  God.  II.  Its  implied  attainability.  No  character  ever 
appeared  in  history  so  imitable  as  the  character  of  Christ.  He  is  the  most  imitable 
character — First :  Who  has  the  most  power  to  command  admiration — the  admira- 
tion of  the  soul.  Secondly :  Who  is  the  most  transparent  in  character.  Thirdly  : 
Who  is  the  most  unalterable  in  purpose.  Therefore  follow  Him.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Personal  holiness : — This  great  gift  and  demand  of  the  Gospel,  I  wish  to  regard  as  a 
thing  simply  personal  and  individual.  I  have  called  it  a  gift,  for  holiness  is  no 
longer  natural  to,  no  longer  rises  spontaneously  in  the  soul  of  man :  it  needs  to  be 
inspii-ed  and  called  forth  by  the  "  Spirit  of  holiness,"  which  is  the  Spirit  of  God. 
And  what  is  this  gift  of  holiness,  so  needful  for  the  Christian,  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  His  own  individual  soul  and  nature  ?  Now  if  holiness  has  its  seat  in  the 
soul,  it  is  clear  that  it  does  not  consist  merely  of  a  certain  number  of  ceremonial,  or 
even  of  religious  acts,  but  that  it  consists  first  of  a  principle,  and  then  of  habits 
springing  from  that  principle.  It  does  not  consist  merely  of  religious  acts,  although 
these  acts  are  quite  necessary  to  a  holy  life.  It  consists  in  the  soul  of  man  being 
brought  into  communion  and  concord  with  God,  the  source  of  holiness.  And  this 
is  done  on  man's  part  by  the  exercise  of  two  qualities  in  his  nature  directed  towards 
God — faith  and  love.  'The  spiritual  power  of  these  two  great  gifts  is  unbounded,  is 
miraculous.  They  transform  the  soul ;  they  make  it,  according  to  its  capacity,  like 
God ;  they  awaken  new  affections ;  they  give  a  new  bias  to  the  will ;  they  inspire 
new  hopes,  desires,  and  aims ;  they  raise  the  spirit  into  a  higher  atmosphere,  while 
they  invest  the  commonest  duties  of  life  with  a  hallowing  influence.  This  is  its 
principle ;  but  it  is  not  merely  an  excited  or  elevated  state  of  mind  or  feeling.  It 
will  not  evaporate  in  sentiment,  but  wiU  go  forth  into  habits,  and  mix  itself  with  all 
the  acts  of  this  life.  Where  the  will  of  man  is  brought  into  harmony  with  the  will 
of  God,  it  must  run  out  into  deeds  and  habits  of  love  and  self-sacrifice,  into  all  that 
is  pure  and  holy.  And  if  we  look  for  a  perfect  exhibition,  an  unique  pattern  of  the 
hoUness  here  enjoined,  we  find  it  in  the  character  and  life  of  our  Divine  Redeemer. 
To  be  holy  is  to  be  like  Christ ;  this  is  the  final  test,  the  consummation  of  human 
nature,  wholly  sanctified  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  For  in  that  heavenly  character, 
what  is  the  leading  idea  ?  One  stands  forth  pre-eminent— the  supreme  lesson  of 
His  life.  It  is  the  sacrifice  of  His  will,  in  love  to  God  and  man.  {A.  Grant,  D.C.L.) 
The  holiness  of  God  : — Why  ought  the  holiness  of  God  to  be  a  reason  for  our  holi- 
ness ?  I.  Because  holiness  is  that  idea  of  Himself  which  God  is  most  intent 
UPON  communicating  to  man.  II.  Evert  other  moral  conception  that  you  can  form 
OF  God  when  you  analyse  it  will  carry  you  back  to  the  fundamental  thought  that 
God  is  a  holy  being.  He  is  said  to  be  good.  Goodness,  if  you  analyse  it,  will  bring 
you  back  to  the  idea  of  doing  that  only  which  is  pure  and  fit  and  just  and  right. 
III.  The  relation  which  subsists  between  man  and  God  makes  it  indispensable 
that  man  should  be  holy,  or  pure  in  his  purpose,  and  this  for  several  reasons. 
The  Scriptures  inquire,  "  How  can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  What 
harmony  can  there  be  between  light  and  darkness,  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong, 
purity  and  impurity,  sin  and  holiness  ?  Two  persons  may  be  most  strongly  attached 
where  one  supplements  the  other.  So,  even  in  the  marriage  relation,  absolute 
identity  of  tastes  is  not  always  essential  to  the  highest  happiness ;  but,  while  there 
may  be  the  supplementing  of  one  with  the  other,  if  there  be  antagonism,  there  can 
be  no  sympathy  or  union.  So  that,  if  we  are  expecting  to  be  accounted  the 
children  of  God,  there  must  be  sympathy,  truth,  identity.  (C  S.  Rohinfon,  D.D.) 
God  and  obligation,  or  the  pattern  of  sanctity  : — A  "  holy  thing  "  is  a  thing  that  has 
been  withdrawn  from  common  uses  and  reserved  for  speciiic  religious  ends.     A 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

"  holy  man  "  is  one  upon  whom  there  has  been  laid  an  authoritative  interdict  irre- 
vocably separating  him  from  the  pursuits  of  common  life,  and  binding  him  to  the 
Divine  service.     But  how  can  God  be  called  holy  in  this  earliest  meaning  of  the 
term  ?     He  is  eternally  pure  and  perfect  and  separate  from  sinners,  and  does  not 
need  to  draw  a  line  between  Himself  and  the  world  by  a  special  consecration  act. 
Well,  God  is  separate  from  all  those  gods  of  the  heathen  kingdoms  who  may  be 
thrust  into  competitive  relations  with  Him.    Even  when  the  gods  of  the  heathen 
are  made  to  represent  virtues  and  heroisms,  when  they  incoi-porate  the  fairest  ideals 
of  the  human  imagination  and  conscience,  in  disposition  and  conduct  and  benign 
economy  they  fall  immeasurably  short  of  the  perfection  of  the  Most  High,  and  He 
is  still  separate  and  alone.     By  acts  that  are  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  in  their 
range,  He  makes  for  Himself  a  consecrated  sphere  of  life  that  must  be  ever  and 
only  His  own  (Micah  vii.  18).     Is  the  time-honoured  logic  of  this  injunction  sound? 
Is  God's  pattern  a  spring  of  motion  and  obligation  to  us  ?     The  logic  has  stood  the 
strain  of  many  centuries :  will  it  do  for  our  critical  decade  ?     I.  The  argument  at 
the  outset  sounds  like  an  argument  basing  itself  upon  the  authority  which  takes 
ITS  KisE  IN  SUPREME  AND  BOUNDLESS  POWER.     The  Divine  Speaker  seems  to  assume 
unlimited  proprietorship  over  us  because  He  imparts  life  and  determines  all  the  out- 
ward conditions  under  which  life  maintains  itself.  Now  a  Jew  would  have  submitted 
himself  at  once.     We,  however,  are  disposed  to  go  a  little  further  into  the  subject 
than  that,  and  ask, "  Does  mere  power,  however  gigantic  its  scale,  create  obligation  "  ? 
It  is  our  privilege  to  live  after  the  French  Kevolution,  and  we  are  not  disposed  to 
submit  to  superior  power  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  is  superior  power.     For  God 
to  bind  upon  us  the  law  of  His  personal  life  because  He  is  stronger  than  we  is  surely 
not  unlike  Fate  trying  to  vanquish  Prometheus  bound  to  the  rock  in  the  Caucasus. 
Well,  whilst  usurped  power  can  bring  no  sanction  with  it,  if  the  power  be  original, 
creative,  unlimited  in  time  and  space,  it  does  bring  essential  obligation  in  its  train. 
God  does  not  want  our  conformity  to  His  pattern  because  His  power  out-towers 
other  types  of  power,  but  because  it  is  spontaneous,  eternal,  and  a  part  of  Himself. 
He  whose  breath  brings  the  secret  of  life,  whose  word  makes  every  wavelet  of  sun- 
shine or  starlight  that  visits  the  eye,  every  atom  of  air  that  sweetens  and  vitalises 
the  blood,  whose  hand  prepares  the  foundation  upon  which  all  life  rests,  and  strikes 
the  blow  which  brings  our  truest  enfranchisements,  has  the  right  to  bind  men  by 
His  pattern.      The  rights  of  all  fatherhoods,  the  prerogatives  of  all  crowns  and 
thrones  and  sovereignties,  the  sanctions  of  all  law  and  ethic  speak  in  this  imperative 
"  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."     II.  The  authority  that  here  addresses  us  is  not  that 
of  supreme  power  only,  but  also  of  absolute  loveliness  and  perfection.  In  bidding 
us  be  like  Himself  God  is  bidding  us  be  like  that  we  most  esteem,  for  has  He  not 
captivated  the  entire  range  of   our   reverence   and  admiration?     The  crown  of 
supremacy  belongs  to   God,  not  by  an  arbitrary  coronation  act,  but  by  His  own 
inherent  fitness  to  wear  it.   We  must  set  ourselves  to  copy  that  which  we  irresistibly 
worship.     The  musician  whose  soul  has  been  visited  by  dream-like  melodies  from 
other  worlds,  is  bound  to  so  group  his  notes  as  to  realise,  for  those  to  whom  he  sings, 
the  mystic  enchantments  that  have  smitten  his  own  soul  with  wonder.     The  painter 
to  whose  inner  sense  the  subtle  charm  and  secret  of  glowing  sky,  or  flowered  land- 
scape, or  fretting  sea,  has  made  itself  known,  is  bound  to  suggest,  as  far  as  the  play 
of  colours  will  do  it,  the  magnificent  vision  that  has  possessed  his  own  imagination. 
All  admirations  have  as  their  very  core  and  essence  the  force  of  a  vast  moral  con- 
straint ;  and  if  God  be  the  best  of  which  we  can  think,  or  reason,  or  dream,  if  He  has 
conquered  all  our  moral  admirations,  if  He  is  the  loftiest  pattern  a  quick  and 
healthy  and  highly  stimulated  conscience  can  conceive,  we  are  bound  to  copy  Him, 
The  highest  form  of  worship  is  imitation.     The  trisagion  of  the  cherubim,  "Holy, 
holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  confesses  the  law  under  which  earth  and 
heaven  alike  are  placed  to  be  like  God.     I  need  not  remind  you  how  in  His  pattern 
prayer  Christ  makes  us  subscribe  to  the  principle  whose  gracious  operation  and 
benefit  we  need  for  ourselves — "  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven."    Where  there 
is  fatherhood  there  is  sonship  and  its  duties,  the  first   of  which  is  to  copy  the 
qualities  of  the  highest  fatherhood.    As  we  confess  the  Divine  perfection  the  voice 
of  unfailing  response  comes  back  in  reply  to  our  homage,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am 
holy."    III.  These  words  are  an  argument  from  the  affinities  and  similitudes  op 
THE  Divine  and  human  natures.     God's  nature  is  the  archetype  of  ours.    What 
does  it  mean  when  it  is  said  we  are  "  made  in  God's  image  "  and  quickened  to  life 
with  God's  breath,  but  that  God  has  put  within  us  the  rudiments  of  His  own  holi- 
ness? The  power  to  grow  like  God  is  implanted  in  man  at  the  very  beginning.   There 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  87 

is  a  long-buried  seed  of  spiritual  excellence  in  him,  old  as  his  dim  origins,  which  the 
processes  of  grace  are  destined  to  awaken  and  perfectly  fructify.  And  to  give  us 
further  assurance  on  the  subject  we  are  not  only  reminded  of  that  image  whose  faint 
outlines  and  affinities  we  still  bear,  but  we  are  told  that  this  high  and  holy  One  has 
made  Himself  in  our  image.  The  correspondences  are  guaranteed  from  two  stand- 
points. He  has  lived  out  His  perfect  life  in  an  environment  that  is  one  with  our  own. 
In  the  person  of  His  spotless  and  eternal  Son,  God  has  bowed  Himself  to  the  most 
abject  conditions  of  our  hfe,  giving  us  a  vision  of  that  we  are  charged  to  copy,  not- 
withstanding the  strain  of  fierce  and  varied  temptations.  The  grace  that  surrounds 
us  on  every  side  enters  our  natures  and  tends  to  produce  there  a  reflection  of  the 
Holy  One  who  has  been  our  Friend  and  Saviour.  In  one  of  his  books  Mr.  Euskin 
says :  "  Some  years  ago  a  young  Scotch  student  came  to  put  himself  under  me, 
having  taken  many  prizes  justly  with  respect  to  the  qualities  looked  for  by  the 
judges  in  various  schools  of  art.  He  worked  under  me  very  earnestly  and  patiently 
for  a  time,  and  I  was  able  to  praise  his  doings  in  what  I  thought  very  high  terms. 
Nevertheless  there  always  remained  a  look  of  mortification  on  his  face  after  he  had 
been  praised,  however  unqualifiedly.  At  last  he  could  hold  no  longer,  but  one  day 
when  I  had  been  more  than  usually  comphmentary,  turned  to  me  with  an  anxious 
yet  not  unconfident  expression,  and  asked,  '  Do  you  think,  sir,  that  I  shall  ever 
draw  as  well  as  Turner  ?  '  I  paused  for  a  second  or  two,  being  much  taken  aback, 
and  then  answered,  '  It  is  more  likely  you  should  be  made  emperor  of  all  the 
Bussias.  There  is  a  new  emperor  every  fifteen  or  twenty  years  on  an  average,  and 
by  strange  hap  and  fortunate  cabal  any  body  might  be  made  emperor.  But  there  is 
only  one  Turner  in  five  hundred  years,  and  God  decides  without  any  admission  of 
auxiliary  cabal  what  piece  of  clay  his  soul  is  to  be  put  into.' "  Come  with  your 
largest  aspirations  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  may  count  upon  a  very 
different  answer  from  that.  "  I  am  the  '  Firstborn  amongst  many  brethren,'  and 
you  shall  be  like  Me,  and  shall  realise  the  very  qualities  of  Him  whose  manifesta- 
tion I  am.  Trust  Me,  and  go  forward  at  My  word,  for  you  may  be  merciful  and 
holy  and  perfect  as  the  One  in  whose  image  you  are  made.  The  seed  of  the  forgotten 
possibility  is  still  in  you,  and  I  come  to  quicken  that  seed  again,  and  in  that  quick- 
ening to  bestow  all  spiritual  grace  and  perfection.  Yours  is  the  very  clay  into  which 
God  determines  to  put  His  eternal  ideal."     IV.  The  argument  is  an  argument  from 

THE  LIVING  CONTACT  AND  MYSTIC  IMMANENCY   OF  THE  MoST    HiGH    HiMSELF.       The  VCry 

self-same  energy  that  makes  God  holy  dwells  in  us  and  blends  itself  with  our  life. 
The  very  motive  which  determines  God's  eternal  and  unspotted  life  of  blessedness 
comes  to  infix  itself  in  us.  The  power  of  God's  personal  holiness,  with  aU  its  mag- 
nificent achievements,  lends  itself  to  us  for  our  perfecting.  1.  God  comes  very 
near  to  every  man  who  wants  to  copy  His  personal  perfection,  and  the  reason  He 
seems  far  off  from  some  is  that  they  have  never  been  inspired  with  the  desire  to 
emulate  His  character.  He  is  a  model  who  lends  Himself  to  the  most  intimate 
handling  of  reverential  natures,  and  to  the  closest  study  of  all  who  love  Him  and 
desire  to  conform  themselves  to  His  spiritual  similitude.  2.  God  is  not  only 
accessible,  but  He  has  the  art  of  imparting  Himself  to  those  who  seek  Him  in 
sincerity  and  love.  If  we  may  use  the  term  without  irreverence,  He  is  the  most 
magnetic  being  in  the  universe,  inspiring  those  about  Him  with  His  own  thought 
and  love  and  sacred  spiritual  ardour.  He  is  ever  ready  to  make  known  His  deepest 
secret  to  us.  3.  He  comes  also  to  dwell  within  us,  and  inform  our  nature  with 
His  hourly  inspirations.  And  if  God  be  in  us,  the  imitation  of  God  is  not  an 
extravagant  or  fantastic  hope.  And  so  our  obligation  is  not  measured  by  what  we 
are  in  ourselves,  but  by  those  new  ranges  and  outbursts  of  energy  the  Holy  Spirit 
brings  into  our  natures.  His  forces  must  be  added  to  our  own ;  the  marvellous 
possibilities  arising  out  of  His  inhabitation  of  human  souls,  the  capacity  attainable 
through  His  infinite  and  unfaltering  succours,  must  be  discerned  and  brought  into 
the  estimate  if  we  would  know  the  sum  of  our  obligation,  the  breadth  of  the 
law  under  which  we  are  placed,  the  lofty  standard  we  are  summoned  to 
reach.  To  be  like  God  is  a  costly  thing,  involving  stern  self-abnegation, 
and  the  strenuous  application  of  aU  that  is  within  you  to  one  end.  Well, 
is  God's  holiness  a  cheap  and  easy  and  self-indulgent  thing  ?  Did  it  not 
cost  Him  the  most  cherished  treasure  of  His  universe  to  exercise  that  holiness 
and  compassionate  an  offending  race?  It  is  only  by  the  renunciation  of 
self  that  you  can  begin,  however  faintly,  to  be  like  God.  (T.  G.  Selby.) 
Holiness  after  the  Divine  type  : — The  word  holy  has  received  various  interpretations, 
according  to  the  culture  of  those  employing  it.    In  the  law  of  Moses,  the  word  of 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

which  it  is  the  translation  seems  to  mean  noticing  more  than  ceremonial  cleanliness. 
Then,  certain  moral  ideas  got  associated  with  it,  and  to  be  holy  signified  to  be 
virtuous.  By  and  by  the  idea  of  pure  feeling  was  added  on,  and  it  was  seen  that 
there  must  be  an  inward  as  well  as  outward  purity  in  order  to  make  a  man  holy. 
Our  English  word  starts  from  an  altogether  different  basis.  Its  fundamental  con- 
ception is  that  of  health ;  the  holy  man  is  the  healthy,  sound,  whole  man.  But, 
then,  it  went  through  the  same  spiritualising  process  ;  first  of  aU,  health,  holiness, 
consisted  simply  in  soundness  of  body,  then  of  mind,  then  of  morals,  and,  finally, 
of  the  whole  being.  I  like  this  conception  better  than  the  Hebrew  ;  it  gives  one  an 
idea  more  completely  in  harmony  with  the  truth.  I  find  it  very  hard  to  work  my 
way  up  to  spiritual  holiness  from  the  Hebrew  standpoint  of  ceremonial  cleanliness. 
But  I  discern  this  holiness,  in  the  highest  sense,  to  be  wholeness,  soundness,  or 
health,  that  is,  existence  in  the  normal  state,  according  to  the  laws  of  my  whole 
being.  And  that,  surely,  is  the  holiness  of  God.  He  lives.  He  acts,  according  to 
the  condition  of  His  own  absolutely  perfect  nature — from  Himself,  according  to  the 
truth  of  His  own  being.  The  text,  then,  is  a  call  to  Christian  people  ever  to  be 
striving  after  higher  attainments  in  this  holiness,  ever  to  be  setting  before  them  the 
absolute  holiness  of  God  as  the  ideal  after  which  they  should  form  themselves.  1. 
First  of  all,  I  feel  there  are  a  great  force  and  beauty  in  the  terms  the  writer  employs : 
"Not  fashioning  yourselves  according  to  your  former  desires,  in  your  ignorance." 
The  idea  is  that  of  constructing  the  outward  form  of  your  life  according  to  the 
inward  scheme  you  have  formed  of  it.  And  so,  again,  when  he  says,  "Be  ye  holy 
in  all  manner  of  conversation,"  it  means,  in  every  turn  of  your  conduct,  in  deeds  as 
well  as  words ;  let  your  outcoming  be  according  to  the  perfect  law  of  your  nature. 
Words,  actions,  are  simply  the  covering,  habitation,  exuded  from  one's  soul  which 
shows  clearly  what  the  soul  is — its  character,  tone,  refinement,  thought,  feeling, 
purposes,  life.  Every  instant  we  are  thus  giving  out  from  ourselves  and  proclaiming 
to  those  who  are  by  us  what  we  are.  And  when  I  say  this,  I  do  not  forget  that  a 
great  deal  of  what  we  say  and  do  is  done  according  to  custom  and  etiquette  of  the 
set  of  people  amongst  whom  we  live.  Very  few  live  according  to  the  pure,  free, 
spontaneous  impulses  of  their  own  nature.  But,  then,  it  must  be  remembered  that 
these  social  usages  of  thought  and  expression  have  entered  into  and  become  a  part 
of  our  inner  being  before  they  get  themselves  outwardly  observed  by  us.  You 
mingle,  for  example,  with  coarse  people  ;  their  coarseness,  sooner  or  later,  consciously 
or  unconsciously,  insinuates  itself  into  your  soul ;  then  you  fall  into  coarse  ways ; 
that  is,  the  coarseness  your  soul  has  grown  into,  comes  out  in  coarse  words  and 
manners.  Or,  let  us  hope,  you  associate  with  refined  people  ;  the  influences  of  their 
refinement  purify  your  soul,  and  it,  too,  becomes  refined ;  the  manners,  morals, 
modes  of  life  which  you  henceforth  exhibit  become,  of  necessity,  the  expression  of 
that  refinement.  A  noble  soul  puts  its  nobleness  into  the  smaller  acts  of  its  life  as 
well  as  into  the  greatest :  two  sentences  will  disclose  the  want  of  order  in  an  illogical 
mind  ;  Divine  love  radiates  its  tenderness  through  the  simplest  expression  ;  the  pure 
soul  indicates  its  purity  by  the  kind  of  its  response  to  purity  and  coarseness,  as  the 
thermometer  responds  to  heat  and  cold.  The  only  way  of  being  good,  pure,  noble, 
holy  in  the  high  Anglo-Saxon  sense  of  the  word,  is  to  have  the  soul  filled  with  truth 
and  goodness,  and  then  act  from  the  inward  impulses  freely.  Schematise,  fashion 
your  outward  life  by  the  plastic  energy  of  your  own  soul.  2.  Secondly,  I  think  this 
text  intimates  the  progressive  character  of  holiness  in  each  individual.  A  past  and 
a  future  are  referred  to ;  the  present  is  the  transition  point  from  the  one  to  the 
other.  In  the  past,  the  outward  life  was  fashioned  by  ignorance,  or  rather,  in 
ignorance ;  now,  knowledge  is  to  take  its  place,  and  a  higher  ideal  is  to  give  the 
model  of  the  conversation.  Yet,  observe,  as  much  as  the  writer  supposes  his 
hearers  to  have  risen  above  that  former  state,  it  was  one  of  comparative  evil  rather 
than  of  positive — of  privative  knowledge  rather  than  absolute  ignorance.  However 
high  the  attainments  of  to-day,  and  however  pure  the  life  of  to-day  may  seem,  when 
the  higher  knowledge  and  life  of  to-morrow  come,  we  shall  look  back  upon  all  we 
have  attained  to-day,  as  to-day  we  look  back  upon  what  we  were  yesterday.  The 
youth  at  sixteen  or  seventeen  thinks  himself  a  man,  and  laughs  at  the  childishness 
of  ten  years  ago.  When  he  has  grown  to  forty  or  fifty  years  he  will  look  back  upon 
his  present  age  as  that  of  his  boyhood.  And  so  it  always  happens  that  our  past 
seems  to  us  folly,  weakness,  evil,  in  the  light  of  the  grace  we  have  now  reached. 
But  that  just  leads  the  thoughtful  to  see  how  the  past  belongs  to  the  present,  and 
forms  an  essential  part  of  it,  containing  within  itself  the  rudiments  of  all  that  is 
truest  and  best  in  us  now.     3.  But  thirdly,  we  have  here  given  to  us  the  primal 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  89 

condition  of  this  increasing  holiness ;  namely,  the  setting  before  us  of  a  perfect 
ideal.  As  He  calling  you  is  the  holy  One,  be  ye  holy  in  all  forms  and  turns  of  your 
life,  for  it  is  written,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  Now,  you  will  observe,  this  is 
quite  accordant  with  all  I  have  said  about  the  holiness  being  dependent  upon,  not 
an  outward  rule,  but  an  inward  principle.  For,  although  correctly,  God  is  set 
before  us  as  the  pattern,  type  or  object  with  which  we  are  to  conform  ourselves  in 
holiness,  yet,  clearly,  it  is  not  God  existing  outwardly  and  beyond  ourselves,  but  as 
He  is  known  to,  and  conceived  in  our  own  minds.  The  outward  revelation  of  God 
must  be  construed  to  the  mind  in  the  form  of  its  own  ideas,  before  it  can  possibly 
produce  the  least  spiritual  effect  upon  the  soul.  And  that  is  true,  whether  the  reve- 
lation be  given  in  nature  or  in  books.  And  now,  consider  a  little  the  principle  that 
it  is  the  forming  of  higher  ideals  which  is  the  one  primal  condition  of  progress  in 
holiness.  You  can  never  rise  above  your  own  thoughts,  that  is  certain.  There  is 
nothing  which  you  have  out  of  which  anything  higher  and  better  could  come  ;  you 
are  kept  down  to  that  level  by  a  law  harder  than  fate.  Ex  nihilo  nihil  Jit.  Blessed 
are  those  who  can  realise  their  thoughts  to  the  fuU  !  For,  whilst  it  is  true  that  we 
cannot  rise  higher  than  our  ideals,  our  thoughts,  it  is  not  true  that  we  can  always 
rise  as  high.  The  reverse  is  the  truth.  We  never  can  shape  the  material  on  which 
we  work  so  readily  as  we  shape  our  thoughts.  The  thing  done  is  never  so  true  and 
good  and  beautiful  as  the  idea  we  had  of  it.  Sometimes  the  fault  lies  in  the  un- 
shapeable,  unplastic  materials.  More  often  with  the  untrained,  disobedient  hand, 
or  other  powers  with  which  we  do  the  work.  What  Divine  songs  our  fancies,  for 
instance,  sometimes  sing,  and  how  they  get  never  sung  by  the  unmanageable  organs 
of  speech !  What  fame  some  artists  would  have,  if  the  hand  could  but  create  the 
idealised  picture  or  sculpture  !  And  all  this  is  still  more  true  of  the  moral  qualities 
of  things,  for  in  them  we  meet  with  more  hindrances  to  realisation.  We  picture 
goodness,  which  a  little  passing  appetite  is  strong  enough  to  mar  in  operation.  We 
idealise  justice,  and  the  chance  of  some  palpable  advantage  causes  the  idea  to  get 
sadly  distorted  when  it  comes  out  in  deeds.  Wonderful  and  mysterious  is  that 
plastic  power  of  the  soul !  as  it  thinks  of  Divine  things  it  becomes  Divine,  and  forth- 
with the  divineness  spreads  through  words  and  deeds ;  and  although  in  spreading 
the  divineness  becomes  diffused,  attenuated,  yet  it  is  divineness  still,  which, 
radiating  through,  glorifies  the  character,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  fulness  of  the 
original  thought,  renders  the  outward  life  Divine.  Wonderful  power !  mirroring 
Thine,  great  Father,  Thou  supernal  power  of  all,  who  clothest  Thyself  with  this 
universe  wrought  out  of  Thine  eternal  ideas — ever  energising  the  forms  of  beauty 
and  life  we  dimly  see  around — dimly  see,  because  not  for  us,  the  finite,  is  it  to  com- 
prehend Thine  infinite  thoughts.  But  as  we  comprehend  and  rise  in  our  conceptions. 
of  Him — as  more  and  more  our  souls  conceive  truly  and  fully  goodness,  love,  the 
perfect  life  to  which  we  are  called  and  of  which  we  are  capable — it  issues  forth  intO' 
the  "  conversation,"  the  character,  the  moulding  and  turning  of  words  and  deeds ; 
and  we  become  holy  as  the  Holy  One  is  holy.  (Jas.  Cranbrook.)  Holiness  : — I. 
Holiness  :  what  is  it  ?  1.  Holiness  does  not  consist  in  bodily  austerities,  or  in 
ritual  observances.  This  view  of  it  has  widely  prevailed  among  men  ;  for  it  is  the 
natural  result  of  that  dislike  of  true  holiness  by  which  they  are  universally  charac- 
terised, when  associated  with  the  conviction  that  holiness  of  some  kind  is  indis- 
pensable with  their  acceptance  with  God.  2.  Holiness  has  been  identified  with 
mere  external  morality.  This  defective  view  of  it  prevails  among  the  worldly- 
minded,  as  the  false  view  already  considered  is  cherished  and  acted  on  by  the 
superstitious.  3.  In  what,  then,  does  true  holiness  consist  ?  (1)  The  words  of 
God,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy,"  obviously  imply  that  holiness  consists  in  resem- 
blance to  God,  or  in  conformity  to  His  moral  character.  God  is  holy — infinitely 
and  unchangeably  holy.  (2)  Though  holiness  consists  in  resemblance  to  God, 
something  more  specific  than  the  mere  statement  of  this  truth  is  requisite  to  give 
you  a  clear  conception  of  its  nature.  In  order  to  this,  you  must  not  only  know  how 
God  thinks  and  feels  and  acts  ;  but,  seeing  that  the  position  which  you  occupy  as 
creatures  is  widely  different  from  that  which  belongs  to  Him  as  the  Creator,  and 
different,  too,  in  many  respects  from  that  which  is  occupied  by  other  creatures 
whose  nature  is  dissimilar  to  that  of  man,  you  must  be  able  to  apply  your  know- 
ledge of  the  thoughts  and  sentiments  and  conduct  of  God  to  your  own  condition 
and  circumstances.  The  means  of  doing  so  has  been  provided  ;  for  His  law — under 
which  term  in  this  statement  the  whole  revelation  of  His  will  respecting  human 
duty,  contained  in  Scripture,  must  be  regarded  as  included — is  an  expression  of 
His  own  excellence,  a  declaration  of  the  manner  in  which  the  moral  perfections  that 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

compose  His  character  must  operate  when  communicated  to  creatures  who  sustain 
the  relations  to  Him  and  to  one  another  which  are  sustained  by  you.     (3)  But  the 
intimation  that  the  likeness  to  God  which  constitutes  true  holiness  denotes  con- 
formity in  heart  and  life  to  His  revealed  will,  is  not  all  that  is  necessary  to  enable 
you  to  form  a  clear  and  accurate  conception  of  the  nature  of  holiness.     You  must 
be  aware  of  what  is  implied  in  conformity  to  the  Divine  law.     It  contains  both 
prohibitions  and  commands  ;  it  tells  you  both  what  you  should  shun,  and  what  you 
ought  to  do.     Now,  the  injunction,  "  Be  ye  holy,"  requires  conformity  to  the  law  of 
God  in  both  these  departments ;  and  none  but  he  who  hates  and  avoids  whatever  it 
condemns  and  forbids,  and  who  loves  and  practises  whatever  it  commends  and 
enjoins,  is  a  holy  person.     II.  Holiness:   why   should   we   seek   it?     1.  You 
should  seek  holiness  as  an  appropriate  means  of  testifying  gratitude  to  God  for  the 
blessings  of  His  salvation.     2.  You  should  seek  holiness  as  an  appropriate  means  of 
ascertaining  and  attesting  your  interest  in  God's  salvation.     3.  You  should   seek 
holiness  as  an  appropriate  means  of  securing  present  happiness.     The  possession  of 
it  imparts  release  from  the  distressing  doubts  and  fearful  apprehensions  with  respect 
to  futurity  which  harass  the  ungodly,  and  gives  that  persuasion  of  interest  in  God's 
favour,  and  that  hope  of  eternal  blessedness,  which  communicate  a  peace  that 
passeth  all  understanding,  and  a  joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.     4.  You 
should  seek  holiness  as  an  appropriate  means  of  recommending  religion,  and  thereby 
advancing  the  glory  of  God.     5.  You  should  seek  holiness  as  an  appropriate  means 
of  preparing  you  for  the  happiness  of  heaven,  and  thus  insuring  your  reception  of 
it.    III.  Holiness  :  now  may  we  acquire  it  ?     The  acquisition  of  holiness  is  in 
Scripture  made  the  subject  both  of   exhortation  and  of  prayer.    Being  made  a 
subject  of  prayer,  holiness  must  be  regarded  as  a  privilege,  or  blessing,  communi- 
cated to  men  by  God.     In  harmony  with  this  view  of  it,  the  work  of  their  sancti- 
fication,  both  in  its  commencement  and  in  its  progress,  is  attributed  to  the  powerful 
operation  of  the  Divine  Spirit.     But  while  the  Scriptures  declare  that  holiness  is  a 
Divine  gift,  imparted  to  men  by  the  efficacious  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and, 
on  this  ground,  a  proper  subject  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  they  also  teach  certain 
important  truths  in  regard  to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Sanctifier,  which 
show  that  the  acquisition  of  holiness  may  appropriately  be  made  the  subject  of 
exhortation  and  injunction.     That  the  acquisition  of  holiness  is  a  duty  incumbent 
on  men  ;  that  they  ought  not  merely  to  pray  for  it,  but  to  strive  after  it,  is  a  truth 
very  plainly  taught  in  the  word  of  revelation — a  truth  which  no  man  who  searches 
the  Scriptures  with  an  unbiased  mind  will  hesitate  to  receive.     1.  Eelease  from 
the  curse  of  the  law  and  reconciliation  to  God  are  an  indispensable  prerequisite  to 
the  operations  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Sanctifier.     2.  The  operations  of  the  Spirit  as 
the  Sanctifier  do  not  supersede  activity  on  the  part  of  the  subjects  of  them.     They 
are  created  anew.    But  the  change  effected  on  them  in  this  new  creation  does  not 
destroy  the  powers  or  faculties  which  constitute  them  voluntary  agents.     It  only 
gives  a  new  direction  to  their  activity ;  and  hence,  though  the  continued  operation 
of  the  Spirit  is  necessary  to  preserve  and  strengthen  the  principle  of  spiritual  life 
which  has  been  implanted  in  them,  yet  its  actings   are  the  actings,  not  of  the 
Spirit,  but  of  the  individuals  to  whom  it  has  been  imparted.     3.  The  truth  revealed 
to  us  in  Scripture  is  the  means  or  instrument  employed  by  the  Spirit  in  all  His 
operations  as  the  Sanctifier.    As  His  agency  does  not  supersede  human  activity, 
so,  in  imparting  to  them  the  earnest  desires,  the  ability,  and  the  direction  which  are 
necessary  to  the  acquisition  of  holiness,  He  always  makes  use  of  the  disclosures  of 
the  mind  and  will  of  God  contained  in  the  word  of  revelation      4.  The  operations 
of  the  Spirit  as  the  Sanctifier  are  the  result  of  prayer — of   earnest,    believing 
prayer.     The   atoning  sacrifice  of   Christ  has  opened  a  channel  through  which 
the  influences   of    the    Spirit  may    be    communicated   to  men,   in    consistency 
with   the  holiness   of   the  Divine    character,    the    honour    of   the    Divine   la\\», 
and   the   rectitude   and   stability   of   the   Divine  administration.      (D.  Duncan.) 
On  being  holy : — Hence  this  command  to  be  holy  requires  that  we  bring  ourselves 
into  a  moral  adjustment  to  God  and  our  entire  moral  duty.    I.  Why  should  we  be 
HOLY?     II.   What  are  the  reasons  of  this  requirement?     1.   We  cannot  but 
require  it  of  ourselves.     Our  own  nature  irresistibly  demands  it  of  us — his  o^vn 
individual  conscience  of  every  moral  agent.     He  knows  he  ought  to,  and  therefore, 
by  a  necessity  as  strong  as  his  own  nature,  he  must  become  holy,  or  fail  of  peace 
and  conscious  self-approval.    No  moral  agent  can  respect  himself  unless  he  is  holy. 
Need  I  urge  that  self-respect  is  a  thing  of  very  great  importance  ?    Few  are  fully 
aware  how  very  important  self-respect  is  to  themselves  and  to  others.     This  form 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  91 

of  self-respect  pertains  to  our  relations  to  this  world  and  to  society.     But  suppose  a 
moral  agent  in  like  manner  to  lose  his  self-respect  towards  God.     How  fearful  must 
be  the  influence  of  this  loss  on  his  heart !     How  reckless  of  moral  rectitude  he 
becomes  in  all  that  pertains  to  his  Maker !     2.  Another  reason  why  we  should  be 
holy  is,  that  God  requires  it  of  us.     He  has  made  us  in  His  own  image ;  and 
therefore,  for  the  same  reasons  that  make  Him  require  holiness  of  Himself,  He 
must  require  it  of  us.     He  requires  us  to  be  holy  because  He  cannot  make  us  happy 
unless  we  will  become  holy.    Kemarks:    1.  Sinners  know  they  are  not  holy.     2. 
The  hope  that  unconverted  people  often  have  that  they  shall  be  saved,  is  utterly 
without  foundation.     3.    Many  who  know  they  must  become  holy,  are  yet  very 
ignorant  of  the  way  in  which  they  are  to  become  so.     Having  begun  in  the  Spirit, 
they  try  to  become  perfect  in  the  flesh.     4.  Pardon  without  holiness  is  impossible, 
in  this  sense :  that  the  heart  must  turn  from  its  sins  to  God  before  it  can  be  forgiven. 
5.  The  command  to  be  holy  implies  the  practicability  of  becoming  so.     6.  Christ's 
promises  and  relations  to  His  people  imply  a  pledge  of  all  the  help  we  need.     The 
entire  gospel  scheme  is  adapted  to  men — not  in  the  sense  of  conniving  at  their 
weakness,  but  of  really  helping  them  out  of  it.     7.  God  sympathises  with  every 
honest  effort  we  make  to  become  holy.     8.  If  we  become  partakers  of  His  holiness, 
we  are  made   sure  of   the  river   of   His  pleasures !      9.  All  men  will  sometimes 
feel  the  necessity  of  this  holiness.      In  some  cases   it   is  felt  most  deeply.     10. 
There  is  no  rest  short  of  being  holy.     Many  try  to  find  rest  in  something  less, 
but  they  are  sure  to  fail.     11.  Many  insanely  suppose  that  when  they  come  to 
die,  they  shall  be   sanctified   and    prepared  for  heaven.      12.  No  man  has  any 
right  to  hope  unless  he  is  really  committed  to  hohness,  and  in  all  honesty  and 
earnestness  intends  to  live  so.     (C  G.  Finney.)         Holiness  repugnant  to  sin  : — 
True  holiness  hath  a  repugnancy  and  contrariety  to  all  sin.     It  is  not  contrary 
to   sin  because  it  is   open  and  manifest,   because  it   is  private  and  secret,   but 
to  sin  as  sin,   whether  public  or  private,   because   both    one   and  the  other  are 
contrary  to   God's  will  and  glory,  as  it  is  with  true  light,  though  it  be  but  a 
beam,  yet  it  is  universally  opposed  to  all  darkness ;  or  as  it  is  with  heat,  though 
there  be  but  one  degree  of  it,  yet  it  is   opposite  to  all  cold ;  so  if  the  holiness 
be  true  and  real,  it  cannot  comply  with  any  known  sin.     You  can  never  reconcile 
them  in  the  affections ;  they  may  have  an  unwilling  consistence  in  the  person,  but 
you  can  never  make  them  agree  in  the  affection.     (Obadiah  Sedgivick.)        Hoio  to 
become  holy  : — There  is  only  one  way  of  becoming  holy  as  God  is ;  and  it  is  the 
obvious  one  of  opening  the  entire  being  to  the  all-pervading  presence  of  the  Holy 
One.     None  of  us  can  acquire  holiness  apart  from  God.     It  dwells  in  God  alone. 
Holiness  is  only  possible  as  the  soul's  possession  of  God ;  nay,  better  still,  as  God's 
possession  of  the  soul.     It  never  can  be  inherent,  or  possessed  apart  from  the 
Divine  fulness,  any  more  than  a  river  can  flow  on  if  it  is  cut  off  from  its  fountain 
head.     We  are  holy  up  to  the  measure  in  which  we  are  God-possessed.     The  least 
holy  man  is  he  who  shuts  God  up  to  the  strictest  confinement,  and  to  the  narrowest 
limits  of  his  inner  being ;  curtaining  Him  off  from  daily  life  by  heavy  curtains  of 
neglect  and  unbelief.     He  is  holier  who  more  carefully  denies  self,  and  who  seeks  a 
larger  measure  of  Divine  indwelling.     The  holiest  is  the  man  who  yields  himself 
most  completely  to  be  influenced,  swayed,  possessed,  inspired  by  that  Spirit  who 
longs  to  make  us  to  the  fullest  extent  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.     {F.  B. 
Meyer,   B.A.)         Holy   in    all   manner   of   conversation: — The   demand   is,    "Be 
holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation."     The  meaning  is,  in  all  your  intercourse 
with  men,   in  every  turning  of  your  history.     At  home,  or  abroad ;  with  your 
own  family,   or  in  presence  of   strangers  ;  at  work,  or  enjoying  relaxation ;  at 
church,  or  in  the  market ;  wherever  you  may  be,  or  however  employed — let  lips 
and  life  be  holiness  to  the  Lord.     A  life  is  like  a  stream  issuing  from  a  mountain- 
lake.     The  water  cannot  be  of  different  colours  at  different  places.     It  cannot  be 
pure  at  one  spot  and  turbid  a  few  yards  further  on.     If  the  fountain  is  transparent, 
the  outflowing  stream  will  be  clear  over  all  its  breadth.     The  holiness  that  is  put 
on,  as  suitable  at  certain  times  and  in  certain  places,  is  not  holiness  ;  it  is  hypocrisy. 
When  the  streams  of  a  life,  as  they  disperse  themselves  over  the  individual  history, 
are  found,  like  the  waters  of  Jericho,  to  be  all  bitter,  it  is  not  possible,  by  any 
medicament,  to  sweeten  portions  of  them  here  and  there,  where  travellers  may  be 
expected  to  taste  them.     There  is  only  one  way  of  cure  :  a  certain  salt  must  be  cast 
into  the  spring,  and  then  all  the  water  that  flows  over  its  brim  will  be  wholesome — 
all  wholesome  alike.     {W.  Arnot.)        Likeness  to  God: — To  change  our  physical 
relation  to  God,  of  absolute  dependence  and  incommensurable  littleness,  is  no  more 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

possible  than  for  the  wave  to  become  the  ocean ;  but  just  as  the  same  laws  that 
sway  the  masses  of  the  sea  also  trace  the  ripple  and  shape  the  spray,  so  may  the 
very  same  Divine  principles,  the  same  preferences,  the  same  constancy  which  belong 
to  the  spiritual  life  of  God,  reappear  in  the  tiny  currents  of  our  will,  and  even  the 
very  play  and  sparkle  of  our  aifections.  It  is  but  the  affectation  of  humility  or  the 
dislike  of  noble  claims  that  can  make  us  shrink  from  our  affinity  with  the  Father 
and  Inspirer  of  all  souls.     [J.  Martineau,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  17-21.  If  ye  call  on  the  Father. — What  the  name  Father  implies  : — 1.  This 
condemns  them  that  live  wickedly  and  in  their  sins,  and  yet  call  God  Father.  They 
might  as  well  say  anything.  If  one  should  fight  against  the  king  and  say  he  were  a 
good  subject ;  or  say  he  is  a  man's  servant,  and  yet  doth  nothing  that  he  is  bidden. 
2.  But  dost  thou  unfeignedly  desire  to  fear  God — (1)  In  thy  general  calling 
as  a  Christian,  to  walk  holily,  righteously,  and  soberly  ?  Fearest  thou  to 
offend  God  thyself,  or  to  see  Him  dishonoured  by  others  ?  Carest  thou  to  please 
Him  ?  Lovest  thou  to  be  in  His  presence  ?  Dost  thou  conscionably  hear  His 
Word,  and  patiently  bear  His  corrections?  (2)  In  thy  special  calling  art  thou 
careful  to  glorify  God,  as  a  parent,  child,  master,  servant,  &c.,  not  only  in 
ceasing  to  do  evil,  but  in  doing  good,  yea,  and  labouring  to  do  it  well  ?  Thou 
mayest  comfortably  and  with  good  leave  call  God  Father,  and  make  account 
of  Him  so  to  be,  which  is  the  greatest  privilege  in  the  world.  {Joh7i  Rogers.) 
The  judgment  of  the  Father  : — In  saying  "  if  ye  call  on  the  Father,"  the  apostle 
did  not  mean  for  a  moment  to  express  any  doubt ;  the  "  if  "  simply  introduces  a 
premiss  on  which  a  conclusion  is  to  be  based,  as  when  St.  Paul  wrote,  "If  ye  then 
be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are  above."  There  was  no  uncertainty 
as  to  whether  the  readers  of  the  Epistle — Christianised  Jews  scattered  abroad — 
were  calling  upon  the  Father,  or  more  correctly,  as  to  whether  they  were  calling 
Him  Father.  That  was  just  what  they  were  doing,  having  learned  to  do  so  in  their 
conversion  to  the  Christian  faith.  They  had  always  believed  in  a  righteous,  im- 
partial Governor  of  the  world — the  God,  namely,  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  who 
was  supremely  the  just  One;  and  now,  since  their  surrender  to  Jesus  as  their 
Master,  and  their  acceptance  of  His  Gospel,  they  had  come  to  name  this  God,  the 
Father.  He  whose  throne  was  in  the  heavens,  who  hated  iniquity  and  ruled  with 
faultless  justice,  He  was  the  Father.  "And  if  He  be,"  says  the  apostle,  "pass,  I 
pray  you,  the  time  of  your  earthly  sojourning,  in  fear.  A  true  word,  a  word  spoken 
in  utter  sincerity,  and  representing  what  is  fact,  may  yet  prove  very  misleading — 
may  convey  or  suggest  something  contrary  to  truth.  If  language  be  a  vehicle  of 
thought,  it  is  far  from  being  always  an  adequate  or  a  safe  vehicle.  Now  the  word, 
"  Father,"  we  might  anticipate,  would  speak  alike  to  all.  The  relation  which  it 
designates  is  common  enough.  Yet  how  differently  the  word  may  affect  different 
individuals,  what  different  pictures  it  may  conjure  up  before  them  !  As  to  what  it 
shall  express  to  any  of  us,  much  will  depend  upon  the  kind  of  domestic  experience 
we  have  had,  upon  the  kind  of  home  with  which  we  are  most  familiar,  in  which  our 
childhood  and  youth  were  spent.  Oh,  the  world  of  grand  and  sweet  meaning  for 
you,  in  the  word  Father !  What  a  solemn,  noble,  gracious  sound  it  has !  But  here 
is  another,  upon  whose  ear  it  falls  with  no  sound  of  music,  in  whose  mind  it  is 
associated  with  harsh  and  tyrannical  exercise  of  authority.  It  brings  to  his 
recollection  a  testy,  passionate,  wrath-provoking  man,  whose  ways  were  hard  to 
bear ;  or  a  man,  cold,  stern,  austere,  whose  presence  chilled  and  rather  discomforted, 
or  one  who,  while  protecting  and  ministering,  was  uncertain  in  judgment — now 
weakly  lenient,  now  unreasonably  and  unwholesomely  strict.  And  St.  Peter  would 
seem  to  have  apprehended  that  it  might  be  thus  with  his  readers,  that  in  calling  the 
Divine  Governor,  Father,  they  might  scarcely  be  alive  to  all  which  the  name  implied ; 
for  he  proceeds  to  indicate  to  them  how  it  behoved  them  to  be  moved  and  affected 
by  the  sense  of  God's  Fatherhood.  "  Since  you  worship  as  the  Father,  Him,  who 
without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work,  pass  the  time  of 
your  sojourning  in  fear."  And  it  is  very  likely  that  this  conclusion  of  his  rather 
surprised  and  staggered  them.  "  In  fear  !  "  they  would  exclaim,  perhaps ;  "  should 
he  not  have  written,  on  the  contrary,  '  in  comfort  and  peace,'  '  in  bright  courage 
and  hope' "  ?  Yes,  yes,  most  surely ;  but  then,  it  should  inspire  you  also  with  a  great 
awe,  and  if  it  do  not,  the  whole  meaning  of  the  word  Father  cannot  have  been 
grasped  by  you  ;  for  the  true  Father  is  not  merely  the  gracious  Protector,  Succourer, 
Provider,  but  the  constant,  persistent,  earnest,  unsparing  Educator,  also,  whose 
love  deals  closely  and  inexorably  with  each  child  of  the  family,  in  desire  for  his  due 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  93 

training  and  his  best  development.  Now,  as  may  have  been  the  case  with  the 
people  whom  St.  Peter  addressed,  we  perhaps,  are  possessed  with  too  poor  and  low 
an  idea  of  fatherliness,  and,  more  or  less  blinded  by  that  idea,  need  to  be  reminded 
of  what  he  saw  and  sought  to  inculcate,  namely,  that  the  Fatherhood  of  the  Almighty 
is  a  very  solemn  reality,  and  serves  to  render  hfe  very  serious.  There  is,  I  think,  a 
widespread  tendency  to  repose  in  it  as  involving  rather  less  demand  upon  us  for 
moral  care  and  earnestness,  as  allowing  us  to  be  rather  less  particular  about  the 
cultivation  of  righteousness,  rather  less  anxious  concerning  our  spiritual  condition 
and  quality.  "Let  us  not  be  troubled  greatly,"  they  say  to  themselves — "let  us  not 
be  troubled  greatly  if  we  are  negligent  and  unfaithful,  and  do  not  amend  or  improve 
as  we  should ;  is  not  the  Judge  and  Ruler  the  Father,  and  will  He  not  therefore  be 
gentle  with  us  ;  may  He  not  therefore,  overlook  much,  and  make  things  considerably 
pleasanter  for  us  in  the  end  than  we  deserve?"  Are  there  not  those  who  reason 
thus  from  the  thought  of  God's  Fatherhood  ?  Yet  did  they  consider  and  understand, 
the  very  thought  in  which  they  find  relief,  would  rather  set  them  trembling.  For, 
see,  what  government  is  so  close  and  penetrating  as  the  government  of  a  true 
father  ?  Is  there  anything  in  existence  to  compare  with  it  ?  How  very  much  it 
takes  cognisance  of,  to  frown  upon,  and  rebuke,  which  no  other  government  notices  ! 
Parents  will  often  punish  severely,  where  the  police  would  never  interfere.  The 
man  whom  the  lad  has  to  fear,  when  others  show  lenity,  is  his  father,  and  because 
he  is  the  father.  A  father's  rule,  again,  a  true  father's  rule,  consists  not  merely  in 
legislating  and  in  punishing  when  laws  are  broken,  but  in  studying  to  train  toward 
obedience — to  school  and  discipline,  with  the  object  of  eliminating  or  checking  what 
is  wrong,  and  guiding  and  helping  to  the  formation  of  right  habits.  He  not  only 
commands  good  conduct,  and  visits  the  opposite  with  his  displeasure,  but  endeavours 
in  every  way,  and  by  every  means,  to  influence  to  goodness,  and  to  educate  the 
child  on  all  sides,  with  whatever  exercises  and  appliances  may  seem  fitting,  to  the 
best  of  which  he  is  capable.  To  this  end,  he  watches  over  and  pursues  him.  Do 
we  not  acknowledge,  that  to  be  at  all  careless  about  the  training  of  our  children, 
and  their  culture  by  us  to  better  things,  is  to  be  unfatherly,  and  that  the  fondness 
which  passes  by  a  fault  demanding  correction,  rather  than  draw  forth  tears  and 
put  to  grief,  is  not  true  paternal  love?  If  then  there  be  a  Divine  Governor  of 
mankind,  all-holy  and  just,  the  principle  and  spirit  of  whose  government  is 
really  paternal,  is  it  not  a  profoundly  serious  thing  for  us  men,  in  our  state 
of  confessed  imperfection,  with  so  much  in  us  which  as  yet  falls  short  of  and 
is  contrary  to  holiness  ?  What  hope  can  there  be  of  rest  or  happiness,  what 
hope  of  acquittal,  for  unrighteous  souls,  if  God,  the  infinitely  righteous,  be  the 
Father?  Can  He  ever  be  content  to  tolerate  them  as  they  are,  to  leave  them 
as  they  are,  unvisited,  unmeddled  with?  If  He  be  indeed  the  Father,  what 
chance  can  there  be  for  one  of  us,  of  our  not  receiving  according  to  our  works  ? 
Do  you  not  perceive  the  certainty,  the  inevitableness  of  due  punishment  upon  the 
supposition  of  His  Fatherhood  ?  I  think  of  the  suffering  that  must  yet  be  in  store 
for  such ;  for  without  suffering,  how  are  these  habits  and  sympathies  of  theirs  to  be 
worked  out  ?  and  I  know,  methinks,  that  they  wiU  have  to  be  worked  out ;  that  the 
great  paternal  love  will  not  be  able  to  refrain  from  them,  or  stay  its  hand  until  they 
are.  {S.  A.  Tipple.)  Fatherly  judgment  and  filial  fear  : — "Walk  during  the  time 
of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  How  does  that  comport  with  the  preceding  glowing 
exhortation  to  "  perfect  hope  "  ?  How  does  it  fit  in  with  the  triumphant  words  in 
the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter  about  "  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory"?  Does 
it  not  come  like  a  douche  of  cold  water  on  such  thoughts  ?  Peter  thinks  they  can 
co-exist;  and,  more  singular  still,  that  the  same  object  can  excite  both.  Nay!  there 
is  no  perfect  hope  which  does  not  blend  with  it  this  fear ;  and  joy  itself  lacks  dignity 
and  nobleness  unless  it  is  sobered  and  elevated  by  an  infusion  of  it.  I.  Here  we 
HAVE,  FIRST,  A  Fatherlt  JUDGMENT.  Mark  the  meaning  and  the  limits  of  the  fatherly 
and  filial  relation  which  is  laid  at  the  foundation  of  the  exhortation  of  my  text. 
"  If  ye  call  on  the  Father  " — he  is  speaking  distinctly  and  exclusively  to  Christian 
people.  Much  has  been  said  in  recent  days,  and  said  in  many  aspects  nobly,  and 
with  good  results  upon  the  theological  thinking  of  our  generation,  about  the  Father- 
hood of  God.  But,  we  are  never  to  forget  that  that  one  word  covers  in  the  Bible 
two  entirely  distinct  thoughts.  In  one  aspect,  God  is  the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all 
flesh  by  their  derivation  of  life  from  Him.  But  in  another  "  to  as  many  as  believed 
on  Him  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  sons  of  God."  And  it  is  on  the  latter 
Fatherhood  and  sonship  that  the  apostle  builds  the  exhortation  of  my  text.  Well, 
then,  further,  the  apostle  here  desires  to  guard  us  against  another  of  the  errors 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

which  are  very  common  in  this  generation.     The  revolt  against  the  sterner  and 
graver  side  of  Christian  truth  has  largely  found  footing  in  a  mistaken  idea  of  the 
implications  and  bearing  of  that  thought  that  God  is  our  Father.   That  relationship 
has  been  thought  to  swallow  up  all  others,  and  men  have  been  unwilling  to  entertain 
the  ideas  of  a  righteous  Governor,  a  supreme  Law-giver,  a  retributive  Judge.     And 
Peter  brings  the  two  ideas  into  juxtaposition,  seeing  no  contradiction  between  them, 
but  rather  that  the  one  necessarily  involves  the  other.     Is  it  not  so  in  your  own 
homes  ?    Does  your  fatherhood  swallow  up  your  obligation  to  estimate  the  moral 
worth  of  your  child,  and  to  proportion  your  conduct  accordingly  ?     The  judicial 
aspect  is  essential  to  the  perfection  of  Fatherhood ;  and  every  family  on  earth  mirrors 
the  fact  to  those  that  have  eyes  to  see.     Mark,  still  further,  the  emphatic  charac- 
teristics of  this  paternal  judgment  which  are  set  forth  in  my  text.     It  is  "  without 
respect  of  persons."     Peter  is  going  back  on  his  old  experience  in  that  unique  word. 
Do  you  remember  when  it  was  that  the  scales  fell  from  his  eyes,  and  he  said,  "  I 
perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  "  ?    It  was  in  the  house  of  Cornelius 
in  Caesarea.     Note,  further,  that  this  paternal  judgment  which  comes  on  the  child 
because  he  is  a  child,  is  a  present  one.     "  Who  judgeth,"  not  "  who  will  judge." 
Ah  !  day  by  day,  moment  by  moment,  deed  by  deed,  we  are  coming  under  the  judicial 
light  of  God's  eye,  and  the  judicial  force  of  His  hand.     "  The  history  of  the  world 
is  the  judgment  of  the  world,"  so  the  lives  of  individual  Christians  do  record  and 
bear  the  results  of  a  present  judgment  of  the  present  Father.     Then  mark,  still 
further,  what  the  thing  judged  by  this  present  impartial  Fatherly  judgment  is — 
"  According  to  his  work."     The  text  does  not  say  "  works,"  but  "  work  " — that  is, 
each  man's  life  considered  as  a  living  whole  ;  the  main  di'ift  and  dominant  purpose, 
rather  than  the  isolated  single  acts,  are  taken  into  view.    Now,  from  all  this,  there 
just  comes  the  one  point  that  I  want  to  urge  upon  our  hearts  and  consciences — viz., 
that  Christian  people  are  to  expect,  to-day  and  hereafter,  the  incidence  of  a  Father's 
judgment.     The  Jews  came  to  Jesus  Christ  once  and  said,  "  What  shall  we  do  that 
we  might  work  the  works  of  God  ?  "     His  answer  made  the  same  remarkable  use  of 
the  singular  instead  of  the  plural  to  which  I  have  drawn  attention  as  occurring  in 
this  text — "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent." 
Yes !     And    if   we,   in   any  real  sense,  are  doing  that   one  work    of   God — viz., 
believing  on  Jesus  Christ — our  faith  will  be  a  productive  mother  of  work  which  He 
will  look  upon  and  accept  as  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  "  well-pleasing  unto  God." 
There  is  a  paternal  judgment ;  and  the  works  which  pass  it  are  works  done  from  the 
root  and  on  the  basis  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.     II.  We  have  here  a  son's  fear. 
Now,  fear  is,  I  suppose,  best  explained  as  being  the  shrinking  anticipation  of  evil. 
But,  as  the  Old  Testament  has  taught  us,  there  is  a  higher  and  a  lower  form  of  that 
apprehension.     In  the  higher  it  is  sublimed  into  lowly  reverence  and  awe,  which 
fears  nothing  so  much  as  being  alienated  from  God.     And  that  is  the  fear  that  my 
text  would  insist  upon.     The  evil  which  a  Christian  man,  the  son  of  the  Father, 
and  the  subject  of  His  judgment,  has  most  to  apprehend — indeed,  the  only  evil 
which  he  has  really  to  apprehend — is  that  he  may  be  tempted  to  do  wrong.     So 
this  fear  has  in  it  no  torment,  but  it  has  in  it  blessedness  and  purity  and  strength. 
It  is  perfectly  compatible  with  all  these  other  emotions  of  which  the  lower  form 
of  fear  is  the  opposite ;   perfectly  compatible   with   confidence,   with  hope,   with 
joy — nay !  rather,  without  this  wholesome  and  restraining  dread  of  incurring  the 
displeasure  of  a  loving  Father,  these  exuberant  and  buoyant  graces  lose  their  chief  est 
security.     The  fear  which  my  text  enjoins  is  the  armed  guard,  so  to  speak,  that 
watches  over  these  fair  virgins  of  hope  and  joy  and  confidence  that  beautify  the 
Christian  life.     If  you  wish  your  hope  to  be  bright,  fear  ;  if  you  wish  your  joy  to  be 
solid,  fear ;  if  you  want  your  confidence  in  God  to  be  unshaken,  cherish  utter 
distrust  of  yourself,  and  fear.     Fear  only  that  you  may  depart  from  Him  in  whom 
our  hope,  and  our  joy,  and  our  confidence,  have  their  roots.     That  fear  is  the  only 
guarantee  for  our  security.     The  man  that  distrusts  himself  and  knows  his  danger, 
and  clings  to  his  refuge  is  safe.    This  son's  fear  is  the  source  of  courage.    The  man 
whose  whole  apprehension  of  evil  is  dread  of  sin  is  bold  as  a  lion  in  view  of  all  other 
dangers.     III.    Lastly,  here  is  the  home-coming,  which  will  finish  the  fear. 
"  The  time  of  your  sojourning,"  says  Peter.     That  thought  runs  through  the  lettor. 
It  is  addressed  "  to  the  strangers  scattered  abroad,"  and  in  the  next  chapter  he 
exhorts  Christian  people,  as  "  strangers  and  pilgrims,"  to  "  abstain  from  tieshly 
lusts."     Here   he   puts   a   term   to   this   dread — "  the   time  of  your   sojourning." 
Travellers  in  foreign  lands  have  to  light  their  fires  at  night  to  keep  oi?  the  lions, 
and  to  set  their  guard  to  detect  the  stealthy  approach  of  the  foe.    You  and  I,  whilst 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  95 

we  travel  in  this  earthly  pilgrimage,  have  to  be  on  our  guard,  lest  we  should  be 
betrayed.  But  we  are  going  home.  And  when  the  child  gets  to  the  Father's  house 
it  does  not  fear  any  more  dangers,  nor  need  bolts  and  bars,  nor  guards  and  sentries. 
Why  did  God  give  us  this  capacity  of  anticipating,  and  shrinking  from,  future  evil? 
Was  it  only  meant  that  its  red  light  should  be  a  danger-signal  in  reference  to  fleeting 
worldly  evils  ?  Is  there  not  a  far  worse  possibility  before  us  all  ?  Let  me  press  on 
you  this  one  question  :  Have  you  ever,  in  all  the  wide  range  which  your  fears  of  a 
future  have  taken,  extended  it  so  far  as  to  face  this  question,  "  What  will  become 
of  me  when  I  come  into  contact  with  God  the  Judge  and  His  righteous  tribunal  ?  " 
You  will  come  in  contact  with  it.  Let  your  fear  travel  so  far,  and  let  it  lead  you  to 
the  one  Eefuge.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work. — God  an  impartial  Judge  : — There  is  a  verse  in  the  Psalms  which  might  not 
unfitly  stand  as  a  text  for  this  whole  Epistle  of  St.  Peter.  It  is  at  the  end  of  the 
111th  Psalm,  in  which  David  had  been  giving  most  high  praise  to  God  for  His  dis- 
tinguishing mercy  towards  His  own  chosen  people.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom  :  a  good  understanding  have  all  they  that  do  thereafter :  the 
praise  of  it  endureth  for  ever."  As  much  as  to  say,  that,  great  as  the  mercies  are, 
which  God  has  provided  for  His  elect  people,  they  are  not  such  as  ought  for  a 
moment  to  set  us  free  from  that  godly  fear,  that  religious  and  awful  sense  of  God's 
unspeakable  presence,  which  is  the  beginning,  the  crown,  of  all  spiritual  wisdom. 
It  must  be  joined  indeed  with  love,  but  we  must  never  expect  to  turn  it  entirely  into 
such  love  as  we  feel  towards  those  who  are  dear  to  us  here  among  men.  In  a  word, 
the  love  and  fear  of  God  will  grow  up  together  in  a  religious  and  thoughtful  heart ; 
as  we  come  to  know  more  of  Him  as  the  greatest  and  best  of  fathers.  Such  is  the 
Psalmist's  account  of  the  fear  of  God  :  and  lest  any  person,  having  an  eye  to  the 
infinite  blessings  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  made  known  to  us  but  unknown  to  h'im, 
should  imagine  that  this  description  of  God's  fear  is  now  as  it  were  out  of  date,  I 
wish  all  Christians  would  observe  how  earnestly  the  very  same  lesson  is  taught  in 
the  New  Testament  also.  Our  Lord  forewarns  us  whom  we  shall  fear ;  Him, 
namely,  who  is  able  to  cast  both  body  and  soul  into  hell.  And  observe.  He  speaks 
thus,  not  to  those  who  were  still  at  a  distance  from  Him,  but  to  His  own  chosen 
apostles  and  followers,  to  those  whom  in  the  same  discourse  He  calls  His  friends  and 
His  Uttle  flock.  Surely  this  one  text  is  enough  to  do  away  with  all  presumptuous 
notions  of  any  persons  ever  becoming  so  good,  or  so  high  in  God's  favour,  as  to  do 
without  the  fear  of  God.  It  is  true,  St.  John, says,  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear," 
but  what  fear  ?  surely  not  religious  reverence  of  the  ever-present  Almighty  Father. 
St.  Peter  was  in  some  measure  afraid,  lest  the  Christians  to  whom  he  was  writing 
should  so  dwell  on  favours  received,  be  so  entirely  taken  up  with  the  comfortable 
promises  of  the  gospel,  as  to  forget  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  plain  duty  of  keeping 
the  commandments.  As  if  he  had  said,  It  is  our  privilege  to  call  God,  Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven.  Christ  Himself  in  His  own  prayer  has  authorised  the  faithful 
to  do  it.  Here  the  irreligious  pride  of  some  men  might  presently  come  in,  and 
tempt  them  to  imagine  that  God  is  partial  to  them ;  that  He  favours  them  above 
others,  and  therefore  they  may  take  hberties  ;  He  will  not  be  so  strict  in  requiring 
an  account  how  they  have  kept  His  laws.  But  St.  Peter  teaches  us  just  the  con- 
trary :  even  as  the  last  of  the  prophets?  Malachi,  had  taught  before,  looking  forward 
by  the  Spirit  to  a  time  when  men,  having  greater  privileges  than  ever,  would  be  in 
danger  of  abusing  them  more  than  ever.  "  If  I  be  a  Father,  where  is  Mine  honour  ?  " 
Ho^«'  can  you  call  the  great  God  of  heaven  and  earth  by  a  name  which  brings  Him 
so  very  near  you,  and  not  feel  an  awful  kind  of  thrill,  a  sense  of  His  presence  in 
your  very  heart?  More  especially,  when  you  add  that  which  he  takes  notice  of  in 
the  next  place  :  that  this  our  heavenly  Father  is  one  who  "  without  respect  of  per- 
sons judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work."  This  was  in  a  great  degree  a  dis- 
covei-y  of  God's  nature  and  character  made  by  the  Gospel.  Before  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour,  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile  looked  on  the  God  of  heaven  as 
being  impartial,  and  judging  without  respect  of  persons.  As  for  the  Gentiles, 
"  They  thought  wickedly,  that  God  was  even  such  an  one  as  themselves."  Again, 
even  God's  own  people,  the  Jews,  were  generally  apt  more  or  less  to  mistake  the 
nature  and  meaning  of  the  great  favour  which  God  Almighty  had  shown  them  for 
so  many  ages.  They  kept  continually  saying  within  themselves,  "We  have  Abra- 
ham to  our  Father  "  ;  in  such  a  manner  as  if  they  were  sure  of  especial  consideration 
to  be  had  of  them  on  that  account  merely ;  as  if  they  might  be  looser  in  their  con- 
duct than  other  men.  When,  therefore,  both  Jew  and  Gentile  were  to  be  called 
into  one  great  family  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  one  of  the  things  most 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

necessary  to  be  taught  was,  "  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,"  &c.  This  St.  Peter 
had  taught  long  ago  to  the  Jews,  when,  by  especial  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
had  to  convert  and  baptize  Cornelius  and  his  household  ;  and  now  again  he  repeats 
the  same  instruction  to  the  converted  Gentiles  themselves,  lest  they  should  abuse 
their  own  privileges,  and  fancy  they  were  entitled  to  favour  at  the  hands  of  the 
most  holy  God,  merely  for  being  on  His  side.  Nor  may  we  imagine  that  the  apostle 
spoke  to  the  men  of  those  times  only  ;  the  Christians  of  all  times  are  in  danger  of 
the  same  kind  of  error  :  we  are  all  too  apt  to  indulge  the  childish  imagination,  that 
our  own  case  has  something  particular  in  it :  that  God  Almighty  therefore,  just  and 
terrible  as  He  is,  will  surely  make  exceptions  in  our  favour.  The  reward,  then,  of 
those  who  shall  receive  God's  blessing  at  last  will  be  strictly  in  proportion,  not  to 
their  deservings,  but  to  their  sincerity  and  steadiness  in  working.  "  They  will  be 
justified,"  as  St.  Paul  says,  "  by  faith,  without  works  of  any  law  " ;  yet,  in  another 
sense,  they  are  justified  by  the  works  of  the  gospel  law,  not  by  faith  only.  God 
graciously  accepts,  not  their  bare  nominal  good  meaning,  but  their  good  meaning 
proved  by  their  works.  And  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  on  this  plan :  because  the 
faith  meant  is  not  a  strong  emotion ;  but  it  is  the  steady  devotion  of  the  heart  to 
do  the  will  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  not  our  own  will.  Therefore,  let  us  fear — for 
we  have  indeed  great  reason — lest,  so  much  depending  on  our  own  works,  those 
works  be  found  at  the  last  day  to  be  nothing  at  all,  or  next  to  nothing.  This  con- 
sideration of  itself  is  surely  terrible  enough  ;  but  there  is  one  thing  yet  remaining, 
which  makes  it  yet  more  alarming  to  the  conscience :  and  it  is  that  which  St.  Peter 
sets  before  us  by  his  use  of  the  word  "  sojourning"  in  this  passage.  "  Pass  the  time 
of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  As  much  as  to  say,  "  Pass  your  time  in  fear,  not 
knowing  how  short  it  may  be."  The  churchyards  around  us  aie  fast  filling;  it 
may  be  our  own  turn  next ;  and  how  far  have  we  advanced,  by  the  aid  of  God's 
Spirit,  in  that  difficult  work  of  putting  off  the  mind  of  this  world,  and  putting  on 
the  mind  of  Christ?  (Plain  Sermong  by  Contributors  to  "Tracts  for  the  Times") 
Pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear. — Fear  of  judgment  to  come,  and  of 
redemption  accomplished  : — Before  the  word  "fear"  there  are  several  reasons  given 
for  its  exercise.  We  call  God  Father.  He  who  applies  such  a  name  to  God  must 
fear  if  he  thinks  what  this  involves  on  his  part.  Especially  when  it  is  remembered 
that  while  He  is  a  Father  He  is  also  a  Judge  strictly  righteous  and  impartial. 
Succeeding  it  is  another  ground.  We  are  redeemed.  And  our  redemption  has 
been  effected  by  the  most  costly  sacrifice — the  blood  of  Christ.  Those  who  believe 
that  cannot  but  feel  a  peculiar  obligation  lying  upon  them.  They  must  be  Christ's 
in  heart  and  soul  and  action.  And  they  cannot  but  fear  lest  they  should  belie  such 
a  marvellous  consecration.  I.  The  sphere  and  operation  of  Christian  feak. 
There  are  some  to  whom  the  importance  attached  to  fear  in  this  place  and  elsewhere 
seems  in  contradiction  to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  John,  who  speaks  of  fear  as 
being  cast  out  by  perfect  love.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  perfect  love  to 
which  this  prerogative  is  assigned.  But  with  imperfect  love  fear  has  an  important 
sphere  of  action.  It  affords  stimulus  to  imperfect  love  and  pushes  it  on  to  perfec- 
tion. Those  whom  the  apostle  exhorts  to  fear  are  the  same  whom  he  has  exhorted 
to  hope  to  the  end.  They  are  men  to  whom  Christ  is  precious,  who  love  Him  and 
rejoice  in  Him  with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  fyll  of  glory.  Fear  existing  along  with 
such  elements  cannot  even  burden.  It  balances,  sobers,  solemnises,  deepens,  inten- 
sifies. But  it  is  often  urged  that  the  actions  which  are  stimulated  by  fear  have  no 
moral  worth,  that  fear  is  but  a  form  of  selfishness,  and  that  therefore  no  fruit  pro- 
duced by  it,  however  well  it  may  look  to  the  eye,  can  be  truly  acceptable  to  God. 
This  has  a  very  specious  look.  It  appears  a  particularly  fine,  exalted,  spiritual 
doctrine.  And  it  really  is  so  in  its  main  features.  It  is  true ;  but  it  is  only  a  half 
truth,  and  half  truths  are  often  the  most  dangerous  of  errors.  What  is  the  other 
half  of  the  truth  ?  Although  fear  in  itself  and  by  itself  cannot  produce  truly  good 
or  spiritually  right  action,  it  yet  performs  a  vital  function  in  keeping  the  soul  awake. 
Fear  rings  the  alarm  bell  and  rouses  the  conscience.  It  blows  the  trumpet  of 
warning.  It  creates  pause  and  opportunity  for  all  better  and  nobler  things  to  make 
themselves  heard.  It  allows  a  man  to  become  aware  of  the  realities,  and  when  he 
is  once  placed  in  contact  with  them  the  best  things  begin.  Everything  depends  on 
being  made  earnest,  sensitive,  lifted  into  a  sense  of  the  eternal  verities.  The  highest 
principles,  righteousness  and  love,  are  often  in  the  best  of  men  forgetful  and  fickle. 
They  are  ensnared,  oppressed,  and  bewildered  many  a  time,  and  need  the  keen 
influence  of  fear  to  bring  them  to  themselves  again.  II.  Fear  in  relation  to  the 
Father  that  jodgeth.    Fear  is  obviously  far  from  being  the  main  feeling  towards 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  97 

God  as  a  Father.  Confidence  and  love  are  especially  the  feelings  called  out  by  the 
Fatherhood  of  God.  But  God  says,  "If  I  be  a  Father,  where  is  My  fear  ?  "  God 
claims  fear  as  a  Father — reverence,  no  doubt,  mainly — honour,  awe  in  the  realising 
of  His  infinitude ;  but  something  more  than  these,  something  else.  For  God  as  a 
Father  judgeth.  Did  He  not  judge  and  condemn  all  sin  He  could  be  no  true  Father. 
Love  must  hate  sin  and  show  its  hatred.  Father  is  no  weak,  soft,  indulgent  word. 
It  means  love,  and  because  it  means  love  it  means  right,  and  undying  opposition  to 
evil.  The  Father  judgeth  without  respect  of  persons.  There  is  no  other  Father 
than  the  Father  who  judgeth.  If  I  believe  in  a  Father  that  judges,  that  will  cer- 
tainly rouse  me  up — it  will  waken  my  slumbering  energies,  it  will  cause  me  to  look 
•well  to  the  state  of  my  heart  and  life ;  but  the  word  Father  will  always  keep  the 
thought  of  judgment  from  overwhelming  me.  III.  In  order  to  have  a  true  Chris- 
tian   FEAR    WE    MUST    PLACE    TOGETHER   JUDGMENT    BY   WORKS    AND    REDEMPTION  BY  THE 

blood  of  Christ.  The  thought  of  judgment  to  come  is  essential  to  the  depth  and 
the  reality  of  life.  Without  this  everything  is  left  in  chaos.  Conscience  is  not 
satisfied,  nor  is  reason.  But  what  reason  and  conscience  demand  cannot  but 
awaken  fear.  This  fear  is  deepened  and  yet  transformed  by  the  thought  of  redemp- 
tion. Eedemption  seems  at  first  wholly  opposed  to  judgment  by  works,  far  more 
than  even  the  Fatherhood  of  God  does.  For  what  does  the  Scripture  mean  by 
redemption  through  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  It  means  that  the  ^an  of  God  took  our 
place  and  bore  us  on  His  heart  in  living  and  dying ;  it  means  that  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  is  that  moral  vindication  of  law  and  right,  that  tribute  to  the  holiness  of  God 
which  God  accepts  as  sufficient  amends  and  reparation.  By  faith  man  falls  in  with 
this  Divine  arrangement,  identifies  himself  with  it  and  is  reconciled  to  God.  And 
this  faith  that  accepts  and  trusts  and  frees  from  condemnation,  also  works  by  love. 
Salvation  by  faith  and  judgment  by  works  are  therefore  no  contradiction.  It  is 
judgment  by  faith  taken  in  its  flower  and  fruit.  But  do  we  not  see  how  fear  awakes 
in  the  view  of  such  a  wonderful  redemption  ?  There  is  something  akin  to  fear  raised 
in  the  soul  by  the  sight  of  sublimity.  The  wide  expanse  of  the  sky  filled  with  sun- 
shine or  peopled  with  worlds  raises  an  awe  subUme,  but  often  weighing  heavily  on 
the  soul.  Vast  fervent  love  indeed  banishes  fear.  It  is  the  one  thing  that  does  this. 
And  yet  such  a  love  as  this — so  holy,  so  mysterious,  so  resolute,  so  devoted — love 
coming  from  such  a  height,  and  going  down  into  such  depths,  cannot  but  awaken  a 
certain  awe.  We  are  overawed  by  the  brilliancy  of  the  light.  "  We  fear  the  Lord 
and  His  goodness."  And  then  when  a  man  thinks  of  being  redeemed  by  such  a 
sacrifice,  when  he  tries  to  realise  at  what  a  cost  redemption  has  been  effected,  does 
not  a  certain  fear  come  over  him  lest  he  should  prove  miserably  unworthy  of  it  ail  ? 
But  let  not  this  fear  in  view  of  redemption  be  deemed  inconsistent  with  the  joy  and 
freedom  which  belong  to  the  gospel.  It  is  precisely  the  man  who  has  that  realising 
sense  of  redemption  which  makes  him  afraid  of  not  proving  worthy  of  it,  who  has 
also  joy.  These  two,  fear  and  joy,  grow  out  of  the  same  root  of  redemption.  The 
more  joy  in  Christ  any  man  has,  the  more  will  he  be  afraid  of  not  conforming 
sufficiently  to  Christ.     (J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  God  will  be  served  in  fear  : — If  these 

words  were  not  known  for  certain  to  be  the  words  of  Holy  Scripture  they  would 
appear  to  many  very  severe,  very  unfit  to  win  souls  to  God.  "  What!"  it  would  be 
said,  "  are  people  to  fear  always?  all  people,  those  who  are  farthest  advanced  in 
true  religion  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  What,  then,  is  to  become  of 
the  natural  cheerfulness  of  youth ;  of  the  enjoyments  inseparable  from  even  health 
and  spirits,  kind  relations  and  friends ;  what  of  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience? 
All  this  and  more  is  said  by  different  sorts  of  persons  agaiast  those  who,  following 
God's  own  method,  would  make  them  serious  in  the  true  scriptural  way ;  by  teaching 
them,  and  encouraging  them  in  the  true  reverence.  It  may  be  of  use  to  us  if  we 
consider  what  those  tempers  are  which  are  most  apt  to  make  men  impatient  of  being 
told  to  "  pass  the  time  of  theur  sojourning  here  in  fear."  There  is  a  certain  time  of 
life  in  which  we  are  almost  all  of  us,  more  or  less,  partakers  of  this  pagan  error  of 
disliking  aU  that  is  really  serious,  all  that  would  impress  us  thoroughly  with  the 
fear  and  dread  of  Almighty  God.  When  youth  and  strength  are  high,  before  we 
have  tasted  of  our  Father's  severer  discipline,  we  shrink  from  the  sadder  lessons  of 
Scripture  and  the  Church  :  we  say  to  ourselves,  "  Surely  this  world,  so  fuU  of  enjoy- 
ment, can  never  have  been  meant  merely  as  a  place  for  the  exercise  of  hard  and 
severe  penitence."  If,  then,  any  young  person  happen  now  to  be  hstening  to  me, 
let  me  beseech  him  to  be  aware  of  this  danger :  to  watch  in  himself  that  spirit  of 
confidence  and  gaiety  which,  under  pretence  of  mere  youthful  cheerfulness,  would 
lead  him  to  make  light  of  God's  most  holy  commandments.    Let  us  only  recollect 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ourselves,  how  it  is  with  us  at  our  prayers.  Are  we  not  too  much  inclined  to  say 
them  over  without  seriously  bringing  before  our  minds  the  awful  presence  of  Him  to 
whom  we  pray  ?  This  too  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  outward  religion,  the  religion 
of  the  body,  is  of  so  very  great  consequence  ;  viz.,  that  it  helps  very  much  to  keep 
and  improve  in  our  hearts  the  true  and  wholesome  fear  of  God.  Because  in  truth 
not  only  does  nature  teach  us  to  express  our  feelings  in  such  postures,  but  also  these 
very  bodies  of  ours,  so  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  are  of  purpose  so  framed  as 
to  have  an  influence  in  their  turn  on  our  souls.  Soldiers,  we  know,  in  all  armies, 
are  made  to  march  erect,  and  to  be  firm  and  straight  in  all  their  bodily  movements ; 
not  merely  for  the  appearance'  sake,  but  because  the  very  attitude,  in  some 
unaccountable  way,  tends  to  make  them  bolder  and  firmer  in  mind ;  and  in  like 
manner  there  is  no  question,  that  kneeling  and  other  humble  gestures  in  devotion, 
practised  not  for  form's  sake,  but  in  obedience  to  the  Church,  and  in  the  fear  of 
God,  would  cherish  and  improve  that  very  fear  in  our  hearts.  Bishop  Wilson  has 
said,  speaking  of  small  instances  of  self-denial,  "  Say  not,  It  is  a  trifle,  and  not  fit  to 
offer  in  sacrifice  to  God."  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  small  occasions  of  nourishing 
the  remembrance  of  Him ;  of  short  prayers  frequently  through  the  day,  of  turning  every 
event  and  accident  of  life,  not  openly,  but  as  much  as  may  be  in  secret,  into  an  oppor- 
tunity for  devout  prayer  and  recollection.  (Plain  Sermons  by  Contrihutors  to  "  Tracts 
for  the  Times")  Godly  fear : — I.  The  fear  hebe  eecommended  is  a  holy  self-suspicion 
and  fear  of  offending  God,  which  may  not  only  consist  with  assured  hope  of  salva- 
tion, and  with  faith,  and  love,  and  spiritual  joy,  but  is  their  inseparable  companion, 
as  all  Divine  graces  are  linked  together.  And,  as  they  dwell  together,  they  grow  or 
decrease  together.  The  more  a  Christian  believes,  and  loves,  and  rejoices  in  the 
love  of  God,  the  more  unwilling  surely  he  is  to  displease  Him,  and  if  in  danger  of 
displeasing  Him,  the  more  afraid  is  he  of  it ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  this  fear  being 
the  true  principle  of  a  wary  and  holy  conversation,  fleeing  sin  and  the  occasions  of 
sin  and  temptations  to  it,  is  as  a  watch  or  guard  that  keeps  out  the  enemies  of  the 
soul,  and  so  preserves  its  inward  peace,  keeps  the  assurance  of  faith  and  hope 
unmolested,  and  that  joy  which  they  cause  unimpaired,  and  the  intercourse  of  love 
betwixt  the  soul  and  her  beloved  uninterrupted.  Certainly  a  good  man  is  sometimes 
driven  to  wonder  at  his  own  frailty  and  inconstancy.  What  strange  differences  will 
be  betwixt  him  and  himself !  How  high  and  how  delightful  at  some  times  are  his 
thoughts  of  God,  and  the  glory  of  the  life  to  come  ;  and  yet  how  easily  at  another 
time  base  temptations  will  bemire  him,  or,  at  the  least,  molest  and  vex  him !  And  this 
keeps  him  in  a  continual  fear,  and  that  fear  in  continual  vigilance  and  circumspec- 
tion. When  he  looks  up  to  God,  and  considers  the  truth  of  His  promises,  and  the 
sufSciency  of  His  grace  and  protection,  and  the  almighty  strength  of  His  Redeemer, 
these  things  fill  his  soul  with  confidence  and  assurance  ;  but  when  he  turns  his  eye 
downward  again  upon  himself,  and  finds  so  much  remaining  corruption  within,  and 
so  many  temptations  and  dangers  and  adversaries  without,  this  forces  him  not 
only  to  fear,  but  to  despair  of  himself ;  and  it  should  do  so,  that  his  trust  in  God 
may  be  purer  and  more  entire.  This  fear  is  not  cowardice.  It  does  not  debase,  but 
it  elevates  the  mind;  for  it  drowns  all  lower  fears,  and  begets  true  fortitude  to 
encounter  all  dangers,  for  the  sake  of  a  good  conscience  and  the  obeying  of  God. 
From  this  fear  have  sprung  all  the  generous  resolutions  and  patient  sufferings  of 
the  saints  and  martyrs.  Because  they  durst  not  sin  against  God,  therefore  they 
durst  be  imprisoned,  and  impoverished,  and  tortured,  and  die  for  Him.  II.  The 
REASON  they  have  here  to  persuade  to  this  fear  is  twofold.  1.  Their  relation  to  God 
as  their  Father  and  their  Judge.  But  as  He  is  the  best  Father,  so  consider  that 
He  is  withal  the  greatest  and  most  just  Judge.  There  is  here  the  sovereignty  of 
this  Judge,  the  universality  of  His  judgment,  and  the  equity  of  it.  "  Pass  the  time 
of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  You  are  encompassed  with  enemies  and  snares  ; 
how  can  you  be  secure  in  the  midst  of  them?  Perfect  peace  and  security  are 
reserved  for  you  at  home,  and  that  is  the  end  of  your  fear.  III.  The  term  ob 
CONTINUANCE  OF  Tuis  FEAR.  It  continues  all  the  time  of  this  sojourning  life  ;  it 
dies  not  before  us :  we  and  it  shall  expire  together.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  feareth 
always,"  says  Solomon  ;  in  secret  and  in  society,  in  his  own  house  and  in  God's. 
We  must  hear  the  Word  with  fear,  and  preach  it  with  fear,  afraid  to  miscarry  in 
our  intentions  and  manners.  "  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,"  yea,  in  times  of  inward 
comfort  and  joy,  "  rejoice  with  trembling  "  ;  not  only  when  a  man  feels  most  his 
own  weakness,  but  when  he  finds  himself  strongest.  None  are  so  high  advanced  in 
grace  here  below  as  to  be  out  of  nei;d  of  this  grace  ;  but  when  their  sojourning  shall 
be  done,  and  they  are  come  home  to  their  Father's  house  above,  then  no  more  fear- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  99 

ing.  No  entrance  for  dangers  there,  and  therefore  no  fear.  [Abp.  Leighton.) 
The  right  feelings  of  the  heavenly  pilgrim : — I.  The  nature  of  the  Christian's 
LIFE.  1.  His  past  condition.  Whence  has  the  pilgrim  come  ?  From  the  city  of 
destruction.  2.  His  present  state.  He  is  a  sojourner.  3.  His  future  destination. 
II.    The  manner  in  which  the   Christian's  life   should  be  spent.      "  In  fear." 

1.  A  fear  of  reverence.  Contrast  the  Divine  majesty  with  our  meanness.  2.  A  fear 
of  caution.  3.  A  fear  of  anxiety.  It  is  better  to  err  on  the  side  of  timidity  than 
presumption.  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  aive  of  the  redeemed  : — I.  Awe  of  the 
redeemed  towards  the  redeeming  God.  "If  ye  call  on  Him  as  Father."  Not 
simply  appeal  to  Him,  but  acknowledge  His  relationship  to  you,  admit  His  claims 
on  you.  II.  Awe  of  the  redeemed  because  of  their  recollection  of  the  evil 
FROM  which  they  HAVE  BEEN  REDEEMED.     1.  A  consciousuess  of  being  redeemed. 

2.  A  consciousness  of  being  redeemed  from  a  habit  of  life  that  was  evil.  3.  A  con- 
sciousness of  being  redeemed  from  an  evil  habit  of  life  that  was  inherited.  III. 
Awe  of  the  redeemed  because  of  the  cost  by  which  they  have  been  redeemed. 
1,  This  cost  in  contrast  with  the  wealth  of  this  world.  2.  This  cost  as  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ.  3.  This  cost  as  known  to  the  infinite  heart  of  the  Eternal  God.  4. 
This  cost  as  approved  by  God.  5.  This  cost  as  incurred  for  man's  sake.  IV.  Awe 
of  the  redeemed  because  of  the  destiny  to  which  they  have  been  redeemed. 
Faith  and  hope  in  God.  God  the  impregnable  fortress,  the  enduring  home. 
{U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  Christian's  fear  : — ^I.  First,  I  would  remind  you  of  the 
awful  nature  of  that  "Father"  on  whom  you  profess  to  call.  1.  Engaging, 
indeed,  is  the  title  under  which  your  religion  addresses  you.  But  that  God,  that 
Father,  to  whom  you  must  one  day  go,  is  a  Being  so  pure  that  even  the  heavens  are 
tainted  in  His  sight.  2.  It  is  not  only  your  appearance  before  Him  on  that  dislr„nt 
day  that  makes  your  sojourning  on  earth  so  fearful ;  for  every  hour  of  your  existKnce 
here  this  incomprehensible  and  unseen  Being  is  about  your  path.  No  retirement 
by  night  is  so  dark  but  His  eye  can  penetrate  it ;  no  walk  by  day  so  intricate  but 
He  can  follow  it ;  no  secret  of  the  soul  so  hidden  but  He  can  see  it.  U.  To  the 
nature  of  that  heavenly  Father,  into  whose  inheritance  we  are  invited,  the  text 
directs  us  to  add  the  judgment  to  which  we  shall  one  day  be  summoned.  III. 
The  third  argument  which  the  apostle  uses  for  religious  fear  is  drawn  from  the 
means  adopted  through  the  blood  of  Christ  for  the  everlasting  salvation  op 
OUR  souls.  IV.  The  nature  of  the  world  in  which  we  dwell,  and  the  weak- 
ness OF  THE  human  HEART.  All  the  wamiugs  that  are  given  us,  all  the  hopes  that 
are  held  out  to  us,  remind  us  of  the  danger  of  the  state  in  which  we  dwell.  The 
world,  by  professing  to  be  Christian,  is  more  dangerous ;  because  it  has  lost  the 
appearance  of  enmity,  and  has  greater  power  over  us  by  its  failures.  Look  into 
your  own  heart,  and,  remembering  yourself  as  a  being  designed  for  immortality, 
think  on  its  wanderings,  its  coldness,  its  impurity,  its  inconstancy,  and  say  if 
anything  was  ever  so  poor,  so  frail,  so  blind,  so  unprepared  to  meet  its  God ! 
(G.  Mathew,  M.A.)  The  reverence  due  to  God  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  fear 
WHICH  IS  HEBE  ENJOINED.  Fear  is  a  passion  implanted  in  our  nature  to  deter  us 
from  what  is  hurtful,  and  to  guard  us  against  danger.  To  lose  the  favour  of  the 
Almighty  here,  and  be  eternally  deprived  of  His  presence  hereafter,  are  evils  the 
most  formidable  to  man.  And  while  fear  imprints  these  so  deeply  on  the  mind  as 
to  produce  an  anxious  dread  of  incurring  His  displeasure,  and  a  serious  concern  to 
gain  His  approbation,  it  becomes  that  religious  regulating  principle  which  is  here 
enjoined.  There  is  a  natural  fear  of  God  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  all.  He 
has  infused  His  fear  into  our  minds,  that,  by  this  rational  awe.  He  might  deter  us 
from  those  practices  to  which  our  corrupt  nature  too  much  inclines  us,  and,  by  the 
sword  of  justice,  overrule  our  affections,  too  refractory  to  be  otherwise  reclaimed. 
It  may  be  observed,  farther,  that  the  rational  fear  before  us  is  equally  remote  from 
that  excess  of  fear  which  gives  rise  to  superstition,  and  that  unwarranted  defect  of 
it  from  which  profane  levity  proceeds.  It  is  a  sober  cheerfulness,  a  manly  serious- 
ness, which  become  the  servants  of  God.  This  demands  no  melancholy  abstraction 
from  the  world  ;  it  condemns  the  indulgence  of  no  innocent  delight.  But  calm  and 
temperate  enjoyment  is  the  utmost  that  is  assigned  to  man.  And  hence  religion 
wisely  recommends  a  spirit  cheerful  but  composed,  equally  remote  from  the 
humiliating  depression  of  fear  and  the  exulting  levity  of  joy.  The  propriety  of  fear 
as  a  regulating  principle,  not  only  religion,  but  the  nature  of  our  present  state,  the 
business  here  assigned  us,  the  instability  of  all  things  round,  and  the  awful  concerns 
of  futurity,  concur  to  establish  and  enforce.  II.  In  what  manner  it  should  in- 
fluence cub  conduct  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life.     To  engage  us  to  depart  from 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

evil  and  to  keep  the  commandments  is  the  direct  tendency  of  religious  fear.  Calling 
forth  our  vigilance  and  circumspection,  it  will  admonish  us  of  latent  dangers,  and 
lead  us  to  a  faithful  discharge  of  every  duty  and  a  serious  preparation  for  eternity. 
Its  influence  will  be  habitual  and  steady.  In  every  state,  and  at  aU  times,  the 
serious  impression  will  be  felt,  by  producing  in  our  lives  a  constant  fear  of  God,  a 
virtuous  deportment  in  the  world,  and  a  holy  reverence  for  ourselves.  Let  us  first 
consider  its  influence  on  our  religious  duties.  To  form  right  notions  of  the  Deity, 
cherish  suitable  affections,  and  express  these  by  acts  of  religious  worship  and  a  holy 
life,  form  the  chief  parts  of  piety.  But  not  to  the  more  immediate  acts  of  public 
and  private  devotion  will  this  influence  be  confined ;  it  will  extend  to  every  act  of 
religious  obedience,  and  to  everything  sacred.  It  will  form  the  constant  temper  of 
the  true  Christian,  and  direct  the  habitual  tenor  of  this  life.  Nor  is  this  destructive 
to  human  enjoyment.  The  restraints  it  imposes  are  curbs  on  vice  ;  but  real  pleasure 
they  extend  and  improve.  It  is  rational  enjoyment  which  they  prescribe,  in  place  of 
momentary  bliss.  III.  Motives  to  engage  all  to  live  here  in  fear.  1.  The 
nature  of  our  present  state  and  our  future  prospects  calls  upon  us  thus  to  fear. 
Can  we  rest  in  security  where  all  is  changing  ?  Can  we  not  be  apprehensive  where 
all  things  cause  alarm  ?  We  stand  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice,  from  which  the 
slightest  breath  may  drive  us  headlong.  Is  this  a  place,  is  this  a  time,  to  swell  in 
fancied  security,  riot  in  unlawful  pleasure,  and  indulge  in  unbridled  joy  ?  2.  By 
living  in  fear  we  will  escape  unnumbered  evils.  From  thoughtless  inattention  fatal 
dangers  arise — fatal  not  only  to  our  worldly  prosperity,  but  to  the  far  more  im- 
portant concerns  of  the  soul.  3.  It  will  promote  the  rational  enjoyment  of  life. 
Always  to  tremble  destroys  felicity,  but  cautious  fear  improves  and  extends  it.  To 
the  man  that  f  eareth  always,  no  accident  happens  unexpected ;  no  good  gives 
immoderate  joy,  nor  no  evil  unnecessary  alarm.  4.  It  will  demonstrate  our  attach- 
ment to  Jesus,  and  lead  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  vows  you  solemnly  came  under  at 
the  table  of  your  Lord.  5.  It  leads  to  happiness  eternal.  The  time  is  at  hand 
when  fear  shall  no  more  disquiet.  (D.  Malcolm,  LL.D.)  Fear  of  terror : — There 
is  a  fear  towards  God  that  might  be  denominated  the  fear  of  terror.  It  is  the 
affection  of  one  who  is  afraid  of  Him.  There  is  in  it  the  alarm  of  selfishness.  It 
is  at  all  times  connected  with  a  view  of  one's  own  personal  suffering  ;  and  the  dire 
imagery  of  pain,  and  perhaps  irreversible  wretchedness,  is  perhaps  that  which 
chiefly  gives  dismay  and  disturbance  to  his  soul.  It  carries  in  it  no  homage  to  the 
sacredness  of  the  Divinity,  yet  is  aggravated  by  a  sense  of  that  sacredness ;  because 
then  God,  regarded  as  a  God  of  unappeasable  jealousy,  is  deemed  to  be  intolerant 
of  all  evil ;  and  the  guilt-stricken  soul,  in  looking  up  to  the  holiness  of  the  Law- 
giver, looks  forward  to  its  own  destruction  in  that  everlasting  hell  where  the  trans- 
gressors of  the  law  find  their  doom.  Now  it  is  obvious  that,  while  haunted  by  a 
fear  of  this  sort,  there  can  be  no  free  or  willing  or  generous  obedience.  There 
might  be  a  service  of  drudgery,  but  not  a  service  of  delight ;  such  obedience  as  is 
extorted  from  a  slave  by  the  whip  of  his  overseer,  but  not  a  free-will  offering  of  love 
or  of  loyalty.  It  is  reserved  for  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to  do  away  this  terror 
from  the  heart  of  man,  and  yet  to  leave  untarnished  the  holiness  of  God.  It  is  the 
atonement  that  was  made  by  Him  which  resolves  this  mystery,  providing  at  once 
for  the  deliverance  of  the  sinner  and  for  the  dignity  of  the  Sovereign.  But  while 
this  view  of  God  in  Christ  extinguishes  one  fear — the  fear  of  terror — it  awakens 
another  and  an  altogether  distinct  fear — the  fear  of  reverence.  God  is  no  longer 
regarded  as  the  enemy  of  the  sinner ;  but  in  the  Cross  of  the  Kedeemer,  where  this 
enmity  was  slain,  there  is  full  demonstration  of  a  moral  nature  that  is  in  utter 
repugnancy  to  sin.  Now  that  we  have  entered  into  reconciliation,  we  hear  not  the 
upbraidings  of  the  Lawgiver  for  the  despite  which  in  former  days  we  have  done 
unto  His  will.  But  the  ofKce  of  the  gospel  is  to  regenerate  as  well  as  reconcile;  and 
every  disciple  who  embraces  it  is  met  with  the  saying,  "  This  is  the  will  of  God, 
even  your  sanctification."  Such  is  the  wide  difference  between  these  two  affections  ; 
and,  corresponding  to  this,  there  is  a  difference  equally  wide  between  the  legal  and 
the  evangelical  dispensations.  Under  the  former  economy,  the  alternative  to  do 
this  and  live  is,  that  if  you  fail  in  doing  this  you  will  perish  everlastingly.  Now 
let  this  be  the  great  stimulus  to  the  performance  of  virtue,  and  then  think  of  the 
spirit  and  of  the  inward  character  wherewith  they  are  impregnated.  It  is,  in  fact, 
a  character  of  the  most  intense  selfishness.  It  is  the  fear  of  terror  which  goads 
him  on  to  all  his  obedience,  and  compels  him  to  act  religiously.  For  such  a  religion 
as  this  it  is  not  needed  that  he  should  have  any  capacity  of  moral  principle.  It  is 
enough  if  he  have  the  capacity  of  animal  pain.     He  is  driven  along,  not  by  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  101 

feelings  of  his  spiritual,  but  by  those  of  his  sentient  nature.  Now  it  is  not  so  with  the 
economy  of  the  gospel.  The  gate  of  heaven  is  thrown  open  at  the  outset  to  its  disciples, 
and  they  are  invited  with  confident  step  to  walk  towards  it.  God  holds  Himself  forth 
not  as  a  Judge  who  reckons,  but  as  a  Father  who  is  reconciled  to  them.  {T.  Chalmers, 
D.D.)  Sojourners  on  earth : — 1.  Our  life  is  a  sojourning  on  earth.  2.  This  sojourning 
hath  a  time.  3.  This  time  must  be  passed.  4.  This  passage  must  be  in  fear.  5.  This 
fear  must  be  of  a  Father.  6.  He  is  so  a  Father,  that  He  is  our  Judge.  (Bp.  Hall.) 
Not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things. — Redemption : — I.  Considee,  with  geateful 

EMOTION,  THE  MEKCIFUL  AND  IMPOETANT  FACT   OF    MAN's    EEDEMPTION.       1.  On  all  hands 

it  is  acknowledged  that  redemption  implies  the  pardon  of  sin,  but  the  dominion 
of  sin  must  also  be  subdued.  2.  Are  you  redeemed  from  a  vain  conversation, 
from  a  useless  form  of  religion,  from  an  unspiritual  profession  of  faith  in  the 
gospel,  from  trifling  and  unprofitable  behaviour,  from  the  course  of  this  world? 
II.  Considee  the  uttee  inadequacy  of  human  means  to  have  accomplished  this 

GEEAT   EEDEMPTION.       III.   ThE    EFFICACIOUS    MEANS  WHEEEBY    THIS   GEEAT    REDEMPTION 

HAS  BEEN  ACCOMPLISHED.  Learn — 1.  The  necessity  of  faith.  2.  Beware  of  enter- 
taining unscriptural  views  of  redemption.  {Essex  Rememhrancer.)  Christianity 
a  redemptive  power : — I.  It  is  a  eedemption  feom  bad  chaeactee.  1.  Sin  is  a  worth- 
less life.  A  vain  conversation.  2.  It  is  a  worthless  life  transmitted.  II.  It  is  a 
redemption  by  a  costly  sacrifice.  1.  By  the  sacrifice  of  a  life.  2.  By  the  sacrifice 
of  a  most  perfect  life.  III.  It  is  a  eedemption  oedained  before  all  time.  1. 
Unsought.  2.  Unmerited.  3.  Absolutely  free.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  things 
of  this  world  are  insvjficiejit  to  redeem  from  spiritual  bondage: — The  reasons  hereof 
may  be  these  :  1.  God  hath  no  need  of  any  of  these  things,  and  they  are  His  already 
(Psa.  xxiv.  i ;  1.  10).  2.  Our  soul  is  an  immortal  and  incorruptible  thing,  a  creature 
that  hath  a  beginning,  but  never  shall  have  end.  3.  Sin  is  a  transgression  against 
an  Infinite  God,  and  so  deserveth  an  infinite  punishment.  4.  Many  times  even 
for  a  trespass  committed  against  men,  these  things  will  not  be  taken  for  a  recom- 
pense. 5.  These  often,  when  God  sends  some  bodily  judgment,  are  unable  to  do 
men  any  pleasure,  nor  can  at  all  pacify  God.  6.  These  cannot  redeem  a  man's 
bodily  life  and  save  it  from  death,  nor  can  they  prolong  a  man's  life  an  hour 
beyond  his  appointed  time  ;  much  less  can  they  redeem  his  soul.  7.  These  cannot 
purchase  wit,  learning,  eloquence  for  those  that  want  them,  much  less  sanctification 
and  grace.  {John  Rogers.)  Vain  conversation  received  by  tradition.— C/w^dren 
infected  by  parental  traditions : — I.  Divees  soets  of  evils  have  beoken  into  the 
LIFE  of  man  by  the  teaditions  OF  FATHEES,  as — 1.  Gioss  crroTs  in  opinion.  2. 
Divers  superstitions  in  their  life,  as  were  the  traditions  of  the  Pharisees.  3.  Children 
learn  divers  sins  only,  or  chiefly  from  their  parents.  II.  If  any  ask  why  the 
TEADITIONS  OF  PARENTS  SHOULD  BE  SO  INFECTIOUS.  1.  Bccausc  they  are  cast  into  the 
natures  of  the  children  in  the  youngest  years,  and  so  are  the  more  infectious  because 
they  were  first  seasoned  with  them.  2.  Because  of  the  aifection  children  bear  to 
their  parents,  and  their  opinion  of  their  sufficiency.  3.  Because  they  are  continually 
conversant  with  them,  and  so  see  no  other  or  no  better  precepts  or  examples.  III. 
The  use  may  be  for  insteuction,  both  to  parents  and  children.  1.  Parents  should 
be  humbled  under  the  consideration  of  the  misery  they  bring  upon  their  children, 
both  by  propagation  and  tradition.  2.  Children  should  also  learn  from  hence — 
(1)  Not  to  rest  wholly  upon  the  tradition  of  parents,  and  to  know  it  is  not  a  sufficient 
rule  to  warrant  their  actions.  (2)  What  good  is  commended  especially  of  the  good 
fathers,  those  we  should  embrace,  and  the  rather  for  their  sakes.  3.  Shall  not  this 
evidently  confute  their  gross  foUy,  that  so  much  urge  the  traditions  of  the  fathers  ? 
4.  Are  men  so  zealous  for  the  tradition  of  their  fathers  of  the  flesh  ;  and  shall  not 
we  be  much  more  zealous  for  the  traditions  of  God  Himself  delivered  in  His  Word  ? 
His  counsels  are  all  perfect;  there  can  be  no  defect  in  them;  and  further,  no  parents 
can  afford  us  such  acceptation,  or  reward  for  obedience.  {N.  Byfield.)  Vain 
conversation  : — The  mind  of  man,  the  guide  and  source  of  his  actions,  while  it  is 
estranged  from  God,  is  nothing  but  a  forge  of  vanities.  St.  Paul  speaks  this  of  the 
Gentiles,  that  they  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was 
darkened,  their  great  naturalists  and  philosophers  not  excepted.  And  thus  the  Lord 
complains  by  Isaiah  of  the  extreme  foUy  of  His  people  (chap.  xliv.  20),  and  by 
Jeremiah,  that  their  hearts  are  lodges  of  vain  thoughts  (chap.  iv.  14),  and  these  are 
the  true  cause  of  a  vain  conversation.  The  whole  course  of  a  man's  life  out  of 
Christ  is  nothing  but  a  continual  trading  in  vanity,  running  a  circle  of  toil  and 
labour,  and  reaping  no  profit  at  aU.  Now,  since  all  a  man's  endeavours  aim  at  his 
satisfaction  and  contentment,  that  conversation  which  gives  him  nothing  of  that, 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

but  removes  him  further  from  it,  is  justly  called  vain  conversation.  Let  the 
voluptuous  person  say  upon  his  death-bed  what  pleasure  or  profit  doth  then  abide 
with  him  of  all  his  former  sinful  delights.  Let  him  tell  if  there  remain  anything 
of  them  all,  but  that  which  he  would  gladly  not  have  to  remain,  the  sting  of  an 
accusing  conscience,  which  is  as  lasting  as  the  delight  of  sin  was  short  and  vanish- 
ing. Let  the  covetous  and  ambitious  declare  freely,  even  those  of  them  who  have 
prospered  most  in  their  pursuits  of  riches  and  honour,  what  ease  all  their  possessions 
or  titles  do  then  help  them  to,  whether  their  pains  are  the  less  because  their  chests 
are  full,  or  their  houses  stately,  or  a  multitude  of  friends  and  servants  waiting  on 
them  with  hat  and  knee.  And  if  all  these  things  cannot  ease  the  body,  how  much 
less  can  they  quiet  the  mind  !  It  is  a  lamentable  thing  to  be  deluded  a  whole  life- 
time with  a  false  dream.  Would  it  not  grieve  any  labouring  man  to  work  hard  all 
the  day,  and  have  no  wages  to  look  for  at  night  ?  It  is  a  greater  loss  to  wear  out 
our  whole  life,  and  in  the  evening  of  our  days  find  nothing  but  anguish  and  vexation. 
Let  us  then  think  this,  that  so  much  of  our  life  as  is  spent  in  the  ways  of  sin  is  all 
lost,  fruitless,  and  vain  conversation.  And  as  the  apostle  says  here,  you  are 
redeemed  from  this  conversation,  this  imports  it  to  be  a  servile  slavish  condition,  as 
the  other  word,  vain,  expresses  it  to  be  fruitless.  And  this  is  the  madness  of  a 
sinner,  that  he  fancies  liberty  in  that  which  is  the  basest  thraldom  ;  as  those  poor 
frantic  persons  that  are  lying  ragged  and  bound  in  chains  imagine  that  they  are 
kings,  and  that  their  irons  are  chains  of  gold,  their  rags  robes,  and  their  filthy  lodge 
a  palace.  {Abp.  Leighton.)  The  precious  blood  of  Christ. — The  precious  blood 
of  Christ : — I.  What  preceded  it.  Blood  of  lambs,  bulls,  and  goats,  without 
number,  and  through  all  ages.  Types  most  costly.  Prophecies  grand  and  minute. 
11.  The  prodigies  which  attended  the  shedding  of  this  blood.  On  previous 
occasions,  when  sacrifices  had  been  offered,  there  were  tokens  of  God's  favourable 
notice — Abel,  Noah,  Abraham,  Gideon,  &c.  But  when  was  it  heard  that  the  sun 
was  clothed  as  in  sackcloth,  that  the  rocks  were  rent,  the  earth  shaken,  <fec.  III. 
Where  it  was  presented  (Heb.  ix.  7,  12).  The  very  life  laid  down  was  taken  up, 
and  is  lived  on  again  in  heaven  in  circumstances  of  the  highest  glory  and  honour. 
IV.  What  it  prevents.  Condemnation,  wrath,  curse.  This  blood  will  ward  off  all 
harm  from  those  who  trust  it.  Will  not  suffer  Satan  or  death  to  destroy  any  who 
are  sheltered  beneath  it.  V.  What  it  procures.  1.  For  man  generally.  (1)  All 
temporal  blessings.  (2)  The  offer  of  salvation.  2.  For  believers — redemption,  even 
the  forgiveness  of  sins  (Eph.  i.  7).  VI.  What  it  produces.  The  blood  of  Christ  is 
omnipotent.  It  prevails  over  guilt,  fear  and  care.  It  casts  down  pride,  casts  out 
the  reigning  power  of  sin,  and  introduces  happiness,  holiness,  humility,  and  hope. 
VII.  What  it  will  perpetuate,  and  secure  for  ever  to  all  believers.  Abidance 
before  the  throne  of  God,  union  with  the  redeemed  of  all  ages,  service  in  the 
heavenly  temple,  the  absence  of  sorrow,  death,  and  sin.  {J.  Cox.)  The  precious 
blood  of  Christ : — 1.  Worlds  in  which  there  is  no  evil  and  no  danger  of  evil  arising 
would  not  be  supplied  with  means  of  prevention  or  of  cure ;  but  in  our  planet  we 
have  remedies  for  almost  all  the  ills  which  flesh  is  heir  to,  and  there  are  laws  of 
compensation  which  show  that  the  God  of  love  does  not  impose  want  and  destitution 
wiUingly.  Here,  then,  where  even  the  juice  of  the  sea-wort  is  a  cordial,  and  "its 
ashes  feed  the  spark  of  life,"  where  the  nightshade  stops  the  painful  vibration  of  the 
nerves,  and  brings  sweet  sleep  upon  eyelids  which  have  become  stiff  in  unseasonable 
wakefulness  ;  here,  where  crowding  insects  cleanse  and  scavenge  our  earth  and  her 
firmament,  and  where  everything  has  its  use  ;  here  we  have  for  the  removal  of  sin 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  2.  A  ruler  who  never  punishes  his  rebellious  subjects, 
and  who  so  pardons  as  to  reproach  his  own  government  and  laws,  will  spread  evil  by 
his  so-called  goodness,  and  will  be  cruel  in  his  apparent  kindness.  The  problem  to 
be  solved  is.  How  can  God  be  just,  and  yet  the  Saviour  of  the  sinner  ?  The  solution 
of  this  problem  is  found  in  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  3.  Christ,  according  to  the 
Scriptures,  is  the  Word  made  flesh.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  the  blood  of  the  flesh  in 
which  God  was  manifest.  All  blood  is  precious — precious  the  blood  of  Abel,  the 
blood  of  the  persecuted  prophets,  &c.,  but  there  is  no  blood  so  precious  as  the  blood 
of  Christ.  4.  Among  the  many  things  which  we  value,  there  is  nothing  which  we 
so  prize  as  the  offerings  of  disinterested  love  :  these  surpass  in  interest,  if  not  in 
value,  the  products  of  our  labour  and  the  blessings  which  we  inherit  as  a  birthright, 
or  which  reach  us  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  Divine  providence,  and  of  our 
political  and  social  institutions.  Now  "  greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a 
man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  The  blood  of  Christ  is  a  double  illustration 
of  disinterested  love,  for  while  the  Son  gives  Himself  for  us,  the  Father  gives  the  Soa 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  103 

to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  5.  How  marvellous  in  their  variety  and  character  are 
the  effects  of  the  blood  of  Christ !  It  brings  Jehovah  forth  from  His  secret  place  with 
the  light  of  love  in  His  countenance,  it  arrests  the  course  of  the  law  in  its  pursuit  of 
the  sinner,  it  magnifies  the  law,  it  restores  access  to  God,  it  cleanses,  justifies,  and 
redeems  unto  God.  Never  was  blood  like:  this.  6.  There  are  different  standards  by 
which  we  value  precious  things.  Some  things  are  valuable  because  of  their  utility, 
and  other  things  because  of  their  singularity  and  rarity  and  beauty,  but  how  few 
things  are  beautiful  and  rare  and  useful  !  Precious  stones  are  beautiful  and  rare, 
but  their  utility  is  small ;  and  the  precious  metals  are  valuable  as  currency,  but  not 
comparable  to  iron  or  even  to  coal.  When,  however,  rarity  is  combined  with  utility, 
and  an  important  service  is  to  be  rendered  by  one  being  or  by  one  thing,  how 
precious  that  being  or  thing  becomes  !  The  one  medicine,  a  specific  for  some  dire 
disease,  the  one  means  of  escape  in  the  hour  of  peril,  the  forlorn  hope  of  an  army, 
the  only  son  of  a  widowed  mother,  are  examples.  And  in  this  position  stands  the 
blood  of  Christ.  The  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  but  the  blood  of  Christ 
alone.  7.  Alas  !  many  of  our  precious  things  deteriorate.  Time,  that  devours  all 
things,  mars  and  breaks  our  choicest  treasures.  Business  fails,  commerce  is 
arrested,  empires  decline,  the  very  Church  of  Christ  becomes  corrupt ;  but  among  the 
things  which  are  incorruptible  and  iindefiled  is  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  8. 
Often  have  we  heard  men  say,  "  Lo !  here  is  the  panacea !  and  lo  !  there  !  "  But 
where  is  the  remedy  for  all  disease,  and  where  the  universal  medicine  ?  The  blood 
of  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  It  removes  the  guilty  smart  from  the  conscience, 
and  it  relieves  memory  of  its  heaviest  burden,  and  takes  from  imagination  all  its 
horrible  creations.  (S.  Martin.)  Redeemed  by  blood  : — Probably  it  is  the  most 
momentous  fact  about  us  that  we  have  been  redeemed.  It  is  much  to  have  been 
created.  It  is  much  to  be  endowed  with  life  in  a  world  so  full  of  marvellous 
possibilities  as  ours.  It  is  much  to  have  a  soul,  which  can  call  up  the  past,  or 
interrogate  the  present,  or  anticipate  and  prepare  for  the  future.  But  it  is  more  that 
we  have  been  redeemed.  Eedeemed,  as  Israel  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt ;  or  as  a 
slave,  by  his  goel,  from  captivity  to  some  rich  creditor  ;  or  as  the  captive  of  some 
hideous  vice  emancipated  from  its  thrall.  I.  The  cost  of  ouk  eedemption  has  been 
IMMENSE.  1.  Negatively.  "  Not  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold."  A 
moneyed  man,  who  has  been  accustomed  to  look  on  his  wealth  as  the  key  to  every 
treasure-chest,  is  sometimes  startled  to  find  how  little  it  can  really  do.  God  could 
have  given  suns  of  gold,  and  stars  of  silver,  constellations  of  bodies  glowing  with 
precious  metals,  but  none  of  these  would  have  been  sufficient  to  free  one  soul  from 
the  curse  or  penalty  of  sin,  or  to  change  it  into  a  loyal  and  loving  subject  of  His 
reign.  The  Creator  must  give  not  things,  but  life — not  His  gifts,  but  Himself,  ere 
He  could  redeem.  2.  Positively.  "  But  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  The 
blood  is  the  life.  Life  is  man's  supreme  possession,  and  his  supreme  gift.  And,  in 
addition,  when  blood  is  mentioned  with  the  laying  down  of  life,  there  is  the  further 
thought  of  intense  suffering,  of  violence,  (fee.  The  blood  of  Jesus  was  precious, 
because  of  the  dignity  of  His  nature,  and  because  of  His  perfect  character.  Without 
blemish,  that  is,  without  personal  sin.  Without  spot,  that  is,  not  defiled  by  contact 
with  sinners.  And  thus  it  was  adequate  for  the  work  of  cleansing  away  the  terrible 
aggregate  of  sin.  II.  The  object  of  our  redemption.  "  From  your  vain  con- 
versation received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers."  It  is  our  ransom  price,  the 
purchase-money  of  our  entire  being  to  be  Christ's.  The  purchaser  of  any  slave 
regarded  him  as  his  chattel,  his  goods.  His  word  and  will  were  absolute  law.  Such 
are  the  rights  which  our  glorious  Master  has  over  us.  Who,  then,  of  us  can  live 
as  we  have  been  wont,  following  after  vanity,  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  our  fore- 
fathers, content  to  do  as  others  before  us?  New  claims  have  come  in.  Our 
Redeemer  is  Lord.  III.  The  characteristic  of  the  redeemed.  "  Who  by  Him  do 
believe  in  God."     {F.B.  Meyer, B.A.)        The  precious  blood  of  Christ : — I.  Estimate 

IT  IN  ITS  ADAPTATION  TO  ALL  THE  WANTS  OF  MAN,  AND  ITS  ANSWERABLENESS  TO  ALL  THE 
PROPERTIES  OF    GoD.       II.  ESTIMATE  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF   THIS  BLOOD  BT  ITS  INTRINSIC 

MERIT.  1.  The  first  circurnstance  prominent  in  this  description  of  our  Saviour's 
sacrifice,  is  that  it  is  a  direct  oblatijfl  to  God.  2.  And  this  oblation  of  Himself  to 
God  contained  an  ample  recognition  of  the  authority  of  God's  law,  and  of  His 
right  to  punish  transgressors.  3.  Another  circumstance  prominent  in  the  description 
of  the  Saviour's  sacrifice  is  the  intelhgence  and  voluntariness  of  the  victim.  4. 
Another  circumstance — one  which  we  believe  was  prefigured  by  the  sacrifices  under 
the  law,  and  one  whi^h  substantiates  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  to  have  been  a  proper 
sacrifice — is  that  He  was  an  unblemished  victim.    III.  Compute  the  value  of  this 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

precious  blood  with  reference  to  the  personal  value  of  the  Saviour.  IV.  Con- 
sider THE  value  attached  TO  THIS  BLOOD  BY  THE  Fatheh.  1.  We  might  illus- 
trate this  by  many  tokens  and  testimonies  of  His  complacency  towards  His  Son, 
before  His  sufferings  and  death.  2.  Consider  as  another  illustration  of  the  precious- 
ness  of  Christ's  blood,  either  in  life  or  death,  to  the  Father,  the  personal  compen- 
sation He  awarded  to  Him  for  His  sufferings.     V.  And  need  I  remind  you  of  the 

IMMENSE  GOOD  THIS  BLOOD  IS  THE  MEANS  OF    PROCURING  TO  MANKIND,  tO  Say   nothing   of 

the  lower  orders  of  the  creation,  as  a  further  illustration  of  this  subject.     VI.  By  way 
of  application,  let  us  see  whether  this  blood  be  not  precious  to  every  rightly 
AFFECTED  HUMAN  HEART.     Mark  its  cfficacy  and  power  over  every  class  of  sinners, 
who  are  resting  upon  its  sovereign  influence  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
"To  you  He  is  precious."     (IF.  M.  Bunting.)         The  precious  blood  of  Christ: — 
The  blood  of  Christ  is  precious — I.  When  viewed  in  connection  with  the  Father's 
PURPOSE  AND  THE  Father's  LOVE.     II.  When  viewed  in  connection  with  the  person 
OF  Christ.     III.  When  viewed  in  its  bearing  upon  man.     (A.  C.  Price.)         The 
blood  of  Christ : — I.  Consider  what  light  is  shed  upon  the  instance  of  Christ 
shedding  His  blood  fob  us  by  the  experience  of  the  many  illustrious  saints  and 
heroes  "  in  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,"  who  in  all  lands  and  ages  have  laid 
down  their  lives  for  the  sake  of  their  country,  or  on  behalf  of  truth,  of 
SCIENCE,  AND  RELIGION.     Would  the  blood  In  any  single  instance  have  had  the 
slightest  moral  or  meritorious  value  apart  from  the  character  of  the  person,  apart 
from  the  fidelity,  the  endurance,  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  person  ?     True,  there  are 
senses  in  which  we  say,  "  The  blood  of  a  living  thing  is  the  life  thereof,"  senses  in 
which  we  say,  with  the  great  Harvey,  "  the  blood  is  the  fountain  of  life,  the  first  to 
live,  and  thje  last  to  die,  and  the  primary  seat  of  the  animal  soul."   But  then,  do  we 
not  always,  in  deeper  senses,  distinguish  between  the  blood  and  the  life ;  do  we  not 
feel  always  that  the  blood  which  can  be  seen  is  but  the  outward  sign  and  symbol  of 
the  inward  life  which  cannot  be  seen ;  do  we  not  feel  that  though  the  blood  is  the 
seat,  the  centre,  the  channel  of  the  life,  the  life  itself  is  as  superior  to  the  blood  as 
the  mind  is  to  the  brain  which  is  its  centre,  or  the  soul  to  the  body  which  is  its 
shell  or  form  ?     Equally  so,  when  we  speak  of  a  man  shedding  his  blood  on  the 
altar  of  his  country  or  his  religion,  we  think  not  of  the  form  or  the  sign,  but  of  that 
which  is  beneath  and  within ;  the  extent  to  which  the  sufferer  manfully  endured, 
the  degree  to  which  he  spared  not  himself,  the  spirit  in  which  for  the  truth,  or  the 
cause,  or  the  monarch,  or  the  land,  or  the  Lord  he  loved,  he  wilhngly,  resolutely 
gave  the  whole  force  of  his  moral  nature,  the  whole  wealth  of  his  heart,  his  charac- 
ter, and  his  soul.     In  like  manner  we  should  think  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
which  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,  not  as  deriving  its  worth  or  its  efficacy  from  any- 
thing that  was  outward  or  physical  or  material,  not  as  being  vested  in  the  blood 
itself  as  blood.     Should  we  not  rather  a  thousand  times  say  the  preciousness  of  the 
blood  of  Christ  was  in  the  inward  and  personal,  the  spiritual  and  Divine  life  which 
dwelt  and  throbbed  in  that  blood  ?    II.  In  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  early 
Christians  the  blood  of  Christ  was  regarded  as  but  a  symbol  of,  or  but  another 
NAME  for,  the  LOVE  OF  Christ.     "  What  is  the  blood  of  Christ?  "  asked  Livingstone 
of  his  own  solitary  soul  in  the  last  months  of  his  African  wanderings.     "It  is  Him- 
self.   It  is  the  inherent  and  everlasting  mercy  of  God  made  apparent  to  human  eyes 
and  ears.      The  everlasting  love  was  disclosed  by  our  Lord's  life  and  death.     It 
showed  that  God  forgives,  because  He  loves  to  forgive."     Does  not  St.  Paul  tell  us 
that  love  is  the  highest  virtue  and  grace  of  man  ?     Does  not  St.  John  tell  us  that 
the  very  essence  of  the  name  and  nature  of  God  is  love  ?     Well,  then,  did  the  early 
Christians  reason  when  they  declared  that  the  blood  is  but  the  symbol  of  that  which 
is  the  most  precious,  perfect,  and  potent  force  in  the  whole  universe — whether  it  be 
affirmed  of  either  God  or  man — love,  unspeakable,  all  blessed,  eternal  love.     (/.  T. 
Stannard.)     The  precious  blood  of  Christ : — The  precious  blood  of  Christ  is  useful 
to  God's  people  in  a  thousand  ways.  After  all,  the  real  preciousness  of  a  thing  in  the 
time  of  trial,  must  depend  upon  its  usefulness.     You  have  heard  the  story  of  the 
man  in  the  desert,  who  stumbled,  when  near  to  die,  upon  a  bag,  and  opened  it, 
hoping  that  it  might  be  the  wallet  of  some  passer-by,  and  he  found  in  it  nothing  but 
pearls !     If  they  had  been  crusts  of  bread,  how  much  more  precious  would  they 
have  been  !     This  may  not  be  according  to  political  economy,  but  it  is  according  to 
common   sense.     I.  The   precious  blood  of  Christ  has  a  redeeming  power.      It 
redeems  from  the  law.     Our  law  is  fulfilled,  for  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness.     II.  The  value  of  the  blood  lies  much  in  its  atoning  efficacy.     We 
are  told  in  Leviticus,  that  "  it  is  the  blood  which  maketh  an  atonement  for  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  105 

soul."  God  never  forgave  sin  apart  from  blood  under  the  law.  Christ,  therefore, 
came  and  was  punished  in  the  place  and  stead  of  all  His  people.  There  is  none 
other  plan  by  which  sinners  can  be  made  at  one  with  God,  except  by  Jesus'  precious 
blood.  III.  The  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  has  a  cleansing  powek  (1  John  i.  7). 
IV.  A  fourth  property  of  the  blood  of  Christ  is  its  presekvino  poweb.  Did  not  God 
see  the  blood  before  you  and  I  saw  it,  and  was  not  that  the  reason  why  He  spared 
our  forfeited  Uves  when,  hke  barren  fig  trees,  we  brought  forth  no  fruit  for  Him  ? 
"  When  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you."  V.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  precious 
because  of  its  pleading  prevalence  (Heb.  xii.  24).  When  I  cannot  pray  as  I  would, 
how  sweet  to  remember  that  the  blood  prays !  VI.  Christ's  blood  is  precious 
because  of  its  melting  influence  on  the  human  heart.  Come  for  repentance,  if  you 
cannot  come  repenting.  VII.  The  same  blood  that  melts  has  a  gracious  power  to 
PACIFY.  Vni.  Its  sanctifying  influence  (Heb.  ix.  14).  IX.  Its  power  to  give 
ENTRANCE.  I  am  peisuaded  some  of  us  do  not  come  near  to  God,  because  we  forget 
the  blood.  If  you  try  to  have  fellowship  with  God  in  your  graces,  your  experiences, 
your  believings,  you  will  fail ;  but  if  you  try  to  come  near  to  God  as  you  stand  in 
Christ  Jesus,  you  will  have  courage  to  come  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  God  will  run 
to  meet  you  when  He  sees  you  in  the  face  of  His  anointed.  X.  Its  confirming 
POWER.  The  promises  are  yea  and  amen,  for  no  other  reason  than  this,  because 
Christ  Jesus  died  and  rose  again.  XI.  Its  invigorating  power.  "  My  blood  is 
drink  indeed."  Oh,  whenever  your  spirit  faints,  this  wine  shall  comfort  you  ;  when 
your  griefs  are  many,  drink  and  forget  your  misery.  0  precious  blood,  how  many 
are  thy  uses !  May  I  prove  them  all !  XH.  The  blood  has  an  overcoming  power. 
It  is  written  in  the  Kevelation,  "  They  overcame  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  How 
could  they  do  otherwise  ?     (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)         The  atonement : — I.  It  is  precious, 

BECAUSE    THE    BLOOD    OF    God's    ANOINTED.       II.    It    IS   PRECIOUS,  FOR   IT    SATISFIED  THE 

JUSTICE  OF  God  when  nothing  else  could,  ni.  It  is  precious,  for  it  is  pleaded 
BEFORE  God  for  the  pardon  and  the  sanctification  of  souls.  IV.  It  is  precious, 
as  applied  to  the  conscience  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for  justification.  V.  It  is 
precious  blood,  as  applied  to  the  soul  fob  sanctification.  VI.  It  is  precious, 
because  by  it  we  overcome  sin  and  hell.  VII.  It  is  precious  blood,  because  it 
WILL  be  the  believer's  THEME  IN  HEAVEN.  Application :  1.  Which  is  most  precious 
to  you,  gold  and  silver,  and  the  precious  things  of  this  world,  or  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ  ?  2.  Have  you  ever  felt  the  preciousness  of  this  blood  ?  3.  Remember, 
there  is  no  advantage  to  be  gained  from  this  precious  blood  without  an  application 
of  it  to  your  soul.  4.  Eemember,  that  its  value  and  virtue  is  just  what  it  always 
was.  5.  Be  sure  never  to  trample  this  precious  blood  under  your  feet,  for  its  con- 
sequences will  be  most  tremendous  (Heb.  x.  29,  30).  (Studies  For  The  .Pulpit.) 
Soul  redemption  : — These  words  lead  us  to  look  at  soul  redemption  in  three  aspects 
— I.  As  an  ACCOMPLISHED  FACT.  "  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed 
with  corruptible  things,"  &c.  U.  As  unattainable  by  worldly  wealth.  "  Not 
redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  sUver  and  gold."  III.  As  effected  only  bt 
Chbist.  "  But  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  (Homilist.)  ChrisVs  precious 
blood : — Precious  blood  indeed  !  who  can  estimate  its  value !  the  more  it  is  known 
the  higher  it  rises  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  are  acquainted  with  it.  And  yefc 
it  is  neglected  and  despised  by  the  generaUty  of  mankind.  Trifles  light  as  air  are 
preferred  before  it.  I.  Why  is  it  precious?  1.  Consider  whose  blood  it  is.  "  The 
blood  of  Christ,"  the  blood  of  our  elder  Brother,  of  a  Friend,  of  a  Prophet,  Priest, 
and  King — the  blood  of  our  incarnate  God  (Acts  xx.  28).  2.  Regard  it  as  the 
evidence  of  infinite  love.  For  whom  was  it  shed?  The  Messiah  was  cut  off,  but  not 
for  Himself.  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions  (Isa.  liii.  5).  As  the  apostle 
argues  (Rom.  v.  6-10).  3.  Yet  more  precious  will  it  appear  if  we  notice  the  miseries 
from  which  it  frees  us — and  the  unspeakable  blessings  it  has  purchased  for  us.  "  In 
Him  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins  according  to 
the  riches  of  His  grace  "  (Eph.  i.  7).  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7 ;  Rev.  i.  5,  6).  "  They  who  were  sometimes  far  off 
are  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ "  (Eph.  ii.  13).  "  Having  made  peace 
through  the  blood  of  His  Cross  "  (Col.  i.  20).  "  Being  justified  freely  by  His  grace 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood,  to  declare  His  righteousness  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  20-26  ;  1  John 
ii.  1,  2  ;  Heb.  ix.  11-18).  Can  a  man  realise  these  blessings  and  live  in  the  habitual 
enjoyment  of  them  ;  and  bear  in  mind  the  price  paid  to  procure  them,  and  not  feel 
the  preciousness  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?     4.  It  is  precious  as  affording  an  all-pre- 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

vailing  plea  in  our  petitions  at  the  throne  of  grace — and  an  universal  antidote  to 
the  temptations  of  Satan  and  unbelief.  5.  The  efficacy  of  this  blood  enhances  its 
preciousness.  "  Jesus  by  His  one  oblation  of  Himself  once  offered  has  made  a  full, 
perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world."  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world  " 
(John  i.  29).  Who  can  comprehend  the  value  of  such  a  ransom  !  6.  The  perpetuity 
of  blessedness  which  it  ensures.  Whom  it  blesses  it  blesses  for  ever.  Jesus  by  His 
own  offering  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified  (Heb.  x.  14).  II.  To 
WHOM  THIS  BLOOD  IS  PRECIOUS.  Would  to  God  that  I  could  say  it  is  so  to  all !  but 
alas!  this  is  not  the  case.  Neither  is  it  true  of  the  many.  The  great  majority 
"  count  the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  they  are  sanctified  an  unholy  thing  " 
(Heb.  X.  29).  And  will  you  not  commemorate  the  shedding  of  that  blood  ?  [R. 
Simpson,  M.A.)  Choice  things  costly  : — Yonder  ermine,  flung  so  carelessly  over 
the  proud  beauty's  shoulder,  cost  terrible  battles  with  polar  ice  and  hurricane.  All 
choicest  things  are  reckoned  the  dearest.  So  is  it,  too,  in  heaven's  inventories.  The 
universe  of  God  has  never  witnessed  aught  to  be  reckoned  in  comparison  with  the 
redemption  of  a  guilty  world.  That  mighty  ransom  no  such  contemptible  things  as 
silver  and  gold  could  procure.  Only  by  one  price  could  the  church  of  God  be 
redeemed  from  hell,  and  that  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb  without  blemish  or 
spot,  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  [T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.) 
The  cost  of  redemption : — A  little  boy  about  ten  years  old  was  once  bidden  by  his 
father  to  go  and  do  some  work  in  the  field.  He  went  as  he  was  told,  but  took  little 
pains  about  it,  and  made  very  slow  progress  in  his  task.  By  and  by  his  father 
called  him  to  him  very  kindly,  and  said,  "  Willy,  can  you  tell  me  how  much  you 
have  cost  me  since  you  were  born  ?  "  The  father  waited  a  while,  and  then  said  that 
he  reckoned  he  had  "  cost  him  a  hundred  pounds."  The  lad  opened  his  eyes  and 
wondered  at  the  expense  he  had  been.  He  seemed  to  see  the  hundred  sovereigns 
all  glittering  before  him,  and  in  his  heart  determined  to  repay  his  father  by  doing 
all  he  could  to  please  him.  The  reproof  sank  deeper  into  his  heart  than  a  hundred 
stripes.  When  I  read  the  story  it  occurred  to  me,  "  What  have  I  cost  my  Saviour?  " 
Then  I  remembered  the  words,  "  Ye  are  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as 
silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish 
and  without  spot."  {G.  Everard.)  Suitable  return  for  Christ's  blood-shedding  :^ 
In  an  Italian  hospital  was  a  severely  wounded  soldier.  A  lady  visitor  spoke  to  him, 
dressed  his  wounds,  smoothed  his  pillow,  and  made  him  all  right  for  the  day. 
When  leaving  she  took  a  bouquet  of  flowers,  and  laid  it  beside  his  head.  The. 
soldier,  with  his  pale  face  and  eyes  fuU  of  tears,  looked  up,  and  said  :  "  That  is  too 
much  kindness."  She  was  a  lady  with  a  true  Italian  heart,  and  looking  back  to  the 
soldier,  she  quietly  replied,  "  No,  not  too  much  for  one  drop  of  Italian  blood."  Shall 
we  not  freely  own  that  the  consecration  of  all  our  powers  of  body  and  spirit  is  not 
too  much  to  give  in  return  for  the  shedding  of  our  Emmanuel's  blood  on  our  behalf? 
Redemption  costly  : — But  why  should  so  vast  a  price  be  required  ?  Is  man  worth 
the  cost  ?  A  man  may  be  bought  in  parts  of  the  world  for  the  value  of  an  ox.  It 
was  not  man  simply,  but  man  in  a  certain  relation,  that  had  to  be  redeemed.  See 
one  who  has  been  all  his  days  a  drunken,  idle,  worthless  fellow.  All  appropriate  to 
him  the  epithet  "  worthless  " — worth  nothing.  But  that  man  commits  a  crime  for 
which  he  is  sentenced  to  be  hanged,  or  to  be  imprisoned  for  life.  Go  and  try  to 
buy  him  now.  Bedeem  him  and  make  him  your  servant.  Let  the  richest  man  in 
Cambridge  offer  every  shilling  he  possesses  for  that  worthless  man,  and  his  offer 
would  be  wholly  vain.  Why  ?  Because  now  there  is  not  only  the  man  to  be  con- 
sidered, but  the  law.  It  needs  a  very  great  price  to  redeem  one  man  from  the  curse 
of  the  law  of  England  ;  but  Christ  came  to  redeem  all  men  from  the  curse  of  the 
Divine  law.  (William  Robinso7i.)  A  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot. — 
Christ's  innocence : — 1.  This  sets  out  His  love  so  much  the  more,  that  being  innocent, 
would  suffer  for  us  wicked  wretches.  2.  This  teaches  us  to  imitate  Him,  and  in  all 
things  to  be  innocent  as  He  was.  3.  In  that  Christ  being  so  innocent,  was  yet 
willing  to  suffer  and  offer  His  blood,  let  us  imitate  Him  in  this  also ;  let  us  be 
patient  in  bearing  troubles  and  persecution  ;  we  must  suiter  for  His  cause  (though 
causelessly)  cheerfully  and  willingly.  We  must  also  suffer  patiently.  (John  Rogers.) 
Without  spot : — As  one  flaw  or  vein  in  the  marble  fatally  damages  the  sculptor's 
work ;  as  one  speck  in  the  lens  of  a  microscope  or  telescope  destroys  its  use  and 
demands  a  recasting ;  as  one  leak  would  inevitably  submerge  the  noblest  vessel  that 
ever  rode  the  waters ;  so  one  leak  in  the  Mighty  Ark  of  Mercy  would  have  been  fatal 
to  His  qualifications  as  a  ransom  for  the  guilty,     {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)        Fore- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  107 

ordained  before  tlie  foundation  of  the  world. — The  ransom  : — I.  The  Divine  foke- 
OEDiNATiON  OF  THE  SACEiFicE.  1.  "  Who  verily  WES  foreordained."  The  literal 
word  here  is  "  foreknown."  Before  the  world  was  God  concentrated  His  thoughts 
upon  His  Son,  not  only  in  His  personal,  but  also  in  His  official  capacity  as  the 
future  Kedeemer  of  mankind.  2.  "  Who  was  verily  foreordained  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world."  Before  it  in  time.  This  affords  a  clue  to  the  occupation  of  the 
Divine  Mind  before  the  creative  fiat  first  broke  on  the  silence  of  immensity.  3. 
"  AVho  verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  was  manifest 
in  these  last  times  for  you."  A  correspondence  therefore  obtains  between  time  and 
eternity,  between  the  manifestation  in  history  and  the  pre-arrangement  in  the 
unfathomable  abysses  of  the  Divine  Mind.  Foreordination  implies  a  plan,  a  plan  of 
the  world  and  a  plan  of  salvation.  The  idea  of  redemption,  of  the  Son  as  a  pro- 
pitiation for  sin,  seems  to  be  the  first  and  most  important  thought  of  God.  It  was 
not  an  after-thought,  but  the  ruling  thought,  and  around  it  all  other  thoughts  were 
systematically  arranged.  Creation  is  to  redemption  what  the  scaffolding  is  to  the 
temple  ;  when  the  latter  will  be  finished,  the  former  will  be  consigned  to  the  flames. 
II.  The  peeciousness  of  the  saceifice.  HI.  The  efficiency  of  the  saceifice. 
1.  The  efficiency  of  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  it  satisfied  Divine 
justice,  for  the  text  informs  us  that  "  God  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead  and  gave 
Him  glory."  The  exact  bearing  of  the  atonement  on  the  Divine  nature  is  a  mystery 
we  cannot  fuUy  explain.  But  whatever  hindrances  to  our  salvation  there  were, 
arising  out  of  the  essential  and  governmental  righteousness  of  God,  they  were  all 
removed  by  the  death  of  the  Cross.  2.  The  second  proof  of  the  efficiency,  and 
therefore  of  the  sufficiency,  of  the  ransom  is — that  it  actually  delivers  men  from 
their  "  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  the  fathers."  Three  interpre- 
tations have  been  given  of  this  phrase,  but  whichever  interpretation  we  take  we  find 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  equally  efficacious.  One  interpretation  is,  that  Christ's  death 
has  redeemed  men  from  the  oppressive  sway  of  religious  traditionalism.  A  second 
interpretation  is,  that  by  "  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  the  fathers  " 
we  are  to  understand  the  combined  power  of  habit  and  example  in  fashioning  the 
course  of  men's  lives.  A  further  interpretation  has  been  suggested,  namely,  that 
by  *'  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  the  fathers  "  we  are  to  understand 
original  sin,  the  innate  depravity  communicated  from  generation  to  generation 
according  to  the  law  of  heredity.  And  it  must  be  conceded  that  this  form  of  cor- 
ruption is  the  most  difficult  of  all  to  be  rooted  out  of  our  nature.  But,  thanks  be  to 
God,  the  blood  of  Christ  can  wash  out  the  dye ;  and  we  look  confidently  forward  to 
the  day  when  we  shall  have  been  actually  redeemed  from  evil  in  every  shape  and 
form,  when  we  shall  be  clean  without  and  white  within,  without  spot  or  wrinkle 
or  any  such  thing.  (<7.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  foreknown  redemption  : — I.  The 
PUEPOSE  foreknown  ;  but  it  is  well  rendered  foreordained,  for  this  knowing  is 
decreeing,  and  there  is  little  profit  in  distinguishing  them.  We  say  usually  that 
where  there  is  little  wisdom  there  is  much  chance,  and,  amongst  men,  some  are  far 
more  foresighted  than  others  ;  yet  the  wisest  and  most  provident  men,  wanting  skill 
to  design  all  things  aright  and  power  to  act  as  they  contrive,  meet  with  many 
unexpected  casualties  and  frequent  disappointments  in  their  undertakings.  But 
with  God,  where  both  wisdom  and  power  are  infinite,  there  can  be  neither  any 
chance  nor  resistance  from  without  nor  any  imperfection  at  all  in  the  contrivance 
of  things  within  Himself  that  can  give  cause  to  add,  or  abate,  or  alter  any  thing  in 
the  frame  of  His  purposes.  The  model  of  the  whole  world  and  of  all  the  course 
of  time  was  with  Him  one  and  the  same  from  all  eternity,  and  whatsoever  is 
brought  to  pass  is  exactly  answerable  to  that  pattern.  Before  man  had  made  him- 
self miserable,  yea,  before  either  he  or  the  world  was  made,  this  thought  of  bound- 
less love  was  in  the  bosom  of  God,  to  send  His  Son  forth  from  thence,  to  bring 
fallen  man  out  of  misery  and  restore  him  to  happiness,  and  to  do  this,  not  only  by 
taking  on  his  nature,  but  the  curse,  to  shift  it  off  from  us  that  were  sunk  under  it, 
and  to  bear  it  Himself,  and  by  bearing  it  to  take  it  away.  11.  The  perfoemance 
OF  THIS  PUEPOSE.  "  Was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you."  He  was  manifested 
by  His  incarnation,  manifested  in  the  flesh,  and  manifested  by  His  marvellous 
works  and  doctrine,  by  His  sufferings  and  death,  resurrection  and  ascension,  by  the 
sending  down  of  the  Holy  Ghost  according  to  His  promise,  and  by  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel.  III.  The  application  of  this  manifestation.  "For  you."  The 
apostle  represents  these  things  to  those  he  writes  to  particularly  for  their  use. 
Therefore  he  applies  it  to  them,  but  without  prejudice  to  the  believers  who  went 
before  or  of  those  who  were  to  follow  in  after-ages.    He  who  is  here  said  to  be  fore- 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  is  therefore  called  "A  Lamb  slain  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world."  And  as  the  virtue  of  His  death  looks  backward  to 
all  preceding  ages,  whose  faith  and  sacrifices  looked  forward  to  it,  so  the  same 
death  is  of  force  and  perpetual  value  to  the  end  of  the  world.  {Abp.  Leighton.) 
For  you,  who  by  Him  do  believe  in  God. — We  cannot  believe  in  God,  hut  by  the  Son: 
— For — 1.  The  Father  dwelleth  in  the  light  that  none  can  attain  unto.  How,  then, 
shall  we  come  to  Him  of  ourselves,  we  being  so  poor  and  weak,  and  He  of  so  infinite 
majesty  ?  As  in  the  summer  we  cannot  directly  look  upon  the  sun  shining  in  his 
full  strength,  but  may  view  it  in  a  pail  of  water,  so  must  we  see  the  Father  in  the 
Son,  who  is  the  image  of  the  Father  and  the  ingraven  form  of  His  person.  2.  God 
is  infinitely  just,  and  we  extremely  wicked  ;  He  a  consuming  fire,  and  we  stubl)le. 
How,  then,  can  we  come  to  Him,  believe  in  Him,  or  take  comfort,  but  only  in  and 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  our  Mediator  ?  (John  Rogers.)  That  raised  Him  up  from  the 
dead. — A  risen  and  glorified  Savioiir  the  ground  of  hope  and  confidence : — The  apostle 
presents  Christ  under  three  grand  aspects.  I.  As  raised  feom  the  dead  by  the 
POWER  OF  God  the  Father.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  fundamental  article 
of  our  religion.  1.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  necessary.  The  graves  of 
earthly  princes  are  the  end  of  their  glory,  the  termination  of  all  their  conquests ; 
the  grave  of  Christ  becomes  the  scene  of  His  divinest  achievement.  2.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  established,  as  a  fact,  on  the  surest  basis.  Divine  wisdom 
seems  to  have  taken  particular  care  to  guard  it  against  all  reasonable  grounds  of 
suspicion  and  doubt.  3.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  the  acknowledged  work  of  a 
Divine  power.  H.  As  glorified  by  the  Father  subsequkntly  to  His  resurrec- 
tion. 1.  The  resurrection  imparted  to  Him  the  glory  of  a  Divine  nature  in  the 
conviction  of  mortals.  (1)  This  it  effected  by  removing  the  disgrace  which  death 
attached  to  Him,  in  the  professed  character  of  a  Divine  deliverer,  and  attesting 
Him  to  be  the  Prince  of  Life.  (2)  The  resurrection  gave  Him  this  glory  also  by 
putting  the  stamp  of  the  Divine  approbation  on  all  His  assertions.  2.  He  was 
glorified  with  the  investment  of  sovereign  power  in  the  nature  in  which  He  rose 
from  the  dead.     This  is  what  is  called  His  mediatorial  glory.     HI.  As  the  ground 

AND    occasion    OF  A  LIVELY   FAITH   AND    HOPE   IN    US   TOWARDS    GoD.       "  That  yOUr  faith 

and  hope  might  be  in  God."  1.  In  His  willingness  to  save  sinners  for  His  Son's 
sake.  2.  Our  faith  and  hope  are  in  God,  through  Christ,  in  relation  to  the  posses- 
sion of  a  future  and  blessed  state  in  reserve  for  believers  after  death.  3.  Our  faith 
and  hope  are  in  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  in  relation  to  the  restoration  of  our 
bodies  at  the  last  day  from  the  gloom  and  dishonour  of  the  grave.     (/.  Leifchild.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls. — The  individual  and  social 
influence  of  religion  : — I.  The  individual  influence  of  religion.  "  Ye  have 
purified  your  souls."  This  implies  that  personal  corruption  is  an  obstacle  to  bene- 
ficial influence  over  society,  and  that,  in  order  to  benefit  others,  we  must  first 
become  pure  ourselves.  This  purifying  process  is  brought  about — First,  by  the 
influence  of  "  the  truth."  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth.  The  Word  of  God 
is  like  the  sun,  showing  everything  in  its  true  colour  ;  and  its  whole  tendency  is  to 
purify  the  heart,  by  opposing  all  evil  and  promoting  all  good.  Secondly,  by  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit.  "  Through  the  Spirit."  Thirdly,  by  the  influence  of 
obedience.  "  In  obeying."  This  combines  the  work  of  man  in  union  with  the 
"  truth "  and  Spirit  of  God  in  the  purification  of  his  heart.  II.  The  social 
INFLUENCE  OF  RELIGION.  "  Yc  have  purified  your  souls  .  .  .  unto  unfeigned  love 
of  the  brethren."  The  spirit  of  love  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  every  society. 
There  is  no  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren  but  from  the  purified  soul.  First,  the 
spirit  of  selfishness  is  obliterated  from  the  purified  soul.  Secondly,  the  purified 
soul  is  God-like  in  its  nature  and  influence.  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  "  God  is 
love."  Thirdly,  the  feelings  of  the  purified  soul  are  always  loving  and  compassionate. 
{H.  E.  Thomas.)  Love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently. — Brotherly 
love : — The  obedience  and  holiness  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  verses  comprehend 
the  whole  duties  and  frame  of  a  Christian  life  towards  God  and  men ;  and  having 
urged  that  in  the  general,  he  specifies  this  grace  of  mutual  Christian  love  as  the 
great  evidence  of  our  sincerity  and  the  truth  of  our  love  to  God,  for  men  are 
subject  to  much  hypocrisy  this  way,  and  deceive  themselves.  They  can  come  con- 
stantly to  the  church,  and  pray,  it  may  be,  at  home  too,  and  yet  cannot  find  in 
their  hearts  to  forgive  an  injury.  I.  The  due  qualifications  of  brotherly  love. 
1.  Love  must  be  unfeigned.  It  appears  that  dissimulation  is  a  disease  that  is  very 
incident  in  this  particular.     St.  Paul  hath  the  same  word  (Rom.  xii.  9),  and  St. 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  109 

John  speaks  to  the  same  effect  (1  John  iii.  18).  He  requires  that  our  love  have 
that  double  reality  which  is  opposed  to  double  dissembled  love  ;  that  it  be  cordial 
and  effectual ;  that  the  professing  of  it  arise  from  truth  of  affection,  and,  as  much 
as  may  be,  be  seconded  with  action  ;  that  both  the  heart  and  the  hand  may  be  the 
seal  of  it  rather  than  the  tongue.  When  after  variances  men  are  brought  to  an 
agreement,  they  are  much  subject  rather  to  cover  their  remaining  malices  with 
superficial  verbal  forgiveness  than  to  dislodge  them  and  free  the  heart  of  them. 
This  is  a  poor  self-deceit.  As  the  philosopher  said  to  him  who,  being  ashamed  that 
he  was  espied  by  him  in  a  tavern  in  the  outer  room,  withdrew  himself  to  the  inner, 
"  That  is  not  the  way  out ;  the  more  you  go  that  way,  you  wUl  be  the  further  within 
it "  ;  so  when  hatreds  are,  upon  admonition,  not  thrown  out,  but  retire  inward  to 
hide  themselves,  they  grow  deeper  and  stronger  than  before.  2.  It  must  be  pure, 
with  a  pure  heart.  Call  it  good  fellowship  or  what  you  will,  all  the  fruit  that  in  the 
end  can  be  expected  out  of  unholy  fellowship  in  sinning  together  is  to  be  tormented 
together,  and  to  add  each  to  the  torment  of  the  other.  The  mutual  love  of 
Christians  must  be  pure,  arising  from  such  causes  as  are  pure  and  spiritual,  from  the 
sense  of  our  Saviour's  command  and  of  His  example  (John  xiii.  34).  They  that  are 
indeed  lovers  of  God  are  united ;  by  that  their  hearts  meet  in  Him  as  in  one  centre : 
they  cannot  but  love  one  another.  Where  a  godly  man  sees  his  Father's  image, 
he  is  forced  to  love  it.  And  as  the  Christian's  love  is  pure  in  its  cause,  so  in  its 
effects  and  exercise.  His  socie';y  and  converse  with  any  tends  mainly  to  this,  that 
he  may  mutually  help  and  be  helped  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.  3.  We 
must  love  fervently,  not  after  a  cold  indifferent  manner.  Let  the  love  of  your 
brethren  be  as  a  fire  within  you,  consuming  that  selfishness  which  is  so  contrary 
to  it  and  is  so  natural  to  men.  Let  it  set  your  thoughts  on  work  to  study 
how  to  do  others  good.  Let  your  love  be  an  active  love,  intense  within  you,  and 
extending  itself  in  doing  good  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of  your  brethren  as  they 
need  and  you  are  able.  H.  "  Love  of  the  brethren."  In  this  is  implied  our  obliga- 
tion after  a  special  manner  to  love  those  of  the  household  of  faith,  because  they 
are  our  brethren.  There  is  in  this  fervent  love  sympathy  with  the  griefs  of  our 
brethren,  desire  and  endeavour  to  help  them,  bearing  their  infirmities,  and  recover- 
ing them  too,  if  it  may  be ;  admonishing  and  reproving  them  as  is  needful,  some- 
times sharply,  and  yet  stUl  in  love;  rejoicing  in  their  good,  in  their  gifts  and  graces, 
so  far  from  envying  them  that  we  be  glad  as  if  they  were  our  own.  You  are 
brethren  by  the  same  new  birth  and  born  to  the  same  inheritance,  and  such  an 
inheritance  as  shall  not  be  an  apple  of  strife  amongst  you,  to  beget  debates  and 
contentions  :  no,  it  is  enough  for  all,  and  none  shall  prejudice  another,  but  you 
shall  have  joy  in  the  happiness  one  of  another,  seeing  you  shall  then  be  perfect  in 
love,  all  harmony,  no  difference  in  judgment  nor  in  affection,  all  your  harps  tuned 
to  the  same  new  song,  which  you  shall  sing  for  ever.  Let  that  love  begin  here 
which  shall  never  end.    {Abp.  Leighton.)       The  life  of  love  and  purity  : — I.  Mutual 

LOVE  THE  DUTY  OF  THE  PUKE.  II.  PURITT,  OBEDIENCE,  LOVE  ARE  THE  SIGNS  OF  A  NEW 
LIFE  WHICH  THE  CHRISTIAN  IS  LIVING.       III.    ThE    FORCES  OUT  OF  WHICH  THIS  NEW  LIFE 

GROWS  ARE  DEATHLESS.  1.  "  Seed  " — (1)  Appears  insignificant.  (2)  Is  often  hidden. 
(3)  Is  vital  and  vitalising.  2.  "  Incorruptible."  Truth  itself  never  dies,  nor  love. 
IV.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  imperishable  means  by  which  these  forces  of 
LIFE  ARE  brought  INTO  THE  VERY  SOUL  OF  MAN.  {U .  R.  Tliomas.)  Christian 
brotherly  love : — I.  Brotherly  love  illustrated.  1.  The  objects  and  elements  of 
this  love.  (1)  It  is  called  "  the  love  of  the  brethren,"  "  brotherly  kindness,"  as 
contradistinguished  from  that  "  charity  "  which  has  for  its  object  the  whole  race  of 
man  (2  John  ii.).  (2)  This  circumstance,  which  necessarily  limits  this  principle  as 
to  its  range,  gives  it  greater  comprehension  of  elementary  principles  and  greater 
intensity  of  influence  and  activity  of  operation.  It  includes  goodwill  in  its  highest 
degree  ;  but  to  this  it  adds  moral  esteem,  complacential  delight,  tender  sympathy. 
2.  The  distinctive  characters  of  Christian  love.  (1)  "  With  a  pure  heart."  (a)  The 
leading  idea  here  is  genuineness — sincerity.  It  must  be  real  love,  not  affected  or 
put  on  (Rom.  xii.  9  ;  1  John  iii.  18).  (b)  It  includes  freedom  from  all  low,  selfir.h 
motives  and  ends.  (2)  "Fervently."  (a)  This  term  conveys  the  idea  of  constancy. 
A  Christian  brother,  when  he  acts  like  himself,  "loves  at  all  times."  No  chan(^e 
of  circumstances,  especially  to  the  worse,  on  the  part  of  its  object,  should  affect  it 
except  in  the  way  of  increasing  it.  {b)  The  word  also  conveys  the  idea  of  intensify 
and  power.  Our  Christian  love  should  be  so  fervent  as  that  "  many  waters  "  of 
neglect,  infirmities,  offences,  petty  injuries,  "  shall  not  quench  it,"  or  even  damp  Its 
ardour.     And  it  should  manifest  its  strength,  not  merely  by  overcoming  op;)osin^'. 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

obstacles,  but  by  making  exertions  and  sacrifices.     (3)  There  is  one  character  w'lich 
it  is  of   peculiar  importance  that  our  mutual  affection  as  Christians  should  be 
distinguished  by — it  should  be  love  like  Christ's  (John  xiii.  34).     His  love  was  free 
and  ready,  considerate  and  wise,  laborious  and  expensive,  generous  and  self-sacri- 
ficing ;   looking  to  all  their  interests,  but  chiefly  to  their  highest  interests  ;   not 
forgetting  that  they  had  bodies,  but  chiefly  concerned  about  their  souls ;  and  such 
should  be  our  brotherly  love.     II.  Bkothekly  love  kecommended.     1.  The  intimate 
and  indissoluble  mutual  relation  between  Christians  as  brethren,  arising  out  of 
their  intimate  and  indissoluble  common  relation  to  God  as  their  Father,  is  a  strong 
motive  to  the  cultivation  and  exercise  of   Christian  brotherly  kindness.     2.  The 
common  character  to  which  all  Christians  have  been  formed  by  the  agency  of  the 
same  Spirit,  and  the  instrumentality  of  the  same  Word,  is  another  strong  motive. 
(J.  Brown,  D.D.)         Catholic  charity  : — I.  Its  necessity.     1.  The  injunctions  of 
Christ  (John  xiii.  34,  35  ;  xv.  12  ;  Matt.  v.  24  ;  xxv.  34,  35,  41,  42).     2.  The  teach- 
ings of  His  apostles  (Bom.  xiii.  8-10 ;  Gal.  v.  22 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.;  1  John  iv.  7,  16,  20, 
&c.).     II.    Its  extent.     1.   To  all  mankind.     The  more  general  it  is,  the  more 
Christian  and  the  more  like  God's  love.     2.  The  more  special  objects  of  our  love 
ought  to  be  those  who  agree  with  us  in  a  common  faith  (Gal.  vi.  10) — i.e.,  all 
Christians,  as  Christians,  and  because  such.     To  love  those  that  are  of  our  way, 
humour,  and  opinion,  is  not  charity,  but  self-love ;  'tis  not  for  Christ's  sake,  but  our 
own.     III.  Its  excellence.     1.  It  is  the  image  of  God,  and  of  all  the  graces  renders 
us  most  like  our  Maker,  for  God  is  love  and  the  lover  of  men.     And  is  it  not  a 
glorious  excellency  that  makes  men  like  the  fountain  of  all  perfection  ?     2.  It  is  the 
spirit  of  angels,  glorified  souls,  and  the  best  of  men.     3.  Love  is  an  eminent  branch 
of  the  Divine  life  and  nature  (1  John  iv.  7,  8).     4.  Love  is  the  bond  and  type  of 
Christian  communion.     5.  Love  is  the  most  Catholic  grace,  and  upon  that  account 
the  most  excellent,  since  that  which  promotes  the  good  of  the  whole  is  better  than  any 
private  perfection.     6.  Love  commends  Christianity  to  those  without,  and  cleanseth 
the  profession  of  it  from  many  spots  it  hath  contracted.     IV.  The  means  or  attain- 
ing THIS  excellent  AND  CATHOLIC  TEMPER.     1.  Directions.     (1)  Acknowledge  worth 
in  any  man.     Whatever  is  good  is  from  God,  and  He  is  to  be  loved  and  owned  in 
all  things,  as  well  in  the  paint  upon  the  butterfly's  wing  as  in  the  glorious  uniform 
lustre  of  the  sun ;  in  the  least  herb  under  our  feet  as  well  as  in  the  stupendous 
fabric  of  the  heavens  over  us.     And  moral  perfections  are  to  be  acknowledged,  as 
well  as  these  natural  ones.     And  we  must  take  care  that  we  make  not  our  relish 
the  measure  of  worth  and  goodness.     Say  not  this  is  excellent  because  it  is  agree- 
able to  your  particular  palates,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  is  vile  because  it  is 
distasteful  to  your  genius.     Let  us,  then,  be  so  ingenious  as  to  own  the  virtue  and 
the  goodness  that  is  in  all  parties  and  opinions  ;   let  us  commend  and  love  it. 

(2)  Be  much  in  the  contemplation  of  the  love  of  God.  He  that  knows  how  much 
God  hath  loved  him,  hath  a  mighty  reason  to  love  his  brother  (1  John  iv.  11). 

(3)  Make  the  great  design  of  religion  yours;  and 'know  that  the  intent  of  that  is, 
not  to  teach  us  systems  of  opinion,  but  to  furnish  our  minds  with  encouragements 
of  virtue  and  instances  of  duty ;  to  direct  us  to  govern  our  passions  and  subdue 
our  appetites  and  self-wills,  in  order  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  good  of  societies, 
and  our  own  present  and  eternal  interests.  (4)  Study  the  moderate,  pacific 
ways  and  principles,  and  run  not  in  extremes.  Both  truth  and  love  are  in 
the  middle.  Extremes  are  dangerous.  2.  Considerations.  (1)  Love  is  part 
of  religion ;  but  opinions,  for  the  sake  of  which  we  lose  charity,  are  none. 
The  first  I  have  proved  already,  and  for  the  other  we  may  consider  that  religion 
consists,  not  in  knowing  many  things,  but  in  practising  the  few  plain  things  we  know. 
(2)  Charity  is  certainly  our  duty,  but  many  of  the  opinions,  about  which  we  fall 
out,  are  uncertainly  true;  viz.,  as  to  us.  The  fundamental  points  of  faith  are 
indeed  as  firm  as  the  centre,  but  the  opinions  of  men  are  as  fluctuating  as  the 
waves  of  the  ocean.  The  root  and  body  of  a  tree  is  fast  and  unshaken,  while 
the  leaves  are  made  the  sport  of  every  wind.  And  colours  sometimes  vary  with 
every  position  of  the  object  and  the  eye,  though  the  light  of  the  sun  be  an  uniform 
splendour.  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  but  men  often  build  upon  it  what 
is  very  tottering  and  uncertain.  The  great  truths  of  religion  are  easily  disccrnihle, 
but  the  smaller  and  remoter  ones  require  more  acuteness  to  descry  them  ;  and  the 
best  light  may  be  deceived  about  such  obscure  and  distant  objects.  The  apostle  tells 
us  that  we  know  but  in  part  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9),  and  makes  confidence  an  argument  of 
ignorance  (1  Cor.  viii.  2).  (3)  Christian  love  is  necessary,  but  agreement  in  opinions 
is  neither  necessary  nor  possible.     (4)  Errors  of  themselves  are  infirmities  of  the 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  Ill 

understanding,  and  not  enormities  of  the  will,  for  no  man  is  willing  to  be  deceived. 
So  that  they  ought  not  to  be  the  objects  of  our  hatred  but  our  pity.  We  all  are 
pilgrims  in  our  way  to  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above.  If  some  will  go  in  this  path, 
some  in  the  other,  these  in  a  circuit,  and  those  amongst  the  rocks,  we  may  be  sure 
it  is  because  they  know  not  the  danger  and  inconveniences  which  they  choose.  (5) 
We  ought  to  make  allowance  for  education,  authority,  and  fair  pretences,  which 
have  a  mighty  power,  even  over  honest  minds,  and  do  often  unavoidably  lead  them 
into  error.  For  let  us  consider  how  easily  we  receive  the  first  impressions,  and  how 
deeply  they  sink  into  our  souls.  (6)  In  many  things  we  err  ourselves  ;  and,  there- 
fore, shall  have  need  of  the  charity  of  others.  3.  Cautions.  (1)  Beware  of 
inordinate  admiration  and  love  of  any  sect.  When  we  passionately  admire  a 
party,  we  are  apt  to  despise  them  that  differ  from  it.  (2)  Avoid  eager  and 
passionate  disputes.  In  these  charity  is  always  lost,  and  truth  seldom  or  never 
found.  If  thou  art  desirous  to  prevail  with  thy  friend  to  lay  down  his  opinion, 
assault  him  not  by  the  fierceness  of  disputes ;  for  such  attempts  will  but  raise  his 
passion,  and  that  will  make  him  stick  the  closer  to  his  error  ;  but  shine  upon  him 
with  a  calm  light,  insinuate  thy  better  principle  by  modest  and  gentle  suggestions. 
(3)  Beware  of  zeal  about  opinions,  by  which  I  mean  all  the  propositions  of  less 
certainty  or  consequence.  (4)  Beware  of  censuring  and  affixing  odious  names  and 
consequences  upon  the  persons  or  opinions  of  others.  {Joseph  Glanvil.)  Christian 
love  : — What  is  that  love  of  which  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  speak  ?  Not  only,  or 
primarily,  kind  feelings  or  generous  impulses.  Not  certainly  the  sentimentality 
which  breathes  itself  out  in  sighs  and  raptures.  Not  merely  the  fond  attachment 
which  clings  as  the  rose  against  the  trellis.  But,  above  all  things,  service — self- 
denial  and  seK-giving.  To  put  another's  well-being  before  our  own,  not  because  it 
is  pleasant  to  do  it,  but  because  it  is  right.  To  make  another  the  pivot  around  which 
the  wheel  of  activity  revolves.  To  check  the  hasty  word,  the  unkind  speech,  the 
damaging  criticism.  I.  The  maeks  of  such  love.  1.  Unfeigned.  Dissimulation 
is  a  disease  very  antagonistic  to  Christian  love.  How  subtly  we  are  tempted  to 
maintain  appearances  because  of  some  ulterior  gain.  Our  politeness  is  often  but 
skin  deep.  Our  smiles  assumed  for  a  purpose.  Our  words  smoother  than  butter, 
whilst  our  hearts  are  drawn  swords.  2.  Pure.  "  Hearts  may  be  cemented  by 
impurity,  by  ungodly  conversation  and  society  in  sin,  as  in  uncleanness  or 
drunkenness."  3.  Fervently.  "  On  the  stretch."  Our  love  seldom  gets  beyond 
"  temperate,"  and  never  to  boiling  point.  II.  The  efficient  cause  of  such 
LOVE.  "It  will  come  through  obeying  the  truth."  1.  We  must  know  the 
truth.  Put  two  burnished  mirrors  opposite  each  other,  and  there  will  be  no 
glow  of  light  on  either ;  but  if  a  candle  stand  between,  the  beams  of  light  are 
flung  to  and  fro,  to  an  extent  impossible  to  either  or  both  alone.  So  the  mere 
contact  of  Christian  with  Christian  will  not  necessarily  produce  the  burning 
heart,  unless  there  be  also  between  them  the  Truth  of  God.  2.  We  must  also 
obey  the  truth.  Do,  and  you  shall  know.  Obey,  and  you  will  love.  3.  As 
we  obey  the  truth,  we  shall  be  purified  by  it.  Young  men  cleanse  their  way 
by  taking  heed  to  the  Divine  Word.  III.  The  Divine  origin  of  the  life 
within.  It  is  "  not  of  man,  or  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God."  {F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  Christian  love  : — I.  Purity.  1.  The  word  for  "  purified  "  is  not 
that  denoting  the  infusion  of  virtue,  but  that  which  signifies  the  expulsion  from 
the  soul  of  all  defilement,  and  especially  of  selfishness.  Worldly  philosophies 
and  religions  only  required  external  lustration  —  the  purification  of  the  life ; 
Christianity  inculcates  inward  sanctity — the  purification  of  the  soul.  2.  The  way 
to  effect  this  is  by  believing  obedience  to  the  truth  as  revealed  in  the  Gospel. 
Christian  truths,  different  from  the  truths  of  mathematics  and  of  art,  exert  a 
sanctifying  influence  on  the  heart.  This  is  the  main  purpose  of  their  revelation. 
But  how  do  they  accomplish  this  object  ?  By  being  obeyed.  3.  Truth  is  only  the 
wire  along  which  the  electric  current  flows  from  the  spirit  of  God  to  the  spirit  of 
man,  only  the  vehicle  to  convey  holy  influences  direct  from  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
the  human  soul,  which  influences  set  up  a  spiritual  ferment  within,  making  the 
impurities  rise  like  scum  to  the  sui-face,  finally  to  be  cast  off  altogether.  What, 
then,  is  the  result  of  this  refining,  purifying  process?  "Unfeigned  love  of  the 
brethren."  A  new  word  has  been  ostentatiously  introduced  into  recent  literature, 
namely,  "altruism."  What  is  its  meaning?  That  man  should  think  more  and 
care  more  for  others  than  for  himself,  that  he  should  be  ready  to  sacrifice  himself, 
if  need  be,  for  the  sake  of  others.  This  idea  is  couched  in  more  intelligible,  becaiiee 
simpler,  language  in  the  text.      II.  Unfeignedness.      "  Unfeigned  love  of  the 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

brethren  " — genuine  love,  without  dissimulation,  free  from  hypocrisy.     1.  We  read 
of  "  faith  unfeigned,"  that  is  to  say,  faith  which  is  firm  and  solid  to  the  core.   Faith 
is  oftentimes  hollow,  simulated.    "  Faith  unfeigned" — faith  that  will  move  forward 
through  all  the  miry  bogs  of  infidelity,  that  will  brave  the  storm  and  stress  of  life. 
2.  "Love  unfeigned" — what  then  is  this?     Love  which  will  not  give  way  under 
trial,  that  will  suffer  a  burden  to  be  put  on  its  back.     III.  Fervour.     1.  This 
implies  that  our  love  of  the  brethren  should  be  powerful  enough  to  overcome  all 
sinful  obstacles  in  our  own  nature,  to  burn  up  all  the  relics  of  selfishness  in  our  own 
souls,  so  that  we  may  find  our  supreme  delight  in  serviceableness  to  our  fellow-men. 
2.  It  is  further  implied  that  our  love  should  be  so  intense  as  to  overcome  all  national 
and  sectarian  differences.     "  Love  one  another  fervently,"  of  whatever  nation  you 
may  chance  to  be.     {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)        Fervent  love  of  the  brethren  : — I.  The 
WORK  ACCOMPLISHED.     "  See  yc  have  purified  your  souls."     There  is  the  beginning 
of  all.    Many  men  are  disposed  to  work  from  without,  and  not  from  within  ;  but  the 
Spirit  works  from  within.     Men  think  that  if  they  whitewash  the  sepulchre  it  is 
enough.     No,  it  must  be  cleansed.     See  to  it  then,  and  "  keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life  "  and  death.     II.  The  instrument  of 
ITS  accomplishment.    "  Ye  obey  the  truth."    God  works  by  instruments  in  the  order 
of  His  providential  creation  and  government.     God  has  appointed,  in  order  to  the 
purifying  of  men's  souls,  a  divinely-constituted  means.    We  have  the  word  of  truth, 
the   incorruptible   seed  of   which  His  people  are  born  again.      III.  One   special 
eesult  of  this  work.      "  Unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren."      (if.  Stowell,  M.A.) 
Fervently : — The   word   thus  translated   means   extended,  or  on  the   stretch.      It 
conveys  the   idea  of   a  constant  tension   such  as  is  supplied  in   machinery  by  a 
steel  spring.     In  one  department  of  a  sewing  machine  all  depends  on  the  thread 
being  kept  constantly  tight,  so  that  the  moment  any  slackness   occurs,  the  loose 
portion  is  picked   up   instantly   and   without  fail.      If   that   operation   were  left 
dependent   on  the   watchfulness   and   quickness  of   a  human   operator,  it  would 
entirely  fail.      The  worker  would  grow   weary,   would  forget,  would  hasten  to 
tighten  the  thread  after  the  time  was  past,  and  all  would  go  to  wreck  and  ruin. 
But  by  entrusting  the  watch  and  the  work  to  a  bent  elastic  steel  wire,  an  absolute 
infallibility  is  secured.     The  watcher  never  forgets,  the  worker  never  wearies.     The 
work  is  done  perfectly,  and  always  done  at  the  right  moment.    The  spring  is  always 
on  the  stretch,  and  never  misses.    Though  it  is  obliged  to  watch  the  slackening,  and 
pull  the  thread  instantly  tight,  a  hundred  times  a  minute,  all  day  long  for  twenty 
years,  it  never  once  forgets  or  fails.      The  precept  requires  a  love  of  this  sort— - 
watching   and  working  in  a  Christian's  heart.      If   you  need  to  remember  your 
duty  every  time  that  a  sudden   injury  occurs,  you   will  not  be  in  time  with   the 
soft    answer    that    turns    away    wrath.      Before    love    has    gathered    itself    up, 
and    determined  on   its    course,   the    opportunity    will    be    past.      The    disciple 
of    Christ    will    appear   as   irascible,   passionate,   and  revengeful  as  other  men. 
There  must  be   a  spring — a  law  of  love   set  once  for   all   as  a  faculty   of  the 
new    heart,  that    will    operate    instantaneously    and     uniformly.        [W.    Arnot.) 
Being  toorn  again. — Regeneration : — I.  The  nature  of  regeneration.     1.  A  change 
of  qualities  or  dispositions  :  not  a  change  of  the  substance  of  the  soul.     2.  A  super- 
natural change  (John  iii.  v).     3.  A  change  into  the  likeness  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.  18). 
4.  A  universal  change  (2  Cor.   v.    17).     5.  A  lasting   change.     (!)  The  mind  is 
savingly  enlightened.     In  the  knowledge  of  God,  sin,  self,  Jesus  Christ,  vanity  of 
world  (Psa.   cxix.  96).     Spiritual  things   (1  John  ii.  20).     (2)  The  will  is  renewed 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).     Cured  of  its  utter  inability  to  will  what  is  good.     Imbued  with 
a  fixed  aversion  to  evil  (Gal.  v.  17).     Endowed  with  an  inclination  and  propensity 
to  good.     (3)  The  affections  are  rectified   and   regulated.     (4)  The  conscience  is 
renewed.     (5)  As  the  memory  wanted  not  its  share  of  depravity,  it  is  also  bettered 
by  regenerating  grace.     It  is  strengthened   for   spiritual   things.     (6)  There   is  a 
change  made  on  the  body,  and  the  members  thereof,  in  respect  of  their  use ;  they 
are  consecrated  to  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  vi.  13  ;  Eom.  vi.  13),  "  servants  to  righteousness 
unto  holiness  "  (Rom.  vi.  19).    (7)  This  gracious  change  shines  forth  in  the  conversa- 
tion.    A   new   heart   makes   newness   of   life.     II.  Why    this  change   is    called 
eegeneration,  a  being  born  again.     It  is  so  called,  because  of  the  resemblance 
between  natural  and  spiritual  generation,  which  lies  in  the  following  particulars. 
1.  Natural  generation  is  a  mysterious  thing :  and  so  is  spiritual  generation  (John 
iii.  8).     2.  In  both,  the  creature  comes  to  a  being  it  had  not  before.     3.  As  the 
child  is  passive  in  generation,  so  is  the  child  of  God  in  regeneration.     4.  There  is  a 
wonderful   contexture   of   pasts   in  both  births.     Oh  the  wonderful  contexture  of 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  113 

graces  in  the  new  creature  !  5.  All  this,  in  both  cases,  has  its  rise  from  that  which 
is  in  itself  very  small  and  inconsiderable.  6.  Natural  generation  is  carried  on  by 
degrees.  7.  In  both  tliere  are  new  relations.  The  regenerate  may  call  God  Father ; 
for  they  are  His  children  (John  i.  12,  13),  "begotten  of  Him  "  (chap.  i.  3).  They 
are  related,  as  brethren,  to  angels  and  glorified  saints;  "the  family  of  heaven." 
8.  There  is  a  likeness  between  the  parent  and  the  child  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  9.  As  there  is 
no  birth  without  pain,  so  there  is  great  pain  in  bringing  forth  the  new  creature. 
The  soul  has  sore  pains  when  under  conviction  and  humiliation.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
The  new  life  : — -1.  Unlike  man's  mortal  life,  this  new  moral  life  is  independent  of 
the  earth.  The  productions  of  the  earth  cannot  support  it ;  the  blasts  and  the 
storms  of  the  earth  cannot  destroy  it.  2.  Unlike  man's  mortal  life,  this  new  moral 
life  is  ever  progressive.  Like  the  trees  of  the  forest  and  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
man's  mortal  life  reaches  a  culminating  point  and  then  dies  out.  Not  so 
with  this  new  moral  life.  3.  Unlike  man's  mortal  life,  this  new  moral  life  is 
essentially  a  blessing.  Man's  mortal  life  may  become,  and  often  is,  a  curse. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Born  again  : — A  man  shall  never  have  occasion  to  curse 
the  day  of  his  new  birth.  (J.  Trapp.)  A  new  creature : — In  passing  from 
nature  to  grace  you  did  not  pass  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  stage  of  the  same 
condition — from  daybreak  to  sunshine,  but  from  darkest  night  to  dawn  of  day. 
Unlike  the  worm  which  changes  into  a  winged  insect,  or  the  infant  who  grows  up 
into  a  stately  man,  you  became,  not  a  more  perfect,  but  a  "new  creature  "  in  Jesus 
Christ.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible. — The 
incorruptible  seed : — I.  Christianity  must  satisfy  the  intellectual  requiee- 
MENTS  OF  EVERY  AGE.  1.  In  order  to  this,  Christianity  in  its  statements,  historical 
and  doctrinal,  must  be  in  perfect  accord  with  the  demonstrations  of  science  in  the 
various  departments  of  knowledge  to  which  it  devotes  itself.  2.  To  be  perpetuated 
as  the  religion  of  the  race,  Christianity  must  not  only  harmonise  with  the  conclu- 
sions of  the  intellect  in  other  provinces,  but  must  continue  to  offer  new  problems  of 
its  own.  The  moment  the  Bible  will  be  an  understood  book,  it  will  be  a  moribund 
book.  And  what  it  proves  itself  to  be  to  individual  man  in  innumerable  cases,  that 
it  claims  to  be  to  man  universal.  Let  the  ages  be  yet  cultivated  with  greater  dili- 
gence and  trained  to  a  higher  point  in  knowledge  than  anything  we  have  so  far 
witnessed,  and  the  Gospel  has  its  questions  for  them,  problems  which  will  utterly 
baffle  the  finest  cultured  minds.  This  assuredly  is  one  element  which  contributes 
powerfully  to  its  perpetuity,  that  the  intellect  can  never  master  it.  3.  But  in  a 
religion  which  claims  perpetuity  you  would  further  expect  it  would  stimulate  the 
understanding  into  greater  activity,  and  infuse  new  life  into  all  its  pursuits.  That 
is  to  say,  it  must  become  the  prime  factor  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Christianity 
does  exercise  restraint,  not  upon  progress  but  upon  retrogression ;  not  upon  truth 
but  upon  sin ;  not  upon  the  intellect  but  upon  the  spirit  which  is  now  working  ia 
the  children  of  disobedience.  It  checks  the  spirit  of  the  nineteenth  century,  it 
spurs  its  science.  II.  If  Christianity  is  to  live  for  ever,  it  must  meet  the 
MORAL  requirements  OF  EVERY  AGE.  1.  TMs  implies  that  it  must  accord  with  the 
distinct  dictates  of  our  moral  nature.  2.  Another  requisite,  in  order  to  its  perpetua- 
tion, is  that  it  be  in  advance  of  the  moral  performances  of  any  particular  age.  3. 
Christianity,  to  endure  for  ever,  must  enter  into  the  morals  of  the  world  as  a 
refining  element.  War — ferocity — butchery — is  that  your  civilisation?  demand 
our  opponents.  We  answer.  Certainly  not ;  that  is  barbarism.  That  is  not  Chris- 
tianity, but  its  opposite,  and  a  cogent  reason  why  Christianity  should  not  be  thrown 
aside  till  they  at  least  have  been  exterminated.  HI.  If  the  Gospel  is  to  endure 
TO  the  end  of  time,  it  must  continue  to  meet  the  spiritual  wants  of  man. 
If  it  do  not  this  it  is  inevitably  doomed  to  extinction.  1.  As  a  sinner,  man  needs  a 
Saviour.  The  sinner  finds  true  inward  rest  in  the  atonement  of  the  Gospel,  the 
sense  of  guilt  is  cancelled.  2.  As  a  creature  he  needs  God.  Cast  a  glance  over  the 
history  of  the  world ;  everywhere  the  great  want  is  God.  What  then  can  give  us 
God  ?  Science  does  not  profess  to  be  able  to  give  Him.  Professor  Huxley  says 
that  the  state  of  mind  becoming  men  of  science  on  this  subject  is  a  sort  of  know- 
nothingarianism  or  Agnosticism.  Well  then,  if  science  cannot  do  it,  is  there  any 
religion  besides  Christianity  that  can  ?  Mahometanism  declares  the  unity  and 
supremacy  of  God.  But  to  say  that  God  is,  and  that  He  is  the  supreme  Ruler,  is 
one  thing ;  to  bring  Him  to  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  the  soul  quite  another.  The 
religion  of  India  strives  to  bridge  the  gap ;  but  instead  of  communion  between  man 
and  God,  it  ends  in  the  absorption  of  man  in  God.  But  however  much  we  desire 
communion,  we  quite  as  much  dread  absorption.    These  meet  only  a  fragment  of 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

our  nature.  But  Christianity  meets  the  whole  man ;  it  presents  God  to  our  con- 
templation in  Him  in  whom  "  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelleth  bodily,"  and 
to  our  consciousness  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  long  as  man  is  a 
sinner  needing  a  Saviour,  and  a  creature  needing  a  God,  Christianity  will  Uve  in 
the  grateful  affection  of  myriads  of  our  race.     (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  All  flesh  is  as  grass. — Change  and  continuance  : — "  What  is  wanting 
here?  "  said  a  courtier  to  an  illustrious  prince,  as  they  stood  together,  the  spectators 
of  a  most  splendid  triumph  in  the  city  of  Eome.  To  him  who  spake,  there  appeared 
to  be  nothing  wanting.  The  gaiety  and  splendour  of  the  spectacle  were  in  his  sight 
complete.  The  supreme  power  represented  by  the  entire  body  of  the  senate  was 
there.  The  spoils  taken  from  the  enemy,  filling  many  carriages  and  piled  upon 
movable  platforms,  were  there.  The  ministers  of  justice,  clad  in  official  costume, 
and  bearing  the  insignia  of  their  office,  were  there.  And  there  was  the  victorious 
general,  attired  in  the  triumphalia  and  crowned  with  laurels.  "  What  is  wanting 
here?"  "What,"  answered  the  prince,  as  he  watched  the  procession  pass  along, 
and  in  passing  pass  away,  "What  is  wanting?  This  is  wanting,  continuance." 
The  procession  would  pass  along  the  appointed  route,  and  then  all  would  be 
dispersed,  and  the  triumph  would  be  a  thing  of  the  past.  All  thoughtful  men  feel 
seriously,  if  not  sorrowfully,  the  changeful  character  of  all  the  things  which  we  see 
and  handle  on  this  earth.  Where  is  continuance  upon  this  planet?  God  has 
established  the  earth,  and  it  abideth,  but  what  beside  abideth  ?  Yea,  even  the  earth 
is  doomed  to  be  burned  up ;  and  while  it  abides,  great  changes  are  continually 
occurring,  even  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  waters  which  fill  its  hollow 
places.  And  where  continuance  would  be  most  valued,  and  where  one  should  have 
expected  it,  even  there  it  is  not.  The  difference  between  poor  men  and  rich  men, 
famous  men  and  men  without  renown,  is  just  the  difference  between  grass  and  the 
flower  of  grass  ;  but  as  both  grass  and  the  fiower  of  grass  wither,  so  it  is  appointed 
unto  all  men  once  to  die.  There  are  things,  however,  which  continue,  good  and 
precious  things  with  which  men  have  to  do,  and  one  of  these  things  is  mentioned 
in  our  text.  Let  us  examine  it.  Words  are  lasting  things.  The  breath  which 
inspires  them  perishes,  the  lips  which  form  them  return  to  dust,  the  instruments 
which  inscribe  them  are  destructible,  but  words  spoken  and  heard,  written  and  read, 
have  a  boundless  life  and  an  immeasurable  power.  A  good  word  may  continue  to 
enlighten,  to  invigorate  for  ever  and  for  ever.  All  this  is  true  of  the  words  of  man, 
but  still  more  enduring  in  all  their  effects  and  influences  are  the  words  of  the  Lord. 
Many  words  has  God  spoken  to  us  men.  Among  these  words  of  God  there  is  one 
communication  which,  on  account  of  its  singularity  and  importance,  is  called  "  the 
Word  of  the  Lord,"  and  which,  by  reason  of  its  pleasantness  and  graciousness,  is 
called  "  the  gospel."  Now,  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever,  and  this  is  the 
Word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you.  It  lives  in  God's  mind  ;  it  lives, 
in  fact,  as  a  thing  done  and  a  provision  completed  ;  and  it  lives  in  the  Ufe  of  those 
who  have  been  born  again.  1.  The  nature  of  God,  as  revealed  to  us  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, is  the  nature  from  which  a  gospel  might  be  expected.  2.  The  gospel,  so  far 
as  we  appreciate  it,  and  so  far  as  we  understand  the  thirsts  and  wants  of  human 
nature,  is  an  all-sufficient  gospel  for  man.  3.  A  gospel  less  than  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God  must  have  left  some  thirst  unslaked,  or  some  necessity  unmet,  or 
some  wound  unhealed,  or  some  tears  unwiped  away ;  and  while  those  tears  were 
falling,  that  wound  smarting,  that  want  craving,  that  thirst  burning,  there  could 
not  have  been  the  experience  and  enjoyment  of  complete  salvation.  4.  A  gospel 
more  real  and  substantial,  or  more  worthy  of  the  world's  acceptation,  could  not 
have  issued  even  from  God.  5.  And  this  gospel  is  abiding,  because  it  is  the  incor- 
ruptible seed  of  life  everlasting.  The  old  spiritual  nature  is  impregnated  with  the 
seed  of  a  new  man,  a  Divine  seed  and  incorruptible,  the  seed  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel ;  and  the  man  who  has  thus  received  the  gospel  enters  upon  a  new  and 
eternal  life.  The  gospel  now  lives  in  a  living  mind,  and  in  a  living  heart,  and  in  a 
living  character  ;  it  repeats  itself  in  the  believer;  and  as  the  character  and  mission 
of  Jesus  Christ  may  be  learned  from  the  written  life  of  Christ,  so  the  gospel  may 
be  learned  from  the  spiritual  life  of  him  who  believes  it.  Let  us  now  indicate  the 
practical  bearing  of  this  doctrine.  1.  The  text  magnifies  the  gospel.  Let  us  be 
devoutly  careful  to  preserve  its  gloriousness  in  our  own  eyes.  And  in  order  to  do 
this  we  must  reverence  the  gospel.  2.  The  text  shows  that  the  gospel  is  intended 
to  be  to  us  personally,  and  thereby  furnishes  us  with  a  test  of  our  religious  state. 
The  gospel  is  intended  to  be  the  germ  of  a  Godlike  life  within  us,  and  if  it  fail  of 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  115 

this,  it  fails  of  its  chief  effect.  3.  The  text  points  out  that  in  which  is  continuance; 
let  us  take  care  to  handle  perishable  things  as  perishable,  and  to  demean  ourselves 
toward  the  gospel  as  everlasting.  4.  The  text  suggests  the  strongest  motives  for 
the  immediate  and  universal  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Flesh  is  as  grass.  The  man 
whose  days  are  as  grass  is  dying  daily.  And  it  is  only  here,  while  he  is  breathing 
out  his  brief  life,  that  his  nature  can  be  impregnated  with  this  incorruptible  seed. 
5.  The  text  encourages  us  to  sustain,  and  in  all  respects  to  provide  for,  the  con- 
tinuous preaching  of  the  gospel.  One  after  another  the  preachers  of  the  gospel 
enter  that  valley,  and  are  seen  no  more.  But  what  do  they  leave  behind  ?  The 
sanctuaries  in  which  they  ministered  ?  Yes ;  but  something  more.  The  flocks 
they  tended  ?  Pleasant  memories  ?  Yes ;  but  much  more.  They  leave  that 
gospel,  written  not  on  tablets  of  stone,  but  upon  the  fleshy  tablets  of  the  heart ; 
they  leave  that  gospel  more  than  written — they  leave  it  in  many  hearts,  a  seed  with 
a  germ  of  Godlike  and  eternal  life  in  it ;  they  leave  it  as  a  new  man,  in  many  who 
have  been  born  again  by  it  as  by  incorruptible  seed ;  they  leave  it  in  the  rich 
experiences  and  holy  activities  of  the  new  man;  they  leave  it  in  a  state 
imperishable,  and  they  may  leave  it  without  anxiety.  (S.  Martin.)  Autumn: 
life's  contrast : — The  form  of  thought  here  used  illustrates  a  common  principle 
in  the  operation  of  the  human  mind  —  that  principle  of  contrast  by  which 
one  thing  suggests  its  opposite.  Life  is  made  up  of  contrasts.  The  secret  of  this 
influence  of  contrast  lies  in  man's  twofold  nature,  allied  on  the  one  side  to  the 
frail  and  perishing,  on  the  other  to  the  stable  and  enduring ;  one  hand  grasping 
dust  and  ashes,  the  other  seizing  upon  the  very  throne  of  God ;  the  outward  eye 
seeing  only  what  fades  and  passes  away,  the  inward  eye  beholding  glories  which 
nothing  can  destroy  or  dim.  There  is  something  beyond  the  reach  of  change  and 
decay  and  mortality — God's  truth,  as  it  has  been  revealed  to  man  ;  God's  promise, 
which  by  His  Son  He  has  made — this  cannot  fail.  It  will  outlast  all  the  forms  of 
outward  life,  and  all  the  splendours  of  nature ;  and,  though  heaven  and  earth  pass 
away,  it  shall  not  pass  away.  The  connection  of  the  text  makes  it  more  emphatic. 
The  apostle  had  been  speaking  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  of  the  faith  and  hope 
which  this  fact  excites  ;  and  he  alludes  to  the  wasting  away  of  all  material  things, 
so  as  to  fix  attention  more  joyfully  on  the  soul's  undying  nature.  He  leaps  from 
the  vessel  that  is  sinking  with  all  earth's  treasure  in  the  sea  of  time,  to  the  firm 
shore  of  immortality.  Let  the  grass  then  wither,  and  the  glory  of  man  fade  away. 
God  willing,  we  would  not  have  the  present  scene  to  be  our  permanent  dwelling. 
The  transient  and  the  abiding  in  the  nature  and  experience  of  man — this  is,  indeed, 
a  contrast  which  it  well  becomes  us  to  consider.  The  great  mistake  that  human 
beings  make  is  in  regarding  perishable  things  as  though  they  were  imperishable, 
and  so  fastening  on  them  the  feelings  and  expectations  which  belong  only  to  the 
imperishable.  Christianity  does  not  forbid  us  to  have  any  regard  for  what  is 
perishable  and  passing  away.  Jesus  Christ  brought  no  ascetic  religion  into  the 
world.  He  does  not  bid  us  dig  a  cave,  and  hide  ourselves  from  all  that  is  bright 
and  gladsome  around  us,  fleeting  though  it  be.  But  what  He  and  His  apostles 
insist  on  is,  that  we  shall  graduate  and  proportion  our  interest  in  all  things  accord- 
ing to  their  worth.  To  put  in  its  right  light  the  contrast,  I  would  bring  out,  suppose 
some  inhabitant  of  that  upper  world — as  it  is  thought  departed  spirits  may — to  lift 
the  curtain,  and  look  in  upon  these  scenes  in  which  we  mingle.  To  one  whose  eye 
looks  from  his  high  station,  how  small  and  obscure  this  lower  world,  the  dim, 
narrow  entrance-way  to  the  more  glorious  mansions  of  the  Father's  house  !  He 
knows  that  authentic  tidings  of  the  great  region  He  dwells  in,  have  reached  the 
ears  of  that  crowd  of  mortals  who  move  along  through  this  entry  of  the  spiritual 
world.  As  the  sickly  generations  of  creatures  advance,  the  angel-spectator  scans 
the  occupations  in  which  they  engage.  What  a  thrill  of  amazement  shoots  through 
his  breast  to  observe  such  multitudes  living  as  though  these  narrow  earthly  steps  to 
the  great  temple  beyond  were  themselves  the  whole  universe,  studiously  averting 
their  eyes  from  the  gate  that  leads  to  the  immense  splendours  of  the  inner  sanctuary. 
One  is  wholly  absorbed  in  giving  free  scope  to  sense  and  appetite  and  superficial 
fancy.  Another  seems  taken  up  entirely  with  swelling  his  pile  of  gold.  He  bends 
steadily  down  over  it,  and,  as  he  stoops,  gives  up  the  lustre  of  heaven  for  its 
glitter.  But  yet  another  sight  that  angelic  witness  as  surely  beholds,  and  oh,  there 
is  not  a  pleasanter  sight  beneath  the  sun  than  that  of  a  rich  man  for  this  world  and 
for  the  world  to  come ;  yea,  of  a  man  who  rejoices  more  than  an  old  alchemist  over 
the  supposed  discovery  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  at  the  opportunity  to  transmute 
his  temporary  into  everlasting  treasure.     Here  surely  the  principle  is  illustrated 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

aright  in  a  contrast  just  and  holy.  This,  then,  without  further  illustration,  is  the 
lesson  of  our  text.  Be  not  deceived  in  your  estimate.  Distinguish  the  things  that 
differ.  Observe  the  contrasts  that  God  has  established.  Is  the  New  Testament 
true  ?  Shall  these  great  scenes  of  judgment  and  doom,  according  to  the  deeds  of 
the  flesh,  be  soon  ushered  in  ?  Make  not,  then,  the  enormous  miscalculation  of 
leaving  so  vast  an  element  out  of  your  account.  Even  in  this  life,  the  contrast 
between  things  earthly  and  things  heavenly  sometimes  demonstrates  itself  in 
striking  results.  The  distinct  consequences  of  diverse  characters  are  especially 
marked,  as  men  advance  in  life  towards  old  age  ;  and  the  rewards  and  retributions 
already  bestowed  seem  to  anticipate  the  judgment-day.  As  I  walked  through 
the  lanes  of  yonder  growing  forest,  on  our  beautiful  common,  the  dry  leaves  crush- 
ing under  my  feet,  and  the  sinking  sun  taking  his  last  look  at  the  bare  boughs  of 
the  trees,  I  met  a  man  on  whom  the  blow  of  grief  had  descended  as  sorely  as  upon 
any,  and  with  oft-repeated  sttoke.  A  new  sorrow  had  just  fallen  on  his  grey  head 
and  long-diseased,  emaciated  frame.  He  spoke  of  faith.  He  spoke  of  loyalty  to 
God  and  duty.  He  spoke  of  heaven  as  though  it  were  near.  He  said  nothing  of 
being  hardly  dealt  with,  nor  hinted  aught  about  not  understanding  why  he  should 
be  selected  for  such  trials,  but  seemed  to  think  there  was  nothing  but  God's  mercy 
and  kindness  in  the  world.  But  he  seemed  to  me,  as  I  looked  upon  him,  to  have 
an  inward  stay  that  would  hold  him  up  when  all  earthly  props  had  fallen  to  the 
ground.  For  once,  the  contrast  between  earth  and  heaven  was  revealed  to  my 
mind;  and  the  dissolving  emblems  of  mortality  under  my  feet,  and  the  cold, 
shifting  mists  over  my  head,  were  transformed  from  sad  tokens  into  symbols  of 
hope  and  joy.  (C.  A.  Bartol.)  The  death  of  a  servant  of  God  : — Two  doctrines 
naturally  arise  from  this  text — I.  That  man  and  his  glory  are  fading  and  wither- 
ing. All  flesh  is  grass.  1.  It  is  weak,  and  low,  and  little  as  grass.  Mankind  is 
indeed  numerous  as  the  grass  of  the  fleld,  multiplies,  replenishes,  and  covereth  the 
earth  ;  but  like  grass,  it  is  of  the  earth,  earthy,  mean,  and  of  small  account.  Alas, 
the  kingdoms  of  men  which  make  so  great  a  noise,  so  great  a  figure,  in  this  lower 
world,  are  but  as  so  many  fields  of  grass  compared  with  the  bright  and  glorious 
constellations  of  stars,  made  up  of  the  holy  and  blessed  inhabitants  of  the  upper 
regions.  Proud  men  think  themselves  like  the  strong  and  stately  cedars,  oaks,  or 
pines,  but  they  soon  find  themselves  as  the  grass  of  the  field,  liable  to  be  nipped 
with  every  frost,  trampled  on  by  every  foot,  continually  insulted  by  common 
calamities.  2.  It  is  withering,  and  fading,  and  dying  as  grass ;  having  both  its 
rise  and  maintenance  out  of  the  earth,  it  hastens  to  the  earth,  and  retires  to  its 
root  and  foundation  in  the  dust.  In  the  morning,  perhaps,  it  is  green  and  growing 
up,  its  aspect  pleasing,  its  prospect  promising ;  but  when  we  come  to  look  upon  it 
in  our  evening  work  we  find  it  cut  down  and  withered.  If  it  be  not  cut  down  by 
disease  or  disaster,  it  wiU  soon  wither  of  itself ;  it  has  in  it  the  principles  of  its  own 
corruption.  Is  all  flesh  grass  ?  All,  without  exception  of  the  noble  or  the  fair, 
the  young  or  the  strong,  the  well-born  or  well-built,  the  well-fed  or  well-bred  ?  Is 
all  grass,  weak  and  withering  ?  (1)  Then  let  us  see  ourselves  to  be  grass,  and 
humble  and  deny  ourselves.  Is  the  body  grass?  Then  be  not  proud,  be  not 
presumptuous,  be  not  confident  of  a  long  continuance  here ;  forget  not  that  the  foot 
may  crush  thee.  Grass  falls  ;  let  me  not  be  such  a  fool  as  to  lay  up  my  treasure 
in  it.  Is  the  body  grass?  Then  let  us  not  indulge  it  too  much,  nor  bestow  too 
much  time  and  care  and  pains  about  it,  as  many  do,  to  the  neglect  of  the  better 
and  immortal  part.  After  all,  we  cannot  keep  it  from  withering,  when  its  day  shall 
come  to  fall.  (2)  Let  us  see  others  also  to  be  as  grass,  and  cease  from  man,  because 
he  is  no  more  than  thus  to  be  accounted  of.  We  are  now  to  consider,  not  common 
men,  but  men  of  distinction,  and  to  see  them  withering  and  falling.  3.  Let  us 
inquire,  What  is  the  glory  of  man  in  this  world  ?  There  is  indeed  a  glory  of  man 
which  is  counterfeit,  and  mistaken  for  glory.  Solomon  says,  "  For  men  to  search 
their  own  glory  is  not  glory"  (Prov.  xxv.  27).  The  glory  men  commonly  pursue 
and  search  for  is  no  glory  at  all.  Is  beauty  and  comeliness  of  body  the  glory  of 
man  ?  So  they  pass  with  some  who  judge  by  the  sight  of  the  eye  ;  but  at  the  best 
they  are  only  the  goodliness  of  grass  ;  they  are  a  flower  which  death  will  certainly 
cut  down  ;  or  the  end  of  time  will  change  the  countenance  ;  either  wrinkled  age,  or 
pale  death.  We  should  therefore  make  sure  the  beauty  of  grace,  the  hidden  man 
of  the  heart,  which  neither  age  nor  death  will  sully.  Is  wealth  the  glory  of  man  ? 
Laban's  sons  thought  so  when  they  said  concerning  Jacob,  Of  that  which  was  our 
father's  hath  he  gotten  all  this  glory  (Gen.  xxxi.  1).  But  this  also  is  a  fading 
flower.    Is  pomp  and  grandeur  the  glory  of  a  man  ?    That  also  withers  away. 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  PETER.  117 

Great  names  and  titles  of  honour  are  written  in  the  dust.  Give  me  leave  to  show 
you  some  instances  of  the  glory  of  a  man.  (1)  Is  a  large  capacity  of  mind  the 
glory  of  a  man?  (2)  Is  learning  to  be  reckoned  the  glory  of  a  man?  (3)  Is 
tenderness  and  humility,  modesty  and  sweetness  of  temper,  the  glory  of  a  man  ? 
(4)  Is  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  the  glory  of  a  man  ?  (5) 
Is  great  usefulness  the  glory  of  a  man,  and  a  delight  in  doing  good  ?  Well,  here  is 
the  glory  of  man :  let  us  be  ambitious  of  this  glory,  and  not  of  vain-glory.  See 
true  honour  in  the  paths  of  wisdom  and  virtue,  and  seek  it  there.  This  is  honour 
that  comes  from  God,  and  is  in  His  sight  of  great  price.  4.  Having  seen  this 
flower  flourishing,  we  are  now  to  see  it  withering.  As  to  himself,  this  glory  is  not 
lost,  is  not  stained,  by  death  ;  it  is  not  like  worldly  honour,  laid  in  the  dust,  and 
buried  in  the  grave ;  no,  this  flower  is  transplanted  from  the  garden  on  earth  to  the 
paradise  in  heaven,  where  it  shall  never  fade.  The  works  of  good  men  follow  them, 
but  they  forsake  us,  and  we  are  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  them.  II.  Though  man 
and  glory  are  fading  and  withering,  yet  God  and  His  Wokd  ake  eveeliving  and 
EVEKiiASTiNo.  The  glory  of  the  law  was  done  away,  but  that  of  the  gospel  remains. 
The  glory  of  ministers  falls  away,  but  not  the  glory  of  the  Word  they  are  ministers 
of.  The  prophets,  indeed,  do  not  live  for  ever,  but  the  words  which  God  com- 
manded them  did,  and  will  take  hold,  as  words  quick  and  powerful.  1.  There  is  in 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  an  everlasting  rule  of  faith  and  practice  for  us  to  be  ruled  by. 
(1)  It  is  our  comfort  that  Christianity  shall  not  die  with  our  ministers,  nor  that 
light  be  buried  in  their  graves.  (2)  It  is  our  duty  not  to  let  our  Christianity  die 
with  our  ministers,  but  let  the  word  of  Christ  contained  in  the  Scriptures  still  dwell 
in  us  richly.  2.  There  is  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord  an  everlasting  fountain  of 
comfort  and  consolation  for  us  to  be  refreshed  and  encouraged  by,  and  to  draw 
water  from  with  joy,  and  an  everlasting  foundation  on  which  to  build  our  hopes. 
{Matthew  Henry.)  Man  compared  to  grass  : — We  are  like  "  grass."  1.  We  are 
like  grass  in  our  relation  to  the  earth.  2.  We  are  like  grass  in  the  frailty  of  our 
nature.  3.  We  are  like  grass  in  the  uncertainty  of  our  lives.  The  blade  dies  in  all 
seasons.  4.  We  are  like  grass  in  the  unnoticeableness  of  our  dissolution.  Blade 
after  blade  withers  and  dies,  and  the  landscape  appears  as  ever.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  fleeting   and   the   durable : — I.    The   transitoky  nature   of  all   the  things 

WHICH    APPERTAIN    TO    THIS    OUR    EARTHLY    STATE.       "  All    flesh  is  graSS,"  &C.       1.    HoW 

affectingly  is  this  sentiment  verified  in  the  personal  endowments  of  man,  beauty 
and  strength !  Survey  that  animal  structure,  once  so  lovely,  when  it  is  wrinkled 
by  the  hand  of  time ;  when  it  is  withered  by  the  action  of  disease ;  when  it  is 
blasted  by  the  stroke  of  death.  Survey  these  melancholy  changes  which  await  the 
sons  and  daughters  of  Adam,  and  you  will  feel  the  propriety  of  the  sentiment  in 
the  text.  2.  The  wisdom  of  man,  no  less  than  his  beauty  and  strength,  serves  as 
an  example  of  the  sentiment  in  the  text.  In  the  present  age  we  are  accustomed  to 
denounce  the  systems  of  former  generations  as  fanciful  or  crude,  and  to  smile  when 
we  hear  them  dignified  by  the  names  of  philosophy  and  science ;  boasting  at  the 
same  time  that  the  perfection  of  philosophy  and  the  arts  have  been  reserved  for  our 
own  age.  Alas  !  for  us,  generations  will  arise  that  will  look  back  on  the  nineteenth 
century,  and  in  their  turn  laugh  at  the  rudeness  of  our  inventions,  the  infancy  of 
our  science,  and  the  blunders  of  our  philosophy.  The  fact  is,  that  all  knowledge 
merely  human  is  destined  to  pass  away  (1  Cor.  xiii.  8).  3.  We  may  also  adduce  as 
an  example  of  the  truth  in  the  text  the  passing  away  of  all  those  things  which 
constitute  the  elegancies  and  decorations  of  civilised  life ;  all  that  is  designed  to 
gratify  the  taste  and  imagination.  Whatever  the  pencil  of  the  painter  has  por- 
trayed ;  whatever  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor  has  wrought  out ;  whatever  the  skill  of 
the  architect  has  raised ;  whatever  the  imagination  has  devised  of  rare  and 
ornamental  in  furniture,  dress,  or  manners — all  must  serve  in  its  turn  to  show  that 
the  goodliness  of  man  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field.  4.  I  must  not  omit  to  bring 
forward  riches  as  furnishing  a  verification  equally  strong  of  the  sentiment  of  the 
text.  5.  These  remarks  apply  with  equal  propriety  to  that  idol  of  many  hearts — 
fame.  The  historian's  pen,  the  poet's  muse,  the  tablet  of  marble  and  brass,  all  the 
means  which  have  been  employed  to  perpetuate  a  name,  have  only  served  as  a 
comment  on  the  text.  6.  Power  and  dominion,  desired  by  some  and  envied  by 
others  as  the  most  abiding  of  human  things,  are  only  exemplifications  on  a  larger 
scale  of  the  truth  aSirmed  in  the  text.  Empires  rise  and  fall ;  sceptres  change 
hands,  thrones  are  overturned,  and  one  dynasty  succeeds  another.  7.  One  other 
illustration  of  the  s.ffecting  sentiment  of  the  text  yet  remains.  The  great  globe 
itself,  the  habitation  of  fallen  man,  is  destined  to  pass  away !    II.  The  durability 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

OF    THAT    DISPENSATION    OF    TRUTH     WITH     WHICH     JeHOVAH     HAS     BLESSED    THE    WORLD. 

By  the  Word  of  our  God  I  understand  Messiah's  dispensation,  the  gospel  of  the 
Son  of  God,  with  all  the  fulness  of  its  grace  and  truth.  1.  It  is  proved  that  this 
Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever,  in  spite  of  all  that  can  be  effected  to  the 
contrary  by  persecution.  Evangelical  truth  has  outlived  the  memory  of  her  once 
mighty  foes ;  has  overturned  the  monuments  reared  to  commemorate  her  own 
destruction ;  and,  clothed  in  celestial  radiance  and  power,  has  gone  on  from  con- 
quering to  conquer  !  2.  The  course  of  events  has  shown  that  the  Word  of  our  God 
shall  stand  for  ever,  notwithstanding  the  hostility  of  infidel  men.  The  religion  of 
Christ  Jesus  may  be  compared  to  an  exceeding  strong  citadel,  erected  on  the 
summit  of  an  everlasting  rock.  They  alone  tremble  for  its  security  who  are 
ignorant  of  its  impregnable  strength.  3.  As  a  confirmation  of  the  position  in  the 
text,  that  the  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever,  we  may  with  holy  exultation 
advert  to  that  spread  of  the  Christian  religion  which  has  taken  place  in  our  day. 
4.  I  may  mention  as  a  further  proof  that  the  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever, 
that  holy  energy  with  which  it  is  still  accompanied.  (J.  Bromley.)  The  loithering 
work  of  the  Spirit  (with  Isa.  xl.  6-8)  : — In  every  one  of  us  it  must  be  fulfilled  that 
all  that  is  of  the  flesh  in  us,  seeing  it  is  but  as  grass,  must  be  withered,  and  the 
comeliness  thereof  must  be  destroyed.  The  Spirit  of  God,  like  the  wind,  must  pass 
over  the  field  of  our  souls,  and  cause  our  beauty  to  be  as  a  fading  flower.  There 
must  be  brought  home  to  us  the  sentence  of  death  upon  our  former  legal  and 
carnal  life,  that  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  Word  of  God,  implanted  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  may  be  in  us,  and  abide  in  us  for  ever.  The  subject  is  the  withering  work 
of  the  Spirit  upon  the  souls  of  men.  I.  Turning  then  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
IN  CAUSING  the  goodliness  OF  THE  FLESH  ^o  FADE,  let  US,  first,  obscrvc  that  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  soul  of  man  in  withering  up  that  which  is  of  the 
flesh,  is  very  unexpected.  You  will  observe  that  even  the  speaker  himself,  though 
doubtless  one  taught  of  God,  when  he  was  bidden  to  cry,  said,  "What  shall  I  cry?" 
Even  he  did  not  know  that  in  order  to  the  comforting  of  God's  people,  there  must 
first  be  experienced  a  preliminary  visitation.  Many  preachers  of  God's  gospel  have 
forgotten  that  the  law  is  the  schoolmaster  to  bring  men  to  Christ.  It  cannot  be 
that  God  should  cleanse  thee  until  He  has  made  thee  see  somewhat  of  thy  defile- 
ment ;  for  thou  wouldst  never  value  the  precious  blood  if  thou  hadst  not  first  of  all 
been  made  to  mourn  that  thou  art  altogether  an  unclean  thing.  The  convincing 
work  of  the  Spirit,  wherever  it  comes,  is  unexpected,  and  even  to  the  child  of  God 
in  whom  this  process  has  still  to  go  on,  it  is  often  startling.  We  begin  again  to 
build  that  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had  destroyed.  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  we 
act  as  if  we  would  be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh ;  and  then  when  our  mistaken  up- 
building has  to  be  levelled  with  the  earth,  we  are  almost  as  astonished  as  we  were 
when  first  the  scales  fell  from  our  eyes.  The  voice  which  saith,  "  Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye  My  people,"  achieves  its  purpose  by  first  making  them  hear  the  cry, 
"  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field."  2. 
Furthermore,  this  withering  is  after  the  usual  order  of  the  Divine  operation.  If  we 
consider  well  the  way  of  God  we  shall  not  be  astonished  that  He  beginneth  with 
His  people  by  terrible  things  in  righteousness.  Observe  the  method  of  creation. 
What  was  there  in  the  beginning  ?  Originally  nothing.  "  The  earth  was  without 
form  and  void  ;  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep."  There  was  no  trace 
of  another's  plan  to  interfere  with  the  great  architect.  So  it  is  in  the  new  creation. 
When  the  Lord  new  creates  us,  He  borrows  nothing  from  the  old  man,  but  makes 
all  things  new.  He  does  not  repair  and  add  a  new  wing  to  the  old  house  of  our 
depraved  nature,  but  He  builds  a  new  temple  for  His  own  praise.  3.  I  would  have 
you  notice  that  we  are  taught  in  our  text  how  universal  this  process  is  in  its  range 
over  the  hearts  of  all  those  upon  whom  the  Spirit  works.  "  All  flesh  is  grass ;  and 
all  the  goodliness  thereof  " — the  very  choice  and  pick  of  it — "  is  as  the  flower  of 
the  field,"  and  what  happens  to  the  grass  ?  Does  any  of  it  live  ?  "  The  grass 
withereth,"  all  of  it.  The  flower,  will  not  that  abide  ?  So  fair  a  thirig,  has  not 
that  an  immortality  ?  No,  it  utterly  falls  away.  So  wherever  the  Spirit  of  God 
breathes  on  the  soul  of  man,  there  is  a  withering  of  everything  that  is  of  the  flesh, 
and  it  is  seen  that  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  If  the  work  in  us  be  not  the 
Spirit's  working,  but  our  own,  it  will  droop  and  die  when  most  we  require  its 
protection.  4.  You  see,  then,  the  universality  of  this  withering  work  within  us, 
but  notice  the  completeness  of  it.  The  grass,  what  does  it  do  ?  Droop  ?  nay, 
wither.  The  flower  of  the  field  :  what  of  what  ?  Does  it  hang  its  head  a  little  ? 
No,  according  to  Isaiah  it  fades ;  and  according  to  Peter  it  falleth  away.    There  is 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  FETE^.  119 

no  reviving  it  with  showers,  it  has  come  to  its  end.  Even  thus  are  the  awaliened 
led  to  see  that  in  their  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  5.  Let  us  further  notice 
that  all  this  withering  work  in  the  soul  is  very  painful.  As  you  read  these  verses 
do  they  not  strike  you  as  having  a  very  funereal  tone  ?  This  is  mournful  work, 
but  it  must  be  done.  All  that  is  of  nature's  spinning  must  be  unravelled.  It  was  a 
great  mercy  for  our  city  of  London  that  the  great  fire  cleared  away  all  the  old 
buildings  which  were  the  lair  of  the  plague,  a  far  healthier  city  was  then  built ; 
and  it  is  a  great  mercy  for  a  man  when  God  sweeps  right  away  all  his  own 
righteousness  and  strength,  when  He  makes  him  feel  that  he  is  nothing  and  can  be 
nothing,  and  drives  him  to  confess  that  Christ  must  be  all  in  all,  and  that  his  only 
strength  lies  in  the  eternal  might  of  the  ever-blessed  Spirit.  6.  Observe  that 
although  this  is  painful  it  is  inevitable.  Why  does  the  grass  wither  ?  Because  it 
is  a  withering  thing.  "  Its  root  is  ever  in  its  grave,  and  it  must  die."  How  could 
it  spring  out  of  the  earth  and  be  immortal?  The  seeds  of  corruption  are  in  all  the 
fruits  of  manhood's  tree  ;  let  them  be  as  fair  to  look  upon  as  Eden's  clusters,  they 
must  decay.  Moreover,  it  would  never  do  that  there  should  be  something  of  the 
flesh  in  our  salvation  and  something  of  the  Spirit ;  for  if  it  were  so  there  would  be 
a  division  of  the  honour.  It  gives  me  great  joy  when  I  hear  that  you  unconverted 
ones  are  very  miserable,  for  the  miseries  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  are  always 
the  prelude  to  happiness.  7.  It  is  the  Spirit's  work  to  wither.  Better  to  be  broken 
in  pieces  by  the  Spirit  of  God  than  to  be  made  whole  by  the  flesh !  What  doth  the 
Lord  say?  "I  kill."  But  what  next?  "I  make  alive."  He  never  makes  any 
alive  but  those  He  kills.  He  never  heals  those  whom  He  has  not  wounded.  II. 
Now,  concerning  the  implantation.  According  to  Peter,  although  the  flesh 
withers,  and  the  flower  thereof  falls  away,  yet  in  the  children  of  God  there  is  an 
unwithering  something  of  another  kind.  "Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible 
seed,"  &c.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever,"  Ac.  Now,  the  gospel  is  of 
use  to  us  because  it  is  not  of  human  origin.  If  it  were  of  the  flesh,  all  it  could  do 
for  us  would  not  land  us  beyond  the  flesh  ;  but  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  super- 
human. Divine,  and  spiritual.  In  its  conception  it  was  of  God;  its  great  gift,  even 
the  Saviour,  is  a  Divine  gift ;  and  all  its  teachings  are  full  of  deity.  Now  this  is 
the  incorruptible  Word,  that  "  God  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us  " ;  that 
"  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  their 
trespasses  unto  them."  This  is  the  incorruptible  Word,  that  "  whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  Do  you  receive  it?  Then  the  Holy  Spirit 
implants  it  in  your  soul.  Do  you  leap  up  to  it,  and  say, "  I  believe  it "  ?  Then  you  possess 
the  living  seed  within  your  soul.  And  what  is  the  result  of  it?  Why,  then  there 
comes,  according  to  the  text,  a  new  life  into  us,  as  the  result  of  the  indwelling  of  the 
living  Word,  and  our  being  born  again  by  it.  Now  observe  wherever  this  new  life  comes 
through  the  Word,  it  is  incorruptible,  it  lives  and  abides  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Man  and  his  glory — the  grass  and  its  floxoer  : — These  verses  institute  a  comparison 
and  bring  out  a  contrast  between  the  natural  life  and  the  spiritual.  Every  son  of 
man  is  born  into  one  life,  and  every  son  of  God  is  born  again  into  another.  There 
is  a  mystery  in  every  man,  but  a  greater  mystery  in  every  Christian.  Nature  is  deep, 
but  grace  is  deeper.  The  two  lives  brought  into  contrast  here  are  the  natural  life 
of  man  in  the  body  which  soon  fades  away,  and  the  new  life  of  the  regenerated 
which  will  for  ever  flourish.  These  two  lives  are  not  in  all  their  aspects  opposite, 
for  the  same  person  may  at  the  same  time  possess  both.  He  holds  them,  however, 
by  different  tenures  :  the  first  or  natural  life  will  soon  depart,  but  the  new  or 
spiritual  life  will  be  his  for  ever.  The  analogy  employed  is  exact  and  full  and 
beautiful — "  All  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass." 
Man  is  like  the  grass,  and  his  glory  like  its  flower.  Life  is  short,  and  the  period  of 
its  perfect  development  is  shorter  still.  The  history  of  a  man  consists  of  a  gradual 
growing  to  maturity,  and  a  gradual  declining  to  the  grave.  Such  is  his  best  estate, 
when  no  accident  cuts  him  o&  in  mid-time  of  his  days.  But  if  this  is  true  of  the 
flesh — the  sensitive  nature  which  man  has  in  common  with  the  brutes — what  shall 
be  said  of  all  his  distinguishing  features  as  a  moral  and  intelligent  being  ?  Although 
the  mere  flesh  is  evanescent,  what  of  the  glory  wherewith  his  Maker  has  crowned 
his  head  ?  The  text  has  two  things  to  say  of  this  glory — the  first,  that  it  greatly 
excels  in  worth  and  beauty  the  animal  structure  on  which  it  grows ;  the  second, 
that  it  is  still  more  short-lived.  If  all  flesh  be  as  grass,  all  its  glory  is  only  as  the 
flower  of  grass.  The  flower  is  indeed  the  glory  of  the  grass,  but  it  comes  up  later 
and  withers  earlier.  What  shall  we  say,  then,  of  all  that  is  peculiar  to  man — of 
all  that  distinguishes  him  from  the  beasts  of  the  field — of  that  human  face  divine, 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  that  articulate  speech,  and  that  calculating  mind,  which  mark  him  off  as  chief 
of  God's  creatures  here  and  ruler  of  His  world  ?  Can  the  glory  of  man  be  compared 
to  the  herbage  as  well  as  his  sentient  nature  ?  No ;  for  though  it  is  more  brilliant 
while  it  lasts,  it  is  sooner  over.  Beauty  of  form  is  one  of  the  distinguishing  glories 
of  humanity.  It  has  pleased  God  our  Father  so  to  arrange  the  features  of  our 
frame,  and  so  to  constitute  our  minds,  that  we  count  them  comely.  We  admire  the 
flower  of  the  herbage,  and  devoutly  see  in  it  the  Creator's  wisdom.  Shall  we  not 
look  with  deeper  interest  on  a  lighted  human  countenance,  and  see  in  that  glory  of 
man  a  glory  to  the  Lord  ?  This  glory  does  not  last  long  ;  it  is  a  flower — fragrant, 
attractive  ;  but  it  withers  soon.  The  flower  is  later  blown  and  earlier  faded  than 
the  frail  green  stem  that  bears  it.  But  the  beauty  of  the  new  creature  in  Christ 
does  not  fade  like  a  flower.  It  is  an  interesting  speculation— although  it  can  be 
nothing  more — to  imagine  the  beauty  of  man  unfallen.  The  peculiar  sweetness 
sometimes  imparted  to  the  countenance  of  an  ordinary  person  by  the  sudden 
influx  of  a  "great  peace"  in  periods  of  spiritual  revival  suggests  the  probability  that 
we  lost  by  sin  an  external  loveliness  so  great  that  we  lack  now  the  power  of  con- 
ceiving fully  what  it  was.  But,  great  though  the  loss  be,  Christians  sorrow  not  over 
it  as  those  who  have  no  hope ;  for  their  gain  is  greater.  Where  sin  abounded  to 
mar,  grace  will  much  more  abound  to  renew.  Whatever  is  lost  by  sin  is  more  than 
restored  by  redemption.  The  risen  Christ  is  glorious,  and  risen  Christians  will  be 
like  Him.  Humanity  redeemed  will  be  humanity  perfect.  I  would  fain  realise  the 
beauty  of  the  resurrection  body,  as  well  as  the  spiritual  purity  of  the  saints  in  light. 
(W.  Arnot.)  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever. — The  living  and  enduring 
Word  : — On  what  grounds  does  the  apostle  assign  to  the  gospel  exclusively  this  high 
character,  that  it  endureth  for  ever?  I.  The  eighteousness  which  the  gospei. 
EEVEALS  for  JUSTIFYING  THE  UNGODLY  IS  EVERLASTING.  Mankind  are  guilty  before 
God  ;  and  what  blessing  is  so  necessary  as  justification  ?  Of  what  avail  are  rank, 
power,  wealth,  learning,  and  even  Church  privileges,  of  which  so  many  boast,  for 
acceptance  with  God  ?  What,  then,  is  the  glory  of  the  self -justiciary  ?  It  is  fading 
and  transient  as  the  flowers  of  the  field.  And  what  presumption  in  sinful  mortal 
man  to  hold  up  any  of  these  things,  or  all  of  them  put  together,  if  that  were  in  his 
power,  as  his  righteousness,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  declared  will  of  his  Creator 
and  Lord.  Is  the  God  who  made  him  to  be  dictated  to  by  him?  No.  That  Word, 
fixing  the  mode  of  acceptance,  endureth  for  ever,  while  the  glory  which  man 
opposes  to  it  shall  wither,  and  leave  its  worshippers  covered  with  confusion.  The 
certainty  and  the  perfect  reasonableness  of  this  result  must  impress  us  more  deeply 
if  we  consider  the  character  of  the  righteousness  which  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
reveals  and  establishes.  It  is  absolutely  perfect,  for  it  includes  obedience  to  both 
the  precept  and  the  penalty  of  the  law  of  God  ;  it  is  divinely  excellent,  for  it  was 
performed  by  the  Son  of  God,  who  condescended  to  assume  our  frail  nature  that 
He  might  perform  it ;  it  is  the  most  glorious  production  of  Divine  wisdom  and 
love :  it  hath  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honourable  ;  it  hath  thus  propitiated 
God  and  abolished  death.  II.  The  vital  principle  which  the  Word  of  God 
INSPIRES  IS  imperishable.  The  only  life  which  we  derive  from  Adam  is  feeble, 
terrestrial,  mortal.  Its  activities,  aims,  and  enjoyments  correspond  to  its  nature 
and  origin.  They  all  centre  in  things  worldly  and  perishing.  The  gospel  is  "  the 
ministration  of  life."  The  Lord  Jesus  conveys  by  it  the  influences  of  His  quickening 
Spirit  into  the  soul  that  was  alienated  from  God  and  absorbed  in  earth,  and 
produces  in  it  the  new  creature,  even  faith  working  by  love.  The  truth  which  the 
Word  testifies  concerning  Christ  being  thus  known  and  believed  becomes  the 
principle  of  a  new  life,  the  activities  of  which  appear  in  the  outgoings  of  the 
soul  towards  Him  in  trust,  hope,  love,  gratitude,  submission.  By  the  illumina- 
tions of  His  Word  Christ  lives  in  that  soul,  and  exerts  a  mighty  power  over  all  its 
faculties — a  power  which  inspires  it  with  His  own  views,  spirit,  and  aims.  Actuated 
by  the  vital  principles  which  His  words  create — for  His  words  are  spirit  and  life — 
the  mind  connects  all  things  with  Christ  and  with  God,  converts  them  into  means 
of  instruction,  into  motives  to  love  and  obedience,  into  materials  for  praise.  It 
regards  its  most  common  mercies  as  the  fruits  of  Divine  bounty,  the  expressions 
of  the  Divine  goodness  and  care.  It  submits  to  privations  and  afflictions,  and 
endures  them  as  the  salutary  discipline  of  a  wise  father ;  and  the  most  ordinary 
occurrences  it  contemplates  as  the  dispensations  of  Him  who  makes  "all  things 
work  together  for  good  "  to  them  that  love  Him.  The  relations,  then,  and  pleasures, 
and  pains,  and  intercourse,  and  pursuits,  and  occurrences  which  are  peculiar  to  the 
present  transient  state,  and  which  are  so  insignificant  in  themselves,  because  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  121 

state  to  which  they  belong  is  so  fluctuating  and  evanescent,  rise  into  dignity  and 
importance,  from  the  influence  which  the  Divine  Word  exerts  on  the  mind  in 
which  it  lives,  and  become  the  means  at  once  of  present  fellowship  with  God  and 
of  training  up  an  immortal  spirit  for  a  holy  and  blessed  eternity.  Now  this  vital 
principle,  so  excellent  in  itself,  is  imperishable.  In  the  present  state,  indeed,  its 
power  is  small,  its  activities  are  feeble  and  irregular,  and,  of  course,  its  influence  is 
very  limited.  But  let  us  recollect  that  it  is  only  very  lately  since  it  came  into 
being,  and  that  it  exists  in  the  midst  of  much  which  is  most  hostile  to  it,  and 
which  continually  opposes  its  growth.  It  shall  exist,  and  notwithstanding  the 
bleakness  of  the  soil  in  which  it  is  planted,  and  the  noxious  exhalations  which  rise 
around  it  and  the  storms  which  assail  it,  shall  wax  stronger  and  stronger ;  for  the 
seed  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord  which  Uveth  and  abideth  for  ever.    III.  The  honour 

TO    WHICH    THE    GOSPEL   RAISES   BELIEVERS,  AND   THE    BEAUTIES  WITH    WHICH    IT    ADORNS 

THEM,  ARE  UNFADING.  It  dignifies  them  with  intimate  relations  to  Christ,  intro- 
duces them  into  God's  favour,  exalts  them  to  be  His  sons,  gives  them  access  with 
confidence  to  His  gracious  presence,  a  claim  on  His  protection  and  care,  and  makes 
them  kings  and  priests  unto  God.  And  these  are  not  only  enduring,  but  ever- 
increasing  honours;  at  least  their  transcendent  excellence  and  glory  shine  with 
increasing  lustre,  and  the  longer  and  the  more  fully  they  are  enjoyed  they  are  the 
more  highly  valued,  and  then-  power  to  ennoble  and  to  bless  is  more  abundantly 
experienced  and  more  humbly  and  gratefully  acknowledged.  They  are  enduring, 
for  the  lovingkindness  of  God,  which  is  the  sum  of  them  all,  is  immutable,  and  the 
charter  which  conveys  them  is  irrevocable,  for  it  is  confirmed  by  the  blood  of 
Christ  and  the  oath  of  God.  IV.  Every  hope  which  is  founded  on  this  Word 
SHALL  BE  more  THAN  FULFILLED.  What  blcssed  hopcs  docs  it  authorise  and 
encourage  the  believer  to  cherish  ! — the  hope  that  God  wiU  never  fail  him  nor 
forsake  hun,  that  the  Divine  Spirit  shall  be  his  guide  and  comforter,  that  hig 
heavenly  Advocate  shall  secure  to  him  mercy  and  grace  in  every  time  of  need, 
that  the  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  him.  Oh !  are  not  these 
glorious  hopes,  not  only  worthy  of  intellectual  and  immortal  beings,  but  hopes 
which  ennoble  and  purify  and  bless  them  !  Can  the  greatest  and  best  portion  of 
worldly  good  which  human  heart  ever  ventured  to  anticipate  bear  comparison  with 
them  for  a  single  moment  ?  And  that  hope  rests  on  a  sure  foundation.  It  is  built 
on  the  living  and  imperishable  Word  of  Him  who  is  eternal  and  almighty,  whose 
name  is  Faithful  and  True,  and  sooner  shall  heaven  and  earth  pass  than  one  iota 
or  tittle  of  His  Word  remain  unfulfilled.  {Jas.  Stark,  D.D.)  The  Word  of  God 
a  living  thing  : — I.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  seed  of  life.  It  is  a  principle 
having  life  and  energy,  which  sown  in  man's  heart  grows  there,  expands,  and  bears 
fruit  to  such  an  extent  that  the  whole  man  is  transformed  into  a  new  creature,  and 
henceforth  lives  to  God.  It  is  not  so  often  a  broad  outline  of  Christian  truth  that 
strikes  its  root  into  the  conscience  as  some  word  or  two ;  some  thought ;  some 
blessed  promise,  such  as  1  John  i.  7 ;  some  touching  invitation,  like  Matt.  xi.  28 ; 
some  alarming  note  of  warning,  as  Luke  xiii.  3 ;  some  fearful  description,  as 
1  Tim.  v.  6.  In  the  private  history  of  almost  every  one  amongst  us  who  has 
dared  to  confess  Christ  there  has  been,  previous  to  that  step,  a  time  of  reading  and 
of  praying  over  the  Word  of  God.  Schoolboys  in  their  private  rooms,  trembling, 
it  may  be,  at  their  fellows'  laugh,  clerks  in  their  intervals  of  business,  a  wife  in  her 
husband's  absence  at  his  daily  work,  soldiers  and  sailors,  have  placed  the  Bible  on 
their  tables,  read,  prayed,  applied  the  Word,  made  it  their  own,  and  so  been  "borr^ 
again  of  this  incorruptible  seed,"  &c.  II.  The  Word  op  God  liveth  and  abideth 
FOB  EVER  ;  and  if  we  need  to  receive  it  into  our  hearts  as  the  seed  of  life,  so  have 
we  need  to  cherish  it  there  as  the  support  of  life — of  that  life  which,  beginning 
here,  goes  on  throughout  eternity.  Distinctly  and  for  ever  shall  we  think  of  and 
see  before  us  the  Lamb  who  has  redeemed  us  to  God  by  His  blood.  Distinctly  and 
for  ever  will  His  holy  law  stand  out  as  the  law  by  which  we  tried  to  live  on  earth 
and  by  which  we  cannot  fail  to  live  in  heaven.  (F.  Morse,  M.A.)  Human 
changes  and  the  Divine  unchangeahlencss : — Human  changes  and  the  Divine  un- 
changeableness — this  is  the  subject  suggested  by  our  text.  Its  first  clause  is  an 
utterance  of  the  despondency  which  comes  over  us  as  we  contemplate  the  frail  lives 
of  men.  The  second  clause  answers  that  despondency  by  affirming  that  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  is  not  changeful  like  the  thought  of  man,  but  enduring  as  God  Him- 
self. The  third  clause  declares  that  in  the  gospel  we  have  the  abiding  Word  of 
God ;  and  the  whole  passage  is  intended  to  illustrate  the  foregoing  declaration 
that  faith  in  the  gospel  makes  men  as  immortal  as  God ;  we  are  "  born  again,  not 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  for  ever."  Now  the  Bible  is  not  a  despondent  book.  Prophets  and  apostles 
give  expression  to  our  despondency  only  to  correct  and  to  console  it.  I.  The  first 
consolation  our  text  has  for  this  depression  is  that  it  contrasts  with  our  frailty 
THE  Word  of  the  Eternal  God.  It  matters  little  that  the  worker  passes  if  his 
work  endures.  If  we  had  but  as  firm  a  faith  in  "the  Word  of  God"  as  we  have 
in  the  results  of  human  investigation,  if  we  were  as  earnest  in  the  Divine  work  as 
in  our  own,  despondency  would  be  at  an  end.  Piety  will  never  be  checked,  faith 
will  never  languish,  because  "  all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the 
flower  of  grass."  For  piety  is  bent  on  serving  God,  and  faith  receives  God's 
revelation ;  and  though  "  the  grass  withereth  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away," 
«'  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  II.  The  next  thought  suggested  by 
our  text  is  that  man's  changefulness  illustrates  the  eternal  purpose  of  God. 
The  Divine  intention  is  brought  out  in  His  dealing  with  the  fleeting  generations  of 
men ;  it  becomes  venerable  in  retrospect,  while  it  is  ever  revealing  itself  in  the 
freshness  of  a  progressive  history.  An  unvarying  history  would  be  a  history  of 
death  ;  we  gain  a  vaster  idea  of  permanence  by  advance  than  we  could  ever  gain 
by  the  continuance  of  unchanging  forms.  "  One  generation  passeth  away,  and 
another  generation  cometh  ;  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever  " — depository  of  God's 
creative  energy.  Another  spring  sees  the  grass  revive ;  the  trees  look  down  on 
the  renewed  face  of  the  earth.  So,  though  men  die,  humanity  endures ;  the 
same  in  its  great  necessities,  the  same  in  its  sense  of  dependence  and  obliga- 
tion, with  quenchless  aspirations  ever  rising  ;  there  is  an  abiding  human 
heart.  And  humanity  finds  the  same  eternal  God,  the  same  object  of  piety, 
the  inspirer  and  rewarder  of  faith,  the  fountain  of  an  everlasting  hope ;  finds 
the  same  salvation,  the  same  Saviour — "Jesus  Christ,  yesterday  and  to-day  the 
same,  and  for  ever."  There  is  development  in  humanity  as  there  is  evolution 
in  nature  ;  and  this  development  witnesses  to  the  abiding  God,  who  needs  ages  to 
■work  out  His  will  and  reveal  His  eternal  purpose  of  goodness  and  grace  to  waiting 
man.  III.  It  is  not  of  the  eternity  of  God  or  of  God's  rule  over  the  world  that  our 
text  speaks ;  it  is  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord,"  which  "  endureth  for  ever."  We 
need  a  revelation ;  an  unrevealed  were  an  unknown  God.  And  yet  how  can  we 
dream  of  abiding  truth  in  a  changing  humanity  ?  As  mankind  advances  will  not 
men's  thoughts  vary  concerning  even  such  fundamental  things  as  moral  obhgation, 
the  character  of  virtue,  the  objects  of  our  devotion,  the  very  being  of  God  ?  The 
answer  is,  there  will  be  development  in  the  Christian  faith ;  a  fuller  apprehension 
of  its  truths,  a  deeper  sympathy  with  its  spirit,  a  larger  experience  of  its  power,  a 
broader  application  of  it  to  the  varying  wants  of  men.  But  it  will  be  from  the  old 
founts  that  the  new  inspirations  will  be  drawn  ;  men  will  turn  to  Christ  and  His 
gospel  in  every  social  complication,  every  conflict  of  faith,  every  spiritual  need. 
The  world's  morals  must  be  Christian  morals ;  the  world's  religion  the  Christian 
faith.  We  are  able  to  apply  the  test  of  history  to  this  prediction.  What  book  is 
there,  eighteen  hundred  years  old,  which  has  the  interest  for  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men  the  gospel  has  ?  We  look  inward,  and  we  find  the  reason  of 
its  perpetuity  to  lie  in  its  appeal  to  what  is  deepest  in  the  soul  of  man.  IV.  The 
enduring  Word  of  God  is  the  pledge  of  our  endurance.  "  Being  born  again, 
not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  for  ever."  The  gospel  has  been  "  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  preserving  it  from 
decay.  Under  it  the  world  has  renewed  its  youth,  and  its  last  days  shall  be  its 
best.  The  love  and  righteousness,  which  are  first  revealed  to  our  faith  as  ever 
abiding  in  God,  and  then  are  formed  in  us — graces  of  character  as  well  as  objects 
of  faith — are  the  only  things  that  can  endure.  The  man  in  whom  they  are  not  is 
dead  while  he  liveth  ;  the  man  in  whom  they  are  shall  hve,  although  he  die.  {A. 
Mackennal,  D.D.)  The  enduring  Word  : — I.  We  have  here  a  Divine  gospel  ;  for 
what  word  can  endure  for  ever  but  that  which  is  spoken  by  the  eternal  God  ? 
II.  We  have  here  an  everlivino  gospel,  as  full  of  vitality  as  when  it  first  came 
from  the  lips  of  God,  as  strong  to  convince  and  convert,  to  regenerate  and  console, 
to  sustain  and  sanctify,  as  ever  it  was  in  its  first  days  of  wonder-working.  III.  We 
have  AN  unchanging  gospel,  which  is  not  to-day  green  grass  and  to-morrow  dry 
hay,  but  always  the  abiding  truth  of  the  immutable  Jehovah.  Opinions  alter,  but 
truth  certified  by  God  can  no  more  change  than  the  God  who  uttered  it.  IV.  Here, 
then,  we  have  a  gospel  to  rejoice  in,  a  Word  of  the  Lord  upon  which  we  may 
lean  all  our  weight.  "  For  ever  "  includes  life,  death,  judgment,  and  eternity. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  Word  of  the  Lord  everlasting  : — I  am  glad  to  have  a 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  PETER.  123 

deliverance  like  this,  so  distinct,  so  comprehensive,  and  at  the  same  time  so 
authoritative.  Men  sometimes  ask  us  what  it  is  that  we  mean  when  we  speak 
so  positively  about  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  In  one  phrase,  we  answer,  we  mean 
the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  which  are  unto  all  people,  that  unto  them  was  born 
on  a  given  day  in  a  city  of  David  a  Saviour,  who  was  Christ  the  Lord.  This 
emphatically  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  The  facts  which  relate  to  the  sufferings  of 
our  Eedeemer  and  the  facts  which  relate  to  His  subsequent  acts  of  everlasting  glory 
are  a  message  from  God  unto  man.  And  the  predictions,  the  narrations,  the 
explanations,  the  invitations,  and  the  promises  altogether  make  up  what  the 
apostle  is  here  designating ;  put  altogether,  they  constitute  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God.  The  adversaries  of  the  Christian  faith  tell  us  that  our  old  gospel  will 
presently  be  disproved.  Strange,  if  it  is  to  come  to  nothing,  that  it  has  survived 
for  nineteen  centuries  already !  I.  It  is  secuee,  whatever  may  be  the  efforts 
OF  POSSIBLE  PERSECUTION.  I  do  not  Say  that  you  will  not  have  apparent  triumphs 
on  the  part  of  the  persecutors.  False  brethren  will  fall  away,  but  God's  truth, 
somehow  or  other,  will  still  survive,  and  He  to  whom  that  truth  pertains  and 
whose  Word  we  are  speaking  will  make  it  good  in  spite  of  opposition,  and  make  it 
good  in  the  oppressions  of  His  faithful  servants,  strengthening  them  with  strength 
in  their  souls,  turning  curse  into  blessing,  and  making  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise 
Him,  whilst  the  remainder  of  that  wrath  He  will  restrain.     11.  The  old  gospel  is 

IN  NO  DANGER  WHATEVER  FROM  THE  INTELLECTUAL  OPPOSITION  OF  OUR  MODERN  INFIDELS. 

Here  and  there  we  have  the  sound  of  triumph  on  the  part  of  our  adversaries. 
Eeading  their  literature,  as  some  of  us  do,  we  find  those  triumphs  much  more 
frequent  perhaps  than  some  of  you  may  suppose ;  but  what  are  the  triumphs  ? 
They  are  not  triumphs  over  the  old  gospel  as  it  came  down  from  heaven.  You 
have  had  things  incorporated  with  Christianity  which  God  never  put  there — they 
are  disproved  ;  you  have  had  opinions  foisted  upon  the  gospel  from  the  traditions 
of  men — they  are  being  detached  ;  you  have  had  interpretations  of  Holy  Scripture 
which  are  undoubtedly  untrue — you  have  had  them  put  to  silence.  But  need  I  say 
that  such  victories  are  not  against  us  ?  They  are  on  our  side !  To  get  rid  of  error 
is  to  get  rid  of  so  much  dead  weight ;  and  although  the  discomfiture  of  a  Christian 
man,  when  the  traditions  which  he  has  maintained  are  taken  from  beneath  him, 
may  not  be  that  which  he  likes,  yet  such  discomfiture  is  so  much  clear  gain  to  the 
Christian  cause,  and  that  clear  gain  it  will  go  on  to  acquire.     III.  The  old  gospel 

IS   IN    NO   danger    from    THE    DISCOVERIES    OF     OUR    SCIENTIFIC   MEN.        I    knOW    of    UO 

statement  so  popular  amongst  the  foes  of  the  Christian  faith  as  this,  that  the 
teachings  of  our  sacred  books  are  at  variance  with  the  teachings  of  the  natural 
sciences  ;  at  variance,  for  example,  with  the  teachings  of  astronomy,  of  archaeology, 
and  especially  of  geology.  Not  one  of  those  sciences  whispers  a  coming  contradic- 
tion to  your  Bibles ;  not  one  of  them  foretokens  a  coming  time  when  you  will  have 
either  to  give  up  that  book  or  to  deny  indisputable  facts.  IV.  The  old  gospel  is 
IN  NO  danger  from  THE  ADVANCEMENT  OF  CIVILISATION.  How  Is  civilisation  advancing ! 
What  a  power  is  that  of  our  commerce,  our  literature,  our  science,  our  art,  our 
philanthropy,  our  moral  and  intellectual  philosophy  !  There  is  much  about  it  to 
be  admired ;  it  softens  asperities,  conciliates  antagonism,  refines  the  manners, 
elevates  the  character,  combines  and  consolidates  into  one  the  entire  family  of 
man.  Wondrous  is  the  good  which  it  has  been  doing,  and  wondrous  is  the  good  of 
which  it  is  itself  the  representative  and  the  embodiment.  Tell  us  that  civilisation 
will  be  the  destroyer  of  Christianity  !  Why,  abstract  from  your  modern  civilisa- 
tion that  which  Christianity  has  imparted  to  it,  and  you  have  just  that  which  very 
presently,  by  common  consent,  would  be  buried  and  out  of  sight.  Why,  it  is  the 
very  child  which  your  Christianity  has  brought  forth ;  it  is  the  very  creation  of 
which  Christianity  in  her  pure  exuberance  is  instrumentally  the  creator.  You  might 
just  as  well  think  of  this  great  superstructure  in  which  we  are  assembled  existing 
without  a  foundation  as  to  think  of  modern  civilisation  existing  without  Christianity. 
V.  The  old  gospel  is  in  no  danger  from  the  ulterior  necessities  of  humanity. 
There  may  be  species  of  human  necessity  that  have  never  yet  come  to  light  in  our 
acquaintance  with  mankind ;  and  there  may  be  species  that  never  will  come  to 
light,  except  it  be  in  some  further  and  advanced  stage  of  the  history  of  our  race. 
The  capacities,  the  susceptibilities,  and  the  activities  of  the  human  soul  are  per- 
fectly wonderful.  Give  to  that  human  soul  the  opportunity,  the  means,  and  the 
appliances  which  may  be  requisite,  and  where  is  the  man  that  will  tell  me  what 
deeper  depths  of  the  emotional  he  may  evince,  what  mightier  forces  of  the  intel- 
lectual he  may  disclose,  what  intenser  sympathy  with  the  diabolical  he  may  display, 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

and  what  more  glowing  apprehensions  of  the  immortal  he  may  manifest  ?  Abide 
by  your  old  gospel  with  an  unfaltering  faith.  Let  that  time  come,  and  be  it 
present  to  your  eye  now,  when  there  shall  be  powers  of  investigation  to  which 
there  is  no  parallel  now ;  there  will  be  the  message  to  the  man  who  possesses  that 
power  of  investigation — Go  and  investigate  the  great  "  mystery  of  godliness."  Be 
your  power  what  it  may,  it  will  find  its  occupation  there.  Be  it  so,  that  there  shall 
be  a  capability  for  apprehension  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  now :  the  command- 
ment will  be — Go  and  take  the  "  unspeakable  gift "  of  God,  and  try  and  find  the 
occupation  for  your  apprehension  there.  Be  it  so  that  there  is  guilt  perpetrated — • 
and  who  can  tell  after  what  we  see  ourselves  what  forms  of  guilt  may  be  per- 
petrated ? — be  it  that  guilt  is  perpetrated  at  which  even  the  devil  stands  aghast : 
there  is  "  the  blood  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin  "  ;  let  the  sinner  go  and  be  cleansed 
and  pardoned  by  that.  Be  it  so  that  there  will  be  unparalleled  sympathy  with  and 
aspiration  for  the  immortal ;  let  the  man  who  is  the  subject  of  such  aspirations  go 
and  try  to  understand  the  "  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  Oh  ! 
there  is  no  danger  for  the  old  gospel !  You  may  have  philosophy  sublimated,  until 
that  with  which  we  are  familiar  shall  be  as  nothing  side  by  side  with  your 
philosophy ;  transcendently  superior  will  be  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God, 
and  so  far  from  being  inadequate  to  man's  requisitions  then,  it  will  supply,  with  an 
amplitude  which  is  imperial,  all  that  shall  be  required.  So  far  from  being  effete 
and  obsolete,  it  will  exist  with  living  and  with  royal  power ;  so  far  from  being,  as 
we  are  told,  an  exploded  superstition,  an  exhausted  fountain,  an  ancient,  decrepit, 
infirm,  unavailable  messenger  of  good,  there  it  will  be,  in  all  the  vigour  of  its  youth, 
proclaiming  salvation  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  declaring  to  mankind  in 
its  highest  elevation  there  is  a  higher  elevation  still.  "Behold,  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  that  is  wisdom  ;  and  to  depart  from  evil,  that  is  understanding."  This  Word 
of  the  Lord  will  be  all  adequate  to  the  necessities  and  the  requirements  of  humanity. 
(W.  Brock.)  The  Word  of  God  everliving  : — How  wonderfully  has  the  Lord 
provided  for  the  continuance  of  the  vegetable  world ;  He  causes  the  plant  to  scatter 
broadcast  a  multitude  of  seeds,  and  bids  the  winds  convey  them  far  and  wide.  The 
fowls  of  the  air  are  commissioned  to  bear  berries  and  fruits  to  their  proper  soils, 
and  even  to  bury  them  in  the  earth ;  while  scores  of  four-footed  creatures,  engaged 
in  storing  up  food  for  themselves,  become  planters  of  trees  and  propagators  of 
plants.  Seeds  bear  a  charmed  life  about  them ;  they  wUl  germinate  after  being 
buried  for  centuries ;  they  have  been  known  to  flourish  when  turned  up  from  the 
borings  of  wells  from  the  depth  of  hundreds  of  feet,  and  when  ponds  and  lakes 
have  been  dried  the  undrowned  vegetable  life  has  surprised  the  beholders  by 
blossoming  with  unknown  flowers.  Can  we  imagine  that  God  has  been  thus  care- 
ful of  the  life  of  the  mere  grass  of  the  field,  which  is  the  very  emblem  of  decay, 
and  yet  is  negligent  of  His  Word,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever  ?  It  is  not  to 
be  dreamed  of.  Truth,  the  incorruptible  seed,  is  ever  scattering  itself ;  every  wind 
is  laden  with  it,  every  breath  spreads  it ;  it  lies  dormant  in  a  thousand  memories ; 
it  preserves  its  life  in  the  abodes  of  death.  The  Lord  has  but  to  give  the  word,  and 
a  band  of  eloquent  men  shall  publish  the  gospel,  apostles  and  evangelists  will  rise 
in  abundance,  like  the  warriors  who  sprang  from  the  fabled  dragon's  teeth  ;  con- 
verts will  spring  up  like  flowerets  at  the  approach  of  spring,  nations  shall  be  born 
in  a  day,  and  truth,  and  God  the  Lord  of  truth,  shall  reign  for  ever.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  This  is  the  Word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached. — The  same 
gospel  for  us  : — 1.  The  same  Word  of  the  Lord — the  same  glorious  gospel — is  now 
preached  to  you.  And  it  is  this  day  as  young  and  fresh,  and  strong  and  imperish- 
able, as  ever  it  was.  It  "  abideth  for  ever."  And  the  flesh  is  still  as  frail,  and  all 
the  glory  of  the  flesh  still  as  fleeting,  as  of  old.  There  is  no  spot  on  this  round 
earth  where  we  can  escape  the  admonition  and  the  rebuke  to  our  levity  and  pride. 
It  startles  the  wayfarer  in  the  bright  savannas  of  the  south,  and  amid  the  sands  of 
the  desert  and  the  icy  desolation  of  the  pole.  It  whispers  from  the  green  mounds 
of  western  forests,  and  is  repeated  by  the  billows  of  ocean  as  they  roll  above  the 
multitudes  that  have  gone  down  to  slumber  in  the  silent  depths.  There  is  no  hope 
for  man,  save  only  what  is  provided  by  that  Word  of  the  Lord  which  in  the  gospel 
is  preached  unto  you.  2.  But  remember  that  even  this  mighty  Word  has  power  to 
bless  and  save  only  as  it  is  believed  and  obeyed.  Alas  !  how  is  this  simple  truth 
wilfully  forgotten  by  multitudes  who  may  yet  be  said  to  be  exemplary  in  their 
attendance  on  public  ordinances !  3.  Let  me  ask  those  of  you  who  profess  faith  in 
the  gospel  whether  your  obedience  of  the  truth  is  such  as  purifies  your  souls  from 
all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit ;  whether,  in  particular,  it  has  tended  in 
any  measure  to  a  brotherly  love  unfeigned.     (J.  Lillie,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  125 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vers.  1-3. — Wherefore  laying  aside  all  malice. — Malice  laid  aside : — I.  That 
EEGENERATioN  AND  THE  LOVE  OF  SIN  CANNOT  STAND  TOGETHER,  It  must  needs  be  accom- 
panied with  a  new  life.  Do  vines  bear  brambles  ?  II.  That  there  is  no  perfec- 
tion HERE  TO  BE  ATTAINED,  for  cvcn  the  bcst  have  sin  dwelling,  though  not  reigning, 
in   them.     III.  That  it  is  no  easy  thing  to  be  a  Christian.     IV.  That  under 

THOSE  corruptions  HERE  NAMED  ALL  OTHERS  ARE  INCLUDED.  V.  ThAT  MOST  OF 
those  here  mentioned  are   inward  CORRUPTIONS   WHICH   WE    MUST   AS   WELL   AVOID   AS 

THE  OUTWARD.  (Johv,  Rogers.)  Renovation  : — I.  What  is  to  be  laid  aside  ? 
"All  malice,  guile,  hypocrisies,  envies,  evil-speakings."  These  are  only  a  few 
specimens  of  the  many  lusts  which  are  to  be  cast  out,  if  we  would  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  If  a  child  has  swallowed  poison  I  could  not  expect  that  whole- 
some food  would  confer  any  benefit  upon  him — the  poison  must  be  first  removed  ; 
and  if  these  poisonous  evils  lodge  in  your  hearts  and  be  not  repented  of,  they 
prevent  the  Word  of  God  having  its  proper  effect,  they  effectually  neutrahse  it. 
II.  The  special  reason  why  these  are  to  be  "  laid  aside."  The  fact  of  their 
being  "newborn  babes,"  the  apostle  urges  as  a  reason  why  they  should  put  away  all 
these  evils.  This  reason  is  a  very  efficacious  one.  If  you  are  born  again,  what 
have  you  to  do  any  more  with  the  old  habits  of  corruption  ?  III.  What  is  to  be 
desired?  "  The  sincere  milk  of  the  Word."  IV.  For  what  is  the  "  sincere  milk 
OF  the  Word  "  to  be  desired  ?  "  That  ye  may  grow  thereby."  {H.  Verschoyle.) 
A  catalogue  of  sins  to  be  avoided : — I.  It  is  exceedingly  profitable  to  gather 
special  catalogues  of  our  sins  WHICH  WE  SHOULD  AVOID,  to  singlc  out  such  as  we 
would  specially  strive  against,  and  do  more  specially  hurt  us.     II.  The  minister 

ought  to  INFORM    HIS   FLOCK    CONCERNING   THE   PARTICULAR   FAULTS   THAT    HINDER   THE 

WORK  OF  HIS  MINISTRY  wherc  he  lives.  It  is  not  enough  to  reprove  sin,  but  there  is 
a  great  judgment  to  be  expressed  in  applying  himself  to  the  diseases  of  that  people, 
in.  The  apostle  doth  not  name  here  all  the  sins  that  hinder  the  Word,  but  he 
imports  that  in  most  places  these  here  named  do  much  reign,  and  marvellously 
let  the  course  of  the  Word.  IV.  It  should  be  considered  how  these  sins  do  hinder 
the  word.  {N.  Byfield.)  Malice. — Malice  is  an  old  grudge  upon  some  wrong 
done,  or  conceived  to  be  done  to  a  man,  whereupon  he  waits  to  do  some  mischief 
to  him  that  did  it.  Anger  is  like  a  fire  kindled  in  thorns,  soon  blazeth,  is  soon  out ; 
but  malice,  like  fire  kindled  in  a  log,  it  continues  long.  This  is  often  forbidden 
(Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  8).  1.  We  ought  to  take  heed  of  the  beginnings  of  unadvised 
anger.  God  is  slow  to  wrath,  and  so  should  we  be.  2.  If  we  be  overtaken  (as  a 
right  good  man  may)  take  heed  it  fester  not,  grow  not  to  hatred ;  heal  it  quickly  as 
we  do  our  wounds.  The  devil  is  an  ill  counsellor.  {John  Rogers.)  The  veno- 
mous disposition  : — There  are  plants  which  may  be  said  to  distil  venom  of  their 
own  accord.  The  machineel-tree,  for  example  (by  no  means  uncommon  in  the 
West  India  Islands),  affords  a  milky  fluid  which  blisters  the  skin  as  if  it  were  burnt 
with  a  hot  iron  ;  and  indeed  so  dangerous  has  the  vegetable  been  accounted,  that 
if  a  traveller  should  sleep  under  its  shade  it  was  once  popularly  believed  he  would 
never  wake  again.  The  venomous  disposition  of  these  plants  has  its  representative 
in  the  human  family.  There  are  persons  to  be  met  with  who  are  so  spiteful  as  to 
cause  pain  the  moment  you  come  into  contact  with  them.  Their  lips  distil  malice, 
and  it  seems  the  object  of  their  life  to  inflict  malignant  wounds.  If  you  trust  them 
your  happiness  will  sleep  the  sleep  of  death.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  All  g^uile. 
— Guile : — It  is  meant  of  guile  that  is  between  men  and  men  in  their  dealings  with 
each  other,  as  in  buying,  selling,  letting,  hiring,  borrowing,  lending,  paying  wages, 
doing  work,  partnership,  &c. ;  when  men  would  seem  to  do  well,  but  do  otherwise; 
when  one  thing  is  pretended,  but  another  practised.  We  are  not  born  for  ourselves, 
but  for  the  good  of  each  other ;  we  must  not  lie  one  to  another,  seeing  we  are 
members  one  to  another,  as  it  were  monstrous  in  the  natural  body  to  see  the  hand 
beguile  the  mouth,  &c.,  and  yet  how  common  is  this  sin!  how  doth  one  spread 
a  net  for  another !  not  caring  how  they  come  by  their  goods,  so  they  be  once 
masters  of  them.  (John  Rogers.)  Guile  in  small  matters  as  well  as  great  to  be 
avoided  : — "All" — this  is  added  to  show  (lest  any  should  think  none  but  guile  in 
great  matters  or  measure  forbidden  here)  that  there  is  a  thorough  reformation 
required.  Therefore  it  wUl  not  serve  any  man's  turn  to  say,  "  My  shop  is  not  so 
dark  as  others;  I.  mingle  not  my  commodities  so  much  as  such  and  such  ;  I  never 
deceived  in  any  great  matters."    All  guile  must  be  abandoned  by  a  Christian  who 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

cares  for  his  soul.     A  Christian  must  show  forth  the  truth  of  his  Christianity  in  his 
particular  calling,  in  his  shop,  buying,  selling,  &e.,  that  men  may  count  his  word 
as  good  as  a  bond,  that  they  dare  rest  on  his  faithfulness,  that  he  will  not  deceive. 
{Ibid.)       Hypocrisies. — Preservatives  against  hypocrisy  : — 1.  Keep  thyself  in  God's 
presence  ;  remember  always  that  His  eyes  are  upon  thee  (Psa.  xvi.  8 ;  Gen.  xvii.  1). 
2.  Thou  must  pray  much  and  often  to  God  to  create  a  right  spirit  within  thee  ;  for 
by  nature  we  have  all  hypocritical  hearts  (Psa.  li.  10).     3.  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence,  watching  daily  and  resisting  distractions,  wavering  thoughts,  and  forget- 
fulness.     Judge  thyself  seriously  before  God  (James  iv.  8;  Matt,  xxiii.  26).     4.  In 
all  matters  of  well-doing  be  as  secret  as  may  be  (Matt,  vi.),  both  in  mercy,  prayer, 
fasting,  reading,  and  the  like.     5.  Be  watchful  over  thy  own  ways,  and  see  that 
thou  be  as  careful  of  all  duties  of  godliness  in  prosperity  as  in  adversity,  in  health 
as  in  sickness  (Job  xxvii.  9,  10).     6.  Converse  with  such  as  in  whom  thou-  dis- 
cernest  true  spirits  without  guile,  and  shun  the  company  of  known  hypocrites.     7. 
Be  not  rash  and  easy  to  condemn  other  men  for  hypocrites,  only  because  they 
cross  thy  opinions,  or  humours,  or  will,  or  practice.     It  is  often  observed  that  rash 
censurers  that  usually  lash  others  as  hypocrites  fall  at  length  into  some  vile  kind 
of  hypocrisy  themselves.     {N.  Byfield.)        Hypocrisy  : — Hypocrites  are  like  unto 
white  silver,  but  they  draw  black  lines,  they  have  a  seeming  sanctified  outside,  but 
stuffed  within  with  malice,  worldliness,  intemperance ;  like  window  cushions  made 
up  of  velvet,  and  perhaps  richly  embroidered,  but  stuffed  within  with  hay.     {J. 
Spencer.)         Hypocrisy  ineffective  .•—Coals  of  fire  cannot  be   concealed   beneath 
the  most  sumptuous  apparel,  they  will  betray  themselves  with  smoke  and  flame ; 
nor  can  darling  sins  be  long  hidden  beneath  the  most  ostentatious  profession,  they 
will  sooner  or  later  discover  themselves,  and  burn  sad  holes  in  the  man's  reputation. 
Sin  needs  quenching  in  the  Saviour's  blood,  not  concealing  under  the  garb  of 
rehgion.      {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Envies. — The  hatefulness  of  envy  :— I.  Consider 
The  subject  persons  in  which  it  usually  is.   It  is  found  most  in  natural  men  (Titus 
iii.  3),  yea,  in  silly  men  (Job  v.  2).     This  was  the  sin  of  Cain  (Gen.  iv).  yea,  of  the 
devil  himself.     II.  Consider  the  cause  of  it.     It  is  for  the  most  part  the  daughter 
of  pride  (Gal.  v.  26),  sometimes  of  covetousness  (Prov.  xxviii.  22),  and  often  of  some 
egregious  transgression,  such  as  in  Eom.  i.  29,  but  ever  it  is  the  filthy  fruit  of  the 
flesh  (Gal.  v.  25).     III.  Consider  the  vile  effects  of  it,  which  are  many.     1.  It 
hath  done  many  mischiefs  for  which  it  is  infamous.     It  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt 
(Gen.  xxxvii.),  and  killed  the  Son  of  God  (Matt,  xxvii.  8) ;  2.  It  deforms  our  natures, 
it  makes  a  man  suspicious,  malicious,  contentious,  it  makes  us  to  provoke,  backbite, 
and  practise  evil  against  our  neighbours.     3.  It  begins  even  death  and  hell,  while  a 
man  is  alive  (Job  v.  2).     It  destroyeth  the  contentment  of  his  life,  and  burns  him 
with  a  kind  of  fire  unquenchable.     IV.  It  is  a  notable  hindrance  to  the  profit  op 
the  Word,  and  so  no  doubt  it  is  to  prayer  and  all  piety,  as  evidently  it  is  a  let  of 
charity    (Phil.   i.    15).     (N.  Byfield.)         All  evil  speaking's. — Rides   against   evil- 
speaking  : — He    that  would   restrain  himself    from    being  guilty   of   backbiting, 
judging,  reviling,  or  any  kind  of  evil-speaking,  must  observe  such  rules  as  these. 
I.  He  must  learn  to  speak  well  to  God  and  of  godliness.     If  we  did  study  that 
holy  language  of  speaking  to  God  by  prayer,  we  would  be  easily  fitted  for  the  govern- 
ment of  our  tongues  toward  men :  we  speak  ill  to  men  because  we  pray  but  ill  to 
God.     II.  He  must  study  to  be  quiet  and  not  meddle  with  the  strife  that  belongs 
not  to  him ;   resolving  that  he  will  never  suffer   as  a  busybody  in  other  men's 
matters  (1  Thess.  iv. ;  1  Pet.  iv.  15).     III.  He  must  keep  a  catalogue  of  his  own 
FAULTS  continually  IN  HIS  MIND.     When  we  are  so  apt  to  task  others  it  is  because 
we  forget  our  own  wickedness.     IV.  His  words  must  be  few,  for  in  a  multitude  of 
words  there  cannot  want  sin,  and  usually  this  sin  is  never  absent.     V.  He  must  not 
allow  himself  liberty  to  think  evil,     a  suspicious  person  will  speak  evil.     VI. 
He  must  pray  to  God  to  set  a  watch  before  the  doors  of  his  lips.     VII.  He  must 
avoid  vain  and  provoking  company.     When  men  get  into  idle  company  the  very 
complement  of  discoursing  extracteth  evil-speaking  to  fill  up  the  time ;   especially 
he  must  avoid  the  company  of  censurers,  for  their  ill-language,  though  at  first  dis- 
liked, is  insensibly  learned.     VIU.  He  must  especially  strive  to  get  meekness, 
and  show  his  meekness  to  all  men  (Titus  iii.  1,  2).   IX.  If  he  have  this  way  offended, 
then  let  him  follow  that  counsel,  "  Let  his  own  words  grieve  hira  "  (Psa.  Ivi.  5)  ;  that 
is  LET  him  humble  HIMSELF  SERIOUSLY  FOR  IT  BEFORE  GoD  by  hearty  repentance ; 
this    sin     is     seldom    mended,    because     it    is     seldom     repented     of.      (Ihid.) 
Pernicious  and  evil-speaking  abundant: — Alas,  evil  speaking  floods  the  world  as 
some  weeds  cover  the  fields  in  early  summer  1     My  heart  was  made  sad  in  some 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  127 

journeys  last  year  as  I  saw  many  large  tracks  of  grain  almost  hidden  by  a  yellow 
sea  of  flowering  weeds.  For  the  time  you  think  it  is  not  possible  that  any  of  the 
corn  can  come  to  perfection.  Even  there,  however,  a  harvest  is  reaped  ;  but  the 
harvest  would  have  been  heavier  if  the  fields  had  been  clean.  Evil-speaking,  like 
one  dominant  weed,  covers  the  surface  of  society,  and  chokes  in  great  measure  the 
growth  of  the  good  seed.  Christians,  ye  are  God's  husbandry — ploughed  field ;  put 
away  these  bitter  things  in  their  seed-thoughts  and  in  their  matured  actions,  that 
ye  may  be  fruitful  unto  Him.  If  the  multitude  of  words  spoken  by  professing 
Christians  in  disparagement  of  their  neighbours  were  reduced  first  by  the  omission 
of  all  that  is  not  strictly  true  and  fair  ;  and  next  by  the  omission  of  all  that  is  not 
spoken  with  a  good  object  in  view  ;  and  next  by  the  omission  of  all  that,  though 
spoken  with  a  good  intention,  is  unwisely  spoken,  and  mischievous  in  its  results  ; — 
the  remainder  would,  like  Gideon's  army,  be  very  small  in  number,  but  very  select 
in  kind.  The  residuum  would  consist  only  of  the  testimony  of  true  men  against 
wickedness,  which  truth  and  faithfulness,  as  in  God's  sight,  compelled  them  to 
utter.  {W.  Arnot.)  As  newborn  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word. — 
Christian  childhood  and  its  appropriate  nourishment : — 1.  The  similitude  by  which 
Christians  abe  here  represented.  1.  This  may  relate  to  the  commencement  of 
the  spiritual  life  at  regeneration,  as  compared  with  its  subsequent  growth  in  this 
world.  Not  only  has  this  life  a  beginning  here,  after  the  natural  birth,  but  it  begins 
like  that,  in  a  small,  feeble,  and  almost  imperceptible  manner.  2.  But  this  child- 
hood may  relate  to  the  whole  state  of  the  spiritual  life  in  the  present  world  as 
compared  with  its  future  manhood.  II.  .What  that  growth  is  which  the  Scrip- 
ture IS  calculated  thus  to  promote  through  the  whole  course  of  our  mortal 
existence.  1.  In  knowledge.  At  first  this  principle  is  weak  in  its  perception  of 
the  things  of  revelation.  It  begins  with  those  parts  of  Scripture  which  he  nearest 
to  human  observation,  and  in  which  the  Bible  most  accommodates  itself  to  human 
ignorance.  It  proceeds  to  those  passages  suited  to  an  awakened  and  quickened 
state  of  feeling.  2.  In  purity.  The  mind  naturally  conforms  itself  to  the  senti- 
ments with  which  it  is  conversant.  3.  In  heavenly-mindedness.  To  that  world 
from  which  the  Scriptures  came,  and  about  which  they  frequently  treat,  they 
insensibly  draw  the  devout  peruser.  They  facilitate  the  withdrawment  of  our 
minds  from  this  world  by  the  transitoriness  which  they  attach  to  all  earthly 
excellences,  and  by  making  them  to  stand  for  signs  of  others,  yet  greater  and 
better,  in  the  celestial  economy.  Hence  our  elevation  is  effectively  promoted. 
4.  In  peace  and  tranquillity  of  mind,  amidst  all  the  disturbances  and  iUs  of  life. 
What  book  is,  or  can  be,  like  the  Bible,  for  its  perpetual  reference  of  all  things  here 
to  a  Divine  superintendence  ?  5.  In  fine,  the  Scripture  is  calculated  to  promote  the 
growth  of  every  grace  of  the  Spirit  necessary  to  complete  the  Christian  character. 
It  feeds  repentance  by  the  evil  it  discloses  in  sin ;  it  feeds  Divine  love  by  the 
excellence  it  portrays  in  God,  rectifying  the  misconceptions  of  the  carnal  mind ;  it 
feeds  faith  by  the  representation  of  its  objects,  and  by  the  impression  it  makes  of  its 
innate  majesty  and  authority  on  the  devout  peruser  of  its  pages.  In  Uke  manner  it 
feeds  hope,  patience,  resignation,  zeal,  and  every  other  grace  which  branches  out  of 
the  principle  of  spiritual  hfe,  and  completes  the  character  of  the  man  of  God. 
III.  What  that  state  of  mind  is  which  Christians  are  required  to    cultivate 

IN    ORDER   TO    SECURE    THIS    GREAT   BENEFIT   FROM   THE    ScBIPTURE.       1.    There  mUSt  be 

the  removal  of  what  would  otherwise  prove  fatal  impediments.  James  inculcates 
the  same  duty  under  a  different  metaphor  (chap.  i.  21).  He  compares  the  Word  to  a 
fruit-bearing  plant,  requiring  a  clean  and  friendly  soil  for  its  growth.  The  weeds 
of  evil  dispositions  must  be  eradicated,  or  its  roots  will  not  spread,  nor  its  virtue 
disclose  itself.  "  Purify  your  hearts,"  therefore,  he  adds  elsewhere,  "  ye  double- 
minded.  Be  ye  doers  of  the  Word,"  &c.  2.  These  impediments  being  removed, 
we  must  cherish  and  promote  the  spiritual  appetite.  The  appetite  of  the  infant  for 
its  appropriate  supply  is  natural.  The  spiritual  appetite,  to  be  analogous  to  it, 
must  have  several  properties.  (1)  It  must  be  earnest.  The  child  cries,  is  impatient 
for  its  designed  support;  and  it  is  not  an  idle,  cold,  sluggish  desire  after  the  aliment 
provided  for  spiritual  growth  that  will  subserve  our  growth.  "  My  soul  breaketh," 
says  David,  "  for  the  longing  it  hath  to  Thy  statutes."  (2)  It  must  be  specific  and 
suitable.  No  toys  and  gew-gaws,  no  gifts  of  gold  and  silver,  no,  nor  even  of  the 
most  delicious  food,  will  compensate  the  infant  for  the  absence  of  its  natural 
support.  Thus  we  must  take  heed  not  to  substitute  for  the  truth  of  Scripture  the 
sentiments  of  men,  though  set  forth  with  all  the  advantages  of  learning  and 
eloquence.     (3)  It  must  be  constant.     The  infant  tires  not  of  its  proper  food,  but 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


finds  in  it  all  it  wants  both  nutritive  and  delicious.  Nor  must  we  tire  of  the  Word 
of  God,  nor  seek  for  a  greater  variety  than  it  presents.  It  contains  within  itself 
all  that  is  necessary  for  life  and  godliness,  for  comfort  and  improvement. 
{J.   Leifchild.)  God^s   newborn   babes   and   their  food  : — I.  Odb   condition  as 

God's  little  ones.  "  Newborn  babes."  This  world  is  but  the  nursery  in  which 
the  heirs  of  God  are  spending  the  first  lisping  years  of  their  existence,  preparatory 
to  the  opening  of  life  to  fuU  maturity  yonder  in  the  light  of  God.  1.  This  word 
should  teach  us  humiUty.  Our  best  pace  and  strongest  walking  in  obedience 
here  is  as  but  the  stepping  of  children  in  comparison  with  the  perfect  obedience  of 
glory,  when  we  shall  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  AU  our  knowledge 
here  is  but  as  the  ignorance  of  infants,  and  all  our  expressions  of  God  and  of  His 
praises  but  as  the  first  stammerings  of  children,  in  comparison  with  the  knowledge 
we  shall  have  of  Him  hereafter.  It  becomes  us,  therefore,  not  to  exercise  ourselves 
in  great  matters,  or  in  things  too  high  for  us,  but  to  quiet  ourselves  as  a  child  that 
is  weaned  of  its  mother.  Not  surprised,  if  unnoticed  or  unknown ;  not  angry,  if 
treated  with  small  respect ;  not  discouraged,  if  face  to  face  with  incomprehensible 
mysteries.  2.  This  word  should  also  teach  us  hope.  There  is  no  young  thing  so 
helpless  as  a  babe.  But  He  who  has  appointed  the  long  months  of  babyhood  has 
also  provided  the  love  and  patience  with  which  mother  and  father  welcome  and 
tend  the  strange  wee  thing  which  has  come  into  their  home.  And  shall  God  have  put 
into  others  qualities  in  which  He  is  Himself  deficient  ?  Shall  He  have  provided  so 
carefully  for  us  in  our  first  birth,  and  have  provided  nought  in  our  second?  Your 
weakness,  and  ailments,  and  nervous  dread,  and  besetting  sins,  and  hereditary  taint  of 
evil  habit  and  dulness  of  vision,  will  not  drive  God  from  you,  but  will  bring  Him  nearer. 
3.  This  word  should  also  teach  us  our  true  attitude  towards  God.  Throw  yourself 
on  Him  with  the  abandonment  of  a  babe.  EoU  on  Him  the  responsibility  of  choosing 
for  you — directing,  protecting,  and  delivering  you.  If  you  are  overcome  by  sin,  be 
sure  that  it  cannot  alienate  His  love,  any  more  than  can  small-pox,  which  has 
marred  some  dear  tiny  face,  prevent  the  mother  from  kissing  the  little  parched  lips. 
II.  Our  food.  "  Long  for  the  spiritual  milk  which  is  without  guile  "  (R.V.).  There 
is  nothing  which  so  proves  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  as  their  suitableness  to 
the  nurture  of  the  new  life  in  the  soul.  As  long  as  that  life  is  absent,  there  is  no 
special  charm  in  the  sacred  Word :  it  lies  unnoticed  on  the  shelf.  But  directly  it 
has  been  implanted,  and  whilst  yet  in  its  earliest  stages,  it  seeks  after  the  Word  of 
God  as  a  babe  after  its  mother's  milk  ;  and  instantly  it  begins  to  grow.  III.  How 
TO  CREATE  AN  APPETITE  FOR  THE  WoRD.  "  Dcsire."  One  of  the  most  dangerous 
symptoms  is  the  loss  of  appetite.  And  there  is  no  surer  indication  of  religious 
declension  and  ill-health  than  the  cessation  of  desire  for  the  Word  of  God.  How 
can  that  appetite  be  created  where  lacking,  and  stimulated  where  declining  ?  1.  Put 
off  the  evil  that  clings  to  you.  2.  Eemember  that  your  growth  depends  on  your 
feeding  on  the  Word.  3.  Stimulate  your  desire  by  the  memory  of  past  enjoyment. 
•'  If  so  be  that  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Spiritual  development : — The  text  urges  three  important  elements  of  holy  living.  I. 
SotjL-MORTiFicATiON — "  Lay  aside  all  malice,"  &c.  This  is  a  sacrifice.  It  does  not 
come  natural  to  the  human  soul.  It  demands  effort.  It  is  not  an  immediate  attain- 
ment, but  demands  a  period  of  growth.  The  series  of  worldly  developments  here 
alluded  to  are  important  marks  of  fallen  men,  and  at  the  same  time  are  painful 
disfigurements  to  professing  Chi'istians.  1.  There  is  malice — i.e.,  ill-feeling  of  every 
kind.  Under  malice  may  be  ranged  political  animosities  which  disturb  the  kindly 
relationship  of  men;  unreasoning  prejudice;  the  desire  to  injure  those  whom  we 
dislike ;  bitterness,  &c.  2.  There  is  guile.  This  includes  deceit.  3.  There  is 
hypocrisy — pretending  a  fictitious  goodness  which  we  do  not  possess.  I  take  it  that 
this  includes  cant,  boasting,  parade  of  religion,  &c.,  for  the  word  is  not  hypocrisy, 
but  hypocrisies.  4.  Envies.  Again  in  the  plural,  for  there  are  different  kinds  of 
envy.  5.  Evil-speakings.  The  failing  here  alluded  to  goes  far  to  cause  all  the 
bitterness  of  worldly  society.  II.  Soul-development.  There  must  be  not  only 
casting  out  of  the  evil,  but  also  the  taking  in  of  what  is  good.  The  first  requirement 
for  development  is  to  be  brought  into  a  state  fit  for  growth.  III.  Soul-incitement 
— "  Since  ye  have  tasted,"  &c.  The  first  taste  creates  a  desire  for  a  more  abundant 
supply.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Sou  I- evolution  : — I.  That  soul-advancement  is  an 
EVOLUTION — "  That  ye  may  grow  thereby."  That  is,  the  growth  of  the  whole  soul — 
all  its  faculties,  forces,  and  germs  of  power.  Growth  implies — 1.  Inner  life.  A 
dead  thing  cannot  grow.  Sometimes  education  is  spoken  of  as  if  the  mind  were  a 
vessel  into  which  a  certain  amount  of  information  is  to  be  poured  until  the  mind  is 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  129 

filled.  Sometimes,  as  if  the  mind  were  a  stone,  on  which  the  instructor  was  to  act 
as  a  lapidary,  and  polish  it  into  some  beautiful  form.  Hence  we  hear  so  much  of 
accomplishments,  painting,  drawing,  music,  &c.  Sometimes,  as  if  the  mind  was 
arable  land,  to  be  ploughed  and  in  which  to  plant  seed  to  germinate  and  develop. 
Philosophically,  nothing  can  grow  in  the  soul.  It  is  the  soul  itself  that  grows. 
2.  An  inner  life  of  latent  power.  A  thing  may  have  life,  and  nothing  within  for 
future  development.  Not  so  with  the  soul ;  it  has  boundless  possibilities.  3.  A  life 
possessing  developing  conditions.  II.  That  soul-evolution  involves  soul-hunger. 
"As  newborn  babes  desire  [K.V.,  long  for]  the  sincere  [E.V.,  spiritual]  milk." 
Vegetable  life  grows  without  a  desire  ;  so,  indeed,  with  animal  life.  But  if  the  soul 
is  to  grow,  it  must  desire  it  intensely.  1.  The  hunger  must  be  for  natural  nutri- 
ment. 2.  The  nutriment  must  be  of  the  best  kind — "  Sincere  [E.V.,  spiritual] 
milk."  What  is  the  best  kind  ?  The  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  milk  of  the  Word  : — I.  Healthy  appetite  :  or,  in  other  words,  an  earnest 
desire  for  spiritual  nourishment.  1.  It  is  of  prime  importance  that  we  have  a  real 
craving  for  spiritual  truth,  for  Christ  will  benefit  us  only  as  we  appropriate  Him. 
2.  We  should  further  cultivate  a  discriminating  taste.  The  babe's  taste  guards  it 
against  unwholesome  food ;  it  covets  nothing  but  the  mother's  milk.  So  ought  we 
to  acquire  a  sensitive  palate  in  respect  of  spiritual  things,  a  palate  able  to  discrimi- 
nate between  the  precious  and  the  vile.  Is  not  the  vitiated  taste  of  many  hearers 
of  the  gospel  a  symptom  of  a  long-standing  disease  ?  3.  We  should  further 
habituate  ourselves  to  desire  strong  meat,  to  digest  well  the  great  fundamental 
doctrines  of  the  gospel.  This  then  is  the  first  requisite  of  orthodoxy,  namely  that 
we  possess  vigorous,  healthy  digestive  organs.  Gospel  truth  must  be  mixed  with 
faith  in  them  that  hear  it ;  that  is  to  say,  they  must  possess  healthy  organs,  able  to 
supply  the  spiritual  secretions  necessary  to  convert  what  we  read  and  hear  into  part 
and  parcel  of  our  spiritual  life.  II.  Healthy  food  ;  or,  in  other  words,  God's  truth 
as  contained  in  Holy  Writ.  1.  The  milk  of  the  Word.  The  great  verses  of  the 
Bible  are  like  so  many  breasts,  from  which  we  are  to  suck  in  the  spiritual  aliment 
necessary  to  our  well-being.  Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  eat  words,  and  especially 
God's  words  ?  The  process  is  as  real,  as  eating  bread  and  meat,  and  the  results  are 
much  more  abiding.  "  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them  "  :  he  converted 
them  into  an  integral  part  of  his  spiritual  nature.  2.  "  The  milk  of  the  Word,"  or 
rational  milk.  Eational  milk  in  contrast  to  the  rites  and  ceremonies  both  of  the 
Jewish  and  heathen  religions.  Christians  are  to  live  more  by  mind  and  less  by  the 
senses.  3.  "  The  sincere — unadulterated — milk  of  the  Word,"  that  is  to  say,  milk 
free  from  all  deleterious  admixtures.  III.  Healthy  geowth.  "  That  we  may  grow 
thereby  unto  salvation."  In  this  Epistle  salvation  is  used  technically  for  salvation 
in  the  future,  salvation  full,  complete,  perfect.  Now  what  does  this  growth  unto 
salvation  imply?  1.  For  one  thing  it  implies  growth  in  knowledge,  for  spiritual 
enlightenment  is  an  essential  factor  in  salvation.  2.  Growth  unto  salvation  further 
implies  growth  in  holiness.  "  Having  laid  aside  all  sin,  and  all  malice,  and  all 
evil-speaking."  Other  religions  forbid  particular  sins ;  but  whilst  prohibiting  one 
class  of  sins,  they  tolerate  other  classes.  Mahometanism,  for  instance,  prohibits 
drunkenness  ;  seldom  does  a  Mahometan  get  intoxicated.  But  whilst  prohibiting 
drunkenness  it  liceuises  adultery.  And  by  thus  flinging  away  sin  from  us  our 
spiritual  palate  will  gradually  recover  its  normal,  healthy  tone ;  we  wUl  relish  the 
unadulterated  milk  of  the  Word  more  than  our  ordinary  food  and  drink.  (J.  C. 
Jones,  D.D.)  The  Christian  life  in  some  of  its  characteristics  : — It  is  agreed  that 
religion,  subjectively  considered,  is  life.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  If  a 
man  has  religion,  it  is  life  in  him.  But  it  is  finite  life,  limited  and  dependent.  It 
requires  for  its  continuance  outside  support  and  supply.  Turning  now  to  this  life 
let  us  take  note  of  some  of  its  characteristics.  1.  And,  first,  all  life  grows.  This 
may  not  be  apparent  to  the  eye,  but  it  is  to  the  reason.  Growth  is  the  most 
unambiguous  and  decisive  sign  of  life.  A  swelling  bud,  a  beating  pulse — this  is 
proof.  Life  and  growth  go  together  as  inevitable  antecedents  and  consequents ;  and 
where  there  is  growth,  there  is  increment.  This  does  not  necessitate  augmentation 
in  size.  It  is  not  untrue  to  fact  or  absurd  to  say  of  a  thing  growing  that  it  is  grow- 
ing small.  Many  a  tree,  many  an  animal,  not  a  few  persons  of  our  acquaintance, 
are  not  as  large  as  they  formerly  were.  2.  Wherever  there  is  growth,  there  is  eat- 
ing. The  plant  eats ;  down  in  the  ground  at  the  end  of  the  rootlets  we  find  spongi- 
oles,  and  these  are  mouths.  In  transplaoating  a  shrub  or  tree  the  thing  we  care  for 
is  not  to  destroy  these  mouths.  If  true  of  vegetable  life  that  it  lives  by  eating,  it  is 
more  obviously  true  of  animal  life.     Do  you  say  that  in  many  of  the  lowest  forms 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

of  sentient  life  we  find  no  mouths  ?  True  apparently ;  but  the  bodies  of  such 
invertebrates  abound  in  absorbents  that  serve  the  same  purpose.  3.  That  nothing 
eats  without  an  appetite.  The  etymology  of  this  word  {appetitus)  gives  as  its  striking 
meaning  a  seeking  for,  longing  after.  In  vegetable  life  we  have  the  analogue  of 
appetite ;  for  we  find  that  every  root,  trunk,  branch,  is  elongating  itself  in  pursuit 
of  its  required  supply.  The  tree  in  the  thick  forest  extends  itself  to  get  up  into  the 
light  and  heat ;  and  the  stray  vegetable  in  the  cellar  does  the  same  to  get  out  of  the 
dark  and  cold  just  where  the  light  and  warmth  have  been  pouring  in.  This  power 
to  elongate  and  reach  its  supply  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  phenomena  in  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  Nor  is  it  otherwise  among  animals.  Their  power  to  help 
themselves  is  itself  a  department  of  science,  and  awakens  the  deepest  interest. 
Besides  the  power  of  elongation  to  get  supply,  they  have  the  power  of  locomotion. 
Appetite  unsupplied  is  hunger,  one  of  the  most  intense  forms  of  physical  unrest ; 
and  impels  to  the  most  intense  exertions  to  get  relief.  But  what  next  after 
appetite  ?  You  say  that  our  series  of  organic  facts  cannot  end  in  appetite ; 
you  say  it  must  have  its  correlative  supply.  You  add  that  there  is  a  wonderful 
law  in  nature  ordaining  in  every  grade  of  life  that  there  shall  be  as  many 
forms  of  reciprocal  supply  as  there  are  subjective  wants.  For  every  mouth  there  is 
the  required  morsel,  and,  in  general  a  superabundant  supply.  In  man  this  law 
bears  sway  in  a  threefold  form,  for  he  has  in  him  three  lives :  life  of  body,  brain, 
and  soul.  The  physical  life  grows  by  eating  what  the  physical  appetite  craves ; 
the  supplies  here  are  found  in  the  outward  physical  world.  This  life  can  live  and 
grow  on  bread  alone.  The  intellectual  life  grows  by  eating  what  the  intellectual 
appetite  craves  ;  the  supplies  here  are  found  in  the  truths  of  fact  and  principle  dis- 
coverable in  the  world  of  science.  The  moral  and  spiritual  life  grows  by  eating 
what  the  moral  and  spiritual  life  craves ;  here  the  supplies  are  found  in  all  the 
verities  that  appertain  to  the  soul  in  relation  to  God  and  the  immortal  life.  Having 
these  three  forms  of  life,  and,  in  natural  order,  these  three  forms  of  growth,  eating, 
and  appetite,  and,  having  these  three  forms  of  supply,  man  can  have  three  forms  of 
satisfaction  :  he  can  be  physically,  intellectually,  and  morally  supplied  and  at  rest. 
Therefore  he  can  have  three  forms  of  health.  He  can  be  whole  in  body,  mind,  and 
soul ;  or  he  can  be  ailing  in-  one  department  of  his  being,  and  well  in  other  respects. 
In  order  to  perfect  health  in  each  life  there  must  be  a  perfect  working  of  the 
functions  of  each  in  possession  of  a  perfect  supply.  A  man  can  have  as  many 
forms  of  hunger,  starvation,  and  death  by  starvation,  as  he  has  hves.  The  inference 
here  is  inevitable,  that  if  a  man  has  in  him  three  lives,  and,  in  his  prerogative  of 
free  will,  can  make  each  growthful  or  not,  according  as  appetite  is  fed  or  not  fed, 
then  man  has  in  him  the  power  of  a  threefold  suicide.  Thus  far  we  have  been  con- 
sidering life  as  it  develops  normally.  In  its  various  grades  we  find  it  growing 
according  to  a  natural  law  inlaid  in  the  constitution.  We  find  it  interfered  with 
only  by  enci<)achment  and  want  of  supply.  Unfallen  human  life  observed  this  law 
in  the  primeval  garden.  But  this  adherence  to  law  in  an  orderly  unfolding  did  not 
continue.  Sin  entered,  and  with  it  a  new  factor,  disease.  It  is  an  easy  consequence 
of  sin,  itself  wholly  unnatural ;  it  belongs  to  that  category  of  thorns  and  thistles, 
toil  and  sweat  and  birth-pangs,  visited  upon  the  race  as  instruments  of  probationary 
discipline  and  culture.  This  prepares  us  to  notice  the  benignity  of  nature  in  pro- 
viding not  only  for  normal  but  as  well  for  abnormal  wants.  Not  only  does  she 
provide  for  hunger,  thirst,  rest,  to  repair  waste  and  recover  tone,  but  she  is  a  store- 
house of  remedies  for  disease.  There  are  provisions  not  only  for  life  when  exhausted 
by  expenditure,  but  when  assailed  and  wounded  by  assault.  It  is  well  known  that 
animals  when  ill  either  refuse  to  eat,  or,  eating,  select  a  medicinal  diet.  Such  food 
is  found  in  those  forms  of  supply  abounding  in  nature  that  are  repelled  in  a  state 
of  health.  Disease  sharpens  an  instinctive  appetite  for  them,  and  impels  to  a 
search  for  them.  Man  as  a  physic:!  being,  diseased,  like  all  animals,  finds  himself 
dependent  for  cure  on  medicinal  remedies  stored  in  nature.  There  is  a  more  subtle 
force  in  man,  and  a  more  destructive  one,  than  disease,  and  whose  proper  seat  is 
the  soul.  It  is  sin  ;  what  disease  is  to  the  body,  sin  is  to  the  spiritual  powers  of 
man.  The  spheres  in  which  these  destructive  forces  work  greatly  differ,  but  such  is 
the  organic  connection  between  them  that  we  are  quick  to  see  the  natural  alliance  of 
sin  and  disease.  As  in  physical  disease  there  is  a  suppression  of  appetite  for  com- 
mon food,  and  a  search  for  a  medicinal  diet,  so  in  man's  apostate  condition  and 
severance  from  God  there  is  disclosed  in  the  remains  of  his  fallen  nature,  in  the 
intuitions  of  reason  and  the  instincts  of  a  guilty  conscience,  a  longing  after  some 
form  of  deliverance  that  has  an  expiatory  value.     Sin  itself  seems  to  evoke  a  long- 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  131 

ing  for  a  remedy  that  will  destroj'  it.  A  sick  man  wants  health,  and  if  he  finds  it 
at  all,  he  finds  it  in  nature's  stores ;  a  lost  man  wants  salvation,  and  if  he  finds 
it  at  all,  he  finds  it  in  Christ  crucified.  Mark  here  the  point  of  critical 
interest :  when  the  sinner  in  the  consciousness  of  his  need  turns  to  Christ 
and  believes  on  Him,  he  is  born  again.  In  this  change,  his  third  hfe  has  been  taken 
off  the  creature  as  having  a  supreme  interest  and  placed  upon  God  where  it 
originally  belonged ;  and  so,  being  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  man,  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  is  made  alive  from  the  dead.  But  the  new  man  that  is  born  in  him  is,  to  use 
the  apostle's  figure,  a  babe  in  Christ.  There  exist  still  in  the  converted  man  the 
remains  of  the  old  nature,  and  these  remains  are  summed  up  by  the  apostle  and 
called  the  old  man.  And  now  what  have  we  ?  A  marvellous  phenomenon  !  a  man 
■with  four  lives  in  him.  The  physical  and  intellectual  lives  remain  ;  then  we  have 
the  new  life,  the  babe  in  Christ,  called  the  new  man ;  finally  we  have  a  fourth  life 
in  the  remains  of  the  old  life,  called  by  St.  Paul  the  old  man.  In  the  soul  of  the 
renewed  man  then  we  find  two  lives ;  and  let  us  mark  their  relation  to  each  other. 
In  the  first  place,  the  new  man  though  a  babe  holds  the  ascendency.  He  is  so  much 
the  creation  of  the  Spirit  that  we  can  say  of  him  that  he  is  the  child  of  a  King.  In 
his  minority  in  this  world  he  has  to  retain  his  throne  by  warfare.  In  the  text,  St. 
Peter,  addressing  believers,  urges  them  to  exercise  the  appetite,  characteristic  of 
newborn  babes,  in  their  longing  for  the  spiritual  milk  of  the  Word  which  is  with- 
out guile,  that  they  may  grow  thereby.  He  assumes  the  existence  of  hfe,  and  life 
that  is  to  grow  by  eating  in  compliance  with  an  awakened  appetite.  The  reign  of 
law  is  supreme  in  all  growth.  All  the  characteristics  of  life  in  the  lower  kingdoms 
of  nature  reappear  here  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  We  have  seen  that  all  appetite, 
wherever  found,  finds  its  corresponding  supply  in  its  environment.  This  is  true  of 
the  life  of  the  believer.  That  hfe  is  Divine  in  its  origin  from  heaven,  and  in  its 
nature  spiritual ;  therefore  corresponding  to  it  is  an  objective  supply  equally  Divine 
and  spiritual.  But  you  ask.  How  about  the  old  third  life,  now  called  by  the  apostle 
the  old  man,  and  which  we  have  seen  to  be  living  a  dying  life  ?  Does  it  grow  ?  I 
reply  that  the  old  man  still  Uves,  but,  struck  with  death,  is  in  a  mortal  decline ; 
there  is  growth  too ;  but  in  proportion  as  the  new  man  grows  strong,  he  grows  weak. 
If  the  new  life  is  stationary,  the  old  life  holds  its  own ;  if  it  is  retrograde,  the  old 
life  waxes  and  regains  ascendency,  "  sin  reigns."  But  you  say  that  if  the  old  life 
lives  in  any  form,  even  a  Ungering  death,  it  must  have  food,  and  what  is  it  ?  This 
is  a  vital  question ;  can  we  find  an  answer  ?  We  have  seen  that  the  new  life  is  in 
spirit  totally  unlike  the  old  life,  and  cannot  therefore  live  on  the  same  diet,  unless 
it  is  mixed.  Here  we  fall  upon  the  great  source  of  weakness  among  behevers — 
adulteration  of  food.  The  Divine  plan  for  the  new  life  is  that  it  should  live  and 
grow  "  on  spiritual  milk,  which  is  without  guile."  The  word  "  spiritual "  here  does 
not  refer  to  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  originator  of  this  diet,  but  to  the  Spirit  of  the 
new  life  itself,  with  which  this  diet  is  perfectly  congruous.  The  new  hfe  is  spirit, 
and  has  a  diet  fitted  to  it  as  such  ;  but  the  diet  must  be  without  guile,  unadulterated, 
the  pure  Word  of  God.  When  the  new  life  has  this  food,  and  only  this  food,  and 
enough  of  it,  it  hastens  on  to  full  growth.  Instances  abound  in  the  Church  of  per- 
sons of  signal  excellence  in  whom  this  hfe  has  had  a  luxurious  exposition.  But 
this  food,  so  nutritious  and  medicinal  to  the  new  man,  is  innutritions  and  destruc- 
tive to  the  old  man.  The  Divine  plan  is  to  kill  the  old  life  by  the  natural  process 
of  starvation.  It  is  said  that  in  certain  soUs  clover  will  not  grow  under  butternut 
trees ;  the  roots  of  the  butternut  extract  from  the  soil  all  the  elements  the  clover 
lives  on,  and  so  the  clover  starves  and  dies.  It  is  by  this  same  law  of  death  by 
starvation  that  the  old  life  in  believers  is  to  end  its  career.  But  the  painful  fact  is 
that  its  law  is  not  obeyed.  Strange  as  it  may  be,  believers  do  not  insist  that  the 
spiritual  milk  they  drink  shall  be  without  adulteration.  They  allow  a  mixed  diet 
— elements  introduced  that  are  agreeable  to  the  old  man.  When  the  diet  is  half 
and  half,  when  both  the  old  and  the  new  man  can  sit  at  the  same  table  and  par- 
take of  the  same  food  with  equal  pleasure,  neither  is  satisfied  ;  both  live  a  stunted 
life.  It  is  just  here  that  we  find  an  explanation  of  the  mystery  of  the  weakness 
that  abounds  in  Christian  living.  Believers  half  hve,  because  fed  on  a  diet  half  of 
which  is  prepared  for  the  old  life.  They  consult  with  flesh  and  blood.  They  are 
self-indulgent  ;  and  the  self  they  indulge  is  the  old  self.  They  hanker  after 
forbidden  food.  In  them  the  old  hfe  is  robust  and  well  to  do,  the  new  is 
pinched  and  emaciate.  Why  is  this?  Because  the  Divine  law  of  growth 
in  the  text  is  not  heeded.  Behevers  are  not  studious  as  to  their  diet.  They 
do  not  live  on  the  spiritual  milk  of    the  Word,  and  insist  that  it  shall  be 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

•without  guile.  They  are  too  tender  and  sympathetic  with  the  old  self. 
Vigorous  self-denial  is  here  demanded.  This  order  is  never  introverted.  It  is 
always  the  new  man  in  us  that  drives  out  the  old ;  and  to  have  the  strength 
required  to  do  it  he  must  have  for  his  diet  the  spiritual  milk  of  the  Word,  which  is 
without  guile.  (C.  B.  Hulbert.)  The  Word  compared  to  milk  : — 1.  The  Word  is 
compared  to  milk  in  respect  of  the  plainness  of  it  to  young  children,  which 
is  therefore  opposed  to  strong  meat,  that  is,  harder  points,  and  mysteries  of 
religion,  so  especially  for  the  nourishing  nature  thereof.  2.  It  is  also  com- 
pared to  milk  for  the  sweetness  of  it.  The  Word  is  sweet  to  a  newborn  Christian. 
3.  Besides,  as  milk  is  a  general  food  for  all  rich  and  poor,  so  is  the  Word  the 
common  food  of  all  Christians,  the  means  of  their  edifying.  {John  Rogers.) 
The  simultaneoits  outgoing  of  evil  and  incoming  of  good  : — Observe  the  relation  in 
which  the  negative  and  the  positive  stand  to  each  other.  Although  the  precept 
about  putting  off  first  meets  our  eye  on  the  page,  the  act  is  not  represented  as 
taking  precedence  in  point  of  time.  It  is  neither  first  put  off  the  evil  and  then 
admit  the  good,  nor  first  take  in  the  good  and  then  get  quit  of  the  evil.  The 
language  of  the  text  determines  that  the  two  acts  are  strictly  simultaneous.  The 
form  of  the  sentence  is,  "  Laying  aside  these,  desire  this."  This  is  scientifically 
correct  as  well  as  scripturally  true.  The  coming  of  Christ  unto  His  own,  to  the 
throne  of  a  human  heart,  "  is  like  the  morning."  And  how  does  the  morning  come? 
Is  it  first  that  the  light  comes  and  then  the  darkness  departs  ?  or  first  the  darkness 
departs  and  then  the  light  advances  ?  It  is  neither.  As  the  light  advances  the 
darkness  recedes.  The  processes  are  strictly  simultaneous,  but  in  nature  the 
advance  of  light  is  the  cause  and  the  departure  of  darkness  the  effect.  Such,  also, 
is  the  rule  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  It  is  indeed  true  that  evil  must  depart  to  let  in 
the  good,  but  it  is  the  advance  of  the  good  that  drives  the  evil  before  it.  Christ  is 
the  stronger  who  overcomes  the  strong  and  casts  him  out  and  reigns  in  his  stead. 
To  take  in  the  milk  and  retain  also  the  envies  and  evil-speakings  will  give  neither 
comfort  nor  growth.  The  effort  to  mingle  these  opposites  mars  the  happiness  of 
many  a  life,  and  distorts  all  its  testimony  for  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  (W.  Arnot.) 
Desire  : — As  in  children,  all  speak  and  work  at  once — hands,  feet,  mouth.  The 
Greek  word  signifieth  vehemently  to  desire.  (J.  Trapp.)  The  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word : — Guileless,  unmixed  milk,  not  sugared  or  sophisticated  with  strains  of  wit, 
excellency  of  speech,  &c.  (ibid.)  Appetite  for  Divine  things  wanted  : — The 
Rev.  Mr.  Walker,  of  Muthil,  was  preaching  in  a  neighbouring  parish.  Next  day 
he  was  met  by  one  of  the  resident  landowners,  who  explained  to  the  reverend 
gentleman  that  he  had  not  been  hearing  him  on  the  Sabbath  afternoon,  as  he  felt 
he  could  not  digest  more  than  one  sermon.  "I  rather  think,"  said  Mr.  Walker, 
"  the  appetite  is  more  at  fault  than  the  digestion."  (C.  Rogers,  LL.D.)  That  ye 
may  grow  thereby. — Christian  growth: — I.  Christians  are  to  "grow" — "grow 
unto  salvation."  This  implies  present  immaturity — that  they  have  not  yet 
reached  "  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ."  Their  hope  is 
ofttimes  indistinct  and  tremulous,  even  when  it  is  not  averted  from  its  appropriate 
object.  Their  holiness  is  stained  by  innumerable  defilements  of  the  flesh  and  the 
spirit.  Their  fear  dissolves  into  a  carnal  security  or  a  worldly  dissipation.  Nor. 
does  "  brotherly  love  continue."  But  if  they  are  Christians  indeed  all  these 
elements  of  the  new  creature  exist  at  least  in  the  germ.  Growth  may  be  slow,  and, 
for  a  time,  even  imperceptible.  Obstructed  by  the  remaining  constitutional  taint 
of  the  old  nature,  it  may  be  hindered  also  by  unfavourable  circumstances,  by  the 
diseases  incident  to  childhood,  or  through  neglect  of  the  appropriate  means  of 
growth.  But  the  tendency  is  there,  and  that  tendency  is  to  be  fostered  by  Chris- 
tian education.  II.  The  particular  means  here  specified  by  which  this  growth 
IS  TO  BE  PROMOTED  is  "  thc  sinccre  milk  of  the  Word."  III.  But,  in  order  to  the 
profitable  use  of  even  the  pure  milk  of  the  Word,  there  are  certain  conditions 
PREREQUISITE.  1.  There  is,  first,  the  necessity  of  spiritual  life.  Without  it,  as 
there  can  be  no  growth,  so  neither  is  there  any  desire  after  the  means  of  growth. 
2.  If  the  soul  is  to  enjoy  the  full  benefit  of  the  provisions  of  grace  it  must  also  be 
careful  of  its  spiritual  health,  avoiding  all  occasions  of  disease,  and  especially 
maintaining  a  constant  guard  against  the  evil  tendencies  of  its  osvn  constitutional 
taint.  3.  When  the  soul  has  thus  been  "  purified  of  malice  and  wickedness,"  one 
unfailing  sign  of  its  healthy  condition  is  a  "  desire  " — an  earnest  desire — for  the 
nutriment  of  the  Divine  Word.  4.  If  we  would  grow  by  means  of  the  Word  it  is 
important  that  we  use  the  Word  for  that  end.  IV.  The  motives  by  which  this 
EXHORTATION  18  ENFORCED.     1.  In  this  growth  Itsslf  there  is  ble-ssing  enough  to  be 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  133 

its  own  motive  and  great  reward.  There  are  other  considerations,  however,  sug- 
gested by  the  text.  Observe — 2.  The  introductory  word,  "  wherefore,"  literally 
"  laying  aside,  therefore,"  &c.,  referring  back  to  the  illustrious  attributes  of  the 
Word,  as  these  had  been  set  forth  at  the  close  of  the  first  chapter.  It  had  there 
been  magnified  as  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  as  the  incorruptible  seed,  as  the  living, 
abiding,  everlasting  Word.  Seeing,  then,  says  Peter,  this  precious  Word  decays 
not,  grows  not  obsolete,  and  can  as  little  be  exhausted  as  it  can  be  superseded  by 
the  word  of  man  or  of  angel,  what  remains  but  that  ye  "  follow  on  to  know  "  it, 
"  give  yourselves  wholly  "  to  it,  and  drink  deep,  drink  daily,  drink  for  ever  of  the 
Divine  fountains.  This  might  the  rather  be  expected  of  them  as — 3.  In  the  third 
place,  they  had  already  experienced  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Word,  "  as  new- 
born babes."  This  is  not  so  much  a  comparison  as  a  reason.  If,  moreover,  they 
remember  still  that  they  are  but  children,  what  more  natural  than  that  they  should 
be  ambitious  to  grow  ?  4.  And  finally,  as  they  had  been  made  subjects  of  the 
gospel's  regenerating  power,  so  they  had  likewise  tasted  the  sweetness  and  blessed- 
ness of  its  revelations.  "  If  so  be  " — or  if  indeed,  as  you  profess,  and  as  I  fully 
believe — "  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  good,  kind.  You  "  tasted," 
and  you  are  well  aware  that  you  did  no  more  than  taste,  "  of  the  heavenly  gift,"  of 
that  which  shall  be  the  eternal  satisfaction  and  joy  of  all  the  redeemed.  With 
what  confidence,  then,  in  your  ready  comphance  may  I  not  say.  Open  your  mouths 
wide  and  the  good  Lord  wiU  fill  them.  Enlarge  to  the  uttermost  both  your 
capacities  and  your  desires,  and  you  will  still  find  this  cup  of  blessing,  this  river  of 
God,  as  full  as  at  the  first.  {J.  Lillie,  D.D.)  Soul-growth  : — I.  It  involves 
YOUNG  LITE.  There  is  no  growth  without  life,  and  old  life  grows  not.  Soul-growth 
consists  in  the  simultaneous  and  harmonious  development  of  all  the  powers  of  the 
mind  under  the  inspiration  and  direction  of  supreme  love  to  God.  II.  It  involves 
SUITABLE  ALIMENT.  1.  The  Word  must  be  taken  into  the  soul  by  hearing  and 
reading.  2.  The  Word  must  be  digested  by  the  soul  by  reflection  and  prayer.  3. 
The  Word  must  be  incorporated  in  the  soul  by  holy  activities  and  habits.  III.  It 
involves  a  healthy  appetite.  1.  The  soul  must  have  an  appetite  for  truth  before 
it  wiU  take  it.  2.  The  soul  must  have  an  appetite  for  the  genuine  truth  before  it 
wiU  get  the  right  nutriment.  (Homilist.)  Growth  by  the  Word  : — I.  The  geeat 
END  TO  be  sought  AFTER.  "  That  yc  may  grow."  The  newborn  babe  is  a  fit 
emblem  of  the  Christian.  He  is  one  who  has  in  him  the  principle  of  a  higher  life, 
and  therefore  the  capacity  of  growth.  1.  In  what  is  it  the  Christian  is  to  grow  ? 
In  all  that  constitutes  the  new  nature  which  he  has  received  of  God.  (1)  The 
foundation  of  the  Christian  life  is  laid  ia  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  On 
this  there  must  be  a  superstructure  of  virtue  and  moral  goodness  reared,  and  the 
advancement  of  the  one  must  keep  pace  with  that  of  the  other.  2.  This  growth  is 
a  gradual  process.  We  must  be  prepared  for  fluctuations  and  vicissitudes  in  our 
spiritual  condition.  3.  Whenever  this  growth  takes  place  it  will  be  discernible. 
Not  directly,  or  in  itself.  A  child  grows  without  being  in  the  least  degree  sensible 
of  it.  Nor  can  even  the  keenest  onlooker  see  the  child  grow.  The  fact  that  it  has 
grown  is  discovered  from  the  comparison  of  what  it  is  now  and  what  it  had  been 
at  some  period  more  or  less  distant  in  the  past.  Even  so  it  is  with  Christian 
growth.  II.  The  means  by  which  this  obeat  end  is  to  be  secueed.  1.  The 
truth  of  God  is  revealed  to  us  as  being  adapted  to  nourish  the  life  of  God  in  the 
soul.  2.  We  are  to  desire  God's  Word  in  order  that  we  may  grow  thereby.  It  is 
very  possible  to  desire  Divine  truth  for  other  reasons  and  other  ends  than  this.  It 
is  quite  possible  to  desire  to  read  Holy  Scripture  because  we  have  been  accustomed 
to  do  so,  or  because  this  wonderful  book  is  very  pleasant  to  read,  and  touches  every 
part  of  our  intellectual  nature.  But  we  must  use  it  intelligently,  perseveringly,  to 
secure  the  great  end.  1.  Have  we  any  right  to  call  ourselves  babes  in  Christ,  chil- 
dren of  God,  bom  again  ?  If  not,  then  simply  we  cannot  grow.  Dead  things, 
stones,  cannot  grow.  2.  Ought  not  the  necessity  of  growing  to  be  more  deeply 
felt,  and  the  duty  on  which  it  depends  to  be  more  faithfully  discharged  ?  (W.  L. 
Alexander,  D.D.)  Retaining  infantile  ideas  : — What  man  amongst  us  would 
consent  to  be  dressed  in  the  garb  of  his  infancy,  and  to  be  sent  forth  into  the  world 
dandled  in  the  arms  of  bearers  and  habited  in  the  long  clothes  of  his  babyhood  ? 
But  so  far  as  spiritual  knowledge  and  attainments  are  concerned  men  are  only  too 
willing  to  retain  their  infantile  ideas,  and  to  resent  any  attempt  to  lead  them  to 
larger  and  loftier  conceptions  of  truth,  to  a  more  robust  and  manly  faith.  {J. 
Halsey.)  The  influence  of  food  on  spiritual  groivth : — Spiritual  growth  and 
development  are  required  of  us,  and  spiritual  growth  and  development  are  a  matter 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

of  spiritual  diet.  Buckle,  in  his  "  History  of  Civilisation,"  shows  how  the  charac- 
ters and  dispositions  of  the  various  races  of  men  are  affected  by  the  food  they  eat. 
The  broad  general  truth  of  this  is  obvious.  The  gross  feeders  are  slow  thinkers, 
and  the  difference  in  the  intellectual  qualities  between  the  Eskimo  with  his  blubber 
and  the  Frenchman  with  his  cutlets  and  claret  is  as  great  as  the  dffiference  between 
the  foods  themselves.  We  are  what  we  are — physically,  mentally,  and  to  a  great 
extent  even  morally — mainly  in  virtue  of  our  diet.  If  we  were  to  be  always  sub- 
sisting on  babies'  food,  farinaceous  powders  and  sopped  rusks,  we  should  never 
grow  into  a  stalwart  manhood.  At  the  same  time  you  do  not  expect  elevation  and 
refinement  of  thought  from  the  gourmand  and  the  epicure.  The  man  who  con- 
fines himself  to  the  elements  of  thinking  limits  himself  to  the  infantile  stages  of 
growth,  to  their  helplessness  and  dependency.  (Ibid.)  Spiritual  growth  to  be 
sought : — They  take  a  pride  in  cultivating  their  physical  nature,  in  developing  their 
muscle  and  sinew  to  the  highest  efficiency  ;  they  will  even  go  into  severe  training 
to  achieve  this  end  ;  but  in  the  spiritual  sphere  the  toothless,  flabby,  milk-imbibing 
infant  is  their  ideal.  (Ibid.)  Thinking  aids  groioth  : — And  it  is  in  that  thinking 
faculty  that  resides  your  power  of  growth.  The  machine  can  never  be  anything 
else  or  anything  better  than  it  is  unless  human  thought  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it. 
You  cannot  teach  a  machine  anything,  and  because  it  cannot  think  it  cannot  grow. 
The  instinct  in  the  animal  is  always  mere  instinct.  It  never  grows.  The  instinct 
whereby  the  bee  makes  its  cell  to-day  is  the  same  as  that  of  its  ancestors  who  sipped 
honey  in  primeval  Eden.  The  ox  is  as  bovine  to-day  as  when  it  first  appeared 
upon  the  stage  of  existence.  Not  one  solitary  idea  has  ever  entered  its  brain  during 
all  those  perhaps  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years.  It  has  never  been  able  to  think 
itself  out  of  the  animal  groove,  to  lift  itself,  by  force  of  its  own  will,  one  step  in  the 
scale  of  creation.  But  in  virtue  of  his  thinking  faculty  man's  capacity  for  growth 
is  illimitable.  If  he  will  only  use  it,  cultivate  it,  develop  it,  no  bounds  can  be  set 
to  its  power  to  expand  and  elevate  him.  [Ibid.)  Appropriate  aliment : — The 
relation  of  growth  to  nutrition  is  a  law  of  the  universe.  Every  description  of  life 
has  its  appropriate  aliment,  and  only  as  it  is  provided  with  this  will  it  grow  ;  and 
if  you  were  a  farmer  you  would  find  that  you  could  not  raise  your  com  and  other 
crops  without  first  charging  the  soil  with  siUca  and  ammonia  and  phosphates,  and 
other  elements  essential  to  the  building-up  of  the  tissues  of  the  plant.  The 
religious  manhood  is  built  up  no  otherwise.  It  is  purely  a  question  of  nutriment. 
(Ibid.)  Deep  Christian  knowledge  to  be  desired  : — You  have  seen  on  a  summer's 
evening  the  gnats  gliding  upon  the  smooth  surface  of  a  great  river.  What  do  they 
know  of  the  river's  wealth,  of  the  beautiful  gardens  of  aquatic  weeds,  of  the 
shoals  of  silvery  fish  and  other  forms  of  life  that  teem  in  the  clear  depths 
beneath  ?  Such  is  the  knowledge  of  the  universe  that  many  Christian 
people  possess,  and  that  they  think  it  right  to  possess.  They  skim  the 
surface,  but  are  careful  not  to  wet  their  wings,  and  to  go  no  deeper  than 
the  guardians  of  orthodoxy  assure  them  it  is  safe.  (Ibid.)  A  sermon 
for  men  of  taste  : — "  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  "  If, 
if  " — then  this  is  not  a  thing  to  be  taken  for  granted.  "  If  " — then  there  is  a 
possibility  that  some  may  not  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  "If,  if" — 
then  this  is  not  a  general  but  a  special  mercy,  and  it  becomes  our  business  to 
inquire  whether  we  are  comprehended  in  that  company  who  know  the  grace  of  God 
by  inward  experience.  I.  First,  then,  taste  is  prominent  in  the  text.  1.  The  taste 
here  meant  is  doubtless  faith.  Faith,  in  the  Scripture,  is  all  the  senses.  It  is  sight 
(Isa.  xlv.  22) ;  hearing  (Isa.  Iv.  3) ;  smelling  (Psa.  xlv.  8) ;  touch  (Mark  v.  30,  31). 
Faith  is  equally  the  spirit's  taste.  "  How  sweet  are  Thy  words  to  my  taste!  yea, 
sweeter  than  honey  to  my  lips."  We  shall  have  an  inward  and  spiritual  apprehen- 
sion of  the  sweetness  and  preciousness  of  Christ  as  the  result  of  living  faith.  2.  The 
taste  here  meant  is  faith  in  one  of  its  highest  operations.  To  hear  Christ's  voice  aa 
the  very  voice  of  God  in  the  soul  will  save  us,  but  that  which  gives  the  true  enjoy- 
ment is  the  aspect  of  faith  wherein  Christ,  by  holy  taste,  becomes  assimilated  to  us ; 
we  feed  on  Him ;  He  becometh  part  of  us  ;  His  living  Word  sustaineth  us,  and  His 
precious  blood  cheereth  us  as  generous  wine.  Do  you  ask,  "In  what  respect  does 
faith  taste  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  ?  "  It  is  faith  operating  by  experience.  3. 
Faith,  as  exhibited  to  us  under  the  aspect  of  tasting,  is  a  sure  and  certain  niark  of 
grace  in  the  heart.  It  is  a  sure  sign  of  vitality.  Man,  by  nature,  is  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins.  Or,  to  put  it  in  another  light,  if  men  have  a  taste  of  Christ,  it  is 
certain  evidence  of  a  Divine  change,  for  men  by  nature  find  no  delight  in  Jesus. 
4.  This  taste,  where  it  has  been  bestowed  by  grace,  is  a  discerning  faculty.     If  thou 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  13-5 

canst  live  upon  a  gospel  which  leads  thee  to  depend  upon  thyself,  thou  hast  no 
spiritual  taste,  or  else  thou  wouldst  loathe,  as  much  as  ever  Egyptian  loathed  to 
drink  of  the  waters  of  Nile  when  turned  into  blood,  to  drink  of  any  river  which 
flows  from  created  springs ;  thou  wouldst  only  drink  of  the  cool  stream  of  the  river 
of  life  which  rises  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  of  God  and  flows  around  the  base  of 
Calvary,  where  Jesus  shed  His  blood.  Say,  soul,  dost  thou  love  Jesus  only  ?  Is 
He  all  thy  salvation  and  all  thy  desire,  and  dost  thou  repose  wholly  and  solely  in 
Him  ?  For  if  not,  then  thou  hast  no  spiritual  taste,  and  thou  hast  no  reason  to 
believe  that  thou  belongest  unto  Jesus  Christ  at  all.  5.  Faith  as  a  taste  is  not 
simply  a  discerning  but  a  delighting  faculty.  Men  derive  much  satisfaction  from 
the  organs  of  taste.  I  pray  you  delight  yourselves  in  Christ !  Let  your  faith  so 
taste  Jesus  as  to  make  you  glad.  Let  your  joy  be  as  the  joy  of  harvest,  and  sing 
ye  with  Zechariah,  "  How  great  is  His  goodness,  and  how  great  is  His  beauty  ! 
Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids."  6.  This  taste 
of  ours  is  in  this  life  imperfect.  As  old  master  Durham  says,  "  'Tis  but  a  taste !  " 
We  have  not  yet  rested  beneath  the  vines  of  Canaan ;  we  have  only  enjoyed  the 
firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  they  have  set  us  hungering  and  thirsting  for  the  fulness 
of  the  heavenly  heritage.  We  groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption. 
7.  Though  ours  is  an  imperfect,  we  thank  God  it  is  a  growing  taste.  We  know  that 
sometimes  in  the  decline  of  hfe  the  taste,  like  the  other  powers  of  manhood,  decays ; 
but,  glory  be  to  God,  a  taste  for  Christ  will  never  decay.     H.  Men  who  have  thus 

TASTED  OF  ChEIST    HAVE    SPECIAL    SINS   TO    AVOID  AND  OBJECTS    TO    DESIRE.       1.    We  first 

dwell  upon  evils  to  be  avoided.  2.  The  apostle,  having  told  us  what  to  avoid,  tells 
us  what  to  eat  and  drink.  "  As  newborn  babes  desire,"  &c.  The  Christian  man 
should  desire  pure  doctrine ;  he  should  desire  to  hear  the  gospel  plainly  and  truth- 
fully preached — not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  in  the  words 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth.  It  is  a  sign  of  declining  health  in  a  Christian 
when  he  does  not  love  the  means  of  grace.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christian  experi- 
ence exemplified : — I.  Define  Christian  experience  so  far  as  expressed  in  the 
LANGUAGE  OF  THE  TEXT.  Tasting  supposcs  life ;  where  there  is  no  spiritual  life  there 
can  be  no  spiritual  taste.  Tasting  implies  reception,  and  this  is  requisite  in  order 
to  appreciation.  They  who  savingly  prove  the  gracious  character  of  God  are  such 
who  have  the  inward  evidence  of  it.  Keligion  is  not  a  matter  of  speculation,  but  of 
experience ;  not  of  form,  but  of  hallowed  feeling.  Such  participation  is  no  criterion 
of  extraordinary  proficiency  in  Christianity  ;  it  is  essential  to  its  existence.  H.  The 
exemplification  of  such  experience  of  religion  in  THE  SOUL.  1.  "If  so  be  ye 
have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  what  thanks  do  you  owe  Him  ?  2.  "If  so  be 
ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  be  gracious  hke  Him.  3.  "  If  so  be  ye 
have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  you  know  what  you  are  to  hope  for.  Proofs 
hitherto  of  His  love  are  pledges  for  the  future.  4.  "  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,"  think  what  is  expected  from  you.  Grow  in  spiritual  stature. 
The  more  ample  the  crop  the  more  delightful  to  the  husbandman  and  to  every 
beholder  who  feels  an  interest  in  what  is  excellent.  5.  "If  so  be  ye  have  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  pity  those  that  have  not.  {Essex  Remembrancer.)  A 
gracious  experience  of  God  : — I.  We  may  consider  the  goodness  or  God.  He  is  said 
to  be  gracious,  or  of  a  bountiful,  kind  disposition.  The  graciousness  of  God  is 
always  sweet ;  the  taste  of  that  is  never  out  of  season.  God  is  gracious,  but  it  is 
God  in  Christ.  Though  God  is  mercy  and  goodness  in  Himself,  yet  we  cannot 
apprehend  Him  so  to  us,  but  as  we  are  looking  through  that  medium,  the  Mediator. 
His  grace  is  all  in  Christ.  Let  us  therefore  never  leave  Him  out  in  our  desires  of 
tasting  the  graciousness  and  love  of  God,  for  otherwise  we  shall  but  dishonour  Him 
and  disappoint  ourselves.  II.  Ye  have  tasted.  There  is  a  tasting  exercised  by 
temporary  believers  spoken  of  in  Heb.  vi.  4.  That  is  merely  tasting,  rather  an 
imaginary  taste  than  real ;  but  this  is  a  true  feeding  on  the  graciousness  of  God ; 
yet  is  it  called  but  a  taste  in  respect  of  the  fulness  to  come.  Jesus  Christ  being  all 
in  all  unto  the  soul,  faith  apprehending  Him,  is  all  the  spiritual  senses.  Faith  is 
the  eye  that  beholds  His  matchless  beauty,  and  so  kindles  love  in  the  soul,  and  can 
speak  of  Him  as  having  seen  Him  and  taken  particular  notice  of  Him.  It  is  faith 
that  touches  Him  and  draws  virtue  from  Him,  and  faith  that  tastes  Him.  In  order 
to  this  there  must  be  a  firm  believing  of  the  truth  of  the  promises,  wherein  the  free 
grace  of  God  is  expressed  and  exhibited  to  us— a  sense  of  the  sweetness  of  that 
grace  being  applied  or  drawn  into  the  soul,  and  that  constitutes  properly  this  taste. 
He  that  hath  indeed  tasted  of  this  goodness,  oh,  how  tasteless  are  those  things  to 
him  that  the  world  calls  sweet !    As  when  you  have  tasted  something  that  is  very 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  :i. 

sweet,  it  disrelishes  other  things  after  it.  Therefore  can  a  Christian  so  easily  either 
want  or  use  with  disregard  the  dehghts  of  this  earth.  III.  The  infebence.  If  ye 
have  tasted,  cfec,  then  lay  aside  all  malice  and  guile,  and  hypocrisies  and  envies, 
and  all  evil-speakings.  Surely  if  you  have  tasted  of  the  kindness  and  sweetness  of 
God  in  Christ,  it  will  compose  your  spirits  and  conform  them  to  Him.  It  will 
diffuse  such  a  sweetness  through  your  soul  that  there  will  be  no  place  for  malice 
and  guile ;  there  will  be  nothing  but  love,  and  meekness,  and  singleness  of  heart. 
As  the  Lord  is  good,  so  they  who  taste  of  His  goodness  are  made  like  Him  (Eph.  iv. 
32).  Again,  if  ye  have  tasted,  then  desire  more.  This  is  the  truest  sign  of  it.  He 
that  is  in  a  continual  hunger  and  thirst  after  this  graciousness  of  God  has  surely 
tasted  of  it.  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,"  saith  David  (Psa.  xlii.  2).  He  had 
tasted  before ;  he  remembers  that  he  went  to  the  house  of  God  with  the  voice  of 
joy.  This  is  that  happy  circle  wherein  the  soul  of  the  beUever  moves.  The  more 
he  loves  it  the  more  he  shall  taste  of  this  goodness,  and  the  more  he  tastes  the  more 
he  shall  still  love  and  desire  it.  But  observe — If  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  then  desire  the  milk  of  the  Word.  This  is  the  sweetness  of  the  Word, 
that  it  hath  in  it  the  Lord's  graciousness,  gives  us  the  knowledge  of  His  love.  This 
they  find  in  it  who  have  spiritual  life  and  senses,  and  those  senses  exercised  to 
discern  good  and  evil,  and  this  engages  a  Christian  to  further  desire  of  the  Word. 
{Abp.  Leighton.)  The  test  of  taste  : — Peter  is  here  quoting  from  Psa.  xxxiv.  8 : 
"  0  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  The  passage  actually  runs — "  0  taste 
and  see  that  Jehovah  is  good,"  and  Peter  does  not  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  apply 
the  passage  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  I.  A  kotal  dainty.  "  The  Lord  is  gracious."  Jesus 
is  full  of  grace.  Once  tasted,  this  grace  is  remembered.  1.  The  Lord  is  gracious 
in  His  person,  nature,  and  character.  He  would  never  have  been  Immanuel,  God 
with  us,  if  He  had  not  been  gracious.  2.  We  have  found  Him  exceeding  gracious 
in  the  manner  of  dispensing  His  salvation.  He  is  most  free,  spontaneous,  and 
generous  in  His  gifts  of  grace.  3.  As  He  is  gracious  by  nature  and  gracious  in 
manner,  so  is  He  gracious  in  His  gifts.  How  gracious  was  He  when  He  gave 
Himself  for  us !  What  priceless  boons  follow  therefrom !  He  gave  us  pardon  and 
life.  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound.  Since  we  have  come 
to  know  our  Lord,  how  gracious  have  we  found  Him  to  be !  "  He  giveth  more 
grace."  Oh,  the  wonders  of  free  grace  in  its  continuance  and  perseverance !  Truly 
"  the  Lord  is  gracious."  4.  The  Lord  is  gracious,  for  He  hears  prayer.  5.  Some 
of  you  have  been  favoured  with  choice  times,  "as  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the 
earth."  You  have  climbed  the  mount  and  been  alone  with  God.  Oh,  the  rapture 
of  intimate  fellowship  with  God !  6.  Possibly  your  experience  has  been  of  a  sadder 
kind ;  you  have  backslidden,  and  He  has  restored  you  in  His  grace.  But  you  do 
not  know  how  gracious  the  Lord  is.  7.  Remember  that  He  is  preparing  us  for  a 
glory  inconceivable.  Everything  is  working  out  His  perfect  design.  H.  But  now 
think  of  A  SPECIAL  sense  which  is  exercised  in  tasting  that  the  Lord  is  gracious. 
Faith  is  the  soul's  taste  by  which  we  perceive  the  sweetness  of  our  Lord  and  enjoy 
it  for  ourselves.  In  answering  the  question.  What  is  meant  by  taste  ?  I  would  bid 
you  notice  the  likeness  of  the  word  "  taste  "  to  another,  namely,  "  test."  1.  Taste 
is  a  test  as  to  things  to  be  eaten.  We  prove  and  try  an  article  of  food  by  tasting  it. 
Even  so  we  do  not  speculate  upon  the  grace  of  God,  but  "  we  have  known  and 
believed  the  love  which  God  has  toward  us."  2.  In  order  to  spiritual  taste  there 
must  be  apprehension.  We  must  have  some  idea  of  what  being  gracious  means, 
and  some  conviction  that  this  is  truly  the  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  The  clearer 
the  knowledge  the  more  distinct  the  taste  may  become.  3.  After  apprehension 
must  come  appropriation.  Martin  Luther  saith,  "And  this  I  call  tasting,  when  I 
do  with  my  very  heart  believe  that  Christ  hath  given  Himself  unto  me,  and  that  I 
have  my  full  interest  in  Him,  that  He  beareth  and  answereth  for  all  my  sins, 
transgressions,  and  harms,  and  that  His  life  is  my  life.  When  this  persuasion  is 
thoroughly  settled  in  my  heart,  it  yieldeth  wonderful  and  incredible  good  taste." 
Appropriate  Christ,  I  pray  you.  Let  each  one  take  Him  to  himself,  and  then  you 
will  know  what  tasting  means.  But  taste  further  means  appreciation.  You  may 
have  a  thing  within  yourself  and  yet  not  taste  it,  even  as  Samson's  lion  had  honey 
within  its  carcase,  but  he  was  a  dead  lion,  and  so  could  not  taste  it.  A  man  may 
get  the  gospel  into  his  mind,  but  never  taste  it.  It  wants  a  living  man,  and  a  living 
appropriation,  and  a  living  appreciation,  or  else  the  royal  dainty  is  not  tasted. 
Have  you  ever  enjoyed  the  truth  that  the  Lord  is  gracious?  Jesus  is  all  in  all  to 
all  who  are  in  Him.  III.  A  searching  question.  "If  so  be  that  ye  have  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious."     1.  This  is  a  very  simple  elementary  question.     I  may 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  137 

not  know  what  a  dish  is  made  of,  but  I  may  have  tasted  it  for  all  that.  I  may  be 
grossly  ignorant  of  the  mysteries  of  cookery,  but  I  can  tell  whether  a  dish  is  sweet 
to  my  taste.  I  put  it  to  every  one  here,  whether  babes  or  strong  men — Have  you 
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  ?  2.  However  simple  is  the  question,  it  goes  to  the 
root  of  the  matter ;  it  takes  in  the  whole  case  of  a  man's  soul.  Do  you  know  Christ 
by  personal  reception  of  Him  ?  If  not,  you  are  in  an  evil  case.  Oh,  that  you  would 
come  to  the  feast !  Oh,  that  you  would  eat  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul 
delight  itself  in  fatness!  3.  Every  man  here  must  answer  that  question  for  himself. 
We  cannot  in  this  matter  be  sponsors  for  one  another.  Tasting  is  an  operation 
which  must  be  performed  by  the  individual  palate.  There  is  no  other  method  of 
practising  it.  Let  me  tell  you  when  we  have  tasted  the  graciousness  of  the  Lord. 
We  have  done  so  after  great  bitterness.  Our  Lord,  as  George  Herbert  would  say, 
has  put  His  hand  into  the  bitter  box  and  given  us  a  dose  of  wormwood  and  gall. 
We  have  drunk  the  cup  in  submission,  and  afterwards  He  has  made  us  taste  that 
the  Lord  is  gracious,  and  then  ail  bitterness  has  clean  gone,  and  our  mouth  has 
been  as  sweet  as  though  wormwood  had  never  entered  it.  The  taste  of  grace  is 
always  on  some  men's  palates  ;  their  mouths  are  filled  aU  the  day  with  the  praises 
of  the  Lord.  These  are  happy  beings ;  let  us  be  of  their  number.  IV.  A  series  of 
PEACTicAi  iNFEEENCES.  1.  "  Desii'e  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word."  If  you  have 
tasted  it,  long  for  more  of  it.  2.  Next,  expect  to  grow,  and  pray  that  you  may  do 
so.  Pray  for  more  faith,  more  hope,  more  love,  more  zeal,  and  so  let  us  grow. 
"Desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  you  may  grow."  3.  Next,  "  If  so  be  ye 
have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  abhor  the  garlic  flavour  of  the  world's  vices. 
I  mean  those  aUuded  to  in  the  first  verse — "  mahce,  guile,  hypocrisies,  envies,  and 
aU  evil-speaking."  4.  I  want  you  also,  if  you  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious, 
to  lose  taste  for  aU  earthly  trifles.  Let  the  ox  have  its  grass  and  the  horse  its  hay, 
but  souls  must  feed  on  spiritual  meat.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  experimental 
test : — There  are  two  ways  of  ascertaining  whether  a  reputed  loaf  of  bread  is  really 
bread,  or  a  reputed  glass  of  water  is  water.  One  way  is  by  chemical  analysis  ;  the 
other  way  is  by  eating  and  drinking.  Upon  the  whole  the  common  and  experi- 
mental test  is  the  more  satisfactory,  and  it  is  quite  as  scientific.  Some  people  reach 
Christ  by  long  and  painful  argumentation  and  searching  into  all  the  evidences  of 
Christianity,  while  others  simply  take  God  at  His  word  and  come  to  an  experimental 
knowledge  of  the  truth  and  saving  power  of  the  gospel.  This  is  by  far  the  better 
way.  "  0,  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  (J.  R.  Pentecost.)  Tasting  : — ■ 
A  taste  whets  the  appetite.  {J.  A.  Bengel.)  Experience  in  religion : — A  hundred 
thousand  tongues  may  discourse  to  you  about  the  sweetness  of  honey,  but  you  can 
never  have  such  knowledge  of  it  as  by  taste.  So  a  world  full  of  books  may  tell  you 
wonders  of  the  things  ot  God  in  religion,  but  you  can  never  understand  them  exactly 
but  by  the  taste  of  experience.     {N.  Caussin.)  i 

Vers.  4,  5.  To  whom  coining,  as  unto  a  living  stone. — Coming — always  coming : — 
The  Christian  life  is  begun,  continued,  and  perfected  altogether  in  connection  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Sometimes  when  you  go  a  journey,  you  travel  so  far  under 
the  protection  of  a  certain  company,  but  then  you  have  to  change,  and  the  rest  of 
your  journey  may  be  performed  under  very  diiierent  circumstances,  upon  quite 
another  kind  of  line.  Now  we  have  not  so  far  to  go  to  heaven  in  the  guardian  care 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  at  a  certain  point  to  change,  so  as  to  have  somebody  else 
to  be  our  leader,  or  some  other  method  of  salvation.  No,  He  is  the  author  and  He 
is  the  finisher  of  our  faith.  We  have  not  to  seek  a  fresh  physician,  to  find  a  new 
friend  or  to  discover  a  novel  hope,  but  we  are  to  look  for  everything  to  Jesus  Christ, 
"the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  "Ye  are  complete  in  Him."  I. 
Here  is  a  complete  description  of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  a  continuous 
"coming"  to  Jesus.  Notice  that  the  expression  occurs  in  connection  with  two 
figures.  There  is  one  which  precedes  it  in  the  second  verse,  namely,  the  figure  of  a 
little  child  fed  upon  milk.  Children  come  to  their  parents,  and  they  frequently 
come  rather  longer  than  their  parents  like  ;  it  is  the  general  habit  of  children  to 
come  to  their  parents  for  what  they  need.  Just  what  your  children  began  to  do 
from  the  first  moment  you  fixed  your  eyes  on  them,  and  what  they  have  continued 
to  do  ever  since,  that  is  just  what  you  are  to  do  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  You 
are  to  be  always  coming  to  Him — coming  to  Him  for  spiritual  food,  for  spiritual 
garments,  for  washing,  guiding,  help,  and  health :  coming,  in  fact,  for  everything. 
You  wiU  be  wise  if,  the  older  you  grow,  the  more  you  come,  and  He  will  be  all  the 
better  pleased  with  you.    If  you  will  look  again  at  your  Bibles,  you  will  get  a  second 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  k 

illustration  from  the  fourth  verse,  "  To  whom  coming  as  unto  a  living  stone,"  (fee- 
Here  we  have  the  figure  of  a  building.     A  building  comprises  first  a  foundation,  and 
then  the  stones  which  are  brought  to  the  foundation  and  are  built  upon  it.     This 
furnishes  a  very  beautiful  picture  of  Christian  life.     II.  Now  to  answer  the  ques- 
tion, WHAT  IS  the  best  WAY  OF  COMING  TO  Christ  AT  FIRST?     1.  The  vcrj  bcst  waj 
to  come  to  Christ  is  to  come  with  all  your  needs  about  you.     If  you  could  get  rid  of 
half  your  needs  apart  from  Christ,  you  would  not  come  to  Jesus  half  so  well,  for 
your  need  furnishes  you  with  motives  for  coming,  and  gives  you  pleas  to  urge.   Sup- 
pose a  physician  should  come  into  a  town  with  motives  of  pure  benevolence  to  exer- 
cise the   healing   art.     What  he  wants  is  not  to  make  money,  but  to  bless  the 
townsmen.     He  has  a  love  to  his  fellow-men,  and  he  wants  to  cure  them,  and  there- 
fore he  gives  notice  that  the  poorest  will  be  welcome,  and  the  most  diseased  will  be 
best  received.     Is  there  a  deeply  sin-sick  soul  anywhere  ?     Is  there  man  or  woman 
who  is  bad  altogether?     Come  along,  you  are  just  in  a  right  condition  to  come  to 
Jesus  Christ.     Come  just  as  you  are,  that  is  the  best  style  of  "  coming."     2.  If  you 
■want  to  know  how  to  come  aright  the  first  time,  I  should  answer,  Come  to  fiwi 
everything  you  want  in  Christ.     I  heard  of  a  shop  some  time  ago  in  a  country  town 
where  they  sold  everything,  and  the  man  said  that  he  did  not  believe  that  there  was 
anything  a  human  being  wanted  but  what  he  could  rig  him  out  from  top  to  toe. 
Well,  I  do  not  know  whether  that  promise  would  have  been  carried  out  to  the  letter 
if  it  had  been  tried,  but  I  know  it  is  so  with  Jesus  Christ ;  He  can  supply  you  with 
all  you  need,  for  "  Christ  is  all."     3.  The  best  way  to  come  to  Christ  is  to  come 
meaning  to  get  everything,  and  to  obtain  aU  the  plenitude  of  grace  which  He  has 
laid  up  in  store  and  promised  freely  to  give.     III.  What  is  the  best  way  to  come 
AFTERWARDS?     The  answcr  is — Come  just  as  you  used  to  come.     The  text  does  not 
say  that  you  have  come  to  Christ,  though  that  is  true,  but  that  you  are  coming ;  and 
you  are  to  be  always  coming.     The  way  to  continue  coming  is  to  come  just  in  the 
same  way  as  you  came  at  first.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Christ  a  living  stone  : — I. 
Christ  the  sure  foundation.     Without  Christ  the  Bible  is  meaningless,  the  world 
hopeless,  heaven  charmless.     You  might  as  weU  have  a  summer  without  a  gleam  of 
light,  without  the  smeU  of  flowers,  or  the  song  of  a  bird,  as  have  a  life  without  Jesus 
Christ.     You  might  as  well  have  a  year  without  a  summer,  nothing  but  barrenness 
and  death,  as  to  have  a  life  without  Jesus  Christ.     You  might  as  well  have  a  night 
without  a  morning,  as  to  live  in  this  world,  and  die,  and  be  buried  without  Jesus 
Christ.     You  might  as  well  speak  of  the  astronomy  of  the  world  and  leave  out  the 
Bun,  as  speak  of  history,  philosophy,  and  creation,  and  leave  out  Jesus  Christ.     In 
Christ,  and  in  Him  alone,  the  real  and  the  ideal  meet.     Christ  was  the  perfect,  the 
symmetrical  Man,  the  true  centre  of  redeemed  humanity.     II.  Christ  rejected  by 
MANY.     He  reveals  character  ;  He  makes  men  declare  themselves  ;  He  is  the  touch- 
stone that  draws  worth  and  develops  worthlessness.     Come  near  to  Christ,  and  if 
you  have  the  elements  of  nobility  you  will  be  drawn  toward  Him ;  if  you  are  worth- 
less you  will  hate  Him.     III.  A  startling  contrast — God's  judgment  of  Christ  as 
compared  with  that  of  men  :  "  Chosen  of  God,  and  precious."    God  knew  Him,  and 
He  knew  God  as  it  is  impossible  for  men  to  know  Him ;  and  this  is  the  judgment 
which  God  here  gives.     IV.  In  order  to  receive  the  blessing  of  Christ's  life,  we  must 
COME  to  Him.     God's  promise  includes  God's  condition.    (R.  S.  MacArthur.)       The 
living  stone  : — I.  The  Church  or  spiritual  temple  in  its  foundation.     1.  Jesus 
Christ  is  here  set  forth  as  the  foundation  of  the  Christian  Church.     2.  The  apostle 
here  seems  to  violate  the  rules  of  rhetoric  and  elegant  composition  by  attributing  life 
to  a  stone.     God's  thoughts  were  so  infinite  that  the  laws  of  grammar  stood  in  con- 
stant need  of  expansion  to  receive  them.    3.  "  Disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen 
of  God."     This  Divine  choice  does  not  refer  primarily,  if  at  all,  to  God's  eternal 
election  of  His  Son  to  be  the  foundation  of  the  Church,  but  to  His  choice  of  Him  in 
consequence  of  His  holy  life  and  atoning  death.     The  disallowing  by  men  and  the 
choosing  by  God  were  simultaneous  processes.     God  chose  Him,  not  arbitrarily,  but 
on  account  of  fitness  after  trying  Him.     II.  The  Church  or  spiritual  temple  in  its 
SUPERSTRUCTURE.     1.  What  then  is  the  first  step  you  should  take  to  be  built  into  the 
walls  of  this  spiritual  edifice  ?     This — you  must  come  to  Jesus  Christ.     "  To  whom 
coming"  ;  or,  as  the  words  might  be  rendered,  "  To  whom  coming  close  up,"  "to 
whom  coming  very  near  " — so  near  as  to  be  in  personal  contact  with  Him,  nothing 
whatever  intervening.     You  must  remove  all  the  earth  and  brush  away  every  grain 
of  sand,  and  build  your  house  on  the  clean  face  of  the  rock,  with  nothing  whatsoevei- 
between.     2.  "To  whom  coming  close  up,  as  unto  a  living  stone,"  then  it  follows 
that  "  ye  also,  as  living  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house."    The  word  for 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  139 

"  stones  "  here  suggests — I  do  not  say  it  positively  means,  but  it  suggests  stones 
dressed,  smoothed,  and  polished,  fitted  to  their  place  in  the  walls  of  the  spiritual 
edifice — the  root  of  the  English  word  lithograph.  Young  people,  and  old,  you  will 
not  do  to  be  built  into  the  walls  of  this  temple  in  the  rough,  as  you  come  from  the 
quarry  of  the  world.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone  can  prepare  you  for  this.  III.  The 
Chuech  oe  spieitual  temple  in  its  seevice.  1.  "  A  priesthood."  So  there  is  a 
priesthood  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  whole  body  of  believers  forms  the  Christian 
priesthood.  2.  "  An  holy  priesthood."  A  learned  priesthood?  No.  An  educated 
priesthood  ?  No.  No ;  an  holy  priesthood.  3.  "  To  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices, 
acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ."  "Spiritual  sacrifices":  what  are  these? 
Singing  ?  Yes.  Praying  ?  Yes.  Preaching  ?  I  am  glad  to  believe  it.  Under  the 
law  material  sacrifices  were  required — oxen,  sheep,  doves ;  but  under  the  gospel 
only  those  sacrifices  which  proceed  from  a  regenerate  heart,  and  which  testify  to  the 
gratitude  and  devotion  of  an  emancipated  spirit.  God  condescends  to  accept  the 
offering  for  the  sake  of  the  love  which  inspires  it.  What  else  is  necessary  ?  That 
we  present  all  by,  or,  as  in  the  Welsh,  "  through  "  Jesus  Christ.  Our  sacrifices 
must  ascend  to  the  throne  through  Him ;  and  as  they  go  through  Him  they  are 
beautifully  filtered  and  refined.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Disallowed  indeed  of  men. — 
Christ  disallowed  : — Disallowed  He  was,  indeed,  of  men  :  they  called  HLm  the  car- 
penter's Son,  a  Samaritan,  winebibber,  deceiver ;  they  would  have  no  other  king  but 
Csesar ;  with  them  Barabbas  was  meeter  to  hve  than  He.  What  was  the  cause  ? 
They  looked  for  one  that  should  come  as  an  earthly  prince,  to  deliver  them  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  Komans  ;  but  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  They  looked 
also  for  one  that  should  have  upheld  their  customs,  laws,  and  traditions ;  but  the 
date  of  them  was  out.  Again,  how  came  they  to  this  height  of  disallowing  Him  ? 
At  the  first  of  ignorance  and  blindness,  but  after  of  malice ;  so  men  grow  (when 
they  desire  not  to  amend  and  see  the  truth)  from  one  degree  of  wickedness  to  another. 
{John  Rogers.)  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up. — Living  stones  : — Keligious 
art  finds  its  culmination  in  the  temple  of  the  ancients  and  the  cathedral  of  the 
moderns.  Higher  than  this  it  cannot  reach.  That  the  temple  made  a  profound 
impression  upon  the  minds  of  the  apostles,  that  its  association  interpenetrated  their 
religious  life  and  coloured  their  teaching,  we  have  unmistakable  evidence.  In  his 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  Paul  seizes  hold  of  the  idea  to  illustrate  the  stability,  the 
growth,  and  the  grandeur  of  the  Church.  It  is  precisely  the  same  idea  which  Peter 
had  in  his  mind.  The  idea  is  a  grand  one,  and  it  has  had  a  fascination  for  more 
than  one  of  the  great  men  of  the  Church.  To  mention  only  one  instance,  it  has 
given  to  us  the  immortal  work  of  John  Howe,  "  The  Living  Temple."  Let  us  look 
at  it.  Kising  slowly  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  noiselessly  and  unobserved  by  the 
majority  of  men,  are  the  fair  proportions  of  a  temple  in  comparison  with  which  the 
grandest  conceptions  of  man  are  but  blurred  and  broken  lines  of  beauty.  Century 
after  century  has  contributed  its  quota  to  the  pile,  and  during  the  unborn  ages  it  wUl 
continue  to  increase  in  symmetry  and  perfection,  until  with  the  last  man  the  edifice 
will  be  complete.  The  text  reminds  us  that  believers  are  the  living  stones  of  this 
living  temple.  Let  us  pay  a  visit  to  the  temple,  and  look  upon  the  stones  that  are 
being  built  into  it.     I.  As  soon  as  we  approach  our  attention  is  arrested  by  some 

HUGE,  UNSHAPELY  BLOCKS  OF  STONE,  SH.UIP-ANGLED,  AND    DISFIGUEED    HEBE    AND    THERE 

WITH  MUD.  We  glance  hastily  up  at  the  superb  building  before  us,  re-examine  the 
stones,  and  then  in  some  wonder  ask  our  guide,  "  What  possible  use  can  these  be 
put  to?"  Touching  the  stone  tenderly  with  his  fingers,  the  master-builder  replies 
that  there  ip  no  better  material  built  up  in  the  whole  fabric  than  this.  Despite  their 
roughness  and  shapelessness,  these  stones,  he  says,  possess  a  nature  which  yields 
readily  to  the  tools  and  skill  of  the  workmen.  Do  we  understand  the  teaching  ? 
Have  we  not  in  our  Church  fellowship  met  with  nlten  and  women  freshly  hewn  from 
the  world's  quarry,  with  such  angularities  of  character,  with  such  imperfect  know- 
ledge, with  such  lack  of  grace,  that  we  have  begun  to  question  if  such  rough  material 
could  be  used  for  anything  but  stumbling-blocks  in  the  cause  of  Christ  ?  It  may 
have  been,  even,  that  we  have  treated  them  with  indifference,  if  not  with  contempt, 
and  denied  them  the  assurance  of  a  brother's  sympathy.  Forgetting  "  the  hole  of 
the  pit  from  whence  we  have  been  digged,"  we  have  despised  these  little  ones  for 
whom  Christ  died.  Let  us  be  consistent  with  ourselves.  We  profess  to  believe  in 
spiritual  capacities  and  capabilities,  and  we  cry  each  day  out  of  the  depths  of  our 
weakness  and  ignorance,  "  Lord,  help  us."  In  what  lies  the  difference  between  us 
and  them  ?  Are  not  their  souls  endowed  with  the  same  faculties,  the  same  capa- 
bilities, spiritually,  as  ours?    But  if  we  have  seen  anything  of  the  operation  of 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Divine  grace  lipon  the  heart,  we  surely  have  seen  enough  to  lead  us  to  the  belief  that 
there  is  no  limit  to  its  power,  that  it  can  fashion  the  roughest  into  symmetry  and 
grace.  The  tinker  of  Elstow  is  transformed  into  the  immortal  dreamer.  Ah,  surely 
bitter  must  be  our  humiliation  if  by  our  spiritual  pride  we  mar  the  beauty  and  use- 
fulness of  our  Christian  life,  and  see  those  whom  we  have  despised  outstripping  us 
in  service,  and  bearing  more  vividly  upon  them  the  imprint  of  Divine  favour.  Pro- 
ceeding in  our  examination  of  the  stones,  we  have  one  pointed  out  to  us  as  being  of 
great  importance.     II.  Examining  it  we  find  that  while  it  bears  evident  m.aeks  of 

THE  workmen's  TOOLS,  IT  IS  ONLY  A  LARGE  PLAIN   BLOCK  OF  STONE,  WITH  NO  PRETENSION 

TO  ORNAJiENT  WHATEVER.  We  acknowledge  at  once  its  solidity,  but  have  to  ask  an 
explanation  of  its  use.  We  are  led  to  a  part  of  the  building  where  the  first  stones 
are  being  laid  in  the  freshly  excavated  earth,  and  there  we  are  told  that  these  plain 
blocks  of  stone  are  used  for  the  wall  foundations.  "  What ! "  we  exclaim,  "  are  they 
to  be  hidden  out  of  sight,  and  their  worth  never  to  be  appreciated?"  "True," 
replies  our  guide,  "  they  are  hidden,  and  the  thoughtless  dream  not  of  them  ;  but 
the  architect  knows  their  value.  They  serve  a  grand  purpose  ;  upon  them  depends 
the  strength,  aye,  and  the  beauty  of  the  building,  too."  Unspeakable  comfort  this 
to  many  a  lonely,  toiling  Christian.  Look  at  that  mother,  the  object  of  her  chil- 
dren's lavish  affection — their  most  trusted  adviser  in  times  of  difficulty  and  doubt. 
But  she  is  unknown  to  the  world  and  fame.  Men  do  not  know  that  the  strength 
and  nobility  of  character  which  they  have  been  accustomed  to  admire  in  her  son, 
has  a  foundation  in  her  life  and  heart.  Let  us  take  courage,  therefore,  and  labour 
on  in  the  dark  a  little  while  longer.  We  cannot  pass  by  these  pillars  without 
stopping  a  minute  or  two  to  admire  their  strength  and  various  beauty.  III.  In 
these  pillars  we  see  grace,  strength,  and  utility  combined.  To  be  a  pillar  in  the 
Temple  of  God  is  the  highest  honour  to  which  we  can  reach.  Do  we  covet  their 
position,  their  fame,  or  their  worth  ?  Then  we  must  drink  of  the  cup  they  have 
drank  of,  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  they  were  baptized  with.  That  the 
Church  has  had  such  pillars,  and  will  continue  to  have  them,  is  her  strength  and 
hope.  "Ah  1  more  ornamental  than  useful,"  we  exclaim,  as  we  are  called  to  look  at 
some  stones  covered  with  filigree  work,  or  highly-finished  carving.  "A  judgment 
somewhat  hasty  and  thoughtless,"  replies  the  architect.  "  See,  this  stone  you  have 
despised  because  of  its  ornament  is  fashioned  for  a  keystone,  and  its  utility  will  be 
enhanced  by  its  beauty.  This  other,  with  all  its  marvellous  delicacy  of  carving,  has 
a  sound  core,  and  is  fashioned  for  the  capital  of  one  of  these  pillars.  It  will  add 
grace  to  the  pillar,  and  will  sustain  part  of  its  load."  Hasty  and  thoughtless  judg- 
ments are,  alas  !  too  frequent  among  professing  Christians.  By  some  zealous 
workers  the  men  and  women  of  culture  are  despised  as  being  necessarily  more 
ornamental  than  useful.  They  are  not  seen  to  be  enthusiastic  in  the  service  of  the 
Master,  and  forthwith,  without  a  moment's  calm  thought,  they  are  spoken  of  rather 
as  hindrances  than  helps  in  the  cause  of  righteousness.  Have  we  been  tempted  to 
think  so  of  any  one?  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  have  not  been  doing  great  injustice 
to  a  keystone  or  a  capital  in  God's  Temple — living  stones,  perchance,  not  only  more 
beautiful  than  we,  but  vastly  more  useful  also.  Some  of  the  most  zealous  and 
humble  Christian  workers  are  to  be  found  among  the  men  and  women  of  culture 
to-day.  And  not  only  is  it  so,  but  they  do  a  work  that  the  less  cultured  cannot  do. 
Like  the  carved  capital  or  keystone,  they  can  catch  the  eye  of  the  careless  or  sceptical 
men  of  culture  and  compel  them,  by  the  force  of  their  intrinsic  worth,  to  investigate 
the  claims  of  religion.  "  How  beautiful  is  the  polish  on  this  stone !  How  it  reveals 
the  beauty  of  the  granite  !  How  it  flashes  back  the  sunlight !  "  Such  is  our  excla- 
mation over  a  stone  which  our  guide  regards  with  a  look  of  mingled  tenderness  and 
delight.  "  Very  beautiful,"  he  replies,  "  but  at  what  cost!"  and  then  he  explains 
to  us  the  hard  pressure,  the  constant  friction,  and  the  other  processes  to  which  it 
had  been  subjected  before  it  took  on  this  lustrous  beauty.  Just  so.  We  have  a 
friend  in  whose  Christian  life  there  is  a  sparkle,  a  heavenly  beauty,  as  exceptional 
as  it  is  delightful.  Would  we  know  the  secret?  Then  let  us  look  into  his  past  life. 
Sorrow  came  to  his  heart  suddenly,  overwhelmingly.  "  Made  perfect  through  suffer- 
ing !  "  How  difficult  the  lesson  !  Instinctively  we  shrink  from  pain.  Truly,  pain 
is  a  mystery.  "  Hold,  hold  !  "  cries  the  stone  to  the  polisher  when  the  cold  water 
and  rough  sand  are  thrown  upon  it,  and  the  heavy  polishing-plane  passes  over  it  for 
the  first  time.  "  Hold,  hold  !  Why  this  rough  treatment?  What  wrong  have  I 
done?  Have  I  not  already  suffered  at  the  hands  of  workmen?  "  "Peace,  foolish 
stone,"  cries  the  pohsher.  "  Dost  thou  not  know  that  there  are  yet  roughnesses  in 
thy  nature  to  be  rubbed  down,  and  wilt  thou  grudge  the  pain  ?    Dost  thou  not  know 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  141 

that  I  will  bring  to  light  thy  hidden  beauty  by  this  process  ?  Thou  wilt  become  a 
mirror  to  catch  the  faintest  smile  of  heaven  if  thou  wilt  but  suffer  it  to  be  so  now." 
IV.  What  mean  these  quantities  of  small  stones  lying  here  and  there  ?  Is  it  pos- 
sible that  they  can  be  used  in  the  great  building?  "  To  which  question  our  instructor 
replies,  "  The  temple  could  not  be  built  without  them.  There  is  not  only  a  place 
for  them,  but  there  are  places  which  nothing  but  they  can  fiU.  Unseen  by  the  eye, 
these  small  stones  supplement  the  deficiencies  of  the  larger  ones,  and  there  would 
be  many  an  interstice  through  which  the  wind  and  rain  would  penetrate  were  it  not 
for  these  insignificant-looking  stones."  Little  children  living  stones  in  God's 
temple  !  Sweet  thought !  What  parent  does  not  clutch  at  it  with  unspeakable  joy? 
The  fact  may  well  fire  the  zeal  and  intensify  the  love  of  every  parent  and  teacher  of 
the  young  in  pouring  out  their  souls  labouring  for  their  weal.  We  would  do  well  to 
ponder — 1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  quite  possible  for  the  living  stones  to  be  deceived 
with  regard  to  their  position  and  importance.  2.  In  the  second  place,  a  true  view 
of  our  own  hearts,  as  well  as  of  the  importance  of  Christian  service,  wiU  lead  us  to 
cast  ourselves  at  the  Master's  feet,  saying,  "  Choose  my  place  for  me."  {W.  Skinner.) 
The  Church  the  temple  of  God  : — I.  It  is  organised  afteb  a  Divine  plan.  1.  This 
is  the  leading  plan  in  the  world's  history.  2.  This  plan,  though  unknown  by  men, 
is  being  worked  out  by  them.  II.  It  is  compacted  together  into  a  necessary 
unity.  Supreme  love  for  a  common  Father,  unbounded  confidence  in  a  common 
Christ,  life  consecration  to  a  common  cause,  are  the  indissoluble  bonds  of  union. 
This  union  is — 1.  Independent  of  local  distances.  2.  Independent  of  external  cir- 
cumstances. 3.  Independent  of  ecclesiastical  systems.  4.  Independent  of  mental 
idiosyncrasies.  UI.  It  is  the  special  residence  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  There 
is  more  of  God  to  be  seen  in  the  true  Church  than  anywhere  else  under  heaven. 
In  nature  you  see  His  handicraft,  in  saints  you  see  His  soul.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Living  stones : — The  only  idea  which  I  think  can  be  legitimately  connected  with 
purity  of  matter,  is  this  of  vital  and  energetic  connection  among  its  particles  ;  and 
the  idea  of  foulness  is  essentially  connected  with  dissolution  and  death.  Thus  the 
purity  of  the  rock  contrasted  with  the  foulness  of  dust  or  mould  is  expressed  by  the 
epithet  "living,"  very  singularly  given  the  rock  in  almost  all  languages;  singularly 
I  say,  because  life  is  almost  the  last  attribute  one  would  ascribe  to  stone  but  for 
this  visible  energy  and  connection  of  its  particles ;  and  so  of  water  as  opposed  to 
stagnancy.     (J.   Riiskin.)  Cohesion  in    God's   spiritual    house : — The    apostle 

assumes,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  if  one  is  in  Christ,  one  is  also  in  His  Church. 
Detached  stones  are  mere  rubble.  There  is  contact,  cohesion,  mutual  attach- 
ment and  support  in  these  "  living  stones  "  of  God's  spiritual  house.  Based  on  the 
"  living  stone,"  the  bed-rock  of  the  Church,  they  grow  together  into  God's  glorious 
human  temple.  (G.  G.  Findlay.)  Mind  the  teviple  is  not  huilt  without  you  : — 
Travellers  sometimes  find  in  lonely  quarries,  long  abandoned,  or  once  worked  by  a 
vanished  race,  great  blocks  squared  and  dressed,  that  seem  to  have  been  meant  for 
palace  or  shrine.  But  there  they  lie,  neglected  and  forgotten,  and  the  building 
for  which  they  were  hewn  has  been  reared  without  them.  Beware,  lest  God's 
grand  temple  should  be  built  up  without  you,  and  you  be  left  to  desolation  and 
decay.  {A.  Maclaren.)  Living  stones  : — Tyndall,  speaking  of  the  frozen  crystals 
in  snowflakes,  says :  "  Surely  such  an  exhibition  of  power,  such  an  apparent 
demonstration  of  a  resident  intelligence  in  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  '  brute 
matter,'  would  appear  perfectly  miraculous.  If  the  Houses  of  Parliament  were 
built  up  of  forces  resident  in  their  own  bricks,  it  would  be  nothing  intrinsically 
more  wonderful."  (Hours  of  Exercise  on  the  Alps.)  An  holy  priesthood. — The 
priesthood  of  the  laity  : — Christians  are  a  royal  priesthood  ;  they  are  united  together 
in  the  Church  to  be  a  holy  priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to 
God  by  Jesus  Christ:  the  joy  of  priesthood  should  be  the  tasted  joy  of  every 
member  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  True  it  is  that  in  its  fullest  sense  there  is  but  one 
priest — Jesus,  the  anointed  of  the  Father.  No  other  priest  can  be,  since  He  ever 
lives  and  ministers  in  His  priesthood.  But  He  ministers  as  priest  under  two  con- 
ditions— in  heaven  in  His  glorified  human  body :  on  earth  in  His  mystical  body — 
the  Church.  When  He  was  on  the  earth  "  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,"  He  ministered 
to  men  through  His  natural  body.  In  it  He  interceded  for  them  with  God,  and 
instituted  and  offered  the  holy  Eucharistic  sacrifice.  By  it  He  spake  to  them  God's 
words,  and  did  among  them  God's  works.  But  when  His  body  was  taken  up  into 
heaven,  it  could  not  be  the  instrument  of  His  priesthood  on  earth.  So  He  created 
His  mystical  body — the  Church.  Thus  the  Church,  as  the  mystical  body  of  Christ, 
is  the  extension  of  His  natural  body,  and  so  is  the  fulness  of  Christ.    As,  then,  before 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

His  ascension,  Christ  ministered  on  earth  in  His  natural  body,  since  His  ascension  He 
ministers  on  earth  in  His  mystical  body.  Hence  His  Church  is  a  sacerdotal  society. 
It  is  a  kingdom  of  priests,  because  its  members  are  the  ministers  of  Christ's  priest 
hood.  Its  priesthood  is  not  one  existing  side  by  side  with,  nor  is  it  supplemental  to, 
the  one  priesthood  of  Christ.  It  is  not  the  delegated  representative  of  an  absent 
Lord  fulfilling  priestly  ministries  on  His  behalf ;  it  is  the  organism  of  a  present 
Lord.  It  is  the  organism  whereby  Christ  intercedes  with  God  for  men  in  prayer 
and  Eucharist  on  earth,  and  by  which  He  teaches  men  God's  faith,  and  ministers 
to  them  God's  grace.  This  sacerdotal  vocation  and  character  is  not  the  exclusive 
possession  of  any  one  section  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ — it  is  common  to  all 
Christian  men.  Each  member  of  the  mystical  body  of  the  Great  High  Priest  is 
himself  a  priest  unto  God.  But  he  is  a  priest  called  on  to  minister  in  the  unity  and 
in  the  order  of  that  mystical  body.  Each  member  in  it  is  placed  in  his  position  in 
its  structure  to  fulfil  the  ministry  proper  to  him  as  the  organ  of  the  whole  body. 
The  priestly  character  is  common  to  all,  but  all  are  not  called  to  the  same  measure 
of  priestly  ministries  or  gifts.  The  priesthood  of  the  laity  is  recognised  by  the 
Church  in  confirmation.  Christians  are  born  to  priesthood  in  the  sacrament  of 
regeneration  as  sons  of  the  second  Aaron,  just  as  Aaron's  sons  were  born  to  the 
priesthood  of  Israel.  But  as  in  Israel  of  old  those  thus  born  were  at  a  given  age 
solemnly  consecrated  and  commissioned  to  execute  the  priest's  ofiice ;  so  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  the  regenerate  are  consecrated,  commissioned,  and  dowered,  for 
the  lay  priesthood  in  the  sacrament  of  confirmation.  This  priesthood  of  the  laity 
has,  as  priesthood  always  has,  a  twofold  aspect — Godward  and  manward.  The 
Church,  as  a  sacerdotal  society,  has  primarily  to  minister  to  God — to  offer  up 
spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  first  duty  of  the  lay 
priesthood  is  by  co-operation  with  the  consecrated  ministers  of  the  Church  to  offer 
to  God  continual  worship  in  Christian  sanctuaries.  Closely  allied  with  the  ministiy 
of  worship  is  the  ministry  of  intercession.  He  whose  soul  ascends  to  God  and 
rests  in  God  in  adoration  will  share  with  God  His  love  to  men,  and,  sharing  this 
love,  he  will  breathe  it  out  in  intercession.  Moreover,  as  God's  priest,  the  layman 
is  called  to  minister  to  man  for  God  in  active  service.  He  has  his  place  in  that 
great  mediatorial  system  by  which  God  wills  to  give  to  men  the  two  great  gifts  of 
truth  and  grace.  Each  Christian  Churchman  is  here  in  a  position  of  grave  respon- 
sibility. All  wealth  is  a  trust  held  by  each  for  all.  And,  in  addition  to  this,  as  the 
priest  of  God,  the  layman  is  called  on  to  do  what  he  can  to  bring  his  feUow-men  into 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  he  knows  it,  and  with  those  gracious  conditions  of  life 
in  which  he  is  privileged  to  live.  He  must  be  an  evangelist — the  bearer  to  others  of 
the  good  tidings  in  the  joy  of  which  he  is  privileged  to  live.  Let  me  conclude  with 
two  cautions  bearing  on  this  question  of  lay  priesthood.  1.  Avoid  individualism  in 
its  exercise.  Priesthood  is  an  official  status ;  it  exists  in  the  body  of  Christ,  and 
can  only  be  rightly  exercised  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  the  unity  of  that  body. 
All  its  ministries  must  be  performed  "  decently  and  in  order."  God  is  not  the 
author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  in  all  churches  of  the  saints,  "  and  peace  is,"  as 
St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  teaches  us,  "the  harmony  of  ordered  union."  2.  The  one 
motive  of  the  layman  in  his  priesthood  must  always  be  to  reveal  to  men  and  to 
bring  them  to  submit  to  the  One  Priest,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  He  ministers  in 
and  through  His  Church.  No  one  can  rise  to  the  realisation  of  his  lay  priesthood 
except  he  be  one  who,  in  the  unity  of  the  Church,  tastes  and  sees  the  goodness  of 
the  Lord.  {Canon  Body.)  The  Church  the  priesthood  of  God  : — I.  The  persons 
OF  WHOM  THIS  PRIESTHOOD  IS  COMPOSED.  The  apostlc  is  here  writing,  not  to  Church 
officers,  but  to  individual  Christians  scattered  throughout  the  world.  Why  should 
they  be  represented  as  a  priesthood  ?  1.  On  account  of  their  entire  devotedness  to 
Divine  service.  2.  On  account  of  their  free  access  to  the  Divine  presence  (Eph.  ii.  18; 
Heb.  X.  19-'22).  II.  The  char.\cter  by  which  this  priesthood  is  distinguished. 
"  Holy."  Moral  holiness  is  resemblance  to  Christ — the  spirit  of  supreme  love  to  the 
Father  and  self-sacrificing  love  for  man.  III.  The  service  to  which  this  priest- 
hood IS  CONSECRATED.  1.  The  Sacrifices  are  spiritual.  2.  Mediatory.  {D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  Christian  priesthood  : — The  priesthood  of  the  law  was  holy,  and  its 
holiness  was  signified  by  many  outward  things,  by  anointings,  and  washings,  and 
vestments ;  but  in  this  spiritual  priesthood  of  the  gospel,  holiness  itself  is  instead  of 
all  these,  as  being  the  substance  of  all.  The  children  of  God  are  all  anointed  and 
purified,  and  clothed  with  holiness.  There  is  here  the  service  of  this  office,  namely, 
to  offer.  All  sacrifice  is  not  taken  away,  but  it  is  changed  from  the  offering  of  those 
things  formerly  in  use  to  spiritual  sacrifices.    Now  these  are  every  way  preferable : 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  143 

they  are  easier  to  us,  and  yet  more  acceptable  to  God.  How  much  more  should  we 
abound  in  spiritual  sacrifice,  who  are  eased  of  the  other  !  But  though  the  spiritual 
sacrificing  is  easier  in  its  own  nature,  yet  to  the  corrupt  nature  of  man  it  is  by  far 
the  harder.  He  would  rather  choose  still  all  the  toil  aiad  cost  of  the  former  way,  if 
it  were  in  his  option.  A  holy  course  of  life  is  called  the  sacrifice  of  righteousness 
(Psa.  iv.  6 ;  and  Phil.  iv.  18 ;  so  also  Heb.  xiii.  16),  where  the  apostle  shows  what 
sacrifices  succeed  to  those  which,  as  he  hath  taught  at  large,  are  abolished.  In  a. 
word,  that  sacrifice  of  ours  which  includes  all  these,  and  without  which  none  of 
these  can  be  rightly  offered,  is  ourselves,  our  whole  selves.  Now  that  whereby 
we  offer  all  spiritual  sacrifices  and  even  ourselves,  is  love.  That  is  the  holy  fire 
that  burns  up  all,  sends  up  our  prayers,  and  our  hearts,  and  our  whole  selves  a 
whole  burnt-offering  to  God — and,  as  the  fire  of  the  altar,  it  is  originally  from 
heaven,  being  kindled  by  God's  own  love  to  us,  and  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  received 
from  Christ,  but,  above  all,  with  His  own  merits.  The  success  of  this  service ; 
acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  children  of  God  delight  in  offering  sacrifices 
to  Him  ;  but  if  they  could  not  know  that  they  were  well  taken  at  their  hands,  this 
would  discourage  them  much ;  therefore  this  is  added.  He  accepts  themselves  and 
their  ways  when  offered  in  sincerity,  though  never  so  mean ;  though  they  some- 
times have  no  more  than  a  sigh  or  a  groan,  it  is  most  properly  a  spiritual  sacrifice. 
No  one  needs  forbear  sacrifice  for  poverty,  for  what  God  desires  is  the  heart,  and 
there  is  none  so  poor  but  hath  a  heart  to  give  Him.  But  meanness  is  not  all. 
There  is  a  guiltiness  on  ourselves  and,  on  all  we  offer.  Our  prayers  and  ssrvices  are 
polluted.  But  this  hinders  not,  for  our  acceptance  is  not  for  ourselves,  but  for  the 
sake  of  one  who  hath  no  guiltiness  at  all,  "  acceptable  by  Jesus  Christ."  In  Him 
our  persons  are  clothed  with  righteousness.  How  ought  our  hearts  to  be  knit  to 
Him,  by  whom  we  are  brought  into  favour  with  God  and  kept  in  favour  with  Him, 
in  whom  we  obtain  all  the  good  we  receive,  and  in  whom  all  we  offer  is  accepted  ! 
In  Him  are  all  our  supplies  of  grace  and  our  hopes  of  glory.  (Abp.  Leighton.) 
The  true  priesthood,  temple  and  sacrifice  : — I.  First,  all  those  who  are  coming  to 
Christ,  daily  coming  nearer  and  nearer  to  Him,  are  as  living  stones  built  up  into 
A  TEMPLE.  1.  They  are  called  a  spiritual  house  in  opposition  to  the  old  material 
house  in  which  the  emblem  of  the  Divine  presence  shone  forth  in  the  midst  of 
Israel,  that  temple  in  which  the  Jew  delighted,  counting  it  to  be  beautiful  for 
situation  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  When  we  become  holy,  as  we  should  be, 
we  shall  count  all  places  and  all  hours  to  be  the  Lord's,  and  we  shall  always  dwell 
in  His  temple  because  God  is  everywhere.  2.  We  are  a  spiritual  temple,  but  not 
the  less  real.  The  Lord  has  a  people  scattered  abroad  everywhere,  whose  lives  are 
hid  with  Him  in  God,  and  these  make  up  the  real  temple  of  God  in  which  the  Lord 
dwelleth.  Men  of  every  name  and  clime  and  age  are  quickened  into  life,  made 
living  stones,  and  then  laid  upon  Christ,  and  these  constitute  the  true  temple,  which 
God  hath  built  and  not  man,  for  He  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands ; 
that  is  to  say,  of  man's  building,  but  He  dwelleth  in  a  temple  which  He  Himself 
hath  builded  for  His  habitation  for  ever,  saying,  "This  is  My  rest  for  ever ;  here 
will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it."  3.  This  temple  is  spiritual,  and  therefore  it  is 
living.  A  material  temple  is  dead,  a  spiritual  temple  must  be  alive ;  and  so  the 
text  tells  us,  "  Ye  also  as  living  stones."  4.  We  are  a  spiritual  house,  and  therefore 
spiritually  built  up.  Peter  says,  "  Ye  are  built  up  " — built  up  by  spiritual  means. 
The  Spirit  of  God  quarries  out  of  the  pit  of  nature  the  stones  which  are  as  yet  dead, 
separating  them  from  the  mass  to  which  they  adhered ;  He  gives  them  life,  and 
then  He  fashions,  squares,  polishes  them,  and  they,  without  sound  of  axe  or 
hammer,  are  brought  each  one  to  its  appointed  place,  and  built  up  into  Christ 
Jesus.  5.  We  are  a  spiritual  house,  and  therefore  the  more  fit  for  the  indwelling 
of  God  who  is  a  Spirit.  It  is  in  the  Church  that  God  reveals  Himself.  If  you 
would  know  the  Lord's  love  and  power  and  grace  you  must  get  among  His  people, 
hear  their  experiences,  learn  from  them  how  God  dealeth  with  them,  and  let  them 
tell  you,  if  ye  have  grace  to  understand  them,  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length, 
and  breadth  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  for  He  manifesteth 
Himself  to  them  as  He  doth  not  to  the  world.  Hath  He  not  said,  "  I  will  dwell  in 
them  and  walk  in  them  "  ?  II.  In  addition  to  being  a  temple,  God's  people  are  said 
to  be  A  PRIESTHOOD.  Observe  that  they  are  spoken  of  together,  and  not  merely  as 
individuals  :  they  make  up  one  indivisible  priesthood  :  each  one  is  a  priest,  but  all 
standing  together  they  are  a  priesthood,  by  virtue  of  their  being  one  with  Christ. 
1.  This  stands  in  opposition  to  the  nominal  and  worldly  priesthood.  2.  This  priest- 
hood is  most  real,  although  it  be  not  of  the  outward  and  visible  order ;  for  God's 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii. 

priests  become  priests  after  a  true  and  notable  fashion.  3.  We  are  priests  in  the 
aspect  of  priesthood  towards  God.  You  are  to  speak  with  God  on  man's  behalf, 
and  bring  down,  each  of  you,  according  to  the  measure  of  your  faith,  the  blessing 
upon  the  sons  of  men  among  whom  you  dwell.  4.  And  you  are  priests  towards 
men  also,  for  the  priest  was  selected  from  among  men  to  exercise  necessary  offices 
for  man's  good.  The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  if  ye  be  as  ye  should 
be,  ye  hold  fast  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  5.  This  is  to  be  your  function 
and  ministry  always  and  in  every  place.  You  are  a  holy  priesthood ;  not  alone  on 
the  Lord's  day  when  ye  come  into  this  house,  but  at  all  times.  III.  Consider  the 
SACRIFICES  which  we  offer — "  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ." 
1.  We  offer  spiritual  sacrifices  as  opposed  to  the  literal.  2.  This  sacrificing  takes 
various  forms.  "  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice."  You  are  to  present  yourselves,  spkit,  soul,  and  body,  as  a  sacrifice  unto 
God.  You  are  also  to  "  do  good  and  to  communicate,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God 
is  well  pleased."  To  Him  also  you  are  to  "  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  continually, 
the  fruit  of  your  lips  giving  glory  to  God."  To  the  Lord  also  you  must  present  the 
incense  of  holy  prayer ;  but  all  these  are  comprehended,  I  think,  in  the  expression, 
*'  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  doctrine  of  sacrifice  : — 
The  theory  of  sacrifice  seems  to  be  intuitively  inherent  in  all  religions.  The 
sacrifice  of  the  life  and  death  of  Christ  is  the  one  essential  foundation  of  every 
acceptable  offering  which  can  be  made  to  God.  God  never  requires  what  we  cannot 
offer.  He  never  asks  a  sin  or  trespass-offering  from  us.  You  and  I  could  not  offer 
that.  But  He  asks  what  we  can  give,  a  sweet-savour  offering,  as  a  testimony  of  our 
gratitude  and  love.  Not  a  sin-offering.  As  far  as  Christ's  work  was  propitiatory, 
it  stands  absolutely  alone.  "He  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sin."  But  though  no 
sufferings,  no  work,  no  worship,  no  service  of  ours  can  propitiate,  God  still 
requires  from  us  offerings  of  another  character.  These  are  called  "  spiritual 
sacrifices,"  which  we  are  "  ordained  "  to  offer.  There  is  no  more  attractive  form  in 
which  a  devout  life  can  appear  than  that  of  a  constant  oblation  to  God,  of  all  that 
we  are,  have,  or  do.  Let  the  thought  of  sacrifice  be  inwoven  into  the  texture  of 
your  life.  Study  to  turn,  not  your  prayers  alone,  but  your  whole  daily  course  and 
conversation,  into  an  offering.  Surely  the  thought  that  God  will  accept  it  if  offered 
in  union  with  the  merit  of  His  Son,  is  enough  to  give  stimulus  to  the  sacrifice  ;  to 
open  purse,  and  hand,  and  heart.  You  can  please  Him  if  you  give,  strive,  work  in 
His  name.  To  please  God.  What  a  privilege  to  lie  open  to  us  day  by  day,  and 
hour  by  hour !  What  a  condescension  in  our  heavenly  Father,  when  we  consider 
the  strictness  of  His  justice,  the  impurity  of  our  hearts,  and  our  manifold  falls,  to 
admit  of  our  pleasing  Him,  or  to  leave  any  room  for  oiir  touching  His  complacency. 
We  may  have  this  dignity  if  we  offer  all  in  Christ.  We  need  not  go  far  to  seek  the 
materials  of  an  acceptable  offering  ;  they  lie  all  around  us  ;  in  our  common  work ; 
in  the  little  calls  of  providence ;  in  the  trivial  crosses  we  are  challenged  to  take  up ; 
nay,  in  the  very  recreation  of  our  lives.  If  work  be  done  (no  matter  how  humble) 
in  the  full  view  of  God's  assignment  of  our  several  tasks  and  spheres  of  labour,  and 
under  the  consciousness  of  His  presence,  it  is  a  sacrifice  fit  to  be  laid  upon  His 
altar.  If  we  study  the  very  perversity  of  our  enemies  with  a  loving  hope  that  we 
may  find  something  of  God  and  Christ  about  them  yet,  which  may  be  the  nascent 
germ  of  better  things  ;  if  we  try  to  make  the  best  of  men,  and  not  the  worst,  treating 
them  as  Christ  treated  them,  we  may  thus  redeem  an  hour  from  being  wasted, 
and  sanctify  it  by  turning  it  into  a  sacrifice  to  God.  If  you  should  obey  an  impulse 
to  divert  some  trifie  meant  for  self  and  luxury  to  Christ's  poor  and  charity,  here, 
again,  is  a  sacrifice,  sweet  smelling  before  God,  which  will  buy  the  better  luxury  of 
His  smile  and  love.  And  if  you  regard  time  as,  next  to  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  most  precious  gift  of  God ;  if  you  gather  up  its  fragments  and  put  them  into 
God's  basket  by  using  them  for  holy  things  and  thoughts — this,  too,  grows  into  a 
tribute  which  God  will  accept.  It  is  the  altar  which  sanctifieth  the  gift.  Apart 
from  Christ  and  Christ's  sacrifice,  no  offering  of  ours  is  redolent  of  the  sweet  savour. 
For  our  best  gifts  are  flecked  and  flawed  by  duplicity  and  evil.  (A.  Mursell.) 
Christians  are  priests : — Christians,  you  are  priests.  Be  like  Christ  in  this. 
1.  Wherever  you  go  carry  a  savour  of  Christ.  Let  men  take  knowledge  of  you, 
that  you  kave  been  with  Jesus ;  let  it  be  plain  that  you  come  from  within  the  veil ; 
let  the  smell  of  your  garments  be  as  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed.  2.  Carry 
a  sound  of  Christ  wherever  you  go.  Not  a  step,  Christians,  without  the  sound  of  the 
gospel  bell !  Even  in  smallest  things,  be  spreading  the  glad  sound.  Edwards  says, 
wherever  a  godly  person  enters,  he  is  a  greater  blessing  than  if  the  greatest  monarch 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  145 

were  entering.  So  be  it  with  you.  (i^.  M.  McCheyne.)  To  offer  up  spiritual 
sacrifices. — The  Christianas  sacrifices  : — 1.  The  offering  up  of  our  bodies  and  souls, 
and  all  that  is  in  us  to  serve  God  ;  having  neither  wit,  will,  memory,  nor  anything 
else,  but  for  the  Lord's  use.  It  is  meet  we  should  offer  this  sacrifice,  for  it  is  His 
by  right  of  creation,  redemption,  and  continual  preservation.  2.  The  sacrifice  of  a 
contrite  and  broken  heart.  3.  Prayer  and  praise.  4.  Alms,  mercy  to  all  in  hunger, 
thirst,  sickness,  prison,  especially  to  the  household  of  faith.     (John  Rogers.) 

Ver.  6.  It  is  contaiaed  in  the  Scripture. — Wherein  the  Scriptures  exceed  all  other 
writings : — I.  They  weee  inspieed  all  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Tim.  iii.  17 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  21),  so  were  no  other  writings.     11.  They  contain  a  wisdom  fab  above  all 

THAT  CAN  BE  HAD  BY  THE   PRINCES   AND   MEN    OF    THIS   WORLD  (1  Gor.  vi.  7).       III.    ThEY 

weee  penned  by  more  excellent  men  than  ANY  OTHEE  WRITINGS :  the  greatest, 
wisest,  holiest  men — Moses,  David,  Solomon,  prophets,  evangelists,  apostles,  &c. 
IV.  They  have  such  peopeeties  as  no  othee  weitings  have  :  they  are  more  perfect, 
pure,  deep,  and  immutable  than  any  man's  writings.  These  contain  all  things 
necessary  unto  faith  and  a  good  life  (2  Tim.  iii.  17, 18).     V.  If  we  consider  the 

EFFECTS  THAT  MUST  BE  ACKNOWLEDGED  TO  THE  PRAISE  OF   THE  SCRIPTURES,  nO  Wl'itingS 

can  describe  God  so  fully  to  us,  do  so  bring  glory  to  God  ;  no  Scripture  but  this  can 
convert  a  soul  (Heb.  iv.  12, 13 ;  Psa.  xix.  11 ;  cxix.  14, 15, 27).  (N.  Byfield.)  I  lay  in 
Sion  a  chief  comer-stone. — The  Divine  foundation: — I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  founda- 
tion STONE,  OR  THE  FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTH  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  1.  JcSUS  Christ  is  the  Cardinal 

truth  of  the  Christian  system.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  central  truth  of  Christianity.  3. 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  all-comprehensive  truth  of  Christianity.  Christ  is  Christianity. 
What  is  meant  by  it  ?  Two  things.  (1)  First,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  essential  to  His 
religion.  Plato  is  not  essential  to  Platonism.  Suppose  that  nothing  was  known  of 
the  birth,  life,  and  death  of  Plato,  that  his  writings  came  down  to  us  anonymously, 
it  would  make  but  very  little  difference  to  his  students.  And  what  is  true  of  Plato 
as  a  philosopher  is  also  true  of  ^akya-mouni,  Confucius,  and  Mahomet,  as  founders 
of  religions.  Their  personalities  form  no  integral  portion  of  their  systems.  Plato 
said,  "Accept  my  ideas";  Christ  said,  "Accept  Me."  ^akya-mouni  said,  "This 
is  the  way,  by  renunciation  "  ;  Christ  said,  "I  am  the  Way."  They,  each  and  all, 
put  the  centres  of  their  systems  outside  themselves  ;  but  Christ  put  the  centre  of 
His  in  His  own  person.  (2)  But,  secondly,  the  phrase,  Christ  is  Christianity,  means 
precisely  the  same  as  when  we  say  that  the  tree  is  the  branches.  The  tree  throws 
itself  out  into  branches,  and  it  must  be  patent  to  all  that  there  can  be  no  more  in 
the  branches  than  there  is  already  in  the  tree.  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  corner- 
stone, OR  THE  HARMONISING  TRUTH  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  1.  He  is  the  Comer-stone  of  the 
religions  of  the  world ;  that  is  to  say,  in  Him  and  the  religion  He  instituted  all 
other  religions  meet  and  are  unified.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Corner-stone  of 
Christian  doctrines  ;  in  other  words,  in  Him  they  find  the  principle  of  their  recon- 
ciliation. 3.  Jesus  Christ  is  also  the  Corner-stone  of  Christian  Churches ;  in  Him 
is  their  one  point  of  union.  HI.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sure  foundation.  "  Whoso- 
ever believeth  in  Him  shall  not  be  confounded."  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sure  foun- 
dation, the  one  truth  which  maintains  its  ground  notwithstanding  the  fierce 
assaults  made  upon  it  from  time  to  time.  2.  He  is  a  sure  foundation  for 
us  to  build  thereupon  the  hope  of  everlasting  life.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 
The  corner-stone : — I.  Stability.  The  corner-stone  upholds  and  is  the  strength 
of  the  building.  So  it  is  in  the  Church,  whether  viewed  collectively,  or  as 
composed  of  individual  Christians.  Strength  is  in  Christ  alone.  II.  Beauty. 
Corner-stones  give  beauty  and  ornament  to  a  building.  They  are  often  graceful 
and  rich,  and  curiously  wrought ;  and  the  other  and  ordinary  stones  of  the  building 
get  comeliness  from  the  very  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  the  corner-stones. 
Now  Christ  is  the  beauty  of  the  spiritual  temple.  III.  Unity.  Corner-stones  are 
the  medium  by  which  the  walls  of  a  house,  with  all  the  several  stones  which 
compose  those  walls,  are  united  in  one  building.  Take  away  the  corner-stones, 
and  the  sides  of  the  house  would  be  separated  from  each  other.  The  stones  of 
which  the  walls  are  built  may  be  of  different  sizes,  and  of  different  degrees  of 
value  or  beauty ;  yet  so  long  as  they  are  held  together  by  the  corner-stone,  the 
house  is  one  house ;  nor  is  there  any  stone  in  it  however  small  or  common  but  that 
stone  is  necessary  to  the  unity  of  the  house.  It  cannot  be  spared.  Such  is  Christ 
as  the  precious  corner-stone  of  the  spiritual  temple.  (A.  C.  Price.)  The  chief 
corner-stone  : — I.  The  foundation  is  called  here  "  a  chief  corner-stone."  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  alone  Head  and  King  of  His  Church,  who  gives  it  laws,  and  rules  it  in 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

wisdom  and  righteousness.  "  Elected,"  or  chosen  out  for  the  purpose,  and  altogether 
fit  for  it.  Isaiah  hath  it,  "  A  stone  of  trial  or  a  tried  stone."  As  things  amongst 
men  are  best  chosen  after  trial,  so  Jesus  Christ  was  certainly  known  by  the  Father, 
as  most  fit  for  that  work  to  which  He  chose  Him  before  He  tried  Him,  as  afterwards, 
upon  trial  in  His  life  and  death  and  resurrection,  He  proved  fully  answerable  to 
His  Father's  purpose  in  all  that  was  appointed  Him.  He  was  God,  that  He  might 
be  a  strong  foundation  ;  He  was  man,  that  He  might  be  suitable  to  the  nature  of 
the  stones  whereof  the  building  was  to  consist,  that  they  might  join  and  cement 
together.  "  Precious,"  inestimably  precious,  by  all  the  conditions  that  can  give 
worth  to  any :  by  rareness  and  by  inward  excellency.  U.  The  laying  of  this 
FOUNDATION.  It  is  Said  to  be  laid  in  Zion  ;  that  is,  it  is  laid  in  the  Church  of  God, 
And  it  was  first  laid  in  Zion,  literally,  that  being  then  the  seat  of  the  Church  and 
of  the  true  religion.  He  was  laid  there  in  His  manifestation  in  the  flesh,  and 
suffering,  and  dying,  and  rising  again ;  and  afterwards,  being  preached  through 
the  world.  He  became  the  foundation  of  His  Church  in  all  places  where  His  name 
was  received.  He  saith,  "I  lay";  by  which  the  Lord  expresseth  this  to  be  His 
own  proper  work,  as  Psa.  cxviii.  23.  And  it  is  not  only  said,  "  I  lay,"  because  God 
the  Father  had  the  first  thought  of  this  great  work,  but  also  to  signify  the  freeness 
of  His  grace  in  giving  His  Son  to  be  a  foundation  of  happiness  to  man,  without  the 
least  motion  from  man,  or  motive  in  man,  to  draw  Him  to  it.  This,  again,  that  the 
Lord  Himself  is  the  layer  of  this  corner-stone,  teaches  us  the  firmness  of  it.  Psa. 
ii.  6,  "  I  have  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion  "  ;  who  then  shall  dethrone 
Him?  "I  have  given  Him  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance,  and  the  ends  of  the 
earth  for  His  possession " ;  and  who  will  hinder  Him  to  take  possession  of  His 
right  ?  III.  The  building  on  this  foundation.  To  be  built  on  Christ  is  plainly 
to  believe  in  Him.  It  is  not  they  that  have  heard  of  Him,  or  that  have  some 
common  knowledge  of  Him,  or  that  are  able  to  discourse  of  Him  and  speak  of  His 
person  and  nature  aright,  but  they  that  believe  in  Him.  Much  of  our  knowledge 
is  like  that  of  the  poor  philosopher,  who  defineth  riches  exactly,  and  discourseth  of 
their  nature,  but  possesseth  none ;  or  we  are  as  a  geometrician,  who  can  measure 
land  exactly  in  all  its  dimensions,  but  possesseth  not  a  foot  thereof.  And  truly  it 
is  but  a  lifeless  unsavoury  knowledge  that  men  have  of  Christ  by  books  and  study, 
till  He  reveal  Himself  and  persuade  the  heart  to  believe  in  Him.  There  is  in  lively 
faith,  when  it  is  infused  into  the  soul,  a  clearer  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His 
excellency  than  before,  and  with  it  a  recumbency  of  the  soul  upon  Him,  as  the 
foundation  of  its  life  and  comfort;  a  resolving  to  rest  on  Him,  and  not  to  depart 
from  Him  upon  any  terms.  IV.  The  fikmness  of  this  building.  "  He  that 
believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  confounded."  This  firmness  is  answerable  to  the 
nature  of  the  foundation.  Not  only  the  whole  frame,  but  every  stone  of  it  abideth 
sure.  It  is  a  mistake  to  judge  the  persuasion  of  perseverance  to  be  self-pi'esumption. 
They  that  have  it  are  far  from  building  it  on  themselves,  but  their  foundation  is 
that  which  makes  them  sure ;  because  it  doth  not  only  remain  firm  itself,  but 
indissolubly  supports  all  that  are  once  built  on  it.  In  the  prophet  whence  this  is 
cited  it  is,  "  Shall  not  make  haste,"  but  the  sense  is  one.  They  that  are  dis- 
appointed and  ashamed  in  their  hopes,  run  to  and  fro,  and  seek  after  some  new 
resource ;  this  they  shall  not  need  to  do  who  come  to  Christ.  V.  The  greatness 
and  excellency  of  the  work  intimated  in  that  first  word,  "Behold,"  which  imports 
this  work  to  be  very  remarkable,  and  calls  the  eyes  to  fix  upon  it.  The  Lord  is 
marvellous  in  the  least  of  His  works ;  but  in  this  He  hath  manifested  more  of  His 
wisdom  and  power,  and  let  out  more  of  His  love  to  mankind,  than  in  all  the  rest. 
Look  upon  this  "  precious  stone,"  and  behold  Him  not  in  mere  speculation,  but  so 
behold  Him  as  to  lay  hold  on  Him  ;  for  we  see  He  is  therefore  here  set  forth,  that 
we  may  believe  on  Him ;  and  so  not  be  confounded,  that  we  may  attain  this  blessed 
union,  that  cannot  be  dissolved.  All  other  unions  are  dissoluble.  A  man  may  be 
plucked  from  his  dwelling-house  and  lands,  or  they  from  him,  though  he  have  never 
so  good  a  title  to  them ;  may  be  removed  from  his  dearest  friends,  if  not  by  other 
accidents  in  his  life-time,  yet  sure  by  death,  the  great  dissolver  of  all  such  unions, 
and  of  that  straitest  one,  of  the  soul  with  the  body  ;  but  it  can  do  nothing  against 
this  union,  but  on  the  contrary  perfects  it.  (Ahp.  Leighton.)  ChrUt  the  one 
foundation  : — St.  Peter,  when  arraigned  before  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  had  reminded 
them  of  that  passage  (Psa.  cxviii.  22)  which  speaks  of  a  stone  cast  aside  by  the 
builders  as  unfitted  for  their  purpose,  but  afterwards,  by  the  Lord's  own  act,  chosen 
out  to  be  "  the  head  of  the  corner."  The  sacred  irony  of  this  contrast  had  evidently 
taken  hold  of  his  mind.    In  the  context  here  he  has  been  referring  to  that  passage 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  147 

in  combination  -with  one  of  Isaiah's  (xxviii.  16),  and  applying  both  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  identified  with  that  Lord  of  whom  another  Psalmist  had  said,  "  0  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  He  now  quotes  from  Isaiah,  applying  the  title 
of  "  corner-stone"  to  his  Master,  just  as  St.  Paul  says  (1  Cor.  iii.  11;  Eph.  ii.  20). 
What  does  this  ancient  and  sacred  image,  thus  borrowed  by  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul 
from  the  stores  of  Hebrew  prophecy,  convey  to  us  Christians  ?  When  Isaiah  was 
drawing  near  to  the  close  of  his  public  life,  a  worldly  and  irreligious  party  had  risen 
to  influence  and  temporary  command  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  Their  aim  was  to 
strengthen  it  by  a  secular  policy,  with  an  Egyptian  alliance  for  its  basis.  Their 
thoughts,  if  put  into  modern  shape,  would  run  somewhat  as  follows  :  "  Judah  must 
be  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  a  narrow  clerical  interest :  it  is  essentially  a  kingdom, 
existing  side  by  side  with  other  kingdoms ;  its  needs,  its  emergencies,  are  like 
theirs ;  it  must,  perforce,  do  as  they  do.  It  must  therefore  shake  off  the  tyranny 
of  meddlesome  preachers,  who  can  only  look  at  secular  matters  from  their  own 
theological  point  of  view,  and  pretend  to  school  practical  men  like  children,  with  a 
dull  iteration  of  precept  upon  precept.  We  have  outgrown  aU  that ;  it  is  time  for 
common  sense  to  reign.  We  know  how  to  make  safeguards  for  the  throne  and  for 
the  country,  which  will  enable  us,  so  to  speak,  to  be  on  friendly  terms  with  death, 
exempt  from  the  peril  of  destruction;  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 
through,  it  shall  not  come  to  us."  Isaiah  turns  round  upon  them  as  the  minister 
of  Him  who  scorneth  the  scorners.  "No,"  he  says,  "  your  hopes  are  vain ;  your 
covenant  with  death  shall  be  cancelled ;  your  hiding-place  is  a  refuge  of  lies,  and 
the  hailstorm  and  the  rising  flood  will  sweep  it  away.  The  scourge,  when  it 
comes,  wiU  simply  trample  you  down.  But  I  will  tell  you  where  a  refuge  can  be 
found ;  there  is  a  stone  laid  by  God  for  a  sure  foundation,  a  stone  tried  and 
precious ;  he  that  trusteth  to  it  shall  not  make  haste,  shall  not  be  shaken  from 
his  foothold."  This  refers  flrst  to  that  sacred  character  of  the  house  of  David, 
which  belonged  to  it  as  destined  to  culminate  in  David's  future  pre-eminent  Son, 
and  in  the  fuller  sense  to  that  Son  in  His  own  Person,  as  realising  all  that  could  be 
indicated  by  the  glorious  titles  of  "  the  Emmanuel,  the  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
Mighty  God."  Because  He  was  one  day  to  appear,  the  pious  in  Judah  would  rest 
their  hopes  and  stay  their  souls  on  Him.  Aiid  this  should  be,  in  a  far  more 
effective  sense,  the  experience  of  those  who  know  the  Christ  as  having  come. 
Consider  a  few  of  the  senses  in  which  He  makes  good  this  title  of  corner-stone. 
How,  do  we  think,  did  the  first  preachers  to  the  heathen  win  converts  ?  By  appeal- 
ing to  men's  deepest  sense  of  need,  to  the  felt  necessity  of  a  centralising,  consoli- 
dating principle  for  human  life.  1.  Two  things,  at  least,  we  must  secure,  if  life  is 
not  to  be  a  failure.  (1)  One  is,  something  certainly  true,  a  truth  to  stand  by  amid 
uncertainties.  As  we  advance  in  our  earthly  journey,  perplexities  gather  round  on 
all  sides.  Life  has  not  verified  our  first  expectations  ;  it  raises  questions  which  it 
does  not  answer ;  there  is  a  confusion  of  theories  ;  but  where  is  that  which  we  can 
depend  upon,  and  grasp  firmly,  looking  life  and  death  in  the  face  ?  The  answer  is 
in  the  words  of  Jesus,  "I  am  the  Truth."  (2)  Man  also  needs  a  power  of  moral 
and  spiritual  rectification.  He  believes  Christ  is  all-precious,  because  He  can  and 
does  help  them  to  become  pure  and  single-hearted,  high  in  aim  and  active  in  duty. 
2.  These  two  great  questions  well  answered  by  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ,  one 
sees  how  in  His  relation  to  the  several  doctrines  and  institutions  of  His  Kingdom, 
He  sustains  the  character  of  the  One  Foundation.  (1)  It  is  so  in  regard  to  doctrines. 
(2)  He  is  also  the  foundation  of  all  His  ordinances.  All  the  instrumental  agencies 
whereby  He  waits  upon  the  soul — the  means,  as  we  call  them,  or  channels  of  His 
grace — derive  their  efficacy  from  Him  ;  nay,  more,  it  is  He  who  is  the  real  though 
unseen  Minister  in  them  all,  the  true  Celebrant,  Baptizer,  Absolver,  Ordainer,  the 
sovereign  Priest  of  His  Church.  3.  If  Christ  be,  in  these  ways,  the  foundation  of 
our  spiritual  life,  in  all  its  aspects,  should  He  not  be  also  the  foundation  of  all  that 
we  do?  (W.  Bright,  D.D.)  The  corner-stone: — I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  corner- 
stone, uniting  Jews  and  Gentiles.  1.  Jews  and  Gentiles  met  in  His  Person.  He 
was  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh,  a  Jew  of  the  Jews,  His  genealogy 
complete  and  flawless  right  up  to  Abraham.  But  as  we  carefully  survey  the  stream 
of  His  ancestry,  we  here  and  there  discover  Gentile  blood  flowing  as  tributaries  to 
it.  It  is  rather  remarkable  that  the  only  women  mentioned  in  the  line  of  His 
pedigree  are  of  Gentile  blood  and  soiled  character.  2.  Jews  and  Gentiles  had  also 
a  place  in  His  ministry.  The  Jewish  Eabbis  never  looked  over  the  Wall  of 
Separation,  never  gave  a  kindly  thought  to  the  great  world  without,  lying  in 
wickedness,    seething    in  misery.      Jesus   Christ,    however,    distinctly    purposed 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

from  the  first  to  bring  Jews  and  Gentiles  into  one  community — an  idea  absolutely 
original.  3.  As  Jesus  Christ  united  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  His  person  and  teaching, 
so  He  has  also  joined  them  in  the  Church  He  established.  To-day  we  behold  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  the  civilised  nations  of  the  earth  and  the  newly-reclaimed  barbarians 
of  the  South  Sea  Islands,  reclining  under  its  refreshing  shade.  H.  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  corner-stone,  uniting  men  and  angels.  1.  Jesus  Christ  has  united  men  and 
angels  in  His  person.  He  is  our  countryman,  cry  the  angels,  the  Lord  from  heaven; 
but  He  is  our  kinsman,  men  make  reply.  He  belongs  to  us  by  the  ties  of  citizen- 
ship, say  the  angels ;  but  He  belongs  to  us  by  the  ties  of  blood,  answer  men.  Thus 
angels  and  men  can  legitimately  claim  a  share  in  this  Son  of  Jesse.  2.  He 
represents  men  and  angels  in  His  teaching  as  being  one  in  Him.  3.  Men  and 
angels  are  brought  together  in  unity  in  His  Church.  HI.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
corner-stone,  uniting  God  and  man.  1.  Both  meet  in  His  person.  2.  He  brought 
God  and  man  together  in  His  ministry.  The  great,  one  might  say  the  central 
doctrine  of  His  preaching  is  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  the  corresponding  sonship 
of  man.  3.  In  the  Church  of  Christ  God  and  man  are  welded  together  in  the  bonds 
of  closest  friendship.  God  is  reconciled  to  man  in  the  sacrifice  of  His  Son, 
and  now  He  is  reconciling  men  to  Himself.  Sinners  are  being  brought  into  line 
with  the  corner-stone,  and  thus  into  union  with  God.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Jesus  Christ  the  corner-stone : — 1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  corner-stone  of  reUgious  doctrine. 
He  was  the  Son  of  the  God  of  truth ;  He  was  truth  Himself,  and  He  came  into  the 
world  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  By  His  personal  ministry  and  by  the  ministry 
of  His  apostles,  He  revealed  to  the  fallen  children  of  men  the  things  which  belonged 
to  their  peace.  2.  Christ  is  the  corner-stone  of  morality.  During  the  whole  period 
of  His  ministry  He  afforded  a  constant  example  of  perfect  obedience  to  the  moral 
law.  Every  duty  which  it  became  Him  as  a  man  to  fulfil  towards  men  He  discharged 
no  less  punctually  than  those  obhgations  of  which  the  immediate  object  was  God. 
3.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  corner-stone  of  salvation.  Through  Him  we  are  justified, 
sanctified ;  through  Him  we  receive  the  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  (T.  Gishorne,  M.A.) 
The  corner-stone  : — The  figures  woven  into  this  passage  are  architectural.  They  do 
not,  however,  touch  the  imagination  as  much  now  as  they  did  when  they  were  first 
drawn ;  for  we  have  been  misled  with  regard  to  the  truths  they  are  designed  to  illus- 
trate, by  the  degradation  that  has  befallen  the  corner-stones  which  we  plant.  The 
corner-stone  is  not  a  foundation-stone  with  us.  It  might  just  as  well  be  put  at  the 
middle  of  the  wall  as  at  the  corner ;  at  the  top  as  at  the  bottom ;  and,  for  that 
matter,  it  might  as  well  be  put  in  the  tower  as  in  the  wall.  It  is  merely  a  ceremonial 
corner-stone,  made  to  contain  a  few  records,  giving  the  date,  the  time,  and  what  not, 
belonging  to  the  building.  But  there  are  real  corner-stones  yet.  When  builders 
have  dug  down  and  found  the  bottom  level,  and  desire  to  lay  a  foundation  which  no 
fire  can  reach,  no  water  undermine,  no  weight  sway,  and  lay  broad  and  vast  stones, 
then  these  stones  have  a  marked  relation  to  the  integrity  of  the  whole  building  above. 
If  they  are  weak,  or  easily  displaced,  the  foundation  will  be  unstable;  and  when  that 
gives  way,  the  superstructure,  no  matter  how  carefully  it  may  be  built,  will  follow 
it.  There  was,  however,  another  kind  of  corner-stone  in  former  times — namely,  a 
massive  slab,  which,  standing  upright,  united  to  itself  firmly  the  two  side  walls,  and 
so  bound  together  the  building  laterally.  Both  of  these  terms  are  in  our  text,  and 
both  of  them  are  applied  to  Christ,  who  is  represented  as  not  only  bearing  up  the 
whole  structure  of  piety  as  a  foundation,  but  binding  it  together  as  a  corner-stone, 
or  the  head  of  the  corner,  so  that,  vertically  and  laterally,  the  building  takes  hold 
and  sustains  itself  by  the  foundation  and  the  corner-stone.  This  passage  teaches 
that  as  a  building  rests  upon  its  foundation-stones,  so  every  Christian  rests  upon 
Jesus  Christ.  They  are  not  merely  connected  with  Him :  they  rest  upon  Him.  So 
do  they  rest  upon  Him,  that  if  He  were  to  be  removed  from  them  all  their  religious 
experience  would  fall,  as  a  wall  would  go  down  if  its  foundation-stones  were  taken 
out  of  the  way.     I.  I  first  ask  you  to  mark  the  distinction  which  exists  between 

A    MERE    general  DEPENDENCE  UPON  GoD,  AND    A    CONSCIOUS    PERSONAL    LIFE    IN    ChRIST 

Jesus,  for  that  is  the  distinction  which  demarks  between  the  school  of  what  may  be 
called  the  naturalists  in  religion,  and  of  evangelical  Christians.  It  is  one  thing  to 
be  a  believer  in  God's  government ;  it  is  another  thing  to  hold  company  with  God — 
to  behold  Him,  to  love  Him,  and  to  commune  with  Him,  to  twine  your  life  about 
Him.  II.  I  remark,  secondly,  that  this  direct,  intimate,  hourly,  and  daily  living 
WITH  Christ,  is  the  thing  which  the  gospel  proposes  as  its  characteristic  aiji. 
Morality  is  a  good  thing.  A  man  without  it  certainly  cannot  be  a  Christian,  although 
he  may  not  be  one  with  it.     Moralities  are  mere  day-labourers,  who  dig  out  the  roots 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  149 

and  clear  off  the  weeds,  and  get  the  ground  ready  for  something  else.  Morals  do 
but  plough  the  soil — piety  is  the  fruitful  stem,  and  love  the  fair  flower  which  springs 
from  the  soil.  It  is  only  love  that  can  find  out  God  without  searching.  Upon  its 
eyes  God  dawns.  Love  is  that  regent  quality  which  was  meant  to  reveal  the  Divine 
to  us.  It  carries  its  own  light,  and  by  its  own  secret  nature  is  drawn  instantly 
towards  God,  and  reflects  the  knowledge  of  Him  back  upon  us.  When  love  hath 
brought  forth  its  central  vision  of  the  Divine,  and  interpreted  it  to  all  the  other 
faculties,  then  they,  in  turn,  become  seers,  and  the  soul  is  helped  by  every  one  of  its 
faculties,  as  by  so  many  eyes,  to  behold  the  fulness  of  God.     III.  I  remark,  thirdly, 

THAT  IT  IS  DEEMED  BY  MEN  VERY  DELUSIVE,  AND  BY  SOMEWISE  MEN  UTTERLY  IMPOSSIBLE, 
IN  THIS    MORTAL    STATE,  FOR    A    MAN   TO  LIVE    BY  FAITH    IN    AN    INVISIBLE    BeINO,  SO  that 

Christ  shall  seem  to  be  a  present  companion  to  him.     You  might  as  well  attempt 
to  root  up  an  oak  of  a  hundred  years'  growth  as  attempt  to  eradicate  my  faith  in 
Christ  present  with  me — Christ  living  with  me,  and  I  with  Him,  so  that  my  life  is 
joined  to  His.     Imagine  that  I  stand,  tearful  and  tremulous,  yet  joyful,  by  the  side 
of  a  magnificent  picture,  which  electrifies  me,  which  touches  all  the  great  fountains 
in  my  nature,  causing  them  to  rise  and  overflow ;  which  translates  my  mind,  and 
purifies  it.     As  I  stand  looking  at  such  a  picture,  a  man  comes  to  me,  and  says, 
"What  are  you  gazing  at,  sir?"     I  begin,  in  broken  language,  to  tell  him  what 
effect  the  picture  is  having  upon  me ;  and  he  looks  at  me  with  astonishment,  and 
says,  "  Well,  it  may  be  that  it  affects  you  so,  but  it  does  not  stand  to  reason  ;  for  it 
is  natural  to  suppose  that  if  it  affected  you  so,  it  would  affect  me  in  the  same  way ; 
and  I  do  not  have  any  such  feelings  as  you  profess  to  have.     I  am  sure  I  would  not  pay 
a  sixpence  for  the  thing."     There  I  stand  trembling  before  the  picture ;  he  reviles 
it,  because  his  sensibilities  are  all  materialised.     Next  there  comes  to  me  a  utilitarian 
— one  of  those  men  who  think  nothing  good  unless  it  be  useful,  and  with  whom  use 
means  that  which  is  good  to  sell  or  to  eat.     "Is  it  possible,"  he  says,  "that  this 
picture  can  operate  upon  your  feelings  ?     It  makes  no  impression  upon  me  whatever. 
I  do  not  see  how  it  can  do  such  a  thing.     If  you  were  to  tell  me  that  it  was  one  of 
Raphael's  great  productions,  and  that  it  was  worth  five  or  six  thousand  dollars,  I 
should  understand  that  it  had  some  value.     You  are  a  little  touched,  are  you  not  ?  " 
Then  a  bloated  sensualist  comes  to  me,  and  says,  "  I  would  give  more  for  one  flagon 
of  wine  than  for  all  the  old  painted  rags  on  earth."     He  and  I  live  in  different 
worlds.     But  if  none  of  these  could  be  made  to  understand  my  feelings  in  the  pre- 
sence of  a  picture,  how  much  less  can  they  know  the  reality  and  glory  of  my  feelings 
before  that  more  glorious  revelation  of  heavenly  beauty  which  shall  remain  unrolled 
for  ever  and  for  ever,  and  which,  as  I  stand  before  it,  causes  everything  in  me  of 
faith,  and  hope,  and  joy,  and  love,  to  cry  out !     IV.  Need  I  speak  of  the  precious- 
NEss  OF  YOUR  Saviour  ?     Nccd  I  caU  to  your  remembrance  the  experiences  in  which 
He  has  manifested  Himself  to  you  ?     Do  you  not  remember  those  days  of  struggle 
and  distress,  through  which  you  passed,  and  that  day  of  hope  and  joy  which  suc- 
ceeded them,  when  Christ  dawned  upon  you,  and  you  felt  that  your  troubles  were 
over,  and  your  resistance  to  His  will  was  ended,  and  you  cried  out,  "  My  Lord  and 
my  God  !  "  and  He  raised  you  to  His  bosom  ?     Has  He  not  revealed  Himself  to  you, 
saying,  "  I  am  with  you ;  I  wiU  never  leave  you  nor  forsake  you  "  ?     The  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ  to  us  takes  away  from  trouble  all  its  sting.    By  and  by  we  shall  stand, 
every  one  of  us,  in  the  narrow  passage  of  death,  and  there  is  but  one  Pilot  there. 
If  He  comes,  bright  and  shining,  from  the  dark  waters  of  the  troubled  sea,  how  sweet 
and  precious  will  He  be  to  the  dying  soul  that  has  loved  Him,  and  longed  to  see 
Him !     {H.  W.  Beecher.)         Faith's  sure  foundation  :—I.  The  foundation  of  the 
believer's  faith.     "  He  that  believeth  on  Him."     The  foundation  of  the  believer's 
faith  is  Christ  Jesus  Himself.     But  in  what  sense  am  I  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  ? 
1.  I  reply,  first,  as  God's  appointed  Saviour  of  men.     "Behold  I  lay  in  Zion  a  sure 
foundation."     V/e  trust  in  Christ  Jesus  because  God  has  set  Him  forth  to  be  the 
propitiation  for  sin.     2.  We  also  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  because  of  the  excellency 
of  His  person.     We  trust  Christ  to  save  us  because  we  perceive  Him  in  every  way  to 
be  adapted  by  the  nature  and  constitution  of  His  person  to  be  the  Saviour  of  man- 
kind.  3.  Another  ground  of  our  reliance  upon  Christ  is  that  He  has  actually  finished 
the  work  of  our  redemption.     There  were  two  things  to  be  done.     The  first  was  the 
keeping  of  the  law  on  our  behalf  :  that  He  has  performed  to  the  uttermost,  even  as 
He  said  to  His  Father,  "I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work 
which  Thou  gavest  me  to  do."   We  see  our  Lord  also  doing  the  other  part  of  His  work, 
namely,  suffering  in  consequence  of  our  sin,  and  our  faith  becomes  fully  established. 
ft.  One  other  truth  must  be  mentioned,  seeing  that  our  Lord  is  now  no  longer  dead, 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

we  feel  it  more  easy  to  place  our  confidence  in  Him  because  He  ever  liveth  to  see  to 
the  completion  of  our  salvation.  A  living  faith  delights  in  a  living  Saviour.  This 
is  the  seal  of  all  that  went  before.  II.  The  manner  of  this  believing.  How  do  we 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ?  Now,  we  have  not  to  go  a  single  inch  to  find  an  instructive 
illustration  of  what  faith  in  Jesus  is.  The  verse  before  us  is  connected  with, build- 
ing. 1.  If,  then,  you  want  to  know  what  it  is  tobeheveon  Jesus,  it  is  to  lie  upon  Him 
as  a  stone  lies  upon  a  foundation  when  the  mason  puts  it  there.  Faith  is  leaning, 
depending,  relying.  2.  A  stone  rests  wholly  on  the  foundation.  That  is  faith : 
resting  upon  Christ  wholly  and  entirely,  looking  to  Him  for  everything  that  has  to 
do  with  our  salvation.  Genuine  faith  in  Christ  does  not  trust  Him  to  pardon  sin, 
and  then  trust  itself  to  overcome  sin.  No,  it  trusts  Christ  both  for  the  conquest  of 
evil  and  for  the  forgiveness  of  it.  3.  The  stone  laid  on  the  foundation  comes  closer 
to  that  foundation  every  day.  When  a  house  is  finished  there  still  goes  on  a  measure 
of  settlement,  and  you  are  glad  if  it  settles  all  in  a  piece  together.  Every  day  the 
stone  is  brought  by  its  own  weight  a  little  closer  to  the  foundation ;  may  every  day's 
pressure  bring  you  and  me  closer  to  Christ.  Oh,  that  the  pressure  of  our  joys  and 
griefs  may  press  us  nearer  to  our  Lord !  4.  A  well-built  stone  gets  to  be  one  with 
the  foundation.  In  the  old  Eoman  walls  the  mortar  seems  to  be  as  hard  as  the 
stones,  and  the  whole  is  like  one  piece ;  you  must  blow  it  to  atoms  before  you  can 
get  the  wall  away.  So  is  it  with  the  true  believer :  he  rests  upon  his  Lord  till  he  is 
one  with  Jesus  by  a  hving  union,  so  that  you  scarce  know  where  the  foundation 
ends  and  where  the  upbuilding  begins  ;  for  the  believer  becometh  all  in  Christ,  even 
as  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  him.  III.  The  evil  which  will  neveb  come  upon  the  man 
who  believeth  on  Jesus.  The  text  says,  "  He  shall  not  be  confounded,"  and  the 
meaning  of  it  is,  first,  that  he  shall  never  be  disappointed.  All  that  Christ  has  pro- 
mised to  be  He  will  be  to  those  who  trust  Him.  And  then  comes  the  next  rendering 
— you  shall  never  be  confounded.  When  a  man  gets  to  be  ashamed  of  his  hope 
because  he  is  disappointed  in  it,  he  casts  about  for  another  anchorage,  and,  not 
knowing  where  to  look,  he  is  greatly  perplexed.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  to 
fall  through,  what  should  we  do?  No,  Jesus,  we  shall  not  be  confounded,  for  we 
shall  never  be  disappointed  in  Thee,  nor  made  ashamed  of  our  hope !  According  to 
Isaiah's  version,  we  shall  not  be  obliged  to  "  make  haste  "  ;  we  shall  not  be  driven  to 
our  wit's  end  and  hurried  to  and  fro.  We  shall  not  hurry  and  worry,  trying  this 
and  that,  running  from  pillar  to  post  to  seek  a  hope  ;  but  he  that  beUeveth  shall  be 
quiet,  calm,  assured,  confident.  He  awaits  the  future  with  equanimity,  as  he  endures 
the  present  with  patience.  Now,  the  times  of  our  special  danger  of  being  confounded 
are  many ;  but  in  none  of  these  shall  we  be  confounded.  Let  us  just  turn  them  over 
in  our  minds.  There  are  times  when  a  man's  sins  all  come  up  before  him  like 
exceeding  great  armies.  All  your  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,  your  bad  tempers  and 
rebellions  against  God — suppose  they  were  all  to  rise  at  once,  what  would  become  of 
you  ?  Why,  even  then,  "  he  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  confounded."  The 
depths  have  covered  them,  there  is  not  one  of  them  left.  He  that  believeth  on  the 
pardoning  Saviour  shall  not  be  confounded,  though  all  his  sins  should  accuse  him 
at  once.  The  unbelieving  world  outside  labours  to  create  confusion.  The  scientific 
discoverers,  the  possessors  of  boastful  culture,  and  all  the  other  braggers  of  this 
marvellously  enlightened  nineteenth  century  are  up  in  arms  against  the  believers  in 
Jesus.  Faith  in  Jesus  can  be  justified  before  a  synagogue  of  savans,  it  deserves  the 
respect  of  a  parliament  of  philosophers.  To  trust  the  Son  of  God  incarnate,  whose 
advent  into  this  world  is  a  fact  better  proved  by  history  than  any  other  that  was  ever 
on  record — to  trust  oneself  upon  His  atoning  sacrifice  is  the  most  reasonable  thing 
that  a  man  can  do.  He  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  confounded  by  human 
wisdom,  for  God  hath  long  ago  confounded  it  and  turned  it  into  foolishness.  But 
the  world  has  done  more  than  sneer ;  it  has  imitated  Cain  and  sought  to  slay  the 
faithful.  There  they  stand.  The  lions  are  loose  upon  them.  Do  they  cry  for 
mercy,  and  treacherously  deny  Christ  ?  They  are  feeble  men  and  women ;  do  they 
recant  and  leave  their  Master  ?  Not  they.  They  die  as  bravely  as  ever  soldier  fell 
in  battle.  Well,  but  there  will  come  other  troubles  to  Christians  besides  these,  and 
in  them  they  shall  not  be  confounded.  They  will  be  tried  by  the  flesh ;  natural 
desires  will  break  forth  into  vehement  lustings,  and  corruptions  will  seek  to  cast 
them  down.  Will  behevers  perish  then?  No.  He  that  believeth  in  Christ  shall 
Cdnquer  himself,  and  overcome  his  easily  besetting  sins.  There  will  come  losses 
and  crosses,  business  trials  and  domestic  bereavements.  What  then?  He  shall 
not  be  confounded ;  his  Lord  will  sustain  him  under  every  tribulation.  At  last 
death  will  come  to  us.    We  may  not  be  able  to  shout  "  victory  " ;  we  may  be  too 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  151 

weak  for  triumphant  hymns,  but  with  our  latest  breath  we  will  lisp  the  precious 
name.  They  that  watch  us  shall  know  by  our  serenity  that  a  Christian  does  not 
die,  but  only  melts  away  into  everlasting  life.  We  shall  never  be  confounded,  even 
amid  the  grandeurs  of  eternity.     (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  7.  8.  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is  precious. — Jesus  precious  to  true 
believers  : — I.  The  persons,  together  with  their  faith,  to  whom  Jesus  is  precious. 
1.  The  grace  of  faith,  which  renders  Jesus  precious  to  the  soul,  is  not  the  faith  of 
assent,  or  such  a  faith  by  which  men  credit  the  testimony  of  Jesus  through  the 
gospel.  2.  It  is  not  only  a  believing  of  Christ,  but  a  believing  in  Christ — ^the  soul's 
receiving  of,  and  resting  upon  Him  alone  for  righteousness,  pardon,  and  salvation. 

3.  That  faith  works  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6).  (1)  This  faith  is  ever  attended  with  an 
affectionate  desire  of  the  company  of  Jesus  Christ  (Cant.  iv.  6 ;  Psa.  iv.  6 ;  Job 
xxiii.  3  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  8).  (2)  With  delightful  thoughts  of  Him  (Psa.  cxxxix.  17). 
(3)  With  cheerful  service  to  Him  (Psa.  cxix.  4,  5).  (4)  Such  as  believe  in  and  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity,  are  tender  of  His  name  and  honour.  (5)  They  are 
afraid  to  offend  Him.  (6)  True  faith  in  Christ,  and  sincere  love  to  Him,  are  ever 
attended  with  the  soul's  longing  to  be  more  and  more  like  Him — in  humihty,  in 
patience,  in  service,  in  resignation,  and  in  holiness,  (a)  It  is  such  a  faith 
as  is  the  act  of  a  living  soul;  for  these  believers,  to  whom  Christ  is  precious, 
are  said  to  be  "new  born."  (b)  Those  to  whom  Jesus  is  precious  are  such  as 
have  "tasted  of  His  grace."  (c)  They  are  described  by  their  living  by  faith  on 
Christ — "  to  whom  coming."  II.  Upon  what  account  is  Jesus  precious  to  them 
that  believe  ?  I  answer,  in  general,  that  it  is  from  His  suitableness  to  them,  their 
relation  to  Him,  and  the  benefits  they  receive  from  Him.  But,  more  particularly 
— 1.  Jesus  is  precious  to  believers,  in  the  constitution  of  His  person,  which  is  very 
wonderful.  2.  On  account  of  His  excellent  qualifications  and  rich  anointing  for 
His  work,  as  Mediator  between  God  and  men.  3.  On  account  of  the  discharge  of 
His  offices  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  in  order  to  the  salvation  of  His  people. 

4.  On  account  of  the  relations  that  He  stands  in  to  them  that  believe.  He  is  their 
Head  of  influence,  and  they  are  members  of  His  spiritual  Body.  He  is  their  Shepherd. 
He  is  their  best  Friend — ^loving,  tender,  compassionate,  sincere,  sympathising,  and 
constant.  He  is  their  great  Physician  and  Healer.  5.  On  account  of  the  display  of 
His  transcendent  love  and  riches  of  His  grace  in  order  to  their  salvation.  6.  He  is 
most  precious  to  believers,  as  whatsoever  makes  any  of  the  creatures  lovely,  desirable, 
and  precious  one  to  another,  is  originally  in  Him ;  it  is  in  them  as  a  cistern,  but 
in  Christ  as  an  inexhaustible  fountain.  (1)  Is  beauty  one  ground  of  the  creature's 
delighting  in  each  other  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  excels  them  all  (Psa.  xlv.  2).  (2)  Does 
wisdom  recommend  any  creature  to  the  affection  of  another  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  is 
the  Wisdom  of  God.  He  not  only  governs  the  world  in  wisdom,  but  as  a  Prophet 
He  teaches  men  to  know  God  and  Himself,  which  is  eternal  life.  (3)  Does  useful- 
ness in  any  creature  bespeak  the  affections  and  esteem  of  others  ?  Jesus  Christ  is 
more  than  all  the  creatures  put  together ;  He  is  all  things  to  His  people — their  light, 
their  life,  their  food,  their  strength,  their  clothing  and  ornament,  their  riches  and 
honour,  their  guide  and  leader,  their  healer,  their  advocate  and  intercessor,  and  all 
in  all.  (4)  Does  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  attended  with  patience  and  humility, 
commonly  win  the  esteem  of  fellow-creatures  ?  Jesus  Christ  excels  them  aU  in 
these  most  desirable  endowments  ;  He  is  a  perfect  pattern  of  humility  and  meekness 
for  all  His  disciples.  (5)  Does  faithfulness  to  any  trust  win  the  love  and  esteem  of 
one  to  another  ?  This  is  eminently  found  in  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  iii.  2).  (6)  Does 
sincere  and  ardent  love  in  any  one  call  for  the  love  and  esteem  of  others  ?  The 
Lord  Jesus  excels  them  aU ;  no  creature  can  possibly  love  another  at  such  a  rate  as 
He  has  done ;  His  love  is  strong  as  death,  many  waters  cannot  quench  it.  And  it 
is  as  free  as  it  is  great  and  uncommon.  III.  How  do  believers  show  that  Christ 
is  precious  to  them?  1.  By  choosing  Him  for  their  own,  and  careful  endeavour 
to  clear  up  their  interest  in  Him.  2.  By  their  frequent  and  dehghtful  thoughts  of 
Him  (Psa.  cxxxix.  17).  3.  By  earnest  desires  of  His  presence,  communion  with 
Him  (Job  xxiii.  3  ;  Psa.  xlii.  1,  2).  4.  They  yield  to  Him  the  seat  and  habitation 
of  their  very  hearts  (Eph.  iii.  17).  5.  By  making  use  of  Him,  for  aU  the  ends  that 
God  the  Father  has  appointed  Him.  6.  By  their  sincere  love  to  Him.  (1)  They 
love  to  think  of  Him,  and  their  love  inclines  them  to  think  and  speak  honourably 
of  Him.  (2)  They  love  His  image  wherever  they  can  perceive  it  (Psa.  xvi.  3). 
(3)  They  love  His  Word  (Job  xxiii.  12;  Eom.  vii.  22).  (4)  They  highly  esteem 
His  ordinances,  and  the  places  and  means  where  they  may  enjoy  Him.     (5)  They 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii, 

are  careful  to  keep  His  commandments  (John  xiv.  21).     (6)  They  desire  to  be  more 
and  more  hke  Him  (Eom.  viii.  29).     (7)  They  rejoice  in  Him,  and  all  He  is  made 
of  God  to  them  (Phil.  iii.  3).     {W.  Notcutt.)         Christ  precious  to  believers  : — I.  First, 
this  is  a  positive  fact,  that  unto  believers  Jesus  Christ  is  precious.     In  Himself 
He  is  of  inestimable  preciousness,  for  He  is  very  God  of  very  God.     He  is,  more- 
over, perfect  man  without  sin.     The  precious  gopher  wood  of  His  humanity  is 
overlaid  with  the  pure  gold  of  His  Divinity.     He  is  a  mine  of  jewels  and  a  mountain 
of  gems.     He  is  altogether  lovely,  but,  alas !  this  blind  world  seeth  not  His  beauty. 
II.  Why  is  Christ  precious  to  the  believer?     1.  Jesus  Christ  is  precious  to  the 
believer  because  He  is  intrinsically  precious.     But  here  let  me  take  you  through  an 
exercise  in  grammar ;  here  is  an  adjective,  let  us  go  through  it.     (1)  Is  He  not 
good  positively  ?    Election  is  a  good  thing ;  but  we  are   elect  in   Christ  Jesus. 
Adoption  is  a  good  thing;  but  we  are  adopted  in  Christ  Jesus  and  made  joint-heirs 
with  Him.     Pardon  is  a  good  thing;  but  we  are  pardoned  through  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus.     And  if  all  these  be  good,  surely  He  must  be  good  in  whom,  and 
by  whom,  and  to  whom,  and  through  whom  are  all  these  precious  things.     (2)  But 
Christ  is  good  comparatively.     Bring  anything  and  compare  with  Him.     One  of 
the  brightest  jewels  we  can  have  is  liberty.     If  I  be  not  free,  let  me  die.     Ay,  but 
put  liberty  side  by  side  with  Christ,  and  I  would  wear  the  fetter  for  Christ  and 
rejoice  in  the  chain.     Besides  liberty,  what  a  precious  thing  is  life  !     "  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."     But  let  a  true  Christian  once 
have  the  choice  between  life  and  Christ — "  No,"  says  he,  "  I  can  die,  but  I  cannot 
deny."     (3)  And  then  to  go  higher  still — Christ  is  good  superlatively.     The  superla- 
tive of  all  things  is  heaven,  and  if  it  could  be  possible  to  put  Christ  in  competition 
with  heaven,  the  Christian  would  not  stop  a  moment  in  his  choice ;  he  would 
sooner  be  on  earth  with  Christ  than  be  in  heaven  without  Him.     2.  Still,  to  answer 
this  question  again :  Why  is  Christ  precious  to  the  believer  more  than  to  any  other 
man  ?     Why,  it  is  the  believer's  want  that  makes  Christ  precious  to  him  !     The 
worldling  does  not  care  for  Christ,  because  he  has  never  hungered  and  thirsted 
after  Him  ;  but  the  Christian  is  athirst  for  Christ,  his  heart  and  his  flesh  pant  after 
God.     This  is  the  one  thing  needful  for  me,  and  if  I  have  it  not,  this  thirst  must 
destroy  me.     Mark,  too,  that  the  believer  may  be  found  in  many  aspects,  and  you 
will  always  find  that  his  needs  will  endear  Christ  to  him.     3.  Look  at  the  believer, 
not  only  in  his  wants,  but  in  his  highest  earthly  state.     The  believer  is  a  man  that 
was  once  blind  and  now  sees.     And  what  a  precious  thing  is  light  to  a  man  that 
sees !     If  I,  as  a  believer,  have  an  eye,  how  much  I  need  the  sun  to  shine  !     And 
when  Christ  gives  sight  to  the  blind  He  makes  His  people  a  seeing  people.     It  is 
then  that  they  find  what  a  precious  thing  is  the  sight,  and  how  pleasant  a  thing  it 
is  for  a  man  to  behold  the  sun.     From  the  very  fact  that  the  Christian  is  a  quickened 
man,  he  values  the  robe  of  righteousness  that  is  put  about  him.     The  very  new- 
born powers  of  the  Christian  would   be  very  channels  for  misery  if  it  were  not  for 
Christ.     But,  believer,  how  precious  is  Christ  to  thee  in  the  hour  of  conviction  of 
sin,   when  He  says,  "  Thy  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee."     How 
precious  to  thee  in  the  hour  of  sickness,  when  He  comes  to  thee  and  says,  "  I  will 
make   all  thy  bed  in  thy  sickness."     How  precious  to  thee  in  the  hour  of  trial, 
when   He  says,   "All  things  work  together  for  thy  good."    How  precious  when 
friends  are  buried,  for  He  says,  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life."     How  precious 
in  thy  grey  old  age,  "  Even  in  old  age  I  am  with  thee,  and  to  hoary  hairs  will  I 
carry  you."     How  precious  in  the  lone  chamber  of  death,  for  "I  will  fear  no  evil, 
Thou  art  with  me.  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  comfort  me."     But,  last  of  all,  how  precious 
will  Christ  be  when  we  see  Him  as  He  is  !     All  we  know  of  Christ  here  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  what  we  shall  know  hereafter.     {C.  H.  Sjntrgeoii.)         Christ  precious 
to  believers : — I.  What  Christ  is  to  His  people.     The  Revised  Version  reads  the 
text,    "  For   you  therefore  which  believe  is  the  preciousness."     His  very  self  is 
preciousness  itself.     He  is  the  essence,  the  substance,  the  sum  of  all  preciousness. 
Many  things  are  more  or  less  precious ;  but  the  Lord  Jesus  is  preciousness  itself, 
outsoaring  all  degrees  of  comparison.     1.  How  do  believers  show  that  Christ  is 
thus  precious  to  them  ?     (1)  They  do  so  by  trusting  everything  to  Him.     Every 
believer  stays  his  hope  solely  upon  the  work  of  Jesus.     Our  implicit  faith  in  Him 
proves  our  high  estimate  of  Him.     (2)  To  believers  the  Lord  Jesus  is  evidently  very 
precious,  because  they  would  give  up  all  that  they  have  sooner  than  lose  Him. 
Tens  of  thousands  have  renounced  property,  liberty,  and  life  sooner  than  deny 
Christ.     (3)  Saints  also  find  their   all  in  Him.     He  is  not  one  deUght,  but   all 
manner  of  delights  to  them.     All  that  they  can  want,  or  wish,  or  conceive,  they 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  153 

find  in  Him.     (4)  So  precious  is  Jesus  to  believers,  that  they  cannot  speak  well 
enough  of  Him.     Could  you,  at  your  very  best,  exalt  the  Lord  Jesus  so  gloriously  as 
to  satisfy  yourself  ?     (5)  Saints  show  that  in  their  estimation  Christ  is  precious, 
for  they  can  never  do  enoi  gh  for  Him.     It  is  not  all  talk ;  they  are  glad  also  to 
labour  for  Him  who  died  for  them.     Though  they  grow  weary  in  His  work,  they 
never  grow  weary  of  it.     (6)  Saints  show  how  precious  Christ  is  to  them,  in  that 
He  is  their  heaven.     Have  you  never  heard  them  when  dying,  talk  about  their  joy 
in  the  prospect  of  being  with  Christ  ?     (7)  If  you  are  not  satisfied  with  these  proofs 
that  Christ  is  precious  to  believers,  I  would  invite  you  to  add  another  yourself. 
Let  every  one  of  us  do  something  fresh  by  which  to  prove  the  believer's  love  to 
Christ.     Let  us  invent  a  new  love-token.     Let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song. 
Let  not  this  cold  world  dare  to  doubt  that  unto  believers  Christ  is  precious  ;  let  us 
force  the  scoifers  to  believe  that  we  are  in  earnest.     2.  In  thinking  Christ  to  be 
precious,  the  saints  are  forming  a  just  estimate  of  Him.     "  He  is  precious."     For  a 
thing  to  be  rightly  called  precious,  it  should  have  three  qualities  :  it  should  be  rare,  it 
should  have  an  intrinsic  value  of  its  own,  and  it  should  possess  useful  and  important 
properties.     All   these  three  things  meet  in  our  adorable  Lord,  and  make  Him 
precious  to  discerning  minds.     3.  The  saints  form  their  estimate  of  HLm  upon 
Scriptural  principles.     "Unto  you  therefore  which  beUeve  He  is  precious."     We 
have  a  "therefore"  for  our  valuation  of  Christ;  we  have  calculated,  and  have 
reason  on  our  side,  though  we  count  Him  to  be  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and 
altogether  lovely.     (1)  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  very  precious  to  us  as  "  a  living  stone." 
As  a  foundation  He  is  firm  as  a  stone ;  but  in  addition,  He  has  life,  and  this  life 
He  communicates,  so  that  we  also  become  living  stones,  and  are  joined  to  Him  in 
living,  loving,  lasting  union.     A  stone  alive,  and  imparting  life  to  other  stones  which 
are  built  upon  it,  is  indeed  a  precious  thing  in  a  spiritual  house  which  is  to  be  inhabited 
of  God.     This  gives  a  character  to  the  whole  structure.     (2)  Our  Lord  is  all  the 
more  precious  to  us  because  He  was  "  disallowed  indeed  of  men."     Never  is  Christ 
dearer  to  the  believer  than  when  he  sees  Him  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men. 
(3)  He  becomes  inconceivably  precious  to  us  when  we  view  Him  as  "  chosen  of 
God."     Upon  whom  else  could  the  Divine  election  have  fallen?    But  He  saith,  "  I 
have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty ;  I  have  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the 
people."     The  choice  of  Jehovah  must  be  divinely  vdse.     (4)  Note  well  that  the 
apostle   calls   Him   "  precious,"   that  is,  precious  to  God.     We  feel  abundantly 
justified  in   our  high   esteem   of   our  Lord,  since  He  is  so  dear  to  the  Father. 
(5)  Moreover,  we  prize  our  Lord  Jesus  as  our  foundation.     Jehovah  saith,  "  Behold, 
I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner-stone."     What  a  privilege  to  have  a  foundation  of  the 
Lord's  own  laying !     It  is  and  must  be  the  best,  the  most  abiding,  the  most  precious 
foundation.     U.  What    it   is  dj  the  saints  which  makes  them  prize  Christ  at 
THIS  RATE.     It  is  their  faith.     "  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is  precious." 
Faith  caUs  Him  precious,  when  others  esteem  Him  "  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."' 
1.  To  faith  the  promises  concerning  Christ  are  made.     The  Bible  never  expects 
that  without  faith  men  will  glorify  Christ.     2.  It  is  by  faith  that  the  value  of 
Christ   is   perceived.     You    cannot  see    Christ   by  mere  reason,   for  the  natural 
man  is  blind  to  the   things   of   the   Spirit.     3.   By   faith    the   Lord    Jesus    is 
appropriated.     In  possession  lies  much  of  preciousness.     Faith  is  the  hand  that 
grasps  Him,  the  mouth  that  feeds  upon  Him,  and  therefore  by  faith  He  is  precious.. 
4.  By  faith  the  Lord  Jesus  is  more  and  more  tasted  and  proved,  and  becomes  more 
and  more  precious.     To  us  our  Lord  is  as  gold  tried  in  the  fire.     Our  knowledge  is 
neither  theoretical  nor  traditional ;  we  have  seen  Him  ourselves,  and  He  is  precious 
to  us.     5.  Our  sense  of  Christ's  preciousness  is  a  proof  of  our  possessing  the  faith 
of  God's  elect ;  and  this  ought  to  be  a  great  comfort  to  any  of  you  who  are  in  the 
habit  of   looking  within.     6.    Christ  becomes  growingly  precious  to   us  as   our 
faith  grows.     If  thou  doubtest  Christ,  He  has  gone  down  fifty  per  cent,  in  thine 
esteem.     Every  time  you  give  way  to  scepticism  and  critical  questioning  you  lose  a 
sip  of  sweetness.     In  proportion  as  you  beheve  with  a  faith  which  is  childlike, 
clear,  simple,  strong,  unbroken,  in  that  proportion  will  Christ  be  dearer  and  dearer 
to  you.     in.  What  believers  receive  from  Him.     Take  the  exact  translation — 
"  Unto  you  that  believe  He  is   honour."     1.  Honour !     Can  honour  ever  belong 
to  a  sinner  hke  me  ?    Worthless,  base,  only  fit  to  be  cast  away,  can  I  have  honour  ? 
The  Lord  changes  the  rank  when  He  forgives  the  sin.     Thou  art  dishonourable  no 
longer  if  thou  believest  in  Jesus.     Thou  art  honourable  before  God  now  that  He 
has  become  thy  salvation.     2.  It  is  a  high  honour  to  be  associated  with  the  Lord 
Jesus.    3.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  built  on  Him  as  a  sure  foundation.    A  minister 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

once  said  to  me,  " It  must  be  very  easy  for  you  to  preach."    I  said,  "Do  you  think 
so?      I  do  not  look  at  it  as  a  light  affair."     "Yes,"  he  said  ;  "it  is  easy,  because 
you  hold  a  fixed  and  definite  set  of  truths,  upon  which  you  dwell  from  year  to  year." 
I  did  not  see  how  this  made  it  easy  to  preach,  but  I  did  see  how  it  made  my  heart 
easy,  and  I  said,  "  Yes,  that  is  true.     I  keep  to  one  fixed  line  of  truth."     "  That  is 
not  my  case,"  said  he;  "I  revise  my  creed  from  week  to  week.     It  is  with  me 
constant  change  and  progress."     I  did  not  say  much,  but  I  thought  the  more.     If 
the  foundation  is  constantly  being  altered,  the  building  will  be  rather  shaky.     4.  It 
is  an  honour  to  believe  the  doctrines  taught  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.     It  is  an 
honour  to  be  on  the  same  lines  of  truth  as  the  Holy  Ghost.     5.  It  is  an  honour  to 
do  as  Christ  bade  us  in  His  precepts.     Holiness  is  the  truest  royalty.     6.  It  will  be 
our  great  honour  to  see  our  Lord  glorified.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Practical  trust  in 
Christ   the  highest  honour : — "  Unto   you  therefore  who   believe   is  the  honour." 
I.  Practical  trust  in  Christ  gives  man  the  noblest  character.     What  is  true  nobility 
or  honour  ?     Disinterested  love  is  the  spring  and  essence  of  a  noble  character,  this 
is  the  soul  of  the  hero.     Where  it  is  not,  though  a  man  be  sage,  statesman,  poet, 
king,  he  is  contemptible.     How  does  a  man  get  this  ?     By  practically  trusting  in 
Christ — in  no  other  way.     H.  Practical  trust  in  Christ  gives   man   the   highest 
EELLowsHiPS.     But  into  what  society  does  practical  trust  in  Christ  introduce  them  ? 
First,  into  the  society  of  sainted  sages — the  great  and  good  men  of  all  lands  and 
times.     Secondly,  into  the  society  of  holy  angels — the  firstborn  of  the  Eternal. 
Thirdly,  Into  the  society  of  the  great  God  Himself.     III.  Practical  trust  in  Christ 
gives   man   the    sublimest    possessions.     (D.    Thomas,   D.D.)         The    honour   of 
believing  in  Christ : — Many  will  doubtless  feel  some  regret   at   the   loss   in  the 
Eevised  New  Testament  of  the  familiar  words,  "  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe 
He  is  precious."     The  marginal  reading  of  the  Eevised  Version  is  even  preferable 
to  that  of  our  text,  "  For  you  therefore  which  believe  is  the  honour."     Men  object 
to  be  told  that  they  must  believe  in  order  to  know  the  truth,  the  power,  the  value 
of  Christianity.     1.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  all  knowledge.     The  student  of  natural 
science  believes  that  there  are  hidden  secrets  of  nature,  laws  unknown  as  yet,  which 
will  be  revealed  to  patient  investigation.     Because  he  believes  this,  he  laboriously  toils 
and  patiently  waits.     2.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  all  enterprise.     It  is  because  men 
Ijelieve,  not  merely  in  the  possibility,  but  in  the  probability  of  the  success  of  an 
undertaking  that  they  are  willing  to  engage  in  it,  and  even  to  incur  toil  and  risk. 
S.  Nay,  more,  faith  is  the  condition  of  existence.     We  eat  because  we  believe  that 
food  is  necessary  and  will  nourish  us.     We  rest  at  home  or  walk  abroad  because 
we  believe  in  the  stability  of  nature's  laws  and  the  goodwill  of  our  fellow-men. 
4.  Faith,  which  is  the  condition  of  everything  else,  itseK  rests  on  conditions,  and 
compliance  with  those  conditions  involves  the  believer  in  much  "  honour."     It 
depends  on  knowledge,  on  experience,  i.e.,  on  evidence.     5.  Nor  does  faith  rest  on 
evidence  simply,  but  on  an  emotion,  on  the  feeling  which  the  evidence  excites,  and 
on  the  will  which  is  thereby  awakened  and  influenced.     6.  What,  then,  is  the  faith 
in  Christ  which  is  the  condition  of  this  honour  ?     What  do  we  believe  about  Jesus 
Christ  ?    What  are  we  called  upon  to  believe,  and  on  what  evidence  ?     (1)  Ascending 
from  tihe  lower  to  the  higher,  we  believe  first  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  ideal  man. 
(a)  Faith  in  the  perfect  humanity  of  Christ  brings  with  it  the  assurance  of  immortal 
life  and  of  undying  sympathy,     (b)  And  as  we  think  of  Him  living  still,  we  feel 
assured  of  His  sympathy  with  us.     For  His  perfection  was  not  something  inherent 
in  Himself,  something  necessary  and  unavoidable,  but  a  perfection  attained  through 
conflict   and   suiifering.     (2)  From  the    belief  in  the  perfect  humanity   of   Jesus 
Christ  we  rise  to  a  higher  faith  in  His  Divinity,  His  Deity.     For  we  find  that  He 
stands  alone  in  His  sinlessness,  in  His  perfection.     This  is,  I  believe,  the  real 
genesis  and  growth  of  true  faith  in  Christ.     It  is  through  His  humanity  that  we 
rise  to  the  conception  of  His  Deity.     "  The  person  of  Christ  is  the  perennial  glory 
and  strength  of  Christianity."     (3)  The  faith  attained  through  looking  at  Christ, 
meditating   on   Christ,  reasoning    about    Christ,    is   developed   and   perfected    by 
experience.     Experience  is  the  test  of  faith,  of  its  value  or  worthlessness.     The 
strongest  faith,  that   which  cannot  be  shaken,  is  that  which   rests  on   personal 
experience.     Unto  you   that  believe  is  the  honour.     What  honour  ?     I.  It  is  the 

HONOUR    OF    BOILDINO     ON     A     FOUNDATION     WHICH     CAN     NEVER     GIVE     WAY.       It    is    the 

safety  of  having  an  unfailing  refuge  in  which  to  hide.  We  have  an  experience  of 
which  nothing  can  rob  us,  and  a  hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed,  which  will  never 
disappoint,  as  the  anchor  of  our  soul.  "  Unto  you  that  believe  is  the  honour."  II. 
Man's  highest  honour  is  to  render  homage  to  perfect  love  and  righteousness  ; 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  155 

AND  THE  TRUEST  HOMAGE  IMITATES  THAT  BEFORE  WHICH  IT  BOWS  IN  REVERENCE. 

Dishonouring  Christ,  men  dishonour  themselves.  Many  may  admire  a  picture 
which  only  one  could  paint,  and  the  consciousness  of  inability  would  prevent 
them  from  attempting  to  emulate  the  artist  whose  work  fills  them  with  delight 
and  wonder.  But  if  the  artist  were  to  offer  to  enable  us  to  do  what  he  had 
done,  and  assure  us  of  his  power  to  do  so  by  the  example  and  experience  of 
numbers  who  had  been  taught  by  him,  should  we  not  gladly  accept  such  an 
offer  ?  Such  an  offer  Christ  makes  to  every  one.  He  sets  before  us  in  His  life 
a  purity,  a  nobility,  a  righteousness  which  we  cannot  attain  by  ourselves, 
but  which  He   can  and  will  help   us  to   attain.     III.  The   honour  is  that  of 

TESTIFYING      TO      THE     POWER     AND      GRACE     OF    THIS    SaVIOUR    AND     FrIEND    OF     MAN, 

THE  HONOUR  OF  MAKING  HiM  KNOWN  TO  OTHERS.  We  cau  Only  do  this  as  we 
believe  in  Him  ourselves,  and  our  life  must  prove  our  faith.  {A.  F.  Joscelyne,  B.A.) 
Christ  is  our  honour  : — The  doctrine  from  these  words  is  this,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
an  honour  to  all  believers.  1.  He  is  the  author  of  honour  to  them.  '2.  He  is,  and 
ought  to  be,  the  object  of  honour  from  them.  He  honours  them,  and  they  do  and 
should  honour  Him.  I.  How  is  the  Lord  Jesus  the  author  of  honour  to  all 
TRUE  believers  ?  We  use  to  say  concerning  the  king,  that  he  is  the  fountain  of 
honour,  that  is,  all  his  subjects  that  are  men  of  honour  derive  their  honour  from 
him.  Others  give  them  honour,  but  it  is  he  that  makes  them  honourable.  Now 
King  Jesus  is  He,  and  He  alone,  that  is  the  fountain  of  honour  to  all  true  believers. 
1.  He  hath  Himself  an  honourable  esteem  of  them.  They  are  persons  of  honour, 
even  the  meanest  of  them,  in  His  account  (Isa.  xliii.  4).  2.  His  will  is  that  every  one 
else  should  be  in  this  like  Himself,  in  having  an  honourable  esteem  of  them.  As 
when  the  king  bestows  a  degree  of  honour  upon  a  person,  makes  him  a  knight,  or  a 
lord,  or  an  earl,  he  expects  others  so  to  regard  him  ;  so  it  is  here  (Esther  vi.  3,  6,  7). 
How  much  soever  they  may  be  despised  by  others,  they  are  the  excellent  of  the 
earth  in  His  eye  because  they  are  so  in  Christ's  eye  (Psa.  xvi.  2).  3.  He  hath  done 
that  for  them  which  in  the  account  of  men  may  and  doth  deserve  that  honour. 
What  is  it  that  He  hath  done  for  them  that  may  be  the  ground  of  men's  honouring 
them  ?  (1)  One  ground  of  honouring  men  is  upon  the  account  of  their  personal 
excellences  and  endowments;  some  are  honourable  for  their  learning  and  know- 
ledge in  arts  and  sciences  ;  some  for  their  wisdom  and  prudence  in  the  management 
of  secular  affairs ;  in  the  field,  as  soldiers ;  in  the  senate,  as  counsellors.  Now  if 
so,  the  people  fearing  God  deserve  honour  indeed,  for  they  have  better  knowledge 
than  others.  They  from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest  know  God.  And  whence 
have  they  that  knowledge  but  from  Christ,  who  gives  them  an  understanding  ? 
(1  John  V.  20.)  They  have  wisdom  also,  another  sort  of  wisdom — wisdom  from 
above  in  soul  affairs.  (2)  Upon  the  account  of  their  great  usefulness  in  their 
particular  places  and  stations ;  in  court  or  camp,  for  peace  or  war.  By  their 
prayers,  fetching  down  mercies,  keeping  off  judgments,  as  Moses.  By  their  pattern, 
they  are  the  lights  of  the  world.  (3)  Upon  the  account  of  their  honourable  relations 
wherein  they  stand.  He  that  is  himself  in  honour  reflects  honour  upon  all  that  are 
related  to  him.  Now  what  are  the  relations  of  true  believers  ?  They  are  all  the 
children  of  God,  and  how  but  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  (Gal.  iii.  16 ;  John  i.  12.) 
And  is  not  that  a  high  honour  ?  To  be  a  servant,  even  the  meanest,  to  men  of 
honour,  carries  honour  in  it  (Psa.  cxvi.  16).  Nay,  they  are  His  friends,  admitted  to 
His  secrets,  acquainted  with  His  counsels  (John  xv.  15).  As  Hushai  was  a  friend  to 
David  (2  Sam.  xv.  37).  Zabud  to  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  5).  (4)  Some  are  honour- 
able on  account  of  their  honourable  hopes.  Young  heirs  are  honoured  for  their 
inheritance  sake,  though  as  yet  under  age.  (5)  Some  are  honourable  on  account  of 
their  honourable  offices  and  employments  (Rev.  i.  5) — kings  and  priests,  so  He 
makes  them.  (6)  Others  are  honourable  on  account  of  their  honourable  name 
(James  ii.  7).  The  word  Christian  is  from  Christ ;  all  this  honour  have  all  His 
saints  (Psa.  cxlix.  9).  II.  What  kind  of  honour  is  it  that  true  believers  have 
FROM  Jesus  Christ?  It  hath  these  properties.  1.  It  is  real  honour.  Other 
honours  are  but  a  shadow,  a  dream,  a  fancy.  This  hath  substance  in  it  (Prov. 
viii.  21).  2.  It  is  righteous  honour.  Other  honours  which  the  honourable  men  of  the 
earth  have  are  oftentimes  unrighteous — unjustly  given,  and  unjustly  taken.  3.  It  is 
heavenly  honour.  Other  honours  are  from  below,  this  is  from  above ;  other  honours 
are  upon  earthly  accounts,  this  upon  heavenly.  The  birth  of  a  believer  is  heavenly, 
his  endowments  heavenly.  4.  It  is  harmless  honour.  Other  honours  often  hurt 
those  that  have  them,  puff  them  up  with  pride,  as  Haman,  but  so  doth  not  this. 
5.  It  is  unsought  honour.    What  endeavours  are  there  to  obtain  other  honours. 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  ii. 

what  struggling,  what  bribing  and  waiting !  6.  It  is  unfading  honour.  It  is  honour 
that  lasts,  it  is  everlasting.  III.  What  mat  we  learn  fkom  this  subject  ?  1. 
We  learn  what  to  think  of  the  great  and  glorious  majesty  of  heaven  and  earth.  His 
name,  and  His  Son's  name,  is  certainly  upon  this  account  to  be  adored  by  us 
and  by  all  His  creatures,  angels  and  men.  For  what  ?  For  His  infinite  love  and 
free  grace  in  condescending  in  this  manner  to  a  remnant  of  Adam's  seed,  so  as  to 
put  all  this  honour  upon  them.  2.  We  learn  what  to  think  of  those  who  are  not 
believers  ;  all  the  ignorant,  careless,  unregenerate  generation  :  certainly  they  have 
no  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.  They  are  none  of  those  that  God  will  honour. 
3.  We  learn  what  is  the  true  way  to  true  honour.  It  is  in  our  nature  to  desire  it. 
But  the  misery  is,  we  mistake  our  end,  and  consequently  our  way.  We  take  those 
things  to  be  wealth  and  pleasure  and  honour  that  are  not  so,  and  that  not  to  be 
so  which  is  so,  and  we  pursue  accordingly.  4.  We  learn  what  is  our  duty  towards 
those  to  whom  Christ  is  an  honour.  Certainly  it  is  our  duty  to  see  them  truly 
honourable,  and  to  love  and  honour  them  accordingly  (2  Kings  xx.  12,  13).  5.  We 
learn  what  is  their  duty  to  whom  Christ  is  an  honour.  To  make  it  their  business  to 
honour  Him  all  they  can.  Why  is  He  to  be  honoured  ?  He  is  worthy  that  it  should 
be  so.  It  is  the  Father's  will  it  should  be  so  (John  v.  22,  23  ;  Col.  i.  18,  19).  It 
will  be  our  own  benefit  and  comfort,  living  and  dying.  We  shall  be  no  losers,  but 
gainers  by  it.  Wherein  are  we  to  honour  Him  ?  In  general — let  Him  be  precious 
to  you.  Have  high  and  honourable  thoughts  of  Him.  Speak  high  and  honourable 
things  concerning  Him,  as  Paul  did.  Do  nothing  to  displease  and  dishonour  Him, 
but  everything  contrary  (Phil.  i.  2).  (Philip  Henry.)  The  preciousness  of  Christ : 
— 1.  He  is  precious  as  a  Eedeemer  from  sin.  The  believer  appreciates  salvation, 
because  he  knows  what  it  is  to  be  lost.     2.  He  is  precious  as  a  manifestation  of  God, 

3.  Look  at  His  mission.     He  enters  into  my  sin  and  poverty  to  pity  and  to  aid. 

4.  He  is  the  central  glory  of  heaven.  Human  loves  are  not  extinguished,  but 
they  will  be  subordinated  to  Him.  (J.  M.  Buckley,  D.D.)  The  ptreciousness  of 
Christ : — I.  In  what  this  peeciousness  consists.  1.  I  would  mention,  first, 
the  difficulty  of  securing  the  possession  of  the  Saviour.  He  is  freely  offered 
"  without  money  and  without  price."  Yet  "  all  men  have  not  faith."  The 
reason  is,  that  there  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  their  believing,  which  is  one  cause 
why  we  may  say  that  Christ  is  precious.  2.  There  are  few  who  possess  this  invalu- 
able gift ;  not,  indeed,  that  there  is  not  in  Christ  a  sufficiency  for  all,  but  Christ  can 
only  be  received  in  one  way — by  faith.  You  may  try  to  discover  the  Saviour  by 
your  works,  but  you  cannot  find  Him.  3.  There  is  a  great  demand  for  the  Saviour; 
not,  indeed,  amongst  the  worldly,  the  frivolous,  the  luxurious  and  selfish,  the  sensual 
and  profane.  But  the  demand  is  amongst  those  who  are  convinced  of  their  sin.  4. 
There  are  advantages  accruing  to  the  possessor,  which  can  leave  no  doubt  of  the 
preciousness  of  Christ.  His  blood  is  precious ;  His  intercession  is  precious ;  His 
righteousness,  His  Word,  His  doctrine.  II.  Who  experience  this  preciousness  ? 
Gold  is  valueless  to  the  infant.  Pearls  are  as  nothing  to  swine.  And,  alas !  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  to  many  as  an  unholy  thing.  1.  To  the  openly  profane, 
Christ  is  as  nothing.  2.  The  men  of  the  world  can  see  nothing  in  Christ  in  which 
they  should  rejoice  ;  but  they  do  see  their  lusts  forbidden,  and  their  lives  condemned 
(Titus  ii.  11,  12).  3.  The  luxurious  experience  no  comfort  in  Christ.  He  who  had 
"  not  where  to  lay  His  head  "  is  a  continual  reproof  to  them.  4.  Nor  is  Christ 
more  precious  to  the  formalist  (Rom.  x.  3,  4).  5.  It  is  to  the  believer,  and  to  the 
beUever  alone,  that  Christ  is  precious.  It  is  the  believer  who  has  felt  the  burden  of 
sin.  He  can  say,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift."  (1)  Meditate 
on  His  name — Jesus,  Saviour !  How  much  does  that  word  convey  to  a  believer's 
heart  1  (2)  Consider  how  precious  to  us  is  the  sympathy  of  Jesus  (Prov.  xviii.  24  ; 
John  xiii.  1).  (3)  Call  to  mind  the  power  and  strength  of  our  Redeemer.  We 
know  that  we  are  surrounded  by  enemies,  that  we  are  subject  to  misrepresentations, 
to  persecutions  for  righteousness'  sake.  But  Jesus,  the  mighty  God,  is  on  our  side, 
and  we  become  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved  us."  (4)  Again, 
behold  the  righteousness  of  Jesus.  (H.  M.  Villiers,  M.A.)  Christ  precious  to  the 
believer : — I.  Christ  is  precious  to  bemevers  on  account  of  what  He  is  in  Him- 
self, n.  Christ  is  precious  to  them  who  believe  on  account  of  what  He  has 
done  fob  them.  in.  Christ  is  precious  unto  them  who  believe,  on  account  of 
what  He  has  done  in  them.  IV.  Christ  is  precious  unto  them  who  believe,  on 
account  of  what  He  is  still  doing  both  for  them  and  in  them.  V.  Christ  la 
precious  to  them  that  believe,  on  account  of  what  He  has  promised  and  pledged 
Himself  to  do  fob  them  hebeafteb.     (D.  Dickson,  D.D.)       Christ  precious  to  them 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  157 

that  believe  : — I.  The  chabacter  op  them  that  believe.  1.  This  is  the  peculiar 
privilege  of  those  who  are  Christians  indeed,  whereby  they  are  distinguished  from 
others.  "  All  men  have  not  faith  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  2).  Many  there  are  who  impose 
upon  themselves,  and  vainly  suppose  that  they  believe,  because  they  entertain  some 
speculative  opinions  about  religion.  2.  Those  who  believe  possess  not  only  a 
peculiar  but  an  important  privilege.  Faith  is  everywhere  represented  in  the  Word 
of  God  as  a  Divine  and  powerful  principle,  which  is  of  unspeakable  moment  to  the 
eternal  interest  of  men.  3.  Those  who  believe  are  endowed  with  a  useful  principle. 
True  saving  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  not  a  dormant  disposition,  but  a  vigorous  and 
active  grace,  attended  with  the  happiest  effects.  It  unites  to  Jesus  Christ.  It 
purifies  the  heart  from  the  love  and  power  of  sin.  It  is  the  source  of  all  holy 
obedience  to  God ;  it  worketh  by  love,  and  is  fruitful  in  all  good  works.     II.  The 

DISTINGUISHING  EVIDENCE  WHICH  IS  PECULIAE  TO  YOU  THAT  BELIEVE.       {W.  McCulloch.) 

The  Christ  of  experience  : — This  is  a  recognition  of  the  practical  religious  value  of 
the  Christ — of  what  He  is  to  those  who  have  put  Him  to  experimental  tests.  All 
the  qualities  that  constitute  preeiousness  are  in  Him,  in  a  degree  of  excellence  that 
imagination  cannot  overcolour,  that  even  love  cannot  exaggerate.  1.  In  respect  of 
rarity.  He  is  the  only  Saviour  of  men  ;  the  "  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man  "  ; 
the  only  hope  of  sinful  souls.  2.  In  respect  of  beauty.  He  is  the  perfection  of  all 
moral  excellence.  3.  In  character  He  is  ideally  good,  pure,  devout,  benevolent, 
loving.  4.  His  work,  as  the  Kedeemer  of  men,  realises  our  very  loftiest  conceptions 
— first,  of  moral  philosophy  ;  next,  of  spiritual  holiness ;  next,  of  self-sacrificing  love. 
5.  In  respect  of  serviceableness,  of  personal  beneficial  relations  to  men,  as  their 
Kedeemer  from  sin.  His  preeiousness  transcends  aU  our  words  or  thoughts.  (1)  We 
might  apply  a  comparative  test,  and  put  the  preeiousness  of  Christ  into  comparison 
with  all  other  possessions  of  our  human  life.  How  does  our  practical  judgment 
estimate  Him  ?  Or  we  might  subject  Him  to  a  comparative  estimate  with  other 
good  men  ;  His  character  with  that  of  all  other  saints ;  His  teaching  with  that  of 
all  other  prophets  ;  His  redeeming  work  with  all  other  schemes  for  human  improve- 
ment. How  instinctively  we  give  Him  the  transcendency !  (2)  Our  estimates  are 
largely  influenced  by  the  judgments  of  others.  Let  us  think,  then,  of  the  estimate 
put  upon  Christ's  character  and  work  by  other  moral  beings.  Is  it  not  significant 
of  His  excellence  that  He  attracts  the  most  readily  and  attaches  the  most  profoundly 
the  holiest  and  noblest  natures  ?  (3)  The  conclusive  appeal,  however,  is  to  the  con- 
scious experience  of  our  own  religious  souls  :  "  If  so  be  we  have  tasted  that  the  Lord 
is  gracious."  This  is  the  ground  upon  which  myriads  of  religious  men,  men  whose 
knowledge  is  limited,  whose  theology  is  confused,  whose  reason  is  easily  baffled, 
who  are  able  neither  to  defend  their  Christianity,  nor  theoretically  to  understand  it, 
justly  trust  in  Him.  They  have  personally  come  to  Christ ;  He  has  consciously 
quickened  the  Ufe  and  the  love  of  their  souls  ;  they  "  know  that  they  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  that  "  whereas  once  they  were  blind,  now  they  see."  His 
Divine  presence  witnesses  in  their  souls.  In  some  mystic  way  He  is  their  daily 
Saviour,  and  Sanctifier,  and  Comforter.     I.  Is  not  Christ  precious  to  us  when  we 

GEOPE  AND  STUMBLE  AT  THE    MTSTERY    OF    GOD,  wheU  WC    fccl    that  "  the    gods    of    the 

heathen  are  no  gods  "  ?  When  we  cannot  by  any  searching  of  our  own  find  out 
God ;  when  a  thousand  possibilities  of  ignorance  and  superstition  torment  us  with 
vague  and  nameless  fears;  what  a  marvellous  revelation  of  light  and  power  of 
assurance  it  is  when  Jesus  Christ  puts  before  us  His  great  teaching  of  God  ;  when, 
with  the  strong  confidence,  and  in  the  quiet  ways  of  perfect  knowledge.  He  tells  us 
of  the  Father  !  Upon  the  conceptions  of  God  which  Jesus  Christ  has  taught  us  our 
religious  life  rests.  These  ideas  are  the  practical  inspirations  of  what  we  are  and 
do.  In  the  sore  feeling  of  our  rebelliousness  and  guilt  we  go  to  Him,  as  the  prodigal 
to  his  father,  to  ask  the  generous  forgiveness  of  His  fatherly  love.  In  the  helpless- 
ness of  our  need  we  cast  ourselves  upon  the  care  of  Him  who  clothes  the  lily  and 
feeds  the  raven.  Whether  true  or  not,  this  conception  of  God  is  the  greatest,  the  most 
inspiring,  the  most  satisfying  thought  ever  presented  to  men ;  the  highest,  purest, 
most  endearing  that  the  world  has  known.  II.  How  precious  the  Christ  is  when 
trHE  SENSE  OF  SIN  IS  QUICKENED  withiu  US,  whcH  wc  awakcu  to  the  grave  culpability 
of  its  guilt,  when  we  realise  its  essential  antagonism  to  the  Divine  holiness,  its 
transgression  of  God's  inviolable  law,  the  imperative  necessity  of  its  dread  penalty 
of  death  !  The  moral  sense,  the  conscience  within  me,  that  which  makes  me  a 
moral  being,  demands  atonement  for  sin  as  much  as  my  safety  does.  Mere  security 
is  no  moral  satisfaction  to  a  righteous  being.  I  could  not  be  happy  in  the  salvation 
of  Christ  if  I  were  saved  as  a  man  is  saved  who  breaks  prison,  or  to  whom  the  prison 


158  .       THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

doors  are  illicitly  opened  ;  if  I  were  saved  at  the  cost  of  a  single  righteous  principle. 
How  unspeakably  precious,  then,  the  Christ  when  He  is  "  set  forth  as  a  propitiation 
for  sin,"  "  who  Himself  bare  our  sin  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  True  or  not  true,  it  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  theory  of 
forgiveness,  the  most  perfect  and  satisfactory  to  all  the  feelings  of  our  moral  nature. 
III.  How  precious  again  is  the  Christ  in  our  struggle  with  practical  evil,  as  we 
fight  with  lusts,  resist  temptation,  overcome  worldliness,  subdue  selfishness,  or 
mourn  over  failures  and  falls!  How  assuring  and  helpful  His  perfect  life,  His 
promised  grace,  His  ready  and  tender  sympathy !  But  for  Him  we  should  have 
despaired  in  our  degradation  and  helplessness.  Again  we  say,  this  conception  of 
Him,  true  or  not,  is  practically  the  greatest  moral  force  that  we  feel.  Therefore  He 
is  precious  to  us,  because  He  enables  the  moral  redemption  of  our  soul.  IV.  How 
precious  the  Christ  is  in  times  of  great  sorrow  ;  when  we  stand  by  open  graves, 
and  "  refuse  to  be  comforted  because  those  whom  we  love  are  not"  !  How  He  comes 
to  us,  as  He  came  "  from  beyond  Jordan  to  Bethany  "  !  How  He  talks  with  us  about 
"  the  resurrection  and  the  life  "  !  How  He  weeps  with  us  in  the  silence  of  ineffable 
sympathy  !  V.  And  how  precious  He  is  in  our  own  mortal  conflict;  when  "  the 
shadow  feared  of  man  "  falls  upon  ourselves ;  when  "  heart  and  flesh  fail  "  ;  when 
human  love  falls  away  from  us,  and  we  hear  its  receding  voices  as  we  go  forward 
alone  into  the  dark  valley  !  "  Into  His  hands  we  commit  our  spirit "  ;  "  His  rod  and 
staff  comfort  us  "  ;  His  hand  clasps  ours  ;  He  leads  us  through  the  darkness  into 
the  eternal  light  and  life.     (H.  Alton,  D.D.)  Christ  precious  to  believers: — I. 

That  Jesus  Christ  is  now  precious  to  believers.  Notice  attentively  how  person- 
ally precious  Jesus  is.  There  are  two  persons  in  the  text :  "  Unto  you  that  believe 
He  is  precious."  You  are  a  real  person,  and  you  feel  that  you  are  such.  You  have 
realised  yourself  ;  you  are  quite  clear  about  your  own  existence  ;  now  in  the  same 
way  strive  to  realise  the  other  Person.  "  Unto  you  that  believe  He  is  precious." 
You  believe  in  Him,  He  loves  you ;  you  love  Him  in  return,  and  He  sheds  abroad  in 
your  heart  a  sense  of  His  love.  Notice,  too,  that  while  the  text  gleams  with  this 
vividness  of  personality,  to  which  the  most  of  professors  are  blind,  it  is  weighted 
with  a  most  solid  positiveness  :  "  Unto  you  that  believe  He  is  precious."  It  does 
not  speak  as  though  He  might  be  or  might  not  be  ;  but "  He  is  precious."  If  the  new 
life  be  in  thee,  thou  art  as  sure  to  love  the  Saviour  as  fish  love  the  stream,  or  the 
birds  the  air,  or  as  brave  men  love  liberty,  or  as  all  men  love  their  lives.  Tolerate 
no  peradventures  here.  Mark,  further,  the  absoluteness  of  the  text,  "  Unto  you  that 
believe  He  is  precious."  It  is  not  written  how  precious.  The  text  does  not  attempt 
by  any  form  of  computation  to  measure  the  price  which  the  regenerate  soul  sets 
upon  her  Lord.  The  thought  which  I  desire  to  bring  out  into  fullest  relief  is  this, 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  continually  precious  to  His  people.  Unto  you  that  believe, 
tLouyh  you  have  believed  to  the  saving  of  your  soul.  He  is  still  precious ;  for  your 
guilt  will  return  upon  your  conscience,  and  you  will  yet  sin,  being  still  in  the  body, 
and  thus  unto  you  experimentally  the  cleansing  atonement  is  as  precious  as  when 
you  first  relied  upon  its  expiating  power.  Nay,  Jesus  is  more  precious  to  you  now, 
for  you  know  your  own  needs  more  fully,  have  proved  more  often  the  adaptation 
of  His  saving  grace,  and  have  received  a  thousand  more  gifts  at  His  blessed 
hands.  II.  Let  us  think  how  Christ  is  to-day  precious  to  you.  To  many  of 
you  there  is  as  much  in  Christ  undiscovered  as  you  have  already  enjoyed.  As 
surely  as  your  faith  grasps  more,  and  becomes  more  capacious  and  appropria- 
ting, Christ  will  grow  in  preciousness  to  you.  Ask,  then,  for  more  faith. 
ni.  Because  Jesus  is  precious  to  believers  He  efficaciously  operates 
UPON  them.  The  preciousness  of  Christ  is,  as  it  were,  the  leverage  of  Christ 
lifting  up  His  saints  to  holiness.  Let  me  show  you  this.  1.  The  man  who 
trusts  Christ  values  Christ;  that  which  I  value  I  hold  fast;  hence  our  valuing 
Christ  helps  us  to  abide  steadfast  in  times  of  temptation.  2.  Notice  further  :  this 
valuing  of  Christ  helps  the  believer  to  make  sacrifices.  Sacrifice-making  consti- 
tutes a  large  part  of  any  high  character.  He  who  never  makes  a  sacrifice  in  his 
religion  may  shrewdly  suspect  that  it  is  not  worth  more  than  his  own  pra.Uical 
valuation  of  it.  3.  Moreover,  this  valuing  of  Christ  makes  us  jealous  against  sin. 
He  who  loves  the  Redeemer  best  purifies  himself  most,  even  as  his  Lord  is  pure. 
4.  High  valuing  of  Christ  helps  the  Christian  in  the  selection  of  his  associates  in 
life.  If  I  hold  my  Divine  Lord  to  be  precious,  how  can  I  have  fellowship  with  those 
who  do  not  esteem  Him  ?  You  will  not  find  a  man  of  refined  habits  and  cultured 
spirits  happy  amongst  the  lowest  and  most  illiterate.  Birds  of  a  feather  liock 
together.    Workers  and  traders  unite  in  companies  according  to  their  occui-atious. 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  159 

Lovers  of  Christ  rejoice  in  lovers  of  Christ,  and  they  delight  to  meet  together ;  for 
they  can  talk  to  each  other  of  things  in  which  they  are  agreed.     IV.  Christ  being 

THUS  PRECIOUS,  HiS  PRECIOUSNESS  BECOMES  THE    TEST    OF    OUR    CHRISTIANITY.       {C.    H. 

Spurgeon.)  The  precious  Saviour  : — There  are  very  few  people  who  would  not 
agree  with  the  apostle  when  he  says  that  Christ  is  precious  to  believers.  But 
when  one  comes  a  little  closer,  and  asks  professing  people  why  He  is  precious  to 
them,  and  in  what  degree,  the  answers  to  this  question  are  vague.  It  is  not  of 
Christ  Himself  that  most  professors  will  speak.  Some  will  say  they  need  His 
righteousness,  others  that  they  hope  in  His  death ;  but  ah  !  the  genuine  child  of 
God  alone  can  say,  from  the  very  bottom  of  his  heart,  "  To  me  Christ  is  precious." 
Christ's  righteousness  cannot  be  separated  from  Himself,  and  nothing  but  faith  in 
a  living,  reigning  Jesus  will  save  the  soul.  But  now,  to  apply  the  subject  more 
directly,  we  shall  briefly  notice  a  few  characteristics  in  believers  themselves  which 
seem  to  show  that  to  them  Christ  is  precious.  1.  Innumerable  marks  might  be 
given,  but  here  is  a  distinguishing  one — Christ  is  the  object  nearest  to  a  believer's 
heart.  He  dwells  in  the  soul,  nearer  than  any  creature — more  closely  entwined 
round  the  heart-strings  than  aught  beside.  2.  The  second  mark  of  the  believer's 
value  for  the  Lord  Jesus  is,  that  he  puts  no  society  in  comparison  with  His  presence ; 
no  other  company  has  such  power  to  refresh  and  comfort  and  purify  the  soul.  3. 
The  third  proof  of  the  estimation  in  which  Christ  is  held  by  His  people  is  that,  for 
His  sake,  and  for  the  love  they  bear  Him,  they  give  up  all  known  sins.  4.  The 
fourth  proof  that  we  shall  now  mention  is  that  where  Jesus  is  precious  His 
ordinances  are  highly  prized — we  shall  value  His  Word,  alone  and  in  the  family,  as 
well  as  in  the  house  of  God.  And  so  also  with  His  house,  His  table.  His  Sabbath. 
5.  Again,  God's  people  are  precious  to  the  believer.  6.  Another  mark  that  Christ 
is  precious  to  believers  is  that  they  are  longing  for  His  second  coming.  The 
way  to  heaven  is  to  be  in  Christ ;  and  heaven  is  to  be  with  Christ.  (W.  C.  Burns.) 
Christ  precious  to  all  true  believers : — "  To  you  therefore  which  believe.  He  is 
precious."  The  illative  particle  "therefore"  shows  this  passage  as  an  inference 
from  what  went  before  ;  and  the  reasoning  seems  to  be  this  :  "  This  stone  is 
precious  to  God,  therefore  it  is  precious  to  you  that  believe.  You  have  the  same 
estimate  of  Jesus  Christ  which  God  the  Father  has ;  and  for  that  very  reason  He 
is  precious  to  you,  because  He  is  precious  to  Him."  1.  He  is  precious  to  all  the 
angels  of  heaven.  Angels  saw,  believed,  and  loved  him  in  the  various  stages  of 
His  life,  from  His  birth  to  His  return  to  His  native  heaven.  Oh,  could  we  see  what 
is  doing  in  heaven  at  this  instant,  how  would  it  surprise,  astonish,  and  confound 
us !  Do  you  think  the  name  of  Jesus  is  of  as  little  importance  there  as  in  our 
world  ?  Do  you  think  there  is  one  lukewarm  or  disaffected  heart  there  among  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thousands  ?  Oh  no  !  there  His 
love  is  the  ruling  passion  of  every  heart  and  the  favourite  theme  of  every  song. 
2,  He  is  infinitely  precious  to  His  Father,  who  thoroughly  knows  Him,  and  is  an 
infallible  judge  of  real  worth  (Isa.  xlii.  1).  And  shall  not  the  love  of  the  omni- 
scient God  have  weight  with  believers  to  believe  Him  too  ?  And  now  what  think 
you  of  Christ  ?  Will  you  not  think  of  Him  as  believers  do  ?  If  so.  He  will  be 
precious  to  your  hearts  above  all  things  for  the  future.  Oh  precious  Jesus  !  are 
matters  come  to  that  pass  in  our  world  that  creatures  bought  with  Thy  blood, 
creatures  that  owe  all  their  hopes  to  Thee,  should  stand  in  need  of  persuasion  to 
love  Thee  ?  What  horrors  attend  the  thought !  (1)  None  but  believers  have  eyes 
to  see  the  glory  of  Christ.  The  god  of  this  world,  the  prince  of  darkness,  has 
blinded  the  minds  of  them  that  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of 
Christ  should  shine  into  them.  (2)  None  but  believers  are  properly  sensible  of 
their  need  of  Christ.  They  are  deeply  sensible  of  their  ignorance  and  the  disorder 
of  their  understanding,  and  therefore  they  are  sensible  of  their  want  of  both  the 
external  and  internal  instructions  of  this  Divine  Prophet,  but  as  to  others  they  are 
puffed  up  with  intellectual  pride,  and  apprehend  themselves  in  very  little  need  of 
religious  instructions,  and  therefore  they  think  but  very  slightly  of  Him.  (3)  None 
but  believers  have  known  by  experience  how  precious  He  is.  They,  and  only  they, 
can  reflect  upon  the  glorious  views  of  Him,  which  themselves  have  had,  to  captivate 
their  hearts  for  ever  to  Him.  (&'.  Davies,  M.A.)  Christ  more  than  precious  : — 
"  When  asked  by  a  member  of  his  family  as  to  his  hope  he  answered :  '  I  am  a 
sinner  saved  by  grace,'  and  added,  '  Jesus ! — Oh,  to  be  like  Him ! '  At  another 
time  he  said  :  '  To  you  that  believe  He  is  precious.'  Then  with  stronger  voice  he 
broke  forth  into  holy  rapture,  and  exclaimed  :  '  Precious,  precious,  more  than 
precious!'     The  writer  of  this  notice,  highly  honoured  with  the  friendship  of  the 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

family,  saw  Mrs.  Simpson  a  few  minutes  after  the  bishop  had  spoken  these  words. 
"While  her  heart  was  breaking,  she  murmured  amid  her  sobs,  'Precious,  precious, 
more  than  precious  ! '     She  might  well  say  :  '  No  one  knew  him  as  we  did  at  home. 
He  was  so  good  and  kind.     We  thought  he  would  be  spared  to  us  a  little  longer.' 
Then  she  turned  again  to  his  comforting  words  about  his  Lord  :  '  Precious,  precious, 
more  than  precious.'     They  sound  as  a  refrain  after  his  '  Psalm  of  Ufe.'  "     (Memoir 
of  Bishop  Simpson.)         Where  Christ  is  valued  He  will  he  made  known  ; — If  He  is 
precious  to  you,  you  cannot  help  speaking  about  Him.     We  remember,  in  a  house 
■which   we   used   to  visit,  an  ornament  under  a  glass  shade  which   delighted   the 
children.     It  was  a  gilt  casket,  with  a  cameo  on  the  top,  and  inside  a  nugget  of 
gold,  the  ore  in  its  rough  state.     It  had  been  brought  from  Australia,  and  was  kept 
locked  up  and  rarely  seen.     No  one  was  the  richer  for  that  gold.     There  are  many 
saved  ones  now  who  have  the  priceless  nugget,  the  living  Christ,  whom  they  would 
not  part  with  for  worlds ;  but  He  is  hidden  in  the  deep  recess  of  their  soul,  and  no 
one  is  the  richer.     You  must  breathe  out  and  pass  on  that  name  of  Jesus ;  there  is 
in  it  a  living  power,  more  than  that  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  of  turning  all  into 
gold.         The  precioiisness  of  Christ  :—I  like  what  was  said  by  a  child  in  the  Sun- 
day school,  when  the  teacher  said,  "  You  have  been  reading  that  Christ  is  precious ; 
what  does  that  mean  ?  "     The  children  were  silent  for  a  little  while,  but  at  last  one 
boy  replied,  "  Father  said  th'^     cher  day  that  mother  was  precious,  for  '  whatever 
should  we  do  without  her ! '  "     This  is  a  capital  explanation  of  the  word.     You 
and  I  can  truly  say  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  He  is  precious  to  us,  for  what 
should  we  do,  what  could  we  do  without  Him  ?        Them  which  be  disobedient — 
Disobedience   the   converse  of  faith  : — It     s  eminently  worthy  of  notice  that  over 
against  "  believe "  in  ver.  6  stands,  not  its  exact  correlative  "  unbelieving,"  but 
"  disobedient."     They  who  receive  Christ  believe  :  you  would  expect  to  read  con- 
versely, they  who  reject  Him  are  unbelieving  ;  but  instead,  you  read  that  they  are 
disobedient.     People   raise  a  great   debate   upon   the  question  whether  a   man  is 
responsible  for  his  belief,  and  whether  he  can  be  condemned  for  not  believing. 
Quietly  this  debate  is  all  quashed  here  by  the  representation  that  unbelief  is  dis- 
obedience.    Unbelief  is  indeed  the  root,  but  the  outgrowth  is  disobedience.     (W. 
Arnot.)       The  stone  which  the  builders  disallowed. — Christ  rejected  by  the  Jeivs : — 
1.  To  show  that  God  had  purposed  the  salvation  of  His  Church  and  building  of  His 
kingdom  by  a  way  that  the  wise  men  of  the  world  never  dreamed  of.     2.  That  their 
malice  might  appear  to  their  punishment,  and  God's  power  in  resisting  them.     3. 
To  show  that  great  men  are  not  always  the  greatest  maintainers  of  the  truth,  but 
often  great  enemies  and  hindrances  thereto.      Uses :  1.  This  serves  to  teach  us 
not   to   stand  upon  great  men's   opinion,  approving   and   disallowing  upon  their 
testimony  or  example.     2.  To  magnify  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God,  that  hath 
used  to  build  His  kingdom,  not  only  without  the  help,  but  against  the  will  of  great 
men.     (John  Rogers.)         The   stone   which   the   builders   disallowed  — I.  A  great 
OPPORTUNITY  MISSED.     Who  are  the  builders  ?     All  the  sons  and  daughters  of  men. 
But  there  are  blind  builders  that  reject  the  "  chief  corner-stone."     They  cannot 
perceive  the  glory  of  the  largest  and  divinest  truth.     The  causes  of  this  blindness 
are  manifold — worldliness,  prejudice,  and  intellectual  pride.     The  immediate  cause 
is  ever  a  superficial  spirituality,  however  it  may  be  produced.     II.  True  greatness 
IGNORED  AND  NEGLECTED.     The  neglcct  Suffered  by  the  prophet  in  his  own  age  is 
proverbial.     He  lets  in  the  glory  from  the  eternal  into  this  half-blind  world  until  it 
becomes  a  pain,  and  he  is  accused  of  being  the  enemy  of  his  generation.     We  pride 
ourselves  that  such  a  history  is  a  thing  of  the   past,  that  we  enlightened  ones 
honour  our  prophets.     It  is  for  a  future  generation  to  discover  whether  we  have 
done  so.     "  Demos  "  is  emphatically  the  builder  to-day.     Is  the  democracy  laying 
the  foundations  of  its  temple  on  the  "  corner-stone  "  of  Divine  and  eternal  truth? 
But  there  is  ever  great  danger  that  "the  spirit  of  the  age  "  may  ignore  the  divinest 
message   that   is  delivered   to   it.      III.  The  certain  supremacy  of  truth.      The 
divinest  truth   must  ultimately  become  the  "  chief  stone  of   the  corner."     False 
prejudices  are  powerful,  and  may  seem  for  a  time  all  supreme.     Truth  is  God,  and 
God  is  truth.     The  eternal  energies  have  the  world  in  their  grip,  and  "  He  must 
reign  for  ever  and  ever."    IV.  The  words  find  their  ideal  fulfilment  in  Jesds 
Christ.     Unspeakably  magnificent  was  the  opportunity  lost  by  the  Jewish  nation. 
God  guard  us  from  similar  blindness !     May  the  Christ  be  apprehended  by  us  in 
all  the  fulness  of  His  glory,  so  that  we  may  not  be  ashamed  when  He  appears  to 
reign.     (John  Thomas,  M.A.)        A  stone  of  stumbling:,  and  a  rock  of  offence. — 
Jesus,  the  stumbling-stone  of  unbelievers: — I.    The  result  of  the  unbelief,  and 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  ICl 

THE  OPPOSITION  OF  MEN,  UPON  THE  LoRD  Jesus  Chhist.  1.  Fivst  Came  the  Jew. 
He  had  the  pride  of  race  to  maintam.  Were  not  the  Jews  the  chosen  people  of 
God  ?  Jesus  comes  preaching  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  He  sends  His  disciples 
even  to  the  Gentiles :  therefore  the  Jews  will  not  have  Him.  But  the  opposition  of 
His  countrymen  did  not  defeat  the  cause  of  Christ ;  if  rejected  in  Palestine,  His 
word  was  received  in  Greece,  it  triumphed  in  Eome,  it  passed  onward  to  Spain,  it 
found  a  dwelling-place  in  Britain,  and  at  this  day  it  lights  up  the  face  of  the  earth. 
2.  Next  arose  philosophy  to  be  the  gospel's  foe.  But  though  it  made  terrible  inroads 
for  a  while  on  the  Church  of  God,  in  the  form  of  gnostic  heresy,  did  it  really 
impede  the  chariot  wheels  of  Christ  ?  The  stone  from  the  shng  of  Christ  has 
smitten  the  heathen  philosophy  in  the  forehead,  while  the  Son  of  David  goes  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer.  3.  After  those  days  there  came  against  the  Church  of 
God  the  determined  opposition  of  the  secular  power.  All  that  cruelty  could  do  was 
done ;  but  what  was  the  result  ?  The  more  the  Christians  were  oppressed,  the  more 
they  multiplied ;  the  scattering  of  the  coals  increased  the  conflagration.  4.  Since 
that  period  the  Church  has  been  attacked  in  various  modes.  The  Arian  heresy 
assaulted  the  deity  of  Christ,  but  the  Church  of  God  delivered  herself  from  the 
accursed  thing,  as  Paul  shook  the  viper  into  the  fire.  Be  of  good  courage,  for 
brighter  days  are  on  the  way.  There  shall  come  yet  greater  awakenings,  the  Lord, 
the  avenger  of  His  Church,  shall  yet  arise,  and  the  stone  which  the  builders  dis- 
allowed, the  same  shall  be  the  head  stone  of  the  corner.  H.  The  consequence  of 
this  opposition  to  the  opposees.  1.  When  men  stumble  at  the  plan  of  salvation 
by  Christ's  sacrificial  work,  what  is  it  that  they  stumble  at  ?  (1)  Some  stumble  at 
the  person  of  Christ.  Jesus,  they  will  admit,  was  a  good  man,  but  they  cannot 
accept  Him  as  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  the  Father.  (2)  Some  stumble  at  His 
work.  Many  cannot  see  how  Jesus  Christ  is  become  the  propitiation  for  human 
guilt.  (3)  Some  stumble  at  Christ's  teaching ;  and  what  is  it  they  stumble  at  in 
that?  Sometimes  it  is  because  it  is  too  holy:  "  Christ  is  too  puritanical.  He  cuts 
off  our  pleasures."  But  He  denies  us  no  pleasure  which  is  not  sinful.  He  multiplies 
our  joys ;  the  things  which  He  denies  to  us  are  only  joyous  in  appearance,  while 
His  commands  are  real  bliss.  We  have  found  some  object  to  the  teachings  of 
Christ  because  they  are  too  humbling.  He  destroys  self-confidence,  and  He  pre- 
sents salvation  to  none  but  those  who  are  lost.  "This  lays  us  too  low,"  saith  one. 
Still  I  have  known  others  object  that  the  gospel  is  too  mysterious,  they  cannot 
understand  it,  they  say.  While  again,  from  the  other  corner  of  the  compass,  I 
have  heard  the  objection  that  it  is  too  plain.  Do  not  cavil  at  it.  What  if  there  be 
mysteries  in  it?  Canst  thou  expect  to  comprehend  all  that  God  knoweth?  Be 
thou  teachable  as  a  child,  and  the  gospel  will  be  sweet  to  thee.  (4)  We  have 
known  some  who  have  stumbled  at  Christ  on  account  of  His  people,  and  truly  they 
have  some  excuse.  They  have  said,  "Look  at  Christ's  followers,  see  their  imper- 
fections and  hypocrisies."  But  wherefore  judge  a  master  by  his  servants?  2.  What 
does  the  stumbling  at  Christ  cost  the  ungodly  ?  I  answer,  it  costs  them  a  great 
deal.  (1)  Those  who  make  Him  a  rock  of  stumbling  are  great  losers  by  it  in  this 
life.  What  anger  it  costs  ungodly  men  to  oppose  Christ !  Some  of  them  cannot 
let  Him  alone,  they  will  rage  and  fume.  Concerning  Jesus  it  is  true  that  you  must 
either  love  or  hate  Him,  He  cannot  long  be  indifferent  to  you,  and  hence  come 
inward  conflicts  to  opposers.  (2)  Ah,  what  it  costs  some  men  when  they  come  to 
die !  If  you  oppose  Him  you  will  be  the  losers.  He  will  not.  Your  opposition  is 
utterly  futile ;  like  a  snake  biting  a  file,  you  will  only  break  your  own  teeth. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Dangerous  to  stumble : — A  bridge  is  made  to  give  us  a  safe 
passage  over  a  dangerous  river ;  but  he  who  stumbleth  on  the  bridge  is  in  danger 
to  fall  into  the  river.     (J.  Trapp.) 

Vers.  9,  10. — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation. — The  true  Israel: — I.  "Ye  are  a 
chosen  genekation  " — the  word  "generation"  here  meaning  not  contemporaries 
but  the  offspring  of  one  common  parent,  the  offshoots  of  one  original  stock. 
1.  The  Israelites  were  a  special  "  generation,"  having  sprung  from  Abraham  as 
their  common  progenitor.  Similarly,  believers  are  a  distinct  "generation"  of 
men,  being  all  born  of  one  God,  and  animated  by  the  self-same  Divine  life. 
Consequently  a  striking  family  likeness  prevails  among  them.  2.  The  Jews 
were,  moreover,  a  "  chosen  generation  " — called  out  of  the  darkness  of  Chaldsean 
idolatry  to  the  marvellous  light  of  Divine  revelation.  And  so  it  is  with  believers 
now.  3.  "Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises — the 
excellences — of  Him  who  hath  called  you."     The  mistake  of  the  Jews  was  to  take 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

for  granted  that  they  were  chosen  to  show  forth  their  own  excellences.  Their 
election  they  converted  into  food  for  pride.  Let  us  remember  the  Church  is  a 
generation  to  show  forth  the  excellences  of  God.  Through  good  men,  not 
necessarily  great  men,  does  God  reveal  His  character ;  through  holy  men,  not 
necessarily  able  men,  does  He  make  known  the  benevolence,  the  uprightness, 
the  genial  warmth  of  His  nature.  H.  "Ye  are  a  eoyal  Priesthood" — a  phrase 
borrowed  from  Ex.  xix.  6.  1.  The  Jewish  nation  was  a  nation  of  priests,  its 
fundamental  idea  being  religious,  not  secular.  This  idea  is  now  embodied  in 
the  Christian  Church.  Every  believer  is  now  a  priest,  having  a  right  to  enter 
into  the  Holiest  of  all.  2.  "A  royal  priesthood."  "Ye  are  kings  and  priests" 
— kings  over  yourselves  and  priests  unto  God.  3.  "  Ye  are  a  royal  priesthood, 
to  show  forth  the  excellences  of  Him  who  hath  called  you."  By  your  holy 
conversation,  upright  demeanour,  you  are  to  show  forth  the  character  of  your 
God.  III.  "  Ye  are  a  holy  nation."  1.  The  Israelites  in  Egypt  were  a 
"  chosen  generation,"  but  not  a  "  holy  nation."  Not  till  they  were  established 
in  their  own  land,  with  laws  and  a  king  of  their  own,  did  they  develop  into  a 
nation.  Believers,  scattered  in  the  world,  without  mutual  recognition,  might  be 
of  the  right  seed ;  but  not  till  they  attach  themselves  to  a  Christian  institution, 
variously  termed  the  kingdom  or  the  Church,  do  they  become  a  nation.  2.  "A 
holy  nation."  God  set  the  Israelites  apart  from  all  the  world.  He  made  them 
what  all  nations  ought  to  be — holy.  True,  they  did  not  live  up  to  their  profession ; 
but  in  theory,  in  ideal,  they  were  holy.  3.  As  a  people  bound  together  for  the 
purposes  of  holiness,  we  should  show  forth  the  excellences  of  our  God.  As  a  holy 
nation,  scattered  amongst  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  we  ought  to  propagate  the 
principles  of  God's  kingdom.  IV.  "Ye  are  a  peculiab  people."  1.  "Ye  are 
a  people."  The  Israelites  were  brought  out  of  Egypt  a  host  of  undisciplined 
slaves,  capabilities  of  great  things  slumbering  within  them,  but  only  half  civilised. 
But  after  forty  years'  pilgrimage  in  the  wilderness,  God  was  able  to  form  them  into 
a  people,  and  settle  them  in  the  land  promised  unto  their  fathers.  And  in  our 
natural  state,  we  cannot  be  said  to  be  a  people  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  bound 
together  by  rational  and  spiritual  ties.  As  individuals  you  can  hardly  be  said  to 
really  exist  till  you  believe.  "  Of  Him  ye  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Ye  were  not  before, 
but  now  ye  are — you  live  in  the  higher  ranges  of  the  soul.  Before  you  only  lived 
in  your  animal  nature — you  did  not  live  the  distinctive  life  of  man.  But  through 
union  with  Christ  first,  and  with  the  Church  afterwards,  you  fulfil  the  idea  of  your 
being,  you  live  in  the  higher  faculties  instead  of  the  lower,  having  higher  purposes 
and  different  interests  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  2.  "  Ye  are  a  peculiar  people," 
tht  word  "peculiar"  here  being  used  m  its  etymological,  not  its  colloquial  sense, 
as  meaning  property,  not  singularity.  "  These  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself — 
they  are  My  very  own."  3.  But  mark,  we  are  God's,  purchased  at  a  great  price,  in 
order  that  we  may  tell  forth  with  a  loud  voice  His  praises.  The  word  for  "  show 
forth  "  means  literally  "  to  proclaim  to  those  without  what  has  taken  place  within." 
Here  Israel  failed.  Let  the  Christian  Church  beware  of  committing  the  same 
mistake — God  has  purchased  us  to  be  His  special  possession,  on  purpose  that 
we  should  proclaim  to  the  world  lying  in  darkness  the  excellences  of  His  love 
in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  We  must  either  send  or  carry  the  light  to  the 
heathen.      {J.    C.    Jones,    D.D.)  The    Christian    estate: — I.    The    state    of 

Christians,  "  a  chosen  generation;"  so  in  Psa.  xxiv.  The  psalmist  there  speaks 
first  of  God's  universal  sovereignty,  then  of  His  peculiar  choice.  As  men  who  have 
great  variety  of  possessions  have  yet  usually  their  special  delight  in  some  one  beyond 
all  the  rest,  and  choose  to  reside  most  in  it,  and  bestow  most  expense  on  it  to  make 
it  pleasant ;  so  doth  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  choose  out  to  Himself  from  the 
rest  of  the  world  a  number  that  are  a  chosen  generation.  "  Generation."  This 
imports  them  to  be  of  one  race  or  stock.  They  are  of  one  nation,  belonging  to  the 
same  blessed  land  of  promise,  all  citizens  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  yea,  all  children 
of  the  same  family,  whereof  Jesus  Christ,  the  root  of  Jesse,  is  the  stock,  who  is  the 
great  King  and  the  great  High  Priest.  And  thus  they  are  a  "royal  priesthood." 
"They  are  of  the  seed-royal,  and  of  the  holy  seed  of  the  priesthood,  inasmuch  as 
they  partake  of  a  new  life  from  Christ.  Thus,  in  Eev.  i.  5,  6,  there  is  first  His  own 
dignity  expressed,  then  His  dignifying  us.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  kingly  priest- 
hood is  the  common  dignity  of  all  believers  ;  this  honour  have  all  the  saints.  They 
are  kings,  have  victory  and  dominion  given  them  over  the  powers  of  darkness  and 
the  lusts  of  their  own  hearts,  that  held  them  captive  and  domineered  over  them 
before.    This  royalty  takes  away  all  attainders,  and  leaves  nothing  of  all  that  la 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  163 

past  to  be  laid  to  our  charge,  or  to  dishonour  us.  Believers  are  not  shut  out  from 
God  as  they  were  before,  but,  being  in  Christ,  are  brought  near  unto  Him,  and  have 
free  access  to  the  throne  of  His  grace.  They  resemble,  in  their  spiritual  state,  the 
legal  priesthood  very  clearly.  1.  In  their  consecration.  The  levitical  priests  were 
washed ;  therefore  this  is  expressed  (Eev.  i.  5),  "  He  hath  washed  us  in  His  own  blood," 
and  then  follows,  "  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests."  2.  Let  us  consider  their 
services,  which  were  diverse.  They  had  charge  of  the  sanctuary,  vessels,  lights,  and 
were  to  keep  the  lamps  burning.  Thus  the  heart  of  every  Christian  is  made  a  temple 
to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  himself,  as  a  priest  consecrated  unto  God,  is  to  keep  it 
diligently,  and  the  furniture  of  Divine  grace  in  it ;  to  have  the  light  of  spiritual 
knowledge  within  him,  and  to  nourish  it  by  drawing  continually  new  supplies  from 
Jesus  Christ.  The  priests  were  to  bless  the  people.  And  truly  it  is  this  spiritual 
priesthood,  the  elect,  that  procure  blessings  upon  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
particularly  on  the  places  where  they  live.  3.  Let  us  consider  their  course  of 
life.  We  shall  find  rules  given  to  the  legal  priests,  stricter  than  to  others,  of 
avoiding  legal  pollutions,  &c.  And  from  these,  this  spiritual  priesthood  must 
learn  an  exact  holy  conversation,  keeping  themselves  from  the  pollutions  of  the 
world :  as  here  it  follows :  "  A  holy  nation,"  and  that  of  necessity  ;  if  a  priesthood, 
then  holy.  II.  The  opposition  of  the  estate  of  Christians  to  that  or 
UNBELIEVERS ;  wB  are  most  sensible  of  the  evil  or  good  of  things  by  comparison. 
Though  the  estate  of  a  Christian  is  very  excellent  and,  when  rightly  valued,  hath 
enough  in  itself  to  commend  it,  yet  it  doth  and  ought  to  raise  our  esteem  of  it  the 
higher,  when  we  compare  it  both  with  the  misery  of  our  former  condition,  and  with 
the  continuing  misery  of  those  that  abide  still  and  are  left  to  perish  in  that  woeful 
estate.  We  have  here  both  these  parallels.  The  happiness  and  dignity  to  which 
they  are  chosen  and  caUed,  is  opposed  to  the  rejection  and  misery  of  them  that 
continue  unbelievers  and  rejectors  of  Christ.  III.  The  end  of  theik  calling. 
That  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises,  &c.  To  magnify  the  grace  of  God  the  more, 
we  have  here :  1.  Both  the  terms  of  this  motion  or  change,  from  whence  and  to 
what  it  is.  2.  The  principle  of  it,  the  calling  of  God.  (1)  From  darkness.  The 
estate  of  lost  mankind  is  indeed  nothing  but  darkness,  being  destitute  of  aU  spiritual 
truth  and  comfort,  and  tending  to  utter  and  everlasting  darkness.  And  it  is  so, 
because  by  sin,  the  soul  is  separate  from  God,  who  is  the  first  and  highest  light,  the 
primitive  truth.  And  the  soul  being  made  capable  of  Divine  light,  cannot  be  happy 
without  it.  And  as  the  estate  from  whence  we  are  called  by  grace  is  worthily  called 
darkness,  so  that  to  which  it  calls  us  deserves  as  well  the  name  of  hght.  Christ 
likewise,  who  came  to  work  our  deliverance,  is  frequently  so  called  in  Scripture,  not 
only  in  regard  of  His  own  nature,  being  God  equal  with  the  Father  and  therefore 
light,  but  relatively  to  men  :  "  The  Ufe  was  the  light  of  men."  There  is  a  spirit  of 
light  and  knowledge  flowing  from  Jesus  Christ  into  the  souls  of  beUevers,  that 
acquaints  them  with  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  cannot  otherwise 
be  known.  And  this  spirit  of  knowledge  is  withal  a  spirit  of  holiness ;  for  purity 
and  holiness  are  likewise  signified  by  this  light.  Then  from  this  light  arise  spiritual 
joy  and  comfort,  which  are  frequently  signified  by  this  expression.  There  are  two 
things  spoken  of  this  light,  to  commend  it,  "  His  marvellous  light;  "  that  is — it  is 
after  a  pecuUar  manner  God's — and  it  is  marvellous.  All  light  is  from  God,  the 
light  of  sense,  and  that  of  reason ;  therefore  He  is  called  the  Father  of  lights.  But 
this  light  of  grace  is  after  a  peculiar  manner  His,  being  a  light  above  the  reach  of 
nature,  infused  into  the  soul  in  a  supernatural  way,  the  light  of  the  elect  world, 
where  God  specially  and  graciously  resides.  Now  this  light  being  so  peculiarly 
God's,  no  wonder  if  it  be  marvellous.  And  if  this  light  of  grace  be  so  marvellous, 
how  much  more  marvellous  shall  the  light  of  glory  be,  in  which  it  ends !  Hence 
learn  to  esteem  highly  of  the  gospel,  in  which  this  light  shines  unto  us ;  the  apostle 
calls  it  therefore  the  glorious  gospel.  Surely  we  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed  of 
it,  but  of  ourselves  that  we  are  so  unlike  it.  (2)  The  principle  of  this  change,  the 
calling  of  God.  "  He  hath  called  you."  Those  who  live  in  the  society  and  profess 
the  faith  of  Christians,  are  called  unto  light,  the  light  of  the  gospel  that  shines  in 
the  Church  of  God.  Now  this  is  no  small  favour,  while  many  people  are  left  in 
darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death,  to  have  this  light  arise  upon  us  and  to  be  in 
the  region  of  it,  the  Church,  the  Goshen  of  the  world  ;  for  by  this  outward  light  we 
are  invited  to  the  happy  state  of  saving  inward  light,  and  the  former  is  here  to  be 
understood  as  the  means  of  the  latter.  This  is  God's  end  in  calling  us,  to  commu- 
nicate His  goodness  to  us,  that  so  the  glory  of  it  may  return  to  Himself.  As  this 
is  God's  end,  it  ought  to  be  ours,  and  therefore  ours  because  it  is  His.    And  for  this 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

very  purpose,  both  here  and  elsewhere  are  we  put  in  mind  of  it,  that  we  may  be  true 
to  His  end  and  intend  it  with  Him.  This  is  His  purpose  in  calling  us,  and  therefore 
it  is  our  great  duty,  being  so  called,  to  declare  His  praises.  All  things  and  persons 
shall  pay  this  tribute,  even  those  who  are  most  unwilling ;  but  the  happiness  of 
His  chosen  is,  that  they  are  active  in  it,  others  are  passive  only.  (Ahp.  Leighton.) 
The  Church  of  Christ : — I.  The  Divine  origin  of  the  Church.  1.  "  An  elect 
race."  Separated,  called,  chosen,  quickened.  Not  a  casual  result  out  of 
ordinary  forces.  H.  Her  function  in  the  world — "  a  royal  priesthood."  Here 
king  and  priest  are  blended  to  show  the  power  and  function  of  the  priesthood.  We 
plead  with  man  for  God  and  with  God  for  man :  the  regal  kings  are  the  saints  of 
God.  HI.  The  beauty  of  her  character — "  a  holy  nation."  With  us  hohness 
frequently  is  a  bundle  of  negation,  an  emptiness  ;  but  holiness  is  a  cluster  of  positive 
glories,  the  glory  of  courage,  the  gleam  of  tenderness,  the  radiancy  of  mercy.  IV. 
Her  preciousness  to  God.  "  A  peculiar  people."  His  delight,  joy,  resting-place. 
It  is  easy  to  depreciate.  It  takes  a  wise  man  to  see  the  background  as  well  as  the 
figure  on  it.  If  the  Church  can  be  chosen,  royal,  priestly,  beauteous,  dear  to  God, 
she  wants  no  earthly  help.  V.  Her  work  in  the  world — "  that  ye  may  show 
forth  the  excellencies  of  Him  Who  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous 
light."  1.  Every  quickened  soul  has  its  own  story  to  tell.  There  is  a  gospel 
according  to  you  and  me.  The  truth  of  God  is  the  gathering  up  of  all  th^se  gospels. 
2.  We  have  the  power  to  utter  praise.  3.  We  have  the  motive — gratitude  for 
deliverance  from  darkness.     {R.  Glover,  D.D.)  The  glory  of  the  Church  as  a 

commonicealth  : — I.  The  glory  of  the  Church  in  its  characteristics.  A  people 
for  God's  own  possession.  First,  by  acquirement — "  He  gave,"  &c.  ;  second,  by 
endearment — "  He  loved,"  &c.  II.  The  glory  of  the  Church  in  its  mission. 
Here  is  its  great  purpose — "  That."  This  throws  us  back  on  the  thought  in  the 
word  "elect" — chosen  for  what  end,  choice  for  what  uses?  The  purpose  is:  1.  A 
great  manifestation.  "  That  ye  may  show  forth."  Tell  out  by  word  and  deed  some 
great  message.  2.  A  great  manifestation  of  the  true  greatness  of  God.  "  The 
excellencies  of  Him."  The  virtues,  the  glories  of  God ;  what  (1)  a  lofty  theme ; 
(2)  boundless  theme ;  (3)  sacred  theme.  3.  A  manifestation  of  the  excellencies  of 
God  in  blessing  men.  "  Who  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light." 
The  Spirit  of  God  calls  from  (1)  the  darkness  of  ignorance ;  (2)  the  darkness  of 
guilt ;  (3)  the  darkness  of  dread.  The  Spirit  of  God  calls  to  (a)  the  "  marvellous 
light"  of  truth  ;  (b)  the  "  marvellous  light  "  of  holiness;  (c)  the  "marvellous  light" 
of  love  ;  (d)  the  "  marvellous  light  "  of  heaven.  III.  The  glory  of  the  Church  in 
ITS  present  condition  as  contrasted  with  the  past  history  of  its  members. 
"Which  in  times  past" — the  mention  of  this  is  to  kindle  gratitude,  to  inspire 
humility,  to  awaken  watchfulness.  (Honiilist.)  A  royal  priesthood. — Every 
baptized  yuan  a  priest  of  God : — I.  It  is  amongst  the  most  common,  and 
certainly  not  the  least  dangerous,  of  the  mistakes  of  the  present  day  to 
identify  the  Church  with  the  clergy,  as  though  the  laity  were  not  to 
THE  FULL  ONE  OF  ITS  CONSTITUENT  PARTS.  I  am  indeed  a  minister  of  the 
Church,  but  not  on  that  account  more  a  member  of  the  Church  than  any 
of  those  amongst  whom  I  officiate.  We  are  not  speaking  of  what  that 
community  may  be  by  practice,  but  only  of  what  it  is  by  profession  ;  and  of  what 
it  would  be  if  it  acted  up  to  the  obligations  taken  on  itself.  Let  a  parish  of  nominal 
Christians  be  converted  into  a  parish  of  real  Christians,  so  that  there  should  not  be 
one  within  its  circuit  who  did  not  adorn  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel ;  and  what  should 
we  have  but  a  parish  of  priests  to  the  living  God  ?  We  call  it  a  parish  of  priests, 
because  we  can  feel  that  it  would  be  as  a  kind  of  little  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  a 
country  or  city,  which  might  elsewhere  be  deformed  by  great  ignorance  and  profligacy. 
There  would  be  no  trenching  upon  functions  which  belong  exclusively  to  men  who 
have  been  ordained  to  the  service  of  the  temple  ;  but,  nevertheless,  there  would  be 
that  thorough  exhibition  of  Christianity,  which  is  amongst  the  most  powerful  of 
preaching,  and  that  noble  presentation  of  every  energy  to  God,  which  is  far  above 
the  costliest  of  sacrifices  and  burnt-offerings.  And  you  will  easily  see  that,  in 
passing  frpm  a  parish  to  a  nation,  we  introduce  no  change  into  our  argument; 
we  only  enlarge  its  application.  We  cannot  tell  you  what  a  spectacle  it  would  be 
in  the  midst  of  the  earth,  if  any  one  people  as  a  body  acted  on  the  principles  of 
Christiiinity  ;  but  we  are  sure  tlaat  no  better  title  than  that  of  our  text  could  be 
given  to  such  a  people.  Neither  is  it  only  through  the  example  they  would  set,  and 
ihe  exhibition  they  would  furnish  of  the  beneficial  power  of  Christianity,  that  the 
inhabitants  of  this  country  would  be  as  the  priests  of  the  Most  High.     You  cannot 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  165 

doubt  that  such  a  nation  would  be,  in  the  largest  sense,  a  missionary  nation. 
Conscious  of  the  inestimable  blessing  which  Christianity  had  proved  to  its  own 
families,  this  people  would  not  send  forth  a  single  ship  on  any  enterprise  of 
commerce,  without  making  it  also  a  vehicle  for  transmitting  the  principles  of 
religion.      II.  But  consider  next:   certain   of  the   consequences  which   would 

FOLLOW,    IF    THE    PEIESTLT     CHARACTER   WERE     UNIVERSALLY    RECOGNISED.         We    begin 

with  observing  that  the  members  of  the  church  watch  its  ministers  with  singular 
jealousy,  and  that  faults  which  would  be  comparatively  overlooked  if  committed  by 
a  merchant  or  a  lawyer,  are  held  up  to  utter  execration  when  they  can  be  fastened 
on  a  clergyman.  We  might  press  them  home  with  the  question,  are  not  ye  priests  ? 
You  may  be  forgetful,  you  may  be  ignorant  of  your  high  caUing  ;  but,  nevertheless, 
you  belong  incontrovertibly  to  "  a  royal  priesthood "  ;  and  if  there  be  avarice 
amongst  you,  it  is  the  avarice  of  a  priest ;  if  there  be  pride  amongst  you,  it  is 
the  pride  of  a  priest ;  if  there  be  sensuality  amongst  you,  it  is  the  sensuality  of 
a  priest.  We  are  quite  persuaded  that  men  vastly  underrate,  even  where  they  do 
not  wholly  overlook,  the  injury  which  the  vices  of  any  private  individual  work  to 
the  cause  of  God  and  religion.     III.  If  you  were  to  regard  yourselves  as  the  priests 

of    God,  TOU  COULD   NOT  BE  INDOLENT  WITH  RESPECT  TO  ANY  ENTERPRISE  OF    CHRISTIAN 

PHILANTHROPY.  You  have  been  appointed  to  the  priesthood  that  you  may  "  show 
forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous 
light."  If  ye  be  priests  of  Christianity,  for  what  end  can  you  have  been  consecrated, 
if  not  that  you  may  disseminate  the  religion  which  you  have  embraced  as  the  true  ? 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  sacred  in  the  secular :  —The  New  Testament  knows  no 
such  thing  as  different  degrees  of  consecration  to  God's  service  for  different  men. 
A  man  is  no  more  consecrated  to  the  work  of  God  when  he  is  made  a  clergyman 
than  he  was  before  as  a  layman.  He  is  simply  consecrated  to  a  special  department 
of  that  work ;  to  the  department,  namely,  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments.  But,  in 
fact,  the  ministry  of  Christ  takes  in  much  more  than  this.  The  word  "  ministry  " 
means  simply  service ;  and  in  this  sense  all  Christian  people  belong  to  the  Christian 
ministry.  We  are  all  ordained  to  it  in  Holy  Baptism.  In  which  department  of 
this  one  great  ministry  a  man  is  to  work — whether  in  the  department  of  the  Word 
and  Sacraments  or  in  what  may  be  called  the  department  of  temporal  supplies — 
this  is  a  question  which  the  man  must  settle  for  himself ;  but  whether  or  not  he 
shall  serve  in  the  ministry  of  Christ  at  all,  this  is  not  an  open  question  for  any  one. 
It  has  been  settled.  One  man  may  go  to  the  altar,  and  another  to  the  counting- 
room  ;  but  the  man  who  goes  to  the  counting-room  has  no  better  right  to  be  selfish 
than  the  man  who  goes  to  the  altar.  Many  people  in  entering  the  Church  think 
not  to  do  anything  in  particular,  but  to  keep  out  of  danger ;  not  to  battle  for  the 
truth,  but  simply  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."  In  the  most  solemn  manner 
they  pledge  themselves  whoUy  to  God's  service,  and  yet  seem  to  have  no  idea  of 
serving  any  one  but  themselves  in  what  they  call  their  secular  sphere ;  that  is,  in 
by  far  the  greater  part  of  their  inner  and  outer  life.  What  is  worse  than  all,  the 
Church  does  not  seem  shocked  at  the  inconsistency.  If  pleasure  have  been  a  man's 
aim  in  the  world,  pleasure  may  continue  to  be  his  aim  in  the  Church ;  only  in  the 
Church  his  pleasures  must  be  innocent.  They  may  be  selfish,  but  they  must  be 
innocent.  If  the  man's  aim  in  the  world  was  to  amass  wealth  just  for  selfish  uses, 
he  may  pursue  that  aim  quite  as  safely  in  the  Church,  and  perhaps  a  trifle  more 
successfully ;  only  his  methods  must  be  honest.  If  he  has  no  ambition  in  this 
direction ;  if  he  says,  "  I  have  enough  to  supply  my  wants,  I  have  no  desire  for 
further  gains,  I  will  retire  from  work  and  live  on  what  I  have " ;  the  selfish 
indifference  is  likely  enough  to  be  taken  as  a  mark  of  Christian  moderation. 
"  I  have  enough."  No  matter  for  others.  No  matter  that  want,  myriad 
voiced,  is  crying  from  altar  and  from  hearthstone.  Suppose  that  a  clergyman 
should  talk  in  this  way :  "I  am  now  fifty  years  old ;  I  have  for  many  years 
been  in  receipt  of  a  large  salary ;  I  have,  by  God's  blessing,  been  able  to  lay 
up  enough  of  it  to  maintain  me  the  remainder  of  my  days ;  I  will  stop  preaching." 
The  inconsistency  in  that  case  would  shock  people.  Why  not  the  same  incon- 
sistency in  the  case  of  a  layman  ?  Simply  because  of  the  unscriptural  distinction 
between  religious  and  secular  in  a  Christian's  life  and  work.  A  gospel  which  does 
nothing  more  than  simply  provide  Christian  manners  for  selfish  lives  will  never  do. 
Only  the  gospel  which  directs  all  human  motives  to  the  one  supreme  end,  of  serving 
God;  which  proclaims  the  priesthood  of  all  believers,  and  the  sacredness  of  all 
spheres  of  duty  and  of  life ;  only  this  is  the  true  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and  only 
this  can  win  the  world.      (J.  S.  Shipman,  D.D.)         An  holy  nation. — Corporate 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Jiuliness : — On  first  hearing  these  words,  we  may  think  that  they  have  more  of 
a  Jewish  than  a  Christian  sound.  Undoubtedly  they  have  a  Jewish  apphcation. 
Three  times  over,  at  the  least,  it  was  declared  to  the  Jews  by  God  :  "Ye  are  a  holy 
nation  " ;  "  Thou  art  an  holy  people  to  the  Lord  thy  God"  ;  and  certainly  they 
were  so.  It  was  both  their  glory  and  their  condemnation.  But,  besides  that  we 
cannot  think  that  any  blessing  conferred  upon  the  Jews  is  withheld  from  Christians, 
these  words  were  expressly  spoken  by  St.  Peter  of  Christians — of  Christians  as  a 
body,  and  they  declare  one  of  the  great  blessings  resting  upon  them,  a  condition  of 
their  individual  and  personal  blessings,  one  which  they  could  not  forget  or  deny 
without  great  injury  to  themselves.  I  propose  to  draw  out  this  great  truth,  the 
truth,  I  mean,  of  the  corporate  holiness  of  Christians,  a  holiness  of  which,  by  being 
incorporated  into  Christ,  they  are  made  to  partake  together  ;  and  separation  from, 
or  loss  of,  which  is  death.  See  how  this  is  brought  out,  not  merely  by  the  apostles, 
but  by  our  Lord  Himself.  It  is  remarkable  how  the  words  and  the  symbols  of  our 
Lord  all  pointed  to  the  disciples  as  a  body ;  how  He  called  them  the  salt  of  the 
earth ;  called  them  friends  ;  how  He  addressed  them  as  His  flock.  His  household, 
as  a  vine — branches  at  least  of  it,  for  He  was  the  Vine,  and  they  all  lived  in  Him. 
Observe  how  St.  Paul  enlarges  the  same  idea,  using  his  favourite  image  of  a  body ; 
the  whole  body  living  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  it ;  how  he  speaks  of  Christians  as 
a  family,  a  peculiar  people,  a  Temple  of  God ;  nay,  addresses  them  all  as  saints, 
though  we  know  that  several  of  them  personally  could  not  claim  the  title  of  holy. 
Still,  in  virtue  of  their  having  been  made  members  of  a  spiritual  body,  they  were 
sharers  of  the  Spirit  that  dwelt  in  the  whole  body  until  they  had  utterly  cast  it  from 
them  and  were  reprobate.  Even  their  children  were  declared  in  this  respect  to  be 
holy ;  they  themselves  were  said  to  be  "  called  with  an  holy  calling,"  "  partakers 
of  the  Divine  Nature  "  ;  not  some  only,  but  all.  What  the  exact  nature  of  this 
corporate  holiness  pervading  the  whole  body  is,  I  do  not  attempt  to  describe  beyond 
saying  that  it  is  union  with  Christ.  Only  it  is  not  a  fiction,  not  merely  a  title,  it 
constitutes  a  real  consecration  to  God  and  the  participation  of  a  real  gift,  which 
cannot  be  done  despite  to  without  danger  of  sacrilege.  Let  us  try  to  grasp  this 
truth.  It  brings  into  full  light  and  gives  reality  to  the  relation  of  each  Christian  to 
Christ.  There  is  not  a  baptized  soul  to  whom  we  may  not  say,  "  God  hath  chosen 
and  called  you  by  a  holy  calling  in  His  Son ;  He  hath  sealed  you,  as  He  has  conse- 
crated the  whole  body,  with  the  spirit  of  promise  "  ;  and  if  in  that  soul  there  is  any 
power  of  making  a  true  response,  we  use  the  strongest  engine  in  our  hands  to  quicken 
it  to  newness  of  life.  See  the  power  of  this  argument  in  effecting  a  true  conversion. 
The  first  pre-requisite  in  a  converted  soul  is  repentance.  Must  it  not  deepen  that 
repentance  for  one  to  feel  that  all  along,  up  to  that  time  (in  whatever  measure  it 
may  be  so)  he  has  been  sinning  against  gi-ace,  resisting  his  holy  calling,  dishonouring 
Christ?  See,  too,  how  this  truth  tends  to  check  that  narrow  spirit  which  leads 
many  pious  people  to  form  themselves  into  small  parties  of  those  like-minded  with 
themselves ;  thus,  not  merely  rending  the  body  of  Christ,  but  frequently  fostering 
a  temper  of  much  uncharitableness  and  self-assumption.  (A.  Grant,  D.C.L.) 
A  peculiar  people. — A  people  proper  to  the  Lord  : — That  is  a  people  proper  to 
the  Lord  which  He  Himself  hath  purchased,  whom  He  keeps  under  His  protection, 
to  whom  also  He  reveals  His  secrets :  His  undefiled.  In  the  flood  He  saved  His 
Church,  when  all  others  were  drowned.  No  marvel,  though  the  Lord  set  such  store 
by  His  Church,  seeing  He  hath  been  at  such  cost  therewith,  as  to  redeem  it  with  the 
blood  of  His  Son,  and  to  give  His  Spirit  thereto,  to  sanctify  and  make  it  like  Him- 
self. The  lands  we  purchase  are  dear  to  us ;  we  are  God's  purchase.  1.  If  we  be 
so  peculiar  and  choice  to  the  Lord,  how  choicely  should  we  walk  ;  how  should  we 
set  as  great  store  by  the  Lord  and  His  commandments,  as  He  hath  done  by  us ! 
2.  This  is  a  comfort  that  God  makes  such  special  reckoning  of  His ;  therefore, 
though  we  have  many  and  mighty  enemies,  yet  we  need  not  fear.  3.  Terror 
to  the  wicked.  How  dare  they  hurt  or  persecute  any  of  these  little  ones, 
lest  their  angel  be  let  loose  to  destroy  them  (Judges  v.  23) !  {John  Rogers.) 
A  peculiar  people  : — The  word  "  peculiar,"  by  which  the  thought  is  expressed 
in  English,  we  derive  directly  through  the  Latin,  and  the  use  of  the  term 
in  the  secular  life  of  the  Komans  will  throw  light  on  its  meaning  here  in  the 
spiritual  sphere.  The  system  of  slavery  prevailed  in  the  Roman  Empire.  It 
interpenetrated  all  society.  An  elaborate  code  of  laws  had  sprung  up  to  regu- 
late its  complicated  and  unnatural  relations.  The  slave,  when  he  fell  into 
slavery,  lost  all.  He  became  the  property  of  his  master.  But  if  he  served 
faithfully,  law   and   custom   permitted  him   to   acquire  private  property  through 


cn.iP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  167 

his  own  skill  or  industry.  A  man  might,  for  example,  hire  himself  from  his 
owner,  paying  him  so  much  a  day.  He  might  then  employ  himself  in  art  or  even 
merchandise,  and,  if  successful,  might  soon  accumulate  a  considerable  sum.  Some 
slaves  in  this  manner  purchased  their  own  liberty  and  raised  themselves  to  a  high 
position.  Now  the  savings  of  a  slave,  after  satisfying  the  demands  of  the  master, 
were  called  his  "  peculium."  The  law  protected  him  in  his  right  to  this  property. 
It  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  very  dear  to  the  poor  man.  It  constituted  his  sole 
anchor  of  hope.  He  cherished  it  accordingly.  From  this  a  conception  and  expres- 
sion have  been  borrowed  to  show  the  kind  of  ownership  that  God  is  pleased  to  claim 
in  the  persons  who  have  been  won  back  to  Himself  after  they  were  lost.  {W.  Arnot.) 
A  peculiar  people  : — A  people  of  purchase ;  such  as  comprehend,  as  it  were,  all  God's 
gettings.  His  whole  stock  that  He  makes  any  great  reckoning  of.  {J.  Trapp.) 
"  A  purchased  people  "  (margin,  A.V.) : — Suppose  you  go  out  and  make  some  pur- 
chase. You  pay  down  the  price  and  get  the  receipt,  and  tell  the  seller  to  send  it 
home  to  you  at  once.  The  day  goes  by  and  it  does  not  come.  Weeks  go  by  and 
it  does  not  come.  You  send  to  the  shop  a  message,  "  What  are  you  doing  with 
what  I  bought  ?  "  They  reply,  "  We  sent  it  up."  "  WeU,  it  has  not  arrived." 
"  Then  the  errand  boy  has  kept  it  on  the  way  ;  we  suppose  he  is  using  it  for  him- 
self for  a  bit  before  he  gives  it  over  to  you."  You  do  not  make  purchases  on  these 
terms.  How  often  God's  own  people  are  like  that  errand  boy !  You  have  been 
bought  with  a  price.  Have  you  sent  yourself  home  to  the  purchaser,  or  have  you 
kept  yourself  on  the  way?  "I  keep  myself  to  myseU,"  people  will  say.  That  is 
the  last  thing  a  Christian  ought  to  do  ;  he  ought  to  give  himself  away  to  God  at 
once.      (Hubert  Brooke,  M.A.)  Show  forth  the  praises  of  Him. — Mirrors  of 

God: — The  Kevised  Version,  instead  of  "  praises,"  reads  "  excellencies  " — and 
even  that  is  but  a  feeble  translation  of  the  remarkable  word  here  employed. 
For  it  is  that  usually  rendered  "  virtues " ;  and  by  that  word,  of  course, 
when  applied  to  God,  we  mean  the  radiant  excellences  and  glories  of  His 
character,  of  which  our  earthly  qualities,  designated  by  the  same  name,  are 
but  shadows.  It  is,  indeed,  true  that  this  same  expression  is  employed  in  the 
Greek  version  of  the  Old  Testament  in  Isaiah  xhii.  in  a  verse  which  evidently 
was  floating  before  Peter's  mind  :  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself ;  they 
shall  show  forth  My  praise."  I.  Here  we  get  a  wonderful  glisipse  into  the 
HEAKT  of  God.  Note  the  preceding  words,  in  which  the  writer  describes  aU  God's 
mercies  to  His  people,  making  them  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a 
holy  nation  "  ;  a  people  "  His  own  possession."  All  that  is  done  for  one  specific 
purpose — "  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you  out 
of  darkness."  Now  that  aim  has  been  put  so  as  to  present  an  utterly  hard  and 
horrible  notion.  That  God's  glory  is  His  only  motive  may  be  so  stated  as  to  mean 
merely  an  Almighty  selfishness.  But  if  you  think  for  a  moment  about  this  state- 
ment, all  that  appears  repellent  drops  away  from  it,  and  it  turns  out  to  be  another 
way  of  saying  "  God  is  love."  Because  what  is  there  more  characteristic  of  love 
than  an  earnest  desire  to  communicate  itself  and  to  be  manifested  and  beheld  ? 
That  is  what  God  wants  to  be  known  for.  Is  that  hard  and  repellent  ?  Why  does 
He  desire  that  He  should  be  known  ?  for  any  good  that  it  does  to  Him  ? 
No  ;  except  the  good  that  even  His  creatures  can  do  to  Him  when  they  gladden  His 
paternal  heart  by  recognising  Him  for  what  He  is,  the  Infinite  Lover  of  all  souls. 
But  the  reason  why  He  desires  most  of  all  that  the  light  of  His  character  may  pour 
into  every  heart  is  because  He  would  have  every  heart  gladdened  and  blessed  for 
ever  by  that  received  and  believed  light.  The  Infinite  desires  to  communicate  Him- 
self, that  by  the  communication  men  may  be  blessed.  II.  There  is  another  thing 
here,  and  that  is  a  wonderful  glimpse  of  what  Chbistian  people  are  in  the  world 
FOR.  "This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself,"  says  the  fundamental  passage  in 
Isaiah  already  referred  to,  "  they  shall  show  forth  My  praise."  It  was  not  worth 
while  forming  them ;  it  was  stiU  less  worth  while  redeeming  them  except  for  that. 
But  you  may  say,  "  I  am  saved  in  order  that  I  may  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  salva- 
tion, immunities  from  fear  and  punishment,  and  the  like."  Yes,  certainly !  But 
is  that  all  ?  I  think  not.  There  is  not  a  creature  in  God's  universe  so  tiny  but 
that  it  has  a  claim  on  Him  that  made  it  for  its  well-being.  That  is  very  certain. 
And  so  my  salvation  is  an  adequate  end  with  God,  in  all  His  dealing,  and  especiallj 
in  His  sending  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  there  is  not  a  creature  in  the  whole  universe: 
though  he  were  mightier  than  the  archangels  that  stand  nearest  God's  throne,  whi 
.  is  so  great  and  independent  that  his  happiness  is  the  sole  aim  of  God's  gifts  to  him. 
Every  man  that  receives  anything  from  God  is  thereby  made  a  steward  to  impart  it 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

to  others.  So  we  may  say,  "  You  were  not  saved  for  your  own  sakes."  One  might 
almost  say  that  that  was  a  by-end.  You  were  saved — shall  I  say  ? — for  God's  sake, 
and  you  were  saved  for  man's  sake  ?  Every  yard  of  line  in  a  new  railway  when 
laid  down  is  used  to  carry  materials  to  make  the  next  yard ;  and  so  the  terminus  is 
reached.  Even  so  Christian  people  were  formed  for  Christ  that  they  might  show 
forth  His  praise.  Look  what  a  notion  that  gives  us  of  the  dignity  of  the  Christian 
life,  and  of  the  special  manifestation  of  God  which  is  aiforded  to  the  world  in  it. 
You,  if  you  set  forth  as  becomes  you  His  glorious  character,  have  crowned  the 
whole  manifestation  that  He  makes  of  Himself  in  Nature  and  in  Providence. 
What  people  learn  about  God  from  a  true  Christian  is  a  better  revelation  than  has 
ever  been  made  or  can  be  made  elsewhere.  HI.  Lastly,  we  have  here  a  piece  op 
STEINGENT  PRACTICAL  DIRECTION.  The  world  takes  its  notions  of  God,  most  of  all, 
from  the  people  who  say  that  they  belong  to  God's  family.  They  read  us  a  great 
deal  more  than  they  read  the  Bible.  They  see  us ;  they  only  hear  about  Jesus 
Christ.  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image"  nor  any  likeness  of 
the  Divine,  but  thou  shalt  make  thyself  an  image  of  Him,  that  men  looking  at  it 
may  learn  a  little  more  of  what  He  is.  If  we  have  any  right  to  say  that  we  are  a 
royal  priesthood,  a  chosen  nation,  God's  "  possession,"  then  there  will  be  in  us 
some  likeness  of  Him  to  whom  we  belong  stamped  more  or  less  perfectly  upon  our 
characters  ;  and  just  as  people  cannot  look  at  the  sun,  but  may  get  some  notion  of 
its  power  when  they  gaze  upon  the  rare  beauty  of  the  tinted  clouds  that  lie  round 
about  it,  if,  in  the  poor,  wet,  cold  mistiness  of  our  lives  there  be  caught,  as  it  were, 
and  tangled  some  stray  beams  of  the  sunshine,  there  will  be  colour  and  beauty 
there.  A  bit  of  worthless  tallow  may  be  saturated  with  a  perfume  which  will  make 
it  worth  its  weight  in  gold.  So  our  poor  natures  may  be  drenched  with  God  and 
give  Him  forth  fragrant  and  precious,  and  men  may  be  drawn  thereby.  Nor  does 
that  exclude  the  other  kind  of  showing  forth  the  praises,  by  word  and  utterance,  at 
fit  times  and  to  the  right  people.  But  above  all,  let  us  remember  that  none  of 
these  works  can  be  done  to  any  good  purpose  if  any  taint  of  self  mingles  with  it. 
"  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  behold  your  good  works  and 
glorify  " — whom  ?  you  ? — "  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Showing  forth  the  excellences  of  Christ : — I.  The  sphere  in  which  we  are  to 
SERVE  God.  In  "  His  marvellous  light."  There  is — 1.  The  light  of  His  truth 
(Psa.  cxviii.  29  ;  cxix.  105,  130).  2.  The  light  of  His  favour  (Psa.  iv.  6  ;  Num.  vi. 
26).  3.  The  light  of  His  holiness  (Eph.  v.  8  ;  1  John  i.  7).  II.  In  what  does  this 
SERVICE  CONSIST?  1.  In  a  life  of  gratitude  (Heb.  xiii.  15  ;  Eph.  v.  20).  2.  In  a  life 
of  testimony  (1  John  i.  1-3  ;  Phil.  ii.  15,  16).  3.  In  a  life  of  godliness.  Show 
forth  the  excellences  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  10 ;  Phil.  i.  11).  III.  What  are  the  chief 
hindrances  to  that  service?  1.  Some  are  afraid  to  begin,  lest  they  should  fall 
back  (1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  Jude  24 ;  Psa.  Ivi.  13).  2.  Some  are  hindered  by  a  feeling  of 
shame  (Mark  viii.  38;  Eom.  i.  16).  3.  Others  are  idle,  because  they  do  not  see 
their  resources  (Phil.  iv.  13  ;  Eph.  i.  3).     (E.  H.  Hopkins.)  Christians  must  he 

real  and  true  : — There  is  a  headman  of  a  kraal  in  Natal,  South  Africa,  who  does 
not  object  to  his  people  becoming  Christians,  but  who  decidedly  objects  to  their 
becoming  bad  Christians.  This  is  how  he  puts  it  to  natives  who  profess  conver- 
sion :  "  If  you  become  better  men  and  women  by  being  Christians,  you  may  remain 
so ;  if  not,  I  won't  let  you  be  Christians  at  all."     {Christian  World.)  Showing 

forth  God^s  excellences  : — The  picture  of  a  dear  friend  should  be  hung  up  in  a  con- 
spicuous place  of  the  house  ;  so  should  God's  holy  image  and  gi'ace  in  our  hearts. 
{J.  Trapj).)  A  living  doxology  : — A  child  of  God  should  be  a  visible  beatitude  for 
joy  and  happiness,  and  a  living  doxology  for  gratitude  and  adoration.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Called  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light — Darkness  and 

light : — I.  The  darkness  from  which  the  soul  has  been  delivered.  1.  It  is  a 
darkness  which  involves  the  loss  of  truth,  the  light  and  life  of  the  soul,  and  of  the 
soul  itself.  2.  This  darkness  carries  with  it  a  heavy  load  of  guilt.  3.  This  dark- 
ness, as  regards  the  moral  nature,  is  woe  and  misery.  II.  The  marvellous  light 
to  which  the  soul  is  admitted.  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Its  source.  3.  Its  effects. 
(Homilist.)  Out  of  darkness  into  light : — I.  What  from.  1.  The  power  of  Satan. 
2.  Moral  confusion.  3.  Impurity.  4.  Spiritual  loss — ignorance.  6.  A  state  of 
misery.  6.  A  state  of  danger.  7.  God  calls  us  out  of  this  darkness  ;  and  if  we  do 
not  obey  His  call  we  "  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  our  deeds  are  evil." 
But  let  us  count  the  cost  of  such  a  choice.  II.  What  to.  1.  God's  kingdom.  2. 
Moral  order.  3.  True  wisdom.  4.  Spiritual  purity.  5.  Heaven  in  prospective. 
HI.  What  fob.     1.  That  we  may  be  obedient  to  His  will,  and  follow  the  example 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  169 

of  Christ — God's  ideal  of  perfected  humanity.  2.  To  live  as  His  children,  and 
render  unto  Him  a  loving,  loyal  service,  bearing  His  gentle  yoke  with  cheerfulness 
and  meekness,  and  so  recommend  the  service  of  God  by  our  conduct  before  men, 
that  they  shall  be  drawn  to  God  by  our  example.  (W.  Harris.)  Spiritual  dark- 
ness and  light : — It  is  very  desirable  that  Christians  should  realise  both  what  they 
have  been  and  what  they  are  ;  both  the  degradation  and  disadvantages  of  the  con- 
dition from  which  they  have  been  delivered,  and  the  dignity  and  privileges  of  the 
condition  into  which  they  have  been  called.  Peter  contrasts  the  two  conditions  of 
life  by  characterising  the  one  as  "  darkness  "  and  the  other  as  "  marvellous  light." 
Perhaps  it  may  help  in  some  degree  to  give  vividness  to  his  thoughts  if  we  recall  an 
incident  in  the  history  of  Israel  in  Egypt.  One  of  the  plagues  sent  on  the  Egyptians 
— the  last  but  one,  and  probably  the  severest,  except  the  last — was  a  darkness  which 
might  be  felt.  The  humblest  hut  of  an  Israelite  was  far  preferable  to  the  palace  of 
Pharaoh.  When  we  regard  this  as  a  figure  of  what  still  exists,  there  are  every- 
where two  peoples  dwelling  side  by  side,  one  of  which  is  enshrouded  in  a  darkness 
more  dismal  than  that  which  lay  upon  the  Egyptians,  while  the  other  is  enjoying  a 
far  more  pleasant  light  than  was  in  the  dwellings  of  the  Israelites.  There  are  two 
conditions  of  life  which  divide  between  them  all  human  society — a  state  of  nature 
and  a  state  of  grace.  And  these  two  states  are  as  opposite  as  night  and  day.  God's 
people  know  both  conditions,  for  they  have  been  deUvered  out  of  the  one  and 
brought  into  the  other.  The  world  lieth  in  darkness;  there  is  darkness  in  our 
natures,  a  darkness  which  hides  the  light,  which  turns  away  from  it,  although  the 
light  may  be  shining  aU  around  it.  This  darkness  extends  to  the  whole  spiritual 
nature,  and  affects  its  observation,  sentiments,  and  actions,  after  the  manner  that 
physical  darkness  affects  the  senses,  sensations,  and  emotions  of  the  body  ;  broods, 
for  example,  over  and  within  the  intellect  of  man.  It  hides  from  him,  in  conse- 
quence, one  vast  region  of  most  important  truth,  and  it  does  not  allow  him  to  attain 
what  is  the  highest  kind  of  knowledge.  There  is  a  natural  world  with  which 
natural  sense  and  intellect  are  competent  to  deal,  but  it  does  not  foUow  that  there 
is  not  also  a  spiritual  world  with  which  they  are  incompetent  to  deal.  This  is  what 
Scripture  testifies.  Natural  things  do  not  need  to  be  spiritually  discerned,  spiritual 
things  do.  We  may  know,  indeed,  much  about  even  many  of  these  things  in  a 
natural  way ;  we  may  become  versed  in  the  controversies  of  theology,  we  may  be 
able  to  discourse  learnedly  of  the  Divine  attributes — on  redemption,  on  regenera- 
tion, and  kindred  themes — but  so  may  a  blind  man  theorise  and  discourse  on  optics 
or  painting.  A  true  perception  of  spiritual  things,  however,  is  as  impossible  to  the 
merely  natural  man  as  a  true  perception  of  light  and  shade  and  colour  is  to  the 
bodily  blind.  Let  us  not  suppose  that  this  spiritual  blindness  is  a  slight  misfortune. 
There  can  be  none  greater.  Physical  blindness  only  excludes  the  perception  of  some 
of  the  works  of  God,  and  from  enjoyment  of  some  of  His  gifts  ;  spiritual  blindness 
deprives  us  of  the  perception  and  enjoyment  of  God  Himself,  and  of  all  living 
insight  into  His  ways  and  dispensations.  God  can  easily  and  richly  compensate  a 
man  for  the  want  of  knowledge  of  anything  finite ;  but  what  compensation  can 
there  be  for  the  want  of  knowledge  of  His  own  perfections,  and  especially  of  His 
love  and  mercy  in  Jesus  Christ,  when  that  knowledge  is  the  highest  good,  true,  and 
eternal  life  ?  Spiritual  blindness  is  the  most  awful  blindness  ;  blindness  as  to  what 
is  alone  essential,  and  as  to  all  that  is  essential ;  blindness  which  involves  loss  of 
the  truth,  the  hght  and  the  life  of  the  soul,  the  loss  of  the  soul  itself.  The  darkness 
of  which  Peter  speaks  presses  not  merely  on  the  intellect  of  man,  it  extends  also  to 
his  will,  and  affects  his  whole  moral  life  and  dignity.  It  involves  moral  as  well  as 
intellectual  blindness,  wickedness  not  less  than  ignorance.  For  one  thing,  this 
darkness,  implying  as  it  does  love  of  the  darkness  and  aversion  to  the  light,  is  not 
only  a  cause  of  sin,  but  is  of  itself  a  grievous  sin.  Our  rejection  of  this  light  caa 
only  be  because  while  it  is  pure  we  are  impure  ;  while  it  is  Divine  love,  there  rages 
in  us  selfish  and  carnal  passion ;  and,  in  short,  that  through  perversity  of  heart,  we 
will  not  recognise  God  to  be  what  He  is,  or  acknowledge  His  claims  to  our  admira- 
tion, gratitude,  and  services.  This  darkness  is  itself  sin,  but  it  also  calls  forth  and 
shelters  all  other  sin,  The  evil  in  us  is  not  only  unchecked,  but  fostered,  and 
every  passion  which  prompts  to  wicked  action  is  allowed  a  most  dangerous  advan- 
tage. Spiritual  darkness  thus  tends  to  spread  and  deepen  into  outermost  moral 
darkness  and  corruption.  But  yet,  further,  the  darkness  of  man's  merely  natural 
state  is,  as  regards  the  intellect,  ignorance  and  blindness ;  and,  as  regards  the  will 
and  moral  life,  a  guUt  and  sin.  As  regards  our  moral  nature,  it  is  guilt  and  misery. 
Light  and  enjoyment  are  always  associated  ;  darkness  and  sadness  are  as  naturally 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

joined.     It  is  pleasant  to  the  eyes  to  behold  the  light  of  the  sun.     Gladness  seems 
to  shrink  away  in  proportion  as  light  is  withdrawn.     The  happy  rejoice  in  the 
light,  but  the  sorrowful  seek  to  be  in  darkness ;  night  is  the  season  of  terrors,  of 
dismal  clouds,  and  of  a  million  fancies  and  gloomy  forebodings.     Here,  too,  out- 
ward darkness  is  a  symbol  of  the  inward.     So  long  as  a  man  is  in  the  spiritual 
darkness  of  his  natural  state,  so  long  as  he  is  not  cheered  by  the  light  from  the 
countenance  of  a  reconciled  God  and  Father,  he  cannot  be  happy.     God  has  so 
made  each  human  heart  that  it  can  only  find  true  satisfaction  in  Himself,  and 
when  it  lives  under  the  light  of  His  approval.     Happiness  must  be  something  real, 
permanent,  and  elevating,  not  something  fleeting,  delusive,  and  degrading.     And  it 
is  only  this  true  happiness  which  I  say  cannot  be  where  God  is  ignored,  where  the 
light  of  His  presence  is  not  recognised,  and  the  blessings  of  His  presence  are  not 
felt.    I  have  dwelt  long  on  the  state  and  condition  of  life  which  Peter  calls  darkness, 
but  I  may  touch  so  much  the  more  briefly  in  consequence  on  that  which  he  calls 
"marvellous  light."     For  darkness  and  light  are  contrasted,  and  not  only  cannot 
be  understood  except  as  contrasted,  but  whatever  is  truly  said  about  either  implies 
something  true  about  the  other.     Therefore,  as  you  have  already  had  explained  to 
you  how  the  darkness  of  which  Peter  speaks  is  in  one  ignorance  and  error,  in 
another  sin  and  unrighteousness,  and  in  yet  another  disquiet  and  unhappiuess,  so 
you  may,  without  further  explanation,  conclude  that  the  light   of  which  Peter 
speaks  must  be  knowledge  and  truth  in  the  intellect,  obedience  and  holiness  in  the 
moral  life,  and  joy  and  happiness  in  the  heart.     "  Marvellous  "  light !     So  St.  Peter 
most  appropriately  calls  it.     It  is  marvellous  in  its  source,  a  marvellous  light  of 
Him  who  is  called  the  Father  of  Lights.     It  comes  from  no  earthly  luminary,  but 
■directly  from  Himself,  specially  revealed  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  conveyed 
to  the  soul  by  the  Divine  genius  of  His  own  Spirit,  freely  given  to  whom,  in  His 
Avisdom,  He  will ;  so  given,  that  many  a  poor,  uneducated  man  can  see  what  the 
wise  of  this  world  are  blind  to.     It  is  marvellous,  too,  as  appearing  after  such 
darkness  ;  the  nature  of  the  light  of  the  world  is  very  marvellous,  although,  owing 
to  its  commonness,  we  seldom  think  how  marvellous  it  is.     But  a  prisoner  brought 
from  long  confinement  in  a  darkened  dungeon,  or  a  blind  man  restored  to  sight, 
will  not  faU  to  appreciate  it  aright.     It  is  those  who  have  just  been  brought  out  of 
the  darkness  of  the  state  of  nature  into  the  light  of  a  state  of  grace  who  feel  most 
vividly  how  marvellous  the  light  of  the  Father  is.    It  is  marvellous,  also,  in  its  own 
nature  ;  marvellous  for  its  exquisite  beauty,  and  marvellous  because  it  is  so  pure 
and  penetrative.     It  reveals  to  men  sins  and  shortcomings  in  their  own  hearts  of 
which  the  light  of  nature  had  awakened  no  suspicion,  and  causes  evils  of  all  kinds, 
even  the  most  secret  and  subtle,  to  be  seen  in  their  real  hatefulness.     It  is  mar- 
vellous in  the  extent  of  its  disclosures,  in  rendering  clear  and  intelligible  to  us  the 
wonders  of  redemption,  and  marvellous  in  its  power  of  diffusing  light  and  happi- 
ness.    It  is  exceedingly  marvellous  in  its  issues,  for  it  is  this  light  of  grace  which 
shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,  and  ends  as  the  light  of  heavenly 
glory.     I  have  still  to  remind  you  that,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostle, 
those  who  have  passed  from  the  darkness  to  the  marvellous  light  are  bound  to  show 
forth  the  praises,  or — as  may  be  more  accurately  rendered — the  excellences  of  Him 
to  whom  the  change  is  due.     They  have  not  worked  their  own  way  out  of  the  dark- 
ness into  the  light,  but  God  has  had  compassion  on  them.     The   final  end  of 
redemption,  as  of  creation,  is  to  show  forth  the  glory  of  God.     It  becomes  every 
rational  creature,  and  it  becomes  stiU  more  every  partaker  of  redemption,  to  act  on 
this  truth.     But  what  will  doing  so  imply  ?     Clearly  this  at  least,  that  we  are  not 
ashamed  to  honour  His  name,  or  defend  His  cause  with  our  lips;  that  we  are 
willing  to  declare  His  perfections  when  we  can  do  so ;  that  whenever  a  word  in 
season  tending  to  exalt  the  character  or  justify  the  ways  of  God  can  be  uttered  by 
us  with  good  effect,  we  are  ready  and  glad  to  utter  it.     But  not  less  certainly  it 
means  also  that  whatever  excellence  of  nature  or  grace  God  has  imparted  to  us,  we 
should  so  use  it  as  that  the  glory  should  redound  to  the  Giver,  and  the  wealth  of 
His  excellences  be  seen  in  the  richness  of  His  love  to  us.    It  implies  that  we  should 
consecrate  our  talents  to  His  services,  dedicate  to  Him  our  reasons,  imaginations, 
affections,  and  souls,  and  strive  to  render  and  keep  them  as  worthy  of  Him  as  we 
can.      {Prof.  R.  Flint.)  Darkness  and  light  .-—I.  Ouk  original  condition  as 

siNNEES.  "  In  darkness."  II.  The  gracious  change  produced.  "  Called  out  of 
darkness  into  marvellous  light."  III.  The  results  of  being  thus  called.  "  That 
ye  show  forth  God's  praises."  1.  By  extolling  His  mercy  (Psa.  ciii.  3-5,  11-13). 
2.  By  exhibiting  His  image  (Eph.  v.  8 ;  1  Thess.  v.  5,  6).     3.  By  obedience  to  His 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  171 

authority  (2  Cor.  x.  4-6).  4.  And  by  zeal  for  His  glory  (2  Cor.  x.  17  ;  Gal.  vi.  14). 
rV.  The  improvement.  1.  Consider  the  state  of  the  sinner  before  God,  as  in  dark- 
ness of  soul.  2.  The  only  way  of  deliverance  is  by  the  death  and  obedience  of 
Jesus  Christ,  as  made  known  by  the  gospel.  3.  Also  let  the  Christian  learn  from 
this  subject  his  great  obligations  to  God,  and  consider  what  ought  to  be  his  con- 
duct. 4.  But  especially  let  him  see  to  whom  the  glory  of  so  much  mercy  belongs. 
(T.  B.  Baker.)  The  gospel  a  light : — Why  is  this  a  marvellous  Ught ?  I.  Because 
it  is  a  light  upon  spiritual  realities.  The  sun  can  light  up  landscapes,  but  where  is 
the  light  which  can  reveal  man  to  himself  and  God  to  man  ?  We  need  another 
light — a  light  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun.  1.  The  gospel  throws  a  marvellous 
light  upon  sin.  2.  Upon  the  holiness  and  awfulness  of  Divine  law.  3.  Upon  the 
elements  which  are  requisite  to  a  perfect  reconciliation  to  God.  11.  Because  it  is  a 
light  upon  spiritual  destinies.  Man  can  throw  no  light  on  his  own  future.  He 
can  but  speculate  and  hope.  The  gospel  distinctly  deals  with  the  mystery  of  time 
to  come.  1.  Judgment.  2.  Eewards  and  punishments.  3.  Duration.  4.  Service.  The 
fact  that  the  gospel  claims  to  be  a  marvellous  light  shows — (1)  That  the  world  is  in  a 
state  of  marvellous  darkness.  (2)  That  the  diffusion  of  the  gospel  is  a  diffusion  of  light. 
(3)  That  all  who  believe  the  gospel  should  walk  as  children  of  the  day.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Refusing  light : — Is  it  not  strange  that  any  will  refuse  to  receive  this  light  ?  If  any  one 
would  persist  in  living  in  a  dark  cave  far  away  from  the  light  of  the  sun,  with  only 
dim  candles  of  his  own  making  to  pour  a  few  feeble,  flickering  beams  upon  the  gloom, 
we  should  consider  him  insane.  What  shall  we  say  of  those  who  persist  in  living 
in  the  darkness  of  sin,  with  no  light  but  the  candles  of  earth's  false  hopes  to  shine 
upon  their  souls  ?  {R.  Miller.)  Opened  eyes  : — There  is  an  old  legend  dating 
back  to  the  seventh  century,  of  St.  Modabert,  who  had  such  sympathy  for  his  blind 
mother  that  he  one  day  rushed  forward  and  kissed  her  eyes,  and  her  sight  came 
immediately  to  her,  and  she  rejoiced  in  the  beauties  of  nature  as  they  shone  about 
her.  Whether  the  legend  contains  any  truth  it  matters  not ;  but  it  certainly  gives 
us  a  very  striking  illustration  of  the  kiss  of  Christ's  love  as  it  opens  the  eyes  of  the 
penitent  believer,  and  reveals  to  him  the  riches  and  beauty  of  the  pardon  of  aU  sin, 
and  makes  him  a  dweller  in  the  kingdom  of  our  God.  (G.  W.  Bibb.)  The 
superior  light  of  the  gospel: — In  the  old  dispensation  the  light  that  broke 
through  clouds  was  but  that  of  the  rising  morning.  It  touched  the  mountain 
tops  of  the  loftiest  spirits ;  a  Moses,  a  David,  an  EUjah ;  caught  the  early  gleams 
while  all  the  valleys  slept  in  the  pale  shadow,  and  the  mist  clung  in  white  folds  to 
the  plains.  But  the  noon  has  come,  and  from  its  steadfast  throne  in  the  very  zenith, 
the  sun  which  never  sets  pours  down  its  rays  into  the  deep  recesses  of  the  narrowest 
gorge,  and  every  little  daisy  and  hidden  flower  catches  its  brightness,  and  there  is 
nothing  hid  from  the  light  therecrf.  Children  of  light : — There  are  children  of 

light  and  children  of  darkness.  The  latter  shun  the  bright,  the  pure  azure  shining 
sky  of  truth  with  all  its  loving  beams.  Their  world  is  like  the  world  of  insects,  and 
is  the  world  of  night.  Insects  are  all  light-shunners.  Even  those  which,  like  the 
bee,  labour  during  the  daytime,  prefer  the  shades  of  obscurity.  The  children  of 
light  are  like  the  birds.  The  world  of  birds  is  the  world  of  light — of  song.  Nearly 
all  of  them,  says  Michelet,  live  in  the  sun,  fill  themselves  with  it,  or  are  inspired  by 
it.  Those  of  the  south  carry  its  reflected  radiance  on  their  wings ;  those  of  our  colder 
climates  in  their  songs ;  many  of  them  foUow  it  from  land  to  land.  {Scientific 
Illustrations  and  Symbols.)  Which  in  time  past  were  not  a  people. — Consider 
what  you  were  : — In  that  he  sets  before  them  the  time  past,  and  what  they  were  ; 
note,  that  for  a  people  to  look  to  their  beginnings  is  of  singular  use.  As  for  us,  who 
since  Christ's  coming  are  admitted  to  the  same  privileges  with  the  Jews.  This 
serves — 1.  To  make  us  humble  and  take  down  our  pride.  2.  To  stir  us  up  to  thank- 
fulness. 3.  To  strengthen  our  faith  to  believe  in  God  for  ever  afterwards,  and  for 
all  blessings  needful  to  salvation.  (John  Rogers.)  The  people  of  God  : — The 
apostle  is  speaking  of  believers  not  individually,  but  collectively.  He  says  of  them 
that  in  their  former  condition  they  "  were  not  a  people  "  ;  that  is,  they  had  no  orga- 
nised existence.  The  present  condition  of  the  Jews  may  supply  us  with  an  illus- 
tration. They  are  now  "  not  a  people."  They  exist  as  individuals,  and  in  a  state 
of  distinctness  from  all  the  nations  amongst  which,  in  their  calamitous  dispersion, 
they  are  scattered ;  but  they  have  no  national  existence — no  king,  no  country,  no 
organisation,  no  government,  no  pohtical  being.  Just  so  the  great  community  of 
believers — God's  spiritual  commonwealth — had  no  being ;  for  the  members  who  now 
compose  it  stood  in  no  covenant  relation  to  God,  and  they  had  no  bond  of  union,  no 
spiritual  incorporation  among  themselves.    Reverse  the  statement  and  you  have 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

their  present  condition.  For,  in  the  first  place,  all  believers,  by  virtue  of  their  faith 
in  Christ,  are  in  covenant  with  God.  God  and  believers  wait  with  each  other  in 
amity.  Whereas  once  there  was  alienation  and  enmity,  there  is  now  mutual  love. 
They  have  taken  Him  to  be  their  God,  and  He  has  taken  them  to  be  His  people. 
And  then,  secondly,  being  in  covenant  with  God,  all  believers  are  in  union  with  each 
other.  This  second  conjunction  flows  by  a  necessary  consequence  from  the  first ; 
for,  being  reduced  under  one  sovereignty,  they  necessarily  compose  one  community. 
While  they  were  estranged  from  God,  they  were  estranged  from  one  another.  Now 
of  this  commonwealth  of  the  faithful,  many  things  may  be  said.  1.  God  places 
Himself  at  its  head.  As  He  stands  in  close  connection  with  every  individual 
member  of  it,  so  He  establishes  a  connection,  not  less  close,  between  Himself  and  all 
the  members  collectively.  He  originates  the  community,  and  He  governs  it.  2.  It 
is  composed  of  all  believers.  This  great  community  excludes  from  its  fellowship 
none  whom  Christ  does  not  exclude  from  salvation.  All  the  saints  are  your  fellow- 
subjects  in  that  kingdom.  Not  all  the  saints  on  earth  simply,  but  the  saints  also  in 
heaven.  3.  The  blessings  of  the  new  covenant  constitute  its  privileges.  These 
blessings  consist  in  whatever  is  obtained  through  the  blood  of  Christ ;  all "  spiritual 
blessings  in  heavenly  places,"  or  heavenly  things ;  things,  that  is,  which  have  a 
heavenly  origin  and  nature,  and  a  tendency  to  prepare  us  for  heaven.  Hence  all 
believers  are  justified  and  sanctified.  4.  Heaven  is  the  place  of  its  perfect  develop- 
ment, and  its  everlasting  home.  It  is  never  seen  as  a  whole  on  earth.  Here  it  has 
never  existed  otherwise  than  in  detachments,  and  separated  portions.  And  these 
never  stay  long.  God's  people  are  gathered  out  of  the  world,  collected  into  little 
fellowships,  trained,  sanctified,  and  then  drafted  away  to  the  great  meeting-place  of 
the  redeemed.     (E.  Steane,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  As  strangers  and  pilgrims  abstain. — Abstaining  fromfleshly  lusts  : — 
"  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you."  There  is  a  faculty  of  reproving  required  in  the 
ministry,  and  sometimes  a  necessity  of  very  sharp  rebukes.  They  who  have  much 
of  the  spirit  of  meekness  may  have  a  rod  by  them  too,  to  use  upon  necessity 
(1  Cor.  iv.  21).  But  surely  the  way  of  meekness  is  that  they  use  most  willingly ; 
with  ingenious  minds,  the  mild  way  of  sweet  entreaties  is  very  forcible  ;  they  pre- 
vail as  the  sunbeams,  which,  without  any  noise,  made  the  traveller  cast  off  his 
cloak,  which  all  the  blustering  of  the  wind  could  not  do,  but  made  him  rather  gather 
it  closer  and  bind  it  faster  about  him.  Now  this  word  of  entreaty  is  strengthened 
much  by  the  other,  "  Dearly  beloved."  Scarcely  can  the  harshest  reproofs,  much 
less  gentle  reproofs,  be  thrown  back,  that  have  upon  them  the  stamp  of  love. 
"Abstain."  It  is  one  and  the  same  strength  of  spirit  that  raises  a  man  above  the 
troubles  and  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  makes  him  despise  and  trample  upon  both. 
Explain  what  these  fleshly  lusts  mean,  then  to  consider  the  exhortation  of 
ABSTAINING  FROM  THEM.  Unchastc  dcsircs  are  particularly  called  by  this  name,  but 
to  take  it  for  these  only  in  this  place  is  doubtless  too  narrow.  That  which  seems  to 
be  the  true  sense  of  the  expression  here,  takes  in  all  undue  desires  and  use  of 
earthly  things,  and  all  the  corrupt  affections  of  our  carnal  minds.  To  abstain  from 
these  lusts  is  to  hate  and  fly  from  the  very  thoughts  and  first  motions  of  them  ;  and 
if  surprised  by  these,  yet  to  kill  them  there,  that  they  bring  not  forth  ;  and  to 
suspect  ourselves  even  in  those  things  that  are  not  sinful,  and  to  keep  far  off"  from 
all  inducements  to  the  polluted  ways  of  sin.  It  was  a  high  speech  of  a  heathen,  that 
"  he  was  greater,  and  born  to  greater  things,  than  to  be  a  servant  to  his  body."  How 
much  more  ought  he  that  is  born  again  to  say  so,  being  born  heir  to  a  crown  that 
fadeth  not  away  ?  Again,  as  the  honour  of  a  Christian's  estate  is  far  above  this 
baseness  of  serving  his  lusts,  so  the  happiness  and  pleasantness  of  his  estate  set  him 
above  the  need  of  the  pleasures  of  sin.  The  philosopher  gives  this  as  the  reason 
why  men  are  so  much  set  upon  sensual  delights,  because  they  know  not  the  higher 
pleasures  that  are  proper  to  the  soul.  We  are  barred  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful 
works  of  darkness,  to  the  end  that  we  may  have  fellowship  with  God  and  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  This  is  to  make  men  eat  angel's  food  indeed,  as  was  said  of  the 
manna.  The  serving  of  the  flesh  sets  man  below  himself,  down  amongst  the  beasts, 
but  the  consolations  of  the  Spirit  and  communion  wioh  God  raise  him  above  himself, 
and  associate  him  with  the  angels.  But  let  us  speak  to  the  apostle's  own  dissuasives 
from  these  lusts,  taken — 1.  From  the  condition  of  Christians  :  "  As  strangers."  If 
you  were  citizens  of  this  world,  then  you  might  drive  the  same  trade  with  them  and 
follow  the  same  lusts  ;  but  seeing  you  are  chosen  and  called  out  of  the  world,  and 
invested  into  a  new  society,  made  free  of  another  city,  and  are  therefore  here  but 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  173 

travellers  passing  through  to  your  own  country,  it  is  very  reasonable  that  there  be 
this  difference  betwixt  you  and  the  world,  that  while  they  live  at  home,  your  carriage 
be  such  as  becomes  strangers ;  not  glutting  yourselves  with  their  pleasures,  but,  as 
wise  strangers,  living  warily  and  soberly,  and  still  minding  most  of  all  your  journey 
homewards,  suspecting  dangers  in  your  way  and  so  walking  with  holy  fear,  as  the 
Hebrew  word  for  a  stranger  imports.  2.  The  apostle  argues  from  the  condition  of 
these  lusts.  It  were  quarrel  enough  against  "  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the 
soul,"  that  they  are  so  far  below  the  soul,  that  they  cannot  content,  no,  nor  at  all 
reach  the  soul ;  they  are  not  a  suitable,  much  less  a  satisfying  good  to  it.  Although 
sin  hath  unspeakably  abused  the  soul  of  man,  yet  its  excellent  nature  and  original 
does  stiU  cause  a  vast  disproportion  betwixt  it  and  all  those  base  things  of  the  earth, 
which  concern  the  flesh  and  go  no  further.  But  this  is  not  all :  these  fleshly  lusts 
are  not  only  of  no  benefit  to  the  soul,  but  they  are  its  pernicious  enemies;  "  they 
war  against  it."  And  their  war  against  it  is  all  made  up  of  stratagem  and  sleight,  for 
they  cannot  hurt  the  soul,  but  by  itself.  They  promise  it  some  contentment,  and 
so  gain  its  consent  to  serve  them,  and  undo  itself.  They  embrace  the  soul  that  they 
may  strangle  it.  {Abp.  Leighton.)  The  stranger  here  : — I.  In  what  respects 
THE  KEAi  Cheistian  IS  A  STRANGER  IN  THE  WORLD.  1.  The  language  of  the  Chris- 
tian is  strange  to  the  world.  Take,  for  instance,  those  simple  words  which  sum  up 
in  one  comprehensive  sentence  so  much  of  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  true  Christian, 
"  The  God  of  all  grace."  This  is  an  expression  so  rich  in  its  associations  to  a 
faithful  mind,  that  the  subject  can  never  be  exhausted.  But  how  few,  if  any,  ideas 
does  an  unfaithful  person  attach  to  it  ?  or  take  the  language  which  a  true  Christian 
uses  to  express  his  ideas  of  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  and  the  necessity  of  the 
new  birth.  The  wondering  ignorance  displayed  by  Nicodemus  affords  an  apt  illus- 
tration of  the  strangeness  of  Christian  language  in  every  age,  to  a  yet  unchristian 
heart.  2.  The  manners  of  the  believer  are  strange  to  the  world.  Both  in  business 
and  pleasure.  "  They  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with  them  to  the  same 
excess."  3.  The  most  remarkable  and  chief  difference  between  the  world  and  the 
Christian,  is  to  be  found  in  their  religion.  There  is  a  religion  of  the  world  outward 
and  formal.     The  religion  of  the  behever  is  promotive  of  humility  and  self-distrust. 

II.    Now    so    MARKED    A    DITFEBENCE    IN     SENTIMENT    MUST    PERPETUALLY    BE    MAKING 

ITSELF  MANIFEST  IN  HIS  CONDUCT.  1.  He  fccls  himself  E  Stranger  only  sojourning 
here  for  a  time,  and  then  passing  away.  He  does  not  permit  himseK  to  be  entangled 
in  the  affairs  of  this  life,  or  so  engrossed  therewith  as  to  find  in  them  his  chief 
happiness.  2.  Again,  he  feels  himself  a  stranger  in  a  land  which  he  believes  to  be 
full  of  danger ;  and  therefore  he  is  one  that  walks  warily.  3.  It  is  another  conse- 
quence of  the  believer's  strangeness  sojourning  in  a  strange  land,  that  he  is  attracted 
to  all  them  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity  and  truth.  There  is  a  common 
sympathy  between  them ;  and  no  truer  test  can  be  given  of  God's  children  than  that, 
in  spite  of  their  lesser  differences,  they  love  one  another.  4.  But  if  such  be  the 
feeling  with  which  they  regard  each  other,  what  must  be  their  affection  for  their 
native  land,  and  for  that  special  spot  within  it  which  is  called  by  the  magic  name  of 
home  ?  "Whatever  may  be  the  counteracting  force  of  outward  circumstances,  the 
heart  still  yearns  for  home  !  5.  With  these  expectations  as  an  abiding  principle,  he 
can  withstand  the  powerful  seductions  of  the  world,  sit  loosely  affected  by  its  most 
innocent  and  useful  engagements,  "waiting"  for  his  summons  to  return  home, 
"  ready  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  (T.  B.  Paget,  M.A.) 
The  plea  against  disorderly  passions  : — I.  Indulgence  in  disorderly  passions  is 

BECOMING  neither  TO  OUE  PRESENT  CONDITION  NOR  TO  OUR  DESTINY.  11.  ThE  INFLU- 
ENCE OF  DISORDERLY  PASSIONS  IS  HOSTILE  TO  ouB  OWN  INWARD  LIFE.  They  war  against 
reason,  memory,  imagination,  conscience,  affection,  and  hope.     III.  Freedom  from 

THESE    PASSIONS    WILL    MAKE    OUR    OUTWARD  LIFE    A   SOCIAL  BLESSING.       1.    Our  OUtward 

life  is  closely  scrutinised.  "  They  behold."  2.  Our  outward  life  is  readily  calum- 
niated. "  Speak  againsi  you."  Gossip  and  slander  are  eager.  3.  Our  outward  life 
should  be  beautiful.  No  human  loveliness,  no  natural  scenery  so  influential  as 
"  good  works."  Souls  ought  to  have  a  grandeur,  a  richness,  a  variety  transcending 
all  the  fascination  of  flowers,  all  the  glory  of  mountains,  all  the  majesty  of  the  sea. 
The  noblest  beauties  are  "  the  beauties  of  holiness."  4.  Such  outward  life  glorifies 
God.  (1)  Directly.  For  it  is  a  tribute  of  praise  to  Him.  (2)  Indirectly.  For  it 
leads  others  to  praise  Him.  A  holy  example  is  often  "  the  gate  beautiful "  by  which 
men  enter  into  the  city  of  God  and  go  up  to  the  knowledge  of  Him  and  communion 
with  Him.  (Homilist.)  Employed  away  from  home  : — In  military  monarchies 
it  has  always  been  the  policy  to  employ  the  soldiers  far  from  home.    When  the 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai-.  u. 

Austrian  Empire  was  a  conglomerate  of  many  nationalities,  German  regiments  v.ere 
sent  to  campaign  in  Italy,  and  Italians  served  in  Germany.  When  the  men  had  not 
a  home  to  care  for,  they  were  more  completely  at  the  disposal  of  their  leaders.  This 
is  Peter's  idea  here.  Christians  are  not  at  home  in  the  world.  There  is  less  to 
distract  them.  They  should  be  better  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  more  loose 
their  hearts  are  to  the  earth,  the  more  firm  will  be  the  anchor  of  their  souls  on  high. 
Conversely,  the  more  they  are  attached  to  their  home  in  heaven,  the  less  will  they 
be  entangled  with  the  wealth  and  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  (W.  Arnot.) 
Fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  souL — The  passions  : — I.  In  order  to  under- 
stand  THE   NATURE   OF   THE   PASSIONS,  WE   WILL   EXPLAIN   THE  SUBJECT   BY   A   FEW  PRE- 

LI3IIN.UIY  REMARKS.  1.  An  intelligent  being  ought  to  love  everything  that  can  ele- 
vate, perpetuate,  and  make  him  happy,  and  to  avoid  whatever  can  degrade,  confine, 
and  render  him  miserable.  This,  far  from  being  a  human  depravity,  is  a  perfection 
of  nature.  By  "  fleshly  lusts  "  St.  Peter  doth  not  mean  such  desires  of  the  heart 
as  put  us  on  aspiring  after  real  happiness  and  true  glory.  2.  An  intelligent  being 
united  to  a  body,  and  lodged,  if  I  may  speak  so,  in  a  portion  of  matter  under  this 
law,  that  according  to  the  divers  motions  of  this  matter  he  shall  receive  sensations 
of  pleasure  or  pain,  must  naturally  love  to  excite  within  himself  sensations  of  plea- 
sure, and  to  avoid  painful  feelings.  This  is  agreeable  to  the  institution  of  the 
Creator.  This  observation  affords  us  a  second  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the  apostle  : 
at  least  it  gives  us  a  second  precaution  to  avoid  an  error.  By  fleshly  lusts  he  doth 
not  mean  a  natural  inclination  to  preserve  the  body  and  the  ease  of  life  ;  he  allows 
love,  hatred,  and  anger  to  a  certain  degree,  and  as  far  as  the  exercise  of  them  doth 
not  prejudice  a  greater  interest.  3.  A  being  composed  of  two  substances,  one  of 
which  is  more  excellent  than  the  other  ;  a  being  placed  between  two  interests,  one 
of  which  is  greater  than  the  other,  ought,  when  these  two  interests  clash,  to  prefer 
the  more  noble  before  the  less  noble,  the  greater  interest  before  the  less.  This  third 
principle  is  a  third  clue  to  what  St.  Peter  calls  "  lusts,"  or  passions.  What  is  the 
meaning  of  this  word  ?  The  Scripture  generally  uses  the  word  in  two  senses. 
Sometimes  it  is  literally  and  properly  put  for  flesh,  and  sometimes  it  signifies  sin. 
St.  Peter  calls  the  passions  "  fleshly  "  in  both  these  senses ;  in  the  first  because  some 
come  from  the  body  as  voluptuousness,  anger,  drunkenness,  and  in  the  second 
because  they  spring  from  our  depravity.  II.  This  is  a  general  idea  of  the  pas- 
sions ;  but  as  it  is  vague  and  obscure,  we  will  endeavour  to  explain  it  more 
distinctly.  1.  The  passions  produce  in  the  mind  a  strong  attention  to  whatever 
can  justify  and  gratify  them.  The  most  odious  objects  maybe  so  placed  as  to  appear 
agreeable,  and  the  most  lovely  objects  so  as  to  appear  odious.  Certainly  one  of  the 
noblest  advantages  of  man  is  to  reason,  to  examine  proofs  and  weigh  motives,  to 
consider  an  object  on  every  side,  in  order  on  these  grounds  to  regulate  our  ideas  and 
opinions,  our  hatred  and  our  love.  The  passionate  man  renounces  this  advantage, 
and  never  reasons,  in  a  passion  his  mind  is  limited,  his  soul  is  in  chains,  his  fleshly 
passions  war  against  his  soul.  2.  Having  examined  the  passions  in  the  mind,  let 
us  consider  them  in  the  senses.  To  comprehend  this,  recollect  that  the  passions 
owe  their  origin  to  the  Creator,  who  instituted  them  for  the  purpose  of  preserving 
us.  When  an  object  would  injure  health  or  life,  it  is  necessary  to  our  safety  that 
there  should  be  an  emotion  in  our  senses  to  effect  a  quick  escape  from  the  danger ; 
fear  does  this.  A  man  struck  with  the  idea  of  sudden  danger  hath  a  rapidity  which 
he  could  not  have  in  a  tranquil  state,  or  during  a  cool  trial  of  his  power.  It 
is  necessary,  when  an  enemy  approaches  to  destroy  us,  that  our  senses  should  so 
move  as  to  animate  us  with  a  power  of  resistance.  Anger  doth  this,  for  it  is  a  col- 
lection of  spirits.  Such  are  the  movements  excited  by  the  passions  in  the  senses, 
and  ail  these  to  a  certain  degree  are  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  our  bodies, 
and  are  the  institutions  of  our  Creator ;  but  three  things  are  necessary  to  preserve 
order  in  these  emotions.  First,  they  must  never  be  excited  in  the  body  without  the 
direction  of  the  will  and  the  reason.  Secondly,  they  must  always  be  proportional. 
I  mean,  the  emotion  of  fear,  for  example,  must  never  be  except  in  sight  of  objects 
capable  of  hurting  us ;  the  emotion  of  anger  must  never  be  except  in  sight  of  an 
enemy,  who  actually  hath  both  the  will  and  the  power  of  injuring  our  well-being. 
And  thirdly,  they  must  always  stop  when  and  where  we  will  they  should.  When  the 
passions  subvert  this  order  they  violate  three  wise  institutes  of  our  Creator.  The 
motions  excited  by  the  passions  in  our  senses  are  not  free.  An  angry  man  is  carried 
beyond  himself  in  spite  of  himself.  A  voluptuous  man  receives  a  sensible  impres- 
sion from  an  exterior  object,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  dictates  of  reason  throws  him- 
self into  a  flaming  fire  that  consumes  him.     The  emotions  excited  by  the  paijsioas 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  175 

in  our  senses  are  not  proportional ;  I  mean  that  a  timorous  man,  for  example,  turns 
as  pale  at  the  sight  of  a  fanciful  as  of  a  real  danger  ;  he  sometimes  fears  a  phantom 
and  a  substance  alike.     A  man,  whose  God  is  his  belly,  feels  his  appetite  as  much 
excited  by  a  dish  fatal  to  his  health  as  by  one  necessary  to  support  his  strength  and 
to  keep  him  ahve.     The  emotions  excited  by  the  passions  in  the  senses  do  not  obey 
the  orders  of  our  will.     The  movement  is  an  overflow  of  spirits,  which  no  reflec- 
tions can  restrain.     This  is  what  the  passions  do  in  the  senses,  and  do  you  not 
conceive  that  in  this  second  respect  they  war  against  the  soul  ?     They  war  against 
the  soul  by  the  disorders  they  introduce  into  that  body  which  they  ought  to  preserve. 
They  dissipate  the  spirits,  weaken  the  memory,  wear  out  the  brain.     They  war 
against  the  soul  by  disconcerting  the  whole  economy  of  man,  and  by  making  him 
consider  such  sensations  of  pleasure  as  Providence  gave  him  only  for  the  sake  of 
engaging  him  to  preserve  his  body  as  a  sort  of  supreme  good,  worthy  of  all  his  care 
and  attention  for  its  own  sake.     They  war  against  the  soul  because  they  reduce  it 
to  a  state  of  slavery  to  the  body,  over  which  it  ought  to  rule.     3.  If  the  senses  were 
excited  to  act  only  by  the  presence  of  objects,  if  the  soul  were  agitated  only  by  the 
action  of  the  senses,  one  single  mean  would  suffice  to  guard  us  from  irregular  pas- 
sions ;  that  would  be  to  flee  from  the  object  that  excites  them.     But  the  passions 
produce  other  disorders,  they  leave  deep  impressions  on  the  imagination.    When  we 
give  ourselves  up  to  the  senses,  we  feel  pleasure,  this  pleasure  strikes  the  imagina- 
tion, and  the  imagination  thus  struck  with  the  pleasure  it  hath  found  recollects  it, 
and  solicits  the  passionate  man  to  return  to  objects  that  made  him  so  happy.     4. 
Let  us  consider,  in  fine,  the  passions  in  the  heart  and  the  disorders  they  cause 
there.     What  can  fiU  the  heart  of  man  ?     A  prophet  hath  answered  this  question, 
and  hath  included  all  morality  in  one  point,  "  My  chief  good  is  to  draw  near  to  God  " 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.  28)  ;  but  as  God  doth  not  commune  with  us  immediately  while  we  are 
in  this  world,  but  imparts  felicity  by  means  of  creatures.  He  hath  given  these  crea- 
tures two  characters,  which,  being  well  examined  by  a  reasonable  man,  conduct  him 
to  the  Creator,  but  which  turn  the  passionate  man  aside.     On  the  one  hand,  crea- 
tures render  us  happy  to  a  certain  degree — this  is  their  first  character :  on  the  other, 
they  leave  a  void  in  the  soul  which  they  are  incapable  of  filling — this  is  their  second 
character.     This  is  the  design  of  God,  and  this  design  the  passions  oppose.     They 
remove  us  from  God,  and  by  removing  us  from  Him  deprive  us  of  aU  the  good  that 
proceeds  from  a  union  with  the  supreme  good,  and  thus  make  war  with  every  part 
of  ourselves,  and  with  every  moment  of  our  duration.     War  against  our  reason,  for 
instead  of  deriving,  by  virtue  of  a  union  with  God,  assistance  necessary  to  the  prac- 
tice of  what  reason  approves,  and  what  grace  only  renders  practicable,  we  are  given 
up  to  our  evil  dispositions,  and  compelled  by  our  passions  to  do  what  our  own  reason 
abhors.     War  against  the  regulation  of  life,  for  instead  of  putting  on  by  virtue  of 
union  to  God  the  easy  yoke,  and  taking  up  the  light  burden  which  religion  imposes, 
we  become  slaves  of  envy,  vengeance,  and  ambition  ;  we  are  weighed  down  with  a 
yoke  of  iron,  which  we  have  no  power  to  get  rid  of,  even  though  we  groan  under  its 
intolerable  weightiness.     War  against  conscience,  for  instead  of  being  justified  by 
virtue  of  a  union  with  God,  and  having  "  peace  with  Him  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ "  (Eom.  v.  1),  and  feeling  that  heaven  begun,  "  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory"  (chap.  i.  8),  by  following  our  passions  we  become  a  prey  to  distracting  fears, 
troubles  without  end,  cutting  remorse,  and  awful  earnests  of  eternal  misery.     War 
on  a  dying  bed,  for  whereas  by  being  united  to  God  our  death-bed  would  have 
become  a  field  of  triumph,  where  the  Prince  of  life,  the  conqueror  of  death,  would 
have  made  us  share  His  victory,  by  abandoning  ourselves  to  our  passions  we  see 
nothing  in  a  dying  hour  but  an  awful  futurity,  a  frowning  governor,  the  bare  idea 
of   which  alarms,  terrifies,  and  drives  us  to  despau-.      HI.  Now  let  us  EXAMrNE 
WHAT  KEMEDiES  WE  OUGHT  TO  APPLY.     1.  In  Order  to  prevent  and  correct  the  dis- 
orders which  the  passions  produce  in  the  mind,  we  must  observe  the  following 
rules — (1)  We  must  avoid  precipitance  and  suspend  our  judgment.     (2)  A  man 
must  reform  even  his  education.     In  every  family  the  minds  of  children  are  turned 
to  a  certain  point.   Every  family  hath  its  prejudice,  I  had  almost  said  its  absurdity  ; 
and  hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  people  despise  the  profession  they  do  not  exercise. 
To  correct  ourselves  on  this  article  we  must  go  to  the  source,  examine  how  our 
minds  were  du-ected  in  our  childhood  ;  in  a  word,  we  must  review  and  reform  even 
our  education.     (3)  In  fine,  we  must,  as  well  as  we  can,  choose  a  friend  wiseenough 
to  know  truth,  and  generous  enough  to  impart  it  to  others ;  a  man  who  will  show 
us  an  object  on  every  side  when  we  are  inchned  to  consider  it  only  on  one.     2.  Let 
us  now  lay  down  a  few  rules  for  the  government  of  the  senses.    Before  we  proceed, 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ri. 

■we  cannot  help  deploring  the  misery  of  a  man  who  is  impelled  by  the  disorders  of  hia 
senses  and  the  heat  of  his  constitution  to  criminal  passions.  Such  a  man  often 
deserves  pity  more  than  indignation.  However,  though  the  irregularity  of  the 
senses  diminishes  the  atrociousness  of  the  crime,  yet  it  cannot  excuse  those  who  do 
not  make  continual  efforts  to  correct  it.  To  acknowledge  that  we  are  constitu- 
tionally inclined  to  violate  the  laws  of  God,  and  to  live  quietly  in  practices  of  consti- 
tutional heat,  is  to  have  the  interior  tainted.  Certainly  the  best  advice  that  can  be 
given  to  a  man  whose  constitution  inclines  him  to  sin,  is,  that  he  avoid  opportunities, 
and  flee  from  suoh  objects  as  affect  and  disconcert  him.  Three  remedies  are  necessary 
to  our  success  in  this  painful  undertaking :  to  suspend  acts,  to  flee  idleness,  to  mortify 
sense.  3.  The  disorders  produced  by  the  passions  in  the  imagination,  and  against 
which  also  we  ought  to  furnish  you  with  some  remedies,  are  like  those  complicated 
disorders  which  require  opposite  remedies,  because  they  are  the  effect  of  opposite 
causes,  so  that  the  means  employed  to  diminish  one  part  not  unfrequently  increase 
another.  It  should  seem  at  first  that  the  best  remedy  which  can  be  applied  to  dis- 
orders introduced  by  the  passions  into  the  imagination,  is  well  to  consider  the  nature 
of  the  objects  of  the  passions,  and  thoroughly  to  know  the  world  ;  and  yet,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  may  truly  be  said  that  the  most  certain  way  of  succeeding  would  be 
to  know  nothing  at  all  about  the  world.  We  hazard  a  fall  by  approaching  too  near, 
and  such  very  often  is  the  ascendancy  of  the  world  over  us  that  we  cannot  detach 
ourselves  from  it  though  we  are  disgusted  with  it.  Let  us  endeavour,  then,  to  pre- 
serve our  imagination  pure  ;  let  us  abstain  from  pleasures  to  preclude  the  possibility 
of  remembering  them;  let  retirement,  and,  if  it  be  practicable,  perpetual  privacy, 
from  the  moment  we  enter  into  the  world  to  the  day  we  quit  it,  save  us  from  all  bad 
impressions,  so  that  we  may  never  know  the  defects  which  worldly  objects  would 
produce  on  our  passions.  This  method,  sure  and  effectual,  is  useless  and  imprac- 
ticable in  regard  to  such  as  have  received  bad  impressions  on  their  imagination. 
People  of  this  character  ought  to  pursue  the  second  method  we  mentioned,  that  is, 
to  profit  by  their  losses,  and  derive  wisdom  from  their  errors.  When  you  recollect 
sin,  remember  the  folly  and  pain  of  it.  4.  To  heal  the  disorders  which  the  passions 
produce  in  the  heart,  two  things  must  be  done.  First,  the  vanity  of  all  the  creatures 
must  be  observed,  and  this  will  free  us  from  the  desire  of  possessing  and  collecting 
the  whole  in  order  to  fill  up  the  void  which  single  enjoyments  leave.  Secondly, 
•we  must  ascend  from  creatures  to  the  Creator,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  folly 
of  attributing  to  the  world  the  perfection  and  sufficiency  of  God.  (J.  Saiirin.) 
Fleshly  lusts : — There  is,  I  fear,  a  large  body  of  our  fellow-creatures  by  whom 
those  "  fleshly  lusts  "  are  regarded  as  affording  the  only  tangible  benefits  of  their 
existence.  Too  little  touched  by  the  spirit  of  piety  to  derive  any  delight  from  the 
abundant  sources  of  religious  contemplation ;  too  devoid  of  those  kind  affections 
which  constitute  the  charm  of  domestic  intercourse,  to  receive  any  satisfaction 
from  the  society  of  their  family  and  friends  ;  and  too  narrow  and  unimproved  in 
mind  to  find  interest  in  any  intellectual  pursuit,  they  are  no  sooner  freed  from  the 
confinement  imposed  upon  them  by  their  business  than  they  turn,  as  to  their  only 
relief  for  the  tedium  of  inactivity,  and  the  only  means  of  enjoyment  for  which 
they  have  any  value,  to  the  gross  gratification  of  their  animal  appetites.  But, 
however  general  such  a  course  of  life  may  be,  it  is  decidedly  unchristian.  Even 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  though  a  man  should  abstain  from  all 
gross  excesses,  and  scrupulously  respect  those  limits  of  external  decency,  he 
cannot  act  upon  the  principle  of  habitual  self-indulgence,  without  being  guilty  of 
violating  one  of  the  most  clearly-expressed  duties  of  the  gospel.  His  religion 
demands  of  him  a  course  of  conduct  the  very  reverse  of  that  which  he  pursues 
(1  John  ii.  15,  16  ;  Romans  viii.  5,  &c. ;  Matthew  xvi.  24).  Those  precepts  of  self- 
denial  and  mortification  which  we  find  inculcated  in  the  gospel,  did  not  originate 
with  the  gospel.  They  made  a  part  of  the  system  of  every  distinguished  moral 
teacher  among  the  heathen  themselves.  Even  the  wise,  and  the  scribe,  and  the 
disputer  of  this  world  could  perceive,  that  voluptuousness  and  sensuality  were 
most  miserably  unworthy  the  attention  of  the  human  soul.  The  grounds  on 
which  I  would  exhort  you  to  abstain  fi-om  "  fleshly  lusts,"  are  those  suggested  by 
St.  Peter,  "  they  war  against  the  soul."  1.  They  are  hostile  to  the  intellectual 
faculties  of  the  soul.  No  man,  whose  avocations  demand  of  him  any  great  and 
frequent  stretch  of  mental  exertion,  is  ignorant  of  this  fact :  and  we  find  those 
instructors  of  youth,  who  merely  treat  of  worldly  arts  and  sciences,  and  treat  of 
them  in  a  worldly  manner,  almost  invariably  inculcate  on  their  pupils,  as  one  of 
the  indispensable  requisites  of  eminence,  the  practice  of  a  strict  and  almost  ascetic 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  177 

temperance,  for  the  sake  of  securing  to  themselves  the  possession  of  the  full,  free, 
and  active  use  of  the  powers  of  their  own  minds.  Such  precepts  derive  their 
reasons  from  the  very  constitution  of  the  human  frame.  If  the  body  suffers  from 
excess,  the  mind  becomes  proportionately  affected.  It  receives  its  impressions 
slowly  and  indistinctly,  from  the  derangement  of  the  channels  through  which  it 
holds  communion  with  the  external  world ;  and  it  revolves,  compares,  and  decides 
upon  them  doubtfully  and  inefficiently,  from  the  lassitude  and  exhaustion  of  the 
machinery  with  which  it  acts.  2.  They  are  also  inimical  to  the  moral  qualities  of 
the  soul.  If  the  generous  affections  are  not  cultivated  by  exercise,  they  dwindle 
away  and  perish.  If  the  selfish  affections  are  allowed  to  act  without  restraint, 
they  acquire  a  frightful  and  gigantic  development.  As  we  hve  to  ourselves  and  for 
ourselves,  we  become  gradually  absorbed  in  our  own  selfish  views  and  interests. 
As  we  pamper  our  appetites,  the  objects  they  delight  in  acquire  consequence  in  our 
estimation.  As  we  devote  ourselves  more  and  more  to  our  own  personal  gratifi- 
cations, we  can  less  and  less  endure  that  those  gratifications  should  encounter  any 
opposition ;  till,  at  length,  we  prove  blind  and  insensible  to  every  claim  but  those 
of  our  own  overweening  will,  and  only  regard  our  fellow-creatures  with  favour,  as 
they  minister  to  our  passions,  or  with  enmity,  as  they  cast  impediments  in  their 
way.  Where  are  we  to  look,  among  the  dissolute  children  of  the  world,  for 
instances  of  permanent  attachment,  of  disinterested  friendship,  of  long-cherished 
gratitude,  and  of  self-sacrificing  tenderness?  Are  such  things  among  the  fruits 
and  flowers  found  to  flourish  in  that  tract  which  they  cultivate  with  so  inde- 
fatigable a  pursuit  of  the  pleasures  of  this  life,  and  so  fatal  an  oblivion  of  the 
treasures  of  the  next  ?  No,  that  false  light  of  cordiality,  which  glows  so  brightly 
during  the  convivial  hour,  becomes  extinguished  as  the  vapours  of  the  goblet  which 
enkindled  it  are  dispersed.  Let  any  individual,  even  the  most  cherished  of  their 
society,  suffer  a  reverse  of  fortune,  and  he  will  put  these  maxims  to  the  proof. 
Let  him  be  the  deer  which  is  striken,  and  he  will  find  himself  abandoned  by  the 
herd.  3.  Such  gratifications  are  not  only  pernicious  to  the  intellectual  faculties 
and  moral  qualities  of  the  soul,  but  they  affect  its  temporal  existence.  They 
disorder  and  destroy  the  earthly  tenement  in  which  it  is  contained.  They  wear 
away,  and  overstrain,  and  often  suddenly  rend  asunder  those  fine  fibres,  by 
which  it  is  confined  to  its  present  transitory  home.  4.  Finally,  according  to  the 
clearly-declared  principles  of  the  Christian  faith,  we  know  that  they  are  most 
pernicious  to  the  eternal  interests  of  the  soul  (Rom.  viii.  7 ;  1  Tim.  v.  6 ;  Eom. 
viii.  6;  Gal.  v.  24;  Rom.  viii.  13).  Indeed,  if  we  look  with  an  unprejudiced  eye 
on  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  gospel  covenant,  we  shall  find  that  no  course 
can  be  more  destructive  to  the  eternal  interests  of  the  soul  than  the  course  pursued 
by  the  voluptuary.  This  earth  is  not  designed  to  be  a  house  of  feasting ;  life  is  not 
meant  to  be  a  holiday  festival ;  we  are  sent  into  the  world  as  a  place  of  discipline 
and  preparation,  in  which  our  souls  may  be  educated  for  a  more  glorious  state  of 
being ;  and  the  allurements  which  address  us,  the  difficulties  we  have  to  combat 
with,  and  the  restraints  we  are  bound  to  lay  on  our  inclinations,  constitute  the 
very  means  by  which  our  souls  are  so  prepared,  and  disciplined,  and  educated. 
But  we  sometimes  hear  the  sensualist  assert  that  it  cannot  be  very  criminal  to 
yield  to  such  temptations,  because  it  is  natural  to  do  so.  This  I  utterly  deny. 
They  are,  on  the  contrary,  diametrically  opposed  to  nature.  The  excesses  of  the 
voluptuary  are  only  natural  if  we  regard  him  as  a  being  in  the  lowest  possible  state 
of  demoralisation,  as  an  anomaly  in  the  creation,  as  a  monster  possessing  passions 
without  conscience  and  appetites  without  reason.  But  to  the  man  who  is  complete 
in  all  the  essentials  of  humanity,  it  is  anything  but  natural  that  he  should  abandon 
himself  to  such  a  course  of  life.  His  reason  opposes  it ;  his  moral  sense  opposes 
it ;  his  regard  for  his  personal  health  and  welfare  opposes  it :  so  thoroughly 
indeed  does  every  higher  principle  of  his  nature  oppose  it,  that  he  must  drown 
reflection ;  he  must  close  his  eyes  against  all  experience  ;  he  must,  in  short, 
forcibly  extinguish  those  moral  and  intellectual  lights  which  God,  in  His 
mercy,  has  given  him  as  his  guides,  before  he  can  pursue  such  habits  without 
repugnance,  without  being  painfully  oppressed  by  the  sense  of  his  own  sin  and 
folly,  and  without  spending  one-half  of  the  day  in  mourning  over  the  excesses  of 
the  other.  {W.  Harness,  M.A.)  A  Jig ht  for  life  : — The  flesh  aims  to  damn  the 
soul.  It  is  in  this  conflict  as  Cassar  said  in  the  battle  he  had  once  in  Africa  with 
the  children  and  partakers  of  Pompey,  that  in  other  battles  he  was  wont  to  fight 
for  glory,  but  there  and  then  he  was  obliged  to  fight  for  his  life.  Remember  thy 
precious   soul  lies  at   stake  in  this  conflict.     {Christopher  Love.)        Destructive 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

lusts  : — Men  that  reject  religion  in  favour  of  indulgence,  do  not  stand  any  chance 
of  permanent  prosperity.  Such  men  are  like  gipsies,  that,  by  some  freak  of 
fortune,  are  turned  into  a  magnificent  mansion,  well  built,  well  furnished,  and 
well  stored  with  works  of  art.  These  gipsies  go  to  work  and  break  to  pieces  the 
exquisitely-carved  furniture,  pull  down  the  rare  pictures,  and  strip  the  house  of  all 
the  valuable  things  in  it,  and  burn  them,  in  order  to  make  their  pot  boil,  and  thus 
to  serve  their  lower  nature,  until,  by  and  by,  the  whole  building  is  desolate,  and 
bleak,  and  barren.  And  men  who  reject  religion  and  serve  their  passions  are  doing 
the  same  thing.  They  are  kindling  those  lower  fires  at  the  expense  of  every- 
thing broad,  and  fine,  and  befuutiful  in  their  higher  nature.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Destroyed  by  lust : — I  can  renLc^mber  the  time  when  flowers,  pictures,  beautiful 
faces  and  music  set  stirring  alwp/'s  some  strong  emotion  within  me,  in  which  it 
seemed  that  I  saw  hidden  away  i  a  crystal  cell  in  the  depths  of  my  own  strange 
heart,  the  shining  form  of  a  white-robed  Soul-maiden,  who  cried  out  to  me,  "Ah  I 
cannot  you  make  your  life  as  pure  and  beautiful  as  the  flowers  and  the  music,  that 
so  you  may  set  me  free  ?  "  But  I  chose  the  ignoble  part,  and  gave  myself  up 
body  and  soul  to  the  greed  for  gain.  And  often  in  the  hour  when,  tempted  by  an 
evil  thought,  I  turned  to  do  some  shameful  or  selfish  action,  I  seemed  to  see  the 
white  arms  of  the  Soul-maiden  uplifted  in  piteous  entreaty  to  heaven,  until  at  last 
the  time  came  when  her  voice  was  silent,  and  when  I  knew  that  I  had  thrust  her 
down  and  down  into  a  darkness  whence  she  would  never  again  come  forth. 
(A  Dead  3Ian's  Diary.)  Destructive  nature  of  fleshly  lusts  : — That  word  "  war  " 
is  full  of  meaning.  It  gives  the  idea  of  the  march  of  an  army  against  a  city,  as 
of  the  Greeks  to  surround  and  capture  Troy — an  assault  which  began  with  open 
war  and  ended  by  the  stratagem  of  the  wooden  horse,  from  which  the  armed 
warriors  descended  into  the  heart  of  the  city  at  dead  of  night.  Of  cjurse  we 
should  all  admit  that  excessive  indulgence  in  any  appetite  injures  the  oody,  and 
especially  the  organs  through  which  the  sin  against  the  whole  fabric  has  been 
committed.  But  we  may  not  all  realise  how  destructive  these  fleshly  lusts  are  to 
the  inner  life.  They  attack  and  conquer  it,  and  lead  it  into  captivity,  impairing 
its  energies,  sullying  its  purity,  lowering  its  tone,  and  cutting  off  the  locks  of 
moral  strength.  Eemember,  then,  when  tempted  to  yield  to  some  unholy  prompt- 
ing, even  though  you  only  indulge  the  thought  and  wish,  you  are  exposing 
yourself  to  a  certain  diminution  of  spiritual  force,  which  will  inevitably  cripple 
your  endeavours,  and  show  itself  in  failure  and  defeat.  No  act  of  sensual  indul- 
gence is  possible  without  inevitable  injury  to  our  true  selves.  It  may  be  forgiven, 
and  put  away,  through  the  forgiveness  of  God,  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  but  the  soul 
can  never  be  quite  what  it  would  have  been  had  the  temptation  been  overcome,  and 
the  grace  of  self-restraint  exercised.  How  many  there  are  around  us,  eminently 
fitted  by  their  gifts,  to  lead  the  hosts  of  God,  who,  like  Samson,  grind  in  the 
prison-house,  making  pastime  for  their  foes,  because  they  have  been  mastered  by 
appetijtes  which  they  should  have  controlled,  as  the  horseman  his  fiery  steed.  Is 
there  not  a  deep  spiritual  truth  in  the  notion  of  the  savage  warrior,  that  the  strength 
of  a  fallen  foe  enters  the  arm  which  has  smitten  him  to  the  dust  ?  Indulge  the  flesh, 
and  you  are  weak.  Curb  it  by  seK-restraint,  and  you  are  strong.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Flesldy  lusts  are  the  soid's  adversaries  : — These  desu-es  that  belong  to  the  flesh  are 
adversaries  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  difference  between  a  war  and  a  battle.  It  is  not 
a  random  stroke ;  it  is  warfare  on  a  plan.  A  battle  may  be  won,  and  yet  the  victor 
be  overcome  ere  the  war  be  over.  The  first  French  emperor  gained  several  great 
battles  in  the  Eussian  campaign ;  but  his  army  was  not  only  vanquished,  it  was 
almost  annihilated  in  the  end.  It  is  thus  that  certain  appetites  and  passions, 
although  once  and  again  overcome  by  a  resolute  will,  return  to  the  charge,  and 
watch  their  opportunity.  It  is  not  a  battle,  and  done  with  it  :  the  vanquished  foe 
often  enslaves  his  conqueror.  A  young  man  in  modern  society  must  do  battle  for 
his  life  with  strong  drink.  He  can  taste  it  freely  and  stop  in  time.  He  despises 
the  weak  who  seek  safety  in  flight  and  abstinence.  He  knows  what  is  good  for  him, 
and  will  not  allow  himself  to  be  overcome.  He  obtains  a  good  many  victories,  and 
counts  himself  invulnerable.  But  the  wily  foe  persists.  By  little  and  little  a 
diseased  thirst  is  generated.  The  enemy  now  has  an  accomplice  within  the  castle 
gates;  and  in  the  end  the  strong  man,  Uke  Samson  with  his  eyes  out,  grinds  dark- 
ling in  his  enslaver's  prison.  (W.  Ariiot.)  Inward  lusts  : — Not  only  acts  of  sin 
breaking  out  in  tlie  body,  but  tne  inward  lusts  that  are  in  the  heart,  though  they 
should  never  break  out,  for  even  the  heart  and  soul  is  flesh  as  well  as  the  body,  and 
fleshly,  even  corrupt  and  sinful,  as  the  sinful  lusts  of  unbelief,  impatience,  hardness 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  179 

of  heart,  hypocrisy,  rebelling  against  that  which  is  good,  weariness  in  well-doing, 
pride,  anger,  envy,  self-love,  covetousness,  uncleanness,  uncharitableness,  &c.  (John 
Rogers.)  Having  your  conversation  honest  among  the  Gentiles. — Christians  are 
to  live  godly,  even  among  the  wicked  : — It  is  our  duty  not  only  to  live  godly  among 
the  godly,  but  even  among  the  wicked  ;  we  must  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil. 
True,  it  is  no  easy  thing  with  the  cruel  to  live  mercifully,  with  the  hurtful  to  live 
helpfully,  with  the  profane  to  live  holily ;  yet  it  is  to  be  attained  unto,  and  we  must 
labour  for  it.  1.  This  rebukes  such  as  severing  themselves  from  all  company, 
because  they  would  not  be  tainted  nor  troubled  with  men's  ill  manners,  betake 
themselves  to  a  solitary,  hermit's  life.  We  are  not- born  for  ourselves,  but  for  our 
parents,  country,  God's  Church,  (fee.  Besides,  it  is'lio  such  mastery  for  a  man  to 
avoid  all  occasions,  as  to  live  among  occasions,  aod  not  be  tainted  with  them.  2. 
It  rebukes  those  that  be  for  all  companies.  In  {  ood  company  they  will  be  sober,  in 
ill  as  the  company  is,  will  swear  with  swearers,  he  also  and  dissemble  when  they 
be  with  such,  so  thinking  that  they  may  hold  with  the  hare  and  run  with  the 
hound  ;  like  the  chameleon  they  change  themselves  into  all  colours  ;  but  these  are 
none  of  God's  honest  men,  they  are  not  for  His  turn,  as  if  He  were  not  the  God  of 
all  places  and  times.  Let  such  know  that  they  have  rotten  and  unsanctified  hearts. 
But  how  should  a  man  do,  to  live  well  among  such  ?  As  they  that  live  where  the 
plague  is,  use  preservatives ;  so  must  we  daily  pray  God  to  keep  us  in  a  continual 
hatred  of  sin,  considering  the  happiness  of  them  that  hold  out.  Think  of  Noah, 
Lot,  Abraham,  and  their  commendation ;  observe  the  judgments  that  fall  upon  bad 
men,  and  think  what  will  be  hereafter.  Again,  avoid  familiarity  with  them ;  we 
cannot  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled,  walk  on  coals  and  not  be  burnt.  '6.  It 
rebukes  such  Christians  as  living  among  such,  walk  not  so  hoUly  as  they  should, 
but  if  they  do  not  approve  of,  yet  consent  to  their  bad  behaviour,  without  dislikes, 
especiaUyl  being  with  their  betters.  4.  If  God  would  have  us  live  well  among  the 
wicked,  what  would  He  then  in  the  midst  of  all  good  means?  What,  then,  is  their 
sin,  and  where  shall  they  appear,  that  break  out  and  live  badly  in  the  midst  of  the 
mean§  o£  good,  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  &c.  ?  What  would  these  do,  if  they  were 
far  from  such  means  ?  5.  It  rebukes  those  that  professing  religion  more  than 
ordinarily,  yet  remember  not  with  whom  they  live,  but  as  if  they  were  only  among 
the  good,  which  would  hide  all  their  frailties,  or  interpret  them  to  the  best,  not  as 
if  they  were  among  the  wicked,  that  seek  occasion  against  God's  servants,  that 
desire  no  better  booty  than  the  fall  of  a  professor,  (fee.  (Ibid.)  The  tvitness  of  a 
pure  life  : — "Having  your  conversation  honest."  Both  terms  need  some  explana- 
tion. In  modern  English,  conversation  means  the  talking  of  two  or  three  persons 
with  each  other ;  but  the  sense  in  this  text  is,  the  whole  habit  and  life-course  of  a 
person — his  character  and  temper  and  conduct  in  presence  of  his  feUows.  At  all 
times,  and  in  all  circumstances,  walk  circumspectly,  for  you  never  know  who  may 
be  looking  on.  The  modern  meaning  of  honest  is,  that  you  do  not  cheat  in  a 
bargain ;  but  as  used  here,  and  in  ancient  times  generally,  it  signifies  beautiful^ 
first  a  material  and  then  a  moral  winsomeness.  These  two  terms  in  conjunction 
convey  the  precept.  Let  aU  the  circumference  of  your  life  shine  in  the  beauty  of 
holiness.  Alas !  bid  this  dull  earth  shine  like  a  star  of  heaven !  To  have  com- 
manded the  house  of  Israel  to  shine  as  a  light  to  surrounding  nations,  would  have 
been  an  impossible  requirement,  if  the  precept  had  not  been  mated  with  a  promise. 
But  as  the  record  runs,  it  is  a  reasonable  service  that  is  demanded  (Isa.  Ix.  1). 
This  precept  given  by  Peter  is  on  both  its  sides  the  echo  of  Isaiah's  words.  A 
light  is  needed  because  darkness  reigns  around.  Peter  desiderates  a  beautiful  life 
among  the  Gentiles ;  and  Isaiah  expects  that,  when  Israel  basks  in  the  favour  of 
God,  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  their  light.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  true  faith  that 
it  has  positive  hope.  It  does  not  despair  even  when  things  are  at  the  worst,  for  it 
trusts  in  God.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  primitive  disciples  should  repel  surround- 
ing, assailing  evil,  and  hold  their  own.  They  expect  to  make  aggression  and  to 
gain  a  victory ;  to  turn  scoffs  into  hymns  of  praise,  and  enemies  of  Christ  into 
zealous  disciples  :  "  That,  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evil-doers,"  (fee.  It  is 
not  by  the  loudest  debate  and  profession  that  these  conquests  can  be  made.  It  is  not 
by  what  Christians  say,  but  by  what  Christians  are,  that  they  can  win  the  neigh- 
bourhood. The  caU  is  not  so  much  to  give  evidence,  as  to  be  witnesses.  Still 
further  the  precepts  run  down  into  detail.  Submission  to  magistrates  is  prescribed 
as  a  Christian  duty.  Considering  the  time  and  the  circumstances,  this  is  a  remark- 
able feature  of  the  New  Testament.  The  gospel  fosters  liberty;  but  does  not 
suggest  insurrection.     Witness  the  emigration  of  the  persecuted  Puritans  from 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

England  to  America.  These  men  would  not  resist  constituted  authority ;  but 
neither  would  they  allow  themselves  to  be  crushed  by  a  despot,  as  long  as  a  remedy, 
which  they  could  with  a  good  conscience  adopt,  lay  within  their  reach.  The 
results  will  tell  with  decisive  effect  on  the  future  condition  of  the  human  race. 
Ordinances  of  man  should  be  obeyed,  but  they  stand  not  on  the  same  level  with 
ordinances  of  God.  (TF.  Arnot.)  The  Church  in  relation  to  the  world  : — The 
relation  in  which  Christians  stand  to  those  who  are  not  Christians  is  of  vital  im- 
portance to  understand  and  feel  (Psa.  xxxix.  1 ;  Neh.  v.  9  ;  Titus  ii.  7,  8).  These 
and  like  references  inculcate  the  duty  of  conserving  the  Christian  name  and  the 
glory  of  God.  That  the  Christian  character  should  be  perfect  for  the  sake  of  its  own 
beauty  is  a  truth  worthy  of  prayerful  solicitude  at  all  times  ;  but  the  Christian 
character  is  more  than  a  garment  to  be  observed — it  is  an  influence  to  be  imparted 
to  others.  I.  We  begin  with  the  fact  that  we  are  watched  bt  those  who 
ARE  or  OPPOSITE  TENDENCIES.  Wc  are  under  daily  examination.  There  are  those 
who  take  a  greater  delight  to  look  at  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  for  five  minutes  than  to 
enjoy  its  light  for  a  lifetime.  But  if  there  were  no  light  in  the  sun  there  could  not 
be  an  eclipse.  So  with  men  of  worth  ;  the  contrast  between  the  excellent  and  the 
not  excellent  fixes  the  eye  of  envy  upon  them,  but  where  excellency  is  it  cannot  be 
altogether  ignored.  Young  Christians,  bear  with  me,  and  suffer  the  word  of 
exhortation.  You  are  not  sufficiently  alive  to  the  fact  that  your  Christian  life  is 
under  a  perpetual  scrutiny.  Not  only  that,  but  efforts  are  made  to  draw  you  aside 
from  the  way  of  peace.  An  honest  conversation  means  a  life  true  in  every  part  to 
the  great  pattern  set  before  us  in  the  gospel.     II.  Let  us  fuethek  consider  the 

INFLUENCE     OF     THE     CHRISTIAN     CHARACTER    FOR     THE     GOOD     OF     OTHERS.       "  Glorify 

God,"  &c.  Too  frequently  it  is  supposed  by  some  that  because  they  cannot  take  a 
prominent  part  in  gospel  services,  and  thereby  possibly  become  instrumental 
directly  in  the  conversion  of  souls,  their  lives  are  comparatively  unobserved  and 
useless.  Let  us  remove  this  notion.  As  there  is  not  a  single  ray  of  light,  or  drop  of 
water,  or  breath  of  air,  which  does  not  contribute  to  the  vast  system  of  hght,  of 
water,  and  of  air,  so  there  is  not  a  single  Christian  example  which  does  not  minister 
in  the  circle  of  the  Church  and  lead  to  higher  results.  1.  Men  will  feel  the  need  of 
the  change  which  they  see  in  us.  2.  Men  will  feel  the  need  of  the  peace  which  we 
enjoy.  3.  Men  wiU  feel  the  need  of  the  prospect  which  cheers  us.  We  have  a 
good  hope  through  grace.  4.  And  lastly,  the  influence  of  the  Christian  life  leads  to 
the  highest  results.  It  may  be  that  to-day  we  think  so  much  of  self  that  we  cannot 
rise  to  the  highest  point  in  our  life.  The  highest  degree  of  Christian  excellence  is 
the  service  and  glory  of  God.  To  realise  this  we  must  look  beyond  ourselves,  and 
beyond  those  to  whom  we  may  bring  salvation  ;  and  beyond  any  benefits  faith  may 
confer  on  either  them  or  us,  to  God.  He  will  manifest  Himself  in  the  day  of 
visitation,  when  we  shall  see  and  feel  that  our  life  is  intended  to  reach  even  to 
Himself.  In  the  day  of  visitation  all  matters  will  be  seen  in  their  true  light. 
The  text  is  a  warning  to  the  world  as  well  as  to  the  Church.  That  any  soul, 
however  degraded,  should  delight  in  making  the  sins  of  others  his  prey,  passes 
comprehension.  What,  a  vulture,  with  only  a  taste  for  carrion  !  A  sen«e  of 
guilt  endeavours  to  fix  all  eyes  on  the  sins  of  others  to  avoid  personal  detection. 
The  sins  of  others  wiU  help  no  man  in  the  day  of  judgment.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  power  of  a  consistent  walk : — The  Eev.  Dr.  Stalker  once  related  the  following 
incident  in  an  address  on  "  Eeligion  in  Common  Life " :  "A  lady  went  to 
him  with  a  request  to  join  his  church.  She  and  her  husband  were  foreigners 
and  Eoman  Catholics,  but  had  lapsed  from  all  church-going  for  ten  or  eleven 
years.  One  night  their  servant  went  home  rather  late  from  a  meeting.  Upon 
pressure  being  brought  to  bear  upon  her,  this  servant  acknowledged  that 
she  had  that  night  been  convicted  of  sin,  and  stayed  behind  to  speak  about 
her  soul.  The  lady  resolved  to  watch  the  girl  for  the  next  fortnight.  Such  a 
change  in  her  temper  and  diligence  was  observable  that,  at  the  end  of  the  fort- 
night, the  mistress  asked  where  the  meeting  was  held,  and  went  on  the  next 
Sabbath  evening,  with  the  result  that  both  she  and  her  husband  were  converted. 
The  servant's  consistent  walk  was  more  powerful  than  anything  she  could  have 
said,  so  true  is  it  that  example  is  better  than  precept."  Beautiful  behaviour  : — 
Ka\t]v  ("honest"),  good,  or  comely.  The  deeper  view  of  Greek  philosophy 
represented  immorality  and  ugliness,  and  morality  and  beauty  as  convertible  ideas. 
(J.  Midler.)  Inconsistency  noticeable  : — The  whole  complexion  of  a  negro  is  less 

noticed  than  a  single  stain  on  the  features  of  a  white  countenance.  {Wm.  Jay.) 
They  speak  against  you  as  evildoers. — The  transgressions  of  Christians  : — Amongst 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  181 

the  numerous  attempts  to  throw  douht  upon  the  evidence  of  our  religion,  not  the 
least  successful  has  been  suggested  by  the  imperfections  of  those  who  profess  them- 
selves the  disciples  of  its  Author.  I.  That  the  objection  itself  is  on  several 
ACCOUNTS  DELUSIVE.  It  is  drawn,  not  from  any  difficulties  inherent  in  religion  or  its 
evidence,  but  from  a  supposed  insufficiency  of  its  influence  and  effects.  Christi- 
anity itself  never  supposes  its  followers  to  be  without  fault,  that  its  influence  can 
secure  unerring  obedience  to  its  own  laws.  So  far  from  this,  indeed,  "  it  is  impos- 
sible," according  to  its  own  language,  "  but  that  offences  will  come."  II.  One 
great  reason  why  the  lives  of  Christians  do  not  always  correspond  to  their  religion, 

IS  that  freedom  of  mind  and  ACTION,  WITH  WHICH  OUK  CREATOR  HAS  ENDOWED  US,  and 

which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  creatures  responsible  for  their  conduct.  Impelled 
by  passions  impatient  for  gratification,  and  surrounded  with  temptations,  frequently 
perplexed  with  difficulties  between  duty  and  inclination,  and  sometimes  deceived 
by  appearances ;  can  it  be  a  just  subject  of  wonder,  if  the  love  of  the  present 
sometimes  prevail  over  the  expectation  of  the  future,  or  the  delusions  of  pleasure 
for  a  while  withdraw  the  mind  from  the  prospect  of  its  consequences ;  if  we 
violate  the  laws  which  we  confess  to  be  just,  and  practise  what  our  religion  con- 
demns ?  in.  These  defects  in  the  conduct  of  individuals  appear  also  the  more 
striking  when  compared  with  the  purity  of  the  rules  by  which  our  actions  ought 

TO  HAVE  BEEN  DIRECTED,  AND  WITH  THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  SANCTIONS  BY  WHICH  THOSE 
RULES  ARE  ENFORCED.  IV.  ANOTHER  PLAUSIBLE  BASIS  FOR  THE  SAME  CENSURE  MAY  BE 
LAID   IN   THE    OPPOSITE    CHARACTERS    OF    VIRTUE    AND    VICE.       VlrtUC    is    alwayS  modeSt, 

peaceable,  and  silent ;  vice  often  forward,  loud,  and  conspicuous.     V.  Christians, 

AGAIN,  HAVE    BEEN    SEVERELY    CENSURED    ON    ACCOUNT    OF    THE    NUMEROUS  DIVISIONS  AND 

distinctions  amongst  THEM.  It  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  that  mankind 
should  differ  in  their  opinions  on  almost  every  other  subject,  and  yet  should  be  all 
agreed  on  this ;  on  a  subject  which  is  of  all  others  the  most  interesting,  the  most 
extensive,  and  the  most  complex.  To  this  let  us  add  the  effects  of  the  weakness 
and  folly,  of  the  vanity  and  ambition,  of  the  enthusiasm  or  the  hypocrisy  of 
various  individuals  amongst  us,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  account  very  satisfactorily 
for  the  multiplicity  of  our  tenets  and  parties.  VI.  Such  as  these  are  the  censures 
that  have  been  thrown  upon  Christianity  and  its  professors.  But  as  far  as  they 
have  any  foundation  in  truth,  the  only  adequate  refutation  is  an  amendment  in 
OUR  own  morals,  a  regulation  of  our  lives,  more  agreeable  to  the  principles  that  we 
profess.  {W.  Barrow,  D.D.)  Christians  vialigned  : — I.  "Whereas  they  speak 
against  you  as  evildoers."  This  is  in  general  the  disease  of  man's  corrupt  nature, 
and  argues  much  the  baseness  of  it — this  propensity  to  speak  evil  one  of  another, 
either  blotting  the  best  actions  with  misconstructions,  or  taking  doubtful  things  by 
the  left  ear;  not  choosing  the  most  favourable,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  very 
harshest  sense  that  can  be  put  upon  them.  All  these  kinds  of  evil  speaking  are 
fruits  that  spring  from  that  bitter  root  of  pride  and  self-love,  which  is  naturally 
deeply  fastened  in  every  man's  heart.  But  besides  this  general  bent  to  evil  speaking, 
there  is  a  particular  malice  in  the  world  against  those  that  are  born  of  God,  which 
must  have  vent  in  calumnies  and  reproaches.  These  evU  speakings  of  the  world 
against  pious  men  professing  religion,  are  partly  gross  falsehoods  invented  without 
the  least  ground  or  appearance  of  truth.  Then  again,  consider,  how  much  more 
will  the  wicked  insult  upon  the  least  real  blemishes  that  they  can  espy  amongst  the 
professors  of  godliness.  And  in  this  there  is  commonly  a  threefold  injury^— they 
strictly  pry  into  and  maUciously  object  against  Christians  the  smallest  imperfec- 
tions and  frailties  of  their  lives,  as  if  they  pretended  to  absolute  perfection.  Men 
are  apt  to  impute  the  scandalous  falls  of  some  particular  Christians  to  the  whole 
number.  It  is  a  very  incompetent  rule  to  make  judgment  of  any  man  by  one 
action,  much  more  to  measure  all  the  rest  of  the  same  profession  by  it.  They 
hnpute  the  personal  failings  of  men  to  their  religion,  and  disparage  it  because  of 
the  faults  of  those  that  profess  it.  II.  "  Having  your  conversation  honest  among 
the  Gentiles."  As  the  sovereign  power  of  drawing  good  out  of  evil  resides  in  God, 
and  argues  His  primitive  goodness,  so  He  teacheth  His  own  children  some  faculty 
this  way,  that  they  may  resemble  Him  in  it.  He  teacheth  them  to  draw  sweetness 
out  of  their  bitterest  afflictions,  and  increase  of  inward  peace  from  their  outward 
troubles.  The  sharp  censures  and  evil  speakings  that  a  Christian  is  encompassed 
with  in  the  world,  are  no  other  than  a  hedge  of  thorns  set  on  every  side,  that  he 
may  not  go  out  of  his  way,  but  keep  straight  on  in  it,  not  declining  to  the  right 
hand  nor  to  the  left;  whereas  if  they  found  nothing  but  the  favour  and  good 
opinion  of  the  world,  they  might,  as  in  a  way  unhedged,  be  subject  to  wander  out 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

into  the  meadows  of  carnal  pleasures  that  are  about  them,  which  would  call  and 
allure  them,  and  often  divert  them  from  their  journey.  And  thus  it  might  fall 
out,  that  Christians  would  deserve  censure  and  evil  speakings  the  more,  if  they  did 
not  usually  suffer  them  undeserved.  III.  "  That  they  may  glorify  God  in  the  day 
of  their  visitation."  He  says  not,  They  shall  praise  or  commend  you,  but,  "  shall 
glorify  God."  It  is  this  the  apostle  still  holds  before  their  eyes,  as  that  upon  which 
a  Christian  doth  willingly  set  his  eye  and  keep  it  fixed,  in  all  his  ways.  He  doth 
not  teach  them  to  be  sensible  of  their  own  esteem  as  it  concerns  themselves,  but 
only  as  the  glory  of  their  God  is  interested  in  it.  "In  the  day  of  visitation."  The 
beholding  of  your  good  works  may  work  this  in  them,  that  they  may  be 
gained  to  acknowledge  and  embrace  that  religion  and  that  God,  which  for 
the  present  they  reject ;  but  that  it  may  be  thus,  they  must  be  visited  with 
that  same  light  and  grace  from  above,  which  hath  sanctified  you.  (Ahp.  Leighton.) 
The  wicked  speak  ill  of  Godfs  children : — The  more  sincere  any  is  in  professing  the 
truth,  the  more  the  wicked  naturally  hate  him.  Thus  have  God's  children  ever 
been  ill-spoken  of  (Matt.  v.  11;  Gen.  xxi.  9;  Gal.  iv.  30;  1  Kings  xviii.  17; 
2  Kings  ix.  11 ;  Ezra  iv.  5-16  ;  Neb.  vi.  5,  6 ;  Esther  iii.  8  ;  Acts  xxiv.  14 ;  Matt.  xi. 
19;  Luke  xi.  15;  John  viu.  48;  Acts  ii.  19;  vi.  11,  16,  20,  21).  1.  Seeing  the 
wicked  are  so  apt  to  speak  evil,  we  should  give  all  diligence  to  look  so  to  our  ways 
as  to  give  them  no  just  occasion.  2.  Think  it  not  strange  to  be  ill  spoken  of ;  it  is 
the  nature  of  the  world  thus  to  do,  as  for  the  birds  to  fly,  and  we  must  not  be 
discouraged  at  it,  and  say,  "I  have  striven  to  do  as  well  as  I  can,  and  yet  I  am 
ill  spoken  of ;  I  cannot  tell  what  to  do,"  and  so  faint  and  melt  as  wax.  Oh,  no ;  but 
let  it  be  as  a  whetstone  to  sharpen  you  on  more  (2  Sam.  vi.  22).  3.  This  might 
make  men  not  too  ready  to  believe  reports,  and  think  ill  of  men  by  and  by  upon 
flying  reports,  seeing  the  world  are  so  apt  to  speak  wrongfully,  especially  of  God's 
children.  4.  For  them  that  be  ill  speakers  of  God's  servants,  they  cannot  bear  a 
worse  badge,  as  ill  a  sign  as  can  be  of  any ;  for  if  he  be  translated  from  death  to 
life  that  loves  the  brethren,  what  then  he  that  hates  them  ?  He  is  no  true  member 
of  the  Church,  nor  led  by  David's  spirit  (Psa.  xv.  8 ;  xvi.  2),  but  is  of  Ishmael's 
generation,  and  will  be  cast  out  as  he.  How  shall  they  escape  the  curse 
threatened  (Isa.  v.  20 ;  Prov.  xvii.  15)  ?  {John  Rogers.)  Your  good  works, 
whicli  they  shall  behold. — The  ministry  of  good  works ; — All  religion  which 
does  not  lead  to  a  life  of  good  works  is  a  counterfeit.  It  is  bad  money,  which 
will  never  pass  current  at  the  court  of  heaven.  It  may  bear  the  name  of  Christ, 
but  it  lacks  His  mind  and  spirit.  It  hinders  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  and 
is  one  of  the  worst  enemies  of  His  kingdom.  On  the  other  hand,  a  life 
fruitful  in  good  works  brings  honour  to  our  Father  in  heaven.  It  manifests  His 
wisdom  in  the  free  salvation  which  He  bestows.  It  prepares  the  way  in  many  a 
heart  for  the  reception  of  the  truth,  and  kindles  in  many  others  a  desire  to  walk 
more  closely  with  God.  Let  me  give  a  single  example,  from  the  writer's  personal 
knowledge,  of  the  effect  of  a  consistent,  holy  life.  A  wealthy  tradesman  in  London 
was  most  zealous  and  self-denying  in  his  labours  and  liberality  in  the  Lord's  work. 
Each  year  he  gave  away  many  thousands  of  pounds,  and  a  large  part  of  this 
anonymously.  I  had  it  from  this  man's  own  lips  that  in  early  life  he  was  saved 
from  infidelity  by  noticing  the  holy,  godly,  blameless  walk  of  a  young  banker's 
clerk.  Who  can  tell  the  countless  benefits  that  thus  arose  to  the  Church  of  Christ 
through  the  consistent  life  of  that  young  man  ?  There  are  one  or  two  points  as  to 
the  life  of  good  works  on  which  it  is  needful  to  dwell.  I.  What  is  the  prepar.\tion 
FOR  SUCH  A  LIFE  ?  How  Can  any  one  hope  to  enter  upon  such  a  course,  and  then 
persevere  in  it  ?  1.  Your  first  duty  is  to  embrace  the  blessed  hope  of  life  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus.  As  the  shipwrecked  man  must  first  lay  hold  of  the  rope  or  get 
into  the  lifeboat  that  so  he  may  escape  destruction  and  get  safe  to  shore,  and  then 
can  again  enter  upon  the  works  of  his  calling,  so  must  you  first  accept  the  free 
invitation  of  Christ  in  the  gospel,  and  reach  the  shore  of  peace  and  reconciliation 
with  God.  Believe  in  the  readiness  and  power  of  Christ  to  save  you.  Kejoice  that 
He  welcomes  you  to  His  care,  and  will  keep  you  by  His  power.  Then  you  may  go 
forward,  and  will  not  fail.  A  life  of  good  works  will  be  a  necessity  to  you.  You 
possess  a  new  motive.  A  spirit  of  grateful  love  to  God  will  fill  your  breast.  You 
will  keep  His  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight. 
2.  Moreover,  you  will  possess  a  new  power.  In  the  strength  of  the  Spirit  you  can 
do  those  good  works  which  are  pleasing  to  your  Father  in  heaven.  Be  sure,  there- 
fore, that  you  begin  your  course  aright.     Begin  in  humility  and  faith.     II.  In  what 

WAY   MAY   YOU   BEST   CAIiUY   OUT    IN    DAILY    PRACTICE   A   LIFE    DEVOTED   TO   GOOD   WORKS? 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  183 

Take  a  sample  of  "  a  good  work,"  one  that  we  know  to  have  been  truly  such  from 
the  lips  of  Christ  Himself.  You  remember  Mary  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper 
(Mark  xiv.  6,  8,  9).  Here  was  every  element  of  a  good  work.  It  was  done  to  Christ 
Himself,  and  out  of  love  to  Him.  It  was  a  costly  work,  for  the  ointment  was  very 
precious.  It  was  a  lowly  work.  Both  hands  and  hair  were  used  in  anointing  the 
Lord's  feet.  It  was  a  work  of  personal  service.  She  did  not  do  the  work  by 
another,  but  herself  ministered  to  Christ.  It  was  a  work  which  spread  a  sweet 
savour  around,  and  thus  of  benefit  to  those  in  the  house.  It  was  a  work  which 
brought  honour  to  the  Lord,  which  pointed  to  His  death  of  suffering,  and  which  was 
abundantly  recompensed  in  the  gracious  words  which  Christ  spoke  of  her.  III.  Let 
me  add  that  there  is  a  foukfold  ministry  of  good  works  in  which  each  Christian 
SHOULD  seek  to  EXCEL.  1.  There  is  the  ministry  of  home  life.  This  stands  in  the 
first  rank  of  duty.  The  lamp  which  the  Lord  hath  lighted  should  give  light  to  all 
that  are  in  the  house  where  it  is  found.  The  most  commonplace  duties  ought  to  be 
done  before  God,  and  thus  become  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  The  care  of  children, 
the  work  of  the  house,  the  use  of  the  needle,  the  rising  in  the  morning,  attention  tc 
the  wants  and  comforts  of  each  member  of  the  fanuly — such  ordinary  things  as 
these  may  afford  scope  for  self-denial,  for  manifesting  an  unselfish  spirit,  and  in 
many  ways  for  proving  the  sincerity  of  our  Christian  profession.  No  less  important 
is  it  that  a  diligent  guard  should  be  set  over  tongue  and  temper,  over  infirmities 
and  irritabihties,  over  clouded  looks  and  wayward  passions,  over  doing  little  things 
which  ought  not  to  be  done,  or  over  doing  right  things  in  a  wrong  way.  2.  There 
is  the  ministry  of  glad,  willing,  freehanded  gifts.  Of  whatever  we  possess  we  are 
but  stewards.  It  belongs  not  to  us,  but  to  Him  who  gave  it  into  our  charge.  Let 
there  be  real  self-denial.  Above  all,  never  forget  that  a  ready,  cheerful  spirit  is 
especially  pleasing  to  God.  3.  There  is  the  ministry  of  personal  work  and  effort  in 
the  Lord's  vineyard.  Give  not  only  money,  but  the  gold  of  time  to  do  work  for 
God,  for  His  Church,  for  the  souls  of  poor  and  rich,  of  sick  and  strong,  of  young 
and  old.  4.  Lastly,  there  is  the  ministry  of  fervent  prayers  and  intercessions.  Of 
all  agencies  this  is  the  most  powerful.  There  are  those  who  by  sickness  and 
extreme  poverty  can  do  little  or  nothing  in  the  way  of  personal  service,  who  yet  by 
true,  believing  prayer  may  bring  down  rich  benefits  on  Christ's  Church.  And  those 
who  can  both  work  and  give  yet  fail  to  employ  the  very  greatest  talent,  if  they 
neglect  constant  intercession  on  behalf  of  others.  (G.  Everard,  M.A.)  True 
revenge : — Be  revenged  by  shining.  (Toplady.)  Looking  for  one  thing  and  finding 
another  .■— "  Which  they  shall  behold,"  while  they  pry  and  spy  into  your  courses, 
(as  the  Greek  word  imports)  to  see  what  evil  they  can  find  out  and  fasten  on. 
{J.  Trapp.)  Glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation.— ITou?  God  is  glorified  bij  us  :—I. 
By  knowledge,  when  we  conceive  of  God  after  a  glorious  manner.  Seeing  we  can 
add  no  glory  to  God's  nature,  we  should  strive  to  make  Him  glorious  in  our  own 
minds  and  hearts.  And  we  may,  by  the  way,  see  what  cause  we  have  to  be 
smitten  with  shame  to  think  of  it,  how  we  have  dishonoured  God  by  mean  thoughts 
of  Him.  II.  By  acknowledgment,  when  in  words  or  works  we  do  ascribe  excellency 
unto  God,  as — 1.  When  in  words  we  magnify  God  and  speak  of  His  praises,  and 
confess  that  He  is  worthy  to  receive  honour,  and  glory,  and  might,  and  majesty 
(Rev.  iv.  11 ;  Psa.  xxix.  ;  Ixxxvi.  9).  2.  When  men  confess  that  all  the  glory  they 
have  above  other  men  in  gifts  or  dignity  was  given  them  by  God  (1  Chron.  xxix.  11, 
13).  And  thus  we  make  God  the  Father  of  glory,  as  He  is  called  (Eph.  i.  17). 
3.  When  the  praise  of  God  or  the  advancement  of  His  kingdom  is  made  the  end  of 
all  our  actions,  this  is  to  do  all  to  His  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  4.  When  we  believe 
God's  promises,  and  wait  for  the  performance  of  them,  though  we  see  no  means 
likely  for  their  accomphshment.  Thus  Abraham  (Rom.  iv.).  5.  When  we  publicly 
acknowledge  true  rehgion,  or  any  special  truth  of  God,  when  it  is  generally  opposed 
by  the  most  men.  6.  When  men  suffer  in  the  quarrel  of  God's  truth  and  true 
religion  (1  Pet.  iv.  16).  7.  When  on  the  Sabbath  men  devote  themselves  only  to 
God's  work,  doing  it  with  more  joy  and  care  than  they  should  do  their  own  work  on 
the  week-days  (Isa.  Iviii.  13).  8.  When  men  do  in  particular  give  thanks  to  God 
for  benefits  or  deliverances,  acknowledging  God's  special  hand  therein.  Thus  the 
leper  gave  glory  to  God  (Luke  xvii.  18  ;  Psa.  xi.  3,  4).  9.  By  loving,  praising,  and 
esteeming  of  Jesus  Christ  above  all  men  ;  for  when  we  glorify  the  Son  we  glorify 
the  Father  (John  i.  14 ;  xi.  4).  10.  When  we  account  of  and  honour  godly  men 
above  all  other  sorts  of  men  in  the  world.  IH.  By  effect,  when  men  make  others 
to  glorify  God.  Thus  the  professed  subjection  of  Christians  to  the  gospel  makes 
other  men  glorify  God  (2  Cor.  ix.  13).     So  the  fruits  of  righteousness  are  to  the 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

glory  of  God  (Phil.  i.  10).  So  here  the  good  works  of  Christians  do  make  new 
converts  glorify  God  ;  so  every  Christian  that  is  God's  planting  is  a  tree  of  righteous- 
ness that  God  may  be  glorified  (Isa.  Ixi.  3).  So  are  all  Christians  to  the  praise  of 
the  glory  of  God's  grace,  as  they  are  either  qualified  or  privileged  by  Jesus  Christ 
(Eph.  i.  7).  (N.  Byficld.)  The  day  of  visitation. — Conversion  the  day  of 
visitation : — I.  Conveksion  is  the  work  of  God.  1.  Let  them  which  have 
felt  this  work  acknowledge  God  in  it,  and  give  Him  all  the  glory.  2.  They 
that  be  yet  without  it,  let  them  not  defer  it  as  a  small  matter  to  the  last,  as 
if  they  could  convert  themselves  when  they  list,  but  humbly  seek  it  of  God 
in  attending  on  His  ordinances.  H.  It  is  God's  great  mercy  to  convert  a 
SINNER.  This  is  the  greatest  mercy  that  can  be  bestowed :  to  be  delivered  from 
sickness  into  health,  from  prison  into  liberty,  from  poverty  to  riches,  from  death 
to  life.      Let  those  that   have    obtained  it  give  glory  to   God.      IH.  A  man  can 

NEVER  GLORIFY  GoD  TILL  GoD  THUS  VISIT  AND  CONVERT  HIS  SOUL.       IV.    WhEN  A  MAN  IS 

CONVERTED  HE  WILL  GLORIFY  GoD ;  yea,  he  cannot  choose  but  in  heart  admire  God's 
goodness  and  love,  and  in  his  life  seek  to  glorify  Him.  Then  will  he  also  do  all  he 
can  to  gain  others  (Luke  xxii.  32).     V.  Even  such  as  have  been  ill-speakers  of 

THE  TRUTH  AND   God's   SERVANTS   MAY  YET  BE  CONVERTED   AND  PROVE    GOOD   CHRISTIANS 

(Acts  ii.  13  ;  Eom.  vi.  17 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9 ;  Tit.  iii.  3).  1.  Never  despair  of  them  that 
be  very  bad,  but  pray  for  them,  and  give  them  good  counsel.  2.  This  may  be  an 
exceeding  provocation  to  the  worst,  that  they  may  prove  good  and  be  saved,  as 
unlikely  as  it  is.  3.  Yet  let  none  instead  of  good  take  hurt  by  this,  and  heart  to  go 
on  in  sin,  seeing  the  worst  may  become  converts.  They  shall  find  God  a  just 
and  severe  revenger  of  such  proud  despisers  and  presumptuous  sinners.  (John 
Rogers.) 

Vers.  13-16.  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man. — The  limits  of 
subjection  to  civil  rulers : — What  if  the  rulers  themselves  be  wicked  men,  and  the 
government  itself  a  tyranny?  1.  Let  it  be  considered  that  there  is  probably  no 
government,  not  even  that  of  the  worst  slave  plantation,  that  is  not  on  the  whole  to 
be  preferred  to  anarchy,  or  no  government  at  all ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  argument 
from  the  uses  of  government  never  quite  fails.  2.  There  is  no  question  whatever 
that,  when  human  government  errs  and  transcends  the  limits  prescribed  by  its  very 
nature  and  the  ends  of  its  being,  forbidding  what  God  has  commanded,  or  com- 
manding what  God  has  forbidden,  our  duty  in  every  such  case  is  to  hearken  unto  God 
more  than  unto  men.  In  the  conflict  of  authorities  the  higher  authority  must  rule. 
3.  The  Christian  law  does  not  strip  a  man  of  whatever  civil  rights  his  country's  law 
allows  him,  nor  does  it  prohibit  him  from  defending  those  rights  in  any  lawful  way 
(Acts  xvi.  37  ;  xxii.  25;  xxv.  11).  4.  These  things  being  understood,  the  apostle's 
rule  may  safely  be  taken  as  absolute  and  universal  in  its  application.  Eeverencing 
still  the  dark  and  distorted  shadow  of  the  Divine  sovereignty,  they  will  leave  it  to 
His  all-controlling  providence,  and  to  outraged  humanity,  to  redress  the  wrongs 
of   nations.     (J.  Lillie,   D.D.)         The   duty  of  submission   to   authority : — I.  All 

AUTHORITY  OF  EVERY  KIND  IS  FROM    GOD,  AND   IS  TO  BE  REGARDED  AS  SUCH.       The  Word 

of  God  goes  further,  and  says,  "  that  there  is  no  power  but  of  God."  Nor  is  this 
truth  confined  to  the  case  of  kings  and  their  subjects  ;  it  applies  to  every  authority 
whatever ;  all  the  relations  in  life,  and  our  obedience,  is  due  simply  because  it  is  the 
will  and  ordinance  of  God.  II.  The  persons  who  receive  this  their  authority 
FROM  God  are  but  men.  Now  man  in  his  natural  state  is  full  of  corruption,  pride, 
selfishness,  unrighteousness,  covetousness,  maliciousness.  It  is  therefore  to  be 
calculated  upon,  and  God  contemplated  this  when  He  gave  the  precept,  that 
the  persons  who  are  in  authority  should  abuse  it  in  some  way  or  another. 
And  therefore  it  is  nowhere  written :  Children,  obey  good  parents ;  servants, 
obey  kind  masters ;  subjects,  obey  a  good  government ;  there  is  no  such  limi- 
tation, but  quite  the  contrary,  "  not  only  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also 
the  froward."  If  those  in  authority  abuse  or  neglect  their  trust,  they  will 
assuredly  have  to  give  account  to  God ;  but  our  duty  is  to  submit,  while  using 
all  lawful  means  to  be  delivered  from  unjust  treatment.  (John  Tucker,  B.D.) 
Submission  to  rulers  : — I.  An  authoritative  command  of  obedience,  "  Submit  your- 
selves." II.  The  object,  to  which  this  obedience  must  be  yielded,  "  Every 
ordinance  of  man."  III.  The  division  of  this  ordinance  of  man  into  supreme 
and  subordinate.  "Submit  to  the  King,  as  supreme;  and  to  governors"  sent  by 
Him,  as  subordinate.  IV.  The  duty  of  all  governors,  and  the  end  of  all  govern- 
ments expressed,  and  that  is,  "  The  punishment  of  evil-doers,  and  the  praise  of 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  185 

them  that  do  well."  V.  The  motite,  which  enforceth  this  exhortation  and 
command:  submit  to  them  "for  the  Lord's  sake."  (Bp.  E.Hopkins.)  Suhjection 
to  authority  : — I.  No  subjection  is  due  to  an  unlawful  and  usurping  power,  upon 
God's  command,  and  for  conscience  sake.  II.  Upon  prudential  and  self- 
preserving  principles,  submission  may  sometimes  be  yielded  to  the  lawful 
commands  of  an  unlawful  and  usurping  power.  III.  We  ought  to  obey  the 
commands  of  the  lawful  magistrate,  in  those  things  which  are  in  themselves 
necessary  to  be  done  and  our  indispensable  duty,  and  that,  not  only  out  op 
conscience  to  God,  but  also  out  of  conscience  to  man.  IV.  If  the  thing 
commanded  be  indifferently  lawful,  and  appear  so  to  us  ;  that  is,  if  it  be  in  its 
own  nature  such  as  we  may  either  do  it,  or  not  to  do  it  without  sin ;  then  are  we 
to  be  determined  by  the  magistrate's  comjl\nds  to  do  what  he  requires,  and 
to  abstain  from  what  he  forbids,  v.  If  the  thing  be  indifferently  lawful  in 
itself,  but  appears  doubtful  unto  us,  and  we  cannot  resolve  ourselves  whether 
it  be  lawful  or  evil,  I  THINK  WE  ARE  OBLIGED,  till  we  receive  clearer  light  and 
information,  to  take  that  part  of  the  doubt  which  the  magistrate  commands  us, 

AS  BEING  THE  SAFEST  AND  MOST  SATISFACTORY  TO  CONSCIENCE.  VI.  If  THE  THING 
enjoined  be  in    ITSELF  SINFUL  AND    UNLAWFUL,  OR    AT  LEAST  APPEAR  SO  UNTO  US,    THEN 

TAKE  THESE  TWO  FOLLOWING  RULES — 1.  We  ought  not,  upon  any  pretences  or  induce- 
ments whatsoever,  to  yield  active  obedience  to  such  a  command.  2.  Though  we  may 
not  yield  active  obedience  to  the  unlawful  commands  of  our  superiors,  yet  we  are 
bound  to  yield  passive  obedience  to  them.     VII.  We  ought,  in  no  case  whatsoever, 

TO  RESIST  AND  REBEL  AGAINST  THE  LAWFUL  POWERS  WHICH  GoD  HATH  SET  OVER  US  ; 

yea,  though  they  should  use  their  power  unlawfully  ;  for  whosoever  resisteth  the 
power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God ;  and  they  that  resist  shall  receive  to  them- 
selves damnation.  (Ibid.)  Submission  to  government: — 1.  The  reasonableness 
of  this  apostolical  precept  is  suggested  by  the  terms  used  to  convey  it ;  for  why 
"  rulers  and  governors,"  unless  it  be  indeed  their  office  to  rule  and  govern,  our  duty 
to  submit  and  obey  ?  2.  But  that  there  should  be  government,  and  that  men 
should  obey  it,  is  the  will  and  appointment  of  God.  3.  A  third  reason  assigned 
for  obedience  to  government  is  the  benefit  derived  from  it  to  the  community. 
It  is  instituted  for  the  protection  of  good  men  by  the  punishment  of  evil  ones. 
4.  A  fourth  reason  for  the  precept  inculcated  is  the  honour  of  Christianity. 
{Bp.  Home.)  Bad  rulers  to  be  obeyed  .—You  will  say  the  doctrine  is  unreasonable, 
and  of  tyranny  there  can  be  no  end  if  it  be  unlawful  to  resist  it.  Perhaps,  if  we 
only  lay  aside  for  a  moment  our  passions  and  prejudices,  we  shall  see  how  much 
better  God  has  provided  for  our  happiness  than  we  ourselves  should  do.  1.  For,  if 
you  allow  to  subjects  a  power  of  taking  arms  and  deposing  their  princes,  who  is  to 
be  judge  when  there  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  exerting  such  power  ?  Men  will 
never  judge  fairly  and  impartially  in  their  own  cause.  2.  It  should  be  considered 
that,  although  government  may  sometimes  be  bad,  rebellion  will  generally  be 
worse.  "  The  wrath  of  a  king,"  says  the  Scripture,  "  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion," 
he  may  destroy  some;  but  "the  madness  of  the  people"  is  as  the  raging  of  & 
tempestuous  sea  when  it  has  burst  its  bounds;  it  overwhelms  all.  Compare  the 
mischief  said  to  be  done,  or  designed,  by  our  unfortunate  Charles  I.  with  the 
bloodshed,  the  devastations  of  the  great  rebellion,  from  the  horrors  of  which  the 
nation  was  at  length  obliged  to  seek  protection  by  re-establishing  the  government 
that  had  been  cast  off.  3.  But  respecting  the  principle  of  obedience,  and  the 
inconveniences  to  which  it  may  sometimes  subject  us,  we  do  not  sufficiently  rely 
upon  the  providence  or  the  promises  of  God.  The  Scriptures  teach  us  that  as  He 
setteth  a  righteous  prince  over  a  people  that  fear  and  serve  Him,  so  He  often 
sendeth  an  unrighteous  one  to  punish  a  wicked  nation.  (Ibid.)  Civil  authorities 
have  their  authority  from  God  : — Water  may  bs  made  to  assume  different  fomis,  in 
fountains  and  cascades,  and  be  made  to  flow  in  different  channels  or  aqueducts  by 
the  hand  of  man ;  but  the  element  itself,  which  flows  in  them,  is  from  God.  So 
again,  marble  may  be  hewn  by  man's  hand  into  different  shapes ;  under  the 
sculptor's  chisel  it  may  become  a  statue,  a  frieze,  or  sarcophagus,  but  the  marble 
itself  is  from  the  quarry,  it  is  from  the  creative  hand  of  God.  So  it  is  with  the 
civil  power.  The  form  which  power  may  assume,  and  the  person  who  may  be 
appointed  to  exercise  it,  may  be  ordinances  of  man,  but  the  authority  itself  is  from 
God.  (C  WordsiDorth.)  Any  kind  of  government  better  than  none  : — There  was  a 
law  amongst  the  Persians  that  when  their  governor  was  dead  there  should  be  a  law- 
lessness for  five  days  after,  that  every  man  should  do  what  he  list ;  now  for  those 
five  days  there  was  such  killing  and  robbiig,  and  such  destroying  one  another,  that 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

by  the  time  the  five  days  were  over,  they  were  glad  of  government  again.  So  that 
any  kind  of  government  is  better  than  no  government ;  but  happy  is  that  people 
that  live  under  a  good  government,  where  justice  flows  from  the  Supreme  as  head, 
and  is  conveyed  by  subordinate  ministers  unto  the  people.  (A.  Burgess.)  That 
with  well  doing  ye  may  put  to  silence. — On  silencing  objections  against 
Christianity  : — I.  What  was  that  cavil  and  objection  against  Christian  religion 

WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  HERE  HATH  RESPECT  UNTO,  AND  WOULD  HAVE  SILENCED  ?   From 

vers.  13,  14  we  learn  that  it  was  that  old  clamour,  that  Christian  religion  was  an 
enemy  to  government,  and  the  professors  of  it  seditious  persons.  This  was  indeed 
the  very  masterpiece  of  Satan's  policy  ;  by  this  he  wrought  the  condemnation  of 
the  blessed  Jesus,  and  even  constrained  Pilate  to  give  sentence  against  Him  (John 
xix.  12-13).  And  by  the  same  artifice  he  hoped  also  to  destroy  His  religion,  and  to 
root  the  profession  of  it  out  of  the  world.  II.  By  what  means  the  apostle  would 
HAVE  this  done.  There  is  not  a  more  excellent  way  to  take  off  all  scandals  against 
religion  than  the  exemplary  lives  of  those  that  profess  it.  But  the  notion  of  well- 
doing here  is  that  honest  and  regular,  that  ready  and  conscientious  subjection  to 
government,  that  he  had  pressed  in  the  preceding  verses.  And  it  is  certainly  the 
most  effectual  way.  1.  All  men  have  not  parts  to  examine  what  the  principles  of 
a  religion  are,  or  to  understand  what  the  natural  consequences  from  them  be ;  and 
many  that  can  do  this  are  idle,  or  cannot  spare  time  to  do  it,  and  all  these  will 
go  that  near  way  of  judging  a  religion  to  be  such,  as  they  behold  the  professors  of 
it  to  be.  2.  Actions  are  commonly  more  convictive,  then  principles  and  professions. 
III.  The  great  reason  and  argument  upon  which  he  presses  it.  1.  This  is  God's 
wiU,  because  He  knows  this  to  be  so  very  much  for  the  good  and  happiness  of  the 
world.  2.  The  maintaining  His  own  appointment  and  institution.  3.  For  the 
credit  of  His  holy  religion.  (H.  Hesketh.)  Why  it  is  so  hard  to  cure  ignorance 
and  silence  ignorant  men: — 1.  Because  it  is  natural  to  them  to  be  hateful  and 
hating  others,  and  it  is  a  hard  task  to  overcome  a  natural  disposition  in  man 
(Titus  iii.  3).  2.  Because  the  unregenerate  mind  of  man  is  full  of  objections,  and 
the  devil  supplies  them  with  cavils.  3.  Because  many  withhold  the  truth  in  un- 
righteousness ;  they  love  darkness  and  lies,  and  therefore  resist  the  power  of  the  truth. 
4.  Because  they  encourage  one  another  in  an  evil  way  ;  they  observe  that  the  great 
men  of  the  world,  and  many  that  are  in  reputation  for  wisdom,  are  scorners  as  well 
as  they  ;  they  think  they  may  revile  securely.  5.  Because  many  ignorant  persons, 
when  they  are  confuted,  yet  are  so  foolish  that  they  will  wilfully  persist  in  their 
objections,  though  they  cannot  reply  against  the  answer,  yet  they  think  if  such  and 
such  were  there,  that  have  more  experience  and  learning,  they  would  make  good 
what  they  say.  6.  Because  malice  hath  no  ears ;  they  hate  the  truth  and  godly 
men.  If  it  be  not  as  they  say,  yet  their  malice  would  fain  have  it  so,  and  if  it  may 
disgrace  the  godly,  they  care  not  whether  it  be  true  or  no.  7.  Because  many  times 
God  gives  them  over  to  such  a  reprobate  sense,  that  through  custom  and  evil 
surmises,  they  think  verily  they  do  not  much  amiss  to  oppose  and  hate  such 
persons.  This  was  the  case  of  such  as  reviled  and  persecuted  the  apostles,  they 
thought  they  did  God  good  service.  Uses— (1)  Therefore  we  should  not  wonder 
if  we  see  this  daily  come  to  pass  that  men  of  all  sorts  should  reproach  the  good 
way  of  God  so  unjustly,  so  pertinaciously.  (2)  It  shows  that  godly  men  had 
need  to  be  circumspect,  and  that  they  which  will  confute  ignorant  men  must  strive 
to  be  thoroughly  furnished  with  wisdom  of  words  and  abundance  of  good  works. 
(3)  It  shows  that  ignorant  persons  are  in  a  lamentable  case,  that  so  wilfuUy  run 
towards  the  gates  of  death  and  ruin,  that  are  so  hardly  cured  of  this  spiritual 
blindness.  (4)  It  imports  that  self-willed  Christians  that  cannot  be  advised  are  to 
be  reckoned  in  the  rank  of  these  fools,  what  show  soever  they  make  of  a  better 
estate.  (5)  It  does  comfortably  import  that  when  one  is  teachable,  and  hates 
reproaching,  and  will  do  or  say  nothing  against  the  truth,  and  uses  the  means  to  get 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  the  truth,  that  such  a  person  is  escaped  from  the  congrega- 
tion of  these  fools,  and  is  in  some  measure  enlightened  with  true  wisdom  from  above. 
(6)  It  may  warn  all  that  love  their  own  souls,  hereafter  to  take  heed,  to  avoid  wilful- 
ness and  self-conceitedness.  (N.  Byfield.)  The  vices  of  Christians  detrimental 
to  the  general  interests  of  religiori : — I.  The  vices  of  believers  afford  an  argument 
to  infidelity.  The  vices  of  believers  are  not  the  consequences  of  religion,  but  of 
its  abuse  or  neglect;  the  corruption  of  Christian  manners  cannot  be  at  all  compared 
with  the  enormous  wickedness  of  the  heathen  nations ;  those  excesses,  which  seem 
more  peculiarly  the  offspring  of  Christianity,  were  the  real  production  of  ignorance 
and  superstition.     Unbelievers  are  not  the  only  persons  whom  our  misconduct  may 


CHAP.  II.]  J.  PETER.  187 

fatally  mislead.  II.  Even  in  professed  Christians  there  is  a  cold  or  con- 
temptuous NEGLECT  OF  PUBLIC  WORSHIP,  AND  OF   REVEALED  DOCTRINES,  WHICH  IS  OFTEN 

DEFENDED  ON  THE  SAME  PRETENCE :  that  it  does  not  appear  that  they  have  either 
of  them  any  actual  influence  on  the  conduct  of  those  who  regard  them  most 
scrupulously.  Belief  in  the  doctrines  of  religion,  and  attendance  on  its  solemnities, 
have  plainly  a  natural  tendency  to  awaken  our  sense  of  those  duties  which  the 
Being,  whom  we  adore,  has  commanded,  and  to  quicken  our  pursuit  of  those 
virtues,  which  it  is  the  end  of  revelation  to  promote.  And  though  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  these  means,  however  wisely  adopted,  partake  in  the  imper- 
fection of  everything  relating  to  man,  and  often  fail  of  their  ends ;  yet  is  it  far 
from  being  certain  that  they  fail  so  frequently,  or  so  considerably,  as  the  objection 
supposes.  Eeligious  observances,  it  is  true,  cannot  divest  us  of  our  natural  frailty ; 
but  they  certainly  give  us  awful  ideas  of  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  and  have 
a  peculiar  tendency  to  encourage  that  serious  disposition  of  mind  which  will  best 
secure  us  from  great  or  frequent  excesses.  III.  The  vices  of  believers  not  only 
furnish  a  pretence  to  the  infidelity  of  some,  and  the  irreligion  of  others,  but  spread 

also  a  very  DANGEROUS  SNARE  IN    THE  PLAINER  PATHS  OF  MORAL  VIRTUE.       The  force  of 

example  on  the  minds  and  manners  of  mankind  is  universally  acknowledged. 
Interest,  inclination,  and  duty,  the  laws  of  man,  the  laws  of  nature,  and  the  laws 
of  God,  are  in  vain  united  to  resist  its  progress:  every  principle  of  action  is  perverted 
by  the  magic  influence  of  prevailing  fashion.  As  therefore  the  consequences  of 
our  conduct  on  the  belief  and  manners  of  those  around  us  are  thus  important  in 
themselves ;  as  they  cannot  be  prevented  by  any  prudence,  nor  averted  by  the 
sincerest  repentance ;  they  surely  form  a  motive  to  goodness,  which  no  thinking 
man  can  overlook,  and  no  generous  man  will  disregard.  (Jas.  Fawcett,  B.D.) 
As  free,  and  not  using. — Freedom  and  law  : — Freedom  is  one  of  those  words  which 
need  no  recommendation  :  it  belongs  to  the  same  category  as  light,  order,  progress, 
law.  It  is  one  of  the  ideas  which,  in  some  sense  or  other,  mankind  accepts  as  an 
axiom ;  as  a  landmark  or  principle  of  healthful  life  which  is  beyond  discussion. 
What  do  we  mean  by  freedom  ?  We  mean  the  power  of  a  living  being  to  act 
without  hindrance  to  the  true  law  of  its  life.  I.  Christ  has  given  men  political  or 
SOCIAL  FREEDOM.  He  has  not  indeed  drawn  out  a  scheme  of  government,  and 
stamped  it  with  His  Divine  authority  as  guaranteeing  freedom.  Yet  with  our  Lord 
there  came  the  germs  of  political  liberty.  When  individual  men  had  learnt  to  feel 
the  greatness  and  the  interest  of  life  ;  the  real  horizon  which  stretches  out  before 
the  soul's  eye  beyond  the  grave ;  the  depths  of  being  within  the  soul ;  its  unex- 
hausted capacities  for  happiness  and  for  suffering ;  the  reality  and  nearness  of 
God,  of  His  Divine  Son,  of  our  fellow-citizens  the  blessed  angels  ;  the  awful,  inex- 
pressible distinction  of  being  redeemed  from  death  by  the  blood  of  the  Most  Holy, 
and  sanctified  by  the  Eternal  Spirit ;  it  was  impossible  not  to  feel  also  that  each 
man  had,  in  the  highest  sense,  rights  to  assert  and  a  bearing  to  maintain.  Thus  a 
Christian  was  a  free  man,  simply  because  he  was  a  Christian.  It  has  often  been 
alleged  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  our  Lord  left  the  great  despotisms  of  the  world  for 
a  while  untouched.  Jesus  Christ  taught.  He  was  crucified.  He  rose.  He  ascended. 
But  the  Csesar  Tiberius  still  sat  upon  the  throne  of  the  Eoman  world.  There  never 
was  a  more  odious  system  of  personal  government  than  that  of  the  Koman 
Emperors;  the  surviving  forms  of  the  extinct  republic  did  but  make  the  actual 
tyranny  which  had  succeeded  it  more  hard  to  bear.  Yet  it  was  of  such  an 
Emperor  as  Nero  that  St.  Paul  wrote  (Eom.  xiii.  1)  ;  and  St.  Peter  (chap.  ii.  13,  14). 
And  in  the  same  way  apostles  advise  Christian  slaves  to  give  obedience  to  their 
masters  as  unto  the  Lord ;  to  obey,  not  with  eye-service,  as  if  they  had  only  to  do 
as  much  as  might  be  insisted  on  by  a  jealous  owner,  but  with  singleness  of  heart,  as 
men  who  throw  every  energy  into  their  work.  It  may  be  asked.  How  are  such 
precepts  compatible  with  the  assertion  that  Christ  gave  us  political  freedom  ?  The 
answer  is  that  He  gave  us  a  moral  force  which  did  two  things.  First,  it  made  every 
Christian  independent  of  outward  political  circumstances ;  and,  secondly,  it  made 
the  creation  of  new  civil  institutions  only  a  question  of  time.  II.  Christ  gave  men 
also  INTELLECTUAL  FREEDOM.  He  enfranchised  them  by  the  gift  of  truth.  He  gave 
truth  in  its  fulness ;  truth  not  merely  relative  and  provisional,  but  absolute  and 
final.  Until  He  came  the  human  intellect  was  enslaved.  It  was  enslaved  either  to 
degrading  superstition,  or  to  false  and  one-sided  philosophies.  When  Christ,  in  all 
the  glory  of  His  Godhead  and  His  Manhood,  had  enthroned  Himself  in  the  soul, 
He  taught  men  to  think  worthily  of  the  greatness  of  God  and  of  the  greatness  of 
man,  nothwithstanding  man's  weakness  and  corruption.    He  freed  men  from  all 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai>.  ii. 

the  cramping  influences  of  local  philosophies,  of  local  teachers,  of  petty  schemes 
and  theories  for  classes  and  races.     He  led  men  out  into  the  great  highways  of 
thought,  where,  if  they  would,  they  might  know  the  universal  Father,  manifested 
in  His  Blessed  Son,  as  the  Author  of  all  existence,  as  its  object,  and  as  its  end. 
Certainly  our  Lord  has  given  us  a  body  of  Truth,  which  we  can,  if  we  like,  reject, 
but  which  it  is  our  happiness  to  believe.     What  He  did  for  men  in  this  way  is 
embodied  in  His  own  teaching,  in  the  writings  of  His  apostles,  and  in  the  creeds  of 
the  universal  Church.     These  are   to  intellectual  liberty   what   law   is   to   social 
liberty.     They  protect,  they  do  not  cramp  it.     They  furnish  a  fixed  point,  from 
which  thought  may  take  wing.     HI.  Christ  has  made  men  morally  free.     He  has 
broken  the  chains  which  fettered  the  human  will,  and  has  restored  to  it  its  buoyancy 
and  its  power.     What  had  been  lost  was  more  than  regained  in  Christ.     Not  merely 
was  the  penalty  of  old  transgressions  paid,  so  that  man  was  redeemed  from  a  real 
captivity :  but  the  will  was  reinvigorated  Ijy  a  Heaven-sent  force  or  grace,  once 
more  placing  it  in  true  harmony  with  the  law  of  man's  life  (Kom.  vi.  18).     Here  it 
is  objected  that  moral  freedom  is  not  worth  having  if  it  be  only  a  service  after  all. 
"You  talk  of  freedom,"  men  say,  "but  you  mean  rule.     You  mean  restrictions 
upon  action ;  restrictions  upon  inclination ;  restrictions  upon  speech.     You  mean 
obligations  :  obligations  to  work  ;  obligations  to  self-discipline ;  obligations  to  sacri- 
fice self  to  others  ;  obligations  to  all  the  details  of  Christian  duty."     You  are  right : 
certainly  we  do.     A  Christian  lives  under  a  system  of  restrictions  and  obligations ; 
and  yet  he  is  free.     Those  obligations  and  restrictions  only  prescribe  for  him  what 
his  own  new  heaven-sent  nature  would  wish  to  be  and  to  do.     Whatever  a  Christian 
may  be  outwardly,  he  is  inwardly  a  free  man.     In  obeying  Christ's  law  he  acts  as 
he  desires  to  act :  he  acts  according  to  this,  the  highest  law  of  his  life,  because  he 
rejoices  to  do  so.     He  obeys  law ;  the  Law  of  God.     But  then  he  has  no  inclination 
to  disobey  it.     He  is,  as  St.  Peter  says,  a  servant  of  God ;  but  then,  as  he  would  not 
for  all  the  world  be  anything  else,  his  service  is  perfect  freedom.     [Canon  Liddon.) 
Freedom  and  servitude : — It  often  happens  that  apparent  contradictions  disappear 
when  we  reach  a  purer  and  higher  range  of  life.     Many  of  the  things  which  perplex 
us  when  children,  and  seem  to  our  eyes  to  be  inconsistencies  on  the  part  of  our 
parents,  now  appear,  when  we  look  back  on  them  with  the  clearer  vision  of  later 
years,  to  be  not  only  consistent,  but  perfectly  justifiable.     And  may  that  not  be  the 
same  in  all  the  regions  of  life  ?     Of  course  it  might  be  said  on  a  superficial  view, 
that  servitude  and  freedom  were  inconsistent  with  one  another.     But  in  the  larger 
life  I  gather  that  it  is  not  so.     The  apostle  at  all  events  speaks  as  though  a  man 
might  be  perfectly  free,  and  at  the  same  time  be  living  a  life  of  servitude.     I.  The 
first  law  almost  of  existence  is  that  which  expresses  itself  in  the  struggle  for 
FREEDOM.     Would  you  uot  Say  that  the  child  that  was  born  but  yesterday  is  very 
much  like  a  man  that  has  just  been  drawn  out  of  the  water  after  drowning?     All 
the  struggle,  all  the  painful  symptoms  you  notice  in  that  drowned  man  are  the 
efforts  of  life,  so  to  speak,  to  recover  itself,  and  to  take  possession  of  those  conditions 
under  which  its  existence  alone  can  continue.     The  child,  in  the  same  way,  is  not 
yet,  as  it  were,  adjusted  to  the  conditions  by  which  it  is  surrounded,  and  the  earlier 
stages  of  life  are  the  struggle  to  lay  hold  of  the  conditions  in  which  it  finds  itself. 
Thus  I  should  say  the  struggle  of  all  early  life  is  the  struggle  to  get  possession  of 
the  right  of  life.     And  this  will  become  more  apparent  if  we  ask  ourselves  what  we 
mean  by  freedom.      Freedom  is  the  educated  capacity  to  live  according  to  the 
capacity  of  our  being.     The  least  reflection  will  show  us  that  this  is  true.     Take, 
for  example,  what  we  know  perfectly  well,  that  our  struggle  as  a  child  turns  upon 
the  conception  that  that  is  the  meaning  of  freedom.     When  you  take  your  child  and 
say,  "  It  is  now  time  that  it  began  to  learn  those  little  physical  exercises,  whether 
you  call  them  calisthenics  or  dancing  classes."     You  say  to  yourself :  "  The  child 
is  not  yet  in  possession  of  its  full  power.     These  exercises  are  to  give  it  mastery 
over  itself  with  regard  to  its  physical  organisation,  and  we  are  trying  to  give  it  such 
a  mastery  that  it  may  be  able  to  use  all  its  physical  power  according  to  the  order, 
law,  and  condition  of  that  physical  framework."     It  is  the  same  when  you  come  to 
the  mental  region.     The  man  who  thinks  freely  thinks  truly,  and  a  man  only 
thinks  freely  according  to  the  law  and  order  of  thought ;  and  when  you  take  your 
lad  and  say,  "  It  is  time  you  were  educated,"  and  send  him  to  school,  you  do  so 
because  you  know  that  exactly  as  physical  training  is  to  make  him  master  of  his 
own  frame,  so  the    mental  training  is   to  make  him  master  of  his   own  intelli- 
gence.    It   is  the   same  thing  in  social  life.      The  awkwardness  which   you  see 
in  your   children  is  just  that  which  arise  out  of  the  fact  that  they  are  not  self- 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  189 

possessed.  But  when  they  go  into  society  and  are  trained  they  become,  by  the 
education  of  mixing  with  their  fellow  men,  possessors  of  themselves,  and  what  you 
call  ease,  manner,  grace,  is  only  that  the  man  is  master  of  himself,  that  the  self- 
consciousness  which  disturbs  his  own  happiness  has  vanished  in  entering  into  his 
rightful  heritage  of  being  a  self-possessed  individual.  Look  at  it  from  the  religious 
point  of  view.  It  is  also  true  that  religion  comes  to  set  a  man  free.  Religion  is  the 
great  co-ordinating  power  of  the  moral  and  physical  forces  of  life.  It  is  that  which 
gives  us  power  over  ourselves.  It  sets  us  free  from  false  conceptions.  "  Stand  fast 
in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  you  free,"  means,  "  Stand  fast  in  the 
possession  of  principles  which  clear  your  mind  from  false  conceptions."  The  bulk 
of  men  are  not  to  be  charged  with  being  slaves  of  the  grosser  or  more  vulgar 
passions,  but  they  are  very  much  the  slaves  of  false  conceptions  of  life.  The 
competition  for  wealth,  the  desire  to  achieve  physical  ease,  free  from  the  anxieties 
of  life — these  things  rise  up  in  men's  minds,  and  are  fostered  by  the  conditions  of 
society,  and  man  is  the  victim  of  a  false  idea  of  life.  Christianity  is  sent  surely  to 
emancipate  men  from  that,  to  show  men  what  the  real  significance  of  life  is,  that 
those  are  little  weaknesses  in  us  which  betray  us  into  conditions  and  surroundings 
which  make  us  less  and  lower  than  we  ought  to  be.  Therefore  Christianity  would 
not  be  a  complete  or  valuable  system  if  its  only  idea  were  that  we  should  negative 
the  positive  sins  in  the  world.  No,  we  must  re-organise  humanity  upon  noble  lines, 
make  man  master  of  himself  and  give  him  a  true  conception  of  life,  that  conception 
of  life  which  God  intends  him  to  take.  II.  The  second  stage  is  the  stage  of 
SERVICE.  As  truly  as  the  earlier  stage  is  the  stage  of  struggle,  so  it  is  true  equally 
that  the  second  stage  is  a  stage  of  service.  It  is  true  in  our  ordinary  life.  There 
is  no  difference,  as  I  take  it,  between  the  religious  point  of  view  and  the  purely 
natural  point  of  view.  The  man  who  is  educated  to  freedom  only  reaches  that 
freedom  in  serving.  It  is  true  in  the  fields  of  nature  :  you  only  bring  a  thing  to 
maturity  in  making  it  of  service.  The  corn  shall  grow  by  slow  degrees.  That  is 
the  process  by  which  it  struggles  into  its  freedom.  It  struggles  first  for  bare 
existence  and  then  for  conditions  under  which  it  may  reach  its  maturity;  but  the 
moment  that  maturity  is  reached  the  harvest  is  come,  it  has  reached  the  condition 
of  life  in  which  service  is  absolutely  imperative  to  it.  This  wheat  grain  means  the 
law  of  service  ;  therefore  the  moment  its  maturity  is  acquired  it  is  acquired  in  order 
that  it  may  be  utilised.  This  is  true  with  regard  to  human  life.  How  we  dreamed 
of  what  we  would  do  when  we  were  twenty-one !  And  yet,  now  that  the  twenty-one 
years  are  passed,  the  man's  only  freedom  is  service.  He  is  not  content  to  be  a  free 
man.  Set  him  free  and  he  is  miserable.  It  comes  in  the  gentle  dawn  of  new 
emotions,  which  lead  him  to  form  his  own  little  home  nest.  He  has  parted 
with  freedom  to  dream  of  domestic  life,  a  life  in  which  he  has  pledged  himself  to 
service  in  the  great  citizenship  of  the  world.  Perhaps  you  are  going  to  make  your 
son  a  surgeon  ;  you  send  him  to  his  long  training,  in  which  his  eye  is  skilled  to 
perceive  the  symptom  and  meaning  of  every  disease,  to  keep  his  nerve  steady.  The 
very  moment  the  se>en  years  of  training  are  past,  what  is  it  that  is  springing  up  in 
his  soul  ?  The  consciousness  of  power.  But  what  does  that  lead  him  to  ?  The 
necessity  of  service.  Trained,  we  must  use  our  powers.  Make  a  man  free  in  his 
whole  nature,  and  you  will  make  him  thirst  to  lay  down  those  powers  for  the  service 
of  his  fellow  men.  Christ  was  free,  but  look  at  that  life  of  our  Lord :  precisely 
because  it  was  free,  the  whole  of  it  was  consecrated  to  service — so  much  so  that  to 
Him  the  only  idea  of  human  existence  was  this,  that  the  powers  of  it  should  be 
used  in  the  service  of  men.     "  I  am  among  you  as  one  that  doth  serve."     IH.  The 

CONNECTION    BETWEEN     THESE    TWO    PRINCIPLES    IS    THE    IMPORTANT    THING.       It    is    HOt 

simply  that  we  are  to  live  a  life  of  service,  nor  that  we  are  to  seek  to  be  free  men. 
It  is  because  we  do  not  see  that  there  is  an  indissoluble  connection  between  the  two 
that  we  sometimes  blunder  in  many  of  the  matters  submitted  to  us.  It  is  the  free 
man  who  can  yield  the  true  service.  That  is  what  we  want  to  get  hold  of.  It  is 
not  that  we  want  to  make  men  serve  one  another  by  compulsion.  That  would  be 
of  no  value  at  all.  You  do  not  want  the  enforced  service  of  your  wife  or  child. 
What  you  ask  is  free  service.  You  speak  of  a  man's  freedom  because  all  his  actions 
are  free  ;  he  is  a  free  man  in  the  use  of  his  powers.  You  speak  also  of  the  charm 
and  the  graciousness  wherewith  a  thing  is  done.  The  meaning  of  it  is  that  it  is  the 
homage  of  a  free  man.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  attitude  of  the  slave  and 
the  splendid  homage  of  a  free  man.  Make  men  conscious  of  their  freedom,  let  them 
feel  that  what  they  do  is  the  free  homage  of  the  free  men,  and  you  will  have  from 
them  what  is  worth  more  than  all  the  tyranny  of  law.  {Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)     False 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

notions  of  liberty  in  religion  and  government  destructive  of  both  : — I.  State  the 
TRUE  notion  of  CHRISTIAN  LIBERTY.  1.  A  freedom  from  the  power  and  dominion  of 
sin  and  the  devil,  and  the  curse  of  the  moral  law.  2.  A  freedom  from  the  ritual 
ceremonies  of  the  Mosaic  law  and  the  spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,  abrogated  by  our 
Saviour.  3.  A  free  use  of  all  things  that  are  in  their  nature  indifferent ;  that  is, 
things  concerning  which  the  law  has  made  no  determination ;  leaving  us  at  our  own 
choice,  either  to  act  or  not  to  act.  II.  Instance  some  of  the  abuses  of  this 
LIBERTY,  wherein  it  may  be  so  perverted  as  to  be  made  a  cloak  of  maliciousness. 
1.  As  to  principles.  It  would  be  endless  to  recount  all  the  blasphemies,  heresies, 
and  errors  maintained  under  this  specious  pretence.  2.  Secondly,  to  their  practice. 
Which  we  shall  find  to  be  a  true  transcript  of  their  principles.  For  such  a  free- 
thinker, if  he  be  consistent  with  himself,  must  be  a  free  actor  too.  He  is  equally 
without  guide  or  governor,  owes  as  little  allegiance  to  his  prince,  as  faith  to  his  God ; 
he  is  a  rebel  against  both  ;  sets  up  his  own  will  as  the  supreme  measure  of  his 
actions,   for  which  he  is   answerable  to  nobody  but  himself.      III.   Prove   the 

ABSURDITY,  AS    WELL    AS   WICKEDNESS,    OF    SUCH    ABUSES   OF    OUR    LIBERTY.       Upon    what 

bottom  would  these  lawless  men  found  their  liberty  ?  By  what  authority  do  they 
these  things  ?  Or  who  gave  them  this  authority  ?  Whence  was  it  ?  From  heaven 
or  of  men  ?  They  own  the  authority  of  neither.  But  they  still  insist,  it  is  their 
natural  right,  as  free-born  men  ;  whereby  none  is  subject  any  further  than  compact 
and  content  obliges  him.  What  do  they  mean  by  this  so  much  talked  of  natural 
right?  Is  it  essentially,  and  independently  inherent  in  themselves,  or  communi- 
cated by  another  ?  If  they  say  the  former,  can  anything  belonging  to  a  dependent 
being  be  itself  independent  ?  If  the  latter,  who  is  that  other  who  so  communicated 
this  right  ?  Who  can  communicate  a  natural  right,  but  the  author  of  nature  ?  To 
speak  strictly,  no  being  has  any  natural  right  but  God ;  who  by  virtue  of  creation 
has  a  natural  essential  right  to  the  obedience  of  His  creatures.  But  those  creatures 
themselves  have  naturally  no  right  to  anything,  unless  it  can  be  proved  that  they 
had  a  natural  right  to  be  created.     IV.  The  happy  consequences  of  true  liberty, 

AND  THE  misery  AND  SLAVERY  OF  THE  MISTAKEN  NOTIONS  ABOUT  IT.       Having  shown  the 

absurdity  and  wickedness  of  this  false  principle  in  itself,  as  utterly  inconsistent  with 
reason  and  religion,  gospel  and  law,  the  contrary  position  must  be  irrefragably 
true,  and  entirely  agreeable  to  the  laws  of  God  and  man ;  and  there  needs  not 
much  argument  to  prove  that  the  effects  must  resemble  the  causes,  and  that 
happiness  and  prosperity,  peace,  and  freedom  must  be  the  natural  product  of  sub- 
jection to  certain  laws ;  and  shame  and  misery,  confusion  and  slavery,  of  their 
immunity  from  all.  (H.  Sacheverell,  D.D.)  On  freedom  of  thought :— 1.  The 
great  purpose  for  which  the  powers  and  the  liberty  of  thought  were  bestowed  wag 
for  the  discovery  of  truth  ;  for  the  discovery  of  those  speculative  truths  which  con- 
duct us  to  the  love  of  God,  and  of  those  practical  truths  which  enable  us  to  be  the 
ministers  of  good  to  man.  When,  therefore,  freedom  of  thought  is  employed  as  a 
means  to  these  its  destined  ends,  it  is  a  virtuous  principle,  and  he  who  feels  it  is 
acting  from  some  of  the  most  respectable  motives  of  his  nature.  He  is  acting,  in 
the  first  place,  in  conformity  to  the  laws  of  his  constitution,  and  has  the  secret 
voice  of  conscience  applauding  him  amid  every  difficulty  of  his  progress.  He  is 
acting,  in  the  second  place,  with  the  dignity  that  belongs  to  the  character  of  man  ; 
and,  while  the  world  around  him  is  swayed  either  by  the  prejudices  of  antiquity, 
or  by  the  idler  prejudices  of  novelty,  he  stands  as  the  superior  to  all  the  prejudices 
which  influence  lower  minds.  2.  When  freedom  of  thought  is  employed  as  an  end 
in  itself,  it  is  a  principle  which  arises  from  very  different  causes,  and  is  productive 
of  very  different  effects.  There  is  naturally  much  admiration  due  to  that  strength 
and  independence  of  mind  which  can  detect  error,  or  which  can  discover  truth  ;  and 
there  is  accordingly,  much  sincere  admiration  paid  to  it.  It  is  in  this  admiration 
that  the  danger  and  the  snare  consist.  Because  freedom  of  thought  has  been  the 
great  instrument  of  the  discovery  of  truth,  it  is  hastily  concluded  that  all  this  ia 
due  to  the  freedom  of  thought  itself  rather  than  to  the  effects  produced.  If  you  feel 
that  opinions  are  valuable  in  your  estimation,  not  because  they  are  free  but  because 
they  are  true,  then  go  on,  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  man,  to  the  true  honours  of 
your  moral  and  intellectual  being.  It  is  in  this  discipline  you  can  acquire  for  your- 
selves permanent  fame.  But  if  in  the  employment  of  the  powers  of  thought  you 
look  only  to  your  own  distinction,  and  care  not  for  the  ends  for  which  they  were 
given,  pause,  I  beseech  you,  before  you  advance  farther.  (A.  Alison.)  Free 
will  .-—Liberty,  freedom  !  The  young  heart  bounds  at  the  thought.  It  speaks  of 
the  unloosing  of  chains,  the  free  roaming  of  the  uncaged  soul,  the  full  freedom  of 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  191 

the  -will.  Man  was  born,  created  to  be  free  ;  full  freedom  is  his  original  endowment, 
the  condition  of  his  nobility  of  soul,  his  distinction  from  the  irrational  creatures, 
the  image  of  God  in  which  he  was  created.  As  contrasted  with  necessity,  it  is  as 
indestructible  as  in  Almighty  God  who  created  it.  What  then  is  the  freedom  which 
the  prophets  foretold,  which  Jesus  said  that  He  would  give  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  sons  of  God  ?  Christ  freed  us  from  the  yoke  of  sin  by  the  freedom  of  righteous- 
ness :  He  freed  us  from  the  dominion  of  concupiscence  by  the  freedom  of  the  Spirit 
and  the  dominion  of  love  and  grace.  "  Tell  me,"  says  Socrates  to  a  disciple, 
"  thinkest  thou  that  freedom  is  a  great  and  glorious  possession  alike  to  a  man  and  a 
state?  "  "  Most  exceedingly."  "  Whoso  then  is  ruled  by  bodily  pleasures  and  on 
account  of  them  cannot  do  what  is  best,  thinkest  thou  that  he  is  free  ?"  "  Not  at 
all."  "For  to  do  what  is  best  seemeth  to  them  to  be  free;  and  so  then,  to  have 
those  who  should  hinder  so  doing  to  be  unfree  ?  "  "  Certainly."  "  The  incontinent 
seem  then  to  you  to  be  unfree?  "  "  Assuredly."  "And  they  seem  to  you  not  only 
to  be  hindered  from  doing  the  best  things,  but  to  be  constrained  to  do  the  foulest?" 
"Both  alike."  "But  what  sort  of  masters  deemest  thou  those  to  be,  who  hinder 
what  is  best,  constrain  to  what  is  worst?"  "The  worst."  "And  what  slavery 
thinkest  thou  the  worst?"  "  That  to  the  worst  masters."  "  The  incontinent  then 
are  enslaved  to  the  worst  slavery  ?  "  concludes  Socrates.  "  I  think  so."  You  know 
how  with  one  consent  heathen  philosophers  said,  "  The  wise  man  alone  is  free." 
"  He  alone  is  indeed  free,"  says  Philo,  "  who  taketh  God  alone  for  his  commander." 
"  The  good  man  alone  is  free  ;  for  the  evil  man,  though  he  deny  it,  is  the  slave  of 
as  many  lords  as  he  has  vices."  "Lust  cometh,  and  saith,  'Thou  art  mine,  for 
thou  covetest  the  things  of  the  body.  In  such  or  such  a  passion  thou  soldest 
thyself  to  me;  I  counted  down  the  price  for  thee.'  Avarice  cometh  and  saith, 
'  Thou  art  mine ;  the  gold  and  the  silver  which  thou  hast  is  the  price  of  thy  slavery.' 
Luxury  cometh  and  saith,  '  Thou  art  mine  ;  amid  the  winecups  I  purchased  thee ; 
amid  the  feasts  I  gained  thee.'  Ambition  cometh  and  said  to  thee,  'Thou  art 
aurely  mine.  Knowest  thou  not,  that  to  that  end  I  gave  thee  command  over  others, 
that  thou  thyself  mightest  serve  me?  Knowest  thou  not,  that  to  that  end  I 
bestowed  power  on  thee,  that  I  might  bring  thee  under  mine  own  ? '  All  vices 
come,  and  one  by  one  they  chant,  '  Thou  art  mine.'  He  whom  so  many  claim, 
how  vile  a  slave  is  he  !  "  From  this  slavery  Christ  came  to  set  us  free.  "  If  the 
Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  But  then  are  we  not  still  under 
a  law  ?  and,  if  we  are  under  a  law,  how  have  we  that  freedom  which  youth 
especially  longs  for  ?  Is  then  lawlessness  the  only  freedom  ?  Men  admire  what  is 
called  "the  reign  of  law,"  throughout  the  boundless  realms  of  God's  creation.  So 
did  they  idolise  the  beauty  of  the  conception,  that  they  are  jealous  even  of  Almighty 
God  Himself,  and  would  not  have  Him,  by  any  higher  law  of  His  love,  suspend  His 
usual  modes  of  His  operation,  Law  then  is  some  thing  beautiful.  Even  in  human 
things,  what  in  sights  and  sounds  so  thrills  through  us,  as  when  many  voices  or 
minds  through  obedience  to  a  law  become  as  one  ?  What  are  all  these  deeds  of  united 
heroism,  when  all  lay  "  with  their  back  to  the  field  and  their  feet  to  the  foe,"  or 
that  inscription,  "  To  Lacedaemon  tell,  that  here,  obeying  her  behests,  we  fell,"  but 
the  wills  of  many,  obeying,  to  the  death,  minds  without  them  whose  will  they 
reverenced  ?  And  cannot  Almighty  God  make  us  love  a  law,  which  is  the 
transcript  of  His  perfections,  the  law  of  love ;  a  law  which  responds  to  the 
law  of  our  better  nature  within ;  which  brings  our  whole  being  into  harmony 
with  itself,  with  our  fellow-beings  and  with  Him.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
Liberty,  its  use  and  safeguards : — I.  Liberty.  1.  EarUest  references.  No  doubt  the 
reference,  in  the  first  place,  is  to  that  liberty  of  the  gospel  which  distinguished  it 
from  Judaism  or  the  old  Mosaic  law.  Then  came  the  gospel,  that  more  spiritual 
and  manly  dispensation,  with  its  great  rush  of  Uberty.  Law  gave  way  to 
principle,  pupilage  to  manhood,  contracted  interests  to  world-wide  fellowship.  But 
with  that  freedom  came  danger :  the  danger  of  excess,  of  self-assertion,  of  even 
licence.  2.  But  this  early  application  and  experience  was  no  uncommon  or 
exceptional  one.  It  was  an  example  and  an  illustration  of  a  very  common  danger 
and  a  very  common  experience.  The  early  Christians  were  tempted  to  excess,  not 
because  they  had  been  Jews  and  had  become  Christians,  but  because  they  were  men 
of  like  passions  with  the  rest  of  mankind.  (1)  There  is  a  great'freedom  open  to 
man,  but  a  freedom  which  does  not  belong  to  man  completely  nor  at  once.  Within 
certain  wide  limits,  man  has  a  great  area  of  freedom.  Physically,  socially, 
providentially,  man  cannot  do  all  he  likes,  but  within  a  wide  area  he  has  a  liberty 
so  great  that  few  of  us  in  our  daily  life  are  ever  brought  up  sharply  by  obstacles 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

and  reminded  that  we  are  hedged  about  by  hindrances.  It  is  only  when  we 
attempt  the  impossible  or  the  extraordinary.  (2)  Now,  this  liberty,  great  as  it  is, 
is  not  attainable  at  once ;  we  enter  upon  it  gradually,  often  slowly.  There  is 
childhood  turning  to  manhood,  the  wider  area  of  liberty  becomes  at  the  man's 
di-sposal ;  but  this  is  reached  only  after  the  lapse  of  the  years  of  childhood,  and 
boyhood,  and  youth.  Or  again,  look  at  what  is  called  success  in  life,  when  the 
man  becomes  more  and  more  his  own  master,  and  the  resources  of  life  become 
more  and  more  his  ;  but  this,  too,  is  gained  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  after 
years  of  toil.  Or,  once  more,  take  political  freedom.  But  here,  too,  liberty  is 
gained  not  so  much  at  once  or  by  leaps  and  bounds.  (3)  Thus  we  have  seen  that 
a  great  freedom  is  open  to  man,  and  that  this  freedom  is  not  attainable  at  once, 
but  rather  gradually.  The  question  now  presents  itself  as  to  the  extent  of  that 
liberty.  As  regards  the  individual.  He  has  liberty,  even  when  he  treads  upon 
forbidden  ground.  It  is  true  that  sooner  or  later  the  violated  law  will  vindicate 
itself.  Nevertheless,  he  is  free  to  violate  these  laws.  So  with  regard  to  the  rights 
and  interests  of  others.  Beyond  a  certain  point,  his  fellow-men  will  step  in  and 
restrain  his  liberty  of  action,  and  by  pains  and  penalties  contract  his  freedom. 
But  up  to  this  point  the  individual  has  a  wide  field  for  the  exercise  of  even  his 
selfishness.  Once  more,  with  regard  to  God.  It  is  true  man  cannot  thwart  the 
great  sweep  of  God's  providence.  Yet,  right  or  wrong,  good  or  evil,  wisdom  or 
folly :  these  he  can  choose.  And  the  great  patience  of  God  in  allowing  man  to 
disregard  Him  is  one  of  the  great  solemn  facts  of  life.  Man's  liberty  is  great,  and 
the  wonder  is  not  at  man's  lack  of  freedom  ;  it  is  rather  the  other  way  :  how  fully 
and  to  what  an  extent  he  can  act  as  if  he  were  his  own  master.  3.  I3ut  with  this 
liberty  comes  the  temptation  to  misuse  it,  to  abuse  it,  to  make  it  an  occasion  of 
evil  rather  than  of  good ;  and  this  individually,  socially,  rehgiously.  Individually, 
by  giving  rein  to  the  passions,  turning  liberty  into  licence.  Socially,  by  defying 
the  opinions  and  claims  of  others.  Eeligiously — or  rather,  irreligiously — by 
ignoring  God  and  His  claim  to  our  obedience,  setting  up  self  as  the  one  great 
object  of  worship.  And  so  liberty  becomes  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  and  an  occasion 
of  evil.  II.  The  use  and  safeguakd  or  liberty.  1.  The  conditions  of  the  prob- 
lem are  twofold.  There  must  be  respect  for  freedom  and  the  recognition  of 
liberty  on  the  one  hand ;  and  on  the  other,  reckless  and  malicious  use  of  freedom 
must  be  counteracted.  These  are  the  two  sides  of  the  problem  which  must  be  kept 
in  view.  Extreme  methods  violate  both  these.  On  the  one  hand,  if  mere  restraint 
be  adopted,  the  result  must  be  a  reduction  of  liberty.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
absence  of  all  restraint  be  allowed,  the  result  will  be  the  destruction  of  aU  true 
freedom.  2.  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  if  liberty  is  to  be  preserved,  and  yet  not 
abused  ?  Three  conditions  must  be  fulfilled :  (1)  There  must  be  respect  for  free- 
dom, not  the  depreciation  of  it,  it  anything  the  enhancing  of  it.  (2)  But  that 
freedom  needs  to  be  guided  towards  noble  ends  to  become  a  great  spontaneous 
power  which  of  itself  will  influence  the  life  aright,  and  direct  it  towards  what  is 
high,  and  generous,  and  good.  This  is  the  more  necessary  the  more  freedom  is 
granted.  Side  by  side  with  freedom,  if  it  is  not  to  be  abused,  must  be  developed 
the  spirit  of  voluntary  acquiescence  in  what  is  right  and  a  conscientious  desire  for 
what  is  best.  (3)  The  third  condition  is  the  sense  of  responsibility  ;  that  as  each 
gift,  power,  opportunity  has  its  corresponding  responsibility,  so  has  this  freedom ; 
that  the  greater  the  freedom,  the  greater  will  be  the  responsibility  for  its  use.  3. 
Now,  this  is  just  what  Christianity  has  done.  At  a  critical  period  in  human  history, 
when  the  old  order  of  tyranny  and  corruption  was  crumbling,  and  the  ground  was 
being  prepared  for  the  growth  of  liberty,  Christianity  came,  implanting  great 
principles,  awakening  the  consciousness  of  wrong,  and  stirring  up  the  love  of  what 
is  right,  and  true,  and  good.  Thus,  as  the  old  restraint  of  the  law  passed  away, 
the  new  spirit  of  personal  responsibility,  that  great  spiritual  force,  came  to  men ; 
and  just  because  Christianity  was  this  spiritual  force,  it  could  do  what  no  other 
power  did.  It  could  do  without  the  old  Jewish  economy,  it  could  sap  the  founda- 
tions of  tyranny,  it  could  be  the  promoter  of  liberty.  It  is  this  action  of 
Christianity  which  is  illustrated  in  St.  Peter's  words.  See  how  naturally, 
instinctively,  and  comprehensively  he  deals  with  the  question  of  liberty.  "  As 
free" — as  if  he  said,  "You  are  free,  you  have  been  made  free,  you  have  a  right 
to  be  free.  The  old  bondage  of  the  law  is  gone,  gone  for  ever,  and  the  freedom 
which  is  yours  has  been  brought  to  you  by  Christ.  It  is  nothing  less  than  a  God- 
given  po.ssession."  But  every  possession  has  its  accompanying  responsibility ;  the 
free  man  is  not  the  same  as  the  irresponsible  man.     In  fact,  our  responsibility 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  193 

increases  with  our  powers,  our  possessions,  our  gifts,  our  opportunities.     What, 
then,  is  the  great  principle  and  power  which  is  to  direct  each  one  in  the  use  of  this 
liberty  ?    It  is  the  great  sense  that  while  you  are  free,  you  are  yet  not  free.     You 
are  to  act  "  as  the  servants  of   God."      Liberty  is  recognised,  but  a  service   is 
presented  as  well ;  but  one  which  is  not  enforced,  it  can  be  given  or  refused.     But 
these  two,  liberty  and  service,  are  connected  by  a  sense  of  responsibility  :  and  that 
a  responsibility  which  recognises  the  claims  of  God  upon  them.     It  is  just  that 
which  imparts  dignity,  and  power,  and  great  gladness  to  duty,  when  it  is  thus  seen 
in  the  light  of  the  great  and  glorious  service  of  God.     For  it  is  only  as  we  use  our 
liberty  and  all  our  powers  in  obedience  to  God  that  we  can  hope  and  accomplish 
much.     While  we  stand,  or  try  to  stand,  alone,  while  we  reject  God  as  the  great 
»nd  of  our  service,  our  powers  are  feeble,  and  our  acts  work  little  good,  great  evil, 
and  weariness  or  dissatisfaction  takes  the  heart  out  of  our  labour.     But  when  we 
bring  our  liberty  and  all  our  powers  into  the  service  of  God,  all  we  have  and  aU 
we  are  and  all  we  do  become  connected  with  what  is  best,  and,  falling  in  with  the 
great  work  of  God,  we  become  not  only  doubly  free,  but  doubly  useful  and  doubly 
strong.     (A.Boyd  Carpenter,  M.A.)         Christian  freedom: — Liberty  is  the  essence 
of  Christianity.     No  one  knows  what  it  is  to  be  quite  "  free  "  tiU  he  is  a  real 
Christian.     1.  A  converted  man,  by  the  fact,  at  once  is  "  free  "  from  his  past.     It 
is  "  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."     It  is  gone  "  away  into  a  land  not  inhabited," 
to  be  mentioned  no  more  !     That  is  "  liberty !  "     0  how  large,  and  how  sweet.     To 
know  that  the  entail  of  the  past  is  all  cut  off.     Therefore  the  converted  man  is 
"free,"  too,  from  thousands  of  chains  which  bind  other  men.     He  is  "free"  from 
death.     To  him  death  is  only  a  liberator.     All  it  can  do  is  to  unshackle  his  spirit 
from  the  thraldom  of  his  body.     The  grave  cannot  hold  him.     Satan  himself — 
the  great  captivator — is  a  captive.     2.  He  is  hi  freedom  from  his  present  self.     Sin 
does  not  rule  in  him  any  more  ;  the  world  no  longer  fascinates,  the  flesh  no  longer 
drags  him  down.     He  has  gone  up  far  above  those  things.     He  walks  his  higher 
path,  a  path  where   the   whole   man   can  expand   itself  ;    a  path   worthy  of  his 
immortality,  at  large,  satisfying,  infinite !     And  beyond  all  this,  that  "  man  in 
Christ"  has  now  "free"  access  to  God.     He  can  go  up  any  moment,  under  any 
circumstances  of  life,  and  he  can  tell  his  Father.    All  this  must  go  to  make  freedom. 
Who,  then,  is  the  "free"  man,  but  he  whom  the  Lord  makes  free?     (J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)         Christian  liberty  : — There  is  not  anything  in  the  world  more  generally 
desired  than  liberty,  nor  scarce  anything  more  generally  abused.     The  apostles, 
therefore,  especially   St.  Peter   and   St.  Paul,  the  two   chiefest  planters   of   the 
Churches,  endeavoured   early  to  instruct  believers  in  the   true   doctrine,  and  to 
direct  them  in  the  right  use  of  their  Christian  liberty  so  often  in  their  several 
epistles   as   fit   occasion   was   offered   thereunto.      And   we  may  further  observe 
concerning  these  two  apostles  that  St.  Paul  usually-  toucheth  upon  this  argument 
of  liberty  as  it  is  to  be  exercised  in  the  case  of  scandal ;  but  St.  Peter  oftener,  as  in 
the  case  of  obedience.     From  which  words  I  gather  three  observations,  all  con- 
cerning our  Christian  liberty,  in  that  branch   of   it  especially  which  respecteth 
human  ordinances,  and  the   use  of    the   creatures  and  of  all  indifferent  things. 
Either  1.  In  the  existence  of  it,  as  free.     2.  In  the  exercise  of  it,  "and  not  using 
your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness."     3.  In  the  end  of  it,  "but  as  the 
servants  of  God."     The  first  observation  :  We  must  so  submit  ourselves  to  superior 
authority,  as  that  we  do  not  thereby  impeach  our  Christian  liberty,  "as  free." 
The  second  this :  We  must  so  maintain  our  liberty,  as  that  we  do  not  under  that 
colour  either  commit  any  sin  or  omit  any  requisite  office,  either  of  charity  or  duty, 
"  and  not  using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness."     The  third  this  :  In  the 
■whole  exercise,  both  of  the  liberty  we  have  in  Christ  and  of  the  respect  we  owe 
unto  men,  we  must  evermore  remember  ourselves  to  be,  and  accordingly  behave 
ourselves  as  those  that  are  God's  servants,  "  but  as  the  servants  of  God."     The 
sum  of  the  whole  three  pomts  in  brief  this :  We  must  be  careful  without  either 
infringing  or  abusing  our  liberty  at  all  times,  and  in  all  things  to  serve  God.     Now 
then  to  the  several  points  as  they  lie  in  the  text.    "  As  free."     Which  words  have 
manifest   reference   to   the    exhortation    delivered   three   verses   before   the   text. 
Submit  yourselves  to  public  governors,  both  supreme  and  subordinate,  be  subject 
to  your  own  particular  masters,  honour  all  men  with  those  proper  respects  that 
belong  to  them  in  their  several  stations  ;  but  look  you,  do  all  this,  not  as  slaves 
but  as  free,  do  it  without  impeachment  of  the  liberty  you  have  in  Christ.     First, 
this  liberty  is  purchased  for  us  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  is  therefore  usually 
called  by  the  name  of  Christian  liberty  (John  viii.  36 ;  Gal.  v.  1).     Secondly,  is 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.^p.  n, 

revealed  unto  us  outwardly  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  God  and  of  Christ, 
which  is  therefore  called  the  law  of  liberty  (James  i.  25;  ii.  12).     And  thirdly,  is 
conveyed  unto  us  inwardly  and  effectually  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
and  of  Christ,  which  is  therefore  called  a  free  spirit  (Psa.  li.  12  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17). 
Now  this  liberty,  so  dearly  purchased,  so  clearly  revealed,  so  firmly  conveyed,  it  is 
our  duty  to  maintain  (Gal.  v.  1).     A  thing  whereof  it  behoveth  us  to  have  a  special 
care,  and  that  for  weighty  respects.     First,  in  regard  of  the  trust  reposed  in  us  in 
this  behalf.     Every  honest  man  taketh  himself  bound  to  discharge  with  faithful- 
ness the   trust  reposed   in   him.     Now  these   two,  the   Christian   faith  and   the 
Christian  liberty,  are  of  all  other  the  choicest  jewels  whereof  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
hath  made  His  Church  the  depository.    Especially  since  we  cannot  so  do,  secondly, 
without  manifest  wrong  to  Christ ;  nor,  thirdly,  without  great  dishonour  to  God. 
Not  without  wrong  to  Christ.     St.  Paul  therefore  disputeth  it  as  upon  a  ground  of 
right.    "Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  be  ye  not  the  servants  of  men"  (1  Cor.  vii.  22). 
You  cannot  dispose  yourselves  in  any  other  service  without  apparent  wrong  to 
Him.     Neither  only  do  we  injure  Christ  by  making  ourselves  the  servants  of  men, 
but  we  dishonour  God  also,  which  is  a  third   reason.     For  to  whom  we  make 
ourselves  servants  him  we  make  our  Lord  and  God.      The   covetous  worldling 
therefore,  by  serving  mammon,  maketh  mammon  his  god.     Yea,  and  our  own  too, 
which  may  stand  for  a  fourth  reason.     "Ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,"  saith  the 
apostle  (1  Cor.  i.  26).     He  would  have  men  take  notice  of  their  Christian  calling, 
that  so  they  might  walk  worthy  of   it.     Now  by  our  calling  we   are  free   men 
(Gal.  V.  13).    And  being  so,  we  infinitely  abase  ourselves  and  disparage  our  calling, 
when  of  free  men  we  become  slaves.     Leo  the  Emperor,  therefore,  by  special  and 
severe  constitution,  forbade  all  free  men  within  the  empire  sale  of  their  liberties, 
calling  it  f  acinus  in  those  that  were  so  presumptuous  as  to  buy  them,  and  no  less 
than  folly,  yea,  madness  in  those  that  were  so  base  as  to  sell  them ;  not  without 
some  indignation  at  the  former  laws  for  suffering  such  an  indignity  to  be  so  long 
practised  without  either  chastisement  or  restraint.     And  if  he  justly  censured  them 
as  men  of  abject  minds,  that  would  for  any  consideration  in  the  world  willingly 
forego  their  civil  and  Eoman  liberty,  what  flatness  of  spirit  possesseth  us  if  we 
wilfully  betray  our  Christian  and  spiritual  liberty?      Whereby,  besides  the  dis- 
honour, we  do  also,  with  our  own  hands,  pull  upon  our  own  heads  a  great  deal 
of  unnecessary  cumber.     For  whereas  we  might  draw  an  easy  yoke,  carry  a  light 
burden,  observe  commandments  that  are  not  grievous  in  the  service  of  God  and 
of  Christ,  by  putting  ourselves  into  the  service  of  men  we  thrust  our  necks  into  a 
hard  yoke  of  bondage.     Besides  these,  that  do  it  thus  by  open  assault,  I  would 
there  were  not  others  also  that  did  by  secret  underminings  go  about  to  deprive  us 
of  that  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus,  even  then  when  they  most  pretend  the 
maintenance  of  it.     We  oftentimes  betray  away  our  own  liberty  when  we  might 
maintain  it,  and  so  become  servants  unto  men,  when  we  both  might  and  ought  to 
keep  ourselves  free.     Which  fault  we  shall  be  the  better  able  to  avoid  when  we 
shall  know  the  true  causes,  whence  it  springeth  ;  which  are  evermore  one  of  these 
two,  an  unsound  head  or  an  unsound  heart.     Sometimes  we  esteem  too  highly  of 
others,  so  far  as  either  to  envassal  our  judgments  to  their  opinions,  or  to  enthral 
our  consciences  to  their  precepts,  and  that  is  our  weakness ;  there  the  fault  is  in 
the  head.     Sometimes  we  apply  ourselves  to  the  wills  of  others,  with  an  eye  to  our 
own  benefit  or  satisfaction  in  some  other  carnal  or  worldly  respect,  and  that  is  our 
fieshliness ;  there  the  fault  is  in  the  heart.     This  latter  is  the  worst,  and  therefore 
in  the  first  place  to  be  avoided.     The  most  and  worse  sort,  unconscionable  men, 
do  often  transgress  this  way.     There  is,  I  confess,  much  reverence  to  be  given  to 
the  writings  of  the  godly  ancient  fathers,  more  to  the  canons  and  decrees  of  general 
and  provincial  councils,  and  not  a  little  to  the  judgment  of  learned,  sober,  and 
godly  divines  of  later  and  present  times.     But  we  may  not  build  our  faith  upon 
them  as  upon  a  sure  foundation.     What  is  Calvin  or  Luther,  nay,  what  is  Paul  or 
Apollos,  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed  ?     That  is  to  say,  instruments,  but  not 
lords  of  your  belief.     To  do  God  and  ourselves  right,  it  is  necessary  we  should  with 
our  utmost  strength  maintain  the  doctrine  and  power  of  that  liberty  wherewith 
Christ  hath  endowed  His  Church,  without  either  usurping  the  mastery  over  others, 
or  subjecting  ourselves  to  their  servitude,  so  as  to  surrender  either  our  judgments 
or  consciences  to  be  wholly  disposed  according  to  the  opinions  or  wills  of  men, 
though  of  never  so  excellent  piety  or  parts.     We  must  so  maintain  our  liberty  that 
we  abuse  it  not,  as  we  shall,  if,  under  the  pretence  of  Christian  liberty,  we  either 
adventure  the  doing  of   some  unlawful  thing,  or  omit  the  performance  of  any 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  195 

requisite  duty.  "As  free,  and  not  using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness." 
The  apostle's  intention  in  the  whole  clause  will  the  better  appear  when  we  know 
what  is  meant  by  cloak  and  what  by  maliciousness.  The  Greek  word  kniKaXvuiia, 
which  is  nowhere  else  found  in  the  whole  New  Testament  but  in  this  verse  only, 
signifieth  properly  any  covering,  as  the  covering  of  badgers'  skins  that  was  spread 
over  the  tabernacle  is  in  the  Septuagint's  translation  called  iTriKaXvfifia.  And 
it  is  very  fitly  translated  a  cloak,  in  respect  of  that  notion  wherein  the  word  in  our 
English  tongue  is  commonly  used,  to  note  some  fair  and  colourable  pretence, 
wherewith  we  conceal  from  the  knowledge  of  others  the  dishonesty  and  faultiness 
of  our  intentions  in  some  things  practised  by  us.  It  is  a  corruption  very  common 
among  us ;  whatsoever  we  are  within,  yet  we  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  outwardly. 
"We  are  loth  to  forbear  those  sins  which  we  are  ashamed  to  profess,  and  therefore 
we  colour  them  and  cloak  them  that  we  may  both  do  the  thing  we  desire  and  yet 
miss  the  shame  we  deserve.  You  see  what  the  cloak  is  ;  see  now  what  is  malicious- 
ness. KaKia  is  the  word,  which  is  properly  rendered  by  malice  or  maliciousness. 
And  as  these  English  words,  and  the  Latin  word  malicia  whence  these  are  borrowed, 
so  likewise  Ko/cta  in  Greek  is  many  times  used  to  signify  one  special  kind  of  sin, 
which  is  directly  opposite  to  brotherly  love  and  charity,  and  the  word  is  usually  so 
taken,  wheresoever  it  is  either  set  in  opposition  to  such  charity  or  else  ranked  with 
other  special  sins  of  the  same  kind,  such  as  are  anger,  envy,  hatred,  and  the  like. 
And  if  we  should  so  understand  it  here,  the  sense  were  good;  for  it  is  a  very 
common  thing  in  the  world  to  offend  against  brotherly  charity  under  the  colour 
of  Christian  liberty,  and  doubtless  our  apostle  here  intendeth  the  remedy  of  that 
abuse  also.  Yet  I  rather  conceive  that  the  word  maliciousness  in  this  place  is  to 
be  taken  in  a  larger  comprehension  for  all  manner  of  evil  and  of  naughtiness.  To 
use  hberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh,  and  to  use  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  malicious- 
ness is  the  very  same  thing,  and  it  is  a  very  great  sin.  For  the  proof  whereof  I 
shall  need  to  use  no  other  arguments  than  the  words  of  the  text  will  afford.  First, 
every  act  of  maliciousness  is  a  sin  ;  and,  secondly,  to  cloak  it  with  a  fair  pretence, 
maketh  it  a  greater  sin  ;  but  then,  thirdly,  to  use  Christian  liberty  for  the  cloak 
giveth  a  farther  addition  to  it  and  maketh  it  a  greater  sin.  First,  it  is  a  sin  to  do 
any  act  of  maliciousness.  Nor  so  only,  but  it  is  a  hurtful  thing,  and  of  a  noxious 
and  malignant  quality,  as  leaven  souring  the  whole  lump  of  our  services  to  God. 
But  if  men  will  need  be  hypocrites,  and  must  have  a  cloak  for  their  maliciousness, 
they  might  yet  at  least  bethink  themselves  of  somewhat  else  of  lighter  price  to 
make  a  cloak  of,  and  not  to  use  to  so  base  a  purpose  so  rich  a  stulT,  as  is  this 
blessed  liberty  which  the  Son  of  God  hath  purchased  with  His  most  precious 
blood.  As  in  nature,  so  in  morality,  by  how  much  better  anything  is  in 
the  right  use  of  it,  by  so  much  is  it  worse  in  the  abuse.  Now  we  see  how 
great  a  sin  it  is  thus  to  abuse  our  liberty  it  wiU  be  needful  in  the  next  place  to 
inquire  more  particularly  wherein  this  abuse  consisteth,  that  so  we  may  be  the 
better  able  to  avoid  it.  We  are  therefore  to  know  that  Christian  liberty  may  be 
abused  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  these  four  ways  following :  First,  we  may 
make  it  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  if  we  hold  ourselves  by  virtue  thereof  discharged 
from  our  obedience,  either  to  the  whole  moral  law  of  God  or  to  any  part  of  it. 
Great  offenders  this  way  are  the  libertines,  who  quite  cancel  the  whole  law  of  God 
under  the  pretence  of  Christian  liberty,  as  if  they  that  were  in  Christ  were  no 
longer  tied  to  yield  obedience  to  the  moral  law,  which  is  a  pestilent  error  and  of 
very  dangerous  consequence.  The  law  considered  as  a  rule  can  no  more  be 
abolished  or  changed  than  can  the  nature  of  good  and  evil  be  abolished  or  changed. 
It  is  our  singular  comfort  then,  and  the  happiest  fruit  of  our  Christian  liberty,  that 
we  are  freed  by  Christ,  and  through  faith  in  Him  from  the  covenant  and  curse  of 
the  law  ;  but  we  must  know  that  it  is  our  duty,  notwithstanding  the  liberty  that 
we  have  in  Christ,  to  frame  our  lives  and  conversations  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
law.  The  second  way  whereby  our  liberty  may  be  used  for  a  cloak  of  malicious- 
ness is  when  we  stretch  it  in  the  use  of  things  that  are  indeed  indifferent  beyond 
the  just  bounds  of  sobriety.  It  belongeth  to  every  sober  Christian  advisedly  to 
consider,  not  only  what  in  itself  may  lawfully  be  done  or  left  undone,  but  also 
what  in  godly  wisdom  and  discretion  is  fittest  for  him  to  do,  or  not  to  do,  upon  all 
occasions,  as  the  exigence  of  present  circumstances  shall  require.  He  that  without 
such  due  consideration  will  do  all  he  may  do  at  all  times,  under  colour  of  Christian 
liberty,  he  shall  undoubtedly  sometime  use  his  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness. 
It  may  be  done  a  third  way,  and  that  is  by  using  it  uncharitably,  which  is  the  case 
whereon  I  told  you  St  Paul  beateth  so  often.     When  we  use  our  liberty  so  as  to 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

stumble  the  weak  consciences  of  our  brethren  thereby.     He  that  will  have  his  own 
way  in  everything  he  hath  a  liberty  unto,  whosoever  shall  take  offence  at  it  maketh 
his  liberty  but  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  by  using  it  uncharitably.     The  fourth  and 
last  way,  whereby  we  may  use  our  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  is  by  using 
it  undutifully,  pretending  it  unto  our  disobedience  to  lawful  authority.     And  so  I 
pass  to  my  last  observation.     The  observation  was  this  :  In  the  whole  exercise 
both  of  the  liberty  we  have  in  Christ  and  of  those  respects  we  owe  unto  men,  we 
must  evermore  remember  ourselves  to  be,  and  accordingly  behave  ourselves  as  those 
that   are   God's   servants;   in  these  last  words,  "But  as  the  servants  of  God," 
containing  our  condition  and  our  carriage.     For  the  first.  We  cannot  imagine  any 
consideration,  that  may  be  found  in  any  service  in  the  world,  to  render  it  desirable, 
which  is  not  to  be  found,  and  that  in  a  far  more  eminent  degree,  in  this  service  of 
God.     If  justice  may  provoke  us,  or  necessity  enforce  us,  or  easiness  hearten  us,  or 
honour  allure  us,  or  profit  draw  us  to  any  service,  behold  here  they  all  concur. 
First,  It  is  the  most  just  service,  whether  we  look  at  the  title  of  right  on  His  part 
or   reasons    of    equity   on   ours.      It   is,    secondly,    the    most   necessary    service. 
Necessary,  first,  because  we  are  born  to  serve.    We  have  not  the  liberty  to  choose 
whether  we  will  serve  or  no  ;  all  the  liberty  we  have  is  to  choose  our  master.     It 
is  necessary,  secondly,  for  our  safety  and  security,  lest,  if  we  withdraw  our  service 
from  him,  we  perish  justly  in  our  rebellion.     It  is  necessary,  thirdly,  by  our  own 
voluntary  act,  when  we  bound  ourselves  by  solemn  vow  and  promise  in  the  face 
of  the  open  congregation  at  our  baptism.     It  is,  thirdly  (which  at  the  first  hearing 
may  seem  a  paradox,  yet  will  appear  upon   further  consideration  to  be  a  most 
certain  truth),  of  all  other  the  most  easy  service,  in  regard  both  of  the  certainty  of 
the  employment  and  of  the  help  we  have  towards  the  performance  of  it.     He  that 
serveth  many  masters,  or  even  but  one,  if  he  be  a  fickle  man,  he  never  knoweth 
the  end  of  his  work.     It  is  some  ease  to  know  certainly  what  we  must  do ;  but 
much  more  to  be  assured  of  sufficient  help  for  the  doing  of  it.     It  is,  fourthly,  the 
most  honourable  service.     He  goeth  for  the  better  man  that  serveth  the  better 
master.     It  is,  fifthly  and  lastly,  the  most  profitable  service.     We  are  indeed  un- 
profitable servants  to  Him,  but  sure  we  have  a  very  profitable  service  under  Him. 
These  things  among  others  the  servant  of  God  may  certainly  reckon  upon  as  the 
certain  benefits  of  his  service  wherein  his  Master  will  not  fail  him  if  he  fail  not 
in   his   service — protection,   maintenance,    reward.      And  he  that  will  be    God's 
servant  in  truth,  and  not  only  in  title,  must  perform  all  these  to  his  heavenly 
Master.     Eeverence  is  the  first,  which  ever  ariseth  from  a  deliberate  apprehension 
of  some  worthiness  in  another  more  than  in  a  man's  self,  and  is  ever  accompanied 
with  a  fear  to  offend  and  a  care  to  please  the  person  reverenced ;  and  so  it  hath 
three  branches,  whereof  the  first  is  humility.     From  which  fear  of  offending  a  care 
and  desire  of  pleasing  cannot  be  severed.     Obedience  is  the  next  general  duty. 
Servants  be   obedient  to  your  masters.      We   are  to  show  our  obedience  to  our 
heavenly  Master  yet  further  by  submitting  to  His  wholesome  discipline  when  at 
any  time  He  shall  see  cause  to  give  us  correction.     The  third  and  last  general  duty 
is  fidelity.     "Who  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant?"     "Well  done,  thou  good  and 
faithful  servant,"  as  if  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  a  servant  consisted  in  his 
faithfulness.     The  first  whereof  is  heartiness  in  His  service.     There  are  many 
servants  in  the  world  that  will  work  hard  and  bustle  at  it  lustily  for  a  fit  and  so 
long  as  their  master's  eye  is  upon  them,  but  when  his  back  is  turned  can  be  content 
to  go  on  fair  and  softly  and  fellow-like.     Secondly,  We  must  show  our  faithfulness 
to  our  Master  by  our  zeal  in  His  behalf.     A  faithful  servant  will  not  endure  an  evil 
word  spoken  of   his   master  behind  his  back,  but  he  will  be  ready  upon  every 
occasion  to  vindicate  his  credit  and  to  magnify  him  unto  the  opinion  of  others. 
He  will  make  much  of  those  that  love  his  master,  and  set  the  less  by  those  that 
care  not  for  him.     And  as  to  his  credit  principally,  so  he  hath  an  eye  also,  in  the 
second  place,  to  the  profit  of  his  master.     Thirdly,  If  we  be  His  faithful  servants, 
we  should  let  it  appear  by  our  diligence  in  doing  His  business.     No  rnan  would 
willingly  entertain  an  idle  servant.     We  see  now  what  we  are  to  do  if  we  will 
approve   ourselves   and   our  services  unto  the  Lord   our  heavenly  Master.     {Bp. 
Sanderson.)         A  cloak  of  maliciousness.— Malicionmess  : — The  word  translated 
"  mahciousness  "  is  a  large  word.     Sometimes  it  means  "cowardice";  sometimes 
"baseness."     It  is  elsewhere  rendered  "evil,"  and  (James  i.  21)  "naughtiness" — 
which  perhaps  best  conveys  the  whole  sense.     "  As  free,  and  not  using  your  liberty 
for  a  cloak  of  anything  that  is  wrong."     For  instance,  there  are  those  vyho,  having 
found  forgiveness,  are  now  walking  very  carelessly,  and  do  not  hold  sin  in  sufficient 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  197 

abhorrence.  Still  more,  there  are  those  who,  because  they  have  escaped  from  one 
sin,  allow  themselves  in  another.  As  when  a  man  only  changes  worldly  pride  for 
spiritual  pride,  or  gives  up  carnal  indulgence  for  some  religious  selfishness,  or, 
worse  still,  when  a  man  deliberately  commits  a  sin,  with  a  thought:  "God  will 
forgive  it,  as  He  has  forgiven  other  of  my  sins.  When  I  have  done  it  I  shall 
pray,  and  I  shall  repent,  and  hear  no  more  about  it."  Or,  more  dreadful  yet,  "  I 
am  elect.  It  does  not  matter  what  I  do.  God  does  not  see  sin  in  His  saints." 
Awful  delusion!  Or — if  "evil"  do  not  go  to  such  a  length  as  that — it  may  be 
your  rehgious  freedom  has  made  you  very  severe  in  your  judgment  of  others.  You 
are  "free,"  but  you  are  not  sympathising  with  those  who  are  doing  the  very  thing 
which  once  bound  you.  You  have  still  almost  a  "  malicious  "  pleasure  in  hearing 
or  speaking  of  somebody's  faults  !  A  "free"  one  should  be  always  so  humble  in 
the  recollection  of  his  past  bondage  that  he  should  be  tender  and  gentle  to  the  sin 
which  he  once  did  !  But  say  you  have  "  liberty,"  how  are  you  using  it  ?  AU  your 
powers,  privileges,  hopes ;  are  you  consecrating  them  to  do  all  the  good  you  can  to 
the  Lord's  "free  "men?  That  serenity  of  mind  that  you  have  now  learnt,  that 
ease  of  heart,  that  sense  of  safety,  that  peace  that  God  has  given  you,  are  they 
held  as  talents  to  use  for  others  ?  All  your  former  experience  of  the  wickedness 
of  the  world,  is  it  now  being  turned  to  good  account  ?  or  are  you  content  with  your 
own  exemptions,  sitting,  as  indifferent  to  what  may  befall  your  fellow-creatures  ? 
And  is  not  all  that  "  using  liberty  as  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  "  ?  Surely  every 
"free"  one  should  be  a  liberator!  (J.  Vaughan,  BI.A.)  As  the  servants  of 
God. — God's  servants : — The  good  old  word  servant  is  going  out  of  fashion.  In  a 
mission  held  lately,  some  services  for  domestic  servants  were  advertised,  and  it 
was  discovered  that  the  notice  gave  offence.  The  servants  were  ashamed  of  their 
name.  There  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  in  the  fact  of  being  a  servant,  but  there 
is  a  great  deal  to  be  ashamed  of  in  the  fact  of  being  a  bad  servant.  Liberty  does 
not  mean  licence.  We  are  not  free  to  do  wrong.  Let  us  look  at  ourselves,  then, 
"as  free,  but  as  the  servants  of  God,"  and  learn  some  of  the  marks  of  a  good 
servant.  I.  A  good  servant  should  be  humble.  There  is  a  great  want  of 
humility  amongst  us.  We  live  in  an  age  of  advancement.  Education  is  making 
gigantic  strides,  all  classes  are  being  put  on  the  same  political  level,  and  all  this 
has  a  tendency  to  make  people  less  humble.  II.  A  good  servant  should  be 
INDUSTRIOUS.  Dr.  Livingstone  took  as  his  motto,  "Fear  God,  and  work  hard." 
It  is  a  good  motto  for  every  Christian  now.  We  are  to  be  workers  together  with 
God.  He  is  always  working  in  us,  and  for  us,  and  we  must  do  our  part. 
You  know  the  Prince  of  Wales  has  for  his  motto — "  Ich  Dien — I  serve."  III.  A  good 
servant  loves  his  master.  The  best  work  is  always  done  where  the  heart  goes  along 
with  the  hands.  We  shall  not  find  any  work  too  hard,  or  any  self-sacrifice  too  great, 
if  we  love  our  Master.  IV.  A  good  servant  will  be  good  to  his  fellow-servants. 
Jesus  came  to  clasp  all  hands  together,  and  make  the  whole  world  kin.  We  who 
are  working  God's  work  should  lend  a  helping  hand  to  others.  In  God's  great  house 
of  this  world  we  have  our  different  stations  and  labours.  Let  the  strong  help  the 
weak ;  let  those  who  have  learnt  most  of  the  service  of  God  our  Master  teach  the 
beginners.     (H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  Honour  all  men. — Various  political  duties  : — I.  Personal  courtesy.  It 
is  our  duty  to.  make  manners  a  part  of  religion.  1.  Eespect.  2.  Consideration. 
Put  yourself  in  others'  ways  and  plans  and  difficulties.  3.  Kindness.  II.  Affec- 
tionate brotherhood.  It  is  only  reasonable  we  should  "  love  the  brotherhood,"  for 
we  are — 1.  Sharers  of  the  same  discipline.  2.  Heirs  of  the  same  blessings.  3. 
Travellers  along  the  same  road.  III.  Dutiful  worshippers.  "  Fear  God."  IV. 
Sanctified  loyalty.  "  Honour  the  King."  1.  Independently  of  the  ruler's  cha- 
racter. 2.  Independently  of  personal  distinction.  (1)  Loyalty  is  the  essential  of 
national  well-being.  (2)  Loyalty  is  the  secret  of  national  happiness.  (3)  Loyalty 
is  the  principle  of  national  prosperity.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Honour  all  men  : — 
First,  the  duty,  what  it  is,  and  then  how  that  duty  is  either  extended  or  limited  in 
regard  of  the  object.  The  duties  are  honour  and  love.  The  first,  by  opening  the 
duty,  and  what  we  are  to  do.  The  next,  by  inquiring  into  the  obligation,  and  why 
we  are  so  to  do.  The  last,  by  examining  our  performance,  and  whether  we  do 
therein  as  we  ought  to  do  or  no.  And  first  of  the  former  precept.  Honour  all  men. 
Honour,  properly,  is  an  acknowledgment  or  testification  of  some  excellency  in  the 
person  honoured,  by  some  reverence  or  observance  answerable  thereunto.  Thus  we 
honour  God  above  all  as  being  transcendently  excellent,  and  thus  we  honour  our 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

parents,  our  princes,  our  betters,  or  superiors  in  any  kind.  The  word  honour  in  this 
place  imports  all  that  esteem  or  regard,  be  it  more  or  less,  which  is  due  to  any  man 
in  respect  of  his  place,  person,  or  condition,  according  to  the  eminency,  merit,  or 
exigency  of  any  of  them  respectively,  together  with  the  willing  performance  of  such 
just  and  charitable  offices  upon  all  emergent  occasions  as  in  proportion  to  any  of  the 
said  respects  can  be  reasonably  expected.  In  which  sense  it  is  a  possible  thing  for 
us  to  honour,  not  only  our  superiors  that  are  over  us  or  above  us,  but  our  equals  too 
that  are  in  the  same  rank  with  us,  yea,  even  our  inferiors  also  that  are  below  us  or 
under  us.  And  in  this  latitude  you  shall  find  the  word  honour  sometimes  used  in 
the  Scriptures,  though  not  so  frequently  as  in  the  proper  signification.  You  have 
one  example  of  it  in  the  seventh  verse  of  the  next  chapter,  where  St.  Peter  enjoineth 
husbands  to  give  honour  to  the  wife  as  to  the  weaker  vessel.  It  was  far  from  his 
meaning  doubtless  that  the  husband  should  honour  the  wife  with  the  honour  properly 
so  called,  that  of  reverence  or  subjection,  for  that  were  to  invert  the  right  order  of 
things  and  to  pervert  God's  ordinance.  In  like  manner  we  are  to  understand  the 
word  honour  here  in  the  text,  in  such  a  notion  as  may  include  aU  those  fitting 
respects  which  are  to  be  given  to  equals  and  inferiors  also,  which  is  a  kind  of  honour 
too  but  more  improperly  so  called.  And  then  it  falleth  in,  all  one  with  that  of  St. 
Paul  (Eom.  xiii.  7).  "Eender  therefore  to  all  their  dues,  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is 
due,  custom  to  whom  custom,  fear  to  whom  fear,  honour  to  whom  honour."  Now 
we  see  in  the  meaning  of  the  words  both  what  duty  we  are  to  perform  and  to  whom. 
It  may  next  be  demanded  upon  what  tie  we  stand  thus  bound  to  honour  aU  men  ? 
I  answer — there  lieth  a  threefold  tie  upon  us,  to  wit,  of  justice,  of  equity,  of  religion. 
A  tie  of  justice  first,  whose  most  proper  olfice  it  is  to  give  to  every  one  that  which  of 
right  appertaineth  to  him.  It  is  a  thing  not  unworthy  the  observing  that  aU  those 
words  which  usually  signify  honour  in  the  three  learned  languages  do  either  primarily 
signify  or  else  are  derived  from  such  words  as  do  withal  signify  either  a  price  or  a 
weight.  Now  by  the  rules  of  commutative  justice  the  price  of  every  commodity 
ought  to  be  according  to  the  true  worth  of  it.  A  false  weight  is  abominable,  and  so 
is  every  one  that  tradeth  with  it ;  and  certainly  that  man  maketh  use  of  a  false 
beam  that  setteth  light  by  his  brother  whom  he  ought  to  honour.  The  next  tie  is 
that  of  equity.  "  "Whatsoever  you  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so 
to  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets."  We  care  not  how  much  honour  cometh 
to  ourselves  from  others,  how  little  goeth  from  ourselves  to  others.  Let  every  man 
therefore  in  God's  name  take  to  himself  that  portion  of  honour  and  respect  that  is 
due  to  him,  and  good  luck  may  he  have  with  his  honour.  Provided  always  that  he 
be  withal  sure  of  these  two  things — first,  that  he  take  no  more  than  his  due,  for  this 
is  but  just ;  and  then,  that  he  be  as  willing  to  give  as  to  take,  for  that  is  but  equal. 
He  that  doth  otherwise  is  partial  and  unreasonable.  And  thus  we  are  tied  in  equity 
to  honour  all  men.  There  is  yet  a  third  tie,  that  of  religion,  in  respect  of  that  image 
of  God,  which  is  to  be  found  in  man.  All  honour  is  in  regard  of  some  excellency 
or  other,  and  there  is  in  man  no  excellency  at  all  of  and  from  himself,  but  all  the 
excellency  that  is  in  him  is  such  only  as  God  hath  been  pleased  to  put  upon  him. 
And  that  excellency  is  twofold — natural  and  personal.  The  natural  excellency  is 
that  whereby  man  excelleth  other  creatures.  Personal  that  whereby  one  man  excelleth 
another.  Of  the  natural  first  which  ariseth  from  the  image  of  God  stamped  upon 
man  in  his  creation.  Besides  this  natural,  God  hath  put  upon  man  a  personal 
excellency  which  is  an  effect  of  His  Providence  in  the  government  of  the  world,  as 
the  former  was  of  His  power  in  the  creation  of  it.  And  here  first  beginneth  the 
difference  that  is  between  one  man  and  another.  We  have  seen  hitherto  both  the 
duty  and  obligation  of  it.  What  are  we  to  perform,  and  why  ?  We  come  now  to 
examine  a  little  how  it  is  performed  among  us.  Slackly  and  untowardly  enough  no 
doubt  as  all  other  duties  are.  Are  there  not  some  first,  who  are  so  far  from  honour- 
ing all  men  as  the  text  requireth  that  they  honour  no  man  at  all,  at  least,  not  as 
they  ought  to  do  ?  No,  not  their  known  superiors  ?  But  how  much  less  then  their 
equals  or  inferiors  ?  There  are  others,  secondly,  that  may  perhaps  be  persuaded  to 
yield  some  honour  to  their  betters  (that  may  be  but  reason)  but  that  they  should  be 
bound  to  honour  those  that  are  not  so  good  men  as  themselves,  or  at  the  most  but 
such  like  as  themselves  are  they  see  no  great  reason  for  that.  But  there  is  no 
remedy  ;  St.  Peter  here  telleth  them  that  must  be  done  too.  There  is  a  third  sort 
that  corrupt  a  good  text  with  an  ill  gloss  as  thus.  The  magistrate  shall  have  his 
tribute,  the  minister  his  tithe,  and  so  every  other  man  his  due  honour,  if  so  be  he 
carry  himself  worthily  and  as  he  ought  to  do  in  his  place,  and  so  as  to  deserve  it. 
In  good  time!      But  I  pray  you  then,  first,  who  must  judge  of  his  carriage  and 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  199 

whether  he  deserve  such  honour,  yea  or  no  ?  But,  secondly,  how  durst  thou  dis- 
tinguish where  the  law  distinguishes  not  ?  Where  God  commandeth  He  looketh  to 
be  answered  with  obedience,  and  dost  thou  think  to  come  off  with  subtihties  and 
distinctions  ?  Least  of  aU,  thirdly,  with  such  a  gloss  as  the  apostle  hath  already 
precluded  by  his  own  comment  in  the  next  verse,  where  he  biddeth  servants  to  be 
subject  to  their  masters,  not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle  but  to  the  froward  also, 
and  such  as  would  be  ready  to  buffet  them  when  they  had  done  no  fault.  Such 
masters  sure  could  challenge  no  great  honour  from  their  servants.  But  tell  me, 
fourthly,  in  good  earnest,  dost  thou  believe  that  another  man's  neglect  of  his  duty 
can  discharge  thee  from  the  obligation  of  thine  ?  Lastly,  when  thou  sayest  thou 
wilt  honour  him  according  to  his  place  if  he  deserve  it,  dost  thou  not  observe  that 
thou  art  still  unjust  by  thy  own  confession?  For  where  place  and  merit  concur 
there  is  a  double  honour  due  (1  Tim.  v.  17).  There  is  one  honour  due  to  the  place 
and  another  to  merit.  (Bp.  Sanderson.)  The  honour  of  humanity  : — It  has  been 
observed  that  more  attention  is  commonly  given  to  the  specific  than  to  the  general 
precepts  of  Holy  Scripture.  Thus,  in  the  verse  there  is  a  particular  precept,  to 
"  honour  the  king,"  which  has  attracted  more  notice  than  the  wider  principle — 
"  honour  aU  men."  The  reason  is  this  :  The  vast  field  of  action  which  opens  before 
us,  when  contemplating  a  general  precept,  is  so  fatiguing  to  the  imagination,  that 
we  are  tempted  to  give  up  the  task  of  considering  it  in  something  like  despair.  Nor 
is  this  the  only  reason  for  the  practical  disadvantages  of  general,  as  compared  with 
specific  precepts.  As  morality  is  too  often  taught,  these  general  precepts  are  rested 
upon  considerations  too  abstract  to  exert  a  real  influence  upon  average  men.  A 
general  precept,  like  that  before  us,  must  be  based  on  an  energetic  conviction,  in 
order  to  give  it  the  needful  vividness  and  force.  Of  this  the  precept  before  us  is  an 
eminent  illustration.  We  only  bring  it  down  from  the  neglected  region  of  moral 
proprieties,  we  only  learn  its  living  and  working  power,  and  give  it  a  clothing  of 
flesh  and  blood,  when  we  place  it  in  the  light  of  the  great  Christian  doctrines  of 
which  it  is  the  practical  and  animated  expression.  What  is  honour  ?  It  is,  first  of 
all,  a  sentiment  which  prompts  us  to  acknowledge,  and  to  do  homage  to,  some  form 
of  truth.  It  must  spring  from  a  sense  of  merit  of  some  kind  in  the  object  which 
provokes  it ;  and,  therefore,  it  must  begin  from  within.  Honour,  then,  in  the  first 
place,  is  a  genuine  movement  of  the  soul ;  but,  secondly,  it  is  often  a  substantial 
expression  of  that  movement  in  the  outward  visible  world  of  sense.  Whether  it  be 
embodied  in  a  gesture,  or  in  a  title,  or  in  a  gift  of  money,  it  is  at  bottom  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  superior  worth,  attaching,  it  may  be,  to  an  individual,  or  to  an  oflice, 
or  to  an  institution.  It  is  a  practical  expression  of  the  sentiment  of  honour,  quickened 
into  activity  by  a  worthy  object.  When,  then,  St.  Peter  says  that  we  are  to  "  honour 
aU  men,"  he  means,  no  doubt,  that  if  opportunity  arises  we  are  to  give  practical 
expression  to  the  disposition  to  honour  them.  But  he  means,  first  of  all,  that  this 
disposition  should  itself  exist.  And  it  is  here  that  we  reach  the  point  at  which  the 
need  is  felt  of  basing  the  precept  upon  a  conviction.  Why  should  we  thus  be  dis- 
posed to  "  honour  all  men  "  ?  It  is  clear  that  if  man  is  left  to  himself,  he  is  by  no 
means  disposed  to  "  honour  all  men."  Why  is  he  bound  to  make  head  against  this 
natural  inclination  ?  Is  it  in  deference  to  a  sense  of  self-interest  ?  to  a  belief  that 
courtesy  is  a  cheap  thing,  which  if  it  does  not  make  friends,  yet  keeps  clear  of  making 
enemies  ?  No  !  The  honour  which  the  apostle  prescribes  is  not  an  insincere  con- 
ventionalism, but  a  true  expression  of  inward  respect.  Are  we  then  to  honour  all 
men  in  deference  to  the  mere  instinct  of  race  ?  You  say  that,  at  least,  in  this  case 
man  should  honour  his  brother  man  as  a  reproduction  of  himself.  Does  then  one 
brute,  nay,  the  most  intelligent  of  the  brutes,  honour  other  brutes  ?  There  is  nothing 
in  a  second  animal,  who  is  a  mere  reproduction  of  my  animal  self,  which  properly 
commands  this  tribute  of  honour ;  while  there  is  much  in  him  which  might  incline 
me  to  refuse  it.  But  here  comes  a  teacher  who  repeats  the  injunction  under  a  new 
formula.  Humanity  is  the  god  of  Positivist  thinkers ;  man  is  the  highest  being 
whom  the  consistent  philosophy  of  experience  can  consent  to  recognise.  Man  in  his 
collective  capacity,  the  organism  "humanity,"  is  to  be  worshipped  by  each  individual 
man.  And  from  this  new  cultus,  we  are  told,  there  is  to  flow  forth  a  morality,  which, 
in  its  spirits  and  its  objects,  shall  be  enthusiastically  human;  against  which,  as  we 
are  further  assured,  the  inferior  ethics  of  Christendom,  weighted  with  the  dogmatic 
teaching  of  the  creeds,  will  struggle  in  vain  for  supremacy  in  the  Europe  of  the 
future.  But  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  this  cultus  of  humanity  ?  Taking  humanity 
as  an  actual  whole,  it  is  to  worship  that,  in  which  the  immoral  decidedly  prepon- 
derates over  the  moral,  the  false  over  the  true,  the  bad  over  the  good.    I.  What, 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u-.  ii. 

THEN,  ARE    THE    MOTIVES  WHICH    SHOULD    LEAD    A    ChKISTIAN    TO  HONOUR   ALL   MEN  ?       1. 

The  first  is,  that  all  men  are  made  in  the  image  of  God.     "  God  created  man  in  His 
own  image,  after  His  likeness."     This  image  and  likeness  consist  in  the  fact  that, 
first  of  all,  man  is  an  intelligent  being,  conscious  of,  and  able  steadily  to  reflect  upon, 
his  own  existence ;  and,  next,  that  his  will  is  free.     In  each  of  these  respects  he  is 
unlilce  any  one  of  the  lower  creatures  ;  in  each  he  is  like  God.     All  men  are  endued 
with  an  immortal,  conscious,  self-determining  principle  of   life.      Or   rather  that 
principle  is  each  man's  true  self,  around  which  all  else  that  belongs  to  him  is 
clustered,  and  to  which  it  stands  in  the  relation  of  a  property,  or  it  may  be  of  an 
accident.     2.  Our  Lord's  death  upon  the  Cross  is  a  second  reason  for  honouring  all 
men.     His  death  was  indeed  a  true  sacrifice  offered  to  the  justice  and  majesty  of 
God,  but  it  was  also  an  act  of  homage  and  honour  to  the  worth  of  the  human  spirit. 
It  was  to  enlighten  the  conscience  of  man,  it  was  to  purify  man's  soul  from  the 
stains,  and  to  free  it  from  the  burden  of  sin,  it  was  to  restore  man  to  his  true  and 
native  dignity  among  the  firstborn  of  creation,  thai  our  Saviour  died.     3.  From 
these  two  motives  a  Christian  will  gather  a  third,  which  must  lead  him  to  honour 
all  men,  both  in  feeling  and  in  act.     I  refer  to  the  capacity  of  every  man,  be  he 
who  or  what  he  may,  while  in  this  world,  for  improvement,  for  goodness.     This 
generous  faith  in  humanity  is  a  creation  of  the  gospel.     The  glory,  the  sinlessness, 
the  ineffable  majesty  of  the  ascended  Christ  is  the  measure  of  the  hopes  of  man. 
And  from  that  throne  of  His  in  the  highest  heavens  there  descends  upon  the  race 
which  He  has  ennobled,  and  which  He  yearns  to  glorify  and  to  save,  an  interest,  a 
radiance  in  Christian  eyes,  an  inheritance  of  a  title  to  honour,  which  has  made  the 
precept  of  the  apostle  one  of  the  main  factors  of  the  moral  life  of  Christendom.     II. 
But  is  the  precept  to  be  understood  literally?      Does  "all  men"  mean  all 
members,  all  classes  of  the  human  family  ?    Let  me  ask,  in  return.  Why  not  ?     Let 
us  look  at  some  of  the  barriers  which  have  been  raised  against  man's  universal  right 
to  honour  by  the  prejudices  of  man.     1.  There  is,  first  of  all,  and,  morally  speaking, 
lowest  of  all,  the  barrier  of  wealth.     Wealth  honours  wealth  ;  income  pays  respect 
to  income ;  but  it  is  wont  to  cherish,  in  its  secret  heart,  an  unmeasured  contempt 
for  poverty.     To  believe  that  a  man  with  £60  a  year  is  just  as  much  deserving  of 
respect  as  a  man  with  £6,000,  you  must  be  seriously  a  Christian.     2.  A  second 
barrier  is  the  spirit  of  station  or  of  class,  founded  whether  upon  success  in  life,  or 
upon  the  circumstances  of  birth.     That  an  aristocracy  has,  in  God's  providential 
government  of  society,  distinct  and  great  functions  to  perform,  is  a  position  which 
is  not  for  one  moment  to  be  denied  ;  since  the  experience  of  history  seems  to  show 
that  society  creates  a  higher  class  by  a  natural  process,  and  we  in  England  know 
how  largely  such  a  class  may,  if  it  will,  serve  its  country.     But  when  it  develops  an 
exclusive  spirit,  which  divides  humanity  into  two  sections,  those  within  and  those 
wiUiout  the  imaginary  barrier,  it  comes  into  collision  with  the  teaching  of  the  gospel. 
The  Divine  image,  expressed  in  man's  intelligence  and  freedom ;  the  atoning  blood, 
giving  the  measure  of  man's  preciousness  in  the  eyes  of  God ;  the  glorified  manhood 
of  Jesus,  revealing  to  man  his  capacity  for  glory ; — these  are  the  privileges  of  no 
class  or  station ;  they  are  the  right  and  the  possession  of  humanity.     3.  A  third 
barrier  is  that  of  race  or  country.     Patriotism,  no  doubt,  has  its  providential  pur- 
pose ;  and  the  instinct  of  race  is  but  an  expansion  of  the  instinct  of  the  family. 
Both  are  based  upon  a  natural  foundation  and  have  a  Divine  sanction ;  but  in  their 
exaggeration  both  may  foster  sentiments  which  are  crimes  against  humanity.     When 
we  hear  of  the  African  savage  who  a  few  months  since  floated  his  canoe  in  a  lake 
of  human  blood,  that  he  might  fitly  observe  his  father's  obsequies,  we  may  for  a 
moment  look  hard  at  the  precept  to  honour  all  men.     Yet,  all  crime  being,  in  the 
eyes  of  absolute  justice,  strictly  relative  to  opportunities,  it  may  well  be  that  this 
pagan  prince  stands  higher  before  heaven  than  do  you  or   I,  when  we   lose  our 
tempers  in  conversation,  or  say  our  prayers  without  thinking  of  the  solemn  work  in 
which  we  are  engaged.     4.  The  absence  of  intelligence  is  often  held  to  constitute 
a  fourth  barrier  against  this  honour  of  man  as  man.     To  make  intelligence,  in  the 
sense  of  cultivated  intellect,  the  real  test  of  a  claim  to  honour,  would  secure  such 
honour  to  Voltaire,  and  (may  we  not  add  ?)  to  Satan,  while  denying  it  to  the  apostles 
of  Christ.     To  make  intelligence,  in  the  sense  of  the  common  faculty  which  is  capable 
of  reflecting  on  self  and  of  knowing  God,  the  ground  of  that  claim,  is  to  own  that  a 
debt  of  honour  is  due  to  the  whole  human  family.     The  precept  before  us,  however, 
is  not  adverse  to  our  recognising  the  specific  titles  to  honour  which  individuals  or 
classes  may  possess.     It  only  insists  upon  a  broader  basis  of  such  right  to  honour 
than  that  which  any  of  these  titles  suggest.     It  is  entirely  in  harmony  with  the 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  201 

honourable  recognition  of  moral  worth,  because  moral  worth  enriches  and  intensifies 
what  is  best  in  humanity,  namely,  the  freedom  and  power  of  man's  wiU.  It  does 
not  force  us  to  condone  either  the  wilful  propagation  of  error  or  the  guilt  of  crime. 
It  does  not  imply  indifference  to  the  interests  either  of  truth  or  virtue.  III.  The 
PRACTICAL  BEAEiKGS  OF  THIS  SUGGESTIVE  PRECEPT  are  SO  numcrous  that  it  will  be 
necessary  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  following,  by  way  of  conclusion.  1.  "  Honour 
all  men  "  is  a  fitting  motto  for  the  spirit  of  much  of  our  study.  2.  Here  is  the 
Christian  rule  for  social  intercourse.  Honour  high  station,  honour  authority,  honour 
genius,  honour  courage,  honour  even  success,  if  you  will ;  but  do  not  limit  your 
honour  to  these  things.  If  you  honour  the  representative  men  of  humanity,  those 
who  embody  and  intensify  its  great  qualities  or  interests,  do  not  forget  that  that 
which  you  honour  in  them  is  shared  in  a  measure  by  all.  3.  Lastly,  in  this  precept 
we  may  discover  the  true  spirit  of  Christian  works  of  mercy.  All  the  plans  which 
Christian  charity  really  devises  and  sets  on  foot  are  based  on  the  principle  of  respect 
for  man.  Christian  charity  relieves  poverty,  not  as  conferring  a  favour,  but  as 
satisfying  what  is  in  some  sense  a  right — the  right  of  humanity  to  live,  and  to  ask 
in  God's  name  at  the  hands  of  property  the  means  of  livelihood.  (Canoii  Liddon.) 
The  honour  due  to  all  men : — There  is  no  need  of  argument  to  prove  the  kindliness 
of  Christianity,  compared  with  every  other  system  of  belief.  Its  regard  for  life  and 
its  sympathy  with  human  weakness  may  be  seen  upon  the  surface  of  every  Christian 
land.  To  this  we  owe  our  hospitals  and  refuges,  and  all  the  multitude  of  charitable 
institutions  which  mitigate  human  suffering.  But  it  is  by  no  means  sufficient 
merely  to  notice  this  as  a  fact.  It  is  of  great  moment  that  we  search  into  the  prin- 
ciple from  which  it  springs,  and  that  principle  is  shortly  but  forcibly  brought  out  in 
the  precept  of  St.  Peter — "  Honour  all  men."  Now  it  is  important  that  we  should 
see  why  this  precept  was  confined  to  Christianity.  It  was  so,  first,  because  its 
teaching  made  it  for  the  first  time  possible,  truly,  and  with  reason,  to  fulfil  it. 
Before  this,  dark  shades  rested  upon  the  nature  of  man.  Different  qualities  of  man 
might  be  honoured,  but  right  reason  could  scarcely  honour  man — poor,  fallen, 
wretched,  debased  man.  So  it  was  of  old.  But  so  it  was  not  after  Christ  our  Lord 
had  come  upon  the  earth.  His  incarnation  has  dispelled  this  darkness.  For  it 
clearly  showed  that  the  sin  which  dwelt  in  man  and  mocked  him,  by  pretending  to 
be  a  part  of  himself,  was  no  true  part  of  himself.  For  in  that  very  humanity,  the 
Son  of  God  had  tabernacled  without  spot  of  sin.  But  besides  this  Christianity  alone 
made  all  men  brothers.  Its  blessed  communion  makes  all  equal,  not  by  putting 
down  the  distinctions  of  earth,  confounding  the  ranks  of  society,  but  by  raising  the 
manhood  in  each  of  us  to  its  true  worthiness,  by  teaching  the  master  to  treat  the 
servant  "not  now  as  a  servant"  but  "above  a  servant,"  as  a  "brother  beloved"; 
by  showing  aU  that  as  "  partakers  of  the  benefit,"  as  members  of  Christ,  they  have 
a  unity  which  the  petty  distinctions  of  earth  cannot  dissever ;  a  true  dignity,  which 
its  seeming  degradations  cannot  obscure.  See,  then,  how  great  a  part  of  Christianity 
is  contained  in  this  precept.  How  growth  in  its  spirit  is  a  necessary  and  certain 
accompaniment  of  growth  in  true,  Uving,  practical  religion,  as  it  stands  opposed  to 
the  sickhness  of  sentimentality.  But  to  see  this  stUl  more  clearly,  look  at  the 
example  of  our  Master,  Christ ;  see  in  Him  the  perfection  of  this  grace.  How  did 
He  look  at  man?  Who  ever  saw  so  far  into  all  the  feebleness,  uncertainty,  and 
wickedness  of  those  who  came  around  Him,  as  He  did  whilst  He  walked  up  and 
down  this  crowded  wilderness  ?  Who  ever  read  the  hidden  evil  of  men's  hearts  as 
He  did  ?  Yet,  how  did  He  look  upon  all  ?  Was  there  one  over  whom,  as  being  a 
man.  He  did  not  yearn ;  was  there  one  sharer  of  humanity  whom,  as  man.  He  did 
not  honour — one  lost  one  whom  He  did  not  "  seek,"  and  was  not  ready  "  to  save  "  ? 
And  this  was  the  secret  of  His  deep  tenderness  towards  sinners.  His  unwearied  for- 
bearance— His  most  compassionate  love.  His  sympathy  with  every  one  of  the  fallen 
but  redeemed  race.  And  we,  if  we  would  have  these  graces  in  our  measure,  must 
seek  for  their  spring  head — we  must  strive  for  this  great  power  of  "  honouring  all 
men " — of  seeing  in  aU  the  true  manhood ;  seeing  in  all  the  true  value  of  life ; 
earnestly  believing  that  in  all  is  that  which  Christ  our  Master  took  unto  Himself, 
and  in  taking  to  Himself  sanctified  and  purified  and  made  capable  of  a  true  and 
real  worthiness.  And  if  we  would  make  any  progress  in  this  high  grace,  we  must 
not  hide  from  ourselves  the  difficulties  which  will  surely  beset  its  exercise.  For 
these  are  many  and  great  and  wiU  be  too  much  for  us,  if  without  counting  the  cost, 
we  endeavour  to  encounter  them.  First,  there  is  selfishness,  that  deep  root  of  inner 
corruption  which  is  the  absolute  antagonist  of  such  a  spirit — for  this,  which  leads 
every  man  to  "mind  his  own  things,"  to  grasp  at  everything  within  his  reach,  to 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

rate  himself,  his  own  plans,  his  own  pleasures,  first,  must  of  necessity  rob  him  of 
the  power  of  "honouring  others."  But  besides  selfishness,  there  is  the  whole  current 
of  worldly  society  to  be  withstood.  In  spite  of  the  great  healing  which  the  gospel 
of  Christ  has  wrought,  its  waters  are  still  bitter  and  turbulent,  and  they  fiow  for  the 
most  part  right  against  the  stream  of  heavenly  things.  1.  Then  let  me  say,  if  you 
would  "  honour  all  men,"  begin  by  truly  honouring  yourselves.  A  true  Christian 
honour  of  ourselves  leads  us  to  feel  most  deeply  the  taint  and  degradation  of  the 
sin  which  dwells  in  us,  which  is  so  unworthy  of  our  redeemed  station.  Instead  of 
feeling  self-sufficient,  we  see  that  only  in  Christ,  only  as  one  of  the  ransomed  family, 
as  dwelt  in  by  Him,  as  justified  through  Him,  can  we  have  hope.  And  thus  we 
join  ourselves  to  our  brethren  in  Christ ;  we  and  they  are  one  in  hope,  only  we  know 
more  of  our  own  loss  and  misery  than  we  can  know  of  theirs  :  and  therefore  we  are 
lowly,  and  honour  them  in  Christ,  their  God  and  ours.  So  also  does  a  Christian 
honour  of  ourselves  oppose  itself  to  vanity.  How  to  such  an  one  can  the  ignorant 
applause  of  his  fellows  be  anything  but  a  mockery?  Again,  his  reverence  for  the 
redeemed  manhood  in  himself  makes  him  fear  lest  sensuality  should  cloud  it ;  lest 
it  should  be  turned  into  the  heaviest  curse  by  separation  from  Christ.  This  makes 
him  most  tender  of  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  others — he  yearns  over  them ;  he 
would  "eat  no  meat  while  the  world  lasteth,"  rather  than  make  "a  brother  to 
offend."  2.  And  as  honouring  ourselves  is  the  first  rule  that  I  would  give, 
so  the  second  is — seek  to  practise  yourselves  in  honouring  others.  God  has  so 
iormed  us  that  our  spiritual  and  moral  cure  is  to  be  wrought  by  the  blessing 
of  His  grace  upon  our  practical  efforts.  We  must  gain  tender,  sympathetic 
iearts,  hearts  which  indeed  honour  our  brethren,  not  by  cultivating  abstract 
sensibilities,  but  by  practising  kindly  actions.      {Bp.  S.  Wilherforce.)  Honour 

•all  men : — "  Honour  all  men.  .  .  .  Honour  the  king."  It  is  the  same  word  in 
both  cases.  Honour  is  the  thing  due  to  king  and  to  man.  But  in  the  Greek 
the  tense  is  different ;  honour  all  men  as  various  occasions  arise  for  it ;  but 
in  the  other  three  cases  the  object  and  the  occasion  are  known ;  give  present 
love  and  fear  and  honour  to  a  visible  brotherhood,  and  a  present  God,  and 
a  known  ruler.  It  is  as  though  the  apostle  prefaced  the  special  precepts  with 
this  more  general  one.  Honour  all  men  everywhere ;  nothing  is  to  annul  this, 
the  charter  of  the  whole  redeemed  race ;  but  specially  love  the  Christian  brother- 
hood, and  fear  the  God  so  visibly  present  among  them,  and  honour  the  appointed 
king.  1.  Man  is  honourable  among  the  creatures  of  God  for  his  knowledge 
and  power  of  thought.  By  the  light  of  God  that  is  in  him,  man  sees  God 
in  the  world  of  matter  and  life.  The  finger-point  of  the  most  wise  Artificer 
is  upon  every  part.  2.  But  that  ;which  is  at  once  the  glory  and  the  shame  of 
man,  is  his  power  to  choose,  his  will.  3.  And  this  power  of  action  is  also  a  power  of 
obedience  to  the  law  of  God.  4.  And,  lastly,  man  is  immortal.  "  God  is  not  the  God  of 
the  dead  but  of  the  living."  We  are  immortal,  for  the  hope  of  a  future  life,  awakened 
and  fostered  by  our  Lord,  cannot  be  meant  to  end  in  a  delusion.  Honour  all  men, 
then ;  honour  those  to  whom  God  has  given  the  discerning  soul,  and  the  deciding 
will,  and  the  guiding  conscience,  and  the  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  (Ahp.  Thomsoii.) 
Honour  all : — This  was  one  of  the  rules  which  St.  Peter  gave  to  the  Christians  of 
his  day.  They  were  placed  in  the  midst  of  Jews  and  heathens.  On  every  side  there 
were  enemies,  slanderers,  persecutors ;  they  were  surrounded  by  foolish  men  living 
in  fleshly  lusts,  froward  and  hard  tempered — and  yet  with  all  this  they  were  to 
honour  all  men.  These  were  not  excluded.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  men  to  say 
that  the  rich  and  the  clever  despise  the  poor,  ignorant,  hard-working  classes  below 
them.  Often  that  way  of  speaking  is  false.  There  are  many  exceptions  to  it.  But 
often,  we  must  confess  with  pain,  it  is  true.  Younger  men  among  those  classes  have 
their  favourite  words  of  contempt  by  which  they  try  to  set  themselves  up  above 
others,  and  to  mark  off  those  who  are  as  much  heirs  of  God's  kingdom  as  they  are 
themselves,  as  people  to  be  laughed  at  or  insulted.  And  so  they  do  not  honour  all 
men.  And  this  want  of  the  will  to  honour  affects  all  relations  of  life.  It  disturbs 
the  peace  and  happiness  of  families.  No  position  of  life  affords  greater  opportunities 
for  exercising  kindness  than  that  of  the  master  or  mistress  of  servants — the  employer 
of  workmen.  And  yet  everywhere  we  find  the  duties  of  that  position  neglected. 
Men  do  not  "  honour  "  those  who  are  thus  placed,  by  the  providence  of  God,  in 
dependence  on  them.  Do  not  think  that  this  commandment  is  easier  for  one  class 
of  men  to  perform  than  for  others.  Those  who  look  up  to  most  other  men  as 
being  above  them  in  rank  and  riches,  are  just  as  faulty  in  this  matter  as  the 
haughtiest  and  highest.     Many  of  you  must  feel  in  your  heart  of  hearts  that  all 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  203 

the  time  when  you  have  seemed  outwardly  most  respectful,  there  has  beeu  no 
reality,  no  truthfulness  in  it.  You  have  honoured  not  the  man,  but  his  money, 
or  his  station,  or  his  opinions,  or  you  have  hoped  to  gain  some  thing  from  him, 
or  you  have  been  afraid  of  his  displeasure.  And  that  want  of  true  honour  which  we 
note  in  these  instances  is  seen  yet  more  in  the  acts  and  the  speech  of  poor  men,  too 
often  even  towards  each  other.  Go  into  the  streets  and  courts  of  any  of  our  great 
cities ;  listen  to  the  disputes  which  are  to  be  met  with  at  every  corner,  and  what 
strikes  one  most  is  the  abuse  and  scorn  which  men  of  the  same  class,  who  are  fellow- 
workers  often,  and  have  a  common  interest,  pour  out  upon  each  other.  They  show 
no  respect,  no  consideration,  no  "  honour."  One  step  further  we  must  go  to  reach 
the  worst  form  of  the  evil.  In  all  ranks  of  society  you  will  find  men  who  ought  to 
know  better,  who  pride  themselves  on  reading  their  Bibles,  and  keeping  out  of  the 
sins  of  their  neighbours,  and  caring  for  their  own  souls.  They,  we  might  think, 
will  surely  "  honour  all  men,"  and  that  not  with  a  false  show  of  honour,  but  in 
earnest.  A  man's  knowledge  of  the  Bible  may  serve  not  to  make  him  truer,  better, 
severer  in  judging  himself,  but  to  give  him  greater  cleverness  in  picking  out  texts 
against  his  neighbours.  He  loves  to  think  of  himself  as  chosen,  saved  from  hell, 
and  sometimes  seems  almost  as  if  he  liked  to  think  also  of  other  men  as  going  the 
wrong  way,  so  that  he  sees  them  led  captive  by  the  devil  without  any  effort  to  save 
them,  without  doing  anything  to  gain  their  affection  and  respect.  I  do  not  say  that 
this  evil  is  universal.  Can  you  not  imagine  what  a  man  would  be  in  whose  soul 
the  words,  "  honour  aU  men — all  without  exception — the  youngest,  the  poorest,  the 
most  sinning,"  had  been  traced  as  with  the  finger  of  God,  never  to  be  blotted  out  ? 
Would  there  not  be  in  such  a  man  an  unequalled  courtesy,  a  gentleness  and  yet 
openness  of  speech  which  would  win  all  men's  confidence  ?  I  can  think  of  such  an 
one  in  any  station  of  life,  as  a  man  himself  to  be  loved,  trusted,  honoured.  Read 
St.  Paul's  Epistles,  take  that  single  letter  even,  which  he  wrote  to  Philemon,  and 
tell  me  if  you  do  not  find  there  precisely  such  a  character  as  that  which  I  have  tried 
to  describe.  See  how  he  behaves  to  governors  and  kings  and  centurions,  and  captains 
of  ships  and  gaolers  and  peasants,  and  everywhere  you  find  the  same  freedom  from 
all  violence  and  selfishness  and  rudeness.  And  this,  doubtless,  was  the  secret  of 
the  wonderful  power  which  he  had  over  the  hearts  of  other  men,  winning  their 
respect  even  in  spite  of  them,  gaining  affection  and  love  from  the  roughest  hearts  which 
seemed  at  first  dead  to  all  such  feelings.  But  there  is  a  higher  example  in  this 
matter,  even  than  St.  Paul's.  Was  there  not  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  one  Who  was 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  taking  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant  that  He  might 
save  all  who  were  willing  to  come  to  Him  ?  Here  then,  once  for  all,  is  an  example 
of  the  width  and  depth  of  this  commandment  of  God.  And  this  which  supplies  the 
example  furnishes  also  the  motive.  Do  not  think  that  St.  Peter  would  have  enforced 
the  rule  of  honouring  all  men  on  those  grounds  on  which  we  sometimes  try  to  per- 
suade our  children  or  our  dependents  to  be  respectful.  It  was  not  because  that  was 
the  way  to  lead  a  quiet  life,  to  get  on  in  the  world :  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  great, 
to  avoid  persecution  and  ill-will ;  but  much  rather  because  Christ  had  taught  him 
to  think  of  a  Father  in  heaven,  who  was  inviting  all  men  to  become  His  children ; 
because  he  beheved  that  Christ  had  come  to  redeem  all  men,  to  manifest  Himself  as 
their  brother  and  their  friend.  How  could  he  despise  those  whom  the  Lord  had  not 
despised  ?  How  could  he  refuse  to  honour  one  for  whom  Christ  had  not  refused  to 
suffer  and  to  die  ?  {Dean  Plumptre.)  No  man  to  be  despised  : — No  nobler  tribute 
could  be  paid  to  a  memory  than  that  which  was  written  of  the  martyred  bishop, 
Pattison,  by  one  of  his  simple  converts  in  the  Southern  seas — "  He  did  not  despise 
any  one,  nor  reject  any  one  with  scorn,  whether  it  were  white  man  or  black  man ; 
he  thought  of  them  all  as  one,  and  he  loved  them  all  aUke."  {Canon  Duckworth.) 
The  respect  due  to  human  nature : — Among  the  many  blessings  of  Christianity,  I 
regard  as  not  the  least  the  new  interest  which  it  awakens  in  us  towards  everything 
human,  the  new  importance  which  it  gives  to  the  soul,  the  new  relation  which  it 
establishes  between  man  and  man.  Christianity  has  as  yet  but  begun  its  work  of 
reformation.  Under  its  influences  a  new  order  of  society  is  advancing,  surely  though 
slowly ;  and  this  beneficient  change  it  is  to  accomphsh  in  no  small  measure  by 
revealing  to  men  their  own  nature,  and  teaching  them  to  "honour  all"  who  partake 
it.  The  soul  is  to  be  regarded  with  a  religious  reverence  hitherto  unfelt.  There  is 
nothing  of  which  men  know  so  little  as  themselves.  Men  have  as  yet  no  just  respect 
for  themselves  and  of  consequence  no  just  respect  for  others.  The  true  bond  of 
society  is  thus  wanting,  and  accordingly  there  is  a  gi'eat  deficiency  of  Christian 
benevolence.     It  may  be  said  that  Christianity  has  done  much  to  awaken  benevolence, 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   n. 

and  that  it  has  taught  men  to  call  one  another  brethren.  Yes,  to  call  one  another 
so,  but  has  it  as  yet  given  the  true  feeling  of  brotherhood  ?  Do  we  feel  that  there 
is  one  Divine  life  in  our  own  and  in  all  souls  ?  Here  is  a  tie  more  sacred,  more 
enduring,  than  all  the  ties  of  this  earth.  Is  it  felt,  and  do  we  in  consequence  truly 
honour  one  another  ?  Sometimes,  indeed,  we  see  men  giving  profound  respect  to 
their  fellow  creatures ;  but  to  whom  ?  To  great  men  ;  to  men  distinguished  by  a 
broad  Une  from  the  multitude.  But  this  is  not  to  "honour  all  men,"  and  the 
homage  paid  to  such  is  generally  unfriendly  to  that  Christian  estimate  of  human 
beings  for  which  I  am  now  pleading.  The  great  are  honoured  at  the  expense  of 
their  race.  They  absorb  the  world's  admiration,  and  their  less  gifted  fellow  beings  are 
thrown  by  their  brightness  into  a  deeper  shade,  and  passed  over  with  a  colder  con- 
tempt. To  show  the  grounds  on  which  the  obligation  to  honour  all  men  rests,  I 
might  take  a  minute  survey  of  that  human  nature  which  is  common  to  all,  and  set 
forth  its  claims  to  reverence.  But  leaving  this  wide  range,  I  observe  that  there  is 
one  principle  of  the  soul  which  makes  all  men  essentially  equal,  which  places  all 
on  a  level  as  to  means  of  happiness,  which  may  place  in  the  first  rank  of  human 
beings  those  who  are  the  most  depressed  in  worldly  condition.  I  refer  to  the  sense 
of  duty,  to  the  power  of  discerning  and  doing  right,  to  the  inward  monitor  which 
speaks  in  the  name  of  God,  to  the  capacity  of  virtue  or  excellence.  This  is  the 
great  gift  of  God.  We  can  conceive  no  greater.  Through  this  the  ignorant  and  the 
poor  may  become  the  greatest  of  the  race ;  for  the  greatest  is  he  who  is  most  true 
to  the  principle  of  duty.  The  idea  of  right  is  the  primary  revelation  of  God  to  the 
human  mind,  and  all  outward  revelations  are  founded  on  and  addressed  to  it.  He 
in  whom  the  conviction  of  duty  is  unfolded,  becomes  subject  from  that  moment  to 
a  law,  which  no  power  in  the  universe  can  abrogate.  He  forms  a  new  and  indis- 
soluble connection  with  God,  that  of  an  accountable  being.  He  begins  to  stand 
before  an  inward  tribunal,  on  the  decisions  of  which  his  whole  happiness  rests ;  he 
hears  a  voice,  which,  if  faithfully  followed,  will  guide  him  to  perfection,  and  in 
neglecting  which  he  brings  upon  himself  inevitable  misery.  We  little  understand 
the  solemnity  of  the  moral  principle  in  every  himian  mind.  Did  we  understand  it, 
we  should  look  with  a  feeling  of  reverence  on  every  being  to  whom  it  is  given.  I 
proceed  to  observe  that,  if  we  look  next  into  Christianity,  we  shall  find  this  duty 
enforced  by  new  and  still  more  solemn  considerations.  This  whole  religion  is  a 
testimony  to  the  worth  of  man  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  the  importance  of  human 
nature,  to  the  infinite  purposes  for  which  we  were  framed.  Men  viewed  in  the  light 
of  this  religion  are  beings  cared  for  by  God,  to  whom  He  has  given  His  Son,  on 
whom  He  pours  forth  His  Spirit  and  whom  He  has  created  for  the  highest  good  in 
the  universe,  for  participation  in  His  own  perfections  and  happiness.  I  estimate 
political  revolutions  chiefly  by  their  tendency  to  exalt  men's  conceptions  of  their 
nature,  and  to  inspire  them  with  respect  for  one  another's  claims.  (W.  E.  Channing.) 
Honour  all  men: — Honour  in  a  narrower  sense  is  not  universally  due  to  all,  but 
peculiar  to  some  kinds  of  persons.  Of  this  the  apostle  speaks  (Rom.  xiii.  8).  We 
owe  not  the  same  measure  of  esteem  to  all.  We  may,  yea,  we  ought  to  take  notice 
of  the  diiJerent  outward  quality  or  inward  graces  and  gifts  of  men  ;  nor  is  it  a  fault 
to  perceive  the  shallowness  and  weakness  of  men  with  whom  we  converse,  and  to 
esteem  more  highly  those  on  whom  God  hath  conferred  more  of  such  things  as  are 
truly  worthy  of  esteem.  But  unto  the  meanest  we  do  owe  some  measure  of  esteem, 
first,  negatively.  We  are  not  to  entertain  disdainful  thoughts  of  any,  how  worth- 
less and  mean  soever.  We  are  also  to  observe  and  respect  the  smallest  good  that  is 
in  any.  Although  a  Christian  be  never  so  base  in  his  outward  condition,  in  body 
or  mind,  yet  they  who  know  the  worth  of  spiritual  things,  will  esteem  the  grace  of 
I  God  that  is  in  him,  in  the  midst  of  all  these  disadvantages,  as  a  pearl  in  a  rough 
I  shell.  The  Jews  would  not  willingly  tread  upon  the  smallest  piece  of  paper  in  their 
way,  but  took  it  up,  for  possibly,  said  they,  the  name  of  God  may  be  on  it.  The 
name  of  God  may  be  written  upon  that  soul  thou  treadest  on.  It  may  be  a  soul 
that  Christ  thought  so  much  of,  as  to  give  His  precious  blood  for  it;  therefore  despise 
it  not.  Wheresoever  thou  findest  the  least  trait  of  Christ's  image,  if  thou  lovest 
Him,  thou  wilt  honour  it.  Or  if  there  be  nothing  of  this  to  be  found  in  him  thou 
lookest  on,  yet  observe  what  common  gift  of  any  kind  God  hath  bestowed  on  him, 
judgment,  or  memory,  or  faculty  in  his  calling,  or  any  such  thing,  for  these  in  their 
degree  are  to  be  esteemed,  and  the  person  for  them.  Or  imagine  thou  canst  find 
nothing  else  in  some  men,  yet  honour  thy  own  nature,  esteem  humanity  in  them, 
especially  since  humanity  is  exalted  in  Christ  to  be  one  with  the  Deity.  Account 
of  the  individual  as  a  man.    The  outward  behaviour  wherein  we  owe  honour  to  all, 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  205 

is  nothing  but  a  conformity  to  this  inward  temper  of  mind ;  for  he  that  inwardly 
despiseth  none  but  esteemeth  the  good  that  is  in  the  lowest,  or  at  least  esteemeth 
them  in  that  they  are  men,  will  use  no  outward  sign  of  disdain  of  any.  He 
will  not  have  a  scornful  eye  nor  a  reproachful  tongue  to  move  at  any,  not  the 
meanest  of  his  servants,  nor  the  worst  of  his  enemies;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
will  acknowledge  the  good  that  is  in  every  man,  and  give  unto  all  that  outward 
respect  that  is  convenient  for  them  and  that  they  are  capable  of,  and  will  be 
ready  to  do  them  good  as  he  hath  opportunity  and  ability.  {Abp.  Leighton.) 
The  duty  of  honouring  all  men: — All  mankind  are  to  be  honoured— 1.  Because 
all  men  are  the  children  of  one  Almighty  Father,  and  were  made  originally  in 
His  glorious  image.  2.  Because  all  men  were  made  of  one  blood.  3.  Because 
all  men  are  gifted  with  the  same  common  immortality.  4.  Because  all  men  have 
been  redeemed  by  one  common  Saviour.  5.  Because  all  men  are  susceptible  of  the 
same  spiritual  and  everlasting  life.  {H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  The  honour  due  to  all 
men : — I.  To  different  classes.  1.  Superiors.  (1)  In  office.  (2)  In  rank 
and  station.  (3)  In  talent  and  attainments.  2.  Equals  (Rom.  xii.  10).  3.  In- 
feriors. I  remember  to  have  heard  a  friend  once  say,  after  passing  and  noticing 
a  poor  man,  "  When  I  meet  a  human  being  I  always  wish  to  consider  that  I 
meet  a  brother."  II.  To  different  characters.  1.  The  good.  "  Go  and  do 
likewise."  You  cannot  honour  a  good  man  more  than  by  treading  in  his  steps. 
2.  The  bad.  (1)  By  sincere  pity  and  kind  concern.  (2)  By  advice  and  counsel. 
(3)  By  your  prayers.  (4)  By  readiness  to  do  them  good.  HI.  Different  ages. 
1.  Old  age.  The  ancient  Spartans  were  famous  for  the  respect  they  paid  to  the 
aged  ;  so  that  it  was  not  unusual  to  say,  "It  is  a  pleasure  to  grow  old  in  Lace- 
demon."  Let  this  pleasure  be  enjoyed  by  the  aged  among  us.  2.  The  young  are 
to  be  honoured  by  tender  and  faithful  solicitude  for  their  welfare ;  by  a  concern  for 
the  right  formation  of  their  characters,  and  the  fixing  of  right  principles  in  their 
minds.  And  if  they  are  yet  under  authority,  by  affectionate  care  of  them,  their 
persons,  their  morals,  their  company,  their  habits,  and  especially  their  souls. 
IV.  Different  SITUATIONS  AND  circumstances.  1.  The  afflicted.  Bear  one  another's 
burdens.  Mutual  sympathy  is  mutual  honour.  2.  The  prosperous.  You  will 
honour  yourself,  as  well  as  your  neighbour,  when  you  rejoice  in  his  prosperity,  and 
feel  your  own  happiness  increased  by  witnessing  his.  3.  The  perplexed.  Feel  for 
and  assist  them.  4.  Relations  and  strangers,  countrymen  and  foreigners,  those  who 
belong  to  our  own  party  or  denomination  and  those  who  belong  to  others,  all  have 
some  claim  upon  us.  More  especially  let  us  honour  an  upright  conscience  wherever 
it  exists,  although  its  conclusions  may  be  different  from  our  own.  (Essex  Remem- 
brancer.) The  value  of  man : — Both  creation  and  redemption  teem  with  evi- 
dences tnat  God  sets  a  high  value  on  His  creature  man.  All  the  relations  and  uses 
of  minerals,  plants,  and  animals  have  been  arranged  for  man's  benefit ;  for  no  other 
creature  is  capable  of  observing  or  turning  them  to  account.  But  the  grandest 
evidence  of  the  value  which  God  sets  on  man  appears  in  the  mission,  ministry,  and 
sacrifice  of  Christ.  So  high  in  heaven  was  the  estimate  of  even  ruined  man,  that 
when  no  other  price  could  buy  the  captive  back  the  Son  of  God  gave  Himself,  the 
just  for  the  unjust.  Value  highly  immortal  beings  made  in  their  Creator's  likeness, 
and  capable  yet  of  living  to  His  praise.  We  act  according  to  our  estimates.  Esti- 
mate humanity  aright  in  the  habit  of  your  hearts,  and  your  conduct  will  fashion 
itself  naturally  accordant,  as  a  river  finds  its  way  to  the  sea.  Value  the  whole  man, 
and  not  merely  a  part.  In  particular,  and  for  obvious  practical  purposes,  value  his 
soul  as  well  as  his  body,  and  his  body  as  well  as  his  soul.  So  did  Christ ;  and 
therefore  so  should  we.  The  body's  sufferings  did  not  occupy  His  attention  to  the 
neglect  of  the  soul's  sins ;  the  soul's  sins  did  not  occupy  His  attention  to  the  neglect 
of  the  body's  sufferings.  (W.  Arnot.)  Value  all  men  : — There  is  no  respect  of 
persons  with  God,  and  there  should  be  none  with  men.  When  you  fail  to  value 
aright  any  man  or  class  of  men,  you  are  fighting  against  God,  and  will  certainly  be 
hurt.  Nothing  is  gained  by  a  false  estimate  of  the  value  of  any  man.  The  circles 
of  Providence,  like  the  celestial  bodies,  correct  aberrations,  and  right  themselves  as 
they  go  round.  Value  the  young.  How  precious  these  germs  are !  They  will  be 
the  men  and  women  of  the  generation  when  we  become  children  again.  Value  the 
poor  and  ignorant.  In  that  state  Christ  valued  you,  believer.  He  did  not  pass  you 
because  you  were  worthless.  Value  the  rich.  He  is  as  precious  as  the  poor,  and 
will  be  as  worthy,  if  he  is  redeemed,  when  he  walks  with  his  Redeemer  in  white. 
Value  the  vicious.  Although  they  wallow  in  a  deep  mire  to-day,  they  have  fallen 
from  a  high  estate,  and  may  yet  regain  it.     That  poor  staggering  drunkard  is  worth 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  ii. 

more  than  worlds,  if  he  were  won.  They  who  hope  in  Christ  should  not  count  any 
case  hopeless.  Value  yourself.  Do  not  hold  yourself  cheap,  ye  who  may  have 
Christ  for  your  brother  and  heaven  for  your  home.  (Ibid.)  Honour  all  men : — 
1.  As  made  in  the  image  of  God.  2.  As  capable  of  neaven.  3.  As  having  some 
special  talent  to  trade  with.  (J.  Trapp.)  The  poor — two  ways  of  treating  : — Dr. 
Joseph  Parker  says  there  are  two  ways  of  accosting  a  poor  man — one  which  tells 
him  he  is  a  man,  and  another  which  only  tells  him  he  is  poor.  Dignity  of 
man  : — M.  Boudon,  an  eminent  surgeon,  was  one  day  sent  for  by  the  Cardinal  du 
Bois,  prime  minister  of  France,  to  perform  a  very  serious  opei-ation  upon  him.  The 
cardinal,  on  seeing  him  enter  the  room,  said  to  him,  "  You  must  not  expect  to  treat 
me  in  the  same  rough  manner  you  treat  your  poor  miserable  wretches  at  your 
hospital  of  the  Hotel  Dieu."  "  My  lord,"  replied  M.  Boudon  with  great  dignity, 
"  every  one  of  those  miserable  wretches,  as  your  Eminence  is  pleased  to  call  them, 
is  a  prime  minister  in  my  eyes."  [J.  Percy.)  Respect  for  manhood  : — It  is  said 
of  Burns  the  poet,  that  walking  along  the  streets  of  Edinburgh  with  a  fashionable 
acquaintance,  he  saw  a  poorly  dressed  peasant,  whom  he  rushed  up  to  and  greeted 
as  a  familiar  friend.  His  companion  expressed  his  surprise  that  he  could  lower 
himself  by  speaking  to  one  in  so  rustic  a  garb.  "Fool!"  said  the  poet,  with 
flashing  eye,  "  it  was  not  the  dress,  the  peasant's  bonnet  and  hodden  gray,  I  spoke 
to,  but  the  man  within — the  man  who  beneath  that  bonnet  has  a  head,  and  beneath 
that  hodden  gray  a  heart  better  than  a  thousand  such  as  yours."  {J.  C.  Lees,  D.D.) 
Honour  all : — At  this  time  the  great  majority  of  human  beings  was  neglected  and 
despised  by  the  wise  and  learned,  as  well  as  dishonoured  and  oppressed  by  the  rich 
and  powerful  and  governing  classes.  With  feeUngs  of  reverence  and  awe  the 
traveller  gazes,  not  only  on  the  crumbling  shrine  and  hallowed  dust  of  lona,  but  on 
the  ruins,  accursed  and  hopeless  though  they  be,  of  wicked  Nineveh  and  proud 
Babylon.  But  here  is  a  ruin  in  which  God  once  dwelt,  and  in  which  He  desires  yet 
again,  and  eternally,  to  dwell.  Surely  it  is  not  for  those  whom  grace,  and  grace 
alone,  has  saved  from  a  like  degradation,  to  exult  over  the  desolation,  or  even  to 
pass  it  by  with  indifference.  "  Honour  all  men" — if  not  for  what  they  have  made 
themselves,  at  least  for  what  the  Creator  and  Redeemer  designed  them  to  be. 
Honour  that  kindly  thought  of  God  toward  them  by  striving,  as  best  you  may,  for 
its  realisation.  And,  when  all  your  efforts  seem  to  prove  abortive,  still  honour  it, 
and  the  objects  of  it,  by  your  prayers  and  tears.  (J.  Lillie,  D.D.)  Love  the 
brotherhood. — Love  the  brotherhood : — As  the  clouds  which  soar  in  the  air  are  to 
the  universal  mass  of  waters,  so  are  the  brotherhood  of  God's  renewed  children  to 
the  whole  human  family.  Of  mankind  these  brothers  are  in  origin  and  nature  ;  but 
they  have  been  drawn  out  and  up  from  the  rest  by  an  unseen  omnipotent  law. 
1.  Love  to  the  brotherhood  is  an  instinctive  emotion.  It  is  not  an  accident,  but  a 
nature.  It  springs  in  renewed  hearts,  as  love  of  her  offspring  springs  in  a  mother's 
breast.  It  is  the  result  not  of  an  artificial  policy,  but  of  a  natural  law.  The  new 
creature  exercises  instincts  as  well  as  the  old.  2.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  not  satisfied 
with  the  measure  of  this  affection  which  existed  among  His  followers  during  His 
personal  ministry.  "  That  they  all  may  be  one,"  was  His  prayer ;  "  Love  one 
another,"  was  His  command.  3.  Those  who  are  destitute  of  this  affection  them- 
selves are  acute  enough  to  observe  the  want  or  weakness  of  it  in  Christians.  4. 
Brotherly  love  among  Christians,  when  it  really  exists,  honours  the  Lord  and  propa- 
gat«s  the  gospel.  It  has  convinced  many  who  resisted  harder  arguments.  5.  It  is 
the  most  pleasant  of  all  emotions  to  the  person  who  exercises  it.  6.  Love  of  the 
brotherhood  is  the  command  of  God,  and,  consequently,  the  duty  of  men  ;  but 
another  thing  goes  before  it  to  prepare  its  way.  Before  you  can  love  the  brother- 
hood, you  must  be  a  brother.  It  is  the  new  creature  that  experiences  this  hallowed 
affection.  (IF.  Arnot.)  The  brethren  and  the  brotherhood  (with  chap.  i.  22)  : — 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  loving  "  the  brethren  "  and  loving  "the  brother- 
hood." "  The  brotherhood"  is  the  society  of  "  the  brethren  " — the  Church.  Each 
needs  the  other.  "  The  love  of  the  brotherhood  "  divorced  from  "  the  love  of  the 
brethren  "  will  always  lead  to  superstition,  to  an  undue  reverence  for  lorui  and 
custom,  to  some  sort  of  tyi-anny.  "  The  love  of  the  brethren  "  separated  from  "  the 
love  of  the  brotherhood  "  will  always  minister  to  foolish  divisions,  to  confusion  of 
faith,  to  ecclesiastical  anarchy.  St.  Peter,  who  said  "  Love  the  brotherhood,"  said 
also  "  Love  as  brethren."  1.  We  ought  to  love  the  brethren.  Religion  is  for  men. 
The  mission  of  the  Church  is  to  help  everybody  who  needs  help.  There  is  constant 
need  of  humanising  the  work  of  the  Chm'ch,  that  is,  of  emphasising  the  supreme 
purpose  for  which  the  Church  exists — to  make  the  world  better.     2.  On  the  other 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  207 

hand,  while  we  ought  to  love  the  brethren,  we  ought  also  to  love  the  brotherhood. 
Christ  Himself  du-ects  us  to  "  hear  the  Church."  The  customs  of  the  ancient 
society,  the  ways  of  the  Church,  ought  not  to  be  readily  laid  aside.  The  probability 
is  that  the  brotherhood  is  wiser  than  any  of  the  brethren.  (Bp.  Hodges.)  Love 
the  brotherhood  : — Now  of  the  obligation  of  this  duty  there  are  two  main  grounds — 
goodness  and  nearness.  1.  We  must  love  the  brotherhood  for  their  goodness.  All 
goodness  is  lovely.  There  groweth  a  love  due  to  every  creature  of  God  from  this, 
that  every  creature  of  God  is  good.  Some  goodness  God  has  communicated  to 
everything  to  which  He  gave  a  being :  as  a  beam  of  that  incomprehensible  light, 
and  a  drop  of  that  infinite  ocean  of  goodness,  which  He  Himself  is.  But  a  greater 
measure  of  love  is  due  to  man  than  to  other  creatures,  by  how  much  God  hath  made 
him  better  than  them.  And  to  every  particular  man  that  hath  any  special  goodness 
in  him  there  is  a  special  love  due.  He  that  hath  good  natural  parts,  if  he  have  little 
in  him  that  is  good  besides,  yet  is  to  be  loved  even  for  those  parts,  because  they  are 
good.  He  that  hath  but  good  moralities  only,  leading  a  civil  life,  though  without 
any  probable  evidences  of  grace  appearing  in  him,  is  yet  to  be  loved  of  us,  if  but  for 
those  moralities,  because  they  also  are  good.  But  he  that  goeth  higher,  and  by  the 
goodness  of  his  conversation  showeth  forth  the  graciousness  of  his  heart,  deserveth 
by  so  much  a  higher  room  in  our  affections  than  either  of  the  former,  by  how  much 
grace  exceedeth  in  goodness  both  nature  and  moraUty.  Since  then  there  is  a  special 
goodness  in  the  brethren  in  regard  of  that  most  holy  faith  which  they  possess,  and 
that  blessed  name  of  Christ  which  is  called  upon  them,  we  are  therefore  bound  to 
love  them  with  a  special  affection.  The  other  ground  of  loving  the  brotherhood  is 
their  nearness.  The  nearer,  the  dearer,  we  say ;  and  there  are  few  relations  nearer 
than  that  of  brotherhood.  But  no  brotherhood  in  the  world  is  so  closely  and  surely 
knit  together,  and  with  so  many  and  strong  ties,  as  the  fraternity  of  Christians. 
1.  We  are  brethren  by  propagation.  Children  of  the  one  eternal  God,  the  common 
Father  of  us  all,  and  of  the  one  Catholic  Church,  the  common  mother  of  us  all. 
And  we  have  all  the  same  elder  brother,  Jesus  Christ,  the  firstborn  among  many 
brethren.  2.  We  are  brethren  by  education — foster  brethren ;  as  Herod  and  Manaen 
were.  They  that  have  been  nursed  and  brought  up  together  in  then-  childhood  for 
the  most  part  have  their  affections  so  seasoned  and  settled  then  that  they  love  one 
another  the  better  while  they  live.  3.  We  are  brethren  by  covenant,  sworn  brothers 
at  our  holy  baptism,  when  we  dedicated  ourselves  to  God's  service  as  His  soldiers  by 
sacred  and  solemn  vow.  Do  we  not  see  men  that  take  the  same  oath  pressed  to 
serve  in  the  same  wars  and  under  the  same  captains?  4.  We  are  brethren  by 
cohabitation.  We  are  all  of  one  house  and  family  ;  not  strangers  and  foreigners,  but 
feUow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God.  Lastly,  we  are 
brethren  by  partnership  in  our  Father's  estate.  Co-partners  in  the  state  of  grace ; 
all  of  us  enjoying  the  same  promises,  liberties,  and  privileges  whereof  we  are  already 
possessed  in  common  ;  and  co-heirs  in  the  state  of  glory,  all  of  us  having  the  same 
joy,  and  everlasting  bliss  in  expectancy  and  reversion.  Having  all  these  obligations 
upon  us,  and  being  tied  together  in  one  brotherhood  by  so  many  bands  of  unity  and 
affection,  I  presume  we  cannot  doubt  but  that  it  is  our  bounden  duty  thus  to  love 
the  brotherhood.  There  remaineth  now  no  more  to  be  done  but  to  look  to  our 
performances  that  they  be  right.  Not  but  that  we  may  make  a  difference  between 
one  brother  and  another  in  the  measure  and  degree  of  our  love,  according  to  the 
different  measures  and  degrees,  either  of  their  goodness  considered  in  themselves  or 
of  their  nearness  in  relation  to  us.  {Bp.  Sanderson.)  Love  the  brotherhood  : — ■ 
No  one  will  deny  that  these  emphatic  words  express  a  great  leading  principle  of  the 
gospel.  But  in  order  to  respond,  in  heart  and  conduct,  to  this  teaching  of  St.  Peter 
we  must  understand  what  the  brotherhood  is ;  we  must  know  something  of  its 
institution  ;  we  must  be  assured  of  its  continued  existence  ;  we  must  be  instructed 
in  the  purposes  which  it  has  to  fulfil,  and  in  the  powers  and  privileges  with  which 
it  is  endowed.  On  aU  these  points  the  first  Christians  had  a  more  perfect,  because 
a  more  practical,  knowledge  than  Christians  in  general  have  now.  To  them  the 
brotherhood  was  not  an  abstract  speculation,  but  a  thing  of  Ufe  and  reality.  They 
were  required  to  consider  it,  act  towards  it ;  and  they  did  so.  But  now  the  case  is 
different.  In  the  present  state  of  the  Christian  world  the  generality  of  Christians 
have  no  practical  acquaintance  with  the  brotherhood  as  such ;  at  least  they  are  not 
conscious  of  any.  It  is  to  them  a  thing  invisible,  inaudible,  unapproachable ;  and 
so  indeed  they  caU  it.  They  cannot  therefore  act  towards  the  brotherhood  as  a 
whole,  but  only  towr.,rds  individuals.  When  they  see  a  man  leading  a  holy  life, 
sound  in  the  faith,  they  love  him  as  a  brother  in  the  Lord.    And  they  do  well. 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

But  it  is  one  thing  to  love  a  brother,  or  a  number  of  brethren,  as  individuals,  and 
another  thing  to  love  the  brotherhood  itself.  And  the  difference  is  most  important. 
For  on  the  one  hand,  though  we  should  love  numberless  individuals,  on  account  of 
their  personal  graces,  yet  this  would  never  lead  us  on  to  the  love  of  the  brotherhood 
as  such.;  whereas  if  we  begin  by  loving  the  brotherhood,  then  our  love  will  manifest 
itself  towards  all  those  who  belong  to  it.  But  we  are  to  observe  another  vast 
difference,  in  a  practical  point  of  view.  Consider  the  many  good  offices  which 
Christians  are  encouraged  to  seek  at  each  other's  hands,  and  of  which  they  stand  so 
greatly  in  need  in  their  present  condition  as  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth — 
exhortation,  admonition,  edification  in  the  truth,  guidance,  governance,  consolation, 
reproof,  intercession,  co-operation.  All  these  most  necessary  ofiices  would,  if  faith- 
fully discharged,  keep  alive  in  us  a  constant  sense  of  mutual  dependence,  and 
quicken  mutual  love.  But  how  lamentably  are  they  neglected.  And  why  are  they 
neglected  ?  We  think  of  each  other  not  as  members  and  representatives  of  our  holy 
brotherhood,  but  as  individuals.  The  feelings  of  love  which  would  lead  us  to  seek 
whatever  help  we  severally  require,  are  not  indeed  destroyed  in  us ;  but  for  the  most 
part  they  now  spring  from  nothing  deeper  than  our  own  opinion  (based  on  our  own 
limited  experience)  of  each  other's  character;  and  therefore  one  while  they  are 
powerless,  bearing  no  fruit  at  all,  and  another  while  they  are  mischievous  and  their 
fruit  unwholesome.  What,  then,  is  to  become  of  those  strong  affections  which  are 
ever  seeking  some  object  whereon  to  rest  in  peace  and  security  ?  He  who  knows 
our  wants  has  also  abundantly  provided  for  them.  He  has  taught  us  not  to  place 
our  hope  of  guidance  and  protection  in  this  man  or  that,  or  in  any  number  of  men ; 
but  to  seek  a  nobler  alliance,  and  make  a  more  exalted  choice.  It  is  not  the  might, 
nor  the  multitude,  nor  the  wisdom,  nor  the  talents,  nor  the  piety  of  men,  which  He 
hath  set  before  us  as  the  best  object  of  our  present  love  and  confidence ;  but  it  is 
communion  with  Himself  our  Heavenly  Father,  and  with  the  holy  angels,  and  with 
the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,  and  with  all  good  men  on  earth,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Here  is  an  object  woi'thy  of  our  hearts,  and 
able  to  satisfy  their  wants ;  here  is  the  brotherhood  which  St.  Peter  bids  us  love — 
the  great  Christian  brotherhood,  the  communion  of  saints,  the  Church  of  the  living 
God.  But  this  brotherhood  being  so  high  and  holy  a  thing,  how  and  where  can  it 
be  seen  on  earth  ?  The  first  Christians  loved  the  brotherhood  in  its  outward  and 
visible  parts — in  its  members,  its  ministers,  its  sacraments,  its  ordinances,  and  its 
laws  ;  loved  it,  I  say,  and  sought  it,  revered,  believed,  obeyed  it,  for  the  sake  of  the 
Awful  Presence  which  they  knew  to  be  dwelling  in  it,  and  acting  by  and  through  it. 
In  its  weak,  despised,  and  suffering  appearance,  they  saw  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  humiliation  of  His  Cross ;  in  its  energy  and  holiness,  its  victories  and 
conversions,  they  beheld  the  power  of  His  resurrection.  Him  they  beheld  in  all  its 
ways  and  works  ;  and  therefore  all  its  ways  and  works  were  precious  in  their  sight. 
No  wonder  that  they  loved  the  brotherhood ;  for  in  its  prayers,  its  sacraments,  its 
ministry,  they  heard  the  prevailing  intercession,  the  pardoning  voice,  the  life-giving 
truth — they  saw  the  dispensing  hand,  the  protecting  arm,  the  all-judging  eye,  the 
gracious  yet  most  awful  form  of  their  ascended  Saviour.  In  a  word,  they  saw  in  it 
His  chosen  representative — the  Apostolic  Church,  by  which  He  completes  on  earth 
His  threefold  office  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  So  when  those  early  believers 
came  themselves  to  be  admitted  into  this  glorious  brotherhood,  though  men  were 
the  instruments  by  whom  the  gate  of  baptism  was  opened  to  them,  yet  were  they 
well  assured  that  their  election  was  of  God.  Well  might  they  set  themselves  in 
earnest  to  follow  their  heavenly  profession,  knowing  the  grace  to  which  they  had 
been  called,  labouring  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure,  trembling  at  the  bare 
imagination  of  letting  slip  so  great  salvation.  For  truly  they  found  themselves  in 
the  midst  of  heavenly  sights  and  heavenly  sounds,  which  many  prophets  and  kings 
had  desired  to  see  and  hear,  but  had  not  seen  or  heard  :  they  found  themselves 
called  to  the  enjoyment  of  those  promises  which  the  saints  of  old  had  seen  afar  off. 
Such  was  the  Christian  brotherhood  to  the  first  followers  of  Christ,  when  its 
members  were  few,  its  outward  condition  weak,  despised,  oppressed.  Now  it  has 
gone  forth  into  all  lands,  and  gathered  into  itself  many  people,  and  it  is  oppressed 
no  longer.  Is  it  then  to  us  the  same  inestimable  treasure  which  it  appeared  to  the 
first  Christians  ?  Alas !  far  otherwise.  The  world,  in  drawing  near  to  it,  has  too 
often  flung  over  it  the  shadow  of  its  own  had  principles  and  unrighteous  practices, 
and  thereby  has  partially  obscured  its  brightness.  Many  even  of  its  own  children 
regard  it  rather  as  a  useful  instrument  of  man  than  as  a  great  unsearchable  mystery 
of  God.     But  still,  we  humbly  trust,  the  presence  of  the  Lord  abideth  in  it.     Still  it 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  209 

has  peace  and  plenteousness  for  those  who  will  repose  in  it  with  calm  believing 
hearts.  Only  let  us  have  faith  to  use  the  light  and  strength  which  yet  remains — 
and  more  may  perhaps  be  given  us.  Only  let  us  "  love  the  brotherhood  "  in  the  day 
of  its  humiliation,  and  show  our  love  by  eschewing  those  things  that  are  contrary  to 
our  profession,  and  following  all  such  things  as  are  agreeable  to  the  same ;  and 
then,  unworthy  as  we  are,  we  may  even  be  allowed  to  contribute  something,  if  it  be 
but  a  prayer,  towards  the  renewal  of  its  life  and  vigour.  (R.  Ward,  31. A.)  Fear 
God.  -Fear  God  : — There  are  two  principal  species  of  fear,  as  we  may  readily  per- 
ceive by  consulting  our  own  emotions — the  fear  of  apprehension,  and  the  fear  of 
^^c.^cct.  The  first  has  for  its  foundation  that  evil  which  he  who  is  feared  can 
inflict ;  the  second  arises  from  the  high  idea  we  have  of  him  for  whom  we  entertain 
this  sentiment.  The  first  is  exercised  towards  a  being  who,  we  suppose,  has  the  will 
and  the  power  to  hurt  us  ;  the  second  is  felt  when,  apprehending  nothing  from  his 
anger,  we  entertain  esteem  and  veneration  for  him.  1.  Let  us  commence  with  the 
fear  of  respect.  This  is  always  felt  by  the  true  believer.  Can  he  avoid  feeling  it, 
when  he  views  on  one  hand  the  splendour  of  the  perfections  of  God,  and  on  the 
other  his  own  littleness  and  baseness  ?  2.  With  respect  to  the  fear  of  apprehension, 
which  has  as  its  foundation  the  evils  which  God  can  inflict  on  us,  it  is  of  two 
different  kinds;  we  may  fear  to  offend  and  displease  God,  and  we  may  fear 
to  be  punished  for  it.  When  the  former  is  the  motive  of  this  fear,  it  is 
called  filial  fear,  because  it  is  the  sentiment  of  an  affectionate  child  towards 
its  parent.  This  fear  has  as  its  source  love  and  gratitude.  3.  With  respect  to 
the  other  kind  of  fear  of  apprehension,  that  which  is  founded  only  on  the  dread 
of  future  punishment,  it  is  (considered  absolutely  and  in  itself)  neither  morally 
good  nor  evil.  Not  morally  good,  since  we  see  it  every  day  felt  by  the  most 
wicked,  and  since  the  devils  themselves  tremble  under  it.  Not  morally  evil,  since 
it  is  a  sentiment  that  reason  would  require  ;  since  God  has  used  the  threatenings 
of  this  punishment  to  deter  men  from  sin.  It  becomes  morally  good  only  when 
united  with  filial  fear.  It  is  morally  evil  when  accompanied  with  love  of  sin,  with 
distrust,  and  despair.  It  then  acquires  the  name  of  servile  fear.  (H.  Kollock,  D.D.) 
The  fear  of  God  : — 1.  There  is,  first  of  all,  a  fear  of  God  which  to  me  appears  to  be 
a  reproduction,  measure,  or  colour  of  the  national  life,  different  as  the  nations  • 
differ.  I  believe  it  to  be  impossible  to  bring  a  Frenchman  and  a  German,  or  a 
Scotchman  and  an  Irishman,  or  any  two  men  that  reach  back  into  a  radical 
difference  of  race,  to  regard  God  in  the  same  way.  2.  But,  in  our  own  nation, 
where  so  many  nativities  centre,  the  idea  of  God  and  the  consequent  fear  of  God 
differ  very  greatly.  The  first  and  lowest  form  is  a  fear  of  God  as  a  gaoler  and 
executioner,  who  stands  and  waits  until  that  sure  detective.  Death,  shall  hunt  the 
criminal  down  and  bring  him  into  court.  The  pagan,  on  this  plane  of  belief,  is 
wiser  than  the  Christian.  He  says  boldly  that  the  doer  of  this  is  the  evil  spirit,  and 
so  he  tries  to  be  on  good  terms  with  him.  But  wherever  such  a  fear  has  a  real 
place  in  the  soul  of  man  or  woman,  African,  Indian,  or  Saxon,  in  that  soul  the  love 
of  God,  or  even  a  true  fear  of  God,  is  utterly  out  of  the  question.  It  destroys  every 
fair  blossom  of  the  soul ;  it  leaves  nothing  to  ripen,  nothing  beautiful  even  to  live. 

3.  Then,  to  the  eye  of  the  resolute  Christian  thinker — who  dares  not,  as  Coleridge 
has  said,  "  love  even  Christianity  better  than  the  truth,  lest  he  shall  come  to  love 
his  own  sect  better  than  Christianity,  and  at  last  himself  better  than  all  " — there  is 
another  form  of  the  fear  of  God,  not  the  best  by  far,  but  far  better  than  this  utterly 
slavish  fear.  I  mean  that  in  which  God  becomes  the  embot'-.ment  of  pure  bargain, 
exacting  from  us  to  the  uttermost  penny  whatever  is  due.  Here  God  appears  with 
tie  guards  and  sanctities  of  the  law  about  Him,  self-imposed  and  self-respected. 
The  man  need  not  contract  the  debt  if  it  does  not  please  him,  but  if  he  does  con- 
tract it  he  must  pay,  or  another  must  pay  for  him.  Then  the  Son  of  the  Great 
Creditor  gives  His  own  body  to  the  knife,  and  bears  the  intolerable  agony  instead  of 
the  debtor.  Now  there  is  a  touch  of  sublimity  in  this  conception.  Yet  when  we 
come  to  question  the  system  it  will  not  stand.  The  moment  you  open  the  idea  with 
the  master-key  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  you  begin  to  see  that  it  cannot  be  true. 

4.  But  a  far  higher  fear  of  God  is  to  fear  Him  as  we  fear  the  surgeon  who  must  cut 
out  some  dreadful  gangrene  in  order  to  save  the  life.  Such  a  fear  as  this  really 
touches  the  outskirts  of  love — it  is  love  and  fear  blended.  When  I  went  to  Fort 
Donelson  to  nurse  our  wounded  men,  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  be  the  personal 
attendant  of  a  gentleman  whose  skiM  as  a  surgeon  was  only  equalled  by  the  won- 
derfully deep,  loving  cendernes^  of  his  heart,  as  it  thrilled  in  every  tone  of  his  voice 
and  every  touch  of  his  hand.    And  it  all  comes  up  before  me  now  how  he  would 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

come  to  the  men,  fearfully  mangled  as  they  were,  and  how  the  nerve  would  shrink 
and  creep,  and  how,  with  a  wise,  hard,  steady  skill  he  would  cut  to  save  life,  forcing 
back  tears  of  pity  only  that  he  might  keep  his  eye  clear  for  the  delicate  duty, 
speaking  low  words  of  cheer  in  tones  heavy  with  tenderness  ;  then,  when  all  was 
over,  and  the  poor  fellows,  fainting  with  pain,  knew  that  all  was  done  that  could 
be  done,  and  done  only  with  a  severity  whose  touch  was  love,  how  they  would  look 
after  the  man  as  he  went  away,  sending  unspoken  benedictions  to  attend  him. 
Now  a  fear  like  this  is  almost  the  loftiest  fear  of  God  that  has  come  to  the  human  soul. 
5.  Then,  finally,  there  is  a  fear  of  God  which  is  more  of  love  than  fear — a  fear  that 
has  no  torment.  There  is  an  inspiration  by  which  our  duties  rise  up  before  us, 
vested  in  a  nobleness  like  that  which  touches  the  landscape  for  a  great  painter.  The 
true  artist  works  ever  with  a  touch  of  fear.  He  stands  at  his  task,  his  heart  trem- 
bling with  the  great  pulses  of  his  conception.  He  is  fearful  exactly  as  he  sees  the  per- 
fection of  the  thing  he  is  trying  to  embody.  Now,  believe  me,  God  hides  some  ideal  in 
every  human  soul.  At  some  time  in  our  life  we  feel  a  trembling,  fearful  longing  to 
do  some  good  thing.  (E.  Collyer,  D.D.)  Honour  the  king. — Good  subjects  : — 
For  the  coherence  of  these  words  with  the  former,  note — 1.  That  the  duties  to 
God  and  our  neighbours,  the  duties  of  the  first  and  second  table,  are  to  accom- 
pany one  another;  they  must  not  be  sundered  (1  John  iv.  21).  (1)  This  rebuketh 
such  as  make  show  of  great  zeal  in  the  duties  to  God  and  of  His  worship,  but  in  the 
meantime  make  no  conscience  of  deceiving,  oppression,  falsehood,  backbiting,  idle- 
ness, &c.  (2)  This  rebuketh  also  such  as  are  very  civil  and  just  in  their  dealings, 
sure  of  their  word,  and  kind  neighbours,  and  yet  make  no  conscience  of  the  duties 
of  the  first  table.  2.  That  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  our 
duties  to  men  in  their  several  places.  None  can  be  a  good  servant,  one  to  be 
entrusted  with  business  of  weight,  with  hope  of  blessing,  but  such  a  one  as  feareth 
God ;  so  no  man  can  truly  honour  the  king  and  be  an  absolute  good  subject  except 
he  fear  God.  Uses  :  1.  Let  all  that  fear  God  show  it  in  their  several  places  by  the 
performance  of  their  duties  to  men,  especially  of  subjection  to  their  governors,  that 
so  they  may  bring  the  same  in  esteem,  and  procure  credit  thereto.  2.  Would  any 
be  good  subjects,  let  them  begin  at  the  right  end,  perform  their  duties  in  the  right 
manner,  even  for  conscience  sake,  as  being  required  of  God.  3.  Magistrates  are  to 
trust  those  most  which  do  most  fear  God,  and  accordingly  to  use  them  kindly  and 
countenance  them  as  being  indeed  their  most  loyal  subjects ;  yea,  to  further  the 
gospel  what  in  them  lies,  whereby  people  may  be  brought  to  fear  God.  (John 
Rogers.)  A  royalty  free  from  dispute  : — The  most  unreasonable  things  in  the 
world  become  most  reasonable  because  of  the  unruly  lives  of  men.  What  is  less 
reasonable  than  to  choose  the  eldest  son  of  a  queen  to  guide  a  State  ?  For  we  do 
not  choose  as  steersman  of  a  ship  that  one  of  the  passengers  who  is  of  the  best 
family.  Such  a  law  would  be  ridiculous  and  unjust,  but  since  men  are  so  them- 
selves, and  ever  will  be,  it  becomes  reasonable  and  just.  For  would  they  choose  the 
most  virtuous  and  able,  we  at  once  fall  to  blows,  since  each  asserts  that  he  is  the 
most  virtuous  and  able.  Let  us  then  affix  this  quality  to  something  which  cannot 
be  disputed.  This  is  the  king's  eldest  son.  That  is  clear,  and  there  is  no  dispute. 
Keason  can  do  no  better,  for  civil  war  is  the  worst  of  evils.     (Blaise  Pascal.) 

Vers.  18-25.  Servants,  be  subject  to  your  masters. — Submission  enjoined  : — The 
word  here  rendered  servants  means  not  slaves  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  but 
domestic  servants — hence  the  exhortation  is  the  more  applicable  to  our  own  age  and 
country.  I.  Their  duty.  1.  "  Servants,  be  subject  to  your  masters  in  all  fear." 
Let  not  the  service  you  render  be  constrained  and  forced,  but  ready  and  joyous, 
remembering  that,  however  humble,  it  is  ennobled  by  religion.  2.  But  to  what 
extent  are  they  to  submit  ?  Has  God  placed  you  under  a  master  who  is  exacting 
and  ungenerous  ?  act  worthily  of  your  profession,  and  show  that  master  that  there 
is  something  real  in  religion.  3.  A  cogent  reason  is  assigned.  "  For  this  is  thank- 
worthy " — literally  grace — "  if  a  man  for  consciousness  of  God  endure  grief,  suffering 
wrongfully."  II.  The  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  set  before  us  as  the  ground  on 
which  the  submission  should  be  practised.     (Thornlcy   Smith.)  The  duty   of 

servants  : — I.  Their  duty.  Be  subject.  Keep  your  order  and  station  under  your 
masters,  and  that  "  with  fear"  and  inward  reverence  of  mind  and  respect  to  them, 
for  that  is  the  very  life  of  all  obedience.  Do  faithfully  to  your  utmost  that  which 
is  entrusted  to  you  and  obey  all  their  just  commands,  and  suffer  patiently  even 
Iheir  unjust  severities.  But,  on  the  other  side,  this  does  not  justify  nor  excuse  the 
unmerciful  austerities  of  masters.     It  is  still  a  perverseness  in  them,  as  the  original 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  211 

word  is  here,  and  must  have  its  own  name,  and  shall  have  its  proper  reward  from 
the  sovereign  Master  and  Lord  of  all  the  world.  II.  The  due  extent  of  this 
DUTY.  "  To  the  froward."  It  is  a  more  deformed  thing  to  have  a  distorted, 
crooked  mind,  or  a  froward  spirit,  than  any  crookedness  of  the  body.  How  can  he 
that  hath  servants  under  him  expect  their  obedience  when  he  cannot  command  his 
own  passion,  but  is  a  slave  to  it  ?  And  unless  much  conscience  of  duty  possess 
servants,  more  than  is  commonly  to  be  found  with  them,  it  cannot  but  work  a 
master  into  much  disesteem  with  them  when  he  is  of  a  turbulent  spirit,  a  troubler 
of  his  own  house.  The  Christian  servant,  however,  who  falls  into  the  hands  of  a 
froward  master  will  not  be  beaten  out  of  his  station  and  duty  of  obedience  by  all 
the  hard  and  wrongful  usage  he  meets  with,  but  will  take  that  as  an  opportunity  of 
exercising  the  more  obedience  and  patience,  and  will  be  the  more  cheerfully  patient 
because  of  his  innocence,  as  the  apostle  here  exhorts.  All  men  desire  glory,  but 
they  know  neither  what  it  is  nor  how  it  is  to  be  sought.  He  is  upon  the  only  right 
bargain  of  this  kind  "  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God."  If  men  commend 
him  not  he  accounts  it  no  loss,  nor  any  gain  if  they  do,  for  he  is  bound  for  a 
country  where  that  coin  goes  not,  and  whither  he  cannot  carry  it,  and  therefore  he 
gathers  it  not.  That  which  he  seeks  in  all  is  that  he  may  be  approved  and  accepted 
of  God,  whose  thanks  are  no  less  to  the  least  of  those  he  accepts  than  a  crown  of 
unfading  glory.  Not  a  poor  servant  that  fears  His  name  and  is  obedient  and 
patient  for  His  sake  but  shall  be  so  rewarded.  III.  The  pkinciple  of  this 
OBEDIENCE  AND  PATIENCE.  "  For  conscicnce  towards  God."  This  imports,  first, 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  His  wiU  in  some  due  measure,  and  then  a  conscien- 
tious respect  unto  Him  and  His  will  so  known,  taking  it  for  the  only  rule  in  doing 
and  suffering.  1.  This  declares  to  us  the  freeness  of  the  grace  of  God  in  regard  to 
men's  outward  quality,  that  He  doth  often  bestow  the  riches  of  His  grace  upon 
persons  of  mean  condition.  He  hath  all  to  choose  from,  and  yet  chooses  where 
men  would  least  imagine  (Matt.  xi.  25  ;  1  Cor.  i.  27).  2.  Grace  finds  a  way  to 
exert  itself  in  every  estate  where  it  exists,  and  regulates  the  soul  according  to  the 
particular  duties  of  that  estate.  A  skilful  engraver  makes  you  a  statue  indifferently 
of  wood  or  stone  or  marble,  as  they  are  put  into  his  hand ;  so  grace  forms  a  man  to 
a  Christian  way  of  walking  in  any  estate.  There  is  way  for  him  in  the  meanest 
condition  to  glorify  God  and  to  adorn  the  profession  of  religion ;  no  estate  so  low 
as  to  be  shut  out  from  this ;  and  a  rightly  informed  and  rightly  affected  conscience 
towards  God  shows  a  man  that  way  and  causes  him  to  waUc  in  it.  3.  As  a  corrupt 
mind  debaseth  the  best  and  most  excellent  callings  and  actions,  so  the  lowest  are 
raised  above  themselves  and  ennobled  by  a  spiritual  mind.  An  eagle  may  fly  high 
and  yet  have  its  eye  down  upon  some  carrion  on  the  earth ;  even  so  a  man  may  be 
standing  on  the  earth,  and  on  some  low  part  of  it,  and  yet  have  his  eye  upon 
heaven  and  be  contemplating  it.  "  For  conscience."  1.  In  this  there  is,  first,  a 
reverential  compliance  with  God's  disposal,  both  in  allotting  to  them  that  condition 
of  life,  and  in  particularly  choosing  their  master  for  them,  though  possibly  not  the 
mildest  and  pleasantest,  yet  the  fittest  for  their  good.  2.  In  this  there  is,  secondly, 
a  religious  and  observant  respect  to  the  rule  which  God  hath  set  men  to  walk  by  in 
that  condition,  so  that  their  obedience  depends  not  upon  any  external  inducement, 
failing  when  that  fails,  but  flows  from  an  inward  impression  of  the  law  of  God  upon 
the  heart.  3.  In  this  there  is  a  tender  care  of  the  glory  of  God  and  the  adornment 
of  religion.  4.  There  is,  lastly,  the  comfortable  persuasion  of  God's  approbation,  as 
is  expressed  in  the  following  verse,  and  the  hope  of  that  reward  He  hath  promised. 
"  Knowing  that  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the  inheritance,  for  ye  serve  the  Lord 
Christ"  (Col.  iii.  24).  (Abp.  Leighton.)  The  conduct  of  servants: — I.  Eeligion 
BROUGHT  INTO  THE  LITTLE  THINGS  OF  LIFE.  It  docs  not  merely  includc  duties  unto 
kings,  but  duty  towards  lesser  lords.  We  may  learn  from  this — 1.  That  religion 
applies  to  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.  Each  state  of  life  has  its  own  little 
kingdom,  its  own  little  world.  2.  That  nothing  is  too  insignificant  to  be  brought 
under  the  power  of  Divine  direction.  II.  Principle  superseding  compulsion.  In 
this  verse  the  apostle  establishes  one  of  the  most  important  principles  of  morality 
— that  our  obligations  to  relative  duties  are  not  to  be  gauged  by  the  character  of  the 
person  to  whom  they  are  performed.  1.  It  is  not  utility  that  should  regulate  our 
conduct.  The  will  of  the  world  is  to  discard  that  which  is  not  useful  or 
profitable.  2.  It  is  not  comfort  that  is  to  direct  our  lives.  3.  It  is  not  force 
that  is  to  drive.  4.  It  is  neither  the  fear  nor  the  love  of  man  that  moves. 
III.  Obedience  independent  of  circumstances.  Masters,  like  kings,  differ. 
Some   are   reasonable   and    kind,    others    are    unreasonable    and    bitter.     Is    a 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

servant  only  to  serve  them  who  are  fair  and  kind?  By  no  means.  The 
rsason  is  explained  when  we  come  to  realise  that  the  present  is  of  very  little 
moment  to  show  who  serve  Christ.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird.)  Suffering'  wrongfully. — 
Endurance  of  ivrong  : — It  may  be  asked  whether  the  advice  of  St.  Peter  to  submit 
quietly  to  wrong  does  not  destroy  manUness  and  force  of  character  if  it  is  acted  on  ? 
Does  it  not  tend  to  create  a  race  of  effeminate,  spiritless  men?  This  question 
involves  another.  In  what  does  moral  strength  consist  ?  It  is  sometimes  taken  for 
granted  that  moral  strength  must  catch  the  eye,  must  inflict  itself  on  the  imagina- 
tion ;  that  it  must  be  something  bustling,  demonstrative,  aggressive ;  that  it  must ' 
at  least  have  colour,  body,  muscle,  to  recommend  it.  This  is  not  the  case.  Moral 
strength,  in  its  very  finest  forms,  may  be  the  reverse  of  all  this  ;  when  it  makes  no 
show,  and  is  passive,  it  is  often  at  its  best.  Many  a  man  who  can  act  with  great 
courage  in  moments  of  great  personal  danger,  in  a  struggle  with  a  brigand,  or  in  a 
burning  house,  cannot  go  through  an  illness  as  bravely  and  patiently  as  a  little  girl. 
The  hardest  thing  often  is  to  do  nothing,  to  await  the  approach  of  danger  or  of 
death,  and  yet  not  to  lose  nerve  and  self-possession.  No  moral  strength  in  the 
whole  history  of  mankind  ever  equalled  that  which  was  displayed  on  Calvary, 
where  all  that  awaited  Him  was  present  from  the  first  to  the  mind  of  the  Divine 
victim,  "who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again;  when  He  suffered  He 
threatened  not,  but  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously"  (chap.  ii. 
23).  Nothing  that  has  been  said  will  be  so  greatly  misconstrued  as  to  be  taken  to 
imply  that  cruelty,  tyranny,  oppression,  can  be  agreeable  to  the  mind  of  God.  He 
permits  these  things  among  men  from  time  to  time,  just  as  He  permits  much  else 
that  is  evil  for  His  own  wise  ends.  He  brings  good  out  of  them,  yet  He  condemns 
them.  By  and  by  He  will  punish  them.  Nowhere  is  it  implied  in  the  Bible  that 
the  systems  involving  the  oppression  of  man  by  man  have  vested  rights  in  the 
moral  universe,  or  that  the  circumstances  which  permit  it  are  even  tolerable,  unless 
they  arc  perpetuated  for  very  different  purposes  indeed.  The  days  will  come  when 
Englishmen  will  look  back  to  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade  by  the  English  Parlia- 
ment as  a  greater  title  to  glory  than  was  Trafalgar  or  Waterloo ;  as  among  the 
very  greatest  in  the  course  of  our  history.  Wilberforce  and  Clarkson  will  rank 
even  before  those  celebrated  commanders,  to  whose  courage  and  genius,  under  God, 
we  owe  the  independence  of  our  country.  Among  yourselves  there  are  probably 
some  who,  for  conscience  toward  God,  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully.  There 
are  no  slaves,  thank  God,  on  English  soil,  but  there  are  multitudes  of  persons  in 
positions  of  dependence  whose  lives  can  easily  be  made  miserable  by  the  cruel 
ingenuity  of  their  betters,  and  too  often  for  no  worse  crime  than  that  of  obeying  a 
higher  sense  of  right.  Every  rank  in  society  has  its  petty  tyrants  and  its  secret 
confessorships ;  to  suffer  wrongfully  for  conscience  toward  God  is  the  monopoly  of 
no  one  class.  Here  is  a  cadet  of  a  noble  family  who  will  not  consent  to  a  transac- 
tion which  he  knows  to  be  unjust,  and  he  is  cut  off  with  a  shilling.  There  is  an 
apprentice  or  clerk  in  a  large  city  house  who  will  not  abandon  the  duties  or 
restraints  of  a  Christian  life  in  deference  to  pressure  or  abuse  or  ridicule  from  his 
companions,  and  he  has  a  hard  time  of  it.  Yonder  is  a  governess  who  has  learnt 
a  higher  estimate  of  life  and  duty  than  her  wealthy  and  ostentatious  employer ;  or 
a  cleipyman  who  feels  too  keenly  the  real  character  of  Divine  revelation  and  the 
.tremendous  issues  of  life  and  death  to  acquiesce  in  some  popular  but  shallow  mis- 
^  representation  of  the  gospel  which  makes  his  people  comfortable  without  bringing 
them  nearer  to  God.  These,  and  such  as  these,  must,  "  for  conscience  toward  God, 
endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully."  Law  can  do  but  little  for  them  ;  the  province 
of  law  lies  outside  the  spheres  of  the  heart  and  the  conscience ;  the  whole  world  of 
motive  is  beyond  it.  But  religion  can  do  much,  or  rather  everything,  by  pointing 
to  the  crucified  and  risen  Prince  of  that  vast  company  in  all  ages  who  have  cared 
less  to  avoid  discomfort  than  to  be  true  to  known  truth  and  duty ;  by  pointing  to 
the  unapproached  bitterness  of  His  sorrow,  and  to  the  completeness  and  splendour 
of  His  triumph.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  blefmingn  of  injustice  : — Where  shall  we 
look  for  an  explanation  of  God's  permission  of  prevalent  injustice  and  wrongful 
suffering  in  the  world  ?  Some  have  sought  an  explanation  in  the  circumstance 
that  all  have  sinned,  and  therefore  all  deserve  to  suffer.  This  affirmation  is 
undoubtedly  true,  yet  it  offers  no  kind  of  solution  to  the  problem.  Nor  does  the 
promise  of  the  ultimate  termination  of  all  evil  in  the  world,  or  the  promise  of  the 
future  reversal  of  all  present  injustices,  or  the  final  recompense  of  the  righteous, 
offer  a  perfect  solution  of  the  mystery  of  present  wrongful  suffering.  All  these 
promises  shed  some  li^'ht  of  comfort  on  the  mystery;  they  also  help  the  suffererg 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  213 

to  endure  their  wrongful  sufferings  gloriously ;  but  they  do  not  explain  why  the 
patient  endurance  of  such  wrongful  sufferings  is  permitted  by,  and  especially 
acceptable  unto,  God.  And  perhaps  no  sufficient  explanation  is  possible  in  our 
present  darkened  and  limited  condition  of  existence.  And,  for  anything  we  know  to 
the  contrary,  the  present  exercise  of  simple  faith  may  be,  through  aU  eternity,  of  such 
unspeakable  value  to  man  that  injustice  and  wrongful  suffering  may  be  permitted  by 
God  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  training  and  development  of  simple,  victorious  faith. 
There  is,  however,  another  blessing  of  injustice  which  lies  within  our  ken  and  is 
perfectly  manifest.  It  is  the  splendour  of  spiritual  character,  which  is  engendered 
by  injustice  and  wrongful  suffering;  and  which,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  is  never 
engendered  in  any  other  way.  As  the  finest  gold  is  the  gold  most  heated  in  the 
furnace,  so  the  finest  souls  are  the  souls  whose  furnace  in  life  has  been  the  hottest. 
Without  burning  and  welding,  human  souls  inevitably  continue  gross  and  feeble. 
If  when  we  commit  a  fault  and  are  buffeted  for  it  we  take  it  patiently,  there  is  no 
glory  in  patience  hke  that.  The  finest  spiritual  glory  requires  a  furnace  heated 
with  injustice  and  wrong  to  make  its  splendour  and  its  strength  appear.  The  very 
injustice  which  is  a  curse  to  the  soul  of  him  who  commits  it  is  transfigured  by 
patient  endurance  into  a  blessing  and  a  glory  to  the  soul  of  him  who  suffers  it. 
Not  those  who  merely  suffer,  but  those  who  suffer  wrongfully,  have  perfect  fellow- 
ship with  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  And  the  patient  endurance  of  such  sufferings, 
because  of  the  strength  and  glory  which  it  imparts  to  the  souls  of  His  greatest 
children,  is  acceptable  and  well-pleasing  unto  God.  (Canon  Diggle.)  Gratitude 
for  tvrongful  suffering  : — The  words  imply — 1.  That  man  has  a  conscience.  2. 
That  conscience  sometimes  leads  to  suffering.  3.  That  sufferings  that  spring  from 
the  following  out  of  a  good  conscience  are  reasons  for  gratitude.  "  This  is  thank- 
worthy." I.  Because  they  involve  the  highest  mokal  teiumph.  It  is  a  triumph 
— 1.  Of  the  spiritual  over  the  material.  2.  Of  the  right  over  the  expedient.  3.  Of 
the  Christly  over  the  selfish.  II.  Because  they  open  up  within  the  man  the 
highest  sources  of  happiness.  III.  Because  it  identifies  the  sufferer  with 
the  illustrious  men  of  all  times.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Suffering  lorongfully  : — 
A  minister  was  asked  by  a  Quaker  lady,  "  Dost  not  thee  think  that  we  can  walk  so 
carefully,  live  so  correctly,  and  avoid  every  fanaticism  so  perfectly,  that  every 
sensible  person  will  say,  '  That's  the  kind  of  religion  I  believe  in '  ?  "  He  replied, 
"  Sister,  if  thee  had  a  coat  of  feathers  as  white  as  snow,  and  a  pair  of  wings  as 
shining  as  Gabriel's,  somebody  would  be  found  somewhere  on  the  footstool  with  so 
bad  a  case  of  colour  blindness  as  to  shoot  thee  for  a  blackbird."  (King^s  Highway.) 
Ye  take  it  patiently. — Patience: — Patience  is  the  endurance  of  any  evil,  out  of  the 
love  of  God,  as  the  will  of  God.  The  offices  of  patience  are  as  varied  as  the  ills  of 
this  life.  We  have  need  of  it  with  ourselves  and  with  others ;  with  those  below 
and  those  above  us,  and  with  our  own  equals ;  with  those  who  love  us  and  those 
who  love  us  not ;  for  the  greatest  things  and  for  the  least ;  against  sudden  inroads 
of  trouble,  and  under  our  daily  burdens ;  disappointments  as  to  the  weather  or 
the  breaking  of  the  heart ;  in  the  weariness  of  the  body  or  the  wearing  of  the  soul ; 
in  our  own  failure  of  duty  or  others'  failure  towards  us ;  in  everyday  wants  or  in 
the  aching  of  sickness  or  the  decay  of  age ;  in  disappointment,  bereavement,  losses, 
injuries,  reproaches ;  in  heaviness  of  the  heart  or  its  sickness  amid  delayed  hopes, 
or  the  weight  of  this  body  of  death,  from  which  we  would  be  free,  that  we  might 
have  no  more  struggle  with  sin  within  or  temptation  without,  but  attain  to  our 
blessed  and  everlasting  peace  in  our  rest  in  God.  All  other  virtues  and  graces 
have  need  of  patience  to  perfect  or  to  secure  them.  Patience  interposes  herself 
and  receives  and  stops  every  dart  which  the  evil  one  aims  at  them.  "  Patience  is 
the  root  and  guardian  of  all  virtue  "  ;  impatience  is  the  enemy  of  all.  Impatience 
disquiets  the  soul,  makes  her  weary  of  conflict,  ready  to  lay  aside  her  armour  and 
to  leave  difficult  duty.  Impatience,  by  troubling  the  smooth  mirror  of  the  soul, 
hinders  her  from  reflecting  the  face  of  God  ;  by  its  din  it  hinders  her  from  hearing 
the  voice  of  God.  How  does  it  shake  faith  to  be  impatient  of  evils,  either  in  the 
world  or  in  the  Church,  or  those  which  befall  a  person's  own  self !  How  does 
impatience  with  others'  defects  chill  love,  or  impatience  with  even  our  own  failings 
and  shortcomings  extinguish  hope !  To  be  impatient  at  blame  is  a  blight  to 
humility ;  at  contradiction,  destroys  meekness ;  at  injuries,  quenches  longsuffer- 
ing ;  at  sharp  words,  mars  gentleness  ;  at  having  one's  own  will  crossed,  obedience. 
Impatience  at  doing  the  same  things  again  and  again  hinders  ]perseverance ; 
impatience  of  bodily  wants  surprises  people  into  intemperance  or  leads  them  to 
deceive,  lie,  steal.     "In  patience,"  our  blessed  Lord  tells  us,  "possess  ye  your 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  ir. 

souls."  By  patience  we  have  the  keeping  of  our  own  souls ;  we  command  our- 
selves, and  our  passions  are  subdued  to  us ;  and  "  commanding  ourselves,  we  begin 
to  possess  that  which  we  are."  Patience,  then,  is  the  guardian  of  faith,  the  fence 
of  love,  the  strength  of  hope,  the  parent  of  peace.  Patience  protects  humility, 
keeps  meekness,  is  the  soul  of  longsuffeiing,  guides  gentleness,  strengthens  perse- 
verance. Patience  makes  the  soul  to  be  of  one  mind  with  God,  and  sweetens  all 
the  ills  of  life.  It  casts  the  light  of  heaven  upon  them  and  transforms  them  into 
goods.  It  makes  the  bitter  waters  sweet ;  the  barren  and  dry  land  fruitful.  Deso- 
lation it  makes  a  loneliness  with  God ;  the  parching  of  sickness  to  be  the  fire  of  His 
love  ;  weakness  to  be  His  strength  ;  wounds  to  be  health ;  emptiness  of  all  things 
to  have  things  from  Him  ;  poverly  to  be  true  riches  ;  His  deserved  punishments  to 
be  His  rainbow  of  mercy ;  death  to  be  His  life.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Patience 
under  oppression : — Writing,  probably  from  Eome — certainly  in  one  of  the  closing 
years  of  his  life — St.  Peter  saw  the  great  tendency  of  social  and  political  circum- 
stances around  him  towards  that  great  outbreak  of  violence  against  the  worshippers 
of  Christ  which  is  known  in  history  as  the  first  persecution,  in  which  he  and  St. 
Paul  laid  down  their  lives.  He  is  anxious  to  prepare  the  Asiatic  Christians  for  the 
trials  which  are  before  them.  Then,  as  now,  there  were  bad  Christians  who  fell 
under  the  just  sentence  of  the  criminal  law,  and  St.  Peter  reminds  them  that  there 
is  no  moral  glory  in  suffering  that  which  we  have  deserved,  even  though  we  take 
our  punishment  uncomplainingly.  "  What  glory  is  it  if,  when  ye  be  buffeted  for 
your  faults,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently?"  But  he  knows  also  that  aggravated 
sufferings  awaited  numbers  of  inoffensive  men  and  women,  whose  only  crime 
would  be  that  they  were  worshippers  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  and  centres  of 
light  and  goodness  in  a  corrupt  and  demoralised  society.  When  the  storm  burst, 
as  it  would  burst,  they  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  the  government  of  the  world 
was  somehow  at  fault  in  this  award  of  bitter  punishment  to  virtuous  and  benevolent 
persons,  conscious  of  the  integrity  of  their  intentions — conscious  of  their  desire  to 
serve  a  holy  God — to  do  any  good  in  their  power  to  their  fellow-creatures.  Accord- 
ingly, St.  Peter  puts  their  anticipated  trials  in  a  light  which  would  not,  at  first 
sight,  present  itseh,  and  which  does  not  lie  upon  the  surface  of  things.  "  If,  when 
ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God." 
There  is  a  peculiar  moral  glory  in  patience  under  unmerited  wrong,  if  not  according 
to  any  human,  yet  certainly  according  to  a  Divine,  standard.  "  This  is  acceptable 
with  God."  Now,  many  men  have  said,  and  more,  perhaps,  have  thought,  about 
such  teaching  as  this,  that  it  is  a  splendid  paradox.  That  a  criminal  should  suffer 
what  he  has  deserved  satisfies  the  sense  of  justice.  That  a  good  man  should  suffer 
what  he  has  not  deserved  violates  the  sense  of  justice  ;  and  if  he  submits  uncom- 
plainingly he  acquiesces  in  injustice.  Nay,  he  does  more  :  he  forfeits  the  indepen- 
dence— the  glory — of  his  manhood.  The  precept  to  take  it  patiently  is,  in  a  word, 
objected  to  as  effeminate  and  anti-social.  Now,  here  it  must  be  remarked,  first  of 
all,  that  for  serious  Christians  this  question  is  really  settled  by  the  precepts  and 
example  of  our  Lord  Himself.  "  Even  hereunto  were  ye  called,  because  Christ  also 
suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,"  <fec.  In  His  public  teaching  our  Lord  made 
much  of  patient  submission  to  undeserved  wrong.  He  pronounced  those  men 
blessed  who  suffered  for  righteousness'  sake.  Not  in  exemption  from  suffering,  but 
in  truthful  endurance,  would  His  true  followers  find  their  peace.  "  In  your  patience 
possess  ye  your  souls."  Nay,  more.  Christians,  He  says,  are  to  welcome  such 
trials.  They  are  to  meet  the  persecutor  half-way.  They  are  to  do  good  to  them 
that  hate  them,  to  pray  for  their  persecutors,  &c.  And  in  perfect  harmony  with  this 
teaching  is  His  own  example.  Well,  it  is  this  sinless  being  who  is  also  the  first  of 
sufferers.  Nothing  was  wanting,  humanly  speaking,  to  make  patience  impossible. 
The  natural  sensitiveness  of  His  tender  frame,  the  ingenious  appliances  of  torture, 
such  as  a  crown  of  thorns  pressed  down  upon  the  head  and  the  temples,  the  coarse 
brutality  of  His  executioners,  the  vivid  consciousness  of  the  sufferer  sustained  from 
moment  to  moment,  might  well  have  exhausted  patience.  And  what  His  mental 
sufferings  must  have  been  we  may  infer  dis'nntly  from  the  agony  in  the  garden. 
But  St.  Peter  directs  especial  attention  to  the  .iisults  to  which  our  Lord  was  subject, 
and  which  may  have  tried  His  patience  even  more  than  the  great  sorrows  of  His 
soul  or  the  tortures  of  His  body.  "  When  He  was  reviled  He  reviled  not  again  ; 
when  He  suffered  He  threatened  not,  but  submitted  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth 
righteously."  No  complaint,  properly  speaking,  escaped  Him.  Certainly,  He 
asked  the  soldier  who  struck  Ilim  on  the  face  for  the  reason  of  the  act.  He  for  a 
moment  broke  His  majestic  silence  in  His  compassion  to  this  poor  man's  insensi- 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  215 

bility  to  natural  justice,  and  perhaps  also  in  order  to  show  that  if  when  suffering- 
more  He  did  not  complain,  it  was  not  because  His  feeling  was  dulled,  but  only 
what  was  due  to  patience.  For  Christians,  then,  I  say,  the  question  whether 
patience  under  undeserved  wrong  is  right — is  a  duty — is  not  an  open  question.  It 
has  been  settled  by  the  highest  authority — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  From 
His  teaching  there  is  no  appeal.  In  His  example  we  Christians  see  the  true  ideal 
of  human  life.  "  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world."  And  yet  if,  for  Christians, 
the  question  is  not  an  open  one,  the  very  authority  which  settles  it  enallej  us  to  see 
some  reasons  for  the  decision.  Indeed,  our  Lord  teaches  us  by  His  sufferings 
more  than  in  any  other  way.  By  these  He  reveals  to  us  the  love  of  God  :  by  these 
He  points  to  the  value  of  heaven.  These  sufferings  are  the  measure  of  the  gravity 
of  our  sins,  of  the  miseries  of  hell,  of  the  solemnity  of  life.  But  beyond  this  our 
Lord  gives  us  lessons  about  pain.  The  existence  of  pain  in  the  world  is  a  fact 
which  has  from  the  earliest  ages  attracted  and  perplexed  human  thought.  What  is 
it  in  itself  ?  It  is  a  certainty  both  to  feeling  and  to  thought,  and  yet  it  is  beyond 
analysis ;  and  its  inaccessibility  to  any  real  examination  adds  to  its  mysteriousness 
with  all  thoughtful  minds,  and  increases  the  anxious  interest  with  which  it  is 
regarded.  It  is  ubiquitous :  it  is  importunate :  it  meets  us  everywhere  :  it  leaves 
us  to-day  only  that  it  may  return  to-morrow.  In  this  vast  district  of  human 
experience  deism  sees,  however  reluctantly,  an  unexplained  hbel  upon  the  character 
of  God — atheism  a  hideous  flaw,  which,  however  bound  up  with  the  order  of 
nature,  impairs  and  disintegrates  it.  The  Greeks  talked  much  of  a  Divine  Nemesis, 
a  word  which  has  played  a  great  part  in  human  thought ;  but  Nemesis  was  not 
merely  Divine  justice  overtaking  human  crime :  it  was  also  a  malignant  envy 
which  grudged  man  his  power  or  his  good  fortune,  and  which  humbled  him 
accordingly.  Heathendom  saw  that  there  was  a  connection  between  pain  and 
conscience.  It  had  very  indistinct  ideas  of  the  nature  of  this  connection.  What  it 
was  exactly  revelation  must  say.  Accordingly  in  the  Old  Testament  there  is  one 
predominating  aspect  of  the  moral  use  of  misfortune  and  pain.  It  is  the  punish- 
ment of  sin.  The  righteousness  of  God  is  the  great  feature  of  the  Jewish  revelation 
of  God.  God  is  power ;  God  is  intelligent ;  but  above  aU  else  God  is  righteous- 
ness. And  it  is  in  accordance  with  His  righteousness — not,  observe  you,  as  the 
caprice  of  an  arbitrary  will,  but  in  deference  to  the  unalterable  necessities  of  our 
self-existing  moral  nature — that  He  inflicts  pain  and  misfortune  as  punishment  for 
sin.  This  faith  that  pain  justly  follows  misdoing,  because  God  who  governs  all  is 
righteousness  and  could  not  have  it  otherwise,  runs  through  the  Old  Testament. 
It  dictates  the  law  :  it  is  illustrated  again  and  again  in  the  history  :  it  is  the  key- 
note to  more  than  half  the  Psalms :  it  supplies  the  prophets  with  their  greatest 
inspirations.  But  although  it  is  true  that  sin  is  followed  by  punishment,  because 
God  is  righteousness,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  human  suffering  in  this  life  is  a 
punishment  for  sin.  Against  this  idea  the  Old  Testament  itself  contains  some  very 
emphatic  protests.  Thus  the  Book  of  Job  has  for  its  main  object  to  show  that  Job's 
misfortunes  are  no  real  measure  of  his  sins.  And  when  Psalmists  could  say,  "  It 
is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  in  trouble,"  or  "  The  Lord  hath  chastened  and 
corrected  me,  but  He  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  death,"  or  "All  Thy  waves  and 
storms  are  gone  over  me,"  it  is  clear  that  already  a  new  light  was  breaking  upon 
the  world.  But  it  was  by  our  Lord  that  the  cloud  was  fully  lifted  from  this  great 
district  of  human  experience,  so  that  we  are  now  able  to  map  it  out,  and  to  discover 
its  bearings,  and  turn  it  to  practical  account.  Our  Lord  does  not  reverse  what  the 
old  dispensation  had  taught  as  to  the  penal  object  of  a  great  deal  of  human  pain, 
but  He  also  rules  that  much  pain  is  strictly  a  discipline — a  Father's  discipline  of 
His  children.  Pain  may  thus  be  a  token  of  favoured  sonship ;  and,  if  so,  then  to 
pass  through  life  without  pain  may  be  anything  but  an  enviable  lot.  "If  ye  be 
without  chastisement,  whereof  all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye  bastards  and  not  sons, 
for  what  son  is  he  whom  the  father  chasteneth  not  ?  "  Pain  thus  need  not  be  an 
enemy  :  it  may  be  a  friend  in  disguise :  at  least  it  may  become  so.  Why  should  it 
not  be  welcomed  ?  This  is  the  voice  of  Christian  teaching.  Why,  like  the  natural 
elements,  fire  and  water,  should  it  not  be  taken  in  hand  and  conquered  and  made 
the  most  of  ?  Why  should  we  not  get  out  of  it  all  the  discipUnary  and  purifying 
virtue  that  we  can,  and  so  turn  the  scourge  into  a  blessing  ?  And  if  the  question 
be  asked  by  some  anxious  soul,  "  How  am  I  to  know?  Is  this  unjust  humiliation, 
or  this  insult,  or  this  loss  of  means,  or  this  illness,  or  this  heartache,  a  punishment 
for  past  sin  or  a  tendei  discipline  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  Conscience  must  itself  reply." 
Here,  then,  is  the  answer  to  the  criticism  on  St.  Peter's  precept,  to  which  I  was 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

referring  just  now.  There  may  be  cases  in  which  the  interests  of  truth  and 
righteousness — the  interests  of  others — may  make  resistance  to  oppression  a  duty. 
They  are  rare,  indeed.  As  a  rule,  trouble  and  pain  are  to  be  taken  patiently  as 
coming  from  God,  inflict  them  who  may.  The  early  Christians  were  men  who  felt 
they  had  nothing  to  do  either  with  the  legal  government  of  the  Roman  Empire  or 
with  the  moral  government  of  the  universe.  All  that  they  knew  was  that  they  had 
to  suffer  for  being  what  they  were,  and  for  believing  what  they  did  believe.  The 
only  question  with  them  was  how  to  suffer.  And  as  for  society,  society  has  been 
again  and  again  purified,  regenerated,  saved,  by  the  passive  endurance,  as  distinct 
from  the  active  struggles,  of  its  very  best  members.  And  let  me  make  two  remarks 
in  conclusion.  In  this  glad  acceptance  of  undeserved  pain  we  see  one  of  the  central 
forces  of  the  Christian  religion  by  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  made  its  way 
among  men  eighteen  centuries  ago  and  ever  since.  Literature,  social  prestige, 
political  influence,  were  all  against  the  Church  ;  but  in  the  long  run  the  old  empire 
was  no  match  for  a  religion  which  could  teach  its  sincere  votaries,  generation  after 
generation,  to  regard  pure  suffering  as  a  privilege,  as  a  mark  of  God's  favour,  as  a 
pledge  of  glory.  Depend  upon  it  patient,  cheerful  acceptance  of  suffering  is  a  great 
force  which  achieves  more  than  many  active  energies  that  command  the  attention 
of  mankind.  And  if  this  way  of  taking  the  troubles  which  are  laid  upon  us  supplies 
Christianity  with  its  force,  so  it  secures  to  human  life  its  best  consolations.  We 
live  in  an  age  of  progress.  The  circumstances  under  which  we  pass  life  are  being 
brought  more  and  more  under  the  control  of  man  ;  but  is  there  less  suffering  in  the 
world  than  there  was  a  hundred  years  ago  ?  Looking  to  the  present  state  of  the 
world,  is  there  likely  to  be  ?  I  fear  not.  Even  science,  which  does  so  much  for  us, 
shifts  the  scene  of  suffering,  rather  than  diminishes  its  area.  What  is  taken  away 
by  one  hand  is  returned  by  the  other.  If  disease  is  assuaged,  life  is  prolonged  under 
conditions  which,  in  an  unscientific  age,  would  have  been  fatal  to  it,  and  which 
necessarily  involve  suffering.  And  human  nature  does  not  change.  The  same 
principles  and  passions  and  dispositions  which,  needlessly  or  intentionally,  inflict 
suffering  on  others  are  at  work  now,  although  their  operation  is  limited  by  improve- 
ments in  human  society.  Some  of  us  may  be  young  and  lighthearted,  and  may  not 
yet  know  what  real  trouble  and  pain  mean.  We  shall  know  in  time.  The  lesson 
comes  to  most  men  early  enough  in  life,  whether  inflicted  by  others  or,  as  more 
frequently,  direct  from  above.  The  important  point  is  to  be  prepared  for  it  when  it 
does  come,  to  see  in  it  the  hand  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  to  thank  Him  for  treating 
us  thus  as  children,  for  punishing,  for  purifying  us  here,  that  He  may  in  His  mercy 
spare  us  hereafter.  (Caiioii  Liddon.)  The  duty  of  patience  under  injuries  : — 
I.  What  is  implied  in  this  duty.  1.  The  not  entertaining  the  impression  of 
injuries  with  acrimony  of  thought  and  internal  resentment.  2.  The  not  venting 
any  such  resentment  in  virulent  vindictive  language.  II.  Whence  it  is  that  this 
DUTY  COMES  TO  BE  SO  EXCEEDINGLY  DIFFICULT.  1.  From  the  peculiar  provoking 
quality  of  ill  language.  2.  Because  nature  has  deeply  planted  in  every  man  a 
strange  tenderness  of  his  good  name,  which,  in  the  rank  of  worldly  enjoyments,  the 
wisest  of  men  has  placed  before  life  itself.  For,  indeed,  it  is  a  more  enlarged 
and  diffused   life,  kept  up  by  many  more  brea'hs  than  our  own.     III.  By  what 

MEANS  A  MAN  MAY  WORK  HIMSELF  TO  SUCH  A  COMPOSURE  AND  TEMPER  OF  SPIRIT, 
AS    TO    BE    ABLE    TO    OBSERVE    THIS    GREAT    AND    EXCELLENT    DUTY.       And  here,    wheU  WB 

consider  what  obstructions  are  to  be  conquered  and  removed,  we  must  acknowledge 
that  nothing  under  an  omnipotent  grace  can  subdue  the  heart  to  such  a  frame.  To 
discommend  this,  of  returning  railing  for  railing,  slander  for  slander,  both  to  our 
practice  and  affection,  I  shall  fasten  only  upon  this  one  consideration ;  namely,  that 
it  is  utterly  useless  to  all  rational  intents  and  purposes.  1.  The  first  reason  that 
would  induce  a  man,  upon  provocation,  to  do  a  violent  action  by  way  of  return, 
should  be  to  remove  the  cause  of  that  provocation.  But  the  cause  that  usually 
provokes  men  to  revile,  are  words  and  speeches ;  that  is,  such  things  as  are  irre- 
vo'-able.  Such  a  one  vilified  me  ;  but  can  I,  by  railing,  make  that  which  was 
s-  en,  not  to  have  been  spoken  ?  Are  words  and  talk  to  be  reversed  ?  Or 
can  I  make  a  slander  to  be  forgot,  by  rubbing  up  the  memory  of  those  that 
heard  it  with  a  reply  ?  2.  Another  end,  inducing  a  man  to  return  reviling  for 
reviling,  may  be  by  this  means  to  confute  the  calumny,  and  to  discredit  the 
truth  of  it.  But  this  course  is  so  far  from  having  such  an  effect,  that  it  is  the 
only  thing  that  gives  it  colour  and  credibility ;  all  people  being  prone  to  judge,  that 
a  high  resentment  of  a  calumny  proceeds  from  concernment,  and  that  from  guilt ; 
which  makes  the  sore  place  tender  and  untractable.     3.  A  third  end  for  which  a 


cH-u-.  11.]  I.  PETER.  217 

man  may  pretend  to  give  himself  this  Uberty  is  because  in  so  doing  he  thinks  he 
takes  a  full  and  proper  revenge  of  him  that  first  reviled  him.  But  certainly  there 
is  no  kind  of  revenge  so  poor  and  pitiful ;  for  every  dog  can  bark,  and  he  that  rails 
makes  another  noise  indeed,  but  not  a  better.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Of  patience  : — 
The  word  patience  hath  in  common  usage  a  double  meaning,  taken  from  the  respect 
it  hath  unto  two  sorts  of  objects  somewhat  different.  As  it  respecteth  provocations 
to  anger  and  revenge  by  injuries  or  discourtesies,  it  signifieth  a  disposition  of  mind 
to  bear  them  with  charitable  meekness ;  as  it  relateth  to  adversities  and  crosses 
disposed  to  us  by  Providence,  it  importeth  a  pious  undergoing  and  sustaining 
them.  That  both  these  kinds  of  patience  may  here  be  understood,  we  may, 
consulting  and  considering  the  context,  easily  discern.     I.  Patience,  then,  is  that 

VIETUE    WHICH     QUALIFIETH    US    TO    BEAK  ALL     CONDITIONS    AND     ALL    EVENTS   BY    God'S 

DISPOSAL     INCIDENT     TO     US,     WITH     SUCH  APPREHENSIONS    AND     PERSUASIONS    OF     MIND, 

SUCH     DISPOSITIONS    AND    AFFECTIONS    OF  HEART,     SUCH    EXTERNAL    DEPORTMENTS    AND 

PRACTICES    OF    LIFE    AS     GOD    REQUIRETH  AND    GOOD     REASON    DIRECTETH.         ItS   Uatur© 

will,  I  conceive,  be  understood  best  by  considering  the  chief  acts  which  it  pro- 
duceth,  and  wherein  especially  the  practice  thereof  consisteth ;  the  which  briefly 
are  these :  1.  A  thorough  persuasion,  that  nothing  befalleth  us  by  fate,  or  by 
chance,  or  by  the  mere  agency  of  inferior  causes,  but  that  all  proceedeth  from, 
the  dispensation  or  with  the  allowance  of  God.  2.  A  firm  belief  that  all  occur- 
rences, however  adverse  and  cross  to  our  desires,  are  well  consistent  with  the 
justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God.  3.  A  full  satisfaction  of  mind  that  aU 
(even  the  most  bitter  and  sad  accidents)  do  (according  to  God's  purpose)  tend 
and  conduce  to  our  good.  4.  An  entire  submission  and  resignation  of  our  wills 
to  the  will  of  God,  suppressing  all  rebellious  insurrections  and  grievous  resent- 
ments of  heart  against  Plis  providence.  5.  Bearing  adversities  calmly,  cheerfully, 
and  courageously,  so  as  not  to  be  discomposed  with  anger  or  grief ;  not  to  be  put 
out  of  humour,  not  to  be  dejected  or  disheartened  ;  but  in  our  disposition  of  mind 
to  resemble  the  primitive  saints  who  "took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  goods," 
who  "  accounted  it  all  joy  when  they  fell  into  divers  tribulations."  6.  A  hopeful 
confidence  in  God  for  the  removal  or  easement  of  our  afflictions,  and  for  His  gracious 
aid  to  support  them  well ;  agreeable  to  those  good  rules  and  precepts  :  "  It  is  good 
that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  wait  quietly  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  " ; 
"  Best  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him " ;  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of 
good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen  thine  heart."  7.  A  willingness  to  continue, 
during  God's  pleasure,  in  our  afHicted  state,  without  weariness  or  irksome  longings 
for  alteration.  8.  A  lowly  frame  of  mind  (that  is,  being  sober  in  our  conceits  of 
ourselves,  sensible  of  our  manifold  defects  and  miscarriages ;  being  meek  and  gentle, 
tender  and  pliable  in  our  temper  and  frame  of  spirit ;  being  deeply  affected  with 
reverence  and  dread  toward  the  awful  majesty,  mighty  power,  perfect  justice  and 
sanctity  of  God ;  all  this)  wrought  by  our  adversity,  effectually,  according  to  its 
design,  softening  our  hard  hearts,  mitigating  our  peevish  humours.  9.  Ee- 
straining  our  tongues  from  all  discontentful  complaints  and  murmurings,  all 
profane,  harsh  expressions,  importing  displeasure  or  dissatisfaction  in  God's, 
dealings  toward  us,  arguing  desperation  or  distrust  in  Him.  10.  Blessing  and 
praising  God  (that  is,  declaring  our  hearty  satisfaction  in  God's  proceedings  with 
us,  acknowledging  His  wisdom,  justice,  and  goodness  therein,  expressing  a  grateful 
sense  thereof,  as  wholesome  and  beneficial  to  us)  in  conformity  to  Job,  who,  on  the 
loss  of  all  his  comforts,  did  thus  vent  his  mind :  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord 
hath  taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  11.  Abstaining  from  all 
irregular  and  unworthy  courses  toward  the  removal  or  redress  of  our  crosses ; 
choosing  rather  to  abide  quietly  under  their  pressure,  than  by  any  unwarrantable 
means  to  relieve  or  relax  ourselves.  12.  A  fair  behaviour  toward  the  instruments 
and  abettors  of  our  affliction ;  those  who  brought  us  into  it,  or  who  detain  us  under 
it,  by  keeping  off  relief,  or  sparing  to  yield  the  succour  which  we  might  expect ;  the 
forbearing  to  express  any  wrath  or  displeasure,  to  exercise  any  revenge,  to  retain  any 
grudge  or  enmity  toward  them ;  but  rather  even  on  that  score  bearing  good-will,  and 
showing  kindness  unto  them.  13.  Particularly  in  regard  to  those  who,  by  injurious 
and  offensive  usage,  do  pi'ovoke  us,  patience  importeth — (1)  That  we  be  not  hastily, 
over  easily,  not  immoderately,  not  pertinaciously  incensed  with  anger  toward  them. 
(2)  That  we  do  not  in  our  hearts  harbour  any  ill  will,  or  ill  wishes,  or  iU  designs 
toward  them,  but  that  we  truly  desire  their  good,  and  purpose  to  farther  it  as  we 
shall  have  ability  and  occasion.  (3)  That  in  effect  we  do  not  execute  any  revenge, 
or  for  requital  do  any  mischief  to  them,  either  in   word   or   deed  ;   but  for  their 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

reproaches  exchange  blessings  (or  good  words  and  wishes),  for  their  outrages  repay 
benefits  and  good  turns.  14.  In  fine,  patience  doth  include  and  produce  a  general 
meekness  and  kindness  of  affection,  together  with  an  enlarged  sweetness  and 
pleasantness  in  conversation  and  carriage  toward  all  men ;  implying  that  how 
hard  soever  our  case,  how  sorry  or  sad  our  condition  is,  we  are  not  therefore 
angry  with  the  world,  because  we  do  not  thrive  or  flourish  in  it ;  that  we  are 
not  dissatisfied  or  disgusted  with  the  prosperous  estate  of  other  men ;  that  we 
are  not  become  sullen  or  froward  toward  any  man  because  his  fortune  excelleth 
ours,  but  that  rather  we  do  "  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice  " ;  we  do  find  compla- 
cence and  delight  in  their  good  success ;  we  borrow  satisfaction  and  pleasure  from 
their  enjoyments.  II.  The  example  of  our  Lord  was  indeed  in  this  kind  the 
MOST  REMARKABLE  THAT  EVER  WAS  PRESENTED,  the  most  perfect  that  Can  be  imagined ; 
He  was,  above  all  expression,  "  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief  " ;  He 
did  undertake,  as  to  perform  the  best  works,  so  to  endure  the  worst  accidents  to 
which  human  nature  is  subject ;  His  whole  life  being  no  other  than  one  continual 
exercise  of  patience  and  meekness,  in  all  the  parts  and  to  the  utmost  degrees  of 
them.  {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  Patience  in  tribulation : — I.  The  special  beautt 
OF  Christian  behaviour.  "  This  is  the  grace  or  beauty."  1.  The  disciple  of  Christ 
does  not  act  from  motives  of  expediency,  but  from  principle.  2.  The  disciple  of 
Christ  does  not  pursue  pleasure  or  ease,  but  duty.  II.  The  exciting  motive  which 
prompts  the  attainment  of  this  character.  He  will  know  that  he  is  pleasing 
God.  He  will  realise  that  God  is  the  avenger.  III.  The  natural  argument  to  be 
SPECIALLY  CONSIDERED.  "  For  what  glory  is  it,"  &c.  This  is  an  urgent  and  important 
warning  and  caution.  It  urges  discrimination  and  self-examination  with  regard  to 
our  sufferings.  {J.  J.  S.  Bird.)  Acceptable  with  God. — Thanks  from  God  : — 
"  This  is  acceptable  with  God."  And  the  Greek  might  bear  such  a  rendering  as  this  : 
"  God  says,  Thank  you."  Yes,  so  it  is.  If  in  some  great  house  some  poor  ser- 
vant, or  if  in  a  school  some  persecuted  child,  will  dare,  for  God's  sake,  to  choke 
back  the  passionate  outburst  of  indignation,  and  to  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully, 
there  is  a  thrill  of  delight  started  through  the  very  heart  of  God,  and  from  the  throne 
God  stoops  to  say,  "  Thank  you."  The  hero-explorer  may  be  thanked  by  his  country 
and  his  Queen,  but  the  weakest  and  obscurest  saint  may  receive  the  thanks  of  the 
Almighty.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Even  hereunto  were  ye  called. — God  has  ordained 
His  people  to  undergo  troubles  in  this  world  :  — God  has  ordained  that  all  His  shall 
suffer  troubles,  therefore  we  are  to  look  for  them,  and  bear  them  patiently.  Through 
many  afflictions  we  must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  God  knows  how  ill  we 
can  bear  prosperity,  but  are  ready  to  surfeit  thereof,  as  children  do  of  sweetmeats. 
Standing  waters  gather  mud.  As  the  Israelites  in  their  journey  to  Canaan  suffered 
much,  so  must  we  in  this  tabernacle,  before  we  come  to  heaven ;  thus  is  God  pleased 
to  exercise  us  for  His  own  glory  and  our  good.  Uses :  1.  We  must  not  think  the 
worse  of  any  because  of  their  afflictions,  or  conclude  them  to  be  bad  men  and 
hypocrites,  which  was  the  fault  of  Job's  friends.  2.  We  must  not  think  the 
better  of  ourselves  for  prosperity.  God  can  afford  the  dogs  the  bones,  the  things 
of  this  world.  3.  We  must  not  dislike  ourselves  for  our  afflictions.  It  is  an  argu- 
ment of  God's  love,  not  of  His  hatred  (Heb.  xii.  6).  To  have  afflictions  and  to 
profit  thereby  is  the  sign  of  a  happy  man.  4.  We  must  prepare  for  afflictions,  not 
dreaming  for  ease ;  they  are  the  better  borne  when  looked  for.  5.  We  must  bear 
them  patiently,  as  being  of  God.  6.  We  must  bear  them  thankfully,  as  whereby 
we  are  furthered  in  holiness.  7.  We  must  bear  them  joyfully,  in  respect  of  the 
eternal  happiness  and  immortal  glory  we  shall  be  shortly  brought  to.  8.  If  the 
children  of  God  get  not  to  heaven  but  through  many  sorrows,  what  shall  then 
become  of  the  wicked  and  ungodly  (1  Peter  iv.  18 ;  Jer.  xxv.  29,  xlix.  12)  ? 
(John  Rogers.)  Christ  also  snflfered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example. — Chrisfs 

sufferings  in  Gethsemane : — "  He  suffered  for  us  "  ;  it  was  during  His  agony  in 
the  garden  that  our  Lord  appears  to  have  been  most  deeply  penetrated  with  the 
sense  of  His  afflictions.  I.  The  intensity  of  those  sufferings  which  our  Saviour 
experienced  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane ;  and,  II.  What  His  conduct  under 
those  bufferings  ought  to  teach  us.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  circumstance  of 
the  gospel  at  which  our  reason  is  so  inclined  to  cavil,  as  the  affliction  which 
our  Saviour  then  experienced.  We  cannot  understand  how  it  is  possible  that 
the  Messiah,  who  is  "  one  with  the  Father,"  should  be  thus  liable  to  grief,  and 
thus  deeply  moved  at  the  prospect  of  His  approaching  persecutions.  Our  difficulty 
here  results  from  our  utter  inability  of  forming  any  notion  of  the  infinite  magnitude 
of  the  Divine  power.     We  can  understand  that  in  the  Majesty  of  the  Deity,  He 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  219 

should   hold   pain   and   sorrow  as  His   subjects;   but  we  cannot   understand   His 
rendering  Himself  subject  to  them.     We  are  unable  to  conceive  that  exercise  of 
His  power  by  which  He  manifested  Himself  as  entire  a  master  of  His  own  infinite 
attributes,  and  withdrew  Himself,  as  it  were,  from  the  sustaining  succours  of  His 
eternal  Godhead,  that,  as  a  man.  He  might  suffer  for  our  redemption.     Yet  this  is 
what  our  Saviour  did.     If  we  were  merely  to  confine  ourselves  to  temporal  views, 
and  exclude  all  consideration  of  the  spiritual  cause  of  our  Lord's  sufferings,  it  may 
even  then  be  with  truth  affirmed  that  such  an  accumulation  of  woes  was  never 
brought  to  bear  at  one  moment  on  one  man.     He  knew  to  a  certainty  that  He  had 
no  deliverance  to  look  for ;  that  Judas,  His  companion,  would  betray  Him  ;  that  the 
princes  and  rulers  would  condemn  Him  ;  that  the  people  would  reject  Him  and  save 
Barabbas ;  and  that  His  enemies  would  heap  their  persecutions  upon  Him  to  the 
last.    In  the  mere  anticipation  of  what  He  was  about  to  undergo,  our  Redeemer  had 
full  cause  for  the  agony  which  He  experienced   and   expressed  in  the   garden  of 
Gethsemane.     But,  with  such  aggravations  suggested  by  His  own  prophetic  spirit 
as  no  other  man  ever  knew,  Jesus  was  cut  off  by  the  very  sublimity  and  holiness  of 
His  character,  from  a  source  of  succour  which,  under  similar  circumstances,  has 
often  afforded  relief  to  other  men.      If  they  do  not  actually  extract  the  sting  of 
human   suffering,  they  serve  to  divert  the  thoughts,  and  thus  to  allay  the  pain 
of  it.     But  what  are  those  passions?     They  are  either  a  sullen  pride  which  wiU 
not  allow  the  afflicted  under  any  circumstances  to  confess  themselves  subdued ;  or 
a  fierce  resentment  which  induces  them  to  baffle  the  malice  of  their  enemies  by 
opposing  a  mask  of  obstinate  insensibility  to  every  attack  ;  or  an  empty  vanity  which 
leads  them  in  the  lowest  depths  of  wretchedness,  and  on  the  very  borders  of  the  grave, 
to  angle  for  the  applauses  of  the  world  by  putting  on  a  light  appearance  of  unconcern. 
But  whatever  support  such  feelings  might  afford  to  others,  they  could  have  afforded 
none  to  Jesus  in  the  hour  of  His  agony.     They  are  repugnant  to  the  dispositions  by 
which  His  gentle  heart  was  animated.     But  it  may  be  conceived  that  Jesus,  under 
all  His  troubles,  might  still  have  found  relief  in  the  consciousness  of  His  innocence. 
If  there  are  occasions  when  this  reflection  may  prove  a  source  of  secret  comfort  to 
the  sufferer ;  there  are  others  when  it  serves  as  the  severest  aggravation  to  his  misery. 
If  an  elder  brother  who  had  mercifully  interposed  to  save  the  children  of  their  com- 
mon parents  from  destitution,  who  had  succeeded  in  placing  them  in  a  prosperous 
condition,  should,  after  all,  detect  them  conspiring  with  his  enemies  to  malign  and 
ruin  him,  would  it  be  any  consolation  to  reflect  that  he  had  not  deserved  such  treat- 
ment at  their  hands  ?     Even  so  must  the  consciousness  of  His  innocence  have 
affected  the  heart  of  Jesus.     It  must  have  been  the  most  galling  addition  to  the 
weight  of  those  oppressions  which  were  heaped  upon  Him  by  His  countrymen.    The 
consideration  that  they,  who  would  be  the  authors  of  His  oppressions,  ought  to  have 
been  bound  together  by  the  remembrance  of  His  loving-kindnesses,  as   His   firm 
protectors,  must  have   struck  far  deeper   into  His  heart  than  ever  the   soldier's 
spear-wound  in  His  side  could  pierce.      But  not  only  on  His  own  account :   His 
compassionate  nature  would  grieve  for  others ;   for  His  disciples,  whom  the  pro- 
fession of  the  faith  in  His  name  should  render  obnoxious  to  the  enmity  of  their 
friends,  and  expose  to  persecution.    But,  as  yet,  we  have  only  surveyed  our  Saviour's 
agony  in  the  garden  as  resulting  from  human  feelings.     We  will  now  proceed  to 
regard  it  as  affected  by  those  views  which  would  have  been  suggested  by  the  religious 
aim  of  His  approaching  passion.     Our  Saviour,  by  His  death  upon  the  Cross,  was 
about  to  pay  the  price  of  the  transgressions  of  the  whole  world.     He  was  about  to 
suffer  for  our  sins;  and  those  sins  for  which  His  death  was  demanded,  would 
naturally  engage  His  contemplations.     He  would  now  see  before  Him  the  multi- 
tude of  those  offences  for  which  a  sacrifice  was  to  be  offered ;  the  heinousness  of 
them  ;  the  outrage  that  they  were  against  the  majesty  of  God  ;  the  ruin,  the  desti- 
tution which  they  had  spread  over  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and  the  weight  of  the 
punishment  they  deserved.     The  bare  idea  of  any  one  of  those  wicked  acts  which 
are  daily  committed  by  the  cruel  or  the  impure,  is  hateful  to  every  innocent  mind. 
What  horror  then  must  necessarily  have  filled  the  soul  of  our  Saviour  when,  not 
singly,  but  in  their  aggregate  amount,  those  mortal  offences  were  brought  before  His 
holy  view,  as  He  estimated  the  extent  of  the  ransom  which  was  due,  and  which  He 
had  Himself  undertaken  to  discharge?    But  our  Lord  thus  "  suffered  for  us,"  says 
St.  Peter  in  my  text,  "  leaving  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps."    The 
lessons  which  His  sufferings  ought  to  teach  us :  1.  We  should  learn  from  them  to 
submit  ourselves  in  every  condition  of  life  with  an  unreserved  obedience  to  the  will 
of  the  Almighty.     2.  We  should  learn  from  our  Lord's  conduct  never  to  despair  of 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  loving-kindness  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  but  to  rely  upon  His  unfailing  goodness  ; 
to  look  to  Him  for  succour  and  relief ;  and  to  feel  assured  that,  if  He  see  not  fit  to 
remove  our  cause  of  sorrow,  He  will,  in  His  infinite  mei'cy,  answer  our  prayers  for 
assistance,  by  vouchsafing  to  our  souls  the  ability  to  support  it.  3.  We  should  learn 
humility  from  the  example  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings.  4.  We  should  leai'n  from 
our  Lord's  example  the  extent  of  that  Christian  love  which,  as  His  disciples,  we  are 
bound  to  bear  our  fellow-creatures.  Our  Lord  suffered  for  us.  He  exhibited,  in 
dying  for  us,  the  fulness  of  that  brotherly  charity  with  which  our  hearts  should 
glow  towards  each  other.  He  condemned  every  affection  which  emanates  from 
a  selfish  and  ungenerous  source,  by  His  willing  immolation  of  Himself  for  the 
sins  of  the  world  that  had  condemned  Him.  His  thus  dying  for  us  teaches 
us  not  only  the  value  we  ought  to  set  upon  our  own  salvation,  but  the 
value  we  ought  to  set  upon  the  salvation  of  others.  (ir.  Harness,  M.A.) 
Christ  our  example  : — The  first  reason  for  the  gift  of  the  Incarnate  Son  to  a  perishing 
world,  is  that  He  might  be  a  sacrifice  for  its  sin.  The  second  reason  is,  that  He 
might  be  an  ensample  of  godly  life  to  those  who  believe  in  Him.  We  sinners  can- 
not invert  the  order,  and  say  that  He  was  given,  first  as  our  example,  and  secondly 
as  our  sin-offering  before  God.  For  we  cannot  imitate  Him  until  He  has  redeemed 
us  from  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin ;  the  first  need  of  a  sinner  is  pardon  and  moral 
freedom,  the  second,  the  ideal  of  a  new  life.  I.  Why  we  need  such  an  example  at 
ALL.  Let  us  ask  ourselves  what  it  is  which  makes  human  nature  radically  different 
from  that  of  any  of  the  creatures  that  surround  us.  The  great  characteristic  of  man 
is  the  possession  of  free  will.  The  growth  of  the  human  body  indeed  is  as  little 
within  man's  control  as  is  that  of  an  animal.  But  human  character,  and  so  much 
of  the  bodily  life  as  bears  on  character,  is  as  much  under  our  control  as  are  the 
canvas  and  the  colours  under  that  of  a  painter.  Our  passions,  our  inclinations,  our 
thoughts,  our  sympathies,  our  antipathies,  our  habits,  are  at  the  disposal  of  our 
wills ;  we  are  what  we  have  gradually  made  oui-selves.  Man,  then,  is  an  artist. 
And  as  an  artist  he  needs  not  merely  the  material  out  of  which  to  mould  some  ex- 
pression of  thought,  but  an  example,  an  ideal,  to  copy.  It  may  indeed  be  asked 
whether  it  will  not  do  as  weU  to  obey  a  precept  as  to  copy  an  example.  Example, 
it  is  said,  is  vague ;  precept  is  explicit.  Precept  is  active ;  it  seeks  you  out  and 
addresses  you.  Example  is  passive ;  it  lets  you  imitate  if  you  will.  Example 
merely  says,  "  This  may  be  done  because  it  has  been  done."  Precept  says,  "  Do  it." 
No,  you  especially  who,  as  parents  or  masters,  are  responsible  for  influence  on 
others  ;  assuredly,  no.  Example  goes  further  than  precept.  Precept  leads  us  to  the 
foot  of  a  precipitous  mountain,  and  it  cries,  "  Scale  that  height."  But  example 
whispers:  "  Mark  what  I  do,  and  then  do  it;  it  cannot  be  hard  for  you  since  it  is 
easy  for  me.  Look  how  I  step  over  that  crevice,  and  rest  on  this  projecting  foot- 
hold, and  tread  lightly  and  quickly  along  that  insecure  bit  of  the  path.  Watch  me ; 
keep  close  to  me.  Then  all  wiU  be  well  in  the  end."  II.  We  do  then  need  an 
example,  and  our  Lord  has  satisfied  this  need  of  our  nature,  and  completely. 
In  Him  we  have  before  us  an  example  which  is  unique.  He  passed  through  life  in 
the  humblest  circumstances :  yet  He  belongs  to  the  human  race.  He  alone  in  the 
world  is  the  universal  man ;  He  is  the  one  man  who  corresponds  to  that  ideal  of 
humanity  of  which  there  are  traces  in  the  minds  of  aU  of  us ;  He  is  the  great 
example.  1.  That  which  strikes  us,  first  of  all,  in  the  example  which  He  has  left 
us,  is  its  faultlessness.  We  are  startled  by  His  own  sense  of  this.  He  never  utters 
one  word  to  the  Father  or  to  man  which  implies  the  consciousness  of  a  defect.  "  I 
do  always  those  things  that  please  the  Father."  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh, 
and  hath  nothing  in  Me."  Was  this  an  illusion,  or  did  it  correspond  with  the  fact? 
He  was  surrounded  by  jealous  observers.  He  could  reckon  on  no  forbearance,  no 
generosity,  no  equity,  in  His  opponents.  Yet  He  passed  their  criticism  unscathed. 
"  Which  of  you,"  He  could  say,  "  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  And  there  was  silence. 
In  this  sinlessness  He  is,  although  our  model,  yet  beyond  our  full  reach  of  imitation. 
The  best  of  men  knows  that  in  his  best  moments  he  is  beset  by  motives,  or  thoughts, 
or  inclinations,  from  which  Christ  was  utterly  free.  But  this  does  not  destroy,  it 
rather  enhances,  the  value  of  our  Lord's  example.  In  all  departments  of  thought 
and  work,  the  ideal  is,  strictly  speaking,  unattainable  by  man ;  yet  man  should 
never  lose  sight  of  it.  2.  We  are  struck  by  the  balance  and  proportion  of  excellences 
in  our  Lord's  human  character.  As  a  rule,  if  a  man  possesses  some  one  excellence 
in  an  unusual  degree,  he  will  be  found  to  exhibit  some  fault  or  shortcoming  in  an 
opposite  direction.  Our  finite  and  fallen  nature  exhausts  itself  by  an  effort  in  a 
single  direction ;  it  would  almost  seem  bound  to  atone  for  a  temporary  success  by 


CHAP.  II.]  r.  PETER.  221 

some  compensating  failure.  Of  this  want  of  balance  in  excellence,  of  this  exaggera- 
tion in  particular  forms  of  excellence  which  entails  an  accompanying  defect,  there 
is  no  trace  in  our  Lord.  Bead  His  life  over  and  over  again,  with  this  point  in  view ; 
and  nothing  will  strike  you  more  than  its  faultless  proportions.  In  so  vast  a  field, 
take  one  illustration  out  of  many :  the  balance  which  He  keeps  between  severity  and 
tenderness.  3.  Consider  again  a  feature  which  runs  through  His  whole  character : 
its  simplicity.  In  nothing  that  He  says  or  does  can  we  detect  any  trace  of  con- 
trivance or  of  aiming  at  effect.  He  takes  the  illustrations  which  come  ready  to  His 
hand,  or  which  meet  His  eye :  the  birds  of  the  air,  the  rain,  the  red  and  lowering 
sky,  the  lily,  the  grain  of  mustard-seed,  the  corn,  the  ruined  tower  of  Siloam.  On 
these  He  grafts  this  or  that  fragment  of  eternal  truth.  We  cannot  enrich  His 
teaching  by  any  additions.  Our  crude  efforts  could  not  but  disfigure  its  incom- 
parable beauty.  As  with  His  words,  so  is  it  with  His  actions.  He  acts  with  a  view 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  and  with  a  view  to  nothing  else.  Hence  a  directness 
and  transparency  in  His  conduct,  which  we  feel  in  every  detail  of  it.  4.  One  further 
point  to  be  remarked  in  our  Lord's  example  is  the  stress  which  it  lays  upon  those 
forms  of  excellence  which  make  no  great  show,  such  as  patience,  humility,  meek- 
ness, and  the  like.  As  we  read  the  gospels,  we  are  led  to  see  that  the  highest  type 
of  human  excellence  consists  less  in  acting  well  than  in  suffering  well.  It  is  this  side 
of  His  example  of  which  St.  Peter  is  thinking  as  being  so  useful  to  the  Christian 
slaves  to  whom  for  the  moment  he  is  -svriting  (ver  23).  Christ  had  before  Him  a 
purpose  of  infinite  beneficence  ;  that  of  recovering  man  to  God  and  to  endless  happi- 
ness. Yet  in  carrying  it  out  He  met  with  scorn,  resistance,  hatred,  persecution. 
Yet  no  unkind  or  impatient  word  falls  from  Him.  He  bears  in  silence  the  contra- 
diction of  sinners  against  HimseK.  He  prays,  "Father,  forgive  them."  He  is 
obedient  unto  death.  "  Leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  His  steps." 
"  Yes,"  it  is  said,  "  it  is  a  beautiful,  a  transcendental  picture ;  and  if  Christ  were 
merely  man,  we  might  perhaps  imitate  Him  !  But  then  He  is  God  as  well  as  man ; 
and  this  seems  to  remove  Him  from  the  category  of  beings  whom  man  can  imitate. 
His  theological  glory  in  the  fourth  gospel  is  fatal  to  His  moral  value  as  a  human 
model  in  the  first  three."  The  difference  between  Jesus  Christ  and  ourselves  is 
indeed  infinite  ;  it  is  the  difference  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature.  And  yet 
He  is  also  truly  man ;  and  for  the  purposes  of  imitation  the  truth  of  His  manhood 
secures  aU  that  we  require.  For  the  purposes  of  imitation,  He  is  practically  not 
more  out  of  our  reach  than  is  a  father  of  great  genius  and  goodness  out  of  the  reach 
of  his  child.  Certainly  we  cannot  imitate  Jesus  Christ  when  He  heals  the  sick,  or 
raises  the  dead.  But  we  can  enter  into  and  cherish  the  spirit  of  those  high  works 
of  mercy.  We  can  do  the  natural  kindnesses  which  are  akin  to  them.  And  there 
are  deeds  and  words  of  His  which  we  can  copy  in  the  letter  as  well  as  the  spirit. 
Indeed,  the  objection  has  been  already  solved  by  the  experience  of  eighteen  centuries. 
The  imitation  of  Christ  is  the  perpetual  source  of  saintly  effort  in  the  Church  of 
Christ.  Generation  follows  generation,  looking  unto  Jesus.  One  man  says,  I  will 
imitate  His  patience ;  and  another,  I  will  copy  His  humility ;  and  a  third,  I  would 
practise,  though  afar  off,  His  obedience ;  and  a  fourth.  His  love  for  men  ;  and 
another.  His  simplicity ;  and  another.  His  benevolence ;  and  another,  His  perpetual 
communion  with  the  Father ;  and  another,  His  renunciation  of  His  Own  will.  When 
one  point  is  gained,  others  follow.  Thus,  little  by  little,  "  Christ  is  formed,"  in  the 
characters  of  His  servants.  This  imitation  of  our  Lord  is  not  a  duty  which  we  are 
free  to  accept  or  decline.  "The  elect,"  says  St.  Paul,  "are  predestined  to  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God."  If  there  is  no  effort  at  conformity,  there 
is  no  true  note  of  predestination.  A  devoted  layman  of  the  Church  of  England  said 
on  his  deathbed,  that,  on  reviewing  his  life,  the  omission  which  he  chiefly  deplored 
was  that  he  had  not  made  a  daily  effort  to  study  and  imitate  Jesus  Christ  as  He  is 
described  in  the  gospels.  Is  not  this  a  common  omission  even  with  serious  Chris- 
tians ?  Should  we  not  do  what  we  may,  while  yet  we  may,  thus  to  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  the  Perfect  Man?  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  ChrUtian  ideal: — "The 
Christian  is  the  noblest  type  of  man,"  says  our  Christian  poet ;  and,  assuredly,  if 
the  Christian  be,  in  any  extent,  a  reflection  of  the  spirit  of  Christ,  this  language 
must  be  true.  Whatever  the  grace  we  seek  to  inculcate  we  may  find  in  Him  a  per- 
fect illustration.  Amid  all  life's  trials,  perplexities,  temptations,  and  requirements 
we  can  have  no  law  so  suited  to  every  occasion  as  this :  "  Let  the  same  mind  be  in 
you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."     I.  An  unconscious  and  indikect  evidence  of 

THIS  IS  THE  FREQUENT  USE  OF  THE  TEBM  "  ChRISTLIKE  "  AS  AN  EPITHET  DESCRIPTIVE  OF 
THE  NOBLEST    TTPE    OF    HUMAN    CHARACTER.       11.    ThE    ESSENTIAL    DIFFERENCE    BETWEEN 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

THE  MORALITY  WHICH  THE  WORLD  PROFESSES  TO  HONOUR  AND  THAT  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  IS  TO 
BE  FOUND  IN  THE  ENDEAVOUR  OF    THE    LATTER    TO    REFLECT    THE    MIND    OF    ChRIST    AS    IT 

ACTUALLY  EXISTS.  I  do  Dot  mean,  of  course,  the  morality  of  pure  selfishness — if  it 
be  worthy  the  name  of  morality  at  all — which  is  all  that  numbers  would  acknow- 
ledge, but  that  which  is  cultivated  by  those  who  would  develop  a  character  higher 
than  the  Christian — the  morality  of  the  "Religion  of  Humanity,"  and  of  those  who 
hang  on  its  outskirts,  approaching  more  or  less  nearly  to  its  ideas.  What  is  it,  and 
how  does  it  differ  from  that  which  the  Church  of  Christ  commends  to  the  accept- 
ance of  men  ?  It  is  clear  that  up  to  a  certain  point  there  is  no  outward  difference. 
The  law  of  truth,  righteousness,  sobriety  is  common  to  both.  Further,  the  morality 
outside  the  Church  is  different  from  that  which  was  in  the  world  before  the  gospel, 
in  that  it  has  incorporated  with  its  precept  that  law  of  gentleness,  mercy,  self-forget- 
fulness  which  was  first  set  before  men  in  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Here,  then,  is 
likeness  so  great,  that  there  are  some  only  too  eager  to  conclude  that  they  are  the 
same.  These  are  the  graces  for  which  we  seek  lofty  aims,  pure  desires,  gentle 
thoughts,  loving  deeds.  What  can  Christianity  do  more  ?  Alas !  has  it  not  failed 
even  to  do  as  much  ?  Without  entering  at  length  into  the  controversy  here,  it  is  at 
all  events  clear  to  those  who  will  look  beneath  the  surface,  that  this  is  not  Chris- 
tianity. The  characteristic  of  the  Lord  was  that  the  zeal  of  God's  house  had  eaten 
Him  up.  In  other  words,  the  central  idea  of  His  life  was  to  please  God.  It  would 
be  misleading  in  the  very  highest  degree  to  describe  a  life  out  of  which  this  ruling 
idea  of  the  Saviour's  conduct,  this  inspiration  of  His  whole  being,  was  omitted  as 
Christlike.  The  difference  is  an  essential  one.  It  goes  to  the  root  of  the  whole 
being,  affects  every  motive,  touches  every  principle,  regulates  the  whole  ambition  of 
the  soul.  III.  One  of  the  first  and  most  frequent  charges  against  the  teaching 
OF  THE  church  IS,  THAT  IT  ENCOURAGES  A  SELFISH  TYPE  OF  RELIGION.  A  grave  im- 
peachment this,  and  one  which,  if  sustained,  certainly  indicates  a  separation  from  the 
spirit  of  Christ.  It  is  a  mere  truism  to  say  that  there  is  no  feature  more  prominent 
in  His  entire  ministry  than  that  of  unselfishness.  The  one  ruling  thought  of  His 
life  on  earth  was  the  salvation  of  others,  and  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  for  this  end. 
And  as  with  His  life,  so  with  His  teaching ;  it  was  full  of  emphatic  warnings  repeated 
against  selfishness.  This  certainly,  is  lost  sight  of  in  too  many  of  the  current  repre- 
sentations as  to  the  nature  of  salvation.  How  often  is  the  stress  of  exhortation  laid 
upon  happiness,  whether  here  or  hereafter,  rather  than  upon  holiness  as  the  supreme 
object  of  Christian  endeavour !  Nay,  how  often  is  the  idea  of  salvation  almost 
restricted  to  this  one  point  of  deUverance  from  the  wrath  of  God  and  the  sentence 
of  the  law  !     IV.  In  the  distinctness  and  prominence  given  to  the  thought,  that 

THE  OBJECT  OF  THE  GOSPEL    IS    TO    CHANGE    THE    CONDITION    OF    MEN    ONLY   BY    A    CHANGE 

AMOUNTING  TO  AN  ENTIRE  RENEWAL  OF  HEART  IN  THE  MEN  THEMSELVES,  IS  TO  BE  BOUGHT 

'   THE  TRUE  ANSWER  TO  THE  SUGGESTION  THAT  THE  CHURCH  IS    ONLY   FOSTERING    A    HIGHER 

TYPE  OF  SELFISHNESS.  Lookcd  at  thus,  salvatioH  is  the  richest  blessing  which  can 
be  conferred  upon  man.  It  means  salvation  from  himself — from  the  evil  heart  of 
unbelief  which  makes  him  depart  from  the  living  God  ;  but  which  also  places  him 
in  sellish  antagonism  to  his  fellowmen  ;  from  the  sway  of  passions  which  scorn  all 
restraints  of  right  and  duty ;  from  the  curse  of  a  restless,  discontented,  repining, 
ambitious  heart.  The  effect  of  a  work  like  that  can  be  only  to  purify  and  ennoble 
the  character.  Its  polar  star  is  no  longer  happiness  but  duty,  and  duty  defined  for 
it  by  its  understanding  of  the  will  of  God.     V.  The  question  which  is  of  grave  and 

CRITICAL  IMPORTANCE,  IS  WHETHER  THE  CHURCH  IS  EARNESTLY  WORKING    TO    THIS    IDEAL, 

AND  SEEKING  TO  ENFORCE  IT  UPON  MEN.  It  is  Hot  to  be  denied  that  there  are  those 
whose  only  desire  is  for  safety,  and  who  wish  to  secure  even  that  at  the  least  possible 
cost,  and  that  they  do  very  much  to  awaken  the  prejudices  of  men  by  the  represen- 
tation they  give  of  Christian  life.  It  is,  in  truth,  little  better  than  a  ghastly  carica- 
ture. They  are  not  distinguished  from  others  by  nobility  of  character,  generosity  of 
spirit,  tenderness  of  heart,  active  and  sympathetic  charity.  They  are  not  courageous 
in  their  assertion  of  principle,  still  less  are  they  foremost  in  the  exposure  and  con- 
demnation of  wi-ong.  They  have  not  keen  instincts  of  justice,  still  less  have  they 
strong  impulses  of  benevolence.  If  they  try  to  reach  the  average  standard  of  service, 
they  never  exhibit  a  spirit  of  self-denying  devotion.  Yet  with  all  this  there  may  be 
unctuous  words  on  their  lips,  and  occasionally  an  apparent  spiritual  excitement. 
But  the  conscience  is  not  sensitive ;  the  heart  is  not  tender ;  perhaps  there  is  not  an 
intelligent  conception  of  what  religion  ought  to  be.  If  we  could  probe  their  prin- 
ciples and  motives,  we  should  probably  find  that  they  had  accepted  the  selfish  con- 
ception of  religion.     They  want  to  be  sure  for  eternity,  and  they  endeavour  to  obtain 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  223 

this  assurance  by  a  rigid  conformity  to  their  ideas  of  the  Divine  requirements.  It 
is  from  professors  of  this  type,  who  are  not  so  uncommon  as  we  should  desire,  that 
unbelievers  take  their  conceptions  of  the  Christian  ideal.  "  These,"  they  would  say, 
"  are  your  saints.  In  what  are  they  better  than  those  whom  they  would  describe  as 
sinners  ?  They  may  seek  a  different  kind  of  happiness,  but  the  one  class  is  as  selfish 
in  its  views  and  aims  as  the  other.  If  this  be  Christianity,  there  is  in  it  nothing  to 
awaken  our  reverence  or  constrain  our  faith."  The  only  answer  that  can  be  found 
is  the  exhibition  of  a  different  spirit.  It  is  for  us  to  meet,  by  publishing  the  gospel 
of  the  kingdom  that  Christ  died,  rose,  and  lives  again,  that  He  may  be  the  Lord 
both  of  the  dead  and  living ;  that  they  only  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  who  keep  His 
commandments ;  that  the  test  of  discipleship  is  obedience,  conformity  to  the 
example  He  has  given,  that  we  may  follow  in  His  steps.  (J.  G.  Rogers,  B.A.) 
The  example  of  Christ : — Christ  came  to  give  us  a  religion — but  this  is  not  all.  By 
a  wise  and  beautiful  ordination  of  providence.  He  was  sent  to  show  forth  His 
religion  in  Himself.  Christianity  is  not  a  mere  code  of  laws,  not  an  abstract  system, 
such  as  theologians  frame.  It  is  a  living,  embodied  religion.  It  comes  to  us  in  a 
human  form  ;  it  offers  itself  to  our  eyes  as  well  as  ears ;  it  breathes,  it  moves  in  our 
sight.  The  importance  of  example  who  does  not  understand  ?  The  temptation  is 
strong  to  take,  as  our  standard,  the  average  character  of  the  society  in  which  we 
live,  and  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  decencies  and  attainments  which  secure  to  us 
among  the  multitude  the  name  of  respectable  men.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
power  in  the  presence,  conversation,  and  example  of  a  man  of  strong  principle  and 
magnanimity,  to  lift  us,  at  least  for  the  moment,  from  our  vulgar  and  tame  habits 
of  thought,  and  to  kindle  some  generous  aspirations  after  the  excellence  which  we 
were  made  to  attain.  I  hardly  need  say  to  you,  that  it  is  impossible  to  place  our- 
selves under  any  influence  of  this  nature  so  quickening  as  the  example  of  Jesus. 
This  introduces  us  to  the  highest  order  of  virtues.  This  is  fitted  to  awaken  the 
whole  mind.  There  is  one  cause,  which  has  done  much  to  defeat  this  good  influ- 
ence of  Christ's  character  and  example,  and  which  ought  to  be  exposed.  It  is  this. 
Multitudes  think  of  Jesus  as  a  being  to  be  admired,  rather  than  approached.  I  wish 
to  prevent  the  discouraging  influence  of  the  greatness  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  show  that, 
hovifever  exalted.  He  is  not  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  our  sympathy  and  imitation. 
1.  I  begin  with  the  general  observation,  that  real  greatness  of  character,  greatness 
of  the  highest  order,  far  from  being  repulsive  and  discouraging,  is  singularly  acces- 
sible and  imitable,  and,  instead  of  severing  a  being  from  others,  fits  him  to  be  their 
friend  and  model.  Greatness  is  not  a  secret,  solitary  principle,  working  by  itself 
and  refusing  participation,  but  frank  and  open-hearted,  so  large  in  its  views,  so 
liberal  in  its  feelings,  so  expansive  in  its  purposes,  so  beneficent  in  its  labours,  as 
naturally  and  necessarily  to  attract  sympathy  and  co-operation.  It  is  selfishness 
that  repels  men  ;  and  true  greatness  has  not  a  stronger  characteristic  than  its  free- 
dom from  every  selfish  taint.  A  superior  mind,  enlightened  and  kindled  by  just 
views  of  God  and  of  the  creation,  regards  its  gifts  and  powers  as  so  many  bonds  of 
union  with  other  beings,  as  given  it,  not  to  nourish  self -elation,  but  to  be  employed 
for  others,  and  still  more  to  be  communicated  to  others.  I  know  not  in  history  an 
individual  so  easily  comprehended  as  Jesus  Christ,  for  nothing  is  so  intelligible  as 
sincere,  disinterested  love.  I  know  not  any  being  who  is  so  fitted  to  take  hold  on 
all  orders  of  minds ;  and  accordingly  He  drew  after  Him  the  unenlightened,  the 
publican,  and  the  sinner.  It  is  a  sad  mistake,  then,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  too  great 
to  allow  us  to  think  of  intimacy  with  Him,  and  to  think  of  making  Him  our  stan- 
dard. 2.  Let  me  confirm  this  truth  by  another  order  of  reflections.  You  tell  me 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  so  high  that  He  cannot  be  your  model ;  I  grant  the  exaltation  of 
His  character.  I  believe  Him  to  be  a  more  than  human  being.  But  on  this  account 
He  is  not  less  a  standard,  nor  is  He  to  discourage  us,  but  on  the  contrary  to  breathe 
into  us  a  more  exhilarating  hope ;  for  though  so  far  above  us.  He  is  still  one  of  us, 
and  is  only  an  illustration  of  the  capacities  which  we  all  possess.  This  is  a  great 
truth.  Let  me  strive  to  unfold  it.  Perhaps  I  cannot  better  express  my  views,  than 
by  saying  that  I  regard  all  minds  as  of  one  family.  When  we  speak  of  higher 
orders  of  beings,  of  angels  and  archangels,  we  are  apt  to  conceive  of  distinct  kinds 
or  races  of  beings,  separated  from  us  and  from  each  other  by  impassable  barriers. 
But  it  is  not  so.  There  is  no  such  partition  in  the  spiritual  world  as  you  see  in  the 
material.  All  minds  are  essentially  of  one  origin,  one  nature,  kindled  from  one 
Divine  flame,  and  are  all  tending  to  one  centre,  one  happiness.  I  am  not  only  one 
of  the  human  race  ;  I  am  one  of  the  great  intellectual  family  of  God.  There  is  no 
spirit  so  exalted,  with  which  I  have  not  common  thoughts  and  feelings.     That  con- 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

ception,  which  I  have  gained,  of  one  universal  Father,  whose  love  is  the  fountain 
and  centre  of  all  things,  is  the  dawn  of  the  highest  and  most  magnificent  views  in 
the  universe ;  and  if  I  look  up  to  this  being  with  filial  love,  I  have  the  spring  and 
beginning  of  the  noblest  sentiments  and  joys  which  are  known  in  the  universe.  No 
greatness  therefore  of  a  being  separates  me  from  Him,  or  makes  Him  unapproach- 
able by  me.  The  mind  of  Jesus  Christ  and  your  mind  are  of  one  family  ;  nor  was 
there  anything  in  His,  of  which  you  have  not  the  principle,  the  capacity,  the  pro- 
mise in  yourself.  This  is  the  very  impression  which  He  intends  to  give.  The 
relation  which  He  came  to  establish  between  Himself  and  mankind,  was  not  that  of 
master  and  slave,  but  that  of  friends.  We  read  too  these  remarkable  words  in  His 
prayer  for  His  disciples,  "  I  have  given  to  them  the  glory  Thou  gavest  Me  "  ;  and  I 
am  persuaded  that  there  is  not  a  glory,  a  virtue,  a  power,  a  joy,  possessed  by  Jesus 
Christ,  to  which  His  disciples  will  not  successively  I'ise.  In  the  spirit  of  these 
remarks,  tlie  apostle  says,  "  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ." 
I  have  said  that,  all  minds  being  of  one  family,  the  greatness  of  the  mind  of  Christ 
is  no  discouragement  to  our  adoption  of  Him  as  our  model.  I  now  observe,  that 
there  is  one  attribute  of  mind,  to  which  I  have  alluded,  that  should  particularly 
animate  us  to  propose  to  ourselves  a  sublime  standard,  as  sublime  as  Jesus  Christ. 
I  refer  to  the  principle  of  growth  in  human  nature.  Our  faculties  are  germs,  and 
given  for  an  expansion,  to  which  nothing  authorises  us  to  set  bounds.  The  soul 
bears  the  impress  of  illimitableness,  in  the  unquenchable  thirst,  which  it  brings  with 
it  into  being,  for  a  power,  knowledge,  happiness,  which  it  never  gains,  and  which 
always  carry  it  forward  into  futurity.  When  I  consider  this  principle  or  capacity  of 
the  human  soul,  I  cannot  restrain  the  hope  which  it  awakens.  The  partition-walls 
which  imagination  has  reared  between  men  and  higher  orders  of  beings  vanish.  I 
no  longer  see  aught  to  prevent  our  becoming  whatever  was  good  and  great  in  Jesus 
on  earth.  In  truth  I  feel  my  utter  inability  to  conceive  what  a  mind  is  to  attain 
which  is  to  advance  for  ever.  To  encourage  these  thoughts  and  hopes,  our  Creator 
has  set  before  us  delightful  exemplifications,  even  now,  of  this  principle  of  growth 
both  in  outward  nature  and  in  the  human  mind.  We  meet  them  in  nature.  Sup- 
pose you  were  to  carry  a  man,  wholly  unacquainted  with  vegetation,  to  the  most 
majestic  tree  in  our  forests,  and,  whilst  he  was  admiring  its  extent  and  proportions, 
suppose  you  should  take  from  the  earth  at  its  root  a  little  downy  substance,  which  a 
breath  might  blow  away,  and  say  to  him,  that  tree  was  once  such  a  seed  as  this ;  it 
was  wrapt  up  here ;  it  once  lived  only  within  these  delicate  fibres,  this  narrow  com- 
pass. With  what  incredulous  wonder  would  he  regard  you.  Such  growth  we  wit- 
ness in  nature.  A  nobler  hope  we  Christians  are  to  cherish ;  and  still  more  striking 
examples  of  the  growth  of  mind  are  set  before  us  in  human  history.  We  wonder, 
indeed,  when  we  are  told  that  one  day  we  shall  be  as  the  angels  of  God.  I  appre- 
hend that  as  great  a  wonder  has  been  realised  already  on  the  earth.  I  apprehend 
that  the  distance  between  the  mind  of  Newton  and  of  a  Hottentot  may  have  been  as 
great  as  between  Newton  and  an  angel.  There  is  another  view  still  more  striking. 
This  Newton,  who  lifted  his  calm,  sublime  eye  to  the  heavens,  and  read,  among  the 
planets  and  the  stars,  the  great  law  of  the  material  universe,  was,  forty  or  fifty  years 
before,  an  infant,  without  one  clear  perception,  and  unable  to  distinguish  his  nurse's 
arm  from  the  pillow  on  which  he  slept.  Has  not  man  already  traversed  as  wide  a 
space  as  separates  him  from  angels  ?  And  why  must  he  stop  ?  There  is  no  extrava- 
gance in  the  boldest  anticipation.  We  may  truly  become  one  with  Christ,  a 
partaker  of  that  celestial  miiid.  Let  us  make  Him  our  constai  t  model.  I  know 
not  that  the  doctrine,  now  laid  down,  is  liable  but  to  one  abuse.  It  may  unduly 
excite  susceptible  minds,  and  impel  to  a  vehemence  of  hope  and  exertion,  unfavour- 
able in  the  end  to  the  very  progress  which  is  proposed.  To  such  I  would  say,  hasten 
to  conform  yourselves  to  Christ,  but  hasten  according  to  the  laws  of  your  nature. 
As  the  body  cannot,  by  the  concentration  of  its  whole  strength  into  one  bound, 
scale  the  height  of  a  mountain,  neither  can  the  mind  free  every  obstacle  and 
achieve  perfection  by  an  agony  of  the  will.  Continuous,  patient  effort,  guided 
by  wise  deliberation,  is  the  true  means  of  spiritual  progress.  In  religion,  as 
in  common  life,  mere  force  or  vehemence  will  prove  a  fallacious  substitute  for 
the  sobriety  of  wisdom.  3.  The  doctrine  which  I  have  chiefly  laboured  to  main- 
tain in  this  discourse,  that  minds  are  all  of  one  family,  are  all  brethren,  and  may 
be  more  and  more  nearly  united  to  God,  seems  to  me  to  have  been  felt  peculiarly  by 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  I  were  to  point  out  the  distinction  of  His  greatness,  I  should 
fay  it  lay  in  this.  He  felt  His  superiority,  but  He  never  felt  as  if  it  separated  Him 
fiv/ni  niui;kiad.     He  saw  in  every  human  being  a  mind  which  might  wear  His  own 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  22S 

brightest  glory.  I  insist  on  this  view  of  His  character,  not  only  to  encourage  us  tu 
aspire  after  a  likeness  to  Jesus  ;  I  consider  it  as  peculiarly  fitted  to  call  forth  love 
towards  Him.  With  these  views  I  feel  that,  though  ascended  to  heaven,  He  is  not 
gone  beyond  the  reach  of  our  hearts ;  that  He  has  now  the  same  interest  in  mankind 
as  when  He  entered  their  dwellings ;  and  that  there  is  no  being  so  approachable, 
none  with  whom  such  unreserved  intercourse  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  future  world. 
I  exhort  you  with  calmness,  but  earnestness,  to  adopt  Jesus  Christ  as  your  example, 
with  the  whole  energy  of  your  wills.  Let  not  the  false  views  of  Christianity  which 
preva.il  in  the  world,  seduce  you  into  the  belief  that  Christ  can  bless  you  in  any 
other  way  than  by  assimilating  you  to  His  own  virtue,  than  by  breathing  into  you 
His  own  mind.  Do  not  imagine  that  any  faith  or  love  towards  Jesus  can  avail  you, 
but  that  which  quickens  you  to  conform  yourselves  to  His  spotless  purity  and  uncon- 
querable rectitude.  Settle  it  as  an  immovable  truth,  that  neither  in  this  world  nor 
in  the  next  can  you  be  happy,  but  in  proportion  to  the  sanctity  and  elevation  of  your 
characters.  (TF.  E.  Channing.)  Christ  is  our  example  : — In  these  words,  take 
notice — 1.  Of  one  end  of  Christ  in  suffering :  that  He  might  leave  us  an  example. 
2.  They  were  remarkable  steps  that  Christ  took  when  He  was  here  in  the  days  of 
His  flesh.  And  among  them  all  He  did  not  take  one  wrong  one.  3.  The  steps  of 
Christ  are  to  be  followed.  Our  Lord  did  whctsoever  became  Him,  and  exactly 
"  fulfilled  all  righteousness  "  (Matt.  iii.  15).  4.  Here  is  a  special  intimation  of  a 
Christian's  duty  patiently  to  bear  injuries,  and  to  take  up  the  Cross.  5.  The  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  and  His  example  being  joined  together  in  the  text,  here  is  a  significa- 
tion that  by  His  death  He  has  purchased  grace  to  enable  us  to  follow  His  example. 
I.  Premise  some  things  by  v!xy  of  caution.  1.  Think  not,  as  long  as  you  remain  in 
this  world,  to  be  altogether  free  from  sin  as  Chri'st  was.  2.  Think  not  that  Christ 
in  all  His  actions  is  to  be  imitated.  There  are  royalties  belonging  to  Him,  which 
none  must  invade.  He  alone  is  judge  and  lawgiver  in  Zion.  3.  Think  not  that 
your  obedience  can  be  meritorious,  as  Christ's  was.  4.  Think  not  that  your  greatest 
sufferings  for  the  sake  of  righteousness  are  in  the  least  expiatory  of  sin,  as  Christ's 
were.  H.  In  what  eespects  Christ  is  an  example  to  be  roiiLo\\T:D.  1.  In  His  great 
self-denials  (2  Cor.  viii.  9;  Rom.  xv.  3;  John  vii.  18).  2.  In  His  patient  enduring 
the  world's  hatred,  and  the  slights  and  contradiction  of  sinners  (John  xv.  18,  19 ; 
Heb.  xii.  2;  Matt.  v.  44).  3.  In  His  resisting  and  overcoming  the  prince  of  dark- 
ness (Matt.  iv.  1-11).  4.  In  His  contempt  of  the  world's  glory,  and  contentment 
with  a  mean  and  low  estate  in  it  (Luke  iv.  5,  6).  5.  In  His  living  a  life  so  very 
beneficial,  doing  good  being  His  perpetual  business  (Acts  x.  38 ;  Eph.  v.  9 ;  Titus  iii. 
8).  6.  In  His  most  profitable  and  edifying  communication  (Psa.  xlv.  2;  Luke  iv. 
22;  1  Pet.  ii.  22,  23;  Matt.  xi.  28).  7.  In  His  manner  of  performing  holy  duties 
(Heb.  V.  7;  Eom.  xii.  11).  8.  In  His  great  humility  and  weakness  (Matt.  xi.  29; 
Prov.  vi.  16,  17).  9.  In  His  love  to  God,  great  care  to  please  Him,  and  fervent  zeal 
for  His  name  and  glory  (John  xiv.  31 ;  viii.  29).  10.  In  His  sufferings  and  death 
(Heb.  xii.  2).  III.  Some  arguments  to  persuade  to  the  imitation  of  our  Lord 
Jesus.  1.  Consider  the  greatness  of  the  person  who  gives  you  the  example  (Rev. 
xix.  16;  Phil.  ii.  10).  2.  Remember  the  relation  wherein  you  that  are  saints  do 
stand  unto  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  You  are  members  of  His  body  "  (Eph.  v.  30).  There- 
fore you  "  should  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  head,  even  Christ" 
(Eph.  iv.  15).  3.  Consider  that  God  did  foreordain  you  that  are  believers  to  a  confor- 
mity to  the  Lord  Jesus  (Rom.  viii.  29).  4.  Walking  as  Christ  walked  wiU  make  it 
evident  that  you  are  indeed  in  Him  (1  John  ii.  6;  Gal.  iv.  19).  5.  Your  following 
the  example  of  Christ  very  much  honours  Him,  and  credits  Christianity  (Col.  iii.  1). 
6.  Christ  frequently  speaks  to  you  to  follow  Him,  and  observes  whether  and  how  you 
do  it  (Rev.  i.  14;  ii.  23).  7.  Follow  Christ's  example,  that  you  may  enter  into  His 
glory  (2  Tim.  ii.  11,  12 ;  Rev.  iii.  21 ;  Col.  iii.  4).  IV.  Some  directions  how  tou  may 
BE  able  to  follow  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  OUR  LoRD  Jesus.  1.  Let  your  unlikenessto  Christ 
be  matter  of  your  great  humiliation.  2.  Study  more  the  admirable  excellency  and 
fairness  of  the  copy  which  Christ  has  set  you,  and  how  desirable  it  is  still  to  be 
growing  up  more  and  more  into  Him  in  all  things.  3.  Being  sensible  of  your  own 
impotency,  live  by  faith  on  the  Son  of  God  (Isa.  xlv.  24;  John  xv.  4,  5).  4.  Give 
up  yourselves  to  the  conduct  of  Christ's  own  Spirit  (Rev.  ii.  7,  11,  17,  29). 
{N.  Vincent,  M.A.)  Christ  our  example  : — -1.  The  life  of  our  blessed  Saviour  is  a 
MOST  absolute  AND  PERFECT  PATTERN  OF  HOLINESS  AND  GOODNESS,  Complete  and  entire 
in  all  its  parts,  and  perfect  to  the  utmost  degree,  in  the  following  whereof  there  is 
no  danger  of  being  misguided,  whereas  all  other  examples  of  mortal  men  are  fallible 
and  uncertain  guides.     II.  As  the  life  of  our  blessed  Saviour  is  a  most  perfect,  so 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

likewise  it  is  a  pamiliab  and  east  example.  The  Divine  nature  is  the  great  pattern 
of  perfection  ;  but  that  is  too  remote  from  us,  and  above  our  sight ;  therefore  God 
hath  been  pleased  to  condescend  so  far  to  our  weakness,  as  to  give  us  a  visible 
example  of  those  virtues  He  requires  of  us  in  "  His  own  Son,  appearing  in  the  like- 
ness of  sinful  flesh,"  practised  in  such  instances,  and  upon  such  occasions  as  do 
frequently  happen  in  human  life.  HI.  The  life  of  our  blessed  Saviour  is  likewise 
AN  ENCOUBAGING  EXAMPLE.  It  Cannot  but  give  great  life  to  all  good  resolutions  and 
endeavours,  to  see  all  that  which  God  requires  of  us  performed  by  one  in  our  nature, 
by  a  man  like  ourselves.  IV.  It  is  an  universal  pattern.  As  the  doctrine  of  our 
Saviour,  so  His  example  was  of  an  universal  nature  and  design,  calculated  for  all 
times  and  places.  1.  It  is  a  pattern  of  the  greatest  and  most  substantial  virtues: 
piety,  obedience,  purity  and  innocence,  universal  charity.  2.  He  was  a  pattern  of 
the  most  rare  and  unusual  virtues  :  sincerity,  humility,  contempt  of  the  world, 
kindness  and  benignity.  3.  The  life  of  our  blessed  Saviour  is  likewise  a  pattern  of 
such  virtues  as  are  most  useful  and  beneficial  to  others.  In  His  readiness  to  do 
good  to  all  persons  and  all  kinds ;  by  instructing  their  ignorance,  and  supplying 
their  wants,  spiritual  and  temporal ;  by  resolving  their  doubts,  and  comforting  them 
in  their  sorrows.  And  then  in  His  seeking  opportunities  for  it,  not  content  with 
those  that  offered  themselves,  and  in  His  unwearied  diligence  in  this  work.  4.  Our 
Saviour  is  likewise  a  pattern  to  us  of  such  virtues  as  are  most  hard  and  difficult  to 
be  practised,  such  as  are  most  against  the  grain  of  our  corrupt  nature,  and  most 
contrary  to  flesh  and  blood.  Christ  denied  His  own  life,  and  gave  up  Himself 
wholly  to  the  will  of  God  (John  v.  33  ;  vi.  38  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  42).  He  denied  His 
own  will  also  in  condescension  to  the  prejudices  and  infirmities  of  men  for  their 
edification  and  good  (Eom.  xv.  2,  3).  He  denied  Himself,  in  the  lawful  pleasures 
and  satisfactions,  in  the  ease  and  accommodations  of  life :  He  Uved  meanly,  and 
fared  hardly.  And  He  denied  Himself  likewise  in  one  of  the  dearest  things  in  the 
world,  to  the  greatest  minds,  I  mean  in  point  of  reputation  :  "  He  made  Himself  of 
no  reputation  "  (Phil.  ii.  7).  But  that  which  I  shall  particularly  take  notice  of, 
under  this  head,  is  His  great  meekness.  5.  Our  Saviour  is  likewise  a  pattern  to  us 
of  the  most  needful  virtues,  and  for  the  practice  whereof  there  is  the  greatest  and 
most  frequent  occasion  in  human  life.  (1)  The  great  humanity  of  His  carriage 
and  deportment,  of  which  He  gave  manifold  instances,  in  His  free  and  familiar 
conversation  with  all  sorts  of  people.  He  did  not  despise  the  meanest.  (2)  Another 
very  needful  virtue,  and  for  which  our  Lord  was  very  eminent,  was  His  disregard  of 
the  opinion  of  men,  in  comparison  of  His  duty.  (3)  Another  virtue  for  which  there 
is  great  occasion  in  human  life,  and  for  which  our  Lord  was  very  remarkable,  was 
His  contentedness  in  a  mean  and  poor  condition ;  and  such  was  His  condition  to 
the  very  lowest  degree.  (4)  The  last  virtue  I  shall  instance  in,  and  for  the  exercise 
whereof  there  is  very  great  and  frequent  occasion  in  human  life,  is  patience  under 
sufferings,  and  such  a  perfect  resignation  of  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God,  that  what- 
ever pleaseth  Him  should  please  us,  how  distasteful  and  grievous  soever  it  be.  And 
of  this  virtue  our  blessed  Saviour  was  the  greatest  example  that  ever  was.  V.  Our 
Lord's  example  is  in  the  nature  of  it  vert  powerful,  to  engage  and  oblige  all 
MEN  TO  the  imitation  OF  IT.  It  is  almost  equally  calculated  for  persons  of  aU 
capacities  and  conditions,  for  the  wise  and  the  weak,  for  those  of  high  and  low 
degree ;  for  all  men  are  alike  concerned  to  be  happy.  And  the  imitation  of  this 
example  is  the  most  effectual  means  we  can  use  to  compass  this  great  and  universal 
end  ;  nay,  it  is  not  only  the  means,  but  the  end,  the  best  and  most  essential  part  of 
it.  To  be  like  our  Lord,  is  to  be  as  good  as  it  is  possible  for  men  to  be ;  and  good- 
ness is  the  highest  perfection  that  any  being  is  capable  of ;  and  the  perfection  of 
every  being  is  its  happiness.  His  life  was  even  and  of  one  tenour,  quiet,  and 
without  noise  and  tumult,  always  employed  about  the  same  work,  in  doing  the 
things  which  pleased  God,  and  were  of  greatest  benefit  and  advantage  to 
men.  Who  would  not  write  after  such  a  copy.  This  pattern,  which  our  religion 
proposeth  to  us,  is  the  example  of  one  whom  we  ought  to  reverence,  and 
whom  we  have  reason  to  love  above  any  person  in  the  world.  Yet  farther,  it  is  the 
example  of  our  best  friend  and  greatest  benefactor.  [Abp.  Tillotiio7i.)  Christ  our 
example:—!.  In  the  object  of  His  life.  2.  In  the  standard  of  His  practice.  3.  In 
His  commerce  and  connection  with  the  world.  4.  In  His  condition  of  life.  5.  In 
His  sorrows  and  joys.  (J.  Cnmming,  D.D.)  Christ's  example  is  to  be  followed— 
1.  Wholly.  2.  Openly.  3.  Fully.  {Ihitl.)  The  necessity  of  a  perfect  model  :— 
1.  It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  in  the  public  services  of  our  church  we  offer 
petitions  for  the  literal  granting  of  which  we  can  scarcely  dare  look.     We  desire  of 


CHAP.  II.]     •  I.  PETER.  227 

God,  for  example,  "  that  this  day  we  fall  into  no  sin,  neither  run  into  any  kind  of 
danger"  ;  and  again,  we  beseech  of  Him  to  "  vouchsafe  to  keep  us  this  day  without 
sin  "  ;  but  there  is  not  one  of  us  who  will  presume  to  say  that  he  ever  i^asses  a  day 
without  sin.  It  would  argue  the  want  of  a  real  hatred  of  sin,  and  would  therefore 
be  highly  dishonouring  to  God,  to  pray  to  be  kept  only  from  a  certain  degree  of 
transgression,  just  as  though  any  other  degree  might  be  allowed  or  overlooked. 
Besides,  we  cannot  be  ignorant  that  humility  is  at  the  root  of  all  Christian  graces, 
and  that  what  encourages  pride  is  most  injurious  to  piety.  Suppose,  then,  we  were 
required  to  imitate  a  pattern  which  might  be  equalled,  and  is  it  not  certain  that  as 
the  resemblance  seemed  to  grow,  we  should  feel  increasing  self-complacency  ?  The 
fine  result  of  copying  an  imitable  model  is,  that  the  vast  distance  at  which  we  stand 
from  perfection  forbids  our  feeling  proud  of  success.  The  advance  appears  nothing, 
when  compared  with  the  space  which  yet  remains  to  be  traversed.  Oh !  it  is 
practically  one  of  the  most  splendid  things  in  Christianity,  that  it  fixes  our  efforts 
on  a  model  so  immeasurably  above  us,  that  we  have  never  time  to  calculate  whether 
or  not  others  are  beneath  us.  We  can  never  repose  complacently  on  what  we  are ; 
we  must  always  find  cause  of  humiliation  in  what  we  are  not.  2.  We  have  to  go 
somewhat  farther.  You  may  say  that  whatever  the  evil  consequences  of  erecting  a 
low  standard,  there  must  be  much  that  is  disheartening  in  the  copying  a  model 
which  is  confessedly  inimitable.  On  the  contrary,  we  argue,  in  the  second  place, 
that  there  is  everything  to  encourage  us  in  the  fact  that  the  standard  cannot  be 
reached  ;  for  it  certainly  is  not  essential  to  the  suitableness  of  our  example,  that  it 
is  one  whose  excellence  we  may  hope  to  overtake.  This  would  be  making  our  power 
of  imitation,  and  not  noble  and  beautiful  qualities,  the  guide  in  selecting  an  example. 
It  will  not  be  questioned  that  a  faultless  work  of  art,  if  such  there  could  be,  can  be 
only  the  best  model  for  an  artist,  and  yet  the  artist  may  not  expect  to  produce  what 
is  faultless.  Why  is  there  to  be  introduced  any  different  rule  into  the  nobler  science 
of  moral  imitation?  Encouragement  will  depend  mainly  on  the  probability  of 
improvement ;  and  this  probability  being  greater  with  a  perfect  than  with  an 
imperfect  model,  it  follows  that  we  have  more  cause  to  feel  encouraged  in  imitating 
Christ,  whom  we  cannot  reach,  than  one  of  our  fellow-men,  whom  we  might  perhaps 
surpass.  What  the  painter  seeks  is  improvement  in  painting ;  what  the  orator 
seeks  is  improvement  in  oratory,  and  therefore  each  is  anxious  to  study  the  prime 
master  in  the  art.  What  the  Christian  seeks  is  improvement  in  spiritual  graces, 
and  he  will  gain  more  from  copying  Christ,  in  whom  those  graces  were  perfect,  than 
by  imitating  any  saint  in  whom  they  were  necessarily  defective.  I  know  indeed 
what  you  may  urge  in  objection  to  our  statement.  You  may  tell  us  that  our  illus- 
trations are  at  fault ;  that  the  painter  and  the  orator  cherish  a  secret  hope  of 
equalling  their  models,  and  that  hence  they  have  an  encouragement  which  is  not 
afforded  to  the  Christian.  The  Christian  is  not,  then,  sustained  as  is  the  painter  or 
the  orator,  by  the  hope,  however  vague,  of  reaching,  if  not  exceeding  the  standard  ; 
and  the  want,  you  say,  of  this  stimulus,  forbids  our  illustrating  the  one  case  by  the 
other.  But  even  if  we  allow  that  thorough  accuracy  of  resemblance  ought  not  at 
least  to  appear  hopeless,  we  can  still  plead  for  the  advantageousness  of  our  being 
set  to  imitate  Christ.  Accuracy  of  resemblance  is  not  hopeless.  "  Beloved,"  said 
St.  John,  "  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall 
be ;  but  we  know  that  when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is."  "  As,  then,  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly,  we  shall  also 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."  So  that  as  a  Christian  looks  onward  to  the  future 
he  has  more  to  encourage  him  than  the  dim  possibiUty  which  you  appeal  to  as 
stimulating*  the  painter  or  the  orator.  His  is  the  noble,  the  inspiring  certainty,  that 
however  slowly,  and  however  painfully  goes  forward  now  the  imitative  work,  a  day 
has  to  dawn,  when,  fashioned  into  perfect  conformity  to  the  model,  he  shall  be  pre- 
sented unto  God  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  He  labours,  there- 
fore, as  one  who  knows  that  his  labour  is  "  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  We  exhort 
you,  then,  to  the  imitation  of  Christ,  assuring  you,  that  the  more  you  strive  to 
acquire  the  resemblance,  the  more  will  you  make  sure  of  your  calling  and  election, 
and  the  more  frequent  and  delightful  will  be  your  foretastes  of  the  joys  which  shall 
hereafter  be  awarded  to  the  faithful.  It  is  not  indeed  by  your  own  skill  or  by  your 
own  energy  that  you  may  look  to  effect  conformity  to  Jesus  ;  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  Divine  Agent  whose  special  office  it  is  to  renew  man  after  the  lost  image  of  his 
Maker.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  character  of  Christ : — Christ  suffered  for  us,  and 
left  us  an  example.  There  must  be  no  division  of  the  two.  You  must  not  regard 
the  suffering  on  one  hand,  and  the  example  on  the  other.     You  must  not  divide 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ■      [chap.  ii. 

Christ.  I  love  to  contemplate  the  life  of  Christ  as  an  example,  and  the  death  of 
Christ  as  an  atonement  for  sin.  If  He  were  an  atonement  without  being  an  example, 
He  would  have  been  no  atonement.  If  He  were  an  example  and  yet  not  an  atone- 
ment, He  would  be  no  example.  If  I  preach  to  you  Christ  as  an  atonement,  but  not 
an  example,  my  doctrine  would  be  immoral ;  and  if  I  preach  to  you  the  example 
of  Christ,  leaving  aside  the  atonement  of  Christ,  my  preaching  would  be  worthless. 
The  New  Testament  always  couples  the  two  elements  in  the  life  of  Christ.  The 
word  "  example  "  in  the  text,  is  synonymous  with  the  word  model,  or  the  idea  of 
design.  I  do  not  know  of  any  system,  or  of  any  religion,  which  can  place  before 
men  a  life  fit  to  copy,  except  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  Him  we  have  the  model  of  a 
perfect  character.  In  the  next  verse  the  apostle  changes  the  figure.  Here  the 
apostle,  after  describing  Christ  as  an  example,  proceeded  to  refer  to  Him  as  a 
Shepherd  leading  His  sheep  to  the  green  pastures.  The  sheep  followed  the  Shep- 
herd. They  had  implicit  reliance  on  Him.  And  Christ  has  left  us  an  example 
which  we  may  with  equal  certainty  follow.  It  is  devotion ;  it  is  worship ;  that  is 
the  sentiment  which  we  cherish  towards  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  not  mere  sentiment. 
Christ  is  not  simply  a  hero — some  one  to  wonder  at,  and  strike  men  with  astonish- 
ment. His  life  is  something  different,  and  something  greater.  His  life  is  an 
example  which  all  men  might  follow.  No  one  in  his  senses  would  dream  of  living 
a  life  like  Christ,  so  obscure  and  so  self-sacrificing — no  one  would  care  to  tread  in 
His  footsteps  and  stoop  so  low  unless  they  looked  at  the  whole  plan,  as  a  complete 
example,  at  the  unity  of  aim,  at  the  supreme  objects  to  the  attainment,  by  His  life 
and  death,  of  those  distinguishing  features  which  made  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  what 
He  was.  You  will  now  see  what  the  subject  of  the  present  discourse  is — The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  an  example.  What  is  a  perfect  example  ?  How  would  you  define 
the  perfect  man  ?  There  are  four  principal  features  in  such  a  character.  1.  A 
perfect  example  must  be  sinless.  Christ  is  not  a  mere  fragment  of  a  man.  Men 
have  peered  into  the  life  of  Christ,  bringing  microscopic  criticism  to  bear  upon  its 
minutest  details,  but  have  failed  to  discover  a  single  fault.  Voltaire  tried,  and 
failed ;  Strauss  has  tried,  and  Kenan.  They  have  all  failed,  and  many  of  them 
were  men  whose  genius  was  sufficiently  creative  in  its  character  to  discover  faults 
where  there  were  no  faults ;  but  in  the  case  of  Christ  they  found  no  sin.  And  yet 
Christ  was  no  recluse.  2.  It  was  not  sufficient  that  the  life  be  a  sinless  one — diffi- 
culties must  be  overcome  ;  that  must  be  a  characteristic  of  the  perfect  man,  the 
great  example  of  humanity.  Now,  there  are  the  angels.  An  angel  is  perfect,  but 
has  not  overcome  difficulties.  Could  any  one  conceive  of  any  combination  of 
circumstances  in  which  the  anguish  could  be  so  keen,  in  which  the  suffering  could 
be  so  intense,  difficulties  so  insuperable  as  those  which  Christ  experienced  and 
overcame  ?  3.  A  perfect  example  must  be  more  than  an  example  :  it  must  hold  out 
pardon  for  the  past.  We  cannot  forgive  ourselves.  Our  past  is  so  sinful  that  we 
falter  before  it.  Eobertson  has  said  that  man  can  afford  to  forgive  himself  if  Jesus 
Christ  can  afford  to  forgive  him  !  That  is  right ;  that  is  true.  It  is  possible  to  break 
the  links  connecting  the  man  with  the  old  life  and  to  restart  in  a  heavenly  direction 
by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  4.  The  Christ  of  the  gospel  is  a  living  Christ. 
That  is  the  foundation  of  the  gospel.  It  would  not  pay  me  to  preach  philosophy 
to  you,  if  I  could  do  so.  I  would  not  preach  poetry  without  a  living  Christ ;  I 
would  not  preach  doctrine  to  you  without  a  living  Christ.  The  Bible  would  not 
be  worth  anything  for  the  purpose  of  preaching  but  that  it  contains  a  living  Christ. 
The  atonement  would  be  valueless  except  for  a  living  Christ.  (T.  C.  Edwards.) 
C]:rist    an   example   in   His   sufferings : — I.    The   sufferings  of   Christ   are   an 

EXAMPLE     TO     HiS    FOLLOWERS,    AS    THEY    WERE    AN    ILLUSTRATION     OF     HiS     INNOCENCE. 

II.   The   SUFFERINGS   OF   Christ   are   an   example   to   His   followers,   as   they 

■WERE  A  DISPLAY  OF  PATIENCE  AND  MAGNANIMITY.  III.  ThE  SUFFERINGS  OF  ChRIST 
are  an  EXAMPLE  TO  HiS  FOLLOWERS,  AS  THEY  WERE  A  DISPLAY  OF  PIETY.  IV.  ThE 
SUFFERINGS    OF    ChRIST    ARE    AN    EXAMPLE    TO    HiS  FOLLOWERS,  AS  THEY  WERE  A  DISPLAY 

OF  GOOD  AFFECTIONS.  (G.  Hill,  D.D.)  On  the  e.ramjfle  of  Christ : — The  example 
of  Christ — is  it  not  an  effort  beyond  humanity  ?  Can  the  example  of  purity  and 
perfection  be  urged  upon  frail  creatures,  whose  passions  and  infirmities  place  them 
for  ever  beyond  the  hope  of  such  attainments  ?  In  the  first  place,  then,  let  it  be 
remarked  that  imitation  is  not  attainment — that  our  professing  to  follow  an 
example  is  a  plain  confession  of  our  inferiority  to  what  we  propose — and  that  men 
might  be  engaged,  as  they  are  in  science,  in  a  perpetual  progress  of  improvement, 
useful  and  consoling,  though  they  can  never  flatter  themselves  with  the  hope  of 
arriving  at  a  point  boyond  which  there  is  no  further  improvement.     But  it  may  be 


CHAP.  II,]  I.  PETER.  229 

said  the  example  of  Christ,  a  model  of  sinless  purity,  is  unfit  for  beings  who  neither 
possess  His  nature  nor  hope  for  His  perfections.  Here  let  us  mark  the  plain  distinc- 
tion between  the  office  of  the  Divine  legislator  and  the  duties  of  the  man  :  the  latter 
all  are  called  on  to  fulfil,  the  former  none  but  He  could  execute.  Even  in  the  most 
exalted  parts  of  His  character — those  that  seem  most  remote  from  human  agency — 
there  are  many  things  the  spirit  of  which  may  be  transfused  into  our  conduct,  and 
make  "the  disciple  not  unworthy  of  his  Master."  It  is  not  for  us  to  march  in 
triumph  to  Jerusalem,  while  those  that  went  before  and  those  that  followed  cried, 
saying,  "  Hosanna  "  ;  but  it  is  for  us  to  mark  the  progress  of  His  grace  in  our 
hearts  and  those  of  His  faithful  followers.  We  cannot,  like  Him,  raise  the  dead 
to  life,  banish  the  infirmities  of  nature  by  a  word,  and  heal  disease  by  a  touch  ;  but 
we  can  watch  in  patience  by  the  bed  of  sickness,  and  by  patience,  and  gentleness 
and  spiritual  consolation  turn  the  visitation  into  a  blessing.  But  it  is  not  alone  to 
the  public  character  of  Christ  that  we  are  to  look  for  objects  of  imitation ;  they 
may  be  found  in  every  part  of  life,  for  all  the  declivities  of  life  He  humbled  Himself 
to  tread.     (C.  R.  Maturin.)  On  the  example  of  Christ : —Ijet  us  begin  with 

observing,  in  general,  the  great  superiority  of  this  to  every  other  example.  Here 
are  to  be  found  all  the  graces  and  virtues  collecting  their  strongest  heat  and 
spreading  their  brightest  lustre,  to  fire  the  soul  with  a  virtuous  ardour,  to  enlighten 
and  direct  the  path  of  life.  It  is  another  obvious  advantage  of  this  example  that 
it  is  calculated  to  extend  its  influence  to  all  the  world.  Christ  appeared  not  in 
those  affluent  circumstances  in  which  there  may  be  little  opportunity  of  the  exercise 
of  the  most  substantial  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  most  difficult  graces,  or  in  which 
the  benefit  of  His  pattern  would  have  been  confined  to  the  smallest  part  of  the 
world,  but  in  those  more  mean  and  humble  scenes  of  life  which  constitute  the 
general  lot  of  men,  where  His  example  might  have  the  most  extensive  influence, 
and  suit  most  eiJectually  the  present  condition  and  necessities  of  human  nature. 
Let  us  now  proceed  to  select  from  the  numerous  graces  which  adorned  the  character 
of  our  Eedeemer  a  few  of  the  most  important.  And  here  it  will  surely  be  unneces- 
sary to  observe  that  it  is  not  every  branch  of  that  character  which  we  are  required- 
to  imitate.  His  supernatural  operations  were  the  displays  of  essential  perfection, 
peculiar  to  the  Deity  Himself,  incommunicable  to  His  creatures.  The  great  line  in 
which  we  are  to  follow  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith  is  in  the  practice  of 
those  distinguished  virtues  which  adorned  His  character,  and  which  constituted  it 
the  standard  of  moral  excellence.  1.  The  first  feature  of  this  kind  which  we  take 
notice  of  is  His  piety  to  God.  His  temper  was  ever  calm  and  peaceful,  such  as 
might  naturally  be  expected  within  a  mind  rejoicing  in  those  blessed  exercises 
whose  natural  effect  is  not  to  sour  and  corrupt  the  heart,  but  to  improve  its  most 
excellent  feelings,  to  mould  it  to  the  image  and  likeness  of  that  God  whom  we 
adore,  to  render  it  merciful,  and  generous,  and  humane,  like  Him  who  is  the  great 
source  of  love.  2.  Another  very  capital  feature  in  the  character  of  the  Eedeemer 
was  His  contempt  of  the  pomp  and  vanities  of  life.  Put  on  His  humility,  and  it 
shall  clothe  thee.  3.  Another  most  important  feature  in  this  illustrious  character 
was  the  ardour  of  His  benevolence.  From  Him  no  calamity  departed  unrelieved, 
no  suppliant  who  did  not  receive  the  requested  boon.  4.  The  last  feature  of  His 
great  character  which  we  take  notice  of  at  present  was  His  meeknass  and  patience. 
If  His  character  is  not  distinguished  by  those  specious  and  dazzling  qualities  which 
are  often  most  dangerous  and  detrimental  to  the  world,  but  which  excite  the  wonder 
of  unthinking  men,  it  exhibits  ornaments  infinitely  more  real,  and  recommends  to 
our  imitation  qualities  more  truly  great  and  generous.  (John  Main,  D.D.)  The 
perfect  ideal : — I.    Christ   the   perfect  ideal   of   submission,   amidst   the   most 

APPALLING  conflicts  OF  LIFE.  II.  ChRIST  THE  PERFECT  IDEAL  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO 
DUTY,  AMIDST    THE    STRONGEST    COUNTER    INFLUENCES.       III.    ChRIST  THE  PERFECT  IDEAL 

OF  UNSELFISH  LOVE,  AMIDST  iNTENSEST  SELFISHNESS.  The  mother,  pale  wlth  incessant 
vigils  by  the  bedside  of  a  sick  child,  exhibits  unselfish  love.  Howard,  dying  of  fever 
caught  in  dungeons  where  he  was  following  after  his  Divine  ideal,  presents  to  us  a 
picture  of  love.  But  it  would  be  easier  to  measure  the  heavens  with  a  span,  or 
weigh  the  mountains  in  scales,  than  to  fully  portray  Christ's  love.  (Homilist.) 
The  imitation  of  Christ : — I.  Mistakes  made  connected  with  it.  Imitating  the  out- 
ward actions  only.  Failing  to  see  the  essential  connection  between  the  outward 
act  and  the  inward  principle.  What  is  visible  is  but  a  portion  of  the  deed.  Some 
try  to  imitate  Christ  to  procure  a  justifying  righteousness.  Others  endeavour  to 
imitate  Christ  to  become  like  Him.  To  walk  in  Christ's  steps  we  must  be  possessed 
by  Christ's  spirit.     II.   Imitate  Him  in  the  renunciation  of  self.     III.  Imitate 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch-u-.  n. 

Him  in  His  consecration  to  God.     IV.  Imitate  Him  in  His  dependence  upon  His 
Father.     (E.  H.  Hopkins.)         Christ  our  copy  : — I.  The  text  eixes  the  absolute 
STANDARD  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.     Christ  is  the  Christian's  example.     The  word 
translated  "  example,"  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament,  means,  first  of 
all,  a  writing-copy  such  as  is  given  to  a  child  learning  to  write.     The  standard  for 
the  measurement  and  aim  of  the  Christian  life  is  therefore — 1.  Christ,  and  not  the 
best  human  life.     2.  Christ,  and  not  distorted  representations  of  Him.     Christ  as 
revealed  in  the  simple  clearness  of  the  Gospels.     3.  Christ,  and  not  the  high-tide 
mark  of  present-day  Christianity.     A  subtle  evil,  into  which  all  are  in  danger  of 
falling,  is  to  feel  that  to  be  as  good  as  others  is  to  be  good  enough.     II.  The  text 
POINTS  out  the  PRACTICAL  MEANING  OF  Christ's  LIFE  FOR  US.     The  word  "example" 
— copy — appeals  to  the  universal  faculty  of  imitation.     A  great  factor  in  all  educa- 
tion.    Christ  did  not  live  for  the  purpose  of  winning  admiration  or  applause.     To 
imitate  is  more  than  to  adore.     III.  Strength  for  and  progress  in  this  imitation 
OF  Christ  will  come  to  those  who  are  constantly  in  His  presence.     Where  the 
child  puts  its  copy  before  it,  there  we  may  put  Christ.     In  His  presence  we  get 
strength  to  become  like  Him.     Things  in  contact  assimilate,  the  stronger  predomi- 
nating.    Things  in  touch  are  rehant,  the  weaker  on  the  stronger.     {J.  D.  Thomas.) 
Copying  hut  a  fragment  of  the  Christ : — Nothing  is  more  striking  to  a  close  observer 
of  human  life  than  the  almost  infinite  variety  of  character  which  exists  among 
those  who  profess  to  be  Christians.     No  two  are  alike.     Even  those  who  are  alike 
revered  for  their  saintliness  show  the  widest  diversity  in  individual  traits,  and  in 
the  cast  and  mould  of  their  character.    Yet  aU  are  sitting  before  the  same  model,  all 
are  imitators  of  the  same  blessed  life.     There  is  but  one  standard  of  true  Christian 
character — the  Ukeness  of  Christ.    Why,  then,  is  there  such  variety  of  character  and 
disposition  among  those  who  aim  to  follow  the  same  example?    1.  One  reason  for  this 
is  that  God  does  not  bestow  upon  all  His  children  the  same  gifts,  the  same  natural 
qualities.  Life  is  not  minted  as  gold  is.  Grace  does  not  transform  Peter  into  a  John,  nor 
Paul  into  a  Barnabas,  nor  Luther  into  a  Melancthon.    It  makes  them  all  like  Christ 
in  holiness,  but  it  does  not  touch  those  features  which  give  to  each  his  personal 
identity.     You  drop  twenty  different  seeds  in  the  same  garden-bed,  and  they  spring 
up  into  twenty  different  kinds  of  plants,  from  the  delicate  mignonette  to  the  flaunt- 
ing sunflower.     In  like  manner  each  believer  grows  up  into  his  own  peculiar  self. 
Eegeneration  neither  adds  to  nor  takes  from  our  natural  gifts.     2.  Another  reason 
for  this  diversity  among  Christians  is  because  even  the  best  and  holiest  saints 
realise  but  a  little  of  the  image  of  Christ,  have  only  one  little  fragment  of  His 
likeness  in  their  souls.     The  reason  is  that  the  character  of  Christ  is  so  great,  so 
majestic,  that  it  is  impossible  to  copy  all  of  it  into  any  one  little  human  life  ;  and 
again,  each  human  character  is  so  imperfect  and  limited  that  it  cannot  reach  out 
in  all  directions  after  the  infinite  character  of  Christ.     It  is  as  if  a  great  company 
of  artists  were  sent  to  paint  each  one  a  picture  of  the  Alps.     Each  chooses  his  own 
point  of  observation,  and  selects  the  particular  feature  of  the  Alps  he  desires  to 
paint.     They  all  bring  back  their  pictures  ;  but  \j !  no  two  of  them  are  alike.     The 
truth  is,  the  Alps  as  a  whole  are  too  varied,  too  vast,  for  any  one  artist  to  take  into 
his  perspective,  and  paint  upon  his  canvas.     The  best  he  can  do  is  to  portray  some 
one  or  two  features — the  features  his  eye  can  see  from  where  he  stands.    And  Christ 
is  too  great  in  His  infinite  perfection,  in  the  many-sidedness  of  His  beauty,  for  any 
one  of  His  finite  followers  to  copy  the  whole  of  His  image  into  his  own  little  life. 
The  most  that  any  of  us  can  do  is  to  get  into  our  own  soul  one  little  fragment  of 
the  wonderful  likeness  of  our  Lord.     {J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)         Christ  our  ideal : — • 
These  are  words  which  betray  their  authorship.     As  we  read  our  thoughts  fly  back 
to  the  upper  room  in  Jerusalem,  when,  on  the  eve  of  His  approaching  sacrifice,  during 
supper  our  Lord  left  His  place  at  the  head  of  the  table  where  He  was  reclining,  laid 
aside  His  garments,  took  a  towel  and  girded  Himself,  and,  pouring  water  into  a  basin, 
proceeded  to  wash  His  disciples'  feet,  and  wiped  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  He 
was  girded.     All  of  them  wondered  :  one  of  them,  Simon  Peter,  remonstrated  with 
Him,  but  He  would  not  be  stayed  in  His  strange  work.    And  when  He  had  resumed 
His  place,  He  answered  their  questioning  looks  and  told  them  what  it  meant.     "  I 
have  given  you  an  example  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you."     Can  we 
wonder  that  the  scene,  the  words,  were  cut  so  indelibly  into  the  memory  of  St. 
Peter  that  years  after,  just  as  though  it  all  happened  yesterday,  he  writes,  "  Christ 
also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an  example  that  ye  should  follow  His  steps."     It 
is  in  its  adaptation  to  the  necessities  of  mankind  the  secret  of  the  power  of  Chris- 
tianity consists.     This  is  why  it  lives  on,  ever  fresh,  ever  vigorous.     It  is  made  for 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  231 

man  as  he  is,  apart  from  the  mere  outward  circumstances  and  environment  of  his 
life.  It  is  as  suited  for  man  to-day  in  his  advanced  civilisation  as  it  was  in  the 
crude  days  of  past  centuries.  For  it  gives  man  what  his  higher  nature  wants  to 
have,  it  tells  man  what  his  spiritual  bemg  yearns  to  know,  it  meets  in  man  the 
God-implanted  instincts  of  his  inner  self,  and  therefore  it  claims  for  itself  the 
admiration  and  reverence  and  love  of  all  men.  What,  then,  is  the  great  need  which 
is  alluded  to  here  ?  It  is  this.  Man  wants  an  ideal  which  shaU  call  forth  his 
enthusiasm  and  awaken  his  energies.  He  must  have  one.  It  is  a  necessity  of  his 
being,  for  every  man  is  made  up  of  two  selves — there  is  the  self  of  the  man  as  he 
is,  and  there  is  the  self  of  the  man  as  he  would  be  or  ought  to  be.  All  through 
life  this  need  makes  itself  felt.  As  soon  as  the  child's  mind  begins  to  open  and  the 
little  one  commences  to  observe  and  think  for  itself,  it  all  unconsciously  looks  round 
for  an  ideal ;  and  if  it  has  a  loving  mother,  it  finds  what  it  wants  in  her.  The 
child  becomes  the  boy,  and  for  a  time,  at  any  rate,  his  father  is  his  ideal  of  strength 
and  wisdom.  The  boy  goes  to  school,  and  some  schoolfellow  skilled  in  games,  or 
clever  in  learning,  or  born  to  rule  his  fellows  becomes  his  ideal.  The  youth  passes 
into  manhood,  but  even  in  the  full  maturity  of  his  developed  power,  even  in  the 
consciousness  of  his  self-reliance,  he  seeks  an  ideal  still,  the  embodiment  of  strength, 
or  wisdom,  or  industry,  or  success.  Ay,  and  not  only  is  this  ideal  a  deep  necessity, 
but  it  is  a  real  force.  It  moulds  the  character  ;  it  influences  the  actions  ;  it  shapes 
the  life  ;  it  fills  with  enthusiasm.  It  is  a  great  motive  power.  And  the  one  man  to 
be  despaired  of  is  the  man  without  an  ideal.  See,  then,  how  Christianity  steps  in 
and  meets  this  yearning.  It  puts  before  man  the  only  ideal  which  will  satisfy  his 
needs  and  meet  his  necessities.  For  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  if  an  ideal  is 
to  be  a  power  it  must  possess  certain  characteristics  and  qualities.  1.  An  ideal 
must  be  definite.  Many  men  mistake  an  idea  for  an  ideal.  And  many  lives  are 
wasted  because  they  are  Uved  running  after  ideas  which  evade  their  grasp,  and  slip 
from  their  hold,  and  lack  definiteness.  2.  An  ideal  must  be  universal.  This  is 
what  humanity  craves.  An  ideal  ought  to  be  a  bond  of  union.  Alas  !  too  often  an 
ideal  separates.  Men  choose  each  his  own  ideal  and  go  their  way,  too  busy  to  think 
of,  or  care  for,  or  help  their  struggling  comrades.  3.  An  ideal  must  be  perfect.  It 
is  in  this  the  danger  of  ideals  consists.  The  man  must  have  an  ideal,  and  in  his 
haste  and  lack  of  right  judgment  he  oftentimes  selects  that  which  is  unworthy. 
What  is  the  consequence?  It  drags  down  the  man.  4.  And  therefore  an  ideal,  just 
in  proportion  as  it  possesses  these  qualifications,  must  be  final.  The  restlessness 
within  the  man  is  calmed  down  and  dies  away  before  such  an  ideal.  And  in  the 
Christian  ideal  all  these  requirements  are  found  brought  together.  Is  it  not  so  ? 
1.  The  Christian  ideal  is  definite.  It  stands  out  like  a  snow-capped  mountain 
against  the  blue  sky,  its  outline  distinctly  defined,  each  peak  and  crag,  each  chasm 
and  precipice  clearly  mapped  out.  The  life  of  the  Christ  has  been  lived  before 
men.  It  is  beautifully  portrayed  for  us  in  the  four  Gospels.  Each  inspired  artist 
has  viewed  it  from  a  somewhat  different  aspect ;  each  dwells  on  that  part  which 
comes  most  closely  home  to  him  ;  each  puts  the  Christ  before  us  as  he  best  knew 
and  understood  Him.  But  there  is  no  contradiction.  Christ  is  a  reality,  not  a 
fancy,  a  history,  not  a  fiction,  a  substance,  not  a  shadow.  His  deeds  are  familiar 
to  us  ;  His  words  are  recorded  for  us.  Now  it  is  holiness — "  Like  as  He  which 
called  you  is  holy,  be  ye  yourselves  also  holy  in  all  manner  of  living."  Now  it  is 
charity — "Walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  loved  you."  Now  it  is  patience — "Consider 
Him  that  hath  endured  such  gainsaying  of  sinners  against  Himself,  that  ye  wax 
not  weary,  fainting  in  your  souls."  Now  it  is  self-denial — "  Let  each  one  of  us 
please  his  neighbour  for  that  which  is  good,  to  edifying,  for  Christ  pleased  not 
Himself."  Now  it  is  Forgiveness — ■"  Forbearing  one  another  and  forgiving  each 
other,  even  as  Christ  forgave  you."  2.  The  Christian's  ideal  is  universal.  It  is 
not  an  esoteric  religion,  such  as  is  the  fashion  of  the  day,  whose  chief  recommenda- 
tion is  that  it  is  unintelligible  to  the  many,  suited  only  to  the  select  few,  a  small 
circle  ;  it  is  for  all,  not  for  some.  Christ  is  the  ideal  of  aU  nations.  But  no  people 
was  ever  so  strong  in  this  sense  of  nationality  as  the  Jew.  And  Jesus  was  a  Jew, 
born  of  a  Jewish  mother,  brought  up  in  a  Jewish  home ;  His  environment  all 
through  His  life  was  Jewish.  Take  the  picture  out  of  its  Jewish  frame,  place  it  in 
Gentile  surroundings,  and  though  the  frame  is  changed,  the  picture  is  just  as 
attractive  and  soul-inspiring.  He  is  the  ideal  for  all.  He  is  the  universal  pattern 
as  He  is  the  universal  Saviour.  Christ  is  the  ideal  for  all  men.  He  lived  the 
ordinary  life  of  ordinary  men  and  women.  Christ  is  the  ideal  for  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men.    He  was  rich — yea,  who  so  rich  as  He?    He  was  poor,  for 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor— yea,  He  had  not  where  to  lay 
His  head.  He  was  learned  above  the  most  intellectual  of  men,  for  He  was  the  Wisdom 
of  the  Father,  and  they  who  heard  Him  were  astonished,  for  He  taught  as  one  having 
authority.  He  was  unlearned,  for  did  they  not  say  of  Him,  "  How  knoweth  this  man 
letters,  having  never  learned  ?  "  Christ  is  the  ideal  for  all  men  in  all  circumstances  of 
life.  We  see  Him  in  solitude,  in  the  home,  in  society.  Christ  is  the  ideal  for  all  ages. 
The  child,  the  boy,  the  young  man  just  entering  life's  arena,  the  matured  in  body 
and  mind,  all  find  in  Him  their  ideal.  3.  The  Christian  ideal  is  perfect.  Where  else 
shall  we  find  an  ideal  that  can  pretend  to  lay  claim  to  perfection?  Not  in  the  heroes 
of  classic  times.  Not  in  Socrates,  with  his  grave  moral  blemishes,  Cicero,  with  his 
childish  vanity,  Seneca,  with  his  miserable  avarice  and  cowardice.  We  shall  not 
find  it  among  the  great  and  good  men  of  Old  Testament  times.  He  is  perfect,  for 
all  virtues  are  concentrated  in  Him.  He  is  perfect.  This  is  the  well-nigh  universal 
testimony  of  men.  And  therefore  the  Christian's  ideal  is  final.  We  cannot  sum 
it  up  better  than  in  the  pithy  words  of  Eenan,  "  After  Jesus  there  is  nothing  more 
but  to  fructify  and  develop,"  or,  as  a  great  lay  writer  says  of  it,  "It  comprehends 
all  future  history.  The  moral  efforts  of  all  ages  will  be  efforts  to  realise  this 
character  and  make  it  actually  as  it  is  potentially  universal.  Humanity  as  it 
advances  in  excellence  will  only  be  approximating  to  the  Christian  type.  Any 
divergence  from  that  will  not  be  progress,  but  debasement  and  corruption."  How 
shall  we  explain  this  perfection  ?  What  does  this  character  of  the  Christ  mean  ? 
Let  these  men  solve  the  difficulty  if  they  can,  who  while  they  bear  witness  to  His 
perfection  refuse  to  accept  His  teaching,  or  else  explain  away  His  words.  Our 
answer  rings  forth  in  the  words  of  the  Nicene  Creed,  "  God  of  God,  Light  o/ Light, 
very  God  of  very  God,"  or  as  we  sing,  "  Perfect  God  and  perfect  man."  This,  then, 
is  the  Christian's  ideal.  It  is  the  Christian's  duty  and  privilege  to  follow  and 
imitate  Christ.  It  is  hard,  for  no  mere  external  resemblance  will  suffice.  Christ  is 
not  a  model,  but  an  ideal,  as  has  well  been  said.  If  He  were  a  model  it  might  be 
enough  for  us  to  copy  its  outline  ;  but  if  He  be  an  ideal  we  must  imitate  His  spirit. 
It  is  hard,  for  the  ideal  is  perfect,  and  therefore  far  above  out  of  our  reach.  The 
higher  we  climb,  the  further  the  summit  seems  to  be  lost  in  the  clouds  of  eternal 
perfection.  It  is  hard,  but  it  is  not  impossible.  We  can  walk  in  the  steps  of  our 
great  example.  How  shall  this  likeness  be  ours  ?  Little  by  little,  through  patience 
and  perseverance.  Little  by  little,  for  it  is  nothing  less  than  the  formation  of 
character,  and  the  formation  of  character  is  always  slow  and  gradual.  It  is  like 
the  growth  of  a  tree  with  its  hard  knots,  its  twisted  branches,  its  smooth  twigs. 
How  gradually  it  has  become  what  it  is  !  How  slow  the  process  by  which  the  twig 
of  one  year  becomes  the  branch  of  next  year  !  How  shall  this  likeness  be  ours  ? 
Answer  me  another  question  and  I  will  tell  you.  What  is  the  lever  power  of  the 
world  ?  It  is  love,  you  say.  And  has  love  no  place  in  the  Christian's  efforts  to  be 
like  Christ  ?  Surely,  yes.  Think  again  of  that  pale,  anxious  student.  He  is 
copying  a  lifeless  face.  From  the  picture  there  comes  no  power  to  inspirit  him  in 
his  toil.  But  we  are  imitating  a  living,  loving  Christ.  Gaze  on  His  features. 
Eemember  He  is  our  sacrifice  as  well  as  our  ideal.  (C.  J.  Ridfjeirny,  M.A.) 
Reviled  not  again. — Ecpianimity  under  reproach  :-  -  A  person  expressing  to  Bengel 
his  sympathy  for  him  at  being  so  virulently  written  against,  he  replied,  "  You  will 
not  regret  this  when  I  tell  you  that  such  very  trials  teach  me  only  the  better  how 
to  gather  up  and  strengthen  the  testimony  of  my  conscience.  I  have  learnt  a  good 
method  of  cheerfully  enduring  reproach.  I  think  of  the  reproachings  and  revilings 
which  the  Son  of  God  has  been  receiving  from  the  Jews  for  1,700  years,  and 
of  His  wonderful  long-suffering  with  them  all  this  while.  Thus  I  learn  not  to 
fret  at  a  few  relies  of  the  same  which  may  be  thrown  at  me.  [BenyeVx  Life.) 
Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found. — Chrint  without  sin  : — The  apostles  of  our 
Lord  notice  with  much  complacency  the  individual  virtues  which  dignified  or 
adorned  His  character,  just  as  the  Evangelists  have  related  the  actions  in  which  they 
were  displayed,  with  much  unaffected  simplicity.  But  while  they  mention  particular 
virtues,  they  do  not  lose  sight  of  the  effect  which  they  may  collectively  produce  in 
illustrating  the  merit  of  Him  in  whose  deportment  they  appeared.  I.  The  moiul 
PERFKCTiON  HERE  ATTiu}?uTED  TO  Christ.  Christ  "  did  uo  sin."  This  phrase, 
according  to  its  original  conception,  means  nothing  more  than  harmlessness  ;  and 
is  not  understood  to  comprehend  any  positive  or  superior  excellence.  But  as 
applied  to  Christ  it  means  a  great  deal  more  ;  and,  indeed,  it  should  in  every  case 
mean  a  great  deal  more,  considering  what  the  Divine  law  prescribes,  and  what  sin 
is  in  reference  to  it.     Sin  essentially  consists  in  transgressing  or  refusing  obedience- 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  233 

to  the  Divine  law.  And  the  law  does  not  merely  prohibit  many  things  which  we 
are  accustomed  to  call  sinful,  it  also  enjoins  many  things  which  we  are  accustomed 
to  call  holy.  The  injunctions  are  as  much  a  part  of  the  law  as  the  prohibitions. 
He  who  will  not  relieve  the  distress  of  his  neighbour  when  he  has  it  in  his  power, 
is  as  really  a  sinner  as  he  who  wantonlj  inflicted  the  injury  which  called  for  this 
expression  of  kindness.  It  is  only  when  a  moral  agent  performs  every  deed  which 
is  commanded  as  well  as  abstains  from  every  deed  which  is  forbidden,  that  he  can 
properly  be  said  to  have  "done  no  sin."  Now,  it  is  in  this  strict  and  elevated 
sense  that  Christ  "  did  no  sin."  All  the  requirements  of  the  law  were  fulfilled  in 
His  character.  Nor  can  the  eye  of  the  most  scrutinising  observer  discover  in  it  one 
feature  of  nonconformity,  or  one  act  of  opposition  to  the  will  of  Him  who  ruleth 
over  all.  There  may  be  particular  virtues,  or  particular  modifications  and  degrees 
of  virtue,  of  which  His  life  will  afford  you  no  instance.  These  are  wanting, 
however,  only  for  this  reason — that  in  the  execution  of  His  appointed  work, 
and  in  the  peculiar  sphere  in  which  He  was  destined  to  move,  no  opportunities 
occurred  for  practising  them.  The  path  of  obedience  which  was  assigned  to 
Him  was  a  long  and  a  rugged  one,  and  He  walked  in  it  with  undeviating  steady 
fastness,  and  He  walked  in  it  to  the  very  end — manifesting  from  the  very 
commencement  to  the  very  termination  of  His  progress  an  unreserved  acquiescence 
in  the  demands  of  God's  law.  In  speaking  with  approbation  of  our  fellow-mortals, 
we  are  generally  necessitated  to  fix  upon  some  one  leading  virtue  by  which  they 
have  distinguished  themselves  ;  but  with  regard  to  Christ  we  perceive  all  the  virtues 
adorning  His  character,  and  we  feel  at  a  loss  in  determining  to  which  of  them  we 
should  give  the  pre-eminence.  In  speaking  with  approbation  of  our  fellow-mortals 
we  are  frequently  obliged  to  dwell  upon  the  excellence  of  their  external  conduct, 
and  to  conceal  the  principles  and  motives  by  which  they  were  influenced.  But  with 
regard  to  Christ,  so  far  as  they  have  been  developed  to  us,  the  principles  on  which 
He  proceeded  were  as  Divine,  and  the  motives  which  impelled  Him  as  disinterested 
and  worthy  as  the  actions  themselves.  In  speaking  with  approbation  of  our  fellow- 
mortals  we  must  always  accompany  our  eulogium  with  certain  exceptions  to  their 
disadvantage — certain  shortcomings  which  detract  from  the  splendour  or  from  the 
value  of  the  good  qualities  for  which  we  commend  them,  or  certain  vices  which 
counterbalance  them  and  render  our  commendations  less  cordial.  But  with  regard 
to  Christ  we  can  discern  no  such  imperfection  or  demerit.  In  speaking  with  appro- 
bation of  our  fellow-mortals  we  are  always  supposed,  even  when  our  laudatory 
language  is  most  unbounded,  to  allow  that  we  wish  not  to  be  strictly  apprehended, 
and  to  leave  it  to  be  understood  that  there  is  need  for  that  charity  which  seeks  not 
to  detect  the  failings  of  humanity,  and  tries  to  cover  them  when  they  are  known  : 
but  with  regard  to  Christ  this  charity  has  no  room  to  operate.  Nor  is  this  moral 
perfection  either  an  imaginary  or  an  exaggerated  attribute  of  Christ.  As  certainly 
as  we  know  that  He  lived  and  died,  so  certainly  do  we  know  that  in  His  life  and  in 
His  death  He  was  without  sin.  For  this  we  have  every  degree  of  evidence  of  which 
the  case  admits,  or  which  can  be  desired  to  satisfy  our  minds.  II.  Let  us  now 
MAKE  OUR  APPLICATION  OF  THIS  TRUTH.  It  is  applicable,  as  we  formerly  stated,  to 
various  useful  purposes.  1.  And  it  serves  to  confirm  our  belief  in  the  truth  of 
Christ's  mission.  This  effect  is  produced  in  some  degree  simply  by  viewing  Christ 
in  the  light  of  a  person  of  good  principle  and  of  excellent  character.  He  holds 
Himself  out  as  a  witness.  It  is  to  the  truth  of  revelation  that  He  gives  His 
testimony,  or  rather  it  is  His  own  Divine  origin  and  embassy  that  He  certifies. 
And  therefore  in  proportion  to  the  confidence  that  we  repose  in  His  general  worth 
will  be  the  credit  that  we  give  to  what  He  sayj  respecting  Himself,  and  to  the- 
message  which  He  brings  from  heaven.  But  the  argument  comes  still  closer  to  us; 
than  this.  Had  the  Author  of  Christianity  been  an  impostor,  it  is  impossible  to 
conceive  that  He  should  have  been  of  such  holy  and  unblemished  character  as  we ; 
find  Him  to  have  been.  The  depravity  of  heart  which  gave  birth  to  such  a  system 
of  artifice,  as  in  this  view  He  must  be  supposed  to  have  contrived  and  published, 
could  not  fail  to  have  given  birth  also  to  a  great  variety  of  crimes  and  vices.  On 
the  supposition  that  Christ  was  an  impostor,  it  was  no  ordinary  or  harmless 
deception  that  He  was  playing  off  upon  mankind.  It  was  founded  on  the  assump- 
tion of  Divine  power ;  it  pretended  to  aim  at  the  Divine  glory ;  it  affected  to 
promulgate  the  Divine  will ;  it  invoked  a  solemn  and  visible  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  presence.  And  while  it  thus  blasphemed  against  God,  it  trifled  with  the 
understanding  and  the  affections  of  man.  It  called  upon  him  to  believe  what  was 
not  true.     Now  I  ask  you  if  it  be  possible  to  reconcile  such  impiety  towards  God, 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n- 

and  such  unfeelingness  towards  men,  with  that  reverence  for  God,  and  that  tender 
compassion  towards  men  by  which  our  Lord  was  so  eminently  characterised  in 
every  other  instance  ?     I  ask  you,  if  such  light  and  such  darkness,  such  righteous- 
ness and  such  unrighteousness,  could  possibly  dwell  together,  and  operate  together, 
in  the  mind  and  in  the  conduct  of  the  same  individual  ?     The  answer  to  all  these 
questions  must  necessarily  be  in  the  negative.     Christ  cannot  be  a  deceiver  as  to 
His  gospel,  and  yet  in  all  other  respects  without  sin.     You  must  either  give  up  the 
one  proposition  or  the  other.     There  is  yet  another  view  to  be  taken  of  this  point. 
Christ  did  more  than  hold  Himself  out  as  a  Divine  messenger — He  held  Himself 
out  as  standing  in  a  peculiar  relation  to  God,  as  being  His  only-begotten  Son,  as 
having  the  attributes  of  Deity,  as  being  one  with  the  Father.     With  these  preten- 
sions His  sinfulness,  even  His  commission  of  one  sin,  would  have  been  completely 
inconsistent,  and  would  have  rendered   them  utterly  false  and  groundless.     His 
perfect  freedom  from  sin,  therefore,  is  essential  to  the  proof  of  His  Divine  mission. 
It  does  not  prove  that  He  was  God,  for  He  might  have  been  a  creature  and  yet 
have  been  preserved  from  all  unrighteousness  by  God's  almighty  power.     But  as 
He   claimed  the  honour   and   asserted   the  possession   of   supreme   Deity,  it   was 
necessary  that  no  unrighteousness  should  cleave  to  Him.     I  have  still  further  to 
observe  that  the  sinlessness  of  Christ  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  miracle,  which  establishes 
the  truth  of  His  mission  as  much  as  any  of  the  miracles  which  are  usually  resorted 
to  for  this  purpose.     And  it  was  not  possible  for  Him  to  be  thus  sinless,  except  by 
the  special  interposition  of  heaven.     The  laws  which  govern  human  nature  and 
human  condition  were  here  suspended,  as  it  were,  for  producing  that  effect.     A 
person  wearing  the  form  of  fallen  humanity  exhibited  not  a  vestige  of  the  weakness 
and   the   wickedness   by  which,  in   every  other   case,  fallen   humanity  has   been 
characterised.     2.  Let  us  apply  the  subject  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  our 
dependence   upon  Christ  as  the  foundation  of   our  hope.     The  law  of   God  has 
demands  upon  us  that  must  be  fully  satisfied  before  we  can  obtain  His  forgiveness 
and  enjoy  His  favour,  and  be  admitted  into  His  heavenly  presence.     It  demands 
punishment,  and  it  demands  obedience ;  and  we  must  suffer  the  one  and  yield  the 
other,  either  in  our  own  persons  or  by  a  substitute.     We  are  very  apt  indeed  to 
trust  in  our  own  strength  for  the  justification  of  which  as  sinners  we  stand  in 
need.     But  a  little  consideration  of  what  our  own  strength  is,  and  of  the  achieve- 
ment to  which  we  propose  to  apply  it,  must  satisfy  us  that  such  a  trust  is  vain. 
Our  only  refuge,  then,  is  in  a  substitute  ;  and  it  is  the  great  business  of  the  gospel 
to  reveal  this  substitute  as  both  willing  and  able  to  do  for  us  what  we  are  incompe- 
tent to  do  for  ourselves.     Now,  in  order  that  our  faith  in  Him  as  our  surety,  who  is 
to  redeem  us  by  His  vicarious  obedience,  may  be  justified,  we  must  have  clear 
demonstrations  of  His  sufficiency  for  sustaining  that  important  character.     It  is 
with  this  view  especially  that  Christ  is  represented  so  distinctly,  and  declared  so 
frequently,  to  be  without  sin.     For  supposing  Him  to  have  been  otherwise,  then  our 
belief  in  His  adequacy  to  the  undertaking  He  had  engaged  in  would  have  been 
Bhaken  or  destroyed.     Let  this  truth  be  always  present  to  your  minds  when  you 
think  of  Christ  as  the  ground  of  your  acceptance ;  and  especially  when  you  look  to 
His  death  as  the  sacrifice  of  atonement  which  He  offered  up  for  your  iniquities, 
and  as  the  finishing  act  of  that  obedience  which  in  your  stead  He  rendered  to  the 
law  of  God.     Be  not  faithless  but  believing.     Let  not  a  sense  of  your  unworthiness 
and   guilt  fill  your  souls  with  desponding  fears  and  apprehensions.     But  place 
unlimited  confidence  in  "  the  holy  one  and  the  just."     His  sacrifice  is  faultless. 
His  merit  is  infinite.     His  work  is  perfect.     3.  Finally,  let  us  apply  the  subject  for 
our  direction  in  that  course  of  life  which  we  must  pursue  as  candidates  for  heaven. 
Though  Christ  by  His  unspotted  sacrifice  and  perfect  obedience  has  renewed  our 
title  to  life  and  immortality,  yet  it  is  still  true  that  without  personal  holiness  we 
cannot  see  the  Lord.     This  character  is  pointed  out  to  us  by  the  precepts  and 
maxims  of  the  gospel.     But  we  have  the  additional  advantage  of  having  it  illus- 
trated  and   enforced  by  the   example   of   our   Saviour.     The  exhibition  of  this 
example  was  one,  though  a  subordinate,  purpose  of  His  incarnation.     He  has  left 
it  upon  record  expressly  and  authoritatively,  "that  we  should  follow  His  steps." 
{A.  Thoini^on,  D.D.)         Sinless  and  guileless : — I.  His  conduct.     "Did  no  sin."     1. 
Though  tempted  severely  and  continually.     2.  Though  surrounded  by  sinful  men. 
3.  Though  exposed  to  poverty  of  the  deepest  kind.     4.  Though  wearing  a  body 
subject  to  infirmities.      II.  His  converse.      "  Neither  was   guile  found."      1.  He 
never  disguised  His  abhorrence  of  falsehood.     2.  He  did  not  promise  more  than 
He  intended  to  perform.     3.  He  did  not  hide  from  His  followers  the  consequences 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  235 

of  their  position.     Application : — 1.  The  purity  of  Jesus  in  word  and  deed  should 
be  sought  by  us.     2.  Hereafter  we  shall  be  as  He  was  and  is.     3.  This  purity  can 
never  be  congenial  to  us  until  our  hearts  are  regenerated.     {R.  A.  Griffin.)        Bore 
our  sins  in  His  own  body. — The  sin-hearer : — This  wonderful  passage  is  a  part  of 
Peter's  address  to  servants ;  and  in  his  day  nearly  all  servants  were  slaves.     If  we 
are  in  a  lowly  condition  of  life,  we  shall  find  our  best  comfort  in  thinking  of  the 
lowly  Saviour  bearing  our  sins  in  all  patience  and  submission.     If  we  are  called  to 
suffer,  as  servants  often  were  in  the  Eoman  times,  we  shall  be  solaced  by  a  vision 
of   our  Lord  buffeted,  scourged,  and   crucified,  yet  silent  in  the  majesty  of  His 
endurance.     We  ourselves  now  know   by  experience  that  there  is   no   place  for 
comfort  hke  the  Cross.     Truly  in  this  case  "  like  cures  like."     By  the  suffering  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  our  suffering  is  made  light.     I.  The  bearing  of  oue  sins  by  our 
Lord.     Jesus  did  really  bear  the  sins  of  His  people.    1.  How  literal  is  the  language ! 
Words  mean  nothing  if  substitution  is  not  stated  here.     2.  Note  how  personal  are 
the  terms  here  employed !     "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body." 
It  was  not  by  delegation,  but  "His  own  self,"  and  it  was  not  in  imagination,  but 
"  in  His  own  body."     Observe  also  the  personality  from  our  side  of  the  question, 
He  "bare  our  sins,"  that  is  to  say,  my  sins  and  your  sins.     As  surely  as  it  was 
Christ's  own  self  that  suffered  on  the  Cross,  so  truly  was  it  our  own  sins  that  Jesus 
bore  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.     3.  This  sin-bearing  on  our  Lord's  part  was 
continual.     The  passage  before  us  has  been  forced  beyond  its  teaching  by  being 
made  to  assert  that  our  Lord  Jesus  bore  our  sins  nowhere  but  on  the  Cross,  which 
the  words  do  not  say.     "  The  tree  "  was  the  place  where  beyond  all  other  places 
we  see  our  Lord  bearing  the  chastisement  due  to  our  sins  ;  but  before  this  He  had 
felt  the  weight  of  the  enormous  load.     The  marginal  reading,  which  is  perfectly 
correct,  is  "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  to  the  tree."     Our 
Lord  carried  the  burden  of  our  sins  up  to  the  tree,  and  there  and  then  He  made  an 
end  of  it.     4.  This  sin-bearing  is  final.     He  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the 
tree,  but  He  bears  them  now  no  more.     The  sinner  and  the  sinner's  Surety  are  both 
free,  for  the  law  is  vindicated,  the  honour  of  government  is  cleared,  the  substitu- 
tionary sacrifice  is  complete.     H.  The  change  in  ouk  condition,  which  the  text 
describes  as  coming  out  of  the  Lord's  bearing  of  our  sins.     "  That  we,  being  dead 
to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness."     1.  We  are  henceforth  legally  dead  to  the 
punishment  of  sin.     What  a  wonderful  dehverance  for  us  !     Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul !     2.  But  Peter  also  means  to  remind  us  that,  by  and  through  the  influence  of 
Christ's  death  upon  our  hearts,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  made  us  now  to  be  actually 
"  dead  to  sins  " :  that  is  to  say,  we  no  longer  love  them,  and  they  have  ceased  to 
hold  dominion  over  us.     The  new-born  life  within  us  has  no  dealings  with  sin  ;  it 
is  dead  to  sin.     The  Greek  word  here  used  cannot  be  fully  rendered  into  English — 
it  signifies  "being  unborn  to  sins."     We  were  born  in  sin,  but  by  the  death  of 
Christ  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  us,  that  birth  is  undone,  "we  are 
unborn  to   sins."     3.  But  our  Lord's  sin-bearing  has  also  brought  us  into  life. 
Dead  to  evil  according  to  law,  we  also  live  in  newness  of  life  in  the  kingdom  of 
grace.     Our  Lord's  object  is  "  that  we  should  live  unto  righteousness."     Not  only 
are  our  hves  to  be  righteous,  which  I  trust  they  are,  but  we  are  quickened  and 
made  sensitive  and  vigorous  unto  righteousness ;  through  our  Lord's  death  we  are 
made  quick  of  eye,  and  quick  of  thought,  and  quick  of  lip,  and  quick  of  heart  unto 
righteousness.     Certainly,  if  the  doctrine  of  His  atoning  sacrifice  does  not  vivify  us, 
nothing  will.     HI.  The  healing  of  oub  diseases  by  this  death.     We  were  healed, 
and  we  remain  so.     It  is  not  a  thing  to  be  done  in  the  future ;  it  has  been  wrought. 
Peter  describes  our  disease  in  the  words  which  compose  ver.  25.     What  was  it, 
then?     1.  First,  it  was  brutishness.     "Ye  were  as  sheep."     Sin  has  made  us  so 
that  we  are  only  fit  to  be  compared  to  beasts,  and  to  those  of  the  least  intelligence. 
We  "  were  as  sheep,"  but  we  are  now  men  redeemed  unto  God.     2.  We  are  cured 
also  of  the  proneness  to  wander  which  is  so  remarkable  in  sheep.     "  Ye  were  as 
sheep  going  astray,"  always  going  astray,  loving  to  go  astray,  delighting  in  it.     We 
wander  still,  but  not  as  sheep  wander ;  we  now  seek  the  right  way,  and  desire  to 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.     If  we  wander  it  is  through  ignorance  or 
temptation.     We  can  truly  say,  "  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  Thee."     3.  Another 
disease  of  ours  was  inabihty  to  return :  "Ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray;  but  are 
now  returned."      Dogs   and   even   swine   are  more  likely  to  return  home  than 
wandering  sheep.     But  now,  though  we  wandered  we  have  returned,  and  do  still 
return  to  our  Shepherd.     Our  soul  cries,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee  ?  and 
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee."    Thus,  by  the  vii'tue  of  our 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Lord's  death  an  immortal  love  is  created  in  us,  which  leads  us  to  seek  His  face, 
and  renew  our  fellowship  with  Him.     4.  Our  Lord's  death  has  also  cured  us  of  our 
readiness  to  follow  other  leaders.     Faith  in  Jesus  creates  a  sacred  independence  of 
mind.     We  have  learned  so  entire  a  dependence  upon  our  crucified  Lord  that  we 
have  none  to  spare  for  men.     5.  Finally,  when  we  were  wandering  we  were  like 
sheep  exposed  to  wolves,  but  we  are  delivered  from  this  by  being  near  the  Shepherd. 
We  were  in  danger  of  death,  in  danger  from  the  devil,  in  danger  from  a  thousand 
temptations,  which,  like  ravenous  beasts,  prowled  around  us.     Having  ended  our 
wandering,  we  are  now  in  a  place  of  safety.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Death  for  sin, 
and  death  to  sin  : — I.  Our  Lord's  death  for  sin.     And  here,  ere  we  approach  to 
behold  the  great  sight,  let  us  put  ofi  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet,  and  bow  down  in 
lowliest  reverence  of  repenting  grief,  for,  remember,  if  Jesus  had  not  died  for  sins, 
we  must  have  died,  and  died  eternally  too.     Oh,  the  bitterness  of  our  souls  had  we 
been  in  such  a  state  !     1.  There  was  a  substitution  for  our  sins,  and  by  that  substi- 
tution believers  are  saved.     It  was  not  merely  a  transfer  of  punishment  from  one  to 
another,  but  there  was  a  transfer  of  sin  in  some  deep  sense,  or  else  the  Scripture 
speaketh  not  what  it  meaneth  :  "  He  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree." 
2.  Now  I  want  you  to  pause,  having  noted  the  fact  of  substitution,  to  consider  the 
substitute.     "  He  His  own  self  bare  our  sins."     And  who  was  "  He  "  ?     I  want  you 
to  feel  a  personal  love  to  our  dear  Lord  and  Master.     I  want  your  souls  at  this 
moment  to  realise  the  actual  character  of  His  existence  and  His  true  personality. 
Though  thus  God  over  all.  He  became  a  man  like  unto  ourselves.     And  He,  in  that 
double  nature  but  united  person,  was  Jesus,  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  the  Virgin  ;  He 
it  was  who  "  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."     3.  Here  we  call  to  your 
remembrance  the  fact  stated  in  the  text  so  positively,  that  the  substitution  of  Christ 
was  carried  out  by  Him  personally,  not  by  proxy.     The  priest  of  old  brought  a 
substitution,  but  it  was  a  lamb.     He  struck  the  knife  and  the  warm  blood  flowed 
adown  it,  but  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  no  substitute  for  Himself,  He  "His  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in   His  own  body."     4.  Notice,  also,  that  the  substitution  of 
Christ  is  described  in  our  text  in  a  way  which  suggests  consciousness,  willinghood, 
and  great  pain.     "He  His  own  self  bare  our  sins."     They  were  upon  Him,  they 
pressed  Him.     The  Greek  word  for  "  bare  "  suggests  the  idea  of  a  great  weight, 
"  He  bare  our  sins  " — stooped  under  them,  as  it  were  ;  they  were  a  load  to  Him. 
5.  And  He  bore  those  sins  manifestly.     I  think  that  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ; 
when  He  says  "  in  His  own  body,"  He  means  to  give  vividness  to  the  thought.     We 
are  so  constituted  that  we  do  not  think  so  forcibly  of  mental  and  spiritual  things  as 
we  do  of  bodily  things ;  but  our  Lord  bare  our  sins  "  in  His  own  body."  "  His  visage 
was  more  marred  than  that  of  any  man,  and  His  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men." 
Bemember  another  text — "  Yet  we  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of  God."    Mark 
the  "  tree  "  or  Cross  for  a  moment  with  much  attention.     (1)  It  was  the  place  of  pain. 
No  death  could  be  more  full  of  agony  than  that  of  crucifixion.     Blessed  be  Thy 
love,  0  Jesus,  that  Thou  couldest  bear  pain  and  death  for  us.     (2)  But  the  Cross 
was  not  the  place  of  pain  merely  ;  it  was  the  place  of  scorn.     To  be  fastened  to  the 
Cross !    Why,  they  would  not  put  the  meanest  Eoman  thereon,  though  he  committed 
murder ;  it  was  a  death  for  slaves  and  menials.     To  be  laughed  at  when  you  suffer 
is  to  suffer  sevenfold.     (3)  But  more,  it  was  the  place  of  the  curse,  for  "  cursed  is 
every  one  that  hangeth  on  the  tree,"  and  the  Word  has  told  us  that  "  He  was  made 
a  curse  for  us."     (4)  Last  of  all,  it  was  the  place  of  death.     II.  Our  death  to  sin. 
"  That  we,  being  dead  to  sin,  should  live  unto  righteousness :  by  whose  stripes  ye 
were  healed."     Now,  observe  right  well  that  we  are  dead  to  the  condemning  power 
of  sin.     Henceforth  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  live  as  a  righteous  man,  accepted 
in  the  Beloved,  to  live  by  His  righteousness  and  rejoice  in  it,  blessing  and  magni- 
fying His  holy  name.     As  many  of  you  as  have  looked  to  Jesus  Christ  bearing  your 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  are  dead  to  sin  as  to  its  reigning  power.     1.  Dead, 
first,  because  we  have  seen  its  detestable  nature.     It  had  its  charms,  but  now  we 
have  perceived  its  hypocrisies.     The  false  prophet  Mokanna,  who  wore  the  silver 
veil  upon  his  brow,  deceived  many,  for  he  said  that  should  that  veil  be  lifted,  the 
light  which  would  gleam  from  under  it  would  strike  men  blind,  the  glory  was  so 
great ;  but  when  one  had  once  perceived  that  the  man  was  leprous,  and  that  on  his 
brow  instead  of  brightness  there  were  the  white  scales  of  a  leper,  nobody  would 
become  his  disciple ;  and  so,  O  sin,  at  the  Cross  I  see  thy  silver  veil  removed,  and 
I  mark  the  desperate  leprosy  that  is  on  thee.     I  cannot  harbour  thee  in  my  heart. 
2.  We  are  dead  to  sin,  again,  because  another  passion  has  absorbed  all  the  forces 
of  our  life.     3.  And  yet  again,  sin  appears  to  us  now  to  be  too  mean  and  trivial  a 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  PETER.  237 

thing  for  us  to  care  about.  We  have  lost  now,  by  God's  grace,  the  faculty  which 
once  was  gratified  with  these  things.  They  tell  us  we  deny  ourselves  many 
pleasures.  Oh,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  a  Christian  lives  a  self-denying  life,  but 
there  is  another  sense  in  which  he  practises  no  seK-denial  at  all,  for  he  only  denies 
himself  what  he  does  not  want,  what  he  would  not  have  if  he  could.  If  you  could 
force  it  upon  him  it  would  be  misery  to  him,  his  views  and  tastes  are  now  so 
changed.  Let  these  eyes  be  for  ever  sightless  as  the  eyes  of  night,  and  let  these  ears 
be  for  ever  deaf  as  silence,  rather  than  sin  should  have  a  charm  for  me,  or  anything 
should  take  up  my  spirit  save  the  Lord  of  love,  who  bled  Himself  to  death  that  He 
might  redeem  me  unto  Himself.  This  is  the  royal  road  to  sanctification.  [Ibid.) 
Burden-hearers  : — "  I  don't  like  this  idea  of  somebody  else  bearing  my  burden," 
said  an  objector  to  the  atonement  recently.  The  reply  was,  "  Friend,  somebody 
else  has  been  bearing  your  burden  ever  since  you  came  into  the  world."  So  is  it 
with  us  all.  Our  mothers  bore  the  burden  of  our  infancy.  The  sailor  bears  the 
burden  that  brings  us  good  news  from  afar.  The  miner  bears  the  burden  that 
warms  our  dwelling,  and  the  reaper  bears  the  burden  that  gives  us  bread. 
That  we,  being  dead  to  sins. — Dead  to  sin  by  Christ's  death  : — Faith  looks  so 
steadfastly  on  its  suffering  Saviour  that  it  makes  the  soul  like  Him,  assimilates  and 
conforms  it  to  His  death,  as  the  apostle  speaks.  That  which  Papists  fabulously 
say  of  some  of  their  saints,  that  they  received  the  impression  of  the  wounds  of 
Christ  in  their  body,  is  true  in  a  spiritual  sense  of  the  soul  of  every  one  that  is 
indeed  a  saint  and  a  believer ;  it  takes  the  very  print  of  His  death  by  beholding 
Him  and  dies  to  sin,  and  then  takes  that  of  His  rising  again,  and  Uves  to  righteous- 
ness. {Abp.  Leighton.)  Dead  to  sin  :  living  to  righteousness  : — A  legend  of  the 
Jews  relates  that  the  Prophet  Ezekiel  once  raised  a  number  of  his  countrymen 
from  the  dead,  but  the  miracle  was  so  far  imperfect  that  the  resuscitated  men  ever 
after  retained  the  complexion  of  corpses,  and  their  garments  the  smell  of  the 
sepulchre.  Some  believe  it  is  after  this  fashion  that  the  Lord  Jesus  raises  us  from 
the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness.  So  far,  at  least,  as  this  world  is  con- 
cerned, we  must  expect  to  retain  the  blemishes  and  scent  of  moral  corruption.  We 
have  not  so  learned  Christ.  (TF.  L.  Watkinson.)  By  whose  stripes  ye  were 
healed. — On  the  diseases  and  health  of  the  soul : — I.  Consider  sin  as  destroying 
THE  HEALTH  OF  THE  SOUL.  1.  Bodily  distempcrs  are  very  often  conveyed  by 
descent  from  others.  So  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  has  spread  a  fatal  corruption 
through  the  whole  human  race.  Man  is  not  only  liable  to  many  bodily  distempers 
from  inheritance,  he  brings  many  upon  himself  by  imprudence  and  by  sinful 
gratifications.  In  like  manner,  besides  what  is  called  original  sin,  we  are  charge- 
able with  many  actual  transgressions.  2.  Having  spoken  of  the  origin  of  sin,  let  us 
now  trace  the  manner  of  its  progress.  (1)  Vices,  like  diseases,  steal  upon  us  by 
slow  degrees.  Their  first  attack  is  often  imperceptible.  (2)  As  bodily  distempers  are 
frequently  most  dangerous  when  the  patient  is  least  sensible  of  them,  so  it  is  a  bad 
symptom  of  the  soul  when  it  has  not  a  just  sense  of  the  evil  of  iniquity.  3.  Having 
considered  sin  as  to  its  source  and  progress,  we  shall  also  take  a  view  of  its  effects. 
(1)  Sickness  weakens  the  body,  debilitates  the  nerves,  and  unfits  mankind  so  long 
as  it  continues  for  enjoying  and  discharging  the  affairs  of  human  life.  Sin  also 
enfeebles  the  mind  by  curbing  and  confusing  the  reasoning  powers.  (2)  Nor  is  this 
the  only  effect ;  for  as  sickness  often  brings  much  pain,  so  sin  also  is  accompanied, 
or  will  be  followed,  by  sorrow  and  sufferings.  (3)  As  diseases  produce  the  death  of 
the  body,  so  sin,  if  unpardoned  and  unremoved,  will  destroy  the  soul.     II.  The 

NATURE     OF    THE    REMEDIES    PRESCRIBED,    AND     THE    CAPACITY     OF     THE     PHYSICIAN    WHO 

DIRECTS  AND  ALSO  APPLIES  THEM.  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Physician,  and  the  means 
prescribed  are  His  Word,  His  ordinances,  and  His  providences,  made  effectual  by 
the  Spirit.  (1)  His  Word  is  medicinal.  A  text  of  the  Bible,  well  applied  and 
directed  to  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  has  produced  very  valuable  effects.  (2) 
The  ordinances  of  Christ,  under  which  are  included  all  acts  of  worship,  prayer, 
praise,  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  are  designed  to  increase  our  hatred  of  sin  and  love 
for  holiness.  (3)  All  events  are  in  the  hand  of  God.  Providential  dispensations 
are  employed  to  reclaim  and  reform  sinners.  Sometimes  more  awful,  sometimes 
more  mild  exertions  are  requisite.  (4)  The  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  another  of 
the  means  promised  and  prescribed  by  the  mercy  of  God  for  the  recovery  of  the 
health  of  souls.  He  is  the  Divine  Agent  who  gives  efficacy  to  the  other  means. 
2.  The  character  and  capacity  of  Jesus  Christ,  our  glorious  Physician,  shall  now  be 
a  little  considered.  (1)  His  knowledge  and  capacity  are  infinitely  great.  (2)  Our 
blessed  Saviour  is  not  only  able  and  skilful,  He  is  also  friendly  and  compassionate- 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

(3)  Our  blessed  Redeemer  is  \tpry  humble  and  condescending.  (4)  The  Son  of  God 
is  a  Physician  to  whom  you  may  have  access  in  all  places  and  at  all  times.  Applica- 
tion :  1.  As  we  derive  by  our  birth  a  weak  and  depraved  nature,  and  are  daily 
increasing  the  number  of  our  offences,  what  strong  reasons  are  these,  not  to  think 
of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think,  but  to  think  soberly !  2.  The 
progress  of  vice,  as  above  considered,  should  excite  in  us  the  greatest  jealousy  and 
circumspection.  3.  The  effects  of  sin,  formerly  mentioned,  show  that  vice  is,  of 
all  evils,  the  most  formidable  to  mankind.  4.  It  is  our  duty  to  follow  exactly  the 
prescriptions  for  spiritual  health  which  Jesus  Christ  has  been  pleased  to  direct. 
5.  Remember  that  it  is  by  a  believing  reliance  on  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  that  the 
remedies  in  the  gospel  prove  means  of  spiritual  health.  (Robert  Foote.)  The 
strijies  of  Jesus  : — There  is  much  that  is  mysterious  about  disease,  and  probably 
much  that  will  always  remain  so,  even  after  human  industry  and  skill  have  done 
their  best  to  fathom  its  secrets.  But  in  ancient  times,  when  medical  science  was 
almost,  if  not  altogether  unknown,  the  causes  that  produced  it  seemed  to  be  impene- 
trable. Its  progress  was  fitful  and  capricious.  In  the  same  way  the  process  of 
healing  was  equally  uncertain.  A  few  simple  remedies  were  used  for  simple  ail- 
ments, and  if  these  were  futile,  men  were  helpless.  Their  pharmacy  was  exhausted. 
Nothing  was  left  but  to  submit  to  the  inevitable.  And  we  can  well  understand  how 
in  such  circumstances  disease  was  felt  to  be  an  appropriate  symbol  of  moral  evil 
which  was  enveloped  in  similar  mystery,  and  seemed  to  be  as  little  amenable  to 
control.  But  the  fact  that  disease  was  recognised  as  so  appropriate  a  symbol  of 
moral  evil  rested  on  something  more  than  external  resemblance.  In  some  cases  it 
was  known  to  be  the  penalty  of  a  moral  offence.  Sin  produces  and  is  succeeded  by 
suffering  in  obedience  to  the  same  law  by  which  the  fruit  is  developed  from  the 
blossom,  or  the  organism  from  the  germ.  And  hence,  when  Scripture  speaks  of  us 
as  needing  healing,  this  is  not  merely  a  figure,  it  is  a  reality.  Sin  contains 
suffering,  as  an  essential  element  in  itself.  We  have,  then,  to  consider  what  this 
conception  of  sin  as  a  disease  is  intended  to  teach,  and  the  aspect  under  which  its 
cure  is  presented  by  the  apostle.  I.  First,  this  conception  of  sin  reminds  us  that  it 
IS  something  abnorm.vl  OB  UNNATURAL.  It  is  an  infliction  that  has  disturbed  the 
harmony  of  our  nature  and  thrown  it  out  of  gear.  In  the  case  of  disease  this  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  we  invariably  protest  against  it,  and  endeavour  to  throw  it 
off.  When  we  fail  to  do  this,  it  is  either  owing  to  our  being  unconscious  of  its 
presence,  or  to  its  having  reached  such  an  advanced  stage  in  its  development  that  it 
has  paralysed  our  powers  of  resistance.  It  is  the  same  also  with  sin.  The  religions  of 
the  world,  with  their  crude  and  often  revolting  methods  of  sacrifice,  bear  pathetic 
witness  to  the  unrest  of  conscience,  and  the  conviction  that  something  is  wrong 
between  man  and  the  powers  above  him.  And  wherever  the  instincts  of  human 
nature  have  been  healthiest,  and  the  moral  sense  has  been  most  widely  awake,  the 
efforts  made  to  pacify  the  offended  Deity  have  been  most  earnest  and  sustained. 
And  there  are  the  same  attempts  to  avert  a  menacing  future,  not,  it  may  be,  by  the 
offering  of  sacrifice,  but  by  more  refined  and  subtle  efforts  at  atonement — the 
religion  of  many  dissolving  itself  into  a  mere  lifelong  effort  to  put  themselves  right 
with  God.  And  how  are  we  to  explain  this  dislocation  ?  What  has  been  its  cause  ? 
What,  but  that  we  have  all  violated  the  eternal  law  of  righteousness,  and  placed 
ourselves  at  variance  with  God  ?  And  no  one  can  break  that  law  and  remain 
unreconciled  to  Him  without  suffering.  It  would  be  infinitely  worse  for  us  if  we 
could.  II.  Secondly,  disease  disables  us  by  impairing  our  strength.  What  we  can 
undertake  in  health  we  cannot  undertake  when  health  has  failed.  Some  things  we 
must  give  up  entirely ;  others  we  can  only  do  partially,  if  we  do  them  at  all. 
Perhaps  we  hardly  realise  the  enormous  waste  for  which  sin  is  responsible,  and 
how  far  short  humanity  falls  of  its  possible  attainments.  Our  proudest  and  most 
brilliant  achie\'ements,  what  are  they  but  solitary  and  occasional  flowers  which 
show  what  the  wilderness  might  have  been  ?  III.  In  the  third  place,  we  know  that 
the  natural  end  of  disease  is  death.  It  can  be  checked.  Its  violence  can  be 
reduced.  It  may  be  entirely  overcome.  But  treat  it  as  though  it  did  not  exist,  and 
allow  it  to  take  its  way,  then,  however  trifling  its  beginnings  and  fitful  its  progress, 
it  will  set  up  a  trouble  and  disturbance  in  the  whole  system  that  will  certainly  lead 
to  its  ultimate  destruction.  So  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
about  this.  The  connection  between  the  two  is  invariable.  And  as  every  sickness 
can  be  most  easily  cured  in  its  initial  stage,  or,  at  least,  before  neglect  has  compli- 
cated the  symptoms,  so  it  is  with  sin.  Trifle  with  it,  indulge  it,  let  it  go  on,  and  it 
will  rivet  its  hold,  and  infect  your  moral  nature  till  the  will  is  hopelessly  enslaved 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  239 

and  the  only  termination  is  death.  And  what  is  the  death  that  comes  as  sin's 
terrible  wages  ?  Is  it  the  death  of  the  body  ?  Is  it  exhausted  and  done  with  when 
the  last  debt  of  nature  has  been  paid  ?  No.  For  sin  is  not  resident  in  the  body, 
so  that  we  can  lay  it  aside  when  we  shuffle  off  this  mortal  coil.  It  is  a  spiritual 
act,  the  result  of  a  certain  spiritual  condition.  And  this  spiritual  condition  is  not 
changed  by  the  mere  fact  of  physical  death.  That,  indeed,  separates  the  soul  from 
the  body,  and  hands  over  the  latter  to  the  powers  of  dissolution.  But  the  former 
remains  as  it  was.  And  if  it  has  not  renounced  its  sin,  and  been  quickened  by  the 
life  that  wages  a  perpetual  warfare  against  it,  death  will  not  sever  it  from  its 
ruinous  ally.  It  will  simply  introduce  it  to  that  final  and  hopeless  separation  front 
God  which  is  the  essence  of  spiritual  death.  For  it  will  no  longer  be  surrounded 
by  what  here  alleviates  and  conceals  the  awfulness  of  such  a  state.  We  have  now 
to  consider  the  aspect  under  which  the  removal  of  sin  is  here  presented.  It  is 
described  as  a  healing  or  making  whole,  and  it  is  effected  by  the  stripes  of  Christ. 
"  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  That  is,  by  what  Christ  suffered  our  sufferings 
are  brought  to  an  end ;  their  source  or  fountain  is  staunched.  But  how  are  we  to 
understand  this  ?  It  is  true  in  a  sense  that  all  suffering,  when  it  becomes  severe, 
can  only  be  cured  by  the  suffering  of  others.  It  imposes  this  penalty  to  some 
extent  on  those  who  undertake  to  relieve  it.  The  strength  and  skiU  of  the 
physician  are  often  heavily  taxed  to  save  his  patient.  And  the  same  remark  is  true 
in  a  still  higher  degree  in  the  treatment  of  moral  evil.  To  check  even  venial  faults, 
so  as  to  help  the  defaulter  to  renounce  them,  requires  a  patient  tact  and  affection 
which  are  rarely  found  combined.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  dealing  with  us 
Jesus  suffers  in  this  way  infinitely  more  acutely  than  we  do,  in  proportion  to  His 
deeper  hatred  of  sin  and  deeper  love  of  holiness.  But  however  great  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  in  this  sense  may  have  been  and  still  are,  it  is  not  to  such  the  apostle 
here  refers.  He  is  thinking  not  of  what  Christ  may  still  endure  from  the  perversity 
and  faithlessness  of  men,  but  of  something  which  He  endured  once,  and  endures 
no  longer.  The  very  word  he  uses  leads  us  in  this  direction.  It  neither  suggests 
the  suffering  involved  in  the  doing  of  good,  nor  the  strain  which  a  loving  sympathy 
has  to  bear  in  sharing  the  sorrows  of  its  fellows.  Stripes  are  imposed  by  some  one 
else.  They  indicate  the  infliction  of  a  pain  which  is  not  the  direct  consequence  of 
our  own  action,  but  to  which  we  are  subjected  by  the  action  of  others.  Moreover, 
they  necessarily  suggest  the  idea  of  punishment.  They  are  a  chastisement,  and 
mark  the  man  who  receives  them  as  obnoxious  to  justice  and  dealt  with  accordingly. 
Now,  it  is  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ  so  understood  the  apostle  says  we  are  healed. 
They  were  stripes.  And  they  were  stripes,  not  for  His  own  sin,  because  He  had 
none,  but  for  ours.  "  He  was  made  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin."  "  By  His  stripes 
we  are  healed."  Yes,  by  His  stripes.  For  all  sin  is  due  to  our  separation  from 
God.  It  marks  the  ebb  of  life,  the  lowering  of  vital  force,  the  feverishness  that 
ensues  from  this  fatal  severance.  And  what  hinders  the  healing  of  the  breach  is 
just  the  fact  that  this  sin  is  the  violation  of  a  righteous  law  which  refuses  to  be  at 
peace  with  us  till  its  claims  are  satisfied.  And  these  claims  are  met  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ.  "  God  was  in  Him,  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself,  not  imputing  unto 
men  their  trespasses."  The  streams  of  life  have  begun  to  flow  into  its  wasted 
framework,  and  wherever  they  reach  the  I'avages  of  sin  are  checked.  Peace  comes 
in  place  of  restlessness,  content  for  dissatisfaction,  hope  for  despair,  and  the  spectre 
of  fear  is  banished.  Slowly  but  surely  the  love  of  goodness  is  developed.  And 
Christ's  healing  relieves  from  a  pain  and  apprehension  that  can  scarcely  be  uttered. 
It  triumphs  over  an  unworthiness  that  is  deeper  than  words.  It  brings  a  hope  and 
gladness  that  transfigures  life,  and  opens  a  fountain  of  new  inspiration.  What 
labour  is  then  too  great,  what  enterprise  too  forlorn,  when  His  grace  has  healed  us, 
and  bound  up  our  painful  wounds  ?  There  was  no  foe  which  could  not  be  con- 
quered, no  misery  which  could  not  be  relieved.  The  tide  had  turned.  The  watch- 
word was,  "Forward!" — " forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind."  Messengers  of 
peace  and  goodwill  hastened  abroad.  Eight  struggled  to  subordinate  the  power  of 
might,  and  has  never  given  up  the  fight.  Philanthropy  arose,  and  the  echo  of  her 
footsteps  was  heard  in  the  waste  and  desolate  places  of  the  earth.  And  what  is  our 
magnificent  array  of  modern  charities,  our  agencies  of  help  that  reach  out  a  hand 
of  succour  to  every  soul  depressed  below  the  general  level  of  comfort  or  advantage  ? 
What  are  the  labours  of  the  economist,  the  statesman,  the  physician,  as  they  push 
their  way  into  the  problems  before  them  with  a  sure  triumphant  conviction  of  ulti- 
mate victory,  but  the  fruits  of  that  great  healing  of  Christ  that  has  turned  darkness 
into  light,  and  the  dull  wretchedness  of  despair  into  bright  and  keen-eyed  hope? 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

*' By  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  Have  you  received  this  healing  of  Christ?  (C. 
Moinet,  31. A.)  Healed  by  Christ's  stripes  : — The  slaves  whom  the  apostle  was 
addressing  understood  full  well  the  meaning  of  "  stripes."  The  Greek  word  means 
the  weal  left  by  a  stripe.  From  the  grave  the  Saviour  came,  bearing  the  weals  of 
many  stripes,  wound-marks  in  hands  and  feet  and  side ;  but  those  bruises  and 
wounds  tell  a  story  which  makes  our  hearts  leap  with  joy.  When  the  Great 
Shepherd,  raised  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  met  His  timid 
followers  in  the  upper  room.  He  bade  them  behold  the  print  of  the  nails  and  the 
scar  in  His  side.  "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad."  And  as  we  consider  the  Lamb, 
"  as  it  had  been  slain,"  and  discern  those  precious  memorials  of  His  finished  work 
on  our  behalf,  we  too  may  break  forth  into  new  songs,  like  those  in  heaven.  Those 
stripes  are  the  price  of  our  redemption,  the  evidence  of  our  purchase,  the  sign- 
manual  of  pardon.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Salvation,  what  it  cost : — "Mamma," 
said  a  little  child  to  her  mother  when  she  was  being  put  to  bed  at  night — "mamma, 
what  makes  your  hand  so  scarred  and  twisted,  and  unlike  other  people's  hands?  " 
"  Well,"  said  the  mother,  "  my  child,  when  you  were  younger  than  you  are  now, 
years  ago,  one  night,  after  I  had  put  you  to  bed,  I  heard  a  cry,  a  shriek,  upstairs. 
I  came  up,  and  found  the  bed  was  on  fire,  and  you  were  on  fire ;  and  I  took  hold  of 
you,  and  I  tore  off  the  burning  garments,  and  while  I  was  tearing  them  off  and 
trying  to  get  you  away  I  burned  my  hand,  and  it  has  been  scarred  and  twisted  ever 
since,  and  hardly  looks  any  more  like  a  hand  ;  but  I  got  that,  my  child,  in  trying  to 
save  you."  I  wish  to-day  I  could  show  you  the  burned  hand  of  Christ — burned  in 
plucking  you  out  of  the  fire  ;  burned  in  snatching  you  away  from  the  flame.  Aye, 
also  the  burned  foot,  and  the  burned  brow,  and  the  burned  heart — burned  for  you. 
"  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmaye.)  Ye  were  as  sheep  going 
astray. — The  former  and  present  state  of  believers  contrasted  : — I.  Let  me,  then,  call 
upon  believers  in  Christ  seeiously  to  review  their  former  condition,  when  they, 
as  well  as  others,  were  as  sheep  going  astray.  The  fitness  of  this  similitude  to 
exhibit  the  natural  state  of  mankind  may  justly  be  inferred  from  the  frequent  use 
that  is  made  of  it  in  the  sacred  writings.  Thus  a  sheep  that  has  forsaken  the  good 
pasture  and  strayed  into  the  barren  wilderness  presents  to  us,  in  the  most  affecting 
light,  an  emblem  of  indigence,  perplexity,  and  disappointment.  Again,  this  figura- 
tive representation  denotes  a  state  of  danger  as  well  as  of  indigence  and  dissatisfac- 
tion. Few  animals  are  beset  with  more  enemies  than  sheep  ;  and  perhaps  none  are 
possessed  of  less  cunning  to  elude  or  of  less  courage  to  resist  them.  With  what 
awful  precision  doth  this  part  of  the  similitude  exhibit  to  us  the  state  of  uncon- 
verted sinners  !  Their  spiritual  enemies  are  both  numerous  and  mighty.  Once 
more  :  though  sheep  are  not  the  only  creatures  that  are  prone  to  wander,  yet  they 
of  all  others  discover  least  sagacity  in  finding  the  way  back  to  the  place  from  whence 
they  strayed  ;  so  that  in  them  we  likewise  behold  a  most  descriptive  emblem  of 
man's  helpless  state  by  nature,  and  of  his  utter  inability  by  any  efforts  of  his  own 
to  regain  his  primeval  happiness  and  glory.  But  still  there  remains  one  other 
ingredient  in  man's  apostasy  from  God  to  which  the  similitude,  comprehensive  as 
it  is,  cannot  be  extended ;  the  fatal  ingredient  I  mean  is  guilt.  A  sheep  gone  astray 
is  an  object  of  pity  rather  than  of  blame.  Man's  apostasy  was  the  effect  not  of 
weakness,  but  of  wilfulness  ;  the  guilt  that  lieth  upon  us  is  nothing  less  than  proud 
and  obstinate  rebellion — rebellion  blackened  with  the  vilest  ingratitude.     II.  "  Ye 

ARE    NOW    RETURNED    UNTO    THE     SHEPHERD    AND     BiSHOP     OF    VOUR    SOULS."       Yc    are 

returned  to  Him  who  came  from  heaven  to  earth  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was  lost  "  ;  who,  though  infinitely  offended  by  your  criminal  apostasy,  hath  Himself 
made  atonement  for  your  past  wanderings,  and  expiated  your  guilt  with  His  own 
precious  blood.  Ye  are  returned  to  Him  who  will  henceforth  watch  over  you  with 
peculiar  care,  and  guard  you  as  His  property  which  He  purchased  with  His  blood. 
Ye  are  returned  to  Him  who  hath  not  only  almighty  power  to  guard  you  against 
danger,  but  infinite  compassion  likewise  to  sympathise  with  you  in  all  your 
distresses,  and  to  comfort  you  in  all  your  sorrows.  III.  What  they  were  by  nature, 
and  what  they  are  by  grace  may  suffice  to  direct  us  to  that  temper  of  heart  with 
WHICH  WE  ought  to  APPROACH  THE  TABLE  OF  THE  LoHD.  And  it  is  obvious — 1.  That 
we  should  do  it  with  the  deepest  humility.  Are  we  sanctified  ?  once  we  were 
impure.  Are  we  found?  once  we  were  lost.  Are  we  made  alive?  lately  we  were 
dead ;  it  was  God  who  quickened  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.  Surely,  then,  pride 
was  not  made  for  man.  2.  We  should  perform  this  service  with  the  warmest 
emotions  of  gratitude  and  love,  giving  thanks  to  the  Fuiher  who  spared  not  His 
own  Son,  but  cleliveieJ  Ilim  to  be  a  sacrifice  and  sin-off'ering  for  us.     3.  Godly 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  PETER.  241 

sorrow  for  past  offences,  and  holy  purposes  to  offend  no  more,  should  likewise 
attend  us  to  the  table  of  the  Lord.   4.  These  purposes  must  ever  be  accompanied  with 
a  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  and  of  our  absolute  need  of  aid  from  above.     Even 
after  we  are  returned  to  the  Bishop  of  our  souls,  if  left  to  ourselves  we  should 
quickly  stumble  and  fall.    5.  This  diffidence  of  ourselves  ought  always  to  be  qualified 
with  a  steadfast  trust,  an  unsuspecting  confidence  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of 
our  great  Kedeemer.      {R.   Walker.)         Men  as  sheep  : — Amongst   all   the   varied 
tribes  of  nature  there  could  not  be  selected  a  more  perfect  type  of  a  life  liable  to 
wander.     The  passage  bird  is  never  lost.     High  over  the  waves  of  the  Atlantic  it 
strikes  a  right  path  to  its  home  a  thousand  leagues  away.     With  unerring  certainty 
the  creature  of  the  forest  finds  a  right  path  to  its  cave  ;  but  the  sheep  has  no  such 
sure  accuracy  of  self-direction  ;  it  is  in  its  nature  a  helpless  and  dependent  thing, 
and  but  for  its  shepherd  would  lose  its  path  to  the  final  shelter.     Just  as  helpless 
and  dependent  is  your  soul.     If  you  travel  in  the  right  path  it  is  not  because  you 
have  an  unerring  instinct,  or  an  unerring  reason,  or  an  unerring  sense  of  right, 
but   because   you   have   an   unerring   Leader.     (C  Stanford,    D.D.)        Are  now 
returned. — The  nerv  life : — The   Israelites  were  a  pastoral  people.     For  although 
in  the  time   of  the   apostle  the  pastoral  life  had  largely  given  way  to  the  agri- 
cultural, yet  all  their  history,  all  those  elements  which  excited  their  imagination 
and  rejoiced  their  patriotism,  were  of  the  pastoral  character.     It  went  into  their 
poetry,  and  the  agricultural  and  pastoral  figures  exceed  in  number,  and  certainly 
equal  in  exquisite  beauty,  any  others  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  whole  range  of  not 
only  the  Bible,  but  of  universal  literature.     This  is  eminently  seen  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, but  the  New  Testament  is  not  without  a  trace  of  such  a  feeling.     Here  we 
are  called  wanderers.     Men  that  are  converted  are  the  men  that  have  wandered 
away  from  the  right  ideals  of  life,  and  have  been  brought  back  again ;  they  wr-e 
wanderers.     We  are  represented  as  going  astray  from  right  dispositions,  and  from 
right  actions,  and  from  right  directions.     Our  aims,  our  conduct,  and  our  character 
are  malformed.     Eeligion  in  the  soul  is  what  the  right  use  of  the  organs  is  to  the 
body.     When  all  the  organs  of  a  man's  body  are  carried  on  according  to  the  laws  of 
nature  you  have  health.     So  when  a  man  has  gone  astray,  he  has  lost  nothing, 
except  the  right  use  of  himself.      He  has  not  lost  will-power;   he  has  not  lost 
intellectual  power.    And  when  a  man  is  recalled  from  wandering,  and  it  is  said  he 
is  born  again,  we  mean  that  from  his  wrong  use  of  himself  he  turns  toward  the 
right  use  of  himself.     He  is  brought  to  recognise  a  higher  standard  of  hving,  body, 
mind,  and  soul,  and  enters  upon  that  better  understanding.     Then  we  say  he  has 
been  recalled  by  his  shepherd  ;  he  has  returned.     Every  organ  of  the  body  is, 
according  to  the  design  of  God  in  nature,  good.     It  is  wrong  use  that  produces  evil. 
Every  faculty  of  the  human  mind  and  soul  is  right  and  needful  to  the  body  and 
soul,  to  social  relations  and  universal  truth.     But  the  wrong  use  of  right  things  is 
sinfulness.     It  may  be  in  a  single  act,  or  in  a  continuity  of  acts  until  they  become 
habit ;  then  it  is  character ;  and  character  is  nothing  but  an  automatic  practice  of 
wrong  uses  induced  by  individual  acts  of  sin.   Now,  on  the  other  hand,  when  a  man 
is  called  of  God,  here  is  the  one  grand  ideal:  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law." 
He  who  carries  his  whole  nature  obediently  to  the  grand  law  of  love  and  all  its 
interpretations  in  God's  Word,  that  man  has  been  restored  to  himself,  and  in  so  far 
to  his  God.     Conversion,  then,  is  the  beginning,  under  insphation's  teaching,  an 
example  of  the  reconstruction  of  a  man's  voluntary  life.     It  is  the  beginning  of 
rebuilding  character  and  conduct,  on  the  basis  of  love.     It  is  the  beginning.     It 
is  no  more  than  the  beginning.     The  Church  is  not,  then,  an  assembly  of  saints. 
It  is  a  school  with  all  manner  of  instruments  that  are  designed  to  help  men.  Merely 
being  in  the  Church  does  not  save  men.     It  is  an  assembly  of  men  beginning, 
mostly,  and  certainly  the  incoming  into  any  Church  is  of  men  that  have  been  lost, 
wandered,  gone  out  of  pasture,  gone  away,  and  they  are  called  back  again.     A  man 
coming  into  the  Christian  Church  is  coming  into  right  conditions  in  which  he  may 
learn  how  to  rectify  the  aberrations  of  his  conduct,  and,  so  far  as  his  nature  has 
been  positively  made  morbid,  rectify  his  nature.    A  man  has  found  out  that  the  way 
of  his  life,  the  way  of  selfishness,  of  pride  and  evil  passions  is  the  bad  way ;  it  is 
contrary  to  God  and  nature — the  best  nature — contrary  to  the  welfare  of  society,  of 
the  family,  and  of  the  individual.     He  is  so  convinced  of  it  that  in  covenant,  in  his 
secret  thought  with  God  he  says,  "  If  Thou  wilt  help  me,  I  will  from  this  hour 
undertake  to  re-educate  myself  into  the   Christ  spirit."     If   you   want  to   know 
whether  you  are  sinful  or  not,  just  take  any  of  these  great  characteristic  commands 
of  Jesus  Christ ;  take  any  point  of  example  in  Himself,  any  conduct,  anywhere,  and 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

try  it  on.  How  shall  a  man  know  whether  his  clothes  fit  or  not  ?  He  goes  into  a 
store  and  says  to  his  tailor,  "  Look  here,  how  do  I  know  what  size  I  want?  "  He 
looks  at  him  a  moment,  then  takes  a  boy's  coat  and  says,  "  Try  that  on,  if  you 
please."  He  gets  one  arm  half-way  down,  and  he  can't  find  any  armhole  on  the 
other  side.  "  Oh,  that  is  a  world  too  small  for  me.  I  can't  get  into  that."  Try 
moral  qualities  in  the  same  way.  You  have  one  text  that  leads  to  this  very  analogy 
or  figure,  "  Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  as  a  garment.  Put  it  on  your  con- 
science. Put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  an  element  of  love.  Put  on  the  saying 
and  helping  of  men,  instead  of  hating  men.  Try  on  each  one  of  these  Christian 
graces,  and  see  whether  they  fit  you,  or  whether  you  can  get  them  on.  A  person 
should  come  into  the  Church  of  Christ  joyfully,  yet  not  so  much  on  account  of 
attainment,  but  because  he  has  put  himself  now  in  the  way  of  attaining,  and  may 
hope  to  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
unto  the  end.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  return  of  the  flock  : — It  is  well  to  look  back 
sometimes.  I.  Estrangement.  "For  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray."  "All  we 
like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  There  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  the  expression 
"going  astray  "  which  very  fittingly  represents  the  condition  of  man  with  regard  to 
Divine  things.  It  implies — 1.  A  state  of  dissatisfaction.  Neither  men  nor  animals, 
as  a  rule,  leave  that  which  gives  them  satisfaction  and  enjoyment.  With  regard  to 
man  and  God  the  word  very  far  from  expresses  the  real  state.  Man  is  more  than 
dissatisfied.  He  abhors  the  necessities  which  the  Divine  fold  entails.  He  hates  the 
restraint,  the  associations,  the  duties.  2.  A  state  of  unrest.  It  is  a  constant 
wandering  ;  a  going  hither  and  thither  without  a  settled  purpose  ;  a  drifting  on  the 
sea  without  an  aim ;  going  whither  chance  or  the  whim  of  the  moment  may  lead. 
3.  A  state  of  danger.  II.  Eeconciliation.  "  But  are  now  returned."  There  is 
something  very  pleasant  in  the  word  "return."  It  speaks  of  old  associations 
renewed,  severed  connections  reunited.  It  means  something  so  different  to  a  new 
breaking  of  the  ground.  The  reunion  with  old  familiar  places,  persons,  or  things 
has  a  charm  which  has  in  itself  the  spirit  of  poetry  and  the  reality  of  prose.  The 
sheep  returning  to  the  fold  goes  back  to  the  familiar  ways,  familiar  surroundings, 
and  the  familiar  voice  of  the  shepherd.  And  so  the  soul  going  to  God  is  only 
returning  to  its  normal  condition.  Don't  let  us  forget  that  the  coming  to  the  fold 
of  Christ  is  a  return.  An  important  point  concerning  this  return  is  that  it  is  not 
natural.  It  is  not  easy  or  pleasant  to  retrace  our  steps,  to  acknowledge  our  foUy. 
III.  Safety.  "  Eeturn  to  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  souls."  Here  is  ample 
protection,  security,  and  supply.  (Homilist.)  The  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of 
your  souls. — The  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls  : — There  is  no  symbol  upon  which 
the  early  Church  seems  to  have  dwelt  with  more  delight  than  that  of  Christ  as  the 
Good  Shepherd,  bringing  home  to  the  fold  the  lost  sheep.  It  was  engraved  on 
gems ;  it  furnished  the  legends  of  seals ;  it  gives  to-day  an  almost  fabulous  value  to 
fragments  of  bi'oken  glass  ;  it  was  painted  upon  the  chalice  of  the  Holy  Communion, 
it  was  carved  upon  the  tomb  of  martyrs  in  the  catacombs.  In  the  text  there  is  pre- 
sented to  us  a  twofold  truth.     I.  The  first  is  the  aspect  of  infinite  love,  as 

KEVEALED  IN  THE  OFFICE  AND  FUNCTION  OF  A  SHEPHERD  ;  and  the  SCCOud  is  THE  WEAK- 
NESS AND  HELPLESSNESS  OF  HUMAN  SOULS,  as  rcvcalcd  in  the  figure  of  a  flock.  And 
these  are  expanded  by  the  additional  idea  of  our  Lord's  episcopate  as  the  Bishop  of 
souls,  and  the  imj)lied  necessity  of  a  fold  where  there  is  a  flock.  And  then,  as  the 
shadow  of  sin  must  ever  rest  upon  our  brightest  hope,  and  the  wail  of  penitence 
mingle  with  our  highest  song  of  praise,  there  is  the  reminder  of  the  fact,  that  from 
the  care  of  this  eternal  Shepherd,  and  the  safety  of  this  Divine  fold,  there  are  those 
who  are  going  astray.  What,  then,  does  this  word  teach  us  of  Christ's  care  for  His 
people  ?  Now,  the  vocation  of  a  shepherd  has  always  been  the  symbol  of  the  most 
tender  and  vigilant  watchfulness.  The  ruling  idea  of  the  shepherd's  vocation  was 
that  he  was  the  appointed  defender  of  his  flock,  and  their  safety  was  committed  to 
him.  When  the  lion  and  the  bear  came  upon  the  flock  which  the  youthful  David 
was  tending,  he  slew  them  both,  and  delivered  the  lamb,  even  at  the  peril  of  his 
own  life.  And  yet,  bold  as  the  shepherd  was  to  all  that  would  assail  his  flock,  to 
the  flock  itself  he  was  the  embodiment  of  tenderness  and  care.  His  authority  was 
the  power  of  love.  His  only  emblem  of  authority  was  the  pastoral  crook  ;  the  well- 
known  tones  of  his  voice  were  the  guiding  power  ;  and,  going  before  his  flock,  he  led 
them  through  green  pastures,  calling  them  all  by  their  names,  and  carrying  the 
lambs  in  his  bosom.  In  this  day  of  intenser  activities,  we  can  hardly  appreciate  all 
that  is  meant  by  such  a  metaphor.  But  these  are  the  hints  which  the  symbol  gives 
us,  of  the  tender  watch-care  of  the  great  Shepherd  of  souls  over  His  flock,  as  He 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  PETER.  243 

first  rescues  them  from  the  devil  going  about  as  a  roaring  Hon,  seeking  whom  he 
may  devour,  and  then  folds  them  safely  within  the  sacred  enclosure  of  His  Church, 
and  then  watches  over  them  in  every  pathway  of  their  daily  hfe.  The  symbol  of  a 
flock  suggests  the  complementary  truth,  and  teaches  us  the  lesson  of  trust  and 
reciprocal  duty.  For  it  defines  our  relation  to  Him,  and  the  obligations  involved  in 
that  relation.  Within  the  fold  of  Christ  we  are  not  compared  to  cattle,  to  be  driven 
by  force  or  fear  ;  we  are  not  as  swine,  to  wallow  in  the  mire  and  filth  of  sin  ;  but 
we  are  sheep,  to  foUow  a  Divine  Shepherd's  voice.  If  the  tenderness  and  love 
of  Christ  be  not  a  sufiicient  power  to  make  us  obedient.  He  will  use  no  force.  If 
the  constraining  power  of  the  Cross  fails  to  guide  our  wayward  feet,  then  we  will 
not  be  guided  by  Him  at  all.  And  the  severest  penalty  of  our  disobedience  will  be 
our  own  going  astray  ;  our  self-exclusion  from  the  fold  of  Christ ;  our  loss  of  His 
watchful  care,  and  our  exposure  to  the  power  of  the  adversary.  And  then,  as  if  to 
interpret  for  all  time  the  fulness  of  this  ofiice  of  our  Lord,  another  word  is  added, 
whose  meaning  was  destined  to  be  permanently  fresh  in  every  age.  The  pastoral 
life  of  Oriental  lands  might  lose  its  meaning  when  transplanted  to  other  lands  and 
centuries ;  but  the  office  and  function  of  a  bishop  is  preserved  for  ever  from  oblivion 
by  its  inherent  position  in  the  organisation  of  the  Church.  And  this  word  the 
apostle  places  side  by  side  with  the  other  word  of  local  significance,  that  both  might 
go  down  the  ages  together,  and  each  interpret  the  meaning  of  the  other.  And  so 
the  Good  Shepherd  is  also  the  Bishop  of  souls.  The  title,  in  its  comprehensive 
significance,  lifts  our  thoughts  to  that  Divine  episcopate  whose  cathedral  is  the 
temple  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens ;  whose  diocese  is  the  universe 
of  souls,  and  whose  affairs  are  administered  to-day  from  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  The  collective  pastorate  of  the  Church  on  earth,  acting  in  His 
name,  is  but  the  representative  of  the  infinite  care  and  ominiscient  watchfulness  of 
the  great  Shepherd  above.  (W.  A.  Snively,  D.D.)  The  Guardian  of  souls : — 
I.  That  men  have  souls.  First,  the  fact  is  the  most  demonstrable  fact  to  man. 
1.  All  the  evidence  that  we  have  both  for  the  existence  of  matter  and  mind  is  derived 
from  phenomena.  The  essence  of  both  is  hidden.  2.  The  essence  whose  phenomena 
come  most  powerfully  under  consciousness  is  most  demonstrated.  3.  The  phenomena 
of  mind  come  far  more  powerfully  under  consciousness  than  that  of  matter. 
Thought,  feeling,  volition,  we  are  conscious  of  these.  Secondly,  the  fact  is  the  most 
important  fact  to  man.  Consider  the  capacities,  relations,  influence,  deathlessness 
of  a  soul.  Thirdly,  the  fact  is  the  most  practically  disbelieved  fact  by  man.  Most 
men  profess  to  believe  it,  but  few  men  really  do  so.  II.  That  men's  souls  kequike 
a  guardian  ;  an  tiriaKowoQ,  an  overseer.  This  is  clear  from  three  things.  First, 
from  the  natural  fallibility  of  souls.  No  finite  intelligence,  however  holy  and 
exalted,  can  do  without  a  guardian.  Secondly,  from  the  fallen  condition  of  souls. 
They  "  have  gone  astray."  Look  at  the  mistakes  they  make  about  the  chief  good, 
worship,  &c.  Thirdly,  from  the  natural  instincts  of  souls.  Souls  through  all  ages 
have  been  crying  out  for  guardians.  III.  That  Cheist  is  the  one  guaedian  of 
HUMAN  souls.  He  is  the  Bishop.  What  should  be  the  qualification  of  him  who  can 
take  care  of  human  souls  ?  He  that  would  do  so  should  at  least  have  four  things. 
First,  immense  knowledge.  He  should  know  the  nature  of  souls,  the  moral  situation 
of  souls,  the  right  way  of  infiuencing  souls.  Secondly,  unbounded  love  and  forbear- 
ance. The  waywardness,  the  insults,  the  rebeUion  of  souls  would  soon  exhaust  any 
finite  amount  of  love  and  patience.  Thirdly,  ever  increasing  charms.  Souls  are  to 
be  drawn,  not  driven.  Fourthly,  inexhaustible  power.  Power  to  extricate  from 
present  difficulties,  to  guard  against  future,  and  to  lead  on  through  interminable 
ages.  Christ  has  all  these  qualifications,  and  more.  Let  Him,  then,  be  my  over- 
seer.    {Homilist.)         The  great  Shepherd  : — I.  The  individual  soul  has  a  Shepheed 

WHO  KNOWS  it  and  CAEES  FOE  IT.  II.  ThE  SINFUL  SOUL  HAS  A  ShEPHEED  WHO  SEEKS 
its  EESCUE  EVEN  BY  HiS  OWN  DEATH.  HI.  ThE  EESTOEED  SOUL  HAS  A  ShEPHEED  WHO 
IS    FILLED    WITH    DlVINE    SATISFACTION    AT   ITS   EECOVEEY.       IV.    ThE    LONELY    SOUL    HAS 

A  Shepheed  who  will  meet  all  the  necessities  of  its  natuee.  V.  The  loyal  soul 
HAS  A  Shepheed  who  will  peovide  foe  all  its  wants.  (Z7.  R.  Thomas.)  Wander- 
ing sheep  : — In  these  words  we  have  a  brief  and  yet  clear  representation  of  the 
wretchedness  of  natural  conditions  and  of  our  happiness  in  Christ.  It  imports 
indeed  the  loss  of  a  better  condition,  the  loss  of  the  safety  and  happiness  of  the  soul, 
of  that  good  which  is  proper  to  it,  as  the  suitable  good  of  the  brute  creature  here 
named  is  safe  amid  good  pasture.  That  we  may  know  there  is  no  one  exempt  in 
nature  from  the  guiltiness  and  misery  of  this  wandering,  the  prophet  is  express  as 
to  the  universality  of  it :  "AH  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."     Yea,  the  prophet 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

adds,  "  We  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  We  agree  in  this,  that  we  all 
wander,  though  we  differ  in  several  ways.  Truth  is  but  one ;  error  endless  and 
interminable.  Thy  tongue,  it  may  be,  wanders  not  in  the  common  path-road  of 
oaths  and  curses,  yet  it  wanders  in  secret  calumnies,  in  defaming  of  others,  or,  if 
thou  speak  them  not,  yet  thou  art  pleased  to  hear  them.  It  wanders  in  trifling  away 
the  precious  hours  of  irrecoverable  time,  with  vain  unprofitable  babblings  in  thy 
converse ;  or,  if  thou  art  much  alone,  or  in  company  much  silent,  yet  is  not  thy 
foolish  mind  still  hunting  vanity,  following  this  self-pleasing  design  or  the  other, 
and  seldom  and  very  slightly,  if  at  all,  conversant  with  God  and  the  things  of 
heaven,  which,  although  they  alone  have  the  truest  and  the  highest  pleasure  in 
them,  yet  to  thy  carnal  mind  are  tasteless  and  unsavoury  ?  Men  account  little  of 
the  wandering  of  their  hearts,  and  yet  truly  that  is  most  of  all  to  be  considered.  It 
is  the  heart  that  hath  forgotten  God,  and  is  roving  after  vanity  :  this  causes  aU  the 
errors  of  men's  woi'ds  and  actions.  A  wandering  heart  makes  wandering  eyes,  feet, 
and  tongue :  it  is  the  leading  wanderer  that  misleads  all  the  rest.  "  But  are  now 
returned."  Whatsoever  are  the  several  ways  of  our  straying,  all  our  wandering 
originates  in  the  aversion  of  the  heart  from  God,  whence  of  necessity  follows  a 
continual  unsettledness  and  disquiet.  The  mind  tumbles  from  one  sin  and  vanity 
to  another,  and  finds  no  rest ;  or  as  a  sick  person  tosses  from  one  part  of  his  bed  to 
another,  and  perhaps  changes  his  bed  in  hope  of  ease,  but  still  it  is  further  off,  thus 
is  the  soul  in  all  its  wanderings.  But  shift  and  change  as  it  will,  no  rest  shall  it 
find  until  it  come  to  this  returning.  But  is  not  that  God  in  whom  we  expect  rest 
incensed  against  us  for  our  wandering  ?  and  is  He  not,  being  offended,  a  consuming 
fire  ?  True ;  but  this  is  the  way  to  find  acceptance,  and  peace,  and  satisfying 
comforts  in  returning  :  come  first  to  this  Shepherd  of  souls,  Jesus  Christ,  and  by 
Him  come  unto  the  Father.  There  be  three  things  necessary  to  restore  us  to  our 
happiness,  whence  we  have  departed  in  our  wanderings.  1.  To  take  away  the 
guiltiness  of  those  former  wanderings.  2.  To  reduce  us  into  the  way  again.  3.  To 
keep  and  lead  us  in  it.     Now  all  these  are  performable  only  by  this  great  Shepherd. 

1.  He  did  satisfy  for  the  offence  of  our  wanderings,  and  so  remove  our  guiltiness. 

2.  He  brings  them  back  into  the  way  of  life — "  Ye  are  returned."  Bat  think  not  it 
is  by  their  own  knowledge  and  skill  that  they  discover  their  error  and  find  out  the 
right  path,  or  that  by  their  own  strength  they  return  into  it.  Men  may  have  con- 
fused thoughts  of  returning,  but  to  know  the  way  and  to  come,  unless  they  be 
sought  out,  they  are  unable.  This  is  David's  suit,  though  acquainted  with  the  fold, 
"  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  Lord,  seek  Thy  servant."  3.  He  keeps  and 
leads  us  on  in  that  way  into  which  He  hath  restored  us.  He  leaves  us  not  again  to 
try  our  own  skill,  whether  we  can  walk  to  heaven  alone,  being  set  into  the  path  of 
it,  but  He  still  conducts  us  in  it  by  His  own  hand,  and  that  is  the  cause  of  our 
persisting  in  it  and  attaining  the  blessed  end  of  it  (Psa.  xxiii.  3).  Are  we  led  in  the 
paths  of  righteousness  ?  Do  we  delight  ourselves  in  Him  and  in  His  ways  ?  Can 
we  discern  His  voice,  and  does  it  draw  our  hearts  so  that  we  follow  it  ?  "  The 
Shepherd  and  the  Bishop."  It  was  the  style  of  kings  to  be  called  shepherds,  and 
is  the  dignity  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  to  have  both  these  names.  But  this 
great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  is  peculiarly  worthy  of  these  names  as  supreme. 
{Ahp.  Leighton.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vers.  1-7.  Likewise,  ye  wives,  be  in  subjection. — Wifely  subjection  : — Here  is 
required  of  wives  subjection  towards  their  husbands ;  though  God  made  them  in 
many  things  equal,  yet  in  wisdom  He  thought  meet  to  make  some  little  inequality, 
and  appointed  the  husband  to  be  the  superior  and  head,  and  so  to  rule,  and  the  wife, 
to  be  subject  to  him ;  yet  not  so  but  that  he  hath  his  rules  to  bound  his  rule,  that  it 
exceed  not  (1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  13).  Neither  is  this  without  reason  ;  for  if  all 
were  equals  in  the  commonwealth  there  would  be  confusion ;  and  if  all  bells  were 
of  a  bigness,  and  all  the  strings  of  an  instrument  of  one  size,  there  would  be  a  harsh 
sound,  and  no  melody  :  so,  were  there  not  some  small  inequality  between  husbands 
and  wives,  there  could  not  but  be  contention.  It  is  God's  order  that  wives  be  sub- 
ject, as  it  is  His  order  the  sun  should  shine,  the  earth  bear  fruit,  the  heavens  cover 
us.     Accordingly,  God  hath  provided  to  make  man  the  stronger,  woman  the  weaker 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  245 

vessel,  that  he  might  be  the  fitter  to  rule,  and  she  (feeling  her  own  weakness)  the 
more  willing  to  be  ruled.  {John  Rogers.)  A  quarrelsome  ivife  : — There  were  times 
when  the  Eev.  Andrew  Fuller  could  be  exceedingly  severe.  He  was  once  spending 
a  few  days  in  a  family  where  the  husband  and  wife  were  not  very  happy  together, 
chiefly,  I  believe,  owing  to  her  tyrannical  spirit,  fostered  by  perverted  views  of  Divine 
truth,  making  her  by  no  means  remarkable  for  kindness  to  her  husband.  One 
evening,  having  heard  Mr.  Fuller  preach,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  school  to 
which  she  belonged  she  remarked:  "Ah,  sir,  we  are  poor  creatures  and  can  do 
nothing."  "  You  are  quite  mistaken,  madam,"  replied  Mr.  Fuller,  "  you  can  do  a 
great  deal."  "  Why,  what  can  I  do?  "  asked  the  lady,  somewhat  excited.  "  Why, 
madam,"  replied  he,  with  a  tone  and  manner  which  can  only  be  imagined  by  those 
who  knew  him,  "  you  can  quarrel  with  your  husband."  The  lady  said  no  more. 
(Baptist  Messenger.)  If  any  obey  not  .  .  .  they  also  may  ...  be  won. — Wives 

must  he  subject  even  unto  bad  liusbands  : — Not  only  must  wives  be  subject  that  have 
good  husbands,  but  even  they  which  hath  infidel  husbands,  unkind,  irreligious  ;  for 
they  are  their  husbands,  whom  they  have  chosen,  and  are  now  in  covenant  to  God 
withal,  and  which  God  hath  laid  out  for  them  as  a  blessing  or  cross.  If  any  shall 
say.  This  is  very  hard,  let  such  know,  that  Christians  must  do  difficult  things. 
Every  bungler  can  make  good  work  of  good,  straight  timber,  but  he  that  can  make 
good  work  of  that  which  is  crooked  and  knotty  is  worthy  commendation.  {John 
Rogers.)  Unconscious  influence  : — The  case  supposed  is  one  that  would  occur 

again  and  again  while  Christianity  was  making  its  way  among  the  pagan  nations. 
A  Christian  woman  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  win  over  her  pagan  husband  by 
direct  efforts ;  she  would  be  thrown  back  upon  the  silent  influence  of  her  chaste, 
holy,  unselfish  conduct  and  conversation ;  and  the  apostle  intimates  that  she  should 
expect  this  to  be  a  sanctified  energy  which  God  would  use  to  accomplish  the  desire 
of  her  heart.  A  fable  is  told  of  a  mountain-island  of  loadstone  that  stood  uj)  in 
mid-ocean,  and  attracted  on  every  side  the  ships  that  sailed  over  the  seas.  As  soon 
as  ever  they  came  within  the  line  of  its  influence  they  were  insensibly  seized,  gradu- 
ally at  first,  then  ever  more  swiftly  they  were  drawn,  until  at  last  they  dashed  to 
destruction  on  the  rocky  coast.  The  Christian  should  be  an  influence  for  Christ  on 
every  side  of  his  nature,  seizing  every  barque  that  sails  by  on  the  ocean  of  life ; 
seizing  it  by  the  power  of  Christian  character  and  Christian  consistency,  and  draw- 
ing it  into  the  harbour  of  God's  love  and  service.  I.  It  may  be  well  to  illustrate 
WHAT  IS  MEANT  BY  ouK  UNCONSCIOUS  INFLUENCE,  and  to  exhibit  its  importance  and 
value.  As  we  meet  together  in  society,  how  distinctly  tone  is  recognised  and  felt ! 
Beyond  the  influence  we  can  exert  on  each  other  by  our  actions,  there  is  the  power 
of  our  very  presence,  an  atmosphere  around  us  which  we  carry  with  us  wherever  we 
may  be.  You  can  be  a  growing  power,  more  decidedly  and  wholly  influencing 
others  for  good,  as  by  watchfulness  and  earnest  culture  you  grow  in  personal  religious 
worth.  II.  Consider  the  sphere  in  which  the  power  of  this  our  un'conscious 
INFLUENCE  WILL  BE  MOST  FELT.  It  will  be  felt  everywhere.  It  is  a  necessity  of  our 
being  that  we  should  exert  it.  It  belongs  to  us,  and  flows  forth  from  us  as  freely  as 
the  fragrance  of  the  violet  wherever  the  violet  is  found.  Yet  such  influence  is  most 
felt  at  home.  Much  ought  to  be  done  by  the  young  Christian's  direct  efforts  for  the 
happiness  and  salvation  of  the  household ;  but  the  very  freeness  of  life  in  the  home 
makes  such  labour  difficult,  and  often  there  are  circumstances  which  make  it  impos- 
sible to  speak  the  word.  So,  in  your  first  religious  sphere,  you  may  be  thrown  back 
upon  the  importance  of  the  influence  silently  exerted  by  your  character.  In  a  home 
some  will  be  dependent  on  you,  whatever  your  place  may  be ;  the  children,  younger 
children,  or  the  servants.  These  will  be  very  easily  affected  by  the  tone  and  spirit 
of  your  life  ;  and  they  will  be  very  keen  to  watch  for  the  spirit  they  know  is  in  har- 
mony with  the  professions  you  make.  In  another  way  those  on  whom  you  depend 
in  the  home  wiU  be  reached  by  you.  On  the  side  of  your  submissions  and  obediences 
you  wiU  win  power  over  them.  Holy,  loving  children  have  been  honoured  as  the 
means  of  winning  their  parents  for  Christ.  And  home  life  includes  a  circle  of  friend- 
ships ;  you  are  not  called  by  your  Christian  profession  to  separate  yourselves  from 
such  circles  ;  but  you  should  carry  into  such  society  a  fragrance  of  Christian  puritie;-; 
and  charities  that  may  ever  flow  out  to  bless  those  with  whom  you  meet.     III.  Ox 

WHAT    THE   EFFICIENCY   OF    THIS    INFLUENCE    WILL    DEPEND.       1.    It    wiU    depend    On  OUr 

cultivation  of  Christian  graces,  and  that  work  includes  the  repression  of  all  our  con- 
stitutional infirmities,  whether  of  temper  or  spirit,  and  the  mastery  of  all  habits  that 
are  relics  of  our  sinful  states.  2.  It  will  depend  on  the  consistency  of  our  Christian 
conduct.     3.  It  will  depend  on  constancy  in  religious  duties.      {R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

The  attractive  power  of  Christian  character : — We  adopt  the  oi:)inion  that  "  the 
Word  "  is  used  in  two  distinct  senses,  and  we  read  the  passage  thus  :  If  any  obey  not 
the  gospel,  they  also  may  without  preaching  be  won  by  the  character  and  conduct 
of  the  wives.  The  subject  before  us  is  this  :  The  gospel  reproduced  in  character  and 
conduct,  a  means  of  saving  sinners  from  the  error  of  their  ways.  In  discussing  this 
subject,  however,  let  me  guard  against  even  the  appearance  of  underrating  the 
written  and  the  preached  Word.  Without  "  the  Word,"  what  revolutions  would,  this 
void  create!  The  "Word"  withdrawn  from  Christendom  would  rend  the  finest 
pictures,  and  pull  down  the  most  splendid  buildings,  and  take  the  salt  from  the  best 
literature,  and  bury  in  oblivion  the  highest  science,  and  darken  the  brightest  homes, 
and  devastate  the  fairest  countries,  and  undermine  all  righteous  thrones,  and  send 
back  some  civilised  nations  to  barbarism,  and  bring  a  huge  shadow  of  death  over 
the  whole  world.  Without  "  the  Word  "  mankind  are  without  gospel,  without  light 
and  life.  I.  "  The  Wokd  "  received  produces  a  distinctive  chaeacteb  in  him  who 
ACCEPTS  it.  This  is  alike  its  object  and  tendency.  "  The  Word  "  reveals  the  one 
living  and  true  God — the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — as  the  redeeming  God,  and 
shows  that  God  is  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself.  Now,  the  man  who  receives 
"  the  Word "  is  translated  from  darkness  to  light,  he  is  transplanted  from  an 
ungenial  to  a  friendly  soil,  and  he  admits  to  his  nature  elements  which,  combining 
with  whatever  is  Divine  within  him,  will  produce  a  new  man  and  effect  a  new  crea- 
tion. II.  The  character  which  "  the  Word  "  produces  is  of  a  nature  to  attract 
AND  win.  The  character  begotten  by  "the  Word  "  is — 1.  Strong.  It  has  in  it  all 
the  constituents  of  complete  spiritual  power,  intelligence  touching  the  highest  sub- 
jects, faith  in  God,  hope  of  the  greatest  and  most  enduring  good,  love  of  the  purest 
and  most  fervent  flame,  immutable  and  everlasting  principles  of  action.  2.  The 
character  formed  by  "the  Word  "  is  also  genial.  There  is  in  it  the  attractiveness  of 
beauty  and  of  pleasantness,  as  well  as  of  power.  The  basis  of  that  which  is  genial 
in  the  Christian  character  is  love.  3.  This  strong  and  loving  character  is  also 
reasonable,  it  is  conformed  in  all  points  to  rational  principles.  It  has  within  it 
none  of  the  elements  which  constitute  the  fanatic  or  visionary.  Imagination  creates 
not  this  character,  but  faith  in  a  Divine  revelation ;  and  that  revelation  presents 
nothing  contrary  to  reason.     HI.  The  influence  of  this  gospel-foemed  character 

IS  FELT  most   where    ASSOCIATION    IS    MOST    FREQUENT  AND  CONTACT    MOST    CLOSE.       The 

text  points  to  a  home  as  the  sphere  of  Christian  influence,  but  it  also  directs  our 
attention  to  woman  as  influential  there,  and  it  leads  our  thoughts  to  the  presence  of 
unbelief  in  the  family.  This  suggests  two  things :  firstly,  that  there  is  often  evan- 
gelistic work  to  be  done  in  families  of  which  Christians  are  part ;  and  secondly,  that 
this  work  may  be  extensively  wrought  by  Christian  women.  Christian  men  and 
women,  whatever  your  hands  may  find  to  do  beyond,  neglect  not  the  home.  IV. 
Believers  of  the  Word  may  accomplish  the  end  of  preaching  by  being  doers  of 
THE  Word  in  the  face  of  unbelievers.  The  great  want  of  the  world  at  the  present 
time,  is  the  Christianity  of  the  New  Testament  translated  into  action.  The  demand 
for  Christians  is  more  urgent  than  the  demand  for  churches.  Men  would  see  works 
that  they  may  believe  our  words.  (S.  Martin.)  Won  by  behaviour  : — A  high-born, 
cultured  lady  was  converted  during  one  of  the  London  missions,  and  it  was  a 
genuine  conversion.  Immediately  she  separated  herself  from  the  world,  revolu- 
tionised her  household,  altered  her  gay  attire  ;  and  instead  of  the  theatre  or  concert 
or  ballroom  night  after  night  she  was  found  at  the  mission  service,  the  prayer-meet- 
ing, or  Bible  reading.  At  first  it  embittered  and  angered  her  worldly  husband,  but 
eventually  he  yielded  to  what  he  termed  "  a  new  caprice."  When  he  found  out 
that  his  beautiful  wife  was  really  in  earnest,  he  persecuted  her,  and  stung  her  with 
bitter  reproaches,  which,  unfortunately,  too  frequently  aroused  her  passionate 
temper,  or  occasioned  an  angry  retort.  One  day  God  used  her  husband's  bitter 
words  to  teach  her  a  great  lesson.  "  When  your  Christ  can  do  something  more  for 
you,  Isabel,"  he  said,  "  I  may  let  Him  try  to  do  something  for  me — not  before." 
"  Wherein  do  I  fail  most  ?  "  she  asked.  "  In  your  temper  and  tongue,  which  are 
sourer  than  when  I  first  knew  you."  "  Is  this  really  so  ?  "  she  asked  herself  when 
alone.  "  If  so,  0  God,  forgive  me"  was  the  sob  which  burst  from  her  lips.  "What! 
is  it  possible  that  my  hastiness  may  perhaps  be  keeping  my  husband  from  God  ? 
Away  with  it.  Lord  !  Give  me,  I  pray  Thee,  victory  over  all  sin."  God  answered 
her  prayer,  but  the  testing  time  had  yet  to  come.  When  her  husband  found  perse- 
cution no  longer  irritated  her,  he  let  jealousy  get  the  better  of  him — jealousy  of  the 
little  delicate  lad,  their  only  child,  who  monopolised  so  much  of  his  mother's  time, 
and  filled  a  large  place  in  her  loving  heart.     One  evening  when  Mr.  N returned 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  247 

home  irritable  and  morose — perhaps  the  worse  for  wine — she  was  singing  softly, 
"There's  a  beautiful  land  on  high,"  and  the  patient  little  sufferer  had  just  said, 

"  I'd  like  to  be  there,  mother,  if  I  could  take  you  with  me,"  when  Mr.  N entered 

the  nursery,  and  said,  irritably,  "Put  that  child  down,  Isabel;  Norton  has  come 
home  with  me  to  dine."  "  Our  little  laddie  is  worse,  Edgar,"  she  said.  "  May  I 
not  stay  with  him  ?  "  "  No,"  and  taking  him  roughly  from  her  knee  he  handed  the 
child  to  the  nurse.  "  AU  nonsense  about  his  being  worse."  But,  as  he  spoke,  a 
loud  moan  escaped  the  little  lad's  Ups.  His  father  had  caught  his  head  accidentally 
against  the  corner  of  the  table,  and  he  cried  out  to  go  back  to  his  mother  again. 
"  The  child  is  not  hurt  much,  Isabel ;  leave  him  at  once,  and  come  and  attend  to 

my  guest."     With  an  aching  heart,  Mrs.  N obeyed,  trembling  lest  the  blow 

might  prove  serious.  Before  dinner,  however,  was  over,  she  was  summoned  to  the 
nursery.  The  child  was  worse.  Both  the  doctor  and  physician  had  been  sent  for, 
and  they  shook  their  heads  at  his  condition.     In  the  midst  of  the  confusion  and 

excitement,  Mr.  N went  out  with  his  friend,  heedless  of  the  message  which  had 

been  sent  to  him  from  the  nursery.     He  did  not  return  until  long  after  midnight. 

But  about  midnight  his  little  child   died.     Isabel  N was  childless.      There 

she  knelt  alone  by  the  bedside  of  her  little  darling's  lifeless  form.  Would  it  be 
possible  to  describe  her  feehngs  or  to  understand  the  conflict  through  which 
she  was  passing?  The  Eefiner  was  looking  on — watching  intently  to  see  the 
effect  of  the  fire  through  which  He  was  causing  His  child  to  pass.  Would  it 
burn  up  the  dross?  Would  it  subdue  the  will?  A  few  minutes  later  her  hus- 
band's step  was  heard  in  the  hall,  and  Mrs.  N— — -  knew  the  butler  would  teU  his 
master  all  that  had  happened.  The  grief- stricken  woman  listened  for  him  to  come 
to  her  at  once,  but  she  heard  him  enter  the  hbrary  and  shut  the  door  ;  and,  in  the 
stillness  which  followed,  she  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  guidance  and  strength.  Pride 
said,  "  Let  him  come  to  you — he  has  wronged  both  you  and  the  child"  ;  but  love 
said,  "  Go  to  him — be  the  first  to  forgive."     Love  conquered,  thanks  be  to  God. 

Mr.  N was  sitting  by  the  table,  his  head  buried  in  his  hands,  when  he  heard 

the  library  door  open,  and  in  another  moment  felt  his  wife's  soft  warm  arms 
encircling  his  neck,  and  her  lips  pressed  to  his  heated  brow,  while  a  voice  of  gentle 
sweetness  said,  "  Jesus  has  taken  our  darling  to  be  with  Him,  Edgar  ;  but  I  will  love 
you  more,  dear."  No  stinging  reproaches — no  hard  hasty  words — not  even  a  tender 
rebuke.  The  man  could  hardly  beheve  he  heard  aright.  What  a  miracle  !  What 
wonderful  love  !  Yes,  and  the  love  broke  his  heart.  "  Come  upstairs  and  see  our 
boy,  Edgar."  Without  speaking  he  followed  her ;  and  while  the  two  knelt  alone  in 
that  stiU  room  and  her  tremulous  voice  pleaded  that  the  sorrow  might  be  sanctified, 
and  that  one  day  they  too  might  join  their  little  one  in  the  Better  Land,  the  proud, 
stubborn  man  yielded  his  heart  to  his  God.  When  he  arose  he  said,  calmly,  "  Isabel, 
Christ  has  done  so  much  for  you,  dear,  that  I  mean  to  ask  Him  to  do  as  much  for 
me.  There  is  something  in  Christianity  after  all."  {Mrs.  Walter  Searle.)  Chaste 
conversation  coupled  with  fear. — Christian  ivomanhood: — The  "  chaste  conversa- 
tion coupled  with  fear"  seems  to  signify  purity  in  an  atmosphere  of  fear,  the  tremu- 
lous grace  which  is  "  afraid  of  the  very  shadow  of  wrong."  The  "  beholding  "is  in 
the  original  a  remarkable  word.  It  seems  to  point  at  "  initiation  "  into  a  world  of 
goodness  before  unknown  to  the  husband.  The  selfish  rhetorician  Libanius,  who 
had  some  Christian  acquaintances,  is  said  to  have  exclaimed  :  "What  wives  those 
Christians  have !  "  A  missionary  to  China  has  heard  Christian  women  say  :  "  Until 
we  became  Christians  we  never  really  knew  that  we  were  women."  (Bp.  Wm. 
Alexander.)  The  Christian  ivoman  : — Let  our  thoughts  be  guided  by  this  twofold 

proposition : — 1.  For  the  unfolding  of  woman's  character,  and  the  balancing  of  her 
spirit,  Christianity  supplies  the  oiily  sufficient  impulse  and  guide.  2.  Christianity 
exhibits  no  more  perfect  illustration  or  achievement  than  in  the  completed  propor- 
tions of  her  spiritual  Ufe.  The  first  epoch  of  trial  in  woman's  life  begins  when  the 
period  of  education  ceases.  It  is  a  period  of  dependence,  in  the  first  place,  with 
most  women — dependence  on  parents — but  still  not  the  less  irksome  for  that,  if  the 
woman,  with  a  consciousness  of  strength,  sees  the  parent  worn  and  anxious  with 
excess  of  labour ;  or  if,  with  willingness  for  effort  which  her  position  or  social  pre- 
judice forbids,  she  sees  her  every  want  met  only  by  reluctant  and  grudged  supplies. 
It  is  a  period  of  uncertainty ;  for  it  looks  straight  out  upon  all  those  contingencies 
that  determine  her  future  lot — a  lot  for  which  she  is  not  so  much  to  lead  or  choose 
as  to  wait  and  weigh  the  perils  of  being  chosen,  or  to  learn  the  calm  fortitude  that 
conquers  neglect  with  dignity.  It  is  a  period  of  highly  wrought  sensibility.  The 
emotions  have  swelled,  from  the  babbling  brook  that  kept  its  quiet  way  within  the 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

banks  of  youth,  into  the  rushing  river  of  impetuous  passion.     It  is  a  period  of 
comparative  irresponsibleness ;  and  who  shall  say  that  irresponsibleness  is  a  blessing, 
when  we  know  so  well  how  occupation  dispels  morbid  introspections,  and  how  daily 
strain  upon  the  muscles  fortifies  timid  and  tremulous  nerves?     It  is  not  true,  I 
think,  of  any  other  condition  of  human  discipline,  more  than  this  one,  that  nothing 
short  of  a  personal  acquaintance  with  Christian  trust  can  satisfy  its  wants.     Two 
other  and  different  resources,  indeed,  the  young  woman  has  :  and  we  need  not 
wander  far  to  search  for  proofs  how  often  she  tries  their  value.     They  are  her 
womanly  pride,   and  the  excitements  of  society.     What  will  Christianity  do  ?     It 
concentrates  the  aimless  and  restless  purposes  rif  woman  on  the  one  grand  object  of 
a  personal  acceptance  with  God.     It  takes  off  the  load,  which  no  human  spirit  can 
bear  and  be  cheerful,  by  its  promise  of  forgiveness  for  what  is  lacking,  and  by  its 
encouraging  assurance  that  when  once  the  life  is  consecrated  to  God  no  single  act 
or  thought  of  good  can  fail  of  fruit  in  the  spiritual  harvests  of  eternity.     It  offers 
her  what  the  mind  of  youth  more  than  anything  else  craves — a  friendship  at  once 
unchangeable  and  trustworthy  as  the  heavens  ;  and  so  it  opens  the  gates  of  the  city 
of  God  straight  into  her  closet  of  prayer,  and,  when  the  world  looks  most  inhospit- 
able, shows  her  friendly  angels  ascending  with  her  supplications,  and  descending 
with  counsel  and  compassion,  between  her  Bethel  and  her  Father.     It  not  only 
quickens  her  to  a  new  fidelity  in  all  the  homely  ministrations  of  the  house  where 
she  lives,  towards  brothers  and  sisters,  parents  and  servants;  it  opens  to  her  the 
lowly  door  of  poverty  ;  it  draws  her,  by  cords  stronger  than  steel,  to  the  unclad 
orphan  and  the  bedside  of  sick  wretchedness ;  it  stimulates  her  invention,  it  ex- 
hausts her  economy,  it  plies  her  fingers,  it  inspires  her  intercessions  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  poor  children's  ignorance,  and  the  redemption  of  their  despair.     Another 
task  still  Christianity  solemnly  charges  upon  woman  in  her  youth.     It  bids  her  by 
every  separate  obligation  of  her  discipleship  be  true  to  immaculate  virtue  in  her 
intercourse  with  companions,  and  in  the  bestowment  of  her  favour.     Would  to  God 
that  some  angel  from  His  own  right  hand  would  reveal  to  her  the  power  she  con- 
trols for  the  redemption  of  those  horrible  vices  that  defile  and  intoxicate  the  land ! 
for  then  she  might  take  up  her  benignant  ministry  as  an  apostle  of  holiness,  per- 
suading the  tempted  by  her  unbending  principle,  as  well  as  bearing  her  own  profes- 
sion incorruptibly.     It  is  time  to  advance  to  a  later  stage  of  the  Christian  woman's 
experience.     If  her  moral  power  is  so  decisive  at  the  time  when  life  has  devolved 
upon  her  the  fewest  responsibilities,  and  neither  age  nor  station  has  vested  in  her 
any  adventitious  authority,  it  is  only  more  commanding  yet  when  she  has  taken  up 
the  complicated  relations  of  marriage,  and  assumed  the  spiritual  governance  of  that 
lesser  church,  that  sacred  seminary — the  family.    The  chief  enemies  to  her  Christian 
simplicity —  and  thus  to  the  symmetry  of  her  own  character,  as  well  as  the  integrity 
of  her  influence — are  social  ambition,  an  appetite  for  admiration,  the  passion  for 
indiscriminate  excitement,  and,  in  other  constitutions,  a  dull  servitude  to  the  routine 
of  mechanical  tasks.     1.  By  social  ambition  I  mean  the  vulgar  appetite  for  those 
external  distinctions  which   are  even  more   dangerous  to  woman   than   to   man, 
because  of  the  inherent  natural  aristocracy  of  her  nature.     A  wife  or  mother  who 
suffers  it  to  be  her  supreme  exertion  to  rise  in  the  public  consideration  has  already 
parted  with  that  artless  sincerity  which  is  the  chief  grace  of  her  womanhood.     2. 
Appetite  for  admiration.     Could  some  searching  census  register  the  number  of  those 
who  are  kept  aloof  from  the  love  of  God  by  this  foolish  vanity  alone,  should  we  dare 
to  look  into  the  swelling  catalogue  ?     Could  some  magic  reflection  be  added  to 
mirrors,  so  that,  while  they  show  back  the  adjustment  of  garments,  they  should  also 
reveal  the  emptiness  of  soul,  what  dismal  disclosures  would  startle  the  sleeping  con- 
science !     3.  Passion  for  indiscriminate  excitement.     What  hold  has  religion  taken 
of  that  mind  which  never  rests  in  its  insatiable  craving  for  some  public  spectacle — 
is  never  satisfied  except  when  it  is  preparing  for  some  scene  of  social  display,  or 
exulting  over  its  conquests  ?     There  is  no  noble  type  of  womanhood  that  does  not 
wear  serenity  upon  its  forehead.     4.  On  the  other  hand,  in  constitutions  of  an 
opposite  inclination,  female  life  is  apt  to  degenerate,  if  not  inspired  by  religion,  into 
a  tame  routine  of  narrow  domestic  cares,  dwarfing  the  spirit  to  its  own  contracted 
limitations.    The  very  nature  of  woman  requires  animation  for  its  health.    Religion, 
with  its  infinite  mysteries,  its  deep  and  stirring  experience,  its  boundless  duties, 
offers  that  needed  stimulus — offers  it  to  the  obscurest  and  the  lowliest.     The  Chris- 
tian wife  and  mother  is  a  Christian  in  the  spirit  by  which  she  orders  her  household 
and  nurtures  her  offspring.     Too  many  mothers  make  their  first  request  for  their 
sons  that  of  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children— that  they  may  sit  on  thrones  of 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  249 

wealth  and  power.  What  wonder  if  those  sons  are  worldlings,  are  hypocrites,  are 
criminals  ?  Too  many  train  up  their  daughters  with  no  loftier  aim  than  to  be 
beautiful  brides,  or  the  centres  of  meretricious  observation  at  summer  watering-places, 
or  to  value  a  husband  by  his  income,  or  not  to  be  over-nice  in  their  judgment  of 
men,  because  they  are  not  expected  to  be  virtuous  like  women.  Infamous  effrontery 
towards  God !  And  thus  I  have  come,  finally,  to  what  may  be  briefly  established — 
that  Christianity  exhibits  no  more  perfect  achievement  than  in  the  completed 
character  of  a  spiritual  womanhood  ;  for,  passing  on  one  stage  later  yet,  we  find  the 
united  result  of  a  life's  discipline  and  a  heavenly  faith  in  the  Christian  woman's  old 
age.  Providence  has  not  withheld  that  confirmation  of  the  power  and  beauty  of 
religion  from  our  eyes.  We  feel  new  confidence  and  truth,  new  love  for  goodness, 
new  zeal  for  duty,  new  trust  in  God,  new  gratitude  to  Christ,  when  we  look  on  her 
ripened  holiness  ;  and,  as  her  strength  faints  before  the  power  of  decay,  behold  the 
crown  of  immortality  descending  almost  visibly  upon  her  head  !  I  cannot  so  well 
finish  this  account  of  a  Christian  woman  as  by  repeating  the  following  touching, 
simple  memorial  of  his  wife  written  by  one  of  the  statesmen  of  England — Sir  James 
Mackintosh — in  a  private  letter  to  a  friend  :  "  She  was  a  woman,"  he  writes,  "  who, 
by  the  tender  management  of  my  weaknesses,  gradually  corrected  the  most  perni- 
cious of  them.  She  became  prudent  from  affection ;  and,  though  of  the  most 
generous  nature,  she  was  taught  frugality  and  economy  by  her  love  for  me.  During 
the  most  critical  period  of  my  life  she  preserved  order  in  my  affairs,  from  the  care 
of  which  she  reheved  me.  She  gently  reclaimed  me  from  dissipation,  she  propped 
my  weak  and  irresolute  nature,  she  urged  my  indolence  to  all  the  exertions  that 
have  been  useful  or  creditable  to  me,  and  she  was  perpetually  at  hand  to  admonish 
my  heedlessness  and  improvidence.  To  her  I  owe  whatever  I  am — to  her  whatever 
I  shall  be.  In  her  solicitude  for  my  interest,  she  never  for  a  moment  forgot  my 
character.  Her  feelings  were  warm  and  impetuous  ;  but  she  was  placable,  tender, 
and  constant.  Such  was  she  whom  I  have  lost ;  and  I  have  lost  her  when  a  know- 
ledge of  her  worth  had  refined  my  youthful  love  into  friendship,  before  age  had 
deprived  it  of  much  of  its  original  ardour.  I  seek  relief,  and  I  find  it  in  the  conso- 
latory opinion  that  a  benevolent  Wisdom  inflicts  the  chastisement  as  well  as 
bestows  the  enjoyment  of  human  life  ;  that  superintending  goodness  will  one  day 
enliven  the  darkness  which  surrounds  our  nature,  and  hangs  over  our  prospects ; 
that  this  dreary  and  wretched  life  is  not  the  whole  of  man ;  that  a  being  capable  of 
such  proficiency  in  science  and  virtue  is  not  like  the  beasts  that  perish  ;  that  there 
is  a  dwelling-place  prepared  for  the  spirits  of  the  just ;  that  the  ways  of  God  will  yet 
be  vindicated  to  man."  (Bp.  Huntington.)  Let  it  not  be  that  outward  adorning. — • 
The  influence  of  Christianity  on  dress  : — To  lay  down  rules  for  the  regulation  of 
dress,  applicable  to  all  circumstances,  all  ranks,  all  ages,  is  impossible.  To  fix  the 
cut  of  the  coat,  the  shape  of  the  bonnet,  were  a  hopeless  and,  indeed,  ridiculous 
task.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to  lay  down  certain  principles,  distinctly  asserted  in,  or 
clearly  deducible  from,  the  gospel.  I.  Chkistian  peinciples  forbid  all  dress  which 
IS  NOT  HONESTLY  PROCURED.  That  drcss  is  dishonestly  procured  for  which  you  know 
you  cannot  pay,  or  the  payment  of  which  is  effected  by  dishonourable  means,  by 
falsehood,  by  embezzlement,  or  fraud.  It  is  not  in  the  higher  circles  only  that 
temptations  to  obtain  dress  by  dishonest  methods  occur.  The  servant  maid  must 
ape  her  mistress  ;  but  the  wages  she  receives  are  not  equal  to  the  demands  of  her 
pride.  But  even  if  every  tradesman's  bill  is  punctually  paid,  still  you  are  guilty  of 
dishonesty  if  the  money  thus  expended  be  drawn  from  other  channels  in  which,  in 
justice  to  yourselves,  or  to  your  families,  it  ought  to  flow.  You  are  unjust  to  your- 
self if  you  starve  either  the  body  or  the  mind  to  decorate  the  person.  II.  Christian 
PRINCIPLES  FORBID  THAT  DRESS  WHICH  IS  IMMODEST.  The  author  of  my  tcxt,  in- 
another  Epistle,  charges  the  women  that  they  adorn  themselves  in  "  modest  apparel.'" 
"A  pnident  woman,"  says  Mr.  Jay,  "will  avoid  whatever  would  appear  light  and 
wanton.  The  apparel  of  a  woman  professing  godliness  should  not  be  the  attire  of 
a  woman  of  the  world,  much  less  the  attire  of  a  harlot.  Females  sometimes  wear  a. 
label  on  which  indecency  and  indelicacy  are  written,  and  then  appear  to  be  offended 
because  observers  can  read.  I  would  not  always  infer  too  much  from  these  outward 
hints ;  but,  in  the  name  of  a  blush,  on  what  principle  can  we  explain  the  invention 
and  adoption  of  certain  modes  ?  I  describe  nothing."  Intimately  connected  with 
modesty  in  dress  is  health ;  and  when  it  is  considered  how  many  thoughtless 
females  have  fallen  the  untimely  victims  of  disease  introduced  into  the  frame  by 
the  general  scantiness,  or  the  partial  distribution  of  their  attire,  I  am  persuaded  the 
allusion  wiU  not  be  deemed  improper.    III.  Christian  principles  forbid  that  cREsa 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

^VHICH  IS  UNBECOMING  YOUK  STATION.  It  is  obvious,  by  a  comparison  of  the  text  and 
parallel  passages  with  the  general  scope  of  Scripture,  that  costly  attire  is  not  for- 
bidden where  the  ability  of  the  person  is  fully  equal  to  its  purchase,  without  injury 
to  any  other  claims.  The  virtuous  woman  is  highly  commended  in  the  Proverbs, 
who,  through  her  industry,  clothed  all  her  household  in  scarlet,  and  herself  with  silk 
and  purple.  Moreover,  the  good  of  society  requires  persons  to  dress,  in  some  degree, 
according  to  their  rank  and  station.     But  it  is  excess  that  the  apostle  censures.     IV. 

ChEISTIAN  PRINCIPLES  FOBBID  THAT  DRESS  WHICH  REQUIRES  AN  UNDUE    CONSUMPTION    OF 

TIME.  I  will  not  recount  the  days  and  years  of  valuable  time  which  some  females 
spend  in  cutting,  adjusting,  adorning,  altering,  and  improving  the  articles  of  their 
dress,  till  the  world  of  novelties  is  ransacked  and  the  invention  at  a  stand :  I  will 
not  number  up  the  hours,  or  tell  the  years  the  aggregate  would  make,  devoted  to  the 
toilette,  with  peevishness  and  impatience,  till  every  ringlet  is  properly  adjusted, 
every  plait  suitably  apportioned,  and  every  gem  placed  to  the  best  advantage  at  the 
expense  of  religion  and  humanity,  and  to  the  ruin  of  both  body  and  soul !  V. 
Christian  principles  forbid  that  dress  which,  by  its  singularity  or  extravagance 
ATTRACTS  PECULIAR  ATTENTION.  The  desiiG  to  court  observation — the  ambition  to  be 
singular — the  hope  of  being  admired,  is  the  essence  of  pride,  and  in  this  vice  both 
the  extremes  of  finery  and  of  plainness  will  be  found  to  meet.  "  Keep  thy  foot  when 
thou  goest  into  the  house  of  God."  Surely,  look  well  to  thy  attire  is  included  in  this 
injunction.  YI.  That  dress  is  forbidden  by  Christian  principles  which  seriously 
OCCUPIES  AND  ABSORBS  THE  POWERS  OP  THE  MIND.  And  yct  how  many  females  are 
there  the  range  of  whose  information  is  bounded  by  these  limits — the  topics  of 
whose  discourse  are  derived  from  this  subject — -who  understand  no  science  but  that 
of  shapes  and  colours — are  acquainted  with  no  art  but  that  of  decoration  and  dis- 
play— and  are  conversant  in  no  history  but  that  of  modes  and  fashions.  It  yet 
lemains  that  I  should  produce  some  considerations  by  which  the  observance  of  them 
may  be  enforced.  VII.  These  principles  should  be  enforced — 1.  By  a  considera- 
tion of  the  sources  whence  your  dress  proceeds.  As  clothes  cannot  impart  moral 
•qualities  or  mental  endowments  to  the  wearer,  so  they  are  little  to  be  gloried  in  on 
another  account :  they  are  derived  from  the  lowest  sources,  and  composed  of  the 
meanest  materials.  Nay,  more  than  this,  is  not  the  dress  on  which  you  pride  your- 
self the  memorial  of  your  shame  ?  But  for  sin  it  had  never  encumbered  the  limbs, 
nor  occupied  for  a  moment's  space  the  care  of  the  unspotted  mind.  2.  By  a  com- 
parative view  of  its  intrinsic  worth.  In  a  time  of  universal  famine  how  many 
jewels  would  you  give  for  a  single  loaf  of  bread?  In  a  raging  fever  how  many 
diamonds  would  you  sacrifice  for  a  moment's  ease  ?  In  a  parched  desert  how  many 
embroidered  robes  would  you  exchange  for  a  cooling  draught  ?  Why,  then,  should 
such  enormous  sums  be  expended  in  glimmering  pebbles  and  sparkling  dust  ?  Com- 
pare them  with  your  books — your  Bibles — your  souls — all  neglected  for  their  sake  ! 
Arise  to  correcter  sentiments  and  nobler  aims.  Make  the  Bible  your  looking-glass, 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit  your  jewels,  the  temper  of  Jesus  your  attire.  3.  Consider 
the  estimation  in  which  dress  is  held  by  the  wise  and  good.  With  them  it 
always  occupies  its  proper  place,  which  is  an  inferior  one ;  and  wherever  it 
rises  to  excess  and  glare,  indicating  the  vanity  and  pride  of  its  possessor,  it 
excites  their  pity  and  contempt.  4.  The  estimation  in  which  you  will  hold 
dress  in  the  hour  of  death  and  in  an  eternal  world.  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.) 
Dress  : — St.  Peter  does  not  prohibit  absolutely  the  plaiting  of  the  hair,  the  wearing 
of  gold,  and  the  putting  on  of  apparel ;  but  he  desires  that  the  precedence  be  given 
to  higher  and  better  things.  I.  Let  us  not  hesitate  to  say  that  there  is  nothing 
IN  Christianity,  rightly  understood,  which  prohibits  a  woman  from  endeavour- 
ing to  dress  well  and  to  look  well.  There  is  no  religion  in  a  mean,  unattrac- 
tive garb.  Years  ago  there  lived  two  Greek  philosophers,  Diogenes  and  Plato. 
Plato,  who  was  a  man  of  wealth  and  taste,  had  handsome  carpets.  Diogenes 
preferred  hving  in  a  tub,  and  saying  disagreeable  things,  under  the  impression  that 
he  was  "faithful."  One  day  he  came,  in  an  ill  temper,  into  his  brother  philoso- 
pher's drawing-room  ;  and  stamping  on  the  carpets,  cried  out,  "  I  trample  on  the 
pride  of  Plato  !  "  "  Yes,"  said  Plato,  quietly, — "  and  with  greater  pride."  Is  there 
not  something  of  this  pride  in  "  unworldly  "  dressing?  Cannot  a  woman  show  her 
Christianity  without  making  herself  conspicuous  by  singularity  ?  But  we  will  take 
a  step  farther.  We  have  said  that  Christianity  does  not  prohibit  attention  to  dress. 
We  will  now  say  that  Christianity  requires  of  a  Christian  woman  to  make  the  best 
of  herself.  God  the  Creator  delights  in  beauty — beauty  of  form  and  hue  and  out- 
line and  arrangement;  and  surely  He  would  have  us,  His  creatures,  delight  ia 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  251 

beauty  also ;  and  surely  any  one  who  shows  a  marked  inattention  to  the  comeliness 
of  outward  things,  shows  himself,  so  far,  out  of  harmony  with  the  Divine  mind. 
II.  The  Chbistian  woman  will  always  subordinate  the  outward  to  the  inward. 
But  she  will  want  rules  to  guide  herself  by.  She  wiU  not  be  extravagant  in  the 
money  she  spends  upon  her  dress.  If  her  personal  appearance  be  a  talent,  so  also 
is  her  money :  and  both  have  to  be  considered.  Another  talent,  which  a  Christian 
woman  will  think  much  of,  is  her  time.  The  highest  praise  as  to  dress,  which  a 
right-minded  woman  would  desire,  would  be  to  have  it  said  of  her  by  the  passers-by, 
"  I  did  not  notice  her  dress ;  but  I  noticed  herself ;  and  she  seemed  an  unaffected, 
modest,  genuine  Christian  lady."  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  Female  adornment:— 
I.  The  capacity  of  woman  for  adornment.  1.  We  say  that  the  female  form  is 
adapted  for  adornment.  2.  We  say  that  the  female  nature  is  adapted  for 
adornment.  Can  kindness,  gentleness,  meekness  sit  with  so  good  a  grace  on 
a  man  as  on  a  woman?  Is  not  sweetness  of  temper  reflected  in  every  look, 
and  does  it  not  beautify  and  glorify  every  feature  ?  II.  The  directions  fob 
women's  adornment.     {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Female  adorning  : — Here,  in  the 

Word  of  life,  we  have  fallen  upon  a  text  that  deals  with  female  attire,  condemning 
one  style  of  adorning,  and  commending  another.  God  loves  beauty  of  every  kind, 
both  the  beauty  of  nature  and  the  beauty  of  holiness.  How  do  we  know  that  ? 
Because  everything  that  He  makes  is  beautiful.  The  works  of  nature  are  beautiful 
on  all  sides,  and  on  all  sides  alike  beautiful.  It  is  not  a  bright  exterior,  and  a 
rough  ungainly  interior  ;  it  is  not  a  poUshed  side  to  the  public  road,  and  a  slovenly 
rubble  wall  on  the  shaded  side.  Nor  is  the  most  elaborate  design  or  the  most 
exquisite  colour  reserved  for  the  most  enduring  objects.  The  snow  crystals,  and 
the  frosted  tracery  on  the  windows,  are  as  perfect  in  design  and  execution  as  the 
monarchs  of  the  forest  that  outlast  fifty  human  generations.  Man  is  the  chief  of 
God's  works,  and  enjoys  most  of  His  care.  He  was  made  most  beautiful,  but  has 
disfigured  himself  by  sin.  When  His  best  work  was  damaged,  the  Creator  did  not 
give  it  up,  and  give  it  over.  He  framed  a  plan  to  restore.  He  desires  to  have  His 
own  image  renewed.  A  man  of  feeble  intellect,  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  was  wont, 
like  most  of  his  class,  to  be  very  slovenly  in  his  appearance.  To  this  weakling  the 
gospel  of  Christ  came  in  power.  He  accepted  God's  covenant  love,  and  found  him- 
self a  child  of  the  family.  Soon  after  this  change  the  minister  met  him  on  a 
Sabbath  morning,  and  was  struck  with  his  unwonted  cleanness,  and  the  efforts  he 
had  made  in  his  own  fashion  to  ornament  his  person.  Accosting  him  kindly,  the 
minister  said,  "  You  are  braw  to-day,  Sandy."  "  He  was  braw  Himsel'  the  day," 
replied  Sandy  reverently ;  meaning  that  Jesus,  when  He  rose  from  the  grave  on  the 
first  day  of  the  week,  was  arrayed  in  the  Divine  glory  and  the  beauty  of  holiness. 
The  Lord  on  high,  who  rejoices  to  receive  the  little  ones,  would,  methinks,  be 
pleased  to  see  Sandy's  Sunday  clothes,  and  to  hear  Sandy's  simple  answer.  Peter 
in  this  text  undertakes  to  tell  how  the  uncomely  may  be  rendered  beautiful.  Here 
is  the  true  adorning;  and  it  is  for  us,  for  aU.  Still  deeper  goes  the  apostle's 
thought  when  he  arrives  at  the  details  of  the  recommended  ornaments.  "  Not  that 
outward  adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of 
apparel"; — what  then?  "Let  it  be  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart."  There  is  a 
whole  Christ  in  every  disciple  who  lives  up  to  his  privileges,  as  there  is  a  whole  sun 
in  the  cup  of  every  flower  that  opens  to  his  shining.  When  this  ornament  is  worn 
in  the  heart  within,  its  beauty  is  seen  on  the  outward  life.  In  general,  a  likeness  of 
Christ  is  in  the  life  of  a  Christian;  and,  in  particular,  "  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit." 
When,  in  the  processes  of  art,  a  new  and  beautiful  colour  is  about  to  be  transferred 
to  a  fabric,  the  hardest  portion  of  the  task  sometimes  is  to  discharge  the  dyes  that 
are  already  there.  A  terrible  process  of  scalding  must  be  applied  to  take  out  the  old 
ere  you  can  successfully  impart  the  new.  In  like  manner,  the  anger  and  pride  and 
selfishness  that  have  first  possession  present  the  greatest  obstacle  to  the  infusion  of 
a  meek  and  gentle  spirit  into  a  man.  If  there  be  a  royal,  there  is  certainly  no  easy, 
road  to  this  consummation.  It  is  a  striking,  bold,  and  original  conception,  to  pro- 
pose that  an  ornament  should  be  hidden  in  the  heart.  Ordinarily,  we  understand 
that  an  ornament,  from  its  very  nature,  must  be  worn  in  a  conspicuous  position. 
When  it  is  hidden,  how  useful  and  valuable  soever  it  may  be,  it  ceases  to  be  an 
adorning.  But  in  the  spiritual  sphere  the  law  is  reversed.  Meekness  is  spoiled 
when  it  is  set  up  for  show.  This  ornament,  moreover,  is  incorruptible.  This 
epithet  is  peculiarly  relevant.  With  the  exception  of  the  metals  and  minerals, 
ornaments  are,  for  the  most  part,  perishable  commodities.  Eain  soils  them ;  the 
sun  burns  their  beauty  out.    In  the  accidents  of  life  they  are  worn  or  torn,  or  stolen 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

or  lost.  The  rose  and  lily  that  bloom  on  the  cheek  are  not  perennial ;  the  wrinkles 
of  age  are  creeping  on  to  drive  them  off  and  take  their  place.  All  these  adornings 
are  corruptible.  This  text  recommends  one  that  wiU  never  fade.  Age  makes  it 
mellower,  but  not  less  sweet.  As  it  is  not  a  colour  of  the  decaying  body,  but  a 
grace  of  the  immortal  spirit,  it  will  pass  unharmed  through  the  dark  valley,  and 
bloom  in  greater  beauty  on  the  other  side.  It  wiU  make  the  ransomed  from  among 
men  very  comely  in  the  eyes  of  angels,  when  they  stand  together  round  the  throne, 
and  serve  their  common  Lord.  One  grand  concern  with  buyers  is  to  obtain 
garments  that  will  last — garments  whose  fabric  will  not  waste,  and  whose  colours 
will  not  fade.  Yet  another  quaUty  is  noticed  of  the  recommended  adorning — it  is 
costly.  In  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  the  godly,  it  is  "  of  great  price."  In  the 
market  of  the  world,  alas  !  we,  like  inexperienced  children,  are  often  cheated.  We 
pay  a  great  price  for  that  which  is  of  no  value.  We  are  often  caught  by  the  glitter, 
and  accept  a  base  metal  for  gold.  He  who  counts  this  ornament  precious  knows  its 
worth.  The  righteousness  of  the  saints  is  dear  to  God  in  a  double  sense.  It  is 
both  beloved  and  costly.  {W.  Arnot.)  Woman's  dress  : — Common  sense,  sustained 
by  Christian  principle,  wiU  ever  reveal  what  your  dress  ought  to  be.  The  coarse 
dress  is  not  necessarily  the  fulfilment  of  the  admonition  of  the  apostle  Peter.  A 
young  woman  is  not  to  affect  the  repulsive  robe  of  the  nun,  as  if  that  were  religion ; 
nor  to  dress  in  the  drab  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  as  if  that  were  humility ;  she  is 
to  dress  as  becomes  her  station,  and  her  rank,  and  her  position.  We  may  depend 
upon  it,  it  is  far  more  conducive  to  the  universal  welfare  that  the  highest  classes 
should  dress  as  becomes  them,  than  that  they  should  lay  it  all  aside,  and  dress  like 
the  Society  of  Friends.  What  would  become  of  aU  the  lace,  silks,  and  warehouses 
in  the  City  of  London,  and  in  Manchester,  and  Nottingham,  and  Glasgow,  and 
other  places ;  what  would  become  of  all  the  mills  that  are  employed ;  if  men  were 
to  try  to  form,  what  cannot  be  formed  in  character,  in  wealth,  or  in  industry — a 
universal  dead  level  ?  All  that  Peter  insists  upon,  and  all  that  we  require  is,  that 
the  young  woman  shall  dress  as  becomes  her  position  in  life  ;  good  taste,  which  is 
always  a  quiet,  never  a  gaudy  thing  ;  and  Christian  principle  regulating  her  in  this : 
and  that  the  aged  woman  shall  be  sober,  autumn  never  trying  to  deck  itself  in  the 
flowers  of  summer,  nor  cold  and  dreary  winter  putting  on  what  is  not  natural — all 
the  splendours  and  the  glories  of  June ;  and  young  and  old  recollecting  this 
beautiful  thought,  "Behold  the  lihes  of  the  field;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they 
spin ;  yet  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these."  (J.  Cumming.) 
The  hidden  man  of  the  heart. — Soul  clothing  : — To  clothe  the  foot  in  costly  apparel, 
and  the  upper  part  with  rags,  were  absurd  ;  so  to  bestow  cost  in  clothing  the  body, 
but  none  on  the  soul.  The  soul  is  immortal,  must  live  for  ever  ;  it  was  created 
according  to  God's  image,  and  now  the  soul  is  most  deformed  with  sin,  and  so  hath 
need  of  clothing,  especially  seeing  God,  who  is  of  pure  eyes,  cannot  behold  it  but 
with  detestation.  The  Church  is  all  glorious  within,  and  such  as  would  be  indeed 
members  of  Christ,  and  heirs  of  heaven,  must  look  for  inward  sanctity.  This  is 
the  most  costly  apparel  that  can  be,  of  God's  own  making,  and  which  none  but  His 
children  wear.  This  is  apparel  for  all  sexes,  ages,  degrees,  and  callings,  whatsoever, 
and  which  doth  well  become  and  fit  each  of  them.  This  is  never  out  of  season, 
never  out  of  fashion ;  it  fits  in  youth,  in  age,  in  life,  in  death,  and  is  to  be  worn  by 
night  as  well  as  by  day,  in  sickness  as  in  health,  yea,  is  then  in  great  account,  when 
other  apparel  is  laid  aside,  and  not  regarded  ;  yea,  this  apparel  we  carry  with  us 
out  of  this  world,  when  we  leave  our  gay  robes  behind  us  ;  and  this  apparel  lasts 
ever,  being  the  better  for  the  wearing.  (John  Rogers.)  Latent  goodness  and 
latent  evil: — If  we  translate  this  into  modern  language,  we  might  say,  "  The  latent 
good  and  evil  in  man."  The  heart  stands  for  the  source,  back  of  all  else,  from 
which  our  life  flows.  What  we  love  most,  that  we  are.  Wherever  our  deepest 
longing  goes,  there  we  are  going.  But  this  profound  tendency  of  the  soul  is  often  a 
hidden  tendency.  It  is  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart."  There  is  in  every  man  a 
great  deal  more  of  good  and  of  evil  than  we  see.  Inside  of  the  visible  man,  whose 
face  and  form  we  see,  there  is  an  invisible  man  of  veins  and  arteries,  and  another 
invisible  man  of  nerves,  and  a  third  invisible  man  of  bones  ;  and  from  the  co- 
operation of  these  proceed  the  actions  of  the  visible  man.  What  we  see  in  nature 
is  only  the  visible  outcome  of  what  we  do  not  see.  So,  in  the  processes  of  the 
human  soul,  what  we  know  proceeds  from  hidden  sources  which  we  do  not  know. 
What  do  I  mean  by  the  formation  of  Christian  character  ?  I  mean  that  a  man  may 
deliberately  choose  to  be  pure,  honest,  truthful,  generous,  religious,  and  that  he  can 
turn  this  choice  at  last  into  a  habit,  so  that  it  shall  be  natural  to  him  to  do  right, 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  PETER.  253 

rather  than  to  do  wrong.  What  he  did  at  first  by  an  effort,  and  with  difficulty,  he 
now  does  without  any  conscious  effort,  and  easily.  Now,  all  these  instincts,  whether 
original  or  acquired,  are  wholly  hidden  from  our  knowledge.  They  are  latent  until 
they  are  called  out  by  some  occasion ;  then  they  show  themselves  spontaneously. 
Some  are  near  the  surface,  and  appear  on  all  occasions  ;  others  are  deep  down,  and 
appear  only  on  special  occasions.  The  moral  cowardice  in  the  apostle  Peter,  which 
could  make  him  deny  his  Master,  was  latent,  and  Peter  could  not  believe  it  possible 
that  he  should  act  thus.  Circumstances  develop  latent  goodness  as  well  as  evil. 
You  are  living  among  neighbours  whom  you  do  not  know  very  well.  But  they  seem 
to  you  commonplace,  or  perhaps  worldly.  But  some  calamity  befalls  you.  This 
event  brings  out  the  goodness  which  was  lying  latent  in  your  neighbours'  hearts  ; 
latent  because  nothing  appealed  to  it.  How  kind  they  are  now !  how  self- 
sacrificing  !  But  the  sickness  of  your  child  was  not  the  cause  of  this  sympathy,  but 
merely  the  occasion  of  its  manifesting  itself  and  becoming  developed.  It  did  not 
make,  it  only  revealed,  these  kindly  thoughts  of  many  hearts.  Just  so  the  great 
calamities  and  dangers  of  a  nation  arouse  as  by  an  electric  touch  the  heroism  and 
self-sacrifice  that  there  may  be  in  the  people.  Cincinnatus  steps  from  behind  hia 
plough  ;  William  Tell  from  his  mountain  home ;  Washington  from  his  comforts ; 
to  serve  his  country  in  council  or  battle.  But  "  the  times  which  try  men's  souls  " 
do  not  make  Washingtons  and  Tells — they  only  test  them  and  call  out  their  latent 
virtue.  Woe  to  the  nation,  woe  to  the  man  who  is  not  equal  to  the  test  when  it 
comes !  If  the  test  does  not  cause  them  to  rise,  it  makes  them  fall.  How  many 
examples  there  are  to  prove  the  existence  of  this  latent  evil !  We  have  seen  a  young 
man  go  from  the  pure  home  of  his  childhood,  from  the  holy  influences  of  a  Christian 
community.  He  leaves  his  home  and  comes  to  the  city  to  engage  in  business.  He 
trusts  in  his  own  heart,  in  his  own  virtuous  habits.  But  there  is  latent  evil  in  his 
heart,  there  is  a  secret  selfishness,  a  hidden  and  undeveloped  sensualism,  which  is 
ready  to  break  out  under  the  influences  which  will  now  surround  him.  He  becomes 
a  lover  of  pleasure ;  he  acquires  a  taste  for  play,  wine  and  excitement.  In  a  year 
or  two,  how  far  has  he  gone  from  the  innocent  hopes  and  tastes  of  his  childhood ! 
The  latent  evil  that  was  in  him  has  come  out  under  the  test  of  these  new  circum- 
stances. Meantime,  another  young  man,  apparently  no  better  than  he,  has,  under 
the  same  circumstances,  developed  the  seeds  of  virtuous  and  holy  purposes,  and  has 
become  a  man  of  unshaken  integrity  and  virtue.  Why  this  difference  ?  You  can- 
not trace  it  to  education,  for  their  education  was  similar,  you  cannot  account  for  it 
by  the  influence  of  circumstances,  example  and  outward  temptations ;  for  these 
were  the  same  in  both  cases.  The  difference  was  in  the  latent  character  of  the  two 
boys.  One  in  the  depths  of  his  soul  was  then  a  sensualist ;  was  then  a  worldly  and 
selfish  boy.  The  other,  with  no  better  outward  habits,  had  in  reality  an  inward 
principle  of  goodness.  And  circumstances  merely  developed  the  latent  good  and 
evil  of  the  two.  The  fact  of  latent  goodness  is  as  true  and  important  as  that  of 
latent  evil.  If  our  inmost  purposes  are  right ;  if  we  have  kept  our  heart  with  all 
diligence  ;  if  we  have  habitually  trusted  our  souls  to  God,  then  we  have  a  stock  of 
latent  goodness,  ready  and  equal  for  any  occasion  which  may  come  to  call  for  it. 
We  need  not  fear,  then,  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  meet  any  emergencies.  An 
unsuspected  strength  will  then  manifest  itself,  a  courage  and  faith  for  which  we 
dared  not  hope  will  triumphantly  reveal  itself.  What,  then,  is  the  practical 
conclu>,ion  from  these  facts?  It  is  that  we  should  both  distrust  ourselves  and  trust 
ourselves  ;  that  we  should  pray.  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  yet  "  count  it  all 
joy  when  we  fall  into  temptation."  If  we  are  already  conscious  of  our  weakness, 
we  may  not  need  the  trial  which  is  sent  to  show  us  our  weakness.  But  if,  never- 
theless, God  sends  the  trial,  then  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  be  tried,  and  let 
us  count  it  all  joy  that  it  has  come.  If  it  brings  out  an  amount  of  latent  evil  of 
which  we  were  not  aware,  then  it  is  well  that  we  should  become  thus  acquainted 
with  our  own  depths  of  sinfulness.  The  disease  must  be  brought  out  before  it  can 
be  cured.  But  if  the.  temptation,  on  the  other  hand,  reveals  and  quickens  powers  of 
inward  virtue  and  resolution,  then  let  us  bless  God  for  this  latent  goodness  which 
He  shows  us.  {Jns.  Freeman  Clarke.)  The  hidden  man : — The  point  is,  that  one 
should  not  expend  the  whole  of  life  on  making  the  outside  beautiful,  but  that  one 
should  see  to  it  that  the  inside  is  adorned  also.  You  are  not  to  cheat  the  soul  of  all 
its  gems  and  virtues  for  the  sake  of  making  yourself  attractive  exteriorly  by  adorn- 
ments of  that  kind.  It  is  not  for  that  general  subject,  however,  that  I  have  selected 
the  passage,  but  for  this  phrase,  "  the  hidden  man."  You  will  have  been  struck  in 
reading,  how  much  this  dual  life  is  insisted  upon  in  the  New  Testament,  especially 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

how  much  use  the  apostle  Paul  makes  of  it.  There  are  two  elements  running  side 
by  side  in  his  philosophy ;  one  the  outward,  another  the  inward.  The  outward 
man  perishes  day  by  day,  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day,  says  the  apostle ; 
and  he  dwells  in  various  phrase  on  that  duality,  the  inward  life,  and  the  outward  or 
physical  life.  Everywhere  there  is  this  reciprocal  action,  the  world  on  the  mind, 
and  the  mind  on  the  world.  The  sense,  the  physical  body,  is  the  instrument  by 
which  the  world  acts  upon  our  hidden  man,  and  by  which  the  hidden  man  acts 
back  again  upon  the  world.  Through  the  exterior  world  the  soul  is  thus  the  reci- 
pient of  treasures.  The  soul  is  like  a  prince  who  receives  embassies  from  all  the 
provinces  round  about ;  presents  and  tribute  come  to  him  from  the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  earth.  The  air,  the  storms,  all  human  occupations,  all  governments, 
individual  men  and  combinations  of  men,  pleasures — all  bring  influence  to  this 
potentate,  the  hidden  man  of  the  soul.  Then,  in  turn,  the  soul  sends  forth  energy, 
speech,  will ;  and  as  the  tide  that  swells  and  fills  the  harbour,  then  reflows  and 
seeks  again  the  great  ocean,  so  the  flux  and  reflux  of  force  between  mind  and  the 
physical  world  is  a  greater  though  an  invisible  and  silent  tide.  The  laws  of  the 
physical  world  are  almost  sterile  until  they  are  touched  by  the  human  will.  Natural 
laws  could  give  us  metals  in  their  foaming,  bubbling  states,  but  they  never  made  a 
knife  or  a  sword.  Nature  made  trees,  but  never  made  a  house.  Nature  has  made 
germs,  man  has  made  the  harvest.  All  the  great  laws  that  make  summer  and 
winter  and  the  intermediate  seasons,  all  the  laws  that  are  called  natural,  all  the 
laws  that  spring  from  political  economy,  all  those  laws  which  are  said,  in  one 
respect,  to  be  natural  laws,  are  not  natural  laws  until  some  human  spirit  sits 
astride  upon  them  and  directs  them.  Now,  the  relative  proportion  between  this 
receiving  and  the  outgoing  power  determines  character.  It  is  the  critical  line  both 
as  respects  quantity  and  quality.  Those  who  live  by  their  senses,  controlled  by 
objects  to  be  seen  or  heard  or  felt  from  without,  live  animal  lives.  They  are 
savages.  Then  come  those  who,  receiving  much,  only  give  forth  the  energy  of  their 
passions — not  intellectual  energy,  not  moral,  not  assthetic.  They  give  forth  simply 
the  energy  of  selfishness,  of  pride,  of  vanity,  of  ambition,  of  avarice,  combativeness, 
or  destructiveness.  It  is  the  lower  tier  of  the  human,  and  the  upper  tier  of  the 
animal  that  is  affected  in  them,  and  that  gives  forth  some  voice  or  fruit.  Then 
come  those  who  give  action,  the  men  who  have  industries,  that  dig,  that  hew,  that 
build,  converting  impressions  and  the  result  of  knowledge  from  without  into  energies 
by  which  they  give  the  fruit  of  physical  combinations  and  constructions.  This 
includes  the  vast  mass  of  the  respectable  people  of  the  globe  to-day.  They  are 
constructors  and  workers.  Then  there  are  those  who  are  over  and  above  all  this 
activity,  for  the  upper  always  owns  the  lower.  He  who  gives  thoughts  can  also 
give  construction,  though  he  who  gives  only  construction  cannot  give  thought.  The 
upper  always  carries  within  it  the  privileges  and  the  fruit  of  the  inferior,  or  of  all 
that  is  below  it.  So  that  the  next  rank  are  those  who  give  forth  thought  and 
emotion,  that  have  it  in  their  power  to  thrill  their  time,  or  to  augment  it,  to  build  it 
up,  to  defend  it ;  men  who  live  in  the  higher  range  of  their  faculties,  and  give  the 
fruit  reaped  from  these  higher  fields,  higher  and  richer.  Then  come  those  who, 
over  and  above  all  activities,  in  physics  and  even  in  intellect,  have  a  reserved  life 
which  has  never  had  expression  except  through  hymns  and  psalms,  the  voice  of  the 
teacher  and  the  inspirations  of  the  poet — the  utterances  of  those  who  have  given  to 
knowledge  a  higher  character  and  a  winged  form.  They  are  sensitive,  open  to  the 
subtle  inspirations  that  move  in  the  higher  realms,  and  are  men  who  live  by  faith 
or  by  the  higher  forms  of  imagination,  not  by  sight  nor  by  the  physical  fruitfulness 
of  the  human  body.  In  regard  to  this  relative  activity  of  different  classes,  what 
they  receive  and  what  they  give  forth,  it  may  be  said  that  it  determines,  not  simply 
individual  rank  or  life,  but  it  determines  also  the  philosophy  or  the  character  of 
different  religions.  Take,  for  instance,  the  contrast  between  Judaism  and  Chris- 
tianity. Judaism  was  a  recipient  religion ;  Christianity  is  a  projecting  religion. 
The  Oriental  mind  generally  receives ;  the  Occidental  mind  gives  forth.  A  word  as 
to  the  relative  productiveness  of  these  two  elements.  The  productiveness  of  the 
mind  is  generally  in  increasing  ratio  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest ;  the  effective- 
ness of  its  outgo  is  generally  in  the  inverse  relation  or  ratio.  Man  can  more  easily 
turn  that  which  is  inspired  in  his  animal  range  and  nature  into  an  external  influ- 
ence and  substance,  than  he  can  that  which  belongs  to  his  highest  nature.  How 
much  of  thought  there  is  in  cultivated  men  1  How  much  of  thought  that  oes  forth 
in  language!  But  how  much  more  thought  that  never  rides  in  the  thariot  of 
language  1     How   much   men   think  day  by  day  that  is   only  thinking  1     In  my 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  255 

orchards  to-day  there  are,  I  think,  on  single  cherry-trees  more  than  a  million 
blossoms ;  and  probably  all  but  about  a  hundred  thousand  of  those  will  drop  with- 
out a  cherry  having  formed  under  them.  Men  are  like  such  trees.  They  breed 
thoughts  by  the  millions,  that  result  in  action  only  in  the  scores  and  the  hundreds. 
Waves  of  feeling  rise,  roll  through  the  mind,  and  leave  no  more  effect  behind  them 
than  the  waves  of  unknown  seas  that  have  rolled  solitary  for  centuries  by  day  and 
by  night.  How  much  there  is  of  purpose  that  is  blighted  and  barren !  How  much 
there  is  in  goodness,  how  much  in  sweetness,  how  much  in  love,  that  runs  the 
circuits  and  touches  all  the  shores  of  human  possibility,  but  never  comes  out  nor 
shows  itself  !  How  many  there  are  doomed  by  necessity,  like  fragrant  trees  in  the 
great  tropical  wildernesses — fragrant  for  ages,  but  neither  brute,  beast,  nor  man 
ever  smells  their  sweetness !  How  many  there  are  that  live  in  society  who  are 
capable  of  issuing  sweetness  that  should  be  of  influence,  and  that  should  make  a 
very  summer  round  about  them,  but  there  is  no  channel,  and  they  die  without 
opportunity  !  The  great  hidden  soul  had  no  tongue,  nor  possibility  of  using  it  if  it 
had  one.  This  hidden  man,  then,  may  be  called  in  respect  to  those  things  that  are 
the  highest  and  the  best  in  this  life,  the  silent  man ;  for  we  can  say  least  of  the 
things  most  worthy  to  be  expressed ;  and  this  great  silence  may  be  said  to  determine 
character  and  condition  very  largely.  They  that  know  how  to  repress  the  lower  and 
the  evil  that  is  generated  within,  are  on  the  platform  of  morality  ascending  towards 
spirituality  ;  and  those  that  ascend  to  the  highest  forms  can  express  but  little.  Yet 
they  have,  as  it  were,  a  palace  within  themselves,  out  of  which  in  days  of  trouble  or 
trial  come  forth  inexhaustible  stores  of  strength  and  of  consolation.  It  is  the  hidden 
man  which  is  at  once  the  glory  and  the  shame  of  mankind — the  rich  of  thought 
and  pure  of  purpose  whose  life  perhaps  can  bring  forth  but  little  outward  fruit,  but 
who  store  up  for  the  eternities  grand  knowledges,  impulses,  and  actions ;  and,  on 
the  other  side,  the  men  who  maintain  an  external  decorum,  but  are  full  of  all 
uncleanliness.  This  hidden  man  is  more  beautiful  than  any  of  you  think,  and  more 
horrible.  The  saint  dwells  in  many  a  bosom,  not  far  removed  from  the  very  angels 
of  the  throne  itself.  Devils  inhabit  the  heart  of  many  and  many  a  "  respectable  " 
man.  Oh  !  bring  out  your  silent  man,  make  him  speak,  unroll  what  is  written  in 
his  thought.  How  many  men  could  hold  up  their  faces  then  ?  And  how  many 
men  who  have  produced  nothing  for  the  market,  not  much  for  the  neighbourhood, 
little  for  the  uses  that  are  common  on  earth ;  that  have  neither  the  pen  of  the  ready 
writer,  nor  the  tongue  of  the  orator,  nor  the  wings  of  the  poet,  are  rich  unto  God  ! 
They  dwell  in  their  meditations,  and  their  imaginations  remain  untranslated  into 
human  language  or  into  human  conditions,  but  they  are  rich  towards  God.  This 
is  a  subject  that  is  full  of  practical  meaning  ;  we  ought  so  to  co-ordinate  the 
receiving  to  the  giving — the  income  to  the  outgo  that  we  shall  stren.'^then  and  make 
better  both  of  them.  So  ought  men  to  organise  their  lives  that  they  shiill  be 
fertile  without,  and  fruitful  and  rich  and  abundant  also  within.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  hidden  man : — I.  It  reminds  us  that  it  is  the  inward  life  that  makes  the 
MAN.  The  "  hidden  man"  is  not  what  first  meets  the  eye  that  constitutes  a  person's 
individuality.  It  is  what  his  will — led,  taught  yet  ignorant,  prejudiced  yet  biassed, 
free  yet  trammelled,  great  yet  little — determines.     II.  We  are  reminded  that  this 

INWARD  MAN  FAR  EXCEEDS  THAT  WHICH   IS   OUTWARD  AND   VISIBLE.       1.    It    CXCCCds    it    in 

value.  A  man  would  not  take  the  kingdom  for  his  body.  Youth  or  age,  beauty  or 
vileness,  do  not  alter  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  man.  Often  indeed  do  we  see  the 
noblest  spirits  inhabit  the  most  unseemly  bodies,  while  those  who  possess  outward 
beauty  are  infamous  in  their  lives.  As  to  the  stupendous  contrast,  in  value,  of  the 
soul  over  the  body,  it  is  impossible  to  define  any  just  description.  A  priceless  jewel 
wrapped  in  a  worthless  piece  of  paper  is  only  a  faint  representation  of  the  contrast 
which  exists  between  them.  2.  The  inner  man  again  is  the  responsible  part  of  our 
human  nature.  The  body  is  but  the  agent.  3.  Compare  again  for  one  moment  the 
elements  of  which  they  are  severally  composed.  The  outward,  visible  man  is  dust. 
The  soul  or  living  essence  is  the  breath  of  the  living  God.  Its  influence  at  once 
exalts  the  body  to  the  highest  step  of  material  creation.     III.  We  may  consider 

THAT  THIS  INWARD  LIFE  IS  AS  THE  TEXT  DESCRIBES  IT A   "  HIDDEN*'  LIFE.       No  human 

eyes  can  penetrate  the  veil  which  hides  it  from  view.  It  is  in  our  own  hearts  we 
live,  in  our  souls  we  exist,  and  in  our  own  hearts  we  must  die.  It  would  be  a 
mockery  to  bring  the  outside  world  into  our  inside  existence.  It  would  be  bad  for 
us,  and  bad  for  the  world,  if  we  did  not  live  in  a  hidden  world.  Thank  God  that 
even  our  sins  are  hid.     IV.  We  would  warn  you  that  this  hidden  life  is  no 

SECRET  from  GoD.       V.    ThAT  THIS  INNER   MAN   DESERVES   AND  DEMANDS   MORE   CAREI'UI* 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

CULTIVATION  THAN  IT  GENERALLY  RECEIVES.  Now,  in  Older  to  effectually  cultivate  the 
heart,  there  must  be — 1.  A  continuous  course  of  introspection.  2.  There  must  be 
self-communion.  3.  There  must  be  the  admission  of  Christ  as  a  guest.  It  is  in 
the  heart  that  Christ  must  dwell.  {Homilist.)  Religion  an  inward  principle  : — 
When  religion  is  styled  "the  hidden  man  of  the  heart"  this  language  cannot  imply 
that  it  is  totally  concealed  from  the  observation  of  the  world.  Effects  may  be  visible, 
while  the  principle  whence  they  proceed  is  removed  from  our  view.  A  beautiful 
river,  which  highly  adorns  the  country  through  which  it  flows,  wiU  not  fail  to 
engage  the  eyes  of  every  beholder.  Yet  the  source  of  it  may  not  be  the  object  of 
our  sight.  In  like  manner  the  fruits  of  pious  dispositions  can  be  witnessed  by  all. 
But  the  dispositions  themselves  fall  not  within  our  notice.  The  words  convey  this 
idea,  that  genuine  religion  consists  in  the  inward  temper.  From  this  view  of  it 
some  instructive  lessons  may  be  deduced.  1.  Eeligion  does  not  so  essentially  depend 
upon  any  particular  mode  of  faith  or  worship  as  some  may  suppose.  2.  This 
subject  teaches  us  that  it  is  highly  unbecoming  and  presumptuous  in  men  to  decide 
with  rashness  on  the  religious  character  and  state  of  their  neighbours.  Fallible  as 
we  are  we  cannot  read  the  motives  of  individuals  ;  and  much  goodness  may  exist, 
which,  from  various  causes,  has  few  or  no  opportunities  of  being  witnessed  by  the 
eye  of  man.  3.  If  religion  be  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart "  it  cannot  exist,  and 
still  less  can  it  flourish  without  the  agency  of  God  accompanying  our  diligence, 
watchfulness,  and  self-denial.  4.  Beligion,  being  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart," 
cannot  easily  be  in  danger  from  causes  altogether  external ;  nor  is  it  amenable  to 
human  laws,  nor  dependent  on  human  patronage.  5.  Since  religion  is  a  principle, 
the  inseparable  alliance  between  the  possession  of  its  spirit  and  our  happiness,  both 
present  and  future,  is  placed  in  a  new  and  striking  light.  The  happiness  of  man 
cannot  be  independent  on  the  mind.  The  purest  happiness  of  the  mind  wiU  be  the 
happiness  of  heaven,  and  the  degree  of  it  will  be  greatest  in  the  cases  of  those  whose 
religion  is  most  eminently  "the  hidden  man  of  the  heart."  (J.  Kentish.)  The 
best  clothing  : — It  is  Tertullian's  counsel  to  young  women  :  "  Clothe  yourselves  with 
the  silk  of  piety,  with  the  satin  of  sanctity,  with  the  purple  of  modesty ;  so  shall 
you  have  God  Himself  to  be  your  suitor."  (J.  Trapp.)  Meehness  : — A  garment 
that  will  never  be  the  worse  for  wearing,  but  the  better.  (Ibid.)  Beauty  beneath 
ugliness  : — A  woman,  famous  as  one  of  the  most  kindly  among  leaders  of  the  best 
American  society,  once  said  :  "  If  I  have  been  able  to  accomplish  anything  in  life  it 
is  due  to  the  words  spoken  to  me  in  the  right  season  when  I  was  a  child  by  an  old 
teacher.  I  was  the  only  homely,  awkward  girl  in  a  class  of  exceptionally  pretty 
ones,  and  being  also  duU  at  my  books,  became  the  butt  of  the  school.  I  fell  into  a 
morose,  despairing  state,  gave  up  study,  withdrew  into  myself,  and  grew  daily  more 
bitter  and  vindictive.  One  day  the  French  teacher,  a  grey-haired  old  woman,  with 
keen  eyes  and  a  kind  smile,  found  me  crying.  '  Qu'  as-tu,  ma  fille  ? '  she  asked. 
'  Oh,  madame,  I  am  so  ugly ! '  I  sobbed  out.  She  soothed  me,  but  did  not  contradict 
me.  Presently,  she  took  me  to  her  room,  and  after  amusing  me  for  some  time,  said, 
*  I  have  a  present  for  you,'  handing  me  a  scaly,  coarse  lump,  covered  with  earth. 
'  It  is  round  and  brown  as  you.  "  Ugly,"  did  you  say  ?  Very  well,  we  will  call  it 
by  your  name,  then.  It  is  you !  Now,  you  shall  plant  it,  and  water  it,  and  give  it 
sun  for  a  week  or  two.'  I  planted  it  and  watched  it  carefully ;  the  green  leaves 
came  first,  and  at  last  the  golden  Japanese  lily,  the  first  I  had  ever  seen.  Madame 
came  to  share  my  delight.  '  Ah,'  she  said,  significantly,  '  who  would  believe  so 
much  beauty  and  fragrance  were  shut  up  in  that  little,  rough,  ugly  thing  ?  But  it 
took  heart  and  came  into  the  sun.'  It  was  the  first  time  that  it  ever  occurred  to 
me  that,  in  spite  of  my  ugly  face,  I,  too,  might  be  able  to  win  friends,  and  to  make 
myself  beloved  in  the  world."  (Great  Thoughts.)  The  hidden  man: — "Why  do 
you  not  wear  richer  apparel?"  once  asked  a  familiar  friend  of  Edward  I.  "Because," 
said  the  sensible  king,  "I  cannot  be  more  estimable  in  fine  than  I  am  in  simple 
clothing."  Exterior  adornment  insufficient : — Those  who  adorn  only  the  exterior, 
but  neglect  the  inner  man,  are  like  the  Egyptian  temples,  which  present  every  kind 
of  decoration  upon  the  outside,  but  contain  within,  in  place  of  a  deity,  a  cat,  a 
crocodile,  or  some  other  vile  animal.  (Clement  of  Alexandria.)  Inner  attractive- 
ness the  most  desirable : — Plain  women,  far  from  underrating  beauty,  are  apt  to 
place  too  high  a  value  upon  it.  Their  own  lack  of  comeliness  is  their  life-long 
sorrow.  They  do  not  realise  that  the  women  who  are  most  ardently  and  lastingly 
loved  by  men  are  seldom  very  beautiful.  Prettiness  wins  admiration ;  something 
much  deeper  and  more  subtle  inspires  and  retains  affection.  No  woman  need  be 
u^]j.    If  there  is  a  soul  in  her  body  it  has  but  to  begin  betimes  to  show  through. 


CHAP.  HI.]  I.  PETER.  257 

From  her  earliest  girlhood  the  thought  she  thinks,  the  feelings  to  which  she  gives 
way,  the  tones  she  utters,  the  wishes  she  indulges,  are  sculpturing  Hnes  in  her  face 
that  are  capable  of  making  a  beauty  all  her  own — lines  whose  writing  will  remain 
when  bloom  fades  and  sparkle  falls.  It  is  in  the  beginning  of  manhood  and  in  the 
beginning  of  old  age  that  a  man  is  captivated  simplj^  by  a  pretty  woman,  and  is  in 
breathless  haste  to  make  her  charms  his  own  possession.  The  maturer  man  is  far 
less  subject  to  a  mistaken  infatuation.  He  looks  for  something  less  ephemeral  than 
a  glowing  cheek  and  melting  eye.  "  As  a  rule  I  prefer  plain  women  to  pretty  ones," 
said  one  of  these  discriminating  persons.  "  They  are  less  self-conscious  and  have 
more  regard  for  the  rights  of  others.  When  my  wife  sends  me  shopping,  as  some- 
times happens,  I  always  select  a  plain  girl  to  serve  me.  You  see  she  knows  her 
lack  of  personal  attractions,  and  that  she  has  nothing  to  depend  on  but  the  excel- 
lency of  her  services.  Therefore  she  takes  infinite  pains  with  her  customers.  She 
pays  strict  attention  to  her  business.  There  is  nothing  surer  in  the  world  than  if 
you  go  into  a  store  and  select  a  plain  girl  to  wait  on  you  you  will  be  well  served. 
The  pretty  girl,  on  the  other  hand,  knows  that  she  is  pretty.  It  is  usually  very 
apparent  that  she  knows  it.  She  trades  upon  her  prettiness.  She  uses  the  time 
and  thought  she  ought  to  devote  to  serving  you  in  trying  to  make  you  understand 
and  appreciate  that  she  is  pretty.  And  this  principle  underlies  beauty's  conduct  in 
other  walks  of  life.  I  admire  lovely  women — most  men  do — but  unless  they  possess 
more  solid  attractions  than  charms  of  person  they  are  soon  outrivalled  by  their 
plain  and  tasteful  sisters."  {Daily  Paper.)  A  reminder  of  heaven  : — "  To  look 
upon  her  face,"  says  Walworth  of  his  mother,  "  was  to  feel  heaven  near.  It  was 
within  her."  A  meek  and  quiet  spirit. — Quietude  : — I.  Some  chaeacteristics  op 
THE  GKACE.  1.  Its  leading  characteristic  is  the  beautiful.  Not  so  much  "  the  true," 
"  the  good,"  is  in  his  mind  as  "  the  beautiful."  First-rate  Christian  excellence 
assumes  lovely  forms.  "  Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God."  2.  The  grace  is 
distinctively  feminine.  The  apostle  is  speaking  to  women,  commending  to  them 
their  distinctive  glory.  Here  we  come  on  a  mystery  of  nature.  All  things  are  set 
over  against  each  other  in  pairs,  complemental.  3.  But  may,  ought,  to  be  assumed 
by  all.  There  is  a  modification  of  the  principle  just  laid  down  as  to  complemental 
beings  and  to  complemental  excellences.  The  one  side  may  and  must  appropriate 
some  characteristics  of  the  other,  e.g.,  a  pillar  all  strength  would  be  ugly ;  all 
garlands  of  flowers  must  fall.  So  a  man  all  power  would  be  dreadful ;  a  woman  all 
amiability  could  not  carry  the  structure  of  life.  4.  It  is  a  grace  of  the  interior  life. 
"  A  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  II.  The  grace  itself.  The  grace  commended  is  that 
of  quietness  of  soul ;  but  on  its  two  sides,  not  disturbing,  not  disturbed.  1.  The 
soul-quietness  that  is  not  disturbed.  The  soul  is  like  a  ship  on  storm-beaten  ocean 
— ever  liable  to  tempest.  (1)  Causes  and  occasions  of  disturbance.  It  may  spring 
from  conditions  of  body,  mind,  estate,  in  the  church,  in  the  world.  (2)  Means  of 
quietude.  Quietude  a  decoration,  but  also  a  need.  How  ?  (a)  Some  hints,  along 
the  common  level  of  things,  (i)  Live  so  as  to  have  a  cool  brain  and  a  clear  mind, 
(ii)  Guard  against  one's  special  temperament,  (iii)  Face  facts,  and  be  not  content 
without  evidence,  (iv)  Guard  against  demoniac  might  of  the  imagination,  (v)  Do 
not  morbidly  underrate  the  kindness  of  fellow-men,  or  overrate  their  antagonism. 
{b)  But  rise  higher.  We  need— (i)  Strong  and  growing  dependence  on  God.  (ii)  To 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit,  i.e.,  to  be  filled  with  such  thoughts  and  feelings,  that 
storm  shall  break  in  regions  below  the  serenities  in  which  we  dwell,  (iii)  Keep  ever 
in  view  the  quietude  of  Christ.  "  See  if  there  be  any  sorrow,"  &c.,  if  there  be  any 
patience  like  to  His.  2.  The  soul-quietness  that  is  not  disturbing.  It  is  the  restless 
that  disturb  the  peace  of  others.  Ourselves  quiet,  we  shall  not  fill  others  with  wild 
alarm.  III.  Other  characteristics  of  the  grace.  Some  characteristics  were 
mentioned  to  prepare  us  to  look  upon  the  grace  itself  ;  these  now  are  separately  and 
fiinally  pointed  out  to  induce  in  us  the  cultivation  of  this  grace  also.  1.  The  soul- 
decoration  is  most  valuable.  One  knows  its  worth.  "In  the  sight  of  God"  it  is 
*'  of  great  price."  2.  Imperishable.  {Henry  T.  Robjohns,  B.A^  0/  meekness 
<ind  qvietness  of  spirit : — I.  What  is  implied  in  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  1.  A 
calm  submission  under  the  merely  natural  evils  and  calamities  which  we  meet  with 
in  the  world.  2.  A  moderation  of  our  anger  and  resentment  upon  occasion  of  moral 
■wrongs  or  injuries.  3.  A  sincere  desire  of  the  harmony  and  happiness  of  society, 
and  a  disposition  to  cultivate  peace  and  friendship  with  all  about  us.  II.  Why  we 
SHOULD  acquire  AND  CULTIVATE  THIS  TEMPER.  1.  The  intrinsic  dignity  and  value  of 
a  meek  and  quiet  temper,  which  is  of  great  price  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  The 
importance  of  a  meek  and  peaceable  spirit  in  religion,  and  its  necessity  for  our 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

obtaining  the  mercy  and  forgiveness  of  God.  3.  Another  argument  may  be  brought 
from  the  great  examples  of  God's  clemency  and  patience,  and  our  Saviour's  meek, 
gentle,  and  peaceable  behaviour  while  He  was  in  this  world.  4.  We  should  cultivate 
a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  from  a  regard  to  the  peace  of  mankind  and  the  happiness  of 
the  particular  persons  with  whom  we  have  any  intercourse.  5.  We  should  cultivate 
a  meek  and  peaceable  spirit  for  our  own  interest  and  satisfaction.  There  is  hardly 
anything  that  can  be  more  prejudicial  to  a  man  than  a  wrathful  and  turbulent 
temper.  III.  The  methods  of  forming  and  eaising  a  spirit  of  meekness  and 
QUIETNESS  IN  US.  1.  For  attaining  to  that  part  of  it,  which  consists  in  a  patient 
submission  to  the  purely  natural  evils  which  befall  us  in  the  world,  the  great 
rule  is  to  impress  our  minds  v/ith  a  deep  conviction  of  the  wisdom,  equity,  and 
goodness  of  Providence,  by  the  direction  or  permission  of  which  all  such  evils 
come  upon  us.  2.  As  the  most  difficult  part  of  meekness  and  quietness  of 
spirit  consists  in  the  due  government  of  our  resentment  with  respect  to  the 
authors  of  moral  injuries,  we  must  take  care  to  represent  such  persons  in  the 
most  favourable  light  that  we  justly  can  to  ourselves.  3.  When  we  feel  our  angry 
passions  beginning  to  move  in  us  let  us  carefully  guard  against  their  rising  to 
any  criminal  or  unbecoming  height  in  us.  4.  Let  us  observe  the  direction  which 
our  Lord  has  given  us,  to  express  a  meek  and  peaceable  spirit  when  we  exercise 
our  devotion  and  offer  up  our  prayers  to  Almighty  God.  From  what  has  been  said 
we  may  see  that  the  notions  which  so  commonly  prevail  in  the  world,  concerning 
the  honour,  courage,  and  magnanimity  of  men  are  extremely  ill-founded.  (-/.  Orr.) 
Hidden  ornaments  : — Who  is  not  fond  of  ornaments?  Even  those  people  who  pre- 
tend to  care  only  for  "  the  useful "  are  not  really  quite  indifferent  to  "  the  orna- 
mental." We  not  only  have  some  things  simply  for  ornament,  but  things  which  are 
made  for  use  we  like  to  look  as  nice  as  possible.  We  do  not  bind  books,  nor  make 
furniture,  nor  build  houses  and  churches  for  the  sake  of  ornament,  yet  we  all  admire 
a  pretty  book,  handsome  furniture,  a  fine  house,  and  beautiful  churches.  You  may 
remember,  in  reading  your  Histories  of  England,  how  the  early  Britons,  in  their 
savage  state,  like  many  of  the  heathen  still,  used  to  paint  their  bodies,  thinking  it 
improved  them.  Now,  this  desire  for  ornament  is  laid  deep  down  in  our  nature,  like 
one  of  the  foundation-stones  of  a  house,  and,  therefore,  it  is  quite  right,  so  long  as 
it  is  guided  properly.  St.  Peter  is  certainly  not  speaking  against  all  ornament. 
How  could  it  be  wrong,  when  our  earth  is  full  of  it  ?  But,  certainly,  St.  Peter  does 
not  mean  we  are  not  to  think  at  all  of  our  appearance.  It  is  not  right  to  be  untidy 
and  slovenly  in  dress.  What,  then,  you  ask,  is  wrong  ?  To  make  one's  outward 
appearance  the  chief  thing.  Some  people  give  you  the  impression  that  they  are 
always  thinking  of  what  they  have  on  ;  they  seem  to  have  just  come  away  from  the 
looking-glass,  for  they  are  so  "  got  up,"  as  we  say,  and  look  more  like  dressed  dolls 
than  like  real  men  and  women.  But  there  are  other  persons  who  always  look  nice 
without  seeming  to  be  conscious  what  they  have  on,  and  who  never  strike  you  as 
having  spent  much  time  over  their  toUet,  or  as  if  it  had  cost  them  much  trouble. 
These  are  the  truest  gentlemen  and  ladies.  Now  St.  Peter  tells  us  what  part  of  our- 
selves we  should  be  most  anxious  to  make  beautiful,  and  what  ornament  we  should 
seek  for  it.  And  what  is  the  part  to  be  adorned?  He  calls  it  "  the  hidden  man  of 
the  heart."  It  reminds  me  of  the  Psalm  which  says,  "  The  king's  daughter  is  all 
glorious  within."  But,  you  say,  who  ever  heard  of  wearing  ornaments  inside,  where 
no  one  can  see  them  ?  It  must,  surely,  be  silly  to  adorn  something  that  is  "  hidden." 
But  no !  it  is  not.  For  any  one  can  see  the  difference  between  a  heart  that  is 
adorned  and  one  that  is  not,  though  you  cannot  see  either  the  heart  or  the  ornament 
itself.  For  look  at  the  adornment  which  St.  Peter  recommends.  It  is  "the  orna- 
ment of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  Let  us  try  to  think  of  some  persons  mentioned 
in  the  Bible  who  wore  this  ornament.  Did  not  Isaac,  when  he  took  that  long  and 
tiring  journey  with  his  father  Abraham,  carrying  the  wood  for  the  sacrifice,  quietly 
obeying  and  meekly  submitting  without  any  explanation  from  his  father  ?  Did  not 
Samuel,  when  he  got  up  that  night  three  times  and  went  to  Eli,  thinking  Eli  wanted 
him,  and  saying  meekly,  "  Here  am  I  "  ?  Did  not  David,  when  he  bore  meekly  his 
elder  brother's  taunts,  reproaching  him  for  neglecting  the  sheep  to  come  and  see  the 
battle  ;  and  afterwards  in  bearing  so  patiently  with  Saul's  fickleness  and  bad  temper  ? 
Above  all,  did  not  Jesus  wear  this  inner  ornament  all  through  His  earthly  life  ? 
And  how  can  you  tell  if  you  have  this  "  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit"? 
Answer  some  questions  to  yourselves,  and  you  will  know.  Are  you  rude  and  rough, 
or  gentle  and  polite  ?  Are  you  wayward  and  wilful,  as  if  you  knew  better  than  those 
who  are  older  and  wiser  than  you  are ;  or  do  you  at  once  and  cheerfully  obey  your 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  259 

parents  and  your  teachers?  Now,  people  generally  keep  their  hest  things  for 
Sundays  and  "  special  occasions,"  when  there  are  strangers  or  visitors  to  see  them. 
At  other  times  some  persons  do  not  seem  to  care  how  they  look  or  what  they  have  ; 
but  this  "  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit"  is  meant  to  be  worn  always,  out-of- 
doors  and  indoors,  at  work  and  at  play,  at  church,  at  school,  and  at  home.  And  I  think 
you  will  agree  with  me  that  we  ought  to  seek  first  that  kind  of  adorning  which  wiU 
best  commend  us  to  those  with  whom  we  live.  Whenever  you  have  on  "  the  orna- 
ment of  a  meek  and  quiet  spuit "  they  cannot  fail  to  notice  it,  for,  Uke  a  lustrous 
jewel,  it  will  glance  out  at  every  turn  through  a  pure,  transparent  life,  and  it  wiU 
make  you  very  dear  to  all  your  friends.  Yes,  this  ornament  is  the  most  beautiful 
of  aU.  But  again,  this  "  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit "  is  most  precious. 
The  apostle  Peter  says  it  is  "  of  great  price."  It  is  precious,  truly,  in  the  sense  of 
being  scarce,  like  rare  flowers  and  ferns  and  precious  stones  ;  for  one  person  who 
possesses  it,  you  may  find  a  thousand  without  it,  yet  who  have  plenty  of  the 
commoner  and  cheaper  kinds  of  ornament.  But  this  one  is  so  precious  chiefly 
because  it  is  an  ornament  of  God's  own  making.  There  is  yet  another  reason  why  it  is 
so  precious.  Do  you  not  think  the  more  of  a  thing  if  it  has  cost  your  parents  much 
money  and  trouble  to  get  ?  Well,  God  made  a  real  and  very  great  sacrifice  that  we 
might  have  this  ornament,  giving  up  His  Son  to  show  it  us  in  aU  its  loveUness,  and  to 
enable  us  to  get  it.  Then,  too,  this  adorning  is  most  lasting.  (C.  S.  Slater,  3I.A.) 
Meekness  : — I.  To  show  what  this  meekness  and  quietness  of  spirit  is.  1.  There 
is  meekness  toward  God,  and  it  is  the  easy  and  quiet  submission  of  the  soul  to  His 
whole  wiU,  according  as  He  is  pleased  to  make  it  known,  whether  by  His  word  or  by 
His  providence.  (1)  It  is  the  silent  submission  of  the  soul  to  the  Word  of  God  :  the 
understanding  bowed  to  every  Divine  truth,  and  the  will  to  every  Divine  precept ; 
and  both  without  murmuring  and  disputing.  (2)  It  is  the  silent  submission  of  the 
soul  to  the  providence  of  God,  for  that  also  is  the  will  of  God  concerning  us.  (a) 
When  the  events  of  Providence  are  grievous  and  afflictive,  (b)  When  tht  methods 
of  Providence  are  dark  and  intricate,  and  we  are  quite  at  a  loss  what  God  is  about 
to  do  with  us.  2.  There  is  meekness  toward  our  brethren,  toward  all  men  (Tit.  iii. 
2),  and  so  we  take  it  here.  (1)  Meekness  teaches  us  prudently  to  govern  our  own 
anger,  whenever  anything  occurs  that  is  provoking,  (a)  The  work  of  meekness  is 
to  calm  the  spirit,  so  as  that  the  inward  peace  may  not  be  disturbed  by  any  outward 
provocation,  (b)  Meekness  wiU  curb  the  tongue,  and  keep  the  mouth  as  with  a 
bridle  when  the  heart  is  hot  (Psa.  xxxix.  1-3).  (c)  Meekness  will  cool  the  heat  of 
passion  quickly,  and  not  suffer  it  to  continue.  As  it  keeps  us  from  being  soon 
angry,  so  it  teaches  us,  when  we  are  angry,  to  be  soon  pacified.  (2)  Meekness 
teaches  and  enables  us  patiently  to  bear  the  anger  of  others,  which  properly  of  meek- 
ness we  have  especially  occasion  for,  in  reference  to  our  superiors  and  equals.  And 
here  meekness  is  of  use,  either  to  enjoin  silence,  or  indite  a  soft  answer.  We 
must  be  of  a  quiet  spirit.  Quietness  is  the  evenness,  the  composure,  and  the  rest 
of  the  soul,  which  speaks  both  the  nature  and  the  excellency  of  the  grace  of  meek- 
ness. The  greatest  comfort  and  happiness  of  man  is  sometimes  set  forth  by  quiet- 
ness (Isa.  xxxii.  17,  18).  In  a  word,  quietness  of  spirit  is  the  soul's  stillness,  and 
silence,  from  intending  provocation  to,  or  resenting  provocation  from,  any  with  whom 
we  have  to  do.  The  word  has  something  in  it  of  a  metaphor,  which  we  would  not 
choose  but  fairly  prosecute,  for  the  illustration  of  the  grace  of  meekness.  1.  We 
must  be  quiet  as  the  air  is  quiet  from  winds.  Disorderly  passions  are  like  stormy 
winds  in  the  soul ;  they  toss  and  hurry  it,  and  often  overset  it  (Isa.  vii.  2),  and  is  an 
apt  emblem  of  a  man  in  passion.  Now  meekness  restrains  these  winds,  says  to  them, 
"  Peace,  be  stiU,"  and  so  preserves  a  cahn  in  the  soul.  It  is  not  well  to  lie  wind- 
bound  in  dulness  and  indifferency ;  but  tempests  are  perilous.  What  manner  of 
grace  is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea  obey  it  ?  If  we  will  but  use  the 
authority  God  has  given  us  over  our  own  hearts,  we  may  keep  the  winds  of  passion 
under  the  command  of  religion  and  reason,  and  then  the  soul  is  quiet,  the  sun  shines, 
all  is  pleasant,  serene,  and  smiling,  and  the  man  sleeps  sweetly  and  safely  on  the 
lee-side.  We  make  our  voyage  among  rocks  and  quicksands,  but  if  the  weather  be 
calm,  we  can  the  better  steer  so  as  to  avoid  them.  2.  We  must  be  quiet  as  the  sea 
is  quiet  from  waves.  Now  meekness  is  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  that  moves  upon  the 
face  of  the  waters,  and  quiets  them.  It  casts  forth  none  of  the  mire  and  dirt  of 
passion.  This  calmness  and  evenness  of  sj)irit  makes  our  passage  over  the  sea  of 
this  world  safe  and  pleasant,  and  speedy  towards  the  desired  harbour,  and  is 
exemplary  in  the  eyes  of  others.  3.  We  must  be  quiet  as  the  land  is  quiet  from 
war.     It  was  the  observable  felicity  of  Asa's  reign,  that  in  his  days  "  the  land  was 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

quiet  "  (2  Chron.  xiv.  15).  Such  a  quietness  there  should  be  in  the  soul,  and  such  a 
quietness  there  will  be  where  meekness  sways  the  sceptre.  A  soul  inflamed  with 
wrath  and  passion  upon  all  occasions,  is  like  a  kingdom  embroiled  in  war.  4.  We 
must  be  quiet  as  the  child  is  quiet  after  the  weaning.  How  easy  its  days !  How 
quiet  its  nights !  If  put  into  a  little  pet  now  and  then,  how  soon  it  is  over  1  U.  The 
EXCELLENCY  OF  MEEKNESS  AND  QUIETNESS  OF  SPIRIT.  1.  Considei  how  Creditable 
a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  is.  (1)  There  is  in  it  the  credit  of  a  victory.  Meekness 
is  a  victory  over  ourselves  and  the  rebellious  lusts  in  our  own  bosoms ;  it  is 
a  quieting  of  intestine  broils,  the  stilling  of  an  insurrection  at  home  which 
is  oftentimes  more  hard  to  do  than  to  resist  a  foreign  invasion.  It  is 
an  effectual  victory  over  those  that  injure  us.  2.  There  is  in  it  the  credit 
of  beauty.  The  beauty  of  a  thing  consists  in  the  symmetry,  harmony,  and 
agreeableness  of  all  the  parts :  now  what  is  meekness,  but  the  soul's  agree- 
ment with  itself  ?  Exorbitant  passion  is  a  discord  in  the  soul ;  it  is  hke  a 
tumpur  in  the  face,  which  spoils  the  beauty  of  it.  3.  There  is  in  it  the  credit  of  an 
ornament.  The  text  speaks  of  it  as  an  adorning  much  more  excellent  and  valuable 
than  gold  or  pearls.  4.  There  is  in  it  the  credit  of  true  courage.  Meekness  is 
commonly  despised  and  run  down  by  the  grandees  of  the  age  as  a  piece  of  cowardice. 
He  that  can  deny  the  brutal  lust  of  anger  and  revenge,  rather  than  violate  the  royal 
law  of  love  and  charity  (however  contrary  the  sentiments  of  the  world  may  be),  is 
truly  resolute  and  courageous ;  the  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  valour. 
Fretting  and  vexing  is  the  fruit  of  the  weakness  of  women  and  children,  but  much 
below  the  strength  of  a  man,  especially  of  the  new  man,  that  is  born  from  above. 
5.  The  credit  of  a  conformity  to  the  best  patterns.  The  resemblance  of  those  that 
are  confessedly  excellent  and  glorious,  has  in  it  an  excellence  and  glory.  To  be 
meek,  is  to  be  like  the  greatest  saints.  Let  the  true  honour  that  attends  this  grace 
of  meekness  recommend  it  to  us :  it  is  one  of  those  things  that  are  honest,  and  pure, 
and  lovely,  and  of  good  report ;  a  virtue  that  has  a  praise  attending  it  (Phil.  iv.  8). 
A  praise,  not,  perhaps,  of  men,  but  of  God  (Bom.  ii.  29).  Consider  how  comfort- 
able a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  is.  Inward  comfort  is  a  desirable  good,  which  has 
more  in  it  of  reality.  What  is  true  comfort  and  pleasure  but  a  quietness  in  our  own 
bosom  ?  Those  are  most  easy  to  themselves  who  are  so  to  all  about  them.  A  meek 
and  quiet  Christian  must  needs  Uve  very  comfortably,  for — 1.  He  enjoys  himself. 
Meekness  is  very  nearly  allied  to  that  patience  which  our  Lord  Jesus  prescribes  to 
us  as  necessary  to  the  keeping  possession  of  our  own  souls  (Luke  xxi.  19).  How 
calm  are  the  thoughts,  how  serene  are  the  affections,  how  rational  the  prospects,  and 
how  even  and  composed  are  all  the  resolves  of  the  meek  and  quiet  soul !  It  is 
spoken  of  as  the  happiness  of  the  meek  that  they  "  delight  themselves  in  the  abun- 
dance of  peace"  (Psa.  xxxvii.  11).  Others  may  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance 
of  wealth.  2.  He  enjoys  his  friends :  and  that  is  a  thing  in  which  lies  much  of  the 
comfort  of  human  life.  Man  was  intended  to  be  a  sociable  creature,  and  a  Chris- 
tian much  more  so.  But  the  angry  man  is  unfit  to  be  so  that  takes  lire  at  every 
provocation.  3.  He  enjoys  his  God ;  and  that  is  most  comfortable  of  all.  It  is 
the  quintessence  of  all  happiness.  4.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  his  enemies  to  dis- 
turb and  interrupt  him  in  these  enjoyments.  His  peace  is  not  only  sweet,  but  safe ; 
as  far  as  he  acts  under  the  law  of  meekness,  it  is  above  the  assaults  of  those  that 
wish  ill  to  it.  Consider  how  profitable  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  is.  Meekness  is 
gainful  and  profitable.  1.  As  it  is  the  condition  of  the  promise.  The  meek  are 
therefore  blessed,  "  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth  "  (Psa.  xxxvii.  11).  2.  As  it  has 
in  its  own  nature  a  direct  tendency  to  our  present  benefit  and  advantage.  He  that 
is  thus  wise  is  wise  for  himself,  even  in  this  world,  and  effectually  consults  his  own 
interest.  (1)  Meekness  has  a  good  influence  upon  our  health.  If  envy  be  the 
"  rottenness  of  the  bones  "  (Prov.  xiv.  30),  meekness  is  the  preservation  of  them.  (2) 
It  has  a  good  influence  upon  our  wealth,  the  preservation  and  increase  of  it.  As  in 
kingdoms,  so  in  families  and  neighbourhoods,  war  begets  poverty.  (3)  It  has  a  good 
influence  upon  our  safety.  Consider  what  a  preparative  it  is  for  something 
further.  1.  It  makes  us  fit  for  duty.  It  puts  the  soul  in  frame,  and  keeps  it  so,  for 
all  religious  exercises.  2.  It  makes  us  fit  'for  any  relation  which  God  in  His  provi- 
dence may  call  us  into.  Those  who  are  quiet  themselves  cannot  but  be  easy  to  all 
that  are  about  them ;  and  the  nearer  any  are  to  us  in  relation  and  converse,  the 
more  desirable  it  is  that  we  should  be  easy  to  them.  3.  It  makes  us  fit  for  any  con- 
dition, according  as  the  wise  God  shall  please  to  dispose  of  us.  Those  that  through 
grace  are  enabled  to  quiet  themselves  are  fit  to  live  in  this  world  where  we  meet 
with  so  much  every  day  to  disquiet  us.     In  general,  whether  the  outward  condition 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  261 

be  prosperous  or  adverse,  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  is  neither  lifted  up  with  the  one, 
nor  cast  down  with  the  other,  but  still  in  the  same  poise  ;  in  prosperity  humble,  the 
estate  rising  but  the  mind  not  rising  with  it ;  in  adversity  encouraged  and  cheered 
up  ;  in  both  even,  like  a  dye,  throw  in  which  way  you  will,  it  lights  on  a  square  side. 
4.  It  makes  us  fit  for  a  day  of  persecution.  5.  It  makes  us  fit  for  death  and  eternity. 
The  meek  and  quiet  soul  is  at  death  let  into  that  rest  which  it  has  been  so  much 
labouring  after  ;  and  how  welcome  must  that  needs  be  !  III.  The  application.  I. 
And  now,  have  we  not  reason  to  lament  the  want  of  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and 
quiet  spirit  among  those  that  profess  religion,  and  especially  in  our  own  bosoms  ? 
It  is  the  manifest  design  of  our  holy  religion  to  soften  and  sweeten  our  tempers,  and 
to  work  off  the  ruggedness  of  them.  1.  Superiors  are  commonly  very  apt  to  chide,  and 
that  is  for  want  of  meekness.  2.  Inferiors  are  commonly  very  apt  to  complain.  If 
everything  be  not  just  to  their  mind,  they  are  fretting  and  vexing.  3.  Equals  are 
commonly  very  apt  to  clash  and  contend.  It  is  for  want  of  meekness  that  there  are 
in  the  Church  so  many  pulpit  and  paper-quarrels.  II.  Have  we  not  reason  to 
endeavour,  since  there  is  such  a  virtue,  to  attain  these  things  ?  For  your  direction 
in  this  endeavour  I  shaU  briefly  lay  before  you — 1.  Some  Scripture-precepts  concern- 
ing meekness.  (1)  That  we  must  seek  meekness  (Zeph.  ii.  3).  (2)  We  must  put  on 
meekness  (Col.  iii.  12).  (3)  We  must  follow  after  meekness  (1  Tim.  vi.  11).  (4)  We 
must  show  all  meekness  unto  aU  men  (Titus  iii.  2).  2.  Some  Scripture  patterns  of 
meekness  and  quietness  of  spirit.  (1)  Abraham  was  a  pattern  of  meekness,  and  he 
was  "  the  father  of  the  faithful "  (Gen.  xiii.  8).  (2)  Moses  was  a  pattern  of  meek- 
ness (Numb.  xii.  3).  (3)  David  was  a  pattern  of  meekness,  and  it  is  promised 
(Zech.  xii.  8).  When  his  enemies  reproached  him,  he  was  not  at  all  disturbed  at  it 
(Psa.  xxxviii.  13).  (4)  St.  Paul  was  a  pattern  of  meekness.  "  He  became  aU  things 
to  aU  men."  (5)  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  the  great  pattern  of  meekness  and  quietness 
of  spirit :  all  the  rest  had  their  spots,  the  fairest  marbles  had  their  flaws,  but  here  is 
a  copy  without  a  blot,  (a)  He  was  very  meek  towards  God  His  Father,  cheerfully 
submitting  to  His  whole  will,  and  standing  complete  in  it.  (6)  He  was  very  meek 
towards  His  friends  that  loved  and  followed  Him.  First,  in  His  bearing  with  their 
weaknesses  and  infirmities.  Secondly,  in  His  forgiving  and  passing  by  their 
unkindnesses  and  disrespects  to  Himself,  (c)  He  was  very  meek  toward  His  enemies 
that  hated  and  persecuted  Him.  3.  Some  particular  instances  wherein  the  exercise 
of  meekness  is  in  a  special  manner  required.  The  rule  is  general ;  we  must  show 
all  meekness :  it  will  be  of  use  to  observe  some  special  cases  to  which  the  Scripture 
applies  this  general  rule.  (1)  We  must  give  reproofs  with  meekness.  It  is  the 
apostle's  direction  (Gal.  vi.  1).  (2)  We  must  receive  reproofs  with  meekness.  (3) 
We  must  instruct  gainsayers  with  meekness  (2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25).  (4)  We  must  make 
profession  of  the  hope  that  is  in  us  with  meekness  (chap.  iii.  15).  (5)  We  must 
bear  reproaches  with  meekness.  4.  Some  good  principles  or  considerations  which 
tend  to  make  us  meek  and  quiet.  (1)  That  he  has  the  sweetest  and  surest  peace 
who  is  the  most  master  of  his  own  passions.  (2)  That  in  many  things  we  all  offend. 
(3)  That  there  is  no  provocation  given  us  at  any  time  but,  if  it  be  skilfully  and 
graciously  improved,  there  is  good  to  be  gotten  by  it.  (4)  That  what  is  said  and 
done  in  haste  is  hkely  to  be  a  matter  for  deliberate  repentance.  (5)  That  that  is 
truly  best  for  us  which  is  most  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God,  and  that  a  meek  and 
quiet  spirit  is  so.  5.  Some  rules  of  direction.  (1)  Sit  loose  to  the  world,  and  to 
everything  in  it.  The  more  the  world  is  crucified  to  us,  the  more  our  corrupt  pas- 
sions wiU  be  crucified  in  us.  (2)  Be  often  repenting  of  your  sinful  passion,  and 
renewing  your  covenants  against  it.  (3)  Keep  out  of  the  way  of  provocation,  and 
stand  upon  your  guard  against  it.  (4)  Learn  to  pause.  It  is  a  good  rule,  as  fn  our 
communion  with  God,  so  in  our  converse  with  men  (Eccles.  v.  2).  (5)  Pray  to  God 
by  His  Spirit  to  work  in  you  this  excellent  grace  of  meekness  and  quietness  of  spirit. 
It  is  a  part  of  that  comeliness  which  He  puts  upon  the  soul,  and  He  must  be  sought 
unto  for  it.  (6)  Be  often  examining  your  growth  and  proficiency  in  this  grace. 
Inquire  what  ground  you  have  got  of  your  passion,  and  what  improvements  you 
have  made  in  meekness.  (7)  Delight  in  the  company  of  meek  and  quiet  persons 
(Prov.  xxii.  24,  25).  (8)  Study  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  (9)  Converse  much  in 
your  thoughts  with  the  dark  and  silent  grave.  [Matthew  Henry.)  In  the  sight 
of  God  of  great  price. — In  God's  sight : — Everything,  you  know,  is  in  God's  sight. 
Not  the  tiniest  atom  in  the  heart  of  the  earth,  not  the  faintest  twinkle  of  the  farthest 
star,  not  a  passing  smile  or  frown  on  your  face,  or  a  secret  thought  in  your  mind, 
can  be  hidden  from  God.  But  more  than  this  is  meant  when  a  thing  is  said  to  be 
precious  in  God's  sight.     It  means  that  He  takes  notice  of  it,  is  pleased  with  it,  and 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

wishes  us  to  count  it  precious.  Things  often  look  very  different  to  us  from  what 
they  really  are.  Coloured  glass  may  look  like  precious  stones.  Gilded  wood  may 
look  like  a  bar  of  gold.  But  God  sees  things  as  they  really  are.  This,  you  see,  is 
beauty  of  mind,  or,  as  we  sometimes  say,  beauty  of  character.  A  statesman  had 
once  been  a  poor  lad,  but  had  raised  himself  by  his  talents  and  industry.  A  rich 
but  vulgar  man  said  to  him  very  rudely,  "  I  remember  when  you  blacked  my  father's 
boots  !  "  Instead  of  losing  his  temper,  he  simply  said,  "  And  did  I  not  black  them 
weU?"  This  was  a  beautiful  reply — it  was  the  "ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit."  (British  Weekly  Pulpit.)  The  holy  women. — Holiness  the  best  commen- 
dation : — Note  that  he  saith  not  wealthy  women,  fair  women,  but  holy  women  ;  here 
is  the  ground  of  his  commendation.  A  little  holiness  is  better  than  a  great  deal  of 
riches  and  beauty.  Beauty  fades  with  sickness,  wealth  hath  many  ways  to  take  it 
away,  but  grace  holds  ever  to  life  eternal,  and  commends  before  God,  angels,  and 
good  men.  (John  Rogers.)  Whose  daughters  ye  are. — Sarah  and  her  daughters  : — 
1.  To  begin  with,  note  what  a  happy  circumstance  it  is  when  a  godly,  gracious  man 
has  an  equally  godly  and  gracious  wife.  2.  We  notice  next,  as  we  look  to  Sarah, 
that  God  does  not  forget  the  lesser  lights.  3.  Next  notice  that  it  would  be  well  for 
us  to  imitate  God  in  this  :  in  not  forgetting  the  lesser  lights.  I  do  not  know  that 
great  men  are  often  good  examples.  Learn  not  from  the  great  but  from  the  good  : 
be  not  dazzled  by  success,  but  follow  the  safer  light  of  truth  and  right.  4.  Further- 
more, another  reiiection  arises,  namely,  that  faith  reveals  itself  in  various  ways. 
Faith  makes  one  person  this,  and  another  that.  Sarah  does  not  become  Abraham, 
nor  does  Abraham  become  Sarah.  5.  We  are  led  by  our  text  to  look  at  the  fruit  of 
faith  in  Sarah.  I.  It  is  said  of  her  that  she  did  well,  "  whose  daughters  ye  are  as 
long  as  ye  do  well."  1.  She  did  well  as  a  wife.  All  the  duties  that  were  incumbent 
upon  her  as  the  queen  of  that  travelling  company  were  performed  admirably.  2. 
She  did  well  as  a  hostess.  Though  she  was  truly  a  princess,  yet  she  kneaded  the 
dough  and  prepared  the  bread  for  her  husband's  guests.  3.  She  did  well  also  as  a 
mother.  We  are  sure  she  did,  because  we  find  that  her  son  Isaac  was  so  excellent  a 
man  ;  and  you  may  say  what  you  will,  but  in  the  hand  of  God  the  mother  forms  the 
boy's  character.  4.  She  did  well,  also,  as  a  believer,  and  that  is  no  mean  point.  As 
a  believer  when  Abraham  was  called  to  separate  himself  from  his  kindred, 
Sarah  went  with  him.  She  continued  with  him,  believing  in  God  with  persever- 
ance. II.  She  proved  her  faith  by  a  second  evidence — she  was  "  not  afeaid  with 
ANY  AMAZEMENT."  She  was  cahn,  and  was  not  put  in  fear  by  any  terror.  There 
were  several  occasions  in  which  she  might  have  been  much  disquieted.  The  first 
was  in  the  breaking-up  of  her  house  life.  An  unbelieving  woman  would  have  said, 
"A  call  from  God?  Nonsense!  Fanaticism!  I  do  not  believe  in  it,"  and  when 
she  saw  that  her  husband  would  go  she  would  have  been  afraid  with  great  amaze- 
ment. Then,  though  we  do  not  hear  much  about  her,  we  know  that  all  those  years 
she  had  to  live  in  a  tent.  It  is  a  very  trying  life  for  a  housewife.  Sarah  travelled 
from  day  to  day,  and  what  with  the  constant  moving  of  the  tent,  as  the  cattle  had 
to  be  taken  to  fresh  pastures,  it  must  have  been  a  life  of  terrible  discomfort ;  yet 
Sarah  never  said  a  word  about  it.  Remember,  they  were  dwelling  in  tents  as  pil- 
grims and  strangers,  not  for  one  day,  or  two,  nor  for  a  few  days  in  a  year,  but  for 
scores  of  years  at  a  stretch.  It  was  bravely  done  by  this  good  woman  that  she  was 
not  afraid  with  any  amazement.  Now,  this  is  a  point  in  which  Christian  women, 
and,  for  the  matter  of  that,  Christian  men  also,  should  seek  to  imitate  Sarah :  we 
should  not  let  our  hearts  be  troubled,  but  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for 
Him.  1.  What  is  this  virtue?  It  is  a  calm,  quiet  trusting  in  God.  2.  When  is 
this  virtue  to  be  exercised  by  us  ?  WeD,  it  should  be  exercised  at  all  times.  If  we 
are  not  self -composed  when  we  are  happy  we  are  not  likely  to  be  calm  when  we  are 
sad.  3.  You  inquire.  Who  are  to  exercise  this  virtue  ?  We  are  all  to  do  so  ;  but  the 
text  is  specially  directed  to  the  sisterhood.  I  suppose  women  are  exhorted  to  it, 
because  some  of  them  are  rather  excitable,  a  little  hysterical,  and  apt  to  be  fearfully 
depressed  and  utterly  carried  away.  4.  But  this  virtue  especially  serves  in  time  of 
trouble,  when  a  very  serious  trial  threatens  us.  Then  the  Christian  is  not  to  say, 
"  What  shall  I  do  now  ?  I  can  never  endure  it.  I  shall  die  of  a  broken  heart."  No. 
Do  not  talk  so.  Try  in  patience  to  lift  up  your  head,  and  remember  Sarah,  "  whose 
daughters  ye  are  if  ye  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement."  5.  And  so  must  it  be 
in  times  of  personal  sickness.  A  Christian  woman  should  not  be  afraid  with  any 
amazement  either  in  adversity  or  in  sickness,  but  her  holy  patience  should  prove  her 
to  be  a  true  daughter  of  Sarah  and  Abraham.  6.  Christian  women  in  Peter's  day 
were  subject  to  persecution  as  much  as  their  husbands.     7.  And  so  if  you  should  be 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  263 

called  to  some  stern  duty,  if  you  should  be  bound  to  do  what  you  feel  you  cannot  do, 
recollect  that  anybody  can  do  what  he  can  do.  Be  not  afraid,  then,  of  any  duty,  but 
believe  that  you  will  be  able  to  do  it,  for  grace  will  be  sufficient  for  you.  8.  At  last, 
in  the  prospect  of  death,  may  you  not  be  afraid  with  any  amazement!  Where 
others  show  their  fear,  and  sometimes  their  terror,  there  should  the  believer  show 
his  peacefulness  and  his  happy  expectancy,  not  afraid  with  any  amazement,  what- 
ever the  form  of  death  may  be.  Now,  what  is  the  excellence  of  this  virtue  ?  I 
answer  by  saying  it  is  due  to  God  that  we  should  not  be  afraid  with  any  amazement. 
Such  a  God  as  we  have  ought  to  be  trusted.  He  worships  best  who  is  most  calm  in 
evil  times.  Moreover,  the  excellence  of  this  virtue  is  that  it  is  most  impressive  to 
men.  Nor  is  the  usefulness  confined  to  others.  It  is  most  useful  to  ourselves  ;  for 
he  who  can  be  calm  in  time  of  trouble  will  be  most  likely  to  make  his  way  through 
it.  Calmness  of  mind  is  the  mother  of  prudence  and  discretion  ;  it  gives  the  firm 
foothold  which  is  needful  for  the  warrior  when  he  is  about  to  deal  a  victorious 
blow.  Those  who  cannot  be  amazed  by  fear  shall  Uve  to  be  amazed  with  mercy. 
"  How,"  says  one,  "  can  we  obtain  it?  "  Eecollect,  it  is  an  outgrowth  of  faith,  and 
you  will  have  it  in  proportion  as  you  have  faith.  Have  faith  in  God  and  you  will 
not  be  afraid  with  any  amazement.  This  holy  calm  comes,  also,  from  walking  with 
God.  No  spot  is  so  serene  as  the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacles  of  the 
Most  High.  When  you  accept  every  affliction  as  a  love-token,  then  will  your  fear 
be  ended.  Next,  remember  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  promise,  and  the  fact  that 
there  is  a  promise  for  your  particular  position.  Search  it  out,  and  then  grasp 
it,  and  say,  "He  must  keep  it;  He  cannot  break  His  word."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Likewise  ye  husbands. — The  duties  of  husbands  : — I.  The  foundation  of  domestic 
LIFE.  "  Dwell  with  your  wives  according  to  knowledge  " — in  accord  with  the  light 
of  reason,  sense,  humanity,  and  especially  revelation.  The  very  attitude  and 
demeanour  of  life  require  to  be  matters  of  study  and  thought.  II.  The  courtesy 
OF  domestic  life.  "  Giving  honour  to  the  wife  as  being  the  weaker  vessel."  This 
consists  in  a  nameless  deference,  an  unfailing  regard,  a  constant  forbearance,  a 
remembrance  of  her  bodily  weakness,  as  well  as  of  her  subordinate  position. 
III.  The  sanctification  of  domestic  life.  "  As  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace 
that  is  given  unto  you."  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  The  weaker  vessel — The  iceaker 
vessel : — Women  are  weaker  in  body  than  men,  weaker  also  in  mind,  timorous, 
soon  discouraged,  soon  provoked,  quickly  take  hurt.  Yet  are  not  wives  so  weal: 
but  God  hath  given  them  competent  ability  of  body  and  mind  to  go  through  with 
their  duties,  and  as  they  be  the  weaker,  so  they  have  the  weaker  works  than  men, 
theirs  being  for  the  most  part  within  doors.  1.  Hereupon  let  wives  submit  them- 
selves the  more  willingly,  and  the  weaker  they  find  themselves,  let  them  trust  the 
more  on  God,  that  they  may  be  strong  in  Him.  2.  For  husbands,  let  them  use 
their  wives  kindly.  They  must  not  grieve  them,  nor  disquiet  them  to  their  undoing. 
They  be  good,  costly,  and  very  profitable  vessels,  for  excellent  use,  but  easily 
cracked  ;  therefore  had  we  more  need  have  the  more  care  of  them,  as  we  have  of 
some  choice  glass.  3.  This  rebukes  those  that  use  their  wives  ruggedly,  sometimes 
railing  at  them.  A  Venice  glass  well  used  and  looked  to  may  last  long,  so  may  a 
good  wife,  but  some  vex  and  grieve  their  wives,  that  they  pine  away  with  sorrow. 
What  an  account  have  these  to  make  !  {John  Rogers.)  Heirs  together  of  the 
grace  of  life. — The  blessedness  of  Christian  connections : — I.  The  view  here  given 
of  future  blessedness.  "  The  grace  of  life."  1.  He  calls  it  "life"  in  an  eminent 
sense.  Now,  it  is  limited.  Then  the  great  ends  of  life  will  be  supremely  answered. 
Its  duration  will  justify  the  appellation  "  life."  2.  He  calls  it  "  the  grace  of  life  " 
because  it   is   the  gift  of   grace,  bestowed  in  a   very  gracious  way.       II.    The 

ENDE.\EING    AND    DELIGHTFUL     WAT    IN    WHICH    CHRISTIANS   ARE    PUT    IN    POSSESSION    OF 

THIS  BLESSEDNESS  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  ONE  ANOTHER.  "  As  being  hcirs  together." 
1.  It  gratifies  our  generosity  and  benevolence.  2.  It  adds  meekness  to  the  inter- 
course of  friendship.  3.  Providence  has  so  ordered  it  that  Christians  should  be 
not  only  fellow-heirs  but  fellow-helpers  to  eternal  life.  4.  It  provides  such  a  cordial 
when  friends  come  to  part.  Lessons:  1.  How  richly  and  graciously  has  God 
ordered  it,  that  the  salvation  of  Christians  should  be  linked  together.  2.  How 
anxious  should  those  who  are  united  by  natural  affection  be,  to  become  heirs 
together  of  such  a  life.  3.  How  important  it  is  that  those  who  are  heirs  together 
of  such  a  life  should  cultivate  the  dispositions  most  suited  to  it.  4.  How  desirable 
it  is  to  have  reference  to  these  views  in  time  of  need.  5.  How  terrible  is  the  senti- 
ment of  the  text  reversed.  (T.  N.  Toller.)  Duties  of  husbands  and  ivives  : — 
1.  The  first  duty  which  he  enjoins  is  subjection  (ver.  1).      2.  The  second  duty 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

enjoined  on  Christian  wives  is  "chaste  conversation";  in  other  words,  a  deport- 
ment governed  by  principles  of  modest  decorum  and  unblemished  purity.  3.  The 
apostle's  third  direction  respects  fear.  "  A  chaste  conversion,  coupled  with  fear," 
by  which  I  understand,  with  Dr.  Doddridge,  the  fear  of  God,  a  holy  principle  of 
reverence  for  the  Supreme  Being,  consistent  with  love  and  springing  greatly  from 
it.  4.  The  fourth  direction  to  Christian  females  respects  indifference  to  external 
ornaments  of  dress  (ver.  3).  5.  The  fifth  advice  is  on  the  cultivation  of  the  mind 
(ver.  4).  "  Whose  adorning,"  &c.  6.  A  sixth  precept,  and  the  last  which  he  urges 
on  his  female  friends,  is  the  union  of  decision  and  cheerfulness  (ver.  6).  Doing 
well  is  practical  decision.  The  absence  of  fear  with  amazement,  or  of  a  perturbed 
dissatisfaction  of  mind,  implies  cheerfulness.  The  apostle  suggests  three  motives 
to  enforce  these  directions.  1.  The  first  is  the  probable  influence  of  the  deport- 
ment of  the  pious  female  in  affecting  the  conversion  of  an  unbelieving  husband 
(vers.  1,  2).  2.  The  second  motive  urged  by  the  apostle  is  the  approbation  of  God 
(ver.  4).  3.  The  third  motive  arises  from  example  (vers.  5,  6).  But  let  me  request 
attention  to  the  exhortation  which  is  given  to  Christian  husbands  (ver.  7).  The 
duty  of  Christian  men  united  in  marriage  is  here  represented  to  consist  chiefly  in 
three  articles.  1.  The  first  is  domestic  attachment — "  Dwell  with  them."  2.  The 
second  duty  enjoined  on  Christian  husbands  is  conduct  governed  by  "  knowledge." 
"  Dwell  with  them  according  to  knowledge."  3.  The  third  duty  which  is  here 
inculcated  on  believing  husbands,  in  reference  to  their  wives,  is  that  of  respectful 
as  well  as  affectionate  attention,  which  the  apostle  calls  giving  them  honour.  Dr. 
Doddridge  supposes  this  to  intend  a  suitable  and,  as  far  as  may  be,  a  liberal 
maintenance.  Certainly  this  is  included ;  but  the  precept  appears  to  go  much 
further.  It  is  a  guard  against  the  abuse  of  that  domestic  authority  which  Provi- 
dence has  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the  husband.  For  how  can  despotic  power  reign 
in  his  breast,  who  honours  the  wife  of  his  bosom?  Various  considerations  to 
enforce  these  duties  arise  out  of  the  apostle's  statement  of  the  wife  as  "  the  weaker 
vessel."  (The  Evangelist.)  Heirs  of  the  grace  of  life  .-—I.  Let  us  attend  to 
THEIR  JOINT  PRIVILEGE.  They  are  "  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life."  The 
happiness  of  the  marriage  relation  is  generally  dependent  on  the  resemblance  of 
the  persons  entering  into  it.  The  significant  expression  used  by  the  sacred  writer 
implies — 1.  That  both  are  partakers  of  "grace" ;  in  other  words,  that  they  are  real 
Christians.  It  is  not  always  so.  2.  That  they  are  not  in  present  possession  of  all 
the  happiness  designed  for  them — "  the  grace  of  life."  This  inheritance,  in  its  largest 
extent,  they  do  not  possess  ;  they  are  "  the  heirs."  They  have  many  toilsome  steps 
to  take  in  the  journey  of  their  present  existence  before  they  reach  their  heavenly 
inheritance.  Uncertainty  hangs  over  every  event.  3.  They  have  glorious  prospects 
in  futurity.     The  heirs  of  God  are  joint  heirs  with  Christ.     II.  The  influence  of 

THIS   PRIVILEGE    ON    THE    GENERAL   DEPORTMENT    OF    CHRISTIANS    UNITED    IN    MARRIAGE. 

1.  In  the  promotion  of  personal  religion.  Marriage  should  be  improved  to  form 
and  refine  the  individual  character,  but  the  duties  of  the  individual  character  can 
never  be  annihilated  by  the  social  bond.  Being  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life, 
each  of  you  is  bound  to  be  uniformly,  decidedly,  eminently  devoted  to  God  and  the 
Kedeemer.  The  same  consideration  should  operate.  2.  On  the  mutual  advance- 
ment of  piety  in  each  other's  hearts.  The  converted  wife  or  the  converted  husband 
is  never  to  be  regarded  by  the  other  party  as  one  standing  in  need  of  no  helps  to 
the  advancement  of  the  highest  interests  of  the  soul.  3.  In  the  engagements  of 
domestic  worship  and  discipline.  Wherever  Christians  pitch  their  tents,  they 
should  without  delay  erect  an  altar.  4.  On  resolutions  made  before  God  with 
regard  to  relations  not  yet  in  existence.  Such  relations,  young  people  entering  into 
the  bonds  of  marriage  ought  to  anticipate.  "  We  may  hereafter  be  parents  "  is  a 
consideration  which  forces  itself  on  their  minds.  5.  On  the  general  conduct. 
Married  people,  feeling  reciprocally  the  influence  of  religion,  will  practically  recom- 
mend it  to  the  approbation  of  all  who  behold  them.    III.  The  connection  of  the 

PERFORMANCE  OR  THE  NEGLECT  OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION,  WITH 
THE    ACCEPTANCE    AND    USEFULNESS,    OR    WITH    THE    HINDRANCE,     OF    PRAYER.         "  That 

your  prayers  be  not  hindered."  1.  To  a  deep  sense  of  the  necessity  of  prayer, 
which  will  be  encouraged  in  the  one  case,  and  wretchedly  hindered  in  the  other. 

2.  To  the  constant  exercise  of  the  external  duty  of  prayer.  3.  To  the  cultivation 
or  the  neglect  of  the  spirit  of  prayer.  4.  To  the  experience,  and  to  the  diminution 
of  the  advantages  of  prayer.  Prayer,  if  an  acceptable,  is  an  operative  service. 
(Ibid.)  Marriage  : — I.  Marriage  is  a  Divine  institution,  and  ought  to  bb 
ACCOMPANIED  BY  A  RELIGIOUS  CEREMONY,      1,  The  Original  institutioH  might  alone 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  265 

suffice  to  satisfy  our  minds  of  this.  It  is  an  honourable  estate,  instituted  of  God 
in  the  time  of  man's  innocency.  2.  Nor  can  it  have  escaped  your  notice  that 
marriage  was  at  all  times  treated  as  a  religious  ceremony.  3.  Moreover,  I  cannot 
conceive  of  any  one  possessed  of  godly  feeUng  within  him  who  can  contemplate  a 
rite  so  instituted  of  God  as  otherwise  than  religious.  4.  And  next  I  ask.  How  can 
that  be  a  mere  civil  contract  which  we  are  so  plainly  taught  in  the  Bible  is  dis- 
tinctly figurative  of  Christ's  love  for  His  spouse  the  Church.     11.  Mabbiage  was 

INTENDED    TO    BE    INDISSOLUBLE,    AND    THE     BEVERSAL    OF    THIS    IS    A    PBOOF     OF     OUR 

DEGBADATioN  BY  SIN.  1.  The  Original  appointment  implies  nothing  less  than  this. 
2.  Christ  distinctly  said  that  marriage  was  intended  to  be  indissoluble  (Matt.  xix. 
3-9).  3.  The  figure  of  the  spiritual  union  betwixt  Christ  and  His  Church  wholly 
fails  if  marriage  was  not  intended  to  be  indissoluble.  4.  But  if  so,  the  question 
arises,  "  How  comes  a  law  of  divorce  in  God's  Word,  or  in  our  own  laws?  "  To 
the  former  question  the  answer  is  simply  in  the  words  of  Christ,  "It  was  not  so 
from  the  beginning,  but  Moses,  for  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,  suffered  this  law  to 
be  given."  "  And  this,"  says  the  FulfiUer  of  all  righteous  law,  "is  the  one  only 
cause  of  divorce  being  ever  permitted  among  you :  it  was  not  so  from  the  beginning." 
III.  Attention  to  the  text  would  do  much  to  eendeb  mabbiage  what  it  was 
ORIGINALLY  INTENDED  TO  BE.  1.  St.  Peter  tclls  you  to  regard  yourselvcs  as  "  hcirs 
together  of  the  grace  of  life."  Marriage  is  for  this  life,  and  in  heaven  they 
"neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God."  And 
yet  St.  Peter  introduces  this  reference  to  eternal  life  in  connection  with  it ;  and  it 
would  be  hard  to  say  why  he  does  so,  unless  it  be  that  a  right  fulfilment  of  that 
condition  is  a  great  help  in  Christianity  between  man  and  wife.  But  this  becomes 
quite  certain,  if  only  you  wiU  observe  one  word  in  the  text.  St.  Peter  does  not  call 
you  "heirs  of  the  grace  of  life,"  but  "heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life."  This 
plainly  asserts  that  in  religious  matters  husband  and  wife  are  intended  to  be  helps- 
meet  for  one  another — but  who  will  think  of  this  that  recognises  marriage  as  a 
legal  ceremony  ? — that  they  are  not  to  live  a  life  through  with,  perhaps,  much  con- 
fiding love  and  esteem  in  other  matters,  but  without  any  care  and  interest  whatso- 
ever in  each  other's  future  state.  2.  One  other  remark  here  must  suffice  ;  it  is  on 
the  importance  of  praying  together.  How  many  unhappy  wives  and  miserable 
husbands  would  be  rendered  blessed  if  only  they  prayed  together  as  "  heirs  together 
of  the  grace  of  life"  !  Who  could  rise  to  quarrel  that  knelt  to  pray?  {G.  Venablet<.) 
Matrimonial  affinity  : — There  are  some  husbands  and  wives  whose  conduct  to  each 
other  depends  entirely  upon  surrounding  circumstances.  When  there  is  plenty  of 
money  at  the  bank,  and  prosperity  is  shining  upon  the  homestead,  their  affinity  and 
love  for  each  other  is  intense.  But  in  the  gloom  of  adversity,  and  under  sombre 
influences,  they  have  no  mutual  attraction  whatsoever,  and  their  affections  are  kept 
in  isolation.  This  type  of  the  matrimonial  life  may  be  called  the  chlorme-hydrogen 
type.  Chlorine  and  hydrogen  are  gases  having  a  powerful  affinity  for  each  other — 
that  is  to  say,  they  will  unite  when  brought  together  in  the  daylight ;  but  if  we 
change  the  conditions,  if  we  bring  them  together  in  the  dark,  their  affinity  is  never 
manifested ;  and  thus,  while  in  the  sunlight  they  rush  together  with  even  explosive 
force,  they  will  remain  quiescent  in  the  darkness,  and  there  for  all  eternity  would 
form  no  combination  whatever.  (Scientific  illustrations.)  That  your  prayers 
be  not  hindered. —  Urtfit  for  prayer : — The  breach  of  conjugal  love,  the  contentions 
of  husband  and  wife,  do,  out  of  doubt,  so  embitter  their  spirits,  that  they  are 
exceedingly  unfit  for  prayer,  which  is  the  sweet  harmony  of  the  soul  in  God's  ears  ;. 
and  when  the  soul  is  so  far  out  of  tune  as  those  distempers  make  it.  He  cannot  but. 
perceive  it  whose  ear  is  the  most  exact  of  all,  for  He  made  and  tuned  the  ear,  and- 
is  the  fountain  of  harmony.  It  cuts  the  sinews  and  strength  of  prayer,  makes, 
breaches  and  gaps,  as  wounds  at  which  the  spirits  fly  out.  When  the  soul  is  calm^ 
and  composed  it  may  behold  the  face  of  God  shining  on  it.  And  those  who  pray 
together  should  not  only  have  hearts  in  tune  within  themselves,  in  their  own  frame, 
but  tuned  together ;  especially  husband  and  wife,  who  are  one,  they  should  have 
hearts  consorted  and  sweetly  tuned  to  each  other  for  prayer.  {Abj}.  Leighton.). 
Hindrances  to  prayer : — I.  First,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  being  hindebed  fbom: 
PEAYEB.  1.  That  may  be  done  by  falling  into  a  generally  lax,  lukewarm  condition 
in  reference  to  the  things  of  God.  When  a  sick  man  is  in  a  decline  his  lungs  suffer 
and  his  voice ;  and  so  when  a  Christian  is  in  a  spiritual  decline  the  breath  of  prayer 
is  affected,  and  the  cry  of  supplication  becomes  weak.  2.  Prayers  may  be  hindered 
by  having  too  much  to  do.  In  this  age  this  is  a  very  common  occurrence.  We 
may  have  too  much  business  for  ourselves.    The  rich  man  in  the  parable  had  no 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

time  for  prayer,  for  he  was  busy  in  planning  new  bams,  but  he  had  to  find  time 
for  dying  when  the  Lord  said,  "  This  night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee." 
We  may  even  have  too  much  to  do  in  God's  house,  and  so  hinder  our  prayers,  by 
being  like  Martha,  cumbered  with  much  serving.  I  never  heard  of  any  one  who 
was  cumbered  with  much  praying.  3.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  also,  that  prayer  is 
hindered  by  having  too  little  to  do.  A  very  large  proportion  of  Christians  do  too 
little.  God  has  given  them  enough  wealth  to  be  able  to  retire  from  business ;  they 
have  time  upon  their  hands,  and  they  have  even  to  invent  ways  of  spending  that 
time.  I  wish  that  all  could  say  with  one  of  the  Lord's  saints,  "  Prayer  is  my 
business  and  praise  is  my  pleasure  "  ;  but  I  am  sure  they  never  will  till  the  zeal  of 
the  Lord's  house  shall  more  fuUy  consume  them.  4.  Some  people  hinder  their 
prayers,  ^gain,  by  a  want  of  order.  They  get  up  a  little  too  late,  and  they  have  to 
chase  their  work  all  the  day  and  never  overtake  it,  but  are  always  in  a  flurry,  one 
duty  tripping  up  the  heels  of  another.  II.  Secondly,  we  must  watch  that  we  be 
not  HINDERED  IN  PRATER,  wheu  we  are  really  engaged  in  that  holy  work.  1.  Let  us 
note  that  some  are  hindered  in  prayer  by  selecting  an  unfit  time  and  place.  There 
are  times  when  you  may  expect  a  knock  at  your  own  door,  do  not  just  then  knock 
at  God's  door.  "There  are  times  that  are  demanded  of  you  by  the  necessities  of  the 
household  and  your  lawful  calling ;  these  are  already  the  Lord's  in  another  way,  let 
them  be  used  for  their  own  purpose.  Give  to  God  and  prayer  those  suitable  times 
in  which  you  can  reasonably  expect  to  be  alone.  A  pious  lad  who  had  no  place  at 
home  to  pray  in,  went  to  the  stable  and  climbed  up  into  the  hayloft ;  but  very  soon 
some  one  came  up  the  ladder  and  interrupted  him  :  the  next  time  he  took  care  to 
pull  the  ladder  up  after  him,  a  very  useful  hint  for  us.  Select  the  fittest  time  and 
place,  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered.  2.  Worldly  cares  are  frequent  and  most 
mischievous  hindrances  to  prayer.  A  Christian  man  should  be  the  most  careful 
man  in  the  world,  and  yet  without  carefulness.  Oh,  for  more  grace  and  less  worry ! 
More  praying  and  less  hoarding !  More  intercession  and  less  speculating  !  As  it  is, 
prayers  are  sadly  hindered.  3.  Earthly  pleasures,  especially  of  a  dubious  kind,  are 
the  worst  of  hindrances.  How  can  you  come  home  from  frivolity  and  sin  and  then 
look  into  the  face  of  Jesus  ?  How  can  the  fashions  of  the  world  be  followed,  and 
communion  with  God  be  maintained  ?  4.  Further,  prayers  may  be  hindered  equally 
much  by  worldly  sorrow.  It  is  right  to  be  sorrowful,  for  God  intends  that  afliiction 
should  be  ^'rievous,  and  not  joyous ;  but  when  sorrow  is  right  it  will  drive  us  to 
prayer,  and  not  drive  us  from  it ;  and  when  we  find  our  grief  at  the  loss  of  some 
dear  child,  or  at  the  decay  of  our  property,  hinders  our  prayers,  I  think  we  should 
say  to  ourselves,  "  Now  I  must  pray ;  for  it  must  be  wrong  for  me  to  be  so  rebellious 
against  my  Father  as  to  refuse  to  ask  anything  at  His  hands."  5.  There  are  cases 
in  which  prayer  is  very  greatly  hindered  by  bad  temper.  We  cannot  pray  for 
forgiveness  unless  we  forgive  the  trespasses  of  others  against  us.  Prayer  can  be 
very  terribly  hindered  in  three  ways  ;  if  we  dishonour  the  Father  to  whom  we  pray, 
or  the  Son  through  whom  we  pray,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  by  whom  we  pray.  III.  We 
may  be  hindered  in  the  speeding  of  our  prayers.  We  may  pray,  but  yet  the 
prayer  may  not  be  heard.  1.  First,  there  must  be  holy  living  in  a  believer  if  his 
prayers  are  greatly  to  succeed  with  God.  If  you  do  not  do  Christ's  will  He  will  not 
do  your  will.  2.  In  addition  to  obedience  there  must  be  faith.  The  prayer  which 
avails  most  with  God  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  believes  that  God  will  hear  him,  and 
who  therefore  asks  with  confidence.  3.  Thirdly,  there  must  be  holy  desires,  or  else 
prayer  will  be  a  failure ;  and  those  desires  must  be  founded  on  a  promise.  There 
is  no  use  in  asking  money  of  a  banker  without  a  cheque :  at  the  counter  they  do 
not  know  you ;  they  know  the  promise  to  pay,  and  if  you  present  that  you  will  get 
the  amount,  but  not  else.  4.  Furthermore ;  if  prayer  is  to  speed,  there  must  be 
fervour  and  importunity.  The  arrow  must  be  put  on  the  bowstring,  and  the  bow 
must  be  drawn  with  all  our  might.  5.  There  must  be,  next,  a  desire  for  God's 
glory — for  that  is  the  white  of  the  target — and  if  we  do  not  shoot  towards  that,  the 
arrow  will  avail  nothing.  6.  We  must  also  have  holy  expectancy,  or  we  shall 
hinder  prayer.  The  man  who  shoots  must  look  to  see  where  his  arrow  goes.  We 
must  direct  our  prayer  unto  God,  and  look  up.  Presumption  in  prayer  shoots  with 
the  bow  of  self-confidence,  not  for  God's  glory,  but  for  the  gratification  of  itself, 
and  therefore  it  fails.  Some  have  the  idea  that,  ask  what  they  like  of  God,' they 
are  sure  to  have  it:  but  I  would  ask  them,  first,  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  secondly,  "  \yhat 
is  it  you  are  going  to  ask?  "  and,  thirdly,  "  What  right  have  you  to  expect  it?  " 
These  inquiries  must  be  clearly  answered,  otherwise  prayer  may  be  an  insult  to 
God.     Straightforward  transactions  you  may  pray  about,  but  do  not  mix  up  the 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  267 

Lord  with  your  financing.  I  am  requested  to  pray  for  a  young  man  who  has  lost 
his  situation,  through  a  defalcation,  that  he  may  get  another  place,  but  instead 
of  doing  so  I  suggest  that  he  should  himself  pray  to  be  made  honest.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  * 

Vers.  8,  9.  Finally,  be  ye  all  of  one  mind. — Christian  unity  : — I.  What  unity  is. 
1.  It  is  a  mutual  agreement.  2.  It  is  a  mutual  care  of  the  common  interest.  If 
there  be  ever  so  much  agreement  in  opinion  and  judgment,  yet  if  the  interests  are 
divided  it  is  not  unity.  3.  The  terms  of  union  and  aU  the  means  of  it  must  be 
lawful.     Otherwise  it  is  not  unity,  but  conspiracy.     II.  The  advantages  of  unity. 

1.  It  is  the  safety  of  all  societies.  2.  Unity  best  serves  the  purposes  of  religion.  I 
need  not  say  that  dissensions  destroy  the  beauty  and  charity  of  religion,  that  thereby 
God  is  dishonoured.  3.  It  is  the  perfection  of  all  political  virtues,  and  for  the  most 
part  of  the  Christian  virtues  also.  Good  government,  wholesome  laws,  mutual 
security,  arts  and  sciences,  trade  and  commerce,  are  aU  the  children  of  union.  And 
as  unity  is  the  perfection  of  political,  so  it  is  for  the  most  part  of  Christian  virtues 
also.  The  apostle  tells  us  that  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  (Rom.  xiii.  10).  And 
then  for  these  other  Christian  vu-tues,  peace,  humility,  forgiveness,  patience,  con- 
tentment, charity,  these  do  aU  as  naturally  flow  from  unity  as  a  stream  does  from 
its  fountain.  III.  The  kelation  that  is  between  unity  and  charity.  I  cannot 
express  this  better  than  in  St.  Augustine's  similitude.  If  there  be  a  thorn  in  the 
foot,  the  back  bends,  the  eyes  search,  the  hands  are  ready,  and  all  parts  are  quick 
and  active  to  reheve  the  member  that  is  grieved.  And  this  is  the  just  resemblance 
of  that  charity  that  arises  from  unity.  The  whole  body  feels  the  smart  and  needs 
of  a  suffering  member.  IV.  Some  considerations  that  may  engage  us  to  the  love 
AND  practice  OF  UNITY  AND  CHARITY.  1.  The  practicc  of  thcsc  virtues  recommends 
our  religion  to  the  world  ;  that  is,  it  gives  people  occasion  to  respect  it,  and  speak 
well  of  it,  and  the  least  of  it  is  that  it  gives  them  no  just  occasion  to  speak  iU  of  it. 

2.  The  practice  of  these  virtues  makes  us  like  God.  3.  It  is  the  state  of  heaven. 
Unity  and  charity  are  immortal  graces;  they  Uve  at  God's  right  hand,  and  are 
part  of  the  employment  and  the  happiness  of  the  other  world.  {Thos.  Wagstaffe.) 
Unity  between  Christian  people  :■ — I.  Wherein  does  unity  between  Christian 
people  consist  ?  Leighton  suggests  that  St.  Peter  here  describes  five  graces,  of 
which  love  is  the  root  or  stalk,  having  two  on  either  side :  on  the  one  side,  like- 
mindedness  and  compassionateness,  on  the  other  side,  tender-heartedness  and 
humble-mindedness.  II.  How  is  unity  between  Christian  people  manifested  ? 
III.  What  is  the  method  for  attaining  this  unity  ?  1.  There  is  a  direction  as 
to  detail  of  speech.  Refrain  from— (1)  The  malicious.  (2)  The  false.  2.  There 
is  a  deep  and  wide  precept  applying  to  the  whole  of  Ufe.     IV.  What  are  the 

MOTIVES     FOR     BEING     ALL    AND     DOING     ALL    THAT    WILL    INSURE    THIS    UNITY.        1.     The 

Christian  man  is  called  to  inherit  blessing.  2.  The  cultivation  of  the  spirit  that 
promoted  social  unity  ensures  the  sunimum  bonum  of  the  individual  life.  3.  Rela- 
tionship to  God  is  the  great  determining  condition  and  motive  in  all  that  leads  to 
true  Christian  unity.  (1)  God  knows  what  we  are  doing.  (2)  God  cares  for  what 
we  are  doing.  {U.  R.  Thomas.)  Christian  unity: — Not  that  he  would  have 
these  Jews  to  be  of  one  mind  with  the  idolatrous  and  profane  Gentiles  amongst 
whom  they  Uved  ;  but  that,  being  believing  Jews,  they  would  all  agree  together  in 
the  matters  of  faith  and  religion  of  Christ,  that  they  would  all  embrace  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  only  Foundation  ;  and  that  some  only  should  not  look  for  salvation  by 
Him,  some  by  the  law,  and  some  by  both,  but  that  all  should  seek  unto  Him  alone. 
And  as  they  were  thus  to  agree  in  matters  of  faith,  so  also  in  their  civil  affairs, 
avoiding  contention  and  strife.  (John  Rogers.)  Avoiding  divisions  : — Beware  of 
two  extremes  that  often  cause  divisions.  1.  Captivity  to  custom.  2.  Affectation  of 
novelty.  (Abp.  Leighton.)  The  social  ideal : — All  of  one  mind,  cemented  into 
a  holy  unity  by  a  common  sympathy.  Ministering  to  the  saints.  Pitiful  to  the 
weak,  erring,  and  poor.  Courteous  to  equals.  Calm  and  forgiving  under  abuse 
and  injury.  Seeking  peace.  Living  under  the  smile  of  God.  Where  in  all  the 
world  can  we  discover  such  a  community  of  Christians  ?  It  were  a  fair  vision, 
worth  going  far  to  see.  An  oasis  in  the  desert.  A  snatch  of  celestial  harmony 
amid  the  jarring  discords  of  human  selfishness.  The  New  Jerusalem  descending 
from  God  out  of  heaven.  Yet  nothing  less  than  this  is  the  Christian  ideal,  as  it  is 
also  that  which  our  Lord  died  to  secure.  And  it  would  well  become  us,  if,  without 
waiting  for  others,  each  one  would  adopt  the  injunctions  of  these  verses  as  the 
binding  rule  of  daily  life.     This  would  be  our  worthiest  contribution  to  the  convinc- 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ing  of  the  world,  and  to  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord.     And  it  would 
spread.    And  does  not  the  apostle's  use  of  the  word  "  finally  "  teach  us  that  all 
Christian  doctrine  is  intended  to  lead  up  to  and  inaugurate  that  life  of  love,  the 
bold  outlines  of  which  are  sketched  in  these  words  ?    {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)      Oneness 
of  mind  : — This  oneness  of  mind  does  not  demand  the  monotony  of  similarity,  but 
unity  in  variety.     Not  the  oneness  of  a  hop-pole,  or  of  a  pile  of  hop-poles  ;  but  of 
the  plant  which,  with  tendril,  leaf,  and  fruit,  rears  itself  aloft  in  the  summer  air. 
Not  the  oneness  of  a  brick,  or  of  a  pile  of  bricks ;  but  of  the  house,  in  which  so 
many  different  materials  and  contrivances  combine  to  shelter  human  life.     Not  the 
oneness  of   a   child ;  but  of   a  family  of   children   who   differ   in  age,  character, 
temperament,  and   chosen   pursuits,  but   are   one   in  love  and  tender  sympathy. 
(Ibid.)        Having  compassion  one  of  another. — Sympathy  : — We  have  got  into  a 
strange  way  of  thinking  about  that  word  "  compassion."     It  seems  to  imply  a  sense 
of  superiority  in  the  person  who  experiences  the  emotion  for  which  it  stands.     We 
talk  about  sympathising  with  people  in  misfortune ;  but  how  do  we  set  about  it  ? 
I  am  afraid  the  usual  way  is  to  go  to  some  one  in  distress  and  say  something  like 
this  :  "  You  poor  thing ;  I  am  so  sorry  for  you."     And  then,  if  it  is  a  kind  of 
distress  that  appeals  to  our  superior  power  for  help,  we  give  a  little  alms,  or  we  do 
some  little  act  of  kindness  before  we  go  away,  and  dismiss  the  subject  from  our 
thoughts.     But  if  it  is  grief  that  excites  our  sympathy,  we  too  often  make  matters 
worse  by  offering  consolations  in  which  we  do  not  half  believe,  such  as  saying  it  is 
all  for  the  best,  or  time  will  wear  it  out.     It  is  easy  enough  to  say  that  other 
people's  misfortunes  are  all  for  the  best.     But  is  it  always  true  ?     Should  we  like 
to  be  told  so  in  a  case  of  our  own  ?     Everything  that  happens  is  for  the  best  in  the 
wise  counsels  of  our  Father  in  heaven.    But  it  is  for  us  to  turn  it  to  the  best 
account.    The  true  sympathy  is  to  enter  into  the  feeling  one's  self,  and  share  it  with 
the  one  to  whom  it  properly  belongs.     And  if  we  believe  in  the  structure  of  Christ's 
body,  of  which  we  call  ourselves  members,  we  must  know  that  what  belongs  to  one 
belongs  to  all — "  And  whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it," 
&c.     The  sympathy  suggested  by  St.  Peter's  word  is  a  comprehensive  feeling.     It 
is  not  limited  to  any  one  kind  of  experience,  such  as  grief  or  pain.     It  must  diffuse 
itself  throughout  the  whole  capacity  of  loving  hearts.     Let  it  once  but  take  posses- 
sion of  us  all  and  see  how  all  jangling  discords  will  subside  before  its  gentle  touch. 
There  will  be  no  more  room  for  envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness. 
Let  us  seek  this  precious  stream  of  harmony  at  the  fountain-head.     Let  the  love  of 
Christ  constrain  us  to  be  of  one  heart  and  one  soul.     And  now,  as  to  the  thorough- 
ness of  this  sympathy,  it  must  be  a  partaking  of  the  results  of  every  impression 
made  upon  each  other.     There  is  nothing  truer  than  the  common  saying  that  habit 
is  a  sort  of  second  nature,  and  we  all  know  that  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  contract 
very  much  such  habits  as  we  wish.     This  fact  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  our  plans  for 
bringing  up  our  children,  that  is  to  say,  if  we  try  to  bring  them  up  after  any  sensible 
plan  at  all.     Some  of  us  are  naturally  more  disposed  to  personal  affection  than 
others.     And  these  take  more  kindly,  as  the  saying  is,  to  the  exercise  of  a  general 
sympathy  with  humanity  at  large.     It  is  well  for  such  persons  if  they  do  not  rest 
satisfied  with  the  emotion  alone  and  pride  themselves  on  being  holier  than  their 
hard-hearted  brethren.     But  the  fact  of  being  less  disposed  to  feel  for  other  people 
is  no  excuse  for  not  trying  to  do  it.     We  may  cultivate  it  like  any  other  habit,  only 
far  more  effectually  by  the  grace  of  God,  till  it  almost  seems  natural  to  us  to  have 
compassion  one  of  another.     I  remember  urging  this  once  upon  a  man,  hard  and 
unloving  by  nature,  who  had  trouble  in  his  family,  and  his  answer  struck  me  very 
forcibly.     "  I  see,"  he  said,  "  you  want  me  to  force  sympathy  in  a  hotbed."     And 
that  is  just  one  of  the  ways  in  which  it  may  be  done,  and  as  a  tender  plant  it  will 
repay  the  greatest  care.     But,  perhaps,  all  this  while,  you  have  no  very  clear  idea 
what  I  mean  by  sympathy.     It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  another  way  of  expressing  a 
very  common  idea — that  of  doing  as  you  would  be  done  by.     It  is  the  putting  of 
one's  self  into  the  person  of  another^ — so  far  as  it  is  possible  or  right  to  do  so.     That 
is  to  say,  so  far  as  it  comes  within  our  province  as  brethren,  members  of  the  same 
family  of  God — nay,  more  than  that,  of  the  same  body  of  Christ — to  care  for  each 
other's  concerns.     Think  of  it  when  your  friends  are  cross  and  you  are  tempted  to 
answer  them  back — think  of  it  when  they  are  tired  and  you  would  worry  them  into 
your  activity,  or  when  they  are  cheerful  and  eager  for  some  enjoyment  and  you 
would  depress  them  with  your  selfish  cares.      Think  of  it  again  when  you  are 
judging  of   other   people's  conduct  under   trials   to   which  you  have  never  been 
exposed,  and  when  words  of  thoughtless  censure  or  bitter  scorn  are  welling  to  your 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  269 

lips.     {H.   C.  Atwool,  M.D.)  Christlike  compassion : — A  good  many  years  ago 

there  lay  in  the  streets  of  Eichmond  a  man  dead  drunk,  his  face  exposed  to  the 
blistering  noonday  sun.  A  Christian  woman  passed  along,  looked  at  him,  and  said, 
"  Poor  fellow !  "  She  took  her  handkerchief  and  spread  it  over  his  face,  and  passed 
on.  The  man  roused  himself  up  from  his  debauch,  and  began  to  look  at  the  hand- 
kerchief, and  lo !  on  it  was  the  name  of  a  highly  respectable  Christian  woman  of 
the  city  of  Kichmond.  He  went  to  her,  he  thanked  her  for  her  kindness,  and  that 
one  little  deed  saved  him  for  this  life,  and  saved  him  for  the  life  that  is  to  come. 
He  was  afterwards  Attorney- General  of  the  United  States  ;  but  higher  than  all,  he 
became  the  consecrated  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.  (T.De  Witt  Talmage.)  Love  as 
brethren. — Brotherly  love  .-—I.  Some  qualities  of  bkotheelt  love.  1.  It  is  a 
peculiar  and  Divine  principle.  2.  It  is  comprehensive  and  universal.  3.  It  should 
be  sincere  and  fervent.  4.  It  must  be  constant  and  permanent.  II.  The  way  in 
WHICH  IT  SHOULD  BE  MANIFESTED.  1.  It  wiU  producc  Unanimity.  2.  It  will  lead 
to  the  exercise  of  compassion  and  sympathy.  3.  It  will  be  regulated  by  Christian 
courtesy.  4.  It  should  be  manifested  by  Christians  in  their  uniting  in  social 
exercises  of  devotion,  and  in  the  public  worship  of  God.  (Essex  Remembrancer.) 
Pity  : — Notwithstanding  the  many  clear  marks  of  wisdom  and  goodness  which  are 
found  in  creation,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  present  world  abounds  with  misery. 
How  few  can  be  found  whose  welfare  is  not  more  or  less  dependent  on  the  will  or 
humour  of  others  ;  considering  how  much  easier  it  is  to  injure  than  to  promote 
human  happiness,  who  can  believe  that  the  common  Parent  of  all  would  have  so 
little  tenderness  for  His  offspring  as  to  leave  them  in  a  world  thus  constituted,  with- 
out some  better  defence  and  stronger  security  than  that  of  reason.  But  observe 
how  admirably  both  the  accidental  and  the  necessary  defects  of  reason  are  supplied 
by  the  active,  uniform,  instinctive  principle  of  pity.  For  by  giving  to  all  men  this 
principle,  and  placing  them  in  a  state  of  mutual  dependency,  God  hath  plainly 
constituted  them  the  guardians  of  each  other's  welfare.  This  tender  affection  is 
accordingly  found  so  essential  an  ingredient  in  the  composition  of  our  nature,  that 
the  absence  of  it  is  termed  inhumanity — a  word  which  carries  with  it  the  deepest 
infamy.  For  it  marks  the  outrage  which  nature  suffers  before  it  can  take  place. 
Interest  or  passion  may  put  men  upon  acts  of  cruelty,  and  these  acts  by  degrees 
may  be  formed  into  habits.  And  it  were  well  if  certain  nations,  among  the  most 
civilised  in  other  respects,  were  more  sensible  of  this  danger.  Nor  is  it  any  excuse 
to  say  that,  for  the  safety  of  society,  actions  must  be  punished  with  severity.  For 
though  all  this  be  true,  yet  is  any  one  so  much  a  member  of  the  community  as  to 
forget  that  he  is  a  man  ?  Or  does  sound  poUcy  require  that  the  celestial  justice 
should  be  transformed  into  an  infernal  fury,  and  employed  in  a  Christian  country 
in  torturing  malefactors  by  arts  and  inventions  which  are  truly  diabohcal  ?  As 
errors  and  corruptions  in  religion  and  government  may  account  for  these  instances 
of  national  cruelty,  so  those  of  education  may  generate  in  particulars  the  same 
barbarous  spirit.  The  veriest  caviller  must  admit,  unless  he  is  stout  enough  to 
combat  conviction,  that  benevolence  and  pity  are  qualities  as  proper  to  the  whole 
species  as  modesty  and  chastity  are  peculiar  to  the  one-half  of  it.  When  God  was 
pleased  to  place  us  in  this  state  of  trial,  to  render  it  the  more  supportable  He  gave 
men  social  and  benevolent  affections.  And  when  He  is  pleased  to  admonish  them 
by  the  mouth  of  His  inspired  apostle  to  be  pitiful  or  compassionate,  it  is  only 
referring  them  to  those  very  feelings  with  which  He  has  impressed,  to  those  very 
faculties  with  which  He  has  endowed  them.  (J.  Mainicrigg,  B.D.)  Be  courteous. 
—  Christian  courtesy  : — The  apostles  are  not  only  careful  to  lay  the  foundation,  but 
to  build  up.  How  comprehensive  this  whole  verse,  "  Cherish  fervent  charity,"  and 
discover  it  in  acts  of  pity  or  courtesy,  according  to  circumstances.  By  courtesy  we 
are  to  understand  "  a  considerate  regard  to  the  feelings  and  accommodations  of 
others,  resulting  from  a  principle  of  Divine  love,  and  discovering  itself  by  a  corres- 
ponding behaviour  in  all  the  various  circumstances  of  our  ordinary  intercourse  with 
mankind."  I.  Simplicity  and  godly  sinceeity.  The  courtesy  of  the  world  is 
an  imposing  form,  a  delusive  shadow,  an  artificial  mode  or  fashion  which  persons 
acquire  under  the  discipline  of  their  dancing-master.  II.  Disinterestedness.  The 
courtesy  of  the  world  is  selfishness  disguised.  III.  Uniformity.  The  courtesy  of 
the  carnal  mind  is  a  sickly,  humorsome,  capricious  thing,  altogether  incapable  of 
persevering  exertion.  IV.  It  is  invariably  associated  with  humility.  In  honour 
preferring  one  another.  The  men  of  the  world  do  this  in  appearance.  It  is  not 
the  habit  which  properly  belongs  to  them  ;  it  is  the  costume  of  a  better  country 
than  that  which  claims  them  for  its  own  ;  a  foreign  dress,  which,  like  the  traveller 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

in  his  journey,  they  find  it  convenient  to  assume  ;  a  mere  cloak  worn  in  public  to 
cover  the  deformity  of  their  natural  disposition.  The  courtesy  of  those  who  follow 
Jesus  is  the  unaffected  expression  of  a  poor  and  contrite  spirit.  V.  To  this  may 
be  added  vigilance.  It  watches  for  opportunities  of  exertion,  yet  is  not  trouble- 
some— not  officious.  It  originates  in  a  certain  kindness  of  heart  which  may  be 
called  the  wakefulness  of  love.  Lessons :  1.  Courtesy  is  a  duty  of  more  than 
human  obligation.  A  breach  of  good  manners  is  therefore  not  merely  a  departure 
from  an  arbitrary  rule  imposed  by  the  fashion  of  the  world,  but  a  breach  of  charity. 
It  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  love.  2.  Courtesy  to  man  is  perfectly  consistent  with 
faithfulness  to  God.  A  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  must  bear  his  testimony 
against  sin  ;  but  our  subject  prescribes  the  manner  only  of  so  doing.  3.  Man  cannot 
practice  Christian  courtesy  till  he  has  renounced  the  world ;  for  the  world  is  not 
the  school  in  which  true  politeness  can  be  acquired.  To  be  kind  to  the  evil 
and  to  the  unthankful  is  a  lesson  of  heavenly  wisdom.  {J.  Summer  field,  M.A.) 
Minor  morals  : — When  the  writer  was  a  boy,  there  was  in  his  neighbourhood  a  stable 
where  a  troublesome  horse  was  kept.  This  horse  had  a  most  inveterate  habit  of 
kicking.  His  owner,  however,  took  care  always  to  explain  that  though  his  horse 
was  a  furious  kicker,  "  it  did  not  mean  anything."  Poor  consolation  certainly  to 
anybody  who  received  a  kick — that  the  horse  had  no  particular  ill-will  to  him  !  It 
was  just  a  way  it  had  !  Since  we  grew  up  to  manhood,  we  have  discovered  that  the 
quadruped  in  question  was  the  type  of  many  bipeds.  Some  Christians  have  a 
genial  disposition  which  falls  like  sunshine  on  all  around  them.  Such  a  man  was 
Wilberforce  ;  we  wish  there  were  more  of  this  class — "  Gentle  unto  all  men,  apt  to 
teach  ;  patient."  "  He  is  a  good  man  at  bottom,  but  has  a  troublesome  temper,"  is 
a  character  which  has  many  representatives  in  the  Church.  And  for  such  the 
apology  is  usually  made  that  "  it  is  just  their  way  !  "  Their  way,  forsooth  !  and  is 
that  all  that  grace  is  doing  in  them  ?  There  is  certainly  much  to  annoy  in  this 
world  of  ours.  We  are  engaged,  for  instance,  in  some  matter  of  business  which 
requires  concentration  of  thought,  when  we  are  interrupted  by  a  visitor  whose  errand 
is  of  the  most  commonplace  description.  We  feel  a  rising  irritation  at  the  unrea- 
sonable intrusion,  but  the  text,  "  Be  pitiful,  be  courteous,"  forces  us  into  com- 
placency, and  we  are  the  better  for  the  lesson.  Or  we  are  enjoying  that  very 
pleasant  thing,  a  busy  leisure,  say  on  some  quiet  Saturday  evening,  when  some 
acquaintance  for  whom  we  have  no  particular  esteem  looks  in,  "just  to  pass  an 
hour  or  two,  knowing  that  we  were  not  likely  to  be  engaged."  This  is  a  little  pro- 
voking, no  doubt,  and  we  are  apt  to  give  our  visitor  a  veiy  cold  shake  of  the  hand, 
till,  "  Be  pitiful,  be  courteous,"  sounds  in  our  conscience,  and  we  perhaps  dis- 
cover at  the  close  of  the  evening  that  we  have  had  a  valuable  opportunity  both  for 
giving  and  getting  advice.  Did  either  of  those  visitors  intend  to  annoy  us  ?  No, 
by  no  means.  The  inconvenience  in  both  cases  arose  from  ourselves,  and  not  from 
our  visitors.  How  very  unreasonable,  therefore,  would  it  have  been  in  us  to  get 
angry  at  them,  and  send  them  away  smarting  under  some  cutting  words,  in  all 
likelihood  to  be  our  enemies  for  ever  after  !  One  advice  we  would  give ;  it  is  the  result 
of  experience.  If  you  really  are  so  engaged  that  you  cannot  afford  a  visitor  a  few 
minutes'  conversation,  tell  him  so.  Do  it  plainly,  frankly,  politely  ;  and  you  may 
be  sure  that  he  will  be  thankful  to  you  for  preventing  him  intruding  unreasonably 
on  your  time.  We  pass,  however,  to  another  class  of  cases.  We  remember 
hearing  it  said  of  the  manager  of  a  bank,  who  died  many  years  ago,  that  he  could 
say  "  no  "  with  a  better  grace  than  most  men  could  say  "  yes."  He  spoke  what  was 
painful  in  the  least  painful  manner  possible.  How  much  does  usefulness  in  the 
world  depend  on  manner  1  Often  have  we  seen  a  harsh  manner  destroy  much 
good.  And  living  examples  there  are  everywhei-e  of  Christian  men  who  would  have 
done  much  good  but  for  that  abominable  manner  of  theirs.  No  doubt  there  is  an 
opposite  extreme — a  silky,  whining,  namby-pambyism,  which  in  the  eyes  of  all 
sensible  people  is  despised  as  silly  and  suspicious.  This,  however,  is  much  rarer 
than  the  bad  manner — the  icy  coldness,  or  suspecting  distance,  or  rudeness  of  the 
rough  Christian.  Some  years  ago  a  friend  of  ours  was  in  an  omnibus  passing  from 
the  heart  of  our  city  to  one  of  the  suburbs.  The  omnibus  stopped  to  pick  up  a  pas- 
senger, who,  from  being  welcomed  by  the  others,  was  evidently  well  known  and 
esteemed.  Our  friend  admired  the  hearty  old  man,  who  had  a  kind  word  for  every- 
body ;  and  his  kind  words  were  evidently  considered  compliments,  though  spoken 
in  broad  Scotch.  From  some  words  that  .dropped  from  him,  he  was  evidently  a  man 
of  unusual  talent,  and  a  Christian.  Our  friend  wondered  who  he  could  be,  and  all  the 
more  as  the  unknown,  with  the  most  polite  attention,  gave  a  poor  servant  girl  some 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  271 

information  which  she  desired  about  a  house  she  had  been  told  to  call  at.  Who 
oould  this  lovable  yet  mysterious  stranger  be  ?  It  was  Dr.  Chalmers.  The  genial 
old  man  had  room  in  his  large  heart  for  sympathy  and  kindness  to  all.  If  we  are 
to  do  good  to  all  as  we  have  opportunity,  we  must  abound  in  kind  words.  Passing 
along  the  street  a  few  days  ago,  we  saw  a  little  child  who  had  tripped  his  foot,  and 
fallen  down.  He  was  crying  over  his  distress.  We  lifted  him  up,  instinctively 
saying,  "  Poor  little  fellow  !  "  These  little  words  of  sympathy  were  very  cheap,  but 
they  brushed  away  his  tears,  and  spread  sunshine  over  his  face  again.  The  poorest 
on  earth  can  say  a  kind  word  to  his  struggling  brother  or  sister  ;  and  who  can  tell 
the  good  that  may  be  done  by  a  single  kind  word  ?  It  may  cheer  an  inquiring 
sinner ;  it  may  send  a  faint  believer  on  his  way  rejoicing.     (D.  Dickson.)  Chris- 

tian courtesy  : — The  words  "  courtesy"  and  "  courteousness  "  are  derived  from  the 
term  "  court,"  and  are  used,  in  their  primitive  sense,  to  describe  that  refinement  of 
manners  which  prevails  in  the  palaces  of  princes  and  distinguishes  the  intercourse 
of  the  great ;  and  because,  from  the  corruption  of  courts,  those  who  move  in  them 
have  often  used  the  manner  and  phraseology  of  respect  when  feelings  directly  the 
reverse  have  been  rankling  in  the  heart,  the  terms  themselves  have  been  associated 
in  many  minds  with  all  that  belongs  to  flattery,  insincerity,  and  falsehood. 
Courtesy  unquestionably  refers  to  all  that  belongs  to  affability  of  manner  in  inter- 
course with  one  another ;  but  Christian  courtesy  involves  along  with  it  the  internal 
principle  from  which  that  affability  should  proceed.  AU  true  courtesy  presupposes 
the  principle  of  benevolence,  or  goodwill  towards  men  ;  a  desire  to  promote,  and 
complacency  in,  the  happiness  of  others.  It  has  been  called  "  benevolence  in 
trifles  " — a  care  in  little  things,  in  words  and  manner  and  acts,  by  minute  attention,  to 
guard  the  feelings  and  to  consult  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  others.  It  compre- 
hends a  readiness  to  conform  to  their  tastes  and  habits  in  matters  of  indifference, 
an  obvious  preference  of  their  accommodation  to  our  own ;  a  solicitude  to  avoid 
whatever  may  give  pain,  when  no  principle  forbids  ;  and,  in  short,  a  constant 
endeavour  to  prevent  pain  and  impart  pleasure.  I.  Let  us,  then,  examine  some 
DiFFEKENT  ASPECTS  OF  COURTESY.  Towards  supcriors  it  is  respect  and  deference ; 
towards  inferiors  it  is  condescension  and  civility ;  towards  equals  it  is  bland  and 
affable  attention.  Or  we  shall  see  better  what  it  is  by  looking  at  its  opposites. 
Christian  courtesy  stands  opposed  to  gross  defects  and  errors  in  the  behaviour.  In 
relation,  for  instance,  to  superiors,  it  is  opposed  not  only  to  impertinence  and  pre- 
sumption, but  to  obsequiousness.  In  relation  to  inferiors  it  stands  opposed  to  cold- 
ness, to  neglect,  to  pride,  to  positive  contempt  of  them  altogether,  or  a  disregard  of 
their  feelings.  In  relation  to  equals  it  stands  opposed  to  moroseness,  or  an  unwill- 
ingness to  be  conciliated ;  to  sullenness,  or  a  kind  of  settled  gloom  of  countenance 
and  carriage ;  to  impertinence  of  remark  and  rudeness  of  reply ;  to  inattention- 
inattention  of  two  kinds,  inattention  either  positive  or  negative — that  is,  either  to 
do  something  for  others,  or  kindly  to  receive  what  is  done  for  us.  It  stands  opposed 
to  whatever  is  eccentric,  or  the  indulgence  of  what  is  not  tolerated  by  the  general 
usages  of  society.  It  stands  opposed  to  fretfulness — that  is,  the  art  of  determining 
never  to  be  pleased,  and  the  want  of  disposition  even  to  appreciate  the  sacrifices 
made  for  the  very  purpose  of  promoting  their  pleasure.  Finally,  it  stands  opposed 
to  pride — to  pride  of  family,  to  pride  of  intellect,  to  pride  of  money,  to  pride  of 
accomplishments,  and  to  the  worst  of  all  pride — the  pride  of  spiritual  pretensions. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  possession  of  this  virtue  in  full  play  implies  two  things. 
It  implies  that  benevolence  exists  in  the  mind  of  the  individual  as  a  principle  ;  not 
merely  as  a  fluctuating  feeling,  according  to  the  flow  of  the  spirits  and  the  circum- 
stances of  the  day,  but  as  a  principle — that  is,  the  steady  purpose  of  the  reason, 
based  upon  the  remembrance  of  the  relation  of  man  and  man,  and  a  just  regard  to 
the  will  of  God.  It  implies,  secondly,  that  it  is  so  regular  as  to  be  habitual ;  that  an 
occasion  of  failure  from  a  sudden  irruption  of  what  remains,  either  of  utisanctified 
or  incurable  depravity,  is  felt  and  lamented ;  that  an  endeavour  to  repair  the  injury 
accompanies  the  neglect ;  and  that  the  principle  is  re-established  in  the  moment  of 
the  judgment  regaining  the  ascendency.  Let  us  now  observe  more  particularly  the 
sphere  in  which  this  virtue  is  to  act  and  to  display  itself ;  of  course,  this  is  com- 
mensurate with  our  social  relations,  but  we  may  mention  some  a  little  more  par- 
ticularly. 1.  It  should  be  seen  in  the  family,  and  should  regulate  the  intercourse  of 
kindred.  Here  it  is  the  mode  of  manifesting  love,  properly  so  called ;  and  it  pre- 
serves and  purifies  affection,  by  requiring  that  its  expression  be  respectful  and  delicate ; 
it  keeps  it  from  being  disordered  and  debased  by  vulgar  familiarity ;  it  prompts  to  little 
ingenious  devices,  by  which  it  is  sustained.     2.  But,  further,  the  virtue  to  which  I 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

refer  should  be  seen  in  the  Church.  As  far  as  the  present  condition  of  society 
allows,  it  will  promote  among  the  members  of  a  church  the  expression  of  interest 
and  sympathy.  3.  Again,  it  should  accompany  the  Christian  into  the  world.  In 
the  transaction  of  business  a  Christian  should  be  distinguished  by  a  readiness  to 
oblige,  and  a  carefulness  to  observe  whatever  may  diffuse  pleasure  and  give  satis- 
faction. In  social  and  familiar  intercourse  it  requires  to  be  often  and  habitually 
observed.  But  I  remark,  more  particularly,  that  in  argumentative  conversation 
courtesy  is  eminently  required.  It  should  make  us  fair  in  argument,  just  to  objec- 
tions, cahn  in  reply,  capable  of  combining  affability  of  manner  with  firmness  of 
opinion,  and  respect  for  conscience  with  opposition  to  mistake.  It  should  lead  us 
to  despise  a  spirit  of  personality.  But  two  observations  still  remain.  (1)  I  wish  it, 
then,  not  to  be  supposed  that  Christian  courtesy  extinguishes  all  strong  feeling,  and 
forbids  the  excited  and  powerful  expressions  of  benevolence.  Goodwill  towards 
man  implies  no  approval  of  his  vices  ;  love  to  humanity  does  not  destroy  distinctions 
of  character.  (2)  Neither  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  courtesy  to  others  involves  a 
forgetfulness  of  what  we  owe  to  ourselves,  or  a  just  sense  of  what  others  owe  to  us. 
There  are  two  extreme  opposites  to  which  the  man  whose  courtesy  is  Christian  and 
conscientious  cannot  go ;  and,  therefore,  his  character  may  sometimes  be  mis- 
taken. He  cannot  give,  as  is  said  in  Scripture,  "  flattering  words  " — that  is  one 
extreme.  And  he  cannot  return  "  railing  for  railing  " — that  is  another.  In  this 
descriptive  account  of  courtesy  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  make  a  remark,  suggested  by 
our  Lord's  conduct.  It  is  to  be  distinctly  noticed  that  in  all  His  allusions  to 
publicans  and  sinners  He  never  uttered  anything  against  them  like  the  language 
He  employed  towards  the  Pharisees ;  it  was  their  profession  of  religion,  in  connec- 
tion with  their  vices,  which  called  forth  His  terrible  rebuke.  Now,  from  this  cir- 
cumstance we  learn  that  in  the  exercise  of  courtesy  a  greater  degree  of  it  may  be 
expressed  towards  decidedly  worldly  characters  than  towards  inconsistent  professors 
of  religion.  II.  The  obligations  under  which  we  lie  to  the  cultivation  of  this 
Christian  grace.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  rests  upon  the  very  same  authority  with 
every  other  part  of  the  Divine  law.  God  has  expressly  enjoined  it ;  and  we  are 
thus,  at  once,  in  possession  of  the  most  infallible  of  all  arguments  to  vindicate  its 
propriety.  2.  Secondly,  to  Divine  authority  we  join  Divine  example.  Our  Lord 
during  His  incarnation  exemplified  this  virtue.  3.  In  the  third  place,  to  the 
example  of  our  Divine  Master  we  add  some  of  the  examples  of  eminent  saints. 
Abraham,  when  he  stood  up  before  his  dead  and  "  bowed  himself  to  the  people  of 
the  land  "  ;  Solomon's  bearing  towards  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  rising  and  paying  her 
distinguished  regard ;  many  of  the  prophets,  from  their  deportment  to  the  kings, 
though  armed  with  messages  to  which  the  monarchs  had  to  bow ;  but,  above  all, 
Paul — Paul,  the  most  distinguished  for  zeal  as  an  apostle,  was  the  most  remarkable 
for  courtesy  as  a  man.  4.  I  conclude  this  part  of  the  subject  by  simply  repeating  a 
few  passages  of  Scripture,  which  either  especially  inculcate  or  obviously  involve  the 
exercise  of  the  duty.  I  merely  enumerate  them :  "  Be  gentle  towards  all  men."  "  Let 
all  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  malice,  and  evil  speaking,  be  put  away  from 
you ;  and  be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  with  brotherly  love,  in  honour  preferring  one 
another."  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things 
of  others  " ;  that  is,  avoid  selfishness,  and  cultivate  courteousness  and  reciprocal 
sympathy.  "Let  each  man  please  his  neighbour  to  his  good  for  edification."  "Let 
your  speech  be  always  with  grace."  "  Give  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due." 
"Honour  the  king."  "Honour  all  men;  love  the  brotherhood."  "Give  none 
offence  to  any  man,  neither  to  Jew  nor  Gentile,  nor  to  the  Church  of  God."  "  Let 
love  be  without  dissimulation."  III.  Inducements  to  the  exercise.  1.  Nov,  in  the 
first  place,  in  relation  to  this  virtue  of  courteousness,  we  may  begin  with  the  very 
lowest  by  remarking  that  an  inducement  to  the  cultivation  of  courtesy  towards 
others  arises  from  the  pleasure  we  experience  when  it  is  exercised  towards  our- 
selves. We  cannot  help  being  conciliated  by  attention  when  it  seems  to  be  sincere. 
It  prepossesses  us  in  favour  of  a  person.  It  removes  prejudices  which  we  enter- 
tain. 2.  Secondly,  the  consciousness  of  the  power  should  lead  us  to  reflect  that 
others  may  be  acutely  pained  by  little  omissions  and  acts  of  which  it  is  possible  we 
were  not  aware  at  the  moment,  and  by  which  we  meant  no  evil.  3.  In  the  third 
place,  another  inducement,  equally  worthy  the  attention  of  persons  professing 
{godliness,  arises  from  the  effect  which  a  courteous  or  an  opposite  behaviour  may 
have  upon  men  of  the  world.  "  Let  not  your  good,"  says  the  apostle,  "  be  evil 
spoken  of."  This  want  of  courtesy  often  has  the  effect  of  destroying  the  influence 
ol  distinguished  excellence.     4.  Lastly,  in  looking  at  a  character  distinguished  by 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  273 

this  virtue  in  its  real  principle,  as  well  as  in  its  manifestation,  we  cannot  but  be 
impressed  with  the  worth  to  which  it  conducts  and  the  dignity  it  confers.  It  sup- 
poses— in  its  higher  state  and  more  perfect  exercises — it  supposes  a  very  great 
degree  of  self-government,  a  noble  superiority  to  little  weaknesses,  by  which  many 
are  characterised.  5.  In  fine,  we  should  discover  an  inducement  to  this  duty  in  the 
charm  with  which,  when  sincere,  it  embellishes  existence.  If  all  mankind  were 
perfect  in  the  principle  and  expression  of  courtesy,  the  world  would  be  the  scene  of 
perfect  and  exalted  felicity.     (T.  Binney.)  True  courtesy,  and  hoiv  to  attain  to 

it : — I  have  sometimes  seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  large  towns  streets  of  houses 
half -built ;  the  foundations  have  been  laid,  the  walls  run  up,  the  roof  put  on  ;  but 
the  mere  shell  is  there,  with  no  window-frames,  no  flooring  laid  on  the  joists,  no 
paper  on  the  walls,  &e.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  are  many  men  and  women 
whose  lives  have  been  built  up  by  religion  about  as  far  as  these  unfinished  houses. 
They  have  sterling  goodness,  they  are  sober,  the  foundation  is  there ;  but  oh !  for  a 
little  paper  and  furniture  to  add  comfort  and  softness,  some  of  the  graces  of  life, 
and  especially  the  grace  of  Christian  courtesy.  I.  Distinguish  true  courtesy 
FROM  FALSE  IMITATIONS  OF  IT.  1.  We  luust  distinguish  true  Christian  courtesy 
from  snobbishness.  Many  people  think  that  to  be  courteous  means  to  bow  down  to 
a  man  who  has  a  longer  purse,  a  better  coat,  or  bluer  blood  than  they  have.  2. 
Again,  we  must  not  mix  up  this  grace  with  the  mere  observance  of  certain  elaborate 
and  artificial  rules  of  etiquette,  which  men  who  are  occupied  all  day  long  with  hard 
work,  and  who  are  naturally  simple  and  direct  in  their  way  of  life,  dislike.  3. 
Courtesy  is  the  natural  result  of  grasping  the  second  great  principle  of  the  Christian 
religion,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Grasp  the  thought  that  your 
neighbour  has  as  much  claim  to  your  respectful  consideration  as  you  have  yourself, 
and  you  will  become  courteous.  This  consideration  will  be  tempered  by  a  further 
feeling,  produced  by  the  actual  position  of  the  person  towards  whom  it  is  extended. 
Towards  woman  the  consideration  is  tempered  with  tenderness,  and  becomes 
chivalry.  Towards  great  leaders  in  state,  religion,  literature,  art,  it  is  qualified  by 
respect.  II.  Point  out  plainly  ouk  deficiencies  in  it.  Are  husbands  always 
courteous  towards  their  wives  ?  There  is  a  neglect,  it  is  to  be  feared,  of  this  virtue 
sometimes  among  Christian  Churches.  Nonconformists  and  Church  people  are  not 
always  courteous  to  one  another.  Then  there  is  often  discourtesy  in  politics.  But 
why  should  we  impute  wrong  motives  to  political  opponents  ?  Lastly,  is  there  not 
room  for  more  courtesy  between  class  and  class  ?  Is  there  not  something  of  an 
aggressive  tone  in  the  "  I-am-as-good-as-you  "  manner  of  some  of  us  towards  those 
who  are  richer  than  ourselves  ?  Of  course,  you  are  as  good,  if  by  "  good  "  you 
mean  that  your  soul  and  your  rights  are  as  precious  in  God's  sight.  But  why  need- 
lessly flaunt  this  in  the  face  of  those  who  have  no  desire  to  question  it  ?  Those 
who  are  poor  need  not  be  servile  nor  blunt.  "  Be  courteous."  III.  How  shall  we 
ATTAIN  to  this  SPIRIT  OF  CHRISTIAN  COURTESY  ?  The  Only  truc  Way  of  attaining  to 
it  is  by  living  in  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.     (C.  H.  Irwin,  M.A.)  Christian 

courtesy  : — The  precept  of  the  text  does  not,  indeed,  belong  to  the  highest  order  of 
Christian  precepts.  It  does  not  rank  with  self-denial,  purity  of  heart,  patience, 
forgiveness  of  injuries,  love  of  the  brethren,  love  to  Christ  Himself,  and  heavenly- 
mindedness ;  yet  it  enjoins  a  duty  of  very  great  importance,  and  of  everyday  use. 
The  demands  for  courtesy  are  continually  occurring.  Every  person  with  whom  we 
have  intercourse  may  give  an  occasion  for  the  observance  or  neglect  of  it.  It  is, 
moreover  a  duty  which  every  man  has  it  in  his  power  to  perform.   It  costs  nothing. 

I.    The  NATURE    OF    COURTESY   AS    A    CHRISTIAN    DUTY.       II.    ItS    BENEFICIAL  EFFECTS  ON 

SOCIETY.  III.  The  strength  which  it  adds  to  Christian  principle.  Courtesy,  as  a 
Christian  duty,  is,  in  fact,  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  particular  exercise  of  Christian 
love.  It  is  one  of  the  outward  acts  wherein  is  manifested  that  disposition  of  heart  which 
the  new  commandment  of  Jesus  Christ  inculcates.  Yet,  as  courtesy  is  but  the  out- 
ward expression  of  that  inward  excellence,  it  may  be  shown  by  those  in  whose 
hearts  the  grace  of  love  does  not  dwell.  The  very  same  things  to  which  love  would 
prompt  may  be  done  on  lower  grounds,  and  from  inferior  motives.  Indeed,  the 
perfection  of  good  breeding  is  simply  this,  that  it  makes  a  man  seem  to  be  what 
love  causes  him  to  be  indeed.  But  then,  where  the  principle  of  Christian  love  is 
wanting,  the  courtesy  which  springs  from  mere  good  breeding  is  very  partial  and 
very  irregular — sometimes  it  falls  short  of  the  mark,  at  other  times  it  goes  beyond 
it ;  towards  inferiors  it  is  often  scanty  in  its  attentions  ;  towards  superiors,  exces- 
sive. "  The  poor,"  says  Solomon,  "  useth  entreaties,  but  the  rich  answereth 
roughly."     This  is  but  too  true  where  the  intercourse  between  these  two  grand 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

classes  of  mankind  is  regulated  by  no  higher  law  than  the  law  of  politeness.  But 
it  is  the  character  of  Christian  love  in  no  case  to  behave  itself  unseemly.  Shall  I 
answer  such  a  one  roughly  because  he  wears  a  coarser  garment  or  feeds  on  meaner 
fare  ?  Politeness  may  not  forbid  it ;  but  Christian  love  surely  will.  There  is 
another  irregularity  in  the  courtesies  of  politeness  which  is  not  found  in  those  of 
love.  It  is  one  main  office  of  courtesy  to  keep  in  check  those  petulant  tempers 
which,  wherever  they  are  not  checked,  create  uneasiness  and  give  offence.  Now,  if 
there  is  any  place  where  it  is  peculiarly  important  that  a  man  should  restrain  these 
tempers,  it  is  at  home.  Yet  good  breeding,  which  leads  a  man  to  curb  his  sullen 
humours  when  he  is  abroad,  by  a  strange  contradiction  suffers  him  to  let  them 
loose  at  home.  And  here  I  would  observe  that  the  good  which  is  done  by  Christian 
courtesy  is  also  done  by  the  imitation  of  it.  The  counterfeit,  when  well  executed, 
passes  current,  and  produces  the  same  effect  as  the  sterling  coin.  It  is  here  just 
the  same  as  in  the  case  of  almsgiving  ;  the  alms  which  are  given  from  ostentation 
do  the  same  good  as  those  which  are  given  from  love.  It  makes  a  great  difference 
to  the  giver,  but  none  at  all  to  the  receiver.  Take  courtesy  on  the  very  lowest 
ground :  suppose  there  to  be  nothing  of  Christian  love  in  it,  yet  think  what  it 
prevents  that  is  contrary  to  love.  Many  a  quarrel  has  arisen,  and  many  a  deadly 
feud  been  caused  by  the  mere  absence  of  courtesy.  Where  courtesy  prevails,  no 
affronts  are  offered,  no  feelings  are  wounded ;  nothing  is  said  or  done  which  can 
provoke  to  wrath.  And  the  benefits  hence  arising  are  incalculable.  But  the  most 
important  view  of  courtesy  is  that  which  we  proceed,  in  the  third  place,  to  con- 
sider, viz.,  the  strength  which  it  gives  to  Christian  principle.  Here,  however,  I 
must  premise  that  it  must  be  a  Christian  principle  itself  before  such  a  principle  can 
be  strengthened  by  its  exercise.  It  must  proceed  from  love,  or  it  cannot  strengthen 
love.  And  in  making  this  inquiry  we  may  observe  that  where  courtesy  is  not  there 
is  reason  to  suspect  that  love  is  wanting  also.  It  is  true  some  minds  are  cast  in  a 
rough  mould,  and  cover  much  substantial  kindness  under  a  rough  exterior.  It  is  a 
pity  it  ever  should  be  so  ;  and  when  it  is  so,  the  reality  of  Christian  love  appearing 
in  so  questionable  a  shape  is  not  lightly  to  be  taken  for  granted.  Is  the  grace  of 
God  to  do  nothing  for  a  man  ?  These  are  considerations  well  worth  being  weighed 
by  those  who  would  excuse  their  want  of  courtesy  upon  the  plea  of  a  naturally 
rugged  temper.  It  behoves  such  to  examine  themselves  whether  they  be  in  the 
faith.  Courtesy  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  prove  a  man  a  true  Christian.  1.  In  the 
first  place,  then,  is  your  courtesy  irrespective  of  persons,  shown  to  the  poor  as  well 
as  to  the  rich  ?  2.  Does  not  your  courtesy  sometimes  go  beyond  the  mark,  as  well 
as  fall  short  of  it  ?  Does  it  not  sometimes  degenerate  into  flattery  or  a  hypocritical 
gentleness  ?  If,  on  fairly  considering  these  questions,  you  have  good  reason  to  con- 
clude that  the  spirit  of  Christian  love  does  indeed  dwell  in  you,  be  thankful  for  so 
excellent  a  gift,  and  let  it  exercise  itself  in  truthful  courtesy  as  much  as  possible. 
By  every  such  exercise  the  principle  of  love  itself  is  strengthened.  Such  is  the  very 
law  of  our  nature.  And  though  this  courtesy  does  not  of  itself  take  so  high  a  rank 
as  the  other  graces  which  have  been  mentioned,  though  it  is  a  very  familiar,  and 
may  be  thought  trivial  thing,  yet  it  has  this  advantage,  that  the  opportunities 
which  it  affords  for  the  increase  of  love  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  which 
can  be  obtained  from  any  other  source.  They  are  continually  occurring.  But  two 
things  are  to  be  remembered.  It  has  been  already  shown  that  love  must  be  formed 
in  the  heart  before  it  can  be  exercised.  From  what  source,  then,  does  love  pro- 
ceed? It  springs  from  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  from  nothing  else.  But 
though  I  say  this,  I  would  observe,  in  the  last  place,  that  I  do  not  mean  by  so 
speaking  to  shut  out  the  continued  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  strengthening  the 
principle  of  love,  nor  the  necessity  of  prayer  for  the  supply  of  that  Spirit. 
(J.  Fawcett,  M.A.)  Christian  politeness  : — 1.  There  is  a  reciprocal  action  between 
an  outward  deportment  and  the  radical  condition  of  the  heart.  Religion  is  real 
refinement.  It  is  not  surface  work,  but  begins  within,  with  the  motives  of  the 
heart.  It  acts  outward,  and  then  re-acts  inward,  as  the  root  shoots  upward  into  the 
branch,  and  then,  by  pruning  the  branches,  the  life  of  the  root  in  turn  is  improved. 
As  Demosthenes  said  of  oratory,  so  may  we  say  of  religion — action  is  of  the  first 
and  last  importance.  2.  A  great  deal  of  Christian  kindness  is  pent  up  by  solid 
stiffness  of  life,  and  so  inoperative.  Therefore,  manners  should  be  studied.  A 
spring  of  pure  water  may  be  obstructed  by  leaves  and  twigs,  and  so  is  the  stream  of 
inward  affection  clogged  by  outward  hindrances  in  its  manifestation.  3.  Con- 
siderateness  is  an  essential  element  of  Christian  politeness.  "  Be  pitiful,  be 
courteous."     It  is  because  your  neighbour  is  weaker  and  ready  to  halt  that  you 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  275 

"make  straight  paths,"  &c.  (Heb.  xii.  13).     (Hugh  S.  Carpenter,  D.D.)  True 

courtesy  : — General  Lee  was  in  the  cars  going  to  Eichmond  one  day,  and  was  seated 
at  the  end  farthest  from  the  door.  The  other  seats  were  filled  with  officers  and 
soldiers.  An  old  woman,  poorly  dressed,  entered  at  one  of  the  stations,  and, 
finding  no  seat,  and  none  having  been  offered  to  her,  approached  the  end  where 
the  general  was  seated.  He  immediately  rose  and  gave  her  his  seat.  Instantly 
there  was  a  general  rising,  each  one  offering  his  seat  to  the  general.  But  he 
calmly  said,  "  No,  gentlemen,  if  there  was  no  seat  for  the  infirm  old  woman, 
there  can  be  none  for  me."  The  effect  was  remarkable.  One  after  another  got  out 
of  the  car.  The  seats  seemed  to  be  too  hot  for  them.  The  general  and  the  old  lady 
soon  had  the  car  to  themselves.  The  Hon.  Daniel  Webster  was  walking  with  a 
friend  in  Washington,  when  a  coloured  man  passing  by  bowed  very  low  to  him. 
Mr.  Webster  returned  as  deep  an  obeisance.  "  Do  you  bow  in  that  way  to  a 
darkey?"  asked  his  friend.  "Would  you  have  me  outdone  in  politeness  by  a 
negro  ?  "  replied  the  great  statesman.  And  in  his  reply  there  is  great  wisdom. 
None  of  us  can  afford  to  be  outdone  in  this  by  one  of  either  a  poorer  or  richer  position. 
Good  vianners : — There  has  been  for  many  years  now  in  England  a  depreciation  of 
the  courtesies  of  manners  as  old-fashioned  and  out  of  place.  We  agree  with  Locke, 
"  Good  manners  are  the  blossoms  of  good  sense,  and,  it  maybe  added,  of  good  feeling 
too."  Up-right  and  down-straight  people  need  not  diminish  these  excellent  qualities,  but 
they  might  often  remember  that  politeness  is  not  all  French  polish.  {W.  M.  Stathnm.) 
The  reward  of  courtesy  : — A  few  years  ago,  a  couple  of  gentlemen,  one  of  whom  was 
a  foreigner,  visited  the  various  locomotive  workshops  of  Philadelphia.  They  called 
at  the  most  prominent  one  first,  stated  their  wishes  to  look  through  the  establish- 
ment, and  made  some  inquiries  of  a  specific  character.  They  were  shown  through 
the  premises  in  a  very  indifferent  manner ;  and  no  special  pains  were  taken  to  give 
them  any  information  beyond  what  their  own  inquiries  drew  forth.  The  same 
results  followed  their  visits  to  the  several  large  establishments.  By  some  means 
they  were  induced  to  call  at  one  of  a  third  or  fourth-rate  character.  The  owner  was 
himself  a  workman  of  limited  means ;  but,  on  the  application  of  the  strangers,  his 
natural  urbanity  of  manner  prompted  him  not  only  to  show  all  he  had,  but  to  enter 
into  detailed  explanation  of  the  working  of  his  establishment.  The  gentleman  left 
him  not  only  favourably  impressed  towards  him,  but  with  a  feeling  that  he  thoroughly 
understood  his  business.  Within  a  year,  he  was  surprised  with  an  invitation  to  visit 
St.  Petersburg.  The  result  was,  his  locomotive  establishment  was  removed  there 
bodily.  It  was  an  agent  of  the  Czar  who  had  called  on  him.  He  has  recently 
returned,  having  accumulated  a  princely  fortune,  and  still  receives  from  his  Eussian 
workshops  a  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year,  and  has  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
largest  fortune  in  this  country :  and  all  are  the  results  of  civility  to  a  couple  of 
strangers.  When  Zachariah  Fox,  the  great  merchant  of  Liverpool,  was  asked  by 
what  means  he  contrived  to  realise  so  large  a  fortune  as  he  possessed,  his  reply  was, 
"  Friend,  by  one  article  alone,  in  which  thou  mayest  deal  too,  if  thou  pleasest — 
civility."  Politeness  : — During  the  American  War  of  Independence  an  old  lady, 
who  had  a  store  in  Philadelphia,  used  to  say  that  the  most  profitable  thing  she  kept 
in  her  shop  was  politeness,  it  drew  the  very  children  to  her  even  better  than  sweeties. 
What  was  it  that  gave  Miss  Nightingale  such  powerful  control  over  the  soldiers  and 
seamen  in  the  hospitals  during  the  Crimean  war,  so  that  they  would  have  done  any- 
thing for  her  in  their  power ;  and  in  her  presence  they  would  not  have  uttered  a 
single  coarse,  vulgar,  profane,  or  improper  word.  It  was,  no  doubt,  largely  owing 
to  her  refined,  cultured,  polite  manner,  dominated  by  a  truly  Christian  spirit.  'The 
true  gentleman  does  not  iiiflict  pain  : — It  is  almost  a  definition  of  a  gentleman  to  say 
that  he  is  one  who  never  inflicts  pain.  He  is  mainly  occupied  in  merely  removing 
the  obstacles  which  hinder  the  free  and  unembarrassed  action  of  those  about  him,  and 
he  concurs  with  their  movements  rather  than  takes  the  initiative  himself.  He  care- 
fully avoids  whatever  may  cause  a  jar  or  a  jolt  in  the  minds  of  those  with  whom  he 
is  cast — all  clashing  of  opinion,  or  collision  of  feeling,  all  restraint,  or  suspicion,  or 
gloom,  or  resentment ;  his  great  concern  being  to  make  every  one  at  their  ease  and 
at  home.  He  has  his  eyes  on  all  his  company  ;  he  is  tender  towards  the  bashful, 
gentle  towards  the  distant,  and  merciful  towards  the  absent.  He  guards  against 
unseasonable  allusions,  or  topics  which  may  irritate.  He  has  no  ears  for  slander  or 
gossip,  is  scrupulous  in  imputing  motives  to  those  who  interfere  with  him,  and  in- 
terprets everything  for  the  best.  (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  True  politeness  : — Here 
is  an  illustration  of  true  politeness  exhibited  by  both  classes  of  society.  One  day, 
in  hastily  turning  the  corner  of  a  crooked  street  in  the  city  of  London,  a  young  lady 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

ran  with  great  force  against  a  ragged  little  beggar  boy,  and  almost  knocked  him 
down.  Stopping  as  soon  as  she  could,  she  turned  round  and  said,  very  kindly,  to 
the  boy,  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  my  little  fellow;  I  am  very  sorry  that  I  ran  against 
you."  The  poor  boy  was  astonished.  He  looked  at  her  for  a  moment  in  surprise, 
and  then,  taking  off  about  three-quarters  of  a  cap,  he  made  a  low  bow  and  said, 
while  a  broad,  pleasant  smile  spread  itself  all  over  his  face,  "  You  can  have  my 
parding,  miss,  and  welcome ;  and  the  next  time  you  run  agin  me,  you  may  knock 
me  clean  down,  and  I  won't  say  a  word."  After  the  lady  had  passed  on  he  returned 
to  his  companion  and  said,  "  I  say,  Jim,  it's  the  first  time  I  ever  had  anybody  ask 
my  parding,  and  it's  kind  o'  took  me  off  my  feet."  {E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.)  Polite- 
ness is  the  oiled  key  that  will  open  many  a  rusty  lock.  (J.  C.  Lees,  D.D.)  Sviall 
courtesies  not  overlooked  : — When  the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  ill,  the  last  thing  he 
took  was  a  little  tea.  On  his  servant's  handing  it  to  him  in  a  saucer,  and  asking 
him  if  he  would  have  it,  the  Duke  replied,  "  Yes,  if  you  please."  These  words  were 
his  last  words.  How  much  kindness  and  courtesy  are  expressed  by  them  !  He  who 
had  commanded  the  greatest  armies  in  Europe  did  not  despise  or  overlook  the  small 
courtesies  of  life.  How  many  boys  do  !  What  a  rude  tone  of  command  they  often 
use  to  their  little  brothers  and  sisters,  and  sometimes  to  their  mothers  !  This  is  ill- 
bred,  and  shows  a  coarse  nature  and  a  hard  heart.  In  all  your  home  talk  remember 
"if  you  please."  Among  your  playmates  don't  forget  "  if  you  please."  To  all  who 
wait  upon  you  and  serve  you,  believe  that  "  if  you  please  "  will  make  you  better 
served  than  all  the  cross  or  ordering  words  in  the  whole  dictionary.  Don't  forget 
three  little  words — "  if  you  please."  Politeness  and  its  place  : — Sir  Ai'thur  Helps 
had  the  happy  faculty  of  putting  expressions  of  wisdom  into  a  few  words.  It  was 
he  who  said,  "  Familiarity  should  not  swallow  up  courtesy."  Probably  one-half  of 
the  rudeness  of  youths  of  this  day,  that  later  in  life  will  develop  into  brutality,  is 
due  to  the  failure  of  parents  to  enforce  in  the  family  circle  the  rules  of  courtesy. 
The  son  or  daughter  who  is  discourteous  to  members  of  the  family  because  of 
familiarity  with  them  is  very  likely  to  prove  rude  and  overbearing  to  others,  and 
very  certain  to  be  a  tyrant  in  the  household  over  which  he  or  she  may  be  called  on 
to  preside.  There  is  at  this  day  undeniably  among  the  rising  generation  a  lack  of 
courteous  demeanour  in  the  family.  Of  all  places  in  the  world,  let  the  boy  under- 
stand home  is  the  place  where  he  should  speak  the  gentlest  and  be  the  most  kindly, 
and  there  is  the  place  above  all  where  courteous  demeanour  should  prevail.  The 
lad  who  is  rude  to  his  sister,  impertinent  to  his  mother,  and  vulgar  in  the  house, 
will  prove  a  sad  husband  for  a  suffering  wife,  and  a  cruel  father  to  unfortunate 
children.  The  place  for  politeness,  as  Helps  puts  it,  is  where  we  mostly  think  it 
superfluous.  Goodness  spoilt  by  rudeness  : — Goodness  with  rude  manners  is  in 
fact  like  a  coquette  ;  or  a  beautiful  river  that  dives  into  dark  coves  and  reappears ; 
or  a  star  with  two  faces ;  or  an  instrument  that  plays  sweet  and  angry  tunes  by 
turns.  (Good  Words.)  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil — Do  not  retaliate  : — The  old 
law  of  an  eye  for  an  eye  is  repealed,  in  favour  of  that  nobler  legislation  which  bids 
us  do  good  to  those  that  hate  us,  and  pray  for  them  who  despitefully  use  and  perse- 
cute us.  Let  us  be  like  the  rock  on  the  wilderness  march,  which  when  smitten 
yielded  water  to  the  thirsty  hosts.  (F.  B.  Meyer.)  Railing  for  railing  : — To 
render  railing  for  railing  is  to  think  to  wash  oft  dirt  with  dirt.  (J.  Trapp.)  Fire 
does  not  extinguish  fire  : — Fire  is  not  extinguished  with  fire,  but  with  water  ;  likewise 
wrong  and  hatred,  not  with  retaliation,  but  with  gentleness,  humility,  and  kindness. 
(Clirysostom.)  Good  for  evil : — While  George  Wishart  in  1512  was  descendingthe 
steps  of  Cowgate,  Dundee,  from  preaching  to  the  plague-stricken  people,  one  of  the 
priests,  who  determined  to  get  rid  of  him,  stood  ready  to  strike  him.  George  knew 
he  meant  no  good.  "  Friend,  what  would  you  ?  "  and  quick  as  thought  wrested  the 
dagger  from  the  would-be  murderer's  hand,  and  flung  it  on  the  ground.  The 
bystanders  now  cried  with  indignation,  "  Kill  him,  kill  him,  the  murderer,  the 
assassin!"  and,  drawing  their  dirks,  they  rushed  on  the  priest.  "  Stay,  friends, 
harm  him  not."  And  George  Wishart  bravely  stood  between  the  angry  men  and 
the  scowling  priest,  who  slunk  against  the  wall,  saved  by  the  one  he  had  sought  to 
kill,  whilst  tlie  reluctant  citizens  allowed  him  to  get  away  unhurt.  Called,  that  ye 
should  inherit  a  blessing. — The  tvork  and  wages  of  the  Christian  worker : — I.  To 

ULESS  IS  THE  CiiUISTIAN's  WORK,  FOR  THEREUNTO  IS  HE    CALLED.       1.    The  first  thing  tO 

be  noted  with  regard  to  this  blessing  as  the  calling  of  the  Christian  is  that  it  is 
conceived  of  not  as  a  mere  matter  of  words  and  form,  but  as  something  real  and 
effective.  In  order  to  bless  we  must  not  only  have  goodwill,  but  we  must  also  have 
sufficient  power  and  suitable  means  at  our  command.     Whom  the  Lord  blesses  he 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  277 

is  blessed.  And  the  manner  of  our  blessing  must  be  as  His.  Whom  we  bless  must 
receive  from  us  the  blessing,  and  to  do  this  we  must  bless  him  from  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  with  the  Lord's  blessing.  2.  Again,  to  bless  is  to  do  something  more  than 
to  bestow  a  gift.  The  multitude  which  pressed  around  Jesus  and  received  from  Him 
abundant  food  out  of  the  five  loaves  and  two  fishes  had  obtained  a  precious  gift, 
but  it  was  a  blessing  in  the  true  sense  only  to  those  who  afterwards  confessed  before 
Jesus  :  Thou  art  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  The  gift  may  be  merely 
material ;  the  blessing  must  be  spiritual.  The  Lord  blesses  that  man  in  whose  soul 
He  reveals  His  Son.  These,  then,  are  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  blessings  of 
the  Lord — it  is  real  and  effective,  and  it  is  spiritual.  Our  Lord's  life  on  earth  from 
first  to  last  was  one  continuous  act  of  blessing  as  thus  understood.  And  now  as  He 
is,  so  are  we  in  this  world.  As  Christ  was  called  to  bless,  and  has,  in  the  fulfilment 
of  His  calling,  blessed  us,  so  we  are  called  to  follow  in  His  steps,  and  bring  to  others 
the  blessing  which  we  ourselves  enjoy.  To  continue  Christ's  work  in  the  world,  to 
be  Christ's  representatives  upon  the  earth,  this  is  at  once  the  highest  and  the  most 
comprehensive  description  of  the  Christian's  rank  and  position.  Seeing,  then,  that 
this  is  our  heavenly  calling,  we  ought  to  consider  it,  so  that  we  may  accomplish  our 
calling,  and  by  word  and  deed  bless  as  we  have  been  blessed.  "  Our  calling" — the 
phrase  is  well  understood  in  the  affairs  of  everyday  life.  Whatsoever  a  man's 
calling  may  be,  upon  that  he  is  expected  to  concentrate  his  attention.  The  slave  of 
Satan  is  diligent  in  doing  his  master's  will,  he  yields  his  members  as  instruments  of 
unrighteousness  unto  sin.  Surely  we  must  show  a  like  diligence  in  our  heavenly 
calling  by  yielding  ourselves  to  God  and  our  members  as  instruments  of  righteous- 
ness unto  God.  Our  calling  is  to  bless,  and  this  calling  we  realise  just  in  the 
measure  in  which  we  surrender  ourselves  to  God,  and  put  all  our  powers  at  His  dis- 
posal, to  be  used  by  Him  as  instruments  in  His  work  of  grace  and  salvation.  II. 
We  are  called  to  bless,  and  we  ake  encouraged  to  labour  on  in  oub  calling  by  the 

ASSURANCE  THAT  WE  SHALL  NOT  MISS  THE  INHERITANCE.       We    are    Called    tO    blcSS    that 

we  may  inherit  a  blessing.  In  the  keeping  of  God's  commandments  there  is  a  great 
reward.  Simply  to  be  called  of  God  is  to  receive  a  blessing.  But  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  worker  in  the  presence  of  those  who  render  him  evil  and  rail  upon  him, 
so  that  in  his  mission  of  blessing  he  may  not  become  weary  in  well  doing,  the 
apostle  assures  him  that  even  over  and  above  the  blessedness  of  being.called  to  bless, 
there  is  blessing  in  store  for  him — an  inheritance  of  blessing  of  which  he  shall  have 
certain  foretastes  here  and  full  experience  in  the  bliss  of  heaven's  rest.  What  is  the 
blessing  which  those  who  bless  inherit  here  and  now?  1.  There  is,  first  of  all,  the 
joy  that  comes  from  the  assurance  that  we  are  obeying  the  command  of  Christ  and 
realising  His  expressed  desire.  2.  Then,  again,  there  is  the  joyful  experience  of  a 
growing  Ukeness  to  Christ.  It  is  the  truest  joy  of  the  disciple's  heart  to  know  that 
he  is  being  conformed  unto  the  image  of  the  Saviour  who  is  so  dear  to  him.  3.  And 
now,  finally :  What  is  the  blessing  which  those  who  bless  hope  yet  to  enjoy  amid 
the  bliss  of  heaven  ?  The  fulness  of  the  inheritance  is  entered  upon  only  when  all 
differences  between  us  and  the  Heir  have  ceased.  And  in  order  that  this  consum- 
mation may  be  attained  unto,  we  must  go  on  prosecuting  our  calling,  which  is  to 
bless  as  He  blessed,  who  went  about  doing  good,  yearning  over  the  unthankful  and 
the  evil  whom  He  had  come  to  seek  and  to  save.     {John  Macpherson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  He  that  will  love  life. — The  true  life  worth  living  : — The  text  is  a 
quotation  from  a  psalm  (Psa.  xxxiv.  12).  The  quotation  in  the  original  is  slightly 
varied  in  the  old  Greek  translation,  and  by  St.  Peter.  One  is  tempted  to  wish  that 
the  R.V.,  instead  of  adopting  "  he  that  would  love  life,"  had  just  added  a  few  letters 
to  the  Authorised  translation.  We  should  then  read,  "  he  that  ivilleth  to  love  life," 
that  is,  "  he  whose  deliberate  will  it  is  to  love  life  ;  he  who  sets  himself  to  love  a 
life,  which  is  true  life."  Let  us,  then,  address  ourselves  to  the  question  now  so 
often  asked,  "  Is  life  worth  living  ?  "  I.  What  is  meant  by  life  ?  There  are  two 
words  in  the  New  Testament  which,  from  the  necessities  of  our  language,  are  alike 
rendered  "  life."  One  of  these  words,  fiio^,  signifies  the  principle  of  animal  life,  the 
things  by  which  that  life  is  preserved  or  gladdened,  and  the  span  of  time  through 
which  it  is  continued.  The  other  word  belongs  to  a  higher  sphere,  ^w?).  It  is  the 
new  life ;  which  may  be  stunted  or  strengthened,  as  grace  is  used  or  abused ;  and 
which,  after  the  resurrection,  is  to  be  clothed  upon  with  a  fitting  framework.  The 
question,  then,  for  us  as  Christians  reaUy  is,  not  whether  life,  in  the  New  Testament 
sense  of  the  word,  ^w»/,  is  worth  living,  but  whether  existence,  iSiog,  under  mere 
animal  or  external  conditions,  is  worth  living  ?     The  last,  no  doubt,  is  an  intricate 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

question,  and  much  may  be  said  in  favour  of  a  reply  in  the  negative.  We  may  be 
reminded  of  the  transitoriness  of  human  existence.  The  vanity  of  our  expectations 
may  be  appealed  to,  the  compression  of  the  successive  objects  of  hope  in  the  iron 
grasp  of  the  coarse  hand  of  necessity.  The  loss  of  those  we  love  is  a  condition  of 
advancing  years.  And  this  is  accompanied  by  the  protracted  humiliation  of  the 
breaking  up  of  the  machine,  by  the  sure  martyrdom  of  gout,  or  of  some  other  bodily 
torture.  With  this  comes  weariness  of  life.  Much,  very  much,  may  of  course  be 
justly  urged  in  mitigation  of  this  pessimism.  "  Life  rightly  used,"  exclaimed  a 
great  statesman,  "  has  happiness  for  each  of  its  ages."  The  sweetnesses  of  domestic 
love ;  the  pleasures  of  human  society  and  friendship  ;  the  overplus  of  health  over 
sickness  and  pain ;  activities,  expectations,  little  surprises  that  come  to  the  weariest 
lot ;  the  air,  the  sky,  the  sunshine ; — these,  and  a  thousand  like  things,  are  woven 
into  a  contexture  of  no  funereal  tint.  "  We  bless  Thee  for  our  creation,  preserva- 
tion, and  all  the  blessings  of  this  life."  II.  But  about  the  answer  to  the  question. 
Is  existence  elevated  into  life  worth  living?  we  as  Christians  can  make  no 
doubt.  1.  Present  acceptance  makes  life  worth  living.  "  A  tranquil  God  tranquil- 
lises  all  things,  and  to  see  His  peacefulness  is  to  be  at  peace."  2.  There  are  times 
of  exquisite  pleasure  in  communion  with  God.  These  compensate  for  the  languor 
of  old  age  and  for  the  slow  "  martyrdom  of  life."  3.  Nor  must  we  forget  the 
pleasure  which  there  is  in  work  for  God.  The  study  of  Scripture  is  a  perpetual 
delight  for  those  who  pursue  it.  The  Church's  sacramental  life  is  full  of  joy.  The 
teaching  of  the  young,  the  ministry  to  the  sick,  the  gathering  in  of  the  fallen,  the 
adornment,  the  quickening,  the  elevation  of  service  and  worship,  have  pleasures  of 
their  own  which  give  animation  and  variety  to  life.  But  what  is  to  be  said  of  one 
form  of  sorrow  inseparable  from  true  religion — the  sorrow  of  repentance  ?  "  That 
kind  of  sorrow  is  its  own  consolation  "  ;  "  He  has  given  a  new  kind  of  tears  upon 
earth,  which  make  those  happy  who  shed  them."  "  Oh  that  we  could  understand 
that  the  mystery  of  grace  gives  blessedness  with  tears !  "  4.  That  life  is  worth 
living  is,  above  all,  proved  by  the  view  which  Jesus  took  of  it.  Does  He  not  say  of 
Himself,  "  My  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men  "  ?  He  is  in  some  measure  (if  we 
may  reverently  say  it)  like  a  great  artist,  when,  after  the  preparatory  toil  and 
thought,  his  idea  stands  out  before  him  in  its  definite  unity  and  beauty,  and  he 
cannot  rest  for  joy  until  it  smiles  before  him  in  marble,  or  is  fixed  in  the  music  of 
deathless  lines.  No  doubt  human  life  is  tragic  and  pathetic,  yet  there  is  a  magic 
smile  on  the  face  of  the  drama  after  all.  (Bp.  Alexander.)  The  way  to  secure 
good  days  : — I.  A  reasonable  desire.  We  have,  in  common  with  the  beasts  the 
intense  desire  to  preserve  our  lives,  a  natural  shrinking  from  death ;  and  it  would 
be  easy  to  show  you  the  important  place  of  this  universal  sentiment  in  the  Divine 
economy.  It  is  indeed  the  basis  of  society ;  the  secret  of  man's  right  relations  with 
his  brother.  For  his  jealousy  in  guarding  the  treasure  of  his  own  life  makes  him 
careful  to  preserve  the  treasure  of  life  for  his  brother.  But  it  may  be  thought  that 
the  supreme  interest  which  the  Christian  has  in  the  life  to  come  should  make  him 
indifferent  to  the  continuance  of  this  life.  But  that  notion  belongs  to  extravagant 
Bentiment,  and  has  no  countenance  from  Bible  teachings.  It  is  only  morbid  feeling 
that  leads  to  ill-speaking  of  present  scenes  and  opportunities.  But  St.  Peter  uses 
another  expression  for  the  befitting  Christian  desire.  A  man  should  hope  for  "  good 
days  "  :  days  filled  up  with  goodness,  in  the  sense  of  good  doings,  and  consequent 
good  enjoyings.  Ours  cannot  be  "  good  days  "  unless  we  enjoy  a  fair  measure  of 
health,  have  useful  occupation,  and  the  pleasure  of  loving  friendships.  II.  This 
REASONABLE  DESIRE  ATTAINED.  The  apostle  lays  dowu  three  conditions,  and  they  are 
all  thoroughly  practical.  1.  He  who  would  see  good  days  will  have  to  rule  his 
speech  :  "  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips  that  they  speak  no  guile." 
If  we  would  see  how  this  "  ruling  of  our  speech"  stands  related  to  "  seeing  good 
days,"  let  us  think  how  many  of  the  misunderstandings  and  separations  and 
troubles  of  our  lives  have  come  out  of  hasty,  unwise,  unkind,  impure  speeches.  2. 
He  will  have  to  order  his  conduct.  And  that  involves  work  of  two  kinds,  each 
closely  related  to  the  other.  As  soon  as  we  take  our  life  into  our  hands,  and  resolve 
to  get  it  into  fair  shape,  we  find  there  is  much  to  cut  off.  The  attaining  of  good 
ever  goes  along  with  the  clearing  out  of  evil.  And  this  makes  the  moral  conflict  of 
our  lives.  We  must  be  doing  good,  seeking  good,  filling  up  our  lives  with  good, 
that  evil  cannot  even  squeeze  in  edgeways.  Activity  in  goodness  is  our  safeguard. 
Temptation  gains  its  effective  power  upon  the  idlers.  3.  He  will  have  to  tone  his  rela- 
tions. "  Let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue  it."  By  peace  we  must  understand  peaceable- 
ness,  the  spirit  of  the  peacemaker,  gentle,  considerate,  charitable.  (The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  PETER.  279 

Let  him  refrain  his  tong^ue  from  evil. — The  words  of  our  lips : — Most  important 
among  Christian  duties  is  control  of  the  tongue,  and  yet  it  is  much  neglected. 
Many  who  would  hesitate  to  do  a  foolish  or  wicked  thmg  do  not  scruple  to  say 
what  is  both  unwise  and  wrong.  I.  Let  us  guard  against  the  unkind  word  of  every 
class,  n.  Another  which  we  must  guard  against  is  the  discontented  word.  Count 
up  God's  mercies  and  blessings  every  day,  and  you  cannot  murmur.  III.  Let  us 
guard  against  the  untruthtul  word  of  every  kind.  A  lie  is  no  less  a  lie  because  it 
is  printed  in  a  prospectus,  or  written  up  in  a  shop  window.  (H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton, 
M.A.)  The  evil  of  the  tongue: — "From  evil."  This  is  a  large  field,  the  evil  of 
the  tongue ;  but  I  give  it  too  narrow  a  name :  we  have  good  warrant  to  give  it  a 
much  larger— a  whole  universe,  a  world  of  iniquity ;  a  vast  bulk  of  evils,  and 
great  variety  of  them,  as  of  countries  on  the  earth  or  creatures  in  the  world.  There 
be  in  the  daily  discourses  of  the  greatest  part  of  men  many  things  that  belong  to 
this  world  of  evil,  and  yet  pass  unsuspected,  so  that  we  do  not  think  them  to  be 
within  its  compass,  not  using  due  diligence  and  exactness  in  our  discoveries  of  the 
several  parts  of  it,  although  it  is  all  within  ourselves,  yea,  within  a  small  part  of 
ourselves,  our  tongues.  1.  Profane  speech,  that  which  is  grossly  and  manifestly 
wicked ;  and  in  this  part  lie  impious  speeches,  which  directly  reflect  upon  the 
glory  and  name  of  God  ;  blasphemies  and  oaths  and  cursings,  of  which  there  is  so 
great,  so  lamentable  abundance  amongst  us ;  and  to  these  join  scoffs  and  mockings 
at  religion,  also  impure  or  filthy  speaking,  which  either  pollutes  or  offends  the 
hearers,  and  is  the  noisome  breath  of  a  rotten,  polluted  heart.  2.  Consider  next,  as 
another  grand  part  of  the  tongue,  uncharitable  speeches,  tending  to  the  defaming 
and  disgrace  of  others ;  and  these  are  likewise  of  two  sorts — open  railings  and 
reproaches,  secret  slander  and  detraction.  The  former  is  unjust  and  cruel,  but  it 
is  somewhat  the  less  dangerous  because  open.  It  is  a  fight  in  plain  field ;  but  truly 
it  is  no  piece  of  a  Christian's  warfare  to  encounter  it  in  the  same  way.  But  the 
other  kind,  detraction,  is  more  universal  amongst  all  sorts,  as  being  a  far  easier  way 
of  mischief.  The  former  are  the  arrows  that  fly  by  day,  but  this  is  the  pestilence 
that  walketh  in  darkness  ;  it  spreads  and  infects  secretly  and  insensibly,  is  not  felt 
but  in  the  effects  of  it ;  and  it  works  either  by  calumnies  altogether  forged  and 
untrue,  of  which  malice  is  inventive,  or  by  the  advantage  of  real  faults,  of  which  it 
is  very  discerning,  and  these  are  stretched  and  aggravated  to  the  utmost.  3.  Vain, 
fruitless  speeches  are  an  evil  of  the  tongue.  Not  only  those  they  call  harmless  lies, 
which  some  people  take  a  pleasure  in  and  trade  much  in,  light  buffooneries  and 
foolish  jestings,  but  the  greatest  part  of  those  discourses  which  men  account  the 
blameless  entertainments  one  of  another,  come  within  the  compass  of  this  evil ; 
frothy,  unsavoury  stuff,  tending  to  no  purpose  nor  good  at  all.  4.  Doubleness  and 
guile  ;  so  great  a  part,  that  it  is  here  particularly  named  a  part,  though  the  evil  of 
it  is  less  known  and  discerned ;  and  so  there  is  in  it,  as  I  may  say,  much  terra 
incognita ;  yet  it  is  of  a  very  large  compass,  as  large,  we  may  confidently  say,  as  all 
the  other  three  together.  '\\Tiat  of  men's  speech  is  not  manifestly  evil  in  any  of  the 
other  kinds  is  the  most  of  it  naught  this  way  ;  speech  good  to  appearance,  plausible 
and  fair,  but  not  upright ;  not  silver,  but  silver  dross,  as  Solomon  calls  it  (Prov. 
xxvi.  23) ;  each,  some  way  or  other,  speaking  falsehood  and  deceit  to  his  neighbour ; 
and  daring  to  act  thus  falsely  with  God  in  His  services ;  rehgious  speeches  abused 
by  some  in  hypocrisy,  as  holy  vestments,  for  a  mask  or  disguise  ;  doing  nothing  but 
compassing  him  about  with  lies,  deceiving  indeed  ourselves,  while  we  think  to 
deceive  Him  who  cannot  be  deceived  and  will  not  be  mocked.  But  to  add  some- 
thing for  remedy  of  these  evils  in  some  part  discovered — for  to  vanquish  this  world 
of  evils  is  a  great  conquest — it  must  begin  at  the  heart,  otherwise  it  will  be  but  a 
mountebank  cure,  a  false,  imagined  conquest.  The  weights  and  wheels  are  there, 
and  the  clock  strikes  according  to  their  motion.  A  guileful  heart  makes  guileful 
tongue  and  lips.  It  is  the  work-house,  where  is  the  forge  of  deceits  and  slanders 
and  other  evil  speakings ;  and  the  tongue  is  only  the  outer  shop  where  they  are 
vended,  and  the  lips  of  the  door  of  it ;  so  then  such  ware  as  is  made  within,  such 
and  no  other,  can  be  set  out.  In  like  manner,  a  purified  heart  will  unteach  the 
tongue  all  fithy,  impure  speeches,  and  will  give  it  a  holy  strain ;  and  the  spirit  of 
charity  and  humility  will  banish  that  mischievous  humour,  which  sets  so  deep  in 
the  most,  of  reproaching  and  disgracing  others  in  any  way,  either  openly  or  secretly  ; 
for  it  is  wicked  self-love  and  pride  of  heart  whence  these  do  spring,  searching  and 
disclosing  the  failings  of  others,  on  which  love  will  rather  cast  a  mantle  to  hide 
them.  Be  choice  in  your  society,  sit  not  with  vain  persons,  whose  tongues  have 
nothing  else  to  utter  but  impurity  or  malice  or  folly.    But  frequent  the  company 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \ci\kp.  hi. 

of  grave  and  godly  persons,  in  whose  hearts  and  lips  piety  and  love  and  wisdom 
are  set,  and  it  is  the  way  to  learn  their  language.  Use  a  little  of  the  bridle  in  the 
quantity  of  speech.  Incline  a  little  rather  to  sparing  than  lavishing,  for  "  in  many 
words  there  wants  not  sin."  In  the  use  of  the  tongue,  when  thou  dost  speak,  divert 
it  from  evil  and  guile  by  a  habit  of  and  delight  in  protltable  and  gracious  discourse. 
Thus  St.  Paul  makes  the  opposition  (Eph.  iv.  29)  :  Let  there  be  no  corrupt  or  rotten 
communication  ;  and  yet  he  urges  not  total  silence,  but  enjoins  such  speech  as 
"  may  edify  and  minister  grace  unto  the  hearers."  And  are  not  such  discourses  much 
more  worthy  the  choosing  than  the  base  trash  we  usually  fill  one  another's  ears 
with  ?  An  excellent  task  for  the  tongue  is  that  which  David  chooseth,  "  And  my 
tongue  shall  speak  of  Thy  righteousness,  and  of  Thy  praise  all  the  day  long."  Were 
the  day  ten  days  long,  no  vacant  room  for  any  unholy  or  offensive  or  feigned 
speech !  And  they  lose  not  who  love  to  speak  praise  to  Him !  for  He  loves  to 
speak  peace  to  them ;  and  instead  of  the  world's  vain  tongue-liberty,  to  have  such 
intercourse  and  discourse  is  no  sad,  melancholy  life,  as  the  world  mistakes  it.  (Abp. 
Leighton.)  Speak  no  guile. — Veracity  :■ — One  of  the  attributes  by  which  the  Most 
High  specially  desires  Himself  to  be  known  by  His  intelligent  universe  is  absolute 
and  unchanging  veracity.  Whatever  He  reveals  to  us  He  would  have  us  receive  as 
the  pure  and  simple  verity.  Whatever  He  has  promised,  though  heaven  and  earth 
should  pass  away,  He  will  assuredly  perform.  In  this  attribute  of  inviolable  tnrh 
God  commands  us  to  be  imitators  of  Him.  He  wills  us  never  to  utter  anything  but 
the  exact  verity.  In  the  commandment  given  to  our  race  by  Moses  it  is  written, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness."  In  the  text,  as  in  other  places.  He  has 
promised  His  special  favour  to  those  that  speak  no  guile.  Our  Lord  Himself  has 
declared  that  liars  are  the  children  of  the  devil ;  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of 
lies.  It  is  manifest  that  these  teachings  have  not  been  without  effect  wherever  the 
Bible  has  been  openly  and  plainly  spread  before  the  people.  Wherever  the  Word  of 
God  is  freely  circulated,  and  generally  read,  a  barefaced  and  habitual  liar  is  rarely  - 
to  be  met  with  among  men  who  lay  any  claim  to  the  respect  of  their  fellow-citizens. 
While,  however,  such  cases  are  rare,  I  fear  that  indirect,  and  what  are  termed  minor 
variations  from  strict  veracity,  are  by  no  means  uncommon.  The  law  of  absolute 
veracity  would  require  that  we  should  utter  nothing  but  the  perfect  verity.  We  are, 
however,  limited  in  comprehension,  and  imperfect  in  knowledge.  To  this  our 
imperfection  the  law  of  God  has  respect,  and  it  requires  of  us  no  more  than  our 
nature  can  perform.  But  some  one  may  ask.  Are  we  obliged  to  tell  every  one  whom 
we  meet  all  that  we  know  and  all  that  we  are  thinking  about  ?  Do  we  violate  the 
law  of  veracity  because  we  do  not  make  a  confidant  of  every  companion,  or  reveal 
all  our  thoughts  even  to  our  most  intimate  friends  ?  We  may  ask  ourselves,  and  it 
would  be  well  if  we  asked  ourselves  much  oftener,  whether  it  is  or  is  not  our  duty  to 
speak.  If  we  decide,  either  from  moral  or  prudential  reasons,  that  it  is  our  duty  to 
be  silent,  it  is  clear  that  the  law  of  veracity  has  no  command  to  utter.  If  we,  on 
the  other  hand,  decide  that  it  is  our  duty  to  speak,  then  the  law  pronounces  its 
decision,  and  forbids  us  to  speak  anything  but  the  truth.  But  the  inquiry  may 
arise.  Are  we  always  obliged,  when  we  speak,  to  speak  the  whole  truth  ?  If  we 
intend  to  convey  the  impression  that  what  we  say  is  the  whole  truth,  when  we  know 
that  it  is  only  a  part,  we  violate  the  law  of  veracity.  If  we  have  no  such  intention, 
but  merely  relate  the  fact  as  a  fact,  without  any  design  to  create  any  other  impres- 
sion, then  we  are  innocent.  The  same  law  applies  to  promises.  A  promise  is  the 
expression  of  our  intention  to  do  something,  with  the  design  of  creating  in  another 
the  expectation  that  it  will  be  done.  Simply  to  express  an  intention  is  not  to  make  a 
promise.  If,  in  the  course  of  ordinary  conversation,  I  happen  to  mention  my 
purpose  to  leave  town  to-morrow,  this  is  not  a  promise,  for  I  did  not  intend  to 
create  an  expectation.  If  I  not  only  say  that  I  am  going,  but  enter  into  an  engage- 
ment with  another  to  accompany  him,  this  constitutes  a  promise.  We  are  morally 
bound  to  fulfil  the  expectation  which  we  have  voluntarily  created.  If  a  moral 
obligation  exists,  it  must  be  fulfilled.  If  a  doubt  remains,  we  must  decide  against 
ourselves,  or  leave  the  question  to  the  decision  of  others.  In  no  other  manner  can 
ve  retain  our  love  of  veracity  unimpaired.  By  the  habit  of  deciding  doubtful  cases 
in  our  own  favour,  selfishness  gains  the  victory  over  our  love  of  truth,  and,  before 
we  are  aware  of  it,  we  become  reckless  of  our  obligations  and  regardless  of  the 
sanctity  of  our  word.  And  here,  again,  it  may  be  asked— for  questions  on  this 
subject  seem  to  be  almost  innumerable — Are  we  bound  to  fulfil  to  the  letter  every 
promise  which  we  make,  even  when  it  is  without  any  condition  ?  I  would  not  say  even 
BO  much  as  this.     The  very  object  for  which  the  promise  was  made  may  have 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  281 

become  unattainable,  and  of  course  the  whole  engagement  falls  to  the  ground.  But 
if  I  break  an  engagement  from  idleness,  or  because  I  prefer  at  the  moment  to  read 
some  book  which  happens  to  interest  nre,  I  am  guilty.  It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  my 
friend  will  excuse  it :  this  may  be,  but  it  alters  not  the  fact  that  I  have  trifled  with 
my  conscience,  degraded  my  moral  nature,  and  sinned  against  God.  All  this 
should  plainly  teach  us  several  important  lessons.  In  the  first  place,  a  promise 
should  always,  if  possible,  be  definite,  and  distinctly  understood  by  both  parties. 
Again,  if  there  be  from  a  necessity  a  contingency,  this  contingency  should  be  as 
accurately  defined  as  the  promise  itself.  And,  lastly,  when  we  are  in  doubt  respect- 
ing the  validity  of  any  obligation — that  is,  when  there  is  a  conflict  in  our  minds 
between  the  claims  of  veracity  and  those  of  interest  and  convenience— it  is  always 
safe  to  decide  in  favour  of  veracity.  This  may,  it  is  true,  cost  us  trouble,  and 
sometimes  apparently  useless  trouble,  but  it  will  confirm  our  virtue  and  teach  us  practi- 
cal wisdom.  Such,  then,  is  the  law  of  God,  revealed  to  us  in  the  Scriptures.  But,  let 
us  ask,  Is  this  law  obeyed  ?  Let  us  glance  at  a  few  of  the  occasions  which  give  rise  to 
the  violation  of  the  precept,  and  we  shall  see  how  easily  men  are  seduced  into  dis- 
obedience to  the  law  of  God.  1.  The  inordinate  love  of  wealth  gives  occasion  to 
frequent  violations  of  the  plainest  precepts  of  veracity.  When  large  profits  can  be 
secured  by  falsehood,  I  am  told  that,  in  our  large  commercial  centres,  lying  and 
even  false  swearing  are  matters  of  daily  occurrence.  The  common  adulteration  of 
articles  of  traffic  comes  under  the  same  condemnation.  Men  take  every  means  to 
give  to  a  worthless  compound  the  appearance  of  a  general  product,  and  then  solemnly 
declare  it  to  be  what  they  know  it  is  not.  Or  we  may  come  to  facts  which  tran- 
spire every  day,  in  every  city  and  village  in  our  land.  The  seller  represents  his 
goods  as  of  the  very  best  quality,  and  offers  them  to  the  buyer  at  a  price  which  he 
declares  to  be  scarcely  above  cost.  The  buyer,  on  the  other  hand,  considers  the 
quality  inferior,  the  price  unreasonable,  and,  at  most,  is  willing  to  purchase  only  on 
a  very  long  credit.  The  bargain  is  at  length  concluded,  the  goods  are  delivered,  and 
the  parties  separate.  All  at  once  the  language  of  these  men  is  suddenly  transformed. 
The  seller  is  rejoicing  that  he  has  disposed  of  his  merchandise  at  so  handsome  an 
advance,   the   buyer  that  he  has  received  so  good  an  article  at  so  low  a  price. 

2.  Idle  curiosity  gives  occasion  to  a  large  amount  of  false  speaking.  Many  persons 
have  an  insatiable  desire  to  know  all  the  affairs  of  their  neighbours,  their  likes  and 
dishkes,  their  domestic  arrangements,  their  opinions  on  all  matters  and  of  all 
persons,  and  thus  to  worm  themselves  into  the  most  secret  recesses  of  their  con- 
fidence. This  is  commonly  done  from  no  malicious  design — for  such  persons  are 
commonly  good-natured — but  from  mere  childish  inquisitiveness.  To  accomplish 
our  purpose,  however,  not  a  little  management  is  necessary,  and  we  are  obliged  to 
pretend  to  know  already  much  of  which  we  are  entirely  ignorant.  This  is  the  first 
departure  from  truth.  We  obtained  our  knowledge  under  the  injunction  of  secrecy. 
But  a  secret  which  does  not  belong  to  us  is  not  easily  kept,  for  this  intense  desire  to 
know  is  always  accompanied  by  an  equally  intense  desire  to  tell.  We  must  reveal 
it  to  our  intimate  friends ;  and  here  is  departure  from  truth  the  second.  Or,  again,. 
we  may  meet  with  another  person  as  inquisitive  as  ourselves,  in  whom  we  dare  not 
confide,  and  whose  prying  curiosity  we  can  elude  in  no  other  way  than  by  falsehood 
or  prevarication ;   here  is  departure   the  third.     Thus  the  habit  grows  upon  us. 

3.  Another  frequent  occasion  for  falsehood  is  found  in  the  fear  of  speaking  or 
acting  at  variance  with  received  conventionalities.  We  express  joy  when  we  feel 
none.  We  counterfeit  sadness  when  we  suffer  no  sorrow.  We  use  the  expressions 
that  are  in  vogue  without  any  regard  to  the  truthfulness  of  their  application,  but . 
merely  because  we  hear  them  used  by  others.  Many  a  family  has  become  habitual 
liars  by  the  daily  repetition  of  these  conventional  falsehoods.  Children  know  that, 
such  language  is  false,  and  they  must  have  more  than  usual  virtue  if  they  are  not. 
fatally  coiTupted.  But  some  one  will  say.  To  do  as  you  advise,  and  avoid  the 
errors  against  which  you  have  cautioned  us,  vrould  require  great  care  and  intense^ 
watchfulness  in  all  our  conversation.  We  should  be  obliged  to  think  before  we' 
speak,  abandon  many  of  the  ordinary  topics  of  discourse,  and  be  content  to  improve 
men  rather  than  amuse  them.  Be  it  so.  In  this  we  shall  only  follow  the  examples 
of  better  and  wiser  men.  It  was  the  prayer  of  David,  "  Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  over 
my  mouth;  keep  the  door  of  my  lips."  But  you  will  say.  To  obey  these  precepts 
with  strictness,  to  speak  nothing  but  the  simple  verity,  and  utter  only  what  God  will 
approve,  would  render  us  very  peculiar.  The  world  lieth  in  wickedness,  and  how 
can  a  child  of  God  live  in  it,  and  not  be  peculiar  ?  Wicked  men  imitate  the  example 
of  the  father  of  lies ;  and  can  we  be  imitators  of  the  God  of  truth  without  being, 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iit. 

peculiar?  Was  there  ever  a  being  on  earth  so  peculiar  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the 
Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith?  Unless  the  teachings  of  Christ  exert  their 
effect  on  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-men,  what  do  we  more  than  others  ?  and 
how  shall  the  world  be  the  better  or  the  wiser  for  our  having  lived  in  it  ?  But,  you 
will  say,  this  is  a  lesson  most  difficult  to  be  learned.  It  requires  that  we  should  be 
always  on  our  guard,  watching  over  ourselves  with  a  vigilance  such  as  we  had 
never  imagined.  The  gospel  of  Christ  has  provided  for  us  all  needful  assistance. 
The  cure  must  be  performed  in  the  inmost  spirit,  and  the  Spirit  helpeth  our 
infirmities.  [F.  Wayland.)  Eschew  eviL — The  evil  of  sin  .-—This  we  must 
eschew,  as  the  bullet  shot  out  of  a  gun,  or  to  be  stricken  with  a  sharp  sword ;  we 
must  abhor  it,  as  a  toad  or  poison ;  we  must  abhor  it  with  a  deadly,  an  utter 
hatred,  and  accordingly  avoid  it  most  carefully.  (John  Eogers.)  Why  sin  must 
be  avoided: — 1.  God  is  thereby  dishonoured  (1  Sam.  xv.  23).  2.  God's  wrath  is 
provoked,  and  that  must  needs  be  dangerous  (Psa.  cvi.  29  ;  Jer.  vii.  17)-  3.  God 
hates  it  and  such  as  commit  it  (Psa.  v.  4 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  14.)  4.  It 
brought  misery  into  the  world,  with  shame  and  confusion  upon  all,  and  hath 
always  been  the  cause  of  all  evils.  5.  It  bringeth  eternal  destruction  both  of  body 
and  soul.  (Ibid.)  All  sins  to  be  escheioed  : — 1.  We  are  to  eschew  all  evil,  even 
the  least.  2.  All  persons  are  to  eschew  the  same,  not  the  greatest  excepted ;  God's 
law  binds  them,  be  they  princes,  magistrates,  ministers,  &c.  They  should  eschew  it 
most,  for  by  their  example  they  do  most  hurt.  3.  At  all  times.  Some  things  be  in 
season  at  one  time,  some  at  another,  but  sin  is  never  in  season.  4.  In  all  places. 
God  is  the  God  of  all  places,  neither  can  any  place  change  the  nature  of  sin.  Thou 
must  eschew  sin  as  well  abroad  as  at  home  ;  in  thy  house,  chamber,  shop,  as  well 
as  at  church.  5.  All  kinds  of  sin  are  also  to  be  avoided.  Error  in  judgment  and 
wickedness  in  conversation,  evil  against  God,  our  neighbours,  or  ourselves.  6.  We 
must  also  avoid  evil  under  what  colour  or  pretence  soever  it  comes.  (Ibid.) 
Dangers  in  life  to  be  avoided  : — I  think  we  ought  to  buoy  for  ourselves  in  our  course, 
as  we  buoy  a  harbour.  Off  this  shoal  a  black  buoy  floats,  and  says  to  those  who 
sail  by,  as  plainly  as  if  it  spoke  in  all  languages,  "  Keep  to  the  right  here  "  ;  and 
over  against  it  floats  another,  and  says,  "  Keep  to  the  left  here."  Now,  in  life's 
ocean,  wherever  we  know  the  quicksands  are,  wherever  we  have  once  been  stranded, 
let  us  sink  the  buoy  and  anchor  of  memory,  and  keep  to  the  right  or  the  left,  as  the 
shoal  may  be.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Eschew  evil  and  do  good  : — In  an  old  English 
work  entitled,  "Warwick's  Spare  Moments,"  we  find  the  following  excellent  remarks  : 
*'  When  I  plant  a  choyse  flower  in  a  fertile  soyle,  I  see  nature  presently  to  thrust  up 
with  it  the  stinging  nettle,  the  stinking  hemlocks,  the  drowzie  poppie,  and  many 
noysome  weeds,  which  wiU  either  choake  my  plant  with  excluding  the  sunne,  or 
divert  its  nourishment  to  themselves ;  but  if  I  weed  but  these  at  first,  my  flower 
thrives  to  its  goodnesse  and  glory.  This  is  also  my  case  when  I  endeavour  to  plant 
grace  in  the  fertile  soyle  of  a  good  wit ;  for  luxurious  nature  thrusts  up  with  it 
either  stinging  wrath,  or  stinking  wantonnesse,  or  drowzie  sloath,  or  some  other 
vices,  which  robb  my  plant  of  its  desired  flourishing,  but  these  being  pluckt  up, 
the  good  wit  produceth,  in  its  time,  the  faire  flower  of  virtue.  I  will  not,  there- 
fore, think  the  best  wits,  as  they  are  wits,  fittest  to  make  the  best  men,  but 
as  they  are  the  purged  best  wits.  The  ground  of  their  goodnesse  is,  not 
the  goodnesse  of  their  wit's  ground,  the  good  weeding  and  cleansing  it.  I  must 
first  eschew  the  evill  ere  I  can  doe  good  ;  supplant  vices,  ere  I  can  implant  virtue." 
And  do  good. — Christians  must  be  doers  of  good  : — 1.  It  is  good  and  amiable  of 
itself,  as  the  Lord  is.  2.  God  commands  it,  who  is  our  Sovereign  Lord  and  King. 
3.  All  promises  in  Scripture  of  good  things,  here  and  hereafter,  are  made  to  well- 
doing (Lev.  xxvi. ;  Deut.  xxviii.).  4.  This  brings  us  peace  of  conscience  in  this 
world.  5.  This  brings  us  to  eternal  happiness  in  the  world  to  come  (Matt.  vii.  21 ; 
John  V.  29  ;  Rom.  ii.  10).  6.  It  is  the  glory  of  a  man  when  he  is  dead.  (John 
Mogers.)  The  extent  of  well-doing  required  : — 1.  We  must  do  all  good  that  we  can, 
and  our  places  require,  having  respect  unto  all  God's  commandments  (Psa.  cxix.  6  ; 
Luke  i.  6  ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  25).  2.  We  must  do  good  at  all  times.  Aguish  fits  of 
goodness,  as  before  the  Communion,  or  in  afflictions,  Ac,  God  cares  not  for ;  He 
will  have  us  to  be  ever  doing  some  good.  3.  We  must  do  good  in  all  places ;  not  in 
the  church  only,  but  everywhere.  4.  So  in  all  companies  we  must  do  good,  or  take 
good  ;  if  we  cannot  do  what  we  would,  we  must  do  what  we  can  ;  it  is  some  good 
to  keep  away  evil.  5.  We  must  do  good  to  all  persons,  all  duties  towards  God — 
publicly,  privately,  on  His  Sabbaths,  on  other  days;  so  towards  our  families,  neigh- 
bours, friends,  superiors,  inferiors,  equals.     We  must  do  good  as  occasion  offers 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  283 

itself,  yea,  towards  our  enemies.     6.  We  must  do  good  in  our  general  calling  as 
Christians,  by  a  holy  conversation  agreeable  to  our  profession,  and  by  our  counsels, 
exhortations,  admonitions,  reproofs,  prayers.     We  must  do  good  also  in  our  parti- 
cular  callings,  as  magistrates,  ministers,  husbands,  wives,  parents,  masters,  &c. 
7.  We  must  do  good  also,  though  it  be  hard  and  difficult  so  to  do.     If  one  way  will 
not  serve  the  turn,  whereby  to  bring  to  pass  our  religioub  purposes,  we  must  set  upon 
another,  as  Luke  v.  18.     8.  We  must  do  good,  though  we  have  no  thanks  for  our 
labour,  yea,  though  we  have  ill-will  and  hard  measure.     9.  We  must  do  good  also, 
though  we  have  few  encouragements  and  small  company  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).     10.  We 
must  do  good  while  we  may,  while  life  and  means  last,  yea  and  constantly.    11.  We 
must  also  do  the  same  in  a  particular  faith,  and  in  uprightness  of  heart,  declaring 
the  same  by  the  reformation  of  our  lives ;  and  this  must  be  in  obedience  to  God, 
aiming  at  His  glory,  and  not  seeking  ourselves,  either  in  our  profit,  pleasure,  or 
credit,    &c.,    all   which  must  be  done   willingly.      {Ibid.)         Do  good: — All  are 
doing  good  or  evil.     Men  are  sowing  to  the  flesh  or  to  the  spirit.     Every  man  is 
working  iniquity  or  righteousness.     To  do  good  is  Godlike.     The  Most  High  has 
never  left  Himself  without  witness,  in  that  "He  did  good  and  gave  us  rain  from 
heaven  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."     We  ought 
to  be  like  God.     Because  God  is  holy,  and  perfect,  and  beneficent,  we  ought  to  be 
pure,   and    upright,    and    useful.      To  live   for  the  good    of    others  makes    us 
like  Christ.      He  went  about  doing  good.       He   is   our   Pattern  as  well  as  our 
Eedeemer.     Then  we  are  often  commanded  to  be  doing  good.     Here  are  a  few 
words  of  Scripture:   "Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good"  ;  "Depart  from   evil, 
and  do  good " ;    "  Love  your   enemies,   bless  them  that   curse  you,   do   good  to 
them  that  hate  you  " ;  "  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto 
all  men  " ;  "  To  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not :  for  with  such  sacrifices 
God  is  well  pleased";  "To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to 
him  it  is  sin."     Our  redemption  by  Christ  was  to  this  very  end  (Titus  ii.  14).     It 
is  well  to  have  some  rules  for  doing  good.     Here  are  some  :  1.  Set  your  heart  on 
doing  good.   Be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season.    Be  in  dead  earnest.    2.  Begin 
at  once.     The  opportunity  is  never  wanting.     3.  Study  how  to  do  good.     Bead 
God's  Word  and  the  lives  of  good  men  and  see  how  others  did  good.     Ingeniously 
find  out  right  ways,  the  best  ways,  of  working.     4.  Pray  for  Divine  direction.     God 
is  all-wise.     Beseech  Him  to  use  you  for  His  glory  and  the  good  of  men.     5.  Never 
despise  the  day  of  small  things.     I  have  been  at  the  heads  of  some  of  our  noble 
rivers,  and  a  barrel  would  have  held  all  the  waters  they  sent  forth  in  an  hour.    One 
grain  of  wheat  has  in  a  few  years  been  so  multiplied  as  to  produce  millions  of 
bushels  in  a  year.     6.  Be  not  afraid  of  trials.     They  are  sure  to  come,  but  go  on. 
Expect  opposition,  but   do   not  needlessly  provoke   it.     7.  Aim  high.     Earnestly 
covet  the  best  gifts  and  the  largest  success.     He  who  strives  to  do  but  little  will 
commonly   do  less.     Plan  great  things.     8.  Keep  your  heart  with   all  dihgence. 
Watch   against  pride,   and   vanity,   and   self-seeking.      9.    While  you  love   God 
supremely,  love  all  men  fervently.     Cherish  the  purest  and  most  kindly  feelings. 
10.  Give  no  just  cause  of  offence.     Be  not  morose  or  censorious.     Meddle  not.     Be 
not  a  critic,  nor  a  judge,  nor  a  busybody ;  but  be  the  servant  of  all  men  for  their 
good.     11.  Never  discourage  others  in  their  good  works.     12.  Not  only  work  your- 
self, but  set  others  to  doing  good  according  to  their  ability.     "  He  who  makes  a  king 
is  greater  than  a  king."     He  who  incites  another  to  a  life  of  usefulness,  doubles  his 
own.     18.  Be  prepared  for   delays,  disappointments,   and   discouragements.     God 
may  design  to   cure  your  hot  haste   and  rashness   by  subjecting  you  to  many 
hindrances.     14.  Be  dUigent.     Be  always  at  it.     He  that  soweth  bountifully,  shall 
reap  also  bountifully.     Blessed  are  they  that  sow  by  all  watercourses.     15.  Cheer- 
fully and  trustfully  leave  all  issues  with  God.     Duty  is  yours.     Eesults  are  the 
Lord's.     16.  Always  do  the  best  you  can  under  the  circumstances.     If  you  cannot 
run,  walk  ;  if  you  cannot  walk,  crawl ;  if  you  cannot  crawl,  your  strength  is  to  sit 
still.     But  let  nothing  fail  through  your  inadvertence,  or  unbelief,   or  vanity,  or 
cowardice,  or  prayerlessness.    17.  Waste  no  time  on  unwise  plans  and  impracticable 
schemes.     Be  sure  you  are  right,  then  go  ahead.     Prove  all  things.     Learn  to  dis- 
criminate.   All  is  not  gold  that  glitters.     18.  Beware  of  all  superstition.     God  has 
no  pleasure  in  fools.     We  cannot  honour  Him  in  things  whereof  we  ought  to  be 
ashamed.     Follow  divinely  sanctioned  methods  of  doing  good.     19.  Guard  against 
fanaticism.      God  has  no  use  for  our  delusions.     Mild  enthusiasm  is  a  great  foe 
to   better  piety.     Like   a  fire  in   a  forest,   it  bums  up   all  the  tender  plants   of 
righteousness.       20.    But  never   confound  pure,  humble,   intelligent    zeal    with 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

its  counterfeits.  Superstition  and  fanaticism  are  from  beneath,  holy  zeal  is  from 
above.  Be  keenly  alive  and  ready  to  every  good  work.  21.  Count  nothing 
of  much  value  in  comparison  of  the  soul.  22.  Obtain  and  retain  a  deep  sense 
of  the  great  price  put  into  your  hand  to  do  good  and  to  lay  up  treasure  in 
heaven.  In  the  great  gospel  harvest,  he  that  reapeth  receiveth  wages  and 
gathereth  fruit  unto  life  eternal.  23.  Put  a  high  estimate  on  the  value  of  time  and 
opportunity.  "  I  have  lost  a  day  "  ought  to  be  a  dreadful  sound  in  the  ears  of  any 
mortal.  Be  on  the  alert.  24.  Keep  your  eye  on  the  person  and  grace  of  Christ. 
Without  Him  you  can  do  nothing.  He  is  our  wisdom  and  strength  and  righteous- 
ness and  sanctification  and  redemption.  None  ever  followed  Him  too  closely  nor 
relied  upon  Him  too  exclusively.      {W.  S.  Plumer,  D.D.)  Seek  peace,  and  ensue 

it.— On  seeking  peace  : — I.  What  we  aee  obliged  to  do.  1.  To  reform  our  hearts 
and  lives.  We  must  subdue  our  lusts  and  bridle  our  passions,  and  govern  our 
tongues,  and  conduct  ourselves  by  the  holy  laws  of  our  religion.  2.  To  obey  our 
superiors  as  far  as  lawfully  we  can.  3.  In  those  things  in  which  we  dissent  from 
others  we  are  to  judge  for  ourselves  only,  and  not  for  others.  4.  That  we  be  very 
diligent  in  the  search  after  truth,  as  well  as  sincere  lovers  of  it.  5.  That  we  pre- 
serve in  our  minds  a  difference  between  the  great  things  of  religion  and  the  smaller 
things  relating  to  it,  and  let  them  have  a  proportionable  regard  and  esteem.  6.  That 
we  endeavour  to  be  exemplary  in  all  those  things  in  which  we  are  all  agreed.  7.  We 
must  put  as  favourable  a  construction  upon  things  and  judge  as  charitably  of  all 
men  as  they  are  capable  of.  8.  We  must  be  careful  that  we  give  no  offence  to  our 
weak  brother  in  things  that  are  indifferent.  9.  Let  us  often  consider  how  great 
mercies  we  enjoy,  and  with  all  thankfulness  bless  the  holy  name  of  God.  This 
method  will  divert  our  complaints  into  praises,  and  greatly  tend  to  the  peace  of  the 
Church.  10.  Let  us  put  up  our  fervent  prayers  to  God  for  the  peace  of  the  Church 
and  State :  to  God,  who  maketh  men  to  be  of  one  mind :  to  God,  who  is  the  God 
of  peace  and  unity  and  love.  II.  Some  of  the  advantages  of  peace  and  unity, 
and  its  tendency  towards  our  happiness.  Peace  and  unity  hath  given  us  the 
advantage  of  waiting  upon  God  without  distraction ;  it  strengthens  us  against  a 
common  enemy  and  commends  our  holy  religion  to  those  who  are  strangers  to  it. 
It  abates  from  the  care  and  burden  of  our  superiors  and  secures  our  rights  and 
properties.  It  is  at  once  our  glory  and  our  defence,  and  the  summary  of  all  the 
blessings  of  this  lower  world.  It  encourages  all  worthy  and  useful  undertakings, 
and  makes  us  formidable  to  those  who  wish  us  evil.  Applications — 1.  It  is  evident 
from  what  hath  been  said  that  our  irregular  heats  and  disputes  are  to  be  imputed  to 
our  lusts.  2.  This  may  serve  for  the  reproof  of  those  among  us  who  by  their  profli- 
gate lives  and  their  intemperate  speeches,  their  rash  censuring  and  notorious 
uncharitableness,  lay  a  foundation  for  new  quarrels  and  contentions.  These  are  the 
men  that  trouble  the  world.  8.  Let  me  exhort  you  all  to  comply  with  my  text. 
But  what  words  shall  I  make  use  of  to  persuade  you  to  unity  and  concord  ?  (1)  I 
cannot  forbear  to  tell  you  that  it  is  your  interest  as  well  as  your  duty  to  seek  peace 
and  ensue  it.  (2)  I  might  exhort  you  to  it  for  your  brethren's  sake  also.  (3)  I 
pray  and  beseecn  you  for  the  Lord's  sake  also  :  for  His  sake  who  hath  commanded 
it ;  for  His  sake  who  came  to  restore  it  to  the  world,  who  is  the  great  Mediator,  and 
came  to  reconcile  us  to  God,  and  to  one  another.     {Bp.  Kidder.)  How  we  must 

seek  peace  : — 1.  By  living  innocently  and  harmlessly  with  our  neighbours.  2.  By 
living  helpfully,  and  doing  good  in  our  places.  3.  By  passing  by  such  small  wrongs 
as  are  done  unto  us.  4.  By  parting  with  some  of  our  right  to  have  peace.  Herein 
we  must  not  stand  upon  terms,  though  haply  it  were  fit  an  adversary  should  come 
to  us,  as  being  younger,  inferior  in  place,  or  who  first  gave  the  cause  of  offence. 
{John  Rogers.)  Why  we  must  seek  peace  : — 1.  Because  it  is  so  pleasing  to  God. 
He  is  the  God  of  peace ;  He  gave  His  Son  to  make  peace  ;  and  He  loves  that  we 
should  live  in  peace,  and  therefore  gives  us  the  gospel  of  peace  and  spirit  of 
peace  ;  yea.  He  so  likes  it  that  He  pronounces  them  blessed  that  help  it  forward. 
2.  This  shall  be  a  sign  that  we  are  taught  of  God,  and  whereby  our  prayers 
will  become  the  more  acceptable  (1  Tim.  ii.  8).  3.  This  is  most  comely  (Psa. 
cxxxiii.  3).  4.  Great  is  the  profit  hereof.  5.  If  we  live  in  peace,  we  are  fit  to  do 
good  to  one  another ;  else  we  can  do  no  good,  but  evil.     (Ihid.) 

Ver.  12.— The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous.— God'«  different  regards 
to  saints  and  dnners  : — I.  The  two  sorts  of  persons  here  spoken  of.  1.  The 
righteous.  They  have  a  true  love  to  all  God's  commandments,  and  will  not  allow 
themselves  in  anything  which  they  know  to  be  contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  2.  Those 


CHAP.  HI.]  I.  PETER.  285 

that  do  evil.  Good  men  sometimes  may  do  evil,  through  ignorance,  or  the  power 
of  temptation  ;  but  this  is  not  the  bent  of  their  minds :  when  sensible  of  it,  they 
are  sorry  for  it.  The  persons  here  spoken  of  are  of  a  different  spirit ;  they  are 
evil-doers  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  Iniquity  is  their  practice  and  delight. 
II.  How  THE  Lord  stands  atfected  both  to  the  one  and  to  the  other.  1.  His 
eyes  are  over  the  righteous  ;  which  implies — (1)  His  knowledge  of  them,  their  condi- 
tion and  circumstances  (Psa.  cxxxix.  2,  3).  (2)  His  affection  to  them.  The  eye  of 
human  creatures  is  apt  to  be  very  much  where  the  heart  is  (Psa.  cxlvi.  8 ;  xi.  7). 
(3)  Plis  providential  care  of  them.  He  acts  for  their  benefit — to  guide,  guard,  and 
deliver.  2.  His  ears  also  are  open  to  their  prayer.  This  implies — (1)  That  prayer 
is  the  common  practice  of  the  righteous  (Eph.  vi.  18).  (2)  That  this  their  practice  is 
pleasing  to  God.  (3)  That  it  is  a  wise  and  reasonable  practice,  as  it  hitherto  has 
been  the  practice  of  all  good  men.  3.  His  face  is  against  him  that  doeth  evil.  This 
signifies,  in  general,  that  He  is  displeased  with  such  persons  (Psa.  vii.  11).  This 
implies — (1)  That  He  observes  them  and  their  actions ;  therefore.  His  face  is 
against  them,  because  He  sees  and  knows  them  to  be  evil-doers.  (2)  That  their 
conduct  is  highly  offensive  to  Him.  (3)  That  He  will  certainly  treat  them  as 
enemies,  if  they  do  not  repent  and  reform  (Prov.  xxviii.  9).  Conclude  with  some 
reflections.  1.  We  may  see  that  happiness  is  the  certain  consequence  of  hoUness, 
and  misery  as  certainly  the  fruit  of  sin.  2.  We  may  hence  take  occasion  to  reflect 
on  the  folly  of  sin,  and  the  wisdom  of  being  religious.  3.  This  shows  us  that  good 
men  have  a  great  deal  of  reason  to  hope  in  the  most  threatening  external  circum- 
stances ;  and  that  bad  men  have  much  to  fear,  even  in  the  most  prosperous  circum- 
stances. 4.  Consider  seriously  what  is  said  in  the  words  of  our  text,  and  let  it 
influence  your  choice  and  conduct.  (T.  Hannam.)  The  Divine  attentiveness  to 
the  righteous  : — Let  us  consider,  first,  who  are  the  persons  spoken  of  as  "  righteous  "  ; 
secondly,  what  is  the  consolation  and  the  assistance  which  they  expect  from 
heaven.  You  might  say,  if  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  only  the  righteous,  who 
shall  presume  to  hope  for  His  favourable  regard  ?  But  you  well  Imow  that  the 
term  "  righteous  "  in  Holy  Scripture  is  not  always  used  to  signify  a  faultless  per- 
fection. They  who  love  and  fear  God,  who  strive  earnestly  to  obey  and  please  Him, 
are  frequently  denominated  righteous.  Their  righteousness,  indeed,  is  ever  very 
defective ;  but  they  are  called  righteous,  because  it  is  their  prevailing  quahty  to  be 
so.  These,  St.  Peter  assures  us,  are  the  objects  of  God's  paternal  regard.  With 
regard  to  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  spoken  of  in  the  text,  we  may  observe  that  Scripture 
mentions  them  in  three  different  ways.  1.  First,  an  eye  of  knowledge,  which 
extends  to  all  things  without  exception.  This  is  over  not  only  the  righteous,  but 
the  wicked  also,  and  over  all  creatures.  2.  God  looketh  with  an  eye  of  displeasure 
(Amos  ix.  4,  8 ;  Ezek.  ix.  10).  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  wicked,  observing 
all  their  evil  doings,  and  preparing  for  them  the  correction  which  they  deserved. 
3.  There  is  another  aspect  of  the  Deity  contrary  to  that  last  mentioned ;  namely, 
of  love  and  favour,  with  which  He  regards  His  faithful  servants  (Deut.  xi.  12  ; 
1  Kings  ix.  3).  Great  indeed  must  be  the  blessedness  of  being  thus  looked  upon 
by  the  eyes  of  God.  It  is  not  a  mere  contemplative  view,  but  infinitely  powerful 
in  operation.  The  sun  in  the  firmament  is  a  faint  resemblance  of  it ;  when  He 
enlightens,  warms,  animates  all  earthly  things  on  which  his  rays  descend.  But 
here  I  must  acknowledge  that  sometimes  the  outward  circumstances  of  the  righteous 
are  calamitous ;  as  if  God  did  not  look  upon  them,  as  if  He  had  forgotten  them. 
The  eyes  of  the  Lord  may  be  over  the  righteous,  whatever  be  their  condition.  St. 
Peter  adds,  "  And  His  ears  are  open  unto  their  prayers "  (Psa.  1.  15  ;  Matt.  vii. 
7,  11).  But  God  does  not  always  answer  the  prayers  of  the  righteous  in  their  own 
time  and  manner,  and  this  sometimes  tempts  them  to  imagine  that  He  is  averse  to 
their  prayers.  If  God  do  not  at  present  grant  your  requests,  it  does  not  follow  that 
He  hears  them  not,  or  that  He  is  not  inclined  to  do  you  good.  But  it  may  not  be 
the  fit  time ;  or,  lastly,  because  He  reserves  His  blessings  as  the  recompense  of 
assiduity  and  perseverance  in  praying.  But  another  objection  may  be  urged :  Do 
we  not  find  several  examples  in  Scripture  of  God  refusing  to  the  most  holy  persons 
the  fulfilment  of  their  prayers  (Deut.  iii.  26 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8)  ?  There  are  two 
different  ways  in  which  God  hears  our  prayers.  One  is,  according  to  our  wishes  ; 
the  other,  according  to  our  real  and  final  good.  We  are  in  adversity  and  affliction, 
and  we  cry  unto  God  for  deliverance,  which  He  does  not  vouchsafe  to  us.  But  by 
this  trial  He  awakens  our  slumbering  zeal.  He  revives  our  fainting  piety.  Has 
not  God,  then,  done  better  than  their  prayers  desired  ?  But  let  us  carefully  remem- 
ber that  this  merciful  kindness  of  the  Lord  is  not  promised  to  all  men  without 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

regard  to  their  fitness  for  it.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and 
His  ears  are  open  to  their  prayers,"  "  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that 
do  evil."     "  God  heareth  not  sinners."     (S.  Partridge,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  And  who  is  he  that  will  harm  you  ? — The  harmed  and  the  unharmed  : — 
The  primary  sense  of  these  words  is  this :  A  man's  best  safeguard  is  benevolence ;  if 
we  are  ourselves  inoffensive  in  our  behaviour,  others  will  be  less  likely  to  injure  us; 
in  proportion  as  we  are  anxious  to  do  good,  we  shall  be  less  likely  to  suffer  evil.  It 
is  true,  indeed,  that  the  main  scope  of  the  argument  is  to  show  the  manifold  bless- 
ings which  even  in  this  world  attend  on  the  righteous.  We  are  taught  that  he  who 
will  love  life,  and  see  good  days,  is  to  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  &c.  We  are 
taught  to  eschew  evil  and  do  good :  to  seek  peace  and  ensue  it.  And  why  ?  Because 
God's  favour  is  thus  secured  to  us,  and  man's  enmity  in  a  great  measure  disarmed. 
"  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,"  &c.  The  believers  were  to  suffer ; 
but  they  could  take  no  harm.  "  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of 
that  which  is  good  ?  "  Wonderful  question !  in  its  very  calmness  and  simplicity. 
Who  shall  harm  you  ?  What,  when  the  whole  world  was  leagued  in  a  malignant 
confederacy  against  them  !  "  Who  shall  harm  you?  "  What,  when  there  was  every- 
thing to  harm  them !  Ignominy,  torture,  famine,  the  sword,  dishonoured  life  or 
violent  death.  Neither,  again,  did  they  affect  insensibility  under  their  sufferings. 
How,  then,  were  they  sustained  ?  They  were  sustained  by  God's  holy  Spirit,  and 
by  a  reliance  on  their  Master's  infallible  promises,  and  by  an  undoubting  confidence 
in  the  life  to  come.  Such  is  the  application  of  the  text  with  reference  to  the  time 
at  which  it  was  written,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  first  promulgators  of  the  blessed 
gospel  of  Christ  Jesus.  With  respect,  again,  to  ourselves,  it  is  far  more  directly 
true  that  no  one  "  will  harm  us,  if  we  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good."  I  do  not 
mean  that  there  no  longer  remains  any  opposition  whatever  between  the  spirit  of 
Christianity  and  the  spirit  of  the  world.  But  I  beUeve  that  these  adversaries,  be  they 
who  they  may,  will  not  be  able  to  do  him  any  essential  injury.  I  believe,  also,  that 
a  steady  and  consistent  godliness  will  go  far  ultimately  to  convert  enemies  into 
approvers,  and  rob  all  opposition  of  its  sting.  But,  again,  if  we  may  trace  an 
intimate  connection  between  holiness  and  happiness,  between  physical  and  spiritual 
advantage — not  invariably,  perhaps,  as  to  outward  circumstances,  because  such  a 
law,  if  altogether  universal,  might  foster  mistaken  notions  of  God's  providence,  while 
it  would  be  incompatible  with  a  state  of  probation — the  converse  proposition,  or  the 
inseparable  union  of  vice  and  wretchedness,  of  impiety  and  fatal  damage  both  to 
body  and  soul,  must  be  still  more  obvious  to  every  man.  We  might  well  alter  the 
text,  and  ask,  "  Who  is  he  that  can  do  us  any  benefit,  if  we  be  not  followers  of  that 
which  is  good  ?  "  If  you  are  followers  of  that  which  is  evil,  you  harm  yourselves  to 
the  uttermost,  and  render  even  your  temporal  felicity  an  impossible  thing.  You 
may  possess  all  the  elements  of  felicity  ;  but  you  so  vitiate  them  that  they  become 
powerful  only  for  your  destruction.  The  noblest  gifts  of  nature  and  of  fortune  you 
turn  absolutely  into  curses  for  yourselves.  For,  take  any  endowment  which  God's 
loving-kindness  may  bestow,  and  see  what  becomes  of  it  in  the  hands  of  the  wicked. 
Is  it  health,  and  a  vigorous  constitution,  and  the  prospect  of  long  life?  These 
advantages  are  transmuted  into  instruments  of  perdition,  by  inducing  a  more  entire 
neglect  of  the  concerns  of  eternity.  Is  it  strength  of  will,  energy,  and  decision  of 
character  ?  That  decision  only  plunges  men  into  crime  with  a  more  headlong  zeal, 
with  a  more  desperate  recklessness.  Is  it  acuteness  of  perception  and  an  abundant 
measure  of  intellectual  capacity  ?  Alas,  this  superiority  of  understanding  serves  to 
make  men  more  subtle  in  confounding  truth  and  falsehood,  in  perverting  right  and 
wrong,  in  beguiling  and  destroying  themselves  with  their  own  frightful  sophistries. 
Is  it  beauty  of  person  ?  Yet,  ah  !  who  has  not  had  opportunity  of  seeing  that  per- 
sonal beauty  without  religious  principle  is  the  most  dreadful  of  all  snares,  the  most 
terribly  fatal  of  all  possessions?  Is  it  wealth,  and  station,  and  influence?  Yet 
these  things  without  holiness  only  enable  men  to  spi-ead  mischief  and  profligacy 
around  them,  and  dig  for  their  own  souls  a  deeper  place  in  the  pit  of  hell.  The 
scorpion-lash  is  made  of  our  own  vices.  That  which  harms  us  is  sin ;  they  who 
harm  us  are  those  who  would  debauch  our  principles,  and  corrupt  our  moral  feelings, 
and  teach  us  to  take  right  for  wrong  and  wrong  for  right,  good  for  evil  and  evil  for 
good.  Finally,  then,  as  to  all  others,  if  you  pretend  to  care  for  the  happiness  of 
mankind,  labour  strenuously  for  their  spiritual  improvement.  As  to  your  family  and 
those  about  you,  aim  not  so  much  to  make  them  clever  or  accomplished,  as  to  make 
them  religious  and  upright.    (J.  S.  Boone,  M.A.)         The  safety  of  the  righteous  man 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  287 

from  injury  and  harm : — I.  The  following  of  that  which  is  good  is  the  eeadt  wat 

TO  PBESERVE  US  FROM  VIOLENCE  AND  HURT,  BECAUSE  THIS  INOFFENSIVE  AND  RELIGIOUS 
DEPORTMENT  COMMANDS  THE  RESPECT  AND  LOVE  OF  THOSE  WHO  AEE  NOT  ENEMIES  TO  PIETY 

AND  VIRTUE.  II.  The  following  of  that  which  is  good,  the  habitual  practice  of  religion 
and  charity,  will  shelter  us  against  harm  and  wrong,  because  it  entitles  to  those 

PROMISES,  whereby  GoD  HAS  ASSURED  HiS  SERVANTS,  THAT  SO  FAB  AS  SHALL  BE  SUITABLE 
TO  His  GLORIOUS  designs  in    GOVERNING   THE  WORLD,  AND    GRACIOUS   PURPOSES    TOWARDS 

THEM,  He  WILL  PROTECT  THEM  against  the  malice  of  those  who  intend  or  attempt 
their  hurt  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9;  Psa.  xci.  1-4,  cxxi.  5-7;  Isa.  xxv.  1,  4,  liv.  14,  17;  Prov. 
xvi.  7).  1.  God  sometimes  accomplishes  His  promises  of  protection  to  His  servants 
by  changing  the  hearts  and  dispositions  of  their  bitterest  enemies,  so  that  they 
become  favourers  and  friends  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  Esau  (Gen.  xxxii.  7,  11) ;  Egyptians 
(Exod.  xi.  3).  2.  God  preserves  the  honest  followers  of  that  which  is  good  from 
harm,  by  so  chaining  up  and  overawing  the  malice  of  their  enemies,  that  however 
their  inward  hatred  remain,  yet  they  do  not  manifest  it  by  outward  injuries  (Gen. 
xxxi.  42 ;  Exod.  xxxiv.  24).  3.  As  the  enemies  of  the  righteous  are  often  constrained 
to  conceal  their  malice  ;  so,  when  God  thinks  it  fit  to  interpose  His  power.  He  screens 
the  righteous  from  the  most  furious  assaults  of  their  open  hatred  and  wrath.  Eed 
Sea ;  Saul  and  David ;  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego ;  Mordecai.  III.  The 
following  of  that  which  is  good,  though  it  does  not  always  moUify  the  hearers,  nor 
manacle  the  hands  of  men,  yet  it  does  that  which  is  much  better,  viz.,  it  turns  the 

GREATEST    INJURIES  OF    THEIR  MOST  DEADLY  ENEMIES  TO  THEIR   PROFIT    AND    ADVANTAGE. 

This  effect  it  produces  sometimes  in  their  temporal,  but  always  in  then-  spiritual  and 
eternal  interests  (Eom.  viii.  28).  Conclusion:  1.  We  are  informed  from  the  truth 
already  cleared,  of  the  most  certain,  the  most  innocent  method  of  securing  ourselves 
and  our  interests  against  oppression  and  wrong,  viz.,  the  sincere  following  of  that 
which  is  good  (Isa.  xxxii.  17,  18,  xxxiii.  16;  Prov.  xviii.  10).  2.  Seeing  God  has 
taken  the  followers  of  that  which  is  good  under  His  protection,  this  should  fill  their 
hearts  with  joy  and  courage,  and  banish  from  them  sinful  and  disquieting  sadness 
and  fear,  even  when  their  enemies  are  most  powerful  (Isa.  xxvi.  1 ;  Psa.  v.  11,  12, 
xxvii.  1-3).  3.  The  consolation  which  this  doctrine  yields  to  the  sincerely  good  is 
much  enhanced  while  he  considers  that  the  greatest  injuries  are  turned  by  the  sove- 
reign providence  and  grace  of  God  to  their  benefit,  sometimes  in  their  temporal,  and 
always  in  their  spiritual  and  eternal  interests.  4.  Since  the  safety  of  our  persons 
and  interests  from  oppression  lies  chiefly  in  the  following  of  that  which  is  good,  it 
should  endear  unto  us  religion  and  virtue,  and  powerfully  dissuade  us  from  ungodli- 
ness and  vice.  5.  Since  the  harming  of  those  who  are  the  followers  of  that  which 
is  good  is  so  unreasonable  in  itself,  and  such  a  perfect  contradiction  unto  God,  who 
is  the  great  Patron  of  holiness,  this  should  make  men  both  ashamed  and  afraid  to 
be  guilty  thereof.  6.  Though  they  who,  after  serious  examination  of  their  ways,  see 
their  own  uprightness,  need  not  suspect  the  same  because  of  those  evils  they  meet 
with  from  the  world,  yet  persecution,  as  all  other  afllictions  do,  fairly  invites  us  to 
search  and  try  our  heart  and  behaviour,  that  so  we  may  know,  whether  or  not  by 
our  turning  aside  from  that  which  is  good,  we  have  provoked  God  to  expose  us  to 
the  spite  and  violence  of  men.  {David  Ranken.)  The  godly  protected  :—liTn?iy 
justly  be  asked  whether  this  is  consistent  either  with  experience  or  with  other  passages 
of  Scripture,  seeing  that  piety  appears  to  have  practically  no  power  in  subduing 
enmity  or  destroying  its  injuriousness.  We  cannot  deny  that  in  a  great  variety  of 
cases,  rehgion,  so  far  from  disarming  hostility  and  securing  good-will,  exposes  a  man 
to  insult  and  persecution.  The  man  may  not  be  altogether  a  follower  of  that  which 
is  good ;  there  is  much  even  in  the  best  which  requires  to  be  amended,  and  which 
must  be  disapproved  of  by  a  heart-searching  God.  Now  you  will  have  gathered 
from  these  observations,  with  regard  to  the  apparent  non-fulfilment  of  the  promise 
of  our  text,  that  it  is  attributable  to  a  defective  performance.  In  the  question  before 
us  St.  Peter  unequivocally  intimates  that  where  such  is  the  experience  there  must 
have  been  some  deviation  from  the  strict  path  of  duty.  And  we  would  therefore 
contend  for  the  literal  truth  of  the  words  of  our  text,  notwithstanding  all  which  may 
elsewhere  be  said  of  the  persecutions  attendant  on  righteousness.  And  first  we 
observe,  that  it  is  in  the  power  of  God,  without  visible  interference  with  the  fixed 
order  of  things,  to  bring  about  such  results  as  seem  good  to  His  wisdom.  It  is  not 
needful  that  He  should  suspend  any  known  laws  or  work  by  any  strange  processes. 
He  can  effect  whatsoever  He  wishes  to  accomplish  by  touching  some  secret  spring, 
or  putting  some  hidden  force  into  action,  while  all  along  there  shall  be  nothing 
apparent  but  the  ordinary  operations  of  effects  and  causes.     This  may  be  specially 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

true  with  regard  to  the  human  heart ;  on  which,  beyond  all  doubt,  God  can  myste- 
riously work,  and  yet  give  no  outward  signs  of  supernatural  agency.  If  God  have 
the  human  heart  thus  entirely  at  His  disposal,  He  may  evidently  cause  it  to  lay 
aside  lust,  and  may  turn  its  affections  into  a  different  channel,  without  anything  of 
violence,  and  without  open  restraint  to  its  designs  and  its  desires.  The  wicked  man 
may  not  be  converted  to  righteousness ;  there  may  not  pass  on  him  that  great 
spiritual  change  which  would  necessarily  lead  him  to  give  friendship  where  before 
he  had  given  hatred  ;  and  nevertheless  there  may  be  a  soothing  of  the  irritated  feel- 
ings, a  dethronement  of  his  anger,  and  even  a  substitution  of  something  like  favour 
for  dislike,  of  which  perhaps  he  cannot  himself  give  account.  The  cases  are  far 
from  uncommon,  in  which  God  thus  secretly  diverts  or  disarms  enmity.  It  is  just 
the  same  with  countries  or  communities  as  with  individuals.  In  the  case  of  the 
Israelites,  their  history  is  little  more  than  a  practical  demonstration  of  the  truth  of 
our  text.  At  any  point  of  their  history,  if  you  find  the  nation  endangered  by  enemies, 
you  infer  at  once  that  there  has  been  disobedience  and  idolatry ;  whilst,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  you  find  them  living  in  conformity  with  God's  laws,  you  may  conclude, 
without  further  examination,  that  the  national  condition  was  prosperous  and  flourish- 
ing. We  would  not  indeed  overlook  the  peculiarities  of  the  Jewish  Dispensation  ; 
therefore  we  do  not  take  what  happened  to  the  Israelites  as  precisely  the  model  of 
what  may  be  expected  by  ourselves.  But  we  know  that  God  acts  on  general  prin- 
ciples, and  we  therefore  believe  that  the  high  road  to  national  prosperity,  under  one 
dispensation,  must,  in  the  main,  be  also  the  high  road  to  it  under  any  other.  Let 
the  laws  of  a  nation  be  laws  framed  in  the  spirit  of  the  Bible  ;  laws  which  discounte- 
nance vice  in  its  every  form  and  patronise  piety ;  let  the  upholding  of  Christianity 
be  proposed  by  rulers  and  pursued  by  people  as  the  great  end  to  which  all  others 
should  be  postponed ;  let  there  be  at  all  times  a  public  recognition  of  the  supremacy 
of  God,  and  the  paramount  importance  of  obedience  to  His  statutes,  and  of  His  in- 
alienable right  to  the  homage,  the  love,  and  the  services  of  His  creatures,  and  we 
may  affirm  of  this  nation  that  it  is  a  "  follower  of  that  which  is  good,"  just  as  might 
any  one  be  a  follower  who  is  "  adorning  in  all  things  the  doctrines  of  the  Saviour." 
Yea,  and  if  a  nation  did  this,  we  believe  that  it  would  as  much  insure  itself  pros- 
perity as  did  the  Jews  when  obeying  the  laws  which  were  given  to  them  by  Moses.  May 
it  not  be  that  the  enmity  of  the  world  is  allowed  to  injure  and  harm  the  righteous 
man,  just  because  he  has  been  remiss  in  the  duties  of  righteousness ;  because  there 
has  been  some  portion  of  conformity  to  the  present  evil  world,  or  some  undue  attach- 
ment to  a  perishable  good?  And  let  it,  too,  be  learned,  from  the  words  under 
review,  that  there  cannot  be  a  greater  delusion  than  the  thinking  to  produce  or  pre- 
serve peace  with  men  by  means  which  must  hazard  the  favour  of  God.  Think  not 
to  avert  danger  except  by  braving  it.  Do  all  you  can  to  please  men,  except  by  dis- 
pleasing God.  And  be  sure  that  the  attempt  to  secure  human  favour  at  the  expense 
of  Divine  will  always  issue  in  the  loss  of  both.  The  traitor  to  his  God  becomes, 
sooner  or  later,  the  scorn  of  his  fellow  men.  Eemember,  for  your  consolation,  that 
in  this,  as  in  every  other  respect,  God  hath  made  your  interest  at  one  with  your 
duty,  so  that  Divine  favour  shall  be  the  best  security  for  human.  And  there  are 
more  hurtful  enemies  than  angry  relations  and  unprincipled  opponents.  A  man's 
foes  may  be  those  of  his  own  household — ay !  of  his  own  heart — the  lusts,  the  pas- 
sions, the  desires  of  corrupt  nature.  These  are  the  enemies  with  which  the  Christian 
has  the  hardest  struggle,  and  through  which  he  is  exposed  to  the  greatest  danger. 
But  if  he  be  a  "  follower  of  that  which  is  good  "  ;  if  he  be  sincere  in  his  wishes  and 
earnest  in  his  efforts  to  be  "  holy  even  as  God  is  holy,"  he  will  gradually  be  enabled 
to  keep  those  enemies  in  check,  and  find  that  grace  has  the  mastery  of  nature. 
Those  who  speak  most  of  the  strength  of  their  passions  are  often  those  who  take 
least  pains  to  resist  them.  In  fact  they  make  that  strength  an  excuse  for  submission, 
whereas  God  would  put  bands  on  that  strength  if  they  were  honest  and  desired  to 
overcome.  There  approaches  another  enemy — one  emphatically  described  as  "  the 
last  enemy — death."  Can  this  enemy  be  stayed  from  doing  harm  to  the  Christian  ? 
"Why,  it  is  beautiful  to  observe  how  Christians,  who  have  felt  a  dread  of  death,  have 
found  their  anxiety  depart  as  the  foe  drew  nigh.  They  have  been  "  followers  of  that 
which  is  good,"  striving  to  cast  all  their  care  upon  God,  believing  that  He  careth 
for  them.  Therefore,  as  death  approached  it  appeared  less  harmful,  and  they  who 
feared  him  most,  but  whom  the  fear  only  made  more  fervent  in  prayer,  are  enabled 
to  look  him  calmly  in  the  face,  and  even  cheerfully  resign  themselves  to  his  embrace 
as  to  that  of  a  friend.  (H.  ISIdvill,  B.D.)  The  advantage  of  imitating  the  good  : — 
There  is  something  in  a  meek  and  holy  carriage  that  is  apt,  in  part,  to  free  a  mao 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  289 

from  many  mischiefs  which  the  ungodly  are  exposed  to.   It  will  be  somewhat  strange 
to  rage  against  the  innocent.     I.  The  caeriage,  "  followers  of  that  which  is  good  "  ; 
the  Greek  word  is  imitators.     The  Word  of  God  contains  our  copy  in  its  perfe.      n, 
and  so  the  imitation  of  good,  in  the  complete  rule  of  it,  is  the  regulating  of  our  ways 
by  the  word.     But  even  there  we  find,  besides  general  rules,  the  particular  tracks  of 
life  of  divers  eminently  holy  persons,  that  we  may  know  holiness  not  to  be  an  idle 
imaginary  thing,  but  that  men  have  really  been  holy ;  though  not  altogether  sinless, 
yet  holy  and  spiritual  in  some  good  measure ;  have  shined  as  lights  amidst  a  perverse 
generation.    Why  may  we  not  then  aspire  to  be  holy  as  they  were,  and  attain  to  it  ? 
Would  you  advance  in  all  grace  ?     Study  Christ  much,  and  you  will  find  not  only 
the  pattern  in  Him,  but  strength  and  skill  from  Him  to  follow  it.     H.  The  advan- 
tage, "  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you  ?  "     In  the  life  of  a  godly  man,  taken  together 
in  the  whole  frame  of  it,  there  is  a  grave  beauty  or  comeliness,  which  oftentimes 
forces  some  kind  of  reverence  and  respect  to  it  even  in  ungodly  minds.     Though  a 
natural  man  cannot  love  them  spiritually,  as  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  yet  he  may 
have  and  usually  hath  a  natural  esteem  of  some  kind  of  virtues  which  are  in  a 
Christian,  and  are  not,  in  their  right  nature,  to  be  found  in  any  other,  though  a 
morahst  may  have  somewhat  like  them.     Meekness,  and  patience,  and  charity,  and 
fidelity — these  and  other  suchlike  graces  do  make  a  Christian  life  so  inoffensive  and 
calm,  that,  except  where  the  matter  of  their  God  or  religion  is  made  the  crime,  malice 
itself  can  scarcely  tell  where  to  fasten  its  teeth  or  lay  its  hold ;  it  hath  nothing  to 
pull  by,  though  it  would ;  yea,  oftentimes,  for  want  of  work  or  occasions,  it  will  fall 
asleep  for  a  while.     Whereas  ungodliness  and  iniquity,  sometimes  by  breaking  out 
into  notorious  crimes,  draws  out  the  sword  of  civil  justice,  and  where  it  rises  not  so 
high,  yet  it  involves  men  in  frequent  contentions  and  quarrels.     {Abp.  Leighton.) 
Doing  good,  as  security  against  injuries  from  men : — I.  The  qualification  supposed 
is,  that  we  be  " followers  of  that  which  is  good."    But  what  is  that?     The  apostle 
does  not  go  about  to  define  it,  but  appeals  to  every  man's  conscience  to  tell  him  what 
it  is.     It  is  not  anything  that  is  controverted,  which  some  men  call  good  and  others 
evil,  but  that  which  is  universally  approved  by  heathens  as  well  as  Christians,  that 
which  is  substantially  good,  and  that  which  is  unquestionably  so.     It  is  not  zeal  for 
lesser  things,  about  the  ritual  and  ceremonial  part  of  religion,  and  a  great  strictness 
about  the  external  parts  of  it,  but  a  pursuit  of  the  weightier  things  of  the  law,  a  care 
of  the  great  duties  of  religion,  mercy,  and  justice,  and  fideUty ;  those  things  wherein 
the  kingdom  of  God  consists — righteousness  and  peace.   II.  The  benefit  and  advan- 
tage which  may  reasonably  be  expected  from  it,  and  that  is,  security  from  the  injuries 
of  men :  "  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you?  "  &c.     The  apostle  doth  not  absolutely 
say  none  will  do  it,  but  he  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing  so  very  unreasonable  and  so  unlikely 
that  it  will  not  often  happen.     And  this  will  appear — 1.  If  we  consider  the  nature 
of  virtue  and  goodness,  which  is  apt  to  gain  upon  the  affections  of  men,  and  secretly 
to  win  their  love  and  esteem.     True  goodness  is  inwardly  esteemed  by  bad  men  ;  it 
carries  an  awe  and  majesty  with  it,  so  that  bad  men  are  very  often  restrained  from 
harming  the  good  by  that  secret  reverence  which  they  bear  to  goodness.     2.  If  we 
consider  the  nature  of  man,  even  when  it  is  very  much  depraved  and  corrupted. 
There  is  something  that  is  apt  to  restrain  bad  men  from  injuring  those  that  are 
remarkably  good — a  reverence  for  goodness,  the  fear  of  God,  and  of  bringing  down 
His  vengeance  upon  their  heads ;  and  many  times  the  fear  of  men,  who,  though  they 
be  not  good  themselves,  cannot  endure  to  see  them  oppressed,  especially  if  they  have 
found  the  real  effects  of  their  goodness  in  good  offices  done  by  them  to  themselves. 
3.  If  we  consider  the  providence  of  God,  which  is  particularly  concerned  for  the 
protection  of  innocency  and  goodness.     III.  And  yet  we  are  not  to  understand 
this  sating  of  the  apostle,  as  declaring  to  us  the  constant  and  certain  event  of 
things  without  ant  exception.      For  good  men  are   sometimes  exposed  to  great 
injuries  of  which  I  shall  give  you  an  account  in  these  following  particulars — 1.  Some 
that  seem  to  be  good  are  not  sincerely  so,  and  when  they,  by  the  just  judgment  of 
God,  are  punished  for  their  hypocrisy,  in  the  opinion  of  many  goodness  seems  to 
suffer.     2.  Some  that  are  really  good  are  very  imperfectly  so,  have  many  flaws  which 
do  very  much  obscure  their  goodness;  they  are  "followers  of  that  which  is  good," 
but  they  have  an  equal  zeal  for  things  which  have  no  goodness  in  them,  or  so  little 
that  it  is  not  worth  all  that  bustle  which  they  make  about  them,  and  will  contend 
as  earnestly  for  a  doubtful  opinion  as  for  the  articles  of  "  the  faith  which  was  once 
delivered  to  the  saints,"  and  will  oppose  a  Uttle  ceremony  with  as  much  heat  as  the 
greatest  immorality.     In  these  cases  it  is  not  men's  goodness  which  raiseth  enmity 
against  them,  but  their  imprudent  zeal  and  other  infirmities  which  attend  it.   3.  The 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

enmity  of  some  men  against  goodness  is  so  violent  and  implacable  that  no  innocency 
can  restrain  their  malice.  Against  these  the  providence  of  God  is  our  best  safe- 
guard. 4.  The  last  and  chief  exception  is  that  of  the  cross,  when  the  sufferings  and 
persecutions  of  good  men  are  necessary  for  the  great  ends  of  God's  glory,  for  the 
advancement  of  religion,  and  the  example  and  salvation  of  others.  {Abp.  Tillotson.) 
The  practice  of  virtue  the  greatest  security  against  our  enemies  : — I.  If  a  man  be  a 
follower  of  that  which  is  good,  'tis  probable  no  man  will  have  any  desire  to  hakm 
HIM.     II.  If  we  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good,  'tis  certain  no  man,  whatever 

his  ^VILL  be,  SHALL  HAVE  ANT  POWER    TO  DO    US   ANY  REAL  HAKM.       1.  The  prOVidence  of 

God  does  in  a  peculiar  manner  watch  over  the  righteous,  to  preserve  them  under  all 
events.  2.  The  enemies  of  a  righteous  man  cannot  do  him  any  real  harm,  because 
they  cannot  take  from  him  anything  wherein  his  true  and  proper  happiness  con- 
sists. 3.  Whatever  loss  a  good  man  sustains  in  the  world  upon  the  account  of  his 
concern  for  truth  and  virtue,  shall  be  abundantly  made  good  to  him  in  that  which  is 
to  come;  and  consequently  'tis  so  far  from  doing  any  real  harm,  that  it  ought  rather 
to  be  accounted  a  gain  than  a  loss.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  protection  of  God  : — 
So  long  ago  as  the  time  of  WiUiam  Penn  the  efficacy  of  arbitration  was  demon- 
strated. He  proposed  to  come  to  America  without  any  weapons,  and  treat  with  the 
worst  savages.  Charles  II.  scoffed  at  him  and  said,  "What:  venture  yourselves 
among  the  savages  of  North  America !  Why,  man,  what  security  have  you  that 
you  will  not  be  in  their  war-kettle  within  two  hours  after  setting  your  foot  on  their 
shores?  "  "The  best  security  in  the  world,"  said  William  Penn.  "I  doubt  that, 
friend  William,"  said  the  king.  "I  have  no  idea  of  any  security  against  these 
American  cannibals  but  a  regiment  of  good  soldiers  with  their  bayonets  and 
muskets :  and  I  tell  you  beforehand,  with  all  my  goodwill  for  you  and  your  family, 
to  whom  I  am  under  obligations,  I  will  not  send  a  single  soldier  with  you."  "I 
want  none  of  your  soldiers,"  said  William  Penn.  "  I  depend  upon  something 
better."  "  On  what?  "  asked  the  king.  William  Penn  answered,  "  On  the  Indians 
themselves,  and  their  moral  sense,  and  the  protection  of  the  Almighty  God."  And 
it  is  a  fact  in  American  history  that  for  seventy  years  the  red  men  kept  that  treaty, 
and  it  was  not  broken  until  the  white  men  broke  it.  Good  still  left  unharmed  : — 
I  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  publicans  and  sequestrators,  and  they  have  taken 
all  from  me.  What  now  ?  let  me  look  about  me.  They  have  left  me  the  sun  and 
moon,  fire  and  water,  a  loving  wife,  and  many  friends  to  pity  me,  and  some  to 
relieve  me,  and  I  can  still  discourse ;  and,  unless  I  hst,  they  have  not  taken  away 
my  merry  countenance,  and  my  cheerful  spirit,  and  a  good  conscience :  they  still 
have  left  me  the  providence  of  God,  and  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  my 
religion,  and  my  hopes  of  heaven,  and  my  charity  to  them  too  :  and  stiU  I  sleep  and 
digest ;  I  eat  and  drink ;  I  read  and  meditate ;  I  can  walk  in  my  neighbour's 
pleasant  fields,  and  see  the  varieties  of  natural  beauties,  and  delight  in  all  that  in 
which  God  delights,  that  is,  in  virtue  and  wisdom,  in  the  whole  creation,  and  in 
God  Himself.      (Bp.  Jeremy  Taylor.)  Followers  of  that   which  is  good. — 

Personal  goodness  : — I.  Its  peospectiveness.  1.  A  desire  for  future  good.  2.  An 
expectation  of  future  good.  U.  Its  sociality.  It  has  a  community  of— 1.  Para- 
mount interest.  2.  Leading  aims.  IH.  Its  reasonableness.  1.  Our  nature  was 
made  for  goodness.  2.  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  give  us  goodness.  3.  God 
works  to  make  us  good.  4.  The  great  struggle  of  our  nature  is  to  be  good.  IV.  Its 
reverence.     Genuine  religion  is  modest,  devout,  meek.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  14-17.  But  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake. — The  sufferings  of  Chris- 
tians : — I.  Why  Christians  mlst  expect  to  meet  with  persecution  or  suffering 
in  the  world.  II.  Keal  Christians  are  happy  even  in  the  midst  of  their  present 
sufferings.  This  will  appear,  if  we  consider  the  object,  the  nature,  and  the 
foundation  of  the  Christian's  happiness.  1.  His  happiness  is  placed  beyond  the 
reach  of  accident,  and  the  fear  of  change ;  a  God  reconciled  through  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  supreme  object  of  his  happiness  and  desire.  2.  As  the  object,  so  is  also  the 
nature  of  the  Christian's  happiness,  such  as  to  justify  the  assertion  that  he  is  happy 
in  the  midst  of  external  sufferings.  Did  the  ultimate  happiness  or  salvation  of 
believers  depend  on  any  temporary  frame  or  feeling,  many  of  the  most  eminent 
saints  might  often  be  pronounced  miserable.  No !  the  Christian's  happiness  is 
founded  on  the  eternal  purposes  and  love  of  God  ;  and  this  consti  utes  at  once  its 
security  and  perfection.  (Thomas  Ross,  LL.D.)  Suffering  for  righteousness  : — 
I.  SuFi-ERiNG  18  SUPPOSED,  NOTWITHSTANDING  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  yea,  for  rightcousness  ; 
and  Ihat,  not  as  a  rare  accident,  but  as  the  frequent  lot  of  Christians.     Think  not 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  PETER.  291 

that  any  prudence  will  lead  you  by  all  oppositions  and  malice  of  an  ungodly  world. 
Many  winter  blasts  will  meet  you  in  the  most  inoffensive  way  of  religion,  if  you 
keep  straight  to  it.  Look  about  you,  and  see  if  there  be  any  state  of  man  or  course 
of  life  exempted  from  troubles.  The  greatest  are  usually  subject  to  the  greatest 
vexations,  as  the  largest  bodies  have  the  largest  shadows  attending  them.  Take 
what  way  you  will,  there  is  no  place  or  condition  so  fenced  but  pubUc  calamities  or 
personal  griefs  find  a  way  to  reach  us.  Seeing  then  we  must  suffer  whatever  course 
we  take,  to  suffer  for  righteousness  is  far  the  best.  What  Julius  Cassar  said  ill  of 
doing  ill,  we  may  well  say  of  suffering  ill,  "  If  it  must  be,  it  is  best  to  be  for  a 
kingdom."  But  I  shall  prosecute  this  suffering  for  righteousness  only  with  relation 
to  the  apostle's  present  reasoning.  His  conclusion  he  establishes.  1.  From  the 
favour  or  protection  of  God.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  being  over  the  righteous  for 
their  good,  and  His  ear  open  to  their  prayer.  2.  For  the  other  argument,  that  the 
following  of  good  would  preserve  them  from  harm,  it  speaks  truly  the  nature  of  the 
thing,  what  it  is  apt  to  do,  and  what,  in  some  measure,  it  often  doth ;  but  consider- 
ing the  nature  of  the  world,  its  enmity  against  God  and  religion,  it  is  not  strange 
that  it  often  proves  otherwise.  But  if  thou  knowest  who  it  is  whom  thou  hast 
trusted,  and  whom  thou  lovest,  this  is  a  small  matter.  What  though  it  were  deeper 
and  sharper  sufferings,  yet  still,  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness,  happy  are  ye. 
II.  That  a  Christian  under  the  heaviest  load  of  sufferings  foe  righteousness 

IS  TET  HAPPY,  AND  THAT  HE  IS  HAPPIER  EVEN  BY  THOSE  SUFFERINGS.  1.  All  the  Suffer- 
ings of  this  world  are  not  able  to  destroy  the  happiness  of  a  Christian,  nor  to 
diminish  it ;  yea,  they  cannot  at  all  touch  it ;  it  is  out  of  their  reach.  If  all  friends 
be  shut  out,  yet  the  visits  of  the  Comforter  may  be  frequent,  bringing  glad  tidings 
from  heaven,  and  communing  with  him  of  the  love  of  Christ  and  solacing  him  with 
that.  Banishment  he  fears  not,  for  his  country  is  above  ;  nor  death,  for  that  sends 
him  home  into  that  country.  2.  But  if  in  other  sufferings,  even  the  worst,  the 
believer  is  still  a  happy  man,  then  more  especially  in  those  that  are  of  the  best  kind, 
sufferings  for  righteousness.  Not  only  do  they  not  detract  from  his  happiness,  but 
they  give  accession  to  it ;  he  is  happy  even  by  suffering.  (1)  It  is  the  happiness  of  a 
Christian,  until  he  attain  perfection,  to  be  advancing  towards  it;  to  be  daily  refining 
from  sin,  and  growing  richer  and  stronger  in  the  graces  that  make  up  a  Christian, 
a  new  creatui'e  ;  to  attain  a  higher  degree  of  patience,  and  meekness,  and  humility  ; 
to  have  the  heart  more  weaned  from  the  earth  and  fixed  on  heaven.  Now  as  other 
afflictions  of  the  saints  do  help  them  in  these  things,  their  sufferings  for  righteousness, 
the  unrighteous  and  injurious  dealings  of  the  world  with  them,  have  a  particular 
fitness  for  this  purpose.  (2)  Persecuted  Christians  are  happy  in  their  conformity 
with  Christ,  which  is  love's  ambition.  A  believer  would  take  it  as  an  affront  that 
the  world  should  be  kind  to  him,  that  was  so  cruel  to  his  beloved  Lord  and  Master. 
(3)  Suffering  Christians  are  happy  in  the  rich  suppUes  of  spiritual  comfort  and  joy, 
which  in  times  of  suffering  are  usual ;  so  that  as  "  their  sufferings  for  Christ  do 
abound,  their  consolations  in  Him  abound  much  more."  (4)  If  those  sufferings  be 
so  small  that  they  are  weighed  down  even  by  present  comforts,  and  so  the  Christian 
is  happy  in  them,  how  much  more  doth  the  weight  of  glory  that  follows  surpass 
these  sufferings !  Now  these  sufferings  are  happy,  because  they  are  the  way  to  this 
happiness  and  the  pledges  of  it.  [Ahp.  Leighton.)  The  ivrongful  suffering  of  good 
men : — I.  The  fact  that  good  men  often  suffer  for  their  goodness  from  their 
FELLOW-MEN.  Peter  uses  the  phrase  "  but  and  if,"  not  because  the  suffering  he 
describes  is  infrequent,  but  because  it  may  not  be  absolutely  universal,  and  because 
the  reflections  on  which  he  is  dwelling  might  seem  to  have  made  such  suffering 
impossible.  For — (1)  It  might  seem  as  though  the  promised  guardianship  of  God 
would  have  ensured  security  to  good  men.  But,  no.  Or  (2)  It  might  seem  that  an 
upright,  benevolent  life  would  have  won  the  gratitude  and  kindness  of  one's  fellows. 
But,  no.  "If  you  would  follow  the  Church  in  her  history,  it  wiU  be  by  the  track  of 
her  blood  ;  if  you  would  see  her,  it  is  by  the  light  of  the  fires  in  which  her  martyi-s 
have  been  burned."  II.  The  inspired  direction  for  men  in  such  wrongful 
suffering.  1.  Fearlessness.  2.  Consecration  to  Christ.  3.  Intelligent  conviction. 
4.  Conscientiousness.  5.  True  triumph.  *'  All  may  not  be  able  to  wield  the  sharp 
sword  of  argument,  but  all  can  wear  the  silver  shield  of  innocent  lives."     IH.  The 

LOFTY    privilege    OF    THOSE    WHO    SUFFER    FOR    RIGHTEOUSNESS*     SAKE.        1.    They     are 

blessed.  2.  Their  suffering  is  better  than  that  of  those  who  suffer  for  wrong  doing. 
3.  Their  suffering  brings  them  into  intimate  fellowship  with  the  Man  of  Sorrows.    IV. 

The  impossibility  of  men  who  in  this  spirit  suffer  wrongfully  being  really  INJURED. 

To  all  wrongful  treatment  by  the  mean,  envious,  or  malicious,  the  true  Christian  can 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

say,  "  You  may  embarrass  my  circumstances,  undermine  my  health,  filch  my 
reputation,  shorten  my  mortal  life,  but  you  cannot  'harm'  me."  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
The  causes  of  the  world's  hatred  of  Chrititians  : — They  are  many  and  obvious.  1. 
For  instance :  The  man  of  God  should  be  an  embodied  conscience.  The  one 
endeavour  of  ungodly  men  is  to  drown  the  remonstrances  of  conscience.  For  this 
they  plunge  into  gaiety,  or  business,  or  exploration ;  for  this  they  hurry  from  scene 
to  scene ;  for  this  they  studiously  avoid  all  that  savours  of  God  or  His  claims.  But 
in  a  holy  life  they  meet  with  a  devout  and  constant  recognition  of  those  claims, 
coupled  with  a  faithful  endeavour  to  fulfil  them.  There  is  an  embodiment  of 
righteousness  without  them,  which  arouses  into  instant  and  unwelcome  activity 
those  convictions  of  their  duty  which  they  have  done  their  best  to  quell.  2.  The 
pride  of  heart  which  resents  superiority  in  another.  The  envy  which  grudges  the 
influence  that  goodness  always  attracts.  The  malice  which  broods  over  the 
contrast  that  purity  presents  to  impurity,  until  the  fact  of  its  doing  so  bulks  as  a 
positive  injury.  AH  these  strong  passions  of  the  unrenewed  heart,  like  PUate  and 
Herod  of  old,  become  friends  in  their  common  antagonism  to  the  saintliness  which 
intrudes  upon  their  privacy  and  menaces  their  peace.  3.  Besides,  there  is  always 
an  aggressiveness  in  true  Christianity  which  arouses  strong  resistance.  (F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  Happy  are  ye. — The  blessedness  of  those  loho  suffer  for  righteousness : 
— I.  The  patient  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake  is  the  giving  obedience  to  one 
of  the  commandments  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  upon  the  doing  thereof  depends  the 
truth  of  their  Christianity  in  this  life,  and  their  salvation  in  the  next  (Matt.  x.  37, 
38,  xvi.  21-25  ;  Mark  viii.  31-38).  II.  The  cheerful  endurance  of  those  evils 
which  befall  the  Christian  in  professing  the  truths  of  God  and  obeying  His 
commandments,  is  an  instance  of  the  most  heroic  virtue,  and  a  happy  proof  of  the 
sincerity  of  his  piety  and  faith.  It  is  the  most  glorious  victory  over  ourselves,  our 
own  passions  and  fears,  and  that  natural  inclination  which  prompts  us  to  secure 
our  life  and  the  conveniences  thereof.  HI.  The  Christian's  being  engaged  in  the 
state  of  persecution,  and  his  valiant  endurance  of  the  same,  is  a  happy  indication 
OF  God's  special  favour  to  him,  and  esteem  of  his  fortitude  and  uprightness 
(Acts  ix.  15,  16  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  16  ;  Phil.  i.  28,  29  ;  Acts  v.  40,  41).  IV.  As  God  lovingly 
calls  true  Christians  to  the  honour  of  suffering  for  His  name,  so  He  graciously 
reckons  Himself  to  be  honoured  by  their  religious  courage  and  fidelity  in  the 
doing  thereof  (John  xxi.  18,  19;  1  Pet.  iv.  14).  V.  The  constant  integrity  of  the 
good  man,  under  all  his  sufferings  for  righteousness,  creates  in  him  that  inward 

PLEASURE  AND  PEACE  OF  MIND  WHICH  IS  THE  CONSTANT  AND  GENUINE  EFFECT  OF 

HOLINESS  and  virtue,  and  of  the  soul's  being  conscious  to  itself  of  its  own  innocence. 
And  it  likewise  obtains  for  him  these  supernatural  joys  and  assistances,  which  in 
the  hour  of  temptation  flow  in  from  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Cor.  i.  3-5,  xii.  9,  10 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  14).  VI.  That  which  is  a  very  considerable  proof  of  the  blessedness  of 
those  who  endure  in  the  spirit  of  patience  and  penitence,  those  sufferings  which 
meet  them  in  the  way  of  their  duty  ;  they  powerfully  contribute  to  purify  their 
SOULS  FROM  REMAINING  CORRUPTION,  and  to  perfect  them  into  the  highest  degrees  of 
holiness  (Isa.  xxvii.  9;  Heb.  xii.  10,  11 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16).  VII.  That  which,  without 
the  possibility  of  a  reasonable  contradiction,  clears  and  completes  the  evidence  for 
the  truth  of  the  happiness  of  these  pious  ones,  who  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  is  : 

THAT    they    are    SECURED    OF    THE    BLESSEDNESS    OF  HEAVEN,  that  thoUgh   it   bC    future, 

yet  with  respect  to  it  St.  Peter  might  very  well  say  in  the  present  tense,  "  Ye  are 
happy  "  (Matt.  v.  10,  xix.  29 ;  James  i.  12).  Conclusion  :  1.  From  the  truth  of  the  fore- 
said doctrine,  viz.,  the  happiness  of  those  who  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  we  see 
the  lamentable  ignorance  and  error  of  carnal  and  worldly-minded  men.  2.  We  learn 
from  the  evidence  of  this  great  truth,  that  it  is  our  wisdom,  as  well  as  duty,  to 
adhere  unto  righteousness  and  truth,  even  in  the  time  of  the  most  terrible 
threatenings  and  persecution.  3.  The  suffering  Christian  is  taught  hereby,  that 
instead  of  repining  against  the  Divine  Providence  on  account  of  his  sufferings,  he 
ought  rather  to  magnify  God,  that  He  graciously  affords  him  the  blessed  oppor- 
tunity and  means  of  knowing  his  own  sincerity,  of  promoting  the  Divine  glory,  of 
partaking  of  unspeakable  spiritual  joys,  and  of  being  advanced  to  the  most  eminent 
holiness  in  this  life,  and  happiness  in  the  next.  4.  Serious  reflection  on  the  felicity 
of  those  who  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  would  be  very  useful  to  mitigate  the 
sorrow  of  those  whose  dearest  friends  may  at  any  time  be  involved  in  persecution 
for  their  keeping  the  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  5.  The  belief  of  this  truth 
should  stifle  our  revenge  against  our  most  malicious  persecutors ;  seeing  we  know 
that,  however  evil  their  intention  may  be,  yet  the  persecution  itself,  through  God's 


cuAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  293 

grace,  turns  about  in  the  end  to  our  inexpressible  advantage.  6.  It  is  comfortable 
to  observe  that  the  happiness  asserted  of  the  sufferers  for  righteousness  is  not 
restricted  to  any  particular  instance  either  of  righteousness  or  suffering.  7.  The 
happiness  of  those  who  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  affords  a  very  powerful  motive 
and  encouragement  to  patience  and  constancy,  in  the  time  of  the  hottest  perse- 
cution. (David  Ranken.)  Be  not  afraid  of  their  terror. — This  is  commonly 
explained  as  the  terror  which  their  menaces  might  excite ;  but  considering  the 
undoubted  reference  to  Isa.  viii.  12,  13,  it  seems  probable  that  St.  Peter  means 
such  terror  as  dismays  those  who  do  not  fear  God  supremely.  {Canon  F.  C.  Cook.) 
Unnecessary  terror  : — The  earth-worm  meets  threatened  danger  in  a  most  unphilo- 
sophic  way.  Directly  it  feels  a  slight  shock  in  the  earth  it  will  hasten  to  the 
surface,  because  it  attributes  that  to  the  proximity  of  its  enemy  the  mole.  The 
knowledge  that  the  worm  can  easily  be  panic-stricken  has  been  acquired  by  the 
lapwings  [Vanellus),  and  these  birds  use  it  for  their  own  advantage  and  the 
destruction  of  their  victim.  The  lapwings  settle  down  on  fields  recently 
ploughed,  where  they  can  find  an  ample  supply  of  worms,  and  striking  against  the 
ground  with  their  feet,  induce  the  worms  to  come  to  the  surface  under  fear  that  the 
shock  is  caused  by  the  mole.  As  fast  as  the  worms  come  in  fear  to  the  surface  they 
are  snapped  up  by  the  lapwings.  Thus  by  endeavouring  to  escape  an  imaginary 
danger,  the  worm  encounters  a  real  one.  There  are  many  creatures,  far  higher  in 
intelligence  than  the  poor  worm,  who  follow  exactly  the  same  panic-stricken  policy 
in  the  supposed  presence  of  danger.  All  weak  natures,  in  fact,  aie  naturally  impelled 
to  adopt  it.  Hence  amongst  mankind,  for  want  of  self-control  and  discretion,  half 
our  miseries,  and  often  our  doom,  may  be  traced  to  acts  caused  by  the  dread  of  a 
danger  which  has  existed  only  in  our  fears.  [Scientific  Illustrations.)  Be  not 
afraid  of  their  terror : — I.  Christian  courage  in  not  being  sinfully  afraid  of  those 
evils  which  men  may  threaten  us  with,  for  righteousness  sake,  is  a  duty  frequently 
RECOMMENDED  TO  US  IN  ScRiPTUBE,  and  timidity  or  irregular  fear  forbidden  (Isa.  viii. 
11,  12  ;  Matt.  x.  28  ;  Luke  xii.  5 ;  Phil.  i.  27,  28  ;  Jer.  i.  5-7 ;  Ezek.  ii.  6  ;  Kev.  ii. 
10,  xxi.  7,  8).  II.  The  being  sinfully  afraid  of  persecution,  or  the  wrath  of 
MAN,  IS  extremely  UNWORTHY  OF  A  CHRISTIAN.  1.  A  Christian  is  the  sworn  soldier 
of  Jesus,  and  Jesus  has  expressly  obliged  him  by  an  unalterable  statute  to  take  up 
his  Cross  and  follow  Him  through  the  most  terrible  dangers  and  inconveniences.  2. 
The  Christian  professes  to  believe  in  an  Almighty  God,  the  best  friend  and  sorest 
enemy  ;  and  in  Jesus  Christ  who  cheerfully  suffered  the  greatest  evils  for  his  sake  ; 
and  that  there  is  an  everlasting  life  both  of  happiness  and  misery,  to  be  bestowed 
upon  men,  according  to  their  final  constancy  or  apostasy.  3.  The  Christian  may 
continually  look  upon  the  glorious  example  of  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of 
our  faith ;  and  upon  the  great  cloud  of  witnesses  or  martyrs,  who  feared  not  the 
wrath  of  man,  nor  loved  their  lives  unto  the  death.     III.  Holy  fearlessness  and 

MAGNANIMITY  IS,  UNDER  GoD,  A    STRONG    GUARD    TO    THE    CHRISTIAN'S   UPRIGHTNESS    AND 

PIETY ;  whereas  fearfulness  and  pusillanimity  do  wofuUy  endanger  and  betray  them 
(Dan.  iii.  16-18;  Acts  xx.  24,  xxi.  13;  Prov.  xxix.  25;  John  xii.  42).  IV.  The 
enemies  of  the  Church  of  God  are  so  entirely  subjected  to  His  providence,  and  the 
Church,  upon  the  other  hand,  is  so  watchfully  regarded  by  the  same  providence, 

THAT  THE  ChURCH's  ENEMIES   CANNOT    INJURE    IT    WITHOUT    THE    DiVINE    PERMISSION,  Or 

extend  their  persecutions  against  the  righteous  beyond  the  limits  which  God  has 
fixed  (Psa.  xxxvii.  32,  33;  John  xix.  10,  11,  vii.  30;  Luke  xxii.  52,  53).  V.  The 
highest  pitch  to  which  the  maUce  of  the  most  implacable  and  powerful  adversaries 
of  truth  and  piety  can  arrive  is,  to  molest  and  ruin  the  faithful  professors  and 
friends  of  the  same,  in  their  outward,  bodily  and  transitory  state  (Matt.  x.  28 ; 
Luke  xii.  4).  Conclusion  :  1.  That  we  may  attain  to  Christian  fortitude  and 
intrepidity  in  the  time  of  persecution,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us  with  a  humble 
importunity  to  make  our  addresses  to  God,  that  He  would  be  graciously  pleased  to 
endue  us  therewith  (Col.  i.  11).  2.  If  we  would  not  be  afraid  of  men,  let  us  use  our 
utmost  endeavours  to  get  our  hearts  possessed  with  the  awful  and  holy  fear  of  God  ; 
and  then  we  wiU  find  by  happy  experience  that  the  latter  fear  drives  away  the 
former.  3.  They  whose  hearts  are  inflamed  with  the  love  of  God,  are  strongly 
fortified  against  the  impressions  of  sinful  fear  and  cowardice,  when  wrathful 
persecutors  either  threaten  or  attack  them  (Cant.  viii.  6,  7).  4.  The  exercising  a 
lively  faith  about  the  glory  and  happiness  which  is  provided  in  the  world  to  come 
for  those  righteous  persons,  who  valiantly  endure  all  these  persecutions,  would 
inspire  the  Christian  with  invincible  fortitude,  fill  his  soul  with  a  noble  contempt  of 
men's  terror,  and  carry  him  forward  triumphantly  in  the  way  of  his  duty,  notwith* 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

standing  the  fiercest  opposition  of  enraged  and  powerful  men  (Heb.  xi.).  5.  They 
who  would  not  be  sinfully  afraid  of  human  terror,  who  would  not  for  the  fear  of  it 
deny  any  known  truth,  or  neglect  any  known  duty :  let  them  entertain  just  senti- 
ments concerning  the  good  and  evil  things  of  this  present  world,  the  advantages 
and  disadvantages,  the  honour  and  dishonour,  the  pleasures  and  pains  thereof ; 
taking  care  that  they  do  not  overrate  them,  and  that  they  do  not  place  their  happi- 
ness in  the  enjoyment  of  the  former,  nor  their  misery  in  suffering  the  latter.  6.  It 
would  be  very  useful  to  the  Christian,  for  preserving  him  from  cowardice,  that  he 
had  continually  before  his  eyes  the  most  glorious  example  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation,  arid  the  heroic  bravery  and  patience  of  the  saints.  For 
then  he  would  be  ashamed  basely  and  sinfully  to  turn  his  back  upon  these  dangers, 
which  not  only  his  Lord  and  General,  but  also  his  fellow-soldiers  did  boldly 
encounter   and   overcome.     {David  Ranken.)  One  fear  drives   out  another : — 

There  seems  here  a  reminiscence  on  Peter's  part  of  words  heard  long  before  :  "Be 
not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can 
do."  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  How  may  we 
obtain  this  lion  heart,  which  knows  no  fear  in  the  presence  of  our  foes  ?  There  is 
but  one  answer  possible.  Expel  fear  by  fear.  Drive  out  the  fear  of  man  by  the 
fear  of  God.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."  How  often  we  see  fear 
expel  fear.  The  fear  of  being  burnt  will  nerve  a  woman  to  let  herself  down 
by  a  water-pipe  from  the  upper  storeys  of  a  house  in  flames.  The  fear  of 
losing  her  young  will  inspire  the  timid  bird  to  throw  herself  before  the 
steps  of  man,  attracting  his  notice  from  them  to  herseK.  The  fear  of  the 
whip  will  expel  the  horse's  dread  of  the  object  at  which  it  has  taken  fright. 
Oh  for  that  Divine  habit  of  soul  which  so  conceives  of  the  majesty,  and 
power,  and  love  of  God,  that  it  dares  not  sin  against  Him,  but  would  rather 
brave  a  world  in  arms  than  bring  a  shadow  over  His  face.  "  So  did  not  I," 
said  a  sincere  and  noble  man,  "  because  of  the  fear  of  God."  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Neither  be  troubled. — Deliverance  Jrom  trouble  : — 1.  The  ordinary  causes  of 
astonishment  and  perplexity  of  spirit  in  the  time  of  adversity  are  these — (1)  When 
the  evil  a  person  lies  under  was  wholly  unexpected.  (2)  When  a  man  in  his 
calamity  is  quite  forlorn  and  destitute,  has  no  friend  to  condole  his  misery,  nor  to 
support  him  under  it.  (3)  When  the  evil  is  lasting  and  invincible,  such  as  the 
miserable  patient  can  reasonably  propose  to  himself  no  deliverance  from.  2.  These 
grounds  of  perturbation  are  not  to  be  found  in  those  afflictions  which  the  righteous 
meet  with  for  righteousness  sake.  (1)  Persecution  of  one  kind  or  other  is  what  the 
true  Christian  may  expect,  and  so  forearm  himseK  (Luke  ix.  2 ;  John  xv.  20, 
xvi.  20,  33  ;  Mark  x.  29,  30;  Acts  xiv.  22 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  12).  (2)  The  righteous,  in  the 
extremest  heat  of  persecution,  are  not  entirely  forsaken  ;  but  even  then  they  have  a 
great  and  faithful  friend,  viz.,  the  Almighty  God,  who  commiserates  their  distress, 
bears  the  heaviest  end  of  the  burden,  and  encourages  them  under  all  their  troubles 
(Psa.  xci.  15 ;  Isa.  xliii.  2,  xlix.  13-16 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  9 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  (3)  The  calamity  with 
which  the  righteous  are  afflicted  for  righteousness'  sake  is  not  past  hope  and  remedy. 
No  ;  they  are  fully  assured  of  deliverance  from  it,  if  not  after  the  manner  which 
they  desire,  yet  in  the  way  which  is  best  for  them  (Psa.  xxxiv.  19,  xci.  14-16 ; 
2  Chron.  i.  9,  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  16-18).     I.  God  can  deliver  His  Church  and  people 

WHILE    THEY    ARE    IN    THE    EXTREMEST    DANGERS    AND    DIFFICULTIES    (2    Pet.    ii.    9).       H. 

In  such  cases  He  hath  very  often  delivered  them.  1.  Some  of  these  deliverances 
were  accomplished,  not  by  prodigious  and  amazing  strokes  of  Divine  power  in 
suspending  or  transcending  the  force  and  course  of  natural  causes,  but  by  gentle 
and  ordinary  means,  gloriously  conducted  by  the  wise  providence  of  God  (Exod.  ii. ; 
1  Sam.  xxiii. ;  Esther  vi.).  2.  Whereas  it  is  said  that  we  are  no  more  to  look  for 
miracles,  I  answer  that  it  is  presumptuous  to  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
peremptorily  to  set  bounds  to  the  infinitely  wise  and  powerful  God  where  He  has 
not  expressly  set  them  to  Himself.  3.  Let  this  matter  be  as  it  may,  yet  I  hope  it 
will  be  granted  that  God  is  still  the  God  of  salvation;  that  "His  hand  is  not 
shortened  that  it  cannot  save,"  &c. ;  that  He  even  is  the  Lover  and  Protector  of 
truth  and  righteousness  and  the  Helper  of  the  helpless ;  that  He  can  abate  the 
pride,  assuage  the  malice,  and  confound  the  devices  of  the  Church's  enemies;  and, 
finally,  that  He  can  raise  up  deliverers  to  the  persecuted  when  and  where  it  was 
least  expected.  III.  There  are  the  strongest  reasons  for  their  believing  that 
AT  len'<»th  God  will  deliver  them  one  way  or  other.  1.  He  will  deliver  them  by 
a  teniportil  deliverance,  if  that  be  most  agreeable  to  His  wise  counsels,  to  the 
meihods  of  His  providence  in  governing  the  world  and  His  Church,  and  to  their 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  29,5 

true  and  greatest  welfare.  2.  If  He  think  it  not  proper  to  remove  sufferings  from 
them,  He  will  remove  them  from  suffering.  IV.  By  heakkening  to  this  counsel  of 
St.  Petek  the  Chkistian  will  exceedingly  consult  the  peace  of  his  own  mind. 
1.  Excessive  and  irregular  sorrow  is  of  itself  a  very  great  calamity ;  it  enfeebles 
the  soul ;  at  once  it  increases  a  man's  affliction  and  disables  him  from  bearing  the 
same  (Prov.  xv.  13  ;  xviii.  14).  2.  As  for  anxiety  of  mind,  it  distracts  and  disquiets 
those  who  are  under  its  dominion  after  a  most  miserable  manner.  3.  Who  can 
express  the  misery  of  those  who,  in  the  time  of  persecution,  give  way  to  anger, 
revenge,  impatience,  and  murmuring  ?  By  their  blustering  passions  they  raise  a 
perpetual  storm  within,  and  are  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot  rest.  4. 
Whereas,  if  they  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness  sake  do  wisely  follow  this 
direction ;  if,  instead  of  abandoning  themselves  to  immoderate  grief  and  to 
pernicious  impatience,  they  maintain  a  holy  cheerfulness  of  spirit,  patience,  and 
contentedness  of  mind,  and  cast  all  their  care  upon  God ;  then  they  will  find,  to 
their  unspeakable  comfort,  that  the  blessed  fruits  of  this  prudent  and  religious 
practice  are  these :  a  reviving  and  supporting  cordial  to  their  hearts  ;  an  admirable 
and  sweet  repose  within,  while  there  is  nothing  but  storm  without ;  and  that  vigour 
of  soul  which  will  enable  them  bravely  to  bear  up  under  the  heaviest  load  of 
adversity.  V.  Special  motives  and  considerations  for  which  the  Christian 
should  avoid  any  of  those  particular  inward  troubles  or  disorders  of  mind  to 
which  he  is  liable  in  the  state  of  persecution,  if  he  be  not  upon  his  guard  and 
continually  supported  by  the  grace  of  God.  1.  Anxious  and  disquieting  thought- 
fulness  and  sorrow  are  very  expressly  forbidden  the  Christians  (Matt.  vi.  25,  &c. ; 
John  xiv.  1,  27,  xvi.  33;  Phil.  iv.  6;  1  Pet.  v.  7).  2.  An  undisturbed,  well- 
grounded,  and  governed  quietness  and  alacrity  of  spirit  under  sufferings  is  the 
highest  pitch  of  faith,  and  a  signal  honour  done  to  the  attributes  and  promises  of 
God.  Whereas  dejecting  sorrow  and  anxious  perplexity  of  mind  is  too  great  a 
proof  of  the  want  or  weakness  of  faith,  and  a  tacit  reproach  to  God.  3.  This  holy 
cheerfulness  and  tranquilUty  of  mind  does  exceedingly  become  the  servants  of  God, 
especially  in  the  time  of  persecution,  and  the  opposite  temper  of  irregular  sorrow 
and  anxiety  is  extremely  unsuitable.  4.  The  Christian  will  entertain  a  horror  at 
immoderate  sorrow  and  anxiety  of  mind  when  he  seriously  considers  the  dreadful 
spiritual  inconveniences  and  evils  which  may  follow  thereupon,  if  they  be  not 
prevented  by  the  singular  goodness  of  God.  (1)  Excessive  sorrow  and  anxiety  are 
apt  to  create  in  those  over  whom  they  prevail  an  indisposition  to  the  exercise  of 
several  graces  and  duties,  the  exercise  whereof  is  nevertheless  highly  necessary  in 
the  conjuncture  of  persecution  and  distress,  viz.,  faith  and  dependence  on  God, 
resignation,  prayer,  thanksgiving,  &c.  (2)  Though  the  persecuted  and  afflicted 
Christian  has  much  need  of  Divine  consolations  from  the  Word  of  God  and  the 
immediate  influences  of  His  Spirit,  yet  excessive  sorrow  and  anxiety  do  exceedingly 
stand  in  the  way  of  his  partaking  of  these  consolations.  (3)  Immoderate  sorrow 
and  anxiety  expose  those  over  whom  they  prevail  to  many  other  dangerous  evils 
and  inconveniences.  These  sinful  infirmities  incline  men  to  be  weary  and  famt 
under  the  cross,  to  be  over-desirous  of  shaking  it  off,  and  to  hearken  to  sinful 
overtures  for  that  effect.      (David  Ranken.)  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your 

hearts. — God  sanctified  in  the  heart : — "  Sanctifying  the  Lord  God  "  means,  not 
making  Him  holy,  for  He  is  already  most  holy,  but  regarding  Him  as  holy, 
treating  Him,  the  idea  of  Him,  and  all  that  is  His,  sacredly,  and  in  a  manner 
different  from  that  in  which  we  regard  all  other  things  and  ideas.  Then,  further, 
it  means  treating  Him  as  thus  holy,  not  only  in  our  outward  deeds  or  words,  but  in 
our  secret  hearts,  where  men  do  not  see  us  nor  know  what  passes  in  us.  And  we 
must  remember,  moreover,  that  when  the  Apostle  says,  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in 
your  hearts,"  he  does  not  only  give  us  a  negative  rule,  as  though  he  said,  "  Think  of 
God  no  otherwise  than  reverently,"  but  he  gives  us  a  plain  affirmative  one,  "  Ever 
have  the  thought  of  Him  before  your  pure  minds,  and  take  care  that  it  be  a  holy, 
reverent,  and  most  sacred  thought."  To  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  our  hearts, 
therefore,  is  to  keep  up  by  every  means  in  our  power  a  holy  regard  of  Him.  And 
again,  sanctifying  the  Lord  God  in  our  hearts  must  surely,  as  a  Christian  precept, 
have  a  more  specific  meaning,  for  not  only  do  we  believe  that  the  great  God  is, 
from  the  very  force  and  meaning  of  His  Being  and  omnipotency,  present  always 
and  everywhere,  but  we  believe  that  the  Deity,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  are  in  some  more  signal  and  more  mysterious  way  present  and  indwelling 
in  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  been  made  children  of  God  and  inheritors  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.     This  sanctifying  of  the  Lord  God  in  our  hearts  forms,  as  it 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

were,  the  real  safeguard  and  sanctification  of  our  imaginations.     It  will  serve  to 
keep  holy  much  within  us  which  is  very  apt  to  run  wild.     For  consider  what  a  large 
portion  of  our  lives  there  is  of  which  we  take  httle  or  no  account  at  all,  which  we 
think  little  of  as  it  passes,  nor  remember  when  it  is  past.     Consider,  for  instance, 
in  any  day  for  what  a  small  proportion  of  the  hours  we  can  give  an  account  or 
recall  the  true  and  real  occupation  of  our  imaginations  and  feelings.     It  is  in  this 
respect,  then,  that  the  "sanctifying  of  the  Lord  God  in  our  hearts"  becomes  so 
signally  important.     This  we  may  maintain  always.     In  activity  and  repose,  by 
night  and  by  day,  in  all  seasons  and  circumstances,  the  sacred  thought  of  God 
before  us,  God  with  us,  will  abash  every  thought  and  feeling  which  is  at  variance 
with  His  will.     Is  it  of  fear  of  men  and  their  ill-treatment  of  us  ?     How  can  such 
fear  remain  or  be  eiJectual  with  us  if  we  habitually  remember  who  and  what  He  is, 
who  is  aU-powerf ul  and  all-present  ?     Is  it  a  thought  of  unholinuss  or  impurity  ? 
How  can  it  stand  and  not  perish  from  our  minds  if  they  are  accustomed  by  con- 
stant effort  to  represent  to  themselves  hourly  the  sanctity  of  God,  who  dwelleth  in 
them  ?     Is  it  a  thought  of  unkindness,  ill-opinion,  disrespect  ?     How,  again,  can  it 
live  in  a  heart  which  is  continually  recalling  itself  to  remember  that  the  Lord  God, 
who  is  infinitely  great  and  infinitely  good,  dwells  within  it  ?     Is  it  a  feeling  of 
vexation  or  impatience  when  things  do  not  go  exactly  as  we  would  have  them,  or 
when  bodily  pain  or  distress  assails  us  ?     How  soon  will  that  heart  check  and  cahn 
its  impatience,  which  is  habitually  taking  pains  to  keep  the  saci'ed  thought  of  God 
before  it — God   in  His  sanctity.  His  majesty,  God  who  dwelleth  in  our  hearts  1 
(Bp.  Moberly.)        God  reverenced  in  the  heart : — I.  Sanctify  the  Lord  God.     He  is 
holy,  the  fountain  of  holiness.     It  is  He  alone  who  powerfully  sanctifies  us,  and 
then,  and  not  till  then,  we  sanctify  Him.     We  sanctify  Him  by  acknowledging  His 
greatness  and  power  and  goodness,  and,  which  is  here  more  particularly  intended, 
we  do  this  by  a  holy  fear  of  Him  and  faith  in  Him.     H.  In  your  hearts.     We  are 
to  be  sanctified  in  our  words  and  actions,  but  primarily  in  our  hearts,  as  the  root  and 
principle  of  the  rest.    He  sanctifies  His  own  people  throughout,  makes  their  language 
and  their  hves  holy,  but  first  and  most  of  all  their  hearts.     It  fears,  and  loves,  and 
trusts  in  Him,  which  properly  the  outward  man  cannot  do,  though  it  does  follow 
and  is  acted  on  by  these  affections,  and  so  shares  in  them  according  to  its  capacity. 
III.  This   sanctifying   of   God   in   the  heart  composes  the  heart  and  frees  it 
FROM  fears.     1.  The  fear  of  God  overtops  and  nullifies  all  lesser  fears :  the  heart 
possessed  with  this  fear  hath  no  room  for  any  other.     It  resolves  the  heart,  in 
point  of  duty,  that  it  must  not  offend  God  by  any  means ;  yea,  rather  to  choose 
the  universal  and  highest  displeasure  of  the  world  for  ever  than  His  smallest  dis- 
countenance for  a  moment.     2.  Faith  in  God  clears  the  mind  and  dispels  carnal 
fears.     It  is  the  most  sure  help.     "  What  time  I  am  afraid,"  says  David,  "  I  will 
trust   in   Thee."     It   resolves   the   mind   concerning   the   event,  and   scatters   the 
multitude  of  perplexing  thoughts  which  arise  about  that :  What  shall  become  of 
this   and    that  ?      What    if    such   an    enemy   prevail  ?      No  matter,   says   faith, 
though   all  fail,   I  know   of   one  thing  that  will   not ;    I   have  a  refuge   which 
all    the    strength    of    nature    and    art    cannot    break    in   upon   or  demolish,   a 
high   defence,   my  Eock   in   whom  I   trust.     {Abp.   Leighton.)         Sanctifying  the 
Lord  in  the  heart: — What  is  meant   by  "sanctifying   the  Lord"?      The   phrase 
occurs   elsewhere    (Isa.    xxix.    23 ;  Lev.    x.    3 ;  Numb.  xx.  12 ;   Ezek.  xxxvi.  23). 
They  sanctify  Him  who  give  Him  His  due,  who  treat  His  claims  as  real  and 
absolute,  who  look  away  from  all  other   powers,  from  all   imagined  resources  or 
grounds  of  confidence,  to  Him  as  the  origin  and  centre  of  their  existence.     1.  St. 
Peter  was  thinking  immediately  of  apprehended  suffering,  and  this  at  the  hands  of 
men,  unconsciously  acting  as  the  instruments  of  a  Master  who  saw  fit  thus  to 
"  prove  "  the  patience  and  fidelity  of  His  servants.     But  a  great  deal  of  actual 
suffering,  apprehended  or  really  imminent,  comes  apart  from  such  instrumentality, 
or,  at  any  rate,  is  only  indirectly  connected  with  human  wills.     For  instance,  suppose 
we  learn  that  a  severe  outbreak  of  disease,  infectious  and  perilous  to  life,  is  among 
us.     Should  we  be  likely  then  to  be  scared  by  the  terror  of  such  a  prospect  ?  or 
should  we  have  faith  enough  to  sanctify  in  our  hearts,  as  Sovereign  and  Lord  of  all 
things,  the  Redeemer  who  healed  sickness  in  others  and  accepted  crucifixion  for 
Himself  ?     Could  we  suppress  unworthy  agitations,  adopt  all  reasonable  precautions, 
and  make  daily  acts  of  faith  in  the  spirit  of  Psa.  xci.  1,  6?    But  again,  we  know 
that  very  often  our  fears  enormously  exaggerate  real  evils,  and  very  often  we  are 
haunted  by  fears  which  are  altogether  imaginary.     Why  not  simply  take  the  Lord 
at  His  own  word,  and  put  aside  faithless  "  anxiety  about  the  morrow  "  ?    2.  Bemem- 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  PETER.  29T 

ber,  further,  that  the  drama  of  spiritual  life  and  death  can  be  performed  on  a 
humbler  stage,  under  conditions  devoid  of  any  impressive  brilliancy.  A  youth,  let 
us  say,  goes  out  from  some  quiet  country  home  into  an  area  which  presents  new 
tests  to  his  moral  and  religious  fidelity ;  the  scene  may  be  a  college  or  a  workshop, 
a  messroom  or  house  of  business — it  matters  not ;  suppose  he  falls  in  with  a  bad 
set ;  suppose  he  is  mercilessly  laughed  at  if  found  to  persevere  in  religious  habits ; 
suppose  that  he  is  accused  of  self -righteousness,  or  even  of  self-interest ;  suppose 
that,  whether  in  rough  or  in  polished  phrase,  the  creed  of  his  boyhood  is  called  an 
obsolete  delusion,  fit  only  for  those  who  are  content  to  be  tutored  by  the  clergy  ;  is 
there  nothing  here  like  a  fiery  trial  ?  How  will  he  stand  it  ?  Will  he  begin  the 
downward  course  by  "  assuming  a  vice  although  he  has  it  not,"  affecting  an  indiffe- 
rence to  religion  beyond  what  he  really  feels  ?  Suppose  that,  on  the  contrary,  he 
retains  that  holy  fear  of  God,  and  perseveres  in  his  duty,  just  "  as  he  did  afore- 
time "  (Dan.  vi.  10) :  what  will  be  said  of  him  above  ?  That,  young  as  he  is,  he  is 
playing  the  man;  that  he  is  responding  to  grace,  and  "witnessing  a  good  confes- 
sion "  ;  that  he  is  "  sanctifying  Christ  in  his  heart  as  Lord."  3.  And  once  more  : 
when  we  are  depressed  and  anxious  as  to  the  prospects  of  the  Church  and  of  the 
faith  ;  when  unbelief  is  increasingly  aggressive,  confident  of  speedy  success ;  when 
prejudices  against  that  truth  of  which  the  Church  is  the  pillar  and  ground-work 
reappear  in  all  their  old  force,  unallayed  by  explanations  or  by  conferences ;  when 
large  masses  of  European  society  seem  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  revolutionary  law- 
lessness, which  fears  God  as  little  as  it  regards  man  ;  then  the  problem  appears  too 
hard,  the  task  too  onerous,  the  promised  success  past  hoping  for.  But  the  history 
of  the  Church  may  remind  us  that  as  we  certainly  are  "  not  better  than  our  fathers," 
so  we  are  not  undergoing  trials  from  which  they  were  wholly  exempt.  But  as  they 
could  and  did  fall  back,  so  must  we  fall  back  on  the  invincible  conviction  that  the 
cause  is  God's  after  all.  Let  the  Most  High  look  to  it.  (W.  Bright,  D.D.)  Be 
ready  always  to  g^ive  an  answer. — The  true  Christian  apologist : — Some  thirty  years 
after  this  letter  was  written  to  the  Christians,  amongst  others,  of  Bithynia,  another 
letter  was  written  about  them  from  the  Koman  governor  of  Bithynia  to  his  imperial 
master  at  Eome.  The  answer  to  that  letter  is  also  preserved.  The  magistrate  asks 
advice,  and  the  emperor  gives  it,  as  to  the  treatment  of  these  Christians.  Such 
questions  as  these  were  presenting  themselves :  Is  the  name  itself  of  Christian  to  be 
a  crime  apart  from  any  proof  of  accompanying  offences?  Is  recantation  to  be 
accepted  in  exemption  from  punishment  ?  Hitherto  his  practice  has  been  to  give 
time  to  reply  to  the  interrogation.  He  has  brought  out  the  images,  the  emperor's 
image  among  them ;  and  if  the  accused  would  repeat  after  him  a  form  of  adoration 
of  the  heathen  gods,  and  if  he  would  add  execration  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ, 
he  has  dismissed  them  ;  if  not  he  has  ordered  them  for  execution.  Trajan  replies 
that  he  entirely  approves  the  course  adopted.  No  search  had  better  be  made  for 
Christians ;  if  accused  and  convicted  they  must  still  be  allowed  the  alternative  of 
recanting,  but  in  default  of  thus  purging  their  crime  they  must  take  the  conse- 
quences. Anonymous  informations,  he  adds,  as  it  were  in  a  postscript,  are  not  tO' 
be  attended  to ;  they  are  a  bad  precedent  and  quite  out  of  date.  I  make  no  apology 
for  recalling  these  few  well-known  particulars  of  a  famous  letter,  as  giving  great 
reality  to  the  position  of  Christians  in  the  age  and  even  in  the  very  region  in  which 
St.  Peter  here  writes.  It  is  quite  plain  that  the  account  which  St.  Peter  speaks  of 
as  likely  to  be  demanded  of  them  is  a  judicial  proceeding,  and  that  the  answer 
which  he  bids  them  to  have  ready  is  the  plea  of  guilty  or  not  guilty  when  they  are 
asked — and  know  too  well  what  it  means — "  How  say  you,  are  you  Christians  or 
not  Christians  ?  "  There  are  persons  in  this  London  to  whom  the  straightforward 
dealing,  creditable  to  them  on  the  whole,  of  Pliny  and  Trajan  with  those  Christians 
of  Bithynia  would  have  presented  an  alternative  of  intolerable  embarrassment. 
Such  direct  demands  for  a  "Yes"  or  a  "  No,"  to  the  inquiry,  "Christian  or  no  ' 
Christian?"  are  out  of  date;  they  would  make  no  allowance  for  the  intellectual 
difficulties  of  the  nineteenth  century ;  they  are  too  rough  and  peremptory  for  us ; 
we  are  balancing,  we  are  waiting  to  settle  a  hundred  things  ere  we  get  to  this.  Of 
course  we  do  not  worship  images,  of  course  we  shall  utter  no  anathema  of  Jesus 
Christ,  but  to  go  to  the  stake  for  Him,  to  be  sent  to  Eome  to  be  executed  for  Him^ 
no,  no.  You  must  not  suppose  us  indifferent  to  the  difficulties  of  the  age  ;  you 
must  not  suppose  any  one  undervalues  the  difficulties  of  believing  or  exaggerates 
the  satisfactoriness  of  the  evidence.  It  is  not  so.  But  neither  can  we  consent  to 
throw  back  or  to  throw  forward  the  whole  question  of  Christian  or  not  Christian,  as 
though  we  might  live  and  die  without  settling  it  for  ourselves  either  way.     Be  very 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Iir. 

glad  that  we  do  not  incur  the  sharper  alternative  of  the  great  first  struggle  between 
Heathenism  and  Christianity,  that  we  find  ourselves  in  days  of  public  toleration 
and  mutual  civility  imposing  no  condition  of  faith  or  speech  upon  those  who  would 
buy  or  sell  in  the  market-place  or  eat  and  drink  at  the  banquet-tables  of  the  world. 
We  will  look  into  this ;  and  we  are  struck  before  all  else  with  the  title  given  to  our 
Christian  possession.     The  account  demanded  of  one  of  those  Christians  of  the  first 

^age  in  Bithynia  was  not  of  their  opinions,  not  of  their  doctrines,  not  even  of  their 
beliefs,  it  was  of  their  hop^e.  St.  Peter,  wishing  to  animate  these  Bithynians  into  a 
readiness  to  make  answer  at  the  bar  of  some  emperor  or  proconsul,  "  I  am  a 
Christian,"  goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter  by  calling  their  Christianity  a  hope.  He 
says  to  them  in  that  word,  "  Kemember  Jesus  Christ  brought  life  and  immortality 
to  light  by  His  gospel.  Keep  Him  and  you  have  a  sure,  a  blessed  hope  through  Him 
who  loved  you ;  part  with  Him,  and  you  are  thrown  back  at  the  very  best  upon  the 
one  guess  among  many  of  a  heathen  philosophy."  That  hope  which  was  the  secret 
of  courage  in  days  when  to  be  a  Christian  was  to  be  in  danger  of  being  a  criminal 

^under  a  capital  charge  is  no  less  the  one  thing  needful  when  the  answer  must  be 
given  with  no  penal  consequences  in  the  counting-houses  and  drawing-rooms  of 
Christendom.  It  is  the  hope  which  attracts ;  it  is  the  hope  which  animates ;  it  is 
the  hope  which  c^onvmces  and  which  persuades,  it  may  be  doubted  wnetEer^Sope 
occilples  quite  the  ptec5  it  ought  to  have  in  the  Christianity  of  this  generation.  We 
hear  much  of  duty,  much  of  effort,  much  of  work,  much  of  charity,  and  something 
of  self-denial ;  but  these  things  are  often  found  in  almost  absolute  isolation  from 
peace  and  joy  in  the  "  good  hope  through  grace" ;  much  time  is  given  to  contro- 
versial or  speculative  theology,  little  to  the  actual  anticipating  and  foretasting  of  the 
powers  and  glories  of  a  world  to  come.  And  this  silence  springs  from  the  secret  or 
half-avowed  thought,  it  is  out  of  date ;  it  was  the  privilege,  or  it  was  the  fancy  of 

"^days  gone  by.  ^These  things  ought  not  so  to  be.  If  a  man  would  settle  it  with 
himself  quite  in  the  early  days  of  his  believing  that  he  means  to  look  for  the  life  of 
the  world  to  come  on  the  definite  ground  of  the  atonement  and  promise  of  his 
Master  and  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  if  he  would  have  out  this  treasure  every 
morning,  handling,  admiring,  cherishing  it,  so  that  it  should  never  be  out  of  his 
thought  or  out  of  his  heart  and  soul,  and  so  that  he  should  positively  intend  to 
carry  it  with  him  to  and  through  the  grave  and  gate  of  death,  then  there  would 
beam  in  his  very  countenance  such  a  light  of  hope  as  would  make  young  men  and 
old  take  knowledge  of  him  that  he  knew  Jesus  Christ  and  was  on  his  way  to  Him ; 
ready  always,  such  would  be  the  result,  to  make  his  defence  to  every  one  that  put 
^him  on  his  trial  concerning  the  hope  that  is  in  him.  \0h!  be  able  to  tell  these 
unsatisfied  questioners  that  you  have  a  hope — a  hope  that  serves  as  your  anchor,  a 
hope  that  keeps  you  steady  amidst  the  swelling  and  surging  waves  of  circumstance ; 
a  hope  that  makes  you  happy ;  a  hope  that  quickens  and  concentrates  energy ;  a 
hope  which  enters  within  that  veil,  which  hangs  and  must  hang  here  between  the 
visible  and  the  invisible  !  Be  able  to  say  and  to  mean  this,  and  then  you  will  be 
Christian  apologists  in  the  best  of  senses,  not  excusing  the  inquirer,  which  would  be 
a  fatal  indulgence,  one  iota  of  definiteness  which  we  feel  regarding  the  personality 
and  regarding  the  inspiration  of  the  Saviour,  but  making  him  feel  that  there  is  a 
ready  access  and  a  joyous  welcome  for  him  "  to  enter  with  boldness  into  the  holiest 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  We  end  with  the  two  words  with  which  St.  Peter 
ends  this  verse.  Beady,  he  says,  to  defend  your  hope  "with  meekness,"  to  defend 
your  hope  "with  fear."  Oh!  what  mischief  has  arisen  to  the  acceptance  of  the 
gospel,  and  so  to  the  salvation  of  souls,  by  the  neglect  of  these  two  rules  on  the  part 
of  Christian  apologists  !  Make  answer,  but  let  it  be  for  a  hope  which  is  first  in  you, 
and  let  it  be  also  with  "  the  meekness"  of  one  who  knows  himself  dust  and  ashes, 
and  with  the  reverence  of  one  who  feels  God  near,  and  sees  in  the  man  opposite  to 
him  a  soul  for  which  Christ  died.  (Dean  Vaufjhan.)  A  reason  of  the  hope  that 
is  in  you. — The  nature  and  reason  of  the  Christianas  hope : — I.  What  is  the 
Christian's  hope  ?  Hope  is  the  desire  of  some  attainment,  attended  with  expecta- 
tion or  conviction  that  the  object  of  desire  is  attainable.  It  is,  therefore,  an  opera- 
tion of  the  mind,  which  involves  the  action  of  reason  and  judgment.  It  is  a  mental 
state  in  contrast  to  despair,  where  all  expectation  of  success  is  extinguished.  But 
the  Christian's  hope  is  distinguished  from  all  other  by  its  object  and  end.  The 
object  of  the  Christian's  hope  is  heaven,  as  a  state  of  holiness  and  communion  with 
God.  II.  What  is  the  reason  of  the  Christian's  hope  ?  1.  He  has  felt  himself 
to  be  a  lost  sinner.  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to  save  them  that  were  lost.  Not 
against  their  will,  but  by  their  own  consent.     Therefore  we  see  that  provision  is 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  299 

made  for  enlightening  the  mind,  so  that  it  may  be  led  to  an  intelligent  choice.  2. 
He  feels  that  he  has  fled  to  Christ  for  salvation.  He  is  a  Saviour,  and  is  embraced 
and  loved  and  honoured  as  sucli.  3.  The  true  Christian  finds  a  third  reason  to 
encourage  a  hope  that  he  is  personally  interested  in  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation,  in 
the  effects  of  this  faith  on  his  life.  {R.  H.  Bailey.)  The  true  Christian  defence  : — 
I.  The  need  of  a  defence  or  apology.  Religion  is  always  the  thing  in  the  world 
that  hath  the  greatest  calumnies  cast  upon  it,  and  this  engages  those  who  love  it  to 
endeavour  to  clear  it  of  them.  This  they  do  chiefly  by  the  course  of  their  lives ; 
yet  sometimes  it  is  expedient,  yea,  necessary,  to  add  verbal  defences,  and  to  vindicate 
not  so  much  themselves  as  their  Lord  and  His  truth,  as  suifering  in  the  reproaches 
cast  upon  them.  Christian  prudence  goes  a  great  way  in  the  regulating  of  this ;  for 
holy  things  are  not  to  be  cast  to  dogs.  But  we  are  to  answer  every  one  that  asks  a 
reason  or  an  account,  which  supposes  something  receptive  of  it.  We  ought  to 
judge  ourselves  engaged  to  give  it,  be  it  an  enemy,  if  he  will  hear ;  if  it  gain  him 
not,  it  may  in  part  convince  and  cool  him ;  much  more  should  he  be  one  who 
ingenuously  inquires  for  satisfaction,  and  possibly  inclines  to  receive  the  truth,  but  is 
prejudiced  against  it  by  false  misrepresentations  of  it.  II.  All  that  we  are  to 
GIVE  account  of  is  comprised  here  under  this — "  the  hope  that  is  in  you."  Many 
rich  and  excellent  things  do  the  saints  receive,  even  in  their  despised  condition 
here ;  but  their  hope  is  rather  mentioned  as  the  subject  they  may  speak  and  give 
account  of  with  most  advantage,  both  because  all  they  receive  at  present  is  but  as 
nothing  compared  to  what  they  hope  for,  and  because,  such  as  it  is,  it  cannot  be 
made  known  at  all  to  a  natural  man,  being  so  clouded  with  their  afflictions  and 
sorrows.  And,  indeed,  this  hope  carries  its  own  apology  in  it,  both  for  itself  and 
for  religion.  What  can  more  pertinently  answer  all  exceptions  against  the  way  of 
godliness  than  this,  to  represent  what  hopes  the  saints  have  who  walk  in  that  way  ? 
If  you  ask.  Whither  tends  all  this  your  preciseness  and  singularity  ?  Why  cannot 
you  live  as  your  neighbours  and  the  rest  of  the  world  about  you  ?  Truly,  the  reason 
is  this— we  have  somewhat  farther  to  look  to  than  our  present  condition,  and  some- 
what far  more  considerable  than  anything  here;  we  have  a  hope  of  blessedness 
after  time,  a  hope  to  dwell  in  the  presence  of  God,  where  our  Lord  Christ  is  gone 
before  us ;  and  we  know  that  as  many  as  have  this  hope  must  purify  themselves 
even  as  He  is  pure.  The  city  we  tend  to  is  holy,  and  no  unclean  thing  shall  enter 
into  it.  The  hopes  we  have  cannot  subsist  in  the  way  of  the  ungodly  world  ;  they 
cannot  breathe  in  that  air,  but  are  choked  and  stifled  with  it ;  and  therefore  we 
must  take  another  way,  unless  we  will  forego  our  hopes  and  ruin  ourselves  for  the 
sake  of  company.  III.  The  manner  of  this.  It  is  to  be  done  with  meekness  and 
fear ;  meekness  towards  men  and  reverential  fear  towards  God.  "  With  meekness." 
A  Christian  is  not  to  be  blustering  and  flying  out  into  invectives  because  he  hath 
the  better  of  it  against  any  man  that  questions  him  touching  this  hope ;  as  some 
think  themselves  certainly  authorised  to  rough  speech,  because  they  plead  for  truth 
and  are  on  its  side.  On  the  contrary,  so  much  the  rather  study  meekness  for  the 
glory  and  advantage  of  the  truth.  "  And  fear."  Divine  things  are  never  to  be 
spoken  of  in  a  light  way,  but  with  a  reverent  grave  temper  of  spirit ;  and  for  this 
reason  some  choice  is  to  be  made  both  of  time  and  persons.  The  soul  that  hath 
the  deepest  sense  of  spiritual  things  and  the  truest  knowledge  of  God  is  most  afraid 
to  miscarry  in  speaking  of  Him,  most  tender  and  wary  how  to  acquit  itself  when 
engaged  to  speak  of  and  for  God.  IV.  The  faculty  for  this  apology.  "Be 
ready."  In  this  are  implied  knowledge  and  affection  and  courage.  As  for  know- 
ledge, it  is  not  required  of  every  Christian  to  be  able  to  prosecute  subtilties  and 
encounter  the  sophistry  of  adversaries,  especially  in  obscure  points ;  but  all  are 
bound  to  know  so  much  as  to  be  able  to  aver  that  hope  that  is  in  them,  the  main 
doctrine  of  grace  and  salvation,  wherein  the  most  of  men  are  lamentably  ignorant. 
Affection  sets  all  on  work  ;  whatsoever  faculty  the  mind  hath  it  will  not  suffer  it  to 
be  useless,  and  it  hardens  it  against  hazards  in  defence  of  the  truth.  But  the  only 
way  so  to  know  and  love  the  truth  and  to  have  courage  to  avow  it,  is  to  have  the 
Lord  "sanctified  in  the  heart."  Men  may  dispute  stoutly  against  errors,  and  yet 
be  strangers  to  God  and  this  hope.  But  surely  it  is  the  liveliest  defence,  and  that 
which  alone  returns  comfort  within,  which  arises  from  the  peculiar  interest  of  the 
soul  in  God,  and  in  those  truths  and  that  hope  which  are  questioned :  it  is  then 
like  pleading  for  the  nearest  friend,  and  for  a  man's  own  rights  and  inheritance. 
This  wiU  animate  and  give  edge  to  it,  when  you  apologise,  not  for  a  hope  you 
have  heard  or  read  of  barely,  but  for  a  hope  within  you  ;  not  merely  a  hope  in 
believers  in  general,  but  in  you,  by  a  particular  sense  of  that  hope  within.     {Ab^. 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Leighton.)  A  reasonable  hope  : — There  is  a  play  upon  the  words  in  the  original 
which  it  is  difficult  to  transfer  into  English.  "  Be  always  ready  to  give  a  justifica- 
tion to  those  who  ask  you  to  justify  the  hope  that  is  in  you,"  or,  "  to  show  a 
reasonableness  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  to  those  that  ask  you  a  reason  for  it." 
The  Bible  is  a  book  of  hope.  The  gospel  is  a  glad  tidings  of  hope.  The  religion  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  pre-eminently  a  religion  of  hopefulness ;  it  differs  in  this  respect 
from  other  religions.  Now  and  then  a  glimmer  of  light  shines  from  ancient  philo- 
sophy, as  in  the  writings  of  Socrates  ;  but,  for  the  most  part,  the  religions  of 
paganism,  though  they  may  be  religions  of  reverence  and  of  duty  and  of  fidelity 
and  of  conscience,  are  not  religions  of  faith  or  of  hope.  Now,  the  message  of 
Christ  enters  into  the  world  bright  with  hope.  It  comes  to  men  as  a  ship  comes  to 
shipwrecked  mariners  on  a  desert  island ;  it  comes  as  the  bugle-blast  comes  to  men 
starving  in  a  beleagured  city  ;  it  comes  with  the  same  note  of  rescue  in  it  that  the 
besieged  at  Lucknow  heard  in  the  Scotch  pibrochs  sounding  across  the  plains. 
Now,  Peter,  recognising  that  the  Christian  religion  is  a  hopeful  religion,  and  that 
the  Christians  are  to  walk  through  life  with  the  brightness  of  hope  shining  in  their 
faces — Peter  says  :  "  You  must  have  a  reason  for  this  hope  ;  it  must  not  rest  merely 
in  your  temperament.  You  must  have  a  reasonable  ground  for  your  hope ;  and 
when  men  who  have  not  a  hopeful  temperament,  and  men  who  have  a  wider  view 
of  life  than  you  have,  and  see  the  evils  that  infest  society  and  life — when  they  come 
to  you  with  their  dark  vision,  and  their  dejected  spirit,  it  is  not  enough  for  you  to 
say,  '  I  am  hopeful ' ;  it  is  not  enough  for  you  to  say,  '  Look  on  the  bright  side  of 
things ' ;  you  must  be  prepared  to  tell  them  what  reason  you  have  for  hope,  what  is 
the  ground  of  your  hopefulness."  Let  us  see  what  are  the  grounds  for  our  hopeful- 
ness for  ourselves,  our  families,  or  nation,  and  the  world.  In  the  first  place,  then, 
we  believe  in  God.  We  believe  that  He  knew  what  He  was  about  when  He  made 
the  world ;  and  that  He  made  the  world  and  made  the  human  race  because  the 
product  of  that  making  was  going  to  be  a  larger  life,  a  nobler  life,  and  therefore  a 
more  blessed  and  a  more  happy  life ;  that  in  the  very  beginning,  when  He  sowed 
the  seeds.  He  knew  what  kind  of  harvest  was  going  to  grow  out  of  it,  and  He  was 
not  one  that  sowed  the  seed  of  tares,  but  one  who  knew  that  the  wheat  would  over- 
balance the  tares  in  the  last  great  harvest.  We  believe  that  He  is  a  God  of  hope. 
He  understands  life  better  than  we  do ;  He  understands  the  tendencies  that  are  at 
work  in  society  and  government  better  than  we  do.  With  all  that  understanding, 
with  the  clear  vision  of  the  dark  side  of  things  as  well  as  the  bright  side  of  things, 
He  has  an  invincible  hope  for  the  future,  and  we  borrow  our  hope  from  His  hopeful- 
ness, and,  because  of  His  hope,  we,  in  our  ignorance,  hope  also.  He  has  given 
definiteness  to  this  hope.  He  has  put  before  us  unmistakably  in  human  history  not 
only  what  He  hopes,  not  only  what  He  desires,  but  what  He  expects,  and  what  He 
means  the  human  race  to  be.  We  look  upon  humanity  and  we  say,  "  What  is 
man?"  And  we  go  down  to  the  savage,  and  look  at  him:  "  No,  he  is  not  man." 
And  we  go  to  the  prison-house:  "No,  these  are  not  men;  they  are  the  beginnings 
of  men,  they  are  men  in  the  making,  but  they  are  not  men."  We  look  out  upon 
society,  with  its  frivoUty  and  its  fashion  and  its  pride  and  its  vanity  and  we  say, 
"  No,  this  is  not  yet  man."  We  look  out  into  the  industrial  organisation,  and  see 
men  hard  at  work  for  themselves  and  for  one  another,  and  we  say,  "This  is  not 
our  ideal  of  man."  We  go  into  statecraft,  but  we  do  not  find  our  ideal  of  man  in 
the  politician  and  statesman.  We  look  along  the  paths  of  history ;  it  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  general  or  the  monarch.  It  is  not  even  in  the  father  and  the  mother, 
though  we  come  nearer  to  it  then.  And  finally  we  come  to  the  New  Testament,  we 
come  to  the  life  of  Christ,  and  we  say,  "  This  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  above  all  others 
the  Son  of  Man."  He  stands  as  the  ideal  of  humanity.  He  is  the  pattern  and  the 
type  of  what  God  means  man  shall  be.  And  then  we  hear  the  voice  of  God  saying, 
"  You  also  are  to  become  as  He  was,  sons  of  God  "  ;  and  from  all  the  radiance  of 
Christ's  face,  and  from  all  the  glory  of  Christ's  character,  we  borrow  inspiration  and 
hopefulness,  because  this  is  what  God  hopes  we  shall  become.  Moreover,  we  see — 
dimly,  it  is  true,  and  imperfectly,  but  we  see — by  faith,  more  and  more,  God  entering 
into  human  life  ;  we  see  Him  moving  upon  human  souls,  and  we  see  Him  shaping 
them  according  to  His  ideal  and  according  to  His  purpose.  We  look  on  human 
life,  with  its  carnage,  with  its  wrestling,  with  its  battle,  with  its  selfishness,  with  its 
corruption — ay,  with  its  grave  and  its  decay ;  we  see  civilisations  perishing  and 
literatures  perishing,  we  see  nations  buried  deep,  and  yet  we  say :  This  is  but  the 
carboniferous  period  ;  this  is  but  the  movement  of  the  chaos ;  there  is  a  God  that 
is  brooding  on  this  chaos ;  there  is  a  law  in  all  this  antagonism  and  battle  of  life ; 


CHAP.  III.]  /.  PETER.  301 

God  is  in  human  history,  as  God  is  in  human  hearts  and  Uves ;  God  is  bringing 
order  out  of  the  chaos,  and  a  new-created  world  will  spring  up  at  His  command. 
Oh,  our  hope  is  not  in  princes  or  potentates,  or  leaders  or  politicians — it  is  in  a  God 
that  is  at  work  in  humanity !  Churches,  creeds,  nations  may  disappear,  but  human 
character  will  grow  and  grow,  because  God  is  begetting  men  and  working  out  His 
own  conception  of  manhood,  because  all  these  things  are  the  instruments  through 
which  He  is  accomplishing  a  definite  creation — not  moulding  men  from  without, 
but  entering  into  men  and  fashioning  them  from  within.  And  so  we  beUeve  God 
is  not  only  using  all  these  outward  instruments  environing  man,  but  He  is  entering 
into  him  and  lifting  him  up,  as  the  mother  lifts  the  child,  httle  by  little.  But  this, 
you  say,  is  hope  for  the  world  at  large.  "  How  about  myself  personally  ?  How 
about  my  little  life  ?  How  about  my  baby  and  my  cradle  ?  I  do  not  care  so  much 
about  the  universe,  as  I  do  about  my  cradle  and  my  baby."  There  are  no  large 
things  with  God,  and  there  are  no  little  things  with  God.  There  are  no  large 
things  in  life,  and  there  are  no  little  things  in  life.  It  is  a  small  rudder  that  directs 
the  course  of  the  ship.  And  we  believe  in  a  God  that  is  not  merely  brooding  over  the 
whole  globe,  but  that  is  determining  the  fall  of  every  leaf  and  the  shaping  of  every 
limb ;  in  a  God  that  not  merely  deals  with  nations  in  the  mass,  but  that  broods  and 
watches  above  every  cradle  and  every  soul.  Some  one  of  you  will  say,  "How  can 
you  believe  this?  Looking  out  into  life,  and  seeing  what  it  is,  can  you  escape 
the  conclusion  that  many  things  are  going  wrong,  and  much  is  running  to 
evil  ?  "  Ah  1  I  do  not  think  you  see  what  life  is.  You  are  just  in  one  room  of 
the  great  school ;  you  are  just  watching  one  episode  of  the  great  drama.  Can 
you  tell  me  what  are  the  resources  of  the  Infinite  Mercy  ?  (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 
The  Christian's  duty,  to  know  the  principles  and  reasons  of  his  holy  faith,  and  to  own 
and  adhere  to  them  in  the  time  of  persecution : — I.  It  is  the  duty  of  every 
Cheistian  to  use  his  most  serious  endeavours  that  he  may  understand  the 
REASONS  AND  GROUNDS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH.  1.  Scripturc  cnjoius  the  excrcisc  of 
our  reason  and  judgment  about  religion  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20  ;  Col.  i.  16 ;  Heb.  vi.  11,  12 ; 
John  V.  31-40 ;  1  Cor.  x.  15  ;  Acts  xvii.  11).  2.  The  sincere  and  humble  per- 
forming of  this  duty  would  contribute  very  much  to  render  our  religion  and  the  acts 
thereof  acceptable  to  God ;  as  being  thereby  more  suitable  both  to  His  nature  and 
ours,  more  fit  for  us  to  offer,  and  for  Him  to  receive  (Mark  xii.  33  ;  Deut.  xv.  21 ; 
John  iv.  22-24).  3.  That  which  should  very  much  excite  the  Christian's  endeavours, 
to  understand  the  principles  and  reasons  of  his  holy  religion  is  that  his  being 
ignorant  of  them  would  be  a  most  shameful  and  ignominious  thing.  How 
extremely  reproachful  is  it  that  men  whom  God  hath  adorned  with  judgment  for 
the  direction  of  their  actions  should  be  stupid  children,  or  very  brutes  in  their 
religion  !  4.  This  ignorance  is  also  extremely  dangerous  to  the  Christian,  because 
it  exposes  him  to  all  the  attempts  of  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  and  makes  him  a 
cheap  and  easy  conquest  to  persecutors  and  impostors.  5.  The  duty  of  inquiring 
into  the  reason  of  religion  is  particularly  incumbent  upon  those  who  disclaim  an 
infallible  judge  of  controversies  upon  earth,  and  reckon  it  to  be  a  Christian 
privilege  and  right  to  receive  no  articles  of  faith  upon  the  sole  credit  of  human 
authority.  6.  The  woful  divisions  of  Christendom  in  matters  of  religion,  the  high 
pretensions  of  each  party  to  the  truth,  and  our  being  surrounded  not  only  with 
heresy  and  schism,  but  also  with  downright  infidelity,  do  loudly  call  us  to  a  most 
impartial  inquiry  into  the  grounds  and  principles  of  faith,  that  so  we  ourselves  may 
be  well  instructed  and  confirmed  therein,  and  be  likewise  ready  to  give  an  answer  to 
those  who  ask  us  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  us.  7.  Consider  the  most  effectual 
methods  for  attaining  the  knowledge  of  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  our  holy  religion, 
and  our  ability  to  vindicate  and  explain  them  to  others  as  we  shaU  have  occasion. 
(1)  We  must  in  all  humility  by  frequent  and  importunate  prayer  apply  ourselves 
unto  God  the  Father  of  lights,  the  great  Author  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  (Eph. 
i.  17,  18;  James  i.  5  ;  Col.  i.  9).  (2)  We  must  make  the  Scriptures  our  continual  and 
serious  study  (2  Tun.  iii.  15,  17).  (3)  We  must  exercise  ourselves  unto  godliness 
(Psa.  XXV.  12-14,  cxix.  100;  Prov.  ii.  7,  iii.  32;  John  vii.  16,  17,  xiv.  21).  (4)  A 
devout  and  conscientious  attending  upon  religious  assemblies  will  be  very  profitable 
to  the  Christian  in  this  affair  (Eph.  iv.  11-15).     II.  The  Christian  is  indispensably 

BOUND  constantly  TO  ADHERE  TO  THE  TRUTHS  AND  PRECEPTS  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  AND,  WHEN 
CALLED  THEREUNTO,  TO  CONFESS  THE  TRUTHS  AND  OBSERVE  THE  PRECEPTS  THEREOF, 

EVEN  IN  THE  MOST  DISCOURAGING  JUNCTURES.  1.  OuT  Lord  has  in  the  plainest  and 
most  peremptory  terms,  and  with  the  most  weighty  sanctions,  obliged  all  His 
followers  constantly  to  adhere  to  His  doctrines  and  precepts  ;  and,  when  called 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

thereunto,  to  confess  the  one  and  obey  the  other,  when  persecution  threatens  or 
attends  the  doing  either  of  them  (Matt.  x.  37-39,  xvi.  24-26;  Luke  xiv.  25-27). 

2.  The  Christian  is  bound  to  the  performance  of  this  duty  by  the  laws  of  the  highest 
ecfuity  and  justice  ;  and  the  doing  otherwise  would  involve  him  in  the  guilt  of  the 
most  criminal  iniquity  and  unrighteousness  to  his  sovereign  Lord  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20). 

3.  The  wilful  and  deliberate  renouncing  of  the  Christian  faith,  or  any  of  the  articles 
and  precepts  thereof,  with  a  design  to  avoid  persecution  thereby,  or  to  retain  or 
acquire  the  advantages  of  this  world,  is  at  once  an  instance  of  the  most  horrible 
impiety,  of  the  vilest  falseness  and  dishonesty,  and  of  the  most  abject  cowardice. 
The  apostate  plainly  declares  that  he  fears  weak  man  more  than  Almighty  God, 
that  he  prefers  the  transient  things  of  time  to  the  infinite  joys  of  eternity.     4.  What 
in  the  most  dangerous  seasons  ought  to  prevail  with  the  Christian  to  be  steadfast 
and  firm  in  professing  the  truths,  and  obeying  the  precepts  of  his  holy  religion,  is 
that  his  constancy  would  tend  very  much  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  interest  of  religion, 
and  the  advantage  both  of  the  friends  and  enemies  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
5.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  are  both  exceeding  encouraged   and   obliged   to 
a  noble  and  bold  adherence  to  the  truth  and  their  duty  in  the  time  of  persecution, 
by  His  glorious  example,  and  that  of  confessors  and  martyrs  under  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.      III.   The  qualifications  which  must  accompany  and   adokn  the 
Chkistian  in  the  dischakge  of  the  duties  contained  in  this  injunction.     1.  Calm- 
ness and  patience  of  spirit,  whereby  the  Christian  may  avoid   exasperating  the 
adversaries  of  the  truth  by  wrath  and  passion  while  he  vindicates  the  same.     2.  A 
holy  and  religious  fear,  lest  by  an  indiscreet  and  unwarrantable  zeal,  or  any  other 
sinful  misbehaviour,  he  should  offend  God,  or  give  just   offence   unto   men,  and 
particularly  to  his  lawful  governors.     3.  A  good  conscience  founded  upon  a  blame- 
less and  Christian  behaviour,  by  which  he  may  be   able  to  silence  or  refute  the 
calumnious  reproaches  of  heathens  and  infidels.     (David  Ranken.)         The  Chriatian 
ready  to  account  for  his  hope  : — I.  The  believer  may  be  questioned  concerning  his 
hope — 1.  By  the  infidel.      To  the   mere   scoffer  the  Christian  is  not   required   to 
reply.     With  such  our  only  aim  should  be  so  to  speak  as  to  awaken  the  conscience, 
and  arouse  and  touch  the  heart.     2.  By  the  worldling.     The  hope  of  the  believer  will 
stand  the  severest  scrutiny ;  while  the  worldling  is  often  found  to  confess  that  the 
advantages  of  the  present  state  are  with  him  who  is  living  under  the  influence  of  a 
hope  that  has  respect  to  the  future.     3.  The  sincere  inquirer   after   truth   may 
question  him.     One  who  has  just  been  made  sensible  that  he  is  a  sinner  against 
God,  and  needs  pardon.     His  mind  is  full  of  anxiety ;  and  he  feels  that  he  needs 
direction,  instruction,    and   guidance.       II.    The   believer   should   be   ready   to 
answer  those  who  inquire  concerning  his  hope.     1.  He  should  be  ready  to  answer, 
not  forward,  but  prepared,  competent  to  reply.     2.  The  reply  should  be  an  answer. 
It  should  be  to  the  point ;  adapted  to  the  character,  and  appropriate  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  questioner.     "  A  word  fitly  spoken,  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of 
silver."      III.  The   disposition   with   which   the   inquiry   should   be   answered. 
1.  With  meekness.     By  a  harsh  manner  of  vindicating  the  truth,  the  enmity  of  the 
carnal  heart  against  it  may  be  increased.     2.  With  fear.     With   holy   fear   and 
jealousy  of  ourselves,  that  we  may  speak  only  that  we  have  known,  and  testify  only 
that  we  have  seen.     Lessons  :  1.  Believers,  aim  to  be  intelligent  Christians.     2.  Be 
humble,  meek  disciples  of  your  great  Master.     3.  Many  of  you  may  never  while  on 
earth  be  questioned  concerning  your  hope.     The  day  is  fast  coming  when  "  the  fire 
will  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is."     What  will  be  the  character  of  the 
worldling's  hope  then  ?     (S.  Steer.)         Christians  required  to  he  prepared  to  give  a 
reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them : — I.  That  if  we  are  true  Christians,  there  is  a 
hope  that  is  in  us.     If  we  are  true  Christians;  Christ  is  in  us  the  hope  of  glory. 
1.  This  hope  may  be  distinguished  from  the  hypocrite's  hope  by  its  objects.     It 
regulates  all  its  expectations  by  the  Word  of  God.    2.  This  hope  may  be  farther  dis- 
tinguished by  its  basis.     This  is  the  inviolable  truth  of  God's  promises,  made  to 
sinners  through  Christ.     3.  This  hope  may  be  farther  distinguished  by  its  effects. 
It  purifies  the  heart.     II.  Th.\t  there  is  a  reason  for  this  hope.     It  is  a  reason 
for  this  hope,  that  the  Word  of  God,  written  by  the  inspiration  of  His  own  Spirit, 
correctly  defines  its  objects.     A  true  Christian  can  also  give  a  reason  for  the  ground 
of  his  hope.     It  is  Christ.     There  is  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  in  the  effects 
which   we   are   conscious   it   has   produced   upon    us.      It   has   a   holy   tendency. 
III.  That  we  are  to  expect  that  men  will  ask  us  a  reason  of  this  hope.     Some 
may  ask  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  from  a  sincere  desire  to  know  and  to  embrace 
the  truth.     But  others  may  ask  us  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  from  a  wish 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  303 

to  weaken  our  confidence,  or  to  tear  us  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel.  IV. 
That  we  are  to  be  peepared  to  give  an  account  to  those  who  thus  ask,  a  eeason 
OF  THE  hope  that  IS  IN  US.  Have  I  searched  the  Scriptures  with  becoming  dihgence, 
so  as  to  know  the  evidence  on  which  my  faith  rests  ?  Have  I  been  so  convinced  of 
the  truth  and  power  of  the  gospel  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  I  am  prepared  to  defend 
it  as  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the  power  of  God  ?  V.  That  we  aee  to  be  so  peepaeei> 
as  to  be  able  to  do  this  with  meekness  and  fear.  1.  With  meekness.  We  are  to 
defend  the  gospel  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  2.  With  fear.  Not  terror,  but 
reverence.  Application  :  1.  If  you  are  disposed  to  question  the  reality  of  the  religion 
of  the  heart,  it  is  not  because  there  can  be  no  proof  given  of  it,  but  from  an  indis- 
position to  believe  it.  2.  Be  sure  that  nothing  but  a  "lively  hope"  implanted 
within  you  will  avail  to  the  good  of  your  soul,  and  that  all  profession  without  it 
will  be  ineffectual  to  your  salvation.  3.  Dread  being  the  subject  of  a  delusive  hope. 
4.  If  you  have  reason  to  fear  that  hitherto  your  hope  has  been  a  deceptive  one, 
seek  and  pray  to  be  made  the  subject  of  a  good  hope  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  abandoning  all  other  dependence,  you  may  be  led  to  Christ  for  salvation, 
on  whose  merits  and  righteousness  you  shall  not  depend  in  vain.  [Essex  Remem- 
hrancer.)  The  Christiaii's  hope : — I.  All  eeal  Cheistians  possess  a  hope  peculiar 
to  themselves.  It  is  a  hope  in  connection  with  Christ,  a  hope  arising  from  the 
gospel.  The  hope  of  the  Christian  is  called  a  living  hope.  It  is  a  hope  that 
sustains  the  spirit  here,  and  embraces  celestial  happiness  hereafter.  II.  This  hope 
rests  on  grounds  the  most  solid  and  indubitable.  This  hope  is  generated  in 
them  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  They  have  the  testimony  of  all  holy  men  in  all 
ages,  and  they  have  their  own  experience.  III.  This  hope  cannot  be  concealed, 
AND  ought  not  TO  BE  CONCEALED.  The  Saviour  commands  that  those  who  have  this 
hope  in  them  should  confess  Him.  IV.  Those  who  have  this  hope  in  them  may 
sometimes  be  questioned  concerning  it.     V.  There  are  times  when  we  are  called 

UPON    TO    EXPLAIN,     TO     VINDICATE,    AND    EVEN     TO    RECOMMEND     THE     RELIGION    WHICH 

BRINGS  US  SUCH  A  HOPE.  There  might  have  been  Jews  anxious  to  know  what 
Christianity  was  ;  there  might  have  been  Gentiles  doubting  as  to  the  truth  of  their 
systems,  and  desiring  to  be  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity ;  and  there 
may  still  be  those  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  who  may  be  anxious  for  information, 
and  it  should  be  our  delight  to  explain,  to  vindicate  and  to  recommend  the  hope  that 
we  cherish.    IV.  This  vindication  and  recommendation  of  our  hope  ought  always  to 

BE  done  in  a  spirit  BECOMING  THE  SERIOUSNESS  OF  THE  SUBJECT.    It  is  HO  light  thing  tO 

deal  with  questions  of  this  sort.  Peter  says,  "  Be  always  ready  " — qualified,  fitted  for  it. 
(R.  Littler.)     Personal  goodness  : — The  words  suggest  four  things  in  relation  to  religion. 

I.  Its  peospectiveness.     It  is  a  "  hope."     Personal  religion  is  a  great  hope  in  a  man. 

II.  Its  sociality.  Here  is  asking  questions  and  answering  them.  Genuine  re- 
ligion excludes  the  anti-social  and  dis-socialising  element — selfishness.  1.  It  has 
a  community  of  paramount  interest.  All  religious  souls  have  the  same  imperial 
concerns.  2.  A  community  of  leading  aims.  One  grand  purpose  runs  through  all 
godly  hearts.  HI.  Its  reasonableness.  "Give  a  reason  for  the  hope."  Every 
godly  man  can  give  a  reason  for  this  hope.  It  does  not  require  erudition  or  talent 
to  enable  him  to  do  so.  Ask  him  why  does  he  hope  to  become  good,  and  he  could 
give  such  answers  as  these :  1.  Because  my  nature  was  made  for  goodness  2. 
Because  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  give  me  goodness.  3.  Because  God  works 
to  make  me  good.  4.  Because  the  great  struggle  of  my  nature  is  to  be  good. 
These  are  good  reasons,  are  they  not  ?  IV.  Its  reverence.  "  With  meekness  and 
fear."  (Homilist.)  Reasons  for  our  hope  : — I.  The  Christian  hope.  Why  is  the 
word  hope  used  instead  of  that  of  faith  ?  Usually  it  is  faith  that  stands  so  con- 
spicuously in  the  foreground  in  Christianity.  Faith  has  mainly  a  reference  to  the 
hard  dry  facts  of  the  intellect.  Of  course  there  is  in  Christianity  a  living,  vital 
faith,  and  eveiy  Christian  must  possess  this.  But  hope  is  a  much  softer  word,  and 
has  to  do  more  with  the  emotional  part  of  human  nature.  Hope  to  be  worth  any- 
thing must  be  based  upon  faith.  Yet  hope  is  the  higher  state  of  the  two.  The 
reason  why  St.  Paul  so  often  speaks  of  hope  is  twofold :  1.  It  had  a  reference  to  the 
early  state  of  his  people.  2.  This  hope  was  connected  with  something  personal  and 
future.  Hope  will,  of  course,  differ  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  man.  The 
miser  hopes  for  gold,  the  ambitious  man  for  power,  the  vain  man  for  applause. 
But  we  have  to  do  with  the  Christian's  hope.  (1)  The  Christian  has  a  hope  in  the 
purpose  of  his  life.  He  has  a  mission  in  the  world  which  God  has  planned,  and  he 
knows  that  whatever  happens  will  be  for  the  best.  He  allows  all  his  arrangements 
to  depend  upon  the  Divine  Will.     In  the  most  minute  events  of  life,  as  well  as  in 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.\p.  ni. 

the  most  gigantic  schemes  that  the  human  brain  can  evolve,  God  rules.  (2)  The 
Christian  has  a  hope  in  the  trials  and  afflictions  of  life.  (3)  The  Christian  has  hope 
in  death.  The  most  brilliant  human  lives  must  end.  (4)  The  Christian  has  hope  in 
the  hereafter.  This  is  the  most  glorious  hope  of  all.  II.  This  hope  has  a  rational 
BASIS.  The  hope  of  the  Christian  may  be  cheering  and  consoling,  yet  if  it  had  not 
a  rational  basis  it  might  after  all  be  a  delusion.  But  Christianity  is  as  much  in 
harmony  with  reason  as  it  is  with  the  emotional  side  of  man's  nature.  And  it  is 
the  only  religion  that  has  a  rational  foundation.  The  necessity  for  a  revelation 
from  God  has  been  felt  in  all  ages  and  amongst  all  peoples.  And  if  such  revelation 
has  been  made  it  must  be  found  in  the  Bible,  for  it  can  be  no  where  else.  Then  the 
evidences  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  are  overwhelming.  The  resurrection  of 
Christ  is  a  fact  established  by  conclusive  evidence.  III.  Every  Christian  should 
BE  prepared  to  DEFEND  HIS  HOPE.  "  Be  always  ready  to  give  a  reason  for  the  hope 
that  is  in  you."  Each  man  is  expected  to  be  able  to  defend  his  faith.  This  reason 
must  be — 1.  Intellectual.  Christians  ought  to  study  the  evidences  of  the  truth  of 
their  religion.  2.  Moral.  Every  Christian's  life  ought  to  be  morally  higher  than 
that  of  others.  3.  Spiritual.  The  Christian  religion  is  an  experimental  religion. 
"  He  that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  IV.  The  spirit  in  which  our 
REASONS  are  TO  BE  GIVEN.  1.  Meekncss.  There  must  be  no  self-sufficiency. 
Humility  is  a  Christian  virtue.  A  religion  of  love  must  be  defended  lovingly.  2. 
With  fear.  This  means  reverence  to  God  and  respect  to  man.  He  must  take  care 
that  the  great  truths  which  he  has  to  teach  do  not  suffer  from  his  ignorance  or 
incompetency.  We  must  each  make  this  hope  our  own.  Christianity  is  a  personal 
matter.  {George  Sexton,  LL.D.).  Ready  to  give  an  ansicer : — The  ability  to  state 
our  convictions  with  clearness  and  completeness  yields  two  benefits.  1.  It  makes 
our  convictions  respected.  There  is  persuasion  in  the  forceful  putting  of  a  thought, 
and  in  sentences  sharply  drawn  and  well  considered.  The  effect  of  words,  as  of 
soldiers,  can  be  trebled  by  their  manner  of  marshalling.  A  word  aptly  chosen  is  an 
argument,  and  a  phrase  judiciously  contrived  a  syllogism.  And  so  Peter  would 
have  his  readers  study  to  state  their  hopes  and  the  grounds  of  them  in  an  orderly 
and  intelligent  manner,  and  procure  for  their  convictions  in  this  way  a  respect,  at 
least,  among  those  whose  opinions  differed  or  even  antagonised.  2.  Another  benefit 
intended  was  the  effect  which  the  rational  statement  of  an  opinion  has  in  giving  to 
that  opinion  firmer  establishment  in  our  own  minds.  Our  religious  beliefs  are 
sometimes  irresolute,  because  we  do  not  know  with  precision  what  they  are,  nor 
with  definiteness  why  they  are.  We  are  established  by  feeling  the  grounds  of  our 
establishment.  The  boat  drifts  tiU  it  feels  the  pull  of  its  anchor.  We  get  a  sense 
of  stability  by  inspecting  the  means  of  our  stability.  If  we  are  crossing  a  stream 
upon  a  bridge  of  ice  or  timber,  even  though  assured  of  safety,  we  contemplate  with 
earnest  pleasure  the  massiveness  of  its  icy  or  oaken  beams.  Even  confidence  loves 
to  be  reminded  of  the  grounds  of  its  confidence,  and  wins  bravery  from  their  review. 
The  architect  lets  the  buttresses  and  the  broadened  courses  of  basal  masonry  as  far 
as  possible  lie  out  in  the  light.  Such  a  disposition  of  facts  satisfies  the  eye  because 
it  satisfies  the  mind.  We  get  a  sense  of  stability  by  inspecting  the  means  of 
stability.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Ready  to  give  an  answer : — Observe,  they  are 
not  required  to  be  always  disputing  about  their  hope,  or  obtruding  it  upon  others, 
without  regard  to  the  proprieties  of  time,  place,  and  person,  but  to  "  be  ready  "  in 
their  own  clear  apprehension  of  the  subject,  and  ready  also  in  a  loving  concern  for 
the  guidance  and  salvation  of  others ;  "  ready  always  "  on  the  humblest  occasions, 
as  well  as  the  more  public  and  formal ;  ready  in  the  house,  and  by  the  wayside,  and 
amidst  the  ordinary  businesses  of  life,  no  less  than  when  brought  before  the  kings 
and  judges  of  the  earth ;  "  ready  always  for  an  answer,"  apology,  vindication, 
defence,  as  when  Paul  spoke  for  himself  on  the  temple-stairs  and  before  Agrippa's 
throne ;  but,  so  far  from  waiting  for  rare  opportunities  of  that  sort,  "  be  ready 
always  for  an  answer  to  every  one,"  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  unlearned,  "  Greek  or 
Jew,  Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  or  free  "  ;  what  you  have  to  say  is  of  equal  moment 
to  one  as  to  another,  and  they  have  all  an  equal  claim  on  your  benevolence ;  "  to 
every  one,"  therefore,  "  that  asketh  of  you,"  and  so  manifests  a  degree  of  interest, 
greater  or  less,  and  howsoever  awakened,  in  the  topic  so  dear  to  yourselves ;  "  that 
asketh  of  you,"  not  merely  "  a  reason  of,"  but,  in  general,  an  account  of,  a  state- 
ment concerning,  "  the  hope  that  is  in  you,"  its  nature,  ground,  object,  and 
inlluences.  Tell  him  how  you,  too,  like  your  heathen  neighbours,  were  lately  living 
v.i'hout  hope  in  the  world  -with  no  hope  for  eternity.  Then  speak  to  him  of  "God 
oai  Saviour,  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  hope."     Open  to  him  the  glorious  mystery 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  805 

of  His  person,  and  work,  and  death,  and  resurrection,  and  ascension.  Explain  to 
him,  moreover,  your  own  personal  interest  in  all  this  through  your  living  union  by 
faith  with  this  blessed  Son  of  God,  the  world's  Eedeemer,  and  the  consequent 
indwelling  and  gracious  witness  of  His  Spirit  with  your  spirit.  (J.  Lillie,  D.D.) 
The  value  of  personal  experience  : — There  is  a  power  in  direct  personal  testimony 
which  transcends  all  laboured  argument.  A  skilled  topographical  engineer  would 
be  prompt  to  yield  his  convictions  as  to  the  lay  of  the  land  beyond  him  in  a  new 
country,  if  a  trusty  rodman  or  chainman  of  his  party  were  to  return  from  a  scout  in 
advance,  and  say  that  he  had  actually  found  a  road  or  a  stream  which  the  engineer 
had  been  positive  could  not  be  there.  So,  also,  it  is  in  the  higher  realm  of  spiritual 
truth.  He  who  has  experienced  the  loving  ministry  and  fellowship  of  Jesus,  can 
carry  more  weight,  in  an  interview  with  an  unbeliever,  by  bearing  his  simple 
witness  accordingly,  than  by  any  processes  of  skilful  reasoning.  If  only  this  truth 
were  more  generally  recognised,  there  would  be  less  of  arguing  and  more  of 
witnessing,  with  better  results  to  those  who  need  to  be  convinced  of  the  truth 
concerning  Jesus.  With  meekness  and  fear. — Logic  aided  by  good  temper  : — Here 
our  A.V.,  following  the  T.R.,  unfortunately  omits  the  emphatic  word  but;  of  two 
Greek  words  so  rendered,  the  more  forcible  is  found  here  in  all  the  best  MSS.  and 
ancient  versions.  St.  Peter  presses  this  condition  most  urgently ;  of  all  dangers 
that  of  angry,  arrogant,  and  irreverent  demeanour  on  the  part  of  men  closely,  and 
often  captiously,  questioned,  is  the  most  common  and  subtle.  Sweetness,  coupled 
with  awe,  remembering  whose  cause  is  defended,  will  commend  true  reasoning, 
and  they  will  be  in  themselves  evidences  calculated  to  impress  and  often  to  win 
opponents.  The  word  "  fear  "  may  also  include  anxiety  to  avoid  giving  offence  by 
inconsiderate  or  intemperate  arguments,  but  it  certainly  does  not  mean  fear  of 
magistrates.  The  Christian  is  bound  to  submit  to  law,  but  is  released  from  all  fear 
of  personal  consequences  when  put  on  his  trial.  {Canon  F.  C.  Cook.)  Having  a 
good  conscience. — A  good  conscience  : — I.  The  possession  of  a  good  conscience 
is  POSSIBLE  FOR  MAN.  1.  A  consciencc  that  rules  the  entire  man.  2.  A  con- 
science that  is  ruled  by  the  will  of  God.  H.  The  possession  of  a  good 
conscience  does  not  peotect  from  the  tongue  of  calumny.  The  man  who 
lives  in  a  corrupt  world,  ringing  out  a  good  conscience  in  every  tone  of 
his  voice,  and  radiating  it  in  every  action,  has  ever  awakened  the  most  antago- 
nism amongst  his  contemporaries,  and  will  ever  do  so.  HI.  The  possession  of  a 
good  conscience  will  utterly  confound  your  enemies.  1.  Slanderers  of  the  good 
are  often  confounded  now  in  courts  of  law.  2.  Slanderers  of  the  good  will  be 
overwhelmingly  confounded  one  day  in  the  moral  court  of  the  universe.  IV.  The 
possession  of  a  good  conscience  is  vitally  connected  with  a  Christly  life. 
\Homilist.)  A  good  conscience : — I.  Conscience  is  an  essential  attribute  op 
PERSONAL  BEING.  It  is  that  in  which  we  are  consciously  bound  in  allegiance  to  the 
Great  Supreme  in  truth,  righteousness,  and  goodness.  Its  function  is — 1.  Pro- 
spectively, to  incite  to  good  and  to  restrain  from  evil ;  and — 2.  Retrospectively,  to 
fill  with  joy  when  the  evil  has  been  overcome  and  the  good  achieved,  and  to  reprove 
and  fill  with  shame  and  remorse  when  the  good  has  been  eschewed  and  the  evil 
done.  II.  A  good  conscience  is  a  most  desirable  possession.  1.  It  must  be  a 
conscience  binding  its  possessor  to  the  right  and  good.  It  is  not  always  thus  with 
conscience.  It  binds,  indeed,  to  what  the  man  judges  to  be  right.  But  his 
judgment  may  be  wrong  (John  xvi.  2 ;  Acts  xxvi.  9).  It  needs  to  be  enlightened 
to  see  light  in  God's  light  (2  Cor.  iv.  3-6).  2.  It  must  be  a  faithful  conscience. 
Some  consciences  are  insensitive,  cauterized  (Eph.  iv.  17-19,  v.  7-14  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1, 
2).  A  good  conscience  is  faithful,  and  performs  its  proper  function.  3.  A  good 
conscience  is  a  peaceful  conscience.  If  burdened  with  guilt  and  fear  it  is  essentially 
"  an  evil  conscience."  For  such  a  conscience  there  is  only  one  source  of  peace  (Heb. 
ix.  13,  14;  1  John  i.  7;  Eom.  v.  1).  4.  A  good  conscience  is  a  self-approving 
conscience  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  Acts  xxiii.  1).  It  involves  the  abiding  consciousness 
of  integrity.     III.  The  virtue  of  a  good  conscience.     It  is  a  precious  possession. 

1.  For  the  man  himself.  It  makes  him  strong  to  toil,  contend,  endure,  die.  It 
ensures  continual  victory  and  final  triumph  (Eom.  v.  3-6,  viii.  35-39;  Heb.  xi.). 

2.  For  the  Church  and  the  world.  A  church  made  up  of  such  members,  of  men 
firmly  holding  "  faith  and  a  good  conscience,"  must  be  a  mighty  power  amongst 
men  ;  "  putting  to  silence  "  the  ignorant  and  foolish  (cha.p.  ii.  15)  ;  and  leading  the 
observant  "to  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation."  Conclusion:  1.  By  penitent 
faith  in  Jesus  secure  a  good  conscience.  2.  By  obedient  faith  in  Jesus  keep  a  good 
conscience.     {}V.  Tyson.)         What  is  a  good  conscience  ? — Conscience  is  that  faculty 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

of  the  human  mind  by  which  rational  creatures  endeavour  to  form  an  estimate  of 
their  own  principles  and  practices,  so  as  to  determine  whether  they  are  good  or  evil. 
It  is  universally  admitted  to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  those  powers  which  our 
aU-wise  and  ever-gi-acious  Creator  has  been  pleased  to  impart  to  us.  But  it,  like 
every  other  faculty  of  the  mind,  has  been  exposed  to  all  the  baneful  effects  of  the 
Fall.  It  is  by  nature — in  common  with  the  human  heart — ignorant,  and  perverse, 
and  polluted.  It  must,  before  it  can  fully  accomplish  the  purposes  for  which  it  is 
intended,  be  instructed,  and  purified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  I.  Mistaken  views  on 
THIS  SUBJECT  ARE,  IT  IS  TO  BE  LAMENTED,  VERY  COMMON.  1.  Natural  amiableness  of 
disposition  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  a  good  conscience.  How  many  a  friend, 
whose  heart  is  desperately  wicked  in  the  sight  of  God,  still  cherishes  the  strongest 
earthly  friendship  !  How  many  an  individual,  whose  heart  never  entertained  any 
just  sense  of  the  enormity  of  sin  as  perpetrated  against  a  holy  God,  has  yet  sighed 
and  cried  over  the  miseries  of  mankind,  and  has  done  what  he  could  to  alleviate 
human  wretchedness  !  But  these  emotions  are  no  proof  whatever  of  the  conscience 
being  right.  Guilty,  indeed,  must  that  conscience  be  which  can  resist  so  much 
natural  tenderness.  2.  Partial  contrition  on  account  of  sin  is  sometimes  mistaken 
for  a  good  conscience.  Who  experiences  at  times  greater  anguish  than  the 
drunkard  ?  but  who  returns  so  readily  or  so  speedily  as  he  to  his  wonted  practices  ? 
3.  Limited  abstinence  from  evil  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  a  good  conscience. 
Many  are  to  be  found  who  cautiously  shun  some  sins,  while  they  confidently  rush 
upon  others.  All  such  partial  turning  from  sin,  or  abstinence  from  evil,  must  prove 
that  the  conscience  is  not  right  before  God.  II.  What,  it  may  now  be  asked, 
IS,  IN  THE  Scriptural  sense  of  the  term,  a  good  conscience  ?  1.  It  is  a 
conscience  renewed  by  Divine  grace.  2.  It  is  a  conscience  regulated  by  the 
holy  Scriptures.  Even  after  holy  principles  are  implanted  within  us,  the 
conscience  is  liable  to  err  unless  a  standard  is  provided  by  which  its  decisions 
may  be  governed.  That  standard  the  Word  of  God  supplies.  To  it  we 
must  appeal  in  every  situation  in  which  we  are  placed.  From  it  we  must 
derive  all  that  instruction  in  righteousness  which  we  need.  (Alex.  Reid.) 
The  conscience : — The  word  "  conscience  "  does  not  occur  often  in  the  Bible.  It 
does  not  occur  once  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  the  thing  "  conscience  "  is  in  the 
Bible  from  first  to  last.  Why  was  it  that  our  first  parents,  when  they  had  eaten 
the  forbidden  fruit,  were  ashamed  to  look  in  each  other's  faces ;  and  why  was  it 
that  they  hid  among  the  trees  ?  That  was  conscience.  Or  take  the  very  next 
story  in  the  Bible— the  death  of  Abel.  Why  did  Cain  hear  a  voice  rising  from  his 
brother's  blood  to  heaven,  and  why  did  he  flee  from  it,  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  ? 
That  was  conscience.  Conscience,  in  fact,  is  everywhere  in  the  Bible.  Without 
conscience  there  would  be  no  religion.  But  let  us  define  clearly  what  conscience 
is,  and  what  it  does.  Conscience  has  been  called  the  moral  sense.  Now,  what 
does  that  mean  ?  It  means  this  :  that  as  by  the  sense  of  taste  we  distinguish  what 
is  sweet  and  what  is  sour,  and  by  the  sense  of  hearing  we  distinguish  what  is  har- 
monious and  what  is  discordant,  and  by  the  other  bodily  senses  we  discriminate 
the  qualities  of  material  things,  so  in  the  soul  there  is  a  sense  which  distinguishes 
right  from  wrong,  and  that  is  the  conscience.  There  have  been  many  nations  who 
have  never  seen  the  Ten  Commandments,  and  yet  they  have  known  quite  well  that 
to  lie,  and  to  steal,  and  to  kill  are  wrong.  How  did  they  know  that  ?  St.  Paul 
seems  to  tell  us  when  he  says,  in  one  of  the  profoundest  passages  of  his  writings, 
"  When  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the  things  contained 
in  the  law,"  &c.  In  opposition  to  this  sceptical  philosophers  have  pointed  to  the 
barbarities  which  have  claimed  the  sanction  of  conscience,  and  from  these  undeni- 
able facts  they  have  drawn  the  inference  that  conscience  knows  no  more  and  no 
better  than  custom  ;  but  the  power  resident  in  human  nature  of  rising  out  of  super- 
stitious practices,  and  seeing  the  better  Ufe  when  it  shows  itself,  appears  to  prove 
that  behind  such  mistakes  there  is  a  power  of  discerning  "  whatsoever  things  are 
true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,"  &c.  The.conscience  is  the  categorical  impera- 
tive. That  is  a  name  given  to  it  by  the  German  philosopher  Kant.  I  suppose  it 
is  too  big  a  name.  It  brings  out  a  second  feature.  As  soon  as  it  is  ascertained 
that  one  course  is  right  and  the  opposite  one  wrong,  the  conscience  commands  us- 
to  follow  the  one  course  and  avoid  the  other.  Thus  it  is  imperative ;  and  it  is  a 
categorical  imperative — that  is  to  say,  it  accepts  no  excuse.  The  course  which  con- 
science commands  may  apparently  be  contrary  to  our  interests ;  it  may  be  dead  against 
our  inclinations ;  it  may  be  contrary  to  all  we  are  advised  to  do  by  friends  and  com- 
liinions  ;  but  conscience  does  not  on  that  account  in  the  least  withdraw  its  impera- 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  307 

tive.  "We  must  obey.  We  may  yield  to  temptation,  or  be  carried  away  by  the  force 
of  passion ;  but  we  know  that  we  ought  to  obey.  It  is  our  duty,  and  that  is  the 
grand  word  of  conscience.  It  is  conscience  that  tells  us  what  duty  is.  I  am  sure 
you  all  remember  in  the  "  Heart  of  Midlothian  "  how  Jeanie  Deans,  with  her  heart 
bursting  with  love  for  her  frail  sister,  yet  refuses  to  deviate  one  hair's-breadth  from 
the  truth,  although  her  falsehood  would  save  her  sister's  life.  But  such  scenes  do 
not  occur  merely  in  fiction.  Perhaps  the  grandest  scene  of  modern  history  is  the 
appearance  of  Luther  at  the  Diet  of  Worms,  when,  facing  the  hostile  powers  of  all 
Europe,  he  said,  "  It  is  neither  safe  nor  honest  to  do  anything  against  conscience. 
Here  stand  I ;  I  cannot  do  otherwise,  so  help  me  God."  There  is  never  an  horn- 
passes  but  in  the  secrecy  of  some  man's  soul  or  in  the  obscurity  of  business  life 
some  one,  putting  aside  the  promptings  of  seK-interest  and  the  frowns  of  power,  pays 
the  same  tribute  to  conscience  by  doing  right  and  taking  the  consequences.  Con- 
science has  often  been  compared  to  a  court  of  justice,  in  which  there  are  the  culprit,  the 
judge,  the  jury,  and  the  witnesses  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  these  aU  are  in  every  man's 
own  breast.  Ay,  and  the  executioner  is  there  too  who  carries  out  the  sentence. 
There  is  not  one  of  us  who  does  not  know  in  some  degree  both  the  pain  and  horror 
of  a  condemning  conscience,  and  the  pleasure  of  an  approving  conscience.  A 
habitually  approving  conscience  gives  even  to  the  outward  man  elasticity  and 
courage,  while  a  habitually  condemning  conscience  gives  to  a  man  a  look  of  con- 
fusion and  misery.  One  of  the  great  wi-iters  whom  I  have  ah-eady  quoted  has  a 
wonderful  passage  in  which  the  two  characters  are  put  in  contrast.  I  wish  I  could 
quote  it  all,  but  I  will  quote  a  few  of  the  most  significant  sentences.  Here  is  first 
the  picture  of  a  very  good  man,  with  a  habitually  approving  conscience  :  "  He  was 
sleeping  peacefully,  and  was  wrapped  up  in  a  long  garment  of  brown  wool,  which 
covered  his  arms  down  to  the  wrists.  His  head  was  thrown  back  on  the  pillow  in 
the  easy  attitude  of  repose,  and  his  hand,  adorned  with  the  pastoral  ring,  and  which 
had  done  so  many  good  deeds,  hung  out  of  bed.  His  entire  face  was  Ut  up  by  a  vague 
expression  of  satisfaction,  hope,  and  beatitude — it  was  more  than  a  smile,  and 
almost  a  radiance.  There  was  ahnost  a  divinity  in  this  unconsciously  august 
man."  And  here  is  the  opposite  picture.  The  burglar,  on  the  contrary,  "  was 
standing  in  the  shadow  with  his  crowbar  in  his  hand,  motionless  and  terrified  by 
this  luminous  old  man.  He  had  never  seen  anything  like  this  before,  and  such 
confidence  horrified  him  " ;  and  then  he  adds,  "  The  moral  world  has  no  greater 
spectacle  than  this — a  troubled,  restless  conscience,  which  is  on  the  point  of  com- 
mitting a  bad  action,  contemplating  the  sleep  of  a  just  man."  In  all  ages  the 
higher  imaginative  literature  has  found  its  best  resources  in  depicting  the  horrors 
of  a  guilty  conscience.  The  ancient  Greeks  represented  these  terrors  by  the  Furies, 
who  with  shadowy,  silent,  but  remorseless  steps,  pursued  the  criminal  until  they 
pulled  him  down  ;  and  in  such  dramas  as  "  Macbeth  "  and  "  Eichard  III."  Shake- 
speare is  dealing  with  the  same  theme.  You  all  remember  how,  when  King  Duncan 
was  murdered,  a  paralysing  and  agonising  terror  fell  on  his  murderer ;  and  how, 
in  "  Richard  III.,"  on  the  night  before  the  battle  in  which  the  tyrant  received  the 
reward  of  his  deeds,  ghosts  of  the  victims  of  his  tyranny  passed  one  by  one  through 
his  tent,  summoning  him  to  meet  them  on  the  battlefield,  until  the  man,  streaming 
with  perspiration,  sprang  from  his  bed,  crying — 

♦•  My  conscience  hath  a  thousand  several  tongues, 
And  every  tongue  brings  in  a  several  tale, 
And  every  tale  condemns  me  for  a  villain." 

But  observe  this,  that  not  only  does  a  man's  own  conscience  pass  sentence  on  his 
conduct ;  but  the  consciences  of  others,  if  they  chance  to  be  acquainted  with  it,  do 
so  too,  and  to  this  may  be  due  a  great  intensification  either  of  the  pleasure  or  the 
pain  which  conscience  caiases.  For  instance,  a  man  may  have  committed  a  crime 
and  suffered  for  it  in  his  conscience,  but  gradually  time  assuages  his  pain,  and  he 
is  forgetting  it.  Well,  suddenly  it  is  found  out,  and  the  conscience  of  the  public  is 
brought  to  bear  on  him.  He  is  put  out  of  respectable  society,  and  feels  now  for  the 
first  time  the  full  enormity  of  what  he  has  done.  The  conscience  is  an  intuition  of 
God.  We  have  seen  that  as  soon  as  the  choice  is  made  and  the  deed  done,  conscience 
inflicted  immediate  reward  or  punishment.  But  it  has  another  function.  It  hints 
unmistakably  at  reward  and  punishment  yet  to  come,  and  from  another  source.  You 
remember  how  Hamlet  expresses  this  when  contemplating  the  crime  of  suicide : 


b08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

"  The  dread  of  something  after  death, 
The  undiscovered  country,  from  whose  bourne 
No  traveller  returns,  puzzles  the  will, 
And  makes  us  rather  bear  those  ills  we  have, 
Than  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of. 
Thus  conscience  does  make  cowards  of  us  all." 

In  the  Egyptian  book  of  the  dead,  which  has  just  been  published  in  Europe,  but 
is  many  centuries  older  than  the  Christian  era,  two  hundred  and  forty  figures  are 
represented  as  meeting  the  soul  when  it  enters  the  other  world.  These  are  virtues, 
and  to  each  of  them  the  soul  has  to  answer  how  far  it  has  practised  these  virtues 
in  this  hfe  ;  and  besides  this  strict  inquiry,  up  in  the  corner  of  the  picture  God  is 
represented  weighing  the  heart.  Analyse  your  own  consciousness  when  conscience 
is  acting,  and  see  if  it  does  not  inform  you  that  God  is  looking  on.  For  instance, 
when  you  have  done  something  wrong,  and  are  feeling  ashamed  and  horrified,  are 
you  not  aware  that  God  is  near  you,  and  that  it  is  from  His  hand  that  retribution 
is  to  come  ?  Will  you  permit  me  to  say  a  word  about  the  cultivation  of  the  con- 
science ?  Conscience  is  the  foundation  of  character.  Does  a  man  listen  to  the  voice 
within  him  ?  Can  he  look  himself  straight  in  the  eyes  ?  That  is  the  most  important 
question  you  can  ask  about  any  man.  There  are  some  men  and  women  that  would 
almost  as  soon  meet  a  tiger  in  the  jungle  as  meet  themselves  in  solitude.  But  if  a 
man  is  accustomed  day  by  day  to  bring  his  conduct  under  the  survey  of  his  own 
conscience,  and  if  he  is  moved  with  joy  and  sorrow  according  to  the  sentences  which 
conscience  pronounces,  that  man  is  safe.  He  will  not  need  to  mind  much  what  the 
opinion  of  other  people  is  about  him.  Yet  conscientiousness  is  not  everything.  It 
may  be  only  a  petty  and  self-satisfied  pharisaism.  There  are  few  things  that 
astonish  me  so  much  as  to  find  how  many  people  there  are  whose  final  judgment 
on  themselves  is  this,  that  they  have  never  done  any  one  any  harm,  and  they  have 
not  much  to  reproach  themselves  with.  That  betrays  an  unenlightened  conscience. 
The  conscience  requires  to  be  made  observant  and  sensitive  by  acquaintance  with 
the  law  of  God,  as  revealed  in  His  Word,  and  especially  as  expounded  by  Christ 
Himself,  when  He  taught  that  even  when  the  outward  conduct  is  correct  the  law 
may  be  broken,  in  the  secret  thoughts  and  wishes.      (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  The 

conscience  of  a  Christian  .-—Wherever  a  man  acts  consistently  on  higher  prin- 
ciples than  are  generally  current,  his  very  example  is  a  silent  rebuke  which  worldly 
society  is  apt  to  resent.  It  cannot  reconcile  his  conduct  with  its  own  generally 
received  maxims.  It  cannot  rise  to  a  conception  of  his  loftier  principles.  What  is 
the  consequence?  Surely  this,  that  society  will  impute  to  him  lower  principles, 
will  fix  a  bad  name  upon  him,  hypocrite,  bigot,  and  the  like,  and  so  seek  to  justify 
itself,  and  put  him  in  the  wrong.  Against  this  power  of  prejudice,  deepening  often 
into  malice,  the  power  of  a  Christian's  conscience  informed  by  faith  and  enlightened 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  his  great  resource.  Let  us  see  how  it  operates.  1.  By  making 
him  feel  directly  the  presence  of  God,  the  conscience  of  the  Christian  becomes  an 
organ  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  with  us,  than  he  that  is  in  the 
world,"  is  his  constant  thought.  He  feels  thus :  I  have  the  moral  power  of  the 
universe  on  my  side.  Truth  must  prevail,  with  God  to  back  it,  in  the  end.  2.  A 
good  conscience  sets  a  man  free  from  all  unworthy  motives.  Whether  those  around 
him  persecute  or  approve,  to  him  matters  little.  He  does  not  derive  his  principles  of 
belief  and  conduct  from  any  censure  or  approval  of  theirs.  He  feels  that  he  need 
conceal  nothing.  He  can  afford,  in  every  sense,  to  "  walk  in  the  light."  How  much 
anxiety  and  inward  disquietude  is  saved  by  this ;  how  much  perilous  manoeuvring 
is  made  needless !  3.  As  a  consequence  of  this,  a  directness  of  aim  and  simplicity 
of  character  distinguishes  the  man.  He  will  not  flatter,  he  will  not  violently  con- 
demn. How  different  this  from  seeking  human  applause  as  an  object,  and  then 
bribing  for  it  in  its  own  base  coin,  by  adulation,  by  trimming  to  prejudices,  by 
adopting  false  views  and  echoing  mere  popular  cries.  (H.  Hayman,  D.D.)  The 
man  inside: — "I  cannot  do  this,"  said  a  Christian  merchant,  in  reference  to  some 
business  operations  in  which  he  was  asked  to  take  part — "  I  cannot  do  this.  There 
is  a  man  inside  of  me  that  won't  let  me  do  it.  He  talks  to  me  of  nights  about  it, 
and  I  have  to  do  business  in  a  different  way  !  "  Oh  !  those  talks  of  night  about  the 
business  of  the  day,  when  the  "  man  inside  "  has  our  ear  and  there  is  no  escape 
from  the  judgment  he  pronounces  1  Thrice  blessed  is  he  who  is  able  to  hear  it  in 
peace !  A  good  conscience  : — It  is  a  conscience  which  is  purged  from  dead  works 
(Ileb.  ix.  14),  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ  (Heb.  x.  22),  borne  witness  to  by 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  309 

the  Holy  Ghost  (Eom.  ix.  1),  whilst  a  joy,  which  is  fuU  of  glory,  wells  up  within  it 
(2  Cor.  i.  12),  and  as  a  calm,  unruffled  lake  of  peace  it  reflects  the  cloudless  heaven 
of  God's  good  pleasure  above.  Such  a  conscience  is  a  good  companion  for  our  days, 
and  a  good  bed-fellow  for  our  nights.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  preserve  its 
integrity.  And  when  life  is  moulded  by  such  an  inward  influence,  it  will  Uve  down 
all  misrepresentation  and  slander,  it  will  outshine  all  the  mists  of  envy  and  malice 
which  have  obscured  its  earliest  beams,  it  will  falsify  false  reports.  Detractors  shall 
be  ashamed  at  the  triumphant  answer  made  to  their  accusations  by  the  unblemished 
beauty  of  a  holy  Christian  life  ;  whilst  those  that  love  God  shall  take  heart.  {F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  18-20.  Christ  also  hath  once  suflFered  for  sias.^The  great  atonement : — I. 
The  glorious  person  who  suffered  for  sin  and  sinners.  II.  The  sufferings  by' 
WHICH  He  made  atonement  for  sin.  1.  Sin  was  the  procuring  cause  of  them.  2. 
His  human  nature  was  the  immediate  subject  of  them.  3.  They  were  the  sufferings 
of  a  Divine  person.  4.  They  were  not  imaginary  but  real.  5.  The  sufferings  of 
Christ  were  necessary.  6.  Vicarious.  7.  Grievous.  8.  Voluntary.  9.  By  them 
the  justice  of  God  was  fuUy  satisfied.  10.  Though  they  are  long  since  finished,  they 
have  the  same  merit  and  efficacy  that  ever  they  had.  III.  The  end  of  Christ's 
sufferings.  1.  How,  or  in  what  respects,  sinners  may  be  said  to  be  brought  to  God. 
Their  being  brought  to  God — (1)  Implies  their  being  brought  into  a  state  of  recon- 
ciliation and  favour  with  God.  (2)  It  impUes  their  having  access  into  the  gracious 
presence  of  God.  (3)  It  implies  their  being  admitted  to  communion  and  fellowship 
with  God.  (4)  Sinners  are  brought  to  God  when  they  attain  to  Ukeness  and  con- 
formity to  God.  (5)  Sinners  may  be  said  to  be  brought  to  God  when  they  forsake 
the  service  of  sin,  and  cordially  engage  in  the  service  of  God.  (6)  Sinners  are 
brought  to  God,  in  the  fuUest  sense,  when  they  are  brought  to  the  full  enjoyment  of 
Him  in  heaven.  2.  What  influence  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  sin  have  on  the 
bringing  of  sinners  to  God.  By  the  sufferings  of  Christ  all  grounds  of  controversy 
between  God  and  sinners  were  legally  rembved  (Col.  i.  20).  (D.  Wilson.)  The 
sufferings  of  Christ: — I.  Their  reality.  Christ  suffered  from — 1.  Privation.  2. 
Satanic  hostility.  3.  Unkindness.  4.  Misunderstanding.  H.  Their  atoning 
NATURE.  1.  The  character  of  Christ.  2.  The  doctrine  of  substitution.  3.  The 
sohtariness  of  the  sacrifice,  (1)  Nothing  more  is  needed.  (2)  Nothing  more  will 
be  given.  IH.  Their  design.  "  That  He  might  bring  us  to  God  " — 1.  In  peni- 
tential sorrow.  2.  To  obtain  mercy  and  peace.  3.  With  entire  self-surrender.  4. 
Unto  God's  immediate  presence.  Lessons :  1.  There  is  hope  and  help  for  all. 
2.  Christ  is  the  way  of  access  to  God.     {M.  Braithwaite.)  The  saints  coming 

home  to  God  by  reconciliation  and  glorification : — The  scope  of  the  apostle  in  this 
place  is  to  fortify  Christians  for  a  day  of  suffering.  In  order  to  their  cheerful  sus- 
taining whereof,  he  prescribeth  two  excellent  rules.  1.  To  get  a  good  conscience 
within  them  (vers.  16,  17).  2.  To  set  the  example  of  Christ's  sufferings  before  them 
(ver.  18).  The  sufferings  of  Christ  for  us  is  the  great  motive  engaging  Christians 
to  suffer  cheerfully  for  Him.  I.  The  sufficiency  and  fulness  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings intimated  in  that  particle  [once]  ;  Christ  needs  to  suffer  no  more,  having  com- 
pleted that  whole  work  at  once.  II.  The  meritorious  cause  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  that  is  sin,  "Christ  once  suffered  for  sins";  not  His  own  sins,  but 
ours.  III.  The  admirable  grace  and  unexampled  love  of  Christ  to  us  sinners, 
"  The  just  for  the  unjust"  ;  in  which  words  the  substitution  of  Chi-ist  in  the  place 
of  sinners  is  plainly  expressed.  Christ  died  not  only  for  our  good,  but  also  in  our 
stead.  IV.  The  final  cause  or  design  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  "  To  bring  us 
to  God."  1.  What  Christ's  bringing  us  to  God  imports.  (1)  That  the  chief  happi- 
ness of  man  consisteth  in  the  enjoyment  of  God  :  that  the  creature  hath  as  neces- 
sary dependence  upon  God  for  happiness,  as  the  stream  hath  upon  the  fountain. 
(2)  Man's  revolt  and  apostasy  from  God  (Eph.  ii.  12).  (3)  Our  inabihty  to  return 
to  God  of  ourselves ;  we  must  be  brought  back  by  Christ,  or  perish  for  ever  in  a 
state  of  separation  from  God  (Luke  xv.  5).  (4)  That  God's  unsatisfied  justice  was 
once  the  great  bar  betwixt  Him  and  man.  (5)  The  peculiar  happiness  of  behevers 
above  all  people  in  the  world  :  these  only  shaU  be  brought  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ 
in  a  reconciled  state ;  others,  indeed,  shall  be  brought  to  God  as  a  Judge,  to  be  con- 
demned by  Him.  All  believers  shall  be  solemnly  presented  to  God  in  the  great  day 
(Col.  i.  22;  Jude  24).  They  shall  be  aU  presented  faultless  before  the  presence  of 
His  glory  with  exceeding  joy.  2.  What  influence  the  death  of  Christ  hath  upon 
this  design.     (1)  It  effectually  removes  all  obstacles  to  it.     (2)  It  purchaseth  (as  a. 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

price)  their  title  to  it.  (John  Flavel.)  The  Saviour'' i  viission  : — I.  The  chaeacteb 
OF  THE  Saviour's  mission.  1.  It  was  one  that  involved  Him  in  suffering.  2.  It  was 
one  of  innocent  suifering.  3.  It  was  one  unconquered  by  suffering.  II.  The  pub- 
pose  OF  the  Saviour's  mission.  1.  We  are  away  from  God.  2.  We  can  be  restored 
to  God.  (1)  In  thought.  (2)  In  will.  (3)  In  resemblance.  (4)  In  filial  fellowship 
and  friendship.  3.  God  Himself  brings  us  back  by  Christ.  III.  The  extent  op 
the  influence  of  the  Saviour's  mission.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  Christ's  sufferings  : — 
I.  The  due  consideration  of  Christ's  sufferings  doth  much  temper  all  the  sufferings 
of  Christians,  especially  such  as  are  directly  for  Christ.  It  is  some  ease  to  the  mind 
in  any  distress,  to  look  upon  examples  of  the  like  or  greater  distress,  in  present  or 
former  times.  It  diverts  the  eye  from  continual  poring  on  our  own  suffering ;  and 
when  we  return  to  view  it  again,  it  abates  the  imagined  greatness  of  it.  The 
example  and  company  of  the  saints  in  suffering,  is  very  considerable,  but  that  of 
Christ  is  more  so  than  any  other,  yea,  than  all  the  rest  together.  Therefore  the 
apostle,  having  represented  the  former  at  large,  ends  in  this,  as  the  top  of  all  (Heb. 
xii.  1,  2).  1.  Consider  the  greatness  of  the  example;  the  greatness  of  the  person 
"  Christ."  There  can  be  no  higher  example.  Since  thus  our  Lord  hath  taught  us 
by  suffering  in  His  own  person  and  hath  thus  dignified  sufferings,  we  should  cer- 
tainly rather  be  ambitious  than  afraid  of  them.  Consider  the  greatness  and  con- 
tinuance of  His  sufferings,  His  whole  life  was  one  continued  line  of  suffering  from 
the  manger  to  the  Cross.  Art  thou  mean  in  thy  birth  and  life,  despised,  misjudged, 
and  reviled,  on  all  hands  ?  Look  how  it  was  with  Him,  who  had  more  right  than 
thou  hast,  to  better  entertainment  in  the  world.  But  the  Christian  is  subject  to 
grievous  temptations  and  sad  desertions,  which  are  heavier  by  far  than  the  suffer- 
ings which  the  apostle  speaks  of  here.  Yet  even  in  these,  this  same  argument 
holds ;  for  our  Saviour  is  not  ignorant  of  those,  though  still  without  sin.  If  any  of 
that  had  been  in  His  sufferings,  it  had  not  furthered  but  undone  all  our  comfort  in 
Him.  2.  Consider  the  fitness  of  the  example.  As  the  argument  is  strong  in  itself, 
so,  to  the  new  man  it  is  particularly  strong ;  it  binds  him  most,  as  it  is  not  far 
fetched,  but  a  home  pattern ;  as  when  you  persuade  men  to  virtue  by  the  example 
of  those  that  they  have  a  near  relation  to.  3.  Consider  the  efficacy  of  the  example. 
"  He  suffered  once  for  sin,"  so  that  to  them  who  lay  hold  on  Him,  this  holds  sure, 
that  sin  is  never  to  be  suffered  for  in  the  way  of  strict  justice  again,  as  not  by  Him, 
so  not  by  them  who  are  in  Him.  So  now  the  soul,  finding  itself  rid  of  that  fear, 
goes  cheerfully  through  all  other  hazards ;  whereas  the  soul  perplexed  about  that 
question,  finds  no  relief  in  all  other  enjoyments :  all  propositions  of  lower  comforts 
are  troublesome  to  it.  II.  Having  somewhat  considered  these  sufferings,  as  the 
apostle's  argument  for  his  present  purpose,  we  come  now,  to  take  a  nearer  view  of 
the  particulars  by  which  he  illustrates  them,  as  the  main  point  of  our  faith  and 
comfort.  Here  are  two  things  to  be  remarked,  their  cause  and  their  kind.  1.  Their 
cause ;  both  their  meritorious  cause  and  their  final  cause ;  first,  what  in  us  procured 
these  sufferings  unto  Christ,  and,  secondly,  what  those  His  sufferings  procured  unto 
us.  Our  guiltiness  brought  suffering  upon  Him,  and  His  suffering  brings  us  unto 
God.  2.  We  have  the  kind  of  our  Lord's  sufferings:  " Being  put  to  death  in  the 
flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  "  Put  to  death."  This  is  the  utmost  point, 
and  that  which  men  are  most  startled  at — to  die  ;  especially  a  violent  death.  "  In 
the  flesh."  Under  this  second  phrase.  His  human  nature  and  His  Divine  nature 
and  power  are  distinguished.  But  the  "  Spirit "  here  opposed  to  the  "  flesh,"  or 
body,  is  certainly  of  a  higher  nature  and  power  than  the  human  soul,  which  cannot 
of  itself  return  to  re-inhabit  and  quicken  the  body.  "  Put  to  death."  His  death 
was  both  voluntary  and  violent.  That  same  power  which  restored  His  life  could 
have  kept  it  exempted  from  death ;  but  the  design  was  for  death.  He  therefore 
took  our  flesh,  to  put  it  off  thus,  and  to  offer  it  up  as  a  sacrifice,  which,  to  be 
acceptable,  must  of  necessity  be  free  and  voluntary ;  and,  in  this  sense.  He  is  said 
to  have  died  even  by  that  same  Spirit,  which  here,  in  opposition  to  death,  is  said  to 
quicken  Him ;  "  Through  the  eternal  Spirit,  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto 
God."  And  yet  it  was  also  expedient  that  His  death  should  be  violent,  and  so  the 
more  penal,  to  carry  the  more  clear  expression  of  a  punishment,  and  such  a  violent 
death  as  had  both  ignominy  and  a  curse  tied  to  it,  and  this  inflicted  in  a  judicial 
way ;  that  He  should  stand,  and  be  judged,  and  condemned  to  death  as  a  guilty 
person,  carrying  in  that  person  the  persons  of  so  many  who  would  otherwise  have 
fallen  under  condemnation,  as  indeed  guilty.  "  Quickened."  For  all  its  vast  craving 
mouth  and  devouring  appetite,  crying,  Give,  give,  yet  was  the  grave  forced  to  give 
Him  up  again,  as  the  fish  to  give  up  the  prophet  Jonah.  The  chains  of  that  prison  are 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  PETER.  311 

strong,  but  He  was  too  strong  a  prisoner  to  be  held  by  them.  That  rolling  of  the  stone 
to  the  grave  was  as  if  they  had  rolled  it  towards  the  east  in  the  night,  to  stop  the  rising 
of  the  sun  the  next  morning  ;  much  farther  above  aU  their  power  was  this  Sun  of 
Bighteousness  in  His  rising  again.  That  body  which  was  entombed,  was  united  to  the 
spring  of  life,  the  Divine  Spirit  of  the  God-head  that  quickened  it.  (Abj).  Leighton.) 
The  sufferings  of  Christ : — Suffering  is  universal  in  the  world.  It  comes  from  the 
first  wailings  of  the  infant  to  the  last  enfeebled  cry  of  old  age.  It  is  found  in  the 
silent  endurance  of  weakness  and  in  the  bold  struggle  of  strength.  It  is  in  every 
station  and  rank  of  life.  It  is  so  various  in  its  manifestations,  that  it  seems  as  if 
we  took  a  new  lesson  in  it  every  day.  To  pass  it  by,  to  try  to  deny  it,  to  make  the 
ignoring  of  it  a  victory  over  it,  is  very  short-sighted  policy ;  it  is  what  we  would  do 
with  no  other  fact  of  like  universal  significance  and  power.  And  therefore,  when 
Christ  begins  His  gospel  with  the  fact  of  suffering,  we  are  at  a  loss  whether  to 
admire  most  the  wisdom  or  the  love  of  the  method ;  together  the  boldness  and  the 
reasonableness  of  what  He  does  startle  us  into  asking  the  secret  of  One  who  could 
thus  utilise  the  world's  greatest  enemy,  and  turn  in  defence  of  mankind  the  very 
weapons  which  have  so  long  wrought  their  destruction.  The  man  who  taught  to 
his  fellow-men  the  uses  of  destructive  fire  was  the  hero  of  ancient  mythology ;  the 
men  who  have  bridled  the  lightnings,  and  chained  the  forces  of  air  and  water,  are 
the  great  names  of  modern  civilisation.  But  what  shaU  we  say  of  Him,  who  stopped 
not  with  the  powers  and  material  of  the  earth,  but,  going  into  the  heart  and  life  of 
man,  found  there  the  fact  of  suffering,  and  out  of  that  formed  the  corner-stone  of 
His  kingdom  ?  who,  out  of  the  cries  and  groans  to  which  we  close  our  ears,  made 
the  praises  of  God  resound  through  the  world  ?  In  this  bold  action  the  first  element 
of  strength  is,  that  all  suffering  is  traced  to  one  source.  Suffering  is  made  to  flow 
from  sin.  Christ  suffered  for  sin,  suffered  as  a  criminal,  suffered  because  of  sin, 
under  the  weight  of  sin.  The  wisdom  of  Christ,  the  singleness  of  His  purpose,  the 
central  power  of  His  action,  start  out  before  us  then ;  and  we  feel  that  He  was  indeed 
one  who  was  fitted  to  deal  with  the  great  fact  of  human  suffering,  as  He  could  thus 
put  His  finger  on  the  very  place  whence  it  all  flowed.  It  is  only  by  getting  at  the 
true  nature  of  a  difficulty  that  we  are  able  to  conquer  it ;  the  new  and  deeper  know- 
ledge opens  ways  of  approach  unthought  of  before.  There  stood  in  proud  seclusion 
the  steepest  peak  in  the  Alps.  Men  looked  at  it,  and  said  that  human  foot  could 
never  scale  its  heights.  Bolder  spirits  tried  every  way  which  they  could  devise, 
approached  it  from  all  sides  but  one ;  and  they  succeeded  in  reaching  certain  points, 
but  still  there  towered  above  them  that  inaccessible  point.  At  length  a  wiser,  more 
experienced  eye  was  turned  to  that  very  side  which  had  been  pronounced  evidently 
impossible ;  and,  as  he  thus  faced  what  had  seemed  the  most  despairing  side  of  the 
problem,  he  saw  that  the  strata  of  the  earth  below,  broken  sharp  off  in  the  upheaval 
of  that  majestic  peak,  furnished  a  series  of  steps  which  made  the  passage  possible 
directly  to  the  summit ;  and  now  every  year  even  unexperienced  feet  make  their  way 
over  the  path  thus  opened.  If  any  of  us  stand  wondering  how  the  mountain  of 
our  own  or  the  world's  suffering  shall  be  conquered,  and  have  never  seen  the  path 
opened  on  the  side  of  man's  sin,  have  tried  every  way  but  the  fight  against  sin,  have 
shed  tears  over  every  calamity  but  the  depravity  of  our  nature,  have  done  every- 
thing but  confess  our  sins  in  the  sight  of  God,  nay,  have  dismissed  that  as  too  dark 
and  hard  a  side  of  the  problem  for  us  to  face,  now  let  the  way  opened  by  One  who 
knew  the  secrets  of  our  nature  and  of  the  generation  of  that  mountain  of  suffering, — • 
let  that  way  be  the  one  for  our  feet  to  follow.  One  of  our  greatest  troubles,  under 
the  suffering  which  we  feel  ourselves  or  see  in  the  world,  is,  that  it  does  not  seem  to 
come  upon  the  right  people.  But  when  this  great  Master  approaches  this  very  fact 
of  suffering,  as  the  one  which  He  will  use  in  His  work,  we  have  reason  to  expect  a 
word  of  authority  from  Him  on  this  most  distressing  feature  of  it.  And  it  is  here ; 
"  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  Christ  suffered.  That  runs  through  all  His  life, — the 
thought  that  it  was  the  very  sinlessness  of  His  life  that  made  Him  able  to  do  the 
work  for  sinful  men,  that  made  Him  able  to  take  up  the  load  of  sin.  The  fact  that 
He  came  from  the  Father,  and  was  ever  bound  to  the  Father,  was  the  very  thing 
that  made  Him  able  to  call  men  back  to  the  Father.  It  is  the  privilege  of  strength 
to  suffer  for  weakness.  As  it  does  so,  strength  is  glorified ;  it  conquers  weakness,  it 
spreads  the  power  of  its  own  life,  it  becomes  strength  in  its  right  place.  Only  the 
mighty  can  help ;  and,  as  He  thus  helps,  we  look  to  His  might  as  the  reason  for  it, 
and  through  the  work  for  us  we  find  our  Saviour.  It  is  not  gratitude  alone — that, 
indeed,  moves  us  as  we  think  of  what  He  did  for  us — but  it  is  the  opening  of  the 
source  of  strength  by  which  He  was  able  to  do  it.     We  come  to  Him  through  grati- 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

tude ;  and,  as  we  reach  Him,  we  find  Him  one  who  is  mighty  to  save,  because  He 
could  bring  us  near  to  God.  This  shows  us  the  meaning  and  power  of  the  last 
clause  of  our  text.  The  apostle  has  been  saying  that  Christ's  sufferings  were  so  like 
the  sufferings  of  the  disciples,  that  they  could  feel  the  sustaining  power  of  them. 
But  here  it  is  not  likeness,  it  is  dependence,  that  is  brought  out.  These  sufferings 
were  to  bring  to  God  the  very  men  who  were  now  exhorted  to  imitate  them.  Never 
were  they  to  forget  that  they  had  been  brought  to  God  by  those  sufferings.  They  had 
opened  His  love.  They  had  drawn  to  Him  who  was  able  to  reveal  God  to  them. 
They  had  made  the  world  a  different  place,  one  that  had  the  power  and  presence  of 
God  as  well  as  of  man  in  it ;  never  were  they  to  forget  that.  But,  as  they  remem- 
bered it,  it  would  affect  their  lives,  and  change  the  whole  character  of  them.  The 
mystery  of  life's  power  would  be  made  theirs.  They,  too,  would  have  but  one  object 
— to  bring  men  to  God.  Never  was  there  a  time  when  the  suffering  of  the  world 
was  so  keenly  felt  as  it  is  to-day.  A  philanthropic  age  needs  the  Cross,  men  anxious 
to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the  world  need  to  have  their  own  hearts  broken  for 
their  sins,  and  all  of  us  need  to  cling  to  these  events  of  the  suffering  and  death  of 
Christ,  and  to  feel  that  they  contain  the  very  power  of  our  lives  within  them — the 
power  of  forgiveness  and  redemption,  the  power  of  happiness,  the  power  of  true 
labour,  the  power  of  the  life  eternal  for  this  world  and  for  the  world  that  is  to  come. 
{Arthur  Brooks.)  The  unrepeatable  sacrifice : — The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  in 
many  respects  peculiar :  I.  They  were  officially  undektaken  and  endured.  The 
designation  by  which  the  Bedeemer  is  here  distinguished,  and  the  emphatic  state- 
ment whereby  He  characterises  His  sufferings  must  be  taken  together—"  Christ  once 
suffered  for  sins."  Suffering  is  no  uncommon  thing;  "Man  is  born  to  trouble." 
But  Christ  was  not  an  ordinary  man.  Here  then  is  a  marked  distinction  between 
His  and  all  merely  human  suffering.  Man  was  not  made  man  for  the  purpose  of 
suffering ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  result,  the  penalty,  of  his  sin ;  but  the  very  end 
for  which  the  Christ  became  man  was  that  He  might  suffer.  In  this  sense,  there- 
fore, it  may  be  said  that  He  "  once  suffered  " — the  entire  of  His  sufferings  from  the 
very  first  lay  before  Him.  To  us  it  is  a  merciful  provision  which  leaves  us  in 
ignorance  of  future  ills.  "  Christ  once  suffered."  His  sufferings  stand  alone. 
Where  can  we  find  a  just  comparison  for  them  ?  Here  then  is  another  peculiarity. 
The  statement  is  that  "  Christ  suffered  for  sins."  Were  His  sufferings  the  conse- 
quence of  His  own  desert  ?  Had  this  been  so,  His  bitter  enemies  would  not  have 
failed  to  convict  Him  of  sin ;  but  His  challenge  in  this  respect  was  never  answered. 
The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  expiatory,  substitutionary  and  vicarious.  What  was 
the  doctrine  of  atonement  under  the  law  ?  Was  it  not  that  the  innocent  suffered 
for  the  guilty,  and  that  on  account  of  this  suffering  the  guilty  might  go  free? 
Hence  the  care  in  selecting  the  sacrificial  victims  that  they  might  be  without  blemish 
or  defect.  How  far  from  satisfying  the  requirements  of  such  language  as  this  is  the 
view  that  would  reduce  the  death  of  Christ  to  the  mere  result  of  a  life  of  disinterested 
and  self-sacrificing  benevolence  employed  in  turning  men  to  righteousness ;  the  seal 
of  His  doctrine,  and  a  distinguished  example  of  passive  virtue !  II.  To  set  forth 
the  DESIGN  of  Christ's  sufferings,  and  to  aim  at  its  accomplishment  in  bringing  men 
TO  God.  Let  us  reflect  upon  the  connection  between  sin  and  suffering,  as  viewed  in 
relation  to  Christ's  suffering  for  sins.  1.  Apart  from  personal  interest  in  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ,  suffering  regarded  as  the  result  of  sin — suffering  for  sin — is  a  fact, 
the  most  ten-ible  and  unrelieved  in  the  experience  and  history  of  our  world.  Men 
may  quarrel  with  the  suffering  while  they  hug  the  sin,  but  the  connection  is  there. 
Science  may  be  invoked,  and  art  and  artifice  may  be  employed  to  make  sinning 
physically  safe  ;  but  all  this  cannot  remove  or  alter  the  fact — the  goads  are  there. 
2.  To  those  who  have  a  personal  interest  in  His  sacrifice,  Christ's  suffering  for  sin 
takes  away  the  sting  of  suffering.  3.  The  removal  or  lessening  of  sin  must  ever  be 
the  most  effectual  way  of  removing  or  lessening  suffering.  That  is  a  spurious 
philanthropy  which  seeks  to  depreciate  the  gospel.  [J.  W.  McKay,  D.D.)  The 
sufferinfis  of  Christ : — I.  The  character  of  the  sufferer,  and  of  the  persons  for 
WHOM  He  suffered.  1.  Christ  hath  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust.  The  expres- 
sion intimates  the  perfect  purity  of  His  nature.  But  the  expression,  "  the  just," 
intimates  not  only  the  perfect  purity  of  His  nature,  but  also  the  perfect  purity  of  His 
life.  His  life  was  as  pure  as  His  nature.  "  He  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
in  His  mouth."  2.  He  suffered  for  the  unjust.  As  the  terra,  "just,"  expresses  the 
perfect  purity,  both  of  the  nature  and  of  the  life  of  the  Saviour ;  so  the  term,  "  un- 
just," must  express  the  impurity,  both  of  the  nature  and  of  the  life  of  those  for 
whom  He  suffered.     II.  What  He  who  is  the  jost  hath  done  for  the  unjust  :  Hb 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  313 

HATH  ONCE  SUFFERED  FOR  THEIR  SINS.  1.  This  language  intimates,  that  Christ  the 
just  One  hath  suffered.  He  suffered  in  His  body.  He  was  wounded,  bruised, 
scourged,  crucified.  He  suffered  in  His  character.  Crimes  were  laid  to  His  charge 
which  His  righteous  soul  abhorred.  He  suffered  in  His  soul.  Satan  tempted  Him ; 
His  friends  forsook  Him  ;  God  hid  His  face  from  Him.  2.  The  language  intimates 
that  Christ  the  just  One,  hath  suffered  for  the  sins  of  the  unjust.  Why,  then,  if 
Christ  had  no  sin  in  His  nature,  no  sin  in  His  life — why  did  He  suffer  ?  Why  did 
not  His  perfect  sinlessness  screen  Him  from  all  evil  ?  To  answer  these  questions, 
we  must  have  recourse  to  the  doctrine  of  the  substitution  and  atonement  of  Christ, 
and  then  to  such  questions  it  is  easy  to  give  an  answer.  3.  The  language  intimates 
that  the  just  suffered  only  once :  Christ  hath  once  suffered  for  sins.  The  expression 
"once,"  denotes  the  perfection  of  His  atonement.  4.  The  language  intimates  that 
Christ  suffered  once  for  sins  voluntarily.  He  is  the  just  One,  the  equal  of  Jehovah, 
and  who  could  have  compelled  Him  to  suffer  ?  Or,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  compel 
Him,  His  sufferings  would  have  possessed  no  value.     HI.  The  design  of  the  just 

SUFFERING    FOR    THE    UNJUST,    THAT    He   MIGHT   BRING    THEM    TO    GoD.       [Wm.    Smart.) 

Christ's  siifferings ;  or,  the  basis  of  evangelism  : — I.  Thet  were  endured  once.  He 
hath  "  once  suffered."  The  word  "  once,"  is  capable  of  being  taken  in  two  senses. 
The  sense  of  actuality :  that  is,  the  mere  expression  of  the  fact  that  He  had  suffered. 
Or,  it  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  onlyness.  "  Once  for  all " : — "  never  again,"  as 
Bengel  has  it,  "  to  suffer  hereafter  "  (Heb.  iv.  28).  Taken  in  this  sense,  two  ideas 
are  suggested :  1.  That  nothing  more  for  the  purpose  is  needed.  His  sufferings  are 
sufficient.  2.  That  nothing  more  for  the  purpose  will  be  vouchsafed.  "There 
remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin."  H.  Thet  were  endured  by  a  just  person. 
The  "  Just."  Christ  was  "  without  sin."  He  was  at  once  the  foundation,  standard, 
and  revelation,  of  eternal  rectitude.  HI.  They  were  endured  on  behalf  of  the 
UNJUST.  1.  This  is  a  proof  of  His  amazing  love.  "  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man 
will  one  die,"  &c.  2.  This  is  an  encouragement  for  the  greatest  sinner.  "  The 
unjust  "  of  all  grades  and  types  of  wickedness.  IV.  They  were  endured  to  bring 
THE  UNJUST  TO  GoD.  "  That  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  1.  Legally :  They  remove 
all  governmental  obstructions  to  reconciliation.  2.  Morally:  They  remove  the 
enmity  of  the  human  heart,  and  are  the  means  of  uniting  the  soul  in  love  to  its 
Maker.  3.  Locally :  Although  God  is  everywhere,  yet  in  heaven  He  is  specially  seen 
and  enjoyed.  V.  They  were  endured  to  the  utmost  extent.  "  Being  put  to  death 
in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  spirit."  1.  Here  is  the  death  of  His  human 
nature ; — "  the  flesh."  "  He  suffered  even  unto  death."  2.  Here  is  the  revivication 
of  His  human  nature  by  the  Divine  Spirit : — "  quickened  in  the  Spirit."  The  sub- 
ject furnishes — First :  Encouragement  to  suffering  Christians.  Secondly :  A  rebuke 
to  those  who  limit  the  provisions  of  the  gospel.  Redemptive  mercy  is  not  for  a 
favourite  few : — it  is  for  the  unjust.  Thirdly:  A  lesson  to  the  impenitent.  What 
ingratitude  is  yours !  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ's  sufferings  : — I.  The  highest 
instance  of  undeserved  persecution.  1.  We  see  that  suffering  is  not  necessarily  a 
mark  of  sin.  2.  We  see  that  sufferings  are  not  necessarily  the  sign  of  a  bad  cause. 
3.  We  see  that  sufferings  are  not  always  a  sign  of  defeat.  II.  We  have  a  distinct 
AND  direct  statement  OF  Christ's  substitutory  sacrifice,  hi.  We  have  a  refer- 
ence TO  the  object  of  Christ's  accomplishing  this  object — "  To  bring  us  to  God." 
We  can  only  appreciate  this  suggestion  by  realising  what  is  implied  in  being  away 
from  God.  For  man  to  be  away  from  God  is  as  if  a  flower  were  separated  from  its; 
root,  a  babe  from  its  mother.  IV.  We  have  the  great  mystery  of  Christ's  death 
alluded  to — "  Put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  spirit."  Our  Lord's- 
soul  could  not  die;  no  more  can  man's  soul  die.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  The 
sufferings  of  Christ  our  atonement  and  our  example  : — I.  Our  atonement.  Christ's- 
sufferings.  1.  Unique  (uTraS,),  once  for  all.  2.  Propitiatory.  "For  sins."  3. 
Vicarious.  "  The  just  for  the  unjust."  4.  Effectual.  "  That  He  might  bring  us  tO' 
God."  n.  Our  example.  (F.  Dobbin,  M. A.)  The  sufferings  of  Christ : — I.  The 
sufferings  of  Christ  are  here  asserted.  II.  The  meritorious  cause  of  them  is. 
assigned.  III.  A  material  circumstance  relating  to  His  sufferings  is  taken  notice. 
OF.     IV.  The  opposite  characters  of  Christ,  and  of  those  for  whom  He  suffered,, 

ARE  laid  down.      V.  ThE  GREAT  DESIGN  OF  HiS  SUFFERINGS  IS  DECLARED.      1.  The  Cuds 

of  Christ's  sufferings  are  various.  (1)  That  He  might  set  us  an  example  of  patience 
and  resignation  to  the  Divine  will,  under  the  troubles  and  difficulties  of  this  life.  (2) 
To  teach  us  self-denial  and  mortification.  (3)  That  He  might  exercise  tender  compas- 
sion towards  us,  under  our  trials  and  sorrows.  2.  But  the  great  end  of  His  suffering 
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  was  to  bring  us  unto  God.  Application :  1.  Our  hearts 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

should  be  greatly  affected  with  the  representation  which  has  been  made  unto  us  of  the 
love  of  Christ.  2.  How  should  we  hate  and  abominate  sin !  3.  Let  us  draw  nigh 
to  God.  4.  All  our  approaches  to  God  should  be  through  Jesus  Christ.  {S.  Price.) 
The  design  of  Christ's  sufferings  : — I.  The  pebson  who  suffered.  It  was  "  Christ, 
the  just."  1.  His  official  character.  The  word  Christ  properly  means  one  anointed 
or  consecrated  to  some  sacred  office.  2.  His  personal  character — "the  just."  II. 
The  sufferings  He  endured.  "  For  Christ  also  hath  once,"  &c.  1.  The  nature 
of  His  sufferings.  "  Christ  suffered,  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh."  2.  The 
period  of  His  sufferings.  3.  The  object  of  His  sufferings.  4.  The  issue  of  His 
sufferings.  He  was  "  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  HI.  The  design  He  accomplished. 
"  That  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  1.  The  natural  state  of  fallen  sinners.  2.  The 
personal  efficacy  of  Christ's  atonement.  It  "  brings  us  to  God."  {Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  The  just  for  the  unjust. — The  just  suffering  for  the  unjust : — 
I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  sufferings.  1.  Intense.  2.  Ignominious.  3.  Volun- 
tary. II.  The  purposes  of  Christ's  sufferings.  "  That  He  might  bring  us  to 
God."  1.  By  His  atoning  sacrifice,  thereby  removing  every  obstacle  in  the  way  of 
the  sinner's  access  to  God.  2.  By  the  operations  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  3.  By  the 
prevalency  of  His  intercession.  (W.  J.  Brock,  B.A.)  ChrisVs  sufferings  for  us  : — 
We  accept  the  life  and  the  death  of  Christ  as  an  atonement,  as  a  substituted  suffer- 
ing, the  just  for  the  unjust ;  but  we  do  not  feel  that  He  was  a  sufferer  only  when 
He  was  on  earth,  and  that  His  suffering  then  was  all  the  suffering  that  was  needful 
to  the  salvation  of  the  world.  It  was  the  nature  of  Christ  to  suffer  for  sinners. 
He  was  embodied  in  the  physical  form  that  we  might  judge  of  what  that  nature 
"was  in  the  past,  and  what  it  was  to  be  in  the  future,  for  the  atoning  nature  of  God 
existed  from  all  eternity,  and  is  going  on  to  all  eternity.  The  Lamb  was  histori- 
cally slain  in  the  time  of  Christ ;  but  long  before  the  coming  of  Christ  there  wa^  the 
Divine  atoning  love,  there  was  the  vicarious  suffering  of  the  Saviour.  And  now, 
although  no  longer  humbled  in  the  flesh,  Christ  has  not  lost  that  pecuUar  element 
and  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature — namely,  substitution,  imputation,  vicariousness. 
Still  He  suffers  in  all  our  sufferings.  He  is  afflicted  in  all  our  afflictions.  1.  Sin 
becomes  exceedingly  sinful  when  judged  by  such  a  test  as  this.  There  is  nothing 
that  the  whole  world  revolts  at  more  than  at  flagrant  ingratitude.  2.  It  is  the 
presentation  of  such  a  Saviour  as  this  that  makes  confession  easy  to  pride.  There 
are  a  thousand  things  that  hinder  men  that  have  done  wrong  from  forsaking  their 
wrong-doing.  But  if  God  be  for  you,  who  can  be  against  you  ?  If  the  bosom  of 
Christ's  love  is  open,  and  is  a  refuge  to  which  you  may  fly  for  safety,  why  should 
you  not  avail  yourself  of  it?  3.  When  we  stand,  at  last,  in  Zion  and  before  God, 
and  look  back  upon  our  past  career,  how  inevitable  will  it  be  that  every  one  shall 
turn  disgusted  from  the  thought  of  his  own  strength,  and  that  we  shall  take  our 
crowns  and  cast  them  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  say,  "  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but 
unto  Thy  name  be  the  praise  of  our  salvation  !  "  The  patience  of  God,  the  gentle- 
ness of  God,  the  forgiveness  of  God,  the  sufferings  of  God  for  us — these  will  stand 
out  in  such  illustrious  light  in  that  day  that  every  one  will  be  filled  with  joy,  and 
gratitude,  and  triumph,  and  new  pleasure  in  the  consciousness  that  it  was  of  God 
that  he  was  saved,  and  not  of  himself.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  the  substitute  : — 
I.  The  need  of  pardon,  suggested  by  the  word  in  our  text — "sins."  Unless  you 
come  to  know  and  feel  your  need  of  a  thing,  you  will  never  desire  or  welcome  it. 
If  I  wished  to  convince  you  that  you  needed  pardon,  from  your  father,  for  instance, 
in  an  ordinary  matter,  I  should  first  have  to  show  you  your  offence.  I  am  afraid 
many  young  people  do  not  feel  their  need  of  pardon  in  a  far  higher  sense.  I  wish 
I  could  write  the  word  "sins"  on  your  hearts  to-day.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest 
words  in  all  the  Bible — in  all  the  world.  It  tells  about  our  offences  against  God — 
about  our  breaking  of  His  holy  law — about  the  evil  we  have  done  against  our  loving 
Father  in  heaven.  And  when  once  we  come  to  get  a  sight  of  our  sins  as  against 
God,  we  never  can  rest  until  we  have  got  His  pardon.  II.  The  gospel  way  of 
PARDON.  Some  people  think  it  is  enough  to  ask  pardon.  Others  think  the  way  of 
pardon  is  to  be  sorry  for  their  sins.  Others  think  the  way  of  pardon  is  trying  to  be 
as  good  as  they  can — saying  their  prayers,  and  striving  to  do  what  is  right.  Now 
the  gospel  way  of  pardon,  though  it  might  be  said  to  include  all  these,  is  yet  diffe- 
rent from  them  all.  It  is  very  simple.  It  is  very  shortly  told.  I  have  heard  an 
esteemed  Edinburgh  minister  tell  of  his  visiting  an  aged  Christian  man  on  his 
deathbed,  and  saying  to  him,  "  Is  it  not  a  happy  thing  that  we  have  the  gospel  set 
forth  in  so  few  and  in  such  simple  words  ?  "  The  old  man  looked  up  and  said, 
"  One  word,  sir !  "     His  friend  said,  "  What  is  the  one  word  ?  "     He  replied,  "  Sub- 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  PETER.  315 

stitution  !  "  The  whole  gospel  in  one  word- — substitution !  If  any  one  were  to  ask 
me,  "  What  is  the  way  of  salvation  ?  "  and  I  wanted  to  put  it  as  shortly  and  as  fully 
as  possible,  I  would  say,  "  It  is  the  immediate,  present  acceptance  of  Christ  as  the 
substitute  on  the  authority  of  God's  word  and  offer."  There  is  a  touching  story 
told  regarding  a  body  of  men  who  had  taken  part  in  a  rebellion,  and  were  sentenced 
to  have  every  tenth  man  of  their  number  shot  to  deter  others  from  doing  what  they 
had  done.  Among  these  were  two,  a  father  and  son.  We  can  fancy  we  see  the 
men  drawn  up  in  a  long  line.  Fixing,  perhaps,  on  the  first  man  by  lot,  he  is  marked 
out  for  death,  and  every  tenth  man  thereafter,  counting  from  him.  The  father  and 
son  stand  together,  and  as  the  son  runs  his  eye  along  the  hne  he  discovers  that  his 
father  is  a  doomed  man.  He  realises  what  it  will  be  to  have  their  family  left  without 
a  head,  his  mother  a  widow,  the  old  home  stripped  of  its  light  and  joy,  and,  quick 
as  thought,  he  steps  in  where  his  father  stood,  and  falls  in  his  stead.  He  becomes 
his  father's  "substitute,"  and,  if  you  ask  the  father  in  after  years  how  he  was 
saved,  with  the  tear  in  his  eye  and  a  quivering  voice,  he  will  tell  you  he  was  saved 
by  a  substitute — that  substitute  his  most  loved  and  loving  son.  This,  then,  is  what 
I  want  to  bring  out  as  the  most  important  thing.  The  gospel  way  of  pardon  is  by 
substitution — by  One  taking  the  place  of  another,  by  the  Just  taking  the  place  of 
the  unjust — the  Good  taking  the  place  of  the  evil — the  just  Jesus,  the  good  Jesus, 
taking  the  place  of  the  unjust  and  the  evil.  God  is  just  and  holy,  as  well  as 
merciful  and  loving.  He  is  a  King  and  Judge,  as  weU  as  a  Father.  The  authority 
of  His  law  must  be  maintained.  His  justice  must  be  vindicated.  The  law  in  its 
precept  and  penalty  must  be  satisfied.  It  must  be  perfectly  obeyed ;  and  in  the 
event  of  disobedience,  the  penalty  of  the  broken  law — death — must  be  suffered, 
either  by  each  man  himself,  or  by  another  in  his  room.  We  have  all  disobeyed, 
and  so  there  is  no  hope  for  any  one  of  us,  except  in  the  obedience  and  death  of 
Christ.  I  would  come  to  each  of  you  and  say,  "  You  are  lost,  and  unless  you  get 
pardon  you  will  be  lost  for  ever.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  willing  to  be  your  substi- 
tute now  and  here,  and  in  God's  name  and  on  the  authority  of  His  own  Word  I 
offer  Jesus  Christ  to  be  your  substitute.  Here  is  One  willing  to  take  your  place. 
WiU  you  have  Him  ?  If  you  take  Him  you  are  saved,  you  are  pardoned."  When 
visiting  our  Jewish  Mission  Schools  at  Pesth,  the  capital  of  Hungary,  a  few  years 
ago,  I  heard  the  truth  on  which  I  have  been  dwelling  strikingly  brought  out  by  one 
of  the  pupils.  The  lesson  was  about  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  and  the  teacher 
asked,  "  What  connection  have  we  with  the  work  and  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus?  " 
A  young  Jew  held  out  his  hand,  as  being  prepared  to  give  an  answer,  and  said,  "  It 
is  just  as  if  we  had  the  merit ;  it  is  just  as  if  we  had  been  crucified  !  "  IH.  The 
RESULTS  OF  PAKDON — that  is  to  Say,  the  consequences  of  being  pardoned  through  the 
substitution  of  another — through  the  Lord  Jesus  taking  our  place.  1.  The  first 
thing  that  follows  gospel  pardon  is  safety.  There  is  no  more  danger.  There  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  who  are  thus  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  There  is  happiness.  (1) 
This  is  the  secret  of  happy  living.  A  young  friend,  who  had  been  in  much  anxiety 
about  her  soul,  was  shown  into  my  study  one  night.  Her  face  was  quite  radiant. 
It  was  such  a  change  from  what  had  been  before  that  I  could  not  help  asking, 
"What  has  happened  to-night  ?  "  The  brief  but  expressive  answer  was,  "I  have 
taken  Him  to  be  my  substitute ! "  That  explained  all.  (2)  This  is  the  secret  of 
happy  dying.  Dr.  Carey,  the  great  Indian  scholar  and  missionary,  tells  of  his  visit 
to  one  of  the  wards  in  an  Indian  hospital.  On  a  bed,  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  lay 
a  dying  soldier.  Stepping  gently  up  to  him,  he  knelt  at  his  bedside,  and  whispered 
into  his  ear,  "  My  dear  brother,  are  you  afraid  to  die  ?  "  Looking  up  with  a  smile, 
the  dying  man  answered,  "Oh,  no,  sir;  I  have  died  already!"  He  meant  that 
Jesus,  his  substitute,  had  died  for  him,  and  he  had  not  to  die,  but  only  to  fall  asleep 
in  Jesus.  3.  There  is  gratitude — thankfulness.  4.  There  is  love.  5.  Lastly,  there 
is  service.  It  is  told  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  ("Philip  Egalit6"),  father  of  Louis 
Philippe,  the  last  king  of  the  French,  that  on  one  occasion  he  was  out  riding, 
followed  by  his  servant,  who  was  also  on  horseback.  The  Duke  had  crossed  an  old 
bridge  over  a  rapid  stream  in  safety,  but  when  his  man-servant  was  following,  the 
bridge  gave  way,  and  horse  and  rider  were  thrown  into  the  river.  In  a  moment  the 
Duke  leaped  from  his  horse's  back,  plunged  into  the  stream,  and  with  considerable 
difficulty  succeeded  in  saving  the  drowning  man  and  bringing  him  to  land.  Need  I 
describe  the  scene  that  followed  ?  All  dripping  as  he  was,  you  might  have  seen  the 
grateful  servant  prostrated  at  his  master's  feet,  promising  the  gratitude  and  service 
of  a  lifetime,  and  asking  what  he  could  do  to  serve  one  who  had  done  so  much  for 
him.     You  know  the  story  of  "  The  Heart  made  Captive  " — the  slave  bought  with 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

British  gold,  who  vowed  he  would  never  serve  his  purchaser.  But  when  he  learned 
that  the  stranger  had  bought  him  to  set  him  free,  there  were  no  bounds  to  his  love 
and  gratitude,  and  no  limits  to  his  service.  When  asked  as  to  the  secret  of  his 
constant  and  devoted  service,  there  was  but  the  one  answer,  "  He  redeemed  me  !  he 
redeemed  me  !  "  Such  is  the  secret  of  all  right-hearted  service  done  for  Christ,  as 
well  as  of  all  holy  living.  "He  is  my  substitute.  He  suffered  for  me.  He  died 
for  me.  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord 
for  all  His  benefits  unto  me  ?  "  (J.  H.  Wilson,  D.D.)  The  just  for  the  unjust : — - 
I.  That  Christ  sufpeeed  should  make  suffering  Christians  patient.  Not  that  I 
would  make  light  of  trials ;  far  from  it.  I  know  they  are  often  bitter  and  so  long- 
continued  as  to  put  a  sore  strain  on  clinging  faith.  Kemember  there  is  a  ministry 
of  suffering.  The  very  trials  of  our  life  are  ordered  by  a  wiser  will  than  ours,  and 
are  parts  of  a  Heavenly  Father's  discipline.  As  the  stress  of  the  storm  strains  the 
ship  and  shows  where  the  weak  parts  are,  so  by  our  trials  God  would  show  us  the 
weak  points  in  our  character,  that  we  may  strengthen  what  is  weak  and  supply 
what  is  wanting.  H.  Christ's  sufferings  were  for  His  people  and  on  account  op 
their  sins,  a  man  leaps  overboard  from  the  deck  of  a  steamer  on  the  broad 
Atlantic,  and  you  think  him  a  fool  or  a  madman.  But  wait  a  little ;  why  did  he 
do  it?  He  saw  a  sailor  on  the  bulwarks  overbalance  himself  and  fall  over  the 
ship's  side,  and  he,  a  strong  swimmer,  leaped  overboard  to  save  him.  And  if  you 
found  that  that  drowning  man  had  in  time  past  often  reviled  the  one  who  in  his 
sore  need  risked  his  own  life  to  deliver  him,  how  could  you  find  words  to  express 
your  sense  of  the  nobleness  of  such  self-sacrificing  conduct  ?  And  do  you  not  think 
that  the  man  thus  plucked  from  the  jaws  of  death  would  be  heartily  ashamed  of  his 
past  reproaches,  and  would  nevermore  cease  to  love  his  deliverer  ?  Is  not  this 
something  like  the  case  of  the  sinner  and  his  Saviour  Christ  ?  HI.  Consider  now 
the  object  with  which  the  Saviour  suffered.  It  was  "  that  He  might  bring  us  to 
God."  This  plainly  implies  a  state  of  alienation  and  estrangement.  0  man,  how 
far  off  hast  thou  wandered !  How  deep  the  enmity,  how  dire  the  distance  between 
thee  and  thy  God !  How  shall  the  awful  gulf  be  bridged  which  thy  sins  have  opened 
between  thy  God  and  thee  ?  You  now  see  how  false  is  the  common  notion  which 
many  have  of  religion.  They  regard  it  as  a  thing  to  be  turned  to  when  one  comes 
near  to  die — as  a  sort  of  desperate  remedy  to  be  taken  when  one  can  do  no  better. 
On  the  contrary,  religion  is  a  walk  of  fellowship  with  God ;  a  thing  for  the  daily 
round  of  duty ;  a  life  of  obedience  flowing  from  love  and  gratitude  for  redemption ; 
a  life  unselfish,  Christ-like,  God-glorifying.  (Wm.  McMordie,  M.A.)  Put  to  death 
in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  [in]  the  Spirit. — The  quickening  influence  of  suffer- 
ing : — The  main  idea  is  of  course  a  comparison  between  the  experiences  of  our  Lord 
and  those  of  His  suffering  followers.  The  sacred  writer  was  striving  to  the  utmost 
to  sustain  and  comfort  them  under  the  severe  stress  of  persecution  through  which 
they  were  passing.  "  Take  heart,"  he  seems  to  say ;  "  your  sufferings  are  not 
exceptional ;  they  run  in  the  Divine  family ;  even  our  Master  was  not  exempt  from 
them ;  He  also  suffered  in  the  flesh ;  but  His  sufferings  did  not  stay  His  blessed 
ministry ;  nay,  they  even  augmented  His  sphere  of  usefulness ;  '  He  was  quick- 
ened in  spirit,'  in  which  also  He  went  forth  to  herald  His  accomplished  work 
in  regions  to  which,  but  for  death.  He  had  not  obtained  access.  So  shsill  it 
also  be  with  you.  Your  sufferings  shall  not  clip  your  wings,  but  add  to  your 
powers  of  flight.  The  things  which  happen  to  you  shall  fall  out  rather  to  the 
furtherance  of  the  gospel;  and  it  is  through  death  that  you  must  pass  up  to 
share  His  glorious  resurrection  and  imperial  power."  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  resurrection  of  Christ : — No  man  ever  yet  came  out  of  a  great  work  the  same  as 
he  went  into  it ;  he  has  always  lost  something,  and  gained  something.  A  great 
effort  for  a  noble  purpose  taxes  a  man's  strength  ;  but  it  builds  up  character,  con- 
fidence, and  reputation.  A  great  effort  for  a  selfish  purpose  drains  a  man's  moral 
resources,  he  has  to  surrender  nobler  considerations  and  higher  purposes ;  but  it 
leaves  him  better  off  in  the  things  of  this  world,  with  a  larger  fortune,  and  a  greater 
command  of  earth's  luxuries.  It  is  this  process  of  gain  and  loss  to  which  our 
attention  is  called  in  the  review  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  It  was  a  great 
transaction,  nothing  less  than  the  attempt  to  overthrow  the  reign  of  sin  and  suffer- 
ing in  the  world.  The  character  and  success  of  the  great  work  would  be  largely 
indicated  by  the  effect  on  Him  who  undertook  it ;  the  question  which  all  must  ask 
is.  What  part  of  Him  gained,  and  what  part  of  Him  lost  ?  As  that  is  known,  it 
ought  to  determine  whether  it  is  a  work  in  which  we  wish  to  join.  Flesh  and  spirit 
were  both  strong  in  Christ  through  all  His  life.     Then  came  the  contest  with  sin 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  317 

and  suif ering,  and  the  body  succumbed.  It  suffered,  and  went  down  into  the  grave. 
When  its  work  was  through,  the  spirit,  which  had  never  been  daunted,  which  had 
rehed  upon  the  Father  in  its  darkest  moments,  had  an  opportunity  to  show  its 
strength.  It  was  the  spirit  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  belonged  to  Him  who  was  the 
incarnate  Son  of  God  ;  and  it  must  take  that  same  body,  and  show  its  own  power, 
and  do  what  the  flesh  had  been  unable  to  do.  The  spirit  must  assert  itself  :  it  must 
be  seen  to  be  the  life-guard  of  the  body ;  it  must  be  evident  as  the  great  protecting, 
rescuing  power.  And  when  that  was  once  done,  there  was  no  defeat.  What  had 
been  lost  by  the  flesh  had  been  more  than  made  up  by  spirit,  and  the  great 
transaction  was  a  victory.  Can  we  wonder,  then,  at  the  Christian's  joy  at  Easter  ? 
It  is  not  as  a  single  event  by  itself  that  the  resurrection  stirs  our  hearts :  it  is 
because  it  is  connected  with  the  whole  nature  of  our  being,  with  the  whole  work  of 
Christ's  life,  and  with  the  mysteries  of  our  existence,  and  of  the  world  for  ever.  We 
see  spirit  triumphing  over  flesh  everywhere ;  not  always,  but  on  every  side  and  in 
aU  departments,  giving  us  the  hope  and  key  to  this  great  fact.  A  poor  weakened 
body  labours  under  pain  and  disease  for  years ;  but  the  mind  grows  brighter  day 
by  day,  and  the  spirit  becomes  more  refined.  It  sometimes  seems  as  if  spirit  could 
do  anything ;  and  it  can,  if  it  is  the  right  spirit.  It  is  its  duty  to  animate  the  flesh, 
and  it  shows  itself  able  to  do  it ;  and  time  after  time  it  manifests  its  ability  far 
above  and  beyond  all  the  powers  of  flesh,  making  that  flesh  do  things  for  which  it 
has  seemed  to  have  no  capability.  Now  let  it  be  the  perfect  spirit,  the  spirit  of  the 
Son  of  God,  and  directly  in  a  line  with  all  our  experiences  is  that  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  We  find  no  hope  of  the  resurrection  but  in  the  greatness  of  Christ,  in  His 
intimate  and  personal  connection  with  the  Father.  It  was  the  Father's  witness  to 
His  being  the  Son  of  God ;  in  that  He  has  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  Spirit  is 
nobler  than  flesh.  Place  two  men  side  by  side,  one  of  whom  has  always  lived 
for  the  flesh,  the  other  of  whom  has  always  tried  to  find  the  spiritual  side  of  every- 
thing, and  of  every  eveilt  with  which  he  has  come  in  contact.  The  former  weighs 
you  down  with  his  grossness.  His  talk  of  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  his  gossipy 
narration  of  things  that  have  taken  place,  his  dull,  unimaginative  dealing  with  all 
that  happens,  his  narrow  interests  and  selfish  aims,  they  are  dreadfully  unsatisfying 
and  wearisome.  The  other  always  seems  to  be  buoyant  with  joy  and  hope  of  some- 
thing better.  He  hates  all  grossness  enough  to  drop  it  out  of  his  life  ;  and  yet,  with 
a  sympathy  with  all  souls,  he  finds  gleams  of  hope  in  those  of  whom  the  world  can 
say  nothing  but  evil.  You  know  the  two  types  of  men,  and  of  the  approaches  to 
them  in  every  degree  and  form,  from  your  daily  experience  with  those  about  you  ; 
you  know  it  still  more  from  the  experiences  within  you.  Every  transaction  upon 
which  you  enter  has  its  two  sides — it  can  exalt  the  flesh  and  kill  the  spirit,  or  it  can 
kill  the  flesh  and  exalt  the  spirit.  You  may  come  out  of  a  successful  business  or 
social  career  with  all  that  the  flesh  can  possibly  give  you,  and  find  that  the  virtues 
of  the  spirit — the  unselfishness,  the  purity,  the  honour,  the  thought  of  better  things 
have  been  put  out  of  existence  ;  you  are  quickened  in  the  flesh,  you  are  put  to  death 
in  the  spirit.  Here  again  we  see  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  was  not  an  isolated 
fact,  and  did  not  stand  alone.  It  gathers  to  itself  all  the  words  of  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  all  the  exhortations  of  nobleness  of  life,  and  living  above  this  world, 
which  had  been  dropping  from  Jesus'  lips  ever  since  He  began  His  ministry.  They 
cannot  stand  alone  ;  they  ask  a  great  completion,  a  victory  on  their  side,  that  they 
may  have  power,  and  not  meet  with  discouragement.  It  seems  as  if  Christ  would 
say,  "  I  appreciate  how  great  a  weight  of  conduct  I  have  put  upon  you ;  I  would 
help  you  bear  it.  I  know  how  the  forces  of  the  flesh  press  on  every  side  ;  a  greater 
force  of  the  spirit  shall  be  with  you  through  Me.  See  what  the  spirit  can  do  to  the 
flesh,  and  be  encouraged  in  every  battle."  The  power  of  a  risen  Saviour  is  to  show 
itself  fn  spiritual  lives.  Do  you  say  that  this  may  demand  the  giving-up  of  certain 
things  ?  Then  let  them  go  ;  be  "  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,"  if  you  can  but  "  live  in 
the  spirit."  That  was  Paul's  desire  :  "If  by  any  means  I  might  attain  to  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead."  It  was  a  matter  of  present  attainment  in  the  triumph  of 
the  spirit  day  by  day  ;  and  for  that  we  too  are  to  labour,  if  our  Easter  joy  and  songs 
do  indeed  mean  all  that  they  say.  We  saw  that  this  greatest  feature  of  Christ's 
resurrection  was  based  on  the  fact  that  no  man  comes  out  of  a  transaction  the  same 
as  he  went  into  it.  The  same  fact  can  lead  us  to  the  most  complete  participation  in 
that  resurrection,  to  which  our  minds  are  always  turned.  Are  we  to  rise  as  He  did? 
Had  it  hope  for  victory  to  any  beyond  Himself  ?  We  never  come  out  of  the  great 
transaction  of  life  the  same  as  we  went  into  it.  We  begin  with  spirit  in  the  infant 
body,  so  unable  to  provide  for  itself.     Then  the  flesh  grows  and  asserts  itself,  until 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.  tii. 

at  length  its  hour  of  weakness  comes,  and,  in  the  failure  of  disease  or  of  old  age,  it 
loses  its  power,  and  sinks  once  more  into  the  earth.  What  happens  then,  we  a^k  ? 
We  never  have  any  doubt  as  to  that  question  about  Christ.  We  find  a  clearer  view 
and  statement  of  His  nearness  to  the  Father  coming  out  each  day,  as  His  life  goes 
on.  More  and  more  He  is  bound  to  Him,  until  at  last,  in  the  great  occasion  of  His 
death,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  trained  and  strengthened  spirit  conquers  and 
raises  Him.  We  can  all  tell  of  lives  that  have  so  followed  Him,  have  so  learned  of 
God's  presence  and  love  in  the  world  through  Jesus  Christ  that  at  every  step  in  life 
their  spirits  have  grown  stronger,  and  without  effort,  nay,  of  necessity,  our  hearts 
include  them  in  the  Easter  rejoicing,  because  we  know  which  side  of  them  the  great 
transaction  of  life  strengthened.  {Arthur  Brooks.)  He  went  and  preached  unto 
the  spirits  in  prison. — The  gospel  preached  to  the  dead : — Who  is  here  spoken  of  ? 
He.  The  form  of  the  expression  resembles  that  in  our  Creeds.  "  He  suffered  and 
was  buried.  He  descended  into  hell."  The  text  does  not  say  that  the  flesh  of  our 
Lord  was  put  to  death  nor  that  His  spirit  was  quickened.  It  states  that  He  was 
Himself  put  to  death  qiia  flesh,  and  Himself  quickened  qua  spirit.  The  flesh  denotes 
His  living  body  and  animal  soul ;  the  spirit  denotes  here  not  the  Holy  Spirit  nor  the 
proper  Deity,  but  the  higher  principle  of  the  human  spirit  life,  which  was  especially 
united  to  the  Deity  of  Christ.  He  who  is  very  God  and  very  man,  one  person  in  two 
natures,  did  suffer  death — in  which  nature  ? — not  in  His  Divine  nature — that  is  im- 
passible— but  in  His  human  nature,  which  is  passible.  In  the  whole  of  His  tripartite 
humanity  ?  Not  so :  in  a  part  of  it,  even  in  the  flesh,  and  having  there  suffered 
death  He,  the  same  person,  was  quickened  in  the  life,  which  never  for  a  moment 
was  quenched,  of  His  own  spirit.  In  that  highest  compartment  of  His  human 
nature  He  experienced  a  transition  to  a  new  mode  of  existence,  which  issued  in  the 
resurrection  of  His  incorruptible  body.  Meanwhile — in  the  intermediate  state — 
between  the  crucifixion  and  the  resurrection.  He,  the  Lord  of  Life,  neither  slumbered 
nor  slept.  His  activity  of  philanthropy  never  ceased.  Through  the  gates  of  death 
in  the  new  life  of  the  disembodied  spirit  He  went.  He  made  a  journey.  He  the 
Crucified  One,  His  body  still  hanging  on  the  tree,  passed  away  from  the  Cross  of 
Calvary  to  the  place  of  custody,  where  the  souls  of  the  departed  were  in  confine- 
ment. These  spirits  in  prison  are  they  who,  when  they  were  in  the  flesh,  in  the 
midst  of  a  universal  apostasy  saw  not  the  signs  nor  felt  the  shadow  of  the  coming 
judgment,  nor  heeded  the  voice  of  the  righteous  preacher,  and  therefore  perished  in 
their  sins  and  in  the  flood.  Their  bodies  were  buried  in  the  deep  of  the  Deluge,  and 
their  spirits  were  carried  into  the  deeper  abyss  of  Hades.  To  these  imprisoned  souls 
was  revealed  in  Hades  the  presence  and  the  form  of  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man, 
clothed  in  human  spirit.  Thus  disembodied  and  spirit-ensphered  the  Son  of  God  to 
the  departed  souls  of  the  antediluvian  world  made  a  journey — and  made  a  preach- 
ment. What  was  that  preachment?  Did  He,  in  whom  death  could  work  no  moral 
change,  speak  in  His  disembodied  spirit  to  disembodied  spirits,  as  He  spake  in  the 
flesh  to  men  in  the  flesh  ?  Did  He,  the  Apostle  on  earth  of  His  Father  in  heaven, 
continue  to  pursue  His  Divine  mission  in  Hades?  There  is  a  passage  in  this  same 
Epistle  which,  rightly  considered,  makes  it  evident  that  St.  Peter  believed  that  to 
the  dead  in  Hades  the  gospel  itself  had  been  proclaimed.  To  what  class  or  classes 
of  the  dead  it  was  proclaimed  he  does  not  specify  ;  by  whom  it  was  proclaimed  he 
does  not  specify ;  but,  if  we  compare  the  two  statements  in  the  same  Epistle — (1) 
that  "  Christ  went  and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  custody,"  and  (2)  that  "  to  the  dead 
also  the  gospel  was  preached  " — we  must  conclude  that,  according  to  St.  Peter, 
our  Lord  in  the  world  of  spirits,  between  His  own  crucifixion  and  resurrection, 
announced  "glad  tidings  of  great  joy."  It  is  certain  that  the  offer  of  salvation 
formed  a  part  at  least  of  His  Divine  message.  And  it  is  likely  that  this  offer  was 
made  to  all.  Why  not  ?  Was  not  this  their  first  opportunity  of  hearing  of  the  great 
salvation  wrought  for  all  believers  ?  There  are  some  who  have  thought  that  the 
substance  of  our  Lord's  preaching  in  Hades  was  of  two  kinds — that  to  some  He 
preached  salvation,  to  others  perdition  ;  that  to  the  irreclaimably  lost  He  preached 
a  concio  damnatoria.  Surely  this  could  not  be;  such  a  theory  could  never  be  in 
haraiony  with  what  we  know  of  His  Divine  mission.  Far  better,  and  far  more  true, 
is  it  to  suppose  that  He  preached  Himself,  the  One  Saviour,  to  all  alike.  Not  that 
all  to  whom  He  preached  were  alike  susceptible  of  the  message  of  glad  tidings; 
because  the  multitude  of  the  antediluvian  unbelievers  had  indeed  died  in  their  sins, 
but  still  had  so  died  in  a  very  unequal  measure  of  sin.  To  the  class  of  incorrigible 
sinners  the  preaching  of  Christ  in  Hades  would,  we  may  believe,  be  in  vain. 
They  had  sinned  away  their  receptivity  of  the  Divine  message.     They  listened, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  319 

indeed,  from  their  sullen  prisons  to  the  heavenly  Herald  of  mercy,  and,  as  they 
listened  to  Him,  they  learned  that  He  had  died  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world, 
that  He  had  died  even  for  their  sins,  but  at  the  same  time  they  knew  of  themselves 
that  He  was  not  their  present  Saviour  but  their  future  Judge.  Thus  they  would 
stand  before  the  Preacher  self-convicted  and  self-condemned.  I  conclude  by  mooting 
the  question  whether  this  interpretation  of  the  text  after  all  involves  any  abnormal 
teaching ;  whether,  in  fact,  it  is  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  of  Christian 
doctrine.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  are  some  few  passages  in  Scripture  which  indi- 
cate the  broad  theory  that  all  men  of  aU  ages,  who  in  this  life  never  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  hearing  of  Christ  and  of  His  salvation,  will  not  perish  hereafter  for  lack  of 
that  opportunity  given  some  time,  but  failing  this  world  will  find  that  opportunity  in 
the  world  to  come ;  and  if  they  are  equal  to  it,  if  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing 
here  they  are  able  to  meet  it,  then  they  wiU  embrace  the  gospel,  and  become  par- 
takers of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  if  not  as  princes  and  rulers  in  Israel,  yet  as  sub- 
jects. From  this  interpretation  of  the  text  an  inference  may  be  drawn.  If  Christ, 
through  all  His  several  stages  of  existence,  was  a  forerunner  and  pioneer  to  His 
apostles  and  faithful  followers,  it  may  be  that  as  the  Personal  Head  of  the  Body 
Mystical  did  in  that  unseen  world  preach  the  gospel  to  departed  spirits,  so  some  or 
many  of  His  living  members,  as  they  have  disappeared  one  by  one  behind  the  veil, 
have  also  in  their  turn,  and  after  His  example,  preached  the  same  gospel  there.  If 
this  idea  is  akin  to  truth,  then  it  is  possible  that  "  through  the  ages  all  along  "  the 
gospel  which  St.  John  calls  "  the  gospel  of  the  ages  "  has  not  been  hidden,  but 
preached  to  such  departed  spirits  as  never  heard,  nor  could  hear,  the  glad  tidings 
when  they  were  in  the  flesh,  and  that  it  is  not  from  lack  of  opportunity  that  any 
soul  perishes.  {Canon  T.  S.  Evans,  D.D.)  The  spirits  in  prison  : — St.  Peter  is 
urging  his  readers  to  endurance  under  suiJering.  He  sets  before  them  the  example 
of  Christ.  He  suffered  not  only  unjustly  but  for  the  unjust.  "  That  He  might 
bring  us  to  God  " — us,  the  erring  and  straying,  the  sin-bound  and  self-exiled.  This 
is  the  starting  point.  St.  Peter  expatiates  in  the  field  thus  entered.  He  bids  us 
contemplate  the  effect  of  Christ's  suffering  upon  Himself.  He  bids  us  contemplate 
the  two  parts  of  His  humanity — the  flesh  and  the  spirit.  Death  dissolved  the  com- 
pound. He  was  "put  to  death"  as  regards  the  one;  He  was  "made  alive"  as 
regards  the  other.  It  is  as  though  the  dropping  of  the  one  gave  new  energy  to  the 
other.  He  had  spoken  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  of  being  "  straitened  "  till  the  great 
"  baptism  "  was  accomplished.  There  was  a  compression  in  that  enclosure  of  flesh 
and  blood  which  would  be  taken  off  instantly  by  its  removal.  While  the  lifeless 
body  was  hanging  for  its  last  hour  on  the  tree.  He,  the  living  spirit,  was  using  the 
new  liberty  in  a  special  office  and  mission — He  was  on  a  journey — He  was  making 
Paradise  itself  a  scene  of  activity — "  in  the  spirit,"  St.  Peter  says,  "  He  went  and 
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison."  St.  Peter  defines  with  great  precision  the  objects 
of  this  unearthly  visitation.  They  are  "  spirits  in  prison  " — they  are  dead  men  fast 
holden  in  Divine  custody,  as  guilty  aforetime  of  a  gi-eat  disobedience,  which  sealed 
their  fate  here,  and  swept  them  promiscuously  into  a  condition  which  men  must 
call  "judgment."  These  "spirits"  were  "disobedient  once" — and  the  tense  sug- 
gests an  act  of  decisive  and  definite  disobedience — "  at  the  time  when  the  long- 
suffering  of  God  was  waiting  in  the  days  of  Noah."  They  were  "  judged  "  for  their 
disobedience  to  this  caU — men,  from  the  side  of  flesh  and  time,  could  not  say  other- 
wise than  that  these  men  had  died  in  their  sins — but  a  miracle  of  mercy  sought 
them  out,  after  long  ages,  in  their  prison-house — the  "three  days"  of  Christ's 
sojourn  "  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  "  were  used,  of  special  grace,  in  their  evangelisa- 
tion— in  the  sight  of  men  they  lie  stiU  under  judgment,  but  in  spirit,  according  to 
God,  they  have  been  quickened  into  a  supernatural  life.  Let  us  see  if  there  is  any- 
thing elsewhere  in  Scripture  that  wiU  help  us  in  bearing  up  under  the  weight  of  this 
remarkable  disclosure.  Yes,  St.  Paul  has  something  very  like  it  in  his  discourse  on 
the  communion — where  he  says  that,  for  dishonouring  this  holy  sacrament,  many 
of  the  Corinthians  not  only  "  are  weak  and  sickly,"  but  even  "  sleep  " — have  been, 
as  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  judged  of  the  Lord,"  not  only  with  "  divers  diseases,"  but 
with  "  sundry  kinds  of  death" — and  goes  on  to  explain  to  them  that,  when  thus 
"  judged,"  punished  even  with  death  itself,  they  are  "  chastened  "  lest  they  should 
be  "  condemned  " — death  itself,  judicial  death,  may  be  but  a  "  chastening  "  to  save 
from  that  "  condemnation  "  which  yet  (the  same  verse  says)  is  for  "  the  world." 
What  is  this  but  St.  Peter's  " judged,  according  to  men,  in  flesh,"  yet  "living, 
according  to  God,  in  spirit "  ?— a  judgment,  not  of  condemnation,  but  of  "  chasten- 
ing "  unto  salvation  ?     Before  we  pass  to  our  last  words  of  counsel,  let  us  throw  the 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

light  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  upon  some  of  those  darkest  passages  in  the  history  of 
the  Old  Testament  which  seem  to  consign  to  a  disproportionate  doom  men  of  a  single 
sin,  or  men  sinning  half  under  compulsion.  Take  such  an  instance  as  that  of  the 
disobedient  prophet — a  man  lied  to  by  another  prophet — and  failing,  under  that 
persuasion,  to  keep  the  safe  rule,  what  God  has  said  to  thee  thyself  is  more  true, 
for  thee  at  least,  and  more  concerning,  than  that  which  God  is  said  to  have  said,  in 
correction  of  it,  or  in  repeal  of  it,  to  another.  That  man,  for  that  yielding,  is 
executed,  within  the  day,  under  God's  death-warrant.  But  is  there  any  man  to  tell 
us,  on  the  word  of  God,  that  the  disobedient  prophet  is  among  the  lost — that  his  is 
so  much  as  one  of  the  "  spirits  in  prison  "  ?  "  Judged  according  to  men  in  flesh  " 
— judged  so  far  as  the  body,  and  the  life  of  time,  goes — for  is  it  not  judgment  to  be 
cut  off  hastily  from  this  life  of  the  living,  and  by  a  sentence  written  for  evermore 
upon  the  page  of  God? — not  necessarily  "  condemned  with  the  world" — "living" 
possibly  all  the  time,  and  to  live,  according  to  God  the  Judge,  and  in  that  higher 
part  of  the  man,  which  is  "  spirit."  How  many  of  the  supposed  injustices  of  God's 
dealing  may  have  their  reconciliation  and  their  justification  in  this  hint  of  the 
apostle's — in  this  more  profound  study  of  the  Scriptures  !  Use  the  text  thus,  and 
it  has  life  in  it.  Let  it  open  to  thee  just  a  glimpse  of  realities  out  of  thy  sight ! 
{Dean  Vavghan.)  Christ  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  spirit  .-—Christ  dealt  with  the 
living  in  the  body,  with  the  spirits  in  the  spirit.  {A.  J.  Bengel.)  Spirits  in 
prison : — I.  That   there  are   human   spirits  actually  in   the   prison   op  hell. 

I.  A  prison  is  a  scene  of  darkness.  Impurity,  remorse,  despair,  constitute  "  the 
blackness  of  darkness  for  ever."  2.  A  prison  is  a  scene  of  guilt.  3.  A  prison  is  a 
scene  of  bondage.  Chains  of  iron  confined  the  miserable  culprit.  4.  A  prison  is  a 
scene  of  thoughtfulness.  Hell  is  a  dark  realm  of  thinkers.  But  there  are  two 
features  connected  with  hell  that  distinguish  it  from  all  the  prisons  on  earth. 
(1)  It  is  self-erected.  Each  prisoner  constructs  his  own  prison.  (2)  It  is  spiritual. 
The  spirit  is  in  prison.     Earthly  prisons  cannot  confine  the  soul.     II.  That  there 

ARE    HUMAN    SPIRITS   WHO   HAVE    BEEN  IN  THE    PRISON  OF  HELL   FOR    CENTURIES.       Christ 

preached  to  them,  by  Noah,  when  on  earth.  Peter  speaks  of  them  now  as  being  in 
hell.  What  period  of  time  has  elapsed  between  this  lengthened  suffering,  however, 
impresses  me  with  two  considerations— 1.  The  fearful  enormity  of  evil.  2.  Man's 
capacity  for  endurance.  Diseases  soon  break  up  the  body ;  time  withers  the  patri- 
archal oak,  crumbles  the  marble ;  and  "  the  waters  wear  away  the  stones  "  of  the 
mightiest  rocks ;  but,  through  ages  of  agony,  the  soul  lives  on !     III.  That  there 

ARE     human     spirits    WHO     HAVE     BEEN     IN     THE    PRISON    OF    HELL    FOR    CENTURIES,    TO 

WHOM  THE  GOSPEL  WAS  ONCE  PREACHED.  Chiist  was  "  in  the  world  "  before  His 
incarnation.  The  fact  that  there  are  spirits  in  hell  to  whom  the  gospel  was  once 
preached  suggests  two  very  solemn  considerations:  1.  That  there  is  no  necessary 
connection  between  hearing  the  gospel  and  salvation.  "  He  that  heareth  My  words, 
and  doeth  them  not,"  &c.  2.  That  the  final  misery  of  those  who  have  heard  the 
gospel  must  be  contrary  both  to  the  disposition  and  agency  of  Christ.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)         The  spirits  in  prison  :—l.  Their  state.     1.  Disembodied.     2.  Immortal. 

II.  Their  condition.  1.  A  prison  is  a  place  of  gloom.  2.  A  place  of  restraint. 
3.  A  place  of  punishment.  4.  A  place  of  confinement  for  trial.  IH.  Their  history. 
1.  They  had  the  gospel  preached  to  them.  2.  God's  long-suffering  waited  for  them. 
Applications :  1.  Let  not  disobedient  men  doubt  the  certainty  of  future  punish- 
ments. 2.  Let  not  sinners  question  the  justice  of  future  punishment.  3.  Let  not  the 
wicked  be  emboldened  by  numbers.  4.  Let  not  the  righteous  be  discouraged  by 
their  fewness.  5.  Let  not  those  who  are  alarmed  despair.  (Essex  Remembrancer.) 
The  longsufifering  of  God  ■waited. — The  patience  of  God  : — The  term  applied  here  to 
the  Almighty  represents  Him  as  we  are  not  very  apt  to  think  of  Him, i.e.,  as  having 
before  Him  all  the  evil,  of  every  kind,  in  His  children,  and  bearing  it;  our  ingrati- 
tude, our  disobedience,  our  folly,  our  fickleness,  our  obstinacy,  our  selfishness,  our 
wilfulness,  our  sensuality,  our  irreverence,  our  vanity — the  whole  dark  and  diversi- 
fied mass  of  our  sin.  The  catalogue  of  its  shapes  and  degrees  is  well-nigh 
inexhaustible,  yet  it  does  not  exhaust  His  patience.  We  have,  it  is  true,  as  men 
and  women,  our  disapprobations  and  even  our  little  indignations  at  wrong-doing. 
But  what  marks  a  special  contrast  between  them  and  the  Divine  displeasure  is  this, 
that  as  they  gain  in  strength  our  human  antipathies  toward  transgression  are  apt 
to  gi-ow  hot  and  hasty.  We  want  to  see  judgment  against  evil  works  executed 
speedily,  forgetting  that  it  was  only  just  now  that  we  began  to  see  them  to  be  evil 
works.  Our  brother  trespasses  against  us,  and,  not  considering  that  he  is  our 
brother,  moulded  of  juSt  such  clay  and  subject  to  just  such  infirmities  as  ourselves, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  321 

we  cry  out  for  the  magistrate  and  the  prison,  if  not  the  lash ;  and  sometimes 
because  there  is  no  lash  in  the  jailer's  hand,  we  take  one  up  with  our  tongue.  This 
is  the  impatient  spirit  that  vitiates  so  many  of  our  remonstrances  against  our 
neighbours'  crimes.  Let  us  give  a  little  wider  reach  to  the  treatment  of  the  subject 
by  contemplating  the  patience  of  God  in  its  sublime  delay,  its  slowness  as  men 
count  slowness,  in  bringing  about  the  most  beneficent  ends.  He  shows  us  this 
patience  first  as  the  Maker  of  things.  You  find  it  in  the  unhurried  order  of  the 
natural  creation ;  the  slow  building  and  furnishing  of  the  outer  worlds  ;  the  slow 
succession  of  geologic  ages ;  the  slow  procession  in  ascending  ranks,  one  only  so 
little  above  another,  of  the  races  of  plants  and  animals,  affording  an  epoch  for  a 
reptile  or  a  fern  ;  the  slow  preparation  of  the  planet  for  its  final  purpose  in  the 
rearing  of  an  immortal  family,  the  revelation  of  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  Divine 
Man  in  the  flesh,  and  the  manifestation,  by  that  incarnation,  of  a  new  earth  with 
the  sons  of  God  for  its  kings  and  priests.  We  rise  from  the  physical  to  the  moral 
world.  Take  the  broadest  divisions  of  the  human  family — races  and  nations. 
From  their  beginnings  in  the  East,  as  an  eastern  shepherd  leads  out  his  flocks,  the 
Everlasting  Father  has  brought  His  tribes  out  of  their  native  sheepcotes  and 
stationed  them  here  and  there  over  the  globe.  Vast  territories,  with  fertile  soils 
and  blooming  vegetation,  with  the  wealth  of  navies  and  harvests  in  their  bosom, 
were  waiting  to  receive  them :  and  some  are  waiting  still.  God  waited  His  own 
good  time  for  occupying  them  with  human  industry.  Nor  is  this  the  chief  exercise 
of  His  patience.  One  after  another  these  nations  have  broken  away  from  their 
Creator's  commandment.  For  each  one  of  them  He  kindled  the  light  of  conscience 
or  of  revelation,  to  show  them  the  way,  and  they  shut  their  eyes  upon  it.  Every 
national  life  has  grown  corrupt.  No  sooner  have  they  come  to  prosperity  than 
they  have  come  to  luxury,  idleness,  and  the  beginnings  of  decay.  They  have 
tempted  and  betrayed  each  other  ;  cheated,  fought,  enslaved,  murdered  each  other. 
Very  seldom  has  He  come  to  them  with  sudden  judgments  or  wide-spread  desola- 
tions. He  has  waited  till  they  would  destroy  themselves.  He  has  tried  them  again 
and  again.  When  one  has  gone  down  He  has  set  up  another,  and  waited  patiently 
for  that.  Even  the  one  people  that  He  chose  out  of  all  the  rest  for  His  own,  folding 
and  guarding  them,  turned  itself  into  the  bitterest  offence  against  Him.  But  His 
longsuffering  waited,  and  waited  not  only  in  the  days  of  Noah,  as  the  text  says,  but 
waited  through  the  age  of  the  patriarchs,  waited  through  the  age  of  Moses,  and  of 
the  judges,  and  of  the  kings,  waited  till  the  captivity,  waited  and  brought  them 
back  after  it,  waited  till  the  fulness  of  time.  But  we  can  bring  the  doctrine  home 
much  closer  to  our  personal  feeling  than  this.  We  all  know  well  enough  what 
those  things  are  that  try  and  irritate  us,  in  the  common  intercourse  of  life,  and 
where  our  patience  gives  way.  We  know  what  the  provocation  is,  when  our 
motives  are  misjudged,  or  our  self-respect  is  insulted ;  when  mean  calculations 
take  advantage  of  our  friendship ;  when  our  children  are  forgetful  or  wilful,  our 
pupils  dull,  our  servants  careless,  our  neighbours  arrogant,  our  beneficiaries 
unthankful  or  impertinent.  We  all  know  the  sting  that  hurts  us  in  contempt,  in 
estrangement,  in  forgetfulness.  Now,  all  these  hateful  things,  in  every  instanc3, 
are  known  to  God.  They  are  fuU  in  His  sight.  Just  so  far  as  they  are  real 
offences  at  all,  they  are  offences  against  Him  before  they  are  to  us.  He  does  not 
overlook  them,  but  looks  directly  at  them  all.  He  sees  the  tyrants,  the  traitors, 
the  hardened  profligates,  Uving  out  their  many  days,  and  some  of  them  dying 
natural  deaths  in  their  beds,  the  Alvas  and  Torquemadas,  small  and  great,  of 
every  age — His  judgment-seat  not  moved  forward  one  hair's  breadth  to  meet  them 
this  side  the  grave.  Some  one  says,  God  is  patient  because  He  is  eternal ;  and  so 
we  make  excuses  for  our  impatience.  God  is  patient  because  He  is  good,  as  well  as 
because  He  is  strong  and  wise.  He  waits  for  men  that  they  may  return  to  Him. 
He  spares  them  that  they  may  spare  each  other.  And  then,  if  we  could  look  far 
into  the  heart  of  God,  might  it  not  appear  that  He  has — considering  their  light, 
their  calling,  then-  privileges,  and  promises — quite  as  much  occasion  to  let  His 
patience  have  her  perfect  work  in  the  inconstancies  of  Christians  as  in  the  crimes  of 
unbelievers?  the  cold  affections,  lifeless  prayers,  halting  steps.  He  has  to  wait 
even  for  His  own  people  that  He  has  redeemed — the  Church  that  He  has  purchased 
with  His  blood — in  her  backward  and  worldly  living.  It  is  quite  noticeable  that 
one  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  dwells  on  this  grace  of  patience  with  peculiar 
earnestness,  returning  to  it  as  if  it  had  a  special  power  to  his  conscience  and  a 
special  sacredness  to  his  heart ;  and  this  is  St.  Peter,  from  whom  my  text  is  taken. 
Have  we  not  a  reason  for  this,  and  at  the  same  time  a  deeper  look  into  his  warm 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

heart,  when  we  turn  to  his  personal  character  and  history?  His  was  just  one  of 
those  impressible,  impetuous  temperaments,  with  great  faults  and  great  virtues, 
which  lay  a  heavy  tax  upon  the  patience  of  friends,  and  yet  inspire,  beneath  all 
that,  a  Uvely  interest.  So  he  must  have  felt  how  repeatedly  and  bitterly  he  had 
tried  that  one  Divine  Friend.  Nor  is  the  whole  Scripture  less  clear  and  strong  as 
to  the  practical  value  of  this  virtue  in  the  Christian  standard  of  character.  Thus 
it  shows  us  the  kneeling  suppliant  at  his  lord's  feet  crying,  "  Have  patience  with 
me  and  I  will  pay  thee  all."  It  pronounces  its  blessing  on  those  that  bring  forth 
fruit  with  patience.  It  casts  in  a  beam  of  light  on  the  dark  mystery  of  our 
sufferings  by  telling  us  that  tribulation  worketh  patience,  and  patience  experience, 
bidding  us  rest  in  the  Lord  and  wait  patiently  for  Him.  Nay,  further  yet ;  by  one 
true  and  deep  interpretation  of  it  the  Cross  of  our  Saviour  is  but  the  symbol  of  this 
doctrine.  Patience  and  passion  are  but  varied  forms  of  one  word  ;  the  sacrifice  of 
longsuffering.  In  the  Son  of  Mary  the  patience  of  God  comes  down  among  men, 
and  we  behold  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of 
grace  and  truth,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  giving  His  life  for  the  world,  and 
waiting  for  its  faith.  {Bp.  Huntington.)  While  the  ark  was  a  preparing. — Safety 
in  the  ark  : — I.  In  the  first  place,  we  see  by  the  parallel  drawn  between  the  faith 

OF   A    ChEISTIAN     and     THE     PRESERVATION    OF    NOAH     IN     THE    DELUGE,    that    WC    mUSt 

look  for  a  deluge  answering  to  that  which  then  came  upon  the  world.     Who  can 
seriously  think  of  the  world  blaspheming  its  Maker,  rebelling  against  Him,  and 
then  proudly  contending  that  there  is  very  little  evil  in  that  rebellion,  and  not  see 
that  some  signal  proof  from  the  Governor  of  all,  that  that  rebellion  shall  not  be 
tolerated  ?     The  deluge  of  wrath,  then,  will  come,  like  the  deluge  that  swept  away 
the  millions  of  mankind  in  the  days  of  Noah.     H.  But  then,  as  there  was  an  ark 
which  Noah  constructed  for  his  preservation  and  that  of  his  family,  we  have  an  ark 
too,  built  not  by  our  own  hands,  but  built  by  our  great  Creator  and  Redeemer. 
Christ  is  to  His  people  now  the  one  Ark.     There  is  one  Shelter  from  the  coming 
deluge  of  God's  wrath,  one  only  Ark,  for  a  lost  soul ;  unless  we  are  saved  by  that, 
we  perish.     Christ  is  the  only  thing  between  us  and  eternal  destruction.     III.  But 
as  Noah  was  saved,  not  merely  by  understanding  its  construction  and  not  merely  by 
looking  at  its  fau'  proportions  and  its  massive  timbers,  but  by  entering  within 
THE  ABK  and  being  shut  within  it  by  God,  so  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  saved  by 
entering  into  their  Ai'k ;  and  the  one  thing  by  which  they  enter  in  is  faith.     So 
that  unless  we  come  to  Christ  as  our  only  hope,  we  are  excluded  from  that  Ark.     It 
is  built  by  the  hand  of  God,  it  will  float  in  safety  over  the  deluge,  and  whoever  is 
in  it  wiU  be  gloriously  saved  ;  but  we  must  get  within  it.   We  may  talk  as  Christians, 
we  may  belong  to  a  Christian  church,  we  may  think  ourselves  safe  ;  but  unless  we 
have  climbed  into  the  true  Ark  by  faith,  and  have  been  shut  in  by  the  hand  of  God, 
we  have  no  more  possibility  of  safety  than  a  person  could  have  been  saved  by 
walking  round  the  ark  which  Noah  had  constructed,  or  examining  with  surprise 
and   admiration   its  massive  construction.     IV.   But  there  is   another  similarity 
between  the  disciples  of  Christ  and  Noah  and  his  family.     That  similarity  is  in 
THE  WATER  OF  BAPTISM,  as  Compared  with  the  water  of  the  deluge  to  Noah.     Anti- 
typical  to  which,  the  apostle  says,  "Baptism  doth  now  save  us."    And  therefore, 
i  ust  as  the  water  bore  up  the  ark  of  Noah,  and  it  was  when  the  waves  dashed  upon 
the  ark  in  which  he  floated  that  his  preservation  was  comijleted,  so  it  is  by  baptism 
that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  are  likewise  saved.   The  water  of  baptism  could  no 
more  save  the  baptized  man,  of  itself,  than  the  water  of  the  deluge  could  save  the 
antediluvian  sinners  who  were  outside  the  ark.     It  was  the  ark  which  saved ;  and 
then  the  water  completed  the  salvation,  by  bearing  up  the  ark  upon  its  flood.     And 
the  water  of  baptism  is  the  antitype  of  that  water  of  the  deluge,  because  it  completes 
the  figure  which  makes  the  person  safe  in  Christ,  who  is  the  only  Ark  of  the  soul 
from  the  deluge  to  come.     That  this  was  the  apostle's  meaning  is  further  mani- 
fested by  the  expression  which  he  used  himself,  to  correct  the  imagination  which 
might  arise  in  any  mind,  that  the  external  rite  had  in  itself  any  such  efficacy.     He 
adds,  "  Not  tlie  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh";  external  washing  cannot 
save  any  one  ;  but  it  is  the  "  inquiring  after  God  of  a  good  conscience,"  it  is  the 
seeking  God  with  the  heart  and  with  the  soul — it  is  this  which  is  the  essence  of  the 
baptismal  profession.     There  are  two  more  points  of  comparison  on  which  I  must 
dwell.     In  the  days  of  Noah  there  were  multitudes  that  disbelieved,  and  but  few 
that  believed,  the  warning  God  gave ;  eight  only  out  of  the  millions  of  mankind 
believed.     The  millions  disbelieved.     And  so  it  is  with  the  threatenings  of  God 
now  ;  there  are  few  that  credit  them,  and  millions  that  disbelieve  them ;  which  are 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  PETER.  323 

right,  the  few  or  the  millions  ?     Christians !  hold  fast  the  truth,  even  if  you  were 
much  fewer  than  you  are  ;  and  never  let  your  opinion  be  in  the  least  shaken  by  any 
allegation  of  the  presumption,  the  enthusiasm,  or  the  folly  of   entertaining  the 
opinions  which  are  against  those  of  the  great  mass  of  mankind.     Hold  them  fast, 
and  it  will  be  for  your  happiness.   And  lastly,  there  is  one  final  comparison  between 
the  two  cases.     The  multitudes  of  those  who  disbelieved,  in  Noah's  days,  perished, 
and  the  few  that  believed  were  saved.     Oh  !  that  a  warning  voice  could  reach  the 
millions  of  this  world  !      (J5.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)        Baptism  doth  now  save  us. — The 
two  baptisms  : — It  is  questionable  whether  we  would   have   had  skill  enough  to 
discover  that  the  two  facts  mentioned  in  the  text  contained  essentially  the  same 
revelation,  if  the  union  had  not  been  expressly  pointed  out  lO  us  in  Scripture.     The 
wild  flood  that  destroyed  the  ancient  world,  and  the  gentle  waters  of  baptism  in 
Christian  times — these  two  at  first  sight  seem  to  have  little  in  common.     The 
connection  is  by  no  means  so  obvious  as  in  some  other  types  ;  but  it  is  not  less  real. 
I.  The  salvation  of  Noah  and  his  family  by  water.     As  long  as  you  think  merely 
of  Noah  being  saved  from  death  by  drowning,  you  miss  the  grand  design  of  God  in 
bringing  the  flood  upon  the  earth.     If  the  purpose  of  the  Supreme  had  been  to 
preserve  the  lives  of  those  eight,  it  could  have  been  accomplished  by  preventing  the 
flood  from  coming,  better  than  by  constructing  an  ark  to  float  on  its  surface.    What 
object  did  the  Almighty  Euler  contemplate  in  those  stupendous  arrangements  ?     To 
preserve  His  truth,  and  the  earthen  vessels  that  contained  it,  not  from  the  flood  of 
water,  but  from  the  flood  of  sin.     The  water  flood,  so  far  from  being  the  source  of 
danger,  was  the  instrument  employed  to  save.     God  employed  one  flood  to  wipe 
away  another.     The  salvation  which  God  works  for  His  own,  both  in  its  whole  and 
in  its  several  parts,  is  a  twofold  operation.     It  is  deliverance  by  destruction.     In 
the  Old  Testament  times,  this  principle  of  Divine  government  was  exhibited  in  acts 
and  ordinances  of   a  more  material  kind.      Christ  had  not  yet  come  ;    and  the 
personal  ministry  of  the  Spirit  had  not  yet  been  fully  developed.     The  providential 
dispensations  and  religious  rites  in  which  the  principles  were  embodied,  accorded 
with  the  infant  state  of  the  world  and  the  Church.     In  form  the  manifestation  was 
childish ;  but  even  in  form  all  that  was  childish  has  been  done  away,  and  the  self- 
same truths  are  set  forth  in  the  ordinances  of  a  more  glorious  ministration.     II. 
The  salvation  of  Christians  by  baptism  is  like  the  saving  of  Noah  by  the  waters 
of  the  flood.     1.  The  danger.     In  God's  sight  the  ailment  of  humanity  is  sin.     Sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin.     Find  the  way  of  making  an  end  of  sin, 
and  the  sting  of  death  is  instantly  taken  away.     If  it  were  not  for  sin  we  should 
have  nothing  to  fear.     We  could  smile  at  death,  and  at  him  who  hath  its  power,  if 
we  were  free  from  sin.     2.  The  deliverance.     It,  too,  is  like  Noah's.     We  are  saved 
by  a  flood.     We  are  saved  by  baptism.     And  what  is  meant  by  baptism  ?     In  the 
first  place,  it  is  not  "  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."     It  is  not  the  out- 
ward act  of  washing  with  water  that  can  save  a  soul  from  the  dangers  that  surround 
us.     It  is  not  a  corporal  and  carnal  thing.     Not  this  ;  but  "  the  answer  of  a  good 
conscience  toward  God."     It  is  the  cleansing  of  the  conscience  from  its  guilt,  so 
that  when  God  makes  inquisition  for  blood.  He  finds  no  spot  or  wrinkle  there  ;  so 
that  the  conscience,  when  put  to  the  question,  answers  peace  to  the  challenge  of  the 
Judge.     "  Baptism  doth  now  save  us  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead."     It  is  by  being  in  Christ  that  we  may  get  our  sins  purged  away,  and  yet  be 
ourselves  saved.     He  stands  before  God  to  receive  what  is  due  to  His  people's  sins. 
"  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accom- 
plished."    That  baptism  to  which  He  looked  forward  from  the  first  of  time,  and 
which  He  met  on  Calvary,  was  none  other  than  the  wi'ath  of  God  against  sin,  which 
He  had  in  covenant  engaged  to  bear.     The  Messiah  met  that  deluge,  and  emerged 
from  it  triumphant.     From  that  baptism  He  rose  again.     The  salvation  of  believers 
lies  not  in  meeting  God  for  themselves,  when  the  vials  of  His  wrath  for  sin  are 
poured  out ;  but  in  being  found  in  Christ,  when  He  receives  His  people's  due.     It 
is  the  part  and  privilege  of  a  believer  to  be  baptized  into  Christ,  and  specifically  to  be 
baptized  into  His  death  (Rom.  vi.  3,  5).     Our  baptism  is  into  Him,  and  He  meets 
the  baptism  for  us  which  would  have  carried  us  away.      We  have  received  the 
baptism,  when  in  our  Substitute  we  have  received  it.     As  Noah  remained  safe,  shut 
up  within  the  ark,  while  it  received  the  surges  of  the  deluge  ;  so  we,  in  Christ  our 
refuge,  are  unhurt,  while  He  meets  and  exhausts  in  our  stead  the  justice  due  to  sin. 
As  the  flood  saved  Noah,  by  destroying  the  wicked  that  swarmed  on  the  earth,  while 
he  escaped  by  being  shut  within  the  ark  ;  the  baptism  wherewith  Christ  was  baptized 
saves  Christians,  by  destroying  sins  and  sinners,  so  that  they  who  are  found  in  Him 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

in  the  time  of  visitation  shall  step  out  with  Him  upon  a  new  earth,  under  a  new 
heaven,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.     (W.  Arnot.)  "Baptism":  helpful: — 

The  apostle  speaks  of  "baptism"  as  saving  us;  that  is  the  point  that  concerns 
us  most.  Of  course  the  question  starts.  How  does  baptism  save  us  ;  in  what 
way  is  it  helpful  to  us  in  our  Christian  life  and  career?  If  you  look  at  the! 
passage  you  will  see  that  the  apostle  guards  himself  carefully.  He  says,  "Not' 
the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  We  cannot  too  distinctly  assert  that 
there  is  nothing  saving  in  "  baptism  "  itself.  In  what  way,  then,  you  may  ask,  does 
baptism  save  us  ?  How  can  it  be  made  helpful  to  us  in  the  cultivation  of  Christian 
character  and  in  the  living  of  Christian  life  ?  The  apostle  tells  us,  "  But  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God."  The  Greek  term  here  translated  "  answer " 
means  a  question  or  interrogation.  It  is  used  to  signify  the  mutual  return  of 
question  and  answer,  which  implies  compact.  You  know  that  when  two  parties 
present  themselves  to  the  minister  for  marriage  he  requires  them  to  say  certain 
words  after  him  ;  those  words  form  what  we  may  call  the  marriage  oath,  or  declara- 
tion, or  compact.  When  that  declaration  or  compact  has  been  made  by  both  parties 
the  man  puts  the  ring  on  the  finger  of  the  woman  as  a  sign  or  evidence  that  such 
declaration  has  been  made.  Now,  what  the  wedding  ring  is  to  the  married  couple 
and  society,  baptism  is  to  the  believer  and  Christ.  It  is  the  sign,  token,  symbol 
of  the  covenant,  compact,  which  the  believer  has  entered  into  with  his  Saviour. 
In  this  sense  it  has  an  element  of  salvation  in  it,  and  it  may  be  made  helpful 
to  you  in  the  cultivation  of  Christian  character  and  life  by  reminding  you  of  the 
terms  of  that  covenant.  I.  That  yov  have  repented  of  tour  past  life  and  conduct. 
There  are  some  in  whom  the  process  or  change  we  call  "repentance"  is  not  very 
marked  or  great.  In  some,  from  their  natural  temperament,  or  from  the  advantages 
of  early  surroundings,  the  religious  life  seems  a  gradual  development.  As  the  lovely 
bud  opens  under  the  genial  influence  of  the  spring's  sun,  so  their  hearts  open  under 
the  genial  influence  of  the  heavenly  Father's  love.  In  others,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
prodigal,  there  is  a  time,  sharp  and  distinct,  when  reflection  arrests  them  in  their 
course  of  sin  and  folly.  Now,  "  baptism"  is  a  standing  perpetual  reminder  of  that 
solemn  crisis — that  solemn  resolve  in  your  history.  Hence  Paul  writes  :  "  Know  ye 
not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Christ  were  baptized  into  His  death?" 
&c.  (Rom.  vi.  3-13).  The  act  of  baptism  is  an  open  public  renunciation  of  sin,  of 
sinful  pleasures,  of  the  follies  of  the  world.  II.  That  you  have  accepted  Christ 
AS  your  Saviour.  The  compact  you  now  make  with  Christ,  and  of  which  your 
"  baptism  "  will  be  the  standing  sign  and  symbol,  is  that  you  accept,  believe  in  Him 
as  your  Saviour.  In  accepting  Christ  as  your  Saviour  you  promise  Him  that  you 
will  give  yourself  up  to  Him.  When  tempted  to  relax  or  disobey,  you  will  answer 
your  tempter,  "  I  have  placed  myself  in  the  hands  of  Christ ;  I  am  not  my  own.  I 
have  His  prescription,  and,  unless  I  attend  to  that,  I  cannot  expect  spiritual  healing 
or  health."  You  will  point  your  tempter  to  your  "  baptism  "  as  a  standing  symbol 
of  your  covenant  with  Christ ;  and  in  this  way  your  "  baptism  "  will  be  helpful  to 
you,  and  will  save  you.  III.  That  you  have  consecrated  yourself  to  Christ's 
service.  The  wife  sees  the  ring  on  her  finger,  and  she  says,  "  I  am  married ;  I 
am  no  longer  my  own.  I  am  pledged  to  give  my  husband  as  much  real  pleasure 
and  joy  as  lies  in  my  power,  to  abstain  from  everything  that  would  grieve  or  dis- 
please him,  to  make  any  and  every  sacrifice  if  necessary  to  contribute  to  his  com- 
fort and  well-being."  In  the  same  way,  remembering  your  "  baptism,"  you  will  say, 
"I  am  married  to  Christ;  I  have  pledged  myself  to  His  service  as  the  gi'eat  purpose 
of  my  life."  IV.  That  you  sustain  the  most  honourable  relation  to  Christ.  I 
wish  I  could  so  fire  the  hearts  of  our  young  men  and  women  that  they  could 
adequately  realise  the  dignity  and  the  honour  of  the  relation  they  sustain  to  Christ,  and 
of  which  "  baptism  "  is  the  standing  sign  and  seal.  You  know  how  the  soldier  is 
fired  with  the  sense  of  his  dignity  as  a  soldier.  There  are  many  things  that  he 
would  not  do  because  it  would  disgrace  his  profession.  And  so  I  would  that  you 
should  be  ever  conscious  of  the  dignity  and  honour  of  the  relation  that  you  sustain 
to  Christ.  Remembering  your  "  baptism,"  the  standing  seal  of  that  relation,  you 
will  say,  "I  am  a  baptized  Christian,  one  of  Christ's  soldiers.  How  can  I  do  this 
mean  act,  spoak  that  false  word,  do  that  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  Christ?" 
In  this  way,  too,  "  baptism  "  may  be  helpful  to  you,  and  so  save  you.  {B.  Preece.) 
Who  is  gone  into  heaven. — Our  Lord's  ascension : — The  ascension  of  our  Lord  was,  in 
one  point  of  view,  only  a  result  of  His  resurrection,  and  the  proper  completion  of  His 
tiinmph  then  achieved.  That  is,  no  new  work  was  done  by  Him  after  His  resurrection 
whi'^^h  brought  about  His  ascension.    It  was  His  pleasure  to  remain  on  earth  during 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  PETER.  325 

those  forty  days,  in  order  to  show  Himself  alone  to  His  disciples,  and  to  establish 
beyond  doubt  the  fact  that  He  was  risen  from  the  dead  ;  but  they  were  only  a  delay 
interposed  before  that  triumphant  departure  whose  way  was  already  prepared.  First 
of  all,  then,  the  ascension  of  Jesus  was  the  seal  of  the  accomplishment  of  redemption. 
His  work  which  He  wrought  in  our  nature  was  the  rescuing  it  from  the  dominion 
of  sin,  and  bringing  it  into  union  with  God.  This  His  glorious  state  of  final 
perfection  of  humanity  is  not  His  alone.  It  belongs  not  to  Him  any  more  than  His 
death  and  resurrection  belonged  to  Him,  as  man  individual.  It  belongs,  in  its 
actuaUty  and  in  its  effects,  to  our  whole  nature,  which  He  bore  on  Him  and  bears 
on  Him  at  this  moment.  In,  and  as  accomplished  in,  that  humanity  thus  glorified, 
does  the  Father  behold  all  His  creatures  and  all  His  purposes  ;  in  Him  it  pleased 
the  Father  that  all  fulness  should  dweU,  and  that  all  things  in  heaven  and  in  earth 
should  be  summed  up.  0  how  blessed  an  encouragement  is  this,  in  all  our 
difficulties  and  under  all  our  troubles.  Thou  feeble  Christian,  who  believest  and 
prayest  and  strivest,  but  hast  never  laid  firm  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  thee,  who 
day  by  day  art  coiming  over  thine  own  imperfections,  turn  thine  eyes  from  looking 
inward,  and  look  upward  on  Him  where  He  is.  That  human  Body,  pierced  but 
glorified,  marred  above  measure,  but  also  exalted  above  measure,  let  that  be  thy 
one  object  of  Contemplation.  There  is  thy  safety ;  there  thy  guarantee  of  God's 
favour  ;  on  that  blessed  Form  falls  no  frown  of  the  Father's  countenance,  but  an 
everlasting  smile  of  approval,  and  under  that  smile  thou.  His  lowly  and  fainting 
member,  art  included.  Fix  thine  eyes  on  Him  and  fear  not ;  in  Him  thou  hast  all ; 
through  Him  thou  shalt  rise  after  all  thy  falls  ;  shalt  enter  into  the  kingdom  after 
all  thy  doubts  ;  for  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life.  I  want  in  my  beUef  which  is  to 
sustain  me,  which  is  to  renew  me  in  holiness,  something  as  present  to  me  as  the 
world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil  are  present  with  me  ;  not  only  a  past  fact,  however 
gracious  and  glorious ;  but  a  present  fact,  which  I  may  look  upon  as  part  of  this 
moment  in  which  I  hve  and  struggle  onward.  And  I  can  find  this  only  in  the 
glorified  form  of  my  Lord,  now  in  heaven  at  God's  right  hand,  holding  together 
this  world,  creating,  blessing,  vivifying,  governing  all  things.  This  is  no  past 
matter.  Far  above  this  earth  with  her  living  tribes  and  her  waving  blossoms,  far 
above  these  bright  stars  which  bound  the  vision  of  the  outward  eye,  I  see  that  form 
of  Him  in  whom  I  live  ;  there  is  He  who  is  made  to  me  wisdom  and  righteousness 
and  sanctification  and  redemption  ;  His  life  is  my  obedience ;  His  blood  is  my 
ransom ;  His  resurrection  is  my  justification.  Earth  and  hell  may  combine  against 
my  weak  nature ;  but  there  I  see  that  nature  standing  in  the  Godhead  glorified, 
and  I  know  that  I  am  safe.  Outward  appearances  may  discourage  me  to  the 
utmost.  Both  the  Church  and  the  world  are  summed  up  in  and  ruled  by  that 
glorified  One,  who  reigns  above  them  both.  Besides  being  the  seal  and  pledge  of 
our  accomplished  redemption.  He  is,  in  this  His  glorified  state,  our  continuing  High 
Priest  and  Intercessor.  There,  in  the  centre  of  the  Father's  glory.  He  rests  not 
idle,  nor  is  He  unmindful  of  those  whom  He  came  to  save.  They  are  ever  borne 
on  His  thoughts,  and  not  the  least  of  their  cares  or  wants  is  forgotten  by  Him. 
Through  Him,  not  as  an  unconscious  medium,  but  as  the  living  and  conscious 
offerer,  all  prayer  is  made.  Again,  our  glorified  Saviour  is  the  giver  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  From  Him  all  spiritual  influence  comes  direct,  and  without  union  with 
Him  no  man  has  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  And  this  is  a  most  important  consideration. 
For  men  are  apt  to  imagine  of  our  blessed  Lord  as  withdrawn  from  His  Church ;  and 
the  participation  of  spiritual  gifts  and  spiritual  life  to  be  derived  from  a  long  suc- 
cession of  secondary  instruments,  and  ordinances  of  grace ;  whereas  it  is  by  direct 
contact  of  every  believing  soul  with  Himself  in  glory,  that  all  spiritual  grace  and  gifts 
are  derived,  and  means  and  ordinances  are  but  helps  to  lifting  the  soul  by  faith  into 
realisation  of  His  person  and  office,  and  into  communion  with  Him.  [DeanAlford.) 
Our  ascended  Lord  : — I.  The  circumstances.  1.  They  begin  thus — "  Who  is  gone 
into  heaven."  "  He  is  gone  " :  that  sounds  rather  dolorous.  Yet  we  dare  not  raise 
a  monument  to  Christ  as  one  who  is  dead.  Let  us  complete  the  sentence — "  who  is 
gone  into  heaven."  Now  you  demand  the  trumpet,  for  the  words  are  full  of  soul- 
stirring  music,  and  create  intense  delight.  Still,  there  are  the  words,  "  He  is  gone  " : 
He  is  gone  away  from  you  and  from  me ;  we  cannot  now  embrace  His  feet,  nor 
wash  them,  nor  lean  our  head  upon  His  bosom,  nor  look  into  His  face.  Henceforth 
we  are  strangers  here  because  He  is  not  here.  He  intends  us  to  remove,  for  He  has 
removed.  We  are  not  at  home  on  earth.  He  seems  to  say,  "  Upwards,  My  brethren, 
upwards  from  off  this  earth  ;  away  from  this  world  to  the  glory  land.  I  am  gone, 
and  you  must  be  gone.     This  is  not  your  place  of  resting,  but  you  must  prepare 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

yourselves  for  a  time  when  it  shall  be  said  of  each  one  of  you,  '  He  is  gone.'  "  Now 
let  us  consider  that  He  "is  gone  into  heaven."  What  does  this  signify  but,  first, 
that  He  is  gone  out  of  the  region  wherein  our  senses  can  perceive  Him  ?  But  then 
we  know  that  our  Lord,  as  man,  is  gone  into  a  greater  nearness  to  God  than  ever ; 
"  He  is  gone  into  heaven,"  where  is  the  throne  of  the  great  King.  Let  us  joy  and 
rejoice  that  our  covenant  Head  is  now  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  at  the  fountain- 
head  of  love  and  grace,  and  that  He  is  there  on  our  behalf.  In  going  into  heaven 
there  is  also  this  thought,  that  our  Lord  is  gone  now  into  the  place  of  perfect  happi- 
ness and  of  complete  glory.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  filled  with  ineffable  satisfaction, 
which  is  the  reward  of  His  passion  and  His  death.  Thinking  this  over,  let  us  reflect 
that  nothing  could  stop  His  going  there.  "  He  is  gone  up  into  heaven,  despite  all 
who  raged  against  Him."  But  I  beg  you  to  remember  that  He  is  gone  up  into 
heaven  as  our  representative.  Jesus  does  nothing  by  Himself  now.  AU  His  people 
are  with  Him.  He  says,  "Behold  I  and  the  children  which  God  hath  given  Me." 
They  are  always  in  union  with  Him.  This  is  the  best  seal  that  our  faith  could 
desire,  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Christ  being  practically  the  resurrection 
and  the  home-bringing  of  all  His  redeemed.  2.  Secondly,  His  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  God :  "  Who  is  gone  into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God." 
Remember  that  this  being  on  the  right  hand  of  God  relates  to  the  complex  person 
of  our  Lord ;  it  relates  to  Him  not  as  God  alone,  but  as  God  and  man.  It  is  His 
manhood  that  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Wonderful  conception !  The  next  being 
to  God  is  man.  Infinite  leagues  must  necessarily  lie  between  the  Creator  and  the 
created ;  but  between  God  and  man  in  Christ  Jesus  there  seems  no  distance  at  all, 
the  man  Christ  Jesus  sits  at  God's  right  hand.  What  meaneth  it  that  Christ  sits 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  Does  it  not  mean,  first,  unrivalled  honour  ?  To  sit  at 
the  right  hand  of  God  is  the  highest  conceivable  glory.  Does  not  it  also  signify 
intense  love  ?  When  Solomon  would  describe  the  love  of  the  King  to  his  bride,  he 
said,  "  Upon  thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  Ophir."  It  means  also 
communion  and  counsel.  We  speak  of  a  person  with  whom  we  take  advice  as  "  the 
man  of  our  right  hand."  God  taketh  counsel  with  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  When 
you  have  a  friend  at  court,  you  hope  you  will  do  well ;  but  what  a  friend  have  we 
in  the  King's  courts ;  even  Him  who  is  the  Wonderful  Counsellor !  Does  it  not 
also  signify  perfect  repose  ?  Jesus  is  gone  up  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  sitteth 
there.  0  restful  Saviour,  we  labouring,  come  to  Thee  and  find  rest  in  Thee ;  we 
also  sit  down  expecting  the  time  when  Thou  shalt  put  down  all  our  enemies,  and 
we  shall  tread  even  Satan  under  our  feet.  3.  The  third  fact  is.  His  dominion : 
"  Angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him."  Angels  are 
subject  to  Him  whom  they  nailed  to  the  Cross,  and  at  whom  they  wagged  their 
heads.  This  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  heaven.  Men  in  countless  myriads  are  in 
heaven  white-robed,  praising  God ;  and  one  Man  is  actually  on  the  throne  of  God, 
vicegerent,  Lord  over  all ;  having  every  knee  to  bow  before  Him,  and  every  tongue 
to  call  Him  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  II.  The  lessons  of  these  cir- 
cumstances. 1.  The  religion  of  Christ  is  true.  Our  doctrine  is  not  sentiment,  and 
view,  and  opinion,  but  fact.  2.  Christ's  cause  is  safe.  Let  not  His  church  tremble, 
let  her  not  think  of  putting  out  the  hand  of  unbelief  to  steady  the  ark  of  the  Lord. 
The  wheel  will  turn,  and  they  that  are  lowest  now  shall  soon  be  highest ;  they  that 
have  been  with  Him  in  the  dust  shall  be  with  Him  in  His  glory.  3.  Now  I  can  see 
that  His  saints  are  safe  ;  for  if  Jesus  has  risen  and  gone  into  His  glory,  then  each 
individual  in  Him  shall  be  safe  too.  4.  This  explains  the  way  in  which  Jesus  deals 
with  sinners.  That  which  took  place  in  His  own  person  He  makes  to  be  a  picture 
of  what  takes  place  in  the  men  whom  He  saves.  If  you  come  to  Him  you  can  only 
get  to  know  the  fulness  of  His  gracious  power  by  being  buffeted  with  conviction  and 
repentance,  and  by  having  self,  especially  self-righteousness,  crucified  and  slain.  5. 
I  think,  since  Christ  has  gone  into  heaven  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  it  shows 
which  way  we  ought  to  go.  "I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  Me."  He  draws  them  to  the  Cross,  and  you  may  be  sure  He  will  draw 
them  to  the  crown.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  at  home : — I.  His  residence.  1. 
He  has  gone  there  as  to  His  proper  abode.  2.  To  prepare  for  His  disciples.  3.  To 
attract  the  hearts  of  His  disciples.  II.  His  position.  "  On  the  right  hand  of  God." 
The  figure  implies — 1.  Might.  Christ  is  at  the  fountain-head  of  power.  2.  Dignity, 
III.  His  authority.  1.  Co-extensive  with  the  universe.  2.  Exercised  for  the  pro- 
motion of  moral  excellence  everywhere.  3.  Specially  contemplates  the  good  of  His 
followers.  (Hiwiilist.)  Angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject 
unto  Him. — All  amjeU  subject  to  Christ: — Both  good  and  bad;  the  good  willingly, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  PETER.  327 

the  others  against  their  will.    I.  Fob  the  good  angels.    1.  If  such  glorious  creatures 
be  subject  to  Christ,  then — (1)  How  great  a  one  is  He,  and  how  glorious  is  His 
kingdom.     (2)  The  greater  honour  and  dignity  our  Head  hath,  the  more  joy  and 
comfort  may  we  have,  who  are  His  members.     2.  In  that  He  appoints  them  to  watch 
and  guard  us — (1)  What  a  great  honour  is  this  to  us.     (2)  How  may  we  hereby  be 
comforted  and  encouraged  against  Satan's  malice.     (3)  We  must  keep  within  com- 
pass, and  walk  carefully  in  God's  ways.     II.  Fob  the  evil  angels.     1.  AU  these  are 
subject  to  Christ,  and  He  hath  triumphed  over  them.     2.  As  it  is  no  small  honour 
to  Him  our  Head  to  have  aU  these  under  Him,  so  the  meditation  hereof  cannot  but 
be  comfortable  to  us,  both  in  regard  of  Him  and  ourselves.     3.  Those  evil  angels 
cannot  do  that  evil  they  would,  and  if  they  cannot,  much  less  can  their  instruments. 
{John  Rogers.)        Christ  the  King  of  angels  : — We  indeed  are  but  little  able  to  enter 
into  the  thoughts  of  apostles  when  they  saw  Him  in  His  crucified  body,  ascending 
up  into  heaven.    But  we  may  understand  that  this  was  a  part  of  their  feelings  ;  that 
now  One,  who  is  true  Man  as  we  are,  who  can  enter  into  our  joys  and  sorrows,  our 
hopes  and  fears.  He  is  set  in  the  highest  place,  over  all  created  things.     And  He 
carries  with  Him  there  the  same  tender  love  towards  the  meanest  of  His  faithful 
servants  which  He  ever  vouchsafed  to  exercise  here.     It  was,  in  some  sort,  as  if 
one's  nearest  and  dearest  relation  were  made  absolute  king  of  the  country.      If 
persons  who  care  for  earthly  things  would  rejoice  in  such  a  change  as  that,  and 
consider  their  own  fortune  made,  how  much  more  joy  to  those  who  care  for 
heavenly  things,  when  we  set  our  hearts  to  consider  that  He  who  laid  down  His 
life  for  us,  He  is  made  the  great  King  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  has  all  the  treasures 
of  grace  and  glory  put  for  ever  into  His  hand.     In  this  we  see  at  once  is  included 
every  good  thing.     But  for  the  present  there  is  one  blessing  in  particular.     It  is  the 
subjection  of  the  spiritual  world  to  our  Saviour,  "  Angels  and  authorities  and  powers 
were  made  subject "  to  the  Son  of  Man  when  He  went  into  heaven,  and  sat  down  on 
the  right  hand  of  God.     We  naturally  think,  even  from  our  childhood,  a  good  deal 
of  the  spiritual  world  ;  of  beings  out  of  sight,  who  yet,  for  aught  we  know,  may  often 
be  very  near  us,  and  may  have  great  power  to  do  us  good,  or  to  hurt  us  in  body  and 
soul.     And  the  thought  of  our  Lord  gone  up  into  heaven,  and  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  is  a  thought  of  great  power  to  set  us  right  in  our  feelings  towards  both 
sorts  of  angelic  beings.     Consider,  first,  what  a  thing  it  is  to  know  that  the  good 
angels  are  on  our  side,  that  they  camp  about  us  to  deliver  us.     This  certainty  of 
angelical  aid,  so  far  as  we  are  on  Christ's  side,  we  have  by  His  exaltation  into 
heaven,  and  the  subjection  to  Him  of  angels,  authorities,  and  powers.     But  those 
words,  doubtless,  mean  the  evil  angels  as  well  as  the  good ;  our  unseen  enemies,  as 
well  as  our  unseen  friends.     Let  us  not  try  to  put  out  of  our  minds  the  notion  of  the 
bad  angels  being  around  us,  until  we  have  turned  in  serious  prayer  to  Him  who  for 
our  sake  holds  them  in  chains.     Imagine  Christ  our  Lord  on  His  throne,  how  His 
eye  is  ever  fixed,  both  on  you  in  your  helpless  slumbering  condition,  and  on  your 
adversary  waiting  to  hurt  you.     And  be  sure,  that  if  before  you  lay  down  you 
seriously  and  reverently  committed  yourself  to  Him  in  prayer,  with  sincere  penitence 
for  all  your  sins.  He  will  not  let  the  roaring  lion  devour  you.     You  may,  without 
presumption,  imagine  Him,  then,  saying  to  some  of  His  good  angels,  "  Here  is  one 
who  lays  down  to  rest,  desking  to  dweU  under  the  defence  of  the  Most  High  ;  he  hath 
set  his  love  upon  Me,  and  tried  to  know  My  name ;  therefore  do  you.  My  good  angels, 
take  charge  of  him,  and  keep  him  from  the  evil  that  walketh  in  darkness."     (Plain 
Sermons  by  Contributoi-s  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times")         The  ascension: — "Who  is 
gone  into  heaven."    It  is  the  correction  of  all  that  is  carnal  and  all  that  is  super- 
stitious in  our  religion.     It  is  the  Christian  application  of  "  God  is  spirit."     It  bids 
us  not  to  rest  in  forms ;  not  to  multiply  services  as  services,  not  to  rest  in  sacraments 
as  sacraments,  but  to  look  through  aU  to  One  who  is  not  here,  but  ascended ;  and 
to  be  sought  therefore  as  one  deeply  sympathising  with  human  infirmity,  but  exer- 
cising that  sympathy  iKjt  in  weak  indulgence  but  in  transforming  strength.     "  Who 
is  gone  into  heaven,"  and  therefore  can  "  fill  all  things."   Such  is  St.  Paul's  argument 
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.   He  reminds  us  that  the  Saviour  Himself,  remaining 
below,  must  have  been  confined  by  earth's  conditions.    It  is  ascension  which  makes 
Him  the  Omnipresent.    "  Gone  into  heaven."   There  then  seek  Him.    There,  when 
you  have  found  Him,  with  Him  dwell.    {Dean  Vaughan.) 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

Vebs.  1-6.  Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh. — Ecee  Homo  : — The  Redeemer  of  the  world 
is  in  one  sense  infinitely  above  us ;  but  in  another  sense  He  is  actually  beside  us. 
His  sympathy  is  as  true  as  His  sovereignty.      I.    Try  to  understand  what  the 
BUFFERINGS  OF  Jesus  WERE.     "  He  Suffered  in  the  flesh."    No  one  can  read  the 
Gospels  without  seeing  indications  of  those  sufferings.     1.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  Jesus  was  exempted  from  many  of  the  physical  ills  from  which  we  suffer. 
We  can  only  think  of  Him  as  healthy,  not  only  because  of  His  birth,  but  because 
the  exacting  nature  of  His  self -forgetful  work  required  a  perfect  physique.     Besides 
this,  we  must  remember  that  many  of  our  physical  sufferings  we  bring  on  our- 
selves.    Idleness,  self-indulgence,   artificial  modes   of   life,  irregularities,  are   the 
causes  of  many  of  the  ills  which  flesh  is  heir  to  ;  but  the  life  of  Jesus  was  exquisite 
in  its  simplicity  and  unstained  by  a  single  vicious  propensity.     And  this  reminds 
us  further  that  He  could  not  have  suffered,  as  we  do,  from  a  sense  of  personal  sin, 
from  the  remorse  which  follows  after  our  utterance  of   an  unkind  word,  or  the 
indulgence  of  an  evil  propensity,  or  from  the  tumult  of  passion  which  rises  up 
within  a  sinful  heart.     Yet  He  was  a  sufferer.     "  He  was  a  Man  of  Sorrows,  and 
acquainted  with  grief."     "HimseK  took  our  infirmities,  and  bore  our  sicknesses." 
But  besides  these  His  whole  Ufe  was  a  martyrdom.     His  sensibility,  not  only  to 
physical  pain,  but  to  mental  and  moral  agony,  must  have  been  exquisite.     2.  Think, 
too,  of  His  utter  loneliness.     His  was  the  solitude  of  a  holy  soul  surrounded  by 
sinners ;  of  a  heavenly  spirit  in  contact  with  things  earthly  and  sensual ;  of  a  mind 
whose  higher  thoughts  not  a  single  being  on  earth  could  appreciate  ;  whose  truest 
objects  in  living  and  dying  as  He  did  none  could  comprehend.     3.  That  expression, 
"  in  the  flesh,"  reminds  us  of  His  uncongenial  surroundings.     He  lived  and  died 
among  a  despised  people,  and  was  regarded  as  an  outcast  even  by  some  of  them  ! 
Often  must  He  have  felt  as  the  Jews  did  when,  exiled  from  home  and  fatherland, 
they  hanged  their  harps  upon  the  willows,  and  wept  as  they  remembered  Zion, 
saying,  "  How  can  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land?"     II.  How  these 
SUFFERINGS  WERE  ENDURED  BY  HiM.     1.  It  is  evident  that  He  accepted  them  as 
God's  appointment  for  Him  here.     "  The  cup  which  My  Father  hath  given  Me 
shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  indicates  His  attitude  to  trouble  right  through.     If  a  day's 
ministry  brought  Him  no  result.  He  did  not  repine ;  if  His  own  nation  rejected 
Him,  He   meekly  accepted  the  result,  though  with  unutterable   sorrow  over  the 
issues  of  it  to  them  ;  if  the  Cross  was  to  be  faced.  He  went  forth  willingly  to 
Calvary,  there  to  die — the  just  for  the  unjust — to  bring  us  unto  God.     2.  Notice 
also  that  our  Lord  never  allowed  Himself  to  be  absorbed  in  His  own  sorrows.     He 
was  always  ready  to  enter  into  other  people's  joys  and  griefs,  whatever  His  own 
sorrows  might  be.     He  is  not  so  absorbed  in  the  joys  of  heaven  that  He  will  not 
listen  to  the  faltering  cry  of  the  lowliest  penitent.     I  have  known  some  sufferers 
who  have  been  armed  with  the  same  mind.     Their  unselfishness  has  been  sublime. 
Their  couch  of  pain  has  proved  the  centre  of  joy  and  peace  to  those  who  circle 
round  them.     III.  But  how  can  we  do  this?     {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)         Christ's 
sufferings  : — I.    Christ  suffered  in  human  nature.      His  sufferings  in  the  flesh 
■were — 1.  Great,  corporeal,  social,  mediatorial.     2.  Ignominious.    Poverty,  obloquy, 
persecution,  crncifixion.     II.    Christ  suffered  for  men.      III.    Christ  suffered 
WITH  A  spirit  which  MEN  SHOULD  CULTIVATE.      1.  Profoundly  religious.      2.  Self- 
denyingly  philanthropic.      IV.    The  possession  of  this  spirit   is   the  power  to 
DELIVER  US  FROM  MOR.tL  EVIL.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Sin  pierced  .-—Use  sin,  as 
Christ  was  used  when  He  was  made  sin  for  us  ;  lift  it  up,  and  make  it  naked  by 
confession  to  God.     And  then  pierce — 1.  The  hands  of  it,  in  respect  of  operation, 
that  it  may  work  no  more.     2.  The  feet  of  it,  in  respect  of  progression,  that  it  go 
no  further.     3.  The  heart,  in  respect  of  affection,  that  it  may  be  loved  no  longer. 
(J.  Trapp.)        Arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same  mind. — Conformity  with 
Christ: — I.    The  high  engagement  to  this  conformity.     "  He  suffered  for  us  in 
the  flesh."    We  are  the  more  obliged  to  make  His  suffering  our  example,  because  it 
was  to  us  more  than  an  example  ;  it  was  our  ransom.     This  makes  the  conformity 
reasonable  in  a  double  respect.     It  is  due  that  we  follow  Him,  who  led  us  as  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation  ;  that  we  follow  Him  in  suffering  and  in  doing,  seeing 
both  were  for  us.     What  can  be  too  bitter  to  endure,  or  too  sweet  to  forsake,  to 
follow  Him?     Were  this  duly  considered,  should  we  cleave  to  our  lusts  or  to  our 
ease  ?     Should  we  not  be  willing  to  go  through  fire  and  water,  yea,  through  death 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  329 

itself,  yea,  were  it  possible,  through  many  deaths,  to  follow  Him  ?  Consider,  as 
this  conformity  is  due,  so  it  is  made  easy  by  His  suffering  for  us.  Our  chains 
which  bound  us  over  to  eternal  death  being  knocked  off,  shall  we  not  walk,  shaU 
we  not  run,  in  His  ways  ?  U.  The  natuee  of  this  conformity,  to  show  the 
nearness  of  it,  is  expressed  in  the  vei-y  same  terms  as  in  the  pattern  ;  it  is  not  a 
remote  resemblance,  but  the  same  thing,  even  "  suffering  in  the  flesh."  But  that 
we  may  understand  rightly  what  suffering  is  here  meant,  it  is  plainly  this,  "  ceasing 
from  sin."  So  that  this  "  suffering  in  the  flesh  "  is  not  simply  the  enduring  of 
afflictions,  which  is  a  part  of  the  Christian's  conformity  to  His  Head,  but  it  imphes 
a  more  inward  and  spiritual  suffering.  It  is  the  suffering  and  dying  of  our 
corruption,  the  taking  away  of  the  life  of  sin  by  the  death  of  Christ :  the  death  of 
His  sinless  flesh  works  in  the  believer  the  death  of  sinful  flesh,  that  is,  the  corrup- 
tion of  His  nature,  which  is  so  usually  in  Scripture  called  "  '-sh."  "  Ceased  from 
sin."  He  is  at  rest  from  it,  a  godly  death,  as  they  who  die  m  the  Lord  rest  from 
their  labours.  Faith  so  looks  on  the  death  of  Christ,  that  it  takes  the  impression 
of  it,  sets  it  on  the  heart,  kills  it  unto  sin.  Christ  and  the  believer  do  not  only 
become  one  in  law,  so  that  His  death  stands  for  theirs,  but  one  in  nature,  so  that 
His  death  for  sin  causes  theirs  to  it  (Eom.  vi.  3).  HI.  The  actual  improvement 
OF  THIS  CONFORMITY.  "  Arm  yoursclvcs  with  the  same  mind,"  or  thoughts  of  this 
mortification.  Consider  and  apply  the  suffering  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,  to  the  end 
that  you  with  Him  suffering  in  the  flesh,  may  cease  from  sin.  Think  that  it  ought 
to  be  thus,  and  seek  that  it  may  be  thus  with  you.  "  Arm  yourselves."  There  is 
still  flghting,  and  sin  will  be  molesting  you  ;  though  wounded  to  death,  yet  will  it 
struggle  for  life,  and  seek  to  wound  its  enemy  ;  it  will  assault  the  graces  that  are 
in  you.  You  may  take  the  Lord's  promise  for  victory  in  the  end ;  that  shall  not 
fail ;  but  do  not  promise  yourself  ease  in  the  way,  for  that  will  not  hold.  If  at 
sometimes  you  be  undermost,  give  not  all  up  for  lost ;  he  hath  often  won  the  day 
who  hath  been  foiled  and  wounded  in  the  fight.  But  likewise  take  not  all  for  won, 
so  as  to  have  no  more  conflict,  when  sometimes  you  have  the  better  in  particular 
battles.  Now  the  way  to  be  armed  is  this,  "  the  same  mind."  How  would  my 
Lord  Christ  carry  Himself  in  this  case  ?  And  what  was  His  business  in  all  places 
and  companies  ?  Was  it  not  to  do  the  will  and  advance  the  glory  of  His  Father  ? 
Thus  ought  it  to  be  with  the  Christian,  framing  aU  his  ways,  and  words,  and  very 
thoughts,  upon  that  model,  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  studying  in  all  things  to  walk 
even  as  He  walked  ;  studying  it  much,  as  the  reason  and  rule  of  mortification,  and 
drawing  from  it,  as  the  real  cause  and  spring  of  mortification.  (Ab}).  Leighton.} 
Cardinal  truths  : — I.  The  cardinal  truth  of  Christianity — "  Christ  hath  suffered 
for  us."  II.  The  Christian's  cardinal  duty — "  Christ  having  suffered  for  us,. 
arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind."  1.  Arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind  as- 
to  the  method  of  conduct.  2.  Ann  yourselves  with  the  same  mind  as  to  the  purpose 
in  view.  HI.  The  Christian's  daily  course  of  life — that  we  should  no  longer 
live,  &c.     {J.  J.   S.  Bird.)         Christ   the  grand   necessity  of  man : — I.    Christ's 

"  mind  "  is  the  WE.VPON  WITH  WHICH  MAN  IS  TO  FIGHT  HIS  WAY  ON  TO  MORAL  PER- 
FECTION. His  moral  perfection  is  here  taught.  But  to  reach  this  what  a  battle 
man  has  to  fight !  By  the  "  mind  of  Christ "  we  are  to  understand,  of  course,  not 
His  mere  intellect,  great  as  it  was,  nor  His  conscience,  sublimely  pure  though  it. 
was  ;  but  the  moral  spirit  that  inspired  and  directed  all  His  intellectual  and  moral 
powers.  By  His  "  mind  "  we  mean,  in  one  word.  His  moral  character.  Now  this 
is  the  weapon  by  which  alone  man  can  win  victories  over  evil,  and  obtain  the 
crown  of  life,  namely,  conformity  to  the  "  will  of  God."  Doctrines  wiU  not  do  it, 
however  Scriptural ;  rehgious  rites  wiU  not  do  it,  however  studiously  observed. 
Who  is  the  man  in  our  world  the  most  successful  in  putting  down  wrong  ?  Not 
the  legislator,  however  just  the  laws  he  enacts ;  not  the  moralist,  however  cogent 
his  arguments  and  powerful  his  rhetoric  ;  but  the  man  who  has  the  "  mind  of 
Christ "  as  his  armour.  II.  Christ's  "  sufferings  "  are  the  argument  for  the- 
EMPLOYMENT  OF  THIS  WEAPON.  First,  the  Sufferings  of  Christ  were  "  in  the  flesh." 
He  was  in  the  flesh,  but  not  flesh.  Secondly,  Christ  suffered  "in  the  flesh"  in 
order  to  establish  human  holiness.  "  That  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of 
his  time  in  the  flesh  to  the  lust  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God."  (D.  Thomas,  D  D.) 
The  rest  of  Ms  time  in  the  flesh. — "  The  rest  of  his  time  in  the  flesh  "  : — Who  can 
tell  how  long  that  may  be  for  any  one  of  us  ?  The  sands  run  swiftly  through  life's 
hour-glass.  The  shadow  hastens  to  go  down  upon  the  dial.  The  waves  eat  away 
BO  quickly  the  dwindling  shoal  of  land  which  crumbles  beneath  us.  The  Christian 
finds  nothing  in  such  thoughts  to  make  him  sad.     Every  milestone  marks  the 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

growing  nearness  of  his  home.  The  waves  cannot  be  crossed  too  swiftly  by  the 
eager  traveller.  Before  us  lie  the  ages  of  eternity,  filled  with  a  blessedness  of 
personal  enjoyment  and  rapturous  ministry  which  defy  tongue  to  tell  or  mind  to 
picture.  But  the  blessed  future  must  not  divert  our  thoughts  from  the  duties  to  be 
discharged  during  the  rest  of  the  time  which  we  are  to  spend  in  the  flesh.  We  must 
not  be  dreamers,  but  warriors.  To  arms !  Arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind  ; 
and  when  we  ask,  "  What  mind  ?  "  we  are  told  to  arm  ourselves  with  the  mind 
that  took  Jesus  to  His  death.  In  a  venerable  old  church  at  Innsbruck,  famous  for 
containing  the  tomb  of  the  great  Emperor  Maximilian,  there  is  a  magnificent  bronze 
statue  of  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  the  illustrious  crusader.  His  head  is  covered  with  a 
helmet,  and  on  the  helmet  rests  a  crown  of  thorns.  Of  course,  there  was  a  meaning 
in  the  mind  of  the  artist  other  than  that  with  which  we  now  invest  the  strange 
conjunction.  He  doubtless  designed  to  represent  the  sacred  cause  for  which  that 
helmet  was  donned.  But  we  may  discover  an  apt  symbol  of  the  teaching  of  our 
apostle,  who  unites  in  these  verses  the  armour  of  the  Christian  soldier,  and  the 
recollection  of  Christ's  suffering  in  the  flesh.  This  witness  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  first  takes  us  to  the  Cross ;  and  after  gazing  reverently  on  that  spectacle  of 
love,  we  are  brought  to  a  point  where  two  ways  diverge.  And  the  only  way  of 
discovering  and  maintaining  the  right  path  is  to  imbibe  the  spirit  of  that  wondrous 
death  ;  nay,  to  bind  it  around  us  as  a  talisman  of  victory.  "  In  hoc  signo  vinces." 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  right  use  of  the  residue  of  our  time  : — I.  Negatively. 
"  Not  to  the  lusts  of  men  !  "  This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  neglect  our  bodily 
interests.  What  are  the  lusts  ?  Animal  instincts  grown  to  a  dominant  force.  II. 
Positively.  "  To  the  will  of  God."  This  implies — 1.  That  God  has  a  will.  2. 
That  God  has  a  will  concerning  men.  3.  That  God's  will  is  revealed.  What  is 
the  will  of  God  concerning  men  ?  First,  it  is  His  will  that  we  should  believe  in 
Christ  (John  vi.  29  ;  1  John  iii.  23).  Secondly,  it  is  His  will  that  we  shall  be 
purified  from  sin.  "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification  "  (1  Thess. 
iv.  3).  Thirdly,  it  is  His  will  that  we  should  cultivate  a  practical  gratitude  for  all 
the  blessings  of  life  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  Fourthly,  it  is  His  will  that  every  man  shall 
be  saved  (1  Tim.  ii.  4).     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  timein  the  flesh  : — I.  Ouktime  in 

THE  flesh  is  chequered.  II.  OUR  TIME  IN  THE  FLESH  IS  SHORT.  III.  OuR  TIME  HERE 
IS  UNCERTAIN.     IV.  OuR  TIME  HERE  IS  IMPORTANT.     (HomiUst.)  TO  the  lUStS  Of  meH. 

- — Men's  lusts  opposed  to  God's  will : — 1.  To  live  after  the  lusts  of  men  and  to  the 
"Will  of  God  are  opposite  each  to  other  as  light  and  darkness.  2.  We  cannot  at 
one  and  the  same  time  both  walk  after  our  lusts  and  live  to  God's  will.  One  lust 
loved,  sufficient  to  condemn.  3.  In  the  course  of  sanctification,  we  must  begin  at 
renouncing  our  own  will,  and  the  lusts  of  men.  None  sow  a  plant  till  weeds  be 
pulled  up ;  none  put  on  new  apparel  till  they  have  put  off  their  rags.  4.  It  is  not 
sufficient  that  we  renounce  our  lusts  and  evil,  except  we  yield  obedience  to  the  will 
of  God.  5.  It  is  not  one  action  or  two  whereby  a  man  is  discovered  what  he  is, 
but  his  constant  course  of  walking  or  living.  (John  Rogers.)  The  flesh  rightly 
used : — The  flesh  itself,  under  the  calm  subduing  influence  of  your  purer  spirit,  will 
become  a  dignified  servant  in  waiting  on  its  superior.  Good  gardeners  know  a 
better  way  of  conquering  the  wild  thorn  than  by  uprooting  and  destroying  it.  They 
set  it  in  their  garden.  They  graft  it  on  some  queenly  rose.  Then  the  wild  thorn 
expends  its  energy  not  upon  itself,  but  upon  that  which  is  above  itself  ;  and  as  a 
reward  is  crowned  with  a  glory  which  itself  could  not  possibly  produce.  (G. 
Calthrop.)  To  the  will  of  God. — Will  of  God  : — 1.  It  is  a  good  wiU.  2.  A  holy 
will.  3.  A  just  will.  4.  An  impartial  will.  5.  A  practicable  will.  6.  A  supreme 
will.  7.  An  obligatory  will.  {John  Bate.)  Living  to  God's  will : — I.  This  is 
THE  LESSON  OF  man's  PAST  EVIL  LIFE.  1.  Saducss.  (1)  Euough  of  siu,  because  of 
its — (2)  Degradation  to  self.  (3)  Injuriousness  to  others.  (4)  Rebellion  against 
God.  2.  Hope.  (1)  Forgiveness  for  time  past.  (2)  Deliverance  from  time  past. 
II.  Notwithstanding  bad  men's  wonder  at  good  men's  conduct,  what  Peter  said 
two  thousand  years  ago  is  true  to-day.  The  thoroughly  corrupt  man  finds  it 
impossible  to  understand  the  Christly  man.  1.  He  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and 
so,  perhaps,  ignores  him  altogether.  2.  Or  he  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and  is 
aggravated  by  it.  3.  Or  he  thinks  his  conduct  strange,  and  it  leads  him  to  inquire. 
TMs  is  the  good  effect.  III.  Both  Christ's  judgment  and  Christ's  gospel  are 
FOR  ALL.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  God's  uill : — The  perfection  of  a  man's  nature  is 
when  his  will  fits  on  to  God's  like  one  of  Euclid's  triangles  super-imposed  upon 
another,  and  line  for  line  coincides.  When  his  will  allows  a  free  passage  to  the 
will  of  God,  without  resistance,  as  light  travels  through  transparent  glass ;  when 


CHAP,  rv.]  I.  PETER.  331 

his  will  responds  to  the  touch  of  God's  finger  upon  the  keys,  like  the  telegraphic 
needle  to  the  operator's  hand  ;  then  man  has  attained  all  that  God  and  religion  can 
do  for  him,  all  that  his  nature  is  capable  of.  The  will  of  God  : — What  a  glorious 
contrast  to  the  will  of  the  flesh  is  "  the  will  of  God  "  !  This  was  the  food  of  Jesus. 
To  do  this  He  came  to  earth.  It  was  the  fire-cloud  that  lit  His  pathway,  the  yoke 
in  carrying  which  He  found  rest,  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  which  dimmed  or  shone 
with  heavenly  guidance.  There  is  no  course  more  safe  or  blessed  than  to  live  in 
the  will  of  God.  God's  will  is  good  will.  Where  the  will  of  God  lies  across  the 
wilderness  pathway,  there  flowers  bloom,  and  waters  gush  from  rocks  of  flint.  Some- 
times the  flesh  rebels  against  it,  because  it  means  crucifixion  and  self-denial,  but 
under  the  rugged  shell  the  sweetest  kernel  nestles,  and  none  know  the  ecstasy 
of  living  save  those  who  refuse  the  broad,  easy  road  of  the  lusts  of  men,  to  climb 
the  steep,  upward  path  of  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart.    (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  3-5.  The  time  past  of  our  life  may  suffice  us. — The  consideration  of  misspent 
time  an  incentive  to  repentance. — 1.  The  time  spent  in  sin,  we  know  how  much  it 
is,  but  what  is  behind  we  know  not.  The  devil  is  sure  of  his  part,  but  what  God 
shall  have,  whether  half  or  a  quarter,  so  much  is  uncertain.  If  we  knew  we  should 
live  twenty  years  more  to  serve  God  as  we  have  done  twenty  years  in  sin,  God 
should  have  but  the  half,  but  we  know  not  whether  we  shall  live  twenty  days. 
Should  we  then  defer  ?  2.  Time  is  very  precious,  above  gold  and  silver,  and  hereof 
we  have  squandered  a  great  part.  3.  There  is  no  time  to  be  spent  in  sin,  but  we 
are  to  serve  God  in  holiness  and  righteousness  aU  the  days  of  our  life.  There- 
fore, having  robbed  Him  of  some  of  His  due,  is  it  not  well  He  wiU  take  this  that 
remains  ?  4.  Whatsoever  time  is  spent  tiU  we  return  to  God  is  all  going  out  of 
the  way ;  and  if  a  man  hath  gone  out  of  the  way  but  till  eight  or  nine  o'clock, 
assuredly  that  is  more  than  enough.  5.  Whatsoever  time  is  spent  that  way  is  but 
doing  that  that  must  be  undone  again  and  repented  of.  Is  not  a  little  of  this  too 
much?  Who  will  willingly  so  do  his  work  that  it  must  be  ravelled  out  again? 
6.  All  that  is  done  this  way  is  for  the  devil,  our  sworn  enemy,  for  whom  even  the 
least  is  too  much ;  for  the  flesh,  to  which  we  owe  nothing ;  and  for  the  world,  which 
is  our  deadly  enemy.  7.  It  is  all  done  against  God,  to  whom  we  owe  all ;  and  is  it 
not  then  sufficient  we  have  wronged  Him  so  far  ?  8.  And  all  is  against  our  own 
souls  ;  and  have  we  not  wounded  them  enough  already?  (John  Rogers.)  Departed 
years  : — What  is  time  ?  Without  regard  to  philosophic  niceties,  I  may  say  that 
it  is  limited  duration,  vouchsafed  to  man  for  moral  purposes,  through  the  media- 
tion of  Christ.  I.  As  a  portion  of  probationary  existence.  "  Time  past  of  our 
life."  Take  three  views  of  the  years  that  have  departed.  1.  Look  at  what  they 
have  given  us.  2.  Look  at  what  they  have  taken  away  from  us.  The  warm 
impulses  and  tender  sensibilities  of  childhood  and  youth.  Precious  gifts  are  these  ! 
What  friends  are  gone  !  3.  Look  at  what  they  have  left  us.  They  have  left  us  life, 
reason,  memory,  religious  privileges,  augmented  responsibility,  wider  memories,  and 
greater  power  for  good  and  evil.  Many  precious  germs  of  blessedness.  II.  As  a  course 
OF  WRONG  MORAL  CONDUCT.  The  apostle  intimates  that  those  to  whom  he  wrote  had, 
during  the  past  years,  "  wrought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles."  During  the  time  past 
of  their  lives  they  had  not  been  passive  but  active.  What  was  this  will  of  the 
Gentiles  ?  The  will  of  corrupt  humanity.  Nothing  more,  nothing  less.  Every 
wheel  in  its  vast  and  complicated  machinery  is  moved  and  ruled  by  this.  It  is  true 
that  this  will  works  in  different  men  with  diiierent  instruments  and  under  different 
phases  of  character.  Its  language  in  some  is  vulgar,  in  others  classic ;  in  some 
obscene,  in  others  refined.  1.  That  this  will  is  generally  the  ruling  power  in  the 
first  stages  of  man's  history.  2.  That  there  is  a  danger  even  of  good  men  yielding 
to  its  influence.  III.  As  an  argument  for  immediate  improvement.  "  For  the  time 
past  of  our  life  may  suffice,"  &c.  The  urgency  of  this  will  appear  from  two  con- 
siderations. 1.  The  will  of  God  ought  to  have  swayed  with  an  absolute  power  from 
the  commencement  of  our  responsible  life.  2.  All  the  time  that  has  been  spent  in 
neglect  of  this  has  been  spent  in  contracting  guilt  and  increasing  our  exposure  to  ruin. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  voice  of  the  past : — Life !     What  mystery  is  wrapped  up 

in  life  !  How  gi-eat  the  power  needed  to  originate  it !  What  transcendent  worth  be- 
longs to  human  life  !  to — I.  "  Our  life."  "  Our  life  "  is  redeemed  life.  It  was  great 
to  speak  a  world  from  nought ;  greater  to  create  moral  life  and  fashion  it  after  the 
Divine  original ;  greatest  to  redeem.  II.  "  The  past  of  life."  How  little  we  know 
of  the  past — taking  the  word  in  its  comprehensive  relationship  to  the  world  !  As 
a  question  of  history  we  know  something  of  the  world's  civilisation,  science,  art, 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

human  laws,  &c.  But  what  do  we  know  of  the  individual  experience  of  mankind — 
its  joys  and  sorrows?  But  there  is  a  past  for  which  God  holds  us  responsible — an 
individual  past.  III.  "  The  time  past  of  our  life."  Nothing  that  I  have  is  my  own. 
I  belong  to  God,  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  I  am,  therefore,  accountable  to  Him  for 
my  time.  Life  is  God's  loan  to  man,  and  time  man's  "  life-rent  of  the  world."  In 
the  great  day  we  are  to  stand  before  God  to  give  an  account  of  our  stewardship. 
The  "life-rent"  which  the  great  Proprietor  claims  is  service.  He  has  put  us  into 
His  beautiful  world  to  make  it  more  beautiful  by  adding  moral  to  material  beauty. 
If  we  fail  to  render  this  service  we  shall  lose  our  life,  in  a  sense  which  human 
language  is  not  adequate  to  express.  "  And  now  what  have  we  to  say  with  respect 
to  this  strange,  solemn  thing — Time? — that  men  do  with  it  through  life  just  what 
the  apostles  did  for  one  precious  irreparable  hour  of  it  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane 
— they  go  to  sleep  !  What  opportunities  have  we  lost !  What  privileges  forfeited  ! 
What  work  for  God  neglected  !  The  secret  of  all  the  failures  which  have  been 
enumerated  is  expressed  by  the  apostle  in  one  word,  self-will — "the  will  of  the 
Gentiles."  Man  doing  his  own  will  is  the  history  of  the  world's  sin  and  woe. 
Adoption  into  the  family  of  God  does  not  exempt  us  from  its  insidious  workings. 
"  The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  asks  us  to  let  the  past  "  suffice 
to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles,"  to  renew  our  early  vows,  our  first  love, 
to  be  henceforth  inspired  with  the  holy  ambition  to  be  "  conformed  to  the  image 
of  His  Son."  To  attain  unto  this  we  must  yield  our  wills  to  God.  What  are  we 
living  for? — for  God  or  for  self?  {A  London  Suburban  Minister.)  The  old  year 
and  the  new  : — Look  at  the  qualities  that  are  here  forbidden.  Lust,  lasciviousness, 
drunkenness,  carousings  —  all  these  are  especially  mentioned;  and  the  apostle 
declares  that  the  time  past  suffices.  You  have  had  experience  enough  in  regard 
to  those  things ;  it  is  time  to  leave  them.  There  are  multitudes  of  men  that  are 
sacking  their  very  constitution ;  for  whatever  may  be  the  opinions  of  men  as  to  the 
morality  of  lascivious  conduct,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  folly  of  it.  And 
what  shall  I  say  of  the  concurrent  danger  of  drunkenness,  or  excessive  indulgence 
of  the  appetite  ?  Surely  I  need  not  point  out  how  base  the  life  of  a  man  is  whose 
whole  being  circles  around  about  that  carnal,  animal  appetite ;  upon  whom  the 
habit  is  growing,  and,  like  a  maelstrom,  swings  into  its  centre,  destroying  every- 
thing that  is  pure  and  beautiful  that  comes  near  it.  It  sacks  and  ransacks  the 
whole  nobility  of  a  man.  The  time  past  is  sufficient  for  such  things.  But  then 
there  are  a  great  many  men  that  do  not  consider  themselves  either  lascivious  or 
drunkards.  Nevertheless,  carousings  are  familiar  to  them.  What  an  ignoble  way 
of  living  to  make  the  whole  of  life  consist,  not  in  building  up,  but  in  the  commerce 
of  the  lower  feelings,  and  the  prostitution  of  the  sanctities  of  friendship  to  make 
the  friendship  of  the  cup,  in  all  that  wild  excitement  which  breeds  no  single  new 
idea,  cleanses  no  single  passion,  throws  light  upon  no  single  element  of  beauty, 
but  is  pure  buoyancy  of  the  flesh  and  the  enjoyment  of  animal  life  !  Higher  than 
these,  but  still  under  the  ban,  are  all  forms  of  life  where  feeling  and  endeavour  are 
concentrated  upon  frivolous  social  enjoyments,  with  their  very  selfishness  and 
vanity  and  pride.  I  would  not  restrict  the  enjoyment  of  the  young,  except  it 
trenched  upon  higher  and  nobler  obligations.  I  love  elasticity  of  spirit,  overflow 
of  pleasantry.  AU  these  things  I  believe  belong  to  life ;  and  just  as  much  under 
the  gospel  as  outside  of  it — yea,  more.  Now  in  regard  to  these  passions,  and  the 
lower  forms  of  intense  self-indulgence  particularly,  the  apostle  is  speaking  here,  and 
says,  "  The  time  past  ought  to  suffice."  All  these  wastes  and  degradations  ought 
to  cease  absolutely.  They  shut  out  a  man's  reason.  They  shut  out  his  best  nature. 
"They  stand  in  the  way  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  final  ends  of  life.  There  are 
times  when  all  these  indulgences  may  be  left.  The  time  past  gives  men  sufficient 
experience  and  knowledge,  both  of  their  uselessness  and  of  their  wastefulness,  and 
also  of  their  peril;  and  that  is  the  time  when  men  should  stop  and  say,  "Well, 
I  have  had  enough  of  that,  now  and  for  ever."  Time  enough  to  bring  the  higher 
qualities  of  your  mind  to  sit  in  judgment  over  the  lower.  The  conscience  is  Chief 
Justice.  Call  up  those  criminal  appetites.  Let  them  hear  the  judge  decide,  and 
follow  the  decision.  The  time  past  is  sufficient  for  knowledge  and  for  judgment. 
That  which  is  true  of  these  lower  passions  and  appetites  is  just  as  true  of  the  higher 
and  inanimate  one  of  a  frivolous,  self-indulgent,  wasteful  life  that  proposes  nothing, 
but  dances  on  from  hour  to  hour,  with  no  more  purpose  than  the  butterflies  or  the 
insects  of  a  summer  day  have.  The  time  past  is  sufficient.  Now,  allow  me  to  ask 
you  :  Are  there  not  in  your  life  some  things  palpitating,  fresh  and  warm  in  your 
bosom,  that  you  know  to  be  wrong  in  your  career?    Is  it  not  time  for  a  change? 


CHAP,  r?.]  I.  PETER.  333 

And  if  your  faults  are  superficial,  if  they  are  simply  faults  of  temper,  or  of  balance 
in  the  development  of  your  life  outwardly,  is  there  nothing  in  your  home  life, 
is  there  nothing  in  your  friendship  life,  is  there  nothing  in  your  business  life,  judged 
by  the  canons  of  morality,  and  still  more  judged  by  the  higher  forms  of  supreme 
duty,  that  needs  to  be  changed  ?  Are  you  the  chief  occupant  of  your  own  self  ?  or 
are  there  vermin  that  dwell  in  the  cracks  and  crevices  and  partitions  of  the  soul- 
house  ?  And  if  there  is  something  more  than  faults,  if  there  is  something  that  lies 
deeper,  ought  you  not,  above  all,  for  this  to  make  a  solemn  pause  ?  Be  manly,  and 
take  a  nobler  view  of  what  a  man  is  born  for,  and  of  what  his  duty  is  to  himself, 
to  his  fellow  men,  to  society,  to  God,  and  to  eternity ;  and  form  a  judgment  of  your- 
self for  the  old  year;  and  on  that  deliberate  personal  investigation  of  facts  and 
dispositions  in  your  own  case  put  the  question  to  yourself,  "  Have  not  I  carried  this 
thing  far  enough  ?  "  If  you  will  do  that,  you  will  have  taken  one  step  ;  and  will  you 
follow  that  up  by  proposing  to  yourself  a  deliberate  decision?  Now,  in  all  these 
changes  that  are  going  on  in  the  human  soul  it  is  too  often  the  case  that  a  man 
says,  "  I  mean  to  try  it ;  but  I  am  not  going  to  expose  myself  to  ridicule,  because 
I  may  not  be  able  to  carry  this  thing  out ;  and  if  I  don't,  well,  nobody  will  know 
it,  and  I  will  be  no  worse  off  than  I  was  before."  That  is  to  say,  you  leave  a  door 
of  retreat  open  for  yourself.  I  would  not  give  the  turn  of  my  hand  for  a  man's 
purpose  who  says  he  is  going  to  change,  but  leaves  all  the  old  influences  at  work, 
and  all  the  means  of  escape  from  his  resolution  at  command.  It  is  an  illusion,  and 
it  is  the  repetition  of  these  things  that  discourages  men  finally,  and  makes  them 
believe  they  cannot  reform  and  cannot  do  what  they  ought  to  do.  If  you  are  going 
to  make  a  decision,  do  it  on  business  principles.  As  aU  resolutions  are  so  fugitive, 
so  unstable,  and  as  experience  has  shown  that  they  are  so  unless  when  a  man  wants 
to  correct  a  habit,  commit  yourself.  What  is  the  effect  of  committing  yourself  ? 
Your  pride  and  your  vanity  now  work  toward  you  and  for  you,  whereas  otherwise 
they  would  work  against  you.  It  is  going  with  the  current,  instead  of  against  it ; 
with  the  wind,  instead  of  against  the  wind.  Therefore,  hedge  yourself ;  trust  in 
somebody.  Now  is  the  time  for  thought ;  now  is  the  time  for  purpose ;  now  is  the 
time  for  declaring  your  purpose  ;  now  is  the  time  to  begin.  Whatever  changes  are 
necessary,  will  you  make  them  now?     {H.  W.  Beecher.)  A  sinner  changed  by 

grace : — I.  The  w.\lk  of  a  natural  man  desceibed.  He  works  "  the  will  of  the 
Gentiles,"  and  lives  in  sin.  U.  The  great  change  that  the  grace  of  God 
MAKES  IN  a  natural  MAN.  The  change  we  mean  is  far  more  than  the  mere  refor- 
mation of  a  sinner's  life ;  it  is  an  inward,  supernatural  change  wrought  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  by  means  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  (Eom.  i.  16).  IH.  The 
reasonableness  of  this  change.  1.  Sin  is  a  dreadful  waste  of  precious  time.  2.  Sin 
is  a  useless  thing.  3.  Sin  is  extremely  hurtful  and  dangerous  to  ourselves  and 
others.  4.  Sin  is  highly  dishonourable  to  the  blessed  God.  5.  A  life  of  sin  is 
directly  contrary  to  our  Christian  profession.  IV.  The  usage  which  a  changed 
person  may  expect  to  meet  with  from  a  wicked  world.  Now,  here  observe  that 
where  such  a  change  as  this  takes  place  it  is  visible ;  for  if  the  world  did  not  see  it, 
they  could  not  hate  it.  The  change  cannot  be  hid.  Carnal  companions  will  be 
deserted;  places  of  vain  amusement  forsaken.  This  will  excite  hatred.  "The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,"  and  everything  godly  and  Godlike  (Eom. 
viii.  7).     {G.  Burder.)  Christian   consistency  : — I.  The  world  silently  con- 

demned BY  the  Church.  This  is  often  done  not  so  much  positively  as  negatively. 
It  is  very  peculiar,  for  they  condemn  them  without  saying  a  word,  simply  by  "  not 
running  into  the  same  excess  of  riot " ;  and  this,  it  seems,  is  exceedingly  well 
understood  by  the  worldly  party.  Noah  condemned  the  world  by  what  he  did,  as 
well  as  by  what  he  said ;  every  stroke  of  his  hammer  was  a  sermon.  The  marked 
avoidance  of  the  prevaiUng  sins  and  follies  of  the  world  is  often  felt  to  be  a  power- 
ful condemnation  of  them.  But  why  should  Christians  thus  refuse  to  mingle 
themselves  up  with  the  evil  of  the  world?  1.  Love  to  Christ  requires  it.  "Foras- 
much, then,  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves,  therefore, 
with  the  same  mind."  2.  The  painful  remembrance  of  the  past  prompts  it.  "  The 
time  past  may  suffice  to  have  wi-ought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles."  It  is  always  a  sad 
thought  to  the  Christian  to  look  back  upon  his  past  devotedness  to  the  sins  of  the 
world.  3.  Christian  consistency  requires  it.  "  Let  every  one  depart  from  iniquity." 
A  wicked  life  in  a  Christian  is  an  indignity  committed  upon  his  Master  in  the  dis- 
guise of  a  friend,  and  an  outrage  against  the  gospel.  It  seems  to  declare  either  that 
tnis  religion  tolerates  immorality,  or  that  it  has  not  sufficient  authority  to  enforce 
its  own  laws.    4.  Your  own  highest  interests  demand  it.    II.  The  church  censured 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha.p.  iv. 

BY  THE  WORLD.  1.  In  their  thoughts.  "  They  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  into 
this  excess  of  riot " ;  but  pardon  me  if  I  say  they  would  think  it  stranger  if  you 
did.  They  may  disUke  you  now,  but  they  would  certainly  despise  you  then. 
"  They  think  it  strange."  Why?  Because  they  know  nothing  of  the  high  standard 
of  excellence  which  Christians  possess ;  nor  of  the  elevated  principles  by  which 
they  are  actuated ;  nor  of  the  superior  sources  of  pleasure  which  are  open  to 
them.  The  Christian  and  the  worldly  man  have  both  reason  to  wonder  at  each 
other.  The  worldling  wonders  that  the  Christian  loves  Christ  so  much :  the 
Christian  wonders  that  the  worldling  loves  Him  so  little.  2.  In  their  speeches. 
They  speak  evil  of  you,  and  contemptuously,  as  precise,  formal,  unsocial,  repulsive. 
The  Jews  spoke  evil  of  the  prophets ;  Ahab  spoke  evil  of  Micaiah :  "I  hate  him, 
for  he  always  prophesies  evil  of  me."  The  disciples  were  "a  sect  everywhere  spoken 
against."  3.  In  their  writings.  Pliny  wrote  to  the  Eoman  emperor  to  complain 
of  the  Christian  converts,  as  addicted  to  a  morose  and  severe  superstition.  Infidel 
and  irreligious  men  have  indited  many  a  sarcasm  against  the  Christian  cause. 
4.  By  their  conduct.  That  is,  towards  Christians,  whom  they  persecute  in  various 
ways.  III.  The  judgment  of  God  concerning  both.  "  Who  shall  judge  both 
quick  and  dead."  1.  The  certainty  of  the  judgment.  "  They  shall  give  an 
account."  2.  The  speediness  of  the  judgment.  "  He  is  ready  to  judge."  3.  The 
universality  of  the  judgment.  "  The  quick  and  dead."  4.  The  consequences  of 
the  judgment.  The  awards  of  eternity  are  final,  and  they  are  extreme.  (The 
Evangelist.)  Contemning  the  good  : — God's  law  is  a  guide  which  conducts  surely 
to  the  goal.  His  precepts  are  nought  but  communications  of  free  favour.  But 
what  does  the  blinded  world  see  in  these  precepts,  testimonies,  and  statutes  ?  First, 
we  are  told,  it  surprises,  seems  unaccountable  to  them,  that  believers  run  not  in 
their  ways.  They  put  on  an  air  of  astonishment  when  you  decline  doing  so. 
"Why  then,"  they  ask,  "do  you  refuse?  Thousands  upon  thousands  are  on  this 
side,  and  among  them  so  many  men  of  note,  so  many  prominent  members  both  in 
Church  and  State  !  "  But  we  are  told  they  blaspheme  all  who  are  not  moved  from 
their  stedfastness.  Their  blasphemy  consists,  first,  in  their  accusing  God's  true 
witnesses  of  blasphemy.  They  stand  up  and  say,  "  This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak 
blasphemous  words  against  this  holy  place  and  the  law  " ;  or,  this  is  the  man  "  that 
teacheth  all  men  everywhere  against  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  this  place " 
(Acts  vi.  13  ;  xxi.  28).  They  abide  by  the  old  slander,  "  We  have  found  this  man 
a  pestilent  fellow,  and  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  world, 
and  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes  "  (Acts  xxiv.  5).  To  the  righteous 
acts  of  the  pious  man  unworthy  motives  are  attributed,  and  he  is  made  a  mark  for 
the  arrows  of  evil  tongues,  solely  because  he  seeks  the  good  of  Israel  all  his  life 
long.  If  he  rest  in  the  promises  of  God,  even  these  are  made  the  subject  of 
mockery !  But  such  blasphemy  and  pretended  surprise  is  very  painful  to  the 
righteous,  and  a  real  snare  to  their  feet,  out  of  which  they  do  indeed  need  to  be 
helped.  How  often  are  the  weak,  and  even  the  apparently  strong  in  faith,  induced 
for  a  time  to  run  with  those  who  make  either  a  mock  or  a  sport  of  sin  !  Yes,  verily, 
nothing  short  of  almighty  grace  will  suffice  to  enable  a  man  calmly  to  take  on 
himself  the  dishonour  with  which  his  Lord  was  dishonoured,  and  to  bear  with 
a  chivalrous  courage  the  contempt  and  shame  which,  for  Christ's  name's  sake, 
the  world  heaps  upon  him  !  [H.  F.  Kohlbriigge,  D.D.)  The  pleasures  of  a  holy  life 
inexplicable  to  the  ungodly: — The  Eoman  soldiers,  at  the  sacking  of  Jerusalem, 
entered  the  temple,  and  went  into  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum ;  but  seeing  no  images 
there,  as  they  used  to  have  in  their  own  idolatrous  temple,  gave  out  in  a  jeer  that 
the  Jews  worshipped  the  clouds.  And  thus  because  the  pleasures  of  righteousness 
and  holiness  are  not  so  gross  as  to  come  under  the  cognisance  of  the  world's  carnal 
senses  (as  their  brutish  ones  do),  therefore  they  laugh  at  the  saints,  as  if  their  joy 
were  but  the  child  of  fancy,  and  they  do  but  embrace  a  cloud  instead  of  Juno 
herself,  a  fantastic  pleasure  for  the  true ;  but  let  such  know  that  they  carry  in  their 
bosom  what  will  help  them  to  think  the  pleasures  of  a  holy  life  more  real,  and  that 
the  power  of  holiness  is  so  far  from  depriving  a  man  of  the  joy  and  pleasure  of  his 
life,  that  there  are  incomparable  delights  and  pleasures  peculiar  to  the  holy  life, 
which  the  gracious  soul  finds  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.  (J.  Spencer.)  E.ixwss 
of  riot : — A  strong  and  expressive  metaphor,  especially  in  countries  where,  after 
violent  rain,  the  gutters  are  suddenly  swollen  and  pour  their  contents  together  with 
violence  into  a  common  sewer.  Such  is  the  apostolic  figure  of  vicious  companies 
rushing  together  in  filthy  confusion  for  reckless  indulgence  and  effusion  in  sin. 
(C.  M'ordsworth.)       Amusements  to  virtue  are  like  breezes  of  air  to  the  flame  :  gentle 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  335 

ones  will  fan  it,  but  strong  ones  will  put  it  out.  (Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Pleasure 
must  first  have  the  warrant  that  it  is  without  sin ;  and  then  the  measure,  that 
it  is  without  excess.     (T.  Adams.) 

Vers.  7-11.  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand. — The  end  of  all  things  : — I.  The 
SOLEMN  TRUTH  HERE  ANNOUNCED.  1.  The  end  of  jour  earthly  engagements  is  at 
hand,  2.  The  end  of  your  worldly  enjoyments  is  at  hand.  3.  The  end  of  trial 
and  sorrow  to  the  godly  is  at  hand.  4.  The  end  of  our  privileges  and  opportunities 
is  at  hand.  5.  The  end  of  our  probation  is  at  hand.  II.  The  important  con- 
siderations FOUNDED  on  THIS  TRUTH.  1.  Be  sober.  2.  Be  watchful.  3.  Be  prayer- 
ful. {Pulpit  Studies.)  The  end  of  all  things  at  hand: — "The  end  of  all  things 
is  at  hand."  1.  This  is  literally  true  of  all  those  object?  which  we  see  or  which  are 
obvious  to  any  of  our  senses.  They  are  temporal ;  they  have  had  a  beginning, 
they  shall  have  an  end.  The  material  universe,  in  all  its  beauty,  forms  but  a  single 
link  in  the  plans  of  that  adorable  Being  who  is  without  beginning  of  days  or  end 
of  time  ;  and  its  whole  duration  is  but  a  single  step  in  the  march  of  that  govern- 
ment which  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  2.  The  end  of  all  things  earthly 
is  at  hand,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  with  them,  or  take  an  interest  in  them, 
because  we  shall  soon  leave  them  aU  behind.  To  each  of  us  the  time  is  short.  Our 
days  are  but  an  hand's  breadth.  Shall  we  devote  ourselves  to  pursuits  we  must  so 
soon  abandon  ?  ShaU  we  heap  up  treasures  in  this  world  as  if  it  were  our  eternal 
home,  when  we  know  not  at  what  moment  we  shall  be  summoned  to  bid  a  last  adieu 
to  all  things  earthly?  3.  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,  because  all  the  objects 
of  time  and  sense  are  frail  and  fluctuating  ;  human  society,  in  all  its  relations  and 
interests,  is  full  of  change ;  and  the  world  itself,  with  everything  fair  and  excellent 
that  it  contains,  is  constantly  fading  and  dying  around  us.  And  now  what  prac- 
tical lessons  ought  we  to  learn  from  the  view  we  have  thus  taken  of  ourselves,  as 
dying  creatures,  and  of  this  as  a  fading  world  ?  Surely  we  ought  to  give  heed 
to  the  exhortation,  "  Be  ye  therefore  sober  and  watch  unto  prayer."  Shall  we  not 
subdue  and  restrain  within  the  strictest  bounds  of  temperance  those  appetites  and 
passions  which  belong  only  to  these  dying  bodies,  and  which,  if  indulged,  will 
destroy  our  souls  ?  But  the  subject  should  teach  us  lessons  of  devotion  as  well 
as  of  soberness.  "  Watch  unto  prayer."  Shall  we  forget  that  awful  eternity  on  whose 
very  threshold  we  daily  walk,  or  fail  to  recognise  our  relations  to  that  adorable 
Being  whose  glorious  perfections  will  so  soon  break  in  unclouded  splendour  upon  our 
souls  ?  Forbid  it,  reason,  duty,  conscience ;  forbid.  Parent  of  our  mercies.  (IF.  J.  Arm- 
strong.) The  nearness  of  eternity  : — I.  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand.  Nothing 
abides  around  you.  Like  the  stream  which  wanders  through  the  valley,  everything 
is  flowing  by.  A  single  year  is  often  sufficient  to  change  the  whole  complexion  of 
life.  The  Christian  contemplates,  if  with  awe,  yet  in  peace,  the  breaking  up  of  all 
human  schemes,  and  societies,  and  pleasures,  and  gains,  and  losses.  He  anticipates 
the  wreck,  but  he  feels  himself  to  be  in  the  ark.  II.  The  practical  influence  of 
THIS  consideration.  1.  Sobiicty  of  mind  is  that  temperate  use  of  all  earthly  things, 
and  that  moderate  estimate  of  their  worth,  which  disposes  the  Christian  rather  to 
detach  his  affections  from  present  objects,  than  to  be  inordinately  excited  by  them. 
The  near  view  of  eternity  peculiarly  assists  him  in  this  moderation  as  to  worldly 
enjoyments.  2.  Prone,  however,  to  be  misled  by  his  senses,  he  feels  the  necessity 
of  incessant  watchfulness.  "  Be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch."  His  natural  love 
of  ease,  his  reluctance  to  self-denial  will  but  too  readily  dispose  him  to  adopt  the 
theory  rather  than  the  practice  of  sobriety.  Hence  it  becomes  his  duty  to  be  ever 
vigilant  over  his  own  spirit,  to  examine  candidly  the  actual  habit  of  his  mind ;  to 
watch  diligently  lest  he  act  inconsistently  with  his  professed  principles  ;  lest  the  world 
exert  an  undue  influence  over  his  heart ;  lest  self-delusion  put  him  off  his  guard. 
3.  But  the  apostle  directs  believers  to  connect  this  sobriety  and  this  vigilance  with 
prayer.  Indeed  prayer  is  the  only  source  of  this  sobriety  and  this  watchfulness  of 
mind.  The  brightest  impressions  fade  from  the  soul  if  they  are  not  renewed  con- 
tinually by  the  grace  and  blessing  of  God.  Hence  prayer  is  to  the  Christian  the 
very  life  and  health  of  his  soul.  [G.  S.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  nearness  of  eternity  : — 
There  is  a  great  contrast  between  the  believers  of  the  apostolic  age  and  ourselves. 
The  voyager  detects  the  near  proximity  of  land  by  the  fresh  land-breeze  which 
breathes  in  his  face,  wafting  the  sounds  and  scents  of  forest,  or  prairie,  or  heather- 
covered  hiU.  So  through  these  Epistles  we  inhale  another  atmosphere  than  that 
with  which  we  are  so  familiar  in  Christian  societies.  We  live  in  the  world 
and  pay  occasional  visits  into  the  unseen  and  eternal;  they  lived  in  the  unseen 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  eternal,  and  paid  periodic  necessary  visits  into  the  world.  We  conform  to 
the  world ;  they  were  transformed  by  the  daily  renewing  of  their  minds.  We 
read  the  society  papers,  discuss  society  gossip,  send  our  children  into  society, 
and  strive  to  hold  our  own  in  dress  and  appointments  with  the  cream  of 
society  around  us ;  they,  on  the  other  hand,  were  thought  strange  and  ridiculous, 
because  they  lived  amongst  men  as  "  the  children  of  the  resurrection."  Surely  the 
contrast  is  not  to  our  credit,  although  we  vaunt  our  fancied  superiority.  [F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  Waiting  for  the  end  : — The  warning  of  the  apostle  meant  one  thing 
to  the  Jew,  another  to  the  Christian.  To  the  Jew  it  meant  that  the  end  of  his 
nation,  as  a  nation,  had  come.  It  meant  that  all  the  types  and  signs  of  the 
Messiah  had  been  fulfilled  in  Christ,  the  true  Light  had  appeared,  and  the  shadows 
must  flee  away.  But  for  the  Christian  the  text  means  more.  For  each  of  us,  in 
one  way  or  another,  it  is  true  that  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  Yes,  of  all 
things  which  belong  to  this  life.  1.  The  end  of  earthly  greatness,  or  wealth,  or 
pleasure,  is  at  hand.  We  read  of  our  most  famous  heroes,  conquerors,  statesmen, 
and  all  we  can  see  of  them  is  a  tomb  in  our  cahn  cathedral.  When  the  famous 
General  and  Conqueror  Churchill,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  was  old  they  used  to 
beguile  the  tedious  hours  by  reading  aloud  the  history  of  his  own  campaigns.  Then 
he  would  turn  to  the  reader  and  ask  the  question,  "Who  commanded?  "  He  had 
forgotten  all  the  glories  of  Blenheim,  and  of  Kamillies,  of  Oudenarde,  andMal- 
plaquet.  I  saw  but  lately  a  lock  of  King  Charles  I.'s  hair,  that  is  all  that  remains 
of  the  martyr-king  of  England.  The  end  of  earthly  greatness  is  at  hand.  2. 
Again,  the  end  of  earthly  friendship  and  connections  is  at  hand.  3.  Next,  the  end 
of  our  opportunities  is  at  hand.  Ah !  make  the  most  of  your  chances ;  once  lost,  they 
come  not  back  again.  Wisely  did  the  old  Greeks  write  upon  the  walls  of  one  of 
their  temples,  "  Know  thy  opportunity."  4.  Once  more,  the  end  of  our  time  of  trial 
and  waiting  is  at  hand.  Peter  bids  us  prepare  ourselves  for  that  great  beginning 
which  commences  when  this  life  is  ended.  He  bids  us  to  be  sober,  to  be  watchful 
in  prayer,  to  have  fervent  love  for  one  another,  and  to  show  it  in  deeds  as  well  as 
words.  You  would  not  expect  the  flowers  to  grow  in  your  garden  if  the  weeds  were 
allowed  to  have  the  upper  hand.  Neither  can  you  expect  the  graces  of  the  soul  to 
flourish  if  your  body  is  your  master.  And  not  only  should  we  be  sober  in  our  bodily 
passions,  but  in  our  words.  There  are  many  good  people,  sober  people  in  other 
things,  who  are  very  intemperate  in  their  talk.  And  again,  we  need  to  be  sober  in 
our  religion,  especially  in  these  days.  I  do  not  mean  that  we  are  to  be  idle  and 
indifferent,  but  we  need  not  be  noisy.  Next,  we  are  bidden  to  watch  unto  prayer. 
{H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  3I.A.)  Be  ye  therefore  sober. — Soberness  and  watchful- 
ness : — I.  The  solemn  fact,  by  the  mention  of  which  it  is  evidently  the  design  of 
the  apostle  to  arouse  thought,  to  set  the  religious  imagination  on  the  full  stretch  of 
all  its  powers.  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  Diffferent  interpretations  have 
been  put  upon  this  expression.  Some  understand  it  of  Christ's  coming  at  the  end 
of  the  world  ;  others  only  the  dissolution  of  the  Jewish  ecclesiastical  poUty,  then 
about  to  receive  its  last  blow  at  the  hands  of  the  armies  of  Vespasian.  The 
predicted  accompaniments  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  were  so  overwhelmingly 
awful,  that,  for  all  practical  purposes  to  the  men  of  that  generation,  the  event  might 
as  well  have  been  the  winding  up  of  the  present  economy — the  termination  of  the 
life  of  all  human  kind.  And  we  see  at  once  the  force  of  the  motive  drawn  from  this 
reference  to  "  the  end  of  all  things."  It  is  to  make  us  connect  with  everything 
belonging  to  our  present  state  the  idea  of  unsettledness  ;  to  keep  our  hearts  from 
gi'owing  to  particular  places,  or  being  bound  up  with  particular  forms  of  happiness ; 
to  make  us  feel  that  everything  we  love  or  look  upon,  in  the  present  state,  is  waning, 
shifting,  and  of  doubtful  life.  Oh !  surely  the  anticipation  of  future  good  things 
should  elevate,  purify,  solemnise,  bless.  It  should  teach  moderation.  It  should 
incite  to  diligence.  II.  Consider  what  duties  devolve  upon  us  in  view  of  these 
expected  consummations.  1.  "  Be  sober."  The  expression  may  be  taken  in  many 
ways.  For  instance,  we  are  to  be  sober  in  the  use  of  God's  providential  gifts.  It  is 
constantly  assumed,  in  Scripture,  that  all  habits  of  luxurious  living,  all  undue  con- 
cessions to  the  desires  of  the  lower  nature,  have  an  injurious  effect  upon  character. 
They  tend  to  impair  the  delicacy  of  the  religious  susceptibilities.  They  induce  a 
dislike  and  reluctance  to  spiritual  employments.  They  incapacitate  for  symj)athy 
with  distress  and  need.  They  tend  to  degrade  and  sensualise  the  whole  man.  2. 
Again,  the  text  may  be  considered  as  warning  us  to  be  sober  in  our  aims  of  life  ;  to 
keep  clear  of  an  entangled,  perplexed,  and  cumbered  spirit ;  not  to  raise  the 
scaffolding  of  our  worldly  hopes  too  high,  nor  to  have  too  many  buildings  going  on 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  337 

at  the  same  time.  The  reason  for  the  admonition  is  to  be  found  in  the  tendency  of 
these  overheated  contests  in  the  race  of  life  to  enslave,  and  pervert,  and  un- 
spiritualise  the  best  affections  of  the  heart.  3.  Further,  I  think  the  text  would 
teach  us  to  be  sober  in  our  griefs — whether  in  time  of  sickness,  or  sorrow,  or 
adversity,  or  bereavement.  III.  "  And  watch  unto  prayeb."  The  exhortation  to 
"  watch  "  supposes  danger,  weakness,  a  proneness  to  fall  asleep,  or  the  near  presence 
of  a  foe.  The  text  seems  to  point  especially  to  certain  dangers  or  hindrances  we 
are  liable  to  in  the  exercises  of  devotion  :  we  are  to  "  watch  unto  prayer."  1.  Thus 
we  are  to  watch  against  weariness,  and  coldness,  and  faintings  of  heart  in  prayer. 
If  prayer  be  the  soul's  strength,  the  heart's  repose,  the  world's  antidote,  the  devil's 
dread,  why  is  it  that  we  pray,  not  only  so  languidly,  but  so  little  ?  It  is  therefore 
languidly,  because  little.  We  do  not  tarry  long  enough  in  the  exercise  to  realise 
that  without  which  prayer  is  no  prayer — namely,  mental  communion  with  the  Infinite, 
something  in  our  heart  felt  to  be  reciprocated  and  returned  by  the  heart  of  God. 
To  watch  against  the  stealthy  encroachments  of  the  world,  we  shall  do  well  to  be 
early  with  our  devotions.  2.  Again,  we  should  watch  against  the  distracting 
influence  of  an  over-anxious  and  careful  spirit  in  prayer.  A  perplexity,  a  dis- 
appointment, a  fancied  grievance,  a  slight  difference  with  a  friend,  an  issue  hanging 
in  suspense,  a  feared  evil  which  may  never  come — any  one  of  these,  if  not  watched 
against,  may  rob  us  of  all  peace  in  devotion  for  days  together.  But  we  must  learn  to 
drive  these  intruders  from  the  altar,  as  Abraham  drove  the  fowls  away.  A  Christian 
is  to  commit  his  way  unto  the  Lord,  and  all  his  way — his  burden,  and  all  his 
burden.  And  having  cast  his  care  upon  the  Lord,  he  leaves  it  where  it  is  cast.  3. 
Further,  we  must  watch  against  any  unsubdued  tendencies  to  evil  in  our  own  hearts, 
in  prayer.  These  tendencies  may  show  themselves  either  in  act  or  in  spirit ;  and, 
in  either  case,  will  raise  up  a  cloud  between  us  and  the  eternal  throne,  which  no 
prayer  can  pass  through.  4.  Lastly,  I  would  regard  our  text  as  an  exhortation  to 
watch  against  unbelief  in  prayer ;  against  any  allowed  misgivings  of  Christ's  love 
to  pity  or  of  His  infinite  ability  to  save.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Christian  sobriety  : — 
There  are  sins  of  the  spirit  as  well  as  sins  of  the  flesh  which  the  truly  sober  man 
will  abstain  from.  The  temperance  commended  in  the  New  Testament  is  no  one- 
sided, one-limbed  virtue.  It  forbids  the  lust  of  wealth,  and  an  extravagant  devotion 
to  business,  and  an  inordinate  indulgence  in  recreation,  as  truly  as  it  forbids  excess 
in  drinking  or  gluttony  in  eating.  It  commands  a  wise  self-government  and  a 
strong  self-restraint  in  relation  to  all  earthly  pursuits  and  enjoyments  and  honours. 
The  Puritanism  that  still  lingers  amongst  us  does  not  think  too  much  about  the 
quality,  but  it  does  think  too  little  about  the  quantity  of  pleasure  that  is  pursued. 
It  is  too  often  overlooked  that  probably  people  are  spiritually  damaged  more  by  the 
extravagant  amount  than  by  the  questionable  character  of  their  recreations.  We 
prescribe  some  and  we  permit  others  ;  but  discrimination  as  to  the  quality  needs  to 
be  supplemented  by  an  equal  care  as  to  the  quantity.  The  exhortation  of  the 
apostle  could  be  enforced  by  many  facts  from  modern  experience.  Some  wander 
away  along  the  path  of  excessive  pleasure-taking,  and  so  the  name  is  legion  of  those 
who,  if  they  confessed  truly,  would  have  to  say — 

"  The  world  is  too  much  with  us  ;  late  and  soon 
Getting  and  spending,  we  lay  waste  our  powers." 

(C.  Vince.) 

"Watcli  onto  prayer. — Watchfulness  and  prayer/ulness  : — In  explaining  this  injunc- 
tion we  shall  show  the  importance  of  a  watchful  and  prayerful  spirit  by  considering 
the  innate  disposition  of  the  human  heart.  I.  The  first  characteristic  of  man's 
sinful  disposition,  requiring  watchfulness  upon  the  part  of  a  Christian,  is  its 
SPONTANEITY.  This  is  that  quality  in  a  thing  which  causes  it  to  move  of  itself. 
The  living  spring  spontaneously  leaps  up  into  the  sunlight,  while  standing  water 
must  be  pumped  up.  Were  man  reluctantly  urged  up  to  sin  by  some  other  agent 
than  himself,  there  would  be  less  call  for  watchfulness.  But  the  perfect  ease  and 
pleasure  with  which  he  does  his  own  sinning  calls  for  an  incessant  vigilance  not  to 
do  it.  The  imperfectly  sanctified  Christian  needs  not  to  make  a  special  effort  in 
order  to  transgress.  Can  religion  in  the  heart  conquer  sin  in  the  heart  if  we  do 
not  bring  the  two  into  close  contact  and  conflict  ?  II.  A  second  characteristic  of 
man's  sinful  disposition,  requiring  watchfulness  and  prayerf ulness  in  the  Christian,  is 

THE   FACT   THAT   IT    CAN   BE   TEMPTED   AND   SOLICITED    TO   MOVE    AT  ANT   MOMENT.      HoW 

easily  is  the  remaining  sin  in  us  drawn  out  into  exercise  by  tempting  objects,  and 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

how  full  the  world  is  of  such  objects !  A  hard  word,  an  unkind  look,  a  displeasing 
act  on  the  part  of  another,  will  start  sin  into  motion,  instanter.  Wealth,  fame, 
pleasure,  fashion,  houses,  lands,  titles,  husbands,  wives,  children,  friends — in  brief, 
all  creation — has  the  power  to  educe  the  sinful  nature  of  man.  Consider  what 
inducements  to  forget  God,  and  to  transgress  His  commandments,  come  from  the 
worldly  or  the  gay  society  in  which  we  move.  Is  not  the  powder  in  the  midst  of  the 
sparks  ?  If  unwatchful  and  prayerless,  it  is  inevitable  that  we  shall  yield  to  these 
temptations.  III.  A  third  characteristic  of  man's  innate  disposition,  requiring 
watchfulness  and  prayer,  is  the  fact  that  it  acquires  the  habit  of  being  moved  by 
temptation.  It  is  more  difficult  to  stop  a  thing  that  has  the  habit  of  motion,  than 
one  that  has  not,  because  habit  is  a  second  nature  and  imparts  additional  force  to 
the  first  one.  This  is  eminently  true  of  sin,  which  by  being  allowed  an  habitual 
motion  becomes  so  powerful  that  few  overcome  it.  The  cravings  of  unresisted  sin 
at  length  become  organic,  as  it  were.  For  though  the  will  to  resist  sin  may  die  out 
of  a  man,  the  conscience  to  condemn  it  never  can.  The  "  ruin  "  of  an  immortal 
soul  is  no  mere  figure  of  speech.  There  is  no  ruin  in  the  whole  material  universe 
to  be  compared  with  it,  for  transcendent  awfulness.  The  decline  and  fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire  was  a  great  catastrophe ;  but  the  decline  and  eternal  fall  of  a  moral 
being,  originally  made  in  the  image  of  God,  is  a  stupendous  event.  {J.  T.  Shedd, 
D.D.)  Watchfulness  associated  with  prayerfiilness  : — The  word  "  watch  "  is  a 

military  terra.  It  teaches  us  that  the  same  alacrity  and  watchfulness  which  dis- 
tinguish the  soldier  on  duty  and  the  sentinel  at  his  post  ought  to  characterise  the 
Christian  ;  and,  as  you  know,  the  safety  of  an  army,  the  chance  of  a  victory,  the 
success  of  a  campaign  may  all  be  endangered  without  watchfulness  on  the  part  of 
the  soldier  and  the  sentinel.  A  like  contingency  may  befall  the  Christian  who  is 
not  watchful.  Now,  I  would  say,  there  are  three  ways  in  which  this  watchfulness  is 
to  be  exercised.  There  is  to  be  watchfulness  over  ourselves,  watchfulness  against 
our  enemies,  and  watchfulness  that  we  get  Divine  assistance  to  help  us  in  our 
struggles.  I  would  liken  the  Christian  to  a  general  commanding  a  besieged  fortress, 
who  has  to  watch  that  he  may  keep  down  mutiny  within  the  garrison,  who  has  to 
watch  that  he  may  repel  the  assaults  of  the  enemy  assailing  the  garrison  from 
without,  and  who  has  to  watch  that  he  may  get  assistance  from  friends  who  ar<s 
advancing  to  help  him.  And  now  notice,  there  is  to  be  prayer  in  addition  to 
watchfulness.  Prayer  is  the  breath  of  the  soul,  the  life  of  the  spirit,  without  which 
you  can  no  more  conceive  of  the  Christian  existing  than  of  an  eye  seeing  without 
light,  or  an  ear  hearing  without  being  subjected  to  the  sense  of  sound.  Prayer  is  to 
the  soul  of  the  Christian  what  his  senses  are  to  his  body.  He  not  more  surely  tells 
his  natural  wants  and  gets  them  relieved,  looks  upon  the  beautiful  objects  in  nature, 
holds  intercourse  with  his  friends,  and  feels  himself  in  contact  with  the  material 
world  by  means  of  his  senses,  than  he  tells  his  s^jiritual  wants  and  gets  them 
relieved,  and  holds  intercourse  with  the  Former  of  his  body  and  the  Father  of  his 
spirit  by  the  exercise  of  prayer.  And  what  is  calculated  to  enhance  the  value  of 
prayer  is  this,  that  while  my  senses  permit  me  to  look  upon  many  beautiful  objects, 
and  urge  me  to  possess  them,  because  they  are  not  mine,  I  am  not  permitted  to 
enjoy  them ;  whereas  there  is  not  a  single  possession  within  the  wide  domain  of 
the  spiritual  world  that  is  not  placed  at  my  disposal  by  prayer.  If  the  Christian  be 
weak,  then  he  is  strengthened  by  prayer.  If  he  be  in  doubt,  then  his  doubts  are 
removed  by  prayer.  If  he  be  in  difficulty,  his  difficulties  are  surmounted  through 
prayer.  But  I  have  to  tell  you,  in  order  to  issue  in  such  gracious  results,  pi'ayer  must 
be  possessed  of  certain  qualities.  1.  And  here  I  would  say,  first  of  all,  prayer  must 
be  intelligent.  In  all  cases,  our  first  prayer  needs  to  be,  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 
2.  Further,  I  have  to  say,  besides  being  intelligent,  prayer  must  be  humble.  "  God 
resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  (and,  of  course,  in  answer  to  prayer)  grace  unto  the 
humble."  3.  But,  besides  being  intelligent  and  humble,  prayer  must  be  offered  in 
faith.  Just  as  you  cannot  get  your  diseased  bodies  cured  without  submitting  to  the 
prescriptions  of  your  physician,  which  implies  faith  in  his  skill,  so  you  cannot  get 
your  sick  souls  healed  without  faith  in  the  Saviour's  willingness  and  ability  to  heal. 
You  must  approach  Him  as  David  did — and  this  implies  faith — when  he  prayed  : 
"  Heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  Thee."  4.  Further,  I  would  say  prayer 
must  be  in  earnest.  It  is  only  the  fervent,  effectual  prayer  of  the  righteous  man 
that  availfith  much.  God  only  promises  to  answer  earnest,  importunate  prayer. 
5.  I  observe  finally,  here,  that  prayer  must  be  constant.  We  have  thus  looked  at 
these  words  separately.  We  will  now  look  at  them  in  their  relation  to  each  other. 
Like  those  other  two  features  of  our  religious  character — faith  and  works — which 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  339 

act  and  re-act  upon  each  other,  so  that  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  our  faith 
will  be  the  number  and  excellency  of  our  works,  so  in  proportion  to  our  spiritual 
watchfulness  will  be  our  prayerf ulness.     This,  I  hold,  must  be  so  from  the  necessity  of 
the  case ;  for  the  man  who  watches  over  himself  is  the  man  who  discovers  his  own 
failings,  the  obstacles  that  impede  his  progress  in  the  life  of  faith,  and  the  number, 
the  strength,  and  the  power  of  his  spiritual  adversaries.     What  is  the  reason  of  the 
vast  number  of  petitions  that  are  presented  to  the  Commons  House  of  Parliament  ? 
Why,  the  inhabitants  of  these  islands  have  watched  the  working  of  the  British 
Constitution,   and  they  have  discovered  that  they  have  wants    to   be  relieved, 
and  grievances  to  be  redressed,  and  think  the   Commons  of  England  in  their 
wisdom  can  relieve  these  wants   and   sweep   away  these  grievances,  and  hence 
the  table  of  the  House   is  being  constantly  flooded  with  petitions.      Well,   the 
Christian  watches  and  discovers  his  own  weakness  and  liability  to  fall,  the  number, 
the  vigilance  and  wiles  of  his  spiritual  foes,  and  he  prays  for  Divine  help  to 
overcome    them    all.      He    watches,    and,    as   a   necessary   consequence,    prays. 
Indeed,  such  is  our  condition  that  we  do  not  simply  need  to  watch  and  pray  to 
resist  temptation,  but  to  watch  and  pray  that  we  may  not  enter  into  it,  for  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  were  we  to  enter  into  it,  we  would  yield  to  it; 
so  that  the   only  true  course  is,   avoid  it,   and  pass  away.      {J.  Imrie,   M.A.) 
Watch  unto  prayer: — Strange  words  for   Simon   Peter   to  use!     For  him,   the 
impetuous,  the  thoughtlessly  self-confident,  to  say,  "  Be  sober,"  seems  a  strange 
contradiction.    Well  were  it  for  us  if  our  failures  led  to  a  similar  recovery.    Human 
nature  is  impatient ;  we  would  overleap  aU  barriers,  and  plunge  at  once  into  the 
full  transport  of  enjoyment,  just  as  the  soldier  prefers  the  dash  of  a  sudden  assault 
to  the  tediousness  of  a  regular  siege.     Delay  looks  to  us  like  defeat,  like  sure  dis- 
appointment.    Why  should  we  have  to  wait  when  God  might  conclude  all  in  an 
instant  ?     Surely,  though  the  Saviour  has  ascended  up  on  high,  there  is  enough  of 
His  influence  left  in  the  world  to  sustain  our  courage  for  a  little  further  delay. 
Why,  with   such  precious  gifts  around  us,  should  we  avariciously  demand  the 
bestowal  of  all  His  store?     It  is  "the  patience  of  the  saints"  that  God  is  looking 
to ;  He  would  see  what  we  can  bear  for  His  sake,  how  long  we  can  stay  without 
doubting  the  sureness  of  His  Word.     I  deny  not  the  tryingness  of  waiting,  but  in 
that  the  real  benefit  of  waiting  consists.     We  fret  for  peace  in  the  world,  and  men 
try,  in  one  way  or  other,  to  force  the  current  of  the  river  and  spread  the  fertilising 
waters  over  tracts  so  high  that  the  forced  stream  cannot  stay  in  the  upland  where 
they  wish  it  to  remain.     Some  would  crush  out  the  violence  of  nations  and  put 
down  war  by  the  sheer  force  of  superior  strength.     The  remedies  to  be  used  are — 1. 
Be  sober.     The  universe  cannot  bend  itself  to  your  will,  therefore  look  not  for  too 
great  results.     2.  Pray.     The  only  instrument  which  man  possesses  for  hastening 
on  the  triumph  of  good,  the  only  reliable  argument  for  converting  the  world,  the 
only  channel  for  peace  to  ourselves,  is  prayer.     3.  Watch  unto  prayer.     How  is  it 
that  men  become  disheartened  and  cease  to  pray  ?     The  wish  is  uttered  with  all 
earnestness,  but  it  is  the  convulsive  effort  of  a  moment,  not  sustained,  nor  followed 
up.     And  often  the  prayer  is  heard,  but  the  suppliant  heeds  it  not.     Watchers  see 
where  others  notice  nothing,  their  senses  are  more  acute.     Act  on  the  firm  faith 
that  every  earnest  prayer  is  heard,  and  then  you  will  receive  insight  enough  to 
trace  the  coming  answer.     Wait  for  it  if  it  comes  not  at  once  ;  it  will  surely  come, 
it  will  not  tarry.     Blows  that  would  crush  others  will  only  prove  the  buoyancy  of 
your   faith.     Failure   in  business,  beggary,  friendlessness,  will  not  prevent  your 
knowing  the  riches  of  contentment  and  of  spiritual  blessings.   (G.  F.  Prescott,  M.A.) 
Watching  in  relation  to  prayer  : — How  often  it  happens  that  when  night  comes  a 
man  prays  rather  from  force  of  custom  than  from  a  sense  of  need.     He  has  no  pie- 
scribed  form  of  prayer,  and  yet  he  finds  himself  continually  repeating  the  same 
things.     His  supplications  lack  variety  and  force  and  definiteness.     He  is  "  as  one 
that  beateth  the  air."     This  comes  in  a  great  measure  from  the  fact  that  he  does 
not  "  watch  unto  prayer."     He  has  taken  little  notice  of  his  own  spirit,  and  there- 
fore he  knows  not  his  own  weakness  and  his  own  necessities.     The  events  of  the 
day  are  not  so  remembered  as  to  give  form  and  colour  and  life  to  his  evening  sup- 
plications.    The  prayer  that  suits  one  day  cannot  effectually  serve  for  all  other 
days.     Changes  in   ourselves  and  in  our  circumstances  call  for  changes  in  our 
petitions.     If  a  man  pass  through  the  day  observing  himself  and  increasing  his 
self-knowledge,  his  devotions  cannot  always  keep  in  old  formal  and  familiar  ruts, 
but  they  must  sometimes  flow  with  new  vigour  along  the  new  charmels  which  the 
new  facts  have  made  for  them.     We  frequently  confess  that  we  know  not  what  to 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

pray  for.  Sometimes  this  ignorance  is  a  weakness  for  which  we  are  to  be  pitied. 
We  cannot  tell  what  to-morrow  will  bring  forth,  and  therefore  cannot  tell  what  special 
grace  to  pray  for.  But  sometimes  our  ignorance  is  our  sin.  We  know  not  what  to  ask 
for  because  we  have  not  by  watching  acquired  the  wisdom  which  guides  supplication. 
(C.  Vince.)  Watching  for  ansxoers  to  prayer  :—YJhen  an  archer  shoots  his  arrow  at 
a  mark  he  likes  to  go  and  see  whether  he  has  hit  it,  or  how  near  he  has  come  to  it. 
When  you  have  written  and  sent  off  a  letter  to  a  friend  you  expect  some  day  that 
the  postman  will  be  knocking  at  the  door  with  an  answer.  When  a  child  asks  his 
father  for  something  he  looks  in  his  face  even  before  he  speaks  to  see  if  he  is 
pleased,  and  reads  acceptance  in  his  eyes.  But  it  is  to  be  greatly  feared  that  many 
people  feel  when  their  prayers  are  over  as  if  they  had  quite  done  with  them.  Their 
only  concern  was  to  get  them  said.  Sailors  in  foundering  ships  sometimes  commit 
notes  in  sealed  bottles  to  the  waves  for  the  chance  of  their  being  some  day  washed 
on  some  shore.  Sir  John  Franklin's  companions  among  the  snows,  and  Captain 
AUen  Gardiner,  dying  of  hunger  in  his  cave,  wrote  words  they  could  not  be  sure  any 
one  would  ever  read.  But  we  do  not  need  to  think  of  our  prayers  as  random 
messages.  We  should  therefore  look  for  reply  to  them,  and  watch  to  get  it.  (J. 
Edmond,   B.D.)  Fervent  charity. — The  pre-eminence  of   charity  : — I.    What 

CHABiTY  IS.  It  is  not  casy  "to  find  one  word  which  adequately  represents  what 
Christ  and  His  apostles  meant  by  charity.  Charity  has  become  identified  with 
almsgiving.  Love  is  appropriated  to  one  particular  form  of  human  affection,  and 
that  one  with  which  self  and  passion  mix  inevitably.  Philanthropy  is  a  word  too 
cold  and  negative.  1.  Let  us  define  Christian  charity  in  two  sentences.  (1)  The 
desire  to  give.  Let  each  man  go  deep  into  his  own  heart.  Let  him  ask  what  that 
mysterious  longing  means  which  we  call  love,  whether  to  man  or  God,  when  he  has 
stripped  from  it  all  that  is  outside  and  accidental,  when  he  has  taken  from  it  all 
that  is  mixed  with  it  and  perverts  it.  Not  in  his  worst  moments,  but  in  his  best, 
what  did  that  yearning  mean?  I  say  it  meant  the  desire  to  give.  Not  to  get 
something  but  to  give  something.  And  the  more  irrepressible  this  yearning  was, 
the  more  truly  was  his  love.  To  give — whether  alms  in  the  shape  of  money, 
bread,  or  a  cup  of  cold  water,  or  else  self.  But  be  sure  sacrifice  in  some  shape  or 
other  is  the  impulse  of  love,  and  its  restlessness  is  only  satisfied  and  only  gets  relief 
in  giving.  For  this,  in  truth,  is  God's  own  love,  the  will  and  the  power  to  give.  (2) 
The  desire  to  bless.  It  wishes  the  well-being  of  the  whole  man — body,  soul,  and 
spirit,  but  chiefly  spirit.  And  the  highest  love  is  the  desire  to  make  men  good  and 
Godlike  ;  it  may  wish,  as  a  subordinate  attainment,  to  turn  this  earth  into  a  para- 
dise of  comfort  by  mechanical  inventions  ;  but  far  above  that,  to  transform  it  into 
a  kingdom  of  God,  the  domain  of  love,  where  men  cease  to  quarrel  and  to  envy,  and 
to  slander  and  to  retaliate.  "  This  also  we  wish,"  said  St.  Paul,  "  even  your  perfec- 
tion." 2.  Concerning  this  charity  we  remark  two  points.  (1)  "  Fervent."  Literally 
intense,  unremitting,  unwearied.  Give  us  the  man  who  can  be  insulted  and  not 
retaliate,  meet  rudeness  and  still  be  courteous;  the  man  who,  like  the  Apostle  Paul, 
buffeted  and  disliked,  can  yet  be  generous  and  make  allowances  and  say,  "  I  will 
very  gladly  spend  and  be  spent  for  you,  though  the  more  abundantly  I  love  you  the 
less  I  be  loved."  That  is  "  fervent  charity."  (2)  It  is  capable  of  being  cultivated. 
When  an  apostle  says,  "  Have  fervent  charity  among  yourselves,"  it  is  plain  that  it 
would  be  a  cruel  mockery  to  command  men  to  attain  it  if  they  could  do  nothing 
towards  the  attainment.  How  shall  we  cultivate  this  charity  ?  Now  I  observe, 
first,  love  cannot  be  produced  by  a  direct  action  of  the  soul  upon  itself.  You  cannot 
love  by  a  resolve  to  love.  That  is  as  impossible  as  it  is  to  move  a  boat  by  pressing 
it  from  within.  Love  is  a  feeling  roused  not  from  ourselves,  but  from  something 
outside  ourselves.  There  are,  however,  two  methods  by  which  we  may  cultivate 
this  charity,  (a)  By  doing  acts  which  love  demands.  It  is  God's  merciful  law  that 
feelings  are  increased  by  acts  done  on  principle.  Let  a  man  begin  in  earnest  with 
I  ought,  he  will  end,  by  God's  grace,  if  he  persevere,  with  the  free  blessedness  of  I 
will.  Let  him  force  himself  to  abound  in  small  offices  of  kindliness,  attention,  • 
affectionateness,  and  all  those  for  God's  sake.  By  and  by  he  will  feel  them  become 
the  habit  of  his  soul.  By  and  by,  walking  in  the  conscientiousness  of  refusing  to 
retaliate  when  he  feels  tempted,  he  will  cease  to  wish  it ;  doing  good  and  heaping 
kindness  on  those  who  injure  him  he  will  learn  to  love  them,  {b)  By  contemplating 
the  love  of  God.  You  cannot  move  the  boat  from  within,  but  you  may  obtain  a 
purchase  from  without.  You  cannot  create  love  in  the  soul  by  force  from  within 
itself,  but  you  may  move  it  from  a  point  outside  itself.  God's  love  is  the  point 
from  which  to  move  the  soul.     Love  begets  love.     It  is  easy  to  be  generous  and 


CEAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  311 

tolerant  and  benevolent  when  we  are  sure  of  the  heart  of  God,  and  when  the  little 
love  of  this  life,  and  its  coldness  and  its  unreturned  affections  are  more  than  made 
up  to  us  by  the  certainty  that  our  Father's  love  is  ours.  II.  What  chakity  does. 
It  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins.  1.  In  refusing  to  see  small  faults.  That  micro- 
scopic distinctness  in  which  all  faults  appear  to  captious  men  who  are  for  ever 
blaming,  dissecting,  complaining,  disappears  in  the  large,  calm  gaze  of  love.  And 
oh  !  it  is  this  spirit  which  our  Christian  society  lacks,  and  which  we  shall  never  get 
till  we  begin  each  one  with  his  own  heart.  What  we  want  is,  in  one  word,  that 
graceful  tact  and  Christian  art  which  can  bear  and  forbear.  2.  Love  covers  sin  by 
making  large  allowances.  In  aU  evil  there  is  a  "  soul  of  goodness."  Most  evil  is 
perverted  good.  Now  there  are  some  men  who  see  all  the  evil,  and  never  trace, 
never  give  themselves  the  trouble  of  suspecting  the  root  of  goodness  out  of  which  it 
sprung.  There  are  others  who  love  to  go  deep  down  and  see  why  a  man  came  to  do 
wrong,  and  whether  there  was  not  some  excuse  or  some  redeeming  cause,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  just.  Just,  as  "  God  is  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth 
in  Jesus."  Now  human  Ufe,  as  it  presents  itself  to  these  two  different  eyes,  the  eye 
of  one  who  sees  only  evil,  and  that  of  him  who  sees  evil  as  perverted  good,  is  two 
different  things.  Take  an  instance.  Not  many  years  ago  a  gifted  English  writer 
presented  us  with  a  history  of  ancient  Christianity.  To  his  eye  the  early  Church 
presented  one  great  idea,  almost  only  one.  He  saw  corruption  written  everywhere. 
In  public  and  in  private  life,  in  theology  and  practice,  within  and  without,  every- 
where pollution.  Another  historian,  a  foreigner,  has  written  the  history  of  the 
same  times,  with  an  intellect  as  piercing  to  discover  the  very  first  germ  of  error,  but 
with  a  calm,  large  heart,  which  saw  the  good  out  of  which  the  error  sprung,  and 
loved  to  dwell  upon  it,  delighting  to  trace  the  lineaments  of  God,  and  discern  His 
Spirit  working  where  another  could  see  only  the  spirit  of  the  devil.  And  you  rise 
from  the  two  books  with  different  views  of  the  world :  from  the  one,  considering  the 
world  as  a  devil's  world,  corrupting  towards  destruction  ;  from  the  other,  notwith- 
standing all,  feeling  triumphantly  that  it  is  God's  world,  and  that  His  Spirit  works 
gloriously  below  it  all.  You  rise  from  the  study  with  different  feelings  :  from  the 
one,  inclined  to  despise  your  species  ;  from  the  other,  able  joyfully  to  understand  in 
part  why  God  so  loved  the  world,  and  what  there  is  in  man  to  love,  and  what  there 
is,  even  in  the  lost,  to  seek  and  save.  Now  that  is  the  "  charity  which  covereth  a 
multitude  of  sins."  It  understands  by  sympathy.  It  is  that  glorious  nature  which 
has  affinity  with  good  under  all  forms,  and  loves  to  find  it,  to  believe  in  it,  and  to 
see  it.  And  therefore  such  men — God's  rare  and  best  ones — learn  to  make  allow- 
ances, not  from  weak  sentiment,  which  caUs  wrong  right,  but  from  that  heavenly 
charity  which  sees  right  lying  at  the  root  of  wrong.  3.  Lastly,  charity  can  tolerate 
even  intolerance.  St.  Paul  saw  even  in  the  Jews,  his  bitterest  foes,  that  "  they  had 
a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge."  St.  Stephen  prayed  with  his  last 
breath,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  Earth  has  not  a  spectacle  more 
glorious  or  more  fair  to  show  than  this — love  tolerating  intolerance,  charity  cover- 
ing, as  with  a  veil,  even  the  sin  of  the  lack  of  charity.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Fervent  charity  .-—I.  A  description  of  charity.  1.  A  sincere  love  to  God  as  the 
spring  of  our  love  to  our  Christian  brethren.  2.  Charity  comprehends  such  a 
habit  of  benevolence  in  the  soul  as  disposes  us  to  wish  all  good  to  others  in  all  their 
capacities,  in  respect  either  of  their  souls,  their  bodies,  their  reputation,  or  their 
estate.  3.  Wherever  this  benevolent  principle  is  it  will  discover  itself  by  a  readiness 
to  assist  and  relieve  all  men,  especially  those  who  stand  in  need  of  our  help,  accord- 
ing to  our  abilities.  4.  That  our  charity  may  be  complete,  and  deserve  to  be  called 
fervent  charity,  it  must  extend  to  all  men,  even  to  our  enemies.  II.  Some  argu- 
ments  TO   IMPROVE   and   STRENGTHEN   ALL   TENDENCIES  IN  US  TO   CHARITY.      1.   FervCUt 

charity  of  aU  other  things  is  most  beneficial  to  society,  nay,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  the  good  order,  peace,  and  happiness  of  every  society.  And  in  this  respect 
charity  well  deserves  to  be  called  the  bond  of  perfectness.  2.  The  exercise  of 
charity  is  agreeable  to  our  natures.  By  being  charitable  we  gratify  the  noblest  of 
our  inclinations  and  appetites.  3.  It  naturally  follows  from  the  former  argument 
that  the  exercise  of  charity  is  the  most  delightful  exercise  we  can  choose  for  our- 
Belves.  (1)  This  satisfaction  doth  not  only  just  accompany  a  charitable  action,  but 
it  is  permanent,  and  endures  as  long  as  our  lives.  (2)  This  pleasure  and  joy  that 
attends  charitable  actions  doth  herein  exceed  all  fleshly  delights,  that  it  is  then  at 
the  highest  when  we  stand  in  most  need  of  it.  4.  To  be  charitable,  to  wish,  and  to 
do  good  to  others,  is  the  most  God-like  qualification  that  we  are  capable  of.  5. 
Another  argument  to  excite  us  to  the  exercise  of  charity  is  taken  from  the  command 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  Christ,  the  author  of  our  religion.  This  is  a  very  powerful  consideration  when 
we  reflect  what  He  hath  done  for  us,  and  upon  the  example  which  He  hath  left  us 
for  our  imitation.  6.  We  all  partake  of  the  same  human  nature,  and  are  all  born 
for  society,  so  I  might  persuade  to  charity  from  this  consideration,  that  we  are  all 
the  children  of  the  same  heavenly  Father,  we  have  all  the  same  Saviour,  we  have 
all  one  faich,  and  we  expect  to  attain  to  the  same  perfect  happiness  in  the  end.  7. 
Let  us  exercise  charity  that  we  may  adorn  our  Christian  profession,  and  cause  it  to 
be  well  spoken  of  in  the  world.  8.  To  persuade  us  to  exercise  fervent  charity 
among  ourselves,  let  us  consider  that  charity  is  the  main  part  of  the  Christian 
religion,  and  as  we  shall  be  found  to  have  or  want  charity,  so  must  we  stand  or  fall 
in  the  great  day  of  judgment.  Chai-ity  is  the  most  acceptable  sacrifice  we  can  offer 
or  service  we  can  perform  to  God.  It  is  said  to  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law. 
(P.  Witherspoon.)  Dissuasives  from  uncharitableness  : — I.  Your  own  character 
AND  HABITS.  1.  Remember  that  you  have  the  very  same  feelings  which  led  to  those 
faults  you  usually  rail  at,  to  their  vices  whose  vices  you  condemn.  Did  vanity  lead 
them  to  folly  ?  that  same  vanity  dwells  with  you.  Did  pride  overthrow  them  ? 
pride  dwells  royally  with  you.  Did  selfishness  make  them  mean  ?  are  not  you 
selfish  ?  Did  their  appetites  seduce  them  ?  are  not  those  same  seducers  at  work  in 
your  bosom?  2.  But  there  is  an  additional  reason  for  forbearing  uncharitable 
censures  in  the  multitude  of  your  actual  overt  transgressions.  They  may  not,  to  be 
sure,  be  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  you  unfeelingly  reprehend.  Are  they 
slovens  ?  Perhaps  you  are  wasters.  They  may  be  fickle  whom  you  blame,  you 
may  be  obstinate.  If  we  looked  as  sharply  at  ourselves  as  we  do  at  censured 
persons  we  might  find  their  faults  matched  in  every  point  in  ourselves.  3.  Even 
this,  however,  does  not  exhaust  the  point  in  hand.  For  in  weighing  relative  guilt 
circumstances  are  always  to  be  considered.  Men  may  be  so  situated  that  a  foible 
will  be  less  excusable  in  them  than  a  vice  in  others.  While  you  freely  rail  at  all 
around  you  perhaps  God  is  putting  you  down,  with  all  your  proud  morality,  as  the 
less  excusable  creature  of  the  two.  You  may  have  a  better  mind,  you  may  have 
been  better  trained,  you  may  have  been  better  educated,  you  may  be  in  better  cir- 
cumstances, you  may  be  surrounded  by  the  influence  of  better  associates,  you  may 
have  ten  restraints  to  others'  one,  they  may  have  ten  temptations  to  your  one.  4. 
The  fourth  particular  is  the  remembrance  of  our  past  mischiefs  as  a  motive  for 
leniency  of  judgment.     II.  The  iNmoNAiiOv  experienced  in  view  of  evil  is  in  a 

LARGE  proportion  OF  CASES  SELFISH,  AND  SOMETIMES  HYPOCRITICAL  AND  DETESTABLE, 

IN  THE  SIGHT  OF  GoD.  I  supposc  that  the  feeling  of  condemnation  is  frequently 
more  wicked  than  the  thing  condemned.  1.  The  first  bill  purporting  to  be  a  true 
indignation  at  evil  has  the  plainest  marks  of  a  clumsy  counterfeit.  The  feeling  has 
no  respect  whatever  to  the  moral  qualities  of  the  evil  it  chastises.  It  is  simply  an 
outcry  raised  to  contrast  our  own  excellences  with  the  censured  evil.  Some  men 
inveigh  against  squandering  because  they  are  economical.  Some  rail  at  parsimony 
because  they  are  open-handed.  Some  cry  out  at  indolence  that  men  may  note  their 
industry.  2.  On  the  success  of  this  device  may  issue  another  counterfeit  of  moral 
indignation.  They  are  clamorous  against  evildoers  to  hide  the  fact  that  they 
themselves  are  such.  3.  Vociferous  indignation  is  not  unfrequently  the  mere 
creation  of  fashion  and  of  sympathy  with  bad  feelings.  Each  clamours  because  all 
the  rest  do.  4.  A  seeming  virtuous  indignation  is  often  only  an  ebullition  of 
wounded  pride  and  vanity.  Is  there  a  misstep  from  virtue  ?  The  guardian  angel 
weeps,  mercy  flies  swiftly  to  the  penitent,  and  Christ  says,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee,  only  go,  and  sin  no  more."  Not  thus  do  fellow-mortals  of  like  passions.  All 
the  slights  and  petty  offences,  all  the  ignoble  strifes  of  envy  and  sensitive  vanity, 
are  raked  out  of  the  embers,  and  the  bitter  taunt  is  but  the  revenge  of  these  covered 
with  the  garb  of  virtue.  A  hated  rival  is  down,  a  haughty  head  a  little  higher  than 
mine  is  in  the  dust,  superior  beauty  is  humbled,  the  wearer  of  better  clothes,  the 
recipient  of  more  pointed  attentions,  the  immovable  rival,  the  one  who  once  said 
this  or  that  of  me— these  are  the  real  archers  lurking  in  the  ambush  of  virtuous  or 
religious  indignation  which  bend  the  bow  and  infix  the  venomous  shaft.  5.  Revenge 
is  almost  invariably  cloaked  under  the  guise  of  moral  indignation.  And  of  this,  as 
of  almost  all  that  I  have  mentioned,  it  may  be  said,  the  uncharitableness  of  the 
censor  is  often  more  malignantly  guilty  than  the  offence  of  the  sinner.  III. 
Reasons  against  censoriousness  and  uncharitableness  springing  out  of  thb 
FEELINGS  AND  AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  VICTIM.  1.  Severity  excrciscd  without  pity  tends 
to  provoke  rather  than  reform  the  transgressor.  That  man  is  the  most  influential 
against  vice  who,  to  a  hearty  abhorrence  of  it,  adds  a  cordial  desire  to  rescue  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  343 

evildoer.  Uncliaritableness  promotes  evil,  while  pity  reforms  it.  2.  Then,  me- 
thinks,  our  pity  should  flow  out  with  our  indignation  in  view  of  the  sufferings  often 
of  those  whom  we  scourge.  There  is  something  peculiarly  touching  in  that  vice 
and  crime  which  prevail  among  the  ignorant  and  neglected.  Multitudes  have  had 
no  childhood  instruction.  Others  have  been  too  fatally  taught  by  renegade  parents. 
Look  in,  then,  upon  the  motley  throng  of  ignorant  and  vicious.  Are  they  happy  ? 
Does  the  fulness  of  the  cup  of  pleasure  take  away  the  necessity  of  pity  from  you  ? 
Of  all  the  sun  shines  on,  none  need  pity  more  than  those  whose  career  of  vice  and 
crime  is  near  to  its  close.  Suffering  has  made  every  feature  haggard,  and  there  is 
war  in  every  limb,  anguish  in  every  nerve,  and  groaning  at  every  bone.  Want 
torments  them.  Their  own  demoniac  passions  scorch  them.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Fervent  charity  : — I.  The  exhortation.  1.  The  Apostle  urged  upon  the  Christian 
converts  the  importance  of  charity.  It  was  the  exercise  of  a  grace,  and  not  merely 
good  temper,  upon  which  he  insisted.  2.  This  love  is  a  Divine  virtue.  Philan- 
thropy may  exist  in  the  sphere  of  nature,  but  love,  in  this  higher  sense,  can  only 
exist  in  the  sphere  of  grace.  This  charity  is  a  Divine  thing,  the  work  and  a  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  3.  This  charity  was  to  be  kept  "fervent."  It  is  a  word 
which  implies  great  earnestness  and  intensity  (Luke  xxii.  44).  It  was  to  be  some- 
thing very  unlike  cold  propriety.  The  metal  was  to  be  kept  glowing,  and  the  chill 
of  selfishness  warded  off.  It  was  to  be  continuous  in  its  exercise,  and  its  exercise 
was  manifold.  4.  The  sphere  of  this  charity :  "  among  yourselves,"  that  is, 
among  Christians.  As  natural  love,  as  a  rule,  is  governed  by  propinquity,  so  is 
spiritual.  This  "  fervent  charity "  was  to  be  exercised  primarily  amongst  those 
who  had  the  closest  union,  inter  se,  through  their  union  in  Christ.  5.  The  Apostle 
marks  the  momentousness  of  his  precept:  "  above  all  things."  II.  The  result  of 
ITS  FULFILMENT.  1.  The  interpretations  that  the  love  in  question  is  God's  love  for 
man,  or  Christ's  love  in  His  Passion,  cannot  certainly  be  accepted,  though,  of 
course,  true  in  themselves.  It  is  quite  evident  that  the  Apostle  is  speaking  of  the 
effect  of  mutual  love.  2.  The  word  "cover"  does  not  simply  mean  "hides,"  the 
sins  leaving  them  where  they  were,  but  causes  their  remission,  in  fact,  obliterates 
them.  3.  Whose  sins  does  the  text  refer  to  ?  4.  Charity  covers  over  our  sins  in 
the  sight  of  God,  because  charity  is  to  sin  what  water  is  to  fire — it  puts  it  out.  It 
is  written  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene,  "  Her  sins  which  are  many  are  forgiven  her;  for 
she  loveth  much."  Love  is  the  soul  of  contrition.  An  act  of  fervent  charity  can 
obliterate  the  sins  of  a  life.  It  is  the  solvent  of  guilt  and  of  penalty.  But 
repentance  does  not  purchase  pardon.  It  is  the  condition  of  receiving  it,  not  its 
source.  Christ  gives  remission  of  sins  in  ways  of  His  own  appointment.  5.  Charity 
also  covers  the  sins  of  others.  It  has  a  way  of  seeing  the  good  in  people  rather 
than  the  bad  :  "  Charity  thinketh  no  evil  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.) 
The  greatness  of  love  .-^Love  is  like  gravitation,  the  great  attracting  power,  keeping 
all  things  in  their  place.  Without  gravitation  the  universe  would  become  a  chaos, 
without  some  measure  of  love  society  would  be  impossible.  The  world  could 
perhaps  rub  along  somehow  without  philosophy,  but  I  defy  it  to  do  so  without  love, 
as  animals  can  exist  without  light  but  not  without  warmth.  Love  is  the  water  of  life, 
of  which  whosoever  will  may  take  freely  without  money  or  price ;  it  is  the  heaven- 
springing  stream  which  quenches  all  thirst,  removes  all  impurities,  and  also,  as  in 
the  case  of  Naaman,  the  very  simplicity  of  the  means  causes  the  proud  to  disdain 
it.  But  like  the  grand  and  wonderful  simplicity  of  the  laws  of  nature,  fulfilling 
themselves  in  the  greatest  and  least  phenomena,  so  is  the  law  of  love,  prompting 
equally  the  widest  public  service  man  can  perform  and  the  smallest  act  of  private 
friendship.  No  matter  how  deformed  or  twisted  a  man's  way  of  thinking  if  love 
once  gets  access  to  him,  for,  like  water,  it  will  find  its  level  in  the  most  crooked  as 
in  the  best  proportioned  vessel.  Like  snow  falling  so  quietly  and  equally  on  all 
manner  of  objects,  however  mean  or  base,  creeping  in  at  every  crevice,  so  also  is 
love,  its  voice  not  heard  in  the  streets,  covering  a  multitude  of  sins,  insinuating 
itself  into  every  cranny  that  selfishness  leaves  open.  (P.  H.  Sharpe.)  Above  all 
things — love  : — It  were  better  to  dispense  with  all  else  in  the  Christian's  character 
and  work  than  to  miss  love,  though,  in  point  of  fact,  where  this  is  in  operation  all 
that  is  likely  to  impress  and  touch  men  must  be  present  also.  This  love  must,  of 
course,  go  forth  in  its  sympathies  and  activities  to  all  the  world,  but  it  should  begin 
at  home.  We  must  have  love  among  ourselves  as  believers  in  the  same  Lord 
before  we  can  presume  to  speak  of  our  love  to  the  great  world  of  men  around.  Nor 
must  it  be  a  platonic  love,  a  love  of  the  cold  light  of  reason,  it  must  be  fervent,  at 
boiling  point,  on  full  stretch,  going  to  the  furthest  extents  of  love,  and  in  doing  so 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

learning  the  breadths  and  lengths  of  the  unsearchable  love  of  God.  {F.  B.  Meyer, 
B.A.)  Love  must  be  fervent : — The  manner  or  kind  of  love  required  is  a  large,  con- 
tinued, stretched-out,  constant  love.  As  a  cloth  folded  up  is  in  a  little  room,  but 
when  it  comes  to  be  cut  is  stretched  out  into  many  men's  uses,  so  our  love  must  be 
stretched  out  to  many  persons,  to  many  duties  ;  as  in  giving  and  doing  good  to 
body,  soul,  goods,  good  name,  and  that  not  sparingly,  but  liberally,  so  in  forgiving 
both  much  and  often,  neither  must  this  be  only  when  we  can  well  do  it,  or 
when  we  have  nothing  else  to  do,  but  when  it  is  against  our  profit,  pleasure, 
ease,  &c.,  so  as  we  neglect  not  ourselves  too  much,  and  thereby  more  plea- 
sure may  be  done  our  neighbours  than  hindrance  come  to  us.  (John  Rogers.) 
Charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of  sins. — Love  cover eth  all  sins: — It  is  strange 
that  this  verse  should  have  been  so  often  misunderstood.  This  is  closely  parallel 
with  that  last  verse  in  St.  James,  "  Brethren,  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth, 
and  one  convert  him  ;  let  him  know,  that  he  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the 
error  of  his  way,  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,"  and,  as  a  necessary  part  of  that 
conversion,  "  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  (that  converted  man's)  sins."  "  Love  shall 
cover  multitudes  of  sins "  from  God  and  man.  Only  observe  carefully,  not  our 
own  sins ;  never,  in  any  sense,  does  love  do  that ;  but  other  men's  sins,  love,  by 
silence  and  by  veiling,  hides  from  man ;  and  by  prayer  and  by  converting,  hides 
from  God.  And  yet,  in  all  ages  of  the  Church,  and  in  every  Church,  people  have 
built  from  my  text  the  fallacy,  that  a  man's  charities  are,  in  some  way,  a  set-off 
against  his  sins.  So  some  people  of  the  world  take  a  satisfaction  every  day,  that, 
if  they  are  living  rather  too  gay  lives,  they  are  kinder  than  others  who  are  called 
serious.  It  is  often  put  thus,  that  Christ's  righteousness  covers  our  unrighteousness, 
i.e.,  in  other  words,  that  His  obedience  is  accounted  to  us  in  place  of  our  disobedience. 
But  I  would  much  rather  say  that  Christ  Himself — His  own  immensity — comes  in 
and  covers  us.  Then  the  view  of  you,  passing  through  Him,  comes  out  to  the  eye 
of  God  a  beautiful  object.  It  is  all  white,  the  dark  places  are  not  seen.  And  when 
I  think  of  the  immense  amount  of  evil,  which  now,  and  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
will  thus  be  hid,  never  to  be  seen  by  God,  through  that  interposition  of  Jesus  Christ, 
what  an  emphasis  may  it  throw  into  the  words,  "  Love  shall  cover  the  multitude  of 
sins."  We  are,  therefore,  never  nearer  to  Christ  than  when  we  are  making  our- 
selves, in  any  way  we  can,  the  coverers  of  sin.  Now  there  is  a  way  by  which  a  man 
can  cover  sins  from  God.  In  the  same  sense  in  which  I  can  convert  a  man  I  can 
cover  that  man's  sins  from  God.  Your  mission  as  a  Christian  is  to  be  a  coverer  of 
sins.  There  is  seldom  a  greater  thing  done  in  this  world  than  when  we  can  manage 
anyhow  to  put  a  sin  out  of  sight.  Therefore,  let  me  offer  to  you  one  or  two  rules 
respecting  this  high  duty.  If  you  know  anything  to  any  one's  detriment,  hold  it  as 
a  sacred  deposit,  to  be  used  religiously.  Do  not  tell  it  unless  the  necessity  be  urgent, 
or  the  utility  great.  Never  tell  of  a  man  what  you  have  not  first  told  to  the'  man. 
Never  think  that  you  can  make  yourself  great  by  making  another  less.  Make  a 
principle  of  always  putting  in  the  foreground  persons'  good  qualities.  If  a  fault  be 
mentioned,  see  and  mention  the  extenuating  circumstances,  the  palliating  considera- 
tions. Look  out  for  them,  and  you  will  find  them.  (J.  Vm(ghan,M.A.)  Charity 
covering  a  multitude  of  sins : — And  wherefore  does  the  apostle  inculcate  this  precept  so 
earnestly?  It  is  not  that  the  duties  of  self-denial  and  humility,  of  soberness  and 
prayer,  can  be  dispensed  with  in  the  formation  of  a  truly  Christian  character ;  it  is 
not  that  charity  alone  will  suffice  to  atone  for  our  deficiencies  in  other  respects ; 
but  charity  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  a  Christian  spirit ;  our  Lord  Himself  has 
said  that  "  by  this  should  His  disciples  be  known."  I.  First,  for  the  force  of  thk 
apostle's  injunction,  "  Above  all  things  have  fervent  charity  among  yourselves." 
I  have  before  called  charity  a  disposition  of  the  mind  ;  and  it  is  of  importance  that 
we  should  remember  that  it  is  such.  Our  grand  errors  on  this  point  arise  from  our 
mistaking  the  effects  for  the  cause ;  in  making  no  distinction  between  particular  acts 
of  a  charitable  nature,  and  that  disposition  which  produces  them.  When  the  favour 
of  God,  the  present  blessings  of  this  life,  and  the  eternal  joys  of  another,  are  pro- 
mised to  charity,  it  is  not  such  and  such  special  acts  of  benevolence  which  shall  be 
BO  signally  rewarded  ;  but  it  is  the  earnest  inclination  to  benefit  our  fellow-creatures, 
and  the  continual  and  diligent  habit  of  doing  good  which  are  of  such  high  price 
before  God.  Our  conduct  will,  of  course,  have  more  or  less  influence  upon  the  good 
and  the  happiness  of  mankind,  according  to  the  circumstances  under  which  we  act, 
and  the  situation  which  we  occupy  in  society.  But  though  a  charitable  disposition 
may  in  one  case  have  a  wider  sphere  of  action  than  it  has  in  another,  still  the  dis- 
position itself  is  altogether  independent  of  these  external  circumstances.  The  desire 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  34.5 

to  benefit  mankind  may  be  as  sincere  and  as  fervent  in  him  whose  means  are 
limited,  as  in  the  richest  and  the  most  powerful  of  the  sons  of  men.  And  though  the 
practical  consequences  of  that  disposition  may  not  be  as  extensively  felt  in  the  one 
case  as  in  the  other,  still  God  regards  the  sincerity  and  the  fervency  of  that  love, 
which  prompts  us  both  to  labour  and  to  endure,  in  such  sort,  as  the  particular 
duties  of  our  station  may  require.  Two  truths  are  to  be  deduced  from  what  has 
been  said  :  first,  a  few  acts  of  a  charitable  nature  do  not  necessarily  prove  the 
existence  of  a  charitable  spirit  in  him  who  performs  them — because  these  may  be 
prompted  by  very  different  motives,  and  because  true  charity  is  not  exemplified 
merely  on  a  few  particular  occasions,  but  in  the  general  tenor  of  our  conduct,  and 
in  the  habitual  discipline  of  our  tempers.  The  second  truth  we  learn  is  this  :  no 
man  can  possess  a  spirit  of  genuine  charity  who  does  not  seize  every  opportunity  of 
being  actively  beneficial  to  his  fellow-creatures ;  and  so  many  opportunities  are 
there  of  this  kind,  which  every  one,  even  the  poorest  among  us,  must  possess,  that 
it  is  easy  for  any  man,  who  will  take  the  trouble  of  examining  into  the  tenor  of  his 
daily  intercourse  with  those  around  him,  to  determine  whether  he  indeed  possesses 
"  that  most  excellent  disposition  of  charity,  without  which  whosoever  liveth  is 
counted  dead  before  God."  II.  But,  in  the  second  place,  the  apostle  says,  in  the 
text,  that  charity  "  shall  cover  the  multitude  of  sins."  Now  it  is  evident,  from 
the  definition  which  we  have  just  given  of  this  disposition  of  the  heart,  that  they 
cannot  be  the  sins  which  we  commit  against  our  fellow-creatures  that  charity  shall 
cover ;  for  did  we  possess  this  grace  in  perfection,  we  should  not  trespass  against 
our  fellow-creatures  at  all.  True  charity  would  lead  us  to  the  unfailing  fulfilment 
of  aU  the  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  brethren.  It  is  equally  certain  that  charity 
towards  men  cannot  atone  for  our  sins  against  God  ;  for  though  the  love  of  our 
neighbour  be  a  characteristic  badge  of  our  Christian  profession,  though  it  is  vain  to 
pretend  our  love  towards  our  Heavenly  Father,  whilst  we  hate  our  fellow-creatures  ; 
though  the  second  commandment  necessarily  springs  from  the  first,  and  is  like  unto 
it  in  its  nature,  still  it  cannot  be  made  in  any  degree  to  supersede  it.  It  can  only 
mean,  therefore,  that  charity  will  cover,  or  conceal,  and  forgive  the  sins  which  they 
commit  against  us.  And  this  will  appear  yet  more  evidently  if  we  consider,  in 
the  first  place,  from  whence  St.  Peter  quotes  this  proverbial  expression ;  and  in  the 
next,  if  we  attend  to  the  general  object  of  this  Epistle.  First,  then,  we  must  remark 
that  these  words  are  quoted  by  St.  Peter  from  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  In  the  twelfth 
verse  of  the  tenth  chapter,  the  wise  man  says,  "  Hatred  stirreth  up  strife,  but  love 
covereth  all  sins."  Here  the  opposite  line  of  conduct  which  is  suggested  by 
hatred  and  love  is  sufficient  to  guide  us  to  a  right  interpretation  of  the  passage. 
The  one  stirreth  up  strifes,  it  dwells  upon  them,  and  rouses  them  up  afresh,  and 
does  not  allow  them  to  be  forgotten.  But  the  contrary  disposition  of  love  covereth 
all  sins  ;  it  is  desirous  that  offences  should  be  hidden  and  die  away,  and  instead  of 
enmity  and  dissension,  is  anxious  for  peace  and  goodwill,  and  mutual  forbearance. 
It  follows,  then,  that  as  St.  Peter  introduced  into  his  Epistle  this  latter  part  of  the 
proverb,  he  intended  it  to  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  stood  in  the 
original  language  of  Solomon.  This  is,  moreover,  still  further  confirmed  if  we  regard 
the  general  tenor  of  St.  Peter's  Epistle.  It  seems  to  have  been  one  of  his  principal 
objects  to  reprove  and  reform  those  dissensions  and  disputes,  which,  even  in  those 
early  days,  prevailed  in  the  Christian  world.  (T.  Ainger,  M.A.)  Love  covers: 
sins : — The  whole  conception  may  have  been  based  on  the  filial  act  of  Noah's  sons,. 
of  whom  it  is  recorded  that  they  took  a  garment,  and  laid  it  upon  both  their  shoulders 
and  went  backward,  and  covered  their  father's  drunken  sin.  1.  Love  forgives.  Wd 
are  to  be  imitators  of  God  in  the  swiftness  and  completeness  of  His  forgiveness. 
2.  It  avoids  giving  occasion  for  sin.  It  has  been  said  that  if  you  have  a  favourite 
horse,  which  always  takes  fright  and  shies  at  a  certain  point  in  the  road,  you  are 
careful  to  come  along  another  road,  if  possible,  or  to  coax  him,  by  speaking  to  him 
kindly,  to  go  by  without  fear.  So  if  you  are  aware  that  a  certain  subject  will  always 
invoke  an  outburst  of  hot  temper  in  your  friend,  true  love  will  lead  you  to  avoid  it. 
You  will  not  needlessly  incite  to  sin  if  you  know  how  to  avoid  giving  the  first, 
inducement.  3.  It  is  quick  to  discern  some  generous  construction  to  put  upon  the: 
fault,  or  to  quote  some  consideration  to  weigh  in  the  opposite  scale.  "  True,  he  was- 
unpardonably  dull  and  slow,  but  then  how  trustworthy  and  reliable."  "  Yes,  he 
was  very  irritable  and  abrupt;  but,  then, remember  what  a  strain  he  has  been  under 
lately  in  his  business,  not  leaving  the  factory  or  counting-house  till  late  at  night, 
and  going  back  early  in  the  morning,  with  no  recreation  or  respite."  "  Granted, 
that  he  is  now  becoming  soured  and  crabbed ;  but,  then,  what  a  glorious  man  he 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

■was  in  those  earlier  days,  when  he  stood  in  the  breach."  "  Are  you  sure  that  there 
is  not  some  other  explanation  possible  for  his  action  ?  "  In  some  such  ways  as 
these,  Christian  love  argues  with  itself  and  others,  and,  as  the  result,  many  a  sin 
is  hindered  on  its  way,  and  many  a  fault  condoned.  4.  It  rebukes  with  great 
tenderness.  There  are  cases  where  duty  demands  public  censure.  The  sore  must 
not  lie  covered  up  lest  it  prove  to  be  deadly.  It  must  be  lanced  or  it  cannot  be 
cured.  But  the  lancing  is  done  with  exquisite  tenderness.  The  wrong-doer  is 
reproved,  rebuked,  and  exhorted,  but  with  all  long-suffering  (1  Tim.  iv.  2).  The 
man  overtaken  with  a  fault  is  restored  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  (Gal.  vi.  1). 
{F.  B.  Meijer,  B.A.)  Charity  coveiing  faults  : — "Dear  Moss!"  said  the  Thatch 
on  an  old  ruin,  "  I  am  so  worn,  so  patched,  so  ragged;  really,  I  am  quite  unsightly. 
I  wish  you  would  come  and  cheer  me  up  a  little  ;  you  will  hide  all  my  infirmities 
and  defects,  and  through  your  loving  sympathy  no  finger  of  contempt  or  dislike 
will  be  pointed  at  me."  "  I  come !  "  said  the  Moss  ;  and  it  crept  up  and  around, 
and  in  and  out,  till  every  flaw  was  hidden,  and  all  was  smooth  and  fair.  Presently 
the  sun  shone  out,  and  the  old  Thatch  looked  glorious  in  the  golden  rays.  "  How 
beautiful  the  Thatch  looks !  "  cried  one.  "  How  beautiful  the  Thatch  looks  !  "  cried 
another.  "  Ah  !  "  cried  the  old  Thatch,  "rather  let  them  say  how  beautiful  is  the 
loving  Moss,  that  spends  itself  in  covering  all  my  faults,  keeping  the  knowledge  of 
them  all  to  herself,  and  by  her  own  grace  making  my  age  and  poverty  wear  the  garb 
of  youth  and  luxuriance."  (Great  Thoughts.)  Use  hospitality  one  to  another. — 
Ungrudging  hoajntality : — To  God  the  intention  of  the  heart  is  all-important.  He 
loveth  a  cheerful  giver.  He  takes  such  delight  in  doing  good  that  He  has  no 
sympathy  with  anything  like  reluctance.  Not  that  hospitality  should  necessarily 
be  profuse  ;  for,  if  it  be,  it  is  difficult  to  maintain,  besides  reminding  the  guest  that 
he  is  regarded  as  a  stranger  ;  only  that  which  is  done  should  be  done  freely,  gladly, 
with  the  whole  heart.  There  is  no  hospitahty  so  grateful  as  that  which  makes  the 
stranger  feel  at  home,  because  there  is  nothing  forced  or  restrained,  and  he  is 
permitted  to  feel  completely  at  his  ease.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  warmth  of 
hoKjiitality  : — If  the  two  hands  be  plunged,  one  in  water  at  the  temperature  of  200°, 
and  the  other  in  snow,  and  being  held  there  for  a  certain  time  are  transferred  to 
water  of  the  intermediate  temperature  of  100°,  this  water  will  appear  warm  to  one 
hand  and  cold  to  the  other — warm  to  the  hand  which  has  been  plunged  in  the  snow, 
•and  cold  to  the  hand  which  has  been  plunged  in  the  water  at  200°.  The  anomaly 
is  easily  explained.  The  sensation  of  heat  is  relative.  When  the  body  has  been 
■exposed  to  a  high  temperature,  a  medium  which  has  a  lower  temperature  will  feel 
cold,  and  when  it  has  been  exposed  to  a  low  temperature,  it  will  feel  warm.  Now 
this  fact  will  suggest,  by  analogy,  a  way  for  testing  hospitality.  It  is  not  uncommon 
to  hear  a  man  speak  about  '*  the  warmth"  of  somebody's  hospitality.  Perhaps  that 
same  "  warmth  "  seemed  very  much  like  coldness  to  us.  How  are  we  to  explain 
the  dilTerence  in  the  sensations  of  our  friend  and  ourselves  ?  Simply  by  remember- 
ing that  hospitality,  like  heat,  is  a  relative  thing.  A  man  who  has  just  come  out 
of  the  cold  house  of  Mrs.  Niggard  will  feel  the  tepid  house  of  Mrs.  Moderate  to  be 
quite  a  warm,  hospitable  place.  On  the  other  hand,  a  man  who  goes  to  Mrs. 
Moderate's  house  after  a  prolonged  stay  at  the  genial  mansion  of  the  generous 
Lady  Bountiful,  will  feel  that  establishment  to  be  rather  chilly  in  its  hospitality. 
(Scientific  Illustrations.)  As  every  man  hath  received  the  gift.— Gifts  : — I.  The 
NDMBEB  AND  VARIETY  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  IN  THE  Chdrch.  The  term  "  gift  "  repre- 
sented by  nine  dii?erent  words  in  the  Greek,  occurs  in  three  different  shades  of 
meaning,  viz.,  "  a  present,"  "an  offering  to  God,"  and  "  a  personal  endowment." 
The  last  is  evidently  the  gift  of  our  text.  1.  Every  believer  has  a  gift,  and  his  own 
gift  (Luke  xix.  13  ;  Matt.  xxv.  15).  The  little  wheels  in  an  engine,  the  little  stones 
in  a  building,  and  the  little  gifts  in  the  church,  occupy  a  place  for  which  the  larger 
would  be  quite  unsuitable.  An  organism  is  healthy  only  when  all  its  members 
perform  their  functions  ;  and  efficiency  in  the  whole  is  the  gross  result  of  efficiency 
in  every  part.  2.  The  gifts  of  the  Church  are  a  revelation  of  the  manifold  grace 
out  of  which  they  spring.  "Gifts,"  the  most  general  class,  such  as  wisdom,  knowledge, 
and  faith,  are  referred  to  the  Father.  "Administrations,"  a  more  limited  class,  as 
healing,  prophesying,  and  speaking  with  tongues,  are  referred  to  the  Son.  "  Opera- 
tions," the  smallest  class,  such  as  miracles,  discerning  of  spirits,  &c.,  are  referred 
to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Individual  character  determines  largely  individual  spiritual 
gifts.  A  ray  of  light  passing  through  a  crystal  heptahedron  is  broken  up  into  seven 
different  colours,  one  of  which  is  appropriated  by  each  of  its  seven  sides.  So 
entering  the  prism,  the  Church,  the  white  light  of  the  Spirit  is  analysed  into  its 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  347 

various  elements,  afid  each  soul  appropriates  the  particular  one  that  suits  it.  The 
gifts  acquired  are  thus  as  various  as  the  cast  of  the  acquiring  minds.     II.  The 

MEANING  AND  PUKPOSE  OF  THE  BESTOWAL  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  ON  THE  ChURGH.  "  Minis- 
tering it  among  yourselves."  This  is  a  noble  thought.  1.  It  implies  that  we  study 
our  gifts,  and  so  make  no  mistake  as  to  the  work  we  are  fitted  to  do.  This  is  a 
matter  of  great  importance.  The  navigation  of  a  ship  will  be  bad  with  children  at 
the  ropes,  and  a  landsman  at  the  helm.  A  ministry  without  ministerial  gifts  is  a 
machine  incapable  of  moving,  even  if  the  power  were  there.  2.  It  implies  that  we 
train  and  cultivate  our  gifts  so  as  to  use  them  at  their  best.  He  would  be  an 
eccentric  farmer  who  allowed  his  land  to  lie  untilled  because  the  soil  was  rich. 
It  is  the  richest  land  and  the  highest  gifts  that,  being  cultivated,  will  yield  the  best 
return.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Alpha,  but  not  the  Omega,  of 
qualification  for  spiritual  work.  The  apostles  had  this  to  begin  with,  yet  wex-e  all 
carefully  trained  by  Christ,  and  Paul  warns  Timothy  to  "  stir  up  "  his  gift.  3.  Our 
gifts  in  their  most  highly  cultivated  form  are  all  to  be  used  for  the  common  good* 
"  Among  yourselves."  The  perfection  of  reciprocity  exists  in  the  religious  life 
(Matt.  v.  23 ;  vii.  12).  There  is  no  place  for  selfishness  in  it ;  the  peculiar  quaUty 
of  it  being  the  look  outward,  instead  of  inward  (Phil.  ii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  x.  24).  The 
selfish  soul  shrivels  and  dies,  and  the  maimed  and  weakened  Church  suffers  in  all 
its  functions.  It  is  incredible  the  moral  power  that  is  lying  dormant  in  the  Church. 
The  power  once  latent  in  steam  and  inaccessible  is  now  evoked  by  the  millions  of 
horse-power  daily.  The  power  once  hidden  in  electricity  is  now  in  exercise  in 
every  village,  carrying  on  swift  and  silent  wing  the  thoughts  of  men  across  the 
continents,  "  and  their  words  to  the  world's  end."  But  the  ten  thousandfold 
greater  power  sealed  up  in  the  napkinned  talents  of,  idle  Christian  people  is  still 
unreached.  What  an  amount  of  religious  machinery  would  be  in  motion  if  an 
ecclesiastical  James  Watt  or  Stephen  Gray  would  come  and  unlock  this  magazine 
of  spiritual  force  !  Nothing  could  stand  against  it.  Darkness  would  be  dissipated, 
sin  would  be  jostled  off  the  earth,  and  misery  would  spread  its  sable  wings  and  fly 
away.  [Homiletic  Quarterly.)  God's  gifts  and  their  use : — I.  It  is  assumed  that 
EVERY  Christian  has  some  gift  from  God.  1.  All  our  endowments  are  blessings 
received  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  2.  All  are  received  from  the  multiform  goodness  of  God. 
"  Manifold."  (1)  How  gracious  is  this  procedure,  by  which  God's  gifts  come  to  us 
tinged  by  the  infinite  variety  of  the  substances  on  which  they  fall !  When  He  might 
have  poured  His  influences  in  one  indistinguishable  flood  of  radiance.  He  rather 
sends  them  reflected  differently  from  each  different  mind,  diversified  by  all  the 
colours  of  the  rainbow,  and  sparkling  with  manifold  hues.  For  thus  we  are  brought 
to  admire  and  rejoice  in  not  only  God  Himself  as  the  primal  source  of  all  good,  but 
in  our  fellow-men  through  whose  "  manifold  "  concurrence  this  "  manifold  grace  " 
has  been  diffused  around  us.  (2)  It  shows  itself  in  all  sorts  of  persons,  with  all 
sorts  of  endowments,  in  all  sorts  of  offices,  for  all  sorts  of  duties.  3.  All  must  be 
accounted  for  to  God.  II.  Each  man's  gift  is  to  be  used  for  the  good  of  his 
FELLOW-MEN.  The  fuuds  put  into  our  charge  must  be  administered.  We  must 
neither  misuse  them  nor  neglect  them.  1.  We  must  not  appropriate  them  to 
ourselves  through  selfishness.  2.  We  must  not  withhold  this  grace  from  others 
through  negligence.  The  sluggishness  of  our  nature  is  as  much  to  be  watched 
against  and  overcome  as  its  selfishness.  III.  God  will  bless  the  proper  use  of 
His  GIFTS.  Look  only  at  the  works  of  nature.  See  how  the  little,  almost  imper- 
ceptible, seed,  being  cas^  into  the  ground  in  the  proper  season,  with  proper  care,  is 
blessed  by  the  bounteous  Author,  and  is  made  to  bring  forth  thirty,  sixty,  a  hundred- 
fold. Will  God  be  more  niggard  of  blessing  to  spiritual  husbandry  than  to  earthly  ? 
No  effort  to  do  good  is  ever  lost.  (T.  Griffith,  M.A.)  Gifts  and  responsibility  : — 
I.  First,  then,  the  idea  of  personal  responsibilitt  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all 
morality.  It  is  not  distinctively  Christian— it  is  human ;  it  is  inherent  in  man  as 
a  moral  being.  If  we  would  trace  it  to  its  immediate  source,  it  springs  from  the 
testimony  of  conscience — the  personal  experience  of  the  Light  which  lighteth  every 
man.  It  not  only  enlightens  and  instructs,  but  it  counsels  and  exhorts.  These 
are  the  conditions  of  our  personal  responsibility.  But  behind  all  these  there  lies 
the  idea  of  the  personal  God,  whose  holy  Ufe  has  ordered  the  distinctions  of  right 
and  wrong.  I  have  dwelt  upon  these  points  because  it  seems  to  me  that  in  theso 
days  there  is  a  tendency  to  lay  the  foundations  of  moral  conduct  and  of  the  religious 
hfe  rather  in  the  emotions  and  affections  than  in  the  demands  of  conscience  and 
the  obedience  of  the  will.  By  such  methods  the  sense  of  responsibility  is  inevitably 
weakened,  and  our  duties,  both  moral  and  religious,  become  only  a  higher  kind  of 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

self-gratification.  It  is  true  that  the  ways  of  wisdom  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and 
that  the  religious  life  is  rich  in  present  rewards  of  both  peace  and  joy.  But  these 
are  not  its  true  or  highest  motives.  It  is  a  great  step  in  the  Christian  life  when 
this  responsibility  is  recognised.  II.  But  the  text  further  reminds  us  of  the 
DIVERSITY  OF  GIFTS.  Every  man  hath  received  a  gift — not  the  gift — not  all  men  the 
same  gift.  The  gifts  and  endowments  of  individual  men  are  as  various  as  their 
outward  appearance.  Every  man  has  some  gifts  ;  no  man  has  all  gifts.  It  is  this 
diversity  that  gives  a  chief  interest,  and  even  beauty,  to  human  Ufe,  and  affords 
opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  some  of  its  highest  virtues.  If  all  men  were  equallj' 
gifted,  the  intercourse  of  life  would  become  drearily  monotonous.  It  would  be  as  if 
in  the  natural  world  all  mountains  were  of  one  height  and  one  outline  ;  all  the  now 
changeful  clouds  of  one  permanent  form ;  aU  trees  of  one  kind  and  colour  and 
shape,  like  the  trees  in  the  toy-box  of  a  child.  But  this  variety  of  gifts  brings  with 
it  a  varying  responsibility,  differing  according  to  the  character  of  the  gifts  which 
each  has  received.  There  is  a  tendency  among  men  to  esteem  some  gifts  more 
highly  than  others  ;  and  this  estimate  varies  in  different  places,  and  under  different 
circumstances,  and  at  different  times.  But  in  themselves  they  bring  no  real  honour 
to  those  who  possess  them.  No  man  deserves  credit  for  mere  intellectual  power 
any  more  than  for  brute  force.  But  it  is  in  the  use  of  these  powers  that  the  man 
himself  is  to  gain  credit  and  honour.  So  far  as  the  gifts  themselves  are  regarded, 
they  are,  as  the  apostle  reminds  us,  the  gifts  of  God.  The  man  of  quick  intelligence 
and  retentive  memory  who  gains  easily  his  place  in  the  tripos  may  be  far  less 
worthy  of  honour  than  one  of  humble  gifts  and  feeble  powers.  For  the  most  part 
it  is  the  union  of  great  gifts  with  diligent  work  which  ensures  success ;  but  it  has 
sometimes  been  otherwise.  But  how  often  the  less  gifted  man,  feeble  in  his  mental 
power  and  slow  in  its  exercise— painfully  acquiring  the  needed  knowledge  with 
continuous  effort,  how  often  is  such  a  one  regarded  only  with  a  haK-contemptuous 
pity.  But  the  diversity  of  gifts  of  which  our  text  speaks  is  not  only  a  difference  of 
degree,  but  of  kind.  Even  here  we  see  this  distinction  in  a  limited  degree.  The 
man  who  is  strong  in  mathematical  may  be  weak  in  classical  studies.  And,  again, 
how  constantly  does  experience  prove  that  there  is  a  special  gift  of  imparting  know- 
ledge distinct  from  that  of  attaining  it.  The  gifts  of  personal  influence,  of  discerning 
sympathy,  of  persuasiveness  of  speech,  of  practical  wisdom,  as  distinct  from  know- 
ledge. All  these  have  their  own  great  value.  But  under  all  these  diversities  of 
gifts  there  lies  upon  each  of  us  the  great  responsibility  declared  in  the  words  of  my 
text,  "  As  every  man  hath  reserved  the  gift,  even  so  minister  the  same  one  to 
another,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God."  III.  To  every  one  of  us 
it  speaks  in  very  solemn  tones,  remembering  the  account  that  we  must  one  day 
GIVE.  But  far  above  all  these  gifts  of  God,  which  we  caU  gifts  of  nature,  are  those 
higher  gifts,  which  we  call  gifts  of  grace — the  gifts  which  find  their  exercise,  not  in 
the  work  of  the  world,  but  in  the  training  and  perfecting  of  the  soul.  These  are 
gifts  which  are  common  to  all,  and  within  the  reach  of  all.  The  gift  of  grace  which 
comes  in  answer  to  our  private  prayers,  the  gi'ace  which  comes  to  us  through  the 
daily  study  of  the  Word— the  grace  of  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood. 
All  these  gifts  we  have  received  in  promise,  and  our  responsibility  lies  in  seeking 
and  claiming  them  for  our  own.  (Bishop  of  Lichfield.)  Duty: — I.  The  Christian 
PRIVILEGE.  The  text  first  of  all  speaks  of  receiving — that  is  the  privilege  to  which 
it  points.  We  get  in  order  that  we  may  give  ;  but  we  can  give  nothing  until  we  are 
first  of  all  put  into  possession.  And  what  the  Christian  does  receive,  he  accepts  as 
a  gift — not  as  the  equivalent  of  service  rendered,  or  achievements  accomplished,  or 
wonh  acknowledged — but  as  a  something  to  which  he  has  no  sort  of  claim,  sent 
down  out  of  that  boundless  Divine  treasury  which  the  apostle,  at  the  end  of  the 
text,  describes  as  "  the  manifold  grace  of  God."  Whatever  gift  you  have,  it  is  of 
God's  sending :  all  spiritual  endowment  and  all  natural  capacity,  your  influence, 
your  wealth,  your  leisure,  your  power  of  speech,  or  action,  or  organisation ;  all  is 
God's  giving ;  you  have  won  nothing,  deserved  nothing.  You  have  received  all, 
freely,  unconditionally,  as  so  many  pledges  and  foretastes  of  "  the  manifold  grace 
of  God."  We  all  have  gift,  and  all  we  have  is  gift.  And  the  dissimilarity  in 
individual  cases  is  the  most  patent  fact  in  experience.  One  man  can  do  good  work 
at  home,  another  finds  his  proper  element  in  the  school,  or  in  the  streets,  or  the 
cottage  meeting.  II.  The  obligation.  "  As  ye  have  received  even  so  minister." 
God's  gift  then  is  not  intended  to  terminate  with  ourselves.  It  is  not  meant  for 
self -gratification,  least  of  all  for  personal  parade.  It  begins  with  the  individual 
always:  it  ends  with  him   never.    This   is  involved  in  the    ultimate    aim   of 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  349 

Christianity  itself.  The  apostle  asks  us  only  to  give  out  what  and  as  we  take  in. 
"As  every  one  hath  received,  minister  the  same."  Give  in  measure  and  in  kind 
as  ye  have  received.  Give  what  you  have  got,  and  do  not  distress  yourself  because 
you  cannot  give  something  else  which  you  do  not  have.  However  much  you 
admire  another  man's  gift,  and  profit  by  it,  there  is  no  call  to  imitate  it.  Do  what 
you  can,  and  you  will  do  as  well  as  the  brother  whose  work  you  so  greatly 
appreciate.  You  will  receive  as  high  a  reward  and  as  lofty  a  commendation.  III. 
And  now  notice  the  Cheistian  position.  The  redeemed  are  required  to  be  "  good 
stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God."  Now,  a  steward  is  not  an  absolute  owner 
but  a  responsible  administrator.  And  all  gifts,  according  to  the  apostle,  are  trusts. 
No  Christian  in  his  view  gets  his  natural  talents  or  material  possessions,  still  less 
his  spiritual  endowments,  for  himself  alone.  This  is  the  position  here  set  forth ; 
but  how  miserably  its  obligation  is  responded  to.  How  scant  a  return  does  our 
stewardship  yield.  (Hugh  Ross.)  Christian  stetoardship  : — The  great  Giver  of 
the  universe  is  the  great  Economist  too.  He  has  written  it  everywhere.  The 
fulness  of  nature  is  not  kept  up  by  new  creations,  but  by  that  power  of  self -repair 
which  He  has  made  the  law  of  its  life.  It  is  the  same  in  the  kingdom  of  grace. 
God  gave  it  a  beginning  by  His  own  direct  and  almighty  power ;  by  the  same  power 
He  could  carry  it  on  to  its  final  completion.  But  this  is  not  His  manner  of  doing. 
He  expects  it,  by  virtue  of  that  principle  of  life  which  He  has  communicated  to  it, 
to  carry  itself  on  now,  not  independently  of  Him,  but  in  reliance  upon  Him,  and 
receiving  from  Him,  just  as  nature  is  dependent  on  Him  for  the  continuance  of  its 
vitalising  force.  But  still,  in  so  far  as  instrumentality  is  concerned,  the  work  is  its 
own,  not  His.  I.  The  nature  of  the  thing  here  spoken  of  :  ministry — service. 
We  are  apt  to  look  on  service  as  a  menial  thing.  There  is  nothing  more  glorified 
in  the  Bible.  Service,  mutual  helpfulness  growing  out  of  mutual  dependence,  is 
the  law  of  the  universe.  The  man  who  lives  for  himself  is  not  worthy  of  the  name 
of  man.  He  is  as  unlike  Christ,  the  ideal  man,  as  it  is  possible  for  him  to  be. 
Service — tender,  considerate,  beneficent  work  for  others — ennobles  a  man,  and  is 
the  first  thing  to  do  so.  Till  then  it  is  all  receiving  with  him,  and  no  giving  ;  all 
incurring  obligation,  no  discharging  of  any ;  and  that  is  death  to  any  character. 
II.  The  range  of  the  duty.  It  is  universal.  1.  "  As  every  man,"  &c.  This  makes 
the  matter  very  simple.  It  puts  an  end  to  all  casuistry  and  all  excuses.  God  is 
the  centre  of  the  universe  which  He  has  made,  and  He  ministers  to  all.  "  To  Him 
belongeth  power."  But  as  all  rational  life  is  after  the  pattern  of  Himself,  He  has 
put  into  it  everywhere  something  of  this  ministering  power,  and  we  fulfil  His  idea, 
and  show  ourselves  to  be  His  children,  rising  into  His  likeness,  just  in  proportion 
as  we  exercise  that  power  in  our  several  spheres.  2.  "  One  to  another."  Here  is 
the  idea  of  reciprocity  added.  It  is  not  to  be  all  giving  with  some,  and  all  receiving 
with  others.  The  thing  is  to  go  round — a  perpetual  interchange  of  blessings  and 
gifts,  a  mutual  well-doing,  a  generous  commerce  of  souls,  supplying  each  other's 
lack  out  of  each  other's  abundance  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  and  from  the 
lowest  to  the  highest.  III.  The  rule  of  the  duty.  "  Minister  the  same."  It  is 
idle  to  say  that  you  can  do  nothing,  for  if  you  are  a  Christian  you  have  received 
something — "  the  gift."  The  apostle  does  not  assert  this,  but  takes  it  for  granted. 
"As  every  man,"  (fee,  and  gift  is  faculty,  for  which  God  holds  us  all  directly 
responsible.  Now,  observe,  this  rule  applies  both  to  the  form  and  the  measure  of 
the  gift,  both  to  its  kind  and  to  its  degree.  It  applies  to  its  form.  It  differs  in  this 
in  different  individuals,  and  hence  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  "  manifold  "  grace  of 
God.  It  is  very  plastic  this  grace  of  God,  and  accommodates  itself  to  the  consti- 
tutional peculiarities  of  men.  However  unpretentious  our  gift  may  be,  it  may 
count  for  more  than  we  think.  If  our  life  and  conduct  say  what  is  true  about 
Christ,  and  nothing  but  what  is  true,  representing  His  yoke  as  easy.  His  burden  as 
light.  His  service  as  love,  His  reign  as  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  then  it  does  not  matter  how  humble  our  work  may  be  in  its  outward  form, 
it  will  still  be  work  for  God,  work  for  Christ,  and  for  truth,  and  the  souls  of  men. 
We  shall  be  ministering  "  as  we  have  received  the  gift."  But  now  observe,  this  "  as  " 
applies  to  degree  as  well  as  to  form.  We  are  to  minister  one  to  another  up  to  the 
extent  to  which  we  have  received  the  gift,  that  is,  to  the  full  extent  of  our  ability. 
(A.  L.  Simpson,  D.D.)         God's  gifts  and  their  purpose  : — I.  All  oub  possessions 

ARE  THE  gifts  OF  GoD,  BEING  PART  OF  HiS  MANIFOLD  GRACE.    1.    When  WC  COHSider  the 

shortness  of  the  time  for  which  these  gifts  are  granted,  we  may  consider  them  as 
loans,  returnable  to  the  lender  when  the  term  for  which  they  are  lent  is  expired. 
2.  These  gifts  are  not  committed  to  us  merely  for  our  own  enjoyment,  but  that  we     _ 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

may  use  them  to  the  benefit  of  the  whole  body  of  the  Church.  This  is  evidently 
God's  purpose.  His  grace  is  manifold.  He  is  no  maker  of  favourites.  3.  That 
which  is  shown  to  be  true  of  God's  natural  gifts  is  true  in  a  still  higher  degree  of 
His  gifts  of  grace.  The  imagining  that  spiritual  privileges  are  bestowed  for  the 
exclusive  benefit  of  their  possessors  was  the  error  which  destroyed  the  Church  of 
Israel.  4.  The  gifts  which  we  receive  of  God  we  receive  of  Him  through  the  Eternal 
Son.  (1)  This  is  true  even  apart  from  the  fact  of  the  Incarnation.  He  is  the  Word  of 
God,  by  Him  all  things  are  made.  Through  Him  God  goes  forth  to  His  creatures. 
(2)  This  is  true  in  a  much  higher  sense  since  the  Word  has  become  Incarnate,  and 
through  His  Incarnation  reconciled  us  to  God.  Having  fulfilled  all  the  will  of  God, 
to  Him  is  given  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  In  the  might  of  that  power  He 
bids  His  apostles  go  forth  to  claim  all  human  souls  as  His  rightful  inheritance.  II. 
What  gifts  has  God  bestowed  upon  us,  and  how  are  we  to  use  them  ?  These  gifts 
are :  (a)  spiritual,  and  {b)  natural.  1.  Spiritual  gifts  are  such  as  we  receive 
through  our  membership  with  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  They  consist  in 
redemption  if  we  will  accept  it ;  sanctification  if  we  will  seek  for  it ;  and  all  the 
blessed  means  whereby  the  life  of  the  Incarnate  Word  is  bestowed  upon  us  and 
kept  alive  within  us,  if  we  will  use  them.  2.  Among  our  natural  gifts  some  are 
common  to  all.  Life,  a  sphere  of  usefulness  large  or  small,  health,  powers  of  mind 
and  body.  There  are  other  gifts  bestowed  upon  some  persons,  and  withheld  from 
others.  The  power  of  influence,  the  possession  of  talent  or  of  wealth,  the  gift  of 
utterance,  the  advantages  of  position.  While  it  is  possible  to  claim  these  natural 
gifts  as  our  own  without  reference  to  our  Incarnate  Lord,  yet  it  is  only  when  we 
possess  them  in  Him  that  we  may  be  said  to  possess  them  truly.  Otherwise,  they 
are  as  likely  to  possess  us  as  we  are  to  possess  them,  to  be  our  masters  as  we  are  to 
be  theirs.  3.  Thus  ministering  the  gift  as  we  have  received  it,  whether  it  be  large 
or  small,  whether  it  be  natural  or  spiritual,  we  find  upon  gathering  up  the  fragments 
that  remain  over  and  above  to  those  to  whom  we  have  ministered,  that  there  is 
greater  store  than  we  knew,  greater  because  more  full  of  God's  blessing!  (Canon 
Vernon  Hutton.)  Personal  Christliness  : — 1.  Whatever  man  has  is  a  gift  from 
God.  2.  Whatever  man  has  he  should  benevolently  employ  for  the  advantage  of 
others.  I.  Personal  Christliness  is  a  Divine  gift.  1.  It  is  the  greatest  gift. 
Qualifies  man  to  please  his  Maker,  bless  humanity,  serve  the  universe,  and  inherit 
all  things.''  2.  It  is  the  costliest  gift.  II.  Personal  Christliness  is  a  Divine  gift 
TO  BE  socially  EMPLOYED.  This  social  ministry  is — 1.  Obligatory.  2.  Varied. 
3.  Divine.  Learn :  1.  The  divinity  of  a  Christly  life.  2.  The  test  of  a  Christly 
life.      Genuine   social  benevolence.      (Homilist.)  Minister  the  same   one  to 

another. — Gifts  to  be  communicated  for  the  good  of  others : — Though  a  Christian  be 
the  freest  man  in  the  world  (as  being  freed  from  Satan,  sin,  hell,  the  law,  &c.),  yet 
is  he  to  be  of  all  others  the  most  serviceable ;  he  must  not  put  his  light  under  a 
bushel,  nor  hide  his  talent  in  a  napkin.  1.  As  the  sun  shines  not  for  itself,  nor  the 
earth  bears  for  itself ;  so  have  not  we  a  gift  for  ourselves,  but  for  the  common  good. 

2.  The  perfection  of  gifts  consists  not  only  in  the  having  of  it,  but  in  the  use  thereof. 

3.  The  communion  of  saints,  which  we  believe,  requires  it.  4.  This  brings  most 
peace  to  our  conscience  both  in  life  and  death.  5.  This  procures  credit  while  we 
live,  as  a  good  name  and  memory  when  we  die.  6.  We  are  divers  ways  partakers/ 
of  the  gifts  of  others,  and  so  must  make  them  partakers  of  ours.  7.  Our  gifts 
increase  by  using ;  the  more  we  bestow  them,  the  more  we  have  them.  {John 
Rogers.)  Receiving  and  ministering  : — Clouds  when  full  pour  down,  and  the 
spouts  run,  and  the  eaves  shed,  and  the  presses  overflow,  and  the  aromatical  trees 
sweat  out  their  precious  and  sovereign  oils.  (J.  Trapp.)  Mutual  obligations  : — 
The  "  grace  of  God  "  means  His  liberality.  It  is  called  "  manifold,"  because  God's 
gifts  are  so  various  in  kind  and  in  degree.  They  are  of  many  descriptions,  and 
vario^isly  proportioned.  On  some  the  Divine  bounty  seems  to  pour  itself  in  torrents, 
while  to  others  it  comes  in  very  slender  rills,  or  apparently  in  drops  only.  Still  we 
know  that  God  "  is  good  to  all."  And,  doubtless,  were  the  least  gifted  among  us 
more  quicksighted  and  pious,  they  would  find  themselves  possessed  of  far  more 
-?onsiderable  gifts  from  God's  hand  than  they  acknowledge  or  discern.  Our  corrupt 
uelfishness  makes  us  dull  of  sight,  coldhearted,  and  ungrateful.  Now  the  apostle 
asserts,  in  the  text,  that  we  are  all  sharers  in  God's  manifold  grace.  "  According  as 
overy  man  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so  minister  the  same  one  to  another."  He 
)ias  just  before  been  enjoining  the  mutual  exercise  of  ungrudging  hospitality.  And 
afterwards  he  si^'nifies,  that  our  powers  of  speech  and  action  are  all  to  be  employed 
in  a  holy  and  charitable  manner  for  the  welfare  of  our  brethren,  and  to  the  glory 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  351 

of  God  our  common  Father,  through  Christ.  You  see,  then,  that  to  each  of  us  is 
allotted  a  ministry.  We  must  lay  ourselves  out  to  do  good  ;  not  wait  lazily  for  an 
almost  constraining  impulse  of  circumstances.  And  that  we  may  be  useful  and  not 
hurtful,  it  is  our  duty  to  ascertain  what  our  gift  is ;  and  not  to  attempt  what  lies 
beyond  our  province,  and  so  mar  instead  of  making  or  mending.  One  obstacle  of 
our  own  making  to  the  useful  exercise  of  our  talents  is  a  reluctance  to  co-operate 
with  those  who  possess  that  quality  which  is  wanting  in  ourselves,  but  which  needs 
to  be  combined  with  ours  in  order  to  its  efficiency.  Now  I  believe  that  God  has/ 
distributed  His  gifts  variously  for  this  very  purpose  among  others,  to  force  upon  uaf 
k  pai'tnership  in  good  works.  He  has  made  us  so  necessary  the  one  to  the  other! 
/that  selfish  separatism  is  hardly  less  consistent  with  human  well-being  than  witn 
/  Divine  philanthropy.  The  man  of  sagacity  is  not  always  good  in  action  :  he  wants 
an  energetic  coadjutor.  Moses,  good  in  counsel,  requires  the  help  of  Aaron  ready 
of  speech.  Nay  more,  it  is  better  for  the  business  of  the  world  that  high  attributes 
should  not  be  so  justly  blended  in  the  several  individuals,  called  to  act  an  important 
part,  as  to  constitute  what  is  nearest  to  perfection  ;  but  rather  that  what  is  excessive 
in  one  should  be  balanced  and  corrected  by  an  excess  of  another  kind  in  his  help- 
mate. The  vehemence  of  Luther  was  a  blemish  in  him,  while  Melancthon  was 
cautious  to  a  fault.  Yet  who  can  doubt  that  the  glorious  Eeformation  was  better 
accomplished  by  two  such  fellow-labourers,  than  it  would  have  been  by  the  same 
men,  had  there  been  an  equal  distribution  between  them  of  their  respective  charac- 
teristic properties.  Such  then  is  God's  way  of  dispensing  His  gifts.  He  divides  "to 
every  man  severally  "  as  He  pleases.  In  the  Church  He  has  given  "  some  apostles, 
and  some  prophets,  and  some  evangelists,  and  some  pastors  and  teachers  ;  for  the 
perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of 
Christ "  ;  and  all  this  is  arranged  with  a  view  to  unity — unity  of  faith,  unity  of  love, 
unity  of  action.  Nothing  can  be  clearer  than  the  duty  of  turning  our  means  and 
opportunities  to  good  account.  We  are  prone  to  view  our  talent  under  false  and 
vicious  limitations ;  to  confine  our  notions  of  the  proper  sphere  of  assiduous  kind- 
ness to  one's  own  immediate  connections.  The  gospel  vastly  expands  our  field  of 
duty.  It  urges  upon  us  that  we  are  all  brethren.  Therefore,  whatever  gift  we 
possess  is  meant  for  the  general  welfare.  Let  me  here  say  a  word  or  two  upon  our 
accountableness.  People  are  not  seldom  anxious  to  believe  that  by  declining  to 
undertake  a  certain  work  they  avoid  a  serious  responsibility.  No  doubt  that 
is  sometimes  true.  But  if  that  work  be  a  duty,  then  you  cannot  escape  the 
responsibility  which  lies  upon  you  to  engage  in  it.  (J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.) 
In  what  a  variety  of  ways  we  may  serve  and  benefit  others  : — Doing  good  to  others 
rejoices  every  human  heart  that  is  not  totally  callous  and  corrupt.  Doing  good  to 
others  engages  the  approbation  of  every  man.     I.  How  great  is,  fikst,  the  diversity 

of  SITUATION'S  AMONG  MANKIND,  AND  HOW  VAEIOUS  THEREFORE  THE  OPPORTUNITY  AND 
THE  INDUCEMENT    TO    BE    USEFUL    TO    ONE    ANOTHER    IN    DIFFERENT  WAYS  !       HoW    many 

classes  and  descriptions  of  persons  fill  up  the  interval  between  the  monarch  or  the 
prince  and  the  meanest  of  his  subjects  !  And  how  various  their  destination  ;  how 
various  the  sphere  of  action  assigned  them ;  how  manifold  the  good  and  useful  that 
each  may  contrive,  adopt,  and  do  therein  !  If  the  government  is  watchful  over  the 
public  tranquillity  and  safety ;  if  the  magistrate  maintains  the  laws  in  their  due 
respect,  and  protects  the  individual  in  his  property ;  if  one  preceptor  teaches  the 
child  the  elements  of  human  knowledge,  another  instructs  the  youth  in  the  higher 
branches  of  science ;  if  the  statesman  is  attentive  to  the  several  exigencies  of  the 
country  and  provides  for  its  great  concerns  ;  the  countryman  produces  a  plentiful 
supply  of  food  from  the  furrows  of  his  plough  and  the  fields  he  industriously  culti- 
vates ;  the  manufacturer  and  the  mechanic  work  up  and  improve  the  products  of  the 
country ;  the  tradesman  brings  them  into  circulation,  and  the  merchant  barters  the 
surplus  against  those  of  other  nations ;  thus  thousands  of  hands  are  set  in  motion 
which  none  of  those  could  perform  without  neglecting  their  own,  and  which  are 
equally  indispensable  with  theirs.  And  how  much  good  now  may  every  one  do,  if 
he  does  what  belongs  to  him  with  willingness,  with  fidelity,  with  a  heart  benevolently 
affected  towards  his  brethren,  participating  in  their  happiness  and  cheerfully  con- 
curring to  promote  it !     II.  Consider  again  how  different  the  wants  of  mankind 

AND  how  various  THEIR  SUFFERINGS,  AND  THENCE    JUDGE    IN  WHAT    A  VARIETY    OF  WAYS 

ONE  MAY  SERVE  AND  BE  USEFUL  TO  ANOTHER.  Here  are  wauts  of  the  body — food,  rai- 
ment, lodging,  health,  strength ;  there  wants  of  the  mind — information,  knowledge, 
wisdom,  virtue,  inward  peace,  pleasure,  hope,  content.  Here  is  the  want  of  neces- 
saries ;  there  the  want  of  the  commodious,  the  elegant,  the  agreeable.     Here  are 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

corporeal  sufferings— weakness,  debility,  mutilation,  decrepitude,  pain,  sickness, 
lingering  death  ;  there  are  sufferings  of  the  soul — vexation,  trouble,  anxiety,  grief, 
dejection,  doubt,  remorse,  pangs  of  conscience,  melancholy,  despondency,  peril  of 
despair.  Here  is  the  want  of  advice,  there  of  support ;  here  of  courage,  there  of 
prudence ;  here  of  means  and  implements  of  trade,  there  of  abilities  for  it ;  here 
of  understanding,  there  of  alacrity  and  application ;  here  of  moderation,  there  of 
patience ;  here  of  modesty  and  diffidence,  there  of  self-importance  and  confidence.  And 
thus  the  matter  stands  in  numberless  other  cases.  The  necessities  of  the  one  are 
not  the  necessities  of  the  other ;  the  sufferings  of  the  one  are  not  the  sufferings  of 
the  other.  What  is  wanting  to  the  former  is  possessed  by  the  latter.  Every  one 
may  therefore  in  various  methods  give  and  receive,  administer  relief  and  accept 
relief,  comfort  and  be  comforted,  serve  and  submit  to  be  served,  communicate  benefit 
and  satisfaction  and  enjoy  benefit  and  satisfaction.     III.  Consider  thirdly,  how 

NUMEROUS  AND  VARIOUS  THE  CAPACITIES  AND  POWERS,  THE  GIFTS  AND  ACQUIREMENTS  OF 
MANKIND  ARE,  AND  THENCE  JUDGE  HOW  GREAT  THE  VARIETY  OF  WAYS  IN  WHICH  THEY  MAY 

SERVE  AND  ASSIST  AND  BENEFIT  EACH  OTHER.  No  One  is  cxactly  that  which  another  is ; 
no  one  has  precisely  that  which  another  has ;  no  one  knows  all  that  another  knows ; 
no  one  can  and  may  do  whatever  another  can  and  may.  One  has  understanding  ; 
and  how  various  the  species  of  it  are  !  Here  is  a  profound,  collected,  there  a  com- 
prehensive and  excursive  ;  here  a  quick  but  volatile,  there  a  slow  but  solid  under- 
standing. Another  has  authority  and  strength,  and  how  various  are  these  in  their 
kinds  !  Here  is  strength  of  mind,  there  strength  of  body ;  here  the  power  of  beauty, 
there  the  power  of  eloquence  ;  here  the  command  of  oneself  and  the  passions,  there 
the  authority  of  the  ruler  and  the  commander  over  his  subjects;  here  impetuous, 
overwhelming,  there  mild,  insinuating,  yet  more  irresistible  force.  And  who  is  able 
to  recount  the  infinite  variations  of  human  capacities  and  powers  and  endowments 
and  their  analogies  to  each  other  ?  One  has  ingenuity,  an  extensive,  strong  turn 
for  invention ;  the  other  has  judgment  and  dexterity  in  execution.  One  quickness 
and  pliancy  to  the  business  of  the  present  moment ;  the  other  persevering,  inde- 
fatigable patience  for  intricate  and  tiresome  undertakings.  One  an  ardency  to 
animate  all  around  it ;  the  other  cool  consideration  and  resolution  to  put  a  stop  to  this 
devouring  flame.  And  now  let  each  exchange  his  capacities  and  endowments  and 
possessions  against  those  of  the  other ;  now  let  every  one  apply  the  particular  talent 
entrusted  to  him,  as  often  as  he  has  the  proper  motive  and  opportunity  for  it ;  what 
a  blessing  would  the  prodigiously  various  commutation  of  kind  offices,  of  assistance 
and  support,  of  benevolence  and  beneficence,  be  to  all  in  general  and  to  each  in 
particular !     IV.  Consider  lastly,  how  manifold  and  different  the  methods  in 

WHICH  ye  may  serve  YOUR  BRETHREN,  IN  WHICH  YE  MAY  DO  THEM  ALL  THE  GOOD  THAT  YE 

ARE  ABLE.  Thinking  and  speaking,  keeping  silenceandhearing,  giving  and  lending, 
partaking  and  borrowing,  bearing  and  suffering  and  relieving,  doing  and  not  doing, 
are  so  many  different  methods  of  serving  and  being  useful  to  others,  and  each  the 
best  in  its  proper  season,  the  most  productive  of  beneficial  consequences.  (G.  /. 
Zollikofer.)  "As"  and  "  so  " — the  method  of  ministry  : — You  and  I  can  only  give  large 
sums  of  money  to  God's  service,  as  God  makes  us  wealthy.  It  is  so  in  earthly 
things,  and  surely  it  must  be  so  in  spiritual  things.  If  we  are  living  in  the  fulness 
of  God,  then  the  promise  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  fulfilled  in  our  case — "  Out  of  oiir 
belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  straitened  in 
ourselves,  then  what  wonder  that  our  life  should  be  unprofitable,  and  that  we  should 
scarcely  to  any  degree  minister  the  gift,  simply  because  we  receive  it  so  scantily. 
But  when  I  look  again  at  that  word  "  as,"  another  thought  occurs  to  me.  It  strikes 
me  that  we  have  not  only  there  a  law  of  proportion,  we  have  also  a  law  of  quality, 
qualifying  the  bestowal  of  the  gift.  The  gift  is  bestowed  by  the  hand  of  Him  who  is 
an  example  to  us  in  giving,  as  well  as  in  every  other  respect.  As  we  receive,  so  we 
are  to  give.  There  ought  to  be  a  certain  God-like  liberality  in  our  efforts  to  dis- 
tribute the  favours  with  which  God  loads  us.  But  further,  that  word  "  as"  seems 
to  teach  us  more  than  this.  Not  only  have  we  received  the  gift  freely,  but  we  have 
received  it  wisely ;  that  is  to  say,  God,  in  bestowing  the  gift  upon  us,  exercised  a 
wisdom  which  belongs  to  His  own  nature,  preparing  us  for  its  reception,  and  bestow- 
ing upon  us  just  the  gift  appropriate  to  our  state.  Are  we  not  too  often  very  clumsy 
in  this  respect  ?  We  get  into  a  kind  of  stereotyped  way  of  working  for  God.  I 
cannot  but  feel  that,  if  we  would  minister  the  gift  as  the  Lord  would  have  us 
minister  it,  we  require  greater  delicacy  of  touch,  keener  discernment  of  human  cha- 
racter, and  a  fuller  appreciation  of  God's  different  methods  of  dealing  with  different 
souls  than  are  connnonly  to  be  met  with.     (IF.  H.  M.  H.  Aitkcn,  M.A.)        As  good 


CHAP,  rv.]  I.  PETER.  353 

stewards  of  the  manifold  grace. — The  Christian  stewardship  : — The  manifold  grace 
of  God  —  the  term  is  a  remarkable  one — it  is  that  word  by  which  the  Greeks 
expressed  infinite  variety  of  hue  or  of  design — the  shiftings  and  glistenings  of  richly- 
mingled  colours,  or  the  dappled  patterns  of  skilful  embroidery.  We  have  not,  I 
think,  been  good  stewards  of  this  manifold  grace.  We  have  been  ever  apt  to  look 
on  the  grace  of  God  in  one  or  at  most  in  some  few  of  its  aspects  only.  We  have 
forgotten  its  manifoldness.  In  other  words,  we  have  assumed  for  the  gospel  of 
Christ  too  exclusively  theological  a  character.  We  want  to  raise  up  the  new  life 
within  men.  Now  it  seems  to  me,  that  in  doing  this  we  have  been  too  long  acting 
contrary  to  all  natural  analogies.  Have  we,  like  the  unskilful  workman,  been  utterly 
careless  about  minutiae  ?  O  when  will  men  begin  to  see  that  religion  is  not  a  sepa- 
rate trade  or  profession,  but  the  business  of  life  ?  When  will  they  begin  to  appre- 
hend the  grace  of  God  in  its  manifoldness  ?  to  see  that  it  was  sent  to  win  every 
affection,  to  brighten  every  smile,  to  shed  fresh  interest  over  every  pursuit,  to  light 
up  new  hopes  in  every  prospect — to  embrace  every  variety  of  human  temperament, 
assist  every  degree  of  human  capacity  ?  We  never  shall  be  good  stewards,  till  we 
know  and  apply  this  truth,  and  carry  it  out  in  practice  in  our  own  times,  and  among 
those  with  whom  we  live.  "  Am  I  a  good  steward  of  this  manifold  grace  ?  "  "  Am  I 
occupying  with  it,  that  at  my  Master's  coming  He  may  find  it  increased  and  fructi- 
fied ?  "  We  will  first  speak,  as  the  most  obvious  case,  of  the  bestowal  of  God's  grace 
in  the  position  and  opportunities  afforded  by  rank,  wealth,  and  influence  among 
men.  It  is  God  who  putteth  down  one  and  setteth  up  another.  The  purpose  for 
■which  He  has  ordained  various  ranks  in  human  society,  is  that  He  may  thereby  be 
glorified  in  the  Christian  use  of  influence  over  others,  the  Christian  bestowal  of 
worldly  means.  Who  can  overestimate  the  value  of  such  an  one  as  a  centre  of  in- 
fluence for  good  ?  A  blessing  to  his  own  relatives,  to  his  dependants,  among  whom 
^he  is  ever  moving  and  speaking  ;  a  blessing  to  his  equals,  with  whom  he  communes 
jja  the  intercourse  of  social  life  ;  a  blessing  to  general  society  in  checking  all  that  is 
(Bvil  and  encouraging  all  that  is  good.  And  a  word  on  mere  wealth,  considered  as  a 
istewardship.  The  question  in  every  case  for  them  is  not  an  absolute,  but  a  relative 
^one  ;  not  "  what?  "  but  "  what  proportion?  "  As  a  man's  worldly  means  increase, 
«so  his  charities  ought  to  increase.  Then  there  is  another  matter  belonging  to  this 
part  of  our  subject ;  the  stewardship  of  administration  of  charity,  or  of  any  money 
laid  out  for  the  general  good.  The  labour  of  love  is  essential  not  only  to  good 
stewardship,  but  to  the  Christian  character  itself ;  and  every  man  may  make — and 
ought  to  make  if  there  be  any  difficulty  in  the  way — leisure  and  opportunity  for  such 
labour  of  love.  The  ways  and  occasions  for  it  are  manifold,  as  the  grace  which  will 
help  us  in  it.  Let  me  now  speak  of  another  stewardship  of  God's  manifold  grace  ; 
that  which  we  ordinarily  know  as  talent ;  ability  of  various  kinds,  wherewith  many 
are  considerably,  and  some  few  eminently,  endowed.  Great  numbers  of  ordinary 
men  are  made  very  much  by  that  which  they  read,  or  that  which  they  hear,  of  the 
sentiments  of  those  who  are  abler  than  themselves.  With  what  a  vast  responsibility 
does  this  invest  those  who  thus  stand  in  the  first  rank,  and  lead  mankind !  How 
great  a  difference,  to  take  an  example,  will  be  made  in  general  society  in  the  matter 
of  Christian  belief,  according  as  one  commanding  man  of  genius,  who  has  power 
over  thought  and  language,  makes  use  of  that  power.  We  are  all,  as  was  said  of 
the  Spartan  army  of  old,  commanders  of  commanders ;  we  all  work  upon  those, 
who  work  in  their  turn  upon  others.  And  therefore  our  ability,  be  it  ever  so  small, 
is  our  stewardship,  of  which  God  will  most  certainly  have  an  account  from  us.  But 
influence  over  others  is  not  the  only  matter  in  which  we  are  to  be  good  stewards  of 
His  manifold  grace.  It  was  given  us  for  influence  over  ourselves  ;  that  our  whole 
body,  soul,  and  spirit  might  be  sanctified  wholly — that  it  might  fill  us  to  our  utmost 
capacity  with  the  fulness  of  God,  and  render  us  efficient  for  promoting  His  glory. 
{Dean  Alford.)  The  idea  and  duty  of  human  life  : — I.  The  true  idea  of  human 
LIFE.  "  Stewards."  We  are  not  principals,  proprietors,  masters,  but  trustees ;  our 
gifts  must  not  be  used  for  ends  of  personal  indulgence ;  we  must  please  our  Lord. 
Do  we  always  remember  this  theory  of  life  ?  Surely  we  often  practically  forget  this, 
and  act  as  if  our  gifts  were  our  own,  to  be  used  simply  for  personal  gratification  and 
aggrandisement.  A  gentleman  walks  into  his  grounds  on  a  summer  morning,  and 
delighted  with  certain  flowers,  says  to  his  gardener,  "  These  are  very  fine  ;  send  a 
few  into  the  house."  The  gardener  distinctly  declines  to  do  anyihing  of  the  sort. 
"  I  am  keeping  these  against  the  Show,"  is  his  reply,  "  and  I  cannot  permit  them  to 
be  cut."  By  and  by  the  gentleman  orders  his  carriage  to  be  sent  round  at  a  given 
time,  when  once  again  the  coachman  refuses  to  obey  :  "  The  roads  are  bad,"  "  It  is 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

inconvenient,"  and  the  carriage  is  not  forthcoming.  Arrived  at  his  counting-house, 
the  gentleman  orders  his  cashier  to  write  him  out  a  cheque  for  £50,  but  to  his 
astonishment  the  clerk  decisively  objects  to  draw  the  cheque  ;  he  "  will  not  allow 
the  balance  at  the  bank  to  be  disturbed."  How  long  would  a  master  endure  that 
kind  of  conduct,  and  consent  to  be  shutout  of  the  disposal  and  enjoyment  of  his  own 
property  ?  But  we  often  act  thus  in  dealing  with  God,  using  His  gifts  capriciously 
and  selfishly,  forgetting  God's  absolute  authority  and  life's  larger  purpose.  What- 
ever we  have,  we  have  received;  whatever  we  have,  we  must  restore.  II.  The 
GEAND  woBK  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  "  As  cvery  man  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so  minister 
the  same  one  to  another."  The  individual  trees  of  a  forest  do  not  need  much  from 
one  another ;  they  grow  the  better,  perhaps,  for  growing  in  a  brotherhood  ;  they 
shelter  each  other,  they  benefit  by  a  certain  neighbourhood  and  reciprocity,  but  they 
are  not  absolutely  essential  to  one  another ;  if  there  were  but  one  oak  tree  in  England 
it  would  grow  pretty  much  as  it  does  to-day  in  the  forests  of  oak.  But  it  is  far 
otherwise  with  the  human  species ;  we  are  essential  to  each  other ;  one  man  in 
Leeds,  one  man  in  Europe,  would  hardly  prosper ;  it  is  only  in  mutuality  that  the 
individual  can  live  and  come  to  the  fulness  of  his  glory  and  fruitfulness,  that  the 
race  can  reach  its  ideal  life.  The  rich  must  help  the  poor.  As  long  as  the  mountain 
and  valley  exist  the  inequalities  of  society  will  exist ;  but  as  in  the  economy  of 
nature  there  is  no  antagonism  between  the  height  and  the  depth,  the  mountain 
sending  its  streams  into  the  valley,  and  the  valley  sending  its  fertility  creeping  up 
the  mountain  side ;  so  there  need  be  no  war  between  rich  and  poor,  between  capital 
and  labour,  because  together  they  establish  that  interdependence  among  men  which 
is  essential  to  the  growth  and  perfecting  of  all.  The  wise  must  help  the  ignorant. 
God  has  given  us  gifts  of  imagination,  knowledge,  expression,  music,  song,  that  we 
may  plant  intellectual  flowers  in  waste  places,  and  make  dull,  sad  lives  bright  with 
thoughts  of  truth  and  hope.  The  strong  must  help  the  weak.  "  Ye  that  are  strong 
must  bear  the  infirmity  of  the  weak."  Thank  God  that  you  are  the  strong,  and  not 
the  weak  ;  that  you  are  the  helper,  and  not  the  helped.  But  there  is  another  side 
to  all  this ;  the  poor,  the  illiterate,  the  weak,  the  obscure  may  also  truly  minister  in 
many  ways  to  the  world's  enrichment  and  blessing.  In  Italy  it  is  a  delight  to  see 
the  rich  vines  creeping  from  tree  to  tree.  But  when  I  was  in  that  country  I  used  to 
look  with  much  interest  on  what  is  generally  overlooked — the  dwarfed,  mutilated, 
hidden  bits  of  trees,  which  to  a  large  extent  support  the  clinging  vines,  and  hold 
them  up  into  the  sun.  These  hidden  props  have  for  the  most  part  few  leaves  and 
less  fruit,  but  their  service  and  glory  are  that  they  bear  up  the  goodly  vine,  with  all 
its  wealth  of  gold  and  purple ;  and  however  entirely  these  stumps  may  be  forgotten 
in  the  day  of  vintage,  they  made  a  splendid  contribution  to  the  joy  of  harvest.  So 
humble  people  often  make  great  men  possible,  although  the  world  knows  the  great 
men  only,  and  forgets  the  lowly  helper.  In  the  biography  of  the  Earl  of  Shaftes- 
bury we  have  an  illustration  of  the  ministry  of  the  obscure.  "Although  there  was 
little  in  the  home  to  foster,  while  there  was  much  to  discourage,  the  growth  of  that 
piety  which  was  to  characterise  so  signally  his  after-life,  one  source  of  helpful  and 
tender  influence  was  preserved  to  him.  There  was  in  the  household  a  faithful  old 
servant,  Maria  Millis,  who  had  been  maid  to  young  Ashley's  mother  when  she  was 
a  girl  at  Blenheim,  and  who  was  now  retained  as  housekeeper.  She  was  a  simple- 
hearted,  loving.  Christian  woman,  faithful  in  her  duties  to  her  earthly  master, 
and  faithful  in  her  higher  duties  to  her  heavenly  Master.  She  formed  a 
strong  attachment  to  the  gentle,  serious  child,  and  would  take  him  on  her 
knees  and  tell  him  Bible  stories,  especially  the  sweet  story  of  the  manger 
of  Bethlehem  and  the  Cross  of  Calvary.  It  was  her  hand  that  touched  the 
chords  and  awakened  the  first  music  of  his  spiritual  life."  The  great  ameliorative 
movements  of  the  world  are  also  vastly  indebted  to  the  weak  and  poor.  Everybody 
knows  of  Livingstone,  of  Bishop  Hannington,  of  Paton,  of  Calvert;  but  the  sublime 
enterprise  conducted  by  these  heroes  would  be  impossible  if  it  were  not  for  the  self- 
denying  work  of  labouring  men,  farm- servants,  domestic  servants,  little  children 
who  give  and  collect  coppers  through  the  land  and  through  the  year.  Do  you  say, 
"  Yes,  if  I  were  a  Garibaldi,  or  a  Victor  Hugo,  or  a  John  Bright,  I  would  rejoice  to 
serve  my  generation  ;  but  my  talent  is  small,  I  am  only  one  of  the  million  "  ?  The 
lily  in  the  field  is  one  of  a  million,  but  it  makes  the  summer  air  a  little  sweeter  for 
all  that ;  the  star  of  the  sky  is  one  of  a  million,  but  it  is  not  less  a  thing  of  glory 
for  that;  the  dewdrop  of  the  morning  is  one  of  a  million,  yet  it  leaves  a  spot  of  fresh 
beauty  as  it  exhales  into  the  light.  The  Orientals  have  a  wise  saying,  "A  little 
stone  n  its  place  weighs  a  hundredweight."     The  most  inconsiderable  people  are 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  355 

valuable  in  their  place.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of 
God. — The  preaching  of  the  Word : — I.  Pabticulae  kules  for  the  preaching  of 
THE  Word  may  be  many,  but  this  is  a  most  comprehensive  one  which  the  apostle 
gives ;  "  If  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God."  1.  In  fidelity,  it 
is  supposed  that  a  man  should  have  a  competent  insight  and  knowledge  in  the 
Divine  oracles,  that  first  he  learn  before  he  teach.  2.  A  minister  must  speak  holily, 
with  that  high  esteem  and  reverence  of  the  great  Majesty  whose  message  he  carries, 
that  becomes  the  divinity  of  the  message  itself,  those  deep  mysteries  that  no  created 
spirits  are  able  to  fathom.  3.  The  Word  is  to  be  spoken  wisely.  By  this  I  mean,  in 
the  way  of  delivering  it,  that  it  be  done  gravely  and  decently.  Now  you  that  hear 
should  certainly  agree  in  this  too.  If  any  hear,  let  him  hear  "  as  the  oracles  of 
God,"  not  as  a  well-tuned  sound,  to  help  you  to  sleep  an  hour ;  not  as  a  human 
oration,  to  displease  or  please  you  for  an  hour  ;  not  as  a  school  lesson,  to  add  some- 
what to  your  stock  of  knowledge,  or  as  a  feast  of  new  notions ;  but  hear  as  the 
orr.cles  of  God.  II.  The  end  of  all  this  appointment  is,  "  that  in  all,  God  may  be 
glorified  through  Jesus  Christ  " ;  that  in  all,  in  all  persons  and  all  things  ;  the  word 
includes  both,  and  the  thing  itself  extends  to  both.  All  persons  and  all  things  shall 
pay  this  tribute,  even  they  that  most  wickedly  seek  to  withhold  it ;  but  this  is  the 
happiness  of  the  saints,  that  they  move  willingly  thus,  are  not  forced  or  driven. 
"  Through  Jesus  Christ."  The  Christian  in  covenant  with  God,  receives  all  this  way 
and  returns  all  this  way.  (Abjy.  Leighton.)  The  oracles  of  God  : — I.  The  oracles 
OF  God  are  of  Divine  origin  and  are  therefore  of  supreme  authority.  The 
heathen  oracles  owed  all  their  influence  to  the  belief  that  prevailed  that  they  were 
the  answers  of  the  god  enshrined  in  his  temple.     II.  That  these  oracles  of  God 

ARE  accessible  TO  US,  AND  MAY  BE  CONSULTED  BY  US,  IN  THE  DIVERSITIES  AND  PER- 
PLEXITIES OF  OUR  CONDITION.  The  heathen  oracles  were  accessible  too,  but  only  under 
circumstances  that  forbid  universal  approach.     III.  The  oracles  of  God  clearly 

ANNOUNCE  the  DiVINE  WILL,  AND  ARE  THEREl'ORE  TO  BE  BELIEVED  AND  OBEYED. 

The  oracles  of  the  heathen  were  mysterious  but  useless  mutterings.  (W.  G.  Barrett.) 
That  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified. — The  import  and  application  of  glorifying 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  .-—I.  The  import.  The  glory  of  God,  as  alone  it  can  be 
affected  by  His  creatures,  consists  in  the  homage  and  service  which  they  render 
Him,  and  in  the  manifestation  of  His  glorious  perfections  and  the  accomplishment 
of  the  great  ends  of  His  moral  administration — the  virtue  and  happiness  of  His 
intelligent  offspring.  II.  The  application.  1.  God  is  glorified  by  the  diffusion  of 
such  knowledge  respecting  His  works,  as  tends  to  give  a  lively  conviction  of  His 
existence,  and  His  attributes  of  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness.  2.  God  is  glorified 
by  all  that  manifests  His  providential  and  moral  administration  respecting  man- 
kind. 3.  God  is  glorified  in  an  especial  manner,  by  the  effectual  diffusion  of  the 
gospel,  since  there  His  perfections  are  most  plainly  illustrated.  His  dealings  towards 
mankind  most  clearly  displayed,  and  His  requirements  of  homage  and  service  most 
forcibly  delineated  and  sanctioned.  4.  We  glorify  God,  whenever  we  act  under  the 
influence  of  religious  principle,  from  a  sense  of  Christian  duty,  prompted  by  the 
example  and  Spirit  of  Jesus,  and  guided  by  His  commands  ;  by  a  sincere  regard  to 
Him  as  our  Maker,  our  Preserver,  our  Witness,  and  our  Judge.  {J.  R.  Beard.) 
God  glorified  by  Christ  .-—Glory  is  the  manifestation  of  the  hidden  attributes  of  the 
ever-blessed  God.  He  dwells  in  light  which  is  so  transcendent  in  its  burning  purity 
that  no  mortal  eye  could  bear  the  blaze  which  enwraps  His  being.  But  if  unknown 
He  would  be  for  ever  unappreciated  and  unloved.  How  could  men  or  angels  worship 
an  inaccessible  and  unknown  God  ?  But  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  dwelt  for  ever  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,  has  declared  Him,  has  brought  out  His  attributes  from 
their  dark  obscurity,  and  has  displayed  them.  The  prism,  which  shows  the  exquisite 
tints  that  hide  in  sunbeams,  glorifies  the  sun  and  its  Maker.  The  artist  who  reads 
nature's  secrets,  and  catches  bewitching  smiles  which  are  only  seen  by  her  lovers, 
glorifies  Him  who  Hves  behind  all  nature.  The  student  who  shows  some  unsus- 
pected beauty  in  our  favourite  author,  adds  to  that  author's  glory  in  our  esteem. 
So,  though  in  an  infinitely  superior  sense,  as  the  Son  has  been  the  medium  through 
which  the  Father  has  shone  forth,  and  has  attracted  the  admiration  and  homage  of 
all  intelligent  creatures,  we  may  rightly  say  that  in  Him  He  has  been  glorified. 
This  was  so  in  creation,  when  the  creative  qualities  of  the  Almighty  passed  through 
the  Son  into  efflorescent  beauty.  It  has  been  so  in  providence,  wherein  the  sus- 
taining grace  of  God  has  been  revealing  itself  through  successive  ages  of  activity. 
It  was  especially  so  in  the  life  and  words  and  death  of  the  Kedeemer.  These  were 
windows  into  the  heart  of  God.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)        Reflected  glory  .-—When 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  sunbeams  fall  upon  a  mirror,  it  flashes  in  the  light,  just  because  they  do  not 
enter  its  cold  surface.  It  is  a  mirror,  because  it  does  not  drink  them  up,  but  flings 
them  back.  The  contrary  is  the  case  with  these  mirrors  of  our  spirits.  In  them 
the  light  must  first  sink  in  before  it  can  ray  out.  They  must  first  be  filled  with  the 
glory,  before  the  glory  can  stream  forth.  They  are  not  so  much  like  a  reflecting 
surface  as  like  a  bar  of  iron,  which  needs  to  be  heated  down  to  its  obstinate  black 
core  before  its  outer  skin  glows  with  the  whiteness  of  a  heat  that  is  too  hot  to 
sparkle.  The  sunshine  must  fall  on  us,  not  as  it  does  on  some  lonely  hill-side, 
lighting  up  the  grey  stones  with  a  passing  gleam,  but  as  it  does  on  some  cloud 
cradled  near  its  setting,  which  it  drenches  and  saturates  with  fire  till  its  cold  heart 
burns,  and  all  its  wreaths  of  vapour  are  brightness  palpable,  glorified  by  the  light 
•which  lives  amidst  its  mists.  So  must  we  have  the  glory  sink  into  us  before  it  can  be 
reflected  from  us.  {A.  Maclaren,D.D.)  Hoiv  Christians  viay  glorify  God  : — A  paint- 
ing that  is  a  work  of  art  may  be  so  inappropriately  framed,  and  hung  at  such  dis- 
advantage as  to  light  and  shade,  that  only  a  master  recognises  its  merits.  Or  it 
may  be  so  worthily  framed  and  so  fitly  placed  that  the  skill  and  power  of  the  artist's 
work  appeal  to  the  most  casual  beholder.  So  a  Christian  heart  may  be  enshrined 
in  such  meagre  and  unworthy  human  qualities  that  they  detract  from  the  recog- 
nition the  grace  of  Christ  ought  to  receive,  the  impression  it  should  make.  Where 
religion  is  in  disrepute,  it  is  largely  because  of  its  association  with  unworthy  human 
qualities,  and  its  consequent  identification  in  the  minds  of  many  with  them.  It  is 
unfortunate  when  a  Christian  man  is  not  also  a  man  among  men,  able  to  hold  his 
own  place,  and  make  for  himself  a  higher.  The  youth  who  is  first  at  the  bat  or  the 
oar  ;  the  student  who  leads  his  college  class  ;  the  man  who  has  made  a  reputation 
or  a  fortune  in  his  profession  or  business;  the  woman  whose  grace  and  accomplish- 
ments are  the  delight  of  her  friends ;  these,  having  the  grace  of  Christ  in  their 
hearts,  are  not  by  these  attainments  detracting  from  its  power,  they  are  enshrining 
that  grace  more  worthily ;  even  as  a  diamond  is  more  fittingly  set  in  a  ring  of  gold 
than  in  one  of  pinchbeck. 

Vers.  12-16.  Think  it  not  strange. — Not  so  strange  : — "  Think  it  not  strange !  " 
But  it  does  seem  strange  that  the  waters  of  a  full  cup  should  be  wrung  out  to  the 
saints,  whilst  sinners  walk  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  hedge  !  Strange  to  find  some  of 
the  sweetest  and  noblest  of  God's  children  racked  with  agony,  dying  of  cancer,  beset 
with  poverty,  misunderstanding,  and  hatred.  And  yet  it  would  be  stranger  still  if 
it  were  not  so.  Let  us  look  into  the  considerations  which  rob  suffering  of  its  strange- 
ness. I.  This  world  is  in  revolt.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  servants  of  the 
Divinely  designated  Prince  should  experience  rough  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the 
rebel  forces  ?  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  II.  Along  this  way  the  Master  went. 
HI.  This  is  the  way  home.  If  we  were  universally  beloved,  and  no  voice  were  ever 
raised  in  hatred  or  calumny,  we  might  truly  question  whether  we  were  at  all  on  the 
heavenward  track.  As  mountain-climbers  after  a  snowstorm  can  tell  the  path  by 
the  line  of  posts  placed  at  intervals  along  the  mountain  side,  so  may  Christians  tell 
that  they  are  on  the  track  of  the  Church  by  the  antagonism  manifested  against  their 
religion  in  Jesus  Christ.  IV.  There  is  an  object  in  such  suffering.  It  is  care- 
fully designed  by  the  skill  of  the  great  Artificer.  There  may  have  been  many  a 
previous  secret  prayer  for  growth  in  grace  and  usefulness,  and  the  answer  has  come 
in  the  use  of  fire,  file,  and  hammer,  wielded  by  God,  though  furnished  by  the  hatred 
of  the  sons  of  men.  There  is  no  other  way  of  eliminating  much  of  the  selfish  dross 
of  our  natures.  V.  Herein  we  partake  of  Christ's  sufferings.  His  life  in  us 
meets  the  same  treatment  as  it  did  in  Him.  Ah,  it  is  good  to  share  anything  with 
Him.  Sweet  things  are  bitter  when  He  is  absent,  and  bitter  things  sweet  if  He  is 
near.  VI.  Look  on  to  the  end.  His  glory  shall  be  revealed !  His  sulrerings 
quicken  our  anticipations  of  that  blessed  day.  Too  much  comfort  might  make  us 
think  ourselves  at  home,  so  that  we  might  not  so  ardently  reach  out  our  hands 
towards  our  coming  glories.  VII.  We  are  compensated  for  such  suffering  by  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit  of  glory.  When  such  suffering  lies  heavily  on  the  soul, 
God  sees  to  it  that  it  is  no  loser.  What  is  lost  from  without  is  replenished  from 
within.  As  water  is  thrown  on  the  fire  from  the  one  side  of  the  wall,  a  bright  angel 
on  the  other  pours  in  oil  through  a  tiny  aperture,  till  the  flame  breaks  out  as  coals 
of  juniper.  Ah,  what  compensations  are  ours  !  The  Jews  who  walk  the  streets  of 
Tangier  and  other  Moorish  towns,  the  hatred  of  all  the  people,  are  said  to  have 
exquisitely  furnished  rooms  within  their  ordinary-looking  dwellings,  where  they 
-urround  themselves  with  every  luxury.     So,  as  the  spiritual  man  turns  from  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  357 

hatred  of  man  to  the  special  bestowments  of  God,  he  is  compensated  a  hundred-fold. 
When  we  have  least  human  love,  we  have  most  of  God's.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  prosier  temper  of  ChrUtians  in  affliction  : — I.  The  suffeeings  of  Christians  are 

NEITHER  "  strange,"  IN  THEMSELVES,  NOR  SO  TO  BE  RECKONED  BY  THEM.    1.  The  nature 

of  their  principles  accounts  for  opposition  from  men  of  the  world.  These  are  prin- 
ciples of  hohness.  They  condemn,  by  contrast,  the  men  of  the  world.  Christians 
must  cease  to  be  what  they  are,  or  the  world  cease  to  be  what  it  is,  for  them  to 
escape  persecution.  2.  The  genius  of  their  dispensation  renders  probable  a  greater 
share  of  outward  iUs  to  them  than  to  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  have 
a  fuller  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  are  put  more  upon  future  hopes,  and  less 
upon  present  things.  "  Prosperity  was  the  promise  of  the  Old  Testament ;  adver- 
sity of  the  New"  (Mark  x.  30).  3.  The  partial  renewal  of  their  character  calls  for 
a  corrective  discipline.  The  buddings  of  evil  dispositions  require  nipping  frosts  to 
check  their  growth.  II.  All  the  sufferings  of  Christians  are  intended  for 
TRIALS  TO  "  try"  THEM.  1.  They  detect  the  presence  of  sin,  as  fire  brings  out  the 
latent  dross  in  metals.  2.  They  make  manifest  the  sincerity  of  our  profession. 
Persecutions  and  afflictions  keep  the  church  from  being  overrun  with  hypocrites. 
3.  They  purify  and  improve  our  Christian  virtues.  III.  Christians  ought  to 
"  rejoice,"  notwithstanding  all  their  sufferings,  and  even  because  of  them. 
*'  Think  it  not  strange,  but  rejoice,"  &c.  1.  They  increase  our  spirituality.  The 
overflowing  of  the  Nile  distressed  Egypt  for  a  time,  but  when  it  retired,  left  behind 
it  fertility  and  abundance.  2.  They  furnish  ground  for  the  comfortable  assurance 
of  a  gracious  state.  If  the  storm  that  uproots  others  leaves  us  standing,  it  gives 
evidence  of  being  weU-grounded  in  faith.  3.  They  enhance  our  future  glory. 
Application :  1.  Let  this  check  the  over  anxiety  of  some  Christians  to  avoid  afflic- 
tion, or  to  prevent  themselves,  if  possible,  from  feeling  it.  2.  Let  the  subject  correct 
our  judgment  respecting  affliction.  3.  Be  brought  by  affliction  to  enter  more  deeply 
into  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  4.  Let  sympathy  with  others  in  their  sulierings  be 
promoted  by  our  own.     (The  Evangelist.)  Trials  no  strange  thing  : — Men  are 

apt  to  fancy,  in  their  misfortune,  that  it  exceeds  the  usual  measure,  or  comes  in  an 
extraordinary  shape.  They  aggravate  their  suffering  by  surprise  and  disappoint- 
ment. They  make  exaggerated  estimates  of  it  by  self-tormenting  reflections.  It  is 
too  heavy  to  bear.  We  could  submit  to  anything  better  than  this.  It  is  "strange" 
that  the  "fiery  trial"  should  scorch  just  in  this  or  that  place,  or  should  consume 
what  they  were  specially  anxious  to  preserve.  It  is  "  strange  "  that  I  should  be 
prevented,  deprived,  disabled.  "  Strange  "  you  call  it.  1.  And  this  word  of  yours 
implies,  in  the  first  place,  that  you  are  on  the  whole  graciously  dealt  with ;  that  the 
order  of  things  which  encircles  you,  and  carries  you  forward,  is  on  the  whole  merci- 
ful. For  why  else  should  you  find  fault  with  what  afflicts  you,  as  if  it  were  a 
departure  from  that  order  ?  The  hand  of  Providence — how  much  oftener  it  is  open 
to  give,  than  clenched  to  strike  !  Do  you  not  prove  yourselves  unreasonable,  there- 
fore, if  you  chide  with  it,  when  it  withholds  your  desire  or  admonishes  you  with  its 
unwelcome  dispensations  ?  And  this  is  one  side  of  our  subject  that  is  worthy  of 
attention.  But  there  is  another.  It  is,  that  the  afflictions  of  life,  though  few  when 
set  by  the  side  of  the  innumerable  kindnesses  that  are  so  continuous  as  to  be  unre- 
garded, are  yet  neither  uncommon  nor  light.  They  form  a  regular  part  of  the  great 
system  of  heavenly  appointments,  in  which  we,  with  our  changing  circumstances 
and  vanishing  Ufe,  are  included.  They  are  more  impartial  than  they  are  supposed 
to  be.  They  spare  none.  They  are  not  to  be  bought  off  by  the  opulent,  nor  fought 
off  by  the  strong.  "  Think  it  not  strange,"  so  run  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  con- 
cerning the  fiery  trial  that  is  to  try  you."  2.  You  there  read  what  is  the  design  in 
view.  It  is  to  prove  and  not  to  destroy  you.  You  are  tempted  by  pleasures  and 
prosperity  to  see  if  you  are  weak  enough  to  be  seduced.  You  are  searched  by  hurts 
and  deprivations  to  see  if  you  are  strong  enough  to  endure.  If  you  are  sick,  secure 
the  inward  health  that  knows  neither  the  fever  of  passion  nor  the  consumption  of 
care.  If  you  are  poor,  learn  to  feel  that  everything  else  is  destitution,  if  compared 
for  a  moment  with  the  incorruptible  wealth  of  conscious  integrity,  and  the  thoughts 
that  turn  confidingly  towards  God,  and  the  substance  that  no  reverses  can  make 
less.  {N.  L.  Frothingham.)  Trial  no  strange  thing  to  the  Christian  ; — It  is  said 
by  the  wise  man  in  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes — "  That  which  hath  been,  is  now  ;  and 
that  which  is  to  be,  hath  already  been ;  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  The 
assertion  here  is,  that  of  there  being  great  uniformity  in  the  dealings  of  God ;  so  that 
the  history  of  any  one  generation  is  little  more  than  the  repetition  of  that  of  any 
other.    From  such  a  description  of  the  dealings  of  God,  it  would  follow  that  there 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

cannot  be  anything  "  strange,"  at  least  not  to  those  who  live  in  a  remote  age  of  the 
world  ;  for  nothing  can  happen  to  them,  which  has  not  often  happened  before,  and 
for  which  therefore  they  might  not  have  been  prepared  by  due  attention  to  the 
experience  of  others.  The  case  is  evidently  very  different  with  ourselves  and  the 
earlier  converts  to  Christianity,  the  difference  being  much  the  same  as  between  the 
later  and  the  earlier  inhabitants  of  the  world.  We  can  appeal  to  the  history  of  many 
ages  for  the  workings  of  Christianity ;  we  can  show  its  predictions  fulfilled,  and  its 
promises  verified,  in  the  progress  of  events  and  the  experience  of  the  Church.  But 
the  first  converts  were  obliged,  in  a  great  degree,  to  take  all  upon  trust.  With  them 
the  whole  was  matter  of  experiment.  There  was  therefore  great  room,  as  it  would 
seem,  for  what  was  "  strange  "  in  their  case,  though  not  in  our  own.  With  us,  the 
experience  of  a  Christian  may  be  mapped  out  beforehand.  His  own  experience 
may  not  be  an  exact  copy  of  that  of  any  one  of  his  predecessors  in  the  faith  ;  but 
there  shall  be  nothing  in  it  which  has  not  been  experienced  before,  the  parallel  to 
which  may  not  be  found  in  the  history  of  any  other  believer,  and  therefore  nothing 
which  ought  to  come  upon  him  unexpectedly,  or  to  take  him  as  it  were  by  surprise. 
But  it  was  not  thus  with  the  earlier  Christians.  They  were  themselves  to  furnish 
experience  for  those  who  came  after  ;  but  had  scarcely  any  power  of  appealing  to 
the  experience  of  those  who  went  before.  And  yet  in  one  great  particular,  it  appears 
from  our  text  that  there  is  no  difference  betwixt  the  earliest  and  the  latest  converts, 
so  far  as  the  foreknowledge  of  God's  dealings  is  concerned.  With  ourselves  it 
amounts  almost  to  a  truism,  that  "  they  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall 
suffer  persecution,"  and  that  "  through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  It  were  expecting  God  to  change  the  established  course  of 
His  dealings,  to  expect  Him  not  to  chasten  where  He  loves,  and  therefore  to  "  think 
it  strange  concerning  the  trials  which  are  to  try  us."  But  can  the  same  be  said  of 
the  earliest  Christians  ?  Had  they  not  embraced  the  religion  of  One,  who  was  pro- 
mised by  the  auspicious  title  of  "  Prince  of  peace  " ;  whom  seers  of  old  had  beheld 
in  visions,  glowing  and  tranquil  and  beautiful  ?  And  might  they  not  therefore  have 
justly  expected  that  their  lot  would  be  one  of  freedom  from  trouble?  No,  saith  the 
apostle  ;  a  "  fiery  trial "  can  be  no  unlooked-for  thing.  I.  Now  the  first  thing  which 
I  would  argue  from  this  alleged  absence  of  "  strangeness  "  from  the  dealings  of  God, 
is  that  there  were  more  points  of  correspondence  than  of  difference  between  the 
Christian  and  the  Jewish  dispensations.  It  is  true  that  they  could  not  co-exist,  but 
not  because  they  were  in  any  measure  opposed  the  one  to  the  other.  The  dawn 
and  the  noon-tide  cannot  co-exist ;  yet  the  one  does  not  so  much  displace  the  other, 
as  it  is  that  other  in  a  more  advanced  stage.  The  Mosaic  economy  was  the  Chris- 
tian in  its  dawn,  or  in  its  bud,  presenting  the  same  truths,  though  in  a  more 
shadowy  form,  and  proposing  the  same  way  of  salvation,  though  with  less  clearness 
and  precision.  The  Christian  dispensation  superseded  the  Jewish,  but  only  in  the 
manner  in  which  history  supersedes  prophecy.  And  this  must  necessarily  have 
been  the  case,  if  you  only  consider  how  God  had  from  the  first  determined  the  plau 
of  our  redemption,  and  virtually  announced  it  ere  Adam  was  driven  from  Paradise. 
There  was  not  one  method  of  being  saved  in  one  age,  and  another  in  another,  so 
far  as  the  method  of  reconciliation  is  concerned ;  neither  can  there  be  thought  to 
have  been  any  such  variation,  so  far  as  the  method  of  application  is  concerned.  In 
all  ages  there  has  been  the  same  necessity  for  a  renewal  of  nature  in  order  to  a 
meetness  for  the  kingdom  ;  and  therefore  must  it  be  supposed  that  in  all  ages  the 
dealings  of  God  with  a  view  to  these  ends  have  borne  in  the  main  the  same  features. 
But  undoubtedly  God  had  from  the  first  made  sorrow  one  of  His  chief  engines  in 
weakening  attachment  to  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  and  directing  the  affections 
towards  heaven.  Was  it  therefore  for  a  moment  to  be  expected,  that  because  there 
came  a  dispensation  of  greater  light,  a  dispensation  of  substance  in  place  of  shadow, 
sorrow  was  to  depart  and  no  longer  to  be  used  in  preparing  men  for  heaven  ?  And, 
indeed,  without  tracing  accurately  a  sameness  in  the  dealings  of  God,  we  might 
venture  to  say  that  the  discipline  of  affliction  is  indispensable  in  the  case  of 
depraved  creatures  like  ourselves.  It  is  not  that  under  this  economy,  but  not  under 
that,  sorrow  is  a  wholesome  thing  for  those  whose  nature  is  corrupt ;  it  is  rather 
that  in  every  condition  and  estate,  man  cannot  do  without  affliction,  if  he  is  to  be 
kept  up  to  the  task  of  preferring  the  future  to  the  present.  Hard  it  may  be,  bitter 
it  may  be,  but  "  strange  "  it  can  never  be,  that  whilst  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above 
all  things  and  desperately  wicked,"  God  should  constantly  verify  the  saying,  "  Many 
are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous."  "  Are  ye  not  men  ?  "  might  be  the  address  of 
the  messenger  of  God  :  "  are  ye  not  sinners  ?  and  is  it  not  your  sanctification  which 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  350 

is  proposed  ?  Oh  !  then,  '  beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial 
which  is  to  try  you,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened  unto  you.'  "  II.  But 
possibly  these  remarks  on  what  we  may  call  the  necessity  for  affliction,  and  there- 
fore on  the  truth  that  it  ought  never  to  seem  "  strange,"  hardly  clear  up  the  point 
which  is  presented  by  our  text.  The  case  of  those  addressed  by  St.  Peter  is  not  that 
of  men  exposed  to  trouble  in  its  ordinary  sense,  but  of  those  on  whom  was  coming 
a  gi-eat  onset  of  persecution.  The  "  fiery  trial  which  was  to  try  them,"  was  to  result 
from  the  efforts  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity  to  destroy  by  violence  what  they 
could  not  disprove  by  argument.  What  is  strange,  if  it  be  not  strange  that  heaven's 
best  gift  should  be  received  with  loathing  ;  that  the  very  remedy,  which  at  an  im- 
measurable cost  God  prepared  for  the  evils  which  have  pressed  on  this  creation, 
should  meet  not  only  with  scorn,  but  hatred  ;  that  they  whom  it  is  designed  to  bene- 
fit, should  agree  with  themselves  to  cast  it  out  from  the  earth  ?  Yet  the  apostle 
does  not  hesitate  to  tell  them  in  our  text,  that  nothing  "  strange  "  had  happened  to 
them,  when  a  "  fiery  trial "  arose  and  they  had  to  maintain  their  profession  in  the 
face  of  persecution  and  death.  We  close  with  this  statement  of  St.  Peter,  and  we 
wish  you  to  see  whether  it  may  not  be  vindicated  by  almost  self-evident  reasons. 
The  results  which  Christianity  proposes,  and  which  beyond  all  question  it  is  calcu- 
lated to  effect,  are  those  of  a  wide-spread  peace  and  a  dominant  happiness  :  but  the 
processes,  through  which  it  would  work  cut  these  results,  are  those  of  self-denial 
and  restraint,  of  mortified  passions  and  curbed  affections  ;  and  they  who  would  be 
quite  in  love  with  the  results,  may  be  quite  at  war  with  the  processes.  There  is  not 
after  all,  anything  surprising  in  persecution,  whether  in  the  bold  shape  it  assumed 
in  early  days,  or  the  more  modified  which  it  exhibits  in  later  ;  it  is,  we  might  almost 
say,  but  a  natural  result  of  the  rejection  of  Christianity — whether  of  the  open  rejec- 
tion of  the  sceptical,  or  of  the  more  covert  of  the  indifferent.  Doctrines  which  are 
not  embraced  must  be  disliked,  when  they  are  doctrines  which  would  bind  us  to 
practices,  which  conscience  secretly  pronounces  to  be  right,  but  which  inclination 
vehemently  opposes ;  and  disliking  the  doctrines,  men  must  also  dislike  those  who 
hold  them,  for  every  believer  is  a  reproach  to  the  unbeliever,  condemning  by  his 
example  those  whom  it  does  not  excite  to  imitation ;  and  there  is  only  a  step  from 
dislike  to  persecution.  Persecution  is  but  dislike  in  action — the  effort  to  remove 
what  annoys  by  reproving.  Then  till  Christianity  be  universal,  persecution,  in  some 
form  or  other,  is  unavoidable.  It  is  not  the  product  of  a  dark  age,  rather  than  of  a 
light ;  it  is  the  product  of  human  nature — the  same  in  its  corruption,  acted  upon  by 
a  system  the  same  in  its  holiness.  III.  But  we  cannot  suppose  that  St.  Peter  used 
these  remarkable  words,  in  order  merely  to  correct  an  erroneous  impression  which 
had  been  made  on  the  minds  of  the  first  Christians — an  impression  as  to  the  likeli- 
hood that  Christianity  would  disarm  rather  than  provoke  opposition  :  we  may  further 
believe  that  he  designed  to  offer  a  topic  of  consolation  and  support — to  suggest  what 
ought  to  reconcile  the  suffering  to  their  lot.  "  You  ought  not,"  St.  Peter  seems  to 
say,  "  to  be  amazed  or  confounded ;  you  are  called  to  no  affliction  which  others 
have  not  sustained ;  and  where  there  is  nothing  but  what  has  been  experienced, 
why  should  there  be  surprise,  as  though  it  were  unexpected  ? "  And  truly 
the  distressing  thing  to  a  believer  would  be,  if  he  were  able  to  show  that  God's 
dealings  with  himself  were  quite  different  from  what  God's  dealings  with  His 
people  had  ordinarily  been.  Suppose  the  registered  course  of  God's  proceedings 
had  been,  that  where  there  was  belief  in  His  Word  there  was  comparative  freedom 
from  trouble,  so  that  religion  and  temporal  happiness  went  hand  in  hand  :  what  a 
fearful  thing  would  it  then  be,  for  a  Christian  to  find  himself  in  trouble  !  It  would 
not  be  the  amount  of  the  trouble,  so  much  as  its  strangeness,  that  would  overwhelm 
him.  His  inference  would  be — "  Surely  I  am  not  one  of  the  people  of  God  :  if  1 
were.  He  would  not  deal  with  me  in  so  unusual  a  manner."  Or,  to  take  what  might 
be  thought  a  more  supposable  case  :  let  righteousness  and  peace  of  mind  be  almost 
invariably  found  together,  so  that  a  righteous  individual  is  seldom,  if  ever,  dis- 
quieted with  doubts  and  apprehensions  :  if,  then,  a  Christian  feels  himself  depressed 
and  cast  down,  his  hopes  darkened  through  the  suggestions  of  his  great  adversary 
the  devil,  do  you  not  see  that  the  bitterest  thing  in  his  portion  would  be,  not  the 
depression,  but  the  consciousness  of  this  depression  being  a  "  strange  thing  "  in  a 
believer,  and  therefore  almost  an  evidence  of  his  not  being  a  believer  at  all  ?  But 
now  take  the  opposite,  which  is  the  actual  case,  namely,  that  the  Christian  has 
nothing  strange  to  undergo,  nothing  befalling  him  but  what  is  common  to  believers ; 
and  do  you  not  perceive  that  this  very  circumstance  is  full  of  consolation,  and  ought 
to  do  much  towards  producing  in  him  patience  and  resignation?    The  tempest  may 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

rage,  the  sword  may  glitter,  the  destroyer  may  ravage ;  but  he  is  calm,  he  is  con- 
fident, because  he  can  never  "  think  it  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to 
try  him,  as  though  some  strange  thing  had  happened  unto  him."  IV.  And  now, 
lastly,  there  is  yet  another  remark  which,  in  a  practical  point  of  view,  is  perhaps  of 
greater  importance  than  the  foregoing.  It  may  be  questioned  whether  our  trans- 
lators have  given  the  exact  meaning  of  the  original,  in  saying,  "Think  it  not 
strange."  The  more  literal  meaning  is,  "Be  not  strange  in  fiery  trial."  It  is  not 
so  much  an  opinion,  as  a  deportment,  to  which  the  apostle  has  respect.  What  he 
enjoins  on  Christians  is,  that  when  the  fiery  trial  came,  they  were  not  to  receive  it 
as  an  unexpected  thing ;  they  were  not  to  be  Uke  strangers,  but  rather  to  show  that 
they  had  been  waiting  the  onset,  and  had  prepared  themselves  to  meet  it.  An  old 
writer  justly  says,  "  Things  certainly  fall  the  lighter  upon  us  when  they  first  fall 
upon  our  thoughts."  Arm  yourselves  therefore  beforehand ;  it  is  hard  to  have  your 
weapons  to  seek,  when  the  foe  is  upon  you.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  Christian'^ 
'persecutions  : — I.  The  connection  of  religion  with  teial — "  Do  not  wonder  at  the 
burning  which  is  to  try  you."  It  is  no  wonder  ;  it  is  a  natural  consequence.  1.  Is 
it  likely  God  would  commit  the  keeping  of  His  honour  and  glory  into  the  hands  of 
untested  witnesses  ?  2.  Is  it  likely  that  God  would  give  the  work  of  saving  souls  to 
untried  emissaries?  3.  Is  it  likely  God  would  admit  to  His  eternal  kingdom 
unproved  citizens  ?  By  no  means.  H.  The  connection  between  trial  and  suffer- 
ing— "  The  burning."  What  more  potent  picture  of  suffering  than  that  which  is 
expressed  by  this  terrible  word?  III.  The  connection  of  suffering  with  joy. 
Strange  apparent  inconsistency! — "Think  it  not  strange,  but  rejoice."  We  may 
gather  —  1.  That  anything  which  brings  us  into  harmony  with  Christ  is  to  be 
desired.  Suffering  brings  us  into  sympathy  with  Him.  We  appreciate  the  sacrifice 
which  His  atonement  entailed  when  we  feel  something  of  its  consequences.  2.  That 
the  only  true  way  to  triumph  is  through  the  vale  of  tears.  Christ  became  Conqueror 
through  submitting.  IV.  The  connection  of  joy  with  glory — "  For  the  spirit  of 
glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon  you."  {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  The  fiery  trial  which, 
is  to  try  you. — Afflictions  are  trials : — 1.  To  try  whether  we  have  any  truth  of  grace 
in  us,  whether  we  be  sound  or  hollow.  2.  To  try  what  measure  of  grace  we  have, 
whether  as  much  or  more  or  less  than  we  thought.  3.  To  purify  and  refine  that 
measure  of  true  grace  that  is  in  us.  In  the  days  of  peace  and  prosperity,  the  best 
men  are  subject  to  gather  soil,  as  standing  waters  putrefy,  bodies  without  exercise 
prove  fuU  of  gross  humours.  {John  Rogers.)  But  rejoice. — A  rejoicing  heart : — 
A  heart  rejoicing  in  God  delights  in  all  His  will,  and  is  most  surely  provided 
to  the  most  firm  joy  in  all  estates  ;  for,  if  nothing  can  come  to  pass  beside 
or  against  His  will,  then  cannot  that  soul  be  vexed  that  delights  in  Him, 
and  hath  no  will  but  His,  but  follows  Him  in  all  times  and  in  aU  estates — 
not  only  when  He  shines  bright  on  them,  but  when  they  are  clouded. 
That  flower  that  follows  the  sun,  doth  so  even  in  cloudy  days — when  it  doth 
not  shine  forth,  yet  it  follows  the  hidden  course  and  motion  of  it :  so  the  soul, 
that  moves  after  God,  keeps  that  course  when  He  hides  His  face ;  is  content, 
yea,  is  glad  at  His  will,  in  all  estates,  conditions,  or  events.  (Abp.  Leighton.) 
Partakers  of  the  sufiFerings  of  Christ. — Participation  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ : — 
It  is  strange  what  a  power  there  is  in  suffering  to  unite  in  deepest  intimacy  those 
who  have  nobly  borne  it  together.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  affections  could  never 
be  welded  so  firmly  as  when  they  have  been  exposed  to  the  fiery  solvent  of  adversity. 
Perhaps  it  is  that  we  never  so  truly  understand  each  other  as  when  great  and 
common  trials  sound  the  depths  of  our  nature,  and  show  to  each  what  is  in  a 
brother's  heart.  Or  it  may  be  that  love  is  strengthened  most  of  all  by  the  trials 
and  hardships  endured  for  the  sake  of  its  object.  The  survivors  of  the  wreck  who 
can  recall  the  days  and  hours  of  danger  and  exposure,  of  alternating  hope  and 
despair,  which  they  bore  together  ;  the  remnant  of  the  forlorn  hope,  who  have  stood 
side  by  side  while  shot  and  shell  were  raining  death  around  them  ;  or  the  few  brave 
and  true  hearts  who  together  have  struggled  through  the  protracted  and  terrible  siege, 
and  whose  friendship  is  cemented  by  a  thousand  associations  of  sympathy  and 
endurance,  cannot  choose  but  feel  in  each  other  a  deeper  than  common  interest. 
Now,  some  such  thought  as  this  may  have  been  present  to  the  apostle's  mind  when 
he  congratulated  his  suffering  fellow-Christians  on  the  fact  that  they  were  partakers 
of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  The  secret  depths  of  that  sorrowing  heart  they  could 
better  understand  in  virtue  of  the  approximation  to  His  grief  which  their  own 
hearts  had  felt,  and  a  fuller  appreciation  of  His  ineffable  love  could  be  theirs, 
when  by  experience  they  had  learnt  something  of  that  penalty  of  suffering  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  361 

sacrifice  which  for  them  He  so  willingly  had  paid.  Instead,  therefore,  of  regarding 
it  as  a  "  strange  thing  "  that  theirs  should  be  a  lot  of  suffering  and  trial,  it  would 
rather  have  seemed  unnatural  had  it  been  otherwise.  But  it  is  not  all  kinds  of 
suffering  in  which  we  have  community  with  Jesus.  There  are  sorrows,  obviously, 
of  which  the  infinitely  pure  and  holy  Saviour  could  have  no  experience,  and  in  the 
endurance  of  which  no  man  can  appropriate  the  consolation  of  fellowship  with 
Christ.  Let  us  endeavour,  therefore,  to  find  out  what  sort  of  suffering  for  sin  is 
possible  to  a  pure  and  holy  nature.  How  far  may  suffering  for  sin  be  really  noble 
and  worthy  ?  What  elements  must  we  eliminate  from  suffering  caused  by  sin  in 
forming  our  ideal  of  suffering  purity?  1.  One  element  of  suffering  for  sin,  and 
that  a  most  bitter  one,  of  which  Christ  could  have  no  direct  experience,  is  conscious 
guilt.  With  all  godly  sorrow  Jesus  sympathises,  but  He  knows  nothing,  and  never 
can,  "of  the  sorrow  of  the  world  that  worketh  death."  2.  Another  element  in 
suffering  for  sin,  of  which  a  perfectly  holy  nature  could  have  no  experience,  is  a 
personal  sense  of  Divine  wrath.  Betwixt  the  experience  of  a  guilty  soul  writhing 
under  the  frown  of  God,  and  His,  even  in  His  darkest  hour  of  sorrow,  there  is  an 
impassable  gulf.  3.  Nor,  finally,  though  Christ  "tasted  of  death  for  every  man," 
could  He  ever  experience  personally  that  which  constitutes  to  the  sinner  the 
very  bitterness  of  death — the  fear  of  what  comes  after  death.  On  the  contrary, 
death  to  Jesus  was  an  escape  from  protracted  banishment  to  endless  and  unutterable 
union  with  His  Father.  It  was  the  passing  from  a  world  in  which  all  had  been  to 
Him  toil  and  weariness  and  woe,  to  one  on  which  the  sweet  memories  of  an  eternity 
of  joy  were  resting.  Death  to  Jesus,  in  one  word,  was  but  a  going  home.  1.  I 
now  go  on  to  inquire  what  kind  of  suffering  for  sin  may  be  conceived  of  as  noble 
and  worthy,  and  so  not  impossible  to  a  pure  and  holy  nature.  (1)  Amongst  these 
kinds  of  suiJering  I  notice,  first,  that  which  a  pure  and  holy  nature  must  feel  from 
the  mere  contiguity  of  evil.  The  mere  spectacle  of  sin,  the  life-long  contact  of  the 
sinless  with  the  vile — implied  on  His  part  bitter  suffering.  To  man  or  woman  of 
pure  mind  and  tender  conscience  it  would  be  intolerable  to  be  forced  to  read  through 
an  obscene  book ;  what  agony  of  mind  then— what  pain  and  distress  of  spirit  more 
unendurable  than  sharpest  bodily  tortures — would  be  involved  in  a  similar  lifelong 
contact  with  sin,  not  recorded  merely,  but  hideously  displayed  in  act !  (2)  Another 
element  of  Christ's  suffering  for  sin,  in  which,  as  we  grow  in  kindred  purity  of 
nature,  we  shall  learn  to  participate,  is  the  reflected  or  borrowed  shame  and  pain 
which  noble  natures  feel  for  the  sins  of  those  with  whom  they  are  closely  connected. 
Christ  was  not  a  mere  spectator  of  the  world's  sin.  He  was  deeply  implicated  in  the 
fortunes  of  the  guilty,  related  to  them  by  the  closest  ties  of  kindred  and  affection. 
There  is  a  borrowed  humiliation  which  we  feel  from  the  sins  of  those  who  are  dear 
to  us ;  there  is  a  keen  and  cruel  pain  which  pierces  a  good  and  generous  heart  in 
the  contemplation  of  a  brother's  wickedness,  and  which  is  second  only,  and  in  some 
respects  not  second,  to  the  agony  of  personal  guilt.  (3)  Once  more,  Christ  suffered 
for  sin,  not  only  as  bearing  relatively  its  guilt,  but  also  as  its  victim.  In  the  persons 
of  those  He  loved,  sin  transmitted  to  Him  a  borrowed  humiliation ;  but  it  hurt  Him 
more  deeply  than  thus,  for  it  rose  up  against  Him,  to  hate  and  assail  and  destroy 
Him.  And  this  to  such  a  nature  as  His  was  the  saddest  thing  of  all.  {J.  Caird,. 
D.D.)  Participation  in  Christ's  siifferh\gs  : — It  has  often  been  said  that  the 
Christian  faith  gives  dignity  to  every  kind  of  suffering.  If  we  may  so  speak,  the 
light  shines  from  Christ's  Cross  as  a  fringe  of  glory  upon  every  cloud  which  environs 
human  life.  You  have  given  up  that  false  notion  which  belonged  rather  to  the 
heathen  age,  that  the  gods  would  not  visit  in  pain  or  suffering  those  who  were  their 
special  favourites.  It  is  the  other  way  in  Christian  conception.  According  to« 
the  Christian,  those  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth.  "  Think  it  not 
strange  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you  " — that  is  coming  for  this  purpose  to. 
put  your  life  to  the  test,  but  see  how  far  your  faith  needs  consolidating,  how 
far  your  love  needs  being  drawn  forth  as  often  love  only  can  be  in  the  hours. 
of  sorrow.  But  he  rises  higher  than  this.  He  seems  to  say  :  "  Do  not 
merely  look  upon  suffering  as  a  certain  ministry  for  good,  but  that  he  that 
suffers  may  be  brought  into  the  charmed  circle  of  fellowship  with  Christ."  But  we^ 
are  met  at  once  by  the  thought :  Are  not  the  sufferings  of  Christ  wholly  unique  in. 
character  ?    Are  they  not  such  that  none  may  share  them  ?     I.  In  what  sense  is; 

IT   TRUE     THAT     THE     CHRISTIAN     CAN    HAVE    A   PARTNERSHIP   WITH    THE    SUFFERINGS    OF 

Christ  ?  In  the  first  place  it  is  not  of  the  ordinary  sorrows  of  life  that  the  apostle 
is  speaking ;  because  he  does  not  speak  respecting  the  sufferings  which  Christ  shares 
•with  us,  but  rather  of   certain  sufferings  which  we  share  with  Christ.     There  is 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

all  the  difference  in  this  world  between  those  sorrows  which  are  rather  the  sorrows 
of  humanity,  and  which  Christ,  in  becoming  man,  of  necessity  became  a  participator 
in,  and  those  sufferings  which  belong  to  the  Christian  life,  and  which  only  Christian 
lives  can  share  with  Christ.  And  I  think  that  just  as  those  sorrows  cannot  be  in 
any  fair  sense  called  the  sufferings  peculiarly  of  Christ,  so  the  whole  analogy  of 
similar  passages  in  the  New  Testament  shows  us  that  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  the 
sufferings  which  we  suffer  as  Christians.  What,  then,  does  he  mean  ?  If  we 
exclude  the  sorrows  of  life  which  are  common  to  all  mankind,  if  we  exclude  the 
special  sufferings  of  Christ  on  the  Cross  as  our  Redeemer,  what  are  the  sufferings 
which  we  are  privileged  to  share  with  Christ  ?  In  one  sense  the  work  of  Christ 
was  complete ;  He  wrought  a  perfect  and  complete  work  upon  the  Cross.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  a  real  sense  in  which  the  work  of  Christ  is  not  complete. 
Christ  may,  if  I  may  use  the  figure,  be  supposed  to  have  formed  a  great  steel  plate, 
on  which  every  line  and  letter  is  engraved,  but  still  the  work  of  striking  off  the 
impressions  is  left  for  the  Church  of  Christ  to  do.  He  formed  every  feature  of  the 
Christian  character  which  was  to  be  stamped  upon  mankind  ;  He  wrought  all  that 
great  and  glorious  work  which  was  the  great  picturing  of  Divine  love  in  the  eyesight 
of  man ;  but  having  wrought  that.  He  left  it  to  His  disciples  to  carry  forth  that 
image  to  the  world,  and  they  were  to  impress  it  upon  the  characters  of  men ;  they 
were,  in  fact,  to  work  out  that  which  Christ  had  left  them  to  work.  He  had  given 
them  the  rule,  they  were  to  work  out  the  examples ;  He  had  given  them  the  great 
completed  seed,  they  were  to  sow  it  into  the  hearts  of  men.  Christ's  Church  is 
built  up  in  suffering.  There  is  not  a  truth  which  is  incorporated  in  our  creeds, 
there  is  not  a  single  aphorism  of  Christianity  which  is  dear  to  your  hearts  that  has 
not  been  consolidated  by  the  blood  of  suffering  men  and  women.  But  there  is 
another  sense  in  which  we  may  also  share  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  All  Christian 
life  is  progressive.  Against  all  the  knots,  and  against  all  the  awkward  angles  of 
character,  the  grace  of  God  has  to  contend,  and  in  contending  with  these  it  is 
purging  out  the  evil  and  implanting  the  good.  And  as  Christian  life  is  thus  pro- 
gressive, so  the  capacity  of  sharing  a  certain  order  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  growing 
■within  us.  If  a  pure-minded  person  were  made  by  necessity  to  go  through  the 
•obscene  details  of  the  police  records,  even  physical  agony  would  be  preferred  to  that. 
And  just  so  he  who  feels  that  his  spiritual  life  is  growing,  that  the  sanctifying 
influences  of  the  Spirit  make  him  more  enamoured  of  purity  and  more  hostile  to 
evil,  begins  to  understand  what  intense  pain  Christ  must  have  endured  in  daily 
contact  with  sin  ;  and  so  he  becomes  a  partaker  in  that  degree  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ.  The  judiciousness  of  the  apostle's  language  is  to  be  seen  in  this :  he  says, 
"  Rejoice,  in  so  far  as  "  (and  no  further)  "  you  are  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ."  That  is  to  say,  he  shows  to  them  that  their  cause  of  rejoicing  can  only 
lie  in  this — their  consciousness  that  they  are  suffering  with  Christ.  He  who  feels 
that  the  spiritual  life  within  him  is  growing  may  know  that  in  proportion  as  he  is 
conscious  of  that  pain  which  sin  must  bring  to  the  pure  in  heart  he  is  able  to  share 
somewhat  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  II.  What,  then,  are  the  soubces  of  the 
JOT?  These  we  have  partly  anticipated.  The  joy,  and  that  which  the  apostle 
wishes  the  Christian  to  rejoice  in,  is  precisely  the  thought  that  he  is  suffering  with 
Christ.  The  faithful  servant  will  feel  that  the  hours  are  not  merely  wasted,  but 
are  positively  dishonestly  employed  that  are  not  being  used  in  his  master's  service ; 
and  thus  the  Christian  feels  that  his  hours  are  not,  indeed,  his  own,  but  belong  to 
his  Master ;  and  even  if  those  hours  must  be  employed  in  pain,  if  constant  conflict 
against  the  powers  of  evil  be  that  which  he  is  called  upon  to  endure,  he  can  rejoice, 
for  it  is  for  his  Master.  Not  that  he  is  indifferent  to  sorrow,  but  that  he  feels  the 
sorrow  is  glorified  by  the  fact  that  it  is  for  Christ.  And  just  as  thus  it  is  a  joy  to 
him  to  rejoice  in  suffering  for  Christ,  so  also  is  it  so  because  he  sees  in  it  a  witness 
of  his  own  progress.  Do  I  find  sin  a  greater  pain,  do  I  find  that  the  presence  of  it 
causes  more  agony  than  before  ?  Then  I  am  glad,  for  at  least  I  can  so  far  feel  that 
I  am  growing  in  the  image  of  Christ ;  I  would  rather  feel  sin  to  be  ten  thousand- 
fold the  agony  it  was  before  than  that  I  should  live  a  life  which  is  utterly  indifferent 
to  Christian  progress.  And  there  is  yet  another  reason  of  joy.  The  love  which  the 
Christian  has  is  that  which  the  apostle  assumes.  But  what  is  one  of  the  first 
features  of  love  ?  Is  it  not  to  be  linked  with  the  object  it  loves  ?  We  always  long 
to  appropriate  that  which  we  love,  because  there  is  the  straining  desire  of  the  soul 
to  be  drawn  nearer  to  the  object  of  its  love.  And  so  the  Christian  feels  that  the 
desire  of  his  love  is  to  be  linked  with  Christ.  And  where  is  the  link  ?  Look  round 
the  world  and  answer,  where  can  the  link  with  Christ  be  ?    Is  it  in  joy  ?     I  know 


CHAP.  IT.]  I.  PETER.  363 

no  joy  as  long  as  sin  reigns  in  the  world.  Is  it  to  be  found  in  the  mere  amuse- 
ments of  life  ?  These  are  impossible.  The  only  law  by  which  the  soul  of  man  can 
be  linked  with  Christ  is  the  law  of  suffering ;  it  is  the  very  law  of  our  physical 
being,  it  is  the  very  law  of  society,  it  is  the  very  law  of  God's  universe,  because  of 
the  strange  distortions  which  sin  has  introduced,  that  all  love  is  a  bond  in  suffering. 
Not  one  has  suffered  ;  not  one  has  loved  without  feeling  that  love  and  suffering  are 
always  co-relatives  in  life.  It  was  not  because  your  life  was  easy  and  smooth 
together  that  you  loved  one  another  so  intensely ;  it  is  because  you  have  fought 
together,  because  you  have  struggled  together,  because  you  were  partners  in  the 
same  sorrow  and  in  the  same  care.  And  not  merely  thus ;  those  who  have  suffered 
the  same  loss,  for  example — see  what  a  freemasonry  of  love  that  establishes  !  But 
it  is  not  merely  this  ;  it  is  more.  It  is  not  merely  the  same  loss  you  are  suffering. 
"  For  the  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up  ;  and  the  reproaches  of  them  that 
reproached  Thee  are  fallen  upon  me  "  ;  but  the  sorrow  which  men  endure  together 
in  establishing  the  same  cause,  is  not  that  a  link  which  binds  them  fast  ?  None 
'have  suffered  for  Christ  without  loving  Christ  the  more,  and  none  have  loved 
Christ  the  more  without  feeUng  Christ's  love  the  more,  and  none  have  felt  Christ's 
love  the  more  without  feeling  that  He  has  stooped  down  to  their  very  side  to  be 
near  them.  (Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer. — 
Righteous  and  evil  suffering : — I.  The  apostle  distinguishes  between  deserved 
AND  xraDESERVED  SDFFEEiNG.  Many  of  the  early  martyrs  brought  on  their  own 
deaths  through  incautious  and  foolish  utterances,  or  want  of  that  meekness  which 
ought  to  characterise  a  professor  of  the  gospel.  II.  The  apostiiE  urges  the  higher 
BESPONsiBiLiTiES  OF  PROFESSORS  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  They  posscss  a  higher  standard  of 
moral  conduct  than  the  worldling.  III.  The  apostle  reminds  us  of  the  terrible 
END  OF  THE  FINALLY  IMPENITENT.  The  shipwTccked  mariner  who  has  lashed  him- 
self to  a  spar,  and  is  striving  frantically  to  reach  the  shore,  is  far  more  likely  to  be 
saved  than  the  sailor  who  stays  on  the  burning  vessel.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  A 
busybody  in  other  men's  business. — The  busybody : — It  is  very  common  to  com- 
pare ourselves  with  other  men,  and  to  draw  flattering  conclusions  from  the  fact  of 
their  conduct  being  marked  by  more  of  open  flagitiousness  than  our  own.  Yet  it 
may  be  the  very  grossest  of  self-deceptions.  The  degree  of  criminality  must 
evidently  depend,  not  only  on  the  sin  committed,  but  on  the  amount  of  temptation 
and  the  measure  of  resistance.  I  am  not  necessarily  better  than  another,  unless 
better  under  precisely  the  same  circumstances  ;  and  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  know 
and  to  judge  what  all  those  circumstances  are.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  suppose 
the  busybody  to  be  equally  criminal  with  the  murderer  and  the  thief,  but  at  all 
events  there  must  be  much  greater  criminality  in  the  busybody  than  we  are 
accustomed  to  suppose  ;  otherwise  an  apostle  would  hardly  have  so  combined 
offenders  as  they  are  combined  in  our  text.  1.  Now  it  is  certainly  far  from  the 
design  of  the  Christian  religion  to  separate  us  one  from  another,  to  shut  us  up  in 
our  individual  capacities,  and  confine  our  attention  to  our  individual  interests. 
Christianity,  on  the  contrary,  enjoins  universal  brotherhood  and  love  ;  brotherhood 
and  love,  which  are  entirely  at  variance  with  the  supposition  that  we  take  no 
concern  in  the  affairs  of  our  neighbour.  The  great  general  rule,  in  this  as  in  every 
case  of  Christian  casuistry,  must  evidently  be  fetched  from  the  motive  by  which  we 
are  actuated.  If  it  be  honestly  our  aim  to  promote  the  Divine  glory  by  promoting 
the  good  of  our  fellow-men,  we  can  scarcely  go  wrong,  whether  in  the  measure  or 
the  manner  in  which  we  concern  ourselves  in  the  affairs  of  other  men.  Whenso- 
ever there  is  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  another,  whensoever,  more  especially,  his 
soul  may  be  benefited  through  our  instrumentality,  then  and  there  indeed  it  were 
worse  than  absurd  to  suppose  it  playing  the  busybody's  part  to  concern  ourselves  in 
his  affairs.  Let  no  one,  therefore,  think  to  shelter  himself  under  the  plea  that 
non-interference  is  a  duty,  and  thus  excuse  himself  from  all  public  endeavour  at 
discountenancing  vice,  defending  truth,  relieving  misery,  or  propagating  Christianity. 
It  is  at  a  far  remoter  point  that  interference  becomes  sinful.  And  we  may  begin 
our  investigation  by  stating  that  probably  St.  teter  had  respect  to  a  species  of 
meddling,  which  is  sufficiently  common,  though  hardly  thought  criminal.  The 
one  compound  word  in  the  Greek  (for  there  is  but  one),  which  is  rendered  by  us 
"  a  busybody  in  other  men's  matters,"  might  be  more  Uterally  rendered — a  bishop 
in  another  man's  diocese  ;  as  though  what  the  apostle  specially  wished  to  denounce 
were  that  interference  with  constituted  authorities,  whether  civil  or  ecclesiastical, 
which  in  those  days  and  countries  exposed  men  to  punishment.  Just  because  tho  ^a 
in  power  bring  not  forward  the  precise  measures  which  these  men  think  the  bejt, 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

they  will  break  at  once  into  injurious  expressions  ;  as  though  they  must  be  better 
judges  of  what  is  good  for  an  empire,  who  have  no  means  of  looking  into  all  the 
intricacies  of  the  machine,  than  others  who  are  placed  at  the  wheel,  and  have  the 
power  of  observing  the  most  secret  springs.  But  it  is  a  more  private  sort  of 
meddling  with  which  the  busybody  is  generally  occupied ;  he,  or  she,  is  prying  into 
family  secrets,  as  well  as  into  state,  and  presuming  to  adjust  the  affairs  of  neigh- 
bours as  well  as  the  intricacies  of  government.  The  man  who,  unasked,  obtrudes 
his  opinions  on  others  in  matters  in  which  they  alone  have  any  concern,  who 
infringes  the  liberty  of  others  where  they  have  undoubted  right  to  follow  their  own 
inclination,  who  sets  up  on  every  occasion  for  a  teacher  of  others,  as  though  he 
must  be  wiser  and  better  informed,  who  is  always  for  adjusting  his  neighbour's 
business,  and  is  so  disinterested  that  he  will  do  it  at  the  neglect  of  his  own  :  such 
an  one — one  who  is  guilty  whether  in  any  or  in  all  of  these  particulars — is 
emphatically  a  "  busybody  in  other  men's  matters."  The  woman  who  plays  the 
spy  upon  her  neighbours,  as  though  she  were  the  constituted  inspector  of  them- 
selves and  their  households,  who  is  not  easy  except  she  knows  every  particular  of 
their  domestic  arrangements,  who,  if  she  have  a  visit  to  pay,  is  sure  to  talk  over 
the  affairs  of  the  family  she  last  left,  only  leaving  herself  time  to  find  out  some- 
thing to  tell  at  the  house  to  which  she  goes  next,  who  is  critical  alike  upon 
character  and  upon  dress,  so  that  she  will  pronounce  with  equal  fluency  what 
people  ought  to  do  and  what  they  ought  to  wear :  such  a  woman  is  undeniably  a 
"busybody  in  other  men's  matters."  2.  But  now  you  will  inquire  what  great 
criminality,  after  all,  attaches  to  the  busybody,  or  with  what  show  of  justice  he  can 
be  associated  with  those  whom  even  human  laws  sternly  reprobate  and  punish.  (1) 
The  busybody  violates  justice ;  because,  by  meddling  with  other  men's  affairs,  he 
does  his  best  to  deprive  them  of  their  office,  which  is  certainly  to  manage  their  own 
business.  (2)  The  busybody,  again,  is  conspicuous  in  arrogance;  for  he  who  is 
always  obtruding  his  advice  is  always  proclaiming  himself  wiser  than  others.  (3) 
The  busybody  neglects  himself,  and  those  affairs  which  are  specially  his  own.  (4) 
And  who  does  more  harm  than  the  busybody  ?  Half  the  dissensions  in  a  neigh- 
bourhood are  his  or  her  work.  The  parties  into  whose  affairs  the  busybody  pries 
are  naturally  incensed  or  irritated  by  the  interference ;  and  in  this  feeling  is 
evidently  laid  the  foundation  of  enmity.  Besides,  what  is  found  out  by  the 
inquisitiveness  of  the  busybody  is  sure  to  be  propagated  by  the  industriousness  of 
the  tale-bearer ;  so  that  the  secrets  of  families  become  public  talk,  and  chief  friends 
are  separated  by  injurious  reports  of  things  which  were  perhaps  never  done,  or 
remarks  which  were  perhaps  never  made.  There  is  another  assassin  besides  he 
who  kills  the  body — he  who  wounds  the  reputation ;  and  who  does  this  more  than 
the  busybody  ?  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  A  hint  to  meddlers  : — Some  people  do  not 
understand  how  to  co-operate  for  public  ends  without  interfering  with  the  privacy 
of  domestic  life.  The  seals  teach  a  good  lesson  in  this  respect.  They  can  work 
together  at  proper  times ;  but  they  honour  the  sanctity  of  home.  They  live  sociably, 
and  in  great  numbers  frequent  the  same  localities.  Although,  in  the  sea,  these 
animals  co-operate  in  numerous  herds,  and  protect  and  valiantly  defend  each  other, 
once  emerged  from  their  favourite  element  they  regard  themselves  on  their  peculiar 
rock  as  in  a  sacred  domicile,  where  no  comrade  has  a  right  to  intrude  upon  their 
domestic  tranquillity.  If  one  of  them  approach  this  family  centre,  the  chief — or, 
shall  we  say  the  father  ? — prepares  to  expel  by  force  what  he  considers  a  foreign 
aggression ;  and  there  invariably  takes  place  a  terrible  combat,  which  only  ends  in 
the  death  of  the  lord  of  the  rock,  or  in  the  compulsory  retreat  of  the  indiscreet 
stranger.  This  proceeding  is  well  worth  the  attention  of  every  busybody.  It  is  full 
of  sense,  and  shows  a  discrimination  between  public  co-operation  for  the  common 
good,  and  officious  interference  in  private  life,  which  would  do  credit  to  even  human 
beings.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Mind  your  own  business  : — "  Come,  hurry  up !  " 
said  the  second-hand  of  a  clock  to  the  minute-hand ;  "  you'll  never  get  round  in 
time  if  you  don't.  See  how  fast  I'm  going,"  continued  the  fussy  little  monitor,  as 
it  fretted  round  on  its  pivot.  "  Come,  hurry  up  !  "  said  the  minute  to  the  hour- 
hand,  utterly  oblivious  of  being  addressed  by  the  second-hand.  "If  you  don't  be 
quick  you'll  never  be  in  at  the  stroke  of  one."  "  Well,  that's  just  what  our  young 
friend  there  has  been  saying  to  you."  At  this  point  the  clock  pealed  forth  the  hour 
as  the  hour-hand  continued,  "  You  see  we're  all  in  time — not  one  of  us  behind. 
You  take  my  advice  :  Do  your  own  work  in  your  own  way,  and  leave  others  alone." 
Moral— Mind  your  own  business.     {Great  Thoughts.) 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  365 

Vers.  16-19.  Yet  if  any  man  suffer  as  a  Christian. — The  ttvofold  sorrow : — One 
often  hears  it  insinuated  that  a  godly  life  is  free  from  care  and  sorrow,  but  those 
persons  do  much  harm  who  would  cheat  people  into  becoming  religious  by  any  such 
delusive  hopes.  All  have  troubles,  but  it  makes  a  very  great  difference  whether  we 
sorrow  with  God  or  without  Him.  Let  us  now  consider  some  of  the  sorrows  of 
righteousness  and  compare  them  with  the  no  less  certain  sorrows  of  unrighteousness. 
We  divide  the  sufferings  of  the  Christian  into,  first,  those  which  spring  from  his 
struggles  with  outer  things  ;  secondly,  those  arising  from  his  own  nature — the  world 
within.  Every  one  knows  how  the  first  professors  of  Christianity  had  to  suffer 
when  that  religion  was  in  its  infancy,  and  paganism  or  indifferentism  was  the  creed 
of  respectability.  They  were  tortured,  thrown  to  wild  beasts,  "  butchered  to  make 
a  Roman  holiday."  The  men  of  noble  aims  find  their  lot  a  sad  and  lonely  one  still. 
They  are  smiled  at  as  enthusiasts,  sneered  at  as  hypocrites.  And  then  there  is  the 
pain  which  is  felt  by  every  one  who  bravely  contends  against  the  besetting  sins  of 
his  inner  life.  Oh,  who  can  escape  from  himself — this  slothful,  vain,  selfish,  lustful, 
envious  self?  To  conquer  this  i^  indeed  a  struggle.  But  do  not  fancy  for  a 
moment  that  the  sorrows  of  unrighteousness  are  at  all  less  real.  Suppose  a  man 
did  gain  the  whole  world  at  the  trifling  cost  (as  he  might  think  it)  of  his  own  soul, 
what  then  ?  We  know  that  Alexander  was  troubled  because  he  had  not  another 
world  to  conquer,  and  is  there  not  such  a  thing  as  satiety,  monotony  of  success,  and 
the  want  of  not  having  a  want?  Euined  homes  and  cursed  lives  proclaim  the 
penalties  of  unrestrained  passions.  The  sufferings  in  this  world  of  the  murderer, 
thief,  evil-doer,  with  death  for  wages,  are  at  least  as  great  as  those  of  the  Christian 
to  be  followed  by  God's  gift  of  eternal  life.  Certainly  it  is  difficult  to  resist  our 
unholy  natures,  to  tame  rebellious  passions  ;  but  there  is  one  thing  even  more  diflB- 
cult,  and  that  is  to  endure  the  misery  which  their  unrestrained  indulgence  invariably 
brings  along  with  it.  Suffer  we  all  must ;  but  surely  it  makes  a  great  difference 
whether  God's  love  is  seen  through  our  sorrow,  or  we  have  the  additional  misery  of 
feeling  that  we  are  in  rebellion  against  our  Heavenly  Father,  and  that,  therefore, 
the  whole  constitution  of  the  world  is  against  us.  {E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.)  The 
character  and  privileges  of  a  Christian  : — I.  His  chaeacter.  1,  A  Christian  is  one 
who  fully  and  cordially  believes  the  testimony  that  is  given  concerning  Christ.  2. 
A  Christian  is  one  who  permanently  obeys  the  commandments  of  Christ.  3.  A 
Christian  is  one  who  receives  his  faith  and  holiness,  and  his  desert  in  them,  by  the 
Spirit  of  Christ.  II.  His  privileges.  1.  A  Christian  is  justified  from  the  guilt 
and  condemnation  of  sin.  2.  A  Christian  possesses  friendship  and  constant  inter- 
course with  God.  3.  A  Christian  possesses  the  certainty  of  victory  over  death. 
4.  A  Christian  has  the  prospect  of  perfect  and  immortal  happiness  and  glory. 
(J.  Parsons.)         The  Christian  described : — I.  The  origin  of  the  name  (Acts  xi.  26). 

II.  The  commonness  of  the  appellation.  1.  In  one  aspect  this  commonness  is 
astonishing,  and  should  be  convincing.  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  2.  In 
another  view  this  commonness  is  reasonable.  3.  In  another  view  the  commonness 
of  the  name  is  lamentable.  The  word  Christian  was  once  very  significant  and 
distinguishing.  But,  alas !  in  numberless  instances  now,  it  is  not  distinguishable 
at  all.  III.  The  real  import  of  this  title.  1.  A  Christian  is  one  who  has  a 
relation  to  Christ;  not  a  professed,  but  a  real  relation — not  a  nominal,  but  a  vital 
relation — yea,  a  very  peculiar  and  pre-eminent  relation,  arising  above  every  other 
you  can  mention ;  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  never  ending  in  its  duration ;  and 
deriving  the  possession  and  continuance  of  every  enjoyment  from  Christ.  2.  A 
Christian  is  a  lover  of  Christ's  doctrine.  3.  A  Christian  is  a  lover  of  Christ's  person. 
4.  A  Christian  is  a  copier  of  Christ's  example.  5.  A  Christian  is  a  dependent  on 
Christ's  mediation.  6.  A  Christian  is  expectant  of  Christ's  coming.  (W.  Jay.) 
Glorify  God  on  this  behalf. — The  pious  sufferer  exhorted  to  glorify  God  : — I.  What 
is  implied  in  suffering  as  a  Christian.  1.  To  suffer  in  the  character  of  a 
Christian.  Where  piety  has  its  seat  in  the  heart  it  will  appear  in  the  life, 
to  be  seen  and  identified  by  all  (Matt.  v.  13-16).  2.  To  suffer  for  dis- 
charging the  duties  of  a  Christian.  Christianity  frees  its  possessors  from  the 
slavery  of  custom;  they  are  governed  by  the  high  principles  of  religion.  3.  To 
suffer  in  the  spirit  of  a  Christian  (Luke  xxi.  19).  II.  Why  characters  who 
THUS  suffer  should  NOT  BE  ASHAMED.  1.  Becausc  they  suffer  innocently.  2. 
They  suffer  in  a  good  cause.  3.  They  suffer  from  the  purest  motive.  4.  They 
suffer  for  a  blessed  Master.     5.  They  suffer  in  imitation  of  the  brightest  examples. 

III.  Their  duty  under  suffering  circumstances,  viz.,  to  "  glorify  God  on  this 
behalf."     1.  Devoutly  acknowledging  Him  and  His  gifts  (1  Chron.  xxix.  11,  12  ; 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

confessing  Him  "  worthy  to  receive  honour,  glory,  might,  and  majesty"  (Rev.  iv. 
11).  The  very  circumstance  of  their  suffering  should  prompt  them  to  this.  2.  By 
firmness  in  the  day  of  trial.  Let  nothing  shake  their  firmness  (1  Cor.  xv.  58) ;  but 
imitate  the  example  of  the  disciples,  who  continued  with  their  Lord  in  His  tempta- 
tions (Luke  xxii.  28,  29).  3.  By  a  faithful  and  patient  endurance  of  suffering.  IV. 
To  THIS  ACT  OF  GLORIFYING  GoD,  THEY  ARE  ENCOURAGED  from — 1.  The  declarations 
and  promises  He  has  made.     These  are  many,  great,  and  various  (Isa.  xli.  10,  xliii. 

1,  2,  Uv.  17  ;  Matt.  x.  32 ;  James  i.  12 ;  Rev.  ii.  10,  xxii.  7).  2.  The  honour  it  will 
confer  upon  them.     Improvement : — 1.  Let  us  examine  our  experience  by  this  test. 

2.  Let  us  encourage  ourselves  in  the  Lord.  3.  Let  us  pray  for  our  persecutors. 
{Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 

Vers.  17-19.  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God. — The  Church's  visita- 
tion : — How  we  may  know  when  some  judgment  approacheth.  God  usually,  before 
any  heavy  judgment,  visits  a  people  with  lesser  judgments.  1.  "  This,  and  this 
have  I  done,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  and  yet  ye  have  not  returned  unto  Me  "  (Amos  iv. 
6,  7).  There  be  droppings  before  the  ruin  of  a  house.  2.  Again,  usually  before 
some  great  calamity,  God  takes  away  worthy  men,  "  the  councillor,  and  the  captain, 
and  the  man  of  war  "  (Isa.  iii.  2,  3).  This  is  a  fearful  presage  that  God  threateneth 
some  destruction,  for  they  are  the  pillars  of  the  church  and  the  strength  of  the 
world  ;  for  they  keep  away  evil  and  do  good  by  their  example  and  by  their  prayers 
many  ways.  3.  God  usually  visits  a  people  when  some  horrible  crying  sins  reign 
amongst  them,  as — (1)  Atheism.  (2)  Idolatry.  (3)  When  divisions  grow  amongst 
a  people.  Union  is  a  preserver.  4.  Again,  when  sin  goes  with  some  evil  circum- 
stances and  odious  qualities,  which  aggravate  the  same  in  the  sight  of  God,  as 
when  sin  grows  ripe,  and  abounds  in  a  land  or  nation.  (1)  When  it  is  impudent ; 
when  men  grow  bold  in  sin,  making  it  their  whole  course  and  trade  of  life.  (2) 
When  sin  grows  common  and  spreads  far.  It  is  an  ill  plea  to  say.  Others  do  so  as 
well  as  I.  Alas !  the  more  sin  the  more  danger.  (3)  When  there  is  a  security  in 
sinning,  without  fear  of  the  Almighty,  as  if  men  would  dare  the  God  of  heaven  to 
do  His  worst.  5.  Unfruitfuhaess  threateneth  a  judgment  upon  a  people.  When 
God,  the  great  husbandman  in  His  Church,  sees  that  upon  so  great  and  continual 
cost  bestowed  upon  us,  we  remain  yet  unfruitful,  He  will  not  suffer  us  long  to 
cumber  the  ground  of  His  Church.  6.  Decay  in  our  first  love  is  a  sign  of  judgment 
approaching.  {R.  Sibbes.)  Difficulties  in  the  pursuit,  despair  in  the  neglect,  of 
salvation: — I.  That  the  conddct  of  God  to  His  Church  is  such,  that  "judg- 
ment "  MAY   BE    said   TO    "  BEGIN   AT    THE  HOUSE    OP    GoD,"    AND    "  THE  RIGHTEOUS  "  TO 

BE  "  SCARCELY  SAVED."  1.  The  Church  is  here  often  subject  to  persecution.  2. 
The  Christian  life  is  a  painful  course  of  exertion  and  warfare.  3.  Many  serious 
apprehensions  and  fears  are  felt  by  the  people  of  God  respecting  their  final  salva- 
tion. 4.  "  The  righteous  is  scarcely  saved,"  as,  to  be  saved,  he  must  endure  to  the 
end.  II.  We  proceed  to  the  solemn  inquiry,  which  the  apostle  infers  from  such 
a  conduct  of  the  Lord  toward  His  servants ;  "  What  shall  be  the  end  of  those  who 
obey  not  His  gospel  ?  whei-e  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear ;  if  judgment 
begin  at  the  house  of  God;  if  the  righteous  be  scarcely  saved?"  1.  Now  if  these 
require  such  a  process  of  afflictive  correction  and  purification,  what  shall  be  the 
doom  of  those  who  experience  none ;  those  who  live  without  God  ?  If  His  corrective 
dealings  were  so  severe,  what  will  be  His  severity,  when  justice  alone,  without 
mercy,  shall  preside  ?  2.  The  saints  are  prepared  for  glory  by  a  course  of  privations 
and  endurances ;  by  learning  to  deny  themselves :  what  then  may  be  expected  by 
those  who  never  aimed  at  following  the  will  of  God  as  their  rule  ?  those,  that  live 
at  large  after  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  the  mind.  3.  If  the  righteous  had  so 
many  fears  and  anxieties  regarding  their  state  ;  what  then  shall  be  the  portion  of  those 
who  had  no  such  fears,  who  lived  in  a  reckless  disregard  of  all  that  is  most  serious  ? 
4.  The  followers  of  Christ,  in  the  midst  of  all  their  difficulties,  endure  to  the  end : 
but  if  thus  only  are  they  saved,  what  shall  be  the  doom  of  those  who  persevered 
in  an  opposite  path  ?  acquiring  only,  at  every  step,  fre.sh  degrees  of  obduration,  a 
more  fixed  habit  of  resistance  to  the  will  of  God  1  "Where  shall  they  appear?" 
{R.  Hall,  31. A.)  The  Church's  visitation  :— I.  The  Church  of  God  is  His  own 
house.  1.  God  hath  two  houses,  the  heavens,  which  are  called  His  house,  because 
He  manifests  His  glory  there,  and  the  Church  here  below,  wherein  He  manifests 
His  grace.  Yea,  the  whole  world,  in  a  sort,  is  His  house,  because  He  manifests  His 
power  and  wisdom  in  it ;  but  heaven  and  His  Church,  in  a  more  peculiar  manner ; 
and  that  in  these  respects — 1.  Because  God  by  His  grace  hath  residence  in  His 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  367 

Church.  (2)  Because  by  the  means  of  salvation— the  Word  and  sacraments  there 
administered— He  doth  feed  His  Church,  as  in  a  house.  (3)  A  man  rests  and  takes 
contentment  in  His  house  ;  so  God  takes  His  best  contentment  in  His  Church  and 
people  ;  they  are  the  most  beloved  of  all  mankind.  (4)  As  in  a  house  we  use  to  lay 
up  our  jewels  and  precious  things ;  so  God  lays  up  in  His  Church  whatsoever  is 
precious — His  praises,  His  graces,  yea,  whatsoever  is  good  and  of  high  esteem,  that 
He  bestows  upon  His  Church  and  people.  2.  God  provides  for  His  Church  as  His 
own  house.  First,  a  man  provides  for  his  family ;  so  doth  God  provide  for  His 
Church.  And  as  a  man  protects  his  house  from  all  enemies,  so  will  God  protect 
His  Church  and  people,  and  be  a  wall  of  fire,  and  a  defence  round  about  them. 

3.  The  heart  of  true  Christians  is  God's  private  closet.  And  as  in  every  house  or 
building,  there  are  some  open  places,  and  some  private  closets,  &c.,  so  is  it  here. 
God  hath  His  private  chamber,  and  His  retiring-place,  which  is  the  heart  of  every 
true  Christian.  II.  The  house  of  God  needs  visiting  and  purging.  1.  Such  is 
the  weakness  of  man's  nature,  that  evil  things  soon  discourage  us  ;  and  good  things, 
except  we  wrestle  with  our  spirits,  prove  a  snare  to  the  best.  Even  the  Church  of 
God,  after  a  long  time  of  peace,  is  apt  to  gather  corruption,  as  water  doth  by  stand- 
ing, and  as  the  air  itself  will  do  if  it  have  not  the  wind  to  purge  it.  2.  Most  certain 
it  is  that  the  Church  of  God  cannot  be  long  without  some  affliction,  considering 
that  it  is  now  in  a  state  of  pilgrimage,  absent  from  God,  in  another  world  as  it 
were.  III.  God  will  come  to  visit  and  purge  His  house  when  need  is.  He 
afflicts  His  own  people  before  others,  because^l.  They  are  of  His  own  family,  and 
are  called  by  His  name  (Numb.  vi.  27).  Now  the  disorders  of  the  family  tend  to 
the  disgrace  of  the  governor  of  it.  2.  The  gospel  suffers  much  through  the  sins  of 
professors.  3.  The  sins  of  the  godly  are  more  heinous  than  others.  (1)  Committed 
against  more  light.  (2)  More  benefits  and  favours.  (3)  Sacrilege.  (4)  Idolatry. 
IV.  God  appoints  a  particular  time  for  His  visitation.  1.  The  time  of  visiting 
the  Church  of  God  is  from  Abel  to  the  last  man  that  shall  be  in  the  earth.  The 
whole  days  of  the  Church  are  a  time  of  persecution.  2.  The  Church  is  afflicted 
when  the  light  of  the  gospel  hath  most  clearly  shined.  3.  Now  is  the  time  of  the 
Church's  affliction.  V.  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  God  begins 
with  His  own  Church  and  people — 1.  Usually  because  He  uses  wicked  men  and  the 
enemies  of  His  Church  for  that  base  service,  to  correct  and  punish  them.  2.  To 
take  away  all  excuse  from  wicked  men.     3.  That  His  children  might  be  best  at  last. 

4.  That  when  He  sends  them  good  days  afterwards,  they  might  have  the  more  taste 
and  relish  of  His  goodness.  {R.  Sibhes.)  Afflictions  amongst  the  peojyle  of  God : — 
I.  Afflictions  must  begin  with  God's  servants.  Jacob's  house  first,  afterwards 
the  Egyptians,  felt  the  famine  ;  first  the  Israelites  were  oppressed,  afterwards  the 
Egyptians  ;  the  Jews  were  first  carried  into  captivity,  but  afterwards  the  Assyrians 
were  destroyed  by  the  Medes  and  Persians.  1.  In  respect  of  their  sins,  they  are  full 
of  terror  ere  they  can  get  any  comfort,  and  when  they  have  obtained  it,  it  is  often 
eclipsed,  and  they  go  mourning.  2.  They  are  subject  to  many  sicknesses,  grievous 
pains,  diseases,  losses,  crosses,  disgrace,  persecution  at  the  hand  of  the  wicked,  &c. 
(1)  To  humble  them  for  sin  past.  (2)  To  fetch  them  into  the  way  from  wandering, 
and  teach  them  obedience.  (3)  To  humble  them.  (4)  To  mortify  their  lusts,  wean 
them  from  the  world,  and  quicken  them  to  duty.  (5)  Hereby  also  God  showeth 
that  He  will  not  bear  with  sin  in  His  dearest  servants.  (6)  To  confute  the  devil, 
and  show  that  God's  people  serve  Him  not  for  wages.  (7)  To  show  them  their 
happiness  is  to  come,  and  that  if  God  thus  school  His  servants,  that  then  He  will  deal 
severely  with  the  wicked,  so  that  this  may  be  a  looking-glass  to  them.  II.  It  is  of 
necessity  that  God's  servants  must  here  suffer  troubles.  1.  In  respect  of 
God's  will.  He  hath  appointed  us  thereunto.  2.  In  respect  of  our  necessity.  Sin 
is  so  riveted  into  us,  and  in  our  very  nature,  as  it  must  be  no  easy  thing  to  pluck  it 
out   from   us.     (John  Rogers.)         God's  judgment  of  the  world : — I.  The  human 

WORLD    morally   IS    DIVIDED    INTO     TWO    GRAND    SECTIONS.       1.    "  The    hoUSC    of    God." 

All  good  men  are  members  of  one  great  family,  They  have  one  Father,  one  Elder 
Brother,  one  spiritual  life,  and  one  common  home.  2.  Those  who  "  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  God."  II.  These  two  sections  are  alike  subject  to  suffering.  1. 
The  best  men,  in  their  greatest  suffering,  feel  that  their  sufferings  are  deserved.  2. 
That  they  are  disciplinary.  III.  The  suffering  of  the  one  is  far  more  terrible 
THAN  that  of  THE  OTHER.  1.  The  oue  has  resignation  to  the  Divine  will ;  the  other 
has  not.  2.  The  one  has  peace  of  conscience  ;  the  other  has  not.  3.  The  one  has 
the  hope  of  a  better  life ;  the  other  has  not.  4.  The  one  has  fellowship  with  the 
Father ;  the  other  has  not.     Learn : — 1.  The  transcendent  importance  of   moral 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

character.  2.  The  fallacy  of  judging  from  appearances.  3.  The  influence  of  the 
gospel  upon  man's  destiny.  (Homilist.)  Judgment  beginning  at  the  house  of 
God: — The  stormy  shower  lighteth  first  on  the  high  hills,  and  having  washed  them, 
settleth  with  all  the  filth  in  the  valleys.  (J.  Tr<^p.)  Judgments  of  grace  : — It  is 
necessary  to  distinguish  the  judgment  of  grace  from  the  judgment  of  wrath,  and 
temporal  punishment  from  eternal.  {J.  P.  Lange.)  What  shall  the  end  be  of 
them  that  obey  not. — What  is  the  doom  of  those  who  die  impenitent  ? — I.  Not  anni- 
hilation. 1.  Future  punishment  of  some  kind  seems  essential  to  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  God.  2.  The  fact  of  there  being  various  degrees  in  punishment  makes  it 
impossible  for  that  punishment  to  be  annihilation.  3.  All  that  is  said  about  the 
sinner's  doom  shuts  out  the  idea  of  annihilation  (Luke  xii.  4,  5  ;  Matt.  xiii.  41,  42 ; 
Mark  ix.  43).  II.  Not  merely  a  temporary  punishment.  The  most  general  argu- 
ment brougnt  against  eternal  punishment  is  that  it  is  opposed  to  the  perfect  justice 
of  God.  "  The  punishment,"  they  say,  "  being  eternal  must  at  last  exceed  the  sin." 
In  order  to  understand  aright  the  nature  of  the  sin,  you  must  bear  in  mind  the 
being  against  whom  the  sin  is  committed.  It  is  against  Jehovah,  the  Infinite 
One,  and  against  one  to  whom  we  are  under  infinite  obligations.  "  But," 
say  others,  "  God  is  infinitely  merciful,  and  the  very  idea  of  eternal  suffer- 
ing is  opposed  to  that  attribute."  It  may  be  according  to  your  idea  of  that  mercy, 
and  yet  not  against  that  mercy  itself.  Kemember  God  is  as  just  as  He  is  merciful. 
That  mercy  can  permit  eternal  suffering  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  does  in  the 
case  of  Satan  and  the  rebel  angels.  There  will  be  nothing  in  hell  to  refine  or  alter 
the  sinner.  Hell  fire  is  no  "  refiner's  fire,"  to  purge  the  dross  away.  {A.  G.  Brown.) 
The  ultimate  destiny  of  the  ivicked  : — The  question  concerns  those  who  "  obey  not 
the  gospel."  Observe,  the  gospel  is  not  to  be  treated  as  a  mere  subject  for  study; 
although  a  more  noble  subject  comes  not  within  the  reach  of  man.  Nor  as  a  means 
of  mere  excitement.  It  is  not  a  book  for  entertainment,  such  as  a  tale,  a  poem,  a 
drama.  The  gospel  is  a  statute,  a  law  to  be  obeyed ;  it  comes  with  the  highest 
authority.  Unless  it  is  translated  into  our  lives,  and  embodied  in  our  actions,  it  is 
a  curse.  I.  The  question  in  the  text  is  one  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine 
with  certitude.  No  less  than  three  theories  have  been  propounded,  in  order  to 
render  an  answer  to  this  tremendous  problem's  utter  extinction — eternal  torment — 
ultimate  restoration.  II.  Certitude  on  such  a  subject  is  of  no  vital  importance. 
1.  Genuine  religion  is  the  one  thing  essential  for  man.  2.  Genuine  religion 
is  independent  of  any  certitude  of  the  future.  3.  Whilst  genuine  religion  is 
independent  of  any  certitude  of  the  future,  it  is  dependent  upon  the  knowledge 
of  some  things,  and  these  things  are  clearly  revealed.  (1)  Our  great  moral 
obligations.      (2)    Our    means    of    spiritual    improvement.      (Homilist.)  The 

end  of  the  ungodly : — This  is  a  verse  of  implication.  It  affirms  nothing,  but 
by  its  own  species  of  argument  causes  us  to  gather  some  very  striking  lessons.  I. 
We  have  implied  the  meaning  of  religion.  "  Obedience."  This  is  God's  due 
as — 1.  Creator.  2.  Father.  3.  King.  II.  We  have  implied  the  law  on  which 
obedience  is  to  be  founded.  "  The  gospel  of  God."  The  gospel  is  the  revelation 
of  good — 1.  On  account  of  its  Author.  2.  Purport.  3.  Practical  influence.  III. 
We  have  implied  that  the  punishment  of  the  unbeliever  will  be  severe.  The 
answer,  left'  here  as  a  great  hiatus,  is  fully  given  in  other  parts  of  Scripture — 1.  In 
the  threats  which  it  utters.  2.  In  the  examples  it  affords.  3.  In  the  logical  course 
of  sequence.  IV.  We  have  implied  a  warning  to  the  sinful.  They  stand  on  the 
brink  of  an  awful  precipice,  in  which  at  any  moment  they  may  fall.  V.  We  have 
implied  a  consolation  to  the  righteous.  If  their  lot  here  is  hard,  it  is  nothing 
to  that  in  store  for  the  disobedient.  Sin  may  be  pleasant  for  a  season,  but  it  brings 
forth  death.     (Pryce  Thomas.)         The  end  of  the  disobedient : — I.  That  there  is 

AN  END  to  the  UNCONVERTED.  II.  ThAT  THIS  END  IS  FRAUGHT  WITH  FEARFUL  CON- 
TINGENCIES.    III.    That  the  nature  of  this  end  demands   urgent   and   careful 

CONSIDERATION.       IV.     ThAT     THIS     END     IS     SHROUDED,    EVEN    TO    THE     MOST    EARNEST 

INVESTIGATION,  IN  OBSCURITY.  {HovdUst.)  The  sin  and  danger  of  not  obeying  the 
gospel : — I.  The  great  privilege  of  having  the  gospel.  1.  It  is  good  news,  the 
best  news  that  ever  reached  our  fallen  world— news  sent  from  heaven,  news  of  a 
reconciliation  for  a  fallen  world.  2.  Though  it  was  intended  for  universal  man 
and  suited  to  meet  all  his  spiritual  wants,  yet  through  the  supineness  of  the  Church 
its  universal  proclamation  has  been  withheld,  and  millions  of  our  fellow-creatures 
left  without  it.  But  we  are  blessed  with  it  in  all  its  purity,  freeness,  and  fulness 
(Psa.  xvi.  G  ;  Heb.  iv.  2).  II.  The  great  sin  of  not  obeying  the  gospel.  It  is 
not  enough  to  go  and  hear  the  gospel,  to  converse  about  it,  to  approve  it,  unless  we 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  3G9 

obey  it  (Titus  ii.  11-14).  III.  The  awful  consequences  of  not  obeying  the 
GOSPEL.  1.  It  will  be  the  end  of  their  hope  and  happiness,  but  not  of  their 
existence.  2.  It  will  be  to  die,  not  only  under  the  curse  of  the  law,  but  under  the 
gospel.  (Pulpit  Studies.)  The  ungodly's  misery  : — I.  The  seeming  prospebitt 
OF  the  wicked  shall  have  an  end.  See  what  a  fearful  judgment  follows  the 
wicked  !  That  which  he  sins  for — his  honour,  riches,  delights — all  shall  vanish 
and  come  to  nothing.  II.  The  happiness  of  the  wicked  is  momentary,  theib 
misery  endless.  When  we  are  tempted  to  any  sin  or  unlawful  course,  consider 
thus  with  ourselves  :  "  Shall  I,  for  a  pleasure  that  will  end,  have  a  judgment  that 
shall  never  end  ?  For  the  favour  of  men  that  wiU  fail,  shall  I  lose  the  perpetual 
favour  of  God  ?  Shall  I,  for  a  little  profit,  lose  my  soul  eternally  ?  "  I  beseech 
you  therefore,  whenever  you  are  solicited  to  sin,  for  profit  or  pleasure,  &c.,  set 
before  your  eyes  the  perishing  condition-  of  these  things,  and  the  everlastingness  of 
that  judgment  which  attends  upon  them.  III.  Those  that  obey  not  the  gospel. 
1.  Sins  against  the  gospel  are  sins  against  those  attributes  wherein  God  wUl  glorify 
Himself  most,  as  His  grace,  mercy,  lovingkindness,  &c.  2.  Sins  against  the  greatest 
light  are  most  sinful.  3.  Another  aggravation  of  sins  against  the  gospel  is  that 
they  sin  against  the  better  covenant.  (R.  Sibbes.)  The  criminality  and  the  conse- 
quences of  unbelief : — I.  The  criminality  op  youb  disobedience.  This  will  appear 
if  you  consider — 1.  The  excellency  and  importance  of  that  gospel  which  you  have 
hitherto  disbelieved.  2.  The  source  in  which  your  unbelief  has  originated.  (1) 
Immoral  conduct.  (2)  Inattention  and  inconsideration.  (3)  Worldly-mindedness. 
(4)  Self-righteousness.  3.  The  motives  and  appeals  which  your  unbelief  has 
resisted.  (1)  Birth  in  a  Christian  family.  (2)  Afilictive  dispensations.  (3)  Con- 
version of  ungodly  companions.  (4)  Impressions  and  convictions.  4.  The  injurious 
influence  which  your  unbelief  may  have  produced  on  the  minds  and  destiny  of 
others.  II.  The  ruinous  consequences  of  your  disobedience.  1.  You  are  now 
in  a  state  of  condemnation.  2.  You  are  in  the  greatest  danger  of  being  suffered  to 
continue  in  impenitence  and  unbelief.  What  will  be  your  condition  in  the  next  world  ? 
{J.  Alexander.)  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved. — The  righteous  scarcely  saved, 
and  the  misery  of  the  wicked  : — To  be  saved  is  what  the  generality  of  persons  in  the 
world  wish  for.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  genuine  sense  of  our  text  hath  a  particular 
reference  to  temporal  salvation  from  calamity,  for  the  copulative  particle  "  and  " 
makes  a  connection  between  it  and  the  foregoing  verses,  where  we  have  the  apostle 
speaking  unto  God's  people  about  their  suffering  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  He  tells 
them  of  judgment  beginning  at  the  house  of  God,  by  which  we  are  to  understand 
affliction  and  calamity,  wherewith  God  exercises  His  people.  But  the  text  need  not 
be  particularly  confined  to  this  sense,  but  may  hold  good  with  respect  to  eternal 
salvation.  1.  That  the  people  of  God  are  a  righteous  people.  They  are  called  so 
in  the  text,  not  that  they  are  so  in  themselves  or  by  nature.  They  are  righteous  in 
the  righteousness  of  Christ,  who  is  called  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  (Jer.  xxiii.  6  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  30).  A  principle  of  righteousness  is  planted  in  them  at  their  conversion, 
from  whence  flows  a  righteousness  of  conversation  (Luke  i.  6).  2.  That  the  people 
of  God  shall  be  saved.  Our  text  plainly  supposes  it,  though  while  in  the  world  they 
are  persecuted.  Now  what  is  it  for  them  to  be  saved  but  to  be  delivered  from  sin 
and  misery,  and  brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  glory  by  Jesus  Christ.  "  Israel 
shall  be  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation."  (1)  They  shall  be 
delivered  from  sin  and  misery.  From  sin,  both  from  the  guilt,  filth,  power,  and 
being  of  it.  (2)  They  shall  be  brought  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  eternal  glory  ;  and 
their  bodies  shall  also  be  saved.  3.  That  though  the  righteous  be  saved,  yet  it  is 
with  abundance  of  difficulty.  In  temporal  calamity  the  Lord  may  suffer  things  to 
run  to  the  very  last  extremity  before  He  appears  for  His  people's  salvation.  Now 
their  being  scarcely  saved  is  not  for  want  of  power  in  God,  for  "  He  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost,"  nor  is  it  for  want  of  will,  for  He  will  give  grace  and  glory  (Psa. 
Ixxxiv.  11),  nor  is  it  for  want  of  an  appointment,  for  He  hath  not  "  appointed  them 
to  wrath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (1  Thess.  v.  9) ;  but  the 
difficulty  lies  in  the  things  they  meet  with  in  the  way  to  salvation.  (1)  At  their 
entrance  into  the  way  to  heaven  they  meet  with  abundance  of  difficulty.  The  gate 
of  conversion  is  strait,  and  a  crowd  of  oppositions  meet  them  at  their  entrance. 
Many  temptations  does  Satan  lay  before  young  converts,  and  such  a  mighty 
advantage  has  he  against  them,  their  corruptions  being  strong  and  grace  weak, 
that  they  find  it  a  very  hard  thing  to  escape.  The  world  also,  sometimes  with  its 
charms  and  sometimes  with  its  frowns,  bears  hard  upon  the  poor  creature,  so  that 
if  he  escape  being  entangled  it  is  with  great  difficulty.     (2)  In  their  progress  on  the 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

vray  to  heaven  they  meet  with  so  many  oppositions  that  they  are  but  scarcely  saved. 
The  way  to  heaven  is  but  a  narrow  way.     God's  people,  like  those  in  the  shipwreck 
with   Paul,  escape  all  safe  to  land,  yet  it  is  with  a  scarcely,  they  get  over  the 
turbulent  sea  of  this  world.    Oh,  the  snares  that  are  laid  for  them  !    (3)  At  their  exit 
out  of  the  world  they  meet  with  abundance  of  difficulty,  so  that  though  they  be 
saved,  yet  it  is  with  a  scarcely ;  their  enemies  would  not  suffer  it  if  they  could 
hinder  it.     When  their  souls  are  ready  to  take  their  flight  into  another  world,  then 
is  Satan  most  busy  to  hinder  their  salvation.     Now  though  it  be  impossible  for  him 
to  hinder  their  salvation,  yet  he  may  so  molest  them  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  obtain 
salvation,  so  that  they  shall  find  they  are  but  scarcely  saved.    This  further  appears — 
(1)  From  the  frequent  apprehensions  they  have  of  their  being  in  danger  of  hell  and 
destruction.     (2)  This  is  further  evident  from  the  fears  there  are  in  the  people  of 
God  about  their  salvation.     4.  That  as  it  is  impossible  for  the  ungodly  and  sinner 
to  be  saved  as  such,  so  their  misery  is  unspeakable.    Where  shall  the  ungodly  and 
sinner  appear  ?     (1)  Negatively,  I  shall  show  where  they  shall  not  appear.     Not  in 
heaven.     Not  in  the  presence  of  God,  for  the  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  His  sight ; 
He  hateth  all  the  workers  of  iniquity.     Not  among  the  righteous.     Sinners  shall 
not  stand  in  the  congregation  of  the  righteous.     Where,  then,  shall  the  wicked 
appear  ?     (2)  Positively,  they  shall  appear  in  hell.     "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned 
into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget  God."     They  shall  appear  at  the  awful 
tribunal  of  God,  before  His  judgment-seat.     And  are  the  righteous  scarcely  saved? 
Hence  learn — 1.  That  going  to  heaven  is  not  so  easy  a  thing  as  some  imagine.    It 
is  not  an  empty  profession  of  religion  that  will  serve  the  turn.     2.  Are  the  righteous 
scarcely  saved  ?    Hence  we  learn  what  a  miserable  disappointment  many  meet  with, 
who,  instead  of  getting  to  heaven,  fall  into  hell.     3.  If  the  righteous  be  scarcely 
saved,  then  we  may  from  hence  learn  the  miserable  condition  of  the  wicked  in 
the  other  world,  who  are  not  saved.     (1)  0  ye  sleepy,  secure  sinners !  where  will 
you  appear  ?     (2)  0  ye  drunkards !  where  will  you  appear — you  that  waste  your 
time  and  estates,  that  spoil  your  constitution,  and  abuse  the  good  creatures  of  God? 
(3)  0  ye  fornicators  and  adulterers !  where  wiU  you  appear  ?     (4)  0  ye  sabbath- 
breakers  !  where  will  you  appear  ?      (5)  0  ye  swearers !  where  wiU  you  appear  ? 
(6)  O  ye  scoifers  at  religion  !  where  will  you  appear  ?    (J.  Sedgfield.)       If  so — ivhat 
then  ? — "  Scarcely  saved  "  points  out  the  difficulty  of  salvation.     It  is  no  light  thmg 
to  be  saved ;  omnipotent  grace  is  needed.     It  is  no  trifling  thing  to  be  lost,  but  it 
can  be  done  by  neglect.     I.  The  fact.     "  The  righteous  scarcely  are  saved."     1. 
From  the  connection  we  conclude  that  the  righteous  are  saved  with  difficulty  because 
of  the  strictness  of  Divine  rule.     2.  From  the  experience  of  saints  we  come  to  the 
same  conclusion.     They  find  many  saving  acts  to  be  hard,  as,  for  instance — (1)  To 
lay  hold  on  Christ  simply,  and  as  sinners.     (2)  To  overcome  the  flesh  from  aay  to 
day.     (3)  To  resist  the  world,  with  its  blandishments,  threats,  and  customs.     (4)  To 
vanquish  Satan  and  his  horrible  temptations.     (5)  To  perfoiTQ  needful  duties  in  a 
humble  and  holy  spirit.     (6)  To  reach  to  gracious  attainments  and  to  continue  in 
them.     (7)  To  pass  the  tribunal  of  their  own  awakened  and  purified  conscience, 
and  to  receive  a  verdict  of  acquittal  there.     3.  From  the  testimony  of  those  who 
are  safely  landed  (Eev.  vii.  14).     II.   The  inference  from  the  fact.     "  Where 
shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "     1.  If  even  the  true  coin  is  so  severely 
tested,  what  will  become  of  the  "  reprobate  silver"?     2.  If  saints  scarcely  reach 
heaven,  what  of  the  ungodly  ?    What  can  they  do  who  have  no  God  ?     What  can 
they  do  who  have  no  Saviour  ?     What  can  they  do  who  are  without  the  Spirit  of 
God  ?     What  without  prayer,  the  Word,  the  promise  of  God,  &c.  ?     3.     If  saints 
are  so  sorely  chastened,  what  will  justice  mete  out  to  the  openly  defiant  sinner  ? 

III.  Another  inference.  Where  will  the  mere  professor  appear?  If  the  truly 
godly  have  a  hard  fight  for  it — 1.  The  formalist  will  find  ceremonies  a  poor  solace. 
2.  The  false  professor  will  be  ruined  by  his  hypocrisy.  3.  The  presumptuous  will 
find  his  daring  pride  a  poor  help.  4.  He  who  trusted  to  mere  orthodoxy  of  creed 
will  come  to  a  fall.    5.  Height  of  office  will  do  no  more  than  increase  responsibility. 

IV.  Another  inference.  Then  the  tempted  soul  may  be  saved.  It  seems  that 
even  those  who  are  truly  saints  are  saved  with  difilculty;  then  we  maybe  saved, 
though  we  have  a  hard  struggle  for  it.  V.  Another  inference.  How  sweet  will 
heaven  be  !  There  the  difficulties  will  be  ended  for  ever.  There  the  former  trials 
will  contribute  to  the  eternal  bliss.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  salvadcm  of  the 
righteous  difficult : — I.  The  character  of  the  persons  here  spoken  of.  1.  The 
righteous.  (1)  None  are  such  legally  (Rom.  iii.  10  ;  Job  ix.  15).  (2)  They  are  such 
as  have  believed  in  Christ,  are  pardoned  and  justified  (Rom.  iii.  25,  20).     2.  The 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  371 

nngodly  sinner.  They  are  such  as  remain  in  their  native,  unconverted  state. 
Particularly  they  are  such — (1)  Over  whom  Satan  exercises  an  uncontrolled 
dominion  (Eph.  ii.  2).  (2)  Alienated  from  the  love  of  God  (Eph.  iv.  18).  (3) 
Rebellion  against  God  (Eom.  i.  28-32).  (4)  Neglecting,  perhaps  rejecting,  the  only 
way  of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  3  ;  x.  28,  29).  II.  The  DirncuLTY  of 
THE  8.VLVATI0N  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS.  1.  The  tcxt  admits  that  the  righteous  shall  be 
saved ;  their  salvation  is  certain  upon  their  being  found  faithful  unto  death.  (1) 
The  testimony  of  Scripture  secures  it  (2  Tim.  i.  12,  iv.  17  ;  chap.  i.  3-5).  (2)  This 
is  the  purpose  of  God  concerning  them  (2  Thess.  ii.  13).  (3)  It  was  the  ultimate 
end  of  Christ's  sufferings  (Heb.  ii.  10).  (4)  Of  His  ascension  into  heaven  (Heb. 
vi.  20).  (5)  God  hath  promised  it  (Eev.  ii.  10).  (6)  The  work  of  salvation  in  the 
righteous  is  already  begun  (PhU.  i.  6).  2.  Nevertheless,  their  salvation  is  here 
represented  as  being  with  difficulty  obtained.  (1)  This  difficulty  is  not  owing  to 
any  deficiency  in  the  love  of  God,  which  is  universal  (John  iii.  16).  (2)  Nor  in  the 
death  and  merit  of  Christ,  which  are  infinite  (Heb.  ii.  9 ;  1  John  ii.  2).  (3)  Nor  in  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit  (John  xiv.  16,  17 ;  xvi.  7,  8).  But  it  is  owing  chiefly — (4)  To 
the  difficulty  of  the  work  they  have  got  to  do  (Tit.  ii.  11-14).  (5)  The  opposition 
they  meet  with  from  the  world.  (6)  The  influence  of  evil  example  which  abounds 
in  the  world  (John  xv.  19).  (7)  The  opposition  they  meet  with  from  Satan  (chap. 
V.  8).  (8)  The  remains  of  corruption  within.  (9)  The  instability  of  some  Christians 
(James  i.  8),  and  the  apostasy  of  others  (1  Tim.  i.  19,  20).     III.  The  certain  and 

DREADFUL    MISERY   THAT    AWAITS    THE    UNGODLY   SINNER.       The    questiou    in    the    text 

relating  to  such  may  refer — 1.  To  a  time  of  popular  calamity  (Luke  xxi.  2.5,  26). 
2.  To  death  (Psa.  ix.  17).  3.  To  the  day  of  judgment.  Let  the  wicked  tremble  for 
the  consequences  of  their  conduct.  Should  they  live  and  die  such,  their  destruction 
is  inevitable.  [T.  Hannam.)  The  difficulty  of  salvation : — Let  us  consider  the 
solemn  truth  assumed — "If  the  righteous  be  scarcely  saved."  The  meaning  of  this 
is  that  the  righteous  are  saved  with  difficulty.,  or,  as  Steiger  well  expresses  it,  "  it 
costs  believers  much  to  remain  steadfast  in  their  endurance  of  trials  and  to  glorify 
God."  The  radical  cause  of  the  difficulty  is  with  the  righteous — original  sin.  The 
external  causes  of  the  difficulty  are  around  beUevers — the  world,  which  is  in  league 
with  their  infected  nature,  and  offers  corresponding  objects  to  all  its  evil  pro- 
pensities. It  is  readily  admitted  that  they  are  surrounded  also  with  the  helps  of 
the  Church.  Now  to  notice  the  particular  causes  of  such  difficulty.  Observe,  first, 
that  the  faith  of  the  righteous,  which  is  always  imperfect,  has,  like  a  physical 
power,  a  constant  tendency  to  decrease  in  strength  and  fii'mness  through  its  exercise 
being  neglected.  The  temptations  to  such  neglect  are  many  and  great.  The 
righteous,  for  the  most  part,  are  leading  a  busy  life.  Hence  they  are  tempted  not 
to  find  time  for  the  exercise  of  faith.  Besides,  sensible  things  ever  surround  them, 
try  to  press  into  their  souls  by  every  avenue  of  their  senses,  and  exclusively  fill 
their  affections  and  engage  their  thoughts ;  hence  their  disinclination  to  exercise 
faith  would  be  proportionately  increased.  True,  if  the  righteous  are  exposed  to 
temptation  to  neglect  the  exercise  of  faith,  they  have  incentives  to  attend  to  the 
duty.  One  incentive  is  a  sense  of  sin.  Another  incentive  is  special  temptation,  or 
trouble,  or  difficulty,  which  often  besets  them,  and  urges  them  to  look  to  their 
Saviour  for  deUverance  or  support.  A  third  incentive  is  the  impulse  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  inciting  thoughts  of  Christ.  Further,  the  faith  of  the  righteous  is  liable  to 
decrease  in  strength  and  stability,  through  their  failure  to  properly  seek  its  nourish- 
ment. Thus  may  their  faith  decline  and  waver  through  defect  in  spiritual  appetite 
or  neglect  of  spiritual  food.  And  their  exposedness  to  this  may  hardly  be  obviated 
by  the  frequent  calls  they  may  have  to  the  healthy  and  invigorating  exercises  of 
devotion.  Again,  the  faith  of  the  righteous  is  hable  to  decrease  in  strength  and 
firmness,  through  being  exposed  to  attacks  from  the  unbelief  of  their  fallen  nature, 
called  in  Scripture  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  Natural  unbelief,  therefore,  needs  to 
be  much  watched  and  prayed  against,  and  an  increase  of  faith  to  be  much 
encouraged  and  prayed  for.  But  further,  the  danger  which  their  faith  is  in  does 
not  only  arise  from  the  unbelief  of  their  fallen  nature,  but  from  the  encouragement 
which  such  unbelief  meets  with  in  the  world — ah !  and  the  professing  Church. 
For  infidelity  in  some  degree,  practical  or  avowed,  is  everywhere  manifest.  The 
manner  of  such  injury  to  their  faith  will  be  different  at  separate  times.  Sometimes, 
to  notice  the  two  extremes,  when  it  is  violently  assailed  by  doubts  within  and  infidel 
expressions  and  actions  without,  its  injury  will  be  sudden  and  apparent,  like  that 
of  a  plant  which  in  spring  is  smitten  with  the  blast  of  the  east  wind,  so  that  one  hour 
its  roots  are  fiiin  and  its  leaves  green,  the  next  its  roots  are  loose,  and  its  leaves  dried 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

up  and  withered.  At  other  times,  when  its  exercise  or  its  nourishment  is  neglected 
through  a  worldly  spirit,  its  injury  will  be  gradual  and  imperceptible,  like  that  of  a 
plant  which,  while  it  is  left  uncultivated,  has  a  worm  at  its  roots.  The  righteous 
are  saved  with  difficulty,  secondly,  because,  in  consequence  of  the  general  causes 
mentioned,  their  holiness  is  exposed  to  some  degree  of  failure.  It  is  exposed  to 
this  through  decrease  of  faith,  like  the  fruit  of  a  tree  through  injury  of  its  root,  and 
also,  like  faith,  through  its  exercise  and  nourishment  being  neglected.  The  holiness 
of  the  righteous  is  exposed  to  failure  in  measure  through  temptations.  Again,  the 
holiness  of  the  righteous  is  exposed  to  failure  through  trials.  Further,  the  righteous 
are  saved  with  difficulty,  because  they  are  exposed  to  failure,  in  measure,  in  holi- 
ness, through  difficulty  in  certain  parts  of  obedience.  It  is  no  easy  matter  for  the 
righteous,  depraved  as  they  are  in  nature,  to  perform  their  various  duties  in  their 
entirety.  But  even  this  is  not  all ;  some  duties  which  the  righteous  have  to  perform 
are  especially  difficult,  through  their  direct  opposition  to  their  natural  tendencies. 
I  mean  such  as  are  involved  in  the  following  sayings  of  the  Master : — "  If  ye 
forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  Heavenly  Father  wUl  also  forgive  you.  But  if 
ye  forgive  not  men  their  trespasses,  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  trespasses" 
(Matt.  vi.  14).  Now  I  have  two  inferences  to  draw  from  this  solemn  subject. 
1.  The  first  is,  if  the  righteous  are  thus  scarcely  saved,  must  not  many  professors 
of  religion  be  in  a  sad  mistake  ?  2.  The  second  inference  is  that  the  righteous 
have  great  cause  for  earnest  striving  that  the  evidences  of  their  conversion 
may  be  clear  to  themselves  and  to  others.  3.  In  a  word,  let  them  "  work  out 
their  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  and  "  give  all  diUgence  to  make 
their  calling  and  election  sure."  (C.  H.  Coleman.)  The  salvation  of  the  sinner 
impossible : — 1.  The  faith  in  Christ  of  the  righteous  is  maintained  with  difficulty. 
But  the  ungodly  and  sinners  have  no  living  faith  in  Christ  at  all.  Thus  they  not 
only  have  not  faith  and  seek  not  after  it,  but  they  yield  themselves  to  be  bound  and 
fettered  in  infidelity.  Yet  without  faith  is  it  not  impossible  that  the  ungodly  and 
sinners  should  be  saved  ?  2.  I  observe,  the  holiness  of  the  righteous  is  maintained 
with  difficulty  in  resisting  and  overcoming  the  evil  dispositions  which  are  inherent 
in  their  fallen  nature.  But  the  ungodly  and  sinners  are  entirely  destitute  of  holiness 
in  principle  and  in  practice.  How,  then,  can  the  ungodly  and  sinners  be  meet  for 
heaven  ?  3.  The  righteous  often  find  it  difficult  to  bear  their  trials  with  Christian 
consistency,  being  liable  to  impatience  and  irritability,  through  want  of  watchfulness 
in  trials  comparatively  light  and  transient,  and  strongly  urged  to  discontent  and 
resistance  of  will,  through  distrust  of  God  and  failure  in  spiritual  firmness,  in  trials 
severe  and  lasting.  But  the  ungodly  and  sinners  almost  always,  under  any  trials, 
allow  themselves  in  discontent,  bad  temper,  and  resistance,  whether  the  trials  come 
the  more  evidently  from  God  or  from  man.  But  the  ungodly  and  sinners  being  thus 
refractory  under  trials,  how  is  it  possible  that  they  can  be  finally  saved  ?  4.  The 
righteous  frequently  experience  great  difficulty  in  performing  some  of  the  harder  duties 
of  the  Christian  life.  But  the  ungodly  and  sinners  neglect  them  altogether.  If  they 
render  bodily  service,  they  render  no  spiritual  service  to  God.  How  is  it  possible, 
then,  that  the  ungodly  and  sinners  can  find  favour  before  the  judgment-seat?  (Ibid.) 
Salvation  difficult  to  the  Christian- — impossible  to  the  sinner : — I.  Why  the  salvation 
OF  THE  KiGHTEous  IS  DIFFICULT.  The  difficulty  in  the  salvation  of  either  the 
righteous  or  the  wicked  turns  not  on  any  want  of  mercy  in  the  heart  of  God.  It  is 
not  because  God  is  implacable  and  hard  to  be  appeased.  Again,  it  is  not  in  any 
lack  of  provision  in  the  atonement  to  cover  all  the  wants  of  sinners.  But,  posi- 
tively, one  difficulty  is  found  in  the  nature  of  God's  government,  and  in  the  nature 
of  free  agency  in  this  world.  God  has  so  constituted  man  as  to  limit  Himself  to 
one  mode  of  government  over  him.  This  must  be  moral,  and  not  physical.  That 
physical  omnipotence  which  sweeps  the  heavens  and  upholds  the  universe  could 
find  no  difficulty  in  moving  lumps  of  clay  so  small  and  insignificant  as  we.  But 
mind  cannot  be  moved  as  God  moves  the  planets.  Physical  force  can  have  no 
direct  application  to  mind  for  the  purpose  of  determining  its  moral  action.  Such 
being  the  case,  the  great  difficulty  is  to  persuade  sinners  to  choose  right.  God  is 
infinitely  ready  to  forgive  them  if  they  will  repent ;  but  the  great  problem  is  to  persuade 
them  to  do  so.  God  may  and  does  employ  physical  agencies  to  act  morally,  but 
never  to  act  physically.  There  are  a  great  many  difficulties  in  the  way  of  convert- 
ing sinners,  and  saving  them  when  once  converted.  One  class  of  these  difficulties 
is  the  result  of  an  abused  constitution.  When  Adam  and  Eve  were  created  their 
appetites  were  doubtless  mild  and  moderate.  They  did  not  live  to  please  themselves 
and  gratify  their  own  appetites.     Their  deep  and  all-engrossing  desire  and  purpose 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  373 

to  please  God  was  the  law  of  their  entire  activities.  Sin  introduced  another  law — 
the  law  of  self-indulgence.  Every  one  knows  how  terribly  this  law  tends  to 
perpetuate  and  strengthen  itself.  Their  appetites  lost  their  proper  balance.  No 
longer  subordinate  to  reason  and  to  God,  they  became  inordinate,  clamorous, 
despotic.  Now  in  order  to  save  men,  they  must  be  restored  to  a  state  in  which  God 
and  reason  control  the  free  action  of  the  mind,  and  appetite  is  held  in  due  subjec- 
tion. Here  is  the  difficulty.  Some  have  formed  habits  and  have  confirmed  them 
until  they  have  become  immensely  strong,  and  it  becomes  exceedingly  difficult  to 
induce  them  to  break  away.  The  rescue  must  be  effected  by  moral,  not  by  physical 
means,  and  the  problem  is  to  make  the  moral  means  powerful  enough  for  the 
purpose.  Again,  we  must  notice,  among  the  difficulties  in  question,  the  entangle- 
ments of  a  multitude  of  circumstances.  I  have  often  thought  it  well  for  Christians 
that  they  do  not  see  all  their  difficulties  at  first.  If  they  did,  its  discouraging  effect 
might  be  disastrous.  The  great  difficulty  is  living  to  please  self  rather  than  God. 
It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  much  this  difficulty  is  enhanced  by  the  agency  Satan  and 
sin  have  had  in  the  framework  of  society.  It  would  seem  that  a  bait  is  held  before 
every  man,  whatever  his  position  and  circumstances  may  be.  There  is  a  man 
chained  to  a  wife  who  is  a  constant  source  of  temptation  and  trial  to  him.  There 
is  a  wife  who  sees  scarce  a  peaceful  moment  in  all  her  life  with  her  husband — all  is 
vexation  and  sorrow  of  spirit.  Many  parents  have  children  who  are  a  constant 
trial  to  them.  They  are  indolent,  or  they  are  reckless,  or  they  are  self-wiUed  and 
obstinate.  Their  own  tempers  perhaps  are  chafed,  and  they  become  a  sore  tempta- 
tion to  a  similar  state  of  chafed  and  fretted  temper  in  their  parents.  On  the  other 
hand,  children  may  have  equal  trials  in  their  parents.  Who  but  God  can  save  against 
the  power  of  such  temptations  ?  Many  children  have  been  brought  up  in  error. 
Their  parents  have  held  erroneous  opinions,  and  they  have  had  their  moral 
constitution  saturated  with  this  influence  from  their  cradle  and  upwards.  How 
terrible  such  an  influence  must  inevitably  be !  Or  the  business  of  their  parents 
may  have  been  such  as  to  miseducate  them.  When  the  mind  gives  itself  up  to 
self-indulgence,  and  a  host  of  appetites  become  clamorous  and  impetuous,  what  a 
labour  it  must  be  to  bring  the  soul  into  harmony  with  God  !  How  many  impulses 
must  be  withstood  and  overcome !  how  great  the  change  that  must  be  wrought  in 
both  the  physical  and  moral  state  of  the  man  !  No  wonder  that  the  devil  flatters 
himself  that  he  has  got  the  race  of  depraved  men  into  his  snares  and  can  lead 
them  captive  at  his  will.  Many  are  not  aware  of  the  labour  necessary  to  get  rid  of 
the  influence  of  a  bad  education.  Ofttimes  the  affections  become  unhappily 
attached,  yet  the  attachment  is  exceedingly  strong,  and  it  shall  seem  like  the 
sundering  of  the  very  heart-strings  to  break  it  off.  Sometimes  we  are  quite 
inadequate  to  judge  of  the  strength  of  this  attachment,  except  as  we  may  see  what 
strange  and  terrible  means  God  is  compelled  to  use  to  sever  it.  Oh,  what  a  work  is 
this  which  Christ  undertakes  that  He  may  save  His  people  from  their  sins  !  How 
strange  and  how  complicated  are  the  difficulties !  Who  could  overcome  them  but 
God  ?  Again,  the  darkness  of  nature  is  so  great  and  so  gross  that  it  must  be  an 
exceedingly  great  work  to  save  them  from  its  influence  and  pour  the  true  light  of 
God  through  their  intelligence.  Indeed,  Christians  never  know  themselves  except 
as  they  see  themselves  in  God's  own  light.  Finally,  the  greatness  of  the  change 
requisite  in  passing  from  sin  to  real  holiness — from  Satan's  kingdom  into  full  fitness 
for  Christ's,  creates  no  small  difficulty  in  the  way  of  saving  even  the  converted. 
Kemarks  :  We  see  why  the  Scriptures  are  so  full  of  exhortations  to  the  Christians 
to  run,  run,  and  especially  to  run  by  rule.  They  must,  however,  give  all  diligence. 
A  lazy  man  cannot  get  to  heaven.  To  get  there  costs  toil  and  labour.  For  his  will 
must  be  sanctified.  The  entire  voluntary  department  of  his  being  must  be  reno- 
vated. The  Christian  is  also  commanded  to  watch — not  to  close  his  eyes  for  a  little 
more  sleep  and  a  Uttle  more  slumber.  We  see,  also,  why  the  Christian  is  to  pray 
always.  We  may  also  see  why  Christians  are  exhorted  to  separate  themselves  from 
the  world.  Mark,  also,  why  Christians  are  exhorted  to  spend  the  time  of  their 
sojourning  here  in  fear,  and  to  walk  softly  and  carefully,  as  before  God,  through 
all  the  meanderings  of  their  pilgrimage.  When  candid  men  come  to  consider  all 
these  things — the  human  constitution,  the  tendency  to  unbelief,  the  impulses 
towards  self-indulgence,  and  the  strength  of  temptation — they  cannot  but  see  that 
there  is  abundant  occasion  for  all  those  faults  in  Christian  character  and  conduct 
which  they  are  wont  to  criticise  so  stringently.  Yet  often,  perhaps  commonly, 
wicked  men  make  no  allowance  for  the  faults  of  Christians,  but  assume  that  every 
Christian  ought  to  be  spotless,  while  every  sinner  may  make  so  much  apology  for 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

his  sin  as  quite  to  shield  his  conscience  from  conviction  of  guUt.  II.  Show  how 
AND  WHY  THE  SALVATION  OF  THE  WICKED  IS  IMPOSSIBLE.  Vitally  important  to  be 
considered  here  is  the  fact  that  the  governmental  difficulty  in  the  way  of  being 
saved,  growing  out  of  your  having  sinned,  even  greatly,  is  all  removed  by  Christ's 
atonement.  The  difficulty  in  the  way  of  saving  sinners  is  not  simply  that  they 
have  sinned,  but  that  they  wiU  not  now  cease  from  sinning  and  believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  CiM:ist.  The  salvation  of  sinners  is  therefore  impossible.  1.  Because  it 
is  impossible  for  God  by  any  means  He  can  wisely  employ  to  persuade  them  to 
desist  from  sinning.  It  may  not  be  wise  for  God  to  bring  all  the  moral  power  of 
His  universe  to  bear  upon  the  sinner  in  this  world.  If  this  were  wise  and  practic- 
able, it  might  avail — for  aught  we  can  know ;  but  since  He  does  not  do  it,  we  infer 
that  He  refrains  from  some  wise  reason.  Certain  limitations  are  fixed  in  the  divine 
wisdom  to  the  amount  of  moral  influence  which  God  shall  employ  in  the  case  of  a 
sinner.  It  is  in  view  of  this  fact  that  I  say  God  finds  it  impossible  to  gain  the 
sinner's  consent  to  the  gospel  by  any  means  that  He  can  wisely  employ.  2.  Again, 
the  sinner  cannot  be  saved,  because  salvation  from  sin  is  an  indispensable  condition 
of  salvation  from  hell.  The  being  saved  from  sin  must  come  first  in  order.  If 
salvation  implies  fitness  for  heaven,  and  if  this  impUes  ceasing  from  sin,  then,  of 
course,  it  is  naturally  and  for  ever  impossible  that  any  sinner  can  be  saved  without 
holiness.  3.  The  peace  of  heaven  forbids  that  you  should  go  there  in  your  sins. 
What  sort  of  happiness,  congenial  to  his  heart,  could  the  sinner  hope  to  find  there  ? 
And  now  will  heaven  let  you  in  ?  No.  Nothing  that  worketh  abomination  can  by 
any  means  go  in  there.  4.  Besides,  it  would  not  be  for  your  own  comfort  to  be 
there.  You  were  never  quite  comfortable  in  spiritual  society  on  earth.  5.  The 
justice  of  God  will  not  allow  you  to  participate  in  the  joys  of  the  saints.  His  *nse 
of  propriety  forbids  that  He  should  give  you  a  place  among  His  pure  and  trustful 
children.  III.  If,  then,  the  sinner  cannot  be  saved  and  go  to  heaven,  wheee  shall 
HE  APPEAE  ?  The  question  is  a  strong  negation.  They  shall  not  appear  among  the 
righteous  and  the  saved.  This  is  a  common  form  of  speaking.  Nehemiah  said, 
"  Shall  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  "  No,  indeed.  Where,  then,  shall  the  ungodly  and 
the  sinner  appear?  In  no  desirable  place  or  position — certainly.  Not  with  the 
righteous  in  the  judgment,  for  so  God's  Word  has  often  and  most  solemnly 
affirmed.  It  is  asked,  Where  shall  the  ungodly  appear  ?  I  answer.  Certainly  not 
in  heaven,  nor  on  the  heavenly  side.  (C.  G.  Finney.)  Saved  with  difficulty  : — 
I.  The  PEOPLE  OF  God  will  be  saved  with  DirricuLTY.  1.  Owing  to  their 
strong  remaining  corruptions.  2.  To  their  long  and  inveterate  habits  of  sin. 
3.  To  the  strong  and  numerous  foes  that  oppose  his  march.  4.  A  great  amount 
of  labour  will  be  requisite  to  push  him  forward  in  his  heavenly  pilgrimage. 
5.  There  will  await  him  many  other  dangers,  of  which  he  can  have  yet  no 
conception.  II.  Bdt  "where  shall  the  ungodly  and  sinner  appear?"  All 
the  difficulties,  and  more  yet,  that  obstruct  the  way  of  the  Christian  heavenward, 
are  surely  before  the  man  who  has  not  commenced  his  route  thither.  1.  The 
man  who  is  not  a  Christian  has  yet  to  enter  upon  the  way.  2.  He  may  have  yet 
more  corruptions.  He  may  have  taken  a  more  wayward  course.  3.  But  his 
iniquities  must  all  be  uprooted.  4.  He  has  more  foes,  in  addition  to  those  planted 
in  the  way  of  the  Christian.  5.  He  must  do  more  labour  than  if  he  had  set  out 
earlier.  6.  The  same,  and  more  yet  dangers  await  him  than  await  the  Christian. 
Eemarks  :  1.  Would  I  have  the  sinner  despair,  lie  down  and  die  ?  WiU  not  heaven 
be  worth  all  the  efforts  he  has  yet  to  make?  2.  Oh,  then,  how  anxious  should 
sinners  be  to  commence  the  great  work  of  their  salvation  1  3.  How  anxious,  too, 
should  the  Church  be  that  sinners  might  hve!  (D.  A.  Clark.)  The  difficulties 
that  are  to  be  encountered  in  the  way  of  salvation : — That  the  righteous  should 
scarcely  be  saved  seems  hardly  reconcilable  with  the  grace  and  design  and  promises 
of  the  gospel.  Did  not  Christ  come  to  save  sinners  ?  I.  In  what  sense  the 
righteous  are  said  to  be  scarcely  saved.  That  may  be  understood  two  ways. 
(1)  With  respect  to  accidental  difficulties  arising  from  the  particular  circumstances 
of  times  and  persons.  For  the  difficulties  of  religion  are  not  alike  in  all  times,  nor 
to  all  persons ;  for  they  are  not  like  a  geometricaj  measure,  which  is  always  exactly 
the  same  ;  but  rather  like  a  voyage  at  sea,  which  is  to  be  managed  by  the  same 
compass  and  to  the  same  port ;  but  it  sometimes  proves  calm  and  pleasant,  and  at 
other  times  stormy  and  tempestuous.  Which  chiefly  happens  when  a  religion 
appears  new,  or  goes  about  to  reform  the  old ;  for  then  it  is  sure  to  meet  with  all 
the  opposition  which  the  passions  and  interests  and  prejudices  of  partial  men  can 
raise  against  it.     For  the  time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  375 

God ;  and  if  it  first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  God?  i.e.,  Christ  hath  foretold  desolation  and  ruin  to  come  upon  the 
Jewish  nation.     Sincerity  and  constancy  are  the  necessary  conditions  of  salvation, 
which  may  be  tried  much  more  in  some  than  it  is  in  others.     We  must  all  have  the 
same  journey's  end  if  we  hope  to  get  to  heaven,  but  some  may  meet  with  a  freer 
road,  and  a  calmer  season,  and  better  company,  in  their  journey  than  others.     But 
herein  mankind  are  apt  to  be  deceived,  as  though  all  the   difficulties  lay  in  a 
suffering  condition ;  whereas  a  soft  and  careless  life  is  rather  more  dangerous  to 
their  souls,  because  persons  are  less  apt  to  suspect  their  danger.     The  temptations 
of  the  suffering  side  are  apt  to  awake  the  sleepy  powers  of  the  soul,  whereas  the 
gentle  and  easy  condition  of  life  often  lays  them  asleep.    But  this  is  not  all ;  for 
ttiere  are  many  things  which  make  it  more  difiicult  to  some  than  others,  which  are 
of  another  nature.     Some  tempers  are  more  flexible  and  pUable  than  others  ;  more 
capable  of  hearkening  to  reason,  and  more  apt  to  reflect  on  their  own  actions; 
whereas  others  are  naturally  stiff  and  obstinate,  who  stick  fast  to  an  opinion  or 
prejudice  which  they  have  once  taken  up.     Some,  again,  are  very  easily  convinced 
of  a  fault,  but  very  hardly  reclaimed.     Again,  some  have  had  the  advantage  of  a 
pious  and  rehgious  education.    For  although  the  difiiculties  be  not  alike  in  all,  yet, 
of  one  kind  or  other,  they  are  such  as  cannot  be  overcome  by  ourselves  without  the 
power  of  Divine  grace  exciting,  preventing,  and  assisting  of  us.     (2)  Having  thus 
showed  what  difficulties  there  are  which  arise  from  the  different  circumstances  of 
times  and  persons,  I  am  now  to  consider  those  which  arise  from  the  terms  of  salva- 
tion, which  are  common  to  all  persons  and  times.     Here  we  must  suppose  salvation 
to  be  the  thing  aimed  at  as  the  chief  end  or  happiness  of  such  men,  and  here  are 
two  kinds  of  difficulties  to  be  inquired  into.     (1)  Such  as  are  imphed  in  the  general 
pursuit  or  happiness.     For  happiness  is  not  a  thing  of  chance  or  necessity,  but  a 
matter  of  choice  and  design.    (1)  That  happiness  did  consist  in  one  uniform  design 
of  lif*",  i.e.,  that  a  man  must  choose  one  proper  and  chief  end  to  himself,  and  so 
order  his  thoughts  and  actions  that  he  may  attain  it.     (2)  That  there  must  be  a 
careful  and  attentive  mind  to  pursue  this  design.     (3)  That  any  man  who  desired 
to  be  happy  must,  above  all  things,  take  pains  about  himself.     (4)  That  those  who 
consulted  most  the  ease  and  pleasure  of  mankind  were  forced  to  put  men  upon 
some  hard  and  unpleasant  things  to  make  anything  like  happiness  to  consist  in 
pleasure.     For  they  cast  off  all  riot  and  excess,  because  the  pain  which  followed 
exceeded  the  pleasure ;  and  therefore  they  made  temperance  and  chastity  necessary 
to  the  true  pleasure  of  life.      So  that  all  were  agreed  that  it  was  impossible  to 
attain  to  anything  that  looked  hke  happiness  without  some  real  difl&culty,  which 
was  necessary  to  be  undergone,  although  the  success  were  uncertain.     (2)  Let  us 
now  consider  the  difficulties  relating  to  salvation,  or  that  happiness  which  Christians 
expect.     And  here  I  shall  show — (1)  It  is  more  reasonable  to  expect  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  salvation.     For  the  more  excellent  and  desirable  the  happiness  is,  the 
more  it  is  worth  the  while  for  us  to  take  pains  about  it ;  especially  when  there  is  a 
certainty  of  attaining  it.     (2)  The  difficulties  in  our  way  to  salvation  are  not  such 
but  we  may  reasonably  hope  to  overcome  them  ;  i.e.,  if  we  set  ourselves  about  it; 
otherwise  a  very  mean  difficulty  will  appear  too  great  for  us.    And  there  are  two 
things  to  show  that  we  may  hope  to  overcome  them.     (1)  That  the  most  difficult 
duties  are  in  themselves  reasonable  to  be  performed  by  us.     (2)  That  God  offers 
His  gracious  assistance  for  the  performance  of  them.     II.  And  this  helps  us  to 

RECONCILE    the    DIFFICULTY     OF    SALVATION    WITH    THE    EASINESS    OF     THE     TERMS     OF 

THE  GOSPEL.  FoT  that  which  is  not  only  hard,  but  impossible  to  us,  in  our  own 
strength,  may,  by  the  mighty  power  of  Divine  grace,  become  not  only  possible  but 
easy  to  us.  III.  And  from  hence  we  see  what  encouragement  there  is  still 
FOR  us  TO  hope  TO  BE  SAVED,  EF  WE  BE  RIGHTEOUS.  There  is  uone  for  the  ungodly 
and  sinner.  "  But  what  is  it,"  some  may  say,  "  to  hear  that  the  righteous  are 
scarcely  saved,  when  we  are  so  conscious  to  ourselves  of  our  own  unrighteous- 
ness ?  "  {Bp.  Stillingjleet.)  The  difficulties  of  salvation  : — This  imports  not  any 
uncertainty  in  the  thing  itself  as  to  the  end,  in  respect  of  the  purpose  and  per- 
formance of  God,  but  only  the  great  difficulties  and  hard  encounters  in  the  way, 
"  fightings  without,  and  fears  within."  All  outward  difficulties,  however,  would  be 
as  nothing,  were  it  not  for  the  incumbrance  of  lusts  and  corruptions  within.  Were 
a  man  to  meet  disgraces  and  sufferings  for  Christ,  how  easily  would  he  go  through 
them,  yea,  and  rejoice  in  them,  were  he  rid  of  the  fretting  impatience,  the  pride, 
and  self-love,  of  his  own  carnal  heart  I  And  many  times,  after  much  wrestling,  ha 
scarcely  finds  that  he  hath  gained  any  ground :  yea,  sometimes  he  is  foiled  and 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

cast  down  by  them.     And  so  in  all  duties  the  flesh  is  dragging  downwards  !     When 
he  would  mount  up,  he  finds  himself  as  a  bird  with  a  stone  tied  to  its  foot ;  he  hath 
wings  that  flutter  to  be  upwards,  but  is  pressed  down  with  the  weight  fastened  to 
him.     What  struggling  with  wanderings  and  deadness  in  hearing,  and  reading, 
and  prayer !     And  what  is  most  grievous,  is,  that,  by  their  unwary  walking  and  the 
prevailing  of  some  corruption,  believers  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  provoke  Him 
to  hide  His  face  and  withdraw  His  comforts.     How  much  pain  to  attain  anything, 
any  particular  grace  of  humility,  or  meekness,  or  self-denial !     And  if  anything  be 
attained,  how  hard  to  keep  and  maintain  it  against  the  contrary  party  !    How  often 
are  they  driven  back  to  their  old  point !     If  they  do  but  cease  from  striving  a  httle, 
they  are  carried  back  by  the  stream.    And  what  returns  of  doubtings  and  unbelief, 
after  they  thought  they  were  got  somewhat  above  them,  insomuch  that  sometimes 
they  are  at  the  point  of  giving  over,  and  thinking  it  will  never  be  for  them  !     And 
yet,  through  all  these,  they  are  brought  safely  home.     There  is  another  strength 
than  theirs,  which  bears  them  up  and  brings  them  through.     But  these  things,  and 
many  more  of  this  nature,  argue  the  difiiculty  of  their  course,  and  that  it  is  not 
so  easy  a  thing  to  come  to  heaven  as  most  imagine  it.     (Abp.  Leighton.)        A 
solemn  appeal : — I.  Consider  the  appeal  in  its  eefebence  to  temporal  CAiiAMiTiES. 
1.  The  righteous  are  saved,  when  the  existence  of  the  Church  is  preserved.    2.  The 
righteous  are  saved  personally,  when  their  lives  are  preserved.     3.  The  righteous 
are  saved,  while  the  life  and  welfare  of  their  souls  are  secured,  whatever  may 
otherwise  befall  them.     II.  Consider  the  appeal  m  its  befeeence  to  spiritual 
AND  ETERNAL  SALVATION.     1.  The  rightcous  are  scarcely  saved — (1)  Because  their 
salvation  could  not  be  purchased  but  at  the  greatest  conceivable  expense.     (2) 
Because  the  purchased  redemption  could  not  be  applied  but  by  supernatural  power. 
(3)  Because  even  when  salvation  is  thus  attained,  it  is  not  persevered  in  without 
the  same  supernatural  aid,  and  the  utmost  diligence.     (4)  Because  after  death  is 
the  judgment.     The  righteous  shall  be  saved,  but  it  will  be  scarcely  when  the 
matter  comes  to  a  scrutiny  of  sterling  evidence.     2.  It  remains  now  to  ponder 
the  inference  which  the  apostle  chiefly  designs  to  impress  on  our  minds,  "  If  the 
righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "    It 
is  as  if  he  had  said.  How  certain  their  doom  !     (1)  How  certain  1     "  Where  shall 
they  appear  ?  "     Not  surely  in  a  saved  state.     This  is  the  simple  answer  to  the 
question.     (2)  How  dreadful  must  it  be  !     The  abrupt  and  pungent  form  of  expres- 
sion suggests  the  horrors  of  their  doom.     (3)  How  reasonable  will  be  their  doom  I 
For  this,  too,  the  question  strongly  implies,  not  only  as  an  appeal  to  reason,  leaving 
themselves  to  decide,  but  as  an  allusion  to  the  mode  of  procedure  in  courts  among 
men.     "  Where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "    On  what  ground  shall 
they  stand  ?    What  can  they  plead  in  their  own  behalf  at  the  bar  of  the  eternal 
Judge?    Inferences:  1.  What  construction  ought  to  be  put  on  the  little  difference 
made  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  in  the  dispensations  of  Providence. 
This  has  often  been  mistaken  by  the  former  (Psa.  Ixxiii.),  and  abused  by  the  latter, 
as  if  religion  were  of  no  value.    A  real  distinction  exists,  and  will  eventually  be 
manifested.     The  ungodly  have  no  reason  to  glory,  indulging  atheistical  thoughts 
because  of  the  sufferings  of  the  godly.     2.  What  views  ought  to  be  entertained  of 
spiritual  salvation  ?    It  is  not  that  easy  trifling  matter  which  many  take  it  to  be. 
"Who  then  can  be  saved?"    3.  Propose  this  question  to  yourselves  in  a  less 
limited  form,  "  Who  can  be  saved  ?  "     Through  the  grace  of  God,  all  sinners,  even 
the  chief.     But,  who  will  be  saved  ?     Only  those  who  hve  a  life  of  faith,  and  make 
their  calling  and  election  sure.     (The  Christian  Magazine.)         The  difficulty  of 
salvation :— The  vf&y  to  come  to  salvation  is  full  of  difficulties — 1.  Because  there 
is  much  ado  to  get  Lot  out  of  Sodom,  to  get  Israel  out  of  Egypt.     2.  Again,  it  is 
hard  in  regard  of  the  sin  that  continually  cleaves  to  them  in  this  world,  which 
doth,  as  it  were,  shackle  them,  and  compass  them  about  in  all  their  performances. 
3.  Besides,  it  is  a  hard  matter  in  regard  of  Satan ;  for  he  is  a  great  enemy  to  the 
peace  of  God's  children.    Pharaoh  after  the  Israelites.     4.  Then,  by  reason  of 
great  discouragements  and  iU-usage  which  they  find  in  the  world  from  wicked  men. 
6.  Besides  this,  scandal  makes  it  a  hard  matter  to  be  saved ;  to  see  evil  courses  and 
evil  persons  flourish  and  countenanced  in  the  world.     6.  This,  likewise,  makes  the 
way  difficult ;  we  are  too  apt  to  offend  God  daily,  giving  Him  just  cause  to  with- 
draw His  Spirit  of  comfort  from  us,  which  makes  us  go  mourning  all  the  day  long ; 
wanting  those  sweet  refreshments  of  spiritual  joy  and  peace  we  had  before.     When 
Christ  wanted  the  sweet  solace  of  His  Father  upon  the  Cross,  how  did  it  trouble 
Him?    {R.  Sibhes.)       Why  God  will  have  the  righteous  with  such  difficulty  saved: — 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  377 

God  will  have  it  thus  to  sweeten  heaven  unto  us.     After  a  conflicting  life  peace  is 
welcome  ;  heaven  is  heaven  indeed  after  trouble.     We  can  relish  it  then.     Because 
God  wiU  discard  hypocrites  in  this  life,  who  take  up  so  much  of  religion  as  stands 
with  their  ease  and  credit  in  the  world,  avoiding  every  difficulty  which  accompanies 
godliness,  but,  so  they  may  swim  two  ways  at  once,  go  on  in  their  lusts  still  and  be 
reUgious  withal.     This  they  approve  of.    Therefore,  God  will  have  it  a  hard  matter 
to  be  saved,  to  frustrate  the  vain  hopes  of  such  wretches.    Alas !  it  is  an  easy 
matter  to  be  an  hypocrite,  but  not  to  Hve  godly.     {Ibid.)         The  righteous  scarcely 
saved  : — Peter  means  this,  "  If  Christians  have  such  a  hard  tug  to  get  into  heaven, 
there  is  no  chance  at  all  for  anybody  else."     The  soul  that  has  long  been  driving 
before  the  winds  of  pleasure  cannot  so  easily  turn  round  and  cut  the  wind's  eye. 
If  religion  were  something  you  could  wear  Uke  a  cane  in  your  hand,  or  a  band  of 
crape  on  your  hat,  or  if  it  were  portable,  in  the  shape  of  a  Bible  or  Psalm-book 
that  you  could  carry  under  your  arm,  it  would  not  seem  so  hard ;  but  to  have  it  as 
a  principle  in  the  soul,  looking  over  your  shoulder  when  you  write  out  your  ledgers, 
coming  in  to  make  suggestions  when  you  are  making  a  trade,  breaking  over  the 
walls  of  Sunday,  and  running  by  your  side  from  Monday  morning  to  Saturday 
night,  verily  that  seems  a  troublesome  religion.     How  many  postpone  conversion 
because  they  think  that  it  is  so  easy  to  become  religious — they  can  begin  at  any 
time  !     They  can  shed  sin  as  naturally  as  a  bird  his  feathers,  or  a  tree  its  bark. 
One  crack  of  the  whip  of  resolution  will  frighten  out  the  drove  of  their  iniquities. 
No  !  no  !  St.  Peter  himself  was  "  scarcely  saved."     It  was  not  until  every  passion 
of  his  soul  was  in  agony  of  earnestness  that  he  fastened  on  to  life.     Oh,  if  in  this 
instance  it  required  the  girding  up  of  the  soul  in  order  to  obtain  the  hope  and  joy 
of  Christ's  salvation,  what  shall  become  of  those  who  make  no  effort,  reach  forth 
no  strong  prayer,  lay  hold  of  no  Bible  promise,  and  sleep  when  peril  stands  at  the 
hehn  ?     If  the  righteous  be  "  scarcely  saved,"  where  will  the  ungodly  and  sinner 
appear?    But  after  pardon  is  obtained,  there  are  batteries  of  strength  which  must 
be  passed  on  our  way  into  the  heavenly  harbour.     All  the  Christian's  foes  are 
marshalled  under  three  sturdy  generals — the  World,  the  Flesh,  and  the  Devil. 
Business,  entrenched  behind  counters,  and  bales  of  goods,  and  safes,  attempts  the 
overthrow  of   our  souls.      Disappointments  fret,  and  fraud  exasperates  us,  and 
meddlesome  curiosity  makes  our  lip  curl.     Gains  lift  us  up,  so  that  losses  can 
better  hurl  us  down.     The  Christian  has  to  contend  against  temptations  which 
made  Adam  disobey,  and  Abraham  lie,  and  Moses  get  angry,  and  Job  swear,  and 
David  sin  against  chastity,  and  Peter  deny  his  Master.      Satan  makes  assault. 
Having  gathered  skill  by  six  thousand  years  of   chicanery  in   making  devotion 
profane,  and  integrity  lie,  and  honesty  cheat,  and  humility  proud,  and  generosity 
tight-fisted,  he  knows  just  where  to  strike  the  Christian.     Bad  spirits  are  ever  on 
the  wing,  coming  to  us  on  steps  of  sunshine,  and  floating  on  the  dark  wave  of 
midnight,  seated  on  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and  dropping  with  the  evening  dew. 
Guns  cannot  shoot  them,  swords  cannot  pierce  them,  fire  cannot  burn  them,  cold 
cannot  freeze  them.     They  fly  with  wings  th-eless,  eye  dimless,  swifter  than  arrows, 
deadlier  than  plagues,  cutting  like  hail,  drowning  like  surges,  crushing  like  rocks. 
Who  can  resist  them  ?     Only  that  arm  which  clasps  God's  arm,  and  that  heart 
sustained  by  God's  heart.     If,  with  heavenly  shield  and  sword,  the  righteous  ara 
only  scarcely  saved,  where,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?     {T. 
De  Witt  Talmage.)        Scarcely  saved  : — The  victorious  general  in  the  hour  of 
triumph  has  not  unfrequently  reason  to  remember  how  nearly,  through  oversight, 
or  miscalculation,  he  had  lost  the  day  :  a  little  more  pressure  on  this  wing  or  that^ 
a  trifling  prolongation  of  the  struggle,  a  few  minutes'  further  delay  in  the  arrival 
of  reinforcements,  and  his  proud  banner  had  been  dragged  in  the  dust.     The  pilot 
guiding  his  barque  safely  into  port  sometimes  knows  how  through  lack  of  seaman- 
ship he  nearly  made  shipwreck.     And  the  successful  merchant  remembers  crises; 
in  his  history  when  he  found  himself  on  the  brink  of  ruin,  when  the  last  straw 
only  was  wanting  to  precipitate  the  catastrophe.     Men  who  have  won  the  prizes  of 
life  have  cause  to  wear  their  honours  meekly  when  they  recall  the  errors  of  judg- 
ment, the  lack  of  courage,  the  acts  of  rashness,  the  ignorance,  the  credulousness,. 
the  hesitation,  which  so  nearly  deprived  them  of  fame  and  fortune.     Our  reUgious. 
history  furnishes  parallels  to  these  narrow  escapes  on  the  lower  level.     (IF.  L.. 
Watkinson.)        Commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  TTim, — The  saint's  hiding- 
place  in  the  evil  day  : — Wherein  consider — 1.  That  the  state  and  condition  of  God's 
children  is  to  suffer.     2.  The  dispensation  of  that  sufi'ering,  they  suffer  not  at  all 
adventures,  but  according  to  the  will  of  God.    3.  Their  duty  in  this  estate,  namely, 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i v. 

to  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  God.  In  the  duty  we  have  these  particulars 
comprehended — 1.  An  action,  to  commit.  2.  An  object,  what  we  must  commit,  the 
soul.  3.  The  person  to  whom,  to  God.  4.  The  manner,  in  weU-doing.  5.  The 
reason  which  should  move  us  hereunto,  implied  in  these  words,  as  unto  a  faithful 
Creator.  Observe — 1.  That  the  state  of  God's  children  is  to  suffer,  yea,  to  suffer 
of  God  ;  for  sometimes  He  seems  to  be  an  enemy  to  His  dearest  servants,  as  unto 
Job.  But  chiefly  they  are  in  a  militant  estate  here.  (1)  Why  God's  children  must 
suffer  here.  Because  they  live  among  those  that  they  cannot  but  suffer  from, 
wheresoever  they  live.  (2)  They  must  suffer  also  in  regard  of  themselves  ;  for  the 
best  of  us  all  have  many  lusts  to  be  subdued,  and  a  great  deal  of  corruption  to  be 
purged  out,  before  we  can  come  to  heaven,  that  holy  place  into  which  no  unclean 
thing  can  enter.  In  the  best  estate  there  will  be  suffering  one  way  or  other. 
Then,  suspect  thyself  to  be  in  a  bad  estate,  for  every  true  Christian  suffers  in  one 
kind  or  other,  either  from  without  or  within.  We  must  be  conformable  to  our 
Head  before  we  can  come  to  heaven.  But  the  dispensation  of  our  suffering  is 
according  to  the  wiU  of  God.  God's  will  concerning  our  suffering  is  permissive  in 
respect  of  those  that  do  us  harm  ;  but  in  regard  of  our  patient  enduring  injuries,  it 
is  His  approving  and  commanding  will.  We  are  enjoined  to  suffer,  and  they  are 
permitted  to  wrong  us.  It  seems,  then,  there  is  some  excuse  for  those  that  persecute 
the  saints.  They  do  but  according  to  God's  will ;  and  if  it  be  so,  who  dares  speak 
against  them  ?  It  is  not  God's  commanding  wiU,  but  His  suffering  wiU.  He  useth 
their  malice  for  His  own  ends.  But  observe  further,  that  we  never  suffer  but  when 
•God  will.  And  His  will  is  not  that  we  should  always  suffer,  though  generally  our 
estate  be  so  in  one  kind  or  other.  God  is  not  always  chiding  (Psa.  ciii.  9),  but  hath 
times  of  intermission,  which  He  vouchsafes  His  children  for  their  good.  And  this 
the  Lord  doth  out  of  mercy  to  His  poor  creatures,  that  they  might  not  sink  before 
Him,  but  gather  strength  of  grace,  and  be  the  better  fitted  to  bear  further  crosses 
afterwards.  And  it  is  for  matters  better  than  life  that  God  lets  His  children  suffer 
here ;  for,  alas !  this  life  is  but  a  shadow,  as  it  were,  nothing.  I  beseech  you, 
therefore,  considering  aU  our  sufferings  are  by  the  appointment  and  will  of  God, 
let  us  bring  our  souls  to  a  holy  resignation  unto  His  Majesty,  not  looking  so 
much  to  the  grievance  we  are  under  as  to  the  hand  that  sent  it.    I.  Now  this 

WELIi-DOING    MUST    BE    DISTINGUISHED    INTO    TWO    TIMES.         1.    BcforC    OUr    Suffering. 

We  must  not  go  out  of  our  sphere,  but  serve  God  in  our  standings,  that  if  trouble 
comes  it  may  find  us  in  a  way  of  weU-pleasing,  either  doing  works  of  charity  or 
else  the  works  of  our  particular  calling  wherein  God  hath  set  us.     2.  So  likewise 
in  suffering  we  must  commit  our  souls  to  God  in  weU-doing  in  a  double  regard. 
1.  We  must  carry  ourselves  generally  well  in  all  our  sufferings.     2.  In  particular, 
we  must  do  weU  to  them  that  do  us  wrong.    First,  I  say,  in  affliction  our  carriage 
must  be  generally  good  in  respect  of  God,  by  a  meek  behaviour  under  His  hand, 
without  murmuring  against  Him.     2.  In  regard  of  the  cause  of  God,  that  we 
betray  it  not  through  fear  or  cowardice,  through  base  aims  and  intentions,  &c., 
but  endeavour  to   carry   it  with  a  good   conscience   in   all  things.      When   we 
make  it  clear  by  managing  anything,  that  we  are  led  with  the  cause  and  con- 
science   of    our    duty,   it  works   mightily  upon  them  that  wrong  us.       (1)    It 
wins  those  that  are  indifferent.      (2)   Confounds  the  obstinate,  and  stops  their 
mouths.     Therefore,  let  us  carry  ourselves  well,  not  only  before,  but  in  suffer- 
ing.     We  should  have  an  eye  to  God,  and  an  eye  to  ourselves,  and  an  eye  to 
others,  and  an  eye  to  the  cause  in  hand  ;    so  we  shall  do   well.       We  must 
not  commit  our  souls  to  God  in  idleness,  doing  nothing  at  all,  nor  yet  in  evil- 
doing,  but  in  weU-doing.      But  I  cannot  do  well,  but  I  shall  suffer  ill.     Labour, 
therefore,  to  carry  thyself  well  in  suffering  evil,  not  only  in  the  general,  but  even 
in  particular,  towards  those  persons  that  do  thee  wrong  ;  endeavour  to  requite  their 
evil  with  good.     There  is  a  great  measure  of  self-denial  required  to  be  a  Christian, 
especially  in  matter  of  revenge,  "  to  pray  for  them  that  curse  us,  to  do  good  to 
them  that  persecute  us,"  &c.,  and  so  "  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  our  enemies'  heads  " 
(Prov.  XXV.  22  ;  Eom.  xii.  20).     How  is  that  ?     1.  Coals  of  conversion.     2.  Coals 
of  confusion.     Some  will  say,  Christianity  is  a  strange  condition,  that  enforceth 
such  things  upon  men,  that  are  so  contrary  to  nature.     It  is  so,  indeed,  for  we 
must  be  new-moulded  before  ever  we  can  come  to  heaven.    But  suppose  a  man 
carry  himself  ill  in  suffering.    There  is  not  the  least  promise  of  comfort  in  Scripture 
to  such  a  man,  unless  he  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  by  timely  repentance ;  for  all 
encouragement  is  to  well-doing.     II.  But  what  must  we  commit  to  God  in  well- 
iJoiNQ  ?     The  keeping  of  our  souls.     The  soul  is  the  more  excellent  part,  witness 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  379 

He  that  purchased  the  same  with  His  dearest  blood.  Therefore,  whatsoever  estate 
thou  art  in,  let  thy  first  care  be  for  thy  soul,  that  it  may  go  well  with  that.  You 
know  in  the  firing  of  an  house,  that  which  a  man  chiefly  looks  after  is  his  jewels 
and  precious  things,  "I  have  some  wealth  in  such  a  place,  if  I  could  but  have  that 
I  care  for  no  more,  let  the  rest  go  "  ;  so  it  is  with  a  Christian,  whatsoever  becomes 
of  him  in  this  world,  he  looks  to  his  precious  soul,  that  that  may  be  laid  up  safely 
in  the  hands  of  God.  But  what  should  we  desire  our  souls  to  be  kept  from  in  this 
world  ?  From  sin  and  the  evil  consequences  thereof.  But  must  we  not  commit 
our  bodies  and  our  estates  to  God,  as  well  as  our  souls  ?  Yes,  all  we  have ;  for 
that  is  only  well  kept  which  God  keeps ;  but  yet  in  time  of  suffering  we  must  be  at 
a  point  with  these  things.  If  God  will  have  our  hberty,  if  He  wUl  have  our  hfe 
and  all,  we  must  hate  aU  for  Christ's  sake ;  but  we  must  not  be  at  such  a  point 
with  our  souls,  we  must  keep  them  close  to  God,  and  desire  Him  to  keep  them  in 
well-doing.  Suppose  it  come  to  an  exigent,  that  we  must  either  sin  and  hurt  our 
souls,  or  else  lose  all  our  outward  good  things  ?  Our  chief  care  must  be  over  our 
souls.  We  must  desire  God  to  preserve  our  souls,  whatsoever  becomes  of  these ; 
our  principal  care  must  be  that  that  be  not  blemished  in  the  least  kind  ;  for,  alas  ! 
other  things  must  be  parted  with  first  or  last.  The  soul  is  the  better  part  of  a 
man,  and  if  that  miscarries,  all  miscarries.  If  the  soul  be  not  well,  the  body  will 
not  continue  long  in  a  good  estate.  Bernard  saith  sweetly,  "  Oh,  body,  thou  hast 
a  noble  guest  dwelling  in  thee,  a  soul  of  such  inestimable  worth  that  it  makes  thee 
truly  noble."  Considering  therefore  that  it  is  Satan's  aim  to  unloose  our  hold 
from  God,  by  defiling  our  souls  with  sin,  oh !  let  it  be  our  chief  care  to  see  to  that 
which  Satan  strikes  at  most !  HI.  But  to  whom  must  the  soul  be  committed  ? 
To  God.  Indeed,  He  only  can  keep  our  souls.  IV.  But  why  must  we  commit  ouk 
souls  to  God  ?  Because  He  is  a  faithful  Creator.  Whence  observe — That  the  soul 
of  man  being  an  understanding  essence,  will  not  be  satisfied  and  settled  without 
sound  reasons.  Comfort  is  nothing  else  but  reasons  stronger  than  the  evil  which 
doth  afflict  us  ;  when  the  reasons  are  more  forcible  to  ease  the  mind  than  the  griev- 
ance is  to  trouljle  it.  It  is  no  difficult  matter  to  commit  our  souls  to  God  when  we  are 
once  persuaded  that  He  is  a  faithful  Creator.  We  must  take  God  here  as  a  Creator 
of  our  whole  man,  body  and  soul,  and  of  the  new  creature  in  us.  Yea,  God  became 
man  to  enrich  us  with  all  grace  and  goodness,  to  free  us  from  the  hands  of  Satan, 
and  bring  us  to  an  eternal  state  of  communion  with  Himself  in  heaven.  (iJ.  Sihhes.) 
The  Christian's  duty  under  trials : — I.  Christians  must  expect  to  suffer.  1. 
Sometimes  by  adversity.  Poverty ;  Christ  so  suffered ;  so  did  His  disciples  ;  bodily 
affliction,  &c.  2.  In  their  reputation.  Holiness  of  hfe  and  zeal  in  religion  will 
provoke  the  ungodly  (Matt.  xi.  18  ;  Luke  vii.  33 ;  Heb.  xi.  25,  26).  3.  In  their 
property.  Persecution  in  olden  times ;  spoihng  of  their  goods ;  loss  of  custom ; 
piety  a  bar  to  temporal  promotion.  4.  In  their  liberty  and  life.  Though  the  age 
of  martyrdom  has  passed,  let  us  cherish  and  honour  the  memory  of  those,  &c. 
II.  Christians  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God.  1.  These  sufferings  are 
for  the  trial  of  faith  (vers.  12,  13 ;  chap.  i.  7).  It  is  the  day  of  battle  that  tests 
the  valour  and  fidelity  of  soldiers.  Then  the  behever  feels  his  own  helplessness  and 
trusts  in  God  alone.  2.  They  promote  spiritual  prosperity  and  happiness.  The 
graces  of  the  Spirit  generally  languish  under  worldly  prosperity  (Matt.  xiii.  22). 
Under  trials  God  gives  "more  grace"  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  3.  They  promote  the 
glory  of  God.  Show  what  His  grace  can  do  in  suppoi-ting  the  mind  of  the  sufferers, 
and  in  filling  their  hearts  with  gratitude.  "  He  hath  done  all  things  well."  III. 
The  conduct  of  Christia'ns  under  sufferings.  1.  They  should  be  characterised 
by  well-doing.  Obedience  a  sign  of  resignation.  The  more  we  are  tried  the  stronger 
must  be  our  attachment  to  Christ  (Job  v.  19-22.)  Active  usefulness  a  cure  for  trouble. 
2.  The  soul  is  to  be  more  valued  than  the  body.  3.  Enlarged  views  of  the  love  and 
care  of  God.  4.  The  actual  surrender  of  the  soul  to  His  keeping.  "  What  can 
separate  us  ?  "  cfec.  Application :  1.  See  the  dignity,  wealth,  and  happiness  of  God's 
people  ;  He  loves  and  protects  them,  and  is  their  portion  (Psa.  xliv.  16).  2.  Learn 
the  folly  of  trusting  in  human  resources  amid  the  trials  of  life.  3.  Note  the  folly 
of  those  who  persecute  the  Church  of  God  (Isa.  hv.  17).  (The  Lay  Preacher.) 
Tranquillity  in  suffering : — These  words  contain  the  true  principle  of  Christian 
patience  and  tranquillity  of  mind  in  the  sufferings  of  this  hfe,  expressing  both 
wherein  it  consists  and  what  are  the  grounds  of  it.  1.  It  lies  in  this,  committing 
the  soul  unto  God  in  well-doing.  If  you  would  commit  your  soul  to  the  keeping  of 
God,  know  that  He  is  a  holy  God,  and  an  unholy  soul  that  walks  in  any  way  of 
wickedness,  whether  known  or  secret,  is  no  fit  commodity  to  put  into  His  pure  hand 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

to  keep.     Therefore  beware  of  wilful  pollutions  and  unholy  ways.     Loose  ways  will 
loosen  your  hold  of  Him  and  confidence  in  Him.     If  thou  give  thy  soul  to  Him  to 
keep  upon  the  terms  of  liberty  to  sin,  He  will  turn  it  out  of  His  doors,  and  remit  it 
back  to  thee  to  look  to  as  thou  wilt  thyself.     Yea,  in  the  ways  of  sin  thou  dost 
indeed  steal  it  back,  and  carriest  it  out  from  Him  ;  thou  puttest  thyself  out  of  the 
compass  of  His  defence,  goest  without  the  trenches,  and  art,  at  thine  own  hazard, 
exposed  to  armies  of  mischiefs  and  miseries.     So  much  sin  as  gets  in,  so  much 
peace  will  go  out.    Afflictions  cannot  break  in  upon  it  to  break  it,  but  sin  doth.     All 
the  winds  which  blow  upon  the  earth  from  all  points,  stir  it  not ;  only  that  within 
the  bowels  of  it  makes  the  earthquake.    I  do  not  mean  that  for  infirmities  a  Christian 
ought  to  be  discouraged.     But  take  heed  of  walking  in  any  way  of  sin,  for  that  will 
unsettle  thy  confidence.     "  Commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls."     Their  chief  concern 
is,  that  whatsoever  be  lost,  this  may  not ;  this  is  the  jewel,  and  therefore  the  prime 
care  is  of  this.     If  the  soul  be  safe,  all  is  well ;  it  is  riches  enough.     What  shall  it 
profit  a  man,  though  he  gain  the  whole  world,  says  our  Saviour,  and  lose  his  own 
soul  ?     And  so,  what  shall  it  disprofit  a  man,  though  he  lose  the  whole  world,  if  he 
gain  his  soul  ?     Nothing  at  all.     Now  the  way  is  this,  commit  it  to  God :  this  many 
say,  but  few  do.     Give  your  souls  into  His  hand,  lay  them  up  there,  so  the  word  is, 
and  they  are  safe,  and  may  be  quiet  and  composed.     Learn  from  hence  what  is  the 
proper  act  of  faith  ;  it  rolls  the  soul  over  on  God,  ventures  it  in  His  hand,  and  rests 
satisfied  concerning  it,  being  there.    And  there  is  no  way  but  this  to  be  quiet  within, 
to  be  impregnable  and  immovable  in  all  assaults,  and  fixed  in  all  changes,  beheving 
in  His  free  love.     The  ground  of  this  confidence  is  in  these  two  things,  the  ability 
and  fidelity  in  Him  in  whom  we  trust.     There  is  much  in  a  persuasion  of  the 
power  of  God.     If  He  was  able  to  give  them  being,  surely  He  is  able  to  keep  them 
from  perishing.     This  relation  of  a  Creator  implies  likewise  a  benign  propension  and 
good-will  to  the  works  of  His  hands.    And  as  He  is  powerful.  He  is  no  less  faithful, 
a  faithful  Creator,  truth  itself.     Those  who  believe  on  Him,  He  never  deceives  or 
disappoints.     There  is  another  ground  of  quietness  contained  in   the  first  word, 
■which  looks  back  to  the  foregoing  discourse,  "  Wherefore  "—what  ?     Seeing  that 
your  reproaches  and  sufferings  are  not  endless,  yea,  that  they  are  short,  they  shall 
quickly  end  in  glory,  be  not  troubled  about  them,  overlook  them.     The  eye  of  faith 
will  do  it.     A  moment  gone,  and  what  are  they?     (Ahp.  Leighton.)         The  souVs 
refuge : — I.  The  sufferance  of  the  saints.     Let  this  teach  us  two  duties.     First, 
to  prepare  for  evils  before  they  come  ;  next,  to  make  them  welcome  when  they  are 
come.     So  they  shall  neither  meet  us  with  fear,  nor  leave  us  with  sorrow.     II.  The 
INTEGRITY  OF  THAT  SUFFERANCE.     They  Only  are  said  to  suffer  according  to  God's 
will,   who  suffer  first   innocently,   then  patiently.     III.    The    comfort   of    this 
INTEGRITY.     He  that  suffers  for  Christ's  testimony  is  confident  of  God's  mercy. 
IV.  The  boldness  of  this  comfort.     1.  God  loves  us,  as  our  Creator.     2.  God  is 
faithful  to  us,  however  unfaithful  we  have  been  to  Him.     V.  The  caution  of  this 
boldness.     "  In  well  doing."     1.  The  wicked  man  may  commit  his  soul  to  God's 
keeping,  but  how  is  he  sure  God  will  take  the  charge  of  it  ?     What  should  God  do 
with  a  foul  and  polluted  soul  ?     The  soul  must  at  last  be  committed  to  some ;  now 
He  only  is  the  receiver  of  it  in  death,  that  was  keeper  of  it  in  hfe.     If  Satan  have 
always  ruled  it,  God  will  not  embrace  it.     2.  A  man  may  do  good,  yet  come  short 
of  this  comfort ;  it  is  given  to  them  that  do  well.     It  is  not  doing  good,  but  doing 
well  that  gets  God  to  keep  the  soul.     You  have  served  Me,  says  God  to  Israel,  but 
after  your  own  lusts.     To  serve  God  is  doing  good,  but  after  their  own  lusts,  is  not 
doing  well.     To  build  a  church  is  a  good  work ;  yet  if  the  foundations  of  it  be  laid 
in  the  ruins  of  the  poor,  their  children  come  not  to  pray  for,  but  curse  the  builder, 
(r.  Adams.)         The  support  of  good  men  under  their  sufferings  for  religion  : — I. 
When  men  do  suffer  really  and  truly  for  the  cause  of  religion  and  God's 
truth,  they  may  with  confidence   commit  themselves   (their  lives   and   all   that 
is  dear  to  them)  to  the  more  especial  care  of  His  providence.     When  men  may  be 
said  to  suffer  truly  for  the  cause  of  religion  and  God's  truth,  and  when  not.     1. 
When  men  suffer  for  not  renouncing  the  true  religion,  and  because  they  will  not 
openly  declare  against  it,  and  apostatise  from  it.     2.  When  then  they  are  persecuted 
only  for  making  an  open  profession  of  the  Christian  religion,  by  joining  in  the 
assemblies  of  Christians  for  the  worship  of  God.     3.    When  they  suffer  for  not 
betraying  it  by  any  indirect  and  unworthy  means.     4.  When  they  suffer  for  the 
maintenance  and  defence  of  any  necessary  and  fundamental  article  of  it,  though 
they  be  not  required  to  renounce  the  whole  Christian  religion.     5.  When  they  suffer 
for  maintaining  the  purity  of  the  Christian  doctrine  and  worship  ;  and  for  opposing 


CHAP.  IT.]  I.  PETER.  381 

and  not  complying  with  those  gross  errors  and  corruptions  which  superstition  and 
ignorance  had,  in  a  long  course  of  time,  brought  into  the  Christian  religion.  6. 
When  they  suffer  for  not  disclaiming  and  renouncing  any  clear  and  undoubted 
truth  of  God  whatsoever  ;  yea,  though  it  be  not  a  fundamental  point  and  article  of 
religion.  Cases  wherein  men  may  seem  to  suffer  for  the  cause  of  religion,  but, 
cannot  truly  be  said  to  do  so.  1.  When  they  rashly  expose  themselves  to  danger 
and  run  upon  sufferings  for  the  sake  of  religion.  2.  When  they  suffer  not  for  their 
faith,  but  their  fancy,  and  for  the  wilful  and  affected  error  of  a  mistaken  conscience. 
3.  When  they  suffer  for  the  open  profession  and  defence  of  truths  not  necessary, 

II.  How  FAB  THET  MAT  KELT  UPON  THE  PROVIDENCE  OE  GOD  TO  BEAB  THEM  OUT  IN 

THESE  SUFFERINGS.  To  which  I  answer  :  that  provided  we  do  what  is  our  duty  oa 
our  part,  the  providence  of  God  will  not  be  wanting  on  His  part  to  bear  us  out  ia 
all  our  sufferings  for  His  cause,  one  of  these  three  ways.  1.  To  secure  us  from  that 
violent  degree  of  temptation  and  suffering,  which  would  be  too  strong  for  human 
strength  and  patience.  2.  In  case  of  such  extraordinary  temptation  and  trial,  to 
give  us  the  extraordinary  supports  and  comforts  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  3.  In  case  of 
a  temporary  fall  and  miscarriage,  to  raise  us  up  by  repentance,  and  a  greater  resolu- 
tion and  constancy  under  sufferings.     III.  What   ground  and  reason  there  is 

FOR     good     men     to     EXPECT     THE     MORE     PECULIAR     AND     ESPECIAL      CARE      OF      God'S 

providence  in  case  of  SUCH  SUFFERINGS.  The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all 
His  creatures,  according  to  that  of  the  Psalmist :  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and 
His  tender  mercies  are  over  aU  His  works."  But  He  exerciseth  a  more  peculiar 
providence  towards  mankind ;  and  more  peculiar  yet  towards  those  who  study  to 
please  Him  by  obeying  Him  and  doing  His  will  (Psa.  xi.  7,  xxxiii.  18).  When,  ia 
all  our  sufferings  for  the  cause  of  reUgion,  we  may,  with  confidence,  commit  our- 
selves to  the  more  especial  care  of  God's  providence.  1.  Provided  always  that  we 
neglect  no  lawful  means  of  our  preservation  from  sufferings,  or  our  deliverance  out 
of  them.  2.  Provided,  likewise,  that  we  do  not  attempt  our  own  preservation  or 
deliverance  from  suffering  by  evil  and  unlawful  means.  3.  Provided,  also,  that  we 
do  trust  the  providence  of  God,  and  do  indeed  commit  ourselves  to  it ;  relying  upon 
His  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  entirely  submitting  ourselves  to  His  will  and 
disposal,  both  as  to  the  degree  and  duration  of  our  sufferings.  4.  Provided  yet 
further,  that  we  pray  earnestly  to  God  for  His  gracious  help,  for  His  merciful 
comfort  and  support  under  sufferings  ;  that  He  would  be  pleased  to  strengthen  our 
faith,  and  lengthen  out  our  patience,  in  proportion  to  the  degree  and  duration  of 
our  sufferings.  5.  Provided,  moreover,  that  we  be  not  confident  of  ourselves,  and  of 
the  force  and  strength  of  our  resolution.  6.  Provided  furthermore,  that,  according 
to  our  ability,  we  have  been  much  in  the  exercise  of  alms  and  charity.  7.  Provided, 
above  all,  that  we  be  sincere  in  our  religion,  and  endeavour  to  be  universally  good, 
and  "holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation,"  and  "to  abound  in  all  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God."  This  is 
the  largest  sense  of  well-doing,  and  the  most  necessary,  to  prepare  us  for  sufferings, 
and  to  give  us  courage  and  constancy  under  them ;  and  likewise  to  engage  the 
providence  of  God  to  a  tender  care  of  us,  and  concernment  for  us,  if  He  shall  see  it 
fit  to  bring  us  into  a  state  of  suffering.  [Ahp.  Tillotson.)  The  keeping  of  the 
soul : — I.  Observe  both  the  mtstert  and  the  merct  of  the  believer's  suffer- 
ings in  this  world.  1.  It  is  a  mystery  that  God  should  be  ]pleased  to  subject  His 
people  to  suffering.  2.  Though  we  may  sometimes  deem  it  a  mystery  we  may 
readily  see  that  it  is  a  mercy — it  is  according  to  the  will  of  God — both  as  to  the  end 
to  be  answered  by  it,  and  as  to  the  measure  and  degree.     II.  There  is  one  supreme 

SUBJECT    which    IN    ALL    OUR    SUFFERINGS    SHOULD   BE    OUR   CHIEF    CARE THAT   IS    THE 

SOUL.  1.  It  is  infinitely  more  precious  than  the  body.  2.  Everlasting  happiness 
depends  upon  committiug  the  soul  to  God  now.     III.  The  text  shows  us  who  alone 

IS    QUALIFIED    TO    BE    THE    KEEPER     OF    THIS    INV,\LUABLE     TREASURE OUR     IMMORTAL 

80UL.  1.  The  soul  belongs  to  God.  2.  This  Divine  and  merciful  Creator  has 
provided  for  the  keeping  of  our  souls.  Sent  a  Saviour  for  them — engaged  to  accept 
and  keep  them.     IV.  Here  is  an  act  of  sacred  resignation  and  confidence  to 

WHICH    ALL,  AND    ESPECLiLLT   ALL    SUFFERERS   FOR   RIGHTEOUSNESS*    SAKE,    ARE    INVITED. 

Let  them  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  Him,  &c.  1.  This  is  an  act  of  faith 
resting  on  His  promise  of  salvation  through  a  Mediator.  2.  This  act  must  be 
accompanied  with  well-doing.  It  must  be  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  {Tlie 
Evangelist.)  A   faithful  Creator. — GoiVs  faithfulness  t — This  is   one  of  those 

Biblical  phrases  upon  which  in  many  a  time  of  need  the  souls  of  men  may 
fall  back  and  rest.      The    phrase  was  intended  originally  for    the    support    of 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

some  in  the  early  Church  who  had  been  compelled  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake. 
Commit  your  souls,   the  Apostle    writes  to   such,    in    well-doing  to   God    as    a 
faithful  Creator.     The  first  truth  involved  in  this  simple,   large  phrase  is  that 
the  Creator  has  character.     A  certain  well-known  and  fundamental  character,  that 
of  faithfulness,  we  are  warranted  by  this  Scripture  in  ascribing  to  the  Creator.     It 
is  one  of  the  general  characteristics  of  revelation  throughout  the  Bible  that  it 
attributes  to  God  certain  distinct  moral  qualities ;  that  it  brings  out  by  these  the 
character  of  God,  rather  than  the  nature  or  mode  in  which  God  may  be  conceived 
to  exist  or  to  create.     This  is  the  grand  peculiarity  of  the  Old  Testament.     This 
one  feature  lifts  it  up  above  all  the  literature  of  the  ancient  times,  as  a  clear 
mountain  above  a  jungle  ;  this  feature  renders  it  an  inspiring  Bible  for  the  world, 
that  it  exalts  the  Lord  God  as  having  character— true,  holy,  righteous,  merciful, 
supremely  moral  character.     You  have  known  some  man  who  had  this  character 
of  faithfulness.     He  may  have  accomplished  little  which  men  will  remember  ;  but 
he  has  kept  on  his  way  faithfully.     He  was  always  to  be  found  where  others  had 
reason  to  expect  to  find  him.     Many  a  faithful  woman's  life  has  been  the  one 
scarce-noticed,  continuous  thread,  slight,  but  not  to  be  broken,  on  which  has  been 
bound  and  kept  together  all  the  happiness  and  success  of  sons  and  daughters.    A 
faithful  life  resembles  the  sure,  unceasing  roadway,  which  runs  on  and  on  over 
the  hills,  and  thi-ough  the  woods,  and  by  the  homes  of  men,  into  which  we  may 
always  come  back  at  evening  time,  no  matter  how  far  we  may  have  wandered  afield 
or  how  long  we  may  have  followed  the  winding  brook,  at  our  own  sweet  will  during 
the  day.     Now  this  familiar,  homelike,  often  unnoticed,  but  fundamental  character 
is  described  by  this  Scripture  directly  to  our  God.     He  is  the  faithful  One.     Other 
Scriptures  ascribe  to  Him  characters  more  transcendent,  and  che  very  glory  of  them 
renders  God  to  our  thought  unspeakable  and  high  as  the  heavens  above  us.     Carry- 
ing our  thought  of  this  character  a  step  further,  observe,  secondly,  that  in  this 
Biblical  phrase  is  included  the  truth  that  God  has  some  regular  method  in  what- 
ever He  does.     For  regular  habit,  or  methodical  action,  is  a  quality  of  faithfulness. 
The  person  who  is  here  and  there  and  everywhere,  and  whose  belongings  are  never 
in  their  place ;  the  person  whose  life  follows  no  conceivable  method  may  have  some 
other  attractive  qualities,  but  would  not  be  counted  on  as  faithful.     So  that  in 
speaking  of  the  Creator  as  faithful  we  must  mean  that  He  has   followed  some 
method  in  creation.     We  say  that  our  God  has  His  regular  habits  of  procedure : 
that  He  does  not  deal  with  His  creation  now  on  one  plan  and  then  on  another ; 
that  He  does  not  let  His  divine  affairs  run  on  of  themselves  from  age  to  age  with- 
out thought,  system,  or  order.     The  faithful  Creator  is  the  God  of  regular  habits, 
the  God  of  system,  the  God  who  has  His  own  time  and  place  for  everything.     Now, 
think  how  very  much  it  means  for  us  to  know  that  God  is  methodical,  whether  in  the 
realm  of  nature  or  of  redemption.     Two  helpful  things  in  particular  let  me  mention 
as  of  daily  importance  for  us  in  the  methodical  habit  of  the  Divine  faithfulness ;  the 
one  is  that  because  God  all  through  nature  and  history  has  been  following  His  one 
chosen  method,  we  can  study  what  He  has  been  doing,  and  find  out  to  some  extent 
at  least  what  His  method  is,  and  as  we  find  it  out  we  can  trust  it  and  adjust  our 
plans  of  life  and  our  efforts  and  hopes  to  it.     So  we  can  live  surely,  as  we  live  in 
accordance  with   God's  method.      Consider  thus   God's  method   in   the   natural 
creation.     It  is  the  business  of  all  our  sciences  to   find  that   out.     And  as  our 
science  discovers  God's  method  in  nature,  we  may  learn  to  use  it  in  our  acts.     We 
propel  our  street  cars,  we  light  our  houses,  we  run  our  machinery,  we  multiply  our 
conveniences,  because  we  have  found  out  something  about  God's  regular  habit  or 
method  of  the  light  and  the  electricity  and  the  admirable  mechanics  of  the  creation, 
to  which  from  the  beginning  He  has  been  faithful.     As  we  learn  what  the  laws  of 
life   are — the   laws   of  development,    survival,  and   fruitfulness — we   discover  still 
further  truth  concerning  the  methods  of  the  faithful  One  from  eternity ;  and  we 
must  trust  these  laws  of  life,  and  adjust  our  free  action  to  them,  or  we  shall  perish. 
It  is  so,  likewise,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     God  has  His  providential  methods  of 
soul-training,  and  soul-enlarging,  and  soul-ripening.     Experience  discloses  to  some 
extent  these  spiritual  methods  of  the  faithful  One;  and  there  is  life,  hope,  and 
peace  in  submitting  our  souls  to  them.     The  other  particular  which  I  would  bring 
out  from   this  general  truth   of  the  methodicalness  which  the  faithful   Creator 
observes  is  this :  a  good  method,  as  we  know,  is  not  to  be  set  aside  every  now  and 
then  because  it  may  seem  not  to  meet  exactly  all  cases  and  contingencies.     So  the 
fact  that  God  has  method,  and  must  have  it  in  order  to  be  faithful,  is  reason 
enough  why  He  does  not  vary  the  course  of  His  providence  to  meet  some  of  our 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  PETER.  383 

desires,  however  much  the  good  God  might  wish  to  gratify  us.     We  indeed  some- 
times have  to  change  our  methods,  because  we  find  that  they  do  not  work.     But 
God's  regular  ways  of  doing  things,  whether  in  the  evolution  of  the  creation  or  in 
His  redemptive  work  of  making  all  things  new — God's  methods  have  been  formed 
in  wisdom,  and  are  on  the  whole  the  methods  which  can  be  trusted  to  work  out 
the  largest  amount  of  possible  creaturely  good.     There  is  no  new  reason,  therefore, 
arising  in  any  juncture  of  natural  forces,  or  even  from  any  emergency  of  hv;man 
history,  which  should  lead  God  to  change  the  laws  of  life  or  to  give  to  His  Church 
some  different  method  of  redeeming  love  than  that  which  has  been  followed,  and 
is  now  pursued,  by  the  Divine  wisdom  on  this  earth.     If,  then,  God's  persistency  in 
keeping  straight  on  along  His  well-known  ways  of  nature  and  grace  may  seem  at 
times   to   work  incidental   evil ;    if   God's   steadfastness  in  letting  fire  burn,  and 
lightnings  blast,  and  devouring  floods  overwhelm,  as  well  as  the  sweet  sunshine 
restore   and  fructify,  may  at  times   destroy  human  homes  or  lay  desolate  for  a 
season  human  hearts — nevertheless,  it  is  His  faithfulness  which  is  involved,  and 
that  same  faithfulness  holds  in  its  own  persistent  method  the  possibility  of  future 
good  in  place  of  present  evil,  and  of  even  larger  and  eternal  good  in  consequence  of 
temporal  hardship.     A  third  element  goes  with  those  just  mentioned.     This  text 
contains   also   the   kindred   truth  that   God   has  aim  or  object.     Faithfulness  is 
fideUty  to  one's  aim  or  object.     It  requires  that  the  goal  be  kept  in  sight.     Faith- 
fulness in  the  highest  is  for  us  to  be  true  to  our  ideals.     It  is  the  same  kind  of 
loyalty  in  the  Creator.     This  likewise  is  a  grandly  uplifting  thought  for  us,  that 
the  Creator  from  the  beginning,  and  through  all  the  method  of  His  working,  has 
never  lost  sight  of  the  goal ;  that  He  is  faithful  to  the  divine  ideals ;  the  divine 
ideal  of  a  free  life  of  the  creature  capable  of  sinning  and  suffering,  because  made 
also  to  achieve  a  righteousness  and  love  which  only  along  the  way  of  spiritual 
freedom  can  ever  be  reached  ;  the  divine  ideal  also  of  embodied  spirit,  capable  of 
being  raised  through  death  to  celestial  perfection.     This  likewise  belongs  to  the 
faithfulness   of   God.     One   other  characteristic  might  be  added   to  these  three 
elements  of  moral  character,  method,  and  aim,  which  are  comprehended  in  the 
faithfulness  of  our  God — viz., responsibility.     This  last,  however,  might  be  regarded 
rather  as  the  resultant  of  aU  the  others,  or  as  a  consequent  of  faithfulness.     God  is 
responsible.     Think  of  that  in  relation  to  your  own  personal  being  and  life,  as  well 
as  in  relation  to  the  affairs  of  God's  world.     Perhaps  we  are  more  ready  to  think 
of  it  in  the  latter  relation,  and  to  admit  God's  responsibility  for  the  world  at  large 
and  its  government,  than  we  are  to  trust  it  in  reference  to  our  own  individual  lives. 
But  it  is  equally  true  of  both.     We  must  assume  the  Divine  responsibility  on  the 
large  scale  of  history.     When  brave  Martin  Luther  was  once  hard  pressed,  and 
inclined  to   be  over-anxious  concerning   the  prospects  of  the   Eeformation,  quiet 
Philip  Melancthon  by  his  side  would  say  to  him,  "  Martin,  let  God  be  Governor  of 
the  world."     The  faithful  Creator  is  the  responsible  One.     There  is  not  a  verse  of 
prophet  or  apostle,  there  is  not  a  word  spoken  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  lead  us  to  suppose 
for  an  instant  that  God  on  high  would  avoid  His  responsibility  for  His  world ;  or 
that  He  would  for  a  moment  put  off  upon  any  man  the  least  of  His  Divine  respon- 
sibility for  affairs.     There  would  be  indeed  no  use  and  no  hope  for  anything  we 
may  do  or  say  to  make  things  human  better  were  it  not  for  this  prior  and  this  final 
responsibility  of   God,  the  faithful   One  from   eternity  to  eternity.     Let   Martin 
Luther  do  and  dare  as  the  great  reformer,  because  God  is  Governor  of  the  world. 
Let  us  do  with  our  might  whatsoever  our  hands  find  to  do,  because  we  are  but 
servants,  and  the  responsibility  is  God's.     Finally,  let  us  take  this  same  truth  into 
our  daily  thought  of  ourselves,  and  of  those  with  whose  lives  ours  are  bound  in 
this  world  and  beyond.     God  gave  you  and  them  power  to  live  together  in  common 
affections  and  pursuits.     He  will  be  faithful  to  His  own  gifts.     He  will  not  deny 
Himself  in  the  being  and  the  powers  of  life,  of  thought,  of  love,  which  He  has 
given  you  and  them.     God  made  these  human  hearts  capable  of  love  immortal, 
and  even  in  their  mourning  capable  of  proving  and  deepening  their  power  of  love ; 
He  is  faithful ;  He  cannot  deny  Himself  in  the  human  hearts  which  He  has  made. 
(Newma7i   Smyth.)  A  faithful   Creator: — Suppose,    in    the    place   of    God  as 

Creator,  we  substitute  chance,  or  fate,  or  law,  what  a  blank  we  have  at  once  in 
the  highest  regions  of  thought  and  feeling !  If  you  are  only  the  offspring  of  a 
blind,  unintelligent,  unknown  force ;  if  you  are  the  product  of  something  that 
men  call  "  a  tendency  "  or  law,  are  you  not  immediately  let  down  from  a  conscious 
dignity,  which  has  been  one  of  the  most  ennobling  factors  and  influences  of  your 
life  ?     As  a  child  of  God  you  have  a  supreme  motive  to  be  Godlike  ;  as  a  creature 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  force  you  are  deprived  of  all  such  motives.     I.  God  the  Creator  is  faithful 
IN  His  relations  to  us  His  creatures.     It  is  surely  not  a  presumptuous  thing  to 
assert  that  God  has  assumed,  by  the  very  act  of  creating  ns,  something  like  responsi- 
bility for  our  well-being.     We  cannot  conceive  of  a  God  calling  sensitive  creatures 
like  ourselves  into  existence,  and  then  leaving  us  to  our  own  poor  hapless  devices. 
We  reason  from  analogy — we  say,  in  the  common  arrangements  of  society,  that 
parentage  involves  the  idea  of  obligation.     But  let  us  come  to  declarations  and 
facts — the  declarations  of  Scripture  and  the  facts  of  human  life.     In  the  Book  we 
read,  from  one  end  to  the  other,  that  God  has  the  charge  of  our  existence ;  that  He 
acknowledges  our  claim,  as  His  creatures,  as  His  children,  on  His  bounty  and 
wisdom  and  love.     We  take  the  third  step  in  the  inquiry,  and  look  at  the  facts  of 
life.     Just  as  a  parent  will  seek  to  adapt  the  surrroundings  of  a  child  to  its  powers 
and  capacities,  to  place  him  in  a  position  where  he  shall  obtain  aU  the  enjoyment 
that  is  compatible  with  his  growth  and  development ;  so  God  has  provided  the 
things  that  are.     He  has  furnished  the  world  as  the  fitting  nursery  and  school- 
house  for  the  family  of  man  that  He  is  educating  for  an  immortal  and  perfect  life. 
II.  God  the   Creator  is  faithful  to  the  great  purpose  for  which  He  made 
TTS  His  creatures.     We  here  and  now  cannot  see  what  the  design  in  the  creation 
of  man  is — that  is,  not  to  the  fuU  of  what  God  purposes  to  make  of  us  ;  how  He 
intends  by  and  by  in  another  state  of  being  to  use  us.     We  are  here  only  preparing 
for  the  sublime  work  of  some  future,  preparing  to  fulfil  what  our  Father  has  had 
in  view  for  us  from  the  beginning.     It  could  have  been  for  no  insignificant  position 
and  service  that  He  did  actually  make  men  in  His  own  likeness,  giving  them  the 
high  honour  of  resembling  Himself  in  those  spiritual  characteristics  which  constitute 
the  essence  of  His  being.     Some  time  since  I  stood  looking  with  melancholy  interest 
on  the  magnificent  desolations  of  Kenilworth  Castle.     It  was  a  spectacle  that  filled 
the  heart  with  regret,  but  beneath  one  part  were  some  workmen  busily  engaged  in 
introducing  new  layers  of  stone.     On  inquiring  what  they  were  doing,  I  was  told 
they  were  supporting  the  ruin  to  prevent  its  getting  any  worse.     That  was  aU  that 
the  owner   of  that  once  famous  place  could  do — support  the  ruin  !     With  that  he 
must  be  content  ;  but  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  he  left  it  alone  to  the  swift 
process  of  decay.     Human  nature  is  ruined,  but  not  left  to  decay,  not  simply  kept 
from  getting  worse.     The  will  of  God  is  complete  recovery,  restoration  to   even 
greater  glory  in  all  its  parts,  and  to  this  end  nothing  the  Divine  Father  could 
expend  that  would  serve  this  purpose  has  been  withheld.    A  faithful  Creator  1   Who 
is  like  unto  Him  ?     He  has  never  left  and  never  forsaken  us.     And  He  will  not 
until  we  again  reflect  His  glory  in  the  fullest  measure,  and  are  prepared  to  take 
that  high  place  and  do  that  grand  service  for  which  we  were  originally  designed. 
Being   faithful  to   us,   can   we   not  trust  Him  and    commit  our  souls  to  Him? 
(W.  Braden.)         The  faithful  Creator: — I.  God  is  faithful  in  responding  to  the 
CLAIMS  OF  His  CREATURES.     EvcH  of  the  animal  creation  this  is  true.     God's  "tender 
mercies  are  over  all  His  works."     The  "  springs  of  the  valleys  give  drink  to  the 
beasts  of  the  field."     "He  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle."     "Not  a 
sparrow  falleth  to  the  ground  without  your  Father."    And  surely  God  is  faithful 
also  in  responding  to  the  claims  of  man.     The  appetites,  desires,  and  affections 
with  which  man  has  been  endowed,  have  their  correspondent  means  of  satisfaction 
in  the  world  around  him.     There  is  nourishment  for  his  body — for  his  intellect — 
for  his  heart.     If  God  is  thus  faithful  in  responding  to  the  claims  of  His  creatures, 
surely  He  is  faithful  also  in  the  sense  of  being  worthy  of  our  trust.     II.  God  is 
faithful  in  ADHERING  TO  His  ORIGINAL  PURPOSE  IN  CREATION.     Humanity,  in  His 
idea,  is  a  holy  and  blessed  thing  ;  and  this  idea  must  yet  be  realised.     God  has  not 
created  sin,  but  He  will  triumph  over  it.     As  man  has  chosen  that  he  shall  not  be 
educated  by  standing  firm,  he  must  be  educated  by  and  through  his  very  fall.     And 
BO  the  "  faithful  Creator  "  becomes  the  merciful  Eedeemer.     How  faithful  is  that 
love  which  will  even  send  sorrow  upon  us — yes,  and  take  sorrow  upon  itself — rather 
than  permit  us  to  come  short  of  the  destiny  for  which  it  created  us.     It  is  God's  ^ 
purpose  to  make  you  holy  and  blessed.     For  this  He  created  you.     For  this  Christ 
died.     For  this  God  is  educating  you.     And  surely,  if  He  is  thus  faithful  in  adhering 
to  His  own  purpose  concerning  you.  He  is  faithful  also  in  the  sense  of  being  worthy 
of  your  trust.     If  He  crosses  your  wishes  and  thwarts  your  projects,  this  may  be 
simply  because  He  is  unwilling  to  let  you  ruin  yourself.     He  would  lead  you  into 
humility.     He  would  subdue  your  selfishness  and  self-will.     He  would  enrich  your 
whole  spiritual  nature.     He  would  lead  you  to  Christ  or  into  closer  sympathy  with 
Christ.     ('/.  C.  Finlayson.) 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  385 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vebs.  1-4.  The  elders  which  are  among  you  I  exhort. — Elders  exhorted : — 1.  In  that 
he,  an  elder,  exhorts  them,  elders,  note  that  ministers  are  fittest  to  teach  ministers 
and  to  judge  of  their  actions.  When  we  dislike  anything  in  a  minister,  it  were 
wisdom  to  ask  the  judgment  of  some  godly  minister  before  we  censure.  2.  In  that 
he  requireth  nothing  at  their  hands  but  what  he  himself  did,  note  that  the  most 
forcible  way  of  teaching,  whether  private  or  public,  is,  first,  to  do  that  in  our  own 
persons  which  we  require  of  others.  He  is  an  ill  captain  that  bids  his  soldiers  go 
fight,  himself  in  the  meantime  tarrying  behind.  3.  In  that  he  beseecheth,  note  his 
modesty  and  humiUty.  (John  Rogers.)  The  office,  spirit,  and  reioard  of  a  faithful 
ministry  : — The  apostle  Peter,  after  various  exhortations  to  strengthen  the  brethren, 
turns  at  the  close  of  his  Epistle  to  his  fellow-ministers,  and  gives  them  his  parting 
counsel.  St.  Peter  calls  the  Church  "  the  flock  of  God."  It  is  not  man's  flock,  but 
God's,  which  He  hath  purchased  with  His  own  blood.  Our  Saviour  spoke  of  the 
Church  as  His  flock — My  sheep,  My  lambs — and  Himself  as  the  Good  Shepherd. 
Each  believer  will  have  his  own  history.  There  will  be  peculiarities  in  it,  not 
found  in  any  other — in  what  way  he  wandered  ;  where  Jesus  found  him — in  the  house 
of  God,  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  at  the  grave  of  some  one  dear  to  him  as  his  own 
soul.  When  thus  brought  home  to  the  fold,  he  becomes  one  of  those  sheep  to  whom 
Jesus  gives  eternal  life.  He  feels  that  he  is  not  his  own,  that  he  has  been  bought 
with  a  price  and  can  no  longer  live  to  his  own  will,  but  to  the  will  of  Him  that  loved 
him.  But  though  thus  made  one  of  the  flock  of  Christ,  the  believer  has  not  yet 
reached  heaven ;  he  must  be  fed,  cared  for,  guided  on  his  way  there,  and  it  is  for 
this  end,  as  well  as  to  add  to  this  flock,  that  the  ofl&ce  of  the  ministry  was  insti- 
tuted. Jesus  so  loves  the  souls  of  men,  for  whom  He  died,  that  He  commits  them 
only  to  those  who  love  Him,  and  will  feed  His  flock.  Having  thus  considered  the 
office  of  the  ministry,  let  us  consider  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  to  be  exercised — not 
of  constraint,  but  willingly,  of  a  ready  mind,  neither  as  lording  it  over  your  charge. 
There  may  be  a  constraint  in  taking  upon  us  this  office  and  ministry,  but  it  is  such 
a  constraint  as  St.  Paul  had  when  he  said,  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me ;  woe  is  unto 
me,  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel !  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  me."  We  may 
shrink  from  it  from  a  sense  of  our  utter  insufficiency  for  such  a  work.  Isaiah  said, 
♦'  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell  among  a  people  of  unclean  lips."  There 
may  be  a  shrinking  from  the  work  from  these  causes,  and  at  the  same  time  a  wiDing 
and  ready  mind.  The  constraint  St.  Peter  speaks  of  is  where  there  is  no  heart  for 
the  work,  where  there  are  secular  motives  of  base  gain  or  ambition.  Where  there 
is  this  constraint,  a  penurious,  stinted  service  will  be  rendered.  Christ  praises  the 
angel  of  the  Church  of  Ephesus  for  labour  unto  weariness.  This  is  what  Christ 
praises  in  His  servants.  Neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage,  the  Church. 
Our  Saviour  had  warned  His  apostles  against  the  spirit  of  ambition  which  was 
found  in  the  world.  "  You  know,"  He  said  to  them,  "  that  the  great  ones  of  this 
world  exercise  lordship  over  men,  but  it  shall  not  be  so  among  you."  And  last  of 
all  in  the  qualifications  of  the  Christian  minister,  we  are  to  be  examples  to  the 
flock  in  word,  in  manner  of  life,  in  love,  in  faith,  in  purity.  Having  thus  con- 
sidered the  office  of  the  ministry,  and  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  to  be  exercised,  let  us 
now  notice  the  reward  of  the  faithful  minister.  "  And  when  the  Chief  Shepherd 
shall  appear,  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  which  fadeth  not  away."  The 
service  of  Christ  in  the  ministry  of.  the  gospel  is  not  without  its  reward.  It  has  its 
reward,  not  only  in  prospect,  after  it  is  finished,  but  by  the  way,  in  the  Life  which 
now  is.  Our  work  brings  us  in  contact  with  Divine  truth,  which  grows  upon  us 
in  interest  and  delight,  so  that  we  are  overmastered  by  its  power  and  glory.  This 
truth  raises  the  soul  above  itself  on  the  wings  of  faith  and  hope,  and  makes  us 
heavenly-minded,  wh'ch  is  life  and  peace.  There  is  a  satisfaction  growing  out  of 
the  nature  of  our  work,  so  that  the  labour  itself  is  its  own  exceeding  great  reward. 
Our  work,  again,  brings  us  into  a  loving  sympathy  with  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  The 
gospel  we  preach  began  first  to  be  preached  by  the  Lord  Himself.  And  as  He  was 
grieved  at  the  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart  of  those  who  heard  Him,  as  He  wept 
over  Jerusalem,  so  does  every  faithful  minister  of  Christ  mourn  over  those  who 
obey  not  the  gospel  and  neglect  its  great  salvation.  (J.  Packard,  D.D.)  Address 
to  the  young  elders  : — It  is  quite  plain  that  St.  Peter  is  here  addressing  distinctively 
not  elders  in  age,  but  elders  by  office.  Age  might  enter  then,  more  than  now,  into 
the  question  of  fitness;    nevertheless,  what  made  a  presbyter  was  not  age,   but 

25 


38G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  v. 

ordination.     And  when  we  see  gathered  together  a  goodly  band  of  youthful  minis- 
ters, we  do  well  to  say  to  them,  Kemember,  you  have  an  office  given  you  which 
reckons  not  by  years,  but  by  graces  ;  you  have  to  walk  the  aisles  of  your  church,  to 
tread  the  streets  of  your  parish,  as  men  (in  one  sense)  prematurely  old — as  men  of 
that  truest  dignity,  which  consists  not  in  wealth,  not  in  rank,  not  even  in  age,  but 
in  bearing  Christ's  commission.     St.  Peter  counts  this  so  honourable  an  office  that 
he  will  claim  even  for  himself  none  higher.     Another  apostle,  his  friend  and  chosen 
brother,  describes  himself  in  like  manner  in  two  of  his  writings,  only  as  "the  elder  " 
(2  John  i.).     They  well  knew,  both  of  them,  the  higher  compulsion  of  sympathy, 
above  anything  that  mere  power  or  official  dignity  can  exercise.     1.  I  will  say  a 
word  upon  the  dedication.     The  Christian  clergyman  is  a  dedicated  man.     Do  you 
heartily  believe  that  your  motive  in  asking  ordination  is  honest,  truthful,  pure  ? 
Is  it  the  choice  of  your  heart  ?     Do  you  mean  to  give  your  life  to  it  ?     You  must 
not  be  satisfied  with  that  sort  of  average  ambiguous  twilight  state  which  the  world 
considers  good  enough  for  a  lay  Christian.     2.  Thus  the  dedication  passes  on  inta 
the  commission.     You  dedicate  yourselves  to  Christ,  and  He  gives  you  His  com- 
mission.    It  would  be  absolutely  intolerable  to  one  who  knows  himself  to  have  to 
feel,  when  he  robes  himself  in  his  vestry  for  the  exercise  of  one  of  his  clerical 
functions,  that  he  is  volunteering  his  counsels  for  that  time  to  a  body  of  rational 
spiritual  beings  who  have  just  as  good  a  right  to  teach  him.     Bearing  this  well  in 
mind,  still  we  say,  Without  Christ's  commission  we  could  not  speak :  with  it  a 
dying  man  may  be  bold  to  speak  to  dying  men.    3.  Next  to  the  sanctity,  the  twofold 
sanctity,  of  the  office,  let  me  strongly  urge  upon  you  its  Divine  humanity.     The 
secret  of  all  influence  is.  Be  human.     One  word  of  genuine  kindness,  of  hearty 
compassionate  sympathy,  will  be  worth  ten  thousand  expositions  of  your  claim  ta 
reverence  :  it  will  open  hearts  otherwise  barred  against  you,  and,  letting  you  in, 
will  let  in  Christ  after  you.     And  as  in  your  intercourse,  so  also  in  your  preaching. 
Let  it  indeed  assert  strongly  the  direct  revelation  and  inspiration  of  your  gospel. 
But  in  the  application  of  this  Divine  gospel,  speak  as  a  man  to  men ;  speak  as  one 
who  knows  its  necessity  to  himself,  as  one  who  knows  the  nature,  the  life,  the  heart, 
to  which  he  has  to  offer  it,  and  has  learned,  not  from  books  but  from  men,  what  is 
that  heart-sickness  too,  and  eager  inward  thirst,  to  which  Christ  his  Lord  came  to 
minister,  and  has  of  His  infinite  mercy  set  him  to  minister  in  His  absence,  in  His 
presence  1     4.  Need  I  say,  then,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  the  Christian  ministry  is 
a  work  ?     It  is  no  pastime.     It  is  no  outside  perfunctory  propriety.     It  is  a  work. 
Be  able  to  say,  I  am  an  elder  of  Christ's  Church,  and  therefore  my  time,  ray 
strength,  my  life,  is  the  Church's,  is  Christ's.     5.  Who  shall  deny  then  this  other 
avowal— that  the  ministry  is  a  difiiculty?     Do  you  suppose,  ye  who  pass  by,  that  a 
clergyman's  ordination  sets  him  above  the  most  trying  snares  of  world,  flesh,  or 
devil  ?     6.  Then  let  me  record,  for  your  encouragement,  this  one  other  character- 
istic— the  ministry  an  honour,  a  privilege,  and  a  blessing.     There   is   a   special 
coronet  for  the  faithful  presbyter,  over  and  above  that  which  he  shall  share  with  the 
lowliest  of  the  redeemed.     In  this  life  it  is  his,  if  he  be  earnest  in  his  work,  to 
enjoy  a  gratitude  scarcely  given  to  another — the  gratitude  of  lives  remodelled,  the 
gratitude  of  souls  saved.      (Dean  Vaughan.)         Peter  exhorting  the  elders  :— I.  A 
WELL-EQUIPPED  soLDiEE.     1.    An   elder.     (1)  In  age.     (2)   In  knowledge.     (3)   In 
experience.     (4)  In  position.     2.  A  witness.     Of  Christ's — (1)  Suffering  ;  (2)  Atone- 
ment ;  (3)  Love  ;  (4)  Sympathy ;  (5)  Humanity.     3.  A  partaker — of  the  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed.     "  Come  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,"  <fec.     11.  A  humble-minded 
SAINT.     This  was  not  one  of  St.  Peter's  early  characteristics.     But  he  had  learnt  by 
experience  to  form  a  true  opinion  of  his  real  position  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  of 
the  many  infirmities  which  pertain  to  fallen  humanity.     This  chastened  spirit  is 
particularly  manifested — 1.  Ey  the  position  assumed.     "Fellow-elder."     There  is 
no  assumption  of  extra  wisdom  or  superior  knowledge.     2.  By  the  method  of  his 
teaching.     Not  "  I  command,"  "  decree,"   "  enforce  "  ;    simply   "  I  exhort."     He 
would  suggest,  remind,  urge  on.     What  a  heavenly  spirit!     \j.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.) 
A  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ. — A  witness  and  a  partaker  : — I.  A  witness  of 
THE  suFi'EKiNos  OF  Chbist.     So  far  as  possible,  let  us  be  witnesses  with  Peter.     1. 
An  eye-witness  of  those  sufferings.     In  this  we  cannot  participate,  nor  need  we 
desire  to  do  so.     2.  A  faith-witness  of  those  sufferings.     (1)    He  had  personally 
believed  on  Jesus  at  the  first.    (2)  He  had  further  believed  through  after-communion 
with  Him.    3.  A  testifying  witness  of  those  sufferings.     (1)  He  bore  witness  to  their 
bitterness  when  borne  by  Jesus.     (2)  He  bore  witness  to  their  importance  as  an 
atonement.     (3)  He  bore  witness  to  their  completeness  as  a  satisfaction.     (4)  He 


CRAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  ;j87 

bore  witness  to  their  effect  in  perfect  salvation.  4.  A  partaking  witness  of  those 
sufferings.  (1)  In  defence  of  truth  he  suffered  from  opposers.  (2)  In  winning 
others  he  suffered  in  the  anguish  of  his  heart.  (3)  In  serving  his  Lord  he  suffered 
exile,  persecution,  death.  What  he  witnessed  in  all  these  ways  became  a  motive 
and  a  stimulus  for  his  whole  life.  II.  A  paetakeb  of  the  glory  to  be  revealed. 
It  is  important  to  partake  in  all  that  we  preach,  or  else  we  preach  without  vividness 
and  assurance.  1.  Peter  had  enjoyed  a  literal  foretaste  of  the  glory  on  the  holy 
mount.  We,  too,  have  our  earnests  of  eternal  joy.  2.  Peter  had  not  yet  seen  the 
glory  which  shall  be  revealed,  and  yet  he  had  partaken  of  it  in  a  spiritual  sense : 
our  participation  must  also  be  spiritual.  Peter  had  been  a  spiritual  partaker  in  the 
following  ways  :  (1)  By  faith  in  the  certainty  of  the  glory.  (2)  By  anticipation  of 
the  joy  of  the  glory.  (3)  By  sympathy  with  our  Lord,  who  has  entered  into  glory. 
3.  Peter  had  felt  the  result  of  faith  in  that  glory.  (1)  In  the  comfort  which  it 
yielded  him.  (2)  In  the  heavenliness  which  it  wrought  in  him.  (3)  In  the  courage 
with  which  it  endowed  him.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Partaker  of  the  g'lory  that 
shall  be  revealed. — Partaking  as  well  as  preaching  : — 'Tis  a  very  sad  thing  when 
preachers  are  like  printers,  who  compose  and  print  off  many  things,  which  they 
neither  understand,  nor  love,  nor  experience ;  all  they  aim  at  is  money  for  printing, 
which  is  their  trade.  It  is  also  sad  when  ministers  are  like  gentlemen  ushers,  who 
bring  ladies  to  their  pews,  but  go  not  in  themselves — bring  others  to  heaven, 
and  themselves  stay  without.  {Ralph  Venning.)  Feed  the  flock  of  God. — True 
office-bearers  in  the  Church : — I.  Their  duty.  Feeding,  leading,  controlling,  pro- 
tecting. II.  Their  motive.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  constrainedly.  (2)  Not 
covetously.  (3)  Not  ambitiously.  2.  Positively.  (1)  Voluntariness.  (2)  Sym- 
pathy, in.  Theik  hope.  1.  "  The  crown  " — symbol  of  dignity.  2.  "  Of  glory  " 
— not  tinselled  or  tarnished,  but  unalloyed.  3.  "  That  fadeth  not  away  " — im- 
perishable. IV.  Their  spirit.  1.  Mutual  siibjection.  2.  Perfect  humility.  V, 
Their  help.  "  Grace  " — the  favour  of  God,  the  greatest  and  mightiest  inspiration 
of   souls.      (U.   R.    Thomas.)  The   discharge   of  the  ministry  : — I.  The   duty 

enjoined.  Every  step  of  the  way  of  our  salvation  hath  on  it  the  print  of  infinite 
majesty,  wisdom,  and  goodness ;  and  this  amongst  the  rest,  that  sinful,  weak  men 
are  made  subservient  in  that  great  work  of  bringing  Christ  and  souls  to  meet,  and 
that  the  life  which  is  conveyed  to  them  by  the  word  of  Ufe  in  the  hands  of  poor 
men,  is  by  the  same  means  preserved  and  advanced.  Oh,  what  dexterity  and  dili- 
gence, and,  above  all,  what  affection  are  needful  for  this  task !  Who  would  not 
faint  in  it,  were  not  our  Lord  the  Chief  Shepherd,  were  not  all  our  sufficiency  laid 
up  in  His  rich  fulness,  and  all  our  insufficiency  covered  in  His  gracious  acceptance  ? 
II.  The  discharge  of  this  high  task  we  have  here  diriy  qualified.  The  apostle 
expresses  the  upright  way  of  it  both  negatively  and  positively.  1.  There  be  three 
evils  he  would  remove  from  this  work — constrainedness,  covetousness,  and  ambition — 
as  opposed  to  willingness,  a  ready  mind,  and  exemplary  temper  and  behaviour.  (1) 
We  are  cautioned  against  constrainedness,  against  being  driven  to  the  work  by 
necessity,  indigence,  and  want  of  other  means  of  subsistence,  as  it  is  with  too  many, 
making  a  trade  of  it  to  live  by;  yea,  making  it  the  refuge  and  forlorn  resource  of 
their  insufficiency  for  other  callings.  This  willingness  should  not  arise  from  any- 
thing but  pure  affection  to  the  work.  (2)  Not  for  filthy  gain,  but  purely  from  the 
inward  bent  of  the  mind.  As  it  should  not  be  a  compulsive  motion  from  without, 
so  it  should  not  be  an  artificial  motion  by  weights  hung  on  within,  avarice  and  love 
of  gain.  The  former  were  a  wheel,  driven  or  drawn,  going  by  force ;  the  latter 
little  better,  as  a  clock  made  to  go  by  art,  by  weights  hung  to  it.  But  there  should 
be  a  natural  motion,  like  that  of  the  heavens  in  their  course.  (3)  The  third  evil  is 
ambition,  and  that  is  either  in  the  affecting  of  undue  authority,  or  the  tyrannical 
exercise  of  due  authority,  or  to  seek  those  dignities  that  suit  not  with  this  charge. 
2.  "But  being  ensamples  "  :  such  a  pattern  as  they  may  stamp  and  print  their 
spirits  and  carriage  by,  and  be  followers  of  you  as  you  are  of  Christ.  And  without 
this,  there  is  Uttle  or  no  fruitful  teaching.  III.  The  high  advantage.  "  And  when 
the  Chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,"  &c.  Thou  shalt  lose  nothing  by  all  this  restraint 
from  base  gain,  and  vain  glory,  and  worldly  power.  Let  them  all  go  for  "  a 
crown" — that  weighs  them  all  down,  that  shall  abide  for  ever.  Oh,  how  far  more 
excellent ! — "  a  crown  of  glory,"  pure,  unmixed  glory,  without  any  pride  or  sinful 
vanity,  or  any  danger  of  it — and  a  crown  "  that  fadeth  not,"  of  such  a  flower  as 
withers  not.  May  they  not  well  trample  on  base  gain  and  vain  applause,  who  have 
this  crown  to  look  to  ?  They  that  will  be  content  with  those  things  let  them  be  so  ; 
they  have  their  reward,  and  it  is  done  and  gone,  when  faithful  followers  are  to 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

receive  theirs.     {Ahp.  Leighton.)         Feed  the  sheep: — I  thought  that  I  was  passing 
by  a  sheepfold,  where  the  shepherds  seemed  extremely  busy.     But  they  were  occu- 
pied entirely  with  the  gate  and  the  hurdles,  and  had  turned  their  backs  on  the  sheep. 
The  pasture  was  bare  and  brown,  little  better  in  some  places  than  a  sandy  waste ; 
the  water  was  muddy,  and  full  of  dead  leaves.     The  sheep  were  few  in  number — 
thin,  emaciated,  and  looked  scarcely  more  than  half  alive.     "  What  are  you  doing, 
friends  ?  "  I  asked  of  the  shepherds.     "  Our  master  told  us  to  feed  his  sheep,"  they 
replied.     "  We  want  to  attract  those  sheep  out  on  the  mountain-side ;   they  are 
his  too."     "And  what  are  you  doing  to  attract  them?"     "  Do  you  not  see  ?     We 
are  gilding  the  gate  and  the  hurdles,  in  the  hope  that,  when  the  sun  shines  on 
them,  those  outside  sheep  will  be  attracted  by  curiosity.     Then  when  they  come 
inside  we  can  feed  them."     "And  why  do  you  not  feed  those  that  are  inside?" 
"  Oh,  they  are  in  ;  they  are  safe  enough  !     They  can  pick  up  food  for  themselves. 
We  have  not  time  to  attend  to  them  as  well  as  attract  the  outsiders,  and  the  latter 
business  is  by  far  the  most  important.     We  have  a  further  attraction  also  :  we  play 
on  the  shepherd's  pipe.     The  outside  sheep  often  come  round  to  listen."     "  But, 
friends,  it  is  for  the  sheep  inside  that  my  concern  is  awakened.     Your  Master  said, 
'  Feed  My  sheep.'    Your  gilding  and  music  will  never  feed  them."    "  Oh,  no  ;  those 
are  for  the  sheep  outside.     We  do  feed  them  inside.     Look,  here  is  grass,  and  there 
are   turnip-troughs."     "Do  you  call  it  grass?     Parched,  poor,  uninviting   stuff! 
My  good  friends,  these  troughs  want  cleansing  and  filling."     "  Do  you  think  we 
have  any  time  for  that?    We  must  attend  to  these  other  things."     "  Surely  not  to 
the  neglect  of  the  main  thing  ?     To  what  are  you  attracting  these  sheep?     To  what 
are  you  dooming  the  others?    Attraction  to  starvation  is  not  a  very  attractive  idea." 
"Then  you  would  have  us  to  spend  all  our  time  on  the  sheep  inside,  and  never 
gather  the  others  in  at  all  ?  "     "  By  no  means.    I  would  have  you  to  attract  the  out- 
siders ;  but  I  would  have  them  attracted  by  fresh  food  and  clear  water,  not  by 
golden  hurdles  and  shepherds'  pipes.     Trust  me,  the  true  way  to  attract  lost  sheep 
is  by  letting  them  see  that  the  found  sheep  are  better  off  than  they  are."     "  That  is 
exactly  what  we  are  trying  to  do.     Therefore  we  gild  the  hurdles  to  entice  them  to 
come  and  look  into  the  fold."     "  And  when  they  come  and  look  in,  you  show  them 
— what?    A  bare  patch  of  ground,  and  a  few  half-starved  sheep.    My  poor  mistaken 
friends,  the  day  is  coming — ay,  and  fast  too — when  you  will  stand  alone  behind  your 
gilded  hurdles  ;  for  the  fold  will  be  left  empty.     The  sheep  will  either  be  starved  to 
death,  or  will  have  dragged  their  emaciated  limbs  to  other  fields  than  yours,  where 
there  is  yet  green  grass  left,  and  the  fountain  of  living  water  is  fresh  and  pure. 
Will  you  put  down  the  paint-pot  and  lay  aside  the  reed,  and   begin  at  once  to 
clear  out  the  water  and  refill  the  troughs  ?    It  is  not  yet  quite  too  late.     It  soon 
will   be."      Does   the   parable   need   interpretation?      Will  the  shepherds  listen? 
(Emily  S.  Holt.)        Taking  the  oversight  theTeof.— Ministerial  oversight: — It  is 
not  enough  for  ministers  to  preach,  yea,  sacredly  and  diligently,  but  they  must 
besides   take    a   particular   oversight   of   their   flock,    and   looking   into   the   con- 
versation  and  behaviour,    and   applying    themselves   accordingly  in   admonition, 
exhortation,  comfort.     If  a  minister  know  any  of  his  people  riotous  or  profane, 
he  must  rebuke  them ;  if  any  out  of  the  way,  admonish  them ;   he  must  hearten 
them   that   be   in  a  good  course  to    go    on    still,  and   must    comfort   them  that 
languish  under  their  sins,  temptations,  and  fears ;  in  a  word,  deal  with  every  one 
as  the  cause  requireth.     1.  This  rebukes  those  ministers  that  be  absent  from  their 
people  usually  or  continually.     How  can  these  take  care  of  them  that  come  not  at 
them  but  rarely,  except  they  could  indent  with  the  devil,  never  to  trouble  their 
people,  or  tempt  them  in  their  absence.     2.  It  rebukes  those  also  that  living  among 
their  people,  yet  care  not  thus,  but  think  themselves  discharged  that  they  meet  them 
at  Church  on  Sunday,  and  then  preach  them  a  sermon,  whereas  all  the  week  after 
they  consider  not  of  them.     (John  Rogers.)         Not  for  filthy  lucre. — God's  servants 
— tJuir  ruling   motix^e  : — You   cannot  serve  two  masters — you  must  serve  one  or 
other.     If  your  work  is  first  with  you,  and  your  fee  second,  work  is  your  master, 
and  the  Lord  of  work,  who  is  God.     But  if  your  fee  is  first  with  you,  and  your  work 
second,  fee  is  your  master,  and  the  lord  of  fee,  who  is  the  devil ;  and  not  only  the 
devil,  but  the  lowest  of  devils — "  the  least  erected  fiend  that  fell."     So  there  you 
have  it  in  brief  terms — work  first,  you  are  God's  servants ;  fee  first,  you  are  the 
fiend's.     And  it  makes  a  difference,  now  and  ever,  believe  me,  whether  you  serve 
Him  who  has  on  His  vesture  and  thigh  written,  "  King  of  kings,"  and  whose  service 
is  perfect  freedom;  or  him  on  whose  vesture  and  thigh  the  name  is  written,  "  Slave 
of  slaves,"  and  whose  service  is  perfect  slavery.     (John  Ruskin.)        Gold  a  con- 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  389 

temptible  motive  for  service : — The  noblest  deeds  which  have  been  done  on  earth 
have  not  been  done  for  gold.  It  was  not  for  the  sake  of  gold  that  our  Lord  came 
down  and  died,  and  the  apostles  went  out  to  preach  the  good  news  in  all  lands. 
The  Spartans  looked  for  no  reward  in  money  when  they  fought  and  died  at  Thermo- 
pylae ;  and  Socrates  the  wise  asked  no  pay  from  his  countrymen,  but  lived  poor 
and  barefoot  aU  his  days,  only  caring  to  make  men  good.  And  there  are  heroes  in 
our  days  also,  who  do  noble  deeds,  but  not  for  gold.  Our  discoverers  did  not  go  to 
make  themselves  rich  when  they  sailed  out  one  after  another  into  the  dreary  frozen 
seas ;  nor  did  the  ladies,  who  went  out  to  drudge  in  the  hospitals  of  the  East, 
making  themselves  poor,  that  they  might  be  rich  in  noble  works  ;  and  young  men, 
too,  did  they  say  to  themselves,  "How  much  money  shall  I  earn?"  when  they 
went  to  the  war,  leaving  wealth  and  comfort,  and  a  pleasant  home,  to  face 
hunger  and  thirst,  and  wounds  and  death,  that  they  might  fight  for  their  country 
and  their  queen  ?  No,  there  is  a  better  thing  on  earth  than  wealth,  a  better  thing 
than  life  itself,  and  that  is,  to  have  done  something  before  you  die,  for  which  good 
men  may  honour  you,  and  God  your  Father  smile  upon  your  work.  (C.  Kingsley.) 
Too  much  money  for  a  clergyman :— Mr.  Fletcher,  of  Madeley,  was  once 
offered  a  hving  in  a  small  parish  in  the  county  of  Durham ;  the  duty  was 
light,  the  stipend  £400,  and  the  surrounding  country  very  charming.  Mr. 
F.  thanked  the  donor  for  his  kind  offer,  but  at  the  same  time  declined 
it,  saying,  "  There  is  too  much  money  for  me,  and  too  little  labour." 
Neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage. — Ministerial  authority  : — 1. 
Ministers  must  not  exercise  civil  authority  and  temporal  power  over  their  people, 
but  use  a  spiritual  rule  over  them,  by  teaching  them,  &c.,  and  ruling  them  by  the 
Word  of  God.  2.  Ministers  must  not  carry  themselves  proudly  and  disdainfully. 
3.  Nor  must  a  minister  rule  them  with  violence  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  18).  (John  Rogers.) 
Not  lords : — Bernard  of  Clairvaux  wrote  to  Pope  Eugene,  "  Peter  could  not  give 
thee  what  he  had  not ;  what  he  had  he  gave  :  the  care  over  the  Church,  not 
dominion."  Ensamples   to  the   floclc — Power    of   example  : — Of    Mr.    Henry 

Townley,  who  died  in  1861,  Dr.  Henry  Allon,  his  pastor,  said  in  his  funeral 
sermon  :  "  I  doubt  whether  a  holier  man  than  Henry  Townley  has  ever  lived.  .  .  . 
I  have  often,  in  his  presence,  felt  humbled  and  awed  at  his  manifest  sanctity  and 
consecration.  I  never  remember  to  have  left  him  without  shame  and  penitence, 
and  prayer  that  God  would  forgive  my  shortcoming,  and  make  me  hke  him." 
When  the  Chief  Shepherd  shall  appear. — The  Chief  Shepherd's  appearance:—!. 
The  style  and  character  here  appropriated  to  our  Divine  Bedeemer.  1. 
"  Shepherd."  (1)  He  has  received  His  Church  as  a  charge  from  the  hand  of  the 
Father.  (2)  He  has  ransomed  the  sheep  with  His  most  precious  blood.  (3)  He 
lives  to  gather  the  wanderers  into  His  fold,  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit  and  the 
instrumentality  of  His  Word.  2.  "  Chief  Shepherd."  (1)  His  infinite  dignity. 
(2)  His  official  supremacy.  (3)  The  pre-eminent  qualities  He  possesses  for  the 
oliice  with  which  He  has  been  invested,  (a)  The  comprehensiveness  of  His  know- 
ledge, (b)  His  almighty  power,  (c)  His  exquisite  tenderness  and  sympathy.  (4) 
To  Him  all  the  subordinate  agents  in  His  kingdom  are  responsible.  II.  This  Chief 
Shepherd  is  about  to  appear.  1.  This  fact  is  most  certain.  2.  The  circum- 
stances of  His  second  coming  will  be  marked  with  peculiar  splendour.  HI.  The 
recompense  which  will  be  awarded  at  that  solemn  hour,  to  those   who  have 

faithfully  fulfilled  the   duties   of  the  office  of  under  shepherds. 1.  the 

beautiful  imagery  employed  by  the  apostle  to  exhibit  this  recompense — "  a  crown 
of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  2.  What  are  the  substantial  truths  couched  under 
this  imagery?  (1)  The  approbation  of  his  Master.  (2)  The  visible  tokens  and 
pledges  of  ministerial  success.  (3)  His  own  personal  exaltation  and  felicity. 
Learn :  1.  The  vast  importance  of  the  Christian  ministry  as  an  ordinance  of  God 
for  the  present  and  everlasting  welfare  of  His  Church.  2.  The  true  honour  which 
is  due,  and  ought  to  be  presented,  to  those  who  have  faithfully  discharged  this 
office  on  earth,  and  especially  when  their  course  has  terminated.  (G.  Clayton.) 
The  Chief  Shepherd  : — I.  The  title  which  is  here  given  to  Christ  as  the  Chief 
Shepherd.  The  very  name  of  "shepherd  "  is  full  of  lustre  and  beauty,  of  conde- 
scension and  grace.  And  whilst  other  names  describe  the  different  parts  of  Christ's 
work,  and  the  various  principles  of  Christ's  character,  this  seems  to  combine  them 
all.  As  Prophet,  He  was  to  teach  His  Church,  to  convey  to  it  the  lessons  of  Divine 
wisdom ;  as  Priest,  He  was  to  make  atonement  for  the  sins  of  His  people  ;  as  King, 
He  was  to  rule  over  them  in  the  gentleness  and  sanctity  of  His  sway ;  but  as  He  is 
the  Chief  Shepherd,  we  have  the  wisdom  and  goodness  which  instructs,  the  grace 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v. 


and  mercy  which  unfolds,  the  power  which  rules,  the  authority  which  legislates,  all 
in  one.    1.  He  is  called  the  Chief  Shepherd.   In  relation,  without  doubt,  to  the  inferior 
and  subordinate  shej)herds.     For  the  universal  Church,  in  all  its  subdivisions,  is 
His  vast  sheepfold,  and  the  ministers  of  religion  are  the  shepherds  in  subordination 
to  Him.     And,  according  to  the  manners  of  the  East,  and  in  ancient  and  early 
times,  there  was  one — the  Chief  Shepherd  whose  own  the  sheep  were.     It  is  in 
reference   to  this,  that   Christ,  in  the   passage   before   us,   is   called   "  the  Chief 
Shepherd."     2.  It  describes,  also,  the  dignity  of  His  person,  and  the  glory  of  His 
perfections.     In  every  respect  He  is  chief — chief  among  the  angels,  having  a  name 
as  much  more  excellent  than  they,  as  His  nature  is  more  excellent  than  theirs.     He 
is  first  among  the  priests :  Adam  was  a  priest,  Abel,  Enoch,  Abraham,  Melchisedec, 
and  Moses  were  priests  ;  and  then  come  the  descendants  of  Ham  in  their  rank  and 
order ;  but  Christ  is  Chief  Priest.     So  He  is  among  the  prophets ;  He  infinitely 
transcended  Moses.  He  is  so  among  the  kings  ;  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords," 
the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  whose  power  and  splendour  overwhelms  them  all. 
And  so  He  is  among  the  shepherds — the  Chief  Shepherd,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  ending.     3.  He  is  Chief  Shepherd  also  in  having  set  a  perfect 
example  of  a  shepherd's  duty  in  watchfulness,  care,  and  love.     What  instructions 
He  delivered  ;  with  what  authority,  dignity,  and  power !     4.  And,  finally,  He  is 
called  Chief  Shepherd  on  account  of  His  exaltation  and  majesty  in  the  heavenly 
world.     He  has  a  name  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee 
should  bow.     II.  The   appearance  which  He  shall   hereafter  maktj;  in  glory  ; 
and  the  word  "  appear  "  denotes  that  He  is  now  hidden.     The  God  of  this  world 
has  blinded  the  eyes  of  many,  that  they  neither  see  nor  believe.     And  as  it  respects 
bodily  vision,  He  is  hidden  also  from  His  own  people  ;  for  we  walk  by  faith  and  not 
by  sight.     1.  But  the  passage  before  us  speaks  of  His  appearance ;  He  is  to  be  made 
manifest.     As  the  heavens  were  opened   at  the   baptism,   and  the   Holy  Ghost 
descended  visibly  in  the  shape  and  appearance  of  a  dove,  so  are  the  heavens  here- 
after to  be  opened,  and  the  Chief  Shepherd  will  appear  and  descend  again.     2.  And 
respecting  the  time  of  this  appearance,  it  is  reserved  in  the  bosom  of  heaven,  as  a 
deep  secret — not  one  of  the  holy  angels  is  permitted  to  know — not  one  of  the  spirits 
of  the  just  made  perfect,  have  any  more  apprehension  of  the  time  of  the  second 
advent  than  you  or  I  have.     3.  Kespecting  the  purpose  of  His  coming.     It  is  not  to 
teach,  to  suffer,  and  to  die ;  this  He  did  once,  and  will  do  it  no  more.   He  wiU  come, 
it  is  said,  without  a  sin-offering  unto  salvation ;  He  will  come  to  accomplish  the 
resurrection  of  all  the  dead.     4.  And  as  to  the  manner  of  the  Advent.     I  take  it 
that  all  which  was  seen  and  heard  at  Sinai,  the  greater  revelation  of  Divine  power 
and  justice,  when  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  was  seen  in  heaven,  and  Jerusalem 
was  overturned,  is  but  a  faint  type  and  foreshadow  of  that  which  shall  then  be. 
Oh,  all  miracles,  all  prodigies  of  Divine  power,  which  have  taken  place  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  to  this  day,  will  be  as  nothing  amidst  all  the  miracles  which 
shall  then  be  accomplished.     It  will  be  a  day  of  God  emphatically,  in  which  it  will 
be  seen  what  God  can  do.    5.  And  now  let  those  of  us  who  are  in  the  ministry 
learn  what  we  are  to  look  for.     Contempt  there  may  be  from  men,  but  there  will  be 
honour  of  God.     (/.  Straiten.)        Ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory. — The  faithful 
minister  : — I.   I   shall  describe  the  nature,  qualifications,  and  duties  of  the 
MINISTERIAL  OFFICE  AS  STATED  IN  THE  CONTEXT.     1.  I  shall  cousidcr  the  duties  which 
this  figurative  description  of  the  pastoral  office  implies.     (1)  It  is  incumbent  on  a 
Christian  shepherd  to  feed  the  flock.     And  what  is  the  provision  with  which  he  is 
to  feed  them  ?     Food  for  the  mind  and  heart,  suited  to  their  condition  as  rational 
beings,  as  fallen  sinners,  and  as  immortal  creatures,  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.    (2) 
Inspection  of  the  state  of  the  flock  is  another  duty  implied  in  this  figure.   We  should 
know  the  circumstances  of  our  people,  the  sorrows  which  oppress,  the  cares  which 
perplex,  the  sins  which  beset  them,  and  the  difficulties  which  embarrass  them,  in 
order  that  we  may  give  to  each  "  a  portion  of  meat  in  due  season."     (3)  Protection 
of  his  flock  is  also  the  duty  of  a  shepherd.     Is  not  Satan  perpetually  going  about  as 
a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour  ?    Is  not  the  spirit  of  the  world  ever 
watching  for  an  opportunity  to  devastate  the  interests  of  piety  in  our  churches  ? 
Are  there  not  heresies  ever  lurking  about  the  pastures  of  truth  ?     (4)  Affectionate 
tenderness  is  generally  associated  with  the  character  of  a  shepherd.     (5)  A  faithful 
minister  will  enforce  all  his  instructions  by  his  example.     2.  The  apostle  states  in  a 
negative  form  the  manner  in  which  the  duties  of  the  pastoral  office  are  to  be  entered 
upon  and  discharged.     (1)  A  minister  is  not  to  take  upon  him  the  oversight  of  a 
flock  under  constraint,  but  with  a  willing  mind.     (2)  We  are  forbidden  to  take  the 


CHAP,  v.]  J.  PETER.  391 

oversight  of  the  flock  for  the  sake  of  filthy  lucre.     (3)  A  Christian  minister  is  not  to 
lord  it  over  God's  heritage.     He  has  no  dominion  over  the  conscience  ;  his  power  in 
the  church  is  ministerial,  not  legislatorial.     II.  I  shaU  consider  his  suboedination 
AXD  KESPONsiBiLiTT  TO  Christ.     Thcse  are  implied  in  the  expression,  "  the  Chief 
Shepherd."     It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  refers  to  our  Divine  Lord.     This  epithet 
implies — 1.  His  superiority  to  all  others.    They  are  mere  men  of  the  same  nature  as 
their  flocks  ;  He  in  His  mysterious  and  complex  person  unites  the  uncreated  glories  of 
the  Godhead  with  the  milder  beauties  of  the  perfect  man.   They  (in  a  good  sense  of 
the  term)  are  hired  pastors  ;  He  is  the  great  Proprietor  of  the  sheep.    They  partake 
of  the  infirmities  of  the  people  ;  He  is  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled.     They  are  en- 
compassed with  ignorance,  and  with  the  best  intentions  often  err  in  the  direction 
of  the  church.    Unerring  wisdom  characterises  all  His  dispensations.    They  possess 
affection  for  their  flock,  but  the  warmest  bosom  that  ever  glowed  with  ministerial 
love  is  as  the  frigid  zone  itself  compared  with  the  love  of  His  heart.     They  are 
weak,  and  are  often  ready  to  sink  under  the  multiplied  cares  of  office  ;  but  though 
the  government  is  upon  His  shoulder.  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary.     They  are 
mortal,  and  continue  not  by  reason  of  death  ;  He  is  the  "  blessed  and  only  Potentate, 
who  only  hath  immortality,"  and  reigns,  as  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church, 
not  "  by  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  by  the  power  of  an  endless  life." 
2.  This  epithet  implies  the  authority  of  Christ.     He,  in  this  respect,  is  the  Chief 
Shepherd.     It  is  exclusively  His  right  to  rule  in  the  Church,  to   regulate  all  its 
concerns  and   all  its   officers.     HI.  Turn  we  now  to  contemplate  the  faithful 
minister's  glorious  reward.      1.  The  reward  will  be  bestowed  when   the  Chief 
Shepherd  shall  appear.     2.  But  I  must  consider  of  what  the  reward  is  to  consist. 
"  He  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."     (1)  The  figure  implies 
honourable  distinction.    The  crown  was  an  emblem  of  honour.    The  faithful  pastor 
will  no  doubt  be  singled  out  amidst  the  solemnities  of  the  last  day,  and  occupy  a 
station  where  every  eye  will  behold  him.     He  will  receive  a  public  testimony  of 
approbation  from  the  Chief  Shepherd.     (2)  Perfect  feUcity  is  evidently  implied  in 
this  figurative  description  of  a  minister's  reward.     The  crown  of  victory  was  worn 
on  days  of  public  rejoicing,  and  he  who  wore  it  was  considered  the  happiest  of  the 
festive  throng,  and  the  centre  of  the  universal  joy.   He  received  the  congratulations 
of  the  admiring  multitude  as  having  reached  the  summit  of  human  happiness. 
The  apostle,  therefore,  intended  to  include  the  idea  of  perfect  happiness  in  his 
beautiful  illusion.     The  holy  pastor  shall  partake,  in  common  with  his  people,  of 
aU  those  sublime  f eUcities  which  the  Father  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him. 
(3)  Eternal  duration  is   ascribed   by  the   apostle  to   the  honour  and  happiness 
promised  in  the  text.     (J.  A.  James.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Likewise,  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves. — Counsels  to  the  younger  ;— 
I.  Submission.  1.  The  younger  are  to  submit  to  the  elders.  Are  you  young  in 
years,  or  in  the  experience  of  the  Christian  life  ?  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceit, 
but  be  willing  to  receive  the  advice  of  your  superiors.  2.  All  are  to  be  subject  one 
to  another.  II.  Humility.  "  And  be  clothed,"  or  rather,  "  clothe  yourselves  with 
humility."  1.  Humility  is  a  garment  to  be  put  on.  And  what  garment  is  more 
beautiful  than  humility?  2.  A  reason  is  assigned.  (1)  "  God  resisteth  the  proud." 
(2)  But  to  the  humble — the  lowly-minded — God  gives  grace,  or  favour,  pouring  it 
down  upon  them  in  richest  plenty.  3.  Humble  yourselves,  therefore,  says  the 
apostle,  and  this  shall  be  the  result :  "  He  will  exalt  you  in  due  time."  IH.  Trust 
IN  God  ;  casting  all  your  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  you.  Humility  is  closely 
allied  with  confidence.  1.  Let  us  look  at  the  import  of  this  exhortation.  It  is  to 
trust  our  heavenly  Father  with  ourselves  and  all  our  concerns.  2.  And  here  is  our 
warrant  for  the  great  privilege  :  "  He  careth  for  you."  (Thornley  Sinith.)  AU  of 
you  be  subject  one  to  another. — Mutual  respect : — There  is  a  general  complaint  in 
our  day  that  reverence  is  rapidly  becoming  extinct.  The  sentiment  of  respect  is 
gone  ;  each  one  stands  upon  his  own  powers  and  his  own  right.  I  suppose  all  of 
us,  in  a  certain  degree,  recognise  the  truth  of  this  charge  against  our  own  time. 
We  may  ask  ourselves  whether  this  feeling  of  personal  independence  is  not  in  itself 
a  good  which  may  make  amends  for  many  losses  that  accompany  the  acquisition  of 
it.  But  any  consolation  which  we  might  derive  from  this  last  reflection  is  checked 
by  another.  Can  we  claim  this  sentiment  of  personal  independence  as  at  all 
characteristic  of  ourselves  ?  Is  it  not  fading  along  with  the  one  which  appears  to 
contend  with  it  ?  Is  there  not  less  of  self-reliance  than  there  was  ?  I.  But  a 
sentence  like  this,  if  we  felt  it  to  be  indeed  a  command,  "  All  of  you  be  subject  one 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

to  another," — would  not  that  be  something  more  than  these  speculations  about  the 
decline  of  reverence  in  an  age  or  a  country  ?  That  speaks  to  me.  It  tells  me  of  a 
temper  which  ought  to  exist  in  society,  which  would  preserve  it ;  but  of  a  temper 
which  is  first  of  all  to  be  cultivated  in  myself — which  cannot  by  possibility  be 
diffused  through  a  mass,  except  as  it  is  formed  in  the  heart  of  a  man.  We  may 
look  at  once  to  the  root  of  the  matter  and  see  whether  our  respect  is  merely  the 
effect  of  the  circumstances  and  accidents  in  which  we  live  ;  whether  it  depends  on 
some  external  conventional  witness  of  propriety ;  whether  it  has  been  merely  taught 
us  by  the  precept  of  men ;  or  whether  it  proceeds  from  an  under  source,  and  is  kept 
alive  by  springs  within,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  Himself  is  renewing  continually. 
The  Bible  and  Christianity  are  continually  forcing  this  thought  upon  us,  that 
nothing  can  stand  which  has  not  a  foundation ;  that  if  we  wish  any  social  edifice 
to  bear  the  winds  and  rain,  we  must  dig  deep  and  build  it  upon  a  rock ;  that  the 
passion  of  the  heart  for  external  things  and  forms,  though  it  looks  strong,  is  not  a 
safe  one — not  one  upon  which  we  can  depend.  To  this  point  then  the  apostle  brings 
us.  He  recognises  the  relation  of  younger  to  elder  as  a  very  deep  relation,  involving 
duties,  calling  for  subjection.  With  this  natural  relation  he  connects  others  equally 
real,  though  not  equally  acknowledged.  But  he  has  no  hope  that  his  admonitions 
will  be  heeded  unless  the  principle  which  lies  beneath  them  is  apprehended.  "  All 
of  you  be  subject  one  to  another."  This  reverence  is  not  one  grounded  ultimately 
upon  differences  of  position  or  differences  of  age.  Unless  each  man  cherishes  it 
toward  every  other  man ;  unless  he  feels  that  there  is  a  grandeur  and  awf ulness  in 
the  fellow-creature  who  is  not  distinguished  from  him  by  any  external  signs  of 
superiority  at  all,  who  has  all  the  external  signs  of  inferiority — unless  he  feels  that 
there  is  (the  word  is  a  strong  one,  but  it  is  St.  Peter's  and  we  cannot  change  it)  a 
subjection  due  to  every  such  man,  that  a  positive  deference  is  to  be  paid  him — he 
will  not  keep  alive  the  other  kind  of  respect,  it  will  assuredly  perish.  The  old 
oriental  notion  that  royalty  is  mystei'ious,  and  that  when  it  casts  away  mystery  it 
ceases  to  obtain  respect,  is  unquestionably  grounded  on  a  great  truth.  St.  Peter 
does  not  deny  the  mystery,  but  he  finds  this  mystery  in  the  being  of  man  himself  ; 
every  one  he  meets  is  the  shrine  of  it ;  every  beggar  carries  in  him  that  which  an 
archangel  cannot  look  into,  which  can  be  described  in  no  words,  measured  by  no 
human  standards.  Try  to  think  of  that  man  as  having  a  whole  world  within  him, 
unknown  to  you,  unknown  to  him,  which  is  yet  a  more  wonderful  world  than  this 
which  his  eyes  and  yours  look  upon  ;  nearer  to  the  centre  from  which  this  external 
one  receives  its  light  and  heat.  Try  to  think  so  !  But  will  the  trial  succeed  ?  Is 
there  any  chance  of  forcing  ourselves  into  so  strange  a  state  of  feeling  ?  Is  not 
this  sympathy  with  people  utterly  different  from  ourselves  a  special  gift  to  a  few 
individuals,  commonly  women  rather  than  men  ?  And  is  it  not  moi'e  properly 
called  pity  than  reverence?  II.  St.  Peter  meets  these  questions  in  the  second 
part  of  the  text :  "  Be  clothed  with  humility."  St.  Peter  knew — no  one  better^ 
that  it  is  not  in  station  nor  in  mere  example  to  make  a  man  humble.  He  was  a 
fisherman,  yet  he  was  proud.  He  conversed  with  our  Lord  for  three  years.  He 
was  low,  but  he  aspired  to  be  high.  He  might  be  spurned  by  the  people  of  Juda;a 
as  a  Galilean,  or  by  the  Romans  as  a  Jew ;  but  perhaps  he  should  set  his  foot  upon 
the  necks  of  both ;  he  should  have  some  goodly  place  in  his  Master's  kingdom,  if 
not  the  highest  place  of  all.  The  self-confidence  was  brought  to  the  test  and  fell. 
What  darkness  closed  in  upon  him  then  and  shut  out  all  the  past  and  the  future ! 
What  light  was  really  coming  to  him  through  that  darkness — a  light  that  illu- 
minated past,  present,  and  future !  Such  phrases  as  these,  then,  which  occur  so 
often  in  the  New  Testament,  "  Put  on  Christ,"  "  Having  the  mind  of  Christ,"  "  Be 
clothed  with  humility,"  which  are  often  cast  aside  as  mere  figures  of  speech, 
oriental  modes  of  thought,  were  the  most  accurate,  the  most  exactly  corresponding 
to  his  inward  experience,  which  the  apostle  could  use.  III.  It  introduces  and 
explains  the  third  clause  of  the  text,  "  For  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth 
grace  to  the  humble."  "How  shall  I  be  rid  of  this  pride,  it  is  so  natural,  so 
ingrained  ?  "  This  must  have  been  St.  Peter's  question  very  often  ;  it  must  be  ours. 
At  last  he  found  the  answer.  It  was  a  terrible  one.  It  was  an  everlasting  one. 
When  he  was  proud  he  was  not  sinning  against  a  rule,  a  precept ;  he  was  resisting 
God.  Every  act  of  pride  was  nothing  more  than  doing  battle  against  Him  ;  refusing 
to  be  ruled  and  moved  by  Him.  And  all  humility  meant  nothing  else  but  yielding 
to  His  government — but  permitting  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  hold  that  spirit  which  He 
had  redeemed,  and  claimed  for  His  own.  And  when  a  man  is  once  bowed  to  the 
conviction  that  he  is  not  meant  to  be  what  his  Master  and  King  refused  to  be,  that 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  393 

it  is  not  condescension  in  him  to  be  on  a  level  with  those  to  whom  the  Prince  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth  levelled  Himself,  "  God  giveth  grace."  All  the  powers  of  the 
universe  are  then  conspiring  with  him,  not  pledged  to  crush  his  wild  Titanic 
ambition.  IV.  St.  Peter  then  could  transfer  his  own  hardly-won  experience  to  the 
Church,  and  could  say  in  his  Catholic  Epistle  to  the  dispersed  of  that  time,  to  the 
dispersed  through  aU  time,  "  All  of  you  be  subject  one  to  another."  So  he  asserted 
the  true  condition  of  a  society  while  he  took  down  the  conceit  of  its  separate 
members ;  so  he  exalted  each  of  these  members  in  the  very  act  of  depressing  him. 
V.  Generally  this  rule  of  being  subject  one  to  another,  when  applied  to  a  society, 
implies  that  we  should  respect  the  opinions,  habits,  individual  peculiarities,  heredi- 
tary prepossessions  of  every  man  with  whom  we  have  to  do ;  that  we  should  take 
it  for  granted  he  has  something  which  we  need  ;  that  we  should  fear  to  rob  him  of 
anything  which  God  has  given  him.  This  respect  for  him  does  not  come  from  our 
caring  more  for  him  than  for  truth.  It  is  part  of  our  homage  to  truth.  There  is 
a  danger  of  making  him  less  true,  of  alienating  him  from  truth,  through  our 
desire  to  attach  him  to  ourselves.  And  therefore  that  same  subjection  one  to 
another  must  make  us  resolute  to  maintain  all  truth  so  far  as  we  have  grasped  it ; 
vehement  in  denouncing  all  the  habits  of  mind  which,  we  know  from  ourselves,  .ire 
unfavourable  to  the  pursuit  of  truth,  and  undermine  the  love  of  it.  And  so  this 
submission  to  man,  which  is  in  very  deed  submission  to  God,  will  preserve  us  from 
all  servility ;  from  that  kind  of  deference  to  the  judgment  of  individuals  or  of 
multitudes  which  is  incompatible  with  genuine  manliness,  because  it  is  incom- 
patible with  genuine  reverence.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  Seniors  should  not  be 
over-exacting : — There  are  occasions  when  it  is  very  helpful  to  our  composure 
and  equanimity  to  look  at  our  debtor  account,  and  not  merely  at  the  credit 
side.  We  may  have  a  real  claim  to  another's  deference,  and  still  may  be  in 
many  respects  inferior  to  him.  It  is  right  that  the  younger  should  defer  to 
and  honour  the  elder;  but  it  is  equally  right  that  the  elder  should  not  insist 
too  much  upon  bare  seniority.  For  others  may  be  in  their  best  bloom  and 
vigour,  while  we  are  already  in  the  decline  of  both.  And  let  us  not  forget 
that  with  all  our  eldership  we  are  but  of  yesterday.  {J.  A.  Bengel.)  Be 
clothed  with  humility. — Humility  illustrated  and  enforced  : — I.  Hxjmilitt  illus- 
trated. 1.  When  St.  Austin  was  asked  what  was  the  first  grace  of  a  Christian,  he 
answered,  humility :  what  the  second,  humility :  what  the  third,  humility.  This 
grace  is  more  fundamental  to  the  nature  of  all  true  religion  than  any  other  grace 
whatever.  The  foundation  of  repentance  is  laid  in  an  abasing  sense  of  our  guilt. 
The  reason  why  men  are  not  humble  is,  that  they  do  not  see  the  greatness  of  God. 
It  is  the  effect  of  all  knowledge  to  humble  us,  by  producing  a  sense  of  our  distance 
from  the  object  which  we  contemplate :  the  farther  we  advance  in  knowledge,  the 
more  this  distance  widens  on  our  view  :  hence  where  an  Infinite  Being,  God,  is  the 
object  of  contemplation,  there  must  be  infinite  scope  for  humility  in  His  wor- 
shippers. The  gospel  is  peculiarly  adapted  to  produce  this  feeling :  this  is  its  very 
end  and  effect :  "  no  flesh  shall  glory  in  His  presence  ;  the  Lord  alone  shall  be 
exalted  in  that  day."  This  effect  arises  from  the  very  constitution  of  the  gospel ;  as 
it  is  a  revelation  of  the  free  grace  of  God  to  sinners,  without  any  respect  to  moral  or 
natural  differences  of  character.  II.  The  motiv'e  by  which  such  a  temper  is 
RECOMMENDED.  1.  "  God  rcsistcth  the  proud."  The  expression  is  very  emphatic ; 
He  sets  Himself  in  battle  array  against  him ;  marks  him  as  an  object  of  pecuhar 
indignation.  It  is  not  so  said  of  any  other  temper.  When  the  heart  is  filled  by 
pride,  nothing  but  spiritual  barrenness  and  hardness  can  ensue.  In  a  word,  the 
proud  are  equally  disqualified  for  the  duties  of  Christianity  here,  and  for  the  bless- 
ings of  glory  hereafter.  2.  "  But,"  as  it  is  added,  "  He  giveth  grace  to  the  humble." 
The  same  words  are  used  by  the  apostle  James,  with  the  additional  expression,  "  He 
giveth  more  grace."  The  humble  feel  their  poverty,  and  pray  for  grace ;  and  their 
prayers  are  heard.  III.  Let  us,  then,  seek  and  cherish  this  grace,  the  only 
temper  that  can  make  us  shine  before  God,  the  only  one  that  can  render  us  blessings 
to  each  other.  The  apostle  exhorts  us  to  "  be  clothed  with  humility."  Men  always 
use  and  wear  their  clothing,  and  we  are  to  be  clothed  with  this  grace  as  a  permanent 
vesture.  It  should  pervade  every  part  of  our  character ;  all  the  faculties  of  the 
mind  :  it  should  regulate  the  understanding,  the  will,  and  the  affections.  And  then 
all  other  graces  will  shine  the  brighter  through  the  veil  of  humility :  it  wiU  shed  a, 
cheering  influence  on  all.  {R.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  loftiness  of  humility  : — This  is 
St.  Peter's  command.  Are  we  really  inclined  to  obey  it  ?  For,  if  we  are,  there  is 
nothing  more  easy.     Whosoever  wishes  to  get  rid  of  pride  may  do  so.     Whosoever 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

^dshes  to  be  humble  need  not  go  far  to  humble  himself.    But  how  ?     Simply  by 
being  honest  with  himself,  and  looking  at  himself  as  he  is.     The  world  and  human 
nature  look  up  to  the  proud  successful  man.     One  is  apt  to  say,  "Happy  is  the  man 
who  has  plenty  to  be  proud  of.     Happy  is  the  man  who  can  divide  the  spoil  of  this 
world  with  the  successful  of  this  world.     Happy  is  the  man  who  can  look  down  on 
his  fellow-men,  and  stand  over  them,  and  manage  them,  and  make  use  of  them,  and 
get  his  profit  out  of  them."     But  that  is  a  mistake.     That  is  the  high-mindedness 
which  goes  before  a  fall,  which  comes  not  from  above,  but  is  always  earthly,  often 
sensual,  and  sometimes  devilish.     The  true  and  safe  high-mindedness,  which  comes 
from  above,  is  none  other  than  humility.     Better  to  think  of  those  who  are  nobler 
than   ourselves,  even  though  by  so  doing  we  are  ashamed  of   ourselves  all  day 
long.     What  loftier  thoughts  can  man  have?    What  higher  and  purer  air  can 
a  man's  soul  breathe?      The  truly  high-minded  man   is   not    the  proud  man, 
who  tries  to  get  a  little  pitiful   satisfaction  from  finding  his  brother  men,  as  he 
chooses  to  fancy,  a  little  weaker,  a  little  more  ignorant,  a  Uttle  more  foolish,  than 
his  own  weak,  ignorant,  foolish,  and  perhaps  ridiculous,  self.     Not  he ;   but  the 
man  who  is  always  looking  upwards  to  goodness,  to  good  men,  and  to  the  all-good 
God  ;  filling  his  soul  with  the  sight  of  an  excellence  to  which  he  thinks  he  can  never 
attain  ;  and  saying,  with  David,  "  All  my  delight  is  in  the  saints  that  dwell  in  the 
earth,  and  in  those  who  excel  in  virtue."     And  why  does  God  resist  and  set  Himself 
against  the  proud  ?     To  turn  him  out  of  his  evil  way,  of  course,  if  by  any  means  he 
may  be  converted  and  live.     And  how  does  God  give  grace  to  the  humble?    Listen 
to  Plutarch,  a  heathen  ;  a  good  and  a  wise  man,  though ;  and  one  who  was  not  far 
from  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  he  would  not  have  written  such  words  as  these :  "  It 
is  our  duty,"  he  says,  "  to  turn  our  minds  to  the  best  of  everything ;  so  as  not 
merely  to  enjoy  what  we  read,  but  to  be  improved  by  it.     And  we  shall  do  that  by 
reading  the  histories  of  good  and  great  men,  which  will,  in  our  minds,  produce  an 
emulation  and  eagerness  which  may  stir  us  up  to  imitation.     We  may  be  pleased 
-with  the  work  of  a  man's  hands,  and  yet  set  little  store  by  the  workman.   Perfumes 
and  fine  colours  we  may  like  well  enough :  but  that  will  not  make  us  wish  to  be 
perfumers,  or  painters :  but  goodness,  which  is  the  work,  not  of  a  man's  hands,  but 
of  his  soul,  makes  us  not  only  admire  what  is  done,  but  long  to  do  the  like.    And 
therefore,"  he  says, "  he  thought  it  good  to  write  the  lives  of  famous  and  good  men, 
and  to  set  their  examples  before  his  countrymen.     And  having  begun  to  do  this,"  he 
says  in  another  place,  "  for  the  sake  of  others,  he  found  himself  going  on,  and 
liking  his  labour,  for  his  own  sake  ;  for  the  virtues  of  those  great  men  served  him 
as  a  looking-glass,  in  which  he  might  see  how,  more  or  less,  to  order  and  adorn  his 
own  life.     Indeed,  it  could  be  compared,"  he  says,  "to  nothing  less  than  living  with 
the  great  souls  who  were  dead  and  gone,  and  choosing  out  of  their  actions  all  that 
was  noblest  and  worthiest  to  know.     What  greater  pleasure  could  there  be  than 
that,"  he  asks,  "or  what  better  means  to  improve  his  soul?     By  filling  his  mind 
with  pictures  of  the  best  and  worthiest  characters,  he  was  able  to  free  himself  from 
any  low,  malicious,  mean  thoughts,  which  he  might  catch  from  bad  company.     If 
he  was  forced  at  times  to  mix  with  base  men,  he  could  wash  out  the  stains  of  their 
bad  thoughts  and  words,  by  training  himself  in  a  calm  and  happy  temper  to  view 
those  noble  examples."     So  says  the  wise  heathen.     Was  not  he  happier,  wiser, 
better,  a  thousand  times,  thus  keeping  himself  humble  by  looking  upwards,  than  if 
he  had  been  feeding  his  petty  pride  by  looking  down,  and  saying,  "  God,  I  thank 
Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are  "?   If  you  wish,  then,  to  be  truly  high-minded, 
by  being  truly  humble,  read  of,  and  think  of,  better  men,  wiser  men,  braver  men, 
more  useful  men  than  you  are.     Above  all,  if  you  be  Christians,  think  of  Christ 
Himself.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)         On  humility  :— I.  I  shall  mention  some  of  the 
CASES  IN  which  HUMILITY  OF  SOUL  WILL  SHOW  ITSELF.      1.  The  natural  powers  of 
the  human  mind  will  be  spoken  of  with  modesty.     2.  When  he  thinks  of  his  graces 
and   attainments,   the   Christian   is  clothed  with  humility.      3.  Another  genuine 
expression  of  humility  is  a  ready  acknowledgment  of  our  constant  dependence.     II. 
I  shall  recommend  the  PRACTICE  OF  HUMILITY.     1.  That  "  he  who  humbleth  him- 
self shall  be  exalted,"   holds  good  with  regard  to  our  connections  amongst  our 
fellow-men.     2.  The  advantages  of  this  grace  are  not  confined  to  temporal  conse- 
quences ;  they  extend  to  a  future  and  eternal  state.     3.  The  inhabitants  of  heaven 
are  celebrated  for  this  grace ;  and  any  who  are  unfurnished  with  it  cannot  be  members 
of  their  society.  4.  To  recommend  the  cultivation  and  practice  of  this  grace,  remember 
our  blessed  Lord  exemplified  it  in  the  whole  of  His  conduct.    III.  I  shall  direct  to 
AN  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THIS  DISCOURSE.      1.  Though  the  language  of  the  text  speaka 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  395 

of  humility  as  something  that  is  external,  "Be  clothed  with  humility,"  nevertheless, 
if  the  heart  is  not  humhled,  all  is  empty  show.  2.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  this 
grace  is  needful  in  every  rank  and  condition  of  hfe.  3.  Consider  the  exhortation, 
"  Be  clothed  with  humility,"  as  given  by  the  apostle  Peter;  and  it  will  direct  us  to  a 
very  particular  improvement.  "  Be  clothed  with  humility."  This  grace  is  not  only 
a  robe  of  ornament,  but  a  shield  of  defence.  When  it  adorns  the  heart  and  life,  it 
defends  the  head  also  in  the  day  of  battle.  (Robert  Foote.)  Humility  : — I.  The 
NATXTEE  AND  THE  EFFECTS  OF  HUMILITY.  1.  Humility,  as  it  relates  to  our  own 
private  thoughts  and  judgment,  requires  that  we  should  entertain  no  better  an 
opinion  of  ourselves  than  we  deserve.  To  judge  too  severely  of  ourselves,  and  to 
fancy  we  are  guilty  of  faults  from  which  we  are  free,  cannot  be  humility,  because 
there  can  be  no  virtue  in  mistake  and  ignorance.  Only  as  we  have  all  a  propensity 
to  extenuate  our  defects,  and  to  overrate  our  good  deeds,  it  is  safest  to  correct  this 
bent  by  forcing  the  mind  somewhat  towards  the  contrary  way,  and  frequently  to 
review  our  faOings,  and  the  many  causes  which  we  have  of  rejecting  all  conceited 
thoughts.  The  imperfections  common  to  human  nature  are  these  :  Mortality ;  a 
stronger  propensity  to  evil  than  to  good ;  an  understanding  hable  to  be  frequently 
deceived,  and  a  knowledge  which  at  the  best  is  much  confined.  The  infirmities 
peculiar  to  ourselves  are  those  defects  either  in  goodness,  or  in  knowledge,  or  in 
wisdom,  by  which  we  are  inferior  to  other  persons.  To  be  sensible  of  these  faults, 
is  humility  as  it  relates  to  ourselves  :  to  overlook  them  is  pride.  2.  True  humility, 
as  it  influences  our  behaviour  towards  our  Maker,  produces  a  religious  awe,  and 
banishes  presumption  and  carelessness  and  vainglory.  3.  Between  an  unmanly 
contempt  and  disregard  of  ourselves,  with  an  abject  fear  and  bUnd  reverence  of 
others,  which  is  one  extreme,  and  a  conceited,  overbearing  insolence,  which  is  the 
other  extreme,  true  humility  proceeds,  always  uniform  and  decent.  The  humble 
person  never  assumes  what  belongs  not  to  him;  he  desires  to  possess  no  more 
power,  and  to  receive  no  more  respect  from  others  than  is  suitable  to  his  own 
character  and  condition,  and  appointed  by  the  customs  of  society.  He  is  not  a  rigid 
exacter  of  the  things  to  which  he  has  an  undoubted  right ;  he  can  overlook  many 
faults ;  he  is  not  greatly  provoked  at  those  slights  which  put  vain  persons  out  of  all 
patience.  II.  The  motives  to  the  practice  of  it.  1.  Humihty  is  a  virtue  so  excel- 
lent that  the  Scriptures  have  in  some  sort  ascribed  it  even  to  God  Himself.  Humility 
consists  principally  in  a  due  sense  of  our  defects,  our  transgressions,  our  wants,  and 
the  obUgations  which  we  have  received.  Therefore  such  humility  cannot  be  in  God, 
who  possesses  all  perfections.  But  there  is  a  part  of  humility,  as  it  relates  to  our 
behaviour  towards  men,  called  condescension  ;  and  this  is  sometimes  represented  in 
Scripture  as  a  disposition  not  unworthy  of  the  Divine  nature.  2.  The  example  of 
our  Saviour  is  an  example  of  every  virtue,  particularly  of  humility.  3.  In  the 
behaviour  of  the  angels,  as  it  is  revealed  to  us  in  the,  Scriptures,  we  find  that  part 
of  humility  called  condescension,  or  a  cheerful  submission  to  any  ofiices  by  which 
the  good  of  others  may  be  promoted.  Hence  we  learn  to  think  it  no  disgrace  to  be, 
as  our  Lord  says  He  was,  the  servant  of  all.  In  truth,  we  cannot  be  more  credit- 
ably employed.  4.  It  is  affirmed  in  many  places  of  Scripture,  that  humility  secures 
to  us  the  favour  of  God,  and  will  bring  down  His  blessing  upon  ourselves  and  our 
undertakings.  5.  Humility  usually  gains  the  esteem  and  love  of  men,  and  conse- 
quently the  conveniences,  at  least,  the  necessaries  of  life.  Since  all  love  themselves, 
they  wLQ  probably  favour  those  who  never  provoke,  insult,  deride,  or  injure  them, 
who  show  them  civility,  and  do  them  good  offices.  The  humble  person,  therefore, 
takes  the  surest  way  to  recommend  himself  to  those  with  whom  he  is  joined  in 
society,  to  increase  the  number  of  his  well-wishers  and  friends,  and  to  escape  or 
defeat  the  assaults  of  detraction,  envy,  and  malice.  6.  The  most  certain  present 
recompense  of  humility  is  that  which  arises  from  its  own  nature,  and  with  which  it 
repays  the  mind  that  entertains  it ;  and  a  very  valuable  recompense  it  would  be, 
though  it  were  the  only  one  allotted  to  this  virtue.  A  humble  person  neither  hates 
nor  envies  any  one  ;  therefore  he  is  free  from  those  very  turbulent  vices  which  are 
always  a  punishment  in  themselves.  He  is  not  discomposed  by  the  slights  or  cen- 
sures of  others.  If  he  has  undesignedly  given  some  occasion  for  them,  he  amends 
the  fault ;  if  he  deserves  them  not,  he  regards  them  as  little.  He  is  contented  with 
his  condition,  if  it  be  tolerable ;  and,  therefore,  he  finds  satisfaction  in  all  that  is 
good,  and  overlooks,  and  in  some  measure  escapes,  aU  that  is  inconvenient  in  it. 
He  has  a  due  sense  of  his  unworthiness  and  defects  ;  by  which  he  is  taught  to  bear 
calamities  with  patience  and  submission,  and  thereby  to  soften  their  harsh  nature, 
and  to  allay  their  violence.    7.  Lastly :  from  the  account  which  we  have  given 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  humility,  we  may  draw  this  conchision,  that  it  is  not,  as  the  haughty  are 
inchned  to  imagine,  an  unmanly  and  sordid  disposition.  It  is  indeed  a  virtue  so 
remote  from  meanness  of  spirit,  that  it  is  no  bad  sign  of  a  great  and  exalted  mind. 
On  the  contrary,  if  we  would  know  what  meanness  of  spirit  is,  and  how  it  acts,  let 
us  look  for  it  amongst  the  proud  and  insolent,  and  we  shall  not  lose  our  labour.  {J. 
Jortin,  D.D.)  Christian  humility  : — I.  Wherein  consists  the  grace  of  Chris- 
tian HUMILITY.  1.  Humility  is  directly  opposed  to  pride.  As  pride  consists  in 
having  high  thoughts  of  oneself,  so  humility  consists  in  having  low  apprehensions 
of  ourselves.  Pride  is  the  child  of  ignorance,  humility  the  offspring  of  knowledge. 
They  are  not  opposite  errors,  between  which  truth  and  goodness  lie,  but  the  former 
is  a  vice,  the  latter  is  a  virtue  ;  the  one  is  the  feeling  generated  by  the  belief  of  a  lie, 
the  other  is  the  temper  of  mind  produced  by  the  reception  of  the  truth.  Humility 
may  be  considered  in  a  twofold  point  of  view,  as  it  respects  God  and  as  it  respects 
our  fellow-creatures,  but  in  these  different  aspects  it  is  not  two  virtues,  but  the  same 
correct  estimate  of  our  character  and  condition  influencing  our  conduct  towards  God 
and  man.  Humility  consists  in  a  due  sense  of  our  dependence.  Pride  can  only 
exist  in  a  fancied  state  of  independence ;  a  feeling  of  obligation  wounds ;  that  of 
constant  dependence  mortifies  pride.  Yet  man  is  entirely  a  dependent  being.  We 
derive  everything  from  God :  "  In  Him  we  live  and  move,  and  have  our  being." 
If  we  are  humble,  it  will  be  a  pleasing  thought  to  us,  that  God  has  unlimited  control 
over  us,  that  we  owe  everything  to  Him,  and  that  He  has  an  indisputable  right  to 
order  our  affairs  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.  In  the  discharge  of 
duty,  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  in  circumstances  of  perplexity,  or  in  all  our  plans 
for  the  future,  we  shall  not  lean  to  our  own  understanding,  nor  rely  upon  our  own 
strength,  but  rather  trust  in  the  Lord  with  our  whole  hearts,  we  shall  acknowledge 
Him  in  all  our  ways,  and  look  up  to  Him  for  the  direction  of  our  steps.  But  we  are 
not  only  dependent  on  God,  we  are  so  in  a  subordinate  sense  on  our  fellow-creatures. 
While  society  is  formed  of  different  ranks  and  orders,  there  is  an  intimate  union 
between  them,  and  a  constant  dependence  of  the  parts  on  each  other.  The  higher 
cannot  do  without  the  lower  ranks,  and  the  latter  are  almost  equally  dependent  on 
the  former.  2.  Humility  consists  of  a  proper  estimate  of  our  relative  importance. 
As  it  respects  God  we  are  as  nothing  before  Him  ;  He  is  the  high  and  lofty  One  who 
inhabiteth  eternity ;  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  He  is  God  ;  boundless  in  might, 
infinite  in  all  His  perfections.  Humility  towards  men  will  consist  very  much  in  a 
due  estimate  of  our  relative  importance,  not  only  to  each  other,  but  in  the  view  of 
the  Divine  Being.  Whatever  nominal  distinctions  are  recognised  in  the  world, 
humility  will  feel  that  God  has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  that  dwell  upon  the 
earth.  What  are  the  mole-hills  of  distinction,  the  little  elevations  of  human  society, 
when  we  contemplate  it  in  the  mass  ?  or  what  are  they  in  the  estimation  of  God, 
who  is  no  respecter  of  persons  ?  Humility  will  not  put  an  extravagant  value  on  the 
distinctions  of  earth ;  it  will  be  kind  and  courteous  to  all,  and  in  all  the  suffering 
and  misery  it  may  be  called  to  contemplate  in  others,  it  will  feel  the  irresistible  force 
of  the  appeal.  Am  I  not  a  man  and  a  brother?  It  will  be  ready  to  render  to  all 
their  due,  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due,  fear  to  whom  fear,  honour  to  whom 
honour.  3.  Humility  will  also  consist  in  a  low  estimate  of  our  knowledge.  "  Be 
not  wise,"  says  the  apostle,  "  in  your  own  conceit."  In  all  the  distinctions  of 
society  there  are  none  in  which  vanity  and  self-conceit  are  so  cherished  as  in  that 
of  human  literature.  Now  humility  will  moderate  our  estimate  of  what  we  know  ; 
it  will  teach  us  that  literary  distinction  arises  far  more  from  adventitious  circum- 
stances, over  which  we  have  no  control,  than  from  any  native  superiority  of  mind; 
and  that  many  of  those  whom  the  providence  of  God  has  precluded  from  the  culti- 
vation of  their  minds  would,  with  equal  advantages  as  ourselves  possessed,  have  far 
outstripped  us  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  Humility  will  cherish  a  conviction 
of  the  imperfection  of  our  faculties.  It  will  feel  on  every  side  the  bounds  of  human 
knowledge :  the  voice  of  God  saying,  "  So  far  shalt  thou  go  and  no  farther."  4. 
Humility  consists  in  a  correct  estimate  of  our  moral  condition.  (1)  We  are  not  only 
subjects  of  the  Divine  government,  but  we  are  guilty  creatures,  under  the  condem- 
nation of  the  law  of  God.  Whatever  the  pride  of  man  may  suggest,  "we  are  all 
gone  out  of  the  way,  we  are  altogether  become  filthy,  there  is  none  that  doeth  good, 
no  not  one."  Humility  rightly  estimates  this  moral  desolation.  It  thus  prepares 
the  mind  for  the  revelation  of  God's  mercy,  to  welcome  the  glad  tidings  of  a  Saviour, 
and  to  submit  to  the  Divine  method  of  forgiving  sins.  And  if  through  grace  we  are 
brought  to  depend  on  Christ  for  salvation,  humility  will  characterise  every  subse- 
quent estimate  of  ourselves.     (2)  A  proper  estimate  of  our  moral  condition  will 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  397 

express  itself  appropriately  towards  our  fellow-men.     II.  We  must  enforce  the 

CULTIVATION    OF    HUMILITY    UPON   YOU    BY   VARIOUS   CONSIDERATIONS.       1.    It  is  in  itS  OWH 

nature  necessary  to  a  reception  of  Christianity.  2.  Humility  is  also  an  essential 
part  of  religion.  Our  hearts  cannot  be  right  with  God  until  we  apprehend  His 
majesty  and  our  own  meanness — until  we  realise  our  entire  dependence  on  Him — 
until,  with  humble  and  imploring  faith,  we  are  looking  to  the  Saviour  for  salvation, 
and  disposed  to  say,  "  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  Humility  is  equally 
necessary  to  our  perseverance  in  the  Divine  life :  the  dependence  on  God  it  gene- 
rates is  the  vitality  of  our  religion ;  the  seK-diffidence  it  creates  is  our  best  security. 
3.  God  has  put  pecuUar  honour  on  humbleness  of  mind,  while  He  has  expressed 
His  detestation  of  the  opposite  spirit.  "  Every  one  proud  in  heart  is  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord."  "  A  high  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  and  the  plowing  of  the  wicked, 
is  sin."  But,  on  the  contrary.  He  everywhere  commends  an  humble  spirit ;  it  is  the 
disposition  of  mind  He  delights  to  favour.  "  Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  He 
respect  unto  the  lowly."  4.  This  virtue  is  enforced  by  the  conduct  of  our  Lord. 
5.  Humility  is  an  undying  grace  ;  it  will  flourish  more  perfectly  in  heaven.  All  the 
saints  and  angels  are  clothed  in  this  appropriate  garb  of  a  creature.  Let  us,  then, 
cultivate  a  quality  of  character  which  will  abide  with  us  through  eternity,  which  will 
constitute  a  portion  of  the  bliss  of  heaven  ;  it  will  enlarge  our  happiness  on  earth, 
and  eminently  meeten  us  for  future  glory.  (S.  Summers.)  Humility  : — The 
word  itself  and  its  history  are  interesting.  "  There  are  cases,"  says  Coleridge,  "  in 
which  more  knowledge,  of  more  value,  may  be  conveyed  by  the  history  of  a  word 
than  by  the  history  of  a  campaign."  Now  take  this  word  humility.  It  was  not  a 
new  word  when  the  New  Testament  was  written.  It  had  been  used  for  years.  Only 
it  is  striking  that  almost  without  exception  the  word  humility,  used  before  the  time 
of  Christ,  is  used  contemptuously  and  rebukingly.  It  always  meant  meanness  of 
spirit.  To  be  humble  was  to  be  a  coward.  Where  could  we  find  a  more  striking 
instance  of  the  change  that  the  Christian  religion  brought  into  the  world,  than  in 
the  way  in  which  it  took  this  disgraceful  word  and  made  it  honourable  ?  To  be 
humble  is  to  have  a  low  estimation  of  one's  self.  That  was  considered  shameful  in 
the  olden  time.  Christ  came  and  made  the  despised  quality  the  crowning  grace  of 
the  culture  that  He  inaugurated.  Lo  !  the  disgraceful  word  became  the  key- word  of 
His  fullest  gospel.  He  redeemed  the  quality,  and  straightway  the  name  became 
honourable.  Think  what  the  change  must  have  been.  Think  with  what  indigna- 
tion and  contempt  men  of  the  old  school  in  Rome  and  Athens  must  have  seen  mean- 
spiritedness,  as  they  called  it,  taken  up,  inculcated  and  honoured,  proclaimed  as  the 
salvation  of  the  world,  and  Him  in  whom  it  was  most  signally  embodied  made  the 
Saviour  and  King  of  men.  Ah,  it  seems  to  me  more  and  more  that  it  must  have 
been  very  hard  for  those  early  disciples  to  have  believed  in  Christ.  But  let  us  see, 
if  we  can,  what  the  change  was  that  Christianity  accomplished,  and  how  it  came 
about.  The  quality  that  Christianity  rescued  and  glorified  was  humility.  Humihty 
means  a  low  estimate  or  value  of  one's  self.  But  all  values  are  relative.  The  esti- 
mate we  set  on  anything  depends  of  course  on  the  standard  with  which  we  compare 
it.  1.  Now  Christianity's  great  primary  revelation  was  God.  Much  about  Him  it 
showed  men,  but  first  of  all  it  showed  them  Him.  He,  the  Creator,  the  Governor, 
became  a  presence  clear  and  plain  before  men's  hearts.  His  greatness.  His  holiness, 
His  love — nay,  we  cannot  describe  Him  by  His  qualities,  for  He  is  greater  than  them 
all — He,  by  the  marvellous  method  of  the  Incarnation,  showed  Himself  to  man. 
He  stood  beside  man's  work.  He  towered  above,  and  folded  Himself  about  man's 
life.  He  entered  into  men's  closets  and  took  possession  of  men's  hearts.  And  what 
then?  God  in  the  world  must  be  the  standard  of  the  world.  Greatness  meant 
something  different  when  men  had  seen  how  great  He  was ;  and  the  manhood  which 
had  compared  itself  with  lesser  men  and  grown  proud,  now  had  a  chance  to  match 
itself  with  God,  and  to  see  how  small  it  was,  and  to  grow  humble  about  itself.  Just 
imagine  that  when  you  and  I  were  going  on  learning  our  lessons,  doing  our  work, 
exercising  our  skill  here  on  the  earth,  and  proud  of  our  knowledge,  our  strength,  and 
our  skill — j  ust  suppose  that  suddenly  Omniscience  towered  up  above  our  knowledge,  and 
Omnipotence  above  our  strength,  and  the  Infinite  Wisdom  stood  piercing  out  of  the 
sight  of  our  ignorant  and  baffled  skill.  Must  it  not  crush  the  man  with  an  utter  insig- 
nificance ?  What  is  the  use  of  heaving  up  these  molehills  so  laboriously  close  by  the 
gigantic  mountain-side  ?  But  if  the  revelation  is  not  only  this ;  if  it  includes  not 
only  the  greatness  but  the  love  of  God  ;  if  the  majesty  that  is  shown  to  us  is  the 
majesty  of  a  father,  which  takes  our  littleness  into  his  greatness,  makes  it  part  of 
itself,  honours  it,  trains  it,  does  not  mock  it,  then  there  comes  the  true  graciousness 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  humility.  It  is  not  less  humble,  but  it  is  not  crushed.  It  is  not  paralysed,  but 
stimulated.  The  energy  which  the  man  used  to  get  out  of  his  estimate  of  his  own 
greatness  he  gets  now  out  of  the  sight  of  his  father's,  which  yet  is  so  near  to  him 
that,  in  some  finer  and  higher  sense,  it  still  is  his ;  and  so  he  is  more  hopeful  and 
happy  and  eager  in  his  humility  than  he  ever  used  to  be  in  his  pride.  This  is  the 
philosophy  of  reverence  and  humility  as  enrichers  of  life  and  mainsprings  of 
activity.  2.  This  is  one,  then,  of  the  ways  in  which  Christ  rescued  and  exalted 
humility.  He  gave  man  his  true  standard.  He  set  man's  littleness  against  the 
infinite  height  of  God.  The  next  way  that  I  want  to  speak  of  is  even  more  remark- 
able. He  asserted  and  magnified  the  essential  glory  of  humanity.  He  showed  us 
that  the  human  might  be  joined  with  the  Divine.  Thus  He  glorified  human  nature. 
Ah,  if  a  man  must  be  humbled,  and  is  exalted  by  his  humility,  when  he  sees  God, 
surely  when  he  sees  the  possibihty  of  himself,  there  is  no  truer  or  more  exalted 
feeling  for  him  than  to  look  in  on  what  he  is,  and  think  it  very  mean  and  wretched 
by  the  side  of  what  he  might  be,  what  his  Lord  has  shown  him  that  he  was  made 
for.  Christ  makes  us  humble  by  showing  us  our  design.  There  is  nothing  more 
strange,  and  at  the  same  time  more  truthful,  about  Christianity  than  its  combina- 
tion of  humiliation  and  exaltation  for  the  soul  of  man.  If  one  wants  to  prove  that 
man  is  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  the  son  and  heir  of  God,  he  must  go  to  the 
Bible.  If  he  wants  to  prove  how  poor  and  base  and  Satan-like  the  soul  of  man  can 
be,  stiU  to  the  Bible  he  must  go.  If  you  want  to  find  the  highest  ecstasy  that  man's 
spirit  ever  reached,  it  is  the  Christian  saint  exulting  in  his  God.  Do  you  want  to 
hear  the  bitterest  sorrow  that  ever  wrung  this  human  heart  ?  It  is  that  same  Chris- 
tian saint  penitent  for  his  sin.  I  think  we  cannot  but  see  the  beauty  of  a  humility 
nke  this  if  it  once  becomes  the  ruling  power  of  a  changed  man's  life,  this  humility 
born  of  the  sight  of  a  man's  possible  self.  It  has  in  it  all  that  is  good  in  the  best 
self-respect.  Nay,  with  reference  to  the  whole  subject  of  self-respect  this  seems  to 
be  true,  that  the  only  salvation  from  an  admiration  of  our  own  present  condition, 
which  is  pride,  is  to  be  found  in  a  profound  respect  for  the  best  possibility  and  plan 
of  our  being,  which  involves  humility.  So  it  is  the  sight  of  what  God  meant  us  to 
be  that  makes  us  ashamed  of  what  we  are.  And  it  is  the  death  of  Christ  for  us,  the 
preciousness  that  He  saw  in  our  souls  making  them  worthy  of  that  awful  sacrifice,  it 
is  that  which  lets  us  see  our  own  soul  as  He  sees  it  in  its  possibility,  and  so  lets  us  see 
it  in  its  reality  as  He  sees  it  too,  and  put  our  pride  away  and  be  humble.  (Bp.  P}tillij)s 
Brooks.)  Clothed  icitli  htnnility  : — The  image  of  the  "  clothing  " — a  word  which  is 
used  only  in  this  place  in  the  Bible — is  thought  to  have  reference  to  a  particular  kind 
of  white  vestment  which  used  to  be  worn  by  slaves.  And  it  was  made  very  long  and 
large,  that  it  might  cover  not  only  all  the  other  dress,  but  the  whole  figure  ;  and  so 
it  may  be  considered  that  the  believer,  remembering  well  that  he  is  the  follower  of 
Him  who  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto  but  to  minister,"  should  place  all  he 
has  and  all  he  is  under  the  folds  of  a  mantling  "  humility,"  and  array  himself  in  a 
servile  robe.  But  let  me  caution  you  not  to  think  that  "  the  clothing  of  humility" 
has  anything  to  do  with  that  robe  of  which  the  Bible  speaks  as  "  the  wedding  gar- 
ment." It  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  except  that  God  invariably  makes  this  the 
lining  for  that.  That  is  something  from  without  a  man ;  this  is  from  within.  That 
is  saving;  this  is  evidential.  Now  I  am  persuaded  that  the  first  way  to  grow  humble 
is  to  be  sure  that  you  are  loved.  The  education  of  almost  any  child  will  teach  you 
that  if  you  treat  that  child  harshly,  you  will  make  his  httle  heart  stubborn  and 
proud  ;  but  if  he  feels  that  you  love  him,  he  wiU  gradually  take  a  gentlcu'  tone.  So 
it  is  with  the  education  through  which  we  are  all  passing  to  the  life  to  come.  The 
first  thing  God  does  with  His  child  is  to  make  the  child  feel  that  He  loves  him. 
There  is  nothing  which  will  stoop  a  man  into  the  dust  like  the  gentle  pressure  of 
the  feeling  "  I  am  loved."  The  forgiven  David,  the  woman  at  Jesus's  feet,  Peter 
under  the  look,  John  in  the  bosom.  Let  me  advise  you  further.  If  you  desire  to 
cultivate  that  posture  of  mind,  accustom  yourself,  force  yourself  to  do  acts  of 
humiliation — whatever  is  most  against  your  natural  taste.  There  is  a  still  dei?per 
feeling  without  which  you  wiU  never  have  on  that  "robe  of  humility" — you  must 
often  sit  and  receive  the  droppings  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  must  meditate  with 
open  eye  on  the  meek,  humble  face  of  Jesus.  You  must  be  in  union  with  Christ. 
There  is  a  false  "  humility "  than  which  none  can  be  more  destructive  to  the 
character.  It  is  of  three  kinds.  There  is  "humility"  of  external  things — in  a 
mortification  of  the  body.  But  it  is  a  cloak,  not  a  robe— a  look,  a  posture,  a 
ceremony.  There  is  another  counterfeit  which  Satan  makes  and  calls  "  humility." 
It  is  what  St.  Paul  calls  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  a  "voluntary  humility" — 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  399 

people  thinking  themselves  unworthy  to  come  to  God.     And  there  are  those  who  do 
not  know  it,  but  who,  like  Peter,  are  under  an  appearance  of  "humility,"  indulging 
contemptuous  pride.     "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."     "  I  am  not  good  enough 
to  be  saved.     I  am  not  worthy  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper.    I  cannot  believe  God 
loves  me."     (J.  Vaughan,  3I.A..)         Humility  explained  and  enforced : — Humility  is 
that  Christian  virtue  without  which  no  other  can  exist,  and  by  which  every  other  is 
beautified,  for,  whilst  the  flowers  of  all  the  Christian  graces  grow  in  the  shade  of 
the  Kedeemer's  Cross,  the  root  of  them  is  humility.     I.  Humility  becomes  us  as 
CKEATUKES.    It  may  also  be  remarked  that  the  temptation  to  pride,  and  consequently 
the  exercise  of  humility,  has  very  much  to  do  with  a  comparative  view  of  ourselves 
and  others.    It  is  not  in  the  superiority  which  we  possess  over  the  inferior  creatures 
that  we  are  apt  either  to  exaggerate  the  difference  or  to  forget  that  it  is  from  God,  but 
it  is  in  the  little  advantage  which  one  man  may  happen  to  possess  above  another, 
whether  in  mental  endowments,  bodily  powers,  or  worldly  wealth.     It  is  this  minor 
distinction,  the  comparative  difference  between  man  and  man,  which  excites  envy 
in  one  party  and  creates  haughtiness  in  another.     But  the  judgment  of  humility  is 
according  to  truth.     This  is  the  spirit  of  humility  which,  like  the  flower  blooming 
in  the  valley,  delights  the  eye  of   the  contemplative,  who,  forgetting  the  gaudier 
plants  of  the  garden,  finds  nothing  to  charm  him  so  much  as  the  simple  beauties 
of   nature.     II.  Humllitt  becomes  us  as   sinneks.     HI.  Humility  becomes  us  as 
DISCIPLES  OP  Christ.     1.  They  must  retain  a  humbling  remembrance  of  past  sins. 
Those  sins,  though  forgiven  by  Jehovah,  must  not  be  forgotten  by  them,  that  they 
may  see  what  they  are  in  themselves,  and  understand  how  much  they  owe  to 
redeeming  love.     2.  The  Christian  must  also  continually  watch  the  state  of  his 
heart.     3.  Whatever  measures  of  holiness  the  Christian  attains  to,  he  must  always 
remember  that  by  the  grace  of  God  he  is  what  he  is.   Thus  all  boasting  is  excluded, 
for  he  has  nothing  but  what  he  has  received.     4.  There  will  always,  whilst  we  are 
on  the  earth,  remain  much  to  be  done,  much  to  be  attained.     Every  grace  will 
be  defective  in  measure  and  mixed  with  infirmity.     The  most  faultless  disciple 
will    here    find    cause    for    humiliation.       Conclusion  :    1.    What    a    delightful 
character  is   the   man  of   distinguished  humility.     He   may  not  have  the  glory 
in  which  the  patriot,   the  hero,  or  the  martyr  is  enshrined,  but  he  is   adorned 
with  the  beauties  of  holiness  ;  he  carries  about  with  him  the  majesty  of  goodness, 
if  not  the  dominion  of  greatness.     2.  Learn  from  this  subject  to  beware  of  false 
humility.    True  humility  is  diifident  and  retiring  ;  it  is  not  like  the  scentless  fiower, 
which  turns  its  face  to  the  sun  throughout  his  course,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  being 
seen,  but  it  is  rather  like  the  modest  violet,  which  hides  itself  in  obscurity,  and 
sends  forth  fragrance  from  its  deep  retirement.    It  employs  no  herald,  it  unfolds  no 
banner,  it  blows  no  trumpet,  but,  whilst  conferring  substantial  benefits,  it  desires  to 
be  like  the  angels,  who,  while  ministering  to  the  heirs  of  salvation,  are  unseen  and 
unknown  by  the  objects  of  their  attention.     3.  Learn  also,  while  you  avoid  false 
humility,  to  labour  for  that  which  is  real.    Let  the  young  labour  for  this.    Christian 
humility  will  teach  you  the  most  willing  obedience,  the  most  gganins  affection,  the 
most  respectful  demeanour  towards  your  parents,  and  it  will  excite  you  to  the  most 
anxious  endeavours  for  the  promotion  of  their  happiness.     Let  not  the  old  neglect 
this  spirit  of  humility.     Do  not  aggravate  the  sorrows  of  your  evil  days  by  pride,  by 
peevishness,  or  by  discontent.    When  almost  every  leaf  is  gone  from  the  rose  of  life, 
let  not  its  thorns  remain.     Let  parents  manifest  much  of  this  temper  in  the  treat- 
ment of  their  children.   Always  endeavour  to  persuade  before  you  attempt  to  compel. 
This  is  the  way  to  grow  in  grace,  for  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace 
unto  the  humble."     (T.  Gibson,  M.A.)         Christian  humility  : — In  looking  into  the 
nature  of  humility,  we  discover  that  it  does  not  involve  meanness  or  servility.    It  is 
not  pusillanimity.     It  contains  no  element  that  degrades  human  nature.     It  is  not 
the  quality  of  a  slave,  but  of  kings  and  priests  unto  God.     It  is  a  necessary  trait  in 
all  finite  character,  and  therefore  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  an  inviolable  dignity 
and  self-respect.     I.  In  the  first  place,  humility  is  becoming  to  man,  because  he  is 
A  CREATURE.     Shall  a  being  who  was  originated  from  nonentity  by  almighty  power, 
and  who  can  be  reduced  again  to  nonentity  by  that  same  power,  swell  with  haughti- 
ness ?      II.   In  the  second  place,  humility  is  becoming  to  man,  because  he  is 
A  DEPENDENT  BEING.    1.  All  his  Springs  are  in  God.   He  is  dependent  for  life,  health, 
and  all  temporal  things.     He  is  dependent,  above  all,  for  spiritual  life  and  health 
and  all  the  blessed  things  of  eternity.     2.  Man  is  dependent  not  only  upon  his 
Creator,  but  also  upon  his  fellow-creature.     III.  In  the  third  place,  man  should  Le 
humble  because  he  is  a  sinful  being.     Considering  the  peculiar  attitude  in  wl.ich 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

guilty  man  stands  before  God,  self-abasement  ought  to  be  the  main  feeling  in  his 
heart,  for,  in  addition  to  the  infinite  difference  there  is  originally  between  himself 
and  his  Maker,  he  has  rendered  himself  yet  more  different  by  apostasy.  The  first 
was  only  a  difference  in  respect  to  essence,  but  the  last  is  a  difference  in  respect  to 
character.  How  strange  it  is  that  he  should  forget  this  difference,  and,  entering 
into  a  comparison  of  himself  with  his  fellow-men,  should  plume  himself  upon  a 
supposed  superiority.  The  culprits  are  disputing  which  shall  be  the  greatest  at  the 
very  instant  when  their  sentence  of  condemnation  is  issuing  from  the  lips  of  their 
Judge !  There  is  still  another  consideration  under  this  head  which  strengthens  the 
motive  for  humility.  We  have  seen  that  the  fact  of  sin  furnishes  an  additional 
reason  for  self-abasement  because  it  increases  the  distance  between  man  and  God  ; 
it  has  also  made  him  still  more  dependent  upon  God.  Nothing  but  pure  and  mere 
mercy  can  deliver  him.  But  nothing  interferes  with  the  exercise  of  mercy  like  pride 
in  the  criminal.  A  proud  man  cannot  be  forgiven.  It  involves  a  self-contradiction. 
If  there  be  self-asserting  haughtiness  in  the  heart,  God  can  neither  bestow  grace 
nor  man  receive  it.  IV.  A  fourth  and  most  powerful  reason  why  man  should  be 
clothed  with  humility  is  found  in  the  vicakious  suffeeing  and  atonement  of  Christ 
IN  HIS  behalf.  Feeling  himself  to  be  a  condemned  sinner,  and  beholding  the  Lamb 
of  God  "  made  a  curse  for  him  "  and  bearing  His  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree, 
all  self-confidence  and  self-righteousness  will  die  out  of  his  soul.  (G.  T.  Shedd, 
D.D.)  Huinility  with  the  fruits  of  it : — I.  To  explain  the  nature  of  humility. 
Humility  consists  in  a  low  opinion  or  esteem.  Now  the  opinion  which  we  form  of 
ourselves  is  either  absolute  or  comparative,  and  whichever  way  we  judge  it  is 
very  certain  that  a  low  opinion  best  becomes  us,  and  is  most  suitable  to  our  nature 
and  state.  1.  First,  if  we  judge  of  ourselves  absolutely,  without  comparing  ourselves 
with  any  others,  humility  and  truth  too  requires  that  our  opinion  should  be  very 
moderate  and  low.  We  know  but  little,  and  we  live,  alas !  to  little  good  purpose. 
What  a  mixture  of  corruption  is  there  with  every  grace,  and  what  a  sully  of  sin  in 
€very  duty !  Again,  as  to  the  happiness  of  our  state,  what  mortal  does  not  feel  that 
lie  is  miserable  ?  Pains  and  diseases  afflict  our  bodies,  crosses  and  disappointments 
perplex  our  circumstances,  the  gloom  of  melancholy  gathers  about  the  heart,  and 
sorrows  overspread  the  whole  world.  2.  Humility  consisteth  in  having  a  low  opinion 
of  ourselves  as  compared  with  others,  whether  with  God  or  with  our  fellow-creatures. 
II.  To  SET  before  you  the  good  fruits  of  humility.  To  this  grace  we  may  apply 
these  words  of  the  prophet,  "  It  taketh  root  downward  and  beareth  fruit  upward  " 
(Isa.  xxxvii.  31),  and  the  deeper  the  root  is  laid,  the  larger  and  fairer  will  the  fruit 
be.  1.  Meekness  is  one  pleasant  fruit  which  grows  upon  humility,  and  to  this  we 
may  join  the  kindred  grace  of  peaceableness  or  quietness  of  spirit  (chap.  iii.  4).  2. 
Patience  is  another  good  fruit  of  humility,  with  which  we  may  join  the  kindred 
grace  of  submission.  Now  patience  has  respect  either  to  God  or  man.  (1)  Patience 
in  respect  to  God  consisteth  in  a  quiet  submission  to  His  afflictive  providences  with- 
out murmuring.  (2)  If  we  further  consider  patience  as  it  respects  men,  as  it  is 
opposite  to  fretfulness  at  their  faults  and  follies,  this  also  is  the  fruit  of  humility ; 
for  if  we  were  as  sensible  of  our  own  follies  as  we  should  be,  we  should  more 
patiently  bear  with  the  faults  and  folUes  of  others.  3.  Self-denial  is  another  good 
fruit  of  humility,  and  how  necessary  a  duty  that  is  you  will  learn  from  those  words 
of  Christ  (Luke  ix.  23).  We  surely  esteem  the  body  at  too  high  a  rate  when  we 
pamper  it  to  the  hurt  of  the  soul.  4.  The  last  good  fruit  of  humility  which  I  shall 
here  speak  of  is  contentment.  The  humble  man  remembers  that,  be  his  worldly 
condition  what  it  will,  it  is  unspeakably  better  than  he  deserves.  III.  To  urge  upon 
you  the  exhortation  in  our  text  by  a  few  motives.  "  Be  ye  clothed  with  humility." 
For — 1.  Consider  how  high  an  approbation  God  has  expressed  of  this  grace,  and 
how  hateful  pride  is  to  Him.  2.  Consider  what  a  lovely  and  engaging  example  of 
Tiumility  Christ  hath  set  us.  3.  Let  me  recommend  humility  as  a  necessary  part  of 
your  preparation  for  heaven.  (D.  Jennings.)  Humility  and  its  greatness: — I. 
Xet  us  examine  the  source  and  ground  of  humility.  This  is  drawn  from  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  from  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  Him.  Hence,  where 
ithe  knowledge  of  God  is  absent,  the  exercise  of  humility  becomes  impossible. 
Humility  begins  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  advances  to  the  knowledge  of 
ourselves.  Thus  we  see  at  our  first  step  that  it  consists  of  something  we  gain,  not 
of  aught  we  lose.  The  humble  man  is  rich  in  his  humility,  for  he  has  gained  that 
which  the  proud  man  has  not.  Pride  is  the  instinct  of  ignorance.  But  we  must 
take  another  step,  and  ask  how  it  is  that  the  knowledge  of  God,  Instead  of  puffing 
a  man  up  with  the  conceit  of  an  acquisition,  only  produces  humility  and  the  most 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  401 

prostrate  lowliness  of  mind.  It  might  be  answered,  because  the  knowledge  itself 
is  but  a  gift  freely  bestowed ;  it  is  a  revelation,  not  a  discovery,  and  therefore 
implies  in  itself  the  obligation  of  a  receiver  towards  a  donor.  This  is  true,  but  a 
more  complete  reply  is,  that  humility  is  produced  by  the  impressiveness  of  the 
majesty  and  greatness  of  the  Divine  Being  as  revealed  to  us  in  His  matchless 
perfections  and  infinite  glory.  This  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  is  not  a  work 
of  nature  but  a  gift  of  grace.  This  new  knowledge  becomes  a  test  whereby  we 
measure  ourselves.  We  cannot  help  this  self -application,  since,  in  knowing  God, 
we  have  gained  a  new  idea  altogether.  And  it  is  in  the  immense  difference  between 
what  God  is  and  what  we  are  that  Christian  humility  originates  and  grows.  Then, 
when  we  read  the  inspired  history  of  man,  lowliness  is  increased.  For  there  we  are 
told  not  alone  of  the  immortal  spirit  breathed  into  man,  but  of  the  Divine  likeness 
in  which  we  were  first  created,  even  in  the  image  and  similitude  of  God.  And  now, 
standing  amid  these  wonders  of  revelation,  with  the  wretched  experience  of  ourselves 
as  we  are  fresh  and  full  upon  us,  there  is  not  a  truth  which  does  not  deepen  our 
awe  by  the  very  wonderfulness  of  the  realities  to  which  we  find  ourselves  related, 
and  with  which  we  stand  in  daily  contact.  For  here  is  the  wonder,  that  true  humi- 
lity grows  out  of  self-respect.  No  man  living  has  so  high  a  conception  of  the  dignity 
of  human  nature  as  the  Christian.  11.  From  the  source  and  nature  of  Christian 
humility  let  us  consider  its  peactical  outgoing.  Here,  again,  we  must  take  the 
side  turned  towards  God  first ;  otherwise  we  shall  be  out  of  order.  What  are  the 
characteristic  feelings  and  what  the  corresponding  acts  which  a  profound  humility 
produces  in  our  intercourse  with  God  ?  In  the  first  place,  it  produces  an  absorbing 
and  unmeasured  admiration.  In  speaking  of  so  great  a  being  as  God,  adoration 
may  perhaps  be  the  better  word,  so  long  as  it  is  understood  to  be  the  adoration  not 
of  fear  but  of  love — the  adoration  of  desire,  of  grateful  affection,  and  of  fervent 
praise.  And  then,  out  of  adoring  praise  to  the  redeeming  God  by  whom  we  live, 
arises  simple  trusting  faith  in  Him.  From  praise  and  trust  combined  there  will 
arise  also  implicit  obedience.  For  admiration  and  trust  exalt  to  the  highest  degree 
the  glory  of  the  Being  admired  and  trusted.  Then  how  can  God  be  wrong  in  any 
way  ?  and  if  right,  then  every  word  of  His  must  be  kept  as  a  seal  of  our  acceptance. 
And  now  we  shall  see  how  these  three  sentiments  of  adoration,  trust,  and  obedience 
necessarily  affect  our  relation  towards  our  fellow-men.  Gentle  manners,  gentle 
looks,  gentle  words  ever  considerate  of  other  men's  feelings,  make  the  true  Christian 
a  natural  gentleman,  and  invest  him  with  an  intuitive  poUteness  which  is  but  the 
outgoing  of  the  Divine  life  within.  {E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  Be  clothed  ivith  humi- 
lity : — I.  Let  us  be  clothed  with  humility  before  God.  God  delights  in  it ;  it  is  the 
*'  ornament  which  in  His  sight  is  of  great  price."  A  lady  applied  to  a  celebrated 
philanthropist  on  behalf  of  an  orphan  child.  When  he  had  bidden  her  draw  on 
him  for  any  amount,  she  said,  "  As  soon  as  the  child  is  old  enough  I  will  teach  him 
to  thank  you."  "Stop  (said  the  good  man),  you  are  mistaken;  we  do  not  thank 
the  clouds  for  rain— teach  the  child  to  look  higher  and  thank  Him  who  gives  both 
the  clouds  and  the  rain."  That  was  being  clothed  with  humility  before  God.  II. 
Let  us  be  clothed  with  humility  before  the  world — the  proud  and  gainsaying 
world.  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  are  to  be  lights  to  it  and  salt  in  it.  Humility 
does  more  than  argument.  If  it  irritates,  it  impresses  and  convinces.  An  aged 
patriarch  was  tauntingly  asked  by  a  boastful  young  Pharisee,  "Do  you  suppose  that 
you  have  any  real  religion?"  "None  to  speak  of,"  was  the  dignified  answer,  and 
it  went  sharp  as  a  javelin  into  that  young  Pharisee's  bosom.  III.  Let  us  be  clothed 
with  humility  before  each  other.  "  Yea,  all  of  you  be  subject  one  to  another." 
This  is  hardest  of  any — this  wants  more  humility  than  either  of  the  preceding. 
Mr.  Newton's  favourite  expression  to  his  friends  was,  "  I  am  not  what  I  ought  to 
be,  I  am  not  what  I  wish  to  be,  I  am  not  what  I  hope  to  be,  but  by  the  grace  of  God 
I  am  not  what  I  once  was."  {James  Bolton.)  The  garment  of  humility : — 
No  garment  sits  so  well  on  human  nature,  and  no  ornament  so  gracefully  conceals 
its  deformity,  as  humility.  Yet  there  is  no  dress  which  we  find  it  more  dilficult 
to  assume.  There  is  something  in  our  imperfect  and  unsanctified  nature  which 
revolts  at  the  very  idea  of  submission,  condescension,  and  inferiority.  I.  What 
IS  meant  by  being  clothed  with  humility.  To  cultivate  this  grace  we  need  only 
contemplate  ourselves  as  we  really  are,  examine  our  true  condition,  look  at  our- 
selves in  the  mirror  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  we  shall  come  away  humbled 
to  the  dust.  II.  Some  advantages  to  be  secured  by  being  humble.  God's  com- 
mandments have  nothing  arbitrary  about  them.  Whatever  He  ordains  is  for 
our  good.     1.  Humility  is  the  great  qualification  for  the  reception  of  knowledge 

26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

and  for  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  A  proud  man  will  neither  learn 
anything  from  his  neighbour  nor  receive  anything  from  his  God.  If  a  man  thinks 
he  knows  enough  already  upon  any  given  subject,  he  is  not  likely  to  learn  much 
more.  Humility  opens  the  pathway  to  all  knowledge.  By  it  our  minds  become 
docile  so  that  they  are  prepared  to  receive  every  new  form  of  truth.  And  if  we 
cherish  this  spirit,  may  we  not  learn  from  all  around  us  ?  Humility  also  prepares 
for  the  reception  of  the  Divine  kingdom  into  the  heart.  2.  Humility  is  essential  to 
the  growth  of  the  soul  in  holiness  and  grace.  All  true  spiritual  progress  is  the  work 
of  God.  K  he  do  not  yield  to  the  power  and  grace  of  God,  how  can  He  fashion  him 
after  His  own  will  ?  Humility,  then,  prepares  us  to  feel  our  inability  to  do  any 
good  thing  of  ourselves,  and  to  look  for  all  in  God.  3.  Humility  opens  the  pathway 
to  honour  and  glory  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  4.  Humility  is  associated  with  the  purest  happi- 
ness. Humility  in  man  helps  him  to  maintain  a  serenity  and  calmness  amidst  aU 
the  storms  of  life.      {Harvey  Phillips,  B.A.)  Two  kinds  of  clothing  : — A  new 

suit  of  clothes !  That's  a  subject  in  which  you  all  take  an  interest.  When  a  boy 
enters  the  army  or  navy  he  puts  on  a  new  suit  of  clothes,  blue  or  red,  and  that 
reminds  him  that  he  is  bound  to  serve  his  queen  and  country,  and  that  he  must 
not  disgrace  his  uniform.  I  am  going  to  speak  to  you  to-day  about  some  different 
kinds  of  clothing,  some  good,  others  bad.  First  of  all,  let  us  think  of  the  clothes 
which  God  makes  for  His  beautiful  world.  He  clothes  the  grass  of  the  field.  Every 
tree  has  a  different  shaped  dress  and  a  different  shade  of  colour.  Even  in  the 
winter,  when  the  trees  look  so  bare  and  cold,  they  are  still  clothed  by  God.  Trees 
have  two  sets  of  leaves,  one  set  for  the  summer,  the  other  for  the  winter.  And  God 
clothes  the  beasts  and  birds  and  gives  each  exactly  the  sort  of  dress  which  he  re- 
quires. You  have  all  seen  the  mole-hills  in  a  field,  and  sometimes  you  have  caught 
a  glimpse  of  the  mole  himself.  WeU,  God  has  clothed  him  in  a  dress  like  black 
velvet,  which  is  just  fitted  for  his  home  underground.  The  animals  which  live  in 
cold  regions  have  a  warm  clothing  of  fur,  and  those  which  hve  among  snow  and  ice 
are  white,  so  that  their  enemies  may  not  easily  see  them.  Now  let  us  think  about 
ourselves.  In  the  Bible  we  hear  of  two  kinds  of  clothing,  the  best  and  the  worst. 
St.  Peter  says,  "  Be  clothed  with  humility " ;  that's  the  best  clothing.  In  the 
hundred  and  ninth  Psahn  we  are  told  of  a  wicked  man  who  "  clothed  himself  with 
cursing  as  with  a  garment " ;  that's  the  worst  clothing.  Now  I  have  noticed  that 
very  often  when  children  are  growing  up  into  big  lads  and  girls,  there  is  a  great 
change  in  their  manners.  Did  you  ever  hear  the  old  fable  of  the  donkey  who  found 
a  lion's  skin  ?  The  donkey  covered  himself  with  the  skin,  and  tried  to  play  the  lion 
and  frighten  the  people.  But  some  of  them  spied  his  long  ears,  and  recognised  his 
well-known  voice,  and  he  was  soon  stripped  of  his  lion's  skin  and  driven  away. 
Now,  my  boys,  if  you  are  tempted  to  put  on  a  suit  of  clothes  which  does  not  become 
you,  if  while  still  boys  you  put  on  the  habits  of  a  man,  and  of  a  bad  man  into  the 
bargain,  remember  the  fable  of  the  ass  in  the  lion's  skin.  But  when  a  child  has 
outgrown  the  good  clothing  of  humihty  and  put  on  a  fuU  suit  of  pride,  there  comes 
another  evil  from  it.  He  often  gives  up  his  prayers  and  his  Bible.  I  told  you  that 
the  Bible  speaks  of  the  worst  kind  of  clothing ;  it  teUs  us  of  a  man  who  "  clothed 
himself  with  cursing  as  with  a  garment."  I  take  cursing  there  to  mean  all  sorts  of 
bad  language.  The  old  Greeks  tell  us  a  story  about  the  death  of  Hercules.  That 
strong  hero  had  shot  his  enemy,  Nessus,  with  a  poisoned  arrow,  and  the  garment 
of  the  slain  man  was  all  stained  with  poisoned  blood.  Before  he  died  Nessus  gave 
his  clothing  to  the  wife  of  Hercules,  telling  her  that  it  would  make  her  husband 
love  her  always.  It  came  to  pass  after  a  time  that  she  gave  the  fatal  garment  to 
her  husband,  and  no  sooner  had  he  put  it  on  than  the  poison  seized  upon  him,  and 
when,  in  his  agony,  he  tried  to  put  off  the  clothing,  it  clung  aU  the  tighter,  and  so 
he  died,  killed  by  his  own  poison.  So  it  is  with  the  man  who  clothes  himself  with 
a  garment  of  cursing  or  bad  talk  ;  it  clings  to  him  and  poisons  him,  body  and  soul. 
There  are  several  other  kinds  of  clothing  of  which  I  might  warn  you.  One  of  these 
is  self -righteousness.  I  have  seen  a  man  with  a  very  glossy  black  suit  of  clothes, 
very  carefully  buttoned  up,  and  at  first  sight  he  looked  most  clean  and  respectable. 
But  when  I  came  to  look  more  closely,  I  found  that  his  linen  was  anything  but 
white  and  clean.  His  respectability  was  all  outside.  If  your  clothes  are  old  and  worn 
out  or  do  not  fit  you,  what  must  you  do?  You  must  get  a  new  suit.  Well,  there  are 
some  kinds  of  clothing  which  we  should  cast  off  as  soon  as  possible.  If  any  of  you 
have  put  on  bad  habits,  filthy  clothing,  such  as  pride,  or  falsehood,  or  bad  talk,  you 
must  change  your  clothes.  Cast  off  the  old  garment,  and  go  down  on  your  knees,  and 
ask  God  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  to  give  you  a  new  dress.  (H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.) 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  405 

Work  tends  to  humility  : — I  canoot  but  think  that  one  of  the  tn^st  ways  in  which 
Christianity  has  made  humility  at  once  a  commoner  and  a  nobler  grace  has  been  in 
the  way  in  which  it  has  furnished  work  for  the  higher  powers  of  man,  which  used 
to  be  idle,  and  only  ponder  proudly  on  themselves.  Idleness  standing  in  the  midst 
of  unattempted  tasks  is  always  proud.  Work  is  always  tending  to  humility.  Work 
touches  the  keys  of  endless  activity,  opens  the  infinite,  and  stands  awe- struck 
before  the  immensity  of  what  there  is  to  do.  Work  brings  a  man  into  the  great 
realm  of  facts.  Work  takes  the  dreamy  youth  who  is  growing  proud  in  his  closet 
over  one  or  two  sprouting  powers  which  he  has  discovered  in  himself,  and  sets  him 
out  among  the  gigantic  needs  and  the  vast  processes  of  the  world,  and  makes  him 
feel  his  littleness.  Work  opens  the  measureless  fields  of  knowledge  and  skill  that 
reach  far  out  of  our  sight.  Is  not  this  what  you  would  do  for  a  boy  whom  you  saw 
getting  proud — set  him  to  work?  He  might  be  of  so  poor  stuff  that  he  would 
be  proud  of  his  work,  poorly  as  he  would  do  it.  But  if  he  were  really  great  enough 
to  be  humble  at  all,  his  work  would  bring  him  to  humility.  He  would  be  brought 
face  to  face  with  facts.  He  would  measure  himself  against  the  eternal  pillars  of 
the  universe.  He  would  learn  the  blessed  lesson  of  his  own  littleness  in  the  way  in 
which  it  is  always  learned  most  blessedly,  by  learning  the  largeness  of  larger 
things.  And  all  this,  which  the  ordinary  occupations  of  life  do  for  our  ordinary 
powers,  Christianity,  with  the  work  that  it  furnishes  for  our  affections  and  our 
hopes,   does  for  the  higher  parts  of  us.     {Bp.  Phillips  Brooka.)  Humility : — 

There  are  some  sins  which  have  resisted  every  influence  but  that  of  Christianity, 
and  over  which  even  the  gospel  itself  seems  to  obtain  a  precarious  triumph.  One 
of  these  is  pride.  To  be  proud  is  not  only  to  be  what  Christianity  condemns,  but 
something  essentially  inconsistent  with  the  first  principles  of  its  teaching,  and  with 
the  special  type  of  character  which  it  seeks  to  create.  Heathenism  showed  it  no 
such  antipathy.  Unless  it  made  itself  specially  ridiculous  by  trading  on  obviously 
false  pretences,  it  was  considered  a  becoming  and  reasonable  thing.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  understand  how  this  should  have  been  so.  Pride,  to  be  seen  in  its 
objectionable  light,  must  be  seen  in  connection  with  those  truths  about  God  and 
human  nature  which  Christianity  first  made  known  to  the  world.  It  is  only  when 
it  stands  in  their  company  it  appears  as  Scripture  represents  it.  How  Christianity 
dethrones  this  idol  of  self  we  know  very  well.  It  reminds  us  that  the  great  thing 
is  not  what  a  man  has,  but  what  he  is.  It  reveals  in  the  Person  of  Christ  the  true 
standard  of  moral  excellence.  Pride  has  to  come  down  from  its  pedestal  and  take 
its  place  in  the  dust.  We  see  we  are  not  only  wrong,  but  responsible  for  being 
wrong.  We  have  been  following  false  ideals.  It  seems  almost  impossible  to 
conceive  how  a  proud  man  can  ever  have  been  truly  convicted  of  sin,  or  brought  to 
receive  the  salvation  of  Christ  as  a  free,  unmerited  gift.  It  seems  more  difficult 
stiU  to  believe  that  such  an  one  is  living  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  receiving 
as  a  sinner  daily  forgiveness,  and  as  having  nothing  being  indebted  to  Him  for  all 
things.  It  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  world  should  be  sceptical  of  our 
Christian  profession  when  it  sees  so  much  that  directly  contradicts  it.  Are  we 
disposed  to  retract  the  confession  which  we  made  so  sincerely  when  we  cried  for 
mercy,  that  of  all  sinners  we  are  the  chief?  Or,  are  we  forgetting  what  the  world 
really  is,  as  we  saw  it  once  in  the  light  of  the  Cross,  when  its  glory  faded  till  it 
vanished  away,  and  we  cried,  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency.of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord  "  ?  Is  it  assuming  its  old  importance  ?  "  Be 
clothed,"  says  St.  Peter,  "  with  humiUty."  And  as  we  read  the  words  we  feel  how 
little  of  this  clothing  we  have  been  accustomed  to  wear,  how  faintly  we  have 
realised  the  nature  of  the  habit  in  which  we  should  always  be  found  apparelled. 
The  word  which  the  apostle  uses  here,  and  which  is  translated,  "Be  clothed,"  is 
interesting  and  somewhat  rare.  It  means  literally  "  to  tie  or  gird  on,"  and  is  so 
rendered  in  the  Eevised  Version,  but  apparently  it  also  refers  to  the  peculiar 
garment  that  was  worn  by  slaves,  and  which  was  the  usual  mark  or  badge  of  their 
condition.     I.  First,  St.  Peter  says,  see  that  youR  humility  is  fastened  to  tou 

AS    IT     WERE     so     SECURELY     NOTHING     SHALL    BE     ABLE     TO    DEPRIVE    YOU    OF    IT.       He 

recognises  the  risk  of  it  being  plucked  off  or  laid  aside.  And  among  those  to  whom 
he  wrote  the  risk  was  doubtless  considerable.  In  so  mixed  a  community  as  the 
Christian  Church  at  that  time  it  would  be  difficult  to  subordinate  all  selfish  desires 
to  the  common  good.  And  persecution,  which  was  then  active,  might  easily 
awaken  a  feeling  of  resentment  or  disdain.  To  be  reviled  and  yet  revile  not  again, 
to  suffer  wrong  and  take  it  patiently,  is  never  an  easy  thing.  In  our  case  the  danger 
may  spring  from  a  different  quarter,  but  it  is  no  less  real.     Perhaps  we  feel  our 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

humility  to  be  nothing  but  a  cloak,  something  put  on  or  assumed  which  is  not 
natural  to  us,  and  in  which  we  pose  in  a  somewhat  hypocritical  guise.  And,  of 
course,  a  humihty  which  is  conscious  of  itself  is  no  humility  at  all.  It  is  the  most 
odious  of  all  possible  counterfeits.  But  the  girdle  or  overall  of  the  slave  to  which 
St.  Peter  alludes  was  his  natural  dress.  It  simply  indicated  his  servile  condition. 
There  was  no  inconsistency  between  the  two.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  humility  is 
the  natural  garb  of  the  Christian,  expressing  his  dependence  on  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
slave  he  is.  Yet  the  temptation  frequently  comes  to  lay  it  aside,  or  to  give  way  to 
a  temper  which  makes  it  impossible  to  wear  it.  It  is  true,  we  argue  to  ourselves, 
we  have  much  to  keep  us  humble,  but  not  more  than  these  others,  or  perhaps  so 
much,  if  they  only  knew  it.  Why,  then,  should  we  yield  to  them,  or  submit 
tamely  to  their  assumptions  ?  If  we  give  them  an  inch,  they  will  take  an  ell,  and 
there  is  no  end  to  the  liberties  some  may  allow  themselves,  or  the  length  to  which 
they  may  presume.  All  this  is  very  natural,  but  is  it  Christian  ?  Is  it  not 
renouncing  the  vesture  of  humility,  and  finding  plausible  excuses  for  the  pride  that 
is  so  ready  to  assert  itself  ?  There  are  interests  that  ought  to  be  dearer  to  us  than 
any  personal  considerations.  Let  us  be  clothed  with  humility.  Let  us  keep  it  on 
firmly.  Let  our  whole  life  in  all  its  details  be  ruled  by  the  remembrance  that  we 
are  not  our  own,  but  Christ's  slaves,  and  bound  to  act  in  accordance  with  our 
condition.      II.  But,  secondly,  being  clothed  with  humility  means  that,  being 

GIRT    with    this   VESTURE    OF    SERVITUDE,  WE    ARE    ALWAYS    TO    BE    READY   FOB    SERVICE. 

There  are  some  clothes  in  which  a  man  cannot  work.  He  puts  them  on  for  state 
occasions.  So  there  are  some  Christians  who  always  seem,  so  to  speak,  to  be  in 
dress  clothes.  They  would  be  quite  shocked  if  you  asked  them  to  do  something 
that  involved  even  a  little  hard  work.  They  are  much  too  dainty  and  refined  for 
that.  Or,  they  strike  you  as  being  available  only  on  great  occasions.  Are  we  so 
clothed  with  humility  as  to  remember  that  it  is  not  ours  to  pick  and  choose,  but  to 
be  ready  at  the  Master's  call?  Do  we  remember  that  no  act  of  service  is  too 
humble  or  obscure  for  us  ;  that  we  are  not  to  think  there  are  some  things  for  which 
we  are  too  good,  and  which  we  are  therefore  justified  in  leaving  undone  ?  When- 
ever we  do  this,  we  discard  our  girdle  or  cloak  of  humility.  We  forget  what 
manner  of  men  we  are  and  the  character  we  wear.  III.  Again,  St.  Peter  reminds 
us  that  humility  is  not  only  indispensable  to  our  serving  Christ,  but  also  to  our 
SERVING  ONE  ANOTHER.  The  coirect  text  of  the  passage  literally  rendered  runs 
thus  :  "  Gird  yourselves  with  humility  for  the  sake  of  one  another."  And  truly  no 
better  specific  could  be  devised  for  developing  the  happiness  and  strength  of  a 
community.  For  a  great  part  of  the  misery  and  confusion  of  the  world  pride  is 
responsible.  It  makes  joint  effort  impracticable,  and  is  the  creator  of  constant 
discord  and  misunderstanding.  Pride  is  an  insoluble  particle.  It  resists  fusion 
and  protests  against  amalgamation.  Humility  presents  no  such  obstacle.  It 
facilitates  union.  It  is  mutual  concession,  "  in  honour  preferring  one  another." 
"Be  clothed,"  therefore,  "with  humility,"  writes  the  apostle,  and  as  the  precept 
is  so  confessedly  difficult  to  obey,  it  may  be  well  to  suggest  one  or  two  directions. 
1.  Let  us  get  out  of  the  way  of  making  ourselves  the  centre  of  everything.  If  we 
are  Christians,  self  has  been  dethroned,  and  it  must  be  forbidden  all  acts  of 
usurpation.  We  have  found  a  larger  and  nobler  centre  for  life,  and  other  interests 
that  are  greater  and  more  commanding  than  our  own.  Let  us  put  these  first — the 
kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.  Let  us  remember  that  these  are  the 
interests  that  endure.  2.  A  second  suggestion  I  may  offer  is,  that  we  should  think 
most  of  all  of  Christ,  and  of  pleasing  Him.  When  He  receives  the  proper  place  in 
our  lives  everything  else  will  surely  come  right.  It  is  only  when  He  is  forgotten,  or 
His  presence  is  faintly  and  fitfully  realised,  other  things  assume  a  disproportionate 
importance.  We  lose  our  standard  of  value,  our  justness  of  perception,  and  our 
whole  perspective  becomes  confused.  (C  Moiiict,  M.A.)  The  i^hndow  shortens  : — 
Opinion  of  ourselves  is  like  the  casting  of  a  shadow,  which  is  always  largest  when 
the  sun  is  at  the  greatest  distance.  By  the  degrees  that  the  sun  approaches,  the 
shadow  shortens,  and  under  the  direct  meridian  light  it  becomes  none  at  all.  It  is 
so  with  our  opinion  of  ourselves ;  while  the  good  influences  of  God  are  at  the 
greatest  distance  from  us,  it  is  then  always  that  we  conceive  best  of  ourselves ; 
as  God  approaches  the  conceit  lessens,  till  we  receive  the  fuller  measure  of  His 
grace,  and  then  we  become  nothing  in  our  own  conceit,  and  God  appears  to  be  all 
in  all.  {Dean  Young.)  Humility  a  beautiful  dress  : — An  Irish  preacher  named 
Thady  Conellan,  who  greatly  assisted  Dr.  Monck  Mason  in  his  labours  connected 
with  the  revision  of  the  Hibernian  Bible  Society's  Irish  Bible,  was  eminent  not 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  405 

only  as  an  orator,  a  wit,  and  a  humble  unostentatious  Christian,  but  was  unmoved 
by  the  splendour  and  gaiety  which  surrounded  him,  and  retained  his  simplicity 
amid  it  all.  A  magnificent  duchess  having  one  day  asked  him,  "  Pray,  do  you 
know  Lady  Lorton?"  was  quickly  answered,  "Yes,  madam,  I  do;  and  she 
is  the  best-dressed  lady  in  Ireland."  "  How  very  odd  !  Best-dressed  lady  in  Ire- 
land." What  a  strange  man  !  "  Pray,  how  is  she  dressed  ?  "  But  her  grace's 
surprise  was  converted  to  satisfaction  when  Thady  rejoined,  "  Yes,  madam, 
Lady  Lorton  is  the  best-dressed  lady  in  Ireland,  or  in  England  either,  for  she 
is  clothed  in  humility."  Vanity  : — Vanity,  or  love  of  display,  is  one  of  the 
most  contemptible  and  pernicious  passions  that  can  take  possession  of  the  human 
mind.  Its  roots  are  in  self-ignorance — its  fruits  are  affectation  and  false- 
hood. Vanity  is  a  kind  of  mental  intoxication,  in  which  the  pauper  fancies 
himself  a  prince,  and  exhibits  himself  in  aspects  disgusting  to  all  observers. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Humility  a  preparation  for  heaven : — 

"  Humble  we  must  be,  if  to  heaven  we  go  ; 
High  is  the  roof  there,  but  the  gate  is  low." 

{Robert  Herrick.) 

Clothed  with  humility : — Humility  is  the  beauty  of  grace.  "  Be  clothed  with 
humility."  The  Greek  word  imports  that  humility  is  the  ribbon  or  string  that 
ties  together  aU  those  precious  pearls,  the  rest  of  the  graces.  If  this  string  break 
they  are  all  scattered.  (T.  Brooks.)  God  resisteth  the  proud. — The  course  of 
things  against  pride  : — No  one  need  fail  in  life,  in  things  temporal  or  things 
spiritual,  through  pride  !  and  yet  not  be  able  to  know  what  kept  him  back.  Not 
temporally,  not  spiritually,  wiU  promotion  come — any  real  progress — while  self- 
conceit  is  there.  The  course  of  the  universe  is  dead  against  that,  and  against 
those  who  are  cursed  with  it.  We  do  not  wonder  that  the  Almighty  should 
"  oppose  Himself  to  the  proud."  Even  we  must  often  have  thought  how  strange  it 
is  that  man  should  be  proud  at  all.  What  have  we  to  be  proud  of.  I.  God 
"  KEsisTETH  THE  PROUD  "  IN  His  PROVIDENCE.  The  coursc  of  God's  Provideucc, 
as  a  general  rule,  does  (as  a  matter  of  fact)  keep  back  the  proud  from  positions  of 
eminence.  In  practice,  the  most  conceited  persons  one  has  ever  known  are  those 
who  have  been  the  deadest  failures.  The  pride  tended  to  the  failure,  no  doubt : 
but  where  other  disqualifications  rendered  success  impossible,  the  self-conceit 
alleviated  the  mortification  of  failure.  For  it  is  more  pleasant  for  a  man  to  think 
that  he  has  been  very  unlucky,  than  to  think  he  has  been  very  incompetent  and 
undeserving.  But,  setting  aside  the  case  of  incorrigibles,  it  is  very  striking,  as  a 
matter  of  historical  experience,  how,  when  the  sore  discipline  had  been  borne, 
when  the  old  conceit  was  fairly  taken  out,  the  tide  turned  and  great  success  came. 
Aye,  the  man  could  stand  it  now :  and  that  which  would  once  have  intoxicated, 
was  now  taken  with  lowly  thankfulness.  True  are  the  wise  man's  words,  "  Before 
honour  is  humUity !  "  I  know,  of  course,  that  the  question  may  be  put :  Have  we 
not  sometimes  seen  self-conceited  people  in  prominent  places  ?  And  the  answer 
must  be,  Not  often,  but  sometimes,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  only  in  appearance  that 
these  cases  are  exceptions  to  the  principle  stated  in  the  text.  For  God  resists  such, 
humbles  them  in  various  ways.  Perhaps  He  allows  them  to  get  the  prominent 
position  and  then  prove  conspicuously  unfit  for  it ;  which  is  (to  one  of  any  worth) 
the  sorest  kind  of  failure.  Or  the  conceited  heart  is  hourly  punished  by  a  host  of 
little  mortifications  and  slights,  keenly  felt  through  all  its  morbidly-sensitive 
texture,  from  which  the  humble-minded  are  entirely  free.  Make  him  chief 
minister  of  the  State,  like  Haman  :  and  the  proud  man  has  all  the  enjoyment 
killed  out  of  his  lot  by  the  slighting  looks  of  one  unmannerly  Jew.  Eaise  the 
proud  man  to  the  throne  itself ;  and  he  holds  his  peace  of  mind  at  the  mercy  of 
any  crowd  that  may  raise  the  shout,  "  Saul  has  slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his 
ten  thousands."  II.  How  God  "  resisteth  the  proud  "  in  His  kingdom  of 
GRACE.  "Where  is  boasting"  here?  "It  is  excluded."  There  is  but  one  lowly 
gate  of  humble  penitence  by  which  any  one  can  pass  into  that  family  of  the 
redeemed  in  which  alone  is  salvation.  And  then  this  repentance  is  not  just  once 
for  all :  it  must  be  a  daily  thing,  a  strengthening  habit.  Look  at  the  whole  design 
of  grace,  and  see  how  from  first  to  last  it  resists  all  pride,  and  cuts  hard  all  human 
self-sufficiency  !  It  sets  out  by  taking  it  for  granted  that  we  are  all  guilty,  all 
helpless.  It  goes  on  to  tell  that  we  can  be  saved  only  by  entire  dependence  on 
another.  Then,  in  the  design  of  grace,  though  we  are  saved  through  Christ  only, 
we  are  called  to  the  highest  degree  of  purity,  truthfulness,  self-sacrifice,  devotion 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  heart  and  of  life  to  God.  Only  through  the  communications  of  the  Blessed 
Spirit  are  we  able  to  do  anything  as  we  ought.  He  begins,  He  carries  on,  He  ends 
our  better  life  !  Thus  it  is  that  in  God's  kingdom  of  grace  there  is  no  room  for 
pride.  It  is  not  merely  resisted,  it  is  shut  out  altogether.  And  now  we  may 
humbly  believe  that  we  can  discern  the  reason  why  "  God  resisteth  the  proud." 
There  is  not  in  our  Heavenly  Father,  in  our  Blessed  Saviour,  the  faintest  infusion 
of  that  wretched  jealousy  of  their  creatures  which  old  heathenism  ascribes  to  its 
gods ;  that  wretched  jealousy  of  human  power  and  wisdom, — even  of  human 
goodness,  which  we  can  trace  in  ancient  classic  tragedy.  It  is  not  a  touchiness 
about  His  own  importance,  such  as  we  should  judge  petty  and  contemptible  in  a 
man,  that  makes  God  resist  the  proud.  It  is  because  the  thing  is  bad  ;  because  it 
is  unlike  us  and  our  place ;  because  it  must  be  got  rid  of  before  we  shall  be  fit 
either  for  this  life  or  for  a  better.  It  is  all  for  our  true  good  and  our  true  happiness 
that  God  opposes  the  ever-growing  self-conceit.  Thus  He  trains  us  for  duty  here 
and  for  rest  hereafter.  [A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The  proud  abased  and  the 
humble  exalted  : — I.  The  folly  of  pride.  1.  Axe  we  proud  of  our  strength  ?  It 
is  far  inferior  to  that  of  many  beasts.  2.  Our  clothing  ?  It  is  not  so  pretty  as 
the  peacock's.  What  is  deficient  in  the  head  they  put  outside.  3.  Our  beauty  ? 
It  is  inferior  to  many  flowers.  4.  Our  riches  ?  That  man  is  a  fool  who  prides 
himself  upon  these,  for  he  is  below  a  chain  of  pearls  or  a  knot  of  diamonds. 
5.  Our  birth?  He  who  plumes  himself  upon  this  is  proud  of  the  blessings  of 
others,  not  his  own.  II.  The  wickedness  of  pride.  1.  It  makes  a  man  especially 
hateful  to  God  (Prov.  viii.  13,  xvi.  5).  2.  It  is  the  most  diabolical  sin  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  (1  Tim.  iii.  6).  3.  It  is  the  most  productive  of  all  sins  (Heb. 
ii.  5  ;  Psa.  x.  2  ;  Prov.  xiii.  10).  HI.  The  destructiveness  of  pride.  It  is  the 
forerunner  of  shame.  IV.  The  cure  of  pride — humility.  1.  Be  convinced  of 
its  great  excellency.  2.  Store  your  mind  with  knowledge.  3.  Its  effects.  (1]  It 
consists  not  in  railing  against  yourself.  (2)  It  consists  more  in  feeling  tnan 
saying.  Lessons :  1.  Never  be  ashamed  of  birth,  parents,  trade,  or  poverty. 
2.  Let  others  be  praised  in  thy  presence;  object  nothing;  his  disparage- 
ment increases  not  thy  worth.  3.  Nay,  exalt  thy  brother,  if  truth  and  God's 
glory  need  it.  Cyrus  played  only  with  those  more  skilful  than  himself,  lest 
he  should  shame  them  by  his  victory,  that  he  might  learn  something  of  them, 
and  do  them  civilities.  (J.  Summerfield,  M.A.)  Humble  yourselves  there- 
fore under  the  mighty  hand  of  God. — Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  : — There  is  nothing  which  more  peculiarly  marks  the  character  of  the 
faithful  Christian  than  the  manner  in  which  he  submits  to  the  dispensations  of 
God.  The  worldly  spirit  either  repines  under  misfortune,  or  is  disconsolate ;  or,  at 
the  best,  bears  up  with  a  mere  animal  fortitude ;  it  finds  no  comfort  but  such  as  is 
afforded  by  the  vain  world.  Eeligion  is  the  only  source  from  which  true  comfort 
can  be  drawn,  and  we  see  her  triumphs  manifested  in  the  most  remarkable  manner 
when  the  faithful  servant  of  God  is  overwhelmed  with  trouble.  "  Humble  your- 
selves under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  Here  we  may  discover  powerful  reasons 
intimated  why  we  should  bring  ourselves  into  a  state  of  entire  submission  to  the 
Divine  will,  and  rest  resigned  under  every  dispensation.  The  hand  of  God  is 
mighty  :  He  is  the  sovereign  Lord  of  all ;  has  an  absolute  right  to  dispose  of  His 
creatures  according  to  His  good  pleasure,  and  is  alone  able  both  to  know  and  to  do 
what  their  several  necessities  require.  A  wise  son  yields  to  an  affectionate  father, 
even  in  points  where  he  cannot  comprehend  the  entire  wisdom  of  his  discipline ; 
not  only  because  experience  has  taught  him  the  benefit  of  subjection,  but  also 
for  the  sake  of  obedience  to  a  father,  who  is  entrusted  with  the  guidance  of  him, 
and  has  a  right  to  be  obeyed.  Another  consideration  here  suggested  is  that  all 
resistance  is  vain:  "  the  mighty  hand  of  God  "  is  uncontrollable.  Whatever  visita- 
tion He  is  pleased  to  send  to  a  family  or  to  an  individual — of  sickness,  of  calamity, 
of  death — there  is  no  keeping  it  out  of  the  dwelling  ;  it  may  be  softened  by  resigna- 
tion, it  may  be  removed,  and  even  blessed  by  prayer  ;  but  we  cannot  hinder  the 
accomplishment  of  God's  will.  Eemark  the  language  of  the  text,  "  Humble 
yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God  "  ;  it  is  not  enough  that  we  be  humbled, 
in  a  worldly  sense,  by  the  stroke  of  misfortune ;  that  is  a  consequence,  which 
may  of  necessity  ensue  :  the  loss  of  possession  may  drive  us  into  needy  soli- 
tude; the  loss  of  health  destroy  our  energy  and  activity;  the  loss  of  reputation 
bring  us  to  shame ;  the  loss  of  friends  oblige  us  to  mourn,  from  the  very  feelings 
of  nature  ;  but  all  this  while  there  may  be  no  humility  of  heart.  (J.  Slade,  M.A.) 
On  humbling  ourselves  before  God  : — I.  First,  our  text  is  evidently  intended  to  bear 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  407 

upon  us  IN  OUR  Church  life.  Each  one  of  us  should  think  Utile  of  himself  and 
highly  of  his  brethren.  1.  True  humility  in  our  Church  relationship  will  show  itself 
in  our  being  willing  to  undertake  the  very  lowest  oifices  for  Christ.  2.  The  next 
point  of  humility  is  that  we  are  conscious  of  our  own  incompetence  to  do  anything 
aright.  Self-sufficiency  is  inefficiency.  He  that  has  no  sense  of  his  weakness  has 
a  weakness  in  his  sense.  3.  This  humility  will  show  itself  next  in  this — that  we 
shall  be  willing  to  be  ignored  of  men.  4.  We  want  humility  in  our  Church  life,  in 
the  sense  of  never  being  rough,  haughty,  arrogant,  hard,  domineering,  lordly ;  or, 
on  the  other  hand,  factious,  unruly,  quarrelsome,  and  unreasonable.  II.  Now  I 
will  use  the  text  in  reference  to  our  behaviour  in  our  afflictions.  Frequently 
our  heavenly  Father's  design  in  sending  trial  to  His  children  is  to  make  and  keep 
them  humble ;  let  us  remember  this,  and  learn  a  lesson  of  wisdom.  The  most 
hopeful  way  of  avoiding  the  humbling  affliction  is  to  humble  yourself.  Be 
humble  that  you  may  not  be  humbled.  1.  And  do  this,  first,  by  noticing 
whether  you  have  been  guilty  of  any  special  sin  of  pride.  Usually  our  sins  lie 
at  the  roots  of  our  sorrows.  If  we  will  repent  of  the  sin,  the  Lord  will  remove 
the  sorrow.  2.  In  your  affliction  humble  yourself  by  confessing  that  you  deserve 
all  that  you  are  suffering.  3.  But,  more  than  that,  humble  yourself  so  as  to  submit 
entirely  to  God's  will.  Ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  you  in  this  act  of  self-humiliation 
while  you  meekly  kiss  the  rod.  IH.  In  our  daily  dealings  with  God,  whether  in 
affliction  or  not,  let  us  humble  ourselves  under  His  hand,  for  so  only  can  we  hope 
to  be  exalted.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  whenever  you  come  to  God  to  come  wondering 
that  you  are  allowed  to  come,  wondering  that  you  have  been  led  to  come ;  marvelhng 
at  Divine  redemption,  astonished  that  such  a  price  should  have  been  paid  that  you 
might  be  brought  nigh  to  God.  Let  grace  be  magnified  by  your  grateful  heart. 
1.  When  you  are  doing  this  be  very  humble  before  God,  because  you  have  not  made 
more  improvement  of  the  grace  that  He  has  given  you.  2.  Next,  humble  yourself 
under  the  hand  of  God  by  feeling  your  own  want  of  knowledge  whenever  you  come 
to  God.  Do  not  think  that  you  understand  all  divinity.  There  is  only  one  body 
of  divinity,  and  that  is  Christ  Himself ;  and  who  knoweth  Him  to  the  full  ?  3.  One 
point  concerning  which  I  should  like  every  one  of  us  to  humble  ourselves  under  the 
hand  of  God  is  about  our  Uttle  enjoyment  of  Divine  things.  IV.  I  finish  by  using 
my  text  with  all  earnestness  in  reference  to  the  unconverted  in  our  seeking  forgive- 
ness AS  SINNERS.  Do  you  waut  to  be  saved  ?  The  way  of  salvation  is,  "  Believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  " But,"  you  say,  "I  cannot  understand  it."  Yet  it  is  very 
simple ;  no  hidden  meaning  lies  in  the  words  ;  you  are  simply  bidden  to  trust  Jesus. 
If,  however,  you  feel  as  if  you  could  not  do  that,  let  me  urge  you  to  go  to  God  in 
secret  and  own  the  sin  of  this  unbelief ;  for  a  great  sin  it  is.  Humble  yourself.  Sit 
down  and  think  over  the  many  ways  in  which  you  have  done  wrong,  or  failed  to  do 
right.  Pray  God  to  break  you  down  with  deep  penitence.  When  your  sin  is  con- 
fessed, then  acknowledge  that  if  justice  were  carried  out  towards  you,  apart  from 
undeserved  grace,  you  would  be  sent  to  hell.  You  have  almost  obtained  mercy  when 
you  have  fully  submitted  to  justice.  Then,  next,  accept  God's  mercy  in  His  own 
way.  Do  not  be  so  vain  as  to  dictate  to  God  how  you  ought  to  be  saved.  Be  a  little 
child,  and  come  and  believe  in  the  salvation  which  is  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ. 
"Ah,"  say  you,  "I  have  done  this,  but  I  cannot  get  peace."  Then  sink  lower 
down.  Did  I  hear  you  say,  "  Alas,  sir,  I  want  to  get  comfort "  ?  Do  not  ask 
for  comfort ;  ask  for  forgiveness,  and  that  blessing  may  come  through  your 
greater  discomfort.  Sink  lower  down.  There  is  a  point  at  which  God  will 
surely  accept  you,  and  that  point  is  lower  down.  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  I  think  I 
have  a  due  sense  of  sin."  That  will  not  do.  I  want  you  to  feel  that  you 
have  not  a  due  sense  of  sin,  and  come  to  Jesus  just  so.  "  Oh,  but  I  do  think 
that  I  have  been  brokenhearted."  I  should  like  to  see  you  lower  than  that,  till 
you  cry,  "  I  am  afraid  I  never  knew  what  it  is  to  be  brokenhearted."  I  want  you 
to  sink  so  low  that  you  cannot  say  anything  good  of  yourself  ;  nay,  nor  see  an  atom 
of  goodness  in  yourself.  Come  before  God  a  criminal,  in  the  prison  dress,  with  the 
rope  about  your  neck.  You  will  be  saved  then.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Submission 
to  Divine  dispensation : — 1.  We  are  to  submit  to  the  Divine  dispensations  in  reference 
to  our  personal  condition.  Men,  for  example,  of  great  talents  and  large  opportu- 
nities, instead  of  shrinking  from  the  responsibility  they  involve,  and  wishing  it  had 
been  their  lot  rather  to  have  been  made  mere  animals  or  stones,  are  to  be  grateful 
for  their  distinction,  and  with  the  full  force  of  their  talent  "  serve  their  generation 
by  the  will  of  God."  While  those  whose  talents  or  circumstances,  or  both,  are 
characterised  by  mediocrity  or  poverty,  instead  of  fretting,  as  though  the  dispen- 


403  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.vp.  v. 

sations  towards  them  of  the  great  Disposer  had  been  unwise  or  unkind,  are  to 
acquiesce  in  the  Divine  appointment,  and  do  their  best  to  benefit  man  and  glorify 
God.  2.  We  are  to  submit  to  the  Divine  arrangements  in  social  and  civil  life.  In 
social  life,  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife;  parents  have  authority  over  children; 
masters  over  servants.  In  civil  life,  submission  is  equally  imperative.  The  language 
of  Scripture  on  this  point  is  singularly  precise  and  unqualified ;  pity  it  should  have 
been  perverted  to  purposes  of  tyranny  (Romans  xiii.  1-7  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1-3  ;  1  Peter  ii. 
13-15).  3.  We  are  to  submit  to  the  Divine  arrangements  in  the  Church.  Instead 
of  sulkiness,  there  should  be  cheerful  compliance ;  instead  of  envy,  generousness ; 
instead  of  paltry  pride,  the  dignity  of  humility ;  instead  of  fitfulness,  patience ; 
instead  of  insubordination,  Christian  submission.  In  the  Church,  emphatically, 
we  are  to  "  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  4.  We  are  to 
submit  to  the  Divine  dispensations  which  operate  in  the  way  of  moral  discipline. 
Afflictions  are  of  necessity  the  present  portion  of  the  servants  of  Christ.  5.  Our 
encouragement,  even  as  intimated  in  this  one  verse,  is  great.  Submission  is  rewarded 
in  the  present  world.  From  how  many  mental  and  other  evils  does  it  save  its 
subjects.  How  great  is  their  peace,  and  their  joy  in  the  light  of  the  Divine 
countenance.  The  chief  reward  will  be  bestowed  in  the  world  to  come.  (S.  J. 
Davis.)  Humbling  of  the  sjmit,  in  humbling  circumstances  : — Objection  1.  If  we 
let  our  spirit  fall,  we  will  lie  always  among  folks'  feet,  and  they  will  trample  on  us. 
No :  pride  of  spirit  unsubdued  will  bring  men  to  lie  among  the  feet  of  others  for 
ever  (Isa.  Ixvi.  24).  Obj.  2.  If  we  do  not  raise  ourselves,  none  will  raise  us ;  and 
therefore  we  must  see  to  ourselves  to  do  ourselves  right.  That  is  wrong.  Humble 
yourselves  in  respect  of  your  sj^irits,  and  God  will  raise  you  up  in  respect  of  your 
lot ;  and  they  that  have  God  engaged  for  raising  them,  have  no  reason  to  say  they 
have  none  to  do  it  for  them.  Obj.  3.  But  sure  we  will  never  rise  high  if  we  let  our 
spirits  fall.  God  will  not  only  raise  the  humble  ones,  but  He  will  lift  them  up  on 
high  ;  for  so  the  word  signifies.  1.  The  bent  of  one's  heart,  in  humbling  circum- 
stances, SHOULD   lie   towards  A  SUITABLE   HUMBLING   OF   THE    SPIRIT,  AS  UNDER   God'S 

MIGHTY  HAND  PLACING  US  IN  THEM.  1.  Some  things  supposcd  in  this.  It  supposeth 
that — (1)  God  brings  men  into  humbling  circumstances  (Ezek.  xvii.  24).  There  is 
a  root  of  pride  in  the  hearts  of  all  men  on  earth,  that  must  be  mortified  ere  they 
can  be  meet  for  heaven.  And  God  brings  men  into  humbling  circumstances  for 
that  very  end  (Deut.  viii.  2).  (2)  These  circumstances  prove  pressing  as  a  weight 
on  the  heart,  tending  to  bear  it  down  (Psa.  cvii.  12).  They  strike  at  the  grain  of  the 
heart,  and  cross  the  natural  inclination.  (3)  The  heart  is  naturally  apt  to  rise 
against  these  humbling  circumstances,  and  consequently  against  the  mighty  hand 
that  brings  and  keeps  them  on.  The  man  natui'ally  bends  his  force  to  get  off  the 
weight,  that  he  may  get  up  his  head,  seeking  more  to  please  himself  than  to  please 
his  God  (Job  xxxv.  9,  10).  (4)  But  what  God  requires  is  rather  to  labour  to  bring 
down  the  heart  than  to  get  up  the  head  (James  iv.  10).  Lastly,  there  must  be  a 
noticing  of  God,  as  our  party,  in  humbling  circumstances.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and 
who  hath  appointed  it  "  (Micah  vi.  9).  2.  What  are  these  humbling  circumstances 
the  mighty  hand  brings  them  into  ?  These  are  circumstances — (1)  Of  imperfection. 
God  has  placed  all  men  in  such  circumstances,  under  a  variety  of  wants  and 
imperfections  (Philip,  iii.  2).  There  is  a  heap  of  natural  and  moral  imperfections 
about  us ;  our  bodies  and  our  souls,  in  all  their  faculties,  are  in  a  state  of  imper- 
fection. (2)  Of  inferiority  in  relations,  whereby  men  are  set  in  the  lower  place  in 
relations  and  society,  and  made  to  depend  on  others  (1  Cor.  vii.  24).  Now,  God 
having  placed  us  in  these  circumstances  of  inferiority,  all  refractoriness  is  a  rising 
up  against  His  mighty  hand  (liom.  xiii.  2).  (3)  Of  contradiction.  This  was  a  part 
of  our  Lord's  state  of  humiliation,  and  the  apostle  supposes  it  will  be  a  part  of  ours 
too  (Heb.  xii.  3).  Whether  these  contradictions  be  just  or  unjust,  God  proves  men 
with  them  to  humble  them,  break  them  off  from  addictedness  to  their  own  will,  and 
to  teach  them  resignation  and  self-denial.  (4)  Of  affliction  (Prov.  xvi.  19).  Pros- 
perity puffs  up  sinners  with  pride  ;  and  oh,  but  it  is  hard  to  keep  a  low  spirit  with 
a  high  lot.  But  God  by  affliction  calls  men  down  from  their  heights  to  sit  in  the 
dust,  plucks  away  their  jay-feathers  wherein  they  prided  themselves,  rubs  the  paint 
and  varnish  from  off  the  creature,  whereby  it  appears  more  in  its  native  deformity. 
Lastly,  of  sin  as  the  punishment  of  sin  (Job  xxx.  19).  3.  What  it  is,  in  humbling 
circumstances,  to  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  (1)  Noticing 
fhe  mighty  hand,  as  employed  in  bringing  about  everything  that  concerns  us,  either 
in  the  way  of  efficacy  or  permission  (1  Sam.  iii.  18).  "  And  he  said,  it  is  the  Lord : 
let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good  "  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10).     (2)  A  sense  of  our  own 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  40a 

worthlessness  and  nothingness  before  Him  (Psa.  cxliv.  3 ;  Gen.  xviii.  27 ;  Isa.  xl.  6). 
(3)  A  sense  of  our  guilt  and  filthiness  (Eom.  iii.  10 ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  It  is  the  over- 
looking our  sinfulness  that  suffers  the  proud  heart  to  swell.  (4)  A  silent  submission 
under  the  hand  of  God.  His  sovereignty  chaUengeth  this  of  us  (Kom.  ix.  20  ; 
Psa.  xxxix.  9 ;  Job  i.  21).  (5)  A  magnifying  of  His  mercies  towards  us  in  the 
midst  of  all  His  pi-oceedings  against  us  (Psa.  cxliv.  3).  Has  He  laid  us  low? 
If  we  be  duly  humbled,  we  wiU  wonder  He  has  laid  us  no  lower  (Ezra  ix.  13). 
(6)  A  holy  and  silent  admiration  of  the  ways  and  counsels  of  God,  as  to  us  unsearch- 
able (Eom.  xi.  33).  Pride  of  heart  thinks  nothing  too  high  for  the  man,  and  so 
arraigns  before  its  tribunal  the  Divine  proceedings,  pretends  to  see  through  them, 
censures  freely  and  condemns.  (7)  A  forgetting  and  laying  aside  before  the  Lord 
all  our  dignity,  whereby  we  excel  others  (Eev.  iv.  10;  Luke  xviii.  11).  Lastly,  a 
submitting  readily  to  the  meanest  offices  requisite  in  or  agreeable  to  our  circum- 
stances. Use  :  Let  the  bent  of  your  heart  then,  in  all  your  humbling  circumstances, 
be  towards  the  humbling  of  your  spirit,  as  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  This 
lies  in  two  things,  (a)  Carefully  notice  all  your  humbling  circumstances,  and  over- 
look none  of  them,  (b)  Observing  what  these  circumstances  do  require  of  you  as 
suitable  to  them.  Let  this  be  your  great  aim  through  your  whole  life,  your 
exercise  every  day.  Motive  1.  God  is  certainly  at  work  to  humble  one  and  all 
of  us.  2.  The  humiliation  of  our  spirits  wiU  not  take  effect  without  our  own 
agency  therein ;  for  He  works  on  us  as  rational  agents,  who  being  moved,  move 
themselves  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  3.  If  ye  do  not,  ye  resist  the  mighty  hand  of  God 
(Acts  vii.  51).  And  of  this  resistance  consider — (1)  The  sinfulness,  what  an  evil 
thing  it  is.  It  is  a  direct  fighting  against  God  (Isa.  xlv.  9).  (2)  The  foUy  of  it. 
How  unequal  is  the  match  ?  How  can  the  struggle  end  weU?  (Job  ix.  4).  4.  This 
is  the  time  of  humiliation,  even  the  time  of  this  life.  "  Everything  is  beautiful  in 
its  season,"  and  the  bringing  down  of  the  spirit  now  is  beautiful,  as  in  the  time 
thereof.  Consider — (1)  Humihation  of  spirit  "is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great 
price"  (1  Peter  iii.  4).  (2)  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  humble  men's  spirits;  it  is 
not  little  that  will  do  it ;  it  is  a  work  that  is  not  soon  done.  There  is  need 
of  a  digging  deep  for  a  thorough  humiliation  in  the  work  of  conversion  (Luke 
vi.  48).  (3)  The  whole  time  of  this  life  is  appointed  for  humiliation.  This  was 
signified  by  the  forty  years  the  Israelites  had  in  the  wilderness  (Deut.  viii.  2  ; 
Heb.  xii.  2).  (4)  There  is  no  humbling  after  (Eev.  xxii.  11).  If  the  pride  of 
the  heart  be  not  brought  down  in  this  Ufe,  it  wiU  never  be.  5.  This  is  the 
way  to  turn  humbling  circumstances  to  a  good  account :  so  that  instead  of  being 
losers,  ye  would  be  gainers  by  them  (Psa.  cxix.  71).  (1)  Humiliation  of  spirit  is  a 
most  valuable  thing  in  itself  (Prov.  xvi.  32).  It  cannot  be  bought  too  dear.  (2) 
Humihty  of  spirit  brings  many  advantages  along  with  it.  It  is  a  fruitful  bough, 
well  laden,  wherever  it  is.  It  contributes  to  one's  ease  under  the  cross  (Matt.  xi. 
30  ;  Lam.  iii.  27-29).  It  is  a  sacrifice  particularly  acceptable  to  God  (Psa.  li.  17). 
The  eye  of  God  is  particularly  on  such  for  good  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  And  it  carries  a  line 
of  wisdom  through  one's  whole  conduct  (Prov.  xi.  2),  "  With  the  lowly  is  wisdom." 
Lastly,  consider  it  is  a  mighty  hand  that  is  at  work  with  us ;  the  hand  of  the  mighty 
God ;  let  us  then  bend  our  spirits  towards  a  compliance  with  it,  and  not  wrestle 
against  it.  Consider — (a)  We  must  fall  under  it.  Since  the  design  of  it  is  to  bring 
us  down,  we  cannot  stand  before  it ;  for  it  cannot  miscarry  in  its  designs  (Isa.  xlvi. 
10),  "  My  counsel  shall  stand."  (b)  They  that  are  so  wise  as  to  faU  in  humiliation 
under  the  mighty  hand,  be  they  never  so  low,  the  same  hand  wiU  raise  them  up 
again  (James  iv.  10).  Directions  for  reaching  this  humiliation.  1.  General  direc- 
tions. (1)  Fix  it  in  your  heart  to  seek  some  spiritual  improvement  of  the  conduct 
of  Providence  towards  you  (Micah  vi.  9).  TiU  once  your  heart  get  a  set  that  way, 
your  humihation  is  not  to  be  expected  (Hosea  xiv.  9).  (2)  Settle  the  matter  of  your 
eternal  salvation,  in  the  first  place,  by  betaking  yourself  to  Christ,  and  taking  God 
for  your  God  in  Him,  according  to  the  gospel  offer  (Hosea  ii.  19;  Heb.  viii.  10).. 
Lastly,  use  the  means  of  soul-humbling  in  the  faith  of  the  promise  (Psa.  xxviii.  7). 
2.  Particular  directions.  (1)  Assure  yourselves  that  there  ai-e  no  circumstances  so- 
humbling  that  you  are  in,  but  you  may  get  your  heart  acceptably  brought  down  tO' 
them  (1  Cor.  x.  13 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (2)  Whatever  hand  is,  or  is  not,  in  your  humbling, 
circumstances,  do  you  take  God  for  your  party,  and  consider  yourselves  therein  aa 
under  His  mighty  hand  (Micah  vi.  9).  Men  in  their  humbling  circumstances  over- 
look God  ;  they  fix  their  eyes  on  the  creature-instrument,  and,  instead  of  humility, 
their  hearts  rise.  (3)  Be  much  in  the  thought  of  God's  infinite  greatness ;  consider 
His  holiness  and  majesty,  fit  to  awe  you  into  deepest  humiliation  (Isa.  vi.  3-5). 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

(4)  Inure  yourselves  silently  to  admit  mysteries  in  the  conduct  of  Providence  towards 
you,  which  you  are  not  able  to  comprehend,  but  will  adore  (Eom.  xi.  33).  (5)  Be 
much  in  the  thoughts  of  your  own  sinfulness  (Job  xl.  4).  (6)  Settle  it  in  your  heart 
that  there  is  need  of  all  the  humbling  circumstances  you  are  put  in  (chap.  i.  6). 
(7)  Believe  a  kind  design  of  Providence  in  them  towards  you.  (8)  Think  with 
yourselves  that  this  life  is  the  time  of  trial  for  heaven  (James  i.  12).  (9)  Think 
with  yourselves,  how  it  is  by  humbling  circumstances  the  Lord  prepares  us  for 
heaven  (Col.  i.  12).  (10)  Give  up  at  length  with  your  towering  hopes  from 
this  world,  and  confine  them  to  the  world  to  come.  Lastly,  make  use  of  Christ 
in  all  His  offices  for  your  humiliation,  under  your  humbling  circumstances.  That 
only  is  kindly  humiliation  that  comes  in  that  way  (Zech.  xii.  10).     II.  There  is  a 

DUE    TIME    WHEBEIN    THOSE    THAT    NOW   HUMBLE    THEMSELVES    UNDER  THE  MIGHTY   HAND 

OF  God  will  certainly  be  lifted  up.  First,  a  general  view  of  this  point.  And 
consider — 1.  Some  things  implied  in  it.  It  bears— (1)  That  those  who  shall  share 
in  this  lifting  up  must  lay  their  accounts,  in  the  first  place,  with  a  casting  down 
(Rev.  vii.  14  ;  John  xvi.  33).  (2)  Being  cast  down  by  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  we 
must  learn  to  lie  quiet  under  it,  till  the  same  hand  that  cast  us  down  raise  us  up 
(Lam.  iii.  27).  (3)  Never  humbled  in  humbling  circumstances,  never  lifted  up  in 
the  way  of  tnis  promise.  (4)  Humility  of  spirit  in  humbling  circumstances  ascer- 
tains a  lifting  up  out  of  them  some  time  with  the  goodwill  and  favour  of  Heaven 
(Luke  xviii.  14).  (5)  There  is  an  appointed  time  for  the  lifting  up  of  those  that 
humble  themselves  in  their  humbling  circumstances  (Hab.  ii.  3).  We  know  it  not, 
but  God  knows  it,  who  has  appointed  it.  (6)  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  imme- 
diately upon  one's  humbling  himself,  the  lifting  up  is  to  follow.  No,  one  is  not 
only  to  lie  down  under  the  mighty  hand,  but  lie  still  waiting  the  due  time ;  humbling 
work  is  longsome  work.  (7)  The  appointed  time  for  the  lifting  up  is  the  due  time, 
the  time  fittest  for  it,  wherein  it  will  come  most  seasonably.  Lastly,  The  lifting  up 
of  the  humbled  will  not  miss  to  come  in  the  appointed  and  due  time  (Hab.  ii.  3). 
Time  makes  no  halting,  it  is  running  day  and  night ;  so  the  due  time  is  fast  coming. 

2.  A  word  in  the  general  to  the  lifting  up  abiding  those  that  humble  themselves. 
There  is  a  twofold  lifting  up.  (1)  A  partial  lifting  up,  competent  to  the  humbled  in 
-time  during  this  life  (Psa.  xxx.  1).  This  is  a  lifting  up  in  part,  and  but  in  part,  not 
wholly ;  and  such  liftings  up  the  humbled  may  expect  while  in  this  worM,  but  no 
more.  (2)  A  total  lifting  up,  competent  to  them  at  the  end  of  time,  at  death  (Luke 
xvi.  22).  Then  the  Lord  deals  with  them  no  more  by  parcels  and  halves,  but  carries 
their  relief  to  perfection  (Heb.  xii.  23).     Now  there  is  a  due  time  for  both  these. 

3.  The  certainty  of  the  lifting  up  of  those  that  humble  themselves  under  humbling 
circumstances.  And  ye  may  be  assured  thereof  from  the  following  considerations. 
(1)  The  nature  of  God,  duly  considered,  insures  it  (Psa.  ciii.  8,  9).  Infinite  power, 
that  can  do  all  things.  Infinite  goodness  inclining  to  help.  He  is  good  and  gracious 
in  His  nature  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6-9).  And  therefore  His  power  is  a  spring  of  comfort 
to  them  (Eom.  xiv.  4).  Infinite  wisdom  that  does  nothing  in  vain,  and  therefore 
will  not  needlessly  keep  one  in  humbling  circumstances  (Lam.  iii.  32,  33).  (2)  The 
providence  of  God,  viewed  in  its  stated  methods  of  procedure  with  its  objects,  insures 
it.  Turn  your  eyes  which  way  you  will  on  the  Divine  providence,  ye  may  conclude 
thence,  that  in  due  time  the  humble  will  be  lifted  up.  («)  Observe  the  providence 
of  God  in  the  revolutions  of  the  whole  course  of  nature,  day  succeeding  to  the 
longest  night,  a  summer  to  the  winter,  a  waxing  to  a  waning  of  the  moon,  a 
flowing  to  an  ebbing  of  the  sea,  &c.  Let  not  the  Lord's  humbled  ones  be  idle 
spectators  of  these  things ;  they  are  for  our  learning  (Jer.  xxxi.  35-37).  {h) 
Observe  the  providence  of  God  in  the  dispensations  thereof  about  the  man 
Christ,  the  most  august  object  thereof,  more  valuable  than  a  thousand  worlds 
(Col.  ii.  9).  Did  not  Providence  keep  this  course  with  Him,  first  humbling  Him, 
then  exalting  Him ;  first  bring  Him  to  the  dust  of  death,  in  a  course  of  sufferings 
thirty-three  years,  then  exalt  Him  to  the  Father's  right  hand  in  eternity  of  glory? 
(Heb.  xii.  2).  (3)  Observe  the  providence  of  God  towards  the  Church  in  all  ages. 
This  has  been  the  course  the  Lord  has  kept  with  her  (Psa.  cxxix.  1-4).  (4)  Observe 
the  providence  of  God  in  the  dispensations  of  His  grace  towards  His  children.  The 
general  rule  is  (chap.  v.  5).  Lastly,  observe  the  providence  of  God  at  length 
throwing  down  wicked  men,  however  long  they  stand  and  prosper  (Psa.  xxxvii. 
35,  36).  (5)  The  Word  of  God  puts  it  beyond  all  peradventure,  which,  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end,  is  the  humbled  saint's  security  for  a  lifting  up  (Psa.  cxix. 
49,  50).  Consider — (a)  The  doctrines  of  the  Word  which  teach  faith  and  hope  for 
ihe  time,  and  the  happy  issue  the  exercise  of  these  graces  will  have,     {h)  The 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  411 

promises  of  the  Word  whereby  Heaven  is  expressly  engaged  for  a  lifting  up  to  those 
that  humble  themselves  in  humbUng  circumstances  (James  iv.  10  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  12). 
{c)  The  examples  of  the  Word  sufficiently  confirming  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  and 
promises  (Eom.  xv.  4).  Lastly,  the  intercession  of  Christ,  joining  the  prayers  of 
His  humbled  people  in  their  humbling  circumstances,  insures  a  lifting  up  for  them 
at  length.  Secondly,  I  proceed  to  a  more  particular  view  of  the  point.  1.  We  will 
consider  the  lifting  up  as  brought  about  in  time,  which  is  the  partial  lifting  up. 
And — first,  some  considerations  for  clearing  the  nature  thereof.  (1)  This  lifting  up 
does  not  take  place  in  every  case  of  a  child  of  God.  Objection,  if  that  be  the  case, 
what  comes  of  the  promise  of  lifting  up  ?  Where  is  the  lifting  up,  if  one  may  go 
to  the  grave  under  the  weight  ?  Were  there  no  life  after  this,  there  would  be  weight 
in  that  objection  ;  but,  since  there  is  another  life,  there  is  none  in  it  at  all.  Question, 
but  then,  may  we  not  give  over  praying  for  the  lifting  up  in  that  case  ?  We  do  not 
know  when  that  is  our  case  ;  for  a  case  may  be  past  all  hope  in  our  eyes  and  the 
eyes  of  others,  in  which  God  designs  a  lifting  up  in  time,  as  in  Job's  (Job  vi.  11). 
(2)  However,  there  are  some  cases  wherein  this  lifting  up  does  take  place.  God 
gives  His  people  some  notable  liftings  up,  even  in  time  raising  them  out  of  remark- 
able humbling  circumstances.  Lastly,  all  the  liftings  up  the  humbled  meet  with 
now  are  but  pledges,  samples  of  the  great  lifting  up  abiding  them  on  the  other  side  ; 
and  they  should  look  on  them  so.  Secondly,  the  partial  lifting  up  itself.  What 
they  will  get,  getting  this  lifting  up  promised  to  the  humbled.  Why,  they  will  get— 
1.  A  removal  of  their  humbling  circumstances.  2.  A  comfortable  sight  of  the 
acceptance  of  their  prayers  put  up  in  their  humbling  circumstances.  3.  A 
heart-satisfying  answer  of  these  prayers,  so  as  they  shaU  not  only  get  the  thing, 
but  see  they  have  it  as  an  answer  of  prayer  ;  and  they  will  put  a  double  value  on 
the  mercy  (1  Sam.  ii.  1).  4.  Full  satisfaction  as  to  the  conduct  of  Providence  in 
all  the  steps  of  the  humbling  circumstances,  and  the  delay  of  the  lifting  up,  how- 
ever perplexing  these  were  before  (Rev.  xv.  3).  5.  They  get  the  lifting  up  together 
with  the  interest  for  the  time  they  lay  out  of  it.  6.  The  spiritual  enemies  that 
flew  thick  about  them  in  the  time  of  the  darkness  of  the  humbling  circumstances 
will  be  scattered  at  this  lifting  up  in  the  promise.  Thirdly,  the  due  time  of  this 
lifting  up.  The  humbUng  circumstances  are  ordinarily  carried  to  the  utmost 
point  of  hopelessness  before  the  lifting  up.  The  knife  was  at  Isaac's  throat  before 
the  voice  was  heard  (2  Cor.  i.  8,  9).  Lastly,  due  preparation  of  the  heart  for  the 
lifting  up  out  of  the  humbling  circumstances,  goes  before  the  due  time  of  that  lifting 
up  according  to  the  promise.  (T.  Boston.)  The  benefit  of  afflictions  ; — I.  The 
HAND  OF  God  is  an  expression  used  in  various  parts  of  Scripture  to  denote  the 
Almighty's  interference  with  the  sons  of  men,  in  a  way  both  of  providence  and 
grace.  Thus  in  Acts  iv.  28  it  signifies  His  eternal  purpose  and  executive  power. 
In  Psahn  civ.  28  it  denotes  His  providential  bounty  and  goodness.  In  John  x.  29 
it  denotes  His  mighty  power  to  preserve  and  defend.  It  is  used  likewise  with 
reference  to  the  inspiration  of  the  prophets :  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  on  Elijah." 
In  other  places  it  expresses  the  help  of  the  Almighty.  Nehemiah  and  Ezra 
repeatedly  acknowledge  the  Divine  aid  which  was  vouchsafed  in  these  words, 
"  according  to  the  good  hand  of  God  upon  us."  The  Psalmist  uses  it  to  denote 
God's  merciful  corrections  (Psa.  xxxii.  4,  xxxviii.  2).  It  is  clearly  in  this  latter  sense 
that  we  are  to  regard  the  expression  in  our  text.  Is  it  asked,  then,  how  God  lifts 
up  His  heavy  hand  upon  His  people,  and  how  they  may  know  that  it  is  lifted  up  ? 
I  answer,  in  various  ways.  In  all  things  He  consults  the  spiritual  good  of  His 
children.  He  varies  therefore  the  mode  of  correction,  as  well  as  the  degree  of  it, 
to  their  peculiar  circumstances  and  situations.  Upon  some  His  hand  is  lifted  up 
in  a  way  which  is  only  known  to  themselves  and  to  their  God.  Their  comforts  are 
withdrawn.  Their  evidences  are  clouded.  Perhaps  they  are  reduced  to  the  very 
brink  of  despair.  But  the  Lord  does  not  always  correct  from  His  own  immediate 
presence.  The  devil  may  be  the  executioner  of  His  chastisement,  as  in  Job's  case. 
The  wicked,  too,  are  spoken  of  by  the  Psalmist  as  the  Lord's  hand  (Psa.  xvii.  13). 
They  may  oppose,  they  may  persecute.  Worldly  losses,  pain,  sickness,  disappoint- 
ments, interruptions  of  domestic  happiness,  the  death  of  friends  and  beloved 
relatives,  are  all  tokens  of  the  uplifting  of  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  II.  Our 
DUTY  UNDER  THE  UPLIFTED  HAND  OF  GoD.  Humblc  yourselvcs,  that  is,  be  lowly. 
Yield  to  the  hand  which  smites  you.  Say,  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  Him  do  what 
fieemeth  Him  good."  The  precepts  of  the  gospel  go  directly  counter  to  our 
depraved  nature.  Were  it  not  for  the  restraining  grace  of  God,  there  is  no 
length  of  repining  which  we  should  not  run.      But  the  believer  has  been  made 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  Grace  has  called  him  back  to  that  Sovereign  from 
whom  he  had  revolted.  The  expression  in  our  text,  "  humble  yourselves,"  seems  to 
imply  three  things ;  consciousness  of  a  necessity  for  the  trial,  patience  under  the 
pressure   of    it,    and   a   believing   expectation   of    deliverance.      III.    The   happy 

EFFECTS    RESULTING    FEOM    THIS     DUTY     OF    HUMBLING    OUESELVES.         "  That    He    may 

exalt  you  in  due  time."  This  expression  may  denote  the  removal  of  the  trial  when 
it  has  effected  its  purpose ;  or  the  esteem  which  the  believer  frequently  obtains, 
even  from  an  ungodly  world,  by  his  firmness  and  consistency  of  conduct;  or 
that  eminence  in  the  graces  and  blessed  fruits  of  the  Spirit  which  beautifies  his 
soul  and  renders  him  really  exalted.  For  holiness,  or,  in  other  words,  conformity 
to  the  image  of  the  Saviour,  is  alone  true  greatness.  [W.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.) 
Self-abasement  and  Divine  exaltation  .-—I.  The  kind  of  suffering  which  the  text 
REPRESENTS  IS  THAT  FROM  WHICH  THERE  IS  NO  PRESENT  ESCAPE.  Peter  is  Hot  referring 
to  very  light  suffering — to  sorrow,  that  is  here  during  this  moment  and  that  will  be 
gone  the  next.  Incurable  sickness — incurable  disease  in  the  body,  is  "  the  mighty 
hand  of  God"  on  a  man.  Confirmed  weakness  or  infinnity  of  the  body  or  mind,  is 
"the  mighty  hand  of  God"  on  a  man.  Inflexible  poverty.  Persecution,  continued 
and  unavoidable.  The  hand  of  God  is  always  upon  us,  but  it  is  not  always  equally 
felt,  or  upon  us  in  the  jame  form.  The  hand  of  God  is  in  all  our  circumstances. 
Is  it  not  in  persecution,  where  the  hand  of  man  is  most  evident  ?  "  If  Shimei  curse, 
let  him  curse,  for  God  hath  sent  him."  Unless  it  were  better  for  you  to  be  perse- 
cuted for  your  religion's  sake,  God  would  not  permit  you  to  be  persecuted.  Your 
wisdom  is  cheerfully  to  submit.  II.  The  text  prescribes  our  behaviour  in  suffer- 
ing, AND  SUGGESTS  THE  STRONGEST  MOTIVES  FOR   THE    ADOPTION    AND    PURSUIT    OF    SUCH 

CONDUCT.  Do  you  notice  how  in  Bible-teaching  God  deals  with  us  as  wise  parents 
treat  little  children  ?  Good  parents  direct  little  children  about  everything,  for  they 
need  such  direction.  Becognise  this,  and  instead  of  seeking  to  have  your  own  way 
about  anything,  try  to  find  out  God's  way,  and  follow  that  way  by  the  leading  of  the 
Saviour  and  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  a  kind  of  submission  which 
we  cannot  avoid.  If  God  put  His  "mighty  hand"  upon  us,  intending  to  keep  us 
under  it,  we  know  of  a  surety  that  we  cannot  escape.  But  with  this  inevitable  sub- 
mission there  may  be  great  pride  of  heart,  expressing  itself  in  murmuring  and  un- 
holy rebellion ;  expressing  itself  in  sinful  efforts  to  get  away  from  the  suffering  and 
in  a  determination  not  to  realise  it,  and  not  to  be  thoroughly  loyal  in  our  thoughts 
and  feelings  as  to  our  circumstances.  A  contrary  behaviour  is  prescribed  here.  We 
are  required  to  be  still,  silent.  Aaron  held  his  peace.  Humility  is  that  chastened 
emotion  which  we  feel  when  conscious  of  our  inferiority,  our  sinfulness,  our  weak- 
ness, our  poverty,  our  helplessness,  and  our  nothingness.  Many  motives  might  be 
suggested.  1.  There  is  one  motive  springing  from  the  words,  "  the  hand  of  God." 
That  sorrow  from  which  I  cannot  escape  is  a  "  hand."  It  is  not  a  chance,  it  is  not 
an  accident,  there  is  a  "  hand  "  in  it.  It  is  connected  with  thought,  feeling,  purpose, 
plan,  intention,  wisdom.  2.  "  The  hand  of  God,  the  mighty  hand."  "  Humble 
yourselves,  therefore,  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt  you  in  due 
time."  God  has  a  good  intent  in  your  depression.  He  is  intent  upon  exalting  you. 
His  love  for  you  involves  this.  His  sending  His  Spirit  to  take  possession  of  your 
nature,  to  regenerate  and  sanctify  and  enlighten,  shows  that  He  desires  to  exalt  you. 
Already,  so  far  as  character  is  concerned,  God  has  lifted  you  up.  But  His  aim  is  to 
exalt  your  entire  humanity,  to  lift  it  up  in  all  its  states,  and  in  all  conditions.  And 
God  is  making  all  things  work  together  for  this.  God  desires  to  exalt,  and  the 
exalting  must  be  with  Him.  It  must  not  be  your  attempt,  your  effort.  3.  For  this 
exaltation  there  is  a  season  of  which  God  can  only  judge.  There  is  a  "  due  time." 
This  lifting  up  is  never  too  soon.  There  is  a  season  for  it,  and  that  season  is  in  the 
soul.  The  advent  of  the  exaltation  is,  without  doubt,  dependent  on  our  self-humilia- 
tion. You  must  mourn,  to  have  your  sorrow  turned  into  joy.  4.  Some  men  are 
ashamed  of  suffering.  That  is  very  much  like  being  ashamed  of  Christ.  Oh,  what 
a  change  in  men's  notions  and  feelings  would  be  effected  if  the  poverty  of  Joseph 
the  carpenter's  son  were  more  before  them,  and  if  they  lived  more  as  in  His  pres- 
ence and  under  His  eye.  "  The  mighty  hand  of  God,"  is  on  some  of  you.  Is  there 
not  a  cause  ?  May  not  that  cause  be  in  certain  faults  and  defects  ?  (5.  Martin.) 
Humiliation  of  soul  under  God's  mighty  hand  : — I.  The  text  insists  upon  the  re- 
cognition of  the  AGENCY  OF  GoD  IN  ALL  OUR  AFFLICTIONS.  "  The  mighty  hand  of 
God."  1.  Now,  observe  that  this  recognition  embraces,  not  second  causes,  but  the 
immediate  hand  of  God.  We  must  go  at  once  to  the  First  Cause  ;  or  else  we  dis- 
honour God  under  every  trial.     2.  Then  observe,  again,  that  this  recognition  must 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  413 

be  of  the  hand,  from  which  there  is  no  escape :  "  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  I  see 
His  "  mighty  hand  "  in  creation,  forming  the  beautiful  world  in  which  I  live  ;  and 
in  providence  I  see  that  same  hand  regulating  every  event  in  the  universe.  And  if 
I  recognise  that  hand  aright,  I  shall  see  it  no  less  in,  and  bringing  to  pass,  every 
affliction  with  which  I  am  assaulted.  It  could  not  have  come  to  me  without  a 
"mighty  hand."  And  while  I  see  this,  it  is  in  vain  to  resist  it.  3.  But,  then,  this 
recognition  must  be  of  the  hand  of  God,  "  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  And  how 
sweet  is  this  !  "  the  hand  of  God."  Power  alone  would  make  me  afraid,  but  it  is 
not  the  hand  of  a  tyrant — it  is  the  hand  of  God  ;  my  covenant  God ;  my  God,  who 
gave  His  dear  Son  for  me  ;  my  God,  who  has  promised  to  keep  and  to  bless  me,  and 
to  take  me  eventually  to  His  kingdom  of  glory.  What  infant  feels  alarmed  when 
its  mother's  hand  is  upon  it  ?  II.  The  text  shows  us  the  spirit  in  which  that 
Divine  agency  is  to  be  recognised.  "  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand 
of  God."  This  includes  a  deep  sense  of  the  malignity  and  evil  of  sin,  which  brings 
all  our  sorrows,  as  committed  against  a  holy  God  and  a  righteous  law,  and  also 
especially  its  aggravation,  as  against  a  God  of  love  and  of  grace,  as  revealed  in  the 

gospel.   III.  A  PROMISE  TO  ENCOURAGE  AND  TO  ENFORCE  THIS  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  HAND 

OF  God:  "That  He  may  exalt  you  in  due  time."     There  is  a  threefold  exaltation, 
of  which  the  Scripture  speaks.     1.  The  first  is  an  exaltation  ii  the  imputed  righteous- 
ness of  Jesus  Christ.     To  stand  complete  before  my  God,  with  a  justification  in 
which  His  own  eye  can  see  no  fault ;  to  feel  that  I  am  an  "  heir  of  God,"  a  "  joint 
heir  with  Christ,"  and  that  eternity  with  all  its  blessings  is  my  own  for  ever.    2.  But, 
secondly,  there  is  an  exaltation  also  from  the  deepest  woe  and  trial  into  which  we 
can  be  brought,  and  of  which  the  Scriptures  speak.     David  says,  "  I  waited  patiently 
for  the  Lord,  and  He  inclined  unto  me  and  heard  my  cry ;  He  brought  me  up  also 
out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay  and  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock  and  estab- 
lished my  goings ;  and  He  hath  but  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  even  praise  unto  our 
God."     3.  And  then  there  is  exaltation  to  the  throne  of  glory.     And  the  first  is 
connected  with  the  last ;  he  that  is  exalted  by  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ, 
shall  eventually  be  exalted  to  the  throne  of  glory.     {James  Sherman.)       The  mighty 
hand  of  God  : — We  might  have  thought  that  such  a  command  as  this  was  somewhat 
unnecessary.     We  might  have  supposed  that  it  needed  but  for  God  to  stretch  out 
His  hand,  and  every  creature  would  go  down  into  the  dust  before  Him.     But  no 
one  who  has  accurately  watched  the  working  of  any  affliction  upon  his  own  or 
another's  heart  wiU  say  this.      There  are  three  ways  in  which  the  chastening  hand 
of  God  may  be  wrongly  received.     You  may  not  see  it  all.     This  is  what  Israel  did 
when  Isaiah  put  up  his  plaint — "  Lord,  when  Thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not 
see  " — but  he  sternly  adds,  "  They  shall  see."     Or  you  may  see — but  you  may  think 
but  very  little  of  it.     "  My  son,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord."     Or, 
at  a  lower  point  than  both — you  may  see,  and  estimate  the  judgment,  and  the  very 
sense  you  have  of  it  may  harden  your  heart  into  pride  and  rebellion,  irritating  your 
temper  and  making  you  more  resolute  for  evil.     This  is  what  Pharaoh  did,  and 
Ahaz.     Strange  that  it  should  be  so !     Yet  all  history  bears  witness  to  the  fact 
that  times  of  national  suffering,  of  famine,  or  plague,  have  been  times  of  extra- 
ordinary wickedness :  for  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death."     AU  evil  that 
is  in  the  world  is  traceable  at  last  to  one  primary  cause ;  the  right  relationship  has 
been  interrupted  between  God  and  His  creatures.     If  man  goes  up  too  high,  or  God 
is  put  down  too  low,  then  evil  is  sure  to  follow.     Therefore  the  first  thing  is  to 
rectify  this.     We  must  be  lower,  and  God  must  be  higher.     Hence  the  primary  law 
of  all  affliction,  "  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
Now  it  is  quite  certain  that  no  man  does  really  "  humble  "  himself  under  anything 
which  he  does  not  recognise  and  feel  to  be  "  the  hand  of  God."    No  one  "  humbles  " 
himself  to  an  accident.     No  one  "  humbles  "  himself  to  a  punishment ;  but  to  "  the 
hand  "  which  deals  it.     And  the  more  that  "hand"  is  admired  and  loved,  the 
deeper  will  be  the  abasement,  and  the  easier  it  will  be  to  make  it.     Therefore  it  is 
all-important,  in  every  trial  that  comes  upon  you,  nationally  or  individually,  that 
you  should  at  once  see — not  natural  causes,  not  even  the  scourge  itself — but  only 
"  the  hand  of  God  "  is  upon  you.     It  is  a  grand  image — "  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
Very  "  mighty  "  must  it  be,  when  "  He  measures  the  water  in  its  hollow,  and  meets 
out  the  heaven  with  its  span."    {J.  Vaiighan,  3I.A.)       Bending  without  breaking: — - 
It  was  an  "  ice  time  "  in  New  England.     One  of  those  rare  days  which  come  once 
or  twice  every  winter,  and,  sometimes,  even  i_i  April,  in  northern  climes,  when  every 
bush  and  every  twig  of  every  stately  tree-trunk  is  thickly  coated  with  glistening 
crystals.     The  whole  country  is  transformed  into  fairyland,  and  Aladdin's  cave  is 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

outdone  by  each  patch  of  scrubby  oak  trees.     We  noticed,  as  the  engine  whirled  us 
through  this  enchanted  land,  that  the  slenderest  of  all  our  northern  forest-trees,  the 
white  birch,  was  prostrated  to  the  very  earth,  and  that  thousands  of  these  trees  were 
lying  prone,  as  if  felled  by  the  woodman's  axe.     "What  a  pity!  "  we  involuntarily 
said  to  ourselves ;  but  on  going  over  that  same  line  of  road  the  next  day,  we  saw 
that  it  was  not  the  birches  that  needed  our  pity,  but  the  sturdy  oaks  and  the  upright 
elms  and  the  heavily-clothed  pines.     The  birches  were  bent  to  the  earth,  to  be  sure, 
but  the  statelier  trees  were  broken  and  maimed,  and  sometimes  rent  in  two,  by  the 
burden  of  the  ice.     The  birches  bowed  their  backs,  but  sprang  up  again  ^  hen  the 
burden  was  removed.     The  trees  of  the  forest  are  typical  of  certain  characters.     He 
who  bows  submissively  before  God's  providences  is  not  the  one  who  is  broken  by 
them.     He  may  be  prostrated  by  heavy  grief  for  a  little  time,  but  he  soon  springs 
up  when  the  sun  shines  again.     Only  he  who  strives  to  bear  by  his  own  might,  and 
in  his  own  strength,  the  grievous  ills  of  life  is  broken  by  them.     To  obsequiously 
prostrate  one's  self  before  earthly  power  may  be  the  part  of  the  craven.     To  bow 
before  the  wiU  of  God  is  a  sign  of  inherent  strength  rather  than  of  weakness,  of 
manliness  rather  than  of  pusillanimity.     Pride  misses  the  blessing  that  is  always  in 
store  for  humble  submission.     [T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)       Casting  all  your  care  upon 
Him. — The  pride  of  care  : — The  two  parts  of  the  text,  taken  together,  state  this  truth, 
that  anxiety  carries  with  it  a  division  of  faith  between  God  and  self,  a  lack  of  faith 
in  God  proportioned  to  the  amount  of  care  which  we  refuse  to  cast  on  Him ;  an 
excess  of  self-confidence  proportioned  to  the  amount  which  we  insist  on  bearing  our- 
selves.    Therefore  the  apostle  says,  "  Humble  yourselves  under  God's  mighty  hand. 
Confess  the  weakness  of  your  hand.     Do  not  try  to  carry  the  anxiety  with  your  weak 
hand.   Cast  it  all  on  Him."  The  Eevised  Version  has  brought  out  a  very  important 
distinction  by  the  substitution  of  "  anxiety  "  for  "  care."     Anxiety,  according  to  its 
derivation,  is  that  which  distracts  and  racks  the  mind,  and  answers  better  to  the 
original  word,  which  signifies  a  dividing  thing,  something  which  distracts  the  heart 
and  separates  it  from  God.     The  word  "  careth,"  on  the  other  hand,  used  of  God, 
is  a  different  word  in  the  original,  and  means  supervising  and  fostering  care,  loving 
interest,  such  care  as  a  father  has  for  a  child.     I  want  to  show  how  the  spirit  which 
refuses  to  give  up  its  dividing  anxiety  to  God  is  allied  to  pride,  and  unbecoming  a 
child  in  the  household  of  a  Divine  Father  who  cares  for  him.     Pride,  I  say — subtle, 
unconscious  pride — is  at  the  bottom  of  much  of  this  restlessness  and  worry.     The 
man  has  come  to  think  himself  too  important,  to  feel  that  the  burden  is  on  his 
shoulders  only;  and  that,  if  he  stands  from  under,  there  must  be  a  crash.     And, 
just  to  the  degree  in  which  that  feeling  has  mastered  him,  his  thought  and  faith 
have  become  divided  from  God.     Let  us  give  him  his  due.     It  is  not  for  his  own 
ease  or  reputation  that  he  has  been  caring.     It  is  for  his  work.     And  yet  he  has 
measurably  forgotten,  that,  if  his  work  be  of  God,  God  is  as  much  interested  in  his 
success  as  he  himself  can  be ;  and  that  God  will  carry  on  His  own  work,  no  matter 
how  many  workmen  He  buries.     He  divides  the  burden,  and  shows  whom  He  trusts 
most  by  taking  the  larger  part  himself,  when  God  bids  him  cast  it  all  on  Him. 
God,  indeed,  exempts  nobody  from  work.     We  may  cast  our  anxiety,  but  not  our 
work,  on  Him.     There  are  few  men  in  responsible  positions  who  have  not  felt  the 
force  of  a  distinguished  Englishman's  words,  "I  divide  my  work  into  three  parts. 
One  part  I  do,  one  part  goes  undone,  and  the  third  part  does  itself."     That  third 
part  which  does  itself  is  a  very  expressive  hint  as  to  the  needlessness  of  our  fretting 
about  at  least  one-third  of  our  work,  besides  giving  a  little  puncture  to  our  self-con- 
ceit by  showing  that,  to  one-third  of  our  work,  we  are  not  quite  as  necessary  as  we 
had  thought  ourselves.    And  as  to  the  third,  which  the  God-fearing  man  cannot  do, 
and  which  therefore  goes,  or  seems  to  go,  undone,  there  is  a  further  hint  that 
possibly  that  third  is  better  undone,  or  is  better  done  in  some  other  way  and  by 
some  other  man.     A  young  lady  had  consecrated  herself  to  the  work  of  missions, 
and  was  about  to  go  to  India.     Just  at  that  point  an  accident  disabled  her  mother, 
and  the  journey  had  to  be  deferred.     For  three  years  she  ministered  at  that  bedside, 
until  the  mother  died,  leaving  as  her  last  request  that  she  should  go  and  visit  her 
sick  sister  in  the  far  west.     She  went,  intending  to  sail  for  India  immediately  on 
her  retili-n ;  but  she  found  the  sister  dying  with  consumption,  and  without  proper 
attendance  ;  and  once  more  she  waited  until  the  end  came.     Again  her  face  was 
turned  eastward,  when  the  sister's  husband  died,  and  five  little  orphans  had  no  soul 
on  earth  to  care  for  them  but  herself.     "  No  more  projects  for  going  to  the  heatlien," 
she  wrote.     "This  lonely  household  is  my  mission."    Fifteen  years  she  devoted  to  her 
young  charge ;  and,  in  her  forty-fifth  year,  God  showed  her  why  He  had  held  her  back 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  415 

from  India,  as  she  laid  her  hand  in  blessing  on  the  heads  of  three  of  them  ere  they 
Bailed  as  missionaries  to  the  same  land  whither,  twenty  years  before,  she  had  proposed 
to  go.  Her  broken  plan  had  been  replaced  by  a  larger  and  a  better  one.  One  could 
not  go,  but  three  went  in  her  stead  :  a  good  interest  for  twenty  years..-  But  there  is 
a  class  of  eases  where  anxiety  is  clearly  prompted  by  seK-interest,  vanity,  and 
worldly  ambition.  SeK  cannot  cast  such  anxiety  on  God,  because  God  will  not  take 
it.  When  God  bids  us  humble  ourselves.  He  surely  will  not  minister  to  our  pride. 
God  does  not  hold  out  His  arms  to  our  burdens  unconditionally ;  He  is  willing  to 
take  the  burden  on  His  hand,  if  we  ourselves  will  come  and  stay  under  His  hand, 
not  otherwise.  He  refuses  to  take  the  care  without  the  self.  If  we  will  put  the  self 
into  His  hand  absolutely.  He  will  take  it,  care  and  all.  But  ruany  an  one  would 
like  to  cast  the  care  on  God,  and  keep  the  self  in  his  own  hand.  Casting  all  our 
care  on  God  is  casting  self  on  God,  for  self  is  our  worst  care.  It  is  not  merely 
coming  to  God  with  our  failures,  and  asking  Him  to  make  them  good,  but  it  is  con- 
fessing also  that  our  unaided  seK  is  the  worst  failure  of  all,  and  saying  frankly  to 
our  heavenly  Father, "  Without  Thee  I  can  do  nothing."  God  has  different  ways  of 
teaching  this  lesson.  You  know  how  a  schoolmaster  will  sometimes  shut  himself 
up  with  a  dull  pupil,  and  hold  him  down  to  a  problem.  So  God  sometimes  shuts  a 
man  up  with  himself  and  his  own  helplessness.  Even  then  He  does  not  force  the 
man's  will ;  but  He  means  that  he  shall  for  once  look  squarely  at  the  impotence  of 
self,  that  he  shall  for  once  confess  to  himself  the  fact  that  self  has  exhausted  its 
resources,  that  the  world  cannot  help  him,  that  he  has  nothing  in  heaven  or  earth 
but  God.  That,  as  men  see  it,  is  a  terrible  blow  to  pride.  The  bitterest  draught 
that  ever  a  man  is  called  on  to  drink  is  the  confession  that  he  cannot  help  himself. 
The  world  says  a  man  is  at  his  worst  then.  I  am  not  sure  of  that.  The  Bible 
would  say  that  he  is  just  within  reach  of  his  best.  The  result  of  this  humbling  of 
self,  and  throwing  it  with  its  anxiety  on  God,  is  quite  contrary  to  human  logic. 
The  world  says  the  man  who  is  humbkd  is  the  crushed  man,  the  defeated  man. 
The  world  is  right,  if  the  man  is  simply  crushed  into  submission  by  overwhelming 
power ;  but  the  world  is  quite  wrong  if  the  man  has  voluntarily  bowed  the  high 
head  of  his  pride,  and  has  cheerfully  yielded  up  his  will  with  his  care  to  God. 
Such  humbling,  if  Scripture  is  to  be  believed,  is  the  way  to  exaltation  :  "  He  that 
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  You  see  something  of  the  same  kind  in 
ordinary  matters.  Now  and  then  you  find  a  man  with  more  conceit  than  ability, 
with  more  self-confidence  than  resources,  who  attempts  to  lead  a  great  movement, 
or  to  conduct  a  great  business  ;  and  the  very  position  brings  out  his  weakness,  and  the 
more  men  say  he  is  a  fool  and  a  weakling.  And  yet  not  a  few  men  have  had  the 
sense  or  the  grace  to  see  the  true  state  of  the  case  in  time,  and  to  swallow  pride,  and 
frankly  to  confess  weakness  by  retiring  from  a  place  for  which  they  were  unfit. 
From  that  moment  they  began  to  rise.  They  never  rose  to  the  high  position  which 
they  coveted  at  first,  but  they  rose  to  a  true  position  which  they  could  hold  ;  and 
that  was  really  higher  than  the  false  position  which  they  could  not  hold.  They 
became  respectable  and  useful  men,  doing  good  work  in  lower  places.  What  is  true 
in  some  cases  in  society  is  true  always  of  men  in  relation  to  God.  The  man  is 
always  in  a  false  position,  a  position  he  cannot  fill,  when  he  ignores  God  and  tries 
to  take  care  of  himself.  He  is  a  better  man,  a  more  efficient  man,  by  humbling 
himself  under  God's  hand  and  letting  God  take  care  of  him.  Bead  on  a  little 
farther  in  this  same  chapter,  and  you  find  that  thought  again  :  "  The  God  of  all 
grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  His  eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  ye  have 
Buifered  a  whUe,  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you."  Ah !  that  is 
exaltation  indeed ;  security,  steadfastness,  mastery  over  that  which  burdens  the 
world,  peace  which  the  world  cannot  give  nor  take  away.  {M.  R.  Viiiceiit,  D.D.) 
A  cure  for  care  : — Very  comforting  has  such  an  exhortation  been  to  suffering  saints 
in  all  ages.  Possibly  Peter  had  in  his  mind  when  he  penned  it  Psalm  Iv.  22.  The 
Jewish  Church  on  many  a  dark  and  cloudy  day  entered  into  the  spirit  of  our  text. 
Luther,  we  are  told,  in  the  trying  times  of  the  Beformation,  used  to  say  to  Melanc- 
thon,  "  Philip,  let  us  sing  the  forty-sixth  psalm,  and  let  them  do  their  best " ;  and  so 
they  sang  in  their  own  German  tongue  that  grand  old  psalm.  Thus  they  "  cast 
all  their  care  on  God."  Let  us  consider  this  subject  of  care  or  anxiety,  first,  in 
some  of  its  negative  aspects.  1.  Christians  ought  not  to  make  cares  for  themselves. 
How  many  business  men,  with  hmited  capital  and  little  experience,  rush  into 
difficulties.  2.  Neither  ought  Christians  to  conjure  up  ima^ary  troubles,  or  to 
anti-date  their  troubles.  How  very  miserable  some  people  are  because  of  that 
dreadful  to-morrow.     3.  Neither  ought  we  to  be  careless  in  reference  to  the  future. 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Approaching  the  positive  aspect  of  our  subject,  and  taking  it  for  granted  that  men 
are  not  making  cares  for  themselves,  the  question  presses  upon  us,  "  Is  there  a 
remedy  for  care?  "  1.  So  far  as  many  are  concerned,  the  text  might  just  as  well 
have  read,  "  Cast  none  of  you  your  care  on  God,  for  God  does  not  care  for  you." 
So  far  as  even  many  professing  Christians  are  concerned,  the  text  might  have  run 
thus  :  "  Casting  your  great  cares  upon  God,  and  so  far  as  daily  cares  are  concerned, 
do  the  best  you  can  to  bear  them."  So  far  as  the  burden  of  sin  is  concerned,  the 
believing,  trusting  soul  says,  "  Thank  God  all  is  well.  I  have  realised  that  my 
blessed  Saviour  '  bore  the  huge  burden  away'  ;  but  it  is  the  little  cares  of  every- 
day life."  Yes,  these  little  cares  and  daily  worries  bring  the  careworn  look,  and 
leave  behind  the  wrinkles.  Now,  here  in  this  text  we  have  God's  own  remedy,  for, 
observe,  it  is  not  "  some  of  your  cares,"  or  "  your  great  cares,"  but  "  all  your  care."^ 

2.  Observe  the  blessed  assurance  here  given,  for  "  He  careth  for  you."  {W.  Halli- 
day.)         Casting  care  : — I.  Man's  caee.     The  sources  from  whence  our  cares  arise. 

I.  There  are  frequent  misunderstandings  with  our  fellow-men.  2.  There  are  our 
business  and  family  claims.  3.  And  there  are  the  religious  claims  that  press  upon 
us.  Few  of  us  have  as  much  care  from  this  source  as  we  ought  to  have.  II. 
God's  care.  "  He  careth  for  you."  His  care  cannot  be  quite  like  ours.  There 
can  be  no  fretfulness  in  it,  and  no  sort  of  fear  and  despair.  1.  His  care  of  all  the 
creatures  He  has  made,  and  all  that  is  involved  in  giving  to  each  his  "  meat  in  due 
season."     2.  But  we  may  further  think  of  God's  precise  knowledge  of  our  anxieties. 

3.  But  there  is  something  more  and  better  than  even  this ;  there  is  God's  care  of 
us  in  the  midst  of  our  anxieties.  He  cares  for  the  influence  of  things  on  our 
characters  rather  than  for  the  things,  as  the  goldsmith  cares  for  his  gold  rather 
than  for  the  fire.  III.  God's  cake  of  us  is  a  persuasion  to  cast  our  care  on 
Him.  He  cares,  why  should  we  ?  Why  should  we  not  be  as  calm  as  the  sailor  boy 
in  the  wild  storm  who  knew  that  "  his  father  held  the  helm  "?  But  it  is  easier  to 
speak  in  general  terms  about  our  "  casting  care  on  God  "  than  it  is  to  explain  precisely 
•what  it  involves.  A  very  simple  illustration  may  help  our  apprehension.  A  small 
tradesman  had  a  case  coming  on  in  the  county  court,  on  which,  for  him,  every- 
thing depended.  A  decision  given  against  him  meant  ruin.  Worrying  over  it  day 
and  night,  he  had  become  thin,  looked  haggard,  lost  appetite  and  sleep.  One  day 
there  came  into  his  shop  a  friend  of  his  boyhood,  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  years. 
This  friend  was  much  distressed  at  his  appearance,  and  said,  "  Why,  whatever  is 
the  matter  with  you  ?  I  am  sure  you  must  have  some  grave  anxiety  weighing  on 
your  mind."  The  tradesman  poured  out  to  his  friend  all  the  story  of  his  troubles  ; 
and  then  that  friend  said,  "Don't  you  trouble  any  more  about  it.  I  am  a  lawyer, 
and  practise  at  the  courts,  and  I  have  had  just  such  cases  as  yours.  I  see  where 
the  point  of  difficulty  in  your  case  is,  and  I  have  no  doubt  we  shall  be  able  to  get 
you  through  all  right.  You  trust  the  matter  entirely  to  me.  I  will  appear  for  you, 
and  all  will  be  well."  What  a  relief  that  tradesman  felt !  He  had  lost  his  burden, 
for  he  had  cast  it  on  his  friend.  "  0  Lord,  I  am  oppressed ;  undertake  Thou  for 
me."     (TJie  Weekly  Pulpit.)  Cast  care  on  God  : — I.  Who  the  persons  are  to 

WHOM   THE   EXHORTATION   MAT   PROPERLY   BE    ADDRESSED.       He    Wl'iteS    tO    those    "  who 

are  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God, 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  He  addresseth  believers  in  Christ  Jesus, 
"  who  loved  Him  though  unseen,"  whom  he  distinguished  as  "  a  chosen  genera- 
tion, a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people."  These  are  the  objects 
of  God's  paternal  care,  and  they  only  are  qualified  to  cast  their  care  upon  Him. 
You  cannot  cast  your  care  upon  God  till  your  acquaintance  with  Him  be  begun. 

II.  TiiE  NATURE  AND  EXTENT  OF  THE  DUTY  ITSELF.  It  differs  entirely  in  its  nature 
from  that  carelessness  and  insensibility  which  the  bulk  of  mankind  too  generally 
indulge.  The  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  this  exhortation  is  addressed  doth 
likewise  serve  to  limit  the  extent  of  the  duty.  It  is  not  every  sort  of  care  that  we 
are  invited  to  cast  upon  God,  but  only  the  care  of  those  things  which  the  Christian 
dare  avow  in  the  presence  of  his  Father,  and  humbly  ask  of  Him  by  prayer.  We 
must  first  examine  the  object  of  our  desire,  whether  it  be  good  in  itself  and  fit  for 
us  ;  whether  it  be  subservient  to  our  spiritual  interest ;  and  if  not,  we  must  neither 
cast  the  care  of  it  upon  God  nor  keep  it  to  ourselves,  but  throw  it  away  altogether. 
1.  A  steadfast  persuasion  that  all  events  are  ordered  by  God  ;  that  we  and  all  our 
interests  are  continually  in  His  hand,  and  that  nothing  can  befall  us  without  His 
permission.  2.  To  cast  our  care  upon  God  is  to  make  His  will  the  guide  and 
measure  of  ours.  3.  That  we  renounce  all  confidence  in  the  creature,  and  place 
our  trust  in  God  alone.     A  divided  trust  between   God  and  the  creature  is  as 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  417 

foolish  and  unsafe  as  to  set  one  foot  upon  a  rock  and  the  other  upon  a  quicksand. 
4.  To  cast  all  your  care  upon  God  implies  a  full  and  unsuspecting  dependence  upon 
His  wisdom  and  goodness  ;  such  a  dependence  as  quiets  the  mind,  disposing  it  to 
wait  patiently  upon  God,  and  to  accept  with  thankfulness  whatsoever  He  is  pleased 
to  appoint.     [R.  Walker.)  Earthly  and  heavenly  care  : — The  first  difficulty  in 

ridding  ourselves  of  irreligious  care  is  in  distinguishing  it  from  that  better  kind  of 
care  which  is  a  duty.  While  St.  Paul  bids  the  Philippians  "  be  careful  for 
nothing,"  he  commends  the  Corinthians  for  their  carefulness,  classing  it  with  the 
graces  of  self -purification  and  zeal.  He  says  he  would  have  the  disciples  "without 
carefulness  " ;  yet  there  is  plainly  a  limit  to  this  recommendation,  for  he  exhorts 
them  to  "  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works,"  and  takes  upon  himself  the  "  care  of 
the  churches."  How  shaU.  we  at  once  have  care  and  cast  care  away?  ^  There  must 
be  a  principle  that  reconciles  these  apparent  disagreements.  It  will  not  do  to 
answer  that  the  difference  is  one  of  quantity,'  It  is  common  to  say  that  the  great 
mistake  about  earthly  care  is  in  allowing  too  much  of  it ;  that  it  is  innocent  in 
moderate  measures.  But  there  are  kinds  of  care  so  purely  selfish,  so  earthly,  so 
poisoned  with  envy,  avarice,  or  the  passion  for  admiration,  that  they  are  evil  irre- 
spective of  all  questions  of  more  or  less.  Christ  does  not  form  souls  into  His  like- 
ness by  such  rules.  He  breathes  into  them  new  desires,  baptizes  them,  into  a  new 
spirit.  Equally  vain  is  it  to  undertake  to  strike  out  a  Christian  course,  by  saying 
we  will  distinguish  between  the  objects  of  our  anxiety — as  by  being  careful  for  the 
spirit  and  negligent  of  the  body ;  careful  for  faith  and  hope  and  charity,  but 
negligent  of  daily  business,  household,  and  society.  This  is  not  Christ's  righteous- 
ness. Jesus  shows  us  the  Father  Himself  taking  care  of  the  fowls  of  the  air,  of 
sheep  and  oxen,  and  of  the  little  fibres  of  our  bodily  frames.  Whatever  care  is 
right  at  all  is  right  here,  as  well  as  hereafter.  And  the  burden  that  we  are  to  cast 
on  the  Lord  is  the  burden  of  the  life  that  now  is.  At  this  point  precisely  we  strike 
the  true  distinction  and  the  Christian  doctrine.  All  right  and  lawful  care  is  just 
that  which  we  can  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  carry  with  us  to  our  Lord,  to  rest 
it  on  that  sympathising  heart  in  Him  which  has  already  carried  our  griefs,  and 
healed  the  disorder  of  the  world  by  the  stripes  of  His  sacrifice:  It  is  the  care 
which  keeps  the  responsibility  of  life  without  despairing  under  it.  It  is  willing 
fiuft'ering,  and  unwillingness  is  the  only  intolerable  burden.  Eid  of  that,  my  future 
€are  is  gone.  The  forbidden  care  is  that  which  we  cannot  carry  with  us  to  God  or 
cast  contentedly  into  His  keeping.  It  hinders  the  affections  when  they  try  to  rise 
heavenward.  It  doubts  whether  Christ  is  still  near  at  hand  and  His  grace  suffi- 
cient. This  is  earthly  care,  unprofitable,  unreasonable,  unholy  care — the  care  that 
wears  out  men  and  women  before  their  time.  We  can  take  this  principle  with  us 
into  each  of  the  three  great  regions  where  anxiety  is  most  apt  to  become  excessive. 
We  have  a  world  without  us,  a  world  within  us,  and  a  world  before  us,  where  our 
responsibility  is  accompanied  at  every  step  with  care.  1.  In  the  world  without  us 
we  have  seen  how  carefully  we  are  called  to  live.  Blessed  is  the  man  who,  having 
done  his  best,  can  settle  himself  calmly  into  God's  order  for  him,  put  anxiety  behind 
him  at  the  end  of  each  day's  work,  reckon  results  as  God's  alone,  believe  that  God 
takes  care  of  ships  and  harvests  as  well  as  of  rituals  and  revelations,  and  so  cast 
every  burdensome  care  on  Him.  2.  There  is  a  world  before  us.  The  very  mystery 
of  that  veiled  country  seems  to  tempt  the  imagination  to  people  it  with  alarms. 
Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow  as  to-morrow,  as  something  lying  outside  of  our 
control,  held  by  God's  hand  for  purposes  of  His  own.  Accept  the  heavenly  order. 
Behold  the  lilies  how  they  grow.  3.  There  is  a  world  within  us,  where  the  spiritual 
formation  of  us  goes  on  and  our  eternity  is  making  for  us  every  hour.  Doubtless 
there  are  some  minds  that  never  thought  of  it  as  possible  that  any  care  about  their 
spiritual  salvation  and  the  things  of  religion  could  be  wrong.  Yet  if  you  would 
come  to  the  heights  of  holy  hving  with  Christ  and  His  saints,  you  must  learn  that , 
impatience  does  not  cease  to  be  impious  because  it  goes  to  church,  nor  does  a  com 
plaining  spirit  honour  the  Eedeemer  though  it  uses  the  vocabulary  of  piety.  If 
your  anxiety  is  only  about  your  salvation  as  a  selfish  and  exclusive  thing,  it  is 
earthly  care,  and  needs  to  be  cast  off.  {Bp.  HimtingtonS  Trust  in  God: — I. 
Some  plain  illustbation  of  the  duty  hebe  enjoined.  1.  A  firm  persuasion  of 
His  infinite  perfections,  of  His  aU-governing  providence,  and  of  His  watchful  care. 

2.  A  calm  and  constant  reliance  on  Him,  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  Mediator. 

3.  An  unreserved  resignation  of  our  lot  to  the  disposal  of  that  God  and  Saviour  on 
whom  our  hopes  for  eternity  are  placed.  4.  Casting  our  cares  on  God  not  only 
implies  referring  our  present  and  future  lot  to  the  unerring  disposal  of  His  wisdom, 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

but  holding  delightful  intercourse  with  Him  in  the  various  occurrences  of  our 
daily  pilgrimage  through  life.      11.    Some    plain   dikections   for  enabling   you 

RIGHTLY     to     CAST     TOUB     BURDENS     ON     THE     LORD,    EVEN    IN    THE    TIME    OF    SEVEREST 

DISTRESS.  1.  Be  sure  that  you  are  interested  in  Christ,  and  that  you  rely  on  His 
merits  and  mediation.  2.  Live  daily  by  faith  on  God  Himself,  as  your  all-sufficient 
portion  through  the  Redeemer ;  and  then  you  may  cheerfully  leave  it  with  Him 
either  to  wound  or  to  heal,  to  exalt  or  to  lay  low.  3.  For  enabhng  you  to  cast  all 
your  cares  on  the  Lord,  and,  in  all  the  trials  of  life,  to  maintain  a  steady  trust  in 
Him  who  reigns  omnipotent,  live  daily  by  faith  on  the  great  and  precious  promises 
of  His  Word ;  let  these  promises  be  your  support.  4.  If  you  would  hve  without 
anxious  care,  and  would  maintain  habitual  trust  in  God  amidst  the  dangers  and 
trials  of  hfe,  look  on  this  life  as  your  pilgrimage,  and  long  for  heaven  as  your 
home.  This  will  prevent  your  indulging  in  immoderate  attachment  to  the  things 
of  time,  and  will  preserve  you  from  many  mortifying  disappointments  which  pro- 
duce fretf ulness  and  depression.  Conclusion :  1.  Learn  how  foolish  and  arrogant 
those  persons  are  who  trust  for  safety  and  success  in  themselves,  independently  of 
God ;  who  rely  on  their  own  wisdom,  talents,  or  exertions.  2.  Learn  that  equally 
foolish  and  arrogant  is  confidence  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  or  placing  your  trust  in 
fellow-mortals.  3.  Learn  how  well  it  becomes  us  to  unite  in  the  devotional 
triumph  of  David,  "Happy  is  he  who  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  whose 
hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God."  4.  Let  me  now  direct  my  exhortation  to  those  who 
have  taken  the  glorious  Jehovah  for  their  refuge  and  their  trust.  (1)  Mark  with 
care  the  daily  dealings  of  Providence  towards  you  and  yours  ;  treasure  them  up  in 
your  memory  for  a  time  of  need,  and  diligently  observe  the  frame  of  your  own 
mind,  both  under  mercies  and  trials.  (2)  Remember  that  your  trials  are  all  necessary, 
and  are  sent  in  love,  to  purify  you  from  sin,  to  wean  you  from  the  world,  to  bring  you 
near  to  God,  and  to  prepare  you  for  heaven.  (3)  Cast  all  your  burdens  on  the  Lord, 
and  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  His  time  and  manner  of  deliverance.  {A.  Bonar.y 
How  to  dispose  of  care : — There  is  suph  a  thing  as  care.  Who  does  not  know  it  by 
experience  ?  It  is  a  burden,  and  it  has  also  a  sting.  There  is  care  both  for  ourselves 
and  others,  which  God  Himself  has  cast  upon  us ;  and  of  which  it  were  sinful  to 
attempt  to  make  any  other  disposition.  But  over  and  above  this,  there  is  a  large 
amount  of  anxiety  which  is  unnecessary,  useless,  injurious.  But  what  shall  we  do 
with  it  ?  Divide  it  with  others  we  may  to  some  little  extent.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  sympathy.  Yet  the  very  etymology  of  the  word  "  sympathy  "  evinces  that  it  is  no 
remedy.  It  is,  after  all,  a  suffering  together.  Mixing  tears  does  indeed  diminish 
their  bitterness.  There  is  a  better  way  of  disposing  of  care  than  to  cast  it  on  our 
feUow-creatures.  Indeed,  what  fellow-creatures  can  we  find  who  have  not  enough 
of  their  own  to  bear  ?  There  are  some  who  cast  off  care  without  reference  to  what 
becomes  of  it.  They  sing,  "  Begone,  duU  care."  These  are  the  reckless.  Care  may 
go  at  their  bidding,  but  the  worst  of  it  is  it  is  sure  to  return  again,  and  it  comes  back 
a  heavier  burden.  This  is  not  the  way  to  dispose  of  care.  Yet  there  is  a  way 
whereby  all  excess  of  anxiety  may  be  effectually  removed.  It  is  to  cast  care  on  God. 
He  can  take  the  burden,  however  heavy.  You  do  not  doubt  that ;  but  you  ask, 
•'  Will  He  ? — may  I  cast  it  on  Him  ?  Will  such  greatness  stoop  to  such  littleness  ? 
— such  holiness  come  down  to  such  vileness  ?  "  Yes,  it  will,  for  condescension  is 
one  characteristic  of  greatness.  So  far  is  it  from  being  presumption  to  cast  your 
care  on  God,  it  is  a  sin  not  to  do  it.  There  is  a  reason  given  by  Peter  for  casting 
care  on  God,  that  is  inexpressibly  touching.  He  follows  no  flourishing  of  rhetoric, 
but  says,  "  He  careth  for  you."  Why  should  you  care  for  yourself,  since  God  cares 
for  you  ?  What  a  thought  to  carry  through  this  vale  of  tears,  and  to  go  down  with 
into  the  deeper  valley  of  death,  that  God  cares  for  me !  Some  poor  saints  think 
nobody  cares  for  them.  But  God  does.  Is  not  that  enough  ?  (W.  Nevins,  D.D.) 
A  cure  for  care: — I.  The  disease  of  care.  1.  Care  even  when  exercised  upon 
legitimate  objects,  if  carried  to  excess,  hath  in  itself  the  nature  of  sin.  Axiy thing 
which  is  a  transgression  of  God's  command  is  sin,  and  if  there  were  no  other 
command,  the  one  in  our  text  being  broken  would  involve  us  in  iniquity.  Besides, 
the  very  essence  of  anxious  care  is  the  imagining  that  we  are  wiser  than  God,  and 
the  thrusting  of  ourselves  into  His  place,  to  do  for  Him  that  which  we  dream  He 
either  cannot  or  will  not  do ;  we  attempt  to  think  of  that  which  we  fancy  He  will 
forget ;  or  we  labour  to  take  upon  ourselves  that  burden  which  He  either  is  not  able 
or  willing  to  carry  for  us.  2.  But,  further,  these  anxious  cares  very  frequently  lead 
to  other  sins,  sometimes  to  overt  acts  of  transgression.  The  tradesman  who  is  not 
able  to  leave  his  business  with  God,  may  be  tempted  to  indulge  in  the  tricks  of 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  419 

trade;  nay,  he  may  be  prevailed  upon  to  put  out  an  unholy  hr.-d  with  which  to 
help  himself.     Now  this  is  forsaking  the  fountain  to  go  to  the  broken  cisterns,  a 
crime  which  was  laid  against  Israel  of  old,  a  wrath  provoking  iniquity.     3.  As  it  is 
in  itself  sin,  and  the  mother  of  sin,  we  note  again  that  it  brings  misery,  for  where 
sin  is,  sorrow  shall  soon  follow.     4.  Besides  this,  these  anxious  cares  do  not  only 
lead  us  into  sin,  and  destroy  our  peace  of  mind,  but  they  also  weaken  us  for  use- 
fulness.    When  one  has  left  all  his  cares  at  home,  how  well  he  can  work  for  his 
Master,  but  when  those  cares  tease  us  in  the  pulpit,  it  is  hard  preaching  the  gospel* 
There   was   a  great  king  who   once   employed  a  merchant  in  his  service   as  an 
ambassador  to  foreign  courts.     Now  the  merchant  before  he  went  away  said  to  the 
king,  "  My  own  business  requires  all  my  care,  and  though  I  am  always  willing  to  be 
your  majesty's  servant,  yet  if  I  attend  to  your  business  as  I  ought,  I  am  sure  my 
own  wiU  be  ruined."     "  Well,"  said  the  king,  "  you  take  care  of  my  business,  and 
I  will  take  care  of  yours.     Use  your  best  endeavours,  and  I  will  answer  for  it  that 
you  shall  be  nothing  the  loser  for  the  zeal  which  you  take  from  yourself  to  give  to 
me."    And  so  our  God  says  to  us,  as  His  servants,  "  Do  My  work,  and  I  will  do 
yours.     Serve  Me,  and  I  will  serve  you."     5.  These  carking  cares,  of  whose  guilt 
perhaps  we  think  so  httle,  do  very  great  damage  to  our  blessed  and  holy  cause. 
Your  sad  countenances  hinder  souls  who  are  anxious,  and  they  present  a  ready 
excuse  for  souls  who  are  careless.     6.  I  close  the  description  of  this  matter  by  saying 
that  in  the  most  frightful  manner  cares  have  brought  many  to  the  poisoned  cup, 
the  halter,  and  the  knife,  and  hundreds  to  the  madhouse.   What  makes  the  constant 
increase  of  our  lunatic  asylums  ;  why  is  it  that  in  almost  every  country  in  England 
new  asylums  have  to  be  erected,  wing  after  wing  being  added  to  these  buildings  in 
which  the  imbecile  and  the  raving  are  confined  ?    It  is  because  we  will  carry  what 
we  have  no  business  to  carry — our  own  cares,  and  until  there  shall  be  a  general 
keeping  of  the  day  of  rest  throughout  England,  and  until  there  shall  be  a  more 
general  resting  of  our  souls  and  all  we  have  upon  God,  we  must  expect  to  hear  of 
increasing  suicides  and  increasing  lunacies.    II.  The  blessed  remedy  to  be  applied. 
Somebody  must  carry  these  cares.    If  I  cannot  do  it  myself,  can  I  find  any  one  who 
will?     My  Father  who  is  in  heaven  stands  waiting  to  be  my  burden-bearer.     1.  Qiie 
of  the  first  and  most  natural  cares  with  which  we  are  vexed  is  the  care  for  daily 
bread.     Use  your  most  earnest  endeavours,  humble  yourself  under  the  mighty  hand 
of  God ;  if  you  cannot  do  one  thing  do  another  ;  if  you  cannot  earn  your  bread  as  a 
gentleman  earn  it  as  a  poor  man  ;  if  you  cannot  earn  it  by  the  sweat  of  your  brains 
do  it  by  the  sweat  of  your  brow  ;  sweep  a  crossing  if  you  cannot  do  anything  else, 
for  if  a  man  will  not  work  neither  let  him  eat ;  but  having  brought  yourself  to  that, 
if  still  every  door  is  shut,  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good,  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in 
the  land,  and  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed."     2.  Business  men,  who  have  not  exactly  to 
hunt  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  are  often  tormented  with  the  anxieties  of  large 
transactions  and  extended  commerce.     I  say,  "  Brother,  hold  hard  here,  what  are 
you  doing  ?    Are  you  sure  that   in  this  you  have  used  your  best  prudence  and 
wisdom,  and  your  best  industry,  and  given  it  your  best  attention?  "    "  Yes."    Well 
then,  what  more  have  you  to  do  ?     Suppose  you  were  to  weep  all  night,  will  that 
keep  your  ship  from  going  on  the  Goodwin  sands  ?     Suppose  you  could  cry  your 
eyes  out,  will  that  make  a  thief  honest  ?     Suppose  you  could  fret  yQurself  till  you 
could  not  eat,  would  that  raise  the  price  of  goods  ?     One  would  think  if  you  were 
just  to  say,  "  Well,  I  have  done  all  that  is  tooe  done,  now  I  will  leave  it  with  God," 
that  you  might  go  about  your  business  and  have  the  full  use  of  your  senses  to  attenj^ 
to  it.     3.  Another  anxiety  of  a  personal  kind  which  is  very  natural,  and  indeed  very 
proper  if  it  be  not  carried  to  excess,  is  the  care  of  your  children.     Mother,  father, 
you  have  prayed  for  your  children,  you  trust  you  have  set  them  a  holy  example,  you 
labour  day  by  day  to  teach  them  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  it  is  well,  now  let  your 
souls  quietly  expect  the  blessing,  leave  your  offspring  with  God ;  cast  your  sons 
and  daughters  upon  their  father's  God  ;  let  no  impatience  intrude  if  they  are  not 
converted  in  your  time,  and  let  no  distrust  distract  your  mind  if  they  should  seem 
to  belie  your  hopes.     4.  But  each  Christian  wiU  in  his  time  have  personal  troubles 
of  a  higher  order,  namely,  spiritual  cares.     He  is  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope, 
but  he  fears  that  his  faith  will  yet  die.     As  yet  he  has  been  victorious,  but  he 
trembles  lest  he  should  one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy.     I  beseech  thee, 
cast  this  care  upon  God  for  He  careth  for  you.    Never  let  anxieties  about  sanctifica- 
tion  destroy  your  confidence  of  justification.     What  if  you  be  a  sinner !     Christ  died 
to  save  sinners.     What  if  you  be  undeserving!     "  In  due  time  Christ  died  for  the 
ungodly."    Grace  is  free.    The  invitation  is  still  open  to  you ;    rest  the  whole 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

burden  of  your  soul's  salvation  where  it  must  rest.  5.  There  are  many  cares  not 
of  a  personal  but  rather  of  an  ecclesiastical  character,  which  often  insinuate  them- 
selves and  plead  for  life,  but  which  must  nevertheless  be  put  away.  There  are 
cares  about  how  God's  work  is  to  be  carried  on.  We  may  properly  pray,  "  Lord, 
send  labourers,"  and  with  equal  propriety  we  may  ask  that  He  who  has  the  silver 
and  the  gold  may  give  them  for  His  own  work ;  but  after  that  we  must  cast  our  care 
on  God.  Then,  if  we  get  over  that,  there  will  be  another  anxiety — one  which  frets 
me  often  enough — which  is,  the  success  of  God's  work.  Husbandmen,  your  Great 
Employer  sent  you  out  to  sow  the  seed,  but  if  no  grain  of  it  should  ever  come  up, 
if  you  sowed  the  seed  as  He  told  you,  and  where  He  told  you.  He  will  never  lay 
the  blame  of  a  defective  harvest  to  you.  And  sometimes  there  is  another  care,  it  is 
the  care  lest  some  little  slip  made  by  ourselves  or  others  should  give  cause  to  the 
enemy  to  blaspheme.  A  careful  jealousy  is  very  well  if  it  leads  to  caution,  but  very 
ill  if  it  leads  to  a  carking,  weak  anxiety.  HI.  The  sweet  inducemij;nt  to  leave 
youR  BUEDEN  :  "  He  careth  for  you."  1.  Believe  in  9,  universal  providence,  the 
Lord  cares  for  ants  and  angels,  for  worms  and  for  worlds ;  he  cares  for  cherubim 
and  for  sparrows,  for  seraphim  and  for  insects.  Cast  your  care  on  Him,  He  that 
calleth  the  stars  by  their  names,  and  leadeth  them  out  by  numbers,  by  their  hosts. 
Let  His  universal  providence  cheer  you.  2.  Think  next  of  His  particular  providence 
over  all  the  saints.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints." 
"  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  Him."  3.  And  then 
let  the  thought  of  His  special  love  to  you  be  the  very  essence  of  your  comfort.  "  I 
will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  God  says  that  as  much  to  you  as  He  said 
it  to  any  saint  of  old.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  On  solicitude  : — Man  is  made  up  of 
soul  and  body.  To  accomplish  the  happiness  of  such  a  being  it  is  necessary  that 
both  of  these  should  be  free  from  disquietude.  It  is  therefore  the  great  aim  of 
religion  to  point  out  the  most  amiable  views  of  the  character  of  God,  and  to  incul- 
cate the  exercise  of  perpetual  hope,  and  trust  in  His  most  beneficent  providence  as 
the  only  effectual  instrument  of  our  present  felicity.    I.  Such  a  precept  as  this 

CANNOT  BE  SUPPOSED  TO  INCULCATE    AN    ENTIEE    NEGLIGENCE,  OK    A    TOTAL   INATTENTION, 

TO  OUR  EXTERNAL  SITUATION  IN  LIFE.  Kcligion  cxpicssly  forbids  US  to  be  slothful  in 
business.  It  calls  us  to  action.  God  is  concerned  for  your  good,  and  careth  for  all 
your  interests.  II.  To  offer  some  arguments  to  enforce  this  precept.  1.  All 
immoderate  care  is  highly  criminal  and  impious  in  its  nature.  Weak  must  be  that 
faith,  and  little  must  that  mind  have  learned  of  the  nature  of  its  Creator,  which  can 
observe  that  He  dispenses  His  bounty  in  such  abundance  through  aU  the  works  of 
His  hands,  and  still  entertain  the  secret  thought  that  His  love  is  exhausted  on  the 
minutest  objects,  and  that  there  is  nothing  in  reserve  for  the  sons  of  men.  2.  All 
inordinate  care  about  the  events  of  life  is  offering  an  affront  to  the  love  and  good- 
ness which  we  have  formerly  experienced,  and  deeply  partakes  of  the  nature  of 
ingratitude  to  God.  3.  An  anxious,  a  discontented  temper  of  mind,  must  prove  a 
source  of  misery,  must  subject  the  soul  to  perpetual  uneasiness  and  pain  in  all  the 
situations  of  life.  He  is  blind  to  every  comfortable  circumstance  that  may  enter 
into  his  lot.  His  imagination  ever  dwells  upon  some  disagreeable  point ;  and  it  is 
not  in  the  power  of  all  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  to  give  it  any  sort  of  solace. 
4.  All  such  peevish  care  is  utterly  unprofitable  and  impotent,  and  totally  incapable 
of  ever  accomplishing  its  end.  The  stream  of  providence  perpetually  rolls  on  with 
an  impetuous  current ;  and  he  who  ventures  to  oppose  it  shall  only  fatigue  himself 
and  waste  his  strength  and  spirits  in  vain.  (John  Main,  D.D.)  A  sermon  to 
vdnisters  and  other  tried  believers  .-—The  verse  preceding  is,  "  Humble  yourselves 
therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt  you  in  due  time."  If 
we  are  truly  humble  we  shall  cast  our  care  upon  God,  and  by  that  process  our  joy 
will  be  exalted.  Oh  for  more  humility,  for  then  shall  we  have  more  tranquillity. 
Pride  begets  anxiety.  The  verse  which  follows  our  text  is  this — "  Be  sober,  be 
vigilant,"  &c.  Cast  your  care  upon  God,  because  you  need  all  your  powers  of 
thought  to  battle  with  the  great  enemy.  He  hopes  to  devour  you  by  care.  I. 
First,  EXPOUND  the  text — "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him  ;  for  He  careth  for  you." 
The  word  used  in  reference  to  God  is  applied  to  caring  for  the  poor,  and  in  another 
place  to  the  watchfulness  of  a  shepherd.  Our  anxiety  and  God's  care  are  two  very 
different  things.  You  are  to  cast  your  care,  which  is  folly,  upon  the  Lord,  for  He 
exercises  a  care  which  is  wisdom.  Care  to  us  is  exhausting,  but  God  is  all-sufficient. 
Care  to  us  is  sinful,  but  God's  care  of  us  is  holy.  Care  distracts  us  from  service, 
but  the  Divine  mind  does  not  forget  one  thing  while  remembering  another. 
"  Casting,"  says  the  apostle.     He  does  not  say,  "laying  all  your  care  upon  Him." 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  421 

but  he  uses  a  much  more  energetic  word.     You  have  to  cast  the  load  upon  the 
Lord ;  the  act  will  require  effort.     Here  is  a  work  worthy  of  faith.     You  wiU  have 
to  lift  with  all  your  soul  before  the  burden  can  be  shifted ;  that  effort,  however,  will 
not  be  half  so  exhausting  as  the  effort  of  carrying  your  load  yourself.     Note  the 
next  words :    "  Upon  Him."     You  may  tell  your  griefs  to  others  to  gain  their 
sympathy ;  you  may  ask  friends  to  help  you,  and  so  exercise  your  humility ;  but 
let  your  requests  to  man  be  ever  in  subordination  to  your  waiting  upon  God.    Some 
have  obtained  their  fuU  share  of  human  help  by  much  begging  from  their  fellow 
Christians  ;  but  it  is  a  nobler  thing  to  make  known  your  requests  unto  God ;  and 
somehow  those  who  beg  only  of  God  are  wondrously  sustained  where  others  fail. 
■Cease,  then,  from  man ;  cast  all  your  care  upon  God,  and  upon  Him  only.     Certain 
courses  of  action  are  the  very  reverse  of  casting  all  your  care  upon  God,  and  one  is 
indifference.     Every  man  is  bound  to  care  about  his  life-duties,  and  the  claims  of 
his  family.     Casting  care  upon  God  is  the  very  reverse  of  recklessness  and  incon- 
siderateness.     It  is  not  casting  care  upon  God  when  a  man  does  that  which  is 
wrong  in  order  to  clear  himself  ;  yet  this  is  too  often  tried.     He  who  compromises 
truth  to  avoid  pecuniary  loss  is  hewing  out  a  broken  cistern  for  himself.     He  who 
borrows  when  he  knows  he  cannot  pay,  he  who  enters  into  wild  speculations  to 
increase  his  income,  he  who  does  aught  that  is  ungodly  in  order  to  turn  a  penny  is 
not  casting  his  care  upon  God.     How,  then,  are  we  to  cast  all  our  care  upon  God  ? 
i/Two  things  need  to  be  done.     It  is  a  heavy  load  that  is  to  be  cast  upon  God,  and  it\ 
requires  the  hand  of  prayer  and  the  hand  of  faith  to  make  the  transfer.     Prayer  \ 
tells  God  what  the  care  is,  and  asks  God  to  help,  while  faith  believes  that  God  can    \ 
and  will  do  it.     When  you  have  thus  lifted  your  care  into  its  true  position  and  cast    J 
it  upon  God,  take  heed  that  you  do  not  pick  it  up  again.     Henceforth  let  us  leave  / 
worldlings  to  fret  over  the  cares  of  this  life ;  as  for  us,  let  our  conversation  be  in 
heaven,  and  let  us  be  anxious  only  to  end  anxiety  by  a  childlike  confidence  in  God. 
II.  To  ENFOKCE  the  text.     I  will  give  you  certain  reasons,  and  then  the  reason  why 
you  should  cast  all  your  care  upon  God.     1.  First,  the  ever  blessed  One  commands 
you  to  do  it.     If  you  do  not  trust  in  God  you  will  be  distinctly  sinful ;  you  are  as 
much  commanded  to  trust  as  to  love.     2.  Next,  cast  all  your  cares  on  God,  because 
you  will  have  matters  enough  to  think  of  even  then.     There  is  the  care  to  love  and 
serve  Him  better  ;  the  care  to  understand  His  Word ;  the  care  to  preach  it  to  His 
people ;  the  care  to  experience  His  fellowship  ;  the  care  so  to  walk  that  you  shall 
not  vex  the  Holy  Spirit.     Such  hallowed  cares  will  always  be  with  you,  and  will 
increase  as  you  grow  in  grace.     3.  And,  next,  you  must  cast  your  care  upon  God, 
because  you  have  God's  business  to  do.     4.  You  ought  to  do  it  not  only  for  this 
reason,  but  because  it  is  such  a  great  privilege  to  be  able  to  cast  your  care  upon 
God.     5.  Let  me  add  that  you  ministers  ought  to  cast  aU  your  care  upon  God, 
because  it  will  be  such  a  good  example  for  your  hearers.     Our  people  learn  much 
from  our  conduct,  and  if  they  see  us  fretting  they  will  be  certain  to  do  the  same. 
6.  But  the  reason  of  reasons  is  that  contained  in  our  text — "  He  careth  for  you." 
Because  He  hath  set  His  love  upon  us  we  can  surely  cast  our  care  upon  Him.     He 
has   given  us   Christ,  will   He  not   give  us  bread  ?     See,  He  has  called  us  to  be 
His  sons,  will  He  starve  His   children?     See  what  He  is  preparing  for  you  in 
heaven,  will  He  not  enable  you  to  bear  the  burdens  of  this  present  life?     We 
dishonour  God  when  we  suspect  His  tenderness  and  generosity.     We  can  only 
magnify  Him  by  a  calm  faith  which  leans  upon  His  Word.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  wisdom  of  God  in  His  providence : — I.    Consider  the  natuke  of  the  duty 
HEBE  REQUIRED,  WHICH  IS  TO  CAST  OUR  CARE  UPON  GoD.     1.  That  after  aU  prudeut 
care  and  diligence  have  been  used  by  us,  we  should  not  be  farther  solicitous  about 
the  event  of  things  which,  when  we  have  done  all  we  can,  will  be  out  of  our  power. 
2.  Casting  our  care  upon  God  implies  that  we  should  refer  the  issue  of  things  to 
His  providence,  which  is  continually  vigilant  over  us  and  knows  how  to  dispose  all 
things  to  the  best.     H.  The  argument  which  the  apostle  here  useth  to  persuade 
us  to  THIS  duty  of  Casting  all  our  care  upon  God,  because  it  is  He  that  careth  for 
us.     1.  That  God  taketh  care  of  us,  implies  in  general  that  the  providence  of  God 
governs  the  world  and  concerns  itself  in  the  affairs  of  men  and  disposeth  of  all 
events  that  happen  to  us.     2.  The  providence  of  God  is  more  peculiarly  concerned 
for  good  men,  and  He  takes  a  more  particular  and  especial  care  of  them.     And 
this  David  limits  in  a  more  particular  manner  to  good  men:  "Cast  thy  burden 
upon  the  Lord,  and  He  will  sustain  thee  ;  He  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be 
moved."     III.  Let  us  now  see  of  what  force  this  consideration  is,  to  persuade  to 
THE  DUTY  enjoined.     1.  Becausc  if  God  cares  for  us,  our  concernments  are  in  the 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

best  and  safest  hands,  and  where  we  should  desire  to  have  them  ;  infinitely  safer 
than  under  any  care  and  conduct  of  our  own.  2.  Because  all  our  anxiety  and  care 
will  do  us  no  good  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  will  certainly  do  us  hurt.  (Abp.  Tillotson.) 
What  to  do  with  care  : — What  is  care  ?  The  word  has  two  shades  of  meaning.  It 
means  simply  attention  when  it  is  said :  "  He  took  care  of  him."  But  it  signifies 
anxiety  in  the  expression  :  "  Ye  shall  eat  bread  with  care."  Now  it  is  possible  to 
begin  with  that  kind  of  care  which  signifies  attention,  and  to  go  on  to  that  which 
signifies  anxiety.  It  is  there  that  our  danger  lies.  Attention  is  an  advantage; 
anxiety  is  an  evil.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  attentive ;  and  it  is  equally  our  duty  to 
avoid  anxiety.  A  young  man,  for  instance,  who  has  just  closed  his  school  life  and 
gone  to  business,  fiiids  himseK  surrounded  by  things  new  and  strange.  He  applies 
himself  with  earnestness  to  understand  his  duties,  and  to  meet  the  approval  of  his 
employer.  While  impelled  by  a  conscientious  desire  to  do  right  and  well,  he  is  in 
the  line  which  conducts  to  success ;  but  if  he  allows  a  harsh  word  to  discourage 
him,  or  a  failure  or  two  to  throw  him  into  despair,  he  passes  into  a  state  of  mind 
presenting  the  greatest  obstacles  to  progress.  A  person  conducting  his  own  business 
must  give  it  attention,  or  it  will  cover  him  with  dishonour.  It  says  Uttle  for  a  man's 
Christianity  if  he  comes  to  poverty  by  his  own  negligence.  But  how  easily  he  may 
pass  across  the  line  which  leads  to  over-solicitude !  Look,  again,  to  the  mother  of 
a  family.  Is  there  any  human  sentiment  more  disinterested,  pure,  and  fervent  than 
a  mother's  love  ?  Have  you  not  known  it  to  grow  into  an  agitating  and  almost 
selfish  apprehension ?  What  can  be  said  about  the  care  due  to  the  soul?  Can  that 
be  excessive  ?  In  a  world  which  is  fuU  of  temptations  to  negligence  and  hardness 
of  heart,  what  can  be  done  without  intense  diligence  and  application  ?  So  long  as 
care  is  just  and  healthful,  it  cannot  be  too  great  on  this  subject.  But  for  this  right 
state  of  mind  many  substitute  a  state  made  up  of  doubt  and  terror.  Now  how  are 
we  to  be  freed  from  a  burden  which  is  so  embarrassing  ?  What  are  we  to  do  with  it  ? 
We  are  desired  to  cast  it  all  upon  God.  But  how  do  we  know  that  He  wiU  accept 
our  care  ?  From  His  own  assurance  that "  He  careth  for  us."  "  He  careth  for  us." 
He  has  not  forsaken  the  world  He  made  ;  how  is  it  possible  that  He  should  have 
ceased  to  think  of  the  creatures  He  has  so  wonderfully  endowed  ?  The  same  wisdom 
■which  made  us  capable  of  perception,  judgment,  and  forethought,  watches  over  all 
our  mental  operations.  While  all  men  are  under  this  providential  charge,  there  are 
some  whom  He  has  brought  into  a  special  relation  to  HimseK.  He  takes  the 
deepest  interest  in  them.  Nothing  can  affect  them  which  does  not  affect  Himself. 
How  strange  that  any  of  them  should  be  crushed  with  anxiety !  It  is  this  confi- 
dence in  God's  care  for  us  which  leads  us  to  cast  our  care  on  Him.  This  assurance 
will  prompt  us  to  tell  Him,  with  all  openness  of  heart,  whatsoever  oppresses  us. 
We  know  how  much  in  a  time  of  sorrow  we  are  relieved  by  the  mere  communication 
of  our  grief ;  we  seem  to  have  parted  with  much  of  it  when  we  have  simply  trans- 
ferred the  knowledge  of  it  to  another  mind.  With  much  greater  reason  may  we 
expect  such  a  result  to  follow  from  looking  to  our  Father  in  heaven,  and  recounting 
to  Him  the  cause  of  our  dread,  and  seeking  from  Him  the  needed  succour.  This 
trust  in  Him  who  careth  for  us,  imparts  not  only  relief  from  oppression  and  new 
power  for  duty,  but  leads  us  into  the  position  most  honouring  to  a  creature.  It 
brings  us  into  immediate  fellowship  with  God ;  it  establishes  an  interchange  of 
thought  and  trustful  love  between  our  hearts  and  His.  We  then  give  Him  proof 
of  our  confidence,  and  He  responds  to  the  sentiment  which  His  own  Spirit  had 
awakened  with  all  the  fulness  of  His  nature.  (C.  M.  Birrell.)  Human  cares 
and  the  Divine  care: — I.  There  are  those  who  declare  that  the  words  have 
NO  meaning.  They  see  no  "He"  in  the  universe.  True,  they  speak  of  nature, 
not  only  with  deep  reverence,  but  in  terms  so  warmly  personal,  that  we  are 
sometimes  tempted  to  think  that  their  science  has  found  what  their  faith  had 
lost ;  but,  if  we  may  trust  their  own  assertions,  it  is  not  so,  for  they  find  no 
evidence  in  nature  of  a  living  God.  Such  men  can  have  no  resource  outside  of 
themselves  in  times  of  sorrow  and  anxiety.  No  man  can  cast  his  care  upon  an 
"  it."  The  materialist's  creed  fosters  an  inhuman  quite  as  much  as  an  ungodly 
type  of  character.  If  ever  the  pressure  of  care  becomes  too  heavy  for  him  to  bear 
it  alone,  one  of  two  results  wiU  follow :  either  the  creed  will  break  down  or  the  man 
will.  II.  Although  atheism  may  be  no  temptation  to  us,  we  may  still  find  it 
difficult  to  realise  that  God  really  cares  for  us.  1.  Easier  to  believe  that 
He  cares  for  the  universe  at  large,  or  even  for  this  world  and  the  human  race  as  a 
whole,  than  that  He  takes  any  interest  in  us,  as  individuals.  Too  prone  to  think  of 
Him  as  exercising  some  kind  of  care  over  us  as  a  general  does  over  his  troops. 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  423 

But  He  is  not  a  general,  but  a  Father,  and  has  room  in  His  infinite  heart  for  each 
one  of  us.  "  He  cares  for  me."  2.  Some  one  may  say,  "  I  cannot  think  God  cares 
very  much  for  me,  or  He  would  not  allow  me  to  suiJer  as  I  do,  and  give  me  this 
■weary  burden  of  care  to  bear  day  by  day."  Like  a  child  complaining  of  having  hard 
lessons  to  learn.  But  are  we  not  assured  that  our  very  trials  are  the  pledge  of 
God's  love  ?  If  we  had  no  care,  we  might  begin  to  doubt  whether  God  cared  for 
us.     in.  Then  the  practical  lesson  of  the  text  is  this,  that  rp  we  lift  the  burden 

OF  OTJB  CAKE  AT  ALL,  WE  ABE  TO  LIFT  IT  FOR  THE  LAST  TIME,  THAT  WE  MAT  CAST  IT  UPON 

God.  Once  there  it  becomes  God's  care,  not  ours.  Because  God  cares  for  us.  He 
will  care  for  it.  IV.  The  little  word  "  all  "  includes  even  the  trivial  and 
PASSING    anxieties   OF   EACH   DAT.      (G.   S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  Confidence  in   God 

lubricates  life  .-—There  is  nothing  in  the  teachings  of  the  Bible  that  tends  to  remove 
the  stimulus  to  industry,  or  to  take  away  the  necessity  of  enterprise.  It  is  neither 
industry  nor  enterprise  that  ever  hurts  anybody.  They  are  pleasurable  and  whole- 
some, and  we  shall  not  wish  the  motive  which  inspires  them  taken  away.  It  is 
with  men  as  it  is  with  machinery.  Everybody  that  knows  anything  about 
machinery  knows  that  it  wastes  faster  when  it  is  allowed  to  stand  still  than  when 
it  is  worked,  if  it  is  worked  aright.  If  a  watch  stands  still  a  year,  it  wears  out  as 
much  as  it  would  in  running  properly  two  years.  But  where  machinery  runs 
without  oil,  and  squeaks  and  grinds,  it  gets  hot,  and  wears  out  r  leedily.  Now 
anxiety  is  in  human  life  just  what  squeaking  and  grinding  are  in  machinery  that 
is  not  oUed.  In  human  life,  trust  is  the  oil.  Confidence  in  God  is  that  which 
lubricates  hfe,  so  that  industry  and  enterprise  develop  the  things  we  ought  to  have, 
and  do  it  in  such  a  way  that  they  bring  pleasure  with  them.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Invented  worries  : — Mosquitoes  are  not  nationalised  everywhere,  but  worries  are. 
Their  sting  is  not  outwardly  perceptible,  but  it  is  painful  enough  within.  Some  of 
our  foreign  friends  want  to  know,  as  they  retire  to  rest  themselves,  "  How  to  make 
outdoor  life  attractive  to  mosquitoes  ?  " — a  humorous  enough  puzzle.  We  know, 
however,  one  thing — that  mosquitoes  come  without  our  consent ;  but  that  we  are 
foolish  enough  to  invent  worries — to  entertain  worries — and  to  do  everything  else 
with  them  but  cast  them  where  we  know  that  all  our  cares  may  and  ought  to  be 
cast.      (W.  M.   Statham,  M.A.)  Casting  all  your  cares  upon  Him: — "In  the 

summer  of  1878,"  says  Mrs.  Sarah  Smiley,  "  I  descended  the  Bighi  with  one  of  the 
most  faithful  of  the  old  Swiss  guides.  Beyond  the  service  of  the  day,  he  gave  me 
unconsciously  a  lesson  for  life.  Fis  first  care  was  to  put  my  wraps  and  other 
burdens  upon  his  shoulders.  In  doing  this  he  asked  for  all ;  but  I  chose  to  keep 
back  a  few  for  special  care.  I  soon  found  them  no  little  hindrance  to  the  freedom 
of  my  movement ;  but  still  I  would  not  give  them  up  until  my  guide,  returning  to 
me  where  I  sat  resting  for  a  moment,  kindly  but  firmly  demanded  that  I  should 
give  him  everything  but  my  Alpine  stock.  Putting  them  with  the  utmost  care  upon 
his  shoulders,  with  a  look  of  intense  satisfaction  he  again  led  the  way.  And  now 
in  my  freedom,  I  found  I  could  make  double  speed  with  double  safety.  Then  a 
voice  spoke  inwardly :  '  0  foolish,  wilful  heart,  hast  thou,  indeed,  given  up 
thy  last  burden  ?  Thou  hast  no  need  to  carry  them,  nor  even  the  right.'  I  saw  it 
all  in  a  flash  ;  and  then,  as  I  leaped  lightly  from  rock  to  rock  down  the  steep 
mountain  side,  I  said  within  myself,  '  And  even  thus  will  I  follow  Jesus,  my  Guide, 
my  Burden-bearer.  I  wiU  rest  all  my  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  me.' " 
(Ibid.)  Nursing  cares  : — Men  do  not  avail  themselves  of  the  riches  of  God's 
grace.  They  love  to  nurse  their  cares,  and  seem  as  uneasy  without  some  fret  as  an 
old  friar  would  be  without  his  hair  girdle.  They  are  commanded  to  cast  their 
■cares  upon  the  Lord ;  but  even  when  they  attempt  it,  they  do  not  fail  to  catch 
them  up  again,  and  think  it  meritorious  to  walk  burdened.  They  take  God's 
ticket  to  heaven,  and  then  put  their  baggage  on  their  shoulders,  and  tramp,  tramp 
the  whole  way  there  afoot.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  He  careth  for  you. — Divine  care  : 
— He  careth  for  all.  "  He  careth  "  for  the  inorganic  creation.  His  care  embraceth 
the  smallest  atom  and  the  mightiest  globe.  "  He  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons: 
.the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down."  AU  the  changes  in  the  atmosphere  are  with 
Him.  "  He  covereth  the  heaven  with  clouds,  and  prepareth  rain  for  the  earth." 
The  sea  is  under  His  care.  "  Thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  sea ;  when  the  waves 
thereof  arise,  Thou  stillest  them "  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  9).  He  careth  for  vegetable 
existence.  "  He  causeth  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herbs  for  the  service  of 
man.  He  sendeth  forth  His  spirit,  and  reneweth  the  face  of  the  earth."  He  careth 
for  irrational  creatures.  "  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  and  to  the  young 
javens  which  cry."     He  feedeth  the  fowls  of  the  air.     Most  assuredly,  then,  "He 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  v. 

careth  "  for  man,  His  intelligent  offspring.  He  careth  for  you  ;  the  race,  the 
nation,  the  family,  the  individual ;  and  especially  for  you,  the  individual.  I.  It 
IS  A  DEMONSTRABLE  FACT.  1.  Antecedent  reasoning  bears  testimony  to  this  fact. 
He  is  our  Creator.  Does  the  artist,  who  has  exerted  his  genius  to  the  utmost  in 
the  production  of  that  which  he  considers  his  masterpiece,  watch  over  it  with  care? 
That  which  he  produced,  is  he  not  anxious  to  preserve?  He  is  our  Proprietor. 
With  what  care  do  men  watch  over  their  own  property.  Is  the  Eternal  indifferent 
to  what  becomes  of  His  property  ?  He  is  our  Father.  He  is  our  Eedeemer.  Will 
He  who  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,"  cease  to  watch 
over  us  every  moment  with  the  utmost  care  ?  The  very  relations  which  He  sustains 
to  us  urge  the  conclusion.  2.  The  condition  in  which  we  were  born  into  this  life. 
We  come  into  this  world  the  most  helpless  of  all  helpless  creatures.  We  find  the 
world  exquisitely  fitted  to  our  organisation  in  every  point.  The  fitness  of  the 
world  to  us  shows  that  He  careth  for  us.  3.  The  unequivocal  teaching  of  the 
Bible.  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,"  &c.  The  consciousness  of 
the  Christian.  Every  Christian  feels  that  God  careth  for  him.  II.  It  is  a 
GLORIOUS  FACT.  1.  It  cucourages  the  most  unbounded  trustfulness.  Who  is 
He  ?  One  who  is  infinite  in  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power.  2.  It  encourages 
adoring   gratitude.      {D.    Thomas,  D.I).)  God's    care : — I.    Its  objects.      II. 

Its  nature.  1.  Cordial  and  tender.  2.  Active  and  efficacious.  3.  Patient  and 
unwearied.  4.  Permanent  and  lasting.  III.  Its  evidences.  1.  The  relation- 
ship He  acknowledges.  2.  His  own  testimony  and  promises.  3.  Our  own 
experience.  4.  The  undertaking  for  our  salvation.  IV.  Its  inferences.  1. 
The  wonderful  nature  of  our  God.  2.  The  duty  and  obligation  which  devolve 
upon  us — to  love  Him  in  return.  3.  The  acknowledgment.  (Homilist.)  He 
careth  for  you : — He  careth  for  you.  He  careth  for  us  all,  for  man  and  for  all 
animate  creation.  How  has  God  helped  humanity  to  comforts  through  the  ages  ! 
If  we  look  at  the  contour  of  continents,  at  ocean  currents,  at  mountain  heights  and 
ranges,  at  plateaus,  at  rivers  as  they  run,  at  lake-chains,  at  animal  life,  at  vegetable 
growth,  at  rock  formation,  or  at  prevailing  winds  and  calms,  all  of  these  things 
speak  of  a  Father's  care  for  His  children,  and  all  of  design,  as  plainly  as  the 
intricate  mechanisms  of  loom,  or  watch,  or  machine  tell  of  a  master  mechanic's 
plans  and  work.  God  loves  man.  He  cares  for  you  and  for  me,  and  proves  it  by 
climate  and  soil  and  by  all  the  aids  to  commerce  and  society.  Given  a  little  more 
or  less  atmospheric  pressure,  a  little  more  or  less  of  God's  holding,  which  men  have 
dared  to  nick-name  gravity,  a  few  more  or  less  degrees  of  heat,  a  variation  from 
God's  physical  laws  by  so  much  as  a  fraction  of  a  degree  in  direction  or  of  a  single 
mile  a  year  in  velocity,  and  wreck  and  ruin  would  result.  He  careth  for  us,  and 
cradles  us  carefully,  and  fans  us  with  pleasant  breezes,  and  feasts  us  with  delicacies, 
and  wafts  pleasant  odours  to  us,  and  makes  us  glad  with  beauty  and  a  thousand  joys. 
We  are  His  children.  Not  a  mountain  is  too  high,  not  a  river  too  swift,  not  a  plain 
too  arid,  not  a  wind  too  penetrating ;  for  our  Father  made  it  so.  Not  a  ray  of 
light,  or  a  flake  of  snow,  or  a  crystal  of  frost,  or  a  degree  of  heat  from  all  eternity, 
but  it  hath  been  His  messenger,  His  loving  messenger  to  our  race.  Not  a  bird's 
song,  not  a  blossom  or  fruitage,  not  a  blade  of  grass  but  it  tells  God's  care.  May 
we  not  go  further  and  trust  enough  to  say,  not  a  poisonous  reptile,  or  devouring 
beast,  or  noxious  plant,  not  even  sorrow,  or  pain,  or  death,  but  some  way  He 
makes  it  do  His  will  for  good  to  humanity.      (H.  E.  Partridge.)  Christ  the 

C  are -hearer : — I.  There  is  no  one  to  whom  these  words  should  not  come  as 
A  message  of  comfort  and  encouragement.  For  care  is  one  of  those  things  which 
fall  to  the  lot  of  everybody,  young  and  old.  Poverty  and  wealth  alike  entangle  us 
in  the  meshes  of  anxiety.  This  arrangement  of  Providence  by  which  every  man 
succeeds  to  a  heritage  of  care  has  been  ordained  by  God  for  the  wisest  and  most 
gracious  ends.  There  is  a  story  told  of  an  ancient  king  that  he  stood  one  day 
before  the  door  of  a  husbandman,  and  called  upon  the  huslsandman  to  come  out  to 
him.  But  being  busy  with  something  else  he  refused  to  come  out,  or  even  to  open 
the  door  so  that  the  king  might  come  in.  And  so,  to  bring  the  man  to  his  senses, 
the  king  lit  a  firebrand  and  cast  it  into  the  husbandman's  granary.  And  that 
brought  him  out.  Now  that  is  the  function  of  our  cares.  They  lead  us  out  to  God, 
and  they  bring  God  into  us.  They  show  us  the  poverty  of  our  own  resources,  and 
they  reveal  to  us  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  II.  The  great  question  is. 
What  are  we  to  do  with  our  care  ?  We  are  to  cast  our  care  upon  God.  Two 
thousand  years  ago,  this  same  question  was  very  much  debated  by  the  learned  men 
of  Greece  and  Eome.     Some  of  them  thought  that  the  remedy  for  care  was  to 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  425 

banish  from  their  minds  all  thought  of  future  trouble,  and  to  enjoy  the  pleasures 
of  the  passing  moment  as  long  as  they  were  capable  of  enjoying  them.  But  what  a 
pagan  doctrine  that  is.  It  tells  a  man  to  enjoy  life  while  he  can ;  but  it  has  no 
word  to  say  to  those  who  are  under  the  cloud  of  trouble,  and  are  enjoying  it  no 
more.  There  was  another  school  of  those  ancient  moralists  who  tried  to  remedy 
that  defect.  They  taught  that  poverty  and  wealth  are  the  mere  accidents  of  life. 
If  a  man  becomes  poor,  the  man  himself,  in  his  own  true  nature,  is  no  worse ;  and 
if  he  becomes  rich,  he  is  no  better.  So  it  is  with  sickness  and  health.  They  are 
the  mere  accidents  or  appendages  of  Mfe.  Man  himself  is  greater  than  they. 
The  true  wisdom  of  life,  therefore,  is  to  be  indifferent  to  them.  That 
doctrine  is  very  much  like  Dr.  Johnson's  cure  for  toothache — to  treat  it 
with  contempt — a  very  good  cure  when  we  are  not  suffering  from  toothache. 
Now  Peter,  in  the  text,  is  no  speculator  nor  theoriser.  He  knows  that  it  is  not  in 
human  nature  to  be  insensible  to  these  things,  and  he  comes  forward,  like  a  prac- 
tical man,  with  a  definite  direction  as  to  how  we  are  to  treat  a  real  evil  which  we 
cannot  ignore,  and  that  direction  is  that  we  are  to  cast  our  care  upon  God.  But 
now,  how  is  this  to  be  done  ?  Our  cares  are  manifold,  and  there  are  different  ways 
of  transferring  them  to  Him  who  has  promised  to  bear  them  for  us.  Some  people 
find  that  they  can  best  get  rid  of  their  cares  by  carrying  them  to  God  through  the 
avenue  of  prayer.  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  wiU  deliver  thee." 
Some  cares  will  best  be  escaped  by  rising  above  them  on  the  wings  of  praise.  For 
songs  are  not  always  the  expressions  of  gladness,  and  if  you  read  the  Psalms  of 
David  you  will  find  that  many  of  them  were  wrung  out  of  his  soul  by  the  visitations 
of  care.  There  is  one  other  method  which  will  hardly  fail  to  dispel  them,  and  that 
is,  to  allow  God  to  speak  to  us.  This  is  done  by  reading  the  Word  of  God,  and  the 
effectiveness  of  this  exercise  as  a  care-remover  is  one  of  the  commonest  experiences 
of  the  Christian  hfe.  HI.  The  kind  of  c.vkes  which  God  will  beak  for  us.  And 
we  learn  from  the  text  that  they  are  not  confined  to  any  particular  class  :  for  we  are 
enjoined  to  cast  all  our  care  upon  Him.  Many  of  our  cares  are  trivial.  The  greatest 
care  that  a  man  can  feel  is  the  burden  of  sin.  God  careth  for  you  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  24).  If  God  frees  us  from  the  greatest  care  of  all,  you  may  rest  assured  that  He 
will  also  free  us  from  every  lesser  care  (Matt.  vi.  25-34).  IV.  We  have  to  notice 
THE  REASON  WHY  WE  SHOULD  CAST  OUR  CARE  UPON  GoD.  It  is  stated  in  the  text,  and 
is  both  intelligible  and  satisfactory.  Peter  boldly  asserts  that  we  are  the  objects  of 
the  Divine  solicitude.  There  is  no  truth  of  which  men  of  faith  have  been  more 
firmly  assured  than  this  same  truth  of  the  loving-kindness  of  God,  and  of  His  tender 
care  for  His  children.  It  sheltered  Abraham  when,  in  the  greatest  trial  of  his  life, 
he  said  calmly  to  his  son,  "  The  Lord  will  provide."  It  was  to  Moses  the  secret- 
place  of  the  Most  High  when,  in  the  prospect  of  death,  he  exclaimed,  "  The  Eternal 
God  is  a  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  And  nowhere  more 
than  in  the  Psalms  of  David  do  we  trace  the  cheering,  and  soothing,  and  strengthen- 
ing influence  of  a  firm  faith  in  God's  loving  care.  {J.  L.  Fyfe.)  God  not  an. 
abstraction  (with  Eph.  iv.  30) : — The  first  of  these  texts  speaks  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
as  being  hurt  by  frivolous  speech,  or  wrathful  passion,  or  irritable  temper  in  Chris- 
tians ;  so  that  He  would  be  grieved  into  silence  or  distance  by  such  offences.  The 
second  text  speaks  of  God  as  entering  into  all  the  anxieties  of  our  life.  Thus  we 
see  that  each  of  these  great  apostles,  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  was  accustomed  to  think 
of  God,  not  as  a  Being  too  distant  or  impassive  to  be  affected  by  our  conduct  or 
emotions,  but  as  an  ever-present,  sensitive,  Almighty  Spirit — a  living  Holiness  and 
a  living  Love.  Such  a  notion  of  God  thus  disseminated  throughout  Europe  and 
Asia  by  the  apostles  of  Christ  was  new  to  both  continents.  As  for  the  Greeks, 
Aristotle,  the  very  chief  thinker  amongst  them,  says  that  any  one  would  laugh  if  a 
man  were  to  say  that  he  loved  Jupiter.  The  work  of  Jupiter  was  to  shake  the 
heavens  as  the  Thunderer,  not  to  draw  near  to  men,  to  enter  into  their  joys  or  woes. 
What  the  Greeks  did  not  know,  the  Komans  knew  not.  Equally  unknown  to  Asia 
was  the  idea  of  a  God  with  feeling,  one  who  could  be  grieved  by  men,  one  who  could 
suffer  with  and  help  us.  In  Brahminism,  the  grand  old  religion  of  India,  the 
Supreme  God  "is  always  represented  as  lost  to  man  in  the  depths  of  His  own  infinity, 
absorbed  in  the  dreams  of  His  own  glory,  too  high  and  too  holy  to  have  the  slightest 
concern  for  the  vile  universe  which  lesser  gods  had  'called  into  existence  between 
them.  In  Buddhism,  a  comparatively  modern  reformation,  God  is  removed  still 
further  from  man ;  He  loses  even  His  personality.  There  is  no  living  God  at  all, 
says  to-day  the  religion  of  two  hundred  millions  of  mankind — only  one  eternal 
order ;  and  the  final  reward  of  right-doing  is  to  lose  one's  personal  existence  and 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

become  impersonal  parts  of  the  Eternal  Force.  Just  as  debased  a  belief  in  necessity, 
in  the  form  of  extreme  Augustinianism,  has  prevailed  among  the  common  people 
of  Europe.  But  why  this  reference  to  Asia  with  its  errors  ?  Because  the  very  same 
influence  which  has  been  the  ruin  of  Asia  is  at  work  around  us  in  Europe,  in  Chris- 
tendom. The  far  larger  part  of  EngUsh  thought  respecting  God  is  affected  by  the 
very  same  delusions  as  to  the  insensibility  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  for  is  not  the  pre- 
vailing notion  among  all  the  ranks  of  our  people,  especially  when  they  wish  to  be 
philosophical,  that  all  the  popular  and  Scriptural  language  respecting  God  as  a 
living  person  near  at  hand,  and  fuU  of  active  thought  and  feeling  respecting  our- 
selves, is  only  an  accommodation  to  the  weakness  of  the  lowest  order  of  mind  ? 
Now,  if  this  be  true,  it  is  obvious  to  remark,  first  of  all,  how  uninteresting  a  thing 
the  worship  of  such  a  God  must  be !  One  to  whom  you  bring  thought,  anxiety, 
emotion,  passion,  praise,  affection,  gratitude,  the  agonies  of  prayer,  and  who  in  return 
looks  upon  you  as  might  a  great  marble  colossus,  with  one  calm  eternal  gaze  of 
infinite  power,  but  without  the  slightest  approach  to  a  responsive  sympathy  or 
fatherly  love.  Now,  the  whole  of  the  Divine  revelation  which  culminates  in  Christ 
is  directed  to  the  establishment  of  a  better  knowledge  of  Him  who  is  not  far  from 
any  one,  and  who  is  "  acquainted  with  all  our  ways."  "  Truly,  our  communion  is 
■with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  Now,  consider  how  strange  it 
would  be  if  God  were  not  such  a  Being  as  this ;  if  He,  the  Creator  of  all  sensibility, 
were  the  only  Spirit  who  was  devoid  of  earnest  sense  and  feeling.  Is  this  world  the 
work  of  a  Father  who  has  no  delight  in  His  children,  in  their  work,  in  their  play,  in 
their  troubles,  or  in  their  joy  ?  Is  His  goodness  only  such  an  attribute  as  withered 
theologians  might  talk  of,  like  a  dry  flower  in  a  traveller's  book,  only  a  mockery  of 
the  beautiful  living  reality  ?  Is  it  nothing  better  than  an  abstraction  ?  Then  consider 
next  what  an  effort  seems  to  be  made  in  nature  to  convey  to  our  minds  on  all  sides 
the  impression  of  there  being  feeling  in  God.  Does  not  every  beautiful  form  in 
plants  or  flowers  breathe  forth  the  very  feeling  of  some  great  work  of  art  ?  But  the 
senses  do  not  reveal  enough  for  the  soul ;  the  heart  asks  for  a  richer  and  fuller 
communion.  We  have  it  in  Christ.  Christ  calls  on  us  to  unlearn  that  false  lesson 
•of  the  impassive  God.  Now  you  cannot  fail  to  notice  the  bearing  of  such  thoughts 
AS  these  on  all  our  views  of  God's  work,  both  in  nature  and  in  redemption.  The 
FInglish  pagan,  the  modern  Buddhist,  with  his  exalted  conception  of  a  Deity  who 
transcends  thought,  and  soars  in  his  infinity  far  above  any  genuine  feehng,  takes 
■what  comes  of  outward  benefit  as  the  result  of  so  much  physical  machinery  guided 
by  man's  intelligence.  He  feels  no  more  thankful  to  God  for  his  daily  blessing 
than  he  would  feel  thankful  to  a  cotton  engine  for  pouring  out  its  endless  yarn. 
But  let  a  man  once  see  through  the  hateful  falsehood  of  this  philosophy,  and  learn 
to  believe  in  the  all-sensitive  nature  which  pervades  the  world,  then  how  differently 
will  he  recognise  the  source  of  his  daily  blessings !  Just  as  we  should  appreciate 
any  entertainment  given  us  by  a  friend — as  a  table  covered  with  fruit  or  flowers — 
so  shall  we  then  acknowledge  the  ever-present  love  which  is  daily  loading  us  with 
benefits.  And,  as  we  should  abhor  a  crowd  of  English  vagrants  who  might  hurriedly 
snatch  up  the  benefactions  of  some  cheerful  giver,  and  depart  from  his  door  without 
even  a  word  of  thankfulness  or  affection,  so  hateful  will  then  appear  the  conduct 
of  mankind  who  take  God's  gifts  in  daily  life  and  depart  without  a  look  of  gratitude. 
Much  more  in  all  that  relates  to  Christ,  the  unspeakable  gift.  The  whole  lesson  of 
the  Atonement  by  the  death  of  Christ  is  lost  for  those  whose  philosophy  leads  them 
to  disbelieve  in  the  sensibility  of  God  to  pain  or  to  sacrifice.  "  He  that  spared  not 
His  own  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  for  us  all."  Every  word  here  speaks  of  a  self- 
crucifying  compassion,  a  self-exacting  benevolence.  Once  more,  it  is  easy  to  see  the 
bearing  of  this  line  of  thought  on  our  own  habitual  feeling  towards  God  if  we  live 
surrounded  by  this  all-sensitive  Spirit.  (E.  White.)  He  careth  for  you: — I.  I 
prove  that  God  takes  care  of  you  by  showing  what  He  has  already  done.  1.  He 
has  created  us.  2.  He  has  died  for  us.  3.  He  has,  also,  risen  from  the  dead  for 
us.  4.  He  has  called  us  to  be  His  children.  5.  He  has  redeemed  us.  6.  He  has 
changed  our  nature.  7.  He  has  cleansed  us.  8.  He  has  directed  the  steps  of  our 
life.  II.  Let  us  prove  that  our  Father  cares  for  us  by  what  He  is  now  doing.  1. 
He  is  living  for  us.  2.  He  is  dwelling  in  us.  3.  He  is  showing  mercy  to  us.  Is  not 
the  preservation  of  your  life  a  proof  that  God  careth  for  you  ?  4.  He  is  bearing 
with  you.  in.  I  would  prove  that  God  careth  for  you  by  what  He  has  under- 
taken TO  DO.  The  Lord  has  undertaken  to  be  your  Father.  {W.  Birch.)  The 
Lord  careth  for  you : — "  One  very  hot  summer's  day  I  was  driving  along  a  dusty 
joad,  when  I  overtook  a  woman  with  a  heavy  basket  on  her  arm.     I  did  not  want 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  427 

to  feel  like  the  priest  in  the  story  that  Jesus  told,  who  '  passed  by  oq  the  other  side,' 
so  I  offered  her  a  ride.  She  gladly  accepted  it,  but  as  she  rode  still  carried  the 
heavy  basket  on  her  arm.  '  My  good  woman,'  I  said  as  kindly  as  I  could,  '  your 
basket  would  ride  just  as  well  in  the  bottom  of  the  trap,  and  you  would  be  much 
more  comfortable.'  '  Ah,  so  it  would,  sir,  thank  you ;  I  never  thought  of  that,'  she 
said,  as  she  put  her  burden  down.  '  That  is  very  much  Uke  what  I  often  do,'  I 
remarked  after  a  little  while.  '  Like  you  do,  sir  ?  '  and  the  woman  looked  up  inquir- 
ingly. '  Yes ;  I,  too,  often  carry  heavy  burdens  when  there  is  no  need  for  It.'  She 
waited  for  my  explanation.  '  The  Lord  Jesus  has  taken  me  up  into  His  chariot, 
and  I  rejoice  to  ride  in  it,  but  very  often  I  carry  a  great  burden  of  care  on  my  back 
that  would  ride  just  as  well  if  I  put  it  down,  for  the  Lord  would  carry  me  and  my 
cares  too.'  '  Yes,  bless  the  Lord  1 '  said  she,  with  a  joy  that  told  that  she  had  found 
the  cure  for  care.  '  It  is  true,  sir,  when  He  takes  us  up  in  His  chariot.  He  takes 
cares  and  all.'  Here  is  the  cure  for  your  cares,  for  all  the  little  daily  worries  and 
the  burdens  of  anxiety  that  oppress  you — the  Lord  careth  for  you."  (M.  Guy  Pearse.) 
Cared  for : — Away  in  my  native  town  lived  an  old  woman,  very  poor  and  very 
wretched.  Sickness  and  poverty  and  age  together  had  made  her  as  wrinkled  and 
soured  as  she  could  be.  Everybody  had  heard  her  long  tale  of  troubles  over  and 
over  again,  and  she  made  the  most  of  them,  as  folks  generally  do,  and  invariably 
ended  with  the  doleful  moan,  "I'm  old,  and  lone,  and  poor,  and  I've  got  nobody  in 
all  the  world  to  give  me  a  bit  of  care."  One  day  she  came  hurrying  up  to  our  house 
as  fast  as  her  stiff  joints  could  carry  her ;  her  face  seemed  to  have  lost  half  its 
wrinkles,  her  eyes  actually  shone  with  delight.  "What  can  have  happened?" 
thought  everybody,  as  she  came  near.  Everybody  soon  knew.  "Bless  ye,"  she 
cried,  "I've  got  a  letter  from  my  boy  in  California — and  I  thought  he  was  dead 
years  agone — and  he's  doing  well,  and  he  says  I  mustn't  fret,  for  he'll  care  for  me 
as  long  as  I  live."  She  had  lost  her  care — somebody  cared  for  her.  (Ibid.) 
God's  regard  for  individuals  : — It  is  said  that  the  great  Duke  of  Wellington,  before 
one  of  his  earliest  campaigns,  had  a  soldier,  with  his  full  marching  accoutrements, 
accurately  weighed.  Knowing  what  one  soldier  of  average  strength  had  to  carry, 
he  could  judge  how  far  his  army  might  be  called  to  march  without  breaking  down. 
Our  God  does  not  deal  in  averages.  He,  with  infinite  wisdom,  knows  the  powers  of 
each  individual  and  all  the  events  which  affect  us.  (.4.  Reed,  B.A.)  God's  care 
for  us : — When  a  tiny  boy,  trying  to  help  his  father  move  his  books,  fell  on  the 
staircase  beneath  the  weight  of  a  heavy  volume,  his  father  ran  to  his  aid  and  caught 
up  in  his  arms  boy  and  burden  both,  and  carried  them  in  his  arms  to  his  room. 
Ajid  wUl  God  deal  worse  with  us  ?  He  cannot  fail  or  forsake.  He  can  smite  rocks, 
and  open  seas,  and  unlock  the  treasuries  of  the  air,  and  ransack  the  stores  of  the 
earth.  Birds  will  bring  meat,  and  fish  coins,  it  He  bid  them.  He  takes  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  Mttle  thing;  how  easily,  then,  your  heaviest  load,  while  there  is 
nothing  so  trivial  but  that  you  may  make  it  a  matter  of  prayer  and  faith.  (F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  The  Divine  oversight : — The  seaman  is  in  the  storm ;  he  has  furled 
the  sails  and  thrown  out  the  anchor ;  he  has  done  what  he  could — the  rest  is  with 
God.  Nor  win  anxious  thought,  or  foreboding  care,  save  him  ;  fresh  effort  itself  may 
only  land  him  on  the  rocks — his  strength  is  in  sitting  still.  There  is  a  story  told 
of  John  Kutledge,  saiUng  on  the  American  lakes,  when  the  ice  gathered  around  the 
ship,  and  destruction  seemed  inevitable,  for  the  immense  masses  were  gradually 
closing  in,  and  the  captain  told  them  that  no  human  effort  could  save  them ;  how 
that  he  knelt  down  and  prayed,  and  as  he  prayed,  the  wind  which  had  been  against 
them  changed,  and  blew  behind,  and  opened  a  way  through  the  ice,  pushing  it  back 
from  the  ship  and  widening  a  passage,  so  that  she  was  saved.  And  when  they  came 
to  the  captain  and  said,  "  Shall  we  put  on  more  canvas?  "  his  reply  was,  "No! 
don't  touch  her !  Some  one  else  is  managing  this  ship."  We  need  to  learn  that 
lesson  daily.  Some  one  else  is  managing  these  lives  of  ours.  Do  we  believe  in  God? 
Shall  we  not  live  and  act,  then,  as  if  we  did  so? 

Vers.  8,  9.  Be  sober,  be  vigilant. — The  advantages  of  moderation  in  the  enjoyment 
of  sensual  pleasure  : — Christianity  in  its  precepts  and  commands,  as  well  as  in  its 
doctrines,  is  precisely  suited  to  our  nature  and  our  necessities.  1.  The  temperate 
man  preserves  his  health  of  body,  health  of  mind,  and  alacrity  and  vigour  both  of 
the  one  and  of  the  other.  2.  Moderation  in  the  enjoyment  of  sensual  pleasure 
enhances  the  very  enjoyment  of  that  pleasure  in  various  ways.  The  moderate  man 
knows  nothing  of  that  languor  and  disgust  which  generally  treads  on  the  heels  of 
the  voluptuary,  so  frequently  embittering  his  pleasures,  rendering  them  insipid  to 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

him,  and  so  seldom  allowing  him  to  enjoy  them  completely.  How  much  more 
taste  does  the  moderate,  the  industrious  man  find  in  the  simplest  meats,  in  the 
most  natural  drinks,  than  the  intemperate  have  in  all  the  delicacies  of  luxury! 
And  how  completely  he  enjoys  the  innocent  pleasure  it  offers  !  He  has  no  need 
artificially  to  prepare  nor  previously  to  devise  means  for  sharpening  his  pallid 
appetite  and  render  himself  susceptible  of  pleasure.  3.  Moderation  in  the 
enjoyment  of  sensual  pleasure  exalts  and  dignifies  the  mind.  It  in  a  manner 
spiritualises  it ;  by  divesting  it  of  the  degrading  that  is  connected  with  mere  animal 
gratification ;  by  teaching  us  to  use  it  as  a  means  to  higher  ends.  Thus  may  we 
connect  spiritual  and  sensual  pleasures  together,  and  give  a  value  to  the  latter  by 
the  former.  All  then  becomes  to  us  the  gift  of  our  gracious  Father  in  heaven,  the 
effect  and  demonstration  of  His  all-comprehending  love,  and  the  pledge  of  still 
greater  benefits  and  pleasures  in  the  world  to  come.  (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)  Christian 
sobriety  is  all  that  duty  that  concerns  ourselves  in  the  matter  of  meat,  and  drink, 
and  pleasures,  and  thoughts ;  and  it  hath  within  it  the  duties  of — 1.  Temperance. 
2.  Chastity.  3.  Humility.  4.  Modesty.  5.  Content.  {Bp.  Jeremy  Taylor.) 
Ready  for  temptation  : — "  I  fell  in  an  unguarded  moment ;  the  temptation  came  so 
suddenly."  How  often  such  excuses  are  made  !  But  why  were  we  off  our  guard? 
Because  we  live  in  spiritual  things  too  much  like  the  Saxon  king  who  earned  for 
himself  the  inglorious  surname  of  the  Unready.  {King's  Highivay.)  Our  vigilance 
must  be  comprehensive  : — Many  a  city  has  been  taken  on  its  strongest  side,  which  was 
counted  so  strong  that  no  watch  was  kept,  even  as  no  danger  was  dreaded  there. 
We  think  that  we  are  not  exposed  to  one  particular  form  of  temptation  ;  let  none 
be  too  sure  of  this ;  and  in  resisting  one  form  of  evil,  never  let  us  forget  that  there 
are  others  in  the  world.  Fleshly  sins  may  be  watched  against,  and  yet  room  be 
given  in  the  heart  for  spiritual  wickedness,  pride,  self-righteousness,  and  the  like. 
The  victories  gained  over  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  may  minister  to  those  subtler  mis- 
chiefs of  the  spirit :  and  our  fate  may  be  like  that  of  the  hero  in  the  Maccabees,  who 
was  crushed  by  the  falling  elephant  himself  had  slain.  There  is  a  white  devil  of 
spiritual  pride  as  well  as  a  black  devil  of  fleshly  lusts ;  and  if  only  Satan  can  ruin 
us,  it  is  all  the  same  to  him  by  what  engines  he  does  it  ;  it  is  all  the  same  to  him 
whether  we  go  down  into  hell  as  gross  and  carnal  sinners,  or  as  elated  self-righteous 
saints.  Set  a  watch,  therefore,  all  round  your  heart ;  not  on  one  side  only,  but  on 
all ;  for  you  can  never  be  sure  on  which  side  temptation  will  assail.  {Archbp. 
Trench.)  Watch  against  little  sins  : — The  truly  pious  is  never  at  rest  in  his 
mind  but  when  he  stands  upon  his  guard  against  the  most  minute  and  unobservable 
encroaches  of  sin,  as  knowing  them  upon  this  account  more  dangerous  than  greater ; 
that  the  enemy  that  is  least  feared  is  usually  the  soonest  felt.  For  as  in  the  robbing 
of  a  house  it  is  the  custom  for  the  sturdiest  thieves  to  put  in  some  little  boy  at  the 
window,  who  being  once  within  may  easily  open  the  doors  and  let  them  in  too,  so 
the  tempter,  in  rifling  the  soul,  despairs  for  the  most  part  to  attempt  his  entrance 
by  some  gross  sin,  and  therefore  employs  a  lesser,  that  may  slide  into  it  insensibly ; 
which  yet,  little  as  it  is,  will  so  unlock  the  bars  of  conscience  that  the  most 
enormous  abominations  shall  at  length  make  their  entrance  and  take  possession  of 
it.  Let  no  man  measure  the  smallness  of  his  danger  by  the  smallness  of  any  sin ; 
for  the  smaller  the  sin  the  greater  may  be  the  stratagem.  Some  have  been  choked 
by  a  fly,  a  crumb,  a  grape-stone ;  such  contemptible  things  carry  in  them  the  causes 
of  death ;  and  the  soul  may  be  destroyed  by  sinful  desires,  idle  words,  officious  lies, 
as  well  as  by  perjuries,  blasphemies,  and  murders.  Those  who  consider  in  how 
many  ways  a  soul  may  be  ruined,  will  not  count  it  scrupulosity  to  beware  of  the 
least  and  slenderest  instruments  of  damnation.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Watch  against 
our  old  sins  : — The  embankment  is  weak  where  it  once  gave  way  ;  and  though  the 
breach  has  been  repaired,  it  must  be  diligently  watched.  The  flames  have  been  put 
out,  but  the  ashes  are  still  smouldering  ;  and,  if  the  wind  rises,  the  fire  may  burst 
forth  anew.  The  rebellion  has  been  put  down ;  but  though  its  armies  have  been 
scattered  and  its  prince  dethroned,  many  traitors  lurk  in  secret  places,  watching  for 
opportunities  to  renew  the  struggle.  Our  old  sins  are  conquered,  but  not  quite 
killed.  {Newman  Hall.)  The  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion. — The  devil  a  roaring 
lion : — There  is  a  lion  at  your  doors — such  an  one  as  hath  none  to  equal  him  in 
power  and  in  fierceness.  Are  they  active  in  pursuit  of  prey?  He  is  infinitely 
more  so.  They  go  but  a  little  distance  from  their  dens,  but  his  circuit  is  the  world 
itself.  Other  lions  roam  abroad  at  certain  seasons  only — night  is  their  busy  time ; 
but  "  when  the  sun  ariseth  they  gather  themselves  together  and  lay  them  down  in 
their  dens  "  (Psa.  civ.  22).     But  this  spiritual  lion  is  perpetually  in  motion.     The 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  429 

day  and  night  are  both  alike  to  him.  Other  Uons  are  bloodthirsty  and  savage  ;  but 
he  hath  no  measure  in  his  fury.  He  cannot  possibly  be  satisfied  unless  all  men 
are  his  prey.  But  mark  some  other  points  of  contrast  which  show  how  far  more 
terrible  this  lion  is  than  the  lions  of  the  forest.  They  are  visible — can  be  more 
easily  avoided ;  but  he  is  an  invisible  being.  He  springs  upon  his  prey  unseen  and 
unsuspected.  The  natural  lion  attacks  his  prey  by  open  violence  ;  but  this  spiritual 
lion  deals  rather  by  secret  craft.  The  natural  lion  seeks  only  to  devour  the  body ; 
the  spiritual  lion  aims  at  the  destruction  both  of  soul  and  body  in  hell.  The  natural 
lion's  strength  is  far  greater  than  the  strength  of  man,  yet  man  has  found  out  ways 
of  overcoming  him ;  but  no  power,  no  skill,  no  contrivances  of  man  can  enable  him 
to  overcome  the  spiritual  lion  our  text  speaks  of.  How  then  may  this  roaring  lion 
be  resisted  and  overpowered  ?  Our  text  returns  an  answer  to  it.  St.  Peter  is 
evidently  speaking  to  believers,  who,  having  been  snatched  already  out  of 
Satan's  jaws,  have  now  only  to  resist  him  to  the  end.  How  is  a  poor  sinner, 
who  "  has  been  carried  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will,"  to  "  escape  out  of  the 
snare"?  Now  to  this  the  whole  gospel  is  an  answer.  Why,  you  must  look 
to  the  Cross.  "  For  this  cause  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  He  might 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devU."  It  is  a  most  important  question  for  the  true 
believer,  "How  am  I  to  resist  this  fearful  adversary  of  my  soul?  Though  I 
must  not  hope,  on  earth,  to  be  free  from  his  temptations,  yet  how  am  I  to  tread 
him  under  my  feet  ?  "  1.  He  exhorts  us  to  sobriety — "  Be  sober."  "  Be  moderate 
— be  self-denying — make  not  provision  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof." 
Let  the  Christian  but  entangle  himself  in  things  of  this  life,  and  Satan  has  him  at 
a  great  advantage.  2.  "Be  vigilant."  They  then  who  have  such  a  watchful  and 
unwearied  enemy  have  need  to  be  upon  the  watch  themselves.  Let  your  eye  but 
rove  a  little  towards  some  forbidden  object,  and  he  will  take  occasion  from  it  to 
inflame  your  heart  with  evU  passions.  Once  say  of  any  sin,  "Is  it  not  a  little 
one  ?  "  and  suffer  yourself,  on  that  ground,  to  indulge  in  it — immediately  the  lion  is 
upon  you  !  He  will  make  this  breach  much  wider,  and  it  will  "  increase  unto  more 
ungodliness."  We  must  not  go  to  sleep  ourselves  under  the  notion  that  the 
Lord  will  guard  us.  It  is  the  wakeful,  not  the  slothful  servant  who  has  a  warrant 
for  God's  protection.  3.  But  the  apostle's  third  direction  is  one  of  such  immense 
importance  that  we  can  neither  be  "  sober  "  nor  "  vigilant "  without  it.  He  bids  us 
be  "  steadfast  in  the  faith."  Let  us  keep  but  faith  within  our  bosoms,  and  we  keep 
Satan  at  a  distance  off.  We  are  proof  against  the  lion.  Yet  a  little  while  and  we 
shall  remove  out  of  the  lion's  reach.  In  the  meanwhile,  if  there  is  a  lion  seeking 
to  devour,  there  is  another  Lion  standing  on  our  part ;  for  it  is  under  such  an 
emblem  that  our  mighty  Saviour  hath  vouchsafed  to  represent  HimseK.  He  is  "  the 
lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  (Kev.  v.  5).  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  roaring  lion  : — I. 
Satan's  perpetual  activity.  Only  God  can  be  omnipresent ;  hence,  Satan  can 
only  be  in  one  place  at  one  time.  Yet,  if  you  consider  how  much  mischief  he  doeth, 
you  will  easUy  gather  that  he  must  have  an  awful  degree  of  activity.  1.  We  know 
that  he  is  to  be  found  in  every  place !  Wherever  the  breath  of  life  is  inhaled,  the 
poisonous  miasma  of  temptation  is  a  thing  familiar.  2.  Then,  remember,  that  as 
he  is  found  in  all  places,  so  you  have  often  found  him  in  all  your  duties.  You  have 
sought  to  serve  God  in  your  daily  avocations,  but  strong  temptations,  furious 
suggestions  of  evil,  hath  followed  you  there.  When  we  wished  to  be  wrestling  with 
the  angel  of  God,  we  have  had  to  contend  with  the  fiend  of  hell.  3.  We  must 
observe  also  how  ready  Satan  is  to  vent  his  spite  against  us  in  all  frames  of  heart. 
When  we  are  depressed  in  spirit — perhaps  some  bodily  illness  has  brought  us  low, 
our  animal  spirits  have  ebbed  and  we  feel  ready  to  sink,  then  that  old  coward  Satan 
is  sure  to  attack  us.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  are  joyous  and  triumphant,  then 
Satan  knows  how  to  tempt  us  to  presumption — "  My  mountain  standeth  firm,  I 
shall  never  be  moved  "  ;  or  else  to  carnal  security — "  Soul,  take  thine  ease,  thou 
hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years  "  ;  or  else  to  self -righteousness — "  My  own 
power  and  goodness  have  exalted  me."  Or  else,  he  will  even  attempt  to  poison  our 
joys  with  the  spleen  of  evil  forebodings.  4.  And  ah !  remember  how  well  he  knows 
how  to  turn  all  the  events  of  Providence  to  our  ill.  Here  comes  Esau,  hungry  with 
hunting ;  there  is  a  mess  of  pottage  ready,  that  he  maybe  tempted  to  sell  his  birth- 
right. Here  is  Noah,  glad  to  escape  from  his  long  confinement  in  the  ark  ;  he  is 
merry,  and  there  is  the  wine-cup  ready  for  him,  that  he  may  drink.  Here  is  Peter ; 
his  faith  is  low,  but  his  presumption  is  high ;  there  is  a  maiden  ready  to  say — 
"  Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  There  is  Judas,  and  there  are  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  in  the  priestly  hand  to  tempt  him,  ay,  and  there  is  the  rope  after- 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

wards  for  him  to  hang  hunself  withal.  11.  Satan's  koabings.  1.  Perhaps  Peter 
here  alluded  to  the  roaring  of  persecution.  How  Satan  roared  with  persecutions  in 
Peter's  days  !  There  were  racks  and  gibbets ;  there  was  the  sword  for  beheading 
and  the  stake  for  burning ;  there  was  dragging  at  the  heels  of  the  wild  horse ;  there 
was  smearing  over  with  pitch  and  then  setting  the  body  still  aUve  to  burn  in  Nero's 
garden.  There  was  nothing  for  the  Christian  then  but  banishment  and  imprison- 
ment ;  these  were  the  lowest  penalties.  2.  But  there  is  another  kind  of  furious 
attack,  the  roaring  of  strong  and  vehement  temptation.  This  some  of  us  have  felt. 
Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  be  caught  hold  of  by  some  frightful  temptation  which  you 
detest,  and  yet  the  clutch  of  the  hand  is  seconded  by  an  arm  so  terrific  in  its  strength 
that  it  drags  you  right  on  against  your  wUl.  3.  Satan  can  roar  also  in  the  Christian's 
ears  with  blasphemies.  Oh !  the  terrors  which  Satan  has  sometimes  caused  to  God's 
people  by  saying,  "  Ah,  you  are  not  a  child  of  God,  or  you  would  not  have  so  vUe 
a  nature."  Whereas  you  never  thought  it  at  all.  It  was  his  suggestion,  not  yours ; 
and  then,  having  laid  his  sin  at  your  door,  he  has  turned  accuser  of  the  brethren, 
and  has  sought  to  cast  down  your  faith  from  its  excellency,  by  making  you  imagine 
that  you  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin.  Now,  if  he  roars  against  you, 
either  with  persecution  or  with  temptation,  or  with  diabolical  insinuations,  take  the 
language  of  our  apostle  here — "  Whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith,"  &c.  III. 
Satan's  ultimate  aim — "  Seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  Nothing  short  of  the 
total  destruction  of  a  believer  will  ever  satisfy  our  adversary.  If  the  battle  were 
between  Satan  and  man,  then,  indeed,  woe  to  us !  We  might  quit  ourselves  like 
men  and  be  strong,  but  before  this  giant  all  the  host  of  Israel  must  flee.  But  the 
battle  is  not  ours  ;  it  is  the  mighty  God's.  Yea,  and  Christ  Himself  must  be 
defeated,  the  glory  of  His  Cross  must  be  dimmed,  the  crown  of  sovereignty  must  be 
snatched  from  His  head,  ere  one  of  those  for  whom  He  died  should  ever  be  given  up 
to  the  power  of  His  adversary.  IV.  What  we  should  do  in  order  that  we  may 
OVERCOME  THIS  ADVERSARY.  1.  "  Whom  rcsist,  stcadfast  in  the  faith."  But  how 
resist  him?  "Steadfast  in  the  faith."  Seek  to  obtain  a  clear  knowledge  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  then  get  a  good  grip  of  them.  This  wlU  make  you 
strong.  Then  take  hold  of  the  promises  of  God,  which  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ 
Jesus.  2.  But  there  is  another  word  added  for  our  comfort — "  Knowing  that  the 
same  afflictions  are  accomplished  in  your  brethren  that  are  in  the  world."  This  is 
well  sketched  by  John  Bunyan.  "As  Christian  was  going  along  the  exceedingly 
narrow  pathway,  with  a  deep  ditch  on  one  side,  and  a  dangerous  quag  upon  the 
other,  he  came  to  a  stand,  and  he  had  half  a  thought  to  go  back  ;  and  then  again 
he  thought  he  might  be  half-way  through  the  valley;  so  he  resolved  to  go  on. 
And  while  he  pondered  and  mused,  he  heard  the  voice  of  a  man  as  going  before  him, 
saying,  '  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear 
no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me.'  Then  he  was  glad,  and  that  for  these  reasons.  He 
gathered  from  thence  that  some  who  feared  God  were  in  this  valley  as  well  as  him- 
self ;  that  God  was  with  them,  though  they  perceived  Him  not ;  that  he  hoped  to 
have  company  by  and  by.  So  he  went  on,  and  called  to  him  that  was  before,  but 
he  knew  not  what  to  answer  for  that  he  also  thought  himself  to  be  alone."  "  I  did 
not  think  that  anybody  ever  felt  as  I  feel."  And  though  I  tell  you  these  things, 
and  know  that  many  of  you  have  heard  Satan  roar,  I  am  compelled  to  confess  that 
I  have  frequently  said  in  my  own  heart,  "  I  do  not  believe  that  any  other  man  ever  had 
this  temptation  before  me."  Well,  this  text  stands  to  refute  our  supposition,  "  The 
same  afflictions  are  accomplished  in  your  brethren  that  are  in  the  world."  (C.  H. 
Spurijeon.)  The 'personaUUj  and  agency  of  evil  spirits  : — When  an  army  is  on  active 
service,  there  is  no  effort  which  its  commander  will  spare,  to  get  accurate  infonnation 
about  the  army  which  is  opposed  to  him.  He  uses  all  the  means  in  his  power :  and 
his  emissaries  are  content  to  run  the  most  fearful  risks  ;  that  he  may  learn  what  is 
the  number  of  the  force  arrayed  against  him ;  what  is  its  position,  what  its  probable 
movements.  And  if  any  skilful  spy  could  so  far  penetrate  the  councils  of  the 
hostile  commander,  as  to  be  able  to  procure  a  sketch  of  his  plan  for  conducting  the 
campaign,  we  can  all  understand  that  such  a  plan  would  be  worth  almost  any 
price.  For  to  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  It  is  part  of  our  religious 
belief,  that  a  host  of  beings,  with  power  and  skill  far  more  than  human,  are  hourly 
exerting  all  their  power  and  all  their  skill  for  our  eternal  ruin.  It  is  a  part  of  our 
religious  belief,  that  at  the  head  of  this  host  of  foes  there  is  one  miserable,  yet 
powerful  being  :  a  being  inconceivably  malignant,  crafty,  wretched :  whose  great 
desire  is  to  dishonour  God,  and  to  make  us  human  beings  as  sinful  and  as  wretched 
as  himself.     Now  there  is  no  doubt  at  all,  that  we  have  all  to  contend  with  a  certain 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  431 

amount  of  lurking  unbelief  in  regard  to  those  evil  spirits  of  which  we  are  to  think. 
You  will  find  men  who  will  tell  you  that  the  existence  of  Satan  and  his  angels  is 
an  antiquated  doctrine,  fitted  for  a  ruder  age,  but  not  suited  to  our  growing 
intelligence  :  they  will  tell  you  that  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  God  would  suffer 
such  beings  to  exist  and  to  assail  us  :  and  that  all  that  was  said  by  Christ  and  His 
apostles  with  regard  to  evU  spirits  must  be  understood  as  having  been  said  in 
compliance  with  the  vulgar  way  of  thinking.  As  to  the  notion  that  the  Almighty 
would  not  suffer  such,  why,  there  is  no  greater  difficulty  in  understanding  why  He 
permits  evil  spirits,  than  in  understanding  why  he  permits  evU  men.  And  we  know 
that  G  od  not  only  allows  evU  men  to  exist ;  but  allows  them  to  tempt  and  mislead 
other  human  souls  to  evU.  And  as  for  the  notion  that  Christ  and  the  apostles  in 
speaking  of  evU  spirits  were  merely  complying  with  the  vulgar  way  of  thinking — 
merely  to  put  that  notion  plainly  before  our  minds  is  enough  to  set  it  aside.  See 
what  it  comes  to.  That  there  are  no  evU  spUits :  that  people,  however,  generaUy 
fancied  there  are  :  and  that  our  Saviour,  for  fear  of  shocking  their  prejudice,  gave 
in  to  that  foolish  error,  and  countenanced  it.  Now,  is  that  conceivable  ?  Would 
that  have  been  worthy  of  Him  who  is  the  Truth  ?  In  leading  our  spiritual  life,  we 
have  to  contend  with  real,  personal  beings,  striving  to  lead  us  wrong :  there  is 
something  more  against  us  than  merely  the  force  of  circumstances,  and  the  current 
of  events  in  a  fallen  world ;  these  are  seconded  and  used  by  real  persons  of  the 
greatest  power  and  craft.  Ought  we  not  to  seek  to  know  something  of  the  nature 
and  the  wUes  of  our  great  adversaries  ?  We  all  know  that  the  Bible  contains  many 
references  to  evU  spirits,  unclean  spirits,  or  devils  :  and  in  the  New  Testament  there 
is  very  much  more  frequent  mention  of  evU  angels  than  of  good  angels.  For  what- 
ever advantages  we  may  ever  derive  from  the  aid  of  good  angels,  we  gain  by  the 
direct  intervention  of  God  :  and  we  aire  not  to  think  of  making  any  application  to 
any  good  spirit  for  his  help.  But  it  is  different  with  evil  spirits.  Against  them  we 
are  called  personally  to  guard.  We  may,  by  our  own  evU  thoughts  and  ways, 
tempt  them  to  tempt  us.  To  them  we  may  open  our  hearts.  And  them  we  may 
by  God's  grace  resist,  and  drive  away.  We  are  exposed  to  great  perils  from  them, 
against  which  we  need  to  be  guarded.  But  the  thing  of  practical  moment  for  each 
of  us,  is  the  manner  in  which  they  make  their  attack  upon  us.  And  it  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  they  wiU  attack  us  in  the  most  crafty 
way.  And  wUl  not  the  most  crafty  way  of  an  evU  spirit  be  the  way  in  which  we 
least  expect  him  ?  Satan  is  too  cunning  to  present  himself  in  his  own  black 
colours  when  he  can  veU  himself  in  a  more  engaging  form.  Do  you  think  a 
fraudulent  trader  would  go  about  proclaiming  that  he  was  a  rogue,  and  that 
if  you  dealt  with  him  he  would  be  sure  to  cheat  you?  If  a  man  were  trying 
to  get  you  to  buy  his  bad  wares,  would  he  be  hkely  to  take  pains  to  tell  you 
how  bad  they  were  ?  No :  the  evil  one  and  his  angels  are  not  weak  enough  to 
announce  to  us  how  evil  they  are,  and  how  bent  upon  our  destruction.  It  is  in 
our  own  growing  worldliness  of  spirit — our  own  disposition  to  put  off  the  care 
of  religion  to  the  more  convenient  season  which  never  comes — in  our  own  temper 
of  careless  easy-mindedness,  forgetful  of  the  awful  realities  of  heaven  and  hell,  and 
vaguely  trusting  that  through  God's  mercy  things  wUl  somehow  go  right  for  eternity 
with  little  thought  or  pains  on  our  part — it  is  in  symptoms  like  these  that  we  may  read 
the  fearful  indications  that  the  devil  and  his  angels  are  working  too  suceessfuUy 
upon  our  hearts.  I  do  not  mention  the  stimulus  of  unholy  passion,  of  covetousness, 
of  envy.  You  fancy  that  the  bitter,  angry  spirit  that  grows  up  within  you  at  some 
sUght  offence  is  but  the  working  of  your  own  natural  temperament :  ah,  you  do  not 
know  how  it  may  be  encouraged  by  some  dark  being,  speciaUy  devoting  himself  to 
the  task.  In  brief,  it  is  reasonable  and  right  for  us  to  suspect  the  presence  and 
influence  of  an  evil  spirit,  in  every  temptation  we  ever  feel  to  sin  or  error  :  in  every 
inteUectual  process  that  would  cast  doubt  upon  God's  revealed  reUgion,  in  every 
iuipulse  that  would  prompt  to  any  deed  or  any  thought  that  varies  from  the  mind 
and  example  of  our  blessed  Saviour  Himself.  Not  by  the  mere  natural  working  of 
our  fallen  mind  does  the  evil  suggestion  arise :  but  weaving  in  with  that,  mysteriously 
co-operating  with  that,  reinforcing  and  aggravating  that,  comes  the  baneful 
influence  from  the  prince  of  perdition  !  And  yet,  though  this  truth  be  most  awful, 
it  is  salutary  :  it  is  one  which  it  is  good  for  us  to  reflect  upon.  Is  there  not  some- 
thing here  to  fill  us  with  the  greater  detestation  of  sin  :  to  lead  us  to  the  more  resolute 
battling  with  temptation?  Think  that  every  time  you  sin,  you  are  doing  the  very 
thing  that  your  most  malicious  enemy  wishes  you  to  do !  Is  not  that  a  motive  to 
hate  sin :  to  battle  with  temptation  ?    [A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)       Of  the  being,  enmity. 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

fierceness,  and  cunning  of  the  devil: — Satan  allows  you  as  much  religion  as  you 
please  for  the  carrying  on  of  his  designs ;  and  yet,  if  you  please,  you  may  have  none 
at  all.  Some  who  are  easily  to  be  won,  he  tempts  to  downright  villainy,  only 
helping  out  their  dull  wits  to  more  exquisite  and  genteel  achievements.  Others 
who  are  more  cautious  of  notorious  sins  he  draws  to  offences  which  seem  less,  but 
are  equally  serving  his  interest.  I.  That  thebe  is  a  devil  was  the  opinion  of  the 
heathen  themselves  that  ever  acknowledged  a  God.  But  most  commonly  they  were 
mistaken  in  the  nature  of  his  being,  and  altogether  as  to  his  origin  and  power. 
Now  as  the  agreement  of  all  nations  in  the  confession  and  worship  of  a  God  is  a 
powerful  argument  to  prove  the  same,  so  the  same  agreement  in  the  general  notion 
of  this  malignant  being  may  be  of  the  like  force.  And  truly  it  seems  agreeable  to 
reason  that  since  there  is  so  much  evil  in  the  world  there  should  be  some  sovereign 
patron  of  it.  He  also  that  shall  consider  the  impetuous  current  of  wickedness  which 
has  run  down  throughout  all  ages  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  which  could 
never  flow  from  infinite  mercy  and  goodness,  hath  reasons  sufficient  to  convince 
him  that  there  must  of  necessity  be  some  powerful  being  which  manages  this 
kingdom  of  darkness  ;  some  chief  promoter  of  evil  and  subtle  contriver  of  our  ruin. 
II.  That  Satan  is  our  inveterate  adversary,  with  the  origin  of  his  malice,  and  the 
reasons  of  God's  permission  and  sufferance.  It  is  very  natural  to  those  that  are 
ambitious,  when  their  designs  of  rising  are  thwarted,  but  much  more  when  they  are 
also  degraded  from  that  high  and  happy  estate  they  once  enjoyed,  to  fall  into  the 
deepest  extremity  of  malice  and  eagerness  of  revenge,  not  only  towards  that  power 
that  frustrated  their  ends,  but  also  with  an  endeavour  to  hinder  all  those  who  are 
in  any  possibility  of  obtaining  that  felicity  which  they  by  their  rebellion  have  lost. 
And  this  is  the  case  of  the  angels  that  fell.  But  since  their  power  is  still  subject  to 
God,  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  He  tolerates  so  vehement  an  adversary  both  to  His 
honour  and  the  works  of  His  hands?  Besides  His  unsearchable  will  and  pleasure, 
I  may  presume  to  offer  two  reasons.  1.  In  relation  to  the  lapsed  spirits  themselves. 
God  determining  not  to  inflict  His  utmost  wrath  upon  them  tiU  the  great  day  of 
judgment  (2  Peter  ii.  4;  Jude  vi).  2.  In  relation  to  mankind.  God  purposing  to 
advance  those  only  to  His  kingdom  whom  neither  the  principalities  nor  powers  of 
the  air  could  shake,  nor  any  subtle  allurements  could  draw  aside.  III.  From 
experience  and  ordinary  observation  we  may  conclude,  that  there  must  of  neces- 
sity be  some  such  enemy  by  whose  instigation  chiefly  and  not  altogether  by  the 
propensity  of  our  own  natures  we  commit  most  sins.  1.  If  we  consider  the  nature 
and  quality  of  most  sins,  how  unanswerable  to  that  earnestness  with  which  men 
commit  them,  we  shall  find  that  the  incitement  proceeds,  not  so  much  from  their 
own  inclinations,  or  the  fairness  of  the  objects,  as  the  secret  subtle  suggestions  of 
Satan.  2.  From  that  general  and  otherwise  unaccountable  averseness  to  religion, 
and  other  miscarriages  in  the  duties  thereof,  which  we  cannot  but  charge  ourselves 
withal.  (J.  Cooke,  M.A.)  The  devil : — I  have  heard  divines  say  that  it  is  very 
hard  to  convince  men  of  the  existence  of  a  devil,  that  they  scarcely  know  whether 
they  are  convinced  of  it  themselves.  I  think  they  are  mistaken.  An  opinion,  a 
fear,  a  fancy — call  it  what  you  will — must  have  prevailed  long,  must  have  taken 
possession  of  men's  minds,  before  it  could  find  its  way  so  readily  to  their  lips.  Are 
there  no  other  signs?  Does  not  each  man  complain  of  some  incubus  which  he 
wants  to  throw  off  ?  One  may  find  it  outside  of  him  ;  if  he  could  have  better  or 
less  stupid  beings  to  work  with,  all  would  be  well.  Another  feels  as  if  it  were  alto- 
gether within  him.  It  is  a  miserable  solitary  strife,  of  which  no  one  knows  anything 
but  himself.  Intelligent  travellers  and  zealous  missionaries  know  that  in  barbarous 
countries  the  difficulty  is  not  to  convince  men  of  this  doctrine,  but  of  any  other. 
We  may  acknowledge  that  our  Lord's  words  were  none  of  them  directed  to  prove  the 
existence  of  evil  spirits.  He  found  their  existence  acknowledged.  Sickness,  pain, 
death,  were  the  demonstrations  to  the  hearts  of  men  of  their  presence.  What  has 
been  said  of  Christ's  words  is  true  also  of  His  acts.  He  who  encountered  sickness, 
madness,  death,  was  certainly  not  setting  forth  the  power  of  evil  spirits.  He  was 
proving  their  weakness.  He  was,  say  the  Evangelists,  "  casting  them  out."  When 
the  apostles  went  forth  to  preach,  they  too  had  no  occasion  to  persuade  men  of  the 
existence  of  evil  powers.  That  was  assumed  ;  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  agreed 
so  far.  Their  theories  were  different ;  the  witness  which  the  facts  of  this  world 
nnd  of  their  own  experience  bore  to  their  consciences  was  essentially  the  same, 
'"an  there  be  a  deliverer  from  these  evil  powers  ? — that  was  the  only  question  which 
it  was  important  to  get  answered.  The  apostles  went  into  all  lands  to  proclaim 
l!iat  there  was  such  a  Deliverer.     They  said  that  Christ  had  overcome  the  diseases 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  433 

of  men  here  upon  earth ;  that  by  death  He  had  overcome  death ;  that  He 
was  every  hour  overcoming  some  principaUty  and  power  in  high  places,  which 
was  claiming  men  as  subjects  and  captives.  This  was  their  gospel.  Having  such 
a  one,  they  spoke  of  necessity  concerning  the  principalities  and  powers.  But  the 
apostles,  like  their  Master,  used  the  singular  number  as  well  as  the  plural.  They 
too  were  obliged  to  speak  of  an  adversary,  of  a  tempter.  The  moment  the  complete 
unity  of  the  Divine  Nature  was  proclaimed— the  unity  of  the  Father  with  the  Son 
in  one  Spirit ;  the  moment  that  men  had  been  baptised  into  this  perfect,  loving, 
all-embracing  Name,  they  must  be  told,  "  There  is  an  adversary  of  this  Name,  a 
self-seeking,  self-concentrated,  self-worshipping  adversary,  who  is  seeking  to  draw 
you  out  of  communion  with  it,  and  therefore  out  of  communion  with  each  other. 
You  must  be  sober,  for  he  seeks  to  make  you  drunk  with  the  pleasures  of  this  life, 
with  your  own  self-conceit,  that  you  may  lose  all  thoughts  of  your  Father's  house.  You 
must  be  vigilant,  for  he  seeks  to  stupefy  you  with  opiates,  to  keep  you  asleep."  St. 
Peter  felt  that  a  picture  as  living  as  this  was  necessary,  that  his  next  words  might 
not  be  idle  words :  "Whom  resist,  steadfast  in  the  faith."  Once  believe  that  you 
have  an  adversary — that  the  conflict  is  not  a  sham  one,  and  you  can  repulse  him. 
You  have  not  to  win  a  position,  but  defend  one.  You  belong  to  God.  You  can  tell 
the  adversary  that  you  owe  him  no  allegiance  ;  that  you  scorn  his  promises  and  his 
threats  ;  that  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  His  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  that  you  do  not  choose  to  exchange  it  for  the  kingdom  of  hell.  The  members  of 
the  Christian  Church  were  very  likely  to  take  up  the  notion  that  they  and  the  world 
around  them  were  under  quite  different  laws ;  that  they  were  not  subject  to  the 
passions  which  other  men  were  subject  to ;  that  they  were  out  of  the  range  of  the 
influence  of  the  evil  spirit.  A  more  plausible  delusion,  or  a  more  perilous  one, 
cannot  be  imagined.  An  apostle  had  no  higher  duty  than  to  shatter  it.  He  was  to 
assure  his  disciples  that  the  privilege  of  their  brotherhood  in  Christ  exempted  them 
from  no  assault  which  threatened  those  who  had  not  asserted  that  privilege.  This 
advantage  he  had,  that  being  one  of  a  society,  of  a  brotherhood,  he  felt  that  his 
enemy  was  the  enemy  of  his  brethren,  and  the  enemy  of  that  world  which  he  wished 
to  claim  as  part  of  his  family.  He  was  fighting  for  all  men  when  he  was  fighting 
for  himself.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  roaring  lion : — Dr.  Livingstone  tells  us 
of  an  African  native  who  was  struck  down  and  torn  by  a  lion,  that  periodically  the 
dreadful  pains  returned  to  the  old  wound,  as  if  again  the  monster  gnawed  at  the 
bone.  So  was  it,  I  think,  with  Peter.  The  old  lion  had  struck  him  down  and  fixed 
his  teeth  in  his  prey.  Snatched  from  the  jaws  of  the  destroyer  by  David's  greater 
Son,  yet  the  scar  throbbed  with  vivid  reminders  of  the  peril,  and  brought  again 
before  him  the  memory  of  his  great  deliverance.  Let  us  turn  and  look  upon  this 
terrible  man-slayer.  I.  Here  is  a  very  real  enemy.  He  is  an  old  doctor,  as 
Latimer  calls  him,  and  well  versed  in  arts  and  crafts ;  but  his  master-stroke  has 
been  reserved  for  these  times.  There  is  a  fable  of  a  fox  that  caught  its  prey  by 
pretending  to  be  dead.  That  is  the  last  of  Satan's  devices.  A  hundred  years  ago 
everything  was  put  down  to  him— storms,  earthquakes,  eclipses,  plagues,  diseases  ; 
there  was  ascribed  to  him  a  power  and  activity  that  were  almost  infinite.  Thanks 
to  science,  she  has  cast  the  devil  out  of  the  hailstorm  and  the  thunder-cloud,  and 
has  taught  us  at  least  some  of  the  laws  which  regulate  these  things.  So  he  has 
altered  his  tactics,  and  with  a  humility  which  his  betters  might  imitate  he  has 
announced  his  own  decease.  "  I  am  dead  " — saith  the  devil — "  indeed  there  is  no 
^evil.  I  am  passed  away  with  witchcraft  and  ghosts  and  all  the  silly  nonsense  of 
the  dark  ages."  No,  no.  We  have  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy  to  which  we  do 
well  to  give  heed.  This  old  adversary  is  as  real  for  you  and  for  me  as  he  ever  was. 
As  real  for  us  as  he  was  for  Adam,  or  for  Job,  or  for  Judas.  Your  adversary — says 
the  apostle,  as  if  he  had  marked  us  out  for  his  prey.  We  dare  not  ignore  him.  We 
dare  not  make  light  of  him.  He  tracks  our  steps  and  seeks  us  as  his  prey.  Be 
sober,  be  vigilant.  H.  He  is  a  mighty  foe.  The  glimpses  we  have  of  him  in  the 
Bible  reveal  one  of  vast  dominion  and  of  amazing  power ;  probably  of  all  God's 
creatures  one  of  the  first  in  the  order  of  time  and  highest  in  rank ;  amongst  the 
foremost  of  the  angels  that  do  excel  in  strength.  There  is  a  majesty  about  him  as 
of  one  conscious  of  vast  power.  Think  of  his  triumphs.  Away  up  in  the  mountain 
caves  is  the  den  of  the  lion,  the  mouth  and  floor  of  it  all  strewn  with  the  bones  of 
his  victims ;  skulls  and  ribs  lie  thickly  scattered.  But  what  a  sight  it  were  to  look 
into  the  den  of  this  old  lion  the  devil,  and  to  see  the  mischief  that  he  hath  wrought ! 
ni.  He  is  a  subtle  foe.  Think  of  his  knowledge  of  human  nature.  Hocv  per- 
fectly he  understands  us!     As  an  old  Puritan  says,  "He  taketh  the  measure  of 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v, 

every  man's  foot ;  and  then  he  fitteth  him  instantly."  Therefore  let  us  put  up  a 
double  guard  on  the  side  of  our  weakness.  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  and,  most  of  all, 
be  sober  and  be  vigilant  where  the  peril  threatens  most.  It  is  then  that  the  devil 
can  do  most  harm  when  he  finds  a  traitor-wish  within  the  soul — into  whose  ear  he 
can  whisper,  a  traitor  that  he  can  bribe.  And  not  only  of  our  besetments  does  he 
make  use.  Our  very  virtues  he  tries  to  turn  into  handles  for  his  malice.  Here  is  a 
pleasant,  genial,  good-hearted  fellow — ah !  the  devil  leads  him  on  and  tumbles  him 
into  the  ditch  of  seK-indulgence,  or  f  etcheth  him  away  by  evil  company.  This  man 
is  thrifty  and  saving :  and  the  devil  elbows  him  on  year  after  year  until  he  casts 
him  into  that  horrible  pit  of  miserliness.  This  man  is  generous,  but  the  devil  puifs 
him  up  with  the  sense  of  his  importance.  This  man  is  very  humble,  and  the  devil 
pushes  him  down  so  far  in  the  vaUey  of  humility  that  he  begins  to  climb  up  the 
other  side  and  is  proud  of  being  so  humble.  This  man  is  resolute  and  determined, 
and  the  devil  eggs  him  on  until  he  is  overbearing  and  tyrannical.  And  this  man  is 
modest  and  retiring,  and  the  devil  keeps  him  lazy  and  useless  by  assuring  him  that 
he  has  no  gifts.  He  can  do  almost  as  much  with  our  virtues  as  with  our  vices. 
For  all  conditions  and  for  all  circumstances  the  tempter  has  his  attack.  Turn  ta 
the  great  temptation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Then,  again,  he  seeks  to  turn  our 
very  mercies  to  our  mischief.  The  lusciousness  and  beauty  of  the  fruit  in  Paradise 
is  made  to  awaken  Eve's  desire ;  and  when  she  wished  for  it,  lo !  there  it  was 
hanging  within  reach.  He  is  a  cruel  foe.  A  lion  for  his  might,  he  is  also  a  lion  for 
his  savage  cruelty.  His  name  is  Apollyon,  the  destroyer.  To  worry  if  he  cannot 
overthrow  ;  to  annoy  if  he  cannot  destroy.  "  Oh,  sir,"  said  one  to  me  one  day,  as 
gentle  and  loving  a  man  as  ever  lived,  "  I  loved  my  wife  better  than  my  life,  but 
when  I  was  drunk  it  was  as  if  the  devil  was  in  me,  and  I  always  began  knocking 
her  about.  I  beat  her  one  night  so  that  she  could  eat  nothing  but  spoon  meat  for 
eleven  days.  And  then  when  I  saw  what  I  had  done  I  had  to  get  drunk  again 
just  to  forget  it."  He  is  a  cruel  monster,  a  hard  master,  driving  his  poor  slave  to 
lowest  depths.  IV.  Lastly,  this  old  lion  can  be  overcome.  "  Be  sober,  be 
vigilant."  The  first  word  suggests  our  peril  from  over-eagerness.  People  who  go 
rushing  into  anything  and  everything,  rush  into  the  hon's  den  and  thrust  their 
heads  into  his  very  mouth.  There  are  some  people  that  the  old  hon  must  hunt 
for,  but  the  over-eager  he  can  get  by  lying  still.  Be  sober.  Take  a  right  estimate 
of  things.  Measure  things  by  God  and  by  eternity.  Don't  be  too  thirsty — that  is 
the  meaning  of  the  precept — too  thirsty  for  pleasure  ;  too  thirsty  for  money ;  too 
thirsty  for  honour ;  too  thirsty  for  your  own  way  in  evei'ything.  Travellers  tell  us 
that  there  are  certain  places  where  you  may  generally  trace  the  steps  of  the  old  lion 
and  expect  to  find  him  waiting  about.  They  are  the  drinking  places,  where  he  can 
spring  upon  his  prey  in  a  moment.  Be  sober.  And  yet  be  vigilant.  The  too 
anxious  are  in  peril ;  but  so  are  the  too  careless.  Be  vigilant.  But  is  that  all  ? 
What  is  the  good  of  telling  the  little  lamb  to  be  sober  and  vigilant  when  the  old 
lion  is  about  ?  We  must  go  further  back  and  further  forward  for  the  instructions 
as  to  our  safety.  "  Humble  yourselves,  therefore,  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
Be  so  little  and  so  weak  that  you  have  no  faith  in  yourself  at  all — and  creep  for 
your  safety  in  under  that  mighty  hand.  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him,  for  He 
careth  for  you."  Beneath  that  hand  I  cannot  know  a  fear.  Here  am  I  as  within 
a  fortress  whose  walls  can  neither  be  scaled  nor  undermined.  That  Presence  alone 
is  our  safety.  "  Whom  resist,  steadfast  in  the  faith."  Be  bold  because  thine  hand  is 
in  the  hand  of  thy  God.  {M.  G.  Pearse.)  The  devil  and  humanity  : — I.  We  have 
here  the  devil  at  work  in  humanity.  He  is  "  going  about,"  not  outside  men,  but  in 
men,  going  about  in  the  regions  of  human  thoughts,  human  passions,  human 
impulses,  human  activities.  "  He  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience."  As  a 
worker — 1.  His  inspiration  is  malignant.  "  He  is  a  roaring  lion."  He  is  not  a 
sleeping  hon,  nor  a  lion  crouching  down,  satiated  with  food,  but  a  lion  roaring  with 
hunger,  savage  for  food.  2.  His  purpose  is  destruction.  "  Seeking  whom  he  may 
devour."  The  devil  is  a  devourer  physically.  The  devil  is  a  devourer  spiritually. 
He  is  a  devourer  of  purity  of  heart,  peace  of  conscience,  confidence  in  and  fellow- 
ship with  the  everlasting  Father.  The  devil  is  a  devourer  socially.  He  is  a 
devourer  of  domestic  harmony,  social  order,  prosperity,  and  peace.  The  devil  is  a 
devourer  politically.  He  is  a  devourer  of  civil  freedom,  national  progress,  inter- 
national harmony.  H.  We  have  the  devil  here  counteracted  by  humanity.  Three 
things  are  necessary  to  counteract  him — 1.  Thoughtfulness — "Be  sober."  This 
does  not  mean  mere  physical  sobriety,  although,  of  course,  it  includes  that — it 
means  sobriety  of  soul,  a  state  of  mind  opposed  to  all  volatile  excitement.     Were 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  435 

men  to  think  whence  they  came,  what  they  are,  whither  they  are  tending,  the  devil 
would  not  easily  influence  them.  2.  Diligence — "  Be  vigilant."  Be  vigilant  in 
building  up  moral  fortresses  around  your  soul,  so  as  to  resist  his  entrance.  3. 
Steadfastness — "  Whom  resist,  steadfast  in  the  faith."  Is  it  wise  in  a  town  to  ignore 
the  pestilence  that  has  entered  its  streets  and  carried  death  to  its  homes  ?  How 
infinitely  more  unwise  is  it  to  ignore  this  roaring  lion !  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
devil  and  humanity : — I.  What  the  devil  beaxly  is  in  eelation  to  men.  First,  He 
is  an  "  adversary."  Secondly,  He  is  a  malignant  "  adversary,"  ravenous  and 
savage.  Thirdly,  He  is  a  prowling  adversary.  "  Walketh  about."  He  is  always 
on  the  move.  He  walks  about  the  markets,  the  governments  and  churches  of  the 
world ;  about  the  public  streets  and  secluded  alleys,  and  about  the  chambers  of 
every  human  soul.  He  has  no  rest.  U.  What  men  reaili  should  be  in  relation 
to  the  DEvUi.  1.  They  should  be  serious.  "Be  sober."  As  calm,  serious,  and 
self-possessed  as  a  soldier  who  waits  the  blast  of  the  trumpet  for  war.  2.  They 
should  be  watchful.  "  Be  vigilant."  He  is  wily,  always  plotting.  3.  They  should 
be  resisting.  "  Whom  resist."  Do  not  yield  an  inch,  but  advance.  4.  They 
should  be  reflective.  "  Knowing  that  the  same  afflictions  are  accomplished  in  your 
brethren."  (Ibid.)  The  same  afllictions  are  accomplished. — The  toide  diffusion 
of  trials  a  motive  to  steadfastness  : — Ordinarily,  if  we  speak  of  afflictions,  or 
sufferings,  you  presently  think  of  the  bereavements  or  sorrows  which  fall  to  us 
through  the  dispensations  of  Providence.  But  the  apostle,  when  he  here  uses  the 
term,  is  speaking  only  of  spiritual  assaults — of  the  attacks  of  Satan,  acting  on  the 
corruptions  of  our  nature,  and  soliciting  us  to  sin.  Are  these  indeed  afflictions  to 
us?  Happy  the  man  who,  though  he  have  to  reckon  among  his  sore  things  "  per- 
secution, and  peril,  and  nakedness,  and  sword,"  can  yet  say,  "  The  sorest  thing  of 
all  is,  that  I  am  continually  wrought  upon  by  an  invisible  foe,  who,  seconded  but 
too  readily  from  within,  places  me  in  peril  of  deserting  my  profession  and  dis- 
honouring my  Saviour."  Yes,  the  greatest  affliction  to  us  should  be  the  not  finding 
affliction  in  sin.  What  is  there  to  encourage  the  Christian  warrior  in  the  knowing 
that  the  same  afflictions  are  the  lot  of  others  as  well  as  himself  ?  Keally  at  first 
sight,  and  with  reference  more  especially  to  the  assaults  of  the  devil,  it  might  be 
said  that  this  was  calculated  to  discourage  us.  It  seems  almost  like  investing  Satan 
with  omnipresence,  to  exhibit  him  as  afflicting  simultaneously  the  whole  body  of 
Christians.  Suppose  it  were  the  registered  course  of  God's  proceedings  tha  t  there 
should  be  comparative  freedom  from  the  assaults  of  Satan,  so  that  the  "  roaring 
lion  "  were  not  allowed  to  come  against  the  Christian.  What  a  fearful  thing  it 
would  then  be  for  a  believer  to  find  himself  attacked  by  the  devil!  It  would  not  be 
the  amount  of  the  attack,  so  much  as  the  unusualness,  that  would  distress  him. 
His  inference  would  be — "  Surely  I  am  not  one  of  the  people  of  God :  if  I  were.  He 
would  not  deal  with  me  in  so  uncommon  a  way."  Or,  if  again,  in  place  of 
exemption  generally  from  spiritual  assault,  there  were  any  one  form  of  temptation 
which  was  seldom  allowed  to  visit  the  righteous ;  would  not  the  being  invaded  by 
this  form  distract  the  godly  man,  not  because  the  form  itself  might  be  more  terrific 
than  he  had  known  before,  but  because,  being  novel,  it  would  seem  to  bring  proof 
that  he  had  deceived  himself  with  regard  to  his  spiritual  condition  ?  But  now  take 
the  opposite,  which  is  the  actual  case,  namely,  that  the  Christian  has  nothing 
strange  to  undergo.  Do  you  not  perceive  that  this  very  circumstance  will  do  much 
to  encourage  him  to  resist  the  devil  and  keep  steadfast  in  the  faith  ?  The  believer 
has  perhaps  to  undergo  a  large  measure  of  domestic  trial ;  death  makes  frequent 
inroads  into  his  family ;  his  circumstances  become  straitened ;  his  children  requite 
him  with  ingratitude  ;  but  he  looks  into  the  history  of  the  righteous,  and  he  finds 
that  there  is  nothing  singular  in  his  portion.  Or  again — and  here,  it  may  be, 
Satan  ha.s  the  greatest  advantage — the  believer  has  seasons  of  spiritual  darkness ; 
and  he  loses  aU  comfortable  sense  of  love  of  God  and  the  atonement  made  by 
Christ.  But  is  he  peculiar  in  this  ?  Has  nothing  like  this  been  experienced  by  the 
believer?  He  turns  to  the  Book  of  Psalms.  What  does  he  find?  Unmingled 
joy?  unclouded  assurance?  Oh,  no!  he  finds  constant  alternations,  as  though 
night  followed  day — depression  succeeded  in  necessary  order  to  exultation.  There 
is,  however,  one  more,  and  an  equally  important  view,  which  may  justly  be  taken 
of  the  passage  before  us.  If  we  are  to  resist  the  devil  with  good  prospect  of  success, 
we  must  prepare  to  resist  the  devil ;  and,  in  order  to  this  preparation,  we  should  be 
observant  of  what  has  happened  and  is  happening  to  others.  An  old  writer  justly 
says,  "  Things  certainly  fall  the  lighter  upon  us  when  they  first  fall  upon  our 
thoughts."     It  is  the  being  taken  by  surprise  which  makes  sorrow  so  hard  ;  and  we 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

want  you  not  to  be  taken  by  surprise.  Oh,  the  experience  of  the  Church  is  not  an 
experience  which  merely  proves  the  frequency  of  trouble  ;  it  proves  also  the  advan- 
tageousness  of  trouble ;  it  proves  that  affliction  "  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of 
righteousness  to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby  " ;  it  proves  that  the  devil  may  be 
resisted ;  that,  with  all  his  subtlety,  and  malice,  and  might,  he  is  more  than 
matched  by  the  believer,  who  takes  to  himself  the  whole  armour  of  God.  And  for 
this  simple  truth  we  would  gain,  if  we  could,  a  strong  hold  upon  your  minds.  The 
devil  is  not  irresistible — not  one  of  his  temptations  is  irresistible.  Will  ye,  then, 
yield,  as  though  it  were  useless  to  withstand  ?  Your  brethren,  in  whom  the  same 
afflictions  have  been  accomplished,  met  the  devil  and  vanquished  him,  but  not  in 
their  own  strength ;  and  you,  too,  may  vanquish  the  devil.  The  promised  aids  of 
the  Holy  Spirit — aids  which  no  Christian  seeks  in  vain  who  seeks  in  'faith — will 
always  suffice  to  carry  you  safely,  yea,  triumphantly  through  the  conflict.  What 
warning,  then,  is  there,  that  we  slumber  not  at  our  post !  what  encouragement  that 
we  shrink  not  from  conflict!  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Sympathy  with  saints  and 
martyrs  : — When  people  are  sick,  and  in  bad  pain,  we  know  how  apt  they  are  to 
imagine,  Surely  never  any  one  was  so  afflicted  as  I  am.  Thus  St.  Peter  encourages 
his  suffering  brethren,  when  a  time  of  trouble  was  coming  on ;  much  as  St.  Paul 
had  befoi-e  encouraged  the  Corinthians.  "  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you, 
but  such  as  is  common  to  man  "  :  nothing  that  is  beyond  human  strength,  assisted 
by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  bear.  This  is  the  answer  to  those  who  think  the 
commandments  of  the  gospel  too  strict,  too  pure  to  be  obeyed.  "  Your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  wiU  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  And  if  that  be  not 
enough,  look  at  the  lives  of  the  saints :  look  and  see  how  good  and  penitent  persons, 
from  time  to  time,  have  really  been  helped  to  keep  these  commands  which  you 
think  too  hard,  and  to  resist  these  temptations  which  you  think  too  strong.  On 
the  other  hand,  that  roaring  lion,  who  is  ever  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  will 
be  busy  encouraging  in  you  just  the  contrary  of  these  good  thoughts.  If  you  are 
in  trouble  he  will  try  to  make  you  feel  as  if  no  other  person  was  ever  in  so  bad  a 
condition.  If  he  can,  he  will  persuade  you  that  all  or  a  great  part  of  your  trouble 
arises  from  such  and  such  a  person's  ill-usage,  and  so  he  will  make  you  spiteful  and 
envious.  Other  persons,  who  are  not  so  ill-used,  may  do  well  to  be  forgiving  and 
meek  :  but  your  case,  he  will  whisper,  is  really  too  hard,  too  bad.  What  is  the  use, 
they  will  say,  of  such  exact  goodness  ?  you  may  as  well  give  it  up ;  for  you  see  it 
does  not  save  you  from  ill-usage  and  suffering.  Thus  the  enemy  moves  us  to  dis- 
content, when  we  are  afflicted  or  ill-used :  but  still  more  does  he  encourage  us  to 
sin,  when  we  are  in  strong  temptation  from  our  own  passions,  or  the  evil  example 
of  others.  He  will  at  such  times  set  us  on  thinking,  that  surely  our  passions  are 
stronger  than  other  men's,  and  therefore  there  is  more  excuse  for  our  giving  way 
to  them.  This  is  how  the  devil  would  beguile  us,  and  a  very  serious  temptation  it 
is  :  he  would  have  us  believe,  either  that  there  never  were  any  saints,  any  persons 
really  good  and  holy,  or  that  if  there  have  been  any,  they  were  such  by  a  kind  of 
miracle.  To  be  afflicted,  then,  is  a  mark  of  Christian  brotherhood:  it  is  a  token 
that  we  belong  to  God's  family.  If  any  one  were  quite  exempt,  he  would  almost 
feel  it  unfair :  might  he  choose,  he  would  rather  take  his  share,  relieving,  if  so  it 
might  be,  his  brethren.  Or  take  the  case  of  comrades  and  fellow-soldiers — what 
sort  of  a  spirit  is  he  thought  to  have  who  draws  back  and  sj)ares  himself  when  the 
rest  are  entering  upon  labour  and  danger  ?  And  here  comes  in  the  other  word,  by 
which,  as  I  said,  St.  Peter  in  the  text  would  stir  us  up  to  a  godly  jealousy  of  the 
saints.  The  word  I  mean  is  "  accomplished."  Their  afflictions  are  accomplished, 
ours  but  just  beginning.  To  conclude :  whereas  the  apostle's  word  is,  that  what- 
ever we  suffer,  the  same  afflictions  are  accomplished  "  in  our  brethren  that  are  in 
the  world,"  we  understand  that  when  they  are  once  out  of  the  world,  there  is  an  end 
of  their  affliction  and  care  for  ever.  (Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  the  "  Tracts 
for  the  Times.") 

Ver.  10.  The  God  of  all  grace. — Trijjle  perfection  : — The  Kevised  Version  makes 
two  changes  of  some  importance  in  this  passage.  The  word  "settle"  is  removed  to 
the  margin.  And  the  form  of  the  whole  passage  is  changed  from  that  of  a  prayer 
to  that  of  an  assurance  :  "  The  God  of  all  grace  shall  Himself  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen  you."  It  may  be  taken  as  a  revelation.  I.  First  of  all,  what  God 
ACTUALLY  IS — a  "  God  of  all  grace  "  ;  that  is,  of  grace  for  all  men,  and  of  every  kind 
of  grace.  Its  contents  may  perliaps  be  defined  best  as  unmerited  good-will,  show- 
ing itnelf  in  act  or  wailing  in  perpetual  eagerness  for  an  opportunity  to  show  itself. 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  437 

Kow  it  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Christian  religion  that  it  represents  God  as 
in  eternal  possession  of  such  grace,  and  as  always  ready  and  disposed  to  exercise  it 
towards  man.  Other  religions  are  apt  to  confine  the  good-will  of  the  God  within 
the  limits  of  the  country,  or  the  tribe,  or  the  association  of  tribes,  or  to  represent 
the  God  as  gracious  only  to  some  men,  although  ungracious  and  His  heart  entirely 
closed  against  others.  To  all  our  dull  questionings  whether  God  really  loves  us, 
the  one  reply  the  New  Testament  makes  is  simply  that  He  is  "the  God  of  all 
grace,"  in  such  a  sense  that  no  higher  degree  of  grace  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the 
other  no  defect  or  arbitrary  restraint  of  grace,  can  be  conceived  of  Him.  1.  That 
reply  is  worth  lingering  upon,  in  order  that  we  may  teach  ourselves  more  confidently 
to  adore.  Through  all  nature  it  is  easy  to  trace  God's  grace  or  effective  good-will 
towards  man,  nor  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  it  is  altogether  confined  to  man. 
That  He  Himself  feels  pleasure  at  the  beautiful  things  He  makes,  whether  they 
spring  into  being  as  the  product  of  a  fresh  creation  or  evolve  their  glories  out  of 
some  "  closely-packed  germ,"  may  be  inferred  from  the  phrase  in  Genesis  (He 
"  saw  that  it  was  good.")  In  the  shapes  of  the  leaves,  the  colours  of  the  flowers, 
and  all  the  fragrance  of  the  garden,  it  is  possible  to  see  not  only  the  skill  of  the 
Creator  in  providing  for  the  vital  purposes  of  nature,  but  His  generosity  also  in 
weaving  beauty  and  use  in  His  processes  and  decking  His  handiwork  with  glories 
that  are  almost  superfluous  but  for  pleasure.  2.  It  is  much  the  same  with  history, 
God's  providential  administration  of  the  world.  Grace  of  every  kind  and  degree, 
of  patience,  and  discipUne,  and  spiritual  help,  may  be  traced  all  through  it,  vindi- 
cating the  interests  of  righteousness,  leading  men  on  to  ever  clearer  moral  perception 
and  completer  moral  attainment.  To  that  statement  it  is  questionable  whether  any 
exception  can  be  taken.  On  the  part  of  some  men,  indeed,  it  is  customary  to  hold 
that  the  testimony  is  divided,  that  whUst  in  certain  places  the  race  has  declined  and 
fallen,  in  others  only  has  it  risen  and  advanced.  But  there  is  a  distinction,  of 
primary  importance  in  human  affairs,  which  does  not  seem  to  warrant  such  a  con- 
clusion. Man's  progress  through  the  centuries  appears  at  times  to  be  confused  and 
slow.  But  that  is  exactly  what  might  have  been  expected  from  man  ;  and  if  any 
long  period  is  taken,  and  his  condition  at  the  close  compared  with  his  condition  at 
the  beginning,  as  far  as  moraUty  and  the  highest  and  iimermost  interests  of  the 
man  are  concerned,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  question  either  that  the  progress  has  been 
very  real  and  great,  or  that  the  cause  of  it  all  has  been  the  overflowing  grace  of 
God.  3.  But  no  manifestation  of  that  grace  in  any  other  sphere  can  compare  with 
its  manifestation  in  religion.  "  Who  hath  called  us  unto  His  eternal  glory  by 
Christ  Jesus."  This  states  that  the  grace  is  so  great  as  to  be  able  to  satisfy  itself 
with  nothing  less  than  that  we  should  be  with  God,  partakers  of  His  nature  and 
sharers  through  eternity  of  His  glory.  Of  course  the  apostle  added  "  by  Christ 
Jesus,"  for  no  Christian  with  the  thought  of  God's  grace  in  his  mind  can  keep  it 
separate  long  from  its  companion  thought  of  the  Saviour.  For  that  there  are  at 
least  two  reasons.  Whenever  a  man  wants  to  know  the  heart  of  God,  the  best 
mode  is  to  dwell  upon  the  kindliness  and  patience  and  love  of  the  Saviour  amongst 
men,  to  trace  them  all  back  to  the  Divine  source  from  which  they  come,  and  to 
regard  them  as  but  sparks  and  emanations,  dulled  in  their  passage  earthwards,  of 
the  ever-glowing  Love  that  sits  upon  the  throne  of  the  heavens.  Secondly,  and 
chiefly,  the  gift  of  Jesus  Christ  is  at  once  the  most  magnificent  and  the  most 
irrefragable  proof  Jehovah  could  give  that  His  grace  is  like  His  justice,  without 
defect  and  without  limit.  11.  Let  us  turn  now  to  the  revelation  the  verse  contains  of 
WHAT  MAN  MAY  BECOME.  1.  The  samc  sccond  phrase,  "called  to  His  eternal  glory," 
sets  it  forth  in  part,  but  is  almost  too  ideal  and  even  inconceivable  for  exposition.  For 
what  the  glory  of  God  is,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  used  here,  His  own  state 
of  blessedness,  the  eternal  beatitude  that  fills  and  surrounds  Him,  of  necessity  no 
man  can  tell.  It  must  include  all  the  gratifications  that  pure  spirit  is  capable  of 
receiving,  with  no  Uability  to  interruption  or  loss,  and  with  all  kinds  of  associated 
joys,  each  of  which  exceeds  man's  highest  imagination.  And  all  this  glory  is  to  be 
ours — the  discord  and  strife  of  our  natures  for  ever  quieted ;  the  whole  moral  nature 
beatified,  perfected,  assimilated  to  God.  In  that  respect,  too,  the  Christian  religion 
does  not  believe  in  limitations.  2.  The  other  part  of  the  revelation  of  what  man 
may  become  can  be  more  easily  understood.  God  "  shall  Himself  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen  you,"  writes  the  apostle  ;  and  he  may  also  have  added  "  settle  you." 
The  first  word  implies  such  adjustment  as  issues  in  exact  fitness  to  relationship — 
the  making  a  man  precisely  what  he  ought  to  be  in  regard  of  his  attitude  towards 
God,  towards  his  fellow-men,  towards  his  own  conscience  and  sense  of  duty.     The 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

second  word  means  radically  power  to  resist  and  stand  firm ;  and  the  third,  power 
of  effective  strength  by  means  of  which  conquests  are  made  and  obstacles  over- 
borne. The  last  word,  "  settle,"  denotes  the  laying  of  a  firm  foundation,  like  the 
rock  of  which  our  Saviour  speaks,  whereon  if  a  man  build,  his  house  will  be  able 
to  defy  the  vehemence  of  wind  and  weather.  There  is  thus  a  triple  perfectness,  set 
before  us  and  even  pledged  to  us  in  this  verse,  as  the  revelation  of  what  man  may 
become  ;  fitness  to  all  moral  relationships,  strength  to  resist  every  assault  of  Satan, 
power  of  progress  and  triumph  which  nothing  can  hinder,  and  all  this  resting  upon, 
nay,  built  into  a  foundation  so  firm  that  the  might  of  hell  cannot  shake  it.  There 
are,  however,  two  or  three  facts  frequently  famihar  to  the  thought  of  every  one, 
which  make  the  prospect  opened  up  by  St.  Peter  very  blessed,  but  sometimes  very 
dubious.  The  one  is  our  almost  constant  consciousness  that  the  motives  of  our 
best  acts  are  mixed,  some  right,  but  others  in  every  way  unworthy.  That  "  alloy  of 
impure  motive  " — at  times  it  seems  to  be  a  defect  we  cannot  escape  from,  "  tainting 
our  best  moments,"  turning  men's  mistaken  praise  into  the  parent  of  humiliation 
and  self-reproach.  But  that  is  not  the  worst.  Moralists  teach  that  the  range  of 
man's  duty  is  "  co-extensive  within  the  range  of  his  moral  consciousness " ;  or,  in 
other  words,  that  the  standard  at  which  he  aims  should  contain  the  completeness  of 
everything,  which  his  conscience  when  most  sensitive  recognises  as  dutiful  and 
right.  Two  miserable  results  immediately  foUow.  Every  one  knows  that  his  per- 
formances day  after  day  insist  upon  lingering  a  great  way  behind  his  standard ;  and 
every  one  must  occasionally  fear  that  the  standard  itself  has  shrunk,  because  the 
conscience  has  been  dulled  by  past  trifling  and  sin.  The  emphatic  positiveness  of 
this  verse  wiU  not,  however,  permit  itself  to  be  overlooked.  And  instead  of  giving 
way  to  doubt  and  questioning  the  possibility  of  our  perfecting,  it  is  better  that  we 
should  set  ourselves  to  find  out  how  such  a  blessing  may  be  certainly  ensured  and 
enjoyed.  St.  Peter  does  not  hesitate  in  his  teaching  or  qualify  his  words  in  any 
way.  He  says  distinctly  that  only  God  can  do  it  for  us,  and  that  He  will  do  it 
because  His  grace  is  complete  and  full.  We  must  therefore  get  the  Spirit  of  God 
into  our  hearts  by  trust  in  Him,  and  become  possessed  of  Him,  or  the  thing  remains 
of  necessity  hopeless.  There  are  indeed  at  the  present  day,  as  there  have  ever  been, 
strong  tendencies  to  look  in  other  directions  for  the  power  that  will  confer  the 
greatest  benefit  upon  society  and  upon  the  individual.  Sometimes  it  assumes  the 
shape  of  the  study  of  some  form  of  art  or  branch  of  science,  of  devotion  to  an 
impossible  equality  or  an  unreasonable  hierarchy,  of  a  kind  of  progress  that 
slaughters  the  unit  and  passes  on  to  a  remote  and  general  triumph,  of  culture, 
or  combination,  or  the  coercion  of  the  will.  Doubt,  however,  is  long-lived 
and  hard  to  kill ;  and  still  it  may  be  our  fears  are  whispering  to  us.  Can 
He  perfect  me,  and  will  He?  It  is  almost  certain  that  Peter  was  an  old  man 
when  he  wrote  these  words;  and  an  old  man's  counsel  and  assurance,  especially 
when  they  are  based  upon  his  own  actual  experience,  are  not  to  be  despised. 
In  his  youth  and  earlier  manhood  he  had  lacked  steadfastness.  If,  there- 
fore, reason  and  experience  have  any  validity  at  all,  there  is  no  room  left  for 
doubt.  It  is  an  argument  in  which  no  possible  flaw  can  be  found ;  the  grace  of 
God  is  not  liable  to  exhaustion  or  abatement,  and  theiefore  whatever  it  has  actually 
done  for  others  it  can  do  for  us.  The  God  of  all  grace  wUl  do  it  for  us.  That 
grace  of  His  will  go  with  us  wherever  we  go,  constantly  compassing  us  about, 
sustaining  our  hearts,  preparing  us  for  blessedness.  (R.  W.  Moss.)  The  God  of  all 
<jrace : — Our  first  experience  in  reading  this  verse  is  amazement  that  borders  on 
bewilderment.  The  whole  is  a  perfect  blaze  of  diamonds.  Keep  your  eyes  upon 
the  verse,  and  see  what  words  we  have :  "  God,"  "  all  grace,"  "  called,"  "  eternal 
glory,"  "Christ  Jesus,"  "dominion  for  ever."  And,  as  if  these  were  not  enough, 
we  find  also  perfection  thrown  in  as  well :  "  make  you  perfect."  And  these 
marvellous  words  daze  us  all  the  more  because  of  their  contrast  to  that  which  has 
gone  before.  "  The  devil,"  "  a  roaring  lion,"  "  suffering,"  "  adversary,"  "  God," 
"  grace,"  "  eternal  glory,"  "  perfection."  Now  we  will  seek  to  put  the  words  in 
order,  and  link  them  together.  And  observe  that,  though  this  text  reads  as  a 
prayer,  it  is  really  a  promise.  Instead  of  the  first  word  being  "  but,"  it  should  be 
"  and."  In  the  previous  verses  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  telling  us  what  we  have  to 
do.  Now  He  tells  us  what  God  has  promised  to  do.  We  must  never  separate  the 
things  that  God  has  joined  together.  If  God  says  in  one  line,  "  Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  He  says  in  the  next,  "  for  it  is  God  that  worketh 
in  you."  And  so,  if  here  I  am  told  that  I  am  to  be  sober  and  vigilant,  and  that 
I  am  to  resist  a  roaring  devil,  and  I  say,  "  How  can  it  be  ?     It  is  more  than  I  can 


<:hap.  v.]  I.  PETER.  439 

do,"  He  who  bids  me  do  it  tells  me  what  He  will  do :  "  And  He  Himself  shall 
perfect,  strengthen,  and  stablish  you."  The  words,  you  see,  are  beginning  to  fall 
into  order.  But  there  is  one  important  point  which  I  question  whether  many  of 
you  have  seen,  because  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  that  sentence,  "after  that  ye  have 
suffered  a  while,"  is  linked  with  the  last  clause  of  the  verse,  whereas  it  belongs  to 
the  first ;  and  it  you  look  you  will  see  what  a  difference  it  makes.  The  God  of  all 
grace  who  hath  called  us,  after  that  we  have  suffered  a  while,  to  His  eternal  glory, 
will  Himself,  whilst  we  are  suffering — during  this  little  interval  that  lies  between 
the  grace  and  the  glory — so  sanctify  the  suffering,  that  it  shall  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen,  settle  us.  The  sufferings  come  between  the  grace  and  the  glory.  I. 
Who  shall  rise  to  the  height  of  this  first  expression,  "  The  God  of  all  grace  "  ? 
It  does  not  mean  that  God  is  gracious  in  His  tendency,  or  simply  gracious  by  His 
nature,  but  that  He  Himself  is  the  reservoir,  the  home,  the  source,  the  supply,  of 
grace  in  all  its  manifestations.  Need  I  recapitulate  them  to  you  ?  Divine  choice 
with  all  its  inscrutable  mysteries.  Eedemption  by  a  dying  Christ.  Justification 
also  in  all  its  wondrous  harmony  between  mercy  and  perfect  equity.  Yes,  and  regene- 
ration too,  with  its  heaven-born  purity,  and  its  new-created  tendencies  within  the 
soul.  All  these  are  covered  by  the  word  "  grace."  These  things  are  only  different 
manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  sublime  attribute.  But,  when  I  mention  these, 
I  have  only  just  touched  the  spray  of  the  wave.  There  are  deeps  that  lie  beneath 
in  this  expression,  "the  God  of  aU  grace,"  for  it  contains  all  the  graces  which  the 
soul  must  possess  before  it  can  enter  eternal  glory.  Most  certainly  there  must  be 
the  grace  of  repentance.  The  cry  of  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  "  is  a  cry  that  comes 
down  from  heaven  before  ever  it  can  break  from  my  lips.  "  The  God  of  all  grace." 
But  repentance  must  ever  be  followed  by  faith.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  Then  there 
are  other  graces  yet  to  be  manifested.  "  Faith  worketh  by  love."  But  love  is  born 
of  God,  for  God  is  love,  and  if  I  love  Him,  it  is  because  He  first  loved  me.  But  no 
man  can  see  the  Lord  apart  from  holiness.  How  can  this  poor,  sin-stained  man 
become  holy  ?  And  the  answer  is,  that  it  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  that  worketh 
holiness ;  and  so,  whilst  He  is  the  God  of  all  manifestations  of  grace.  He  is  the 
God  of  all  the  graces  that  I  possess.  But  I  have  hardly  begun  yet  with  this  enumer- 
ation. This  text  covers  much  more,  for  it  includes  all  the  supplies  of  grace  that 
are  needed  along  the  road.  It  is  a  weary  road :  I  need  refreshing  grace.  It  is  a 
sorrowing  path,  because  it  is  a  sinful  one :  I  need  comforting  grace.  As  a  wander- 
ing sheep,  I  need  restoring  grace.  Being  weak  as  a  babe,  I  need  upholding  grace. 
And  everything  that  a  saint  can  need  from  the  moment  of  my  new  birth  to  that 
ecstatic  instant  when  I  stand  before  His  eternal  glory,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  lies 
centred  in  God.  11.  This  God  of  all  grace  calls  tjs  to  eternal  glory.  Let  us 
begin  at  the  beginning.  He  has  called  you.  The  call  that  is  intended  here  is,  as 
Archbishop  Leighton  beautifully  puts  it,  that  call  which  goes  deeper  than  the  ear, 
touches  the  heart  within,  throws  open  the  door,  and  admits  the  Christ.  And  con- 
sequently you  will  find  that  the  word  "  called "  becomes  the  title  of  the  true 
Christian.  A  man  of  God  is  one  who  has  been  called.  But  how  is  he  called  ?  It 
is  "unto  His  eternal  glory  in  Christ";  not  simply,  mark  you,  for  Christ's  sake. 
That  is  true,  but  it  is  not  the  truth  here  taught.  He  has  called  us  to  eternal  glory 
"  in  Christ."  He  called  Christ  into  glory,  and,  when  He  called  Christ  into  glory. 
He  called  me,  because  I  am  in  Christ.  The  call  that  I  receive  is  a  call  that  sounds 
in  the  Son's  ear.  It  is  a  call  "  to  His  glory."  We  share  His  blessedness.  God's 
glory  is  Himself.  There  is  nothing  more  glorious  about  His  glory  than  Himself. 
"The  only  way  in  which  God  can  glorify  Himself  is  to  reveal  Himself.  Come,  lave 
thy  spirit  in  the  eternal  blaze  of  Deity.  Come,  be  at  home  with  Me.  That  one 
word  "glory"  covers  all  Joy,  all  blessing,  all  bliss.  God  has  called  us  unto  His 
eternal  "glory."  But  this  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  theme.  You  have  to  put 
the  word  "  eternal  "  into  the  scale.  It  is  not  a  call  for  an  age  or  for  a  millennium. 
Oh,  fools  that  we  are  to  weep  our  eyes  out  over  earth's  sorrows,  and  to  grumble  our 
spirits  into  wretchedness  because  of  a  passing  moment  of  care  !  III.  He  allows 
A  little  interval  of  suffering  which  is  itself  full  of  blessing.  Ah,  we  too 
often  want  to  leave  that  bit  out,  "After  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while."  The  call 
comes,  but  the  glory  does  not  come  immediately  after  the  call.  The  suffering  is 
part  of  the  call,  as  well  as  the  glory.  It  is  not  a  haphazard  thing  that  comes  in.  It 
is  all  a  part  of  the  plan.  When  God  calls  you  to  glory.  He  calls  you  to  come  to 
glory  through  a  little  while  of  suffering.  How  this  takes  away  all  the  acidity  of 
one's  sorrows!  It  is  part  of  the  road  to  the  eternal  glory.  It  is  just  as  much 
included  in  the  plan  as  aU  the  rest.    And  then,  you  see,  it  says  that  it  is  only  a 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

"little"   while.     Eeally  the  word   "while"   is  not  there.     It  is  "after  ye  have 
suffered  a  little  "  ;  and  you  can  choose,  if  you  like,  whether  it  means  degree  or 
duration.     You  say,  "  But  why  can  I  not  go  to  heaven  at  once  ?"     The  answer  is 
found  in  the  last  Une  of  our  text.     He  Himself  will  "make  you  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen,  settle  you."    He  will  do  it  through  this  little  interval  of  suffering.     He 
will  perfect  you.     Ah,  there  is  nothing  about  us  that  is  not  imperfect.     There  are 
many  little  rents  in  us,  and  the  Lord  allows  us  to  go  through  this  little  while 
of  suffering  so  that  He  may  repair  the  imperfections.  Bad  as  you  are,  you  would  be 
worse  if  you  had  less  trouble.     There  is  not  here,  to-day,  a  child  of  God  who  is  not 
the   richer  and  the  holier  for  the  little  while   of   suffering.      The   next   word  is 
"stablish,"  and  that  implies  fixity.     Oh,  we  are  very  prone  to  fluctuation.     Some- 
times nothing  but  a  heavy  heart  will  give  weight  to  a  character,  and  so  God  says, 
"I  cannot  let  that  light  and  frivolous  child  remain  like  a  piece  of  thistledown  float- 
ing at  the  dictation  of  every  breath  of  air.     I  must  pass  him  through  a  little  while 
of  suffering."     That  is  stabUshing.     The  word   "  settle  "  does  not  appear  in  the 
R.V.      The  last  word  there  is   "  strengthen,"   and   the   meaning  of   the  word  is 
"  made  powerful  to  resist  attack."     There  is  the  devil.     He  is  roaring.     Do  you 
think  you  can  resist  the  great  adversary  ?    Never !     But  the  Lord  steps  in,  and 
says,  "  If  I  bid  you  meet  the  roaring  lion,  I  will  pass  you  through  a  little  season  of 
suffering  which  shall  repair  and  stablish  you,  and  put  spiritual  thews  and  sinews 
into  you,  so  that  in  My  strength  you  may  overcome."     {A.  G.  Brown.)         Grace  all 
in  all : — I.  First,  we  are  taught  that  the  true  conversion  of  the  soul  to  God  is  a 
Divine  work,  a  work  which  the  mercy  of  Heaven  must  begin,  and  the  power  of 
heaven  carry  forward,  otherwise  it  never  can  be  performed.     1.  As  to  the  source 
from  whence  conversion  proceeds.     St.  Peter  distinctly  acknowledges  it  to  be  of 
God ;  he  refers  expressly  to  Him  as  the  Author  of  that  great  change  which  had  taken 
place  in  his  own  soul,  and  in  the  souls  of  those  to  whom  he  was  writing.     Consider 
in  how  many  ways  grace  must  be  bestowed  upon  us  in  order  to  our  salvation  :  we 
want  grace  to  draw  us,  grace  to  enable  us  to  believe,  grace  to  strengthen  us,  grace  to 
make  us  persevere ;  grace  was  wanting  to  contrive  the  scheme  of  our  redemption ; 
grace  to  carry  it  into  execution,  and  grace  to  finish  that  glorious  work.     2.  As  to 
the  manner  in  which  we  are  made  partakers  of  this  inestimable  mercy :  it  is  by 
calling  "  God,  who  hath  called  us."     Here  is  another  proof  that  this  change  is  "  not 
of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."     He  makes  ready,  and  He  invites  ;  we  ourselves 
have  no  more  to  do  with  the  preparing  of  that  rich  provision  which  is  made  for  our 
souls  in   the  gospel,  than  the  guest  has  with  the  feast  set  before  him  by  some 
hospitable  entertainer.     Nay,  we  have  not  naturally  even  the  wish  to  partake  of  it. 
3.  As  to  the  means  by  which  it  is  accomplished  :  it  is  "by  Jesus  Christ."     That  the 
children  of  God  are  called,  that  they  are  converted,  that  they  are  justified,  that  they 
are  sanctified,  that  they  shall  be  glorified,  is  all  owing  to,  is  all  accomplished  by, 
our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour.     4.  As  to  the  end  to  which  it  leads  :  that  end  is  God's 
eternal  glory.    It  is  "  His,"  His  own  glory.  His  brightest  gift.  His  choicest  possession : 
it  is  that  gift  of  God  which  Christ  shed  His  precious  blood  to  purchase.     It  is 
"  eternal  "  ;  it  is  not  like  our  poor  fleeting  pleasures ;  not  like  earthly  riches,  which 
make   themselves  wings  and  flee  away ;  not  like  the  pomps  of  this  world,  of  a 
fashion  which  is  always  changing ;  but  a  glory  which  is  without  change,  without 
end ;  a  sun  of  brightness  which  shall  never  set.     II.  That  they  in  whom  this  work 
OF  GRACE  IS  GOING  ON,  Called  as  they  are  to  eternal  glory,  are  by  no  means  to  con- 
sider themselves  as  free  from  sufferings  or  trial  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  apostle 
seems  to  speak  of  these  things  as  if  they  were  certain  to  befal  them ;  or  rather,  I 
should  say,  he  addresses  his  converts  as  being,  for   the  present,  actually  under 
tribulation.     1.  They  find  their  spiritual  good  thereby  promoted.     2.  They  find  that 
when  trouble  is  nigh,  God  is  also  present.     3.  They  find  not  only  that  their  troubles 
will  soon  be  over-past,  but  far  over-paid.     III.  That  what  grace  has  begun  we 

HHOULD  BE  VERY  EARNEST  THAT  THE    SAME    GRACE    WILL    PERFECT.       This  is  the  bleSslng 

which  the  apostle  asks  for  in  his  prayer.  And  now  let  me  address — 1.  Those  who 
are  under  the  influence  of  that  grace  of  which  the  apostle  is  speaking  ;  who  have 
felt  its  power  in  turning  them  from  their  sins,  in  drawing  them  to  Christ  for 
salvation.  (1)  Learn  to  prize  the  grace  you  have  received ;  remember  from  whom 
it  Cometh  ;  at  what  a  price  it  was  purchased ;  remember  how  it  is  conveyed  to  your 
souls  by  that  blessed  Spirit  whose  office  it  is  to  sanctify  all  the  elect  people  of  God. 
(2)  Be  careful  how  you  quench  or  slight  it ;  do  nothing  contrary  to  its  suggestions ; 
endeavour  to  do  all  things  according  to  its  guidance.  (3)  Endeavour  to  improve  it ; 
btrive  to  show  that  you  have  not  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain ;  do  not  "  take 


CHAP.  V.  ]  I.  PETER.  441 

the  beginning  of  a  Christian  life  for  the  end  of  it,  and  sit  down  at  the  entrance," 
when  you  ought  rather  to  be  pressing  forward  on  the  way ;  go  on  from  strength  to 
strength ;  aim  high.     2.  I  would  address  myself  to  those  whose  consciences  tell 
them  they  are  as  yet  strangers  to  this  grace,  or,  at  least,  are  not  living  under  its 
power.     (1)  Oh,  I  will  not  endeavour  to  set  before  you  the  vanity  of  a  life  spent  in 
search  of  things  temporal ;  there  must  be  some  moments  of  seriousness.     Point  to 
that  glory  which  you  think  so  little  about,  and  in  preference  to  which  you  choose 
earthly  things  as  your  portion.     (2)  Let  me  also  remind  you  that  to  this  glory,  with 
all  its  brightness  and  all  its  reality,  and  all  its  eternity,  you  are  invited.     {F.  Lear.) 
The  God  of  all  the  graces  : — You  know  that  the  word  "  grace  "  has  many  meanings, 
both  in  the  original  language  of  the  verse  and  in  our  own  language.     As  we  use  it 
familiarly,  it  is  often  "beauty."     So  that  we  have  it,  "The  God  of  all  beauty." 
And  when  you  are  admiring  the  gracefulness  of  some  human  form,  in  its  finished 
delicacy;  or  looking  upon  the  loveliness  of  nature— never  forget  that  He  is  "the 
God   of  beauty."    Let   us  look   at  it  in  another  of  its  meanings.     "  Grace "  is, 
properly,  a  free  gift,  and  since  every  good  thing  is  utterly  undeserved  by  us,  every 
good  thing  is  of  "  grace."     All  that  raises  and  gladdens  life— all  goes  to  make  "  the 
grace  of  God."    But  we  generally  accept  the  word  as  having  reference  to  spiritual 
good.     For  instance,  we  take  it  as  relating  to  the  Christian  virtues,  "  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit " ;  and  we   call  them  "  the  graces."     And  He  is  "  the  God  of  all  the 
graces."     Now,  there  are  some  "graces"  that,  at  this  moment,  you  feel  that  you 
particularly  need.    Eemind  yourself,  and  remind  God,  that  He  is  the  God  of  that 
"grace";  that  it  is  all  His :  His  to  give;  a  part  of  His  province;  an  attribute  of 
His  sovereignty.    But  "  grace  "  is  more  distinctly  the  pardon  of  sin.     The  pardon 
of  sin  is  a  "  grace  "  ;  a  privilege ;  not  purchased — by  anything  we  can  say,  or  do,  or 
think,  or  pray,  or  believe.    But  pardon  is  not  all  you  want.     From  the  spiritual 
cradle  to  the  gate  of  heaven,  it  is  all  of  "  grace."     You  may  safely,  then,  reason 
thus  :  "  Lord,  Thou  didst  call  me.     Thou  didst  it  of  Thy  free  favour.     Therefore 
carry  on,  and  perfect  Thine  own  work."    And  in  life,  as  it  goes  on,  your  providences 
want  their  "  graces."    And  every  providence  requires  its   own   appropriate  and 
comforting  "grace."     Sorrow  and  joy,  bodily  health  and  sickness,  successes  and 
disappointments — all  want  their  own  proper,   rectifying,   effectual   "  grace."     {J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)        Who  hath  called  us   unto  His  eternal  glory. — Glory  : — I. 
What,  then,  is  the  destiny  of  the  saints?     God  has  "called  us  unto  His  eternal 
glory."     "  Glory !  "  does  not  the  very  word  astound  you  ?     Think  of  glory  for  us 
who  have  deserved  eternal  shame !     Glory  for  us  poor  creatures  who  are  often 
ashamed  of  ourselves !     1.  This  glory  has  been  promised.     What  said  David  ? 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.  24).     2.  It  is  to  this  glory  that  we  have  been  called.     We  are  called  to 
repentance,  to  faith,  to  holiness,  we  are  called  to  perseverance,  and  all  this  that  we 
may  afterwards  attain  unto  glory.     We  have  another  Scripture  of  like  import  in 
1  Thess.  ii.  12.     3.  And  we  are  not  only  called  to  it,  but  glory  is  especially  joined 
with  justification  (Eom.  viii.  30).     If  you  are  justified  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
you  shall  be  glorified  through  Christ  Jesus,  for  thus  hath  God  purposed,  and  so 
must  it  be.     Do  you  not  remember  how  salvation  itself  is  linked  with  glory? 
(2  Tim.  ii.  10).      The  two  things  are  riveted  together,  and  cannot  be  separated. 
4.  The  saved  ones  must  partake  of  the  glory  of  God,  for  this  are  they  being  pre- 
pared every  day  (Rom.  ix.  23).     This  is  the  process  which  commenced  in  regenera- 
tion, and  is  going  on  in  us  every  day  in  the  work  of  sanctification.     We  cannot  be 
glorified  so  long  as  sin  remains  in  us;  we  must  first  be  pardoned,  renewed,  and 
sanctified,  and  then  we  are  fitted  to  be  glorified.     5.  Thus,  then,  it  seems  we  are 
called  to  glory,  and  we  are  being  prepared  for  it ;  is  it  not  also  a  sweet  thought  that 
our  present  fellowship  with  Christ  is  the  guarantee  of  it?  (Rom.  viii.  17).     "No 
cross,  no  crown  "  :  but  he  that  has  shared  the  battle  shall  partake  in  the  victory. 
6.  I  have  not  yet  done,  for  there  is  a  text,  in  Heb.  ii.  10,  which  is  well  worthy  of 
our  consideration :  we  are  to  be  brought  to  glory.     We  might  despair  of  ever  getting 
into  the  glory  land  if  we  had  not  One  to  bring  us  there,  for  the  pilgrim's  road  is 
rough  and  beset  with  many  foes.     7.  This  glory  will  be  for  our  entire  manhood,  for 
our  body  as  well  as  for  our  soul.     It  will  be  rendered  perfect.     The  body  of  a  child 
will  be  fully  developed,  and  the  dwarf  will  attain  to  full  stature.     The  blind  shall 
not  be  sightless  in  heaven,  neither  shall  the  lame  be  halt,  nor  shall  the  palsied 
tremble.    The  deaf  shall  hear,  and  the  dumb  shall  sing  God's  praises.    II.  Wheeein 
doth  this  destiny  consist  ?     1.  Reckon  that  glory  to  a  saint  means,  first  of  all, 
purified  character.     God's  Holy  Spirit,  when  He  has  finished  His  work,  will  leave 
in  us  no  trace  of  sin :  no  temptation  shall  be  able  to  touch  us,  there  will  be  in  us  no 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

relics  of  our  past  and  fallen  state.  2.  Next,  I  understand  by  "  glory  "  our  perfected 
manhood.  Here  we  are  but  in  embryo  :  our  minds  are  but  the  seeds,  or  the  bulbs, 
out  of  which  come  the  iiower  and  glory  of  a  nobler  manhood.  Your  body  is  to  be 
developed  into  something  infinitely  brighter  and  better  than  the  bodies  of  men  here 
below :  and  as  for  the  soul,  we  cannot  guess  to  what  an  elevation  it  shall  be  raised 
in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Further,  by  "  glory"  and  coming  to  glory  I  think  we  must 
understand  complete  victory.  4.  An  invaluable  ingredient  in  true  glory  is  the 
Divine  approval.  One  approving  glance  from  the  eye  of  Jesus,  one  accepting  word 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Father,  will  be  glory  enough  for  any  one  of  us.  5.  But  this 
is  not  all :  children  of  God  will  have  the  glory  of  reflecting  the  glory  of  God.  When 
any  of  God's  unfallen  creatures  shall  wish  to  see  the  greatness  of  God's  goodness, 
and  mercy,  and  love,  they  that  dwell  in  heaven  will  point  out  a  glorified  saint. 
Whenever  any  spirit  from  far-off  regions  desires  to  know  what  is  meant  by  faithful- 
ness and  grace,  some  angel  will  reply,  "  Go  and  talk  with  those  who  have  been 
redeemed  from  among  men."  Oh,  this  shall  be  our  glory,  that  God  shall  shine 
through  us  to  the  astonishment  of  all.  6.  In  certain  cases  a  man's  glory  lies  in  his 
relationships.  If  any  of  the  royal  family  should  come  to  your  houses  you  would 
receive  them  with  respect ;  yes,  and  even  as  they  went  along  the  street  they  would 
be  spied  out,  and  passers-by  would  say,  "  That  is  the  prince !  "  and  they  would 
honour  the  son  of  our  good  Queen.  But  royal  descent  is  a  poor  business  compared 
with  being  allied  to  the  King  of  kings.  7.  Then  there  will  be  connected  with  this 
the  fact  that  we  shall  be  connected  with  Jesus  in  everything.  For  do  not  you  see 
it  was  because  of  our  faU  that  Christ  came  here  to  save  men  ;  when  He  wrought 
out  a  perfect  righteousness,  it  was  all  for  us  ;  when  He  died,  it  was  all  for  us  ;  and 
when  He  rose  again,  it  was  all  for  us  ?  And  what  is  more,  we  lived  in  Christ,  we 
died  in  Him,  we  were  buried  in  Him  and  rose  in  Him,  and  we  shall  ascend  into 
heaven  to  reign  with  Him.  8.  And  yet  this  is  not  all,  for  there  in  heaven  we  shall 
dwell  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God.  We  shall  dwell  with  Him  in  nearest  and 
dearest  fellowship !  All  the  felicity  of  the  Most  High  wiU  be  our  felicity.  9. 
Highest  of  all  our  glory  will  be  the  enjoyment  of  God  Himself.  He  will  be  our 
exceeding  joy :  thfs  bliss  will  swallow  up  every  other,  the  blessedness  of  God. 
"  The  Lord  is  my  portion,"  saith  my  soul.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee? 
and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee."  Our  God  shall  be  our 
glory.  10.  Yet  bear  with  me,  I  have  left  out  a  word  again  :  the  text  has  it,  "  Unto 
His  eternal  glory."  Ay,  but  that  is  the  gem  of  the  ring.  The  glory  which  God  has 
in  reserve  for  His  chosen  will  never  come  to  an  end  :  it  will  stay  with  us,  and  we 
shall  stay  with  it,  for  ever.  It  will  always  be  glory,  too  ;  its  brightness  will  never 
become  dim  ;  we  shall  never  be  tired  of  it,  or  sated  with  it.  III.  What  influence 
SHOULD  ALL  THIS  HAVE  UPON  OUR  HEAETS?  1.  I  think  it  ought  to  cxcitc  dcsirc  in  many 
here  present  that  they  might  attain  unto  glory  by  Christ  Jesus.  2.  This  ought  to 
move  us  to  the  feeling  of  fear.  If  there  be  such  a  glory  as  this,  let  us  tremble  lest  by 
any  means  we  should  come  short  of  it.  3.  If  we  are  right,  how  this  ought  to  move 
us  to  gratitude !  What  a  contrast  to  our  deserts !  4.  It  should  move  us  to  a 
dauntless  courage.  If  this  glory  is  to  be  had,  do  we  not  feel  like  the  heroes  in 
Bunyan's  picture  ?  Before  the  dreamer  there  stood  a  fair  palace,  and  he  saw 
persons  walking  upon  the  top  of  it,  clad  in  hght,  and  singing.  Around  the  door 
stood  armed  men  to  keep  back  those  who  would  enter.  Then  a  brave  man 
came  up  to  one  who  had  a  writer's  ink-horn  by  his  side,  and  said,  "  Set  down 
my  name  " ;  and  straightway  the  warrior  drew  his  sword,  and  fought  with  all 
his  might,  until  he  had  cut  his  way  to  the  door.  WiU  you  not  draw  your  swords 
and  fight  against  sin  till  you  have  overcome  it?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  After  that  ye 
have  suffered  a  while. — The  consolations  and  sufferings  of  the  believer,  and  their 
eff'ects  iqwn  his  character : — I.  The  consolation  here  set  before  us.  "  God  hath 
called  us  unto  His  eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  In  such  wonderful  terms  the 
Word  of  God  expresses  the  blessed  remedy  which  His  mercy  hath  provided  for  the 
evils  of  man's  fallen  state  ;  and  you  cannot  fail  to  observe  how  much  more  they 
express  than  a  mere  relief  from  such  evils.  It  is  a  call  to  a  state  of  actual  happiness. 
It  is  a  call  to  a  state  of  positive  excellence  or  holiness.  It  is,  finally,  a  call  to  a 
state  which  we  have  no  language  to  describe,  nor  material  of  thought  to  imagine — 
namely,  a  state  of  "  glory."  II.  The  course  through  which  you  must  pass. 
"  After  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while."  Men  have  sometimes  made  it  an  objection 
ai^ainst  the  goodness  of  God,  that  there  is  so  much  suffering  in  this  world.  This 
they  might  do  with  more  reason  if  they  could  show  that  men  are  innocent  in  this 
world  and  deserve  no  correction,  or  even  that  they  are  willing  to  be  prepared  for 


CHAP,  v.]  J.  PETER.  443 

the  happiness  of  another  world  and  need  no  such  calls  to  serious  consideration ; 
but,  in  the  present  sinful  state  of  fallen  man,  the  very  goodness  of  God  requires 
that  there  should  be  suffering.  That  suffering  is  indeed,  in  justice,  the  punish- 
ment for  sin,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is,  in  mercy,  the  corrective  of  our  wanderings. 
"  God  hath  called  us  to  His  eternal  glory  " ;  but  how  little  do  men  naturally  care  even 
for  eternal  glory,  so  long  as  they  can  find  their  pleasure  elsewhere?  The  very 
bounties  of  their  Creator  unhappily  rather  drive  them  to  a  greater  distance  from 
Him,  instead  of  drawing  them  nearer.  He  needs  to  wither  these  comforts,  or  to 
interrupt  our  enjoyment  of  them,  before  we  can  see  their  insufficiency  and  remember 
the  better  blessings  awaiting  us.  It  is  generally,  in  short,  only  after  we  have 
*'  suffered  a  while,"  that  we  think  of  "  the  eternal  glory  "  to  which  God  hath  called 
us.  You  cannot  indeed  be  supposed  to  wish  for  afflictions,  or  to  welcome  them 
as  your  choice.  This  is  always  your  best  consolation  under  them,  that  they  are 
neither  sent  idly  nor  borne  uselessly.  They  not  only  serve  to  show  you  more  clearly 
the  true  value  of  the  eternal  glory  which  awaiteth  you,  but  also  to  prepare  your 
souls  the  better  for  its  enjoyment.  In  this  view  they  bring  a  blessing  which  com- 
pensates for  their  evil.  III.  The  effect  to  be  peoduced  both  by  toub  consola- 
tions AND  sufferings  AS  CHRISTIANS,  viz.,  that  you  may  be  "  made  perfect,  stab- 
lished,  strengthened,  settled."  (J.  Brewster,  D.D.)  The  ChurcKs  present  and 
future: — I.  The  Church's  present  lot.  "After  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while." 
It  seems  a  strange  thing  to  say  that  there  is  a  necessity  for  suffering  while  here. 
The  Church's  lot  is  not  here  intended  to  be  anything  else ;  not  that  it  is  always 
the  same  in  amount  of  suffering,  but  that  it  never  is  wholly  free  from  it.  The 
suffering  may  be  inward  or  it  may  be  outward.  But  mark,  the  apostle  says  it  is 
•'  a  little  while."  We  read  of  "  much  "  tribulation  and  "  great "  tribulation,  but 
here  it  is  for  a  little.  "  Our  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment."  Perhaps 
it  may  seem  long  to  us.  II.  The  Church's  perfection,  completion,  or  consum- 
mation through  means  of  suffering.  "  Make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen, 
settle  you."  "  Make  you  perfect."  As  if  thus — "  Make  you  perfect  "  :  that  is  to 
say,  "stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you."  "Perfect."  The  word  is,  literally,  "fully 
equip  you,"  equip  you  as  a  soldier  is  equipped  for  warfare.  There  are  many 
things  that  go  to  equip  a  soldier :  not  merely  his  armour,  not  merely  his  sword 
and  his  shield,  but  his  bodily  frame.  Now  the  word  first  of  all  is  a  full  fit 
out,  and  a  full  equipment,  so  that  he  shall  in  the  end,  when  the  process  is  com- 
pleted, be  fully  ready  for  that  which  is  before  him.  "  Make  you  perfect  "  is  the 
meaning  of  every  trial.  1.  "  Stablish  "  is  more  exactly  rendered  by  "  firm,"  "  con- 
solidate," "  make  firm."  This,  I  should  say,  is  the  first  part  of  the  threefold  part 
of  the  process  which  these  three  words  describe  :  the  consolidation  of  the  Christian 
character,  making  him  firm  in  all  parts  of  his  spiritual  frame.  2.  Strength.  There 
is  strength  as  weU  as  consoUdation  needed.  There  are  many  things  that  are  firm 
and  consoMdated  that  are  not  strong.  God's  object  is  to  make  us  strong.  3.  The 
third  thing  here  specified  is  settling,  that  is,  firmly  rooting  and  grounding,  so  that 
we  shall  not  be  moved.  These  words  describe  the  process  that  is  going  on  through 
the  discipline  which  God  is  exercising  through  every  son  that  He  receiveth. 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Suffering  and  perfection  : — Peter  speaks  of  our  "having  suf- 
fered a  whUe,"  and  then  being  made  "  perfect."  What  a  consolatory  juxtaposition 
have  we  here — suffering  first,  and  perfection  afterwards.  To  make  me  enjoy  heaven, 
He  causes  me  to  weep  a  while  here.  Music  is  all  the  more  delicious  when  preceded 
by  discord  ;  peace  is  the  more  prized  after  war ;  health  after  sickness  ;  and  life,  in 
all  its  beauty  and  vigour,  will  be  only  truly  enjoyed  "  after  that  we  have  suffered 
a  while."  Thanks  to  Peter  for  that  little  word  "  awhile."  It  is  not  always  "  night." 
It  shall  be  day  when  the  sun  gets  up.  It  shall  not  be  always  suffering  with  us. 
No — no  ;  already  the  handkerchief  is  shaken  out,  wherewith  tears  are  to  be  wiped 
away.  (John  Macfarlane,  D.D.)  An  apostolic  prayer: — It  is  the  first  duty  of 
a  christian  minister  to  endeavour  to  convert  sinners  to  God.  The  second  object 
of  the  Christian  ministry  is  the  improvement  of  those  already  converted.  Those 
trees  of  righteousness  are  not  only  to  be  planted  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  but  to 
be  watered  also.  I.  The  character  of  Jehovah.  He  is  called  "  the  God  of  all 
grace."  II.  An  operation.  "  Who  hath  called  us  to  His  eternal  glory  by  Christ 
Jesus."  This  glory  is  eternal.  A  future  state  of  being  is  intended  to  develop  all 
our  spiritual  excellences,  and  therefore  it  is  called  glory.  III.  We  have  here 
a  PRAYER.  "But  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  His  eternal  glory 
by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,  make  you  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen,  settle  you."    Peter  here  has  a  pleonasm  which  shows  how  earnestly 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.    . 

he  felt  it  in  his  own  mind ;  he  was  deeply  impressed,  but  could  hardly  find  words 
to  express  his  meaning  and  desire.  "  Do  for  you  exceeding  abundantly  above  all 
that  ye  can  ask  or  think."  There  are,  however,  in  this  prayer  three  things  which 
we  may  distinctly  observe.  1.  First,  it  includes  much  progress  in  religion  :  "  Make 
you  perfect."  Christians  should  never  be  satisfied.  In  your  secular  affairs  yea 
wish  not  only  to  go  on,  but  to  prosper.  Why  not  show  the  same  concern  in  your 
religious  affairs  ?  A  little  does  not  satisfy  you  in  temporals,  why  should  it  in 
spirituals  ?  especially  since  the  latter  is  much  more  necessary  and  desirable  ;  and 
you  are  commanded  not  only  to  have  the  Spirit,  but  to  be  "  filled  with  the  Spirit." 
2.  Another  thing  to  be  observed  in  this  prayer  is  confirmation.  For  it  is  to  little 
purpose  to  gain  unless  you  retain  also.  "  Stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you."  3.  But 
observe,  thirdly,  the  Divine  agency  necessary  for  this.  Peter  not  only  admonishes, 
but  prays  for  them.  Who  is  to  make  them  so  ?  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  the  God  of  all 
grace,  who  hath  called  us  to  His  eternal  glory."  Who  is  to  be  the  finisher  but  He 
who  is  the  Author?  "  He  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  wiU  perform  it  unto 
the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  "  He  shall  fulfil  in  you  all  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will, 
and  the  work  of  faith  with  power."  IV.  Consider  the  concession.  "  After  that 
ye  have  suffered  a  while."  First,  a  suffering  state  is  to  precede  their  finishing 
their  course  with  joy.  Yes,  before  you  reign  with  Him  you  are  to  suffer 
with  Him.  In  the  beginning  of  the  gospel  the  sufferings  of  Christians  arose 
much  from  persecution.  I  have  known  persons  who  have  probably  suffered  more 
than  many  of  the  martyrs.  The  martyr  has  had  public  excitement ;  these  have 
suffered  in  obscurity :  the  martyr's  sufferings  have  soon  ended ;  but  here  the  melan- 
choly experience  stretches  out  from  week  to  week,  and  even  from  year  to  year. 
These  sufferings  are  needful :  God,  who  loves  His  people  infinitely,  would  not 
allow  them  to  suffer  without  some  gracious  design.  Yes,  the  fallow  ground  requires 
the  ploughshare  to  prepare  it  for  the  seed.  Even  the  vine  needs  the  pruning-knife, 
that  it  may  bring  forth  fruit.  {W.  Jay,  M.A.)  Stablish,  stren^hen,  settle  you. 
— The  good  and  means  of  establishment : — Some  think  these  words  are  spoken  in  the 
way  of  a  promise  from  God ;  others  think  they  are  spoken  in  the  way  of  prayer 
to  God.  1.  The  mercy  and  blessing  prayed  for.  It  is  expressed  in  four  words : 
"Perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  and  settle  you."  The  first  word,  which  we  render 
"  perfect,"  should,  I  think,  be  translated  otherwise.  It  is  the  same  word  that  is 
used  in  Matt.  iv.  21  and  Mark  i.  19  for  mending  of  their  nets  ;  and  the  same  that 
is  used  in  Gal.  vi.  1 :  "  You  that  are  spiritual  '  restore'  such  an  one  with  the  spirit 
of  meekness"  ;  and  it  signifies  such  a  restoring  as  is  of  unjointed  members.  Now 
these  Christians  being  scattered,  the  apostle  prays  that  God  would  please  to  joint 
them  again.  Thus  the  God  of  all  grace,  after  you  have  suffered  and  been  shattered, 
bring  you  into  order,  restore  and  repair  you.  It  is  a  great  blessing  of  God,  and 
worthy  of  all  our  prayer,  to  be  established  and  settled  in  the  truth  and  good  ways 
of  God.  Settling  grace  and  mercy,  in  opposition  both  to  outward  and  inward 
trouble,  is  a  great  mercy  and  well  worth  praying  for.  1.  First,  it  is  a  great  mercy 
and  blessing  for  a  nation  or  kingdom  to  be  in  a  settled  state  and  condition  out- 
wardly ;  for  it  is  the  mercy  promised,  and  promised  mercies  are  no  small  mercies 
(Jer.  xxiv.  6,  xxxii.  37,  41 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  IG).  2.  Secondly,  as  it  is  a  mercy  for 
a  nation  to  be  settled  and  established,  so  for  the  Church  of  God  ;  for  when  the 
Church  hath  this  rest,  then  it  is  edified,  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  in  the 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  ix.  31).  EstabUshment  is  the  mercy  promised  to 
the  Church  also  (Isa.  ii.  2).  It  is  that  mercy  and  blessing  which  the  apostles 
laboured  for  continually  (Acts  xiv.  21).  This  they  also  prayed  for  ;  and  therefore 
as  the  Apostle  Peter  shuts  up  his  Epistle  with  this  prayer  for  the  dispersed  Christian- 
Jews,  so  the  Apostle  Paul  doth  close  up  his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  with  the 
same  desire  and  prayer  for  them  (2  Cor.  xiii.).  And  Bom.  xvi.  25.  And  as  it 
is  the  mercy  prayed  for,  so  sometimes  it  is  made  the  signal  mercy  whereby 
the  Church  is  declared  to  be  the  Church  of  Christ :  "  Whose  house  ye  are,"  saith 
the  apostle  to  the  Hebrews,  "if  you  hold  fast  the  confidence  of  your  rejoicing 
stedfast  to  the  end."  3.  But  especially  it  is  a  great  mercy  for  a  particular  soul  to 
be  settled  in  the  truth  and  established  in  the  good  ways  of  God.  It  is  the  ground 
of  all  our  fruitfulness :  ye  know  how  it  is  with  a  tree  or  plant,  though  in  itself  it  be 
never  so  good,  yet  if  it  be  not  settled  in  the  earth  it  bringeth  JEorth  no  fruit :  if  the 
plant  be  good  and  the  soil  good,  it  may  bring  forth  good  fruit  ;  but  if  you  be  always 
removing  it  from  one  place  to  another,  it  cannot  bring  forth  fruit.  It  is  the  bottom 
of  all  our  praises.  The  birds  do  not  ordinarily  sing  till  they  be  set ;  they  do  not 
usually  sing  flying ;  but  when  they  are  fixed :  so  saith  David,  "  My  heart  is  fixed, 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  445 

0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed  "  ;  and  what  then  ?  then  saith  he,  "  I  will  sing  and  give 
praise "  ;  but  not  till  then.  And  what  is  the  reason  that  many  pass  so  many 
years  of  their  lives  in  doubtings  and  fears,  never  praising  God  for  any  love  or 
mercy  to  them  ?  but  because  they  are  unsettled  in  their  spiritual  estate  and 
condition.  It  is  the  beginning  of  our  perseverance :  then  I  begin  to  persevere 
when  I  begin  to  settle  and  to  be  established.  As  instability  is  the  beginning 
of  apostasy,  so  settledness  is  the  beginning  of  perseverance.  It  is  that  good 
thing  which  pleaseth  God  exceedingly.  God  was  so  pleased  with  Jehoshaphat 
upon  that  account  that  He  passed  by  his  infirmities,  even  because  his  heart  was 
fixed  and  established  (2  Chron.  xix.  2).  And  it  is  also  the  character  of  a  good 
and  gracious  person,  whereby  he  is  distinguished  from  the  ungodly  of  the  world. 
A  good  man  lives  and  dwelleth  at  the  sign  of  a  settled  conversation  ;  he  is  planted 
by  the  rivers  of  water  (Psa.  i.) ;  the  wicked  are  as  the  chaff  that  is  driven  to 
and  fro,  not  settled,  not  planted.  II.  It  is  worthy  of  all  oue  pkayees.  It  is 
a  great  blessing,  and  worthy  of  all  our  prayers,  to  be  settled  and  established  in  the 
good  ways  of  God.  It  is  that  mercy,  grace,  and  blessing  which  we  all  need.  It  is 
God  only  who  doth  give  out  this  grace,  it  belongs  unto  Him  alone  to  establish 
nations,  churches,  and  persons.  He  is  able  to  establish  those  who  do  come  to  Him 
for  it :  "  Now  to  Him  that  is  of  power  to  establish  you,"  (fee.  (Rom.  xvi.  25).  He  is 
willing  to  do  it :  "  But  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  will  establish  you  and  keep  you 
from  evil "  (2  Thess.  iii.  3).  He  is  engaged  to  do  it,  for  He  hath  promised  to  do  it, 
as  hath  been  proved  already,  and  it  is  His  prerogative :  "  Now  He  which  estab- 
lisheth  us  with  you  in  Christ,  and  hath  anointed  us,  is  God  "  (2  Cor.  i.  21).  What 
shall  we  do,  then,  that  we  may  be  established?  1.  As  for  a  nation  or  Christian 
state.  It  must  first  settle  religion,  for  religion  is  the  mainmast,  and  if  that  be  not 
strengthened  all  the  tackling  will  be  loose  (Isa.  xxxiii.  23).  Then  must  there  be 
care  taken  for  a  succession  of  godly  magistrates.  And  therefore  let  them  and  all  the 
people  remember  the  good  counsel  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.  20).  2.  As  for 
a  Church.  If  particular  churches  would  be  settled  and  established,  they  must  have 
all  the  officers  and  ordinances  of  Christ  then ;  as  a  ship  under  sail,  with  all  its  sails 
out,  is  beautiful  and  doth  move  evenly,  so  shall  they  also  do.  Oh,  that  churches 
therefore  would  take  heed  of  these  great  sins,  pride,  and  covetousness,  which  will 
always  keep  them  in  an  unsettled  condition.  But  especially  it  is  the  duty  of  all  the 
churches  to  pray  much  for  this  great  mercy  of  establishment  (Isa.  Ixii.  6).  3.  As 
for  particular  persons.  Wouldst  thou  be  established  in  the  truth  and  good  ways 
of  God  ?  Then  observe  what  those  things  are  which  do  make  others  unsettled,  and 
take  heed  thereof.  Surely  either  it  is  because  they  do  want  primitive  breakings ;  for 
the  stony  ground  comes  to  nothing  at  the  last,  though  it  hath  much  joy  at  the  first, 
because  it  wants  depth  of  earth.  The  stick  that  is  thrust  into  the  earth  is  more 
easily  pulled  up  than  the  plant  which  is  rooted  in  the  earth.  So  are  all  those  who 
have  no  root  in  themselves.  Or  because  they  take  up  great  resolutions  without 
answerable  pre-deliberations ;  whereas  we  know  that  the  needle  must  play  about  the 
polar  point  before  it  comes  to  stand  and  settle ;  he  that  would  hit  the  mark  must 
take  his  level  before  he  parts  with  his  arrow.  And  if  men  resolve  before  they  have 
fully  considered,  they  will  ere  long  be  unresolved  again.  Or  because  men  do  not 
walk  by  a  settled  rule :  he  can  never  be  settled  that  doth  not  walk  by  a  settled  rule. 
So  long  as  I  want  the  Divine  counsel  of  the  Word,  my  heart  is  like  a  vagrant  that 
is  most  unstable,  said  Bernard ;  for  whilst  I  am  not  subject  to  God,  I  am  contrary 
to  myself.  Or  because  they  are  divided  in  their  own  hearts.  A  double-minded  man 
is  unstable  in  all  his  ways — a  heart  for  the  world,  yet  a  good  mind  to  Christ ;  how 
is  it  possible  but  they  should  be  most  unsettled  ?  Or  because  they  are  too  con- 
fident of  their  own  strength  and  judgment :  whereas  the  only  way  to  be  firm  and 
stedfast  is  to  be  sensible  of  one's  own  infirmity.  Or  because  men  do  forsake  the 
ministry  which  Christ  hath  given  to  the  churches  for  their  edification,  perfection, 
and  establishment  (Eph.  ix.  11-14).  Or  because  they  have  too  fair  an  opinion  of 
those  that  are  erroneous,  thinking  that  they  may  be  godly,  though  they  be  never 
so  unsound  in  their  judgments.  Or  because  that  men  do  not  improve  their  Christian 
communion  for  the  life  and  power  of  godliness,  but  for  light  only,  and  discoursing 
notions:  whereas  Paul  saith  (1  Tim.  vi.  20,  21).  Or  because  they  have  not  been 
built  on  the  rock  Christ,  but  on  some  sandy  foundation  :  whereas  the  Psalmist 
saith,  "  He  set  my  feet  on  a  rock,  and  established  my  goings"  (Psa.  xl.  2).  But 
what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  be  more  settled  in  regard  of  my  judgment,  and  that 

1  may  be  established  in  the  present  truth  ?  Get  a  clear  and  distinct  understanding 
in  the  things  and  truths  of  the  gospel :  labour,  not  only  to  know,  but  to  get  a  clear 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch-u-.  v. 

and  judicious  apprehension  and  clearness  in  the  truths  of  Christ.  Be  sure  that  yoa 
do  not  make  any  impression  the  rule  and  square  of  your  judgment ;  judge  not 
doctrines  by  impressions.  "  We  have  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,  whereunto  ye 
shall  do  well  that  you  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place  "  (chap.  i.  19). 
The  Word  of  God  without  is  my  rule,  the  light  within  is  my  help  to  understand  that 
rule ;  but  if  I  judge  of  doctrines  by  impressions  of  the  Word  on  my  heart  I  can  never 
be  settled ;  therefore  take  heed  of  that.  Get  into  the  house  of  God ;  God's  house 
is  an  house  of  establishment ;  there  He  commandeth  His  blessing,  and  life  for  ever- 
more ;  there  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  make  men  pillars  for  stedf astness  (Rev. 
iii.  12).  Whatever  truth  you  know  do  not  only  know  it  in  a  spiritual  way,  but  put 
the  same  into  practice ;  the  way  to  be  established  in  the  truth  is  to  walk  therein 
(Col.  ii.  6,  7).  But  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  be  more  settled  in  my  life  and  estab- 
lished in  the  good  ways  of  God  ?  You  must  be  very  sensible  of  your  own  unsettled- 
ness,  and  be  humbled  for  it ;  he  is  not  far  from  establishment  that  is  very  sensible 
of  his  own  unsettledness.  Labour  for  a  solid  and  a  serious  spirit :  a  serious  spirit 
and  an  established  heart  go  together  (Prov.  iv.  26).  Be  sure  that  you  do  not  live 
upon  your  condition  itself,  but  on  the  God  of  your  condition ;  that  is  perpetual 
which  hath  a  perpetuating  cause.  The  more  delight  and  contentment  that  you  find 
in  the  good  ways  of  God,  the  more  your  hearts  will  be  fixed,  established,  and  staked 
down  to  them ;  comfort  and  establishment  go  together  (2  Thess.  ii.  17).  Do  you 
desire  to  be  fixed  and  established?  labour  more  and  more,  then,  to  make  your  way 
to  heaven  easy  and  comfortable  to  you.     (W.  Bridge,  3I.A.)  Chnstian  stability, 

strength,  and  establishment : — Through  "  suffering,"  and  after  the  "  suffering  "  will 
come  four  things:  "  Make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you."  1.  By  the 
first,  I  understand  that  God  will  knit  you  together,  one  part  with  another.  So  that, 
as  we  say  of  anything  which  is  entire  and  unbroken,  "  It  is  perfect,"  so  it  will  be 
with  you.  Your  mind,  your  affections,  and  your  soul,  and  your  body  one — living 
for  the  same  end,  living  the  same  life,  by  the  same  Christ.  .Yourself  one  man, 
a  whole,  "  perfect."  2.  Then,  made  one  with  yourself.  His  one  Spirit  animating 
the  whole  being.  He  will  "  stablish  "  you,  give  you  firmness  and  stability.  Now  is 
not  it  exactly  what  you  want  ?  Not  feelings,  principles — "  stability."  You  shall 
feel  your  foundation  under  you  deeper  than  the  everlasting  hills !  3.  He  will  fulfil 
His  beautiful  promise.  "Will  He  plead  against  me  with  His  great  power  ?  No; 
but  He  will  put  strength  into  me."  You  will  become — that  which  in  such  a  world  as 
this  you  need — that  which  is  the  secret  of  all  peace,  of  all  decision,  of  all  usefulness  in 
life — a  strong  character.  4.  And  so  we  travel  to  the  highest,  the  last,  and  the  best 
— "  He  will  settle  you."  He  will  give  you  rest.  Heaven  has  been  beautifully 
defined  "the  rest  of  desire."  But  how  is  "settling,"  rest?  To  "settle,"  is  to 
repose  upon  your  foundation ;  to  "  settle,"  is  to  have  an  attraction,  and  to  that 
attraction  always  to  point.  The  ship  "settles"  to  her  anchor;  the  mountains 
"settle"  to  their  base ;  the  magnet  "settles"  to  its  pole.  So  God  will  "settle" 
you  on  Christ.  And  not  only  that.  Every  brick  put  into  the  wall,  every  storey 
added  to  a  well-built  house,  "  settles  "  the  whole  structure.  In  like  manner  God, 
enabling  you  to  add  work  to  work  and  usefulness  to  usefulness,  will  so  "settle" 
you,  by  your  increase,  while  He  "  builds  you  up  in  your  own  most  holy  faith  " ;  and 
"then  "settled"  on  Christ,  in  Christ,  to  Christ,  for  Christ,  with  Christ,  you  will  not 
be  the  restless  creature  you  once  were ;  you  will  not  need  to  go  about  here  and  there 
for  satisfaction,  for  you  have  a  resting-place,  and  in  that  place  of  your  rest  you  will 
understand  the  wisdom  and  the  order  of  the  arrangement  and  the  exquisite  com- 
pleteness of  the  Divine  plan.  {J.  Vanghan,  M.A.)  A  New  Yearns  benediction : — 
Peter  turns  from  exhortation  to  prayer.  Having  exhorted  believers  to  walk  sted- 
fastly  he  bends  his  knee  and  commends  them  to  the  guardian  care  of  Heaven, 
imploring  upon  them  one  of  the  largest  blessings  for  which  the  most  affectionate 
heart  ever  made  application.  I.  What  the  apostle  asks  for  all  to  whom  this 
Epistle  was  written.  He  asks  for  them :  perfection,  establishment,  strengthening, 
settling.  1.  Perfection.  Indeed,  though  this  be  a  large  prayer,  and  the  jewel  is 
a  diamond  of  the  first  water  and  of  the  finest  size,  yet  is  it  absolutely  necessary 
to  a  Christian  that  he  should  ultimately  arrive  at  perfection.  What  were  a  Christian 
if  he  were  not  perfected  ?  Have  you  never  seen  the  human  face  divine  starting  out 
from  the  chiselled  marble  ?  You  have  seen  the  exquisite  skill  of  the  sculptor,  and 
you  have  said  within  yourself,  "  What  a  marvellous  thing  will  this  be  !  what 
a  matchless  specimen  of  human  skill !  "  But,  alas !  it  never  was  completed,  but 
was  left  unfinished.  And  do  you  imagine,  any  of  you,  that  God  will  begin  to 
sculpture  out  a  perfect  being  and  not  complete  it  ?    Hath  God  taken  us  as  unhewn 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  447 

stones  out  of  the  quarry,  and  hath  He  begun  to  work  upon  us  and  show  His  Divine 
art,  His  marvellous  wisdom  and  grace,  and  will  He  afterwards  cast  us  away  ?  Oh, 
the  prayer  shall  be  fulfilled.  After  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,  God  shall  make 
you  perfect,  if  He  has  begun  the  good  work  in  you.  But  it  must  be  after  that  ye 
have  suffered  a  while.  There  is  no  way  of  ridding  you  of  your  dross  and  your  tin 
but  by  the  flames  of  the  furnace  of  affliction.  2.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  the  second 
blessing  of  the  benediction — establishment.  What  is  a  Christian  man  better  than 
the  flower  of  the  field,  which  is  here  to-day,  and  which  withers  when  the  sun  is 
risen  with  fervent  heat,  unless  God  estabUsh  him  ?  Oh,  may  God  fulfil  to  you  this 
rich  benediction,  that  your  goodness  may  not  be  as  the  morning  cloud  and  as  the 
early  dew  which  passeth  away ;  may  every  good  thing  that  you  have  be  abiding. 
May  your  character  be  not  a  writing  upon  the  sand,  but  an  inscription  upon  the 
rock.  But  mark,  we  cannot  have  this  blessing  until  after  we  have  suffered  a  while. 
It  is  of  no  use  our  hoping  that  we  shaU  be  weU-rooted  if  no  March  winds  have 
passed  over  us.  The  young  oak  cannot  be  expected  to  strike  its  roots  so  deep  as  the 
old  one.  3.  Now  for  the  third  blessing,  which  is  strengthening.  Ah,  this  is  a  very 
necessary  blessing  too  for  all  Christians.  There  be  some  whose  characters  seem 
to  be  fixed  and  established.  But  still  they  lack  force  and  vigour.  Oh,  may  God 
strengthen  you  this  year !  But  remember,  if  He  does  do  so,  you  wiU  then  have  to 
suffer.  "  After  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,"  may  He  strengthen  you.  There 
is  sometimes  an  operation  performed  upon  horses  which  one  must  consider  to  be 
cruel — the  firing  of  them  to  make  their  tendons  strong.  Now,  every  Christian  man 
before  he  can  be  strengthened  must  be  fired.  He  must  have  his  nerves  and  tendons 
braced  up  with  the  hot  iron  of  affliction.  4.  And  now  I  come  to  the  last  blessing 
of  the  four — "  settling."  I  will  not  say  that  this  last  blessing  is  greater  than  the 
other  three,  but  it  is  a  stepping-stone  to  each  ;  and,  strange  to  say,  it  is  often  the 
result  of  a  gradual  attainment  of  the  three  preceding  ones.  "  Settle  you  !  "  Oh, 
how  many  there  are  that  are  never  settled !  The  tree  which  should  be  transplanted 
every  week  would  soon  die.  Nay,  if  it  were  moved,  no  matter  how  skilfully,  once  every 
year,  no  gardener  would  expect  fruit  from  it.  How  many  Christians  there  be  that 
are  transplanting  themselves  constantly,  even  as  to  their  doctrinal  sentiments ! 
Stand  firm  and  steadfast  by  that  which  ye  have  been  taught,  and  ever  seek  the 
spirit  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  If  any  man  preach  any  other  gospel  than  that  which 
we  have  received,  let  him  be  accursed."  If,  however,  I  wished  you  to  be  firm  in 
your  doctrines,  my  prayer  would  be  that  you  may  be  especially  settled  in  your  faith. 
You  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  and  you  rest  in  Him.  But  sometimes 
your  faith  wavers,  then  you  lose  your  joy  and  comfort.  I  pray  that  your  faith  may 
become  so  settled  that  it  may  never  be  a  matter  of  question  with  you  whether  Christ 
is  yours  or  not,  but  that  you  may  say  confidently,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed, 
and  I  am  persuaded,"  &q.  Then  I  pray  that  you  may  be  settled  in  your  aims  and 
designs.  See  what  niche  it  is  that  God  would  have  you  occupy.  Stand  in  it,  and 
don't  be  got  out  of  it  by  all  the  laughter  that  comes  upon  you.  If  you  beMeve  God 
has  called  you  to  a  work,  do  it.  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing,  for  in  due  season  ye 
shall  reap  if  ye  faint  not.  Be  ye  settled.  But  you  will  not  be  settled  unless  you 
suffer.  You  will  become  settled  in  your  faith  and  settled  in  your  aims  by  suffering. 
II.  The  reasons  why  the  Apostle  Peteb  expected  that  his  prayer  would  be 
HEARD.  1.  Did  not  unbelief  whisper  in  Peter's  ear,  "  Peter,  thou  askest  too  much. 
If  thou  hadst  said,  '  Lord,  make  them  holy,'  had  it  not  been  a  sufficient  prayer  "  ? 
"  No,"  saith  Peter,  "  I  am  sure  I  shall  receive  what  I  have  asked  for,  for  I  am  in 
the  first  place  asking  it  of  the  God  of  all  grace."  Not  only  the  God  of  the  little 
graces  we  have  received  already,  but  the  God  of  the  great  boundless  grace  which 
is  stored  up  for  us  in  the  promise,  but  which  as  yet  we  have  not  received  in  our 
experience.  "  The  God  of  all  grace  " ;  of  quickening  grace,  of  convincing  grace, 
of  pardoning  grace,  of  believing  grace,  the  God  of  comforting,  supporting,  sus- 
taining grace.  Surely  when  we  come  to  Him  we  cannot  come  for  too  much.  2. 
Unbelief  might  have  said,  "  Ah,  Peter,  it  is  true  that  God  is  the  God  of  all  grace, 
but  He  is  as  a  fountain  shut  up,  as  waters  sealed."  "Ah,"  saith  Peter,  "get  thee 
hence,  Satan ;  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God.  It  is  not  a  sealed 
fountain  of  all  grace,  for  it  has  begun  to  flow."  "  The  God  of  grace  hath  called 
us."  Calling  is  the  first  drop  of  mercy  that  trickleth  into  the  thirsty  lip  of  the 
dying  man.  Calling  is  the  first  golden  link  of  the  endless  chain  of  eternal  mercies. 
If  God  has  called  me,  I  may  ask  Him  to  establish  and  keep  me ;  I  may  pray 
that  the  bush  may  burn,  but  not  be  consumed.  Dare  I  ask  that  to  hfe's  latest 
hour  I  may  be  faithful  to  God,  because  God  is  faithful  to  me  ?     Yes,  I  may  ask 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


it,  and  I  shall  have  it  too ;  because  the  God  that  calls  will  give  the  rest.  3.  But 
I  think  there  is  a  stronger  reason  coming  yet :  "  The  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath 
called  us  unto  His  eternal  glory."  Has  God  called  me  to  heaven,  and  is  there 
anything  on  earth  He  will  deny  me  ?  If  He  has  called  me  to  dwell  in  heaven,  is 
not  perfection  necessary  for  me  ?  May  I  not,  therefore,  ask  for  it  ?  If  He  has 
called  me  to  glory,  is  it  not  necessary  that  I  should  be  strengthened  to  fight  my 
■way  thither  ?  May  I  not  ask  for  strengthening  ?  4.  The  last  reason  why  the 
apostle  expected  that  his  benediction  would  be  fulfilled  was  this  :  "  Who  hath 
called  us  to  His  eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  It  is  not  a  hard  thing  to  believe 
that  Christ's  blood  was  sufficient  to  purchase  every  blessing  for  me.  If  I  go  to 
God's  treasury  without  Christ,  I  am  afraid  to  ask  for  anything,  but  when  Christ 
is  with  me  I  can  then  ask  for  everything.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  Silvanus. — Silvanua  : — I.  The  importance  of  subordinate  work.  A 
chief  man  "  accustomed  to  pull  the  stroke  oar,"  yet  content  in  his  relation  to  an 
apostle  to  occupy  a  lower  position.  Silvanus  could  not  write  letters  like  Peter,  but 
he  could  carry  them  when  written.  Those  who  can  do  great  work  in  the  Church 
are  but  units,  those  who  are  fitted  for  subordinate  work  millions.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  what  is  important  and  what  subordinate.  The  tiny  rivet  is  just  as  important 
as  the  piston.  The  folks  in  the  rear  looking  after  the  supplies,  of  whom  one  never 
reads  in  the  despatches,  are  just  as  essential  as  those  in  the  front.  Be  not  too  proud 
to  be  subordinate.  Silvanus  was  content  to  be  a  satellite  of  somebody  all  his  life 
long.  II.  The  importance  and  obligation  of  persistently  doing  our  work  though 
NOBODY  TAKES  ANY  NOTICE  OF  IT.  Silvanus  did  uot  sit  stiU  with  his  "  hands  in  his 
pockets"  simply  because  nothing  was  said  about  him,  no  notice  taken  of  him.  Keep 
"  pegging  away,"  noticed  or  unnoticed.  This  man  did  so  through  years  of  oblivion. 
And  yet  after  all  his  services  were  noticed :  we  are  talking  about  them  nineteen 
centuries  afterwards.  III.  An  example  of  a  character  we  can  all  emulate.  "A 
faithful  brother."  A  great  genius,  a  wise  philosopher,  an  eloquent  preacher  ?  No, 
a  faithful  brother.  It  may  be  a  foolish  brother,  but  faithful.  We  can  all  emulate 
that,  whatever  our  opportunities.  If  we  are  faithful,  men  will  know  where  to  have 
us,  will  know  we  shall  not  shirk  obligation,  will  not  scamp  our  work.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Exhorting  and  testifying. — Testimony  aird  exhortation  : — I.  In 
that  the  apostle  testifieth  by  sound  arguments  that  they  were  in  the  right  way,  note 
that  IT  IS  needful  for  every  one  to  know  and  be  well  assured  of  the  religion 
HE  professeth,  THAT  IT  IS  THE  TRUTH  OF  GoD,  foT  there  be  many  religions,  yet  but 
one  truth ;  miss  that,  and  perish.  We  must  not  go  by  guess  in  our  religion.  1. 
This  rebukes  those  that  take  occasion,  because  there  be  so  many  religions,  therefore 
they  will  meddle  with  none,  but  take  their  ease  and  tarry  till  all  agree.  2.  It 
rebukes  those  that  profess  a  religion,  as  all  do,  but  know  not  whether  it  be  truth  or 
not,  and  have  no  ground  from  the  Word  for  the  same.  3.  As  it  is  our  duty  to 
testify  and  prove  our  religion,  so  it  is  yours  to  know  and  acknowledge  it,  that  if  an 
angel  should  come  and  inform  you  otherwise,  you  might  not  give  ear  to  him.  II. 
They  that  know  the  truth  ought  so  highly  to  esteem  it,  and  be  so  thankful 
TO  God  for  it,  as  they  never  suffer  themselves  to  be  rejioved  therefrom, 
whether  for  hope  of  gain  or  fear  of  trouble,  &c.  We  must  buy  the  truth,  nor 
sell  it.  III.  In  that  the  apostle  takes  such  care  with  those  that  now  stood  in  the 
truth  to  hold  them  therein,  note  that  it  is  a  hard  matter  for  those  to  hold  out 
stk.'.dfast  that  have  begun  to  do  well,  for  our  heart  is  deceitful,  the  devil  is 
subtle  and  strong,  and  there  are  also  many  seducers,  many  baits,  many  discourage- 
ments, &c.  IV.  In  that  his  Epistle  consists  in  testifying  by  sound  reasons  for  the 
conlinnation  of  their  judgments,  and  then  of  the  exhortation  for  the  whetting  on 
of  their  affections,  note  that  both  parts  are  necessary  to  preaching,  the  one 
still  to  accompany  the  other.  People  must  make  use  and  account  of  both,  regard 
doctrine  for  knowledge,  and  suffer  exhortation  for  practice.  {John  Rogers.)  An 
(ijwatulic  testimony  and  exhortation : — "  I  have  written  briefly,"  says  Peter.  But  his 
letter,  in  comparison  with  the  other  epistles  of  the  New  Testament,  is  longer  than 
many  of  them.  He  regards  it  as  short  when  measured  by  the  greatness  of  its 
theme.  For  all  words  which  are  devoted  to  witnessing  to  the  glory  of  God  revealed 
in  Jesus  Christ  must  be  narrow  and  insuflicient.  So  in  that  word  "  briefly  "  we  get 
a  glimpse  of  the  apostle's  conception  of  the  transcendent  greatness  of  the  gospol 
which  he  had  to  proclaim.  I.  Peter's  testimony.  Now  there  is  a  very  beautiful, 
though  not  to  superficial  readers  obvious,  significance  in  this  testimony.  "  This  is 
the  Uue  grace  of  God."     What  is  meant  by  "  this  "  ?    Not  merely  the  teaching 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  449 

which  he  has  been  giving  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  letter,  but  that  which  some- 
body else  had  been  teaching.  Now  these  churches  in  Asia  Minor  to  whom  this 
letter  was  sent  were  in  all  probability  founded  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  or  by  men 
working  under  his  direction.  And  here  Peter  puts  his  seal  on  the  teaching  that 
had  come  from  his  brother  apostle,  and  says,  "  The  thing  that  you  have  learned, 
and  that  I  have  had  no  part  in  communicating  to  you,  this  is  the  true  grace  of 
God."  We  have  an  interesting  evidence,  all  the  stronger  because  unobtrusive, 
of  the  cordial  understanding  between  the  two  great  leaders  of  the  Church  in 
apostolic  times.  But,  apart  altogether  from  that  thought,  note  two  things — the 
one  the  substance  of  this  witness-bearing,  and  the  other  Peter's  right  to  bear  it. 
As  to  the  substance  of  the  testimony — "grace"  is  properly  love  in  exercise 
towards  inferior  and  sinful  creatures.  And,  says  Peter,  the  inmost  significance  of 
the  gospel  is  that  it  is  the  revelation  of  such  a  love  as  being  in  God's  heart. 
Another  meaning  springs  out  of  this.  That  same  message  is  not  only  a  revelation 
of  love,  but  it  is  a  communication  of  the  gifts  of  love.  And  the  "  true  grace  of 
God  "  is  shorthand  for  all  the  rich  abundance  and  variety  of  the  sevenfold  perfect 
gifts  for  spirit  and  heart  which  come  from  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  this  gospel 
of  the  Divine  Christ  that  died  for  our  sins,  and  lives  to  give  His  Spirit  to  all  waiting 
hearts — this  is  the  true  grace  of  God.  It  is  very  needful  for  us  to  keep  in  view 
always  that  lofty  conception  of  what  this  gospel  is,  that  we  may  not  bring  it  down 
to  the  level  of  a  mere  theory  of  religion,  nor  think  of  it  as  a  mere  publication  of 
dry  doctrines.  Further,  what  right  had  this  man  to  take  this  position  and  say,  "  I 
testify  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God  "  ?  He  was  no  great  genius ;  he  did  not 
know  anything  about  comparative  religion,  which  is  nowadays  supposed  to  be 
absolutely  essential  to  understanding  any  one  religion.  Well,  there  are  two  or 
three  answers — one  peculiar  to  him,  and  others  common  to  all  Christian  people. 
The  one  peculiar  to  him  is,  as  I  believe,  that  he  was  rightly  conscious  that  Jesus 
Christ  had  bestowed  upon  him  the  power  to  witness,  and  the  authority  to  impose 
his  testimony  upon  men  as  a  word  from  God.  In  the  most  inartificial  and  matter- 
of-course  way  Peter  here  lets  us  see  the  apostoUc  conception  of  apostolic  authority. 
We  Christian  people  have  a  right  to  authority  based  on  personal  experience.  If  we 
have  plunged  deep  into  the  secrets  of  God,  and  lived  closely  in  communion  with 
Him,  and  for  ourselves  have  found  the  grace  of  God,  His  love,  and  the  gifts  of  His 
love  coming  into  our  Uves,  then  we  too  have  a  right  to  go  to  men  and  say,  "  Never 
mind  about  me  ;  never  mind  about  whether  I  am  wise  or  foolish.  I  do  not  argue, 
but  I  tell  you  I  have  tasted  the  manna,  and  it  is  sweet ;  I  have  drunk  of  the  water, 
and  it  comes  cool  and  fresh  from  the  rock.  One  thing  I  know — that  whereas  I  was 
blind,  now  I  see."  If  we  testify  thus,  and  back  up  our  witness  with  lives  corre- 
sponding, some  who  are  wholly  untouched  by  a  preacher's  eloquence  and  contro- 
versialist's arguments  will  probably  be  led  by  our  attestation  to  make  the  experiment 
for  themselves.  II.  Further,  notice  Peter's  exhortation.  According  to  the  right 
rendering,  the  last  clause  is,  "  in  which  stand  fast."  The  translation  in  the 
Authorised  Version,  "  in  which  ye  stand,"  gives  a  true  thought,  though  not  the 
apostle's  intention  here.  For,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  men  cannot  stand  upright  and 
firm  unless  their  feet  are  planted  on  the  rock  of  that  true  grace  of  God.  It  is  no 
use  talking  to  men  about  steadfastness  of  purpose,  stability  of  life,  erect  independence, 
resistance  to  antagonistic  forces,  unless  you  give  them  something  to  stand  upon. 
And  the  only  standing  ground  that  wiU  never  yield,  nor,  like  the  quicksand  with 
the  tide  round  it,  melt  away — we  do  not  know  how — from  beneath  our  feet,  is  "  the 
grace  of  God."  However,  that  is  not  what  the  Apostle  Peter  meant.  He  says, 
"  See  that  you  keep  firmly  your  position  in  reference  to  this  true  grace  of  God." 
The  text  exhorts  us  against  ourselves  and  against  the  temptations  of  the  world, 
which  are  always  present  with  us,  and  are  far  more  operative  in  bringing  down  the 
temperature  of  the  Christian  Church  and  of  its  individual  members  than  any 
chilling  that  arises  from  intellectual  doubts.  And  how  are  we  to  obey  the  exhorta- 
tion? Well,  plainly,  if  "  this"  is  the  revelation  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  "the  true 
grace  of  God,"  which  alone  will  give  stability  to  our  feet,  then  we  "  shall  not  stand 
fast  "in  it  unless  we  make  conscious  efforts  to  apprehend,  and  comprehend,  and 
keep  hold  of  it  in  our  minds  as  well  as  in  our  hearts.  Again,  try  to  keep  heart  and 
mind  in  contact  with  it,  amidst  distractions  and  daily  duties.  Try  to  bring  the 
principles  of  the  New  Testament  consciously  to  bear  on  the  small  details  of  every- 
day life.  Be  sure  that  you  desire,  and  put  yourself  in  the  attitude  of  receiving,  the 
gifts  of  that  love,  which  are  the  graces  of  the  Christian  life.  And  when  you  have 
got  them  apply  them,  "that  you  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day;  and, 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 


having  done  all,  to  stand."     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  true  grace  of  God. — The 

gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  : — I.  The  economy  of  the  gospel  is,  throughout  its 

CONSTITUTION  AND  INFLUENCE,  A  GRAND    DISPLAY   OF    DiVINE    GRACE.       1.    We  mUSt  first 

direct  you  to  the  announcements  of  the  gospel  as  to  the  methods  by  which  blessings 
are  meritoriously  secured.  2.  We  have  also  to  direct  you  to  the  announcements  of 
the  gospel  as  to  the  influence  by  which  blessings  are  actually  imparted.  3.  We  are 
also  to  notice  the  announcements  of  the  gospel  as  to  the  nature  of  the  blessings 
themselves  which  are  enjoyed.  4.  We  must  also  notice  the  announcements  of  the 
gospel  as  to  the  extent  to  which  these  blessings  are  to  be  diffused.     II.    The 

ECONOMY   OF    THE    GOSPEL,  AS  A  GRAND  DISPLAY  OF  DiVlNE  GRACE,  IMPRESSES  IMPORTANT 

DEMANDS  UPON  ALL  TO  WHOM  IT  IS  PROCLAIMED.  1.  The  gospcl,  as  "  the  truc  gracB 
of  God,"  should  be  cordially  believed.  2.  The  gospel,  as  "  the  true  grace  of  God," 
must  be  steadfastly  adhered  to.  3.  The  gospel,  as  "  the  true  grace  of  God," 
must  be  zealously  diffused.  {James  Parsons.)  True  grace : — Grace,  in  scriptural 
language,  denotes,  in  general,  free  favour  to  the  unworthy,  to  the  guilty.  Accord- 
ingly the  gospel,  which  proclaims  salvation  freely  to  all,  is  here  denominated  "  the 
grace  of  God."  Now  the  gospel  may  be  considered  in  three  views.  First,  and  most 
characteristically,  it  may  be  contemplated  as  a  promise  of  life  and  salvation  through 
Jesus  Christ,  fraught  with  the  richest  blessings.  Again,  the  gospel  may  be  viewed 
as  a  testimony,  in  which  the  messengers  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  as  faithful  witnesses, 
announce  certain  great  facts,  appealing  to  the  judgment  of  God  as  that  which  shall 
confirm  the  truth  of  their  testimony,  as  well  as  avenge  the  guUt  and  disobedience 
of  such  as  slight  or  gainsay  it.  Lastly,  the  gospel  is  frequently  represented  as  a 
promulgation  of  privilege,  involving,  of  course,  a  prescription  of  duty,  pointing  to 
the  hope  of  man,  explaining  the  plan  of  salvation  through  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and 
inculcating  upon  all  the  necessity  of  immediately  embracing  this  way  of  life,  and 
availing  themselves  of  that  "  grace  which  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal 
life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Obviously  the  apostle,  in  our  text,  while  he  doubt- 
less includes  the  first  of  these  considerations,  is  viewing  the  gospel  immediately  ia 
the  two  last  as  an  exhortation  inculcating  duty,  and  as  a  testimony  proclaiming 
truth  and  inviting  men  to  improve  it.  And  he  employs  both  expressions  to  indicate 
his  own  earnestness  in  the  address,  as  well  as  the  deep  interest  which  they  had  in 
acting  upon  it.  We  exhort  and  testify,  then,  with  Peter,  and  with  all  the  apostles, 
that  the  method  of  redemption  proclaimed  in  the  gospel,  by  sovereign  mercy  reign- 
ing through  the  Cross  of  Christ,  is  the  "  true  grace  "  by  God,  that  alone  which  is 
founded  in  fact,  which  can  yield  satisfaction  to  the  reflecting  mind ;  and  that  all 
other  plans  of  salvation  which  men  have  invented,  however  specious  they  may 
appear  or  confidently  they  may  have  been  put  forward,  as  calculated  to  honour 
God  and  magnify  His  mercy,  will  prove  delusory,  and,  if  persisted  in,  destructive. 
I.  There  are  those  who  expect  ultimate  salvation  on  this  principle,  that 
God  from  His  great  goodness  will  overlook  sin,  and  decline  to  push  it  as  a 
matter  of  course.  This  is  an  opinion  which  hardly  any  of  you  will  avow,  and 
perhaps  none  of  you  will  advocate.  Yet  it  is  congenial  to  the  corrupted  mind,  has 
been  not  only  adopted,  but  argued  by  others,  and,  there  is  reason  to  fear,  is  secretly 
entertained  by  very  many.  "  The  sinners  of  My  people  say,"  is  the  testimony  of 
God  concerning  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Amos,  "  the  evil  shall  not  overtake  or 
prevent  us."  And,  again,  saith  God  by  Zephaniah,  "  The  men  that  are  settled 
upon  their  lees  say  in  their  hearts.  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do 
evil."  And,  at  an  earlier  period  of  their  history,  this  is  represented  by  Moses  as 
language  which  might  be  justly  ascribed  to  them,  though  equally  indicative  of 
sottishness  and  of  impiety,  "  I  shall  have  peace,  though  I  walk  in  the  imagination 
of  mine  heart,  and  add  drunkenness  to  thirst."  Such  impunity,  indeed,  would  be 
amazing  "grace"  on  the  part  of  God— i.e.,  free  favour  to  the  guilty.  But  is  it 
"true  grace"?  Is  it  such  grace  as  can  be  imputed  to  Him  without  impiety? 
Assuredly  not.  It  is  totally  incompatible  with  His  revealed  characters.  For  if 
He  be  "  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious,  longsuffering  and  slow  to 
wrath,  abundant  in  goodness,"  it  is  also  testified  of  Him  that  He  is  "  abundant 
in  truth,  and  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  It  is  irreconcilable  with 
the  dictates  of  right  reason ;  for,  as  the  poet  says,  "  A  God  all  mercy  is 
a  God  unjust."  And  it  is  opposed  to  the  honour  and  interests  of  the  Divine 
government.  What  would  be  the  consequences  ?  How  fearful,  how  sweeping,  how 
disastrous !  II.  There  are  many  who  would  not  be  thought  to  adopt  this  hypothesis 
of  necessary  impunity  to  the  unbelieving  and  impenitent  transgressors  of  every 
class,  arising  from  the  goodness  of  God,  and  yet  conceive  that  He  will  accept 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  451 

OF  EXTEBNAIi  RITES  AND  OBLATIONS,  OF  RELIGIOUS  FORMS  AND  OBSERVANCES,  AS  A 
COMPENSATION   FOR   THE   NEGLECT    OF   DUTY,  AND    FOR   THE  VIOLATION  OF  HiS  HOLY  LAW. 

Upon  this  principle,  it  is  obvious,  every  institute  of  paganism  is  constructed.  Nay, 
the  Jews,  who  ought  to  have  known  better  things,  were  impressed  with  this  beUef. 
Accordingly,  amid  the  perpetration  of  their  crimes  and  the  denunciations  of  their 
prophets,  they  cried  out,  not  only  without  trembling  apprehension,  but  with  boastful 
confidence,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  are  we  1  "  And  is  there  not  reason  to  fear  that  there  is  too  great  a  leaning 
to  forms,  under  the  clearer  light  of  the  gospel,  and  among  all  parties  of  Christians  ? 
Do  you  not  see,  from  day  to  day,  some  of  one  class,  for  example,  though  sunk  in 
carelessness  or  addicted  to  vice,  deluding  themselves  with  the  hope  that  penance  and 
prayer,  the  confession  and  the  mass,  rites  and  ceremonies  the  most  frivolous  and 
unintelligible,  can  atone  for  guilt,  propitiate  God,  and  save  the  soul  ?  Nay,  among 
the  disciples  of  a  purer  faith  and  simpler  institute,  may  we  not  detect  an  undue 
dependence  upon  the  mere  ceremonial  of  service  ?  Now  were  Jehovah  to  accept  of 
appearances  instead  of  reahties,  of  forms  instead  of  actual  services,  and  of  heartless 
obedience  instead  of  holy  conduct,  this  might  be  accounted  grace  indeed.  But  ia 
it  such  grace  as  we  dare  impute  to  God  ?  Is  it  "  true  grace  "  ?  Is  it  such  that  you 
would  venture  to  rest  your  eternal  all  upon  it  ?  I  hope  not.  And  if  you  did  you 
would  act  a  part  the  most  foolish,  and  entirely  contrary  to  the  most  explicit  testi- 
monies of  Scripture.  The  very  question  is  proposed,  and  the  answer  given,  in  the 
Book  of  Micah  (vi.  6-8).  III.  But,  abandoning  the  hope  of  salvation  exclusively 
by  external  rites,  there  are  some  who  think  that  this  is  to  be  attained  by  human 

OBEDIENCE  ALONE,  AND  BY  SUCH  OBEDIENCE  AS  MAN  CAN  RENDER  IN  HIS  PRESENT 

SINFUL  AND  IMPERFECT  STATE.  That  God  prefers  the  obedience  of  life  to  mere 
ecclesiastical  rites  is  certain.  But  the  obedience  of  man — in  its  best  form,  you 
know — is  greatly  defective.  How  little  is  there  of  enUghtened  view,  how  little  of 
holy  principle,  how  Uttle  of  fihal  love,  how  httle  of  disinterested  regard,  how  Utile 
of  Godlike  aim,  is  there  in  the  services  of  the  best !  Verily  they  are  sinfully 
imperfect  in  every  view.  Were  God,  then,  to  condescend  to  accept  these  sinful  and 
imperfect  services  as  the  ground  of  hope,  how  hberal,  how  generous  would  He 
appear  !  But  would  this,  I  ask,  be  "  true  grace  " — grace  such  as  we  may  ascribe  to 
Him,  and  as  the  Scriptures  represent  to  be  the  principle  of  His  moral  government  ? 
Unquestionably  not.  Can  God  accept  that  which  is  greatly  or  altogether  without 
holy  principle,  without  godly  spirit,  without  honourable  aim  ?  Much  more,  can  He 
render  immortaUty  as  the  recompense  of  obedience  so  essentially  and  criminally 
defective  ?  IV.  Some,  however,  conceive  that,  though  they  dare  not  depend  upon 
their  own  righteousness  alone,  yet,  as  aided  and  supported  by  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  it  may  justly  become  the  ground  of  their  hope,  and  be  considered  as  thb 
true  grace  of  God.  And  were  this  foundation  conceded,  were  this  plea  admitted, 
there  would  be  grace  on  the  part  of  God — grace  in  the  appointment  of  the  Saviom* — 
grace  in  the  obedience  and  atonement  of  the  Saviour,  and  grace  in  the  acceptance  of 
human  merit  (if  so  proud  a  name  may  be  attached  to  so  poor  a  thing),  as  the  price 
of  "eternal  redemption."  But  this  is  not  the  "true  grace"  of  God;  for,  I  ask 
you,  where  in  Scripture  is  our  Saviour's  righteousness  spoken  of  as  only  a  secondary 
thing,  subordinate  to  human  worth  ?  Where  is  it  represented  under  the  degrading 
character  of  a  make-weight,  of  a  certain  supplementary  provision  to  human 
infirmity,  of  a  sort  of  accessory  to  human  goodness,  of  an  authorised  appendage 
to  human  merit  ?  Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  uniformly  asserted  to  have  done  all 
— to  have,  in  the  emphatical  language  of  the  prophet,  "  finished  transgression, 
made  an  end  of  sin,  made  reconcUiation  for  iniquity,  sealed  the  vision,  and  con- 
firmed the  covenant  ?  "  V.  Finally,  there  are  those  who,  rejecting  this  hetero- 
geneous admixture,  and  every  other  ground  of  dependence  that  is  human,  rely  for 

ACCEPTANCE    AND    SALVATION    SOLELY   UPON   THE  GRACE  OF  GoD,  AS  IT  "  REIGNS  THROUGH 

THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  Christ  UNTO  ETERNAL  LIFE."  This  is  the  vicw  given  in 
Scripture.  Hear  how  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  on  this  subject,  in  a  way  greatly 
analogous  to  the  passage  before  us,  and  calculated  to  throw  light  upon  it :  "  Being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  om*  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
also  we  have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  hope 
of  the  glory  of  God."  This  is,  indeed,  "the  true  grace  of  God" — the  grace  of 
redemption  pure,  and  free,  and  rich,  and  high,  and  infallible :  pure,  without  any 
intermixture  of  human  merit ;  free,  springing  from  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of 
Jehovah  alone,  and  from  no  necessary  impulse  of  His  nature,  or  controlling  neces- 
sity or  incidental  exigency  of  His  government ;  rich,  exceedingly  abundant  in  every 


452  THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

respect,  applicable  to  all,  adequate  for  each,  and  fraught  with  the  noblest  blessings 
to  our  fallen  race;  high,  grand  in  its  conception,  glorious  in  its  character,  admirable 
in  its  provisions,  heavenly  in  its  results  ;  infallible,  on  which  we  may  rest  without 
the  fear  of  disappointment,  and  in  which  we  can  rejoice  without  the  dread  of 
delusion.  In  particular,  this  is  the  only  plan  of  salvation  which  places  the 
Divine  generosity  in  the  most  unexceptionable  and  attractive  light,  while  it  satisfies 
justice,  condemns  sin,  secures  the  honours  of  the  Divine  law,  extends  the  reign 
of  goodness,  and  brightens  the  glories  of  the  moral  empire  of  God.  {John 
Mitchell,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  The  Church  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with  you,  saluteth 
you. — The  Church  in  Babylon : — The  Kevised  Version  omits  "  the  Church,"  and 
substitutes  "  she  " ;  explaining  in  a  marginal  note  that  there  is  a  difference  of 
opinion  as  to  whether  the  sender  of  the  letter  is  a  community  or  an  individual. 
All  the  old  MSS.,  with  one  weighty  exception,  follow  the  reading,  "  she  that  is 
at  Babylon."  That  the  sender  of  the  letter  is  a  church,  symbolically  designated  as 
a  "  lady,"  seems  the  natural  meaning.  Then  there  is  another  question — Where 
was  Babylon?  An  equal  diversity  of  opinion  has  arisen.  In  my  own  opinion 
"  Babylon  "  means  Kome.  We  have  here  the  same  symbolical  name  as  in  the 
Book  of  Eevelation,  where  it  is  intended  primarily  as  an  appellation  for  the 
imperial  city,  which  has  taken  the  place  filled  in  the  Old  Testament  by  Babylon, 
as  the  concentration  of  antagonism  to  the  kingdom  of  God.     I.  We  have  hebe  an 

OBJECT     LESSON    AS    TO    THE    UNITING    POWEB    OF    THE     GOSPEL.         JuSt    think    of     the 

relations  which,  in  the  civil  world,  subsisted  between  Rome  and  its  subject 
provinces  :  the  latter,  with  bitter  hatred  in  their  hearts  to  everything  belonging 
to  the  oppressing  city,  having  had  their  freedom  crushed  down  and  their  aspirations 
ruthlessly  trampled  upon  ;  the  former,  with  the  contempt  natural  to  metropolitans 
in  dealing  with  far-off  provincials.  The  same  kind  of  relationship  subsisted 
between  Eome  and  the  outlying  provinces  of  its  unwieldy  empire  as  between 
England,  for  instance,  and  its  Indian  possessions.  And  the  same  uniting  bond 
came  in  which  binds  the  Christian  converts  of  these  Eastern  lands  of  ours  to 
England  by  a  far  firmer  bond  than  any  other.  The  separating  walls  were  high, 
but,  according  to  the  old  saying,  you  cannot  build  walls  high  enough  to  keep  out 
the  birds ;  and  spirits,  winged  by  the  common  faith,  soared  above  all  earthly-made 
distinctions  and  met  in  the  higher  regions  of  Christian  communion.  Now  our 
temptation  is  not  so  much  to  let  barriers  of  race  and  language  and  distance  weaken 
our  sense  of  Christian  community,  as  it  is  to  let  even  smaller  things  than  these  do 
the  same  tragical  office  for  us.  And  we,  as  Christian  people,  are  bound  to  try  and 
look  over  the  fences  of  our  "  denominations "  and  churches,  and  recognise  the 
wider  fellowship  and  larger  company  in  which  all  these  are  merged.  11.  We  note, 
further,  the  cleab  eecognition  hebe  of  what  is  the  strong  bond  uniting  all 
Christians.  Peter  would  probably  have  been  very  much  astonished  if  he  had  been 
told  of  the  theological  controversies  that  were  to  be  waged  round  that  word  "  elect." 
The  emphasis  here  Ues,  not  on  "elect,"  but  on  "together."  It  is  not  the  thing 
so  much  as  the  common  possession  of  the  thing  which  bulks  largely  before  the 
apostle.  In  effect  he  says,  "  The  reason  why  these  Roman  Christians  that  have 
never  looked  you  Bithynians  in  the  face  do  yet  feel  their  hearts  going  out  to  you, 
and  send  you  their  loving  messages,  is  because  they,  in  common  with  you,  have 
been  recipients  of  precisely  the  same  Divine  act  of  grace."  By  the  side  of  these 
transcendent  blessings  which  they  possessed  in  common,  how  pitiably  insignificant 
all  the  causes  which  kept  them  apart  looked  and  were !  And  so  here  we  have  a 
partial  parallel  to  the  present  state  of  Christendom,  in  which  are  seen  at  work,  on 
one  hand,  superficial  separation;  on  the  other,  underlying  unity.  The  splintered 
peaks  may  stand,  or  seem  to  stand,  apart  from  their  sister  summits,  or  may  frown 
at  each  other  across  impassable  gorges,  but  they  all  belong  to  one  geological 
formation,  and  in  the  depths  their  bases  blend  indistinguishably  into  a  continuous 
whole.  Their  tops  are  miles  apart,  but  beneath  the  surface  they  are  one.  III. 
Then,  lastly,  we  may  find  here  a  hint  as  to  the  pressing  need  for  such  a  realisa- 
tion OF  unity.  "  The  Church  that  is  in  Babylon  "  was  in  a  very  uncongenial 
place.  Thank  God,  no  Babylon  is  so  Babylonish  but  that  a  Church  of  God  may 
be  found  planted  in  it.  No  circumstances  are  so  unfavourable  to  the  creation  and 
development  of  the  religious  life  but  that  the  religious  life  may  grow  there.  An 
orchid  will  find  footing  upon  a  bit  of  stick,  because  it  draws  nourishment  from  the 
atmosphere ;  and  they  who  are  fed  by  the  influx  of  the  Divine  Spirit  may  be  planted 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  PETER.  453 

anywhere,  and  yet  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  God.  But  it  also  gives  a  hint  as 
to  the  obligation  springing  from  the  circumstances  in  which  Christian  people  are 
set,  to  cultivate  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a  great  brotherhood.  Howsoever  solitary, 
and  surrounded  by  uncongenial  associations  any  Christian  man  may  be,  he  may 
feel  that  he  is  not  alone,  not  only  because  his  Master  is  with  him,  but  because 
there  are  many  others  whose  hearts  throb  with  the  same  love,  whose  lives  are 
surrounded  by  the  same  diificulties.  If  thus  you  and  I,  Christian  men,  are  pressed 
upon  on  all  sides  by  such  worldly  associations,  the  more  need  that  we  should  let 
our  hearts  go  out  to  the  innumerable  multitude  of  our  fellows,  companions  in  the 
tribulation  and  patience  and  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Marcus  my  son. — Marcus  my  son : — I.  The  working  of  Christian  sympathy. 
Mark  was  a  full-blooded  Jew  when  he  began  his  career.  "  John,  whose  surname 
was  Mark,"  like  a  great  many  other  Jews  at  that  time,  bore  a  double  name,  one 
Jewish,  "  John,"  and  one  Gentile,  "  Marcus."  But  as  time  gees  on  we  do  not  hear 
anything  more  about  "  John,"  nor  even  about  "  John  Mark,"  which  are  the  two 
forms  of  his  name  when  he  is  first  introduced  to  us  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  but 
he  finally  appears  to  have  cast  aside  his  Hebrew,  and  to  have  been  only  known  by 
his  Eoman  name.  And  that  change  of  appellation  coincides  with  the  fact  that  so 
many  of  the  allusions  which  we  have  to  him  represent  him  as  sending  messages  of 
Christian  greeting  across  the  sea  to  his  Gentile  brethren.  And  it  further  coincides 
with  the  fact  that  his  gospel  is  obviously  intended  for  the  use  of  Gentile  Christians, 
and,  according  to  an  old  and  reliable  tradition,  was  written  in  Eome  for  Koman 
Christians.  All  of  which  facts  just  indicate  two  things,  that  the  more  a  man  has 
real  operative  love  to  Jesus  Christ  in  his  heart  the  more  he  will  rise  above  all 
limitations  of  his  interests,  his  sympathy,  and  his  efforts,  and  the  more  surely  will 
let  himself  out,  as  far  as  he  can,  in  affection  towards  and  toils  for  all  men.  This 
change  of  name,  though  it  is  a  mere  trifle,  and  may  have  been  adopted  as  a  matter 
of  convenience,  may  also  be  taken  as  reminding  us  of  a  very  important  truth,  and 
that  is,  that  if  we  wish  to  help  people,  the  first  condition  is  that  we  go  down  and 
stand  on  their  level,  and  make  ourselves  one  with  them,  as  far  as  we  can.  And  so 
Mark  may  have  said,  "I  have  put  away  the  name  that  parts  me  from  these  Gentiles, 
for  whom  I  desire  to  work,  and  whom  I  love ;  and  I  take  the  name  that  binds  me 
to  them."  You  must  become  like  the  people  that  you  want  to  help.  H.  The  history 
of  Mark  suggests  the  possibility  of  overcoming  early  faults.  We  do  not  know 
why  he  refused  to  bear  the  burden  of  the  work  that  he  had  so  cheerily  begun. 
When  he  started  he  did  not  bargain  for  going  into  unknown  lands,  in  which  there 
were  many  toils  to  be  encountered.  He  was  willing  to  go  where  he  knew  the 
ground.  At  all  events,  whatever  his  reason,  his  return  was  a  fault,  or  Paul  would 
not  have  been  so  hard  upon  him  as  he  was.  And  the  best  way  to  treat  him  was  as 
the  apostle  did  ;  and  to  say  to  Barnabas'  indulgent  proposal,  "  No  !  he  would  not 
do  the  work  before,  and  now  he  shall  not  do  it."  That  is  often  God's  way  with  us. 
It  brings  us  to  our  senses,  as  it  brought  Mark  to  his.  We  do  not  know  how  long 
it  took  to  cure  Mark  of  his  early  fault,  but  he  was  thoroughly  cured.  The  man 
that  was  afraid  of  dangers  and  hypothetical  risks  in  Asia  Minor  became  brave 
enough  to  stand  by  the  apostle  when  he  was  a  prisoner,  and  was  not  ashamed  of 
his  chain.  And  afterwards,  so  much  had  he  won  his  way  into  the  apostle's  con- 
fidence, and  made  himself  needful  for  him  by  his  services,  that  the  lonely  prisoner, 
with  the  gibbet  or  headsman's  sword  in  prospect,  feels  that  he  would  like  to  have 
Mark  with  him  once  more,  and  bids  Timothy  bring  him  with  himself,  for  "he  is 
profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry."  Let  no  man  set  limits  to  the  possibilities  of  his 
own  restoration,  and  of  his  curing  faults  which  are  most  deeply  rooted  within  him- 
self. Hope  and  effort  should  be  boundless.  So  we  may  win  victories  on  the  very 
soil  where  formerly  we  were  shamefully  put  to  the  rout.  III.  Take  another  lesson 
— the  g<reatness  of  '♦  LITTLE "  SERVICE.  We  do  not  hear  that  this  John  Mark 
ever  tried  to  do  any  work  in  the  way  of  preaching  the  gospel.  His  business  was  a 
very  much  humbler  one.  He  had  to  attend  to  Paul's  comfort.  That  needed  some 
self -suppression.  It  would  have  been  so  natural  for  Mark  to  have  said,  "  Paul 
sends  Timothy  to  be  bishop  in  Crete,  and  Titus  to  look  after  other  churches ; 
Epaphroditus  is  an  official  here,  and  Apollos  is  a  great  preacher  there.  And  here  . 
am  I,  grinding  away  at  the  secularities  yet.  I  think  I'll  '  strike,'  and  try  and  get 
more  conspicuous  work."  Or,  he  might  perhaps  deceive  himself  and  say,  "  more 
directly  rehgious  work,"  like  a  great  many  of  us  that  often  mask  a  very  carnal 
desire  for  prominence  under  a  very  saintly  guise  of  desire  to  do  spiritual  service. 
That  was  self-suppression.     But  it  was  a  clear  recognition  of  what  we  all  ought  to 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

have  very  clearly  before  us,  and  that  is,  that  all  sorts  of  work  which  contribute  to 
one  end  are  one  sort  of  work ;  and  that  at  bottom  the  man  that  carried  Paul's 
books  and  parchments,  and  saw  that  he  was  not  left  without  clothes,  though  he 
was  so  negligent  of  cloaks  and  other  necessaries,  was  just  as  much  helping  on  the 
cause  of  Christ  as  the  apostle  when  he  preached.     IV.  Take  as  the  last  lesson  the 

ENLARGED     SPHERE     THAT      FOLLOWS     FAITHFULNESS      IN     SMALL     MATTERS.         What     & 

singular  change  !  The  man  that  began  with  being  a  servant  of  Paul  and  of 
Barnabas  ends  by  being  the  evangelist,  and  it  is  to  him,  under  Peter's  direction, 
that  we  owe  what  is  possibly  the  oldest,  and,  at  all  events  in  some  aspects,  an 
entirely  unique,  narrative  of  our  Lord's  life.  For  quite  certainly,  in  God's  provi- 
dence, the  tools  do  come  to  the  hand  that  can  wield  them,  and  the  best  reward  that 
we  can  get  for  doing  well  our  little  work  is  to  have  larger  work  to  do.  The  little 
tapers  are  tempted,  if  I  may  use  so  incongruous  a  figure,  to  wish  themselves  set  up 
on  loftier  stands.  Shine  your  brightest  in  your  comer,  and  you  will  be  '♦  exalted  " 
in  due  time.     (Ibid.) 


THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOR. 

II.  PETER, 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,  on   the  Verges   ot  The   Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


SECOND  PETER 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    SECOND    EPISTLE 
GENERAL     OF    PETEB. 

Authenticity  of  the  Epistle. — The  external  evidence  in  favour  of  the  First 
Epistle  of  Peter  is  as  strong  as  for  any  other  writing  in  the  New  Testament.  We 
cannot  make  the  same  remark  in  reference  to  the  Second  Epistle  ;  the  testimonies 
in  its  favour  among  the  writings  of  the  Fathers  are  rare,  of  a  comparatively  late 
date,  and  indefinite.  The  allusions  in  the  works  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  Clemens 
Komanus  and  Hennas,  adduced  by  Lardner  and  Kirchofer,  are  too  vague  and  sUght 
to  be  founded  on.  Justin  Martyr  (a.d.  150)  observes :  "  We  understand  that  the 
saying,  '  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years,'  belongs  to  this  matter  " 
(Dial,  cum  Tryph.  81),  which  is  possibly  a  quotation  from  2  Pet.  iii.  8,  though 
it  may  also  be  taken  from  Psalm  xc.  4.  The  same  reference  is  made  by  Irenaeus 
(a.d.  178,  Adv.  Haer.,  v.  23,  2).  Eusebius  informs  us  that  Clemens  Alexandrinus 
(a.d.  180)  in  the  work  called  Hypotyposis,  has  given  us  abridged  accounts  of  all  the 
canonical  Scriptures,  not  even  omitting  those  that  are  disputed,  namely,  the  Book 
of  Jude  and  the  other  catholic  Epistles  (H.  E.,  vi.  14) ;  and  from  this  it  has  been 
inferred  that  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  was  known  to  Clemens,  although  there 
is  no  reference  to  that  Epistle  in  his  extant  works.  There  appear  to  be  allusions 
to  this  Epistle  in  the  writings  of  Hippolytus  (a.d.  200).  "  They,  abashed  and 
constrained  by  the  truth,  have  confessed  their  errors  for  a  short  period,  but  after 
a  little  time  wallow  again  in  the  same  mire  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  22 ;  Adv.  Haer.,  22). 
"  You  shall  never  have  to  breast  the  boUing  flood  of  hell's  eternal  lake  of  fire,  and 
the  eye  ever  fixed  in  menacing  glare  of  wicked  angels  chained  in  Tartarus  as 
punishment  of  their  sins"  (2  Pet.  ii.  4;  Adv.  Haer.,  x.  30).  "For  the  prophets 
did  not  speak  by  their  own  power,  nor  did  they  preach  what  they  themselves 
wished ;  but  in  the  first  place  they  were  truly  enlightened  by  the  Word,  then  they 
were  taught  by  visions  in  respect  to  future  events,  and,  being  thus  influenced,  they 
uttered  things  which  God  had  revealed  to  them  alone  "  (De  Anti-christo,  chap.  ii.). 
Origen  (a.d.  250),  in  passages  found  in  the  Latin  translation  of  his  works  by  Eufinus, 
several  times  expressly  ascribes  this  Epistle  to  Peter.  "  And  Peter  says.  Ye  are 
made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  "And  as  the  Scripture  says  in  a  certain 
place,  the  dumb  ass  with  man's  voice  forbids  the  madness  of  the  prophet."  "  Peter 
speaks  aloud  through  the  two  trumpets  of  the  prophet"  (0pp.  torn.,  ii.  pp.  200, 
231,  412).  These  testimonies  are,  however,  to  be  taken  with  reservation,  as  it  is 
weU  known  that  Eufinus  made  additions  to  the  works  of  Origen.  Eusebius  gives 
the  following  quotation  from  Origen :  "  Peter,  upon  whom  the  Church  of  Christ 
is  built,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail,  has  left  behind  one 
Epistle  undisputed,  perhaps  a  second,  but  on  this  there  is  some  doubt "  (H.  E., 
vi.  25) ;  which  shows  that  Origen  was  acquainted  with  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter, 
but  doubted  its  genuineness ;  nor  is  the  Epistle  quoted  in  any  of  his  extant 
authentic  works.  Firmilian,  Bishop  of  Csesarea  (a.d.  2-50),  in  his  Epistle  to 
Cyprian,  writes :  "  Abusing  also  the  blessed  Apostles,  Peter  and  Paul,  as  if  they 
had  delivered  this  doctrine ;  though  they  in  their  Epistles,  have  anathematised 
heretics,  and  admonished  us  to  avoid  them "  (cf.  Cyprian,  75).  By  the  term 
Epistles  Firmilian  may  allude  to  only  one  epistle  of  Peter ;  but  what  he  here  says 
can  only  refer  to  the  Second  Epistle,  for  in  this  Epistle  alone  is  there  any  reference 
to  heretics.  The  Epistle  is  not  quoted  nor  referred  to  in  the  writings  of  Cyprian 
and  TertuUian.     Eusebius  does  not  appear  to  have  recognised  its  genuineness.     He 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


writes  :  "As  to  the  writings  of  Peter,  one  of  his  Epistles,  called  the  First,  is  acknow- 
ledged as  genuine.  But  that  which  is  called  the  Second,  we  have  not  indeed 
understood  to  be  embodied  with  the  Sacred  Books ;  yet  as  it  appeared  useful 
to  many,  it  was  studiously  read  with  the  other  sacred  Scriptures  "  (H.  E.,  iii.  3). 
And  in  another  place  he  classes  it  among  the  disputed  writings:  "Among  the 
disputed  books,  although  they  are  well  known  and  approved  by  many,  is  reported 
that  called  the  Epistle  of  James  and  Jude,  also  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  and  the 
Second  and  Third  Epistles  of  John"  (H.  E.,  iii.  25).  The  Epistle  is  not  found  in 
the  Muratorian  canon,  and  is  omitted  in  the  Peshito  and,  most  probably,  in  the 
Old  Latin.  After  the  time  of  Eusebius,  it  was  received  into  the  canon,  and 
is  attested  by  the  succeeding  Fathers.  The  internal  evidence  in  favour  of  the 
Epistle  is  stronger  than  the  external.  It  is  such  an  Epistle  as  we  would  suppose 
Peter  would  have  written.  The  earnestness  of  its  tone,  the  repeated  exhortations 
to  holiness,  the  solemn  warnings  against  apostasy,  and  the  references  to  the  last 
things,  all  remind  us  of  that  apostle,  who  knew  by  experience  the  danger  of 
hypocrisy  and  the  necessity  of  perseverance,  and  whose  glance  was  always  towards 
the  future.  There  are  also  references  to  incidents  in  the  life  of  Peter ;  as,  for 
example,  his  presence  at  the  Transfiguration  and  our  Lord's  notification  of  his 
martyrdom.  There  is  also  a  similarity  in  style  and  sentiment  to  the  First  Epistle. 
In  both  Epistles  the  word  avaaTpo^l],  conversation,  is  frequently  employed.  The 
word  apETrj,  virtue,  which  is  elsewhere  restricted  to  man,  is  in  both  Epistles  applied 
in  an  unusual  manner  to  God ;  as  in  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ,  "  That  ye  should  show  forth 
the  virtues  of  Him  who  hath  called  you  "  ;  and  in  2  Pet.  i.  3,  according  to  the 
correct  reading,  "  Through  the  knowledge  of  Hjm  who  has  called  us  through  His 
glory  and  virtue."  The  word  c'nroQtffiQ,  not  elsewhere  used  in  the  New  Testament, 
is  found  in  2  Pet.  i.  14,  of  the  putting  off  the  earthly  tabernacle,  and  in  1  Pet. 
iii.  21,  of  the  putting  off  the  sins  of  the  flesh.  So  the  phrase  "  spots  and  blemishes" 
is  found  in  both  Epistles  (1  Pet.  i.  19 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  The  adjective '/^lof  is 
employed  in  both  in  the  sense  of  the  possessive  pronoun.  So  also  the  sentiments 
in  both  Epistles  are  similar.  Both  dwell  upon  the  inspiration  of  the  prophets ; 
both  mention  the  Deluge  and  the  small  number  who  were  saved  ;  in  both  the 
eschatological  element  is  prominent ;  in  both  there  are  similar  references  to  the 
coming  of  Christ ;  and  in  both  the  last  things  are  dwelt  upon.  It  has  also  been 
observed  that  there  are  undesigned  coincidences  between  this  Epistle  and  the 
speeches  of  Peter  as  recorded  in  the  Acts.  These  coincidences,  however,  are 
neither  numerous  nor  important.  In  both  there  is  reference  to  rioting  and 
drunkenness  in  the  daytime  (Acts  ii.  15;  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  In  both  the  rare  word, 
ivffiftua  for  holiness  is  employed  (Acts  iii.  12 ;  2  Pet.  i.  7).  In  both  the  unusual 
word  SiffiroTtjg,  instead  of  Kvpiog,  is  used  for  Lord  (Acts  iv.  24;  2  Peter  ii.  1).  In 
both  the  enemies  of  the  faith  are  accused  of  denying  Christ ;  in  the  Acts,  of 
denying  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just  (Acts  iii.  14) ;  and  in  the  Epistle  of  denying 
the  Lord  that  bought  them  (2  Pet.  ii.H).  Another  internal  argument  in  favour 
of  this  Epistle  is  its  marked  superiority  to  the  writings  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers. 
In  this  Epistle  there  is  nothing  at  variance  with  the  spirit  or  dignity  of  the  sacred 
Scriptures ;  there  is  a  marked  inspiration  and  loftiness  in  its  sentiments ;  an 
absence  of  everything  that  is  frivolous  or  trivial.  "Who,"  observes  Dean  Farrar, 
"  will  venture  to  assert  that  any  Apostolic  Father — that  Clement  of  Borne,  or 
Ignatius,  or  Polycarp,  or  Hermas,  or  Justin  Martyr — could  have  written  so  much 
as  twenty  consecutive  verses  so  eloquent  and  so  powerful  as  those  of  the  Second 
Epistle  of  Peter  ?  No  known  member  of  the  Church  in  that  age  could  have  been 
the  writer ;  not  even  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  Diognetus.  Would  a  writer 
so  much  more  powerful  than  any  of  these  have  remained  uninfluential  and 
unknown?  Would  one  who  could  wield  his  pen  with  so  inspired  a  power  have 
failed  to  write  a  line  in  his  own  name,  and  for  the  immediate  benefit  of  his 
own  contemporaries?"  In  consequence  chiefly  of  the  weakness  of  the  external 
evidence,  no  writing  of  the  New  Testament  has  been  more  disputed  by  theologians 
of  all  phases  of  opinion.  Even  Calvin,  in  a  remarkable  passage,  expresses  his 
doubts  of  its  genuineness.  "  What  Jerome  writes,"  he  observes,  "  influences  me 
that  some,  induced  by  a  difference  in  the  style,  did  not  think  that  Peter  was  the 
author.  For  though  some  affinity  may  be  traced,  yet  I  confess  that  there  is  that 
manifest  difference  which  distinguishes  different  writers.  There  are  a'so  other 
probable  conjectures  by  which  we  may  conclude  that  it  was  written  by  another 
rather  than  by  Peter.  At  the  same  time,  all  agree  that  it  contains  nothing 
unworthy  of  Peter,  as  it  shows  everywhere  the  power  and  dignity  of  the  apostolic 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  vii 

spirit.  If  it  be  received  as  canonical  we  must  allow  Peter  to  be  the  author,  since 
it  has  his  name  inscribed,  and  he  also  testifies  that  he  lived  with  Christ ;  and 
it  would  have  been  a  fiction  unworthy  of  a  minister  of  Christ  to  have  personated 
another  individual.  I  therefore  conclude,  if  the  Epistle  be  regarded  as  worthy 
of  credit,  it  must  have  proceeded  from  Peter  ;  not  that  he  himself  wrote  it,  but  that 
some  one  of  his  disciples  set  forth  in  writing,  by  his  command,  those  things  which  the 
necessity  of  the  times  required."  Luther  also  appears  to  have  doubted  the  author- 
ship of  Peter,  and  so  also  did  Erasmus.  1.  The  chief  internal  objection  brought 
against  this  Epistle  is  its  difference  in  style  and  sentiment  from  the  First  Epistle. 
This  was  first  dwelt  upon  by  Jerome,  who  solved  the  difficulty  by  supposing  that 
a  different  interpreter  was  employed  in  translating  the  Second  Epistle ;  that 
whereas  Mark  or  Silvanus  was  Peter's  interpreter  when  he  wrote  the  First 
Epistle,  he  employed  another  person  when  he  wrote  the  Second.  The  chief  points 
of  dissimilarity  in  sentiment  insisted  upon  are  the  following :  "  The  keynote  of  the 
First  Epistle  is  hope,  whilst  the  keynote  of  the  Second  is  knowledge.  In  the  First 
Epistle,  our  Lord's  name  is  used  without  any  appellation ;  in  the  Second,  the  word 
Saviour  or  Lord  or  both  are  added.  In  the  First  Epistle  there  are  frequent 
references  to  the  Old  Testament ;  in  the  Second  these  references  are  remarkably 
rare.  Whilst  in  both  Epistles  the  coming  of  Christ  is  alluded  to,  in  the  First  it  is 
mentioned  as  a  revelation  (dnoKaXv^^iQ),  in  the  Second  as  a,  presence  {irapovaia).  In 
the  First  Epistle  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are  dwelt  upon ;  in  the  Second  they  are 
not  mentioned."  This  objection  does  not  seem  at  aU  formidable.  Whatever  force 
is  in  it  is  counterbalanced  by  the  points  of  similarity  of  style  and  sentiment  which 
are  undoubtedly  to  be  found  in  both  Epistles.  Besides,  these  writings  are  too  short 
to  judge  from  them  of  the  style  of  the  author ;  more  especially  as  Peter  has  no  such 
definite  and  marked  style  as  the  Apostles  Paul  and  James.  Most  of  the  linguistic 
peculiarities  are  to  be  found  in  the  second  chapter,  which  bears  such  a  remarkable 
resemblance  to  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  And  as  to  the  difference  of  sentiment  in  the 
Epistles,  this  may  in  a  great  measure  be  accounted  for  by  the  different  designs  of 
the  Epistles,  the  one  being  chiefly  hortative  and  the  other  polemical.  2.  Mayerhoff 
objects  to  the  Epistle  because  the  author  shows  a  manifest  solicitude  to  make  him- 
self known  as  Peter.  He  is  continually  bringing  forward  himself  as  if  he  wished 
to  impress  upon  his  readers  that  it  was  Peter  who  wrote  this  Epistle.  Thus  in 
the  address  he  calls  himself  "  Simon  Peter."  He  reminds  his  readers  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  revealed  to  him  that  he  must  soon  put  off  his  earthly  taber- 
nacle. He  alludes  to  his  presence  with  Christ  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration, 
when  he  heard  the  voice  from  the  excellent  glory :  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  He  identifies  himself  with  the  author  of  the  First 
Epistle.  And  he  speaks  of  Paul  as  his  beloved  brother,  thus  claiming  an  equality 
with  him.  But  this  objection  is  as  frivolous  as  it  is  weak.  These  references  may 
as  well  be  adduced  as  arguments  in  favour  of  the  authorship  of  Peter,  being 
reminiscences  of  what  happened  to  him.  Besides,  if  we  attend  to  the  context, 
we  shall  find  that  there  are  special  reasons  for  these  references,  that  they  are 
natural  and  not  designedly  and  artificially  introduced.  3.  The  manner  in  which 
he  mentions  the  Epistles  of  Paul  is  also  regarded  as  evidence  of  spuriousness. 
Mention  is  made  of  aU  Paul's  Epistles,  as  if  a  collection  of  them  had  already  been 
formed ;  and  they  are  put  on  the  same  footing  with  the  other  scriptures,  that 
is  the  Jewish  scriptures,  as  if  they  were  possessed  of  equal  authority :  both  of 
which  particulars  did  not  occur  until  after  Peter's  death.  But  there  is  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  the  phrase  "all  his  Epistles"  denotes  a  collection  of  Paul's  Epistles, 
but  merely  those  which  were  known  to  the  readers  of  Peter's  Epistle  ;  and  we  know 
that  several  of  Paul's  Epistles  were  written  to  the  churches  addressed  by  Peter.  It 
certainly  appears  that  Peter  places  Paul's  Epistles  in  the  same  rank  with  the  Jewish 
Scriptures ;  but  there  is  nothing  objectionable  in  this,  as  Paul  himself  makes  the 
same  assertion,  and  requires  that  his  Epistles  be  received  as  a  revelation  from  the 
Lord.  4.  It  is  further  objected  that  the  expression  "  Holy  Mount  "  betrays  a  post- 
apostolic  age,  when  a  degree  of  sacredness  was  imparted  to  the  scenes  of  gospel 
history.  The  phrase  "  Holy  Mount "  in  Peter's  time  could  only  be  applied  to 
Mount  Zion.  But  Peter  uses  the  epithet  holy  merely  because  such  a  wonderful 
incident  as  the  Transfiguration  occurred  upon  that  mount :  it  was  holy  because 
on  it  the  Lord  displayed  His  glory.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  afterward  any  par- 
ticular mountain  was  ever  known  by  the  appellation  the  "Holy  Mount,"  as  being 
the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  5.  Another  objection  strongly  insisted  on  is  the 
use  which  is  made  in  this  Epistle  of  the  Epistle  of  Jude.   The  resemblance  between 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


these  two  canonical  Epistles  is  certainly  remarkable,  and  is  too  strong  to  be  regarded 
as  accidental.  Without  determining'  which  Epistle  was  written  first,  taking  the  case 
that  Jude's  Epistle  was  the  earlier,  though  remarkable,  it  does  not  appear  to  us  to 
be  opposed  to  Peter's  authorship  that  he  should  incorporate  into  his  Epistle  what 
was  already  written  by  another  sacred  writer.  We  know  that  Paul  sometimes 
quotes  eren  from  heathen  writers.  It  is  highly  probable  that  Peter  in  his  First 
Epistle,  which  is  undoubtedly  genuine,  quotes  from  the  Epistle  of  James  ;  and 
Jude  himself  quotes  from  the  Apocryphal  book  of  Enoch ;  and  therefore  the  use 
of  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  though  surprising,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  proof  of 
spuriousness.  6.  An  entirely  new  objection  has  recently  been  brought  forward 
by  Dr.  Abbott,  namely,  that  the  author  of  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  was 
acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Josephus,  and  that  consequently  he  could  not 
be  the  Apostle  Peter.  Dr.  Abbott  grounds  his  argument  chiefly  on  a  comparison 
between  the  Epistle  and  two  passages  from  the  works  of  Josephus — the  one  the 
preface  to  the  Antiquities,  and  the  other  the  account  of  the  last  words  of  Moses — and 
he  endeavours  to  prove  from  the  similarity  of  words  and  phrases  that  the  author 
of  the  Epistle  was  acquainted  with  these  passages.  Such  a  comparison  of  words 
and  phrases  as  is  here  made,  howerer  plausible,  fails  to  carry  conviction.  It  is 
highly  improbable  that  a  Christian  writer  of  the  second  century,  even  although 
he  were  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Josephus,  should,  in  a  short  Epistle, 
slavishly  imitate  particular  passages  contained  in  them  ;  and  it  is  still  more 
improbable  that  Josephus  should  take  the  trouble  of  studying  a  short  Epistle  of  the 
Christians,  in  whose  religion  he  did  not  believe,  with  a  view  to  the  composition 
of  his  history — an  Epistle  also  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  subject  he  had 
undertaken  to  write  upon.  Taking  a  conjunct  view  of  the  whole  evidence,  we 
admit  that  the  external  evidence  is  weak ;  there  is  no  positive  testimony  in  favour 
of  the  Epistle  until  the  middle  of  the  third  century.  We  consider  that  the  internal 
evidence  is  stronger,  especially  the  undoubted  similarity  in  style  and  sentiment 
to  the  First  Epistle,  even  in  the  midst  of  differences — a  similarity  which  cannot  pos- 
sibly be  accounted  for  from  a  design  of  the  author  to  palm  off  his  writing  as  the 
EpiaLle  of  Peter  ;  and  the  marked  superiority  which  there  is  in  this  Epistle  over  the 
writings  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers.  Nor  do  we  think  the  internal  objections  brought 
against  the  Epistle  of  much  weight,  with  the  possible  exception  of  that  arising 
from  the  use  made  of  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  On  the  whole,  the  balance  of  evidence 
is  in  favour  of  the  authenticity  of  the  Epistle.  Besides,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
the  Fathers  of  the  fourth  century,  when  the  canon  was  fixed,  had  much  more 
evidence  than  we  possess ;  and  that  it  was  only  as  the  result  of  careful  examination 
that  any  writing  was  admitted  as  part  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.     (P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.) 

Contents  of  the  Epistle. — The  Epistle  is  both  prohibitory  and  hortative,  and 
these  two  elements  pervade  it  throughout ;  the  first  part  is  an  exhortation  to  make 
progress  in  the  Divine  life ;  the  second  part  is  a  warning  against  heretical  teachers. 
The  apostle,  having  saluted  his  readers,  prays  that  grace  and  peace  may  abound 
to  them  through  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  They  must  remember  their  high  and 
holy  calling  :  they  were  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  they  were  delivered  from 
the  corruptions  of  the  world.  They  must  then  make  progress  in  the  Divine  life ; 
grace  must  be  developed  within  them  ;  they  must  add  to  their  faith  all  the  other 
virtues  of  the  Christian  character ;  and  thus,  by  the  exercise  of  faith  and  holiness 
of  life,  they  are  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure.  He  was  now  aged,  and  his 
death,  revealed  by  his  Lord,  was  close  at  hand ;  but  he  was  anxious,  before  his 
decease,  earnestly  to  exhort  them  to  persevere  in  the  faith  ;  they  had  not  followed 
cunningly  devised  fables  ;  he  himself  heard  Christ  proclaimed  by  the  audible  voice 
from  heaven  to  be  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  and  they  had  the  predictions  of  the 
prophets  on  which  to  rely  (chap.  i.).  From  exhortation  he  turns  to  warning.  False 
teachers  had  arisen  among  them,  who  had  introduced  damnable  heresies,  denying 
the  Lord  that  bought  them,  bringing  destruction  on  themselves  and  their  followers. 
Their  destruction  was  certain  ;  the  examples  of  the  fallen  angels,  of  the  world 
before  the  Flood,  and  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  were  all  warnings  and  proofs  that 
misery  followed  on  the  footsteps  of  crime.  They  were  spots  and  blemishes  in  their 
feasts,  a  disgrace  to  their  community,  the  seducers  of  the  unstable,  the  senants 
of  corruption,  the  heirs  of  wrath.  If  his  readers  suffered  themselves  to  be  seduced 
by  them,  if  they  were  entangled  in  their  errors  and  overcome,  they  were  in  a  far 
more  perilous  condition  than  those  who  had  never  heard  of  Christianity,  and  had 
never  been  rescued  from  the  pollutions  of  the  world  (chap.  ii.).     These  scoffers, 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  PETER.  ix 

who  called  in  question  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  were  not  unforeseen  :  their  coming 
had  been  foretold  by  the  holy  prophets  and  by  the  apostles  of  Christ.  The  advent 
of  Christ  might,  according  to  their  view,  appear  to  be  delayed ;  but  they  must 
remember  that  time  in  the  eyes  of  God  was  very  different  from  time  in  the  eyes 
of  man :  one  day  was  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years 
as  one  day.  The  Lord  was  not  in  reaUty  slack  concerning  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  of  His  coming.  They  must  exercise  patience  and  persevere  in  a  course 
of  holy  hving.  The  day  shall  assuredly  come  when  this  present  world  and  all  that 
it  contains  shall  be  burnt  up ;  but  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  shall  spring  from 
the  ashes  of  the  old.  They  must  prepare  for  this  solemn  day;  the  delay  is  an 
evidence  of  God's  long-suffering,  as  Paul  had  written  to  them.  The  apostle  then 
concludes  the  Epistle  with  a  brief  summary  of  its  object ;  that  they  should  avoid  the 
errors  of  the  wicked,  and  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Savioor  Jesos  Christ.    (Ibid. ) 


II.  PETER. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ. — The  author  and 
his  readers  : — I.  The  author  describes  himself  by — 1.  His  name.  (1)  "  Simon." 
Commonly  a  happy  name  in  the  Scriptures.  Not  that  grace  is  tied  to  names  ;  for 
there  was  a  Simon  Magus,  a  sorcerer.  Whatsoever  thy  name  be,  let  thy  heart 
be  Simon's.  It  is  said  to  signify  hearing  or  obeying  ;  so  do  thou  confess,  profess, 
love  thy  Master.  (2)  "  Peter  "  was  his  surname,  given  him  by  Christ  HimseK.  2. 
His  condition.  "  A  servant."  (1)  This  extols  the  dignity  of  Christ  that  so  famous 
an  apostle  creeps  to  Him  on  the  knees  of  lowliness.  Many  arrogate  great  dignity 
to  themselves,  because  so  famous  men  are  their  servants.  Ahasuerus  might  vaunt 
of  his  viceroys;  but  let  all  sceptres  be  laid  down  at  the  foot  of  Him  who  is 
crowned  with  unspeakable  glory  for  ever.  (2)  This  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  St. 
Peter's  humility.  The  godly  are  no  further  ambitious  than  to  belong  to  Christ. 
3.  His  ofiQce.  "An  apostle."  (1)  He  joins  together  service  and  apostleship.  (a) 
To  distinguish  and  exemplify  his  calhng  (Heb.  v.  4).  (b)  To  show  that  apostleship 
was  a  matter  of  service  ;  as  an  honour,  so  a  burden  (Matt.  ix.  38).  (2)  It  was  the 
custom  of  the  apostles  to  magnify  their  office  (Rom.  xi.  13),  to  weaken  the  credit  of 
false  intruders  (1  Cor.  ix.  1).  4.  His  Master.  "Of  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  They  were 
apostles  of  Christ,  for  none  ever  called  themselves  apostles  of  God  the  Father, 
because  Christ  Himself  only  was  the  Father's  Apostle.  (2)  Christ  only  hath 
authority  to  make  apostles.  He  chose  them  to  the  work,  who  could  enable  them  to 
the  work.  (3)  They  came  not  in  their  own  name,  but  in  Chi'ist's  (2  Cor.  v.  20 ;  xi.  2). 
II.  The  persons  to  whom  this  Epistle  is  written.  1.  The  generality  of  the 
person.  "  To  them,"  all  them.  This  is  called  a  "  general  epistle  " — (1)  Not  only 
because  the  doctrine  contained  in  it  is  orthodox  and  catholic.  (2)  Nor  because  the 
use  of  it  is  general.  (3)  But  because  it  was  directed  to  all  the  saints  and  wor- 
shippers of  Jesus  Christ,  howsoever,  wheresoever  dispersed,  or  whensoever 
despised.  For  with  God  is  no  respect  of  persons.  2.  The  qualification  of  this 
generality.  "  That  hath  faith."  3.  The  excellency  of  this  qualification. 
"  Precious  faith."  As  Athens  was  called  Greece  of  Greece,  so  faith  may  be  called 
the  grace  of  grace.  {T.  Adams.)  Them  that  have  obtained  like  precious 
faith. — Apostolic  faith : — Let  us  first  of  all  glance  at  the  family  that  is  here 
addressed.  The  letter  is  directed  plainly,  and  to  deal  honestly  with  Scripture,  and 
to  deal  honestly  with  souls,  we  must  do  as  an  honest  postman  would  do.  When  he 
takes  his  budget  of  letters  from  the  office,  he  does  not  take  pains  to  tear  off  the 
envelopes  and  directions,  and  scatter  them  in  the  streets  for  any  one  to  pick  up. 
This  should  be  the  case  with  regard  to  this  Epistle.  It  is  not  addressed  to  us 
individually,  but  it  is  "  to  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious  faith  with  us." 
In  order  to  ascertain  if  the  letter  belongs  to  me,  I  must  ascertain  if  I  have  like 
precious  faith  with  the  author.  The  fraternity  to  whom  all  this  Epistle  is  addressed, 
they  have  obtained  like  precious  faith — apostolic  faith.  How  is  this  ?  Did  they 
buy  it  ?  Did  they  earn  it  ?  Did  they  trace  it  out  by  dint  of  study  ?  Verily  not. 
Those  who  really  have  it,  have  it  inspired  in  their  souls,  implanted  in  their 
experience  as  a  living  grace,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  this  leads 
me  to  observe  that  this  precious  faith  obtains  and  maintains  a  holy  intimacy  with 
God  in  all  the  persons  and  perfections  of  the  Trinity.  There  is  another  point  I 
must  press  upon  you,  and  that  is  the  basing  of  faith  upon  truth,  as  its  solid  bottom. 
If  the  faith  of  God's  elect  has  taken  possession  of  your  heart,  I  know  that  the 
testimony  of  Scripture  with  regard  to  all  the  doctrines  of  grace,  will  be  received  in 
your  creed.  II.  Ascertain  the  evidence  of  our  affinity.  "  Like  faith  in  us." 
"  Like  !  "  How  am  I  to  know  it  is  "  like  "  ?  Now  I  really  think  it  will  be  quite  fair 
to  ascertain  what  is  like  the  apostles' ;  let  us  appeal  to  the  apostles'  preaching,  and 

30  1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

to  their  practice.  Now  I  think  their  preaching  consisted  of  three  things  chiefly — 
affirming,  admonishing,  and  advising.  They  were  accustomed  to  affirm.  Says  the 
apostle—"  opening  and  alleging  that  Jesus  Christ  must  needs  suffer  and  enter  into 
His  glory."  Well,  then,  they  went  on  to  admonish,  and  they  could  say  to  the 
rejectors  of  the  gospel,  "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish."  And  this 
led  on  to  their  advising  them  to  continue  steadfast  to  the  truth,  to  flee  the  very 
appearance  of  evil,  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  their  minds,  and  so  on.  Moreover,  I 
should  like  all  such  to  ask  the  question,  whether  their  practice  is  at  all  like  the 
apostles'.  Like  precious  faith  will  produce  like  precious  practice.  And  we  find  the 
apostles  active  in  the  cause  of  God.  So  also  we  find  that  the  apostles'  practice  was 
very  affectionate — that  they  spoke  in  love  to  those  who  surrounded  them.  I  want 
more  of  this  affectionate  deportment,  as  well  as  activity,  and  zeal,  and  vigilance  in 
the  cause  of  God.  And  then,  mark,  their  lives  were  of  an  inspiring  nature.  They 
did  not  content  themselves  with  earth — they  wanted  not  its  gaudy  toys,  but  they 
waited  for  that  crown  of  righteousness  which  was  laid  up  for  them.  Well,  just  go 
on  to  mark  that  the  apostles'  faith  was  immovable  and  invulnerable.  Now,  I  ask 
whether  this  faith  that  we  profess  is  so  much  like  the  apostle's  that  it  is  un- 
movable.  Can  you  stand  a  cannonading  from  the  enemy  ?  Can  you  stand  a  good 
volley  of  reproach  and  insult  from  the  world  ?  Just  pass  on  to  mark  that  this  like 
precious  faith,  which  thus  appeals  to  the  apostles  is  necessarily  fixing  its  attention 
upon  the  name  and  perfect  work  of  Christ,  its  object  is  to  glorify  Christ.     III.  The 

VERT   WONDERFUL    APPELLATION    GIVEN    TO    THIS    FAITH.       It   is    "like    prCCioUS     faith." 

One  of  the  first  features  of  its  preciousness  is  that  it  takes  hold  of  all  the  stores  of 
the  covenant  of  grace,  and  appropriates  them  as  its  own.  But  there  is  one  point 
in  the  preciousness  of  faith  which  appears  to  me  more  precious  than  all  the  others, 
and  that  is  its  habitual  war.  "  Why  we  thought  that,  being  justified  by  faith,  we 
have  peace  with  God."  So  we  have,  and  yet  there  is  habitual  war.  There  is  old 
Satan,  with  his  roaring  like  a  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  What  is  to  be 
done  with  him  ?  "  Whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith."  That  is  war,  at  any  rate. 
(J.  Irons.)  Like  precious  faith : — I.  The  object  of  faith  as  here  defined.  Bevised 
Version  reads  more  accurately,  "  faith  ...  in  the  righteousness."  Faith  is  trust, 
and  the  object  of  trust  must  be  a  person.  We  may  say  that  we  trust  a  promise,  but 
that  really  means  that  we  trust  him  who  has  made  it.  We  may  beheve  a  creed,  but 
for  trust  we  must  have  a  living  Christ  of  whom  the  creed  speaks.  11.  The  worth 
OF  this  faith.  1.  You  remember  that  in  one  verse  we  read  about  the  door  of  faith. 
What  is  the  worth  of  a  door  ?  It  is  only  a  hole  in  a  wall.  The  value  of  the  door  is 
that  which  it  admits  into.  So  faith  is  precious,  not  because  of  anything  in  itself, 
but  because  of  what  it  grasps,  and  of  what  it  admits  into  your  heart.  Just  as  the 
hand  of  a  dyer  that  has  been  working  with  crimson  will  be  crimson ;  just  as  the 
hand  that  has  been  holding  fragrant  perfumes  will  be  perfumed  ;  so  my  faith, 
which  is  only  the  hand  by  which  I  lay  hold  upon  precious  things,  will  take  the 
tincture  and  the  fragrance  of  what  it  grasps.  A  bit  of  earthenware  piping  may  be 
worth  a  few  pence  in  intrinsic  value,  but  if  it  is  the  means  by  which  water  is 
brought  into  a  beleaguered  city,  which  else  would  perish  of  thirst,  who  will  estimate 
its  worth  ?  2.  Then  again,  we  may  consider  the  worth  of  faith  as  a  defence.  We 
read  of  the  shield  of  faith.  I  do  not  become  safe  by  believing  myself  to  be  so, 
however  strong  may  be  the  imagination  or  the  fancy.  All  depends  upon  what  it  is 
that  I  am  relying  on.  Your  faith  is  precious  because  it  knits  you  to  Christ's 
immortal  stability.  3.  And  in  like  manner  we  may  consider  the  worth  of  faith  as 
a  purifier.  But  how  does  faith  purify  ?  Is  there  anything  in  my  confidence  which 
will  make  me  pure  ?  No !  there  is  no  moi'al  efficacy  in  the  mere  act  of  trust.  All 
depends  upon  what  it  is  that  you  are  trusting  to.  You  will  get  like  what  you  are 
trusting  to.     The  only  faith  that  purifies  is  faith  in  Him  that  is  pure.    III.  The 

SUBSTANTIAL    IDENTITY     AND    EQUAL    PRECIOUSNESS    OF    FAITH     IN     ALL     VARIETIES     OF 

FORM  AND  DEGREE.  The  deepest  thing  in  every  man  that  has  it  is  his  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  likeness  in  that  brings  him  near  all  others  who  have  it,  however  unlike 
on  the  surface  their  characteristics  may  be.  All  manner  of  differences  in  opinion, 
in  politics,  in  culture,  in  race  which  may  separate  men  from  men,  are  like  the 
cracks  upon  the  surface  of  a  bit  of  rock,  which  are  an  inch  deep,  while  the  solid 
mass  goes  down  a  thousand  feet.  But  I  am  not  going  to  pretend  that  the  man 
whose  Christ  did  not  die  for  him,  and  whose  Christ  gives  him  no  righteousness  in 
which  he  can  stand  before  God,  possesses  "  like  precious  faith  with  us."  To  say 
that  he  does  is  to  worship  charity  at  the  expense  of  truth.  The  poor  man's  half 
sovereign   which   stands  between   him  and  want  is  made   of  the  same  gold  as 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  3 

Rothschild's  millions.  And  so  the  smallest  and  the  feeblest  faith  is  one  in 
character,  and  one  in  intrinsic  value  with  the  loftiest  and  superbest.  Only  as  is  the 
measure  of  the  man's  faith,  so  will  be  the  measure  of  his  possession  of  the  precious 
things.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Of  faith : — I.  As  to  its  nature.  It  doth  involve 
knowledge,  knowledge  of  most  worthy  and  important  truths,  knowledge  peculiar 
and  not  otherwise  attainable,  knowledge  in  way  of  great  evidence  and  assurance. 
1.  Truth  is  the  natural  food  of  our  soul.  What  hght  is  without,  that  is  truth 
within,  shining  on  our  inward  world,  illustrating,  quickening,  and  comforting, 
exciting  all  our  faculties  to  action,  and  guiding  them  in  it.  Faith,  therefore,  as 
implying  knowledge  is  valuable.  2.  But  it  is  much  more  so  in  regard  to  the 
quality  of  its  objects,  which  are  the  most  worthy  that  can  be,  and  most  useful  for 
us  to  know,  the  knowledge  whereof  doth  indeed  advance  our  soul  into  a  better 
state,  doth  raise  us  to  a  nearer  resemblance  with  God.  Thereby  we  understand  the 
nature  or  the  principal  attributes  of  God.  By  it  we  are  fully  acquainted  with  the 
will  and  intentions  of  God,  relating  both  to  our  duty  and  our  recompense.  By  it 
we  are  informed  concerning  ourselves.  It  enableth  us  rightly  to  distinguish 
between  good  and  bad,  right  and  wrong.  It  prescribeth  us  an  exact  rule  of  life.  It 
proposeth  the  most  valid  inducements  to  virtue.  It  discovereth  the  special  aids 
dispensed  to  us  for  the  support  of  our  weakness  against  aU  temptations.  The 
knowledge  of  these  things  is  plainly  the  top  of  all  knowledge  whereof  we  are 
capable ;  not  consisting  in  barren  notion,  not  gratifying  idle  curiosity,  not  serving 
trivial  purposes,  but  really  bettering  our  souls.  3.  Faith  also  hath  this  excellent 
advantage  that  it  endueth  us  with  such  knowledge  in  a  very  clear  and  sure  way, 
it  not  being  grounded  on  any  slippery  deduction  of  reason,  nor  on  slender  conjec- 
tures of  fancy,  nor  on  musty  traditions  or  popular  rumours ;  but  on  the  infallible 
testimony  of  God  conveyed  unto   us  by  powerful  evidence.     II.  It    hath  also 

DIVERS   INGREDIENTS,    OR   INSEPARABLE    ADJUNCTS,    WHICH     IT    DOTH   IMPLY,    EENDERIXG 

IT  COMMENDABLE  AND  ACCEPTABLE  TO  GoD.  As — 1.  Faith  impUcth  a  good  usc  of 
reason.  This  is  that  which  commendeth  any  virtue,  that  a  man  acting  after  it  doth 
act  wisely,  in  conformity  to  the  frame  and  design  of  his  nature.  2.  Faith  implieth 
a  compliance  with  the  providence  and  grace  of  God.  3.  Faith  doth  imply  good 
opinion  of   God  and  good  actions  toward  Him.     III.  Thus   is  faith  precious, 

CONSIDERING     ITS     NATURE,      AND     THOSE      ESSENTIAL     INGREDIENTS      OR       INSEPARABLE 

ADJUNCTS  WHICH  IT  DOTH  INCLUDE  OR  IMPLY.  It  wiU  also  appear  to  be  so  if  we 
consider  its  rise  and  those  good  dispositions  which  concur  in  its  production.  1.  To 
the  engendering  of  faith  there  is  required  a  mind  sober,  composed,  and  wakeful ; 
ready  to  observe  what  befalleth,  apt  to  embrace  what  is  offered,  conducible  to  our 
good ;  a  mind  not  so  drowned  in  worldly  care,  sensual  enjoyment,  or  impertinent 
sport  as  to  neglect  the  concerns  of  our  eternal  state.  2.  Faith  doth  require  much 
diligence  and  industry.  3.  Faith  must  needs  proceed  from  sincerity  and  soundness 
of  judgment.  4.  To  the  begetting  faith  there  must  concur  humility,  or  a  readiness 
to  entertain  sober  and  moderate  opinions  of  ourselves,  together  with  suitable 
affections  and  desires.  5.  To  faith  much  fortitude,  much  resolution  must 
conspire,  for  he  that  firmly  persuadeth  himseK  to  be  a  Christian  doth  embark  in  a 
most  difficult  warfare.  6.  The  noble  virtue  of  patience  is  likewise  accessory  to 
faith.  7.  With  faith  also  must  concur  the  virtue  of  prudence  in  aU  its  parts  and 
instances ;  therein  is  exerted  a  sagacity,  discerning  things  as  they  really  are  in 
themselves,  not  as  they  appear  through  the  masks  and  disguises  of  fallacious 
semblance.  8.  In  fine,  the  embracing  Christian  doctrine  doth  suppose  a  mind  imbued 
with  all  kinds  of  virtuous  disposition  in  some  good  degree.  IV.  Its  effects  are 
of  two  sorts :  one  springing  naturally  from  it,  the  other  following  it  in  way  of 
recompense  ffom  Divine  bounty.  I  shall  only  touch  the  first  sort,  because  in  this 
its  virtue  is  most  seen,  as  in  the  other  its  felicity.  Faith  is  naturaUy  efficacious 
in  producing  many  rare  fruits.  Even  in  common  life  faith  is  the  compass  by 
which  men  steer  practice,  and  the  mainspring  of  action,  setting  all  the  wheels 
of  our  activity  on  going  ;  every  man  acteth  with  serious  intention,  and  with  vigour 
answerable  to  his  persuasion  of  things,  that  they  are  worthy  his  pains,  and  attain- 
able by  his  endeavours.  In  like  manner  is  faith  the  square  and  the  source  of  our 
spiritual  activity,  brooking  pains  and  hardships.  What  but  faith,  eyeing  the  prize, 
will  quicken  us  "to  run  patiently  the  race  that  is  set  before  us"?  We  are  told 
that  faith  doth  "purify  our  souls  and  cleanse  our  hearts  ";  that  is,  our  whole 
interior  man,  all  the  faculties  of  our  soul ;  disposing  them  to  an  universal 
obedience  and  conformity  to  God's  holy  will ;  and  so  it  is,  for  faith  not  only  doth 
clear  our  understanding  from    its   defects,  but  it  cleanseth  our  will  from  its 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

vicious  inclinations,  it  freeth  our  affections  from  disorder  and  distemper,  in 
tendency  toward  bad  objects,  and  in  pursuit  of  indifferent  things  with  immoderate 
violence ;  it  purgeth  our  conscience  or  reflexive  powers  from  anxious  fear, 
suspicion,  anguish,  dejection,  despair,  and  all  such  passions  which  corrode  and 
fret  the  soul ;  how  it  effecteth  this  we  might  declare ;  but  we  cannot  better  set  forth 
its  efficacy  than  by  considering  the  special  influence  it  plainly  hath  in  the  produc- 
tion of  each  virtue,  or  on  the  performance  of  every  duty.  "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue," 
saith  Peter,  implying  the  natural  order  of  things,  and  that  if  true  faith  precede 
virtue  will  easily  follow.  In  fine,  it  is  faith  alone  which  can  plant  in  us  that  which  is 
the  root  of  all  contentedness  and  all  patience ;  a  just  indifference  and  unconcernedness 
about  all  things  here  ;  it  alone  can  untack  our  minds  and  affections  from  this  world, 
rearing  our  souls  from  earth  and  fixing  them  in  heaven.  {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.) 
The  nature  of  saving  faith  : — In  the  sacred  oracles  five  objects  especially  are 
called  precious.  The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious.  The  blood  of  Christ  is 
precious.  Christ  is  precious  to  His  ransomed  people.  The  promises  of  the  gospel 
are  great  and  precious.  And  in  our  text  faith  is  called  precious.  That  is  accounted 
precious  which  is  of  an  excellent  quality,  especially  if  it  be  rare.  Gold  is  preferred 
to  brass,  moral  virtue  to  gold  ;  but  the  faith  of  God's  elect  infinitely  surpasseth 
these,  and  every  acquisition  below  the  sun.  And  in  its  operations  and  effects  it  is 
most  excellent.  What  tends  farther  to  raise  the  value  of  saving  faith  in  our  esteem 
is — 1.  The  manner  in  which  we  are  made  partakers  of  it,  namely,  by  the  gracious 
and  sovereign  disposal  of  heaven.  2.  That  the  weakest  real  believers  share  the 
blessing  together  with  the  strongest  apostles  themselves,  greatly  magnifieth  our 
idea  of  its  worth.  I.  First,  saving  faith  consists  in  the  credit  the  heart  yieldeth 
TO  THE  testimony  OF  Jesus,  "  the  Amen,  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness."  This 
testimony  we  have  delivered  to  us  in  the  law  and  the  gospel.  1.  In  believing  the 
soul  is  persuaded  of  the  power  of  Christ  to  save  it,  guilty  and  wretched  as  it  is ;  for 
God  hath  laid  help  upon  One  that  is  mighty  to  save.  2.  In  saving  faith  the  soul 
gives  full  credit  to  this  great  gospel  truth,  that  the  mercy  of  Christ  is  equal  to  His 
power  to  save.  3.  In  believing  the  heart  fully  confides  in  the  faithfulness  of  Christ 
to  perform  His  promise  of  eternal  life  to  aU  those  who  believe  on  Him.  4.  Take 
notice  of  the  light  or  evidence  by  which  true  beUevers  discern,  and  yield  their 
assent  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  Now  this  is  wholly  supernatural.  The  full 
credit  given  by  the  heart  to  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  in  His  Word,  is  peculiar  to 
saving  faith  ;  there  is  therefore  an  essential  difference  between  this  and  the  assent 
of  mere  common  professors.  This  difference  chiefly  consists  in  three  things.  (1)  The 
transcendent  glories  of  faith's  object  are  truly  discerned  by  the  one  ;  the  other  has 
only  some  dark  ineffectual  notices  of  them.  The  difference  is  as  real  and  as  great 
as  that  of  seeing  an  object  and  hearing  of  it  only.  (2)  The  objects  of  faith  are 
most  agreeable  to  the  faculties  and  condition  of  true  believers.  In  them  they 
perceive  everything  for  their  entertainment  and  profit.  (3)  They  differ  widely  in 
the  effects  they  have  upon  the  minds  of  their  respective  subjects.  The  impressions 
the  objects  of  faith  make  upon  the  mind  of  temporary  believers,  are  as  a  morning 
cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away,  leaving  their  hearts  still  unchanged. 
But  sincere  believers  with  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 
II.  Explain  the  nature  of  trust  in  Christ,  the  second  constituent  of  saving  faith. 
This  act  of  faith  is  called  a  receiving  Christ,  embracing  Him,  accepting  Him, 
coming  to  Him,  leaning  upon  Him,  and  resting  on  Him  for  salvation.  1.  It 
implies  a  hearty  approbation  of  the  scheme  of  redemption  in  the  blood  of  Christ, 
as  originating  from,  and  infinitely  worthy  of,  the  wisdom,  mercy,  and  love  of  God. 
2.  Trust  in  Christ  more  specifically  consists  in  the  hearty  acquiescence  of  the  soul 
in  Him  for  salvation.  Its  leading  exercise  is  a  rest  in  His  propitiation  for  pardon, 
and  then,  being  accepted  in  the  Beloved  for  grace,  for  glory,  and  for  every  mercy. 
He  is  all  in  all  to  believers.  (1)  The  gospel  offers  Christ  fully  in  all  His  offices, 
for  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  And  faith  corresponding 
fully  with  the  offer,  accepteth  Him  as  the  only  remedy  for  ignorance,  guilt,  slavery, 
and  every  misery  to  which  sin  hath  subjected  a  fallen  world.  (2)  The  gospel 
offers  Christ  in  due  order — Christ  Himself  first,  and  then  His  gifts.  It  inviteth  us 
to  come  to  Him,  and  promiseth  rest  upon  our  coming.  (3)  The  gospel  offers  Christ 
and  all  the  blessings  of  His  purchase  freely,  without  money  and  without  price ; 
and  faith  disclaiming  all  goodness  wrought  in  or  done  by  the  creature,  as  a  ground 
of  trust.  Lessons:  1.  What  ground  of  lamentation  is  it,  and  how  surprising  that 
the  far  greatest  part  of  those  who  profess  the  name  of  Christ,  and  the  Scriptures  to 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  5 

be  His  Word,  have,  notwithstanding,  so  little  of  Him  in  their  religion,  and  are  such 
strangers  to  the  doctrine  of  faith  in  His  blood  for  salvation.  2.  From  what  hath 
been  said,  many  professors  of  religion  might  be  easily  convinced,  did  they  yield  to 
the  evidence  of  it,  that  they  have  not  the  true  faith  of  the  gospel,  but  are  still  held 
in  the  chains  of  unbelief  and  condemnation !  For  he  that  believeth  not  is  con- 
demned akeady.  3.  I  most  earnestly  beseech  unbelievers  of  every  description  to 
acknowledge  your  character  fully  and  freely.  Admit  the  conviction  of  your  guilt 
and  danger,  fall  at  the  feet  of  mercy,  and  beg  for  the  life  of  your  souls.  (R.  South, 
D.D.)  The  value  of  faith : — 1.  Faith,  considered  intellectually,  is  valuable.  2. 
The  value  of  faith  appears  in  its  power,  of  realising  in  our  minds  the  existence  and 
presence  of  God.  3.  Faith  appears  pre-eminently  precious  when  we  remember  that 
by  it  we  obtain  a  part  in  the  great  work  of  redemption  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  affected.  4.  The  preciousness  of  faith  appears  in  its  beneficial  influence  on 
character.  5.  The  value  of  faith  is  felt  in  the  power  it  has  to  sustain  and  comfort 
the  mind  when  no  other  help  is  available.  (The  Congregational  Pulpit.)  Faith 
and  life  : — Faith  and  life !  these  are  vital  points  to  a  Christian.  They  possess  so 
intimate  a  connection  with  each  other  that  they  are  by  no  means  to  be  severed. 
You  shall  never  find  true  faith  unattended  by  true  godliness ;  on  the  other  hand, 
you  shall  never  discover  a  truly  holy  life  which  has  not  for  its  root  a  living  faith 
upon  the  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Woe  unto  those  who  seek  after 
the  one  without  the  other !     I.  Observe  what  He  says  conceening  the  character 

AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  FAITH,  AND  THEN  CONCEENING  THE  CHARACTER  AND  ORIGIN  OF 

SPIRITUAL  LEFE.  Let  US  begin  where  Peter  begins,  with  the  faith.  You  have  here 
a  description  of  true  saving  faith.  1.  First,  you  have  a  description  of  its  source. 
He  says,  "  To  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious  faith."  It  is  not  a  matter 
which  springs  up  by  a  process  of  education,  or  by  the  example  and  excellent 
instruction  of  our  parents ;  it  is  a  thing  which  has  to  be  obtained.  Now,  that 
which  is  obtained  by  us  must  be  given  to  us ;  and  well  are  we  taught  in 
Scripture  that  "  faith  is  not  of  ourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  2.  Peter 
having  described  the  origin  of  this  faith,  proceeds  to  describe  its  object.  The 
word  "  through  "  in  our  translation  might,  quite  as  correctly,  have  been  rendered 
"  in " — "  faith  in  the  righteousness  of  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
True  faith,  then,  is  a  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  is  a  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
as  Divine.  Who  but  a  God  could  bear  the  weight  of  sin?  Who  but  a 
God  shall  be  the  "same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever"?  Eemark,  that  the 
apostle  has  put  in  another  word  beside  "  God,"  and  that  is,  "  of  God  and  our 
Saviour."  As  if  the  glory  of  the  Godhead  might  be  too  bright  for  us,  he  has 
attempered  it  by  gentler  words — "  our  Saviour."  Now,  to  trust  Jesus  Christ  as 
Divine,  will  save  no  man,  unless  there  be  added  to  this  a  resting  in  Him  as  the  great 
propitiatory  sacrifice.  A  Saviour  is  He  to  us  when  He  delivers  us  from  the  curse, 
punishment,  guilt,  and  power  of  sin.  3.  Notice  the  word  "  righteousness."  It  is  a 
faith  in  the  righteousness  of  our  God  and  our  Saviour.  I  have  not  received  Jesus 
Christ  at  all,  but  I  am  an  adversary  to  Him,  unless  I  have  received  Him  as  Jehovah 
Tsidkenu — the  Lord  of  our  righteousness.  There  is  His  perfect  Ufe  ;  that  life  was  a 
life  for  me ;  it  contains  all  the  virtues,  in  it  there  is  no  spot ;  it  keeps  the  law  of 
God,  and  makes  it  honourable;  my  faith  takes  that  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  it  is  cast  about  me,  and  I  am  then  so  beauteously  arrayed,  that  even  the  eye  of 
God  can  see  neither  spot  nor  blemish  in  me.  4.  Our  apostle  has  not  finished  the 
description,  without  saying  that  it  is  "  like  precious  faith."  All  faith  is  the  same 
sort  of  faith.  5.  He  tells  us  too  that  faith  is  "precious";  and  is  it  not  precious? 
for  it  deals  with  precious  things,  with  precious  promises,  with  precious  blood,  with 
a  precious  redemption,  with  aU  the  preciousness  of  the  person  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  WeU  may  that  be  a  precious  faith  which  supplies  our 
greatest  want,  delivers  us  from  our  greatest  danger,  and  admits  us  to  the  greatest 
glory.  Well  may  that  be  called  "  precious  faith,"  which  is  the  symbol  of  our 
election,  the  evidence  of  our  calling,  the  root  of  all  our  graces,  the  channel  of 
communion,  the  weapon  of  prevalence,  the  shield  of  safety,  the  substance  of  hope, 
the  evidence  of  eternity,  the  guerdon  of  immortality,  and  the  passport  of  glory.  So 
much,  then,  concerning  faith.  Now  we  shall  turn  to  notice  the  life.  "  Grace  and 
peace  be  multiplied  unto  you  through  the  knowledge  of  God,"&c.  1.  Here  we  have, 
then,  the  fountain  and  source  of  our  spiritual  life.  Just  as  faith  is  a  boon  which 
is  to  be  obtained,  so  you  will  perceive  that  our  spiritual  life  is  a  principle  which  is 
given.  A  thing  which  is  given  to  us,  too,  by  Divine  power — "  according  as  His 
Divine  power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness." 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  selfsame  power  which  is  required  to  create  a  world  and  to  sustain  it  is  required 
to  make  a  man  a  Christian,  and  unless  that  power  be  put  forth  the  spiritual  life  is 
not  in  any  one  of  us.  2.  You  will  perceive  that  Peter  wished  to  see  this  Divine  life 
in  a  healthy  and  vigorous  state,  and  therefore  he  prays  that  grace  and  peace  may 
be  multiplied.  Divine  power  is  the  foundation  of  this  life ;  grace  is  the  food  it 
feeds  upon,  and  peace  is  the  element  in  which  it  lives  most  healthily.  3.  Observe, 
again,  that  in  describing  this  life  he  speaks  of  it  as  one  which  was  conferred  upon 
us  by  our  being  called.  He  says,  "  We  were  called  unto  glory  and  virtue."  I  find 
translators  differ  here.  Many  of  them  think  the  word  should  be  "By" — "We  are 
called  by  the  glory  and  virtue  of  God  " — that  is,  there  is  a  manifestation  of  all  the 
glorious  attributes  of  God,  and  of  all  the  efficacious  virtue  and  energy  of  His  power 
in  the  calling  of  every  Christian.  He  says  there  was  in  that  calling,  the  Divine 
glory  and  virtue ;  and,  doubtless,  when  you  and  I  shall  get  to  heaven,  and  see 
things  as  they  are,  we  shall  discover  in  our  effectual  calling  of  God  to  grace,  a  glory 
as  great  as  in  the  creation  of  worlds,  and  a  virtue  as  in  the  healing  of  the  sick,  when 
virtue  went  from  the  garments  of  a  Saviour.    11.  In  the  fourth  verse  he  deals 

WITH  THE  PRIVILEGES  OF  FAITH,  AND  ALSO  WITH  THE  PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE. 

Notice  the  privilege  of  faith  first.  "  Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises."  1.  Note  here,  then,  we  have  received  by  precious  faith 
the  promise  and  pardon.  2.  Then  comes  the  righteousness  of  Christ :  you  are  not 
only  pardoned,  that  is,  washed  and  made  clean,  but  you  are  robed  in  garments  such 
as  no  man  could  ever  weave.  The  law  was  great — this  righteousness  is  as  great  as 
the  law.  The  law  asked  a  precious  revenue  from  man,  more  than  humanity  could 
pay — the  righteousness  of  Christ  has  paid  it  all.  Is  it  not  great  and  precious  ?  3. 
Then  next  comes  reconciliation.  You  were  strangers,  but  you  are  brought  nigh  by 
the  blood  of  Christ.  Is  not  this  great  and  precious  ?  4.  Then  comes  your  adoption. 
"  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,"  &c.  "  And  if  children,  then  heirs,"  &c. 
Oh,  how  glorious  is  this  great  and  precious  promise  of  adoption !  5.  Then 
we  have  the  promise  of  Providence  :  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  love  God,"  &c.  6.  Then  you  have  the  promise  too,  that  you  shall  never 
taste  of  death  but  shall  only  sleep  in  Jesus.  "  Write,  Blessed  are  the  dead,"  Ac. 
Nor  does  the  promise  cease  here — you  have  the  promise  of  a  resurrection.  "  For 
the  trumpet  shall  sound,"  &c.  Now,  beloved,  see  how  rich  faith  makes  you ! — 
what  treasure  ! — what  gold-mines ! — what  oceans  of  wealth ! — what  mountains  of 
sparkling  treasures  has  God  conferred  upon  you  by  faith !  But  we  must  not  forget 
the  life.  The  text  says  He  has  given  us  this  promise,  "  that  " — "  in  order  that." 
What  then  ?  What  are  all  these  treasures  lavished  for  ?  Is  the  end  worthy  of  the 
means  ?  Surely  God  never  giveth  greater  store  than  the  thing  which  He  would 
purchase  will  be  worth.  We  may  suppose,  then,  the  end  to  be  very  great  when 
such  costly  means  have  been  given  ;  and  what  is  the  end?  Why,  "that  by  these 
ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  We  are,  by  grace,  made  like  God. 
"  God  is  love  " ;  we  become  love — "  He  that  loveth  is  born  of  God."  God  is  truth  ; 
we  become  true,  and  we  love  that  which  is  true,  and  we  hate  the  darkness  and  the 
lie.  God  is  good,  it  is  His  very  name ;  He  makes  us  good  by  His  grace,  so  that  we 
become  the  pure  in  heart  who  shall  see  God.  Nay,  I  will  say  this,  that  we  become 
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  in  even  a  higher  sense  than  this — in  fact,  in  any 
sense,  anything  short  of  our  being  absolutely  Divine.  Do  we  not  become  members 
of  the  body  of  the  Divine  person  of  Christ  ?  And  what  sort  of  union  is  this — 
"  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones  "  ?  Then  the  other  result 
which  follows  from  it  is  this,  "  Having  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 
through  lust."  Ah,  beloved,  it  were  ill  that  a  man  who  is  alive  should  dwell  in 
corruption.  "Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead?"  said  the  angel  to 
Magdalene.  Should  the  living  dwell  among  the  dead?  Should  Divine  Ufe  be 
found  amongst  the  corruptions  of  worldly  lusts?  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Precious 
faith : — Those  he  describeth  here  from  their  faith,  which  is  amplified,  first,  from 
the  certainty  of  it,  they  had  obtained  it.  Secondly,  from  the  quality  and  worth 
of  it ;  it  was  of  like  price  with  the  faith  of  the  apostles,  worthy  of  the  same  respect 
that  theirs  was.  Thirdly,  from  the  means  whereby  they  did  obtain  it,  even  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  that  is.  His  fidelity  and  truth  in  keeping  His  promises. 
True  justifying  faith  is  of  great  price  and  worth,  styled  here  a  precious  faith.  First, 
from  the  causes  of  faith.  Secondly,  from  the  effects  of  faith.  Thirdly,  from  the 
subject  of  faith,  or  persons  which  have  faith  ;  those  are  not  evefy  one,  for  all  men 
have  not  faith.  Fourthly,  from  the  properties  or  qualities  of  faith.  It  is  a  saving 
faith ;  it  is  a  justifying  faith ;  it  is  a  sanctifying  faith.     It  is  the  faith  of  God's 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER. 


elect.  It  hath  great  boldness  in  it.  Fifthly,  from  the  object  of  faith,  which  is  Jesus 
Christ;  styled,  therefore,  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  Sixthly,  by  comparing  faith  with 
other  graces,  hope,  love,  humility,  and  the  like,  they  are  precious.  Therefore  is 
faith  (the  mother  grace,  the  lady  and  mistress  on  whom  the  rest  wait)  of  great  price 
and  worth.  Seventhly,  by  comparing  it  with  things  external  which  are  accounted 
precious,  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  and  the  like.  For  instruction,  first,  that  faith 
is  diligently  to  be  inquired  and  searched  for.  Secondly,  that  faith  is  much  to  be 
respected  and  honoured.  Thirdly,  that  such  as  have  obtained  faith,  are  possessors 
of  a  jewel  of  great  price.  (A.  Syinson.)  Like  precious  faith  : — Faith  in  all  God's 
chUdren  is  alike  precious.  Alike,  I  say,  in  price,  in  worth,  in  nature,  in  substance, 
in  kind,  though  not  in  extent  and  measure.  There  is  a  weak  faith  and  there  is  a 
strong  faith,  and  yet  both  alike  precious.  Peter  no  doubt  had  greater  faith  than  all 
or  most  of  those  had  to  whom  he  wrote,  yet  doth  he  acknowledge  that  they  had 
obtained  like  precious  faith.  Some  attain  unto  a  great  faith,  which  may  be  compared 
to  a  great  fiame,  a  great  fountain,  a  strong  man's  holding  or  gripping  of  a  thing  ; 
some  again  have  but  a  weak  faith,  like  a  sparkle,  like  a  drop  of  water,  Uke  a  child 
holding  of  a  thing ;  the  sparkle  is  as  truly  fire  as  the  flame  is ;  the  drop  as  really 
water  as  the  fountain  is ;  the  child's  gripping,  as  the  strong  man's.  Even  so 
faith  in  the  least  child  of  God,  though  it  were  but  as  a  "grain  of  mustard  seed,"  is 
as  truly  faith  as  the  faith  of  the  apostles,  the  faith  of  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  So  that  faith  is  alike  precious  to  all.  (Ibid.)  The  preciousness 
of  faith  : — I.  Faith  is  pbecious   in  its  object.     II.  Faith   is   peecious   in   its 

TESTIMONY.       III.    FaITH    IS    PRECIOUS  IN  ITS  BENEFITS.       IV.    FaITH  IS  PKECIOtJS  IN  ITS 

INFLUENCES.  Faith  produces — 1.  A  living  spiritual  influence.  2.  A  comforting 
influence.  3.  An  enriching  influence.  4.  An  establishing  and  conquering  influence. 
5.  A  joyous  triumphing  influence.  6.  A  meetening  influence  for  eternal  glory. 
(J.  Burns.)  Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you. — The  salutation  : — I.  The 
matter.  "  Grace  and  peace."  1.  We  are  here  taught  the  Christian  use  of  salutings ; 
such  godly  compliments  are  not  to  be  neglected.  2.  We  are  further  taught  here  to 
use  good  forms  in  saluting.  "  Grace  and  peace,"  gracious,  not  grievous  ;  holy,  not 
hollow  ;  blessings,  not  curses.  (1)  "  Grace."  By  this  is  generally  meant  the  receiv- 
ing of  the  sirmer  into  the  covenant  of  mercy,  into  God's  favour  by  Christ.  («) 
Many  prophets  and  holy  men  of  the  first  times  lived  in  grace,  but  not  under  grace. 
(b)  Many  in  our  times  Uve  under  grace,  but  not  in  grace,  hearing  the  gospel  and 
receiving  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  (c)  The  unbelieving  Gentries  were 
neither  in  grace  nor  under  grace,  (d)  They  that  now  believe  are  both  under  grace 
and  in  it.  Under  it,  as  released  from  the  damning  power  of  sin  (Eom.  viii.  1)  ;  in 
it,  as  delivered  from  the  reigning  power  of  sin.  (2)  "  Peace."  I  take  it  specially 
for  the  tranquillity  of  conscience;  that  which  follows  righteousness.  (3)  I  come 
from  considering  this  sweet  pair  of  graces  asunder,  to  jcfin  them  again  together. 
(a)  It  is  not  enough  to  wish  grace  to  the  souls  of  our  friends,  but  also  peace  ;  that 
is,  health  to  their  bodies,  and  other  temporal  blessings,  (b)  The  apostle  puts  grace 
before  peace,  (c)  The  apostle  wisheth  to  us  the  best  things,  grace  and  peace. 
There  be  two  fiends  that  torment  us — sin  and  a  bad  conscience.  Now  grace  delivers 
us  from  sin,  and  peace  doth  quiet  the  conscience.  II.  The  measure  of  His  wish  : 
the  increase  and  multiplication  of  these  blessings.  For  the  goods  of  this  world,  the 
best  point  of  arithmetic  is  division  :  it  is  a  better  thing  to  give  than  to  receive,  said 
our  Lord.  But  for  heavenly  graces,  the  best  point  is  multiplication.  1.  There  is 
no  plenary  perfection  in  this  life,  for  we  must  still  be  in  multiplying  our  graces. 
2.  We  must  seek  to  multiply  our  grace  and  peace.  He  hath  nothing  that  thinks  he 
hath  enough.  III.  The  manner.  "  Through  the  knowledge,"  &c.  This  means  not 
a  mere  knowledge,  but  an  acknowledgment,  a  reflective  and  doubling  knowledge. 
There  is  knowledge  mental,  sacramental,  and  experimental.  The  first  is  by  the 
light  of  nature ;  the  second  by  the  power  of  grace  ;  the  third  by  the  practice  of  life 
and  continual  proving  the  favour  of  God.  1.  The  means  of  multiplying  grace  and 
peace  in  our  hearts  is  knowledge  of  God  (John  xvii.  3  ;  Psa.  ix.  10).  2.  There  is 
something  in  grace  and  knowledge  still  wanting,  that  must  be  multiplied  and 
increased;  for  we  know  but  in  part.  3.  There  is  no  knowing  of  God  with 
comfort,  but  through  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  27).  Without  Him,  he  that 
increaseth  knowledge,  increaseth  his  own  sorrow  (Eccles.  i.  18).  (Thos.  Adams.) 
Multiplied  grace  desired  for  others : — 1.  Such  as  have  experience  of  the  worth 
of  grace  and  peace  in  themselves,  desire  also  that  others  may  be  partakers 
of  the  same.  2.  The  preachers  of  God's  Word  ought  by  their  labours  and 
endeavours,  by  their  wishes  and  prayers,  to  point  out  unto   their  people  those 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

things  for  which  they  should  especially  labour  and  endeavour,  3.  The  grace 
and  favour  of  God  is  the  chiefest  good  thing  to  be  sought  after,  to  be  wished  and 
desired  above  all  things  in  the  world  next  to  God's  glory.  4.  God  doth  bestow  His 
graces  upon  His  own  children,  not  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees  as  He  findeth  them  fit 
and  capable  to  receive  them.  This  I  gather  from  the  word  "  multiplied."  5.  Grace 
and  peace  may  be  obtained,  continued,  and  increased  through  the  knowledge  of  God 
and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  That  the  main  reason  why  so  many  complain  of  the 
want  of  peace  of  conscience,  and  of  their  not  profiting  in  grace,  is  their  not 
growing  and  increasing  in  saving  knowledge.  {A.  Synmon.)  Through  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord. — Life  through  the  knoivledge  of  Christ : — 
The  advancement  in  the  Divine  life  of  those  in  whom  it  is  begun  is  the  aim 
of  this  Epistle.  Solemn  and  earnest,  yet  animating  and  assuring,  are  these  his 
farewell  words.  It  is  a  voice  from  the  borders  of  eternity — from  the  threshold  of 
glory — the  voice  of  one  who  has  all  but  reached  the  goal.  The  Christian  life  is  life 
that  springs  up  and  grows  through  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  I.  Aspects  of  life 
IN  Christ.  The  delineation  of  life  in  Christ  by  the  hand  of  the  apostle  here  is  one 
of  marvellous  richness  and  completeness.  First  your  eye  is  directed  to  heavenly 
birth — the  Divine  source  of  the  holy  life  which  we  enjoy  through  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord.  You  see  it  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven, 
having  the  glory  of  God  stamped  on  it.  "  His  Divine  power  (ver.  3)  has  given  us  all 
things  that  pertain  to  life  and  godliness."  If  with  your  own  hand  you  must  tend 
and  trim  the  lamp,  that  the  flame  of  hoUness  may  burn  on  and  burn  even  brighter, 
God  ministers  the  oil  of  grace  wherewith  it  is  fed.  But  next,  if  we  ask.  What  are 
the  essential  elements  and  characteristic  features  of  this  life  from  on  high  ?  we 
have  a  clear  answer.  Worthy  of  its  Divine  source  is  its  noble  expression,  in  those 
Christian  excellences  which  the  apostle  in  the  three  following  verses  (5-7),  com- 
mands us  to  acquire.  A  fair  and  glorious  edifice  this  which  you  are  called  to  build. 
Survey  it  well  from  base  to  cope,  if  you  would  know  what  it  is  to  build  yourself  up 
on  your  most  holy  faith.  In  the  change  which  every  day  is  making  on  you,  is  there 
discernible  any  trace  of  the  gradual  advancement  towards  completion  in  your  daily 
deeds  and  words  of  such  a  structure  as  this  ?  II.  Life  through  the  knowledge 
OF  Christ.  The  dawn  of  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  is  the  dawn  of  spiritual  life  in  your  heart — its  noon  is  Ufe  eternal  in  the 
heavens.  That  life  and  that  light  are  really  one.  Till  you  know  God  revealing 
Himself  in  Christ,  and  in  Christ  reconciUng  Himself  to  you,  you  have  not  begun 
the  Christian  life.  To  know  Jesus  is  to  master  the  science  of  salvation — it  is  to 
know  God.  To  know  Jesus  is  to  receive  the  life  of  God  into  our  souls.  To  see 
farther  into  the  heart  of  Jesus,  to  see  in  His  face  the  ever-blessed  Trinity — Father, 
Son,  and  Spirit — with  whom  in  eternal  bonds  you  are  linked,  and  for  whose  blissful 
communion  you  are  prepared — this  is  to  make  progress  in  the  life  of  faith.  Each 
new  step  of  advance  in  that  life  is  the  fruit  and  the  forerunner  of  new  discoveries 
of  Christ.  (W.  Wilson,  M.A.)  The  knowledge  of  God  in  C/trisf  .-—The  fires  of 
the  sun  in  the  distant  heavens  are  not  more  necessary  to  ripen  the  wheat  or  to 
perfect  the  grace  of  the  wild-flower  than  are  the  great  revelations  of  Christ  concern- 
ing God  to  create  and  sustain  the  characteristic  Christian  virtues.  The  religion  of 
Christ  regulates,  inspires,  and  sustains  the  morals  of  Christ.  The  morals  are  part 
of  the  religion.     (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  His  Divine  power  hath  g^iven  unto  us  all  things. — The  Divine 
liberality  : — I.  The  fountain.  1.  The  hope  of  the  petitioner.  The  experience  of 
former  mercy  works  a  persuasion  of  future  mercy.  (1)  Let  us  pray  in  confidence 
that  God  will  hear  us,  because  He  hath  heard  us.  A  noble  princess  asked  a  courtier 
when  he  would  leave  begging  ;  he  answered,  when  she  left  giving.  (2)  Seeing  that 
God  gives  more  where  He  hath  given  much,  let  us  be  thankful ;  for  how  should 
God  bless  us  with  that  we  have  not  if  we  do  not  bless  Him  for  that  we  have  ?  2. 
The  ability  of  the  Giver.  Here  is  power,  yea,  Divine  power  ;  not  only  great,  but 
good.  For  mercy  and  majesty  must  meet  together  in  the  donation  of  all  things 
that  pertain  to  life  and  godliness.  The  knowledge  of  this  Divine  and  giving  power 
may  comfort  the  most  dejected  heart.  (1)  Concerning  the  salvation  of  others  and 
ourselves ;  how  desperate  soever  we  judge  their  estates,  by  reason  of  their  continual 
habit  of  sinning,  yet  this  Divine  power  is  able  to  convert  them.  (2)  This  comforts 
us  in  the  midst  of  all  afliictions.  We  are  weak  in  ourselves,  unable  to  stand  under 
the  lightest  cross ;  but  there  is  a  Divine  power  that  strengthens  us.  Though  it 
doth  not  nullify  our  sorrows,  yet  it  doth  fortify  our  patience  (Col.  i.  11).     (3)  This 


CHAP.  I.]  n.  PETER.  9 

comforts  us  in  prayer.  (4)  This  comforts  us  against  all  opposition,  even  those 
principalities  that  wrestle  against  us  (1  John  iv.  4 ;  Eev.  xii.  11).  (5)  Let  this 
hearten  us  to  cheerful  liberality ;  because,  whatever  we  lack  or  lose,  there  is  a 
Divine  power  able  to  requite  it  (2  Cor.  ix.  8).  3.  The  liberty  of  the  action.  God 
does  not  set,  nor  let,  nor  sell,  nor  lend,  but  give.  (1)  How  to  judge  of  all  we  have; 
as  the  Lord's  gifts,  not  our  own  merits  (1  Cor.  iv.  7,  xv.  10).  (2)  Follow  God's 
example,  in  being  evermore  giving  good  things.     4.  The  necessity  of  the  receivers. 

(1)  ^^'e  had  nothing ;  miserable  beggars.  (2)  We  deserved  nothing.  5.  The  uni- 
versality of  the  gift.  "  All  things  that  pertain  " — (1)  To  life,  (a)  Natural.  He 
put  a  soul  to  our  flesh,  gave  birth  to  the  child,  nourishment  after  birth ;  bread  when 
we  were  hungry,  drink  when  we  were  thirsty,  &c.  To  the  wise  man  his  wisdom,  to 
the  strong  his  might,  to  the  wealthy  his  riches,  &c.  {b)  Spiritual ;  whereby  we  Uve 
to  Him,  and  in  Him,  and  whereby  He  lives  in  us.  (2)  To  godhness.  By  His  grace 
we  come  to  godliness,  and  by  godliness  to  life.  H.  The  cistern.  The  ever-flowing 
and  over-flowing  conduit  is  Christ,  in  whom  dwells  all  fulness  (Col.  i.  19).  The 
more  capacious  a  vessel  of  faith  we  bring,  the  greater  measure  of  faith  we  shall 
receive.  1.  The  water  of  life,  which  is  an  effectual  calling  to  glory  and  virtue.  (1) 
Who  hath  called  us.  Christ  alone  can  caU  home  sinners.  (2)  The  action.  There 
was  a  time  when  Christ  came  personally  to  caU.  He  went  out  from  His  majesty 
that  is  invisible,  to  His  mercy  that  is  manifested  in  His  works.  Now  He  calleth  at 
divers  times,  in  divers  places,  and  after  divers  manners,  (a)  In  all  ages  of  the 
world,  and  of  men's  lives.  (6)  Some  from  their  ships,  others  from  their  shops,  &c. 
(c)  After  divers  manners.  First,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word ;  and  herein  He 
useth  two  bells  to  ring  us  to  church,  the  treble  of  mercy  and  the  tenor  of  judgment. 
Next,  in  His  sacraments.  (3)  Whom  hath  He  called ?  "Us" — miserable  sinners, 
that  were  deaf  and  could  not  hear  Him,  lame  and  could  not  meet  Him,  blind  and 
could  not  see  Him,  dead  and  could  not  answer  Him.  (4)  To  what?  "  To  glory 
and  virtue."  (a)  In  present  being.  We  must  understand  by  "  glory  "  the  honour 
of  being  Christians ;  by  "  virtue  "  the  good  life  that  becometh  Christians,  [h)  Here- 
after we  shall  come  to  a  perfect  and  plenary  possession.  The  virtue  there  is  a  pure 
white  garment  without  spot,  and  the  glory  a  golden  crown  of  eternity.  2.  The 
pipe  and  bucket  to  draw  and  derive  all  to  us.  "  Through  the  knowledge,"  &c. 
One  was  of  opinion  that  a  philosopher  excels  an  ordinary  man  as  much  as  an 
ordinary  man  excels  a  beast ;  but  every  true  Christian  excels  a  philosopher  as  much 
as  a  philosopher  does  a  dunce.  They  scarce  knew  God  in  His  creatures  ;  we  know 
God  in  His  Christ.  There  is  no  pleasure  so  sweet  as  knowledge,  no  knowledge  so 
sweet  as  that  of  religion,  no  knowledge  of  religion  so  sweet  as  that  of  Christ ;  for 
this  is  eternal  life,  &c.  (John  xvii.  3).  Let  us  therefore  use  the  means  to  get  know- 
ledge.    (1)  Eead  the  Scripture ;  that  is  God's  will,  there  is  knowledge  (John  v.  39). 

(2)  Frequent  the  temple ;  that  is  God's  house,  there  is  knowledge  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  16, 17). 

(3)  Eesort  to  the  Communion ;  that  is  God's  maundy,  there  is  knowledge  (1  Cor.  xi.  26). 

(4)  Consult  His  ministers,  for  the  priest's  lips  preserve  knowledge.  (Thos.  Adams.) 
The  wonders  of  Divine  grace  : — I.  The  greatness  of  Divine  grace.  "  His  Divine 
power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness."  The 
reference  here  is  to  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Grace  comes  by  Divine  power.  It 
is  no  angelic  effort  or  human  invention.  Its  wisdom  is  Divine  omniscience.  Its 
power  is  Divine  omnipotence.  Its  activity  is  Divine  omnipresence.  Its  resources 
infinite.  Its  love  the  eternal  love  of  God.  2.  It  supplies  every  real  need.  Life  is 
the  state  and  godliness  the  activity.  In  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  every  possible 
want  of  the  soul  is  met.  II.  The  method  of  Divine  grace.  It  comes  through  the 
knowledge  of  Him  that  calleth  us  by  His  own  glory  and  virtue.  In  knowledge  is 
the  spring  of  life.  Our  actions  are  governed  by  our  volitions,  our  volitions  by  our 
emotions,  our  emotions  by  our  knowledge  or  belief.  Thoughts  of  Christ's  love  set 
our- hearts  all  aglow  with  love  to  Him,  and  that  love  becomes  the  spring  of  a  new 
and  holy  hfe.  III.  The  consolation  of  Divine  grace.  "  Exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises."  IV.  The  glory  of  Divine  grace.  That  through  these  ye 
may  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  V.  The  foe  of  Divine  Grace.  The 
corruption  that  is  in  the  world  by  lust.  There  are  two  great  spiritual  cities  :  in  the 
one  there  is  corruption  by  lust,  in  the  other  life  by  godliness.  The  Divine  new  life 
is  in  peril  in  the  poisoned  air,  that  life  which  to  the  believer  is  infinitely  more 
precious  than  all  besides.  {The  Freeman.)  All  things  that  pertain  unto  life 
and  godliness. — All  things  pertaining  to  life  aid  godliness  given  unto  the  saints : 
— I.  That  the  people  of  God  are  to  live  godly  lives.  II.  That  for  this 
life  and  godliness,  Divine  power  bestows   everything  necessary.      1.  It   is 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

necessary  that  He  should  give  us  all  things,  for  we  have  nothing  in  ourselves. 
2.  It  is  very  gracious  of  Him  to  give  all  things.  We  were  told  that  during  the 
first  winter  campaign  in  the  Crimea,  our  armies  were  subject  to  many  sufferings 
and  privations  on  account  of  inadequate  provisions.  This  might  have  been  so  ;  it 
often  has  been  so  in  times  of  war,  and  no  human  power  can  prevent  it.  But  it  can 
never  be  so  with  the  armies  of  the  Cross.  Divine  power  is  our  guarantee.  III. 
The  text  teaches  us  that   all  things  are   in  Christ,  and  obtained  through 

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  HiM.  TV.  ThAT  AMONG  THE  "ALL  THINGS"  WE  HAVE  IN  ChRISI 
THE  PROMISES  ARE  ESPECIALLY  TO  BE  PRIZED.  V.  ThAT  THE  POSSESSION  OF 
THESE    HEAVENLY  GIFTS    MAKES    US    PARTAKERS    OF    THE    DiVINE    NATURE.       {H.    Quick.) 

Christ  the  complement  of  our  life  : — In  the  sunshine  there  is  a  colour  for  every  plant 
that  seeks  its  own  hue  out  of  sunshine,  and  in  Jesus  Christ  there  is  every  possible 
hue  which  the  heart  could  want.  All  things  that  pertain  to  godliness  are  in  Christ 
— in  other  words,  Christ  is  the  complement  of  our  nature.  When  I  use  that  word 
complement — a  mathematical  term — I  infer  that  just  as  a  segment  of  a  circle  may 
be  a  very  small  thing,  and  may  need  the  rest  of  the  circumference  to  be  its  comple- 
ment, so,  whatever  be  the  segment  of  your  life,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  complement  of 
aU  the  rest.  He  just  fiUs  out  your  deficiency  and  makes  you  a  complete  thing.  It 
is  no  use  a  man  saying  he  was  born  deficient  in  patience,  because  there  is  all  the 
patience  of  Jesus  to  complete  his  impatience ;  no  use  for  a  man  to  complain  of 
weakness  or  cowardice,  when  any  kind  of  want  comes,  which  has  been  permitted  to 
come  into  his  life  that  he  might  learn  to  appropriate  the  fulness  of  Christ.  So  the 
apostle  gloried  in  his  infirmity,  because  he  said — the  smaller  the  segment  is  the 
more  of  a  complement  I  get,  and  a  man  may  even  be  proud  in  a  sense  of  the 
natural  deficiencies  of  his  nature,  because  he  is  thrown  back  upon  Jesus  Christ,  in 
whom  everything  is  stored  to  make  him  a  saint.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Called  ua 
to  glory  and  virtue. — A  glimpse  of  glory : — I.  That  whereby  a  Christl^^n  mat 
have  title,  interest,  and  comfort,  in  life  and  GLORY.  It  is  not  a  knowledge  of 
calling  in  general,  but  of  that  particular  calling  of  ourselves  to  glory  and  virtue. 
This  doth  interest  us  in  the  promises  of  God  (Acts  ii.  39).  No  calling,  no  promise. 
Nay,  further,  without  this  there  is  no  encouragement  to  holiness  (1  Tim.  vi.  12). 
By  our  calling,  which  is  by  an  eternal  purpose  and  grace  of  God  in  time,  changing 
and  renewing  us  unto  holiness  of  life,  we  come  to  know  the  eternal  decree  of  God, 
which  otherwise  were  presumption  to  look  unto.  For,  as  a  prince's  secret  mind  is 
made  known  by  edicts  and  proclamations,  which  before  we  durst  not  search  into, 
neither  could  know,  so  when  God's  secret  counsel  to  execution  is  manifested,  by 
changing  our  hearts,  by  calling  us  from  the  world  to  an  holy  calling,  in  a  sanctified 
life :  this,  then,  is  no  presumption,  but  duty  in  us,  by  our  calling,  to  judge  of  our 
election,  and  so  of  our  calling  to  glory  and  virtue.  IE  you  look  for  an  example  of 
this,  see  that  of  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  20).     II.  That  this  knowledge  of  our  particular 

CALLING    IS    one     OF    THE     STRONGEST    MOTIVES    UNTO   ALL    GOODNESS.       So    WC    SCe    the 

apostles  in  their  opinions  stiU  urge  holiness  and  sanctification  from  this  ground  of 
the  assurance  of  calling  and  election  (Gal.  v.  13  ;  Eph.  iv.  2 ;  Col.  iii.  12).  He  that 
hath  no  assurance  of  this  calling  can  have  little  comfort  in  performing  of  holy 
duties.  A  fearful,  doubting  soul  lives  in  much  vexation.  Use  1 :  The  first  is 
against  all  such  as  oppose  this  doctrine,  chiefly  the  Papists,  who  are  for  that,  that 
a  man  should  not  inquire  after  the  assurance  of  his  salvation.  Use  2  :  The  second 
is,  that  every  man  then  must  try  his  title,  what  calling  he  hath.  Use  3  :  The  third 
is  for  instruction.  If  this  be  so,  let  not  then  any  man  dare  to  confound  the  external 
calling  of  men  with  the  internal  calling  of  God.  Further,  how  precious  this  calling 
should  be  unto  us,  we  may  see  (Luke  x.  20).  Here  is  only  cause  of  true  joy.  By 
this  then  be  sure  to  take  thy  warrant  of  rejoicing,  fetch  it  out  of  this  calling,  that 
God  hath  called  thee  to  glory  and  virtue,  which  is  the  next  thing  to  consider  of ; 
our  calling  to  glory  and  virtue  ;  I  mean  a  consideration  of  these  things  whereunto 
we  are  called,  glory  and  virtue.  1.  Glory.  Glory  is  the  end  of  aU.  The  glory  of 
God  is  the  furthest  reach  and  end  of  all  things,  and  virtue  is  the  way  leading  unto 
glory.  This  glory  then  we  speak  of  is  the  reward  of  goodness,  and  is  ever  attended 
with  virtue.  For  as  shame  and  sin  still  go  together,  so  do  glory  and  virtue,  even 
by  the  testimony  of  the  consciences  of  all  good  and  ill  men.  The  glory  then  we 
speak  of  is  an  eternal  glory.  It  is  not  meant,  when  he  says  "  called  to  glory,"  that 
a  Christian  is  only  called  unto  that,  and  unto  nothing  else  by  the  way,  but  by  the 
way  he  is  called  unto  virtue,  and  by  occasion  unto  affiictions.  But  God's  end  of 
calling  us  is  unto  glory  ;  as  1  Thess.  ii.  12.  This  glory  is  only  of  His  mercy,  from 
whence  glory  floweth  unto  us ;  mercy  is  the  ground  thereof.    What  shall  I  say  of 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  11 

glory  (Kev.  xix.  9)  ?  Here  shall  be  glory,  and  surpassing  glory,  as  it  is  written  (1 
Cor.  i.  9),  then  to  be  "  called  unto  fellowship  with  Christ "  ;  yet  more,  as  Eom.  viii. 
17,  to  be  heirs  ;  nay,  yet  a  step  more,  to  be  co-heirs  with  Him  together  in  glory. 
And,  finally,  what  use  the  faithful  make  of  this  glory  against  all  the  crosses, 
afflictions,  and  tempests  of  this  life,  the  apostle  showeth  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  What  can 
be  said  more  ?  If  yet  you  desire  to  hear  more  of  glory,  consider — 1.  First,  for  the 
place.  It  is  heaven,  the  proper  seat  and  mansion  of  all  glory,  where  Christ  is.  So 
Christ  speaketh  in  the  prayer  of  His  (John  xvii.  24).  So  also  1  Thess.  iv.  17.  2. 
The  second  thing  is  the  company,  with  whom.  No  unclean  thing  shall  enter 
therein  (Kev.  xxi.  27).  3.  Thirdly,  the  title,  what.  Not  of  creatures,  or  of  servants, 
not  so  only,  but  of  sons  and  heirs,  and  co-heirs  with  Christ.  This,  one  would  think, 
were  sufficient ;  and  yet  the  Scripture  gives  us  others  to  the  like  effect,  as  that  we 
shall  be  kings  and  priests  unto  God.  But  as  those  spies  who  went  to  view  the  land 
of  Canaan,  by  some  of  the  grapes  and  fruits  which  they  brought  did  judge  of  the 
fertility  of  the  land,  so,  I  say,  if  by  the  Word  of  God  those  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  those  beginnings  of  grace,  the  divers 
working  and  operation  of  the  same  Spirit,  those  feelings  and  joys  of  the  faithful 
raised  thereby,  peace  of  conscience,  and  all  that  which  shines  in  the  glory  of  the 
gospel,  we  may  think  of  the  same.  4.  Now  we  want  but  the  time,  how  long. 
What  can  be  said  of  eternity  ?  Think  that  we  can,  this  is  ever  beyond  the  reach  of 
all  our  thoughts,  only  I  may  say  thereof  as  it  is  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  10).  The  uses.  1.  If 
this,  then,  as  is  proved,  be  the  only  calling  that  we  are  called  unto,  unto  glory  and 
vii'tue,  let  us  labour  to  acknowledge  the  excellency  of  the  calling  of  God,  and  set  a 
due  price  upon  the  same.  2.  The  next  is,  to  value  the  children  of  God  highly  for 
the  graces  of  God  in  them,  so  judging  of  them.  3.  The  last  is  for  consolation,  a 
man  that  hath  this  calling  unto  glory.  Oh,  how  marvellously  may  such  an 
one  be  joyful  in  all  tribulations,  sorrows  and  crosses !  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
Spiritual  life  :  its  origin  and  true  development : — I.  God  calls  us  ;  that  is  the  origin 
of  all  spiritual  life.  It  is  His  good  pleasure  to  bless  and  to  save.  In  the  exercise 
of  this  sovereignty  God  calls  all  men  not  to  judgment  and  sorrow,  but  to  glory  and 
vu'tue.  n.  Having  glanced  at  the  origin  of  all  spiritual  life,  now  look  at 
its  DEVELOPMEKT I  God  calls  US  to  glory  and  to  virtue.  1.  God  calls  us  to  glory. 
The  most  obvious  meaning  of  this  word  is  honour,  dignity,  or  illustrious  rank ;  such 
is  the  idea  of  this  word  in  chap.  ii.  of  this  Epistle,  and  ver.  10,  where  it  is  rendered 
"  dignities."  The  idea  of  Peter  in  saying  that  God  has  called  us  to  glory  appears 
to  be  that  the  spiritual  Ufe  to  which  God  calls  us  is  one  of  renown  and  dignity. 
God  calls  us  not  to  dishonour,  mortification,  and  degradation.  Eeligion  is  the  ele- 
vation of  the  whole  nature  of  man.  2.  God  has  called  us  to  vii-tue.  In  this  word 
virtue  there  is  great  meaning.  The  old  Boman  empire,  based  on  power,  knew  no 
virtue  but  valour.  Vir  was  the  Latin  for  man,  and  virtus  was  that  which  a  man 
was  expected  to  put  forth  in  opposition  to  effeminancy  and  weakness.  The  Eoman 
had  no  idea  of  virtue  in  one  sense  of  the  word  as  signifying  morahty.  His  idea  of 
virtue  was  one,  and  no  more  :  a  brave  man  was  a  virtuous  man.  God  calls  us  all 
to  fortitude.  (W.  G.  Barrett.)  Virtue  and  religion  enforced  : — Sir  Walter  Scott 
left  a  solemn  and  weighty  legacy  to  others  than  his  son.  On  his  death-bed  "his 
eye  was  clear  and  calm,"  we  are  told ;  "  every  trace  of  the  wild  fire  of  delh-ium 
extinguished.  '  I  have  not  a  moment  to  speak,'  he  said  ;  '  be  virtuous — be  religious. 
Be  a  good  man.  Nothing  else  will  give  you  any  comfort  when  you  come  to  die.'  " 
Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises. — The  Christian's  privileges  : — I.  A  Con- 
veyance. 1.  The  instrument.  This  "  whereby  "  stands  like  a  Janus,  looking  both 
to  the  matter  past  and  to  come.  The  matter  past  was  the  knowledge  of  Christ. 
Let  us  use  all  the  means  to  get  knowledge ;  yet,  after  all  this,  glory  not  in  thy 
knowledge.  Knowledge  without  truth  is  like  Uriah's  letters  that  contained  his  own 
death.  To  know  good,  and  do  ill,  makes  a  man's  own  mittimus  to  hell.  2.  The 
materials.  The  law  gave  menaces,  the  gospel  gives  "promises,"  and  brings  mercy 
to  our  houses  and  our  hearts.  3.  The  latitudes  of  these  promises.  (1)  "  Great." 
They  promise  a  thing  no  less  than  greatness  itself  :  the  love  of  God,  an  immense 
kingdom,  the  world  invisible.  (2)  "Precious"  (Psa.  Iv.  22;  Matt.  xi.  28;  Eom. 
viii.  28).  (n)  If  God  so  promise,  let  us  trust  Him  (Heb.  x.  23).  (5)  Seeing  these 
promises  are  so  precious,  store  thy  heart  with  them;  that  which  way  soever  the 
blow  comes  it  may  assault  thee  without  fear,  not  without  foresight.  4.  The  form 
of  the  conveyance — a  deed  of  gift.  AH  worldly  things  are  but  lent ;  only  spiritual 
graces  are  given.  The  Lord's  bounty  requires  of  us  some  duty.  (1)  Call  upon  the 
Giver,  as  the  beggar  frequents  the  gates  of  bounty,  and  that  in  faith  (James  i.  6). 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

(2)  Be  thankful  to  the  Giver,  not  only  for  spiritual,  but  even  for  temporal  things. 
It  is  not  enough  to  take  the  whole  loaves,  but  let  us  even  gather  up  the  fragments. 
And  if  God  gives  all  to  us,  let  us  give  something  to  Him.  Not  only  my  goods,  but 
myself.  (3)  Be  not  proud,  arrogate  not  that  to  thyself  which  is  God's  gift.  5. 
These  promises  are  signed,  sealed,  delivered,  and  bound  with  an  oath.  (1)  God 
hath  put  His  hand  to  them  in  the  gospel.     (2)  The  two  sacraments  are  the  seals. 

(3)  They  are  delivered  to  us  (Rom.  viii.  15).  Use :  From  the  stability  of  God's 
promises  to  us  let  us  learn  to  be  constant  in  the  performance  of  our  promise,  both 
to  God  and  to  man.  U.  An  inheeitance.  God's  nature  may  be  participated  two 
ways,  of  quality  and  of  equality.  1.  For  equality  :  this  is  only  proper  to  the  three 
Persons  of  the  Trinity.  2.  Our  participation  must  be  only  qualitative :  by  nature 
we  understand  not  substance,  but  quality,  by  grace  in  this  world  and  by  glory  in  the 
world  to  come.  This  communication  of  the  Divine  nature  to  us  is  by  reparation  of 
the  Divine  image  in  us  (Heb.  xii.  10 ;  Eph.  iv.  24  ;  Rom.  viii.  29).  (1)  As  servants 
of  a  Master;  not  merely  as  creatures;  so  all  men  partake  (Acts  xvii.  28).  (2)  As 
subjects  of  a  Prince  ;  and  thus  we  partake  with  the  King  of  heaven  in  many  bene- 
fits.    (3)  As  sons  of  a  Father  :  thus  we  partake  many  things  of  the  Divine  nature. 

(4)  As  members  of  a  Head  (1  Cor.  xii.  27).  (5)  As  branches  of  a  Vine  (John  xv.). 
III.  A  DELIVERANCE.  1.  The  discovcry  of  great  danger.  (1)  The  infection,  cor- 
ruption of  lust.  It  gets  into  the  thoughts,  senses,  tongue,  hands,  &c.  (2)  The 
dispersion  through  the  world.  Consider  the  villainy,  misery,  inconstancy,  msufifi- 
ciency  of  it.  2.  The  recovery.  We  have  escaped,  not  by  our  power,  but  by  His 
grace  that  hath  delivered  us  (Psa.  cxxiv.  7).  There  is  a  fourfold  manner  of  freeing 
captives.  (1)  By  manumission  (John  viii.  36).  (2)  By  commutation.  Christ  was 
killed ;  we  escaped.  (3)  By  ransom  (1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  i.  19).  (4)  By  violence 
(2  Tim.  iv.  17).  God  did  all  this  for  us,  and  shall  we  do  nothing  for  Him,  for  our- 
selves ?  (Thos.  Adams.)  The  promises  of  God  : — I.  The  excellency  of  the 
Divine  promises.  The  promises  of  Scripture  are  generally  declarations  which  God 
has  made  of  His  intention  to  bestow  blessings  upon  His  faithful  people.  Under  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation  the  promises  mainly  related  to  the  future  advent  of  the 
Messiah.  The  Christian  covenant  is,  in  fact,  one  comprehensive  promise  (Jer.  xxxi. 
33,  34;  xxxii.  40;  Heb.  viii.  6-12).  So  that  illumination,  pardon,  holiness,  and 
union  with  God — that  is,  all  imaginable  mercies — are  included  in  this  one  rich  and 
overflowing  promise.  II.  The  design  for  which  these  promises  are  given — "that 
by  these  you  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  corrup- 
tion that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  The  two  designs  of  the  promises,  then, 
are  a  dehverance  from  the  corruptions  of  the  world  and  a  participation  of  the  purity 
of  God.  What  this  corruption  is  need  scarcely  be  described.  Men  by  their  concu- 
piscence and  ungoverned  passions  corrupt  each  other.  The  Divine  nature  stands 
opposed  to  all  this  corruption.  We  are  to  be  holy  as  God  is  holy.  1.  That  this 
is  the  direct  tendency  of  the  Divine  promises  may  appear,  first,  from  the  considera- 
tion that  it  is  in  the  view  of  His  love  and  grace  as  displayed  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son, 
which  God  is  pleased  chiefly  to  employ  to  win  the  heart  to  His  service.  2.  The 
assurances  of  assistance  offered  to  us  in  the  promises  tend  also  du'ectly  to  promote 
holiness.  The  promise  of  forgiveness  excites  us  to  forsake  sin ;  the  promise  of 
inward  grace  to  mortify  it.  3.  Again,  the  condition  annexed  to  the  promises  make 
them  the  powerful  means  of  producing  in  us  conformity  to  the  Divine  nature.  These 
are  frequently  expressed.  To  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation  aright  will  I  show 
the  salvation  of  God.  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment.  4.  But  I  ask  once 
more,  What  is  the  matter  of  God's  promises — what  are  the  blessings  themselves 
which  they  hold  out  to  us  ?  Do  they  not  all  either  imply  holy  obedience  or  directly 
include  it  ?  Repentance,  faith,  love,  joy ,  hope,  peace,  strength,  communion  with  God, 
are  subjects  of  the  promises ;  and  what  are  these  but  parts  of  sanctification  ?  5. 
I  ask,  again,  what  are  the  direct  and  necessary  effects  of  such  promises,  when  they 
are  received  ?  They  are  the  nutriment  of  faith  which  worketh  by  love.  They 
inspire  hope  which  purifies  the  heart  even  as  God  is  pure.  They  work  therefore  not 
as  an  opiate  to  stupefy,  but  as  a  medicine  to  restore.  And  all  this  they  do,  not  by  a 
mere  natural  process,  but  by  the  gracious  appointment  of  God.  III.  The  test 
which  it  furnishes  of  our  state  before  God.  If  men  will  put  a  general  notion  of 
God's  mercy  in  the  place  of  His  promises;  if  they  will  substitute  a  form  of  godliness 
for  a  Divine  nature,  and  a  mere  decency  and  good  order  before  others,  for  an  "  escape 
from  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world  through  lust,"  they  must  perish.  (D. 
Wilso7i,  M.A.)  Great  and  precious  promises  : — Did  you  ever  hear  the  story  how, 
once  upon  a  time,  a  dove  moaned  and  mourned  to  her  fellow-birds  of  the  tyranny 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  13 

of  the  hawk — the  dove's  great  foe  ?  One  advised  her  to  keep  below ;  but  the  hawk 
can  stoop  for  his  prey.  Another  said,  Soar  aloft ;  but  the  hawk  could  soar  as  high 
as  she  could.  Another  said,  Fly  to  the  woods ;  but  the  woods  are  the  very  palace 
and  court  of  the  cruel  hawk  ;  safety  could  not  be  found  there.  And  another  said, 
Fly  to  the  towns ;  but  there  she  was  in  danger  of  being  caught  by  man,  who  might 
even  make  her  a  sport  for  the  hawk.  At  last  one  said.  Fly  to  the  holes  of  the  rocks. 
Violence  cannot  surprise  the  dove  there.  Thus  it  is  with  the  sou!  of  man — distressed 
and  fearful.  Come  to  me,  says  Eiches,  and  I  will  shelter  you.  No,  Wealth  is  only 
the  devil's  lure,  and,  by  and  by,  his  rein  and  his  spur.  Come  to  me,  says  Pleasure ; 
but  she  is  the  very  Delilah  of  the  soul,  to  betray  you  to  the  Philistines.  Honour 
says,  Come  to  me ;  but  there  is  no  assurance  in  any  of  these.  No.  Oh,  ye  that 
dwell  in  cities  and  repose  in  wealth  or  pleasure  or  honour,  there  is  safety  in  Jesus 
or  nowhere.  "  Leave  the  cities  and  dwell  in  the  rock — in  the  Kock  of  Ages — fly  to 
the  promises,  and  be  like  the  dove  that  maketh  her  nest  by  the  side  of  the  hole's 
mouth."  I.  Consider  the  promises.  Ah,  if  we  practically  realised  the  might, 
the  majesty,  and  the  meaning  of  God's  promises,  how  happy  they  would  often  make 
us  !  The  astronomer,  when  he  knows  that  the  hour  of  the  planet  draws  nigh, 
prepares  his  glasses  and  chmbs  his  highest  towers,  and  through  its  bright  far- 
seeing  eyes  he  watches  and  he  waits  till  he  beholds  it  come  labouring  along  its 
infinite  way.  And  when  it  has  shone  through  the  darkness  its  hour  or  its  season, 
then  it  fades  down  again  into  the  darkness  till  another  season  shall  come,  and,  per- 
haps, another  astronomer  hails  its  beams.  So  the  promises  of  God  are  made  to 
conditions,  and  they  shine  like  constellations.  Oh,  sweet  garden  of  the  promises  ! 
But  are  they  not  rather  hke  trees — exceeding  great  and  precious  promises?  It 
seems  to  me,  when  I  study  the  life  of  the  promises,  I  come  as  into  a  vast  and  stately 
forest,  planted  by  the  glorious  men  of  God  in  old  time  by  His  will  and  word;  and 
they  are,  "  the  fir  tree,  the  pine,  and  the  box  together."  There  are  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon,  which  He  hath  planted;  and,  hke  all  trees,  they  are  fit  for  meditation 
and  fruit  and  use.  How  cool  it  is  to  walk  amongst  the  promises  !  They  are  quiet 
places,  and  sacred  and  secret  ways,  where  God,  in  an  especial  manner,  meets  with 
man's  soul.  When  the  glorious  sun  strikes  down,  how  the  promises  stretch  out 
their  cool  arms  ;  and  when  storms  are  in  the  heavens  they  cannot  strike  through 
these  boughs.  And  so  every  promise  conceals  or  reveals  some  biography — some  way 
of  God  in  a  human  soul.  Poor  Bilney,  that  noble  martyr,  lost  all  comfort  after  he 
had  recanted  till  he  found  the  words,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 
all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I 
am  chief."  Beza  found  the  life  of  his  hope  in  word^  which  I  can  never  forget: 
"  My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  Me  ;  and  I  will  give 
unto  them  eternal  life ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck 
them  out  of  My  hand."  Some  of  the  fathers  divided  the  promises  into  Pabulum 
fidei,  and  Anima  fidei — "  Food  of  faith,"  and  the  "  Soul  of  faith."  "  Oh,  thou  of  little 
faith,"  see  yonder  is  the  state ;  but  do  you  not  see  the  sunshine  falling  over  it  ? — 
those  arrowy  flakes  of  gold,  they  are  the  promises — the  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  :  when  you  come  to  that  darkness,  fear  not,  but  you  shall  inherit  that  light. 
II.  Exceeding  great  and  precious.  Do  but  think  how  wonderful  it  is  that  God 
should  make  Himself  known  by  man.  And  all  God's  works  are  promises.  They 
are  tokens  of  holiness,  and  wisdom,  and  faithfulness.  Why  do  you  plant  an  acorn  ? 
Does  it  not  contain  a  promise  ?  Infinite  value  is  placed  here.  And  methinks  if  we 
did  but  read  the  works  and  ways  of  God  in  nature  aright  we  should  see  everywhere 
the  promise  of  our  future.  Oh,  when  I  can  stand  on  the  great  mountain  chains  of 
the  Bible,  what  a  view  I  have !  And  do  not  promises  strengthen  ?  Our  whole  life 
is  maintained  by  promise.  Without  promise  we  should  sink  into  the  deepest  places 
of  despair.  We  need  spiritual  tonics.  We  need  them  to  destroy  our  unhealthy 
consciousness,  which  is  only  another  name  for  weakness.  And  how  glorious  that, 
by  these  promises,  we  are  able  to  look  beyond  the  tomb  ;  yes,  by  them  we  escape 
the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust  and  see  our  fair  inheritance  there. 
But  remember  one  great  condition  by  which  you  know  your  relation  to  the  promise 
— "escaping  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  Here,  you  see,  is 
the  great  condition.  Have  you  escaped  the  corruption  ?  Till  you  breathe  in  purer 
air  you  cannot  expect  to  breathe  the  sweetness  of  this  promise.  Obedience  first, 
then  recompense.  {E.  P.  Hood.)  The  promises  of  God  : — I.  Their  greatness  will 
appear  if  we  consider  their  Author.  They  derive  importance  and  value  from  the 
holiness  of  God  in  all  its  glory,  from  His  justice  in  all  its  inflexibility.  Finally, 
they  must  derive  importance  from  His  infinite  benevolence  and  mercy  in  which  they 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

originated,  of  which  they  are  the  magnificent  expression  and  all  the  resources  of 
■which  they  open.  Is  there  not  an  important  sense,  then,  in  which  these  promises 
are  as  precious,  as  great  as  God  is  glorious  ?  Those,  therefore,  who  neglect  them 
despise  Jehovah  Himself  when  making  the  most  interesting  appeals  to  their  hearts, 
and  involve  themselves  in  guilt  and  wickedness  proportionable  to  the  glories  of 
the  Divine  character.  II.  The  greatness  and  value  of  the  promises  wiU  appear  if 
•we  consider  them  in  their  own  nature  and  pkopebties,  or,  if  we  attend  to  their 
INTRINSIC  WORTH.  In  estimating  the  value  of  promises,  this  is  the  chief  consideration. 
No  matter  what  may  be  the  rank  or  character  of  the  promiser,  or  what  the  relation 
in  which  he  stands  to  us.  The  promise  cannot  be  denominated  great  and  precious 
if  it  relates  to  an  insignificant  object  or  to  one  that  does  not  meet  our  exigencies. 
The  great  consideration  here  is :  suppose  the  promises  to  be  accomplished,  and  all 
the  good  that  is  contained  in  them  enjoyed,  will  aU  our  capacities  be  filled?  Shall 
we  be  completely  delivered  from  all  dangers  and  enemies  ?  Shall  we  be  raised  to 
the  perfection  of  our  nature  ?  If  so,  but  not  otherwise,  the  promises,  the  value  of 
which  we  are  endeavouring  to  estimate,  are  exceeding  great  and  precious.  Now, 
tried  by  this  criterion,  the  promises  to  which  the  apostle  refers  wiU  appear  to  be  fully 
entitled  to  the  epithets  under  consideration.  For  when  they  are  all  accomplished 
in  heaven,  what  want  will  remain  unsuppUed  ?  what  capacity  unfilled,  even  to 
overflowing  ?  what  danger  or  enemy  will  threaten,  what  desirable  good  will  not  be 
possessed  ?  What  wiU  then  be  wanting  to  complete  the  dignity  and  happiness  of 
human  nature  ?  III.  Consider  the  medium  through  which  these  promises  have  been 
made,  or  the  way  in  which  these  blessings  are  secured  and  conferred,  and  they,  too, 
will  show  that  they  are  indeed  exceeding  great  and  precious.  "  God  is  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,"  and,  therefore,  making  aU  the  promises 
through  Him.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  are  in  Him  yea,  and  in  Him  Amen." 
They  are  aU  made  and  confirmed  in  Him.  In  Him  who,  though  He  was  the  bright- 
ness of  His  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  Person,  the  Lord,  the 
Creator  of  angels,  and  the  object  of  their  worship,  became  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem, 
the  sufferer  on  the  Cross.  In  Him  who,  by  the  exercise  of  every  grace  of  which 
innocent  human  nature  is  capable,  and  the  performance  of  every  duty  in  their  very 
perfection,  and  that  in  the  most  difficult  circumstances,  met  all  the  demands  of  an 
absolutely  perfect  law.  In  Him,  who,  by  making  His  Ufe,  His  blood.  His  soul  an 
offering  for  sin  by  drinking,  to  the  very  dregs,  the  bitter  cup  of  Divine  wrath, 
secured  aU  the  blessings  contained  in  the  promises.  IV.  Consider  the  number  and 
VARIETY  of  the  promises.  We  have  given  to  us  not  an  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promise  merely,  but  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  relating  to  all  the  endless 
variety  of  the  believer's  wants  and  circumstances  and  dangers  and  duties :  to  prosperity 
and  to  adversity,  to  the  body  and  to  the  soul,  to  time  and  to  eternity,  to  earth  and  to 
heaven.  V.  Consider  next  the  suitableness  of  these  promises,  and  this,  too,  will 
prove  that  they  are  exceeding  great  and  precious.  A  promise  may  be  valuable  in 
itself,  and  as  it  regards  the  blessing  which  it  exhibits ;  and  yet  it  may  be  to  the 
individuals  to  whom  it  is  made  of  no  importance  because  it  is  not  suitable  to  their 
circumstances.  How  valuable  to  some  would  be  the  promise  of  a  large  sum  of 
money,  of  a  rich  and  extensive  estate,  of  a  crown  1  What  are  they  to  the  man  who 
is  the  victim  of  a  mortal  disease,  who  has  only  a  few  moments  longer  to  live? 
"  Behold,  he  is  at  the  point  to  die,"  and  what  are  riches  and  crowns  to  him  ?  How 
valuable  is  a  promise  of  pardon  to  a  convicted  and  condemned  malefactor !  But 
what  is  it  to  the  man  who  glories  in  his  innocence  and  virtue  and  claims  the  protec- 
tion of  the  law,  and  the  blessings  of  hf e  as  his  right  ?  But  the  promises  of  the 
gospel  are  as  suitable  to  our  circumstances  as  they  are  great  and  wonderful  in 
themselves.  They  secure  light  to  those  who  are  in  darkness,  and  rich  supplies  to 
those  who  are  perishing  of  hunger,  and  pardon  to  those  who  are  guilty  and  con- 
demned. VI.  Consider  the  immutability  of  these  promises,  and  this  will  show  that 
they  are  exceeding  great  and  precious.  How  inexcusable,  then,  is  unbelief !  VII. 
On  account  of  their  influence  the  promises  may  well  be  denominated  exceeding 
great  and  precious.  The  promises  of  men  often  exert  an  injurious  influence  on  those 
to  whom  they  are  made.  They  dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  enkindle  a  flame  of 
unhallowed  feelings,  lead  astray  from  the  path  of  duty,  and  thus  prove  the  most 
dangerous  temptations  to  sin.  How  many  have  been  led  by  them  to  act  a  foolish,  a 
base,  a  disgraceful  part !  By  seeking  the  honour  that  comes  from  men  they  have 
lost  all  the  honour  that  comes  from  God.  But  the  influence  of  the  promises  of  the 
gospel  is  always  beneficial.  They  ever  enlighten  and  sanctify  and  stimulate  to  act 
a  wise  and  noble  part.    This  must  be  the  case,  for  they  make  those  who  embrace 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  15 

them  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  and  keep  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the 
world  through  lust.  Now  we  may  infer  from  what  has  been  advanced — 1.  That 
the  Bible  is  an  exceedingly  great  and  precious  book,  for  it  contains  all  these 
promises.  2.  We  may  learn  whether  or  not  we  are  personally,  actually  interested 
in  these  promises.  3.  How  great  the  folly  and  guilt,  how  wretched  the  state  of  those 
who  despise  all  these  promises  and  reject  all  these  blessings  !  4.  Remember  that  the 
Bible  contains  not  only  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  but  exceedingly  great 
and  terrible  threatenings,  and  the  latter  are  as  dreadful  as  the  former  are  glorious, 
(ir.  Scott.)  Divine  promises  :—I.  The  means  whereby  God  conveys  His  grace  to  us, 
viz.,  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  1.  Their  excellency  is  set  forth  by  two  adjuncts. 
They  are  "  exceeding  great  and  precious."  The  one  noteth  their  intrinsic  worth  and 
value;  they  are  "exceeding  great."  The  other,  our  esteem  of  them;  they  deserve 
to  be  "  precious "  to  us.  2.  Their  freeness :  "  given,"  made  freely,  made  good 
freely.  U.  The  end  and  use  of  them  :  that  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature  ;  that  is,  the  communicable  excellence  of  God.  1.  Because  these 
are  communicated  to  us  by.  God  ;  they  are  created  in  us  by  His  Divine  power.  We 
have  them  by  virtue  of  our  communion  with  Him.  They  flow  from  God,  as  the 
light  doth  from  the  sun.  2.  Because  by  these  perfections  we  somewhat  resemble 
God.  Therefore  it  is  said  (1  Pet.  ii.  9),  "We  show  forth  His  praises,"  His  virtues 
or  Divine  attributes,  His  "wisdom,  goodness,  bounty,  holiness";  for  in  these  we 
most  resemble  Him.  HI.  The  way,  method,  and  order  how  we  receive  this 
benefit  of  the  Divine  nature.  "Having  first  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the 
world  through  lust."  As  we  die  to  sin,  the  Divine  nature  increaseth  in  us.  There 
is  a  putting  off  before  there  can  be  a  putting  on  (Eph.  iv.  22-24).  1.  What  is  to 
be  avoided :  "  The  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  Observe,  sin  is 
called  "  corruption"  as  often  in  Scripture,  because  it  is  a  blasting  of  our  primitive 
excellency  and  purity  (Gen.  vi.  12;  Psa.  xiv.  1).  Observe,  the  seat  of  this  corrup- 
tion is  said  to  be  in  the  world,  where  lust  and  all  uncleanness  reigneth,  therefore 
called  "the  pollutions  of  the  world"  (chap.  ii.  20).  The  generality  of  men  are 
defiled  with  them,  corrupted  in  their  faith,  worship,  and  manners ;  therefore  con- 
version is  called  for  under  these  terms  (Acts  ii.  40).  Lastly,  observe  that  this 
corruption  is  said  to  reign  in  the  world  "  through  lust."  Besides  the  bait  there  is 
the  appetite ;  it  is  our  naughty  affections  that  make  our  abode  in  the  world 
dangerous.  2.  The  manner  of  shunning,  in  the  word  escaping.  There  is  a  flying 
away  required,  and  that  quickly,  as  in  the  plague,  or  from  a  fire  which  hath  almost 
burned  us,  or  a  flood  that  breaketh  in  upon  us.  We  cannot  soon  enough  escape 
from  sin  (Matt.  iii.  7  ;  Heb.  vi.  18).  No  motion  but  flight  becomes  us  in  this  case. 
Doctrine :  That  the  great  end  and  effect  of  the  promises  of  the  gospel  is  to  make 
us  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  I.  Let  us  consider  the  effect  or  end.  1.  That 
it  is  a  natural,  not  a  transient  effect.  There  may  be  such  a  sense  of  the  goodness, 
wisdom,  and  power  of  God  as  may  produce  a  sudden  passion ;  as  suppose  of  fear 
or  love.  It  may  only  affect  us  for  the  present,  but  inferreth  no  change  of  heart 
and  life.  But  the  promises  of  the  gospel  are  to  breed  in  us  such  a  temper  of  heart 
as  may  be  a  second  nature  to  us,  a  habit  or  constitution  of  soul  that  may  incline 
us  to  live  to  God.  A  habit  serveth  for  this  use,  that  a  man  may  act  easily, 
pleasantly,  and  constantly.  (1)  To  act  easily.  There  is  an  inclination  and 
propensity  to  holiness.  (2)  To  act  pleasantly.  They  have  not  only  a  new  bias 
and  tendency,  but  it  is  a  dehght  to  do  what  is  holy  (Psa.  xl.  8),  as  being  in  their 
element  when  they  are  thus  employed.  (3)  It  is  a  constant  principle  of  holy 
operations,  so  that  a  man  doth  not  only  obey  God  easily,  but  evenly,  and  without 
such  frequent  interruptions  of  the  holy  life.  2.  It  is  a  Divine  nature  ;  that  is,  not 
only  such  as  floweth  from  God,  but  may  carry  some  resemblance  with  Him  or  to 
Him.  It  floweth  from  God,  for  we  are  "partakers";  it  is  but  a  ray  from  His 
excellency,  and  it  carrieth  a  likeness  to  Him,  or  cometh  nearer  to  the  nature  of  God 
Himself  than  anything  that  a  man  is  capable  of.  Now  this  is  said  for  two  reasons 
— (1)  To  show  the  dignity  of  it.  Nothing  known  to  man  is  so  like  God  as  a 
sanctified  soul.  The  saints  have  their  Maker's  express  image  ;  therefore  if  God  be 
excellent  and  holy,  they  are  so.  The  image  and  picture  of  God  and  Christ  is  in 
them,  not  made  by  a  painter  or  carver,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (2) 
To  show  the  quality  and  condition  of  it.  You  must  have  a  new  nature,  and  such 
a  nature  as  may  be  a  Divine  nature.  If  you  have  nothing  above  natural  men  or 
coiTupt  nature,  you  are  strangers  to  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  8.  This  Divine 
nature  may  be  considered  three  ways.  Either — (1)  As  begun ;  when  we  are  first 
"  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds,"  and  regenerated  "  according  to  the  image  of 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

God"  (Eph.  iv.  23,  24).  (2)  As  increased;  when  more  like  God  in  a  conspicuous 
degree.  (3)  As  it  is  perfected  in  heaven  ;  for  there  we  have  the  nearest  communion 
with  God,  and  so  the  highest  conformity  to  Him  that  we  are  capable  of  (1  John  iii.  2). 

II.  Let  us  now  see  the  means  by  which  God  doth  accomplish  this  effect :  "  To  us 
are  given  great  and  precious  promises."  1.  It  is  an  instance  of  God's  love,  that  He 
will  deal  with  us  in  the  way  of  promises.  (1)  A  promise  is  more  than  a  purpose ; 
for  the  purpose  and  intention  of  a  man  is  secret  and  hidden  in  his  own  bosom,  but 
a  promise  is  open  and  manifest.  Thereby  we  get  the  knowledge  of  the  good 
intended  to  us.  (2)  It  is  more  than  a  doctrinal  declaration.  It  is  one  thing  to 
reveal  a  doctrine,  another  to  promise  a  benefit ;  that  maketh  a  thing  known,  this 
maketh  a  thing  sure,  and  upon  certain  terms ;  that  gives  us  notice,  but  this  gives 
us  interest.  (3)  It  is  more  than  a  prophecy  or  simple  prediction.  Scripture 
prophecies  will  be  fulfilled  because  of  God's  veracity ;  but  Scripture  promises  will 
be  fulfilled,  not  only  because  of  God's  veracity,  but  also  His  fidelity  and  justice ;  for 
by  God's  promise  man  cometh  to  have  a  right  to  the  thing  promised.  2.  The 
promises  of  the  new  covenant  are  of  a  most  glorious  and  valuable  nature.  They 
are  not  about  small  things,  or  things  of  little  moment,  but  about  worthy  and  dear- 
bought  blessings.  3.  They  are  precious  promises,  worthy  of  our  esteem  ;  for  they 
are  not  about  things  that  we  have  nothing  to  do  with,  but  such  wherein  we  are 
deeply  and  intimately  concerned.  In  God's  promises  there  is  due  provision  made 
for  the  desires,  necessities,  and  wants  of  mankind.  4.  All  this  is  given  to  us 
wretched  men  without  any  desert  of  ours ;  nay,  we  had  deserved  the  contrary. 

III.  The  influence  of  the  one  upon  the  other ;  or,  how  do  these  promises  promote 
the  Divine  nature?  1.  From  their  drift,  which  is,  to  draw  us  from  the  creature  to 
God,  and  the  world  to  heaven ;  to  mortify  the  esteem  of  the  false  happiness  which 
corrupteth  our  natures ;  and  to  raise  us  to  those  noble  objects  and  ends  which 
dignify  and  adorn  the  soul,  and  make  it  in  a  sort  Divine.  It  breedeth  an  excellent 
spirit  in  us,  which  is  carried  above  the  world,  and  the  hopes  and  fears  of  it 
(1  Cor.  ii.  12).  2.  The  matter  of  the  promises.  Many  of  which  concern  the  change 
of  our  hearts,  the  cleansing  or  healing  of  our  natures  (Heb.  viii.  10 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
2-5,  26;  Jer.  xxxiii.  8).  3.  The  conditions  or  terms  on  which  our  right  is  sus- 
pended. Not  pardon  without  repentance  (Acts  iii.  19).  Not  heaven  or  eternal 
life  without  holiness  (Heb.  xii.  14).  4.  The  power  with  which  the  promises  are 
accompanied  (chap.  i.  3).  The  Divine  nature  is  communicated  to  us  by  virtue  of 
the  promises ;  for  the  Spirit  is  our  sanctifier,  and  He  works  by  congruous  means. 
Use  1.  Believe  the  promises,  for  they  are  most  sure  and  certain.  God's  testimony 
of  the  good  things  He  will  bestow  upon  us  cannot  deceive  us,  or  beget  a  vain  and 
uncertain  hope.  Use  2.  Esteem  them  (Heb.  xi.  13).  Use  3.  Labour  to  improve 
the  belief  of  every  promise  for  the  increase  of  holiness,  that  we  may  be  like  God, 
pure  and  holy  as  He  is  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  "Exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  " ; — I.  First,  the  soukce  of  all  the  promises  is  shown  by  this 
same  apostle  to  be  "  the  abundant  mercy  of  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  (1  Pet.  i.  3-5).  By  whatever  name  called,  in  whatever  dispensation  or 
method  made  known,  the  "abundant  mercy  "  of  the  ever-blessed  God  has  been  the 
great  original,  only  source  of  promise  to  man.  U.  Their  character.  They  are 
"  exceeding  great,"  or,  as  the  Ehemish  version  literally  translates  it,  "  most  great." 
As  the  announcements  of  Divine  mercy  concerning  the  provisions  of  redemption  for 
man,  we  may  expect  the  promises  to  be  so  great  as  to  meet  all  the  wants  and  woes 
of  our  fallen  nature.  1.  One  wide,  deep,  and  long-felt  want  of  our  spiritual  nature 
is — "  light."  The  most  enlightened  Pagans  but  guessed  at  immortality,  and  felt 
after  the  true  God  among  a  rabble  of  false  ones.  Need  I  point  out  to  you  how 
Jesus  Christ  is  thus  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations  "  ?  "  To  Him,"  as  the  true  Light, 
"gave  all  the  prophets  witness."  Pleasant  to  the  eyes,  cheering  to  the  heart, 
indispensable  to  labour,  assuring  to  the  traveller,  longed  for  by  the  watchman,  an 
indispensable  condition  of  all  healthy  growth,  and  therefore  of  life,  light  is  in  every 
language  the  symbol  of  truth;  and  as  Jesus  Christ  is  "the  brightness  of  the  Father's 
glory,"  so  His  gospel  is  "  the  light  of  lights  "  in  all  these  respects  to  believing  souls. 
2.  Another  deep-felt  want  of  the  human  soul  is  the  craving  for  "  peace  with  God." 
Wherever  the  religious  instincts  have  been  awakened,  their  most  poignant  conscious- 
ness has  been  that  of  guilt,  a  dread  of  the  Invisible,  and  "  a  fearful  looking  for  of 
judgment."  Hence  all  the  self-torments  of  superstition,  and  the  altars  and  offerings 
of  Paganism,  past  and  present.  And  of  all  the  promises  of  God,  none  are  more 
"  exceeding  great  and  precious"  than  those  which  invite,  intreat,  "  beseech  men  to 
be  reconciled  unto  God,"  on  the  ground  of  the  great  propitiation  of  Jesus  Christ  for 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  17 

sin.  They  are  more  precious  than  the  royal  warrant  that  releases  the  death-doomed 
culprit ;  they  are  our  passport  and  safe-conduct  into  present  safety  and  eternal  life. 
3.  Thus  we  might  proceed  in  regard  to  every  want  of  the  human  spirit.  Does  the 
quickened  soul  pant  for  self-harmony  and  purity,  crying,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean 
heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me  "  ?  Then  one  of  a  thousand 
promises  uttered  from  the  heart  of  God  replies,  "  I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon 
you  ;  from  all  your  filthiness  and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you  ;  a  new 
heart  will  I  give  unto  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  4.  Does  the 
heart,  pre-designed  for  Divine  love  and  fellowship,  feel  restless  for  its  adapted 
element^a  good  which  it  knows  not,  and  without  which  it  must  inly  burn  and  pine 
for  ever?  To  all  this  multitude  of  weary,  feverish  souls  there  comes  from  the 
Father  of  spirits  such  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  as  these:  "  Ho,  every 
one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  :  and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come."  5. 
Again,  does  the  universal  soul  of  man  believe  in  and  anticipate  immortal  Ufe? 
Does  the  savage  from  his  instincts,  and  the  sage  from  his  reasonings,  expect  to  live 
for  ever  ?  Does  even  the  bad  man  inly  shudder  at  the  prospect  of  annihilation, 
and  the  good  man  long  for  immortality?  Then  the  certainty,  the  nature,  and  the 
path  of  endless  life  are  the  subject-matter  of  transcendently  "great  and  precious 
promises."  6.  Finally,  as  to  the  wants  of  the  soul  and  their  Divinely  promised 
supply.  The  life  and  immortality — rather  incorruptibility — brought  to  light  by  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  meet  another  demand  of  our  nature — "  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead."  And  are  they  not  "precious" — "precious"  as  the  free  pledges  of 
sovereign,  paternal,  everlasting  gi'ace ? — "precious"  as  the  fruits  of  Jesus'  death- 
enduring  love  ? — "  precious "  as  the  subject  of  the  Comforter's  ministry  to  the 
heart,  and  the  medium  of  His  sanctifying  energy  therein  ?  They  are  precious  for 
their  past  beneficent  history  in  healing  wounded  spirits  and  raising  fainting  hearts. 
Their  greatness  and  preciousness  have  been  in  part  realised  by  the  first  advent  of 
Christ  and  this  present  "  dispensation  of  the  Spirit."  This,  however,  is  but  the 
introduction  to  the  vast  volume  of  "  good  things  yet  to  come."  The  sons  of  God 
are  now  adopted,  but  not  manifested.  III.  This  is  rendered  still  more  evident  by 
THE  DESIGN  of  the  promiscs I  "That  we  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature, 
having  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  1.  This  declara- 
tion inevitably  implies  that  man  has  lost  that  participation  in  the  Divine  nature 
which  is  called  "  the  image  of  God,"  and  which  consisted  in  "  spiritual  knowledge, 
righteousness,  and  true  holiness."  2.  It  also  implies  that  there  is  in  man's  nature, 
however  faUen,  a  constitutional  capacity  (though  we  know,  alas !  a  deep  disinclina- 
tion) to  receive  back  and  reflect  the  moral  character  of  God.  3.  It  suggests  that  aU 
the  needful  influences  are  given  by  the  God  of  the  promises,  and  lie  within  our 
reach  for  the  recovery  of  the  Divine  nature ;  and  that  God  holds  us  responsible  for 
the  earnest,  prayerful  use  of  those  gracious  means  whereby  we  may  gi-ow  into  His 
likeness,  and  ascend  to  fellowship  with  Himself.  4.  And  this  involves  most 
inspiring  views  of  what  redeemed  humanity  may  attain  even  on  earth,  much  more 
in  heaven.  5.  This  fellowship  with  God  is  the  only  means  of  escaping  the  infectious 
pollutions  of  moral  evil  that  abound  in  the  world  on  every  side,  and  that  spring 
from  the  desires  of  the  heart  turned  from  God  to  impure  and  forbidden  objects.  6. 
The  promises,  then,  are  indispensable  to  the  attainment  of  this  end.  They  reveal 
the  "  Fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,"  and  assure  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  renew  and  inhabit  the  soul.  {John  Graham.)  The  efficacy  of  the 
promises  : — What  is  the  "  whereby"  with  which  the  passage  commences  ?  designa- 
ting, as  it  appears  to  do,  some  channel  of  communication.  There  are  here  several 
antecedents  to  which  the  "  whereby  "  may  be  grammatically  referred ;  but,  without 
examining  a  variety  of  critical  opinions,  it  appears  to  me  the  most  obvious  course 
to  take  the  concluding  words,  "  glory  and  virtue,"  as  the  antecedent  which  we  are 
in  search  of;  "the  knowledge  of  Him  that  has  called  us  to  glory  and  virtue; 
whereby" — that  is,  through  which  glory  and  virtue^" are  given  to  us  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises."  We  are  called  to  glory  and  to  vh'tue — to  a  warfare 
that  is  full  of  honour,  but  at  the  same  time  full  of  difficulty,  requii-ing  much  wisdom 
and  vigour  in  the  combatant.  If  we  obey  this  calling,  and  throw  ourselves  into  the 
conflict,  then  the  struggle  in  which  we  are  engaged  will  be  the  best  witness  that  we 
are  the  elect  of  the  Most  High.  Having  this  witness,  we  possess  an  assurance  that 
the  promises  of  the  Bible  are  spoken  specially  to  ourselves.  Now,  having  thus 
cleared  up  the  connection  between  the  text  and  the  context,  it  stiU  remains  that  I 
vindicate  the  description  that  is  here  made  of  the  promises  given  in  the  Bible.  Yet, 
can  this  be  necessary?    If   there  be  a  spiritual  solicitude  for  which   the  Bible 

31 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

contains  not  a  word  in  season ;  if  there  be  a  doubt  which  is  left  without  a  message 
to  disperse  it ;  if  there  be  an  anxiety  which  is  passed  by  without  a  whisper  to  soothe 
it ;  and  if  there  be  a  tear  which  it  dries  not ;  then  I  will  give  up  the  description, 
and  pronounce  it  overdrawn.  But  in  nothing  has  God  so  manifested  His  wisdom, 
as  in  the  precision  with  which  His  Word  meets  the  wants  of  His  people.  It  were 
idle  to  attempt  to  descend  into  particulars.  Exceedingly  great  are  the  promises  of 
the  Bible ;  great  in  their  sweep,  for  they  leave  no  circumstance  unattended  to ; 
great  in  their  power,  for  they  bring  aU  the  magnificence  of  eternity  to  bear  on  the 
solicitudes  of  time.  And  precious  are  the  promises,  as  well  as  great.  He  who  can 
appropriate  them  has  blessings  which  no  arithmetic  can  reckon,  a  security  which 
no  contingency  can  shake,  and  a  help  which  never  can  be  without  use.  But  there 
is  no  need  that  I  insist  further  on  the  character  that  the  text  gives  of  the  promises. 
Those  who  have  proved  them  acknowledge  them  to  be  "  exceeding  great  and 
precious  " ;  they  who  have  proved  them  not,  want,  alas !  the  spiritual  ardour  by 
which  their  character  is  to  be  discerned,  and  are  therefore  not  to  be  convinced  by 
the  most  elaborate  description.  We  aU  profess  to  beUeve  that  once  on  the  earth  the 
spectacle  was  exhibited  of  the  human  nature  adopted  into  union  with  the  Divine. 
There  was  the  perfect  instance  of  one  of  our  race  being  made  partaker  of  the 
Divine  nature  :  I  need  scarcely  add  that  the  instance  will  stand  for  ever  by  itself ; 
and  that  the  sense  in  which  we  alone  can  share  in  the  nature  of  God  differs  from 
that  in  which  Christ  Jesus  had  share.  He  had  it  in  essence — we  in  conformity ; 
He  by  being  God — we  only  by  being  renewed  after  the  image  of  God.  The  Greek 
might  more  strictly  be  rendered  "  partakers  of  a  Divine  nature,"  and  not  of  the 
Divine  nature.  Now,  the  point  which  yet  remains  to  be  investigated,  is  the  agency 
of  the  promises  in  effecting  such  a  change ;  for,  you  will  observe,  that  whilst  par- 
taking of  the  Divine  nature  is  the  result,  the  promises  are  the  means  through  which 
it  is  brought  about.  "Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  that  by  these  ye 
might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  The  machinery  exhibited  in  the  Bible 
when  a  spiritual  transformation  is  in  question,  is  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Third  Person  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  We  may  be  assured,  therefore,  that  when 
any  other  machinery  is  brought  on  the  stage,  we  are  to  understand  that  it  is 
effectual,  not  through  its  inherent  energies,  but  only  through  its  being  actuated  by 
that  Agent.  The  promises  in  themselves  have  no  power  to  animate ;  but  if  I 
believe  in  the  promise,  then  the  promise  becomes  a  quickening  thing ;  and  that 
which  as  spoken  was  merely  sound  that  melted  into  air,  is  now  a  radiant  star  which 
rules  me  and  guides  me  by  the  brilliancy  of  its  light.  We  shall  take  for  granted, 
in  aU  we  say  of  the  power  of  the  promises,  that  the  power  is  derived  from  faith, 
and  faith  from  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  we  go  on  to  show  in  the  first  place  the  power 
which  promises  wield  over  men  in  ordinary  things,  and  in  the  second  place,  the 
influence  which  they  exert  over  Christians  in  particular.  If  you  took  a  rapid 
survey  of  the  various  classes  and  occupations  of  men,  you  would  find  that  almost 
every  one  is  submitting  himself  to  the  power  of  promise.  If  you  enter  the  crowded 
marts  of  commerce,  or  pass  through  the  courtly  circles  of  ambition,  or  sit  with  the 
student  in  his  secluded  chamber,  or  accompany  the  dissolute  into  the  haunts  of 
pleasure,  the  same  pursuit  is  in  each  case  carried  on ;  they  are  aU  hunting  after 
some  fancied  good,  which,  though  it  may  cheat  them  at  last,  engages  them  at 
present.  Some  busy  spirit  has  been  whispering  into  the  ear  of  every  man  whom 
you  meet,  that  if  he  will  but  follow  this  course,  or  that  course,  he  shall  attain  the 
object  of  his  desire.  And  the  greatest  marvel  is,  that  although  the  experience  of 
successive  ages  has  shown  there  is  a  he  in  each  of  these  promises,  they  nevertheless 
attain  the  same  credit  as  ever.  If  it  could,  however,  come  suddenly  to  pass  that 
an  arrest  was  put  on  this  circulation  of  promise,  there  would  be  an  instant  stand- 
still in  the  busy  scenes  of  human  occupation.  And  I  need  hardly  point  out  how 
amplified  would  be  the  power  of  promise  if  there  were  anything  like  an  assurance 
of  fulfilment.  If  men  can  do  such  things  on  chance,  what  wiU  they  do  on  certainty? 
Now  I  turn  from  this  rapid  survey  of  the  power  which  promise  wields  over  men  m 
general ;  and  I  ask  you  whether,  if  you  turn  the  uncertainty  of  promise  into 
certainty,  you  may  not  expect  to  find  the  power  a  thousand  times  greater  which  is 
wielded  over  Christians  in  particular  ?  The  defects  in  promise  are  here  done  away 
with ;  the  result  which  is  desired  not  only  may  take  place,  but  shall  take  place. 
And  if  a  promise,  which  is  both  indefinite  in  its  terms  and  insecure  in  its  pledges, 
be  the  eflicient  thing  we  have  already  described,  who  shall  marvel  that  where  the 
terms  are  the  noblest,  and  the  pledges  are  the  strongest,  it  shall  lead  those  who 
believe  to  work  out  their  salvation  with  the  fear  and  trembling  of  men  who  know 


CH.u>.  1.]  II.  PETER.  19 

themselves  to  have  eternity  at  stake  ?  I  will  seek,  however,  to  dissect  this  point  a 
little  more  nicely;  for  it  is  both  of  interest  and  importance.  Escaping  the  pollution 
that  is  in  the  world,  we  account  to  be  the  same  thing  as  being  made  partakers  of 
the  Divine  nature.  It  is  by  escaping  pollution,  by  withdrawing  from  the  trammels 
and  habits  of  sinfulness,  that  this  partnership  in  the  celestial  character  is  procured ; 
and  if  we  can  show  that  it  is  by  the  promises  that  pollution  is  escaped,  it  wiU  follow 
that  it  is  through  the  promises  that  conformity  to  the  Divine  nature  is  attained. 
But  whether  it  be  by  promises  or  by  threatenings  that  the  work  is  commenced, 
assuredly  it  is  by  promise  that  the  work  is  carried  on.  Is  the  believer  disheartened 
when  he  considers  the  might  of  his  spiritual  enemies?  the  promise  is  kindly 
whispered,  "  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  thy  feet  shortly."  He  takes  courage, 
and  wrestles  with  the  enemy.  Is  he  confounded  at  the  view  of  indwelling  corrup- 
tion ?  "  God  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  to  bear." 
Are  kinsmen  and  friends  alienated  from  him  on  account  of  his  profession  of 
godliness?  What  sustains  him  but  this? — "When  my  father  and  my  mother 
forsake  me,  then  the  Lord  will  take  me  up."  Does  prayer  seem  unanswered? 
"  Wait  on  the  Lord ;  be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen  thine  heart." 
Do  sorrows  seem  multiplied  ?  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God."  Is  his  progress  in  the  life  of  faith  scarcely  perceptible  ?  Where  God 
hath  begun  a  good  work.  He  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  see, 
then,  that  promises  are  mighty  engines  in  the  hands  of  God's  Spirit.  It  is  by 
these  souls  are  animated  to  prayer ;  it  is  by  these  they  are  prepared  for  warfare  ;  it 
is  by  these  they  are  warmed  in  love ;  it  is  by  these  they  are  cheered  on  in  their  way 
after  holiness.  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Precious  promises  : — What  makes  a  promise 
precious  ?  1.  The  thing  promised  must  be  valuable.  2.  He  who  promises  must  be 
truthful.  3.  He  who  promises  must  be  able  to  perform.  (IF.  Lawson,  D.D.) 
The  Divinely  assimilating  force  of  Divine  promises : — Christianity  is  a  system  of 
promises.  Even  its  doctrines  and  precepts  may  be  regarded  as  promises.  These 
promises  are  "  exceedingly  great "  in  their  nature,  variety,  and  influences  ;  they 
are  exceedingly  "  precious  "  too  ; — precious  essentially  and  relatively  in  themselves 
and  in  their  bearings  on  man.     I.  These  promises  tend  to  assimilate  us  to  God 

BY   GIVING    us   AN   ATTRACTIVE   VIEW  OF   HiS   CHARACTER.       TwO  thoUghtS  will  illustrate 

this  point : — 1.  Man's  moral  character  is  formed  on  the  principle  of  imitation. 
There  are  two  wrong  developments  of  this  instinct.  (1)  When  it  is  directed  to  the 
natural  peculiarities  of  others.  (2)  When  directed  to  the  moral  faults  of  others. 
2.  Man's  imitation  is  ever  du'ected  to  that  which  seems  to  him  beautiful.  He  will 
not  copy  that  which  appears  to  him  unamiable,  unlovely,  repulsive.  If  the  Infinite 
appear  to  us  supremely  lovely.  He  will  by  the  laws  of  our  imitative  nature  mould 
us  into  His  own  image.  Now  His  promises  give  us  this  attractive  view  of  Him. 
A  sincere  promise  reveals  the  author's  disposition.  If  the  promise  is  trifling  where 
there  are  large  resources,  it  indicates  a  niggardly  soul,  and  the  reverse.  A  sincere 
promise  reveals  the  author's  resources.  If  great  things  are  promised,  the  possession 
of  great  things  are  implied.  According  to  these  criteria,  what  infinite  kindness  and 
inexhaustible  resources  do  the  promises  of  God  reveal !  H.  These  promises  tend 
TO  assimilate  us  to  Him  by  bringing  us  into  personal  contact  with  His 
CHARACTER.  Wc  must  be  with  a  being  to  become  like  him.  Fellowship  is  absolutely 
indispensable.  There  is  on  the  one  hand  a  giving,  and  on  the  other  a  perpetual 
receiving.  Thus  the  two  are  brought  together.  Both  minds  meet,  as  it  were,  in 
the  promise.  HI.  These  promises  tend  to  assimilate  us  to  Him  by  giving  us 
A  living  interest  in  His  character.  {Homilist.)  The  design  of  the  promises 
of  God : — I.  In  the  Divine  nature  are  attributes  properly  incommunicable  ; 

SUCH    AS    CANNOT,    IN     THE    NATURE    OF    THINGS,    BE    IMPARTED  ;     SUCH    AS    CANNOT     BK 

EVEN  IMITATED  BY  CREATURES.  It  is  pcculiar  to  Him  to  cxist  in  and  from  Himself ; 
while  a  creature  is  a  dependent  being,  and  ever  must  remain  so.  It  is  peculiar  to 
Him  to  be  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  It  is  peculiar  to  Him  to  have  supreme 
dominion.  Absolute  perfection,  that  which  is  liable  to  no  injury,  admits  of  no 
diminution,  is  capable  of  no  advancement,  is  peculiar  to  Him.  Finite  cannot  equal 
infinite.  It  is,  then,  in  moral  attributes  that  we  are  to  look  for  this  participation 
of  the  Divine  nature ;  in  those  which,  indeed,  constitute  the  very  glory  of  that 
nature  ;  the  others  being  adorable  as  they  are  exercised  and  employed  by  a  perfect 
wisdom,  rectitude,  and  love.  But  let  it  be  here  observed  that  the  promise  is  not 
that  we  shall  be  raised  into  something  like  God ;  some  mere  imitation  of  what  is 
morally  perfect  in  Him.  We  are  to  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  There  is  to 
be  a  communication  on  the  part  of  God,  and  a  reception  on  our  own,  of  those 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

principles  on  which  all  that  is  pure  and  holy  in  God  may  be  said  to  depend ;  a 
communication  continued  to  us,  on  which  the  growth  and  permanency  of  those 
principles  rest.  The  moral  nature  of  God,  thus  to  be  participated  by  believers,  may 
be  summed  up  in  the  three  terms.  1.  Knowledge.  The  power  of  knowing  is  the 
property  of  spiritual  beings.  It  is  not  merely  to  perceive  in  the  low  degree  which 
belongs  to  irrational  animals,  but  to  apprehend,  to  remember,  to  compare,  to  infer, 
and  from  particular  to  bring  out  general  truths,  which  are  to  be  laid  up  in  the 
mind  for  meditation  or  action.  This  knowledge  is  the  knowledge  of  things  as  good 
or  evil,  as  right  or  wrong,  as  tending  or  not  tending  to  our  own  happiness,  and  that 
of  the  whole  creation.  Infinitely  perfect  is  this  knowledge  in  God.  And  by  the 
indwelling  of  His  teaching  Spirit,  opening  these  truths  to  our  mind,  and  rendering 
us  discerning  to  apply  them.  He  makes  us  partake,  in  our  degree,  of  His  own 
knowledge.  His  infallible  judgment  of  things.  Then  it  is  that  we  walk  in  the  light. 
We  find  a  sure  way  for  our  feet,  and  so  are  enabled  to  escape  the  snares  of  death. 
2.  Holiness.  This  is  essential  to  God.  It  is  that  principle  in  Him,  whatever  it 
may  be,  which  has  led  Him  to  prescribe  justice,  mercy,  and  truth,  and  to  prohibit 
their  contraries  under  penalties  so  severe;  that  principle,  which  is  more  than  a 
mere  approval  of  the  things  which  He  enjoins ;  which  makes  Him  love  righteous- 
ness. The  holiness  of  a  creature  as  to  actions  is,  conformity  to  the  will  of  God, 
which  is  the  visible  declaration  of  His  holy  nature.  That  conformity  implies 
justice,  a  rendering  to  all  their  due ;  a  large  duty,  referring  not  only  to  man,  but 
likewise  to  God,  to  whom  are  to  be  given  the  honour  and  worship  He  requires  from 
us :  perfect  truth  and  sincerity  in  everything,  so  that  all  outward  acts  shall  concur 
with  the  heart,  and  the  heart  with  them ;  and  the  strict  regulation  of  every  temper 
and  appetite,  so  that  they  may  be  kept  within  the  bounds  prescribed,  beyond  which 
they  become  impurity  and  sin.  But  there  must  be  principle  from  which  all  this 
must  flow,  or  it  is  only  external  and  imitative ;  and  that  principle  is  found  only  in 
the  new  man,  that  which  comes  from  this  participation  of  the  Divine  nature.  3. 
But  the  Divine  nature  is  love.  Who  can  doubt  this  when  he  sees  the  happiness  of 
the  creatures  so  manifestly  the  end  of  their  creation  ?  when  we  can  trace  all  misery 
to  another  source?  when  we  see  the  mercies  He  mixes  with  His  judgments,  always 
bringing  some  good  out  of  evil  ?  when  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  gave  Him 
freely  for   us   all?     II.  We   observe,  that   the   value   of   the   pkomises   of  the 

GOSPEL    IS   SPECMLLY   DISPLAYED   BY    THEIB   CONNECTION  WITH    THIS   END.       "  There  are 

given  unto  us  exceeding  gi-eat  and  precious  promises,  that  by  these  ye  might  be 
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  To  raise  men  to  this  state  is  matter  of  promise, 
and  therefore  of  grace.  We  might  have  been  left  to  the  sin  and  degradation  we 
had  sought.  And  the  promises  thus  given  to  us,  all  of  them  suppose  the  covenant 
of  grace.  And  when  we  consider  their  great  design  to  make  us  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature,  how  clearly  and  brightly  does  it  display  their  value  !  They  appear 
to  us  of  unspeakable  value;  "  exceeding  great  and  precious."  1.  They  are  so  in 
respect  of  the  honour  which  this  great  attainment  puts  on  man.  2.  Consider  this 
value  in  respect  to  interest.  What  is  the  real  interest  of  man  but  the  attainment 
of  the  favour  and  image  of  God  ?  3.  Consider  this  value  in  respect  of  peace.  There 
can  be  no  peace  to  the  wicked.  Every  evil  brings  its  own  punishment  with  it  in 
the  disquietude  which  it  occasions.  4.  Consider  this  value  in  respect  of  usefulness. 
Knowledge  is  a  powerful  instrument  of  God  when  prompted  by  benevolence  and 
sustained  by  consistency  of  character.  And  where  there  is  this  participation  of  the 
Divine  nature,  there  we  find  all  these  elements  of  usefulness,  knowledge,  holiness, 
and  love.  5.  And  lastly,  consider  this  value  in  reference  to  hope.  {R.  Watson.) 
That  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature. — Partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature  .-—The  keynote  of  the  passage  is  the  word  "Divine,"  which  occupies 
so  conspicuous  a  place  at  the  commencement  and  the  close.  To  the  momentous 
questions.  What  is  the  source  and  what  the  nature  of  true  religion  ?  the  sum  briefly 
is— It  is  a  Divine  life.  Its  source  is  traced  to  the  Divine  power  of  the  Mediator, 
and  on  its  features  are  stamped  the  impress  of  the  Divine  image.  1.  Life  and 
godliness  is  a  comprehensive  and  practical  description  of  true  religion.  Life  alone, 
in  Scripture,  often  describes  the  state  of  grace,  and  sums  up  all  the  blessings  of 
salvation  (1  John  v.  12;  Acts  v.  20).  Godliness,  also,  by  itself,  often  denotes  the 
whole  of  religion— the  whole  life  of  faith  (1  Tim.  iii.  16;  iv.  7).  Employed 
together  they  modify  each  other's  meaning,  and  give  completeness  to  the  delineation 
of  the  Christian  life.  Life  points  out  its  inward  source  in  the  heart,  godliness  its 
outward  manifestations  in  conduct  and  character.  Be  it  ours  to  seek  this  life. 
Filled  with  it,  it  will  show  itself  in  the  blossoms  and  fruits  of  godliness.     And,  let 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  PETER.  21 

us  not  forget,  that  if  there  is  no  godliness  of  conduct  or  character,  we  want  the 
only  sure  evidence  that  life  from  on  high  has  descended  into  our  souls.  2.  Have 
I  escaped  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  ?  Worldly  life  apart  from  God, 
and  opposed  to  God,  is  moral  and  sph'itual  death ;  in  its  most  refined  as  well  as  in 
its  grosser  forms,  in  its  intellectual  as  well  as  in  its  sensual  enjoyments,  it  has  the 
taint  of  corruption.  Its  maxims  and  morality  are  unsound.  The  tie  that  binds  us 
to  the  world  and  its  corruption  is  the  corruption  of  our  own  hearts.  That  removed, 
the  magnetic  attraction  of  evil  is  broken.  The  world  and  the  renewed  nature  have 
no  affinity,  but  repel  each  other.  Like  the  occupant  of  the  diving-bell,  breathing 
air  which  is  replenished  and  purified  by  constant  supplies  from  above,  and  which, 
by  its  elastic  force,  keeps  out  the  water  which  presses  on  every  side ;  so  the 
Christian,  breathing  the  vital  air  of  a  heaven-derived  life,  moves  unharmed  in  the 
midst  of  the  world's  corruption ;  surrounding  him  on  every  side,  it  cannot  over- 
whelm. 3.  Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  !  At  that  momentous  change,  variously 
spoken  of  as  a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  as  a  new  creation,  as  regeneration,  there 
is  communicated  to  the  soul  a  Divine  principle  of  life  which,  through  grace, 
gradually  transforms  the  whole  man.  Nothing  less  wUl  do  as  a  commencing  point 
for  the  Christian  life  as  a  foundation  on  which  to  build  a  new  and  Godlike 
character.  By  God's  overruling  providence  and  restraining  grace  and  favourable 
circumstances  the  worst  outbreaks  of  sin  are  often  prevented,  as  by  the  physician's 
skiU  the  maladies  of  an  unsound  constitution  may  be  mitigated.  But  only  by  a 
renewal  of  the  soul,  by  the  communication  of  the  life  of  God,  can  we  obtain  true 
spiritual  health  and  vigour.  Christ  then  becomes  our  Ufe.  We  are  renewed  in  the 
whole  man  after  the  image  of  God,  and  thus  are  made  partakers  of  the  Diving 
nature  in  the  only  sense  possible  for  creatures.  But  the  fellowship  of  the  renewed 
soul  with  God  is  also  embraced  in  that  participation  of  the  Divine  nature  of  which 
the  apostle  speaks.  Converse  with  God  is  the  highest  bliss  of  which  we  are  capable. 
The  life  that  has  descended  from  God  into  our  hearts  rises  up  to  Him  again  in 
desire  and  love,  and  the  new  nature  in  us  subsists  by  communion  with  the  source 
whence  it  is  derived.  {W.  Wilson,  M.A.)  The  promises  designed  to  make  men 
holy  : — I.  The  Sceipttjres  often  declare  this  to  be  a  peincipal  design  of 
THE  Divine  promises.  "  Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us 
cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the 
fear  of  God."  Whatever  is  necessary  to  encourage,  to  cheer,  to  strengthen,  to 
prompt  in  the  course  of  holy  obedience,  is  derived  by  constant  appeals  and  illus- 
trations from  the  promises  of   God.     II.   We  argue  the  same  thing  from  the 

CHARACTER    OF    MAN    AS    A    MORAL    BEING,    AND     THE     PURPOSE    OF    GoD    TOWARD    HIM. 

The  great  purpose  of  God  toward  man  is  to  perfect  his  moral  character  through 
moral  influence.  But  where  is  this  influence  furnished  ?  in  what  are  these  motives 
presented,  if  not  in  the  blessings  promised  as  the  reward  of  obedience  ?  If  God  by 
these  promises  intended  merely  to  comfort  His  people  by  quieting  their  fears  and 
awakening  their  hopes,  why  are  not  His  promises  absolute  and  unconditional 
securities?  III.  From  the  direct  practical  tendency  of  the  proivhses  of  God. 
There  is  no  higher  evidence  of  the  design  to  be  answered  by  the  appointments  of 
God  than  the  true  tendency  of  such  appointments.  1.  Such  is  the  tendency  of  the 
Divine  promises,  as  they  remove  every  obstacle  to  personal  holiness.  To  rouse 
man  to  holy  activity  the  promise  of  God  is  indispensable.  You  may  show  him  an 
opening  hell,  but  without  a  promise  revealing  a  pardoning  God  and  opening  heaven 
he  will  never  stir.  With  such  promises  aU  the  hopelessness  and  despair  of  escaping 
the  curse  is  taken  away  by  the  assurance  of  favour  and  reward  to  obedience.  With- 
out the  promises  there  would  remain  also  another  obstacle  of  paralysing  influence 
— the  impracticability  of  obedience  without  the  grace  of  God.  But  with  the 
promise  of  a  faithful  God  sounding  in  his  ears,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee," 
how  will  he  rise,  as  it  were,  in  the  consciousness  of  that  strength,  which  shall  be 
perfected  in  his  weakness,  and  enter  the  career  of  obedience  with  the  inspiration 
of  hope !  2.  This  tendency  is  apparent  in  the  nature  of  the  blessings  promised. 
Whether  we  look  at  the  general  or  specific  nature  of  the  Divine  promises  we  see 
that  they  cannot  become  effectual  as  motives  without  producing  holiness.  What 
are  the  promises  of  God  ?  Peace  of  conscience  is  promised.  But  who  can  think 
of  escaping  the  reproaches  of  this  inward  monitor  except  by  the  practice  of  holiness  ? 
Is  justification  unto  life  promised  ?  But  who  can  be  influenced  by  this  blessing  as 
a  motive,  and  still  wish  to  incur  the  guilt  and  the  condemnation  of  sin  ?  Is  heaven 
promised  ?  but  what  is  there  in  heaven  but  an  influence  of  transformation  into  the 
hkeness  of  the  God  who  reigns  there  ?     3.  The  same  tendency  is  apparent  in  the 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.\p.  i. 

circumstances  or  mode  of  the  Divine  promises.  Such  is  the  manner  of  God's 
promises  as  to  secure  to  the  utmost  their  full  energy  on  the  soul.  While  the 
holiness  of  man  is  their  ultimate  end,  there  is  no  sensibility  or  interest  of  man  to 
■which  they  do  not  appeal,  and  aim  to  render  subservient  to  that  end.  They  create 
no  interference,  but  insure  a  perfect  coincidence  between  man's  temporal  and 
eternal  well-being.  4.  The  same  tendency  is  apparent  from  the  number  and 
magnitude  of  the  blessings  promised.  Remarks  :  1.  We  see  the  error  of  those  who 
aim  to  derive  comfort  only  from  the  Divine  promises.  To  say  nothing  of  the 
prostration  of  the  Divine  law  thus  involved,  the  notion  is  a  direct  perversion  of  the 
very  promises  of  God,  which  are  pleaded  as  its  warrant.  Where  is  the  promise  of 
life  except  to  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  ?  Others  there  are  who  make  the 
application  of  the  promises  to  depend  on  the  belief  of  their  own  personal  interest  in 
them,  as  if  to  believe  one's  self  to  be  interested  in  the  promises  of  God  reaUy  made 
us  so.  This  perversion  is  equally  gross.  The  promises  of  God  given  to  promote 
holiness,  and  made  to  nothing  but  holiness,  do  these  secure  an  interest  in  their 
blessings  to  him  who  has  no  hohness  ?  There  is  yet  another  error  nearly  allied  to 
these,  and  still  more  common.  There  are  those  who,  though  they  deny  not  that 
the  only  warrant  for  the  hopes  of  the  gospel  is  obedience  to  the  gospel,  yet  seem 
practically  to  disregard  the  conviction.  Their  concern  is  to  discover  the  evidence 
of  an  interest  in  the  promises,  rather  than  to  create  that  evidence,  by  increasing 
their  holiness.  2.  How  great  are  the  obligations  of  the  people  of  God  to  holy 
obedience!  (N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  influence  of  the  promises  of  the  gospel: — 
Not  that  we  can  partake  of  the  essence  and  nature  of  God,  as  some  have  blas- 
phemously affirmed.  For  this  would  be  for  men  to  become  gods,  and  to  be  advanced 
to  the  state  and  perfection  of  the  Deity.  I.  By  way  of  internaIi  efficacy  and 
ASSISTANCE.  And  this  influence  the  promise  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  His 
gracious  help,  hath  upon  the  minds  of  men,  inclining  them  to  that  which  is  good, 
and  enabling  them  to  do  it.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is  promised  to  us,  in  consideration 
and  commiseration  of  that  impotency  which  we  have  contracted.  II.  By  way  of 
MOTIVE  AND  ARGUMENT,  to  cncourage  US  to  "  cleanse  ourselves  from  aU  filthiness  of 
flesh  and  spirit,  and  to  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  For — 1.  A  full  pardon 
and  indemnity  for  what  is  past  is  a  mighty  encouragement  for  us  to  return  to  our 
duty,  and  a  forcible  argument  to  keep  us  to  it  for  the  future.  2.  The  promise  of 
God's  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  is  likewise  a  very  powerful  encouragement  to  holiness, 
encouraging  us  hereto  by  this  consideration,  that  we  have  so  unerring  a  guide  to 
counsel  and  direct  us,  so  powerful  an  assistant  to  "  strengthen  us  with  all  might  in 
the  inner  man."  3.  The  promise  of  eternal  life  and  happiness,  if  duly  considered, 
hath  a  mighty  force  in  it,  to  take  us  off  from  the  love  and  practice  of  sin,  and  to 
encourage  our  obedience  and  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  AU  that  now 
remains  is  to  make  some  useful  reflections  upon  what  hath  been  discoursed  upon 
these  two  heads.  1.  If  we  expect  the  benefits  of  these  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  of  the  gospel,  we  must  be  careful  to  perform  the  conditions  which  are 
indispensably  required  on  our  parts.  2.  From  hence  we  learn  that  if  the  promises 
of  the  gospel  have  not  this  effect  upon  us,  to  make  us  partakers  of  a  Divine  nature, 
it  is  our  own  fault,  and  because  we  are  wanting  to  ourselves.  3.  If  the  promises  of 
the  Christian  religion  are  apt  in  their  own  nature  to  work  this  great  effect  upon 
us,  to  make  us  like  to  God,  to  make  us  good,  and  just,  and  merciful,  how  doth 
this  upbraid  the  degenerate  state  of  the  Christian  world  at  this  day,  which 
does  so  abound  in  all  kind  of  wickedness  and  impiety ;  so  that  we  may  cry  out, 
upon  reading  the  gospel :  "  Either  this  is  not  the  gospel  which  we  read  and  the 
Christian  religion  which  we  profess,  or  we  are  no  Christians."  {Abp.  Tillotson.) 
Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature: — "  Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,"  which  is  to  say, 
taking  part  in  the  Divine  nature.  Not  simply  like  God,  but  in  a  way  shareholders 
in  Him ;  something,  possibly,  as  the  waves  of  the  sea  are  partakers  in  the  sea,  some- 
thing, it  may  be,  as  the  leaves  of  a  tree  share  in  the  life  of  the  tree.  We  are  not 
afraid  of  widening  out  the  area  of  our  humanity  along  the  line  of  its  upward 
frontier.  Man  differs  in  one  very  peculiar  regard  from  the  brute ;  not  only  in 
moving  in  a  higher  range  of  life  and  experience,  but  in  not  being  tethered  to  any 
fixed  condition.  The  brute  is  a  brute,  and  always  a  brute.  Improve  your  dog,  and 
he  will  still  be  brutal ;  debase  your  dog,  and  he  will  still  be  brutal,  and  evince  no 
symptoms  of  dropping  to  a  lower  grade  of  being.  Once  a  dog,  always  a  dog !  On 
the  contrary,  there  is  a  just  sense  in  which  you  can  say  of  humanity,  that  it  is  not 
so  much  a  condition  as  it  is  a  position  of  poise  between  two  alternative  conditions. 
It  is  like  standing  at  the  halfway  point  on  the  Gemmi  Pass  in  Switzerland.     Yoa 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  23 

look  down  to  the  profound  depths  beneath  you,  or  you  turn  and  look  up  to  the 
superb  heights  above  you,  but  you  are  not  going  to  stop  there,  nor  to  live  there.  It 
is  not  a  place  to  remain,  but  a  place  from  which  to  look  off.  You  are  either  on 
your  way  down  the  pass  to  Leuker-Bad,  or  you  are  on  your  way  up  the  pass  to  the 
Wild-striibel ;  it  is  merely  a  position  of  poise  between  two  alternative  destinations.  Ye 
are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  Our  thought  now  is  particularly  up  the  pass,  not 
down.  There  is  more  danger  in  a  theology  that  differences  man  from  God  than  in 
one  which  assimilates  man  to  God.  There  is,  as  a  rule,  more  quickening  stimulus 
in  the  prospect  of  victory  than  there  is  in  the  danger  of  defeat.  Few  men  ever 
become  great  through  fear  of  remaining  small.  There  is  more  incentive  in  trying 
to  get  to  the  top  of  the  class  than  in  trying  to  keep  away  from  the  bottom  of  it.  If 
God  can  humanise  the  Divine  to  the  point  of  its  becoming  man,  as  in  the  instance 
of  Jesus,  what  is  to  hinder  Him,  in  the  exercise  of  the  same  omnipotence,  from 
deifying  man  to  the  point  of  his  becoming  Divine?  It  is  no  farther  from  the 
bottom  of  the  mountain  to  the  top  than  it  is  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  Now  that, 
as  we  read  the  gospel,  is  exactly  what  the  blessed  Spirit  is  trying  to  do  with  us. 
God  became  like  us  that  we  might  become  hke  God.  He  is  seeking  to  lead  us  back 
over  the  same  road  that  He  came  down.  "  Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature." 
"  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  It  is  all  in  that  word  "  sons."  There  is  com- 
munity through  identity.  You  cannot  get  sonship  in  any  other  way.  A  loyal  son 
is  governed  by  his  father  ;  but  it  is  the  best  element  of  that  loyalty,  not  that  the 
son  does  what  the  father  bids  him  do,  or  makes  him  do,  but  that  the  son  has  his 
father's  spirit  so  reproduced  in  himself,  and  so  become  a  part  of  himself  and  he  so 
a  partaker  in  his  father's  nature,  that  his  one  act  is  at  the  same  instant  both  his 
act  and  his  father's  act.  And  when  we  pray  that  God  wiU  control  us  by  His  Spirit, 
■we  certainly  hardly  expect  that  He  is  going  to  put  His  personality  behind  us,  so  as 
to  push  us  onward ;  or  put  His  personality  in  front  of  us,  so  as  to  hold  us  backward. 
We  would  rather  mean,  would  we  not,  that  as  children  of  His,  we  are  bound  in  the 
bundle  of  one  life  with  Him,  moving  therefore  at  the  impulse  of  energies  that  are 
ours  without  their  ceasing  to  be  His — somewhat,  perhaps,  as  each  separate  storm- 
wave  rolls  in  the  expression  of  its  own  might,  which  is  at  the  same  time  a  part  of 
the  might  of  the  sea ;  somewhat,  perhaps,  as  each  separate  leaf  or  branch  grows 
green  in  the  expression  of  its  own  life,  which  is  at  the  same  time  a  part  of  the  hfe 
of  the  vine.  I  in  you,  you  in  me.  Frontier  lines  gone.  One  in  each  other.  A 
single  bundle  of  hfe,  human  or  Divine,  either  or  both ;  a  shareholder  in  God ; 
up  the  Gemmi  Pass  toward  the  indistinguishable  summit.  (C  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  : — I.  Look,  first,  at  this  lofty  purpose  which  is  here 
presented  as  being  the  very  aim  and  end  of  God's  gift  in  the  gospel.  The  human 
nature  and  the  Divine  are  both  kindred  and  contrary.  There  are  no  gods  of  the 
heathen  so  far  away  from  their  worshippers,  and  there  are  none  so  near  them,  as 
our  God.  The  arched  heaven,  though  high,  is  not  inaccessible  in  its  cloudless 
beauty,  but  it  touches  earth  aU  round  the  horizon  ;  and  man  is  made  in  the  image 
of  God.  True,  that  Divine  nature  of  which  the  ideal  man  is  the  possessor  has 
faded  away  from  humanity.  But  stUl  the  human  is  kindred  with  the  Divine.  The 
tiniest  spark  of  flame  is  of  the  same  nature  as  those  leaping,  hydrogen  spears  of 
illuminated  gas  that  spring  hundreds  of  thousands  of  mUes  high  in  a  second  or 
two  in  the  great  central  sun.  But  that  kindred,  belonging  to  every  soul  of  man, 
abject  as  well  as  loftiest,  is  not  the  "partaking  "  of  which  my  text  speaks,  though  it 
is  the  basis  and  possibility  of  it ;  for  my  text  speaks  of  men  as  "  becoming  par- 
takers." What,  then,  is  it  ?  No  mere  absorption,  as  extravagant  mystics  have 
dreamed,  into  that  Divine  nature,  as  a  drop  goes  back  into  the  ocean  and  is  lost. 
There  will  always  be  "I"  and  "thou,"  or  else  there  were  no  blessedness,  nor 
worship,  nor  joy.  We  must  so  partake  of  the  Divine  nature  as  that  the  bounds 
between  the  bestowing  God  and  the  partaking  man  shall  never  be  broken  down. 
But  that  being  presupposed,  union  as  close  as  possible  is  the  great  hope  that  all 
Christian  men  and  women  ought  consciously  to  cherish.  Only  mark,  the  beginning 
of  the  whole  is  the  communication  of  a  Divine  life  which  is  manifested  mainly  in 
what  we  call  moral  hkeness.  Partakers  we  shall  be  in  the  measure  in  which  by 
our  faith  we  have  drawn  from  Him  the  pure  and  the  hearty  love  of  whatsoever 
things  are  fair  and  noble  ;  the  measure  in  which  we  love  righteousness  and  hate 
iniquity.  And  then,  remember  also  that  this  lofty  purpose  which  is  here  set  forth 
is  a  purpose  growingly  realised  in  man.  The  apostle  puts  great  stress  upon  that. 
He  is  not  talking  about  a  being,  but  about  a  "  becoming."  That  is  to  say,  God 
must  ever  be  passing,  moment  by  moment,  into  our  hearts  if  there  is  to  be  anything 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

godly  there.  Cut  off  the  sunbeam  from  the  sun  and  it  dies,  and  the  house  is  dark; 
cut  off  the  life  from  the  root  and  it  withers,  and  the  creature  shrivels.  The 
Christian  man  lives  only  by  continual  derivation  of  life  from  God ;  and  for  ever 
and  ever  the  secret  of  his  being  and  of  his  blessedness  is  not  that  he  has  become  a 
possessor,  but  that  he  has  become  a  partaker,  of  the  Divine  nature.  By  daily 
increase  we  shall  be  made  capable  of  daily  increase.     II.  Look,  next,  at  the  costly 

AND    SUFFICIENT    SIEANS    EMPLOYED    FOR    THE    REALISATION     OP     THIS     GREAT     PURPOSE. 

"  Promises"  here  must  necessarily,  I  think,  be  employed  in  the  sense  of  fulfilment 
of  the  promises.  And  so  we  might  think  of  all  the  great  and  wondrous  words  which 
God  has  spoken  in  the  past,  promises  of  deliverance,  of  forgiveness,  and  the  like  ; 
but  I  believe  that  by  these  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  "  is  meant  the 
unspeakable  gift  of  God's  own  Son,  and  the  gift  therein  and  thereafter  of  God's 
life-giving  Spirit.  For  is  not  this  the  meaning  of  the  central  fact  of  Christianity, 
the  incarnation — that  the  Divine  becomes  partaker  of  the  human  in  order  that  the 
human  may  partake  of  the  Divine  ?  Contrariety  vanishes ;  the  difference  between 
the  creature  and  the  Creator  disappears.  III.  Let  me  say,  lastly,  that  this  great 
text  adds  a  human  accompaniment  of  that  Divine  gift,  "  Having  escaped  the 
corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  Corruption  is  initial  destruction, 
though  of  course  other  forms  of  life  may  come  from  it ;  destruction  is  complete 
corruption.  The  word  means  both.  A  man  either  escapes  from  lust  and  evil,  or 
he  is  destroyed  by  it.  And  the  root  of  this  rotting  fungus  "  is  in  lust,"  which  word, 
of  course,  is  used  in  a  much  wider  meaning  than  the  fleshly  sense  in  which  we 
employ  it  in  modern  times.  It  means  "  desire  "  of  all  sorts.  The  root  of  the 
world's  corruption  is  my  own  and  my  brothers'  unbridled  and  godless  desires.  So 
there  are  two  states — a  life  plunged  in  putridity,  or  a  heart  touched  with  the  Divine 
nature.  Which  is  it  to  be  ?  It  cannot  be  both.  A  man  that  has  got  the  life  of 
God,  in  however  feeble  measure,  in  him,  will  flee  away  from  this  corruption  like 
Lot  out  of  Sodom.  And  how  will  he  flee  out  of  it  ?  By  subduing  his  own  desires  ; 
not  by  changing  position,  not  by  shirking  duty,  not  by  withdrawing  himself  into 
unwholesome  isolation  from  men  and  men's  ways.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Having 
escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust. — Depravity  : — I.  The 
SOURCE  OF  A  TREMENDOUS  EVIL.  Lust — of  flesh,  eye,  and  pride  of  life.  II.  The 
NATURE  OF  THIS  EVIL.  1.  Corruption  of  the  physical  nature — health  damaged, 
disease  engendered.  2.  Corruption  of  the  intellect — judgment  biased,  mental 
powers  enfeebled.  3.  Corruption  of  the  moral  nature — heart  polluted.  4.  Corrup- 
tion of  the  life — the  corruption  of  the  intellect  and  heart  having  its  full  develop- 
ment. III.  The  ESCAPE  from  the  evil.  1.  From  its  tyi'annical  power  and 
authority.     2.  From  its  baneful  effects,  both  in  time  and  eternity.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Giying  all  diligence. — Christian  diligence  : — It  is  not  fit  that  heaven 
should  take  all  the  pains  to  bring  earth  to  it ;  earth  must  do  somewhat  to  bring 
itself  to  heaven.  God's  bountifulness  is  beyond  our  thankfulness  ;  yet  thankfulness 
is  not  enough ;  there  is  matter  of  labour  in  it.  If  the  lord  of  a  manor  have  given 
thee  a  tree,  thou  wilt  be  at  the  charges  to  cut  it  down  and  carry  it  home.  He  who 
works  first  in  thy  conversion  hath  in  wisdom  made  thee  a  second.  Thou  seest 
God's  bounty ;  now  look  to  thine  own  duty.  I.  Diligence.  Here,  first,  for  the 
quality.  There  is  no  matter  wherein  we  hope  for  God  in  the  event,  accomplished 
without  diligence  in  the  act.  He  that  expects  a  royalty  in  heaven  must  admit  a 
service  on  earth.  The  good  man  is  weary  of  doing  nothing,  for  nothing  is  so 
laborious  as  idleness.  Satan's  employment  is  prevented  when  he  finds  thee  well 
employed  before  he  comes.  It  is  observable  that  albeit  the  Romans  were  so  idle  as 
to  make  idleness  a  god,  yet  they  allowed  not  that  idle  idol  a  temple  within  the  city, 
but  without  the  walls.  There  are  four  marks  and  helps  of  diligence :  1.  Vigilance. 
A  serious  project,  which  we  can  hardly  drive  to  our  desired  issue,  takes  sleep  from 
our  eyes.  2.  Carefulness  (Eccles.  v.  1).  3.  Love.  This  diligence  must  fetch  the 
life  from  affection,  and  be  moved  with  the  love  of  virtue.  4.  Study  (2  Tim.  ii.  15). 
II.  Give  diligence.  Not  a  pragmatical  business  in  others'  affairs  ;  but  rectify  thy 
diligence,  confining  it  principally  to  thyself.  Dress  thine  own  garden,  lest  it  be 
overrun  with  weeds.  III.  All  diligence.  Here  is  the  quantity—"  all."  1.  The 
working  up  of  salvation  is  no  easy  labour;  thereto  is  requirable  all  diligence.  Such 
a  diligence  respects  so  great  an  object,  and  such  an  object  requires  so  great  a 
diligence.  Refuse  no  labour  for  such  a  reward.  The  best  things  are  the  hardliest 
come  by  (Matt.  xi.  12).  Spare  no  invention  of  wit,  no  intention  of  will,  no  contention 
of  strength  about  it.    Will  we  adventure  our  estates,  our  lives,  to  find  out  new  lands 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  25 

where  may  be  gold,  and  spend  no  diligence  for  that  where  we  are  sure  there  is  gold, 
and  such  as  cannot  perish?  2.  God  requires  "the  whole  duty  of  man"  (Eccles. 
xii.  13) ;  that  is  God's  due.  What,  nothing  left  for  this  world  ?  Yes,  moderate 
providence  ;  the  saving  of  souls  hinders  not  provision  for  bodies,  but  furthers  and 
blesses  it  (Matt.  vi.  33).  Follow  thou  Christ ;  the  rest  shall  follow  thee.  IV.  Beside 
THIS  .  .  .  ADD.  Thus  much  for  the  addiction :  now  to  the  addition,  wherein  we  find 
a  concession,  an  accession  that  He  requires — "  add."  You  have  done  something,  yet 
there  is  a  "besides."  I  yield  a  beginning,  I  ask  a  proceeding  (Heb.  vi.  1).  God's 
arithmetic  principally  consists  in  addition.  To  give  every  man  his  own  is  but  equity ; 
but  the  addition  of  charity  makes  blessed.  And  as  addition  teaches  us  to 
add  grace  to  grace,  so  there  is  a  multiplication  required  to  increase  the 
effects  of  those  graces  in  a  multiplicity  of  good  works.  Knowledge  not  un- 
proved will  be  impaired.  If  there  be  no  usury,  we  shall  lose  the  principal. 
As  in  generation,  so  in  regeneration,  we  must  be  growing  up  to  a  full  stature 
in  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  13).  As  a  traveller  passes  from  town  to  town  till  he  come  to  his 
inn,  so  the  Christian  from  virtue  to  virtue  till  he  come  to  heaven.  (Thos.  Adams.) 
The  power  of  diligence : — I.  Now  as  to  the  homely  vietue  itself,  "  giving  all  dili- 
gence." We  all  know  what  "diligence"  means,  but  it  is  worth  while  to  point  out 
that  the  original  meaning  of  the  word  is  not  so  much  diligence  as  haste.  It  is 
employed,  for  instance,  to  describe  the  eager  swiftness  with  which  the  Virgin  went 
to  Elizabeth  after  the  angel's  salutation  and  annunciation.  It  is  the  word  employed 
to  describe  the  murderous  hurry  with  which  Herodias  came  rushing  in  to  the  king 
to  demand  John  the  Baptist's  head.  It  is  the  word  with  which  the  apostle,  left 
solitary  in  his  prison,  besought  his  sole  trusty  companion  Timothy  to  "  make  haste 
so  as  to  come  to  him  before  winter."  Thus,  the  first  notion  in  the  word  is  haste, 
which  crowds  every  moment  with  continuous  effort,  and  lets  no  hindrances  entangle 
the  feet  of  the  runner.  When  haste  degenerates  into  hurry,  and  becomes  agitation, 
it  is  weakness,  not  strength ;  it  turns  out  superficial  work,  which  has  usually  to  be 
pulled  to  pieces  and  done  over  again,  and  it  is  sure  to  be  followed  by  reaction  of 
languid  idleness.  But  the  less  we  hurry  the  more  should  we  hasten  in  running  the 
race  set  before  us.  But,  with  this  caution  against  spurious  haste,  we  cannot  too 
seriously  lay  to  heart  the  solemn  motives  to  wise  and  well-directed  haste.  The 
moments  granted  to  any  of  us  are  too  few  and  precious  to  be  let  slip  unused.  The 
field  to  be  cultivated  is  too  wide  and  the  possible  harvest  for  the  toiler  too  abundant, 
and  the  certain  crop  of  weeds  in  the  sluggard's  garden  too  poisonous,  to  allow  dawd- 
ling to  be  considered  a  venial  fault.  Little  progress  will  be  made  if  we  do  not  work 
as  feeling  that  "  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand."  The  first  element,  then, 
in  Christian  diligence  is  economy  of  time  as  of  most  precious  treasure,  and  the 
avoidance,  as  of  a  pestilence,  of  all  procrastination.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time." 
"  Wherefore,  giving  all  haste,  add  to  your  faith."  Another  of  the  phases  of  the 
virtue,  which  Peter  here  regards  as  sovereign,  is  represented  in  our  translation 
of  the  word  by  "  earnestness,"  which  is  the  parent  of  diligence.  Earnestness 
is  the  sentiment,  of  which  diligence  is  the  expression.  So  the  word  is  frequently 
translated.  Hence  we  gather  that  no  Christian  growth  is  possible  unless  a  man 
gives  his  mind  to  it.  Dawdlers  will  do  nothing.  There  must  be  fervour  if  there 
is  to  be  growth.  The  engine  that  is  giving  off  its  steam  in  white  puffs  is  not 
working  at  its  full  power.  When  we  are  most  intent  we  are  most  silent. 
Earnestness  is  dumb,  and  therefore  it  is  terrible.  Again  we  come  to  the  more 
familiar  translation  of  the  word  as  in  the  text.  "Diligence"  is  the  panacea  for 
all  diseases  of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  the  homely  virtue  that  leads  to  all  success. 
If  you  want  to  be  a  strong  Christian — that  is  to  say,  a  happy  man — you  must 
bend  your  back  to  the  work  and  "  give  all  diligence."  Nobody  goes  to  heaven  in 
his  sleep.  No  man  becomes  a  vigorous  Christian  by  any  other  course  than 
"giving  all  diligence."  It  is  a  homely  virtue,  but  if  in  its  homeliness  we  prac- 
tised it,  this  church  and  our  own  souls  would  wear  a  different  face  from  what  it  and 
they  do  to-day.  II.  Note  the  wide  field  of  action  for  this  homely  grace.  First, 
note  that  in  our  text,  "giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith."  That  is  to  say, 
unless  you  work  with  haste,  with  earnestness,  and  therefore  with  much  putting  forth 
of  strength,  your  faith  will  not  evolve  the  graces  of  character  which  is  in  it  to  bring 
forth.  He  has  just  been  saying  that  God  has  "  given  to  us  all  things  that  pertain 
to  life  and  godhness,  and  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."  The  Divine 
gift,  then,  is  everything  that  will  help  a  man  to  hve  a  high  and  godly  life.  And, 
says  Peter,  on  this  very  account,  because  you  have  all  these  requisites  for  such  a 
hfe  aJready  given  you,  see  that  you  "  bring  besides  into  "  the  heap  of  gifts,  as  it 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

were,  that  which  you  and  only  you  can  bring,  namely,  "all  diligence."  The  phrase 
implies  that  diligence  is  our  contribution.  "  Diligence  "  makes  faith  fruitful.  Dili- 
gence makes  God's  gifts  ours.  Then,  again,  the  apostle  gives  an  even  more  remark- 
able view  of  the  possible  field  for  this  all-powerful  diligence  when  he  bids  his  readers 
exercise  it  in  order  to  "make  their  calling  and  election  sure."  If  we  desire  that 
upon  our  Christian  lives  there  shall  shine  the  perpetual  sunshine  of  an  unclouded 
confidence  that  we  have  the  love  and  the  favour  of  God,  and  that  for  us  there  is  no 
condemnation,  but  only  "  acceptance  in  the  beloved,"  the  short  road  to  it  is  the  well- 
known  and  trite  path  of  toil  in  the  Christian  life.  Still  further,  one  of  the  other 
writers  of  the  New  Testament  gives  us  another  field  in  which  this  virtue  may 
expatiate,  when  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  exhorts  to  diligence,  in 
order  to  attain  "  the  full  assurance  of  hope."  The  last  of  the  fields  in  which  this 
virtue  finds  exercise  is  expressed  by  our  letter,  when  Peter  says,  "  seeing  that  we 
look  for  such  things,  let  us  be  diligent,  that  we  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace  with- 
out spot,  and  blameless."  If  we  are  to  be  "found  in  peace,"  we  must  be  "found 
spotless,"  and  if  we  are  to  be  "  found  spotless  "  we  must  be  "  diligent."  What  a 
beautiful  ideal  of  Christian  life  results  from  putting  together  all  these  items !  A 
fruitful  faith,  a  sure  calling,  a  cloudless  hope,  a  peaceful  welcome,  at  last !  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Diligence  : — 1.  That  it  is  not  enough  to  flee  and  abstain  from 
our  fleshly  lusts,  and  so  perform  the  duty  of  mortification,  unless  also  we  add  unto 
the  same,  faith,  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  and  the  like  Christian  graces.  2. 
That  naturally  we  are  sluggish,  slothful,  and  dull  in  the  performance  of  holy  duties, 
and  therefore  have  need  to  be  often  roused  up,  admonished,  and  warned  to  perform 
■our  duty  with  all  diligence.  3.  That  we  cannot  attain  unto  any  of  the  graces  of 
God's  Spirit  without  diligence,  painful  labour,  and  travail.  4.  That  the  gifts  and 
graces  of  God's  Spirit  are  worth  the  pains  taking,  worthy  I  say,  both  in  regard  of 
their  nature  and  in  regard  of  the  recompense  which  we  receive  by  them.  5.  That 
neither  the  unlawful  pleasures  of  this  world  are  to  be  sought  at  all  with  any  diligence, 
or  the  lawful  pleasures  and  profits  thereof  with  all  diligence.  6.  That  this  diligence 
which  is  required  must  be  total,  both  inward  and  outward — outward  in  every  member 
of  the  body,  inward  in  every  faculty  of  the  soul.  To  the  first  I  answer,  that  God 
doth  require  this  great  diligence  in  the  apprehension  and  application  of  His  benefits. 

I.  Because  of  the  worth  and  excellency  of  His  benefits.  2.  Because  of  their  ineifi- 
cacy  unto  us  if  not  apprehended  and  applied  by  us.  3.  Because  of  the  great  profit 
which  we  shall  reap  thereby,  being  by  us  rightly  apprehended  and  with  all  diUigence 
applied.  4.  Because  of  the  great  diligence  which  Satan  and  his  adherents,  the  world 
and  the  flesh,  do  use  to  deprive  us  of  the  same.  5.  Because  the  work  is  great,  we  un- 
wieldy, our  time  both  short  and  uncertain,  yea,  and  not  being  diligently  apprehended 
as  they  are  diligently  offered,  they  are  not  afterward  so  easily  attained.  {A.  Symso7i.) 
Christian  diligence : — I.  The  gbaces  which  we  are  here  exhorted  to  cultivate. 

II.  The  considerations  by  which  these  exhortations  are  enforced.  By  cultiva- 
ting these  various  graces  we  shall  show — 1.  That  our  piety  is  not  merely  speculative 
and  nominal.  2.  They  will  contribute  materially  to  our  spiritual  illumination.  3. 
A  consciousness  of  our  personal  acceptance.  4.  Perseverance  in  the  face  of  tempta- 
tions and  difficulties.  5.  A  joyful  and  triumphant  death.  {Expository  Outlines.) 
A  doionright  Christian  : — It  was  the  saying  of  a  shrewd  thinker  :  "  If  it  is  worth, 
while  being  a  Christian  at  all,  it  is  better  to  be  a  downright  Christian."  Activity 
necessary  to  piety  : — To  purity  activity  seems  essential.  Fill  your  room  with  the 
purest  air,  and  shut  it  up  for  one  month,  and  when  you  open  it  the  air  is  foul.  Its 
stagnation  has  made  it  impure.  The  same  is  true  of  water ;  no  matter  how  pure  it 
may  be,  let  it  become  stagnant,  and  it  grows  fetid  and  deleterious.  The  spiritual 
world  presents  an  analogy.  Idleness  is  the  stagnation  of  the  mind,  and,  like  that 
of  the  air  and  water,  it  breeds  impurity.  (Christian  Armour.)  Connection  with 
preceding  verses  : — "  As  He  hath  given  us  all  things  needful  for  life  and  godliness 
(so),  do  you  give  all  diligence,"  &c.  The  oil  and  flame  are  given  wholly  by  God's 
grace,  and  "  taken  "  by  believers ;  their  part  is  to  trim  their  lamps.  {A.  R.  Faiisset, 
M.A.)  Practice  necessary  to  perfection  : — A  neighbour  near  my  study  persists  in 
practising  upon  the  flute.  He  bores  my  ears  as  with  an  auger,  and  renders  it  almost 
an  impossibility  to  think.  Up  and  down  his  scale  he  runs  remorselessly,  until  even 
the  calamity  of  temporary  deafness  would  almost  be  welcome  to  me.  Yet  he  teaches 
me  that  I  must  practise  if  I  would  be  perfect ;  must  exercise  myself  unto  godliness 
if  I  would  be  skilful ;  must,  in  fact,  make  myself  familiar  with  the  Word  of  God, 
with  holy  living,  and  saintly  dying.  Such  practice,  moreover,  will  be  as  charming 
as   my  neighbour's  flute  is  intolerable.     (C.  H.   Spurgeon.)         Exercise  develops 


CHAP.  I.]  n.  PETER.  27 

strength  : — As  in  the  body  so  is  it  in  the  soul,  exercise  develops  strength.  The 
Laplanders  and  the  Patagonians  are  in  climates  almost  equally  cold.  The  Lap- 
landers are  a  small  race,  the  Patagonians  a  large  one.  What  makes  the  difference  ? 
The  Laplanders,  supported  by  their  reindeer,  spend  most  of  their  time  in  indolence ; 
the  Patagonians  are  an  active  race,  and  spend  much  of  their  time  in  fishing  and 
hunting.  Hence  the  stunted  development  of  the  one,  and  the  large  dimensions  of 
the  other.  It  is  thus  grace  expands  by  the  activity  of  love.  (C.  Graham.)  Add. — 
Religion  a  principle  of  growth : — Our  age  is  writing  "  progress  "  on  its  banners.  It 
bids  us  to  forget  the  things  that  are  behind,  as  incomplete  and  unsatisfactory,  and 
to  press  toward  those  which  are  yet  before  us.  We  believe  that  the  gospel,  and  it 
alone,  adequately  meets  this  deeply-seated  craving  of  our  times.  Eeligion  is  a 
principle  of  perpetual  progress.  Setting  before  us,  as  the  great  end  of  our  existence, 
and  as  the  only  perfect  model  of  moral  excellence,  the  Infinite  Jehovah,  it  requires, 
and  it  also  ministers  an  ever-growing  conformity  to  Him.  "  Grow  in  grace,"  is  the 
apostle's  injunction  to  all  recipients  of  that  grace.  It  is  the  secret  and  rule  of 
personal  reform,  constantly  advancing,  and  of  social  amelioration,  enfranchisement 
and  elevation.  1.  The  Church  needs  in  this  age  to  be  kept  in  mind  of  the  great 
truth,  that  there  remains  yet  much  land  to  be  possessed.  2.  And  if,  from  the 
peculiar  state  and  needs  of  the  churches,  we  turn  to  review  the  present  aspect  of  the 
world,  we  seem  to  discover  similar  reasons  why  the  churches  should  not,  now  at 
least,  overlook  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is,  to  its  obedient  disciples,  a  principle  of 
continuous  advancement,  a  law  of  expansion  and  moral  elevation.  The  world, 
falsely  or  with  justice,  is  shouting  its  own  progress,  and  promising  in  the  advance- 
ment of  the  masses,  the  moral  development  of  the  individual.  It  is  an  age  of  rapid 
discovery  in  the  physical  sciences.  The  laws  and  uses  of  matter  receive  profound 
investigation,  and  each  day  are  practically  applied  with  some  new  success.  Yet 
physical  science  can  certainly  neither  create  nor  replace  moral  truth.  The  crucible 
of  the  chemist  cannot  disintegrate  the  human  soul,  or  evaporate  the  moral  law. 
But  besides  these  advances  in  physical  science,  our  age  is  one  of  wondrous  political 
revolutions.  It  is  again,  even  in  lands  and  governments  where  political  revolution 
is  not  needed  or  is  not  desired,  an  age  of  social  reform.  3.  And  now,  having  seen 
how  in  the  aspects,  both  secular  and  ecclesiastical,  of  our  age.  Christians  were 
especially  summoned  to  evolve  what  of  progression  there  was  in  their  own  faith,  let 
us  see  how  in  the  inspired  presentations  of  that  faith,  the  fullest  provision  is  made 
for  man's  moral  growth.  Were  there  no  other  precept :  "Be  ye  therefore  perfect, 
even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect,"  would  be  sufficient  to  show 
how  a  limitless  expansion  of  our  intellectual  and  moral  stature  was  set  before 
us  in  the  gospel.  To  man,  the  heir  of  immortality,  it  prescribes  the  law 
and  warrants  the  hope  of  an  immortal  progression.  There  are  stages  in 
Christian  attainment;  and  one  but  prepares  for  another,  and,  without  all,  the 
Christian  cannot  be  fully  useful  or  perfectly  blessed.  4.  From  the  word  "  add," 
a  heedless  reader  might  infer  that  all  the  graces  thus  clustered  were  independent 
each  of  the  other,  and  might  be  selected  or  omitted  as  each  disciple  saw  fit ;  and 
that  a  man  might  at  least  be  safe  in  having  but  the  first,  though  in  his  negligence 
lacking  aU  the  rest.  But  such  is  not  the  apostle's  meaning.  The  believer  is  called 
upon  to  furnish  not  a  single  and  isolated  grace,  but  to  supply  "  adding  "  one  to 
another,  the  whole  consenting  train,  and  harmonious  interwoven  troop,  the  com- 
plete sisterly  choir  of  Christian  graces.  He  is  to  look  upon  the  one  in  this  cluster 
of  Christian  excellences  as  fragmentary  and  untuned  without  the  others.  The  one 
grace  is  the  supplement  and  complement  indispensable  to  the  symmetry  and  melody 
of  all  its  sister  graces.  Now  in  this  choir  or  train  Faith  is  the  elder  born,  and  upon 
it  all  these  other  graces  depend.  It  alone  justifies,  but  as  the  old  theologians  were 
fond  of  saying,  not  being  alone.  It  comes  singly  to  the  task  of  man's  justification, 
but  in  the  heart  and  life  of  the  justified  man  it  does  not  come  as  a  solitary,  building 
there  its  lonely  hermitage.  (W.  R.  Williams.)  Christian  growth  : — The  word 
which  has  been  translated  "  add  "  is  a  very  pictorial  term,  and  refers  to  a  choir  of 
well-trained  musicians.  The  musical  illustration  of  Christian  growth  is  a  very  pro- 
found and  far-reaching  one.  Keats  says  that  "heard  melodies  are  sweet,  but  those 
unheard  are  sweeter,"  implying  that  there  is  a  music  which  appeals  to  the  soul  finer 
than  anything  that  can  be  expressed  by  human  voice  or  musical  instrument. 
Beethoven  was  deaf,  heard  no  outward  sounds,  but  the  soul  of  music  was  in  him, 
and  therefore  with  the  deeper  inner  ear  he  heard  continuously  the  Divine  music  to 
which  all  things  are  attuned.  Music  is  the  great  principle  of  order.  It  enters  into 
the  essence  of  all  things.    The  music  of  the  spheres  is  not  a  mere  poetic,  but  a 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

scientific  phrase.  Everything  speaks  to  the  ear  of  the  thoughtful  of  the  wonderful 
rhythm  of  the  universe.  What  nature  does  unconsciously  and  will-lessly,  we  are  to 
do  consciously  and  willingly.  We  are  to  keep  step  and  time  to  the  music  of  the 
universe — and  to  add  to  our  faith  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  patience,  godliness, 
brotherly  kindness,  and  charity — and  thus  practically  make  the  statutes  of  the  Lord 
our  song  in  the  house  of  our  pilgrimage.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  may  add 
to  our  faith  all  the  graces  which  the  apostle  enumerates.  We  may  add  them  as  a 
builder  adds  stone  to  stone  in  his  waU  ;  or  we  may  add  them  as  a  plant  adds  cell  to 
cell  in  its  structure.  Whether,  therefore,  we  take  our  illustration  from  architecture 
or  from  plant  life,  the  essential  point,  as  implied  by  the  significance  of  the  word 
"  add  "  in  the  original,  is  that  growth  should  be  harmonious.  Architecture  is  said 
to  be  "  frozen  music."  This  is  true  of  the  commonest  wayside  wall.  What  is  it 
that  makes  the  sight  of  a  well-built  wall  so  pleasing  to  the  eye  ?  What  is  it  that 
makes  building  a  wall  such  an  interesting  employment  that  children  take  instinctively 
to  it  ?  Is  it  not  the  lore  of  symmetry — the  delight  in  shaping  large  and  small, 
rough  and  smooth,  pieces  of  stone,  adapting  them  one  to  the  other,  and  placing  them 
in  such  a  way  that  together  they  make  a  symmetrical  structure  ?  And  if  we  see  this 
curious  harmony  in  the  humblest  rustic  building,  how  grandly  does  it  come  out  in 
the  magnificent  Gothic  cathedral,  where  every  part  blends  faultlessly  and  carries  out 
the  design  of  the  architect ;  and  clustered  pillar,  and  aerial  arch,  and  groined  roof 
soar  up  in  matchless  symmetry,  and  the  soul  is  held  spellbound  by  the  poetry  which 
speaks  through  the  entire  structure  !  There  is  a  remarkable  peculiarity  in  the  text 
in  the  original  which  must  be  specially  pointed  out.  The  preposition  which  we 
have  translated  "to"  should  be  rendered  "  in,"  and  so  rendered,  we  are  significantly 
taught,  that  Christian  growth  is  not  by  mechanical  addition,  but  by  vital  increase. 
We  are  to  add  not  "  to  "  our  faith,  but  "  in  "  our  faith,  virtue,  and  "  in  "  our  virtue, 
knowledge,  and  so  on.  The  first  thing  that  we  are  commanded  by  the  apostle  to 
"  add  "  to  our  faith  is  virtue,  meaning  by  this  term  vigour,  manliness.  Our  faith  is 
to  be  itself  a  source  of  power  to  us.  We  are  to  be  strong  in  faith.  It  is  to  be  to  us 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  enabling  us  to  overcome  the  temptations  and  evils 
of  the  world,  and  to  rise  above  all  the  infirmities  of  our  own  nature.  Our  faith 
should  be  manifested  as  it  was  in  olden  times  by  a  victorious  strength  which  is  able 
to  overcome  the  world,  which  fears  the  Lord  and  knows  no  other  fear.  To  this 
strength  or  manliness'we  are  further  commanded  to  "  add  "  knowledge.  In  our  manli- 
ness we  are  to  seek  after  knowledge.  The  quality  of  courage  is  to  be  shown  by  the 
fearlessness  of  our  researches  into  aU  the  works  and  ways  of  God.  We  are  not  to  be 
deterred  by  any  dread  of  consequences  from  investigating  and  finding  out  the  whole 
truth.  The  wisdom  from  above  includes  not  only  the  knowledge  that  we  are  pardoned 
sinners,  but  also  aU  that  can  furnish  the  understanding  and  fiU  the  soul  with  food  for 
its  high  capacities  and  boundless  appetites.  With  wonderful  sagacity  the  apostle 
commands  us  to  add  to  our  knowledge  temperance ;  for  there  is  a  tendency  in  know- 
ledge to  puff  us  up  and  fiU  our  hearts  with  pride.  Temperance  gives  us  just  esti- 
mates of  ourselves  and  of  the  world.  It  gives  us  the  true  knowledge  of  all  things. 
It  enables  us  to  use  our  knowledge  aright,  to  convert  thought  into  action,  and  vision 
into  life.  We  are  to  know  ourselves  and  our  relations  to  God's  Word  in  order  to 
regulate  our  hfe  accordingly.  To  this  self-government  we  must  add  patience.  As 
the  plant  slowly  ripens  its  fruit,  so  we  are  to  ripen  our  Christian  character  by  patient 
waiting  and  patient  enduring.  It  is  a  quiet  virtue  this  patience,  and  is  apt  to  be 
overlooked  and  underestimated.  But  in  reality  it  is  one  of  the  most  precious  of  the 
Christian  graces.  The  noisy  virtues — the  ostentatious  graces  have  their  day; 
patience  has  eternity.  And  while  it  is  the  most  precious,  it  is  also  the  most  difficult. 
It  is  far  easier  to  work  than  to  wait ;  to  be  active  than  to  be  wisely  passive.  But  it 
is  when  we  are  stiU  that  we  know  God  ;  when  we  wait  upon  God  that  we  renew  our 
strength.  Patience  places  the  soul  in  the  condition  in  which  it  is  most  susceptible 
to  the  quickening  influences  of  heaven,  and  most  ready  to  take  advantage  of  new 
opportunities.  But  to  this  patience  must  be  united  godliness.  Godliness  is  God- 
likeness,  having  the  same  mind  in  us  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  viewing  everything 
from  the  Divine  point,  and  living  in  our  inner  life  as  fully  in  the  light  of  His 
presence  as  we  live  in  our  outer  life  in  the  light  of  the  sun.  And  exercising  our- 
selves unto  this  godliness,  our  patience  will  have  a  Divine  quality  of  strength, 
endurance,  beauty  imparted  to  it  such  as  no  mere  natural  patience  possesses.  We 
wrong  God  when  we  are  unkind,  ungenerous,  and  uncourteous  to  each  other.  But 
brotherly  kindness  is  apt  to  be  restricted  towards  friends  only — towards  those  who 
belong  to  the  same  place  or  the  same  church,  or  who  are  Christians.    It  must, 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  29 

therefore,  be  conjoined  to  charity.  In  our  brotherly  kindness  we  are  to  exercise  a 
large-hearted  charity.  Such,  then,  are  the  graces  which  we  are  enjoined  by  the  apostle 
to  add  to  each  other,  to  develop  from  each  other,  not  as  separate  fruits  dispersed 
widely  over  the  branches  of  a  tree,  but  as  the  berries  of  a  cluster  of  grapes  growing 
on  the  same  stem,  mutually  connected  and  mutually  dependent.  This  is  the  ideal 
of  a  perfect  Christian  character.  It  must  have  these  parts  ;  it  must  be  characterised 
by  these  qualities.  These  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  These  are  the  products  of 
genuine  faith.  They  are  not  like  the  links  of  an  u'on  chain,  manufactured  separately, 
and  mechanically  added  to  each  other  ;  but  they  are  like  the  hving  cells  of  a  grow- 
ing plant,  in  which  one  cell  gives  birth  to  another,  and  communicates  its  own 
qualities  to  it.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  An  apostle^  s  method  of  silencing  objectors: — 
"  Add  to  your  faith  virtue."  "You  have  faith."  This  is  assumed,  you  perceive. 
"  Now,"  says  the  apostle,  "  let  your  faith  be  associated  with  virtue."  The  word  is 
used  in  only  thi-ee  passages  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  a  word  derived  from  the 
name  of  the  Greek  god  of  war,  and  hence  would  give  some  countenance  to  those 
who  would  simply  make  it  to  mean  fortitude,  or  courage.  Others  take  it  in  another 
sense,  by  associating  it  with  rectitude  of  conduct — everything  that  is  "lovely  and  of 
good  report,"  in  conduct.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  do  without  either 
meaning.  The  apostle  speaks,  in  one  of  his  passages,  of  our  being  "  a  chosen 
people,  a  royal  priesthood,  to  show  forth  the  virtues  of  Him  who  hath  called  us  "  : 
that  is,  "to  show  forth  the  praises  "  ;  so  to  exhibit  God  in  connection  with  our  faith 
in  His  Son,  that  men  may  praise  Him,  seeing  how  His  name  and  His  law  are 
magnified  in  the  work  of  redeeming  love.  In  another  passage,  in  the  PhUippians, 
the  Apostle  Paul  uses,  in  a  more  general  sense,  the  same  word  :  "  If  there  be  any 
virtue  " — if  there  be  anything  at  all  commendable.  Now,  I  think,  we  must  look  at 
the  word  as  having  both  these  senses.  "  See,"  the  apostle  says,  "  that  your  profes- 
sion of  faith  is  in  connection  with  such  conduct  that  the  name  of  God  may  be 
magnified  in  you  and  by  you."  But,  then,  why  should  we  exclude  the  idea  of 
courage  ?  Eight  conduct  in  the  midst  of  evU  men  ;  consistency  of  conduct  in  the 
midst  of  a  world  lying  in  the  wicked  one ;  forgetting  all  distinctions  of  time,  or 
country,  or  circumstances,  to  take  God's  mercy,  and  apply  it  to  our  own  souls  ;  to 
accept  Christ  as  God's  weU-beloved  Son  ;  to  look  right  into  the  grave,  and  think  of 
the  judgment-seat  will  require  fortitude  ;  and  take  the  word,  in  whatever  sense  you 
please,  fortitude  and  courage  and  rectitude  of  conduct  must,  says  the  apostle,  be 
associated  with  your  profession  of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  then  the  apostle  says 
■we  are  to  associate  also  "knowledge"  ;  that  is,  he  enjoins  upon  us  to  be  intelligent 
professors  of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  God  puts  none  of  our  faculties  under  ban ;  God 
does  not  ask  any  man  whom  He  has  endowed  with  faculties,  by  which  He  may  be 
glorified  by  His  creature,  to  keep  them  in  abeyance,  to  leave  them  uncultivated.  We 
are  to  have  the  soul  fiUed  with  wisdom  from  above,  and  to  seek  all  kinds  of  wisdom, 
that  we  may  consecrate  them  to  the  service  of  God.  And  mark  how  necessary 
it  is  for  the  believer  in  Christ  Jesus  ever  to  be  growing  in  intelligence.  New 
errors  creep  into  the  Church ;  new  forms  of  error  are  presented  to  the  believer.  He 
is  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  instruction  which  God  blessed  to  the  bringing  him 
into  Uviag  relationship  with  Christ  Jesus.  We  ought,  as  a  matter  of  conscience, 
and  as  a  matter  of  duty,  to  seek  to  increase  our  intelligence,  that  we  may  be  ready 
always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man,  and  a  reason  of  a  hope  that  is  in  us.  And 
then  the  apostle  enjoins  "  temperance  "  upon  us.  The  simple  meaning  of  the  idea 
is  self-government,  or  self-restraint,  rather.  This  was  one  of  the  virtues  which  the 
Grecian  philosophers  laid  great  stress  upon,  in  this  general  sense,  not  simply  in 
eating  and  drinking,  but  in  everything  that  referred  to  the  passions  of  men.  As  the 
apostle  says,  "  Be  angry,  and  sin  not."  If  there  is  just  cause  of  anger,  we  are  to  be 
moderate  in  our  anger.  And  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  persons  who  are  "  lovers  of 
pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God  "  ;  that  is,  they  are  not  temperate  in  their  pleasures. 
There  is  nothing  contradictory  between  this  temperance  and  earnestness.  Now,  a 
man  may  be  earnest  without  intelligence  ;  he  may  be  zealously  affected  even  in  a 
bad  cause  ;  but  temperance — prudence,  that  is,  moderation  in  our  views,  and  in  the 
mode  of  carrying  out  our  views — may  be  found  in  connection  with  great  earnestness. 
But,  then,  to  "  temperance  "  we  are  to  add  "  patience."  Even  when  you  regulate 
yourselves  most,  and  have  your  spirits  under  the  directing  influences  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  you  cannot  possibly  live  and  act  for  Christ  without  finding  some  difiiculties. 
"  But,"  says  the  apostle,  "  just  quietly  endure  all  things  ;  just  patiently  persevere  in 
all  that  concerns  your  Christian  course."  "  And,  then,"  says  the  apostle,  "  associate 
also  with  these  things  godliness."      The  word  means  certain  acts  of  worship  pre- 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

sented  to  God ;  but  it  means  more  than  this,  it  means  a  reverential  spirit,  by  which 
our  acts  of  worship  are  regulated.  Is  it  not  remarkable  how  much  our  religious 
worship  is  dependent  upon  certain  influences,  certain  associations,  certain  circum- 
stances ?  You  perceive  a  man  who  has  associated  early  in  life  with  persons  who 
frequent  the  house  of  God,  and  he  contracts  a  kind  of  habit,  and  it  is  a  long  while 
before  he  can  shake  off  this  habit.  Now,  just  change  a  man's  position  in  society; 
see  what  the  increase  of  this  world's  goods  will  do  for  a  man ;  you  see  him  slacken- 
ing his  attendance  at  the  house  of  God,  and  leaving  certain  acts  of  worship  that  he 
once  regularly  engaged  in.  I  have  seen  men  who  rigidly  observed  certain  outward 
acts  of  worship  when  they  were  at  home.  I  have  seen  them  give  the  lamentable 
proof  that  it  was  all  a  matter  of  external  influence.  And  therefore  the  apostle 
says,  "Associate  with  everything  that  is  right,  everything  that  is  virtuous  in 
conduct,  godliness":  that  is,  a  devout  and  a  reverential  spirit,  manifested  in  con- 
nection with  your  devotedness  to  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  But  the  apostle  says, 
"  Not  simply  towards  God,  but  towards  your  fellow-men."  Christ  Himself  enjoined 
upon  His  disciples  love  towards  each  other,  by  which  they  should  manifest  that 
they  loved  Him.  (J.  Sherlock.)  Additions  to  faith  : — I.  The  additions  which 
•sou  ABE  TO  MAKE  TO  YOUB  FAITH.  The  apostle  doBs  not  exhort  Christians  to  seek 
after  faith.  This  he  supposes  them  to  possess  already.  You  say  you  have  faith — 
but  faith  without  works  is  dead,  being  alone.  Faith  resembles  a  foundation,  of 
high  importance  in  case  of  a  building,  but  useless  if  no  superstructure  be  reared. 
It  is  only  a  beginning,  which  is  nothing  without  progress.  What  are  clear  notions 
unless  they  influence ;  or  proper  motives  unless  they  impel  ?  Moses  had  faith, 
and  he  esteemed  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt. 
1.  The  first  addition  which  he  requires  of  you  as  believers  is  virtue — courage. 
This  principle  in  the  whole  of  your  Christian  course  will  be  found  indispensably 
necessary.  You  live  in  a  v/orld  unfriendly  to  religion.  It  will  be  found  no  easy 
thing  to  deny  yourselves  and  take  up  your  cross,  to  pluck  out  a  right  eye.  Some 
of  these  difficulties,  indeed,  might  be  avoided  if  you  were  only  to  be  reUgious  and  not 
to  appear  so.  If  we  trace  things  to  their  origin  we  shall  find  a  thousand  evils 
springing,  not  from  ignorance  but  cowardice.  Pilate  condemned  a  Saviour  of 
whose  innocency  he  was  conscious  because  of  the  Jews.  Many  of  the  Pharisees 
"  believed  on  Him,  but  feared  to  confess  Him  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the 
synagogue."  The  disciples  were  afraid  and  forsook  Him.  2^  A  second  addition  is 
knowledge.  And  this  very  properly  follows  the  former.  It  Caches  us  that  courage 
is  a  force  which  wisdom  is  to  employ  ;  courage  may  urge  us  to  undertake  the  war, 
but  judgment  is  to  manage  it.  And  hence  it  will  be  easy  to  determine  the  nature 
of  this  qualification.  It  is  practical  knowledge  ;  it  is  what  we  commonly  mean  by 
prudence,  which  is  knowledge  applied  to  action.  It  is  what  Paul  recommends  when 
he  says,  "Be  ye  not  unwise,  but  understanding  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  Walk 
circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise.  Walk  in  wisdom  towards  them  that  are 
without,  redeeming  the  time."  This  kind  of  knowledge  results  principally  from 
experience  and  observation ;  and  he  is  blameable  indeed  who  does  not  grow  wiser 
as  he  grows  older,  and  who  does  not  make  every  day  a  correction  of  the  former. 
Our  own  history  affords  us  some  of  the  best  materials  to  improve  and  embellish 
our  character.  We  should  derive  strength  from  our  weaknesses,  and  firmness  from 
our  falls.  But,  alas  !  what  numbers  are  there  upon  whom  the  continuance  of  life 
and  all  means  of  improvement  seem  to  be  thrown  away.  They  have  eyes,  but 
they  see  not;  ears  have  they,  but  they  hear  not.  Whereas  "the  wisdom  of  the 
prudent  is  to  understand  his  way."  "  The  prudent  man  looketh  well  to  his  going." 
He  draws  down  his  knowledge  from  speculation,  and  uses  it  in  common  life.  He 
judges  of  the  value  of  his  notions  by  their  utility.  He  studies  his  character  and 
condition.  He  examines  his  dangers,  his  talents,  his  opportunities.  ^.  You  are  to 
avoid  intemperance.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  word  may  be  applied  to  the 
mind  as  well  as  the  body.  4.  You  are  to  add  to  your  temperance  patience.  There 
is  an  obvious  and  striking  i^ation  between  these.  The  one  requires  us  to  bear,  the 
other  to  forbear.  The  one  regards  the  good  things,  the  other  the  evil  things  of  the 
world.  By  temperance  we  are  preserved  under  the  smiles  of  prosperity,  and  by 
patience  we  encounter  the  frowns  of  adversity.  5.  Godliness  is  indispensable. 
Courage  and  prudence,  temperance  and  patience,  would  be  no  Christian  qualities, 
if  in  the  exercise  of  them  we  were  not  influenced  by  suitable  regards  to  God. 
Without  this  reference  our  religion  is  nothing  more  than  morality.  6.  We  are  to 
add  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness.  7.  To  brotherly  kindness,  charity.  II. 
Inquibe  how  THIS  IS  xo  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.    The  apostle  tells  us.    It  is  by  giving 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  31 

all  diligence.  1.  These  things  deserve  your  diligence.  It  is  pitiable  to  see  men 
employing  their  zeal  and  consuming  their  strength  upon  trifles.  But  this  cannot 
be  said  of  spiritual  blessings  and  graces.  These  are  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great 
price.  They  are  necessary  to  man.  They  purify  his  passions,  and  tranquillise  his 
conscience.  They  enrich,  they  dignify  him,  they  are  his  perfection.  They  make 
him  happy.  2.  Diligence  will  infallibly  secure  these  things.  3.  There  is  no 
attaining  these  things  without  dihgence.  Diligence  is  indispensable.  (1)  Indis- 
pensable if  we  appeal  to  analogy.  You  must  labour  even  for  "  the  meat  that 
perisheth."  (2)  Indispensable  if  we  appeal  to  the  chai'acter  of  a  Christian.  He  is 
a  merchant,  a  scholar,  a  husbandman,  a  traveller,  a  soldier — the  anxiety  of  the 
merchant,  the  application  of  the  scholar,  the  hardy  toil  of  the  husbandman,  the 
wearying  progress  of  the  traveller,  the  painful  exercise  of  the  soldier,  are  images 
which  ill  accord  with  indolence  and  ease.  (3)  Indispensable  if  we  appeal  to  the 
promises  of  the  gospel.  These  aU  require  it,  encourage  it,  produce  it.  (IF.  Jarj.) 
The  Christian  chorus: — The  word  translated  "add"  takes  us  back  to  an  old 
Grecian  custom ;  it  means  to  be  a  chorus-leader,  to  furnish  a  chorus  at  one's  own 
expense.  The  Greeks  worshipped  their  gods  through  a  hired  chorus.  When  a 
poet  had  completed  his  work,  he  called  upon  the  archon  (or  city  mayor)  to  grant  a 
chorus.  He  in  turn  appealed  to  a  wealthy  citizen  called  a  choragus,  who  collected 
a  chorus,  hu-ed  a  trainer,  and  in  time  rendered  the  poet's  composition  to  the  delight 
of  the  citizens  and  the  glory  of  the  gods.  As  a  reward  he  received  a  tripod,  which 
he  consecrated,  and  in  some  cases  placed  on  a  monument.  The  Athenian  street 
lined  with  these  memorials  was  called  "  the  avenue  of  tripods."  Into  this  custom 
as  a  mould  Peter  pours  the  truth  of  God's  gift  and  man's  duty.  Vers.  2-4  set  forth 
God's  gift  to  man,  the  composition  of  Jehovah,  the  sacred  score,  the  expression  of 
His  life  and  love.  Grace  and  peace  are  allotted  to  us  ;  they  are  not  obtained  by  effort, 
but  are  gifts  of  God.  All  that  pertains  to  life  and  godliness  comes  through  precious 
promises.  He  who  takes  the  promises  of  faith  takes  the  life  of  God  into  his  soul. 
Here  stands  the  poet  with  his  finished  work,  pleading  for  a  chance  to  help  the 
people  and  honour  the  gods.  He  has  put  himself  into  the  composition,  it  is  as  yet 
only  a  promise  of  harmony ;  the  chorus  is  organised,  tramed,  the  people  gather,  the 
soul  of  the  composer  finds  expression,  the  people  are  inspired  to  nobler  hves,  the 
gods  are  glorified.  Until  the  archon  accepts  the  poet's  promise,  and  the  chorus 
renders  it,  the  poet  is  dumb.  God  has  given  Himself  in  great  and  precious 
promises,  completed  His  work,  and  now  calls  upon  men  to  accept  and  fill  the 
universe  with  Divine  harmony.  Vers.  5-7  give  us  man's  duty  growing  out  of  God's 
gift.  His  work  is  the  inspiration  to,  not  the  substitute  for  our  work.  God 
operates,  man  must  co-operate.  The  au-  is  free,  therefore  breathe  it;  the  earth 
is  rich,  therefore  till  it ;  the  seed  is  vital,  sow  it ;  the  sea  is  wide,  launch  out 
upon  it.  Opportunity  means  duty ;  gifts  bring  obligations.  Peter  is  writing  to 
Christians — to  "  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious  faith."  Faith  is  a 
present  possession,  something  assumed,  to  which  other  things  are  to  be  added. 
Yet  faith  is  but  one  grace,  one  instrument  in  chorus ;  without  it  the  others 
are  useless ;  with  it  alone  you  can  never  render  God's  composition.  A  solo 
is  not  a  chorus.  Beethoven  and  Wagner  cannot  be  rendered  by  one  instru- 
ment ;  much  less  can  God  be  set  forth  by  one  virtue.  "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue." 
Not  virtue  in  the  narrow  sense  of  moral  excellence,  but  of  the  energy  which 
Christians  are  to  exhibit,  as  God  exerts  His  energy  upon  them.  Faith  in  "  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  "  must  be  an  energetic  faith.  The 
verb  of  life  is  passive  toward  God,  but  active  toward  men.  The  poet  threw  himself 
into  his  composition  ;  the  chorus  was  simply  to  take  in  what  he  gave,  and  pour  it  out 
upon  others.  God  has  put  Himself  into  this  gift  of  His  ;  receiving  it  we  are  to 
yield  our  powers  to  it,  and  let  His  energy  control  us.  A  lazy  Christian  is  a  contra- 
diction in  terms.  "  And  to  energy  knowledge  " — intelligence,  understanding, 
spiritual  discernment.  This  looks  two  ways  :  understanding  of  truth,  and  discern- 
ment of  what  is  right  and  wrong  in  life.  As  the  years  go  by  we  should  know 
more  and  more  of  God's  will  as  made  known  in  His  Word.  Astronomy  is  ever 
finding  new  stars.  Christians  should  find  new  depths,  new  heights,  and  new 
breadths  in  God's  Word  as  the  years  go  by.  "  And  to  knowledge  temperance  " — 
self-control,  the  vu'tue  of  one  who  masters  his  desires  and  passions.  Keep  the  beast 
beneath  the  saddle.  Eyegate  and  eargate  must  be  guarded  lest  the  enemy  capture 
man's  soul,  and  the  door  of  speech  be  kept;  for  "If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,"  &c. 
"And  to  self-control  patience  " — the  characteristic  of  a  man  who  is  unswerved  from 
his  deliberate  purpose  and  his  loyalty  to  faith  and  piety  by  even  the  greatest  trials 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  suffei'ings.  Not  only  endurance  of  the  inevitable,  but  the  heroic,  brave 
patience,  with  which  a  Christian  not  only  bears  but  contends.  Faith,  energy,  self- 
control  count  for  little  unless  you  endure ;  there  are  many  Galatian  Christians,  who 
run  well  for  a  time ;  but  the  crowns  are  given  to  men  who  complete  the  race. 
Quick  response  on  the  part  of  the  soil  is  no  guarantee  of  a  harvest ;  depth  is  as 
needful  as  willingness.  "And  to  patience  godliness" — reverence,  respect,  piety 
toward  God ;  the  confession  of  human  dependence  upon  God  manifested  in  conduct 
and  conversation.  Having  faith,  energy,  self-control,  and  patience,  there  is  danger 
lest  we  lose  the  fine  sense  of  reverence  ;  danger  that  we  become  irreverent.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  Christian  life  there  is  an  awful  sense  of  God ;  in  too  many  cases 
this  wears  off,  we  become  familiar  with  and  degrade  holy  things  and  places,  forget 
to  bow  in  prayer,  to  close  the  eyes  in  worship.  "  And  to  godliness  brotherly 
kindness  " — love  of  the  brethren.  Nearness  to  Christ  as  the  head  means  nearness  to 
one  another  as  members  in  particular  ;  the  muscles  that  bind  the  members  to  the 
head  bind  them  to  one  another;  the  nerves  that  give  the  head  control  of  the 
members  are  nerves  of  mutual  joy  and  suffering.  Godliness  cannot  be  solitary 
and  selfish,  but  must  be  social  and  unselfish ;  he  who  loves  God  must  love  his 
brother  also.  "  And  to  brotherly  kindness  charity  "—love,  the  broad  affection  which 
should  characterise  Christians,  the  love  of  men  as  men,  "  God  is  love."  The  object 
of  God's  love  is  the  world  ;  likeness  to  God  means  love  to  all  mankind.  Paul  calls 
it  the  bond  of  perfectness,  the  sash  which  binds  all  other  graces  into  place,  the 
girdle  over  all ;  here  it  is  the  last  instrument ;  without  it  you  cannot  render  God's 
composition  to  the  world.  The  first  is  faith  in  God,  the  last  is  love  to  man,  for 
faith  in  God  begets  His  likeness  in  us.  Yonder  is  God,  the  great  composer,  bidding 
us  render  His  composition.  What  powers  He  must  see  in  us  ;  what  confidence  in 
our  powers  He  must  have  ;  what  a  calling  is  ours !  When  St.  Cecilia  played  the 
angels  responded ;  well  may  they  respond  when  human  powers  are  counted  worthy 
to  render  God's  opera.  Oh,  men  and  women,  rise  to  the  dignity  of  your  powers  and 
possibilities  !  God  waits  for  expression,  angels  wait  to  hear  God  expressed.  There 
are  eight  instruments  called  for,  the  octave,  the  perfection  of  harmony ;  though  the 
chorus  be  what  no  man  can  number,  yet  at  the  heart  of  it  is  the  octave,  and  God 
calls  on  each  man  to  use  the  powers  in  himself ;  each  man  has  the  octave  in  him- 
self, and  is  called  upon  to  chorus  his  powers,  to  train  his  gifts.  Then  we  have 
(ver.  8)  the  consequences  of  faithful  service.  Grace  and  peace  are  multiphed 
through  knowledge,  and  knowledge  comes  thi'ough  faithful  use  of  these  powers. 
The  musician  who  gives  himself  to  the  works  of  the  master  gains  knowledge  of 
the  score,  and  is  transformed  into  a  sort  of  human  photograph,  possessed  by  and 
giving  out  the  genius  of  the  composer.  So  the  Christian  who  tries  to  render  God's 
composition  comes  into  a  fuller  knowledge  of  it,  sympathy  with  it ;  God's  thoughts 
become  his  thoughts,  and  God's  ways  his  ways  ;  he  no  longer  lives,  but  Christ  lives 
in  him.  The  composition  controls  the  performer.  On  the  other  hand,  "  He  that 
lacketh  these  things  is  bhnd,"  &c.  The  word  "  blind  "  here  carries  with  it  a  curious 
figure,  "darkened  by  smoke."  Smoke-blinded,  squinting  his  eyes  up,  forgetting 
the  door  of  entrance  and  exit,  bewUdered,  he  gropes  about  searching  in  vain  for  the 
way  out  of  sin.  Kefusing  to  give  himself  to  God's  gift,  to  cultivate  the  Christian 
graces,  his  horizon  narrows,  his  life  shrinks ;  what  he  has  mastered  sinks  from 
him  :  forgiveness  forgotten,  sin  returns,  and  he  is  lost.  Hear  God's  call  to  constant 
practice,  "Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  God's  work  is 
done,  Christ  has  offered  the  finished  opera  ;  in  grace  as  in  nature  the  end  of  His 
work  is  the  beginning  of  your  work;  where  the  composer  stops  the  performer 
begins,  and  at  this  point  the  composer  becomes  dependent  upon  the  performer. 
Enter  diligently  upon  your  part  of  the  task  ;  "  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  " 
thou  shalt  reach  the  final  reward.  And  that  is  "  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered 
unto  you,"  &c.  "  Ministered  "  is  the  passive  of  the  same  verb  that  is  translated 
"  add  "  in  ver.  5.  As  the  city  honoured  the  man  who  assumed  the  burden  of  the 
chorus,  giving  him  a  public  triumph,  rearing  for  him  a  tripod  on  the  broad 
avenue,  so  God  shall  minister  to  those  who  chorus  His  works  of  grace  a 
mighty  triumph  in  the  kingdom  of  His  Son.  (0.  P.  Gifford.)  Apostolic 
Chriatvinity : — Men  are  very  fond  of  looking  at  the  Divine  government  from 
that  side  where  it  can  be  the  least  seen,  and  where  they  are  most  subject  to  the 
errors  of  their  own  fluctuating  imaginations,  and  to  the  obscurities  of  philosophy, 
falsely  so  called.  It  is  far  better,  wherever  we  can,  to  look  at  the  great  truths  of  the 
Divine  moral  government,  at  the  mystery  of  God's  dealing  with  men  in  this  world, 
from  the  human  side.    And  this  is  what  is  done  in  this  passage.    It  is,  in  brief,  the 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  33 

inspired  disclosure  of  the  purposes  of  God  in  respect  to  men.  What  it  is  that  the 
grace  of  God  is  attempting  to  do  with  those  who  are  called  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
is  set  forth.  We  are  called  of  God.  In  our  version  it  is  "  to  glory  and  virtue,"  but 
in  the  original  it  is  "  by  glory  and  virtue,"  as  if  the  call  was  not  by  the  nature  of 
man,  but  by  the  nature  of  God.  By  His  own  being,  by  the  glorious  and  virtuous 
power  of  His  own  Spirit,  He  calls  us  up  out  of  our  lower  life — out  of  that  nature  of 
ours  which  is  physical.  The  apostle  goes  on  to  say,  "  On  account  of  this,  giving  all 
diligence."  You  are  called.  The  call  is  one  which  is  to  be  answered.  There  is  to 
be  working  together  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit  and  human  endeavour, 
"  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  which  worketh 
in  you."  "  On  account  of  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith  virtue."  What 
is  faith?  Supersensuousness.  Well,  what  is  supersensuousness ?  It  is  all  that 
truth  which  exists  beyond  the  discernment  of  the  senses.  Now  the  apostle  says, 
"Add  to  that  faith  virtue."  "Add  to  this  vision-seeing  tendency  of  yours,  which 
may  etherealise  itself  and  go  off  in  a  cloudy  di'eam — add  to  this  the  practice  of  a 
wise  and  righteous  kiud.  Add  to  your  faith  virtue,  in  the  old  Koman  sense — true 
manhood."  By  the  way,  I  have  jumped  a  thought.  It  does  not  say  "  add  to  "  in 
the  original ;  it  says,  "  Provide,"  or  "  develop  in."  It  is  as  if  he  had  had  in  his 
mind  the  thought  of  a  plant.  "Add  to  your  faith,  or  in  your  faith,  virtue; 
in  other  words,  develop  out  of  your  faith  virtue — that  is,  practical  godliness ; 
and  in  your  virtue  or  from  out  of  your  virtue,  develop  knowledge."  By  this 
is  not  meant,  evidently,  that  knowledge  which  we  gather  by  our  senses — scientific 
knowledge,  ideas,  facts  ;  but  a  higher  knowledge — that  subtle  intuition  of  truth 
which  men  have  who  live  high  and  noble  lives.  That  which  is  meant  by  temperance 
is  self-government.  And  in  temperance,  or  from  it,  develop  patience — endurance — 
the  spirit  of  bold,  quiet  waiting.  "  And  to  patience,  godliness."  That  is,  let  your 
patience  be  not  stoical.  Let  it  not  be  stubborn,  sulky.  Let  it  be  the  waiting  and 
endurance  of  a  man  who  believes  that  God  reigns,  and  that  all  the  affairs  of  the 
universe  are  in  His  hands,  and  shall  work  toward  good.  "And  to  godliness,  brotherly- 
kindness."  That  is,  let  there  be  in  your  godliness  a  warm  sympathy  and  affection, 
not  only  for  yourself,  but  for  your  family,  for  all  your  near  neighbours,  for  all  your 
neighbours  that  are  more  remote,  for  all  your  townspeople,  for  all  the  world.  "  And 
to  brotherly  kindness,  charity."  Local  affection  and  universal  affection — add  these. 
Here,  then,  is  the  apostle's  conception  of  a  Christian  man's  character,  development, 
and  destiny ;  and  I  remark — I.  This  ideal  destiny  of  man  is  one  that  shall  lead  him 
into  the  likeness,  into  the  sytapathy,  and  into  the  participation  of  the  Divine  nature. 
The  reason  why  we  know  so  little  of  the  Divine  nature  is,  that  we  have  so  little  in 
ourselves  that  interprets  it  to  us.  I  have  groped  to  see  if  there  are  not  at  least  some 
traces  along  the  line  of  this  march,  and  I  think  I  see  some.  I  observe,  for  instance, 
in  the  progress  of  the  lower  animal  in  man  up  toward  the  higher,  that  when  it 
reaches  the  human  race,  the  difference  between  undeveloped  men  and  men  who  are 
developed,  is  the  power  to  discern  the  invisible.  That  is,  men  whose  forces  are 
muscular  are  inferior  to  men  whose  forces  are  mental.  And  when  the  apostle  says 
that  we  are  to  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  I  say  that  the  declaration  is  in 
harmony  with  everything  that  I  see  going  on  in  human  nature.  We  rise  away  from 
the  animal  toward  the  spiritual.  We  advance  from  lower  manhood  to  higher  man- 
hood. The  line  is  from  the  flesh  toward  the  spirit.  Therefore,  it  might  naturally 
be  expected  that  Christian  character  would  consummate  itself  in  the  development 
of  the  Divine  nature.  That  is  the  highest  form  of  spiritual  existence,  and  when  the 
apostle  says  this  is  so,  I  am  prepared  to  receive  it,  and  to  rejoice  over  it.  II.  No 
man  was  ever  converted  to  Christianity  at  one  flash.  No  man  ever  built  a  house  at 
a  single  blow,  except  in  a  summer  dream.  The  conversion  by  which  the  Spirit  of 
God  starts  a  man,  just  starts  him — that  is  all.  It  turns  him  away  from  the  wrong 
direction.  It  turns  him  toward  the  right  model.  It  gives  his  heart  an  inspiration 
for  things  higher,  and  then  says  to  him,  "  Work  out  your  salvation."  A  man  who 
has  a  musical  ear  goes  into  a  workshop  and  sees  lying  there  large  quantities  of 
material  of  various  kinds — iron,  and  steel,  and  copper,  and  brass — and  he  says, 
*'  Let  me  make  these  available."  And  he  takes  the  various  kinds  of  metal,  and  puts 
them  into  a  furnace  and  melts  them,  and  pours  the  hquid  which  they  form  into  a 
mould ;  and  when  it  is  cool  and  brought  out  it  is  a  bell.  Such  is  the  result  of  the 
combination  of  all  these  incoherent  substances.  And  when  it  is  struck  it  is  musical. 
And  he  says,  "  I  have  hit  it !  It  is  perfect !  "  But  it  is  a  monotone  ;  and  after  some 
thought  he  says.  "  No,  I  have  not  reached  perfection  yet.  There  is  more  material 
here.     What  if  I  should  make  another  bell?  "     So  he  goes  to  work  and  makes  a 

32 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

second  bell.     And  then  he  makes  a  third ;  and  then  a  fourth.     And  some  musician 
says,  "  Hang  them  up  in  yonder  tower,"  and  they  are  lifted  up  into  the  tower ;  and, 
swinging  there,  they  ring  out  through  the  air  glorious  chants  which  call  men  to 
God's  house.     God  has  lifted  up  the  spire  or  tower  of  the  human  soul,  and  has  set 
in  it  some  thirty  bells ;  and  they  are  all  to  be  brought  into  accord.     There  are  two 
or  three  that  strike  bass  notes  musically ;  but  it  is  our  business  to  bring  harmony 
into  the  whole  mighty  collection  of  musical  instruments  that  are  swinging  in  the 
belfry  of  man's  soul.     No  man  is  perfect  until  all  his  faculties  are  brought  into  har- 
monious play.     God  never  put  a  faculty  into  a  man  which  was  not  necessary ;  and 
if  we  are  to  be  perfect,  every  one  of  our  faculties  must  be  developed  and  used.     As 
God  looks  upon  men,  they  are  not  perfect  until  they  are  built  up  into  the  lines  and 
lineaments  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  have  partaken  in  part  of  the  Divine  nature. 
Then  they  are  sons  of  God ;  and  to  be  a  son  of  God  is  something  transcendently 
glorious.     III.  The  glorious  ideal  of  Christianity,  compared  with  all  the  current 
ideas,  stand-up  in  bright  and  rebuking  contrast.     How  many  are  calling  men  to 
church-membership !     How  many  are  calling  men  to  morality !     How  many  men 
are  called  to  philosophy  !     How  many  men  are  called  to  philanthropy  !     But  such 
is  not  the  call  of  God.     God  calls  men  to  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.     And 
the  providence  of  Divine  grace  is  working  on  that  pattern  incessantly.     What  the 
gardener  means,  and  what  Nature  means,  are  very  different  things.      What  the 
grape-vine  means  is  to  drive  out  its  branches,  rank  and  strong,  far  and  wide.     What 
the  gardener  means  is  grapes ;  and  therefore  he  cuts  back  the  vine  on  every  side. 
"Let  me  grow,"  says  the  vine.     "Bear,"  says  the  vintner.     "  Give  me  more  room 
for  my  leaves,"  says  the  vine.     "  Then  give  me  more  grapes  for  my  wine,"  says  the 
gardener.     Men  in  this  world  are  seeking  to  develop  forces  that  shall  be  for  their 
pleasure.     God  is  meeting  those  who  are  His  own  with  blows  at  every  step,  and 
beating  them  back.     He  is  tempering  this  man's  zeal  by  various  shames.     He  is 
subjecting  another  man  to  such  tests  as  shall  compel  him  to  come  to  endurance. 
In  various  ways  God's  providence  is  meddling  with  us.     We  are  all  praying  that 
God's  will  may  be  done ;  but  we  do  not  like  the  answer  to  our  prayer  when  it  comes. 
The  soul  is  a  temple,  and  God  is  silently  building  it  by  night  and  by  day.     Precious 
thoughts  are  building  it.     Disinterested  love  is  building  it.     Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  building  it.     All-penetrating  faith  is  building  it.     Gentleness,  and  meekness,  and 
sweet  solicitude,  and  sympathy  are  building  it.     All  virtue  and  all  goodness  are 
workmen  upon  that  invisible  temple  which  every  man  is.     "  Ye  are  the  temple  of 
God."     The  foundations  are  laid,  the  lines  are  drawn,  and  silently,  night  and  day, 
the  walls  are  carried  up,  tier  after  tier  being  laid ;  and  when  the  temple  is  built  it 
shall  seem  as  if  it  were  composed  of  precious  stones — of  beryl,  and  amethyst,  and 
topaz,  and  diamond — so  that  at  last  when  it  is  completed,  and  there  comes  the  shout 
of  "  Grace,  grace,  unto  it,"  it  shall  be  a  temple  built  in  darkness  to  reveal  light ; 
built  in  sorrow  to  produce  a  joy  which  shall  never  die.     ly.  If  these  views  are 
generally  correct,  we  may  see  in  them  the  correction  of  many  of  the  popular  sayings 
and  tendencies  of  the  day.     I  am  met  at  every  step  by  those  who  say,  "  I  ought  to 
conform  to  the  laws  of  my  being."     Which  way  is  the  eagle's  nature,  where  he  lies 
in  his  nest,  or  where  he  is,  in  the  might  of  his  power,  poised  under  the  sun,  on  a 
summer  day  ?     Is  a  man's  nature  that  which  he  is  born  to,  or  that  which  he  comes 
to  by  unfolding  ?     Is  a  man's  nature  that  which  is  furthest  from,  or  nearest  to,  that 
which  God  meant  should  be  the  final  estate  to  which  he  is  to  come  ?    A  man's  real 
nature  lies  far  beyond  his  present  sphere.     Nature  in  a  man  is  not  what  he  came 
from,  but  what  he  is  going  to.     I  am  not,  therefore,  to  take  my  models  and  patterns 
from  behind ;  but  this  one  thing  I  am  to  do — I  am  to  forget  the  things  which  are 
behind,  and  to  look  on  beyond,  and  to  take  my  conceptions  of  true  manhood  and 
noble  nature  from  the  ideals  which  I  form  of  God — and  they  are  interpreted  in  my 
experience  by  God's  Spirit.    {H.  W.  Beecher.)        Combination  of  Christian  (irace.'! : — 
You  would  think  that  flower-garden  very  defective  which  grew  only  one  kind  of 
flower,  however  beautiful  that  one  may  appear.     It  is  the  large  variety  of  flowers 
that  gives  interest  and  pleasure  in  a  garden.     Thus,  if  you  see  a  Christian  with  only 
one  predominant  grace,  whatever  it  may  be  and  however  fine,  he  is  lacking.     It  i? 
the  variety  of  graces,  and  their  combination  in  the  one  life  of  experience  and  practice, 
that  give  charm  and  glory  to  Christian  character,  as  it  is  the  combination  of  colours 
that  makes  the  light  of  the  day.   (Jas.  Hamilton,  D.D.)       An  incongruous  addition  : — 
As  it  is  always  incongruous  to  see  a  mighty  foundation  with  a  trivial  superstructure, 
a  block  of  granite  the  basis,  and  a  mud  wall  the  building,  a  foundation  of  jasper, 
and  the  remaining  corners  all  brick  ;  so  where  there  really  is  precious  faith  to  begin 


cnAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  35 

with,  you  grieve  that  there  should  not  be  added  courage,  knowledge,  temperance ; 
but  wood,  hay,  stubble,  trivial  tastes,  narrow  notions,  sectarian  prejudices,  a  sour 
or  censorious  spirit,  and  manifold  infirmities  of  the  flesh  and  spirit.  [Ibid.) 
"Faith.— Faith  the  root  of  Christian  life  :— When  the  Vatican  issued  the  celebrated 
Bull  Unigenitus,  the  occasion  of  so  many  scandals,  and  of  such  protracted  contro- 
versy, and  in  which  it  condemned,  as  abounding  with  most  portentous  errors,  the 
excellent  commentary  upon  the  New  Testament  of  the  pious  Father  Quesnel,  it 
selected  as  one  of  those  errors,  a  remark  of  the  good  Jansenist  upon  the  chapter 
before  us,  that  "Faith  is  the  first  of  graces,  and  the  source  of  every  other."  And 
yet  what  else  than  this  very  sentiment  does  the  language  of  the  apostle  here  suggest  ? 
Faith  is  put  by  him  first  in  order ;  and  is  it  not  so  put  by  Peter's  Lord  ?  (John  iii.  36.) 
I.  Faith,  in  its  widest  sense,  is  teust  or  belief  ;  confidence  in  the  word,  character, 
or  work  of  another.  Though  requisite  in  religion,  it  is  as  much  requisite  elsewhere. 
Human  society  in  its  whole  framework  is  so  held  together ;  and  the  kindreds  and 
amusements  and  business  of  the  world  are  presenting  to  the  most  earthly-minded, 
continual  images  and  intimations  of  that  faith  which,  when  demanded  of  him  by 
the  Church  and  by  the  Word  of  God,  he  may  sometimes  affect  to  regard  as  strange 
and  unexampled.  The  generous  confidence  of  soldiers  in  a  tried  and  heroic  leader ; 
the  implicit  confidence  of  his  correspondents  in  a  merchant  of  known  means,  and 
of  proved  integrity ;  the  trust  of  the  voyager  in  the  intelligence  and  vigilance  of  the 
navigator ;  the  unshaken  assurance  of  a  friend  in  the  worth  and  affection  of  one 
whom  he  has  long  known  and  intimately  loved — these  are  aU  but  examples,  in  daily 
recurrence,  of  the  use  and  the  need,  of  the  sweetness  and  of  the  power,  of  a  reason- 
able faith  and  a  well-placed  trust.  The  faith  of  the  gospel  is  something  more  than 
these,  only  as  being  trust  in  God.  It  is  trust  as  to  matters  of  higher  concernment, 
and  upon  better  warrant,  and  in  a  greater  and  better  Being.  It  is  a  reliance  on  His 
true  testimony.  It  is  not  irrational,  for  it  has  overwhelming  evidence.  Instead  of 
its  being,  as  the  bigots  of  scepticism  (for  infidehty  has  its  blind  and  bitter  bigotry) 
represent  it,  a  bandage  for  the  eyes,  and  a  manacle  for  the  free  hand,  faith  is  really, 
to  the  eyes  of  the  soul,  a  telescope  bringing  near  the  far  glories  of  heaven:  "the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen,  and  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for."  And  it  is,  to 
the  hand,  a  clue  leading  our  steps  out  of  the  mazy  dungeon  of  sin,  and  through  the 
labyi'inth  of  earth.  It  is  a  magnet  pointing  the  voyager  to  his  desired  haven ;  the 
charter,  to  the  criminal,  of  an  undeserved  and  full  pardon.  And  as  this  faith  is 
trust  in  the  truth  of  the  ever-truthful  God,  it  is  highest  wisdom,  as  it  is  reliance  on 
the  Omnipresent,  the  Almighty,  and  the  everlasting  Jehovah,  it  is  the  surest,  the 
only  safety.  II\  And  should  it  be  asked,  why  has  it  this  priority  in  the  Christian 
system,  we  answer,  it  may  well  occupy  this  place  of  precedency  in  the  scheme  of 
man's  salvation,  for  various  reasons.  1.  Man's  history  required  it.  Unbelief,  the 
opposite  of  faith,  had  the  primary  place  in  man's  faU  and  perdition.  2.  It  occupies 
the  first  place,  again,  from  the  nature,  respectively,  of  God  and  man.  He,  as  the 
Infinite  and  Omniscient,  knows  much  which  man,  as  the  finite  being  of  limited 
faculties  and  existence,  can  know  only  through  His  Divine  testimony.  3.  Again, 
God's  unutterable  tenderness  and  goodness  have  assigned  to  faith  this  post  of  pre- 
cedency. The  babe,  yet  but  a  prattler,  may  have  full  trust  in  the  parent  who  cherishes 
it.  Before  it  can  reason,  or  even  speak,  it  may  believe  in  its  father  and  mother. 
4.  And  man's  besetting  sin — the  pride  which,  after  all  the  deep  descent  of  the  Fall, 
clings  so  persistently  to  him,  however  degraded,  made  it  fitting,  that  the  mode  of  his 
acceptance  before  God  should  be  one  that  allowed  no  occasion  for  boasting.  III. 
But  will  not  a  scheme  of  salvation,  thus  free  and  indiscrdiinate,  break  down 
ALL  VIRTUE,  AND  "  THE  DIGNITY  OF  HUMAN  NATURE,"  and  abolish  law,  and  hoUness,  and 
truth?  So,  in  all  ages,  objectors  have  argued.  But  the  providence  of  God,  and  the 
history  of  the  churches,  have  sufficiently  answered  these  cavillings.  The  faith  that 
justifies  is  implanted  by  a  transforming  Spirit,  and  reconciles  to  a  holy  and  sin- 
hating  Father,  and  unites  to  a  Redeemer  detesting  and  destroying  iniquity. 
Whilst  faith  then  accepts  pardon  as  God's  free  gift,  it  accepts  as  the  inseparable 
concomitants  of  that  pardon,  penitence  for  sin,  gratitude  to  the  Giver,  ingenuous 
love,  adoption  into  the  household  of  God,  and  assimilation  to  the  Elder  Brother 
— the  Head  of  that  household.      IV.  From   the  necessity  of   its  nature  the 

IMPLANTED  FAITH  BECOMES  A  ROOT  OF  SPIRITUAL  GROWTH,  AND  A  PRINCIPLE  OF  PRACTICAL 

development.  In  its  earlier  stages  faith  is  generally  but  feeble.  That  it  should 
remain  so,  is  not  the  wUl  of  Him  who  implants  and  who  sustains  it.  1. 
From  the  nature  of  faith,  and  of  the  human  mind  itself,  faith,  where  well  placed, 
on  a  trustworthy  object,  must  grow  and  strengthen  by  exercise  and  continual  repeti- 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

tion.  2.  The  growth  set  before  our  faith  appears,  again,  from  the  character  and 
structure  of  Scripture,  the  volume  on  whose  testimonies  faith  fastens,  and  in  whose 
rich  pastures  she  must  ever  feed.  God  might  have  made  it  a  book  to  be  exhausted 
at  one  reading  ;  or  a  record  of  the  past,  unavailing  to  the  men  of  the  present ;  or  a 
mysterious  outline  of  the  future,  of  little  clearness  or  usefulness  till  the  times  of  its 
fulfilment  had  come.  Instead  of  this,  it  is  a  book  of  all  times,  full  of  the  ancient 
past,  and  the  busy  present,  and  the  dread  or  gorgeous  future.  It  has  the  simplest 
teachings  interwoven  inextricably  with  its  most  fathomless  mysteries.  Now,  when 
faith  is  presented  with  such  a  manual,  not  to  be  mastered  in  weeks  or  years,  but 
still  evolving  new  lights  to  the  latest  studies  of  the  longest  Ufetime,  does  not  the 
structure  of  the  book  proclaim  the  intent  of  God,  that  faith  should  not  sit  down 
content  with  present  attainments,  and  its  as  yet  immature  strength?  3.  And  so, 
too,  the  character  of  God  Himself  proclaims  the  same  great  law  of  the  constant 
growth  of  faith.  "Acquaint  thyself  with  Him  and  be  at  peace,"  is  the  demand  of 
reason,  no  less  than  Scripture.  Man  has  capacities  and  aspirations  that  the  earthly, 
the  perishable,  the  finite,  and  the  sinful  can  never  satisfy.  4.  The  office  and  cha- 
racter of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Author  of  faith,  point  to  the  same  results.  The  Saviour 
Himself  described  the  influence  of  this  Spirit's  indwelling  "  as  a  well  of  water  "  in 
the  disciple  "  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  {W.  R.  Williams.)  Faith: — I. 
Its  necessity.  1.  Our  apostle,  to  build  the  house  of  Christianity,  lays  this  as  the 
foundation.  Philosophy  lays  her  ground  in  reason,  divinity  in  faith ;  the  first  voice 
of  a  Christian  is,  "  I  believe."  2.  The  necessity  of  faith  appears— (1)  In  respect  of 
God  (Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Eom.  x.  14 ;  Matt.  viii.  13).  (2)  In  respect  of  the  devil  (1  Pet. 
v.  9).  He  is  too  strong  for  thee  if  thou  meetest  him  with  thy  virtue,  or  with  thy 
good  works ;  for  he  will  object  sins  enough  to  outweigh  them.  Solon  cannot  meet 
him  with  his  justice,  nor  Solomon  with  his  wisdom;  every  poor  sinner  can  overcome 
him  with  his  faith  (Eph.  vi.  16).  (3)  In  respect  of  thyself,  (a)  Thou  art  ignorant. 
There  is  no  understanding  of  God  but  by  faith,  {h)  Thou  art  originally  corrupt, 
naturally  hateful  to  God ;  nothing  canst  thou  do  to  please  Him,  till  thyself  be  first 
made  acceptable  to  Him.  The  doer  is  not  acceptable  for  the  deed,  but  the  deed  for 
the  doer.  Hadst  thou  aU  the  succeeding  graces,  and  not  this  foundation  of  faith, 
whereby  thy  person  is  made  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  when  thou  art  judged,  thou 
couldst  not  be  saved.  II.  Its  singulaeitt.  Not  faiths,  but  faith  (Eph.  iv.  5). 
There  is  but  one  faith  in  the  church,  as  but  one  church  in  the  faith ;  one  faith  in 
nature,  not  one  in  number.  Every  man  hath  his  own  faith,  yet  all  have  but  one 
faith.  HI.  Its  pkopbiety.  1.  "  Your  faith,"  because  you  have  a  right  and  interest  to 
this  faith.  Divers  gifts  are  appropriated  to  divers  men ;  but  faith  is  general  to  all 
the  elect.  2.  "  Your  faith,"  because  every  one  must  have  a  proper  and  peculiar  use 
of  faith.  Thou  canst  not  see  Christ  with  another's  eyes,  nor  walk  to  heaven  on 
another's  feet.  IV.  Its  socrETY.  "  To  your  faith  "  ;  "to  "implies  some  accession. 
Faith  is  a  great  queen  ;  it  is  base  to  let  her  go  without  a  court  and  a  train.  (Thos. 
Adanm.)  Virtue. — Faith  and  virtue  : — Isaac  Taylor  has  told  us  we  may  find  an 
illustration  of  this  apostolic  injunction  by  taking  a  view  at  large  of  church  history. 
If  we  do  so  we  shall  "  discern  beneath  the  scientific  phraseology  of  the  passage,  a 
condensed  but  comprehensive  caution  against  each  of  those  prominent  corruptions 
that  have  developed  themselves  in  the  course  of  eighteen  centuries.  They  are  readily 
enumerated,  and  may  be  put  somehow  in  this  fashion."  1.  Pusillanimous  or  inert 
faith.  2.  The  licentious  abuse  of  the  gospel.  3.  A  fanatical  or  haughty  subjuga- 
tion of  animal  desires.  4.  Anchoretic  pietism.  5.  Sectarian  or  factious  sociality. 
Thus  our  apostolic  canon  is  seen  to  hold  up  as  in  a  mirror  the  history  of  the 
degenerate  Christianity  of  all  ages."  Now  let  us  think  of  faith  and  manly  energy 
combined.  It  would  be  better  to  inquire  at  this  point,  what  is  the  New  Testament 
conception  of  "  virtue  "  ?  We  have  to  thank  the  gospel  of  Christ  for  the  force  of 
the  meaning  which  we  at  present  attach  to  the  word.  You  are  familiar  with  the 
history  and  some  of  the  literature  of  the  great  heathen  nations — the  Greeks  and  the 
Romans.  You  know  what  "virtue"  meant  with  them.  Patriotism,  first  and  chiefly; 
willingness  to  endure  all,  to  give  up  all  for  the  safety  or  benefit  of  their  country ; 
fearlessness  of  danger ;  implacability  of  hatred  of  the  enemy ;  scorn  of  physical 
suffering;  insensibility  to  the  common  sympathies  of  men;  the  cultivation  of  a 
brave  war-spirit;  this  was  courage,  manliness,  "virtue,"  in  those  days.  We  have, 
as  I  said,  to  thank  the  gospel  that  the  meaning  of  the  word  has  changed,  that  wo 
understand  true  manliness  to  consist  in  the  full  and  free  development  of  all  that  is 
good  in  human  nature ;  the  cultivation  of  some  of  those  tenderer  emotions  which 
.vere  so  hanshtily  scorned ;  the  rf^cognition  of  the  fact  that,  in  quiet,  unanswering 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  37 

submission,  there  may  be  majesty  of  soul  as  true  or  truer  than  is  evident  in  the  man 
who  does  battle  with  fortune  and  writhes  under  her  hand  ;  that  love,  mercy,  forgive- 
ness of  injury,  are  not  tokens  of  an  effeminate  heart,  but  of  manliness ;  that  a  man 
is  most  victorious  when  he  conquers  himself,  and  most  free  when  he  yields  ready, 
grateful  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  The  manliest  man  must  be  the  Christian ; 
and  what  strikes  us  chiefly  in  thinking  of  the  great  names  of  pagan  history,  men  of 
the  type  of  Aristides,  of  Pericles,  of  Socrates,  of  Decius,  of  Brutus,  is  that  it  was  the 
inspiration  of  this  truth  that  they  lacked  for  their  perfection.  This  manly  energy, 
then,  is  to  be  cultivated,  conjoined,  mixed  up  with  that  faith  in  the  promises  of  God 
which  is  the  only  true  basis  upon  which  spiritual  character  can  be  built.  Now, 
such  a  command  would  not  have  been  given  if  the  apostle  had  not  foreseen  that  the 
tendency  of  human  nature  would  be  to  divorce  these  two  thingG,  as  either  incom- 
patible with  each  other,  or,  at  all  events,  as  not  necessarily  connected.  Some  of 
you  have  not  lived  beyond  the  remembrance  of  your  first  Christian  experience. 
What  effect  was  produced  upon  you  by  the  vivid  consciousness  that  you  stood  cleared 
frorn  sin  in  the  presence  of  a  merciful  Father ;  that  eternal  life  was  yours,  that  all 
the  promises  of  the  rich  heavenly  inheritance  were  yours?  Was  not  the  effect 
that  your  inclination  was  just  to  sit  still,  and  ponder  thankfully  the  marvellous 
grace  of  God,  in  reveahng  such  blessing,  in  assuring  to  you  such  a  glorious  future? 
Such  a  desire  for  quiet  contemplative  enjoyment  of  this  new  experience  filled  you, 
that  you  regarded  with  distaste  anything  which  threatened  to  break  in  upon  it. 
Now  you  see  the  wisdom  of  it  all.  Now  you  see  the  necessity  of  the  apparent  harsh- 
ness of  some  of  that  life.  As  some  one  has  said  of  the  early  Christians,  "  they  were 
daily  brought  upon  a  path  of  danger  which  made  them  such  men  of  action,  of 
promptitude,  and  of  courage,  as  they  were  men  of  meditation ;  while,  more  than 
any  others,  they  hved  in  correspondence  with  things  '  unseen  and  eternal,'  more 
than  any  others  also  they  wrestled  with  things  earthly,  being  embarrassed  amid 
common  cares,  exhausted  by  hunger,  thirst,  and  toil,  distracted  by  fears,  and  often 
actually  engaged  in  encountering  the  anguish  of  cruel  deaths.  Thus  they  were 
compelled,  by  the  very  position  they  occupied,  to  '  mingle  with  their  faith,  virtue.'  " 
Such  has  been,  in  varying  fashion,  the  course  of  God's  providence  with  all  of  us. 
Our  nature  is  such  that  the  active  and  the  passive  emotions  must  both  have  play, 
or  the  man  is  not  proportionate  in  his  development — the  man  is  not  manly.  It  is 
no  small  evidence  of  the  Divinity  of  Christianity  that  such  a  precept  as  this  is  found 
as  part  of  its  ordinance,  showing  that  the  religion  is  adapted  for  the  man  by  a 
wisdom  above  his  own.  Faith  cannot  thrive  without  some  expression  in  action. 
Faith  without  activity  ends  in  superstition.  Now,  just  glance  at  the  other  side  of 
the  truth.  There  must  be  this  Christian  manliness  evident  and  active,  but  it  must 
have  faith  as  its  basis,  as  its  very  life.  While  language  helps  thought,  language 
without  thought  would  be  nothing.  Activity  without  faith  leads  to  infidelity,  utter 
and  complete  atheism.  (D.  J.  Hamer.)  Virtue : — I.  Consider,  first,  what  this  virtue 
IS.  No  better  suggestion  has  been  made  than  that  which  takes  it  as  meaning  a  certain 
manly  energy,  vigour,  and  firmness  of  disposition,  which  is  the  first  outcome  of  Chris- 
tian faith,  and  may  well  be  the  first  aim  of  Christian  effort.  Now  that  strength  of 
nature,  firm  tenacity  of  character,  will  at  bottom  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  good 
strong  will ;  for  a  man's  strength  is  the  strength  of  his  will.  And  that  being  understood, 
what  are  the  shapes  in  which  this  manly  energy  will  manifest  itself  ?  There  should 
flow  from  faith  a  tenacious  vigour  which  masters  circumstances  and  does  not  let  them 
work  with  us  as  they  please.  True,  the  ship  can  only  be  carried  by  the  wind  and 
the  currents,  but,  equally  true,  if  there  be  a  good  strong  hand  on  the  tiller,  and  the 
canvas  be  wisely  set,  she  can  sail  almost  in  the  wind's  eye.  Circumstances  do  make 
us,  but  it  depends  on  us  what  they  make  us.  Though  they  supply  the  force,  the 
guidance  lies  in  the  hand  that  holds  the  reins  and  pulls  the  bit.  The  strength  of 
the  Christian  man  will  manifest  itself  in  ruling  outward  things,  and  making  them 
subservient,  whether  they  be  sorrowful  or  joyful,  to  the  highest  end  of  all,  even  his 
larger  possession  of  a  fuller  Divine  nature.  And,  in  hke  manner,  the  "  virtue  "  of 
my  text  will  manifest  itself  in  the  rigid  subjugation,  by  the  energy  of  a  strong  will, 
of  all  my  own  inclinations,  desires,  tastes,  passions,  and  the  like ;  which  all  seek 
to  assert  themselves,  and  which  the  more  mightily  and  ungoverned  they  work,  the 
weaker  a  man  is.  In  like  manner,  this  manly  energy,  which  all  Christians  are 
bade  in  the  very  first  place  to  cultivate,  will  teach  us  independence  of  other  people. 
Learn  not  to  live  upon  their  smiles,  dare  to  be  voices  and  not  echoes,  and  to  take 
your  commandments,  not  from  the  habits  of  your  class  or  of  your  calling,  but  from 
the  lips  which  alone  have  power  to  command,  and  whose  approval  is  praise  indeed. 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.\p.  i. 

Let  me  remind  you  that  the  gentle  Christ  is  the  pattern  of  this  manly  force  as  of 
everything  else.  All  that  the  world  adores  as  power  looks  weak,  hysterical,  strained 
by  the  side  of  the  calm  gentleness  of  that  life  which  bears  no  trace  of  effort,  and 
yet  is  mightier  than  all  besides.  He  is  Power,  because  He  is  Love.  H.  And  now 
observe  the  root  of  this  virtue,  or  energy,  in  faith.  A  faith  which  does  not 
grow  into  virtue  and  knowledge,  and  all  the  other  links  in  this  chain  is,  if  not  dead, 
at  least  ready  to  perish  if  it  has  not  vitality  enough  to  fruit.  And  then  need  I  say 
that  the  exercise  of  confidence  in  God,  as  revealed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ,  has  a 
direct  tendency  to  produce  this  strong  form  of  character  of  which  my  text  speaks  ? 
Faith  as  the  realisation  of  the  Unseen  will  bring  strength.  III.  And  now  a  word 
as  to  THE  culture  of  this  "virtue"  bt  our  own  effort.  The  original  word  is 
very  graphic  and  picturesque.  It  means,  "  Bringing  in  by  the  side  of,"  when  fully 
and  clumsily  and  yet  accurately  translated.  "  Bringing  in  your  diligence  by  the 
side  of  " — what?  By  the  side  of  that,  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  God's 
gift  does  not  make  my  effort  unnecessary,  but  rather  demands  it  as  its  completion 
and  consequence.  The  best  way  by  which  we  can  give  diligence  to  make  ourselves 
strong,  is  by  nurturing  the  faith  which  strengthens.  Get  into  the  habit  of  thinking 
about  Jesus  Christ  all  through  your  days,  get  into  the  habit  of  bringing  mind  and 
heart  and  will  under  the  dominion  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel,  and  you  will 
find  the  strength  flowing  into  you  and  you  wiU  be  mighty  by  Him.  And  we  can 
get  this  strength  in  larger  measure,  too,  by  the  simple  process  of  habitually  acting 
as  if  we  possessed  it.  That  is  to  say,  you  may  cultivate  the  habit  of  suppressing 
yourselves,  of  stopping  your  ears  to  men's  voices,  of  mastering  and  coercing 
circumstances.  The  Will  gets  dominion  by  asserting  its  dominion.  There  are  no 
better  ways  of  evolving  this  strenuous  vigour  from  faith  than  these  two — First,  live 
near  the  source  of  it — "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength." 
And  then,  exercise  the  little  that  you  have  got,  and  it  will  grow  by  exercise.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Virtue  : — I.  The  meaning  of  the  word.  II.  The  description 
OF  THIS  characteristic  AS  BELONGING  TO  A  CHRISTIAN.  1.  What  a  Christian  ought 
to  be.  Not  feeble,  vacillating,  pusillanimous ;  but  brave,  strong,  trustworthy.  2. 
How  a  Christian  ought  to  endure.  3.  How  a  Christian  ought  to  resist.  IH.  The 
NEED  FOR  THIS  CHARACTERISTIC.  There  is  no  high  goodness  without  strength. 
IV.  The  WAT  to  the  attainment  of  vhitue.  1.  A  deep  conviction  of  its  necessity. 
2.  Fellowship  with  heroes  who  have  embodied  it.  3.  Communion  with  its 
great  source.  4.  Exercise  of  as  much  of  it  as  we  possess.  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
Virtue  : — In  common  speech  every  moral  excellence  is  called  a  virtue.  We  also 
give  the  name  "  virtue "  to  that  outward  conformity  to  the  law  of  God  which 
constitutes  a  good  moral  character.  Thus  honesty  is  a  virtue  ;  veracity  is  a  virtue ; 
chastity  is  a  virtue,  &c.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  text  does  not  use  the  word 
in  either  of  these  significations.  It  cannot  intend  by  virtue  moral  excellence  in 
general,  since  it  goes  on  to  enumerate  several  particular  moral  excellences,  such  as 
temperance,  patience,  godliness,  and  charity,  which  must  be  added  to  virtue  in 
order  to  complete  the  Christian  character.  It  cannot  intend  any  one  in  particular 
of  those  moral  traits  which  we  sometimes  call  virtues,  since  in  addition  to  virtue 
it  specifies  most  of  these  by  name.  For  the  meaning  of  the  apostle  we  must  go 
back  to  the  primary  idea  of  virtue — which  is,  manhood,  manly  vigour,  a  courageous 
tone  of  mind.  The  old  martial  Romans,  from  whom  our  word  virtue  is  directly 
inherited,  used  this  term  to  denote  primarily  the  sum  of  all  corporeal  or  mental 
excellences  in  their  ideal  of  a  man.  The  use  of  virtue  in  the  sense  of  power  or 
energy  is  common  in  old  English ;  and  there  are  some  traces  of  this  elsewhere  in 
our  version  of  the  Scriptures,  which  help  to  determine  the  meaning  of  virtue 
in  the  text.  The  Greek  word  here  translated  virtue  occurs  but  four  times  in  the 
New  Testament.  As  used  by  Paul  in  Phil.  iv.  8,  it  has  the  sense  of  moral 
excellence.  But  as  used  by  Peter  with  respect  both  to  God  and  to  man,  the  word 
clearly  denotes  force,  energy,  power.  There  is  another  word  (dvyafiig)  whose 
primary  meaning  is  power,  which  our  translators,  following  Wiclif,  sometimes 
render  by  virtue,  thus  showing  that  they  attached  to  virtue  the  old  Latin  sense 
of  energy  or  force  (Luke  viii.  46  ;  vi.  19).  Here  virtue  denotes  not  moral  good- 
ness, but  miraculous  healing  power.  Wiclif  uses  virtues  as  the  equivalent  of 
miracles.  Where  our  version  speaks  of  the  "  mighty  works  "  done  in  Chorazin, 
Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum,  Wiclif  styles  these  "virtues."  Again,  "  He  could 
there  do  no  mighty  work " ;  Wiclif  reads,  "  He  must  not  do  there  any  virtue " 
(Mark  vi.  5).  Milton  applies  the  phrase  "celestial  virtues"  to  the  fallen  "powers 
and  dominions  "  of  heaven,  rising 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  PETER.  39 

"  More  glorious  and  more  dread  than  from  no  fall." 

Here  the  word  "virtues"  conveys  no  idea  of  moral  excellences,  but  is  the  equiva- 
lent of  potentates.  It  is  obvious,  then,  that  in  old  English  and  in  the  first  English 
version  of  the  Bible  the  word  virtue  had  its  primitive  Latin  sense  of  manliness,  a 
vigorous  or  energetic  spirit,  and  that  it  sometimes  retains  this  meaning  in  our 
version  and  also  in  good  poetry.  This  is  the  meaning  which  most  fitly  renders  the 
original  term  in  the  text.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  express  this  idea  of  virtue  by 
any  one  English  synonym.  Isaac  Taylor  paraphrases  it  as  "  manly  energy,  or  the 
constancy  and  courage  of  manly  vigour."  The  one  word  which  comes  nearest 
to  it,  while  it  has  the  abundant  sanction  of  good  English  writers,  is  hardly 
domesticated  in  the  pulpit ;  yet  both  the  word  and  the  thing  were  strikingly 
expressed  by  an  honoured  foreign  missionary,  when  urging  upon  the  American 
Board  the  immediate  and  thorough  occupation  of  Turkey,  with  men  and  means 
for  the  service  of  Christ.  Said  Dr.  Schauffler,  "  After  aU  the  discouragements  and 
disasters  of  the  Crimean  campaign,  official  mismanagement,  army  jealousies,  camp 
sickness,  and  the  discomforts  of  winter,  the  soldiers  held  on  and  took  Sevastopol, 
not  by  science  but  by  pluck  " — and  what  we  need  is  Christian  pluck  to  take  posses- 
sion of  Turkey  in  the  name  of  Christ.  This  is  the  virtue  which  all  Christians  are 
expected  at  all  times  to  cultivate.  "  Giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith  virtue." 
The  apostle  speaks  to  those  whom  he  f uUy  recognises  as  one  with  himself  in  Christ. 
The  faith  that  bringeth  salvation  is  already  theirs.  But  they  are  not  to  rest  in 
that  faith  as  the  whole  of  the  Christian  character  and  life.  Add  to  your  faith, 
virtue  ;  as  followers  of  Christ  cultivate  a  true  Christian  manhood.     I.  In  what 

THIS    MANHOOD    CONSISTS.        II.    ItS   PLACE    IN    A    COMPLETE    CHARACTER.         III.    HoW    IT 

MAY  BE  ATTAINED  AND  CULTIVATED.  1.  The  virtuc  of  which  the  apostlc  speaks — 
boldness,  vigour,  courage,  manhood — is  not  to  be  confounded  with  rashness.  In 
his  earlier  experience  as  a  disciple,  Peter  was  sadly  deficient  in  the  very  virtue 
which  he  here  recommends,  though  he  was  by  no  means  wanting  in  a  rough 
physical  vigour,  and  the  courage  which  that  inspires.  2.  This  manly  virtue  should 
not  be  confounded  with  wilfulness.  Stubbornness  of  will  is  not  strength  of 
character.  It  is  doggedness  or  mulishness,  not  manhness.  If  wilfulness  were  a 
virtue,  then  Pharaoh  was  the  most  virtuous  of  men.  A  resolute,  unfaltering 
purpose  to  do  right,  a  wiU  to  honour  God  and  to  stand  by  truth  and  duty,  a  will 
which  cannot  be  broken  upon  the  wheel,  nor  relaxed  by  the  fires  of  martyrdom, 
but  like  steel  grows  more  firm  and  inflexible  under  pressure  and  heat — such  a  will 
is,  indeed,  a  manly  virtue.  But  "will-worship,"  the  magnifying  of  self-will, 
adherence  to  a  position  or  course,  not  because  it  is  known  and  felt  to  be  right,  but 
because  it  has  been  taken,  and  pride  forbids  to  change — this  wilfulness  is  as  far 
from  Christian  manliness  as  a  spoiled  child  is  from  an  angel.  3.  But  the  virtue  of 
which  we  speak,  while  it  is  neither  rash  nor  wilful,  is  always  bold,  firm,  and  deter- 
mined in  maintaining  truth  and  performing  duty :  it  is  a  manly  and  energetic  tone 
of  mind.  (1)  An  obvious  constituent  of  this  state  of  mind  is  an  intelligent  con- 
viction of  truth  and  duty.  "  A  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways." 
Steadfastness  in  purpose  is  impossible  where  the  mind  is  doubtful  as  to  the  object 
in  view.  A  purpose  springing  from  mere  feeling  is  apt  to  prove  unstable,  since  feeling 
is  a  variable  quantity.  Manly  resolve  rests  upon  inteUigent  conviction.  Strength 
of  conviction  gives  courage  to  resolution.  (2)  But  in  order  to  this  manly  virtue,  the 
principle  of  obedience  to  God  must  be  established  in  the  soul  as  final,  above  all 
personal  interests,  above  all  earthly  goods,  above  all  merely  human  custom  or  law, 
above  whatever  would  obtrude  itself  between  the  personal  soul  and  a  personal  God, 
its  Creator,  Kuler,  and  Judge.  You  cannot  cower  down  a  soul  that  rests  implicitly 
on  God.  When  Luther  stood  before  that  court  of  the  German  empire  which  held 
his  life  in  its  hands,  it  is  said  that  he  was  the  only  person  in  the  assembly  who  was 
perfectly  undisturbed.  Luther  was  ready  to  die  for  the  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith,  since  he  himself  had  added  to  faith — virtue,  a  manly  courage,  a  holy  energy 
of  soul — proceeding  from  an  intelligent  and  principled  obedience  to  God.  (3)  One 
other  constituent  enters  into  this  manly  virtue — that  is,  frankness  or  sincerity  in 
avowing  one's  convictions  of  truth  and  duty.  He  who  would  be  manly  must  be 
open.  Frankness  is  not  forwardness ;  it  does  not  require  that  one  should  be 
always  thinking  aloud  ;  neither  is  it  bluntness ;  but  it  does  forbid  one  from  a 
selfish  motive,  to  conceal  his  convictions  when  truth  and  duty  are  in  question. 
When  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin  threatened  Peter  and  John,  and  forbade  them  to 
«peak  or  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  the  apostles  fell  back  upon  conscience  and 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  i. 

the  law  of  Christian  obedience,  and  said,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God, 
to  hearken  to  you  more  than  to  God,  judge  ye  ;  for  we  cannot  but  speak  the  things 
which  we  have  seen  and  heard."     That  was  Christian  manliness.     Peter  had  now 
learned  to  add  to  his  faith,  virtue.     I.  The  impoktance  of  this  virtue  to  com- 
pleteness OF  character  is  evident  without  argument.     There  can  be  no  sterling 
character  without  this.     The  annals  of   Christian  martyrdom  often  exhibit  this 
manly  virtue  grafted    upon    child-like   faith.      II.   How   shall   this  virtue   be 
attained  ?     1.  Study  the  examples  of  those  who  have  manifested  virtue.     Look 
at  Noah,  standing  up  against  the  cavils  of  an  apostate  world  to  do  the  command 
of  God — a  preacher  of  righteousness.     Look  at  Abraham,  with  firm  tread  walking 
trackless  wastes  to  unknown  lands,  his  courage  rooted  in  faith.     Look  at  Moses 
confronting  the  stubborn  will  of  Pharaoh.     Look  at  Paul,  ready  to  face  a  Jewish 
mob,  or  the  prejudiced  Sanhedrin,  or  pagan  governors  and  Koman  captains,  or 
the  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus,  or  the  dungeon  at  Eome,  and  to  stand  in  Caesar's  palace 
as  a  witness  for  Christ.     2.  To  attain  the  fuU  vigour  of  Christian  manliness,  you 
must  exercise  this  virtue  whenever  you  have  opportunity.     Virtues  will  not  come 
to  serve  us  upon  great  occasions  unless  they  are  trained  and  developed  day  by  day. 
The  young  Christian  should  begin  early  to  cultivate  this  holy  courage — learn  to  say 
"  no "  to  every  solicitation  of  evil ;  learn  to  say  "yes "  to  every  call  of  duty.    3.  Since 
virtue  rests  upon  faith,  you  can  strengthen  and  develop  it  by  increasing  faith  as  a 
living  power  in  the  soul.     Much  as  we  may  discipline  ourselves  to  virtue,  our 
strength  must  lie  not  in  ourselves  and   our  purposes,  but  in  God  our  Saviour. 
"  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth 
strength."    A  living  faith  secures  a  manly  piety.    (Joseph  P.  Thovipson.)       Virtue  : 
— The  term    dperri,   translated    virtue    in    the    text,    denotes    strictly  manhood, 
prowess,  manly  qualities.     Stephanus  defines  it  by  "  virtus,  sed  proprie  virtus 
bellica  "  ;  martial  courage  or  valour.     He  cites  a  gloss  on  Thucydides  i.  33  ;  where 
"  arete"  is  expressed  by  indust^-ia,  navities,  virtus,  fortitudo ;  activity,  zeal,  manli- 
ness, fortitude.      Suidas  denotes  "  arete  "  to  be  "  Constantia  et  animi  vigor  " ; 
firmness  and  strength  of  mind.     Homer  applies  it  to  his  heroes  to  denote  valour 
in  battle,  and  other  manly  qualities.     The  Mycenaean  Periphetes  is  said  to  have 
been  "  superior  in  all  kinds  of  virtues  (apiTUQ),  whether  in  the  race  or  in  the 
combat"  (II.  xv.  642).      Here  virtue  denotes  physical  qualities,  such  as  speed, 
strength,  prowess.     So  the  "  god-like  Polydorus  "  in  the  agility  and  valour  which 
he  displayed  in  fight,  is  said  to  have  exhibited  "  virtue  of  feet "  or  limbs  {wo^uiv 
aptTTiv.     H.  XX.  411).     The  same  term  is  applied  to  the  "valour"  of  Meriones 
(II.  xiii.  277),  and  to  the   "bodily  vigour"  of  Menelaus  (II.  xxiii.  578).     This 
primary  sense  of  aptTi)  is  strictly  expressed  by  the  Latin  virtus,  from  which  virtue 
is  derived.     This,  in  its  literal  sense,  is  manhood,  valour ;  and  is  applied  to  physical 
courage  and  to  energy  of   character — vigour  of   mind  in  dangers  and   labours. 
Cicero  speaks  of  something  akin  to  virtue  in  animals,  as  in  lions,  dogs,  and  horses; 
but  insists  "  that  virtue  of  the  mind  "  (animi  virtus),  being  the  offspring  of  reason, 
is  to  be  preferred  to  "  physical  virtue  "  (corporis  virtuti  anteponatur.     De  Finibus 
V.  13,  38).     He  also  speaks  of  "  the  Divine  force  and  virtue  of  the  orator."     Here 
virtus  is  a  pleonasm,  reiterating  the  idea  of  vis.     (Ibid.)         Virtue  : — I.  What  is 
VIRTUE  ?     II.  As  early  as  the  days  of  apostles  there  were  in  the  Christian  Church 
THOSE  who  would  MAKE  FAITH  SUFFICE  WITHOUT  VIRTUE.     Somc  reaUy  loving  and 
practising  piety,  have  yet,  in  their  crude  theories,  discredited  morality  and  virtue, 
for  the  purpose  of    extolling,   as   they  supposed,  religion.      HI.  But   there   is 

ANOTHER     CLASS     WHO     PROCLAIM     THE     SUPERIORITY     OF     VIRTUE    TO    FAITH,     and    the 

sufficiency  before  God  and  man,  for  this  life  and  the  next,  of  virtue  without  faith. 
But  if  virtue  be  but  the  small  portion  of  man's  duties  that  he  owes  in  this  life  to 
his  fellow-mortals,  and  man  be  formed  for  another  life  as  well  as  this,  and  have  a 
God  as  well  as  human  society  to  regard  and  propitiate,  it  seems  impossible  on  any 
rational  principle  to  establish  it  that  the  discharge  of  this  small  portion  of  his 
obligations  shall  be  accepted  in  fuU  for  his  neglect  of  yet  higher  duties  to  a  yet 
higher  Being.  And  if,  in  matters  of  human  courtesy  and  friendship  even,  you  are 
wont  to  look  at  the  motive  as  determining  the  worth  or  worthlessness  of  the  service 
rendered,  does  it  not  seem  necessary  even  to  the  claim  of  true  virtue  for  these 
social  and  human  duties,  that  the  man  discharging  them  do  it  from  right  motives, 
from  the  true  love  of  man  and  the  paramount  love  and  fear  of  Almighty  God  ? 
From  mere  vain  craving  after  honour  and  praise,  men  may  discharge  the  duties. 
But  are  such  duties,  so  prompted  by  lower  motives,  genuine  virtue  ?  Again,  take 
a  few  of  the  more  eminent  of  those  whose  vii'tues  are  thus  held  up  as  surpassing 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  41 

the  fruits  of  Christian  faith.  Take  Hobbes,  the  philosophical  oracle  of  the  court 
of  the  last  Stuarts.  Take  Hume,  whom  his  friend,  Adam  Smith,  pronounced 
among  the  most  faultless  of  human  characters ;  or  in  later  times  Bentham.  And 
after  a  close  analysis  of  the  lives  and  influence  of  these  men,  do  you  not  find  the 
inquiry  of  the  apostle  remaining  still  in  full  force,  "  Who  is  he  that  overcometh 
the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  "  Was  the  morality  of 
any  of  these  men  superior  to  the  average  morality  of  their  times  ?  Did  virtue  do 
in  them  what  faith  achieves  in  the  Christian — overcome  the  world?  Again,  did  it 
tend  to  improve  that  world,  recovering  its  degraded,  and  uplifting  its  oppressed 
classes?  Go  out  as  missionaries  of  the  new  lights  of  philosophy  without 
Christianity ;  and  who  of  you  would  hope  to  see  the  new  creed,  like  the  faith  of 
the  New  Testament,  teaching  the  barbarian,  taming  the  cannibal,  making  freedom 
possible,  and  law  and  duty  sovereign  over  the  nations  ?     IV.  But  tubn  to  dwell 

BATHEB    upon    THE     UNION    THAT     SCRIPTUEE    MAKES    BETWEEN     THE    TWO    PRINCIPLES, 

which  we  have  seen  isolated  and  divorced,  requiring  as  those  Scriptures  do,  the 
man  of  faith  to  become  the  pattern  of  virtue,  abounding  in  every  good  word  and 
work.  The  problem  is  not  to  guide  the  sinless,  but  to  recover  the  sinful.  How 
can  you  efface  the  brand  of  sin  on  their  souls  ?  MoraUty  has  not  the  atoning 
calvary.  It  cannot  call  down  on  its  pentecostal  aspirations  the  rushing  fires  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  virtue  that  would  be  thus  recuperative  on  the  masses  must  be 
preceded  by  a  faith,  with  which  shaU  go  the  regenerating  power  of  God,  and  for 
which  shall  have  been  first  provided  the  great  remedial  and  reconciliatory  process 
of  the  redemption.  Let  the  Pharisee  or  the  Sadducee  go  with  another  doctrine 
than  that  of  faith  to  Zaccheus,  would  they  have  won  his  fourfold  restitution  of 
aught  wrongly  gained  ?  The  God  that  shaU  answer  by  fire,  He  is  God.  Faith  can 
produce  virtue.  Look  again  at  the  way  in  which  she  instructs  virtue.  Eead  the 
twelfth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Komans,  or  take  the  same  apostle's  discourse  of 
charity  and  its  fruits,  in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  his  first  letter  to  the  Corinthian 
Church.  Saw  you  ever  such  full,  and  brilliant,  and  unmatched  portraitures  of 
virtue  as  this  ?  But  beside  these  preceptive  instructions,  remember  that  all  the 
doctrines  and  mysteries  that  faith  receives  have  their  practical  lessons.  The  fall, 
and  original  sin,  how  they  teach  humiUty  and  dependence  on  God — the  first  lessons 
of  moral  progress.  The  incarnation  and  redemption— is  that  a  mere  logomachy  ? 
On  the  contrary,  see  in  it  a  great  scheme  for  the  subdual  of  sin,  and  the  implanta- 
tion of  hope,  and  love,  and  gratitude.  But  must  faith  produce  always  virtue  ?  It 
must,  or  it  is  not  genuine.  The  inseparable  accompaniment  of  true  faith  in 
Scripture  is  repentance ;  and  what  is  repentance  but  the  practical  and  the  outward 
and  inward  renunciation  of  sin?  {W.  R.  Williams.)  Of  Christian  fortitude  : — 
I.  First,  let  us  consider  that  which  must  AccoiiZPANT  oue  whole  duty,  the  manner 

OF    PERFORMING    IT,    OB   APPLYING    OURSELVES    TO    IT,    "  GIVING    ALL    DILIGENCE."       It    iS 

not  to  be  confined  to  one  point,  but  runs  through  the  whole  detail  of  the  Christian 
graces  which  is  here  given.  We  should  summon  all  the  powers  of  our  souls  con- 
tinually to  attend  this  very  thing,  and  watch  every  occasion  of  doing  and  of 
receiving  good.  The  necessity  of  this  will  appear  if  we  reflect  on  the  constitution 
of  human  nature,  and  the  Divine  wisdom  and  condescension  in  accommodating  to 
it  the  way  of  conferring  the  greatest  blessings  upon  us.  The  blessed  Author  of  our 
beings  has  a  regard  to  their  frame  while  He  carries  on  His  merciful  designs 
towards  us.  He  does  not  deal  by  us  as  unintelligent  machines,  but  rational 
creatures.  He  does  not  make  us  happy  without  our  own  knowledge,  choice  and 
concurrence.  I  will  add  but  one  observation  more  on  this  subject,  that  religious 
industry  will  produce  constancy,  as  its  natural  effect.  Whatever  obligations  we  are 
under  to  diligence  in  our  duty  at  any  time  do  equally  bind  us  at  every  time  ;  and 
there  can  be  no  sure  evidence  of  our  sincerity  without  a  persevering  steadfastness  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord.  II.  I  now  come  to  the  first  particular  which  the  apostle 
EXHORTS  us  to  ADD  TO  OUR  FAITH,  AND  IT  IS  VIRTUE.  This  virtuc  carrics  in  it  the  idea 
of  hazards  and  difficulties,  and  the  excellence  of  it  consists  in  a  magnanimous 
superiority  to  all  dangers  and  all  opposition.  As  it  is  peculiar  to  a  probationary 
state,  or  a  state  of  discipline,  like  ours,  it  is  that  without  which  there  can  be  no  real 
goodness,  at  least  no  steadfastness  in  such  a  state.  The  "  flesh  lusteth  against  the 
spirit "  ;  our  senses  and  inferior  appetites  always  minister  the  occasion  of  evil.  Now, 
these  must  be  resisted  by  a  Christian.  Here,  then,  is  another  occasion  for  the 
exercise  of  Christian  fortitude,  which  may  in  some  cases  require  all  our  strength. 
How  difficult  must  it  be  to  stand  unmoved  against  a  train  of  sufferings  in  our 
outward  estate.    And  how  much  invisible  wicked  agents  may  contribute  to  the 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

difficulties  and  trials  of  the  Christian  life,  who  can  certainly  say?  Having  thus 
shown  you  the  proper  object  of  Christian  fortitude,  or  the  occasion  of  its  exercise, 
I  will  next  consider  the  exercises  and  dispositions  of  mind  which  are  necessary  to 
it,  or  do  concur  in  it.  And  let  us,  first  of  all,  observe  that  it  is  very  different  from 
a  blind  passion.  Nothing  is  more  necessary  in  the  whole  of  our  religion  than  that 
■we  be  sedate  and  deliberate  ;  and  particularly  that  our  zealous  resolutions  for  God 
be  formed  upon  a  just  and  solid  ground  of  calm  and  mature  consideration.  Secondly, 
having  proceeded  so  far,  the  next  thing  necessary  is  steadfast  resolution.  It  is  of 
consequence  to  us  that  we  hold  on  in  a  religious  way,  that  we  endure  to  the  end. 
Then  certainly  we  should  fortify  our  minds  against  temptation  by  firm  purposes  ; 
we  shall  find  the  firmest  we  can  enter  into  weak  enough.  Thirdly,  the  virtue  which 
the  apostle  here  exhorts  us  to  add  to  our  faith  imports  bearing  trials,  uneasiness 
and  fatigues  with  equanimity.  A  Christian  has  the  same  sense  of  pleasure,  profit, 
and  honour  with  other  men :  and  yet  he  bravely  denies  them.  He  has  the  same 
feeling  of  pain,  and  yet  is  not  moved  by  it  to  forsake  his  duty  ;  and  herein  he  acts 
reasonably,  for  the  tendency  of  such  disagreeable  sensations  is  overruled  by  superior 
motives ;  he  sees  such  an  excellence  in  religion,  finds  such  an  inward  peace  and 
comfort  in  his  integrity,  has  such  a  solid  joy  in  the  prospect  of  a  future  glorious 
reward,  as  is  sufficient  to  bear  him  up  under  all  his  present  uneasiness.  Here, 
then,  is  the  exercise  of  religious  fortitude.  [J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  Christian 
fortitude  : — I.  I  am  to  explain  the  nature  of  this  grace  of  Christian  courage  or 
FORTITUDE.  Couragc,  in  general,  is  a  temper  which  disposes  a  man  to  do  brave  and 
commendable  actions,  without  being  daunted  at  the  appearance  of  dangers  and 
difficulties  in  the  way.  1.  For  what  it  is  to  be  exercised.  It  is  courage  in  Christ's 
cause ;  that  is,  in  maintaining  the  profession  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  adhering 
to  the  practice  of  our  duty.  2.  Against  what  Christian  courage  is  to  be  exercised. 
It  supposes  oppositions,  trials  and  dangers  in  our  way,  else  there  would  be  no 
occasion  for  it.  It  is  a  temper  for  which  there  will  be  no  room  in  heaven.  (1)  The 
power,  the  subtilty,  and  activity  of  the  powers  of  darkness  call  for  courage  in  a 
Christian.  (2)  The  oppositions  from  within  ourselves  require  courage.  (3)  The 
several  discouragements  or  dangers  we  may  meet  with  from  other  men,  in  the  way 
■of  our  duty,  and  even  for  our  duty,  make  courage  necessary.  3.  Wherein  or  in 
what  acts  and  instances  it  should  express  itself.  (1)  In  deliberate  and  vigorous 
resolutions  for  God  and  our  duty,  upon  counting  the  cost.  (2)  In  the  suppression 
of  distracting  fear  of  evils  at  a  distance.  (3)  In  a  vigorous  application  to  our 
Christian  work,  notwithstanding  the  stated  and  constant  difficulties  and  oppositions 
attending  it.  (4)  In  a  readiness  to  undertake  hard  and  difficult  services  when  God 
calls  to  them.  (5)  In  a  uniform  steadiness  of  conduct  under  all  the  trials  we 
actually  meet  with.  II.  What  mat  be  intended  in  the  exhortation  to  add  virtue, 
OR  courage,  to  our  faith.  When  we  are  called  to  make  this  addition  we  are  only 
required  to  build  the  most  proper  and  natural  structure  upon  our  most  holy  faith. 
The  fortitude  required  by  the  gospel  is  distinguished  from  all  other  fortitude,  not 
only  as  it  is  upon  account  of  the  truths  and  duties  of  Christianity,  but  as  it  is 
founded  upon  Christian  principles.  Christian  faith  is  most  fit  to  inspire  with 
Christian  fortitude.  1.  Faith  discovers  Divine  providence  as  engaged  for  us  and 
with  us  in  all  our  difficulties.  2.  Faith  proposes  the  Divine  Spirit  as  directly 
provided  to  help  our  infirmities.  Particularly  for  this  very  purpose,  to  inspire  us 
with  needful  courage.  3.  Faith  represents  our  main  enemies  as  already  vanquished, 
and  as  having  their  chief  power  broken.  4.  Faith  gives  us  particular  assurance 
that  our  trials  shall  not  exceed  our  strength ;  either  the  strength  we  have,  or  that 
which  shall  be  imparted  (1  Cor.  x.  13).  5.  Faith  sets  in  view  greater  evils  to  be  feared 
from  our  cowardice  than  can  be  feared  from  our  adherence  to  God.  6.  Faith  assures 
us  of  the  certain  and  glorious  success  of  our  courage.  That  our  endeavours  against 
our  powerful  enemies  shall  issue  in  a  full  conquest  (Rom.  xvi.  20.)  7.  Faith  represents, 
to  us  the  noblest  examples  of  such  holy  fortitude  upon  the  same  principle.  Lessons  : 
1.  Consider  this  grace  of  fortitude  as  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the 
Christian  life.  The  variety  of  oppositions  and  difficulties  in  our  way  make  it 
necessary.  2.  Cultivate  therefore  your  faith,  in  order  to  the  forming  of  your  minds 
to  holy  fortitude.  3.  Use  all  farther  additional  means  to  fortify  your  minds.  Be 
prepared  for  the  worst,  by  counting  frequently  the  cost.  Make  clear  the  goodness  of 
your  cause,  for  which  you  may  be  called  to  exert  your  courage.  Carefully  exercise 
a  good  conscience :  without  this  the  best  cause  in  profession  will  be  very  faintly 
maintained  in  an  evil  day.  {J.  Evans.)  Courage  .-—Whatever  the  Christian  was 
in  the  early  days,  he  could  not  well  be  a  coward.    He  oould  not  live  in  any  fear  as 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  43 

to  what  people  would  say  about  him :  there  was  no  doubt  about  that.  And  he  could 
not  hve  with  a  miserable  counting  of  the  loss  or  gain  that  religion  should  bring 
him.  He  knew  full  well  that  it  would  mean  abuse,  loss,  danger,  perhaps  death.  So 
in  the  old  time  Christianity  fu-st  demanded  faith  that  took  hold  of  the  promises — 
and  then  demanded  courage  that  held  on  to  them  at  any  risk  though  earth  and 
hell  raged  furiously.  To-day  religion  is  not  so  much  a  battlefield  as  it  is  a  hospital 
for  sick  and  disabled  folks ;  it  is  very  often  only  a  round  of  poultices  and  plasters 
and  nourishing  diet,  where  the  talk  is  of  troubles  and  trials  and  what  we  have  to  go 
through.  Look  at  the  company  in  which  this  valour  is  found.  "  Add  to  your  faith 
valour."  St.  Peter  is  writing  to  those  who  have  obtained  like  precious  faith  in  the 
Saviour.  But  it  is  not  good  for  Faith  to  be  alone ;  to  live  in  luxurious  ease ;  hers  is  a 
high  and  sacred  calling.  So  is  it  that  at  her  right  hand  must  stand  the  tall  and  stal- 
wart captain  of  her  guard.  Courage,  my  Lord  Courage,  strong  in  action,  resolute  in 
danger,  fearless  always.  And  at  her  left  is  her  Prime  Minister,  and  councillor,  old 
Knowledge,  with  lofty  brow,  and  ready  understanding  of  the  times  and  its  require- 
ments, and  skilful  in  devices  for  meeting  them.  Then  comes  the  Comptroller  of 
the  Household,  a  goodly  gentlemen  of  clear  eye  and  of  fair  complexion,  my  Lord 
Temperance.  Then  cometh  the  Lady-in-Waiting,  Patience,  fair  Patience,  whose 
cheery  song  keepeth  the  palace  bright  in  troublous  times.  "Bear  bravely," 
Patience  sings,  "  it  is  all  well  that  cometh  down  from  Him  ;  and  it  is  ever  well  for 
them  that  journey  up  to  Him."  Then  cometh  the  Queen's  chaplain.  Godliness,  who 
moveth  amidst  the  rest  having  a  deep  and  holy  sense  of  God's  claim,  a  steadfast  eye 
to  His  commandments,  a  lofty  sense  of  His  greatness,  and  a  glad  obedience  to  His 
will.  Then  come  the  two  almoners  who  dispense  the  Queen's  bounty — Brotherly 
Kindness  and  Charity.  Thus  only  is  Faith  secure,  and  thus  only  can  she  rightly 
discharge  all  her  duties  and  claim  all  her  honours,  when  she  is  attended  by  each  of 
these.  I.  That  Christ's  religion  asks  for  courage  should  give  it  a  stronger 
CLAIM  UPON  us.  I  ask  you  to-day  to  come  and  pledge  yourself  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  because  it  does  need  courage.  II.  With  many  is  it  not  just  this  one  thing 
— the  lack  of  courage — WHICH  IS  THE  UNDOING  OF  THE  LIFE  ?  Somc  Want  courage 
to  decide  for  Christ.  III.  In  these  busy  times  many  a  man  wants  courage  to  deal 
WITH  circumstances  THAT  HINDER  HIM.  "  Well,"  says  somebody,  indignantly, 
"  must  I  sacrifice  my  business  ?  "  Yes  ;  or  anything  else,  if  you  can  dare  to  call  it 
a  sacrifice,  seeing  what  infinite  gain  is  at  stake.  IV.  Others  need  courage  to 
DEAL  WITH  DAMAGING  INFLUENCES  ABOUT  THEM.  There  is  some  Companion,  or  some 
pursuit,  or  some  pleasure  that  takes  away  all  the  heart  and  appetite  for  the  service 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  leaves  you  like  a  garden  in  winter — nipped,  withered,  dead, 
without  bud  or  bloom  or  beauty.  There  are  things  that  make  prayer  such  hard 
work  that  it  seems  impossible,  and  the  Bible  is  a  weariness,  and  the  service  of  God 
is  a  dreary  restraint.  Resolve  by  God's  help  to  have  done  with  them  bravely  for 
the  sake  of  the  King,  and  for  the  sake  of  your  own  true  life.     V.  There  are  others 

STILL  who  need  COURAGE  TO  DEAL  RESOLUTELY  WITH  BESETTING  SINS.       YoUr  Only  hope 

is  to  add  to  your  faith  courage — to  have  no  terms  with  the  enemy.  You  musL 
perish  or  your  foe ;  the  two  cannot  live  together.  (M.  G.  Pearse.)  Christian 
courage : — It  is  not  physical  courage,  the  courage  of  the  brute,  the  courage  of  the 
man  without  nerves ;  it  is  tlje  courage  of  the  man  who  has  moral  sense  developed 
and  spiritual  ideas  strong.  I  suppose  you  have  heard  the  story  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  who,  seeing  in  the  thin  red  line  which  shines  in  Britain's  glorious  story 
a  man  trembling  in  battle  but  who  would  not  retreat,  said :  "  There  is  a  brave  man  ; 
he  knows  his  danger,  and  he  faces  it."  Another  story  is  that  two  men  were  once 
standing  together  in  battle,  one  strong  with  accumulated  flesh  and  blood,  phlegmatic, 
not  knowing  what  fear  was,  and  the  other  thin  and  pale  and  nervous  ;  and  as  he 
trembled  so  much  that  his  spirited  horse  trembled  also,  his  phlegmatic  companion 
turned  to  him  and  said:  "Humph!  afraid,  are  you?"  "Yes,"  said  he,  "if  you 
were  as  much  afraid  as  I  am  you  would  run."  And  so  sometimes  in  the  Christian 
life  apparently  the  weakest  one  is  called  to  bear  the  heaviest  strokes  of  Providence. 
He  staggers  under  his  affliction  even  as  Jesus,  pale  and  weak  and  trembling, 
staggered  beneath  the  Cross.  So  we  are  not  called  to  physical  courage — that  is  good 
enough  in  its  way — but  to  moral  courage.  {W.  E.  Griffis,  D.D.)  Goodness  is  true 
manliness  : — There  is  nothing  really  brave,  really  manly,  really  womanly,  on  earth, 
unless  it  is  also  good.  To  be  good  and  to  do  good — that  alone  is  manly.  There 
are  two  Latin  words  for  man.  The  one — homo — means  merely  a  man  as  an  animal 
distinguished  from  a  dog  or  a  horse.  But  the  other  word — vir — means  a  man  in 
the  best  and  truest  sense;  and  that  gives  us  our  word  "  virtue."    Never  forget,  virtue 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  manliness  are  one.  {Canon  Teignmouth  Shore.)  Knowledge. — Knoioledge  : — 
I.  What  exactly  is  meant  by  this  second  link  of  oub  chain.  What  is  meant  here 
is  a  practical  insight  into  what  Chi-istian  people  ought  to  do,  not  only  in  general,  but 
at  each  moment  in  accordance  with  the  circumstances  and  demands  of  the  instant. 
The  more  we  can  rule  our  lives  by  the  intelligent  application  of  principles,  and  not 
by  mere  use  and  wont,  instinct,  imitation,  mechanism,  necessity,  the  more  we  shall 
be  the  men  and  women  that  God  meant  us  to  be.  But  Peter  does  not  stop  with  such 
a  mere  toothless  generality  as  that ;  for  everything  depends  on  what  the  law  is 
which  we  apply  to  conduct.  So  this  knowledge  is  not  only  of  what  it  is  right  and 
wise  to  do  at  the  moment ;  but  it  is  knowledge  of  what  it  is  right  and  wise,  on 
Christian  ground,  to  do  at  the  moment  and  in  the  circumstances.  Let  the  perception 
of  duty  be  a  perception  illuminated  and  determined  by  the  principles  of  the  gospel, 
and  bring  that  law  to  bear  upon  all  life.  Such  a  continual  reference  of  daily 
exigencies  and  circumstances  to  the  great  principles  that  lie  in  Christ  and  His 
revelation  wiU  take  the  place  of  that  selfish  and  secular  tact  and  instinct  which  the 
world  prizes  so  highly.  It  will  give  delicacy  to  roughness,  sympathy  to  the  hard, 
tact  to  the  clumsy,  and  will  bring  a  simplicity  of  motive  and  a  suppression  of  self 
which  are  the  best  possible  precautions  for  seeing  clearly  what  the  will  of  tiie  Lord 
is.  "  Supply  in  your  strength  knowledge."  II.  The  connection  of  this  link  in 
THE  CHAIN  WITH  THOSE  THAT  GO  BEFOEE.  The  believing  man  is  the  truly  sagacious 
man.  The  real  prudence  is  got  in  communion  with  Jesus  Christ.  The  eye  that 
looks  at  the  sun  is  blinded,  but  the  eye  that  looks  constantly  at  God  sees  all  things 
as  they  are,  and  is  delivered  from  the  illusions  which  deceive  the  rest  of  mankind. 
To  see  all  in  God  and  God  in  aU,  that  is  the  way  to  understand  the  depths  of 
things,  and  to  know  what,  at  each  moment,  they  call  upon  us  to  do.  What  we  want 
to  know  is  not  only  what  circumstances  and  self -advantage  require,  but  what  Christ 
requires,  and  that  we  shaU  learn  when  we  keep  near  to  Him  in  faith.  In  like 
manner  the  strength,  of  which  my  text  has  been  speaking,  naturally  produces — 
when  it  gets  fair  play,  and  when  men  give  themselves  honestly  to  work  out  all  that 
is  in  it — it  naturally  produces  this  happy  certitude  and  illumination  upon  the  path 
by  which  we  should  walk.  III.  The  peactical  duties  which  come  out  of  this 
EXHORTATION.  1.  Fiist,  study,  and  keep  very  near  the  pattern  of  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  nothing  more  wonderful  in  that  wonderful  life  than  the  unconscious  facility  and 
certainty  with  which  He  did  the  very  act,  and  said  the  very  word  that  the  moment 
required.  2.  Then,  again,  I  would  say  try  and  get  a  more  fiirm  and  intelligent  grip 
of  the  principles  of  the  New  Testament  as  a  whole.  I  believe  there  is  the  weakness 
of  much  of  our  modern  popular  Christianity.  You  do  not  read  your  Bibles  half 
enough.  3.  Let  me  say  again  what  is  only  a  deduction  from  what  I  have  already 
said — regard  aU  Christian  truth  as  being  meant  to  influence  conduct.  We  write  up 
in  churches  the  Creed  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Ten  Commandments  on  the  other. 
Christ  is  creed  and  Christ  is  commandment.  4.  Again,  let  us  see  to  it  conversely, 
that  we  bring  all  the  actions  of  our  lives  under  the  grip  of  our  Christian  principle. 
The  lawyers  say,  "  De  minimis  non  curat  lex."  "  The  law  does  not  take  care  of  the 
very  small  things."  Perhaps  it  does  not ;  Christ's  law  does.  It  stretches  out  its 
hand  over  all  life,  and  the  smallest  duties  are  its  special  sphere.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
"  To  virtue  knowledge  "  : — Virtue  without  knowledge  were  like  a  beautiful  damsel 
blind,  or  a  fair  house  that  hath  not  a  window  in  it.  Virtue  is  like  a  pearl  in  the 
shell ;  there  must  be  knowledge  to  break  the  shell,  or  we  cannot  come  at  the  pearl. 
Ignorance  is  dangerous.  Thus  the  devil  carries  many  to  hell,  as  falconers  carry 
their  hooded  hawks,  without  baiting.  There  is  no  wretchedness  so  pitiable  as  that 
which  is  not  known  to  the  sufferer.  If  men  will  not  know  God,  God  will 
not  know  them.  The  work  of  regeneration  begins  at  illumination.  The  first 
thing  that  sunk  in  our  first  parents  was  knowledge :  now  where  the  wound 
began,  there  must  begin  the  medicine.  Knowledge  is  the  light  of  virtue.  1. 
By  knowledge  is  here  meant  an  insight  into  heavenly  things.  2.  This  earnest 
exhortation  to  knowledge  intimates  that  naturally  we  want  it.  The  first  way 
to  knowledge  is  to  know  our  own  ignorance.  3.  Knowledge  is  not  the  cause 
of  sin,  but  ignorance ;  for  virtue  is  begotten  and  nourished  by  knowledge. 
4.  Seeing  we  must  join  with  our  faith  knowledge,  it  is  manifest  that  an 
ignorant  faith  is  no  faith.  5.  This  knowledge  must  be  added  to  virtue  also. 
(ThoK.  Adam!<.\  Knowledge : — I.  There  is  in  the  Church  of  God,  as  well  as  in 
society  generally,  a  disposition  to  exalt  practice  at  the  expense  of  theory  ;  and 
YET  ALL  practice  IS  BUT  THE  EMBODIMENT  OF  SOME  THEORY.  There  is  in  somc  minds 
a  disposition  to  mock  at  all  science  and  all  patient  thought  as  being  but  idle  and 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  45 

unprofitable  speculation.  Common  sense  is  lauded  at  the  expense  of  study  and 
research.  The  labourer  is  exalted  above  the  thinker,  and  the  man  of  experimental 
activity  is  pronounced  the  truly  useful,  whilst  the  studious  and  reflecting  is 
denounced  as  a  thriftless  and  unprofitable  cumberer  of  the  earth.  But  society  and 
the  Christian  Church  need  the  thinker  as  much  as  they  require  the  labourer.  Every 
seaman  is  not  expected  to  construct  his  own  nautical  tables,  or  every  miner  to  build 
his  own  steam-engine  that  may  uplift  the  ore  or  drain  off  the  superfluous  waters. 
Yet  without  the  aid  of  the  astronomer  and  the  machinist,  of  what  avail  would  be 
the  practical  energy  of  the  hardy  mariner,  or  the  begrimed  miner  toiling  in  his  ever 
dark  and  narrow  gallery  ?  So,  in  religion,  a  just,  religious  practice  must  grow  out 
of  just,  religious  principles.  And  although  a  simple  and  childlike  faith  may  readily 
grasp  the  great  outlines  of  these  principles,  it  requires  that  faith  should  be  patient 
and  studious,  in  order  that  these  principles  may  be  fuUy  understood  and  justly 
stated,  may  be  seen  in  their  due  position,  and  may  be  held  in  their  just  proportion, 
and  in  their  mutual  dependence  and  symmetry.  11.  Now  our  text  and,  in  fuU 
harmony  with  it,  the  entire  body  of  the  Divine  Scripture,  require  that  the  Christian 

PROFIT  IN  HIS  RELIGIOUS  COURSE,  BY  GOING  ON  FROM  FAITH  TO  VIRTUE,  AND  FROM  VIRTUE 

TO  KNOWLEDGE.  The  first  great  necessity  of  our  nature  is  that  we  know  ourselves, 
that  we  learn  from  the  book  of  God  our  origin,  destiny,  and  redemption.  But  to 
have  a  just  and  safe  knowledge  of  ourselves  it  is  needful  that  we  know  our  God. 
Framed  by  Him  and  for  Him  we  cannot  ascertain  the  moral  bearings  or  calculate, 
so  to  speak,  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  our  own  drifting  course  over  the  ocean  of 
life  ;  but,  as  we  refer  to  Him  whose  wiU  is  the  meridian  line  by  which  we  estimate 
the  position  of  all  beings,  and  whose  favour  is  the  Light  and  central  Sun  of  our  moral 
life.  And  knowing  ourselves,  and  knowing  our  God  in  Scripture,  we  are  called  upon 
to  know  this  world,  that  portion  of  it  called  Nature  which  we  can  reach  and  survey; 
and  that  march  of  the  Divine  purposes  in  the  government  of  the  race  which  we  call 
history ;  and  to  know  life,  or  those  arts,  and  occupations,  and  relations,  and 
human  laws,  and  local  customs  that  are  to  affect  us  in  the  discharge  of  our  duties 
to  our  feUows.  We  are  required  to  know  man,  not  only  as  he  should  be,  and  as  in 
his  original  innoceace  he  was,  but  man  as  he  is,  in  his  selfishness,  craftiness,  and 
wretchedness,  and  yet,  withal,  in  the  long  and  tangled  train  of  aU  his  susceptibilities, 
and  his  capabilities,  and  his  hopes  and  his  fears,  his  grovelling  desires  and  his 
soaring  aspirations.  HI.  The  order  of  Christian  knowledge  as  following  and 
TENDING  TO  GUARD  AND  GROWN  FAITH  AND  VIRTUE.  Why  should  it  be  set  here,  and  not 
at  an  earlier  place,  in  the  rank  of  Christian  excellences?  1.  We  suppose  the 
reason  to  have  been  this :  it  was  to  remind  us  of  a  great  truth,  that  practical 
obedience  or  virtue  is  necessary  if  we  would  gain  any  great  advancement  in 
Christian  knowledge.  Not  only  is  such  obedience  an  evidence  of  a  sound  under- 
standing, but  it  is  also  a  safeguard  for  it.  No  man  can  keep  a  healthy  and  sound 
intellect  who  is  perpetually  sporting  with  known  error,  and  wallowing  in  known 
iniquity.  The  very  conscience  may  become  defiled,  and  the  eyes  of  the  soul  con- 
tract blindness,  by  disuse  and  misuse.  2.  Virtue  was  again  made  to  precede  know- 
ledge, in  order  to  protect  against  a  great  error  that  began  to  be  promulgated  ere  the 
first  apostles  had  quitted  the  arena  of  the  Church  militant  for  the  thrones  of  the 
Church  triumphant.  Gnosticism,  or  the  system  of  knowledge,  claimed  in  the 
early  Christian  Church  the  highest  prerogatives.  It  sought  to  plant  knowledge, 
or  the  teaching  of  its  own  wild  and  foul  philosophy,  as  the  very  basis  of  faith. 
Much  of  the  EationaUsm  and  Pantheism  of  our  own  times  proceeds  on  the  same 
most  false  and  most  fatal  principle.  Instead  of  going  out  of  ourselves  to  find,  by 
faith  in  God's  testimonies,  what  He  is  and  what  we  ourselves  are,  and  to  obtain 
the  recuperative  grace  that  sanctifies  the  heart  and  so  enlightens  the  intellect,  this 
system  drags  the  God  and  the  oracle  and  the  revelation  into  man's  self,  makes  its 
own  purblind  reason,  and  its  own  hasty  and  crude  utterances,  in  the  natural  state 
of  alienation  from  God  and  moral  blindness,  the  law  of  judgment,  to  God  and  to 
His  teachings.  3.  The  gospel  does  not  proscribe  knowledge :  it  requires  it.  It 
makes  knowledge  possible  to  the  savage  by  awakening  aspirations  where  before 
were  only  appetites ;  and  by  letting  out  on  every  side  the  horizon  of  his  cribbed  and 
narrow  intellect,  into  the  wide  eternity  and  the  high  infinity  around  and  above  him. 
It  not  only  patronises  and  diffuses  knowledge  ;  it  classifies  it  as  humanity  unaided 
cannot  do  it.  See  in  modern  missions  the  usefulness  and  glory  of  consecrated 
learning  in  a  William  Carey  and  a  Henry  Martyn,  a  Morrison  and  a  Judson  ;  and 
is  it  not  evident  that,  whatever  else  the  gospel  be,  it  is  not  the  patron  or  the  parasite 
of  ignorance  ?    4.  Physical  science  in  our  day  has  made  rapid  progress.    Religion 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

frowns  not  on  it.  But  far  as  physical  science  claims  to  be  paramount  and  sufficient 
and  exclusive,  it  has  usurped  honours  that  are  not  its  due.  It  would,  in  so  doing, 
treat  man  as  a  being  of  mere  bodily  organs,  without  conscience,  without  a  God,  and 
without  an  eternity;  and  in  so  regarding  our  race  it  robs  and  degrades  us.  Religious 
knowledge  comes  in  to  prevent  the  degradation  and  to  denounce  the  usurpation. 
Religious  knowledge  comes  in  to  remedy  the  deficiency,  and  to  right  the  wrong. 
Political  enfranchisement,  or  the  recovery  of  the  rights  of  the  masses,  is  another 
most  popular  subject  of  thought  and  debate.  But  when  was  humanity  so  elevated 
as  when  the  Creator  assumed  its  likeness  in  Bethlehem  ?  How  is  fraternity  to  be 
expounded  and  established,  but  by  bringing  men  to  look  on  themselves,  as  being  in 
common  amenable  to  the  Last  Judgment,  and  as  being  also  in  common  interested 
in  the  great  propitiation  ?  The  gospel  it  is,  then,  that  gives  the  best  knowledge ; 
ascertains  the  relative  rank  and  worth  of  all  knowledge  ;  popularises,  dift'uses,  and 
defends  it ;  and  above  aU  gives  to  man,  the  sufferer,  the  knowledge  of  the  Consoler ; 
and  to  man,  the  sinner,  the  revelation  of  the  atonement ;  and  to  the  groping  captive 
of  sin  and  heir  of  the  pit,  announces  liberty  and  holiness,  citizenship  in  heaven  and 
sonship  with  God.  {W.  R.  Williams.)  Of  knowledge  : — I.  What  kind  of  know- 
ledge IS  THE  SUBJECT  OF  THIS  EXHORTATION?  Knowledge  is  an  attainment  very 
suitable  to  a  reasonable  nature,  and  is  the  glory  of  man  because  it  is  the  improve- 
ment of  that  faculty  which  is  one  of  his  distinguishing  privileges.  But  there  is  a 
great  diversity  in  the  kinds  of  knowledge,  which  chiefly  depends  on  the  quality  of 
the  object  and  the  importance  of  the  ends  it  serves.  That  knowledge  which  the 
text  recommends  is,  according  to  this  rule,  the  most  valuable  (Prov.  ix.  10.)  If  we 
observe  the  connection  of  the  apostle's  discourse,  that  he  has  placed  knowledge  in 
the  middle  of  the  Christian  virtues,  it  will  appear  plainly  enough  that  he  means  a 
right  understanding  of  them,  such  a  knowledge  as  is  necessary  to  our  practising 
them.  We  should  constantly  study  to  be  more  and  more  acquainted  with  the 
Christian  virtues,  to  understand  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and  be  making  daily 
proficiency  in  the  exact  knowledge  of  our  duty.  We  should  use  our  own  active 
endeavours  that  we  may  grow  in  knowledge,  for  the  purposes  of  usefulness  and 
goodness.  Secondly,  another  thing  intended  in  this  exhortation  is  a  disposition  to 
improve  knowledge  to  the  proper  practical  ends  of  it.  II.  The  reasonableness  of 
ouB  endeavouring  to  attain  knowledge,  and  make  DAILY  PROGRESS  IN  IT.  If  know- 
ledge be  absolutely  necessary  to  our  doing  our  duty  acceptably,  then  all  the  argu- 
ments which  press  us  to  the  one  do  also  oblige  us  to  the  other.  First,  this  is  the 
way  to  be  preserved  from  snares,  of  which  we  are  always  in  danger  through  temp- 
tation and  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Secondly,  in  proportion  to  the  measure  of  our 
knowledge,  so  is  our  steadfastness ;  if  it  is  of  a  rational  kind.  Thirdly,  this 
unsteadiness,  together  with  weakness  of  understanding,  which  is  one  cause  of  it, 
renders  men  in  a  great  measure  unprofitable  to  the  world  and  to  the  Church.  There 
is  not  anything  a  Christian  should  have  more  at  heart  than  to  promote  the 
common  edification  of  the  body  of  Christ.  And  that  this  may  be  effected,  adding 
knowledge  to  our  faith  and  virtue  is  the  best  expedient.     III.  Some  directions  fob 

ATTAINING  USEFUL  AND  SALUTARY  KNOWLEDGE.       1.  The  first  is  a  high  CStCCm  of  it.       If 

it  be  pleasant  to  our  souls,  if  we  have  a  just  sense  of  its  excellency,  and  thus  our 
affections  are  captivated  to  it ;  it  is  the  best  preparation  of  mind  we  can  have  for 
this  most  important  acquisition.  2.  Let  us  use  the  means  of  attaining  knowledge 
with  great  diligence  and  care.  There  is  no  other  way  to  prove  our  sincerity 
and  our  love  of  wisdom.  3.  But  it  is  above  aU  things  necessary  that  we  use  the 
means  of  knowledge,  and  particularly  that  we  search  the  Holy  Scriptures 
without  prejudice  and  prepossession.  4.  The  best  means  of  attaining  to  religious 
knowledge,  is  doing  what  we  know  to  be  the  will  of  God.  [J.  Aherncthy,  M.A.) 
Knmvledcje  : — The  meaning  of  the  term  "  knowledge  "  must  be  ascertained  by  a  com- 
parison of  the  text  with  other  passages  in  which  this  word  occurs.  It  is  of  course 
knowledge  with  respect  to  spiritual  things  and  religious  duties  of  which  the  apostle 
here  speaks.  This  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  some  thirty  times,  and  with 
various  shades  of  signification.  Sometimes  it  denotes  a  supernatural  gift,  know- 
ledge by  immediate  inspiration.  Perhaps  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  "  word  of 
knowledge "  is  classed  with  the  gifts  of  healing  and  of  tongues,  and  with  other 
miraculous  powers.  But  since  all  Christians  are  exhorted  to  add  knowledge  to  their 
faith,  the  apostle  cannot  intend  a  miraculous  gift  which  God  only  could  bestow. 
And  for  the  same  reason  he  cannot  here  intend  the  power  or  faculty  of  knowing  in 
which  sense  the  word  is  used  when  it  is  said  that  "  the  love  of  Christ  passeth  know- 
ledge," i.e.,  is  beyond  the  natural  comprehension  of  men.     We  cannot  add  a  new 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  47 

sense  or  faculty  to  our  natural  endowments.  Again,  the  word  "  knowledge"  is  used 
for  the  object  of  knowledge,  and  especially  the  system  of  truth  made  known  in  the 
gospel.  But  this  must  be  known,  in  a  measure,  before  we  can  have  faith  ;  and  the 
knowledge  spoken  of  in  the  text  comes  after  faith.  Knowledge  is  used  also  to  denote 
a  general  apprehension  of  religious  truth  ;  but,  as  this  is  essential  to  the  act  of  faith 
in  Christ,  it  could  hardly  be  referred  to  as  a  something  to  be  added  to  faith.  Isaac 
Taylor  says  this  knowledge  is  "  neither  human  erudition  nor  general  inteUigence, 
but  that  specific  knowledge  of  which  the  gospel  is  the  subject."  There  is  another 
use  of  the  word  which  applies  it  to  the  deep,  clear,  and  cordial  perception  of  truth, 
followed  by  the  discriminating  adaptation  of  truth  to  practical  ends.  Thus  the 
apostle  Paul  speaks  of  the  Christians  at  Eome  as  "  full  of  goodness,  filled  with  all 
knowledge,  able  to  admonish  one  another  "  (Kom.  xv.  14) ;  i.e.,  they  possessed  that 
discriminating  insight  into  truth  which  would  shed  light  upon  questions  of  practical 
duty.  Knowledge  is  a  spiritual  apperception  of  Divine  things,  forming  and  con- 
trolling the  practical  judgment.  A  soul  informed  by  such  knowledge  discerns  the 
way  of  truth  and  duty.  This  knowledge  is  not  the  mere  perception  of  the  truths  of 
the  gospel  in  their  objective  form,  but  an  apperception  of  gospel  truths  in  their 
inward   spiritual  relations.     I.  What  this  knowledge   is.     II.   How  it   mat  be 

CULTIVATED.       III.    ThE    EXCELLENCE    OF    THIS    KNOWLEDGE     IN     ITS    EFFECTS.       1.    This 

inward  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His  truth  differs  from  the  intel- 
lectual perception  of  truth,  just  as  the  feeling  that  we  know  the  mind  and  heart  of 
another  differs  from  the  knowledge  of  his  person  which  we  gain  through  the  eye  ; 
it  is  the  difference  between  heart  knowledge  and  knowledge  merely  by  perception  or 
intellection.  Now  we  may  know  Christ,  and  yet  may  not  know  Him  ;  may  know 
Him  as  to  His  person  revealed  as  Divine  ;  we  may  know  Him  as  to  His  character 
recorded  in  the  four  Gospels ;  we  may  know  Him  as  to  His  doctrine  and  His  work ; 
and  still  we  may  come  far  short  of  really  knowing  Christ.  Such  knowledge  is 
objective ;  i.e.,  it  exists  in  our  thought  as  an  object,  and  does  not  bring  us  into  per- 
sonal sympathy  with  Christ  as  our  Saviour  and  Friend.  It  is  in  the  brain  but  not 
in  the  heart.  2.  And  here,  again,  this  knowledge  differs  from  faith.  Faith  is  that 
belief  in  Christ  upon  the  evidence  of  the  Gospels  which  leads  the  soul  to  rely  upon 
Him  as  its  Saviour,  and  to  commit  itself  to  His  service.  This  faith  rests  upon  a 
degree  of  knowledge  as  its  warrant.  But  having  gained  this  faith,  and  rested  our- 
selves in  it,  we  are  exhorted  to  add  to  it  knowledge  ;  not  the  mere  knowledge  of  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour — for  that  we  have  already — but  knowledge  of  Christ 
Himself,  which  comes  through  the  heart,  proving  His  doctrine.  His  promises.  His 
love,  in  its  own  blessed  experience.  3.  But  this  inward  knowledge  of  Christ  has  its 
outward  expression  in  a  judgment  wisely  exercised  upon  truth  and  duty.  We  need 
to  cultivate  the  judgment  as  well  as  to  fortify  the  spirit,  to  attain  to  a  sound  discern- 
ment of  duty  as  weU  as  to  firmness  in  duty.  It  is  a  proverb  that  discretion  is  the 
better  part  of  valour  ;  a  critical  judgment  as  to  the  time  and  manner  of  acting  is 
important  to  the  success  of  the  boldest  and  bravest  action.  In  his  description  of  the 
good  man  the  Psalmist  happily  combines  a  sound  judgment  with  boldness  and 
firmness  as  essential  qualities  of  his  character.  "  He  wiU  guide  his  affairs  with 
discretion  ;  surely  he  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever.  His  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in 
the  Lord.  His  heart  is  established,  he  shall  not  be  afraid."  Such  knowledge  is  not 
what  men  of  the  world  call  prudence,  which  is  exercised  more  in  the  cautious 
avoidance  of  evil  to  one's  self  than  in  devising  and  executing  that  which  is  good. 
There  are  two  or  three  words  which  somewhat  approach  to  this  meaning — discern- 
ment, discretion,  and  discrimination ;  these  all  in  their  radical  idea  mean  "  to 
separate,"  "  to  distinguish,"  to  "  make  a  difference,"  especially  between  the  true  and 
the  false,  the  right  and  the  wrong,  in  theory  and  in  practice.  This  discrimination 
as  to  truths  and  motives  duly  exercised  by  the  mind  itself,  and  faithfully  applied  to 
our  outward  conduct,  constitutes  knowledge  as  a  practical  thing.  IV.  How  shall 
THIS  KNOWLEDGE  BE  ATTAINED?  1.  By  the  prayerful  study  of  Christ  as  He  is  set 
before  us  in  the  gospel.  The  mere  tourist  sauntering  through  a  gallery  of  art  recog- 
nises in  one  painting  a  work  superior  to  the  rest ;  but  the  artist  lingers  before  that 
picture  and  scans  its  every  point  till,  without  the  help  of  catalogue  or  cicerone,  he 
discovers  it  to  be  a  Titian,  a  Tintoretto,  a  Murillo,  and  feasts  his  soul  upon  those 
diviner  touches  that  reveal  the  master's  hand.  You  must  not  look  only,  or  read  by 
catalogue  or  note-book,  but  must  study.  Prayer  is  the  life  element  of  such  a  study. 
2.  We  gain  this  knowledge  by  a  diligent  and  teachable  seeking  after  the  will  of 
Christ.  The  spirit  of  obedience  helps  to  the  knowledge  of  duty.  This  determina- 
tion to  do  the  will  of  Christ  is  like  a  signal  rocket  piercing  the  gloom  of  night  from 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.  i. 

y 

a  ship  on  an  unknown  shore.  3.  We  gain  this  knowledge  by  studying  questions  of 
right  and  duty  in  the  closet.  The  place  for  calm,  mature  judgment  is  the  place  of 
secret  prayer.  4.  We  may  gain  this  knowledge  by  being  willing  to  learn,  and  to 
correct  mistakes.  The  key  of  knowledge  is  humility.  5.  We  may  cultivate  this 
knowledge  by  often  testing  ourselves  by  our  principles.  If  we  were  careful  to  keep 
a  daily  balance-sheet  of  our  actions  and  principles,  we  should  be  more  quick  to 
detect  errors  of  judgment,  and  to  increase  our  stock  of  practical  wisdom.  True 
principle  is  a  fixed  quantity.  It  rests  upon  the  eternal  base  of  truth  and  justice,  and 
is  firm  as  the  pillars  of  heaven.  As  the  old  Egyptians  took  their  astronomical  bear- 
ings from  the  sun-line  upon  the  pyramid,  so  should  we  take  our  moral  bearings  by 
the  light  of  Christ's  teaching  and  life,  giving  the  meridian  line  of  principle  and  duty. 
V.  The  excellency  of  this  knowledge  in  its  effects.  1.  This  knowledge,  com- 
bined with  firmness  in  faith,  gives  beauty  and  dignity  to  character.  We  have  seen 
that  virtue  gives  energy,  strength,  resolve  ;  but  a  character  in  which  force  and 
earnestness  predominate  is  one-sided ;  may  easily  run  into  extremes.  2.  This 
knowledge  gives  us  power  over  ourselves.  Man  was  created  a  power,  and  not  a 
thing.  In  proportion  as  the  soul  gains  a  true  spiritual  power  over  its  inferior 
desires  does  it  become  a  power  over  the  world.  3.  This  knowledge  gives  us  power 
for  good  and  even  great  achievements.  It  is  no  modern  discovery  that  "  knowledge 
is  power."  4.  This  knowledge  of  Christ  gives  us  power  over  evil  and  over  death. 
It  is  half  the  battle  to  know  the  enemy,  his  ground,  his  resources,  and  his  tactics. 
Classical  usage  helps  us  little  as  to  the  meaning  of  yvuxrig  (gnosis)  in  the  New 
Testament.  Plato  uses  it  commonly  of  "  understanding,"  though  sometimes  of  a 
deeper  philosophical  insight.  But  with  the  Neo-Platonists,  gnosis  came  to  be  almost 
a  technical  term  for  higher  insight,  deeper  wisdom,  a  certain  mysterious  knowledge 
reserved  to  the  initiated.  In  this  sense  of  deep  spiritual  insight,  but  without  the 
associations  of  mysticism  or  mystery,  the  word  gnosis  is  often  used  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  a  term  peculiarly  liable  to  abuse  by  enthusiastic  minds,  and  before 
the  close  of  the  apostolic  age  there  began  to  appear  a  sect  of  Gnostics,  who  claimed 
to  have  "  an  extraordinary  insight  into  Divine  things  beyond  the  system  of  faith, 
which  the  people  commonly  received  on  authority."  This  insight  they  professed  to 
have  gained  through  certain  secret  traditions  handed  down  from  Christ,  the  higher 
light.  Their  gnosis  corresponded  to  the  esoteric  doctrines  of  the  old  Greek  philoso- 
phers, mysteries  to  be  communicated  only  to  the  initiated.  The  Epistles  of  John 
seemed  to  have  been  aimed  in  part  at  this  Gnostic  tendency.  The  true  Christian 
knowledge  is  as  far  as  possible  both  from  the  obscureness  of  mysticism  and  from  the 
pretensions  of  clairvoyance.  The  gnosis  of  the  New  Testament  is  the  privilege  of 
all  Christians  alike.      (Joseph  P.  Thompson.)  Temperance. — Temperance  : — I. 

Temperance  is  the  cueb,  bringing  into  subjection  all  those  passions  of  human 
nature  that  tend  to  voluptuousness,  just  as  patience  and  meekness  check  and  keep 
under  the  fiercer  passions  or  those  tending  to  violence.  Christian  temperance  sets 
itself  in  opposition  to  the  drunkard's  bowl,  and  the  glutton's  banquet,  and  the  revels 
of  the  profligate,  and  the  anxious  longings  of  the  covetous,  and  against  the 
immoderate  desire  of  what  is  not  ours,  as  well  as  against  the  undue  and  immoderate 
abuse  of  what  is  ours.  It  includes,  thus  considered,  sobriety,  and  chastity,  and 
moderation — all  the  varieties  of  a  wise  self-discipline,  imposed  on  man's  fierce  quest 
of  pleasure.  II.  Let  'youk  knowledge,  then,  said  the  apostle  to  the  readers  of  his 
Epistle,  defend  itself  by  the  companionship  of  temperance.  Why,  it  may  be 
asked,  should  this  be  selected,  and  not  any  other  of  those  clustering  graces  which  go 
to  attest  the  energy  and  fruitfulness  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  work  of  his  moral 
renovation  ?  Let  it  be  remembered,  then,  that  in  the  sin  of  our  first  parents,  the 
knowledge  which  they  sought,  beyond  God  and  His  instructions,  was  knowledge 
which  brought  with  it  a  sin  against  the  holy  temperance  that  had  before  been  the 
law  of  Paradise,  and  the  defence  of  primeval  innocence.  Was  it  not  then  fitting 
that  the  victim  of  the  Fall  should  be  perpetually  reminded  of  his  need  to  be  on  his 
guard  evermore  against  that  dominion  of  the  bodily  senses  into  which  the  Fall 
betrayed  us  ?  In  Satan's  school  knowledge  brought  forth  intemperance  ;  but  it  must 
not  be  so  in  Christ's  school.  Is  it  not,  again,  a  fact,  sustained  by  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Churches,  that  even  when  men  enjoy  this  gospel  their  knowledge,  both  in 
things  secular  and  spiritual,  is  but  too  often  perverted  into  a  license  for  casting  ofE 
the  self-control  and  the  serene  moderation  of  Christian  principle  ?  Is  not  a  palmy 
civilisation  often  found  shading  a  feverish  and  lawless  sensuaUty?  "\\';  ■;  it  not  thus 
that  Solomon— after  his  wide  research,  that  wrote  of  plants  from  the  cedar  of 
Lebanon  to  the  hyssop  on  the  wall,  and  in  consequence  of  his  growing  acquaint- 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  49 

ance  and  his  large  converse  with  heathen  society — became  in  his  old  age  a  doting 
conformist  to  the  lewd  idolatry  of  Ashtaroth  ?  III.  To  glance  at  the  bearing  of 
THIS  Christian  grace  on  the  temperance  reformation  of  our  times.  But  we 
suppose  that  the  best  friends  of  temperance  will  yet  find  that,  to  give  it  permanence, 
it  needs  the  broader  basis  and  the  deeper  root  of  a  religious  movement ;  and  that 
there,  as  in  so  many  other  earthly  reforms,  the  controlling  motives — the  effectual 
lever,  must  rest  on  some  stronger  and  firmer  basis  than  earthly  considerations. 
Drunkenness  is  enough  to  damn  a  man  ;  but  the  mere  absence  of  drunkenness  is 
by  no  means   enough  to   save  him.     IV.  The  claims  of  this  Christian  grace, 

TAKEN    IN    THE    WIDE    AND    COMPREHENSIVE    SENSE    WHICH     SCRIPTURE    ATTACHES    TO     IT, 

UPON  THE  DISCIPLES  OF  OUR  TIMES.  1.  It  is  Hcccssary  to  truc  piety.  The  knowledge 
and  love  of  God  cannot  lodge  in  a  heart  crowded  and  dragged  downward  by  debasing 
and  sinful  pleasure.  If  men  are  Christ's,  they  are  crucified  with  Him  to  the  flesh 
and  the  world.  2.  It  is  necessary  to  Christian  usefulness.  The  man  who  would  be 
really  and  truly  useful  must  have  an  unselfish  sympathy.  Now,  of  this  the  lovers 
of  pleasure  are  notoriously  destitute.  Few  things  more  rapidly  bring  a  seared 
callousness  over  the  heart  than  the  habitual  pursuit  of  gross  and  selfish  pleasure. 
3.  It  is  necessary  to  national  well-being  and  prosperity.  {W.  E.  Williams.)  Of 
temi^erance : — I.   The   virtue   itself,  and  wherein  it  consists,   will  be  easily 

CNDERSTOOD   BY   ANY    ONE    WHO    ATTENDS     TO    THE     PRESENT     CONSTITUTION    OF    HUMaV 

NATURE,  and  what  our  experience  will  obviously  suggest  to  us.  The  Author  of  our 
being  has  implanted  in  us  passions  which  excite  us  to  such  action  as  is  useful  for 
our  safety ;  and  herein  His  wisdom  and  goodness  appears,  making  provision  for  the 
continuance,  the  comfort,  and  aU  the  purposes  of  our  existence  in  this  world.  But, 
as  the  highest  ends  of  our  being  are  not  confined  to  the  present  state,  the  same  wise 
Creator  has  endued  us  with  nobler  powers  and  affections,  by  which  we  are  deter- 
mined to  the  pursuit  of  more  excellent  objects,  wherein  our  true  perfection  and 
happiness  consists  ;  it  is  plain  these  inferior  appetites  were  ordained  to  be  in  sub- 
jection to  reason,  and  to  be  gratified  within  such  limits  as  to  be  consistent  with 
superior  enjoyments,  and  with  the  proper  exertion  of  superior  powers.  To 
consider  this  subject  a  little  more  particularly — 1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  plain 
that  sobriety  or  temperance  does  not  require  the  rooting  out  or  an  obstinate 
refusal  to  satisfy  or  comply  with  the  original  appetites  of  nature.  2.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  temperance  requires  such  a  regulation  and  restraint  of  our 
desires  towards  sensible  objects,  or  the  pleasure  of  the  external  senses,  that 
they  shall  not  possess  that  room  in  our  esteem  which  is  due  to  things  of  vastly 
greater  excellence  and  value.  Temperance  not  only  forbids  all  excesses,  but  requires 
such  an  habitual  moderation  that  the  freedom  of  the  mind  may  be  preserved,  its 
powers  in  a  constant  readiness  for  better  exercises,  and  that  it  may  have  a  taste  for 
intellectual  and  moral  pleasures.  The  natural  effect  of  a  customary  indulgence  to 
carnal  desires  is  a  confirmed  habit  which  increases  the  desire  so  as  it  prevails 
against  better  inclinations  ;  and  then  experience  shows  the  truth  of  what  the  apostle 
teaches,  "  that  fleshly  lusts  war  against  the  soul  "  ;  they  tend  to  enervate  its  powers, 
impair  its  liberty,  and  bring  it  into  bondage.  3.  I  observe  that  sobriety,  like  all 
other  virtues,  is  seated  in  the  mind.  The  appetites  take  their  rise  from  the  body, 
but  the  regulating  them  belongs  to  the  higher  faculties  of  the  soul.  It  is  in  the 
superiority  of  the  soul  in  its  freedom,  and  in  the  dominion  of  reason  and  conscience 
over  the  lower  desires  and  passions  that  the  virtue  chiefly  consists.  II.  To  propose 
SOME  MOTIVES  TO  SOBRIETY  OR  TEMPERANCE.  This  particular  virtue  of  temperance 
stands  upon  the  same  foot  with  the  rest,  and  is,  like  them,  recommended  by  its  own 
native  beauty  and  intrinsic  worth,  which  at  first  strikes  any  mind  which  attends  to 
it.  It  is  impossible  for  any  one,  upon  a  deliberate  comparison,  not  to  acknowledge 
in  his  heart  that  the  sober  man  is  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour  who  is  intem- 
perate ;  that  it  is  a  more  lovely  character  and  more  worthy  of  the  human  nature  to 
have  the  rule  over  one's  own  spirit.  Besides,  intemperance  naturally  tends  to  make 
life  not  only  mean  and  contemptible,  but  miserable.  But  I  intended  principally  to 
insist  on  these  considerations  which  are  contained  in  the  gospel.  It  deserves  the 
serious  attention  of  Christians  that  the  blessed  Author  of  our  religion  Himself,  and 
His  apostles  after  Him,  very  earnestly  inculcate  this  virtue.  Let  it  never  enter  into 
our  thoughts  that  great  professions  of  respect  or  pretended  faith  will  please  Jesus 
Christ  if  we  continue  in  carnal  impurity  and  live  after  the  flesh.  But  there  are  two 
arguments  which  you  will  find  often  urged  in  the  new  Testament :  one  is  taken  from 
the  circumstances  of  our  present  state  compared  with  the  future.  The  second  is, 
that  temperance  is  an  excellent  preservative  from  snares  and  temptations.     (■/. 

33 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crap.  i. 

Ahernethy,  31. A.)  Self-government: — One  of  the  old  Italian  masters  has  left  ug 
his  conception  of  temperance  on  the  walls  of  a  little  chapel,  where  he  has  painted  a 
heroic  female  figure  with  a  bridle  upon  her  lips,  and  her  right  hand  binding  the  hilt 
of  a  sheathed  sword  to  its  scabbard.  And  that  conveys  in  symbol  and  emblem  an 
idea  of  a  self-command  that  restrains  the  utterance  of  emotion  and  sheathes  the 
sword  of  passion.  I.  This  self-command  is  a  universally  admitted  necessity. 
A  man  has  only  to  look  at  himself  to  see  that  he  is  so  made  as  that  bits  of  him  are 
meant  to  be  governed,  and  bits  of  him  are  meant  to  govern ;  that  there  are  some 
parts  of  his  nature  which  are  intended  to  be  kept  down  under  hatches,  and  some  that 
are  meant  to  be  on  the  quarter-deck,  with  the  helm  in  their  hands.  We  have  only 
to  look,  for  instance,  at  the  way  in  which  the  necessities  and  the  appetites  which 
belong  to  our  bodily  organisation  work,  to  see  that  they  were  never  meant  to  have 
the  mastery,  or  to  be  left  to  operate  as  they  please.  A  man  is  hungry,  thirsty,  feels 
the  sting  of  some  perfectly  innocent,  legitimate,  fleshly  need,  and  that  appetite  is  a3 
blind  as  a  bat  to  all  other  considerations  except  its  own  gratification.  No  matter 
what  lies  between  it  and  its  object,  its  tendency  towards  the  object  is  the  same.  And 
is  a  man  to  let  such  a  mere  unintelligent  and  almost  involuntary  impulse  drive  him  ? 
And  it  is  just  as  true,  too,  about  other  bits  of  our  nature,  for  instance — emotions  and 
passions.  Anger  is  a  very  good  thing  ;  God  puts  it  in  us.  It  is  meant  to  be  exer- 
cised. Yes  !  But  it  is  meant  to  be  governed.  And  so  joy,  mirth,  fear,  and  all  the 
rest  of  them  ;  all  these  are  inseparable  from  the  perfecting  of  a  man's  nature.  But 
their  unbridled  working  is  the  ruin  of  a  man.  And  then  excellences  want  to  be 
controlled,  in  order  that  they  may  not  run  to  faults.  Some  edible  plants,  if  they 
once  run  to  seed,  are  ruined  for  food  ;  so  a  man's  good  qualities  need  to  be  kept 
under,  in  order  that  they  may  not  become  exaggerated  into  weaknesses.  And  a  man's 
bad  qualities,  natural  weaknesses  and  defects  of  character,  which  are  too  deeply 
engrained  in  him  ever  to  be  got  rid  of— these  want  control  in  order  that  they  may 
be  turned  into  excellences,  as  it  is  quite  possible  for  them  to  be.  What  did  God  put 
a  will  into  you  for,  but  that  you  might  be  able  to  say  not  "  I  like  "  ;  or  "  I  was 
tempted,  and  I  could  not  help  it "  ;  but  that  you  might,  before  each  action,  be  able 
to  say  "  I  will "  ;  and  that  passions,  and  the  stings  of  lust  and  sense,  of  appetite  and 
flesh,  and  emotions  and  affections,  and  vagrant  fancies  and  wandering  thoughts, 
and  virtues  that  were  running  to  seed,  and  weaknesses  that  might  be  cultivated  into 
strength,  might  all  know  the  master  touch  of  a  governing  will,  and  might  obey  as 
becomes  them  ?  And  what  did  God  give  you  a  conscience  for,  but  that  the  will, 
which  commands  all  the  rest,  might  take  its  orders  from  it  ?  II.  This  absolute 
NECESSITY  IS  A  PROVED  IMPOSSIBILITY.  From  the  beginning  moral  teachers  of  all 
sorts  have  been  saying  to  men,  "  Rule  yourselves  "  ;  and  from  the  beginning  the 
attempt  made  to  govern  myself  by  my  unaided  self  is  doomed  to  failure.  Not  abso- 
lute failure,  thank  God !  I  would  not  be  understood  as  if  I  were  denying  that,  to  a 
large  extent,  every  man  and  woman  has  this  power  of  self-government.  But  I  do 
want  you  to  consider  that  the  worth  of  self-control  depends,  to  a  large  extent,  on  the 
motive  from  which  it  is  practised  ;  and  that,  unfortunately,  for  twenty  men  that  will 
exercise  it  for  the  sake  of  temporal  purposes  and  immediate  advantage,  there  is  one 
who  will  exercise  it  for  the  sake  of  higher  motives.  A  great  deal  of  the  moral 
reformation  and  restraint  which  the  best  of  men,  who  are  not  Christians,  put  in 
practice  upon  themselves,  is  exactly  like  taking  a  child  with  scarlet  fever  and  putting 
it  into  a  cold  bath.  You  drive  in  the  eruption,  and  that  is  about  as  much  as  you  do, 
except  that  you  make  the  disease  worse,  because  you  have  driven  it  in.  But,  beyond 
that,  when  once  a  man's  passions,  or  affections,  or  desires,  or  any  other  part  of  him, 
have  got  the  bit  between  their  teeth,  and  have  cast  off  control,  it  is  impossible  to 
bring  them  again  into  obedience.  When  the  very  instrument  by  which  we  are  to 
coerce  the  worst  part  of  our  nature  is  itself  tainted,  what,  in  the  name  of  common 
sense,  is  to  be  done  then  ?  When  you  send  out  the  military  to  suppress  the  mob, 
and  the  military,  bayonets  and  all,  go  over  to  the  mob,  there  is  nothing  left  for  the 
sovereign  but  to  abdicate.  As  somebody  has  said  about  such  a  matter,  it  is  a  bad 
job  when  the  extinguisher  catches  fire.  And  that  is  exactly  the  condition  which 
men  stand  in  who  are  seeking  to  exercise  a  thorough-going  self-restraint,  when  the 
self  which  should  govern  is  itself  tainted  and  evil,  the  will  bribed  and  enslaved,  the 
conscience  sophisticated  and  darkened.  What  is  the  use  of  saying  to  such  a  man, 
"  Govern  thyself  "  ?  III.  Here  we  have  a  Christian  certainty,  if  we  choose  to 
MAKE  it  80.  Let  these  three  things,  faith,  strength,  insight,  work  upon  you,  and 
they  will  make  the  impossible  possible.  That  is  to  say,  if  you  want  to  govern  your- 
selves begin  with  faith.     We  rule  ourselves  when  we  let  Jesus  Christ  rule  us.     The 


CHAP.  I,]  II.  PETER.  51 

Christian  man,  thinking  of  his  conflict,  and  knowing  that  with  his  ten  thousand  it 
is  hard  for  him  to  meet  the  twenty  thousand  who  are  arrayed  against  him,  invokes, 
as  some  petty  chief  of  a  weak  tribe  might,  the  aid  of  the  great  emperor  whose 
dominions  are  at  hand,  and  when  he  stretches  his  protecting  power  over  the  Uttle 
territory  there  is  Uberty  and  there  is  victory  for  the  trembling  prince.  So  hand  over 
the  authority  and  the  sovereignty  of  thy  soul  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  will  give  thee 
the  strength  to  govern  thyself.  And,  in  like  manner,  we  have  here  implied  another 
prescription,  "Add  to  thy  strength,  temperance."  If  I  am  in  Christ  it  is  not  a 
question  of  one  bit  of  my  nature  against  the  other,  but  it  is  a  question  of  the  higher 
nature,  which  is  His,  flowing  into  mine,  and  so  enabling  me,  the  true  me,  which  is 
Christ  in  me,  to  keep  down  the  animal  and  the  evil  that  attaches  to  me.  And,  in 
like  manner,  there  is  the  third  condition  of  self-command  here  ;  that  knowledge  of 
which  the  preceding  clause  speaks,  which  is  mainly  a  clear  insight  into  Christian 
duty.  If  we  have  once  clear  in  sight  the  dictates  of  an  enlightened  conscience,  felt 
to  be  Christ's  will,  then  it  will  not  be  so  hard  to  put  the  screw  on  all  that  rebels 
against  Him,  and  to  stimulate  (for  that  is  a  part  of  self-command)  the  lagging 
and  slothful  graces  of  our  hearts.  So  it  comes  to  this,  the  necessity,  which  is 
an  impossibility  for  everybody  else,  is  a  possibility  for  the  weakest  among  us,  if 
we  let  Christ  rule  in  our  hearts.  Put  the  reins  into  Christ's  hands,  and  He 
will  make  you  kings  over  yourselves,  and  priests  unto  Him.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Temperance : — The  grace  of  temperance  may  be  here  diversely  understood.  I. 
Foe  such  a  discretion  as  mat  season  all  these  graces  ;  so  taken  it  is  the  salt 
of  every  virtue.  Devotion  without  discretion  is  like  a  hasty  servant  that  runs 
away  without  his  errand.  Profession  of  faith  without  temperance  is  turned 
into  hypocrisy  or  preposterous  zeal ;  virtue  without  it  is  f oUy.  Patience  without 
discretion  wrongs  a  good  cause.  Godliness  without  temperance  is  devotion  out  of 
its  wits.  Brotherly  kindness  without  temperance  is  brotherly  dotage.  Charity 
without  temperance  is  prodigality;  it  gives  with  an  open  hand  and  shut  eye. 
II.  For  such  a  discretion  as  mat  moderate  knowledge,  and  qualify  that  heat 
to  which  it  is  addicted  (1  Cor.  viii.  1).  Temperance  is  not  so  much  a  virtue 
itself  as  a  marshal  or  moderator  of  virtues.  It  is  not  enough  to  do  a  good 
work  unless  the  due  place,  fit  manner,  and  convenient  time  be  observed.  III. 
For  such  a  moderation  of  the  mind  wherebt  we  so  demean  ourselves  as 
neither  to  surfeit  on  fulness,  nor  to  despair  on  want.  IV.  For  a  moderate 
use  of  outward  things.  There  is  intemperance — 1.  In  lust ;  so  it  is  called 
incontinence.  This  may  be  avoided — (1)  By  subduing  the  body  to  the  soul 
(1  Cor.  ix.  27).  (2)  By  debarring  the  flesh  all  lust-provoking  meats  and  drinks. 
High  diet  is  adultery's  nurse.  (3)  By  avoiding  temptations  (1  Cor.  vi.  18).  (4)  By 
meditating  on  the  punishment.  What  men  think  most  pleasing  is  most  plaguing ; 
to  have  their  lusts  granted  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  12).  2.  In  apparel.  Christ  says  the  body  is 
more  worth  than  raiment ;  but  some  strive  to  make  their  raiment  more  worth  tnan 
their  bodies ;  like  birds  of  paradise,  their  feathers  are  better  than  their  carcases. 
3.  In  meats.  (1)  For  the  manner  ;  this  is  merely  circumstantial,  and  may  thus  be 
expressed :  too  soon,  too  late,  too  daintily,  too  fast,  too  much,  is  gluttony.  (2)  For 
the  measure :  it  is  an  insatiate  desire  of  delicacies  (Luke  xii.  19  ;  Phil.  iii.  19).  As 
too  much  rain  drowns  the  fields  which  moderate  showers  would  make  fruitful ;  so 
this  plethory  of  diet,  instead  of  conserving  nature,  confounds  it.  (3)  For  the 
matter:  it  is  great  feasting.  (4)  The  effects  are  manifold  and  manifest.  (a) 
Grossness.  (b)  Macilency  of  grace,  (c)  Consumption  of  estate.  (d)  Sickness 
of  body,  (e)  Rottenness  and  death.  The  finest  food  shall  make  no  better  dust. 
(i)  Abstinence  is  man's  rising,  as  intemperance  was  his  fall,  (ii)  It  is  God's 
blessing  that  makes  fat,  and  not  meat.  4.  In  drinks.  (1)  It  makes  room  for 
the  devil.  (2)  It  overturns  the  estate.  (3)  It  poisons  the  tongue.  (4)  It 
intoxicates  all  reason.  (5)  It  enervates  the  strength.  (6)  It  is  the  bond  to 
incontinence.  (7)  It  is  an  incendiary  to  quarrels  and  homicides.  (8)  It  is  a 
woe  to  itself  (Prov.  xxiii.  29).  Learn  we  how  to  avoid  it — (a)  Because  we  are 
men.  While  the  wine  is  in  thy  hand,  thou  art  a  man ;  when  it  is  in  thy  head, 
thou  art  become  a  beast,  (b)  Because  we  are  citizens,  and  therefore  should  lead 
civil  lives  ;  drunkenness  is  an  uncivil  exorbitance,  (c)  Because  we  are  Christians 
(1  Tim.  vi.  11 ;  Titus  ii.  11,  12 ;  Luke  xxi.  34).  [Thomas  Adams.)  Temperance : — 
This  is  the  third  figure  in  that  sum  in  compound  addition  the  footing  up  of  which 
makes  the  complete  Christian  character.  Our  modern  use  of  this  word  temperance 
restricts  it  mainly  to  abstinence  from  strong  drink.  Abstinence  alone  does  not  fully 
express  the  idea,  since  this  presents  rather  its  negative  side.     The  word  means 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


strictly  "  ruling  with  a  strong  hand,"  having  the  masteiy;  and  when  applied  to  a 
person,  the  temperate  man  is  he  who  governs  himself  firmly,  who  has  the  mastery 
especially  over  the   passions  and  appetites   of   his  lower  nature.    I.  What  this 
SELF-coNTKOL  INVOLVES   OE  IMPLIES.     'EyKfjuTtiu   is   used   by  Plato  and  Aristotle 
to  express  self-discipUne,  self-mastery.    Xenophon  uses  it  to  express  the  government 
of  aU  the  passions  and  appetites ;  such  a  mastery  of  the  natural  desires  for  food, 
drink,  and  sensual  gratification,  and  such  a  power  to  endure  cold,  heat,  fatigue,  and 
want  of  sleep,  as  become  a  good  general  in  time  of  war.     (Mem.  1.  2,  1 ;  1.  5,  1 ; 
2.  1,  1.)     So  Paul  used  the  word  when  addressing  Felix,  who  Uved  in  open  adultery 
with  Drusilla,  and  who  indulged  every  selfish  and  sensual  passion ;  he  reasoned  of 
"  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment,"  till  the  wretch  trembled.     The  Latin 
temperantia,  from  which  our  word  temperance  is  derived,  has  the  same  meaning ; 
moderation,  regulation,  government,  self-restraint.     And  it  is  applied  not  only  to 
sensual  appetites,  but  to  the  government  of  the  tongue,  the  eyes,  the  temper  ;  to  the 
restraint  of  the  emotions  of  grief  under  calamity  or  of  exultation  in  victory.    Cicero 
defines  temperantia  to  be  that  which  teaches  us  to  follow  reason,  both  in  what  we 
seek  and  in  what  we  avoid ;  a  firm  and  judicious  control  of  reason  over  impulse  and 
desire   (De  Finibus  1,   14,  and  2,  19).      II.  By  what  meaks  it  mat  be  attained. 
1.  This  Christian   temperance  or  self-control   implies  and  demands,  the   absolute 
subjection  of  all  evil  appetites,  passions,  and  desires.     Those  grosser  social  vices 
with  which  the  pagan  society  of  the  old  world  was  thoroughly  infected,  and  which 
the  old  pagan  religion  encouraged — vices  which  destroyed  home,  corrupted  literature, 
debased  art,  and  defiled  the  altars  of  the  gods — were  so  little  thought  of  as  evils, 
were  so  fully  sanctioned  by  custom,  were  so  gilded  over  by  the  example  of  public 
men,  the  toleration  of  law,  and  the  flattering  arts  of  genius,  were  so  protected  by 
the  priests,  who  made  them  a  means  of  revenue,  that  it  was  an  easy  thing  for  a 
Christian  at  Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  at  Antioch,  or  any  like  luxurious  capital,  to  slide 
into  sins  the  bare  suggestion  of  which  we  should  resent  with  abhorrence.     Anger, 
in  the  common  use  of  the  word,  is  an  evil  passion.    A  passionate  man  cannot 
exercise   self-control.      Some  ancient  philosophers  used  the  word  temperance  as 
the  specific   opposite  of  irritability.      Self-indulgence  in  appetite,  whether  under 
the  form  of  drunkenness  or  of  gluttony,  is  a  sin.     It  is  a  sin  against  the  body, 
whose  beautiful  mechanism  we  strain  and  impair  by  any  excess.     It  is  an  offence 
against  the  mind,  whose  faculties  we  clog  and  stupefy  by  excess.    It  is  a  sin  against 
God,  the  gifts  of  whose  bounty  are  perverted.     Covetousness  is  specified  again  and 
again  in  the  Word  of  God  as  one  of  the  worst  forms  of  carnal  passion ;  and  the 
subjection  of  this  is  indispensable  to  self-government.     The  greed  of  gain  must  be 
subdued,  or  it  will  choke  the  life  of  godliness  in  the  soul.    The  Christian  must  learn 
to  moderate  his  views  and  desires  of  worldly  possessions.     The  tendency  to  a  self- 
satisfied  and   even  luxurious   enjoyment  of  the  world  is,  perhaps,  the   strongest 
antagonist  in  our  times  to  a  simple  scriptural  piety.     Sensual  appetite,  pleasure- 
seeking  for  its  own  sake,  and  frivolity  in  the  methods  of  enjoyment,  a  vain  love  of 
pomp  and  show — these  proceed  from  a  propensity  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with 
the   love  of   God.      2.  Besides  this  absolute  subjection  of  all  evil  passions  and 
propensities,  the  law  of  temperance  requires  that  those  natural  desires  which 
are  in  themselves   innocent  and  lawful,  should,  both  as  to  the  manner  and   the 
measure  of   their   indulgence,  be  regulated  by  a  regard  for  the   highest  good  of 
the   soul.      Appetites  and   tastes  we  have  which  were  never  designed  to  be  our 
tempters  and   tormentors — making   the  body  a  mere   battlefield  of   the  soul — but 
were  meant  to  minister  to  a  pure  and  healthy  enjoyment.      But  the  peculiarity 
of  these  native  appetites  and  tastes  in  man  is  that  they  do  not,  like  the  instincts 
of  animals,  regulate  themselves,  but  require  the  mild  restraint  of  reason.     That  is 
a  nice  point — a  hair-line — where  desire  instead  of  ministering  to  rational  enjoyment, 
oversteps  the  bounds  of  reason,  and  becomes  an  ungovernable  passion.     Keep  well 
within  that  line.      3.  It  has  been  assumed  in  this  discussion  that  since  all  sin 
concentrates  in  a  selfish  will,  this  of  course  must  be  subdued  in  order  to  a  sound 
and  perfect  self-control.     But  I  wish  to  insist  upon  the  idea  that  selfishness  is  not 
merely  to  be  restrained,  held  in  check  by  compromises,  but  to  be  conquered,  if  ever 
the  soul  would  gain  the  mastery  of  itself  for  God.    Our  love  of  God,  to  be  complete, 
must  be  unconditional.    The  existence  of  a  calculating,  selfish  spirit  is  incompatible 
with  the  very  idea  of  love.     III.  How  shall  it  be  attained?     1.  Not  by  mere  force 
of  will,  determining  to  override,  and  if  possible  to  annihilate  the  sensibilities  and 
propensities  of  our  nature,  whether  for  good  or  evil.     The  cold  impassiveness  of 
marble  is  not  self-control,  nor  can  the  Christian  perfect  his  moral  nature  by  cutting 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  PETER.  53 

away  all  natural  emotions  and  sympathies.  One  may  conquer  many  an  appetite 
and  passion  by  mere  force  of  wiU,  and  in  so  doing  may  strengthen  the  will  itself  in 
resistance  to  God,  and  may  stiffen  that  will  with  the  pride  of  self-righteousness. 
2.  Neither  is  self-control  to  be  attained  by  the  arbitrary  mortification  of  the  body, 
by  means  of  denials  and  penances.  Christianity  was  not  made  for  the  desert  and 
the  convent,  but  for  the  living  and  hostUe  world ;  and  we  are  not  to  become  saints 
by  secluding  ourselves  from  the  outer  world,  but  are  to  be  saints  in  it  by  the  power 
of  a  new  life.  3.  But  in  order  to  gain  self-control  we  must  study  ourselves,  especially 
as  to  our  weak  points  of  character,  and  aim  to  conquer  specific  modes  or  habits  of 
evil  to  which  we  are  prone.  4.  Again,  the  power  of  self-control  will  be  strengthened 
if  we  cherish  habitually  the  sense  of  God's  presence  and  of  His  watchful  eye.  And 
not  only  the  thought  of  God  as  ever  nigh  to  us,  but  the  presence  of  God  by  His 
spirit  within  us  must  be  cherished  if  we  would  govern  ourselves  by  His  law.  The 
apostle  enumerates  temperance,  self-government  among  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 
Ajid  now,  in  conclusion,  let  me  urge  you  to  give  all  diligence  to  add  this  grace 
to  your  character;  to  perfect  yourself  in  the  government  of  your  own  heart. 
(1)  I  in-ge  you  to  this  diligence  by  the  greatness  of  the  object  to  be  obtained. 
Consider  what  it  is  to  gain  the  mastery  over  a  single  passion.  Think  of  the 
poets,  the  statesmen,  the  warriors  who  have  sunk  under  the  inebriating  cup 
and  have  left  a  dishonoured  name.  (2)  I  exhort  you  to  be  diligent  in  this  seK- 
conquest  because  it  is  made  practicable  by  timely  diligence.  Passions  indulged  have 
a  rapid  and  fearful  growth.  (3)  I  exhort  you  to  this  self-control  for  your  own  peace 
of  mind.  (4)  Your  duty  to  Christ  and  your  professed  hope  in  Him  require  that  you 
shall  govern  yourself  in  His  spirit.  "  He  died  for  aU,  that  they  should  not  hence- 
forth live  to  themselves,  but  to  Him  who  died  for  them  and  rose  again."  [Joseph  P. 
Thompson.)  Self-mastery  : — I.  The  natxire  of  self-mastery.  H.  The  difficulties 
of  self-mastery.  1.  Hereditary.  2.  Surrounding.  3.  Inherent.  IH.  The  advan- 
tages of  self-mastery.  The  evils  from  which  it  saves — physical,  social,  spiritual. 
IV.  The  MEANS  of  self-mastery.  1.  Fellowship  with  other  self-conquerors.  2. 
Communion  with  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Help  from  heaven.  4.  Earnest,  brave 
endeavours.      (U.  R.    Thomas.)  Temperance: — Temperance,   self-mastery,  the 

power  of  self-restraint,  is  a  necessary  part  of  Christian  Ufe,  natural  to  it, 
indispensable  to  its  perfection.  Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean.  You  have  a 
servant :  he  comes  to  you  unacquainted  with  the  perfect  working  of  your  system 
of  business,  strange  to  you,  strange  to  the  service  he  has  to  render ;  you  do  not  take 
him  into  your  full  confidence  at  fii-st ;  you  give  him  such  detailed  directions  that  he 
cannot  well  make  a  mistake.  By  and  by  you  give  him  your  confidence,  you  throw 
him  upon  his  honour ;  he  knows  as  well  as  if  you  were  always  telling  him  what  you 
want  him  to  do.  If  there  comes  to  pass  a  transaction  different  from  what  he  has 
been  engaged  in,  he  knows  your  principles  so  well  that  he  can  complete  it  without 
referring  to  you  at  all.  Detailed  instruction  is  no  longer  necessary.  It  strikes  you, 
too,  very  forcibly  sometimes,  does  it  not,  that  the  higher  position  which  the  servant 
now  occupies  may  be  much  more  abused  than  the  lower — the  more  mechanical 
office  ?  He  is  freer  in  one  sense  from  control,  and,  if  he  be  a  good  man,  the  very 
fact  that  you  put  him  on  his  honour  in  your  service  makes  him  doubly  dutiful. 
But  you  know  that  confidence  may  be  abused,  and  the  fuUer  the  trust,  the  greater 
the  possibility  of  abuse.  You  know  that  freedom — leaving  a  man  to  act  for  himself, 
with  nothing  but  weU-instiUed  principles  to  guide  him — means  possibility  of  delin- 
quency as  well  as  possibility  of  uprightness.  You  say,  in  a  word,  that  the  man  has 
knowledge ;  and  that  knowledge  will  be  a  dangerous  thing  for  him  and  for  you 
unless  it  be  conjoined  with  self-mastery,  self-restraint.  You  say,  in  other  words, 
that  in  this  high,  confidential,  honourable  position  in  which  the  servant  stands,  to 
be  faithful  and  perfect  in  his  service  he  must  "  add  to  his  knowledge,  temperance." 
You  have  raised  your  servant  from  being  little  better  than  a  machine,  and  you  have 
made  a  man  of  him ;  the  risk  increases  with  the  dignity.  Intemperance  is  of  two 
kinds — asceticism  and  licentiousness ;  temperance  is  the  mean  between  the  two.  If 
a  man  is  of  such  a  nature  that  he  cannot  use  his  freedom  without  abusing  it,  if  he 
must  go  to  one  extreme  or  the  other,  it  is  better  that  he  should  be  an  ascetic  than  a 
theological  libertine,  just  as  it  is  better  for  a  man  who  must  be  either  an  entire 
abstainer  or  a  drunkard,  that  he  should  be  the  former.  Both  extremes  are  equally 
intemperate  ;  but,  of  course,  while  there  is  not  much  more  than  self-denial  in  the 
one,  there  is  sin  in  the  other.  (D.  J.  Hamer.)  Self-control : — A  river  is  usually 
an  unmixed  blessing  to  a  country.  It  fertilises  adjacent  lands.  It  presents  a  match- 
less highway  for  commerce.     But  there  are  exceptions  to  the  rule.     One  of  the 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

largest  rivers  in  the  world  is  known  by  the  name  of  "China's  sorrow."  The 
banks  through  which  the  Yellow  Eiver  flows  for  nearly  a  thousand  miles  of  its 
course  are  so  low  and  so  friable  that,  with  the  first  flash  of  the  spring  floods, 
away  they  sink,  and  thousands  of  square  miles  of  country  are  laid  under  water. 
It  is  not  hemmed  in  by  granite  or  limestone  gorges  like  its  great  and  incomparably 
useful  neighbour  the  Yang  Tsze.  Its  torrents  are  unrestrained.  Within  historical 
times  it  has  shifted  its  course  altogether,  and  discharges  itself  into  the  sea  some 
hundreds  of  miles  away  from  the  old  mouth.  Although  a  river  of  first-class  dimen- 
sions, counted  by  the  volume  of  water  it  discharges,  for  nearly  a  thousand  miles  of 
its  course  it  is  scarcely  navigable.  It  is  a  colossal  power  for  good  wasted  through 
the  lack  of  strong,  binding  power  in  its  banks.  And  there  are  not  a  few  people  who 
are  like  this  capricious  river  in  the  career  they  follow.  We  might,  perhaps,  descinbe 
them  as  the  "  Cliurch's  sorrow."  There  is  uncommon  virtue  or  potency  in  their 
characters,  and  they  are  not  altogether  wanting  in  knowledge.  But  through  the 
lack  of  this  temperance  or  "  self-restraint "  they  break  out  at  given  periods  like 
"  China's  sorrow,"  and  make  schism  and  faction  in  the  Church,  and  fritter  away 
their  own  capacity  for  usefulness,  and  possibly  in  the  end  shift  their  course  into 
altogether  unexpected  channels.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  Patience. — Patience  : — I.  Thk 
Christian  attitude  in  eefeeence  to  all  that  is  unwelcome  and  sorrowful. 
"  In  your  self-control  supply  patience."  Is  there  one  of  us  who  is  not  awai'e 
of  some  crook  in  the  lot?  Well,  then,  this  is  true  wisdom,  quietly  take  it  and 
let  it  work  as  it  is  meant  to  work.  It  is  Christian  patience  that  is  here  enjoined, 
not  the  mere  stoical,  submitting  to  the  inevitable ;  not  the  mere  pride  of  not  showing 
my  feeling ;  not  the  mere  foolish  attempt  to  argue  myself  into  insensibility.  This 
Christian  patience  has  for  its  very  first  element  the  recognition  of  the  bitterness  of 
the  cup  that  He  gives  us  to  drink.  The  second  element  in  Christian  patience  is 
quietly  bearing,  with  submitted  and  acquiescent  will,  the  pain  or  sorrow  that  comes 
upon  us.  Now,  remember  where,  in  our  series  of  Christian  graces,  this  wise 
endurance  of  the  inevitable  and  God-sent  suffering  comes.  It  comes  after  self- 
command.  That  teaches  us  that  it  will  take  a  great  effort  of  self-control  to 
keep  the  quivering  limb  quite  still,  if  undrugged  by  any  false  ansesthetic,  under 
the  gleaming  knife.  But  we  can  do  it.  And  remember,  too,  that  this  injunction  of 
Christian  patience  comes  in  a  series  which  is  all  dependent  on  faith.  Patience  is 
possible  when  beneath  all  the  sorrows,  be  they  great  or  small,  we  recognise  God's 
will.  And  in  another  way  faith  ministers  patience  by  teaching  us  to  understand 
and  recognise  the  meaning  of  sorrows.  II.  The  Christian  attitude  towards  all 
DirncuLTY,  THE  ARMOUR  FOR  THEM  THAT  STRUGGLE.  What  wc  havc  to  deal  with 
here  is  Christian  perseverance.  And  about  that  I  have  only  two  things  to  say. 
First,  how  impossible  it  is  to  get  any  wholesome,  vigorous  Christian  life  without  it ; 
and  in  the  second,  how  faith  likewise  ministers  to  aU  persistent  effort  and  energy. 
As  to  the  first,  no  course  of  life  which  has  in  view  a  far  off  end,  towards  which  all 
its  efforts  are  to  be  directed,  but  runs  the  risk  of  wearying  ere  the  end  is  attained. 
The  quiet  persistence  with  which  the  leaf  "  grows  green  and  broad,  and  takes  no 
care  "  ;  the  quiet  persistence,  with  which  from  tiny  knob,  hard  and  green,  the  grape 
advances  to  blushing  purple,  and  juicy  sun-warmed  mellowness,  is  the  type  of  the 
fashion  in  which  alone  the  harsh  crudities  of  nature  can  be  turned  into  the  sweet- 
nesses of  grace.  "  Add  to  your  faith  persistence."  And  be  thankful  to  remember 
that  our  gospel  alone  gives  men  motives  and  power  thus  to  persevere  to  the  end. 

III.    The    ATTITUDE    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    SOUL    TOWARDS   LONG-DEFERRED    GOOD.       There 

is  an  element  of  hope  in  the  New  Testament  conception  of  patience.  In  fact,  in 
some  passages  the  word  seems  almost  to  be  a  synonym  for  hope,  and  we  read  in 
other  places  of  the  patience  of  hope.  This  view  of  the  "  patience  of  hope  "  suggests 
to  us  a  thought  or  two.  The  weakness  and  the  misery  of  all  earthly  anticipation  i3 
that  it  is  full  of  tumult  and  agitation.  Hope  is  not  calm,  but  the  very  opposite. 
As  usually  entertained  it  leads  to  impatience  and  not  to  patience.  And  the  reason 
why  hope  is  impatient  is  because  we  foolishly  set  our  hopes  on  things  that  are  too 
near  us,  and  on  things  that  are  uncertain.  The  man  that  is  only  going  a  railway 
journey  of  an  hour's  duration  will  be  more  tired  at  the  end  of  the  first  half-hour 
than  a  man  who  is  going  a  journey  of  a  day's  duration  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  first 
half  of  the  day.  If  we  were  only  wise  enough  to  fling  our  hopes  far  enough  forward, 
and  to  set  them  upon  that  future  upon  which  they  may  fasten,  which  is  as  certain 
as  the  past,  there  would  be  no  need  and  no  possibility  Of  the  agitations  that  perturb 
all  earthly  anticipations.  And  you  can  get  the  patience  that  endures  and  persists 
where  you  get  everything  else — from  Him  who  is  its  example  as  well  as  its  giver. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  55 

{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Patience: — Patience  is,  in  the  estimation  of  some,  a  mere 
drudge  among  the  virtues.  In  Scripture  she  is  a  queen,  magnanimous  and  dignified. 
How  it  is  and  why  it  is  that  the  disciples  of  temperance  or  self-restraint  are  imme- 
diately commended  to  the  cultivation  of  a  gentle  and  forbearing  spirit,  will,  as  we 
think,  appear  if  we  but  advert  to  the  petulance  which  all  rigorous  and  abstinent 
self-control  is  apt  to  foster.  Thus,  during  the  great  fast  of  the  Mohammedans,  the 
Kamadan,  observed  by  severe  abstinence  from  food  through  all  the  hours  of  daylight, 
travellers  have  noted  the  querulous  spirit  that  seems  for  the  time  to  reign  through 
a  Turkish  city.  A  recent  British  missionary  speaks  of  the  devotees  of  Hindooism, 
whose  austerities  are  most  rigid,  and  who  proclaim  superiority  to  all  passion,  as 
being  notorious  for  "  a  general  irritability."  The  ascetic,  of  all  times  and  of  all 
forms  of  faith,  has  been  subject,  and  not  without  some  plausibility,  to  the  imputation 
of  sourness.  I.  What  Christian  patience  is  not.  1.  The  patience  of  the  disciple 
of  Jesus  is  not  stoical  apathy,  nor  acquired  or  affected  obduracy  to  all  physical 
suffering.  2.  Nor,  much  less,  is  Christian  patience  a  meek  indifference  to  all 
error  and  wickedness  in  the  world  around  us.  The  standard  of  Christian  piety 
adopted  by  some,  which  is  all  softness  and  repose,  would  have  no  room  for  men  like 
the  lion-hearted  Knox  who  did,  under  God,  so  thorough  and  good  a  work  before  a 
licentious  court,  and  a  frowning  nobility,  and  a  raging  priesthood,  for  the  Scottish 
nation.  Patience  shines  forth  in  such  a  spirit  at  such  a  time  triumphant.  It  is  the 
patience  that  dares  brave  all  anger,  and  loss,  and  suffering ;  but  that  dares  not 
sacrifice  truth  or  duty,  or  make  the  fear  of  God  to  bend  to  the  fear  of  man. 
II.  What  then  is  Christian  patience  ?  We  understand  by  it  "  a  calm  endurance 
of  evil  for  God's  sake."  Now,  evil  is  both  physical  and  moral.  Physical  evil 
includes  pain,  want,  disease,  and  death ;  moral,  errors,  sorrows  of  soul,  and 
wickedness  in  all  its  varying  shades,  and  in  all  its  hideous  shapes.  Taken  in 
this  largest  sense,  patience  includes  the  grace  of  meekness,  from  which,  however, 
in  other  portions  of  Scripture,  it  is  distinguished.  Meekness  is  the  quiet  endurance 
of  wrong  from  man,  and  patience  is  the  endurance  of  woe  appointed  of  God.  But 
in  our  text  we  suppose  the  word  patience  to  include  both  meekness  and  patience 
strictly  so  called.  It  is  the  quiet  endurance  of  evil  for  God's  sake.  That  it  is 
endured,  impUes  that  the  evil  is  not  self-invented  and  self-inflicted.  If  the  physical 
evil  be  the  effect  of  our  own  utter  neglect,  the  passive  endurance  of  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  make  the  sufferer  a  patient  Christian  in  the  truest  sense  of  those  terms.  Against 
moral  evil  it  must  bear  patiently  its  bold  protest ;  but  the  want  of  immediate  effect 
to  that  protest,  and  the  presence  of  that  evil  in  the  world,  and  its  temporary  triumph, 
must  not  shake  the  Christian's  patient  reliance  on  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  the 
Divine  Providence.  For  Christian  patience  is  essentially  hopeful.  It  must  quietly 
wait  for  the  salvation  of  God.  So  is  it  also  in  the  New  Testament  represented  as 
bound  up  with  Christian  diligence  or  industry.  The  Bible  tells  us  of  "  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing,"  and  sends  the  pleader  of  the  promises  and  the  keeper 
of  God's  precepts  to  learn  of  the  husbandman,  who,  having  sown  the  seed,  must 
have  long  patience  for  the  harvest.  We  have  seen  its  needfulness  to  fill  out  Christian 
temperance.  III.  Let  us  observe,  now,  its  relations  to  other  graces  of  the 
RELIGIOUS  character.  1.  Ours  is  a  day  of  rehgious  effort  for  reform  at  home 
and  evangelisation  abroad.  Look  at  the  need  of  patience  to  preserve  the  spirit 
of  the  labourers  in  working  order,  and  to  render  their  endeavours  successful. 
Mackintosh  praises  Wilberforce  as  being  a  model  reformer,  because  of  his 
immovable  sweetness,  as  well  as  his  inflexible  persistency.  But  many  good  men 
assay,  without  this  patient  sweetness,  to  refoi-m  others  by  the  virtual  tyranny  of 
harsh  and  unreasoning  criminations.  They  resort  to  moral  coercion  where  they 
should  use  moral  suasion.  2.  Again,  as  a  preservative  of  faith  and  knowledge  and 
godliness,  patience  is  indispensable.  It  was  said  by  the  illustrious  philosopher 
Newton,  that  if  he  had  accomplished  anything  in  science,  it  had  been  "  by  dint 
of  patient  thought."  The  believer  in  Scripture  who  would  feed,  from  its  full  pages, 
his  faith  and  knowledge  and  piety  into  richer  development  and  greater  vigour,  must 
be  patient  in  searching,  patient  in  pondering  and  comparing,  and  patient  in  praying 
over  those  sacred  lines.  3.  Again,  virtue  and  godliness  and  charity,  all  practical 
Christian  excellences,  need  patience  for  their  development.  "  Confidence,"  said  a 
British  statesman,  "  is  a  plant  of  slow  growth."  True,  consistent  piety  is  also  such, 
and  needs  long  and  meek  study  of  God's  providence  and  Word  to  refine  and  perfect 
it.  Carey  said,  modestly,  in  his  old  age,  when  his  grammars  and  versions  of  Holy 
Scripture  were  almost  a  library  in  themselves,  "  I  can  do  one  thing — I  can  plod." 
Men,  families,  nations,  have  pined  and  dwindled  because  they  could  not  plod.    In 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  soul's  struggle  heavenward  we  do  well  to  recollect  that  he  "  who  endureth  to  the 
end  "  shall  be  saved,  and  that  by  faith  and  patience  we  inherit  the  promises.     IV. 
Let  us  now  consider  the  motives  that   should  persuade  us  to  be  patient  as 
Christians.     For  as  patience  includes  meekness  under  wrongs  of  our  fellow-men, 
we  must  forgive  or  we  may  not  hope  ourselves   before  God  to  be  forgiven.      As 
patience  includes  submission  to  the  Divine  appointments,  let  us  remark  that  our 
trials  are  lessened  by  serene  meekness  and  resignation.     God  lightens  and  removes 
them  more  early,  and  they  do  not  so  deeply  wound  and  empoison  the  soul.    We  are 
to  remember,  too,  the  necessity  of  this  grace  to  success  and  influence  with  our 
feUow-men.    It  is  the  patient  perseverance  in  weU-doing  that  builds  up  consistency, 
and  influence,  and  weight  of  character.     We  are,  again,  all  to  remember  our  own 
unworthiness  before  God,  and  our  liability  to  pay  ten  thousand  talents,  ere,  in  our 
fretfulness,  we  chide  man  harshly,  or  murmur  bitterly  against  our  God  and  His 
providence.     Nor  is  it  unfitting  that  we  remember  how  much  of  mercy  and  kind- 
ness there  is  in  God's  allotments.     V.  We  see  why  patience  is  to  be  desired, 
BUT  HOW  is  it  to  BE   ATTAINED?      1.  By  the  study  of   Scripture.      We  see  there 
glorious    examples  and  inspiriting    promises,   and  the  most    solemn    warnings, 
and    the    most    apposite    models    and    precepts.      2.   Let    us    pray.      Does    the 
spirit  in  us  lust  to   envy?      And  would  envy  swell  into  wrath,  or  blasphemy, 
or  murder?      The   apostle's  reply  is,   "He,"   our    God,   "  giveth  more   grace." 
And  He  gives  it  in  answer  to  prayer.     The  apostles  when  bidden  by  their  Lord 
often  to  forgive  the  offending  and  injurious,  prayed,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith." 
Eepeat  the  petition.      For  its  teacher  yet  lives  to  be  its   answerer.      3.  Above 
all,   be  in  communion,  much  and  habitually,   with  Christ.      (IF.  R.  Williams.) 
Patience : — Now  let  us  look  at  this  matter  fairly.    Jesus  Christ  does  not  want  to 
put  us,  as  His  disciples,  in  an  artificial  world.     He  has  thought  for  us  in  the 
future  and  also  in  the  present.     He  takes  up  the  conditions  of  our  life  here.  He 
takes  up  aU  the  powers  of  our  nature ;  and  the  truth  which  He  reveals  so  asserts 
itself  that  when  fuUy  grasped  and  acted  out  the  powers  of  our  nature  are  most 
fuUy  ordered  and  developed,  the  conditions  of  our  life  are  most  perfectly  met.     We 
are  placed  in  certain  circumstances,  and  Christ  knows  them.   Christ  would  so  teach 
us,  so  mould  our  nature,  that  we  fulfil  all  the  conditions  of  our  earthly  course  in 
such  a  way  as  to  be  best  prepared  for  entering  on  the  fuller  realities  of  the  heavenly 
and  eternal  life.     Patience,  then,  power  of  endurance,  power  of  perseverance,  is  a 
necessary  part  of  Christian  character.     Take  one  or  two  simple  reminders  and  this 
will  appear  clearly  enough.     Men   are  in  a  condition  of  suffering  in  this  world. 
Account  for  it  as  you  may,  expound  the  purpose  of  it  as  you  may,  the  fact  remains. 
Somehow  or  other  we  seem  to  be  always  playing  at  cross-purposes  with  ourselves. 
Who  ever  formed  a  plan  and  found  no  hindrance  to  the  carrying  of  it  out  ?    And  is 
it  not  in  these  smaller  matters  that  our  chief  causes  of  discomfort  lie  ?     The  big, 
thick  clouds  that  altogether  shut  out  the  light  from  a  man's  life  only  gather  once  or 
twice  perchance  in  his  history.     Yet  all  men  have  to  suffer,  and  to  suffer  severely, 
from  minor  trials  every  day ;    and  to  meet  these  some  firm,  abiding  principle 
regulating  the  life  is  needed.     Does  it  not  also  suggest  itself  to  you  that  the  position 
in  which  Christianity  puts  a  man  in  relation  to  God,  to  himself,  even,  to  things 
present  and  things  future,  is  such  as  to  require  that  he,  at  all  events,  of  all  men 
should  be  possessed  of  this  grace  of  "  patience,"  this  energy  of  quiet  perseverance. 
If  it  be  a  necessity  in  every-day  life  apart  from  Christianity,  it  is  all  the  more  a 
necessity  to  the  Christian.     He  sees  things  to  which  other  men  are  blind ;  he  has 
burdens  laid  upon  him  which  other  men  know  nothing  of ;  and  he  of  all  men  must 
be  specially  strengthened  to  endure.     A  man  takes  a  piece  of  rough  iron  and  fines 
and  hardens  it  into  steel.     It  is  sterner  and  stronger  than  it  was  in  some  respects, 
but  is  more  susceptible  in  others.     It  will  glitter  with  brilliant  polish,  but  a  breath 
can  dim  and  tarnish  it.     The  finely  tempered  sword  must  be  kept  ensheathed,  or  it 
will  lose  its  lustre.     So  Christianity  takes  a  man  in  his  rough,  natural  state  and 
refines  his  nature.     He  is  stronger  and  yet  more  susceptible  than  he  was  before. 
It  comes,  then,  to  this  alternative :  he  must  be  moved  from  the  risk  of  danger, 
taken,  in  a  word,  out  of  the  world,  or  he  must  have  a  new  power  of  endurance 
given  to  him  which  will  enable  him  to  resist  contaminating  influence.    A  gardener 
takes  a  flower  root ;  what  it  has  of  beauty  is  wild  and  fitful,  it  has  many  rough 
defects.     He  cultures  it,  and  by  care  and  scientific  appliance  he  makes  the  same 
life  bring  forth  more  beautiful  blossoms.     But  the  plant  has  a  fragile  beauty  ;  it 
cannot  now  weather  the  storm,  it  must  be  guarded  against  the  nipping  frost  and 
the  rude  wind.    So  Christianity  takes  a  man  and  puts  such  grace  into  his  heart 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  57 

that  his  life  bears  flowers  and  fruit  "  unto  holiness  " ;  but  he  cannot  bear  uncon- 
sciously what  he  could  before.  It  comes,  then,  to  this  alternative :  that  he  must 
be  removed  from  contact  with  the  storms  of  this  world's  experience,  or  else  he  must 
have  what  the  gardener  cannot  give  his  cherished  plant,  special  and  increased 
power  to  withstand  and  to  patiently  endure.  So  you  see  this  grace  of  which  Peter 
speaks,  and  which  at  first  sight  seems  rather  incongruous  with  the  rest,  is  really  a 
necessary  and  inherent  part  of  the  Divine  life  in  man.  Christianity  would  deal 
cruelly  and  fatally  with  us  if  "  patience  "  were  not  inalienably  connected  with  the 
life  wliich  it  cherishes.  But  there  are  other  points  in  which  such  necessity  as  I 
have  asserted  is  clearly  seen  besides  that  arising  from  the  keener  susceptibility  of 
the  Christian.  We  set  out  with  a  high  ideal.  Our  whole  nature  thrills  with  the 
new  life  that  has  begun  to  stir  within  us.  The  sense  of  deliverance  is  precious. 
We  feel  that  new  motives,  new  aims,  new  desires  have  come  to  us.  Sin  and  misery 
have  fled  away  ;  hope  and  joy  and  peace  will  fill  our  heart.  Such  happy  life  is  to 
be  for  our  constant  enjoyment.  Are  these  not  the  thoughts  which  fill  the  soul 
when  it  fii'st  passes  from  death  unto  life  ?  Has  such  experience,  then,  been  an 
unchanging  one  with  you?  Have  you  never  been  thrust  back  from  what  you 
thought  a  sure  and  safe  position  of  advance  ?  Sin  does  not  lose  its  hold  upon  us 
all  at  once.  We  are  weak,  and  only  by  patient  perseverance  can  we  be  made 
strong.  We  are  subject  to  temptation,  and  only  by  patient  watching  can  we  hope 
to  escape.  We  are  ignorant,  and  only  by  patient  learning  can  we  attain  unto 
knowledge.  A  war  is  carried  on  within  us  in  which  the  good  principles  do  not 
come  scatheless  from  the  conflict.  These  rebuffs  and  disappointments  and  failures 
are  sure  to  meet  us.  Our  Master  had  to  contend  with  evil,  and  led  the  way 
by  His  example  of  faith  and  patience  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises :  so 
must  we  persevere  and  endure  unto  the  end.  (D.  J.  Hamer.)  Patience : — 
I.  The  elements  of  a  true  Chbistian  patience.  The  literal  meaning  of 
inro/iovr)  is  "remaining  behind,"  or  "remaining  in  the  house";  i.e.,  abiding — 
das  zuriickbleiben,  zuhausebleiben  (Passow).  Hence  constancy,  stability,  steadi- 
ness. "  Our  days  on  the  earth  are  as  a  shadow,  and  there  is  none  abiding " 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  15).  The  Septuagint  here  uses  v-n-ofiovrj  to  denote  stability,  the 
opposite  of  that  which  is  transitory  and  fleeting.  In  the  text  De  Wette  renders 
vTTonovT)  by  Standhaftigkeit,  steadfastness.  It  is  something  more  than  submissive- 
ness,  by  which  Isaac  Taylor  defines  it.  Patientia  denotes  the  quality  of  bearing  or 
enduring.  Cicero  applies  it  to  the  endurance  of  hunger  and  cold.  In  analysing 
patience  into  its  elements  we  must  view  it  both  upon  the  negative  and  the  positive 
Bide.  1.  Patience  does  not  imply  a  want  of  sensibility  to  suffering,  sorrow,  or 
wrong.  A  North  American  Indian  would  think  it  unmanly  or  cowardly  to  betray 
a  consciousness  of  pain,  to  utter  a  cry  or  shed  a  tear  for  any  physical  suffering. 
We  may  not  seek  for  patience  in  an  insensibility  to  suffering,  whether  natural  or 
forced,  nor  in  a  sullen  disregard  of  personal  consequences  in  carrying  out  some 
proposed  end  or  meeting  an  imagined  fate.  2.  And  here  we  may  note  more 
particularly  that  patience  does  not  argue  indifference  to  the  issue  of  the  trials  or 
labours  which  are  upon  us.  The  mind  will  forecast  its  own  future,  will  have 
hopes,  will  have  fears,  will  have  a  choice  as  to  events  affecting  its  own  happiness ; 
no  logic  or  philosophy  or  schooling  can  destroy  these  essential  qualities  of  the 
human  soul ;  take  away  these,  and  man  ceases  to  be  a  man.  He  who  professes  not 
to  be  troubled  about  events  because  he  does  not  care  what  happens  is  not  an 
example  of  the  patient  man.  The  true  patient  man  does  care  what  happens.  The 
care-nothing  spirit  is  not  true  Christian  patience.  3.  Neither  is  a  do-nothing 
spirit  to  be  identified  with  patience.  There  are  times  when  ijatience  counsels  to 
inaction,  when  "  the  strength  of  Israel  is  to  sit  still."  But  this  patience  of  waiting 
is  not  the  inaction  of  sluggishness  nor  of  despondency.  It  is  a  watchful  inaction, 
like  that  of  men  sleeping  upon  their  arms,  with  their  camp-fires  always  lighted  and 
the  sentinels  at  their  posts.  The  shipwrecked  mariner  in  an  open  boat  without  oar 
or  sail  has  nothing  to  do  but  wait  for  the  appearance  of  relief.  But  if  he  has  a 
compass  and  a  paddle  and  knows  himself  to  be  within  a  hundred  miles  of  land, 
then  patience  will  be  shown  not  in  idle  waiting  or  in  praying  for  some  chance  relief, 
but  in  working  on  without  murmuring  and  without  despair,  though  the  hand  is 
weary  and  the  head  is  faint,  and  neither  sun  nor  star  appears  over  the  waste  of 
waters.  Viewed,  then,  positively  patience  requires — 1.  The  consciousness  of  a 
right  intent.  This  removes  from  within  all  disturbing  causes  which  might  irritate 
and  unsettle  the  mind,  and  enables  us  to  commit  our  way  to  the  Lord  in  confidence. 
We  shall  grow  patient  under  trials  in  proportion  as  we  grow  unselfish.     And  so  too 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

of  labours ;  if  we  enter  upon  these  with  a  pure  intent,  if  we  rise  above  all  selfish 
feeling  to  the  grandeur  of  working  for  mankind  and  for  God,  then  shall  we  hold  on 
by  the  attraction  of  the  work  itself,  never  ruffled  by  opposition  nor  disheartened  by 
difficulty.  Hence  the  exercise  of  a  true  Christian  patience  demands  a  conscience 
void  of  offence  towards  man  and  God.  2.  The  exercise  of  Christian  patience 
demands  imphcit  confidence  in  God  and  in  our  cause  as  approved  by  Him. 
Patience  and  faith  go  hand  in  hand.  The  main  element  in  patience  is  Christian 
submission  to  the  will  of  God.  This  rests  upon  confidence  as  its  basis — confidence 
in  the  wisdom,  the  power,  and  the  love  of  God.  3.  Patience  must  have  in  it  the 
element  of  hope.  Patience  is  incompatible  with  despair.  Patience  under  trial 
expects  God's  appearing.  Patience  in  labour  awaits  God's  help.  The  virtue  of 
patience,  by  reason  of  its  quiet  and  retiracy,  commands  but  little  notice  and 
admiration  from  men.  Men  do  not  lay  the  stress  of  greatness  upon  the  passive 
virtues.  II.  The  place  and  value  of  patience  in  the  Christian  chabacter. 
1.  This  virtue  of  patience  we  need  in  all  our  labours  for  the  cause  of  Christ  and 
the  good  of  men.  In  working  against  evil  we  are  prone  either  to  irritation  or  to 
despondency.  Our  weak  natures  are  annoyed  by  the  opposition  we  encounter  in  a 
good  cause.  2.  We  need  this  patience  under  the  afflictions  and  wrongs  which  we 
personally  suffer — afflictions  at  the  hand  of  God,  persecution,  calumny,  wrong  from 
our  fellow-men.  How  sweet  is  patience  under  the  hand  of  God  !  It  is  like  sunlight 
and  flowers  in  the  chamber  of  sickness.  But  it  is  easier  to  bear  great  and  prolonged 
afflictions  which  come  directly  and  visibly  from  the  hand  of  God  than  the  petty 
vexations  and  wrongs  which  arise  from  untoward  circumstances  and  evil  men. 
Great  occasions  rally  great  principles  and  brace  the  mind  to  a  lofty  bearing,  a 
bearing  that  is  even  above  itself.  But  trials  that  make  no  occasion  at  all  leave  it 
to  show  the  goodness  and  beauty  it  has  in  its  own  disposition.  3.  We  need  patience 
with  respect  to  the  fulfilling  of  God's  plans  of  mercy  for  the  world.  God's  promises 
are  like  century  plants.  They  grow  silently,  almost  imperceptibly,  through  wind 
and  storm,  by  day  and  night,  and  year  by  year.  {Joseph  P.  Thomj^son.)  Godli- 
ness.— Godliness  : — At  first  sight  it  appears  strange  to  find  "  godliness  "  ranked 
among  the  special  virtues  of  the  Christian  character,  whereas  it  is  a  very  much 
more  general  expression  than  any  of  these  specific  excellences  which  precede  it  in 
this  list.  Nor  is  it  less  singular  to  find  it  inserted  in  the  midst  of  a  catalogue  of 
Christian  graces,  whereas  we  should  rather  expect  it  to  stand  as  the  all-inclusive 
foundation  of  them  all.  What  do  we  mean  by  godliness  ?  The  fundamental  idea 
is  reverence  toward  God.  That  reverence  expresses  itself  both  inwardly  and  out- 
wardly— inwardly  by  habitual  communion  with  Him  in  spirit ;  outwardly  by 
habitual  service  of  Him  in  act.  The  word  covers  substantially  the  same  ground  as 
the  Old  Testament  expression,  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  If,  then,  we  take  that  for 
the  meaning  of  the  word,  the  singularity  of  its  insertion  in  this  catalogue  may  be 
found  to  be  the  means  of  teaching  important  truths.  I.  The  fii'st  lesson  that  I 
would  gather  is  as  to  the  root  of  real  religion.  We  must  never  forget,  in  con- 
sidering this  series  of  Christian  virtues,  that  faith  is  regarded  as  the  foundation  of 
them  all.  It  is  the  raw  material,  so  to  speak,  out  of  which  all  these  other  graces 
and  excellences  are  made.  And  this  is  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the  sense 
of  reverence  to  God  manifesting  itseK  in  habitual  communion  with  Him  and 
habitual  service  of  Him  which  is  meant  by  this  word  godliness.  Some  of  us  say 
that  we  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and  are  living  by  faith.  Does  your  faith  lead  you 
to  this  continual  godliness  ?  Are  you  brought  by  it  into  continual  communion 
with  Jesus  Christ,  and,  through  Him,  with  God  ?  Do  you  constantly  refer  all  your 
actions  to  Him  ?     II.  We  have  here  the  other  lesson  that  real  religion  is  a  thing 

TO    BE    cultivated    BY    THE     STRENUOUS    EXERCISE    OF    CHRISTIAN    GRACES.       No    man 

becomes  "godly"  by  mere  desiring.  The  bridge  between  faith  and  godliness  is 
made  of  manly  strength,  discrimination  and  discernment  of  duty,  rigid  self-control, 
patient  perseverance.  If  you  have  these  things  your  faith  will  effloresce  into 
godliness  ;  if  you  have  not,  it  will  not.  You  will  want  all  these  virtues  and  graces 
which  precede  godliness  in  my  text.  You  will  want  manly  strength — ^for  a  hundred 
reasons,  because  of  the  condition  of  things  round  about  you,  which  is  always  full 
of  temptations  to  draw  you  away,  because  of  your  own  proclivities  to  evil.  And 
you  will  want  manly  strength,  because  you  can  get  no  hold  of  an  unseen  God 
except  by  a  definite  effort  of  thought,  which  will  require  resolute  will.  Further,  for 
godliness,  we  need  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  discrimination  between  good  and  evil, 
right  and  wrong,  because  the  world  is  full  of  illusions,  and  we  are  very  blind.  And 
we  need  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  self-control  and  rigid  repression  of  passions,  and 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  59 

lusts,  and  desires,  and  tastes,  and  inclinations  before  His  calm  and  sovereign  will, 
because  the  world  is  full  of  fire  and  our  hearts  and  natures  are  tinder.  And  we 
need  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  patience  in  all  its  three  senses  of  endurance  in 
Borrow,  of  persistence  in  service,  and  of  hope  of  the  future,  because  the  more  a 
man  cultivates  that  habit,  the  larger  will  be  his  stock  of  proofs  of  the  loving-kind- 
ness and  goodness  of  his  God,  and  the  easier  and  more  blessed  it  will  be  for  him 
to  live  in  continual  communion  with  Him.  Exercise  thyself  into  godliness,  and  do 
not  fancy  that  the  Christian  life  comes  as  a  matter  of  course  on  the  back  of  some 
one  initial  act  of  a  long-forgotten  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  Then  another  lesson 
to  be  gathered  from  this  catalogue  of  graces  is  that  teue  religion  is  the  best  pre- 

SEEVATVIE  AND  STRENGTHENER  OF  ALL  THESE  PRECEDING  EXCELLENCES.       Do    not    Spend 

your  time  upon  merely  trying  to  cultivate  special  graces  of  the  Christian  character, 
however  needful  they  may  be  for  you,  and  however  beautiful  they  may  be  in  them- 
selves. Seek  to  have  that  which  sanctifies  and  strengthens  them  all.  Faith  is  the 
foundation,  godliness  the  apex  and  crown.     IV.  And  the  last  thought  is  that  this 

TRUE  religion  OR  GODLINESS  UNITES  IN  ONE  HARMONIOUS    WHOLE    THE    MOST    DISSIMILAR 

EXCELLENCES  OF  CHARACTER.  Noticc  that  in  this  series  all  the  excellences  which 
precede  my  text  are  of  the  sterner,  the  more  severe,  and  self-regarding  kind,  and 
that  those  which  follow  it  are  of  the  gentler  sort  and  refer  to  others.  If  I  might 
60  say,  it  is  as  in  some  Alpine  range,  where  the  side  that  faces  the  north  presents 
rugged  cliffs  and  sparse  vegetation,  and  close-knit  strength  to  breast  the  tempest 
and  to  live  amidst  the  snows,  whilst  the  southern  side  has  gentler  slopes  and  a  more 
fertile  soil,  a  richer  vegetation,  and  a  sunnier  sky.  And  in  like  manner  the  difficult 
problem  of  how  far  I  am  to  carry  my  own  cultivation  of  Christian  excellence  apart 
from  regard  to  others,  and  how  far  I  am  to  let  my  obligations  to  help  and  succour 
others  overcome  the  necessity  for  individual  cultivation  of  Christian  character,  is  best 
solved  as  Peter  solves  it  here.  Put  godliness  in  the  middle,  let  that  be  the  centre, 
and  from  it  will  flow  on  the  one  side  all  needful  self-discipline  and  tutoring,  and  on 
the  other  all  wise  and  Christlike  regard  to  the  needs  and  sorrows  of  the  men  around 
us.  {A.  Maclareii,  D.D.)  Godliness: — A  religious  man  is  he  who  practically 
makes  his  accountability  to  God  the  law  of  his  life,  who  is  bound  to  God  with  the 
sense  of  personal  obligation  for  aU  that  he  receives,  in  all  that  he  does.  What, 
then,  is  that  godliness  which  is  capable  of  being  nurtured  as  an  addition  to  saving 
faith  in  Christ  and  to  the  several  virtues  before  enumerated  ?  Some  understand 
the  term  in  the  old  English  sense  of  god-Kfce-ness,  a  moral  resemblance  to  God. 
But  this  does  not  express  the  objective  sense  conveyed  in  the  original  word.  God- 
ward-n&ss,  if  we  might  make  such  a  term,  would  be  nearer  this  than  God-like-ness, 
a  state  of  mind  which  is  toward  God  as  the  sole  object  of  its  adoration  and 
religious  reverence,  the  central,  supreme  object  of  its  trust  and  love,  the  final 
source  of  moral  obligation  and  authority.  One  may  have  a  certain  faith  in  Christ 
■who  is  yet  wanting  in  a  just  and  commanding  reverence  toward  God.  A  mind  that 
believes  in  Christ  as  historically  revealed  in  the  New  Testament,  accepts  Him  as  a 
Divine  Teacher,  and  even  regards  His  death  as  in  some  way  connected  with  the 
redemption  of  mankind,  but  which  does  not  recognise  a  necessity  for  that  death  as 
an  atonement  between  human  guilt  and  Divine  justice,  is  wanting  in  that  godliness 
of  which  the  apostle  speaks.  It  has  not  attained  to  that  reverence  for  God  in  the 
holiness  of  His  Being  and  the  purity  of  His  law  which  makes  the  atonement  at 
once  a  moral  necessity  for  the  soul  itself  and  a  legal  necessity  for  the  Divine 
government.  A  mind  that  looks  to  Christ  as  the  author  of  a  universal  and  indis- 
criminate salvation  for  the  race,  and  admits  no  distinction  in  the  results  of 
probation  between  those  who  accept  and  those  who  reject  the  terms  of  that  salva- 
tion, is  surely  wanting  in  this  godliness.  A  just  reverence  for  God  as  lawgiver  and 
judge  is  wanting.  I.  The  essential  characteristics  of  godliness.  1.  That  it  is 
most  inward  in  its  seat  and  power.  The  Apostle  Paul  has  in  view  this  internal 
spiritual  quality  of  true  godliness  when,  writing  to  Timothy,  he  says,  ♦*  FoUow  after 
righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness."  Here  godliness  is  dis- 
tinguished from  righteousness.  Eighteousness,  as  it  stands  in  this  catalogue  of 
Christian  qualities,  denotes  rectitude  of  action;  godliness  points  to  the  inward 
spring  of  that  action,  and  the  ground  of  its  righteousness,  in  a  just  sentiment  of 
veneration  toward  God.  True  godliness  has  the  soul  for  its  seat  and  God  for  its 
object.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."  2.  This  sentiment  is  equally 
compounded  of  love  and  fear.  That  veneration  or  reverence  toward  God  which  is 
true  piety  is  grounded  in  a  love  of  His  holiness.  There  is  a  veneration  whose 
chief  element  is  awe ;  a  reverence  for  dignity,  station,  greatness,  power,  which  is 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


cold  and  formal  and  distant.  Such  is  the  veneration  which  barbarian  tribes 
manifest  for  the  mysterious  powers  of  Nature.  But  the  veneration  of  the  Christian 
mind  for  God  is  not  a  dim  awe  of  invisible  power,  a  dread  of  that  Almighty  force 
which  heaped  up  the  mountains,  but  is  a  reverence  for  that  which  is  greater  than 
physical  force,  however  sublime  and  terrible,  even  the  greatness  of  a  good  and 
just  and  holy  character.  The  poet  Shelley  disowned  a  personal  God  ;  yet  what  one 
has  aptly  styled  "  the  atheistic  hunger  of  his  soul"  caused  him  to  fill  the  universe 
with  invisible  powers  to  which  he  paid  that  credulous  homage  which  atheism 
always  pays  to  mystery.  But  with  this  love  and  adoration  of  the  character  of  God 
should  mingle  always  a  salutary  awe  of  His  majesty.  "  By  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
men  depart  from  evil."  II.  What  are  the  modes  of  its  expression  ?  1.  We 
should  cherish  this  reverence  for  the  being  of  God  when  we  approach  Him  in 
prayer.  Abraham  and  Moses,  and  Samuel  and  David,  with  all  their  importunity 
in  supplication,  were  filled  with  reverence  and  godly  fear  when  they  drew  nigh  to 
God  in  prayer.  2.  We  should  cherish  reverence  for  the  name  of  God.  3.  True 
godliness  implies  a  reverence  for  the  law  of  God  as  the  supreme  and  final  rule  of 
moral  action.  "  Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against 
Thee."  4.  We  should  cherish  also  a  profound  reverence  for  the  will  of  God  as 
manifested  in  His  providence.  "  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it." 
The  godly  mind  rises  above  all  secondary  causes  in  nature  and  all  intermediate 
human  agencies  to  perceive  and  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  its  afflictions. 
III.  Guard  against  its  counterfeits.  1.  We  are  cautioned  not  to  confound  gain 
with  godliness.  The  Apostle  Paul  warns  Timothy  against  "men  of  corrupt  minds 
and  destitute  of  the  truth,  supposing  that  gain  is  godliness."  At  first  view  this 
seems  a  strange  and  almost  incredible  form  of  heresy.  But  call  to  mind  the  fact 
that  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  temporal  prosperity  was  promised  to 
godly  living,  and  you  will  readily  see  how  the  idea  might  arise,  as  it  did,  that  out- 
ward prosperity  was  always  a  mark  of  inward  piety.  This  substitution  of  gain 
for  godliness  is  one  of  the  most  subtle  and  depraving  devices  of  the  enemy  of  souls. 
It  is  making  a  calf  of  gold  under  the  very  brow  of  Sinai,  and  setting  aside  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  for  an  image  of  Mammon.  2.  The  other  error  is  thus  characterised 
by  Paul.  He  speaks  of  men  who  are  "  lovers  of  their  own  selves ;  lovers  of 
pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God,"  who  yet  have  a  form  of  godliness  but  deny  the 
power  thereof.  Manifold  are  the  forms  under  which  such  godliness  appears. 
There  is  a  poetic  form  of  godliness,  a  sentiment  which  takes  the  air  of  reverence 
and  breathes  the  name  of  the  Divinity  when  singing  of  the  gi-ander  forms  of  nature. 
The  old  Greek  and  Latin  poetry  peopled  the  invisible  with  gods,  whose  presence 
and  agency  it  represented  in  all  the  mysteries  of  nature  and  in  all  leading  events  of 
human  experience.  The  machinery  of  Homer's  great  epic  lies  within  the  super- 
natural ;  the  gods  played  their  part  in  every  Greek  tragedy.  Indeed,  we  know  the 
religion  of  Greece  and  Rome  mainly  through  their  literature.  But  while  true 
godliness  is  true  veneration  for  God,  not  all  veneration  is  godliness.  It  may  lead 
the  soul  to  God,  or  it  may  not  lie  deeper  than  the  sentient  and  the  imaginative. 
There  is  an  artistic  or  aesthetic  form  of  godliness.  The  Greek  mind,  which  under 
the  fairest  clime  and  the  most  liberal  government  was  stimulated  to  the  highest 
culture  in  taste  and  art,  expressed  its  devotion  through  artistic  forms,  especially  in 
sculpture.  But  taste  and  art,  however  subsidiary  to  the  expression  of  devotion, 
can  never  be  of  the  essence  of  godliness.  There  is  a  dogmatic  form  of  godliness,  a 
creed -worship,  a  veneration  for  dogmas  and  authorities  in  religion.  Wherever  the 
creed  is  put  before  the  life  as  evidence  of  piety,  the  profession  of  the  lips  before 
the  confession  of  the  heart,  there  the  form  of  godliness  is  substituted  for  its  power. 
There  is  a  mechanical  work-form  of  godliness.  This  puts  all  the  religious  energy 
of  the  soul  into  such  outward  visible  acts  as  seem  to  be  deeds  of  piety,  but  which 
may  be  only  deeds  of  self-righteousness.  The  methodical  and  laborious  Southey 
was  once  describing  to  a  friend  his  minute  allotment  of  time  for  his  diversified 
labours  in  reading  and  writing — such  an  hour  being  given  to  French,  the  next  to 
Spanish,  the  next  to  a  Review,  the  next  to  classics,  the  next  to  history,  &c.  "  But 
pray,  Mr.  Southey,"  interrupted  the  friend,  "  at  what  time  do  you  think  ?  "  Might 
it  not  be  asked  of  some  who  abound  in  the  drill-work  of  religion,  "  At  what  time  do 
you  pray  ?  "  IV.  The  motives  for  cultivating  a  true  godliness.  1.  That  God 
is  as  He  is.  Could  we  but  form  a  conception  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures, 
surely  we  must  bow  reverently  and  walk  softly  before  Him.  2.  The  ble-^ssedness  of 
godliness  both  here  and  in  the  hereafter.  3.  The  fact  that  we  shall  soon  meet 
God   face   to   face.     (Joseph   P.    Thompson.)         Godliness : — The   term   ivffiliua. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  61 

here  translated  godliness,  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  denote  that  reverence 
toward  God  which  is  a  spontaneous  feeling  of  the  heart  in  view  of  His  character 
(see  in  Kobinson).  Cornelius  was  "  a  devout  man  (tvffti3t)g),  and  feared  God." 
The  prevailing  use  of  tvakjiua  by  classic  writers  gives  to  it  this  same  objective 
sense.  Plato,  Thucydides,  Desmosthenes,  use  it  to  express  veneration  toward  the 
Deity  {-KpoQ  Qiovq).  See  in  Stephanus,  Suidas,  and  Passow  ed.  Kost  und  Palm. 
In  the  "  Definitions  "  sometimes  ascribed  to  Plato,  evffijSua  is  defined  to  be  AiKaioavvTj 
TTEpi  Qiovg,  that  which  is  just,  fitting,  meet,  as  toward  the  gods.  The  Stoics  defined 
it  to  be  tTTw-iini)  Qiov  Oepairdag — the  appreciative  or  becoming  service  of  the  gods. 
Stephanus  defines  it  by  religiositas,  thus  expressing  the  same  idea  of  reverence 
toward  God.  De  Wette,  in  his  note  upon  2  Peter  i.  6,  says  "  Ehrfarcht  und  Liebe 
gegen  Gott" — veneration  and  love  toward  God.  This  use  of  the  word  precludes  the 
idea  of  God-like-ness,  and  favours  the  less  euphonious,  but  more  expressive  tei-m, 
God-it'ard-ness.  It  denotes  also  something  deeper  than  a  formal  outward  reverence 
for  the  demands  of  God,  and  refers  directly  to  the  reverence  of  the  soul  toward  God. 
(Ibid.)  Of  godliness  : — I.  Wherein  godliness  consists.  It  takes  in  all  those 
dispositions  of  mind  with  the  proper  expressions  of  them  which  are  due  to  the  high 
perfections  of  the  Deity,  and  which  result  from  the  relations  we  bear  to  Him.  As  He 
is  eternal,  independent,  infinitely  excellent,  powerful,  wise,  holy,  and  good,  the  light 
of  nature  itself  teaches  us  to  glorify  Him  by  our  praises,  to  esteem,  love,  and  fear 
Him,  and  to  obey  His  will  in  all  things  as  far  as  it  is  known  to  us.  As  He  is  the 
almighty  Creator  of  all  things  visible  and  invisible,  the  preserver  and  governor  of 
the  world,  from  hence  arises  the  obligation  to  gratitude,  confidence  in  His  mercy, 
submission  and  resignation  to  His  providence.  The  inward  affections  which 
naturally  arise  comprehended  in  godliness  are,  first,  fear,  a  reverence  for  His 
majesty,  a  serious  affecting  sense  of  all  His  glorious  attributes,  not  a  confounding 
terror  and  amazement.  Secondly,  the  fear  of  God,  as  the  Scripture  explains  it, 
which  is  an  essential  part  of  godliness,  and  of  the  respect  He  claims  from  us,  doth 
not  exclude  love.  His  goodness  naturally  excites  love.  Gratitude  is  a  kind  of  love 
which  naturally  arises  in  the  mind  to  any  being  who  discovers  kind  intentions 
towards  us.  The  exercise  of  love  and  respect  seems  especially  to  consist  in  an 
entire  acquiescence  in  the  order  He  has  appointed,  with  confidence  in  His  wisdom 
and  goodness  and  submission  to  His  will.  When  I  speak  of  resignation  to  God,  I 
do  not  only  mean  that  we  should  be  satisfied  with  the  occurrences  of  life,  but  that 
we  should  approve  and  actively  obey  His  precepts,  submitting  to  His  moral  as  well  as 
providential  government.  This  doctrine  has  been  always  taught  in  the  true 
Church,  and  care  taken  to  prevent  men's  falling  into  that  fatal  error  of  placing 
the  all  of  religion  in  acts  of  devotion,  while  they  neglected  that  much  more  sub- 
stantial proof  of  respect  to  the  Deity,  the  imitating  of  His  righteousness  and 
mercy.  Yet  the  external  acts  of  adoration  and  homage  to  the  Deity  are  not  to  be 
left  undone,  and  the  performing  of  them  according  to  His  institution  is  a  part  of 
godliness.  Not  that  there  is  any  value  in  the  outward  performance,  as  separated 
from  the  affection,  but  supposing  first  the  sincerity  of  good  principles  and  disposi- 
tions in  the  soul,  they  ought  to  be  exerted  in  external  acts  of  worship  for  two 
reasons.  First,  because  that  has  a  tendency  to  increase  them.  The  body  and  the 
mind  in  our  present  constitution  have  a  mutual  influence  on  each  other.  Secondly, 
another  reason  for  outward  acts  of  adoration  and  homage  to  God  is  that  thereby  we 
may  glorify  Him.  II.  The  reasonableness  and  necessity  of  adding  godliness  to 
ALL  OTHER  VIRTUES.  First,  if  we  consider  godliness  in  itself  abstractedly,  it  will 
appear  to  be  a  very  eminent  and  important  branch  of  our  duty.  Not  only  is  it  so 
represented  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but  if  we  attend  to  the  reason  and  nature  of  the 
thing,  we  must  be  convinced  that,  as  God  is  the  most  excellent  of  all  beings  with 
whom  we  have  to  do  as  our  ruler  and  constant  benefactor  and  our  judge,  our 
first  respects  are  due  to  Him.  It  is  the  distinguishing  privilege  of  mankind  to  be 
capable  of  religion.  Secondly,  it  ought  therefore  to  be  added  to  all  other  virtues, 
because  it  is  the  chief  support  and  security  of  them,  and  where  it  prevails  has  a 
great  influence  on  men  to  practise  them.  The  efficacy  of  godliness,  strictly  so 
called,  to  the  production  of  all  other  virtues  appears  from  the  nature  of  it  already 
explained,  for  it  imports  a  disposition  to  obey  all  God's  commandments  and  to  do 
everything  which  He  approves.  {J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  Godliness  : — It  was  a 
beautiful  saying  of  one  of  the  old  Fathers  when,  addressing  himself  to  God,  he 
exclaims,  "  Thou  hast  formed  man,  Thy  creature,  for  Thee,  and  he  cannot  be  at 
rest  until  he  have  come  again  unto  Thee."  I.  What  is  the  godliness  here  com- 
mended ?    Looking  to  the  sense  of  the  term  here  employed  in  the  Greek  original, 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

it  is  piety  or  the  fear  of  God — that  veneration  of  the  Most  High  which  leads  to 
homage  and  obedience.  Godliness  has  its  three  sides.  It  is  communion  with  God, 
for  the  society  of  our  Maker  is  enjoyed  in  true  worship  of  Him.  It  is  intellectual 
and  spiritual  assimilation  to  Him,  in  the  cordial  admission  and  love  of  His  truth ; 
and  practical  assimilation  to  Him,  in  the  endeavour  to  reflect  on  the  world  the 
lustre  of  His  graces  and  some  broken,  distant  beams,  at  least,  of  His  moral 
excellences.  To  make  this  possible — to  raise  the  fallen  and  rebuild  the  down- 
trodden and  polluted  shrine — God  Himself  has  come  amongst  us.  II.  There  aee 
FOUL  SEMBLANCES  OF  GODLINESS,  mere  idols,  that  delude  many.  Let  us  keep  our- 
selves from  them.  1.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  mere  veneration  for  some 
higher  existence,  however  imaginary  and  false  our  views  of  this  existence — that 
such  vague  veneration  is  godliness ;  that  God  hears  alike  with  delight  those  who 
call  Him  Jehovah  and  receive  the  Bible  and  those  who  call  Him  Juggernaut  and 
who  swear  by  the  Hindoo  Shaster.  In  this  vague  and  unscriptural  sense  of  the 
term  the  atheistic  poet,  Shelley,  and  the  pantheistic  philosopher,  Spinoza,  have 
been  called  men  of  piety,  because  of  a  spirit  of  tenderness  and  awe  that  was  attri- 
buted to  them.  But  atheism — the  ungrateful  and  irrational  dethronement  and 
denial  of  any  God — is  that  to  be  by  any  apothecary's  art  of  liberalism  made  to 
coalesce  with  the  love  and  worship  of  the  true  God,  as  forming  the  same  incense  of 
accepted  adoration  ?  As  to  pantheism,  it  is  opposed  to  piety  or  true  godliness 
radically  and  throughout.  True  godliness  begins  in  humility  and  penitence, 
and  is  sustained  by  prayer  and  adoration.  But  pantheism  begins  in  pride. 
2.  It  is  a  mistake,  again,  to  look,  as  some  seem  now  disposed  to  do,  upon 
the  austerities  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church  of  Eome,  as  the  fairest  exhibition 
of    godliness.     III.    In    what    mode,    then,   mat    we    safely    and   successfully 

ATTAIN     THE     GODLINESS     WHICH     THE     APOSTLE     HERE     ENJOINS  ?        Far,     then,     aS    it 

is  a  life,  God  must  give  it.  Far  as  it  is  a  truth.  He  in  His  Scriptures  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  His  Son  must  teach  it;  and  far  as  it  is  a  communion,  it  must  be 
sought  in  the  one  way,  Christ.  Daily  and  earnest  and  effectual  supplication  is 
necessary.  This  must,  again,  seek  God's  teachings  in  the  study  of  His  revealed 
truth.  Here  He  has  manifested  Himself,  His  purposes,  and  character ;  and  this. 
His  book,  He  delights  to  honour  and  to  transcribe  afresh  into  the  experience  and 
hearts  of   His  devout  people.     IV.  Every  inducement  of  interest  and  duty,  of 

HONOUR  AND  SAFETY,  OF  BENEVOLENCE  TO  MAN  AND  PIETY  TOWARDS  GOD,  REQUIRES 
EACH    OF    US    TO    BECOME    THE    FRIEND   AND    CHILD    AND    FOLLOWER   OF    THE    LIVING    GOD. 

1.  Bemember  that  it  is  the  highest  style  of  human  nature.  The  scholar,  the  sage, 
the  discoverer,  and  the  hero,  what  are  they,  before  God,  to  the  saint  ?  2.  Holiness 
is,  again,  the  master-key  of  the  universe.  Born  to  die,  you  are  fated  to  travel 
hence.  But  whither  ?  Become  God's  charge  and  child.  Be  a  renewed  man  by 
God's  grace,  and  you  are  gifted,  virtually,  with  the  freedom  of  the  universe.  3. 
Kemember,  again,  that  it  is  the  one  thing  needful.  Send  bread  to  the  famishing, 
give  sympathy  to  the  oppressed,  give  healing  remedies  to  those  who  are  sick  and 
ready  to  die,  give  education  to  the  ignorant.  But  before  the  school,  or  political 
emancipation,  or  health,  or  even  bread,  the  tribes  of  Adam  need  true  godliness. 
4.  The  last  consideration  is  that  as  godliness  is  the  bond  and  crown  of  all 
the  virtues,  so  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  the  one  sufficient  remedy  for  the 
subjugation  and  removal  of  all  the  vices.  (W.  R.  Williams.)  Godliness : — 
Let  us  trace  the  wisdom  and  necessity  of  the  exhortation,  and  the  wisdom 
and  necessity  of  that  which  is  thus  commanded.  It  was  a  wise  suggestion 
to  men  of  every  age  that  they  should  possess  and  develop  this  habit  of  pious 
reverence.  It  gives  us  the  hint  that  the  contrary  was  likely  to  be  the  tendency.  It 
is  no  easy  thing,  under  all  circumstances,  to  look  calmly  and  trustfully  up  to  the 
throne  of  the  living  God,  and  cheerfully  commit  all  our  life  to  His  fashioning  and 
to  His  keeping  :  it  is  no  easy  thing  at  all  times  to  trace  the  gentleness  of  His  grace 
in  the  ways  of  providence.  We  see  the  necessity  of  the  exhortation,  then,  because 
this  reverence  of  heart  in  all  purity  and  faith  is  hard  of  accomplishment.  Our 
lot  seems  to  be  cast  in  what,  generally  speaking,  may  be  called  a  thinking  and 
reading  age.  Men  are  learning  to  observe,  and  to  glory  in  observing.  There  is 
God's  great  universe,  spreading  about  us  on  all  sides,  and  He  who  created  it,  and 
created  us,  knew  that  as  men  learned  to  read,  they  would  aspire  to  acquaintance 
with  the  truths  which  unfold  themselves  to  careful  observation.  The  only  thing  I 
have  to  say  about  it  is,  that  it  makes  a  life  of  reverence,  of  piety,  of  "  godliness," 
harder  to  us  than  it  was  to  men  who  lived  in  the  time  nearer  to  human  intellectual 
infancy.    By  the  discovery  of  what  are  called  natural  laws,  and  the  secondary 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  63 

causes  of  the  effects  we  see  around  us,  do  we  not  apparently  lengthen  the  distance 
between  ourselves  and  God  ?  To  the  savage,  the  thunder  is  the  voice  of  the  Great 
Spirit,  the  lightning  is  the  flash  of  His  angry  eye.  He  stands  face  to  face  with 
his  deity  in  these  things.  To  the  Israelite,  God,  Jehovah  worked  directly  in  send- 
ing the  plagues  upon  the  obstinate  king  and  his  people,  who  would  not  let  them  go ; 
in  bringing  streams  of  water  from  the  rock,  in  sending  manna  for  their  food,  in 
overthrowing  their  enemies,  in  establishing  their  greatness.  They  did  not  see,  or 
care  to  see,  the  second  causes,  the  long  chain,  it  may  be,  of  means  by  which  these 
effects  were  accomplished.  They  seemed  to  stand  ever  in  the  immediate  presence 
of  their  God.  Is  it  not  true  that  the  advancement  of  science  and  acquaintance 
with  natural  laws  has  removed  you  to  a  lengthened  distance  from  Him,  who  works 
through  all  things  by  the  word  of  Hig  power  ;  and  that,  as  there  is  a  wider  interval 
for  you  to  overpass,  it  is  harder  for  you,  than  it  was,  say  for  Abraham,  or  Noah,  to 
live  a  life  of  reverence  and  the  fear  of  God  ?  Thus  much  concerning  the  necessity 
for  the  exhortation.  One  word  on  the  necessity  of  that  which  is  thus  commanded. 
Because  the  thing  is  harder  there  is  the  more  credit  in  its  accomplishment.  If  the 
man  has  a  larger  interval  over  which  to  look,  the  stronger  must  be  his  sight,  if  he 
is  able  to  see  clearly  through  all  the  intermediate  second  causes,  the  great  first 
Mover  in  all  things,  working  out  His  purpose.  The  more  thickly  the  "  clouds  and 
darkness  "  roU  around  God,  the  truer  man  does  he  assert  himself,  who  is  able  to 
trace  His  loving  intention  through  the  mystery.  If  we  are  ever  to  come  to  the  full 
stature  of  manliness  in  Christ,  we  must  possess  in  active  exercise  this  disposition  of 
"godliness."  (D.  J.  Hamer.)  Of  the  practice  of  godliness  : — 1.  The  amiableness 
of  a  truly  pious  temper,  and  the  importance  of  it  in  religion.  2.  It  will  have  a 
most  happy  influence  to  make  us  holy  and  righteous  in  our  whole  conversation  in 
the  world.  3.  It  will  tend  exceedingly  to  our  own  interest  and  happiness.  The 
exercise  of  it  will  afford  us  the  most  sincere  and  high  pleasure  and  satisfaction. 
I.  The  proper  methods  of  raising  and  cultivating  a  temper  of  rational  piety 
AND  devotion.  1.  Let  us  be  at  pains  to  acquire  just  notions  of  the  Deity  ;  for  the 
opinions  which  we  form  of  Him  will  have  the  greatest  influence  on  our  temper  and 
behaviour  towards  Him.  2.  Let  us  keep  up  a  lively  sense  of  the  excellence  and  the 
goodness  of  God  in  our  minds  by  serious  attention  to  them,  and  frequent  reflections 
upon  them.  3.  Let  us  consider  God  as  always  present  with  us,  and  the  Witness  and 
Inspector  of  our  behaviour.  The  lively  consideration  of  this  cannot  but  make  us 
exceedingly  careful  to  treat  Him  with  all  possible  respect  and  honour,  and  to  do 
everything  which  we  apprehend  will  be  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  Him.  4.  Let  us 
attend  carefully  upon  the  positive  institutions  of  religion,  and  the  outward  duties  of 
devotion.  These  have  been  appointed  on  purpose  to  maintain  in  us  a  lively  sense 
of  God  and  His  excellences,  to  recall  to  our  minds  the  several  considerations  which 
have  a  tendency  to  improve  and  strengthen  our  good  dispositions  towards  Him,  to 
instruct  us  in  the  duty  which  we  owe  to  Him,  and  to  make  us  serve  Him  with  the 
greater  zeal  and  cheerfulness.  And  if  we  attend  to  them  for  these  ends,  we  shall 
fuid  them  means  every  way  fitted  to  answer  them.  (J.  Orr,  D.D.)  Brotherly 
kindness. — Brotherly  kindness : — I.  Observe  how  in  the  very  name  op  this  grace 

THERE  lie  lessons  AS   TO  ITS  FOUNDATION  AND  AS  TO  ITS  NATURE.       The  WOrd  is  all  but 

a  coinage  of  Christianity,  and  the  thing  is  entirely  so.  The  gospel  bridged  over  all 
the  divisions,  and  brought  bond  and  free,  Jew  and  Gentile,  man  and  woman,  into  a 
great  unity,  so  deep,  so  real,  that  aU  antagonism  vanished.  "  The  mystery  hid 
from  ages  "  was  revealed — that  a  common  relation  to  a  Divine  Father  made  all  the 
men  who  partook  of  it  one.  But  let  us  think  of  what  instruction  this  word 
contains  in  reference  to  the  foundation  of  this  Christian  unity.  We  go  deep 
down  into  the  very  heart  of  Christianity  when  we  talk  about  all  Christians  being 
"  brethren."  It  is  not  a  mere  sentimental  expression  to  convey  the  idea  that  they 
ought  to  love  one  another,  but  it  is  a  declaration  of  the  deep  reason  why  they  ought 
thus  to  love  one  another ;  and  it  links  on  to  that  great  truth,  that  in  Jesus  Christ 
all  they  that  love  Him  and  trust  to  Him  do  receive  direct  from  God  a  real  com- 
munication of  a  new  and  supernatural  spiritual  life,  which  makes  them  no  more 
merely  sons  of  God  by  creation. and  after  the  flesh,  but  sons  of  God  through  the 
Spirit.  The  lonely  pilgrim  travels  to  the  Cross,  and  when  he  comes  there  he  finds 
that  he  is  "  come  unto  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  firstborn  which  are 
WTitten  in  heaven."  This  unity  is  a  far  deeper  thing  than  mere  identity  of  opinion. 
Christ's  Church  is  no  voluntary  association  into  which  men  may  pass  or  not,  as 
they  please,  but  you  are  born  into  it,  if  you  are  Christian  people,  as  much  as  you  are 
born  into  your  mother's  house.     And  you  can  no  more  denude  yourselves  of  your 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

relationships  to  the  other  men  who  possess  the  same  life,  than  you  can  break  the 
tie  of  brotherhood  which  binds  you  to  all  them  that  have  received  corporeal  life 
from  the  same  source  as  you.     II.  Obsekve  that  the  place  which  this  virtue 

HOLDS    IN    THE    SEKIES    TEACHES   US    THE    ONE-SIDEDNESS    OF    A   CHARACTER   WITHOUT    IT, 

HOWEVER  STRONG  AND  sELE-coNTROLLED.  Uulcss  the  rock  be  CTowned  with  a  coronet 
of  wild  flowers  it  is  savage  and  black.  And  unless  to  our  strength  that  fronts  the 
world,  to  our  quick  discernment  of  duty  that  looks  through  illusions  and  clearly 
sees  duty,  to  our  self-control,  that  is  severe  to  ourselves,  and  to  ourselves  alone  ;  to 
our  patient  persistence  that  bears  and  does  and  hopes  on  and  ever,  we  add  the 
supreme  beauty  of  sympathetic  gentleness  and  Christlike  tenderness,  all  these  other 
lovelinesses  will  lack  their  last  touch  of  poignant  exquisiteness  that  makes  them 
complete.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  very  real  danger  in  earnest  Christian  culture, 
that  we  shall  concentrate  our  attention  far  too  much  on  the  self-regarding  virtues, 
and  too  little  upon  those  which  refer  to  others.  The  place  which  this  brotherly 
kindness  occupies  in  our  series,  may  further  teach  us  that  it  is  a  great  mistake  for 
good  men  to  cultivate  the  gentler  graces  at  the  expense  of  the  sterner  and  the 
stronger.  Christian  love  is  no  mere  feeble  emotion,  but  a  strong  and  mailed 
warrior,  who  beareth  all   things,   and  can  do  all  things.     III.  The  occurrence 

OF    THIS    grace     in     OUR     SERIES     TEACHES     US     THE     LESSON     THAT    IT     IS     A    DUTY    TO 

BE  WON  BY  EFFORT.  It  is  just  as  much  your  duty  to  cherish  brotherly  love 
to  all  professing  Christian  people  as  it  is  to  govern  your  own  passions,  or  to 
do  any  of  these  other  things  that  are  enjoined  upon  us  here.  The  introductory 
clause  of  this  whole  series  covers  them  all.  "  Giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your 
faith."  The  hindrances  are  strong  and  real  enough  to  make  effort  to  overcome 
them  absolutely  essential.  There  is  our  own  selfishness.  That  is  the  master-devil 
of  the  whole  gang  that  come  between  us  and  true  Christian  charity  to  our  brethren. 
And  then,  besides  that,  there  is  in  our  day  a  wide  distinction  among  Christian 
people,  in  station,  in  education,  in  general  outlook  upon  life,  in  opinion.  In  addition 
there  is  that  most  formidable  hindrance  of  all,  our  wretched  denominational 
rivalries.  IV.  The  place  which  this  grace  holds  in  our  series  teaches  us  the 
BEST  WAY  of  MAKING  IT  OUR  OWN.  "  In  your  godUncss  supply  brotherly  love."  The 
more  we  realise  our  dependence  upon  God  the  more  we  shall  realise  our  kindred 
with  our  brethren.  The  electric  spark  of  love  to  Christ  wiU  combine  the  else 
separate  elements  into  one.  Cleaving  to  the  one  Shepherd,  the  else  scattered  sheep 
become  one  flock,  held  together,  not  by  the  outward  bonds  of  a  fold,  but  by  the 
attraction  that  fastens  them  all  to  Him.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Brotherly 
kindness  : — I.  The  connection.     The  apostle  joins  brotherly  kindness  to  godliness — 

1.  Because  brotherly  kindness  is  the  daughter  of  godliness.  The  river  of  charity 
springs  from  the  fountain  of  piety.  2.  Because  brotherly  kindness  is  the  moderator 
of  godliness.  God  loves  not  such  mad  zeal,  that  so  fixeth  the  eyes  on  heaven  that 
it  despiseth  to  look  on  their  poor  brother  on  earth.  3.  Because  godliness  is  proved 
by  brotherly  kindness  (1  John  ii.  9).  II.  The  definition.  It  is  a  love  to  the  faith- 
ful ;  to  such  as  possess  the  same  faith  with  us,  and  by  that  faith  are  adopted  heirs 
to  the  same  God,  through  the  brotherhood  of  the  same  Christ.  It  is  distinguished 
from  charity  by  nearness  and  dearness.  By  nearness,  I  mean  not  local  but 
mystical.  Charity  hath  a  great  latitude,  and  is  like  the  heaven  that  covers  all ; 
brotherly  kindness  like  the  sun  that  shines  upon  the  one  half  at  once.  The  firma- 
ment sends  influence  to  more  than  the  sun,  but  the  sun  comes  nearer  to  that  object 
it  blesseth  than  the  firmament.  By  dearness  ;  for  the  bond  of  nature  is  not  so 
strong  as  the  bond  of  grace.  Our  creation  hath  made  us  friends  ;  our  redemption, 
brethren.  III.  The  distinction.  There  are  three  sorts  of  brethren.  1.  By  race; 
and  that  either  by  birth,  or  by  blood.  2.  By  place,  such  as  are  of  the  same  nation. 
3.  By  grace.  IV.  The  conclusions.  1.  The  necessity  is  great.  (1)  It  is  worthy  in 
itself ;  that  virtue  which  is  ranked  with  godliness  must  needs  be  honourable.  (2) 
We  are  apt  to  neglect  it ;  therefore  St.  Peter  urges  it  several  times  (1  Pet.  i.  22, 
ii.  17,  iii.  8,  and  here) ;  St.  Paul  thrice  (Rom.  xii.  10;  1  Thess.  iv.  9 ;  Heb.  xiii.  1). 

2.  The  practice.  (1)  What  it  forbids  as  opposites  to  it,  and  murderers  of  it. 
(a)  Contentious  litigation  (1  Cor.  vi.  6,  7;  Prov.  vi.  19;  Gen.  xiii.  8).  (b)  An 
inveterate  hatred.  God  loves  all  His  children  ;  wilt  thou  hate  him  that  God  loves? 
(1  John  ii.  11,  iii.  15).  (c)  Even  anger  itself  is  a  traitor  to  this  virtue ;  for  as  hatred 
is  a  long  anger,  so  anger  is  a  short  hatred ;  malice  is  nothing  else  but  inveterate 
wrath  (Matt.  v.  22).  (d)  Oppression  (1  Thess.  iv.  G).  (c)  A  proud  contempt  of  one's 
brethren  (Psa.  1.  20).  (2)  Positively.  {<i)  This  brotherly  kindness  is  shown  in 
reprehending  those  we  love   (Lev.  xix.  17).     (h)  Helping  their  poor  estates.     (<;) 


CHAP.  I.]  U.  PETER.  65 

Praying  for  them.  {Thos.  Adams.)  Brotherly  kindness  : — I.  This  same  apostle 
has,  in  his  earher  epistle,  enjoined  it  upon  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  "  love  the 
BBOTHEKHOOD."  And  whom  has  the  Saviour  taught  us  to  regard  as  being  thus  our 
kindred  and  our  brethren  ?  We  turn  to  the  Gospels  for  the  needful  hght  in  inter- 
preting the  Epistles.  1.  When  our  Lord  was  celebrating  with  His  apostles,  the  last 
religious  ordinance  of  His  life  on  earth,  He  said  to  them,  "  A  new  commandment  I 
give  unto  you.  That  ye  love  one  another ;  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one 
another.  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one 
to  another"  (John  xiii.  34,  35).  This  law  was  new  in  its  authorship.  The 
Decalogue  on  Sinai  had  been  given  through  Moses.  The  Son  Himself  was  now 
come  to  speak,  face  to  face,  that  law  of  Love  which  crowned  and  solved  all  the 
earlier  commandments.  It  was,  again,  novel  in  its  motives.  To  intimate  His  equal 
Deity,  the  Son  here  makes  love  to  Himself,  the  motive  of  holy  obedience.  As  it  was 
new,  too,  in  its  evidence.  It  would  become,  before  the  world,  the  badge  and 
public  pledge  of  Christian  discipleship.  2.  But  whilst  I  am  required  to  cherish 
a  brother's  warm  regard  for  these,  are  none  but  these  my  brethren  ?  We  answer  to 
this  question  :  Spiritual  ties,  whilst  overriding,  do  not  annul  all  natural  bonds. 
And  who  are  our  brethren,  by  these  earlier  and  human  ties  ?  We  suppose  all  who 
are  near  to  us— those  attached  and  grappled  to  us  by  the  domestic  charities ;  those, 
again,  with  whom  we  are  united  of  our  free  choice  by  the  bonds  of  friendship  ;  and 
those,  lastly,  who  are  our  countrymen,  one  with  us  by  the  law  of  patriotism.     II. 

How,    THEN,    IS    IT     THAT    GODLINESS    NEEDS    THE    ADDITION    OF    BROTHEELY   KINDNESS? 

1.  Far  as  the  range  of  worldly  brotherhood  extends,  in  our  relations  to  the  home, 
to  the  circles  of  friendship,  and  to  our  countrymen  generally,  godliness  should  be 
guarded  by  this  grace  of  human  sympathy,  to  counteract  an  unjust,  but  common 
imputation  against  true  piety.  The  monk,  fleeing  to  the  wilderness ;  the  spiritualist, 
overlooking  his  engagements  to  society  and  the  household,  in  the  care  of  the  closet 
and  his  soul,  are  answerable  for  an  error  here.  Their  godliness  lacks  brotherly 
kindness.  So,  too,  the  hostihty  of  the  worldly  to  true  piety,  venting  itself  of  old  by 
statutes  and  penalties ;  venting  itself  in  our  times,  rather  in  derision  and  cruel 
mockery,  may  easily  provoke  in  the  minds  of  the  truly  godly  an  alienation  that 
would,  unchecked,  issue  in  utter  isolation.  But  this  is  rather  natural  than  justi- 
fiable. It  is  not  so  much  the  strength  of  the  Christian's  godliness,  as  the  human 
weakness  intermingled  with,  and  diluting  that  piety,  which  thus  teaches  him  to 
withdraw,  because  he  has  cause  of  complaint.  2.  But  not  only  may  the  bonds  of 
worldly  and  human  brotherhood,  thus,  with  or  without  the  Christian's  fault,  be 
seemingly  sundered  by  his  godliness ;  a  man's  piety  may  seem  to  hinder  his  recog- 
nition at  times  of  the  ties  of  spiritual  brotherhood  also.  If  it  be  asked,  how  this 
can  be,  let  it  be  remembered  in  reply,  that  a  man  of  eminent  devoutness  may  easUy 
become  absorbed  and  abstracted  in  manner.  3.  But  a  more  disastrous  ban-ier  to 
this  brotherly  kindness  is  the  existence  and  range  of  controversy  among  Christians. 
III.  We  now  reach  that  division  of  our  subject  in  which  we  consider  how  the 
Christian  grace  of  brotherly  kindness  is  to  fill  up  the  sphere  of  worldly 
brotherhood,  embracing  as  that  does,  friendship,  kindred,  and  country.  1.  As 
to  the  power  of  religion  to  adorn  and  cement  friendship,  the  history  of  the  Church 
speaks  emphatically.  2.  As  to  the  effects  of  reUgion  on  those  who  are  our  brethren 
because  our  countrymen,  the  topic  of  Christianity  in  its  relations  to  the  nation  is  too 
vast  and  complicated  to  be  at  this  time  discussed.  It  is  evidently  a  duty  of  Christian 
patriotism,  to  urge  thoroughly  the  work  of  Home  Missions,  and  to  send  the  Bible 
and  Sabbath-school  and  ministry  on  the  very  crest  of  the  westward  waves  of 
emigration.  IV.  The  manner  in  which  the  Christian  grace,  which  the  apostle 
here  enjoins,  should  be  displayed  in  the  distinct  sphere  of  spiritual  brother- 
hood. 1.  Within  the  same  church,  then,  the  disciples  of  our  Saviour  need  to  bo 
more  and  more  given  to  mutual  intercession.  2.  Christians  in  this  day  need, 
again  to  ponder  the  warnings  of  James  as  to  social  and  terrestrial  distinctions, 
unduly  dwelt  upon  in  the  intercourse  of  fellow-disciples.  Fraternity  among 
Christians,  again,  requires  that  we  do  not  abandon  merely  to  the  care  of  the 
State,  the  poor  and  dependent  of  our  fellow-disciples.  (W.  R.  Williams.) 
Brotherly  kindness  : — Now,  one  of  the  first  impulses  of  the  heart  when  men  are 
thrown  together  is  to  lay  hold  at  once  of  points  of  contact,  to  recognise  identity  of 
interests,  community  of  feeling,  to  get  rid,  as  far  as  possible,  of  those  things  which 
are  exterior  and  accidental,  or  else  to  pierce  through  these  and  find  how,  in  all 
essential  and  unalterable  things,  the  human  heart  is  at  one  with  its  kind.  I  know 
that  society,  and  commercial  society  not  least,  manifests  contending  interests,  that 

•di 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  motto  seems  to  be — "  Every  man  for  himself,  and  (sometimes  not  very  reveren- 
tially added,  by  the  way)  God  for  us  all  "  ;  that  it  appears  ahiiost  necessary  that  a 
man  should  harden  his  neart  against  consideration  for  his  brother  man  ;  that  he  is 
afloat  upon  an  angry  sea ;  that  the  struggles  of  others  often  dash  the  water  in  his 
face,  and  threaten  his  own  existence,  and  that  even  if  he  abstain  from  retaliation, 
he  scarcely  dare  reach  out  a  hand  to  help  a  brother  for  fear  of  being  dragged  down. 
I  know  these  things  from  present  observation  ;  but  stiU  it  is  true  that  all  such  cir- 
cumstances are  an  after-growth,  and  that  under  the  earliest,  simplest  conditions  of 
human  society,  "  brotherly  kindness  "  is  an  instinct,  an  irresistible  impulse.     You 
may  see  it,  if  you  like,  springing  forth  again,  with  all  its  early  strength  and  fresh- 
ness, on  occasions  such  as  when  men,  few  in  number,  and  with  all  differences  of 
position  destroyed,  have  to  form  among  themselves  society  anew ;  in  any  case  of 
shipwreck,  say,  when  some  are  cast  upon  uninhabited  land.     The  brotherly  instinct 
is  at  work  again  at  once,  and  only  expires  when  simplicity  is  corrupted,  and  arti- 
ficialism  blots  it  out.     Now,  is  it  not  the  wish  of  the  best  moments  of  every  man, 
that  this  feeling  could  be  maintained,  that  all  contending  interests  should  sign  a 
truce  of  brotherhood  ?    And  I  suppose  the  best  of  men,  as  they  find  the  hopes  which 
their  fancy  had  kindled  die  away  in  the  light  of  fact,  say,  "  The  thing  is  impossible : 
while  I  have  to  deal  with  such  men  as  so-and-so,  I  can  afford  little  room  for  the 
exercise,  in  this  relation,  of  such  a  virtue  as  '  brotherly  kindness.'    We  must  be 
living  under  a  different  condition  of  things  from  the  present,  aU  society  must  be 
made  afresh  before  this  can  be."    Exactly  so,  and  that  is  the  root  of  the  whole 
matter.     Men  must  be  renewed,  redeemed,  and  then  "  brotherly  kindness  "  may 
have  its  full  and  perfect  exercise.     Is  not  this  announced  as  the  mission  of  gospel 
truth  in  this  world  ?    It  reveals  our  own  nature  to  us ;  it  shows  us  in  what  points 
we  are  akin  one  to  another.    And  now  another  question  meets  us ;  the  answer  to 
which  will  engage  our  attention.     Peter  is  writing  to  Christians,  "  to  those,"  he 
says,  "  who  have  obtained  like  precious  faith  with  us  through  the  righteousness  of 
God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."    Why  does  he  think  it  needful  to  insist  upon 
the  exercise  of  this  virtue,  "  brotherly  kindness"  ?     Is  not  this  the  message  that  we 
"  have  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should  love  one  another  ?  "     What  need, 
then,  for  special  exhortation  as  to  the  mingling  of  this  with  the  other  elements  of 
Christian  character  ?     If  we  think  for  a  moment,  the  answer  to  such  question  will 
readily  occur.   Christianity,  the  religion  of  faith  and  love,  is  the  law  of  the  heavenly 
life,  but  it  is  sent  to  us  here,  and  now,  for  the  ordering  of  this  earthly  life.     I  shall 
now  point  out  what  seem  to  me  the  grounds  on  which  the  seclusive,  meditative, 
form  of  piety  might  be  judged  likely  to  manifest  itself  unduly,  and  then  remind  you 
of  one  or  two  facts  which  show  that  such  judgment  is  well  founded.     Gospel  truth 
teaches  us  this  one  thing  of  aU  most  clearly — the  individual  relation  between  each 
human  heart  and  God — personal,  not  representative,  nor  corporate  religion — the 
impossibility  of  vicarious  love,  of  deputy  service.     Personal  susceptibility,  personal 
action  are  necessary  if  the  soul  is  to  make  any  way  toward  heaven.   This  revelation 
gives  him  not  only  new  light  concerning  his  own  nature,  it  gives  him  new  ideas  of 
God.     This  Infinite  Being  is  revealed  as  standing  in  near  relation  to  our  spirit,  as 
having  made  sacrifice  for  our  soul's  redemption,  so  that  our  life  is  lifted  out  of  all 
its  appearance  of  littleness,  sublimed  by  the  ordering  of  His  perfect  will,  sanctified 
by  the  might  of  His  Holy  Spirit.   May  not  a  man,  when  thoughts  like  these  possess 
him,  when  his  godliness  takes  its  truest,  intensest  form,  well  be  wishful  to  stand  in 
some  "  quiet  place  "  apart  from  interruptive  society,  where  he  may  fathom,  in  some 
measure,  the  vastness  of  what  has  been  revealed.     But  there  is  more ;  this  Divine 
relation  is  to  be  an  abiding  one :  death  is  no  destroyer  of  it,  but  rather  a  caster 
down  of  what  has  been  a  hindrance  to  the  closer  union.   These  highest  delights  are, 
in  one  sense,  solitary  ones,  we  can  communicate  no  idea  of  them  in  words,  and  we 
are  tempted  to  leave  that  society  in  which  none  can  fully  know  us  and  have 
sympathy  in  our  joy,  and  wait  in  communion  with  Him  who  sees  all  and  knows  all, 
and  accepts  the  silent  homage  of  our  hearts.    Now,  such  tendency  as  this  towards 
seclusion  has  manifested  itself  in  time  past,  and  it  is  seen  to  this  day.     We  know  it 
in  the  experience  of  those  who  are  called  Mystics,  men  of  the  German  school  like 
Tauler,  men  of  the  French  school  like  Gerson.     We  see  it  in  the  seclusion  of  her- 
mits, and  monks,  and  nuns.     But  has  the  idea  no  force  with  us?     We  are  social, 
but  is  it  Christian  or  worldly  sociality  that  we  practise  ?     Do  we  not  seclude  our 
religious  life  too  much  within  ourselves  ?     (D.  J.  Homer.)       Brotherly  kindnex.'^  : — 
I.  The  characteristics  of  brotherly  love.    1.  This  love  is  based  upon  the  evidence 
of  a  Christly  character,  and  is  prompted  by  love  to  Christ  Himself.     It  is  not  the 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  67 

doctrine  of  a  universal  fraternity  which  the  text  inculcates,  but  brotherly  love 
between  the  members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  This  brotherly  love  rests  primarily 
upon  a  character  recognised  and  approved  as  the  basis  of  fellowship  ;  it  is  the  love 
of  a  friend  of  Christ  for  another  in  whom  also  he  discerns  a  friendship  for,  and  a 
likeness  to  Christ.  The  profession  of  love  to  Christ  is  not  enough  to  command  this 
brotherly  love.  We  do  not  then  bestow  this  brotherly  affection  indiscriminately 
upon  all  who  caU  themselves  by  the  name  of  Christ.  We  must  have  evidence  that 
they  are  His  disciples.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may  not  withhold  this  love 
from  any  who  show  truly  the  spirit  of  Christ.  The  love  of  Christ  will  prompt  to 
this.  That  love  is  the  most  potent  of  moral  affinities.  Not  more  surely  does  the 
magnet  search  out  and  draw  to  itself  particles  of  steel  in  a  heap  of  sand,  than  does 
the  love  of  Christ  in  the  heart  draw  to  itself,  by  its  sweet  and  potent  magnetism, 
whatever  has  a  real  affinity  for  Christ.  It  is  not  an  external  and  formal  fellowship, 
not  the  spirit  of  sect  or  party,  not  alliance  in  a  particular  Church,  which  generates 
and  feeds  this  love ;  but  an  inward  affection  for  Christ  Himself,  which  causes  us  to 
delight  in  whatever  is  like  Christ  or  is  pleasing  to  Christ.  Our  very  love  for  Christ 
forbids  that  we  should  love  as  brethren  those  who  do  not,  above  aU  errors  and  faults, 
clearly  evince  their  love  for  Him.  2.  This  brotherly  love  does  not  require  in  Chris- 
tians an  entu-e  agreement  in  opinion  or  coincidence  in  practice.  3.  This  brotherly 
love  does  not  forbid  Chi-istians  to  controvert  the  opinions  or  reprove  the  faults  one 
of  another.  4.  True  brotherly  love  does  not  require  the  same  marks  of  outward 
consideration  toward  all  Christians.  This  love  is  neither  a  vague  sentimentalism 
nor  a  levelling  radicalism.  11.  The  grounds  or  eeasons  of  this  mutual  affection  of 
THE  FOLLOWEEs  OF  Christ.  We  have  seen  that  this  brotherhood  of  believers  is  founded 
originally  in  their  common  relations  to  Chi'ist.  Descending  now  from  this  general 
survey,  we  may  note  more  particularly — 1.  That  brotherly  love  is  the  only  real  bond 
of  union  in  a  Church  of  Christ.  What  is  a  Church  ?  A  body  of  professed  believers 
in  Christ,  associated  under  a  covenant  for  mutual  watchfulness  and  help  in  the 
Christian  life,  and  for  maintaining  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel.  Its  basis  is  a 
covenant.  A  covenant  differs  herein  from  a  constitution.  A  constitution  is  a 
system  of  rules  and  principles  for  the  government  of  persons  united  under  it.  But 
a  covenant,  as  the  term  is  used  in  Church  affairs,  is  "  a  solemn  agreement  between 
the  members  of  a  Church,  that  they  will  walk  together  according  to  the  precepts  of 
the  gospel,  in  brotherly  affection."  Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  covenant  cannot 
stand  one  moment  without  love.  Love  is  its  essence ;  its  vital  element.  In  the 
normal  structure  of  our  churches,  we  have  nothing  to  hold  us  together  but  the 
simple  bond  of  love.  2.  Brotherly  love  is  the  truest  evidence  of  a  regenerated  and 
sanctified  heart.  The  heart  of  man  is  by  nature  selfish  and  proud.  It  careth  for 
its  own  things  and  not  for  the  things  of  others.  The  gospel  makes  the  soul  and  its 
interests  paramount  to  aU  temporal  distinctions ;  it  puts  the  spiritual  infinitely 
above  the  physical ;  it  honours  character  above  all  rank,  and  station,  and  wealth, 
and  power ;  it  honours  all  men  as  the  offspring  of  God ;  and  it  looks  upon  the 
renewed  man  in  Christ  as  the  image  of  Christ,  to  be  received  and  loved  for  His  sake. 
"  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  aU  ye  are  brethren."  3.  This  law  of  Chris- 
tian brotherhood  declared  by  our  Lord,  not  only  secures  to  each  and  every  disciple 
the  same  rights  and  privileges  in  His  kingdom  ;  it  forbids  any  relation  between 
Christians  which  is  inconsistent  with  their  absolute  equality  before  Him,  and  their 
fraternal  love  for  each  other.  4.  The  fraternal  love  of  Christians  gives  to  the  world 
the  highest  and  most  convincing  proof  of  the  reaUty  and  the  power  of  Christian 
faith,  and  is  the  necessary  condition  for  the  advancement  of  Christianity  in  the 
world.  For  the  spread  of  Christianity,  therefore,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  found 
schools  and  colleges,  build  churches,  establish  missions,  multiply  tracts  and  Bibles ; 
aU  this  apparatus  is  needed  for  the  work ;  but  they  who  would  reform  and  save  the 
world,  must  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity  among  themselves.  HI.  How  shall 
this  LOVE  BE  DEVELOPED  AND  CHERISHED  ?  1.  Wherever  this  is  possible.  Christians 
must  cultivate  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  each  other.  How  often  a  Church  is  rather 
an  aggregation  of  independent  units  than  the  coalescing  of  congenial  fervent  hearts ! 
2.  We  must  cherish  brotherly  love  by  dwelling  in  our  thoughts  and  speech  upon  the 
excellences  of  brethren  rather  than  upon  their  infirmities  and  defects.  [Joseph  P. 
Thompson.)  Charity. — Charity  : — We  have  now  reached  the  last  bead  on  this 
rosary  of  Christian  graces.  As  the  apostle  uses  it  here,  this  love  is  the  crown  and 
consummate  flower  of  all  Christian  excellence  ;  the  last  result  of  discipline  and  self- 
culture,  the  very  image  of  God.  I.  "  Charity"  is  the  sum  of  all  duty  to  all  men. 
We  hear  it  urged — and  there  is  a  truth  in  the  saying — "  we  want  less  charity  and 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  i. 

more  justice."  Yes  !  but  we  want  most  the  charity  which  is  justice  ;  the  love  which 
every  man  has  a  right  to  expect  from  us.  You  do  not  do  your  duty  to  anybody, 
however  you  may  lavish  gifts  upon  them,  unless  this  Christ-like  sentiment  dweUa 
in  your  hearts.  The  obligation  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  character  of 
the  object  on  which  that  ray  is  to  fall.  The  sun  is  as  much  bound  to  shine  upon  a 
dunghill  as  upon  a  diamond.  Our  obligation  to  love  our  fellows  has  a  far  deeper 
source  than  the  accidents  of  their  character.  Now  let  me  remind  you  that  all  this 
is  an  intensely  practical  exhortation.  People  curl  their  lips  at  the  fine  words  that 
Christian  teachers  talk  about  universal  love,  and  say,  "  Ah  !  a  pretty  sentiment.  It 
does  not  mean  anything."  Well !  let  a  man  try  for  a  week  to  live  it,  and  the  want  of 
practicalness  in  the  exhortation  will  be  the  last  thing  that  he  will  complain  of.  Fine 
emotion  is  all  very  well,  but  even  Niagara  is  going  to  be  turned  to  practical  use  now- 
a-days,  and  made  to  work  for  its  living.  And  all  the  rush  of  the  deepest  and  purest 
emotion  is  nought  unless  it  drives  the  wheels  of  life.   II.  Notice  how  this  samk  grack 

OR  VIRTUE  IS  REPRESENTED    AS    BEING    ATTAINABLE  ONLY  AS  THE  OUTCOME  OF  GODLINESS. 

There  is  only  one  thing  that  can  conquer  the  selfishness  which  is  the  great  enemy 
of  this  universal  charity,  and  that  is  that  the  love  of  God  poured  into  a  man's  heart 
shall  on  its  bright  waves  float  out  the  self-regard  which  is  central  and  deep  almost 
as  life  itself.  III.  This  grace  is  the  last  result  of  all  Christian  culture  and 
VIRTUE.  The  man  that  is  simply  righteous,  strong,  seK-controUing,  patient,  has  not 
yet  touched  the  highest  apex  of  possible  development.  AU  these  cold  and  stern 
graces  need  to  be  lit  up,  like  the  snow  of  the  glacier,  with  the  gleam  of  this  sweet, 
solemn  light,  in  order  that  they  may  glitter  with  their  serenest  whiteness.  Add  to 
virtue,  love  ;  to  knowledge,  gentleness  ;  to  aU  the  graces  which  regard  our  own  self- 
development,  the  supreme  consecration  of  the  excellence  that  forgets  itseK,  and 
stretches  out  loving  hands,  laden  with  tender  sympathies  and  large  gifts  towards 
the  weary,  even  if  it  be  the  hostile  world.  Further,  this  Divine  charity,  not  only 
completes  these  sterner  graces,  but  it  needs  them  for  its  development  and  its  per- 
fecting. Our  love  to  our  fellows  will  never  be  noble,  deep.  Christlike,  unless  it  be 
the  child  of  severity  to  ourselves.  And  still  further  let  me  remind  you  that  this 
wide,  expansive,  aU-comprehending  charity  is  the  child  of  an  intensely  personal 
faith.  It  is  when  the  love  of  Christ  to  me  dawns  on  my  heart  that  I  am  brought  to 
the  broad  charity  that  grasps  all  the  men  whom  Christ  has  grasped,  and  cannot  but 
love  in  its  poor  measure,  them  whom  He  so  much  loved  that  He  died  for  them. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Of  brotherly  kindness  and  charity  : — I.  The  principle  itself 
is  easily  understood,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  The  proper 
expressions  of  this  inward  good  affection  in  the  mind  are  as  various  as  the  necessi- 
ties of  mankind,  and  the  abilities  and  opportunities  of  others  to  relieve  them.  To 
instruct  the  ignorant,  to  reclaim  the  disobedient,  to  convert  sinners,  to  strengthen 
the  weak,  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  to  encourage  the  sincere  ;  these  are  the  noblest 
offices  we  can  possibly  perform  to  our  brethren,  because  they  serve  the  highest  ends, 
and  produce  the  best  and  most  lasting  effects.  But,  besides  these  offices  of  charity, 
there  are  others  enjoined  by  the  natural  law  of  benevolence,  and  which  the  gospel, 
so  far  from  overlooking,  peculiarly  enforces.  The  wise  and  sovereign  providence  of 
God  has  so  ordered  that  there  is  a  diversity  in  the  state  of  men ;  some  are  indigent, 
others  in  a  capacity  of  relieving.  In  all  these,  and  other  cases  of  a  like  nature, 
reason  and  a  compassionate  heart  will  readily  suggest  to  a  man  how  he  ought  to 
show  his  charity.  II.  The  obligations  we  are  under  to  the  practice  of  this  excellent 
duty.  1.  And  the  first  thing  I  shall  mention  is  taken  from  the  consideration  of  our- 
selves. Let  any  one  look  into  the  workings  of  his  own  heart  when  a  pitiable  object 
is  presented  to  him,  and  try  whether  he  does  not  feel  something  within  which  calls 
him  to  stretch  forth  his  hand  for  the  relief  of  the  distressed?  if  it  is  not  with 
violence  to  himself  that  he  can  harden  his  heart,  and  hide  himself  from  human 
misery  ?  The  greater  ability,  therefore,  which  Divine  providence  gives  any  man  of 
diffusing  the  effects  of  his  virtue  far  and  wide  by  relieving  multitudes  of  his  fellow- 
creatures,  the  larger  occasion  he  has  of  enjoying  the  purest  pleasure,  even  like  that 
of  God  Himself,  whose  happiness  is  in  communicating  good,  for  the  absolute  perfec- 
tion of  His  nature  raises  Him  above  the  possibility  of  receiving  any.  2.  Another 
obligation  to  the  practice  of  brotherly  kindness  and  charity  arises  from  the  object  of 
it,  our  brethren  and  neighbours,  their  condition,  and  the  relation  we  stand  in  to 
them.  Do  we  acknowledge  God  the  Author  of  our  being  ?  He  is  equally  the  Author 
of  theirs,  which  should  inspire  us  with  tender  compassion  towards  each  other.  But 
the  Christian  religion  has  super-added  special  obligations  to  those  general  ones  which 
the  common  ties  of  humanity  lay  upon  us,  by  establishing  a  new  and  intimate  rela- 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  PETER.  69 

tion  among  the  disciples  of  Christ.  3.  In  the  third  place,  we  are,  with  respect  to 
God,  under  great  and  indispensable  obligations  to  the  exercise  of  brotherly  kindness 
and  charity.  This  is  clearly  insinuated  in  the  text,  for  the  apostle  exhorts  us  to  add 
charity  to  godliness.  The  principles  of  the  fear  and  love  of  God  will  naturally 
determine  us  to  exercise  good-will  and  beneficence  to  our  brethren.  (/.  Ahernethy, 
M.A.)  Charity  : — We  are  now  got  to  the  roof  of  this  spiritual  house,  charity. 
This  is  the  highest  round  of  the  ladder  :  there  be  eight  steps,  this  is  the  uppermost, 
as  nearest  to  heaven.  I.  The  motives  to  charity.  1.  The  necessity  of  it — (1)  In 
respect  of  God.  He  charges  us  with  it,  both  in  the  law  and  in  the  gospel  (Lev.  xix. 
18 ;  John  xiii.  34).  (2)  In  respect  of  thyself.  Things  of  greatest  use  should  be  of 
greatest  estimation.  Thou  wouldst  know  if  thou  breathest.  Christian  ;  the  sign  of 
it  is  thy  charity.  This  is  the  pulse  of  faith  (Jas.  ii.  18).  2.  The  dignity  of  it.  It 
is  a  royal  office ;  yea,  a  Divine  practice.  Mercy  and  charity  is  the  sole  work  com- 
municable to  man  with  God.  The  Lord  is  content  to  acknowledge  Himself  the 
charitable  man's  debtor  (Prov.  xix.  17).  3.  The  commodity  of  it.  It  secureth  all, 
increaseth  all,  blesseth  all.  4.  The  danger  of  neglecting  it  (Matt.  xxv.  41-43  ;  Prov. 
xxi.  13 ;  Jas.  ii.  13).  II.  The  jiaterials  wherein  this  external  and  practical 
PART  OF  charity  CONSISTS.  1.  Who  must  give  charitably  (1  Tim.  vi.  17  ;  Luke  xii. 
21;  1  Tim.  vi.  18;  2  Cor.  viii.  12;  Eph.  iv.  28;  Luke  iii.  11).  2.  What  must  be 
given  :  not  words,  but  deeds  ;  a  charitable  heart  hath  a  helpful  hand.  3.  To  whom 
extends  our  charity :  this  munificent  part  of  it  to  the  poor  (Luke  xiv.  13,  14;  vi.  33). 
4.  Whereof  must  we  give  :  not  evil-gotten  things,  but  our  own.  When  the  oppressor 
hath  built  his  almshouse,  and  hopes  by  his  perfunctory  devotions  to  be  admitted  to 
heaven,  the  curses  of  the  undone  wretches  knock  him  down  to  hell.  5.  How  we 
must  give— (1)  Cheerfully.  (2)  Discreetly.  (3)  With  a  right  intention ;  for  God's 
glory,  not  thine.  (4)  Opportunely.  The  more  delay  in  giving,  the  less  honour  in 
the  gift.  (5)  Before  giving  thy  goods  to  the  poor,  give  thyself  to  God.  {Thos.  Adams.) 
Charity  : — I.  The  place  charity  occupies.  It  is  brought  forward  last  in  our  text, 
not  as  being  in  itself  independent  of,  and  in  order  of  time,  subsequent  to  those 
which  the  apostle  has  before  recounted  ;  but  it  is  exalted,  because  of  its  power  to 
keep  in  unison  all  the  other  graces,  as  the  knot  completes  and  holds  together  the 
garland.  The  regenerate  soul  loves  God  in  the  first  pulsations  of  his  new-found 
spiritual  life  ;  and  gratitude  to  the  Redeemer  who  has  bought  him,  prompts,  early 
and  continually,  all  his  acts  of  obedience  to  God,  and  all  his  acts  of  kindly  service 
to  his  fellow-man.  But  how  is  it  related  to,  and  distinguished  from  brotherly 
kindness  ?  Whilst  the  latter  regards  mainly  the  principle  of  fraternal  obhgation  to 
human  nature,  the  former  finds  its  chiefest  scope  and  its  highest  object,  in  the  filial 
ties  binding  man  to  his  Father  and  God.  The  love  of  God  subordinates  and  regu- 
lates aU  the  outgoings  of  attachment  in  the  renewed  heart.  II.  We  must  now 
discuss  the  true  nature  of  Christian  charity,  as  distinguished  from  the 
semblances  that  usurp  wrongfully  its  titles  and  honours.  It  is  not,  then,  as 
the  popular  usage  of  the  word  would  often  make  it — bare  almsgiving.  Neither  is 
this  grace  a  mere  magnanimous  disregard  of  all  doctrinal  variances,  and  a  baseless 
assurance  that  all  forms  of  faith  are,  if  sincere,  equally  acceptable  to  God.  No : 
the  charity  of  the  Scriptures  loves  the  true  God  ;  and  as  He  is  the  God  of  Truth,  it 
loves,  ardently  and  without  compromise,  His  truth,  unmitigated  and  unadulterated. 
Nor  is  evangelical  charity  connivance  with  sin.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour, 
and  not  suffer  sin  upon  him,  but  in  any  wise  rebuke  it,"  said  the  law.  "  Charity 
rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth,"  is  Paul's  language  in  his 
matchless  portraiture  of  this  grace.  And,  as  in  the  nature  of  God,  love  to  truth 
and  holiness,  is  an  attribute,  having  as  its  opposite  pole,  hatred  to  falsehood  and 
unholiness ;  so,  in  each  other  true  servant  of  God,  the  love  of  piety  is  necessarily 
■  detestation  of  impiety,  and  hatred  for  the  workers  of  iniquity — not  indeed  detesta- 
tion of  their  persons  and  souls,  but  of  their  practices,  and  principles,  and  influences. 
For  the  charity  of  the  Scriptures  is,  first,  love  to  God,  the  Creator  and  Source  of  all 
goodness — to  the  good  amongst  men,  as  bearing  His  regenerate  image — and  to  the 
evil  of  our  race  it  is  a  charity,  that  seeks  to  reclaim  and  restore.  III.  And  now  let 
us  dwell  upon  some  of  the  fruits  which  Christian  charity  might  and  should 
display  in  the  field  of  human  society.  Its  root  is,  then,  in  another  world.  It 
is,  first,  filial  towards  God  ;  and  then  fraternal  towards  man  as  the  creature  of  God. 
{W.  R.  Williams.)  Charity  : — Christianity  inculcates  charity,  universal  love. 
This  religion  of  Jesus  implies  a  love  that  is  unrestricted  in  its  exercise,  but  the 
implication  lies  a  little  farther  from  the  surface  than  that  which  teaches  social  feel- 
ing among  Christians  themselves.     You  cannot  conceive  of  a  man  who  loves  Christ 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  t. 

not  having  the  impulse  to  exercise  kindness  of  feeling  towards  those  who  hold  the 
same  "  precious  faith  and  promises  "  with  himself.  Fellowship,  more  or  less  close, 
is  implied  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case.  But  you  can  conceive  of  a  man  who  has 
strong  feelings  of  brotherly  kindness,  and,  in  one  sense,  because  such  feelings  are 
strong  within  him,  not  expanding  his  love  to  include  those  who  are  not  one  with 
him  in  matters  of  faith.  Conceive  of  such  a  thing,  did  I  say  ?  The  possibility  has 
become  a  fact  over  and  over  again.  Think  of  the  market-place  at  Smithfield,  where 
Protestants  and  Komanists  were  burnt  as  each  adverse  party  came  into  power ;  and 
why  all  this  ?  Was  it  not  because  men  had  "  brotherly  kindness  "  of  so  strange 
and  strong  a  kind,  that  they  had  no  "  charity  "  at  aU?  We  see  it  in  all  regions  of 
thought.  In  politics  men  are  banded  into  cliques  and  parties,  and  because  of  the 
very  strength  of  the  bonds  that  hold  them  together,  they  find  it  hard  to  exercise 
charity  towards  opponents.  Even  in  the  cold  region  of  philosophy,  where  there  is 
so  much  that  is  abstract,  so  much  that  seems  unfruitful  and  uneventful,  any 
acquaintance  with  the  history  of  the  rise  and  growth  of  rival  schools  will  remind  us 
that  fierce  persecution-spirit  has  not  been  wanting.  As  we  see  this  lack  of  charity 
manifesting  itself  in  every  branch  of  thought,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that,  and  in 
this  matter  of  religion,  we  find  sectarianism  rampant,  and  charity  lacking.  I  have 
said  that  the  inference  from  the  genius  of  Christianity  is  universal  love,  but  that  it 
is  not  so  obtrusive,  not  so  readily  reached,  as  the  duty  of  "  brotherly  kindness." 
It  shows  itseK  clearly,  though,  after  a  little  thought.  It  springs  from  the  fact  that 
Christianity  is  a  religion  for  the  whole  earth,  and  that  it  teaches  us  how  to  strike 
away  all  that  is  accidental  in  the  condition  and  surroundings  of  men,  and  to  find 
under  these  outward  differences  of  nation  and  caste,  of  position  and  intellect,  the 
heart  that  throbs  with  the  same  passionate  impulse  as  our  own.  The  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  proclaims  its  mission  to  be  to  unite  once  more  all  the  children  of  men 
into  one  Divine  family.  Now  the  fact  that  charity  and  love  for  aU  men,  irrespec- 
tive of  class,  or  creed,  or  circumstance,  love  for  them  because  they  are  men,  created 
and  redeemed  by  the  one  God  and  Father  of  us  all,  is  so  rarely  and  so  imperfectly 
exercised,  presents  itself  as  something  for  which  we  should  be  able  to  account.  Not 
to  excuse  it,  but  to  find  out  the  reason  of  it.  Persecution,  in  its  most  virulent,  in 
its  fiercest  form,  has  well-nigh  disappeared  now-a-days.  But  are  there  not  three 
kinds  of  relation  in  which  we  may  stand  to  men  :  one  of  active  opposition,  one  of 
neglect  and  apathy,  one  of  active  sympathy  and  hearty  co-operation  ?  We  may  in 
some  measure  have  shifted  from  the  first  to  the  second  in  our  dealing  with  those 
who  do  not  agree  with  our  system  of  thought,  and  belief,  and  action,  but  that  we 
have  not  advanced  to  the  third  is  an  unquestionable  fact.  I  do  not  plead  for 
sympathy  with  error  and  sin,  but  this  I  say — that  we  shall  be  striving  after  imita- 
tion of  God  Himself  if  we  still  love  the  sinner  and  the  wanderer,  not  because  of, 
but  in  spite  of  their  being  such,  and  try  to  reclaim  them  from  that  which  has  a 
tendency  to  interrupt  our  charity  in  its  full,  free.  Divine  flow.  A  man  with  any 
spark  of  enthusiasm  about  him,  a  man  of  strong  conviction,  having  settled  views  of 
truth,  is,  by  the  very  force  of  his  own  nature,  made  impatient  of  dissidence  and 
contradiction.  He  thinks  that  all  men  ought  to  see  with  his  eyes,  and  to  speak 
with  his  tongue.  It  seems  then  to  follow  from  this,  that  the  more  that  intelligent 
holding  of  Christian  truth  obtains  among  men,  the  more  difficult  wiU  the  exercise 
of  this  grace  of  charity  become !  The  exercise  of  charity,  universal  love,  demands 
an  effort ;  so  does  everything  that  is  worth  having  ;  and  this  is  perhaps  the  highest 
form  of  religious  feeling  to  which  we  can  aspire.  Retaining  our  own  moral  convic- 
tions, not  sacrificing  our  individualism  of  nature,  to  look  abroad  upon  others,  who, 
conscientiously  as  ourselves,  have  laboured  their  way  towards  the  attainment  of  the 
truth,  and,  as  the  result,  see  it  in  a  different  light,  and  speak  of  it  in  a  different 
language — to  look  abroad  upon  all  these,  and  love  them.  Heaven's  light  shines 
down  upon  the  world,  and  some  things  cast  up  the  red  ray,  others  the  green,  others 
the  blue,  or  yellow.  Let  them  not  become  bitter  one  against  the  other,  because 
individuality  so  asserts  itself.  It  is  the  same  holy  light,  it  touches  them,  they  live 
in  it.  Let  them  rejoice  and  love  one  another.  (D.  J.  Hamer.)  Charity  : — I. 
Its  essential  elements  and  conditions.  1.  As  an  essential  element  of  this  love 
there  must  be  the  full  recognition  of  a  common  humanity  in  all  men,  whatever 
their  country,  their  colour,  their  language,  their  birth,  or  their  condition.  2.  But 
the  doctrine  goes  farther,  and  recognises  in  all  mankind  not  only  the  brotherhood 
of  a  common  physical  descent  and  of  like  physical  characteristics,  but  a  higher 
relationship  as  the  common  offspring  of  God.  3.  And  hence  again,  this  love  for 
man  which  the  gospel  enjoins,  must  flow  primarily  from  love  to  God.     4.  The  Scrip- 


€HAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  71 

tures  always  trace  this  love  to  a  renovated  heart.  II.  Its  practical  sphere  and 
EFFECTS.  1.  We  may  trace  the  practical  working  of  this  spirit,  in  charity  for  the 
opinions  of  others  in  matters  of  religion.  2.  Another  application  of  this  law  of  love 
is  to  the  faults  of  others.  3.  This  spirit  of  love  should  be  viewed  in  its  application 
to  the  necessities  of  our  fellowmen.  4.  This  spirit  of  love  wiU  prompt  also  to  all 
wise  and  beneficent  measures  of  philanthropy  and  reform.  III.  Hindrances  to  its 
EXPRESSION.  1.  These  hindrances  lie  in  the  want  of  consideration.  A  candid 
allowance  for  the  circumstances  of  others  would  almost  always  mitigate  that  severity 
of  judgment  which  fastens  upon  the  outward  act,  or  makes  one  an  offender  for  a 
word.  2.  In  the  want  of  intercourse.  If  travel  enlarges  the  mind,  it  expands  the 
heart  also  to  a  kindlier  judgment  of  men,  and  sympathy  toward  them.  3.  In  some 
lurking  selfishness,  which  invents  excuses  for  not  loving  others.  IV.  The  methods 
OF  developing  this  affection.  1.  By  rightly  estimating  its  power.  Power  does 
not  lie  in  noisy  demonstration  or  in  visible  force.  The  power  that  again  melts 
down  these  barriers  and  unlocks  the  frozen  earth,  can  you  hear  that,  though  it 
makes  the  trees  clap  their  hands  and  wakes  aU  the  birds  to  song  ?  And  can  you 
hear  love  ;  or  weigh  it,  or  measure  it  ?  But  in  that  little  word  lies  a  power  greater 
than  philosophy,  diplomacy,  or  arms,  to  rule  and  mould  the  world.  2.  By  the 
constant  and  studious  practice  of  love.  3.  By  elevated  communion  with  God. 
♦'  God  is  love ;  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dweUeth  in  God,  and  God  in  him." 
And  so  we  are  urged  to  cultivate  this  love.  4.  By  its  own  dignity  and  blessedness. 
The  Scriptures  place  love  before  aU  things,  in  the  enumeration  of  Christian  graces. 
"  Charity  never  faileth."     {Joseph  P.  Thompson.)  Charity  : — I.  The  glory  of 

love.  We  might  conclude  its  surpassing  glory  from  its  position  in  the  exhortation. 
By  a  sort  of  spiritual  rhetoric  it  is  the  word  of  the  climax.  It  is  love  which,  like 
the  sunlight,  giving  the  landscape  its  sublimest  glories,  transfiguring  it  with  some- 
thing like  the  lustre  of  "  the  golden  city,"  gives  to  all  the  landscape  of  character  its 
beauty.  It  is  love  which,  like  the  Shekinah  that  glorified  the  temple,  alone  glorifies 
the  structure  of  a  character  built  on  faith,  and  consisting  of  virtue,  temperance,  &e., 
is  an  empty  shrine  tiU  it  glows  there.  It  is  love  that  crowns  manhood.  II.  The 
POWER  of  love.  It  is — 1.  The  spring  of  a  true  character.  Supplying  the  constant 
arid  sufiicient  motive  to  lead  men  to  live  the  right  life.  It  is — 2.  The  sign  of  a  true 
character.  As  in  their  search  for  nightingales,  controversial  naturalists  discover 
them  by  their  song,  so  in  their  search  for  Christians,  men  discover  them  by  their 
deeds  and  life  of  love.  It  is — 3.  The  sceptre  of  a  true  character.  We  conquer  by 
love.  III.  The  dutt  to  love.  IV.  The  way  to  love.  How  can  this  glory  be 
attained,  this  power  exercised,  this  duty  discharged  ?  1.  Cherish  lovingness. 
Banish  pride,  malignity,  envy,  uncharitableness.  2.  Exercise  love.  3.  Have 
fellowship  with  Christ.     (U.  R.  Thomas.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Ye  shall  neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful — Fruits  of  the  knowledge  of 
Christ : — Among  the  most  beautiful  emblems  of  the  Christian  life  in  Scripture  are 
those  employed  to  shadow  forth  its  fruitfulness.  The  choicest  and  noblest  trees, 
the  majesty  and  gracefulness  of  whose  form  delight  our  eye,  or  whose  fruits  regale 
our  taste,  are  the  Divinely  chosen  types  of  saved  and  sanctified  men.  I.  The 
SUPREME  importance  OF  CHRISTIAN  FRUITFULNESS.  It  was  not  that  youT  leaves 
might  idly  wave  in  the  sun,  be  fanned  with  the  pleasant  breath  and  sprinkled  with 
the  refreshing  dews  of  heaven,  that  you  were  taken  from  the  wild  forest  of  nature 
and  planted  in  the  garden  of  God  ;  but  that  you  might  reward  the  husbandman's 
care  with  abundance  of  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  And,  if  this  result  is  not 
realised,  you  may  read  His  deep  sorrow  and  anger  in  the  words  pronounced  over 
Israel  (Isa.  v.  6).  Fearful  is  the  doom  of  barrenness  (Heb.  vi.  7-9).  II.  Fruitful- 
ness— in  what  it  consists.  It  is  in  a  man's  works  and  words  and  influence  that, 
according  to  the  view  of  the  apostle,  we  are  to  find  the  fruits  of  the  Christian  life. 
Do  not  tell  us  of  feelings  and  experiences,  of  qualities  and  graces,  of  which  you  say 
you  are  conscious  ;  unless  these  inward  impulses  and  affections  make  your  life 
fertile  in  holy  and  loving  purposes  and  performances.  It  is  by  what  a  man  does 
that  it  becomes  known  what  he  is.  The  fruit  proceeds  from  the  tree,  but  is  distinct 
from  it.  It  is  elaborated  by  the  tree  from  the  juices  that  circulate  through  root  and 
stem  and  branch.  The  air,  and  light,  and  moisture,  and  nutritious  elements  of  the 
soil  contribute  the  materials ;  but  the  tree,  out  of  these,  by  the  power  of  its  wondrous 
life,  forms  a  product  altogether  new.  And  so,  like  the  bounteous  fruit-tree,  every 
man  who  rightly  fills  his  place  in  God's  vineyard  is  not  a  consumer  only  but  a  pro- 
ducer.   The  world  is  the  better  for  him.    What  has  been  taken  into  his  own  soul 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

from  above  and  from  around — the  doctrine  of  God's  Word — the  influences  of  God's 
Spirit — the  lessons  of  nature  and  Providence — mingles  with  his  being,  and  is 
changed  and  elaborated  into  holy  thoughts,  which  may  refresh  thousands  of 
hearts— into  precious  words  of  truth  and  power  to  become  the  germs  of  life  in  others, 
and  into  deeds  of  holiness  and  love.  III.  The  degree  in  which  fruitfulness  is 
ATTAINABLE.  "  Barren  and  unfruitful " — are  not  two  terms  to  express  the  same 
idea.  A  fallow  field,  which  yields  nothing  for  the  reaper's  sickle,  is  "  barren  "  in 
the  sense  here  meant.  A  field  which  rewards  the  husbandman's  toil  with  only  a 
scanty  crop  would  be  appropriately  designated  "  unfruitful."  He  is  far  from 
exhibiting  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  life,  who,  like  the  bleak  patch  beside  the 
lonely  cottage  on  the  side  of  some  stony  hill,  produces  but  a  poor  and  precarious 
harvest,  although  he  has  made  a  great  and  happy  transition  from  the  desert  barren- 
ness of  an  unregenerate  state.  Maturity  in  grace,  with  its  rich  and  mellow  clusters, 
is  a  spectacle  as  lovely  as  it  is  rare.  Where  it  does  exist,  it  is  often  hidden  from 
the  view  in  many  a  humble  home,  in  many  a  sequestered  path.  It  is  by  our  bear- 
ing "  much  "  fruit,  our  Saviour  tells  us,  that  His  Father  is  glorified  in  us.  It  is  His 
continual  aim  that  the  fruitful  branch  may  become  more  fruitful  still.  IV.  The 
PRODUCTIVE  ENERGIES  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  FAITH.  To  be  fruitful,  all  the  fuuctious  of  a 
tree  must  be  in  a  healthy,  vigorous  state,  its  roots  drawing  nutriment  from  beneath, 
its  leaves  drinking  in  the  dew  and  sunshine,  the  sap  stirring  through  trunk  and 
branch  and  leaf.  If  all  its  activities  are  in  full  and  healthy  play,  its  energies  will 
not  be  wasted  in  excessive  growths  of  foliage  and  useless  sprays,  but  it  will  in  its 
season  bring  forth  fruit.  What  qualities  must  our  souls  possess  in  order  to  secure 
fruitfulness  ?  They  are  virtue,  knowledge,  self-restraint,  patience,  godliness, 
brotherliness,  charity.  They  impart  to  the  soul  a  stamina  and  vigour,  which  not 
only  preserve  its  life  in  the  drought  of  summer  and  amid  the  icy  winds  of  winter, 
but  load  the  boughs  with  fruit.  (W.  Wilson,  31. A.)  The  choir  of  graces  : — 
In  ancient  Athens  there  was  a  class  of  officers  called  chorus-leaders,  who 
represented  the  various  tribes  and  at  public  festivals  or  religious  rejoicings  for 
a  victory,  brought  out  a  chorus  to  lead  the  songs  of  the  people.  These  leaders 
were  not  always  singers  or  practical  musicians,  but  they  equipped  the  chorus  and 
paid  the  cost  of  marshalling  it  upon  public  occasions.  Hence  the  term  which 
denoted  their  office  came  to  mean  in  general,  "  one  who  provides  supplies,"  and, 
therefore,  as  in  the  text,  add  to  or  supply  to  faith,  virtue,  and  the  whole  train  of 
graces.  Faith  is  the  leader  of  this  choir ;  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  patience, 
godliness,  brotherly-love,  and  charity  are  marshalled  under  faith  as  their  leader,  to 
swell  the  praises  of  Christ  from  an  obedient  and  loving  soul.  Faith  is  the  clef 
which  gives  the  key  in  which  these  seven  notes  of  the  perfect  scale  are  sounded. 
Faith  organises  and  sustains  the  chorus  and  has  a  place  for  each  in  its  well-trained 
band.  When  all  are  assembled  faith  drills  them  into  harmony.  But  if  any  one  be 
wanting  faith  itself  appears  defective,  and  the  soul  is  out  of  tune.  It  is  as  if  the 
first  violin  were  wanting  at  a  Philharmonic  concert,  or  the  trumpet  obligato  should 
fail  to  sound  in  the  resurrection  scene  of  Handel's  "  Messiah."  1.  That  one  who  is 
wanting  in  these  graces  and  takes  no  pains  to  cultivate  them  has  no  warrant  to 
believe  himself  a  Christian.  Every  one  of  these  virtues  being  thus  inward  and 
spiritual,  and  having  an  intimate  and  necessary  relation  to  faith  in  Christ,  where 
these  are  wanting  there  can  be  no  living  germinating  faith.  I  do  not  understand 
the  apostle  to  teach  that  completeness  in  each  of  these  virtues,  and  the  exact  pro- 
portion and  harmony  of  the  whole  are  essential  to  a  Christian  character ;  but 
are  not  these  graces  themselves,  each  and  all  of  them,  so  essential  to  that 
character  that  if  any  one  of  them  is  wholly  wanting,  neither  possessed  nor  sought 
after,  he  who  is  thus  deficient  is  blind  and  destitute  as  to  the  Christian  character 
and  life  ?  A  true  Christian  may  betray  a  lack  of  moral  courage  in  certain  emer- 
gencies, as  did  Peter  after  the  arrest  of  Jesus.  But  suppose  Peter  had  continued  to 
deny  Christ  at  every  approach  of  danger,  should  we  not  have  classed  him  with  the 
apostate  Judas  ?  One  may  be  a  true  Christian  whose  knowledge  of  Christian 
doctrine  is  meagre,  and  who  makes  frequent  mistakes  in  practice.  But  if,  after  five, 
ten,  twenty  years,  one  knows  no  more  of  the  Bible  and  has  no  more  heart-knowledge 
of  Christ,  shall  we  continue  to  regard  his  experience  of  conversion  as  genuine?  A 
Christian  may  sometimes  neglect  a  call  of  charity,  or  set  aside  a  real  claim  upon 
his  love.  But  if  he  never  heeds  such  a  call,  can  he  be  a  child  of  our  Father  in 
heaven  ?  Moreover,  since  all  these  graces  may  be  imitated,  the  positive  and  entire 
lack  of  one  proves  the  rest  to  be  counterfeit  or  superficial.  2.  A  full  and  symmetrical 
development  of  these  graces  is  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  and  the  most  beautiful 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  73 

exhibition  of  Christian  faith.  The  mind  delights  its  symmetry.  The  symmetrical 
development  of  the  human  form,  in  which  each  member  and  feature,  perfect  in 
itself,  is  well  proportioned  to  every  other,  is  our  ideal  of  beauty.  This  symmetry 
of  form  and  feature,  extending  to  every  line  of  the  countenance  and  every  muscle  of 
the  anatomy,  is  the  life-like  perfection  of  the  statue ;  proportion  is  indispensable  to 
beauty  in  architecture ;  symmetry  and  perspective  to  the  harmony  of  colours,  to 
the  effect  of  painting ;  chord  and  harmonies,  preserved  even  in  the  most  difficult 
combinations  of  sound,  are  the  highest  charm  of  music ;  rhythm,  the  measured 
and  regular  succession  of  sounds,  is  essential  to  good  poetry ;  the  proportion  of 
numbers  and  of  mathematical  laws  enters  into  every  science  which  aims  at  com- 
pleteness. But  in  nothing  is  this  symmetry  so  strenuously  insisted  upon  as  in 
moral  character.  The  sharp  and  sometimes  carping  criticism  of  men  of  the  world 
upon  the  faults  and  even  the  peccadilloes  of  professed  Christians  shows  the  demand 
of  conscience  for  completeness  of  character,  and  does  homage  to  Christianity  itself 
as  a  complete  system  of  morality.  Hence  the  New  Testament  lays  much  stress  upon 
completeness  of  Christian  character;  for  the  word  "perfection"  signifies  not  so 
much  the  absolute  sinlessness  of  a  sanctified  nature,  as  the  completeness,  the  full 
symmetrical  development  of  the  renewed  man  in  all  the  graces  of  the  Christian 
life.  This  conscious,  steady,  visible  growth  in  all  the  graces  is  the  best  evidence 
of  a  renewed  heart.  This  full  and  symmetrical  development  of  the  Christian 
graces  makes  to  the  world  a  most  beautiful  and  convincing  exhibition  of  the  Chris- 
tian faith.  A  perfect  Christian  character  is  one  in  enumerating  whose  graces  you 
can  always  say  and,  and  never  interpose  a  but.  The  average  Christian  character  is 
sadly  marred  by  that  little  disjunctive  conjunction — He  is  a  very  good  man — but ; 
He  is  kind  and  charitable  at  heart — but  rough  and  irritable  in  manner ;  he  is 
temperate  and  patient — but  lacking  charity ;  he  is  reverent  and  devout — but  lacks 
moral  courage.  3.  The  abounding  of  these  graces  in  the  soul  will  make  it  fruitful 
in  the  knowledge  of  Christ — will  insure  for  it  a  progressive  and  rewarding  piety. 
The  relation  of  heart-culture  to  the  enjoyment  of  religion  is  like  that  of  good 
agriculture  to  a  good  crop.  You  cannot  have  a  garden  by  merely  purchasing  a 
place.  The  soil  may  be  of  excellent  quality,  and  the  situation  most  favourable ; 
the  title'  may  be  well  secured,  and  the  party  of  whom  you  buy  may  make  most 
abundant  promises  as  to  the  fertility  and  beauty  of  the  ground ;  but  unless  you  give 
all  diligence  to  make  and  stock  the  garden,  unless  you  dig  and  plant,  and  weed  and 
trim,  your  title,  deed,  and  promises  will  not  give  you  a  single  shrub  or  flower.  If 
well-selected  fruits  and  flowers  are  in  your  garden  and  abound,  they  will  make  you 
fruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  its  capacities  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  its  pleasures. 
Two  reflections  are  obvious  here.  1.  If  Christians  find  no  enjoyment  in  religion,  it 
is  because  they  have  failed  to  cultivate  its  particular  and  combined  graces.  2.  The 
highest  fruitfulness  of  a  Church  is  to  be  secured  by  the  perfecting  of  personal 
character  in  its  members.  (Joseph  P.  Thompson.)  Two  sorts  of  Christians : — I. 
The  bright  pictuee  of  what  every  Christian  may  and  should  be.  1.  Every 
Christian  may  have  for  his  own  in  assured  possession  that  whole  series  of  lustrous 
beauties  of  character  (vers.  5-7).  You  may  be  strong  and  discerning  and  tempe- 
rate, &c.  It  is  a  prize  within  your  reach  ;  is  it  in  any  sense  a  prize  within  your 
possession  ?  2.  We  may  each  have  an  increasing  possession  of  all  these  graces. 
"  If  these  things  be  yours  and  abound,"  or,  as  the  word  ought  more  accurately  to 
be  rendered  "  and  increase."  The  expression  suggests  that  if  in  any  real  sense  they 
are  in  you,  they  will  be  increasingly  in  you.  The  oftener  a  man  lavishes  the 
treasures  of  his  love  the  richer  is  the  love  which  he  has  to  lavish.  The  more 
rigidly  he  schools  and  disciplines  himself  the  more  complete  becomes  his  command 
over  his  unruly  nature.  3.  We  may  all,  if  we  will,  have  these  graces  making  us 
diligent  and  faithful.  The  meaning  of  the  word  rendered  "barren"  is,  as  the 
Revised  Version  and  the  margin  of  the  Authorised  give  it,  "  idle."  WeU,  that  seems 
a  little  thing,  that  all  that  aggregation  of  Christian  graces  has  only  for  its  effect  to 
make  men  not  idle,  not  unfruitful.  And  it  seems,  to  some  extent,  too,  illogical, 
because  all  these  graces  are  themselves  the  result  of  diligence,  and  are  themselves 
fruit.  But  the  apparent  difiiculty,  like  many  of  the  other  anomalous  expressions  of 
Scripture,  covers  deep  thoughts.  The  first  is  this — Look  after  your  characters  and 
work  will  look  after  itself.  The  world  says,  "Do!  do!  do!"  Christianity  says, 
"  Be  !  be !  be  !  "  If  you  are  right,  then,  and  only  then  will  you  do  right.  So  learn 
this  lesson,  do  not  waste  your  time  in  tinkering  at  actions,  go  deeper  down  and 
make  the  actor  right,  and  then  the  actions  will  not  be  wrong.  The  highest  exer- 
cises of  these  radiant  gems  of  Christian  graces  is  to  make  men  diligent  and  fruitful. 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


Again,  it  takes  the  whole  of  these  Christian  graces  to  overcome  our  natural  indo- 
lence.    The  pendulum  will  be  sure  to  settle  into  the  repose  that  gravitation  dictates 
unless  the  clock  be  kept  wound  up,  and  it  needs  all  the  wheels  and  springs  to  keep  it 
ticking  for  its  four  and  twenty  hours.     The  homely  duty  of  hard  work,  the  prosaic 
virtue  of  diligence,  is  the  very  flower  and  highest  product  of  all  these  transcendent 
graces.     Then,  still  further,  there  is  a  lesson  here  in  the  collocation  of  the  words 
before  us,  namely,  an  idle  Christian  is  certain  to  be  a  barren  one.     And  now  the 
last  point  in  this  picture  of  what  all  Christian  people  may  be  is — by  the  exercise  of 
diligence  and  fruitfulness  attain  to  a  fuller  knowledge  of  Christ.   Literally  rendered, 
the  text  reads,  "  towards  the  knowledge."     There  be  two  measures  of  knowledge  of 
Christ.     There  is  that  initial  one  which  dawns  upon  a  heart  in  the  midst  of  its  sin 
and  evil,  and  assures  it  of  a  loving  friend  and  of  a  Divine  Redeemer  ;  and  there  is 
the  higher,  constantly  expanding,  deepening,  becoming  more  intimate  and  unbroken, 
more  operative  on  the  life  and  transforming  in  the  character,  which  is  the  reward 
and  the  crown  of  earth,  and  the  crown  and  heaven  of  heaven.     And  it  is  this  know- 
ledge which  the  apostle  here  says,  will  follow  if,  and  only  if,  we  have  striven  to  add 
to  our  faith  all  these  graces,  and  they  have  made  us  strenuous  in  service  and  fruit- 
ful in  holiness.     II.  The  contrasted  outlines  of  the  black  picture  of  what  some 
OF  us  ARE.     1.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be  purged  from  his  old  sins  and  yet  not 
to  be  growing.     It  is  a  case  of  arrested  development,  as  you  sometimes  see  a  man 
with  the  puny  limbs  of  childhood ;  or,  as  you  sometimes  see  a  plant,  which  you 
cannot  say  is  dead,  but  it  has  not  vitality  enough  to  flower  or  to  fruit.     2.  Further, 
such  a  one  is  "  blind,"  or,  as  the  apostle  goes  on  to  explain,  or,  if  you  like,  to  correct 
himself,  "  he  cannot  see  afar  off."     The  apostle  employs  a  unique  word  to  express 
"  cannot  see  afar  off,"  which,  if  you  wiU  pardon  the  vulgarism  for  the  sake  of  the 
force,  I  would  venture  to  translate  "  blinks."     There  was  a  time  when  you  had 
clear  vision.     The  smoky  roof  of  your  cabin  was  rent,  and  you  saw  through  it  up  to 
the  Throne,  but  your  eyes  have  gone  dim  because  you  have  been  careless  to  develop 
your  faith ;  and  where  there  is  no  development  of  faith  there  is  retrogression  of 
faith.     Therefore,  all  the  far-off  glories  have  faded,  and  the  only  things  that  you 
see  are  the  things  that  are  temporal,  the  material,  the  pressure  of  present  cares,  and 
the  like.     3.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  last  point  in  this  sad  picture.     "He  hath 
forgotten  that  he  was  purged  from  his  old  sins."   Yes !    These  idle  unfruitful  Chris- 
tians have  in  their  memories,  if  they  would  only  open  the  cupboard  door  and  look,  a 
blessed  gift  long  ago  given  that  might,  and  that  ought  to  stimulate  them.    They  are 
their  own  worst  condemnation.     There  was  a  time  when  they  felt  the  burden  of  sin 
upon  their  consciences  when  they  hated  it  and  desired  to  be  free  from  it.    And  what 
has  it  all  come  to  ?     The  sins  forgiven  have  come  back  ;   the  sins  hated  have 
reasserted   their   dominion  ;    Pharaoh  has   caught  them   again.     The  moment's 
emancipation  has  been  followed  by  a  recrudescence  of  all  the  old  transgressions. 
So  they  contradict  themselves  and  their  own  past  and  contravene  the  purpose  of 
God  in  their  pardon,  and,  with  monstrous  ingratitude,  are  untouched  by  the  tender 
motives  to  growth  in  holiness  which  lie  in  the  pouring  out  of  the  blood  which 
cleanses  from  all  sin.     [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — As  He  is  "  Lord  "  He  can,  as  He  is  "  Jesus  "  He 
will,  as  He  is  "Christ"  He  doth,  as  He  is  "  Our"  He  shall  save  us.     "Lord"; 
consider  His  righteousness.     "Jesus";  consider  His  sweetness.     "Christ";  con- 
sider His  willingness.     "Our";  consider  His  gooJtioss  that  gives  us  interest  in 
Himself  and  vouchsafes  us  to  challenge  His  mercy.      "  Lord,"  in  regard  of  His 
dominion  (Psa.  xcix.  1).     "Jesus,"  in  regard  of  His  salvation  (Psa.  Ixviii.  20). 
"Christ,"  in  regard  of  the  promise  (John  vii.  26,  41).     "Our,"  in  regard  of  His 
appropriating  Himself  unto  us  (Heb.  ii.  16).    "  Lord,"  in  His  power.  His  works  declare 
Him  to  be  the  Lord  (Psa.  cxxxv.  6).     "Jesus,"  in  being  made  (Gal.  iv.  4;  John 
i.  14).     "  Christ,"  in  being  sacrificed  and  crucified  for  us  (1  Cor.  xi.  24).     "  Our," 
in  respect  of  the  covenant  (Heb.  viii.  10).     Infinite  mercy !     The  Lord's  Christ  is 
become  our  Jesus  (Luke  ii.  26).     {Thos.  Adams.) 

Ver.  9.  He  that  lacketh  these  things  is  blind. — The  miserable  state  of  barren  pro- 
fessors : — I.  Pp;nury.  It  is  a  received  maxim  that  God  and  nature  have  wrought 
nothing  in  vain  ;  no  part  or  faculty  of  the  body  can  be  well  spared.  We  can  spare 
nothing  for  this  world ;  but  for  heaven  we  can  quietly  lack  things  that  conduce  to 
our  eternal  peace  !  What  is  the  reason  ?  A  man  never  misses  what  he  cares  not 
for.  A  man  may  lack  outward  things  yet  come  never  the  later  to  heaven  ;  yea,  the 
sooner  the  surer  ;  but  woe  to  him  that  lacks  "  these  things  1 "   This  is  the  want  now 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  75 

least  feared,  and  this  shall  be  the  want  most  lamented.  Grace  is  solid  and  real 
(Prov.  X.  22).  Whatsoever  we  lack  let  us  not  lack  "  these  things."  II.  Blindness. 
1.  Satan  blinds  the  intellectual  eye  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  2.  Lusts  darken  the  mind.  3. 
The  dust  of  this  world  makes  many  blind.  III.  Apostasy.  "  Hath  forgotten  "  : 
the  original  implies  one  that  did  voluntarily  attract  forgetfulness  to  himself ;  the 
author  of  his  own  mischief.  1.  The  corruption  of  the  heart.  2.  The  danger  of 
that  corruption.  "  Old  sins  " — sins  that  he  hath  done  of  old.  Long  nurture  is 
another  nature.  3.  The  deliverance  from  that  danger.  "  He  was  purged."  Sal- 
vation may  be  said  to  belong  to  many  that  belong  not  to  salvation.  4.  The 
unthankfulness  for  that  delivery.  "  Forgotten."  The  defect  of  corporal  sight  hath 
often  mended  the  memory  ;  but  it  is  not  so  for  spiritual  (Mark  viii.  18).  A  carnal 
mind  is  blind  to  conceive,  ready  to  forget.  (1)  Chrysostom  says,  "  Nothing  more  helps 
us  forward  in  a  good  course  than  the  frequent  recognition  of  our  sins."  (2)  As  we 
remember  our  sins  to  repentance,  so  we  must  forget  them  in  respect  of  continuance. 
Otherwise  the  memory  of  them  doth  not  reduce  us  to  life  but  forward  us  to  death. 
(Ibid.)  Religious  nearsightedness  : — The  man  to  whom  these  grave  defects  are 
imputed  is  supposed  to  possess  an  elementary  degree  of  faith  and  to  have  once  felt 
the  purifying  power  of  God  in  his  dark  and  guilty  spirit.  He  has  received  into  him- 
self the  graft  of  a  Divine  life,  but  through  some  unhealthy  condition  of  the  stock 
that  life  has  not  become  active,  pulsating,  fruitful.  The  life  can  only  reach  the  true 
measure  of  its  excellence  through  earnest  self-cultivation.  In  the  spiritual  world 
there  are  wasted  seeds,  stunted  developments.  This  disastrous  turning  back  of 
God's  spring  in  our  hearts  starts  in  our  own  neglect.  To  know  what  these  defi- 
ciencies that  maim  a  man's  religious  life  are,  we  must  turn  to  the  category  of 
qualities  needing  cultivation  that  Peter  gives  us.  "  Giving  all  diligence,  in  your  faith 
supply  virtue."  That  faith  may  be  brought  to  bear  its  perfect  fruit  of  virtue  and 
strength,  we  must  cultivate  all  the  ethical  branches  of  the  faith  that  had  been 
Divinely  implanted  within  us.  There  is  no  true  beginning  for  us  before  the  beginning 
of  faith,  and  that  must  be  created  within  us  by  the  very  power  of  God.  Do  we  not, 
however,  say  sometimes  that  the  religious  life  not  only  begins  but  also  ends  in  faith  ? 
So  it  does  ;  just  as  when  you  go  to  London,  if  you  get  into  a  through  carriage,  your 
journey  begins  and  ends  in  the  same  compartment.  But  the  compartment  roUs 
through  many  belts  of  varying  country  before  you  step  out  of  it  into  the  streets  of 
London.  And  so,  though  all  religious  life  begins  and  ends  in  faith,  the  faith  moves 
in  the  meantime  through  a  very  wide  range  of  virtues.  "  In  your  faith  supply  virtue." 
Here  man's  part  in  the  cultivation  of  religion  begins.  Virtue  implies  the  tone  and 
strength  of  religious  life.  "  And  in  your  virtue  supply  knowledge."  Eeligious  life 
that  has  virtue  without  knowledge  is  on  pretty  much  the  same  level  as  aerial  navi- 
gation. The  balloon  may  be  made  to  rise  into  the  pathway  of  forces  that  will 
sweep  it  on  with  unapproachable  speed,  but  there  is  no  known  apparatus  by  which 
its  course  can  be  accurately  directed.  Delicate  regulating  power  from  within  is 
wanted.  So  with  the  character  to  which  virtue  has  been  added  without  the  further 
complement  of  knowledge.  The  lack  always  makes  void  much  of  the  grace  of  the 
past.  "  And  in  knowledge  supply  temperance "  or  self-restraint.  Strength  of 
character  must  never  make  us  reckless.  Our  temperance  must  be  united  with 
"  patience."  Under  the  crosses,  disappointments,  and  sufferings  of  our  daUy  Ufe 
there  must  be  steadfastness  and  untroubled  hope.  Murmuring  and  petulance  are 
symptoms  of  subtle  spiritual  disease.  "  And  in  your  patience  supply  godliness." 
Our  resignation  to  the  cross-influences  of  our  life  must  not  begin  and  end  in 
stoicism.  It  would  be  a  very  poor  end  to  all  our  tribulations,  if  they  ossified  our 
sensibilities  and  qualified  us  for  the  defiance  of  pain.  And  then  to  the  temper  we 
cherish  towards  God  there  must  be  joined  a  right  attitude  of  mind  towards  our 
fellow-believers.  "  In  your  godliness  supply  brotherly  kindness."  And  to 
"  brotherly  kindness  "  there  must  be  joined  a  world-embracing  charity.  Narrow 
tempers  are  inconsistent  with  religious  life.  A  true  faith  will  always  bring  with  it, 
if  duly  cherished,  a  generous  breadth.  Where  there  is  the  lack  of  this  you  have 
religious  defect,  limitation,  shortsightedness.  Let  us  just  glance  at  these  qualities 
again,  and  see  how  each  quality  connects  itself  with  some  important  part  of  man's 
nature.  "  To  faith  add  virtue."  Virtue,  or  inward  strength,  connects  itself  with 
the  will,  for  it  is  through  the  will  it  works.  That  is  the  first  thing  God  claims  for 
Himself  in  His  purifying  work  of  grace.  "  To  virtue  knowledge."  It  is  through  all 
the  channels  of  the  intellectual  life  that  knowledge  is  received  and  treasured. 
When  God  washes  a  man  from  the  defilements  of  the  past,  He  demands  the  conse- 
cration of  intelligence  to  His  service.     "  And  to  knowledge  temperance."    Tempe- 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ranee  is  concerned  with  the  government  of  the  passions ;  and  God,  in  cleansing  a  man 
from  his  past  pollutions,  seeks  the  subjection  of  well-ruled  passions  to  His  service. 
"  To  temperance  patience."     Patience  connects  itself  with  the  sensibilities  through 
which  we  are  made  to  suiier.   In  cleansing  a  man,  God  seeks  the  after-harmony  of  all 
his  sensibilities  with  the  Divine  will.     "  And  to  patience  godliness."     In  separating  a 
man  from  evil,  God  seeks  for  the  response  of  all  the  religious  faculties  to  His  operations. 
"  And  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness  and  charity."   These  qualities  link  themselves 
with  the  sphere  of  the  affections.     In  cleansing  a  man  from  his  old  sins,  God  seeks 
to  bring  about  the  healthy  exercise  and  benevolent  direction  of  his  affections.     The 
whole  range  of  man's  powers  is  indirectly  specified,  the  powers  through  which  a  man 
enters  into  relationship  with  his  feUow-men,  as  well  as  the  powers  through  which 
he  knows  God  and  enters  into  relationship  with  the  Eternal.     God  cleanses  a  man 
to  make  him  holy  in  all  these  relationships,  holy  by  the  putting  on  of  aU  these  high 
graces.     "  For  if  these  things  are  yours  and  abound,  they  make  you  that  ye  shall 
neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful  unto  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    An 
imputed  possession  of  these  excellences  will  give  us  no  high  place  in  the  scale 
of    spiritual  being.      The  stinted,  spasmodic  possession  of  these  graces  will  not 
ennoble  us  very  much  more  than  the  mere  fiction  of  an  imputed  possession.     These 
things  are  in  some  people  as  rare  plants  are  in  particular  sections  of  country.     You 
may   come  across  them  if  you  are  very  lucky  and  search  long  enough.     A  true 
believer's  life  should  be  as  full  of  them  as  the  banks  and  hedgerows  of  mid-May  are 
full  of  the  gUnt  and  perfume  of  flowers.    Faith  oftentimes  Ues  dormant  like  hiber- 
nating insects.    A  book  of  Chinese  fables  tells  of  a  country  where  the  people  wake 
once  in  fifty  days,  and  take  the  dreams  of  their  sleep  for  realities,  and  the  things  they 
see  in  their  waking  moments  for  dreams.    The  imaginative  author  might  have  been 
describing  some  believing  Christians.  The  power  of  innate  faith  rarely  breaks  out  into 
moral  movement.    Now  faith  is  not  a  fruit-bearing  stock,  but  so  much  dead  lumber 
within  us,  unless  it  lead  by  the  way  of  these  practical  graces  up  to  the  perfect  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  Christ.   That  is  to  be  the  grand  issue  of  all  these  excellences.   The  end 
has  not  been  reached  when  they  have  regulated  our  present  hfe  and  beautified  our 
present  relationships.     The  apostle  describes  the  lack  of  these  thiiags,  first,  under 
the  metaphor  of  a  grave  defect  in  one  of  the  leading  physical  senses ;  and,  secondly, 
under  the  figure  of  a  lapse  in  the  working  of  the  intellectual  powers.     1.  He  who  is 
wanting  in  one  or  all  of  these  high  qualities  lacks  the  primary  organ  of  perfect  spiritual 
perception.     "  He  is  bhnd."     The  stagnant  and  unprogressive  believer  is  bUnd,  no 
less  than  the  purely  natural  man  who  discerns  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
How  many  of  us  have  inadequate  views  of  what  salvation  means  !    Some  people  see 
nothing  in  salvation  but  deliverance  from  wrath  and  tempest  and  everlasting  fire. 
A  miserably  defective  view  that  is  I     God  does  not  save  us  to  put  us  on  to  some 
secure  level  of  moral  mediocrity  and  to  leave  us  there,  but  to  bring  us  into  fellowship 
with  Himself.    A  shipwrecked  sailor  has  been  helped  by  a  timely  hand  on  to  a  raft 
or  floating  spar.     He  has  not  been  put  there  that  he  may  Uve  on  a  keg  of  rain-water 
and  a  cask  of  biscuits,  and  spend  the  rest  of  his  days  on  a  few  square  feet  of 
planking.   That  is  but  a  passing  means  to  a  larger  and  a  better  end.   If  you  watched 
him  drifting  on  the  raft,  and  saw  that  he  made  no  effort  to  secure  the  larger  and 
better  end,  you  would  say  he  was  either  blinded  by  the  sea-spray,  struck  by  the 
lightning  of  the  storm,  or  driven  insane  by  his  misfortunes.     He  drifts  close  under 
the  beetling  cliffs.     Now  he  is  within  an  arm's  length  of  some  fissure  in  the  cliffs. 
Through  that  fissure  rock-cut  steps  lead  up  and  out  into  a  land  of  springs,  and  corn- 
fields and  orchards,  and  noble  cities,  and  breadths  of  summer  sunshine,  and  aU  the 
precious  fellowships  of  men.     He  drifts  away  as  though  it  were  his  will  to  live  and 
die  on  the  raft.     Voices  call  to  him  from  the  shore,  but  he  seems  careless  of  the 
benign  destiny  to  whose  threshold  he  has  come.     The  man,  you  would  say,  is  blind. 
So  with  those  of  us  who,  saved  by  the  forgiving  grace  of  God,  neglect  to  enter  into 
that  region  of  privilege  and  fellowship  and  ennobling  spiritual  experience  to  which 
virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  patience,  godliness,  brotherly  kindness,  charity  are 
the  successive  step's  for  the  loyal  and  believing  soul.     "  He  that  lacketh  these  things 
is  blind."    And  now  Peter  softens  the  expression  and  substitutes  a  somewhat  milder 
term.     2.  At  best  the  blindness  is  half-blindness.     If  the  man  who  neglects  the 
cultivation  of  these  qualities  is  not  as  dark  as  an  unregenerate  man,  he  at  least 
labours  under  a  most  serious  disability.     He  suffers  from  spiritual  myopia,  for  the 
word  used  in  the  text  is  precisely  the  same  Greek  word  the  medical  man  of  to-day 
uses  to  describe  short-sight.    "  He  cannot  see  afar  off."    He  discerns  the  near,  but  is 
quite  at  fault  when  he  comes  to  deal  with  the  distant.     Foregrounds  are  clear,  but 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  77 

all  the  backgrounds  are  sheer  haze.  The  shortsighted  man  can  see  the  puddle  at 
his  feet  as  he  crosses  the  desert,  but  not  the  river  of  crystal,  with  belt  of  green,  that 
flows  for  his  refreshment  on  the  far  away  edge  of  the  desert.  And  so  with  the 
unprogressive  beUever  who  is  afflicted  by  this  spiritual  shortsightedness.  In  the 
absence  of  the  knowledge  to  which  these  graces  lead  he  does  not  discern  the  com- 
plete character  of  the  Benefactor  who  has  washed  and  purified  him  ;  nor  does  he 
discern  the  heavenly  ideal  to  which  the  washing  and  the  purification  were  to  point 
his  aspirations  and  direct  his  footsteps.  He  sees,  perhaps,  a  little  of  what  God  con- 
verts from,  but  scarcely  anything  of  what  God  converts  to.  He  has  no  perception  of 
the  largeness  of  his  own  destiny.  3.  Again,  St.  Peter  describes  the  lack  of  these  higher 
Christian  excellences  under  the  figure  of  an  intellectual  lapse.  "  Having  forgotten 
the  cleansing  from  his  old  sin."  When  some  Lady  Bountiful  takes  pity  on  a  gutter 
child,  and  washes  it  from  its  nauseous  accumulations  of  filth,  it  is  that  having  put 
it  into  better  clothes,  she  may  introduce  it  to  a  more  genial  and  generous  life.  If 
the  child  begins  to  dress  itself  in  its  old  rags  and  patches,  or  stands  shivering  in  the 
cold,  neglecting  to  wrap  itself  about  in  the  better  raiment  that  has  been  made  ready 
for  it,  it  is  because  the  child  has  forgotten,  if  it  ever  understood,  the  purpose  for 
which  the  Lady  Bountiful  took  it  from  the  streets  and  washed  it.  She  wanted  to 
make  it  her  own,  and  give  it  a  place  on  her  hearth  and  at  her  table.  God  washed 
us  from  the  guilt  and  contamination  of  the  past,  not  that  we  might  stand  lounging 
for  ever  at  the  starting-point  of  our  first  faith,  or  possibly  go  back  to  our  old  defile- 
ments, but  that  we  might  put  on  Christ  and  be  clothed  in  these  excellences  that  are 
summed  up  in  the  glorious  character  of  Christ,  and  stand  in  His  presence,  chosen 
friends  and  companions  for  ever.  If  the  new  life  is  not  delighting  the  eye  with  its 
inimitable  grace,  and  filling  the  air  with  its  reviving  freshness,  it  is  because  there 
has  been  some  untimely  and  disastrous  arrest.  The  past  cleansing  and  its  Divine 
motive  of  perfect  life  and  attainment  have  been  overlooked  and  forgotten.  4.  These 
words  imply  that  the  memory  of  past  grace  will  be  a  living  and  effectual  inspiration 
to  us  at  each  successive  step  of  our  perfecting.  When  God  first  touches  our  spirits 
with  His  cleansing  power,  that  act  has  in  it  the  potentiality  of  complete  Christian 
excellence.  The  sustained  remembrance  of  your  conversion  will  keep  fresh  and 
forceful  the  motive  that  will  stimulate  you  to  the  attainment  of  these  various  moral 
and  spiritual  excellences.  You  might  as  well  try  to  grow  a  cedar  tree  without  roots 
as  seek  to  cultivate  these  qualities  without  the  pecuhar  type  of  motive  suppUed  by 
the  act  of  God's  gracious  cleansing  from  sin.     (T.  G.  Selby.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure. — Diligence 
in  making  our  calling  sure  : — I.  Exhortation.  1.  An  induction.  (1)  "  Where- 
fore." This  word  infers  a  consequence  on  the  premises,  or  is  a  reason  of  the  pre- 
cedent speech.  The  apostle  had  formerly  shown  the  danger  of  such  as  forget  their 
own  purging.  But  there  are  many  who  forget  not  that  they  were  purged  by  the 
redemption  of  Christ,  but  remember  it  too  much ;  and  from  this  derive  encourage- 
ment of  a  licentious  life,  quitting  themselves  from  aU  sins  by  His  passion.  He  that 
thus  spells  Christ,  hath  but  small  literature  of  religion  (Eom.  vi.  1 ;  John  v.  14 ; 
2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17).  The  end  of  our  conversion  is  to  amend  our  conversa- 
tion. (2)  "  Brethren."  (a)  This  word  of  relation  declares  in  the  apostle  two  virtues — 
(i)  His  humility ;  he  prefers  not  himself  to  the  rest  of  God's  saints,  but  calls  them 
all  brethren,  (ii)  His  policy ;  he  desires  to  win  their  souls,  and  therefore  insinuates 
himself  into  their  love.  This  title  ascribes  to  the  people  some  dignity;  that  by 
faith  in  Christ  they  become  brethren  to  the  very  apostles,  and  have  the  fraternity  of 
the  heavenly  saints.  This  term  is  not  without  some  requirable  duty.  Is  the  minister 
thy  brother?  hear  him  (Acts  iii.  22).  But  take  heed  lest  God's  gentleness  be  abused 
by  thy  contempt ;  it  is  the  word  of  thy  Judge  and  Maker,  though  in  the  mouth  of 
thy  brother.  (3)  "  Give  diligence."  Doth  a  man  reap  without  sowing  ?  You  have 
not  wealth  from  the  clods  without  digging ;  and  would  you  have  blessing  from  the 
clouds  without  working  ?  The  labour  of  our  bodies  for  this  world  was  but  a  curse ; 
the  labour  of  our  souls  for  heaven  is  a  blessing.  "  Give  diligence."  This  exhorta- 
tion presupposes  no  proper  strength  of  our  own  to  do  this,  for  it  is  God's  work  in 
us.  (4)  "Piather."  Let  not  the  goodness  of  God,  which  without  your  desert  has 
chosen  and  called  you  to  the  profession  of  Christ,  forgiving  and  purging  your  former 
sins,  make  you  idle  and  careless.  But  rather  strive  to  answer  this  mercy  in  your 
faithful  conversation ;  lest  you  f aU  into  that  pit  of  destruction,  from  whence  by  His 
death  He  hath  redeemed  you.  "The  rather."  He  seems  to  encourage  this  endeavour, 
partly  by  the  benefit,  partly  by  the  danger,  and  partly  by  the  reward:   the  first 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

whereof  incites  our  gratitude,  the  next  our  fear,  the  last  our  hope.     2.  An  instruc- 
tion.    "Make  your  calling,"  &c.     (1)  The  matter  expressed,     (a)  For  the  order: 
the  apostle  puts  vocation  in  the  former  place,  which  yet  in  propriety  is  the  latter ; 
for  election  is  before  all  time,  vocation  in  time.     But  this  is  a  right  form  and 
method  of  speech,  to  set  that  last,  which  is  worthiest  and  weightiest.     Besides,  we 
pass  by  things  nearer  to  things  more  remote ;  first  we  must  look  to  our  calling,  and 
by  our  calling  come  to  assurance  of  our  election.     (I)  For  dependence :  we  must 
know  that  our  calling  depends  upon  our  election.     The  determinate  counsel  of  God 
doth  not  take  away  second  means,  but  disposeth  those  passages  into  order.     These 
two,  election  and  vocation,  are  like  Jacob's  ladder,  whereupon  the  saints  ascend  like 
angels  to  God  :  election  is  the  top,  vocation  the  foot.     (2)  The  manner :  how  this 
may  be  assured.     There  are  but  two  ways  for  a  man  to  know  it ;  either  by  going  up 
into  heaven,  or  by  going  down  into  himself.     In  the  one  there  is  presumption  and 
danger,  in  the  other  security  and  peace.     In  Kom.  viii.  16  we  have  two  testimonies : 
not  God's  Spirit  alone ;  there  may  be  presumption :  not  our  spirit  alone  ;  there  may 
be  illusion :  both  must  witness  together,  concur  to  make  up  this  certificate.     II. 
Confirmation.     1.  The  qualification.     "  If  ye  do  these  things."     (1)  The  condition 
— "  if."   "We  must  first  do,  and  then  have.   Among  men  he  fii'st  serves  that  deserves ; 
for  God,  we  can  merit  nothing  by  doing,  yet  we  shall  have  nothing  without  doing 
(Matt,  XX.  8,  XXV.  21 ;  Rev.  xxii.  12).      (2)    The  practice  or  fruitfulness  in  good 
works — "  if  ye  do";  not  think,  or  say,  but  do.     Idleness  never  had  the  testimony  of 
God's  acceptance ;  it  is  a  vice  that  damns  itself.     There  must  be  hearty  love,  lively 
practice,  kindly  thanks,  costly  service.     (3)  The  sincerity — "these  things":  not 
what  gain  prompts,  or  lust  suggests,  but  what   God  commands.     Such   things 
as  pertain    to  knowledge,   virtue,   godliness.      2,   The    ratification.      "Ye    shall 
never  fall."    Does  the  apostle  here  attribute  something  to  our  works,  as  if  the 
merit  of  our  doing  should  preserve  us  from  falling?    No,  he  speaks  not  concerning 
the  cause  of  mercy,  but  the  way  of  grace.     Our  own  works  do  not  uphold  us, 
but  assure  us  by  a  token  that  we  are  upheld  by  God;  they  are  the  inseparable 
effects   of    that    grace,   by  which  we    are    kept    from   falling.      (Thos.   Adams.) 
Diligence  in  the  Chrixtiaii   life : — Do  we   not  in  worldly  and   intellectual   circles 
observe  men  who  deplorably  fail  to  fulfil  their  election  ?     We  see  those  who  in  the 
largeness  of  their  mental  gifts  are  evidently  predestinated  leaders  and  ornaments  of 
their  generation ;  but  yielding  to  temptation,  they  surrender  themselves  to  inferior 
pleasures  and  pursuits,  the  magnificent  promise  of  their  nature  comes  to  naught, 
and  their  career  closes  in  melancholy  failure.     Others  are  born  into  privileged 
families,  they  inherit  titles  and  wealth,  they  are  called  by  the  fortune  of  birth  to  be 
social  princes,  they  are  indisputably  elected  to  high  position  and  influence ;  and  yet 
not  infrequently  do  these  predestinated  ones  manage  by  ill  conduct  to  tarnish  their 
coronet  and  finish  on  the  dunghill.     As  in  the  intellectual  and  social  life,  so  is  it  in 
the  spiritual ;  souls  called  to  immortal  distinction  fail  through  sloth  and  sin  to  make 
their  election  sure.     We  must  be  diligent  to  cast  out  the  evil  things  we  find  in  our- 
selves.    Many  roots  of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  us,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  cast 
them  out.      The  Canadian  thistle  is  one  of  the  direst  plagues  with  which  the 
husbandman  has  to  contend.     It  seems  impossible  to  extirpate  it.     It  is  well-nigh 
proof  against  the  most  desperate  efforts  to  get  rid  of  it ;  fire,  poison,  and  the  knife 
have  no  more  than  a  temporary  effect  upon  its  vitality.     Neither  the  scythe,  the 
hoe,  nor  the  plough  can  destroy  it.   Dug  up,  burnt  up,  strewn  with  salt,  treated  with 
aquafortis,  covered  with  lime,  it  springs  and  blooms  and  seeds  anew.     Nothing 
remains  but  to  blow  it  up  with  dynamite.     Our  faults  are  so  deep  and  inveterate 
that  we  must  bend  our  whole  strength  to  the  task  of  their  destruction.     We  must 
give  diligence  to  bring  into  our  life  all  good  and  beautiful  things.     The  apostle  in 
this  passage  enjoins  us  to  add  one  virtue  to  another  until  we  possess  and  display 
them  in  all  their  completeness  and  beauty.     It  is  not  enough  to  cultivate  isolated 
patches  of  life,  to  raise  this  grace  or  that ;  we  must  bring  in  every  virtue,  every 
grace,  and  cover  the  whole  ground  of  character  and  action.     Most  gardeners  are 
content  when  their  grounds  include  only  a  few  specimens  of  the  growths  of  various 
types  and  climes;  if  they  can  produce  a  fair  show  with  these,  they  are  satisfied.     It 
is  quite  different,  however,  with  the  national  gardeners  at  Kew  ;  there  the  grand  aim 
is  certainly  not  display,  it  is  not  even  to  possess  a  profusion  of  floral  treasures,  but 
to  make  the  grounds  and  conservatories  widely  representative,  to  make  them  com- 
prehend as  far  as  possible  every  shrub  and  tree  and  flower  that  grows  upon  the  face 
of  the  whole  earth.     The  paradises  of  God  bear  all  manner  of  precious  fruit,  and  if 
our  heart  and  life  are  to  be  the  King's  gardens  we  shall  need  to  give  all  diligence. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  79 

Having  brought  all  good  things  into  our  life,  it  is  only  by  diligence  that  we  keep 
them  there.  "  If  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall  " — indicating  the  tendency 
and  peril  of  our  nature.  Unless  there  is  constant  diligence  and  culture  we  cannot 
hold  the  heights  we  have  scaled,  the  fields  we  have  won,  the  ground  we  have  re- 
claimed. Neglect  a  beautiful  garden  for  a  while,  and  see  how  savage  nature  will 
avenge  herself  and  spoil  your  paradise!  As  a  French  naturalist  says:  "  There  is 
in  nature  a  terrible  reaction  against  man  ;  if  we  put  our  hand  into  our  bosom,  the 
garden  is  in  revolt."  It  is  much  the  same  with  human  nature.  Slowly,  painfully 
do  we  subdue  our  life  to  orderliness,  to  purity,  to  beauty ;  but  how  it  springs  back 
if  we  relax  our  vigilance !  We  need  all  diligence  to  cast  out  of  our  breast  the  bitter 
root,  the  wild  grape,  the  poisoned  gourd.  Then,  having  brought  good  things  into 
our  life,  we  need  all  diligence  to  convert  them  into  perfect  things.  "If  ye  do  these 
things,  ye  shall  never  fall."  The  original  is  very  impressive  and  assuring :  "  Ye 
shall  not  fall  by  any  means  ever."  A  man  may  do  his  best  in  the  worldly  sphere 
and  fail,  but  no  saint  can  do  his  best  and  fail.  "  For  so  an  entrance  shall  be 
administered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom."  "  Give  all  dili- 
gence." The  character  of  life's  ending  is  much  in  our  own  power ;  we  are  now 
determining  our  end.  The  measure  of  our  diligence  shall  be  the  measure  of  our 
victory.  Every  well-spent  hour  is  another  flower  for  our  dying  pillow;  every  earnest 
effort  to  please  God  is  so  much  sunshine  for  the  dark  valley ;  every  mastered  temp- 
tation brings  another  angel  to  sing  in  the  chamber  where  the  good  man  meets  his 
fate.     (W.  L.   Watkinson.)  On  giving  diligence  in   our   election : — I.    That   it 

IS  IN  EVEKT  one's  POWER  TO  MAKE  HIS  CALLING  AND  ELECTION  SURE.  II.  ThE  ONLY 
WAT  OP  MAKING  OUR  CALLING  AND  ELECTION  SURE  IS  TO  LIVE  IN  THE  SINCERE  AND  CON- 
SCIENTIOUS PRACTICE  OF  ALL  CHRISTIAN  VIRTUES.  This  appears  from  the  beginning  of 
the  chapter.  III.  Those  virtues  and  graces  by  which  alone  we  can  make  sure 
TO  ourselves  election  and  salvation,  require  the  greatest  pains  and  industry. 

I.  The  main  fundamental  reason  why  religion  is  so  very  difficult  is  because  of 
that  natural  propensity  w6  have  to  sin.  2.  Besides  this  unhappy  degeneracy 
against  religion,  there  are  inveterate  sinful  habits  to  be  rooted  out,  and  these 
do  strangely  increase  the  difficulty.  3.  The  last  reason  to  evince  the  difficulty  of 
being  religious  is  the  uneasiness  of  planting  new  and  opposite  habits,  in  the 
room  of  our  former  vicious  ones.  (R.  Warren,  D.D.)  An  exhortation  to  earnest- 
ness in  religion : — Four  classes  of  motives  are  suggested  by  this  passage  urging 
the  exhortation  it  contains.  I.  The  supreme  importance  of  religion,  II. 
Another  motive  to  diligence  in  religion  urged  by  this  exhortation  is 
the  value  of  an  unequivocal  character.  III.  A  third  motive  to  diligence 
suggested  by  this  exhortation  is,  that  God  deals  with  us  on  a  system  of  reward. 
"  Give  diligence,"  and  you  shall  have  these  three  things — assurance,  stability,  and 
an  abundant  entrance  into  heaven.    IV.  One  other  motive  to  diligence  furnished 

BY  this  passage,  IS  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  REWARD  TO  BE  BESTOWED.       HoW  majCStic  the 

idea  presented  here !  A  kingdom  !  {Josiah  Viney .)  From  grace  to  glory : — But 
do  not  our  calling  and  election  proceed  from  God  ?  How  then  can  these  be  made 
sure  by  any  action  of  ours  ?  Can  we  confirm  Jehovah  Himself  in  His  purpose,  or 
bring  confij-niation  to  any  of  His  promises  ?  The  sureness  to  be  attained  is  the 
sureness  of  evidences  which  men  themselves  can  bring  out,  take  note  of,  and  increase 
beyond  the  possibility  of  a  question.      I.  The  text  presents  God's  calling  and 

ELECTION  OF    HiS  PEOPLE  AS   A    MOTIVE  TO  DILIGENCE  ON  THEIR  PART  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN 

LIFE.  The  Bible  never  represents  the  fact  that  all  believers  are  called  of  God  by 
His  Spirit  as  superseding  in  the  least  the  necessity  of  personal  effort  for  the  attain- 
ment of  holiness,  but  makes  this  fact  a  ground  of  exhortation  to  diligence  and  per- 
severance. The  reason  why  many  regard  the  purposes  of  God,  even  in  the  applica- 
tion of  His  grace,  as  in  some  way  a  barrier  to  their  own  effort,  is  that  they  conceive 
of  all  God's  purposes  as  being  executed  by  physical  and  irresistible  force.  This 
objection  is  contradicted  by  our  own  consciousness.  If  God  at  any  point  comes  in 
conflict  with  our  free  agency,  it  must  be  in  carrying  out  His  purpose,  and  not  simply 
in  having  a  purpose.  "  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship  ye  cannot  be  saved."  God's 
purpose  was  to  be  made  sure  by  the  agency  of  men  accustomed  to  manage  a  ship. 

II.  The  VIRTUES  and  graces  of  the  Christian  character  in  a  full  and  symmetrical. 

DEVELOPMENT,   GIVE    TO    THEIR   POSSESSOR    THE    ASSURANCE    OF   HIS   PERSONAL    CALL   AND 

ELECTION.  No  amount  of  technical  knowledge  of  religion  can  certify  our  personal 
interest  in  Christ.  No  rapture  of  occasional  experience  can  certify  our  caUing  and 
election.  Assurance  grows  with  the  fruits  of  grace,  is  inseparable  from  these,  is  a 
dry  branch  without  these.     III.  This  complete  Christian  character  attained  in 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

LIFE    ASSURES    PEACE    AND    TRIUMPH  IN  DEATH,  AND    A   JOYFUL    ENTRANCE    INTO   ETERNAL 

LIFE.  As  Dr.  Doddridge  interprets  the  text,  carrying  out  the  figure  of  a  choir  of 
graces,  "  if  you  will  lead  on  the  virtues  and  graces  here  enumerated  in  their  beauti- 
ful order,  those  graces  will  attend  you  in  a  radiant  train  to  the  mansions  of  immortal 
glory  and  blessedness."  He  who  matures  these  graces  in  life  shall  have  victory  over 
death.  (Joseph  P.  Thovipson.)  The  gains  of  Christian  diligence  : — Notice  how 
very  homely  a  virtue  it  is  that  takes  all  this  motive  to  persuade  lazy  people  to  it — 
nothing  more  than  hard  work.  Diligence  is  a  very  prosaic  grace,  extremely  unlike 
the  heated  emotion  and  the  idle  sentimentality  which  some  of  us  take  to  be  religion, 
but  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  excellence,  and  emphatically  of  all  Christian  excellence. 
I.  Diligence  in  the  cultivation  and  nurture  of  the  Christian  character  is  the 
SEAL  OF  OUR  CHRISTIAN  STANDING.  Excrcise  it,  says  Peter,  to  "  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure,"  to  confirm  your  possession  of  these  Divine,  and,  in  themselves, 
unalterable  facts.  God  does  not  choose  men  to  a  salvation,  which  consists  of  certain 
arbitrary  privileges  which  they  may  possess  whatever  their  character,  but  He  "  calls 
us  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  Him."  If  we  are  not  carrying 
out  His  design  in  that  choice,  are  we  not  invalidating  it?  On  our  faithfulness  and 
Christian  diligence  depends  our  continued  possession  of  the  privileges  which  God 
has  given  us.  There  is  another  side  to  this  thought,  viz.,  that  this  same  diligence 
confirms  our  Christian  standing  to  our  own  consciousness.  The  real  sign  to  a  man 
that  he  is  Christ's  is  that  he  is  growing  like  Christ.     H.  This  diligence  in  the 

CULTURE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER  BECOMES  A  STAFF  TO  OUR  ELSE  TOTTERING  STEPS. 

"  For,"  says  Peter,  "  if  ye  do  these  things  ye  shall  never  fall."  So  our  Version  ha3 
it ;  but  the  promise  is  even  more  emphatic — "  Ye  shall  never  stumble,"  which  comes 
before  falling.  Does  that  mean  that  it  a  man  will  only  set  himself  diligently  to  try 
and  cultivate  these  Christian  graces  he  wiU  thereby  become  immaculate  and  free 
from  sin?  Not  so.  Observe  the  language — " If  ye  do  these  things."  More  literally 
and  accurately  we  might  read — "  While  ye  do  these  things."  As  long  as  a  man  is 
diligently  occupied  with  the  stress  of  his  effort  in  adding  to  his  character  the  graces 
that  are  here  enjoined,  so  long  will  he  stand  firm  in  righteousness.  We  have  no 
such  efficient  prophylactic  or  shield  against  the  assaults  of  evil  as  the  pursuit  of 
good.  ■  Again,  the  way  to  keep  ourselves  from  becoming  worse  is  resolutely  to  aim 
at  getting  better.  Again,  such  diligence,  though  it  may  not  be  crowned  with  com- 
plete success,  will  certainly  secure  from  utter  failure.  III.  This  diligence  in 
Christian  culture  is  the  condition  of  the  entrance  abundantly  ministered. 
There  is  a  "  being  scarcely  saved,"  and  there  is  an  "  entrance  abundantly."  And 
the  principle  that  lies  here  is  plain,  that  the  degree  of  our  possession  of  the  perfect 
royalty  of  Heaven  depends  on  our  faithfulness  here  on  earth.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Your  calling  and  election  sure. — The  elect  making  sure  of  their  election  : — There  are 
many  things  in  life  about  which  we  all  desire  to  feel  "  sure."  For  instance,  the 
firmness  of  our  health ;  the  completeness  of  cure  when  we  have  been  sick ;  the 
stability  of  the  engagements  by  which  you  earn  your  daily  bread  ;  the  fidelity  of 
our  kindred  and  friends  ;  and  the  well-being  and  well-doing  of  loved  ones  who  are 
absent.  The  marvel  is  that  people  who  say  they  are  "  the  called"  and  "  the  elect " 
are  sometimes  among  the  careless  ones.     I.  Certainty  as  to  his  position  a  most 

DESIRABLE  OBJECT  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN HE    OUGHT  TO    BE  "  SURE."       If  he  be  not  SUre, 

one  of  two  things  must  be  true :  either  he  doubts  without  cause,  or  he  trusts  with- 
out cause.  The  latter,  if  it  continue,  will  be  fatal — he  will  be  ruined  by  false  con- 
fidence; and  the  former,  if  it  abide,  will  be  injurious.  Look  first  at  doubt  without 
cause,  which  we  say  is  injurious.  Does  it  not  cripple  exertion?  What  can  a  man 
do  who  is  ever  questioning  his  chief  responsibilities  and  capabilities,  and  who  is  not 
even  sure  as  to  his  position  ?  Doubt  breaks  up  peace.  There  is  no  rest  to  the 
spirit  that  is  unassured,  and  at  the  same  time  doubt  must  seriously  lessen  joy. 
Now  peace  and  joy  are  not  to  be  dealt  with  as  religious  luxuries,  they  are  states  of 
soul  which  are  required  for  the  most  practical  of  uses.  Peace  is  a  holy  keeper  of 
the  heart  and  mind,  and  joy  is  a  Divine  invigorator  and  refresher,  for  "  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  your  strength."  Ungrounded  confidence,  on  the  other  hand,  is  most 
dangerous.  Of  the  two,  better  doubt  for  ever,  where  there  is  eternal  cause  for  con- 
fidence, than  rely  without  cause.  He  who  thinks  he  has  found  will  not  seek.  But 
now  what  profit  is  there  in  being  "sure"?  To  be  "  sure,"  prevents  the  waste  of 
energy  in  groundless  doubt  and  in  useless  inquiry  ;  for  you  will  find  that,  in  cases 
of  groundless  doubt,  there  is  an  immense  waste  of  energy  in  constant  introspection, 
and  fearfulness,  and  foreboding.  Moreover,  to  be  "sure"  sets  the  man  free  for 
works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love;  he  can  give   himself  to  intercession  and  to 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  81 

prayer  for  others,  his  own  case  being  settled.  To  be  "sure"  places  a  man  at 
liberty  to  leave  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  to  go  on  unto 
perfection.  11.  This  is  to  be  secuked  by  diligent  attention.  "  Give  diligence 
to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  The  word  used  is  very  expressive — strive, 
use  all  activity,  strain  every  nerve.  Now  the  following  things  must  be  done  before 
we  can  be  sure.  1.  There  must  be  a  strict  inquiry  into  God's  description  of  the 
"  called  "  and  the  "  elect."  God  does  not  lay  much  stress  upon  the  emotions  ;  He 
lays  chief  stress  upon  the  state  of  the  will  towards  Himself.  "For  ye  were  as 
sheep  going  astray,  but  are  now  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your 
souls."  2.  We  require  a  close  examination  of  our  inner  and  outer  life.  In  all 
cases  of  regeneration  the  change  is  thorough.  It  is  not  perfected  at  once,  but  it 
affects  the  whole  nature.  And,  in  connection  with  this,  there  should  be  a  narrow 
search  for  unfavourable  signs  which  might  counteract  the  favourable  signs,  and  a 
search  for  special  favourable  signs  which  should  confirm  the  rest.  We  require  also 
the  continued  pursuit  of  those  attainments  which,  as  made,  will  involve  cumulative 
evidence.  This  is  a  matter  which  Christians  sadly  neglect.  I  see  them  dweUing  on 
their  conversion,  instead  of  acquiring  confidence  from  what  is  now  going  on  within 
their  souls.  Yet,  if  you  be  a  Christian,  there  is  a  glorious  work  going  on  now ; 
yesterday  it  was,  and  it  is  now.  Then,  in  connection  with  all  this,  I  need  not  say 
there  must  be  not  only  an  anxious  desire  to  recover  any  ground  which  you  may 
have  lost,  but  there  must  be  direct  appeal  to  God  on  this  subject.  (-S.  Martin.) 
An  assurance  of  salvation  .•—I.  Is  the  attainment  of  this  mor.\x  certainty  as  to 
OUR  calling  and  election  really  possible  ?  We  hesitate  not  for  a  moment  to 
answer  the  question  in  the  afiirmative.  If  the  object  to  which  this  exhortation 
unquestionably  points  be  altogether  beyond  our  reach,  how  are  we  to  account  for 
the  importance  thus  manifestly  attached  to  it  ?  The  prophet  Isaiah  (xxxii.  17), 
speaking  of  the  happy  consequences  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  expressly 
declares  that  "  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace  ;  and  the  effect  of  righteous- 
ness quietness  and  assurance  for  ever. "  St.  John  also  (1  John  iii.  19) — "Hereby 
we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  Him."  St. 
Paul  likewise  (Heb.  vi.  11)  thus  addresses  the  Jewish  converts,  "  We  desire  that 
every  one  of  you  do  show  the  same  diligence  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the 
end."  Nor  is  the  attainableness  of  this  personal  assurance,  or  moral  certainty 
as  to  our  calling  and  election,  less  clearly  proved  by  the  evidence  of  fact  and 
experience.  II.  Does  the  attainment  of  this  moral  certainty,  as  to  our  calling 
AND  election,  BELONG  ESSENTIALLY  TO  A  STATE  OF  GRACE  ?  While  on  the  One  hand 
it  has  been  confidently  asserted  that  assurance  as  to  our  personal  interest  in  the 
blessings  of  Christ's  purchase  bears  presumption  on  its  very  face,  not  a  few  have 
confidently  maintained  that  this  assurance  of  salvation  is  of  the  very  essence  of 
faith,  or,  in  other  words,  that  without  it  we  can  have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the 
redemption  of  the  gospel.  That  this  opinion  is  erroneous  appears  evident,  we 
apprehend.  1.  It  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  Christian  hfe.  Still  exposed  to 
temptation,  and  not  unfrequently  overpowered  for  a  time  by  its  assaults,  the 
progress  of  the  genuine  believer  is  ever  chequered  by  the  visitation  of  fear,  of 
despondency,  and  of  sorrow,  as  well  as  of  the  opposite  emotions  of  hope,  and  confi- 
dence, and  joy.  Nay,  indeed,  such  oppressive  feelings  are  often  necessary ;  they  are 
subservient  to  his  present  advancement  in  his  spiritual  course  and  his  final  triumph 
over  his  spiritual  foes.  2.  While  the  doctrine,  against  which  we  are  now  con- 
tending, is  thus  in  obvious  contrariety  to  the  nature  of  the  Christian  life,  it  is  also, 
at  the  same  time,  very  manifestly  inconsistent  with  the  general  bearing  of  Scripture 
statement  and  exhortation.  Nothing  is  more  apparent  in  God's  holy  Word  than 
the  encouragement  that  is  there  given  even  to  those  whose  state  of  mind  and  of 
heart  is  just  the  very  opposite  to  everything  like  security  or  confidence.  The  broken 
heart,  the  poor  in  spirit,  are  blessed.  3.  But  not  only  does  the  contrariety  of  the 
doctrine,  against  which  we  are  contending,  to  the  nature  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
its  inconsistency  also  with  the  general  bearing  of  Scripture  statement  and  exhorta- 
tion thus  clearly  demonstrate  its  fallacy :  the  consequences  likewise  to  which  it 
naturally  leads  are  sufficient  to  convince  every  candid  inquirer  that  it  is  at  the  same 
time   most  pernicious   and   dangerous.     III.    How  is    this  assurance  or  moral 

CERTAINTY,  IN    REGARD    TO    OUR    CALLING   AND  ELECTION,  REALLY  TO  BE    SECURED  ?       The 

apostle,  turning  our  attention  to  the  virtues  and  graces  of  the  Christian  life,  very  dis- 
tinctly points  to  the  exercises  of  such  virtues  as  the  source  of  the  assurance  here  more 
immediately  referred  to.  Nor  does  this  conclusion  rest  upon  the  language  of  the 
Apostle  Peter  alone.     Our  Lord  Himself,   exposing  the  false   confidence  of  the 

35 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Pharisees,  expressly  declares  to  them  that  the  sincerity  of  the  Christian's  faith,  and 
consequently  his  spiritual  safety,  is  to  be  discovered  by  its  effects.  "  Either,"  says 
He,  "  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good,  or  else  make  the  tree  corrupt,  and  his 
fruit  corrupt :  for  the  tree  is  known  by  his  fruit."  {John  Thomson.)  Election  : — 
What  does  Scripture  teach  concerning  election  ?  At  the  outset  let  me  remark  that 
wherever  the  Bible  speaks  of  the  elect  it  speaks,  not  of  God's  purpose  to  make  men 
different,  but  of  the  fact  that  they  do  differ — a  fact  not  only  recognised  by  God,  but 
determining  His  conduct  towards  us.  And  further,  the  view  Scripture  sets  forth  of 
the  subject  is  intensely  practical,  whereas  the  view  too  commonly  taken  of  the 
doctrine  has  made  it  one  of  pure  speculation  and  of  no  practical  value  at  all.  Now, 
that  a  doctrine  of  election  should  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  ought  to  present  no 
difficulty,  ought  to  surprise  no  one,  for  the  simple  reason  that  whatever  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  doctrine  may  be,  it  is  confessedly  founded  on  fact.  Election  in  some 
shape  or  form  meets  us  everywhere,  wherever  we  observe  the  ways  and  doings  of 
God.  In  the  material  world  nothing  can  be  clearer  than  that  some  objects  have 
endowments  which  do  not  belong  to  others.  Some  attract  us  by  their  beauty  of 
foi-m,  their  fragrance,  and  so  forth ;  while  others  repel  us  as  being  unsightly,  offen- 
sive, noxious.  Is  not  this  of  the  will  of  God  ?  Is  not  this  His  election,  that  some 
objects  shall  possess  what  is  denied  to  others?  In  the  heavens  one  star  differs  from 
another  star  in  glory.  Among  the  angels  there  are  principalities  and  powers,  elect 
angels.  In  fact,  throughout  the  creation  of  God  we  nowhere  find  uniformity  or 
equality  of  endowment ;  everywhere  we  find  variety.  And  similarly  amongst  men : 
compare  the  poet  with  the  ploughman.  And  similarly  amongst  races :  compare  the 
Anglo-Saxon  with  the  Hottentot.  What  gifts  are  lavished  on  the  one  that  are 
denied  the  other  !  And  we  find  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  these  differences  are 
of  God.  We  ought  not  to  be  surprised,  therefore,  on  opening  the  Bible,  to  find  in 
it  a  doctrine  of  election.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  whole  substance  of  the  Bible 
is  a  series  of  elections  made  by  God  Himself.  Noah  was  elected  of  God  to  be  the 
second  father  of  the  race ;  Abraham  to  be  the  father  of  the  elect  people  ;  Moses  to 
be  their  legislator  ;  Samuel  to  be  their  prophet ;  David  to  be  their  king ;  Christ  to 
be  their  hope ;  the  apostles  to  be  His  witnesses.  The  fact  therefore  meets  us  wherever 
we  turn.  The  only  question  is,  as  to  the  significance  of  the  fact,  as  to  how  we 
are  to  interpret  it.  Have  we  the  key  ?  I  believe  we  have,  and  in  the  history  of 
Israel  I  conceive  God  would  have  us  understand  what  the  Divine  election  means. 
First  of  all,  the  election  of  Israel  was  an  arbitrary  act  of  God.  The  ground  of  it 
was  not  any  foreseen  excellence  in  the  people,  for,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this  they 
never  possessed.  A  more  troublesome,  murmuring,  rebellious,  disobedient,  faithless 
people  the  annals  of  history  do  not  know.  Then,  again,  as  to  the  persons  elected. 
The  election  was  national,  not  personal ;  of  the  whole  body,  not  of  the  individuals. 
The  election,  moreover,  was  not  to  a  blessing  absolutely — certainly  as  regards  the 
individuals  of  the  race — but  to  the  offer  of  one  conditionally.  In  other  words,  it 
was  not  an  election  to  final  salvation ;  not  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  promised  land 
as  a  possession,  but  only  to  a  condition  of  privilege,  the  result  of  which  might  be 
the  ultimate  possession,  but  only  of  individual  choice.  The  evidence  of  this  is  the 
simple  fact  that  entrance  into  Canaan  was  denied  to  all  but  two  :  a  blessing  was 
placed  within  the  reach  of  the  people  ;  whether  it  should  be  theirs  or  not  depended 
on  themselves.  As  the  vocation  and  privilege  of  Israel  were  higher  than  those  of 
other  nations,  so,  too,  were  they  subjected  to  severer  discipline.  A  high  standard 
of  national  life  was  set  before  them,  and  they  were  trained  to  it  by  a  stern  and 
exceptional  process.  So  that  their  election  of  God  implied  sharp  discipline.  There 
was,  further,  a  deep  purpose  in  their  discipline  which  we  must  not  overlook,  or  we 
shall  misunderstand  the  whole.  It  was  this  :  that  the  blessings  they  were  to  reap 
as  the  result  of  their  fidelity  were  not  for  themselves  alone.  They  were  to  be  the 
instruments  of  blessing  to  mankind.  The  face  of  God  shone  on  Israel  that  His 
way  might  be  known  on  earth.  His  saving  health  to  all  nations.  Israel  mistook  its 
vocation,  wrapt  itself  in  the  cloak  of  exclusive  privilege,  and  affirmed,  "  The  temple 
of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we."  If,  then,  we 
apply  these  principles,  what  shall  we  expect  to  find  ?  We  shall  expect  to  find  that 
the  election  will  be  of  the  sovereign  will  of  God,  unaffected  by  any  foreseen  conduct. 
The  former  part  of  this  statement  is  denied  by  none  :  the  latter  part  is  implied  in 
the  Saviour's  description  of  the  day  of  judgment,  in  the  universal  declaration  of 
the  gospel  that  this  life  is  a  state  of  trial,  and  in  such  positive  assertions  as  those  of 
Paul,  that  God  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,  that  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons,  and  the  like.     We  shall  expect  to  find  several  other  things. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  83 

As  to  the  persons  elected,  except  as  regards  individuals  called  to  some  special  work, 
Scripture  tells  us  nothing.  We  are  all  sure  that  they  are  the  elect  of  God  who 
prove  their  election  by  the  loftiness  and  excellence  of  their  spiritual  life,  and  that 
this  is  the  only  proof  that  can  be  given  or  that  could  be  accepted  as  reasonable. 
And  as  to  the  election  itself,  if  it  is  to  eternal  life  at  all,  surely  it  is  to  eternal  life 
as  a  present  possession  and  experience,  and  not  simply  to  something  to  be  received 
in  the  future.  But  the  analogy  of  Israel  would  lead  us  to  say  that  the  election  is 
not  to  eternal  life  at  all,  but  to  a  condition  of  privilege,  the  result  of  which  may  be 
the  possession  of  a  spiritual  life,  which  links  men  on  to  the  Eternal  God,  and  is  eternal 
life  ;  but  this  only  where  there  is  choice  ;  otherwise  the  election  to  privilege  does 
not  secure  to  men  eternal  life,  as  belonging  to  the  Israelitish  people  did  not  secure 
entrance  to  the  promised  land.  Again,  if  this  fact  be  clearly  apprehended,  that  the 
knowledge  of  God  is  eternal  life,  and  that  this  is  the  life  to  which  the  elect  are 
called— not  a  future  so  much  as  a  present  good,  and  this  good  a  very  lofty  level  of 
life,  the  privilege  of  aiming  higher,  working  harder,  sacrificing  more,  suffering  more 
keenly  than  any  others  in  the  world — this  will  explain  the  fact  which  has  often 
perplexed  men,  that  the  path  of  the  noblest  saints  has  been  a  path  of  sternest 
discipline.  Their  summons  is  to  a  nobler,  loftier,  more  self-sacrificing  life,  a  life 
of  self-forgetting,  absorbing,  loving  service  to  Christ,  and  it  is  as  they  live  this  life 
nobly  and  well  that  they  make  their  calling  and  election  sure.  {R.  V.  Pryce,  M.A.) 
Particular  election : — When  Mr.  Whitfield  was  once  applied  to  to  use  his  influence 
at  a  general  election,  he  returned  answer  to  his  lordship  who  requested  him  that 
he  knew  very  little  about  general  elections,  but  that  if  his  lordship  took  his  advice 
he  would  make  his  own  particular  "  calling  and  election  sure,"  which  was  a  very 
proper  remark.  I.  First  of  all,  then,  there  are  the  two  important  matters  in 
RELIGION — secrets,  both  of  them,  to  the  world — only  to  be  understood  by  those  who 
have  been  quickened  by  Divine  grace:  "calling  and  election."  It  will  be  asked, 
however,  why  is  "  calling "  here  put  before  "election,"  seeing  election  is  eternal, 
and  calling  takes  place  in  time  ?  I  reply,  because  calling  is  first  to  us.  The  first 
thing  which  you  and  I  can  know  is  our  calling :  we  cannot  tell  whether  we  are 
elect  until  we  feel  that  we  are  called.  We  must,  first  of  all,  prove  our  calling,  and 
then  our  election  is  sure  most  certainly.  And  this  is  a  matter  about  which  you  and 
I  should  be  very  anxious.  For  consider  what  an  honourable  thing  it  is  to  be 
elected.  In  this  world  it  is  thought  a  mighty  thing  to  be  elected  to  the  House  of 
Parliament ;  but  how  much  more  honourable  to  be  elected  to  eternal  life ;  to  be 
elected  to  "the  Church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven"! 
Election  in  this  world  is  but  a  short-lived  thing,  but  God's  election  is  eternal.  It 
is  worth  while  to  know  ourselves  elect,  for  nothing  in  this  world  can  make  a  man 
more  happy  or  more  valiant  than  the  knowledge  of  his  election.  "  Nevertheless," 
said  Christ  to  His  apostles,  "  rejoice  not  in  this,  but  rather  rejoice  that  your  names 
are  written  in  heaven  " — that  being  the  sweetest  comfort.  And  this,  too,  makes  a 
man  valiant.  When  a  man  by  diligence  has  attained  to  the  assurance  of  his 
election  you  cannot  make  him  a  coward.  "  Was  not  I  ordained  by  God  to  be  the 
standard  bearer  of  this  truth  ?  I  must,  I  will  stand  by  it,  despite  you  all."  He 
saith  to  every  enemy,  "Am  I  not  a  chosen  king?  "  II.  Come,  then,  here  is  the 
second  point — good  advice.  "  Make  your  calling  and  election  sure. "  "How,  then," 
says  one,  "  am  I  to  make  my  calling  and  election  sure  ?  "  Why,  thus :  If  thou 
wouldst  get  out  of  a  doubting  state,  get  out  of  an  idle  state ;  if  thou  wouldst  get 
out  of  a  trembling  state,  get  out  of  an  indifferent,  lukewarm  state  ;  for  lukewarm- 
ness  and  doubting,  and  laziness  and  trembling,  very  naturally  go  hand  in  hand. 
Be  diligent  in  your  faith.  Take  care  that  your  faith  is  of  the  right  kind — that  it  is 
not  a  creed,  but  a  credence.  Take  care  that  your  faith  results  from  necessity — that 
you  believe  in  Christ  because  you  have  nothing  else  to  believe  in ;  and  give 
diligence  to  thy  courage.  Labour  to  get  virtue ;  plead  with  God  that  He  would 
give  thee  the  face  of  a  lion,  that  thou  mayest  never  be  afraid  of  any  enemy.  And 
having,  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  obtained  that,  study  well  the  Scriptures  and 
get  knowledge,  for  a  knowledge  of  doctrine  will  tend  very  much  to  confirm  your 
faith.  Try  to  understand  God's  Word ;  get  a  sensible,  spiritual  idea  of  it.  And 
when  thou  hast  done  this,  "  Add  to  thy  knowledge  temperance."  Take  heed  to  thy 
body :  be  temperate  there.  Take  heed  to  thy  soul :  be  temperate  there.  Be  not 
drunken  with  pride.  Be  not  passionate :  be  not  carried  away  by  every  wind  of 
doctrine.  Get  temperance,  and  then  add  to  it  by  God's  Holy  Spirit  patience ; 
ask  Him  to  give  thee  that  patience  which  endureth  affliction,  which,  when  it 
is  tried,  shall   come  forth   as  gold.      And   when   you   have  that,  get  godliness. 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

III.  The  apostle's  eeasons  why  you  should  make  your  calling  and  election 
SURE.  I  put  in  one  of  my  own  to  begin  with.  It  is  because,  as  I  have 
said,  it  will  make  you  so  happy.  Men  who  doubt  their  calling  and  election 
cannot  be  full  of  joy ;  but  the  happiest  saints  are  those  who  know  and  believe 
it.  But  now  for  Peter's  reasons.  1,  Because  "  if  ye  do  these  things  ye  shall 
never  fall."  "Perhaps,"  says  one,  "in  attention  to  election  we  may  forget  our 
daily  walk,  and  like  the  old  philosopher  who  looked  up  to  the  stars  we  may 
walk  on  and  tumble  into  the  ditch !  "  "  Nay,  nay,"  says  Peter,  "  if  you  take  care 
of  your  calling  and  election,  you  shall  not  trip  ;  but,  with  your  eyes  up  there,  look- 
ing for  your  calling  and  election,  God  will  take  care  of  your  feet,  and  you  shall 
never  fall."  2.  And  now  the  other  reason.  "For  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered 
unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  Just  one  thought  more.  It  is  said  that  the  entrance  is  to  be  "  ministered 
to  us."  That  gives  me  a  sweet  hint.  Christ  will  open  the  gates  of  heaven  ;  but 
the  heavenly  train  of  virtues — the  works  which  follow  us — will  go  up  with  us  and 
minister  an  entrance  to  us.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  nature,  possibility,  duty,  and 
means  of  the  assurance  of  one^s  effectual  calling  : — I.  It  is  not  only  possible,  but 
a  duty  in  Christians,  to  endeavour  after  an  assurance  of  their  effectuaij 
CALLING  AND  ELECTION.  1.  When  wc  say  a  believer  may  and  ought  to  be  assured 
of  his  calling  and  election,  we  do  not  mean  as  if  of  his  own  self  he  could  have  this 
Divine  persuasion.  As  it  is  with  the  colours  that  are  the  object  of  the  sight,  though 
they  be  never  so  good  and  visible,  yet  if  there  be  no  light  the  eye  cannot  see  them. 
Thus  it  is  here :  though  there  be  never  such  excellent  graces,  and  though  God  hath 
wrought  a  wonderful  change  in  thee,  yet  thou  art  not  able  to  see  it  till  the  Spirit  of 
God  enable  thee.  2.  The  soul  of  a  man,  being  a  rational  and  spiritual  substance, 
hath  two  kinds  of  acts.  There  are,  first,  the  direct  acts  of  the  soul,  whereby  it  is 
carried  out  immediately  and  directly  to  some  object.  And  there  are,  secondly, 
reflex  acts,  whereby  the  soul  considers  and  takes  notice  of  what  acts  it  doth.  It  is 
as  if  the  eye  were  turned  inward  to  see  itself  (1  John  ii.  3).  So  that  when  we 
believe  in  God,  that  is  a  direct  act  of  the  soul ;  when  we  repent  of  sin,  because 
God  is  dishonoured,  that  is  a  direct  act ;  but  when  we  know  that  we  do  believe,  and 
that  we  do  repent,  this  is  a  reflex  act.  Now,  whether  this  certainty  or  assurance 
be  a  certainty  of  faith,  or  of  sense,  or  rather  mixed  of  both,  I  shall  not  dispute. 
3.  This  assurance  is  a  privilege  which  may  be  had,  and  it  is  our  sin  if  we  breathe 
not  after  it,  or  do  anything  that  may  justly  fill  our  hearts  with  doubts  and  difiidence. 
Yet  it  is  not  of  absolute  necessity  to  salvation.  4.  Neither  yet  is  this  assurance  the 
apostle  presses  us  unto  such  as  admits  of  no  doubts,  no  temptations  or  oppositions 
by  Satan.  II.  Consider  what  are  those  effects  of  grace  which,  if  a  man  walk 
IN,  he  may  be  partaker  of  this  privilege:  not  but  that  God  by  His  absolute 
sovereignty,  and  for  holy  ends,  may  leave  the  most  circumspect  Christians  in 
darkness,  without  any  light,  as  it  was  in  Job.  And  the  prophet  intimateth,  "  Who 
is  among  you  that  feareth  God,  and  hath  no  light,  walking  in  darkness?"  (Isa.  1. 10.) 
1.  We  must  give  all  diligence  and  heed  to  the  obtaining  of  this  privilege.  We  must 
make  it  our  business ;  it  must  be  importunately  begged  for  in  prayer.  2.  The  way 
to  obtain  this  assurance  is  a  fruitful,  fervent,  and  active  walking  in  all  the  ways  of 
holiness.  "  If  these  things  be  in  you  and  abound,"  saith  the  apostle.  The  sparks 
that  are  ready  to  go  out  do  hardly  evidence  there  is  any  fire.  We  doubt  of  life 
when  we  feel  scarce  any  breath.  And  thus  it  is  here.  The  more  negligent  and 
lazy  thou  art  in  the  ways  of  godliness,  the  less  certainty  must  needs  be  in  thee. 
And  the  reason  is  plain  ;  for  if  gi-aces  exercised  be  the  sign  or  seal,  then  the  more 
these  appear,  the  more  thriving  and  flourishing  they  are,  the  surer  testimonies 
there  will  be  of  thy  calling  and  election.  'S.  Another  way  to  preserve  or  obtain  this 
assurance  is  humility  and  meekness,  going  out  of  ourselves,  avoiding  all  presump- 
tion, all  self-righteousness  (Phil.  ii.  12).  4.  This  assurance  is  obtained  and 
preserved  by  a  tender  watchfulness  against  all  known  sin.  For  it  being  sin  only 
that  separates  between  God  and  the  soul,  this  only  raiseth  up  the  great  gulf,  there- 
fore all  witting  and  willing  allowing  of  this  is  a  direct  destroyer  of  all  assurance. 
5.  Another  way  to  obtain  this  is  to  take  heed  of  grieving  the  Spirit  of  God  or 
quenching  the  motions  of  it.  For  seeing  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  witnesseth, 
and  it  is  the  Spirit  that  feeleth,  if  we  would  have  assurance,  we  are  to  nourish  it, 
to  do  nothing  that  may  resist  and  repel  it.  6.  If  thou  wouldst  attain  to  this  assur- 
ance, acquaint  thyself  well  with  the  covenant  of  the  gospel,  with  the  precious 
promises  revealed  there,  with  the  gracious  condescensions  of  God's  love  in  Christ. 
Many  of  the  children  of  God  are  kept  in  a  doubtful  and  perplexed  estate  because  they 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  85 

consider  not  the  riches  of  Christ's  grace  revealed  in  the  gospel.  (Anthony  Burgess.) 
Of  effectual  calling : — I.  I  now  come  to  show  the  great  advantage  of  this 
CERTAINTY.  Where  the  godly  heart  hath  this  holy  assurance  and  persuasion 
wrought  by  God's  Spirit,  there  it  hath  many  helps  which  the  tempted  soul  wanteth. 
1.  Where  there  is  certainty  of  this  heavenly  privilege,  there  the  soul  is  more 
inflamed  and  enlarged  to  love  God.  2.  Certainty  of  our  calling  and  election  will 
breed  much  spiritual  strength  and  heavenly  ability  to  all  graces  and  duties,  to  go 
through  all  relations  with  much  holiness  and  hvely  vigour.  3.  This  certainty  and 
assurance  of  grace  would  exceedingly  keep  up  the  heart  under  all  afflictions  and 
outward  miseries.  4.  This  certainty  of  grace  is  a  strong  and  mighty  buckler 
against  aU  those  violent  assaults  and  temptations  that  the  devil  useth  to  exercise 
the  godly  with.  5.  This  certainty  is  a  special  means  to  breed  contentment  of 
mind,  and  a  thankful,  cheerful  heart  in  every  condition.  6.  This  certainty  of 
grace  is  a  sure  and  special  antidote  against  death  in  all  the  fears  of  it.  This  makes 
the  king  of  terrors  a  king  of  all  consolations ;  for  seeing  that  by  grace  we  are  the 
members  of  Christ,  death  hath  no  more  sting  on  us  than  on  Christ  our  Head.  These 
are  the  advantages.  II.  But  the  godly  heart  may  inquire,  how  sh.4XL  i  know  this 
holt  certainty  and  persuasion  by  God's  Spirit  from  my  own  persuasion,  from  the 
SELF-FLATTERY  THAT  IS  IN  ME  ?  1.  Holy  Certainty  is  kept  up  in  all  exercises  of  grace 
and  constant  tender  avoiding  of  all  known  sin ;  but  presumption  will  agree  with  the 
practice  of  aU  these.  2.  Presumption  is  unwilling  to  be  searched  and  tried.  It 
flieth  from  the  light,  it  cannot  abide  the  touchstone ;  but  this  holy  certainty  loveth 
a  deep  search.  3.  Presumption  beareth  up  a  man's  heart  tiU  a  man  come  to  some 
great  and  extraordinary  calamities,  and  then  this  bubble  vanisheth  away.  Dross 
will  melt  in  the  fire,  but  gold  will  be  the  more  refined.  The  wind  makes  chaff  fly 
away,  but  leaveth  the  corn  more  purified.  4.  Presumption  is  not  opposed  nor 
assaulted  by  the  devil.  Satan  doth  not  tempt  and  labour  to  drive  people  out  of  it, 
but  nourisheth  them  in  it.  But  out  of  this  holy  certainty  the  devil's  main  scope  is 
to  drive  them.  5.  It  is  the  sure  character  of  presumption  that  it  divideth  the 
means  and  the  end.  It  hopes  for  such  privileges,  though  it  never  do  the  duties. 
Now  this  is  not  assurance,  but  a  presumptuous  delusion,  whereas  you  see  this  text 
is,  to  give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  sure.  6.  Presumption  is  but  a  self- 
deceiving,  false  logic  that  a  man  deceiveth  himself  with.  Whereas  you  heard  this 
certainty  is  a  knowledge  wrought  by  God's  Spirit  in  us.  7.  The  presumptuous 
man  is  full  of  haughty  arrogance  and  proud  preferring  of  himself,  contemning  and 
undervaluing  others.  Thus  that  Pharisee,  "Lord,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men,"  &c.  Whereas  true  assurance  is  accompanied  with  deep  humility  and 
a  pitiful  respect  to  others.  III.  In  the  next  place  it  may  be  questioned  what  that 
GODLY  PERSON  SHOULD  DO  WHO  HATH  NOT  THIS  ASSURANCE  ?  Though  gracc  be  in  him, 
he  knoweth  it  not,  yea,  he  thinketh  the  clean  contrary.  Now  to  such  an  one 
we  say,  let  him  walk  in  a  faith  of  adherence  and  dependence  when  he  hath  none 
of  these  evidences.  This  the  Scripture  calls  trusting,  rolUng,  leaning,  and  staying 
of  the  soul  upon  God,  And  this  dependence  of  faith  is  far  more  noble  than  the 
assurance  of  faith.  1.  In  assurance,  there  I  go  on  in  holy  duties  and  love  of  God, 
because  of  the  sensible  sweetness  and  delight  that  I  have ;  but  in  dependence, 
there  I  trust  in  God  when  I  have  no  sense  or  feeling.  2.  To  depend  and  wait  on  God 
though  darkness  be  in  thy  soul,  argueth  thy  faith  more  firm  and  strong.  It  was  an 
high  expression  in  Job,  "  Though  He  kiU  me  I  will  trust  in  Him."  Do  not  then  give 
over  thy  constancy  in  holy  duties ;  be  not  discouraged  in  waiting  on  God  for 
assurance,  for  He  will  at  last  cause  the  sun  to  arise,  and  the  dark  night  to  fly 
away.  (Ibid.)  Assurance : — One  may  be  a  believer  in  Christ  and  not  have 
attained  to  a  full  assurance  of  salvation.  Faith  has  a  beginning  and  an  end.  It 
may  be  weak  or  strong,  partial  or  complete.  Believers  are  enjoined  to  make  their 
calling  and  election  sure.  The  distinction  is  an  important  one.  "  Many  are  called, 
but  few  chosen."  The  calling  we  regard  as  simply  the  Word  of  God,  or  the  truth 
of  God,  as  objectively  put  before  the  mind.  To  make  that  sure  is  to  make  perfectly 
certain  to  ourselves  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.  More  particularly,  that 
Word  sets  before  us  the  whole  true  character  of  God,  the  whole  true  condition  of 
man,  and  the  whole  truth  as  to  the  way  of  salvation.  One  must  understand  the 
message,  or  comprehend  to  some  extent  the  terms  of  the  invitation.  He  must  be 
sure  that  it  is  really  addressed  to  him,  and  that  he  is  entitled  to  accept  it  as  such. 
Having  satisfied  himself  of  that,  he  must  give  himself  to  the  more  complete  under- 
standing of  it.  How  long,  then,  does  it  take  one  to  know  the  truth  of  the  call, 
objectively  considered — the  truth  concerning  God,  one's  self,  and  the  way  of  salva- 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

tion  ?  It  will  take  him  to  the  end  of  time,  neither  more  nor  less.  The  holiest  man 
that  ever  lived  could  not  spare  a  single  moment  of  the  whole  time  given  to  him  by 
God  from  the  work  of  making  his  calling  sure.  The  way  of  salvation  is  simply  the 
life-long  process  of  getting  into  the  truth,  and,  ever  as  we  realise  that,  the  corre- 
sponding process  of  bringing  it  forth  into  the  life  again.  It  is  here  that  the  calling 
glides  into  the  election.  To  make  one's  election  sure  is  the  additional  matter  of 
attaining  to  perfect  certainty  as  to  one's  individual  and  personal  acceptance  with 
God.  This  is  the  subjective  aspect.  It  brings  into  view  the  living  and  growing 
relation  of  one's  own  spirit  and  character  to  the  truth.  It  is  an  axiom  that  the 
Word  of  God  is  true.  It  is  also  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  But  it  is  quite  another 
question  as  to  whether  a  given  individual  is  among  the  elect  or  no.  The  elect  are 
those  whom  God  chooses  as  His  own,  and  the  only  way  by  which  we  can  either  be 
among  the  elect  or  know  that  we  are,  is  the  way  of  choosing  from  day  to  day  the 
will  of  God  as  our  will  or  rule  of  life.  The  faith  that  saves  and  leads  to  assurance 
is  declared  in  Scripture  to  have  two  aspects.  It  is  "  the  substance  "  or  fundamental 
condition  of  a  great  and  manifold  hope ;  the  hope  of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  good 
over  evil  and  of  truth  over  error ;  the  hope  of  the  personal  appearing  of  the  great 
God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  hope  of  our  individual  acceptance  in 
His  sight.  It  is  also  "the  evidence"  in  the  present,  that  these  hopes  will  be 
realised.  As  the  substance,  it  is  a  life-long  thought,  and  as  the  evidence,  a  life-long 
work.  As  both  in  one  it  is  an  ever-growing  spiritual  reality,  identical  with  the  life- 
long duty  of  making  our  calling  and  election  sure.  (F.  Ferguson.)  An  entrance 
shall  be  ministered. — Entrance  into  the  kingdom : — I.  The  passage.  1.  The  sure- 
ness.  (1)  The  reason — "for."  As  if  to  say:  There  are  some  blind,  and  forget  the 
way  of  truth :  what  then  ?  Therefore  make  your  election  sure.  Why  ?  For  if 
je  do  so  ye  shall  never  fall.  How  are  we  sure  that  we  shall  not  fall  ?  For  so  you 
have  a  full  entrance  to  blessedness.  (2)  The  means — "  so."  Make  your  election 
sure ;  and  by  living  soberly  and  righteously  endeavour  the  ascertaining  to  your  own 
hearts,  that  God  hath  decreed  you  to  salvation ;  for  so  you  shall  have  a  free 
entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  2.  The  readiness — "  an  entrance,"  without 
trouble.  (1)  The  entrance  to  grace  and  mercy  is  open,  and  ready  to  entertain  all 
entering  feet  (Eev.  iii.  7).  (2)  The  removal  of  such  impediments  as  might  hinder 
this  passage,  (a)  The  world  is  none  of  the  least ;  and  in  this  there  is  a  double 
opposition  ;  on  the  left  hand  indigence,  on  the  right  opulence,  (h)  The  flesh  steps 
in  next  to  bar  up  our  entrance.  There  is  no  man  hath  a  worse  friend  than  he 
brings  from  home,  (c)  The  devil  is  a  master  antagonist,  a  watchful  and  wrathful 
enemy,  (d)  Death  is  the  last  enemy,  but  not  the  least.  Yet  to  the  faithful  that 
fiend  is  a  friend  (rhil.  i.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  54,  55).  (3)  The  matter  of  this  entrance. 
It  consists  in  two  things,  (a)  Our  union  with  Christ.  If  the  Head  be  entered,  the 
members  cannot  be  denied,  {h)  Our  communion  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The 
fitness,  or  preparation.  We  are  not  beholden  to  ourselves  for  this  entrance  :  it  is 
"  ministered "  to  us.  (1)  The  means  is  ministered,  therefore  it  is  called  the 
ministry  of  the  Word,  the  ministration  of  the  sacraments.  (2)  The  apprehension 
of  this  means  is  ministered,  for  it  is  given  to  us  to  believe  (Phil.  i.  29).  (3)  The 
object  of  this  apprehension  is  ministered,  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  vi.  23).  4.  The  easiness — "  abundantly."  The  gate  is  not 
narrow  in  itself,  but  only  in  respect  of  unqualified  enterers.  It  is  too  low  for  lofty 
and  aspiring  ambition,  too  narrow  for  pride,  too  straight  for  covetousness ;  but  to 
faith  it  is  broad.  If  the  worldling  would  untwist  his  riches  by  charity,  and  the 
sinner  untwist  his  sins  by  repentance,  they  may  abundantly  enter.  II.  The  palace. 
1.  Its  royalty.  It  is  the  Lord's  own  "kingdom."  2.  Its  immutability.  The 
honour  of  earthly  princes  is  often  laid  in  the  dust ;  but  this  is  an  eternal  kingd;.iii. 
The  royalty  of  Christ  is  absolute,  independent,  universal,  and  everlasting  (Luke  i.  33). 
It  is  fit  that  He  should  be  so  honoured  who  was  so  humbled.  Our  sin  brought 
Him  exceeding  low,  let  His  own  righteousness  exalt  Him  exceeding  high. 
(1)  The  supremacy  of  the  King.  By  comparing  earthly  things  with  heavenly, 
we  may  observe  the  excellency  of  that  regiment  in  which  we  stand :  it  is 
a  kingdom ;  and  the  dignity  of  the  Governor :  He  is  an  eternal  King  (1  Tim. 
i.  17).  All  inferior  kingdoms  are  derived  from  Him,  and  subordinate  to  Him 
(1  Tim.  vi.  15).  (2)  The  security  of  the  subjects.  We  have  a  King  to  rule 
us;  a  King  of  majesty,  a  King  of  mercy;  one  who  can  protect  us  from  all  evil, 
and  supply  us  with  all  good.  (3)  The  felicity  of  this  kingdom,  whose  law  is 
truth,  whose  King  is  the  Trinity,  and  whose  bounds  are  eternity.     (Thos.  Adaim^.) 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  87 

The  abundant  entrance^: — I.  The  first  thing  the  apostle  would  have  them  keep  in 
remembrance  is  the  glokious  state  op  a  Christian  in  eternity.  1.  One 
reason  why  the  glorious  state  of  a  Christian,  either  in  time  or  eternity — in  one  case 
the  kingdom  of  grace,  and  in  the  other  the  kingdom  of  glory — is  called  "  the  king- 
dom of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  is  that  it  is  the  purchase  of  His  blood ; 
it  is  a  purchased  possession.  2.  Then  this  kingdom  may  very  properly  be  called 
"  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  because  it  is  the  work  of  His 
hands.  3.  We  shall  see  then  what  we  do  not  understand  now — the  nature,  the 
office,  the  order,  and  the  actions  of  angels.  4.  We  see  the  glory  of  "  the  kingdom 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  "  in  the  act  of  His  own  exaltation.  5.  But 
there  are  other  peculiarities  in  this  kingdom.  There  are  peculiar  privileges,  which 
the  inhabitants,  and  kings,  and  priests,  and  subjects  of  this  kingdom  enjoy.  One 
of  these  privileges  is  this  :  whatever  we  see  increases  our  happiness  ;  not  only  from 
its  own  excellency,  but  it  increases  our  happiness  because  it  is  mine.  "He  that 
overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things."  There  is  another  thing  which  will  finish 
heaven's  happiness,  and  that  is  that  every  object  is  mine  for  ever.  It  is  not  only 
"  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  but  it  is  "the  everlasting 
kingdom."  H.  We  come  now  to  the  grand  work  of  a  Christl^n  in  time.  What 
is  that?  1.  To  make  sure  work  for  heaven,  we  must  get  a  clear  title  to  heaven. 
■2.  Again,  in  order  that  we  may  make  our  calling  and  election  sure,  we  must  get  a 
personal  meetness  for  heaven,  not  merely  a  title.  III.  How  must  we  do  this  work  ? 
1.  Here  is  the  grand  work ;  all  you  are  to  do  is  to  enter  into  that  work  with  all 
your  hearts — "  Give  diligence."  Exercise  your  given  power  and  improve  your 
given  opportunity  in  removing  impediments.  2.  Again,  exercise  your  given  power, 
and  improve  your  given  opportunity,  in  an  immediate  application  to  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb.  3.  And  then  we  must  yield  to  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for 
without  that  we  can  do  nothing.  IV.  The  motives  to  engage  us  in  the  work  and 
SUPPORT  us  under  IT.  1.  The  all-important  ground  of  this  duty,  and  the  all- 
important  argument  to  engage  us  in  this  duty,  is  eternity.  2.  Another  argument  is, 
the  inestimable  privileges  in  life.  What  are  the  inestimable  privileges  in  life? 
Absolute  security  from  apostacy.  Give  diligence,  and  you  shall  "  never  fall."  3. 
Then  there  is  present  happiness  in  making  our  calling  and  election  sure.  4.  There 
are,  therefore,  inestimable  privileges  in  life  ;  and  there  are  inestimable  advantages 
in  death.  "  For  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the 
everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  (IF.  Dawson.) 
Entrance  into  Christ's  kingdom : — I.  Somewhere  in  the  universe  of  God  Christ 
has  a  glorious  kingdom.  II.  An  entrance  into  this  kingdom  is  the  highest 
destiny  of  mankind.  Here  he  obtains — 1.  The  most  perfect  freedom.  2.  The 
most  exalted  fellowships.  8.  The  most  blessed  progress.  In  knowledge,  power, 
dignity,  usefulness.  III.  The  more  moral  virtues  we  attain,  the  more  abundant 
WILL  BE  OUR  ENTRANCE.  (HomUist.)  Getting  into  harbour  : — There  is  land  ahead, 
and  the  spiritual  mariner  knows  that  when  that  land  is  reached  his  toils  will  cease 
for  ever.  The  picture  which  Peter  here  had  before  his  mind's  eye  was  purely 
nautical.  His  idea  was  that  of  a  ship  which,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  was 
entering  with  full  sail  into  her  destined  haven.  All  on  board  are  hopeful  and 
joyous.  Nothing  has  happened  to  maim  either  the  vessel  or  the  crew.  The 
crowds  on  the  beach  seem  to  be  almost  within  hail.  I.  The  country  to  which  we 
ARE  bound.  1.  It  is  gloriously  governed.  It  is  a  "kingdom";  and  it  is  "the 
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ "  ;  that  is,  He  reigns  and  rules  in 
it.  (1)  He  reigns  by  right  of  Divine  authority.  (2)  He  reigns  by  right  of  irresis- 
tible conquest.  What  a  glorious  victor  is  our  King !  (a)  He  conquered  for  us. 
Sin,  death,  and  hell,  allied  against  Him  for  our  hurt,  were  completely  routed  by 
His  almighty  arm.  (b)  He  conquered  in  us.  The  old  rebel  heart  resisted  Him  to 
the  utmost,  but  He  ultimately  overcame.  The  day  of  our  subjugation  was  one  of 
the  happiest  we  ever  knew.  (3)  He  reigns  by  right  of  universal  suffrage.  Loyalty 
to  the  King  is,  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  a  rule  that  knows  not  a  single  exception. 

2.  It  is  permanently  established.  It  is  a  "  kingdom "  in  which  there  are  no 
republicans,  and  it  is  an  "  everlasting  kingdom,"  in  which  there  are  no  revolutions. 

3.  It  is  unspeakably  blessed.  The  King  is  "  our  Saviour  "  1  The  term  is  very 
comprehensive.  In  every  conceivable  sense  King  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  of  His 
people.  II.  The  welcome  we  may  anticipate  there.  1.  We  may  expect  an 
entrance.  Apart  from  the  common  contingencies  of  ordinary  navigation,  there  are 
two  sources  of  danger  sometimes  experienced  on  the  sea.  The  first  is  that,  in 
sailing  to  the  port,  enemies  may  be  met  with  on  the  voyage ;  and  secondly,  in 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

attempting  to  get  to  the  shore,  enemies  may  oppose  the  landing.     2.  Yse  may  expect 
an  entrance  ministered.    And  as  ships  cannot  pass  unchallenged  into  our  national 
harbours,   so  there  is  no  getting    into  heaven    by    stealth.      Each  entrance   ia 
"ministered."     Out  here,  on  the  ocean,  you  may  feel  that  you  are  so  mixed  up 
with  all  the  rest,  that  by  and  by  there  will  be  a  chance  of  sailing  in  with  the 
crowd.    But  it  is  a  fearful  mistake.     Do  not  be  deceived  !     Ships  do  not  enter  that 
harbour  thus.     The  narrow  entrance,  which  you  are  so  fast  approaching,  will  only 
admit  "one  by  one."     Each  soul  must  encounter  the  Divine  scrutiny.     3.  We  may 
expect  an  entrance  ministered  abundantly.     Some  months  ago  a  large  ship  was 
observed,  under  full  sail,  making  for  Kingstown  harbour.     Her  crew  had  discovered 
a  fire  in  her  hold,  and  after  exhausting  themselves  in  attempts  to  get  it  under,  they 
managed,  as  a  last  resource,  to  run  the   vessel  straight   for   the  port.      To  the 
amazement  of  the  people  on  the  shore,  she  came  on,  without  slackening  sail,  until 
she  had  reached  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and  then,  the  sailors  being,  through 
exhaustion,  unable  to  control  her  com'se,  she  came  dashing  right  through  all  the 
ships  that  were  lying  at  anchor,  and  running  burning  on  the  beach,  she  became  a 
total  wreck.     She  reached  the  port,  but  none  could  say  she  had  "  an  abundant 
entrance."     If  he  could  possibly  avoid  it,  no  sailor  would  care  to  finish  a  voyage 
like  that.     But  I  fear  that  many  people  content  themselves  with  a  prospect  of  thus 
getting  into  heaven.     Of  course,  the  poor  fellows  on  board  the  burning  vessel  were 
glad  to  escape  even  though  they  were  "  saved  so  as  by  fire  "  ;  but  they  would  have 
been  far  happier  had  they  succeeded  in  bringing  safely  home  their  vessel  and  her 
cargo.     The  ship  that  receives  the  most  abundant  entrance  is  not  the  one  that  runs 
away  from  every  foe,  lest  she  should  receive  a  scratch  or  lose  a  little  gilt  from  her 
figure-head ;  but  the  vessel  that  receives  abundant  honour  is  she  which,  having 
carried  the  thunders  of  her  country's  guns  into  the  very  strongholds  of  the  foe, 
returns    amid  the   plaudits   of    the  nation  —  like   Nelson's  immortal    Victory — 
covered  with  glory.     Think  of  the  other  shore  !     What  welcomes  await  the  voyager 
within  the  harbour!     How  "  abundantly  "  will  he  be  received  by  those  who  have 
gone  before !     HI.  The  conditions  by  which  it  is  secured.     1.  Faith  in  Christ. 
2.  Life  for  Christ.     The  apostle  says,  "  And  beside  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add 
to  your  faith  virtue,"  &c.   3.  Glory  with  Christ.   This  is  the  fruit  of  which  faith  is  the 
root,  and  of  which  life  for  Christ  is  as  the  tree.     The  sailor  often  meets  with  the 
heaviest  gales  just  before  he  reaches  the  port ;  and  the  Christian  sometimes  finds 
the  tribulation  keener  as  he  approaches  the  kingdom.     But  the  weather  is  not 
always  stormy.     It  is  sometimes  sweetly  calm,  and  at  such  times  many  get  into 
port.      Their   entrance    is    equally    blessed,   for    they  have    passed    through    all 
their  dangers  and  fears  during  the  early  portion  of  the  voyage.     {W.  H.  Burton.) 
Happiness  in  death : — The  apostle  urges  the  manner  of  our  dying — he  would  have 
us  die  not  only  in  a  state  of  salvation,  but  of  peace — and  triumph.    I.  The  state  to 
which  the  Chkistian  looks  foewakd — "  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."     1.  Christians,  we  know  very  little  of  "the  hope  which  is 
laid  up  for  us  in  heaven  "  :  it  is  "  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us."     Two 
things  are  spoken  of  this  kingdom  which  deserve  remark.     1.  The  first  concerns  its 
permanency  and  duration — it  is  "  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour." 
"  The  fashion   of   this  world   passeth   away."     The  Assyrian,  Persian,  Grecian, 
Roman  Empires  arose,  astonished  mankind  for  a  season,  and  disappeared.     2.  It  is 
"  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."    And  what  means 
this  relation  ?   It  is  surely  designed  to  distinguish  Him  from  a  mere  possessor,  and 
to  intimate  peculiar  prerogative,  residence,  administration.     It  is  His  by  claim.    As 
the  Son  of  God  He  is  "  Heir  of  all  things."     He  acquired  it  as  the  reward  of  His 
obedience  and  sufferings.     He  has  now  the  disposal  of  the  oflices  and  privileges  of 
the  empire  among  His  faithful  followers.     This  was  surely  the  idea  of  the  dying 
thief  when  he  prayed,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom." 
He  is  the  Sovereign  ;  and  there  He  rules — not,  as  here,  "  in  the  midst  of  His  ene- 
mies " — no  treason,  no  sedition,  no  disaffection  there.   There  He  reigns  immediately, 
always  in  view,  and  accessible  to  all.     II.  The  desirable  mode  of  admission.     And 
here  we  read  of  an  entrance — ministered — abundantly.     What  is  this  entrance  ? 
Unquestionably — Death.     But  you  should  remember  that  your  entrance  into  the 
invisible  world  is  administered.     Not  only  is  the  will  of  God  concerned  in  the  general 
sentence  of  mortality  pronounced  upon  us,  but  death  always  receives  a  particular  com- 
mission from  Him.     The  circumstance  of  time  is  fixed  by  Him:  "the  number  of 
our  months  is  with  Him."     The  place  is  determined  by  His  purpose.     The  means 
and  the  manner  of  our  removal  are  disposed  by  His  pleasure.     The  death  of  some 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  89 

is  distinguished  by  honours  not  vouchsafed  to  all :  and  this  is  what  the  apostle 
means  by  an  entrance  ministered  unto  us  abundantly.  For  all  do  not  enter  alike. 
Some,  shipwrecked,  are  washed  by  the  surge  half -dead  on  the  shore,  or  reach  it 
clinging  terrified  to  a  plank ;  others,  with  crowded  sails  and  with  a  preserved  cargo 
of  spices  and  perfumes,  beautifully,  gallantly  enter  the  desired  haven.  A  triumph 
was  not  decreed  to  every  Eoman  general  upon  his  return  to  the  capital.  We  may 
observe  a  remarkable  diversity  even  in  the  deaths  of  common  believers.  Some  die 
only  safe ;  while  their  state  is  unknown  to  themselves,  and  suspected  by  others.  In 
some,  hope  and  fear  alternately  prevail.  Some  feel  a  peace  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing— while  some  exult  with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  And  in  these 
is  fulfilled  the  language  of  the  promise,  "  With  gladness  and  rejoicing  shall  they  be 
brought :  they  shall  enter  into  the  King's  palace."  They  will  need  it  themselves. 
It  is  a  new,  a  trying,  and  an  awful  thing  to  die.  They  will  find  dying  to  be  work 
enough,  without  having  doubts  and  fears  to  encounter.  You  should  long  for  this 
also  on  the  behalf  of  others.  This  is  the  last  time  you  can  do  anything  in  serving 
God  in  your  generation  ;  but  by  this  you  may  be  rendered  peculiarly  useful.  Your 
dying  looks  and  your  dying  words  may  make  impressions  which  shall  never  be 
erased.  III.  To  examine  the  condition  upon  which  this  privilege  is  suspended, 
AND  which  is  obviously  HERE  IMPLIED — "  For  SO  an  entrance,"  &c.  This  course 
requires— That  you  should  habituate  yourselves  to  familiar  thoughts  of  death. 
This  will  dissipate  the  terrors  which  arise  from  distance  and  imagination.  This 
will  break  the  force  of  surprise.  And  the  less  powerfully  you  are  attached  to  earthly 
things,  the  more  easy  will  be  your  separation  from  them.  It  requires  that  you 
should  obtain  and  preserve  the  evidences  of  pardon ;  without  these  you  cannot  be 
fearless  and  tranquil  in  the  near  views  of  eternity,  since  "  after  death  is  the  judg- 
ment." Is  he  in  a  condition  to  die  who  has  lived  in  the  practice  of  some  known 
sin,  and  in  the  omission  of  some  known  duty  ?  It  requires  an  attention  to  religion 
in  your  families.  I  pity  that  father  who  will  be  surrounded  when  he  dies  with 
children  whose  minds  he  never  informed,  whose  dispositions  he  never  curbed, 
whose  manners  he  never  guarded.  In  a  word,  it  requires  you  to  live  in  the  strenuous 
cultivation  of  practical  and  progressive  religion.  "  And  besides  this,  giving  all  dili- 
gence, add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  cfcc.  If  there  be  such  differences  among  Christians 
in  dying,  we  may  be  assured  that  there  will  be  inequalities  in  heaven.  What  prepara- 
tion have  you  made  for  a  dying  hour  ?  {W.  Jay.)  An  ahundant  entrance  into 
heaven : — He  had  prayed  for  a  triumphant  death.  One  day,  when  speaking  about 
heaven,  some  one  said,  "  I'll  be  satisfied  if  I  manage  somehow  to  get  in."  "  What! " 
said  Eobert,  pointing  to  a  sunken  vessel  that  had  just  been  dragged  up  the  Tay, 
"  would  you  like  to  be  pulled  into  heaven  by  two  tugs,  like  the  London  yonder?  I 
tell  you  I  would  like  to  go  in  with  all  my  sails  set  and  colours  flying."  {Life  of 
Robert  Annan.) 

Vers.  12-15.  To  put  you  always  in  remembrance. — Pastor  and  people  :— I.  Thk 
pastor's  informing.  1.  His  piety ;  desirous  to  bring  them  to  the  forementioned 
kingdom.  2.  His  vigilance ;  admitting  no  neglect  of  their  souls,  what  discourage- 
ments soever  affront  him.  3.  His  modesty ;  professing  that  he  doth  rather 
remind  than  teach  them.  4.  His  fidelity ;  he  will  do  it  "  always,"  without  weari- 
ness of  that  which  may  tend  to  their  edification  and  comfort.  5.  His  sincerity ; 
he  doth  not  incite  them  to  vain  and  unnecessary  things,  but  "these  things"  that 
build  them  up  to  salvation.  II.  The  people's  proficiency.  1.  Their  illumination. 
2.  Their  confirmation.  No  man  runs  so  fast  but  he  may  need  some  spurring. 
There  is  still  something  that  he  would  teach  and  they  should  learn.  The  horse 
that  would  run  well  of  his  own  mettle  doth  yet  mend  his  pace  by  the  rider's 
encouragement.  {Thos.  Adains.)  The  writer^s  diligence  and  his  readers^  obedi- 
ence : — I.  The  writer's  diligence.  1.  "Wherefore."  Because  the  foundation  of 
eternal  life  is  to  be  laid  here,  and  in  this  life  an  entrance  must  be  made  to  that 
everlasting  kingdom,  or  there  will  be  no  fruition  hereafter ;  therefore  I  will  take  all 
possible  pains  to  prepare  your  souls  for  it.  The  state  future  follows  the  former,  as 
the  upper  building  follows  the  foundation.  2.  "  I  will  not  be  negligent."  His 
diligence  is  well  furthered  by  his  sedulity.  3.  "  To  put  you  in  remembrance."  We 
must  often  be  stirred  up,  line  upon  line,  &c.  4.  "  Always."  This  duty  of  assiduity 
cannot  be  performed  by  any  minister  of  the  gospel  without  a  constant  abiding 
among  his  people.  5.  "  Of  these  things  "—i.e.,  such  as  may  save  your  souls.  The 
minister  must  labour  neither  for  praise  nor  for  purse,  but  for  conscience ;  he  must 
fish  for  souls,  not  for  riches.     There   are  too  many  that  seek  the  Church  goods 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

rather  than  the  Church's  good.  II.  The  people's  obedience.  1.  The  apostle 
takes  for  granted  that  they  understood  these  things  akeady,  and  were  constant  in 
the  assurance  of  the  truth  of  them.  A  happy  progress  !  If  your  mind  be  estabUshed 
in  understanding,  your  heart  in  affecting,  your  Ufe  in  obeying,  blessed  are  you ; 
your  minister  shall  praise  you,  the  Church  will  praise  you,  the  angels  praise  you, 
yea,  you  shall  be  praised  of  Christ  Himself.  2.  This  concession  makes  way  for  a 
further  imposition.  Though  you  know  these  things,  and  be  estabUshed,  yet  you  must 
admit  a  further  confirming  (Rom.  xv.  14,  15).  The  cessation  of  remembrancing 
may  easily  lapse  us  to  forgetfulness.  (Ibid.)  Constant  remembrance : — I.  A 
SATISFACTORY  POSITION.  They  are  commended — 1.  For  proper  knowledge.  "  Ye 
know  them,"  i.e.,  the  practical  bearings  of  the  Christian  religion.  2.  For  genuine 
faith.  "  Established — settled— in  the  truth."  II.  A  hazardous  condition.  The 
higher  a  man  rises,  the  more  Satan  desires  to  sift  him.  1.  The  natural  tendency 
of  fallen  nature.  2.  The  many  and  urgent  temptations  to  leave  even  what  we 
know.  III.  A  JUDICIOUS  precaution.  "  I  will  .  .  .  put  you  always  in  remem- 
brance." 1.  The  necessity  for  this  course  ought  to  reconcile  us  to  the  constant 
repetition  of  even  the  most  elementary  truths  of  religion.  2.  Christianity  consists 
of  two  parts — faith  and  practice.  Both  are  easily  forgotten  or  neglected.  Other 
things  absorb  the  mind.  [Homilist.)  Ministers  as  remembrancers  : — The  very 
inwardness  of  the  principal  truths  of  religion  makes  our  being  frequently  reminded 
of  them  so  much  the  more  necessary,  and  renders  the  ministrations  of  a  Christian 
pastor  so  essential  to  our  spiritual  welfare.  Nay,  further,  our  very  familiarity  with 
Christian  truths  makes  the  office  of  the  minister  as  a  remembrancer  not  less 
necessary.  Even  the  more  we  know  of  them,  the  more  we  need  to  be  reminded  of 
them.  But  why  is  this  continual  remembrance  of  religious  truths  so  essential  to 
the  Church,  that  Christ  has  not  only  appointed  a  special  order  of  remembrancers, 
but  has  also  instituted  holy  mysteries  as  sacraments  of  commemoration  ?  Because 
only  as  truths  live  within  the  mind  can  they  be  influential  on  the  heart  and  conduct. 
And  only  as  we  are  continually  reminded  of  them  do  they  gain  this  hfe  within  us. 
It  is  not  enough  to  have  received  truths,  we  must  feel  them.  We  are  living  daily 
in  a  world  of  sense  ;  we  need  to  be  transferred  continually  into  the  world  of  spirit. 
We  see  around  us  the  vanities  of  time  ;  we  need  to  have  heaven  opened  to  our  gaze, 
that  we  may  behold  the  grand  realities  of  eternity.  The  grand  obstacle  to  all 
religion  and  holiness  is  sense — the  Uving  in  the  present  and  the  visible,  and  therefore 
for  the  present  and  the  visible.  The  grand  method  of  deliverance,  therefore,  from  this 
obstacle  is  faith.  I  put  you  in  remembrance  that  you  are  the  creatures  of  the  one  living 
and  true  God.  I  put  you  in  remembrance  that  before  this  God,  to  whom  you  are 
thus  accountable,  you  stand  charged  by  His  most  righteous  law  as  guilty  sinners. 
I  put  you  in  remembrance  that  this  same  God,  whom  you  have  thus  displeased,  and 
before  whom  you  stand  guilty,  is  very  holy  and  yet  very  merciful.  I  put  you  in 
remembrance  that  in  consequence  of  this  compassion  this  same  God — so  holy,  yet 
so  merciful — sent  down  His  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world  to  take  your  place,  to 
bear  your  sins.  I  put  you  in  remembrance  that  this  pursuit  of  personal  moral 
excellence  and  holy  character  can  be  successfully  begun,  continued,  and  completed 
by  you  only  as  you  obtain  the  influence  and  help,  the  life,  the  love,  and  the  power 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  (r.  Griffith,  M.A.)  Established  in  the  present  truth. — 
Present  truth : — I.  The  gospel  speaks  of  a  present  reconciliation  of  God  to  man. 
II.  Christians  have  a  present  life  in  Christ.     III.  Present  reconciliation  in 

THE    present   life    MEANS    PRESENT   CONFESSION.       IV.    We    HAVE    A    PRESENT    HEAVEN. 

{A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  Shortly  I  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle. — The  shortness 
of  our  life  : — I.  From  this  notion  of  putting  off  our  bodies  it  will  appear  that — ^We 
DO  IN  REALITY  CONSIST  OF  BODY  AND  SOUL,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  religion.  If 
we  were  all  body,  the  pleasures  and  interests  of  the  body  would  be  our  supreme 
happiness  ;  but  since  we  have  a  soul  to  govern  the  motions  of  the  body,  it  must  be 
our  wisdom  and  our  interest  to  take  diligent  heed  of  that  soul,  and  not  suffer  the 
body  to  engross  all  our  care.  A  creature  that  is  made  of  two  distinct  parts  cannot 
be  completely  happy  by  providing  for  one  part  only.  Our  care  of  the  life  of  the 
soul  will  oblige  us  to  take  care  of  any  hurt  or  mischief  that  may  befall  it,  as  we  see 
it  does  in  our  bodies.  Again,  do  we  bestow  much  time  and  labour  upon  adorning 
our  bodies,  it  is  abundantly  more  for  our  interest  that  we  spare  a  portion  of  them  to 
the  soul,  in  exalting  that  with  wisdom  and  holiness.  II.  This  observation  that  we 
are  to  put  oft  our  bodies  will  instruct  us  in  the  dignity  and  superiority  of  the 
SOUL  above  the  body.  The  soul  herself  suffers  nothing  by  this  separation,  but 
is  made  more  glorious  by  it.     The  soul  is  the  seat  of  knowledge  and  sensation. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  91 

and  the  body  is  very  insignificant  without  it.  The  soul,  therefore,  is  the  best 
part  of  us.  The  body  has  no  life  without  the  soul,  but  the  soul  has  life 
though  it  be  stripped  of  body.  How,  then,  can  we  justify  our  neglect  of 
the  soul  and  our  unmeasurable,  our  most  unreasonable  affection  for  the  body  ? 
III.    Are  we    constantly  apprehensive  that  we    must  leave  our  bodies?      This 

SHOULD  TEACH  US  NOT  TO  VALUE  OUESELVES  UPON  ANT  BODILY  ACCOMPLISHMENTS  AND 
QUALIFICATIONS,  NOR  TO  ALLOW  TOO  LARGE  A  SHARE  OF  OUR  PAINS  AND  TIME  IN  SEARCHING 
AFTER  THEM,  BUT  TO  PURIFY  BOTH  SOUL  AND  BODY,  AND  TO  PREPARE  THEM  FOR  A  HAPPY 

RECEPTION  INTO  THE  OTHER  WORLD.  It  is  absurd  to  boast  or  grow  proud  of  things 
which  we  are  soon  to  part  with,  or  be  very  eager  to  obtain  what  we  are  sure  we 
cannot  hold  for  a  long  time.  The  ornaments  of  sobriety  and  temperance,  humility 
and  meekness,  charity,  wisdom,  and  holiness,  will  stand  us  in  greatest  stead  when 
our  bodies  have  left  us.  And  nothing  but  they  will  do  us  service.  (R.  Warren,  D.D.) 
The  shortness  of  human  life  : — 1.  "  I  know  " — not  perhaps  precisely  the  day,  or  the 
place,  or  the  manner.  But  death  is  not  a  stranger  to  my  thoughts  ;  my  account  is 
cast  up,  I  am  ready.  2.  "  That  I  must  put  off,"  or  lay  down ;  willingly,  not  on 
compulsion ;  not  pulled  down,  but  laid  down.  It  is  a  metaphor  drawn  from  a 
wager;  the  faithful  man  doth  wager,  and  pawn  his  soul  to  God.  3.  "This  my 
tabernacle" — not  my  castle,  or  strong  tower,  or  standing  house;  but  a  tent,  a 
movable,  a  tabernacle.  4.  "  Shortly."  The  time  is  not  so  far  off  that  I  dream  not 
of  it ;  not  likely  to  happen  in  another  age,  and  creeping  on  by  slow  degrees.  The 
sun  is  not  descending,  but  ready  to  set  ;  the  messenger  knocks  at  the  door  ;  the 
clock  runs  upon  the  last  minute  ;  the  epilogue  is  on  the  stage  ;  the  taper  at  the  last 
glimpse  ;  the  oak  falling  under  the  latest  blow  of  the  axe.  5.  "  As  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hath  showed  me."  It  is  a  shame  for  me  to  be  unprepared  when  such  a 
Prophet  hath  certified  me,  both  in  prediction  and  example  showing  the  way.  I.  A 
RESOLUTION.  "  Knowing."  The  assurance  of  unavoidable  death  is  a  doctrine  well 
known.  Make  a  virtue  of  necessity ;  offer  God  that  for  a  gift,  which  you  are  bound 
to  pay  as  a  debt.  II.  A  dissolution.  1,  Personal.  "  I " — though  a  preacher,  an 
apostle,  &c.  These  singular  deductions  out  of  universal  propositions,  are  profitable 
to  men,  and  acceptable  to  God.  (1)  Seeing  we  must  die,  do  you  pray  for  us,  that 
we  may  do  your  souls  good  while  we  live  (Eph.  vi.  18,  19).  (2)  Seeing  our  life  is  so 
short,  do  you  apprehend  the  means  while  it  lasteth  (Heb.  iii.  45).  2.  Necessary. 
"  I  must."  If  heaven  were  to  be  had  upon  earth,  saints  should  not  dwell  in  taber- 
nacles. 3.  Voluntary.  "  Put  off."  The  apostle  calls  himself  a  depository,  that 
hath  a  jewel  committed  to  him  on  trust,  which  he  is  willing  to  surrender.  4. 
Instant.  "  Shortly."  (1)  The  less  space  a  man  hath  allowed  for  his  business,  the 
more  he  should  ply  it.  The  fewer  days,  the  fruitfuller  lessons.  (2)  The  words  of 
dying  men  have  been  most  emphatical,  most  effectual.  The  last  words  of  good  men 
are  best,  as  the  last  glare  of  the  sun  going  down  most  clear.  An  admonition  uttered  by 
such  a  teacher,  at  such  a  time,  to  such  an  auditory,  challenges  good  attention,  great 
devotion.  III.  A  revelation.  "  Even  as  our  Lord,"  &c.  1.  Those  who  refer  it 
to  the  manner,  conceive  this  revelation  to  be  given  him  (John  xxi.  18, 19).  2.  They 
that  refer  it  to  the  time  of  his  dying,  understand  it  thus :  That  Peter  should  die,  he 
knew  in  general ;  that  he  should  die  a  martyr,  he  knew  in  particular  ;  but  that  he 
should  die  shortly  he  could  not  know,  except  by  some  later  revelation,  in  special. 
It  is  probable  that  where  Peter  wrote  this  Epistle,  even  there  he  received  this  revela- 
tion. 3.  Now  howsoever  an  apostle  had  some  special  premonstrance  of  the  near- 
ness of  his  end,  yet  this  is  not  common,  though  old  age  and  consumptions  be  certain 
f  orewarners  of  approaching  death.  We,  too,  have  the  more  preparation,  by  how  much 
we  have  the  less  revelation  conjcerning  the  time  and  circumstances  of  our  death. 
{Thos.  Adams.)  Putting  off  the  bodily  tabernacle  : — 1.  His  exemplary  industry 

and  diligence  in  his  ministerial  work.  (1)  The  quaUty  of  his  work,  which  was  "  to 
stir  them  up  by  putting  them  in  remembrance,"  to  keep  the  heavenly  flame  of  love 
and  zeal  lively  upon  the  altar  of  their  hearts.  He  well  knew  what  a  sleepy  disease 
the  best  Christians  are  troubled  with,  and  therefore  he  had  need  to  be  stirring  them 
up,  and  awaking  them  to  their  duty.  (2)  The  constancy  of  his  work,  "  As  long  as  I 
am  in  this  tabernacle."  The  body  is  called  a  tabernacle,  in  respect  of  its  moveable- 
ness  and  frailty,  and  in  opposition  to  that  house,  "  eternal  in  the  heavens."  And 
it  is  observable  how  he  limits  his  serviceableness  to  them.  Death  puts  an  end  to 
aU  our  ministerial  usefulness  ;  but  till  that  time  he  judged  it  meet  to  be  aiding  their 
faith  ;  our  life  and  labour  must  end  together.  2.  The  motive  stimulating  him  to 
this  dihgence ;  "  knowing  that  I  must  shortly  put  off  this  tabernacle,  even  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  hath  shewed  me."   (1)  He  reflects  upon  the  speediness  or  near  approach 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

of  his  death.  "  I  must  (shortly)  put  off  this  my  tabernacle  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  6).  (2)  The 
necessity  of  his  death :  It  is  not  I  may,  but  I  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle. 
(3)  The  voluntariness  of  his  death  ;  for  voluntariness  is  consistent  enough  with  the 
necessity  of  the  event.  He  saith  not,  "I  must  be  torn,  or  rent,  by  violence  from  it "  ; 
but  "I  must  depose,  or  lay  it  down."  The  law  of  mortality  binds  all,  good  and  bad, 
young  and  old,  the  most  useful  and  desirable  saints  whom  the  world  can  worst  spare, 
as  well  as  useless  and  undesirable  sinners  (Eom.  viii.  10).  The  continuance  of 
these  our  tabernacles,  or  bodies,  is  short,  whether  we  consider  them  absolutely  or 
comparatively.  1.  Absolutely.  If  they  should  stand  seventy  or  eighty  years,  whic]? 
is  the  longest  duration  (Psa.  xc.  10),  how  soon  wiU  that  time  run  out!  2.  Com- 
paratively. Let  us  compare  our  time  in  these  tabernacles.  (1)  Either  with  eternity, 
or  with  Him  who  inhabits  it,  and  it  shrinks  up  into  nothing  (Psa.  xxxix.  5).  Or 
(2)  with  the  duration  of  the  bodies  of  men  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  when  they 
lived  many  hundred  years.  The  reasons  of  putting  off  the  earthly  tabernacle  so 
soon,  are — 1.  The  law  of  God,  or  His  appointment.  2.  The  providence  of  God 
ordering  it  suitably  to  this  appointment.  And  both  these  in  pursuance  of  a  double 
design.  (1)  By  dissolving  the  tabernacles  of  wicked  men,  God  pays  that  debt  of 
justice  owing  to  the  first  Adam's  sinful  posterity  (Rom.  vi.  23).  (2)  By  cutting  off 
the  lives  of  good  men,  God  pays  to  Christ  the  reward  of  His  sufferings,  the  end  of 
His  death  which  was  to  bring  many  sons  to  glory  (Heb.  ii.  10).  Inference  1.  Must 
we  put  off  these  tabernacles  ?  Is  death  necessary  and  inevitable  ?  Then  it  is  our 
wisdom  to  sweeten  to  ourselves  that  cup  which  we  must  drink  ;  and  make  that  as 
pleasant  to  us  as  we  can  which  we  know  cannot  be  avoided.  Inference  2.  Must  we 
put  off  these  tabernacles  of  flesh  ?  How  necessary  is  it  that  every  soul  look  in 
season,  and  make  provision  for  another  habitation  ?  Inference  3.  Must  we  put  off 
our  tabernacles,  and  that  shortly  ?  What  a  spur  is  this  to  a  diligent  redemption 
and  improvement  of  time  ?  You  have  but  a  little  time  in  these  tabernacles ;  what 
pity  is  it  to  waste  much  out  of  a  little  !  Inference  4.  Must  we  shortly  put  off  these 
our  tabernacles  ?  Then  slack  your  pace  and  cool  yourselves ;  be  not  too  eager  in 
the  prosecution  of  earthly  designs.  Inference  5.  If  we  must  shortly  put  off  these 
tabernacles,  then  the  groaning  and  mourning  time  of  all  believers  is  but  short ;  how 
heavy  soever  their  burden  be,  yet  they  shall  carry  it  but  a  little  way.  Inference 
6.  Must  you  shortly  put  off  those  tabernacles  ?  Then  spare  them  not  whilst  you 
have  them,  but  employ  them  for  God  with  all  diligence.  Inference  7.  Look  beyond 
this  embodied  state,  and  learn  to  live  now  as  you  hope  to  live  shortly  ;  begin  to  be 
what  you  expect  to  be.     [John  Fluvel.)         Man's  earthly  mode  of  being  ; — I.  Here 

IS  A  FELT  DUTY  CONNECTED  WITH  THIS  MODE  OF  BEING.       "  I  think  it  meet,  aS  loUg  aS  I 

am  in  this  tabernacle,  to  stir  you  up,"  <fec.  The  spiritual  excitation  of  the  Christian 
soul.  He  sought  to  put  Christians  in  mind  of  five  things  which  he  refers  to  in  the 
context :  That  spiritual  excellence  is  the  great  end  of  Christianity  (vers.  3,4);  that 
spiritual  excellence  is  progressive  in  its  nature  (vers.  5,  7)  ;  that  it  requires  very 
diligent  cultivation  (vers.  5,  10)  ;  that  it  is  the  only  guarantee  of  salvation  (ver.  9)  ; 
and  that  it  will  ultimately  meet  with  a  glorious  reward  (ver.  11).  Now  there  are 
three  important  things  implied  in  the  apostle's  aim — 1.  A  paramount  necessity  for 
the  Christian  ever  to  feel  these  things.  His  own  progress  and  the  conversion  of 
the  world  depend  upon  this.  2.  A  sad  tendency  in  the  Christian  to  forget  these 
things.  3.  An  obligation  which  one  Christian  has  to  endeavour  spiritually  to  excite 
others  by  these  things.  II.  A  destined  change  that  awaits  this  mode  of  being. 
"  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle."  1.  The  nature  of  the 
change.  It  is  a  putting  off  the  tabernacle.  2.  The  nearness  of  the  change. 
"Shortly."  3.  The  assurance  of  the  change.  "Knowing."  It  is  not  a  subject 
of  doubt.  III.  A  GLORIOUS  CAUSE  that  must  outlive  this  mode  of  being.  "  More- 
over I  will  endeavour  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease  to  have  these  things 
always  in  remembrance."  Three  things  implied  :  1.  The  necessity  of  Christianity' 
to  posterity.  All  generations  require  it ;  therefore  it  must  be  handed  down.  2.  The 
felt  interest  of  the  good  in  posterity.  They  are  far  more  anxious  to  bequeath  truth 
and  godliness  than  estates  or  empires.  3.  The  capacity  of  men  to  help  posterity. 
Through  a  holy  life,  and  instructions  oral  or  written.  Properly  estimate  thy  mortal 
mode  of  life.  Thou  art  dwelling  in  a  tabernacle.  I  would  not  have  thee  ascetically 
to  despise  thy  body,  for  it  is  the  workmanship  of  God  ;  an  exquisite  instrument  of 
the  soul;  the  inlet  of  the  material,  and  the  outlet  of  the  spiritual.  But  I  would 
have  thee  to  remember  that  it  is  not  thyself,  but  a  temporary  habitation  of 
that  soul  of  thine,  which  is  identified  with  a  gospel  in  which  the  universe  is 
interested,  and  upon  which  the  salvation  of  thy  race  depends.     Realise  the  vastness 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  93 

of  the  work  thou  hast  to  do  while  in  thy  frail  tabernacle,  and  do  it.  {Homilist.) 
That  ye  may  be  able,  after  my  decease. — A  noble  endeavour  and  desire  : — I.  The 
apostle's  endeavoub.  1.  The  first  thing  required  to  this  endeavour  is  learning. 
(1)  They  are  dangerous  teachers,  that  never  were  learners.  While  they  will  not  be 
scholars  of  truth,  they  become  masters  of  error.  They  must  know  their  winds, 
ebbings  and  Sowings,  creeks  and  sea-marks,  that  will  be  fishers.  Wherein 
consists  this  learning  ?  Not  in  a  theory  of  divers  arts,  but  in  the  sober  use  and 
discreet  application  of  divinity.  (2)  Some  think  a  minister  hath  no  great  need  of 
learning,  because  he  is  to  speak  to  the  unlearned  (Heb.  v.  11,  12).  2.  The  next 
thing  required  to  this  endeavour  is  an  honest  and  religious  life.  If  this  have  been 
bad  before  thy  calling,  redeem  it  now.  The  minister  that  spends  himself  like  a 
taper  to  light  others,  must  not  himself  go  out  with  an  ill  savour.  An  innocent  Ufe 
is  a  silent  testimony  of  a  good  minister.  3.  The  last  thing  required  to  perfect  this 
endeavour  is  constant  labour.  Pray  the  Lord  to  send  forth  labourers,  not  loiterers, 
into  His  harvest.  II.  The  apostle's  purpose.  1.  "  That  ye  may  be  able."  All 
is  for  your  sakes,  this  preaching,  this  remembering,  this  writing,  all  for  you. 
2.  "  After  my  decease,"  &c.  The  apostles  did  not  only  preach  to  us  vocally  while 
they  lived,  but  even  now  also  exemplarily  by  their  former  conversation,  and  still 
doctrinally  by  their  holy  rules.  The  words  of  a  preacher  die  not  with  him,  but  live 
in  the  hearers'  hearts,  and  shall  either  convert  them  here,  or  convince  them 
hereafter.  (Thos.  Adains.)  The  Oiristian^s  usefulness  in  and  after  death : — It  is 
worthy  of  remark  how  frequently  the  inspired  writers  insist  on  fundamental 
doctrines.  They  had,  indeed,  evidently  no  desire  to  tie  down  either  themselves  or 
their  converts  to  any  one  set  of  truths,  whilst  there  were  others  which  God's  Spirit 
was  ready  to  unfold.  On  the  contrary,  they  speak  reprovingly  of  that  indolence  or 
indifference  which  made  men  rest  in  first  principles  when  it  became  them  to  go  on 
to  perfection ;  but  nevertheless  they  had  no  idea  of  men  abandoning  the  first 
principles,  as  though  they  were  not  necessary  to  the  more  advanced  inquirer. 
Now,  the  first  thing  we  wish  to  point  out  is  the  sincere  desire  for  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  salvation  of  sinners,  which  must  have  animated  the  man  who  could  breathe 
the  language  of  our  text.  We  read  in  such  language  an  entire  forgetf ulness  of 
self,  the  indication  of  a  pure  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church.  If  carnal  motives 
had  actuated  the  apostle,  he  would  probably  have  desired  that  his  departure  might 
be  injurious  to  the  Church.  Suppose  that,  having  been  kept  sound  in  the  faith,  so 
long  as  he  ministered  amongst  them,  numbers  were  afterwards  to  decline,  what  a 
testimony  would  seem  to  be  given  to  his  power  and  faithfulness  as  contrasted  with 
those  of  his  successors  in  office !  Something  of  the  same  kind  is  frequently 
occurring  in  the  world.  The  felt  injury  which  results  from  the  loss  of  an  indivi- 
dual causes  him  greater  glory  than  even  all  the  benefits  which  he  may  have  been 
enabled  to  effect.  When,  for  example,  a  statesman,  who  has  guided  with  a  master 
hand  the  vessel  of  the  commonwealth  through  the  breakers  and  shoals,  is  with- 
drawn from  his  post  whether  by  death  or  intrigue,  and  the  rudder  is  given  into  a 
feebler  grasp,  what,  if  he  sought  only  his  own  reputation,  would  that  statesman 
more  desire  than  that  dangers  should  threaten  and  shipwreck  to  the  state  seem 
inevitable  ?  It  would  be  by  the  proud  inferiority  of  those  who  filled  his  place,  that 
his  own  greatness  would  become  most  conspicuous.  And  we  are  not  without 
examples  of  the  same  kind  in  regard  of  the  ministers  of  Christ.  Now,  we  have 
hitherto  simply  argued  upon  the  evidence  which  we  think  is  furnished  by  our  text 
to  the  humility  of  the  apostle,  of  the  readiness  of  St.  Peter  to  be  counted  nothing, 
and  less  than  nothing,  provided  the  cause  of  Christ  might  prosper  and  prevail. 
But  now  we  wish  to  take  a  somewhat  different  view  of  the  passage.  We  have 
already  said,  that  in  all  probability  the  apostle  was  not  reckoning  upon  what  might 
be  done  by  his  successors  towards  preserving  in  his  converts  the  remembrance  of  the 
truths  he  had  taught.  He  appears  rather  to  have  calculated  upon  the  permanence 
of  his  own  instructions,  when  himself  should  have  been  withdrawn  by  death.  This 
is  very  observable.  He  announces  his  determination  of  putting  the  Church  in 
remembrance  as  long  as  he  lived ;  arguing,  manifestly,  that  it  would  never  be  safe 
for  him  to  relax  in  his  work ;  nevertheless  he  reckons  on  the  Church  retaining  the 
remembrance,  when  death  should  have  silenced  his  monitory  voice.  You  will 
perceive  there  is  here  something  like  a  contradiction.  If  it  were  necessary  to  be 
always  putting  them  in  remembrance  whilst  he  lived,  how  could  he  hope  that  thei'e 
would  not  be  forgetfulness  when  he  was  dead  ?  We  think  it  possible  that  the 
apostle  had  reference  to  what  was  likely  to  be  the  power  of  his  death ;  and  if  so, 
there  is  a  beauty  and  a  pathos  in  the  passage  which  is  not  to  be  surpassed  in  the 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

whole  range  of  Scripture.  There  is  often  practically  far  more  of  power  in  the 
death  than  in  the  liJEe  of  a  religious  individual.  There  is  something  so  hallowed 
around  the  memory  of  the  dead,  something  so  spiritual  and  unearthly,  that  the 
most  hardened  are  more  touched  by  the  remembered  words  of  the  departed  than  by 
all  the  utterances  of  the  hving.  When  memory  syllables  to  us  the  admonitions  of 
those  who  lie  mouldering  in  the  dust,  it  is  almost  as  if  a  spectre  spoke,  and  we 
start  and  shrink  as  if  in  contact  with  a  messenger  from  the  invisible  world. 
Neither  is  this  the  only  or  the  chief  reason  why  death  gives  this  impressiveness  and 
this  permanence  to  inculcated  truth.  It  is  in  death  that  a  man  puts  to  the  proof 
the  worth  of  the  principles  which  he  has  spent  life  in  recommending  and  enforcing ; 
and  if  he  be  enabled,  during  the  taking  down  of  the  "  earthly  house  of  this 
tabernacle,"  to  give  evidence  of  a  joy  and  a  peace  of  spirit  which  are  to  be 
accounted  for  only  by  the  truth  of  what  he  has  taught,  why  there  is  yet  more  in 
his  tranquillity  and  assurance  than  in  all  the  fervour  and  power  which  he  may 
have  thrown  into  his  lessons  to  convince  men  that  he  has  followed  no  cunningly 
devised  fable.  It  is  this  which  lays  so  great  a  weight  of  responsibleness  upon  those 
who  are  much  with  the  righteous  in  the  season  of  their  sickness  and  death.  Yes, 
more,  far  more,  may  be  done  by  dying  than  has  been  effected  by  living.  It 
is  a  blessed  thought,  and  appears  in  no  common  degree  to  strip  death  of  its 
repulsiveness,  and  even  invest  it  with  beauty.  This  is  what  I  call  victory 
in  death.  Even  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  is  said  to  have  destroyed 
death,  so  may  we,  treading  humbly  in  his  footsteps,  use  it  to  undermine  the 
empire  of  Satan.  Of  this  the  Church  teems  with  proof.  Thus  was  it  that 
confessors  and  martyrs  prevailed.  Oh !  it  should  mightily  encourage  us  to 
persevere  in  enduring  to  the  end,  to  know  that  when  we  shall  be  weakest  then  we 
may  be  strongest.  In  place  of  feeling  when  we  lie  down  on  our  death-bed  that  all 
is  over,  and  we  can  do  nothing  more,  we  may  feel  that  if  the  dying  statesman 
cannot  benefit  the  state,  nor  the  expiring  warrior  beat  down  the  foe,  the  departing 
Christian  may  fight  the  battle  of  God,  and  speed  the  march  of  Christianity.  We 
shall  not  die  as  teachers ;  we  shall,  God  helping,  teach  in  dying.  The  tears  which 
are  wept  over  us  shall  be  from  the  fountains  of  the  heart  broken  up  by  our  removal. 
Our  memory  shall  haunt  the  scene  of  our  labours.  Now,  suppose  we  take  another 
view  of  this  text.  It  is  not  unhkely  that  St.  Peter  had  respect  to  his  writings  when 
he  announced  that  he  would  endeavour  to  instruct  after  death.  He  preached  to 
one  generation ;  he  wrote  for  every  future.  It  was  his  hope  and  endeavour,  as 
announced  in  our  text,  to  instruct  after  death.  He  did  not  wish  to  be  forgotten,  so 
that  when  he  passed  away  from  earth  he  might  survive  in  his  writings,  and  still  be 
instrumental  in  winning  souls  to  Christ.  There  is  something  very  grand  and 
ennobling  about  this  ambition.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  man  who  entertains  and 
accomplishes  the  wish  of  doing  the  work  of  an  evangelist  after  death,  triumphs 
over  death  in  the  highest  possible  sense.  I  could  almost  dare  to  say  that  he  never 
dies.  There  is  many  a  private  Christian  who  is  long  remembered  and  venerated, 
whose  example  is  efficacious  long  after  his  decease,  and  whose  lessons  operate 
when  the  tongue  which  delivered  them  has  mouldered  into  dust.  And  we  call 
it  the  destruction,  the  abolition  of  death,  when  man  may  thus  do  good  notwith- 
standing his  decease.  This  is  true  immortality;  for  such  as  these  the  curse  is 
wholly  done  away.  They  know  no  pause  in  the  highest  employments.  And  may 
it  not  be  lawful  to  desire  and  to  strive  for  the  being  thus  held  in  remembrance  after 
death  ?  As  Christians,  we  should  pant  to  bring  glory  to  God.  We  should  not  be 
willing  to  be  circumscribed  by  life.  The  battle  is  to  go  on,  and  we  should  long  to 
take  part.  The  Church  is  to  be  edified,  and  we  should  crave  for  employment ;  yea, 
it  might  be  as  pure  and  as  humble  a  wish  as  ever  was  breathed,  though  it  might 
sound  like  that  of  one  eager  for  human  distinction,  if  it  did  not  suffice  us  to  be 
useful  to  others  whilst  we  tabernacled  amongst  them,  but  if,  throwing  onwards  our 
thoughts  to  yet  distant  days,  we  were  to  address  our  fellow-men  in  the  words  of  the 
apostle :  "  We  will  endeavour  that  ye  may  be  able  after  our  decease  to  have  these 
things  always  in  remembrance."  Now,  we  cannot  conclude  without  pointing  out 
to  you  the  exquisite  composedness  with  which  St.  Peter  speaks  of  death,  and 
without  breathing  a  prayer  that  when  our  last  hour  shall  be  near  we  may  as 
placidly  expect  its  approach.  The  apostle  evidently  contemplates  without  appre- 
hension his  dissolution,  though  he  knew  that  he  must  die  a  cruel  and  ignominious 
death.  And  his  only  anxiety  is  for  the  welfare  of  those  from  whom  he  should  be 
separated.  It  only  argues  terror  of  death  when  men  shrink  from  making  arrange- 
ments in  anticipation  of  their  dissolution.    I  love  to  hear  the  dying  Christian  speak 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  95 

calmly  of  the  churchyard  where  he  wishes  to  be  buried,  of  the  distribution  of  his 
property,  of  the  place  where  his  children  are  to  live.  I  feel  that  he  is  ready  for  his 
last  dread  account,  when  he  can  thus,  without  flinching,  direct  all  which  has 
concern  to  his  being  numbered  with  the  dead ;  but  the  noblest  thing  of  all  is  when 
the  dying  Christian  shows  that  his  last  thoughts  are  on  the  welfare  of  the  Church 
and  the  glory  of  God.  The  wounded  warrior,  as  the  life-blood  ebbs  away,  will 
sometimes  kindle  at  the  noise  of  the  battle.  He  will  half  raise  himseK  from  the 
earth,  listen  to  the  distant  shout,  and  forget  his  anguish  as  he  fancies  that  he  hears 
the  triumph  of  his  comrades  in  arms.  Yes,  chivalry  has  such  stories  to  tell ;  but 
Christianity  has  nobler.  The  servants  of  Christ,  when  they  can  no  longer  join  the 
war,  wiU  breathe  out  the  soul  in  longings  for  its  success.  They  will  think  on  the 
yet  vast  powers  of  heathenism — on  the  aboundings  of  vice — on  the  spreadings  of 
infidelity  ;  and,  though  about  to  put  off  their  armour  and  enter  into  rest,  will  give 
their  last  thought  to  the  struggle,  and  their  last  prayer  for  the  triumph  of  the 
hosts  of  the  Lord.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  A  good  man's  endeavour  to  compensate 
for  the  limitations  of  a  mortal  life : — It  is  one  of  the  noblest  protests  of  man 
against  mortality.  "  I  will  endeavour  that  after  my  decease,"  &c.  Many  have 
been  the  protests  of  man  against  mortality,  or  his  efforts  to  modify  its  effect.  One 
toils  night  and  day  life  through  to  establish  a  reputation ;  another  a  business  ; 
another  to  bequeath  a  fortune ;  another,  like  Peter,  to  leave  behind  an  influence 
which  shall  ennoble  other  Uves  (Gen.  xi.  4  ;  Job  xix.  23,  24,  &c.).  1.  Here 
observe  the  desire  is  not  that  after  Peter's  decease  people  should  remember  him  as 
much  as  "  the  things  "  he  had  taught  them.  To  the  true  minister  the  message  is  of 
infinitely  more  importance  than  himself.  2.  The  ambition  of  Peter  is  that  he 
should  aid  the  memories  of  his  brethren  in  the  best  direction  and  for  the  highest 
purpose.  3.  There  is  another  law  which  Peter  recognises,  namely,  that  by  which 
the  utterances  of  a  teacher  are  not  unfrequently  best  remembered  when  he  is  gone 
— "  after  my  decease."  Peter  himself  had  remembered  his  Lord's  words  best  at 
such  a  time  (Matt.  xxvi.  75 ;  Luke  xxii.  61 ;  see  also  John  ii.  22,  xii.  16, 
Ac).  Now  what  are  those  things  which  Peter  considers  of  such  importance  for 
men  to  remember  ?  (See  vers.  8,  9,  10,  12.)  (1)  The  largeness  of  the  Divine 
provision — "AU  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godliness."  (2)  The  promise  of 
its  bestowal — "  Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."  (3)  The  ultimate  end  of 
all — "  That  ye  may  become,"  &c.  Now  we  come  to  the  bearing  of  aU  this  upon 
human  consecration — "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  &c.  Here  is  a  summary  of 
Divine  grace  and  human  duty.  These  are  the  things  which  he  wishes  them  to 
remember.  "These  things"  are  the  conditions  of  " fruitfulness,"  vision,  and 
steadfastness,  and  these  are  the  things  that  make  human  life  great.  Now,  he 
would  not  have  them  think  that  this  progressiveness  in  the  Divine  life  was  an  easy 
task.  Again,  observe  that  he  who  asks  diligence  of  them  pledges  himself  also  in 
our  text,  "Yea,  I  will  give  diligence,"  &c.  Now,  these  are  the  words  of  an  aged 
man — a  man  who  during  life  has  undergone  much  discipUne,  and,  consequently, 
who  has  been  matured  and  ennobled.  How  closely  such  lives  are  knitted  with  the 
lives  of  others,  and  how  far-reaching  their  influence !  This  is  one  of  the  great 
redeeming  features  of  the  brevity  of  human  life :  that  it  projects  its  force  into  the 
ages,  yea,  into  eternity.  Death  can  do  nothing  to  such  a  man  except  to  transfigure 
him.     (D.  Davies.) 

Vers.  16-20.  We  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables. — From  starlight 
to  sunlight : — I.  The  mythical  mode.  "  In  declaring  the  power  and  advent  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  we  were  not  as  those  who  are  famihar  only  with  the  popular  myths 
which  are  deemed  sufficient  for  the  multitude ;  we  were,  rather,  as  the  favoured  few 
who  are  admitted  to  the  secret  mysteries,  who  are  permitted  to  know  the  truths  that 
underlie  the  fables  and  stories  which  fill  the  popular  imagination."  What,  then, 
were  these  "  myths,"  and  what  the  "  mysteries  "  ?  The  myths,  in  their  origin,  were 
simply  poetical  conceptions  of  the  processes  and  phenomena  of  Nature.  Thus,  for 
instance,  the  sun  sinks,  or  seems  to  sink,  every  night  into  the  sea ;  in  the  fervid 
East,  moreover,  it  dries  up  the  streams.  But  "sun,"  and  "sea,"  and  "streams" 
had,  in  the  infancy  of  the  world,  masculine  and  feminine  names,  as,  indeed,  they 
stiU  have  in  most  of  the  languages  spoken  by  men.  These  masculine  and  feminine 
names  were  soon  turned  into  proper  personal  names  by  the  vivid  imagination  of 
men  to  whom  the  world  was  fresh  and  wonderful ;  and  hence,  instead  of  saying 
"  The  sun  sinks  into  the  sea,"  they  said,  "  The  Sun-God  sinks  into  the  lap  of  the 
Sea-Goddess,  and  rests  until  their  child,  the  Dawn,  wakes  him  from  his  slumbers." 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Instead  of  saying  "  The  sun  dries  up  the  stream,"  they  told  a  pretty  story  of  a 
certain  River  Nymph  whom  the  Sun-God  dearly  loved,  and  who  would  give  him  no 
peace  till  he  came  to  her  in  all  the  glory  of  his  heavenly  pomp,  beholding  which  she 
was  forthwith  consumed.  All  the  great  and  many  of  the  lesser  processes  of  Nature 
were  thus  mythicized,  turned  into  poems  and  stories — the  succession  of  day  and 
night,  the  dependence  of  men  and  cattle  on  the  shining  of  the  sun,  on  the  fruits  of 
the  earth,  on  the  svireet,  fresh  water  of  the  mountain  streams.  Still,  under  all  these 
freaks  of  fancy  there  lay  concealed  the  germs  of  many  religious  truths,  as,  for 
example,  these :  that  the  Powers  which  ruled  in  heaven  cared  for  the  earth  and 
blessed  it ;  that  God,  or  the  gods,  might  take  human  form  and  dwell  among  men ; 
and  that  there  was  a  fair  spiritual  world,  larger,  brighter,  happier  than  the  world  of 
sense,  into  which  even  man  might  pass  and  rise.  As  years  and  centuries  elapsed, 
these  truths  were  forgotten  out  of  mind,  as  were  many  of  the  ethical  maxims  deduced 
from  them.  In  order  that  they  might  not  altogether  perish  from  the  memory  and 
life  of  man,  certain  "mysteries"  were  founded  and  ordained.  To  be  "admitted," 
that  is,  to  be  initiated,  into  these  mysteries,  was  an  honour  granted  to  comparatively 
few  of  the  millions  of  antiquity ;  and  it  was  granted  only  after  they  had  passed 
through  a  probation  which  either  was,  or  was  affirmed  to  be,  terrible  to  any  but  men 
of  a  brave  and  constant  spirit.  Their  good  faith  was  thus  put  to  a  severe  preliminary 
test ;  tremendous  oaths  binding  them  to  secrecy  were  administered  to  them ;  to 
divulge  a  mystery  or  to  intrude  upon  it  uncalled  were  offences  punishable  with 
death.  Now,  says  St.  Peter,  when  we  made  known  to  you  the  power  and  advent  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  were  telling  you  no  pretty  popular  myth,  no  fable  of  a 
Divine  person  who  came  down  and  dwelt  with  men,  such  as  you  have  often  heard 
from  your  priests  or  rhapsodists,  such  as  you  may  still  hear  from  your  heathen 
neighbours.  We  had  been  initiated  into  the  very  mysteries  of  truth ;  we  had 
mastered  their  secrets,  that  we  might  divulge  them  to  you.  We  spake  of  that 
which  we  ourselves  had  seen,  and  handled,  and  felt,  of  the  Word  of  Life.  11. 
The  Mir.ACULOus  mode.  From  the  mythical  St.  Peter  passes  to  the  miraculous 
method  of  revelation.  Where  was  that  inner  temple,  that  sacred  and  oracular 
shrine,  in  which,  after  their  initiation,  the  apostles  were  admitted  to  the  mysteries 
and  stood  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  the  unclouded  majesty  of  the  Incarnate  God  ?  It 
■was  on  "the  holy  mount,"  on  which  the  Lord  Jesus  was  transfigured  before  their 
eyes.  But  why  does  the  apostle  select  this  scene  in  our  Lord's  life — the  Transfigur- 
ation— before  all  others  ?  Simply,  I  suppose,  because  at  that  moment,  in  that  scene, 
all  that  was  most  marvellous  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  shown  forth  in  its  most 
marvellous  forms.  The  "advent"  of  Christ  was  a  miracle;  every  word  and  deed 
that  disclosed  His  Divine  "power"  was  a  miracle:  but  the  miraculous  element  of 
Plis  "  advent  and  power  "  culminated  in  His  Transfiguration.  III.  The  prophetic 
MODE.  After  describing  the  honour  and  glory  done  to  Christ,  and  the  voice  which 
came  to  Him  from  the  glory  that  shone  around  Him  on  the  holy  mount,  the  apostle 
adds :  "  But  we  have  something  surer  still — the  prophetic  word,  whereunto  ye  do 
well  that  ye  give  heed,"  &c.  Why  does  he  call  it  "  something  surer  still "  ?  First, 
because  it  is  "  as  a  lamp  shining  in  a  dark  place."  Now,  as  we  all  know,  we  can 
find  our  way  even  on  the  darkest  night,  if  only  we  have  "  a  lamp  to  our  feet "  ;  and, 
moreover,  we  can  see  to  do  any  necessary  work,  if  only  we  have  a  lamp  shining 
over  our  head.  In  plain  words,  the  apostle's  argument  is  that  miracles  are  not 
guides,  or  not  safe  guides ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  we  are  under  a  guidance  that 
is  both  good  and  safe  when  we  follow  the  moral  rules  of  the  written  Word.  The 
Divine  Word  has  another  claim  on  our  regard  and  preference.  For  this  "lamp" 
which  shines  so  helpfully  on  the  activities  of  human  life,  has  been  lit  and  is  fed  by 
God  Himself.  "  No  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation."  That  is  to 
say,  the  prophetic  Word  is  not  a  mere  logical  deduction  from  the  facts  of  life  and 
Nature  ;  nor  is  it  a  mere  guess  at  things  to  come,  based  on  a  knowledge  of  what 
has  taken  place  in  the  past.  There  was  something  higher  than  human  wisdom  in 
the  prophetic  utterances,  something  safer  than  the  prognostics  of  human  reason ; 
for  prophecy  never  came  only  from  the  will  of  man,  but  holy  men,  borne  along  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  ship  is  borne  before  the  wind,  spake  the  words  that  were  given 
them  from  God.  There  is  a  Divine  wisdom,  therefore,  an  infallible  wisdom ;  there 
is  a  Divine  power,  an  almighty  power,  in  the  inspired  Word,  even  when  it  is  most 
human  and  imperfect  in  outward  form.  This  was  one  contrast  in  the  apostle's  mind  : 
and  the  other  was  that  the  prophecies  of  Scripture  were  superior  to  the  oracles 
uttered  by  the  ministrants  of  heathen  shrines.  When  these  oracles  were  con- 
sulted, they  gave  "  private  interpretations."     IV.  But,  finally,  the  spiritual  mode 


CHAP.  1.]  II.  PETER.  97 

of  revelation  is  even  safer  and  better  than  the  prophetic  mode,  as  much  better  as 
sunhght  is  better  than  lamplight.  When  Christ  is  once  with  us,  and  in  us,  what 
further  proof  can  we  require  of  His  "advent"  or  of  His  "  power"  to  quicken  and 
redeem  ?  With  Christ  to  teach  us  what  He  would  have  us  do,  we  can  dispense  with 
all  other  teachers,  all  other  aids.  Myths  !  We  have  been  initiated  into  the  very 
mysteries  of  the  faith,  and  are  joyful  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty.  Miracles ! 
He  has  wrought  the  great  miracle  upon  us,  bringing  a  clean  thing  out  of  an 
unclean,  opening  our  blind  eyes,  unstopping  our  deaf  ears,  quickening  us  from 
our  death  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Laws  and  hopes !  When  once  we  have 
personally  laid  hold  on  Christ,  we  are  a  law  unto  ourselves,  and  move  in  the 
freedom  of  a  glad  obedience  to  His  will ;  we  have  a  hope  already  fulfilling  itself 
in  us,  and  yet  opening  up  into  widening  vistas  of  light — the  hope  of  eternal  life  and 
service  and  peace.  The  morning  star  has  risen  in  our  hearts ;  the  day  has  dawned ; 
the  darkness  is  over  and  gone,  and,  with  the  darkness,  all  our  need  of  the  lamps 
and  stars  which  once  made  night  tolerable  to  us.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Apostolic 
testimony  : — I.  A  disclaiming  of  all  fabulous  mixtures  with  the  sacred  truth. 
II.  A  proclaiming  of  the  virtue  and  excellency  of  Christ.  1.  The  manifes- 
tation itself.  "We  made  known  unto  you."  The  apostles  did  not  hide  the 
mysteries  of  salvation  revealed  to  them  (Eom.  xvi.  25,  26).  (1)  This  doctrine 
makes  to  the  conviction  of  them  that  conceal  the  way  of  the  Lord  (Matt,  xxiii.  13 ; 
Eom.  i.  18).  (2)  This  reproves  them  also  that  content  themselves  with  their 
ignorances,  and  never  labour  for  knowledge.  2.  The  matter  manifested.  "  The 
power  and  coming  of  our  Lord."  By  this  the  apostle  intends  the  sum  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  full  salvation  that  is  given  us  by  Christ,  in  whom  are  all  the 
treasures  of  blessedness.  Of  this  he  makes  two  distinct  parts.  (1)  That  Christ 
came  in  the  flesh,  suffered  for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification. 
(2)  The  virtue  and  efficacy  of  this  in  our  hearts,  when  we  manifest  the  fruit 
of  it  in  our  well  living  and  well  believing.  III.  A  testifying  of  this,  and 
THAT  FROM  THE  SUREST  WITNESSES.  In  witncsscs  there  are  three  things  especially 
required.  1.  That  they  be  of  good  report  and  repute ;  for  a  bad  and  vicious  life 
enervates  their  testimony.  But  these  were  holy  men ;  He  that  sent  them  to  give 
testimony  did  not  deny  them  sanctimony  (John  xvii.  17).  2.  That  they  be  eye- 
witnesses ;  so  were  these.  3.  That  they  agree  in  their  testimony.  (Thos.  Adams.) 
Christianity  not  a  cunningly  devised  fable  : — ■"  For  we  have  not  followed  cunningly 
devised  fables."  The  infidel  says  we  have.  This  is  no  new  cry.  It  is  as  old  as 
Christianity  itself.  The  apostles  themselves  were  said  to  have  been  imposed 
upon.  Since  that  day  the  ground  of  attack  has  been  changed.  We  are 
now  told  that  the  apostles  were  the  impostors.      I.  The  statements  that   have 

BEEN    denounced   AS    FABLES.       II.    ThE    PERSONS    WHO    ARE    SAID    TO    HAVE    FABRICATED 

THESE  FABLES.  Infidelity  asserts  that  they  were  deceivers.  Of  this  we  might 
justly  demand  proof.  They  appear  to  be  men  of  strict  integrity.  They  do  not 
hesitate  to  expose  each  other's  faults  or  to  confess  their  own.  They  appear  to 
be  utterly  destitute  of  the  art  of  deception.  1.  Is  it  pretended  that  these  grand 
impostors  were  men  of  renown  for  their  talents  and  influence,  and  that,  therefore, 
they  acquired  an  ascendancy  over  the  public  mind  ?  This  is  at  once  disproved  by 
the  fact  that,  at  the  very  outset  of  their  career,  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin  perceived  that 
they  were  "  unlearned  and  ignorant  men"  (Acts  iv..  13),  whilst  Gentile  magistrates 
and  governors  regarded  them  as  weak,  demented  enthusiasts,  whose  fittest  treatment 
was  scourging  and  imprisonment.  2.  Will  it  be  contended  that  in  the  construction 
■of  their  scheme,  they  adapted  their  fables  to  the  popular  taste  ?  This  is  at  once 
denied.  Their  system  was  absolutely  opposed  to  parties  of  every  class,  to  men  of 
every  clime.  How  different  was  the  system  of  Mohammed !  and  how  different  have 
been  the  schemes  of  more  modern  infidels  !  How  careful  have  these  impostors  been 
to  pander  to  the  passions  of  those  they  have  sought  to  delude,  presenting  or 
promising  whatever  has  been  adapted  to  the  views  and  the  tastes  of  the  proud, 
the  worldly-minded,  the  sensual,  and  the  profane  !  3.  But  it  is  said  that  they  were 
fools  and  fanatics.  This  assertion  is  more  easy  than  the  proof.  They  were,  indeed, 
accused  of  folly  and  of  madness,  but  they  convinced  their  accusers  that  they  spake 
the  words  of  truth  and  soberness.  Their  writings  certainly  afford  evidence  that  they 
■were  men  of  more  than  ordinary  mental  vigour.  Their  style  is  nervous  and  plain. 
Their  story  is  simply  and  unaffectedly  told.  4.  But  they  were  actuated  by  ambition, 
it  is  said.  On  what  object  was  their  ambition  fixed  ?  Worldly  honour  or  worldly 
power  is  usually  the  great  object  of  the  ambitious.  Besides,  it  was  not  their 
ambition  to  exalt  themselves,  though  they  had  opportunities  of  doing  so  (Acts  iii., 

36 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

xiv.).  The  entire  history  of  the  apostles  is  pregnant  with  proof  that  they  sought 
not  their  own,  but  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ.  What  things  might  have  been  gain 
to  them,  those  they  counted  loss  for  Him.  5.  Impostors  generally  expect  to  get 
something  by  the  impositions  they  practise  ;  and  the  greater  the  risk  of  detection, 
or  the  danger  of  punishment,  the  greater  is  the  gain,  the  hope  of  which  is  their 
animating  motive.  Now,  what  was  the  gain  which  prompted  the  apostles  to  devise 
and  to  execute  their  grand  imposture  ?  You  must  be  aware,  that  so  far  as  this  world 
was  considered,  they  had  everything  to  lose,  and  nothing  to  gain.  "  Bonds  and 
afflictions  awaited  them  in  every  city."  Will  it  be  said  that  all  this  was  the 
obstinacy  of  contumacy?  that  rather  than  avow  the  cheat,  they  readily  under- 
went privations  and  sufferings?  The  Ufe  of  reproach  and  trial  the  apostles 
lived,  and  the  death  of  torture  that  they  died,  incontestably  prove  their  sincerity. 
III.  But  who  were  the  parties  on  whom  these  sp-called  fables  were  so  suc- 
cessfully IMPOSED?  1.  If  the  evangelic  history  had  been  a  fraud,  of  course  the 
apostles  would  have  been  most  likely  to  succeed  in  the  work  of  deception  among 
the  inhabitants  of  some  barbarous  clime ;  or,  at  any  rate,  among  those  who  Uved 
far  away  from  the  scenes  where  the  plot  was  laid.  Did  they  then  travel  into  some 
remote  or  obscure  region,  where  the  inhabitants  would  have  little  inclination  to 
suspect  them,  and  less  opportunity  to  detect  their  deceit?  No;  they  began  at 
Jerusalem.  2.  Shortly  afterwards,  the  apostles  were  induced  to  go  unto  the 
Gentiles ;  the  one  who  was  most  active  in  this  great  missionary  enterprise  among 
the  heathen,  being  a  convert  to  the  faith  ol  Christ — not  an  original  disciple  of  the 
Nazarene — and  a  convert,  whose  accession  was  one  of  the  noblest  triumphs  of  truth, 
of  which  the  Church  of  Christ  can  boast.  Do  you  not  think  that  the  disputer  of 
that  day  would  demand  evidence  before  he  gave  credence  to  the  statements  of  the 
apostles  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  and  the  noble  of  Home, 
would  easily  have  detected  the  deceit  of  "  Christ  crucified,"  had  it  been  a  cunningly 
devised  fable,  and  would  indignantly  have  denounced  its  abettors  as  worthless 
impostors  had  they  not  been  the  ambassadors  of   God?      IV.  The   consistency 

OF    REVEALED    TRUTH    WITH    REASON    AND   WITH    COMMON     SENSE.        Let    it,    however,    be 

remarked  that  those  truths  of  Divine  revelation,  which  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
understand  in  order  to  be  saved,  are  so  simple  and  plain  that  the  wayfaring  man, 
though  a  fool,  needs  not  to  mistake  respecting  them.  And  therefore  we  argue  that 
they  are  not  cunningly  devised  fables.  1.  To  begin  at  the  beginning — we  mention 
first  the  existence  of  one  great,  supreme  Being,  whom  the  Bible  denominates  God. 
This  great  doctrine  is  everywhere  assumed  thi-oughout  the  sacred  volume,  and  fonna 
the  foundation  of  aU  religion,  and  of  all  morality  too.  2.  This  Bible  professes  to 
be  a  revelation  from  God,  designed  to  teach  us  His  will,  and  to  point  out  to  us  the 
path  that  leads  to  immortal  blessedness.  Is  there  anything  unreasonable  in  this  ? 
'6.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  ascertain  whether  those  truths  which  we  call,  by  way  of 
eminence,  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  are  incredible  or  absurd.  The  first  we  notice  is 
the  entire  and  universal  depravity  of  man.  Go  where  you  will,  do  you  not  find 
your  fellow-creatures  depraved  as  well  as  degraded  ?  Is  not  the  hand  that  God  has 
filled  with  plenteousness  lifted  up  in  daring  rebellion  against  Him?  4.  Another 
great  doctrine  is  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  is 
objected  that  it  is  most  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Divine  Being  should  lavish 
so  much  love,  as  the  doctrine  of  redemption  supposes,  on  this  insignificant  world  of 
ours,  while  there  are  so  many  worlds,  ajid  so  many  systems  beside,  filled  with  intelli- 
gent beings,  all  demanding  the  care  of  the  Great  Supreme  as  well  as  ourselves.  We 
see  nothing  unreasonable  in  this  supposition.  Does  the  mother  who  watches  and 
weeps  over  her  sick  or  dying  child,  love  her  other  children  the  less  because  her  heart 
is  so  strongly  drawn  towards  the  afilicted  one  ?  Does  it  not  magnify  the  Divine 
Being  to  know  that  when  man  had  sinned  and  thereby  excluded  himself  from  the 
family  of  God,  the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  spared  not  His  own  Son,  in 
order  that  the  banished  ones  might  be  restored  ?  5.  And  what  inconsistency,  either 
with  reason  or  with  common  sense,  can  you  find  in  the  doctrines  of  justification  or 
pardon  righteously  bestowed,  because  obtained  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
of  the  sanctification  of  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  V.  Among  the  results 
of  this  lengthened  inquiry  into  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  we  trust  will  be — 1.  The 
confirmation  of  the  believer  in  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  You  know  what  you  have 
believed.  You  know  whom  you  have  believed.  You  will  not  sell  your  birthright  for 
a  mess  of  pottage.  2.  Another  result  we  hope  will  be  the  establishment  of  such  as 
may  be  wavering.  3.  A  third  result  we  anticipate  from  this  inquiry  is  a  clearer 
perception  of  the  nature  of  Christianity,  and  a  deepened  conviction  of  its  value. 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  9i) 

How  vast  are  my  obligations  to  the  blessed  God  for  having  devised  such  a 
scheme  for  saving  rebellious  worms,  and  for  having  made  it  known  to  me. 
How  necessary  for  me  to  avail  myself  of  its  privileges.  (P.  C.  Horton.) 
The  certainty  of  the  Christian  faith : — I.  There  was  nothixo  about  the  apostles 
OF  WILD  ENTHUSIASM.  Beforc  they  staked  everything,  present  Ufe  and  life  eternal, 
on  the  truth  of  Christianity,  they  had  amplest  proof  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
was  the  very  Son  of  the  Most  High,  the  predicted  Messiah.  1.  The  miracles 
wrought  by  Jesus  were  the  capital  proofs  of  His  Messiahship.  2.  The  miracles 
of  which  Jesus  Christ  was  the  subject  were  among  the  signs  of  His  glorious 
majesty  by  which  the  twelve  recognised  Him  for  the  Redeemer.  Of  some  of  these 
prodigies,  indeed,  they  were  not  spectators ;  not  of  the  meteor  star,  which,  on 
reaching  His  birthplace,  hung  over  it.  Nor  yet,  did  they  witness  the  sublime  scene 
of  His  baptism.  3.  The  transfiguration,  I  observe,  was  that  view  of  the  Lord's 
majesty  to  which  holy  Peter  reverts  with  singular  fondness.     H.  Let  us  pass  to  a 

FEW     MAEKS      OF      ChEIST'S     POWER      AND      MAJESTY      EXHIBITED      IN      HiS      PERSONAL 

CHARACTER.  1.  The  imperturbable  temper  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  among  the 
shining  proofs  of  His  moral  greatness  and  Divine  nature.  2.  His  patient  endurance 
of  injuries  has  a  further  peculiarity  about  it,  which  denotes  a  more  than  human 
elevation  of  mind.  For  be  it  remembered  that  we  are  often  debarred  from 
revenging. ourselves  by  want  of  power,  or  by  fear  of  retribution.  But  Jesus  was 
clothed  with  ahnightiness.  3.  The  condescension  of  this  Man,  so  mighty  in  word 
and  deed,  to  the  mean  and  wretched  and  vicious  whenever  they  craved  Ets  assist- 
ance, was  another  indication  of  a  mind  cast  in  a  singular  and  heavenly  mould. 
Nothing  of  this  kind  was  found  among  the  Pharisees  and  popular  teachers  of  the 
day.  4.  The  wisdom  of  Jesus,  so  immensely  beyond  what  His  country.  His  years, 
His  education  gave  reason  to  look  for,  must  also  have  satisfied  candid  observers 
that  He  was  from  above.  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Herodians  tried  their  skill 
from  morning  to  night,  and  were  unscrupulous  in  the  artifices  they  employed  to 
entrap  Him ;  but  without  effect.  But  there  was  a  higher  kind  of  wisdom  in  which 
Jesus  stood  alone.  Who  can  peruse  His  discourses  on  moral  and  religious  subjects ; 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  parables  of  the  Ten  Virgins,  of  the  Prodigal  Son, 
and  not  confess  that  no  mere  human  mind  of  any  age,  least  of  all  that  of  a  Jew  in 
an  age  so  ignorant,  corrupt,  and  superstitious,  could  possibly  give  birth  to  such 
pure  and  holy  lessons  ?  5  The  authority  of  our  Lord's  diction  and  manner  was 
another  ray  of  His  native  grandeur,  which  penetrated  the  souls  of  His  adherents 
and  ranks  high  among  the  proofs  of  His  divinity.  He  swept  away  the  treasured 
notions  that  had  come  down  from  father  to  son,  by  the  right  which  belonged  to 
Him  as  the  infalhble  interpreter  of  heaven.  He  debated  nothing.  He  rarely 
deigned  to  offer  reasons  or  proofs.  He  never  suggested  any  doctrine  doubtingly. 
You  recognise  the  style  of  One  quite  aware  that  He  is  as  much  above  other  teachers 
as  the  heaven  is  higher  than  the  earth  ;  and  that  to  put  Himself  upon  a  level  with 
them  were  to  belie  His  own  character  and  mission.  6.  Once  more  His  devotedness 
to  God,  so  pure,  so  noble,  so  fervent,  so  invariable,  was  it  not  of  a  kind  to  distinguish 
Him  from  ordinary  saints,  as  the  sun  from  twinkling  stars  ?  His  zeal  for  God's 
glory  in  a  manner  consumed  Him.  Whatever  are  the  arrangements  of  Providence 
He  rejoices  in  them  precisely  because  they  are  the  movements  of  God's  will.  (J.  N. 
Pearson,  M.A.)  The  credibility  of  Christianity  : — The  Bible  is  no  "  cunningly 
devised  fable."  I.  If  it  be  a  fable,  it  was  not  devised  half  cunningly 
ENOUGH.  I  allude  to  many  apparent  inconsistencies  in  the  Bible.  What  wise  man, 
in  devising  a  fabulous  history,  would  have  loaded  it  with  such  difficulties  as  these  ? 
II.  If  IT  be  a  fable,  it  is  impossible  to  guess  by  what  class  of  persons  it 
WAS  DEVISED.  "Kings,"  perhaps,  "invented  the  Bible  in  order  to  keep  their 
subjects  in  awe  of  their  authority."  "  Priests,"  exclaims  another,  "were  no  doubt 
the  authors."  Yet  there  is  a  great  deal  written  here  against  wicked  priests  also, 
which  would  scarcely  have  been  inserted  by  them.  Was  it,  then,  the  rich  who 
devised  this  fable  ?  Yet  what  is  more  common  in  the  Bible  than  lessons  on  the 
worthlessness  and  vanity  of  riches  ?  I  need  not  ask  whether  the  inventors  of  this 
fable  are  to  be  looked  for  among  the  poor.  They  are  otherwise  engaged  than  in 
writing  books.  "Some  learned  men,  doubtless,  compiled  this  book!"  Still  the 
same  difficulty  meets  us.  Learned  men  are  often  supposed  to  be  proud  of  their 
wisdom  ;  but  here  worldly  wisdom  is  undervalued,  and  men  are  told  that  they  must 
"  become  fools  if  they  would  be  really  wise  "( 1  Cor.  iii.  18).  Here,  then,  is  a  book, 
for  which  no  probable  author  can  be  found,  if  it  be  a  fable.     HI.  If  it  be  a  fable, 

IT  IS  unaccountable  that  it  should  have  been  so  LONG  AND  SO  EXTENSIVELY 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

FOLLOWED.     IV.  If   it   be    a   fable,  the   following   of    it   has   at   least   been 

BENEFICI.AL    TO    MANKIND.       V.    If    IT    BE    A    FABLE,  I    MUST     NEVEKTHELESS     FOLLOW     IT 

TILL  Yoo  CAN  SHOW  ME  SOME  MOKE  EXCELLENT  WAY.  I  Want  a  guide  in  my 
ignorance;  I  want  a  comforter  in  my  troubles.  Is  human  reason  that  guide? 
Alas  !  I  find  cause  to  distrust  that  at  every  step  which  I  take.  Is  self-gratification 
the  better  comforter  ?  What !  to  follow  the  devices  and  desires  of  my  own  heart  in 
spite  of  this  forbidding  fable?  If  the  gospel  be  not  a  fable,  it  is  truth,  and  truth 
of  such  a  nature  that  you  will  be  saved  or  lost,  according  as  you  believe  or  neglect 
it.  It  must  be  "  followed " ;  it  must  affect  your  heart  and  influence  your  life. 
{J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  All  true  : — I.  Petee's  peksonal  pebsuasion  of  the  tkuth  of 
HIS  keligion.  "  We  have  not,"  &c.  There  are  seasons  when  we  all  feel  anxious  to 
know  on  what  ground  we  stand,  just  because  we  cannot  go  into  eternity  thinking 
and  guessing  about  some  peradventure.  We  must  have  certitude  then.  II. 
Obsekve  Peter's  repetition  of  the  old  truth  once  again  before  he  dies. 
The  testimony  of  an  old  man  like  Peter,  who,  in  his  review  of  the  past,  felt  happy 
and  satisfied  in  the  conviction  of  the  truth  he  had  professed,  is  worth  many  a 
volume  of  evidences  to  the  Christian  religion.  III.  The  happiness  Peter  had  in 
the  recollections  of  the  past.  All  aged  people  revert  to  the  past  with  peculiar 
feelings  of  interest,  if  not  enthusiasm.  There  is  happiness  in  having  good 
recollections — in  having  bright  yesterdays  to  look  back  upon — in  needing  no 
desperate  endeavours  to  forget.  IV.  The  way  in  which  Peter  falls  back  on 
the  Word  of  God  as  the  true  ground  of  faith  and  peace.  "  We  have  a  more 
sure  word  of  prophecy,"  &c.  He  had  James  and  John,  his  companions,  to  think  of. 
He  had  the  glory  of  the  mount  and  the  transfiguration  to  dwell  upon.  But  now  he 
needed  more.  The  friend  may  deceive  you :  the  recollections  of  the  past  may  be 
confused,  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever.  It  is  a  sure  word  of  prophecy. 
(W.  G.  Barrett.)  The  value  of  moral  evidence  : — Moral  reasons  are  sufficient  to 
guide  men  in  the  aflairs  of  the  present  life.  A  man  will  embark  on  board  a  vessel 
which  he  only  knows  by  the  report  of  others  to  be  seaworthy.  He  trusts  to  the 
skill  of  a  captain  and  the  effectiveness  of  a  crew  of  whom  he  knows  only  by 
report.  He  embarks  to  go  to  a  place  which  he  only  believes  on  the  testimony  of 
others  to  exist.  All  this  he  does  to  obtain  a  probable  good.  He  acts  similarly  to 
escape  an  apprehended  evil.  When  sick,  he  will  send  for  a  physician  of  whose 
skill  he  has  only  heard.  He  takes  medicine  which  he  does  not  certainly  know  will 
cure  him.  In  these  cases  he  acts  reasonably.  It  is  clear  that  when,  in  relation  to 
^iie  life  to  come,  he  refuses  moral  evidence,  he  acts  unreasonably.  (C.  Graham). 
The  Christian  revelation  to  be  lyresumed  divine: — The  existence  of  God  admitted, 
anotiier  question  at  once  suggests  itself.  Has  this  Divine  Being  directly  revealed 
Himself  and  made  known  His  will  to  man  ?  We  were  taught  in  childhood  that 
He  has.  We  say,  first  of  all,  that  the  very  existence  of  this  alleged  revelation,  in 
the  form  in  which  we  find  it,  affords  a  presumption  of  its  truth.  1.  The  first  thing 
that  strikes  one  on  glancing  at  the  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  in  which 
what  is  called  the  Christian  revelation  is  contained,  is  the  exceedingly  heterogeneous 
character  of  their  contents.  A  little  of  all  ages,  of  all  sorts  of  men,  and  of  all 
varieties  of  human  thought !  But  on  even  a  cursory  reading  of  these  writings, 
heterogeneous  as  they  seem,  you  cannot  fail  to  be  equally  impressed  with  a  second 
fact  about  them,  that  they  have,  after  all,  a  strange  and  most  striking  unity.  One 
spirit  breathes  throughout  the  whole.  The  same  conception  of  God,  as  the  eternal, 
self-existent,  and  infinite  Creator,  of  His  natural  government  of  the  world,  and  of 
His  moral  government  of  rational  creatures  ;  the  same  general  notions  of  right  and 
wrong  ;  the  same  views  of  the  design  of  human  existence,  of  the  individual  respon- 
sibility of  men,  of  the  blessedness  of  well-doing  and  of  the  miseries  of  sin,  of  the 
guilt  and  want  of  mankind,  of  the  justice,  the  goodness,  and  the  grace  of  God,  and 
of  the  way  of  reconciliation  with  Him.  Nor  does  this  unity  of  sentiment,  of  spirit, ' 
and  of  general  scope  and  purpose  seem  less,  but  rather  greater,  the  more  carefully 
and  thoroughly  these  various  compositions  are  examined.  That  these  men  have 
not  been  mere  copyists  from  each  other,  the  specific  diversities,  and  the  accessions 
and  progressive  development  of  thought  afford  decisive  proof.  Two  questions  meet 
us  therefore,  namely.  How  came  they,  any  of  them,  by  views  at  once  so  unique  in 
themselves  and  so  immeasurably  superior  in  intellectual  and  moral  elevation  to 
those  attained  by  the  historians,  the  poets,  and  the  sages  of  all  the  world  besides  ? 
And  then,  how  came  they,  writing  separately  and  each  for  his  own  particular  end, 
living  also  some  of  them  centuries  and  even  thousands  of  years  apart,  so  to 
harmonise  with  and  to  supplement  each  other  that,  taken  together,  their  writings 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  101 

form  one  grand  and  well-adjusted  whole?  We  will  not  now  assert  that  with  these 
questions  before  us  the  conviction  must  arise  that  there  is  something  supernatural 
in  all  this.  2.  The  presumption  thus  created  by  the  existence  of  the  Christian 
revelation  in  the  form  in  which  we  find  it,  is  greatly  strengthened,  we  further 
observe,  by  the  obvious  and  admitted  fact  that  it  has  entered  most  profoundly  into 
the  life  and  thought  of  the  world.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  other  pretended  systems 
of  religion  have  done  the  same.  There  are  no  facts  of  history  by  which  such  an 
assertion  can  be  justified.  3.  Still  further,  a  third  fact  lies  before  us  in  regard  to 
the  asserted  Christian  revelation,  which,  fairly  considered,  must  predispose  us  to 
receive  it.  The  effects  which  it  has  wrought,  both  on  individual  man  and  on 
society,  have  uniformly  been  salutary  in  a  very  eminent  degree.  These,  too,  are 
allowed  to  be  the  proper  products  of  Christianity,  and  not  things  incidentally  con- 
nected with  tt.  4.  Not  less  significant  is  a  fourth  fact  which  presents  itself  at  the 
outset  to  the  inquirer  about  the  Christian  revelation.  It  has  thus  far  stood  secure 
against  all  assaults  of  those  who  have  sought  to  overthrow  it,  although  these 
assaults  have  been  many,  persistent,  and  often  conducted  with  great  ability  and 
learning.  The  ancient  prophets,  each  in  his  turn,  encountered  the  resistance  of 
unbelief.  Then  followed  the  long  and  mighty  struggle  between  Christianity  and 
the  prevailing  systems  of  philosophy  and  religion  throughout  the  Roman  empire. 
It  was  a  contest  of  life  and  death.  Yet,  after  all,  the  Christian  faith  held  on  its 
way  and  triumphed.  So  it  has  been  in  the  modern  world.  The  wits,  philosophers, 
and  savants  of  France,  in  the  last  century  assailed  it  with  pungent  satire,  with  the 
coarsest  ribaldry.  English  Deism,  in  a  higher  style  of  thought,  with  greater  strength 
of  reasoning,  with  no  little  real  learning,  enlisting  champions  who,  to  great  meta- 
physical acumen,  added  untiring  patience  and  fixed  determination,  attacked  the 
historical  credit,  the  supernatural  credentials,  and  the  asserted  revelations  of  the 
Christian  Scriptures.  There  was  no  lack  of  will,  or  talent,  or  diligent  endeavour. 
5.  It  is  a  fact  which  no  one  tolerably  informed  as  to  the  condition  and  movements 
of  the  religious  world  will  question,  that  at  no  period  of  its  histoiy  was  Christi- 
anity more  vital,  more  powerful,  more  expectant  and  progressive  than  at  the 
present  time.  Can  falsehood  be  imagined  to  have  such  vitality  ?  6.  Consider,  too, 
that  if  the  Christian  revelation,  as  it  has  been  received  for  ages,  is  Divine,  it  must 
be  the  greatest  of  misfortunes  to  reject  it  as  a  fable.  If  it  be  indeed  a  sun  kindled 
of  God  to  illuminate  the  moral  darkness  of  our  world,  it  will  shine  on  to  cheer, 
and  warm,  and  bless  the  happy  multitudes  who  welcome  it,  though  you  shall 
avert  your  eyes  and  hide  from  its  beams  in  the  thick  shades  of  unbelief.  You 
have  nothing — nothing — to  gain  if  it  be  false.  You  have  everything  to  hope 
for  life,  for  death,  for  an  immortality  beyond,  if,  as  you  have  been  taught  from 
childhood  to  believe,  it  is  indeed  a  real  utterance,  a  precious  gift  of  the  ever- 
living  God  to  man.  [R.  Palmer,  D.D.)  The  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord. — 
Christ's  power  and  coming  manifested  by  the  apostle's  doctrine  and  preaching : — 
I.  The  office  and  ministby  of  the  apostle.  And  that  principally  consisted  in 
this :  In  making  known  the  power  and  miracles,  the  birth,  life,  death,  and  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ.  But  this  doctrine  that  the  apostle  preached  consists  of  two 
heads :  1.  The  coming  of  Christ.  By  which  is  meant  His  incarnation  and  appear- 
ance in  the  flesh.  This  was  that  mystery  that  was  hid  from  ages,  but  was  made 
manifest  in  these  last  days.  2.  The  power  of  Christ,  the  apostle  is  said  to  make 
known,  which  indeed  at  first  seemed  much  disguised.  For  who  would  have  expected 
any  miraculous  discoveries  of  power  from  One  whom  they  had  seen  poor  and  help- 
less Himself  ?  And  yet  in  this  state  of  weakness  He  was  made  strong,  grew  bold 
and  confident,  despising  the  pride,  trampling  upon  the  bravery  of  this  world,  resisting 
temptations,  triumphing  over  the  powers  and  charms  of  riches.  Now  to  make  this 
power  known  to  the  world  is  to  show  how  much  all  men  may  be  benefited  by  the 
power  of  Christ,  if  they  shall  love  Him  and  believe  in  Him.  For  to  as  many  as 
receive  Him  gives  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  who  believe 
in  His  name.  II.  The  rules  he  obsekved  in  making  known  the  po'R'er  and  coming 
OF  Jesus  Christ.  They  used  all  honest  and  justifiable  arts  in  preaching  the  gospel, 
but  declined  all  ways  of  sophistry  and  deceit.  As  if  they  had  said.  Our  cause  is  too 
plain  and  evident  to  need  such  poor  artifices  as  lies  and  fables  to  support  it.  1. 
The  consideration  of  what  hath  been  said  should  encourage  us  to  embrace  this 
article  of  our  faith,  Christ  Jesus  came  in  the  flesh,  and  all  others,  with  that  zeal 
and  love,  as  those  who  will  live  and  die  by  them.  2.  As  we  are  to  receive  the 
doctrines  of  Christianity  as  most  true  and  unquestionable,  so  we  ought  to  take  care 
that  we  build  not  upon  this  foundation,  hay  and  stubble  (2  Cor.  iii.  12).     3.  Let  us 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

bethink  ourselves  how  much  we  are  obliged  to  God  for  this  signal  mercy  and  bless- 
ing, the  making  known  to  us  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  flesh. 
Methinks  our  hearts  should  be  all  on  fire,  and  burn  within  us  while  we  are  dis- 
coursing and  talking  of  it.  (R.  Warner,  D.D.)  The  power  and  coming  of  our 
Lord  : — I.  The  coming  of  Chkist  was  in  poweb.  If  all  the  devils  in  hell  could  have 
hindered  it,  He  had  been  stayed.  The  kings  of  the  earth  conspire  and  take  counsel 
together ;  but  neither  their  power  nor  their  policy  could  withstand  His  coming. 
Neither  was  the  glory  of  Christ  wanting,  though  it  conveyed  itself  in  a  less  public 
form.  He  had  a  famous  harbinger  to  go  before  Him  and  prepare  His  way.  There  was 
majesty  in  His  humility.  II.  The  gospel  is  no  weak  thing,  but  comes  in  power. 
Christ  came  once  unto  men  ;  He  comes  still  unto  men  in  the  Spirit.  The  law 
came  with  more  terror,  but  the  gospel  comes  with  more  power.  For  that  could  not 
turn  his  heart  that  bare  it  in  his  hand ;  but  the  gospel  is  able  to  change  the  man 
(Eom.  i.  16).  III.  The  Woed  of  God  hath  more  power  than  all  men's  edicts. 
IV.  The  invincible  power  of  the  gospel  is  manifested  in  throwing  down  those 
BULWARKS  RAISED  AGAINST  IT.  {Thos.  Adams.)  Eye-witQCsses  of  His  majesty. — 
21ie  majesty  of  Christ : — In  the  midst  of  the  darkest  scenes  of  humiliation,  a 
peculiar  majesty  was  seen  to  accompany  our  Lord.  These  signs  of  heavenly 
greatness  confirmed  the  faith  of  His  disciples  when  sinking  under  the  pressure  of 
disappointment  and  affliction.  I.  The  apostles  were  witnesses  of  His  majesty  when 
they  witnessed  His  matchless  character.  1.  He  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  man, 
and  He  took  on  Him  the  infirmities  of  our  nature ;  but  He  was  unstained  by  our 
sins  and  imperfections.  2.  But  in  Christ  we  not  only  see  a  character  without  sin, 
but  perfect  in  its  nature ;  manifesting  the  highest  virtues  in  transcendent  excellence. 
3.  With  these  celestial  excellencies  of  character  is  joined  an  habitual  and  singular 
elevation  above  the  world.  His  affections  and  labours  are  directed  to  spiritual  and 
eternal  objects.  They  elevate  Him  in  the  midst  of  ignominy;  and  give  glory  and 
majesty  to  His  shameful  death.  4.  In  Christ  the  various  and  seemingly  opposite 
graces  of  character  combine ;  and  everywhere  appear  in  their  due  place  and  on 
their  proper  occasion.  U.  That  in  correspondence  with  the  perfection  of  the 
character  of  Christ,  is  His  manner  while  fulfilling  the  work  which  His  Father  had 
given  Him  to  do.  There  was  a  calm  and  simple,  yet  deep  solemnity,  in  His 
demeanour  and  words,  suited  to  the  truths  which  He  declared,  and  the  office  which 
He  sustained — which  manifested  also  His  sense  of  their  infinite  importance,  and 
tended  powerfully  to  affect  the  minds  of  those  whom  He  addressed.  Without  the 
slightest  tendency  to  haughtiness  or  pride,  a  Divine  authority.  He  manifested 
the  native  greatness  of  His  character.  III.  There  were  extraordinary  events 
AND  WONDERS  in  hcavcn  and  on  earth,  which  in  the  midst  of  the  deepest 
humiliation,  gave  indications  of  the  majesty  of  Christ.  {S.  MacGill,  D.D.) 
He  received  from  God  the  Father  honour  and  glory.  The  vision  of  Chrii^t^s  majesty  : 
■ — I.  The  person  to  whom  this  honour  is  given.  "  He  received."  H.  From 
WHOM  He  received  it.  The  Father  gives,  the  Son  receives.  The  Father  speaks 
from  heaven,  the  Son  hears  it.  III.  What  He  received.  1.  Christ  would  receive 
honour  of  His  Father.  2.  All  honour  and  glory  is  Christ's,  as  being  delivered  to 
Him  by  the  Father  (Luke  x.  22).  3.  All  true  and  blessed  honour  comes  from  God, 
and  is  to  be  sought  there.  IV.  The  time  when  the  apostles  beheld,  and  theib 
Master  received,  this  glory  and  majesty.  1.  "  When  there  came."  Why  did 
the  apostles  single  out  the  transfiguration,  more  than  any  other  event,  to  exemplify 
Christ's  majesty,  and  the  honour  conferred  on  Him  by  the  Father  ?  (1)  Because 
Moses  and  Elias  appeared  to  Him  there :  in  all  the  rest  of  His  miracles  He  had  no 
company  but  men  on  earth,  now  He  had  a  testimony  from  two  glorious  saints  in 
Paradise.  (2)  Because  He  was  adorned  with  celestial  glory.  Nothing  of  earth 
was  seen,  but  a  Divine  and  heavenly  majesty  appeared.  2.  "  Such  a  voice." 
This  is  the  voice  that  shall  one  day  be  heard  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the 
other.  3.  "  From  the  excellent  glory."  There  be  glories  in  the  world,  but  they  are 
not  excellent  (Gen.  xlix.  3,  4).  This  glory  is  admirable.  (1)  For  dignity.  It  is  a 
glory :  and  this  hath  been  the  scope  of  most  men's  endeavours  and  reaches. 
(2)  For  clarity.  It  is  not  a  hidden,  but  a  revealed  glory  (Col.  iii.  4).  Clear, 
both  for  condition,  it  shall  be  excellent ;  for  cognition  and  apprehension,  it  shall 
be  seen  in  the  full  excellency  of  it.  It  is  an  everlasting  solstice ;  the  length  is 
interminable,  the  brightness  unchangeable,  the  fulness  unvariable.  (3)  For  verity. 
It  shall  be  indeed,  not  in  show  only,  but  upon  us.  (4)  For  the  eternity.  If  it  had 
an  end,  it  were  not  excellent.  V.  The  matter  and  subst.^nce  of  the  testimony. 
1.  "  This  " ;  the  word  shows  Him  to  be  that  Messias,  long  before  prophesied,  and 


«HAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  103 

now  manifested.  This,  singularly ;  not  another,  but  this  is  He.  2.  "  My  Son," 
consubstantially,  because  begotten  of  Mine  own  substance.  Originally  Mine,  by 
«nion  of  nature  ;  though  in  Him  others  be  made  Mine  also,  by  adoption  of  grace. 

3.  "  Beloved,"  eternally ;  not  in  time  accepted,  but  before  all  beginning  begotten. 

4.  "  In  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  and  never  was  offended :  all  other  men  were  the 
children  of  wrath ;  I  could  not  be  pleased  with  them ;  but  in  this  Son  I  rest. 
^Thos.  Adams.)  The  Father  well  pleased  in  the  Son  : — I.  It  is  very  important 
that  you  have  right  thoughts  of  the  Sonship  of  Christ,  or  of  the  sense  in  which 
Christ  is  affirmed  to  be  God's  Son.  Is  is  clear  from  Scripture  that  Christ  is  the 
Son  of  God,  in  such  sense  as  to  prove  Him  Divine ;  for  St.  Paul  argues  from  His 
Sonship,  His  superiority  to  angels,  "  Unto  which  of  the  angels  said  He  at  any  time. 
Thou  art  My  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee  ?  "  II.  We  are  now  to  consider 
the  statement,  that  in  this  beloved  Son  God  "  is  well  pleased."  We  shall  now 
regard  the  Son  solely  in  His  character  of  Mediator — that  character  which  He  was 
born  to  assume.  The  Father  maybe  considered  as  "well  pleased"  in  His  Son, 
first,  because  Christ's  mediation  magnified  all  the  attributes  of  God,  and  secondly, 
because  it  met  all  the  necessities  of  man.  And  now,  having  investigated  the  causes 
of  the  Father's  being  "  well  pleased  "  in  the  Son,  it  becomes  us  to  ask  you  whether, 
when  Christ  is  displaying  His  character  of  a  Saviour,  you,  too,  are  "  well  pleased  " 
in  Him.  Judge  your  own  restoration  to  God's  forfeited  image,  by  deciding  whether 
any  of  the  like  reasons  operate  to  make  you  "  well  pleased "  in  Christ.  {H. 
3Ielvill,  B.D.)  Graduated  certification  of  gospel  truth  : — I.  The  Divine  revela- 
tion which  he  had  on  the  holy  mount  was  ceetifting.  II.  The  Divine  revelation 
which  he  had  in  the  inspired  record  was  more  certifying.  1.  The  written  Word 
furnishes  a  greater  variety  of  Divine  manifestations.  2.  The  written  Word  offers 
opportunities  to  a  larger  number  of  witnesses.  3.'  The  written  Word  supplies  better 
conditions  for  the  formation  of  a  sound  judgment.  III.  The  Divine  revelation  that 
he  had  in  his  own  consciousness  was  the  most  certifying.  Peter  draws  a  com- 
parison between  the  light  of  the  Bible  and  the  light  of  Christian  consciousness,  and 
implies  that  the  latter  is  far  more  valuable  than  the  former.  1.  The  one  is  a  lamp, 
the  other  is  a  "  day,  or  morning  star."  2.  The  one  is  without,  the  other  is  within. 
3.  The  one  is  temporary,  the  other  is  permanent.  4.  The  one  is  the  harbinger  of 
everlasting  day,  the  other  is  not  necessarily  so.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  19-21.  A  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place. — The  Word  of  God  a  light 
shining  in  a  dark  place  : — I.  In  showing  the  correctness  of  this  description,  I 
would  begin  with  reminding  you  that  by  the  "  dark  place  "  we  must  understand 
this  world  in  relation  to  its  spiritual  condition.  But  in  the  midst  of  all  this  dark- 
ness a  light  has  still  been  shining,  and  that  light  is  the  Word  of  God.  II.  To 
illustrate  it  by  a  reference  to  facts.  Has  it  not  uniformly  come  to  pass  that 
true  religion  has  flourished  or  decayed  in  exact  proportion  to  the  degree  in  which 
the  Bible  has  been  disseminated  or  suppressed  ?  1.  In  practically  applying  the 
subject,  the  first  inference  which  I  shall  deduce  from  it  is  that  suggested  by  St. 
Peter  himself  in  the  text — seeing  that  there  is  such  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place, 
"  ye  will  do  well  that  ye  take  heed  to  it."  Bear  in  mind  the  purpose  for  which  it 
was  vouchsafed  :  not  to  gratify  a  vain  curiosity,  not  to  puff  up  with  fleshly  wisdom, 
but  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,  to  enlighten,  convert,  and  purify  the  soul.  Bear 
in  mind  that  it  is  not  enough  to  live  under  the  light ;  you  must  also  walk  in  the 
light.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  light  is  around  you  ;  it  must  be  also  in  you.  You 
may  have  your  understanding  enlightened  with  Scriptural  truths,  and  yet  your 
heart  may  be  "  a  dark  place."  2.  Seeing  that  there  is  such  a  light  shining  in  a 
dark  place,  ye  wiU  do  well  to  aid  the  diffusion  of  it.  Having  "  taken  heed  to  it  " 
yourselves,  let  it  be  your  care  to  extend  the  blessing  of  it  to  others.  Can  you, 
indeed,  do  otherwise?  {E.  Cooper,  M.A.)  Unfulfilled  prophecy  a  light  provided 
for  the  Church  of  Christ : — I.  State  some  op  the  uses  of  unfulfilled  prophecy. 
1.  One  use,  of  course,  is  to  prove  the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  God's  Word,  estab- 
lishing by  implication  His  foreknowledge.  2.  Another  use  of  unfulfilled  prophecy 
is  guidance  and  direction.  3.  Unfulfilled  prophecy  is  also  for  warning  both  to  the 
Church  and  to  sinners — to  the  Church,  that  they  may  be  found  ready,  with  their 
loins  girt,  overcoming  the  evil,  and  waiting  for  the  glory ;  to  the  world,  that  they 
may  have  opportunity  to  escape,  or,  if  they  refuse,  be  left  without  excuse  in  the 
rejection  of  the  truth.  4.  Hope  is  specially  strengthened  and  sustained  through 
the  communication  of  what  is  to  come.  5.  Among  many  other  uses  of  unfulfilled 
prophecy  is  the  answer  which  it  affords  to  the  questionings  of  infidelity.     II.  The 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

PRINCIPLES  ON  WHICH  PROPHETICAL  LANGUAGE  AND  ITS  STATEMENTS  SHOULD  BE  INTER- 
PRETED. To  the  question,  "  How  can  we  certainly  discover  the  right  way  of  inter- 
preting unfulfilled  prophecy,"  we  answer  at  once,  "  By  observing  how  God  has 
interpreted  prophecy  in  what  has  been  fulfilled  already."  III.  Let  us  now  proceed 
to  discuss  in  a  few  words  the  one  pre-eminently  great  event  of  unfulfilled  prophecy 
— The  second  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  great  focus  of 
prophetic  light,  and  all  other  events  and  circumstances  are  gathered  in  beautiful 
symmetry  around  it.  IV.  The  events  which  we  believe  will  be  connected 
with    the   Advent.      (C.   J.    Goodhart,   31. A.)  Scri2)ture   light   the   mo»t   sure 

light : — I.  It  is  possible  that  a  good  man  mat  be  in  the  dark.  Was  not 
David  in  the  dark  (2  Sam.  xxii.  29)  ?  Was  not  Job  in  the  dark  (Job  xix.  8)  ? 
A  good  man  may  live  and  dwell  in  a  place  or  town  where  no  means  of  grace 
are ;  in  a  poor,  dark,  and  ignorant  corner  of  the  world.  Did  not  Job  dwell  in 
the  land  of  Uz  ?  As  a  good  man  may  be  offended  and  stumbled,  so  he  may 
stumble  into  some  mistakes  and  errors ;  erroneous  times  are  dark  times :  every 
error  is  darkness,  as  truth  is  light.  Ye  see  how  it  is  in  a  room  where  there  are 
many  pictures ;  though  ye  see  some  of  them  presently,  yet  others  have  a  silken 
curtain  drawn  before  them,  which  ye  see  not  immediately :  so  here,  though  God 
do  reveal  much  unto  you,  yet  there  is  a  silken  curtain  that  is  still  drawn  before 
some  truths,  and  therefore  even  a  good  man  may  be  much  mistaken.  And  if  a 
good  man  may  be  under  some  temptation  and  sin,  then  he  may  be  in  the  dark. 
II.  Though  a  good  man  mat  be  in  the  dark,  tet  he  hath  Scripture  light  to  walk 
BT.  God  hath  not  left  him  comfortless,  and  without  light,  in  obscure  darkness. 
But  have  not  even  wicked  men  this  light  also  of  the  Scripture,  to  walk  by  in  their 
darkness?  I  answer.  They  have  it  as  a  blind  man  hath  the  sun.  And  though  a 
wicked  man  doth  hear  and  may  read  the  Scripture,  and  know  many  truths  which 
are  therein  contained,  yet  he  doth  not  know  the  greatness  of  them.  But  may  not  a 
good  man's  eyes  be  held  from  this  Scripture  light  ?  When  he  is  converted,  then 
are  his  eyes  said  to  be  opened,  then  is  he  anointed  with  the  unction  of  the  Holy 
One,  and  doth  know  all  things  necessary  unto  his  salvation.  He  doth  not  shut 
his  own  eyes  against  any  Scripture  light.  He  knows  more  than  he  is  able  to 
utter  and  he  feels  more  than  he  can  speak.  And  though  some  Scripture  truths  may 
be  hidden  from  him  sometimes,  yet  he  hath  his  intervals  of  sight.  And  though  a 
good  man  may  be  in  the  dark,  yet  God  doth  not  leave  him  so.  III.  This  Scripture 
LIGHT  IS  the  most  EXCELLENT,  SAFE,  AND  SURE  LIGHT  :  it  is  the  light  of  Hghts ;  the 
most  excellent  light  of  all  under  God  in  Christ.  For — 1.  It  is  a  true  light.  There 
is  God  seen  especially,  and  Christ  seen ;  there  also  you  see  yourself  and  your  own 
dirty  face ;  there  also  you  see  the  creatures  that  are  in  the  room  with  you,  and  their 
emptiness  ;  the  emptiness  of  men,  and  of  all  comforts  and  relations.  2.  As  it  is  a 
true  light,  so  it  is  an  admirable  and  wonderful  light.  In  other  knowledges,  the 
more  ye  know,  the  less  ye  admire  ;  but  in  Scripture  knowledge,  the  more  light  ye 
have,  and  the  more  ye  know,  the  more  you  will  lift  up  your  hands  and  admire,  at 
your  own  ignorance  and  God's  gi-ace.  3.  As  it  is  an  admirable  light,  so  it  is  a  safe 
and  sure  light.  Other  false  lights  do  lead  men  into  fens  and  bogs  ;  but  we  have  a 
more  sure  and  safe  light,  and  the  more  of  it  falls  upon  your  eye,  the  more  is  your 
eye  preserved.  4.  As  it  is  a  safe  and  sure  light,  so  it  is  a  pleasant  and  satisfying 
light.  Light  is  pleasant  to  the  eye,  and  the  eye  ordinarily  is  not  satisfied  with 
seeing  :  but  this  is  that  light  which  doth  bring  men  to  rest ;  for  when  a  man  knows 
what  shall  be  his  portion  for  ever,  then  his  heart  is  at  rest,  and  not  before.  5.  As  it 
is  a  pleasant,  satisfying  light,  so  it  is  a  full  and  sufficient  light,  able  to  make  the 
man  of  God  perfect  unto  salvation.  What  state  can  you  be  in,  but  the  Scripture 
will  find  a  commandment  for  your  rule,  and  a  promise  for  your  assistance  and 
reward  ?  6.  As  it  is  a  full  and  sufficient  light,  so  it  is  a  clear  light,  a  light  that 
shineth  ;  it  hath  no  thief  in  it,  as  many  lights  and  candles  have  :  not  that  there  are 
no  hard  things  therein,  and  difficulties.  Yet  what  truth  is  in  all  the  Scripture, 
which  is  necessary  to  salvation,  but  doth  lie  plain  and  clear  ?  ^Deut.  xxx.  11-14 ; 
Bom.  X.  6).  7.  As  it  is  a  clear  light,  so  it  is  the  best  light  in  tne  world,  the  most 
excellent  light,  a  light  beyond  all  other  things  which  do  pretend  to  light.  (1) 
Wherein  doth  this  Scripture  light  exceed  or  go  beyond  revelations  or  visions,  and 
the  light  thereof?  (n)  This  Scripture  light,  as  you  have  seen,  is  a  full  light, 
a  light  which  did  shine  forth  at  once  in  and  by  Jesus  Christ.  Eevelations  and 
visions  are  more  particular ;  though  God  did  sometimes  speak  in  that  way  and 
manner,  yet  then  He  spake  drop  by  drop ;  but  now  He  hath,  in  these  last  days, 
spoken  His  full  mind  by  His  Son.     These  were  but  as  the  apples  which  did  fall 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  105 

from  the  tree  of  wisdom ;  but  in  the  gospel  and  Scripture,  ye  have  the  whole  tree 
itself,  (b)  Scripture  light  is  the  highest  light ;  Scripture  dispensation  the  highest 
dispensation  :  the  dispensation  of  visions  and  revelations  was  of  a  lower  rank,  (c) 
This  Scripture  light  is  a  more  sure  and  certain  light :  for  if  God  should  now  speak 
unto  you  by  visions,  or  visional  revelations,  how  would  you  know  that  this  were  the 
voice  of  God,  and  not  a  delusion  of  Satan  ?  (d)  There  is  no  danger  in  tending  upon 
and  taking  heed  to  this  Scripture  light.  But  if  men  do  attend  to  revelations  and 
visions,  how  easily  may  they  be  drawn  to  despise  the  Scripture,  and  such  as  do  wait 
thereon  !  (e)  Why  but,  you  will  say,  maj.^not  God  speak  by  extraordinary  visions 
and  revelations,  in  these  days  of  ours  ?  Though  God  may  thus  speak  to  some  of 
His  servants,  yet  if  I  have  an  itching  desire  after  visions  and  revelations  it  is  ill. 
(2)  As  for  dreams  and  voices,  the  Scripture  or  the  written  Word  of  God,  is  more 
excellent  than  those  ;  and  the  hght  of  Scripture  is  the  best  light  in  compare  with 
any  light  that  may  come  from  them.  (3)  As  for  impressions  made  upon  the  soul, 
whether  by  a  particular  word  or  without  it ;  the  Scripture,  or  the  wiitten  Word  of 
God,  is  more  sure  than  those ;  and  the  light  thereof  the  best  and  most  excellent 
light  in  comparison  with  the  light  of  impressions.  If  I  do  make  an  impression  the 
certain  judge  of  doctrines,  then  am  I  much  deceived.  (4)  As  for  that  light  and  law 
of  grace  which  is  in  the  saints,  the  hght  of  the  Scripture  is  beyond  and  more 
excellent  than  that.  The  light  and  law  within  us  here  is  imperfect,  for  we  see  but 
in  part,  and  know  in  part  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9) ;  but  the  Word  of  God  written,  the  Scrip- 
ture and  the  light  thereof,  is  perfect  (Psa.  xix.).  The  law  of  grace  within,  and  the 
light  within,  is  not  able  to  convince  others.  Though  experience  be  a  great  help  to 
our  faith,  yet,  take  it  alone,  abstracted  from  the  Word,  and  it  cannot  heal  our 
unbelief.  But  though  experience  be  the  parent  of  hope,  yet  it  is  not  the  ground  of 
our  faith ;  it  is  an  help  unto  faith,  but  not  the  first  ground  of  our  faith.  (6)  As 
for  Divine  providence,  the  Scripture  is  a  more  sure  lifrht  than  it.  For  God  doth 
sometimes  try  us  by  His  providence.  So  He  led  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilder- 
ness forty  years  to  try  them,  and  to  know  what  they  would  do,  and  to  humble  them. 
But  the  Scripture  is  the  rule  of  our  doing,  and  therefore  a  more  safe  and  sure  light 
to  walk  by.  And  if  the  providence  of  God  extendeth  unto  all  our  actions,  good  and 
evil,  and  to  evil  as  weU  as  unto  what  is  good,  then  there  is  no  certain  rule  or  judg- 
ment to  be  made  up  from  thence.  (7)  As  for  human  reason  and  the  light  thereof. 
Scripture  light  is  more  excellent  than  it.  For  though  human  reason  be  a  beam  of 
Divine  wisdom,  yet  if  it  be  not  enlightened  with  a  higher  light  of  the  gospel,  it 
cannot  reach  unto  the  things  of  God  as  it  should.  And  as  mere  human  reason 
cannot  make  a  sufficient  discovery  of  sin,  so  it  cannot  strengthen  against  sin  and 
temptation :  temptations  answered  by  reason  will  return  again  ;  it  cannot  convert 
the  soul.  "  But  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul."  Though  the 
light  of  reason  be  good,  yet  it  is  not  a  saving  light.  K  is  revelation  hght  from  the 
gospel  that  doth  bring  to  heaven  :  mere  human  reason  cannot  do  it.  Is  there  then 
no  use  of  reason  and  of  the  light  thereof  ?  Yea,  much,  not  only  in  civil  things  but 
in  the  things  of  God,  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual.  IV.  As  Scripture 
light  is  the  most  excellent  light,  the  best  and  most  sure  light,  so  it  is  oue  duty, 

THE  DUTY  OF  ALL  THE  SAINTS  AND  PEOPLE  OF  GoD,  TO  TAKE  HEED  THEREUNTO,  and    that 

especially  in  their  dark  times  and  places.  Yet  further,  ye  shaU  do  well  that  ye  take 
heed  thereunto,  for  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  written  is — 1.  The  Word  of  the  Son  of 
God.  The  more  excellent  the  person  is  that  speaks  unto  you,  the  more  diligently 
ye  will  take  heed  unto  what  he  saith.  2.  As  the  Scripture  is  the  Word  of  the  Son, 
so  it  is  the  only  rule  of  our  Uves.  Now  that  which  is  the  only  rule  of  our  lives,  we 
are  in  special  manner  to  take  heed  unto.  3.  As  the  Scripture  and  the  Word  of  God 
written  is  the  only  rule,  so  it  is  that  salt  which  doth  season  aU  your  enjoyments. 
It  is  the  rule  and  measure  of  your  worship  ;  for  if  you  do  not  worship  according  to 
the  appointments  of  God  in  His  written  Word,  your  worship  is  but  idolatry  and  super- 
stition. It  is  the  great  relief  of  your  souls  in  time  of  temptation.  It  is  that  which 
sanctifieth  all  your  outward  comforts,  even  amongst  the  creatures  (1  Tim.  iv.  4). 
And  shaU  the  Word  of  God  written  be  such  a  blessed  treasure,  and  shall  we  not  take 
heed  thereunto?  4.  As  it  is  the  salt  of  all  your  comforts,  so  it  is,  and  shall  be,  your 
judge  at  the  great  day.  But  the  text  saith,  "  That  we  shall  do  well  to  take  heed 
thereunto,  until  the  day  dawn,  and  day-star  arise  in  our  hearts  "  :  but  the  day  hath 
dawned  on  me,  and  the  day-star  hath  arisen  in  my  heart ;  and  therefore  now,  what 
need  I  take  heed  to  the  Scripture  or  the  wi'itten  Word  any  longer  ?  I  answer,  Yea, 
still  you  have  need  to  do  it :  for  did  not  the  day  dawn  and  the  day-star  arise  on  the 
hearts  of  the  apostles  and  Christians  in  their  days,  according  to  your  sense  and 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

meaning  ?  yet  they  still  attended  on  the  written  Word  of  God.  But  why  are  the 
saints  and  people  of  God  to  take  heed  unto  the  Scripture  and  the  written  Word  of 
God  especially  in  their  dark  times  and  seasons  ?  I  answer,  Because  they  are  then 
in  most  danger  of  stumbling  and  falling  :  he  that  walketh  in  the  dark,  stumbleth  ; 
and  who  is  not  then  apt  to  fall  ?  But  by  taking  heed  to  this  sure  light,  they  shall 
be  kept  from  the  power  of  their  darkness.  What  must  we  do,  that  we  may  take 
heed  and  attend  unto  Scripture  ?  Ye  must  do  three  things — I.  Ye  must  attend  to 
know  and  understand  it.  II.  Ye  must  attend  to  keep  it.  And — III.  Ye  must  attend 
to  walk  by  the  same.  And — I.  For  your  knowledge  in  and  understanding  of  the 
Scripture,  and  the  written  Word  of  God,  ye  must — 1.  Observe,  keep,  and  hold  fast 
the  letter  of  it ;  for  though  the  letter  of  the  Scripture  be  not  the  Word  alone,  yet  the 
letter  with  the  true  sense  and  meaning  of  it,  is  the  Word.  2.  If  you  would  have  the 
true  knowledge,  and  understand  the  Scripture,  and  so  behold  this  great  light  in  its 
fuU  glory  and  brightness,  you  must  diligently  inquire  into  the  true  sense  and 
meaning  of  it,  for  the  true  sense  and  meaning  is  the  soul  thereof.  II.  But  secondly, 
and  more  practically :  if  you  would  so  understand  the  Scripture,  that  you  may  take 
heed  thereunto,  as  to  a  light  shining  in  your  dark  state,  then — You  must  go  to  God 
for  the  Spirit ;  for  without  it  ye  cannot  understand  the  mind  of  God  in  the  Scripture : 
no  man  knows  the  mind  of  Paul  but  by  the  spirit  of  Paul ;  nor  the  mind  of  Peter 
but  by  the  spirit  of  Peter  ;  no  man  knows  the  mind  of  Christ  but  by  the  Spirit  of 
Christ :  stand  therefore  under  gospel  dispensations,  where  the  Spirit  braathes. 
Take  heed  of  a  worldly,  fleshly  mind ;  fleshly  sins  do  exceedingly  blind  the  mind 
from  the  things  of  God,  and  a  worldly  mind  cannot  savour  them.  Yet  take  heed 
that  you  be  not  too  indulgent  to  your  own  condition,  disposition,  or  opinion.  It  is 
a  good  speech  of  Hilary :  He  is  the  best  interpreter  of  Scripture  that  doth  rather 
bring  his  sense  from  the  Scripture  than  carry  his  sense  to  the  Scripture.  If  you 
■do  desire  so  to  understand  the  Scripture,  as  it  may  be  a  light  to  all  your  paths ; 
then  be  sure  that  you  put  nothing  else  in  commission  with  it  for  your  rule.  It  is 
with  the  Scripture  in  this  respect,  as  with  God,  Christ,  and  the  Spirit;  if  you  come 
to  God  for  help,  yet  if  you  join  another  god  in  commission  with  Him,  He  will  not 
give  down  His  help.  And  so  here :  though  you  come,  and  tend,  and  wait  upon 
•God  in  the  Scripture,  yet  if  there  be  anything  else  which  you  do  make  your  joint 
rule  with  the  Scripture,  any  light  within  you,  or  precept  of  man  without  you,  it  will 
not  give  down  its  light  to  you,  but  you  will  be  left  in  the  dark.  III.  Yet  one  thing 
more.  If  you  would  take  heed  to  the  Scripture,  you  must  so  heed  the  same,  as  you 
may  walk  thereby.  Therefore  prize  it  much :  who  takes  heed  to  that  which  he  does 
not  prize  ?  Therefore,  also,  get  your  heart  affected  with  love  to  every  truth  which 
you  know;  for  because  men  receive  not  the  truth  in  the  love  thereof,  there- 
fore God  doth  give  them  up  to  strong  delusions :  men  take  heed  unto  what 
they  love.  And  therefore  that  you  may  heed  it  so  as  to  walk  thereby,  let  it 
be  your  continual  companion,  going  where  you  go;  if  you  go  into  the  fields, 
oh !  let  the  Word  go  with  you ;  if  into  your  calling,  oh !  let  the  Scripture 
and  the  written  Word  of  God  be  with  you.  Thus  shall  you  take  heed 
unto  it,  as  to  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place.  {W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Until 
the  day  dawn. — The  dawn  of  day  : — The  words  admit  of  two  rather  different 
meanings.  They  may  refer  to  the  light  which  sometimes  breaks  upon  the  heart 
after  prayer  or  meditation.  I  would  suppose  that  you  are  a  real  inquirer  after 
truth.  You  have  been  searching  for  it  long  and  earnestly,  but  the  dark  places  in 
the  Bible— those  dark  places  which  underlie  all  great  truths — and  the  dark  places 
in  your  own  heart  are  many.  You  cannot  see  any  light.  Least  of  all  can  you  see 
that  you  have  yourself  any  part  or  lot  in  the  matter.  The  day  cometh  and  also 
the  night,  for  the  night  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  coming  as  the  day.  It  will  come 
in  its  own  appointed  time,  and  not  a  moment  sooner.  The  day's  dawn  will  arise 
exact  to  its  moment.  Or  it  may  be  thus.  You  have  lost  the  light  which  you  once  . 
enjoyed.  Something  has  come  between  your  soul  and  God,  and  now  all  is  dark. 
What  shall  you  do  ?  Pray  on,  repent  on,  confess  on,  plead  on  a  little  longer.  It 
only  wants  your  perseverance  "until  the  day  dawn."  Or  perhaps  you  say,  "I  have 
never  known  any  of  the  rapturous  views  which  some  speak  of."  It  is  not  given  to 
everybody  in  the  same  degree,  but  to  each  as  he  needs  it,  or  as  he  can  bear  it.  The 
nights  are  as  needful  as  the  days  to  all  the  processes  of  nature.  A  brightened  day 
lOf  Christian  experience  may  be  yet  waiting  for  you.  Do  not  let  hope,  or  faith,  or 
courage  fail  until  it  dawn.  Meanwhile,  that  "  until "  is  a  very  important  part  of 
the  blessing.  Many  a  good  thing  has  lost  all  its  goodness  simply  because  it  came 
too  soon.     Do  not  hurry  on  the  morning.     God  knows  best  how  long  your  night 


CHAP.  I.]  II.  PETER.  107 

.•shall  be.  But  there  is  another  interpretation  which  belongs  to  the  text  with  equal 
or  greater  appropriateness.  "  The  day."  The  day  of  all  days  for  this  world  is  the 
Advent  of  Christ.  That  day  which  will  throw  over  this  earth  a  light  never  seen 
before,  and  clothe  it  with  the  most  brilliant  splendour.  Of  the  exact  period  of  that 
day's  dawn  we  have  been  most  wisely  and  mercifully  kept  in  ignorance.  Is, 
then,  this  life  all  night  ?  Why  speak  of  the  day  dawning  as  if  it  is  all  now 
so  very  dark  ?  It  is  all  comparative.  This  life  is  a  very  happy  life ;  this 
world  is  a  beautiful  world  ;  but  we  all  find  that  colour  changes  its  hue 
under  contrast.  To-morrow's  exceeding  joy  may  make  a  bright  yesterday  look 
dull,  however  pleasant  it  was.  And  when  Jesus  comes  with  His  glory,  and 
the  heavens  are  new,  and  the  earth  is  new,  all  that  is  now  the  holiest,  and 
loveliest  and  best — tainted  as  it  all  is  with  sin  and  change  and  sorrow — it  will  all 
look  like  a  shadow.  Still  it  is  not  to  disparage  the  present,  but  to  exalt  the  future, 
that  we  are  told  to  wait  "  until  the  day  dawn."  To  all  the  mysteries  of  our  world 
and  being,  to  the  chaos  of  our  thoughts,  to  the  dark  things  within  and  around  us 
on  every  side,  the  key,  the  true  solution  is  "  until  the  day  dawn."  Bear  that  key 
with  you,  and  it  will  unlock  the  whole  year.  Expect  and  be  always  looking  for 
more  and  more  light,  tiU  one  by  one  the  shadows  flee  away,  and  the  whole  orb  of 
truth  rises  in  his  majesty,  and  "the  day  dawn."  (J.  Vavghan,  3I.A.)  The  day- 
star  arise. — The  rising  of  the  day-star : — There  is  a  difference  between  "  the 
dawn"  and  the  "day-star."  The  light  of  "the  dawn"  is  general;  the  "day- 
star  "  gives  the  thought  a  focus  and  fixes  it  to  one  spot.  "  The  dawn  "  is  to  the  whole 
world ;  "  the  day-star  "  arises  in  our  hearts.  What  "  the  day-star  "  is,  is  left  with- 
out a  shadow  of  a  doubt.  For  Christ  has  singled  it  out  as  the  last  title  which  He 
claims  in  the  whole  Bible.  "  I  am  the  bright  and  morning  star."  As  "  the  morning 
star  "  He  comes  to  us  in  the  night  of  waiting,  doubt,  and  sorrow.  "  The  day-star  " 
is  the  morning  close  at  hand.  "  The  dawn "  is  the  day  begun.  Yet  they  can 
never  be  divided.  "  The  dawn  "  must  soon  be  full  day,  and  "  the  day-star  "  loses 
itself  in  the  risen  sun.  Now  trace,  for  a  moment,  the  connection  which  Ues  in  the 
allegory — between  "the  dawn"  and  "the  day-star."  I  will  give  one  or  two 
instances.  You  have  been  reading  your  Bible,  and  searching  into  some  of  the  deep 
things  there.  You  are  a  sincere  inquirer  after  truth,  but  for  a  while  it  is  all  dark  ; 
and  when  it  is  the  darkest,  just  before  the  light  is  going  to  break,  a  thought  comes 
into  your  mind  ;  it  gives  you  afresh  view  of  the  whole  subject ;  it  gets  clearer  and 
clearer;  it  spreads  like  "the  dawn"  over  the  hiUs;  in  another  bound  it  unveils 
itself  to  you.  Why?  Whence  comes  this  "  dawn  "  ?  Is  it  from  the  head,  or  is  it 
from  the  heart  ?  Certainly  from  the  heart.  There  is  Christ  in  it.  "  The  day- 
star  "  is  in  that  "  dawn."  You  feel  it.  The  day  "  dawned  "  when  "  the  day-star 
arose  in  your  heart."  And  so  Christ  made  the  night  of  your  ignorance  turn  into 
the  day  of  your  joy.  I  will  take  it  thus.  Some  sin  has  gradually  darkened  your 
mind.  It  throws  its  deep  shadow  over  everything.  You  cannot  find  forgiveness, 
and  your  whole  life  is  wrapped  in  gloom.  The  night  of  your  life  becomes  thicker 
and  thicker.  You  pray ;  there  is  no  answer.  You  repent ;  but  there  is  no  peace. 
When  almost  suddenly — as  it  seems  to  you — a  hope  seems  to  spring  up,  things  begin 
to  look  brighter,  despair  ceases,  praise  and  hope  find  their  way  to  your  thoughts. 
There  is  a  "  dawn  "  !  But  whence?  Christ  and  His  tender  love  has  come  nearer 
to  you.  He  reveals  Himself  to  you  as  your  complete  and  all-sufficient  Saviour. 
AH  is  changed.  Why  ?  "  The  day-star  "  has  "  risen  in  your  heart."  Or  see  what 
shall  be  presently.  The  second  Advent  of  Christ  is  breaking  upon  this  earth.  A 
new  day  shall  burst.  This  is  wonderful.  Are  you  frightened  at  the  solemnities  of 
that  hour — the  convulsions  of  nature — the  roUing  of  the  heavens  up  into  a  scroU — 
the  sight  of  God  !  Do  they  appal  you  ?  No.  You  are  calm ;  you  rejoice.  Why  ? 
For  "  the  day-star  "  is  there,  and  long  before.  He  has  been  "  the  day  dawn  "  in  your 
soul.  He  is  yours.  You  know  Him.  He  has  "  risen  in  your  heart,"  and  now  has 
come  the  noontime  of  your  joy !  Now  let  us  observe  a  little  more  concerning 
"  the  day-star."  And  first  I  notice  that  it  "  ariseth  "  of  its  own  free  action,  of  the 
very  necessity  of  its  being ;  in  its  very  nature  it  ariseth.  It  must  "  arise."  We  do 
not  make  the  day-star  "  arise  " ;  neither  do  we  make  Jesus  come  into  our  poor 
dark  hearts.  He  does  it  of  His  own  free  grace  and  favour.  He  comes  of  His  own 
necessity.  Such  is  His  love  He  cannot  but  choose  to  come.  He  "  arises"  in  your 
heart.  The  expression  shows  that  it  is  gradual.  "He  arises."  He  goes  higher 
and  higher.  The  light  gets  stronger,  and  we  see  Him  more  and  more.  And  where 
the  days  are  His,  we  know  that  there  will  be  day — perfect  day.  The  great  question 
ior  every  one  of  us  is,  "  Is  that  day-star  yet  arisen  in  my  heart  ?     If  not,  why  ?  " 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAr.  i. 

Are  you  wilfully  hindering  it  ?  Are  you  turning  away  from  it  ?  {J.  Vaughnn,  31. A.) 
Christmas,  or  the  tico  risings  of  the  Day-sta7-  {Lnke  i.  78,  79  ;  2  Pet.  i.  19) : — Christ  has 
two  incarnations — the  one  outside  of  man,  the  other  inside ;  two  births — the  one  in 
the  manger,  the  other  in  the  soul.  I.  His  objective  birth  or  rising.  "  The  day- 
spring  from  on  high,"  (fee.  This  day-star  arose  in  Bethlehem.  First,  the  origin  of 
this  rising.  "  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  God's  sovereign,  compassion- 
ate, boundless  love  was  the  cause.  Secondly,  the  purpose  of  this  rising.  "  To  give 
light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness."  This  was  the  condition  of  the  world — in  moral 
night,  ignorant,  polluted,  miserable.  II.  His  subjective  birth  or  rising.  "  The 
day-star  arise  in  your  hearts."  Christ  is  in  His  disciples  (1)  as  the  dominant 
object  of  affection,  (2)  as  the  dominant  theme  of  thought,  (3)  as  the  dominant 
motive  of  action.  III.  His  objective  and  subjective  rising  compared.  Both  agree 
in  this.  They  are  from  the  "  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  But  the  following 
are  points  of  difference :  First,  the  objective  rising  exists  independently  of  the 
subjective ;  but  not  the  subjective  without  the  objective.  In  other  words,  unless 
Christ  had  been  born  in  the  manger  He  would  never  have  been  born  by  faith  in  the 
human  soul.  Secondly,  the  objective  rising  may  become  a  curse,  the  subjective 
never.  The  man  who  does  not  receive  Christ  into  the  heart,  but  continues  to  reject 
Him,  is  injured  immensely  by  the  fact  of  His  outward  revelation.  Thirdly,  the 
objective  rising  is  independent  of  human  choice  or  effort,  but  not  the  subjective. 
Fourthly,  the  objective  rising  is  not  a  matter  of  consciousness ;  the  subjective  is. 
That  Christ  came  into  the  world  can  only  be  proved  by  logic  and  dealing  with 
known  facts;  consciousness,  the  strongest  and  ultimate  proof,  can  yield  no  testi- 
mony to  the  fact.  But  the  subjective  rising  is  a  matter  of  consciousness.  Con- 
clusion :  Learn — first,  what  personal  Christianity  is ;  secondly,  what  the  duty  of 
the  preacher  is.     Try  to  get  Christ,  and  not  creeds,  into  human  souls.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  No  prophecy  ...  is  of  any  private  interpretation. — On  the  indis- 
creet application  of  Scriptural  prophecy  : — As  the  term  "  prophecy  "  is  here  used 
without  any  limitation,  it  seems  clearly  designed  to  comprehend  all  those  prophetical 
enunciations  which  have  been  vouchsafed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  All  such 
prophecy  is  a  light  vouchsafed  to  man  from  the  great  Source  of  all  light  and  all 
knowledge.  But  it  is  a  light  purposely  shaded  at  first  with  some  obscurity  ;  it 
shines  only  as  in  a  dark  place  until  the  day  of  its  fulfilment  shall  dawn.  The 
epithet  here  applied  to  prophecy  is  rendered  in  our  translation  "  more  sure,"  but  it 
would  be  more  correctly  rendered  "  more  firm,  more  constant,  more  enduring." 
Prophecy  affords  a  more  firm  and  enduring  evidence  than  miracles,  inasmuch  as  it 
has  a  slow  and  gradual  development,  unfolding  its  proofs  more  clearly  and  com- 
pletely as  ages  roll  on ;  its  light  shines  forth  to  the  eyes  of  men  with  a  fuller  and 
brighter  lustre  in  proportion  as  the  veil  is  withdrawn  from  futurity.  When  miracles 
are  no  longer  vouchsafed  for  the  confirmation  of  the  truth,  prophecy  becomes,  by 
the  lapse  of  time,  a  more  powerful  and  convincing  head  of  evidence  as  it  is  proved, 
by  the  course  of  events,  to  be  really  prophecy.  And  thus  may  it  be  said  that  in 
the  more  clear  and  full  development  of  one  species  of  evidence  we  have  a  growing 
compensation  for  whatever  may  be  conceived  to  be  lost  by  the  lapse  of  time  to  the 
strength,  or  clearness,  or  fulness  of  the  other.  To  this  "  word  of  prophecy,"  he 
says,  "ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,"  that  ye  pay  the  serious  attention  which  it 
deserves ;  but  he  cautions  them  first,  before  they  do  so,  to  know,  to  recollect,  to 
bear  in  mind  that  "  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation." 
The  apostle  intends  to  caution  his  disciples  against  the  hasty,  fanciful,  and  incon- 
siderate interpretation  of  all  Scriptural  prophecy.  Our  attention  then  becomes 
directed  by  these  words  to  a  subject  of  great  importance — the  indiscreet  application 
of  the  prophetical  parts  of  Scripture.  Now  undoubtedly  we  may  trace  one  fruitful 
source  of  this  practice  to  the  propensity  which  prevails  with  all  of  us  to  magnify 
and  exaggerate  everything  that  passes  within  the  narrow  sphere  of  our  immediate 
observation.  As  in  the  objects  presented  to  our  bodily  senses,  that  which  stands 
immediately  before  us  absorbs  the  greatest  portion  of  our  attention  and  precludes 
the  sight  of  others  that  are  more  distant.  Misled  by  these  false  and  prejudiced  views, 
individuals  have  been  easily  carried  away  with  the  notion  that  the  occurrences  of 
their  own  little  day  and  contracted  sphere  of  observation  are  of  sufficient  distinction 
to  be  made  the  specific  subject  of  Scriptural  prophecy.  But  operating  in  unison  with 
this  undue  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  events  which  are  present  have  been 
an  over-forward  disposition  to  display  superior  penetration  and  ingenuity  amongst 
those  who   interpret  prophecy,  and   credulous   superstition   and  prying    curiosity 


CHAP.  1.]  II.  PETER.  109 

amongst  those  who  believe  their  interpretations.  Now  in  the  case  of  the  prophecies 
contained  in  Scripture  a  peculiarly  tempting  field  is  opened  for  those  persons  who 
are  given  to  these  adventurous  speculations.  But  it  is  of  far  less  importance  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  which  have  led  to  the  indiscreet  application  of  Scriptural 
prophecies,  or  to  detail  what  has  taken  place  in  times  past,  than  to  endeavour  to 
repress  the  practice  by  pointing  out  the  injury  which  it  must  ever  cause  to  the 
general  interests  of  religion  and  to  the  authority  of  the  Christian  records.  Now 
the  principal  evil  which  must  with  too  great  certainty  be  "derived  from  this  practice 
is  that  of  exciting  a  general  prejudice  against  the  truth  of  all  Scriptural  prophecies. 
When  different  persons  are  found,  many  of  sufficient  credit  for  learning  and  acute- 
ness,  eagerly  and  confidently  applying  the  prophecies  to  events  widely  different, 
what  impression  must  be  made  on  the  public  at  large,  on  those  who  form  their 
judgment  of  these  matters  at  a  distance  and  without  paying  close  and  accurate 
attention  to  them  ?  The  inference  will  too  obviously  be  that  the  prophecies  of 
Scripture  may  be  turned  to  any  sense  at  the  will  of  the  interpreter.  Nor,  if  such 
an  imputation  be  cast  on  the  prophetical  parts  of  Scripture,  will  the  cause  of 
revelation  in  general  wholly  escape.  Or,  if  the  credit  of  Scripture  be  saved,  it  will 
be  saved  only  at  the  expense  of  the  veracity  and  good  faith  of  those  who  attempt 
these  interpretations.  While  so  much  positive  evil  results  from  the  licence,  which 
has  been  too  often  assumed,  of  hazarding,  on  light  grounds  and  hasty  views,  novel 
interpretations  of  Scriptural  prophecy,  the  most  powerful  of  all  arguments  is 
afforded  by  this  consideration  to  induce  all  persons  who  feel  the  reverence  due  to 
the  inspired  Word  of  God  to  abstain  most  carefully  from  this  indiscreet  practice. 
Prophecy  was  not  given  to  gratify  the  prying  curiosity  of  men  ever  anxious  to  dive 
into  the  recesses  of  futurity,  nor  to  exercise  their  forward  ingenuity  in  searching 
out  new  interpretations  which  might  arrest  the  attention  of  the  public.  It  was 
designed  for  a  more  availing,  a  greater,  and  a  nobler  purpose — for  the  purpose  of 
affording  to  the  truth  of  Christianity  its  growing  testimony,  which  might  be 
unfolded  by  degrees  and  open  fresh  conviction  on  the  mind  as  the  revolutions  of 
time  should  produce  its  gradual  accomplishment.  Consistently  with  this  purpose, 
a  certain  degree  of  obscurity  was  unavoidable.  Under  these  views  of  the  real 
character  and  true  intent  of  Scriptural  prophecy,  let  it  be  hoped  that  the  inter- 
pretation of  it  will  never  be  attempted  carelessly  and  lightly  from  any  private 
motive  of  exhibiting  penetration  and  ingenuity,  but  only  from  the  deliberate  con- 
sideration of  what  may  conduce  to  the  right  understanding  and  elucidation  of  it. 
(G.  D'Oyly,  D.D.)  Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved. — The  inspira- 
tion, conscription,  and  exposition  of  Scripture : — The  apostle  had  formerly  com- 
mended reading  of  the  prophets  by  the  benefit  of  them ;  now  in  reading  them  he 
gives  warning  from  the  difficulty  of  understanding  them.  There  often  lies  a  deep 
and  hidden  sense  under  a  familiar  and  easy  sentence.  Let  not  men  rush  into 
their  exposition,  like  hasty  soldiers  into  a  thicket,  without  seeking  direction  from 
the  captain.  When  we  come  to  read  them  we  must  subject  ourselves  to  the 
government  of  the  Spirit.  I.  The  inspibation  from  God.  It  was  not  a  vision 
of  their  own  heads,  but  they  "  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 

I.  Consider  the  infallible  completion  of  things  long  before  prophesied  in  their  due 
seasons  (1  Kings  xiii.  2).  2.  Consider  that  their  being  hath  continued  from  Moses 
unto  this  day.  This  is  miraculous — that  in  so  great  hurly-burlies  and  alterations 
they  should  not  be  lost !  3.  That  the  scope  of  it  should  be  to  build  up  no  worldly 
thing,  but  only  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  to  direct  us  to  Jesus  Christ.  4.  That 
it  should  pass  with  credit  through  the  whole  world,  and  find  approbation  of  all 
languages,  nations,  and  places,  and  where  it  meets  with  oppositions  should  make 
way  through  them  as  thunder  through  the  clouds.  5.  That  the  Hebrew  tongue, 
wherein  the  Old  Testament  was  written,  doth  so  excel  all  tongues,  in  antiquity, 
sanctity,  majesty.  6.  The  majesty  of  the  style,  which  yet  is  not  only  powerful 
in  words,  but  effectual  in  working  (Heb.  iv.  12).  7.  From  the  very  baseness  of 
falsehood,  we  learn  to  admire  the  lustre  of  truth.  To  disgrace  and  weaken  the 
credit  of  the  Scriptures  Satan  had  his  poets  and  fabulists,  whose  mythologies 
were  obtruded  for  true  reports.  8.  This  is  an  argument  of  the  finger  of  God 
and  supernatural  power  in  Holy  Writ,  that  the  penners  of  it  renounced  all 
affectation  and  delivered  the  true  message  even  against  their  own  reputations. 

II.  The  conscription.  Although  not  by  the  will  of  man,  yet  was  it  done  by  the 
hand  of  man.  1.  "Men."  Why  did  not  God  choose  some  other  nature  of  greater 
authority  and  credit  ?  (1)  That  no  glory  might  be  ascribed  to  the  means  (2  Cor. 
iv.  7).     (2)   In   commiseration   of   man's  weakness  (Exod.  xx.  19).     (3)  For  the 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

security  of  our  souls.  If  our  preacher  were  an  angel,  Satan  could  transform  him- 
self into  that  shape.  (4)  In  fit  respondence  to  the  work  of  our  redemption  (Act& 
iii.  22).  2.  "  Men  of  God."  This  is  an  ancient  attribute  (1  Kings  xvii.  18  ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  17).  But  especially  they  are  called  men  of  God  because  their 
dispensation  comes  from  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  13).  3.  "Holy  men."  The  Lord  who. 
sent  them  qualified  them.  III.  The  exposition,  which  is  by  no  private  spirit,  but 
by  the  Holy  Spirit's  illumination  of  man's  mind  and  directing  the  Church.  He  that 
expounds  the  Scripture  upon  the  warrant  of  his  own  spirit  only  doth  lay  the  brands 
of  the  fire  together  without  the  tongs,  and  is  sure  at  least  to  burn  his  own  fingers. 
(Thos.  Adams.)  The  Bible : — That  is  the  Scriptural  way  of  stating  the  great  doctrine 
that  the  Bible  is  inspired,  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.  And  you  remark  the 
grand  simplicity  and  directness  of  the  statement.  The  Holy  Spirit  speaks  to  us  in 
Holy  Scripture  :  we  can  understand  that ;  let  us  hold  by  that.  How  He  does  so  is 
not  revealed,  and  so  we  cannot  tell.  We  are  all  well  assured  that  the  supernatural 
influences  of  that  Divine  Spirit  do  still,  in  every  Christian  man  and  woman,  weave 
in  with  the  natural  workings  of  soul  and  mind,  of  heart  and  head.  When  the 
Blessed  Spirit  helps  us  to  pray  He  avails  Himself  of  our  natural  faculties — of  our 
memory,  of  our  perception  of  things  which  may  befall  us,  of  our  capacity  of 
feeling,  trusting,  and  loving.  The  prayer  is  the  prayer  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  it 
is  also  the  individual  and  characteristic  prayer  of  this  man,  of  that  woman,  of  that 
little  child.  It  is  exactly  so  with  that  rarer  gift  which  we  call  inspiration,  as  with 
the  sanctifying,  comforting,  prayer-prompting  communications  for  which  ordinary 
Christians  ask  and  look  day  by  day.  You  know  how  the  inspired  writers  of  the 
Bible  retain  their  individuality.  St.  Paul  does  not  write  like  St.  John ;  St.  Luke 
writes  quite  differently  from  either,  and  St.  Peter  from  all  three.  And  yet  do  you 
not  feel  that  there  is  a  something  which  belongs  to  all  of  the  many  men  that  wrote 
the  Bible  ?  One  Breath  has  breathed  upon  them,  one  Hand  has  touched  them  aU  I 
In  a  certain  loose  way  we  may  speak  of  the  inspiration  of  the  poet,  the  orator,  the 
painter ;  and  it  would  be  mere  pedantry  to  quarrel  with  a  phrase  so  well  understood 
in  the  main.  But  never  forget  that  differing  not  in  degree  but  in  kind — differing 
essentially,  vitally,  altogether — is  the  true,  holy,  Divine  inspiration  of  the  men  who 
wrote  the  I3ible.  And  we  are  to  distinguish  likewise  between  the  supreme  inspira- 
tion thus  described  and  the  ordinary  and  stiU-continuing  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
There  is  a  wide  difference  between  that  guidance  which  you  and  I  may  get  for  the 
asking  and  the  true  inspiration  of  those  few  among  our  race  concerning  whom  St. 
Peter  tells  us  that  "  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  And  now,  having  said  so  much  as  to  the  nature  of  the  inspiration  of  the 
Bible,  let  me  suggest  some  thoughts  upon  God's  Word  generally.  The  Bible, 
remember,  is  the  Word  of  God.  It  not  merely  contains  the  Word  of  God,  as  in 
some  sense  all  things  do,  for  "the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
firmament  showeth  His  handiwork  "  ;  it  is  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  the  flower  and 
crown  of  all  God's  revelation  to  man  :  everything  that  we  can  read,  or  fancy  we 
read,  on  the  pages  of  Nature  or  Providence  we  find  far  more  plainly  stated  in 
the  IBible.  And  we  find  a  vast  deal  more.  We  find  there  things  most  needful  to 
salvation,  about  which  earth  and  sea  and  stars  are  dumb.  Even  the  lesser  charac- 
teristics of  the  Bible  are  noteworthy.  The  very  language  of  this  blessed  book  is 
such  as  wonderfully  suits  its  claim  to  be  God's  message  to  all  races  and  tongues. 
The  Bible  bears  translation  into  other  languages  as  no  other  book  does.  It  is  at 
home,  and  at  its  ease,  in  all  languages.  You  hear  it  said  that  there  is  no  more 
remarkable  miracle  of  skill  than  the  language  of  our  English  Bible,  which  is  indeed 
the  standard  of  perfection  in  our  tongue.  But  there  is  something  more  in  this  than 
the  industry,  tact,  scholarship  of  the  translators.  Surely  it  is  that  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  used  holy  men  of  old  to  write  God's  message  to  all  human  beings.  He  moved 
them  so  to  write  it  in  such  tongues  and  in  such  words  as  would  bear,  as  human 
words  never  did,  to  be  rendered  into  the  mother  tongue  of  every  being  who  has 
speech  and  reason.  And  then  how  this  wonderful  volume  suits  all  men  in  matters 
more  vital  than  its  language!  There  are  exti-aordinary national  diiferences  in  ways 
of  thinking  and  feeling,  and  extraordinary  differences  in  such  things  between  the 
people  of  different  times  and  ages.  And  yet  this  wonderful  book,  dealing  as  it  does 
throughout  just  with  religious  faith  and  feeling,  suits  man  wherever  you  find  him, 
comes  home  alike  to  Eastern  and  Western  nations,  never  gets  out  of  date,  never  is 
outgrown  by  the  increasing  intelligence  of  educated  men,  and  expresses  no  feeling 
in  which  all  Christian  people  cannot  sympathise.  How  it  suits  all  our  moods,  all 
our  circumstances !     In  every  state  of  thought  and  feeling  we  find  what  we  want 


CHAP.  I.]  n.  PETER.  Ill 

in  the  Bible.  And  just  remember,  too,  what  is  the  secret  of  the  Bible's  so  coming 
home  to  all.  It  is  not  a  question,  here,  of  those  intuitions  of  moral  truth  which,  when 
we  read  or  hear  them,  make  us  say,  "Now  that  is  true,"  or  even  say, "  We  have  often 
thought  that  ourselves,  though  we  never  heard  it  expressed  before."  The  Bible  comes 
home  to  all,  because  it  treats  of  great  facts  which  we  never  could  have  found  out, 
yet  which,  when  told,  commend  themselves,  not  to  sensibility,  not  to  taste,  not 
even  to  intellect  merely,  but  to  our  conscience  and  heart,  to  our  deepest  and  most 
solemn  convictions  of  what  is  Divine  and  right  and  true !  Therefore  it  is  that 
the  little  volume  is  the  first  prized  possession  of  childhood,  and  old  people 
have  it  in  their  hands  to  the  last ;  therefore  it  goes  into  the  soldier's  knapsack ; 
therefore  the  aged  statesman  and  judge  would  read  it  like  a  little  child  ;  therefore 
you  find  it  under  the  pillow  of  the  dying,  wet  with  tears.  (A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.) 
The  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  ; — That  the  book  which  we  emphatically 
call  the  Bible  was  written  by  the  inspiration  of  suggestion.       I.  Let  us  inquike 

WHAT  IS  TO  BE  UNDERSTOOD  BY  THE  INSPIRATION  OF  SUGGESTION.       Some    SUppOSe    there 

are  three  kinds  of  inspiration,  which  they  distinguish  from  each  other  by  calling 
the  first  the  inspiration  of  superintendency,  the  second  the  inspiration  of  elevation, 
and  the  thu'd  the  inspiration  of  suggestion.  1.  It  was  necessary  that  the  sacred 
penman  should  be  conscious  of  Divine  inspiration  all  the  while  they  were  writing. 
It  was  not  sufficient  for  them  barely  to  know  that  they  began  to  write  under  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit.  For  nothing  short  of  a  constant  realising  sense  of  His  motion 
and  direction,  could  give  them  full  assurance  that  what  they  wrote  was  the  infallible 
"Word  of  God,  which  they  might  honestly  present  to  the  world  under  the  sanction  of 
Divine  authority.  2.  The  Supreme  Being  was  as  able  to  afford  them  the  highest 
as  the  lowest  kind  of  inspiration.  3.  That  the  sacred  penmen  were  utterly  incapable 
of  writing  such  a  book  as  the  Bible  without  the  constant  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  4.  To  suppose  that  they  sometimes  wrote  without  the  inspiration  of  sug- 
gestion, is  the  same  as  to  suppose  that  they  sometimes  wrote  without  any  inspira- 
tion at  all.  The  distinguishing  of  inspiration  into  three  kinds  is  a  mere  human 
invention,  which  has  no  foundation  in  Scripture  or  reason.  And  those  who  make 
this  distinction  appear  to  amuse  themselves  and  others  with  words  without  ideas. 
5.  That  the  sacred  penmen  profess  to  have  written  the  Scriptures  under  the 
immediate  and  constant  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  It  may  be  proper  to  take 
particular  notice  of  the  most  weighty  objections  which  may  be  made  against  the 
PLENARY-INSPIRATION  OF  THE  HoLY  SCRIPTURES.  1.  It  may  be  Said  there  appears  a 
great  diversity  in  the  manner  and  style  of  the  sacred  penmen,  which  cannot  be 
easily  reconciled  with  the  supposition  of  their  being  equally  and  constantly  guided 
by  the  inspiration  of  suggestion.  It  is  true,  indeed,  we  plainly  discover  some 
variety  in  the  manner  and  style  of  the  sacred  writers.  But  this  is  easy  to  account 
for,  by  only  supposing  that  God  dictated  to  each  sacred  penman  a  manner  and  style 
corresponding  to  his  own  peculiar  genius,  education,  and  manner  of  hving.  But 
on  the  other  hand,  we  find  a  much  greater  similarity  in  their  manner  and  style  than 
could  be  reasonably  expected  on  supposition  of  their  writing  agreeably  to  their  own 
genius  and  taste,  without  the  suggesting  influences  of  the  Spirit.  2.  It  may  be 
said  that  the  mistakes  and  contradictions  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  plainly  refute 
the  notion  of  their  being  written  under  the  inspiration  of  suggestion.  To  this  it 
may  be  replied  in  general,  that  most  of  the  supposed  mistakes  and  contradictions  to 
be  found  in  the  Scriptures  may  be  only  apparent,  and  so  might  be  fully  removed,  if 
we  were  better  acquainted  with  the  original  languages  in  which  the  sacred  books 
were  written,  and  with  the  customs  and  manners  of  the  different  ages  and  places  in 
which  the  sacred  penmen  lived.  But  the  direct  and  decisive  answer  to  this  objection 
is  that  it  operates  with  equal  force  against  every  kind  of  inspiration.  3.  It  may  be 
said,  since  God  originally  intended  that  the  Bible  should  be  transcribed  by  different 
hands  and  translated  into  different  languages,  there  was  no  occasion  for  His  sug- 
gesting every  thought  and  word  to  the  sacred  penmen  ;  because,  after  all,  their 
writings  must  be  subject  to  human  defects  and  imperfections.  It  is  sufficient  to 
observe  here  that  every  transcription  and  translation  is  commonly  more  or  less 
perfect,  in  proportion  to  the  greater  or  less  perfection  of  the  original.  And  since 
the  Scriptures  were  designed  to  be  often  transcribed  and  translated,  this  made  it 
more  necessary,  instead  of  less,  that  they  should  be  written,  at  first,  with  peculiar 
accuracy  and  precision.  4.  It  may  be  said  that  the  Apostle  Paul  seems  to  acknow- 
ledge, in  1  Cor.  vii.,  that  he  wrote  some  things  in  that  chapter  according  to  his 
own  private  opinion,  without  the  aid  or  authority  of  a  plenary  inspiration.  In  one 
verse  he  says,  "  I  speak  this  by  permission,  and  ncrt  of  commandment."    And  in 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

another  verse  he  says,  "  To  the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord."  If  we  understand  these 
expressions  literally,  then  we  must  suppose  that  the  apostle  and  all  the  other  sacred 
penmen  always  wrote  under  a  plenary  inspiration,  only  when  they  gave  intimations 
to  the  contrary.  But  we  find  no  such  notice  given,  except  in  the  chapter  under 
consideration ;  and  therefore  we  may  justly  conclude  that  all  the  other  parts  of 
Scripture  were  written  by  the  immediate  inspiration  of  God.  But  if,  in  the  second 
place,  we  understand  the  apostle  as  speaking  ironically  in  the  verses  before  us,  then 
his  expressions  will  carry  no  idea  of  his  writing  without  Divine  aid  and  authority. 
And  there  is  some  ground  to  understand  his  words  in  this  sense.  There  is,  how- 
ever, a  third  answer  to  this  objection,  which  appears  to  be  the  most  satisfactory ; 
and  that  is  this  :  the  apostle  is  here  speaking  upon  the  subject  of  marriage ;  and 
he  intimates  that  he  has  more  to  say  upon  this  subject  than  either  the  prophets  or 
Christ  had  said  upon  it.  Accordingly  he  says,  "  I  speak  this  by  permission,  and  not 
of  commandment.  To  the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord."  By  these  expressions  he 
means  to  distinguish  what  he  said  from  what  other  inspired  teachers  had  said  upon 
the  same  subject.  On  the  whole  there  appears  no  solid  objection  against  the 
plenary  inspiration  of  any  part  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
every  argument  which  proves  them  to  be  partly,  equally  proves  them  to  be  altogether, 
given  by  the  immediate  inspiration  of  God.  Improvement :  1.  If  the  Bible  contains 
the  very  ideas  and  sentiments  which  were  immediately  suggested  to  the  sacred  pen- 
men by  the  Divine  Spirit,  then  gi-eat  caution  and  circumspection  ought  to  be  used 
in  explaining  Scripture.  The  words  of  Scripture  may  not  be  lightly  altered,  nor 
expunged,  nor  supplied,  nor  wrested  from  their  plain  and  obvious  meaning  according 
to  the  connection  in  which  they  stand.  2.  If  the  Divine  Spirit  suggested  every  word 
and  thought  to  the  holy  penmen,  then  it  is  not  strange  that  they  did  not  understand 
their  own  writings.  These  the  apostle  tells  us,  in  our  context,  they  did  not  under- 
stand. They  might,  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit,  write  precepts,  predictions,  promises, 
and  theatenings,  of  whose  import  they  were  ignorant,  that  would  be  very  intelligible 
and  very  useful  in  future  ages.  They  wrote  not  for  themselves,  but  for  others  ;  not 
for  present,  but  future  times.  And  this  affords  an  additional  evidence  of  the  plenary 
inspiration  of  all  the  sacred  writings.  3.  If  the  Bible  was  written  under  the  inspira- 
tion of  suggestion,  then  it  is  an  infallible  rule  of  faith,  and  the  only  standard  by 
which  to  try  our  religious  sentiments.  4.  If  holy  men  of  old  wrote  as  they  were 
moved  by  God,  then  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  the  Bible  should  bear  clear  and 
strong  marks  of  its  Divine  author.  Accordingly,  when  we  look  into  the  Bible,  we 
find  the  image  and  superscription  of  the  Deity  on  every  page.  It  displays  all  the  per- 
fections of  God.  5.  If  the  Bible  be  the  immediate  revelation  of  God's  mind  and  will 
to  men,  then  it  is  a  most  precious  book.  6.  If  the  Bible  contains  the  mind  and  will 
of  God,  then  all  who  enjoy  it  may  know  in  this  world  what  will  be  their  state  in  the 
next.  It  clearly  describes  both  heaven  and  hell,  and  the  terms  upon  which  we  may 
obtain  the  one  and  escape  the  other.  7.  If  the  Bible  be  indeed  the  Word  of  God, 
then  it  is  not  strange  that  it  has  had  such  a  great  influence  over  the  minds  of  men. 
{N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  An  inspired  definition  of  inspiration : — "  Men  spake — from 
God  "  (E.V.).  It  is  a  definition  of  inspiration.  A  definition  simple,  precise,  ex- 
haustive. "  Men  spoke  " — spoke,  without  ceasing  to  be  men  ;  spoke  with  all  those 
characteristics  of  phrase  and  style,  of  thought  and  mind,  of  position  and  history 
which  mark  and  make  the  man ;  yet  "  spoke  from  God,"  with  a  message  and 
mission,  under  an  influence  and  an  impulse,  a  control  and  a  suggestion,  which  gave 
to  the  word  spoken  a  force  and  a  fire,  a  touch  and  a  contact,  a  sight  and  an  insight, 
unlike  other  utterances  because  of  a  breath  of  God  in  it,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all 
flesh.  "  Men  spake."  "  Human  beings,"  St.  Peter  says — the  "men"  is  emphatic. 
Shall  we  blame  those  who,  first  of  all,  would  ask.  Who  ?  would  busy  themselves  in 
the  endeavour,  by  examination  and  comparison,  to  learn  what  can  be  learnt  of  the 
authorship  of  particular  books ;  and  would  then  go  on  to  ask.  What  ?  in  other 
words,  to  bring  every  appliance,  of  manuscript  and  version  and  ancient  quotation, 
to  bear  upon  the  text  of  Scripture.  Inquiries  like  these  are  only  for  the  learned. 
But  let  us,  who  can  but  look  on  or  listen,  at  least  refrain  from  denunciations  of  a 
process  for  which  we  ought  to  have  the  deepest  respect.  Men  spake.  And  does 
not  St.  Peter  as  good  as  say,  And  remained  men  in  the  speaking  ?  Where  is  the 
authority  for  supposing  that  the  inspiring  Spirit  levelled  the  intellects,  obliterated 
the  characteristics,  overwhelmed  the  peculiarities,  of  the  several  writers?  Men 
spake.  And  one  of  them  has  told  us  how.  By  a  careful  investigation  of  various 
writings  going  before,  and  an  earnest  endeavour  to  arrange  in  their  true  order  the 
facts  of  the  history  which  he  was  to  chronicle.     Men  spake— and  men  wrote — and 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  113 

they  were  men  still.  Matters  which  toil  and  pains  could  ascertain — matters  which 
lay  in  the  province  of  intellect,  whether  in  the  way  of  research  or  in  the  way  of 
discovery — matters  for  which  God  had  provided  the  instrument  of  knowledge  in  the 
human  being  as  by  Him  created,  even  though  ages  and  generations  might  come  and 
go  before  the  actual  knowledge  was  made  his  own — on  these  things  inspiration  was 
silent.  Men  spake,  and  in  speaking  were  men  still.  Even  their  message,  even 
the  thing  they  were  sent  to  tell,  must  be  expressed  in  terms  of  human  speech, 
through  a  medium  therefore  of  adaptation  and  accommodation.  Men  spake — from 
God.  "Moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  two  halves  of  the  text  are  dependent 
upon  each  other.  Not  angels — or  they  had  no  sympathetic,  no  audible  voice  for 
man.  Not  machines — or  speech  (which  is,  by  definition,  intelligence  in  communi- 
cation) had  been  a  contradiction  in  terms.  These  human  beings  spake  from  God  ; 
for  He  had  something  to  say,  and  to  say  to  man.  There  is  something  which  God 
only  can  say.  There  is  something  which  reason  cannot  say,  nor  experience,  nor 
discovery,  nor  the  deepest  insight,  nor  the  happiest  guessing,  nor  the  most  sagacious 
foresight.  There  is  a  world  of  heaven,  which  flesh  and  blood  cannot  penetrate. 
There  is  a  world  of  spirit,  impervious  even  to  mind.  There  is  a  world  beyond 
death,  between  which  and  the  living  there  is  an  impassable  gulf  fixed.  More  than 
this — there  is  a  world  of  cause  and  consequence,  which  no  moralist  can  connect  or 
piece  together.  There  is  a  world  of  providence,  which  gives  no  account  of  itself  to 
the  observer.  More  yet  than  this.  There  is  a  fact  of  sin,  inherited  and  handed  on, 
working  everywhere  in  hearts  and  lives,  spoiling  God's  work  and  ruining  man's 
welfare.  Who  can  tell,  concerning  this,  whether  indeed  there  is  any  recovery  from 
this  deep,  this  terrible,  this  fatal  fall  ?  And  yet  man  needs  to  hear  of  these  things. 
And  confess  now,  you  who  have  gone  with  us  thus  far,  how  utterly  beside  the  mark 
of  such  a  work  as  this  would  have  been  an  inspiration  of  science,  or  an  inspiration 
of  geography,  or  an  inspiration  of  history,  or  an  inspiration  of  geology,  astronomy, 
botany,  or  chemistry.  Men  spake,  and  they  spake  from  God.  He  had  that  to  tell 
which  men  by  searching  could  not  find  out.  He  set  this  human  being  to  tell  it  to 
his  fellows.  But  oh,  trust  God  to  do  the  right  thing !  Do  not  mistrust  Him,  and 
summon  Him  to  the  bar  of  your  poor  intellect  every  time  that  you  cannot  quite  see 
what  He  was  about.  How  can  you  account  for  a  slaughter  of  twenty  thousand  men 
in  one  tiny  battlefield  in  Beth-horon  or  on  Mount  Ephraim  ?  how  can  you  explain 
the  dumb  ass  speaking  with  man's  voice,  and  Samuel  coming  up  again  at  the  bidding 
of  the  witch  of  Endor,  &c.  Say,  if  you  are  wise,  with  the  three  Israelites  to  King 
Nebuchadnezzar,  "  I  am  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter."  Men  spake — 
and,  while  they  spake,  they  were  men  still.  But  they  spake  from  God — and  what 
they  said  from  Him  was  truth  and  nothing  but  truth,  and  in  it,  thus  spoken,  is  the 
very  light  of  my  life.  Never  will  I  part  with  that  light  till  I  reach  a  world  which 
no  longer  wants  it,  because  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  light 
thereof.     (Dean  Vaughan.)  , 


CHAPTEB  n. 

Ver.  1.  But  there  were  false  prophets  also. — False  prophets  and  false  teachers  : — 
I.  A  NARRATION,  1.  The  Connection  of  the  words.  "  Also  "  implies  that  there  were 
always  true  prophets.  God  never  leaves  His  people  without  tutors.  2.  The  corrup- 
tion of  the  persons.  "  False  prophets."  (1)  They  that  came  in  the  name  of  God, 
but  were  never  sent  by  God  (Jer.  xxiii.  21).  (2)  They  that  come  in  God's  name, 
and  are  sent,  but  deliver  a  false  message.  3.  The  intrusion  of  their  mischief. 
*'  Among  the  people."  But  durst  these  black  impostors  press  into  so  famous  a 
light,  and  not  fear  discerning  ?  (1  Kings  xviii.  19,  xxii.  6.)  They  say  it  is  half  a 
protection  to  foreknow  a  danger :  behold  the  apostle's  fidelity,  and  therein  God's 
mercy.  II.  A  caution.  1.  Who  they  be  that  assault  us.  Falsehood  insinuates 
itself  always  in  the  semblance  of  truth.  For  error  is  so  foul  a  hag,  that  if  it  should 
come  in  its  own  shape,  all  men  would  loathe  it.  2.  Whither  they  come.  Not  to 
the  Turks,  or  Gentiles,  or  other  heretics  only;  but  to  "  you  "  that  have  the  gospel. 
They  seem  to  come  unto  you,  but  indeed  they  come  against  you  ;  they  promise 
your  good,  but  they  perform  your  hurt.  (1)  God  suffers  these  for  the  trial  of  our 
iaith  (1  Cor.  xi.  19).     (2)  God  suffers  them,  that  the  true  pastors  might  more 

37 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lU 

patiently  exercise  their  knowledge.  Heresy  makes  men  sharpen  their  wits,  the 
better  to  confute  it.  (3)  God  permits  them  for  men's  ingratitude.  3.  These  false 
teachers  intrude  themselves — as  sometimes  a  gamester,  being  flushed  with  his  luck 
— and  they  meet  with  three  encouragements  :  (1)  The  numbers  and  applaudings  of 
their  auditors  (Jer.  v.  31).  (2)  The  honour  and  respect  that  is  done  them.  (3) 
Large  gifts  and  riches.  4.  Tneir  unavoidable  necessity.  They  will  press  in,  and 
we  cannot  easily  stave  them  off.  Jesus  Christ  must  enlighten  our  hearts  to  decUne 
these  false  teachers.  Now  the  means  whereby  Christ  teacheth  us  is  the  Scripture, 
III.  A  DEscBiPTioN  of  thesc  pernicious  liars,  concerning  whom  we  find  a  threefold 
mischief :  one  that  issues  from  them,  another  that  abides  in  them,  a  third  that  is 
inflicted  on  them.  1.  Their  seminary  mischief,  offensive  and  noxious  to  others. 
(1)  The  matter,  what  they  bring  in — "  damnable  heresies."  (a)  Heresy  is  that 
which  doth  diametrically  oppose  the  truth,  and  set  up  an  opinion  against  it.  Error 
is  when  one  holds  a  wrong  opinion  alone ;  schism,  when  many  consent  in  their 
opinion ;  heresy  runs  further,  and  contends  to  root  out  the  truth,  (b)  "  Heresies,"  in 
the  plural,  to  point  at  a  multitude.  The  troubles  of  the  Church  seldom  come  single ; 
but  either  unite  their  forces,  as  the  five  Amorite  kings  combined  against  Gibeon 
(Josh.  X.  5) ;  or  separately  they  vex  her  on  every  side,  as  Solomon  was  assaulted  by 
Hadad,  Eezon,  and  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xi.).  (c)  They  "  shall  bring  in."  Here  is 
the  necessity.  "Shall";  though  provision  spend  aU  her  wit,  and  prevention  all 
her  strength,  yet  no  avoiding  it.  (d)  The  malignity  of  them.  "  Damnable  heresies.'* 
(i)  Because  they  are  reprobated  of  God.  (ii)  Because  pestilent  to  the  kingdoms  or 
nations  where  they  are  admitted,  (iii)  Because  they  bring  destruction  to  all  their 
followers  and  defenders.  2.  The  causes  that  produce  such  inevitable  effects. 
3.  The  manner  of  their  induction  :  underhand,  "  privily."  (1)  Their  subtlety, 
whereby  they  insinuate  their  unseen  poisonous  seeds  (Eph.  iv.  14).  (2)  Their 
vigilant  care  to  spy  out  the  opportunity,  how  they  may  privily  bring  heresy  in. 
(Micah  ii.  1).  (3)  Their  hypocrisy,  with  the  covertly  carriage  of  their  intended 
plagues  (Rom.  xvi.  18).  Vice  dares  not  walk  without  a  borrowed  shape.  4.  Their 
criminal  evil.  (1)  They  "  deny."  It  were  bad  enough  to  shght  Him,  worse  to 
forget  Him,  yet  worse  to  forsake  Him ;  but  to  deny  Him  is  fearful.  (2)  "  The  Lord." 
Not  a  creature,  not  a  man,  not  a  father,  not  a  friend,  not  an  angel,  not  themselves  ; 
but  the  Lord,  this  is  more  fearful.  (3)  "That  bought  them."  It  is  much  to  deny 
a  benefactor,  more  to  deny  a  parent,  more  to  deny  a  Creator ;  but  yet  there  is  a> 
step  higher:  to  deny  a  Eedeemer.  Denial  of  Christ  is  of  two  sorts — either  in  judg- 
ment or  in  practice ;  denial  in  faith  or  denial  in  fact.  The  latter  is  of  infirmity, 
the  other  of  infidelity.  5.  The  punishment.  (1)  They  "  bring  upon  themselves." 
(a)  The  wicked  are  the  causes  of  their  own  condemnation  (Isa.  1.  1 ;  Prov.  v.  22 ; 
Psa.  Ixiv.  8  ;  Jer.  ii.  17).  [b)  God  is  not  the  cause  of  man's  transgression  or  damna- 
tion (James  i.  13  ;  Rom.  ix.  19).  (c)  They  themselves  bring  it;  therefore  not  any 
fatal  necessity  out  of  themselves,  but  their  own  malice  within  them.  (2)  "  Destruc- 
tion." This  is  the  measure  of  their  punishment^total  ruin.  (3)  "  Swift."  Man 
may  shoot  and  miss,  or  his  arrow  be  so  slow  of  flight  that  it  may  be  avoided ;  but 
if  God  shoots,  He  hits  and  kills.  (Thos.  Adams.)  Error  in  the  Church: — 1.  The 
futility  of  insisting  on  having  even  now  what  might  be  called  a  pure  Church.  "  It 
must  needs  be,"  said  our  Lord,  "  that  offences  come."  2.  It  is  none  the  less  the  duty 
of  the  friends  of  truth  and  righteousness  to  maintain  the  spirit  of  a  vigilant  and 
strenuous  resistance  to  the  assaults  of  error  and  corruption.  3.  That  a  doctrine  or 
a  practice  has  many  followers,  even  among  church  members,  affords  but  a  poor 
presumption  that  it  deserves  to  be  followed  (Matt.  xxiv.  5,  10-12).  4.  The  certain 
and  irretrievable  ruin  of  ungodly  men.  5.  Finally,  let  us  bless  God  that,  through 
the  waste  wilderness  of  obstruction,  deceit,  and  delusion.  His  own  holy  Word  has 
clearly  marked  for  us  "  the  way  of  the  truth."  {J.  Lillie,  D.D.)  Doctrinal  poison  : 
— The  poison  that  ended  the  life  of  Alexander  VI.  of  Italy  was  no  less  destructive 
because  it  was  concealed  in  a  glass  of  wine.  The  virus  that  sent  to  the  grave  Sir 
Thomas  Overbury  was  not  the  less  fatal  because  it  was  hidden  in  a  jelly  handed  to 
him  by  a  fascinating  lady.  The  bite  of  the  asp  that  closed  the  career  of  Cleopatra 
was  not  the  less  deadly  because  the  reptile  rested  on  roses.  Doctrinal  poison  is 
none  the  less  mortal  because  the  pen  of  a  prince  in  erudition  inscribes  on  it  the 
word  "  scholarship."  {S.  V.  Leech,  D.D.)  Damnable  heresies. — Destructive 
heresies: — 1.  It  is  a  destructive  heresy  for  a  man  to  think  that  he  can  be  saved 
without  faith  in  Christ,  while  ignoring,  or,  it  may  be,  denying  the  redemptive  work 
of  Christ.  2.  It  is  a  destructive  heresy  for  a  man  to  think  that  he  is  safe  and  in 
the  way  of  salvation  while  yielding  to  corrupt  passions  and  living  a  careless  life* 


CHAP.  11.]  II.  PETER.  115 

3.  It  is  a  destructive  heresy  for  a  man  to  regard  himself  as  a  Christian,  and  think 
he  is  right  for  heaven,  while  possessing  nothing  of  the  mind  and  spirit  of  Christ. 

4.  It  is  a  "  heresy  of  destruction  "  for  a  man  to  think  that  if  he  abstains  from  grea 
and  glaring  transgressions  he  may  safely  indulge  in  sins  of  the  heart,  and  need  no 
be  over  particular  about  what  has  been  called  "the  minor  moraUties  of  life."  5.  It 
is  a  "  heresy  of  destruction  "  for  a  man  to  think  that  he  is  a  Christian  sheltered  by 
the  blood  of  Christ  while  he  consciously  and  continually  disregards  the  commands 
of  Christ.  6.  It  is  a  "heresy  of  destruction"  for  a  man  to  boast  that  Christ  is  all 
in  all  to  him  while  he  withholds  himself  and  all  he  has  from  Christ.  7.  It  is  a 
"  heresy  of  destruction  "  for  a  man  self-complacently,  to  suppose  that  he  may  "  gird 
up  the  loins  of  his  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  unto  the  end  "  while  he  is  conscious 
of  no  love  to  God,  and  while  cherishing  hatred  of  his  fellow-man.  Let  us  examine 
ourselves,  lest  we  should — (1)  Endanger  our  own  soul's  salvation.  (2)  Endanger 
the  souls  of  others.  (3)  Deny  the  Lord  that  bought  us.  (4)  And  so  dishonour  God, 
bring  upon  ourselves  "  swift  destruction."  [The  Study.)  Denjong  the  Lord  that 
bought  ihem. — The  master  and  his  slaves  : — There  were  three  great  stains  on  the 
civilisation  of  the  world  into  which  Christianity  came — war,  the  position  of  women, 
and  slavery.  The  relation  of  the  New  Testament  to  the  last  of  these  great  evils 
naturally  connects  itself  with  the  words  before  us.  This  same  wicked  thing,  slavery, 
is  used  as  an  illustration  of  the  highest,  sacredest  relationship  possible  to  men — their 
submission  to  Jesus  Christ.  With  all  its  vileness,  it  is  still  not  too  vile  to  be  lifted 
from  the  mud,  and  to  stand  as  a  picture  of  the  purest  tie  that  can  bind  the  soul. 
The  word  in  our  text  for  "  Lord"  is  an  unusual  one,  selected  to  put  the  idea  in  the 
roughest,  most  absolute  form.  It  is  the  root  of  our  word  "  despot,"  and  conveys, 
at  any  rate,  the  notion  of  unlimited,  irresponsible  authority.  Nor  is  this  all.  One 
of  the  worst  features  of  slavery  is  that  of  the  market,  where  men  and  women  and 
children  are  sold  like  cattle.  And  that  has  its  parallel  too,  for  this  Owner  has 
bought  men  for  His.  Nor  is  this  all ;  for,  as  there  are  fugitive  slaves,  who  "break 
away  every  man  from  his  master,"  and  when  questioned  will  not  acknowledge  that 
they  are  his,  so  men  flee  from  this  Lord  and  Owner,  and  by  words  and  deeds  assert 
that  they  owe  Him  no  obedience,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  Him.  I.  Christ's 
ABSOLUTE  OWNERSHIP.  To  material  things  and  forces  He  spake  as  their  great  Com- 
mander, saying  to  this  one  "  Go,"  and  he  went,  and  showing  His  Divinity,  as  even 
the  pagan  centurion  had  learned,  by  the  power  of  His  word,  the  bare  utterance  of 
His  will.  But  His  rule  in  the  region  of  man's  spirit  is  as  absolute  and  authoritative, 
and  there  too  "His  word  is  with  power."  Loyola  demanded  from  his  black-robed 
militia  obedience  so  complete  that  they  were  to  be  "  just  like  a  corpse,"  or  "  a  staff 
in  a  bUnd  man's  hand."  Such  a  requirement  made  by  a  man  is  of  course  the 
crushing  of  the  will  and  the  emasculation  of  the  whole  nature.  But  such  a  demand 
yielded  to  from  Christ  is  the  vitalising  of  the  will  and  the  ennobling  of  the  spirit. 
The  owner  of  the  slave  could  set  him  to  any  work  he  thought  fit.  So  our  Owner 
gives  all  His  slaves  their  several  tasks.  As  in  some  despotic  Eastern  monarchies 
the  sultan's  mere  pleasure  makes  of  one  slave  his  vizier  and  of  another  his  slipper- 
bearer,  our  King  chooses  one  man  to  a  post  of  honour  and  another  to  a  lowly  place ; 
and  none  have  a  right  to  question  the  allocation  of  work.  What  corresponds  on 
our  parts  to  that  sovereign  freedom  of  appointment  ?  Cheerful  acceptance  of  our 
task,  whatever  it  be.  The  slave's  hut,  and  Uttle  patch  of  garden  ground,  and  few 
bits  of  furniture,  whose  were  they — his  or  his  master's  ?  If  he  was  not  his  own, 
nothing  else  could  be  his  own.  And  whose  are  our  possessions  ?  If  we  have  no 
property  in  ourselves,  still  less  can  we  have  property  in  our  property.  These  things 
were  His  before  and  are  His  still.  Such  absolute  submission  of  will  and  recogni- 
tion of  Christ's  absolute  authority  over  us,  our  destiny,  work,  and  possessions,  is 
ennobling  and  blessed.  We  learn  from  historians  that  the  origin  of  nobility  in 
some  Teutonic  nations  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  dignities  enjoyed  by  the  king's 
household — of  which  you  find  traces  still.  The  king's  master  of  the  horse,  or 
chamberlain,  or  cupbearer,  becomes  noble.  Christ's  servants  are  lords,  free  because 
they  serve  Him,  noble  because  they  wear  His  livery  and  bear  the  mark  of  Jesus  as 
their  Lord.  H.  The  purchase  on  which  that  ownership  is  founded.  This 
master  has  acquired  men  by  right  of  purchase.  That  abomination  of  the  auction- 
block  may  suggest  the  better  "  merchandise  of  the  souls  of  men  "  which  Christ  has 
made  when  He  bought  us  with  His  own  blood  as  our  ransom.  First,  then,  that  is 
a  very  beautiful  and  profound  thought,  that  Christ's  lordship  over  men  is  built  upon 
His  mighty  and  supreme  sacrifice  for  men.  We  are  justified  in  saying  to  Him, 
"  0  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy  servant "  only  when  we  can  go  on  to  say,  "  Thou  hast 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

loosed  my  bonds."  Then  consider  that  the  figure  suggests  that  we  are  bought 
from  a  previous  slavery  to  some  other  master.  He  that  committeth  sin  is  the  slave 
of  sin.  If  the  Son  therefore  make  you  free,  you  shall  be  free  indeed.  III.  The  eun- 
AWATS.  We  do  not  care  to  inquire  here  what  special  type  of  heretics  the  apostle 
had  in  view  in  these  solemn  words,  nor  to  apply  them  to  modern  parallels  which  we 
may  fancy  we  can  find.  It  is  more  profitable  to  notice  how  all  godlessness  and  sin 
may  be  described  as  denying  the  Lord.  All  sin,  I  say,  for  it  would  appear  very  plain 
that  the  people  spoken  of  here  were  not  Christians  at  all,  and  yet  the  apostle  believes 
that  Christ  had  bought  them  by  His  sacrifice,  and  so  had  a  right  over  them,  which 
their  conduct  and  their  words  equally  denied.  How  eloquent  that  word  "  denying  " 
is  on  Peter's  lips!  It  is  as  if  he  were  humbly  acknowledging  that  no  rebellion 
could  be  worse  than  his,  and  were  renewing  again  his  penitence  and  bitter  weeping 
after  all  those  years.  All  sin  is  a  denial  of  Christ's  authority.  It  is  in  effect 
saying,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  It  is  at  bottom  the  uprising 
of  our  own  self-will  against  His  rule,  and  the  proud  assertion  of  our  own  indepen- 
dence. It  is  as  foolish  as  it  is  ungrateful,  as  ungrateful  as  it  is  foolish.  That 
denial  is  made  by  deeds  which  are  done  in  defiance  or  neglect  of  His  authority, 
and  it  is  done  too  by  words  and  opinions.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  ways. — Pernicious  ways : — I.  An 
ATTRACTION.  1.  The  ringleaders.  (1)  The  necessity  of  a  head  to  every  schism 
and  faction ;  never  was  breach  made  in  the  vineyard  of  Christ  but  some 
principal  beast  led  the  whole  herd.  If  their  reward  in  heaven  be  so  great  that 
save  one  soul  from  death,  how  great  shall  their  torment  be  in  hell  that  pervert 
many  souls  to  destruction!  (a)  The  way  to  suppress  a  schism  is  to  cut  off  the 
head;  it  will  be  hard  for  a  body  to  move  headless,  (h)  Seeing  there  are  such 
corrupters  of  our  truth,  and  disturbers  of  our  peace,  let  us  be  sure  to  hold  the 
truth  in  peace,  cleaving  to  our  Head,  Jesus  Christ  (Col.  ii.  19).  (2)  The  great 
force  of  example.  («)  Let  this  teach  men  of  place  to  look  unto  their  exemplary 
lives,  lest,  as  they  have  made  themselves  examples  of  transgression,  God  make 
them  examples  of  destruction,  (b)  Seeing  we  are  all  apt  to  be  followers,  let 
us  seek  out  the  best  patterns  (Phil.  iii.  17 ;  Psa.  xvi.  3).  (3)  Their  mischiefs,  (a) 
There  is  a  plurality,  diversity  of  their  "ways."  Truth  is  but  one,  errors  are  infinite. 
Goodness  is  a  uniform  simple,  sin  a  multiform  compound.  Satan  baits  his  hook 
according  to  the  appetite  of  the  fish.  He  studies  many  ways  to  make  you  wretched ; 
do  you  study  one  way  to  make  yourselves  blessed,  (b)  These  ways  are  pernicious 
or  damnable.  The  wicked  never  rest  till  they  meet  with  final  ruin.  2.  The  rabble. 
(1)  Their  multitude — "  many."  Wickedness  is  never  scant  of  followers.  (2)  Their 
tractableness — "  shall  follow."  There  is  a  pliable  disposition  in  all  men  naturally  to 
evil,  in  these  a  desperate  precipitation,  (a)  The  greediness  of  the  ungodly  to  sin, 
that  they  scarce  tarry  for  temptation,  (b)  Sin  is  strong  when  it  meets  with  a  weak 
resister.  How  easy  is  it  for  error  to  domineer  over  ignorance !  (c)  Observe  the 
power  of  evil  men  over  their  associates,  whether  in  perverting  the  higher  faculties 
of  the  soul,  reason,  and  understanding,  and  conscience,  or  in  corrupting  the  lower 
will  and  affections,  {d)  We  must  not  fall  off  from  the  faith  and  Church  of  Christ 
because  multitudes  travel  another  way.  (e)  Seeing  there  is  such  certain  danger  in 
following  after  common  copies,  let  me  avert  you  from  all  these  pestilent  examples, 
and  propose  to  you  one  worth  your  imitation.  II.  A  detraction.  1.  The  patient 
that  suffers.  (1)  The  singularity — "  the  way,"  that  excellent  way.  There  is  only 
one  way  of  truth  and  of  salvation  by  it.  (2)  The  sincerity — the  way  "  of  truth." 
(a)  It  is  certain.  It  is  called  "  the  testimony  "  (Isa.  viii.  20)  because  it  bears  witness 
unto  itself ;  so  is  it  called  "  the  truth  "  because  it  shall  accomplish  itself,  (b)  It  is 
excellent,  as  being  the  letters  patent  of  our  salvation.  2.  The  injury  that  is  offered 
to  it.  (1)  "By  whom."  The  instruments  or  occasioners  of  this  scandal — those 
misled  proselytes.  The  seminaries  of  infection  have  poisoned  them,  and  they  spread 
that  pestilence,  to  the  dishonour  of  Christ  and  the  scandal  of  His  gospel,  (a)  Not 
only  the  principals,  but  even  the  accessories  in  schism  are  guilty  of  sin,  and  liable 
to  punishment,  (b)  The  authors  of  this  seducement  are  not  discharged,  though 
their  scholars  have  dissipated  the  evil.  (2)  "  The  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken 
of."  The  aspersion  laid  upon  the  gospel  by  their  means  is  blasphemy,  the  worst 
kind  of  evil  speaking.     (Thos.  Adams.) 

Ver.  3.  Make  merchandise  of  you.  — False  teachers  as  merchantmen : — The  apostle 
here  makes  a  continuation  of  their  sins  and  a  declaration  of  their  plagues.     They 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  PETER.  117 

extend  the  thread  of  their  mischief  very  long,  till  hell  fire  burn  it  off.  They  broach 
heresies,  corrupt  multitudes,  sell  souls,  as  merchants  do  their  wares ;  cozen  men's 
consciences,  colour  foul  natures  with  fair  words,  blaspheme  the  gospel,  deny  Jesus 
Christ.  Oh,  how  constant  and  long-winded  are  they  in  their  wickedness!  But 
there  is  a  judgment  that  wakes  while  they  slumber.  I.  The  general  similitude 
(merchandising)  heee  used.  The  calling  of  a  merchant  is  of  great  antiquity  and 
necessary  use.  Merchants  are  the  feet  of  the  world,  whereby  distant  countries  meet 
together.  Yet  it  is  a  dangerous  profession,  not  only  for  wreck  of  life  and  goods,  but 
also  of  conscience ;  which  is  not  always  made  in  their  ships  abroad,  but  too  com- 
monly in  their  shops  at  home.  1.  The  merchants  are  false  teachers.  As  Judas 
sold  Christ  for  thirty  pieces,  so  they  sell  men  to  sin,  little  esteeming  the  price  that 
a  soul  cost.  2.  The  wares—"  you  "  ;  your  estates,  liberties,  lives,  and  souls.  They 
set  up  a  mart  of  holy  things,  and  with  their  impostures  fill  their  purses.  An  evil 
pastor  may  sell  his  flock  three  ways— (1)  By  flattery.  He  that  encourages  a  man 
in  his  errors  seUs  him  for  his  own  gain.  (2)  By  heresy.  Broaching  schisms  and 
factions  and  erroneous  opinions,  as  it  were  feeding  the  people  with  bones,  or  rather 
poisons,  instead  of  wholesome  meat.  (3)  By  silence.  The  watchman  who  does  not 
ring  the  alarm  bell  at  the  approach  of  danger  betrays  the  city  to  the  enemy.  3. 
"  Through  covetousness."  This  is  the  ground  or  motive  of  their  traffic.  It  is  true 
of  every  schism,  what  was  said  of  Lucilla's  faction,  with  a  little  inversion :  anger 
bred  it,  pride  fostered  it,  and  covetousness  confirmed  it.  (1)  This  sin  of  covetous- 
ness is  iniquity  in  all  men,  blasphemy  in  a  clergyman.  The  titles  we  bear,  the 
office  we  sustain,  the  Person  we  represent,  the  nearness  of  our  calling  to  that  absolute 
integrity,  are  remembrances  unto  us  that  we  be  not  covetous.  (2)  There  is  no  fault 
in  a  minister  like  covetousness,  because  there  is  no  sin  reigning  in  the  world  like 
worldliness.  We  may  preach  our  hearts  out  to  dissuade  men's  affections  from  this 
world;  if  we  embrace  it  ourselves,  they  will  never  believe  us.  (3)  The  vice  of 
covetousness  is  an  epidemical  disease,  the  grand  Cairo  of  mischief,  the  metropolis 
of  wickedness,  a  universal  plague  that  has  infected  all  conditions  of  people.  4.  The 
means  of  their  utterance,  "  feigned  words  "  !  Heresy  was  never  found  disjoined  from 
hypocrisy.  Their  speeches  are  so  ambiguous  and  equivocal,  that  they  seem  to  hold 
both  ours  and  our  adversaries'  tenets.  What  they  cannot  perform  by  the  evidence 
of  truth,  they  seek  to  attain  by  the  eloquence  of  art.  As  rebels  make  their  proclama- 
tions in  the  name  of  the  king,  and  pirates  intending  to  rob  merchants  hang  out  the 
flags  of  other  nations,  both  to  scandal  them  and  to  conceal  themselves;  so  do 
hypocrites  wear  Christian  colours  that  they  may  be  the  devil's  cozeners.  II.  Their 
perdition.  1.  The  severity  of  it.  (1)  Their  "judgment."  The  menaces  of  God 
are  not  always  followed  with  an  infallible  event,  being  sometimes  on  purpose  signi- 
fied, that  they  may  be  by  penitence  prevented.  (2)  For  whose  sake  doth  God 
execute  judgment  upon  these  false  teachers?  For  His  own  glory  and  the  Church's 
good,  that  they  may  no  longer  cozen  men's  souls  with  their  impostures.  (3)  Though 
the  Lord  wiU  judge  these  wicked  persons,  yet  this  forbids  not  magistrates  to  execute 
justice  upon  them.  (4)  Their  "judgment" — their  own;  as  proper  to  them  as  the 
inheritance  they  bought  with  their  money.  Sin  doth  naturally  draw  a  punishment. 
(5)  Their  "  judgment."  But  is  it  so  certainly  theirs,  that  no  repentance  can  prevent 
it  ?  Yes,  serious  repentance  may  avert  the  vengeance,  if  their  gracious  God  gives 
the  repentance.  (6)  Their  "  judgment  and  their  damnation."  Observe  the  propor- 
tion and  adaptation  of  their  punishment  to  their  sin.  It  holds  in  divers  analogies, 
(a)  They  denied  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  therefore  the  same  Lord  shall  judge 
them,  (b)  They  acted  all  their  villainy  in  secret,  therefore  now  it  shall  be  laid  open, 
(c)  The  way  of  truth  hath  been  blasphemed  by  them,  therefore  now  it  is  fit  that  it 
be  glorified  on  them,  (d)  Before  they  sold  men  in  covetousness,  therefore  now  they 
shall  be  sold  themselves  in  justice,  (e)  Before  they  brought  in  the  heresy  of  damna- 
tion, therefore  now  they  shall  sustain  the  penalty  of  damnation.  (/)  Before  they 
did  pull  on  themselves  destruction  voluntarily,  therefore  now  must  father  the  child 
of  their  own  begetting,  and  suffer  destruction  necessarily,  (g)  Their  sin  did  hasten 
punishment  and  make  it  swift,  therefore  fit  it  should  no'longer  tarry;  it  "hngereth 
not."  (7)  "  Damnation  "  is  principally  taken  for  the  censure  or  sentence  condemn- 
ing ;  as  the  sentence  follows  the  trial,  and  the  execution  the  sentence  ;  here  it 
intends  the  execution  of  the  judgment.  2.  Sleepeth  not,  lingereth  not,  slumbereth 
not.  Though  it  be  not  yet  present,  it  is  propinquant ;  if  not  extant,  yet  instant.  (1) 
This  wakeful  vengeance  is  threatened  against  the  ungodly  very  fitly ;  for  nothing 
is  more  proper  to  the  nature  of  sin  than  to  sleep  in  security.  (2)  Sin  will  not  let 
justice  sleep,  but  sends  it  up  continual  challenges,  provoking  Him  to  draw  that 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

sword,  which  He  had  rather  should  rest  in  the  scabbard,  than  be  sheathed  in  His 
own  creatures.  3.  "  Long  ago."  There  is  a  preordination  of  plagues  for  reprobates, 
and  the  very  moment  of  the  execution  appointed  (Jude,  ver.  4).  Lessons:  1.  Seeing 
God  doth  not  sleep  in  His  justice,  let  not  us  sleep  in  our  injustice.  2.  As  this  is 
terror  to  the  ungodly,  so  comfort  to  the  righteous.  As  justice  is  ever  waking,  so 
mercy  is  never  asleep.  {Thos.  Adams.)  Manhood  in  the  market : — Who  are  they 
that  are  engaged  in  this  business  ?  1.  The  liquor-dealers.  2.  Writers  and 
publishers  of  obscene  literature.  3.  Purchasers  of  the  virtue  of  women.  4. 
Bribers  and  bribe-takers.  5.  Mercenary  journalists.  6.  Atheistic  orators  and 
religious  quacks.     {A.  Little.) 

Vers.  4-10.  If  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned. — Angelic  sinners  : — I.  That 

they  are  the  most  ancient  sinners.  They  were  the  first  transgressors  of  Heaven's 
eternal  law.  1.  The  uniqueness  of  their  circumstances.  They  had  no  tempter. 
Adam  had  ;  so  has  his  race  ever  since ;  so  have  we.  All  their  propensities  were  in 
favour  of  holiness.  2.  The  force  of  their  freedom.  Having  neither  an  outward 
tempter  nor  an  inward  propensity  to  wrong,  they  must  have  risen  up  against  all  the 
external  circumstances  and  internal  tendencies  of  that  being.  H.  That  they  are 
the  most  influential  sinners.  1.  They  were  the  original  introducers  of  sin  to  this 
world.  2.  They  are  the  constant  promoters  of  sin  in  this  world.  HI.  That  they 
are  the  most  incokkigible  sinners.  Instances  of  man's  conversion  from  sin  are 
numerous.  Their  incorrigibility  shows  two  things.  1.  That  intellectual  knowledge 
cannot  convert.  2.  That  an  experience  of  the  evil  of  sin  cannot  convert.  IV. 
That  they  are  the  most  miserable  of  sinners.  There  are  three  things  which  indi- 
cate the  extent  of  their  misery.  1.  Contrast  between  their  present  and  past  condi- 
tion. 2.  The  vastness  of  their  capacity.  3.  The  utter  hopelessness  of  their  state. 
{Ho)uili»t.)  Fallen  angels  a  lesson  to  fallen  men  : — "  These  are  ancient  things." 
Most  men  hunger  after  the  latest  news ;  let  us  on  this  occasion  go  back  upon  the 
earliest  records.  It  does  us  good  to  look  back  upon  the  past  of  God's  deaUngs  with 
His  creatures  ;  herein  lies  the  value  of  history.  We  should  not  confine  our  atten- 
tion to  God's  dealings  with  men,  but  we  should  observe  how  He  acts  towards 
another  order  of  beings.  If  angels  transgress,  what  is  His  conduct  towards  them  ? 
This  study  will  enlarge  our  minds,  and  show  us  great  principles  in  their  wider 
sweep.  I.  Consider  our  text  for  our  warning.  "  God  spared  not  the  angels  that 
sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell."  Behold  here  a  wonder  of  wickedness,  angels 
sin  ;  a  wonder  of  justice,  God  spared  them  not ;  a  wonder  of  punishment,  He  cast 
them  down  to  hell ;  a  wonder  of  future  vengeance,  for  they  are  reserved  unto  judg- 
ment !  Here  are  deep  themes  and  terrible.  1.  Let  us  receive  a  warning,  first, 
against  the  deceivableness  of  sin,  for  whoever  we  may  be,  we  may  never  reckon  that, 
on  account  of  our  position  or  condition,  we  shall  be  free  from  the  assaults  of  sin,  or 
even  certain  of  not  being  overcome  by  it.  Notice  that  these  who  sinned  were  angels 
in  heaven,  so  that  there  is  no  necessary  security  in  the  most  holy  position.  This 
should  teach  us  not  to  presume  upon  anything  connected  with  our  position  here 
below.  You  may  be  the  child  of  godly  parents  who  watch  over  you  with  sedulous 
care,  and  yet  you  may  grow  up  to  be  a  man  of  Belial.  You  may  never  enter  a 
haunt  of  iniquity,  your  journeys  may  be  only  to  and  from  the  house  of  God,  and 
yet  you  may  be  a  bond  slave  of  iniquity.  The  house  in  which  you  live  may  be  none 
other  than  the  house  of  God  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven  thi'ough  your  father's  prayers, 
and  yet  you  may  yourself  Uve  to  blaspheme.  2.  The  next  thought  is  that  the  greatest 
possible  ability,  apparently  consecrated,  is  still  nothing  to  rely  upon  as  a  reason 
why  we  should  not  yet  faU  so  low  as  to  prostitute  it  all  to  the  service  of  the  worst  of 
evils.  A  man  may  not  say,  "I  am  a  minister:  I  shall  be  kept  faithful  in  the 
Church  of  God."  Ah  me  !  But  we  have  seen  leaders  turn  aside,  and  we  need  not 
marvel ;  for  if  angels  fall,  what  man  may  think  that  he  can  stand  ?  3.  Neither 
must  any  of  us  suppose  that  we  shall  be  kept  by  the  mere  fact  that  we  are  engaged 
in  the  sublimest  possible  office.  Apart  from  the  perpetual  miracle  of  God's  grace, 
nothing  can  keep  us  from  declension  and  spiritual  death.  4.  I  want  you  to  notice, 
as  a  great  warning,  that  this  sin  of  the  angels  was  not  prevented  even  by  the  fullest 
happiness.  The  most  golden  wages  will  not  keep  a  servant  loyal  to  the  kindest  of 
masters.  The  most  blessed  experience  will  not  preserve  a  soul  from  sinning.  No 
feelings  of  joy  or  happiness  can  be  relied  upon  as  sufficient  holdfasts  to  keep  us 
near  the  Lord.  5.  This  warning,  be  it  noted,  applies  itself  to  the  very  foulest  of 
sin.  The  angels  did  not  merely  sin  and  lose  heaven,  but  they  passed  beyond  all 
other  beings  in  sin,  and  made  themselves  fit  denizens  for  hell.     Oh  my  unrenewed 


CHAP.  11.]  II.  PETER.  119 

hearer,  I  would  not  slander  thee,  but  I  must  warn  thee  :  there  are  all  the  makings 
of  a  hell  within  thy  heart !  It  only  needs  that  the  restraining  hand  of  God  should 
be  removed,  and  thou  wouldst  come  out  in  thy  true  colours,  and  those  are  the 
colours  of  iniquity.  6.  The  text  may  lead  us  a  little  farther  before  we  leave  it,  by 
giving  us  a  warning  against  the  punishment  of  sin  as  well  as  against  the  sin  itself. 
"  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell."  They  were 
very  great ;  they  were  very  powerful ;  but  God  did  not  spare  them  for  that.  If 
sinners  are  kings,  princes,  magistrates,  millionaires,  God  will  cast  them  into  hell. 
You  unbehevers  may  combine  together  to  hate  and  oppose  the  gospel,  but  it  matters 
not,  God  will  deal  with  your  confederacies  and  break  up  your  unities,  and  make  you 
companions  in  hell  even  as  you  have  been  comrades  in  sin.  Neither  did  He  spare 
them  because  of  their  craft.  There  were  never  such  subtle  creatures  as  these  are — 
so  wise,  so  deep,  so  crafty ;  but  these  serpents  and  all  the  brood  of  them  had  to  feel 
the  power  of  God's  vengeance,  notwithstanding  their  cunning.  II.  But  now  I  want 
to  ask  all  your  attention  to  this  second  point  for  ouk  admieation.  1.  I  want  you  to 
admire  the  fact  that  though  angels  fell  the  saints  of  God  are  made  to  stand.  Oh, 
the  splendour  of  triumphant  grace  !  Neither  the  glory  of  our  calling,  nor  the  un- 
worthiness  of  our  original,  shall  cause  us  to  be  traitors ;  we  shall  neither  perish 
through  pride  nor  lust ;  but  the  new  nature  within  us  shall  overcome  all  sin,  and 
abide  faithful  to  the  end.  2.  Now  let  us  learn  another  lesson  fuU  of  admiration, 
and  that  is  that  God  should  deal  in  grace  with  men  and  not  with  angels.  One 
would  think  that  to  restore  an  angel  was  more  easy  and  more  agreeable  to  the  plan 
of  the  universe  than  to  exalt  fallen  man.  I  rather  conceive  it  to  have  been  the 
easier  thing  of  the  two  if  the  Lord  had  so  willed  it.  And  yet,  involving  as  it  did  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  and  His  death  to  make  atonement,  the  infinitely 
gracious  Father  condescended  to  ordain  that  He  would  take  up  men,  and  would  not 
take  up  the  fallen  angels.  It  is  a  marvel :  it  is  a  mystery.  I  put  it  before  you  for 
your  admiration.  Behold  how  He  loves  us !  What  shall  we  do  in  return  ?  Let  us 
do  angels'  work.  Let  us  glorify  God  as  angels  would  have  done  had  they  been 
restored  and  made  again  to  taste  Divine  favour  and  infinite  love.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  punishment  of  the  wicked  : — I.  The  certainty  of  the  sinner's  future  punish- 
ment might  be  argued  from  that  attribute  of  justice  which  belongs  to  the  Divine 
character,  and  the  entire  purity  of  which  is  in  Scripture  so  frequently  insisted  on. 
For  it  is  manifestly  contrary  to  justice,  that  no  distinction  should  be  made  between 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  1.  The  first  instance  he  adduces  is  that  of  "the 
angels  that  sinned."  The  angels,  it  may  be  admitted,  fell  from  a  loftier  elevation 
in  the  scale  of  being  than  man  did ;  but  the  final  fall  of  those  who  perish  through 
their  own  neglect  of  the  salvation  of  the  gospel,  will  be  more  terrible  than  that  of 
angels.  2.  But  the  apostle  deduces  the  same  inference  from  the  Divine  judgments 
at  sundry  times  inflicted  upon  men — specifying  particularly  the  general  deluge,  and 
the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha.  And  the  inference  on  this  latter  ground 
is  as  just  as  in  the  former.  For  in  the  first  place  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
that  these  remarkable  events  were  purposely  intended  to  manifest  in  a  conspicuous 
manner  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin.  3.  But  whUe  they  serve  as  manifestations 
of  the  general  truth,  that  God  cannot  look  upon  sin  with  allowance,  they  serve 
more  particularly,  as  argued  by  the  apostle,  to  remind  us  that  a  day  of  still  more 
awful  judgment  is  approaching,  in  which  the  ungodly  shall  be  subjected,  not  to  the 
calamity  of  a  temporal  destruction,  but  to  a  punishment  commensurate  with  the 
magnitude  of  their  guUt.  II.  The  magnitude  of  the  evil  and  suffering  in  which 
THEIR  PUNISHMENT  IS  TO  CONSIST.  1.  It  has  already  been  apparent  in  some  degree, 
that  the  punishment  is  indescribably  dreadful ;  and  it  is  farther  manifest  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  a  punishment  which  cannot  be  inflicted  upon  them  in  the  present  life. 
Our  nature  in  its  present  state,  if  subjected  to  such  a  torment,  would  faint,  and  be 
consumed ;  and  the  punishment,  so  far  at  least  as  the  body  is  concerned,  would 
presently  be  ended.  2.  There  is  another  terrible  indication  on  this  subject,  in  the 
circumstance  that  the  punishment  is  one  in  which  man  wiU  be  associated  with  the 
fallen  angels.  What  must  be  the  nature  of  that  torment  which  constitutes  an 
adequate  punishment  to  fallen  angels !  3.  And  then  to  all  these  considerations  is 
to  be  added  the  tremendous  thought  that  the  punishment  is  everlasting.  The 
fearful  characteristic  of  those  who  die  under  "  the  curse  of  the  law  "  is  that  they 
die  "without  mercy."  "Their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched;" 
and  "  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever."  (T.  Crowther.) 
The  punishment  of  the  angels  that  sinned  : — 1.  He  "  delivered  them  "  :  but  into 
■whose  hands  ?    Indeed,  He  delivers  guilty  mortals  into  the  hands  of  guilty  angels 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

(Matt,  xviii.  34;  1  Cor.  v.  5  ;  1  Tim.  i.  20).  Some  answer,  that  themselves  are  the 
instruments  to  torture  themselves.  After  a  sort,  every  transgressor  is  his  own 
tormentor ;  and  wickedness  is  a  vexation  to  itself.  Ambition  racks  the  aspiring ; 
envy  eats  the  marrow  of  his  bones  that  envieth  ;  the  covetousness  which  would  be 
most  rich,  keeps  the  affected  with  it  most  poor  ;  ebriety  begets  the  headache  ;  lust 
afflicts  the  body  that  nourishes  it ;  and  we  say  of  the  prodigal,  he  is  no  man's  foe 
but  his  own.  2.  "  Into  chains  of  darkness."  Into  darkness — there  is  their  misery ; 
into  chains — there  is  their  slavery.  (1)  Darkness  signifies  the  wrath  of  God,  and 
is  opposed  to  that  favour  of  His  whicn  is  called  the  light  of  His  countenance  (Psa. 
iv.  6).  (2)  "  Chains."  (a)  The  power  of  Divine  justice,  (b)  The  guiltiness  of 
their  own  conscience.  (T.  Adams.)  Noah  ...  a  preacher  of  righteousness. — 
Noah's  preaching : — 1.  Noah  had  his  calling  immediately  from  God  ;  whereas  we 
are  mediately  ordained  by  the  imposition  of  hands.  2.  The  Lord  honoured 
Noah  in  conferring  his  office  upon  him.  Certainly  a  minister's  life  is  full  of 
honour  here  and  hereafter,  too ;  so  it  is  full  of  danger  here  and  hereafter,  too.  3. 
Noah  faithfully  executed  this  calling,  and  continued  preaching  a  hundred  years. 
Both  in  his  doctrinal  instructions  and  exemplary  life  he  was  a  preacher  of 
righteousness.  4.  He  had  not  such  happy  success  of  his  preaching  as  his  own 
soul  desired,  and  he  might  in  reason  have  expected.  A  man  may  be  lawfully 
called  by  God  and  His  Church,  and  yet  not  turn  many  souls.  It  is  the  measure, 
not  the  success,  that  God  looks  to  ;  our  reward  shall  be  according  to  our  works,  not 
according  to  the  fruit  of  our  works ;  which  is  our  comfort.  5.  So  long  as  Noah 
preached,  the  world  was  warned.  God  needed  not  to  have  given  them  any  warning 
of  His  judgments  ;  they  gave  Him  no  warning  of  their  sins.  Yet,  that  He  might 
approve  His  mercy,  He  gives  them  long  warning  that  they  might  have  space  enough 
of  repenting.  Oh,  how  loth  is  He  to  strike  that  threatens  so  long  before  He 
executes  !  (Ibid.)  Sodom  and  Gomorrha. — Sodom  and  Gomorrha, : — 1.  The 
strongest  cities  are  not  shot-proof  against  the  arrows  of  God ;  but  even  things 
ordained  for  refuge  are  by  His  justice  made  destructive.  There  is  nothing  peaceable 
where  God  is  an  enemy.  2.  Sin  can  bring  down  the  most  magnific  cities.  3.  None 
of  these  wicked  cities  escaped.  Men,  women,  children,  houses,  plants,  monuments, 
all  that  grew  on  the  earth  were  destroyed  (Gen.  xix.  25).  4.  Great  is  the  danger  of 
living  in  opulent  and  delightful  places.  Where  is  no  want  is  much  wantonness ; 
and  to  be  rich  in  temporals  hastens  poverty  in  spirituals.  In  a  scantiness,  the 
things  themselves  do  stint  and  restrain  our  appetites  ;  but  where  is  abundance,  and 
the  measure  is  left  to  our  own  discretion,  our  discretion  is  too  often  deceived. 
(Ibid.)  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  an  example  of  the  fate  of  the  ungodly  : — 1.  No 
society  of  men  or  policy  can  hinder  the  judgment  of  God,  which  He  wiU  bring  upon 
them  for  their  sins.  2.  The  same  judgments  of  God  are  executed  by  contrary 
causes.  The  old  world  was  destroyed  by  water,  these  cities  by  fire.  Sinners  should 
not  think  themselves  safe  because  they  have  escaped  one  judgment,  for  when  they 
are  farthest  off  from  one  evil,  another  is  ready  to  faU  upon  them  (Amos  v.  19).  3. 
Extreme  judgments  follow  extreme  sins.  4.  They  that  are  unto  others  examples 
of  sin  shall  be  also  unto  them  examples  of  punishment.  (Wm.  Ames,  D.D.) 
Delivered  just  Lot. — Lot  in  Sodom  : — I.  The  Spirit's  testimony  coxcerning  Lot. 
Lot  was  a  "  just  "  man  and  a  "  godly."  What  disclosures  shall  the  last  day  make! 
What  changes  in  our  views  of  individuals  !  1.  His  state  before  God.  Only  as 
justified  by  faith  can  we  be  accounted  righteous.  2.  Lot's  character.  The  bent  and 
purpose  of  his  soul  was  towards  God.  He  ran  not  as  he  should  have  done  in  the 
way  of  God's  commandments ;  trial  upon  trial  was  needed  to  keep  alive  the  flicker- 
ing lamp  of  spiritual  life.  H.  His  situation  in  Sodom.  He  first  "  pitched  his 
tent  towards  "  it,  and  the  next  step  was  downwards — he  dwelt  in  Sodom.  1.  I  ask 
of  that  residence,  was  it  profitable  ?  I  would  not  make  it  the  chief  motive  to  serve 
the  Lord,  that  it  shall  be  well  with  you  here ;  but  I  would  yet  say  lose  not  this 
world  and  that  which  is  to  come.  2.  I  ask,  further,  concerning  that  residence,  was 
it  happy  ?  Did  it  bring  peace  to  his  soul  ?  could  he  rejoice  whilst  there  abiding  ? 
What  saith  the  Word  of  God  ?  It  speaks  of  him  as  "  vexed  from  day  to  day." 
"  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptation,"  and  He  did 
deliver  Lot;  but  He  suffered  His  servant  to  feel  that  "an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing" 
it  is  to  depart  from  the  narrow  way;  whilst  dwelling  in  Sodom,  happiness  must  not 
be  his.  3.  Nay,  was  that  residence  safe  ?  He  came  forth  from  it  a  fugitive  who 
had  entered  it  as  a  prince.  Are  you  seeking  to  avoid  reproach  by  some  concession 
contrary  to  God's  truth  ?  Are  you  planning  for  the  world's  aid  ?  Cast  off  your 
vain  confidences,  safety  is  not  in  them  1    III.   The  hindrances  to  his  removal 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  121 

MIGHT  BE  THESE.  1.  The  tie  of  property.  There  Lot  had  laid  up  his  goods.  For 
a  time,  doubtless,  worldly  prosperity  was  his,  and  the  entanglement  was  strong. 
How  strong  that  tie  is  to  all !  How  great  the  grace  to  those  who  have  burst  from 
its  hold!  2.  The  ungodly  amongst  whom  he  dwelt  would  be  opposed  to  Lot's 
departure.  He  evidently  stood  in  fear  of  them,  and  he  might  dread  to  give  them 
any  excuse  for  violence.  3.  His  family  had,  fearful  to  relate,  formed  alliances  in 
that  city  of  evil ;  these  would  cling  around  him,  and  prevent  the  determination  to 
depart.  4.  But  far  more  than  all  was  that  lethargy  of  soul  the  hindrance,  which^ 
nourished  by  the  atmosphere  in  which  he  lived — increased  by  each  day's  sojourn  in 
the  infected  city — ^would  make  him  less  and  less  capable  of  the  effort  needed  for  his 
escape.  Conclusion :  1.  What  a  God  is  He  with  whom  we  have  to  do !  2.  What 
a  world  is  that  with  which  we  have  to  contend !  We  dwell  as  it  were  on  enchanted 
ground.  3.  What  depths  of  heart-deceit  does  the  history  of  man  bring  to  light ! 
(F.  Storr,  M.A.)  Just  Lot : — I.  His  grace — a  just  man.  1.  What  this  justice 
is.  (1)  Legal  righteousness  is  of  three  sorts — (a)  Perfect,  which  consists  in  an 
absolute  completion  of  the  law :  this  is  lost  beyond  all  recovery,  {b)  Civil,  which 
consists  in  an  outward  deportment  conformable  to  the  law  (Matt.  v.  20).  (c) 
Internal,  when  a  man  by  repentance,  and  by  endeavour  after  repentance,  inwardly 
serves  God.  This  may  justify  our  faith ;  it  cannot  justify  us.  (2)  Evangelical 
righteousness  is  that  which  is  revealed  in  the  gospel ;  and  should  never  have 
been  revealed  if  that  of  the  law  could  have  saved  us.  2.  Thus  is  a  man  just  before 
God,  but  Lot  was  also  just  before  men ;  and  there  is  a  visible  justice,  as  well  as  the 
invisible.  (1)  There  is  a  righteousness  of  preparation,  which  is  a  resolution  of 
heart  to  be  righteous  (Psa.  cxix.  106).  Though  he  do  sometimes  admit  sin,  he 
doth  never  intend  sin.  (2)  There  is  a  righteousness  of  separation,  because  it  is 
seen  to  decline  the  places  of  temptation  (IJohn  v.  18).  (3)  There  is  a  righteousness 
of  reparation  which  consists  in  the  reforming  of  errors  and  conforming  of  manners, 
salving  past  defects  by  a  bettered  life,  and  is  indeed  the  righteousness  of  repentance. 
Bighteous,  not  because  there  is  no  sin  committed,  but  because  there  is  no  sin  that 
is  not  repented.  (4)  There  is  a  righteousness  of  comparison ;  so  was  Lot  just 
comparatively  among  the  Sodomites.  (5)  There  is  an  operative  righteousness. 
The  best  traveller  may  stumble  in  his  journey,  yet  have  his  eye  observant  and  his 
foot  constant  on  his  way.  (a)  If  we  will  be  delivered,  let  us  be  just,  (h)  Never  did 
man  serve  God  for  nothing ;  if  Lot  be  just,  he  shall  now  find  the  benefit  of  it.  (c) 
The  Lord  first  makes  us  just  and  then  saves  us.  II.  His  place,  which  was  sinful. 
But  why  would  Lot  stay  in  such  a  wicked  city  ?  Not  as  a  neighbour  affected  with 
their  customs,  but  as  a  physician  to  cure  their  diseases.  But  he  that  looked  for  a 
paradise  found  a  hell,  and  the  cup  of  his  prosperity  was  spiced  with  the  bitter  fruits 
of  a  cursed  society.  What  doth  Lot  in  Sodom — a  saint  among  sinners  ?  Fishes 
may  be  fresh  in  salt  waters ;  live  in  the  sea  and  not  partake  the  brinish  quality. 
It  is  not  so  with  man  ;  rather  some  evil  for  neighbourhood's  sake.  Can  a  man  be 
clean  among  lepers  ?  Sooner  are  the  good  corrupted  by  the  bad  than  the  bad  are 
bettered  by  the  good.  III.  His  case.  "  Vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the 
wicked."  1.  The  matter  of  his  vexing  was  their  sin  ;  the  evil  of  the  place  came 
from  the  persons,  who  were  fuUy,  filthily,  palpably  wicked.  (1)  The  impudence. 
It  was  manifest  wickedness  ;  their  faces  did  not  blush  at  it  (Isa.  iii.  9).  (2)  The 
continuance.  As  their  sins  were  extant,  so  constant ;  their  ways  were  always 
grievous  (Psa.  x.  5).  It  is  not  so  much  sin,  as  the  trade  of  sin,  that  is  damnable. 
(3)  The  uncleanness.  Their  sin  was  not  only  palpable  and  durable,  but  detestable 
They  were  exposed  to  turpitude,  their  bodies  prostituted  to  fleshly  pollutions.  2. 
"Vexed."  This  was  no  ordinary  disturbance,  nor  common  displeasure;  but. 
oppressed,  excruciated,  tormented  ;  his  senses,  his  very  soul,  exceedingly  afflicted. 
He  was  not  an  idle  looker-on,  as  if  he  minded  not  what  they  did ;  nor  in  a  timorous, 
observation  of  the  proverb,  "  Of  little  meddling  comes  great  rest "  ;  but  knowing  it 
to  be  the  cause  of  God,  his  heart  was  perplexed  about  it.  He  was  not  vexed  with 
them,  but  with  their  deeds  ;  we  are  to  hate  none  for  their  creation,  but  perverting 
the  end  of  their  creation.  "Vexed."  That  which  is  here  passive  is  in  the  next 
verse  active:  he  "vexed  his  righteous  soul."  Who  bade  him  stay  there  to  be 
vexed  ?  He  vexed  himself  when  he  might  have  quitted  himself.  Yet  because  he 
was  vexed  he  is  delivered.  Because  he  avoided  their  sins  he  escaped  their 
judgments.  And  surely  they  were  both  miraculous  ;  for  his  declining  their  sins 
was  no  less  a  wonder  than  his  deliverance  from  their  flames.  As  the  latter  was 
God's  gracious  prevention,  so  the  former  was  His  prevenient  grace.  {Thos.  Adams.) 
Vexed  Ms  righteous  souL — A  sainfs  vexation : — I.  The  incentives.     1.  Causal  or 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

radical — "  He  being  righteous."  As  in  natural  things,  like  things  are  not  opposed 
by  like  things,  fire  fights  not  against  fire,  but  against  water ;  so  in  moral  things,  the 
innocent  are  not  opposed  by  the  innocent ;  one  good  man  does  not  persecute  another. 
Wolf  and  wolf  can  agree,  lamb  and  lamb  fall  not  out ;  but  who  can  reconcile  the 
wolf  to  the  lamb?  2.  Occasional — "Dwelling  among  them."  One  reason  why 
God  suffers  evil  men  is  to  try  the  good.  They  are  the  best  lilies  that  thrive 
amongst  thorns.  (1)  "Amongst  them"  that  hate  righteousness,  and  him  for  it. 
(2)  "Among  them"  that  thought  Lot  to  be  the  only  man  that  molested  them.  (3) 
"Among  them"  that  thought  Lot  a  proud  and  imperious  fellow.  (4)  "Among 
them"  that  thought  him  a  fool  for  his  labour.  (5)  "Among  them"  that  thought 
him  exorbitant,  because  he  walked  not  after  their  rule.  (6)  "Among  them"  that 
hated  the  truth,  and  loved  the  prophecy  of  wine  and  strong  drink.  Among  these 
bad  men  dwelt  this  good  Lot,  and  still  he  was  righteous.  It  is  likely  they 
endeavoured  to  win  him  to  them,  either  by  rewards  or  menaces.  3.  Objectual — 
"Their  unlawful  deeds."  Sin  is  the  object  or  matter  of  a  saint's  vexation.  That 
•which  grieves  God  should  also  vex  us:  this  hath  tried  the  zeal  of  the  saints.  (Exod. 
xxxii.  19;  1  Kings  xix.  14;  1  Sam.  iv.  22;  Numb.  xxv.  7,  8).  4.  Organical  or 
instrumental—"  In  seeing  and  hearing."  The  eye  and  ear  are  those  special 
doors  that  let  into  the  heart  its  comfort  or  torment.  (1)  The  sight  of  sin  makes 
a  man  either  sad  or  guilty ;  if  we  see  it,  and  be  not  sorrowful,  we  are  sinful.  (2) 
The  most  offensive  sins  are  such  as  be  objected  to  sight  and  hearing.  Spiritual  and 
internal  sins  may  be  more  culpable,  outward  are  more  infamous.  (3)  He  did  see 
and  not  see,  hear  and  not  hear.  Connivance  at  rank  impiety  is  bad  in  all  men,  in- 
tolerable in  some;  such  are  the  ministers  of  either  gospel  or  justice.  (4)  Sodom's 
sin  was  so  much  the  more  heinous  to  God,  for  offending  man,  and  vexing  the  heart 
of  His  servant  Lot.  (5)  He  that  would  not  be  vexed  with  evils,  let  him  turn  his 
eyes  and  ears  another  way.  Let  us  frequent  their  company,  where  in  seeing  and 
tearing  we  may  reap  comfort.  II.  The  fiee  itself.  "  Vexed  his  righteous  soul." 
1.  Its  property.  (1)  It  is  the  argument  of  a  righteous  man  to  be  far  from  his  Maker's 
service.  As  sails  to  the  ship  and  wind  to  the  sails,  so  is  fervency  to  righteous- 
ness. A  soldier  without  courage,  a  horse  without  mettle,  a  creature  without 
vivacity,  such  is  a  Christian  without  fervency.  (2)  It  doth  also  improve  righteousness ; 
like  the  fire  which  came  down  from  heaven  upon  the  sacrifices,  causing  them  to 
ascend  thither  in  acceptation.  Fervency  is  that  mark  which  God  would  have  us 
set  on  all  His  services,  that  so  they  may  be  discerned  to  be  His  own.  (3)  It  honours 
righteousness;  many  thousands  have  been  righteous  whose  names  are  not  on 
record ;  but  of  those  who  have  been  zealous  in  their  piety,  the  Scripture  takes 
special  notice.  2.  Its  sincerity.  As  this  was  no  common  fervency,  so  no  counter- 
feit ;  he  little  dissembles  whose  soul  is  moved.  (1)  There  be  some  that  vex  them- 
selves out  of  envy ;  Lot  did  not  so.  This  is  a  black  zeal,  reckoned  among  the  works 
of  the  flesh  (1  Cor.  iii.  3;  Acts  v.  17;  Gal.  v.  21 ;  James  iii.  14;  1  Cor.  xiii.  4;  Eom. 
xiii.  13).  (2)  There  be  that  vex  themselves  out  of  choler;  transported  with  in- 
temperate passions.  We  do  not  read  that  Lot  was  cruel  and  turbulent,  vexing 
others ;  but  he  vexed  himself.  (3)  There  be  that  vex  themselves  without  cause, 
and  strike  their  friends  for  their  enemies.  Let  our  zeal  come  in  to  part,  not  to  par- 
take the  fray ;  all  endeavouring  and  praying,  that  peace  may  be  within  the  gates  of 
Zion.  (4)  "There  be  that  vex  themselves  out  of  hypocrisy ;  they  have  other  ends 
than  God's  glory.  (5)  There  be  that  vex  themselves  out  of  ignorance;  for  there  is 
a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge.  Here  is  a  pitiable  fervency,  like  mettle  in  a 
blind  horse,  or  a  sting  in  an  angry  bee.  (6)  The  very  name  of  a  counterfeit  pre- 
supposeth  an  original.  That  virtue  which  even  hypocrites  put  on  to  grace  them, 
is,  questionless,  some  rare  and  admirable  thing.  The  true  Lot,  whose  fervency  is 
in  the  spirit,  not  in  show;  in  substance,  not  in  circumstance;  for  God,  not  for  him- 
self;  guided  by  the  Word,  not  by  humour;  tempered  with  charity,  not  driven  with 
turbulency ;  such  a  man's  praise  is  of  God,  though  it  be  not  of  men ;  and  through 
all  contempts  on  earth,  it  shall  find  a  glorious  reward  in  heaven.  3.  Its  singularity. 
One  Lot  will  be  righteous  amongst  and  against  all  Sodom,  and  express  this 
righteousness  in  the  midst  of  their  vicious  customs.  It  hath  been  the  lot  of  fervent 
holiness  to  be  rare,  as  to  be  excellent:  adherents  may  hearten,  opposites  must  not 
dash  zeal  out  of  countenance.  (1)  So  near  as  we  can,  let  us  make  choice  of  the 
good;  for  man  naturally  produces  works  conformable  to  the  objects  before  his  eyes. 
(2)  If,  like  Lot,  we  be  necessitated  to  the  society  of  bad  people,  yet  let  us  be  good 
BtiU ;  yea,  therefore  the  more  holy,  because  in  the  midst  of  a  perverse  generation, 
ehining  as  lights  in  a  dark  place.    (3)  Let  us  follow  the  examples  of  the  best,  not 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  PETER.  i23 

of  the  most.  Who  had  not  rather  be  righteous  with  one  singular  Lot,  than 
perish  with  all  ungodly  Sodom?  4.  Its  constancy.  "From  day  to  day."  The 
fixed  stars  are  even  Uke  themselves,  whereas  meteors  and  vapours  have  no  con- 
tinued light.  To  run  with  the  stream,  or  sail  with  the  wind,  or,  like  the  mari- 
gold, to  open  only  with  the  sunshine,  is  no  praise  of  piety.  Give  me  that  Job  that 
will  be  as  honest  a  man  among  his  thousands  as  under  the  rod,  when  the  number 
of  his  present  ulcers  exceeds  his  former  riches.  {Titos.  Adams.)  How  ought  we  to 
bewail  the  sins  of  the  places  where  we  live  ? — It  is  the  disposition  and  duty  of  the 
righteous  to  be  deeply  afflicted  with  the  sins  of  the  places  where  they  live.  I.  For 
the  obvious  Scripture  examples. — Our  Lord  (Mark  iii.  5)  was  "grieved  for  the  hard- 
ness of  their  hearts,"  namely,  in  opposing  His  holy  and  saving  doctrines.  David 
professeth  that  "  rivers  of  waters  ran  down  his  eyes,  because  men  kept  not  God's 
law  "  ;  and  that  when  he  "beheld  the  transgressors,  he  was  grieved;  because  they 
kept  not  His  Word"  (Psa.  cxix.  136,  158).  The  next  example  shall  be  Ezra's,  who, 
hearing  of  the  sins  of  the  people  in  marrying  with  heathens,  in  token  of  bitter  grief 
for  it,  "  rent  his  garment  and  his  mantle,  and  plucked  off  the  hair  of  his  beard  and 
of  his  head,  and  sat  down  astonied"  (Ezra  ix.  3);  and  he  did  neither  "eat  bread, 
nor  drink  water :  for  he  mourned  because  of  the  transgression  of  them  that  had 
been  carried  away  "  (Ezra  x.  6).  To  these  I  might  add  the  example  of  Jeremiah 
(Jer.  xiii.  17).  I  shall  conclude  this  with  that  expression  of  holy  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  18). 
II.  The  manner  how  this  duty  of  mourning  for  the  sins  of  others  is  to  be  performed. 
1.  In  our  mourning  for  the  sins  of  others  in  respect  of  God,  we  must  advance — (1) 
His  great  and  unparalleled  patience  and  long-suffering  extended  toward  those  whose 
sins  we  lament.  This  was  evident  in  Nehemiah's  bewaiUng  the  sins  of  the  sinful 
Jews  (Neh.  ix.  30).  (2)  In  mourning  for  the  sins  of  the  wicked,  advance  God  in 
the  acknowledgment  of  His  justice  and  spotless  righteousness,  should  He  with 
utmost  severity  take  vengeance  upon  offenders.  (3)  In  spreading  before  God  the 
wickednesses  of  great  sinners,  admire  His  infinite  power,  that  can  not  only  stop  the 
worst  of  men  in,  but  turn  them  from,  their  course  of  opposing  God  by  their  rebellions. 
We  are  not  so  to  mourn  for,  as  to  despair  of  the  conversion  of,  the  worst.  They  are 
as  much  within  the  converting  reach  as  the  destructive  reach  of  God's  hand.  (4) 
In  mourning  admire  that  grace  and  power  that  hath  kept  thee  from  their  excesses. 
It  should  more  comfort  thee  that  thou  sinnest  not  with  them,  than  trouble  thee 
that  thou  sufferest  from  them.  2.  The  second  branch  of  the  manner  how  we  must 
bewail  the  sins  of  others  is  as  it  respects  those  for  whom  and  for  whose  sins  we 
lament  and  mourn.  (1)  We  must  bewail  the  sins  of  our  bitterest  enemies,  as  well 
as  of  our  most  beloved  relations — a  rare  and  seldom-practised  duty  I  fear  that  this 
will  be  found.  (2)  We  ought  to  bewail  the  sins  of  our  near  and  dear  relations  in  a 
greater  measure  than  those  of  mere  strangers — natural  affection,  sanctified,  is  the 
strongest.  (3)  They  that  mourn  for  others'  sins,  especially  the  sins  of  those  they 
most  love,  must  mourn  more  for  their  sins  than  their  afflictions  and  outward 
troubles.  (4)  We  ought  to  bewail  the  sins  of  others  according  to  the  proportion  of 
iihe  sins  of  the  times  and  places  where  we  live.  (5)  We  ought  to  mourn  for  the 
sins  of  others  advantageously  to  those  for  whom  we  mourn,  with  the  using  of  all 
due  means  to  reclaim  and  reduce  them,  (a)  By  prayer  for  their  conversion  and 
God's  pardoning  them,  (b)  We  must  endeavour  to  follow  the  mourning  for  sinners 
with  restraining  them  from  sin  (if  we  have  it)  by  power,  (c)  We  must  mourn  for 
sinners  with  advantaging  them  by  example,  that  they  may  never  be  able  to  tax  us 
-with  those  sins  for  which  we  would  be  thought  sorrowful,  (d)  We  must  follow  our 
mourning  for  others'  sins  with  labouring  to  advantage  them  by  holy  reproof  for 
the  sins  we  mourn  for.  (e)  With  expressing  that  commiseration  toward  a  sinner  in 
private  which  thou  expressest  for  him  before  God  in  secret.  (6)  We  must  mourn 
for  those  sins  of  others  that  are  in  appearance  advantageous  to  ourselves.  S.  I 
shall  consider  how  we  should  mourn  for  the  sins  of  others  in  respect  of  ourselves. 
(1)  They  whom  God  hath  set  in  any  place  or  station  of  superiority  over  others, 
either  more  public  or  in  families,  should  be  the  most  eminent  mourners  for  the  sins 
of  those  committed  to  their  charge.  (2)  Those  who,  now  converted,  have  been  the 
most  open  sinners  in  their  unconverted  state  should  more  lay  to  heart  the  sins  of 
the  openly  wicked  than  those  who  have  hved  more  civilly  and  without  scandal. 
(3)  They  that  mourn  for  others'  sins  must  more  mourn  because  those  sins  are 
offensive  and  dishonourable  to  God  and  hurtful  to  sinners,  than  because  they  are 
injurious  to  themselves  that  mourn  over  them.  (4)  They  that  mourn  for  others' 
sins  should  mourn  more  in  secret  than  in  open  complaining.  (5)  They  that  mourn 
ior  others'  sins  must  mourn  to  a  high  degree  who  have  been  the  occasions  and 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

promoters  of  their  sins — either  by  neglecting  to  reprove  them  for,  restraining  them 
from,  or  giving  them  examples  of,  sinning.     This  sanctified  conscience  will  make 
one  of  the  bitterest  ingredients  into  sorrow  for  the  sins  of  others.     (6)  They  that 
mourn  for  the  sins  of  others  must  mourn  with  a  holy  reflection  upon  themselves. 
(a)  They  must  reflect  upon  themselves  with  sorrow,  because  they  have  the  same 
impure  natures  that  the  most-to-be-lamented  sinner  in  the  world  hath,     (b)   With 
a  reflection  of  examination,     (i)  Whether  you  have  not  some  way  or  other  furthered 
this  sinner  in  his  much-to-be-lamented  impieties,     (ii)  Whether  the  same  open  sins 
that  are  acted  by  him — the  noted  offender — or  sins  almost  or  altogether  as  bad,  are 
not  acted  and  entertained  by  thee  in  secret  places,  or  at  least  in  thy  heart,     (c)  With 
a  reflection  of  care  and  watchfulness  that  thou  mayest  never  dare  to  fall  into  the 
sins  that  thou  bewailest  in  another ;  that  thou  who  labourest  to  quench  the  fire 
that  hath   seized  upon  thy   neighbour's  house,   mayest  be    careful    to   preserve 
thine  from  being  set  on  fire  also.     III.  To  show  why  this  holy  mourning  is — 
1.  The  disposition,  and  2.  Duty  of  the  righteous,  I  shall  express  the  reasons  of 
both  distinctly.     1.  It  is  their  disposition,  and  that  under  a  threefold  qualifica- 
tion— (1)  Because  they  are  a  knowing  people.     They  know  what  tears  and  heart- 
breakings  sin  hath  stood  them  in ;  they  know  that  sin  will  cost  the  wicked  either 
tears  of  repentance  or  damnation  ;  they  know  that  sin  is  but  gilded  destruction, 
and  fire  and  brimstone  in  a  disguise  (2  Cor.  v.  11).     (2)  As  to  a  saint's  disposition ; 
he  is  compassionate  and  tender-hearted.     If  sinners  mourn,  he  mourns  with  them  ; 
if  not,  he  mourns  for  them.     (3)  The  righteous  are  a  purified,  sanctified  people.     A 
saint,  as  such,  hates  nothing  but  sin.     2.  It  is  the  duty  as  weU  as  the  disposition  of 
the  righteous  to  mourn  for  the  sins  of  others  ;  and  that  as  they  are  considerable  in 
a  threefold  relation.     (1)  In  their  relation  to  God.     As  "  the  sons  of  God  "  they  are 
commanded  to  be  "  blameless,  without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  per- 
verse nation"  (Phil.  ii.  15).     (2)  Their  relation  to  the  Mediator,  the  Lord  Christ. 
Here  I  shall  mention  only  a  double  relation  between  Christ  and  saints,  that  engageth 
them  to  mourn  for  the  sins  of  others,     (a)  The  first  is  His  relation  to  us  as  a 
suffering  Surety,  in  respect  whereof  He  paid  the  debt  of  penalty  which  we  owed  to 
God's  justice;  for  it  was  sin  in  man  that  made  Christ  "  a  man  of  sorrows."     (b) 
There  is  a  second  relation  between  Christ  and  saints  that  should  make  them  mourn 
for  the  sins  of  the  wicked ;  and  that  is  the  relation  of  Teacher  and  Instructor.     We 
are  His  disciples  and  scholars ;    and  it  is  our  duty  as  much  to  make  Him  our 
Example  as  to  expect  He  should  obtain  our  pardon.     Christ  never  had  a  pollution, 
but  oft  a  commotion,  of  affection  ;  Christ  never  wept  but  for  sin  or  its  effects.     (3) 
Their  relation  to  the  wicked,  for  whose  sins  they  should  mourn,     (a)  The  saints  are 
men  with  the  worst ;  they  have  the  relation  of  human  nature  to  the  greatest  sinners 
upon  earth  (Heb.  xiii.  3).    It  is  a  wickedness  to  hide  ourselves  from  our  own  flesh 
(Isa.  Iviii.  7).     (ft)  The  righteous  are  the  same  with  the  wicked  in  respect  of  corrupt, 
depraved  nature ;  born  in  sin  as  much  as  they,  with  a  principle  of  inclination  to 
all  their  impieties  (Eph.  ii.  3).     Should  it  not,  then,  make  thee  mourn  to  consider, 
by  the  wickedness  of  others,  thine  own  inbred  depravation  ?  what  thou  hadst  done 
thyself  if  God  had  not  either  renewed  or  restrained  thee  ?  yea,  what  thou  wouldest 
do  if  God  should  leave  thee,  and  withdraw  His  grace  from  thee  ?     (c)  Perhaps  the 
holiest  men  have  been,  some  way  or  other,  furtherers  of  the  sins  of  the  wicked 
among  whom  they  live ;  perhaps  by  their  former  sinful  example  when  they  lived 
in  the  same  sins  themselves  which  now  the  wicked  wallow  in.     Shouldest  not  thou, 
then,  mourn  for  killing  that  soul  which  God  so  severely  punisheth,  though  free 
grace  hath  pardoned  thee  ?     Should  we  not  quench  that  fire  with  our  tears  which 
we  have  blown-up  with  our  bellows  of  encouragement?     {d)  In  this  relation  of 
saints  to  sinners  that  should  put  them  upon  mourning  for  them,  it  is  very  con- 
siderable that  the  godly  and  the  wicked  make  up  one  community,  or  political  body, 
in  the    places  where  they  live.      In  which  respect  the  sins  of  some   particular 
offender  or  offenders  may  pull  down  judgments  upon  the  whole  body.     So  that 
every  one  had  need  do  his  utmost,  by  mourning,  and  in  whatever  other  way  he  can, 
to  redress  the  sins,  and  so  to  prevent  the  plagues,  of  the  place  where  he  lives.     IV. 
Application.     Use  I.  Of  information  in  sundry  branches.     1.  Godliness  is  uni- 
form in  all  times,  places,  and  companies.     A  righteous  man  is  not,  as  the  swine  in 
a  meadow,  clean  only  in  clean  places ;  he  will  maintain  opposition  to  sin  in  the 
midst  of  inducements  to  sin.     His  goodness  may  justly  be  suspected  that  only 
shows  itself  in  good  places,  companies,  and  times.     2.  The  greatest  sinners  cannot 
constrain  us  to  sin.     The  greatest  temptation  is  no  plea  for  committing  the  least 
sin :  if  we  give  not  away,  none  can  take  away  our  holiness.     3.  One  cause  may 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  PETER.  125 

produce  contrary  effects.  Others'  sins  draw  the  wicked  to  follow  them,  but  they 
put  the  saints  upon  bewailing  them.  4.  It  is  our  duty  to  rejoice  in  the  holiness,  if 
to  mourn  for  the  sins,  of  others.  Love  to  God's  house  in  others  was  David's  gladness 
^Psa.  cxxii.  1).  It  was  the  greatest  joy  of  holy  John  that  his  spiritual  "  children 
walked  in  the  truth  "  (3  John  4).  Holy  ones  were  Paul's  "  joy,  crown,  and  glory  " 
(1  Thess.  ii.  19,  20).  5.  Christianity  abolisheth  not  affection,  but  rectifies  it.  Grace 
is  like  the  percolation  or  draining  of  salt  water  through  the  earth ;  it  only  takes 
away  the  brackishness  and  unsavouriness  of  our  affections  and  faculties.  6.  Every- 
thing betters  a  saint.  Not  only  ordinances,  word,  sacraments,  holy  society,  but 
€ven  sinners  and  their  very  sinning.  Even  these  draw  forth  their  graces  into 
exercise,  and  put  them  upon  godly,  broken-hearted  mourning.  7.  The  great  misery 
that  sin  hath  brought  into  the  world,  to  make  sorrow  and  mourning  necessary. 
It  should  make  us  long  for  a  better  world,  where  that  which  is  here  our  duty  to 
practise  shall  for  ever  be  our  privilege  to  be  freed  from.  8.  There  must  needs 
remain  a  better  state  for  the  saints.  9.  How  ought  sinners  to  mourn  for  their  own 
sins  !  The  nearer  the  enemy  is,  the  more  dreadful  he  is.  Nothing  more  dismal 
than  to  see  a  sinner  to  go,  not  swiftly  only,  but  merrily,  to  eternal  mourning. 
"  He  that  hath  no  tears  for  himself,  should  be  helped  by  others."  Use  II.  The 
second  use  is  of  reprehension;  and  that  to  sundry  sorts.  1.  To  those  that 
reproach  the  holy  mourning  of  saints  for  others'  sins.  They  are  falsely  esteemed 
the  incendiaries  in  a  state  whose  great  study  is  to  quench  God's  burning  wrath.  If 
sinners  kindle  the  fire,  let  saints  quench  it.  2.  This  doctrine  of  mourning  for  the 
sins  of  others  speaks  reproof  to  those  that  take  pleasure  in  the  sins  of  others 
(Eom.  i.  32).  3.  This  doctrine  reproves  those  that  mourn  for  the  holiness  of  others. 
I  have  known  some  parents  that  have  greatly  desired  their  children  should  be  good 
husbands,  to  get  and  increase  their  estates ;  but  then  have  been  very  fearful  lest 
they  should  be  too  godly  ;  and  it  hath  been  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  that 
their  children  proved  spendthrifts,  neither  godly  nor  good  husbands.  It  is  often 
seen  that,  as  gardeners  with  their  shears  snip  off  the  tops  of  the  tallest  sprigs,  so 
men  most  labour  to  discountenance  the  tallest  in  Christianity.  4.  This  doctrine 
reproves  those  that  put  others  upon  sin,  so  far  are  they  from  mourning  for  their 
sins.  Poor  souls !  have  they  not  sins  enough  of  their  own  to  answer  for  ?  It  is 
little  enough  to  be  a  leader  to  heaven,  but  too  much  to  be  a  follower  to  hell ;  what, 
then,  to  be  a  leader !  Use  III.  Of  exhortation,  to  mourn  for  the  sins  of  the 
wicked  among  whom  we  live.  1.  If  we  mourn  not  for  others'  sins,  theirs  become 
ours.  2.  Mourning  for  others'  sins  is  the  way  to  awaken  thy  conscience  for  thine 
own  former  sins.  3.  Without  mourning  for  sinners  you  will  never  seek  the 
reformation  of  sinners.  4.  This  mourning  for  others'  sins  will  make  us  more  fear- 
ful to  admit  sin  into  ourselves.  5.  Mourning  for  others'  sins  speaks  thee  a  man  of 
public  usefulness  to  thy  country.  6.  Mourning  for  others'  sins  makes  the  sins  of 
others  beneficial  to  thee.  7.  Holy  commotion  of  soul  for  others'  sins  sends  forth  a 
most  acceptable  and  fragrant  savour  into  the  nostrils  of  God.  Use  IV.  I  shall 
add  one  use  more ;  and  that  is  direction  to  the  means  of  practising  this  duty  of 
holy  mourning  for  others'  sins:  1.  Look  not  upon  this  duty  with  self -exemption. 
As  if  it  belonged  only  to  the  highest  in  the  practice  of  religion,  or  persons  in  office. 
All  desire  to  be  marked,  and  therefore  should  be  mourners  (Ezek.  ix.  4).  2.  Look 
upon  mourning  for  sin  to  be  no  legal  practice,  but  an  evangelical  duty.  The 
gospel-grace  makes  tears  sweeter,  not  fewer.  3.  Preserve  tenderness  of  conscience 
in  respect  of  thine  own  sins.  4.  Strengthen  faith  in  divine  threatenings  against 
sin.  5.  Be  holily,  not  curiously,  inquisitive  into  the  state  of  the  times.  6.  Take  heed 
of  being  drowned  in  sensual  delights.  {W.  Jenkin,  M.A.)  Distress  of  the  pious  at 
the  wickedness  of  the  godless  : — The  pious  are  distressed  at  the  sins  of  the  godless 
because — 1.  These  sins  suUy  the  glory  of  God  ;  2.  They  show  the  tyranny  of  Satan 
over  men  ;  3.  They  conduce  to  the  condemnation  of  the  godless.  {J.  FromnUller.) 
Grief  at  sin : — John  Bunyan's  wife  having,  after  several  previous  applications  to 
different  judges,  made  a  specially  importunate  appeal  to  Judges  Hale  and  Twisdoii 
for  the  release  of  her  husband  from  Bedford  gdol,  and  being  again  unsuccessful, 
said  :  "I  remember  that  though  I  was  somewhat  timorous  at  my  first  entrance 
into  the  chamber,  yet,  before  I  went  out,  I  could  not  but  break  forth  into  tears,  not 
so  much  because  they  were  so  hard-hearted  against  me  and  my  husband,  but  to 
think  what  a  sad  account  such  poor  creatures  will  have  to  give  at  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  when  they  shall  then  answer  for  all  things  whatsoever  they  have  done  in  the 
body,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  bad."  (Tinling's  Illustrations.)  A  Christian 
in  the  world  is  like  a  rose  among  noxious  weeds  : — Does  a  rose  refuse  to  grow  and  to 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

emit  a  sweet  odour  because  there  are  noxious  weeds  in  the  same  field  ?  And  does 
the  rose  complain  and  declare  that  it  will  not  fulfil  its  mission  until  every  weed  is 
pulled  up?  A  rose  is  a  rose  in  the  midst  of  thorns  and  thistles.  A  Christian 
is  a  Christian  under  all  circumstances,  and  whether  the  world  is  full  of  noxious 
weeds,  and  the  Church  swarming  with  hypocrites,  the  man  of  faith  continues  to 
grow  and  bear  fruit,  exhahng  a  sweet  and  salutary  fragrance  on  all  around.  A 
Christian  who  refuses  to  shed  spiritual  fragrance  upon  the  desert  air,  because  of 
the  presence  of  mean  and  defective  church  members,  is  a  mere  fungus  sort  of 
Christian,  being  devoid  of  the  seeds  of  truth,  and  hence  empty  of  spiritual  vitality. 
The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly. — The  Lord's  knoivledge  our  safeguard : 
— I.  The  Lord's  knowledge  in  kefekence  to  charactek.  1.  He  knows  the  godly 
— (1)  Under  trial,  when  they  are  not  known  to  others.  (2)  Under  temptation,  when 
scarcely  known  to  themselves.  2.  He  knows  the  unjust — (1)  Though  they  make 
loud  professions  of  piety.  (2)  Though  they  may  be  honoured  for  their  great  posses- 
sions, n.  The  lord's  knowledge  in  reference  to  the  godly.  He  knows  how 
to  let  them  suffer,  and  yet  to  deliver  them  in  the  most  complete  and  glorious 
manner.  1.  His  knowledge  answers  better  than  theirs  would  do.  2.  His  know- 
ledge of  their  case  is  perfect.  3.  He  knows  in  every  case  how  to  deliver  them.  4. 
He  knows  the  most  profitable  way  of  deliverance.  5.  His  knowledge  should  cause 
them  to  trust  in  Him  with  holy  confidence,  and  never  to  sin  in  order  to  escape. 
in.  The  Lord's  knowledge  in  reference  to  the  unjust.  1.  They  are  unjust  in 
all  senses,  for  they  are— (1)  Not  legally  just  by  keeping  the  law.  (2)  Nor  evangelic- 
ally just  through  faith  in  Jesus.  (3)  Nor  practically  just  in  their  daily  lives.  2. 
The  Lord  knows  best— (1)  How  to  deal  with  them  from  day  to  day.  (2)  How  to 
reserve  them  under  restraints.  He  makes  it  possible  to  reprieve  them,  and  yet  to 
maintain  law  and  order.  (3)  How  to  punish  them  with  unrest  and  fears  even  now. 
(4)  How  and  when  to  strike  them  down  when  their  iniquities  are  full.  (5)  How  to 
deal  with  them  in  judgment,  and  throughout  the  future  state.  The  mysteries  of 
eternal  doom  are  safe  in  His  hand.  (C.  H.  Spurgeo7i.)  God's  dealings  with  the 
godly  and  their  persecutors  : — I.  The  deliverance  of  the  godly.  1.  A  deliverance. 
It  is  a  great  comfort  in  every  distress  to  hope  for  a  deliverance ;  to  believe  it, 
greater;  to  be  sure  of  it,  greatest  of  all.  Thus  certain  is  every  Christian,  by  the 
assurance  of  faith,  grounded  on  the  infallible  promise  of  God.  God  often  defers 
His  deliverance.  (1)  To  return  us  home :  when  no  man  will  harbour  that  uuthrif  t 
son,  he  will  back  again  to  his  father.  (2)  To  make  us  seek  our  deliverance  in  the 
right  place :  while  money  can  buy  physic,  or  friends  procure  enlargement,  the  great 
Physician  Helper  is  not  thoroughly  trusted.  (3)  To  set  a  better  price  on  His 
benefits ;  for  suddenly  gotten  are  suddenly  forgotten.  2.  The  persons  delivered  are 
the  "godly."  Godliness  consists  in  two  things:  (1)  The  devout  admiration;  and 
(2)  Sincere  imitation  of  God.  3.  From  what — "  out  of  temptations."  They,  of  all 
men,  are  most  subject  to  temptations.  The  higher  a  tree  shoots  up,  the  more 
tempest-beaten.  To  suggest  evil  is  Satan's  blame ;  to  resist  it  our  praise.  The 
more  we  are  tried  in  the  furnace,  the  purer  gold  we  shall  go  to  the  treasury  of 
heaven.  Lord,  make  us  as  strong  as  the  devil  is  malicious.  (1)  We  that  pray  for 
deliverance  from  evil  must  endeavour  against  evil.  Let  us  have  wary  eyes,  for  it 
is  not  the  self-appearing  devil,  but  the  same  or  transformed  angel,  that  doth  corrupt 
us.  (2)  Consider  what  preventions  the  provident  God  useth  against  our  sinnings. 
Sometimes  He  shortens  our  own  arms,  sometimes  strengthens  others  against  us. 
Sometimes  reason  is  heard,  when  religion  sits  out ;  and  the  dishonesty,  inutility,  or 
difficulty  of  a  sin  is  perpended.  But  it  is  best,  when  the  fear  of  God  hath  corrected 
us,  or  the  Word  of  God  averted  us,  or  the  Spirit  of  God  recalled  us.  (3)  Let  us 
meditate  how  we  are  blessed  of  God,  and  have  reason  to  bless  God,  for  these  happy 
deliverances.  (4)  If  we  love  not  evil,  let  us  long  for  our  final  and  plenary  deliver- 
ance from  it ;  that  immortal  court,  where  sin  can  no  more  enter ;  out  of  this  the 
tempter  is  excluded  for  ever.  Here  the  Lord  delivers  us  from  the  damnation  and 
domination  of  sin,  there  from  the  temptation  and  assault;  here  it  shall  not  over- 
come us,  there  it  shall  not  come  near  us.  4.  Our  deliverer — "  The  Lord."  His 
sovereignty  is — (1)  Independent.  (2)  Absolute.  (3)  Universal.  (4)  Necessary.  We 
could  not  live  but  by  His  dominion.  (5)  Immutable.  What  God  once  is,  He  is  for 
ever.  (6)  Incomprehensible.  (7)  Glorious  and  blessed.  5.  "  The  Lord  knoweth 
how."  As  there  is  nothing  impossible  to  His  might,  so  there  is  nothing  concealable 
from  His  understanding.  (1)  He  knows  our  temptations  before  they  be  upon  us ; 
He  sees  the  preparing  of  the  potion,  weighs  the  ingredients  to  a  scruple,  qualifies 
the  malignity  of  the  purgatives  with  sweet  consolations.     (2)  He  knows  them  whea 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  127 

they  be  upon  us  (Exod.  ii.  25  ;  Psa.  xxxi.  7).  (3)  He  knows  how  to  rid  them  from  us. 
They  are  often  so  perplexful  and  intricate,  that  neither  we  see,  nor  the  world  sees, 
nor  reason  apprehends  how,  yet  the  Lord  knoweth.  II.  The  end  of  theie  peese- 
crTOKS.  1.  The  malefactors.  The  wicked  are  '  unjust."  (1)  To  God.  Righteous- 
ness is  an  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  and  injustice  is  no  other  than  disobedience. 
(2)  To  man.  Such  are  they  that  measure  their  right  by  their  power,  and  therefore 
will  do  injury  because  they  cannot  do  it.  Unjust — (a)  To  the  commonwealth,  (b) 
To  the  Church,  (c)  To  private  persons.  (3)  To  a  man's  self.  So  is  the  thriftless, 
that  spends  himself  into  poverty  by  pride  and  luxury ;  the  envious,  that  loses  the 
sweetness  of  his  own  by  grudging  at  his  neighbours ;  the  covetous,  that  adds  to  the 
continent  of  his  treasure  what  he  should  add  to  the  content  of  his  nature.  2.  The 
binding  over.  "  Are  reserved."  Whether  they  sleep  or  wake,  play  or  work,  stand 
or  walk,  their  time  runs  on,  their  judgment  is  nearer ;  and  they  are  more  surely 
kept  unto  it,  than  any  dungeon,  with  the  thickest  walls  and  strongest  chains,  can 
hold  a  prisoner  till  his  arraignment  comes.  (1)  Wickedness  hath  but  a  time,  but 
the  punishment  of  wickedness  is  beyond  all  time.  (2)  The  unjust  are  already 
reserved,  the  decree  is  passed  against  them.  They  are  bound  over  to  the  last 
assizes  by  a  threefold  recognisance,  as  it  were  with  infrangible,  though  insensible, 
chains  of  judgment — the  bond  of  their  sins,  the  bond  of  their  conscience,  and  the 
bond  of  omnipotent  justice — and  this  threefold  cable  is  not  easily  broken.  3.  The 
assizes.  "  To  the  day  of  judgment."  (1)  The  sufficiency  of  the  Judge.  (2)  The 
necessity  of  the  judgment  (2  Thess.  i.  6,  7).  4.  The  execution.  "  To  be  punished." 
In  this  judgment,  God  respects  no  persons ;  He  knows  no  valour,  no  honour,  no 
riches,  no  royalty,  in  the  matter  of  sin ;  but  Rom.  ii.  9.  {Thos.  Adams.)  The 
trial  and  deliverance  of  the  godly  : — I.  Oub  religion  must  be  fairly  tried. 
1.  The  pleasures  of  hfe,  as  they  are  generally  deemed,  present  themselves 
before  you ;  many  of  them  decidedly  sinful,  others  of  them,  though  not  directly  im- 
moral, yet  very  ensnaring,  they  invite  you  to  the  indulgence  of  gratifications  which 
war  against  the  soul.  Do  you  habitually  resist  these  salutations?  2.  The  world, 
apart  from  its  disgusting  vices,  exhibits  to  your  mind,  in  bright  colours,  the 
numerous  comforts,  the  many  enjoyments,  the  family  advantages,  the  great  interests, 
belonging  to  a  state  of  prosperity  and  affluence.  Do  you  when  thus  tempted  adhere 
firmly  to  the  great  Christian  principle  of  renouncing  the  world?  3.  Even  religion 
itself,  with  imposing  professions,  will  invite  your  attention  and  adherence  for  the 
purpose  of  ensnaring  and  deceiving  your  souls.  Do  you  continue  steadfast  in  the 
faith,  true  to  your  only  Lord  and  Master  ?  Do  you  reject  every  substitute  for  Christ 
Himself  ?  4.  A  persecuting  sphit,  under  the  pretext  of  holy  zeal  for  God  and  religion, 
has  often  been  exerted,  and  has  proved  a  severe  trial  of  faith  and  sincerity.  Do 
you  notwithstanding  cleave  to  the  Lord  ? — hold  fast  the  profession  of  your  faith 
without  wavering  ?  5.  Afflictions  generally  are  a  trial  of  our  religion.  It  is  when 
we  are  brought  low  in  trouble  that  the  excellency  of  faith,  the  sincerity  of  our 
hearts,  the  truth  of  our  profession,  the  reality  of  our  love  to  God,  and  the  purity  of 
our  faith  in  the  Son  of  God  will  be  most  satisfactorily  manifested.  Yet,  let  it 
be  seriously  remembered,  that  it  is  not  the  impression  of  the  moment,  but  the 
subsequent  permanent,  abiding  eiJects  of  affliction  that  become  a  real  test  of 
godliness.  II.  The  encouraging  promise  conveyed  in  this  passage  to  men  of 
TRUTH  AND  SINCERITY.  "  The  Lord  kuowcth  how  to  dehver  the  godly  out  of  temp- 
tation." A  faithful  God  is  not  only  able  to  comfort  and  sustain  them  that  wait  upon 
Him,  but  He  will  do  it  most  wisely ;  He  knoweth  how  to  dispense  His  grace  most  ad- 
vantageously to  them  that  really  love  Him  and  cast  their  care  upon  Him.  (S.  Morell.) 
Deliverance  from  temptation  the  privilege  of  the  righteous  : — 1.  Who  are  here  to  be 
understood  by  "  the  godly."  He,  and  he  only,  can  lay  claim  to  so  glorious  a  quali- 
fication who  is  actually  in  covenant  with  God,  and  that  not  only  by  external 
profession,  but  by  real  relation.  In  a  word,  he,  and  he  only,  ought  to  pass  for 
godly,  according  to  the  unalterable  rules  of  Christianity,  who  allows  not  himself  in 
the  omission  of  any  known  duty,  or  the  commission  of  the  least  known  sin.  And 
this  certainly  will,  and  nothing  less  that  I  know  of  can,  either  secure  a  man  from 
falling  into  temptation,  or  (which  is  yet  a  greater  happiness)  from  falling  by  it.  2. 
The  other  thing  to  be  inquired  into  is,  what  is  here  meant  by  "temptation";  a 
thing  better  known  by  its  ill  effects  than  by  the  best  description.  The  Greek  word 
signifies  "  trial,"  and  so  imports  not  so  much  the  matter  as  the  end  of  the  dispen- 
sation. But  (the  common  and  most  received  use  of  the  word  having  added  some- 
thing of  malignity  to  its  fu-st  and  native  signification)  generally  in  Scripture  it 
denotes  not  only  a  bare  trial,  but  such  a  one  as  is  attended  with  a  design  to  hurt  or 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

mischieve  the  people  so  tried.  As  for  the  sense  in  which  the  word  ought  to  be  taken 
here,  it  may  be,  and  no  doubt  with  great  truth  is,  in  the  full  latitude  of  it,  applic- 
able to  both  sorts  of  temptation  :  it  being  no  less  the  prerogative  of  God's  goodness 
and  power  to  deliver  men  from  such  trials  as  afdict  them,  than  from  such  as  are 
designed  to  corrupt  them.  Nevertheless,  I  think  it  also  as  little  to  be  doubted,  that 
the  text  chiefiy  respects  this  latter  signification,  and  accordingly  speaks  here  most 
designedly  of  such  a  deliverance  as  breaks  the  snares  and  defeats  the  stratagems  by 
•which  the  great  and  mortal  enemy  of  mankind  is  so  infinitely  busy,  first  to  debauch, 
and  then  to  destroy  souls.  And  now,  if  it  be  inquired  whether  they  are  the  righteous 
only  whom  God  delivers  from  temptation,  and  that  no  such  deliverances  are  ever 
vouchsafed  by  Him  to  any  of  the  contrary  character,  I  answer  that  I  can  find  nothing 
in  Scripture  or  reason  to  found  such  a  doctrine  upon,  but  that  such  deliverances 
both  may  be  and  sometimes  are  vouchsafed  to  persons  far  enough  from  being 
reckoned  godly,  either  in  the  accounts  of  God  or  man.  And  first,  that  they  may  be 
so,  we  need  no  other  reason  to  evince  it  than  this,  that  God  in  these  cases  may  very 
■well  restrain  the  actions,  without  working  any  change  upon  the  will  or  affections. 
And  in  the  next  place,  that  such  deliverances  not  only  may  be,  but  sometimes 
actually  are  afforded  to  persons  represented  under  no  note  of  piety  or  virtue,  but 
much  otherwise,  those  three  memorable  examples  of  Abimelech,  Esau,  and  Balaam 
(Gen.  XX.,  xxxiii. ;  Numb,  xxii.)  suificiently  demonstrate.  So  that  we  may  rationally 
conclude  that  even  wicked  persons  also  are  sometimes  sharers  in  such  deliverances ; 
but  still  so,  that  this  by  all  means  ought  to  be  observed  withal,  that  the  said  deliver- 
ances are  dealt  forth  to  these  two  different  sorts  of  men  upon  very  different  grounds, 
viz.,  to  the  former  upon  the  stock  of  covenant  or  promises ;  to  the  latter  upon  the 
stock  of  uncovenanted  mercy,  and  the  free  overflowing  egress  of  the  Divine  benignity, 
often  exerting  itself  upon  such  as  have  no  claim  to  it  at  all.  I.  To  show  how  fab 
God  delivers  persons  truly  pious  out  of  temptation.  1.  God  delivers  by  way 
of  prevention,  or  keeping  off  the  temptation ;  which,  of  all  other  ways,  is  doubtless  the 
surest,  as  the  surest  is  unquestionably  the  best.  For  by  this  is  set  a  mighty  barrier 
between  the  soul  and  the  earliest  approaches  of  its  mortal  enemy.  Unspeakable  are  the 
advantages  vouchsafed  to  mankind  by  God's  preventing  grace,  if  we  consider  how 
apt  a  temptation  is  to  diffuse,  and  how  prone  our  nature  is  to  receive  an  infection. 
For  though  the  soul  be  not  actually  corrupted  by  a  temptation,  yet  it  is  something 
to  be  sullied  and  blown  upon  by  it,  to  have  been  in  the  dangerous  familiarities  of 
sin,  and  in  the  next  approach  and  neighbourhood  of  destruction.  Such  being  the 
nature  of  man,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  for  him  to  be  near  an  ill  thing  and  not  the 
worse  for  it.  2.  We  are  now  to  consider  such  persons  as  advanced  a  step  further, 
and  as  they  are  actually  entered  into  temptation  ;  and  so  also  God  is  at  hand  for 
their  deliverance.  For  as  it  was  God  who  suspended  the  natural  force  of  that 
material  fire  from  acting  upon  the  bodies  of  the  three  children  mentioned  in  Dan. 
iii.,  so  it  is  God  alone  who  must  control  the  fury  of  this  spiritual  flame  from  seizing 
upon  the  soul,  having  always  so  much  fuel  and  fit  matter  there  for  it  to  prey  upon. 
And  for  an  eternal  monument  of  His  goodness.  He  has  not  left  us  without  some  such 
heroic  instances  as  these  upon  record  in  His  Word,  that  so  the  saints  may  receive 
double  courage  and  confidence,  having  their  deliverance  not  only  sealed  and  secured 
to  them  by  promise,  but  also  that  promise  ratified  and  made  good  to  them  by  pre- 
cedents and  examples,  like  so  many  stars  appearing,  both  to  direct  and  to  comfort 
the  benighted  traveller.  3.  And  lastly,  we  are  to  consider  the  persons  hitherto 
spoken  of  as  not  only  entered  into  temptation,  but  also  as  in  some  measure  prevailed 
upon  by  it.  But  that  I  may  give  some  light  to  this  weighty  case  of  conscience,  how 
far  a  person  truly  godly  may,  without  ceasing  to  be  so,  be  prevailed  upon  by  temp- 
tation, I  will  here  set  down  the  several  degrees  and  advances  by  which  a  temptation 
or  sinful  proposal  gradually  wins  the  soul,  and  those  all  of  them  comprised  in 
James  i.  14,  15.  1.  The  first  of  which  we  may  call  seduction.  2.  The  second 
degree  of  temptation  may  be  called  enticement  or  allurement.  3.  The  third  degree 
is,  when  after  such  possession  had  of  the  thoughts  and  fancy,  the  temptation  comes 
to  make  its  way  into  the  consent  of  the  will,  and  to  gain  that  great  fort  also,  so  that 
the  mind  begins  to  propose,  and  accordingly  to  contrive  the  commission  of  the  sin 
proposed  to  it.  4.  The  fourth  degree  of  prevalence  which  a  temptation  gets  over 
the  soul  is,  the  actual  eruption  of  it  in  the  perpetration  or  commission  of  the  sin 
suggested  to  it.  5.  The  fifth  and  last  degree,  completing  the  victory  which  tempta- 
tion obtains  over  a  man  is,  when  sin  comes  to  that  pitch  as  to  reign,  and  so  by 
consequence  put  out  of  all  possibility  either  of  resistance  or  escape.  Having  thus 
reckoned  up  the  several  degrees  of  temptation,  and  set  before  you  the  fatal  round 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.      ■  129 

of  the  devil's  methods  for  destroying  souls,  let  us  now  in  the  next  place  inquire  how 
far  God  vouchsafes  to  deliver  the  pious  and  sincere  out  of  them.  In  answer  to 
which,  I  first  of  all  affirm,  that  God's  methods  in  this  case  are  very  various,  and  not 
io  be  declared  by  any  one  universal  assertion.  Sometimes  by  a  total  and  entire 
deliverance,  He  delivers  them  from  every  degree  and  encroachment  of  a  temptation. 
Sometimes  He  lets  them  fall  into  the  first  degree  of  it,  and  receive  it  into  their 
thoughts  ;  but  then  delivers  them  from  the  second,  which  is  to  cherish  and  con- 
tinue it  there,  by  frequent  pleasing  reflections  upon  it.  Sometimes  He  gives  way  to 
this  too,  but  then  hinders  it  from  coming  to  a  full  purpose  and  consent  of  will. 
Sometimes  He  lets  it  go  thus  far  also,  and  suffers  sin  to  conceive  by  such  a  purpose 
or  consent:  but  then,  by  a  kind  of  spiritual  abortion,  stifles  it  in  the  very  birth,  and 
so  keeps  it  from  breaking  forth  into  actual  commission.  And  lastly,  for  reasons 
best  known  to  His  most  wise  providence,  He  sometimes  permits  a  temptation  to  grow 
•so  powerful  as  to  have  strength  to  bring  forth  and  to  defile  the  soul  with  one  or 
more  gross  actual  eruptions.  But  then,  in  the  last  place,  by  a  mighty  overpowering 
grace.  He  very  often,  as  some  assert,  or  always,  as  others  affirm,  keeps  it  from 
an  absolute,  entire,  and  final  conquest.  So  that  sin  never  comes  to  such  a  height  as 
■to  reign  in  the  godly,  to  bear  sway,  and  become  habitual.  But  though  its  endea- 
vours are  not  always  extinguished,  nor  its  sallyings  out  wholly  stopped,  yet  its 
■dominion  is  broken.  It  may  sometimes  bruise  and  wound,  but  it  shall  never  kill. 
Now  the  foregoing  particulars,  upon  a  due  improvement  of  them,  will  naturally 
teach  us  these  two  great  and  important  lessons.  1.  Concerning  the  singular  good- 
ness as  well  as  wisdom  of  our  great  Lawgiver,  even  in  the  strictest  and  severest 
precepts  of  our  religion.  Certainly  it  is  a  much  greater  mercy  and  tenderness  to  the 
souls  of  men  to  represent  the  first  movings  of  the  heart  towards  any  forbidden 
object  as  unlawful  in  themselves,  and  destructive  in  their  consequence,  and  thereby 
to  incite  the  soul  to  a  vigorous  resistance  of  them  while  they  may  be  mastered,  and 
with  ten  times  less  trouble  extinguished,  than  after  they  are  once  actually  com- 
mitted, they  can  be  repented  of.  No  doubt  sin  is  both  more  easily  and  effectually 
kept  from  beginning  than,  being  once  begun,  it  can  be  stopped  from  going  on.  2. 
■The  other  great  lesson  is  concerning  the  most  effectual  method  of  dealing  with  the 
tempter  and  his  temptations;  and  that  is,  to  follow  the  method  of  their  dealing  with 
us.    A  temptation  never  begins  where  it  intends  to  make  an  end.     II.  To  show 

"WHAT   IS    THE   PRIME    MOTIVE,    OB   GRAND   IMPULSIVE    CAUSE,  INDUCING    GoD    TO  DELIVER 

PERSONS  TRULY  PIOUS  OUT  OF  TEMPTATION.  Now  this  is  twofold :  1.  The  free  mercy 
of  God  ;  and  2.  The  prevailing  intercession  of  Christ.     HI,  To  show  why  and  upon 

WHAT    grounds   DELIVERANCE  OUT  OF  TEMPTATION    IS    TO  BE  REPUTED  SO  GREAT  A  MERCY 

AND  SO  TRANSCENDENT  A  PRIVILEGE.  In  Order  to  wMch,  as  aU  deliverance,  in  the 
very  nature  and  notion  of  it,  imports  a  relation  to  some  evil  from  which  a  man  is 
delivered ;  so  in  this  deliverance  out  of  temptation,  the  surpassing  greatness  of  it, 
and  the  sovereign  mercy  shown  in  it,  will  appear  from  those  intolerable  evils  and 
mischiefs  which  are  always  intended  by,  and  naturally  consequents  upon,  a  pre- 
vailing temptation.  Four  things  more  especially  are  designed  and  driven  at  by  the 
tempter  in  all  his  temptations.  1.  To  begin  with  the  greatest,  and  that  which  is 
always  first  intended,  though  last  accomplished,  the  utter  loss  and  damnation  of  the 
soul.  For  this  is  the  grand  mark  which  the  tempter  shoots  at,  this  being  the  beloved 
prize  which  he  contends  so  hard  for.  2.  In  the  second  place,  loss  of  a  man's  peace 
with  God  and  his  own  conscience,  and  the  weakening,  if  not  extinguishing,  aU  his 
former  hopes  of  salvation.  It  confounds  and  casts  a  man  infinitely  backwards  as 
to  his  spiritual  accounts.  It  degrades  him  from  his  assurance ;  renders  his  title  to 
heaven  dubious  and  perplexed ;  draws  a  great  and  discouraging  blot  over  all  his 
evidences,  and  even  shakes  in  pieces  that  confidence  which  was  formerly  the  very 
life  and  support  of  his  soul,  with  new,  terrible,  and  amazing  objections.  3.  The 
third  consequence  of  a  prevailing  temptation  is  the  exposing  of  a  man  to  the  temporal 
judgments  of  God  in  some  signal  and  severe  affliction.  For  though  in  much  mercy 
God  may,  as  we  have  shown,  save  such  a  one  from  eternal  death,  yet  it  rarely 
happens  that  He  frees  him  both  from  destruction  and  from  discipline  too  ;  but  that 
some  time  or  other  He  gives  him  a  taste  of  the  bitter  cup,  and  teaches  him  what  his 
fiin  has  deserved,  by  what  at  present  it  makes  him  feel.  4.  The  fourth  and  last 
mischievous  consequence  of  a  prevaihng  temptation  is  the  disgrace,  scandal,  and 
reproach  which  it  naturally  brings  upon  our  Christian  profession.  The  three  former 
consequences  terminated  within  the  compass  of  the  sinner's  own  person  ;  but  this 
last  spreads  and  diffuses  the  mischief  much  further :  nothing  in  nature  casting  so 
>deep  a  stain  upon  the  face  of  Christianity  as  the  blots  which  fall  upon  it  from  the 

38 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

lewd  and  scandalous  behaviour  of  Christians.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  And  to  reserve 
the  imjust  unto  the  day  of  judgment  to  be  punished.— T/ie  reality  of  future 
punisliincnt : — I.  Think  of  the  cbisis  which  is  indicated  by  the  text.  "  Th& 
day  of  judgment."  At  the  day  of  judgment  those  of  whom  our  text  speaks  will  be 
present.  These  unjust  ones  will  avowedly  be  all  there.  They  are  still  existing, 
because  then  they  will  be  forthcoming.  Yes,  and  all  besides  these  unjust  ones  are 
still  existing,  in  order  that  they  may  be  forthcoming  then.  Every  descendant  of 
Adam  is  existing  unto  this  hour ;  living  as  much  as  we  are  living,  away  amidst  the 
intermediate  blessedness  or  woe ;  awaiting  there  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  judg- 
ment. Public  pronunciation  must  there  be  of  the  allotted  destiny,  world  without 
end.  The  present  does  not  terminate  upon  itself.  II.  Think  of  the  pasties 
designated  by  the  text.  "  The  unjust."  This  word  is  used  to  represent  the 
ungodly.  To  be  unjust  towards  our  fellow-man  is  to  do  unto  him  that  which 
should  have  been  avoided,  and  to  neglect  to  do  unto  him  that  which  should  have 
been  performed.  We  sustain  to  him  relationships  involving  manifold  obligations. 
We  sustain  towards  God  relationships  involving  manifold  obligations.  Certain 
things  are  due  from  us  to  God ;  certain  tempers  of  heart ;  certain  modes  of  thought ; 
certain  habits  of  life.  They  are  in  no  wise  optional.  Now,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day  inquisition  will  be  instituted  accordingly.  Not  a  godly  man  has  lived 
who  will  not  then  be  honourably  recognised.  Not  an  ungodly  man  has  lived  whose 
ungodliness  will  not  then  be  brought  transparently  to  light.  Compromise  will  be 
impossible.  Suppression  will  be  impossible.  Evasion  will  be  impossible.  III. 
Think  of  the  doom  declared  by  our  text.  "  Punishment  unto  which  they  have 
been  reserved."  There  was,  according  to  the  intimation,  an  idea  of  ultimate 
escape.  The  penalty  which  had  been  merited  would  somehow  be  averted.  So  in 
their  folly  men  imagined  they  should  not  surely  die.  But  God  was  knowing  them 
all  the  while ;  preparing,  moreover,  all  the  while,  as  His  forewarnings  told,  to 
execute  His  will.  Dare  any  man  amongst  us  to  suggest  that  the  great  God  was 
inconsiderate  when  He  spoke  of  a  fearful  looking-for  of  judgment  ?  Dare  any  man 
amongst  us  to  suggest  that  He  who  holdeth  us  responsible  for  the  full  sincerity  of 
our  own  words  has  been  so  far  indifferent  to  the  full  sincerity  of  His  own  as  to 
speak  of  tribulation  in  the  future  life  when  there  is  no  such  thing  as  tribulation  ? 
Eeal,  downright  positively  real,  this  future  punishment  of  the  unjust.  Forecast- 
ings  of  the  punishment  are  sometimes  realised  in  the  present  life.  Instances  of 
punishment  have  now  and  then  occurred  among  the  children  of  men  which  are 
enough  to  silence  the  objections  which  some  of  you  are  making  now.  You  want 
the  preacher  to  remember  the  goodness  of  God.  I  have  it  in  remembrance  ;  but  I 
have  in  remembrance  also  the  blindness  of  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  and  the  latter 
end  of  Herod,  who  was  eaten  up  of  worms.  You  want  the  preacher  to  remember 
the  goodness  of  God.  I  have  it  in  remembrance  ;  but  I  have  in  remembrance  also 
the  expulsion  of  Adam  and  Eve  from  Paradise ;  the  cherubim  with  the  flaming 
sword  being  placed  there  to  dare  them  ever  to  return.     (W.  Brock.) 

Ver.  10.  Them  that  walk  after  the  flesh,  .  .  .  and  despise  government. — Walking 
after  the  flesh  : — Now  from  the  thesis  he  accommodates  the  general  doctrine  to  his 
own  purpose.  If  God  will  take  vengeance  on  all  the  wicked,  let  not  these  pernicious 
seducers  think  to  escape.  1.  They  follow  "  the  flesh,"  not  reason,  much  less  the 
Spirit.  2.  They  "  walk  after  "  the  flesh  :  the  flesh  is  not  like  some  stranger,  whom 
they  meet  rarely  ;  or  some  friend,  whom  they  see  but  now  and  then ;  or  a  domestic 
companion,  with  whom  they  eat,  drink,  play,  sleep.  But  it  is  their  commander, 
whose  colours  they  march  under.  It  is  the  weight  that  sets  all  their  wheels  a-going ; 
the  horses  that  draw  their  chariot,  the  very  life  of  their  corruption,  and  corruption  of 
their  life,  without  which  they  do  nothing.  3.  "In  the  lust  of  uncleanness  " — a 
sordid,  irrational,  stinking  turpitude.  After  this  the  reprobate  walks ;  his  whole 
self,  all  the  parts  of  him  :  his  eyes  walk  after  to  look  upon  it ;  his  ears  walk  after 
to  hearken  to  it ;  his  mouth  walks  after  to  talk  of  it ;  his  feet  walk  after  to  pursue 
it ;  his  hands  stay  not  behind  to  act  it ;  his  heart  is  foremost  of  all  to  desire  it.  4. 
Finally,  whatsoever  may  cross  their  lusts,  they  set  themselves  to  contemn.  "  Despise 
government."  Not  that  Almighty  Word  which  rules  heaven  and  earth,  but  all  the 
beams  of  God's  omnipotent  royalty,  in  His  deputed  magistracy.  As  if  they  resolved 
to  disgrace  that  wherein  God  had  imprinted  the  most  immediate  characters  of  His 
own  supreme  majesty.  {Thos.  Adams.)  Presumptuous. — Presumption  : — Presump- 
tion is  a  deliberate  and  wilful  sinning  against  conscience,  example,  or  warning.  1. 
There  be  some  that  presume  of  safety  in  sin,  not  doubting  to  fare  well,  while  they 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  PETER.  131 

fear  not  to  do  ill :  as  if  this  world  were  to  last  for  ever,  and  the  corn  and  tares  were 
never  to  be  parted.  2.  There  be  some  that  attempt  things  without  wan-ant,  or 
expect  things  without  promise  ;  this  is  the  common  presumption  of  the  world.  And 
they  that  know  they  cannot  live  without  feeding,  or  change  places  without  moving, 
yet  will  hope  to  be  saved  without  practical  obedience.  3.  There  be  some  that  take 
their  salvation  without  all  question,  and  are  so  sure  of  heaven  that  they  never  doubt 
the  contrary  ;  and  this  is  presumption.  Every  good  grace  hath  its  counterfeit :  if 
in  the  faithful  there  be  a  modest  assurance  of  their  blessedness  in  Christ,  the 
carnal  will  be  blown  up  with  an  impudent  arrogance,  as  if  their  footing  was  as 
sure  in  heaven  as  any  man's.  That  we  may  not  be  thus  cozened,  observe  some 
differences  between  presumption  and  assurance.  (1)  Presumption  is  natural, 
assurance  supernatural :  we  were  born  with  that,  we  are  new-born  to  this :  that  was 
the  legacy  of  Adam,  this  of  Christ.  (2)  Presumption  submits  not  itself  to  ordinary 
means,  assurance  refuses  no  means  of  being  made  better.  (3)  Presumption  is  with- 
out all  doubting,  assurance  feels  many  perplexities  :  he  that  doubts  not  of  his  estate, 
his  estate  is  much  to  be  doubted  of.  (4)  Presumption  is  joined  with  looseness  of 
hfe,  persuasion  with  a  tender  conscience :  that  dares  sin  because  it  is  sure,  this 
dares  not  for  fear  of  losing  assurance.  (Ibid.)  Presumption  is  a  firework,  made 
up  of  pride  and  foolhardiness.  It  is  indeed  like  a  heavy  house  built  upon  slender 
crutches ;  hke  dust,  which  men  throw  against  the  wind,  it  flies  back  in  their  face, 
and  makes  them  blind.  Wise  men  presume  nothing,  but  hope  the  best ;  presump- 
tion is  hope  out  of  her  wits.  (Ibid.)  Presumption : — I  heard  the  Hon.  Thomas 
Marshall,  of  Kentucky,  make  a  ten  minutes'  speech  in  Broadway  Tabernacle,  in 
which  he  said,  "  Were  this  great  globe  one  chrysolite,  and  I  offered  the  possession 
if  I  would  drink  one  glass  of  brandy,  I  would  refuse  it  with  scorn  ;  and  I  want  no 
religion,  I  want  the  temperance  pledge."  With  that  wonderful  voice  of  his  he 
thundered  out,  "  We  want  no  religion  in  this  movement ;  let  it  be  purely  secular, 
and  keep  religion  where  it  belongs."  Poor  Tom  Marshall,  with  all  his  self-con- 
fidence, fell,  and  died  at  Poughkeepsie  in  clothes  given  him  by  Christian  charity. 
(J.  B.  Gough.)  Self-willed. — Self-willed  sinners  : — The  natural  and  unsanctitied 
will  of  man  is  hard  to  tame.  No  prince  can  tame  the  will :  he  may  load  the  body 
with  irons,  vex  the  sense  with  pains,  yea,  surcharge  the  affections  with  sorrows ; 
yet  still  a  man's  wiU  is  his  own :  in  his  will  he  is  a  king,  even  while  his  body  is 
below  a  slave.  The  wiU  can  make  a  man's  life  happy  or  wretched,  when  fortune 
cannot  do  it.  The  self-willed  man  needs  no  greater  enemy  than  he  is  to  himself. 
1.  The  malicious  and  spiteful  (Numb.  xvi.  3).  2.  They  that  despair  of  proffered  grace, 
and  with  both  hands  put  back  the  proffered  goodness  of  God.  3.  Contemners  of  the 
Word  (Hos.  viii.  12).  4.  Blasphemers.  (T.Adams.)  Self-ioill: — The  self-willed  is  a 
slave  to  the  worst  part  of  himself ;  that  which  is  beast  in  him  governs  that  which  is 
man :  appetite  is  his  lord,  reason  his  servant,  religion  his  drudge.  His  five  senses  are 
all  the  articles  of  his  faith ;  and  he  had  rather  be  a  famous  man  upon  earth  than  a 
saint  in  heaven.  He  likes  nothing  for  any  goodness,  but  because  he  will  like  it ; 
and  he  wiU  like  it  because  others  do  not.  If  an  unseasonable  shower  cross  his 
recreation,  he  is  ready  to  fall  out  with  heaven,  and  to  quarrel  with  God  Himself,  as 
if  he  were  wronged  because  God  did  not  take  his  time  when  to  rain  and  when  to 
shine.  He  is  a  querulous  cur  that  barks  at  every  horse  ;  and  in  the  silent  night  the 
very  moonshine  opens  his  clamorous  throat.  All  his  proceedings  are  so  many 
precipices,  and  his  attempts  peremptory.  He  hath  not  the  patience  to  consult  with 
reason,  but  determines  all  merely  by  affection  and  fancy.  There  is  no  part  about 
him  but  often  smarts  for  his  will.  His  sides  be  sore  with  stripes,  and  thank  his  will 
for  it.  His  bowels  are  empty,  and  complain  that  his  will  robs  them  of  sustenance. 
Yea,  not  seldom,  his  wiU  breaks  the  covenant,  and  his  neck  pays  the  forfeit.  He 
is  the  lawyer's  best  client,  his  own  sycophant,  and  the  devil's  wax,  to  take  what 
impression  he  will  give  him.  (Ibid.)  Not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  dignities. — 
Speaking  evil  of  dignities  : — In  the  discharging  of  this  artiUery  of  hell  against  the 
glories  and  powers  which  God  has  ordained,  we  may  consider  four  particulars :  the 
bullet,  the  musket,  the  powder,  and  the  mark.  The  musket  is  the  malice  of  the 
heart ;  the  powder  the  spitefulness  of  the  tongue ;  the  bullet  is  blasphemy,  dis- 
gracing of  magistrates  ;  the  mark,  or  butt,  is  dignities.  1.  This  piece  is  charged 
with  three  deadly  bullets,  libelling,  murmuring,  mutinying.  (1)  Libellers  think  it 
a  point  of  wit  to  traduce  magistracy.  Scandals  of  great  men  have  seldom  any 
fathers  ;  they  kill,  and  make  no  report.  (2)  Murmurers,  though  they  disperse  not 
written  scandals  of  the  magistracy,  yet  mutter  out  repining  exceptions  against  their 
actions.    (3)  Mutineers  so  speak  evil  of  dignities  that  they  raise  up  evil  against 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

dignities.  He  that  poisons  the  people  with  a  mal-opinion  of  their  prince,  is  the 
most  dangerous  traitor.  2.  The  engine  that  carries  this  mischievous  burden  is  the 
tongue.  It  flies  hghtly,  but  injures  heavily.  It  is  but  a  httle  member,  but  the 
nimblest  about  a  man,  able  to  do  both  body  and  soul  a  mischief.  3.  The  powder 
that  chargeth  the  tongue,  and  carries  this  shot  of  blasphemy,  must  needs  be  malice, 
the  saltpetre  of  a  rancorous  hatred.  4.  The  butts  at  which  this  pestilent  artillery 
lets  fly  the  apostle  calls  dignities,  glories.  God  hath  not  only  set  them  as  vice- 
gerents in  His  own  room,  but  also  enabled  them  with  gifts  for  so  great  a  design- 
ment.  Good  kings  are  no  ordinary  blessings :  a  worthy  general  is  worth  half  an 
army ;  such  as  Moses  and  Joshua  were,  whose  faith  fought  more  for  the  camp 
than  the  camp  fought  for  them.  Inferences :  (1)  Glories  they  are,  why  then  should 
they  not  be  glorious  ?  Let  their  pomp,  apparel,  diet,  dwelling,  all  be  magnificent ; 
let  nothing  be  wanting  to  their  state  upon  whom  depends  the  state  of  all.  (2) 
Dignities  they  are,  therefore  should  be  worthy — (a)  Of  admittance,  (h)  In  per- 
formance.    No  dastards,  not  proud  and  disdainful,  nor  covetous.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  Whereas  angels  .  .  .  bring  not  railing  accusation. — Lessons  from  the 
angels  : — From  this  angelical  moderation  we  learn — 1.  Not  to  accuse.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  significant  names  of  the  devil,  to  be  an  accuser  of  the  brethren.  Love 
covers  a  multitude  of  sins  ;  malice  discovers  what  should  be  concealed.  2.  Not  to 
rail.  This  is  indeed  properly  the  language  of  hell.  Angels  do  not  rail,  devils  do  ; 
angels  do  not  curse,  devils  do.  Your  curse  is  an  arrow  shot  against  a  stone,  it  shall 
wound  yourselves.  3.  To  be  afraid  of  these  impieties,  as  being  always  before  the 
Lord.  A  good  man  would  not  admit  them,  were  he  sure  that  God  would  never  take 
notice  of  it ;  but  before  the  Lord,  who  dares  rail  on  His  delected  image  ?  Corrupt 
fear  dreads  the  penalty,  loves  the  sin.  Gracious  fear  dreads  the  sin,  and  escapes 
the  penalty.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  pure,  because  it  keeps  the  heart  from  being 
defiled.     {Thos.  Adams.) 

Ver.  12.  But  these,  as  natural  brute  beasts. — Men  like  beasts : — I.  Their 
RESEMBLANCE.  1.  What  they  are  like — beasts.  You  have  read  many  fables  and 
apologues,  wherein  beasts  are  feigned  to  speak  like  men ;  but  who  would  endure 
that  theatre,  where  men  be  seen  to  play  the  beast  ?  Such  is  the  power  of  sin,  it 
can  transform  men  into  beast.  While  idolaters  turn  beasts  into  gods,  they  turn 
themselves  into  beasts.  2.  Wherein  they  are  like  them.  (1)  The  whole  intend- 
ment of  the  beast  is  sensuality  ;  and  so  of  wicked  men.  (2)  Beasts  cannot  foresee 
the  future,  nor  provide  for  it.  (3)  Beasts  are  not  ashamed  of  their  deeds  ;  where 
is  no  reason,  there  is  no  sin ;  and  where  no  sin,  no  shame.  These  have  reason,  yet 
are  not  ashamed  of  their  abominations  (Jer.  viii.  12) ;  and  therein  are  beasts,  or 
worse.  II.  Their  ordinance.  "  Made  to  be  taken  and  destroyed."  1.  God  is  an 
absolute  Lord  over  His  creatures,  and  hath  as  just  right  of  their  disposition,  as  He 
had  power  of  their  creation  (Matt.  xx.  15).  2.  God  is  always  most  just,  nor  can 
He  do  other  than  what  is  perfectly  good.  His  judgments  are  sometimes  manifest, 
often  secret,  always  wonderful,  never  unjust.  3.  The  will  of  God  is  the  cause  of 
all  causes,  in  which  we  must  make  a  stand  ;  and  neither  beyond  it,  nor  without  it, 
seek  for  any  reason.  4.  God  hath  not  ordained  any  to  destruction  without  the 
respect  of  sin.  III.  Their  ignorance.  "  Speak  evil  of  the  things  that  they  under- 
stand not."  Not  to  understand,  is  the  infirmity  of  a  man ;  to  speak  of  that  he 
understands  not,  is  the  part  of  a  fool ;  but  to  speak  maliciously  evil,  is  the  part  of 
a  devil.  They  will  not  understand,  they  wiU  not  be  silent,  they  will  not  speak  well. 
If  they  will  not  know,  let  them  bo.d  their  peace  ;  nay,  they  will  speak  ;  but  then 
let  them  give  good  words ;  nay,  they  will  speak  evil.  IV.  Their  vengeance. 
"  Shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corruption."  1.  No  cause  doth  more  necessarily 
produce  its  proper  effect,  than  sin  doth  naturally  beget  punishment.  2.  Forbear- 
ance of  punishment  is  no  argument  of  immunity ;  though  not  presently,  they  shall 
perish.  3.  Obstinate  sin  would  make  its  own  rod,  were  there  none  prepared.  The 
grace  of  God  resisted,  turns  to  desperateness ;  and  wicked  men,  like  some  beasts, 
grow  mad  with  baiting.  They  cannot  be  quiet  till  they  have  wrought  out  their  full 
destruction.  (Thos.  Adams.)  Scnsvality  : — 1.  Sin,  where  it  reigns,  turns  a  man 
into  a  brute  beast  as  it  were.  This  is  showed  in  all  those  places  of  Scripture 
where  wicked  men  are  compared  unto  brute  beasts,  either  in  general  or  in  special, 
to  horses,  mules,  dogs,  swine,  foxes,  wolves,  bears,  lions,  &c.  2.  The  fountain  of 
all  this  sin  and  misery  is  the  want  of  a  right  and  spiritual  judgment.  3.  A  sign 
of  such  a  condition,  that  is,  of  a  man  turning  to  a  brute  beast,  is  to  follow  the 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  133 

passions  of  corrupted  nature  ■without  reason.  4.  Such  men  do  corrupt  also  what- 
soever natural  goodness  they  have  in  them.  5.  Such  sinners  are  entangled  in  their 
sins,  and  kept  unto  destruction  like  as  brute  beasts  in  their  snares,  wherewith  they 
are  taken  (2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;  Lam.  i.  14).     {Wm.  Ames,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Shall  receive  the  reward  of  unrighteousnesi. — Sin  punished : — 
1.  When  we  think  of  the  sins  of  wicked  men,  we  should  likewise  think  of  their 
punishments.  (1)  Because  these  two  are  in  God's  purpose,  and  their  own  nature 
knit  together.  (2)  Because  the  consideration  of  sin  often  does  more  hurt  than  God, 
if  the  consideration  of  the  punishment  be  not  joined  unto  it.  2.  Profuse  luxury  is 
a  sign  of  a  man  sinning  securely.  3.  Luxury,  the  more  it  is  shown  openly,  the 
more  it  is  to  be  condemned.  4.  There  is  the  greatest  danger  in  those  sins  from 
which  the  greatest  pleasure  and  delight  ariseth.  (1)  Because  pleasure  is  a  sign  of 
a  perfect  habit.  (2)  Because  pleasure  is  very  hardly  left.  5.  They  that  please 
themselves  most  in  their  sins,  do  most  contaminate  both  themselves  and  others. 
6.  The  outward  members  also  of  wicked  men  are  full  of  wickedness.  Because  out 
of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  all  our  faculties,  and  all  the  instruments  of  opera- 
tions receive  impressions  answerable  unto  the  heart.  7.  The  uncleanness  of  the 
body  is  oftentimes  joined  with  impuri^  of  religion  (ver.  14).  8.  In  such  men 
covetousness  is  oftentimes  joined  with  their  impiety.  9.  The  exercising  of  the  heart 
unto  such  sins  doth  very  much  strengthen  and  increase  them.  10.  They  that  are 
after  this  manner  accustomed  unto  their  sins  are  hardened  in  them.  11.  Such 
men  are  most  to  be  detested.  {Wm.  Ames,  D.D.)  Pleasure  to  riot. — Pleasure : — 
1.  Whether  a  man  may  take  any  pleasure  in  this  world,  or  no  ?  Yes,  certainly ; 
one  special  use  of  wisdom  stands  in  tempering  our  pleasures  :  to  be  delighted  is  not 
evil,  but  to  be  delighted  in  evil.  Why  hath  God  given  man  such  a  choice  of  earthly 
commodities,  but  for  his  use  ?  The  wise  man  can  distinguish  between  the  love  of 
pleasure  and  the  use  of  pleasure;  and  while  others  serve  delight,  he  teacheth 
delight  to  serve  him.  2.  How  may  a  Christian  take  pleasure  in  the  world  ?  By 
having  respect  to  three  things :  whether  it  be  lawful,  expedient,  or  becoming.  The 
pleasure  must  be  lawful,  there  can  be  no  safety  in  a  sinful  delight.  Poison  may  be 
qualified,  and  become  medicinal ;  there  is  use  to  be  made  of  an  enemy ;  sickness 
may  turn  to  our  better  health,  and  death  itself  to  the  faithful  is  but  a  door  to  life  ; 
but  sin  can  never  be  made  good.  Pleasure  therefore  first  must  have  the  warrant, 
that  it  be  without  sin  ;  then  the  measure,  that  it  be  without  excess.  If  the  cup  be 
evil,  we  may  not  taste  it ;  though  good,  yet  not  carouse  it.  We  are  not  born  to 
play  or  sport.  Nor  is  the  lawfulness  only  observable,  but  the  conveniency ;  a  man 
may  wear  good  clothes  unhandsomely.  The  stuff  may  be  good,  yet  while  the 
fashion  of  the  garment  does  not  become  him,  it  appears  ridiculous.  The  place, 
occasion,  company,  opportunity,  all  must  be  fit.  (Thos.  Adams.)  Spots  they  are, 
and  blemishes. — Spots  and  blemishes  : — In  every  sin  there  is  not  only  guilt,  that 
binds  over  to  punishment,  but  defilement ;  which  makes  the  sinner  not  less  filthy 
than  guilty ;  and  even  when  the  guilt  is  remitted,  the  filth  remains  still.  The  hurt  is 
not  so  soon  cured,  as  the  fault  is  pardoned.  1.  All  men  are  spotted,  originally  from 
their  parents  ;  of  actual  spots  themselves  are  the  parents.  If  all  our  internal  spots 
should  break  out,  we  could  not  endure  one  another.  The  whole  world  would  be  an 
hospital,  and  every  man  a  lazar.  2.  The  whole  world  is  spotted,  that  is  another 
step  :  in  the  universal  blemishes  of  nature  let  us  read  our  own.  To  charge  God 
with  this  degeneration  is  the  highest  blasphemy :  coldness  may  sooner  arise  from 
fire,  than  any  evil  from  the  fountain  of  goodness.  3.  But  if  every  man  be  spotted, 
who  shall  then  enter  into  heaven,  seeing  into  that  city  no  unclean  thing  shall 
come  ?  (Eev.  xxvi.  27.)  This  is  true,  yet  many  that  have  been  unclean  persons  are 
since  admitted  (1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  Rev.  vii.  14 ;  Jer.  iv.  14).  The  grace  of  God  may  go 
a  great  way  in  our  souls,  and  yet  not  leave  us  without  spots.  Not  to  have  no  spot 
here,  but  to  have  no  spot  imputed  hereafter,  is  the  happiness  of  a  Christian.  4.  We 
have  all  spots,  but  these  are  spots ;  for  the  apostle  speaks  not  of  their  actions  here, 
but  their  persons  ;  not  the  blemishes  of  the  men,  but  that  the  men  themselves  are 
blemishes.  This  is  a  high  degree  of  sin,  to  be  wholly  turned  into  sin.  5.  To  whom 
do  these  appear  spots  and  blemishes  ?  (1)  To  God,  who  hath  pure  eyes,  and  can 
abide  no  unclcgn  thing.  (2)  To  the  angels.  Iniquities  be  sport  for  devils,  but  an 
eyesore  to  the  angels ;  they  that  rejoice  at  a  sinner's  conversion  do  rather  grieve 
at  his  aberration.  (3)  To  good  men,  whom  nothing  pleaseth  that  displeaseth  their 
Maker.  (4)  To  bad  men ;  for  howsoever  sinners  love  to  be  evil  themselves,  yet 
they  would  have  others  good  to  them.     (5)  To  the  creatures ;  they  grieve  that  they 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

are  compelled  to  wait  on  a  wrong  master.  (6)  And  do  they  not  offend  themselves  ? 
No,  the  sick  man  may  feel,  the  dead  does  not.  6.  Sin  is  of  a  defiling  quality  ;  like 
a  bemired  dog,  when  it  fawns  upon  us  it  fouls  us.  It  may  in  this  one  thing  be 
compared  to  fii-e,  it  converts  matter  into  itself.  7.  Open  and  notorious  offenders 
ought  to  be  denied  these  holy  feasts ;  and  instead  of  communicating  with  us,  to 
pass  under  the  censure  of  excommunication  from  us ;  till  in  penitent  tears  they 
have  cleansed  their  pollutions.  8.  We  may  not  abstain  from  the  sacrament, 
because  there  be  spots  and  blemishes  in  the  society.  9.  As  all  sins  are  spots,  so 
some  have  a  more  special  resemblance,  as  carrying  in  them  a  natural  poison  and 
filthiness.  Such  particular  instances  we  find  in  Scripture,  wherein  God  discovered 
the  spots  in  their  consciences  by  sticking  spots  on  their  bodies  (Exod.  ix.  11 ; 
Numb.  xii.  10  ;  2  Kings  v.  27).  Application  :  1.  Learn  to  see  thy  spots.  Many  have 
unknown  sins,  as  a  man  may  have  a  mole  on  his  back,  and  himself  never  know  it 
(Psa.  xix.  12).  But  many  a  one  knows  his  fault,  yet  loves  it.  2.  Confess  these 
spots.  The  spots  that  God  hateth,  are  the  spots  that  man  hideth.  3.  It  is  mad- 
ness to  confess  ourselves  foul,  and  not  to  wash,  therefore  let  us  eriueavour  our  own 
cleansing.  In  our  making  there  was  work  for  God  only  ;  in  our  marring  there  was 
work  for  ourselves  only  ;  in  our  restoring  there  is  work  for  God  and  ourselves 
together.  4.  There  is  only  one  fountain  to  purge  all  these  spots,  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb.  For  this  purpose  Christ  was  baptized,  even  to  wash  us.  His  first  baptizing 
was  with  water.  His  last  with  blood  ;  both  of  them  wash  the  world  from  their  sins. 
(Ibid.)  Sporting  themselves  with  their  own  deceivings. — Sporting  with  sin  : — 
It  is  hard  when  the  fool  can  find  no  bauble  to  play  with  but  sin ;  casting  firebrands, 
and  arrows,  and  death  ;  and  then  jeers  (Prov.  xxvi.  19).  Custom  brings  sin  to  be 
so  familiar,  that  the  horror  of  it  is  turned  into  pleasure,  and  homicide  is  held  but  a 
sport.  It  is  ill  for  a  man  to  make  himself  merry  with  that  which  angers  God.  If 
sin  were  rightly  considered,  it  were  more  worthy  our  tears  than  our  sport;  the 
fool  laughs  at  it,  but  the  saint  weeps  for  it.     [Ibid.) 

Ver.  14.  Having  eyes  full  of  adultery. — Adidtery : — 1.  It  is  a  conquering  sin, 
for  it  hath  overcome  the  strongest.  2.  It  is  a  cheating  sin,  for,  instead  of  repent- 
ance, it  works  the  adulterer  to  labour  a  concealment.  Instead  of  clearing  their  sin, 
they  labour  to  cloak  it.  3.  It  is  a  commanding  sin  ;  no  iniquity  that  stands  in  the 
way  must  be  refused  if  adultery  be  once  admitted.  4.  It  is  a  condemning  sin,  and 
carries  its  own  sentence  about  it.  It  must  needs  abandon  all  love  of  God,  for  that 
and  the  love  of  a  harlot  cannot  stand  together.  As  malice  is  damnable,  because  it 
is  so  diametrically  repugnant  to  God  who  is  love,  so  God  is  also  purity,  and  there- 
fore nothing  more  directly  contrary  to  Him  than  uncleanness.  I.  Their  eyes  be  the 
beagles  that  hunt  after  the  game.  1.  There  is  no  sense  which  is  not  at  the  heart's 
command ;  but  the  principality  of  those  servants  is  varied  according  to  the 
disposition  of  their  mistress.  If  the  heart  be  gracious,  the  ear  hath  the  superiority; 
if  vicious,  the  eye.  2.  The  eye  is  of  all  senses  the  quickest  of  apprehension— a 
port  to  land  the  commodities  of  hell  before  the  soul  have  warning.  3.  The  eye  is 
the  pander  of  a  lustful  heart ;  the  window  that  lets  in  the  infection,  the  first 
betrayer  of  the  fort.  Pliny  writes  of  a  chalky  brimstone  that  draws  to  itself 
distant  fire :  the  wanton  eye  attracts  this  adulterous  fh-e  to  the  heart.  Alexander 
refused  so  much  as  to  see  Darius's  wife,  a  lady  of  incomparable  beauty,  fearing  lest 
he  that  had  conquered  the  husband  should  be  overcome  by  the  wife.  4.  Satan's 
first  project  is  to  take  the  eye ;  if  that  be  once  his  friend,  he  hopes  well  of  all  the 
rest.  Indeed,  if  the  door  stand  open  to  the  thief,  what  safety  can  be  in  the  house  ? 
5.  Where  be  the  eyes  that  have  not  been  faulty  ?  If  the  eyes  have  sinned,  why 
should  not  the  eyes  be  punished  ?  Oh,  let  those  eyes  that  have  been  the  cisterns  of 
corruption  become  the  fountains  of  compunction  !  II.  "  Adultery  "  is  the  game, 
the  beast  they  hunt.  1.  The  main  attractive  of  the  eye  is  beauty,  and  of  this  the 
fancy  is  informed  by  the  eye  ;  yet  being  so  informed,  then  the  eye  is  ruled  by  the 
fancy,  and  as  that  imagines  her,  so  the  eye  sees  her.  Many  a  woman's  beauty 
hath  been  her  ruin ;  but  blessing  never  forsook  a  beautiful  soul.  2.  But  if  a  man's 
eye  be  delighted  with  beauty,  may  he  not  enjoy  it  with  chastity  ?  What  a  laborious, 
what  a  dangerous  way  the  lustful  finds  out  to  his  pleasure  !  3.  It  is  an  adulteress 
they  love,  and  that  is  but  one  bow  short  of  Satan.  We  hate  the  Turks  for  selling 
Christians  as  slaves.  How  odious  are  they  that  sell  themselves !  III.  "  Full  of 
adultery  " — this  is  the  pursuit  of  the  game,  full  cry.  The  eyes  do  not  engross  all 
their  uncleanness  ;  they  are  not  only  full,  and  the  other  parts  empty.  The  caterer 
fills  his  basket  with  provision,  but  this  serves  afterward  to  fill  the  mouth  and  to  fill 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  135 

the  stomach.  The  eyes  be  first  full,  as  the  cistern  ;  but  the  cistern  serves  all  other 
offices  of  the  house.  Nor  is  this  a  fulness  of  satisfaction,  for  as  "  he  that  loveth 
silver  shall  never  be  satisfied  with  silver,"  so  he  that  loves  women  shall  never  be 
satisfied  with  women.  Unnatural  desires  are  infinite  :  hunger  is  soon  appeased 
with  meat,  and  thirst  allayed  with  drink  ;  but  in  burning  fevers,  the  more  water  is 
drunk,  the  more  it  is  thirsted  for.  "  Full."  There  is  no  mediocrity  in  sin :  in 
extremes  can  be  no  mean ;  and  every  sin  is  an  extreme,  either  deficient  or  excessive. 
{Thos.  Adams.)  That  cannot  cease  from  sin. — The  fixity  of  habit : — "  Having 
eyes  full  of  an  adulteress."  All  who  possess  eyes  at  all  have  them  full  of  some- 
thing. I  have  heard  one  of  exquisite  aesthetic  sensibility,  who  had  seen  some  of 
the  glorious  painted  glass  at  St.  Gudule,  in  Brussels,  on  a  summer  day,  declare 
that  for  days  his  eyes  were  "  full  of  those  colours,  especially  the  blue."  The  eye 
of  the  woman  of  "  meek  and  quiet  spirit,"  wherever  circumstances  may  lead  her, 
is  full  of  love.  Even  so  the  sensualist's  eye  is  "  full  of  an  adulteress,"  filled  full, 
so  that  it  can  hold  no  more.  The  eyes  are  fixed  in  an  evil  expression  which  they 
can  never  lose.  They  give  signal  to  aU  whom  it  concerns  that  they  are  ever  on  the 
•watch.  That  which  is  choke-full  often  means,  in  the  original,  satiated.  But  such 
eyes  are  insatiate  and  insatiable.  This  is  one  of  God's  terrible  voices  of  moral 
judgment,  one  of  those  hints  which  tell  us  what  a  man  may  become.  Let  us 
consider  that  law  of  human  character  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  law  of  Divine 
punishment,  without  which,  indeed,  the  latter  cannot  be  spiritually  construed  to  the 
spiritual  nature.  Character,  then,  as  the  derivation  of  the  word  implies,  has  a 
tendency  to  become,  and  frequently  does  become,  absolutely  stereotyped,  from  a 
practical  point  of  view.  Generally  speaking,  up  to  a  certain  date,  a  man  may 
issue  a  second  edition  of  his  moral  life,  revised  and  corrected,  perhaps  even  entirely 
recast.  Still  a  day  comes  when  the  second  edition,  with  the  "  errata  "  expunged, 
is  not  possible  any  longer.  The  eye  once  "  full  of  an  adulteress  "  may  be  filled 
•with  dust,  but  the  ineradicable  image  has  been  carried  to,  and  abides  for  ever  in, 
that  "  inward  eye,"  which  is  the  "  bliss  "  or  bane,  the  heaven  or  hell  of  "solitude." 
This  is  a  solemn  argument  for  youth,  when  the  vapour  of  imagination  and  passion 
are  beginning  to  condense  into  habit ;  for  that  portion  of  manhood  during  which 
habit  is  becoming  of  insoluble  density.  Let  us  beware  of  the  lust  of  the  eyes.  Be 
ours  the  prayer,  "  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity  ;  and  quicken  Thou 
me  in  Thy  way."  Nor  let  any  who  ponders  this  argument  turn  from  it  with  a  sigh 
of  despair,  "  For  me  it  is  too  late."  If  we  have  enough  of  will  left  to  desire 
earnestly  a  new  mind,  it  is  not  too  late.  Such  can  still  hear  the  voice — "Him  that 
Cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  (Abp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Covetous 
practices. — Covetousness  : — Some  of  us  may  remember  the  fable  of  a  covetous  man, 
who  chanced  to  find  his  way  one  moonlight  night  into  a  fairy's  palace.  There  he 
saw  bars,  apparently  of  solid  gold,  strewed  on  every  side,  and  he  was  permitted  to 
take  away  as  many  as  he  could  carry.  In  the  morning,  when  the  sun  rose  on  his 
imaginary  treasure,  borne  home  with  so  much  toil,  behold !  there  was  only  a  bundle 
of  sticks,  and  invisible  beings  filled  the  air  around  him  with  scornful  laughter. 
Covetousness: — Oh  do  not  so  marry  yourselves  to  money  that  you  are  resolved 
nothing  shall  pai"t  you  but  death ;  be  not  like  the  medlar,  which  is  never  good  till  it 
be"  rotten.  A  covetous  man  may  be  compared  to  a  Christmas-box — he  receives 
money,  but  parts  with  none  till  death  breaks  this  box  in  pieces ;  then  the  silver  and 
gold  comes  tumbling  out.     (T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Following  the  way  of  Balaam. — Balaam : — I.  We  begin  with  the 
■GOOD  PAET  of  the  character  of  Balaam.  Balaam  was  a  true  prophet  of  God.  He 
was  the  last  prophet  under  the  patriarchal  dispensation.  He  had  the  knowledge  of 
religion,  faith  in  the  future  Messiah,  and  prayer  for  the  great  blessing — a  death  of 
peace  and  hope.  11.  Let  us  now  consider  the  character  of  Balaam  ;  as  it  may  be 
called,  THE  BAD  PART.  The  bad  part  of  Balaam's  character  was  that  he  united  with 
his  religion,  faith,  and  prayer,  the  errors  of  the  head,  which  ruined  his  religion, 
and  the  vices  of  the  heart,  which  ruined  his  faith  and  prayer.  He  complied  with 
the  practices  of  the  idolaters  that  surrounded  him ;  and  he  was  guilty  of  that  love 
of  money  which  made  him  desire  the  wages  of  unrighteousness  and  receive  the 
rewards  of  Balak,  against  the  warnings  of  his  conscience  and  his  knowledge  of 
God.  We  must  now  consider  the  especial  reason  why  the  dumb  ass,  on  which  the 
prophet  rode,  was  the  fittest  channel  by  which  God  would  reprove,  first,  his 
idolatry,  and  then  his  covetousness.  1.  And  first  the  dumb  ass  was  the  fittest 
channel  by  which  God  would  reprove  the  idolatry  of  Balaam.    It  was  as  if  a  voice 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.vp.  ii. 


came  from  the  God  of  Israel,  saying  to  the  prophet,  "  Wilt  thou  forsake  the  one 

true  God,  and  join  thyself,  for  the  sake  of  money,  to  the  foolish  idolatry  of  the 

people  around  you  ?    I  will  open  the  mouth  of  the  most  stupid  of  their  idols  to 

reproach  thee,  the  prophet  of  God,  to  convince  thee,  and  so  convince  them,  that  I 

am  the  only  God,  the  only  giver  of  all  the  usefulness  of  the  instinct  which  has 

caused  the  dumb  ass  to  be  worshipped  and  honoured."     2.  So  also  the  ass  was  the 

fittest  channel  for  the  reproof  of  the  covetousness  of  Balaam.     The  wild  ass  of  the 

East  was  not,  as  is  too  often  imagined,  the  same  sort  of  animal  as  that  among  us. 

It  was  selected,  because  of  its  size  and  beauty,  to  be  the  bearer  of  kings,  magistrates, 

and  princes  ;  and  its  use  may  be  said,  therefore,  to  be  confined  to  those  who  were 

the  leaders  and  the  wealthy  among  the  people.     Now  the  only  palliation  that  can 

be  alleged  for  the  love  of  money  is  the  poverty  which  fears  want,  or  which  desires 

the  advantages  which  money  confers.     Balaam  had  no  excuse  for  the  covetousness 

which  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  and  the  proof  of  all  this  was  the  mere 

fact  of  his  possessing  the  animal  which  was  possessed  only  by  the  rich,  the  great, 

and  the  wealthy.     When  the  Lord,  therefore,  opened  the  mouth  of  the  ass,  it  was 

as  if  God  said,  "  Why  should  the  prophet  of  the  true  God  thus  be  led  away  by  the 

hope  of   money  ?   why  should  the  prophet  of   the  true  God  love  the  wages  of 

unrighteousness  ?    Is  not  the  possession  and  the  use  of  the  dumb  ass  on  which 

you  ride,  the  proof,  and  the  demonstration  to  all  around  you  that  you  already  enjoy 

all  that  human  ambition  is  wont  to  desire,  and  all  that  human  avarice  is  wont  to 

covet  ?  "    Be  content.     The  most  wonderful  of  all  God's  miracles  was  wrought  to 

prove  to  us  God's  abhorrence  of  the  most  usual  of  all  the  sins  that  beset  us,  that 

we  may  learn  to  avoid  that  "  covetousness  which  is  idolatry."     (G.  Townsend,  D.D.) 

Balaam : — Of  the  melancholy  history  of  this  wicked  man  let  us  make  its  proper 

use.     1.  It  teaches  the  danger  of  giving  way  in  the  first  instance  to  temptation. 

After  we  have  been  once  conquered,  we  have  lost  half  our  strength.     2.  Again,  we 

are  taught  by  this  story  that  a  religious  disposition  makes  always  the  greatest  and 

best  part  of  every  man's  character.     Shining  talents  are  what  men  desire,  as  they 

procure  the  admiration  of  the  world ;  but  we  see  in  God's  sight  it  is  otherwise. 

He  often  gives  them  to  the  most  unworthy.     A  good  heart  is  worth  them  all,  and 

will  make  us  illustrious,  when  all  the  rest  become  nothing.     3.  We  learn,  further, 

from  this  story,  the  dreadful  state  of  being  what  the  Scriptures  call  forsaken  of 

God.     4.  But  the  most  obvious  use  of  the  story  is  to  convince  ourselves  of  the  folly 

and  wickedness  of  acting  under  two  characters — of  hiding  a  bad  heart  under  the 

pretences  of  rehgion.     What  pains  it  costs — the  constant  attention  to  every  word 

and  action.     In  fact,  it  would  cost  less  to  be  good  in  earnest.     Barely  did  hypocrisy 

ever  carry  its  deceit  to  the  grave.     Will  the  best  gains  of  hypocrisy  repay  us  for  a 

bad  conscience?     (W.  Gilpin,  M.A.)        The  dumb  ass  .  ,  .  forbad  the  madness 

of  the  prophet. — Lessons  from  Balaam's  ass  : — Balaam's  madness  had  turned  him 

into  a  beast,  and  why  might  not  one  beast  teach  another?     In  some  things  the  ass 

excelled   her  master.     1.  She  saw  the  judgment,  he  was  blind :   instinct  better 

instructed  her  than  reason  and  religion  had  enlightened  him.     2.  The  ass  had  a 

tongue  of  equity ;  the  prophet  a  tongue,  hand,  and  heart  of  iniquity.     3.  The  ass 

was  not  capable  of  sin,  and  did  therefore  justify  herself ;  the  master  was  so  mad 

upon  sin  that  he  would  needs  ruin  himself.     Observations :  1.  The  weaker  vessel 

may  hold  the  better  liquor.     The  uncleansed  lay  hold  on  heaven,  whereas  men  of 

knowledge  often  wallow  in  the  lusts  of  flesh  and  blood.     We  are  ordained  to  judge 

the  angels;  but  if  we  degenerate  from  our  prerogative,  angels,  men,  infidels,  harlots, 

yea,   even  beasts   and  stones,  shall   be  our  judges.     2.  As  Balaam  proceeds   in 

forwardness,  so  doth  the  ass  in  reprehension.    At  every  turn  she  answered  him,  in 

every  passage  she  was  quit  with  him.     We  cannot  run  so  fast  but  God  can  overtake 

us,  nor  be  so  cunning  but  He  can  teach  even  a  beast  to  overreach  us.     3.  The 

sensual  creatures  are  set  to  condemn  our  sins  and  to  reflect  our  evils  upon  us.  , 

Peter  hath  a  cock  to  tell  him  his  cowardice,  and  Balaam  an  ass  to  reprove  his 

avarice.     There  is  no  creature  dumb  when  God  bids  it  to  speak.     If  there  were  no 

preachers  to  declaim,  no  conscience  to  accuse,  the  very  creatures  themselves  would 

cry.     The  beds,  boards,  walls,  windows,  markets,  closets  should  have  tongues  to 

condemn  us.     (T.  Adams.)        Balaam: — To  us  the  narrative  as  a  whole  is  stamped 

visibly  and  broadly  with  the  arrow-mark  of  heaven.    As  Canon  Kingsley  says,  it  is 

one  which  never  would  have  been,  never  could  have  been,  invented  by  the  Jews. 

They  never  would   have  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  heathen  prophet  the  sublime 

evangelic  statements  which  Balaam  utters.     The  character  is  evidently  drawn  from 

life.    A  few  of  those  traits  of  truth  and  experience  we  shall  proceed  to  notice.    I. 


CHAP.  II.]  11.  PETER.  137 

The  first  thing  which  strikes  us  in  Balaam's  history  is  that  we  have  here  a  very 
BAD  MAN,  though  A  TRUE  PROPHET.  He  was  covetous — "  his  heart  was  exercised 
with  covetous  practices,"  "  he  ran  greedily  after  reward."  Some  of  you  may  think 
that  not  a  very  great  sin,  but  Scripture  brands  it  as  idolatry.  Balaam,  however, 
was  worse  than  that.  Like  Simon  Magus,  he  was  desirous  of  turning  the  gifts  of 
inspiration  to  low  mercenary  gain,  and  of  making  the  things  of  the  kingdom  an 
affair  of  barter.  Yea,  worse  than  that.  He  rushed  pell-mell  to  evil ;  and  not  only 
when  remonstrated  with  did  he  refuse  obedience,  he  became  desperate  in  dis- 
obedience. There  is  no  telling  what  a  man  may  descend  to  !  Gifts  are  not  graces ; 
great  men  are  not  always  good  men.  Intellectual  attainments,  like  some  other 
things,  may  be  valued  too  highly.  Better  the  most  drivelling  idiot  that  crawls 
than  the  laurelled  victor  who,  to  attain  his  end,  has  prostituted  his  powers  to  the 
prince  of  darkness.  H.  We  have  a  striking  instance  of  apparent  obedience  to 
the  Divine  will  masking  an  insincere  heart.  Balaam  has  been  called  a  con- 
scientious man.  We  should  demur  to  that.  Still,  he  had  a  remarkably  clear  idea 
of  the  fidelity  of  God,  of  His  unchangeableness,  of  His  unimpeachable  righteous- 
ness, of  His  inflexible  truth.  He  had  a  conscience,  though  very  poorly  he  used  it. 
Conscience  was  strong  enough  in  him  to  make  a  coward  of  him ;  to  make  him  now 
this,  now  that.  It  was  not  strong  enough  in  him  to  lift  him  above  the  fascinating 
power  of  evil.  Hence  those  inconsistencies  which,  like  the  confusing  influences  of 
light  and  shade,  render  this  man  as  much  a  problem  as  any  in  history.  Oh,  what- 
ever we  are,  God  help  us  to  be  true !  HI.  We  see  how  God  frequently  concedes 
IN  JUDGMENT  A  man's  WISHES.  Somo  of  US  havc  greatly  wondered  why  God,  the 
second  time  of  Balaam's  asking  Him,  said,  "Go  with  the  men";  and  yet  "that 
His  anger  should  be  kindled  "  because  Balaam  did  precisely  what  He  had  told  him 
to  do.  Now  this  difficulty  is  met  by  two  passages  of  Scripture  :  one  is  in  Ezek.  xiv., 
where  we  are  told  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel  came  and  sat  before  the  prophet,  and 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying,  "  Shall  I  be  inquired  of  at  all  by  them  ? 
Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  every  man  of  the  house  of  Israel  that  setteth 
up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and  putteth  the  stumbling-block  of  his  iniquity  before  his 
face  and  cometh  to  the  prophet,  I,  the  Lord,  will  answer  him  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  idols."  The  other  passage  is  in  2  Thess.  ii. :  "  God  will  send 
them  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  a  lie."  He  "had  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness." Do  you  think  God  was  going  to  give  that  man  repeatedly  right 
and  gracious  answers  when  he  knew  that  the  thing  he  asked  was  displeasing  to 
God  ?  No  !  to  the  fro  ward  God  will  show  Himself  fro  ward.  If  a  man  "  will  have 
none  of  the  Divine  counsel,"  it  is  no  use  repeating  and  repeating  what  God  would 
have  him  do,  nor  is  it  becoming  the  majesty  of  God.  He  will  say,  "  Well,  then, 
you  will  not  take  no  for  an  answer  ;  I  have  told  you  the  consequences  ;  be  it  then 
even  as  you  wish."  Often  there  would  be  no  surer  way  to  afliict  us  than  to  give  us 
what  we  wish.  IV.  Here  is  illustrated  that  secret  law  by  which  the  sinner 
IS  almost  compelled  to  continue.  He  thinks  he  can  stop  when  he  pleases.  No 
such  thing !  except  the  grace  of  God  aids  the  endeavour.  "  Go  with  the  men  !  " 
said  the  angel.  I  see  that  your  heart  still  hankers  after  Balak's  gold,  you  are  not 
in  earnest  confessing  your  sin  or  in  real  acquiescence  with  the  Divine  judgment. 
"  Go"  then  with  them  !  Does  not  that  illustrate  the  way  of  God's  providence  with 
thousands  upon  thousands  ?  The  sensualist  no  sooner  has  indulged  a  lawless 
passion  than  he  begins  to  see  the  folly  of  it ;  but  how  few  turn  and  implore  help 
and  ask  pardon  of  Almighty  God  !  Go  on  !  says  the  angel.  The  fear  of  discovery, 
the  growing  power  of  habit,  the  augmented  strength  of  evil  passion,  the  shame  of 
acknowledgment,  the  bonds  of  association,  all,  like  the  weeds  around  the  drowning 
man,  hinder  endeavours  at  self-rescue.  There  is  an  inevitable  pressure  from 
behind  which,  once  the  false  step  is  taken,  almost  necessitates  continuance.  V. 
We  have  here  presented  us  the  picture  of  a  God-deserted  man,  not  at  first,  but 
FINALLY.  If  we  may  say  so,  at  first  God  seemed  to  have  a  liking  for  that  man  ;  as 
indeed  for  what  finally  reprobate  transgressor  at  one  time  had  He  not  a  liking  ? 
"  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked." 
(G.  Short,  B.A.) 

Vers.  17-22.  These  are  wells  without  water. — False  teachers : — I.  Their  un- 
profitableness. "  Wells  without  water."  1.  Pastors  are  like  wells— (1)  For  con- 
stancy. They  keep  their  residence ;  men  know  where  to  find  them.  (2)  They  are 
wells  of  piety ;  the  water  of  life,  the  word  of  salvation  is  in  them.  (3)  They  are 
wells  of  sanctity,  and  therefore  must  be  clean.    (4)  They  are  wells  of  knowledge, 


133  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

and  of  sufficient  depth,  skilled  in  the  mysteries  of  salvation.  (5)  They  are  wells  of 
pity,  full  of  compassion,  yearning  over  the  danger  of  men's  souls.  (6)  They  are 
wells  of  peace  and  amity,  such  as  reconcile  feuds  and  appease  discords ;  as  the  water 
of  a  well  serves  to  quench  flames.  (7)  They  are  wells  of  charity,  that  do  not  only 
give  good  counsel  with  their  lips,  but  good  relief  with  their  hands.  2.  False 
teachers  are  "  wells  without  water."  A  blind  guide,  an  ignorant  physician,  a  candle- 
stick without  light,  a  penny  without  provision,  a  well  without  water,  is  a  miserable 
provision.  Suppose  we  are  thirsty  and  would  drink,  foul  and  would  wash,  hot  and 
would  be  cooled,  our  houses  are  on  fire  and  we  would  have  them  quenched ;  if  we 
come  to  the  well  with  our  buckets  and  find  it  empty,  we  know  not  whether  our  grief 
or  indignation  be  greater.  II.  Their  variableness.  "  Clouds  that  are  carried 
with  a  tempest."  1.  The  fitness  of  the  metaphor  (Ezek.  xx.  46;  Deut.  xxxii.  2). 
(1)  Clouds  are  made  to  contain  water,  and  preachers  should  be  filled  with  whole- 
some doctrine.  (2)  Clouds  are  drawn  up  by  the  sun,  and  teachers  called  to  that  holy 
profession  by  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  (3)  Clouds  are  nearer  to  heaven  than  com- 
mon waters,  and  ministers  are  advanced  nearer  to  the  secrets  of  God  than  other  men. 
(4)  Clouds  hang  in  the  air  after  a  strange  manner,  and  preachers  live  in  the  world  in  a 
wondrous  sort ;  all  the  winds  of  the  earth  and  furies  of  hell  band  against  them,  yet 
still  they  are  supported  by  their  Ordainer.  (5)  Clouds  are  set  to  distil  rain  upon  the 
dry  places  of  earth,  and  preachers  to  satisfy  the  thirsty  soul.  2.  The  levity  of  these 
hypocrites.  "  Carried  with  a  tempest."  Some  are  not  stable  in  the  truth  ;  but  it 
is  not  possible  for  any  man  to  be  constant  in  errors,  for  the  next  fancy  will  take 
him  off  from  the  former.  As  wanton  children  are  won  to  be  quiet  with  change  of 
toys,  so  the  devil  is  fain  to  please  such  men  with  variety  of  crotchets.  He  forgets 
what  he  hath  been,  understands  not  what  he  is,  and  knows  not  what  he  ^^ill  be. 
III.  Their  unhappiness.  1.  The  nature  or  quality  of  it — "  the  mist  of  darkness." 
Such  a  mist  shall  be  on  their  souls,  as  comes  upon  a  swooning  man,  who  cannot 
see  though  his  eyes  be  open,  the  organs  being  (for  the  time)  incapable  of  illumina- 
tion. 2.  The  congruity  of  it — "  reserved."  These  black  clouds  did  wholly  endeavour 
to  superinduce  darkness  on  the  Church,  therefore  the  mist  of  darkness  is  reserved 
for  them  for  ever.  It  is  but  justice  if  God  be  not  found  of  those  that  were  content  to 
lose  Him.  3.  The  perpetuity  of  it — "  for  ever."  (Thos.  Adams.)  Disappointing 
teachers  : — These  false  teachers  bear  the  semblance  of  teachers,  just  as,  for  a  little 
iiime,  a  place  in  Eastern  lands  where  water  has  flowed  will  continue  green,  but  dis- 
a.ppoint  the  thirsty  traveller  who  may  be  led  by  a  Uttle  verdure  to  hope  for  water. 
There  was  water,  and  perhaps  not  long  ago,  but  there  is  none  now,  and  so  with 
these  deceivers.  They  give  promise,  but  that  promise  is  never  realised.  {Prof.  J. 
a.  Lnmby.)  Wells  icithout  water  : — Water !  How  precious  it  is !  Because  God 
has  given  it  to  us  so  plentifully,  we  are  apt  to  underestimate  its  worth.  Were  we 
tormented  with  thirst  in  the  desert,  we  could  consider  water  a  priceless  boon.  In 
the  East  wells  of  water  were  very  precious.  Passing  through  the  desert,  the 
traveller  would  alight  at  one  with  joy,  quaff  the  cooling  draught,  and  then  refreshed 
pursue  his  onward  way.  "  Wells  without  water."  Travellers  in  Eastern  climes  have 
often  come  across  them.  Hot  and  weary,  they  have  gone  with  anticipative  joy, 
only  to  be  disappointed  at  finding  parched  emptiness.  In  passing  through  life's 
wilderness,  have  we  not  often  come  across  "  wells  without  water  "  ?  In  the  life- 
endeavour  have  we  not  often  been  disappointed  ?  How  many  enter  into  business  and 
anticipate  success?  They  work  with  a  will.  But  their  efforts  have  all  been  "  wells 
without  water  "  !  Others,  again,  have  succeeded  in  business.  But  the  dark  shadow 
is  there ;  and,  so  far  as  happiness  is  concerned,  successful  business  men  have  found 
that  mere  earthly  possessions  have  proved  "  wells  without  water."  What  a  desire 
some  persons  have  to  be  known !  The  essential  characteristic  of  their  existence 
is  to  be  prominent.  But  in  mere  fame  there  is  little  or  no  satisfaction.  Scotland 
was  singing  in  her  crowded  towns  and  in  her  bonny  glens  the  songs  of  her  favourite 
poet.  Burns,  while  he  wrote  as  he  lay  in  his  last  illness,  not  in  the  flight  of  poetic 
genius,  but  in  the  uncoloured  utterance  of  homely  prose — "  I  have  known  existence 
of  late  only  by  the  presence  of  the  heavy  hand  of  sickness,  and  have  counted 
time  by  the  repercussions  of  pain."  Then  followed  these  words  of  anguish  :  "  I 
close  my  eyes  in  misery,  and  open  them  without  hope."  When  Dr.  Johnson  finished 
his  dictionary,  the  more  particular  literary  effort  of  his  life,  the  Earl  of  Chesterfield 
offered  that  patronage  to  the  completed  work  which  he  had  refused  to  the  struggling 
writer.  Dr.  Johnson  replied  :  "  The  notice  which  you  have  taken  of  my  labours  has 
been  delayed  till  I  am  indifferent  and  cannot  enjoy  it ;  till  I  am  solitary  and  cannot 
impart  it ;  till  I  am  known  and  do  not  want  it."    The  mere  notice  of  the  titled 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  139 

great,  earthly  reputation,  worldly  fame,  these  are  but  empty  wells  that  mock  the 
thirsty  wanderer  through  the  desert — "  wells  without  water  "  !  Some  may  say  we  do 
not  aspire  to  fame.  True,  but  is  not  excitement  sought  in  other  ways  ?  Is  happiness 
being  sought  in  the  attractions  of  society,  or  in  any  of  the  numerous  vain  amuse- 
ments of  the  world  ?  In  all  walks  of  life,  in  all  the  varied  paths  of  the  journey,  we 
find  "  empty  wells."  They  are  on  all  sides  of  us.  We  see  persons  standing, 
thirsting,  and  unable  to  gratify  their  thirst,  looking,  with  disappointment  written  on 
their  careworn  faces,  into  "  wells  without  water."  You  have  met  with  individuals 
cold,  hard,  selfish.  They  live  merely  for  themselves.  They  have  the  human  head, 
but  the  statue's  heart.  No  word  of  sympathy  escapes  their  lips,  no  look  of  pity 
comes  from  their  cold  eyes.  To  make  appeals  to  them  is  like  "'  dropping  buckets 
into  empty  wells,"  which  would  certainly  grow  old  in  drawing  nothing  up  !  Then 
there  are  some  who  attempt  to  build  wells.  They  dig  deep.  They  pile  one  chari- 
table action  upon  another.  They  exercise  the  greatest  self-denial  in  carrying  on 
their  task,  and  when  it  is  done  they  find  their  labour  in  vain.  No  man's  thirst  is 
slaked  ;  it  may  be  an  elaborate  work,  but  it  is  a  piece  of  beautiful  emptiness — one 
of  the  "  wells  without  water."  There  is  a  well  of  living  water.  With  joy  the  pilgrim 
can  drink  from  the  well  of  salvation,  a  well  where  the  thirsty  can  drink  to  their 
heart's  content,  and  thirst  no  more  for  streams  that  are  impure.  (J.  P.  Hutchinson.) 
They  allure  .  .  .  those  that  were  clean  escaped.  —Deceivers  and  deceived  : — I.  The 
CECEivEES.  1.  Their  posture.  (1)  They  think  to  carry  it  away  with  "  words."  (a) 
Error  hath  always  most  words ;  like  a  rotten  house,  that  needs  most  props  to  uphold 
it.  (6)  In  much  speaking  is  foolish  speaking  :  it  is  very  difficult  to  speak  much  and 
well.  The  ship  that  hath  more  rigging  and  sail  than  ballast,  will  never  make  a 
_good  voyage.  (2)  Their  full-mouthed  speeches — "  great  swelling  words."  Nothing 
is  more  loud  than  error :  the  more  false  the  matter,  the  greater  noise  to  uphold  it 
(Acts  xix.  34).  "  Swelling  words  "  are  like  the  reports  of  ordnance — they  blaze,  and 
crack,  and  smoke,  and  stink,  and  vanish.  (3)  The  last  attribute  of  their  speech 
is  vain,  "  words  of  vanity."  If  the  matter  were  good,  yet  many  words  were  vain, 
great  words  were  vain ;  but  here  both  the  matter  and  words  and  all  are  vanity 
itself.  2.  Their  imposture — "  they  allure."  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  fishing 
or  fowling.  Those  fishes  that  were  taken  out  of  the  feculent  pond  of  this  world, 
and  put  into  the  crystal  streams  of  the  church,  are  by  these  seducers  again  drawn 
out  of  the  streams  of  the  church  into  the  pool  of  the  world.  The  hook  whereby 
they  perform  this  is  fraud :  the  same  devil  teacheth  his  trade  to  all  his  followers : 
the  lion  is  strong  enough,  but  the  serpent  doth  the  mischief.  II.  The  deceived. 
"  Those  that  were  clean  escaped."  1.  They  were  pot  quite  delivered  from  sin,  but 
from  the  external  profession  of  sin,  and  from  the  doctrine  that  maintains  sin.  The 
children  of  the  world  may  outwardly  be  gathered  to  the  congregation  of  Israel,  yet 
not  be  of  Israel.  They  are  escaped  from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  gross  and  raging 
impiety  and  idolatry ;  but  in  the  house  of  God  they  are  bitten  by  a  serpent,  sly 
hypocrisy.  2.  They  are  again  returned  to  error.  What  a  poor  way  went  they 
toward  heaven,  so  soon  to  turn  back !  It  is  but  Ephraim's  morning  dew ;  let  the 
«un  of  prosperiiiy  rise  but  two  hours  high,  the  dew  is  gone.  A  Galatian  humour,  to 
begin  in  the  spirit,  and  to  end  in  the  flesh ;  like  a  meteor  or  gliding  star,  that 
seemed  in  heaven,  shot  through  the  air,  and  lighted  on  a  dunghill.  (1)  All  sin  is  a 
labyrinth ;  the  entrance  is  easy ;  all  the  difficulty  is  to  get  out  again.  (2)  The 
practice  of  these  deceivers  is  upon  them  that  are  escaped  from  their  errors.  The 
malignant  jailer  pursues  after  him  that  hath  broken  prison.  3  "  Through  much 
wantonness."  This  is  that  little  postern  set  open,  to  which  Satan  is  so  much 
beholden  for  his  readmittance.  (Tlios.  Adams.)  While  they  promise  them 
liberty. — The  method  of  the  seducers : — I.  The  allurement  of  the  weak.  It  was 
Christ's  charge  to  Peter  (Luke  xxii.  32).  It  is  Satan's  charge  to  his  agents — Now 
you  are  confounded,  confound  your  brethren.  II.  The  way  of  this  allurement  is 
BY  promise.  1.  Promises  are  the  cheapest  things  man  can  part  with,  and  yet  the 
strongest  enchantments.  2.  Fair  promises  are  strong  snares  to  entangle  fools.  8. 
It  is  ill  to  promise  and  to  deceive ;  but  it  is  worse  to  promise  with  a  purpose  to 
deceive.  4.  Seducers  refuse  no  way,  so  they  may  deceive;  they  swear,  they 
forswear,  propose  and  interpose,  to  make  strong  their  party.  III.  The  force  op 
THAT  PROMISE  IS  LIBERTY.  Seusuality  and  a  carnal  freedom  is  the  spell  that 
conjures  these  wild  spirits,  and  brings  them  in  subjection  to  their  heretical  teachers. 
They  may  promise  them  civil  liberty :  this  they  are  not  sure  to  perform ;  or  con- 
sciential  :  this  they  will  not  perform ;  or  spiritual :  this  they  cannot  perform ;  but 
profane  excess,  riotous  intemperance,  the  uncontrollable  swing  of  their  lusts,  this 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

they  will  endeavour  to  perform.  IV.  The  conviction  of  that  foece.  "  They 
themselves  are  the  servants  of  corruption."  All  sin  is  a  servitude ;  and  that  which 
flatters  men  with  the  greatest  opinion  of  liberty,  makes  them  the  most  miserable 
vassals  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  They  may  think  that  they  have  the  world  at  command, 
and  not  the  world  them.  They  have  a  secret  and  insensible  tether,  which  that 
enemy  ties  to  their  heels,  and  holds  in  his  hand  :  while  they  run  whither  he  allows 
them,  they  shall  have  scope  enough ;  but  if  they  offer  towards  goodness,  he 
instantly  snatches  them  up.  V.  The  pkoof  of  that  conviction.  "For  of  whom 
a  man  is  overcome,"  &c.  The  metaphor  seems  to  be  taken  from  war  ;  where  the 
conqueror  brings  the  vanquished  into  captivity.  And  this  misery  of  the  captive 
differs  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  victor ;  if  he  be  imperious,  and  given  to 
cruelty,  he  doth  so  much  the  more  embitter  the  slavery.  1.  It  is  an  ignominious 
state.  2.  A  hard  and  troublesome  condition.  3.  Intolerable.  4.  Useless.  5. 
Irretrievable,  sold  to  sin  with  small  hope  of  recovery.  6.  Pitiable,  the  grief  of  every 
Christian.  7.  Destructive.  The  end  of  every  service  is  wages,  and  this  is  a  wages 
without  end,  even  everlasting  pain.  {Ibid.)  On  sjnritiial  or  inward  liberty : — I. 
My  text  implies  that  vicious  men  are  slaves  ;  that  it  is  an  absurdity  in  them 
to  pretend  to  be  advocates  for  liberty ;  and  that  consequently  the  practice  of  virtue 
is  necessary  to  give  men  true  liberty.  The  wicked  men  that  St.  Peter  had  in  view 
opposed  the  restraints  of  law  and  authority — they  vilified  civil  governors — re- 
nounced the  obligations  of  righteousness  ;  and  by  doing  this  they  boasted  that  they 
stood  up  for  liberty ;  not  considering  their  own  slavery,  and  not  distinguishing  between 
licentiousness  and  liberty.  You  must  be  sensible  that  these  observations  imply  that 
there  is  a  moral  slavery  which  ought  to  be  the  principal  object  of  our  detestation,  and 
consequently  a  moral  liberty  which  ought  to  be  the  principal  object  of  our  attach- 
ment. My  present  business  will  be  to  explain  this,  and  to  show  its  importance  and 
excellence.  Now  liberty  being  an  exemption  from  all  such  force  as  takes  away  from 
us  the  capacity  of  acting  as  we  think  best,  it  is  plain  that  whenever  any  passion  be- 
comes predominant  within  us,  or  causes  us  to  contradict  our  sentiments  of  rectitude, 
we  lose  our  liberty,  and  fall  into  a  state  of  slavery.  When  any  one  of  our  instinctive 
desires  assumes  the  direction  of  our  conduct  in  opposition  to  our  reason,  then  reason 
is  overpowered  and  enslaved,  and  when  reason  is  overpowered  and  enslaved  we  are 
overpowered  and  enslaved.  On  the  other  hand,  when  our  reason  maintains  its  rights, 
and  possesses  its  proper  seat  of  sovereignty  within  us,  then  are  we  masters  of  ourselves, 
and  free  in  the  truest  possible  sense.  A  submission  to  reason  is  not  in  any  way  incon- 
sistent with  liberty ;  on  the  contrary,  it  supposes  natural  liberty,  and  is  the  very  idea 
of  that  moral  liberty  which  is  my  present  subject.  The  more  we  are  in  subjection  to 
reason,  the  more  power  we  have  to  do  as  we  like.  The  dictates  of  reason  are  the 
dictates  of  our  own  hearts ;  and  therefore  the  very  reverse  of  anything  that  can  be 
deemed  force  or  slavery.  II.  To  mention  a  few  reasons  in  obdee  to  eecomjiend 
THIS  liberty  to  tou.  The  bare  description  of  it  is  indeed  enough  to  make  every  one 
desire  it.  It  is  replete  with  blessings  and  advantages.  1.  Consider  particularly  what 
an  honour  there  is  in  liberty,  and  what  a  baseness  in  sin.  To  lose  inward  liberty  is 
to  lose  all  that  can  procure  esteem,  and  to  become  poor,  abject,  and  impotent.  2. 
Let  me  desire  you  to  consider  what  advantages  and  blessings  liberty  of  mind  will 
bring  with  it.  The  discerning  faculties  of  the  person  who  possesses  this  liberty  must 
be  more  clear  than  that  of  any  other  man.  There  is  in  such  a  mind  a  conscious- 
ness of  dignity,  which  is  more  desirable  than  any  sensual  gratification,  and  which 
cannot  be  given  by  the  possession  of  any  worldly  honours  and  titles.  {R.  Price,  D.D.) 
Moral  theory  of  civil  liberty  : — This  is  a  true  delineation  of  the  fact  that  animalism 
leads  to  despotism,  and  necessitates  it ;  and  the  whole  chapter  illustrates  that 
fundamental  idea.  There  are  two  essential  conditions  of  civil  liberty :  first,  self- 
government,  and  second,  the  civil  machinery  of  free  national  life.  Self-government 
is  a  better  term  than  liberty.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  liberty.  It  is 
quite  inconsistent  witji  the  very  creative  notion  which  we  express.  We  gain  strength 
and  bodily  ease  and  comfort  in  proportion  as  we  obey  law.  We  are  not,  therefore, 
free  physically,  in  regard  to  the  body  ;  and  just  as  little  are  we  free  mentally:  for 
there  is  an  order  within,  which  is  as  real,  and  the  observance  of  which  is  as  indis- 
pensable to  comfort  and  liberty,  as  the  order  of  the  body  and  its  physical  organisa- 
tion. Nor  are  we  absolutely  free  in  our  relations  to  the  material  world.  Physical 
laws  round  about  us  are  more  potent  than  walls  in  a  prison  are  round  about  the 
prisoner.  Do,  obey,  and  live ;  disobey,  and  die.  A  man  is  hedged  up  in  his  own 
nature  ;  and  he  is  hedged  up  just  as  much  in  the  world  in  which  he  was  born,  and 
in  which  he  moves.     All  these  restraints  would  seem  to  be  restraints  upon  the  sum 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  PETER.  141 

of  life  and  individual  power  ;  but  if  you  analyse  it  it  will  be  found  that,  while  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  liberty,  these  restraints  all  work  primarily  against  the 
animal  nature.  So  that  while  a  man  is  restricted  at  the  bottom,  he  spreads  out  at 
the  top,  and  gains  again,  with  amplitude  and  augmentation,  in  the  higher  realms  of 
his  being,  all  that  he  loses  by  the  restrictions  which  are  imposed  by  great  cardinal 
laws  upon  his  lower  nature.  The  more  effectually,  then,  these  lower  elements  are 
repressed,  the  more  liberty  is  given  to  the  affections.  The  degree  of  liberty  attain- 
able by  an  individual  depends  upon  the  restraint  which  he  puts  upon  the  lower 
nature,  and  the  stimulus  which  he  gives  to  the  higher.  The  liberty  which  is 
attainable  by  masses  of  men  living  together  depends  on  the  training  that  the  society 
which  they  constitute  has  had  in  keeping  down  the  animalism,  and  exalting  the 
true  manhood  of  the  citizens  in  the  community.  Society  cannot  be  free,  except  as 
the  reason  and  the  moral  sentiments  have  a  sufficient  ascendency.  You  have  often 
heard  it  said  that  a  free  government  depends  upon  the  intelligence  and  virtue  of  the 
citizens.  This  is  an  empirical  fact.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  radical  nature  of 
man  that  it  should  be  so.  The  first  and  most  important  condition  of  liberty, 
psychologically  stated,  is  that  men  should  learn  how  to  restrain  their  lower,  basilar, 
passional  natures,  and  should  be  willing  to  restrain  them,  and  so  give  liberty  to 
their  reason,  their  affections,  and  their  moral  sentiments.  The  other  condition 
which  we  mentioned  as  indispensable  to  civil  liberty  is  the  possession  of  the 
machinery  of  free  civil  society.  There  is  to  be  the  presence  of  laws  adapted  to  that 
state  of  things,  and  there  is  to  be  a  knowledge  of  those  laws.  Ages  were  employed 
in  experimenting  and  finding  out  what  was  the  mode  by  which  a  free  people  might 
discuss,  deliberate  upon,  and  decide  their  own  questions  of  policy.  It  has  been  a 
slow  invention,  improved  and  improving  from  age  to  age.  These  two  elementary 
conditions  —  the  moral  condition  of  the  people,  and  the  apparatus  of  civil 
government  adapted  to  freedom — must  unite  and  co-operate,  before  there  can  be 
any  permanent  civil  liberty  in  any  nation.  On  this  foundation  I  remark — 1.  The 
desire  to  be  free  is  not  a  basis  broad  enough  for  liberty.  AU  men  Uke  liberty,  if  by 
that  expression  is  meant  dislike  of  restraint ;  but  if  the  love  of  liberty  means  the 
repression  of  all  one's  lower  nature,  and  the  education  and  dominancy  of  all  one's 
higher  nature,  then  I  deny  that  men  desire  liberty.  The  love  of  liberty  is,  like 
virtue  and  religion,  the  result  of  culture  in  men.  The  love  of  liberty  is  a  virtue.  It 
is  a  moral  inspiration.  It  is  not  merely  a  wild  disposition  to  throw  away  govern- 
ment ;  it  is  a  disposition  to  supersede  the  necessity  of  an  outward  government  by 
the  reality  of  a  government  within.  Let  me  see  a  man  that  loves  liberty,  and  I 
shall  see  a  man  that  loves  freedom  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  others.  And  when 
it  takes  on  this  form,  mankind  and  manhood  have  advanced  far  along  the  road  of 
intelligence  and  true  piety.  2.  The  adoption  of  free  governments  by  an  untrained 
and  unrestrained  people  will  not  secure  liberty  to  them.  Liberty  does  not  come 
from  machineries,  though  it  uses  them,  and  must  have  them.  You  might  build  a 
hundred  cotton  factories  in  the  wilderness  where  the  Indians  are,  and  the  Indians 
would  not  on  that  account  be  an  ingenious  and  manufacturing  people.  The  manu- 
facturer must  precede  the  machinery,  and  know  how  to  use  it.  You  might  carry 
cannon,  and  muskets,  and  rifles,  and  endless  magazines  of  ammunition,  into  the 
midst  of  a  peace-loving  and  cowardly  nation,  and  that  would  not  make  them  a  war- 
like people.  The  instruments  do  not  make  courage,  though  where  there  is  courage 
the  instruments  are  indispensable  to  its  use.  And  where  armed  tyranny  prevails, 
the  whole  machinery  of  free  nations  substituted  in  its  place  does  not  make  the 
nation  free.  A  nation  is  not  free  until  it  is  free  in  its  individual  members.  Christ 
makes  men  free.  The  spirit  of  Christ — the  spirit  of  faith,  the  spirit  of  self-denial, 
the  spirit  of  self-government,  the  spirit  of  aspiration,  the  spirit  of  benevolence — that 
it  is  that  makes  men  free.  3.  The  directest  road  to  civil  liberty  lies  in  augmenting 
the  true  manhood  of  a  people.  You  cannot  make  a  people  free  that  are  ignorant 
and  animal ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  you  cannot  for  ever  keep  any  people  in 
bondage  that  are  thoroughly  educated  and  thoroughly  moral.  Schools,  virtuous 
home-training,  free  religious  knowledge,  whatever  will  swell  the  manhood  of  the 
individuals  of  a  nation — these  are  the  means  which  produce  liberty.  If,  therefore, 
one  desires  in  Europe  to  sow  the  seeds  of  true  liberty,  I  would  not  say,  "  Keep  back 
books  that  teach  about  the  machinery  of  society."  Let  them  be  instructed  in  those 
things.  But  do  not  rely  on  those  things.  Ply  the  bottom  of  society  with  schools. 
Ply  the  masses  with  those  things  which  shall  teach  them  how  to  live  with  organi- 
sation ;  how  to  deny  themselves ;  how  to  live  to-day  for  future  periods  of  time ; 
how  to  practise  the  simple  virtues;  and  how  to  carry  those  virtues  up  to  the 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

spiritual  forms  in  which  they  are  to  eventuate.  He  that  teaches  men  how  to  be 
true  men  in  Christ  Jesus  is  aiming  as  straight  at  liberty  as  ever  any  archer  that 
bended  the  bow  aimed  at  the  target.  That  is  the  reason  why  true  preachers  are 
always  revolutionary  men.  To  preach  a  larger  manhood  is  to  unsettle,  by  prophecy, 
all  thrones.  You  cannot  force  knowledge  into  a  man ;  and  just  as  little  can  you 
force  liberty  into  men.  It  is  a  thing  of  development.  It  is  a  thing  that  cannot  be 
brought  into  a  man  or  a  nation,  but  that  has  to  be  wrought  out  of  the  elements  of 
the  man,  or  of  the  nation.  Make  men's  limbs  so  large  that  there  is  not  iron  enough 
to  go  around  them.  Make  men's  muscles,  like  Samson's,  so  strong  that  withes  and 
cords  are  like  flax  touched  with  fire  when  they  strain  them.  That  will  cure 
bondage ;  and  that  is  the  best  way  to  cure  it.  Make  men  larger ;  make  them 
measure  more  about  the  girt  of  the  conscience,  and  less  around  the  animalism,  and 
then  you  cannot  oppress  them.  4.  Modern  nations,  with  a  certain  degree  of  civili- 
sation, are  all  tending  to  civil  liberty ;  and  democracy,  as  it  is  called,  is  inevitable. 
This  is  admitted  by  aU  heads,  crowned  as  well  as  others.  It  is  only  a  question  as- 
to  how  long  a  time  will  be  required  to  bring  about  the  result.  The  universal  brain 
is  showing  itseK  to  be  mightier  than  the  class  brain.  The  crowned  head  must  give- 
way  to  the  thinking  head  of  the  millions.  In  this  tendency,  the  first  step  should  be 
popular  intelligence,  or  real  growth  at  the  bottom  of  society.  Then  the  institutions 
of  liberty  will  come  gradually  themselves.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  temptation  of 
liberty  .-—Nothing  more  strikingly  characterises  the  teaching  of  the  early  preachers- 
of  Christianity,  while  it  attests  their  faithfulness,  than  the  uncompromising  distinct- 
ness with  which  they  put  forth  the  claims  of  the  gospel  to  the  whole  obedience  of 
mankind,  and  declared  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the  Christian  service.  Self- 
crucifixion,  the  absolute  submission  of  their  wills  to  the  law  of  another  will,  &c. 
Such  doctrine  is  not  acceptable  now,  and  it  was  not  when  St.  Peter  wrote.  Accord- 
ingly, we  find  that  while  the  apostles  were  busily  engaged  in  enforcing  this  doctrine, 
there  were  other  teachers  no  less  busily  occupied  in  endeavouring  to  counteract  their 
endeavours,  and  who,  to  this  end,  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  human  nature, 
addressed  themselves  to  just  those  cravings  of  that  nature  which  are  at  once  the 
strongest  and  the  blindest.  The  teachers  of  Christianity  preached  obedience ;  they 
taught  the  necessity  of  self-subjugation  ;  they  enforced  the  duty,  while  they  showed 
the  blessedness,  of  submission  to  the  law  of  God  and  of  Christ.  What,  then,  was 
the  argument,  and  what  the  enticement,  with  which  these  false  teachers  endeavoured 
to  hold  men,  and  too  often  succeeded  in  holding  them,  in  disobedience  and  rebellion  ? 
It  was  then,  as  now  and  ever,  "  liberty."  Liberty  !  that  first  temptation  that  was 
whispered  cunningly  amid  the  fresh  leaves  and  flowers  of  unfallen  Eden,  and 
which  has  smoothed  the  way  to  all  other  temptations  and  all  other  sins  whatsoever. 
Liberty !  that  form  of  light  with  which  Satan  so  often  delights  to  clothe  himself. 
Liberty  !  that  treacherous  phantom  that  has  slain  more  living  men — ay,  slain  them 
eternally — than  all  the  blood-dripping  tyrants  of  the  world.  Liberty !  that  fair 
child  of  heaven  which  for  six  thousand  years  men  have  blindly  sought,  and  which 
not  even  six  thousand  years  have  taught  them,  can  nowhere  else  be  found  than  in 
the  house  of  law.  I.  The  nature  of  the  temptation  which  these  early  opposers 
OF  the  truth  held  out  to  men  to  keep  them  from  submission  to  the  law  op 
Christ.  1.  Doubtless  the  apostle  exactly  states  the  promise  made  by  these  opposing 
teachers ;  and  it  is  therefore  worth  while  to  observe  that  no  limit  is  placed  to  the 
range  or  application  of  the  liberty  promised.  These  teachers  very  well  knew  the 
corruption  and  weakness  of  the  human  heart ;  and  while  therefore  they  mis- 
represented the  service  of  Christ  as  a  needless  and  cruel  bondage,  they  took  care  to 
place  before  men  the  service  of  sin  as  a  full  and  perfect  liberty.  "  They  promise 
them  liberty  " — deliverance  from  the  iron  authority  of  the  Divine  will ;  deliverance 
from  a  sense  of  constant  condemnation  and  restraint ;  freedom  for  their  whole 
nature  in  all  its  parts ;  liberty  to  think  and  feel  and  do  without  hindrance  and 
without  fear.  And  what  is  this  but  the  temptation  which  we  every  day  see  coiling 
itself  around,  and  fixing  its  fascinating  eye  upon  the  hearts  of  men ;  and  to  the 
promise  of  which  we  see  men  everywhere  striving  to  attain  ?  2.  Observe  how 
another  fact  is  brought  out  by  this  statement  of  the  apostle — the  fact,  namely,  of  a 
recognised  line  of  separation  dividing  always  between  the  servants  of  Christ  and  the 
servants  of  the  world.  It  is  its  exclusiveness  that  makes  Christianity  so  repulsive. 
It  is  because  Christ  will  divide  His  claims  with  none  other,  that  it  is  so  easy  to- 
represent  His  service  as  a  bondage,  when  compared  with  the  "  liberty  "  of  the  world. 
II.  The  promise  made  by  the  world  and  its  votaries  of  an  absolute  liberty 
IS  FALSE  AS  A  MATTER  OF  FACT.     1.  Man,  by  the  requirements  of  his  very  nature 


CHAP.  11.]  11.  PETER.  143 

and  condition,  must  serve.  He  cannot  be  without  a  master — some  dominant 
power,  that  is,  ruling  supremely  in  his  heart ;  and  as  a  moral  being  there  are  only- 
two  services  between  which  he  can  choose — the  service  of  good  and  the  service  of 
evil,  the  service  of  Christ  and  the  service  of  the  world.  2.  There  is  no  greater 
delusion  than  to  imagine  because  a  man  has  cast  aside  his  allegiance  to  his  Maker, 
or  has  even  succeeded  in  excluding  entirely  all  thought  of  his  Maker  from  his  heart, 
that  therefore  he  is  free.  He  is  not  free.  There  is  no  such  deep  bondage — a 
bondage  fixing  its  relentless  grasp  upon  the  inmost  powers  of  the  soul — as  the 
liberty  of  the  world.  The  garlands  of  its  holiday  are  flowers  wreathed  on  chains ; 
and  although  its  victim  himself,  owing  to  the  very  stupor  of  his  degradation,  the 
delirium  which  falls  on  those  long  bound  in  prison,  may  come  at  times  to  be 
ignorant  of  his  state,  that  state  can  in  no  wise  be  hid  from  any  one  who  is  not  him- 
self a  servant  of  the  world.  No  ;  he  is  not  free.  (1)  He  is  held  in  bondage,  first 
of  all,  to  the  world's  opinions.  Boasting,  perhaps,  of  what  he  calls  his  intellectual 
freedom,  scoffing,  perhaps,  at  the  authoritative  teachings  of  God's  Word,  he  is  yet 
held  in  thraldom  by  the  judgments  of  other  men,  and  does  not,  in  opposition 
thereto,  obey  the  dictates  of  his  own,  (2)  He  is  a  slave  again  to  his  own  body. 
His  lower  nature,  that  which  allies  him  to  the  brute,  rises  up  in  proud  supremacy, 
and  rules  triumphantly  over  all  that  connects  him  with  his  God.  (3)  He  is  a 
slave,  moreover,  to  his  own  fears.  Ever  and  anon  his  torpid  conscience  will 
uprear  its  crest  and  inflict  its  sting.  IH.  The  only  question  with  which  we,  as 
wise  men,  are  concerned  is,  which  of  these  two  is  the  better  service  ?  which 

WILL   result  to    us    IN    THE  GREATER  RECOMPENSE    OF    REWARD  ?      We  haVC  HOt  Spoken 

unfairly  of  the  service  of  the  world.  We  have  admitted  all  its  claims,  so  far  as 
those  claims  are  true.  It  promises  hberty,  and  we  have  shown  you  the  liberty  that 
it  gives.  Undoubtedly  there  is  an  earthly  gain  and  a  present  enjoyment  to  the 
natural  heart  in  such  freedom — the  freedom  of  an  untrammelled  will,  the  freedom 
to  enjoy  without  stint  aU  the  pleasures  that  this  world  can  give ;  and  if  the  full 
results,  and  therefore  the  final  value,  of  man's  acts  were  present  and  finished  in  the 
acts  themselves,  there  would  perhaps  be  little  to  be  said.  But  the  real  advantage 
and  value  of  all  human  acts,  even  the  commonest,  and  therefore  of  all  human 
states,  are  decided  by  their  ultimate  results,  whether,  as  to  time,  those  results  are 
immediate  or  remote.  To  determine,  therefore,  the  true,  and  consequently  the 
abiding,  value,  whether  of  the  service  of  Christ,  or  the  service  of  the  world,  we  must 
consider  the  permanent  results  of  each  as  they  remain  fixed  in  our  own  nature,  or 
affect  permanently  the  conditions  of  our  own  existence.  1.  Applying  this  test,  what 
must  we  say  of  the  service  of  the  world  ?  How  can  we  characterise  results  which, 
as  we  have  seen,  are  poor  and  miserable  indeed,  utterly  unworthy  of  man,  debasing 
and  unsatisfying  even  upon  earth,  and,  instead  of  brightening,  covering  with  cloud 
and  darkness  his  real  existence,  even  the  eternal  existence  of  his  soul  ?  It  is,  as 
the  apostle  says,  "  corruption."  Yes,  "  corruption  " — slavery  to  this  body  which, 
with  all  its  strength  and  all  its  pride  and  all  its  lust,  shall  presently  be  hid  away 
from  sight  and  sense  as  ,an  offensive  thing ;  slavery  to  this  poor  world  of  men 
around  me,  corruptible  like  me,  and  day  by  day  dropping  into  this  great  charnel- 
house  of  earth ;  slavery  to  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the 
pride  of  life,  which  send  their  destroying  power  into  eternity  itself,  and  turn  into 
"  corruption  "  the  immortal  soul.  2.  Test  in  the  same  way  the  service  of  Christ, 
and  see  if  the  Christian — Christ's  true  servant — is  a  slave.  If  deliverance  from  his 
greatest  adversary,  if  superiority  to  all  human  power,  if  a  constant  sense  of  perfect 
security  and  peace — if  this  be  slavery,  then  he  is  in  bonctRge  indeed  ;  but  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  these  are  the  evidences  of  liberty,  then  is  he  free.  Through  the  power 
of  Christ  he  vanquishes  the  temptations  that  once  vanquished  him.  Living  a  life 
of  obedience  like  that  of  the  angels,  knowing,  through  the  approving  witness  of  the 
Spirit,  that  he  is  accepted  as  a  repentant  son  by  his  loving  Father,  he  lives,  through 
faith,  in  that  Father's  home — that  home  so  bright  and  beautiful  upon  the  summit 
of  the  universe  ;  and  the  laws  of  that  home  are  the  laws  of  his  life.  And  so,  living 
with  angels,  what  cares  he  for  unrighteous  men  ?  or  what  on  earth  can  harm  him  ? 
He  is  above  all  bondage  and  above  all  fear.  Death  itself  has  lost  all  power  over 
him.  Its  darkness  even  now  is  filled  with  the  kindling  rays  of  eternal  life.  Is  not 
this  liberty  ?  and  is  not  such  liberty  worth  seeking  for  ?  Is  there  a  sane  man  here 
present  who,  determining  this  question  from  the  true  point  of  right  judgment, 
even  that  bed  of  death  which  may  be  spread  for  him  to-morrow,  would  not 
give  all  the  honours  and  all  the  gains  and  all  the  joys  that  this  world 
can  offer  to  be  —  a  freedman  of  God?     {W.  Rudder,   D.D.)        Tlie  servants 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


of  corruption.  —  The   sinner^ s  natural  poiver  and  moral   weakness:  —  I  propose 
to   discuss   the   moral   state   of    the    sinner.     I.  The   first    important    fact    to 

BE     NOTICED     IS     THAT     ALL     MEN    ABE    NATURALLY    FREE,    AND    NONE    THE    LESS   SO    FOB 
BEING  SINNERS.       ThEY    NATURALLY   HAVE    FREEDOM    OF    WILL.       TMs  freedom  is  iu  the 

will  itself,  and  consists  in  its  power  of  free  choice.  To  do,  or  not  to  do — this  is  its 
option.  It  has  by  its  own  nature  the  function  of  determining  its  own  volitions.  The 
soul  wills  to  do  or  not  to  do,  and  thus  is  a  moral  sovereign  over  its  own  activities. 
In  this  fact  lies  the  foundation  for  moral  agency.  Still  further  :  man  can  dis- 
tinguish between  those  acts  in  which  he  is  free,  and  those  in  which  he  is  acted  upon 
by  influences  independent  of  his  own  choice.  He  knows  that  in  some  things  he  is 
a  recipient  of  influences  and  of  actions  exerted  upon  himself,  while  in  other  things 
he  is  not  a  recipient  in  the  same  sense,  but  a  voluntary  actor.  The  fact  of  this 
discrimination  proves  the  possession  of  free  agency.  Again,  the  Bible  always  treats 
men  as  free  agents,  commanding  them  to  do  or  not  to  do  as  if  of  course  they  had 
all  the  power  requisite  to  obey  such  commands.  A  young  minister  once  said  to  me, 
"  I  preach  that  men  ought  to  repent,  but  never  that  they  can."  "  Why  not  preach 
also  that  they  can  ?  "  said  I.  He  replied,  "  The  Bible  does  not  affirm  that  they 
can."  To  this  I  replied  that  it  would  be  most  consummate  trifling  for  a  human 
legislature,  having  required  certain  acts,  to  affirm  that  its  subjects  have  the  power 
to  obey.  The  very  requirement  is  the  strongest  possible  affirmation  that,  in  the 
belief  of  the  enacting  power,  the  subjects  are  able  to  do  the  things  required. 
Freedom  of  will  lies  among  the  earliest  and  most  resistless  convictions.  Probably 
no  one  living  can  remember  his  first  idea  of  oughtness — his  first  convictions  of  right 
and  wrong.  It  is  also  among  our  most  irresistible  convictions.  The  fact  of  personal 
responsibility  is  fastened  on  us  so  that  we  might  as  well  escape  from  ourselves  as  from 
this  conviction.  II.  While  it  is  true,  past  a  rational  denial,  that  men  have  this 
attribute  of  moral  liberty,  it  is  equally  true  that  they  are  morally  enslaved 
— in  moral  bondage.  The  liberty  they  have  by  created  constitution ;  the  bondage 
comes  by  voluntary  perversion  and  abuse  of  their  powers.  The  Bible  represents 
men  as  being  in  bondage — as  having  the  power  to  resist  temptation  to  sin,  but  yet 
as  voluntarily  yielding  to  those  temptations.  What  the  Bible  thus  represents, 
experience  proves  to  be  true.  Wicked  men  know  that  they  are  in  bondage  to  Satan. 
What  do  you  think  puts  it  into  the  heart  of  young  men  to  plot  iniquity  and  drink  it 
in  like  water  ?  Is  it  not  the  devil  ?  How  many  young  men  do  we  meet  with  who, 
when  tempted,  seem  to  have  no  moral  stamina  to  resist,  but  are  swept  away  by  the 
first  gust  of  temptation  !  Men  are  in  bondage  to  their  appetites.  What  can  be  the 
reason  that  some  young  men  find  it  so  hard  to  give  up  the  use  of  tobacco  ?  They 
know  the  habit  is  filthy  and  disgusting.  So  when  a  man  is  in  bondage  to  alcohol, 
and  so  with  every  form  of  sensual  indulgence.  Satan  helps  on  the  influence  of 
sensuality,  and  does  not  care  much  what  the  particular  form  of  it  may  be,  provided 
its  power  be  strong  enough  to  ruin  the  soul.  It  all  plays  into  his  hand  and  promotes 
his  main  purpose.  So  men  are  in  bondage  to  the  love  of  money ;  to  the  fashions  of 
the  world ;  to  the  opinions  of  mankind.  By  these  they  are  enslaved  and  led  on  in 
the  face  of  the  demands  of  duty.  Every  impenitent  man  is  conscious  of  being 
really  in  bondage  to  temptation.  What  man,  not  saved  from  sin  through  grace, 
does  not  know  that  he  is  an  enigma  to  himself  ?  What  1  does  he  not  know  that  his 
weakest  desires  carry  his  will,  the  strongest  convictions  of  his  reason  and  conscience 
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding?  This  is  a  most  guilty  state,  because  so  altogether 
voluntary — so  needless,  and  so  opposed  to  the  convictions  of  his  reason  and  of  his 
understanding,  and  withal  so  opposed  to  his  convictions  of  God's  righteous 
demands.  To  go  counter  to  such  convictions,  he  must  be  supremely  guilty.  Of 
course  such  conduct  must  be  most  suicidal.  The  sinner  acts  in  most  decided 
opposition  to  his  own  best  interests,  so  that  if  he  has  the  power  to  ruin  himself  this 
course  must  certainly  do  it.  This  is  a  state  of  deep  moral  degradation.  Intrinsi- 
cally it  is  most  disgraceful.  Everybody  feels  this  in  regard  to  certain  forms  of  sin 
and  classes  of  sinners.  A  drunkard  we  regard  as  a  long  way  towards  beasthood. 
Nay,  rather  must  we  ask  pardon  of  all  beasts  for  this  comparison,  for  not  one  is  so 
mean  and  so  vile — not  one  excites  in  our  bosom  such  a  sense  of  voluntary  degrada- 
tion. So  of  the  miser  when  he  gets  beyond  all  motives  but  the  love  of  hoarding; 
when  his  practical  question  is — not.  How  shall  I  honour  my  race,  or  bless  mj 
generation,  or  glorify  my  Maker;  but.  How  can  I  make  a  few  coppers?  Even 
when  urged  to  pray,  he  would  ask—"  What  profit  shall  I  have  if  I  do  pray  unto 
Him  ?  "  When  you  find  a  man  thus  incapable  of  being  moved  by  noble  motives, 
what  a  wretch  he  is !     How  ineffably  mean  1     So  I  might  bring  before  you  the 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  145 

ambitious  scholar,  who  is  too  low  in  his  aims  to  be  influenced  by  the  exalted 
motive  of  doing  good,  and  who  feels  only  that  which  touches  his  reputation. 
Is  not  this  exceedingly  low  and  mean  ?  (C  G.  Finney.)  Of  the  same  he 
is  brought  in  bondage. — A  fatal  promise  : — 1.  This  conquest  shows  the  falsehood 
of  the  tempter  in  his  promise.  They  promise  liberty,  and  here  is  the  result 
— bondage.  2.  This  conquest  shows  the  ultimate  wretchedness  of  the  victim. 
He  is  brought  in  "bondage."  What  is  the  bondage?  (1)  Their  slavery  is  the 
most  real.  Chains  and  prison  walls  can  only  enslave  the  body.  (2)  Their 
slavery  is  the  most  criminal.  Corporal  slavery  is  generally  a  misfortune;  the 
sufferer  is  not  responsible  for  his  position.  3.  Their  slavery  is  the  most 
lasting.  Death  destroys  corporal  slavery.  {Homilist.)  On  the  slavery  of 
vice  : — Bondage  and  subjection  are  disagreeable  sounds  to  the  ear,  disagreeable 
ideas  to  the  mind.  The  advocates  of  vice,  taking  advantage  of  those  natural 
impressions,  have  in  every  age  employed  them  for  discrediting  religion.  To  be  free 
imports,  in  general,  our  being  placed  in  such  circumstances  that,  within  the 
bounds  of  justice  and  good  order,  we  can  act  according  to  our  own  deliberate  choice, 
and  take  such  measures  for  our  conduct  as  we  have  reason  to  believe  are  conducive 
to  our  welfare;  without  being  obstructed  either  by  external  force,  or  by  violent 
internal  impulse.  This  is  that  happy  and  dignified  state  which  every  wise  man 
earnestly  wishes  to  enjoy.  The  advantages  which  result  from  it  are  chiefly  these 
three :  freedom  of  choice ;  independence  of  mind ;  boldness  and  security.  I.  Vice 
is  inconsistent  with  liberty,  as  it  deprives  sinners  of  the  power  of  free  choice  by 
bringing  them  under  the  dominion  of  passions  and  habits.  Religion  and  virtue 
address  themselves  to  reason.  But  vice  can  make  no  pretensions  of  this  kind.  It 
awaits  not  the  test  of  deliberate  comparison  and  choice,  but  overpowers  us  at  once 
by  some  striking  impression  of  present  advantage  or  enjoyment.  It  hurries  us 
with  the  violence  of  passion,  captivates  us  by  the  allurements  of  pleasure,  or 
dazzles  us  by  the  glare  of  riches.  The  sinner  yields  to  the  impulse  merely  because 
he  cannot  resist  it.  After  passion  has  for  a  while  exercised  its  tyrannical  sway,  its 
vehemence  may  by  degrees  subside.  But  when,  by  long  indulgence,  it  has 
established  habits  of  gratification,  the  sinner's  bondage  becomes  then  more 
confirmed  and  more  miserable.  For,  during  the  heat  of  pursuit,  he  is  httle 
capable  of  reflection.  But  when  his  ardour  is  abated,  and,  nevertheless,  a  vicious 
habit  rooted,  he  has  full  leisure  to  perceive  the  heavy  yoke  he  has  brought  upon 
himself.  Vice  confirms  its  dominion,  and  extends  it  still  farther  over  the  soul  by 
compelling  the  sinner  to  support  one  crime  by  means  of  another.     II.  The  slavery 

PKODUCED      BY     VICE     APPEARS     IN     THE     DEPENDENCE     UNDER     WHICH     IT     BRINGS     THE 

SINNER  TO  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  EXTERNAL  FORTUNE.  One  of  the  favouritc  characters 
of  liberty  is  the  independence  it  bestows.  He  who  is  truly  a  free  man  is  above  all 
servile  compliances  and  abject  subjection.  But  the  sinner  has  forfeited  every 
privilege  of  this  nature.  His  passions  and  habits  render  him  an  absolute  dependant 
on  the  world  and  the  world's  favour ;  on  the  uncertain  goods  of  fortune  and  the 
fickle  humours  of  men.  Having  no  fund  within  himself  whence  to  draw  enjoy- 
ment, his  only  resource  is  in  things  without.  His  hopes  and  fears  all  hang  upon 
the  world.  This  is  to  be,  in  the  strictest  sense,  a  slave  to  the  world.  Religion  and 
virtue,  on  the  other  hand,  confer  on  the  mind  principles  of  noble  independence. 
The  upright  man  is  satisfied  from  himself.  He  despises  not  the  advantages  of 
fortune,  but  he  centres  not  his  happiness  in  them.     III.  Another  character  of  the 

SLAVERY   OF   VICE     IS     THAT     MEAN,    COWARDLY,    AND     DISQUIETED     STATE     TO     WHICH     IT 

REDUCES  THE  SINNER.  Bolducss  and  magnanimity  have  ever  been  accounted  the 
native  effects  of  liberty.  The  man  of  virtue,  relying  on  a  good  conscience  and  the 
protection  of  Heaven,  acts  with  firmness  and  courage ;  and,  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duty,  fears  not  the  face  of  man.  The  man  of  vice,  conscious  of  his  low  and 
corrupt  aims,  shrinks  before  the  steadfast  and  piercing  eye  of  integrity ;  is  ever 
looking  around  him  with  anxious  and  feai-ful  circumspection,  and  thinking  of 
subterfuges  by  which  he  may  escape  from  danger.  The  one  is  bold  as  a  lion  ;  the 
other  flieth  when  no  man  pursueth.  Corresponding  to  that  abject  disposition  which 
characterises  a  bad  man  are  the  fears  that  haunt  him.  The  terrors  of  a  slave 
dwell  on  his  mind  and  often  appear  in  his  behaviour.  For  guilt  is  never  free  from 
suspicion  and  alarm.  I  have  thus  set  before  you  such  clear  marks  of  the  servitude 
undergone  by  sinners  as  fully  verify  the  assertion  in  the  text  that  a  state  of  vice  and 
corruption  is  a  state  of  bondage.  In  order  to  perceive  how  severe  a  bondage  it  is, 
let  us  attend  to  some  peculiar  circumstances  of  aggravation  which  belong  to  it. 
1,  It  is  a  bondage  to  which  the  mind  itself,  the  native  seat  of  Uberty,  is  subjected. 

39 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii, 

2.  It  is  a  bondage  which  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.) 
Vicious  bondage : — I.  That  God  asks  us  to  give  Him  our  hearts.  II.  What 
IS  LIBERTY?  Is  it  Ucence  and  lawlessness?  Must  all  conduct  be  without  order 
and  without  law  in  order  to  constitute  it  freedom  ?  We  know  better.  Look  at 
Paris  and  the  bloody  Commune !  There  is  no  tyranny  like  that  of  lawlessness.  The 
would-be  sinner  complains  of  being  tied  to  the  apron-strings  of  his  mother  in 
order  that  he  may  put  himself  under  the  bonds  of  Satan.  He  does  this  to  prove 
his  independence.  But  no  man  in  any  condition  of  life  is  allowed  to  act  as  he 
pleases.  If  he  were,  society  would  be  impossible.  III.  Where  the  wisest  laws  are, 
THERE  IS  THE  TRUEST  LIBERTY.  We  voluutarily  place  ourselves  under  such  laws 
that  our  rights  of  liberty  may  be  protected.  It  is  so  in  the  state,  so  in  society,  so  in 
religion.  That  cannot  be  a  bond  which  carries  with  it  an  endorsement  of  the  high 
nature  within  us.  IV.  The  beginnings  of  evil  are  dangerous.  1.  It  was  a 
bondage  of  the  soul,  of  the  spirit,  of  the  higher  nature  within  us.  The  fetters  of 
sin  were  riveted  around  these.  2.  The  aggravation  of  this  slavery  is  its  voluntary 
assumption.  It  is  a  bondage  more  galling  because  self-chosen.  3.  In  this  slavery 
we  become  subjects  to  our  own  servants.  It  is  a  revolution  in  our  moral  nature,  by 
which  the  highest  parts  become  the  lowest,  the  lowest  the  highest.  {H.  Johnson, 
D.D.)  If  .  .  .  they  are  again  entangled  .  . .  the  latter  end  is  worse. — Entangled 
again : — I.  A  proposition.  1.  "  They  have  escaped."  Next  to  the  finding  an 
unexpected  benefit,  it  is  a  great  happiness  to  escape  an  unsuspected  danger ;  yea, 
the  escaping  of  a  great  danger  is  more  joy  than  the  receiving  of  an  ordinary 
benefit.  2.  "  The  pollutions  of  the  world."  (1)  The  pollutions  which  we  contract 
from  the  riches  of  the  world.  (2)  The  pollutions  we  derive  from  the  honours  and 
dignities  of  the  world  pride  here  challengeth  the  first  place,  and  let  her  have  it, 
even  to  be  the  queen  of  all  sordid  filthiness.  (3)  The  pollutions  we  deduce  from 
the  pleasures  of  the  world.  Oh,  what  a  torrent  of  turpitudes  here  stream  in  upon 
us !  («)  Immoderate  diet.  (b)  Drunkenness,  (c)  Lust.  3.  "  Through  the 
knowledge,"  &c.  (1)  There  is  no  knowledge  to  do  good  in  corrupted  nature  and 
filthiness  of  the  flesh.  (2)  There  is  no  escaping  out  of  this  filthiness  and  corrup- 
tion, but  by  knowledge.  (3)  No  knowledge  can  deliver  us,  but  that  of  our  Saviour 
Christ.  (4)  No  knowledge  of  our  Saviour  can  eiTect  this,  but  that  which  is 
sanctified  with  faith  and  repentance.  II.  A  supposition.  1.  The  easiness  of 
falling  back.  "  If  " — it  is  no  impossible  thing.  Yes,  the  commonness  proves  it  too 
easy.  Man  goes  forth  in  the  morning  weak  and  unarmed,  to  encounter  with 
powers  and  principalities.  To  fight  this  combat  he  takes  a  second  with  him,  and 
that  is  his  flesh,  a  familiar  enemy,  a  friendly  traitor  ;  the  devil  comes  against  him 
with  his  second,  too,  and  that  is  the  world.  Soon  doth  the  flesh  revolt  to  the  world, 
and  both  stick  to  Satan ;  so  here  is  terrible  odds,  three  to  one.  2.  The  difficulty  of 
recovering  them,  after  their  relapse.  (1)  "  They  are  entangled,"  as  birds  are 
caught  in  an  evil  net ;  where  the  more  they  struggle  to  get  out,  the  faster  they 
stick.  (2)  "  And  overcome."  That  which  puts  a  man  from  the  use  of  his  reason, 
and  a  Christian  from  his  exercise  of  religion,  overcomes  him.  The  ambitious  are 
overcome  with  the  desire  of  honour,  so  that  they  are  not  their  own  men.  Of 
all,  the  worldlings  are  basely  overcome ;  for  they  think  they  have  the  world  in  a^ 
string,  when  the  world  hath  them  in  a  strong  chain.  (3)  "Entangled  and  over- 
come " — put  them  both  together.  It  is  the  depth  of  misery  to  fall  under  the 
curse  of  Ham,  a  servant  of  servants.  III.  A  conclusion.  "  The  latter  end  is 
worse,"  &c.  1.  Their  sins  are  worse  now  than  they  were  at  fii'st,  therefore  their 
estates  must  needs  be  so.  2.  Besides  all  their  other  sins,  they  have  the  sin  of 
unthankfulness  to  answer  for.  3.  Because  custom  in  sin  hath  deadened  all 
remorse  for  sin.  4.  Because  their  hypocrisy  prevents  all  ways  of  remedy.  5. 
Because  they  wilfully  destroy  themselves  by  renouncing  all  gracious  remedies. 
6.  Because  a  relapse  is  even  more  dangerous  than  the  first  sickness;  sooner 
incurred,  more  hardly  cured.  {Thos.  Adams.)  A  great  gain,  a  great  loss,  and 
a  great  curse: — I.  A  great  gain.  What  is  the  gain?  An  escape  from  "the 
pollutions  of  the  world  through  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  1.  The  world  is  a  scene  of  moral  corruption.  2.  To  escape  these  corrup- 
tions is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  man.  3.  This  escape  is  effected  through  "  the 
knowledge  of  Christ."  Other  sciences  have  signally  failed  to  purify  the  world. 
II.  A  GREAT  LOSS.  Pctcr  supposcs  the  position  of  escapenient,  after  being  gained, 
lost.  They  are  "  entangled  and  overcome."  1.  Good  men,  being  moral  agents, 
can  fall.  2.  Good  men,  in  this  world,  are  surrounded  by  influences  tempting  them 
to  apostasy.    3.  Good  men  in  this  world  have  fallen  from  the  positions  they  have 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  147 

occupied.  David,  Peter,  &c.,  are  examples.  III.  A  great  cuese.  "  The  lattet 
end  is  worse  with  them  than  the  beginning."  1.  Because  he  is  the  subject  of 
greater  guilt.  2.  Because  he  has  the  elements  of  greater  distress.  3.  Because 
he  is  in  a  condition  of  greater  hopelessness.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
danger  of  relapse  : — The  infant  faith  of  Christ  had  to  encounter  three  mighty 
foes.  First  of  all  there  was  the  Judaism  on  the  foundation  of  which  the  new 
system  was  based,  or  rather  the  complement  or  fulness  of  which  the  new  system 
was.  The  next  enemy  was  the  ancient  Paganism.  Here  the  conquest  was  more 
decisive,  though  the  combat  was  the  sharper.  The  third  enemy  of  the  early  Church 
is  not  so  easily  recognised  upon  the  surface  of  Holy  Scripture  as  the  other  two,  but 
it  is  there  notwithstanding.  The  Acts  of  the  Holy  Apostles  relate  a  strange  passage 
as  occurring  at  Samaria  between  St.  Peter  and  Simon  Magus,  but  they  do  not 
mention  that  Simon  was  the  first  heretic — was  the  most  active  propagator  of  that 
deadly  Gnosticism  which  for  so  many  centuries  preyed  upon  the  vitals  of  the 
Church,  and  even  now  in  these  last  days  from  time  to  time  shows  itself  in  some 
new  and  strange  manifestation.  Oriental  in  its  origin,  it  was  founded  in  a  belief 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  antagonism  between  mind  and  matter,  the  one  of  which  it 
held  to  be  good,  the  other  intrinsically  evil.  Such  a  system  as  this  was  essentially 
hostile  to  God's  truth,  and  accordingly  we  find  that  St.  John,  in  his  Gospel  and 
Epistles,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude  in  the  works  attributed  to  them,  devote  themselves 
to  the  condemnation  of  the  system.  St.  John  applies  himself  to  confute  the 
doctrinal  errors,  and  to  show  that  Christ  the  Word  is  no  mere  seon,  or  personal 
attribute  of  the  Deity,  but  very  God  of  very  God,  as  the  Creed  says.  The  other 
apostles  direct  their  teaching  against  the  moral  effects  of  the  same  system,  the 
vanity  and  conceit,  the  shallowness  and  pretence,  the  laxity  and  profanity  of  the 
adherents  of  this  vain  philosophy.  Moreover,  not  only  was  the  fight  against  these 
three  foes  carried  on  in  fair  and  open  field,  but  the  times  called  for  other  solicitudes 
with  regard  to  them.  It  was  not  that  they  injured  the  Church  by  assault  from 
without  and  by  resistance  to  its  holy  aggression ;  they  more  subtilly  worked  as  a 
leaven  within  the  Church  itself.  We  have  then  to  inquire.  How  does  this  text 
apply  to  us  ?  I.  First  of  all,  this  text  strikes  at  the  root  of  the  error  that 
GRACE  IS  indefectible  :  that  a  man  once  in  the  favour  of  God  can  never  fall  away 
from  it.  This  is  a  very  common  belief  in  this  country,  and  no  wonder,  for  it  is 
well  suited  to  the  self -righteousness  and  slothfulness  of  fallen  human  nature.  The 
apostle,  however,  teaches  the  very  contrary.  An  awful  truth,  then,  is  it  that  they 
who  have  at  one  time  been  truly  faithful,  may  totally  and  finally  fall  away  ! 
II.  But  without  taking  into  consideration  such  a  fact  as  final  reprobation  succeeding 
upon  the  despite  of  the  graces  we  have  received,  we  have  to  consider  the  general 
proposition  of  our  apostle,  that  the  case  of  relapse  is  so  much  more  deplorable 
THAN  ANY  OTHER  SPIRITUAL  CONDITION ;  that  in  the  casc  of  those  that  are  entangled 
and  overcome,  the  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than  the  beginning.  Why  should 
this  be  so  ?  1.  Because  the  fall  is  by  so  much  more  criminal  by  how  much  it  has 
been  committed  voluntarily  and  with  the  eyes  open.  2.  And  next,  such  an  act 
implies  not  only  rebellion  and  insolence,  but  also  heinous  ingratitude.  3.  Relapse 
is  dangerous,  on  account  of  the  exceeding  difficulty  of  recovery.  As  in  the  physical 
frame  in  illness  a  relapse  is  ever  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  original  ailment,  and 
makes  the  patient  worse  than  he  was  before  ;  so  in  the  world  of  faith,  the  state  of 
the  Christian  who,  after  baptism  and  repentance,  falls  again  into  the  disorders  he 
has  forsworn,  is  so  grievous,  that  the  coarsest  similes,  such  as  the  vomit  of  the  dog, 
and  the  wallowing  of  the  swine,  are  used  by  the  apostle  to  picture  his  condition. 
In  every  kind  of  wickedness  relapse  is  most  dangerous,  not  only  in  destroying  the 
power  of  resistance,  but  in  many  other  ways :  for  perhaps  the  most  fearful  of  all 
the  results  of  sin  is  the  withdrawal  of  the  grace  of  God.  However  generous  God 
may  be  of  His  benedictions  (and  never,  never  tiU  the  great  day  of  account  shall  we 
know  all  that  He  has  done  for  us).  He  cannot  bear  that  they  should  be  misused. 
Nor  are  we  to  maintain  that  this  law  refers  merely  to  great  and  heinous  crimes, 
such  as  intemperance,  and  impurity,  and  the  like ;  the  same  runs  through  every 
infraction  of  God's  law.  Whenever  a  man  relapses  into  any  wilful  sin  of  which  he 
has  repented,  he  incurs  in  a  degree  the  condemnation  of  the  text.  Whatever  his 
fault  may  be,  ill-temper,  touchiness,  ambition,  avarice,  over-solicitude  for  the 
things  of  this  life,  &c.  The  conscience  has  fairly  done  its  work,  and  being  despised, 
in  time  refuses  to  act ;  the  moral  sense  is  blunted  ;  the  casuistry  of  indulgence 
begins  to  pervert  the  whole  nature ;  God  begins  to  withdraw  His  assistance,  and 
the  stereotyping  of  an  evil  habit  begins  to  take  effect !    A  grievous  condition  to  be 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

in !  As  the  man  sunk  in  temporal  misfortunes  looks  back  on  the  days  of  his 
departed  prosperity  and  esteems  no  kind  of  misery  so  great  as  the  recollection  of 
his  former  happiness,  so  one  can  conceive  no  picture  so  desolate  as  the  retrospect 
of  a  man,  plunged  in  some  sin  which  is  slowly  and  surely  destroyiag  him,  to  the 
scenes  of  his  long  lost  innocency.  He  knows  them  well,  he  recognises  their  beauty, 
he  bewails  their  loss  as  he  turns  from  them  with  a  sigh,  but  he  cannot  have  the 
heart  to  conquer  the  evil  one.  But  while  I  press  these  serious  thoughts  upon  you,  I 
would  not  have  myseK  misunderstood.  What  I  have  said  of  deliberate  relapse 
into  sin,  does  not  apply  to  those  little  backslidings  which  are  the  consequence  of 
the  weakness  of  our  nature.  The  grand  distinguishing  idea  between  these  two 
states,  is  the  earnest  will  to  keep  straight  and  the  fervid  desire  after  hoUness.  Why 
should  we  be  disheartened  ?  Is  not  the  Christian  course  a  course  of  constant  falls 
and  risings  again  ?     (Bj).  Forbes.)         The  danger  of  relapsing  : — I.  The  sins  of 

THOSE  WHO  RELAPSE  AEE,  WHILST  CONTINUED  IN,  MOEE  HEINOUS.  1.  BecaUSe  Com- 
mitted against  greater  knowledge.  The  surest  knowledge  of  moral  duties  is  that 
which  is  attained  by  practice.  It  is,  indeed,  possible  for  a  man  to  know  his  duty 
who  never  performs  it ;  but  still  there  is  as  much  difference  betwixt  a  speculative 
and  a  practical  knowledge  of  our  duty,  as  between  our  being  acquainted  with  a 
road  from  a  transient  view  of  it  in  a  map,  and  from  our  having  frequently  travelled 
over  it.  As  well  may  an  experienced  pilot  pretend  not  to  know  his  compass,  as 
he,  who  hath  for  some  time  steered  his  course  by  the  laws  of  God,  pretend  to  be 
ignorant  of  them.  They  have,  during  his  integrity,  taken  up  his  thoughts  ;  he  must 
have  frequently  meditated  upon  them,  in  order  to  his  regulating  his  actions  by 
them  ;  and  when  he  hath  reflected  on  his  past  actions,  they  have  been  the  measure 
by  which  he  hath  examined  the  rectitude  or  obliquity  of  them.  By  these  means 
they  have  made  a  strong  impression  on  his  mind,  and  he  must  offer  great  violence 
to  himself  before  he  can  deface  characters  which  are  so  deeply  imprinted  on  his 
soul.  2.  Because  committed  against  greater  strength  to  obey.  Our  spiritual 
enemies,  when  they  have  once  been  entirely  defeated,  caimot  on  a  sudden  recover 
their  strength.  3.  Because  they  tend  more  to  the  dishonour  of  God.  He  who  hath 
for  some  time  made  himself  remarkable  by  a  strict  observance  of  God's  laws,  hath 
thereby  openly  declared  for  the  interests  of  virtue  and  piety.  He  is  now  to  sustain 
no  less  a  character  than  that  of  a  champion  for  the  cause  of  God,  and  men  wiU  be 
apt  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  this  cause  by  the  conduct  of  him  who  pretends  to 
maintain  it.  They  wiU  think  it  reasonable  to  form  their  opinions  of  reUgion  by 
his,  and  to  have  no  greater  concern  for  it  than  he  hath.  4.  Because  committed 
against  greater  obligations  to  obedience.  Those  who  have  conformed  their  Uves  to 
the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  once  convinced  that  a 
religious  life  was  to  be  preferred  to  a  wicked  course ;  the  nature  of  good  and  evil 
is  not  since  changed ;  their  experience  cannot  have  convinced  them  of  any  mis- 
take;  there  is  no  reason  for  altering  their  judgment;  and  whilst  that  continues 
the  same,  their  practice  ought  to  be  conformable  to  it.  But  yet  further,  such  men 
must  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  made  frequent  vows  of  obedience.  They  have 
entered  into  a  solemn  covenant  with  God,  and  this  covenant  hath  been  often  renewed. 
II.  There  is  much  less  probability  of  their  recovering  themselves  out  of 
THIS  sinful  state  BY  REPENTANCE.  1.  There  is  less  probabiUty  such  persons 
should  ever  go  about  to  repent.  Those  evil  habits  which  require  much  time  to 
master,  and  which  are  not  to  be  rooted  out  but  by  slow  degrees,  yet  if  after  some 
abstinence  they  are  again  indulged,  do  return  upon  us  with  all  their  former 
strength.  The  relapsed  sinner  meets  his  former  crimes  with  the  same  pleasure 
with  which  we  are  wont  to  receive  an  old  bosom  friend,  and  the  intermission  gives 
the  sin  at  its  return  a  new  and  better  reUsh.  2.  Should  the  relapsed  sinner 
entertain  thoughts  of  repentance,  it  is  yet  to  be  feared  that  this  repentance  may 
not  prove  effectual.  In  every  work  which  we  undertake,  we  proceed  more  or  less 
vigorously  in  proportion  to  the  different  hopes  we  have  of  success.  Now  these  are 
the  circumstances  of  a  relapsed  sinner ;  his  repentance  is  a  work  of  great  difBculty, 
and  his  hopes  of  acceptance  are  very  faint.  There  must  be  some  extraordinary 
effusion  of  God's  grace  to  recaU  the  relapsed  sinner.  But  what  reason  hath  he  to 
expect  this  supernatural  aid,  who  hath  already  so  much  abused  it  ?  III.  Now  if 
the  sin  and  hazard  of  relapsing  be  so  great,  it  will  be  the  duty  of  all  who  yet 
STAND,  TO  take  CAKE  LEST  THEY  FALL ;  and  of  thosc  who  are  fallen,  to  use  all 
diligence  to  recover  their  ground.  The  state  of  the  former  is  happy,  but  not  secure, 
and  therefore  they  ought  to  be  upon  their  guard ;  the  conduct  of  the  latter  is  very 
dangerous,  but  not  quite  desperate,  and  therefore  they  ought  to  work  out  their  salva- 


CHAP.  II.]  II.  PETER.  149 

tion  with  fear  and  trembling.    [Bp.Smalridge.)      Apostasy: — I.  The  state  supposed. 

I.  They  had  escaped,  &c.  An  escape  of  any  kind — from  a  prison,  from  shipwreck, 
from  a  railway  accident,  from  a  dangerous  sickness,  is  ever  deemed  a  cause  of 
thankfulness,  and,  in  some  instances,  is  commemorated  for  many  years  after  it. 
But  the  escape  here  spoken  of  is  the  greatest  that  a  man  can  ever  know.  2.  These 
persons  had  again  become  entangled  therein  and  overcome,  or  "  having  again 
become  entangled  therein,"  they  "  were  overcome."  How  many  sad  illustrations 
of  these  words  might  be  gathered  from  the  annals  of  every  Church  !  We  have  seen 
young  men  of  great  promise  and  of  superior  abihties  rescued  from  the  snare  of  the 
devil — from  intemperance,  dishonesty,  or  lust,  and  becoming  earnest  members  of 
a  Christian  community,  to  the  joy  of  many  hearts ;  but  in  an  evil  hour  they  have 
listened  to  the  voice  of  the  charmer,  they  have  been  led  back  to  their  former  sinful 
habits.  3.  Hence,  "the  latter  end  is  worse  with  them  than  the  beginning,"  or 
"  their  last  s.ate  is  worse  than  the  first."   It  is  our  Lord's  own  saying  (Matt.  xii.  45). 

II.  The  fulfilment  of  certain  proverbs.  1.  The  dog  possesses  many  valuable 
qualities,  and  for  its  fidelity  and  kindness  is  naturally  a  favourite.  But  it  is  often 
rapacious,  and  is  especially  greedy.  It  seldom  knows  when  it  has  had  enough ; 
and  when  it  vomits  its  food,  it  will,  as  I  have  seen  it,  return  and  lick  it  up  again. 
Backsliders  are  compared  to  it  in  this  respect.  2.  The  sow  is  an  unclean  animal, 
and  loves  filth  of  every  kind ;  wash  her,  and  as  soon  as  she  can  she  will  plunge 
herself  again  into  the  mire,  and  is  never  so  happy  as  when  wallowing  in  some 
dirty  bog.  Are  not  sinners  often  like  her  ?  How  many  reformed  drunkards  have 
returned  to  the  intoxicating  cup,  and  plunged  again  into  the  filthiest  excesses  of 
their  previous  lives  1  (Thornley  Smith.)  Necessity  of  perseverance  in  loell- 
doing : — If  it  be  not  enough  for  a  Christian  to  begin  well  unless  he  continue  in 
the  profession  and  doing  of  that  wherein  he  hath  begun,  then  foUoweth  it  that 
perseverance  is  so  needful,  as  without  which  we  cannot  see  the  face  of  God.  This 
is  required  in  the  performance  of  every  duty.  Is  it  prayer  ?  we  must  always  pray. 
Is  it  thanksgiving  ?  we  must  in  all  things  give  thanks.  Is  it  fasting  ?  we  must 
continually  cease  from  sin.  Is  it  faith  ?  we  must  never  be  without  it.  Is  it 
obedience  to  God's  commandments  ?  we  must  always  perform  it.  Is  it  love  unto 
our  neighbours  ?  we  must  continue  therein.  The  like  may  be  said  of  every  other 
duty.  It  is  not  enough  for  a  time  to  escape  them  who  Uve  in  error,  and  thereafter 
give  way  unto  them,  but  as  Caleb  and  Joshua  constantly  followed  the  Lord,  and 
were  partakers  of  the  promised  land,  so  must  we  constantly  go  on  in  the  course  of 
godliness  that  we  may  obtain  that  kingdom  of  heaven.  (A.  Syinson.)  Sin 
renewed  after  pardon : — Oh,  tempt  not  God's  Spirit  any  more — ye  have  provoked 
Him  too  much  already ;  let  not  your  consciences  soothe  you  up  in  your  sins ; 
remember  that  I  do  now  give  you  warning  of  them,  fall  not  therein.  The  more 
thou  renewest  thy  sins  the  more  thou  feedest  thy  corruptions  and  makest  them  the 
more  rebellious.  A  chained  dog  breaking  loose  becometh  more  fierce ;  a  river  long 
stopped,  if  a  breach  be  made,  runneth  the  more  violently ;  so  for  thee  to  restrain 
thy  sin  for  a  time,  and  then  to  give  way  unto  the  same,  is  most  dangerous.  Thou 
fallest  from  God  to  the  devil,  from  a  holy  profession  to  profaneness,  thus  showing 
thyself  unthankful  unto  God.  What  should  we  not  give  to  obtain  grace,  to  get 
God's  favour  ?  nothing  should  so  entangle  us,  as  that  for  the  love  thereof  we  should 
reject  both  God  and  grace.  Oh,  there  is  no  loss  compared  to  the  loss  of  grace,  to 
the  loss  of  God's  favour  ;  no  ruin  to  the  ruin  of  the  soul ;  what  wiU  it  advantage 
us,  to  gain  the  whole  world  with  the  loss  of  our  souls  ?  (Ibid.)  The  way  of 
righteousness. — The  way  of  righteousness  is  so  called,  because  both  formally  it  is  a 
righteous  way ;  and  effectively,  it  makes  the  walkers  in  it  righteous.  Certainly 
there  is  but  one  way  to  heaven,  and  this  is  it.  There  be  many  ways  to  some  famous 
city  upon  earth,  many  gates  into  it.  But  to  the  city  of  salvation  and  glory  there 
is  but  one  way,  one  gate,  and  that  is  a  narrow  one  too,  the  way  of  righteousness. 
There  was  a  way  at  the  first ;  the  way  of  the  law,  or  rather  of  nature  ;  Adam  was 
put  into  it,  but  he  quickly  went  out  of  it.  Since  that,  no  man  ever  kept  it  one 
hour  ;  but  only  He  that  knew  the  way,  that  made  the  way,  that  is  the  way,  even 
the  new  way  of  righteousness,  Jesus  Christ.  What  then  is  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness? (John  iii.  16).  This  way  hath  two  boundaries,  repentance  and  obedience. 
1.  Repentance  on  the  one  side,  a  mourning  for  sins  past ;  which  is  as  sure  an  effect 
or  demonstration  of  faith,  as  faith  is  a  cause  of  the  peace  of  conscience.  2.  Obedi- 
ence on  the  other  side  ;  for  though  we  live  by  faith,  yet  our  faith  doth  not  live,  if  it 
produce  not  good  works.  We  suspect  the  want  of  sap  in  the  root  of  a  tree,  if  we 
find  barrenness  in  the  branches.     (Thos.  Adams.)         The  dog  is  turned  to  his 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

own  vomit  again. — The  dog  returned  to  his  vomit  : — I.  A  conclusion.  1.  The 
verity  of  the  proverb.  Good  proverbs  are  commended  to  us  for  five  special 
excellences,  wherein  they  transcend  other  discourses.  (1)  For  their  antiquity. 
The  sayings  of  our  fathers  and  ancestors  have  a  reverend  estimation  among  us ; 
nor  do  we  wrap  them  up  in  the  bundle  of  our  ordinary  lessons,  but  preserve  them 
as  dear  relics  of  their  happy  memories.  (2)  For  their  brevity.  They  are  concise 
and  compendious,  and  so  more  portable  for  the  memory.  (3)  For  their  significancy, 
comprehending  much  matter  in  few  words.  (4)  For  experience.  The  sages  have 
tried  that  doctrine  themselves,  which  they  commend  to  others.  (5)  For  their 
truth.  False  proverbs  are  Satan's  logic,  which  he  hopes  will  be  received  for  their 
wit,  though  they  savour  not  of  honesty  or  verity.  2.  The  verification  of  the 
proverb.  "It  is  happened  unto  them."  Swine  and  dogs  will  return  to  their  old 
filthiness ;  but  woe  unto  those  men  that  shall  degenerate  into  such  brutish  qualities ! 
It  becomes  them  worse  than  those  beasts,  and  a  far  worse  end  shall  come  unto 
them  than  unto  beasts.  II.  A  comparison.  1.  Consider  the  two  creatures  together. 
{1)  Sin  doth  liken  men  to  beasts,  to  sordid  beasts,  and  that  in  their  basest  filthiness. 
(2)  God  made  us  little  inferior  to  angels,  and  we  make  ourselves  little  superior  to 
beasts.  2.  Severally.  (1)  The  dog  hath  many  good  qualities,  and  is  divers  ways 
nseful  and  serviceable  to  man ;  yet  still  he  is  a  dog.  A  wicked  man  loseth  not  his 
substance,  or  faculties,  so  that  he  ceaseth  to  be  specifically  a  man  ;  but  he  ceaseth 
to  be  a  good  man.  There  is  such  a  corruption  diffused  through  all  those  powers 
and  faculties,  that  he  is  a  wicked  one.  (2)  The  hog  is  not  without  some  good 
properties.  There  is  no  creature  not  endued  with  some  goodness  in  its  kind ; 
though  nature  be  corrupted,  it  is  not  abolished.  But  my  argument  is  their  filthi- 
ness. (a)  The  hog  is  a  churlish  creature,  grudging  any  part  of  his  meat  to  his 
fellows.  And  have  we  no  such  covetous  men,  whose  insatiate  eye  envies  every 
morsel  that  enters  into  their  neighbour's  mouth  ?  {b)  The  swine  is  ravenous,  and 
devouring  all  within  his  reach  :  a  fit  emblem  of  worldly  men,  who  because  they 
have  no  inheritance  above,  engross  all  below  ;  nor  is  there  any  means  to  keep  them 
quiet,  tiU  they  see  no  more  to  covet,  (c)  Swine  are  ever  rooting  in  the  ground,  and 
destroying  the  very  means  of  increase.  If  the  covetous  could  have  their  will,  the 
whole  earth  should  not  yield  a  handful  of  corn,  but  that  which  grows  on  their  own 
lands,  or  lies  mouldering  in  their  garners,  (d)  If  the  swine  be  troubled,  he  sets  up 
his  bristles,  and  foams  with  anger.  Such  a  savage  impatience  possesses  many 
hearts,  that  with  fierce  wrath  they  foam  at  their  mouths,  and  strike  with  their 
tusks,  and  supply  the  defect  of  words  with  wounds.  (Ibid.)  "  No  place 
like  home  "  ; — In  a  cellar  I  found  a  family  consisting  of  five  persons,  all  huddled 
together  in  a  most  miserable  condition.  Their  story  moved  the  compassion  of  a 
kind  lady,  who  commissioned  me  to  take  better  and  more  healthy  lodgings  for  them 
at  her  expense,  and  remove  them  out  of  that  wretched,  damp  place.  She  said  she 
could  get  no  sleep  for  thinking  of  these  poor  creatures.  I  soon  obtained  a  two- 
roomed  lodging  for  them,  with  a  good  fire,  but  this  failed  to  please  them  as  well  as 
their  old  abode.  The  following  day,  on  calling,  I  saw  that  they  had  darkened  the 
windows  with  paper ;  "  the  light,"  they  said,  "  made  them  feel  so  cold."  In  a  day 
or  two  after,  I  found  to  my  surprise  that  they  had  gone  back  to  their  "  own  sweet 
cellar."      "  There's   no   place  like  home."      (IF.   Haslam.)  Altogether   become 

abominable  : — To  describe  in  all  its  horror  the  abysmal  depth  to  which  these  false 
teachers  have  sunk,  the  apostle  makes  use  of  two  proverbs,  one  of  which  he  adapts 
from  the  Old  Testament  (Prov.  xxvi.  11),  while  the  other  is  one  which  would 
impress  the  Jewish  mind  with  a  feeling  of  utter  abomination.  The  dogs  of  the 
East  are  the  pariahs  of  the  animal  world,  while  everything  pertaining  to  swine  was 
•detestable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Israelite.  But  all  the  loathing  which  attached  to  these 
outcasts  of  the  brute  creation  did  not  suffice  to  portray  the  defilement  of  these 
teachers  of  lies  and  their  apostate  lives.  It  needed  those  other  grosser  features — 
the  return  to  the  disgorged  meal ;  the  greed  for  filth,  where  a  temporary  cleansing 
serves,  as  it  were,  to  give  a  relish  for  fresh  wallowing — these  traits  were  needed  ere 
the  full  vileness  of  those  sinners  could  be  expressed.     {J.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  Til.]  II.  PETER.  151 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.  1,  2.  This  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write  unto  yoiL — St.  Peter^s  love 
token : — I.  The  nature  of  it — a  letter  written.  What  shall  we  render  to  the  Lord 
for  His  mercy  in  writing  these  blessed  covenants  ?  U.  The  number  of  it — a  second 
after  the  former.  "  This  second  " ;  not  so  much  fearing  the  miscarriage  of  the 
first,  as  hoping  to  work  better  confirmation  by  the  next.  III.  The  tenor  of  it — 
to  stir  up  their  minds.  Why  are  the  words  of  the  wise  compared  to  goads  (Eccles. 
xii.  11)  but  to  show  that  the  best  in  God's  team  need  pricking  forward?  IV.  The 
order — by  way  of  remembrance.  This  is  a  just  order  and  method  ;  first,  to  teach 
the  way  of  the  Lord,  then  to  remind  men  of  walking  in  it.  We  are  not  only  called 
teachers,  but  remembrancers  (Isa.  Ixii.  6).  {Thos.  Adavis.)  I  stir  up  your  pure 
minds. — A  Christian  memory : — The  power  of  memory  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
amazing  part  of  our  mental  equipment.  It  is  a  golden  thread  that  links  infancy 
and  age,  on  which  are  hung,  like  pearls,  varied  facts  and  experiences  of  every  hue. 
Memory  has  her  servant,  recollection,  an  invisible  librarian  running  about  the 
chambers  of  the  mind,  to  find  what  she  calls  for.  Now  God  uses  this  faculty  in 
the  work  of  building  up  Christian  character.  1.  The  gospel  has  a  history  to  be 
remembered.  2.  History  repeats  itself  ordinarily;  but  this  history  of  the  gospel 
can  never  be  repeated.  Christ  has  suffered  once  for  all.  A  Christian  memory  is 
swift  to  remember  this.  3.  In  the  revelation  of  His  "  memorial  name  "  Jehovah 
has  emphasised  the  significance  of  memory.  He  is  not  an  abstraction,  a  far-distant 
personality,  even,  but  "  the  Father  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac  and  Jacob  " — a  historic 
<jod.  4.  Again,  keep  in  mind  that  the  life  of  our  Lord  in  glory  is  linked  with  that 
of  His  redemptive  work  on  earth,  as  truly  as  your  existence  there,  some  day,  will  be 
connected  with  your  residence  here  on  earth.  5.  Finally,  a  Christian  memory  holds 
in  trust  these  historic  dates  of  Christ  and  His  redemption,  because  of  the  fact  that 
they  are  to  be  the  theme  of  adoring  praise  throughout  eternity.  (J.  M.  English, 
D.D.)  Mindful  of  the  words  which  were  spoken  before. — Mindfulness  : — I. 
The  object  of  their  mindfulness.  1.  "  Words,"  for  their  plain  certainty ;  not 
shadows  and  abstruse  paradoxes.  2.  "  Spoken  before,"  for  their  antiquity  ;  not 
things  of  yesterday ;  no  new  devices.  3.  "  By  the  prophets,"  for  the  authority ; 
men  that  had  their  commission  immediately  from  God  Himself.  4.  "  Holy 
prophets,"  for  the  sanctity ;  they  passed  not  through  the  lips  of  a  Balaam,  or 
Caiaphas.  5.  "  The  commandment  of  us,"  &c.  The  prophets  were  legal  apostles, 
the  apostles  are  evangelical  prophets.  Both  these  came  to  the  world  with  com- 
mandments. (1)  Neither  prophets  nor  apostles  did  ever  command  in  their  own 
names ;  but  the  former  came  with  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  the  other  in  the 
name  of  Christ.  (2)  St.  Peter  refers  us  to  the  words  of  the  prophets  and  command- 
ments of  the  apostles,  and  precisely  chargeth  our  mindfulness  with  these  lessons. 
{3)  Neither  the  prophets  without  th^  apostles,  nor  the  apostles  without  the  prophets, 
but  both  together.  The  gospel  without  the  law  may  lift  men  up  to  presumption  ; 
the  law  without  the  gospel  may  sink  them  down  to  desperation.  (4)  The  rule  of 
truth  is  delivered  to  us  by  the  prophets  and  apostles.  II.  Their  mindfulness  of 
THAT  object.  This  consists  in  two  things :  1.  Observation.  God  never  meant  His 
Word  for  a  vanishing  sound ;  that  which  is  kept  upon  eternal  record  in  heaven, 
and  is  a  constant  dweller  in  the  elected  heart  (Col.  iii.  16),  must  not  be  a  sojourner, 
much  less  a  passenger,  with  us.  2.  Conversation.  It  is  a  barren  mindfulness  that 
does  not  declare  itself  in  a  holy  fruitfulness.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  desire  the 
faculty  and  facility  of  doing ;  earnestly  to  desire  it  is  one  half,  yea,  the  best  half. 
2.  Let  us  be  thrifty  husbands  of  time  and  means  to  be  spiritually  rich.  3.  Let  us 
reduce  all  to  practice.     (Thos.  Adams.)  Compendious  commandments  : — Cultivate 

the  habit  of  reflective  meditation  upon  the  truths  of  the  gospel  as  giving  you  the 
pattern  of  duty  in  a  concentrated  and  available  form.  It  is  of  no  use  to  carry  about 
&  copy  of  the  "  Statutes  at  Large  "  in  twenty  foUo  volumes,  in  order  to  refer  to  it 
when  difficulties  arise  and  crises  come.  We  must  have  something  a  great  deal  more 
compendious  and  easy  of  reference  than  that.  A  man's  cabin-trunk  must  not  be  as 
big  as  a  house,  and  his  goods  must  be  in  a  small  compass  for  his  sea  voyage.  We 
have  in  Jesus  Christ  the  "  Statutes  at  Large,"  codified  and  put  into  a  form  which 
the  poorest  and  humblest  and  busiest  amongst  us  can  apply  directly  to  the  sudden 
emergencies  and  surprising  contingencies  of  daily  hfe,  which  are  always  sprung  upon 
us  when  we  do  not  expect  them,  and  demand  instantaneous  decision.   {A.  Maclaren.) 

K' ' 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Vers.  3,  4.  There  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers. — The  character  of  the  last 
days : — I.  The  personal  qualifications  of  the  disputeks  here  described.  To 
be  a  scoffer  is  sure  no  very  laudable  character,  being  the  joint  result  of  pride  and 
malice,  the  doing  mischief,  and  the  doing  it  in  sport.  But  as  this  temper  is  most 
injurious,  it  is  also  ignorant  and  indocile.  The  sure  effect  of  knowledge  is  an 
humble  sense  of  the  want  of  it ;  the  deeper  we  immerse  ourselves  in  any  art  or 
science,  the  greater  difficulties  are  started  by  us.  But  over  and  above  the  in- 
gredients, of  pride,  Ul-nature,  and  incorrigible  folly,  the  mockers  of  the  text  are 
branded  with  immorality  and  vice — "  to  walk  after  their  own  lusts."  And  sure 
there  cannot  be  a  more  prodigious  impudence  than  that  guilty  persons  liable  to  the 
severest  punishments  should  dare  to  awaken  observation  by  being  sharp  on  others. 
II.  The  force  of  their  discoursings.  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ?  " 
The  delaying  of  performance  is  no  prejudice  against  it.  With  Almighty  God  every- 
thing, however  distant  it  may  seem,  is  actually  present.  First,  the  apostle  denies  the 
proposition  that  all  things  continue  as  they  were  since  the  Creation ;  and  secondly, 
he  denies  the  consequence  drawn  from  thence,  Though  all  things  did  continue,  it 
no  way  follows  they  shall  for  ever  do  so.  III.  As  they  are  a  recital  of  a 
prophecy.  The  appearance  of  these  scoffers  in  the  world  is  itself  a  very  signal 
mark  of  its  approach  (Jude  17,  18 ;  1  Thess.  v.  1 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  37).  Will  they 
find  arguments  of  mockery  and  laughter  in  the  place  of  weeping,  and  wailing, 
and  gnashing  of  teeth?  If  they  can  do  this,  in  God's  name  let  them  mock 
on,  deny  a  future  judgment,  or  what  is  more  brave,  let  them  dare  it.  {John 
Fell,  D.D.)  The  nature,  folly,   and    danger   of  scoffing   at   religion : — I.    To 

consider  the  nature,  folly,  and  danger  of  scoffing  at  religion,  than 
which  nothing  can  be  more  offensive  to  a  considerate  mind.  1.  Is  there 
anything  ridiculous  in  the  belief  of  a  Deity,  a  supreme,  infinite,  and  intelli- 
gent mind,  the  creator  and  governor  of  the  universe?  Is  it  absurd  to  assert 
that  He  who  made  the  world  exercises  an  universal  providence  and  directs  all 
the  affairs  of  it?  What  is  there  ludicrous  in  any  of  the  duties  of  piety,  in  a 
supreme  reverence  and  love  of  God  ?  What  is  there  that  has  a  ridiculous  aspect, 
or  can  excite  any  but  the  laughter  of  fools,  in  justice,  temperance,  &c.  ?  Again,  is 
it  at  aU  unsuitable  to  our  most  worthy  notions  of  God  to  believe,  that  when  the 
world  was  universally  corrupted,  He  would  graciously  interpose  for  the  good  of  His 
creatures,  and  teach  them  their  duty  by  an  extraordinary  revelation  ?  Is  it  in  the 
least  irrational  to  suppose  that  this  revelation  has  fixed,  with  the  utmost  distinct- 
ness, the  terms  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  and  thereby  removed  distracting 
suspicions  and  superstitious  terrors  ?  2.  Further,  the  grand  principles  and  duties 
of  religion  are  so  far  from  having  anything  ridiculous  in  them,  that  they  are  some 
of  the  plainest  and  most  obvious  dictates  of  reason,  which  renders  the  guilt  of 
the  scoffer  much  more  aggravated  and  his  impertinence  and  folly  more  insup- 
portable. 3.  Let  me  only  add  that  religion  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  the 
comfort  of  men's  minds,  the  peace  of  society,  and  the  general  good  of  the  world. 
So  that  whoever  sets  himself  to  viUfy  these  important  truths  not  only  fixes  certain 
reproach  upon  himself  by  misplacing  his  ridicule  on  what  has  really  nothing  absurd 
in  it,  but  is,  in  fact,  whatever  his  intention  may  be,  whether  to  gratify  a  trilling 
humour,  display  the  forwardness  of  his  genius,  or  corrupt  the  morals  of  the  age,  an 
enemy  to  society  and  the  general  happiness  of  mankind.  4.  And  as  the  guilt  of 
these  scoffers  is  very  great,  their  danger  is  in  proportion.  For  if  the  principles  of 
religion  should  happen  to  be  true,  he  that  has  so  abused  his  reason,  that  noblest 
gift  of  God,  as  to  employ  it  against  his  Maker,  and  all  that  is  amiable  and  useful 
in  human  life,  must  expect  to  be  treated  with  the  utmost  rigour  and  severity.  II. 
To  inquire  into  the  causes  of  it.  1.  It  sometimes  springs  from  a  levity  of  mind 
which  disposes  men  to  treat  all  subjects  ludicrously.  2.  Again,  bantering  religion 
frequently  proceeds  from  ignorance  and  superficial  inquiry.  3.  Sometimes  again  it 
happens  that  the  fashion  of  the  age  they  live  in,  or  the  general  humour  of  the  com- 
pany they  frequent,  makes  persons  set  up  for  scoffers.  4.  Scofiing  at  religion  may, 
in  some  persons,  proceed  from  a  direct  hatred  of  it,  occasioned  by  a  prejudice  in 
favour  of  their  vices.  This  was  the  case  of  the  scoffers  mentioned  in  the  text,  who 
are  expressly  described  as  walking  after  their  own  lusts.  I  may  safely  assert  that 
immorality  in  the  practice  is  the  source  of  the  most  invincible  prejudices  against 
religion.  How  natural  is  it  for  those,  who  live  as  without  God  in  the  world,  to  wish 
that  there  was  no  such  Being,  that  by  destroying  the  first  principle  of  all  religion  they 
may  justify  the  want  of  it  in  their  practice.  I  shall  only  add,  that  when  men  are 
averse  to  the  principles  of  religion,  they  will  naturally  decline  all  further  inquiries 


CHAP,  III.]  11.  PETER.  153 

into  the  reasonableness  of  them,  and  be  fond  of  everything  that  looks  plausible  on 
the  side  of  infidelity.  Learn  :  1.  Into  what  extreme  corruption  the  mind  of  man, 
■which  is  indued  with  such  noble  faculties  and  formed  for  Godlike  perfection,  is 
capable  of  being  sunk,  even  to  mistake  confusion  for  order  and  deformity  for  beauty  ? 
2.  Again,  that  we  may  not  be  imposed  on  by  the  scoffers  of  our  own  times,  let  us 
always  take  care  to  distinguish  between  reasoning  and  ridicule.  We  should  examine 
what  it  is  that  is  really  ridiculous :  whether  it  be  religion  itself,  or  something  of  a 
different  nature  substituted  in  the  place  of  it.  3.  Finally,  that  we  may  keep  at  the 
utmost  distance  from  this  crime,  let  us  employ  our  reason  in  defending  religion  and 
representing  it  in  a  just  and  amiable  light.  Let  our  natural  abilities  be  devoted  to 
this  service,  and  all  our  studies  and  improvements  made  subservient  to  it.  {James 
Foster.)  The  folly  of  scoffing  at  religion : — I.  We  will  consider  the  natukb 
OF  THE  SIN  HERE  MENTIONED,  which  is  scoffing  at  religion.  "  There  shall  come 
scoffers."  In  those  times  there  was  a  common  persuasion  among  Christians,  "  that 
the  day  of  the  Lord  was  at  hand."  Now  this,  it  is  probable,  these  scoffers  twitted 
the  Christians  withal.  They  looked  upon  all  things  as  going  on  in  a  constant  course. 
II.  The  CHARACTER  WHICH  IS  HERE  GIVEN  OF  THESE  SCOFFERS.  They  are  said  to  walk 
after  their  own  lusts.  St.  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  gives  much  the  same  character  of 
them  that  St.  Peter  here  does  (vers.  18,  19).  To  deride  God  and  religion  is  the 
highest  kind  of  impiety.  And  men  do  not  usually  arrive  to  this  degree  of  wicked- 
ness at  first,  but  they  come  to  it  by  several  steps.  I  remember  it  is  the  saying  of 
one,  who  hath  done  more  by  his  writings  to  debauch  the  age  with  atheistical  prin- 
ciples than  any  man  that  Uves  in  it,  "  that  when  reason  is  against  a  man,  then  a 
man  will  be  against  reason."  I  am  sure  this  is  the  true  account  of  such  men's 
enmity  to  religion — religion  is  against  them,  and  therefore  they  set  themselves 
against  religion.  Besides  that,  men  think  it  some  kind  of  apology  for  their  vices 
that  they  do  not  act  contrary  to  any  principle  they  profess.  III.  The  heinousness 
AND  THE  aggravations  OF  THIS  VICE.  If  it  provc  truc  that  there  is  no  God,  the 
religious  man  may  be  as  happy  in  this  world  as  the  atheist.  Besides  that,  the 
practice  of  religion  and  virtue  doth  naturally  promote  our  temporal  felicity.  It  is 
more  for  a  man's  health,  and  more  for  his  reputation,  and  more  for  his  advantage 
in  all  other  worldly  respects,  to  lead  a  virtuous  than  a  vicious  course  of  life.  And  for 
the  other  world,  if  there  be  no  God,  the  case  of  the  rehgious  man  and  the  atheist 
wiU  be  alike,  because  they  will  both  be  extinguished  by  death  and  insensible  of  any 
further  happiness  or  misery.  But  then  if  the  contrary  opinion  should  prove  true, 
then  it  is  plain  to  every  man,  at  first  sight,  that  the  case  of  the  religious  man  and 
the  atheist  must  be  vastly  different ;  then  where  shall  the  wicked  and  the  ungodly 
appear  ?  I  will  but  add  one  thing  more,  to  show  the  folly  of  this  profane  temper. 
And  that  is  this :  that  as  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  other  sins,  so  there  is  in  truth  the 
least  temptation  to  it.  Profane  persons  serve  the  devil  for  nought.  Lessons  :  1.  To 
take  men  off  from  this  impious  and  dangerous  folly  of  profaneness,  which  by  some 
is  miscalled  wit.  2.  To  caution  men  not  to  think  the  worse  of  religion,  because 
some  are  so  bold  as  to  deride  it.  3.  "To  persuade  men  to  employ  that  reason  and 
wit  which  God  hath  given  them,  to  better  and  nobler  purposes,  in  the  service  and 
to  the  glory  of  that  God  who  hath  bestowed  these  gifts  on  men.  {Abp.  Tillotson.) 
The  sin  of  scoffing  at  religion : — I.  The  nature  of  the  vice.  1.  It  is  not  the  serious, 
inquirer  that  I  complain  of,  let  his  objections  be  raised  against  whatever  doctrines- 
they  may,  but  the  individual  who  treats  the  subject  with  a  spirit  of  levity,  derision, 
and  contempt.  (1)  In  some  instances  this  unhappy  and  unholy  disposition  goes  so 
far  as  to  despise  every  kind  of  religion,  natural  as  well  as  revealed.  (2)  In  other 
cases,  the  scorner  appears  in  the  character  of  a  deist,  who,  while  he  professes  to 
believe  the  truth,  and  to  submit  to  the  obligations  of  natural  religion,  attacks  the 
system  of  Divine  revelation.  He  reviles  the  Scriptures  as  forgeries,  (a)  Much 
unhallowed  ridicule  is  thrown  by  some  on  what  are  considered  by  us  as  the  most 
sublime  and  important  doctrines  of  revelation — I  mean  the  trinity  of  persons  in  the 
Godhead,  and  the  atonement  of  our  Lord,  (h)  The  scorner  will  not  unfrequently  be 
found  avowing  his  belief  in  the  important  articles  which  I  have  just  mentioned, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  he  ridicules  the  only  legitimate  influence  and  valuable 
results  of  these  doctrines.  Has  not  the  term  saint,  that  highest  appellation 
which  can  be  given  to  man  or  glorified  spirit,  been  bandied  about  society  as  a  term 
of  reproach  ?  (c)  Another  way  of  scoifing  at  religion  is  to  pitch  upon  the  im 
perfections  of  good  men  and  to  expose  them  to  public  ridicule.  But  how 
hateful  is  the  malignity  which  delights  to  throw  all  the  praiseworthy  parts  of  the 
character  into  the  shade  of  one  ludicrous  trait,     (d)  It  is  a  miserable  device,  which 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

many  have  had  recourse  to,  to  select  the  absurdities  of  fanaticism  and  the  hollow 
pretences  of  hypocrisy,  as  they  have  been  exhibited  in  some  false  professors,  and 
thus  to  raise  a  prejudice  against  all  genuine  religion.  2.  To  inquire  where  and 
when  the  practice  of  scoffing  is  indulged  in.  (1)  In  the  theatre.  (2)  How  often  the 
social  circle  is  the  scene  of  this  unhallowed  sport  and  the  entertainment  of  the 
convivial  party  "s  heightened  by  profane  ridicule.  (3)  How  saturated  with  the  sin 
of  scoffing  at  religion  are  many  of  the  publications,  and  much  of  the  periodical 
literature  of  the  present  day.  H.  The  causes  of  scoffing.  1.  There  are  many 
subordinate  and  proximate  ones.  (1)  Of  these,  pride  and  an  unmortified  opinion 
of  self  takes  the  lead.  (2)  Scoffing  is  sometimes  the  result  of  a  prevailing  and 
indecent  levity  of  mind,  an  habitual  and  indulged  frivolity,  which  alike  indisposes 
and  unfits  a  man  for  any  serious  pursuit.  (3)  A  silly  affectation  of  novelty  com- 
bined with  a  wish  to  be  thought  superior  to  the  terrors  of  superstition,  leads  in 
many  cases  to  the  sin  of  ridiculing  piety.  (4)  Many  are  led  on  to  assume  the 
character  of  the  scomer  by  the  power  of  fashion  and  the  contagion  of  evil  com- 
pany. (5)  Inability  to  attack  religion  in  any  other  way  induces  some  to  assaU  it 
with  their  scorn.  2.  But  the  chief  source  of  scoffing  is  that  which  the  apostle 
has  mentioned  in  the  text,  "  Scoffers  walking  after  their  own  lusts."  HI.  The 
CHARACTER  OF  THIS  VICE.  1.  It  is  irrational.  Eidicule  is  neither  the  test  of  truth  in 
others  nor  the  way  to  obtain  it  for  ourselves.  2.  It  is  rude  and  uncivil.  A  decent 
respect  is  due  to  every  man's  convictions  on  the  subject  of  religion,  though  they 
may  be  erroneous.  3.  It  is  a  most  cruel  and  inhuman  sin.  Did  he  but  consider  how 
many  there  are  who,  amidst  the  vicissitudes  and  the  trials  of  life,  have  no  ray  of 
consolation  from  any  other  source  to  fall  upon  their  dreary  path,  would  he  follow 
them  to  their  last  refuge  and  attempt  to  drive  them  by  unhallowed  scorn  even  from 
thence  ?  4.  It  is  a  most  hardening  vice.  The  sacred  writers  speak  of  a  scorner  as 
almost  irreclaimable.  5.  But  its  impiety  in  the  sight  of  God  surpasses  all  descrip- 
tion. Religion  is  at  once  the  production  and  the  image  of  Deity  ;  and  to  scoff  at 
religion,  therefore,  is  to  scoff  at  God.  6.  It  is  a  contagious  and  injurious  vice. 
Scorners  are  the  chief  instruments  of  Satan,  the  promoters  of  his  cause,  his  most 
zealous  apostles,  his  most  able  advocates,  and  his  most  successful  emissaries.  IV. 
The  PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  SCORNER.  1.  Are  there,  tell  me  scoffers,  no  midnight 
scenes  of  terror  and  self-reproach  ?  How  wiU  this  be  increased  on  the  bed  of  death  ? 
2.  I  cannot  conceive  of  any  character  with  whom  Jehovah  will  be  so  awfully  severe 
as  the  scoffer  ;  his  is  the  loftiest  height  of  vice,  and  his  will  be  the  lowest  depth  of 
punishment.  God's  patience  in  bearing  with  such  impious  creatures  is  wonderful ; 
and  His  justice  in  punishing  them  will  be  in  proportion.  3.  And  then,  who  shall 
tell  the  secrets  of  his  prison,  or  conceive  of  what  the  scorner  shall  endure  in  the 
dark  world  of  heU  ?  There  will  be  no  saint  near  him  there  on  whom  to  utter  the 
effusions  of  his  ridicule.  Not  one  flash  of  wit  will  for  a  moment  relieve  the  darkness 
of  eternal  night ;  not  one  saUy  of  humour  resist  the  oppression  of  eternal  despair. 
{J.  A.  James.)  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming? — The  delay  of  the  advent 
of  Christ : — I.  The  scientific  difficulty.  1.  So  far  as  the  objection  relates  to  the 
delay  of  the  second  advent,  it  would  seem  that,  in  a  scientific  age  like  the  present, 
it  would  least  of  all  have  weight.  For  the  history  of  the  earth,  as  related  by 
geology,  and  the  history  of  the  cosmical  system,  as  related  by  astronomy,  present 
periods  so  vast,  that  the  eighteen  hundred  years,  during  which  Christianity  has 
been  evolving  its  work  among  men,  shrink  into  utter  insignificance  in  the  com- 
parison. Certainly,  the  man  of  science,  of  all  men,  should  recognise  the  utter 
inadequacy  of  human  standards  of  time  as  measures  of  the  development  of  the  plans 
of  the  Creator.  2.  Again,  so  far  as  the  objection  relates  to  other  aspects  of  the 
subject,  such  as  the  regularity  and  immutability  of  natural  law  which,  it  is  alleged, 
forbid  any  such  catastrophe  as  the  end  of  the  world,  I  suggest— (1)  That  creation  is 
the  fundamental  fact  on  which  aU  our  knowledge  rests.  Science  is  compelled  to 
admit  the  beginning  of  the  Kosmos.  The  very  principle  of  evolution  which,  in  some 
form  or  other,  is  now  generally  adopted  as  a  twin  generalisation  with  gravitation, 
carries  with  it  the  idea  of  a  beginning.  Even  if  the  Kosmos  had  been  self-evolved, 
the  seed  out  of  which  it  evolved  itself  must  be  assumed.  But  does  not  this  suggest 
that  it  is  working  towards  an  end?  an  ultimate  solution?  (2)  That  the  three 
leading  ideas  involved  in  the  second  advent,  and  that  which  is  associated  with  it,  at 
least  in  perspective,  the  end  of  the  world,  find  clear  analogies  in  the  latest  theories 
of  science,  (a)  The  second  advent  involves  the  idea  of  the  imagination  of  a  higher 
stage  of  life  and  being  for  man — emancipation  from  old  fetters,  the  ascent  to  a 
liigher  plane,  the  taking  on  a  new  body  with  new  powers,  and  under  new  and  higher 


CHAP,  m.]  II.  PETER.  155 

conditions.  But  this  is  just  sin  the  line  of  the  story  which  science  is  telling  us — 
whether  in  astronomy,  geology,  natural  history,  or  sociology — the  several  spheres 
in  which  the  law  of  evolution  is  traced.  (6)  The  second  advent  involves  the  sudden 
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  a  new  birth  of  the  world  resulting  from  it. 
But  again,  the  scientific  man  at  our  side  teaches  us  that  the  ascent  of  matter  and 
force  to  higher  planes,  though  indeed  in  orderly  succession,  has  not  been  by  infinite 
gradation  as  upon  a  sliding  scale,  but  always  by  paroxysms.  The  story  of  a  chemist 
is  a  story  of  successive  births  of  force  into  higher  and  higher  forms,  the  transforma- 
tion of  dead  into  living  matter,  of  physical  into  chemical  force,  and  again  of  chemical 
into  vital  force.  These  are  all  instances  of  sudden  births  into  higher  conditions 
with  new  properties  and  powers  which  could  not  have  been  imagined  before,  (c) 
The  second  advent — or  that  great  event  which,  in  the  perspective,  is  contiguous 
with  it,  though  in  reality  it  may  he  far  beyond  it  (like  two  distant  peaks,  which  seem 
to  spring  from  the  same  base  though  a  wide  valley  really  intervenes) — involves  also 
stupendous  natural  phenomena — the  regeneration  by  fire,  the  new  heavens  and  the 
new  earth.  But  here  again  the  analogy  of  science  is  in  harmony  with  the  scriptural 
revelation  ;  for  the  geologist,  in  telling  of  an  internal  treasure-house  of  fire,  as  well 
as  the  astronomer  in  his  theory  of  "  planetary  old  age,"  clearly  establish  that 
harmony.  And,  moreover,  if  there  is  a  law  of  conservation  of  force,  there  is  also, 
as  its  antithesis,  a  law  of  dissipation  of  energy.  Says  Le  Comte,  "  All  scientific 
speculations  on  the  subject  of  the  final  destiny  of  the  Kosmos  bankrupt  nature. 
The  final  result  is,  the  running  down  of  all  forms  of  force  into  heat,  and  so  the 
final  death  of  the  Kosmos."  II.  The  historical  difficulty.  Christ  promised  to 
come  again  in  person  to  judge  the  world.  He  said,  "Behold,  I  come  quickly."  But 
He  has  not  come.  Long  cycles  of  history  have  rolled  round,  yet  still  He  comes  not. 
Now  how  do  we  meet  this  objection?  Exactly  as  St.  Peter  did — by  reminding  the 
objector  that  with  the  Lord  "  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day."  He  is  the  strong 
and  patient  worker.  Whether  we  study  the  record  of  races  or  of  civilisations, 
the  conclusion  is  the  same — that  the  God  who  orders  the  course  of  history  does 
indeed  reckon  "  a  thousand  years  as  one  day,"  maturing  His  purposes  through  long 
tracts  of  time,  and  refusing  to  hasten  His  work  in  obedience  to  the  impatience  of 
men.  Great  nations  are  not  born  in  a  day  ;  strong  civilisations  are  not  the  product 
of  a  generation;  both  are  rather  the  resultant  of  a  combination  of  forces  and 
influences  whose  origin  must  be  sought  in  remote  antiquity.  Judging,  then,  from 
the  analogy  of  history,  what  should  be  the  case  of  Christianity  ?  Here  was  a  new 
spiritual  kingdom  set  up  on  earth,  designed  to  be  as  wide  as  the  world,  and  as 
universal  as  man.  How  would  its  results  be  reached  ?  Surely  we  should  expect 
that  such  a  design  could  only  be  wrought  out  through  long  cycles  of  time  ;  or,  at 
least,  this  is  certain,  leaving  out  of  view  what  could  be  done  (for  who  shall  limit  the 
power  of  the  Almighty  ?)  if  experience  shall  prove  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  to 
establish  itself  slowly  and  through  long  ages  of  development,  this  is  only  what  the 
analogy  of  history  would  teach  us  to  expect.  But  does  not  this  slow  ripening  of  the 
great  periods  of  history  and  civilisatiqn,  while  it  removes  the  difficulty  occasioned 
by  the  long  delay  of  the  second  advent,  create  at  the  same  time  a  presumption  against 
the  manner  of  its  imagination  ?  The  Scripture  picture  represents  a  sudden  event, 
a  great  crisis  and  catastrophe  in  the  history  of  the  world,  in  the  second  coming  of 
Christ.  But  this,  too,  finds  its  frequent  analogies  in  history.  The  records  of  man- 
kind afford  instances  not  a  few  of  great  crises  in  the  history  of  cities  and  nations 
and  races,  when  sudden  destruction  has  overtaken  them,  when  the  long  pent-up 
clouds  of  wrath  have  burst  upon  them  and  swept  them  away  from  among  the 
families  of  the  earth.  Such  was  the  case  with  Nineveh  and  Babylon.  Such  was 
the  ease  with  Accad,  a  city  older  than  either  of  these,  which  was  indeed  the  cradle 
of  civilisation,  but  which  so  utterly  disappeared,  that  its  existence  #as  not  even 
known  forty  years  ago,  and  was  only  brought  to  light  by  the  discovery  of  the  key  to 
the  arrow-headed  characters,  in  which  the  story  of  the  Accadians,  with  their  laws  and 
literature  and  religion,  had  remained  securely  locked  up  for  more  than  three  thousand 
years.  Such  was  the  case  with  Jerusalem,  which  when  it  filled  up  the  measure  of  its 
guilt,  perished  in  that  sudden  storm  of  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish. 
Such  was  the  case  with  the  Eoman  Empire,  when  it  sank  to  rise  no  more  before  the 
devastating  flood  of  the  Northern  barbarians.  Similar  examples  are  not  wanting  in 
modern  history,  illustrating  the  principle  in  question,  and  giving  ground  for  the 
assertion  that  the  analogy  of  history  is  in  harmony  with  the  prophecy  that  the  Day 
■of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night — a  day  of  judgment  and  indignation 
and  wrath  to  those  who  are  disobedient  and  rebellious  against  the  Sou  of  God,  but 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

a  day  of  Kedemption  to  all  them  that  wait  for  His  appearing.  (R.  H.  McKim,  D.D.) 
All  things  continue  as  they  were. — 3Ian^s  external  universe  as  read  hy  the  scoffing 
sceptic : — I.  They  get  from  it  a  one-sided  idea.  The  idea  they  obtained  from 
the  observation  of  nature  was,  that  it  was  unchanging.  "  Since  the  fathers  fell 
asleep,  all  things  continue,"  &c.  This  is  only  partially  true.  We  thank  God  for 
this  constancy.  Without  it  the  farmer  would  have  no  motive  to  cultivate  his  field, 
the  mariner  no  chart  to  guide  him  over  the  deep,  the  philosopher  no  data  on  which 
to  prosecute  his  inquiries  or  to  build  up  his  science.  All  would  be  confusion.  Man, 
without  plan,  and  without  hope,  would  move  under  the  wild  impulses  which  the 
casualties  of  the  moment  awakened.  Still,  nature  has  her  changes.  Nay,  amidst  all 
this  constancy  are  there  not  incessant  revolutions  ?  Does  not  the  inorganic  change 
in  its  appearance  ?  Old  mountains,  rivers,  islands  disappear,  and  new  ones  emerge. 
The  vegetable  and  animal  worlds  succeed  each  other.  Nay,  perhaps  there  is 
nothing  the  same — all  things  change.  A  one-sided  view  of  a  many-sided  thing  is 
evermore  erroneous.  II.  They  apply  this  one-sided  idea  against  the  written 
WORD.  •'  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  "  Now,  has  not  the  sceptic  always 
read  nature  in  this  way  ?  Whether  he  has  looked  at  its  astronomical,  geological,  or 
physiological  phases,  has  he  not  always  so  read  it  as  to  get  some  false  idea  of  it,  in 
order  to  turn  it  against  the  Bible  ?  III.  They  do  this  from  a  sad  perversity  op 
heart.  They  are  "  scoffers  walking  after  their  own  lusts  and  willingly  ignorant." 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Miracles  are  now  neither  necessary  to  the  conviction  of  unbe- 
lievers, nor  the  conversion  of  sinners  : — I  shall  consider  the  words  as  a  standing 
objection  of  scoffers  or  free-thinkers  against  the  truth  and  authority  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion.  I.  That  miracles  are  not  now  necessary  to  the  conviction  of 
unbelievers.  It  is  sufficient  that  we  are  assured  there  was  a  time  when  the  Chris- 
tian religion  was  confirmed  by  numerous  and  undoubted  miracles.  Those  who 
contend  for  the  continuance  of  miracles  in  order  to  evince  more  effectually  the  truth 
of  revealed  religion,  proceed  upon  one  of  these  suppositions.  Either  that  it  is 
necessary  every  particular  person  should  for  his  own  satisfaction  be  an  eye-witness 
of  some  miraculous  fact,  or  else,  that  once  at  least  in  every  age  and  nation,  God 
should  exert  His  omnipotence,  and  the  miracle  be  committed  to  some  public  and 
standing  record  for  the  information  of  those  who  were  not  eye-witnesses  of  it.  As 
to  what  is  here  required  in  the  last  place,  it  is  obviated  by  saying  that  we  have  all 
the  evidence  of  the  miracles  recorded  in  the  gospel,  that  any  man,  who  is  not  an 
eye-witness  of  it,  can  have  of  a  miracle  done  in  his  own  age  or  nation.  Upon 
the  former  supposition,  miracles  would  be  so  frequent  that  they  would  become 
of  little  force  or  consideration.  This  is  certain,  that  the  effects  which  miracles  have 
upon  men  depend  upon  a  good,  docile,  and  obedient  temper  of  mind.  He  that  is 
in  this  good  disposition  needs  no  further  evidence  of  miracles  for  his  conviction ; 
but  he  that  is  not,  would  not  be  convinced  by  them,  though  we  should  suppose 
them  more  frequent.  II.  But  if  miracles  are  not  necessary  to  the  conviction  of 
unbelievers,  MAY  THEY  not  be  necessary  to  the  conversion  of  sinners?  or  to  reclaim 
those  who  already  believe  from  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  and  bring  them  to 
repentance  ?  I  answer  again  in  the  negative.  1.  The  same  motives  which  now 
induce  men  to  put  off  their  repentance  would,  in  all  probability,  be  as  prevalent, 
though  we  should  suppose  miracles  more  frequent.  Would  a  miracle  tend  to  con- 
vince a  sinner  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the  laws  of  the  gospel  ?  That  we  here 
suppose  him  convinced  of  already.  Would  it  tend  to  enforce  his  obedience  to  those 
laws  by  conveying  any  sanctifying  graces  into  his  nature  ?  What  would  it  then  do 
in  order  to  his  conversion  ?  You  will  say  it  might  be  an  occasion  of  bringing  him 
to  a  better  temper  of  consideration,  and  to  make  him  take  up  some  speedy  resolu- 
tions of  amendment.  It  is  granted ;  but  then  such  a  resolution  is  no  more  than 
what  we  see  sinners  taking  up  daily,  and  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  how  ordinary  is 
it  for  them  to  shift  off  their  repentance  from  time  to  time,  till  it  be  past  time  !  2. 
It  is  not  reasonably  to  be  expected  such  an  impression  should  be  of  any  long  or 
lasting  continuance.  3.  Though  what  is  here  asserted  could  not  be  made  appear 
from  probable  reasons  and  arguments  ;  yet  it  is  confirmed  by  experience  and  un- 
deniable matters  of  fact.  We  have  numerous  examples  in  Scripture,  and  it  may  not 
be  improper  to  instance  some  few  of  them  to  this  purpose.  (1)  Who  would  have 
thought  that  Pharaoh,  after  all  the  miracles  which  were  done  before  his  eyes,  and 
which  he  did  not  only  see,  but  feel  the  dreadful  effects  of,  should  still  have  persisted 
in  his  disobedience  to  the  commands  of  God  ?  (2)  So,  again,  notwithstanding  the 
many  miracles  Moses  afterwards  wrought  in  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews,  what  little 
effect  had  they  towards  reclaiming  them  either  from  the  error  or  evU  of  their  ways  1 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  157 

1.  And  when  I  say  that  miracles  are  not  now  necessary  to  the  conviction  of  unbe- 
lievers, I  would  be  understood  as  speaking  only  of  such  unbelievers  as  live  among 
Christians,  and  may  at  any  time  have  the  proofs  of  Christianity  laid  clearly  before 
them.  2.  If,  then,  God  Almighty  has  afforded  us  all  sufficient  means  to  convince 
us  of  the  truth  of  our  holy  rehgion,  let  us  faithfully  endeavour  to  employ  those 
means  to  the  ends  they  are  designed  ;  let  us  frequently  reflect  on  the  reasonableness 
of  Christianity,  and  the  evidence  of  its  truth,  that  our  faith  may  be  built  upon  a 
solid  foundation.     {R.  Fiddes,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5-7.  This  they  willingly  are  ignorant  of. — Willing  ignorance : — Nelson,  at 
St.  Vincent,  putting  the  telescope  to  his  blind  eye,  and  swearing  that  he  could  not 
see  the  signal  to  cease  firing,  affords  an  apt  illustration  of  many  who,  for  less 
worthy  motives,  will  not,  because  they  wish  not,  see  the  truth.  I.  The  avowed 
INFIDELS  AND  ATHEISTS.  They  are  willingly  ignorant — 1.  Of  the  teachings  of  the 
Bible  which  they  affect  to  despise.  2.  Of  the  evidences  of  its  Divine  origin  and 
inspiration.  3.  Of  the  evidences  of  the  being,  wisdom,  and  love  of  God.  4.  Of  the 
evidences  of  the  Divine  origin  of  Christianity.  11.  Many  men  of  science  and 
CULTURE.  III.  Multitudes  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  AU 
those  who  habitually  neglect  the  sanctuary,  and  to  whom  the  Bible  is  an  unknown 
book.  (The  Study.)  The  world  that  then  was,  .  .  .  perished. — The  flood: — I. 
A  M.UiEFACTOR.  "  The  world  that  then  was."  Locally,  a  piece  of  it  perished :  the 
earth  ;  materially,  a  gi'eat  deal  of  it  perished  :  aU  the  riches  and  commodities  of  the 
earth ;  principally  considered,  all  perished  but  eight  persons :  formally,  there  was 
nothing  left.  Only  God's  quarrel  to  the  world  was  for  the  men  of  the  world ;  and 
His  quarrel  to  the  men  of  the  world  was  for  their  sins.  The  world  itself  was,  in 
this,  hke  the  sea  ;  and  sins,  like  the  winds  :  the  sea  would  be  calm  and  quiet  if  the 
winds  did  not  trouble  it ;  if  iniquities,  like  storms,  had  not  put  the  course  of  nature 
into  an  uproar,  the  world  had  not  perished.  II.  An  executioner.  "  Being  over- 
flowed with  water."  This  is  an  excellent  servant  to  us,  so  God  made  it ;  but  an  ill 
master,  so  our  sins  make  it.  Nothing  is  so  sovereign,  which  being  abused  by  sin, 
may  not,  of  a  blessing,  become  a  curse.  III.  The  conveniency  of  the  execution. 
The  water  was  not  far  to  fetch  ;  either  with  danger,  as  David's  water  from  the  well 
of  Bethlehem,  through  an  army  of  PhiHstines ;  or  with  labour,  as  Jacob's  water 
from  a  deep  well  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth ;  but  near  at  hand,  ready.  (Thos. 
Adams.)  3Ian's  external  universe  as  regarded  by  the  thoughtful  Christian  : — What 
is  the  Christian's  view  of  nature  ?     The  answer  we  get  from  this  passage  is — I.  He 

BEGARDS    IT    AS    ORIGINALLY  PRODUCED  BY  THE  DiVINE  WoRD.       "  By  the  Woid  of    God 

the  heavens  were  of  old,"  &c.  It  had  an  origin — it  is  not  eternal ;  it  arose  not  from 
chance,  but  from  the  Divine  Word.  II.  He  regards  it  as  dependent  every 
MOMENT  UPON  THE  DiviNE  WoRD.  "  The  heavcus  and  the  earth,  which  are  now,  by 
the  same  Word  are  kept  in  store."  1.  That  the  past  changes  of  nature  are  to  be 
referred  to  the  Divine  Word.  Peter  here  refers  to  one  tremendous  catastrophe. 
"  The  world  that  then  was,  being  overflowed  with  water,  perished."  The  deluge 
was  no  accident.  "  I,  even  I,  do  brin^  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the  earth,"  &c.  The 
earthquake,  the  tornado,  the  blight,  the  pestilence,  all  these  things  in  nature  come 
from  the  Word  of  God.  His  will  is  in  all.  2.  That  the  present  existence  of  nature 
is  to  be  referred  to  His  Word.  "  But  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  are  now  by 
the  same  Word  kept  in  store  " — are  preserved  in  their  present  state.  If  this  is  a  right 
view  of  material  nature,  we  may  infer  three  important  considerations.  (1)  That 
it  is  absurd  to  cite  the  so-called  laws  of  nature  against  the. fulfilment  of  God's 
revealed  purposes.  This  is  just  what  the  scoffing  sceptics  did  in  the  days  of  Peter. 
The  laws  of  nature  seemed  against  the  deluge ;  but  God  purposed  that  these  things 
should  take  place,  and  the  laws  of  nature  yielded.  The  laws  of  nature  may  seem 
against  a  resurrection,  &c.,  but  the  purpose  of  God  will  be  fulfilled.  If  material 
nature  was  originally  produced  by,  and  is  ever  dependent  upon,  the  Word  of  God, 
we  infer — (2)  That  there  can  be  no  real  contradiction  between  its  facts  and 
those  of  the  Bible.  Moreover,  if  material  nature  was  originally  produced  by,  and  is 
ever  dependent  upon,  the  Divine  Word,  we  infer — (3)  That  its  relation  to  the  soul 
should  be  especially  realised.  As  the  Word  of  God  is  thus  in  material  nature,  material 
nature  has  a  meaning.  It  is  the  voice  of  God  to  the  human  heart,  a  Divine  appeal  to  the 
human  conscience.  Nature  has  a  moral  meaning,  God's  Word  is  in  it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years. — God's  estimate  of  time  : — I.  First, 
take  this  statement  as  a  general  principle,  "  that  one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a 
thousand  years,"  &c.     1.  In  opening  up  this  general  principle  we  remark  that  all 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

time  is  equally  present  with  God.  Childhood,  manhood  and  old  age  belong  to 
creatures,  but  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High  they  have  no  abode.  Growth, 
progress,  advancement,  all  these  are  virtues  in  finite  beings,  but  to  the  Infinite  the 
thought  of  such  change  would  be  an  insult.  Yesterday,  to-day,  and  to-morrow, 
belong  to  dying  mortal,  the  Immortal  King  lives  in  an  eternal  to-day.  This  is  a, 
subject  upon  which  we  can  only  speak  without  ourselves  fully  understanding  what 
we  say,  but  yet,  perhaps,  a  metaphor  may  tend  to  make  the  matter  a  little  simpler. 
There  is  a  river  flowing  along  in  gentle  slope  toward  the  sea.  A  boatman  is  upon 
it ;  his  vessel  is  here  ;  anon  it  is  there ;  and  soon  it  will  be  at  the  river's  mouth ; 
only  that  part  of  the  river  upon  which  he  is  sailing  is  present  to  him.  But  up 
yonder,  on  a  lofty  mountain,  stands  a  traveller ;  as  he  looks  from  the  summit  he 
marks  the  source  of  the  river  and  gazes  upon  its  infant  stream,  where  as  yet  it  is 
but  a  narrow  line  of  silver  ;  then  he  follows  it  with  his  clear  eye  until  it  swells  into 
a  rolling  flood,  and  he  tracks  it  until  it  is  finally  absorbed  into  the  ocean.  Now,  as 
the  climber  stands  upon  that  Alp,  that  whole  sparkling  line  of  water  adorning  the 
plain  is  equally  present  to  him  from  its  source  to  its  fall ;  there  is  not  one  part  of 
ihe  stream  that  is  nearer  to  him  than  another ;  in  the  long  distance  he  sees  the 
whole  of  it,  from  the  end  to  the  beginning.  Such,  we  think,  is  the  stream  of  time 
to  God.  From  the  altitude  of  His  observance  He  looketh  down  upon  it  and  seeth  it 
at  one  gaze ;  taking  in,  not  at  many  thoughts,  but  at  one  thought,  all  the  revolutions 
of  time  and  all  the  changes  of  ages,  and  seeing  both  the  thousands  of  years  that 
have  gone,  and  the  thousands  that  are  yet  to  come,  as  present  at  one  view  before 
his  eye.  2.  The  text  teaches  us  next  that  all  time  is  equally  powerless  with  God  to 
affect  Him.  A  day  does  not  make  any  particular  change  in  us  that  we  can  notice. 
But  if  you  take  fifty  years — what  a  difference  is  perceptible  in  any  of  us !  But  as 
a  day  seems  to  make  no  change  with  us,  so,  but  far  more  truthfully,  a  thousand  years 
make  no  change  with  God.  Ages  roll  on,  but  He  abideth  the  same.  We  need  be 
under  no  apprehension  that  God  will  ever  be  affected  with  weakness  through  the 
revolutions  of  time.  The  Ancient  of  Days,  ever  omnipotent,  fainteth  not,  neither 
is  weary.  And  as  time  brings  no  weakness,  certainly  it  shall  bring  no  decay  to 
God.  Upon  His  brow  there  is  ne'er  a  furrow  ;  no  signs  of  palsy  are  in  His  hand. 
And  as  no  weakness  and  no  decay  can  be  brought  to  God  by  time,  so  no  change  in 
His  purpose  can  ever  come  through  revolving  years.  To  that  whereto  He  hath  set  His 
seal  He  standeth  fast,  and  what  His  heart  decrees,  that  will  He  do.  Moreover,  as 
there  can  be  no  change  in  His  decree,  so  no  unforeseen  difficulties  can  intervene  to 
prevent  the  accomplishment  of  it.  As  long  as  there  is  a  work  to  do,  He  shall  do  it ; 
as  long  as  there  is  an  enemy  to  conquer,  that  enemy  shall  be  overcome.  3.  Yet 
further — no  doubt  the  text  intends  to  teach  that  all  time  is  insignificant  to  God. 
Within  the  compass  of  a  drop  of  water  we  are  told  that  sometimes  a  thousand 
living  creatures  may  be  discovered,  and  to  those  little  creatures  no  doubt  their  size 
is  something  very  important.  There  is  a  creature  inside  that  drop  which  can  only 
be  seen  by  the  strongest  microscope,  but  it  is  a  hundred  times  larger  than  its 
neighbour,  and  it  feels,  no  doubt,  that  the  difference  is  amazing  and  extraordinary. 
But  to  you  and  to  me,  who  cannot  even  see  the  largest  creature  with  the  naked  eye, 
the  gigantic  animalcule  is  as  imperceptible  as  his  dwarfish  friend,  they  both  seem 
so  utterly  insignificant  that  we  squander  whole  millions  of  them,  and  are  not  very 
penitent  if  we  destroy  them  by  thousands.  But  what  would  one  of  those  little 
infusorial  animals  say  if  some  prophet  of  its  own  kind  could  tell  it  that  there  is  a 
creature  living  that  could  count  the  whole  world  of  a  drop  of  water  as  nothing,  and 
could  take  up  ten  thousand  thousand  of  those  drops  and  scatter  them  without 
exertion  of  half  its  power ;  that  this  creature  would  not  be  encumbered  if  it  should 
carry  on  the  tip  of  its  finger  all  the  thousands  that  live  in  that  great  world — a  drop 
of  water ;  that  this  creature  would  have  no  disturbance  of  heart,  even  if  the  great 
king  of  one  of  the  empires  in  that  drop  should  gather  all  his  armies  against  it  and 
lead  them  to  battle?  Why,  then  the  little  creatures  would  say,  "  How  can  this  be  ; 
we  can  hardly  grasp  the  idea  ?  "  But  when  that  infusorial  philosopher  could  have 
gotten  an  idea  of  man,  and  of  the  utter  insignificance  of  its  own  self,  and  of  its  own 
little  narrow  world,  then  it  would  have  achieved  an  easy  task  compared  with  that 
which  lies  before  us  when  we  attempt  to  get  an  idea  of  God.  4.  I  think  we  ought 
also  to  learn  from  the  text  that  all  time  is  equally  obedient  to  God.  You  and  I  are 
the  servants  of  time,  but  God  is  its  sovereign  Master.  II.  God's  estimate  of  a  day. 
He  can  make  a  day  as  useful,  and  to  Him  it  shall  be  as  long  as  a  thousand  years.  I 
think  this  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  of  the  Church's  hopes.  We  have  been  saying, 
"  How  many  converts  have  been  made  by  the  Missionary  Society  during  fifty  or 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  ■  159 

sixty  years  ?  "  and  we  have  said,  "  Well,  at  this  rate,  how  long  will  it  be  before  the 
world  is  converted  ?  "  Ah!  "  At  this  rate  ";  but  how  do  you  know  God's  rate  ?  God 
can  do  as  much  in  a  day  as  has  been  done  in  a  thousand  years  that  are  past,  if  so 
He  wills  it.  Only  let  Him  will  it,  and  there  shall  be  one  day  written  in  the  records 
of  the  Church  that  shall  be  equal  in  achievements,  and  in  triumphs,  to  any  thousand 
years  of  her  history  recorded  aforetime.  This  should  lead  us  to  remember  that 
when  God  speaketh  of  judging  the  world  at  the  day  of  judgment.  He  will  find  no 
difficulty  in  doing  it.  Two  hundred  judges  might  find  it  difficult  to  try  in  one  day 
all  the  cases  that  might  be  brought  before  them  in  a  single  nation,  but  God,  when 
He  holdeth  the  great  assize,  shall  be  able  to  convict  every  guilty  one,  and  to  absolve 
every  penitent,  and  that,  too,  in  one  day.  HI.  God's  estimate  of  a  thous.ujd 
YEAKS.  A  day  is  to  Him  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day. 
"  How  long,  how  long  ?  "  the  saints  under  the  altar  cry.  "  How  long?  "  and  the 
saints  at  the  altar  here  to-day  take  up  the  same  wailing  notes,  "  How  long? "  But 
He  answereth,  "  I  am  not  long.  What  if  I  have  waited  and  the  time  is  long  to  you  ; 
yet  it  is  not  long  to  Me."  God  bids  you  think  for  a  moment,  that  if  you  really 
measure  aright,  it  is  no  lengthened  period  of  time  that  He  has  made  the  vision  to 
tarry.  For  see  you  first,  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  Christ's  crucifixion  is  not 
long  compared  with  eternity.  Then,  again,  when  ye  say  that  God  is  long  in  the 
accomplishment  of  His  great  purposes,  remember  that  He  has  no  need  to  be  in  a 
hurry.  Whatsoever  you  and  I  find  to  do,  we  must  do  it  with  all  our  might :  for 
there  is  neither  work  nor  device  in  the  grave  whither  we  are  hastening  ;  but  God 
liveth  for  ever.  Besides,  there  is  an  advantage  in  His  being  slow — it  tries  our  faith. 
To  win  a  fight  when  it  lasteth  but  for  an  hour,  what  is  there  in  it  ?  One  gallant 
charge  and  the  foemen  have  fled.  Comrade,  but  that  is  a  battle  worthy  to  be 
written  with  your  Waterloos  and  your  Marathons,  when  hour  after  hour,  and  day 
after  day,  valour  disdains  to  succumb,  and  patience  endures  the  fight  while  foot  to 
foot  the  soldiers  stand.  Further,  it  is  weU  that  God  should  thus  be  long,  because 
He  is  unravelling  revelation.  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  prevailed  to 
loose  the  seals,  and  to  open  the  book  for  us,  and  year  after  year  He  reads  another 
page,  and  yet  another  in  the  Church's  history.  If  Christ  should  come  to-day,  if  we 
should  have  no  more  conflicts,  no  more  trials,  then  we  might  suppose  that  the  book 
had  come  to  its  brilliant  golden  finis  ;  but  if  it  keepeth  on  a  thousand  years  to  come, 
so  much  the  better :  the  glowing  eyes  of  angels  wish  not  for  the  end  of  the  story,  and 
the  bright  eyes  of  immortal  spirits  before  the  throne,  when  it  shall  be  all  over, 
shall  not  regret  that  it  was  too  long.  No,  let  it  go  on,  great  Master ;  let  a  thousand 
years  run  on  ;  our  loving  hearts  will  patiently  bear  it,  as  though  it  were  but  one 
day.  And  more  :  the  victory  of  Christ  at  the  end  will  be  all  the  greater,  and  the 
redemption  all  the  more  glorious,  because  of  this  long  time  of  strife  and  confusion. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Time  a  rate  of  motion  .'—The  apostle  evidently  wishes  us  to 
look  upon  the  flight  of  the  years  more  as  God  in  His  eternity  looks  down  upon 
them.  We  are  to  approach  the  idea  of  eternity  not  by  multiplying  years  together 
in  indefinite  figures  of  time,  but  more  truly  by  remembering  that  with  the  Eternal 
our  measurements  of  time  have  no  importance.  I.  I  ask  you  to  reflect,  first,  that 
TIME  IS  a  gift  of  God  TO  THE  CREATION.  Time  is  a  bequest  from  the  Eternal 
conveyed  and  secured  in  the  constitution  of  the  creation.  These  visible,  revolving 
worlds  are  by  nature  temporal.  Time  is  the  rate  of  motion  determined  by  the 
Creator  in  His  own  thought  of  the  worlds.  Now,  inasmuch  as  time  itself  is  an 
original  gift  of  God  to  the  creation,  we  may  well  stop  to  reflect  upon  the  value  of 
this  gift.  It  is  one  of  the  primal  evidences  of  the  benevolence  of  the  Creator. 
This  original  providence  of  perfect  time  for  the  world,  true  to  the  infinitesimal  of 
a  second  through  the  ages  of  ages,  is  evidence  of  the  far-seeing  thoughtfulness  of 
the  Creator.  It  is  the  first  condition  and  means  of  conveyance  of  all  other  good 
gifts  of  God.  Time  is  the  magna  cliarta  of  all  man's  rights  upon  the  earth.  The 
ancient  order  of  the  heavens  is  the  surety  that  our  God  is  not  a  Sovereign  who 
has  made  us  of  His  mere  pleasure,  but  one  who  has  made  all  things  according  to 
His  good  pleasure  ;  and  whether  man's  works  upon  the  earth  be  good  or  evil,  this 
solar  system  which  God  made  shall  keep  true  time  without  variableness,  or  shadow 
of  turning,  until  the  end  comes  and  time  shall  be  no  longer.  II.  Keeping  in  mind 
this  fact  that  time  is  a  gift  of  God  to  the  creation,  reflect,  secondly,  that  what  we 

KNOW   AS    TIME    IS    ONLY    THE    PARTICULAR    RATE    OF    MOTION    TO     WHICH    OUR     LIFE     ON 

THIS  EARTH  HAS  BEEN  ADJUSTED.  For  example,  you  can  easily  imagine  that  the 
human  race  might  have  been  put  to  school  upon  a  planet  of  swifter  revolutions 
than  our  earth,  and  all  our  vital  powers  adapted  to  the  more  rapid  succession  of 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

day  and  night  upon  that  orb — our  pulses  made  to  beat  proportionally  quicker,  and 
the  whole  mechanism  of  life  and  thought  made  to  run  more  swiftly — so  that  the 
same  human  history  might  be  lived  through  upon  that  faster  world.  So,  on  the 
other  hand,  God  might  have  graduated  our  rate  of  living  and  thinking  to  the 
motions  of  a  slower  planet  than  this  earth,  and  still  our  consciousness  of  the 
duration  of  the  years,  our  sense  of  time,  have  remained  precisely  the  same.  Time, 
then,  is  only  a  relative  thing,  the  rate  of  motion  of  the  mechanism ;  nothing  of 
absolute  determination  or  worth  in  itself.  God  has  chosen  this  earth  for  our 
time-keeper,  and  adjusted  our  consciousness  of  life  to  its  rate  of  motion ;  God  has 
determined  the  existing  time-rate  of  human  history  for  us,  out  of  many  possibilities 
of  different  time-rates,  for  reasons  which  He  thought  best,  and  which  we  do  not  know. 
I  may  make  this  idea  of  the  relative  nature  of  time  still  plainer  by  reminding  you 
how  often  in  our  own  experiences  we  escape  from  the  ordinary  course  of  the  world's 
time,  and  in  a  sense  make  our  own  time  for  ourselves,  as  we  hve  in  memory  or  in 
anticipation.  Fear  and  hope,  sorrow  and  joy,  thought  and  action,  when  intense, 
have  a  certain  witchery  and  mastery  over  our  time ;  and  not  the  revolutions  of 
the  earth,  but  the  beatings  of  our  spiritual  pulses,  and  the  life  of  our  hearts,  make 
our  days  short  or  long  upon  the  earth.  We  mortals  are  all  of  us  swept  along  in 
the  flood  of  the  years  ;  yet  it  seems  as  if  we  have  power  in  sudden  upspringings  of 
thought  to  leap,  as  it  were,  out  of  this  stream  of  time  and  change,  and  to  catch 
some  gleam  upon  our  spirits  of  a  higher  element  of  existence,  like  God's  eternal  light, 
and  then  we  fall  back  again  into  the  hurrying  stream  which  is  our  proper  element  of 
existence  now.  All  this  superiority  of  soul  to  time  in  memory,  thought,  and  hope, 
means  that  there  is  something  timeless  and  deathless  within  us — something  of  the 
being  of  the  Eternal  in  the  living  soul  of  man.  You  and  I  are  made  of  the  dust  of 
the  earth  ;  but  within  these  bodies  bound  to  the  earth,  and  destined  to-morrow  to 
return  to  its  dust,  is  a  godlike  something  which  refuses  to  measure  its  life  by  the 
revolutions  of  the  stars  ;  a  something  which  sinks  back  into  its  own  consciousness 
of  being,  and  in  its  brooding  thought  and  love  forgets  the  passing  hours  and 
separations  of  this  mortality  ;  a  mystery  of  spirit  within  man  which  by  its  own 
thought  of  God  and  immortality  proves  itself  to  be  above  the  course  of  nature,  and 
possessed  of  a  Divine  birthright.  First  of  all,  let  us  take  the  help  for  faith  in 
God's  character  which  the  text  was  intended  to  give.  We  wonder  how  God  can 
live  these  long  ages  in  the  calm  blessedness  of  His  presence  around  our  human 
history  of  sin  and  death :  where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ?  But  be  not  ignorant 
of  this  one  thing — God  does  not  measure  His  times  by  our  clocks ;  a  thousand  of 
our  years  is  as  one  day  to  Him.  Everything  depends  upon  the  point  of  view  from 
which  things  are  judged ;  and  God  looks  from  eternity  to  eternity  !  You  look  out 
in  the  morning,  and  see  a  cloud  overhanging  the  top  of  a  mountain.  At  noon  you 
glance  up,  and  the  south  wind  still  leaves  its  vapours  upon  the  mountain.  At 
evening  you  may  notice  that  the  cloud  is  still  there,  though  beginning  to  be  changed 
by  the  setting  sun  into  a  glory.  It  has  been  a  short  day  to  you  in  your  business 
and  your  pleasures.  But  had  you  been  on  the  mountain  waiting  for  the  cloud  to 
lift,  and  hoping  for  a  clear  broad  view,  the  hours  would  have  lengthened,  and  as 
you  watched  the  time  and  the  shiftings  of  the  mists,  the  day  would  have  seemed 
almost  endless.  We  are  now  under  the  cloud — a  very  little  cloud  of  sin  and 
sorrow,  it  may  be — -a  passing  cloud — in  the  large,  bright  universe  of  God !  We  are 
waiting  for  the  hour  of  clear  revelation  ;  and  this  world-age  seems  long.  But  what 
is  it  to  Him  who  inhabiteth  eternity — who  sees  all  around  ?  Again,  these  reflections 
may  serve  to  teach  us  afresh  the  real  value  of  time  to  us.  Time,  I  have  said,  is 
simply  the  rate  of  the  mechanism ;  hence  it  is  worth  in  any  life  simply  what  it  is 
used  for — what  is  worked  out  in  it.  We  should  look  upon  our  lifetime  as  a  means 
towards  an  end — time  the  means,  and  a  Christlike  character,  worth  God's  keeping  in 
His  own  eternity,  the  end  of  our  life  here.  The  one  thing  needful  is  that  the  soul  go 
hence  clothed  in  Christ's  wedding  garment ;  not  how  long  a  time  God  gives  us  to 
dress  our  souls  for  that  perfect  society.  Has  He  not  already  given  us  time  enough  ? 
{Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  God^s  eternity  considered  in  reference  to  the  suajjension 
of  His  promised  •purposes  : — I.   Endeavour   to    illustrate    their    import,   and 

ESTABLISH    THE    TRUTH    OF   THE    PROPOSITION    WHICH    THEY  CONTAIN.       TheSC  WOrds  are 

designed  as  an  answer  to  the  objections  which  irreligious  scoffers  advance  against 
the  certainty  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divi/ie  declarations,  founded  on  its 
long  delay.  1.  EveJy  portion  of  duration  is  something  real,  and  has  a  true  and 
proper  existence ;  but  the  epithets  great  and  small,  when  applied  to  this  (as  well  as 
to   anything  else),  are   merely  comparative.     We  should  consider  fifty  years  as 


CHAP,  in.]  11.  PETER.  161 

forming  a  very  large  portion  of  human  life  ;  but  the  same  number  of  years  in  the 
history  of  an  empire  would  be  justly  considered  small.  Thus  is  the  same  quantity 
either  great  or  small,  as  you  place  it  by  the  side  of  something  much  inferior  to  it 
in  magnitude,  or  much  superior.  2.  Hence  it  results  that  absolute  greatness 
belongs  only  to  what  is  infinite  ;  for  whatever  falls  short  of  this,  however  great  it 
may  appear,  its  supposed  greatness  is  entirely  owing  to  the  incidental  absence  of 
another  object  that  is  greater.  3.  In  duration,  absolute  greatness  belongs  only  to 
eternity.  4.  We  must  then  conceive  that  He  who  has  subsisted  throughout  eternal 
ages ;  who  knows  "  no  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  years " ;  who  possesses 
eternity ;  to  whom  all  its  parts  (if  we  may  be  allowed  so  to  speak)  are  continually 
open,  both  past  and  future  ;  must  have  a  very  diiierent  apprehension  of  that 
inconsiderable  portion  of  it  we  call  time,  from  creatures  who  are  acquainted  with 
no  other.  Nor  let  any  one  object,  and  say  it  must  appear  as  it  is,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  it  appears  to  Him  different  from  what  it  does  to  us. 
No  doubt  it  appears  to  Him  exactly  as  it  is.  His  apprehensions  are,  unquestionably, 
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  things  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  from  thence  that  it  must 
appear  in  the  same  light  as  it  does  to  us.  That  each  portion  of  duration  appears 
to  Him  real,  we  admit :  we  are  not  contending  for  its  being  annihilated  in  His  view. 
Something  it  is,  and  something  ;t  appears,  unquestionably,  in  His  eyes.  The 
measure  by  which  God  estimates  time  is,  consequently,  quite  different  from  that 
which  we  are  compelled  to  apply  in  its  contemplation.  We  measure  one  portion 
of  duration  by  another;  He  measures  time  by  eternity.  How  inconceivably 
different  must  be  the  apprehension  arising  from  these  different  methods  of 
considering  it !  II.  The  use  to  which  the  docteine  of  the  text  may  be 
APP»iED.  1.  It  removes  the  ground  of  objection  against  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
declarations,  arising  from  the  accomplishment  being  long  delayed.  2.  It  accounts 
for  the  peculiar  cast  of  Scripture  language,  when  employed  in  announcing  the 
coming  of  Christ,  and  the  end  of  all  things.  3.  Though  we  cannot  immediately 
change  our  senses,  let  us  endeavour  to  conform  our  ideas  and  convictions  to  the 
dictates  of  Infallible  Wisdom  on  this  subject.  Let  us  consider  the  whole  duration 
of  things  here  as  very  short.  (R.  Hall.)  Heaven's  clock  goes  at  a  different  rate 
from  our  little  timepieces.  {A.  Maclaren.)  God's  calm  vieiv  of  events  in  time  is  one 
of  the  marks  of  Divinity.  For  not  only  is  it  true  that  a  thousand  years  are  to  God 
as  one  day  to  us,  but  it  is  also  true,  as  St.  Peter  tells  us,  that  "  one  day  is  with  the 
Lord  as  a  thousand  years  "  are  with  us.  We  know  what  the  effect  of  a  thousand 
years  past  (for  of  a  thousand  years  to  come  we  cannot  know  the  effect)  is  upon  the 
human  mind.  We  regard  things  that  happened  a  thousand  years  ago  very  calmly, 
without  any  of  the  passion  which  thrilled  the  breasts  of  the  men  who  hved  when  the 
events  we  now  read  of  in  history  were  taking  place.  That  is  the  way  in  which  God 
regards  events  the  very  day  they  happen.  They  are  to  Him  as  if  they  had 
happened  a  thousand  years  ago  ;  so  calm  is  the  Divine  temper,  so  far  from  the 
impatience  and  haste  characteristic  of  us  men  who  live  for  threescore  years  and 
ten.  This  comes  of  His  being  the  Everlasting  One.  Yet,  strange  to  say,  while  God 
takes  things  so  calmly  and  never  hurries.  He  at  the  same  time  never  forgets.  A  thou- 
sand years  are  to  Him  as  one  day  to  ,us.  He  is  as  much  in  earnest  in  His  purpose  at 
the  end  of  a  millenium  as  we  are  with  ours  the  day  we  form  it.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 
The  Lord  is  not  slack  .  .  .  but  is  long-suffering. — Reasons  why  God  delays  the 
punishments  of  wicked  men : — I.  That  men  may  be  brought  to  a  sense  of  their 
CONDITION,  and  led  to  use  those  methods  which  may  serve  to  avert  God's  anger. 

II.  That  in  many  cases  ready  punishment  cannot  be  inflicted  on  bad  men  without 
LAYING  A  considerable  SHARE  OF  IT  ON  THE  GOOD,  and  therefore  God  spares  them  for 
the  present  that  the  righteous  may  not  be  involved  in  the  calamities  of  the  wicked. 

III.  The    AGENCY   OF   ILL   MEN    MAY    BE    MADE    USE    OF    IN    ORDER    TO    BRING  ABOUT  MANY 

GREAT  DESIGNS  OF  PROVIDENCE,  and,  in  particular,  the  delays  of  vengeance  on  some 
ill  men  may  serve  for  the  chastisement  of  others.     IV.  But  it  is  much  one,  with 

EESPECT    TO    the    DiVINE     BeING,    WHEJJ     PUNISHMENT     IS     INFLICTED     ON     ILL     MEN    IF 

IT  BE  INFLICTED  AT  ALL :  One  day  is  with  Him  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand 
years  as  one  day.  Nor  can  the  sinner,  if  he  reflects,  take  any  great  satisfaction  in 
thinking  that  those  punishments  are  distant  which  are  yet  certain.     V.  That  the 

PRESENT  delays  OF  VENGEANCE,  IF  THEY  DO  NOT  WORK  THEIR  PROPER  EFFECTS  AND  LEAD 
MEN    TO    THAT    REPENTANCE    THEY   WERE    INTENDED    TO    PRODUCE,    WILL    BUT   AGGRAVATE 

THEIR  RUIN.     (Bp.  John  Conybeare.)         God's  forbearance  to  sinners  : — I.  I  am  to 

OrVE  SOME  ACCOUNT  AND    TO   ASSIGN    SOME   REASONS    OF    God's   FORBEARANCE  TO  SINNERS. 

1.  That  the  delay  bears  no  proportion  either  to  the  eternity  of  His  own  or  to  the 

40 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir.  , 

future  continuance  of  our  being.     2.  God  never  intended  this  world  for  the  place  of 
our  final  recompense,  and  therefore  is  the  less  concerned  to  interpose  with  frequency 
for  the  immediate  punishment  of  the  sinner.     3.  We  may  presume  it  designed  in 
much  mercy  to  sinners  that  He  does  not  catch  at  every  advantage.   4.  It  is  designed 
to  lead  us  to  repentance.     There  are  critical  junctures  in  religion,  as  well  as  in  Ufa 
and  fortune.     II.  The  loxg-suffeking  of  God  is  no  reason  to  believe  He  will. 
NEVEB  TAKE  VENGEANCE.     The  reasons  which  account  for  His  forbearance  destroy 
that  inference.     1.  If  the  end  of  the  world  and  the  dissolution  of  all  things  be  the 
vengeance  expected,  it  was  no  way  proper  to  raise  so  vast  a  fabric  except  it  had 
been  designed  for  some  ages'  continuance.     2.  For  if  sin  could  never  be  committed 
without  immediate  vengeance  closely  pursuing  it,  there  could  be  no  proper  founda- 
tion of  reward  to  our  obedience.   3.  Whatever  continuance  the  world  may  seem  made 
for,  yet  the  lives  of  particular  men  are  short  and  uncertain.     III.  The  delay  of 
His  vengeance  can  be  no  just  eeason  for  our  continuance  in  sin.     It  does  not 
lessen  our  danger ;  it  gives  no  cplour  to  the  notion  that  God  is  an  unconcerned 
spectator  of  wickedness.     But  now  His  present  forbearance  makes  proof  that  He 
wiU  hereafter  pursue  the  wicked  with  His  vengeance.     IV.  His  long-suffering  is 
much  rather  an  argument  to  us  to  forsake  sin,  and  to  proceed  henceforward 
IN  ALL  holy  obedience.    1.  It  is  SO  in  poiut  of  gratitude,  because  we  have  seen  that  it 
is  an  effect  of  His  mercy.     2.  But  if  the  motives  of  gratitude  fail  of  persuading  us, 
we  should  at  least  consider  that  our  interest  is  very  deeply  concerned  in  this  matter. 
For  it  is  a  very  great  aggravation  to  turn  the  means  of  grace  into  occasions  of  sin. 
{N.  Marshall,  D.D.)         The  long -suffering  of  God  a  proof  of  His  poioer  : — Suppose 
I  were  one  of   those  scoffers,   what  should   I  be  most  inclined  to   doubt  from 
observing  how  God's  threatenings  did  not  take  effect?   I  suppose  the  power  of  God. 
I  should  be  inclined  to  say,  "  God  has  threatened  what  He  is  not  able  to  perform  ; 
hence,  the  reason  why  sun,  moon,  and  stars  still  rise  and  set  in  their  appointed 
order."     Well,  if  this  were  my  way  of  arguing,  would  it  be  any  answer  to  me  to 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward."     Yes,  indeed  it  would.     There  is  ho 
proof  of  the  Divine  power  so  great  as  the  Divine  long-suffering.     How  beautifully 
does  one  of  our  collects  express  this  truth !   "  0  God,  who  declarest  Thine  almighty 
power  most  chiefly  in  showing  mercy  and  pity."    Now,  before  beginning  to  prove  to 
you  that  long-suffering  is  a  great  proof  of  the  power  of  God,  we  would  allow  this 
idea  to  be  at  variance  with  that  most  commonly  entertained.     We  have  only  to 
make  mention  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  thoughts  are  instantly  far  away  amid 
the  fields  of  immensity,  busying  themselves  with  accumulations  of  the  workings  of 
Almightiness — star  upon  star,  and  system  upon  system.     And,  from  the  fact  of  crea- 
tion, we  pass  onward  to  that  of  preservation :  we  tell  you  that  the  complicated 
machinery  of  the  universe  is  superintended  and  upheld  by  God.   Far  be  it  from  us  to 
imply  that  such  a  mode  of  demonstrating  the  power  of  God  is  other  than  correct. 
But  it  would  appear  to  be  possible,  that  whilst  searching  through  the  universe  for 
evidence  of  the  power  of  God,  we  may  pass  by  the  more  signal  demonstration  lying 
individually  in  ourselves.     We  speak  not  of  the  testimony  which  is  undoubtedly 
given  by  the  construction  of  our  bodies,  and  by  the  surprising  manner  in  which 
the  material  incloses  the  immaterial.     But  there  may  be  evidence  which  is  still 
more  overlooked,  and  that,  too,  an  evidence  which  each  may  fetch  from  his  own 
experience   and  his  own  habits.     Towards  each  transgressor  there  has  been   an 
exercise  of  long-suffering  on  the  part  of  the  Almighty;   so  that  if   the  greatest 
demonstration  of  God's  power  be  God's  long-suffering,  then  each  of  us  may  find  in 
himself  that  great  demonstration  in  all  its  completeness.     With  an  hatred  of  sin 
which  outruns  our  conception,  and  much  more  our  imitation,  God  is  looking  down 
on  every  misdoing  by  which  the  earth  is  polluted.   He  is  present  at  the  perpetration 
of  each  species  of  crime— standing  by  the  blasphemer  whilst  pouring  out  his  curses, 
and  by  the  murderer  whilst  bearing  down  on  his  victim.     If  this  fact  be  pondered,  it 
must  always  startle  us.     And  yet  He  strikes  not.     We  just  ask  you  to  imagine  a 
tender-hearted  man  standing  by  whilst  some  monster  of    his  species  was  foully 
ill-treating  some  fellow-creature  or  animal.     Suppose  him  possessed  of  the  most 
perfect  ability  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  cruelty,  and  awarding  due  punishment.    The 
first  impulse  would  be  to  exercise  this  ability.     And  if,  in  place  of  yielding  to  the 
impulse,  he  should  reflect  within  himself— If  I  spare  this  guilty  one  awhile,  if  I 
visit  not  on  him,  on  the  instant,  his  iniquity,  he  may  possibly  repent— why  we  do 
not  deny  that,  by  a  great  effort,  reflection  might  carry  over  the  impulse,  and  the 
man  might  pass  on  in  the  hope  of  future  amendment,  resolved  to  administer  no 
present  correction.     We  allow  that   there  is  no  actual  impossibility  against  the 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  163 

exercise  of  such  forbearance.  But  we  think  you  will  all  agree  that  a  vast  moral 
effort  would  be  needed  for  the  repressing  his  feelings.  Long-suffering  is  power 
over  one's  self.  If,  then,  it  be  reverent  so  to  speak,  God's  long-suffering  is  power 
over  Himself.  And  assuredly  God's  power  over  Himself  must  be  greater  than  the 
power  which  He  puts  forth  when  He  deals  with  what  is  material  and  finite.  You 
may  read  of  such  instances  as  of  a  man  in  the  hardihood  of  his  Atheism  challenging, 
so  to  speak,  the  Deity  to  prove  His  existence  by  striking  him  to  the  earth.  "  If 
there  be  a  God,  let  Him  show  Himself,  by  smiting  me.  His  denier."  Now  you  can 
hardly  picture  to  yourselves  a  Being  exercising  over  Himself  so  much  control  as 
that,  with  all  the  apparatus  of  fiery  reply  at  His  disposal.  He  should  not  answer  the 
challenge  by  levelliiig  him  who  utters  it  with  the  ground.  Can  you  measure  to  me 
the  effort  which  it  would  be  to  the  Creator  to  keep  back  the  thunderbolt  and  chain 
up  the  lightning  ?  Yet  the  Atheist  is  allowed  to  depart  unscathed.  What  lesson 
does  the  beUever  in  God  derive  from  this  absence  of  all  anger.  He  learns  God's 
might  a  hundredfold  more  from  the  unbroken  silence  of  the  firmament  than  he 
would  do  from  the  hoarse  tones  of  vengeance  rushing  down  to  the  destruction  of 
the  rebel.  The  Atheist  overthrown  is  as  nothing  to  the  exhibition  of  the  Atheist 
spared.  We  shall  probably  arrive  at  right  apprehensions  of  God's  long-suffering 
as  connected  with  God's  other  attributes,  if  we  carefully  review  two  simple  facts. 
The  first  is  that  God  can  punish  every  sin  ;  the  second,  that  God  can  pardon  every 
sin.  It  is  essential  to  the  long-suffering  of  God  that  each  of  these  assertions  should, 
in  the  largest  sense,  hold  good.  Unless  there  be  the  power  of  punishing,  there  can 
be  no  long-suffering ;  for  long-suffering  necessarily  pre-supposes  that  the  Being,  who 
might  on  the  instant  take  vengeance,  passes  over  for  a  while  the  iniquity.  On  the 
other  hand,  unless  God  can  pardon  every  sin,  what  is  there  in  His  long-suffering  ? 
We  can  have  no  idea  of  long-suffering  except  as  exhibited  in  our  text — that  it  is 
bearing  with  the  offender  in  order  that,  time  being  given  him  to  consider  his  ways, 
he  may  yet  by  repentance  turn  away  punishment.  If  we  can  satisfactorily  show 
that  God  is  pre-eminently  powerful,  inasmuch  as  He  is  both  the  punisher  and  the 
pardoner  of  sin,  we  shall  have  established  the  point  under  debate — that  God's  long- 
suffering  is  a  great  measure  of  His  power.  You  wiU  readily  admit  that  it  is  proving 
God  powerful  to  prove  Him  superior  to  every  creature,  so  that  were  the  whole 
universe  banded  against  Him,  it  would  have  no  power  in  trenching  upon  His 
sovereignty.  But  how  can  we  more  thoroughly  assure  ourselves  of  God's  superiority 
to  every  creature  than  by  ascertaining  that  over  every  creature  who  swerves  from 
obedience  God  can  exercise  the  office  of  avenger.  Whoever  the  creature  who 
apostatises  from  God,  whether  standing  high  or  low  in  the  scale  of  intelligence, 
beyond  aU  question  the  power  of  God  can  reach  to  restrain  or  crush  this  creature. 
It  may  indeed  be  that  the  creature  is  permitted  to  go  on  in  rebellion  ;  and  thus  no 
direct  evidence  is  given  of  the  supremacy  of  God.  Wherein,  then,  would  be  the 
proof  of  God's  power?  Simply  in  God's  long-suffering.  Long-suffering  is  the 
greatest  exhibition  of  power  on  this  side  the  day  of  judgment.  It  is  our  evidence 
that  God  now  possesses  all  that  God  shall  then  exercise.  And  when  I  am  told  that 
God  is  long-suffering,  and  no  limitations  are  placed  on  the  attribute,  you  bring 
before  me  a  picture  as  overwhelming  in  its  details  as  stupendous  in  its  outlines.  I 
see  at  once  that  it  God  can  be  long-suffering,  then  God  can  punish  every  sin.  He 
could  not  be  long-suffering  unless  He  could  punish ;  He  could  not  punish  unless  He 
were  supreme.  And  then  observe,  secondly,  that  God  can  pardon  every  sin.  Of  all 
extraordinary  truths,  perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  is  that  sin  can  be  forgiven. 
It  may  be  a  bold  thing  to  say ;  but  if  you  examine  carefully,  you  will  see  that  there 
is  a  strong  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  long-suffering  is  not  natural  to  God. 
For  was  God  long-suffering  without  effort  ?  Could  He  be  long-suffering  without 
a  preparation  ?  He  could  be  long-suffering  only  as  He  had  resolved  to  give  up  His 
well-beloved  Son  to  the  fiercest  agonies  and  the  foulest  wrongs.  And  when  I  think 
of  the  difference  between  God,  the  Creator  of  worlds,  and  God,  the  Pardoner  of  sin, 
the  one  done  without  an  effort,  and  the  other  demanding  an  instrumentality  nobly 
sublime ;  the  one  effected  by  a  word,  the  other  wrought  out  in  agony  and  blood 
— oh !  the  world  created  is  as  nothing  to  the  sin  blotted  out !  That  God  can 
pardon  is  the  very  summit  of  what  is  wonderful ;  and,  therefore,  0  Lord,  do  I 
most  know  Thee,  the  Omnipotent,  when  I  behold  in  Thee,  the  Long-sufferer! 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  patience  of  God : — I.  Consider  the  patience  and  long- 
suffering  OF  God  towards  mankind,  as  it  is  an  attribute  and  perfection  of  the 
Divine  nature  :  "  God  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward."  1.  The  patience  of  God  is 
His  goodness  to  sinners  in  deferring  the  punishment  due  to  them  for  their  sins ; 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  the  moderating  as  well  as  the  deferring  of  the  punishment  due  to  sin  is  an 
instance  likewise  of  God's  patience ;  and  not  only  the  deferring  and  moderating  of 
temporal  punishment,  but  the  adjourning  of  the  eternal  misery  of  simiers  is  a 
principal  instance  of  God's  patience ;  so  that  the  patience  of  God  takes  in  all  that 
space  of  repentance  which  God  affords  to  sinners  in  this  life — nay,  all  temporal  judg- 
ments and  afflictions  which  befall  sinners.  2.  It  is  not  necessarily  due  to  us,  but 
it  is  due  to  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  it  is  a  principal  branch  of  God's 
goodness,  which  is  the  most  glorious  perfection  of  all  other;  and  therefore  we 
always  find  it  in  Scripture  in  the  company  of  God's  milder  attributes.  3.  Give 
some  proof  of  the  great  patience  and  long-suffering  of  God  to  mankind.  And 
this  will  evidently  appear  if  we  consider  these  two  things — 1.  How  men  deal  with 
God.  Every  day  we  highly  provoke  Him  ;  we  grieve  and  weary  Him  with  our 
iniquities  (Isa.  xliii.  24).  2.  The  patience  of  God  will  farther  appear  if  we  con- 
sider how,  notwithstanding  all  this,  God  deals  with  us.  He  is  patient  to  the 
whole  world.  He  "  prevents  us  daily  with  the  blessing  "  of  His  goodness,  prolonging 
our  lives  and  vouchsafing  many  favours  to  us.  But  the  patience  of  God  will  more 
illustriously  appear  if  we  consider  these  following  particulars — (1)  That  God  is 
not  obliged  to  spare  and  forbear  us  at  all.  (2)  That  God  spares  us  when  it  is  in  His 
power  so  easily  to  ruin  us.  (3)  That  God  exerciseth  this  patience  even  when  we 
are  challenging  His  justice  to  punish  us  and  provoking  His  power  to  destroy  us. 
(4)  That  He  is  so  very  slow  and  unwilling  to  punish  and  to  inflict  His  judgments 
upon  us.  (rt)  God's  unwillingness  to  punish  appears  in  that  He  labours  to  prevent 
punishment ;  and  that  He  may  effectually  do  this  He  endeavours  to  prevent  sin, 
the  meritorious  cause  of  God's  judgments  ;  to  this  end  He  hath  threatened  it  with 
severe  punishments  that  men  may  fear  to  offend,  (b)  He  is  long  before  He  goes 
about  this  work.  Judgment  is,  in  Scripture,  called  "His  strange  work";  as  if 
He  were  not  acquainted  with  it  and  hardly  knew  how  to  go  about  it  on  the  sudden 
(Deut.  xxxii.  41).  (c)  When  He  goes  about  this  work  He  does  it  with  much 
reluctance  (Hosea  xi.  8).  He  is  represented  as  making  many  essays  and  offers 
before  He  came  to  it  (Psa.  cvi.  26).  God  withholds  His  judgments  till  He  is  weary 
of  holding  in,  as  the  expression  is  (Jer.  vi.  11),  until  He  can  forbear  no  longer  (Jer. 
xliv.  22).  (d)  God  is  easily  prevailed  upon  not  to  punish,  as  in  the  case  of  Nineveh. 
With  what  joy  does  He  tell  the  prophet  the  news  of  Ahab's  humiliation !  (e)  When 
He  punisheth  He  does  it  very  seldom  rigorously  and  to  extremity,  not  so  much  as 
we  deserve  (Psa.  ciii.  10).  (f)  After  He  hath  begun  to  punish,  and  is  engaged  in 
the  work.  He  is  not  hard  to  be  taken  off  (2  Sam.  xxiv.).  Nay,  so  ready  is  God  to 
be  taken  off  from  this  work,  that  He  sets  a  high  value  upon  those  who  stand  in  the 
gap  to  turn  away  His  wrath  (Numb.  xxv.  11-13).  5.  The  patience  of  God  will 
yet  appear  if  we  consider  some  eminent  instances  of  it.  His  forbearance  is  so 
great  that  He  hath  been  complained  of  for  it  by  His  own  servants.  Job,  who  was 
so  patient  a  man  himself,  thought  much  at  it  (Job.  xxi.  7,  8).  Jonah  chaUengeth 
God  for  it  (Job  iv.  2).  II.  That  the  patience  of  God  and  the  delay  of  judgment 
IS  NO  ground  why  sinners  should  hope  fob  impunity  :  "  God  is  not  slack  concerning 
His  promise  as  some  men  count  slackness."  HI.  The  true  reason  of  God's  patience 
AND  long-suffering  TO  MANKIND :  "  He  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  This  is  the  primary 
end  of  God's  patience  to  sinners;  and  if  He  fail  of  this  end  through  our 
impenitency  He  hath  other  ends  which  He  will  infallibly  attain  ;  He  will  hereby 
glorify  the  riches  of  His  mercy  and  vindicate  the  righteousness  of  His  justice  ;  for 
God  does  not  lose  the  glory  of  His  patience,  though  we  lose  the  benefit  of  it, 
and  He  will  make  it  subservient    to   His  justice   one  way  or  other.      Lessons : 

1.  That  nothing  is   more  provoking  to   God  than  the   abuse   of   His  patience. 

2.  That  the  patience  of  God  will  have  an  end.  3.  That  nothing  will  more 
hasten  and  aggravate  our  ruin  than  the  abuse  of  God's  patience.  (Abp.  Tillotson.) 
Mcm's  external  universe  as  maintained  by  God  for  a  moral  purpose : — I.  That  man's 
external  univer/se  IS  MAINTAINED  BY  GoD.  1.  Howcver  loug  He  may  coutinue  to 
uphold  it,  He  does  not  overlook  the  claims  of  His  justice.  There  are  before  Him 
"  a  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men."  2.  However  long  He  may 
continue  to  uphold  it,  duration  is  nothing  to  Him.  "  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as 
a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  He  is  not  limited  to  time  as 
we  are.  3.  However  long  He  may  continue  to  uphold  it.  He  does  not  forget  His 
promise.  "  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  His  promise,  as  some  men  count  slack- 
ness." 4.  However  long  He  may  continue  to  uphold  it,  His  forbearance  is  manifest 
through  the  whole.     He  "  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward."    II.  That  man's  external 


^AP.  III.]  II.- PETER.  165 

^ , — _^     —  -    —   ^ 

UNIVERSE    IS   MAINTAINED   BY   GoD   FOR   A    MORAL   PURPOSE.         "  Not    willing    that    any 

*hould  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  What  is  the  purpose  ? 
Why  is  this  world  kept  in  existence  for  so  many  ages  ?  Is  it  that  men  might 
luxuriate  amidst  animal  gratifications,  revel  amidst  the  elements  which  minister  to 
the  senses,  and  pander  to  the  passions  ?  Is  it  that  they  might  train  the  intellect  to 
think,  and  to  fill  the  mind  with  knowledge  ?  Not  even  this.  It  is  the  moral  restora- 
tion of  man.     "  That  none  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance." 

1.  This  moral  restoration  of  man  requires  "  repentance."  2.  This  moral  restoration 
of  man  is  according  to  the  Divine  will.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God  true  to  His  pur- 
pose .-—Sometimes  in  architecture  and  sculpture  designs  are  formed  as  an  exercise 
of  skill,  without  any  intention  of  embodying  them  in  work.  And  sometimes 
politicians  frame  schemes  which  are  intended  only  for  Utopia,  and  for  the  carrying 
out  of  which  no  attempt  will  be  made.  But  God's  design  is  for  execution  and  His 
scheme  for  embodiment.  A  purpose  to  work  out  His  design  has  firm  hold  of  every 
portion  and  feature  of  that  design.  (S.  Martin.)  That  all  should  come  to 
repentance. — The  rules  and  directions  for  the  right  performing  the  duty  of  repent- 
ance : — 1.  The  first  is  this,  implore  repentance  at  the  hands  of  God  (2  Tim.  ii.  25). 

2.  Have  due  regard  to  the  sacred  Word.  Suppose  we  were  travelling  in  the  dark, 
what  could  we  do  better  in  such  a  case  than  procure  a  light  to  guide  us  ?  Naturally 
we  are  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  mists  of  error,  and  want  to  be  illuminated 
in  the  right  way  (Psa.  cxix.  105  ;  2  Pet.  i.  19).  And  that  the  Holy  Scripture  has  a 
peculiar  efficacy  to  purify  from  sin,  which  is  done  by  repentance,  is  evident  (Psa. 
cxix.  9).  3.  Consider  the  nature  of  God.  As  His  word  rightly  heard,  so  His  nature 
duly  contemplated,  will  be  not  only  a  mighty  antidote  against  sin,  but  as  strong 
an  inducement  to  repentance;-  Now  the  nature  of  God  we  may  best  learn  from  His 
glorious  name  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).  God  in  His  nature  is  holy,  and  even  essentially 
and  infinitely  holy  (Isa.  Ix.  3).  And  can  we  endure  to  rest  in  wilful  sin  when  it 
is  an  evil  abominable  to  God,  and  makes  us  as  odious  to  Him  as  it  is  in  its  own 
nature  ?  Eeflect  then  seriously  again,  that  He  is  just  too.  And  as  His  perfect 
purity  sets  Him  against  sinners,  so  His  absolute  justice  inclines  and  constrains  Him 
to  punish  all  that  persist  in  it.  And  then  we  may  consider  further  that  He  is 
powerful  too,  and  armed  with  omnipotence.  And  so  He  is  able  to  punish  us  (Psa. 
Ixxvi.  7).  4.  Place  the  promise  and  assurance  of  pardon  before  your  eyes  (Ezek. 
xviii.  30;  Luke  xxiv.  47  ;  Acts  iii.  19,  v.  31).  5.  Fix  your  thoughts  upon  Christ's 
sufferings.  They  were  various,  sharp,  and  terrible  ;  but  all  for  our  sins.  {R. 
Warren,  D.D.)       God's  willingness  to  pardon : — I.  That  God  is  "  not  willing  that 

ANY  SHOULD  PERISH,"  APPEARS  BY  HiS  OWN  POSITIVE  DECLARATIONS.  II.  ThaT  GoD 
"  IS  UNWILLING  THAT  ANY  SHOULD  PERISH,"  IS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  INVITATIONS  WITH 
WHICH  THE  SACRED  SCRIPTURES  ABOUND.  III.  ThE  SAME  TRUTH  IS  STILL  FURTHER 
ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  ENCOURAGEMENT  GOD  EVERYWHERE  PRESENTS  TO  THOSE  WHO  SHOW 
AN  INCLINATION  TO  RETURN.  IV.  ThE  SAME  TRUTH  IS  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  THREATEN- 
INGS  AND  WARNINGS  WHICH  ARE  GIVEN  TO  PERSONS  AND  NATIONS  BEFORE  DESTRUCTION 
COMES  ON  THEM.  V.  ThE  DELAY  OF  JUDGMENT  ILLUSTRATES  MY  TEXT.  VI.  ThE  MOST 
NOTORIOUS  CHARACTERS  ARE  SPECIFIED  IN  THE  OFFERS  AND  INVITATIONS  OF  MERCY  WHICH 
WE  FIND  IN  SACRED  SCKIPTURE.  VII.  ThE  DEATH  OF  ChRIST  IS  AN  ILLUSTRATION  OP 
THE  PROPOSITION  IN  THE  TEXT.       VIH.  "ThE  MEANS  EMPLOYED  TO  KEEP    UP    THE    GOSPEL 

OP  Christ  before  the  world  and  the  Church  declares  the  same  truth.     IX.  The 

PAINS  TAKEN  TO  REMOVE  DISTRUST  PROVE  THAT  GoD  IS  "  NOT  WILLING  THAT  ANY  SHOULD 

PERISH."  He  not  only  gives  us  His  declaration  that  He  is  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  He  gives  us  His  oath.  X.  The  proposition  contained  in  the  text 
IS  illustrated  by  many  examples  :  Manasseh.  Thief  on  cross.  (W.  Freeland, 
LL.D.)  God's  unwillingness  : — I.  What  does  the  apostle  mean  here  by  the  expres- 
sion "  PERISH  "  ?  What  is  it  to  perish  ?  This  will  be  most  appropriately  answered 
in  the  words  of  Holy  Scripture.  Paul  called  it  "  Being  punished  with  everlasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power" 
(2  Thess.  i.  9).  "Sudden  destruction"  (1  Thess.  v.  3).  "Swift  destruction" 
(chap.  ii.  1).  "  The  vengeance  of  eternal  fire  "  (Jude  7).  II.  What  reasons  have  we 
to  conclude  that  any  will  thus  perish  ?     1.  Fallen  angels  have  perished  (Jude  6). 

2.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  have  "suffered  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire  "  (ibid.  7). 

3.  Other  men  deserve  to  perish.  "  The  Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin."  4. 
That  part  of  the  punishment  which  consists  in  natural  death  is  daily  being  inflicted 
before  our  eyes.  5.  God  has  said  that  some  characters  shall  perish.  "  He  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  III.  But  who  are  thus  in  danger  ?  1.  "  Despisers  " 
(Acts  xiii.  41).     2.  Profane  persons,  and  aU  who  "  forget  God  "  (Psa.  ix.  17).     3. 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

All  the  impenitent  (Luke  xiii.  5).  4.  All  unbelievers  (Mark  xvi.  16).  IV.  How  are 
we  to  understand  the  expression  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish  ?  Hell 
does  not  exist  without  His  permission  !  Death  is  His  messenger  !  The  judgment 
of  the  great  day  will  be  held  by  His  appointment !  But  then — 1.  God  will  not  punish 
without  occasion.  Nor  2.  Till  the  guilt  of  man  has  rendered  it  necessary.  Nor  3. 
Without  having  provided  a  remedy  : — the  best  possible  remedy.  Nor  4.  Without 
having  authorised  the  publication  of  that  remedy.  Nor  5.  Without  having  implored 
men  to  accept  it.  Nor  6.  Without  having  given  space  for  repentance.  7.  Nor  will 
He  inflict  eternal  judgment  on  one  soul  which  has  not  proved  its  final  enmity  to 
Him,  to  truth,  to  holiness.  V.  What  evidences  have  we  that  God  is  "  not  willing 
THAT  ANT  SHOULD  THUS  PEEisH "  ?  1.  The  evidcncc  arising  from  His  character. 
2.  From  His  word.  3.  From  His  oath  (John  iii.  16).  4.  From  the  gift  of  His 
Holy  Spirit.  5.  From  the  revelation  of  His  truth.  6.  From  the  exaltation  of 
Christ  as  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to  give  repentance.  7.  From  the  promise  of 
the  personal  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit — to  them  that  ask  it.  8.  From  every  instance 
of  true  repentance  which  has  occurred.  9.  From  sparing  mercy  from  day 
to  day.  10.  From  warnings,  exhortations,  invitations,  directions,  promises,  &c., 
without  number.  VI.  What  is  the  imperative  and  only  alternative  that  men  may 
not  perish  ?    We  answer,  "  repentance."     {The  Evangelist.) 

Ver.  10.    The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief. — The  day  of  the  Lord : — I. 
The  text  first  points  us  to  a  period  advancing  rapidly  upon  us,  in  the  future  ;  and 

as  such  DLFEEES  FEOM  ANY  OTHEK  WHICH  MAY  HAVE  MAEKED  AN  EPOCH  IN  THE  SUCCES- 
SION OF  AGES  SINCE  THE  woELD  BEGAN.  1.  The  bright  display  of  the  Lord's  attributes 
which  will  then  be  made.  2.  The  affairs  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom  of  grace,  the 
reign  of  Christ,  as  such,  will  then  be  completed.  3.  The  exhibition  of  His  equity, 
which  will  then  be  made  in  the  regular  dispensations  of  His  providence  among  men. 
4.  The  Lord  will  then  receive  in  and  from  His  people  glory  and  renown.     II.  The 

DECLAEATIONS  MADE  IN  THE  TEXT  CONCEENING  ITS  COMING.       1.    The  Certainty  of    it.       2. 

The  sudden  and  unexpected  manner  of  its  approach.  (1)  To  excite  men  to  watch 
for  the  event.  (2)  The  knowledge  of  the  exact  time  might  alarm  men,  and  prevent 
attendance  to  the  present  duties  of  life.  IH.  Some  of  the  occueeences  of  the  day 
OF  THE  LoED.     {J.  Thompson  Smith.)  Preparation  for  death  aiid  judgment : — I. 

The  period  refeeeed  to.  There  have  been  memorable  days  in  the  history  of  the 
world  and  in  the  histories  of  nations.  1.  On  that  day  the  dispensation  of  mercy  will 
close.  2.  It  will  be  the  day  of  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Believer,  it 
will  be  the  consummation  of  thy  bliss  to  have  a  perfect  sight  of  •Christ  "  without  a 
veil  between,"  and  to  bear  an  exact  conformity  to  His  likeness.  But  0  sinner ! 
how  wilt  thou  meet  His  frown  ?  3.  It  will  be  the  day  of  the  Lord's  especial  honour. 
4.  It  is  the  day  on  which  all  His  declarations  will  be  fulfilled  and  verified — His 
declarations  of  mercy  to  His  people  and  His  threatenings  of  destruction  to  the 
impenitent  and  unbelieving.  H.  The  duties  to  m'hich  its  expected  coming  calls 
vs.  1.  We  should  watch  against  a  spirit  of  slothfulness  and  indifference.  2.  We 
should  anxiously  desire  to  be  found  ready  whenever  that  day  may  come.  (1)  Eecon- 
ciliation  with  God  is  necessary.  (2)  A  close  and  humble  walk  with  God  is  requisite. 
(3)  Frequent  meditation  on  the  consequences  of  that  day  will  prepare  us  for  its 
coming.  III.  Motives  to  lead  us  to  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  1.  The 
uncertainty  of  the  time  when  this  day  shall  come.  2.  The  danger  and  ruin  result- 
ing from  the  want  of  preparation  for  its  coming.  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  The 
heavens  shaU  pass  away  with  a  great  noise. — The  destruction  of  the  universe  : — 1. 
The  destruction  of  the  universe  affords  us  a  picture  of  the  power  of  our  Judge. 
How  powerful  is  this  Judge  !  Who  can  resist  His  will  ?  2.  The  conflagration  of  the 
universe  affords  us  a  picture  of  the  horrors  of  vice.  Behold  how  far  God  carries 
His  resentment  against  sin.  Heavens,  earth,  elements,  are  ye  guilty?  But,  if  ye  be 
treated  with  so  much  rigour  for  having  been  the  unconscious  instruments  of  the 
crime,  what  must  the  condition  of  the  criminal  be?  3.  In  the  burning  of  the 
universe  wo  find  a  representation  of  the  vanity  of  the  present  world.  What  is  this 
world  which  fascinates  our  eyes?  It  is  a  funeral  pile  that  already  begins  to  burn, 
and  will  soon  be  entirely  consumed.  The  hope  of  an  imaginary  immortality  hath 
been  able  to  support  some  men  against  the  fear  of  a  real  death.  The  idea  of 
existing  in  the  minds  of  those  who  exist  after  them  hath,  in  some  sort,  comforted 
them  under  the  miserable  thought  of  being  no  more.  Hence  pompous  buildings, 
hence  rich  monuments,  and  vainglorious  titles  inscribed  on  marble  and  brass.  But 
behold  the  dissolution  of  all  those  bonds,  and  the  memory  of  all  that  is  fastened  to 


CHAP,  m.]  II.  PETER.  167 

the  world  will  vanish  with  the  world.  4.  The  conflagration  of  the  universe  fur- 
nisheth  a  description  of  the  world  to  come.  Ye  often  hear  us  declaim  on  the 
nothingness  of  earthly  things.  How  is  it  that  God,  who  hath  resolved  to  render  us 
one  day  happy,  doth  not  allow  us  to  continue  in  this  world,  and  content  Himself 
with  uniting  all  happy  circumstances  in  our  favour  ?  Ah !  a  life  formed  on  this 
plan  might  indeed  answer  the  ideas  of  happiness  which  finite  geniuses  form,  but 
such  a  plan  cannot  even  approach  the  designs  of  an  infinite  God.  A  life  formed 
on  this  plan  might  indeed  exhaust  a  terrestrial  love,  but  it  could  never  reach  the 
love  of  an  infinite  God.  To  accomplish  this  love  there  must  be  another  world ; 
there  must  be  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth ;  there  must  be  objects  far  more  grand. 
5.  Finally,  the  destruction  of  the  universe  displays  the  excellence  of  piety.  Oh  that 
I  could  represent  the  behever  amidst  fires,  winds,  tempests,  the  confusion  of  all 
nature,  content,  peaceable,  unalterable !  (J.  Saurin.)  The  earth  also  .  .  .  shall 
be  burned  up. — The  world  on  fire  : — I.  The  last  geneeal  conflagration.  In  this 
Epistle  there  is  one  truth  very  plainly  taught,  namely,  that  this  present  world  is  to 
be  consumed  by  fire.  We  learn  also  that  this  conflagration  will  take  place  in  con- 
nection with  the  judgment,  for  "the  heavens  and  the  earth  which  now  are,  are  kept 
in  store,  reserved  unto  fire,  against  the  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly 
men."  We  gather  also  from  our  text  that  this  fii-e  will  burn  up  all  the  works  existing 
upon  the  earth — everything  which  man  has  constructed  shall  perish.  Chemists  tell 
us  that  the  great  noise  which  Peter  speaks  of  would  certainly  accompany  such  a 
combustion.  The  whole  world  shall  become  one  molten  mass  again,  and  this 
terrestrial  firmament  shall  cease  to  be.  We  may  here  note  that  the  prophecy  that 
the  earth  will  thus  be  consumed  with  fervent  heat  is  readily  to  be  beheved,  not  only 
because  God  says  it,  but  because  there  are  evidently  the  means  at  hand  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  prophecy.  Pliny  was  wont  to  say  that  it  was  a  miracle  that 
the  world  escaped  burning  for  a  single  day,  and  I  do  not  wonder  at  the  remark, 
considering  the  character  of  the  district  in  which  he  spent  much  of  his  time.  In 
visiting  the  country  around  Naples  the  same  thought  constantly  occurred  to  me. 
Yonder  is  Vesuvius  ready  at  any  moment  to  vomit  fire,  and  continually  sending  up 
clouds  of  smoke.  Then  go  across  to  the  Solfatara  on  the  other  side  of  Naples, 
stand  at  the  vent  of  that  ancient  volcano  and  listen  to  the  terrific  rumblings  which 
attend  the  rush  of  steam  and  sulphur ;  then  stamp  your  foot  or  dash  a  stone  upon 
the  ground,  and  hear  how  the  earth  resounds ;  it  is  evident  that  you  are  standing 
over  a  vast  cavern.  Look  around  you  and  remark  how  the  earth  steams  with 
sulphureous  exhalations.  Observe,  also,  how  the  earth  in  some  places  has  risen  and 
fallen,  again  and  again.  Yet  this  volcanic  region  around  Naples  is  but  one  of  the 
many  ventholes  of  the  great  fires  which  are  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth ;  three 
hundred  or  more  burning  mountains  have  already  vomited  flame.  According  to  the 
belief  of  many  geologists,  the  whole  centre  of  the  earth  is  a  mass  of  molten  matter, 
and  we  live  upon  a  thin  crust  which  has  cooled  down,  and  is  probably  not  so  much 
as  one  hundred  miles  thick.  The  probabilites  are  that  the  whole  internal  mass  is 
in  a  liquid,  and,  perhaps,  in  a  gaseous  state.  Astronomers  tell  us  that  within  the 
last  two  hundred  or  three  hundred  years  some  thirteen  fixed  stars  have  disappeared, 
and  according  to  their  beUef  they  havejbeen  burned  up.  If  such  things  happen  in 
other  worlds,  is  there  anything  improbable  in  the  belief  that  the  like  will  occur  to 
us  ?  But  if  there  were  no  internal  sea  of  fire,  and  no  instance  of  other  worlds  being 
consumed  by  fire,  who  can  guess  the  power  which  lurks  in  electricity,  and  other 
subtle  forces  ?  God's  dreadful  armies  lie  in  ambush  everywhere.  He  has  but  to 
speak  the  word,  and  the  servants  of  His  omnipotence  will  rise,  terrible  in  their 
destructive  power.  Earth  is  as  a  pile  of  wood,  and  the  torch-bearers  stand  ready 
to  kindle  it  at  any  moment.  Although  we  read  of  the  world  being  burned  by  fire,  we 
are  not  told  that  it  will  be  annihilated  thereby.  We  beUeve  from  various  things 
which  are  hinted  at  in  Scripture,  though  we  would  not  dogmatise,  that  this  world 
will  be  refitted  and  renovated ;  and  in  that  sense  we  expect  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  Luther  used  to  say  that  the  world  is  now  in 
its  working  clothes,  and  that  by  and  by  it  will  be  arrayed  in  its  Easter  garments  of 
joy.  One  hkes  to  think  that  the  trail  of  the  old  serpent  will  not  always  remain 
upon  the  globe,  and  it  is  a  cheering  thought  that  where  sin  has  abounded  God's 
•glory  should  yet  more  abound.  11.  The  apostle  has  drawn  practical  inferences. 
*'  Seeing  then  that  aU  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons  ought 
ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?  "  What  connection  can  there  be 
between  the  burning  of  the  globe  and  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?  The  first 
connection  is  this.     Our  position  as  Christians  is  at  this  moment  Uke  that  of  Noah 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

before  the  destruction  of  the  world  by  water.  What  manner  of  person  ought  Noah 
to  have  been  ?  I  should  suppose  such  a  man,  daily  expecting  the  rain  to  descend 
and  the  flood  to  burst  up  from  beneath,  would  lead  a  life  very  free  from  worldlLness, 
a  life  the  very  reverse  of  the  rest  of  his  fellow-men.  Now  our  life  ought  to  be  like 
that  of  Noah.  Look  around  on  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  when  you  enjoy  them 
say  to  yourself,  "  All  these  are  to  be  dissolved  and  to  melt  with  fervent  heat."  You 
understand  that  the  things  which  are  seen  are  but  a  dream,  tha,t  the  things  unseen 
are  alone  substantial.  Therefore  sit  loose  by  all  things  below  the  moon,  and  clutch 
as  with  the  grasp  of  a  dying  man  the  things  eternal  which  God  has  revealed  to  you. 
Such  conduct  will  separate  you  from  your  fellow-men.  As  there  is  down  deep  in 
your  heart  an  object  different  from  theirs,  and  as  you  set  a  different  estimate  on  all 
things,  your  conduct  will  be  wide  apart  from  theirs ;  being  swayed  by  different 
motives,  your  life  will  diverge  from  theirs,  and  they  will  misunderstand  you,  they 
will  impute  ill  motives  to  you.  I  remark  further,  that  the  nearness  of  the  Lord  as 
suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  world  is  to  be  destroyed,  according  to  His  word, 
suggests  holiness.  The  sinner  finds  a  reason  for  sin  when  he  says,  "  God  is  not 
here  :  everything  goes  on  in  the  ordinary  way  :  God  does  not  care  what  men  do." 
"  No,"  says  the  apostle,  "  He  is  not  away.  He  is  here,  holding  back  the  fire  forces  ; 
He  is  reserving  this  world  a  little  while,  and  by  and  by  He  will  let  the  fires  loose 
and  the  world  will  be  destroyed.  He  is  not  far  off :  He  is  even  at  the  door."  How 
can  ye  sin  against  One  who  is  so  close  at  hand  ?  The  apostle  says,  "  "What  manner 
of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  ?  "  Remember  he  was  talking  to  seints,  and  he  teaches 
us  that  even  saints  ought  to  be  more  saintly  than  they  are.  "We  have  not  attained 
to  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  I  may  say  to  the  best  child  of  God  here  this  morning, 
"  There  is  a  yet  beyond."  And  then  he  goes  on  to  specify  two  branches  of  holy  Ufe. 
"In  all  holy  conversation,"  that  is  to  say,  all  holy  behaviour  towards  men;  "and 
godhness,"  that  is,  all  pious  dealing  towards  God.      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  On  the 

dissolution  of  the  world  : — I.  Contemplate  the  Supeeme  Being  directing  the  dis- 
solution, AS  He  directed  the  original  formation,  of  the  world,  n.  Let  us  con- 
template  THE    dissolution    OF   THE   WORLD   AS   THE   END  OF  ALL  HUMAN   GLORY.      This 

earth  has  been  the  theatre  of  many  a  great  spectacle,  and  many  a  high  achievement. 
HI.  Contemplate  the  soul  of  man  as  eejlaining  unhurt  in  the  midst  of  this 
GENERAL  DESOLATION,  whcH  the  wholc  animal  creation  perishes,  and  the  whole  frame 
of  nature  falls  into  ruins.  Here,  then,  let  us  behold  what  is  the  true  honour  and 
excellence  of  man.  IV.  "We  contemplate  the  dissolution  of  the  world  as  the 
introduction  to  a  greater  and  nobler  system  m  the  government  of  God.  We, 
according  to  His  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness.    (H.  Blair,  D.D.)       Man's  external  universe  as  awaiting  a  tremendous 

crisis  : There  is  a  spiritual  conflagration  now  going  on.    Christ  came  "  to  send  fire 

on  the  earth."  His  word  like  a  fire  consumes  the  false  and  the  corrupt.  But  the 
conflagration  in  the  text  is  a  material  one.  I.  That  the  character  of  this  crisis 
WILL  BE  VERY  TERRIBLE.  1.  The  agent  by  which  it  will  be  accomplished,  "  fire," 
is  terrible.  Fire,  when  not  in  its  latent  but  active  state,  is  the  most  terrible  force  in 
the  world.  There  is  agony  in  its  touch.  Forms  the  most  beautiful  it  turns  to 
ashes.  Water,  which  destroyed  the  old  world,  is  in  some  of  its  forms  a  terrible  power, 
but  life  can  subsist  in  it.  You  can  touch  it  without  pain,  you  can  float  on  its  sur- 
face, you  can  construct  a  vessel  to  bear  you  over  its  surgmg  floods  and  seas.  But 
not  so  with  "  fire."  No  ark  will  bear  you  over  a  fiery  deluge.  2.  The  extensiveness 
of  its  scene  makes  it  terrible.  "  The  heavens  shall  pass  away."  "  The  earth  also 
and  all  the  works  that  are  therein."  3.  The  tumult  with  which  it  will  be  attended 
is  terrible.  "  A  great  noise."  There  are  some  sounds  that  shake  one's  very  soul 
with  horror.  The  howl  of  the  wind  rising  into  the  tempest,  the  rumble  of  the 
approaching  thunderbolt,  the  wild  and  dismal  roar  of  the  ocean  when  lashed  into 

fury these  are  all  sounds  more  or  less  of  terror.    But  there  are  animal  sounds 

still  more  so.  The  groans  of  the  dying,  the  meanings  of  bereaved  love,  the  shrieks 
of  an  agonised  heart— these  are  fearful  sounds.  What  a  noise  is  produced  by  a 
little  bonfire,  what  a  noise,  too,  by  a  little  steam  from  the  engine ;  but  what  must 
be  the  noise  of  burning  forests,  and  boihng  oceans,  of  falling  cities  and  rocking 
mountains  !  This  "  great  noise  "  will  be  very  terrible.  4.  The  unexpectedness  with 
which  it  will  come  is  another  element  of  terror.  "  It  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
night."  It  will  not  come  as  a  thief  in  some  respects.  (1)  A  thief  comes  without 
warning.  (2)  A  thief  has  no  right  to  come.  (3)  A  thief  may  be  resisted.  There 
is  a  possibility  of  turning  him  back ;  but  not  so  with  this  crisis.  It  must  come. 
II.  Taix  THE  APPROACH  OF  THIS  CRISIS  IS  VERY  CERTAIN.     1.  It  is  Certain  that  there 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  169 

is  a  point  in  the  future  that  will  terminate  men's  present  connection  with  this  earth. 
2.  There  is  conclusive  evidence  that  this  period  will  be  attended  with  a  conflagration. 
in.  That  the  peospect  of  this  ceisis  should  exert  on  mankind  a  hallowing 
INFLUENCE.  The  apostlc  states  two  effects  which  the  prospect  ought  to  produce 
upon  us — 1.  Practical  holiness  in  every  part  of  our  life — "  Holy  conversation  and 
godliness."  If  all  our  material  interests  are  thus  to  pass  away,  with  what  earnest- 
ness ought  we  to  cultivate  those  principles  of  character,  those  dispositions  of  mind, 
and  those  habits  of  life  which  will  abide  for  ever?  2.  An  earnest  longing  of  the 
soul  for  the  future.     "  Looking  for  and  hasting,"  &c.      (J).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Ele- 

ments that  will  enhance  the  final  conflagration  : — Since  the  noblest  attribute  of  water 
is  its  blandness,  who  would  be  prepared  to  find  that,  chemically  speaking,  it  is 
remarkable  for  its  fiery  composition  ?  When  its  two  constituents  are  burned  in  the 
oxy-hydrogen  blowpipe,  they  produce  a  flame  of  extraordinary  ferocity.  Such  is 
the  violence  with  which  they  combine  that  it  is  necessary  to  keep  them  from  ming- 
ling, except  in  small  quantities,  unless  they  are  just  at  the  point  of  ignition.  Dr. 
Clarke  placed  a  brick  screen  between  himself  and  the  dangerous  gases  when  he  first 
experimented  on  their  power,  but  was  nearly  killed  by  an  explosion.  Perhaps, 
when  the  world  and  all  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up,  the  ocean  may 
really  be  the  magazine  from  which  fuel  may  be  drawm  to  support  the  great  con- 
flagration. But  let  this  be  as  it  may  in  God's  good  counsel,  is  it  not  a  startling 
thought  that  water,  the  uncompromising  adversary  of  fire,  should  be  compounded 
of  two  elements  whose  conjunction  is  accompanied  by  a  passionate  burst  of  flame 
and  a  terrible  eruption  of  caloric  ?     (Scientific  Illustrations.) 

Vers.  11-18.  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved. — Immortality 
and  science  : — It  is  a  singular  fact  that  these  words  have  far  more  probability  of 
truth  than  they  had  a  generation  ago.  Then,  the  stability  of  the  physical  universe 
was  held  to  be  a  settled  fact  of  science  ;  it  is  not  so  regarded  now.  If  this  world 
and  the  universe  of  worlds  are  to  undergo  at  times  such  catastrophes  as  science  and 
Scripture  indicate,  even  to  possible  destruction,  where  shall  immortal  man  abide  ? 
Physical  science  chiefly  touches  human  destiny  at  two  points  of  what  is  technically 
known  as  the  principle  of  continuity;  namely,  the  resolution  of  thought  and 
feeling  into  molecular  changes,  and  the  development  of  man  from  preceding  lower 
orders  of  life.  The  principle  is  thought  to  militate  against  immortality,  as  it 
implies  that  all  the  potency  of  life  is  within  matter,  and  that  all  mental  and  moral 
activities  are  but  the  operation  of  organised  matter.  Under  this  hypothesis 
thought  and  feeling  are  resolved  into  the  whirl  of  molecules  and  the  formation  and 
destruction  of  tissue,  a  wholly  material  process,  necessary  in  its  character  and 
admitting  of  no  permanent  personality.  To  find  anything  outside  of  this  all- 
comprehending  law  of  which  immortality  can  be  predicated,  anything  that  survives 
when  the  bond  breaks  that  holds  the  whirling  atoms  together,  is  an  impossibility 
under  this  conception.  On  the  contrary,  its  analogies  seem  to  point  to  an 
opposite  result.  It  is  not  strange  that  the  dreariness  of  such  conclusions  repels  the 
mind  towards  some  better  hope,  and  that  physicists  are  working  other  veins  of  truth 
if  for  no  other  end  than  to  escape  the  horror  of  desolation  their  own  triumphs  have 
compelled  them  to  face.  Mr.  Fiske  says :  "  There  is  Uttle  that  is  even  intellectually 
satisfying  in  the  awful  picture  which  science  shows  us  of  giant  worlds  concentrating 
out  of  nebulous  vapour,  developing  with  prodigious  waste  of  energy  into  theatres  of 
all  that  is  grand  and  sacred  in  spkitual  endeavour,  clashing  and  exploding  again 
into  dead  vapour  balls,  only  to  renew  the  same  toilsome  process  without  end — a 
senseless  bubble-play  of  Titan  forces,  with  hfe,  love,  and  aspiration  brought  forth 
only  to  be  extinguished."  Such  sentiments  characterise  the  ablest  physicists  of 
the  age.  We  reach  at  last  either  nothingness,  or  a  cinder,  or  a  ceaseless  clash  and 
repulsion  of  vapour-balls  called  worlds,  with  possible  moments  of  life  amidst  vast 
cycles  of  lifeless  ages.  We  reach  the  end  of  a  road,  but  find  nothing  to  tell  us  why 
it  exists.  The  question  forces  itself  upon  us,  if  by  looking  in  other  directions  we 
cannot  reverse  this  process  and  find  some  worthy  end  of  creation,  something 
instead  of  nothing,  the  play  of  mind  instead  of  the  whirl  of  molecules,  life  instead 
of  death.  The  recent  verdict  of  science  as  to  the  fate  of  the  material  universe 
drives  us  with  irresistible  force  to  belief  in  an  unseen,  spiritual  world — not  the 
belief  of  religious  faith,  but  of  cold,  hard  reason.  The  other  main  point  at  which 
physical  science  touches  human  destiny  is  in  connection  with  that  part  of  the 
doctrine  of  physical  evolution  which  holds  that  all  forms  of  life  are  developed 
from  preceding  forms  under  the  impulse  of  some  unknown  force — a  theory  not  yet 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

exactly  defined,  and  far  from  being  fully  proved.  Take  the  extremest  form  of 
evolution — matter  having  all  the  potency  of  life  within  itself — it  does  not  necessarily 
exclude  future  existence.  If  matter  can  attain  to  mind  that  longs  for  immortality, 
may  not  its  potentiality  be  able  to  achieve  it  ?  K  it  can  develop  the  conception, 
may  it  not  be  able  to  develop  the  fact  ?  If  the  question  still  recurs,  at  what  point  in 
the  process  of  evolution,  granting  its  truth  for  the  moment,  the  principle  of 
immortality  is  inserted,  or  gets  possession  ? — a  question  of  great  pungency  under 
the  principle  of  continuity,  we  answer  it  by  instancing  an  analogy.  At  what  point 
of  its  growth  does  a  plant  acquire  the  power  of  seK-perpetuation  ?  As  a  shoot  it 
utterly  perishes  if  cut  down  ;  the  lusty  after-growth  of  stem  and  branches  also 
withers  into  nothingness  ;  the  flower  is  not  "  a  self -reviving  thing  of  power  "  ;  but 
the  flower,  gathering  light  and  dew  into  its  glowing  bosom,  intermingles  with  them 
its  own  life  essence  and  so  bears  a  seed  around  which  it  folds  its  faded  petals  as  a 
shroud,  and  falls  into  the  dust,  no  longer  to  perish,  but  to  live  again.  This  is  more 
than  illustration,  it  is  an  argument.  A  living  thing  under  the  law  of  development 
comes  to  have  a  power  of  self -perpetuation  that  it  did  not  have  at  first ;  why  should 
it  not  be  so  with  the  life  that  has  culminated  in  man?  He  is  the  flower  of  life,  and 
in  his  heart  alone  may  there  be  found  the  seed  of  eternal  existence.  But  this 
phase  of  the  subject  is  unsatisfactory  ;  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  it  under  these 
suppositions,  and  we  turn  to  another.  We  want  not  mere  continuance,  but  some 
solid  ground  for  belief  in  personality  after  death.  Evolution  cannot  impair  the 
fact  of  personality  here  or  hereafter,  simply  because  man  transcends  nature,  which 
is  the  field  of  evolution.  Man  may  comprise  all  that  has  gone  before  him  in 
nature,  but  he  is  not  summed  up  by  it.  As  the  grand  proof  of  this,  we  adduce  the 
fact  of  the  moral  nature  with  its  prime  characteristic  of  freedom.  Mr.  Darwin  himself 
admits  that  "  free-wiU  is  a  mystery  insoluble  to  the  naturalist."  Necessity,  which 
is  the  equivalent  of  law,  never  could  evolve  freedom.  But  choice,  or  freedom,  is 
the  constituting  characteristic  of  man,  upon  which  is  built  the  whole  fabric  of  his 
life  and  moral  nature.  It  makes  him  a  person  ;  it  is  the  basis  of  his  history.  It 
puts  him  above  the  order  and  on-going  of  nature.  Professor  TyndaU  says  that  the 
chasm  between  brain-action  and  consciousness  is  impassable,  that  "here  is  a  rock 
upon  which  materiahsm  must  split  whenever  it  pretends  to  be  a  complete  philo- 
sophy of  the  human  mind."  The  admission  is  valuable,  not  merely  because  of  its 
origin,  but  for  its  impregnable  truth.  With  such  a  chasm  between  the  two  parts  of 
man's  nature — molecular  processes  and  perpetual  flux  on  one  side,  and  conscious 
identity,  moral  sense,  and  freedom  on  the  other  side — we  need  not  feel  troubled  at 
anything  physical  evolution  may  assert  of  man :  it  simply  cannot  touch  him.  We 
may  now  build  our  argument  as  to  his  destiny,  unhindered  by  any  clamour  that  may 
reach  us  from  the  other  side  of  this  chasm — a  chasm  that  science  itself  recognises 
in  our  composite  nature.  But  other  difficulties  may  arise,  such  as  the  thought  that 
this  sense  of  personal  identity  may  be  temporary,  that  as  our  life  was  drawn  out 
into  separateness  from  the  great  ocean  of  being,  so,  having  some  cycle  within  itself, 
it  will  sink  back  into  it,  as  a  star  rises  and  sets.  Age  and  infancy  are  very  like, 
especially  when  each  is  normal ;  sleep  and  unconsciousness  mark  both.  As  there  is 
no  identity  before  infancy,  is  there  any  after  age  ?  The  fact  that,  notwithstanding  the 
extreme  plausibility  of  this  familiar  analogy,  the  human  mind  has  never  accepted 
the  suggestion,  has  great  significance  ;  it  has  instinctively  felt  that  this  resemblance 
does  not  indicate  a  reaUty.  Descartes  argued :  "  I  think,  therefore  I  am."  Had  he 
continued,  I  am,  therefore  I  shall  continue  to  be,  he  would  have  uttered  as  cogent 
logic.  Granted  the  consciousness  of  personality,  and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  of 
non-existence.  If  self  is  a  unit,  and  not  a  conglomerate  of  atoms,  how  is  it  to  be 
got  out  of  existence  ?  But  it  may  be  said,  if  there  is  another  hfe,  there  must  be 
another  world.  Where  is  it  ?  Of  what  composed  ?  If  it  is  within  the  limits,  or 
under  the  laws  of  matter,  it  can  have  no  endurance.  The  soul  must  have  a  sphere 
like  itself,  permanent,  unfluctuating.  Surely  if  philosophy  may  create  a  universe 
in  which  to  float  the  worlds,  and  convey  those  quiverings  of  burning  suns  that  we 
call  heat  and  light,  it  will  not  withhold  a  fit  sphere  for  the  soul  when  it  breaks  away 
from  the  bonds  of  matter.  We  base  our  proof,  however,  not  on  mere  analogy,  but 
on  the  simple  ground  that  the  nature  of  the  soul  demands  a  proper  and  answering 
sphere,  as  wings  demand  air,  and  fins  water.  Otherwise,  creation  is  without  order 
and  coherence.  Were  we  to  search  for  this  sphere  of  the  soul,  we  would  not  look 
for  it  in  any  refinement  of  matter,  nor  in  any  orb  beyond  the  "  flaming  walls  of  the 
world,"  but  rather  in  an  order  over  against  this  visible  order,  as  mind  stands  over 
^.gainst  the  body.    If,  however,  it  be  said  that  the  mind  must  always  have  a  body^ 


CHAP,  m.]  11.  PETER.  171 

or  something  like  it,  to  hold  it  up,  a  sub-sto — a  something  like  quicksilver  upon  a 
mirror,  to  take  up  and  turn  back  its  operations,  something  to  sustain  reaction  and 
perhaps  necessary  to  yield  consciousness — we  may  follow  a  hint  dropped  by  science 
in  its  latest  suggestions.  Physicists  of  the  highest  rank  hold  to  the  existence  of  a 
pure  or  non-atomic  fluid  filling  all  space,  in  which  the  worlds  swim,  a  sort  of  first 
thing  to  which  atomic  matter  is  a  second  thing.  But  while  science  thus  acknow- 
ledges a  non-atomic  fluid  filling  the  inter-stellar  spaces  as  a  basis  upon  which  the 
universe  is  a  cosmos,  or  a  united  whole,  it  cannot  impugn  the  analogy  of  a  non- 
atomic  soul  fluid,  or  ether,  as  the  basis  or  body  upholding  the  mind,  if  we  care  to 
<5laim  it.  As  we  can  imagine  all  the  worlds  from  "  Blue-eyed  Lyra's  topmost  star" 
to  the  smallest  asteroid,  swept  together  into  some  far-off  corner  of  space — a  not 
improbable  result — and  leave  it  clear  of  atomic  matter  yet  filled  with  ether  ready  to 
float  and  unite  another  universe,  so  the  material  atomic  body  may  be  swept  away 
and  gathered  to  its  original  dust,  leaving  the  immaterial  body  intact,  a  basis  for  the 
mind  and  its  action  as  it  had  been  before.  Science  and  Eevelation  here  draw  very 
near  to  each  other,  science  demanding  a  non-atomic  substance  as  the  only  possible 
basis  of  conscious  identity,  and  Eevelation  asserting  "  there  is  a  spiritual  body," 
and  "God  giveth  it  a  body  even  as  it  pleased  Him."  (T.  T.  Hunger,  D.D.)  Dis- 
turbances in  nature  an  argument  for  holy  living : — Nothing  preaches  to  us  such  a 
sermon  of  the  vanity  of  man,  his  works,  his  ambition,  his  art,  his  fashion,  his 
pleasures,  his  proud  over-weening  science,  as  the  instability  of  earth  and  of  its  final 
dissolution.  But  these  extraordinary  movements  of  Nature  have  for  us  a  vastly 
higher  argument  than  this.  1.  In  these  terrific  convulsions  of  the  natural  world 
there  are  found  motives  of  unusual  moment  for  highest,  holy  living.  The  force  of 
this  argument  will  perhaps  be  most  felt  when  we  consider,  first,  the  vital  relation 
which  exists  between  this  dissolution  of  nature  and  the  sin  of  man.  The  fatal 
effects  of  sin  were  not  limited  to  the  boundaries  of  human  nature,  but  they  reach 
out  into  all  the  boundaries  of  creation,  everywhere  bringing  blight  and  derange- 
ment. The  imperfect  and  abnormal  growths  in  tree  and  plant ;  the  pains,  diseases, 
death,  which  riot  among  these  mute,  inanimate  things  ;  the  distempers  and  sorrows 
of  the  inferior  animals  ;  the  drear  waste  of  deserts,  the  thawless  regions  of  ice,  the 
fierce  and  fitful  agitations  in  nature,  the  internal  fires  and  ferments,  ocean  tempests 
and  distractions,  are  palpable  symptoms  of  organic  difficulty  and  incurable  sickness 
throughout  the  whole  natural  world.  Ought  we  not  to  find  in  this  exhibition  of 
nature's  unrest  and  discord  an  irresistible  argument  for  holiness  of  life  ?  How  can 
we  delay  to  forsake  that  against  which  nature  from  the  fii'st  rebels,  against  whose 
influence  the  very  earth  protests  in  her  volcanic  thunders  and  her  profound 
shudderings.  2.  Again  we  find  an  argument  for  holy  living  when  we  consider  the 
vital  relation  which  exists  between  this  dissolution  of  nature  and  the  restoration  of 
man.  Dissolution  is  not  annihilation,  it  is  simply  transformation.  These  are  not 
the  death-pangs,  but  the  birth-throes  of  nature.  They  clearly  foretell  a  new 
creation,  in  which  all  that  so  terribly  blights  and  mars  the  present  one  shall  be 
absent.  Does  not  the  thought  of  all  this  come  at  last  to  press  home  upon  us  as 
with  a  tremendous  argument  to  Uve  in  all  godliness  of  life  ?  No  man  of  impure 
habits  or  misshapen  character  and  detormed  repulsive  life  shall  range  through 
that  fair  region,  for  there  the  river  of  life  flows  pure  from  the  eternal  throne, 
and  instead  of  the  thorn  there  is  the  fir  tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier  there 
is  the  myrtle  tree.  (G.  B.  Spalding,  LL.D.)  The  dissolution  of  the  loorld  : — 
I.  The  cektainty  of  the  dissolution  of  the  world.  That  all  these  things 
shall  be  dissolved  is  a  doctrine  expressly  dehvered  in  Scripture,  and  by  many 
impi-essive  allusions  brought  home  to  the  human  heart.  The  day  no  sooner  dawns 
and  gains  its  meridian  splendour  than  it  begins  to  decline  and  ends  in  night. 
Spring  no  sooner  introduces  the  bloom  of  summer  than  autumn  assumes  its  reign, 
and  then  the  devastations  of  winter  desolate  all  the  beauties  of  the  year.  Around 
us  all  things  continually  change,  and  life  itself  is  ever  passing  away ;  grey  hair  and 
the  faded  look  soon  remind  us  that  old  age  is  at  hand.  Nothing  is  stable  on  earth. 
Cities,  states,  and  empires  have  their  period  set.  The  labours  of  men  perish ;  the 
monuments  of  art  moulder  into  dust ;  even  the  works  of  nature  wax  old  and  decay. 
The  world  was  created  for  the  pleasure  of  God ;  and,  when  its  destined  course  is 
fulfilled,  He  commands  its  destruction.  He  saw  it  meet  that  when  the  probationary 
course  of  the  generations  of  men  was  finished,  their  present  habitation  should  pass 
away.  Of  the  seasonableness  of  that  period  He  alone  can  judge.  But  amidst  this 
great  revolution  of  nature  our  comfort  is  that  it  is  a  revolution  conducted  by  Him, 
•the  measures  of  whose  government  are  all  founded  on  goodness.     Over  the  shock 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rii. 


of  the  elements  and  the  wreck  of  nature  eternal  wisdom  presides.  It  is  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  terrors  His  faithful  subjects  shall  have  nothing  to  dread. 
II.  The  sudden  and  unexpected  coming  of  this  geeat  £¥!»/•.  How  miserable 
they  whom  it  shall  overtake  in  the  midst  of  dark  conspiraoiei',  criminal  deeds,  or 
profligate  pleasures !  III.  The  consequences  of  the  dissoi-vtion  of  the  world 
TO  MAN.  IV.  The  influence  which  the  dissolution  of  all  things  ought  to 
PKODUCE  upon  our  LIVES.  It  ought  to  produce  a  seriousn'^ss  of  thought,  at  all 
times,  upon  the  mind.  (D.  Malcolm,  LL.D.)  The  end  of  all  things  : — We  think 
it  quite  unnecessary  to  travel  into  the  question  whether  these  words  mark  an 
annihilation  of  matter,  or  only  its  purification  preparatory  to  its  re-appearance  in 
some  better  form ;  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  that  the  effect  shall  be  the  same 
as  if  the  whole  were  taken  down,  and  star  after  star  and  system  after  system 
departed  from  the  vast  fields  of  |^space.  I.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  the 
assertion  as  to  the  dissolution  of  all  material  things  may  be  considered  and  applied ; 
we  may  speak  of  them  as  to  be  dissolved,  either  as  they  are  in  themselves,  or  as 
they  are  possessed  by  us.  1.  And  first  as  to  the  fact,  literally  taken,  that  "  all  these 
things  shall  be  dissolved."  We  must  pause  to  note  the  sublimity  and  augustness  of 
the  fact  that  the  Almighty  is  to  remain  unchanged  and  unchangeable,  whilst  the 
very  heavens  and  suns  and  stars  are  dim  with  age.  We  find  His  eternity  before  the 
series  commenced,  and  we  find  it  when  the  series  shall  have  passed.  Who  amongst 
us  does  not  feel  rebuked  by  the  truth  now  presented  to  his  attention,  if  indeed  he 
be  living  in  the  preference  of  the  objects  of  sight?  Man  of  pleasure!  go  on 
delighting  thyseK  with  things  which  gratify  the  senses  ;  man  of  learning  !  continue 
to  neglect  "the  wisdom  which  is  from  above";  man  of  avarice!  persist  in  digging 
for  gold,  and  consume  thy  days  and  nights  in  heaping  up  riches  ;  man  of  ambition  ! 
still  toil  for  distinction,  and  spare  no  sacrifice  which  may  gain  the  honour  of  this 
world.  But  now,  aU  ye  worshippers  of  visible  things,  that  immortal  yourselves  ye 
choose  for  your  portion  what  is  infinite  and  perishable.  Appointed  yourselves  to 
an  endless  duration,  ye  place  your  happiness  in  objects  that  are  to  last  for  a  time 
and  then  whoUy  disappear.  "  All,"  yea  "  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved."  2. 
But  we  observed  to  you  that  there  was  another  sense  in  which  this  declaration 
might  be  taken — regard  being  had  to  the  shortness  of  our  own  lives,  rather  than 
finite  duration  of  all  visible  things.  Even  if  there  were  never  to  come  an  appointed 
change  over  the  visible  universe,  if  the  sun  were  never  to  be  extinguished  nor  the 
earth  consumed,  ye  cannot  deny  that  so  far  as  ye  yourselves  are  concerned  "  all 
these  things "  would  have  to  "  be  dissolved."  We  will  not  argue  with  the 
sensualist  in  the  midst  of  the  fascinating  objects  wherein  he  delights  ;  we  will  not 
argue  with  the  miser  whilst  the  gold  glitters  and  sparkles  before  him ;  we  will  not 
argue  with  the  philosopher  as  the  broad  arch  of  the  heavens  files  his  study  ;  but 
we  will  argue  with  them  amidst  the  graves  of  a  churchyard,  and  our  reasoning 
shall  be  its  inhabitants  of  all  ages  and  all  ranks.  We  need  not  continue  our 
progress  through  the  melancholy  spot ;  but  will  any  of  you  go  away  from  the 
churchyard  unimpressed  with  the  feeling  that  all  created  good  can  be  enjoyed  but 
for  a  short  time,  and  therefore  that  it  is  not  the  good  which  should  engage  the 
affections  of  creatures  appointed  for  immortality?  II.  But  let  us  endeavour  to 
place  before  you  this  inference  in  a  somewhat  clearer  point  of  view.  The  apostle 
argues  that  forasmuch  as  all  visible  things  are  to  "be  dissolved  "  they  ought  "not  to 
engage  our  affections ;  in  other  words,  he  argues  from  the  transitoriness  of  all  that 
earth  can  give  to  the  folly  of  making  it  our  chief  good ;  and  we  wish  to  prove  to  you 
that  the  argument  is  in  every  way  sound  and  logical.  You  must  admit  in  the 
general  that  the  worth  or  the  value  of  a  possession  depends  in  great  measure  on  the 
length  of  time  for  which  it  is  to  be  enjoyed.  The  objects  of  human  pursuit  are  for 
the  most  part  precious  in  men's  eyes  in  proportion  to  their  probable  duration, 
and  you  take  the  most  effectual  way  of  depreciating  them  by  proving  them  transi- 
tory in  respect  to  themselves,  or  transitory  in  respect  to  their  possessor.  And  if 
this  be  true,  there  ought  to  be  needed  nothing  but  an  actual  consciousness  of  the 
shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life,  in  order  to  our  estimating  at  their  true  worth  the 
riches  and  honours  and  pleasures  of  the  world.  It  would  cause  the  gold  that  ye 
covet  to  look  dim,  and  the  honours  that  ye  envy  to  fade  in  your  estimation,  and  the 
knowledge  for  which  ye  toil  to  seem  of  little  worth,  and  the  pleasures  which  ye 
crave  to  appear  to  you  insipid,  were  ye  indeed  in  the  habit  of  expecting  your 
decease,  and  were  ye  really  to  count  yourselves  "  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon 
earth."  It  is  only  because  there  is  no  such  feeling,  and  practically  no  such  compu- 
tation that  ye  are  yet  so  fascinated  and  engrossed  with  what  the  world  can  bestow 


CHAP.  III.]  n.  PETER.  173 

on  its  -votaries.  III.  If  there  be  one  effect  which  more  than  another  this 
consideration  of  the  dissolution  of  all  visible  things  is  adapted  to  produce,  it  is  a 
willingness  "  to  do  good  and  to  communicate."  Shall  we,  if  indeed  it  be  only  for  a 
brief  time  that  we  can  have  possession  of  earthly  things — shall  we  either  selfishly 
hoard  them  or  squander  them  on  our  own  gratification,  when  we  may  "  make  to 
ourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,"  and  secure,  by  our  acting  as 
stewards  rather  than  proprietors,  unfading  riches  in  that  day  when  the  earth  and 
heavens  shall  flee  from  the  face  of  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne.  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be. — Things  and  persons,  here  and  hereafter  : — 
I.  An  important  classification  :  "  Things"  and  "persons."  1.  Things.  We  call 
the  visible  universe  the  great  system  of  things.  We  need  sometimes  to  remember 
that  they  are  things  only.  The  uplifted  mountains  which  awe  us  with  their 
sublimity  are  simply  things.  The  animal  and  vegetable  creations  belong  to  the 
same  category.  There  are  endless  varieties  of  life,  instinct,  structure,  and  form ; 
but  all  are  things.  The  possessions  on  which  men  so  much  pride  themselves,  and 
which  attract  such  consideration  from  their  fellows,  are  things,  and  nothing  more. 
Our  very  bodies,  so  closely  related  to  ourselves — inseparably  united  with  us  for 
this  life — are  yet  not  ourselves.  They  are  but  things.  Youthfulness,  elasticity, 
and  bloom ;  age,  debility,  and  decay,  are  not  ourselves,  nor  our  friends ;  they  are 
things  only — frail  and  changing  things.  2.  Persons.  Persons  are  endowed  with 
inteUigenee  and  will ;  they  discern  both  right  and  wrong ;  they  love  and  loathe. 
What  a  tremendous  prerogative,  to  be  a  person !  What  high  fellowship !  God 
is  a  Person.  So  are  angels.  Man  is  the  image  of  his  Maker.  What  a  pinnacle 
of  danger  is  this  !  What  a  fall  is  possible  from  hence  1  Things  exist  for  persons, 
not  persons  for  things.  Creation  is  for  God,  not  God  for  creation.  Nature,  like 
the  Sabbath,  is  for  man,  not  man  for  nature,  not  man  for  the  Sabbath.  The  popular 
philosophy  of  our  day  reverses  this  order.  Its  practical  teaching  is,  that  persons 
exist  for  things.  As  long  as  you  court  men,  not  for  what  they  are,  but  for  what 
they  have,  you  put  things  above  persons.  In  the  Divine  intention  things  are 
subordinate  to  persons.  Business,  riches,  competence,  poverty,  are  tests  of  men. 
They  are  instruments  of  education  and  discipUne.  None  of  these  things  are  for 
themselves ;  they  are  ordained  for  persons — for  the  development  of  the  mind  and 
conscience  and  heart  of  man.  The  solemn  question  about  every  one  is — ought  to 
be  now— will  be  hereafter — not.  What  has  the  man  made  by  business  ?  but.  What 
has  business  made  the  man  ?  The  world's  creed  is — Man  exists  for  business,  not 
business  for  man.  The  same  perversion  is  visible  in  the  misuse  of  the  human 
body.  One  needs  sometimes  to  ask.  Which  is  the  man,  the  body  or  the  soul  ?  The 
outer  man  is  designed  to  be  the  hourly  test  of  the  inner  man.  The  end  of  the 
thing  is  answered,  when  the  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual  habits  of  the  person 
inhabiting  and  using  it  are  expanded  and  perfected.  The  husk  is  shed  when  stem 
and  leaf  appear.  11.  An  insteuctive  contrast  :  "  Things"  shall  be  "  dissolved"  ; 
"persons"  must  continue  "to  be."  1.  "Things"  shall  be  "dissolved."  The 
globe  is  but  our  larger  habitation,  and,  like  the  body  which  we  occupy,  it  will  not 
survive  its  uses.  It  is  not  "  shall  be  dissolved."  It  is,  "  are  being  dissolved." 
Future  events  are  close  to  the  vision  of  the  seer.  There  is  something  of  the 
remotest  future  in  every  immediate  present.  "  We  all  do  fade  as  the  leaf."  The 
elements  of  death,  to  which  we  must  succumb  at  the  last,  work  in  us  through  child- 
hood, youth,  and  maturity.  So,  too,  the  seeds  of  the  final  ruin  are  sown  in  the 
world  now,  and  grow  from  hour  to  hour.  2.  "  Persons  "  continue  to  be.  "  Per- 
sons "  cannot  "  dissolve."  The  consciousness  of  existence  and  the  sense  of 
responsibility  are  indestructible.  They  may  be  bedimmed,  but  not  extinguished. 
The  intellectual  and  moral  energies  of  the  soul  are  a  fire  which  may  be  buried,  and, 
for  a  while,  be  constrained  to  smoulder ;  but,  uncovered  to  the  air,  it  will  break 
forth  once  more  into  dazzling  flame.  Ah  !  what  changes  persons  can  pass  through, 
and  stiU  remain  the  same  !  What  differences  there  are  between  childhood  and  age, 
and  yet  the  individual  continues  as  before  !  A  man  may  so  alter  his  earthly  con- 
dition that  the  past  may  become  a  dream,  and  will  no  more  be  realised  in  the 
present.  He  may  modify  and  even  cancel  all  the  judgments  which  he  ever  held, 
and  may  reverse  all  his  moral  principles  and  religious  hopes.  But  not  even  a 
suspicion  will  ever  cross  his  mind  to  confuse  the  unquestioned  conviction  that,  as 
a  person,  he  is  unaltered  and  the  same.  Life  and  death,  the  grave  and  judgment, 
heaven  and  hell,  immortal  activity  and  endless  years  will  never  bedim  the  indivi- 
duality of  a  single  soul.  Personality  in  every  deathless  spirit  shall  stretch  in  a  line 
of  unwavering  light   to  all  eternity.      III.  A  solemn  inference:   "Seeing  then 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be." 

1.  Ye  ought  to  live  in  the  hallowed  discharge  of  all  duty  towards  God  and  man. 
(1)  "In  all  holy  conversation."  The  word  is  plural,  "conversations."  As  usual 
in  our  version,  conversation  means  conduct.  The  plural  indicates  no  particular 
conduct,  but  all  conduct  without  exception.  (2)  "  And  godliness."  The  plural 
occurs  here  also,  "godUnesses."  Godliness  is  all  thought,  feeling,  and  conduct 
which  are  possible  to  a  man  towards  God.  This  is  man's  action  towards  heaven, 
as  the  former  is  man's  action  towards  earth.  Penitence  for  sin  ;  faith  in  Christ, 
whose  blood  was  shed  ;  the  eager  pursuit  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace,  that  godliness 
with  you  may  be  likeness  to  God  ;  these  and  all  emotions,  resolutions,  and  actions 
which  can  cleanse  the  conscience,  pacify  the  heart,  and  refine  the  character,  are  to 
distinguish  men  who  recognise  that  "all  things  are  dissolving,"  that  "persons" 
are  immortal,  and  may  be  for  ever  blessed.  2.  In  the  holy  fulfilment  of  all  duty 
to  man,  and  in  the  sacred  enjoyment  of  all  hallowed  privilege  from  God,  ye  are 
to  expect  the  grand  consummation,  and  by  the  same  conduct  to  hasten  it  on. 
(1)  "  Looking  for  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God."  The  word  means  watching  and 
waiting.  It  is  looking,  not  doubtfully,  but  in  expectancy.  This  state  of  mind  is 
the  fruit  of  "all  holy  conversations  and  godlinesses."  It  cannot  be  projected  by 
a  wish.  It  can  no  more  be  extemporised  in  the  Christian  life  than  can  an  elaborate 
Corinthian  capital  or  an  ethereal  group  of  sculpture  be  flung  off  and  finished  with 
a  blow.  Languishing  piety  and  increasing  worldliness  will  not  attain  it.  If  you 
would  reap  the  harvest,  you  must  sow  the  seed,  and  protect  the  rising  growth  from 
all  blight  and  injury.  (2)  "And  hasting  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God."  "All 
holy  conversations  and  godlinesses,"  not  only  create  the  state  of  expectancy,  but  in 
the  design  of  the  Almighty  they  bring  on  the  day.  The  great  system  of  "  things  " 
is  passing  to  dissolution,  let  holy  "  persons,"  who  will  mount  above  the  ruin  and 
live  for  ever,  hasten  the  blissful  hour.  [H.  Batchelor.)  What  manner  of  persons 
Christian  professors  ovght  to  be  : — I.  Zealous  and  in  eaknest  as  to  the  concekns  of 
RELIGION.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if,"  &c.  II.  Penitent  and  bkoken-heabted 
(Psa.  li.  17).  in.  Believing  on  Cheist  as  set  fokth  in  the  Word  (John  vi.  27-29). 
IV.  Patient  and  resigned.     Because — 1.  Their  sufferings  less  than  they  deserve. 

2.  Christ  suffered  more  for  them.  3.  They  suffer  for  their  profit.  V.  Benevolent, 
CONDESCENDING,  AND  MERCIFUL.  Because  Chiist  has  been  so  to  them  (2  Cor.  viii.  9 ; 
1  John  iii.  16,  17).  VI.  Circumspect.  Because  their  danger  is  great.  VII.  Grate- 
ful. Because  all  their  blessings  are  undeserved.  VIII.  Hopeful.  Because  what 
God  has  done  for  them  ensures  everything.  IX.  Beady  for  the  dissolution  of 
their  present  state,  and  the  coMiviENCEMENT  OF  THAT  TO  COME.     Learning  hence — 

1.  Christianity,  when  reduced  to  practice,  is  benef.cial  to  others  as  well  as  to  our- 
selves. 2.  Christianity  at  a  low  ebb  amongst  us.  3.  God  wiU  help  those  who  are 
seeking  to  be  what  they  should  be  (Phil.  iv.  13).  4.  The  consideration  of  what  we 
should  be  teaches  us  our  need  of  Christ  in  everything  (Gal.  ii.  19,  20).  (H.  Foster, 
M.A.)  Looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God. — Desire 
for  the  day  of  God : — I.  The  privilege  and  duty  enjoined.  Christians  should  live 
and  walk  as  on  the  borders  of  eternity,  dying  daily.  This  "looking  for"  the 
coming  of  Christ  is  similar  to  that  of  the  watchman  who  waits  with  earnest  solici- 
tude for  the  dawn  of  day.  It  is  the  look  of  desure,  not  of  regret ;  of  hope,  not  of 
fear ;  and  hence  it  is  added,  "  hasting  to  "  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.  The 
Christian  ought  to  do  this  in  two  ways — 1.  In  desire.  As  he  approaches  the 
heavenly  country  he  ought  to  breathe  more  of  its  atmosphere ;  to  become  more  and 
more  engrossed  with  those  foretastes  which  faith  gives  him  of   its  blessedness. 

2.  In  preparation.  II.  The  means  by  which  we  may  attain  to  the  exercise  of 
this  duty  and  the  enjoyment  of  this  privilege.  III.  The  blessed  consequences 
which  would  result  from  our  habitually  looking  for  and  hastening  unto  the 
COMING  OF  THE  DAY  OF  GoD.  1.  It  would  make  us  watchful  and  circumspect. 
2.  It  would  support  us  under  the  trials  of  life.  3.  It  would  make  us  bold  in  our 
Master's  cause.  4.  It  would  lead  us  to  form  proper  notions  of  worldly  things. 
5.  It  would  cause  our  light  to  shine  brighter  amongst  men.  (W.  C.  JVilson,  31. A.) 
Advaiicing  the  Second  Advent  .-—From  the  Bibles  that  have  marginal  readings  it 
will  appear  that  these  words  admit  of  a  different  construction—"  Looking  for  and 
hasting  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God."  Practically  it  comes  to  the  same,  whether 
we  hasten  to  Christ  or  cause  Christ  to  hasten  to  us.  But  the  intention  is  that  we 
should  do  both—"  Hasting  unto,"  and  ourselves  "  hastening,"  "  the  coming  of  the 
day  of  God."  But  now  the  question  presents  itself—"  Can  anything  which  a  man 
does  really  '  hasten,'  by  a  single  moment,  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  ?  "     It  is 


CHAP,  in.]  II.  PETER.  175 

a  question  which,  in  fact,  loses  itself  in  a  far  greater  one — "  Can  the  acts  of  the 
Almighty,  which  are  all  pre-determined  from  all  eternity,  be  affected  by  anything 
which  His  creatures  do?  "  In  every  age  Christians  are  to  be  praying  and  labouring 
for  the  extension  of  the  gospel  over  the  whole  earth.  And  so  labouring  and  so 
praying  they  may  command  results.  The  Church  shall  grow,  souls  shall  be  saved, 
God  shall  be  glorified.  But,  nevertheless,  all  this  is  only  the  earnest  of  a  better 
dispensation — the  f  aUing  drops  which  tell  that  the  shower  is  coming.  "  But  can 
mortal  wishes,  or  mortal  feelings,  accelerate  that  '  day  of  God '  ?  "  Assuredly. 
God  has  oftentimes,  in  His  mercy,  changed  His  times  for  His  people's  sake.  Many 
things  have  gone  back.  Death  has  retired  for  fifteen  years.  The  destruction  of  a 
city  has  been  postponed  indefinitely.  Great  calamities,  threatening  a  king  and  his 
people,  have  been  handed  down  to  the  third  and  fourth  generations.  But,  has 
anything,  with  God,  gone  forward ?  "In  those  days  shall  be  afdiction,  such  as  was 
not  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  which  God  created  unto  this  time,  neither 
shall  be.  And  except  that  the  Lord  had  shortened  those  days."  What  does  that 
"  shortening  "  mean  ?  That  the  day  of  deliverance  was  put  forward  "  for  the  elect's 
sake."  Then  here  is  a  great  and  happy  event  "hastening  "  on  for  man  !  What, 
then,  must  we  do  "  to  hasten  the  day  of  God "  ?  1.  Pray  for  it.  What  is  the 
promise,  ought  always  to  be,  emphatically,  the  prayer  of  the  dispensation.  2.  Let 
the  Church  live  in  love  and  union,  in  order  that  a  united  Church  may  attract  her 
Lord  to  "  come."  3.  Make  great  efforts  for  the  evangelisation  of  the  world.  4. 
Cultivate  personal  holiness.  Will  He  "come"  until  His  Bride  has  put  on  her 
jewels  ?  And  when  she  is  decked,  and  when  she  is  meet  indeed,  can  He  stay  away  ? 
\j.  Vaughan,  M.A)  The  day  of  God: — Can  it  be  that  God  has  left  large  tracts 
of  present  time  to  themselves ;  that  He  has  retreated  into  some  distant  future,  when 
He  will  exert  a  jurisdiction  that  does  not  now  belong  to  Him  ?  Certainly  not. 
This  were  irreconcileable  with  any  true  idea  of  the  Omnipresent  and  the  Eternal. 
All  days  most  assuredly  are  His,  who  is  the  Lord  of  time.  Each  hour,  each 
minute,  as  it  passes  by,  is  passed  beneath  His  eye,  or  rather  within  His  encom- 
passing presence.  I.  By  "  the  day  of  God  "  is  meant  a  day  which  will  not  merely 
BE  His,  AS  all  days  ABE  His,  BUT  WHICH  WILL  BE  FELT  TO  BE  His — a  day  in  which 
His  true  relation  to  time  and  life,  which  is,  in  the  case  of  the  majority  of  men, 
only  dimly  perceived,  will  be  unreservedly  acknowledged;  a  day  which  will  belong 
to  Him,  because  in  the  thoughts  of  every  reasonable  creature  of  His  hand,  whether 
it  will  be  for  weal  or  for  woe.  He  will  have  no  rival.    H.  "  The  day  of  God  "  means, 

AGAIN,  A  TIME   WHEN    ALL   HUMAN    THINGS   WILL  BE  RATED  AT  THEIE  TRUE  VALUE  ;    when 

man's  hfe,  and  all  that  belongs  to  it,  will  be  seen  in  the  hght  of  the  infinite  and  the 
eternal,  and  therefore  in  its  relative  insignificance.  "The  day  of  God"  thus 
tacitly  imphes  a  contrast ;  it  means  that  the  days  of  man's  earthly  life  and  all  that 
concerns  it  will  have  passed  away  (Isa.  ii.  12-17).  Most  men  who  have  Uved  until 
middle  life  have  experienced  something  that  will  enable  them  in  part  to  understand 
this.  You  have  gone  on  for  years  without  any  shock  to  the  even  tenour  of  life. 
You  may  have  fallen  under  the  empire  of  nature  and  the  empire  of  your  bodily 
senses,  and  everything  belonging  to  this  world  may  have  come  to  be  seen  in 
exaggerated  proportions,  because  you  have  lost  sight  of  a  higher.  Now,  a  state  of 
mind  like  this  is  abruptly  broken  in  upon  by  a  great  trouble,  by  a  loss  of  income, 
by  a  loss  of  reputation,  by  the  death  of  a  dearly  loved  relative,  by  a  break-up  of 
your  health.  He  finds  that  he  has  made  too  much  of  it,  both  in  detail  and  as  a 
whole,  and  he  wakes  up  to  see  that  there  is  another  world  beyond  it,  compared  with 
which,  at  its  very  best,  it  is  poor  and  worthless  indeed.  This  is  for  him  a  true 
"  day  of  the  Lord  "  ;  and  in  the  Ught  of  that  day  he  learns  this  truth,  that  "  all 
flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  of  man  as  the  flower  of  the  field,"  and  that  while 
"  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  fadeth,  the  Word  of  our  God  shall  abide  for 
ever."  And  every  such  experience  in  life  is  a  preparation  for  the  awful  day,  when 
we  shall  learn,  as  never  before,  the  insignificance  of  all  that  only  belongs  to  time. 
III.  "  The  day  of  God"  means  the  day  of  universal  judgment.  Certainly  God  is 
always  judging  us.  Moment  by  moment  we  live  beneath  His  all-seeing  eye  ;  He 
registers  each  act,  each  word,  each  thought,  each  movement  of  passion,  each  truancy 
of  the  will,  each  struggle  by  His  grace  to  live  for  Him,  each  victory  over  the  craft 
and  subtlety  of  the  devil  or  man.  Yes,  He  is  always  on  His  throne  of  judgment, 
but  this  does  not  prove  that  no  time  is  coming  when  He  will  judge  as  never  before. 
The  predicted  day  of  judgment  will  differ  from  the  continuous  judgment  that  always 
is  exercised  by  the  Divine  Mind  as  it  gazes  upon  a  moral  world  in  two  respects — hi 
its  method  and  in  its  finality.     It  will  be  carried  out,  that  last  judgment,  by  the 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

Man  Christ  Jesus  in  person.  And  as  the  last  judgment  will  be  administered  by  a 
visible  judge,  by  our  dear  Lord,  who  was  crucified  for  us,  and  who  rose  from  the 
grave,  and  who  ascended  into  heaven,  so  it  will  be  final.  There  will  be  no  appeal, 
no  rehearing,  no  reversal  possible.  Every  grace  responded  to,  or  neglected,  will  be 
taken  into  account.  Every  thought,  word,  act,  habit,  all  that  has  gone  to  make  up 
our  final  self — and  everything  from  the  cradle  to  the  dying  hour,  most  assuredly, 
contributes  something — all  will  be  taken  fully,  unerringly  into  the  reckoning.  And 
thus,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  it  is  called  an  "  Eternal  Judgment,"  meaning  a 
judgment  from  which  there  is  no  appeal,  in  the  new  and  everlasting  age.  We 
cannot  picture  to  ourselves  this  judgment;  but  that  does  not  prove  that  it  will 
not  take  place.      (Canon  Liddon.)  The  infiuence   of  belief   in   the   coming  of 

the  day  of  God : — I.  The  expectation  of  a  coming  day  of  God  affects  Christian 
thought,  in  the  first  place,  by  keminding  us  of  what  human  life  really  is  and 
MEANS.  Springing,  as  it  does,  out  of  the  very  idea  of  duty,  being,  as  it  is, 
the  inseparable  concomitant  of  a  reasoned  conception  of  right  and  wrong  as 
the  law  planted  within  us  by  some  moral  being,  who  must  have  the  will  and 
the  power  to  enforce  it,  the  expectation  of  a  coming  judgment  at  once  raises 
man  into  his  true  place  as  the  first  of  created  beings  here  below ;  and  yet, 
withal,  it  keeps  him  there.  In  short,  the  knowledge  that  we  have  to  be  judged  at 
once  guarantees  our  dignity  and  defines  our  subordination.  It  is  only  as  moral 
beings  having  free-will  that  we  are  capable  of  undergoing  judgment  at  all ;  and,  as 
having  to  undergo  it,  we  are  necessarily  and  infinitely  below  Him  whose  right  and 
whose  duty  it  is  to  judge  us.  II.  A  second  way  in  which  the  expectation  of  the 
coming  of  the  day  of  God  powerfully  affects  Christian  thought  is  that  which 
ILLUMINATES  THE  SENSE  OF  BESPONSiBiLiTY.  The  scnsc  of  responsibility  is  as  wide 
as  the  moral  sense  of  man ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  as  wide  as  the  human  race.  This 
primal  idea,  rooted  in  our  first  instinctive  perceptions  of  moral  truth,  that  we  are 
responsible  beings,  necessarily  implies  that  some  one  exists  to  whom  this  responsi- 
bility is  due.  Who  is  it  ?  We  look  around  us,  and  we  see,  most  of  us,  some  fellow- 
creatures  to  whom  we  have  to  answer  for  our  conduct.  The  child  knows  that  he 
must  answer  for  it  to  his  parents — to  his  mother  in  early,  to  his  father  in  later 
years.  The  schoolboy  thinks  of  his  master,  the  clerk  of  his  employer,  the  soldier 
of  his  commanding  officer.  As  we  get  higher  in  the  scale  of  society,  it  may  seem 
at  a  distance  that  there  are  personages  so  exalted  as  to  be  subject  to  no  human 
masters  to  whom  their  responsibility  is  due ;  but  in  reality  it  is  quite  otherwise. 
Those  who  govern  us  are  answerable  to  what  is  called  public  opinion  for  their 
conduct  of  public  affairs.  That  is  to  say,  they  have  to  give  an  account,  not  to  one, 
but  to  many  millions  of  their  countrymen.  But  if  conscience  speaks  to  us  at  all 
with  clearness  and  honesty,  it  tells  every  one  of  us  one  thing  about  such  responsi- 
bihties  we  owe  to  our  fellow-creatures,  and  that  is  that  such  responsibility  covers 
only  a  very  small  part  indeed  of  our  actual  conduct.  A  great  deal  goes  on  in 
every  life  which  is  either  right  or  wrong,  yet  for  which  a  man  feels  in  no  way 
accountable  to  any  human  critic  or  authority  whatever.  Is  he,  therefore,  not 
accountable  for  such  acts  and  words  as  do  not  fall  within  human  jurisdiction? 
And  this  knowledge  obliges  us  to  look  often  and  beyond  this  human  world  to  One 
to  whom  our  responsibility  is  reaUy  due.  As  He  only  can  take  account  of  that 
which  is  withdrawn  from  the  eyes  of  our  fellow-men,  so  He  assuredly  does  take 
account  of  all  in  which  others  may  have  a  right  to  do  so.  We  are  responsible  to 
God — yes,  all  who  seriously  believe  that  He  exists  as  the  moral  Governor  of  this 
world  which  He  has  made  must  admit  this  responsibility.  But,  then,  the  question 
arises  :  When  is  the  account  to  be  rendered  ?  That  God  keeps  His  eye  upon  it  day 
by  day  in  the  case  of  every  one  of  us  is  as  certain  as  that  He  exists.  It  is  faith  in 
a  future  judgment  which  makes  the  sense  of  responsibility  living  and  operative,  by 
making  the  prospect  of  a  real  reckoning  definite  and  concrete.  III.  Belief  in  a 
coming  day  of  God  affects  our  whole  view  of  human  history  and  of  human 
LIFE.  When  we  take  up  a  volume  of  ancient  history,  or  of  the  history  of  our  own 
country,  of  what  does  it  mainly  consist  ?  It  describes  royal  and  noble  personages 
succeeding  one  another — their  birth,  their  training,  their  coronations,  their  deaths. 
It  describes  the  varying  fortunes  of  multitudes  of  human  beings  associated  together 
as  what  is  called  a  nation,  their  privations,  their  conquests,  their  gradual  improve- 
ment, the  crimes  for  which  they  are  collectively  responsible.  In  short,  we  read 
history  too  often  as  though  it  told  us  all  that  was  to  be  said  about  man,  as  though 
when  man  had  done  with  this  earthly  life  there  was  really  an  end.  Ah  1  we  forget 
the  truth  which  makes  history  so  inexpressibly  pathetic,  that  all  is  not  really  over 


CHAP,  in.]  II.  PETER.  177 

with  those  whom  it  describes,  that  they  have  only  ceased  to  be  visible,  that  the 
most  important  part  of  their  career  yet  awaits  them,  viz.,  the  account  they  have  to 
give  of  it.  Our  Saxon  forefathers,  and  the  Britons  whom  they  so  ruthlessly 
exterminated,  and  Alfred,  and  Edward  the  Confessor,  and  William  the  Conqueror, 
and  Rufus,  and  Coeur  de  Lion,  and  John,  and  the  great  Plantagenets,  the  Edwards 
and  the  Henrys,  and  Elizabeth,  and  Mary  Stuart,  and  Charles,  and  Cromwell,  and 
the  Georges,  and  the  Pretenders,  and  the  great  statesmen  who  fill  the  canvas  of  the 
first  half  of  this  century,  and  the  men  of  the  first  Revolution,  and  the  Napoleons, 
down  to  those  who  left  us  but  yesterday — depend  upon  it  they  are  no  mere  names  ; 
they  are  still  living  beings ;  and  this  is  the  fact,  the  pathetic  fact,  common  to  aU.  of 
them,  that  they  are  waiting  for  the  final  judgment,  and  they  already  know  enough 
to  know  what  it  will  mean  to  each  one  of  themselves.  This  view  of  history,  con- 
sidered in  the  hght  of  a  coming  day  of  judgment,  extends  itself  at  once  and 
inevitably  to  human  life  in  our  own  day  and  immediately  around  us.  Our  first 
and,  so  to  call  it,  our  natural  view  of  human  beings  around  us  takes  note  of  their 
positions  in  this  world,  and  of  the  points  wherein  they  differ  from  or  resemble  our- 
selves. We  think  of  them  as  better  or  worse  off,  as  more  or  less  educated,  as 
friendly  or  as  distant  acquaintances,  as  belonging  to  a  past  or  to  a  younger  genera- 
tion, or  to  our  own,  as  standing  in  this  or  in  that  relation  to  the  public  life  of  the 
country,  as  belonging  to  this  or  to  that  profession,  as  occupying  this  or  that  or  a  third 
position  in  the  social  scale ;  but  once  let  us  have  steadily  thought  out  the  truth 
that,  like  ourselves,  every  human  being  is  certainly  on  his  trial  and  his  judgment 
before  Him,  and  how  insignificant  do  all  those  considerations  about  our  fellow- 
creatures  appear  in  the  light  of  this  tremendous  fact !  Yes,  those  possessors  of  vast 
influence,  which  they  use,  if  at  all,  for  selfish  ends ;  those  owners  of  accumulated 
wealth,  which  they  spend  so  largely,  if  not  altogether,  upon  themselves ;  those  men 
of  cultivated  minds,  who  regard  cultivation  as  an  end  in  itself,  and  without  a 
thought  of  what  it  may  be  made  to  do  for  others  or  for  the  glory  of  God  ;  yes, 
the  consideration  that  all,  all  will  be  judged,  and  that  every  hour  that  passes 
brings  them  nearer  to  the  judgment,  makes  us  think  of  human  life  around  us  in 
quite   a   new  light.      (Ibid.)  The  day  of    God : — I.  The   solemn   event   we 

SHOULD  anticipate.  "  The  day  of  God,  wherein,"  &c.  1.  The  day  of  His  glory. 
2.  The  day  of  His  power.  3.  The  day  of  His  wrath.  U.  The  pbactical  influence 
IT  SHOULD  PEODUCE.  "  Lookiug  for  and  hasting  unto,"  &g.  1.  It  should  duly 
interest  our  minds.  2.  It  should  duly  influence  our  conduct.  "Looking  for  and 
hasting  unto  the  day  of  God  "  comprehends  earnest  desire  and  diligent  preparation. 
III.  The  impobtant  reflections  it  should  suggest.  1.  The  awful  nature  and 
effects  of  sin.  2.  The  emptiness  and  vanity  of  the  world.  3.  The  necessity  of 
seeking  an  interest  in  Christ.     {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth. — New  heavens  and  new 
earth : — A  question  here  arises  whether  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  will  be 
created  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old.  The  idea  of  the  annihilation  of  so  many 
immense  and  glorious  bodies,  organised  with  inimitable  skill,  is  gloomy  and  for- 
bidding. It  ought  not  to  be  believed  without  the  most  decisive  proof.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  a  most  animated  thougKt  that  this  visible  creation  which  sin  has 
marred  wiU  be  restored  by  our  Jesus.  1.  The  words  which  are  employed  to  express 
the  destruction  of  the  world  do  not  necessarily  imply  annihilation.  The  figures 
taken  from  the  wearing  out  of  a  garment  and  from  the  vanishing  of  smoke  do 
neither  of  them  import  the  destruction  of  substance.  For  the  substance  of  a 
garment  when  it  moulders  away,  and  of  smoke  when  it  vanishes,  is  not  annihi- 
lated ;  only  the  form  is  changed.  Is  it  said  that  the  world  shall  perish  ?  The 
same  word  is  used  to  express  the  ancient  destruction  of  the  world  by  the  flood.  Is 
it  said  that  the  world  shall  have  an  end  and  be  no  more  ?  This  may  be  understood 
only  of  the  present  organisation  of  the  visible  system.  The  natural  power  of  fire 
is  not  to  annihilate,  but  only  to  dissolve  the  composition  and  change  the  form  of 
substances.  2.  Our  text  and  several  similar  passages  compel  me  to  believe  that 
new  material  heavens  and  a  new  material  earth  wiU  be  raised  up  to  supply  the 
place  of  those  which  the  conflagration  shaU  have  destroyed.  This  being  allowed, 
it  seems  more  natural  to  suppose  that  the  old  materials  will  be  employed  than  that 
they  wiU  be  annihilated  and  new  ones  created  in  their  stead.  We  know  that  the 
glorified  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  formed  of  materials  which  now  exist  on  the 
earth,  and  that  even  the  glorious  body  of  Christ  is  formed  of  no  other.  3.  The  new 
heavens  and  new  earth  seem  eminently  represented  as  a  part  of  the  vast  plan  of 

41 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

restoration  which  Christ  undertook  to  accompUsh.  But  it  is  not  the  part  of  Christ 
in  this  work  to  create  out  of  nothing,  but  only  to  renew.  4.  The  time  of  Christ's 
advent  to  judgment  is  called  "  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things."  5.  But  the 
passage  on  which  the  advocates  for  renovation  chiefly  rely  remains  yet  to  be  pro- 
duced (Eomans  viii.).  If,  then,  by  "  the  creature  "  is  meant  "  every  creature  "  or 
"  the  whole  creation,"  how  is  the  whole  creation  to  "  be  delivered,"  in  the  resurrec- 
tion, "from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God?"  Not  by  annihilation,  but  by  a  glorious  renovation.  But  why,  if  the- 
heavenly  bodies  are  to  be  continued  in  existence,  should  they  be  dissolved  by  fire, 
since  they  are  not,  as  far  as  we  know,  defiled,  as  our  earth  is,  by  sin  ?  One  end  of 
their  dissolution  may  be  that  by  a  different  composition  of  their  materials  they  may 
be  rendered  more  pure  and  glorious.  Another  end  may  be  to  make  a  memorable 
display  of  God's  abhorrence  of  everything  which  has  had  the  most  distant  con- 
nection with  sin.  They  have  ministered  to  apostate  man  and  lighted  him  in  his- 
course  of  rebellion.  Lift  up  your  heads,  ye  people  of  God,  and  sing,  for  your 
redemption  draweth  nigh.  What  though  you  are  poor  in  this  world,  the  new 
heavens  and  new  earth  wiU  be  all  your  own.  Ye  who  must  now  walk  on  the  earth 
lame  and  halt,  while  the  world  rattle  by  you  in  their  splendid  equipages,  shall 
shortly  make  easy  excursions  from  star  to  star,  and  from  world  to  world.  (E. 
Griffin,  D.D.)  The  new  creation  : — I.  Keflect  on  the  great  creation  and  the 
PURPOSE  of  God  in  making  the  infinity  of  worlds.  That  there  is  no  adequate 
purpose  it  would  be  absurd,  indeed  almost  blasphemous,  to  suppose.  The  tornado 
may  work  blindly  as  it  tears  down  the  forest  trees  in  its  fury ;  but  how  unworthy 
would  be  such  blind,  aimless  work  on  the  part  of  the  Infinite  God  !  A  giant  may 
put  forth  his  portentous  strength  in  mere  vain  display ;  but  could  God  exert  such 
stupendous  energy  in  order  that  some  fraction  of  its  wonder  might  dazzle  the  few 
beholders  in  one  world  ?  Surely  a  devout  faith,  as  well  as  a  reasoning  intelligence, 
must  conclude  that  the  purpose  which  alone  explains  the  creation  and  arrangement 
of  our  earth  is  that  it  should  be  the  home  of  life,  and  of  beings  able  to  apprehend 
God's  will,  is  the  actuating  purpose  of  all  the  rest  of  the  creation.  II.  But  in  this 
world,  at  least,  there  has  been  failure.  In  man's  inmost  nature  there  has 
been  a  collapse.  High  faith  and  loyalty,  integrity  and  pureness,  persistent 
endeavour  for  the  right — all  this  has  broken  down,  and  man's  moral  and  spiritual 
nature  is  in  ruins.  But  into  the  midst  of  the  ruin  of  human  hope  there  has  come 
the  all-renewing  power  of  a  great  redemption.  III.  How  boundless  is  the  prospect 
OPENED  out  to  MAN  BY  THIS  NEW  HOPE !  What  infinite  possibility  and  promise 
of  the  development  and  appUcation  of  human  faculty  !  what  a  future  for  the 
researches  of  science  and  the  plastic  skill  of  art !  and  what  sacred  joy  in  the 
perfected  and  permanent  relationships  of  human  society  !     IV.  Our  attention  is 

DIRECTED    TO    THE    REGNANT   PRINCIPLE    OF    THE    NEW    UNIVERSE.        Where    vicC    reigUS 

all  is  hell ;  where  vice  and  virtue  are  in  conflict  life  is  mingled  joy  and  pain ;  but 
where  triumphant  righteousness  makes  its  abiding  home  there  must  be  health 
without  any  lurking  incipiency  of  sickness,  joy  without  threat  of  grief,  love  with- 
out peril  of  parting,  and  life  without  possibility  of  death.  "Wherein  dwelleth 
righteouness " — as  the  very  coherence  of  the  texture  of  the  new  world,  and  the 
pervasive  and  penetrating  energy  of  the  new  life.  And  for  this  ultimate  triumph 
of  righteousness  God  is  our  guarantee.  (T.  F.  Lockyer,  B.A.)  A  new  heaven 
and  a  neio  earth: — I.  The  events  looked  for.  1.  First,  the  destruction  of  the 
world  that  now  is.  Not  only  the  heavens,  but  "  the  elements."  Light,  heat,  air, 
moisture — all  these  are  to  come  under  the  action  of  the  final  fire.  Then  "  the 
earth,"  where  God  planted  Eden  of  old,  and  whose  virgin  soil  was  trodden  by 
sinless  humanity  ;  earth,  where  are  Bethlehem,  Gethsemane,  and  Calvary,  with  all 
their  holy  memories  of  suffering  and  of  rejoicing  and  of  triumph.  Then  not  only 
earth,  but  the  things  that  are  on  the  earth ;  all  that  human  art  and  human  labour 
and  human  skill  may  have  added  to  the  earth  or  reconstructed  out  of  material 
things.  Then  the  means — fire.  Fire  is  the  mightiest  force  with  which  we  are 
acquainted  in  the  material  world.  Science  has  taught  us  that  no  material  has 
been  found  as  yet  which  fire  cannot  melt.  And  fire  is  not  only  the  mightiest  force, 
but  it  is  the  most  universally  diffused.  We  find  it  everywhere — in  the  vegetable, 
in  the  animal,  and  in  the  mineral.  There  is  fire  in  the  tree  which  grows,  and 
hence  the  savage  will  take  two  sticks,  and,  rubbing  them  briskly  together,  he  pro- 
duces a  spark  and  flame.  Though  there  is  much  of  moisture  in  the  wood,  never- 
theless he  can  produce  fire  from  it.  There  is  fire  in  the  very  stone  on  which  yon 
tread.     Hence  the  sparks  that  you  see  struck  forth  beneath  the  prancing  steed,  or 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  173 

sometimes  occasioned  by  your  own  sharp  footsteps.  There  is  fire  in  the  water.  If 
there  were  not  it  would  all  be  frozen.  Fire  enters  into  the  constitution  of  our  own 
body.  There  is  heat  in  the  skin  and  in  the  flesh,  in  the  blood  and  in  the  bone,  and 
in  the  sinew ;  and  it  causes  life  to  kindle  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  very 
crown  of  the  head.  This  earth  of  ours  was  once  a  sea  of  molten  lava.  It  is  now 
cooled  at  the  surface,  and  this  constitutes  the  crust  of  the  globe  ;  but  if  you  were 
only  to  dig  down  seven  miles  through  that  crust,  you  would  still  come  upon  the  ocean 
of  Mquid  lava.  And  God  has  only  to  let  loose  this  treasure  of  fire  from  its  secret  place, 
and  then  it  will  rush  with  destructive  fury  from  world  to  world  and  from  system  to 
system.  No  wall  can  be  constructed  as  a  barrier  to  check  its  progress.  Then  you 
will  observe  another  thing — the  manner.  "  Pass  away  with  a  great  noise."  The 
manifestations  of  God  to  man  are  sometimes  calm  and  peaceful  and  assuring.  At 
other  times  His  manifestations  are  accompanied  with  things  that  awaken  terror  or 
create  alarm.  So  it  was  in  connection  with  Sinai.  Then  this  great  crisis  is 
designated  the  day  of  the  Lord — the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Why  is  it  designated 
the  day  of  Christ  ?  (1)  It  will  be  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  because  the  transac- 
tions of  the  day  wUl  be  all  based  upon  the  mediatorial  work  of  Christ.  (2)  Because 
it  will  be  the  day  for  the  vindication  of  Christ  against  all  the  falsehoods  and  the 
prejudices  and  the  wrong  judgments  which  men  have  entertained  concerning  Christ. 
(3)  Then  it  is  the  day  of  the  Lord  as  distinguished  from  man's  day.  It  is  your 
day  now  ;  and  I  say  to  young  men  it  is  your  day  now  to  do  as  you  please — to  rebel 
against  God.  But  it  will  be  the  Lord's  day  when  the  heavens,  being  on  fire,  shall 
be  dissolved.  2.  Next,  the  reconstruction  of  a  new  earth  out  of  the  material  of 
the  old.  The  renewal  of  the  earth  and  the  heaven  wUl  be  a  something  that  v.ill 
take  place  after  the  destruction  of  the  old  earth  and  the  old  heaven.  Now  we  must 
bear  in  mind  that  in  the  material  world  nothing  is  annihilated.  He  will  want  all 
the  gold  to  pave  the  highways  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  He  will  want  the  diamonds 
and  the  precious  stones  to  gem  the  battlements  of  the  city  of  the  saints.  He  will 
put  them  all  into  one  seething  cauldron  and  melt  and  purify  and  purge  them,  and 
make  them  fit  material  for  the  erection  of  the  future  home  of  the  saints.  "  We 
look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  The 
wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just.  They  shall  inherit  the  earth,  and  the 
■wicked  shaU  not  have  a  part  in  it  at  all.  But  is  this  old  earth  to  be  cursed  for 
ever  ?  No.  Jesus  Christ's  work  as  Redeemer  would  not  be  complete.  After  He 
has  saved  man.  He  will  have  to  effect  the  restitution  of  things  as  well  as  of  men. 
He  will  have  to  extract  the  curse  from  the  heart  of  the  earth,  and  so  silence  the  cry 
of  a  groaning  creation.  And  let  me  say  that  this  new  heaven  and  new  earth,  in  its 
purified  form,  will  be  far  superior  to  our  old  home.  What  do  we  find  here? 
Beasts  of  prey  are  prowling  the  deserts.  In  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
"  no  lion  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  thereon."  In  the  old 
earth  venomous  vipers  and  poisonous  reptiles  are  crawling,  and  sometimes  they 
inflict  pain,  and  even  death,  upon  our  fellow-men.  But  in  the  new  heavens  and 
the  new  earth  nothing  that  hurts  and  destroys  shall  ever  be  seen  in  all  God's  holy 
mountain.  In  this  old  earth  what  do  I  find  ?  The  air  is  laden  with  pestilence  and 
desolation  and  death.  But  in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  the  atmosphere 
shall  be  purged  of  all  deleterious  influences,  and  the  inhabitants  shall  never  say 
"  I  am  sick."  Here  time  lays  its  destroying  hand  upon  the  mightiest  monuments 
that  man  has  ever  reared.  But  in  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  "  neither  moth 
nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  thieves  do  not  break  through  and  steal."  Immortality 
is  possessed  by  everything  there.  The  inheritance  is  "  incorruptible  and  undefiled, 
and  it  fadeth  not  away."  In  the  new  heavens  and  in  the  new  earth  there  shall  be 
no  more  sea,  no  element  of  destruction  there.  And  then  I  look  at  the  heavens 
above  me,  so  magnificent  on  a  bright  starry  night ;  but  I  cannot  help  being 
reminded  of  the  alternations  of  heat  and  cold,  of  the  insufferable  heat  of  summer 
and  the  greater  heat  endured  in  other  portions  of  the  world  than  ours,  and  of  the 
insufferable  cold  of  winter.  But  in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  there  will 
be  no  such  alternations.  There  is  no  need  of  the  sun  or  of  the  moon,  but  the  Lord 
God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  light  thereof.  In  this  old  earth  the  hearts  of 
righteous  ones  are  wounded  and  pierced  to  the  very  quick  by  the  wickedness  of 
those  around  them.  But  in  the  new  heavens  and  in  the  new  earth  there  "  dwelleth 
righteousness."  There  will  be  no  sorrow  or  suffering  through  the  wickedness  of 
men  rebelling  against  the  Lord  most  high.  II.  What  should  be  our  attitude 
WITH  THESE  THINGS  BEFORE  US?  "  Be  diligent " — that  is,  "Do  your  best,  that  ye 
may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace."     Oh  !  is  it  possible  to  be  at  peace  when  the  world 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

is  in  a  blaze  ?  Yes,  thank  God,  it  is  possible  to  be  at  peace  then.  But  how  are  we 
to  be  at  peace  under  such  conditions?  "  Found  of  Hha.  without  spot  and  blame- 
less " — "without  spot"  inwardly;  "blameless"  outwardly.  A  pure  heart  and  a 
pure  life.  There  will  be  nothing  to  fear  then.  Suppose  two  men  standing  side  by 
side  at  that  day  gazing  upon  the  upheaving  of  all  things.  The  one  man  has  been 
a  millionaire  commanding  his  broad  acres  and  his  ample  revenue,  but  has  died 
without  Christ.  The  other  man  has  died  in  the  poor-house,  and  gone  to  heaven 
by  faith  from  his  humble  abode.  The  two  stand  side  by  side.  Ah,  which  of  the 
two  would  you  prefer  to  be,  then  ?  The  one  loses  all.  The  fire  burns  all  he  ever 
possessed.  The  other  loses  nothing.  The  flames  cannot  touch  his  possessions. 
He  has  a  pure  heart,  a  clear  conscience,  a  spirit  delivered  from  sin ;  and  the  fires 
cannot  touch  them.  {Richard  Roberts.)  The  final  heaven  : — There  was  but  one 
word  between  chaos  and  creation — there  need  be  but  one  between  the  sustentation 
and  the  dissolution  of  the  universal  frame.  And  we  are  looking  for  these  things  ! 
To  this  promise  we  hope  to  come  !     It  is  the  goal  of  consummated  bliss  !    I.  Let 

tJS  ENDEAVOUR  FEOM  THIS  DESCRIPTION  TO  SUGGEST  TO  OUR  MINDS  THE  TRUE  NATURE 
OF    THAT    PERFECT    FELICITY   AND    SATISFACTION    WHICH   ABE    RESERVED   FOB   THE  PEOPLE 

OF  God.  1.  The  scene  we  occupy  was  evidently  intended  for  a  great  system  of 
life.  There  is  scarcely  spot  or  element  in  which  it  may  not  be  found.  It  is  a  great 
contrivance  for  all  the  forms  and  kinds  of  existence.  It  would  be  unmeaning, 
running  to  waste,  but  for  this  intention.  Air,  land,  water  are  crowded  with  their 
several  tribes.  The  happiness  of  every  one  is  consulted,  function  and  habitude 
agree  most  perfectly  with  the  province  and  support  provided  for  them,  and  none 
who  survey  and  reason  out  the  final  causes  of  things  can  doubt  the  will  of  the 
great  Master  and  Lord  of  all.  Still  he  who  was  made  the  last  of  all  earthly 
creatures  is  the  greatest :  to  him  they  are  all  tributary  and  ministering,  and  God 
has  given  him  dominion  over  them.  Then,  assuredly,  when  there  shall  be  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth,  man,  the  capital  figure  of  the  present  system,  shall  still 
be  more  prominently  raised.  He  shall  there  need  for  help  no  inferior  creatures. 
Their  spirit  has  gone  downward  to  that  earth  which  is  no  more.  But  he  is  not 
alone.  The  ministering  spirits  which  ministered  to  the  heirs  of  salvation  during 
this  life  shall  be  his  companions  amidst  these  fairer  fields.  2.  The  world  in 
which  we  dwell,  with  all  its  proper  appendages  of  circumambient  air  and  supernal 
light,  is  a  material  fabric.  If,  therefore,  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  shall  be 
constituted,  they  must  be  material  and  related  to  space,  or  the  figure  does  not  hold. 
And  everything  concerning  that  abode  would  seem  to  confirm  it.  It  has  its 
entrances,  its  dimensions,  its  boundaries,  that  which  can  be  "  seen,"  that  which 
may  be  "  heard."  The  flesh  of  the  risen  saints  is  seen  in  those  borders.  The 
glorious  body  of  the  Eternal  Son  is  the  centre  of  all  the  beatific  attractions  and 
influences.  3.  The  visible  works  of  God  are  the  means  by  which  intelligent 
creatures  rise  in  their  thoughts  to  Him  and  judge  of  Him.  These  are  the  monu- 
ments of  His  existence  and  natural  perfections.  Heaven  and  earth  but  vary  and 
multiply  the  perfect  demonstration  of  a  First  Cause,  His  skill.  His  might,  and  His 
bounty.  When  we  read,  consequently,  of  "  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth," 
we  cannot  fail  to  infer  that  they  shall  be  impressed  with  the  same  designations. 
How  shall  the  depths  of  those  heavens,  how  shall  the  ever-spreading  horizons  of 
that  earth,  be  "sought  out"  and  interpreted  for  the  praises  of  Him  whose  glorious 
majesty  shines  forth  from  their  incomparable  frame  I  4.  The  community  of  the 
saints  is  now  a  most  pleasing  fact :  they  are  one.  A  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth 
shall  now  embrace  their  whole  multitude.  God  hath  prepared  a  habitation  for 
them.  They  are  all  brought  home.  5.  WhUe  the  present  state  of  our  sojourn 
abounds  in  multitudinous  life,  while  it  is  chiefly  administrative  to  the  life  of  man, 
we  cannot  but  be  amazed  at  the  contrivance  and  the  fulness  of  those  provisions 
which  give  general  life,  and  peculiarly  that  of  man,  its  greatest  possible  happiness 
and  freest  possible  exercise.  We,  however,  boast  a  life  of  higher  functions  and 
aims.  To  be  spiritually-minded  is  life  and  peace.  The  spirit  of  life  breathes  it 
into  our  soul.  Though  the  sky  and  earth  cannot  affect  this  new  mode  of  being, 
this  life  of  faith,  yet  the  passions  and  concernments  of  the  present  do  war 
perpetually  with  it.  But  "the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth"  shall  as  much 
favour  the  inward  life,  the  life  of  the  spirit,  as  these  mundane  conveniences  and 
laws  now  sustain  our  inferior  life.  6.  If  the  future  condition  of  happiness  and 
glory  which  shall  be  prepared  for  the  redeemed  may  be  thus  expressed,  we  may 
expect  that,  notwithstanding  the  difference  between  it  and  "this  visible,  diurnal 
sphere,"  there  shall  be  certain  points  of  resemblance.     What  are  now  the  marks  of 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  181 

our  dwelling  ?  Heavens — earth.  How  is  our  eternal  abode  described  ?  New 
heavens — new  earth.  Is  not  there  in  the  former  an  analogue  to  the  latter  ?  Is  not 
the  second  the  reflex  of  the  first  ?  Was  there  not  a  shadowing  out  of  ideas  which 
shaU  seem  familiar  to  the  saints  in  that  glory  ?  That  which  is  inferior  in  appetite 
and  instinct  is  done  away.  But  is  there  no  beauty  in  form  and  colour  which  the 
eye  may  behold  ?  Are  there  no  ravishing  harmonies  for  the  ear  ?  Everything 
here  may  be  but  rudiment  and  cypher  to  be  evolved  and  interpreted  in  far  distant 
seats  of  the  universe.  By  a  graduated  scale  we  may  now  rise  through  an  ascending 
series  of  progressive  changes  until  we  reach  the  climax  of  all.  7.  But  this  supposed 
parallelism,  however  unequal,  between  these  diiJerent  scenes  of  existence,  compre- 
hends an  exercise  of  distinct  and  perfect  memory.  The  "terrible  crystal"  of  the 
new  heavens,  the  fair  paradise  of  the  new  earth,  must  recall  the  old.  8.  The 
manner  in  which  the  present  heavens  and  earth  are  supplanted  by  the  new  declares 
that  a  measure  of  happiness  is  ensured  by  the  exchange  which  perfectly  corresponds 
to  the  solemn  revolution.  Joy  is  the  invariable  fruit  of  a  rightly  appreciated 
Christianity.  9.  Nothing  more  distinctly  marks  the  evil  of  sin  than  the  variance 
which  is  often  supposed  in  Scripture  between  man  and  the  scenes  of  his  habitation. 
These  are  bid  to  rise  up  and  declare  against  him.  He  is  represented  as  alone 
"  coming  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  They  are  true  to  their  purpose,  while  he  has 
turned  aside  from  the  end  for  which  he  was  created  and  endowed.  Hence  those 
awful  apostrophes  with  which  inanimate  objects  are  invoked,  as  if  even  they  could 
but  condemn  him.  They  are  summoned,  like  so  many  witnesses  and  justices, 
to  denounce  his  crimes.  But  "the  new  heavens  and  earth"  shall  environ 
nothing  which  can  offend.  They  shall  correspond  with  whatever  they  embrace. 
Their  pure  elements  shall  only  encompass  the  pure.  10.  Since  heaven  and  earth 
combine  aU  our  ideas  of  the  fair  and  grand,  since  these  complete  our  present 
sphere  of  life  and  action,  the  continuance  of  such  machinery  in  a  future  state 
must  intimate  to  us  the  diversity  of  its  good.  Herein  is  every  constituent  of  our 
pleasure,  whether  sensual  or  intellectual.  From  above  or  beneath  we  derive  all 
our  gratifications.  There  is  endless  variety.  11.  We  have  no  such  images  of 
permanence  as  those  works  of  God  concerning  which  we  speak.  "  For  ever,  0 
Lord,  Thy  word  is  settled  in  heaven."  "  They  shall  fear  Thee  as  long  as  the  sun 
and  moon  endure."  "  The  earth  abideth  for  ever."  God  suspends  the  proof  of 
his  faithfulness  upon  these  ordinances,  upon  the  covenant  of  day  and  night.  Yet 
are  we  forewarned  of  their  wreck.  If,  then,  these  monuments  of  whatever  is 
durable  are  themselves  to  be  destroyed,  if  the  azure  fade  and  the  globe  decay,  how 
certainly  may  we  regard  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth  the  voucher  of  a  proper 
immortality !  Their  sun  shall  no  more  go  down.  Their  refulgent  tissues  shall 
not  decay.  They  are  the  perfect  signals  of  a  duration  which  admits  no  intervals 
and  wants  no  monitors — which  cannot  be  broken  into  ages  nor  counted  out  by 
stars !  12.  The  power  of  God  to  protect  and  bless  is  not  infrequently  rested  upon 
His  creative  achievements.  "  My  help  cometh  from  the  Lord,  which  made  heaven 
and  earth."  "  The  Lord  that  made,  heaven  and  earth,  bless  thee  out  of  Zion." 
"  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  which  made  heaven  and 
earth."  The  mourner,  the  oppressed,  the  persecuted  have  sought  unto  Him  who 
had  done  all  these  things — His  aid  and  benediction  they  could  not  henceforth 
distrust  nor  slight.  The  meek  of  the  earth  were  safe  beneath  the  care  of  Him  who 
made  it.  The  new  heavens  and  earth  are  fashioned  by  the  same  omnipotent 
artificer,  the  God  of  truth  and  of  salvation,  and  in  the  same  manner  does  He  design 
that  they  should  support  the  quietness  and  assurance  of  His  people  for  ever  !  He 
who  reared  them  shall  be  their  God  so  long  as  they  endure.  They  are  the  standard 
evidence  and  voucher  of  what  He  can  and  will  work  on  their  behalf.     H.  Let  ds 

EXAMINE    THE   EVIDENCE    ON   WHICH    THIS    FIKM   EXPECTATION   RESTS.        To    Abraham     a 

covenant  was  given  in  which  were  contained  many  promises  of  a  more  than  earthly 
kind.  He  had  the  seal  of  righteousness  by  faith.  From  him  was  to  descend  a 
spiritual  seed.  We  believe  in  the  Lord,  and  He  counteth  it  to  us  for  righteousness  I 
We  take  this  ancient  warrant,  which  no  time  can  impair  nor  cancel — a  warrant 
distinct,  successive,  cumulative^and  "  according  to  His  promise  we  look  for  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness."  Christianity,  which 
brings  life  and  incorruption  to  light,  which  is  the  promise  of  eternal  life,  exhibits 
the  true  and  alone  hope  of  this  surpassing  condition.  We  have  everlasting 
consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace.  We  depend  upon  the  hope  of  eternal 
life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began.  Promise 
is   a    form    of    Scriptural    revelation    and    encouragement   with    which   we    are 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

familiar.  It  is  an  infinite  condescension  in  God  thus  to  bind  Himself,  and  to 
speak  to  His  servants,  "  for  a  great  while  to  come."  [R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
New  heavens  and  new  earth : — 1.  We  know  historically  that  earth,  that  a  solid, 
material  earth,  may  form  the  dwelling  of  sinless  creatures  in  fuU  converse  and 
friendship  with  the  Being  who  made  them.  Man,  at  the  first,  had  for  his  place  this 
world,  and  at  the  same  time,  for  his  privilege,  an  unclouded  fellowship  with  God, 
and  for  his  prospect  an  immortality  which  death  was  neither  to  intercept  nor  put 
an  end  to.  He  was  terrestrial  in  respect  of  condition,  and  yet  celestial  in  respect 
both  of  character  and  enjoyment.  This  may  serve  to  rectify  an  imagination,  of 
which  we  think  that  all  must  be  conscious — as  if  the  grossness  of  materialism  was 
only  for  those  who  had  degenerated  into  the  grossness  of  sin.  Were  our  place  of 
everlasting  blessedness  so  purely  spiritual  as  it  is  commonly  imagined,  then  the 
soul  of  man,  after,  at  death,  having  quitted  his  body,  would  quit  it  conclusively. 
That  mass  of  materialism  with  which  it  is  associated  upon  earth,  and  which  many 
regard  as  an  incumbrance,  would  have  leave  to  putrefy  in  the  grave,  without  being 
revisited  by  supernatural  power,  or  raised  again  out  of  the  inanimate  dust  into 
which  it  had  resolved.  There  will,  it  is  true,  be  a  change  of  personal  constitution 
between  a  good  man  before  his  death  and  a  good  man  after  his  resurrection — not, 
however,  that  he  will  be  set  free  from  his  body,  but  that  he  will  be  set  free  from  the 
corrupt  principle  which  is  in  his  body — not  that  the  materiaUsm  by  which  he  is 
now  surrounded  will  be  done  away,  but  that  the  taint  of  evil  by  which  this 
materialism  is  now  pervaded  will  be  done  away.  And  this  will  be  his  heaven, 
that  he  will  serve  God  without  a  struggle  and  in  a  full  gale  of  spiritual  delight — 
because  with  the  full  concurrence  of  all  the  feehngs  and  all  the  faculties  of  his 
regenerated  nature.  The  great  constitutional  plague  of  his  nature  will  no  longer 
trouble  him ;  and  there  will  be  the  charm  of  a  general  affinity  between  the  purity 
of  his  heart  and  the  purity  of  the  element  he  breathes  in.  But  the  highest  homage 
that  we  know  of  to  materiahsm  is  that  which  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  has 
rendered  to  it.  That  He,  the  Divinity,  should  have  wrapt  His  unfathomable 
essence  in  one  of  its  coverings ;  that  He  should  now  be  throned  in  universal 
supremacy,  that  substantial  and  embodied  humanity  should  be  thus  exalted,  does 
this  look  like  the  abolition  of  materialism,  after  the  present  system  of  it  is  destroyed  ; 
or  does  it  not  rather  prove  that,  transplanted  into  another  system,  it  will  be 
preferred  to  celestial  honours,  and  prolonged  in  immortality  throughout  all  ages  ? 
2.  But  though  a  paradise  of  sense,  it  will  not  be  a  paradise  of  sensuality.  There 
will  both  be  heavens  and  earth,  it  would  appear,  in  the  next  great  administration — 
and  with  this  specialty  to  mark  it  from  the  present  one,  that  it  will  be  a  heavens 
and  an  earth  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  Were  it  the  great  characteristic 
of  that  spirituality  which  is  to  obtain  in  a  future  heaven,  that  it  was  a  spirituality 
of  essence  then  occupying  and  pervading  the  place  from  which  materialism  had 
been  swept  away,  we  could  not,  by  any  possible  method,  approximate  the  condition 
we  are  in  at  present  to  the  condition  we  are  to  hold  everlastingly.  But  when  we 
are  told  that  materialism  is  to  be  kept  up,  and  that  the  spirituality  of  our  future 
state  lies  not  in  the  kind  of  substance  which  is  to  compose  its  framework,  but  in 
the  character  of  those  who  people  it — this  puts,  if  not  the  fulness  of  heaven,  at 
least  a  foretaste  of  heaven,  within  our  reach.  We  have  not  to  strain  at  a  thing  so 
impracticable  as  that  of  diluting  the  material  economy  which  is  without  us — we 
have  only  to  reform  the  moral  economy  that  is  within  us.  This  will  make  plain  to 
you  how  it  is  that  it  could  be  said  in  the  New  Testament  that  the  "  kingdom  of 
heaven  was  at  hand " — and  how,  in  that  book,  its  place  is  marked  out,  not  by 
locally  pointing  to  any  quarter,  and  saying,  Lo  here,  or  lo  there,  but  by  the  simple 
affirmation  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within  you.  And  hence  one  great  purpose 
of  the  incarnation  of  our  Saviour.  He  came  down  amongst  us  in  the  full  perfection 
of  heaven's  character,  and  has  made  us  see  that  it  is  a  character  which  may  be 
embodied.  We  learn  from  Christ  that  the  heavenly  graces  are  all  of  them 
compatible  with  the  wear  of  an  earthly  body  and  the  circumstances  of  an  earthly 
habitation.  And  had  we  only  the  character  of  heaven,  we  should  not  be  long  of 
feeling  what  that  is  which  essentially  makes  the  comfort  of  heaven.  Let  us  but 
love  the  righteousness  which  He  loves,  and  hate  the  iniquity  which  He  hateth,  and 
this,  of  itself,  would  so  soften  and  attune  the  mechanism  of  our  moral  nature, 
that  in  all  the  movements  of  it  there  should  be  joy.  Let  the  will  of  God  be  done 
here  as  it  is  done  there,  and  not  only  will  character  and  conduct  be  the  same  here 
as  there,  but  they  will  also  resemble  each  other  in  the  style  though  not  in  the 
degree  of  their   blessedness.     And  here  we  may  remark  that  the  only  possible 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  183 

conveyance  for  this  new  principle  into  the  heart  is  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)        Mart's  external  universe  as  assuming  a  real  form  : — I.  That  the 

NEW  HEAVENS  AND  THE  NEW  EAETH  WILL  EMERGE  FROM  THE  RUINS  OF  THE  PRESENT. 

This  is  far  the  most  probable  for  the  following  reasons — 1.  Our  planet  has  already 
undergone  changes  somewhat  analogous.  Geology  would  give  us  to  understand 
that  this  globe  has  passed  through  numerous  changes.  2.  The  apparent 
indestructibility  of  matter.  3.  The  moral  events  that  have  transpired  on  this  earth. 
4.  The  context  makes  it  evident.  Lest  the  reader  should  fancy  that  the  fire  should 
entirely  destroy  this  beautiful  world,  it  was  natural  for  St.  Peter  to  intimate  that  a 
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  would  grow  out  of  it.     II.  The  new  heavens  and 

THE   NEW    EARTH    WILL    BE    THE     ABODE     OF     "  RIGHTEOUSNESS."       "  Wherein     dwclleth 

righteousness."  This  is  its  moral  glory,  this  it  is  that  marks  it  off  in  glorious 
contrast  from  its  present  character.  This  world  at  present  is  like  the  house  of  the 
old  leper,  every  part  defiled.  But  "  righteousness  "  will  dwell  in  its  future  state. 
1.  It  will  dwell  universally.  2.  It  will  dwell  supremely.  Now,  wherever  found,  it 
is  in  a  servile  state.  Eight  is  under  the  foot  of  might.  3.  It  will  dwell  exclusively. 
There  will  be  nothing  of  an  opposite  character.  4.  It  will  dwell  permanently.  Its 
regions  will  never  be  invaded,  its  authority  wUl  never  be  shaken,  its  glory  will 
never  be  overshadowed  by  evil.  This  indwelling  righteousness  is  its  glory.  The 
most  bright  and  majestic  objects  of  nature  looked  at  through  a  corrupt  heart  are 
uninteresting.  No  one  can  see  God's  beauty  in  the  external  world  who  has  not 
moral  beauty  within  ;  no  one  can  catch  the  sweet  harmonies  without  who  has  not 
the  moral  harmonies  within.  The  soul  is  the  measure  and  mirror  of  man's  universe. 
III.  That  the  new  heavens  and  earth  ake  objects  of  prospective  interests  to 
THE  good.  "  We,  according  to  His  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth." 
This  looking  implies  two  things — 1.  Sufiicient  evidence  to  believe  that  these  new 
heavens  and  earth  will  appear.  Looking  means  expecting — expecting  implies 
reason.  2.  A  conviction  that  some  advantages  wiU  accrue  from  the  appearance. 
Looking  implies  desire — desire  implies  the  desirable.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
qualities  of  the  new  earth: — I.  This  earth  is  perishing.  All  the  productions  of 
nature,  aU  the  works  of  art,  all  the  arrangements  of  pohcy  that  regard  it,  perish  ; 
man,  its  lord  and  master,  is  short-lived  and  perishing.  II.  The  nature  of  the 
EARTH  which  IS  TO  SUCCEED  THE  PRESENT.  1.  The  earth  beyond  the  grave  is  new  ; 
by  which  we  are  to  understand  that  it  is  as  perfect  in  its  structure  and  as  attractive 
in  its  appearance  as  if  it  had  just  come  from  the  hands  of  its  Creator.  No 
inundations  have  deluged  it ;  no  torrents  have  disfigured  it.  No  lapse  of  years 
impairs  its  beauty,  or  introduces  among  its  objects  anything  like  ruin.  2.  In  the 
earth  beyond  the  grave  "  dwelleth  righteousness";  by  which  we  may  understand 
that  it  is  the  habitation  of  the  righteous,  and  the  place  where  their  work  of 
righteousness  is  rewarded.  Conclusion :  1.  The  illustration  of  the  text  shows  the 
value  of  righteousness.  Eevolutions  shake  the  thrones  of  princes  ;  but  righteousness 
is  raised  on  everlasting  foundations,  and  they  who  have  taken  their  seat  there  cannot 
be  moved.  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  enforces  heavenly  mindedness.  Set  thy 
affections  on  that  world  which  is  lasting  as  thyself,  and  which  only  is  capable  of 
yielding  thee  perfect  bliss.  3.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  enforces  trust  in  God.  He 
whose  word  made  and  wUl  unmake  the»world  is  the  only  stay  for  you.  4.  The 
doctrine  of  the  text  should  awaken  devout  gi'atitude  to  Christ.  (IF.  Thorhurn.) 
Seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be  diligent — Wonders  in  man''s  future  history: — 

I.  That  the  wonders  in  man's  future  are  transcendentlt  great.  "  Such  things." 

II.  That  these  wonders  ake  anticipated  by  some.  "Ye  look  for  such  things."  1. 
They  are  expected  for  very  good  reasons.  (1)  They  are  certain.  (2)  We  have  an 
interest  in  them.  These  are  good  reasons.  2.  They  are  expected  with  very  different 
feelings.  By  some  with  indifference,  by  some  with  dread,  by  some  with  rapturous 
joy.  HI.  Th-i^t  these  wonders  demand  personal  preparedness.  How  shall  I 
become  prepared  to  meet  them?  The  text  suggests  two  things  as  an  answer.  1. 
Reconciliation  with  God.  "  Found  of  him  in  peace."  2.  Sanctification.  "  Without 
spot  and  blameless."  IV.  That  these  wonders  demand  Christian  earnestness. 
"Be  dUigent."  1.  Think  of  the  greatness  of  your  work.  2.  The  brevity  of  your 
probationary  period.  (F.  F.  Thomas.)  Christian  diligence,  with  its  motives 
and  end  : — I.  Persons  addressed.  "  Wherefore,  beloved,"  &c.  1.  Beloved  of  God. 
That  the  people  of  God  are  beloved  by  Him,  we  infer  from  the  titles  by  which  He 
distinguishes  them  (Deut.  xxxiii.  12  ;  Neh.  xiii.  26  ;  Dan.  ix.  23 ;  Mai.  iii.  17  ;  Kom. 
ix.  25).  2.  Beloved  of  each  other.  II.  Events  anticipated.  "Ye  look  for  such 
things."    m.  A  chabge  given.     "  Be  diligent."     DiUgence  is  opposed  to  idleness, 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

slothfulness,  or  inattention.     {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermoiis.)         "  Be   dili- 
gent "  ; — I.  The   clear  hope  which  should  fill  our  future.     "  Seeing  that  ye 
look  for  such  things."    What  things  ?     Peter  has  been  drawing  a  very  vivid  picture 
of  the  end,  in  two  parts,  one  destructive,  the  other  constructive.     Opticians  make 
glasses  with  three  ranges,  and  write  upon  a  little  bar  which  shifts  their  eye-pieces, 
"  Theatre,"  "  Meld,"  "  Marine."     Which  of  the  three  is  your  glass  set  to?     The 
turn  of  a  button  determines  its  range.     You  can  either  look  at  the  things  close  at 
hand,  or,  if  you  set  the  eye-piece  right,  and  use  the  strongest,  you  can  see  the  stars. 
Which  is  it  to  be  ?     The  shorter  range  shows  you  possibilities ;  the  longer  wiU  show 
you  certainties.     The  shorter  range  shows  you  trifles ;  the  longer,  all  that  you  can 
desire.     How  many  hopes  we  have  outgrown,  whether  they  were  fulfilled  or  disap- 
pointed.    But  we  may  have  one  which  will  ever  move  before  us,  and  ever  draw  our 
desires.     The  greater  vision,  if  we  were  only  wise  enough  to  bring  our  lives  habit- 
ually under  its  influence,  would  at  once  dim  and  ennoble  aU  the  near  future.     II. 
The  definite  aim  which  this  clear  hope   should  impress  upon   life.     If   you 
knew  that  you  were  going  to  emigrate  soon,  and  spend  all  your  life  on  the  other 
side  of  the  world,  in  circumstances  the  outlines  of  which  you  knew,  you  would  be  a 
fool  if  you  did  not  set  yourself  to  get  ready  for  them.     The  more  clearly  we  see,  and 
the  more  deeply  we  feel,  that  future  hope,  which  is  disclosed  for  us  in  the  words  of 
my  text,  the  more  it  will  prescribe  a  dominant  purpose  which  will  give  unity,  strength, 
buoyancy,  and  blessedness  to  any  life.     "  Seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be 
diligent."    For  what  ?     "  That  ye  maybe  found  of  Him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and 
blameless."        Every  word  is  weighty  here.     1.  "  That  ye  may  be  found."     That 
implies,  if  not  search,  at  least  investigation.    It  suggests  the  idea  of  the  discovery 
of  the  true  condition,  character,  or  standing  of  a  man  which  may  have  been  hidden 
or  partially  obscured  before — and  now,  at  last,  is  brought  out  clearly.     2.  Then, 
note,  "  Found  in  Him,"  or,  "  in  His  sight."    Then  Christ  is  the  Investigator,  and  it 
is  before  "  those  pure  eyes  and  perfect  judgment "  that  they  have  to  pass,  who  shall 
be  admitted  into  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  "  wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness."       3.  Then  mark  what  is  the  character  which,  discovered  on  investigation 
by  Jesus  Christ,  admits  there  :  "  without  spot  and  blameless."     There  must  be  the 
entire  absence  of  every  blemish,  stain,  or  speck  of  impurity.     "  Blameless  "  is  the 
consequence  of  "  spotless."    That  which  in  itself  is  pure  attracts  no  censure,  whether 
from  the  Judge  or  from  the  assessors  and  onlookers  in  His  court.     In  Peter's  other 
letter  Christ  Himself  is  described  as  a  Lamb  "  without  blemish  and  without  spot." 
And  thus  the  character  that  qualifies  for  the  new  heavens  is  the  copy  in  us  of  Jesus 
Christ.    Still  further,  only  those  who  thus  have  attained  to  the  condition  of  absolute, 
speckless  purity  and  conformity  to  Jesus  Christ,  will  meet  His  searching  eye  in  calm 
tranquillity  and  be  "  found  of  Him  in  peace."     The  steward  brings  his  books  to 
his  master.     If    he  knows  that  there  has  been  trickery  with  the  figures,  and 
embezzlement,  how  the  wretch  shakes  in  his  shoes,  though  he  may  stand  apparently 
calm,  as  the  master's  keen  eye  goes  down  the  columns !     If  he  knows  that  it  is  all 
right,  how  calmly  he  waits  the  master's  signature  at  the  end,  to  pass  the  account! 
If  we  are  to  meet  Jesus  Christ  with  quiet  hearts,  and  we  certainly  shall  meet  Him, 
we  must  meet  Him  "  without  spot  and  blameless."     III.  The  earnest  diligence 
with   which   that  aim  should  be  pursued,  in  the  light  of  that  hope.      Peter 
is  fond  of  using  the  word  which  is  here  translated  "  be  diligent."     Hard  work, 
honest  effort,  continuous  and  persevering,  is  his  simple  recipe  for  all  nobleness. 
The  word  includes  in  its  meaning  earnestness,  and  it  very  frequently  includes  that 
which  is  the  ordinary  consequence  of  earnestness — viz.,  haste  and  economy  of  time. 
1.  Be  in  earnest  in  cultivating  a  Christian  character.     2.  Make  it  your  business  to 
cultivate  a  character  like  that  of  Jesus  Christ.     3.  Make  haste  about  cultivating  a 
Christlike  character.     The  harvest  is  great,  the  toil  is  heavy,  the  sun  is  drawing  to 
the  west,  the  reckoning  is  at  hand.    There  is  no  time  to  lose  ;  set  about  it  as  you  have 
never  done  before,  and  say,  "  This  one  thing  I  do."    {A.  Maclarcn,  D.D.)      Christian 
diligence: — 1.  The  stupendous  events  which  are  expected.   II.  The  important  duty 
WHICH  IS  REQUIRED.    1.  The  oppositc  of  that  moral  stupidity  which  prevails  among 
men.      2.  The  reverse  of  that  indolence  of  soul,  with  which  so  many  engage  in 
the  affairs  of  salvation.     3.  The  opposite  of  a  worldly  spirit.     III.  The  happy  end 
TO  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.   1.  "  That  ye  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace  " — not  in  affluence, 
honour,  ease  or  indulgence  ;  but  in  peace — (1)  With  aU  mankind ;  (2)  With  your 
own  heart;  (3)  With  God,  your  reconciled  Father.     2.  "Without  spot"  (1  John 
i.    7).     Let    us   plunge    with   confidence  into  this  fountain  opened   for  sin  and 
uncleanness.     Let  us  also  be  diligent,  not  only  that  we  may  be  made,  but  also 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  185 

that  we  may  be  preserved  pure.  3.  "Blameless";  your  holy  love  so  manifest,  your 
justification  and  acceptance  so  clear,  that  bad  men  and  devils  dare  not,  good  men 
and  angels  cannot,  and  God  will  not,  lay  anything  to  your  charge.  (Jas.  Bromley.) 
That  ye  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace. — Peace  with  God  : — 1.  Observe,  that 
whatever  be  our  state  or  character,  we  shall  all  be  found  of  God.  If  we  are 
sinners,  and  die  such,  our  sins  will  find  us  out.  2.  As  all  will  be  found  of  God  at 
last,  so  there  are  some  who  will  be  "  found  of  Him  in  peace."  Such  as  have  had 
the  enmity  of  thsir  hearts  slain  by  Divine  grace.  This  it  is  that  heightens  every 
other  blessing,  alleviates  every  affliction,  and  supports  in  the  agonies  of  death.  3. 
In  order  to  be  found  in  peace  at  last,  it  is  needful  that  we  seek  it  here  with  diligence. 
Let  us  carefully  examine  into  the  state  of  our  souls.  Occupy  till  He  come,  and  then 
His  coming  will  be  neither  a  terror  nor  surprise.  4.  Let  us  qow  inquire  who  they 
are  that  will  be  found  of  God  in  peace.  (1)  Those  only  whom  God  finds  in  this 
world,  and  brings  into  a  state  of  grace.  (2)  Those  shall  be  found  of  God  in 
peace  who  here  have  found  Him.  Some  seek  and  find  Him  in  the  closet,  some  in 
the  public  assembly,  and  some  on  a  sick  and  dying  bed.  Some  in  their  youth,  and 
others  in  more  advanced  years.  If  we  do  not  find  Him  as  a  friend  and  a  father. 
He  will  find  us  as  a  judge  and  avenger.  (3)  Those  only  will  be  found  of  God  in 
peace  who  are  found  in  Christ.  This  is  what  Paul  so  earnestly  desired :  "  That 
I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  Him."  (4)  Those  only  will  be  found  of 
Him  in  peace  in  whom  some  good  thing  is  found  towards  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
Our  nature  must  be  renewed.  (5)  Those  only  will  be  found  of  God  in  peace 
whom  He  finds  walking  in  the  paths  of  peace.  Religion  does  not  so  much  consist 
in  talking  of  God  as  in  acting  for  Him  ;  not  in  theory  but  in  practice.  Improve- 
ment :  1.  The  subject  administers  reproof  to  the  careless,  who  content  themselves 
with  some  sluggish  attempts,  but  who  are  never  in  earnest  about  salvation.  2. 
We  may  hence  learn  that  it  is  possible  for  persons  to  be  satisfied  about  themselves, 
and  to  have  a  kind  of  peace  in  their  own  minds,  and  yet  not  be  found  of  God  in 
peace.  3.  We  see  the  suitableness  and  importance  of  the  advice  given  us  in  the 
text :  "Be  diligent,  that  ye  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace."     (B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  longsuffering  of  our  Lord  is  salvation. — The  longsuffering  of 
God : — I.  The  fact  of  the  longsuffering  of  God.  Sentence  of  condemnation  is 
not  speedily  executed.  The  blessings  of  health  and  prosperity  often  accompany  the 
sinner  all  through  his  course  of  rebellion.  The  patience  of  God  appears  inexhaustible. 
II.  The  generous  object  of  God's  longsuffering.  1.  God  bears  with  transgres- 
sors not  because  He  is  ignorant  of  their  actions.  2.  Not  because  He  is  indifferent 
to  their  actions.  3.  Not  because  He  wants  the  power  "  to  avenge  Him  of  His 
adversaries."     4.  God  bears  with  sinners  because  His  name  and  His  nature  is  love. 

(1)  It  is  the  actual  design  of  God  by  this  longsuffering  to  bring  men  to  salvation. 

(2)  The  tendency  of  this  longsuffering,  as  well  as  God's  design,  is  to  salvation.  (3) 
The  actual  effect  of  this  longsuffering  on  the  part  of  God  is  salvation.  But  though 
the  longsuffering  of  God  be  thus  designed  to  be  salvation,  yet  "  the  day  of  the  Lord 
will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  There  is  a  period  to  the  Divine  patience.  (G.  T. 
Noel,  M.A.)  The  forbearance  of  God,  ending  in  the  salvation  of  men: — I.  The 
longsuffering  of  the  Lord.  1.  It  may  be  defined  as  the  suffering  of  opposition, 
injuries,  and  insults,  for  a  long  time  without  punishing  them.  2.  The  instances 
and  displays  of  the  longsuffering  of  God  are  amply  recorded  in  the  Bible.  8.  And 
the  world,  through  all  the  ages  of  its  being,  has  presented  the  same  picture.  What 
has  been  the  history  of  every  nation  ?  of  every  city  ?  of  every  village  ?  of  every 
family  ?  of  every  person  ?  A  record  of  Divine  patience.  4.  Let  us  suggest  a  few 
considerations  calculated  to  put  the  longsuffering  of  God  in  a  clear,  strong  light. 
(1)  The  pointedness  of  our  offences.  It  is  this  which  gives  to  sin  its  evil.  It  is 
pointed  against  God.  It  is  a  thrust  at  His  throne.  (2)  That  entireness  which 
belongs  to  the  sin  of  man.  No  counterbalancing  conduct.  There  is  no  mixture  in 
the  conduct  of  unconverted  men  towards  God.  There  may  be  some  things  well 
towards  man.  But  towards  God  all  is  wrong.  (3)  The  inexcusableness  also  of 
offences  against  God  tends  to  enhance  our  views  of  His  longsuffering.  Has  God 
ever  given  you  any  reason  to  treat  Him  as  you  have  treated  Him  ?  (4)  The 
ingratitude  of  our  offences  must  also  be  remembered.  (5)  The  implacableness 
of  offenders  against  God  renders  His  longsuffering  the  more  remarkable.     II.  In 

WHAT    SENSE    THE    LONGSUFFERING    OF    THE    LoRD    IS    SAID    TO    BE    SALVATION.         1.    It   IS 

only  by  a  reference  to  the  great  purpose  of  salvation  that  we  can  satisfactorily 
account  for  the  longsuffering  of  the  Lord.  2.  Consequently  the  longsuffering  of 
the  Lord  is  to  afford  adequate  occasion  and  room  for  carrying  the  plan  of  salvation 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

into  execution.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  standing  indication  to  men  of  the  willingness 
of  God  to  save.  4.  It  is  then  a  motive  to  induce  men  to  be  saved.  It  is  part  of 
that  goodness  which  leadeth  men  to  repentance.  5.  But  salvation  is  often  the  blessed 
result  of  Divine  forbearance.  This  is  its  grand  issue.  The  longsuffering  of  the 
Lord  is  salvation  in  actual  effect  and  eternal  consequences.  It  ends  in  this.  III. 
Enforce  the  injunction  to  estimate  rightly  the  longsuffering  of  the  Lord. 
"  Account  that  the  longsuffering  of  the  Lord  is  salvation."  See  that  you  put  this 
interpretation  upon  Divine  forbearance,  esteem  it  as  salvation.  1.  Do  not  then 
make  it  the  food  of  scepticism.  This  was  the  wretched  mistake  of  those  ungodly 
persons  of  whom  the  apostle  had  spoken.  "  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked  ; 
what  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap,"  whether  it  be  early  or  late.  2.  Neither 
regard  the  longsuffering  of  the  Lord  as  connivance.  Do  not  think  that  because  He 
does  not  smite,  He  therefore  smiles.  3.  Nor  must  you  account  that  the  longsuffer- 
ing of  the  Lord  is  security.  Whilst  you  are  saying  peace  and  safety,  sudden 
destruction  may  come  upon  you.  Account  that  the  longsuffering  of  the  Lord  is 
salvation.  Regard  this  as  the  end.  Believe  that  you  are  allowed  and  encouraged 
to  seek  that  end.  Let  the  longsuffering  of  God  be  your  introduction  to  His  mercy. 
You  may  turn  this  stream  of  life  into  poison  and  death.  {Essex  Remembrancer.) 
God's  longsuffering  :  an  ai^peal  to  the  conscience : — I.  Admire  the  longsuffer- 
ing OF  God.  1.  Admire  the  longsuffering  of  God  as  to  peculiar  sins.  Look, 
they  make  images  of  wood  or  stone,  and  they  say  "  These  are  God,"  and  they  set 
up  these  things  in  the  place  of  Him  that  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 
How  does  He  bear  it — He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens,  in  whose  hand  our  breath 
is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways?  Others,  even  in  this  country,  blaspheme  God. 
And  oh,  how  is  it  that  God  bears  it  when  they  dare  imprecate  His  curse  upon 
their  bodies  and  their  souls  ?  Besides,  there  are  those  who  use  fair  speech, 
and  yet  blaspheme  most  intolerably.  How  is  it  that  the  Thrice-holy  One 
bears  with  them  ?  And  then  there  are  others  who  wallow  in  unmentionable 
impurity  and  uncleanness.  The  moon  sees  a  world  of  foulness,  fornication,  and 
adultery :  and  yet,  0  God,  thou  bearest  it !  And  then,  when  I  turn  my  thoughts 
another  way,  to  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  to  the  grinding  down  of  those  who, 
with  the  hardest  labour,  can  scarcely  earn  bread  enough  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together,  how  does  the  just  God  permit  it?  2.  Especially  notice  that  this  long- 
suffering  of  God  is  seen  in  peculiar  persons.  In  certain  persons  sins  are  greater 
than  the  same  sins  would  be  in  other  people.  They  have  been  favoured  with  a 
tender  conscience,  and  with  good  instruction,  so  that  when  they  sin  they  sin  with  a 
vengeance.  3.  It  is  wonderful  that  God  should  have  such  longsuffering  when  we 
look  at  the  peculiar  circumstances  under  which  some  men  sin.  (\)  Some  men  sin 
against  God  wilfully,  when  they  have  no  temptation  to  it,  and  can  plead  no 
necessity.  (2)  Some  manifest  the  longsuffering  of  God  very  wonderfully  in  the 
length  of  time  in  which  they  have  been  spared  to  sin.  Remember  that  it  would  be 
easy  on  God's  part  to  be  rid  of  you.  One  wish,  and  the  sinner  will  never  provoke 
Him  any  more,  nor  refuse  His  mercy  again.  He  will  be  gone  out  of  the  land  of 
hope.  II.  Take  the  right  account  of  the  longsuffering  of  god.  "  Account 
that  the  longsuffering  of  our  Lord  is  salvation."  What  does  this  mean  ?  1.  Does 
it  mean,  first,  as  to  the  saving  of  the  many  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is,  as  I  believe, 
to  have  the  pre-eminence.  Christ  came  not  to  destroy  the  world,  but  that  the 
world  through  Him  might  be  saved  ;  and  so,  as  every  year  rolls  by,  let  us  account 
it  salvation,  and  spend  and  be  spent  in  the  hope  that  by  any  means  we  may  save 
some.  2.  The  next  meaning  of  this  is  to  any  of  you  who  are  unconverted.  I  want 
you  to  account  that  the  longsuffering  of  God  in  sparing  you  means  to  you  salvation. 
Why  are  you  here  to-night?  Surely  it  is  salvation.  I  met  years  ago  a  soldier  who 
had  ridden  in  the  charge  of  Balaclava.  He  was  one  of  the  few  that  came  back 
when  the  saddles  were  emptied  right  and  left  of  him.  I  could  not  help  getting  into 
a  corner,  and  saying  to  him,  "Dear  sir,  do  you  not  think  that  God  has  some 
design  of  love  to  you  in  sparing  you  when  so  many  fell  ?  Have  you  given  your 
heart  to  Him  ?"  I  felt  that  I  had  a  right  to  say  that.  Perhaps  I  speak  to  some  of 
you  who  were  picked  off  a  wreck  years  ago.  Why  was  that  ?  I  hope  it  was  that  you 
might  be  saved.  You  have  had  a  fever  lately,  and  have  hardly  been  out  before. 
Why  were  you  saved  from  that  fever  when  others  were  cut  down  ?  Surely  it  must 
mean  salvation.  When  Master  Bunyan  was  a  lad,  he  was  so  foolhardy  that,  when 
an  adder  rose  against  him,  he  took  it  in  his  hand,  and  plucked  the  sting  out  of  its 
mouth,  but  he  was  not  harmed.  It  was  his  turn  to  stand  sentinel  at  the  siege  of 
l^ottingham,  and  as  he  was  going  forth,  another  man  offered  to  take  his  place. 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  187 

This  man  was  shot,  and  Master  Bunyan  thus  escaped.  "We  should  have  had  no 
*'  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  if  it  had  not  been  for  that.  Did  not  God  preserve  him  on 
purpose  that  he  might  be  saved  ?  3.  This  text  seems  to  me  to  have  a  bearing  upon 
the  people  of  God.  "  Account  that  the  longsuffering  of  God  is  salvation."  I  must 
turn  the  text  to  give  you  really  what  lies  in  it.  It  is  salvation  to  a  man  to  be  put 
side  by  side  with  Christ.  If  you  have  to  bear  the  jests  of  the  ungodly — if  God  spares 
them,  and  permits  them  to  persecute  you,  be  glad  of  it,  and  reckon  it  as  salvation, 
for  now  you  are  made  partaker  of  Christ's  sufferings.  What  more  salvation  do  you 
desire  ?  Remember,  too,  that  when  the  ungodly  persecute  the  righteous,  they  give  them 
the  mark  of  salvation,  for  of  old  it  was  so.  He  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  perse- 
cuted him  that  was  born  after  the  spirit.  Once  more :  reckon  tne  longsuifering  of 
God,  when  it  permits  the  ungodly  to  slander  and  injure  you,  as  salvation,  because 
it  tends  to  your  salvation  by  driving  you  nearer  to  the  Lord.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.) 
The  longsuffering  of  God : — God  bears  long  with  sinful  men,  to  give  them  further 
opportunities  of  securing  salvation.  1.  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  the  long- 
suffering  of  God  has,  in  many  instances,  just  the  contrary  effect.  "Because 
sentence  is  not  speedily  executed  against  an  evil  work,  therefore  the  hearts  of  the 
sons  of  men  are  fully  set  within  them  to  do  evil."  When  the  prophet  Isaiah 
denounced  the  judgments  of  God,  he  was  met  with  the  reply,  "  The  vision  that  he 
seeth  is  afar  off ;  "  and  when  his  prophecy  was  not  immediately  fulfilled  they  said, 
"  The  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  vision  faileth."  Myriads  have  been  ruined  for 
ever  by  abusing  the  longsuffering  of  God.  They  never  intended  to  brave  His  wrath, 
but  they  saw  so  little  cause  for  immediate  alarm  that  they  ventured  a  little  further, 
until  they  had  gone  too  far  to  retrace  their  steps.  Have  you  ever  noticed  that  our 
Saviour  seldom  warns  us  against  a  deliberate  rejection  of  the  gospel  offers  ?  He 
knew  that  such  guilt  would  be  rare.  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great 
salvation?  "  And  how  often  does  the  Saviour  call  upon  us  "  to  watch,"  and  warn 
us  that  His  coming  will  be  "  as  a  thief  in  the  night  "  !  2.  And  it  is  astonishing 
with  what  ingenuity  men  can  encourage  this  presumptive  confidence  in  the  long- 
suffering  of  God.  Listen,  for  instance,  to  their  remarks  at  funerals.  If  it  be  an 
aged  person  that  has  deceased,  they  say.  Ah  !  he  had  lived  to  a  good  old  age,  and  it 
was  a  matter  of  course  that  he  should  die.  If  it  be  an  infant  that  is  cut  off,  they  say. 
There  are  so  many  diseases  to  which  little  ones  are  subject.  In  another  case  the 
remark  concerning  the  deceased  will  be.  He  has  been  very  imprudent,  and  brought 
his  death  upon  himself.  Or,  in  yet  another  case.  This  person  has  long  been 
declining,  and  had  the  seeds  of  death  within  him  ;  but  I  have  no  such  symptoms  of 
decay  or  dissolution.  All  this  is  to  keep  off  the  idea  of  dying,  and  to  encourage  the 
hope  that  the  longsuffering  of  God  will  wait  yet  longer.  3.  Indeed  it  is  an  easy 
matter  to  encourage  a  vain  trust  in  the  longsuffering  God  if  we  are  so  disposed. 
How  many  things  there  are  to  help  on  presumption  if  we  are  inclined  to  indulge  it ! 
Time  flies  silently.  Sickness  and  death  do  their  work  very  silently.  Men  do  not  fall 
like  the  leaves  in  a  cold  climate,  where  a  single  night's  frost  can  strip  every  tree  of  its 
verdure ;  but  the  process  is  rather  like  the  falling  of  the  foliage  in  a  tropical  region, 
where  leaf  drops  after  leaf,  and  is  succeeded  by  another  springing  forth  in  its  place, 
so  that  the  eye  scarce  notices  the  change.  See  how  noiselessly  even  our  religious 
opportunities  slip  away  from  us !  Many  have  spent  the  greatest  part  of  their 
earthly  Sabbaths,  and  scarce  reflected  that  they  are  gone.  God  does  not,  in 
general,  deal  with  us  by  startling  methods  ;  He  uses  these  as  rarely  as  the  thunders 
and  earthquakes  of  the  natural  world,  but  speaks  to  us  for  the  most  part  in  gentle 
and  persuasive  tones.  4.  It  may  be  asked,  perhaps,  why  did  God  adopt  such  a 
method  of  dealing  with  us  ?  If  He  had  struck  the  offender  dead  by  a  visible  inter- 
position ;  if  He  had  called  from  heaven,  as  He  did  to  Saul  of  Tarsus,  to  persuade  us 
to  repentance,  we  should  have  been  awed  into  obedience.  But  it  would  have  made 
but  little  difference  if  God  had  dealt  with  us  by  startling  methods.  One  who  will 
slumber  may  be  startled  out  of  it  a  few  times,  but  by  and  by  he  would  sleep  as  the 
sailor  does  amid  the  rocking  billows  on  the  mast-head.  Now,  let  me  ask,  what 
better  mode  God  could  have  adopted  of  saving  souls  than  that  which  for  years  He 
has  been  using  without  success  ?  Do  you  say  that  the  reason  and  understanding 
must  be  convinced  before  one  can  become  a  Christian  ?  And  has  not  God  done 
enough  to  satisfy  your  reason  ?  Do  you  say  that  the  heart  must  be  moved  by  love 
and  mercy,  and  not  by  terrors  ?  Have  there  not  been  mercy  and  love  in  God's 
dealings  with  you  ?  If  the  compassion  of  our  God  was  not  infinite,  these  protracted 
sins  against  His  longsuffering  wt^uld  a  great  while  ago  have  drawn  down  His  wrath. 
■5.  And  it  is  because  that  righteous  anger  may  finally  be  incurred  that  I  would  urge 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

you  to  sin  no  more  against  the  longsuffering  of  God.  These  days  are  passing  off 
■with  so  little  to  excite  your  fears ;  these  seasons,  when  you  have  little  concern  for 
your  souls,  are  most  of  all  to  be  dreaded.  They  are  sealing  your  destiny,  as  the 
whirlpool  draws  in  the  boat  without  a  single  ripple  for  some  time  to  betray  its  influ- 
ence, until  at  last  destruction  roars  around,  too  late  for  retreat.  These  fair  days  of 
seeming  peace  which  God  is  giving  you,  are  the  working  days  for  laying  up  the 
eternal  harvest.     {W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  The  longsuffering  of  God  to  be  accounted 

salvatio7i : — Our  own  existence  here  is  a  proof  of  the  longsuffering  of  God.  By  our 
apostasy  we  have  forfeited  all  title  to  His  favour  and  protection.  That  sentence, 
however,  is  not  yet  executed.     I.  The  statement  of  the  text  is  to  be  considered 

GENERALLY   AS   A   LAW,    OR   RULE,    OR    PRINCIPLE,    OF    THE    DiVINE     GOVERNMENT.         The 

longsuffering  of  God  is  salvation,  not  directly  in  itself,  but  indirectly  in  subordina- 
tion to  a  fixed  plan  and  purpose  of  salvation.  It  is  not  the  longsuffering  of  God 
that  saves  a  single  sinner,  but  the  love  of  God  in  Christ ;  and  His  longsuffering 
contributes  to  the  sinner's  salvation  in  no  other  way  than  by  placing  within  his 
reach,  and  pi-essing  upon  his  acceptance,  the  gospel  overtures  of  mercy.  God  has 
but  one  method  of  saving  sinners.  It  is  not  His  longsuffering  that  saves  them,  but 
that  grace  for  the  exercise  of  which,  on  their  behalf.  His  longsuffering  affords  scope 
and  space.  On  this  point  be  not  deceived.  Consider  not  God  as  acting  merely  from 
the  impulse,  so  to  speak,  of  personal  feelings  of  compassion,  when  He  spares. 
Regard  Him  as  sustaining  a  public,  an  official  character,  in  which  He  has  high 
authority  to  vindicate,  and  good  government  to  maintain.  True,  He  is  full  of 
tenderest  feelings  of  pity  to  you  personally ;  but,  then,  as  a  judge  may  not  gratify 
his  personal  feelings  as  a  man,  without  reference  to  his  state  and  duty  as  a  judge 
upholding  law  and  order,  so  God,  in  His  compassionate  regard  to  you,  lays  not 
aside  His  regard  to  the  claims  of  His  own  sovereignty,  and  the  sanctity  of  His  own 
administration.  The  very  giving  up  of  His  Son  to  be  sin  for  you  is  the  proof  also 
of  His  concern  for  the  honour  and  the  majesty  of  that  justice  which  was  to  be  pre- 
served untarnished  at  such  a  cost.  It  is  in  the  character  of  a  just  God  and  a. 
Saviour  that  He  is  longsuffering ;  not  in  relenting  pity,  reversing  His  sentence  of 
judgment.  This  great  salvation  He  now  offers  to  you.  Be  not  so  infatuated  as  to 
think  you  may  dispense  with  it.  II.  This  law  or  principle  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, that  the  longsuffering  of  God  is  to  be  accounted  the  salvation  of  man,  may  be 
APPLIED  TO  THE  CASE  OF  TEMPORAL  JUDGMENTS,  and  may  explain  the  Lord's  method 
of  dealing  with  us  in  regard  to  those  evils  to  which,  even  in  this  life,  as  sinners  we 
are  exposed.  1.  God,  in  sending  temporal  judgments,  often  gives  previous  warning, 
and  interposes  delay,  that  by  timely  precautions  they  may  be  averted  ;  and  in  this 
sense  His  longsuffering  is  to  be  accounted  salvation.  Do  your  part  to  render 
harsher  measures  needless,  by  taking  warning  in  time.  2.  There  is  another  way  in 
which  the  longsuffering  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  sending  of  temporal  judgments. 
He  gives  us  time,  not  perhaps  to  avert  them  altogether,  but  yet  so  to  prepare  for  their 
coming,  that,  when  they  do  come,  they  shall  come  as  fatherly  chastisements,  not  as 
judgments  in  fact  at  all,  but  as  mercies.  And,  in  this  sense — a  far  higher  and  more 
important  sense  than  is  implied  in  the  removal  of  any  temporal  calamity — the  long- 
suffering  of  God  is  to  be  accounted  salvation.  III.  But  the  most  important  view  for 
us  to  take  of  the  maxim  of  our  text  is  in  its  application  to  that  judgment  of 

ETERNAL   WRATH   IN    THE    LIFE    TO    COME,    TO   WHICH    WE    STAND    EXPOSED.        Here     it     is 

especially  that  the  longsuffering  of  our  Lord  is  to  be  accounted  salvation.  In  this 
view  of  it,  our  text  suggests  the  true  explanation  of  that  most  perplexing  of  all 
enigmas — the  present  state  of  sinners  on  the  earth  seeming  to  be  tolerated  by  a  holy 
and  righteous  God.  It  is  a  state,  we  now  see,  in  which  God  is  longsuffering  that  rnan 
may  be  saved.  Be  it  remembered,  however,  it  is  only  a  respite,  and  a  respite  which 
does  not  by  any  means  or  of  necessity  imply  an  ultimate  reprieve.  You  are  spared 
for  a  little,  but  you  are  spared  for  a  particular  purpose ;  and  if  that  purpose  be 
not  attained,  there  is  no  other  resource — the  sentence  must  take  effect.  {R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Our  beloved  brother  Paul  ...  in  all  his  epistles. — St.  Paul  and  his 
writings  : — This  passage  proves  that,  at  the  time  Peter  wrote,  some  epistles  of  Paul 
existed,  and  intimates  that  they  were  written  according  to  a  kind  of  wisdom  which 
he  had  supernaturally  received.  It  proves,  also,  that  they  were  considered  of  much 
authority.  This  passage  declares,  also,  that,  from  some  cause,  either  in  the  writer 
or  the  subject,  there  were  some  things  in  these  epistles  hard  to  be  understood,  and 
likely  to  be  perverted.     It  is  my  present  design  to  give  you,  in  the  first  place» 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  189 

the  history  and  character  of  St.  Paul,  and  then  to  consider  the  causes  of  that 
obscurity  in  his  writings  of  which  Peter  complains.     I.  Those  portions  of  his  life 

WHICH  TEND  MOST  TO  ILLUSTRATE  HIS  CHARACTER  ARE  HIS  CONDUCT  BEFORE  HIS  CON- 
VERSION,   AND   THE    CONSEQUENCES    OF    THAT   REMARKABLE   EVENT.        In    the    histOiy   of 

Paul  we  have  two  different  men  to  describe,  the  persecutor  and  the  apostle.  Nothing 
can  be  imagined  more  complete  than  the  change  of  views  in  this  apostle,  yet  he  pre- 
serves through  the  whole  of  his  life  what  may  be  called  the  original  stamina 
of  his  character.  There  is  nothing  which  impeaches  his  integrity,  or  which 
ought  to  render  us  suspicious  of  his  moral  character.  He  was  only  actuated 
by  a  species  of  mistaken  zeal,  which  has  been  common  enough  in  every  age.  But 
God  had  marked  out  this  young  man  for  the  most  eminent  apostle  of  that  faith 
which  he  was  now  intent  upon  exterminating.  If  we  suppose  Paul's  character  such 
as  I  have  represented  it  to  be,  there  wanted  nothing  but  to  show  to  this  young  man, 
by  the  irresistible  evidence  of  his  senses,  that  this  very  Jesus,  whom  he  regarded  as 
a  crucified,  detestable  malefactor,  was  really  alive  in  power  to  turn  the  whole 
current  of  his  conduct,  sentiments,  and  character.  This  mercy  God  granted  him. 
In  summing  up  the  traits  of  Paul's  character,  you  will  observe  how  singularly  he 
was  qualified  for  that  office  to  which  he  was  especially  destined,  the  apostleship  of 
the  Gentiles  throughout  the  Roman  Empire.  He  was  the  only  one  of  the  apostles 
who  appears  to  have  had  what  may  be  called  a  liberal  education,  or,  at  least,  who 
had  any  tincture  of  the  literature  and  philosophy  of  the  Greeks.  The  mission 
which  was  given  him  demanded  not  only  a  strength  of  genius  like  his,  but  an 
ardour  which  no  discouragement  should  quench.  I  will  close  this  division  of  my 
subject  with  two  reflections.  1.  In  the  first  place,  notwithstanding  the  extreme 
ardour  of  this  apostle's  imagination,  nothing  which  he  has  left  us  discovers  any- 
thing of  fanatical  delusion.  2.  How  important  must  that  cause  be  which  such  a 
man  as  Paul  could  maintain  with  such  amazing  exertions,  such  unwearied  zeal, 
through  a  long  life  of  such  discouragements,  privations,  persecutions  and  indignities, 
even  to  the  hour  of  his  martyrdom !  He  saw  the  happiness  of  the  world  suspended 
on  the  reception  of  Christianity.  He  found  that  the  dearest  interests  of  the  souls 
of   men   were   entrusted  to  him.     11.  I  proceed  to  state,  and,  if  possible,  to 

ILLUSTRATE,    THE     SOURCES    OF     THE    OBSCURITY     WHICH    PARTICULARLY     ATTENDS     THE 

apostolical  parts  of  the  New  Testament.  1.  The  first  source  of  obscurity  is, 
that  they  are  private  letters,  addressed  to  particular  societies,  or  individuals,  upon 
particular  occasions.  2.  Another  cause  of  the  obscurity  of  Paul's  epistles  is,  the 
peculiar  genius  of  the  man.  His  imagination  was  easily  inflamed  with  the  subject 
on  which  he  was  writing.  The  motions  of,  his  mind  were  exceedingly  rapid.  3. 
The  education  and  peculiar  circumstances  of  Paul  contribute,  also,  to  the  obscurity 
of  his  epistles.  Paul  was  a  man  whose  head  was  filled  with  the  Jewish  learning  of 
his  age ;  and  he,  no  doubt,  writes  often  like  one  whose  early  notions  were  formed 
in  the  school  of  Gamaliel.  Hence  he  uses  many  words  in  a  signification  which  is 
now  extremely  difiicult  to  settle.  The  word  "  justification  "  is  a  remarkable  instance 
of  this.  It  is  doubtful,  in  some  instances,  whether  he  means  by  it  a  benefit  relating 
only  to  this  life,  or  extending  to  our  eternal  condition.  The  term  "  law  "  is  another 
of  similar  ambiguity  ;  and  it  is  only  by  careful  attention  that  we  can  determine,  in 
particular  passages,  whether  the  apostle  means  by  it  the  whole  Jewish  dispensation 
or  the  ceremonial  part  of  it,  or  that  moral  law  which  is  equally  obligatory  on  every 
rational  creature.  4.  A  fourth  source  of  obscurities  in  the  epistles  is  to  be  found  in 
a  maxim  of  interpretation  which  has  too  much  prevailed  without  reason  :  "  that  we 
must  expect  to  find  in  the  present  circumstances  of  Christianity  a  meaning  for,  or 
something  answering  to,  every  appellation  and  expression  which  occurs  in  Scrip- 
ture ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  applying  to  the  personal  condition  of  Christians  at  this 
day,  those  titles,  phrases,  propositions,  and  arguments  which  belong  solely  to  the 
situation  of  Christianity  at  its  first  institution."  (J.  S.  Buckminster.)  The 
authority  of  Church  guides  : — I.  And  that  which  first  entitles  the  governors  of  the 
Church  to  a  superiority  over  their  subjects  is  that  special  ordination  and  commission 
which  they  have  received  from  Christ  to  instruct  the  world  in  aU  necessary  truths, 
and  that  charge  which  He  hath  laid  upon  others  to  obey  them.  II.  The  reason- 
ableness of  this  submission  will  appear  from  those  promises  of  assistance  which 
Christ  hath  made  to  them.  And  those  are  illumination,  direction,  and  power. 
Illumination  in  things  obscure ;  direction  in  things  difficult ;  power  to  encounter 
and  overcome  all  opposition.  III.  The  reasonableness  of  this  submission  will 
appear  from  their  study  and  learning  in  Divine  matters,  and  from  the  far  less 
knowledge   and  ordinary   capacity  in   others.      IV.    The  necessity  of   this  sub- 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

mission  appears    as    it    is    the   only  means  to   bestore   peace   and   unity    to 

THE    ChTJBCH  ;    HAPPINESS    AND    TRANQUILLITY    TO    THE     StATE.       (MUeS    Bame,     IJ.D.) 

In  wMch  are  some  tilings  hard  to  be  understood. — Why  Scnpture  is  hard  to  he 
understood: — The  mysteries  of  salvation  are  hard  but  to  our  understanding;  the 
difficulty  is  not  in  their  own  nature  but  in  our  capacity.  As  some  rural  inhabitant 
being  admitted  into  a  royal  palace  admires  the  building,  and  is  transported  with 
the  rareness  and  magnificence  of  it ;  and  much  of  it  he  understands :  when  he 
comes  into  the  hall  he  knows  that  that  is  a  place  for  feeding ;  when  into  the  gallery, 
he  knows  that  to  be  a  place  for  walking ;  when  into  the  bed-chamber,  he  knows 
that  to  be  a  place  for  sleeping ;  but  into  some  rooms  he  is  brought,  no  whit  inferior 
to  the  former  for  state  and  pleasure,  the  use  whereof  he  knows  not ;  will  he  now 
censure  the  architect  for  making  of  such  unnecessary  and  superfluous  places  ?  or 
not  rather  lay  the  blame,  where  it  is,  upon  his  own  ignorance  ?  The  Scripture  is 
a  goodly  edifice,  the  Almighty  King's  palace ;  whereof  Paul  was  one  of  the  master 
builders.  When  we  read  his  epistles  we  are  surveying  the  rooms  and  receptacles ; 
some  whereof  we  easily  apprehend,  as  1  Tim.  i.  15,  Bom.  viii.  1,  Phil.  iv.  8, 
1  Thess.  V.  17  ;  but  searching  further,  we  light  upon  some  curious  rooms,  bearing 
as  much  art  and  majesty  in  them  as  the  rest,  but  more  obscure  and  mystical,  and 
veiled  with  the  curtain  of  awful  secrecy  ;  such  are  certain  doctrines  of  St  Paul ;  we 
are  not  forbidden  to  view  them,  and  review  them,  to  study  and  meditate  on  them  ; 
but  if  we  cannot  perfectly  understand  them,  far  be  it  from  us  to  tax  St.  Paul  of 
obscurity ;  no,  let  us  impute  the  fault  to  our  own  simplicity.  {Thos.  Adams.) 
Biblical  difficulties : — I.  As  acknowledged  by  the  inspibed.  1.  To  those  who 
reject  the  Bible  on  account  of  its  difficulties.  The  Bible  does  not  profess  to  be  a 
book  easily  understood.  Its  difficulties  are — (1)  Consistent  wi'^h  its  character.  It  is 
a  revelation  of  the  Infinite  directed  to  the  finite.  (2)  Consistent  with  its  intention. 
The  Bible  is  an  educational  book.  The  school  book  which  the  student  has  mastered 
ceases  to  be  educational.  2.  To  those  who  arrogate  a  thorough  comprehension  of 
the  Bible.  II.  As  perverted  by  the  ungodly.  1.  The  perverters  are  here  described. 
"Which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  wrest,  as  they  do  also  the  other 
Scriptures,  unto  their  own  destruction."  2.  The  perversion  is  here  indicated. 
" '  They  wrest ' — pervert.  The  word  here  used  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  derived  from  a  word  meaning  a  windlass,  winch,  instrument  of« 
torture  [aTptjiXi]),  and  means  to  roll  or  wind  on  a  windlass ;  then  to  wrench  or  turn 
away  as  by  the  force  of  a  windlass ;  and  then  to  wrest  or  pervert.  It  implies  a 
turning  out  of  the  way  by  the  application  of  force.  Here  the  meaning  is,  that  they 
apply  those  portions  of  the  Bible  to  a  purpose  for  which  they  were  never  intended." 
3.  Their  destiny  is  here  stated.  "  Their  own  destruction."  What  is  spiritual  des- 
truction ?  The  destruction  of  all  the  blessings  that  can  make  existence  worth 
having — life,  peace,  hope,  &c.  Such  is  the  perversion  of  those  difficulties,  but  what 
is  the  proper  use  of  them  ?  (1)  They  should  superinduce  humility.  Before  their 
majesty  the  intellect  should  fall  prostrate.  (2)  They  should  stimulate  intellectual 
inquiry.  They  challenge  thought — their  oceans  ask  you  to  navigate  them,  their 
hills  to  climb  their  summit,  their  mines  to  dig  and  be  made  rich.  (3)  They  should 
point  to    a    future    life.      (D.    Thomas,   D.D.)  The    mysteriotis    doctrines    of 

Christianity : — I.  We  must  observe,  that  in  a  Divine  revelation  mysterious 
doctrines  could  not  have  been  avoided.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time — 
clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him — His  judgments  are  unsearchable  ;  and 
His  ways  past  finding  out.  II.  That  from  the  limitation  of  our  faculties  our 
infoiimation  mu.st,  of  necessity,  have  its  limits.  In  sciences  merely  human,  one 
discovery  does  little  else  than  produce  the  desire  of  more.  Our  utmost  attainments 
are  still  unsatisfactory  and  incomplete.  Were  the  mysteries  which  at  present  perplex 
us  fully  explained,  others  would  be  brought  within  our  view.  How  far  soever  we 
might  be  permitted  to  advance,  we  must  at  last  reach  the  point  where  our  faculties 
would  fail  us.  III.  These  mysteries  in  religion  are  such  only  with  reference  to 
OUR  UNDERSTANDINGS.  To  US  that  is  difficult  which  we  cannot  perform ;  that  is 
mysterious  which  we  cannot  comprehend.  But  the  difficulty  and  the  mystery 
depend  less  upon  the  objects  themselves  than  upon  the  narrowness  of  our  capacities. 
In  our  future  state  of  existence  we  shall  probably  be  allowed  to  acquire  much  higher 
degrees  of   information   than  we   at   present  possess.     IV.   It   will   tend  still 

FURTHER  TO  RECONCILE  US  TO  THE  MYSTf;RI0US  DOCTRINES  OF  OUR  FAITH,  IF  WE 
SERIOUSLY    REFLECT    THAT    THERE    ARE     MYSTERIES    EQUALLY    UNSEARCHABLE    IN    ALMOST 

EVERYTHING  AROUND  US.  Not  a  subjcct  Can  be  named  which  the  human  mind  can 
be  said  fully  to  understand.     Lessons :  1.  The  difficulty  and  obscurity  inseparable 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  191 

from  some  of  the  articles  of  our  faith  is  an  obvious  reason  that,  whenever  they  are 
discussed  at  all,  they  should  be  discussed  with  caution  and  diffidence.  2.  The 
doctrines,  however,  which  we  cannot  comprehend,  it  is  still  incumbent  upon  us  to 
believe.  We  pursue,  not  what  we  know,  but  what  we  think,  will  promote  our  own 
good.  And  the  same  principle  prevails  in  the  religion  that  we  profess.  3.  Finally, 
while  we  admit  that  the  Christian  revelation  has  its  mysteries,  like  every  other 
work  of  its  Divine  Author,  and  Uke  that  Author  Himself,  we  maintain  that  it 
teaches  plainly  all  that  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  or  to  practise.  (W.  Sparrow, 
D.D.)  The  difficulties  of  Scripture: — The  writings  of  St.  Paul,  occupying  as 
they  do  a  large  portion  of  the  New  Testament,  treat  much  of  the  sublimer  and 
more  difficult  articles  of  Christianity.  There  is  a  great  deal  made  known  to  us  by 
the  Epistles,  which  could  only  imperfectly,  if  at  all,  be  derived  from  the  Gospels. 
It  was  to  be  expected  that  the  New  Testament  would  be  a  progressive  book ;  the 
communications  of  intelligence  growing  with  the  fuller  opening  out  of  the  dispensa- 
tion. And  it  is  a  natural  consequence  on  the  greater  abstruseness  of  the  topics 
handled,  that  the  apostle's  writings  should  present  greater  difficulties  to  the  Biblical 
student.  With  this  admission  of  difficulty  we  must  join  the  likelihood  of  miscon- 
ception. If  a  man  have  error  to  maintain  he  will  turn  for  support  to  passages  of 
Scripture  of  which,  the  real  sense  being  doubtful,  a  plausible  may  be  advanced  on 
the  side  of  his  falsehood.  But  you  will  observe  that,  whilst  St.  Peter  confesses  both 
the  difficulty  and  the  attendant  danger,  he  gives  not  the  slightest  intimation  that 
the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  were  unsuited  to  general  perusal.  Had  St.  Peter  intended 
to  infer  that,  because  obscurity  and  abuse  existed,  there  ought  to  be  prohibition,  it 
is  altogether  unaccountable  that  he  did  not  lay  down  the  inference.  A  fairer 
opportunity  could  never  be  presented  for  the  announcement  of  such  a  rule  as  the 
Eoman  Catholic  advocates.  After  all,  it  is  not  so  much  the  difficulty  which  makes 
the  danger  as  the  temper  in  which  the  Bible  is  perused.  We  desire  to  bring  before 
you  what  we  count  important  considerations,  suggested  by  the  announcement  that 
there  are  difficulties  in  Scripture.  There  "  are  some  things  hard  to  be  understood." 
We  lay  great  stress  on  the  fact  that  it  is  an  inspired  writer  who  gives  this 
decision.  The  Bible  attests  the  difficulties  of  the  Bible.  If  we  knew  the  Bible  to  be 
difficult  only  as  finding  it  difficult,  we  might  be  inclined  to  suppose  it  luminous  to 
others  though  obscure  to  ourselves.  We  should  not  so  thoroughly  understand  that 
the  difficulties  which  one  man  meets  with  in  the  study  of  Scripture  are  not  simply 
produced  by  his  intellectual  inferiority  to  another — no,  nor  by  his  moral  or  spiritual 
inferiority — but  are,  in  a  great  degree,  inherent  in  the  subject  examined,  so  that  no 
equipment  of  learning  and  prayer  will  altogether  secure  their  removal.  We  take 
into  our  hands  the  Bible,  and  receive  it  as  a  communication  of  God's  will,  made, 
in  past  ages,  to  His  creatures.  And  we  know  that,  occupying,  as  all  men  do,  the 
same  level  of  helplessness  and  destitution,  so  that  the  adventitious  circumstances 
of  rank  and  education  bring  with  them  no  differences  in  moral  position,  it  cannot 
be  the  design  of  the  Almighty  that  superior  talent,  or  superior  learning,  should  be 
essential  to  the  obtaining  due  acquaintance  with  revelation.  There  can  be  no 
fairer  expectation  than  that  the  Bible  will  be  intelligible  to  every  capacity,  and  that 
it  will  not,  either  in  matter  or  manner,  adapt  itself  to  one  class  in  preference  to 
another.  And  when,  with  all  this  antecedent  idea  that  revelation  will  condescend 
to  the  very  meanest  understanding,  we  find,  as  it  were  on  the  covers  of  a  book,  the 
description  that  there  are  in  it  "  things  hard  to  be  understood,"  we  may,  at  first, 
feel  something  of  surprise  that  difficulty  should  occm-  when  we  had  looked  for 
simplicity.  And  undoubtedly,  however  fair  the  expectation  just  mentioned,  the 
Bible  is,  in  some  senses,  a  harder  book  for  the  uneducated  man  than  for  the 
educated.  So  far  as  human  instrumentality  is  concerned,  the  great  mass  of  a 
population  must  be  indebted  to  a  few  learned  men  for  any  acquaintance  whatsoever 
with  the  Scriptures.  Never  let  learning  be  of  small  account  in  reference  to 
religion.  But  after  all,  when  St.  Peter  speaks  of  "things  hard  to  be  understood," 
he  cannot  be  considered  as  referring  to  obscurities  which  human  learning  will 
dissipate.  He  certainly  mentions  the  "unlearned"  as  wresting  these  difficulties, 
implying  that  the  want  of  one  kind  of  learning  produced  the  perversion.  But,  of 
course,  he  intends  by  "unlearned"  those  who  were  not  fully  taught  of  the  Spirit, 
and  not  those  who  were  deficient  in  the  acquirements  of  the  academy.  The  "  un- 
learned," in  short,  are  also  "the  unstable":  it  is  not  the  want  of  earthly 
scholarship  which  makes  the  difficulties,  it  is  the  want  of  moral  steadfastness  which 
occasions  the  wresting.  We  have  nothing,  therefore,  to  do  in  commenting  on  the 
words  of  St.  Peter  with  difficulties  which  may  be  caused  by  a  defective,  and  removed 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

by  a  liberal,  education.  The  difficulties  must  be  difficulties  of  subject.  It  were  a 
waste  of  time  to  adduce  instances  of  the  difficulties.     I.  We  would  show  you  that 

IT    WAS   to    be    expected    THAT    THE    BiBLE    WOULD     CONTAIN     "  SOME    THINGS   HARD   TO 

BE  UNDERSTOOD."  Wc  should  like  to  be  told  what  stamp  of  inspiration  there  would 
■be  upon  a  Bible  containing  nothing  " hard  to  be  understood."  Is  it  not  almost  a 
self-evident  proposition  that  a  revelation  without  difficulty  could  not  be  a  revelation 
of  divinity  ?  You  ask  a  Bible  which  shall,  in  every  part,  be  simple  and  intelligible. 
But  could  such  a  Bible  discourse  to  us  of  God,  that  Being  who  must  remain 
necessarily  and  for  ever  a  mystery  to  the  very  highest  of  created  intelligences  ? 
Could  such  a  Bible  treat  of  purposes  which  extend  themselves  over  unlimited  ages  ? 
Could  such  a  Bible  put  forward  any  account  of  spiritual  operations,  seeing  that, 
whilst  confined  by  the  trammels  of  matter,  the  soul  cannot  fathom  herself,  but  with- 
draws herself,  as  it  were,  and  shrinks  from  her  own  scrutiny  ?  Could  such  a  Bible, 
in  short,  tell  us  anything  of  our  condition  whether  by  nature  or  grace  ?  But  it  is 
not  the  manner  in  which  they  are  handled  which  makes  them  "  hard  to  be  under- 
stood." The  subject  itself  gives  the  difficulty.  If  you  will  not  have  the  difficulty 
you  cannot  have  the  subject.  You  must  have  a  revelation  which  shall  not  only 
tell  you  that  such  and  such  things  are,  but  which  shall  also  explain  to  you  how  they 
are:  their  mode,  their  constitution,  their  essence.  And  if  this  were  the  character  of 
revelation  it  would  undoubtedly  be  so  constructed  as  never  to  overtask  reason ;  but 
it  would  just  as  clearly  be  kept  within  this  boundary  only  by  being  stripped  of 
all  on  which  we  mainly  need  a  revelation.  A  revelation  in  which  there  shall  be 
nothing  "  hard  to  be  understood"  must  limit  itself  by  the  powers  of  reason,  and 
therefore  exclude  those  very  topics  on  which,  reason  being  insufficient,  revelation  is 
required.  There  is  no  want  of  simplicity  of  language  when  God  is  described  to  us. 
But  who  understands  this?  Can  language  make  this  intelligible?  We  might 
argue  in  like  manner  with  regard  to  every  Scriptural  difficulty.  We  account  for  the 
existence  of  these  difficulties  mainly  by  the  fact  that  we  are  men,  and,  because  men, 
finite  in  our  capacities.  Let  there  be  only  the  same  amount  of  revelation,  and  the 
angel  may  know  more  than  the  man  because  gifted  with  a  keener  and  more  vigorous 
understanding.  And  it  is  evident,  therefore,  that  few  things  could  have  less  warranty 
than  the  supposition  that  revelation  might  have  been  so  enlarged  that  the  knowledge 
of  man  would  have  reached  to  the  measure  of  the  knowledge  of  angels.  We  again 
say  that  there  is  no  deficiency  of  revelation,  and  that  the  difficulties  which  occur  in 
the  perusal  of  Scripture  result  from  the  majesty  of  the  introduced  subjects  and  the 
weakness  of  the  faculties  turned  on  their  study.  And  we  are  well  persuaded  that, 
however  disposed  men  may  be  to  make  the  difficulties  an  objection  to  the  Bible,  the 
absence  of  those  difficulties  would  have  been  eagerly  seized  on  as  a  proof  of  im- 
posture. There  would  have  been  fairness  in  the  objection.  It  can  only  be  viewed  as  a 
necessary  consequence  on  the  grandeur  of  the  subjects  which  form  the  matter  of 
revelation  that,  with  every  endeavour  at  simplicity  of  style  and  aptitude  of  illustra- 
tion, the  document  contains  statements  which  overmatch  all  but  the  faith  of  man- 
kind. And,  therefore,  we  are  bold  to  say  that  we  glory  in  the  difficulties  of 
Scripture.  We  can  feel  the  quick  pulse  of  an  eager  wish  to  scale  the  mountain  or 
fathom  the  abyss.  But  at  the  same  time  we  know,  and  we  feel,  that  a  Bible  without 
difficulties  were  a  firmament  without  stars.  We  know,  and  we  feel,  that  the  vast 
business  of  our  redemption,  arranged  in  the  councils  of  the  far-back  eternity,  and 
acted  out  amid  the  wondering  and  throbbings  of  the  universe,  could  not  have  been 
that  stupendous  transaction  which  gave  God  glory  by  giving  sinners  safety,  if  the 
inspired  account  brought  its  dimensions  within  the  compass  of  a  human  arithmetic, 
or  defined  its  issues  by  the  lines  of  a  human  demarcation.  And,  therefore,  do  we 
also  know  and  feel  that  it  is  a  witness  to  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  that,  when  this 
Bible  would  furnish  us  with  notices  of  the  unseen  world  hereafter  to  be  traversed,  or 
when  it  would  turn  thought  on  the  Omnipotent,  or  when  it  would  open  up  the 
scheme  of  the  restoration  of  the  fallen ;  then,  with  much  that  is  beautifully  simple, 
there  are  mingled  dark  intimations,  and  pregnant  hints,  and  undeveloped  statements 
before  which  the  weak  and  the  masterful  must  alike  do  the  homage  of  a  reverent 
and  uncalculating  submission.  We  do  not  indeed  say — for  the  saying  would  carry 
absurdity  on  its  forefront — -that  we  believe  a  document  inspired  because  in  part 
incomprehensible.  But  if  a  document  profess  to  be  inspired,  and  if  it  treat  of 
subjects  which  we  can  prove  beforehand  to  be  above  and  beyond  the  stretchings  of 
our  intellect,  then  we  do  say  that  the  finding  nothing  in  such  a  document  to  baffle 
the  understanding  would  be  a  proof  the  most  conclusive  that  what  alleges  itself 
divine  deserves  rejection  as  forgery.     II.  The  advantages  which  follow,  and  the 


CHAP.  III.]  11.  PETER.  193 

DISPOSITIONS   WHICH    SHOULD   BK    ENCOURAGED    BY,  THE   FACT  WHICH    HAS   PASSED    UNDER 

REVIEW.  We  see  at  once  from  the  statement  of  St.  Peter  that  effects,  to  all  appear- 
ance disastrous,  are  produced  by  the  difficulties  of  Scripture.  The  "  unlearned  and 
unstable "  wrest  these  difficulties  to  "  their  own  destruction,"  and,  therefore,  by 
what  process  of  reasoning  can  they  be  proved  advantageous  ?  We  have  shown  you 
that  the  absence  of  difficulties  would  go  far  towards  proving  the  Scriptures  un- 
inspired ;  and  we  need  not  remark  that  there  must  be  a  use  for  difficulties  if 
essential  to  the  complete  witness  for  the  truth  of  Christianity.  But  there  are  other 
advantages  which  must  on  no  account  be  overlooked.  We  only  wish  it  premised,  that 
though  the  difficulties  of  Scripture — as,  for  example,  those  parts  which  involve  pre- 
destination— are  wrested  by  many  "to  their  own  destruction,"  the  "  unlearned  and  un- 
stable ' '  would  have  equally  perished  had  no  difficulties  whatsoever  existed.  They  would 
have  stumbled  on  the  plain  ground  as  well  as  on  the  rough:  there  being  no  more  certain 
truth  in  theology  than  that  the  cause  of  stumbling  is  the  internal  feebleness  and  not 
the  external  impediment.  A  man  may  perish  ostensibly  through  abuse  of  the  doctrine  of 
election.  But  would  he  not  have  perished  had  he  found  no  such  doctrine  to  wrest  ?  Ay, 
that  he  would ;  as  fatally  and  as  finally.  It  is  the  love  of  sin,  the  determination  to  live 
in  sin,  which  destroys  him.  This  being  premised,  we  may  enlarge  on  the  advantages 
resulting  from  the  fact  that  Scripture  contains  "  some  things  hard  to  be  understood." 

1.  And  first,  if  there  were  nothing  in  Scripture  which  overpowered  our  reason,  who 
sees  not  that  intellectual  pride  would  be  fostered  by  its  study  ?  You  can  make  no 
way  with  the  disclosures  of  Holy  Writ  until  prepared  to  receive,  on  the  authority  of 
God,  a  vast  deal  which,  of  yourself,  you  cannot  prove,  and  stUl  more  which  you 
cannot  explain.  A  Bible  without  difficulties  would  be  a  censer  full  of  incense  to 
man's  reason.  And  if  the  fallen  require  to  be  kept  humble,  if  we  can  advance  in 
spiritual  attainment  only  in  proportion  as  we  feel  our  insignificance,  would  not 
this  conversion  of  the  Bible  into  the  very  nurse  and  encourager  of  intellectual  pride, 
abstract  its  best  worth  from  revelation  ;  and  who,  therefore,  wUl  deny  that  we  are 
advantaged  by  the  fact  that  there  are  in  Scripture  "things  hard  to  be  understood"? 

2.  We  remark  again,  that  though  controversy  has  its  evUs,  it  has  also  its  uses. 
It  is  not  the  stagnant  water  which  is  generally  the  purest.  We  hold  that  heresies 
have  been  of  vast  service  to  the  Church,  in  that  they  have  caused  truth  to  be  more 
thoroughly  scanned,  and  aU  its  bearings  and  boundaries  explored  with  a  most  pains- 
taking industry.  It  is  astonishing  how  apt  men  are  to  rest  in  general  and  ill-defined 
notions.  If  never  called  to  defend  the  truth  the  Church  would  comparatively  lose 
sight  of  what  truth  is.  3.  When  I  read  the  Bible  and  meet  with  passages  which, 
after  the  most  patient  exercises  of  thought  and  research,  remain  dark  and  im- 
penetrable, then,  in  the  most  especial  degree,  I  feel  myself  immortal.  The  finding 
a  thing  "hard  to  be  understood"  ministers  to  my  consciousness  that  I  am  no 
perishable  creature  destined  to  a  finite  existence,  but  a  child  of  eternity,  appointed 
to  survive  the  dissolutions  of  matter,  and  to  enter  on  another  and  an  untried  being. 
If  the  Bible  be  God's  revelation  of  Himself  to  mankind,  it  is  a  most  fair  expectation 
that,  at  one  time  or  another,  the  whole  of  this  revelation  will  be  clear  and  accessible. 
We  can  never  think  that  God  would  teU  man  things  for  the  understanding  of 
which  he  is  to  be  always  incapacitated.  Such  are  certaiu  of  the  advantages  which 
we  propose  to  investigate.     III.  It  yet  remains  that  we  briefly  state,  and  call 

UPON   YOU    to   cultivate,  THE    DISPOSITIONS  WHICH   SHOULD  BE   BROUGHT    TO    THE  STUDY 

OF  A  Bible  thus  "  hard  to  be  understood."  We  would  have  it  therefore 
remembered,  that  the  docility  and  submissiveness  of  a  child  alone  befit  the 
student  of  the  Bible ;  and  that,  if  we  would  not  have  the  whole  volume  darkened, 
its  simplest  truths  eluding  the  grasp  of  our  understanding,  or  gaining  at  least  no 
hold  on  our  affections,  we  must  lay  aside  the  feelings  which  we  carry  into  the 
domains  of  science  and  philosophy,  not  arming  ourselves  with  a  chivakous  resolve 
to  conquer,  but  with  one  which  it  is  a  thousand-fold  harder  either  to  form  or  exe- 
cute, to  yield.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone  can  make  us  feel  the  things  which  are  easy  to 
be  understood,  and  prevent  our  wresting  those  which  are  hard.  Never,  then,  should 
the  Bible  be  opened  except  with  prayer  for  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit.  You  will 
read  without  profit  as  long  as  you  read  without  prayer.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Hard  things : — 1.  We  believe  the  hard  things  were  left  in  the  Bible  for  a  lofty 
purpose.  God  wished  us  to  think  and  reason.  God  had  a  great  purpose  to  fulfil 
in  the  training  of  the  race.  Hence  both  in  nature  and  ia  the  Bible  He  allows  per- 
plexing questions.  He  can  only  discipline  man's  thinking  by  allowing  him  to  be 
subject  to  perplexity.  We  believe,  then,  that  God  purposely  left  certain  difficulties 
in  the  Bible  to  create  diversity,  to  foster  the  thinking  power,  and  to  lead  to  the 

42 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

exercise  of  that  charity  that  never  faileth.  Instead  of  codification  and  finality, 
there  is  always  something  to  cause  fresh  thought,  to  interest  by  its  newer  sugges- 
tions— something  to  quicken  mind  and  lead  the  soul  to  listen  to  the  whispers  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  2.  We  have  to  recognise  that  danger  arises  from  the  presence  of  the 
"hard  things"  in  the  Book.  Peter  saw  that,  and  said  that  the  "unlearned  and 
unstable  "  would  "  wnrest  them  to  their  own  destruction."  Such,  by  a  twist  of  an 
obscure  text,  would  bolster  up  unbelief  or  find  countenance  for  a  pet  idea.  They 
will  find  even  excuse  for  sin  by  twisting  some  word.  The  ill-tempered  will  quote, 
"  Be  ye  angry,"  and  leave  out  the  words  "  sin  not."  The  covetous  man  will 
defend  greed  by  "  Be  diligent  in  business,"  and  leave  out  "serving  the  Lord."  The 
neglecter  of  worship  will  quote  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,"  and  go  off 
to  indulge  in  that  which  will  not  help  him  to  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day.  3.  Some 
things  in  life  as  well  as  in  the  Book  are  "hard  to  understand."  (F.  Haatiiigs.) 
Obscure  passages  in  the  Bible : — "  What  would  you  think  of  a  very  hungry  man, 
•who  had  not  eaten  a  morsel  of  food  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  and  was 
asked  by  a  charitable  man  to  come  in  and  sit  down  at  a  richly  covered  table,  on 
which  were  large  dishes  of  choice  meat,  and  also  covered  ones,  the  contents  of  which 
the  hungry  man  did  not  know,  instead  of  satisfying  his  exhausted  body  with  the 
former,  he  raises  one  cover  after  another  and  insists  on  finding  out  what  these  un- 
known dishes  are  composed  of  ?  In  spite  of  all  the  advice  of  the  charitable  man  to 
partake  first  of  the  more  substantial  dishes,  he  dwells  with  obstinate  inquiry  on 
nicer  compounds,  until  overcome  with  exhaustion  he  drops  down.  What  do  you 
think  of  such  a  man?"  "He  is  a  fool."  {Dr.  Leiber.)  They  that  are  un- 
learned and  ujistable  wrest. — Wresting  Scripture : — I.  The  men  whose  evil  hand- 
ling OF  the  Sceipture  I  A3I  GOING  TO  POINT  OUT  are  described  generally  in  our 
text  as  "unlearned  and  unstable."  Those  meant  by  "  unlearned  "  are  men  who, 
whatever  be  their  human  knowledge,  have  either  never  "learned  of  the  Father,"  or 
who  are  at  best,  "  unskilful  in  the  Word  of  righteousness  "  (Heb.  v.  13)  ;  and,  he 
adds,  "  unstable  men  " — men  who,  if  in  some  degree  enlightened,  yet  are  not 
established  in  the  faith  ;  but  are  like  "  children  driven  to  and  fro  and  tossed  about 
with  every  wind  of  doctrine  "  (Eph.  iv.  14).     II.  Now  let  us  see  what  are  the 

VARIOUS    WAYS    IN    WHICH    THIS    OFFENCE    AGAINST    God's    BoOK    MAT  BE    COMMITTED.       1. 

One  of  the  most  awful  ways  of  wresting  Holy  Scripture  is  where  men  try  to  draw 
out  of  its  pages  a  justification  of  their  sins.  David,  they  say,  was  once  guilty  of 
adultery — Jacob,  of  deceit — and  Peter  of  a  lying  oath ;  and  yet  they  were  good 
men.  And  this,  they  think,  is  either  a  warrant  or  excuse  for  the  sins  in  which  they 
live  themselves.  Oh  !  when  men  read  a  portion  of  God's  Word  which  describes 
some  evil  deed,  and  are  tempted  from  His  silence  to  suppose  He  disregarded  it,  let 
them  look  at  other  portions.  Let  them  think  of  His  most  holy  laws  ;  let  them  mark 
His  terrible  threatenings  "  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men  " 
(Eom.  i.  18).  2.  Another  grievous  way  of  wresting  Scripture  is  where  men  try  to 
draw  out  of  its  doctrines  a  justification  of  their  doing  nothing  for  their  souls.  8.  A 
third  way  in  which  Holy  Scripture  may  be  "  wrested,"  and  often,  I  fear,  is  so,  is  as 
follows.  Men  adopt  a  certain  set  of  doctrines  as  their  own,  these  doctrines  may 
seem  to  be  the  language  of  certain  texts  of  Scripture,  but  are  evidently  contrary  to 
others.  What,  then,  do  they  do  when  they  are  pressed  with  all  those  passages  which 
make  against  them?  Why,  they  try  to  give  these  passages  another  meaning. 
They  find  out  some  ingenious  method  of  explaining  them  away,  or  of  adapting  them 
to  their  own  peculiar  views.  4.  I  wiU  speak  of  one  instance  more  of  the  "  wrest- 
ing" of  the  Scriptures.  It  is  where  men  quote  Scripture,  as  Satan  did  (Matt.  iv.  6), 
by  halves,  so  as  to  make  it  seem  to  speak  the  thing  they  wish.  How  awful  is  that 
threatening  which  is  addressed  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  to  all  such  triflers  with 
the  Bible !  (Rev.  xxii.  18,  19).  III.  How,  then,  ark  we  to  escape  the  guilt  and 
DANGER  of  WRESTING  HoLY  ScRiPTURE  ?  1.  The  chicf  mcaus,  most  assuredly,  of 
avoiding  such  a  guilt  as  this,  is  to  pray  for  the  Spirit  as  our  Guide  and  Interpreter 
in  reading  His  own  Book.  2.  Let  me  recommend  to  you,  again,  some  frames  of 
mind  in  which  we  must  ever  pray  and  strive  to  open  the  Lord's  Book.  (1)  One  is  a 
.sense  of  our  own  ignorance,  with  a  desire,  a  most  unfeigned  desire,  to  be  led  and 
taught  of  Holy  Scripture.  (2)  Again,  it  is  a  great  point  to  study  Holy  Scripture  in 
simplicity  of  mind  without  any  prejudice  or  bias.  (3)  He  who  would  shun  the  sin 
of  wresting  Holy  Scripture  must  study  it  with  diligence.  He  must  take  all  the 
pains  he  can  to  ascertain  its  real  meaning.  (4)  So  as  not  to  wrest  it  to  your  own 
destruction — study  it  as  a  sinner  searching  for  a  Saviour.    (A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 


CHAP,  ni.]  II.  PETER.  195 

Vers.  i7,  18.  Beware  lest  ye  also  .  .  .  fall — Seducers  of  faith  : — 1.  Let  us  shun 
the  society  of  idolatrous  seducers,  and  hate  the  very  air  they  breathe.  We  shall 
hardly  win  them  to  goodness  ;  their  familiarity  will  easily  possess  us  of  their  wicked- 
ness. 2.  The  greater  show  of  sanctity  that  error  puts  on,  the  more  suspicious  let  us 
be  of  the  intended  mischief.  3.  Let  us  consider  that  these  seducers  help  to  over- 
throw us,  but  what  help  is  there  in  them  to  raise  us  up  ?  (Thos.  Adams.)  Chris- 
tian perseverance  : — I.  The  nature  of  that  duty  which  is  here  kecommexded. 
The  apostle  does  not  address  himself  here  to  such  as  were  unacquainted  with  the 
ways  of  godliness,  but  those  who  had  been  initiated  in  the  Christian  profession. 
It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  begin  well,  and  to  set  out  hopefully  in  the  exercises  of 
religion,  but  we  must  run  till  we  have  reached  the  goal.  11.  Arguments  which 
MAT  REASONABLY  INCLINE  US  TO  THE  PRACTICE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  1.  Thc  casiness  of  pro- 
ceeding in  a  virtuous  course  when  once  we  are  made  familiar  with  it,  should  power- 
fully persuade  us  to  persevere  in  goodness,  and  not  to  fall  from  our  own  stedf astness. 
2.  The  great  advantages  which  will  redound  to  us  from  the  performance  of  this 
duty  should  powerfully  persuade  us  to  persevere  in  godliness  and  not  to  fall  from 
our  own  stedfastness.  3.  The  dangers  and  inconveniences  of  a  contrary  proceeding 
should  powerfully  persuade  us  to  persevere  in  goodness  and  not  to  fall  from  our 
own  stedfastness.  III.  Such  rules  and  instructions  as  may  duly  qualify  us  fob 
THE  PERFORMANCE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  1.  Let  US  cndeavour  to  strengthen  our  good 
resolutions.  2.  Let  us  be  perpetually  upon  our  guard,  and  keep  a  vigilant  eye  over 
all  our  actions.  3.  Let  us  be  frequent  in  the  exercises  of  religious  duties,  especially 
in  such  as  are  more  solemn  and  public.  4.  Let  us  be  fervent  in  private  prayer  to 
Almighty  God ;  that  He  will  assist  us  with  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  give  us  grace  to 
proceed  without  danger  of  falling.  (TV.  Brady.)  Young  Christians  : — Your  little 
child  hangs  over  the  taffrail  of  the  steamboat  and  says,  "Father,  what  is  that  black 
thing  in  the  water  ?  "  You  say,  "  That  is  a  buoy,  showing  there  is  a  rock  under- 
neath, and  danger  there."  So  the  Apostle  Peter  in  the  text  points  out  the  perils  of 
the  Christian  voyage.  It  would  be  a  strange  thing  if  all  our  anxiety  about  men 
ceased  the  moment  they  were  converted.  You  would  almost  doubt  the  sanity  of  that 
farmer  who,  having  planted  the  corn  and  seen  it  just  sprout  above  ground,  should 
say,  "  My  work  is  all  done.  I  have  no  more  anxiety  for  the  crop."  You  have  only 
just  been  launched ;  the  voyage  is  to  be  made.  Earth,  and  heaven,  and  hell  are 
watching  to  see  how  fast  you  will  sail,  how  well  you  will  weather  the  tempest,  and 
whether  at  last,  amid  the  shouting  of  angels,  you  shall  come  into  the  right  harbour. 
I.  Hold  before  your  soul  a  very  high  model.  Do  not  say,  "  I  wish  I  could  pray 
like  that  man,  or  speak  or  have  the  consecration  of  this  one."  Say,  "  Here  is  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  a  perfect  pattern.  By  Him,  with  God's  grace,  I  mean  to  shape 
all  my  life."  You  have  a  right  to  aspire  to  the  very  highest  style  of  Christian 
character.  I  admit  that  a  man  cannot  become  a  Christian  like  that  without  a 
struggle  ;  but  what  do  you  get  without  fighting  for  it  ?  In  the  strength  of  Christ  go 
forward.  God  is  for  you,  and  if  God  be  for  you,  who  can  be  against  you?  Re- 
member that  God  never  puts  you  in  battle  but  He  gives  you  weapons  with  which  to 
fight.  II.  Abstain  from  all  pernicious  associations,  and  take  only  those  that 
are  useful  and  beneficent.  I  know  young  people  who  have  meant  well  enough, 
but  they  have  floated  off  into  evil  influences,  and  they  have  associated  day  by  day 
with  those  who  hated  God  and  despised  His  commandments,  and  their  characters 
are  all  depleted.  I  can  see  they  are  changed  for  the  worse,  but  they  are  not  aware 
of  it.  Oh,  young  man,  come  out  of  that  bad  association.  Stand  back  from  that 
furnace  in  which  so  many  young  Christians  have  been  destroyed.  III.  Be  .actively 
employed.  Who  are  the  happy  people  in  the  Church  to-day  ?  The  busy  people. 
The  very  first  prescription  that  I  give  to  a  man  when  I  find  him  full  of  doubts  and 
fears  about  his  eternal  interest  is  to  go  to  work  for  God.  Here  is  a  wood  full  of 
summer  insects.  An  axeman  goes  into  the  wood  to  cut  firewood.  The  insects  do 
not  bother  him  very  much,  and  every  stroke  of  the  axe  makes  them  fly  about.  But 
let  a  man  go  and  lie  down  there  and  he  is  bitten,  and  thinks  it  is  a  horrible  thing  to 
stay  in  that  wood.  So  there  are  thousands  of  Christians  now  in  the  Church  who 
go  out  amid  great  annoyances  in  life — they  are  not  perplexed,  they  are  all  the  time 
busy ;  while  there  are  others  who  do  nothing,  and  they  are  stung,  and  covered  from 
head  to  foot  with  the  blotches  of  indolence,  and  inactivity,  and  spiritual  death.  IV. 
Be  f.uthful  in  pr-^yer.  You  might  as  well,  business  man,  start  out  in  the  morning 
without  food  and  expect  to  be  strong  all  that  day — you  might  as  well  abstain  from 
food  all  the  week  and  expect  to  be  strong  physically,  as  to  be  strong  without  prayer. 
And  the  only  difference  between  this  Christian  who  is  getting  along  very  fast  in  the 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

holy  life,  and  this  one  who  is  only  getting  along  tolerably,  is  that  the  first  prays 
more  than  the  last.  V.  Be  faithful  in  Bible  research.  A  great  many  good  books 
are  now  coming  out.  Glorious  books  they  are.  But  I  have  thought  that  perhaps  the 
followers  of  Christ  sometimes  allow  this  religious  literature  to  take  their  attention 
from  God's  Word,  and  that  there  may  not  be  as  much  Bible  reading  as  there  ought 
to  be.  You  go  to  the  drug  store  and  you  get  the  mineral  waters  ;  but  you  have 
noticed  that  the  waters  are  not  so  fresh  or  sparkling  or  healthful  as  when  you  get 
these  very  waters  at  Saratoga  and  Sharon — getting  them  right  where  they  bubble 
from  the  rock.  And  I  have  noticed  the  same  thing  in  regard  to  the  truth  of  the 
gospel.  While  there  is  a  good  deal  of  the  refreshment  and  health  of  the  gospel  of 
God  as  it  comes  through  good  books,  I  find  it  is  better  when  I  come  to  the  eternal 
rock  of  God's  Word,  and  drink  from  that  fountain  that  bubbles  up  fresh  and  pure 
to  the  life,  the  refreshment,  the  health  of  the  soul.  (T.  de  Witt  Talmage.) 
Spiritual  steadfastness : — I.  A  spiritual  steadfastness  may  be  obtained.  The  Prophet 
David  commands  it,  prays  for  it,  and  confesseth  that  some  did  obtain  it,  possess  it. 
And  doth  not  the  apostle  also  persuade  to  the  same,  crying,  Be  steadfast,  immovable  ? 
Who,  then,  hath  cause  to  question  the  truth  of  this  doctrine  ?  If  any  shall,  reason 
may  relieve  him.  For,  is  not  a  man  a  subject  capable  of  it,  may  he  not  be  fitted  to 
receive  it  ?  Is  not  the  faculty  of  his  understanding,  in  respect  of  its  essence, 
sound  ?  His  will  of  power,  strongly,  since  his  fall,  bent  to  action  ?  And  hath  he  not 
affections,  violent,  passionate  ?  Again,  shall  we  think  anything  impossible  with 
God  ?  And  if  this  were  not  thus,  for  what  end  was  preaching  appointed,  sacrament'? 
ordained,  and  prayer  commanded  ?  Are  these  given  in  vain  ?  Finally,  let  me  ask 
thee  a  question,  Shall  not  Christ  be  of  ability  to  recover  what  Adam  of  imbecility 
lost  ?  The  Holy  Ghost  to  build  what  the  unclean  spirit  did  destroy  ?  Sphitual 
steadfastness  is  a  firm  retention  of  the  degree  of  grace  received.  Observe  further 
that  this  steadfastness  is  habitual,  practical.  Again,  habitual  steadfastness  is  in 
the  understanding,  will,  and  affections.  As  for  practical  steadfastness,  that  is 
external,  internal.  II.  The  cause  of  these  declinings.  And  they  be  within  us, 
without  us.  First,  melancholy,  for  it  is  a  true  axiom  that  the  soul  follows  the  dis- 
position and  temperature  of  the  body.  Secondly,  some  raging  lust,  unmortified 
affection.  When  such  a  passenger  is  in  the  ship  of  man's  soul,  like  another  Jonah 
it  will  unsettle  all.  If  the  reins  hang  under  his  feet,  the  strongest,  readiest  footed 
beast  may  stumble.  Cut  all  the  feet  equal  the  table  stands  steadfast,  else  not. 
Thirdly,  unbelief,  what  mists  will  this  raise  in  our  understandings.  How  subtly  will 
this  sophister  argue,  dispute,  what  ?  Where  is  the  promise  of  Christ's  coming  ? 
Fourthly,  carnal  confidence,  that  is,  whatsoever  we  trust  in  except  Christ  Jesus. 
Fifthly,  weakness  of  grace,  to  speak  properly  this  is  not  a  real  or  positive  cause  of 
declining,  yet  by  occasion  may  have  a  finger  in  the  business.  Sixthly,  want  of 
knowledge  experimental.  Now  the  contrary  of  aU  these  we  have  mentioned  will  be 
excellent  helps  for  the  firm  retention  of  grace  received.  Wherefore  keep  thy  body 
in  good  plight,  feed  on  choice  meats,  walk  in  pure  air,  use  moderate  labour,  recrea- 
tion. Mortify  also  fleshly  lusts,  crucify  the  whole  body  of  sin,  for  in  so  doing  thou 
shalt  remove  rubs  out  of  the  way,  curb  the  old  man,  and  bind  him  to  good  behaviour. 
See  in  like  sort  thou  increase  thy  faith,  and  that  will  expel  infidelity — consume  it  as 
fire  doth  stubble.  And  shall  not  hope  in  Christ  make  the  new  man  lusty,  arm  him 
against  fear,  foil  despair,  and  in  all  assaults  cheer  up  his  spirits  ?  Be  sure  to  grow 
in  grace,  for  is  not  a  feeble  person  subject  to  trip,  to  stumble  when  able  bodies  hold 
out,  march  valiantly,  win  the  field  ?  And  thus  much  of  the  inward  causes  of  declin- 
ing ;  the  other,  from  without  us,  follow.  First,  wavering  minded  companions.  He 
who  walks  with  such  will  in  time  walk  as  such.  Secondly,  the  fierce  trial  of  affliction. 
Thirdly,  personal  wrongs,  undeserved  injuries.  Fourthly,  public  scandal.  Fifthly, 
example  of  supposed  great  ones.  For  some  are  like  a  strong  poison  that  dispatcheth 
its  patient  quickly,  others  a  lingering  disease  which  killeth  certainly  though  not 
suddenly.  These  things  being  inserted  let  us  proceed.  First,  when  we  have  not  so 
clear  an  apprehension  of  the  worth  of  grace,  and  the  means  to  procure  it,  increase 
it,  as  in  former  time.  If  the  glory  thereof  be  darkened,  and  we  account  faith,  love, 
hope,  but  as  common  favours,  in  some  degree  we  are  declined.  Secondly,  if  we 
want  an  eager  appetite  after  the  doctrine  of  sound  words,  the  bread  and  water  of 
life,  feed  on  them  more  for  fear  and  fashion  than  love  and  affection,  we  have  just 
cause  to  suspect  ourselves.  Thirdly,  a  neglect  of  our  particular  calling.  For  a 
diligent  hand  maketh  rich,  as  well  in  spiritual  as  corporal  things.  Unthrifts  and 
loiterers  always  die  l)eggars.  Fourthly,  when  we  feebly  perform  holy  actions,  or 
fearfully  omit  them.     Fifthly,  a  fifth  symptom  is  a  quiet  concoction  of  what  hereto- 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  197 

fore  we  have  distasted,  spued  out,  holding  the  same,  as  then,  for  loathsome  meats. 
A  soul  in  her  best  plight,  as  she  abhors  the  greatest  so  hates  the  least  known  evil. 
Sixthly,  finally,  when  men  offend,  and  will  not  endure  reproof.  And  may  a  spiritual 
steadfastness  be  fallen  from  ?  Then  try  thyself  if  thou  be  or  not  revolted.  Trades- 
men keep  a  register  of  all  their  proceedings,  cast  up  their  accounts  yearly,  take  a 
strict  view  how  they  have  decreased  or  increased  their  substance ;  and  should  not 
Christians  be  as  wise  in  their  generation  ?  First,  we  must  call  to  remembrance  what 
truths  in  the  understanding,  or  in  our  conversation,  we  have  fallen  from,  and  so 
return  unto  them.  Secondly,  we  are  to  consider  what  sin  we  have  embraced, 
whether  it  be  an  error  in  judgment  or  practice,  and  if  we  clearly  discern  any,  then 
to  cease  from  it.  First,  cast  in  thy  mind  what  an  uncomfortable  condition  thou  art 
fallen  into,  compare  it  often  with  the  times  of  old.  Do  not  slavish  fears  upon  the 
least  occasion  arise  in  thy  soul  ?  Secondly,  consider  that  greater  evils  than  these 
may  attend  thee.  This  may  suffice  to  have  spoken  of  the  last  branch  of  our  text, 
the  other  succeedeth.  "  Lest  ye  also  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked." 
Error  leadeth  from  steadfastness.  He  who  is  led  with  error  is  always  unsettled. 
For  error  leads  from  God.  And  is  not  He  the  best  stay,  and  very  centre  whereupon 
all  the  creatures  are  settled,  established.  Again,  whither  leads  error  to  any  constant 
object  ?  Is  it  to  the  world  ?  Doth  not  the  fashion  of  it  pass  away  ?  Think  it  not 
strange,  then,  if  they  who  err  from  the  doctrine  of  godliness  be  unstable  in  all 
their  ways.  What  marvel  is  it  that  men  walking  on  craggy  rocks,  steep  mountains, 
and  unequal  ways,  trip,  stumble,  and  catch  a  fall  ?  Whereas  the  apostle  calls  it 
the  error  of  the  wicked,  we  may  collect,  that  the  way  of  error,  by  a  peculiar  preroga- 
tive, is  the  way  of  the  wicked.  True  it  is  that  error  is  called  a  way,  but  a  crooked, 
wandering,  and  evil  one.  For  as  the  commandments  of  God  are  styled  ways,  so  are 
the  doctrines  of  men.  Thus  far  we  are  agreed ;  but  what  may  be  the  reasons 
hereof?  1.  Because  the  wicked  invent  them,  are  the  prime  authors  of  them.  For 
what  a  man  effecteth  is  properly  said  to  be  his  own.  2.  Again,  in  regard  they  con- 
serve and  support  them.  3.  This  way  is  not  from  God ;  He  disclaims  it.  For  all 
His  paths  are  holy,  and  good,  and  true.  "  Beware  lest  ye  also,"  &c.  The  note 
which  issueth  out  of  this  phrase  is  this,  that  by  one  error  many  may  be  seduced. 
As  first,  from  the  quality  of  error,  for  it  is  of  a  spreading  nature.  Besides,  error  is 
easy,  pleasant ;  and  what  is  agreeable  to  the  flesh  of  multitudes  is  followed.  The 
way  of  truth  is  straight,  narrow.  Moreover  men  are  wonderfully  prone  to  follow 
examples,  the  worst,  not  the  best.  And  by  one  error  may  many  be  seduced  ;  then 
get  a  good  eye,  a  sound  judgment ;  exercise  thy  wits,  that  thou  mayest  discern 
between  truth  and  falsehood.  Error  being  discovered  is  to  be  avoided.  {John 
Barlow,  D.D.)  ^'  Beivare"  : — It  is  a  word  for  trespassers,  and  God  puts  it  up  in 
all  the  by-ways  of  temptation.  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Salutary  warnings  : — 
There  are  evils  which  give  warning  of  their  coming.  Drunkenness  does  not  seize 
upon  a  man  suddenly.  It  gives  warnings  often  and  many.  Avarice,  and  a  number 
of  other  vices,  can  be  detected  long  before  we  are  within  their  reach.  There  are 
infallible  indications  by  which  we  may  be  warned.  The  approach  of  vice  is  like  the 
approach  of  the  rattlesnake.  This  horrible  reptile,  one  of  the  most  venomous  of 
serpents,  warns  man  involuntarily  againstjits  formidable  presence.  At  the  end  of 
its  tail  there  is  placed  a  rattle,  which  consists  of  a  string  of  hollow,  dry,  and  semi- 
transparent  bones,  which  constantly  clatter  against  each  other  as  the  reptile  moves, 
with  a  hoarse,  dull,  echoing  sound.  The  bony  rings  increase  in  number  with  the 
reptile's  age,  and  it  gains  an  additional  one,  it  is  said,  at  each  casting  of  the  skin. 
The  warning  which  it  is  thus  compelled  to  give  of  its  approach  enables  those  who 
hear  to  escape  an  awful  death.  Happy  are  those  men  whose  ears  are  open  to  the 
warnings  which  social  monsters,  far  more  horrid  than  even  the  rattlesnake,  in  like 
manner  invariably  give  of  their  presence  and  movements,  and,  profiting  thereby, 
manage  to  escape.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Stop  the  begiiinincjs  of  sin  : — I  have 
seen  the  little  pearls  of  a  spring  sweat  through  the  bottom  of  a  bank,  and  penetrate 
the  stubborn  pavement,  till  it  hath  made  it  fit  for  the  impression  of  a  child's  foot, 
and  it  was  dispersed  like  the  descending  dews  of  a  misty  morning,  till  it  had  opened 
its  way  and  made  a  stream  large  enough  to  carry  away  the  ruins  of  the  undermined 
strand,  and  to  invade  the  neighbouring  gardens  ;  but  then  the  despised  drops  were 
grown  into  an  artificial  river,  and  an  intolerable  mischief.  So  are  the  first  entrances 
of  sin  stopped  with  the  antidotes  of  a  hearty  prayer,  and  checked  into  sobriety  by 
the  eye  of  a  reverent  man,  or  the  counsel  of  a  single  sermon  ;  but  when  such  begin- 
nings are  neglected,  and  our  religion  hath  not  in  it  so  much  philosophy  as  to  think 
anything  evil  so  long  as  we  can  endure  it,  they  grow  up  to  ulcers  and  pestilential 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

evils  ;  they  destroy  the  soul  by  their  abode  which,  at  the  first  entry,  might  have 
been  killed  by  the  pressure  of  a  little  finger.     (Jeremy  Taylor.) 

Ver.  18.  But  grow  in  grace. — Religions  grou-th  : — Almost  every  created  thing 
seems  to  heave  within  it  the  principle  of  growth.  The  tree  grows  from  a  seed.  The 
bird,  fish,  beast  of  field,  all  come  to  maturity  by  growth.  The  human  body  grows 
from  feeblest  infancy  into  the  strength  of  manhood.  And  mind  grows  as  well  as 
matter.  The  reasoning  faculty,  the  imagination,  the  memory,  expand  and 
sti-engthen.  So,  too,  the  moral  and  spiritual  affections  of  the  soul.  Hence  religion, 
which  consists  of  love  to  God  and  man,  may  grow  also.  I.  Geace,  in  its  strict 
sense,  is  the  free  favour  of  God  to  the  unworthy.  The  grace  of  God  toward  men 
produces  piety ;  grace  is  the  cause,  piety  the  effect.  1.  To  grow  in  grace  is  to 
grow  in  virtue,  faith,  meekness,  gentleness,  patience,  a  spirit  of  forgiveness,  useful- 
ness. 2.  In  this  growth  of  all  right  principles  there  will  be  going  on  at  the  same 
time  in  the  soul  the  weakening  and  decay  of  all  wrong  principles.  II.  We  may 
overlook  too  much  the  importance  of  eeligious  growth.  We  may  be  in  danger 
of  feeling  that  when  one  is  introduced  into  the  kingdom  by  conversion  and  the 
joining  of  the  Church,  the  great  work  is  done.  Not  so  our  Saviour.  How  much 
He  laboured  to  train  His  disciples.  III.  Having  life  by  union  with  the  Saviour,  we 
grow  in  grace  by  using  the  means  of  grace.  There  is  a  law  of  spiritual  growth 
just  as  fixed  as  the  law  of  natural  growth.  The  means  of  grace,  suited  to  advance 
us  in  the  Divine  life,  are  daily  provided,  not  only  in  the  house  of  God,  but  in  every 
engagement  of  the  world.  Every  human  being  you  meet  may  offer  you  a  means  of 
grace,  for  there  is  a  Christian  feeling  to  be  cherished  toward  all,  and  a  Christian 
way  of  treating  all.  IV.  That  we  may  grow  in  grace,  we  need  to  use  the  means 
OF  grace  in  their  due  proportion.  Meditation  is  good,  but  where  it  becomes 
exclusive  it  is  evil.  So  outward  activity,  in  labouring  for  the  salvation  of  men,  is 
of  the  highest  importance  ;  but  let  this  absorb  the  Christian,  and  the  most  fruitful 
piety  will  wither  and  die.  V.  Nor  are  we  to  despise  outward  forms  and  symbols 
AS  HELPS  IN  RELIGIOUS  GROWTH.  It  may  be  asked.  What  matters  the  form  if  I 
have  the  spirit  ?  But  will  you  have  the  spirit  as  fully  without  the  aid  of  the  form  ? 
We  are  not  purely  spiritual  beings  ;  we  are  body  as  well  as  spirit.  And  there  is  an 
action  of  the  body  that  harmonises  with  and  helps  the  spirit.  Nor  can  devotion 
prosper  well  without  set  seasons ;  we  need  the  aid  of  habit  to  assist  in  the  formation 
of  spiritual  character.  VI.  He  who  will  grow  in  grace  must  be  ready  to  suffer. 
The  natural  life  in  us  dies  not  without  some  species  of  internal  agony.  For  one 
Christian  God  has  one  form  of  trial ;  for  another,  another  form.  VII.  Growth 
DEMANDS  earnestness.  No  oue  gi'ows  who  does  not  mean  to  grow.  VIII.  Growth 
demands  exercise.  As  fast  as  we  learn  duty,  we  must  apply  it.  "  To  him  that 
hath  shall  be  given."  Every  act  of  faith  increases  the  principle  of  faith;  as  every 
battle  Washington  fought  for  his  country  only  increased  his  patriotism.  (John 
BlacLeod.)  Groxcth  in  grace  :- — I.    The  meaning    of   the    expression   itself, 

"  Grow  in  grace."  The  Christian  is  not  a  lifeless  machine.  He  is  not  to  satisfy 
himself  with  going  through  a  cold  round  of  duties.  Wherein  are  you  improved  ? 
II.  The  means  of  growing  in  grace.  1.  Faith,  to  be  strong,  must  be  exercised. 
Commit  your  ways  to  God.  Trust  Him.  Your  faith  will  increase.  2.  Another 
means  which  may  be  suggested  is  prayer.  If  you  will  only  wrestle  with  God  in 
prayer  as  Jacob  did,  you  will  succeed.  3.  I  may  specify  Scriptural  reading.  4.  A 
further  and  most  important  means  for  advancing  in  our  heavenward  journey  is 
meditation  upon  the  promises  of  God.  5.  I  will  only  mention  one  other  means  of 
growth  in  grace,  self-examination.  Prevention  is  better  than  cure ;  when  you 
know  your  deficiencies,  then  you  may  guard  against  them  ;  thus  mischief  may  be 
kept  away.  III.  We  are  not  to  suppose,  however,  that  our  course  is  to  be 
ONE  of  continued  SUCCESS.  There  are  many  hindrances.  1.  I  may  name,  as  the 
chief  hindrance,  the  corruption  of  our  hearts.  2.  Connected  with  this  hindrance 
is  that  which  I  may  term  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.  3.  I  pass  on  to  that  indifference 
to  the  truth  of  religious  doctrines  now  so  common  amongst  men.  It  leads  men 
away  from  the  contemplation  of  Christ.  It  makes  them  afraid  to  maintain  their 
cause  boldly  before  their  fellows.  Their  minds  become  less  affected  with  the  sense 
of  the  preciou-sness  of  Jesus.  IV.  I  will  not  add  any  lengthened  detail  of  the 
encouragements  to  seek  this  growth  in  grace.  The  certainty  of  success.  Your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  will  help  you.  (H.  M.  Villicrif,  M.A.)  Signs  of  growth 
in  grace  and  motives  inrititig  to  it: — I.  By  the  grace  of  God  we  understand  the 
favour  or  love  of  God ;  but  in  the  Christian  Scriptures  it  means  that  especiai, 


CHAP,  in.]  II.  PETER.  199 

EXERTION  OF  HiS  LOVE,  WHICH  IS  APPLIED  TO  MANKIND  AS  SINNEBS,  AND  TO  THE 
KECOVEEY    AND    FINAL    SALVATION    OF    A   GUILTY   WOBLD.       II.     WhAT    THAT    IS    IN    WHICH 

ouB  GBo^YTH  IN  SUCH  GRACE  MAT  BE  DiscEENED.  1.  It  may  be  in  an  especial 
manner  discerned  in  humility.  The  virtue  required  of  us  is  no  abjectness  of  spirit. 
It  is  that  heart  which  feels  its  own  infirmities  and  sins.  2.  An  abjuration  of 
our  favourite  sin.  3.  A  genuine  love  of  virtue  for  the  love  of  God,  and  a  uniform 
preparation  of  heart  against  the  various  temptations  which  may  assail  us.  "If 
the  first  sparks  of  evil  were  quenched,  how  should  they  ever  break  forth  into  a 
flame  ?  How  shall  he  kill,  who  dare  not  be  angry  ?  Be  adulterous  in  act,  who 
does  not  transgress  in  desire  ?     III.  Permit  me  to  remind  you  of  the  solemnity 

AND  GBANDEUB  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  WHICH  YOUB  KNOWLEDGE  OF  JeSUS  ChRIST  COMPRISES. 

Say,  therefore,  whether  this  knowledge  of  your  Lord  and  Saviour  lead  you  not  to 
those  virtues  which  we  have  now  been  discussing,  as  adapted  to  your  state  of  grace. 
Say  whether  under  such  a  God  anything  can  be  so  indispensably  requisite  as 
humility ;  whether  under  such  a  Saviour  anything  can  be  so  required  as  abjuration 
of  sin  ;  whether  under  such  a  Comforter  anything  can  be  so  becoming  as  firmness 
of  heart ;  whether  under  such  promise  of  forgiveness  and  of  glory  anything  can 
come  so  directly  from  the  soul  as  sorrow  for  our  sin.  {G.  Matheiv,  M.A.)  The 
Christian's  improvement : — I.  The  several  steps  and  stages  of  the  Christian's 
PROGRESS.  II.  The  necessity  and  advantage  of  this  growth  and  improvement. 
1.  That  our  sincerity  in  religion  can  no  otherwise  be  well  approved.  2.  Our 
perseverance  cannot  be  ensured  whilst  we  are  at  a  stand.  3.  As  grace  is  the  seed 
of  glory,  that  seed  must  rise  by  gradual  advances  to  its  fuU  maturity.     III.  Some 

OF    THE    means   WHEREBY   WE    ALL   MAY   BE    THUS   BUILT    UP.       1.    SinCC    thoSe   habitS  of 

virtue  which  are  essential  to  our  improvement  are  contracted  by  a  frequent  repeti- 
tion of  single  acts,  let  us  by  all  means  cherish  the  opportunities  of  exerting  those 
acts.  2.  Therefore  we  should  work  up  our  minds  to  a  full  persuasion  that 
religion  is  the  most  important  business  of  our  lives.  (N.  Marshall,  D.D.) 
Growth  in  grace : — I.  It  will  appear  to  be  highly  reasonable,  yea  necessary, 

THAT    YOU    GEOW    IN    GRACE,     AND    THAT     BOTH     IN     RESPECT     OF     YOURSELVES     AND     IN 

respect  of  God.  First,  in  respect  of  yourselves,  and  that  upon  this  fivefold 
account.  1.  Because  your  present  condition  which  you  are  now  in  requireth  it. 
It  is  true  in  the  first  creation  of  the  world  all  creatures  and  species  of  things  were 
made  perfect.  Trees  and  plants  sprung  up  to  their  height  at  the  first.  But  it  is 
not  so  since  either  in  nature  or  grace.  Thus  our  state  being  imperfect  here,  and 
we  coming  not  to  a  height  at  once,  it  is  requisite  that  we  increase  our  strength 
gradually ;  that  is,  that  we  be  every  day  growing,  and  that  we  constantly  make 
accessions  to  our  feeble  virtues  and  graces.  2.  A  continual  growth  in  grace  is  very 
reasonable  and  necessary,  because  our  duty  is  so  large  and  comprehensive.  "  The 
commandments  of  God  are  exceeding  broad."  Christianity  especially  is  a  vast 
work.  3.  We  cannot  show  the  truth  of  grace  in  us  unless  we  daily  increase  ;  for 
this  is  one  great  sign  of  it,  and  that  an  inseparable  one.  The  true  sons  of  Sion  go 
from  strength  to  strength  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  7).  It  is  a  sign  of  insincerity  and  unsound- 
ness to  sit  down  and  rest  satisfied  with  a  mean  degree  of  holiness.  "  He  was  never 
good  indeed,"  saith  St.  Bernard,  "  who  ertdeavoureth  not  to  be  better."  4.  Growth 
in  grace  is  necessary  in  order  to  joy  and  comfort.  But  as  growth  and  increase  in 
grace  are  requisite  in  respect  of  ourselves,  so,  secondly,  in  respect  of  God,  and  that 
upon  this  fourfold  account.  1.  Because  growth  in  grace  is  answerable  to  God's 
expectation  from  us.  2.  This  is  answerable  to  Christ's  design,  as  you  read  in 
John  XV.  5.  3.  This  is  answerable  to  the  means  appointed  by  God  and  Christ,  as 
praying,  the  Word  read  and  preached,  the  blessed  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
the  gifts  and  graces  of  others,  holy  conference,  meditation,  and  the  like.  4.  By 
our  growth  in  grace  God  is  most  signally  glorified.  II.  How  you  M.iY  examine 
YOURSELVES  as  to  this  weighty  matter,  that  you  may  know  you  are  of  the  number 
of  those  persons  who  really  grow  in  grace.  1.  He  that  truly  gi'ows  in  grace  hath  a 
greater  sense  of  his  defects  and  failings  than  ever  he  had  before.  First,  a  greater 
sense  of  the  shallowness  of  his  understanding.  Secondly,  of  the  sinfulness  of  his 
life.  In  the  first  place,  he  daily  grows  more  apprehensive  of  the  defect  of  his 
knowledge.  Again,  if  we  grow  in  grace,  we  shall  have  every  day  a  greater  sight 
and  sense  of  our  sins.  2.  Profound  humility  is  an  undeniable  mark  of  a  man  that 
increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God.  3.  If  your  desires  of  grace  increase,  it  is  an 
argument  that  your  graces  themselves  do  so.  The  sharpness  of  the  appetite  is 
some  indication  of  bodily  growth  and  nourishment.  If  you  experience  these  fervent 
longings,  you   may  conclude  that  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  grow  in  you. 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

4.  The  true  growth  of  a  Christian  is  proportionable  and  uniform ;  by  which  I 
mean  that  he  is  one  who  grows  in  all  his  parts.  The  new  man  is  not  monstrous 
in  its  accretion.  5.  You  may  know  your  growth  in  grace  by  the  easiness  you  find 
in  religion.  You  will  certainly  perform  all  duties  with  facility  and  dexterity. 
6.  There  will  be  uneasiness  and  pain  as  long  as  you  are  hindered  from  reUgious 
exercises  and  holy  duties.  Lastly,  if  your  conversation  be  in  heaven,  if  your 
thoughts,  desires,  and  longings  tend  thither,  if  you  ardently  wish  to  depart  and  to 
be  with  Christ,  this  is  a  good  evidence  of  your  growing  in  grace  and  goodness.  But 
yet  here  great  caution  is  to  be  used,  lest  you  be  mistaken  in  this  important  point 
which  I  have  been  treating  of.  You  must  therefore  remember  these  four  things — 
1.  When  I  say  that  every  true  believer  grows  in  grace,  it  is  not  meant  that  he  doth 
so  every  moment  or  every  hour  of  his  life.  As  it  is  in  the  natural  body,  there  may 
be  some  disease  or  malady  that  will  retard  the  growth  for  a  time.  2.  All  Christians 
have  not  a  like  growth.  3.  All  graces  grow  not  alike  in  the  same  person. 
4.  Eemember  this  also,  that  grace  may  grow  insensibly  sometimes ;  it  may  increase, 
but  you  may  not  perceive  it.      III.  To  dikect  you  to  the  use  of  those   means 

WHEREBY   YOU    MAY   MOST    EFFECTUALLY   GROW    IN    VTRTUE    AND    GODLINESS.         YoU    will 

certainly  make  gi-eat  progress  in  religion  by  an  uninterrupted  exercise  of  your 
graces  and  by  a  constant  performing  of  your  duties.  Think  not  highly  of  your- 
selves by  reason  of  any  progress  you  have  made.  For  this  may  stop  you,  but  it 
will  never  promote  your  farther  proceeding.  Set  before  you  the  examples  of  the 
eminent  saints  and  servants  of  God.  It  will  not  be  amiss  to  observe  the  practices 
and  examples  of  the  wicked.  They  stand  not  still,  they  increase  in  vice ;  like 
crocodiles,  they  grow  as  long  as  they  live.  Every  day  adds  to  their  hatred  of  God 
and  goodness,  to  their  love  of  sin  and  vice,  and  to  their  dextrous  practice  of  it. 
Lastly,  observe  how  in  all  other  things  men  strive  who  shall  make  the  greatest 
proficiency,  and  let  this  be  one  help  to  further  your  growth  in  grace.  You  will  find 
that  Christians  are  compared  in  the  gospel  to  merchants,  bankers,  stewards,  who 
are  persons  that  are  busy  to  increase  their  own  or  others  estates.  This  may  teach 
the  professors  of  Christianity  what  they  are  to  do,  viz.,  to  improve  what  they  have. 
Add  to  your  attainments,  be  they  never  so  great.  IV.  To  pbess  this  duty  upon 
YOU  BY  SOME  COGENT  MOTIVES.  (J.  Edivavds,  D.D.)  Soul  education  : — I.  Soul 
education  is  growth.  This  implies — 1.  That  the  soul  is  a  vital  existent.  That 
soul  education  is  a  growth,  implies — 2.  That  the  soul  is  a  vital  existent  possessing 
developable  powers.  There  are  Uving  things  that  have  not  the  power  of  growth. 
Some,  perhaps,  have  been  created  with  their  nature  fully  developed.  There  is  no 
power  in  them  of  coming  to  any  higher  point.  And  others  have  passed  through  all 
the  stages  of  development,  and  are  exhausted.  It  is  not  so  with  the  soul.  Its 
potentialities  are  unbounded.  Omniscience  only  knows  what  greatness  of  intellect, 
grandeur  of  character,  splendour  of  achievements,  come  within  the  power  of  every 
mind,  however  humble.  That  soul  education  is  a  growth,  implies — 3.  That  the 
soul  is  a  vital  existent,  possessing  developable  powers,  requiring  developable  condi- 
tions. The  seed  may  contain  a  germinant  power  capable  of  covering  continents 
■with  fields  of  golden  grain ;  yet  if  it  remains  shut  up  in  the  granary,  or  buried 
under  a  rock,  it  will  never  be  anything  more  than  dry  dust.  It  is  so  with  the  soul. 
Soul  education,  then,  is  growth.  Not  the  growth  of  anything  imparted  to  it,  but 
the  growth  of  itself ;  not  the  growth  of  any  of  its  particular  faculties,  but  the 
growth  of  its  entire  self,  simultaneously  and  symmetrically.  II.  Soul  education  is 
growth  in  Christ.  "  Grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ."  These  two  words  represent  the  two  great  elements  by  which  alone 
the  human  soul  can  be  educated.  "  Love  and  truth."  1.  Christ  is  the  ideal  after 
which  the  soul  is  to  grow.  2.  Christ's  character  is  the  element  in  which  alone  the 
soul  can  grow.  His  "  grace  "  and  His  "  knowledge  "  furnish  the  only  atmosphere 
in  which  the  human  soul  can  healthfully  live,  thrive,  and  grow.  (D.  Thomiis,  D.D.y 
Growth  in  grace : — I.  What  is  meant  by  growing  in  grace  ?  To  grow  in  grace 
is  to  increase  in  a  spirit  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  and  to  govern  our  conduct 
more  and  more  by  the  same  principles  that  God  does.     II.  Some  things  that  are 

NOT    evidences    OF    GROWTH    IN    GRACE   ALTHOUGH   THEY   ARE    SOMETIMES    SUPPOSED    TO 

BE  SUCH.  1.  It  is  not  certain  evidence  that  an  individual  grows  in  grace  because 
he  grows  in  gifts.  We  naturally  increase  in  that  in  which  we  exercise  ourselves. 
We  may  pray  ever  so  engagedly,  and  increase  in  fluency  and  apparent  pathos,  and 
yet  have  no  grace.  2.  Growing  in  knowledge  is  not  evidence  of  a  growth  in  grace. 
In  heU  no  doubt  they  grow  in  knowledge,  but  never  in  grace.  3.  It  is  not  evidence 
that  a  person  grows  in  grace  because  he  thinks  he  is  doing  so.    A  person  may  be 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  201 

favourably  impressed  with  regard  to  his  progress  in  religion,  when  it  is  evident  to 
others  that  he  is  in  fact  declining.  III.  Some  things  that  are  evidences  of  a 
GROWTH  IN  GRACE.  1.  When  an  individual  finds  he  has  more  singleness  of  heart, 
and  more  purity  of  motive  in  his  conduct,  it  is  evidence  that  he  is  growing  in  grace. 

2.  An  individual  who  grows  in  grace  is  more  and  more  actuated  by  principle,  and 
less  and  less  by  emotion  or  feeling.  By  principle,  in  contradistinction  from  feeling 
or  emotion,  I  mean  a  controlling  determination  in  the  mind  to  do  right.  3.  Another 
important  evidence  of  growth  in  grace  is  more  love  to  God.    By  this  I  do  not  mean 

,  that  there  will  be  in  all  cases  a  conscious  increase  of  emotions  of  love  to  God,  but 
that  there  wUl  be  a  strengthening  of  real  attachment  to  God's  character  and  govern- 
ment. And  this  increased  attachment  will  evince  itself  in  a  growing  veneration  for 
all  the  institutions  of  religion,  and  for  all  the  commands  of  God.  4.  Another 
evidence  of  growth  in  grace  is  when  a  person  increases  in  love  to  men  as  well  as 
love  to  God.  5.  Those  who  grow  in  grace  feel  more  and  more  self-loathing.  This 
is  the  natural  result  of  having  a  clear  view  of  God.  It  makes  a  person  sink  down  in 
seK-abasement.  6.  An  increased  abhorrence  of  sin  is  another  mark  of  growth  in 
g laee.  When  a  person  feels,  day  by  day,  less  and  less  disposed  to  compromise  with 
any  sin,  in  himself,  or  in  others,  it  is  a  sign  that  he  is  growing  in  grace.  7.  He 
who  grows  in  grace  has  less  relish  for  the  world.  He  has  less  and  less  desire  for 
its  wealth,  its  honours,  its  pleasures.  8.  Increasing  delight  in  the  fellowship  of 
the  saints  is  another  evidence  of  growth  in  grace.  9.  He  who  grows  in  grace  finds 
it  more  and  more  easy  to  exercise  a  forgiving  spirit,  and  to  pray  for  his  enemies. 
10.  Growing  more  charitable  is  an  evidence  of  growth  in  grace.     But  he  is  more 

'  ready  to  ascribe  a  person's  apparently  wrong  conduct  to  mistake,  or  misappre- 
hension, or  some  other  cause,  than  to  direct  evU  intention.  11.  Having  less  and 
less  anxiety  about  worldly  things  is  an  evidence  of  growth  in  grace.  12.  Becoming 
more  ready  to  bestow  property  is  a  sign  of  growth  in  grace.  13.  He  feels  less  and 
less  as  if  he  had  any  separate  interest.  It  is  a  great  thing,  in  regard  to  growth  in 
grace,  to  feel  that  aU  you  have  is  Christ's,  and  that  you  have  absolutely  no  separate 
interest  in  living,  or  in  dying,  or  in  holding  property,  or  children,  or  character. 
14.  It  is  an  evidence  of  growth  in  grace  when  a  person  becomes  more  willing  to 
confess  faults  to  men.  15.  Growing  in  grace  raises  a  person  more  and  more  above 
the  world.  The  growing  saint  regards  less  and  less  either  the  good  or  ill  opinions 
of  men.  He  feels  that  it  is  of  little  importance,  only  as  it  may  affect  his  useful- 
ness. IV.  How  TO  GROW  IN  GRACE.  1.  Watch  agaiust  besetting  sins.  (1)  Levity. 
(2)  Censoriousness.  (3)  Anger.  (4)  Pride.  (5)  Selfishness,  in  all  its  forms. 
Here  is  the  great  root  of  all  the  difficulty.  This  is  the  foundation,  the  fountain, 
the  substance,  and  sum  total,  of  all  the  iniquity  under  heaven.  Watch  here ;  look 
out  constantly ;  see  where  self  comes  out  in  your  conduct,  and  there  set  a  guard. 
(6)  Sloth.  (7)  Envy.  If  you  see  others  going  ahead  of  you  in  prosperity,  in 
influence,  or  in  talents,  examine  your  feelings,  and  see  whether  you  are  pleased  at 
it.  If  the  sight  give  you  pain,  beware !  (8)  Ambition.  By  this  sin  angels  fell, 
and  it  is  impossible  to  grow  in  grace  without  suppressing  it.  (9)  Impure  thoughts. 
It  is  necessary  to  make  a  covenant  with  our  eyes,  and  with  our  ears  too,  and  all  our 
senses,  or  they  will  prove  the  inlet  of  temptation  and  sin.  If  you  find  yourself  in 
danger,  turn  your  thoughts  away  instantly.  2.  Another  dh-ection  for  growing 
in  grace  is,  take  care  to  exercise  all  the  Christian  graces.  Exercise  yourself 
especially  in  those  things  where  you  find  yourself  most  deficient.  If  you  are 
exposed  to  a  particular  sin,  guard  there.  If  you  are  deficient  in  a  particular  grace, 
exercise  that.  (1)  Suppose  you  are  naturally  worldly-minded,  and  in  danger  of 
being  carried  away  by  the  love  of  the  world.  Shut  down  the  gate,  and  determine 
that  you  wUl  on  no  account  add  to  your  wealth,  or  lay  field  to  field.  (2)  Suppose 
you  are  in  danger  of  being  flattered  and  lifted  up  with  pride.  As  a  reasonable 
being  you  are  bound  to  know  this,  and  be  on  your  guard.  (3)  If  you  find  that  you 
are  reluctant  to  confess  your  faults,  break  right  over  it,  and  confess  to  everybody 
that  you  have   injured.      Practise  it  on  all  occasions,  till  you  get  the   victory. 

3.  Exercise  decision  of  character.  To  walk  with  God  a  man  must  walk  contrary 
to  the  course  of  this  world.  He  must  face  public  sentiment.  4.  To  grow  in  grace, 
a  man  must  possess  gi-eat  meekness.  If  a  man  suffer  himself  to  be  fretted  by 
opposition,  and  thrown  into  a  passion  by  obstacles  that  are  thrown  in  his  way,  he 
may  rest  assured  that  Satan  will  manage  to  keep  him  in  such  a  state  of  mind  that 
he  will  by  no  means  grow  in  grace.  V.  Some  things  that  are  evidences  of 
DECLENSION.  1.  The  person  who  grows  weary  of  being  asked  to  give  for  promoting 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  evidently  declining.     2.  Becoming  backward  to  converse 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

on  the  subject  of  religion,  and  particularly  to  converse  on  spiritual,  and  experi- 
mental, and  heart-searching  points,  is  evidence  of  declension.  3.  When  a  person 
is  less  disposed  to  engage  in  the  duties  of  devotion,  public,  social,  or  private,  it  is  a 
sign  of  declen::ion.  4.  Taking  more  delight  in  public  meetings  than  in  private 
duties  and  secret  communion  with  God,  is  another  evidence  of  a  declining  state. 
5.  Feeling  less  delight  in  revivals  of  religion  is  a^  sad  token  of  declension.  6.  A 
person  that  becomes  captious  about  measures  used  in  promoting  revivals  is  in  a 
declining  state.  VI.  How  to  escape  from  a  state  of  declension.  1.  You  must 
admit  the  conviction  that  you  are  in  a  state  of  declension.  2.  Apply  to  yourself  all 
that  God  says  to  backsliders,  just  as  if  you  were  the  only  individual  in  the  world 
in  that  condition.  3.  Find  out  the  point  where  you  began  to  decline.  See  what 
■was  the  first  cause  of  your  backsliding,  and  give  that  up.  You  will  often  find  this 
first  cause  where  you  did  not  expect  it,  in  something  which  you  called  a  little 
matter,  or  that  you  tried  to  make  yourself  beUeve  was  not  a  sin.  4.  Give  up  your 
idols.  If  it  be  an  article  of  property,  dispose  of  it  in  some  way  ;  give  it  away,  sell 
it,  burn  it,  away  with  it,  rather  than  have  it  stand  between  you  and  God.  5.  Be 
careful  to  apply  afresh  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  pardon  and  peace  with  God. 
Eemarks :  1.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  standing  still  in  religion.  2.  The  idea 
that  persons  grow  in  grace  during  seasons  of  declension  is  abominable.  Their 
whole  progress  is  the  other  way.  3.  There  are  but  few  persons  that  do  grow  in 
grace.  How  many,  instead  of  setting  themselves  resolutely  to  obey  God,  and 
setting  their  faces  as  a  flint  against  all  sin,  passively  commit  themselves  to  the 
stream,  and  expect  to  be  wafted  home  to  glory  in  this  lazy  way,  without  the  trouble 
of  a  conflict.  4.  We  see  the  great  fault  of  ministers.  How  little  pains  they  take 
to  train  up  young  converts.  5.  Unless  ministers  grow  in  grace  it  is  impossible  for 
the  Church  to  grow.  "Like  priest  like  people"  is  a  maxim  founded  on  principles 
of  correct  philosophy.  6.  Great  pains  should  be  taken  by  young  ministers  to  grow 
in  grace.  7.  It  is  just  as  indispensable  in  the  promotion  of  a  revival,  to  preach  to 
the  Church,  and  make  them  grow  in  grace,  as  it  is  to  preach  to  sinners,  and  make 
them  submit  to  God.  (C.  G.  Finney.)  Soul  culture  .-—The  words  are  suggestive 
of  two  thoughts  :  that  growth  implies  life,  and  that  life  requires  culture.  I.  Life  is 
characterised  by  keceiving.  There  are  four  things  indispensably  requisite  to  the 
growth  of  plants.  The  elements  essential  to  the  growth  of  spiritual  life  are  analogous. 
1.  There  must  be  light.  The  Word  of  God  is  to  the  growth  of  a  soul  as  necessary 
«,s  light  to  vegetation.  2.  There  must  be  also  heat.  Knowledge  without  life — 
truth  without  love — resembles  a  frosty  moonlight.  Flowers  open  to  the  sun,  and 
hearts  open  to  Christ,  when  the  constraining  power  of  His  love  is  felt  as  a  burning 
heat.  The  soul  must  build  its  conservatory  on  the  south  side  of  the  temple  of 
truth.  This  will  make  the  soul  of  the  Christian  a  Divine  sunflower.  3.  Moisture 
is  essential  to  the  growth  of  plants.  In  rain  and  dew  the  tree  receives  those 
influences  without  which  neither  beauty  nor  fruitfulness  can  exist.  What 
moisture  is  to  vegetation  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to  soul-growth.  4.  To  the 
growth  and  healthiness  of  vegetation  there  must  be  air.  "  Of  all  common  things, 
air  is  the  most  common.  No  space  or  place  is  accessible  to  us  that  is  not  filled  with 
it.  It  is,  of  all  material  wants,  that  which  is  most  indispensable  to  our  existence. 
The  character  of  a  tree,  plant,  or  flower  will  be  determined  by  the  air  of  the 
neighbourhood  where  it  is  planted.  Impure  air  will  affect  the  vitality  of  a  plant  as 
truly  as  it  does  the  lungs  of  an  animal.  "  The  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man  " 
cannot  thrive  save  in  an  atmosphere  somewhat  congenial  with  its  heavenly 
character.  It  must  move  in  an  air  higher  and  purer  than  that  of  earth.  We 
must  know  what  it  is  to  have  "  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ,"  and  with  His  saints.  To  "  grow  in  grace  "  we  must  surround  our- 
selves with  the  elements  of  a  Divine  life.  The  character  and  complexion  of  our 
daily  life  will  be  the  natural  result  and  outgrowth  of  the  company  we  keep,  the 
society  in  which  we  move,  the  religious  atmosphere  we  breathe.  11.  The  second 
property  of  life  is  that  of  giving.  The  flower  gives  its  fragrance  and  loveliness ; 
the  plant  its  nourishment  and  healing;  the  tree  its  shadow  and  fruit.  The  animal 
gives  its  strength  of  sinew,  bone,  and  muscle.  Man  does  the  same,  with  the 
additional  contribution  of  intellectual  strength.  Without  this  giving  forth  there 
would  be  no  true  or  perfect  development  of  life.  The  man  that  lives  for  self  is  a 
man  of  stunted  growth.  A  Christian  that  lives  for  self  is  a  spiritual  dwarf. 
{A  London  Suburban  Minifiter.)  A  psalm  for  the  Neiv  Year  :—l.  A  Divine 
INJUNCTION  WITH  A  SPECIAL  mRECTiON '.  "  Grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."     "  Grow  in  grace."     What  is  this  ?    It  must 


CHAP,  m.]  11.  PETER.  203 

be  in  the  outset  implied  that  we  have  been  quickened  by  grace.  Dead  things 
cannot  grow.  Growth  shall  prove  your  life.  Grow  in  that  root-grace,  faith. 
Seek  to  believe  the  promises  better  than  ye  have  done.  Let  your  faith  increase  in 
extent,  believing  more  truth ;  let  it  increase  in  firmness,  getting  a  tighter  grip  of 
«very  truth ;  let  it  increase  in  constancy,  not  being  feeble  or  wavering,  nor  always 
tossed  about  with  every  wind ;  let  your  faith  daily  increase  in  simplicity,  resting 
more  fully  and  more  completely  upon  the  finished  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
See  to  it  that  your  love  also  grows.  If  ye  have  loved  with  a  spark,  pray  that  the 
spark  may  become  an  all-consuming  flame.  Ask  that  your  love  may  become  more 
extended — that  ye  may  have  love  unto  all  the  saints  ;  more  practical,  that  it  may 
move  your  every  thought,  your  every  word  and  deed  ;  more  intense,  that  ye  may 
become  as  burning  and  shining  lights  whose  flame  is  to  love  God  and  man.  Pray 
that  ye  may  grow  in  hope,  that  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened, 
ye  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  His  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of 
His  inheritance  in  the  saints  ;  that  ye  may  by  hope  enter  into  the  joys  of  heaven 
while  ye  are  on  earth ;  that  hope  may  give  you  immortality  while  you  are  yet 
mortal — may  give  you  resurrection  before  you  die.  Ask  that  you  may  grow  in 
humility,  till  you  can  say,  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  the  saints  "  ;  that  ye 
may  grow  in  consecration,  till  ye  can  cry,  "For  me  to  live  is  Christ:  to  die  is 
gain  "  ;  that  ye  may  grow  in  contentment  till  ye  can  feel,  *<  In  whatsoever  state  I 
am,  I  have  learned  therewith  to  be  content."  Advance  in  likeness  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  that  your  very  enemies  may  take  knowledge  of  you  that  ye  have  been  with 
Jesus  and  have  learned  of  Him.  Pray  that  ye  may  grow  downward  ;  that  ye  may 
know  more  of  your  own  vileness,  more  of  your  own  nothingness ;  and  so  be  rooted 
in  humility.  As  ye  root  downward,  seek  to  grow  upward.  Send  out  the  topshoot 
of  your  love  towards  heaven.  Then  pray  to  grow  on  either  side.  Stretch  out  your 
branches ;  let  the  shadow  of  your  holy  influence  extend  as  far  as  God  has  given 
you  opportunities.  But  see  to  it  also  that  ye  grow  in  fruitfulness,  for  to  increase 
the  bough  without  adding  to  the  fruit  is  to  diminish  the  beauty  of  the  tree.  We  are 
not  compared  to  trees,  but  to  children.  Let  us  grow  as  babes  do,  nourished  by 
unadulterated  milk.  Steadily,  slowly,  but  surely  and  certainly.  Little  each  day, 
but  much  in  years.  But  do  ye  inquire  why  and  wherefore  we  should  thus  grow 
in  grace  ?  Let  us  say  that  if  we  do  not  advance  in  grace  it  is  a  sorrowful  sign. 
It  is  a  mark  of  unhealthiness.  It  is  an  unhealthy  child  that  grows  not,  a  cankered 
tree  that  sends  forth  no  fresh  shoots.  More ;  it  may  be  not  only  a  sign  of 
unhealthiness,  but  of  deformity.  If  a  man's  shoulders  have  come  to  a  certain 
breadth,  and  his  lower  limbs  refuse  to  lift  him  aloft,  we  call  him  a  dwarf,  and  we 
look  upon  him  with  some  degree  of  pity.  Now  to  grow  may  be,  moreover,  the 
sign  of  death.  It  may  say  to  us.  Inasmuch  as  thou  growest  not,  thou  livest  not ; 
inasmuch  as  thou  dost  not  increase  in  faith,  and  love,  and  grace ;  and  inasmuch  as 
thou  dost  not  ripen  towards  the  harvest,  fear  and  tremble  lest  thou  shouldst  only 
have  a  name  to  live  and  be  destitute  of  life,  lest  thou  shouldst  be  the  painted 
counterfeit;  a  lovely  flower-picture  drawn  by  the  painter's  skilful  hand,  but 
without  reality,  because  without  the  life-power  which  should  make  it  bud  and 
germinate  and  blossom  and  bring  forth  fruit.  Grow  in  grace,  because  to  increase 
in  grace  is  the  only  pathway  to  enduring  nobility.  Oh !  would  ye  not  wish  to  stand 
with  that  noble  host  who  have  served  their  Master  well,  and  have  entered  into 
their  eternal  rest  ?  But  to  grow  is  not  only  to  be  noble — it  is  to  be  happy.  That 
man  who  stays  growing  refuses  to  be  blessed.  Forward  is  the  sunlight !  forward  is 
victory !  forward  is  heaven !  But  here,  to  stand  still  is  danger ;  nay,  it  is  death. 
O  Lord,  for  our  happiness'  sake,  bid  Thou  us  advance ;  and,  for  our  usefulness' 
sake,  let  us  ascend.  I  have  thus  explained  the  Divine  exhortation ;  but  you 
perceive  it  contains  a  special  injunction,  "And  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  We  must  see  to  it  that  we  ripen  in  the  knowledge  of  Him 
— of  Him  in  His  Divine  nature,  and  in  His  human  relationship  to  us ;  in  His 
finished  work,  in  His  death,  in  His  resurrection,  in  His  present  glorious  interces- 
sion, and  in  His  future  royal  advent.  We  must  study  to  know  more  of  Christ  also 
in  His  character — in  that  Divine  compound  of  every  perfection,  faith,  zeal, 
deference  to  His  Father's  will,  courage,  meekness,  and  love.  Above  all,  let  us  long 
to  know  Christ  in  His  person.  This  year  endeavour  to  get  better  acquaintance 
with  the  Crucified  One.  Grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  then.  And  do  ye  ask 
me  why  ?  Oh  !  if  ye  have  ever  known  Him  you  will  not  ask  that  question.  He 
that  longs  not  to  know  more  of  Christ,  knows  nothing  of  Him  yet.     II.  A  gkateful 

THANKSGIVING,  WITH  A  MOST  SUGGESTIVE   TERMINATION  :    "  To  Him   bC   glory  both  nOW 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iix. 

and  for  ever.  Amen."  The  apostles  very  frequently  suspended  their  writing  in 
order  to  lift  up  their  hearts  in  praise.  Praise  is  never  out  of  season,  and  it  is  no 
interruption  to  interrupt  any  engagement  in  order  to  laud  and  magnify  our  God. 
"To  Him  be  glory."  Yes,  to  Him,  ye  atheists,  who  deny  Him;  to  Him,  ye 
Soeinians,  who  doubt  His  Deity ;  to  Him,  ye  kings,  who  vaunt  your  splendour, 
and  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  you  ;  to  Him,  ye  people,  who  against  Him 
stand  up,  and  ye  rulers  who  against  Him  take  counsel ;  to  Him,  the  King  whom 
God  hath  set  up  upon  His  holy  hill  of  Zion ;  to  Him  be  glory.  To  Him  be  glory  as 
the  Lord :  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ;  "  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty 
God,  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace."  To  Him  be  glory  as  Saviour.  He 
alone  hath  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  His  blood  ;  He  alone  hath  "  trodden  the 
wine-press,"  and  "  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah,  glorious 
in  His  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength."  "  To  Him  be  glory." 
Church  of  God  respond !  Let  every  pious  heart  say,  "  To  Him  be  glory."  But 
the  apostle  adds  "  now" — "  to  Him  be  glory  now."  Oh,  postpone  not  the  day  of 
His  triumph  ;  put  not  off  the  hour  of  His  coronation.  Now,  now ;  for  now,  to-day. 
He  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  in  heavenly  places  with  Christ 
Jesus.  "  And  for  ever."  Never  shall  we  cease  our  praise.  Time  !  thou  shalt 
grow  old  and  die.  Eternity  !  thine  unnumbered  years  shall  speed  their  everlasting 
course  ;  but  for  ever,  for  ever,  for  ever,  "  to  Him  be  glory."  But,  now,  there  is  a 
conclusion  to  this  of  the  most  suggestive  kind — "Amen."  1.  First,  it  is  the 
desire  of  the  heart,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly ;  Amen.  Even  so,  come.  Lord 
Jesus."  We  say  "  Amen  "  at  the  end  of  the  prayer  to  signify,  "  Lord,  let  it  be  so  " — 
it  is  our  heart's  desire.  2.  But  it  signifies  more  than  this ;  it  means  the  affirmation 
of  our  faith.  We  only  say  amen  to  that  which  we  really  believe  to  be  true.  We 
add  our  affidavit,  as  it  were,  to  God's  promise,  that  we  believe  Him  to  be  faithful 
and  true.  3.  But  there  is  yet  a  third  meaning  to  this  amen.  It  often  expresses 
the  joy  of  the  heart.  As  you  see  King  Jesus  sitting  upon  Mount  Zion  with  death 
and  hell  beneath  His  feet,  as  to-day  you  anticipate  the  glory  of  His  Advent,  as 
to-day  you  are  expecting  the  time  when  you  shall  reign  with  Him  for  ever  and 
ever,  does  not  your  heart  say  "  Amen  "  ?  4.  But,  lastly,  amen  is  sometimes  used 
in  Scripture  as  an  amen  of  resolution.  It  means,  "  I,  in  the  name  of  God,  solemnly 
pledge  myself  that,  in  His  strength,  I  will  seek  to  make  it  so ;  to  Him  be  glory 
both   now  and  for  ever."     (C  H.   Spurgeon.)         Of  growth  in   grace : — I.  How 

MANY  WATS  MAY  A  CHRISTIAN  BE  SAID  TO  GROW  IN  GRACE  ?      1.    He  grOWS  in  the  eXCrcisC 

of  grace  ;  his  lamp  is  burning  and  shining.  2.  He  grows  in  the  degree  of  grace 
(Psa.  Ixxxiv.  7).  II.  What  is  the  right  manner  of  a  Christian's  growth?  1.  To 
grow  less  in  one's  own  eyes.  2.  To  grow  proportionably — in  one  grace  as  well  as 
another.  3.  When  a  Christian  has  grace  suitable  to  his  several  employments  and 
occasions.  III.  Whence  is  it  that  true  grace  cannot  but  grow  ?  1.  It  is  proper 
for  grace  to  grow ;  it  is  the  seed  of  God.  2.  Grace  cannot  but  grow  from  the 
sweetness  and  excellency  of  it ;  he  that  hath  grace  is  never  weary  of  it,  but  still 
would  have  more.  3.  Grace  cannot  but  grow  from  a  believer's  ingrafting  into 
Christ ;  he  who  is  a  scion,  ingrafted  into  this  noble,  generous  stock,  cannot  but 
grow.  IV.  What  motives  or  incentives  are  there  to  make  us  grow  in  grace  ? 
1.  Growth  is  the  end  of  the  ordinances.  2.  The  growth  of  grace  is  the  best 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  it.  3.  Growth  in  grace  is  the  beauty  of  a  Christian. 
4.  The  more  we  grow  in  grace,  the  more  glory  we  bring  to  God.  5.  The  more  we 
grow  in  grace,  the  more  will  God  love  us.  6.  What  need  have  we  to  grow  in 
grace  ?  There  is  still  something  lacking  in  our  faith.  Grace  is  but  in  its  infancy 
and  minority,  and  we  must  still  be  adding  a  cubit  to  our  spiritual  stature.  7.  The 
growth  of  grace  will  hinder  the  growth  of  corruption.  As  some  plants  have  an 
antipathy,  and  will  not  thrive  if  they  grow  near  together,  as  the  vine  and  the  bay 
tree :  so,  where  grace  grows,  sin  will  not  thrive  so  fast.  8.  We  cannot  grow  too 
much  in  grace ;  there  is  no  excess  there.  The  body  may  grow  too  great,  as  in  the 
dropsy;  but  faith  cannot  grow  too  great :  "  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly  "  ;  here 
was  exceeding,  yet  not  excess.  As  a  man  cannot  have  too  much  health,  so  not  too 
much  grace.  9.  Such  as  do  not  grow  in  grace,  decay  in  grace.  "  Not  to  advance 
in  the  path  of  life  is  to  return."  10.  The  more  we  grow  in  grace,  the  more  we 
shall  flourish  in  glory.  V.  How  shall  we  know  whether  we  grow  in  grace? 
1.  The  signs  of  our  not  growing  in  grace,  but  rather  falling  into  a  spiritual 
consumption.  (1)  When  we  have  lost  our  spiritual  appetite.  (2)  When  we  grow 
more  worldly.  (3)  When  we  are  less  troubled  about  sin.  2.  The  signs  of  our 
growing  in  grace.     (1)  When  we  are  got  beyond  our  former  measures  of  grace. 


CHAP,  m.]  II.  PETER.  205 

(2)  When  we  are  more  firmly  rooted  in  religion,  rooted  in  Him,  and  established : 
the  spreading  of  the  root  shows  the  growth  of  the  tree.  (3)  When  we  have  a  more 
spiritual  frame  of  heart.  More  spiritual  in  our  principles,  affections,  and  perform- 
ance of  duty.  (4)  When  grace  gets  ground  by  opposition.  The  fire,  by  an 
antiperistasis,  burns  hottest  in  the  coldest  season.  The  martyrs'  zeal  was  increased 
by  persecution.  Here  was  grace  of  the  first  magnitude.  VI.  What  shall  we  do 
TO  GKOw  IN  grace  ?  1.  Take  heed  of  that  which  will  hinder  its  growth — the  love 
of  any  sin.  2.  Use  all  means  for  growth  in  grace.  It  is  better  to  grow  in  grace 
than  gifts  ;  gifts  are  for  ornament ;  grace  is  for  nourishment,  to  edify  others,  to 
save  ourselves.  VII.  How  may  we  comfort  such  as  complain  they  do  not  grow 
IN  grace  ?  They  may  mistake  ;  they  may  grow  when  they  think  they  do  not.  The 
sight  Christians  have  of  their  defects  in  grace,  and  their  thirst  after  greater 
measures  of  grace,  makes  them  think  they  do  not  grow  when  they  do.  Let 
Christians  be  thankful  for  the  least  growth.  If  you  do  not  grow  so  much  in 
assurance,  bless  God  if  you  grow  in  sincerity ;  if  you  do  not  grow  so  much  in 
knowledge,  bless  God  if  you  grow  in  humility.  If  a  tree  grows  in  the  root,  it  is  a 
true  growth  ;  if  you  grow  in  the  root  grace  of  humility,  it  is  as  needful  for  you  as 
any  other  growth.  (T.  Watson.)  Christian  growth  : — The  command  is  that  we 
enlarge  ourselves ;  that  we  pass  up  by  graduation  from  one  class  to  another  class 
in  the  great  school  of  life,  of  action,  of  understanding.  The  injunction  pre- 
supposes that  we  are  capable,  that  we  have  faculties  susceptible  of  being  disciplined 
and  trained.  It  pre-supposes  that  we  are  intelligent  and  ambitious  after  good,  and 
desirous  of  higher  attainment.  The  germ  idea  contained  in  the  word  "  education  " 
is  that  of  leading  forth  the  natural  capacity  of  the  man.  An  educated  person  is 
a  person  who  has  been  led  forth,  or  brought  out,  or  developed  from  what  he  was 
into  something  larger,  and  fuller,  and  more  complete.  Moral  education  i^,  there- 
fore, the  leading  forth  of  the  moral  capacity  of  man.  Human  nature  is  a  nature 
of  capacity  ;  it  is  susceptible  of  great  development  in  any  direction  and  toward 
any  state  of  being.  It  can  be  led  out  toward  the  good  or  toward  the  bad  ;  can  be 
made  to  seek  its  affinities  among  the  high  or  the  low.  It  can  be  influenced  toward 
heaven  or  it  can  be  influenced  toward  hell.  As  far  as  we  can  see,  there  is  no  limit 
to  this  development  of  man's  capacity.  The  whole  human  machinery  impresses 
one  in  its  every  part  with  the  idea  of  motion,  and  the  assertion  that  the  mind  and 
soul  will  ever  come  to  a  dead  standstill,  whether  here  or  in  the  hereafter,  is  one 
repugnant  to  the  very  genius  of  their  construction.  The  endless  activity  of  God, 
according  to  its  capacity  to  receive  it,  seems  to  have  been  imparted  to  His  last  and 
finest  creation,  man.  Now,  this  marvellous  being,  whose  capacity  of  growth  is 
endless,  is  located  in  the  midst  of  a  thousand  incentives  of  growth.  Kegard  him 
simply  as  an  animal,  and  what  that  he  needs  does  the  earth  and  the  air  refuse  him 
for  food?  Look  at  him,  as  a  student,  as  an  embodiment  of  mental  faculties,  and 
behold  how  multitudinous  are  the  objects  that  elicit  his  inquisition.  The  earth  on 
which  he  walks  swells  with  problems  that  challenge  solution  ;  the  air  he  breathes 
is  charged  with  forces  and  combinations  of  elements  which  provoke  him  to 
analysis.  Contemplate  him  as  a  social  being,  and  see  in  the  midst  of  what 
quickening  and  vital  associations  he  liyes.  Love,  sympathy,  tenderness,  mercy, 
pity — each  through  its  own  channel  sends  down  its  crystal  stream  to  swell  the  tide 
of  his  ever-widening  life.  Or  examine  him  in  his  spiritual  connections.  What 
capacity  of  moral  discernment  do  we  not  find  in  him  ?  What  magnificent  equip- 
ment of  sensibilities  is  his ;  what  profound  depth  of  life  he  has ;  what  energy  to 
aspire,  what  power  to  feel,  what  force  to  execute,  what  ability  to  acquire  impres- 
sions distinguish  him?  The  education  of  such  a  being  must  be,  to  every 
thoughtful  mind,  one  of  the  gravest  subjects  within  the  whole  range  of  human 
inquiry.  The  worst  thing  that  any  man  can  do  is  to  think  of  himself  as  a  creature 
of  little  value.  I  care  not  how  ordinary  you  may  be  in  your  own  eyes  ;  I  care  not 
how  little  gifted  you  may  be  as  others  might  judge,  still  I  beg  you  to  remember 
that  you  are  of  the  highest  dignity  in  the  eye  of  your  Maker.  It  is  safe  to  say  that 
there  is  not  a  creation  of  God,  there  is  not  a  combination  permitted  by  Him,  the 
object  of  which  is  not  man's  education.  You  are  to  look  upon  the  whole  world  in 
all  its  growths,  in  all  its  ever-revolving  changes,  as  ordained  for  your  instruction 
and  assistance.  There  is  not  a  tree,  there  is  not  a  spire  of  grass,  there  is  not  even 
a  daisy-head  that  you  passed  this  summer  in  the  fields,  that  was  not  created  and 
put  in  growth  and  bloom  for  you.  Wisdom  as  to  these  is  wisdom  as  to  God, 
and  he  is  wisest  as  regards  the  Creator  who  comprehends  most  clearly  all  the  use 
and   relation   of   created  things.      Now,   bearing    these    things   which   we    have 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

suggested  in  mind,  we  submit  to  you,  if  the  appliances  for  the  leading  forth  of 
your  nature,  in  all  manner  of  admirable  ways,  is  not  a  matter  of  wonder  and 
gratitude.  If  you  will  put  yourself  in  connection  with  all  these  helps,  so  boun- 
teously given  ;  if  you  will  only  co-operate  with  the  agents  and  agencies  devised  in 
your  behalf,  how  can  your  natures  fail  to  be  daily  enlarged  by  what  is  about  you  ? 
Who  can  say  what  knowledge  a  babe  gets  out  of  its  mother  by  feeling  with  its  little 
hands  about  the  mother's  face?  This  we  must  remember  also,  that  we  are  not 
educated  along  one  line  or  by  a  single  contact  with  men,  but  along  many  lines  and 
by  means  of  association  with  many.  Hence  God  groups  us.  Like  stars,  men  are 
clustered  in  constellations,  and  move  on  in  systems,  mutually  attracting,  mutually 
repelling  each  other.  There  is  no  education  equal  to  that  which  a  man  or  woman 
can  get  in  the  sweet  school  of  family  life.  It  is  the  school  in  which  love  should  be 
master  and  mistress.  In  it  the  only  law  known  should  be  that  of  affection ;  the 
highest  privilege,  that  of  serving.  This  family  life  may  be  lived  in  humble 
circumstances,  as  men  count  surroundings  ;  but  its  influence  on  your  soul  may  be 
as  precious,  and  the  results  as  happy,  as  if  you  had  lived  within  the  sentinel- 
guarded  doors  of  a  palace.  As  Christianity  enlarges  the  domain  of  its  sovereignty 
over  men,  this  family  principle  gets  wider  and  wider  application.  The  ties  of 
blood  cease  to  bound  the  limits  of  affectionate  regard,  and  a  spiritual  brotherhood 
unites  you  to  a  larger  circle.  Ultimately  the  whole  race  will  be  kin  to  each 
member  of  it.  In  order  that  this  education  of  human  nature  may  go  forward 
unto  its  complete  triumph,  it  is  necessary  that  every  organisation,  every  form 
of  government,  and  the  entire  social  structure,  should  be  of  a  proper  kind. 
There  is  no  pressure  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  a  man  more  potent  than 
that  of  organisation.  If  the  organisation  of  the  family  be  wrong  in  its  spirit, 
in  its  tone  and  temper,  then  wiU  each  member  of  the  family  be  wrong  in  his  or  her 
tone  and  temper.  A  family  whose  government  rests  on  the  principle  of  force,  of 
authority  that  speaks  only  by  the  infliction  of  punishment,  will  make  children  in  it 
cowardly,  hypocritical,  and  brutal.  A  Church  whose  organisation  rests  on  a 
bigoted  foundation  will  make  its  members  bigoted.  The  influence  of  its  pulpit, 
and  even  of  its  prayers,  will  educate  men  and  women  into  narrowness  of  thought 
and  harshness  of  opinion.  You  cannot  base  a  Church  of  Christ  on  anything  less 
wide,  less  liberal,  less  sympathetic,  than  the  heart  of  Christ.  Education  is  thus  for 
ever  progressive,  and  the  human  mind  at  the  dawn  of  each  generation  goes  in 
search  of  the  undiscovered  as  birds  go  forth  from  their  groves  with  the  coming  of 
every  morning  to  canvass  the  fields  for  their  food,  and  feel  in  the  movement 
of  their  flight  the  joy  of  a  fresh  experience.  Thus  you  see  that  education  includes 
the  idea  of  growth.  The  educated  man  is  the  grown  man.  He  has  grown  out  of 
old  forms  of  thought  into  new  ones.  He  has  left  one  plane  of  feeling  and  been 
lifted  to  a  higher  plane.  That  which  was  difficult  for  him  to  understand  has 
become  plain.  He  walks  as  those  who  walk  in  the  light.  Christianity,  as  measured 
by  its  effect  on  humanity,  if  properly  interpreted  and  understood,  is  movement. 
It  builds  no  permanent  encampment  for  its  followers.  Its  army  is  for  ever  on  the 
march,  and  every  night  finds  them  in  a  new  camp-ground.  We  must  remember 
that  we  are  all  school-children  in  spiritual  education.  We  are  not  far  advanced^ 
we  are  on  the  lower  benches,  and  are  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  Master.  We  are  not 
studying  the  high  sciences  of  God.  We  are  not  able  to  fathom  the  "  deep  things" 
of  His  will.  We  are  only  being  instructed  in  the  first  lessons  of  good  manners. 
We  are  only  being  taught,  here  and  now,  how  to  behave.  By  and  by,  when  we 
have  learned  how  to  behave,  when  we  have  become  obedient,  cheerful,  patient,  and 
good  ;  by  and  by,  when  our  spiritual  senses  have  become  organically  so  developed 
as  to  create  a  hunger  for  finer  knowledge,  and  have  begun  to  long  to  see  the 
things  that  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  to  hear  the  things  that  ears  have  never  heard, 
God  will  lift  us  and  honour  us  with  higher  seats  where  the  older  scholars  sit,  and 
we  shall  begin  to  be  wise  as  well  as  good.  For  this  education  of  which  I  am 
talking,  this  leading  out  of  man's  moral  faculties,  is  a  thing  not  of  to-day,  nor  a 
movement  of  time  as  men  count  time  ;  it  is  a  thing  of  the  ages.  It  is  a  movement 
which  rolls  itself  on  into  eternity.  As  to  extent,  there  is  no  end  to  it.  I  close  with 
this  word  of  cheer.  The  theme  suggests  it.  Whatever  your  state  spiritually  may  be, 
you  need  not  remain  in  it.  You  can  grow  out  of  that  state  into  a  better  one.  You 
who  have  failed  can  grow  out  of  your  failure  into  success.  You  who  are  despondent 
can  grow  up  into  the  condition  of  hopefulness.  You  who  are  sad  God  will  lift  into 
joy.  You  who  are  in  the  midst  of  sin  can  be  redeemed  out  of  that  sin,  and  become 
upright.     You  who  are  weak  in  the  structure  of  your  virtue  can  be  braced  with  the 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  207 

bands  of  everlasting  power.  The  heavens  are  full  of  attractions,  and  by  their  sweet 
might  you  can  be  lifted  until  you  stand  higher  than  the  stars.  (W.  H.  H,  Murray.) 
Growth  in  grace : — I.  What  is  it  to  grow  in  geace.  1.  The  Christian  should  be 
ambitious  to  increase  in  the  number  of  his  graces.  2.  We  should  grow  in  the 
measure  of  our  graces.  3.  We  should  grow  in  the  use  of  our  graces.  II.  Why 
GBOWTH  IN  GRACE  SHOULD  BE  SOUGHT.  1.  Bccause  God  has  afforded  a  variety  of 
helps  to  promote  it.  2.  As  we  are  otherwise  in  continual  danger  of  losing  what  we 
have  already  obtained.  3.  Our  advancement  in  glory  will  be  in  proportion  to  our 
present  improvement  in  grace.  "  III.   How  growth  in  grace  is  to  be  attained. 

I.  Ascertain  that  the  good  work  is  really  begun.  2.  Cherish  a  lively  sense  of  your 
imperfections.  3.  Carefully  avoid  whatever  would  hinder  your  growing  in  grace. 
4.  As  you  must  be  diligent  in  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  so  you  must  take  care 
not  to  place  any  confidence  in  them.  (S.  Lavington.)  Groivth  in  grace  : — I.  A 
sense  of  insufficiency  is  an  indispensable   prerequisite  to  growth  in  grace. 

II.  But  a  self-renouncing  dependence  on  Divine  help  must  not  be  allowed  to 
supersede  or  to  slacken  your  own  endeavours.  III.  Growth  in  grace  is  a  process 
•which  cannot  go  on  without  sooner  or  later  manifesting  itself  by  its  fruits. 
1.  A  growing  reliance  on  Christ.  2.  Increasing  power  over  temptation.  3.  The 
increasing  influence  of  conscience.  4.  Increasing  disinterestedness  of  religious 
feeling.  5.  Increased  complacency  in  thinking  of  death  and  eternity.  (J.  M. 
McCidloch,  D.D.)  Grow  in  grace: — 1.  In  growing  better,  the  first  thing  is  to 
become  good ;  or  rather  this  is  preUminary  to  all  improvement.  The  foundation 
must  be  laid  before  the  building  can  rise.  No  digging  about  and  enriching, 
no  ever  so  auspicious  alternation  of  sun  and  shower  can  bring  forward  a 
plant  which  has  no  life  in  it.  Yet  in  morals  this  is  what  some  are  endeavouring 
to  do ;  they  would  feed  death  and  cultivate  sterility.  The  sinner  must  pass 
from  the  state  of  nature  to  that  of  grace  before  he  can  grow  in  grace.  2.  Then 
the  soul  being  born  again,  the  principle  of  spiritual  life  being  communicated 
to  it,  it  must  have  nourishment  in  order  to  grow ;  the  principle  of  spiritual 
life  is  not  independent  of  aliment  any  more  than  that  of  animal  life.  Now 
truth  is  the  nutriment  of  the  soul,  and  it  must  be  taken,  or  the  soul  will  not 
grow,  and  in  a  httle  whUe  will  cease  to  live.  They  say  it  is  no  matter  what  a  man 
believes,  or  whether  he  believes  anything,  so  he  but  practises  aright,  which  is  &s  if 
one  would  say,  it  is  immaterial  what  a  man  eats  or  whether  he  eat  at  all,  so  he  but 
lives.  Can  he  live  without  eating,  and  eating  wholesome  food?  If  error  is  not 
injurious,  poison  is  not;  and  if  ignorance  is  not  hurtful,  starvation  is  harmless. 
The  man  who  is  indifferent  to  the  interests  of  truth  is  also  to  those  of  virtue.  It  is 
impossible  to  love  the  one  without  loving  the  other.  Truth  is  the  principle  and 
pabulum  of  virtue.  The  Word  of  God  must  be  understood,  believed  and  meditated 
on,  and  especially  its  testimony  concerning  Christ,  otherwise  there  can  be  no  growth 
in  grace.  3.  The  exercise  of  the  moral  powers  and  gracious  dispositions  in  you  is 
essentially  necessary  to  their  growth  and  expansion.  How  can  one  grow  in  benevo- 
lence or  in  compassion  unless  he  obeys  its  dictates?  in  temperance  unless  he 
habitually  practises  temperance?  how  increase  in  humility  unless  he  frequently 
humble  himself?  And  as  they  cannot  be  exercised  without  trials  and  afilictions, 
hence  the  necessity  of  these  to  the  growth  of  those  virtues  and  the  perfection  of  the 
human  character.  God  is  the  author,  upholder,  and  finisher  of  good  in  us.  No  use 
of  means,  and  no  making  of  exertion  are  of  any  avail  without  His  secret,  spiritual 
efficiency ;  hence  a  spirit  of  dependence  on  God  must  be  cultivated  and  exercised, 
and  hence  is  prayer  an  indispensable  means  of  growth  in  grace.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  promised  only  to  them  who  ask  Him.  5.  Watchfulness  is  another  important 
means  of  growth  in  grace.  The  plant  of  grace  requires  the  most  anxious  attention 
and  the  most  constant  care.  It  has  many  enemies — some  that  grub  the  earth, 
and  some  that  infest  the  air — and  it  is  exposed  to  many  evU  influences.  It 
must  be  assiduously  watched.  6.  Christians  are  members  of  a  mystical  body 
of  which  Christ  is  the  head,  and  from  Him,  in  consequence  of  this  connection, 
they  derive  strength,  grace,  nourishment,  and  every  needed  good.  Now  faith  is 
the  bond  of  this  union,  and  the  stronger  the  faith,  the  closer  the  bond,  and  the 
more  free  the  communication.  Hence,  if  one  would  grow  in  grace,  he  must 
habitually  exercise  faith  in  Christ,  and  increase  in  faith.  7.  Striving  against 
sin  is  all-important  to  growth  in  grace  and  holiness.  8.  Sensual  indulgence  is 
a  formidable  foe  to  growth  in  grace;  and,  when  carried  far,  is  incompatible  with 
its  existence.  Hence  the  necessity  of  abstinence  and  self-denial.  9.  The  love  of  the 
world  is  another  enemy  to  holiness.     There  is  a  wonderful  moral  efficiency  in  the 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Cross  of  Christ  to  destroy  this  inordinate  affection.  10.  Finally,  the  promises  exert 
a  sanctifying  influence  when  contemplated  and  applied  (2.  Pet.  i.  4).  {W.  Nevins, 
D.D.)  Groivth  : — I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  gbowth  in  grace.  I  do  not  for 
a  moment  mean  that  a  believer's  interest  in  Christ  can  grow.  I  do  not  mean  that 
he  can  grow  in  safety,  acceptance  with  God,  or  security.  I  only  mean  increase  in 
the  degree,  size,  strength,  vigour,  and  power  of  the  graces  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
plants  in  a  believer's  heart.  I  hold  that  every  one  of  those  graces  admits  of  growth, 
progress,  and  increase.  I  hold  that  repentance,  faith,  hope,  love,  humility,  zeal, 
courage,  and  the  like,  may  be  little  or  great,  strong  or  weak,  vigorous  or  feeble,  and 
may  vary  greatly  in  the  same  man  at  different  periods  of  his  life.  One  principal 
ground  on  which  I  build  this  doctrine  of  "  growth  in  grace,"  is  the  plain  language  of 
Scripture.  "  Your  faith  groweth  exceedingly"  (2  Thess.  i.  3).  "We  beseech  you 
that  ye  increase  more  and  more"  (1  Thess.  iv.  10).  "Increasing  in  the  knowledge 
of  God  "  (Col.  i.  10).  "  Having  hope,  when  your  faith  is  increased  "  (2  Cor.  x.  15). 
"  The  Lord  make  you  to  increase  in  love  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  12).  "  That  ye  may  grow 
up  into  Him  in  all  things  "  (Eph.  iv.  15).  "  I  pray  that  your  love  may  abound  more 
and  more"  (Phil.  i.  9).  "  We  beseech  you,  as  ye  have  received  of  us  how  ye  ought 
to  walk  and  to  please  God,  so  ye  would  abound  more  and  more  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  1.) 
"Desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby"  (1  Pet.  ii.  2.) 
"Grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ" 
(2  Pet.  iii.  18).  The  other  ground  on  which  I  build  the  doctrine  of  "growth  in 
grace,"  is  the  ground  of  fact  and  experience.  What  true  Christian  would  not 
confess  that  there  is  as  much  difference  between  the  degree  of  his  own  faith  and 
knowledge  when  he  was  first  converted  and  his  present  attainments,  as  there  is 
between  a  sapling  and  a  full-grown  tree  ?  His  graces  are  the  same  in  principle ;  but 
they  have  grown.  Let  us  turn  away  to  a  more  practical  view  of  the  subject  before 
us.  I  want  men  to  look  at  "  growth  in  grace  "  as  a  thing  of  infinite  importance  to 
the  soul.  1.  "Growth  in  grace"  is  the  best  evidence  of  spiritual  health  and 
prosperity.  In  a  child,  or  a  flower,  or  a  tree,  we  are  all  aware  that  when  there  is  no 
growth  there  is  something  wrong.  2.  "  Growth  in  grace  "  is  one  way  to  be  happy  in 
our  religion.  God  has  linked  together  our  comfort  and  our  increase  in  holiness.  He 
has  graciously  made  it  our  interest  to  press  on  and  aim  high  in  our  Christianity. 
3.  "  Growth  in  grace  "  is  one  secret  of  usefulness  to  others.  Our  influence  on  others 
for  good  depends  greatly  on  what  they  see  in  us.  4.  "Growth  in  grace"  pleases 
God.  The  husbandman  loves  to  see  the  plants  on  which  he  has  bestowed  labour 
flourishing  and  bearing  fruit.  It  cannot  but  disappoint  and  grieve  him  to  see  them 
stunted  and  standing  still  (John  xv.  1,  8).  The  Lord  takes  pleasure  in  all  His 
people,  but  especially  in  those  that  grow.  5.  "Growth  in  grace"  is  not  only  a 
thing  possible,  but  a  thing  for  which  believers  are  accountable.  II.  There  ake 
MARKS  BY  WHICH  GROWTH  IN  GRACE  MAY  BE  KNOWN.  1.  One  mark  is  increased 
humility.  2.  Another  mark  is  increased  faith  and  love  towards  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  3.  Another  mark  is  increased  holiness  of  life  and  conversation.  4.  Another 
mark  is  increased  spirituality  of  taste  and  mind.  5.  Another  mark  is  increase 
of  charity.  6.  One  more  mark  is  increased  zeal  and  diligence  in  trying  to  do  good 
to  souls.  III.  The  means  that  must  be  used  by  those  who  desire  to  grow  in 
GRACE.  1.  One  thing  essential  to  growth  in  grace  is  diligence  in  the  use  of  private 
means  of  grace.  2.  Another  essential  is  carefulness  in  the  use  of  public  means  of 
grace.  3.  Another  essential  is  watchfulness  over  our  conduct  in  the  little  matters  of 
every-day  life.  4.  Another  essential  is  caution  about  the  company  we  keep  and  the 
friendships  we  form.  5.  There  is  one  more  thing  which  is  absolutely  essential  to 
growth  in  grace,  and  that  is  regular  and  habitual  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus. 
{Bishop  liyle.)         Christian  life  a  groivth: — I.    The   heart   must   become   booted 

IN      LIVING,     CHRIST-LIKE     PRINCIPLES.  II.     ThE      CHRISTIAN     RELIGION      IS      TO      BE 

cultivated.      III.    Due    attention    must    be   given   to    the    law  of  spiritual 

DEVELOPMENT.        IV.    ThE    LAW     OF    GBOWTH    WORKS    ITS    PURPOSE   THROUGH    CH.\NGING 

SEASONS.  V.  The  growing  life  will  manifest  itself.  {W.  Ciirrie.)  Growth 
the  test  of  Christian  life  : — The  want  of  gro\vth  is  the  want,  generally  speaking, 
of  organisation.  Eocks  do  not  grow,  soil  does  not  grow.  Growth  belongs  to 
the  higher  stages  of  development,  and  as  things  grow,  not  by  accretion,  but  by 
definite  formation,  by  their  growth  we  judge  of  their  vitality.  When  anything 
ceases  to  grow  its  end  is  near.  Any  man  that  has  ceased  to  grow  is  waiting  for  his 
undertaker,  and  the  longer  he  has  to  wait  the  greater  is  the  pity  for  everybody 
about  him.  There  are,  of  course,  in  so  compound  a  creature  as  man,  several  con- 
centric circles  of  growth.     There  is  bodily  growth,  but  that  usually  takes  care  of 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  209 

itself,  and  needs  no  exercitation.  Then  there  is  physical  culture,  a  growth  not  in 
dimensions  alone,  but  in  other  ways.  One  may  develop  strength  ;  it  may  be 
increased  by  his  purpose.  One  may  develop  activity  ;  one  may  develop  skill  of 
hand  or  alertness  and  quickness  of  foot.  This  is  the  lowest  form  of  growth,  and 
yet  the  lowest  growth  even  of  the  body  is  a  worthy  one,  and  justifies  our  endeavour. 
A  healthy  and  well-developed  body  is  a  chariot  fit  to  carry  a  hero's  soul.  To  grow 
up  in  good  sound  health,  without  violation  of  the  great  canons  of  morality,  and 
with  the  law  of  moderation  fixed  upon  every  appetite  and  passion,  is  itself  no 
insignificant  ideal  for  a  young  man  or  woman.  But,  then,  we  are  familiar,  in  this 
land  where  education  is  almost  an  atmosphere  and  a  byword,  with  growth  in 
intelligence  and  knowledge.  These  two  things  are  very  different.  Intelligence 
implies  a  certain  condition  of  the  knowing  faculties.  Knowledge  is  the  fruit  of 
intelligence.  There  is  just  as  much  difference  between  them  as  there  is  between 
skill  and  the  product  of  skill,  or  between  husbandry  and  the  harvests  that  hus- 
bandry can  produce.  A  man  may  have  intelligence  and  scarcely  any  knowledge. 
A  man  may  have  a  good  deal  of  knowledge  and  hardly  any  intelligence.  But 
where  one  has  both  intelligence  and  knowledge,  and  is  growing  in  them  both,  that 
is  a  transcendently  noble  thing.  It  is  the  direct  tendency  of  intelligence  and  know- 
ledge to  produce  morality.  I  declare  that  education,  or  the  development  of  the 
knowing  parts  of  a  man,  gives  him  so  large  a  view  of  the  field  of  life  that  he  is 
more  likely  to  see  that  morality  is  safety  than  if  he  were  ignorant ;  and  that  the 
general  fact  stands  proved  that  intelligence  and  knowledge  tend,  on  the  whole,  by 
immense  measure,  toward  goodness,  respectability,  virtue,  and  morality.  So  if  we 
grow  in  aptitude  for  intelligence  and  knowledge  we  shall  make  a  long  stride  away 
from  animalism,  and  from  the  dangers  that  beset  the  passions  and  appetites  of 
human  life.  Now,  while  bodily  growth,  intellectual  growth,  and  growth  in  know- 
ledge are  to  be  esteemed,  and  are  not  to  be  thrown  into  the  shade  by  any  miscon- 
ception of  the  value  of  grace  and  religion,  I  affirm  that  the  highest  growth,  because 
it  is  the  one  that  carries  all  these  others  with  it  more  or  less,  or  blesses  them,  is 
growth  in  grace.  Self-sacrifice,  that  is  one  element  of  it.  Meekness  and  humility 
are  other  elements  of  it.  Good  nature,  which  is  called  kindness  in  the  text  of 
Scripture,  is  another  element  of  it.  Easiness  to  be  entreated  is  one  of  the  elements 
of  growth.  In  regard  to  that  manhood  which  springs  from  the  activity  of  our 
highest  spiritual  and  moral  functions,  in  regai-d  to  this  eminent  spiritual-minded- 
ness,  I  must  say  that  it  does  not  belong  to  the  cave  nor  to  the  cloister.  The  serene 
wisdom  of  love,  and  the  guidance  of  God's  presence  with  a  man,  will  prosper  him 
more,  in  the  long  run,  in  every  relation  of  life,  than  the  turbulent  wisdom  that 
springs  from  vanity,  from  pride,  from  avarice,  from  passion.  Men  adopt  a  lower 
form  of  power  when  they  undertake  to  carry  out  the  ends  of  life  by  the  selfishness 
that  prevails  in  human  society.  It  requires  more  skill  in  the  beginning  to  wield 
this  higher  power — to  learn  the  trade,  that  is,  of  piety  in  its  application  to  life.  It 
also  requires  more  time  for  reaping  the  fruit.  Some  harvests  are  sown  in  autumn, 
and  the  sun  leaves  them ;  but  they  come  to  ripeness  next  summer.  Some  things 
can  be  sown  in  spring  and  reaped  before  midsummer.  In  regard  to  moral  and 
spiritual  elements,  it  takes  more  time  to  develop  them  and  procure  their  final 
results  in  secular  wisdom  than  it  does  to  take  the  lower  and  superficial  forms  and 
achieve  success,  but  when  once  they  are  established  they  do  not  go  back.  A  man 
that  fears  and  loves  God,  and  therefore  stands  intact  under  the  temptations  of  life, 
men  will  give  large  premiums  to  get.  It  is  ripening  growth  that  is  demanded.  In 
other  words,  it  is  not  enough  for  our  religion  that  we  have  revivals  of  it ;  it  is  not 
enough  that  we  have  flashes  of  any  or  all  of  these  spiritual  feelings  and  experiences. 
What  is  wanted  is,  that  they  shaU  become  steadily  a  part  of  us  and  abide  in  us,  so 
that  they  constitute  our  character.  Then  growth  in  grace  amounts  indeed  to  a 
sure  victory.  The  piety  that  comes  and  goes  is  better  than  nothing — scarcely  more 
than  that ;  but  the  higher  spiritual  qualities  of  a  man's  nature  that  abide  with  him, 
and  grow  stronger,  and  throw  their  roots  deeper,  and  take  hold  on  life  with  more 
multiplied  hands,  are  the  qualities  that  constitute  the  true  man.  When  such  things 
shall  have  been  thoroughly  developed,  the  stability  and  habitualness  of  the  highest 
Christian  experiences  will  work  spontaneity.  The  mind's  action  in  this  channel 
will  become  automatic.  Then,  too,  there  will  be  harmony.  It  will  not  be  simply 
a  few  feelings  that  will  run  in  this  line,  but  the  whole  soul.  Like  an  orchestra  well 
trained,  it  will  be  harmonious,  and  will  increase  in  force  from  year  to  year.  For 
while  prophecy  and  teaching  and  knowledge  do  not  abide,  while  we  are  in  the 
childhood  of  the  human  race,  and  know  everything  only  in  fragments  and  parts, 

43 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

there  are  some  things  that  death  itself  does  not  change.  We  are  told  that  they  are 
faith,  hope,  and  love.  These  go  on  ineradicable  and  unchangeable.  Such  men 
walk  with  God.  If  you  liken  human  life  and  development  to  a  dwelling,  the  lower 
story  is  on  the  ground,  and  made  of  clay.  How  roomy  and  how  full  of  men  that 
live  next  to  the  dirt !  Above  that,  however,  is  a  story  of  iron.  There  are  men  of 
energy,  and  of  a  ruling  purpose  irresistible,  seeking  and  gaining  their  ends  at  all 
hazards,  and  this  story  is  populous  too.  The  next  story  is  dressed  in  velvet  and 
carved  wood,  and  here  are  they  that  dwell  in  their  affections,  and  are  brought 
together  by  the  sympathy  of  a  common  gentleness  and  kindness,  but  on  the  lower 
levels  of  life.  Above  that  is  a  room  of  crystal  and  of  diamonds,  and  there  are  but 
few  that  dwell  in  it.  From  its  transparent  walls  one  may  behold  the  heavens  and 
the  earth.  Out  of  it  men  may  see  the  night  as  well  as  the  day — men  who  live  a 
life  so  high,  so  pure,  and  so  serene  that  they  may  be  said  to  dwell  at  the  very 
threshold  of  the  gate  of  heaven  itself.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Groioing  in  grace:  — It 
is  implied  that  we  are  not  perfect  in  grace,  that  there  is  wide  room  for  growth. 
Another  thing  implied  is  that  we  may  and  can  grow  if  we  will.  God  knows  our 
abilities  and  our  inabilities,  our  dispositions  and  indispositions,  the  moral  outflow 
and  the  moral  recoil,  and,  knowing  all.  He  says,  "  Grow  in  grace."  I.  Directions, 
How  to  grow  in  grace  ?  We  cannot  but  remember  that  growth,  to  be  real  and 
healthy,  must  be  free.  It  may  seem,  therefore,  an  impertinent  thing  to  interpose 
directions  at  all.  But  in  truth  we  do  not  interpose  them  with  any  authority.  We 
shall  bring  them,  such  as  they  are,  within  sight.  Use  them  if  they  are  suitable. 
If  not,  find  other  modes  more  akin  with  your  spirit's  life.  Only  grow.  1.  Might 
not  one  try  this  among  other  things,  at  least  for  a  little  while — say  for  one  week — 
that  one  shall  take  a  strong  morning  thought  concerning  it.  2.  Then,  in  the  next 
place,  let  there  be  an  actual  arrangement  of  things,  in  so  far  as  he  has  the  power — 
of  the  employments  and  circumstances  of  the  day— with  express  view  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  this  the  supreme  purpose.  3.  If  in  the  general  review  and  arrange- 
ment of  the  life  some  things  are  found,  perhaps  in  the  very  structure  of  it,  or 
hanging  closely  to  the  structure,  which  are  seen  to  be  hindrances,  then  let  them  be 
laid  aside  without  reserve,  without  delay.  A  thing  may  not  be  a  sin,  and  yet  it  may 
serve  the  sinful  cause  as  effectually  as  if  it  were.  If  you  planted  apple  trees  in  your 
orchard  in  the  hope  of  feasting  your  eyes  in  a  while  with  their  wealth  of  blossom 
and  heaping  your  baskets  with  the  sweet-smelling  fruit,  would  you  hang  weights  on 
the  branches  to  see  how  much  they  would  bear  and  still  grow  ?  Would  you  gather 
up  the  withered  branches  and  hook  them  on  to  the  fresh  green  ones  ?  If  you  did 
they  might  not  kill  them,  but  would  they  not  mar  the  beauty,  would  they  not  hinder 
the  growth  ?  It  may  seem  to  be  hardly  necessary  to  say  anything  regarding  the 
renunciation  of  sin  as  such.  We  have  spoken  of  hindrances  both  slight  and 
serious.  Now  let  me  say  that  a  man  should  hold  himself  ready  to  take  all  gracious 
helps  for  gracious  growing.  These  helps  are  manifold  and  very  near.  It  is  there- 
fore exceedingly  important  that  the  soul  should  be  in  a  receptive  state.  Everything 
about  the  kingdom  of  grace  is  in  such  a  state  of  readiness  that  in  a  moment  God 
can  give  help  if  the  soul  is  prepared  to  take  it.  Now  to  be  ready  does  not  mean 
having  an  assemblage  of  great  thoughts  in  the  mind.  It  does  not  mean  having  the 
feelings  or  the  frame  of  the  heart  in  a  theological  or  so-called  evangelical  state.  It 
means  being  humble  and  looking  up  with  desire  to  God.  One  more  hint.  It  is 
this.  That  we  should  maintain  a  constant  connection  with  the  fountain-head  of 
grace  in  God  by  everything  which  constitutes  prayer.  God's  windows  are  open. 
God's  fountains  are  flowing.  God's  lights  are  streaming,  and  His  vital  airs  are 
breathing  forth,  and  every  prayerful  spirit  will  catch  a  double  measure  of  those 
heavenly  gifts  and  treasures  as  they  come.  II.  Inducements.  1.  The  first  is  the  ease 
with  which  this  growing  can  be  accomplished  when  we  heartily  incline  to  it.  If  we 
would  but  hold  ourselves  in  simplicity  in  the  garden  of  God,  and  abide  where  we  are 
planted,  by  His  rivers  of  water,  the  fruit  would  be  in  season  and  the  leaf  would 
never  wither.  2.  Another  inducement  is  found  in  the  principle  of  necessary 
growth  which  belongs  to  every  rational  soul.  We  must  grow  in  something,  and  if 
not  in  grace,  you  know  in  what  the  growth  will  be.  "  Ye  therefore,  beloved, 
beware,  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own 
steadfastness."  And  now,  when  you  see  the  danger,  how  are  you  to  act  to  avoid 
it?  "Grow  in  grace."  That  will  keep  you  safe  and  well — in  the  right  faith,  in 
the  right  practice.  If  we  do  not  believe  the  truth  and  grow  in  that  we  shall  soon 
be  heretics,  holding  fallacies,  believing  lies.  If  we  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  grow  by  that  pure  and  infinite  affection,  the  longing,  unportioned  heart 


CHAP,  in.]  11.  PETER.  211 

will  soon  have  another  in  His  place.  It  will  wind  itself,  like  the  ivy,  around  any- 
thing that  comes,  be  it  no  better  than  mouldering  wall  or  rotting  tree,  rather  than 
live  in  vacuity  or  sink  into  utter  negation.  We  must  grow  ;  then  let  our  growing 
be  in  lily-like  beauty,  in  cedar  strength,  in  "  smell  as  Lebanon."  Every  other  kind 
of  growth  is  uncertain,  limited,  transient.  But  growth  in  grace  is  for  ever  ;  there 
is  nothing  in  grace  which  indicates,  far  less  necessitates,  decay.  It  is  for  every 
place ;  for  land  and  sea,  for  earth  and  heaven.  It  is  for  all  time,  now  and  ever- 
more. It  is  for  the  whole  nature  of  man — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  [A.  Raleigh, 
D.D.)         The  growth  of  grace  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  their  growing  in  grace. 

1.  They  must  exercise  grace  more  constantly.  2.  Uniformity  as  well  as  constancy 
is  implied.  Some  shine  in  one  grace  and  some  in  another,  while  very  few  shine 
in  all  the  beauties  of  holiness.  II.  Why  growth  in  knowledge  is  necessary  in 
ORDER  TO  the  GROWTH  IN  GRACE.  1.  Knowledge  tends  to  increase  their  obligations 
to  grow  in  grace.     The  knowledge  of  duty  always  increases  an  obligation  to  do  it. 

2.  Divine  knowledge  not  only  increases  the  obligations  of  Christians  to  grow  in 
grace,  but  actually  increases  the  holiness  of  all  their  holy  affections.  The  degree 
of  holiness  in  every  exercise  of  love  to  God  is  always  in  proportion  to  the  light  or 
knowledge  which  the  person  has  at  the  time  of  exercising  that  particular  grace.  A 
Christian  has  a  much  clearer  and  more  extensive  view  of  God  at  one  time  than  at 
another,  and  his  love  is  always  virtuous  in  exact  proportion  to  the  degrees  of  his 
present  knowledge.  One  exercise  of  faith  is  more  virtuous  than  another,  because 
the  beUever  may  have  much  greater  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  one  time 
than  he  has  at  another.  The  same  holds  true  of  submission,  joy,  gratitude,  and 
every  other  Christian  grace.  The  celebrated  Howard,  who  spent  his  property  and 
his  life  in  relieving  the  objects  of  charity  in  Britain  and  in  various  other  parts  of 
Europe,  was  a  man  of  benevolence,  and  his  benevolence  was  in  proportion  to  his 
knowledge.  As  he  had  a  far  more  extensive  view  of  the  miseries  of  mankind  than 
Christians  in  general,  so  his  exercises  of  kindness  and  compassion  were  much  more 
virtuous  than  theirs  towards  similar  objects.  III.  The  importance  of  their 
GROWING  IN  both  THESE  RESPECTS.  1.  The  houour  of  religion  requires  Christians 
to  grow  in  knowledge  and  grace.  Though  the  men  of  the  world  are  disposed  to 
despise  religion,  yet  they  are  constrained  to  respect  it  in  those  professors  who 
appear  to  be  both  knowing  and  growing  Christians.  2.  It  is  of  great  importance 
that  Christians  should  grow  both  in  knowledge  and  in  grace,  not  only  on  the 
account  of  others,  but  on  their  own  account.  (1)  For,  in  the  first  place,  their 
growth  in  these  respects  will  be  the  most  effectual  security  against  the  gross  and 
dangerous  errors  to  which  they  are  continually  exposed  in  their  present  imperfect 
state.  (2)  Growth  in  knowledge  and  grace  will  happily  tend  to  remove  darkness 
and  doubts  from  the  minds  of  Christians.  (3)  Furthermore,  growth  in  knowledge 
and  grace  will  prepare  Christians  for  the  delightful  and  acceptable  performance  of 
every  duty.  (4)  It  is,  finally,  of  great  importance  that  Christians  should  make 
continual  advances  in  knowledge  and  grace  to  prepare  them  for  the  closing  scene 
of  life.  If  they  neglect  to  improve  their  minds  in  knowledge  and  their  hearts  in 
holiness  they  may  expect  to  live  in  bondage  and  die  in  darkness,  for  Christians 
commonly  die  very  much  as  they  live.  Improvement.  1.  If  knowledge  be  neces- 
sary to  promote  the  growth  of  grace,  then  the  most  instructive  preaching  must 
be  the  most  profitable.  2.  If  religious  knowledge  be  conducive  to  the  growth 
of  reUgious  affections,  then  that  religious  conversation  among  Christians  is  the 
most  useful  which  is  the  most  instructive.  3.  If  Divine  knowledge  has  a  ten- 
dency to  promote  all  the  Christian  graces  and  virtues,  then  growing  Chris- 
tians have  an  increasing  evidence  of  their  good  estate.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Growth  : — I.  I  ask,  first,  into  what  we  are  to  grow  ?  Now,  the  Kevised  Version 
throws  some  hght  upon  the  connection  of  the  two  things  specified  in  my  text  by  a 
very  shght  but  significant  alteration.  It  reads,  "  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour."  Both  are  connected  with  Him;  He  is  the  source  of  the 
grace ;  He  is  the  object  of  the  knowledge.  Thus  we  get  the  thought  that*  all  our 
Christian  progress,  in  its  deepest  meaning,  consists  in  penetrating  more  deeply  into 
Christ,  and  what  He  has  and  is.  We  hear  a  great  deal  about  "  progress  "  in  these 
days  ;  and  very  much  of  it  consists  in  departure  from  Jesus  Christ.  Those  of  us 
who  know  and  possess  most  of  Him  have  but  a  drop  from  the  great  ocean ;  one 
sparkle  from  the  star  ;  a  pittance  from  the  storehouse.  We  have  an  infinite  treasure, 
and  our  growing  wealth  consists  in  our  pressing  further  into  its  rooms  filled  with 
bullion,  and  taking  more  and  more  of  Him  into  ourselves.  For,  again,  the  true 
notion  of   Christian  progress   consists  in  the  growing  reception  of   a  gift.     We 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

advance,  not  by  our  own  unaided  efforts.  Reception  is  growth  ;  and  the  more  we 
open  our  hearts  to  receive,  the  more  we  advance  in  the  Christian  life.  Instead  of 
toilsomely  trying  to  struggle  up  the  steep  mountain,  we  are  borne  up  on  wings  as 
eagles.  Hence  the  blessed  distinctive  mark  of  Christian  progress  is  that,  in  the 
midst  of  the  most  strenuous  eiiorts,  there  may  be  perpetual  calm.  To  have  more  of 
Christ — that  is  growth.  But  if  we  look  at  the  two  points  which  the  apostle 
separates  here,  a  word  may  be  said  about  each  of  them.  Our  reception  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  a  growing  reception  of  His  grace.  Now,  "  grace  "  here  seems  to  mean,  not 
so  much  His  undeserved  love  to  inferiors,  as  the  consequences  of  that  love  in  His 
gifts  to  us.  Or,  to  put  it  into  other  words,  what  is  meant  by  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  in  this  connection  is  the  bestowing  upon  us,  in  our  spirits, 
that  we  may  work  them  out  and  manifest  them  in  our  lives,  all  the  excellences  and 
virtues  of  a  Christlike  character.  And  I  lay  this  on  your  hearts,  that  growth  in 
grace  is  not  so  much  the  blessedness  of  private,  personal  experience,  or  the  welling 
up  of  certain  emotions  in  heart  and  mind,  as  conduct  in  the  life,  aspiring  after,  and 
showing  in  exercise  "  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of  good  report."  If  these 
things  be  in  you,  and  grow  in  you,  you  are  growing  in  grace.  Then  consider  the 
other  side  of  this  exhortation — grow  in  the  "  knowledge  of  Christ."  That  probably 
concerns  mainly  what  we  call  intellectual  processes,  and  yet  not  altogether.  For  it 
it  is  a  Person  that  is  known,  then  the  process  of  knowing  cannot  be  altogether  a 
mere  matter  of  dry  brain-work.  It  may  be  enough  to  begin  the  Christian  life  that 
a  man  should  have  but  a  little  acquaintance  with  Jesus  Christ,  but  there  is  not 
enough  to  keep  it  up  unless  that  acquaintance  is  ever  growing,  becomes  tenderer, 
deeper,  quieter,  more  assured,  more  impossible  to  be  ever  altered.  There  is  no  fear 
of  exhausting  Christ.  But  we  may  look  at  this  exhortation  in  a  slightly  different 
way.  "  Grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ"  means  not  only  grow  in  personal 
acquaintance  with  Him,  but  grow  in  the  perception  of  the  truths  which  are 
embodied  in  His  person  and  work.  Now,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  so-called  progress 
in  Christian  knowledge  which  largely  consists  in  getting  away  from  the  initial  truths 
and  going  out  into  other  regions.  That  is  not  growth  ;  that  is  decay.  For  the  initial 
truths  are  the  most  important  truths,  and  when  a  man  has  learned  that  "  God  so 
loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  that  whosoever  believeth  on 
Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,"  he  has  learned  what  only  needs 
to  be  pondered  upon  and  followed  out,  and  above  all  lived  by,  in  order  that  it  shall 
open  into  a  boundless  universe  of  truth  and  wisdom.  Progress  into  Christ  is  like 
that  of  the  bee  that  buries  itself  more  deeply  into  the  flower,  and  draws  honey  from 
its  innermost  recesses.  First  Christ  may  be  seen  as  but  a  speck,  then  He  is  a  disc 
of  brightness  in  the  dark,  and  then  he  is  a  flaming  sun  that  lightens  all  the  sky. 
II.  How  ARE  WE  TO  GROW  ?  My  text  is  a  commandment ;  therefore  growth  comes 
through  our  own  efforts.  Now,  there  are  many  metaphors  in  the  New  Testament 
for  this  conception  of  Christian  progress.  One  set  of  them  represents  it  as  being 
spontaneous,  automatic,  effortless.  As,  for  instance,  when  our  Lord  says,  "  First 
the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  "  ;  there  is  no  effort  there.  But 
that  is  only  one  side  of  the  truth.  Another  side  to  the  answer  to  the  question.  How 
we  are  to  grow  ?  is  involved,  as  I  have  just  said,  in  the  fact  that  we  are  commanded 
to  do  so.  So,  very  characteristically,  when  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  this  same 
subject  he  rarely  uses  the  metaphor  of  growth.  And  what  are  the  figures  which  he 
prefers?  The  race,  which  implies  strenuous  strain  of  the  muscles,  and  is  not  to  be 
won  without  effort,  dust,  and  sweat.  The  fight,  for  there  is  resistance  to  be  faced 
and  overcome.  With  these  figures  my  text  falls  in,  and  suggests  that  there  can  be 
no  growth  in  the  Christian  life  without  strenuous  endeavour.  No  doubt  the  progress 
of  the  Christian  life  consists  mainly  in  reception,  but  reception  is  not  passive.  If 
you  do  not  hold  the  cup  out,  it  will  not  be  filled.  What,  then,  have  we  to  do  ? 
First,  and  mainly,  to  keep  very  near  to  our  Lord.  Communion  with  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  secret  of  all  growth.  If  we  are  close  by  Him,  He  will  pour  Himself  into  our  hearts. 
Food  is  needed  for  growth.  If  a  Christian  starves  his  soul  by  neglecting  to  feed  on 
the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven,  no  wonder  that  he  is  stunted.  Exercise 
is  essential  for  growth.  Unused  muscles  atrophy,  like  the  fakir's  arm  that  has  been 
held  up  for  twenty  years  in  one  position,  and  now  is  stiff  and  rigid  as  a  bar  of  iron. 
Use  the  grace  that  you  have,  and  practise  the  truth  that  you  are  sure  of,  and  the 
grace  will  grow  and  other  truths  will  be  made  clear.  HI.  Lastly,  what  happens  to 
tJB  IF  WE  DO  NOT  GROW?  My  tcxt  begins  with  a  "but,"  and  that  throws  us  back 
to  what  goes  before.  The  connection  which  is  thus  established  is  very  noteworthy 
and  monitory.     "  Beware  lest  ye  also  .  .  .  fall  from  your  own  steadfastness;  but 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  213 

grow."  So,  then,  the  only  way  to  prevent  falling  is  gi-owth ;  and  if  you  are  not 
growing,  you  are  certainly  falling.  No  weight  will  stand  at  rest  on  an  inclined 
plane.  If  it  is  not  being  hauled  up  it  will  be  hurtling  down.  The  student  who  is 
not  advancing  in  his  science  will  forget  what  he  has  learned.  Water  that  stagnates 
gathers  a  scum.  The  talent  that  is  wrapped  in  a  napkin  rusts ;  and  the  oxidising 
diminishes  its  weight  and  also  dims  its  brightness.  I  feel  that  all  our 
churches  are  full  of  cases  of  arrested  development.  Let  me  put  a  plain  ques- 
tion :  Are  we  more  like  Jesus  Christ  than  we  were  a  year  ago  ?  Let  us  remember 
that  the  process  of  growth  begun  here  will  go  on  for  ever.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Growth: — I.  The  chakacteeistics  of  growth.  1.  The  first  characteristic  of  growth 
that  we  would  notice  is  its  silence.  It  is  of  all  things  the  most  calm,  the  most  quiet, 
the  most  dignified.  Whatever  else  may  give  rise  to  agitation  and  commotion  and 
excitement,  it  is  not  spiritual  growth.  To  this  the  analogy  of  nature  clearly  points. 
This  the  Great  Teacher  Himself  flatly  aflirms.  "  The  Kingdom  of  God,"  He 
says,  "  Cometh  not  with  observation."  Silently  the  Spirit  of  Truth  makes  use  of 
the  instrumentality  of  the  truth  in  communicating  to  our  nature  that  life  without 
which  we  know  not  what  it  is  to  live.  Silently  the  same  Spirit  helps  us  to  draw 
from  the  storehouse  of  the  truth  the  nourishment  that  is  needful  to  sustain  and 
strengthen  the  life  that  has  been  given.  Thus  it  is  that  the  process  of  spiritual 
growth  begins,  and  thus  it  is  that  it  is  can-ied  onward  and  forward  toward  a  higher 
and  fuller  development.  2.  A  second  characteristic  of  growth  is,  that  it  is  a  gradual 
process.  People  sometimes  feel  discouraged  by  the  littleness  of  their  attainments 
in  the  Christian  life  and  the  tardiness  of  their  spiritual  growth,  and  too  often  there 
is  cause  for  humiliation  on  this  score ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  would  prefer  the  slowest 
rate  of  progress  that  is  compatible  with  growth  to  that  unnatural  rapidity  of 
development  that  is  sure  to  fall  into  rapid  consumption.  If  the  progress  of  the 
cornstalk  which  comes  to  maturity  in  a  few  months  be  scarcely  measurable  at  the 
interval  of  a  week,  and  if  the  progress  of  the  oak  tree  which  comes  to  maturity  in  a 
century  or  more  be  barely  observable  in  a  year,  what  are  we  to  say  of  that  spiritual 
growth  which  shall  not  be  consummated  and  completed  until  all  the  cycles  and  the 
seons  of  eternity  have  run  their  course,  and  become  buried  in  the  bosom  of  the 
infinite  past  ?  If  the  interval  at  which  progress  may  be  measured  and  ascertained 
is  to  be  lengthened  in  proportion  to  the  period  of  growth,  how  long  must  that 
interval  be  in  the  case  of  the  Christian's  advancement  in  the  life  divine  ?  3.  There 
are  many  other  characteristics  of  growth,  but  of  these  we  shall  mention  only  one, 
and  that  is  the  tendency  of  growth  whenever  found  to  develop  in  a  definite 
direction.  Nature  has  a  certain  model  or  type  to  which  the  growth  of  the  seed  must 
conform.  And  she  keeps  that  before  her,  and  to  the  best  of  her  ability  she  builds 
up  blade  and  stalk  and  ear  after  the  fashion  of  this  particular  model.  So  it  is  with 
the  acorn.  It  grows  after  a  long  lapse  of  years  into  an  oak.  This  is  the  type 
toward  which  nature  was  working  all  the  time.  To  the  filling  up  of  this  model  the 
growth  of  the  tree  always  tended.  So  it  is  with  everything  else  in  nature.  So  it  is 
with  the  Christian.  Spiritual  growth  is  in  a  definite  direction.  It  tends  to  a  perfect 
type.  It  advances  in  the  direction  of  Christ.  II.  This  brings  us  naturally  to 
consider  in  the  next  place  the  conditioSs  of  gbowth.  1.  There  is  first  the 
condition  of  previous  life.  As  well  expect  a  com  seed  to  grow  into  an  oak  as  expect 
the  man  who  is  destitute  of  spiritual  life  to  "  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  How  does  that  life  become  ours  ?  It  is  not 
ours  by  nature.  It  is  ours  only  in  union  with  Christ.  2.  The  other  condition  of 
growth  to  which  we  would  refer  is  the  presence  of  favourable  surroundings,  or  to 
put  it  in  the  language  of  modern  science,  the  existence  of  an  appropriate 
"environment."  Spiritual  life  is  what  you  might  call  a  hardy  plant.  It  will  grow 
in  almost  any  situation,  in  castle  and  cottage,  under  peasant's  roof-tree,  under 
monarch's  dome,  in  the  shop  and  the  counting-house  and  the  study,  in  the  factory 
and  the  market,  and  the  farm.  But  when  all  this  has  been  allowed,  it  must  still  be 
admitted  that  neither  soil  nor  atmosphere  in  this  world  is  such  as  to  ensure  a  perfect 
growth.  The  perfect  type  cannot  be  cultivated  in  this  unsuitable  soil  and  in  this 
unfavourable  climate.  It  needs  to  be  transplanted  to  another  sphere,  to  a  more 
kindly  soil  and  to  a  more  congenial  clime  before  the  perfect  ideal  can  be  approached 
or  approximated.  Meantime  it  is  our  duty  and  our  privilege,  by  Divine  grace,  to 
make  the  most  of  the  circumstances  in  which  we  find  ourselves  here.  But  further, 
we  are  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  And  how  do  you  grow  in  the  knowledge 
of  a  person  ?  By  associating  with  him.  By  attending  carefully  to  the  diiJerent 
ways  in  which  he  reveals  himself.     If  you  would  know  Christ  you  must  make  Him 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

your  constant  companion  and  counsellor,  you  must  speak  with  Him,  and  above  all 
you  must  hear  Him  speak  with  you.  (W.  J.  Lowe,  M.A.)  The  means  of  growth 
in  grace : — I.  The  oedinances  of  the  New  Testament  are  means  or  improvement 
IN  RELIGION.  1.  Divine  revelation,  by  its  influence  on  the  understanding,  the 
heart,  the  will,  and  the  conscience  of  man,  in  every  condition  of  life,  promotes  the 
Christian's  growth  in  holiness,  in  comfort,  and  in  usefulness.  2.  The  sacraments 
are  means  of  improvement  in  religion.  3.  Conversation  among  private  Christians 
is  one  of  the  means  of  growth  in  knowledge,  in  holiness,  and  in  usefulness.  It  is 
itself  a  part  of  our  religious  enjoyments ;  and  the  means  of  increasing  both  the 
desire  and  the  capacity  for  more  enjoyment.    4.  Prayer.    II.  Judicious  reflections 

UPON    OUR   PERSONAL    CONCERNS,    IN    THE    LIGHT  OF   DiVINE    REVELATION,  HAVE    A    GREAT 

INFLUENCE  UPON  OUR  RELIGIOUS  IMPROVEMENT.  1.  Let  US  considcr  the  sinfulness  of 
our  disposition  and  deportment.  2.  A  due  consideration  of  God's  providence 
respecting  us  tends  to  our  personal  progress  in  true  religion.  3.  Meditations  on 
the  love  of  God  are  conducive  to  the  improvement  of  the  Christian  character.  4. 
Judicious  reflections  upon  our  own  mortality,  and  the  future  state  which  we  are 
daily    approaching,    have    a    tendency    to    prepare    us    for    both.     III.    Divine 

INFLUENCES      ARE     REQUIRED      AND      EMPLOYED      IN      THE      PROGRESSIVE     IMPROVEMENT 

OF  THE  SAINTS.  1.  The  Spirit  presents  to  the  saints  the  proper  objects  of 
pursuit.  2.  The  Spirit  directs  the  affections  of  the  heart  to  spiritual  objects. 
3.  Divine  influence  strengthens  the  saints  for  every  duty.  Conclusion :  1. 
I  observe  that  there  are  different  degrees  of  gracious  attainments,  and  I 
urge  upon  all  ranks  the  duty  of  further  progress — "  Grow  in  grace."  2.  Be 
not  discouraged  although  your  progress  in  religion  is  neither  as  uniform  nor 
as  rapid  as  you  first  expected  it  should  actually  prove.  (A.  McLeod,  D.D.) 
Groicth  in  the  grace  of  Christ : — 1.  Have  we  not  need  to  grow  in  the  lowliness  of 
Christ?  2.  The  unselfishness  of  Christ  is  brought  out  by  the  evangelists  in  a 
striking  manner.  3.  An  uncompromising  enemy  of  Pharisaism  and  aU  hypocrisy, 
there  was  not  the  slightest  taint  of  cynicism  or  misanthropy  in  Christ.  4.  Notice 
one  more  outstanding  feature  in  the  character  of  Christ — His  beautiful  enthusiasm 
in  the  cause — that  is,  our  cause — which  He  has  espoused.  Such  an  example  of 
joyful  self-sacrifice  the  world  never  witnessed  before,  and  never  wiU  do  again. 
"  Grow  in  the  grace  of  Christ,"  that  is,  if  true  Christians,  we  have  the  grace  of 
Christ  in  some  germinal  measure :  but  that  is  not  enough,  there  must  be  growth  in 
it,  and  continual  growth  in  it.  To  a  sincere  follower  of  Christ  there  can  be  no  con- 
tentment with  partial  growth.  (TF.  Skinner.)  Growth  in  grace  by  ordinary  means  : 
— This  higher  life  is  attained  and  maintained  chiefly  by  the  diligent  and  right  use  of 
ordinary  means — prayer,  praise,  worship,  reading  the  Word,  &c.  Extra  means 
may  stimulate,  but  they  do  not  largely  feed ;  hence,  those  who  principally  depend 
on  the  irregular,  the  sensational  means,  are  always  spiritually  poor  and  feeble.  The 
stimulant  is  in  excess  of  the  nutriment,  and  is  followed  by  reaction  and  exhaustion. 
All  God's  highest  and  best  works  are  accomplished  by  ordinaiy  means,  by  light,  and 
heat,  and  moisture ;  by  regular  and  orderly  growth.  The  thunder,  whirlwind,  and 
flood,  though  useful  at  the  time,  yet  contribute  but  a  small  share  in  effecting  the 
grand  result  of  Nature's  processes.  It  is  so  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  thing  most 
needed  is  not  extra  means,  but  extra  diligence  in  the  use  of  ordinary  means. 
\R.  Chew.)  And  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  .  . .  Jesus  Christ. — Growth  in  grace 
and  knoicledge  : — The  best  persons  have  need  of  improvement.  The  possibility  of 
growing  in  grace  will  be  readily  admitted  by  the  true  Christian.  But  what  is  meant 
by  growing  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  ?  1.  By  the  knowledge  spoken  of,  first,  we 
may  understand  the  evidences  of  the  Christian  religion.  2.  But  that  knowledge  in 
which  Christians  should  grow  may  be  taken  to  include,  or  even  to  consist  of,  a 
familiar  acquaintance  with  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  both  historical  and  prophetical, 
doctrinal  and  practical.  3.  There  is  a  species  of  knowledge  in  its  very  nature  pro- 
gressive, and  which  above  all  other  knowledge  it  concerns  us  to  acquire  ;  I  mean 
self-knowledge.  Our  growth  in  this  will  also  cause  us  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of 
Christ,  and  show  us  the  need  we  have  of  a  Eedeemer.  But  there  is  another  branch 
of  self-knowledge  equally  proper  for  man  to  study ;  I  mean  not  the  weakness  of  his 
nature,  but  the  strength.  As  none  ever  pushed  his  capacity  for  intellectual  improve- 
ment as  far  as  it  was  able  to  extend,  so  in  matters  of  morality,  few  or  none  ever 
exerted  their  strength  as  far  as  it  would  have  carried  them  in  the  pursuit  of  virtue. 
{A.  Gibson,  M.A.)  Growing  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — I.  What  it  is  to  grow 
IN  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  1.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is  of  the  greatest 
excellency.     Other  kind  of  knowledge  is  like  light  from  the  stars  ;  this  like  beams 


cnAP.  in.]  II.  PETER.  215 

from  the  sun.  To  know  Christ  assimilates  and  makes  us  like  Him.  2.  The  know- 
ledge of  Christ  is  of  absolute  necessity.  3.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is  by  super- 
natural revelation.  4.  The  knowledge  of  Chi'ist  was  communicated  in  a  degree 
under  the  Old  Testament.  5.  The  revelation  of  Christ  under  the  New  Testament 
is  more  clear.  Therefore  to  be  ignorant  of  Him  is  the  more  without  apology.  6. 
All  true  believers  in  Christ  have  some  knowledge  of  Him  (Kom.  x.  14).  7.  Those 
who  know  most  of  Christ  know  Him  but  in  part.  Therefore  are  they  to  be  urged 
to  grow  in  knowledge.  (1)  Growing  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  implies  a  fuUer 
apprehension  of  His  Godhead.  (2)  A  clearer  sight  of  His  humanity.  (3)  A  more 
plain  discerning  and  full  persuasion  that  He  was  foreordained  to  be  a  Eedeemer. 
(4)  A  greater  insight  into  His  sufferings.  (5)  A  more  fruitful  eyeing  of  His  resur- 
rection and  going  to  His  Father.  (6)  Greater  satisfaction  aboat  His  imputed 
righteousness.  (7)  A  more  constant  and  fiducial  eyeing  of  His  intercession,  and 
the  pity  and  compassions  of  Him  that  intercedes.  (8)  Being  better  acquainted  with 
His  great  power,  and  continual  presence  with  His  Church  which  is  so  nearly  related 
to  Him.  (9)  A  better  understanding  of  Him  as  "  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant." 
(10)  A  more  earnest  looking  for  His  appearing.  H.  What  PKOPERirEs  are  re- 
quired IN  THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  TMs  knowledge  of  Christ  should  grow  more  and 
more  certain.  2.  It  should  more  and  more  humble  the  Christian.  3.  It  should 
grow  more  spiritual.  4.  It  should  encourage  to  a  more  settled  reliance  upon  Him. 
5.  It  should  raise  Him  higher  and  higher  in  Christians'  estimation.  6.  It  should 
have  a  great  aspect  upon  whatever  else  is  revealed  in  the  Word  of  God.  7.  It 
should  be  operative  still  in  a  greater  measure.  8.  It  should  cause  great  glorying 
and  joy.  III.  How  to  increase  and  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ. 
1.  Be  sensible  of  your  remaining  ignorance.  2.  Compare  all  other  knowledge  with 
this,  and  see  the  vast  difference  in  point  of  excellency.  3.  You  must  not  lean  to 
your  own  parts  and  understandings.  4.  Heedfully  attend  to  the  word  of  the  truth 
of  the  gospel.  5.  Look  unto  Jesus  Himself  (Col.  ii.  3).  6.  Cry  for  more  knowledge, 
and  eye  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation.  7.  Take  heed  of 
seducing  spirits.  8.  Abstain  from  worldly  and  fleshly  lusts.  9.  Associate  yourselves 
with  those  who  have  a  great  measure  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  10.  Let  your 
end  in  desu-ing  a  greater  degree  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  be  right.  Not  that  you 
may  be  puffed  up  in  your  own  minds,  or  admired  of  men ;  but  that  Christ  may  be 
more  admired  and  esteemed  by  you.  Improvement.  1.  To  unbelievers.  (1)  Christ 
is  willing  to  receive  the  very  worst  of  you,  upon  you  returning  and  beheving.  (2) 
Christ  is  wilhng  to  give  Himself  to  you.  2.  To  saints.  (1)  Improve  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  with  reference  to  God  Himself.  (2)  To  the  law  of  God.  (3)  To  sin. 
(4)  To  angels  both  good  and  bad.  (5)  To  this  present  world.  (6)  To  duties, 
grace,  and  perseverance.  (7)  To  comfort.  (N.  Vincent,  M.A.)  Growth  iii 
the  knowledge  of  God : — To  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God  is  distinctly  com- 
manded, not  in  this  passage  alone,  but  in  very  many.  The  progress  of  the  mind 
in  the  knowledge  of  physical  truth,  scientific  truth,  depends  very  much  upon 
the  exercise  of  the  senses  upon  matter ;  but  the  growth  of  knowledge  in  moral 
truth  depends  upon  the  exercise  of  moral  feelings.  While  sense  is  the  source  of 
physical  or  scientific  knowledge,  disposition  is  the  source  of  the  knowledge  of  moral 
truth.  Growth  in  the  knowledge  of  a  Divine  Being  unites  both  of  these.  1.  The 
earliest  knowledge  which  we  have  of  Divine  existence  is  derived,  undoubtedly,  from 
teachers  and  parents.  It  differs,  therefore,  ta  children,  according  to  the  instruction 
which  they  receive.  It  is  ampler  or  scantier,  it  is  more  wisely  or  less  wisely  im- 
parted, according  to  circumstances.  If  the  notion  entertained  by  children  could 
be  analysed,  I  think  it  would  be  found  to  consist  largely  of  the  social  and  moral 
qualities  which  exist  in  the  family,  framed  and  bordered  with  their  imaginations, 
in  whfch  physical  qualities  largely  inhere.  2.  I  suspect  that  the  next  stage  of 
growth  consists  in  clothing  these  abstract  notions,  which  we  gain  very  early,  and 
which  are  taught  out  of  catechisms,  with  the  facts  of  the  history  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  they  are  narrated  by  the  evangelists.  So  that  it  may  be  said  of  hundreds 
of  people,  that  their  God  is  literally,  yet  entombed  in  the  Bible.  They  do  not  use 
these  records  as  building  materials  out  of  which  to  develop  an  ever-increasing  con- 
ception of  heavenly  excellence.  8.  But  if  one  be  of  a  devout  nature,  and  he  be 
earnestly  alive  to  moral  growth,  then  his  reading  and  his  childhood  instruction, 
after  being  subject  to  reflection,  to  mental  digestion,  will  carry  him  forward  one 
step  further  in  the  growth  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  His  conception  of  the  Divine 
nature  will  begin  to  enlarge  and  fill  out  in  every  direction  if  only  there  is  a  real, 
active,  earnest  moral  life  going  on  within  him.    In  this  work  the  imagination  will 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

be  the  architect,  reason  will  be  the  master-builder,  and  the  materials  will  come 
largely  from  experience.  Men's  minds  are  magnets.  One  man  going  into  the 
Bible,  or  into  the  realm  of  experience,  his  mind  seeks  that  which  shall  feed  his 
strongest  faculties — his  ideality,  his  self-esteem,  his  conscience,  and  his  reason  ;  and 
he  draws  those  elements  out,  and  leaves  all  the  others.  He  sees  those,  and  feels 
those,  and  he  is  astonished  if  anybody  can  resist  the  evidence  which  is  so  irresistible  to 
him.  He  has  a  Calvinistic  conception  of  God  which  is  overwhelming  to  him,  and  to 
every  other  man  who  is  organised  just  as  he  is.  But  here  is  another  man  that  stands 
near  him  whose  rmagnet  draws  another  kind  of  filings,  and  who  is  j  ust  as  true  to  himself. 
He  has  an  inward  want  of  a  conception  that  is  all  beaming,  and  genial,  and  sweet, 
and  tender.  He  does  not  disbelieve  in  righteousness,  nor  in  conscience,  nor  in  law,  nor 
in  government ;  but  he  is  relatively  insensitive  to  these  as  he  is  sensitive  to  those 
other  elements.  This  man's  constitutional  endowment  draws  to  him  all  that  goes 
to  make  up  this  partialism,  and  he  is  amazed  to  hear  one  talk  so  like  a  fool  as  his 
brother  does.  He  has  read  the  Bible,  and  he  has  seen  no  such  evidence  as  that 
which  his  brother  professes  to  have  seen.  Why,  to  him  it  is  as  clear  as  noonday 
that  God  is  all  summer.  A  third  man,  standing  and  looking  upon  these  disputants, 
says,  "  They  are  fools,  both  of  them.  I  do  not  think  God  cares  much  about 
government,  or  much  about  this  benevolence.  It  seems  to  me  that  God  is  a  lover 
of  things  in  order,  full  of  taste,  full  of  proportion,  and  full  of  harmony.  He  is  all 
music,  and  all  blossom,  and  all  beauty  as  I  conceive  Him."  That  part  of  this  man's 
mind  which  craves  these  things  being  most  sensitive,  he  takes  just  that  class  ol 
materials.  His  magnet  draws  those  things  and  no  others.  4.  There  is  a  powerful 
influence  at  work  in  the  formation  and  growth  of  the  knowledge  of  God  as  derived 
from  experience.  If  a  person  lies  sick,  to  him  all  the  world  is  cut  off,  all  hopes  are 
ended,  all  life  seems  sad.  He  does  not  turn  to  the  jubilant  side  of  God.  He  turns 
to  those  sides  on  which  God  declares  that  He  comforts  the  sorrowing  as  a  mother 
comforts  her  children.  Another  person  is  put  in  circumstances  by  God's  providence 
where  he  needs  perpetual  nerve  and  perpetual  enterprise.  The  sterner,  the  more 
active  elements  of  the  Divine  nature,  are  congenial  to  his  want  and  to  his  experi- 
ence. And  so  he  ponders  these  most,  and  comes  to  these  most.  Is  one  discouraged? 
He  looks  for  something  in  his  God  that  shall  encourage  him.  Is  one  sad  from 
remorse  and  repentance  ?  He  looks  to  the  forgiving  side  of  God.  Is  one  set  to 
defend  the  truth  in  a  period  of  backslidmg  and  persecution  ?  He  instinctively  goes 
after  the  prophet's  God.  5.  One  of  the  most  powerful  influences,  aside  from  those 
which  I  have  mentioned,  for  the  shaping  of  our  conceptions  and  the  development 
of  our  knowledge  of  God,  is  the  necessity  or  the  attempt  to  employ  the  Divine 
nature  in  the  rescue  and  education  of  our  fellow-men.  To  bring  the  Divine  nature 
home  to  all  the  phases  of  character  which  surround  us,  to  all  the  conditions  of  life, 
and  to  the  subjugation  of  the  strong  attributes  of  the  mind;  to  find  men  just  where 
they  are  in  all  their  infinite  variations  of  condition  ;  to  find  that  which  arrests  their 
attention  ;  to  find  that  which  shall  inspire  in  them  some  moral  reaction ;  to  find 
that  which  shall  feed  them — this  is  one  of  the  most  potential  of  all  influences  for 
developing  in  you  the  growth  of  the  Divine  idea.  For  there  is  no  material  like 
human  nature,  and  there  is  no  dignity  like  working  in  it,  and  there  is  no  grandeur 
like  success  in  thus  working.  It  is  declared  that  he  who  saves  a  soul  from  death 
shall  shine  like  the  stars  of  the  firmament  in  the  future  kingdom  of  God.  These 
are  the  principal  ways  that  suggest  themselves  to  me  in  which  we  grow  in  the  know- 
ledge of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  And  if  we  be  living  Christians,  true 
men,  we  are  growing.  Our  conception  of  the  Divine  nature  never  remains  at  the 
same  stage  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.  It  is  enlarging  itself  by  experience ; 
it  is  enriching  itself  by  the  position  and  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  so 
that  no  man  can  compass  in  words  what  he  believes  of  God.  If  he  believes  all 
things  that  come  through  his  intensified  affections,  through  his  various  wants,  and 
through  the  wants  of  those  round  about  him,  these,  methodised  by  reflection,  and 
vitalised  by  imagination,  constitute  an  air-filling  notion  of  God,  so  vast  and  so  con- 
tinually changing  that  anybody  would  say,  "  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  write 
what  he  thinks  or  to  say  what  he  thinks  " — as  we  should  suppose  it  would  be  if  God 
is  infinite  and  is  overflowing  according  to  the  conception  which  the  thought  of 
infinity  inspires.  And  so  every  creative  mind,  every  active  mind,  that  is  really  in 
union  with  God,  by  prayer  and  aflinity,  and  is  working  like  Him,  as  well  as  with 
Him,  and  day  by  day  is  still  augmenting  in  these  various  ways  his  realisations  of 
God,  having  the  Divine  spirit  in  him,  and  growing  evermore  up  into  Him  in  all 
things,  who  is  the  Head,  Jesus  Christ — every  such  man  has  a  growth  of  which  he 


CHAP,  m.]  IL  PETER.  217 

himself  is  not  conscious,  and  which  he  never  can  and  never  could  represent  to 
others.  This  view  should  lead  persons  to  study  and  consider  what  their  condition 
is — whether  they  have  any  living  influential  conception  of  God.  You  have  been 
taught  that  He  is  the  Ruler,  that  He  is  the  Governor.  Is  He  your  Guide  ?  Is  He 
your  Master  ?  Is  He  your  Friend  ?  Is  He  your  Companion  ?  Does  He  smile  on 
you  ?  Does  He  converse  with  you  ?  Is  He  the  Toiler  with  our  toil  ?  Does  He  rest 
when  you  rest,  and  travel  when  you  travel  ?  Do  you  live  and  move  and  have  your 
being  in  Him  ?  If  so,  you  have  a  God,  and  you  have  reason  for  endless  congratula- 
tion and  joy.  One  evidence  that  we  have  a  true  conception  of  God  is,  that  it  is 
growing.  Why,  the  whip  that  stood  before  my  door  has  become  a  bush  ;  and  the 
bush  has  become  a  large  shrub,  and  the  shrub  is  mounting  up  into  a  tree,  and  the 
tree  shaU  yet  spread  its  branches  wide  abroad.  And  that  little  germ  which  first 
came  up,  and  that  vast  tree,  are  the  same,  although  they  have  differed  every  year 
more  and  more  by  development  and  growth.  And  so  does  our  conception  of  God 
grow  abroad,  multiplying  its  branches,  and  sub-dividing  them  into  infinite  twigs,  but 
they  all  cohere  in  the  unity  of  the  original  idea  of  conception.  Gro^vth  does  not 
imply  the  abandonment  of  our  former  notions,  then.  It  is  simply  the  unfolding,  in 
a  line  or  direction,  more,  not  less,  and  differing,  not  by  rejecting  one  element  and 
inserting  another,  but  by  making  each  element  that  was  true  yesterday  more  true 
to-day  by  fulness,  variety,  and  application  in  all  directions.  And  this  variety, 
renewing  multiphcity  and  intensity  of  conception,  is  of  more  benefit  to  man  than 
are  selectness  and  definiteness  of  statement.  That  which  you  see  most  in  God  I 
am  not  bound  to  beat  down  because  I  see  another  quaUty  more  than  you  see  it,  and 
do  not  see  the  one  that  you  see  as  much  as  you  see  it.  Men  are  the  complements  of 
each  other.  Some  men  interpret  God  through  beauty.  They  are  my  brothers, 
though  I  may  be  deficient  in  interpreting  the  Divine  nature  through  this  quality.  I 
.  am  your  brother,  though  I  may  not  gain  the  same  conception  of  God  that  you  do. 
One  stands  in  Milan  Cathedral,  under  the  nave,  and  looks  up  into  those  mysterious 
depths  until  he  seems  as  though  he  would  exhale  and  fly  into  space.  There,  in  the 
brooding  darkness,  the  feeling  of  reverence  weighs  upon  his  very  soul.  And  the 
Milan  Cathedral  to  him  is  that  which  it  seems  to  be  when  the  low-lying  sun  has 
shot  through  the  window  and  kindled  the  whole  interior.  At  the  very  same  moment 
there  stands  upon  the  roof  another  man,  and  about  him  are  those  three  thousand 
statues  carved  and  standing  in  their  several  niches  and  pinnacles  ;  and  everything 
looks  like  the  bristling  frost-work  in  a  forest  of  icicles  ;  and  far  above  and  far  on 
every  side  swell  the  lines  of  beauty.  How  different  is  his  conception  from  that  of 
the  man  who  stands  in  the  nave  below  !  But,  at  the  same  time,  a  man  stands  out- 
side looking  at  the  cathedral's  fretted  front  and  its  wondrous  beauty  and  diversity ; 
while  a  fellow-companion  and  traveller  is  on  the  other  side  looking  also  at  the 
exterior.  Here  are  four  men — one  before  the  structure,  one  behind  it,  one  on  the 
roof,  and  one  in  the  interior !  and  each  of  them,  as  he  gives  his  account  of  the 
Milan  Cathedral,  speaks  of  that  which  made  the  strongest  impression  upon  his 
,mind,  and  that  most  carried  him  away.  But  it  takes  the  concurrent  report  of  these 
four  men  to  represent  that  vast  work  of  arqjiitecture.  Is  it  so  with  a  man-built 
cathedral  ?  and  shall  it  not  be  so  with  the  mighty  God  who  is  from  eternity  to 
eternity  ?  Is  there  any  man  that  can  take  the  reed  of  his  understanding  and  lay  it 
along  the  line  of  God's  latitude  and  longitude  as  if  he  were  measurable  as  a  city  ? 
Is  there  any  man  that  can  cast  his  plummet  into  the  depths  of  the  Infinite  and  say, 
" I  have  sounded  God  to  the  bottom"?  Each  man  has  that  conception  of  God 
which  he  is  capable  of  receiving.  This  is  added  to  the  common  stock.  And  it  is 
these  concurrent  differences,  these  harmonious  separations,  that  make  the  symphony 
of  knowledge.  We  do  not  want  unison  :  we  want  harmony.  Harmony  is  made  by 
different  parts,  and  not  by  the  repetition  of  the  same  sounds  and  tones.  {H.  W. 
jBeecher.)  Growth  in  the  knotoledge  of  Christ : — At  first  sight  it  would  appear  as 
if  Peter  had  inverted  the  natural  order  of  things  when  he  puts  growth  in  the 
"knowledge"  of  Christ,  after  and  not  before,  growth  in  the  "grace"  of  Christ. 
How  can  we  grow  in  the  grace  of  Christ  if  we  do  not  first  possess  a  knowledge  of 
Him  ?  To  know  Christ,  in  the  highest  sense  of  that  word,  we  must  first  seek  to 
grow  in  the  grace  which  distinguished  Him  so  signally  among  the  children  of  men. 
I  stand  with  a  great  artist  before  a  famous  picture.  I  make  bold  in  my  ignorance 
of  art  to  confess  that  I  can  see  nothing  extraordinary  in  it  at  all.  "  What," 
exclaims  my  companion,  somewhat  indignantly  but  with  great  enthusiasm,  "  don't 
you  observe  the  splendid  manipulation  ?  "  and  forth  he  launches  into  a  glowing 
analysis  of  the  picture  before  us.   While  he  is  explaining  I  can  discern  more  clearly 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

than  I  did  before  what  made  the  picture  famous  in  the  eyes  of  others,  but  yet  at 
the  close  I  had  to  exclaim,  "  Well,  my  friend,  I  have  no  doubt  I  would  speak  as 
you  have  done  if  I  had  your  eyes,  but  I  confess  I  don't  see  what  makes  you  so 
enthusiastic.     I  should  much  like,  however,  to  possess  your  knowledge  and  enthu- 
siasm, and  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  only  show  me  how."     "  There  is  only  one  way  of 
possessing  the  knowledge,"  replies  my  companion  ;  "  you  must  begin  to  learn  the 
first  elements  of  drawing  and  colouring,  and  as  you  progress  in  the  acquisition  of 
the  art  of  painting  you  will  know."    Without  striving  to  grow  in  the  graces  of  the 
painter's  pencil,  you  will  never  understand  the  feelings  of  the  painter  himself. 
Turning  now  to  moral  qualities  we  are  not  infrequently  surprised  by  the  strength 
and  the  beauty  of  character  which  some  of  our  fellow-creatures  display.     Here  is 
one  with  a  spirit  which  nothing  can  ruffle  or  disturb.     To  us,  so  easily  provoked,  so 
hasty  to  resent,  so  strong  in  speech  "  not  seasoned  with  salt,"  that  person  is  a 
mystery.   "  There  is  but  one  way  to  a  knowledge  or  understanding  of  this  man.   We 
must  begin  where  he  began,  by  curbing  the  hasty  passions  of  the  heart,  by  con- 
tinuous efforts  to  return  good  for  evil,  and  then,  by  striving,  to  grow  in  his  grace, 
we  will  be  in  a  position  to  grow  in  knowledge  of  him.     So  it  is  with  regard  to  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.     If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine." 
Before  we  can  be  said  to  know  the  spirit,  the  life,  of  our  Master,  or  enter  upon  the 
full  possession  of  the  truths  He  came  to  reveal,  we  must  first  strive  to  grow  in  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.   By  knowledge  of  Christ  it  will  be  seen 
that  we  mean  such  an  entering  into  sympathy  with  the  springs  and  motive  forces  of 
His  life  as  shall,  by  its  gradual  increase,  lead  us  into  the  perfection  of  spiritual  life. 
1.  Those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  newly-quickened  souls,  or  those  who  can 
recall  the  first  experiences  of  the  Divine  life  within  their  own  hearts,  will  bear  me 
out  in  this,  that  love  to  Christ  is,  at  such  a  time,  the  one  absorbing  passion  of  the 
soul.     The  mind  seems  able  only  to  grasp  one  truth — audit  is  a  grand  one — "  Jesus 
so  loved  me  that  He  gladly  endured  the  shame  and  agony  of  the  Cross  in  order  to 
save  me."    Love  is  the  first  beautiful  impulse  of  the  heart.    It  is  the  root  of  all  the 
virtues.     It  may  be  blind  in  the  first  stages  of  its  existence,  but  it  soon  attains,  at 
least,  to  partial  vision — vision  which  will  grow  from  more  to  more  if  rightly  used.    We 
often  love  each  other  impulsively,  but  there  is  little  harm  done  if  the  impulse  will 
but  lead  up  to  reason.     But  the  test  of  growth  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  when 
we  love  Him  for  what  He  is  in  Himself,  and  not  so  much  for  what  He  has  done. 
The  latter  is  not  free  from  a  taint  of  selfishness.     Applying  this  test  to  Christ,  do 
I  love  Him  most  because  He  is  the  incarnation  of  virtue  and  goodness  ?     Then  is 
my  love  not  altogether  worthy  of  Him.   It  has,  at  any  rate,  lost  the  alloy  of  impulse 
and  selfishness,  so  apt  to  spoil  the  most  precious  ore  of  the  heart.     2.  The  soul  does 
not  long  remain  under  the  genuine  influence  of  Christ  when  it  learns  that  to  live 
like  Him  is  better  than  simply  to  love  Him,  however  ardently.     It  is  necessary  that 
the  Saviour  should  be  first  revealed  to  the  sinner  in  the  first  act  of  salvation,  but 
once  this  is  accomplished  the  Teacher  sent  from  God  leads  the  soul  up  from  him- 
self, so  to  speak,  to  a  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  God  the  Father.     When 
adopted  into  the  family  of  God,  we  have  many  graces  lying  dormant,  and  not  a  few 
faculties  impaired  or  withered  by  courses  of  sin.     We  need  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
quicken  those  graces  in  life,  and  to  put  new  life  into  those  withered  faculties.     This 
fact  we  will  come  to  recognise  only  when  comparing  our  lives  with  that  of  Christ : 
we  then  see  our  barrenness  and  emptiness.     Love  for  Him  will  lead  us  in  that  case 
to  desire  to  be  like  Him.     But  to  live  the  life  of  Christ  we  need  a  nature  balanced 
and  sustained  like  His.     How  shall  we  reach  this  most  desirable  state  of  life  ?     By 
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  alone.    "  He  will  take  the  things  of  Christ  and  show 
them  unto  us."     But  to  live  this  life,  what  is  it  ?     Simply  this.     I  recognise  that 
God  has  given  me  powers  and  virtues  as  well  as  the  opportunity  to  exercise  them, 
and  that,  therefore.  He  means  me  to  use  them  for  some  purpose.   Now,  what  is  that 
purpose  ?   The  answer  is  found  in  Christ.   Here  is  a  Divinely  inspired  and  quickened 
lite ;  how  is  it  spent  ?   In  making  sorrow  less,  in  making  joy  more  to  abound.   That 
is  the  simple  philosophy  of  the  life  of  Christ.     This  then  is  to  be  my  life — a  con- 
tinual expenditure  of  vital  forces  in  order  to  complete  the  work  which  Christ  began 
— the  redemption  of  the  whole  world  from  the  blight  of  sin.     Can  any  grander 
conception  of  life  enter  your  imagination  ?     Did  we  but  possess  more  of  the  spirit 
of  our  Master  we  would  gladly  suffer  a  daily  crucifixion  if  thereby  we  could  bless 
the  race.     Yes,  a  true-hearted  heroic  man  will  always  consider  that  good  service  is 
infinitely  better  than  joy  which  is  selfish,  and  will  therefore  look  upon  life  as  the 
vantage  ground  of  Divine  service  and  not  of  selfish  pleasure.     This  we  learn ;  up  to 


CHAP.  III.]  II.  PETER.  219 

this  state  we  may  hope  to  climb  by  growing  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  Life,  then, 
to  us  should  not,  and  in  fact  does  not  pass  like  a  dream  of  bliss.  No  one  who  has 
eyes  to  see  can  ignore  the  cruel  wrongs,  the  sickening  spectacles  of  lust  and  crime 
with  which  the  world  is  full.  No  one  with  ears  to  hear  can  deny  that  the  air  is  full 
of  discords,  and  the  ear  is  often  stretched  and  strained  in  vain  to  catch  the  under- 
tone of  harmony  which  some  hope  and  some  allege  may  be  heard  underneath.  The 
penalty  of  growth  in  true  life  is  growth  in  care,  mental  perplexity,  and  pain.  The 
more  we  know,  the  more  of  mystery  there  is  to  us,  the  more  Christ-like  we  are,  the 
more  sensitive  we  become  to  the  desolation  which  sin  has  wrought  in  this  beautiful 
world  of  ours.  Hence  we  come  to  recognise  the  need  of  another  truth  which  most 
likely  has  not  hitherto  come  prominently  in  view — that  for  our  life  to  be  vigorous 
and  well  sustained  under  all  circumstances  we  must  have  our  faith  firmly  grounded 
in  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Besting  by  a  firm  faith  on  the  omnipotence,  the  unerring 
wisdom,  the  infinite  love  of  God,  the  heart  wiU  bravely  face  the  bUnding  storm  of 
life,  heroieally  grapple  with  its  mysteries,  and  hush  its  doubts  and  fears  with  the 
inspiring  whisper,  "  The  Father  reigneth."  {W.  Skinner.)  On  growth  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ : — I.  To  give  some  account  op  the  knowledge  of  our  Lokd 
AND  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  neces- 
sary to  salvation.  2.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is  attained  by  the  study  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  3.  The  saving  knowledge  of  Christ  is  effectually  obtained  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  The  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  desirable 
and  delightful.  II.  What  is  implied  in  growing  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  or  what  of  Christ  His  disciples  should  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of.  1.  They  should  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Person  of  Christ.  2. 
Believers  should  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  the  love  of  Christ.  3.  They  should  grow 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  perfection  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  4.  They  should 
grow  in  the  knowledge  of  the  word  and  way  of  Christ.     III.  To  specify  some  of 

THE  EVIDENCES  THAT  THE    DISCIPLES   OF   ChRIST    ARE    GROWING    IN    THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF 

Him.  1.  He  will  be  rising  higher  and  higher  in  the  estimation  of  your  souls.  2. 
You  will  be  growing  in  a  filial  dependence  on  Him.  3.  The  more  you  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  the  more  you  wiU  be  assimilated  to  His  glorious  image.  4.  The 
more  you  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  you  will  the  more  cheerfully  worship, 
honour,  and  obey  Him.  {Johii  Jardine.)  Increase  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ : — 
When  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  first  came  to  America  they  did  not  discover  all — the  iron, 
the  coal,  the  natural  gas.  So  with  Christ.  There  are  many  needs  in  us  of  which 
-the  young  convert  dreams  not.     (D.  Watson.) 


mjX 


•^ 


■"I'mV^r   ^^^°'°9'Cal   Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01127  8159 


Date  Due 

. , 

K  '; 

'-; : 

i 

ft  '/^''Si 

1' 

piv-.-rT-- 

r 

^/^mfif^ 

*^0»^''- 

tiAlm. 

jfl'in^sfte^ 

w^ 

1^ 

^^fi(L^^,^„:2i 

i, 

r» 

^ 

